

==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: 5_6276241692534247313_240912_174435.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
_ Textbook of :
RASASHASTRA
AND

BHAISHAJYA KALPANA

Telegram

Essentials of
Ayurveda

As per the competency-based Ayurveda Medical Curriculum

----- PAGE 2 -----
A Textbook of

RASASHASTRA
AND

BHAISHAJYA KALPANA

Part-2 : AY’URVEDIYA AUSHADHI PRAYOGA VIGYANA
As per the competency-based Ayurveda Medical Curriculum

According to New NCISM Syllabus

Dr. Jyoti Sharma
B.A.M.S., M.D.
Assistant Professor
Depit. of Rasashastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana
Dr Vijay Ayurvedic Medical College, Hospital & Research Center
Varanasi, U.P.

CHAUKHAMBA SURBHARTI PRAKASHAN
VARANASI

----- PAGE 3 -----
NCISM
Il PROFESSIONAL AYURVEDACHARYA (BAMS)
SUBJECT CODE : AYUG-RB
SUMMARY
Total number of Teaching hours: 450

Lecture hours (LH)-Theory

‘Paper! 75 150
Paper ll 75

Non Lecture hours(NLH)-Theory

Paper! &ll 90

Non Lecture hours (NLH)-Practical aoe,

Paper!&ll 210

Examination (Papers & Mark Distribution)
Practical Component Marks
Item Theory Component Marks
Practical Viva Elective

Paper! 100 100 70 -
Paper Il 100

Sub-Total 200 200

Total marks 400

PAPER-2

AYURVEDIYA AUSHADHI PRAYOGA VIGYANA

me Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana
Introduction, Ethymology, Scope of Aushadhi Prayoga vigyana

Prashastha bheshaja Lakshana

16 2. Single drug (Herbal & Mineral)
Single drug its variety of formulations and their different indications

e Chemical/phytochemical composition
Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics as per formulation

Therapeutic properties
Awasthanusara Uses (as applicable)
Matra

150 (LH)

300 (NLH)

30

----- PAGE 4 -----
ly)

Anupana
Pathyapathya

Sevana Kala ee
Kala maryada (duration of medication as applicable) cae
Side effects of medication (as applicable) vu
Research updates and clinical evidences for each of the following
formulations ;

Guduchi Guduchi Swarasa (Sha.Sam.M Kh. NE ‘

Guduchyadi Churna (BR. Pechayelrut RATT as

Guduchi Kwatha (B.R. Jwaradhikara)

Guduchi Hima (B.R. Chardi Rogadhikara)

Guduchi Ghana- Samshamani Vati (AFI Part || Page 183)

Guduchi Satva (AFI-Part |, Page 205)

Amrutadi Guggulu (AFl-Part III, Page 107)

Amritarishta (AFI Part | page 6)

Amalaki Amalaki Swarasa (Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha.)

Bhallataka Guda (B.R. Arsha Rogadhikara)

Bhallatakadi Taila (B.R. Nadivrina Rogadhikara)

Bhallataka Avaleha (B.R. Arsha Rogadhikara)

Bhallatakadi Lepa (B.R. Kushta Rogadhikara)

Bhallatakadi Kwatha (B.R. Urusthabha Rogadhikara)

Note: For Bhallataka additional ashuddha, avidhi sevanajanya vyadhi

and their shantyupaya Gandhaka

Gandhaka churna (SY Page 217)

Gandhaka Rasayana (AFI-Part ll, Page 115)

Gandhaka Druti (RRR 3rd Chapter)

Gandhaka Taila (R.T. 8th Chapter)

Gandhakadya Malahara (AFI-Part Il, Page 165)

Gandhakadi Lepa (RRS Shiroroga Chikitsa)

Gandhaka Vati (B.R. Agnimandya Rogadhikara)

Gairika

Gairika Pradeha (Cha.Chi. Visarpa Rogadhyaya

Laghusuta shekhara Rasa (AFI Part II Page 282)

Gairikadya Malahara (AFI-Part III, Page 224)

Gairikadya Gutikanjana (B.R. Netraroga)

Gairika rasakriya (Cha.Chi.26/235)

Varnakara lepa (Cha.Chi.25/117)

3. Single drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti) 2: 15 12
e Single drug/ formulation and its mode of action in different

indications

Chemical/phytochemical composition

Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics as per formulation

Therapeutic properties

Awasthanusara Uses (as applicable)

Matra

Anupana

Pathyapathya

Sevana Kala

Kala maryada (duration of medication as applicable)

Side effects of medication (as applicable)

Ashuddha apakwa, avidhi sevanajanya vyadhi and their

shantyupaya,

Research updates and clinical evidences for each of the following

formulations:

7m Ss... eee “=A
Br Rasashastra and Bhaishajya i, Iban
= ‘d

urs

----- PAGE 5 -----
Syllabus

18 4. Aushadhi Kalpa-! (Compound formulations)

Abhraka Bhasma
Swarna Makshika Bhasma
Swarna Bhasma

Rajata Bhasma

Lauha Bhasma

Tamra Bhasma

Vanga Bhasma

Naga Bhasma

Yashada Bhasma
Kasisa Bhasma
Shuddha Shilajatu
Shuddha Gandhaka
Shuddha Gairika
Shuddha Kankshi
Mukta Pishti & Bhasma
Pravala Pishti & Bhasma
Vajra Bhasma

Kaparda Bhasma
Shankh Bhasma
Godanti Bhasma
Shuddha Tankana
Shuddha Kankshi

Chemical/phytochemical composition

e Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics as per formulation
e Therapeutic properties and its mode of action in different
indications,

Awasthanusara Uses (as applicable)

Matra

Anupana

Pathyapathya

Sevana Kala

Kala maryada (duration of medication as applicable)

Side effects of medication(as applicable)

Ashuddha apakwa processed, avidhi sevanajanya vyadhi and their

shantyupaya,
e Research updates and clinical evidences for each of the following

formulations:

Kharaliya Rasayana

e Arogyavardhini Gutika : A.F.. - |, Rasayoga, 20:4, R.R.S. Visarpa

Chi. 20/106
Kumara Kalyana Rasa : A.F.l. - |, Rasayoga, 20:9, B.R. Balaroga / 163

e

e Garbhapala Rasa : A.F.. - II, Rasayoga, 16:14,R.T.Sa, Part - |, 140
Chandraprabha Vati ; A.F.I. - |, Vati Gutika, 12:10,Sha.Sa.M.7/40
Pravala Panchamrita Rasa: AF. - II, Rasayoga, 16:37,B.R.

Gulma / 139

Anandbhairava Rasa : A.F.. - |, Rasayoga, 20:3,R.Sa.Sa.Jwara 2/103
Yogendra Rasa : A.F.l. -1, Rasayoga, 20:31,B.R. Vatavyadhi / 506
Laxmivilas Rasa: A.F.l. - |, Rasayoga, 20:39, B.R. Rasayana / 55
Vasantakusumakara Rasa : A.F.l. - |, Rasayoga,20:42,R.Sa.Sa.

Rasayana Vajikarana / 80
Vasantamalti Rasa : A.FI. - 1, Rasayoga, 20:41, Si.Bhai.Ma.Ma.

Jwara / 60
Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa : A.F.l. - |, Rasayoga, 20:26, B.R.,

Vatavyadhi/502
Shankha Vati ; A.E.. - |\Vati Gutika, 12:32,B.R. Agnimandya / 182

Shwaskuthara Rasa; A.Fl. - I, Rasayoga, 20:49,Yo.Ra., Swasa /

Page 373
Kamadudha Rasa : A.F.. - Il, Rasayoga, 16:9,R.Ta.Sa. Kharaliya

Rasayana / 80
Sutashekhar Rasa : A.Fil. - Il, Rasayoga, 16;63,Yo.Ra. Amlapita /

Page 125
Navayasa Loha : A.F.l, - II, Lauha, 17:2,Cha.Sa.Chi.16/70

----- PAGE 6 -----
Soe ___ Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana

© Ichchhabhedi Rasa : A.F.I. - |, Rasayoge, 20:5,B.Ra. Udararoga / 84
e Krimikuthara Rasa : A.F.l. - Il, Rasayoga, 16:12,R.Ta.Sa.Kharallya
Rasayana / P. 103

Parpati Rasayana
© Panchamruta Parpati: A.F.l. - |, Parpati, 16:1, B.R.Grahani / 461

© Bola Parpati: AFI. - |, Parpati, 16:2, Yo.R., Pradara / P 842
Kupipakwa Rasayana
© Swarna Vanga : A.F.l. - |, Kupipakva, 15:9, Rasamruta 3/95
© Makaradhwaja : A.F.l. - |, Kupipakva, 15: 2, B.R. Vajlkarana 2/ 237
© Sameerpannaga Rasa : A.Fl. - |, Kupipakva, 15:8, A.A.G.S. Part - 4
Page 88
Pottali Rasayana
© Hemagarbha Pottali : A.F.I. - Il, Rasayoga, 16:66, Rasamruta
Rasavigyaniya 9/218

19 5. Aushadhi Kalpa-Il (Compound Drugs/Formulations)
© Chemical/phytochemical composition
© Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics as per formulation
© Therapeutic properties and its mode of action in different
indications,
Awasthanusara Uses (as applicable)
Matra
Anupana
Pathyapathya
Sevana Kala
Kala maryada (duration of medication as applicable)
Side effects of medication (as applicable)
Improperly processed, avidhi sevanajanya vyadhi and their
shantyupaya,
e Research updates and clinical evidences for each of the following
formulations:
Dashamoola Kwatha (AFI Part | Page 55)
Mahamanjistadi Kwatha (AFI Part | page 59)
Pushyanuga Churna (AFI-Part |, Page 113)
Sudarshana Churna (AFI Part | Page 116)
Lavana Bhaskara Churna (AFl-Part |, Page 114)
Bilvadi Gutika (AFI Part | Page 188)
Chitrakadi Gutika (AFl-Part I, Page 186)
Sanjivani Vati (B.R. Jwaradhikara)
Vyoshadi Vati (AFI Part Ill Page 253)
Bala Chaturbhadra Rasa (B.R. Balarogadhikara)
Simhanada Guggulu (AFl-Part |, Page 71)
Yogaraja Guggulu (AFI-Part I, Page 69)
Chyavanaprashavaleha (AFI Part | page 37)
Dadimavaleha (Y.R. Jwaratisaradhyaya)
Panchagavya Ghrita (AFI Part | Page 90)
Brahmi Ghrita (AFI Part | Page 93)
Narayana Taila (AFI Part | Page 138)
Neelibhringadi Taila (AFI Part | Page 139)
Panchaguna Taila (AFI-Part II, Page 145)
Aravindasava (AFI Part | page 7)
Ashokarishta (AFI Part | page 8)
Kumaryasava (AFI Part | page 10)
Kutajarishta (AFI Part | page 10)
Gandhakadya Malahara (AFI-Part Il, Page 165)
Lepa Guti (AFI Part Ill page 232)

20 6. Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products 3 5 5
Definition of dosage form,-Cosmetics Advantages and disadvantages
of currently available dosage forms and cosmetics. Route of their
administration. Research updates on modification of classical Ayurvedic
dosage forms and relevant case studies.

----- PAGE 7 -----
24

22

23

7. Nutraceuticals
Introduction Types, non Indian nutraceuticals and thelr uses Ayurvedic

Perspective of Nutraceuticals with special reference to dietic
preparation, rasayana with one examples for each category , mode of
action, nutritional value calculation, research updates and case studies
on below mentioned category

General Health : Kushmanda avaleha

Pediatric Health: Preenana Modaka (Kashyapa)

Geriatric Health: Chavanaprasha avaleha

Reproductive Health: Phala Grita

Women's health: Soubhagya shuntipaka, Shatavari grita
Cardio-protective: Arjuna Ksheerapaka & Rasona ksheera paka

Sports endeavor: Kharjuradi mantha

Mental health: Brahma Rasayana

8. Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa
Properties of Anupana
Factors to be considered for selection of Anupana
© Dosha
® Aushadha
© Roga/ Rogi
e Ahara Purpose of Anupana
Contraindications of Anupana
Eka Kalpa Vydi anusara aneka Anupana for following yogas
1. Kaishore Guggulu: Sarangadhar Samhita, Madhyam khanda-

7/72-81, P: 136
Yogaraj, Guggulu: Sarangadhar Samhita Madhyam khanda- 7/56-69,

P:135

3. Narayana Churna: Sarangadhar Samhita of Pandit Saranga-
dharacharya, , Madhyam khanda- 7/83-91, P:123-124

. Rasa Sindoor: RasaTarangini Hindi commentary of Sri Sadananda
Sarma,Chaukhambha Surbharti, Murcchana vigyaniya Taranga,
6/203-234, P: 125-127

. Rasa Parpati: Rasa Tarangini of Sri Sadananda Sarma,Chaukhambha
Surbharti Prakashan, Murcchana vigyaniya Taranga, 6/144-153, P:

116-117
Kankayan Vati : Sarangadhar Samhita Surbharti Prakashan,

Madhyam khanda, 7/50-55, P: 134-135)

9. Aushadhi Prayoga Marga
Introduction

Types in ayurveda
Advantages and disadvantages of each aushadhi prayoga marga and

probable mode of action after administration of following dosage forms
in below mentioned routes
1, Mukha (Oral Cavity): Vati, Gutika, Churna, Asava, Arishta,Kashaya,
Avaleha, Khanda, Sneha (Ghrita/Taila),
Nasa(Nasal Route)- Dosage form used - Churna, taila, swarasa, arka
. Karna (Through Ear)- Taila, Ghrita
_ Akshi (Through Eyes) - Ghrita, Taila,
. Twak (Through Skin)- Lepa, Alepa, Pralepa, Malahara, upanaha,
pradeha, abhyanga, udvartana
¢ Shirodhara - Takra
e Abhyanga- Sahacharadi Taila
© Ashti Bhagna- Murivenna Taila
© Vrana- Jatyadi Taila
e Smashru — Shankha Bhasma
°
e
t
e

2

ORwWD

Kesha Ghanata- Bringaraja Taila
Akala Palita — Hasthi Danta Masi
Indralupta — Icchabhedi Rasa
Lomashatana — Lomashatana Lepa
Guda ( Anal Route)- Dosage forms - Vartis, taila, ghrita, kalka,

churna, kashaya

10

xii

----- PAGE 8 -----
Kalpana

Ki Mutra marga (Through ureth ra Basti with Dosage form:
Talla, ghrita 8, Yoni marga (Through vagina): Yon! Dharana, Yon!
ina

formulations.
Rational prescription along with safe «
formulations as per NABH guideline —
25 11, Traditional & Local health Pra
"Introduction to Traditional & Local h
_ initiatives to preserve it. Brief introduction to T
26 12, Pharmacovigilance for Ayurved: dru :
Pharmacovigilance and Adverse Drug R
Programme of Ayurveda, Siddha, Una'
Drugs Central Sector Scheme and Centres of P
& H Drugs

Total Marks

----- PAGE 9 -----
CONTENTS

Acknowledgement

List of Abbreviation

4. Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana
1.1 Concept of Aushadhi
44 *s 1.2 Prashasta Bheshaja Lakshana
1.3 Synonyms of Chikitsa
ue (4 Dosage forms used in Ayurvedic
formulations include
1.5 Aushadha Matra
1.6 Aushadha Sevana Kala
1.7 Anupana
18 Pathya Apathaya
1.9 Pharmacology
_ 1.10 Route of Drug Administration
1.11 Bioavailability
Multiple Choice Questions
2. Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)
2.1 Guduchi
2.1.a Guduchi Svarasa
2.1.b Guduchyadi Churna
2.1.c Guduchi Kvatha
2.1.d Guduchi Hima
2.1.e Guduchi Ghana — Samshamani Vati
__——«2.1.£ Guduchi Sattva
ee 2.1. Amritadi Guggulu
__2.1.h Amritarishta
a Amalaki Svarasa
2.2.b Amalakyadi Churna
2.2.c Triphala Rasayana

-

2.2.4 Chyavanaprasha
2.2.e Dhatri Lauha
2.2.£ Amalakyadi Gutika
2.2.¢ Phalatrikadi Kvatha
2.2.h Triphala Ghrita

2.3 Bhallataka
2.3.a Bhallataka Modaka
2.3.b Bhallataka Ghrita
2.3.c Bhallataka Guda
2.3.d Bhallatakadi Taila
2.3.e Bhallataka Avaleha
2.3.f Bhallatakadi Lepa
2.3.¢ Bhallatakadi Kvatha

2.3.h Toxicity Study and its Management:

2.4 Gandhaka
2.4.a Gandhaka Churna
2.4.b Gandhaka Rasayana
2.4.c Gandhaka Druti
2.4.4 Gandhaka Taila
2.4.e Gandhakadya Malahara
2.4.£ Gandhakadi Lepa
2.4.¢ Gandhaka Vati

2.5 Gairika (Red Ochre)
2.5.a Gairika Pradeha
2.5.b Laghusutashekhara Rasa
2.5.c Gairikadya Malahara
2.5.d Gairikadya Gutikanjana
2.5.e Gairika Rasakriya

Vii

vill

xviii

26
28
30
31
32
33
34
35
ye
39
40
41
Al

BEoS

47
48
49
51

aeo3 F

56
57

----- PAGE 10 -----
58 4.1.p Navayasa Loha 120

2.5. Varnakara Lepa
Multiple Choice Questions 59 4.1.q paige Le 4
3. Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti) 68-96 Al. Ke asa oy)
3.1 Abhraka Bhasma 68 4.2 Parpatt Regeyans : 124
3.2 Svarna Makshika Bhasma 70 4.2.a Pancha Parpati 125
3.3 Svama Bhasma 72 4.2.b Bola Parpati 126
341 73 4.3 Kupipakva Rasayana 127

3.4 Rajata Bhasma

.3.a Syarna Vanga 128
3.5 Lauha Bhasma 75 434 ove B
76 4.3.b Makaradhvaja 129
3.6 Tamra Bhasma } R
Bs 77 4.3.c Samirapannaga Rasa 13]
eles 4.4 Pottali Rasayana 32
3.8 Naga Bhasma 79 ; ;
4.4.a Hemagarbha Pottali 133
3.9 Yashada Bhasma 80 Multinle CIEE ONerten: a
()
3.10 Kashisha Bhasma 81 ae ‘ a aloe
ee . Aushadhi =
oe o (Compound Drugs/Formulations) 139-120
3.12 Shuddha Gandhaka 83 51 Daghamulalkevatiia 139
3.13 Shuddha Gairika 84 5,2 Mahamanjishthadi ele 140
3.14 Shuddha Kankshi 85 5.3 Pushyanuga Churna 14)
Stews eet 54 Sudarshana Churna 43
pees Bhasma 8 5.5 Lavana Bhaskara Churna 45
3.17 Pravala Pishti 86 5 6 Bilvadi Cutika 146
3.18a Pravala Bhasma 87 ay Chitrakadi Gutika 148
3.18b Vajra Bhasma 88 5.8 Sanjivani Vati 149
3.19 Kaparda Bhasma 89 5.9 Vyoshadi Vati 151
Sal Sr Las a 20 5.10 Bala Chaturbhadra Rasa 152
3.21 Godanti Bhasma 90 5.11 Simhanada Guggulu 153
3.22 Shuddha fenkans 91 5.12 Yogaraja Guggulu 55
Multiple Choice Questions 92 5.13 Chyavanaprasha Avaleha 156
4. Aushadhi Kalpa - | 5.14 Dadimavaleha 158
(Compound Formulations) 97-138 5.15 Panchagavya Ghrita 60
4.1 Kharaliya Rasayana 97 5.16 Brahmi Ghrita nei
4.1.a Arogyavardhini Gutika 97 5.17 Narayana Taila 163
4.1.b Kumara Kalyana Rasa 100 5.18 Nilibhringadi Taila 163
4.1.c Garbhapala Rasa 101 5.19 Panchaguna Taila 66
41d Chandraprabha Vati 103 RAD Awwindesawa 67
4.1.e Pravala Panchamrita Rasa 105 SonAcholanchtal 68
4.1. Anandabhairava Rasa 106 5.22 Kumaryasava 70
4.1.g Yogendra Rasa 108 5,23 Kutajarishta 7
4.1.h Lakshmivilasa Rasa 109 5.24 Gandhakadya Malahara 73
4.1.1 Vasantakusumakara Rasa 111 5.25 Lepa Guti 74
4.1j Vasantamalati Rasa 12 Multiple Choice Questions 75
4.1. Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa 1136. Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products 181-19
4.1.1 Shankha Vati 115 6.1 Introduction of Different Dosage Form 81
4.1.m Shvasakuthara Rasa 16 6.2 Importance of Dosage Forms 81
4.1.n Kamadudha Rasa M7 6.3 Principles of Dosage Form Design 82
4.1.0 Sutashekhara Rasa 118

6.4 Primary Reasons for Designing

----- PAGE 11 -----
en ee

Contents ec

a Dosage Form
1. Protection
2. Improve Therapeutic Activ
3. Patient Compliance
6.5 Classification of Dosage Forms
1, Solid Dosage Forms
2. Liquid Dosage Forms
3. Semi-Solid Dosage Forms
6,6 Cosmetic Products
6.7 Advantages and Disadvantages of
Currently Available Dosage Forms
1. Oral Dosage Forms
2. Topical Dosage Forms
3. Parenteral Dosage Forms
4. Inhalation Dosage Forms
5. Rectal and Vaginal Dosage Forms

ity

184

185
185
186
186
186
186

6. Sublingual and Buccal Dosage Forms 186

6.8 Modification of Classical
Ayurvedic Dosage
6.9 Route of Drug Administration
6.10 Research Updates
Multiple Choice Questions

7. Nutraceuticals

7.1 Kushmanda Avaleha
7.2 Preenana Modaka
7.3 Chyavanaprasha Avaleha
7.4 Phala Ghrita
7.5 Saubhagya Shunthipaka
7.6 Shatavari Ghrita
7.7 Arjuna Kshirapaka
7.8 Rasona / Lashuna Kshira Paka
7.9 Kharjuradi Mantha
7.10 Brahma Rasayana
Multiple Choice Questions

8. Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa

8.1 Kaishora Guggulu

8.2 Yogaraja Guggulu

8.3 Narayana Churna

8.4 Rasa Sindura

8.5 Rasa Parpati

8.6 Kankayana Vati
Multiple Choice Questions

9. Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

9.1 Mukhya Prayogartha Kalpana
9.2 Nasya Kalpana
9.3 Karna Kalpana

186
187
191
192
195-213
195
197
198
200
202
203
205
206
207
208
210
214-226
214
215
217
219
221
222,
224
227-258
227
230
231

si ae) SINGLE en

9.4 Akshi Kalpana
9.5 Tvak Kalpana
9.5,a Shirodhara
9.5.b Abhayanga
9.5.c Ashti Bhagna
9.5.d Vrana
9.5.e Smashru
9.5.f Kesha Ghanata
9.5.¢ Akala Palita
9.5.h Indralupta
9.5.1 Lomashatana
9.6 Guda Marga
9.7 Mutra Marga
9.8 Yoni Marga
Multiple Choice Questions
10. Rational Prescription along with Safe
Dispensing of Ayurvedic Formulations
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Rational Prescription
10.3 Safe Dispensing

10.4 Additional Guidelines for Rational
Use of Ayurvedic Formulations

Multiple Choice Questions
11. Traditional & Local Health Practices & TKDL

11.1 Introduction to Traditional and
Local Health Practices and Govern-
ment Initiatives to preserve it

11.2 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
(TKDL)
Multiple Choice Questions
12. Pharmacovigilance for Ayurveda Drugs
12.1 Introduction
12.2 Important Terminology
12.3 History
12.4 Major Development in PV
12.5 PV Centers In India
12.6 Adverse Drug Reaction in Ayurveda
Multiple Choice Questions
Appendices

Appendix-I : Brief Introduction of Classi-
cal Doses form and their Method of
Preparation

Wi

232

236
739
240
242
244
245
247
248
249
250
252
253
254
256

259-263
259
259
259

260
262
264-272

264

265
272
273-278
273
273
273
273
274
274
278

279-287

279

Appendix-II : List of Disease and its English

Equivalent Terms

Appendix-IIl : Weight and Measures
Alphabetic Index
Bibliography

286
287
288-289
290

----- PAGE 12 -----
A. Plants Part
1, AR.
2. BI.
3. Dr. Fr.
4. Dr. Sd.
5, Enm.
6. Exd.
7. Fil.
8. Fr.
9. Gl.
10. Ht, Wd.
ch UB
Ve G
13, Ol.

18. Rt. Bk.
19. Rt. Tr.
20. Sd.

21. Stmn.
22. St.

23. St. Bk.
B, Books

1. AAGS.

27 AFL

3. AHS
4. AHLU.

Arial Roots
Bulb

Dried Fruit
Dried Fruit
Endosperm
Exudate
Flower
Fruit

Gall

Heart Wood
Leaf

Latex

Oil
Pericarp
Plant (Whole)
Rhizome
Root

Root Bark
Root Tuber
Seed
Stamens
Stem

Stem Bark

Ayurvediya Aushadhi Guna
Dharma Shastra
The Ayurvedic
of India
Ashtanga Hridaya Samihita
Ashtanga Hridaya
Uttarasthana

Formulary

API

. Ay. Pr.

7. Ay. Sa.S
8. BR.

9,
10.
ll.

12.
13:

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23,
24,
25, Si.Bhai.Ma.Ma.

Bha. Bha. R.
Bha. Pra.
Cha. D.
Cha.Sa.Chi.

Ni. R. (Ma)

Ra. Cha.
R.Mr.
RR.
RRS.
RSa,Sa.
R. Ta. Sa.
RT.
R.Yo. Sa.
Sa. Yo.
Sha, S.
Si. Yo. Sa

26. Su. Sa,

27, YAR
C. Common

Qs. -

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
of India

Ayurveda Prakasha

Ayurveda Sara Sangraha

Bhaishajya Ratnavali

Bharata Bhaishajya Ratnakara

Bhava Prakasha

Chakra Datta

Charaka Samhita

Chikitsa Sathana

Shri Nighanturatnakara
(Marathi)

Rasachandashu
Rasamritam
Rasaratnakara

Rasa Ratna Sammuchya
Rasendra Sara Sangraha
Rasa Tantra Sara
Rasatarangini
Rasayogaratnakara
Sahasrayosa
Sharngadhara Samihita
Siddhayoga Sangraha
Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala
Sushruta Samhita

~ Yoga Ratnakara

----- PAGE 13 -----
/ cHarter \\

1

1.1 Concept of Aushadhi

Aushadha, meaning medicine or drug, is essential for
health preservationand disease treatment. Aushadhacan
be used single or in combination. The Charaka Samhita
lists 152 superior single drugs (agraya prakarana), the
Ashtanga Sangraha lists 155, and the Ashtanga Hridaya
lists 55. Aushadha is one of four healthcare aspects,
along with the physician, attendant, and patient. All
substances (dravya) derive from the five mahabhutas
(prithvi, apa, agni, vayu, akasha), and the body is a
composition of these elements in varying proportions.
Imbalance in these proportions disrupts homeostasis,
causing disorders. To restore balance, substances with
the required mahabhuta composition are administered.
Since aushadha is a dravya, it restores homeostasis
and treats disease. Effective disease management
requires correct identification, dosage, and timing of
aushadha administration. Proper selection depends on
understanding its mode of action, and to avoid adverse
effects, aushadha must be patient-specific, location-
specific, and season-specific. Examination of aushadha
is crucial prior to use.

wad oe fatenfarantret Seq! (Gangadhar)

According to ancient scholars, aushadhi (medicine) is
always beneficial (hita) for the patient (rogi). The term
aushadhi comes as an upalaksana, where “upa” refers
to upasarga (a prefix).

Setanta AHAETaERTA: 11 (Kashyapa Samhita)
Aushadha refers to substances that bear osa (also known
as rasa), which leads to arogya (health). Therefore,
aushadhi and oshadhi are synonymous. Generally,
aushadha means preparations made from drugs to cure
diseases and promote health.

AUSHADHI PRAYOGA VIGYANA

eat fe TIAA |
a qoredarratendgttarare renter trertiait:
maetrenst aretfehaveefterct 1 (Cha. Vi. 1/22/2)

Aushadha kalpana involves preparing medicines by
applying varic us processing techniques to crude drugs.
This processing transforms the substances, enhancing
their pharmacological actions (a process known as
samskara). Common processing techniques include
dilution, application of heat, cleansing, churning,
storing, maturing, flavoring, and preservation in
containers.

sere Heid UYTCTHAATL

Gala Wallace ea ra: tt (Cha.Ka. 12/48)
There is no letter that is not a mantra (incantation), no
root that is not a medicine, and no human being who
is not useful. Only the yojaka (coordinator) is a rare
commodity.

Ina broad sense, any substance or mixture of substances
intended for internal or external use to preserve and
strengthen health, and to prevent or cure disease in
humans or animals, is called aushachi.

Ta srenitft Yas

Aw We ates sitaery Faw: 11 (Ghabdakalpadruma)
ded Gre Vast Tena chet | (Cha. Su.1/134)

“Bheshaja” or “Bhaisajya” refers to substances or
treatments that alleviate the fear of disease or restore
health by balancing the doshas.

In Ayurveda, the concept of “Padacatushtaya” refers
to the four categories of essential elements necessary
for the sustenance of life. These categories are
Bhesak (Physician), bhesaja (medicine), Paricharaka
(Attendant), and Rogi (Patient). Among these, bhesaja,
or medicine, holds a significant position, being essential
for the treatment of diseases and the preservation
of health.

----- PAGE 14 -----
—————

=

TEE
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 1

1.2 Prashasta Bheshaja Lakshana

oT Sead | (Cha. Chi. 1/3)

aged Sg Bat aranaeMy || (A. H. Su.1/28)
Emphasizing bhesaja in Ayurvedic texts like those
of Charaka and Vagbhata highlights its importance
in maintaining well-being. Bhesaja, is valued for its
applicability, quality richness, abundance, and versatility
in addressing various health concerns. Hence Bhesaja
is kept in second position among the padacatushtaya
because of its great role in treatment grounds.

While food is essential for nourishment, medicine
plays a vital role in restoring health during imbalances
or diseases, emphasizing the significance of using
appropriate medicines for overall health and illness
management.

1.3 Synonyms of Chikitsa
Watt wrt warfare far
fae, SUSATATH......... 1 (Cha. Chi. 1/3)
Vyadhiharana
Pathya
Sadhana
Aushadha
Prayashcitta

4,
&

D
oe

o> &

te
Bey

&

Prasamana

eo
By

Prakriti sthapana
Hita

1.4 Dosage forms used in Ayurvedic formulations
include

Kashayayoni, Panchavidha kashaya kalpana, Churna,
Avaleha-Prasa, Ghana, Sattva, Vatika, Gutika, Candrika,
Vataka, Pinda, Modaka, Varti, Guggulu kalpana, Masi
kalpana, Lovana kalpa, Kasra kalpana, and Ksharasutra.

| 1.5 Aushadha Matra

“Matra” denotes a measure of various factors such as
quantity, size, duration, number, or degree. In Ayurveda,
consideration of dosha is crucial to achieve the desired
therapeutic outcome. If the dose is excessive, it can lead
to harmful side effects, while an insufficient dose may
prove ineffective. Therefore, dosage should be carefully
regulated to ensure that the drug produces the desired
effects without harming the tissues. The determination
of dosage should take into account both the condition
of the disease and the individual characteristics of the
patient.

oy

ftaftatedra Ware: creat cat ery!
Waa gaeyit a Bar Wat Wercteld |
(Sha. Pra. Kha,1 /37-38)
The prescription of medicine does not adhere to a fixeq
dose applicable universally to all patients. Instead, the
dosage varies based on several factors:
1. Kala (Time): This includes considerations such as the
season when the drug is administered.

Ny

. Agni (Digestive Power): The patient's ability to digest
influences dosage.
3. Vayas (Age): Dosage may differ based on the
patient's age.
4. Bala (Strength): The patient’s overall strength and
vitality are taken into account.
5. Prakriti (Constitution): The individual’s physical
constitution is considered.
6. Dosha (Nature of Dosha): The specific nature of the
dosha involved in causing the disease.
7. Desha (Habitat): The patient's habitat or geographical
location is also a factor.
Physicians determine a suitable dose of medicine
by considering these factors. There is no universally
applicable dosage for everyone. Instead, the dosage
of medicine is individualized based on factors such
as time, digestive capacity, age, strength, constitution,
dosha, and habitat.
Sharngadhara has proposed dosages based on age
and preparations. According to his recommendations,
for a one-month-old child, the dosage should be one
ratti (125 mg), administered as a confection with milk,
honey, sugar, and ghee. The dosage increases gradually
at the rate of one ratti per month up to one year of
age. Afterward, the dosage increment continues up to
the age of seventy, and then gradually decreases in a
regressive manner. This dosage regimen applies to both
powders and pastes, whereas for decoctions, the dosage
should be four times the specified amount.
PosoLoGy

* Posology is the branch of pharmacology that deals
with the study of dosages and doses of medicines, as
well as the factors influencing their administration.

* It involves determining the appropriate dosage of a
drug for a particular patient based on various factors
such as age, weight, gender, health status, and the
severity of the condition being treated.

* Posology aims to ensure the safe and effective use
of medications by providing guidelines for dosage
regimens that optimize therapeutic outcomes while
minimizing the risk of adverse effects.

----- PAGE 15 -----
Chapter 1 » Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana

~ Calculating the dosage of medication based on
age involves considering several factors such as
the developmental stage of the individual, their
metabolism, and their response to the medication.

Here’s a General overview of how Dosage may be calculated

according to Age:

1. Infants and Newborns: Dosage for infants and
newborns is typically based on their weight rather
than their age. Pediatricians often use weight-based
dosing charts to calculate the appropriate dosage
for medications :

e Young Rule
e Dilling Rule

2. Children: As children grow older, their dosage may

be adjusted based on age and weight. Pediatric

dosing guidelines take into account the child’s
age, weight, and sometimes body surface area to
determine the appropriate dose.

. Adolescents: Adolescents may require dosages
similar to adults, but adjustments may still be made
based on factors such as weight, developmental
stage, and metabolism.

. Adults: Foradults, dosages are typically standardized
based on average body weight and are often not
adjusted solely based on age. However, individual
factors such as liver or kidney function may still
influence dosing.

5. Elderly: Elderly individuals may require lower
dosages due to changes in metabolism, reduced
organ function, and increased sensitivity to
medications. Renal and hepatic function should
be considered when calculating dosages for this
population.

It’s essential to follow dosage guidelines provided
by healthcare professionals or medication labels,
as incorrect dosing can lead to adverse effects or
reduced efficacy of the medication. Always consult
with a healthcare provider for personalized dosage
recommendations tailored to individual needs and

circumstances.

4.6 Aushadha Sevana Kala

The pharmacokinetics of aushadha are influenced
by the body's biological rhythm. Therefore, to
achieve maximum health benefits, aushadha must be
administered at the appropriate time based on factors
such as the patient’s disease, strength, and age. This
optimal time for aushadha administration is known
as “bheshaja kala” or “aushadha sevana kala” or

“aushadha apeksha kala.”

w

ba

Various Ayurvedic texts mention different periods
for administering aushadha. Ashtanga Sangraha lists
eleven, while Charaka, Sushruta and Kashyapa mention
ten. Sharngadhara, on the other hand, identifies five
suitable periods for aushadha administration. These
periods are essential considerations for maximizing
the efficacy of treatment and ensuring the desired
therapeutic outcomes.

ACCORDING TO ARCHARYA CHARAKA
Sosraiet Yel HA WATTS: |
aan waa reared eat! (Cha. Chi. 30/298)

Early morning on empty stomach
Before food

1. Bhuktadau -1

2.  Bhuktadau -2

3. | Madhya in between a single meal

4. Pashchat -1 After morning food

5. _ Pashchat -2 After evening food

6. Muhurmuhuh Frequently

7.  Samudga Before and after food

8, Bhaktasamyukta Along with food

9. Grasa Along with each bolus of the food
10. Grasantara In between 2 bolus

ACCORDING TO SUSHRUTA
aya Ugdgute arava a sit eeitTTaATCT:
(Gu.Uttar. 64/65)

1. Abhakta Without food

2.  Pragbhakta Before food

3.  Madhyabhakta In between a meal

4. _ Adhobhakta After food

5,  Sabhakta Mixed along with the food

6.  Antarabhakta In between 2 meals

7.  Samudga Before and after food

8. 9 Muhurmuhuh Again and again (frequently)
9. Sagrasa Along with each bolus of food
10. Grasantara In between two bolus

ACCORDING TO VAGBHATA
Weds: VU Wear MT AI (A.S.Su. 23/12)

1. Abhakta Without food

2. Pragbhakta Before food

3.  Madhyabhakta In between a meal

4, _ Adhobhakta After food

5.  Sabhakta Mixed along with the food
6.  Antarabhakta In between two meals

7. | Samudga Before and after food

8. Muhurmuhuh Again and again

9. — Sagrasa Along with each bolus of the food
10. | Grasantara In between 2 bolus.

11. Nishi Night at bed time

----- PAGE 16 -----
; "

Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 1

ACCORDING TO SHARNGADHARA

3a: vata: are dasrre0t JU

fenfarqated wre wer feats

Baan wis a ygeeata dar PAAR (Sha. Pra. 2/2-3)

L Suryodaya At sun rise time
as Divasabhojana During day meals
Be Sayantane Evening times

4. Muhurmuhuh Repeatedly

5. Nishi At bed time

CHRONOTHERAPEUTICS

1. Itrefers to the science of timing drug administration
to optimize treatment outcomes based on the body's
natural biological rhythms.

. This approach acknowledges that various
physiological processes, such as metabolism,
hormone levels, and organ function, follow circadian
rhythms, which can influence the absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and elimination of drugs.

3. By aligning drug administration with these rhythms,

chronotherapeutics aims to enhance therapeutic
efficacy, minimize side effects, and improve patient
compliance.

N

4. This field is particularly relevant in conditions
where disease symptoms or drug responses vary
throughout the day, suchas in asthma, hypertension,
and cancer.

ol

. Chronotherapeutics emphasizes the importance of
personalized medicine and considers factors such
as the patient's age, sex, lifestyle, and disease status
when determining optimal dosing schedules.

1.7 Anupana

Anupana refers to a substance or vehicle used as a
medium to administer medicine. It plays a crucial
role in enhancing the efficacy and absorption of the
medicine, as well as mitigating any potential side effects.
Anupanas can vary widely and may include water, milk,
honey, ghee (clarified butter), juice, or specific herbal
decoctions. The choice of anupana depends on factors
such as the patient's constitution, the nature of the
medicine, the desired therapeutic effect, and the doshic
imbalance being addressed. Additionally, anupanas
may also be selected based on taste, temperature,
and other sensory properties to optimize the overall
therapeutic experience and promote healing.

ANUPANA DEFINITIONS

* Ay ward Wad sft ATTA (Shabdakalpadruma)

BUT aT ay Bre tae sit AIT!
(Cha. Su. 27/319; Chakrapani Tika

© Hee 3 Ua Wal Sit ATTA
(Su. Su. 46/419; Dalhana Tika)

© agar sia at] at I a
(Sha. Ma. Kha. 8/4; Adhamalla Tika)

e AA HEU Mae Sit AGATA (Dravyaguna 1st part)

SIGNIFICANCE OF ANUPANA

aan ae wet fared rorta wate |
aquaacneg dam ata TAs! (Sha. Ma. Kh. 6/5)
Sharngadhara compares anupana to oil on wate;
illustrating its role in facilitating rapid absorption and
assimilation of medicine.
fiarat maafettgaatert: |
FaTeTearenngataa: Pad!

(V. P. Pra.Tritiya khanda 82
Insufficient water consumption during meals can lead
to dryness in the food, which affects its texture and
moisture content. When food lacks moisture, it becomes
harder to chew and swallow, which can slow down
the digestive process. Proper digestion relies on the
food being adequately moistened by saliva and gastric
juices, allowing enzymes to break it down efficientl;
Without sufficient moisture, this process becomes less
effective, potentially leading to indigestion, discomfori,
and nutrient malabsorption. Therefore, it’s important to
drink water regularly during meals to ensure that food
remains moist and facilitates optimal digestion.

1.8 Pathya Apathaya

“Pathya” is indeed derived from the Sanskrit root word
“Patha,” which conveys the meaning of “a way or
channel.” In the context of Ayurveda, “Pathya” refers
to a regimen or dietary guidelines that are considered
beneficial or conducive to health. These guidelines
suggest the appropriate lifestyle practices, dietary
choices, and behaviors that support well-being and
balance in the body. By following Pathya, individuals
aim to maintain or restore health, aligning themselves
with the natural rhythms and needs of their bodies.
eaters a ad at Marat (Cha.Su. 25/45)
Pathya refers to dietary and lifestyle practices that
are considered beneficial for health. These practices
typically include foods, behaviors, and routines that
help calm the mind, nourish the body, and promote
overall well-being. Pathya emphasizes consuming

----- PAGE 17 -----
“Chapter 1 = Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana

wholesome, nutritious foods, following a regular
routine, and engaging in activities that support mental
and physical health.
On the other hand, Apathya refers to practices that are
considered detrimental to health. These may include
consuming unhealthy foods, following irregular or
unhealthy routines, and engaging in behaviors that
disrupt mental and physical well-being. Apathya is
the opposite of Pathya and is generally avoided or
minimized to maintain optimal health according to
Ayurvedic principles.
Pathya and Apathya principles are utilized both for
disease prevention and treatment in Ayurveda. Vaidya
Lolimbraja, in his book “Vaidyajivanam,” describes a
fundamental principle regarding Pathya and Apathya.
He explains that the arrangement of diet, known as
pathyaharvyavastha, is outlined in Ayurveda in a
highly scientific manner. Pathya refers to a diet that
is beneficial for both the mind and body, promoting
health and well-being. In contrast, Apathya refers to a
diet that negatively impacts the mind and body, leading
to adverse effects on health. By adhering to Pathya
guidelines and avoiding Apathya practices, individuals
can support their overall health and prevent the onset
or progression of diseases according to Ayurvedic
principles.
Pathya encompasses various beneficial aspects of Dietary
and Lifestyle practices, including:

1. Satmya: Compatibility with one’s constitution or

natural tendencies.
2. Svasthahitakara: Promoting health and well-being.

3. Upashaya: Alleviating or mitigating symptoms or

diseases.

4. Svasthavasthapalaka: Supporting the maintenance of
good health.

5. Hita Ahara: Consuming wholesome and
nourishing foods.

6. Svastha Aujaskara: Enhancing vitality and energy.
7. Shramakara: Providing comfort and tranquility.
8, Dhatu Avirodhi: Supporting the proper functioning
of bodily tissues.

9. Sukha Parinamakara: Leading to pleasant or favorable
outcomes.
Dhatu Samyakara: Balancing and harmonizing
bodily tissues.
Apathya, on the other hand, represents practices that are
considered detrimental to Health, including:

1. Asatmya: Incompatibility with one’s constitution or

natural tendencies.

10.

5

2. Svastha Ahitakara: Detrimental to health and

well-being.

3. Ahitakara: Producing adverse effects or harm.

4. Anupashaya: Failing to alleviate or exacerbating
symptoms or diseases.

5. Asukha Parinamakara: Leading to unpleasant or
unfavorable outcomes.

6. Ashramakara: Disrupting comfort or tranquility.

7. Dhatu. Asamyakara: Causing imbalance
disharmony in bodily tissues.

1.9 Pharmacology

Is the scientific field dedicated to researching the
impacts of drugs on living organisms. It encompasses
the investigation of how drugs interact with biological
systems, including their mechanisms of action,
therapeutic effects, side effects, and the factors
influencing their absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and excretion in the body. Pharmacology plays a
crucial role in drug discovery, development, and
utilization in the treatment and prevention of diseases.
It provides insights into understanding drug actions,
drug interactions, and the rational use of medications
to optimize patient outcomes while minimizing adverse
effects.

Pharmacokinetics is the branch of pharmacology
that deals with the study of the movement of drugs
within the body. It focuses on how drugs are absorbed,
distributed, metabolized, and excreted over time.
Pharmacokinetics involves the quantitative analysis of
drug concentrations in various biological compartments,
such as blood, plasma, tissues, and urine, as well as the
determination of pharmacokinetic parameters such
as absorption rate, distribution volume, clearance
rate, and half-life. Understanding pharmacokinetics is
crucial for optimizing drug dosing regimens, predicting
drug interactions, assessing drug safety and efficacy,
and individualizing drug therapy based on patient
characteristics such as age, weight, renal function, and
hepatic function.

or

Pharmacodynamics is the branch of pharmacology
that focuses on understanding the biochemical and
physiological effects of drugs on the body, as well as
the mechanisms underlying these effects. It examines
how drugs interact with their target molecules, such
as receptors, enzymes, and ion channels, to produce
their therapeutic or toxic effects. Pharmacodynamics
also investigates the relationship between the dose of
a drug and its pharmacological response, including
factors such as potency, efficacy, and dose-response

----- PAGE 18 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 7

relationships. Understanding pharmacodynamics is
essential for predicting and optimizing the therapeutic
outcomes of drugs, as well as for designing safer and
more effective medications.

[ 1.10 Route of Drug Administration

Refers to the method by which a drug is introduced into
the body to achieve its desired effect. Various methods
exist for administering drugs, such as:
i. Oral: Drugs are taken by mouth and swallowed,
either in the form of tablets, capsules, liquids, or
powders.

N

- Sublingual: Drugs are placed under the tongue
and absorbed through the mucous membranes,
bypassing the digestive system and entering the
bloodstream directly.

3. Buccal: Drugs are placed between the cheek and
gum and absorbed through the buccal mucosa,
entering the bloodstream directly.

4. Rectal: Drugs are inserted into the rectum and
absorbed through the rectal mucosa, entering the
bloodstream or exerting a local effect in the rectum
or nearby tissues.

5. Parenteral: Medications are delivered through
injection or infusion directly into body tissues
or the bloodstream, encompassing intravenous
(IV), intramuscular (IM), subcutaneous (SC), and
intradermal (ID) routes of administration.

6. Topical: Drugs are applied to the skin or mucous
membranes for local effects, such as creams,
ointments, lotions, sprays, or patches.

7. Inhalation: Drugs are administered by inhalation into
the lungs for systemic effects or to treat respiratory
conditions, such as metered-dose inhalers, dry
powder inhalers, nebulizers, or vaporizers.

Note: The choice of route of drug administration depends

on various factors, including the properties of the

drug, the desired onset and duration of action, the
patient’s condition, and patient preference. Each
route has its advantages and disadvantages in term;
of absorption, bioavailability, convenience, ang
potential adverse effects.

| 1.11 Bioavailability

Refers to the fraction or percentage of an administereq
dose of a drug that reaches systemic circulation and is
available to exert its pharmacological effect. In other
words, it measures the extent and rate at which the active
ingredient of a drug is absorbed into the bloodstream
and becomes available at the site of action.

Factors that can influence bioavailability include:

1. Route of administration: Different routes of
administration (oral, intravenous, intramuscular,
etc.) can affect how quickly and completely a drug
is absorbed into the bloodstream.

2. Absorption: The drug’s chemical properties,
formulation, and presence of food or other
substances in the gastrointestinal tract can affect its
absorption.

3. Distribution: Once in the bloodstream, a drug may

bind to proteins or distribute into tissues, which can

affect its bioavailability.

. Metabolism: Drugs may undergo metabolism by
enzymes in the liver or other tissues, which can
reduce their bioavailability.

- Elimination: Clearance of a drug from the body
through metabolism or excretion can also impact its
bioavailability.

Note: Understanding bioavailability is important for
optimizing drug therapy, as it determines the dose
needed to achieve the desired therapeutic effect. It
also helps in comparing different formulations of a
drug or different routes of administration to ensure
consistent and predictable drug levels in the body.

P=

on

----- PAGE 19 -----
Chapter 1 * Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana

site AR CEUIICNS ACRE Gi Dik Naas na

Chapter At A Glance

CONCEPT OF AUSHADHI IN AYURVEDA

Aushadhi, derived from the Sanskrit term “aushadha,”
refers to medicine or drug essential for health
preservation and disease treatment. The use of aushadi,
whether as single substances or in combinations, plays
a vital role in maintaining homeostasis and addressing
imbalances in the body.

CLASSIFICATION AND SOURCES

Single Drugs (Agraya Prakarana):

* Charaka Samhita: 152 superior single drugs

+ Ashtanga Sangraha: 155

¢ Ashtanga Hridaya: 55

All substances (dravya) used as aushadhi are
derived from the five mahabhutas (elements): prithvi
(earth), apa (water), agni (fire), vayu (air), and akasha
(ether). The body itself is a composition of these
elements in varying proportions. Imbalances in these
proportions disrupt homeostasis, leading to disorders.
To restore balance, substances with the required
mahabhuta composition are administered as aushadi.

ESSENTIAL COMPONENTS OF HEALTHCARE IN AYURVEDA

Aushadhi is one of the four pillars of healthcare,

along with:

1. Physician (Bheshaka): The knowledgeable and
skilled healer.

2. Attendant (Paricharaka): The caregiver who assists in
treatment.

3. Patient (Rogi):
treatment.

The individual receiving the

EXAMINATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Effective Disease management with Aushadhi requires:

¢ Correct identification

~ Proper dosage

% Timely administration

Proper selection depends on understanding the
aushadi’s mode of action. It must be tailored to the
patient, location, and season to avoid adverse effects.
Thorough examination of aushadi is crucial prior to
its use.

PREPARATION (AUSHADHA KALPANA)

Aushadhi kalpana involves processing raw drugs to
enhance their pharmacological actions (samskara).
Techniques include:

* Dilution

* Application of heat

* Cleansing

* Churning

* Storing

* Maturing

* Flavoring

* Preservation

DOSAGE AND POSOLOGY

Aushadha Matra (Dosage): The measure of quantity,

size, duration, number, or degree is critical. Dosage

considerations include:

~ Kala (Time): Season and time of day

Agni (Digestive Power): Patient's digestive ability

~ Vayas (Age): Patient’s age

“ Bala (Strength): Patient's overall strength

& Prakriti (Constitution): — Individual’s physical
constitution

% Dosha (Nature of Dosha): Specific nature of the dosha
involved in the disease

& Desha (Habitat): Patient’s geographical location
Sharngadhara suggests age-based dosages, especially
for infants and the elderly, adjusting gradually as
per individual needs.

CHRONOTHERAPEUTICS

Aligning drug administration with the body’s

biological rhythms enhances therapeutic efficacy and

minimizes side effects. This field considers circadian

rhythms in various physiological processes, aiming for

personalized medicine.

ANUPANA (ADJUVANT)

Anupana is a vehicle or medium for administering

medicine, such as water, milk, honey, or specific herbal

decoctions. It enhances the efficacy and absorption of

the medicine while mitigating potential side effects. The

choice of anupana depends on factors like the patient's

constitution, the nature of the medicine, and the doshic

imbalance.

PATHYA AND APATHYA

“ Pathya: Refers to dietary and lifestyle practices
beneficial for health :
e Satmya: Compatibility with one’s constitution.
e Svasthahitakara: Promoting health and well-being
e Upashaya: Alleviating symptoms.
e Hita Ahara: Wholesome and nourishing foods.

----- PAGE 20 -----
Rasashasira and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter 7

* Apathya: Practices detrimental to health:

e Asatmya: Incompatibility with one’s constitution.
e Svastha Ahitkara: Detrimental to health.
© Anupashaya: Failing to alleviate symptoms.

+ Pharmacokinetics involves: examining how drugs are
absorbed, distributed, metabolized, and excreted
within the body.

+ Pharmacodynamics focuses: on understanding the
biochemical and physiological effects of drugs and
the mechanisms by which they exert their actions.

ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION

* Oral

* Sublingual

* Buccal
+ Rectal
~ Parenteral (IV, IM, SC, ID)

“ Topical

¢ Inhalation

Bioavailability; The fraction of an administereq

dose reaching systemic circulation and exerting jj,

pharmacological effect.

Note: Understanding and applying these principles
ensures that aushadi in Ayurveda is used effectively
for treating diseases and maintaining health,
emphasizing personalized treatment based op,
individual needs and conditions.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

ry

. What is the primary goal of Aushadha (medicine) in
Ayurveda?

a. To enhance physical strength

b. To restore homeostasis and treat disease
c. To improve mental clarity

d. To provide nutritional supplements

2. Which of the following is NOT one of the four essential
healthcare aspects in Ayurveda?

a. Physician (Bheshaka)
b. Medicine (Bheshaja)
c. Diet (Pathya)
d. Patient (Rogi)
3. What does the term ‘Anupana’ refer to in Ayurveda?
a. The main ingredient in a medicine
b. Amethod of preparing medicine

c. A substance or vehicle used as a medium to
administer medicine
d. A specific type of Ayurvedic treatment
4. Which factor is NOT considered when determining the
appropriate dose of aushadha in Ayurveda?
a. Time (Kala)
b. Digestive power (Agni)
c. Patient’s favourite food
d. Patient’s age (Vayas)
5. What is the meaning of ‘Samskara’ in the context of
Aushadha kalpana?
a. The selection of appropriate herbs
b. The process of preparing and transforming
crude drugs
c. The administration of medicine to the patient

d. The evaluation of a patient’s condition
6. Which of the following is a synonym for ‘Chikitsa’ jn

Ayurveda?
a. Vyadhiharana c. Kalpana
b. Anupana d. Dosha

7. What does ‘Pathya’ in Ayurveda refer to?
a. Harmful dietary practices
b. Beneficial dietary and lifestyle practices
c. Medicine dosage
d. Diagnostic techniques
8. InAyurvedic posology, whatis the primary consideration
when calculating the dosage of a drug?

a. The colour of the medicine

b. The patient’s blood type

c. The patient’s age, weight, and constitution
d. The cost of the medicine

wo

. According to Sharngadhara, how many suitable periods
are identified for aushadha administration?

a. Three c. Seven
b. Five d. Ten
Chronotherapeutics in Ayurveda involves:
a. Timing drug administration to align with
biological rhythms
b. Mixing medicines with food
c. Administering drugs only at night
d. Combining different drugs for better efficacy
11. Which route of drug administration involves placing
the drug under the tongue for absorption through the
mucous membranes?
a. Oral
b. Buccal

10

ce. Sublingual
d. Rectal

----- PAGE 21 -----
“Chapter 1 * Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana

12, Which route of drug administration bypasses the

13.

w

14.

us,

16.

digestive system and directly enters the bloodstream?
a. Oral
b. Sublingual

c. Rectal

d. Topical

Which of the following is a parenteral route of drug
administration?

a. Intravenous (IV)
b. Oral d, Inhalation

Which factor does NOT influence the bioavailability
of a drug?

a. Route of administration

ce. Topical

b. Drug distribution

c. Patient's age

d. Drug metabolism

Bioavailability refers to:

a. The rate at which a drug is eliminated from

the body.

b. The fraction of an administered dose that reaches
systemic circulation.

. The speed at whicha drug is distributed to tissues.

. The amount of drug needed to achieve a
therapeutic effect.

ao

Which route of drug administration is typically used for
local effects on the skin or mucous membranes?
a. Oral

b. Topical

c. Rectal
d. Intramuscular

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

ayy,

18.

19.

20.

itil,
16.

Which route of administration is likely
to be affected by the presence of food in the
gastrointestinal tract?
a. Oral

b. Intravenous

In which route of administration are drugs absorbed
through the rectal mucosa?

a, Oral c. Rectal

b. Buccal d. Sublingual

Which of the following routes is used for drugs
administered by inhalation into the lungs?

c, Oral

d. Inhalation

most

c. Inhalation
d. Topical

a. Topical

b. Buccal

What does bioavailability measure in pharmacology?

a. The maximum concentration of a drug in the
bloodstream.

b. The fraction of an administered dose that is
metabolized by the liver.

c. Theextent and rate at which the active ingredient
is absorbed into the bloodstream.

d. The duration of time a drug remains in the body.

ANSWERS KEYS

b 2. c 5, c 4. c 5 b
a Up b 8. c b 10. a
c 12. b 13. a 14. c 15: b
Dia else ae 18. c iG), d 20. c

Long Answer Questions (SAQ)

Lakshana of Prashastha Bheshaja
Scope of Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana.
Explain Aushadha Sevana Kala
Explain Aushadha Prayoga Marga.
Short Note on Pathya- Apathaya.

Expalin Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana, including its ety-
mology, scope, and the characteristics of Prashastha
Bheshaja Lakshana in detail?

----- PAGE 22 -----
[2.1 Guduchi

Reference: The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-
01, Volume 01, Pg. 70.
Guduchi consists of dried, mature pieces of the stem
of Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers., a member of
the family Menispermaceae. This perennial climber is
found throughout tropical India. The drug is collected
during the summer, preferably in the month of May,
and can also be used in its fresh form. i
SYNONYMS
Sanskrit: Amritavalli,
Guduchika, Chinnodbhava
» Assamese: Siddhilata, Amarlata
* Bengali: Gulancha

Amrita, Madhuparni,

Bo

English: —

Gujrati: Galac, Garo

Hindi: Giloya, Gurcha

« Kannada: Amritaballi

* Kashmiri: Amrita, Gilo

» Malayalam: Chittamritu

- Marathi: Gulvel

* Oriya: Guluchi

“ Punjabi: Gilo

% Tamil: Seendal, Seendil kodi

Telugu: Thippateega

» Urdu: Gilo

DESCRIPTION

A. Macroscopic: The drug occurs in pieces of varying
thickness, ranging from 0.6 to 5 cm in diameter. Young
stems are green with smooth surfaces and swellings at
the nodes, while older stems have a light brown surface
marked with warty protuberances due to circular
lenticels. When cut transversely, the surface shows
a radial structure with conspicuous medullary rays
traversing porous tissues. The taste is bitter.

Som

>

SINGLE DRUG (HERBAL & MINERAL)

B. Microscopic: The transverse section of the stem
shows the outermost layer of cork, differentiating
into an outer zone of thick-walled, brownish, and
compressed cells, and an inner Zone of thin-walled,
colorless, tangentially arranged cells in 3-4 rows. This
is followed by five or more rows of secondary cortex
cells, with the outer rows being smaller than the inner
ones. Just within the opening of lenticels, groups
of sclereids consisting of 2-10 cells are found in the
secondary cortex region. The outer zone of the cortex
consists of 3-5 rows of irregularly arranged, tangentially
elongated chlorenchyma cells. Cortical cells situated
towards the inner side are polygonal in shape and
filled with plenty of starch grains, which can be simple,
ovoid, irregularly ovoid-elliptical, or occasionally
compound with 2-4 components. Several secretory cells
are scattered in the cortex. Pericyclic fibers are lignified,
with a wide lumen and pointed ends, and are associated
with many crystal fibers containing a single prism in
each chamber.

The vascular zone is composed of 10-12 or more wedge-
shaped strips of xylem, externally surrounded by
semi-circular strips of phloem, alternating with wide
medullary rays. The phloem consists of sieve tubes,
companion cells, and phloem parenchyma of polygonal
or tangentially elongated cells, some of which contain
crystals of calcium oxalate. The cambium is composed
of one to two layers of tangentially elongated cells in
each vascular bundle. The xylem consists of vessels
tracheids, parenchyma, and fibers. In the primary
xylem, the vessels are comparatively narrow and
devoid of tyloses, while secondary xylem elements are
thick-walled and lignified. The vessels are cylindrical in
shape, bearing bordered pits on their walls. Medullary
rays are 15-20 or more cells wide, containing rounded
hemispherical, oblong, or ovoid starch grains with
faintly marked concentric striations and a central hilum
appearing like a point. These starch grains measu!
5.5-11.20 pm in diameter and 6-11.28 pm in length

----- PAGE 23 -----
Chapter 2 = Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) 11

The pith is composed of large, thin-walled cells mostly INGREDIENTS UsED
containing starch grains. Z TURES: proRaEaSA Sa
IDENTITY, PURITY, AND STRENGTH ee Properticn
Guduchi St. 1 Part
A. Dried drug:
1, Totalash: Not more than 2 percent (Appendix 2.2.3).
2. Foreign matter: Nil (Appendix 2.2.2).
3. Acid-insoluble ash: Not more than 1 percent
(Appendix 2.2.4).
4. Acid-insoluble ash: Not more than 3 percent

Procedure:
1. Choose high-quality dried Guduchi stems that are
free from mold, insects, and other impurities.
2. Rinse the dried stems quickly under running water
to remove any surface dust and impurities.
3. Soak the one part of Guduchi stems in four parts

A dix 2.2.6).
(Appendix 2.2.6) of water overnight. This will help to rehydrate the
5. Alcohol-soluble extractive: Not less than 3 percent stems and make them easier to process.
Cippesel Aa : 4, After soaking, chop the rehydrated stems into small
6. Water-soluble extractive: Not less than 11 percent pieces to facilitate easier grinding and extraction
(Appendix). of juice.
B. For fresh drug: 5, Crush the chopped pieces using a mortar and pestle
1. Foreign matter: Nil (Appendix 2.2.2). to make a coarse paste (Kalka).
2. Moisture content: 75 percent (Appendix 2.2.9). 6. Pour the Crushed Guduchi into a clean muslin cloth

or a fine strainer.
7. Squeeze the muslin cloth or use the strainer to extract
the juice. Ensure that all the liquid is extracted by

Constituents : Terpenoids and alkaloids.
* Properties and Action

e Rasa: Tikta, Kashaya pressing thoroughly.
pecupe, Tapa 8. Filter the juice again through a fine sieve or muslin
e Virya: Ushna cloth to ensure there are no residues left in the juice.
e Vipaka: Madhura 9. Collect the filtered juice in a clean, dry container.
e Karma: Tridoshamaka, Samgrahi, Balya, Dipana, Anupana: Honey

Rasayana, Raktarodhaka, Jvaraghna. Indication: All types of Prameha

* Important Formulations : Amrtarista, Amritottara  pyarimacopyNAMICcs

Kvatha Churna, Guduchi Taila, Guduchiayadi x : f
Chua, Guduchi Sattva,  Chinnodbhavadi 1. Guduchi Svarasa has Rasayana (rejuvenating)

e5

pues Chum. 2 es d levels, i ti
rs 7 x fs egu ates OO sugar evels, improves panecrea (e
‘ eee es : Kushtha, Vatarakta, Jvara, Kamala, Brecon endlenhencesinculincensitiv ty, bencticial
GUNG Pa for diabetes (Prameha) management.
Dose: ¢ 3. Boosts immunity, scavenges free radicals, and reduces
1. 3-6 gms of the drug in powder form. oxidative stress to prevent diabetic complications.
2. 20-30 ml of the drug for decoction. PHARMACOKINETICS
2.1.4 GUDUCHI SVARASA 1. Active compounds are absorbed, distributed, and
Reference: Sha.Sam.Ma. Kh. Chp1/7 page 138 interact with cellular receptors after oral intake.
a agi—agqaall Ta: aeam: aauretstd | 2. Administered with honey for improved taste and

(Sha. S.M.Kh. 1/7) efficacy.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Name

ti lame
Efficacy of Guduchi
Svarasa (Bhavaprakasa)
in the Management of
Madhumeha

In this study, 25 patients with classical Madhumeha symptoms
were selected, regardless of sex or occupation. Evaluation
based on Rogabala, Dehabala, Chetasabala, and Agnibala,
using specific scoring, underwent statistical analysis via a
Paired t-test. Guduchi Svarasa showed significant efficacy in
alleviating Madhumeha symptoms, particularly in post-meal
blood sugar levels.

Prakash Mane, Professor, Rognidan
Department, DY. Patil Vidyapeeth’s
Dr. DY. Patil College of Ayurved
and Research Centre, Pimpri, Pune,
MHA, India.

----- PAGE 24 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 5

Nami Author Name | a Ss
Sumedh Sanjay Joshi, Post Graduate Sharngadhara has listed 46 formulations containing Guduch |
Scholar, Department of Dravyaguna, | as an Ingredient. Only 3 of these formulations (Amrita Ghrita,
All india Institute of Ayurveda, New | Guduchi Hima, and Amrita Svarasa) feature Guduchi as the sola
Delhi, India. drug and are indicated for managing Prameha, Kushtha, ang
: Jvara, Otherwise, Guduchi Is included in various formulations
meant for diverse pathologies.

Therapeutic efficacy
of Guduchi w.s.t to
Madhyama Khanda of
Sharngadhara Samhita

——_|

4, Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

2.1.8 GUDUCHYADI CHURNA
Reference: B.R., Plihayakrita Rogadhikara

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again

ART HOT Aaa: TA TATRA: 1 through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency,
Waa TaN quia fatafaraq 6. Store the final compound powder in sterilized,
Taian Saar acy | | airtight glass containers to preserve its potency and
waapiad eed arearareanante ar freshness.

AM ease aetavrad aa 7. Label the containers with the name Guduchyad;
ae =a erat : ee and the preparation date.

. 6 fs jose: &
(B.R., Plihayakrita, Rogadhikara, 41/12-14) Anupana: Coldl Waren

INGREDIENTS USED Odour: Odourless

cme

Guduchi St. 1 Part Taste: Tikta i.

Ativisha ae ‘feng Indications: Yakritpliha roga and all types of fever.
Shunthi Rz. 4 Part PHARMACODYNAMICS

Chirayata Pi. 1 Part 1. Guduchi, Ativisha, and Chirayata have antipyretic
Kalamegha Pl. 1 Part properties, modulating temperature regulation to
Nagarmotha Dr. Rz. 1 Part reduce fever.

Pippali Fr. 1 Part 2. Shunthi and Pippali aid digestion and enhance
Yavakshara = 1 Part bioavailability of active compounds.

Shudha Kashisha = — 1 Part 3. Nagaramotha and Yavakshara alleviate liver and
Champaka Bk. 1 Part spleen disorders, improving liver function and

hemoglobin levels.

Procedure:

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for 1 administered orally as a powder mixed with cold

Guduchyadi Churna. Ensure each ingredient is water for rapid gastrointestinal absorption.

clean and free from impurities. 2. Metabolized in the liver, targeting the liver, spleen,

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and and digestive system.

pestle) ora grinder, grind eachingredient separately 3, Dosage of 3 grams ensures optimal therapeutic

into a fine powder. effects with minimal adverse reactions.
3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean 4. Characteristic yellowish color and bitter taste
cloth to remove any coarse particles. indicate bioactive compounds.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Prof. Dr. Mrs. Sunanda R. Pedheka, BAMS, | Ar
M.D., Ph.D. Kayachikitsa, Professo
Department of Kayachikitsa, Faculty
of Ayurved, |. M. S. Banaras Hindu|
University, Varanasi, U. P,

Efficacy of Guduchyadi
Churna in Anxiety

ip A, treated with |
Disorder

effective results |

----- PAGE 25 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

\rticle Name Author Name

in the Management of] Yavatmal, Maharashtra, India.
Pandu Roga with Special
Reference to Anaemia—A
Single Case Report

Role of Guduchyadi Churna Tarannum Khan, PG Scholar, PG Dept.
as an Internal Intervention | of Kayachikitsa, DMM Ayurved College,

in this case study, Guduchyadi churna was orally
administered twice daily for 45 days after meals with
lukewarm water. The follow-up on the 45th day revealed
that targeting the rasavaha srotas with this treatment
not only improved Haemoglobin concentration but also
alleviated symptoms associated with Pandu roga.

2.1.¢ GUDUCHI KVATHA
Reference: B.R., Jvaradhikara
1, Uget Prats Wars THT |
UH Hava it TeEMictd U7: |
Rowe C SPLINES NE all
(B.R., Jvaradhikara, 6/62)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi St. 1 Part
Nimba Bk. 1 Part
Dhaniya Sd. 1 Part
Padmaka Bk. 1 Part
Rakta Chandana Bk. 1 Part
Water for Decoction = 16 times
Reduced to = 1/16 part
Procedure:

1. Obtain the necessary all the required for Guduchi
Kvatha. Ensure each ingredient is dried and cleaned
properly.

2. Grindeachingredientseparately intoacoarsepowder.

3. Mix all the coarse powders properly in a clean, dry
container.

4 Add sixteen times the amount of water to the
mixture of coarse powders.

5. Allow the mixture to soak in the water overnight.

6. The next morning, subject the mixture to mild heat.
Continue heating until the liquid reduces to 1/16th
of its original quantity.

7. Once reduced, filter the mixture through a clean
cloth to remove the solid residues.

8. Collect the filtrate in a clean container. This filtrate
is known as Guduchi Kvatha.

Dose: 50 ml.
Indications: All types of jvara, Aruchi, Vamana, Pipasa
and Daha.

Ds AMTATOMG TAT: |
Aigisd cara: AghsataTgTA: 11 (B.R., Jvara., 6/76)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi St. 1 Part
Sariva Rt. 1 Part
Draksha Fr. 1 Part
Shatapushpa Fr. 1 Part

Punarnava Pl. 1 Part
Water for Decoction = 16 times
Reduced to = 1/16th part

Dose: 50 ml, Twice a day.
Indications: Vataja jvara.
3, Tgeat Wage a gla TET Ya
AMATO HUTA Watts: 1! (B.R., Jvara., 6/88)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi St. 1 Part

Sauf Fr. 1 Part
Draksha Fr. 1 Part
Rasana Lf. 1 Part
Punarnava PI. 1 Part
Trayamana Rz. 1 Part
Water for Decoction = 16 times
Reduced to = 1/16th Part

Dose: 50 ml, Twice a day.
Indications: Vataja jvara.
4. Yet Gara act AOA
oe Wet eel gla ATE A THe: 1
auganty wratiuta AeA Well (B.R., Jvara., 6/99-100)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi St, 1 Part
Chirayata Pl. 1 Part
Sugandhabala Rt. 1 Part
Khasa Sd. 1 Part
Musta Rz. 1 Part
Nishota Rt. 1 Part
Amala Fr. 1 Part
Draksha Fr. 1 Part
Vasa Lf 1 Part
Parpat Rt. 1 Part
Water for Decoction = 16 times
Reduced to = 1/16th Part
Dose: 50 ml.

Anupana: Honey.

Indications: Pittaja jvara.

5, Ygeracthawn: chert atst We: |
forced ety crevitawararyt (BR. Jvara., 6/122)

----- PAGE 26 -----
a Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter 5

14

5 ippali Fr. 1 Part
Part Used HEE
Brihati Rt. 1 Part
| Guduchi St. 1 Part 7
Amalaka Fr. 1 Part Daruharidra Bk. art
Parpata Rt. 1 Part Patola Lf. d Part
Water for Decoction = — 16 Parts Water for Decoction = = 16 Parts
Reduesdie = 1/A6th Part Reduced to = 4/16th Part
Dose: 50 ml.

Dose: 50 ml.
Indications: Pittaja jvara, Daha, Trishna. Indications: Pittakaphaja jvara, Kasa.

6. Use Get Wa APRgaaraey | 8. Tere ra oat gl at ATA
SHAS TAA SATS ASST facaiarsaes gagaaaa! (BR. Jvara., 6/43)

! INGREDIENTS USED
MASSA Sed TUGTATSTSAITA: |
Faugarireitaeest factamueft a1

(B.R., Jvara., 6/153-154) — ‘Guduchi St. 1 Part
INGREDIENTS USED Musta Dr. Rz. 1 Part
Chirayata pa (Ble 1 Part
Guduchi St. 1 Part Kantkari Pl. 4 Part
Rakta Chandan Bk. 1d Part Shunthi —Rz é d Part
Padmaka Hd. Wa. 4 Part Bilva Bk. 4 Part
Shunthi Rz. 1 Part Gambhara Rt _ i Part
Indrayava Sd. ape Sonapatha Rear paps (2 Part
Aarni Rt. 1 Part
ae ou: pals Paphala Rt. dart
poate @ rer Katuki Dr. Rz 1 Part
Amalatasa St. Bk. 1 Part Indrayava Sd. 4 Part
Sugandhabala Rt. 1 Part Yavasa Pl. 1 Part
Pata Rt. 1 Part Water for Decoction = ; 16 Parts
Dhaniya Fr. 1 Part Reduced to = 4/16th Part
Water for Decoction = 16 Parts indications yee of fever.
Reduced to = 4/16th Part PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Guduchi; Known for its immunomodulatory,
Dose: 50 ml. anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic properties. lt
enhances the body’s resistance to infections and

Indications: Sannipattaja Jvara, Kasa, Shvasa, Daha,
reduces fever by modulating immune responses.

Trishna.
7. Ughanittranaas Wet fad ATATEcH | 2. Musta: Possesses anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
cat Ute setae: cara: Tete: Prensa AI properties. It helps in reducing fever and alleviating
(B.R., Jvara., 6/180) pain associated with fever.
INGREDIENTS USED 3. Chirayata: Known for ifs bitter principles which
have antipyretic and anti-inflammatory effects. It

helps in reducing fever and detoxifying the bod).

4. Amala: Rich in vitamin CG, it acts as an antioxidant

Guduchi St. 1 Part

Nimba Bk. 1 Part and immune booster. It helps in reducing fever and
Vasa Lf. 1 Part improves overall health.

Shati Rt. 1 Part 5. Kantkari: Has expectorant and antipyretic properties

Chirayata Pl. 1 Part It is used to treat respiratory conditions associated
with fever.

----- PAGE 27 -----
Chapter 2 » Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

15

6. Shunthi: Known for its anti-inflammatory and 13. Indrayava: Known for its antipyretic and

antipyretic properties. It helps in reducing fever
and relieving symptoms such as body aches.

antimicrobial properties. It helps in reducing fever
and treating infections.

7. Bilva: Has antimicrobial and antipyretic properties. 14. Yavas: Has antipyretic and anti-inflammatory

It helps in reducing fever and digestive issues.
8. Gambhari: Possesses antipyretic and  anti-

properties. It helps in reducing fever and alleviating
symptoms of respiratory and digestive disorders.

inflammatory properties. It is effective in reducing PHARMACOKINETICS

fever and inflammation.

9. Syonaka: Known for its anti-inflammatory and
antipyretic properties. It helps in reducing fever

1. Absorption: Taken orally as a decoction; active

ingredients extracted into water are absorbed
through the gastrointestinal tract.

and relieving pain 2. Distribution: Active compounds are distributed via

10. Arni: Has antipyretic and  anti-inflammatory
properties. It helps in reducing fever and improving

the bloodstream, targeting the immune, respiratory,
and digestive systems.

respiratory health. 3. Metabolism: Primarily metabolized in the liver;

11. Paphala: Known for its antipyretic properties. It
helps in reducing fever and alleviating associated

some components undergo biotransformation to
active or inactive forms.

SY Eq OORS, 4. Excretion: Metabolites excreted via the kidneys

12. Katuki:  Possesses_ strong antipyretic and
hepatoprotective properties. It helps in reducing
fever and protecting the liver.

RESEARCH UPDATES

(urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces),
decoction aids in waste elimination.

Manisha Amitkumar Jagtap,
Guduchyadi Kashaya— A Lecturer in Kaumarbhritya
Review Article Dept. in Sumatibhai Shah
Ayurved Mahavidhyala,
Hadapsar.

This review article aims to explore the therapeutic applications
of Guduchyadi kashaya and analyze the diverse pharmacolo-
gical properties and therapeutic uses of its constituent drugs.
{t primarily focuses on identifying the key properties of indivi-
dual drugs and their potential impacts on disease pathoge-

nesis.

Pharmcological Potential Ansary. PY., Professor

of Guduchyadi Kvatham in & HOD, Department of
Combating Covid-19 Dravyaguna vijnanam,
Government Ayurveda College,
Tripunithura, Kerala.

The study highlights Guduchyadi kvatham’s effectiveness for
treating Pitta and Kapha imbalances, particularly in fever cases.
Its ingredients benefit various bodily systems. Pharmacological
activities like anti-inflammatory, antipyretic, antiviral,
antibacterial, and anti-allergic properties endorse its efficacy
against viral diseases, making it a valuable treatment option for
fever and related symptoms.

A Clinical Study To Evaluate ~|iRehana Parveen, PG Scholar,
the Efficacy of Guduchyadi Department of Kaya Chikitsa,
Kwath in the Management of | Government Ayurvedic College

Diabetic Polyneuropathy and Hospital, Guwahati,
Assam, India

Sixty patients aged 20-70 with Diabetic Polyneuropathy
were randomly. divided into two groups. Group A received
Guduchyadi Kwath, 40ml twice daily after meals, while Group
B received Tab Methylcobalamine (500 mcg) + Gabapentin (300
mg), 1 tablet daily for 90 days with 6 follow-ups. Results show
that Guduchyadi kvatha is equally effective as the control drug
in treating DPN, except for neuropathic pain where the control
drug showed superiority over Guduchyadi kvatha.

Efficacy of Guduchyadi Kvatha | Dr. Kowsalya R.G., PG

yoni Prakshalana on Upapluta | Scholar, Sri Kalabyreshwara
Yonivyapada — A Case Report | Swamy. Ayurvedic Medical
College and Hospital,
Research Centre, Vijayanagar,
Bangalore-560104, Karnataka

From this case study, Guduchyadi Kvatha yoni prakshalana
has proven effective in treating upapluta yonivyapad due
to its Tridosha Nashaka (balancing of the three doshas),
Sravahara (promoting discharge), Kanduhara (relieving itching),
Shothahara (anti-inflammatory), Dahaprashamana (alleviating
burning sensation), Vranashodana (cleansing wounds),
Krimighana (anti-parasitic), immunomodulatory, antimicrobial,
and anti-inflammatory properties.

----- PAGE 28 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 2

2.1.D GUDUCHI HIMA
Reference: B.R., Chhardi Rogadhikara
oa Teen fattrad sara ferent
fageta wae tifercor wargay||
(B.R., Chhardi Rogadhikara, 19/16)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi St. 1 Part
Water = 6 Parts
Procedure:
1. Obtain dried Guduchi (Giloy) stems and ensure

they are clean and free from impurities.

Using a Khalva Yantra, grind the Guduchi stems

into a coarse powder (Yavakuta Churna).

Collect the coarse powder into a clean earthen pot.

. Add 6 parts of cold water to the earthen pot
containing the Guduchi coarse powder. Ensure the

amount of water is sufficient to cover the powder
completely.

N

came)

5. Allow the mixture to soak overnight, exposing it
to moon rays for additional cooling and enhancing
properties.

6. The next morning, rub the soaked mixture with
your hands to ensure thorough extraction of the
medicinal properties.

7. Filter the mixture through a clean cloth to remove
the solid residues.

8. Collect the filtered liquid in a clean container. This
liquid is known as Guduchi Hima Kalpana.

Anupana: Madhu.

Indication: Types of Vamana Nasta.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Alkaloids: Cold extraction preserves the alkaloids
like berberine, choline, and palmatine, which have
immune-modulatory and anti-inflammatory effects.

2. Glycosides: Cold extraction retains glycosides, such
as tinosporide and cordifolioside, known for their
adaptogenic and antioxidant properties.

3. Steroids and Polysaccharides: These compounds
are important for their role in enhancing immune
response and exhibiting anti-diabetic effects.

MECHANISM OF ACTION

1, Immunomodulation: Guduchi is known to modulate
the immune system by enhancing the function
of macrophages, activating the production of
antibodies, and increasing resistance to infections.
The cold extraction process preserves these
immunomodulatory constituents, allowing them to
function effectively.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The preserved alkaloids and
glycosides exhibit anti-inflammatory effects by
inhibiting the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines,

3. Antioxidant: Guduchi contains antioxidants that
scavenge free radicals and protect against oxidative
stress. Cold extraction helps in retaining these
antioxidants, enhancing the herb’s efficacy in
reducing oxidative damage.

4. Hypoglycemic Effect: The cold extraction method
retains compounds that help in regulating blood
glucose levels by promoting insulin secretion and
improving glucose utilization.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Administered orally as a kashaya
(decoction); active compounds are efficiently
extracted into the water and absorbed through the
gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: Active ingredients are distributed via
the bloodstream, targeting various systems including
the digestive, thermoregulatory, and cardiovascular
systems to exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: Primarily metabolized in the liver,
where components may undergo biotransformation
into more active or inactive forms.

4, Excretion: Metabolites are excreted through the
kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces),
ensuring effective elimination of waste products.

RESEARCH Uppates : No Data Found.
2.1.£ GUDUCHI GHANA — SAMSHAMANI VAT!

Reference:
* AFI, Part IL, Page 183.
* Siddhayoga Sangraha- Jvara Rogadhikara

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

A Part
Parts a)

Procedure:

1. Obtain fresh or dried Guduci (Giloy) stems and
ensure they are clean and free from impurities.

2. Grind the Guduci stems into a coarse powder using
a grinder or Khalva Yantra.

3. Place the Kvatha Churna into a vessel. Add four
times the amount of water to the vessel and let the
mixture soak overnight.

4. The next morning, heat the soaked mixture ove!
a low flame (mandagni) until the total quantits

reduces to 1/4th of the original volume. This is now
the Kvatha (decoction).

----- PAGE 29 -----
Chapter 2° Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

5. Filter the Kvatha through a clean cloth to remove
solid residues.

6. Transfer the filtered Kvatha into a stainless
steel vessel. Heat the Kvatha over a low flame
(mandagni) until it becomes a concentrated form
suitable for making tablets or pills, then roll it into
tablets or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Guduchi Ghana.

9. Store the Guduchi Ghana in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 250-500 mg
Therapeutic Indication: Jvara, Jirna jvara, Rajayakshma,
Pandu, Vishamajvara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Guduchi Ghana (Samshamani Vati)- is a concentra-
ted form of Tinospora cordifolia, renowned for its
immunomodulatory and antipyretic properties.

2. The potent bioactive compounds in Guduchi
stimulate the production and activity of white
blood cells, enhancing the body’s immune response
to infections and fevers.

3. It acts on the hypothalamus, regulating body
temperature and exerting antipyretic effects,
thereby reducing fever.

RESEARCH UPDATES

4. Guduchi’s anti-inflammatory properties help
alleviate symptoms associated with fever, such as
headache, body ache, and malaise.

5. The formulation’s efficacy against various types
of fever, including chronic and intermittent fevers,
showeases its versatility in managing different
pathological conditions.

6. It also aids in the management of conditions like
anaemia (Pandu) and general debility (Jirna jvara),
enhancing overall health and vitality.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: Taken orally, Guduchi Ghana
(Samshamani Vati) is absorbed through the
gastrointestinal tract, allowing its bioactive
compounds to enter the bloodstream.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
are distributed throughout the body, particularly
targeting the immune system and the hypothalamus
to exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: The compounds in Guduchi Ghana are
metabolized primarily in the liver, where they may
be transformed into more active or inactive forms,
facilitating their therapeutic actions.

4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted via the

kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces),
ensuring the elimination of waste products from
the body,

Hie pus

A Physicochemical
Standardization of
Guduchi Ghana Vati
W.S.R. To Time of
Collection of Guduchi

Dayanand Tanvi, PG
Scholar, Dept. of PG
Studies in Rasashastra
and Bhaishajya
Kalpana Muniyal
Institute of Ayurveda
Medical Sciences,
Manipal-576104,
Karnataka

=

Guduchi was harvested in Grishma Ritu, Varsha Ritu, and Sharad Ritu.
Guduchi Ghana Vati, prepared following the classical method in Siddhayoga
Sangraha, revealed the presence of aldehydes, ketones, carbonyl groups,
OH groups, and cyclic ring stretching.

Quantitative starch yields were 3.15%, 2.97% and 2.09% in Sharad Ritu,
Varsha Ritu and Grishma Ritu, respectively. Starch percentages were
30.20%, 18.86%, and 14.27% in Sharad Ritu, Varsha Ritu, and Grishma Ritu.
Alkaloid content varied with 9.09% in Grishma Ritu, 4.25% in Varsha Ritu,
and 1.643% in Sharad Ritu.

Pharmaceutically, Sharad Ritu exhibited the best yield with a higher starch
content, while Grishma Ritu showed a higher alkaloid content.

Comparative Analysis of
Samsamani Vati / Guduchi
ghana Vati of Competitive
Ayurveda,
Pharmaceuticals of India

Ashok Kumar Panda,
Senior Research Officer,
Central Ayurveda
Research Institute,
Bhubaneswar, Orissa

Tinosporide is significantly present in Patanjali, Zandu, and IMPCL products,
with trace amounts in Dabur and none detected in the Baidyanath sample.
The bitter principle is more prominent in Zandu and Baidyanath products.
IMPCL products exceed permissible limits for heavy metals (Lead and
Mercury). Studied products are free from Arsenic, Cadmium, pathogens,
and Aflatoxins. There is a lack of uniformity in Samshamani Vati/Guduchi

Ghana Vati among Indian brands. Maintaining consistency in Ayurveda
pharmaceuticals for bioactive molecules is recommended for both efficacy
and safety.

----- PAGE 30 -----
Abhimanyu Kumar,
Vice Chancellor, Dr.
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Rajasthan Ayurved
University, Kadwad,
Nagaur, Highway
Road, Jodhpur,
Rajasthan-342037, India

A Retreenectve Study
on Efficacy and Safety of
Guduchi Ghana Vati for

Covid-19 Asymptomatic
Patients

were
in this study, The median age was 46 years (ue 19-72). ‘Samples Were |
exclusively collected from COVID care centers admitting asymptomatic to |
mild-to-moderate cases. Pregnant, post-natal, or lactating mothers with
COVID exposure or confirmation were admitted to a separate hospital. |

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 2

|
|
—!

2.1.F GUDUCHI SATTVA
Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 205
(YR. Raja, 1-12)

INGREDIENTS USED

Guduchi St. 1 Part
Water = 21 Parts
Procedure:

1. The guduchi stem is cut into small pieces, macerated
in water, and left to soak overnight.
2. The mixture is then strained through a cloth,
allowing the solid matter to settle.
3. The supernatant liquid is decanted, and the sedi-
ment is washed by adding water and decanting it
21 times.
4. The resulting sediment (Sattva) is then dried and
powdered.
5. Store the Guduchi Sattva in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.
Dose: 1 gm.
Anupana: Honey.
Therapeutic Indications: Raktapitta, Kashaya, Padadaha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
Guduchi
constituents

1. Immunomodulatory Effect: (Tinospora
cordifolia) active like
tinosporin, tinosporide, and cordifolioside. These
compounds enhance the activity of macrophages,
increase leukocyte count, and stimulate the
production of cytokines, thereby modulating the

contains

immune response.

2. Anti-inflammatory and Antipyretic Effect: The plant’;
constituents, such as alkaloids and glycosides,
inhibit the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and prostaglandins, reducing _ inflammation
and fever.

3. Hepatoprotective Effect: © Guduchi contains
hepatoprotective compounds that enhance liver
function and protect against liver damage by
scavenging free radicals and promoting the
regeneration of liver cells.

4. Antioxidant Effect: The presence of antioxidants
like flavonoids and polyphenols in Guduchi
helps _ neutralize free _ radicals,

oxidative stress.

reducing

5. Adaptogenic Effect: Guduchi helps in balancing
stress hormones and improves the body’s ability to
cope with physical and mental stress.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Guduchi Sattva, taken orally, is rapidly
absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. The
extraction process used in preparing the Sattva

ensures that the active compounds are in a readily
absorbable form.

iS)

Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituents
of Guduchi are distributed throughout the
body via the bloodstream. They reach various
tissues, including the liver, immune cells, and
inflamed areas.

3. Metabolism: Guduchi’s active compounds are
primarily metabolized in the liver. The metabolis™
may involve biotransformation into more active 0°
inactive forms, depending on the compound.

4. Excretion: The metabolites of Guduchi are excreted

through the kidneys (urine) and, to some extent

through the gastrointestinal tract (feces).

----- PAGE 31 -----
Chapler 2» Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) a a

RESEARCH UPDATES

: | ‘Author Nami
Quality Control Evaluation Rohit Sharma, Departments of
j of Guduchi Sattva (solid Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
/aqueous extract of Tinospora | Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and
cordifolia (Willd, Miers): An | Research in Ayurveda, Gujarat Ayurved
Herbal Formulation University, Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

The study evaluates quality control parameters for
Guduchi Sattva using 15 batches, recording an average
3.8% dried Sattva. It contains alkaloids, carbohydrates,
and starch, with a total alkaloid content of 0.31%
No heavy metals or microbial load were detected,
establishing these observations as a standard for future
Sattva studies.

Physicochemical Evaluation
of Sattva Extracted From

Male and Female Plants of
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia
(Willd., Miers)

Rohit Sharma, Assistant Professor,
Department of Rasashastra &
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Abhilashi
Ayurvedic College & Research Institute,
Abhilashi University, Chail Chowk,
Mandi-175028, H.P., India

This study aims to assess quantitative variation and
physicochemical profiles in Sattva extracted from male
and female varieties of Guduchi. Ten batches (5 from
each group) of Guduchi Sattva were prepared, and
findings were systematically recorded. Results indicate
a higher average yield of dried Sattva in the female
variety (3.18%) compared to the male variety (2.25%).
Extractive values (water and methanol soluble) and total
alkaloid content were slightly elevated in the Sattva from
the female variety.

2.1.6 AMRITADI GUGGULU Part Used

Reference: AFI, Part III, Page 107 Chitraka Rt. 24 gms
RAS Wea WIei: | Pippali Fr. 24 gms
Yah Hcy asia all Shunthi Rz. 24 gms
Hedland Gged aaa STTe | Hera ‘ a

a Sok Bibhitaki Py 8 gms
RE SAAT TH Amalaki P. 8 gms

GeliaacHyeM HUTA Heliaay | Guduchi St. 24 gms
Fgdtahasgrt Weta tet AAT Tvak St. Bk. 24 gms
fignettad dita qotad sigan i zs eins
3 ; + fi 2 a N Trivrita Rt. 12 gms
wat aeTaet arearaturit fagrad: | PSH

5 aa GS Deincicoc a ik, Take the required quantity of Triphala (Haritaki,
5 5 2 Bibhitaki and Amalaki). Add required quantity of
gat wes SIG SUBSE water to the Triphala and Boil the mixture until it is
AISielad PAY SAAAAAETAT || reduced to 1/4th of its original volume.
aia fiasanadssen fey: 2. Filter the Triphala Kvatha to remove solid residue.

TSrTSyvST Ars EATS | 3h Add the required amount of Guda to the filtered

Tt Wea: Brest: Triphala Kvatha and Boil the mixture again until it
SIEGES ICI cer el moreso) reaches a thick consistency (Guda Paka).

4, Addalltheremaining drugs to the thickened mixture
INGREDIENTS USED and mix thoroughly to form a homogeneous mass.

Part Used by chape tie mites inte alatee polis omear aclean

utensil with ghee to prevent sticking and place the

Guduchi St. 2.304 kg : :
ER Giazulo ai 768 gms bolus in the greased utensil.

(aries P. 768 gms 6. Roll the bolus into small, uniform pills.

Bibhitaki P. 768 gms 7. Allow the pills to dry properly and store the dried
‘Amalaki P, 768 gms pills in a sterilized, airtight container.

Varshabhu Rt. 768 gms Dose: 250-500 mg.

Water for Decoction - 12.288 L Indication: Amalpitta, Kushtha, Arsha, Agnimandya,
Reduced upto - 3.072L Dushta vrana, Vatarakhta, Bagandara, Prameha, Nadi

Danti Rt. 24 gms Vrana, Amavata.

----- PAGE 32 -----
20

Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 2

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory and Analgesic Effects:

PHARMACOKINETICS

Sudha 1. Absorption: The bioactive compounds in Amritag;

Guggulu, Guduchi, Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki, Guggulu are absorbed through the gastrointestina)
Chitraka, Danti inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokines tract, The use of honey as an adjuvant (Anupana)
and COX-2 enzyme, reducing inflammation enhances the absorption of these compounds.

and pain.
2. Digestive and Carminative Effects: Pippali,

Vidanga, Trivrta stimulate digestive enzymes,
enhance gut motility, and reduce gas formation.

3. Detoxifying and Antimicrobial Effects: Haritaki,
Bibhitaki, Amalaki, Varshabhu have astringent and
antimicrobial properties, aiding detoxification and

infection protection.

4. Hepatoprotective and Antioxidant Effects: Guduchi,
Haritaki, Amalaki enhance liver function, protect

liver cells, and reduce oxidative stress.
5. Immunomodulatory Effects: © Guduchi,

Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituent.
are distributed throughout the body via th.
bloodstream. They are known to cross various
biological membranes and reach target tissues, such
as joints, skin, liver, and the immune system.

3. Metabolism: The active compounds are primarily
metabolized in the liver. The metabolism involves
biotransformation into more active or inactive
forms, depending on the specific compound.

4. Excretion: The metabolites of the compounds in

Sudha Amrutadi Guggulu are excreted through the

N

Sunthi,

Guggulu enhance both cellular and humoral kidneys (urine) and, to some extent, through the

immunity.

RESEARCH UPDATES

gastrointestinal tract (feces).

A pharmaceutico- Swati Sharma, Assistant
Analytical Study of | Professor, Shiva
Amritadya Guggulu | Ayurvedic Medical
College & Hospital,
Chandpur, Dist. Bilaspur,
HP, India

A standard epertna procedure was developed for preparing the genuine drug
and analyzing its safety and purity. A 50% weight loss occurred, mainly due
to impurity removal from the Guggulu and handling. Low acid insoluble ash
(1.08%) indicated minimal dirt and sand particles. Low moisture content (6.2% |
loss on drying) improved shelf life and therapeutic value. Overall, pharmaceu-
tical and analytical studies confirmed the drug’s authenticity and quality. |

Mode of action Triveni Raina, PG Scholar,
of “Amritadya Dept. of Rog Nidan,
Guggulu” in the RGGPG Ayurvedic
Management of College, Paprola, HP.
Sthoulya W.S.R. to
Obesity.

Amritadya Guggulu, with its Rasa-Katu, Tikta, Kashaya, Laghu Guna, Ruksha
Virya, Katu Vipaka, and Kapha-Vata Shamaka properties, is effective in managing
Sthaulya. Its Rasapanchaka makes it well-suited for Kapha-dominant conditions,
breaking the Samprapti of Sthaulya. This study aims to comprehensively explore
the mode of action of Amritadya Guggulu in managing Sthaulya, integrating |
Ayurvedic principles with modern pharmacology. |

A Comparative Kumari Renuka,

Study to Evaluate P.G. Scholar (Ay.)

the Efficacy of Kayachikitsa, Deptt. of
Amritadya Guggulu | Kayachikitsa, Dr. BNM
with Sthaulyahari Rural Ayurvedic Medical
Peya in the College & Hospital,
Management of Vijaypur

Sthaulya

'n this randomized study, 40 patients from Dr. BNM Rural Ayurvedic College,
ViJaypur, were divided into two groups. Group A received Amritadya Guggulu
(500 mg), and Group B received Sthaulyahari Peyya for 45 days. Wilcoxon
signed-rank and Mann-Whitney U tests were applied during follow-ups. Both
groups showed significant improvements in Sthaulya, with Sthaulyahari Peyya
proving more effective for Atitrish kshudha, and daurbalya. Amritadya
Guggulu demonstrated superior outcomes for body weight, WHR, and BMI
In conclusion, Sthaulyahari Peyya led I ich loss, while Amratadya
Guggulu was more effective in reduci dy weight and BMI.

2.1.H AMRITARISHTA
Reference: AFI, Part I, page 6
AGATA: Tey STATA TI
Uelaiyrs vara A adeiet wer FTI
Terr fagen: fag sare vite ferrega: |
ae: Urea igre THETA ||

Were TAT SA ATA STA |

aatafatat acres wera
wetichtchd WIS Freee |
sryette selena ape ||

(B.R. Jvara, 6/690-693)

----- PAGE 33 -----
Chapter 2 = Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Guduchi Rt/ St. Bk 4.800 kg
Bilva Rt./ St. Bk 480 gms
Shyonaka Rt./ St. Bk 480 gms
Gambhari Rt./ St. Bk 480 gms
Patala Rt./ St. Bk 480 gms
Agnimantha Rt./ St. Bk 480 gms
Shalaparni Pl. 480 gms
Prishniparni Pl. 480 gms
Brihati Pl. 480 gms
Kantakari Pl. 480 gms
Gokshura Pl. 480 gms
Water for decoction - 49.152 L
‘Reduce upto = 12.288 L
Guda : = 14.400 kg
Ajaji Fr. 768 ems
Raktapushpa Pl. 96 gms
Saptachada St. Bk. 48 gms
Shunthi Rz. 48 gms
Maricha Fr. 48 gms
Pippali Fr. 48 gms
Nagakeshara Stmn. 48 gms
Musta Rz. 48 gms
Katuka Rz. 48 gms
Ativisha Rt. 48 gms
Indrayava Sd. 48 gms
Procedure:

1. Pound the Guduchi stem and prepare a coarse
powder of all the remaining dravyas (herbal
ingredients).

2. Add water to the pounded Guduchi and other
coarse powders and soak the mixture overnight.

3. The next morning, add 50 liters of water to the
soaked mixture.

4. Boil the mixture and reduce it to one-fourth of its

original volume and filter the kvatha (decoction).

- Take a Sandhana Patra (fermentation vessel) and
smear it with Sarshapa (mustard) oil. Pour the
filtered kvatha into the Sandhana Patra.

6. Add melted Guda (jaggery) to the kvatha, along
with all the remaining dravyas in the form of
Yavakuta Churna (coarse powder).

7. Close the Sandhana Patra with Sandhi-bandhana
(sealing the lid) and allow the mixture to ferment
properly.

8. Once it attain sandhanalakshana, then filter the
final product.

oT

ae

9, Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency.

Dose: 12 to 24 ml.
Therapeutic Uses: All type of Jvara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antipyretic Effect: Guduchi, Bilva, Shyonaka,
Gambhari, Patala. These herbs help reduce fever
by modulating the body’s thermoregulatory center
and reducing the synthesis of pyrogenic cytokines.

. Anti-inflammatory and Analgesic Effects: Shunthi,
Maricha, Pippali, Nagakeshara. These ingredients
inhibit the production of inflammatory mediators
such as prostaglandins and cytokines, reducing
inflammation and pain.

3, Antimicrobial and Antiviral Effects: Musta, Katuka,
Ativisha, Indrayava. These herbs possess broad-
spectrum antimicrobial properties, inhibiting the
growth of bacteria and viruses.

4. Immunomodulatory Effects: Guduchi, Saptachada,
Ajaji. These herbs enhance both innate and adaptive
immunity by stimulating the production of white
blood cells and antibodies.

5. Digestive and Carminative Effects: Ajaji, Shunthi,
Maricha. These herbs stimulate digestive enzymes,
improve gut motility, and reduce gas formation.

6. Detoxifying and Antioxidant Effects: Guduchi,
Haritaki, Amalaki. These herbs help in detoxifying
the body by promoting liver function and
scavenging free radicals.

N

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Amritarishta, taken orally, is absorbed
through the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of
honey and jaggery enhances the bioavailability of
the active compounds.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituents
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They reach various tissues, including
the immune system, liver, and inflamed areas.

3. Metabolism: The active compounds are primarily
metabolized in the liver. The metabolism involves
biotransformation into more active or inactive
forms, depending on the specific compound.

4. Excretion: The metabolites of the compounds in
Amritarishta are excreted through the kidneys
(urine) and, to some extent, through the
gastrointestinal tract (feces).

----- PAGE 34 -----
22

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 2

Or. Abhishek Girish
Taksale, M.D, 2nd Year
(Sch) (Kayachikitsa) R.A.
Podar Medical College,
Professor (Chikitsa) Worli,
Mumbai, MHA

Amritarishta: A
Medico Review

2. _| Antimicrobial Activity

Preeti Tiwari, Head of De-
partment of Pharmacogno-
sy, Dr. K. N. Modi Institute
of Pharmaceutical Educa-
tion and Research,
Modinagar (U. P.)

of Amritarishta
Prepared by
Traditional and
Modern Methods

Evaluation of Md. Abdur Rouf, Lecturer,
Hepatoprotective Department of Pharmacy
Activity of Ayurvedic | Gono Bishwabidyalay

Amritarishta Mirzanagor, Savar, Dhaka,

Bangladesh.

Amritarishta, a polyherbal
types of fever. With 5-8% self-generated natural alcohol and Water, jt
facilitates absorption in the body. The key ingredient, Amrita (Guduchi), act,
as a natural immune booster with significant antipyretic properties.

In this study, Amritarishta, prepared through traditional (Amritarishta-7) |
and modern (Amritarishta-M) methods, along with commercially available
Amritarishta, were assessed for their antimicrobial activity against common
human pathogens. Notably, all test preparations demonstrated substantia|
inhibition zones against the selected pathogens, suggesting their potentia|
as natural drugs for treating infectious diseases caused by these organisms,
AMR, a polyherbal ayurvedic medicine, has demonstrated significant
hepatoprotective efficacy at a dosage of 5 ml/kg in this study. The
findings suggest the presence of active constituents contributing to this
pharmacological effect. Further research is recommended to explore the

__|underlying mechanisms of these observed activities.

4. | Antidiabetic Potential

Preeti Tiwari

of Amritarishta Head of Department

Prepared by of Pharmacognosy, Dr.
Traditional and K. N. Modi Institute of
Modern Methods Pharmaceutical Education
in Alloxan Induced and Research, Modinagar,
Diabetic rats Uttar Pradesh, India

This study investigated the effects of Amritarishta-T, Amritarishta-M, and
commercially available Amritarishta on fasting blood glucose and serum|
lipid profile in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. Administering 2 ml/kg orally for
21 days resulted in decreased blood glucose, increased blood glutathione
levels, and significant improvements in serum cholesterol, LDL, triglycerides, |
and HDL levels, Glibenclamide, a standard antidiabetic drug, was used for
comparison. Overall, these formulations effectively normalized the assessed
parameters in diabetic rats.

5. | Standardization

Kiran A. Wadkar, Dept.

of Marketed of Pharmacognosy,
Amritarishta—A Appasaheb Birnale College
Herbal Formulation Of Pharmacy, South

Shivaji Nagar, Sangli,
Maharashtra, India.

This study seeks to standardize amritarishta through chromatographic and|
spectral analysis. The spectral data and HPTLC fingerprint of the ethanolic|
extract serve as valuable tools for routine standardization, enabling the
assessment of batch-to-batch variation. Fraction | andl of the extract, along |
with standard luteolin and apigenin were compared using TLC, HPTLC, and
hplc to confirm the presence of these compounds.

«

2.2 Amalaki * Oriya: Anala, Ainla

References: The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India,
Part- 01, Volume- 01, Pg. — 06

Amalaki consists of the fresh fruit pulp of Emblica
officinalis Gaertn. (Family Euphorbiaceae), a small to
medium-sized tree found in mixed deciduous forests,
ascending to 1300 meters on hills, and cultivated in
gardens and homeyards.
SYNONYMS
* Sanskrit : Amalaka, Amritaphala, Dhatriphala
“ Assamese: Amlaku, Amlakhi, Amlakhu
“ Bengali: Amla, Dhatri
* English : Emblic Myrobalan
“* Gujrati: Ambala, Amala
Hindi: Amla, Aonla
“ Kannada : Nellikayi
* Kashmiri: Embali, Amli
“ Malayalam : Nellikka
@ Marathi: Anvala, Avalkathi

* Punjabi: Aula, Amla
* Tamil: Nellikkai, Nelli
* Telugu : Usirika

* Urdu : Amla, Amlaj

DESCRIPTION

ate

2.

A. Macroscopic: The fruit is globose, 2.5-3.5 cm in
diameter, fleshy, and smooth with six prominent lines.
Itis greenish when tender, changing to a light yellowish
or pinkish color when mature, with a few dark specks.

The taste is sour and astringent, followed by a delicately
sweet taste.

B. Microscopic: The transverse section of the mature fruit
showsanepicarp consisting of asingle layer of epidermis
and 2-4 layers of hypodermis. The epidermal cells are
tabular in shape, covered externally with a thick cuticle,
and appear polygonal in surface view. The hypodermal
cells are tangentially elongated, thick-walled, and
smaller in dimension than the epidermal cells.

----- PAGE 35 -----
Chapter 2° Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

The mesocarp forms the bulk of the fruit, consisting
of thin-walled parenchymatous cells with intercellular
spaces. The peripheral 6-9 layers are smaller, ovoid, or
tangentially elongated, while the rest of the cells are
larger, isodiametric, and radially elongated. Several
collateral fibrovascular bundles are scattered throughout
the mesocarp, consisting of xylem and phloem.

The xylem is composed of tracheal elements, fiber
tracheids, and xylem fibers. The tracheal elements show
reticulate, scalariform, and spiral thickenings. The
xylem fibers are elongated with a narrow lumen and
pointed ends. The mesocarp contains large aggregates
of numerous irregular silica crystals.

IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH

Not than 2 percent

4. Foreign matter: more
(Appendix 2.2.2).

_ Total Ash: Not more than 7 percent (Appendix DDO):

3. Acid-insoluble ash: Not more than 2 percent

4. Alcohol-soluble extractive (On dried basis): Not less
than 40 percent (Appendix 2.2.6).

5. Water-soluble extractive: Not less than 50 percent
(Appendix 2.2.7).

6. Moisture content: Not less than 80 percent

nN

* Constituents : Ascorbic acid and tannins

&

“ Properties and Action :

e Rasa: Amla, Kashaya, Madhura, Tikta, Katu

e Guna: Ruksha, Laghu

e Virya: Sita

© Vipaka: Madhura

© Karma : Tridosajit, Vrishya, Rasayana, Cakshushya
Important Formulations : Cyavanaprasa.

Raktapitta, | Amlapitta,

+ Therapeutic Uses
Prameha, Daha.
% Dose : 10-20 g of the drug.
5-10 ml of fresh juice.
2.2.A AMALAKI SVARASA

Reference: Sha.Sam.Ma. Kh.
aicgrqutgent at vat era: TTT: |
(Sha. S.M. Kh. 1/7)

INGREDIENTS USED

Amalaki Fr. 1 Part

Procedure:
1. Choose fresh, ripe Amla fruits that are free from
blemishes and damage.

23

2. Wash the Amla fruits thoroughly under running

water to remove dirt and impurities.

3, Cut the cleaned Amla fruits into small pieces to

facilitate easier extraction of juice.

he seeds from the chopped pieces.

into a blender and
help in blending (if

4, Remove t

5, Place the chopped Amla pieces
add a small amount of water to
required).

. Blend the Amla pieces u
pulp is formed.

Pour the Amla pulp into a cle
fine strainer. Squeeze the mus
strainer to extract the juice. Ensure
is extracted by pressing thoroughly.

8. If needed, filter the juice again through a fine sieve
or muslin cloth to ensure there are no pulp residues
left in the juice.

9. Collect the filtered juice ina clean,

Anupana: Honey, Haridra Churna.

ntil a smooth, consistent

a

an muslin cloth or a
lin cloth or use the
that all the liquid

Na

dry container.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1, Antioxidant Effects: Amalaki, Haridra. Both Amalaki
and Haridra are rich in antioxidants. Amalaki
contains high levels of vitamin C and other
polyphenols, while Haridra contains curcumin.

2. Anti-inflammatory Effects: Haridra, Curcumin, the
active component of Haridra, inhibits inflammatory
pathways by reducing the production of pro-
inflammatory cytokinesand enzymes suchas COX-2.

3. Immunomodulatory Effects: Amalaki, Honey-
Amalaki enhances both innate and adaptive
immunity through its high vitamin C content and
other immunomodulatory compounds. Honey also
has immune-boosting properties.

4. Digestive and Carminative Effects: Honey aids in
digestion by promoting the growth of beneficial
gut bacteria and enhancing the activity of digestive
enzymes.

5. Antimicrobial Effects: Honey, Haridra. Honey
has natural antimicrobial properties due to its
high sugar content, low pH, and the presence
of hydrogen peroxide. Haridra exhibits broad-
spectrum antimicrobial activity.

6. Hepatoprotective Effects: Amalaki supports liver
health by promoting detoxification processes and
protecting liver cells from damage.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The combination of Amalaki with honey
and Haridra is taken orally. Amalaki’s vitamin

----- PAGE 36 -----
24

re thr Tn Te ee
Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana » Chapter 2

C and polyphenols, along with curcumin from
Haridra, are absorbed through the gastrointestinal
tract. Honey enhances the bioavailability of these
compounds.

. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituents
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They reach various tissues, including
the liver, immune cells, and inflamed areas.

. Metabolism: The active compounds, particularly

curcumin from Haridra, undergo metabolism
primarily in the liver, where they are converted into
various metabolites. Amalaki’s components are also
metabolized in the liver.

. Excretion: The metabolites of the compounds in this

formulationare excreted through the kidneys (urine)
and, to some extent, through the gastrointestinal
tract (feces).

RESEARCH UppatEs : No Data Found.

2.2.B AMALAKYADI CHURNA

Reference: Sha.Sam.M. Kha. Churnakalpana

ae fark wear frac Srarecar

(Sha.Sam. M.Kha. 6/7)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Amalaki Fr, 1 Part

Chitraka Rt. 1 Part

Haritaki Fr. 1 Part

Pippali Fr, 1 Part

Saindhava 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for

Amalakyadi Churna. Ensure each ingredient is
clean and free from impurities.

. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each

ingredient separately into a fine powder.

. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean

cloth to remove any coarse particles.

. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clean,

dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients,

. Filter the compound powder mixture once again

through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

4

6. Store the final compound powder in sterilizeq,

airtight glass containers to preserve its potency ang
freshness.

7, Label the containers with the name Amalakyaq,

Churna and the preparation date.

Dose: 3-6 gms.
Therapeutic Uses: All type of Jvara, Bedana, Aruchikara,
Kaphahara, Dipana, Pachana.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1, Antipyretic Effect: Amalaki, Haritaki, Pippali. Thes,

herbs help reduce fever by modulating the body’,
thermoregulatory center and reducing the synthesj,
of pyrogenic cytokines.

. Digestive and Carminative Effects: Chitraka, Pippali
Saindhava. These ingredients stimulate digestiy,
enzymes, improve gut motility and enhang
appetite.

. Laxative Effect; Haritaki acts as a mild laxative
helping in bowel movement regulation.

. Anti-inflammatory and Analgesic Effects: Chitraka
Pippali. These ingredients inhibit the productior
of inflammatory mediators like prostaglandins
and cytokines, reducing inflammation and pain.

. Antioxidant and Immunomodulatory Effects: Amalak
Haritaki. These herbs possess strong antioxidant
properties, scavenging free radicals and boosting
the immune system.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Amalakyadi Churna, taken orally, is

absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. The
use of Saindhava (rock salt) enhances the
bioavailability of the active compounds.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituents

are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They reach various tissues, including
the gastrointestinal tract, immune system, and sites
of inflammation.

3. Metabolism: The active compounds are primarils

metabolized in the liver. The metabolism involves
biotransformation into more active or inactive
forms, depending on the specific compound.

4. Excretion: The metabolites of the compounds 1"

Amalakyadi Churna are excreted through the
kidneys (urine) and, to some extent, through !!'
gastrointestinal tract (feces).

----- PAGE 37 -----
a a ee NE

“Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Minera) 2 26

RESEARCH UPDATES

D Anuradha, Dr URAGR,
Govt, Ayurvedic College,
OppP.l. SA, Hospltal, AG,
Colony Road, Erragaddda,
Hyderabad-500038,
Tailangana,

Garbhini Pandu

The Role of Amalaki
Churna in the
Management of

Jadhvar Pallvi Tukaram,
PG scholar, Dept. of Stree
Rog Evam  Prasutitantra,

pee ron Cage ei re
Acharya Charaka mentioned Kashaya Rasa Is having pharmacological

A clinical study on anaemia Ih pregnancy using Arnlakyadl churnam was
conducted on 80 preqnant women alGAN Erragadda OPD, Fach womantook
4g of the churnam with heney twice dally for 90 days after light meals, The
compound, comprising Amlakl, Yashtimadhu, and svarnamakshikabhasma,
proved economical, sale, and effective without complications, Monthly
Assessments over 90 days revealed Improved clinical symptoms, weight
goin, and Increased Hb% In all patients, No side effects were observed, and
the treatment was well-tolerated.

action like stambhana and kapha nashaka so Kashayarasa stop to srava 1-2
gm with honey BD for seven days.

Shvetpradara PMT’S Ayurvedic College,
Shevgaon, — Ahmednagar,

Maharashtra, Indla

2.2.¢ TRIPHALA RASAYANA
Reference: Cha.Chi, Rasayana Adhyaya
1, PRATHAMA TRIPHALA RASAYANA
TOA aTH aT UTS & fares |
Yet F AYR acaratacteat A
Waser Vaent Eracia Ta
Stagted yotrsnisentta a1 sft Facey
(Cha.Chi. Rasayana Adhyaya, 1/3/41-42)
Administer one Abhaya in the morning after ensuring
digestion of the previous meal, followed by two
Bibhitaki before meals, and three Amalaki with honey
and ghee during meals.
Anupana: Madhu and Ghrita
Duration: | Year
Benefits: The Rasayana promotes a life lasting for one
hundred years, free from aging and disease.
2. DVITIYA TRIPHALA RASAYANA
THe Wat cheadreeTaA |
comers a fc aftercare
myers sitet ar WeTAC |
TSH ANAT Sat eretal AAT: MTL
gia FATT TTA |
(Cha.Chi. 1/3/43-44)

Apply Triphala Kalka to a new iron vessel and let it
sit for 24 hours. Then, extract the vessel coated with
Triphala Kalka using water and honey. Consume this
mixture with honey, and after digestion, follow it with
Prabhuta Sneha Ashana.

Duration: 1 Year.

Benefits: One can enjoy a life spanning one hundred
years, devoid of signs of aging and diseases.

3. TRITIYA TRIPHALA RASAYANA

agent qmeftat frorar eitgettar |
farmer fete arftt arnt fete THEE!
(gfe farmer )
(Cha.Chi. 1/3/45)
Combining Triphala with Madhuka, Vamshalochana,
Pippali, along with honey and Ghrita, or Triphala with
Sita in equal quantities forms an effective Rasayana.
4, CHATURTHA TRIPHALA RASAYANA
dette: Gault aaa HeperT |
fasgitarcteat a fragt avr aU
Parenter Herre itareTAET |
VSATA MET TAT SATCU 1 Stet FATA |
(Cha.Chi. 1/3/47)
Triphala combined with Sarva Lauha such as Suvarna,
Vacha, Vidanga, Pippali, Lavana, along with honey and
Ghrita, is consumed for its benefits.
Duration: | Year.
Benefits: Promotes Medha, Smriti and Balaprada,
Ayuprada and Dhanya and Jara Roga Nibarhani.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1, Cognitive Enhancement (Medha and Smritiprada):
Triphala (especially Amalaki), Vacha, Pippali,
Suvarna, These ingredients improve cognitive
functions by enhancing neurogenesis, supporting
neurotransmitter balance, and providing
neuroprotective effects. Amalaki and Suvarna are
known for their brain tonic properties, while Vacha
and Pippali stimulate mental clarity and memory.

2, Strength and Vitality (Balaprada): Triphala, Ghrita,
Vidanga, Sarvalauha. These components nourish

----- PAGE 38 -----
26

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 2

the body’s tissues (Dhatus), improve digestion
and nutrient absorption, and enhance overall
strength and vitality. Ghrita acts as a carrier that
enhances the bioavailability of nutrients and active
compounds.

3. Longevity (Ayuprada and Dhanya): Triphala, Honey,
Suvarna. The synergistic effect of these ingredients
supports cellular regeneration, combats oxidative
stress, and maintains the balance of the body’s
doshas (Vata, Pitta, Kapha), Suvarna is particularly
revered for its rejuvenating properties.

4. Anti-aging (Jararoga Nibarhani): Triphala, Honey,
Ghrita, Suvarna. These ingredients have strong
antioxidant properties that reduce the effects of
aging at the cellular level. They help in detoxifying
the body, improving skin health, and maintaining
youthful energy levels.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Bali Chouhan
Akanksha, PG Scholar Dept. of
Shalakya Tantra, Rishikul Campus,
UAU, Haridwar, Uttarakhand

Standardization of
Triphala Rasayana

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: The formulation, taken orally, isabsorbeq
through the gastrointestinal tract. The presence ¢
honey and Ghrita enhances the absorption of active
ingredients, particularly fat-soluble compounds.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituent,
are distributed throughout the body via th.
bloodstream. These ingredients reach various
tissues, including the brain, muscles, and organs,
where they exert their beneficial effects.

3. Metabolism: The active compounds undergo
metabolism primarily in the liver, where they are
biotransformed into more active or inactive forms.
The components of Triphala, along with Vache
Pippali, and Suvarna, have specific metaboli
pathways that enhance their bioactivity.

4. Excretion: The metabolites of the compounds jn
this formulation are excreted through the kidneys
(urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces).

Triphala Rasayana, described in Yogaratnakara, is prepared by mixing
Triphala with vanshalochana, pippali, sita, or saindhava, validated
through chemical experimentation. Formulated using the Churna
Kalpana method with self-prepared kvatha dravya for bhavana
tablets meet pharmacopoeial standards for hardness, weight, and

disintegrationtime. _ io

Role of Triphala
Rasayana in the
Prevention of
Recurrent Rhinitis- An
Open Clinical Trial

Kripa Shankar Sharma

Assistant Professor, Department
of Svasthavrita, Murari Lal
Rasiwasiya Ayurvedic College,
Charkhi Dadri, Dist. Bhiwani,
Haryana, India

2.2.D CHYAVANAPRASHA

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 37
facaistana: yarn: ayaa: ureteric |
wads: ued: ACE Fedtgay |
oTgt acta Gar Stat TTP |
ATT AGA elegstiseaa TT VET
aed Gear war Gent arg |
faent quyentt crcicit cpreatteaet |
Tor Ten APTS A
Ug cael Serer feared |
Peerage Peper aetatua4: 11
Ucigievias FFA seat eigen FT|
TRASH: YAS Peasy AAA ||

Triphala Rasayana, given twice daily as churna for 60 days, significantly
alleviated recurrent rhinitis symptoms in adults and children,
alongside Madhu & Ghrita. Clinical and hematological assessments
showed consistent improvement up to the fourth follow-up, with
significant results, except for IgE levels. Triphala Rasayana proves
effective for long-term prevention of recurrent rhinitis.

ead Hea fregviic warTad |

age Guaitat: eri fact raw

Soa CAAT: UX TATA: |

Fase ragreauiareyad |

avatar FegMt AAA TSE: 11

PRATT welt arty for |

Foor Waser eta srrerrast te

SRA WAT Weal SE ATHT HTSTAT |

ST Vaan: Gratse Ursa

wig vet UraiMgie solved waa ||

TUTTE AU: Wa Meet a tori shy tra |

gd BIAS ae faut wo qatar |
(Cha. Chi., 1/1/62-7"

----- PAGE 39 -----
Chapter 2 = Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

INGREDIENTS USED

Bilva
Agnimantha
Shyoneka
Gambhari
Patala
Bala
Shalaparni
Prishniparni
Mudgaparni
Mashaparni
Pippali
Gokshura
Brihati
Kantakari
Karkatashringi
Tamalaki
Draksha
Jivanti
Pushkeara
Agru
Abhaya
Amrita
Ridhi
Jivaka
Rishabhaka
Sati
Musta
Punarnava (Rakta)
Meda
Ela
Chandana
Utpala
Vidari
Vrshamula
Kakoli
Kakanasika
Amlaka
Water for Decoction
Reduced to
Ghrita
Taila
Matsyandika
Madhu
Tugakshiri
Pippali
Tvak
Patra
Kesara

Part Used

Rt./ St. Bk,
Rt./ St. Bk.
Rt./ St. Bk.
Rt./ St. Bk.
Rt./ St. Bk.
Pl.

Pl.

Pl.

PI.

Pl.

Fr.

Pl.

Pl.

Pl.

Gl.

Pl.

Dr.Fr.

Rt.

Rt.

Ht. Wd.

Bs

St.

Sub. Rt. Tr.
Rt. Tr.

Rt. Tr.

Rz.

Rz.

Pl.

Rt. Tr.

Sd.

Ht. Wd.
FI.

Rt. Tr.

Rt.

Sub. Rt.
Fr.

Fr.

ol.

SC
Fr.

St. Bk.
Sd,

Lf.
Stmn.

48 gms
48 gms
48 ems
48 ems
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
500 in no
12.2881
3.072 L
288 gms
288 gms
2.400 kg
288 gms
192 gms
96 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
48 gms

Procedure:

il,

Bundle ripened fresh Amalaki in a piece of cloth.

2. Coarsely powder the ingredients from Bilva to

10.

11.

12.

Kakanasika and place them in a vessel.

. Add 120 liters of water to the vessel. Suspend the

Amalaki pottali in the vessel and boil the mixture
until the water is reduced to one-fourth (30 liters).

_ Remove the Amalaki bundle from the vessel and

strain the decoction and keep it separately.

Remove the seeds from the boiled Amalaki and

make a paste of the pulp.

. Strain the paste through a piece of cloth ora 40-mesh

sieve over a wide-mouthed vessel to remove fibers.

. Fry the strained pulp with ghrita (ghee) and taila

(oil) until the moisture evaporates.

. Add sugar to the strained decoction and boil

the mixture to the lehyapaka stage (semi-solid
consistency).

Add the fried pulp to the lehyapaka and boil the
mixture again until well combined.

Add the fine powders of ingredients from
Tugakshiri to Kesara to the lehya. Stir well and
allow the mixture to cool.

Once cooled, add madhu (honey) to the mixture
and mix thoroughly.

Store in air tight container.

Dose: 12- 24 gms.
Anupana: Water, Milk.
Therapeutic Indication: Kasa, Shvasa, Kshata, Kshina,

Svarabheda,

Hridroga, Mutraroga, _ Uroroga,

Vatarakhta, Shukra Dosha, Pippasa, Rasayana, Medhya,
Smritiprada, Jara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

A;

Rejuvenation and Anti-aging: Amalaki, Gokshura,
Vidari, Meda, Kakoli. Rich in antioxidants and
adaptogens, these ingredients combat oxidative
stress, support cellular regeneration, and enhance
overall vitality.

. Cognitive Enhancement: Amalaki, Vacha, Pippali,

Ela. These ingredients improve brain function,
enhance neurotransmitter activity, and protect
neural tissue.

. Immune Boosting: Amalaki, Guduchi, Pippali. Boosts

immune response, increases resistance to infections,
and supports overall immune health.

Respiratory Health: Pippali, Gokshura, Kantakari,
Brihatii These herbs have  expectorant,
bronchodilator, and anti-inflammatory properties

----- PAGE 40 -----
28

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ¢ Chapter D

that clear respiratory passages and _ alleviate
congestion.

5. Digestive Health: Pippali, Musta, Haritaki. Enhances
digestion, improves nutrient absorption, and
balances digestive fire (Agni).

6. Cardiovascular Health: Arjuna, Draksha,
Pushkaramula. Supports heart health by improving
cardiac function, enhancing blood circulation,
and providing antioxidant protection to cardiac
tissues.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Chyavanaprasha is absorbed through
the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of honey

RESEARCH UPDATES

and ghee enhances the absorption of fat-sol,,)
vitamins and compounds.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compoung
are distributed via the bloodstream to vario,,
tissues and organs where they exert their therape,,;,
effects.

3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolis;,
primarily in the liver. They are biotransformg,
into active metabolites that enhance their bioactiy; th

4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted throug!
the kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tra,
(feces).

Chyavanaprasha: A

Traditional Indian Research Institute for Drug

Rohit Sharma, Central Ayurveda

Bioactive Health
Supplement

Development (CCRAS), Ministry
of AYUSH, Government of India,
4-CN Block, Sector-V, Bidhannagar,
Kolkata-700091, W.B., India;

iz medamrao69@gmail.com

Chyavanaprasha preparation involves decocting herbs,
extracting, mixing with honey, and adding aromatic powder;
The final product resembles fruit jam, with a sweet, sour, and
spicy taste. Scientific exploration is needed to understand it;
therapeutic potential due to scattered information. Efforts were
made to compile data from various sources, including ancient
texts and scientific literature, to highlight CP’s therapeutic role

Chyavanaprasha: An Sneha Jadhav, Department of
Ayurvedic Bioactive Pharmaceutics Vasantidevi
Immune & Curative Patil Institute of Pharmacy,
Health Supplement Kodoli Tal- Panhala, Dist-

Chyavanprasha, crafted from 50 Ayurvedic herbs, is a popular
dietary supplement in India. It boosts muscle strength
rejuvenates cells, balances doshas, slows aging, enhances
memory, and supports heart health, and aids digestion and

_|| Kolhapur-416114 (MHA) respiratory functions.
Ee [soiden Ager Rohit Sharma, Department of The report aims to dispel Chyawanprasha Usage misconceptions
Chyavanaprasha with
Meager Evidential Base

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana, |and guide Tesearchers in ve natural products, drug
Faculty of Ayurveda, Institute of development, functional foods, and nutraceuticals. National
from Human Clinical Trials | Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu :
University, Varanasi-221005, Uttar

experts should convene to establish standardized CP research
Pradesh, India
Bharat Rathi, Professor, Dept. of

protocols,
RSBK, Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved
College, Salod, Maharashtra, India.

4. | Pharmaceutical
Standardization of
Chyavanaprasha
prepared by two
different methods

The study compared pharmacy and traditional Chavanaprasha
preparation methods, favoring the pharmacy approach
due to better outcomes in time, yield, and physicochemica
Properties. Notably, frying in non-polar media may alter
ascorbic acid. Considering Polarity’s impact on absorption
pharmacy-prepared Chawanaprash may offer superior efficacy
pending further validation,

2.2.6 DHATRI LAUHA
Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 284

argues ven arate citeqonst |

Val siti art ei ort qawate
aft a Gem gat alsa sefear

Wmgaag fguet Tengaery ay | Hae: Ufc: cafe gar sate

AGMA ATCT AAT | Wereeaty Ih Ure aprae wet 1147 11

aostay Wek Ya: Pagar Aa Te ATT (B:R. Shula., 30/142-147)
Fer VE Heda Yael AAAS A INGREDIENTS USED

OMet TWyrata Wy fracas | Amalaki Be Seales
WaAsqrase wata zur facet AIH Lauha Bhasma 192 gms

----- PAGE 41 -----
Chapter 2+ Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) =

Yastimadhu Rt 96 ams
Amrita Kvatha St, Q.S,(Bhavana)
Procedure:

1, Take all the required dried ingredients for Dhatri
Lauha, Ensure each ingredient is clean and free
from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) ora grinder, grind each ingredient separately
into a fine powder.

oe)

. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Adding Amrita kvatha and triturate well for 7 times
in 7 days.

7. Roll it into tablets or pills.

§. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

9. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Dhatri Lauha.

10, Store the Dhatri Lauha in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 2-1 gm.

Anupana: Ghee, Honey.

Indication: Shularoga, Amalapitta, Netraroga, Anaha,

Mandagni, Raktapitta, Pandu, Kamala, Palitya, Vibanda.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Nam«

Narayanam Srikanth, Deputy
Director General, Departments

/Dhatri Lauha in the

| Management of Iron

Deficiency Anaemia:
Prospective Open

Label Single Arm Multi
‘| Center Trial

Research In Ayurvedic Sclences,
Ministry of Ayush, Government
of India.

Deepika Khandelwal, Associate
Professor, Department of
Striroga & Prasutitantra,
1.P.G.T. & R.A, Gujarat

Ayurved University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat, India.

Importance of Rasayana
Drugs in Dhatri Lauha
W.S.R. to Garbhini Pandu
(Iron Deficiency Anaemia
in Pregnancy)

5 The study Involved

of Ayurveda, Central Council for

29

PHARMACODYNAMICS.

1. Antloxidant and Rejuvenating Effects: Amalaki is rich
in vitamin C and other antioxidants that scavenge
free radicals, reduce oxidative stress, and enhance
cellular regeneration.

2. Hematopoletic Effect; Lauha Bhasma is a potent
source of bioavailable iron, which is essential for
hemoglobin synthesis and erythropoiesis.

3. Anti-inflammatory and Healing Effects: Yashtimadhu
contains glycyrrhizin which has anti-inflammatory
properties, and Amalaki supports tissue healing.
Digestive Health: Amalaki, Yashtimadhu. These herbs
enhance digestive fire (Agni), improve nutrient
absorption, and soothe the gastrointestinal tract.
Liver Protection and Detoxification: Amrita Kvatha
enhances liver function, detoxifies the liver, and
supports metabolic processes.

6. Improvement of Eye Health: Amalaki high vitamin
C content and antioxidant properties of Amalaki
support eye health and improve vision.

a

or

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The formulation is absorbed through
the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of honey
and ghee as anupana enhances the absorption of
fat-soluble vitamins and minerals.
Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
are distributed via the bloodstream to various tissues
and organs where they exert their therapeutic effects.
3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism
primarily in the liver. They are biotransformed into
active metabolites that enhance their bioactivity.
4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted through the
kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces).

2

480 participants aged 18-60 with IDA, treated
with Dhatri Lauha, After 45 days, there was a significant increase in
mean Hb% from 8.46 + 1.14 g/dl to 9.18+ 1.61 g/dl (P< 0.001). Liver
and kidney function remained normal, and no withdrawals due to
adverse events occurred. Dhatri Lauha proves safe and effective in
improving hemoglobin levels, red blood cell parameters, and iron
stores In IDA patients.

Dhatri Lauha Results
Appearance - Rough

Colour — Greyish Brown

Odour = Light Sweetish

Taste — Start with sour and end with sweet
pH-4.0

LOD — 6.15%

Iron content as Fe,O,~ 37.70%w/w
Uniformity of weight — 5.20g+20 mg

Total ash — 35.14% w/w

Acid insoluble ash — 17.52% w/w

Water soluble extractive value — 23.07%
Alcohol soluble extractive value — 16.09%

----- PAGE 42 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter D

Trivedi Atal Bihari, Associate
Prof. H.0.D, Deptt. of
Kayachikitsa J.1.A.R, Jammu,
J&K India

Clinical Study to Evaluate
the Efficacy of Dhatri
Lauha in the Management
of Pandu Roga W.S.R. to
Iron Deficiency Anaemia

Role of Dhatri Lauha

in Management of
Garbhini Pandu Roga (Iron
Deficiency Anaemia in
Pregnant Women)

Dr. Lariya Neelam, Associate
Professor, Department of
Kayachikitsa, Sri Sai Institute
of Ayurvedic Research and
Medicine, Bhopal (MP)

Peal jean eek Resulp

In a two-month clinical trial involving 30 patients, Dhatri lauha
was evaluated for its efficacy in managing Iron Deficiency Anaem,
(Pandu Roga). Patients were regularly assessed on Subjective
and hematological parameters, with follow-ups twice a Month
Results indicate Dhatri Lauha’s potency in treating Pandy Roga,
attributed to its effectiveness in addressing Pitta Pradhana Vyaqp|
where impaired colour and complexion (Panduta) occur due to
vitiated Pitta.

In pregnancy, inadequate nutrition and pitta-dominant anaemia
lead to pandu (anemia) prevalence. Aggravated pitta depletes
nutrients, starting from rasa dhatu, impacting subsequent dhatus
and ojas. Dhatri Lauha addresses this by balancing pitta and
nourishing rasa dhatu, meeting key requirements per Charak,

L Samhita. [
2.2.F AMALAKYADI GUTIKA 8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. Thi.
Reference: Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha.Vati Kalpana final product is called Amalakyadi Gutika.
SMG Het SE CIS aac: | 9. Store the Amalakyadi Gutika ina clean, dry, airtigh:
Weer - ‘ container to preserve its potency.
qa Wear q SESE] Ul
gon vat eater gave = , Indication: Trishna, Mukhashosha.
Dose: 500 mg
(Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha.Vati Kalpana, 7/17)
PHARMACODYNAMICS

INGREDIENTS UsED

Part Used

Amalaki Fr, 1 Part

Kamala Sd. 1 Part

Kushtha Bk. 1 Part

Lajja Grain- Popped 1 Part

Vata Ar. Rt. 1 Part

Madhu = Qs.
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Amalakyadi Gutika. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together inaclean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Adding Madhu, until it becomes a concentrated
form and suitable for making tablets or pills, then
roll it into tablets or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

1, Hydrating and Moisturizing Effects: Amalaki is rich
in vitamin C and antioxidants that hydrate anc
nourish tissues. Kamala (lotus seeds) provide
cooling and moisturizing effects, while the aerial
roots of Vata help maintain moisture balance.

2. Anti-inflammatory and Healing Effects: Kushtha has
potent anti-inflammatory properties that help
reduce inflammation and irritation in the mouth
and throat. Amalaki promotes healing due to its
rich antioxidant profile.

3. Cooling and Soothing Effects: Kamala have a natura
cooling effect, which helps to soothe and calm the
mucous membranes. Lajja (popped grain) also
contributes to the cooling and soothing action.

4. Demulcent and Lubricating Effects: Honey acts as
a natural demulcent, coating and lubricating the
mucous membranes, thereby protecting them from
dryness and irritation.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active compounds in Amalakyad
Gutika are absorbed through the oral mucosa an¢
gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active ingredients
are distributed via the bloodstream to the targeted
areas, primarily focusing on the oral cavity an
mucous membranes.

3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metaboll
transformation primarily in the liver. Amalaki 0"

----- PAGE 43 -----
“Chapter 2 = Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

other components are biotransformed into active
metabolites that enhance their bioactivity.
4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted through the
Kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces).
RESEARCH UPDATES

| Sr.No. | Article Name | Author Name
a

Preliminary Ambika S, Post — Amalakyadi
Pharmaceutico Graduate Schol- Gutika Result

Analytical ar, Department Appearance — Solid
Study of of Rasashastra round in shape
Amalakyadi and Bhaishajya Colour —Black

Gutika Kalpana, Sri Odour — Characteristic

Dharmasthala smell Taste Kashaya
Manjunathesh- and tikta rasa pH — 3.6
ware College Disintegration time —
of Ayurveda 10 minutes
Hospital, Friability — 0.01%
Hassan-573201, Uniformity of weight
Karnataka —5.20g2-20 mg

Total ash— 0.9%

Acid insoluble

ash — 0.01%

Water Soluble

ash — 2.55%

Water soluble extrac-

tive value -0.134%

Alcohol soluble

extractive value

— 0.022%

2.2.6 PHALATRIKADI KVATHA
Reference: Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha.Kvatha Kalpana
Ftencngd aawtetatiar ti
(Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha.Kvatha Kalpana, 2/109)

INGREDIENTS USED

Amalaki EB 1 Part
Haritaki P. 1 Part
Bibhitaki P. 1 Part
Musta Rz. 1 Part
Daruharidra Bk. 1 Part
Indravaruni Rt. 1 Part
Haridra Rz. 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Obtain the necessary herbs and ingredients required
for Phalatrikadi Kvatha. Ensure each ingredient is
dried and cleaned properly.

2. Grind each ingredient separately into a
coarse powder.

3. Mix all the coarse powders properly in a clean, dry
container.

es 8

4. Add sixteen times the amount of water to the
mixture of coarse powders.

5, Allow the mixture to soak in the water overnight.

6. The next morning, subject the mixture to mild heat.
Continue heating until the liquid reduces to 1/8th
of its original quantity.

7. Once reduced, filter the mixture through a clean
cloth to remove the solid residues.

8. Collect the filtrate in a clean container. This filtrate
is known as Phalatrikadi Kvatha.

Dose: 48 ml.

Therapeutic Indications: All types of Diabeties.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1.

Anti-diabetic Effects: Amalaki, Haritaki, Bibhitaki,
Daruharidra, Haridra. These herbs help to lower
blood sugar levels by enhancing insulin sensitivity,
promoting pancreatic function, and reducing
glucose absorption in the intestines.

. Anti-inflammatory and Antioxidant Effects: Amalaki,

Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Haridra. Rich in antioxidants
like vitamin C (Amalaki) and = curcumin
(Haridra), these herbs reduce oxidative stress and
inflammation, common complications in diabetes.

. Liver Function and Detoxification: Musta, Daruharidra.

These herbs support liver function, helping in
the detoxification process and improving overall
metabolic functions.

. Digestive and Metabolic Effects: Musta, Indravaruni.

Improve digestion and metabolism, which can be
impaired in diabetic conditions. Musta enhances
digestive fire (Agni), and Indravaruni acts as a
laxative and purgative, aiding in the elimination
of toxins.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The active compounds from the kvatha

are absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active ingredients

are distributed via the bloodstream to various
tissues, including the pancreas, liver, and adipose
tissues.

3. Metabolism: The compounds are metabolized

primarily in the liver. Ingredients like Haridra
(curcumin) undergo conjugation and _ other
metabolic pathways to become bioactive.

4. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted through the

Kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract
(feces).

----- PAGE 44 -----
32
RESEARCH UPDATES

Sr.No. | Article Name || Author Name [Result |

1. A Critical Dr. Vipin The study highlights
Review of Kumar, M.D. that Phalatrikad!
Phalatrikadi © (Kaya Chikitsa),  kvatha drugs possess
Kvatha WSR Ph.D, IMS, the following
to Liver BHU, Varanasi, properties: Pittahara,
Disorders Lecturer, Pittarechaka,

Deptt. of Kaya Yakriduttejaka,
Chikitsa, SKD Dipana, Rechana,
Govt. Ayurvedic Pachaka, Shothahara,
College and Jvarahara, Kamala and
Hospital, Panduhara, Yakrita
Muzaffar- and Raktvikarahara,
nagar-251001, Tridoshahara,
U.P. Rasayana,
Mutrajanana,
Pittasaraka,
Anulomaka, Shvedaka,

Dahaprashamana and
Raktapittahara, which
alleviate koshthashrita
kamala and Pandu.

2.2.H TRIPHALA GHRITA
Reference: Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha. Ghrita Kalpana
Fractal Ted Wee ATA
TRUM WAS TA: TIAL!
Sra WA Ya chech: Hui: GaN

amr Tecra a avg facet aaa a
Swen a vedi fafa sree Fa
waste Word aia AateT: FateuM: |
Toei WAadleg UM TeMaR ray
(Sha.Sam.Ma.Kha. Ghrita Kalpana, 9/66-71)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Triphala Kvatha P. 768 ml
Vasa Kvatha Pl, 768 ml
Bhringaraja Kvatha Pl, 768 ml
Aja- Dugha = 768 ml
Haritaki [?, 12 gms
Bibhitaki P. 12 gms
Amalaki P. 12 gms
Pippali Fr. 12 gms
Draksha Fr, 12 gms
Chandana Bk. 12 gms
Saindhava = 12 gms
Bala Rt. 12 gms

~_Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter ¢

| DrugName [Part Used | Proportion’ J

Kakoll Rt. 12 gms
Kshira Kakoll Bulb 12 grns
Medha Rt. 12 gms
Maricha Fr. 12 gms
Nagara Rz. 12 gms
Sharkara =- 12 gms
Pundrika PI. 12 grns
Kamala PI. 12 gms
Punarnava Pl, 12 gms
Yashtimadhu Rz. 12 gms
Go-Ghrita = 768 mi
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya
(Haritaki to Yashtimadhu) and grind them into a
fine powder (Churna).

e Addasufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the Triphala kvatha, Vasa Kvatha and
Bhringaraja Kvatha as per classical refrences.

e Take also Aja— Dugdha as dravadravya.

3. Mixing:

e Inaclean vessel, add Go-Ghrita (1 Part) as mention
quantity along with Kalka Dravya (1/4th part)
and Drava Dravya (4 Parts).

4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

¢ Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

° Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove i!
from the heat.

e Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

6. Cooling and Storage:

° Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room
temperature.

© Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container ina cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 12 gms.

Anupana: Warm Water, Warm Milk.

----- PAGE 45 -----
Chapter 2 « Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

Therapeutic Indications: Timira, Netrakandu, Kancha
Roga, Netra Srava, Patala roga, Blindness.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1G

Antioxidant and  Anti-inflammatory _ Effects:
Triphala (Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki), Haridra,
Daruharidra, Medha. These ingredients are rich in
tannins, flavonoids, and other phytochemicals that
reduce oxidative stress and inflammation, crucial
for eye health.

. Ocular Health: Triphala, Bhringaraja, Vasa. Promote

the health of ocular tissues, improve vision, and
provide nourishment.

. Antimicrobial Properties: Pippali, Maricha, Nagara.

These have antimicrobial properties that help in
preventing and treating infections.

Nutritional Support: Goat milk, Ghee, Bala, Kakoli,
Kshira Kakoli. Provide essential fatty acids,

vitamins, and minerals that support overall health
and strengthen eye tissues.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The ghrita (ghee) base aids in the
absorption of lipid-soluble active ingredients
through the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: The active ingredients are distributed
via the bloodstream to various tissues, including
the ocular tissues.

3. Metabolism: The herbal components undergo

metabolic processes primarily in the liver. Ghee
acts as a medium to enhance the bioavailability of
the herbs.

4. Excretion: Metabolities are excreted through the

kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract
(feces).

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutical
Evaluation of
Triphala Ghrita

Ingredients
Identification and

Formulation

Pharmaceutical Analysis
of Triphala Ghrita—A
Compound Ayurvedic

Vishwalata Dhole, M.S.
Shalakyatantra, Nashik,
Maharashtra

Tape Ghrita, utilized for treating various eye zene exhibited the
following characteristics at room temperature: Refractive Index of 1.37,
Loss on Drying at 0.88%, Ash value at 0.052% w/w, Acid value at 1.700%
w/w, lodine value at 32% w/w, Saponification value at 244.0% w/w, and
Total fat content at 97.50%.

Dhruva Dabh, M.S.,
Scholar, Department of
Shalakya Tantra.

The aim was to establish the pharmacognostical and phytochemical
profile of Triphala ghrita. Analysis revealed rosette crystals, epicarp cells,
and tannin content. Pharmaceutical analysis showed a loss on drying of
0.01%, a saponification value of 199.94%, a specific gravity of 0.09%, a
refractive index of 1.464%, and 12 spots in High-Performance Thin Layer
Chromatography at 254 nm. These parameters provide a baseline for
future studies.

Efficacy of Triphala

in Computer Vision
Syndrome

Ghrita Netratarpana

Deepak P. Sawant, Associate

Professor and HOD, Shalakya

Tantra, Vasantdada Patil
Ayurvedic Medical College
and Institute of Yoga, Sangli,
MAA, India.

In this study, 60 patients were divided into two groups, with 30 in each.
Group | received Triphala Ghrita Tarpana while Group {| underwent
exercise. All 60 patients completed the trial successfully. The results
from the treatment group were satisfactory, showing effectiveness in
alleviating all signs and symptoms of Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS),
as supported by statistical analysis (P<0.001).

4. | Investigation on

Triphala Ghrita

ile

Anticataract Activity of

K. N. Mahajan, Department
of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Smt.S.S. Patil
College of Pharmacy,
Chopada-425127

(MHA), India

Triphala ghrita showed dose-dependent protection against galactose-
induced cataracts in rats. Doses of 1080 mg and 2160 mg per 200 g
exhibited significant delays in cataract onset and progression. The 1080
mg dose notably prevented stage || cataracts within 14 days and stage III
cataracts within 21 days, with no stage III or IV cataracts observed after
30 days. Although the 2160 mg dose did not lead to stage IV cataracts
after 30 days, it did induce stage III cataracts. The superior efficacy of the
1080 mg dose may be due to the antioxidant properties of gallic acid,
ellagic acid, and ascorbic acid present in Triphala ghrita.

2.3 Bhallataka

References: The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part

01, Volume 02, Pg. 37

Bhallataka consists of the mature fruit of Semecarpus
anacardium Linn. (Family Anacardiaceae), a medium-

sized tree found in moist deciduous forests throughout
the country.

SYNONYMS

¢ Sanskrit : Arushakara, Bhallata.

% Assamese : Bhelaguti.

----- PAGE 46 -----
34

* Bengali: Bhela

© English : Marking Nut

< Gujarati: Bhilam

* Hindi: Bhilawa

* Kannada : Bhallataka

© Kashmiri : —

* Malayalam : Chera

* Marathi: Bibba

* Oriya : Bhollataki, Bholai

* Punjabi: Bhilawa

Tamil : Tatamkottai, Scramkotati
Telugu : Nallajidi, Nallajidiginga
* Urdu: Baladur, Bhilavan
DESCRIPTION

A. Macroscopic: Fruit laterally flattened, drupaceous,
dark brown, nut 2.5-3 cm long, obliquely ovoid, smooth,
shining with residual receptacle.

B. Microscopic
* Fruit:

The pericarp is differentiated into three layers: the
epicarp, mesocarp, and endocarp.

e In longitudinal section, the pericarp shows an
outer epicarp consisting of a single layer of
radially elongated and lignified epidermal cells.
Characteristic glands are found in the pericarp,
exuding oil globules. These glands arise as small
protuberances in the epicarp. Under the pressure
exerted by mesocarp cells, some epidermal cells
and the cuticle rupture, facilitating the exudation
of oil globules from the oil glands.

The mesocarp is a very broad zone, 30-40 layers
thick, composed mostly of parenchymatous
cells with lysigenous cavities and fibrovascular
bundles. Below the epidermis, a few outer
parenchyma cells are smaller compared to the rest.

Rosette crystals of calcium oxalate are dispersed
throughout the parenchymatous cells. Some
cells dissolve, forming lysigenous cavities that
increase in size with the maturity of the fruit.
These cavities do not have any special lining
and contain an acrid and irritant yellowish oily
secretion.

The endocarp consists of two distinct layers. The
innermost layer is prismatic, with very much
elongated radial walls highly thickened. The outer
layer is shorter and thinner than the prismatic
layer but with cells similar to the former.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 5

e Many mesocarp parenchyma cells contain LOSetie
crystals of calcium oxalate and oil drops i
oil glands.

© Lysigenous cavities of the mesocarp contain ah
oily vesicating substance, insoluble in water bu
soluble in alcohol, ether, and chloroform.

“ Powder:

© Dark-brown in color.

e It exhibits rosette crystals of calcium oxalate alon,
with oil globules.

IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH
1. Foreign matter: Not more than 1 percep;
(Appendix 2.2.2).

2. Acid-insoluble ash: Not more than 0.5 percen;
(Appendix 2.2.4).

3. Alcohol-soluble extractive: Not less than 11 percent
(Appendix 2.2.6).

4. Water-soluble extractive: Not less than 5 percen;
(Appendix 2.2.7).

Constituents : Tarry oil containing Anacardic Acid and a
non-volatile alcohol known as Cardol.

Properties and Action

** Rasa: Madhura, Katu, Tikta, Kashaya

* Guna : Laghu, Tikshana, Snigdha

* Virya: Ushna

“ Vipaka: Madhura

* Karma : Vatahara, Kaphahara, Dipana, Pachana,

Chedi, Bhedi, Medhya

Important Formulations: B. Rasayana, B. Modaka, Amrita

Bhallataka Leha, Sanjivani Vati

Therapeutic Uses :

Kushtha.

Dose : 1.2 g of the drug in Kshirapaka form.

2.3.A BHALLATAKA MODAKA

Reference: B.R., Pliha-Yakrit Rogadhikara

ACMA SA We Ae: |

TORT, WiteareTaUTy |

(B.R., Pliha-Yakrit Rogadhikara, 41/4”)
INGREDIENTS UseD

Part Used | prononii

Anaha, Grahani, Gulma, Krmi,

Shuddha Bhallataka Fr. 1 Part
Haritaki P. 1 Part
Jira Fr. 1 Part
Guda

= 6 Parts

----- PAGE 47 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) 35

Procedure: 4. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted through the

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces).

Bhallataka Modaka. Ensure each ingredient is clean _ pesgarcH UPDATES
and free from impurities.

2 § , grind first three 1. Effect of Bhal- Harmeet Kour, This study highlights the

ingredient @ i i ‘
g separately into a fine powder. lataka Modaka International significant +hepatopro-

3. Take guda (jaggery) and water. Make a gudapaka In CCl4 In- Ayurvedic tective effects of Bhal-
(3-4 thread consistency). duced Acute- Medical lataka Modaka against

zi hepatotoxici- Journal. CCl4-induced liver dam-

4, Then add all thefine powdered drugs. tyin Rats age in rats. It was ob-
5. Stir well until suitable for tablets form served that Bhallataka
(Modaka shape). Modaka improved bio-

A chemical parameters

6. Dry properly and store in a sterilized, airtight (AST, ALT, ALP, total pro-
container. tein, albumin) and liver

histopathology to a de-
: gree comparable to that
Anupana: Warm milk of Liv. 52.

Therapeutic Indications: Pliha Vriddhi Vikara Nashta

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Dose: 1 gm for 7 Days

2.3.B BHALLATAKA GHRITA

1. Anti-inflammatory and Hepatoprotective Effects: Reference: B.R., Gulma Rogadhikara
Shuddha Bhallataka, Haritaki, Jira. Shuddha 1. PRATHAMA

Bhallataka contains bioactive compounds such as aecaert fue Taraet UPA
. . |
bhilawanols which have strong anti-inflammatory ;
aed faenrererarates terete 1

properties. Haritaki and Jira also contribute with 4 :
their antiinflammatory and hepatoprotective TreTase yet a freed AE TATA!
effects. fag tend feg araych fas wer
2. Digestive and Metabolic Enhancement: Jira, Haritaki, fare nah went fasat mee Rag
Jira is known for enhancing digestive functions and Weaet Uae Seat TT feared
improving metabolism. Haritaki supports digestive  ya.geetich ATH UHICHRR WA
health and acts as a mild laxative. SCE CEIUUICINN ERG i
3. Immunomodulatory Properties: Shuddha Bhallataka. (B.R,, Gulma Rogadhikara, 32/155-158)
Bhallatak has immunomodulatory properties that ‘ Z
help in boosting the immune system. INGREDIENTS USED

4. Antioxidant Effects: Haritaki, Jira. Both ingredients Part Used

contain antioxidants that neutralize free radicals Kvatha Dravya
and reduce oxidative stress. Shuddha Bhallataka Fr. 93 gms
Shalaparni Pl. 46 gms
PHARMACOKINETICS erat = rane
1. Absorption: The active constituents from Shuddha — antkari all ee
Bhallataka, Haritaki, and Jira are absorbed through rina Pl. “6 ine
the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of jaggery — Gokshura Pl. 46 ems
(Guda) may facilitate the absorption due to its  Vigarikanda Bk. 46.ems

carbohydrate content. Water for decoction - 3Lts

2, Distribution; Once absorbed, the bioactive Kalka Dravya
compounds are distributed throughout the body,  Pippali Fr. 12 gms
reaching the liver and spleen where they exert their Shunthi Rz. 12 ems
therapeutic effects. Vacha Rz. 12 gms
3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism Vidanga Rz. 12 gms
in the liver. Bhallataka’s active compounds are Saindhava - 12 gms
metabolized into their active forms, which are then Shuddha Hingu Exd. 12 gms
Yavakshara — 12 gms

available to exert their therapeutic effects.

----- PAGE 48 -----
2g 36 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 5
2: DERIVA
Vida Lavana a 12 gms aera Ua: Prekesantat fats
5 Kachura Dr. Rz. 12 gms ager fatreft Ud aerated AAT aaa | I
Shitetaka Re zens (BR., Gulma Rogadhikara, 32/15,
Mulethi Rt. 12 gms )
Rasana Lf. 12 gms INGREDIENTS USED
Go- Ghrita : 750\gms
Go- Dugdha = 750 ml Shuddha Bhallataka Kalka Fr. 250 gms
Shuddha Bhallataka Kvatha Fr. 4 kgs
Procedure: Go-Grita ee ke
1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya: Water for Kvatha = 16 Its

e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Pippali
to Rasana) and grind them into a fine powder
(Churna).

e Add asufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the kvatha, by adding kvatha dravya
from shuddha bhallataka to Vidarik and as per
classical refrences.

° Take also Go - Dugdha as dravadravya

3. Mixing:

° Inacleanvessel,add Go Ghritaas mention quantity

along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.
4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

° Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid
burning the ingredients. Heat the mixture until
the water content evaporates and sneha siddhi
lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

° Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

¢ Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

4 6. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room
temperature.

° Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 6 - 12 gms.

Anupana: Warm Milk.

Therapeutic Indications: Kaphaja Gulam, Pliha Roga,
Pandu Roga, Shvasa, Grahni, Kasa.

Procedure:
1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

e Take the mentioned Quantity of Bhallataka ang
grind them into a fine powder (Churna).

e Add asufficient quantity of water to the powdereq
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the Bhallataka kvatha as per classica|

refernces.
3. Mixing:

e Inaclean vessel, add Go-Ghrita as mention quan-

tity along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya,
4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stire
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

° Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

6. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room
temperature.

© Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 3- 6 gms.

Anupana: Sugar and Warm Milk.
Therapeutic Indications: Kaphaja Gulma.
PHARMACODYNAMICs

1. Antipyretic and Anti-inflammatory Effects: Bhallat®
Shunthi, and Pippali inhibit the production 0

----- PAGE 49 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) 37
pyrogenic and pro-inflammatory cytokines, RESEARCH UPDATES
reducing fever and inflammation.
2. Digestive and Carminative Effects: Vidarikanda adj ; F
Shaleeeeni Prishan, Fests 7 a Bhallatakadi Sandesh R. This study aimed to
pi 2 aparni, Kantkari, and Gokshura Ghrita: Wayal, Center develop cow ghee-based
enhance digestive enzyme activity, improve gut Develop- for Research Polyherbal _ Bhallatakadi
motility, and reduce bloating and gas formation. ment and and Develop- Ghrita formulations, com-
3. Hepatoprotective Eff ‘ s evaluation ment,PRIST paring them with tradi-
eco ive Effects: Bhallataka, Mulathi, and with refer- University, tional Ayurvedic process-
Rasana promote liver function, protect liver cells ence to Thanjavur, es, Plants were identified,
from damage, and support detoxification pro- Murchce- Tamilnadu, processed, and used to
Pocces! hhanaand India create the formulations,
Shata-Dhau- which were evaluated for
4. Respiratory and Expectorant Effects: Kantkari, ta Process various properties includ-

Pippali, and Shunthi aid in clearing respiratory
passages, reducing symptoms of cough and
breathlessness.

5. Immunomodulatory Effects: Bhallataka and Go-
Ghrita enhance immune function by stimulating
the production of white blood cells and modulating
immune responses.

6. Antimicrobial Effects: Vidanga, Saindhava, Shuddha,
Hingu and Chitaraka possess broad-spectrum
antimicrobial properties, inhibiting the growth of
bacteria and viruses.

7. Adaptogenic Effects: Bhallataka and Rasana help the
body cope with stress by balancing stress hormones

ing antioxidant activity and
stability. Results indicated
maintained ghee charac-
teristics, dose-dependent
antioxidant activity, and
shelf life ranging from 1.6
to 3.3 years under acceler-
ated conditions and 2.2 to
3.8 years under real-time
stability. Standardization
is essential for ensuring
consistent quality and
efficacy.

2.3.¢ BHALLATAKA GUDA
Reference: B.R., Arsha Rogadhikara

and improving overall resilience. UeeIAUEA F Terg it aaa |
PHARMACOKINETICS Tees Ta der Tae Tsget ATR I
Veridehdeates ferat da Vela |

1. Absorption: Taken orally, the decoction and paste

(kvatha and kalka dravyas) are absorbed through Ferg ofeateamrer ater TgET TAT |
the gastrointestinal tract, with bioactive com- Saigaid Cad eM
pounds being efficiently extracted during the Egehraetaatt Wideas APT: 1
preparation process.

Distribution: The active compounds are distributed
throughout the body via the bloodstream, targeting
various systems such as the digestive, hepatic,
respiratory, and immune systems to exert their
therapeutic effects.

N

(B.R., Arsha Rogadhikara, 9/129-133)

INGREDIENTS USED

: eae ae ae ee Sruvetelita Biel Fr. 2500 in number
transformed into more active or inactive forms. Gute : = 5 Kg
The liver enzymes play a crucial role in the Anes P. 12 gms
biotransformation of the active constituents. bloritskt: P. 12 gms
4. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted through the phat P. 12 gms
kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract Sunt Re: 12 gms
(feces), ensuring the elimination of waste products. Hippall Et 12 gms
The presence of Go-Ghrita (ghee) enhances the March Fr. 12 gms
bioavailability and absorption of fat-soluble  vavana Fr. 12 gms
Musta Rz. 12 gms

compounds, supporting efficient excretion.

----- PAGE 50 -----
38

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana = Chapter >

Saindhave Lavana 12 gms

Dalachini Bk. 12 gms

Ela Sd. 12 gms

Teja Patra Lf 12 gms

Nagakeshara Sd, 12 gms

Water =— 13 Lts
Procedure:

pa)

- Take 2000 pieces of purified Bhallataka and add 13
liters of water.
2. Reduce the mixture to one-fourth of its original
volume.
S. Add guda (jaggery) to the filtered kvatha (decoction)
and cook on low heat until it reaches a 3-4 thread
consistency.

4. Then add all the remaining powdered drugs.
5. Stir well and allow the mixture to cool.
6. Store in air tight container.

Dose: 2-5 gms.

Anupana: Milk, Water.

Therapeutic Indications: Kushtha, Kamala, Kasa,
Plihodara, Krimi, Prameha, Pandu, Bagandara, Arsha.

2°* Reference:
weg At zest faa yet
Ueciteadea A Ueig FTAA AT: 11
Sel Teqeitcat rahe Ase |
amt: aegead Wega Maa a
agdgighie a YStecttn: Ca: 1
(B.R., Arsha Rogadhikara, 9/134-137)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Bhallataka Fr. 1000 in Number

Dashamula Rt./ Pl. 460 Gms
Guduchi St. 46 Gms
Gokshura PI. 46 Gms
Chitraka Rt. 46 Gms
Kachura Dr. Rz. 46 Gms
Guda = 5 kgs
Madhu = 190 Gms
Pippali Fr 190 Gms
Eranda Taila = 190 Gms
Dalachini Bk. 190 Gms _
Ela Sd. 190 Gms

Part Used Proportion
Maricha 190 Gms
Water = 13 Lts

Procedure:

1. Take 2000 pieces of purified Bhallataka and add 13
liters of water.

2. Reduce the mixture to one-fourth of its Original
volume.

3. Add Guda (jaggery) to the filtered kvath,
(decoction) and cook on low heat until it reaches a

3-4 thread consistency.
4. Then add all the remaining powdered drugs.
5. Stire well and allow the mixture to cool.
6. Store in air tight container.
Dose: 5 Gms
Anupana: Milk and Water
Therapeutic Indications: Arsha, Kasa, Pandu, Shotha,
Agnimandya.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Anti-inflammatory and Antioxidant Effects: Shuddha
Bhallataka, Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Shunthi, Pippali,
Maricha, Ajavayana, Musta, Saindhava Lavana,
Dalachini, Ela, Teja Patra, Nagakesara. These
ingredients possess potent anti-inflammatory and
antioxidant properties, which help in reducing
inflammation, scavenging free radicals, and
protecting cells from oxidative damage.
2. Digestive and Carminative Actions: Shunthi, Pippali,
Maricha, Ajavayana, Musta, Saindhava Lavana,
Dalachini, Ela, Teja Patra. These herbs improve

digestion, relieve flatulence, and alleviate
gastrointestinal discomfort.
3. Hepatoprotective Effects; Amalaki,  Haritaki,

Bibhitaki. These herbs have hepatoprotective

properties, which help in protecting the liver from

damage and promoting its regeneration.
PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents are absorbed
through the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: Distributed to various tissues an
organs, especially the liver and spleen, where they
exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: Metabolized in the liver to activ’
metabolites.

4. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted mainly throug!
urine and feces.

----- PAGE 51 -----
“Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

RESEARCH Uppates : No Data Found.

aTsT

2.3.D BHALLATAKADI TAILA
ee eee
Reference: B.R. Nadivrana Rogadhikara

(B.R., Nadivrana Rogadhikara, 50/25)

INGREDIENTS USED

Bhallataka RP 1 Part
Arka Rt. 1 Part
Maricha Fr. 1 Part
Saindhava = 1 Part
Vai- Vidanga Fr. 1 Part
Haridra Rz. 1 Part
Daru Haridra Bk. 1 Part
Chitraka Bk. 1 Part
Tila Taila = 4 Ser
Bilava Svarasa = 1 Ser
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

N

SS

wn

e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya
(Shuddha Bhallatak to Chitraka) and grind them
into a fine powder (Churna).

e Add asufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the Bilava Svarasa as per classical
references.

Mixing:

e Inaclean vessel, add Tila taila as mention quantity
along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.

Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

. Filtering:

¢ Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the taila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
the solid residues of the herbal paste.

. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Therapeutic Indications: Nadivarna, Apachi.

PHARMACODYNAmICcS

1. Anti-inflammatory and Antimicrobial Effects:
Bhallataka, Arka, Maricha, Vai-Vidanga, Haridra,
Daru Haridra, Chitraka. These herbs possess potent
anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties,
which help in reducing inflammation, controlling
infection, and promoting wound healing.

. Analgesic and Antipruritic Actions: Bhallataka, Arka,
Maricha. These herbs provide relief from pain and
itching associated with skin disorders.

3. Wound Healing and Tissue Repair: Bilva Svarasa, Tila
Taila. Bilva Svarasa and Tila Taila promote wound
healing by facilitating tissue repair, reducing
inflammation, and preventing infection.

nN

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents are absorbed
through the skin and penetrate deep into the tissues.

2. Distribution: Distributed to the affected skin areas,
where they exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: Metabolized locally within the skin
tissues.

4. Excretion: Metabolites are eliminated locally or may
be absorbed systemically and excreted through
urine and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Article Author
Name Name

Evaluation Anu The stability study main-
of Shelf Life Ruhilaa, tained temperature and hu-
of Bhallataka All India midity at 40 + 2°C and 75 +
Taila (Oil). Institute of 5%, respectively. Initial and
Ayurveda, subsequent assessments at
New Dehli. 1, 3, and 6 months evalu-

ated formulation degrada-
tion. Microbial and heavy
metal tests ensured product
safety. Results show a shelf
life of Bhallataka Taila (Oil) at
4.89 years, surpassing gov-
ernment guidelines. The oil's
lack of liquid media and high
PUFA and tocopherol content
enhance stability. Analytical
parameters, including mois-
ture content, specific gravity,
acid value, peroxide value,
saponification value, and vis-
cosity, met standards, ensur-
ing therapeutic safety.

----- PAGE 52 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana Chapter >

2.3.E BHALLATAKA AVALEHA Anupana: Go- Dudha with sugar.
Reference: B.R., Arsha Rogadhikara Therapeutic Indications: Arsha Roga, Balaya, Vrishya
‘dabeespe wen] feet faararesaftaahr | PHARMACODYNAMICs
wat Sais gear courte art 11 1. Hemorrhoid Relief: Shuddha Bhallataka, Ghrit
a eels yaaa a gar SIG Sugat, Go-Dudha. Shuddha Bhallataka has any,
faatuen stegfiz: utes facet wears fet wat | inflammatory properties, which help ne

Wt: Waisataaes wai WafgenraRaery Tahar | inflammation associated with hemorrhoids, Chri,
oul: Qitet wpetsam: Reretgtis vegans: 11 and sugar provide soothing effects, while Go-Dudh,

Wal eat acqnd & ea Fas helps in cooling the body and reducing discomfo,,
lant ffzaqaar sit aN 2. Strength and Vitality Enhancement: Shuddh;
7 aan ofterinfia a = eo Bhallataka, Ghrita, Sugar, Go-Dudha. Shuddh,
Ww 5 : Bhallataka is known for its Rasayana (Tejuvenatins
Wasnt J RATA properties, which help enhance strength and

(B.R., Arsha Rogadhikara, 9/157-161) vitality. Ghrita and sugar provide nourishmep,

INGREDIENTS UsED and energy, while Go-Dudha contributes to Overa|

Ne

Shuddha Bhallataka Fr 2980 gms 3. Aphrodisiac and Sexual Potency Enhancement
Water = 12 Its Shuddha Bhallataka, Ghrita, Sugar, Go-Dudh;
Ghrita = 750 gms Shuddha Bhallataka is considered Vrishy;
Sugar Be 750 ems (aphrodisiac) in Ayurveda, promoting sexy,
Go- Dudha za 12 Lts health and potency. Ghrita and sugar provide
nourishment to the reproductive system, while Go-

Procedure: Dudha enhances reproductive fluids and Vitality.

1. First, purified Bhallataka is taken and then cow's PHARMACOKINETICS

milk is added to it.

2. Cooked thoroughly until it reaches a semi-solid
consistency (Mava/ Khoya).

1. Absorption: Active constituents are absorbed
through the digestive tract. Facilitates the absorption
of therapeutic compounds into the bloodstream

3. Then paste of Bhallataka is fried in ghee. allowing them to reach the target tissues and exer:
4. Separately, in a stainless steel utensil, required their effects.
water and sugar are mixed and cooked to forma _2, Distribution: Distributed to various organs and
two-thread consistency. tissues, including the digestive system and
5. Afterward, the bhrjita Bhallataka is added to reproductive organs.
the syrup. 3. Metabolism: Metabolized by the liver and
6. Stir well and allow the mixture to cool. other organs.
7. Store in air tight container. 4. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted through urine
Dose: 5-10 Gms. and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Nam \uthor Nan
Harshal J. Shende, MD
(RSBK); Vishwaharta
Ayurved Infertility

& Research Centre,
Mumbai, MHA.

Bhallataka underwent Shodhana with Eishtika churna, resulting in 8.64% ©
content in the Etheral soluble extract test. Maximum oil loss of 134 gm occurred
due to adsorption by Eishtika churna. The Process produced a dark Avaleh®
with sweet and astringent taste. Total yield obtained was B1-1240 gm, B2-1257
8m, B3-1232 gm. The mean Acid insoluble ash was 0.13%, indicating maxim"
bioavailability. The mean PH was 4.8, reflecting acidity.

The aim was to assess the antimicrobial activity of Bhallataka Avaleha agai"
various microbes. It demonstrated potent antibacterial effects, particule"
against bacteria causing respiratory tract infections. Significant bacteriost="

activity was observed against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptoco-
pyogenes.

Standardization of
Bhallataka Avaleha

Harshal J. Shende, MD
(RSBK); Vishwaharta
Ayurved Infertility

& Research Centre,
Mumbai, MHA

To study the anti-
microbial activity
of standardized

Bhallataka Avaleha

----- PAGE 53 -----
Chapter 2° Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

44

2.3.F BHALLATAKADI LEPA
Reference: B.R., Kushtha Rogadhikara

Ace THEU TTS A Toaa CATV SUT
Gea USS AU US-atsa Stes WaT
aaa VAR VersHaA Tegel ATT |
SS facta facet aw Way Sai asta I

(B.R., Kushtha Rogadhikara, 54/ 10-11)
INGREDIENTS USED

Bhallataka 1 Part
Chitraka Rt. 1 Part
Snuhi Rz. 1 Part
Arka Uf 1 Part
Gunja Sd. 1 Part
Shunthi Rz. 1 Part
Pippali Fr, 1 Part
Maricha Fr. 1 Part
Shankha Bhasma = 1 Part
Tutha — 4 Part
Kutha Bk. 1 Part
Saindhava Lavana — 1 Part
Vida Lavana — 1 Part
Samudra Lavana _ 4 Part
Sauvarchala Lavana — 1 Part
Audvida Lavana — 1 Part
Sajji kshara = 1 Part
Yava Kshara = 1 Part
Languli 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients of Bhallatakadi Lepa.
2. Grind them into a fine powder and store it properly
3. Before applying it to the body, mix with the Arka
kshira, Snuhi Kshira as the medium to create a
soft paste.
Local Application: 20-30 gms + Snuhi Kshira 50 ome +
Arka Kshira 50 gms.
Therapeutic Indications: Kushtha, Kilasa, Tila Kalaka,
Chamkila, Arsha.
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
1. Anti-inflammatory; The combination of herbs
and salts in the lepa formulation exhibits anti-
inflammatory properties, reducing inflammation
associated with skin disorders like Kushtha
and Kilasa.
2. Analgesic: The application of this lepa locally can
help alleviate pain and discomfort associated with
skin conditions like Tila Kalaka and Chamkila.

3. Antimicrobial: The ingredients in the lepa possess
antimicrobial properties, which may help in
preventing infections and promoting wound
healing.

4. Astringent: Some components of the lepa
formulation have astringent properties, which can
help in tightening the skin and reducing secretions,
beneficial in conditions like Arsha (hemorrhoids).

RESEARCH UPDATES

[eae ArticleName [Author Name] Result

Aclinical trial  Lokendra Fifteen patients _ ini-
onthe efficacy Pahadiya,PG tially enrolled, but five
of Bhallatakadi Final Year dropped out. The re-

lepalnChar- — Scholar, maining ten received
makila W.S.R. Depart. Bhallatakadi lepa for
Cutane- of Shalya one month with a two-
ous warts Tantra, NIA, month follow-up. Statis-
Jaipur, Rajast- tical analysis showed it

han, India. ineffective in reducing

wart number or size.

Mild ASRs and LSRs

were noted. The study
suggests seasonal varia-
tions, potency, and mar-
ket adulteration as fac-
tors contributing to drug
inefficacy. A longitudinal
study is advised for com-
prehensive analysis.

2.3.G BHALLATAKADI KVATHA
Reference: B.R., Urustambha, Rogadhikara
Mee M PVA IATA: |
UaAeigal a Beets Tao: U

(B.R., Urustambha Rogadhikara, 28/15)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Bhallataka Fr. 1 Part
Guduchi St. 1 Part
Shunthi Rz. 1 Part
Devadaru Bk. 1 Part
Haritaki Pi 1 Part
Punarnava Pl. 1 Part
Bilav Rt. 1 Part
Aarni Rt. 1 Part
Sonapatha y Rt. 1 Part
Patala : Rt. 1 Part
Gambhari Rt. 1 Part
Shalaparni Pl. 1 Part
Prishniparni Pl. 1 Part
Brihati Pl. 1 Part
Kanthakari Pl. 1 Part

----- PAGE 54 -----
42

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter >

Part Used
Pl.

Gokshura 1 Part
Water = 16 Times and
reduced upto
% th part
Procedure:

1. Obtain the necessary all the ingredients required
for Bhallatakadi Kvatha. Ensure each ingredient is
dried and cleaned properly.

2. Grind each
coarse powder.

ingredient Separately into a

3. Mix all the coarse powders pro

perly in a clean, dry
container.

- Add sixteen times the amount of water to the
mixture of coarse powders.

5. Allow the mixture to soak in the water overnight.

- The next moming, subject the mixture to mild heat.
Continue heating until the liquid reduces to 1/4th
of its original quantity.

7. Once reduced, filter the mixture through a clean
cloth to remove the solid residues.

8. Collect the filtrate in a clean container. This filtrate
is known as Bhallatakadi Kvatha.

Anupana: Water.

Therapeutic Indications: Urustambha Roga.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory Action; The herbs like
Guduchi, Punarnava, and Gokshura possess
anti-inflammatory properties. They can inhibit
the production of inflammatory mediators,
thereby reducing inflammation associated with
Urustambha Roga.

2. Analgesic Action: Some components of the
formulation, such as Gokshura and Haritaki, may
have analgesic properties. They can alleviate pain
and discomfort in the thighs, characteristic of
Urustambha Roga.

3. Immunomodulatory Effects: Guduchi is known for
its immunomodulatory effects. By modulating
the immune response, it can enhance the body’s
defense mechanisms, aiding in the management of
Urustambha Roga.

4. Muscle Relaxant Action: Certain herbs like Punarnava
and Gokshura possess muscle relaxant properties.
They can help relax the muscles in the thighs,
reducing stiffness and promoting mobility.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents of the herbs
in the formulation are typically absorbeq mn
the gastrointestinal tract. The extent and raj,
of absorption may vary depending on factors
such as the solubility and bioavailability of the
phytochemicals.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the phytoconstituenj,
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They may reach target tissues in the
thighs and exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of the phytochemical,
occurs primarily in the liver. They undergo Various
biotransformation processes, which may involve
oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, or conjugation
reactions.

4. Elimination: Metabolites of the phytochemicals are
eliminated from the body primarily through rena]
excretion or fecal elimination. The half-life ang
duration of action of the active compounds Thay
vary, influencing the dosing frequency and duration
of treatment.

RESEARCH UppaATES : No Data Found.

2.3.H TOXICITY STUDY AND ITS MANAGEMENT:
Semecarpus anacardium, known as Bhallataka, js
classified as a Sthavara Vanaspatika Upavisha (irritant
organic vegetable poison) in various Ayurvedic texts, Its
synonyms, Shophahetu, Shophakrita, and Vranakrita,
indicate its potential to cause inflammation and
ulceration. Bhallataka possesses Laghu (light), Ruksha
(dry), and hot properties, akin to poison.

It is recommended that Bhallataka undergo purification
(shodhana) before administration to patients. Bhallataka
(Semecarpus anacardium Linn.) is listed among
poisonous substances in Ayurvedic, Siddha, and Unani
systems of medicine. Shodhana is a purification method
used in Ayurveda to cleanse poisonous medicinal

plants, metals, minerals, etc. This process removes
unwanted impurities.

Semecarpus anacardium nuts can be safely taken orall)
with milk, ghee, or peanut oil, as these methods preven‘
toxic effects and instead yield anabolic benefits. 10
achieve therapeutic effects without toxicity, it is essential

to closely follow the traditional methods recommendet
in Ayurveda and Siddha.

TOXIC PART
¢ Fruit

e Colour: Hard, black rind with brownish, oily ji’
known as Bhallataka oil inside.

----- PAGE 55 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

43

© Weight: 1.5 to 3.5 grams.

e Oil: Brownish and oily.
* Medicinal Dose

© Kalka: 3-6 grams.

e Taila: 10-20 drops.
Fatal Dose: 5-10 grams of pulpy juice or 140-150 grains.
Fatal Period: 12-24 hours.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF BHALLATAKA POISONING

1. ORAL INGESTION:

+ Excessive salivation, nausea, and vomiting.

~ Formation of blackish blisters containing acrid serum.

+ Burning sensation in the mouth, throat, chest, and
upper abdomen.

*» Increased thirst, decreased urine output, or absence
of urine.

«+ Abdominal pain and cramps throughout the
abdomen.

* Watery diarrhea, sometimes with blood and mucus.

2. SKIN CONTACT:

+ Eczematous eruptions accompanied by severe
itching.

« Painful blackish blisters with acrid serum.

+ Fever and painful urination with dark-colored urine.

IN AYURVEDA

In Charaka Samhita, contact with fruits or flowers of
Bhallataka is mentioned as one of the causes of Agantuja
shotha (inflammation due to external factors). Contact
with the juice of Bhallataka can lead to severe burning
sensation (Daha) and wound formation (Vrana).
Direct contact with the face can result in acute burning
sensation accompanied by swelling (Shotha) and skin
eruptions (Visarpa). Some individuals may exhibit
intolerance to Bhallataka, presenting symptoms such
as dark urine, generalized itching, red patches on the
skin blistering, diarrhea, fever, bloody urine, and even
mental confusion (Unmada). Other symptoms may
include reduced urine output (Oliguria), cloudy urine,
itching around the anus and penis.

SHANTYUPAYA/ TREATMENT:

1. For local application, a paste of sesame (Tila) rubbed
with buffalo milk and mixed with butter, ora paste
of licorice (Yashthimadhu) and sesame rubbed on a
Sala leaf is recommended.

2. A paste of sesame with goat milk and butter or with
black clay (Krishna Mritika) is used for treating
inflammation caused by Bhallataka.

3. For quick relief from Bhallataka-induced inflamma-
tion, options include a mixture of Indian Elm
(Mehnad) juice and butter, a mixture of cedar wood
(Devadaru), mustard (Sarshapa), cypress grass
(Nagaramotha), and clarified butter (Navanita), or
a blend of clarified butter, sesame seeds, and sugar
mixed with milk. Alternatively, a concoction of neem
leaves (Neema), sesame seeds (Tila), and sesame oil
(Tila Tail) boiled together and concentrated for local
application can be used.

RATIONALE

The tarry oil found in the pericarp of the fruit is the main
cause of irritation. This oil consists of 90% Anacardic
acid, an oxyacid, and 10% Cardol, a higher non-volatile
alcohol. Bhilawanol, a mixture of 3-n-pentadec(en)-
ylcatechols, is the major component. Additionally, there
are two incompletely identified phenols: semecarpol
and anacardol. The corrosive juice from the pericarp
contains catechol, fixed oil, and anacardol, which are
responsible for its corrosive properties. In Bhallataka,
Bhilawanol and Anacardic acids are the main
constituents causing blisters, with Bhilawanol being
known as Urushiol. When Urushiol comes into contact
with the skin, itinduces dermatitis. Traditional methods
of shodhana (processing) of Bhallataka fruits have been
found to reduce this irritation.

2.4 Gandhaka

References: The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part

01, Volume 07, Pg. 9

Definition: Gandhaka is sulphur (S), a non-metallic solid

element.

SYNONYMS

* Sanskrita : Bali, Daityendra, Gandha, Sugandhaka,
Vali, Sugandhika

“ Assami : Kibrit

+ Bangali : Gandhaka

¢ English : Sulphur

“ Gujarati: Gandhaka

* Hindi: Gandhaka

* Kannada : Gandaga

* Malayalam : Gandagam

“ Marathi: Gandhaka

¢ Punjabi: Gandhaka

* Tamil: Kandagam, Kantakam (S.F.1.)

+ Telugu: Gandhakam

+ Urdu: Kibreet (Gandhak) (N.RU.M.)

----- PAGE 56 -----
es

44

Broad Classification: Native element.
Origin and occurrence: Native Gandhaka is found in the
craters and crevices of extinct volcanoes, where it forms
asa direct sublimation product from volcanic gases. It is
also present around thermal springs, in cap-rocks of salt
domes, and within sedimentary sequences containing
sulfates and organic materials like bituminous
limestone. Gandhaka is often associated with gypsum
and limestone. To purify native Gandhaka, which may
be contaminated with sand, clay, bitumen, or other
foreign matter, it is melted in ovens or distilled in closed
vessels.
In India, Gandhaka deposits are limited, with the only
known occurrence being at Tsokar Lake in the Leh
district of Jammu and Kashmir. Mining for Gandhaka
does not take place in India. However, elemental
Gandhaka is commercially recovered as a by-product
from fertilizer plants in Panipat (Haryana), Naya
Nangal, and Bhatinda (Punjab), as well as from the oil
refinery in Mathura (Uttar Pradesh). Large deposits of
elemental Gandhaka are found underground in various
parts of the world, particularly in Poland, Mexico, and
the USA.
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
~ Nature : Crystalline lumps
* Colour : Sulphur yellow
* Streak : Yellowish white
~ Cleavage : Poor
* Fracture : Conchoidal
~ Lustre : Resinous
* Tenacity : Brittle
“ Transparency : Translucent
+ Hardness: 1.5 to 2.5
* Sp.Gr.: 1.95 to 2.10

CHEMICAL PROPERTIES
~ Effect of Heat: On burning a small quantity in a
crucible, Gandhaka partially melts with evolution of
brownish sulphur fumes.
Gandhaka melts at about 1100 where as it burns at
2700 in air with a bluish flame yielding sulphur-di-
oxide (SO,).
* Solubility: Insoluble in water as well as any acid, but
soluble in carbon-disulphide.
Assay: Should contain notless than 90% Sulphur, when
analysed by Gravimetric method (Appendix-3.1.8).
Heavy metals and Arsenic: Should not contain more
than the stated limits for the following: Arsenic = 1
ppm and Cadmium = 2 ppm (Appendix-3.2).

*

Es

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana e Chapter 5

“ Shodhana: Shall not be used in formulations Withoy
subjecting it to shodhana.
SHODHANA
Ref: Rasamrita-2/3
Ted ate wel GT YS TSS AAT |
Teuuifearimtaar fated! (Rasamrita, 2/3)
1. Gandhaka : 1 part
2. Go-dugdha or
Bhringaraja rasa (PI.): Q.S.

METHOD

Take fine powder of Gandhaka in a ladle, add little

amount of ghrita, melt and pour in to the vessel Which

contains go-dugdha or bhringaraja svarasa. Collect on

cooling to room temperature, wash with plenty of luke

warm water, dry, prepare the fine powder and presen, A

for further purpose.

GANDHAKA HAS THE FOLLOWING ATTRIBUTES

Properties and Actions:

“ Rasa: Madhura, Katu, Tikta, Kashaya

* Guna : Ushna, Sara, Snigdha

« Virya: Ushna

~ Vipaka: Katu

+ Karma : Rasayana, Dapiana, Pachana, Vatahara,
Kaphahara Balya, Medhya, Pittala, Chakshushya,
Krmihara, Sutajit, Kushthahara, Amadoshahara,
Sutendraviryaprada.

Therapeutic Uses of Shuddha Gandhaka: Kandu (itching);

Kushtha (diseases of the skin); Visarpa (erysepales

Dadru (taeniasis); Amavata (theumatism); Kapha

toga (disease due to kapha dosha); Garavisha (slow

accumulated poison); Pliha roga (splenic disease);

Kshaya (pthisis); Kasa (cough); Shvasa (Asthma); Netra

roga (diseases of eyes); Vata roga (diseases due to

Vata dosha).

Dose: 125 mg - 1 g of Shuddha Gandhaka.

Important Formulations: Chandrakala rasa, Rasa parpati
Gandhaka rasayana.

,

2.4.A GANDHAKA CHURNA
Reference: Shasrayoga, Churna Prakarana
calenaent Ta Weegee |
age yut dah waa Eat: |
aa sagErpenaary aor |

(Sahasrayoga, Churna Prakarana, p- |

----- PAGE 57 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

45

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Gandhaka =- 1 Part
Shuddha Parada — 1 Part
Kakamachi Svarasa (PI.) as
Bhringaraja Svarasa (PI.) as
Bakuchi Svarasa (Sd.) 2 Parts
Procedure:

1. First of all, take Shuddha Gandhaka and make it
into fine powder.

2. Triturate this powder with Bhringaraja Svarasa and
Kakamachi Svarasa for 7 days.

3. After this, add equal quantity of Shuddha Parada
and triturate it properly to make Kajjali.

4. Make seven more trituration process with the same
juice and dry the mixture.

5 Now add equal quantity of Bakuchi powder to
this mixture and knead it well with the juices
mentioned above.

6. Make this mixture into 500 mg size tablets and
dry them.

Dose: 500 mg.

Anupana: Kshira.

Action: Kaphahara.

Indication: Sarva Prakara Kushtha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antifungal and Antibacterial: Gandhaka Churna,
containing purified sulphur (Shuddha Gandhaka)
and purified mercury (Shuddha Parada), exhibits
potent antimicrobial properties. It can inhibit the
growth of various fungi and bacteria, making it
beneficial for treating skin infections associated
with different types of Kushtha.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of Kakamachi
Svarasa, Bhringaraja Svarasa, and Bakuchi Svarasa
helps in reducing inflammation. This property is
particularly useful in alleviating symptoms like
redness, swelling, and itching associated with
different types of skin disorders.

3. Kaphahara (Pacifying Kapha Dosha): Gandhaka
Churna hasa drying effect, attributed to the presence
of sulphur and mercury. This drying action helps in
reducing excess moisture and oiliness on the skin,
thus benefiting conditions where Kapha dosha
aggravation is involved.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents of Gandhaka
Churna are typically absorbed in the gastrointestinal

tract. Sulphur and mercury compounds may
undergo absorption through passive diffusion or
active transport mechanisms.

. Distribution: Once absorbed, the constituents

are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They may reach target tissues in the
skin, exerting their therapeutic effects on various
skin disorders.

. Metabolism: Sulphur and mercury compounds

may undergo metabolic transformations in the
liver. However, the metabolism of these elements
in the body is complex and depends on various
factors, including chemical form and route of
administration.

. Elimination: Metabolites of sulphur and mercury

may be excreted from the body primarily through
urine and feces. However, the elimination of these
heavy metals is relatively slow and may lead to
their accumulation in the body if not properly
metabolized and excreted.

RESEARCH Uppates : No Data Found.

2.4.8 GANDHAKA RASAYANA
Reference: AFI, Part Il, Page 115

West atertivaen aera TTS ara: |
VATA AMTT FAM ANSTAN FATIGSTT UI
wuld Aaa Ae ae a US gedeatel|
aug o es fauaaya Agee Sera:
ANIMA Wevilag St Ret Th Tey
Suisat ASU Whe SATS BLOT AAA
Yorat wade HOT elit gaia AMAIA ||

(YR. Rasayan, 1-4)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part

Go-Dugdha = Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Tvaka Kvatha St. Bk. Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Ela Kvatha Sd. QS. Bhavana for 8 times
Tejpatra Kvatha Lf Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Nagakesara Kvatha Adr. Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Guduchi Kvatha St. Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Pathya Kvatha Fr. P. QS. Bhavana for 8 times
Bibhitaki Kvatha Fr. P. Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Amalaki Kvatha Fr, P, QS. Bhavana for 8 times
Sunthi Kvatha Rz. Q'S. Bhavana for 8 times
Bhrngaraja Svarasa Pl. QS. Bhavana for 8 times
Ardraka Svarasa Rz. Q.S. Bhavana for 8 times
Sita - Q'S. Bhavana for 8 times

----- PAGE 58 -----
/

46

Procedure:

th,

Prepare the decoctions (Kvatha) of Tvaka, Ela,
Tejapatra, Nagakesara, Guduchi, Pathya, Bibhitaki,
Amalaki, and Shunthi separately each according to
their mardana time.

. Prepare the fresh juices (Svarasa) of Bhringaraja and

Ardraka.

. Take I part of Shuddha Gandhaka and place it ina

clean, dry mortar (Khalva Yantra).

. Add sufficient quantity (Q.S.) of Go Dugdha (Cow’s

Milk) and triturate the mixture until it become dry,
repeating for 8 Bhavanas.

. Add Tvaka Kvatha and triturate for 8 Bhavanas

and repeat with Ela Kvatha, Tejpatra Kvatha,
Nagakesara Kvatha, Guduchi Kvatha, Pathya
Kvatha, Bibhitaki Kvatha, Amalaki Kvatha, and
Shunthi Kvatha, performing 8 Bhavanas each.

. Continue with Bhringaraja Svarasa and Ardraka

Svarasa, performing 8 Bhavanas each.

7. Finally, add Sita (Sugar) and perform 8 Bhavanas.
8. Roll the mass into small, uniform tablets.

10.

- Place the tablets on a clean tray and expose them to

sunlight until completely dry.

Store the fully dried tablets in sterilized, airtight
glass containers.

Dose: 1-3 gms.
Therapeutic Indications: Kandu, Kushtha, Visavikara,

Viryakshaya, Agnimandya, Atisara, Grahani, Shula,
Jimmajvara, Meha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Rasayana (Rejuvenating): Gandhaka Rasayana is

a potent rejuvenating formulation known for its
ability to enhance vitality and promote overall
well-being. It contains purified sulphur (Shuddha
Gandhaka), which acts as a Rasayana, nourishing
the body tissues and enhancing their functions.

RESEARCH UPDATES

i CATAIVHEAI
Study of Gandhaka Rasayana

M WV. R. Wijayanthamala,
PG Scholar, Dept. of
Rasa Shastra Bhaishajya
Kalpana, National Institute
of Ayurveda, Jaipur

(Raj.), India

PHARMACOKINETICS

Results show the weight of GRi nese after BB preena) aligning
with the liquid’s solid content. Low moisture content (4.67%!
suggests enhanced stability and shelf life. Low Acid Insoluble Ast
indicates minimal dirt. High water and alcohol soluble extractives
(62.18% and 63.12%) confirm abundant active principles. Hee
metals and microbial analyses met safety standards. HPTLC value*
confirm diverse active Principles.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapte; 3

2. Immunomodulatory: The combination of Vario,
herbal decoctions and juices like Tvaka, El,
Tejpatra, Nagakesara, Guduchi, Pathya, Bibhitay,
Amalaki, Shunthi, Bhringaraja, and Adaraj,
helps in modulating the immune response of the
body. This immunomodulatory action strengthe,,.
the body’s defense mechanism against vario,,,
infections and diseases.

3. Antimicrobial: Gandhaka Rasayana —exhi}j,,
antimicrobial properties attributed to the presen,,
of Shuddha Gandhaka. It helps in combating
microbial infections associated with skin disorder,
like Kandu (itching) and Kushtha (skin diseases),

4. Antioxidant: The herbal ingredients in Gandhak,
Rasayana possess antioxidant properties, which help,
in scavenging free radicals and reducing once 4
stress. This antioxidant activity contributes to th
overall health benefits of the formulation.

1. Absorption: The active constituents of Gandhak,
Rasayana are typically absorbed in the
gastrointestinal tract. The herbal decoctions and
juices present in the formulation facilitate the
absorption of nutrients and bioactive compounds.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the constituents
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They reach target tissues and organs
exerting their rejuvenating and therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of the active ingredients
in Gandhaka Rasayana may occur primarily in th
liver. Metabolites are formed, which may undergo
further transformations before being eliminated
from the body.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized constituents
are excreted from the body primarily through
urine and feces. The elimination process helps in
maintaining the body’s homeostasis and preventing
the accumulation of toxins.

fas

----- PAGE 59 -----
Chapter 2 » Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

47

A Review on Probable Mode
of Action of Gandhaka
Rasayana—An Ayurvedic
Herbo - Mineral Formulation
with Multifaceted Action.

lee Author Name
Madduru Muni Haritha,
First Year PG Scholar,
Dept. of Rasashastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
KLE Shri BMK Ayurved
Mahavidyalaya,
Shahapur, Belagavi,
Karnataka, India

Result

Gandhaka Rasayana Is effective in alleviating symptoms of diseases
related to Pitta, Kapha, and Rakta doshas. It possesses excellent
Rasayana properties, promoting regeneration in the body and aiding
inchronic diseases. Its benefits include Raktaprasadana (purification
of blood), Kledaghna (removing excess moisture), Krimihara
(anti-parasitic), Vishaghna (antidote to toxins), Kushthaghna
(skin disorders), Amapachana (digestive aid), and Agnideepana
(improving digestion), contributing to overall health maintenance.

A Randomised Controlled
Trial to Evaluate the Effect
of Gandhaka Rasayana Rectal
Suppository in Post Operative

Ranjani Deshpande,
Consultant Ayurveda
Surgeon, Sritulasi
Ayurvedalaya, Bengaluru,

Pain Management in Ano-
Rectal Disorders

Karnataka, India

In a study of 40 patients, Group A received Gandhaka Rasayana
rectal suppositories while Group B received Diclofenac Sodium
suppositories post-operatively for 5 days. Group A showed
85% improvement, Group B 80.39%. Gandhaka Rasayana, with
Tridoshashamaka properties, was finely prepared for optimal
absorption and exhibited significant pain relief in ano-rectal
disorders.

4. |Screening of Antibacterial
and antifungal activity of
Gandhaka rasayana—an
Ayurvedic formulation

Reshma M. Saokar,
Assistant Professor,
Department of Rasashastra
and BK, SDM College

of Ayurveda, Hassan,
Karnataka, India.

Gandhaka Rasayana solutions inhibited bacteria (22-30 mm)
and fungi (16-25 mm) significantly compared to Fluconazole and
control. Its composition includes Fe, Cu, Ni, Zn, Ca, Na, As, triclinic

cells, carbohydrates, steroids, and tannins, suggesting immunity
enhancement. Gandhaka Rasayana displayed stronger antibacterial
activity than antifungal.

2.4.¢ GANDHAKA DRuUTI
Reference: Rasaratna Sammuchchya 3rd Chapter
ica aa diguatd fader aq!
Fant dglaratsa aT cet HASTA
Fea He aA Wosciereaet TAI
Sat Pate Welt forge: SALAS |
ai oid Wiatas AacMhata gar
deed Widd tres Org Ul faced |
TgeasA Ua ai eid AF TATA
aie dod dia aa Urey a ATTA
ad ae A Beitd TeniatageTA|
a RAI eae WeRttit
(Rasaratna Samuchchaya, 3/27-31)

INGREDIENTS USED

Gandhaka = 1 Part
Trikatu Churna = 1/16th Part
Tila Taila = Qs.
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients of Gandhaka Druti.

2. Take Shuddha Gandhaka, Trikatu dravyas and
make it into a fine powder.

3. Place a piece of cloth oma flat surface.

4. Spread the Shuddha Gandhaka Churna and Trikatu
Churna evenly over the cloth.

5. Roll the cloth like a wick and tie the whole roll
with thread.
6. Dip this wick into a vessel filled with Tila Taila for
3 hours.
7. After 3 hours, pick up the wick with a holder and
light it with a matchstick.
8. As the wick burns, Gandhaka will melt and drop
down in the form of oil.
9. Collect the oil and preserved in a glass container.
Dose: 3 Drops
Anupana: Nagavalli Parta Churna, Shuddha Parada
Therapeutic Indications: Agnimandya, Aruchi, Kshaya,
Pandu Roga, Kasa, Shvasa, Shula, Amaatisara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Dipana (Appetizer): Gandhaka Druti acts as a potent
dipana, stimulating the digestive fire (agni) and
improving appetite. This action helps in enhancing
the digestion and assimilation of nutrients
from food.

2. Tikshna: The formulation contains Gandhaka
(sulphur) and Trikatu Churna (a combination of
dried ginger, black pepper, and long pepper), which
impart sharpness to the preparation. This sharpness
aids in digesting ama (toxins) and alleviating
symptoms of indigestion.

3. Rasayana (Rejuvenating): Gandhaka Druti may
possess rasayana properties, contributing to the
rejuvenation and revitalization of the body. It helps
in promoting overall health and well-being.

----- PAGE 60 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapte; 3

48
4. Vata-Kaphahara: The formulation’s tikshna (sharp) their therapeutic effects on various organs and
nature helps in pacifying aggravated Vata and systems.
Kapha doshas, thereby providing relief from 3, Metabolism: Metabolism of Gandhaka Druti ma,
conditions associated as ee such e occur primarily in the liver, where the actiy,
respiratory disorders, digestive issues, and genera conatituentare biotanstormediet meserebs ito
weakness. :
These metabolites may then undergo furthe,
PHARMACOKINETICS transformations or be eliminated from the body.

1. Absorption: When administered orally or topically,
Gandhaka Druti is absorbed through the mucous
membranes or the skin. The active constituents
enter the bloodstream and reach their target tissues.

2. Distribution: The active ingredients of Gandhaka
Druti are distributed throughout the body, exerting

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized constituen;.
of Gandhaka Druti are eliminated from the bod,
primarily through urine and feces. The eliminatio;
process helps in maintaining the body’s equilibriuy,
and preventing the accumulation of toxins.

RESEARCH UPDATES

| ___ Article Name | 2: 5 f ASS E

Pharmaceutical Study ndey, Final |The concept of Druti extends beyond simply liquefying metals/minerals
on Gandhaka Druti: A _| Year, PG Scholar, S.1.G. it has various implications. Different procedures and drugs led to diverse
Review Article Ayurveda Medical preparation methods. This medicine enhances appetite and treats conditions

College, Koppal, like kshaya roga, pandu roga, kasa, shvasa, shula, grahani roga, and ama
Karnataka. dosha. It promotes body lightness.

2. Review on Druti Dr. Dev Raj Kshetri, PG A detailed review of classical Rasashastra literature on Druti Kalpana;
Kalpana with Agnivesh Boys’ Hostel, and Gandhaka Druti has been conducted. Druti formulations for Mercury
Special Reference Jorawarsingh Gate, Amer | fixation aie more numerous than those for clinical use. Gandhaka Drut
to Gandhaka Druti Road, Jaipur - 302 002, holds sigtiificance in Parada samskara and treating skin diseases, along with

Rajasthan, India. Rasayana purposes. The study also analyzed various methods in classica

texts for preparing Gandhaka Druti. These variations in preparation methods
may align with their uses in different ailments and Mercury processing.

Formulation and pe Dev Raj Kshetri, PG An average of 52.67 ml Gandhaka Druti was made from 50 gm purified
Development of Agnivesh Boys’ Hostel, | Gandhaka and 3.125 gm Trikatu Churna. Three 1000 gm batches of Gandhaka
Gandhaka Jorawarsingh Gate, Amer | Druti cream were prepared.

Druti Cream Road, Jaipur - 302.002, _| Gandhaka Druti Cream, a modified form, was successfully developed, Further
Rajasthan, India. studies are needed for its physico-chemical properties and therapeutic
efficacy in skin diseases. e

its

2.4.0 GANDHAKA TAILA 3. Allow the milk to cool.
Reference: Rasa Tarangini, 8th Chapter 4. Once cooled, churn the milk to form butter.
aradan vate fag fare driest fe qo 5. Place the butter in a vessel.

dg paeieyaaned Tees et fartorreary || 6. Heat the butter on a fire to produce Taila (oil).
wrrde fate vite aertr epi fagtact a1 Dose: External Use Only.

Rigaaiteatrmag face sorta: WRT UU Therapeutic Indications: Kushtha, Kshudra, Visarpa
(Rasa Tarangini, 8/94-95) Rakta Dushti Janaya Vyadhi.

INGREDIENTS USED PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Kushtha: Gandhaka Taila is effective in managing
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part various skin disorders like eczema, psoriasis, and
Go Dugdha = Qs. dermatitis due to its potent antibacterial, antifungal
ae ang anti-inflammatory properties. It helps in
1p ae reducing itching, inflammation, and skin redness.
1. Collect cow milk an § ? 2. Kshudra: Gandhaka Taila is beneficial in treatins

2. While boiling, add the powder of Shuddha minor ailments of the skin, including rashes, mine’
Gandhaka to the milk. cuts, wounds, and abrasions. Its application helps

----- PAGE 61 -----
Chapter 2° Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

in promoting wound healing and preventing
secondary infections.

3. Visarpa: Gandhaka Taila is indicated in the
management of visarpa, which is characterized by
redness, swelling, and severe pain in the affected
area. The antimicrobial properties of Gandhaka
Taila help in combating the causative organisms
and reducing inflammation.

4, Rakta Dushti Janya: This formulation acts as a blood
purifier, helping to eliminate toxins from the blood.
Regular application of Gandhaka Taila on the skin
helps in detoxifying the blood and improving
overall skin health.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: When applied topically, Gandhaka Taila
is absorbed through the skin layers. The active

RESEARCH UPDATES

constituents penetrate the epidermis and dermis,
reaching the underlying tissues.

2. Distribution: The active ingredients of Gandhaka
Taila are distributed evenly across the affected skin
area. They exert their therapeutic effects locally and
may also be absorbed systemically to some extent.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of Gandhaka Taila may
occur locally in the skin tissues, where the active
constituents undergo biotransformation processes.
Metabolites may be formed, which contribute to the
therapeutic actions of the formulation.

4. Elimination; Metabolites of Gandhaka Taila,
along with any unabsorbed residues, may be
eliminated from the body through the normal
routes of excretion, such as sweat glands and
sebaceous glands. This elimination process helps in
maintaining skin health and integrity.

ml ae

Sachin S. Sheth, Assistant
Professor, Dept. of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, APM's Ayurved

Preparation of Gandhaka Taila
by Patalayantra method and
Pharmaceutico-analytical Study
of Gandhaka Taila cream

Maharashtra, India.

Mahavidyalaya, Sion, Mumbai,

The cream’s analytical values align with the established norms
found in Gandhaka Taila literature, known for its efficacy
against skin diseases. Oil is vital for skin structure, while
hydration requires both oil and water. This cream aims to offer
an oil alternative, proven safe for external use.

Himsiksha Verma, V.Y.D.S.
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya,
Dharpa Khurja, Distt.

Bulandshahar, U.P, India

2. | Antimicrobial Study

of Gandhaka Taila: An
Ayurvedic Wound Healer

on Staphylococcus Aureus,
Escherichia Coli and Candida
Albicans

Gandhaka Taila, a herbo-mineral preparation for skin diseases,
has two types described in Rasa literature. Both types, made
following distinct methods, showed antimicrobial effects
against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Candida
albicans. This confirms the efficacy of Gandhaka Taila as an
antimicrobial oil.

3, | Pharmaceutico-Analytical Study | Kotrannavar VS, Depart. of
of Gandhaka Taila Rasashastra, K.L.E.University’s
Shri B.M.K. Ayurveda
Mahavidyalaya, Shahapur,
Belgaum-590003,

| Karnataka, India.

Gandhaka Taila analysis reveals inorganic elements: Ca, Mg,
Fe, and S as sulphide. Other properties include: TLC Rf value
of 0.58, HPTLC with 3 peaks, alkaline pH (7.74), low moisture
(0.13%), Sp. gravity of 1.043, Total Ash value at 0.125%,
Refractive index of 1.468, Saponification value of 46.28, lodine
value at 4.69, and Fat content of 95.83%.

Kottanavar SS KAHER’s, Shree

BMK Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya
and Research Centre Belagavi,
Karnataka

4. | Effect of Gandhaka Taila on
Pama (Scabies)

In the clinical study observed that majority (75%) of patients
where use of Gandhaka taila as external application in Pama
markedly reduced itching, lesions, oozing and burning
sensation.

2.4.£ GANDHAKADYA IMALAHARA
Reference: AFI, Part Il, Page 165, R.T. 8/63-65

pantie gfe caterer

INGREDIENTS USED

P aN 2 Siktha Taila = 72. gms
bie ae pee Shuddha Gandhaka = 6 gms
eo sen freee Girisindura — 6 gms
wat aaa a arg: | Shuddha Tankana — 2 gms

Karpura = 2 gms

forrgreaeael yet UTAaetaTeUTTg | (RT, 8/63-65)

----- PAGE 62 -----
90

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter D

Procedure:

Collect all the ingredients of Gandhakadya Malahara.
All the ingredients except Siktha Taila should be taken
in a mortar and ground well. Then, Siktha Taila should
be mixed in thoroughly and ground continuously for
some hours. This mixture is known as Gandhakadya
Malahara and should be preserved in a glass container.
Dose: External Used.

Therapeutic Indications: Pama.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antibacterial and Antifungal: Gandhakadya Malahara
possesses potent antibacterial and antifungal
properties due to the presence of Shuddha
Gandhaka and Girisindura. It helps in inhibiting the
growth of bacteria and fungi on the skin, thereby
preventing infections.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The formulation exhibits anti-
inflammatory effects, reducing redness, swelling,
and pain associated with skin conditions. This
property aids in soothing irritated skin and
promoting healing.

3. Astringent: Gandhakadya Malahara acts as an
astringent, helping to tighten and tone the skin. It
helps in reducing excessive oiliness and improving
skin texture.

RESEARCH UPDATES

4. Healing: The combination of ingredients ite
Gandhakadya Malahara promotes wound healing
by accelerating the regeneration of skin cells. |,
helps in the formation of healthy granulation tissy,
and speeds up the closure of wounds.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: When applied topically, Gandhakady,
Malahara is absorbed through the skin layers, Th,
active constituents penetrate the epidermis anq
dermis, reaching the underlying tissues.

2. Distribution: The active ingredients of Gandhakady,
Malahara are distributed evenly across the affecteq
skin area. They exert their therapeutic effects
locally and may also be absorbed systemically {
some extent.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of Gandhakadya Malahara
may occur locally in the skin tissues, where the active
constituents undergo biotransformation processes,
Metabolites may be formed, which contribute to the
therapeutic actions of the formulation.

4. Elimination: Metabolites of Gandhakadya Malahara,
along with any unabsorbed residues, may be
eliminated from the body through the normal
routes of excretion, such as sweat glands and
sebaceous glands. This elimination process helps in
maintaining skin health and integrity.

DOr KC fen Professor, D Dept.
of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya

A critical review on
Gandhakadya malahara

Kerala, India

Kalpana, Govt. Ayurveda College,
Pariyaram, Kannur, Pin-670 503,

based on its ingredients. elishete Malahara, mentioned
in Rasatarangini, includes Siktha taila as a base with Shuddha
Gandhaka, Shuddha Girisindura, ‘
herbo-mineral formulation is fo

Nighil Gigi, Post Graduate
Scholar, Dept. of Rasa Shastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Ramakrishna Ayurvedic
Medical College, Hospital and
Research Centre, Bengaluru,
Karnataka, India

Dr. Nirmala Chandrabhanji
Apaturkar, Lecturer (Rachana
Sharir) at Bhausaheb Mulak
Ayu College, Nandanwan,
Nagpur, MHA.

Antimicrobial activity of
Gandhakadya Malahara
in vitro study

Effect of Gandhaka
‘Malahara on Padadari: A
Case Study

Gandhakadya Malahara from Rasatarangini combines five
ingredients, prepared according to classical references. Analytical
results: P-Anisidine value 8.497 mEq/kg, Peroxide value 5.55
mEq/kg, Viscosity Index 1.18, pH 6.45, and fatty matter 19.6
Antimicrobial study showed effectiveness against P. mirabilis and
P. acne, attributed to its Tvak Vikaras (skin disorders) properties
This makes Gandhakadya Malahara a known antimicrobial agent

i: ad properties are
ze, local application of
results for Padadari. !t
available, affordable

----- PAGE 63 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

2.4. F GANDHAKADI LEPA
Reference: RRS, Siroroga Chikitsa
Welch Yee Tea Say |
fase oF Snag cise Tsai
(RRS, Siroroga Chikitsa, 68)
INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part

Shuddha Parada - 1 Part

Saindhava Lavana = 1 Part

Kachanara Rt. 1 Part

Arka Latex Q’S. For Application
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients of Gandhakadi Lepa.

2. Grind them into a fine powder and store it properly.

3. Before applying it to the body, mix with the Arka
kshira as the medium to create a soft paste.

Dose: External Use Only.
Therapeutic Indications: Gandamala Varna
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antibacterial and Antifungal: Gandhakadi Lepa
possesses antibacterial and antifungal properties
due to the presence of Shuddha Gandhaka. It helps
in inhibiting the growth of bacteria and fungi on the
skin, thereby preventing infections associated with
Gandamala (skin disorders).

2. Anti-inflammatory: The formulation exhibits anti-
inflammatory effects, reducing redness, swelling,
and pain associated with Gandamala. This property
aids in soothing irritated skin and promoting
healing.

3. Astringent: Gandhakadi Lepa acts as an astringent,
helping to tighten and tone the skin. It assists
in reducing inflammation and improving the
appearance of skin affected by Gandamala.

4, Healing: The combination of ingredients promotes
wound healing by accelerating the regeneration
of skin cells. It helps in the formation of healthy
granulation tissue and speeds up the closure of
wounds associated with Gandamala.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: When applied externally, Gandhakadi
Lepa is absorbed through the skin layers. The
active constituents penetrate the epidermis and
dermis, reaching the underlying tissues affected by
Gandamala.

51

2. Distribution: The active ingredients of Gandhakadi
Lepa are distributed evenly across the affected skin
area. They exert their therapeutic effects locally and
may also be absorbed systemically to some extent.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of Gandhakadi Lepa may
occur locally in the skin tissues, where the active
constituents undergo biotransformation processes.
Metabolites may be formed, contributing to the
therapeutic actions of the formulation.

4. Elimination: Metabolites of Gandhakadi Lepa,
along with any unabsorbed residues, may be
eliminated from the body through the normal
routes of excretion, such as sweat glands and
sebaceous glands. This elimination process helps in
maintaining skin health and integrity.

RESEARCH UPDATE

article Name | Author Name | Result |
1

AReviewonA _ Dr. Sanjay Acharya Charaka
Clinical Study A. Dhurve identified Sidhma
ofGandhakadi (M.D.,Ph.D.) asatype of Maha
LepalnSidhma Assistant Kushtha, with symp-
with Special Professor, toms resembling
Reference to Department of Tinea Versicolor.
Tinea Versicolor Kayachikitsa, This study evalu-
(Pityriasis Bharati ated the efficacy of
Versicolor). Vidyapeeth Gandhakadi Lepa in
Deemed managing Sidhma,
University showing promising
College of results in treating
Ayurved, Tinea Versicolor.
Pune -Satara
Road, Pune-

411043, MHA

2.4.6 GANDHAKA VATI
Reference: B.R., Agnimandya Rogadhikara
Tag Wich Yes YUSMT a AAA!
eag Hite ale Weteh g Ue Aaa
ted faci wel fact a qaeiers
Wore Ucies AN Yctehst AAT
Fearraene aaa] A TTL: |
ARUATOTATAT AethetroT MOTTE |
UHI sh Ga AAAS: 1
(B.R., Agnimandya Rogadhikara, 10 / 242-244)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Parada = 46 gms
Shuddha Gandhaka = 23 gms
Shunthi Rz. 46 gms
Lavanga Fr. 46 gms

----- PAGE 64 -----
ae

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter » j

Lavang,

digestiy,

a
ese nara ents bale A ston
Marica Fr. 46 gms stimulating the secretion of digestive enzymes ang
Saindhava = 140 gms enhancing gastrointestinal motility.
Sauvarchala — 140 gms 2. Carminative: The combination of Shunthi, L
Chanakamala = 93 gms and Marica exhibits carminative propertic.
Muli Kshara = 93 gms relieving flatulence, bloating, and abdomin,)
Nimbu Svarasa Fr. Bhavana for 7 Times discomfort associated with

disturbances. They help in expelling gas from th,
Procedure: gastrointestinal tract.

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Gandhaka Vati. Ensure each ingredient is clean and
free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Adding Nimbu svarasa as bhavana for 7 times,
until it becomes a concentrated form and suitable
for making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets
or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Gandhaka Vati.

9. Store the Gandhaka Vati in a clean, dry, airtight

container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 500 mg.
Anupana: Warm Water.
Therapeutic Indications: Ajirna, Mandagni.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Digestive Stimulant; Gandhaka Vati acts as a digestive

stimulant due to the presence of Shunthi (Ginger),

Lavanga (Clove), and Marica (Black Pepper).

RESEARCH UPDATES

PHARMACOKINETICS

3. Antacid: Chanakamala and Muli Kshara act a,
antacids, neutralizing excess stomach acid ang
providing relief from hyperacidity and heartbu;,
This property helps in alleviating symptoms
Ajirna (indigestion) caused by excessive gastric aciq
secretion.

4. Agnikara: Saindhava and Souvarchala enhanc
digestive fire (Agni), promoting efficient digestio,
and metabolism. They play a crucial role jp
improving appetite and assimilation of nutrients.

1. Absorption: The active constituents of Gandhaka
Vati are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract
following oral administration. The absorption may
vary depending on factors such as the formulation
matrix and individual physiological factors.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active ingredients
are distributed systemically through the
bloodstream, reaching target tissues such as the
stomach, intestines, and liver. They exert their
therapeutic effects on the digestive system.

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of Gandhaka Vati
may occur primarily in the liver, where certain
constituents undergo biotransformation processes
Metabolites may be formed, which could contribute
to the pharmacological actions of the formulation.

4. Elimination: Metabolites of Gandhaka Vati, along
with any unabsorbed residues, are eliminated from
the body primarily through renal excretion and
fecal elimination. The duration of elimination may
vary depending on the pharmacokinetic properties
of individual ingredients.

A review on Gandhak Vati é
An Ayurvedic formulation
in Patients of Agnimandya
and Ajirna
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India

Nakhat, Final’ Year Post Gaducte
Scholar, Dept. of Rasa Shastra

& Bhaishajya Kalpana, National
Institute of Ayurveda DE-NOVO,

Ajirnay a a troublesome digestive disorder, “often stems
from Agnimandya, caused by poor dietary. habits. Basic
Management includes Dipana, Pachana, and langhana
techniques, alongside internal medicines like Gandhaka Vati
Various ancient books list nine formulations of Gandhaka
Vati, each with distinct ingredients and therapeutic benefits. |

----- PAGE 65 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

uth N
Kalawana OTM|
Dept. of Kaumarbhritya,
\.P.GT.&R.A,, Gujarat Ayurved
University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat-361008, India

Pharmacognostical and
Pharmaceutical analysis of
Gandhakadi Yoga Vati

Pharmacognostical and
analytical study of Ayurvedic
formulation: Gandhak Vati

RKSB, PG Scholar,

Shruti Shah, B. K. Birla College
of Arts, Science and Commerce
(Autonomous), Kalyan, MHA, India.

The study aimed to analyze the pharmacognostical
characteristics and physico-chemical parameters of
Gandhakadi Yoga Vati, an Ayurvedic formulation used in
treating Thalassemia Major. Microscopic analysis revealed
features such as oil globules, stone cells, oleoresin contents,
fibers, and warty trichomes with crystaline deposits. Physico-
chemical parameters showed a loss on drying of 3.5% w/w,
pH of 6.5, alcohol soluble extractive of 8.9% w/w, and water
soluble extractive of 5.596 w/w. High-Performance Thin-Layer
Chromatography (HPTLC) indicated six peaks at 254 nm and
three peaks at 366 nm wavelengths.

This study aimed to standardize “Gandhaka Vati" by assessing
its phytochemical and physicochemical properties. Following
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia guidelines, tests were conducted
on powder characteristics, phytochemical constituents,
and biochemical aspects. Additional assessments included
hardness, friability, organoleptic characteristics, and TLC.
Instrumental analysis involved HPLC, HPTLC, and FTIR. These
results contribute to the formulation’s standardization.

2.5 Gairika (Red Ochre)

References: The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India,
Part 01, Volume 07, Pg. 5.

Definition: Gairika is red ochre, an iron oxide (Fe,O,).
This predominantly earthy form of the hematite mineral
is also referred to as Reddle.

SYNONYMS

Sanskrit: Kashayakkal, Kavi, Svarnagarika

oad

+ Bangali: Girima

+ English : Ochre, Reddle

+ Gujarati: Geru, Sonageru

* Hindi: Geru, Gerumitti

* Kannada : Hojatha, Jajoo, Kaavi, Kemmannu

~ Malayalam : Kavimannu

“Marathi: Geru, Sonakava

* Punjabi : Geri

& Tamil : Seemaikkaavikkallu, Kavikkal (S.FI.)

+ Telugu : Kavirayi, Kaavi

+ Urdu: Geru (Teen-e-Rumi) (N.EU.M.)

Broad Classification: Oxide

Origin and occurrence: Gairika, essentially a hematite
mineral, isa natural pigment found alongside other iron-
titanium oxide minerals in igneous and metamorphic
rocks as an accessory mineral. It is typically associated
with magnetite and may contain minor amounts of
titanium and magnesium. Gairika often forms as an
alteration product of other iron minerals or through the
degradation of highly ferruginous rocks, manifesting

as weathered residual concentrations. It is commonly

mixed with clay and other impurities.

In India, two types of ochres are prevalent based on

their color: Red ochre and Yellow ochre. Anhydrous iron

oxide represents red ochre (Gairika), while hydrated

iron oxide denotes yellow ochre.

Gairika (Red ochre) is widely distributed across India.

Deposits of Gairika are primarily found in various

regions including Rajpur, Banaskantha, Jamnagar, and

Kuchchh in Gujarat; Bellary and Bidar in Karnataka;

Gwalior, Jabalpur, Satna, Kailashpur, Madhogarh,

and Mandla in Madhya Pradesh; and Udaipur, Alwar,

Bikaner, Chittorgarh, and Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan.

Other known occurrences exist in Andhra Pradesh and

West Bengal.

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES

* Nature: Massive clayey

* Colour: Reddish brown

~ Streak: Reddish brown

* Fracture: Uneven

* Lustre : Earthy

* Tenacity : Brittle

* Transparency : Opaque

+ Hardness : 5.5 to 6.5 but much softer in earthy variety

% Sp. Gr. : 2.7

CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

* Effect of Heat: Gairika becomes magnetic on heating.
Magnetism can be felt using a horse-shoe magnet

----- PAGE 66 -----
54

(Appendix-3.3.3/1.9). Does not easily fuse in a blow
— pipe flame.
Solubility in Acid: Soluble in hydrochloric acid.

%

os

Assay: Gairika should not contain less than 16%
Fe or not less than 21% Fe,O, when analysed by
gravimetric method (Appendix-3.1.4).

* Heavy Metak Test: Gairika should adhere to the
specified limits for heavy metals and arsenic, which
are Lead <6 ppm, Arsenic <2 ppm, and Cadmium <
2 ppm, as outlined in Appendix-3.2.

Other elements: May contain the following within +
20% of the stated

limits: 1% Magnesium and 1%
(Appendix-3.1 & 3.2).

Shodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without
subjecting it to shodhana.

Titanium

SHODHANA:

Ref: Rasaratna Samuccaya, 3/49
tite q vat weutfad Users | (RRS., 3/49)
* Gairika: 1 Part
“ Go-dugdha: Q.S. for Bhavana
METHOb:
First, finely powder Gairika. Then, mix it with Go-
dugdha (cow’s milk) three times, ensuring thorough
incorporation each time. Dry the mixture properly.
This prepared powder can be used for therapeutic
purposes.
Gairika has the following attributes:
“» Properties and Actions:

e Rasa — Madhura, Kashaya

¢ Guna — Snigdha, Visada

e Virya —Sita

e Vipaka —- Madhura

e Karma — Pitta-Nashaka, Balya, Vrana Ropana,

Netrya, Kaphajit

Therapeutic Uses of Shuddha Gairika: Netra roga (diseases
of eyes); Raktapitta (bleeding disorder), hikka (hiccup);
vamana (vomiting); visa vikara (disorders due to
poison); Rakta pradara (Menorrhagia or Metrorrhagia
or both); kandu (itching); Jvara (fever); daha (burning
sensation); Udara roga (diseases of abdomen).
Dose: 250 - 500 mg of Shuddha Gairika.
Important Formulations: Kumkumadi taila, Bhringaraja
taila, Tutthadi lepa, Maha Jvarakusha rasa, Laghu
Sutashekhara Kamadudha rasa (Mauktika
yukta)

Tasa,

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

2.5.A GAIRIKA PRADEHA
Reference: Cha.Chi. Visarpa Rogadhyaya

Wig Wate: Ulhat hte aT Fara!
(Cha.Chi. Visarpa Rogadhyaya, 21/39)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Gairika = 1 Part
Ghrita = Qs.

Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients of Gairika Pradeha.

2. Grind them into a fine powder and store it properly

3. Before applying it to the body, mix with the Ghrit,
as the medium to create a soft paste.

Dose: External Use Only.
Therapeutic Indications: Visapra Roga
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antimicrobial: Gairika (red ochre) possesse:
antimicrobial properties, which help in inhibitine
the growth of microorganisms responsible for skin
infections. This property is beneficial in managing
Visarpa Roga (a type of skin disorder characterized
by spreading lesions).

2. Astringent: Gairika acts as an astringent, causing
contraction of skin tissues. This property helps in
drying out the lesions, reducing inflammation, and
promoting healing of the affected skin.

3. Cooling: Gairika has a cooling effect on the skin,
which provides relief from itching, burning
sensation, and other discomfort associated with
skin infections.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When Gairika Pradeha is applied
externally, the active constituents of Gairika are
absorbed through the skin. The absorption rate may
vary depending on factors such as skin integrity
and the vehicle used (in this case, ghrita).

2. Local Distribution: Once absorbed, Gairika is
distributed locally within the skin tissues. It exerts
its therapeutic effects on the affected areas, targeting
microbial growth and inflammation.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of Gairika may occur
locally within the skin cells. Metabolites formed
through enzymatic processes contribute to the
observed pharmacological actions, including
antimicrobial and astringent effects.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unabsorbed residues
of Gairika may be eliminated from the skin surface

----- PAGE 67 -----
Chapter 2° Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

through perspiration and desquamation of skin
cells. The duration of elimination depends on
factors such as skin turnover rate and individual
skin health. ;

RESEARCH Uppates : No Data Found.

2.5.B LAGHUSUTASHEKHARA RASA
2 SSS Orr

Reference: AFI, Part Il, Page 282, Rasatantrasara VA
Siddhaprayoga Sangraha, Kharliya Rasayana-330
Ah Aca ATAca Mage: 11

ARTaca Ta Vad SHER CE: |

Jsalgatad gerd freeway 1

Heifaretgacdtem; (A.Au.Gu.Dh Sha. Pt. IV, Dr. 79)

(Vaidya Panchanana Gangadhara Gune)
INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Garika = 240 gms
120 gms
Q:S. for Bhavana 3 Days

Sunthi Rz.
Nagavalli Svarasa Lf.

Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Laghusutashekhara Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is
clean and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Adding Nagavalli svarasa as bhavana for 3 days,

until it becomes a concentrated form and suitable

for making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets
or pills.

. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This

final product is called Laghusutashekhara Rasa.

9. Store the Laghusutashekhara Rasa in a clean,

dry, airtight container to preserve its potency and
freshness.

N

99
Dose: 250 mg to 500 mg
Anupana: Sitayukta Dugdha
Therapeutic Indications: Pittaja Sirashula,

Ardhavabhedaka, Suryavata, Pittaja Unmada, Daha,
Urddhvarakta pitta, Mukha Paka.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Analgesic: Laghusuta Shekhara Rasa exhibits
analgesic properties, which help in alleviating pain
associated with Pittaja Sirashula (headache due to
Pitta vitiation), Arddhavabhedaka (migraine), and
other conditions affecting the head and face.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The formulation possesses anti-
inflammatory effects, reducing inflammation and
swelling in conditions like Suryavata (migraine
with symptoms like photophobia, phonophobia,
and nausea) and Pittaja Unmada (mental disorders
due to Pitta imbalance).

3. Cooling: Laghusuta Shekhara Rasa has a cooling
effect on the body, which helps in pacifying
symptoms like Daha (burning sensation) and
Urddhvaraktapitta (bleeding disorders affecting
the upper part of the body).

4. Digestive: Shunthi (ginger) in the formulation aids
in digestion and helps in managing Pittaja
conditions, including Pittaja Sirashula and Mukha
Paka (oral ulcers).

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The active constituents of Laghusuta
Shekhara Rasa are absorbed through the
gastrointestinal tract upon oral administration.
Shunthi may enhance the absorption of other
ingredients due to its bioavailability-enhancing
properties.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the components
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. They exert their therapeutic effects on
various target tissues, including the head, face, and
digestive system.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of theingredients may occur
in the liver and other tissues. Metabolites formed
may contribute to the observed pharmacological
actions, including analgesic and anti-inflammatory
effects.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unmetabolized residues
are eliminated primarily through urine and feces.
The duration of excretion depends on factors such
as renal function and hepatic metabolism.

----- PAGE 68 -----
56

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 2

RESEARCH UPDATES

Mode of Action of
Laghusut Shekhara

Rasa In Ardhavbhedaka
(Migraine)

Amit Nageshwara
Post Graduate Scholar, PG
Department of Rasashastra
and Bhaisajya Kalpana,
Shubhdeep Ayurved Medical
College and Hospital, Indore,
Madhya Pradesh, India

Pallavi Y.C. Assistant Professor,
Dept. of PG Studies in

Rasa Shastra, JSS Ayurveda
Medical College, Mysore,
Karnataka, India.

Dr. Varsha Hiwale, India.

Standardization
of Laghu Suta

Shekhara Rasa — An
Analytical Study

Scientific Explantion
of Mode of Action of
Laghu Sutshekhar Rasa
in Amlapitta

ushna, is effective in correcting the imbalanced state of vate and pitta,
thereby improving Ardhavabhedaka (Migraine). This formulation aids
in reducing the vitiated dravya rupa of pitta and supports proper agni|
functioning. These herbo-mineral compounds offer a promising ang
straightforward treatment approach for migraine, potentially marking|
a significant breakthrough in its management. |
Laghu Suta Shekhara Rasa, prepared according to Rasa Tarangini,
underwent qualitative and quantitative analysis, including TLC, ash|
value, and X-Ray Diffraction. Godugdha and Goghrita were also
analyzed. Samples with purified gairika showed minor changes in iron,
silica, and alumina content.
Laghu Sutshekhara Rasa corrects imbalanced Pitta, enhancing digestion |
and promoting proper Agni function. Its properties, including laghu,
katu, snigdha, and ushana, reduce the vitiated Drava roop of Pitta,
potentially marking a breakthrough in Amlapitta treatment. |

Physicochemical
Evaluation of Laghu
Sutasekhara Rasa

Sharma, Vinay, Department
of Rasa Shastra & Bhaisajya
Kalpana, Institute of Post

Tablets with special Graduate Training & Research
reference to Gairika in Ayurveda, Gujarat Ayurved
Shodhana University, Jamnagar,

Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and quality control parameters
are crucial for ensuring the consistent preparation of Laghu Sutshekhara
Rasa tablets. The CDCs (Critical Control Points) of Shuddha Gairika can
be implemented in the purification process. Hypotheses regarding
Gairika purification can be explored through chemical analyses, paving
the way for further studies.

Gujarat, India.

2.5.¢ GAIRIKADYA MALAHARA

Reference: AFI, Part II, Page 224, B.H.U. Anubhutayoga

INGREDIENTS USED

3.

Shuddha Svarna Garika = 12 gms
Haridra Rz. 12 gms
Hartala = 1gm
Siktha Taila = 72 gms
Procedure:

Collect all the ingredients of Gairikadya Malahara. All
the ingredients except Siktha Taila should be taken in a
mortar and ground well. Then, Siktha Taila should be
mixed in thoroughly and ground continuously for some
hours. This mixture is known as Gairikadya Malahara
and should be preserved in a glass container.

Dose: External Application
Therapeutic Indications: Kandu, Tvak Roga Adhikara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory: Haridra (turmeric) possesses
potent anti-inflammatory properties due to its
active compound, curcumin. This helps in reducing
inflammation, redness, and itching associated with
various skin disorders like kandu (itching) and tvak
roga (skin diseases).

2. Antibacterial: Haridra exhibits antibacterial activity
against a wide range of microorganisms. This
property aids in preventing and treating bacterial
infections of the skin, thus promoting healing.
Antifungal: Turmeric is known for its antifungal
properties, which are beneficial in managing fungal
infections of the skin, including ringworm and
candidiasis.
4. Astringent: Shuddha Svarna Gairika (purified red
Ochre) acts as an astringent, tightening the skin
tissues and reducing secretions. This property helps

in drying out the lesions and promoting healing.
PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When applied externally, the
active constituents of Gairikadya Malahara are
absorbed through the skin. The absorption may
vary depending on factors such as skin integrity,
formulation, and duration of application.

2. Local Distribution: Once absorbed, the herbal
components are distributed locally within the skin
tissues, where they exert their therapeutic effects.
They target inflammation, microbial growth, and
other underlying factors contributing to skin
disorders.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
may occur locally within the skin cells. Metabolites

----- PAGE 69 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) Sea

formed through enzymatic processes contribute to

the observed pharmacological actions nie perspiration and desquamation of skin cells. The

Minlahara airikadya duration of elimination may vary depending on
Retin) i factors such as skin turnover rate and individual
4. Elimination: Metabolites and unabsorbed residues skin health.

are likely eliminated from the skin surface through

RESEARCH UPDATES

The drug, prepared according to standard protocols, underwent
physiochemical, heavy metal, and microbiological analyses for
standardization. Antimicrobial studies revealed effectiveness against
various microorganisms. Results complied with Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
standards. Gairikadya malahara is safe and effective in preventing
infections on granulation surfaces, validated by thorough standardization.
Further clinical studies on chronic nonhealing ulcers are recommended,

|
‘SU

Preparation,
standardization, and
in vitro antimicrobial
efficacy of Gairikadya
malahara — An
Ayurvedic ointment

Dr. Danish Javed,
Department of Ayush, All
India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Saket Nagar,
Bhopal, M.P., India

2.5.D GAIRIKADYA GUTIKANIANA Pippali (long pepper) possesses antimicrobial
Reference: B.R., Netraroga properties, further aiding in combating infections.
Ts Ge HOT TNS aa 3. Anti-inflammatory: Pippali and Tagar have anti-

fas faudistcat afsatesrireaa 11 inflammatory properties, which help in reducing

inflammation and swelling in the eyes. This action
(B.R,, Netraroga., 64/21) is beneficial in conditions such as conjunctivitis and

INGREDIENTS USED eye strain.

i ion: iri acts as an
4) sctingent Anon lucas eal

astringent, toning the ocular tissues and reducing

Shuddha Gairika = 1 Part xO 7
Saindhava Lavana - 2 Parts excessive secretions. This action helps in improving
Pippali Fr. mapas the overall health of the eyes and maintaining their
Tagar 8 Parts moisture balance.
Goat Milk/ Water = Q.S. For Bhavana PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Topical Absorption: When applied externally to
Procedure: the eyes, the active constituents of Gairikadya
1. Prepare a fine powder of all the dravyas. Gutikanjana are absorbed through the conjunctival
2. After giving Bhavana with Ajakshira the paste tissues. The absorption may vary depending on
should be coated on a Tamra Patra (Copper Vessel). factors such as the integrity of the ocular surface

3. When dry, it is collected and made into pills. and the solubility of the herbal components.

mae : 2. Local Distribution: The absorbed herbal compounds
4. Store it ina clean, dry, airtight container. Pp

are distributed locally within the ocular tissues,
Dose: External use only. where they exert their therapeutic effects. They
Size of Gutika: 1 inch target inflammation, infection, and other underlying

Therapeutic Indications: Abhishyanda factors contributing to various eye ailments.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
“ee eee may occur locally within the eye tissues. Metabolites
1. Cooling and Soothing Effect: Gairikadya Gutikanjana formed through enzymatic processes contribute to

PHARMACODYNAMICS

contains Shuddha Gairika (purified red ochre),
which imparts cooling and soothing properties.
This helps in reducing inflammation, redness, and
discomfort associated with various eye conditions.
2. Antibacterial and Antimicrobial: The presence
of Saindhava Lavana (rock salt) contributes
antibacterial properties, helping to prevent and
treat bacterial infections of the eyes. Additionally,

the observed pharmacological actions of Gairikadya
Gutikanjana.

. Elimination: Metabolites and unabsorbed residues

are likely eliminated from the eye surface through
tear production and drainage into the nasolacrimal
duct. The duration of elimination may vary
depending on factors such as tear turnover rate and
individual eye health.

----- PAGE 70 -----
58 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter »

RESEARCH UPDATES bacterial infections in the eyes. By inhibiting 4,

healing process of various infectious eye condition,

Role of Dr. Shwetha The chemical forms pain '
Girikarnyadi  G.R. Post Grad- of metals can affect 4. Astringent Action: Gairika Rasakriya’s astringen;
Gutkaanjana uate Scholar, _bioavallability, properties, attributed to Shuddha Gairika an,
ies : ait ete a éhaithe ee Nagarmotha, help in toning the tissues of the ey.,
nagemen alakya lantra, process enhances
ae n tightening the tissues, r
of Krimi Government physico-chemical his etcitomn ests in iat 8 educing
Granthi— Ayurvedic Med- changes, boosting excessive secretions, and promoting overal|
A Review ical College, material efficacy. eye health.
Bengaluru, : Thus, the SUNIBHE PHARMACOKINETICS
Karnatka, India. action of multiple
active chemicals in 1, Topical Absorption: When applied externally to th.
Girikarnyadi Gutika’s eyes, the active constituents of Gairika Rasakriy,
herbo-mineral are absorbed through the conjunctival tissues. Th.

combination may yield

“pti d ding on factor ae
aes A ESRESTT absorption may vary depending S sucha

the integrity of the ocular surface and the solubility
of the herbal components.

2. Local Distribution: The absorbed herbal compound;
are distributed locally within the ocular tissues,

2.5.E GAIRIKA RASAKRIYA
Reference: Cha.Chi. 26/235

TRh Gara Ged Wet a vata (Cha.Chi. 26/235) where they exert their therapeutic effects. They
INGREDIENTS USED targetinflammation, infection, and other underlying
factors contributing to Pittaj Netra Roga.

Shuddha Gairika ay 1 Part 3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
Saindhava Lavana 3 1 Part may occur locally within the eye tissues. Metabolites
Nagarmotha Dr. Rz. 1 Part formed through enzymatic processes contribute to
Gorochena Ze 4 Part the observed pharmacological actions of Gairika

Rasakriya.

Procedure: 4. Elimination: Metabolites and unabsorbed residues
1. Take all the ingredients of Gairika Rasakriya. are likely eliminated from the eye surface through
2. Prepare a paste of all the dravyas like semi-solid tear production and drainage into the nasolacrimal

consistency. duct. The duration of elimination may vary
3. Used as Vidalaka as netra kriya kalpa. depending on factors such as tear turnover rate and
individual eye health.

Dose: External Used Only
Aare rae RESEARCH UPDATES : No Data Found.
Therapeutic Indications: Pittaja Netra Roga.

2.5.F VARNAKARA LEPA
PHARMACODYNAMICS —— eee

1. Cooling Effect: Gairika Rasakriya is formulated with References Charge 2577
Shuddha Gairika (red ochre), which has cooling AMSAT TTT PTT AATAT |
properties. This cooling effect helps in pacifying aera: carte Aft ate. (Cha Chi. 25/117)

Pitta dosha, thereby reducing inflammation |nerepients UsED

and heat-related symptoms in Pittaj Netra Roga
(conditions related to Pitta imbalance in the eyes). eset Proportion

Dhayamaka Pl. 1 Part

2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of Saindhava Pipale een T part
Lavana (rock salt), Nagarmotha, and Gorochana et, Rt. 1 Part
may possess anti-inflammatory properties. These sy uqqha Gaitila = 1 Part
ingredients work synergistically to alleviate Nagakesara Sd. 1 Part
inflammation and redness in the eyes, providing Amritasanga (Tutha) BE, 1 Part
relief from conditions like conjunctivitis and  ,acisq oa 1 Part

eye strain.
3. Antibacterial: Saindhava Lavana and Gorochana Procedure:
have antibacterial properties that help in preventing 1. Collect all the ingredients of Varnakara Lepa.

----- PAGE 71 -----
Chapter 2 *_Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

2s
3)

59

Grind them into a fine powder and store it properly.
Before applying it to the body, mix with the
Gokshira/Rose water as the medium to create a
soft paste.

Dose: External Use Only.

Therapeutic Indications: All types of Varna.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

a

Nn

So

oy

=

Skin Rejuvenation: Varnakara lepa is formulated
with ingredients known for their skin rejuvenating
properties. Dhayamaka, Pipala, and Veta promote
skin health and vitality by providing nourishment
and improving blood circulation to the skin tissues.

. Pigmentation Control: Shuddha Gairika, Nagakesara,

Amritasanga (Tutha), and Kashisha are renowned
for their ability to manage various types of skin
pigmentation disorders. They help in reducing
melanin production, thereby lightening dark spots,
hyperpigmentation, and uneven skin tone.

. Anti-inflammatory: Some components of the lepa,

such as Dhayamaka and Nagakesara, possess anti-
inflammatory properties. They help in soothing
irritated skin, reducing redness, and alleviating
inflammation associated with skin conditions like
acne, eczema, and dermatitis.

Antioxidant: The formulation may exhibit
antioxidant activity attributed to ingredients like

Pipala and Veta. Antioxidants help in neutralizing
free radicals, thereby protecting the skin from
oxidative damage and premature aging.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When applied externally, the
active constituents of Varnakara lepa are absorbed
through the skin. The absorption may vary
depending on factors such as skin permeability and
the solubility of the herbal components.

. Local Distribution: Upon absorption, the herbal
compounds are distributed locally within the skin
layers, where they exert their therapeutic effects.
They target the melanocytes, sebaceous glands, and
inflammatory mediators present in the skin

. Metabolism: The metabolism of the herbal
constituents may occur locally within the skin cells.
Metabolites formed through enzymatic processes
contribute to the observed pharmacological actions
of the lepa.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unabsorbed residues
are eliminated from the skin surface through
natural processes such as sweating and shedding
of skin cells. The duration of elimination may vary
depending on factors like skin turnover rate and
individual skin health.

N

w

RESEARCH Uppates : No Data Found.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

Which part of the Guduchi plant is used to prepare
Guduchi Svarasa?
c. Roots

d. Flowers

a. Leaves
b. Stem
What is the main pharmacological property of Guduchi
Svarasa?

a. Antipyretic

b. Analgesic

c. Rasayana (rejuvenating)

d. Sedative

What is the recommended Anupana (adjuvant) for
consuming Guduchi Svarasa?

a. Milk c. Honey

b. Ghee d. Water

What is the primary indication for using Guduchi

Svarasa?

c. Skin diseases

d. Alltypes of Prameha
(diabetes)

a. Fever

b. Digestive disorders

5. How does Guduchi Svarasa benefit diabetic patients?
a. By lowering blood pressure
b. By improving vision
c. By regulating blood sugar levels and enhancing

insulin sensitivity

d. By promoting weight loss

6. Which of the following is NOT an ingredient of
Guduchyadi Churna?

a. Tulasi ¢. Shunthi
b. Ativisha d. Chirayata
7. Whatis the recommended dose of Guduchyadi Churna?
a. 1 gram c. 3 grams
b. 2 grams d. 4 grams
8. What is the primary indication for using

Guduchyadi Churna?

a. Joint pain

b. Respiratory disorders

ce. Liver and spleen diseases
d. Kidney stones

----- PAGE 72 -----
60

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 2

9

10.

itil,

12.

13.

14.

I5:

16.

Ah

18.

- Which ingredient of Guduchyadi Churna helps in
enhancing digestion?

ce. Shunthi

d. Nagaramotha

a. Guduchi
b. Ativisha
How is Guduchyadi Churna administered?

a. Mixed with hot water

b. In the form of a tablet

c. Orally as a powder mixed with cold water
d. Applied topically as an ointment

Which ingredient of Nishabdi Jvarari Kashaya has
expectorant properties?
a. Musta c. Kantkari

b. Chirayata d. Bilva

What is the primary indication for using Nishabdi
Jvarari Kashaya?

a. Joint pain

b. Respiratory disorders

c. Liver and spleen diseases

d. All types of fever

Which herb in Nishabdi Jvarari Kashayais rich in vitamin
Cand acts as an antioxidant and immune booster?

a. Amala c. Bilva

b. Shunthi d. Katuki

How is Nishabdi Jvarari Kashaya administered?

a. Orally as a powder

b. Orally as a decoction

c. Topically as an ointment

d. Subcutaneously as an injection

Which herb in Nishabdi Jvarari Kashaya is particularly
effective in protecting the liver?

a. Chirayata c. Arni

b. Gambhari d. Katuki

What is the primary indication for using Guduchi Hima?
a. Joint pain

b. Digestive disorders

c. Fever and vomiting

d. Respiratory infections

What is the main function of Guduchi and Nimba in
Guduchi Hima? ;

a. Enhancing digestion

b. Alleviating joint pain

c. Reducing fever

d. Relieving respiratory symptoms

Which ingredient of Guduchi Hima contributes to its
cooling effect and helps soothe inflammation?

c. Rakta Chandana
d. Nimba

a. Dhaniya
b. Padmaka

19:

20.

21,

22.

23.

24.

255

26.

27.

28.

7);

How is Guduchi Hima administered?

a. Orally as a tablet

b. Topically as a cream

c. Orally as a decoction

d. Subcutaneously as an injection

What is the recommended Anupana (adjuvant) fo,

consuming Guduchi Hima?
a. Water c. Ghee
b. Milk d. Honey
What is the primary therapeutic indication for Guduct
Ghana (Samshamani Vati)?
a. Joint pain c. Fever
d. Respiratory infec.
tions

b. Digestive disorders

How is Guduchi Ghana prepared?
a. By distillation c. By decoction

b. By maceration d. By fermentation
What is the recommended dose of Guduchi Ghana?

a. 100-250 mg ce. 500-750 mg

b. 250-500 mg d. 750-1000 mg

How does Guduchi Ghana exert its antipyretic
effects?

a. By increasing body temperature

b. By stimulating white blood cell production

c. Byregulating body temperature and reducing fever
d. By inducing inflammation

Apart from fever, what other condition can Guduchi
Ghana help manage?

a. Hypertension c. Anaemia

b. Diabetes d. Anxiety

What is the primary therapeutic indication for
Guduchi Sattva?

a. Joint pain c. Liver disorders

b. Digestive disorders d. Blood disorders
How is Guduchi Sattva administered?

a, Orally as a tablet

b. Orally as a decoction

c. Orally as a powder mixed with honey

d. Topically as an ointment

What is the recommended dose of Guduchi Sattva?
a. 500 mg c. 2 grams
b. 1 gram d. 5 grams

What is the primary pharmacodynamic effect of
Guduchi Sattva?

a. Antipyretic effect

b. Analgesic effect

c. Antihypertensive effect

d. Antihistaminic effect

----- PAGE 73 -----
Pa TIT] FSS] | ERT a ee el
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) =a

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39>

How does Guduchi
protective effect?

Sattva exert its hepato-

a. By increasing liver enzymes

b. By inhibiting liver function

c. By scavenging free radicals and promoting liver
cell regeneration

d. By reducing liver size

What is the primary therapeutic indication for Amritadi

Guggulu?

a. Joint pain c. Skin disorders

d. Respiratory infec-
tions

How is Amritadi Guggulu administered?
a. Orally as a tablet

b. Orally as a decoction

e. Topically as an ointment

d. Intravenously as an injection

b. Digestive disorders

What is the recommended dose of Amritadi Guggulu?
a. 100-250 mg ce. 500-750 mg

b. 250-500 mg d. 750-1000 mg
Which ingredient in Amritadi Guggulu contributes to its
digestive and carminative effects?

a. Guduchi
b. Haritaki
What is the primary pharmacodynamic effect of
Amritadi Guggulu?

a. Antipyretic effect

b. Analgesic effect

ce. Anti-inflammatory effect

d. Antihypertensive effect

What is the primary therapeutic use of Amritarishta?
a. Skin disorders

b. Respiratory infections

c. Pippali
d. Guggulu

c. Fever

d. Digestive disorders

Which ingredient in Amritarishta is primarily
responsible for its antimicrobial effects?

a. Shunthi c. Pippali

b. Indrayava d. Ativisha

How is Amritarishta administered?

a. Topically as an ointment

b. Orally as a tablet

¢. Orally as a decoction

d. Intravenously as an injection

What is the recommended dose of Amritarishta?
c. 25-50 ml

d. 50-100 ml

a. 5-10 ml
b. 12-24 ml

40.

41.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

61

Which herb in Amritarishta contributes to its digestive
and carminative effects?

a. Guduchi c. Shunthi

b. Ajaji d. Saptachada

Which component of Amalaki Svarasa primarily
contributes to its antioxidant effects?

a. Honey ce. Vitamin C

b. Haridra d. Amalaki

How does honey contribute to the pharmacodynamics
of Amalaki Svarasa?

a. By promoting liver health

b. By enhancing immune function

c. By providing antimicrobial effects

d. By aiding in digestion and acting as an antioxidant
Which ingredient in Amalaki Svarasa is responsible for

its antimicrobial effects?
a. Amalaki c. Honey
b. Haridra d. Vitamin C

. How is Amalaki Svarasa administered?

a. Orally with honey and Haridra

b. Topically as an ointment

c. Intravenously as an injection

d. Orally as a tablet

What is the primary pharmacokinetic route of
metabolism for the active compounds in Amalaki
Svarasa?

a. Kidneys (urine)

b. Gastrointestinal tract (feces)

Grltiver

d. Immune cells

Which component of Amalakyadi Churna primarily
contributes to its antipyretic effect?

a. Chitraka c. Pippali

b. Haritaki d. Amalaki

How does Haritaki contribute to the pharmacodynamics
of Amalakyadi Churna?

a. By stimulating digestive enzymes

b. By enhancing gut motility

c. By reducing inflammation and pain

d. By boosting the immune system

Which therapeutic use is NOT associated with
Amalakyadi Churna?
a. Bedana

b. Aruchikara
How is the absorption of active compounds in
Amalakyadi Churna enhanced?

a. By the use of honey

ce. Dipana
d. Kaphahara

----- PAGE 74 -----
62

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 9

b. By the use of ghee
c. By the use of Saindhava (rock salt)
d. By the use of Haritaki
50. Which part of the body primarily metabolizes the active
compounds in Amalakyadi Churna?
a. Kidneys
b. Liver
c. Gastrointestinal tract
d. Immune system
51. How is the administration of Triphala Rasayana divided
throughout the day?
a. One Abhaya before meals, two Bibhitaki during
meals, and three Amalaki after meals.
b. One Abhaya before meals, two Bibhitaki before
meals, and three Amalaki during meals.

c. One Abhaya after meals, two Bibhitaki before
meals, and three Amalaki with honey and ghee
during meals.

d. One Abhaya after meals, two Bibhitaki during
meals, and three Amalaki with honey and ghee
before meals.

52. What is the recommended duration of Triphala
Rasayana intake?
a. 6 months
b. 1 year

c. 3 years
d. 6 years

53. What are the benefits of Triphala Rasayana according
to the text?

a. Longevity and freedom from aging
b. Improved digestion and vitality
c. Enhanced mental clarity and memory
d. Relief from joint pain and inflammation
54. Which of the following ingredients in Chyavanaprasha
contributes to its antioxidant properties?

a. Arjuna c. Amalaki
b. Gokshura d. Vidari

55. What is the recommended dose of Chyavanaprasha?
a, 6-12 gms c. 24-48 gms
b. 12-24 gms d. 48-96 gms

56. Which therapeutic indication is NOT listed for
Chyavanaprasha?

a. Respiratory Health
b. Digestive Health
c. Dermatological Disorders
d. Cardiovascular Health

57. Which ingredient in Dhatri Lauha contributes to its
hematopoietic effect?
a. Amalaki
b. Yastimadhu

ce. Lauha Bhasma
d. Amrita Kvatha

58.

59.

60.

61,

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

What is the recommended dose of Dhatri Lauha?

a. 1-2 gms c. 0.5-1 gm

b. 2-4 gms d. 3-6 gms

Which therapeutic indication is NOT listed fo,
Dhatri Lauha?

a. Netraroga ce. Pandu

b. Mukharoga d. Kamala

What is the primary indication for Amalakyadi Gutika?

a. Hridroga c. Sandhivata
b. Trishna d. Netraroga
What is the therapeutic indication for

Phalatrikadi Kvatha?

a. Respiratory disorders

b. Gastrointestinal disorders

c. Skin disorders

d. Diabetes

Which ingredient in Triphala Ghrita contributes to its
antimicrobial properties?

a. Haritaki c. Pippali

b. Bibhitaki d. Maricha

Which ingredient in Triphala Ghrita contributes to its
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, crucial for
eye health?

a. Pippali
b. Haritaki d. Nagara

What is the recommended dose of Bhallataka Modaka
for treating Pliha Vriddhi Vikara Nashta?

a. 1 gram for 7 days

ce. Bhringaraja

c. 6 grams for 1 day
b. 1 gram daily d. 7 grams for 7 days

Which part of the Bhallataka fruit is used in the
preparation of Bhallataka Modaka?

a. Seed ce. Skin
b. Pulp d. Pericarp

What is the primary function of the Kvatha Dravya in
Bhallataka Ghrita?

a. To provide flavor

b. To enhance absorption

c. To provide therapeutic benefits
d. To act as a preservative

Which ingredient in Bhallataka Ghrita contributes to its
anti-inflammatory properties?

a. Pippali c. Vacha
b. Shunthi d. Vidanga
What is the main therapeutic indication of

Bhallataka Ghrita?
a. Arthritis c. Respiratory disor-
ders

b. Liver enlargement d. Eye diseases

----- PAGE 75 -----
Chapter 2» Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

wn

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

What is the primary therapeutic indicati
ndication f
Bhallataka Guda? n for

a. Rakta Pitta
b. Vata Vyadhi

¢. Kapha Dosha

d. Arsha

Which ingredient contributes to the anti-inflammatory
properties of Bhallataka Guda?

a. Amalaki ¢. Shunthi

b. Haritaki d. Pippali

How is Bhallataka Guda prepared before consumption?

a. Grinding c. Chopping

b. Boiling d. Extracting

Which conditionis NOT listed asa therapeuticindication
for Bhallataka Guda?

a. Kamala c. Prameha

b. Kasa d. Pandu

What is the approximate quantity of Shuddha
Bhallataka used in the preparation of Bhallataka Guda?
a. 2500 grams c. 25 grams

b. 250 grams d. 2.5 kilograms
Which ingredient in Bhallatakadi Taila contributes
primarily to its antimicrobial properties?

a. Maricha
b. Arka

c. Haridra
d. Bhallataka

Whatis the therapeuticindication for BhallatakadiTaila?
a. Vata Vyadhi c. Prameha
b. Nadivarna d. Kamala

Which part of the Bhallataka plant is used in the
preparation of Bhallatakadi Taila?

c. Pericarp

d. Roots

a. Seeds
b. Leaves

How is Bilva Svarasa incorporated into Bhallatakadi
Taila?

a. As an extract c. Asa paste

b. As a powder d. Asa juice

What is the role of Tila Taila in Bhallatakadi Taila?

a. It acts as a preservative.

b. It enhances the fragrance.

c. It facilitates wound healing.

d. It provides color to the oil.

What is the primary therapeutic indication for
Bhallataka Avaleha?

a. Shotha c. Arsha Roga

b. Krimi d. Pandu

Which component of Bhallataka Avaleha is responsible
for its aphrodisiac properties?
a. Water

b. Ghrita

c. Shuddha Bhallataka
d, Sugar

81,

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

63

What is the primary therapeutic indication for
Bhallatakadi Lepa?

a. Pandu ce. Shotha

b. Arsha d. Grahani

Which ingredient in Bhallatakadi Lepa contributes to its
antimicrobial properties?

a. Arka c. Pippali

b. Shunuhi d. Saindhava Lavana
What is the recommended method of application for
Bhallatakadi Lepa?

a. Oral consumption c. Local application
b. Intravenous injection d. Inhalation

Which condition is NOT listed as a therapeutic indication
for Bhallatakadi Lepa?
a. Kushtha

b. Kilasa

What role does Languli play in the Bhallatakadi Lepa
formulation?

a. Provides astringent properties

b. Enhances absorption

c. Improves color and texture

d. Acts as a preservative

Which condition is Bhallatakadi Kvatha primarily
indicated for?

c. Tila Kalaka
d. Svasa

a. Kushtha c. Urustambha Roga
b. Arsha d. Shotha

Which herb in Bhallatakadi Kvatha possesses
immunomodulatory effects?

a. Punarnava c. Guduchi

b. Gokshur d. Haritaki

What is the recommended anupana (vehicle) for
Bhallatakadi Kvatha?

a. Warm milk c. Honey

b. Warm water d. Ghee

Which herb in Bhallatakadi Kvatha is known for its
muscle relaxant properties?

a. Haritaki c. Punarnava

b. Gokshur d. Shuddha Bhallataka
How is Bhallatakadi Kvatha prepared in terms of the
proportion of water used?

a. Water is used equal to the weight of the herbs
b. Water is used 8 times the weight of the herbs
c. Water is used 16 times the weight of the herbs
d. Water is used 4 times the weight of the herbs
What is the primary action of Gandhaka Churna?

a. Pittahara c. Kaphahara

b. Vatahara d. Tridoshahara

----- PAGE 76 -----
64 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter »
$2. Which of the following is NOT an ingredient of 104. Which of the following is an anupana (vehicle) {o,
Gandhaka Churna? Gandhaka Druti?
a. Shuddha ce. KakamachiSvarasa a. Honey c. Warm Water
Gandhaka d. Bhringaraja b. Nagvalli Parta
b. Shuddha Parada Svarasa Churana d. Milk
93. How is Gandhaka Churna administered? 105. Which of the following therapeutic indications is Noy
a. With honey @. Waihranl: mentioned for Gandhaka Druti?
b. With water d. With ghee a. Agnimandya c. Kasa
$4. What is the pharmacological indication of b. Kshaya d. Vatarakta
Gandhaka Churna? 106. What is the main ingredient used in Gandhaka Taila?
a. Vishaghna a. Guduchi c. Haritaki
b. Rasayana b. Shuddha
c. Sarva Prakara Kushtha Gandhaka d. Triphala
d. Jvarahara 107. What is the recommended usage of Gandhaka Taila?
95. How does Gandhaka Churna exert its antimicrobial a. Internal Use Only
effects? b. External Use Only
a. By promoting inflammation c. Both Internal and External Use
b. By increasing moisture d. None of the above
c. By inhibiting fungal and bacterial growth 108. Which of the following is NOT a therapeutic indication
d. By reducing excess heat for Gandhaka Taila?
96. Which of the following is NOT an indication for a. Kushtha c. Visarpa
aoe ans b. Kshudra d. Grahani
a. Atisara c. Svasa 109. How does Gandhaka Taila act on Rakta Dushti Janya
b. Grahani d. Kasa conditions?
97. What is the primary action of Gandhaka Rasayana? a. Acts as a blood purifier
a. Pittahara c. Kaphahara b. Reduces fever
b. Vatahara d. Tridoshahara c. Enhances digestion
98. Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in d. Improves respiratory function
Gandhaka Rasayana? 110. What is the primary pharmacodynamic action of
a. Ela Kvatha c. Brahmi Svarasa Gandhaka Taila for Kushtha?
b. Shunthi Kvatha d. Adaraka Svarasa a. Antiviral
99. How is Gandhaka Rasayana administered? b. Antibacterial, antifungal, and anti-inflammatory
a. With honey c. With milk c. Antipyretic
b. With water d. With ghee d. Analgesic
100. What is the therapeutic indication of Gandhaka 111. Whatis the main ingredient in Gandhakadya Malahara
Rasayana related to skin disorders? used for its antibacterial and antifungal properties?
a. Jirnajvara c. Kandu a. Sikta Taila c. Karpura
b. Meha d. Agnimandya b. Shuddha
101. What is the main ingredient used in Gandhaka Druti? Gandhaka d. Shuddha Tankana
a. Guduchi c. Haritaki 112. Which ingredient in Gandhakadya Malahara is
b. Gandhaka d. Triphala measured at 72 grams?
102. What is the proportion of Trikatu Churana used in a. Shuddha c. Sikta Taila
Gandhaka Druti? Gandhaka
a. 1/2 Part c. 1/8 Part b. Girisindura d. Karpura
b. 1/4 Part d. 1/16 Part 113. What is the primary therapeutic indication for
103. What is the dose of Gandhaka Druti? Gandhakadya Malahara?
a. 1 Drop c. 3 Drops a. Grahani c. Pama
b. 2 Drops d. 5 Drops b. Visarpa d. Kushtha

----- PAGE 77 -----
Chapter 2 * Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral)

114.

115.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

Which property of Gandhakadya Malahara helps in
reducing redness, swelling, and pain associated with
skin conditions?

a. Antibacterial c. Astringent

pb. Anti-inflammatory d. Healing

How does Gandhakadya Malahara aid in wound
healing?

a. By reducing oiliness

b. By accelerating the regeneration of skin cells
c. By acting as an antioxidant

d. By improving digestion

. What is the total quantity of Girisindura used in the
formulation?
a. 2 grams c. 72 grams
b. 6 grams d. 10 grams
How does Gandhakadya Malahara act as an

astringent?

a. By increasing moisture retention

b. By tightening and toning the skin

c. By providing a cooling effect

d. By enhancing blood circulation

When Gandhakadya Malahara is applied topically,
how are its active constituents primarily absorbed?
a. Through the gastrointestinal tract

b. Through the bloodstream

c. Through the skin layers

d. Through the respiratory system

Which ingredient in Gandhakadi Lepa is responsible
for its antibacterial and antifungal properties?

a. Saindhava Lavana c. Shuddha Gandhaka

b. Kachanara d. Arka Latex
Gandhakadi Lepais indicated for which skin condition?
a. Kushtha c. Gandamala

b. Pama d. Visarpa

What role does Shuddha Parada play in
Gandhakadi Lepa?

a. It acts as an antibacterial agent.

b. It provides an astringent effect.

c. Itaids in anti-inflammatory action.
d. It enhances the healing process.
How is Gandhakadi Lepa typically applied?
a. Internally, with milk as Anupana

b. Externally, on the affected skin area
c. Internally, with water as Anupana
d. Orally, in capsule form

What is the primary therapeutic action of the
astringent property in Gandhakadi Lepa?
a. Inhibiting bacterial growth

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

b. Tightening and toning the skin

c. Reducing itching

d. Promoting granulation tissue formation

Whatis the function of Arka Latex in Gandhakadi Lepa?

a. It acts as a binding agent.

b, It provides anti-inflammatory effects.

c. Itis used to dilute the formulation.

d. It serves as a medium for application.

Which pharmacokinetic process ensures the local

therapeutic effect of Gandhakadi Lepa?

a. Absorption c. Metabolism

b. Distribution d. Elimination

What is the primary benefit of the healing property of
Gandhakadi Lepa?

a. Tightening the skin

b. Reducing bacterial growth

c. Promoting wound healing

d. Enhaucing metabolism

How does Gandhakadi Lepa help in reducing skin
inflammation?

a. By acting as a dipana (appetizer)

b. By providing antimicrobial effects

c. By exhibiting anti-inflammatory effects

d. By acting as a blood purifier

What is the role of Saindhava Lavana in
Gandhakadi Lepa?

a. It enhances the antimicrobial property.

b. It acts as an anti-inflammatory agent.

c. It improves the texture of the skin.

d. It serves as a binding agent.

Which ingredient in Gandhaka Vati acts as a digestive
stimulant by enhancing gastrointestinal motility?
a. Saindhava c. Shunthi
b. Shuddha

Gandhaka d. Chanakamala
Gandhaka Vati is indicated for which of the following
conditions?
a. Kushtha c. Ajirna (indigestion)
b. Pama d. Gandamala

Which of the following ingredients in Gandhaka Vati
acts as an antacid?

a. Saindhava and Sauvarchala

b, Chanakamla and Muli Kshara

c. Shuddha Parada and Shuddha Gandhaka

d. Lavanga and Marica

Whatis the primary role of Saindhava and Sauvarchala
in Gandhaka Vati?

a. Neutralizing excess stomach acid

----- PAGE 78 -----
66

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

133.

b. Enhancing digestive fire (Agni)
c. Inhibiting bacterial growth
d. Providing antimicrobial effects

What is the recommended dose of Gandhaka Vati?
a. 250 mg ce le
b. 500 mg d.2¢

- Which property of Gairika (red ochre) helps in
managing skin infections in Visarpa Roga?
a. Anti-inflammatory c. Astringent
b. Antimicrobial d. Cooling
- What is the primary use of Gairika Pradeha according
to the therapeutic indications?
a. Pama c. Visarpa Roga
b. Ajirna d. Gandamala
. Which component in Gairika Pradeha provides a
cooling effect on the skin?
a. Shuddha Gairika
b. Ghrita
c. Both Shuddha Gairika and Ghrita
d. Neither Shuddha Gairika nor Ghrita

137. How is Gairika Pradeha absorbed into the body?
a. Through the gastrointestinal tract
b. Through the bloodstream
c. Through the skin
d. Through the lungs
138. What role does Ghrita play in Gairika Pradeha?
a. Antimicrobial
b. Cooling
c. Vehicle for topical application
d. Astringent
139. Which ingredient in Laghusuta Shekhara Rasa helps in
digestion and managing Pittaja conditions?
a. Shuddha Gairika c. Nagavalli Svarasa
b. Shunthi d. Sitayukta Dugdha
140. What is the recommended dose range for Laghusuta
Shekhara Rasa?
a. 100 mg to 250 mg c. 500 mg to 750 mg
b. 250 mg to 500 mg d. 750 mg to 1000 mg
141. Which property of Laghusuta Shekhara Rasa is
beneficial for managing migraine with symptoms like
photophobia and nausea (Suryavata)?
a. Analgesic c. Cooling
b, Anti-inflammatory d. Digestive
142. What is the therapeutic indication for Laghusuta

Shekhara Rasa involving mental disorders due to Pitta
imbalance?

a. Pittaja Sirashula
b. Ardhavabhedaka

c. Pittaja Unmada
d. Mukha Paka

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

Which anupana (vehicle) is recommended fo,
Laghusuta Shekhara Rasa?

a. Warm Water

b. Sitayukta Dugdha (milk with sugar)

c. Honey d. Ghee

Which of the following ingredients in Gairikady.
Gutikanjana is used for its cooling and soothing effect?
a. Saindhava Lavana c. Shuddha Gairika
b. Pippali d. Tagar

What is the proportion of Pippali used in Gairikadya
Gutikanjana?

a. 1 Part c. 4 Parts

b. 2 Parts d. 8 Parts

Which ingredient in  Gairikadya Gutikanjana
contributes antibacterial properties?

a. Shuddha Gairika c. Pippali

b. Saindhava Lavana d. Tagara

What therapeutic indication is Gairikadya Gutikanjana
primarily used for?

a. Headache c. Skin infections
b. Abishanda (eye
conditions) d. Stomach ailments

How are the metabolites and unabsorbed residues

of Gairikadya Gutikanjana primarily eliminated from

the eye?

a. Through the bloodstream

b. Via the digestive system

c. Through tear production and drainage into the
nasolacrimal duct

d. Through the lymphatic system

Which condition is Gairika Rasakriya primarily
indicated for?

a. Headache

b. Pittaja Netra Roga (Pitta-related eye conditions)
c. Skin infections

d. Stomach ailments

Which of the following ingredients in Gairika Rasakriya
has antibacteriai properties?

a. Nagaramotha
b. Shuddha Gairika d. Gorochana

What is the proportion of each ingredient used in
Gairika Rasakriya?

a. 1 Part each c. 3 Parts each
b. 2 Parts each d. 4 Parts each

Which ingredient in Gairika Rasakriya contributes to
its cooling effect?

a. Nagaramotha
b. Shuddha Gairika

c. Saindhava Lavana

¢. Saindhava Lavana
d. Gorochana

----- PAGE 79 -----
Chapter 2 » Single Drug (Herbal & Mineral) — 57

453. How are the metabolites and unabsorbed residues of

Gairika Rasakriya eliminated from the eye? ANSWERS KEN

a. Through the bloodstream Lies eBay fz ui nein GBiehe Eee NAN ee MAR 10k
b. Via the digestive system Nace aus ercy stihl Si: eC islungs
ce. Through tear production and drainage into the ae] (6 SLA RN ar La ae A AR SR
nasolacrimal duct it Pee db fataruqol tots je te ZU
d. Through the lymphatic system PA Gna E22Pm Cee 28 eb sek pez aeee Byles Chen ae
154. Which of the following is NOT an ingredient in 26ph) di 278) SICreYZBes Ries ecemniese ened oe
Varnakara lepa? ed eembey iene b erally af shh | ei) en iG
a. Dhayamaka c. Nagakesara 36 Siar con eS 7 ema bin | 38hn oma oon iD msO17/ eg
b. Pipala d. Pippali Aten ecu agna ids 43) (bum e44en asl Asa koe
155. What is the primary therapeutic indication for 46 iad 47 ke (48h Cc Mudgee pO 1B
Varnakara lepa? 1a po soi bin Sanu feanea | 547 cs 9 open)
a. Eye infections COM e nn Tal cMnESe tics) S9nut DeamoOn 1D.
b. Joint pain Gilad Gay lid Ge | GA] a pC
ce. Varna (skin conditions) Gare RVG och) Ga) Ct CEE Polar eee
d. Digestive disorders Gils |b Pe eOan| VES (ac) PE | 1D | Ee
156. Which ingredient in Varnakara lepa is known for its Tei he Tas Rag cele eae
ability to manage skin pigmentation disorders? SE IS ppePeel Gc) Cen er) | MCI Ve
a. Dhayamaka c. Pipala BOA Cue C72 mic we SBem ty Day Ose ee DNsaU-7 tC
b. Nagakesara de Veta i, Pee Gb te dl.) Geb) 4) SE ole Ga Ee ee
ven pee } : : 99. b 100. c
157. Which ingredient in Varnakara lepa is used for its anti- Obs bs Che Ba eae eee
inflammatory properties? AOMe by 1/4025 1d) a) 1O3su ence P1047) Bape (1052
Maasisal 1064 bws/4071) 1b) (10Saijacda 109: aie aba) 110; :
b. Amritasanga (Tutha) ciate ME fiat |e Vai, |G [ah pl) } aul
dd Gai pe bie et eal. Sonne 11. Ou Cuma et? Oem
patayomaka 121 Tp lity, \eR | 1S La | el falas
d. Shuddha Gairika
Hl h tabolit d earbedvecia ¢ A26O |e) | $1275. scab 2Si ara 6120s Macedo O ere
and unabsorbed residues o
aoegpow are the me = r oe aan : A344) bi 18200 ee bam h1SSe ee Die 134se obese Wd SSeaaic
Varnakara lepa primarily eliminated from the skin?
ameetenitie bloodstream 136s bay 137N ere sBents Can 1 39a egbean d40-5 Ib)
5 ui
: Vi a i ti t GEN Ty |e) LMR oly pels |G jak. fee
; ve system
pee ieeute 8 ; TAG bie e14 720) Dien 49ehecig 149m Dae) 50.8 ac
c. Through natural processes such as sweating aa Wend en | ce Woah
and shedding of skin cells re 3 aa : aA : :

d. Through the lymphatic system

Short Answer Questions (SAQ) Long Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Write the ingridents, dose and its therapeutic |
properties of Amritarishta. |

e Toxicity of Bhallataka and its management. |

e Write the Pharmacodynamics and Pharmacokinetics
of Chyavanaprasha and its research updates.

e Expalin Gairikadya Malahara and its Research updates. |

© Amritadi Guggulu

© Triphala Ghrita

© Bhallataka Guda

e Laghusutasekhara Rasa

----- PAGE 80 -----
CHAPTER \\

; 3 }

~—

3.1 Abhraka Bhasma

1. Reference: Rasatarangini, 10/39-42
canis tas tasittrcag |
Veqredalfa forth Freaci

(Rasatarangini, 10/39-42)
INGREDIENTS USED
Part Used
Dhanyabhraka _- 1 Part

Arka (L.) Q'S. for Mardana
Nyagrodhamula Kvatha (Rt.) Q.S. for Mardana

Rambha Rasa (Rz.) QS. for Mardana

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Dhanyabhraka well with Arka Kshira for one day. Form
thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place
these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi
Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
seven times. Next, follow the same procedure, but
use Nyagrodhamula Kvatha as the mardana dravya,
repeating the process three times. In the final phase,
use Kadali Kanda Svarasa as the mardana dravya and
repeat the process seven times. After this, perform the
bhasma pariksha (testing of the ash). If it passes, the
Abhraka Bhasma is ready for internal administration.

Puta: Gajaputa.

SINGLE DRUG
(BHASMA, SHUDDHA & PISHTI)

2. Reference: Rasatarangini, Taranga 10/43-45 (Shat
Vidhana)

ahaa calcharet Maye: GLAST |

ema Wa Tevet caacittyterr 1

Ure fares ayant yooh GeTeH |
Yedelactaaria: Hatten frerax: 11

MAM Yeres THATS |

Pyeg orad ster aeate faatsiai (R.T., 10/43-45)

INGREDIENTS USED

apu

‘Drug Name 5

Dhanyabhraka — 1 Part

Arka (ts Q:S. for Mardana
Vata Kshira (ks Q'S. for Mardana
Snuhi Kshira L Q’S. for Mardana
Kakamachi Rasa Pl. Q'S. for Mardana
Gokshura Kvatha Fr. Q:S. for Mardana
Apamarga Rasa Pl. Q.S. for Mardana
Vata Praroha Svarasa AR. Q'S. for Mardana
Gomutra = Q:S. for Mardana
Tulasi Svarasa Uf. Q\S. for Mardana
Kadali Rz. Q'S. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Dhanyabhraka well with Arka Kshira for one day. Form
thin, flat cakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place
these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi

Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
ten times.

Next, follow the same procedure for all the remaining
drava dravyas used as the mardana dravya, repeating
the process ten times each. In total, 100 putas are done
after all the processes. After this, perform the bhas™
pariksha (testing of the ash). If it passes, the Abhrak
Bhasma is ready for internal administration.

Puta: Gajaputa.

----- PAGE 81 -----
Single Drug (Bhasina, Shuddha & Pishti)
3, Reference: Ayurveda Prakasha, Adhyaya 2/132
(Sahasraputi V idhana)

— wmge 1, sega 2, Agvege’ 3, yaqart 4,
TST TAT S, THATS 6, YET 7, Tents: 8, Tet
Wits 9, FAcTATTATHTT 10, StH: 11, og: 12, weet
13, Sitwat 14, wnfeauit 15, yvaquit 16, mozart 17,
HAT 18, FR 19, WAT: 20, faeravit 21, wet 22, TE:
23, Rrqriat Tae: 24, WARM 25, Het 26, WAH 27,
Wiest 28, Tet 29, favitts: 30, act 31, fara
32, “Su Tere 34, es 35 ple amet

get 47, gal 48, quail 49, wrt 50, afSauecat 51,
WWI $2, GTA $3, aNTaeeit 54, faust 55, vaatiar
sé, feesifaat 57, avenauil ss, fase so, nea:
60, sae NSA S Sea aa: (sha sr
Tr: | TRS Heat Sar: | TITS ST Wes ST
Yet: WaT Naha Us TESST Waa i sia BERTIE!

(Ayurveda Prakasha, 2/132)
INGREDIENTS USED

Abhraka = 1 Part

Arka L QS. for Bhavana
Vate u QS. for Bhavana
Snuhi E Q.S. for Bhavana
Kumari Lf. Q.S. for Bhavana
Eranda Rf. & Lf Q.S. for Bhavana
Kakamachi Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Musta Rz. QS. for Bhavana
Vata AR. Q:S. for Bhavana
Bastashonita = Q.S. for Bhavana
Bilva Rt/ Lf QS. for Bhavana
Agnimantha Rt./St. Bk Q.S. for Bhavana
Shyonaka Rt./St. Bk QS. for Bhavana
Patala Rt./St. Bk QS. for Bhavana
Gambhari Rt./St. Bk Q:S. for Bhavana
Shaliparni Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Prishniparni Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Kantakari Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Kadamba = Q:S. for Bhavana
Brihati Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Gokshura Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Ajagandha Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Apamarga Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Guda — QS. for Bhavana
Shveta Sarsapa Sd. QS. for Bhavana
Palaka Lf. QS. for Bhavana
Malati Fl. QS. for Bhavana

Gomutra — QS. for Bhavana

er 69

Haritaki P. QS, for Bhavana

Amalaki P. QS. for Bhavana
Bibhitaki Pi QS. for Bhavana
Talisa Uf. QS. for Bhavana
Citraka Rt. Tr. Q.S. for Bhavana
Jalakumbhi Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Talamuli Rt. Tr. QS. for Bhavana
Vasa Lf. Q.S. for Bhavana
QS, for bhavana

Ashvagandha Rt. Q.S. for Bhavana
Agastya Lf. QS. for Bhavana
Bhringaraja Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Kadali Rt. Tr. QS. for Bhavana
Saptaparna St. Bk. QS. for Bhavana
Devadaru Ht. Wd. QS. for Bhavana
Guduchi St. QS. for Bhavana

Dhattura Lf QS. for Bhavana
Kasamarda Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Matulunga Fr Q.S. for Bhavana
Lodhra St. Bk. QS. for Bhavana
Tulasi Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Durva Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Musakaparni Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Rajani Rz. QS. for Bhavana
Dadima Lf QS. for Bhavana
Ghonta Fr. QS. for Bhavana
Shankhapushpi Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Nagavalli Fr QS. for Bhavana
Tagara Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Shveta Punarnva Lf Q.S. for Bhavana
Hilamochika Rt./Rz. QS. for Bhavana
Mandukaparni Pl. QS. for Bhavana
Tiktika Pl. Q.S. for Bhavana
Madana Fr. QS. for Bhavana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Dhanyabhraka well with Arka Kshira for one day. Form
thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place
these cakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi
Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
seventeen times.

Next, follow the same procedure for all the remaining
drava dravyas used as the mardana dravya, repeating
the process seventeen times each. In total, more than
1000 putas are done after all the processes. After this,
perform the bhasma pariksha (testing of the ash). If
it passes, the Abhraka Bhasma is ready for internal
administration.

Puta: Gajaputa.

Dose: 125 mg to 375 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Ghee, Triphala Kvatha, Guduchi
Svarasa, Adraka Svarasa.

----- PAGE 82 -----
70 ae

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte, .

Therapeutic Uses: Agnimandya, Grahani, Shvasa, 5. Antioxidant: Scavenges free radicals, Preventi,
Raktapitta, Kasa, Prameha, Pandu, Kesha patina, cellular damage and delaying aging.

Tvakroga, Jara, Napumsakta, Kushtha, Pliha, Udara, 6

. Immunomodulatory: Enhances the immune system
Visha, Krimi Roga.

function, boosting defense mechanisms again

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS infections,

1. Rasayana: Abhraka Bhasma is a potent rejuvenating Zoantacla: Benes aa, ee relieving
substance that enhances vitality and promotes SYMP ios OMe ay ue g :
longevity at a cellular level. 8. Aphrodisiac: Promotes sexual health and Vitality

2. Hematogenic: It aids in blood cell formation, ete issues: like “erectile “dysfunction an,

improving hemoglobin levels and treating anaemia.
3. Nervine Tonic: Strengthens the nervous system,
enhancing cognitive function and alleviating

9. Anti-inflammatory: Reduces inflammation, Provi-
ding relief from conditions such as arthritis an,

ae : s gastritis.
conditions like stress and anxiety. F
Al Cardi : : 10. Antidiabetic: Helps regulate blood sugar levels ang
» Car loprotective: Regulates blood pressure, improves improve insulin sensitivity in managing diabete
circulation, and strengthens the heart muscle. Pe ilitue

RESEARCH UPDATES

A Classical Review on | Mali Ramavtar, PG The review highlights the classical guidelines for Abhraka Shodhana
Pharmaceutical and Scholar, Dept. of Dhanyabhraka, and Marana, emphasizing key aspects such as temperature
Analytical Study of Rasashatra & Bhaishajya patterns and the number of Puta. It suggests that further Practical studies
Abhraka Bhasma Kalpana, Govt. Ayurved on Abhraka Bhasma are needed to establish standard operating procedures
College,Maharashtra, India | and define its analytical parameters.
Synthesis and Manjiri Ranade, Reader, Abhraka Bhasma is prepared through Shodhana and Marana processes,
Characterization of Sri Sai Ayurvedic Medical _| resulting in fine Particles and significant changes in particle size and
Abhraka Bhasma College, Aligarh, U.P., India. | chemical composition, including elements like C, O, Si, Fe, K, Al, and Mg
prepared by Two Both preparation methods are validated by Ayurvedic tests. Further phase

Different Ayurvedic 2 and 3 clinical trials are needed to confirm the efficacy of Abhraka Bhasma
Methods— A Standar- in treating various conditions.
dization Study

Study of General Rambhadur P. Subedi, In the current study, chemical modifications of Abhraka Bhasma in the
Properties of Department of Biological | GI tract were analyzed. Acidic conditions led to Significant changes
Abhraka Bhasma: A Sciences, Ramniranjan in its absorbance pattern, with further Modifications observed upon
Nanomedicine Jhunjhunwala College, neutralization. These changes were primarily related to iron compounds

Mumbai, Maharashtra Additionally, while no distinct antibacterial properties were found,
Abhraka Bhasma did inhibit yeast growth to some extent. Further in-depth

studies are needed to better understand the physiological actions and
components of Abhraka Bhasma.

Pharmaceutical and Nandurkar Vishal Marotrao | Prepared samples of Abhraka Bhasma (AB-1, AB-
Analytical Study of Associate Professor, using organoleptic and modern physico-chemical parameters. The
Abhraka Bhasma Department of Rasashastra | samples exhibited consistent characteristics: lustrous, vermilion-colored
& Bhaishajya Kalpana, fine, crevice-filling, soft, smooth, smokeless, and tasteless. Analytical tests,
Shri kK. R. Panday Ayurved | including LO.D., L.O.I., pH, conductivity, solubility, and elemental assays of

College, Dighori, Nagpur, Fe," and Fe,*, showed minimal variation, indicating uniform preparation
Maharashtra, India. Procedures.

| 3.2 Svarna Makshika Bhasma INGREDIENTS UsED
1. Reference: Rasendrasara Sangraha, 1/211-212

2, AB-3) were evaluated

i 2 Shuddha Suvarna 1 Part
alae agate Ta rat ae Makshika &
sole 2 aay g i lt Shuddha Gandhaka = % Part
Was Heat Yea WAYS FI

fared wag orem Ufone era: 11 (RSS. 1/211-212) ‘Panda Talla a SaEMarians

----- PAGE 83 -----
Paani == Saale Dri \BiaOcs oe mE
Chapter 3 * Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)
Sis Senda & ish) ee

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Svarna Maksika and Shuddha Gandhaka

triturated. Add Eranda Tailas marana drava dravya for
one day. Form thin, flat chaktikas and dry them under
the sun. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa
and apply Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta.
This process is done by ten times. If more putas are
needed, repeat this process until the bhasma passes the
bhasmapariksha.

Puta: Gajaputa- 10 in numbers.

i. Reference: Rasa Tarangini, 21/19-20.

(R.T., 21/19-20)
INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Suvarna Makshika — 1 Part
Nimbu Svarasa Fr. Q'S. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Svarna Makshika with Nimbu Svarasa for one
day. Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the
sun. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and
apply Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat

RESEARCH UPDATES

Sruthi Nambiar, PG Scholae
Dept. of Rasashastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Sri Dharmasthala
Manjunathesware College
of Ayurvedaand Hospital,
Hassan, Karnataka, India

Svarnamakshika, a maharasa dravya and rasayana, is effective against
various diseases. Properly processed Svarnamakshika bhasma acts
broadly due to its nanoparticle form and inherent properties. It can be
prescribed for many conditions, including in the weak, delicate, pregnant
women, and children, with appropriate dosage and anupana. powever,
more clinical trials are needed to validate its effects.

——

ra}

—

this process for ten times or until the bhasma passes the
bhasma pariksha.
Dose: 125 mg- 250 mg.
Anupana: Honey.
Therapeutic Uses: Pandu, Shotha, Prameha, Jirna Jvara,
Rajayakshma, Anidra, Apasmara, Rajahkrichchhra,
Kushtha, Arsha, Krimi.
PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS
1. Hepatoprotective: Protects the liver from damage
and improves its function.
2. Antioxidant: Scavenges free radicals, delaying aging
and cellular damage.
3. Anti-inflammatory: Reduces inflammation, easing
symptoms of arthritis and gastritis.
4. Immunomodulatory: Strengthens the
system to combat infections and diseases.
5. Antimicrobial: Inhibits the growth of bacteria,
viruses, and fungi, preventing infections.
. Antidiabetic: Helps regulate blood sugar levels and
improve insulin sensitivity.
. Anti-arthritic: Reduces joint inflammation and pain
in arthritis conditions.
. Nervine tonic: Enhances cognitive function and
nervous system strength.
9. Cardioprotective: Supports heart health by regulating
blood pressure and circulation.
10. Rejuvenative: Revitalizes the body, enhancing
vitality and promoting longevity.

immune

ca)

“I

foe]

This study aimed to fingerprint raw and processed Svarnamakshika (SM)
using pharmacy techniques. SM was heated with lemon juice for 3 days,
then processed with purified Gandhaka and lemon juice, and heated in 09*
putas using 4 kg cow dung cakes per puta. Quality control tests ensured
bhasma quality. X-ray Diffraction showed raw SM contains CuFeS., while
SM bhasma has Fe,0,, FeS., CuS, and SiO... SEM analysis revealed dntformly
arranged grains in SM bhasma (1-2 microns) compared to scattered grains
in raw SM (6-8 microns). This study is the first to fingerprint SM bhasma
using this method.

In this study, SM and SM Bhasma were analyzed using Transmission
Electron Microscope (TEM) and Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDAX).
The analysis identified iron, copper, and sulfur in SM, and additional
trace elements like potassium, magnesium, aluminum, and silicon in
SM Bhasma. TEM revealed a significant reduction in grain size from 5-10
microns in SM to 50-200 nm in SM Bhasma. >|

Sudhaldev Mohapatra
Department of Rasa
Shastra, Faculty of
Ayurveda, Institution of
Medical Sciences, Banaras
Hindu University, U.P. India

bhasma): An approach
to standardization

Sudhaldev Mohapatra
Lecturer, Department of
Rasa Shastra, A and U
Tibbia College, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi, India

Analytical study

of raw Svarna

Makshika (Chalcopyrite)
| and its Bhasma through
ca TEM and EDAX

----- PAGE 84 -----
Pharmaceutical and
Anlytical Studies on
Svarna Makshika
Bhasma — An Ayurvedic
Formulation

Cte

for Advanced Research in
Indian System of Medicine
(CARISM), SASTRA
University, Thanjavur-
613401, Tamilnadu.

Shodhana and marana processes are crucial for converting raw Svarna
Makshika into absorbable Svarna Makshika Bhasma. Although classic,
suggest 5-8 putas, 29 were needed in this study to achieve desireg
qualities. More putas reduce impurities and enhance therapeutic
properties. The resulting smaller particle size improves absorption ang
assimilation, meeting both Ayurvedic and modern standards.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 3

3.3 Svarna Bhasma

1. Reference: Rasendra Sara Sangraha, 1/255-256
SRR TH eat Ged Great g Tia
Seats Teh seat ada Fees a1
Freed wrad er eit Sa: WA: GA A

(R.S.S., 1/255-256)
INGREDIENTS UsED

Shuddha Svarna - 1 Part
Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 3 Parts
Procedure:

Take Shuddha Parada and equal amounts of Shuddha
Svarna (gold) and triturate them together in a mortar

to form a homogeneous mixture, shaping it into a ball
(golaka).

Place this ball with shuddha gandhaka both above and
below it in sharava and seal it. Then, administer Puta

for 14 times. Repeat this process until the bhasma passes
the bhasma pariksha.

2. Reference: Rasamrita 3/16-18
Werauiaa Yor aad Ade
Fa? 2 ter
faarta alert Wear cat Taye Ta!
fectranfege ea Feet uretadt ga: I
FeO Va GH Soe SMPs: Ge: 11 (Rasamrita, 3/16-18)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Svarna = 1 Part
Shveta malla - 1 Part
Kanchanara Drava St. Bk QS. for Mardana
Tulasi Svarasa Pl. Q.S. for Mardana

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Svarna and Shuddha Shveta Malla triturated.

Add Nimbu Kanchana rasa marana drava dravya fo;
one day. Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them
under the sun. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava
Samputa and apply Sandhi Lepa. Then, administe;
Laghu Puta. 2nd time Obtained ist puta product adq
1/4th part of Shuddha Shveta Malla and triturateg
with tulsi svarasa. Then, administer Laghu Puta. This
process is done by ten times. If more putas are needed
repeat this process until the bhasma passes the bhasma
pariksha.

Dose: 15.5 to 62.5 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Butter.

Therapeutic Uses: Grahani, Amalpitta, Hikka, Pandu,
Shwasa Roga, Jvara, Dhatu Kashaya, Apasmara,
Rajayakshma, Buddhikshaya, Hridroga, Snayu-
daurbalya, Sharira Varna, Unmada, Svarabeda,
Visha, Vajikarana, Rasayana, Medhya, Smritivar-
dhaka.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS

1. Immunomodulatory: Regulates and strengthens the
immune system.

2. Antioxidant: Scavenges free radicals and reduces
oxidative stress.

Ca

Nervine tonic: Strengthens the nervous system and
improves cognitive function.

4. Cardioprotective: Supports heart health and

regulates blood pressure.

5. Adaptogenic: Helps the body adapt to stress and

maintain balance.
6. Anti-inflammatory: Reduces and

alleviates related symptoms.

inflammation

7. Rejuvenative: Revitalizes the body and promotes
longevity.
8. Hematinic: Enhances hemoglobin and

promotes blood formation.

levels

9. Aphrodisiac: Enhances sexual vigor, libido, and
fertility.

----- PAGE 85 -----
Chapter 3 = Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishli)

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutical
Standardization of Svarna
Bhasma (Incinerated
Gold) by Adopting
Traditional Method

Lab, Dept. of RS & BK, SSAM
&H, Hirawadi, Nashik, Dist.
Nashik, Maharashtra, India.

Chemical characterization
of incinerated gold
(Svarna Bhasma)

Sanjay Khedekar, Dept.
of RS & BK, SSAM & H,
Nashik, MHA

Sanjay B. Khedekar, Research |

In this study, Svarna Bhasma was prepared and analyzed to develop
standard parameters. Three batches were made, following traditional
procedures for Shodhana (purification) and Marana (incineration)
with a specialized heating pattern. An 18% loss was observed after
thirty subsequent putas, resulting In a finished product containing
52.33% elemental gold.

Svarna Bhasma, prepared using traditional Ayurvedic Rasashastra
methods, contains gold as the major element. Its particle size ranges
from 1-10 jim and it has 52.33% elemental gold.

TE

studies of Svarna
bhasma (gold bhasma),
an Ayurvedic drug

Division of Biosurface
Technology, Biomedical
Technology Wing, Sree Chitra
Tirunal Institute for Medical
Sciences and Technology,
Thiruvananthapuram, India

3. | Physicochemical Variation | Jayesh Bellare, Department _ | Thisstudy compared Suvarna Bhasma from five manufacturers,
in Nanogold Based of Chemical Engineering, distinct morphological differences. Two samples were suspected to
Ayurved Medicine Suvarna | Indian Institute of deviate from claimed Ayurvedic procedures. Varied particle structures
Bhasma Produced by Technology Bombay, among the samples led to different pharmacokinetic profiles in rat
Various Manufacturers Powai, Mumbai - 400076, models. The study concludes that these differences imply varying
Lead to Different In Vivo Maharashtra, India. efficacy and safety, advocating for stringent manufacturing control
Bioaccumulation Profiles and quality assurance.

4, | Blood compatibility Willi Paul, Svarna bhasma, a therapeutic gold nanoparticle with a crystallite size

of 28-35 nm and 90% purity, shows promise for clinical use due to its
low negative zeta potential and absorption in the small intestine. Its
nano-size facilitates uptake into organs through blood, suggesting its
potential for targeted therapy. The standardized blood compatibility
studies reinforce its safety profile and support its application in
medicine. These protocols could serve as screening tests for bhasma
preparations worldwide.

3.4 Rajata Bhasma

1. Reference: Rasatarangini, 16/17-21
wigaiad at faxed AATEC!
TAR ages Hers aia |
Prqararad cro fetich GaTaA I
Fa: URI eha Stet PETAL: |
Use dibs Get aaa AST!
fifa mig ware yeni aa |
PRIaayS Sel Yetaraye adi: 1!
Ua gerade Tard Birra!
(Rasatarangini, 16/17-21)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Rajata = 24 gms

Shuddha Parada = 24 gms

Nimbu Svarasa Fr. Q.S. for Mardana
Shuddha Gandhaka - 24 gms
Shuddha Haratala = 24 gms
Procedure :

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Rajata and Shuddha Parada to form pishti.
Add Nimbu Svarasa, triturate for one day, and wash
with water. The next day, add Shuddha Gandhaka

and Shuddha Haratala and triturate well. Administer
three Laghuputa. If more putas are needed, repeat this
process until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.
2. Reference: Rasatarangini, 16/37-40
Peta aeaaHUieca |
anfgafird ge fear sols ara
HAMA Taeaatad ||
Yat Ya: Waelagsit HraaeqarA |
HAA Tod AL HOTTA SC
MAGA Wa aT |
Ua Wa wees AAEM asaq |

(Rasatarangini, 16/37-40)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Rajata 1 Part
Shuddha Hingula 2 Part
Nimbu Svarasa Q.S. for Mardana

Fr.

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Rajata and Shuddha Hingula triturated. Add
Nimbu Svarasa as marana drava dravya for one day.
Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun.
Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Kukkuta Puta, for 14 in

----- PAGE 86 -----
74 ~__ Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana » Chapter 3

with inflammatory conditions such as arthritis
gastritis, and skin disorders.

numbers. If more putas are needed, repeat this process

until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.

Puta: Kukkuta Puta-14 in numbers. 4.
Dose: 125 mg.

Immunomodulatory: Some studies suggest that
Rajata Bhasma may have immunomodulatory
effects, meaning it can modulate the immuno
response, [t can enhance immune function, Making
the body more resilient to infections and diseases.

Anupana: Chitraka Mula Kashaya, Parpataka Kashaya,
Ushira Kashaya, Brahmi Rasa, Honey.

Therapeutic Uses: Shosha, Dhatu Kshaya, Prameha,
Madatyaya, Visha, Jwara, Pitta Roga, Pliha Roga, 5.
Buddhimaandya, Garbhashaya Dosa, Apasamara.

Hematinic: Rajata Bhasma is considered a hematinic,
meaning it helps in the formation of blood anq
improves hemoglobin levels. It can be beneficia|
in the treatment of anemia and other blood-relateq
disorders.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTION

1. Antimicrobial: Rajata Bhasma possesses antimicrobial
properties, making it effective against a wide range
of microorganisms including bacteria, viruses, and
fungi. It can be used to treat various infections and
promote wound healing.

6. Nervine tonic: In Ayurveda, Rajata Bhasma is also
known for its nervine tonic properties, which
can help strengthen the nervous system and
improve cognitive function. It may be used to treat

2. Antioxidant: Silver, the main component of Rajata : ;
E neurological disorders and promote overall mental

Bhasma, exhibits antioxidant activity. It helps in

scavenging free radicals and reducing oxidative
stress, thereby protecting cells and tissues from
damage caused by reactive oxygen species.

- Anti-inflammatory: Rajata | Bhasma has _ anti-
inflammatory properties, which can help reduce
inflammation and alleviate symptoms associated

well-being.

. Cardioprotective: Some research suggests that Rajata

Bhasma may have cardioprotective effects, helping
to maintain cardiovascular health by regulating
blood pressure, reducing cholesterol levels, and
improving heart function.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutical
Study of Rajata
Bhasma by Two

Different Methods

2. ‘Therapeutic
Potential of Rajata
(Silver) Bhasma:
A Review

3}, Analytical Study of
Rajata Bhasma w:s.r.
to Ayurvedic and
Modern Parameters

4. Standardization
of Rajat Bhasma
Prepared with the
Classical Method
of Rasendra Sara
Sangraha

Dr. Diksha Sharma,

P.G. Department of Rasa
Shastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
R.G.G.P.G. Ayurvedic College,
Paprola, H.P.

Kajree Pardeshi, PG Scholar,
Department of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, SDMCA
Hassan, Karnataka, India

Pritika, Dept. of Rasa Shastra

& Bhaishajya Kalpana, Babe ke
Ayurvedic College and Hospital,
Daudhar, Moga,Punjab, India.

Khobragade Vaishali Mahadeorao,
Associate Professor, Ph.D. Scholar,
Department of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajyakalpana, R.A. Podar
Ayurvedic Medical College, Worli
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Two batches of Rajata bhasma, prepared differently but yielding similar
tesults, were analyzed. Rajata Bhasma | used Shudha Rajata Patra,
Shuddha Parada, Shuddha Gandhaka, Shuddha Harataala, and was
levigated with Nimbu Svarasa, while Rajata Bhasma II used Shuddha
Rajata Patra, Samaguna Kajjali, and was levigated with Ghritakumari
Svarasa. Rajata Bhasma | underwent 18 Laghu Putas, and Rajata
Bhasma II underwent 17, both resulting in black bhasma with yields of
84.2% and 95%, respectively.

Adherence to classical guidelines ensures the non-toxicity of metal and
mineral medicines like Rajata bhasma. It’s widely used in formulations
for systemic disorders, especially in neurological, psychological,
infertility, and infectious conditions, owing to its proven efficacy
and antimicrobial properties. Although ancient texts document its
therapeutic uses, clinical trials are necessary to validate its efficacy
across disorders.

The Rajata bhasma has successfully passed Bhasma pariksha tests,
including Varitaratva, Rekhapurnata, Nishchandrata, and Shlakshanatva,
ensuring its safety and efficacy. This validates the pharmaceutical
Procedures outlined in Rasa Vaidya, making the bhasma safe for
therapeutic use. Analytical studies support these findings, confirming
the meticulous preparation methods employed.

Statistical analysis of physico-chemical and XRF results across three
batches of Rajata Bhasma revealed minimal Standard Deviation. This
indicates the effectiveness of pharmaceutico-analytical methods
employed for quality control and standardization, aligning with the
guidelines of Rasendrasara Sangraha.

----- PAGE 87 -----
Chapter 3° Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

75

3.5 Lauha Bhasma

1. BHANU PAKA
Reference: Rasatarangini, 20/22-24

(Rasatarangini, 20/22-24)
INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Loha Churna = 1 Part
Triphala Kvatha P. 1 Part

Method of Bhanupaka: Triphala Kvatha is prepared by
adding two parts of water and reducing it to 1/4 part
of water. Loha is mixed with Triphala Kvatha and kept
under sun till the fluid gets evaporated. This should be
repeated 7 times.
2. STHALI PAKA
Reference: Rasatarangini, 20/26-28
aTgenlarcerg wile Wee
Wa: ed ¢ set alectarat aaa
questa quaettact GUAT |
Vraaaetet Actecienaaaerr: 1
PAetates HOTA aT MiSs STL
wunmnases sara fasta

(Rasatarangini, 20/26-28)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Bhanu Paka Lauha = 1 Part
Triphala P. 3 Parts
Water for Decoction = 48 Parts
Reduced to = 6 Parts

Method of Sthali Paka: Loha Churna,a processed with
Bhanupaka is washed with water and kept in a Sthali
and Triphala Kvatha is added and heated on Tivragni

till the moisture evaporates.

3. PUTAPAKA METHOD

Reference: Rasatarangini, 20/ 31-39
Tafehntasrat aed cite feria!
Ged wed GA Geant: AY: ||
writnrenfaraad cig Wace: |
aaretaraeteat Ta safes aT |
aaa ag aes Feo ¢ fre!

clears Tear Featencneiag: |
fraciyfed vie ada fabreatstad

(Rasatarangini, 20/31-39 3 52)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Sthali Paka Loha 1 Part

Triphala I2, 1 Part
Water for decoction = 2 Parts
Reduced to — 1/4th part of water

Puta: Gajaputa.

Method of Putapaka: Loha Churna processed with
Sthali Paka is washed with water and mixed with
Triphala Kvatha and ground well. Thin flat cakrikas
are prepared, dried and placed in Sarava Samputa.The
Sandhi is sealed, dried and subjected to Gaja Puta.
Dose: 120-250 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Ghee, Trikatu Churna, Haridra Rasa.
Therapeutic Uses: Atisara, Shula, Amalapitta, Udararoga,
Kamala, Pandu, Krimi, Medodosha, Prameha, Pliha
Roga, Shotha, Svasa, Kushtha.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS

1. Hematopoietic: Lauha Bhasma is renowned for
its hematopoietic properties, meaning it helps in
the formation of red blood cells. It contains iron
in a bioavailable form, which can contribute to
the treatment of anemia and other blood-related
disorders.

2. Rejuvenative (Rasayana): In Ayurveda, Lauha
Bhasma is considered a Rasayana, or a rejuvenating
substance. It is believed to enhance vitality, energy
levels, and overall health when taken in the proper
dosage and under the guidance of a qualified
practitioner.

3. Digestive: Lauha Bhasma is known to stimulate the
digestive fire (Agni) and improve digestion. It can
be beneficial in conditions like indigestion, loss of
appetite, and malabsorption syndromes.

----- PAGE 88 -----
76

_ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 3

4. Anti-inflammatory: Lauha Bhasma exhibits anti-
inflammatory properties, which can help in
reducing inflammation in various parts of the body.
This action is particularly useful in conditions
involving joint pain, swelling, and inflammatory
skin disorders.

5. Antioxidant: Iron is known to have antioxidant
properties, and Lauha Bhasma, being a source of
iron, can help in combating oxidative stress and free

radical damage in the body. This action is crucja| fo;
overall health and may contribute to the Preventio,,

of various chronic diseases.

6. Immunomodulatory: Some studies suggest th,
Lauha Bhasma may have immunomodulator,
effects, meaning it can regulate the immun,
system. This property can be beneficial in boosting

immunity and fighting off infections.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Name
Rajendraprasad M.,
Lecturer, Department of
Rasashastra, JSS Ayurveda

Medical College, Mysore,
Karnataka.

1. | Pharmaceutical and
Analytical Study on
Lauha Bhasma

ies |

The pharmaceutical and analytical study on lauha bhasma suggests that it
should undergo both samanya shodhana and vishesha shodhana for prope;
formation, purifying the iron and rendering it brittle. Trividha paka process
enhances its properties and reduces particle size for better absorption

Ayurvedic parameter tests like Apunarbhava, Nirutta, and the Namburi,
Phased Spot Test confirm the fineness of Lauhabhasma, aiding in quality
standardization.

2. | Pharmaceutical study
of Lauha Bhasma

Neetu Singh, K. R. C.
Reddy, Department of
Rasa Shastra, Faculty of
Ayurveda, Institute of
Medical Sciences, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi,
Uttar Pradesh, India

During the putapaka process, an electric muffle furnace (EMF) was utilized
Two batches were studied: Batch | maintained a temperature of 800°C,
while Batch II maintained 600°C. This aimed to validate marana process
and determine an ideal temperature for Lauha Bhasma preparation.
After 20 puta at 600°C, Lauha Bhasma was properly prepared, exhibiting
characteristic features like “pakva jambu phala varna” and varitar. However,
at 800°C, the process faced difficulties, resulting in hard and brassy yellow

Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita, Madhyama Khanda,

L pellets, requiring a temperature decrease for desired coloration.

3. | Standardization of Dr. Jadhao Ujwala This research details the pharmaceutical processes of Lauha shodhana
Lauha Bhasma Ashokrao, Assistant and Lauha marana, along with physicochemical analysis of Lauha bhasma,
Professor, Department of | offering insights for future studies. The method involved mixing Hingula

Rasa-Shastra & B. K. Govt. | with Shuddha lauha churna, triturating with Kumari Svarasa, and subjecting

Ayurved College, Nanded, | to Gajaputa. Observations recorded color changes and texture transition |

Maharashtra, India. from hard to soft, fine powder, with weight reduction after each puta. |

3.6 Tamra Bhasma WAC aat FT Ye TSS TTL

Talguild Hage Ad aT Ys ta!

ipaee (Sha. S.M., 11/28-35)
: INGREDIENTS USED
gent aavater art Heaaae FT: | :
Seong tea
a. ‘ ; Shuddha Tamra Patra = 1 Part
Ulely Adh Fal SRT Ada Nimbu Rasa Fr Q:S. for Svedana
ad Sg vartr cae fe a1 Shuddha Parada = 1/4th Part
TSA AA ALT TTA | Gandhaka = 2 Part
cuny Changeri PI. QS. for Lepana
da: fagat a Aitett aed at Gar
z L ait a Rakta Punarnava St. Tr QS. for Mardana
aencdet ateniel crmaageit aay | Shuddha Gandhaka =a %Part
Tea Aaietch VTS VATA AT Wea Ghrita — Qs.
argent: wate fayfacraonafH: | eee
ie 3 rocedure:
Zeal USGS Yet adaeoat fauraad i ; :
aa The fine tamra leaves are subjected to svedana with
PAS Heras

nimbu svarasa for three days using a dola yantra. After
this, one-fourth shudhha parada and nimbu svarasa are
triturated together for one yama (approximately three

----- PAGE 89 -----
Chapter 3 = Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

11

hours). This causes the mercury to adhere
leaves.

Next, take double the amount of shuddha gandhaka
with nimbu svarasa and triturate it and apply it to
the copper leaf and make a ball of it. After this, grind
minakshi dravya, Changeri or punarnava and apply
thick paste on top of this ball and then mix ash and salt
in water and fill the pot with it. Then, close the lid, put
it on the stove and keep it Manda, Madhya, and Tivra
until itcools down. Remove the balls from the pot when
they cool down and make a ball by triturating it with
a Jimikanda rasa the next day. Then take half Shuddha
Gandhaka from Tamra and apply it to the Tamra ball in
ghee. And sharava samputa is done and the Gaja Puta
is given.

Dose: 31.25 to 62.5 mg.

Anupana: Trikatu Kashaya, Ghee, Honey, Duralabha
Kvatha, Adraka Rasa, Guduchi Rasa.

to the tamra

RESEARCH UPDATES

Therapeutic Uses: Udararoga, Sthaulya, Jalodara,
Shotha, Vataroga, Kaphapitta Roga, Visa, Rajayakshma,
Kasa, Shvasa, Netra Roga, Kushtha, Parinama Shula,
Shula, Jvara, Gulma, Pliha Yakrit Roga, Meha, Kshaya,
Agnimandya, Grahani.

PHARMACOLOGY

1. Naga Bhasma, derived from purified lead (Shuddha
Tamra Patra), Gandhaka, and other ingredients,
possesses diverse therapeutic properties.

2. Traditional indications include abdominal disorders
(Udararoga), obesity (Sthaulya), edema (Shotha),
respiratory conditions (Kasa, Shvasa), eye disorders
(Netra Roga), skin diseases (Kushtha), and various
metabolic disorders (Meha, Kshaya).

3. Its pharmacological actions may include anti-
inflammatory, anti-asthmatic, anti-diabetic,
analgesic, and immunomodulatory effects.

procedure of Tamra Bhasma

1. | Standard manufacturing Chandrashekhar Y., PhD Scholar,

Department of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana including Drug

Classical methods were used,
temperature profiles for Puta in an electrical muffle
furnace. 483.4 g of black cupric sulfide (TB) was obtained

Research, Institute for Post Graduate
Teaching and Research in Ayurveda,
Gujarat Ayurved University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat, India.

from 500 g of Tamra after three Putas. X-ray diffraction
confirmed the final product. P3. article size analysis
revealed 10% below 2um. Inductive coupled plasma -
atomic absorption spectrometry indicated 58.56 wt%
copper and 22.48 wt% sulphur, along with traces of
arsenic, lead, zinc, mercury, and manganese.

Review of Research

works done on Tamra
Bhasma [Incinerated
Copper] at Institute for
Post-Graduate Teaching
and Research in Ayurveda,
Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

Swapnil Y. Chaudhari

PG Scholar, Department of Rasa
Shastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana
including Drug Research, Institute for
Post Graduate Teaching and Research
in Ayurveda, Gujarat Ayurved
University, Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

Tamra Bhasma was found safe at Therapeutic Equivalent |
Dose (TED) levels in clinical and experimental studies.
Somanathi Tamra Bhasma showed superiority over
Tamra Bhasma in pharmaceutical, pharmacological, and
clinical aspects. Clinical efficacy was demonstrated in
various conditions with satisfactory responses and no
adverse effects reported. Further well-stratified studies
are suggested for a larger population.

Analytical Study of
Tamra Bhasma

College, Tirupati, A.P.

Rugmini R.K., PG Scholar final year,|Tamra Bhasma, prepared using classical methods,
Department of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, S.V. Ayurvedic

was analyzed using ancient and modern parameters,
including XRD, SEM, EDS, PSA, ZP, UV, and FTIR. Results
showed major peaks of HgS, CuS, and a minor peak
of CuO in XRD, while SEM displayed irregular shaped
flakes. EDS confirmed significant presence of O, S, Cu,
and Hg. Particle size was 2.2 nm with a Zeta Potential
of -44.2 mV. UV exhibited maximum absorption at 574
nm, and FTIR revealed 27 peaks. These parameters are
crucial for qualitative and quantitative Bhasma analysis.

3.7 Vanga Bhasma

1, Reference: Ayurveda Prakasha, 3/179-180
ag wera ae fercarsters frac!
Tat Taye Vera YATRA

AIT BVT ATA Te: YET!
We aude: Vad Se Mata ATLA

(Ayu. P., 3/179-180)

----- PAGE 90 -----
78

~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapie, ;

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Vanga Jarita - 1 Part

Shuddha Haratala = 1 Part

Nimbu Nira Fr QS. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Vanga Jarita and Shuddha Haratala triturated. Add
Nimbu Svarasa marana drava dravya for one day. Form
thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place
these cakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi
Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. 2nd time Obtained ist
puta product add 1/10th part of Shuddha Haratala and
triturated with Nimbu Svarasa. Then, administer Gaja
Puta. This process is done by ten times. If more putas
are needed, repeat this process until the bhasma passes
the bhasma pariksha.

2. Reference: Rasamrita, Adhyaya-3/94

TREN Haake at: eitratur at!

Tanei afar: Feat TITS ys Ta

Ua aayeds yd stata fsa! (Rasamrita, 3/94-9514)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Jarita Vanga = 1 Part
Kumari Svarasa Lf. Q.S. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate Jarita
Vanga with Kumari Svarasa for one day. Form thin,
flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place these
chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi Lepa.
Then, administer Ardha Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.

Analyaeale
Vanga Bhasma

Ayurveda College, Jalandhar,
Punjab, India

Pharmaceutical and
Analytical studies
on Vanga Bhasma:
Anupdated Review

Kalpana, Babe Ke Ayurvedic
Medical College & Hospital,
Daudhar, Moga, Punjab, India

Deptt. of Rasa Shastra, Dayanand | with a long history of use in

Pritika Devi, Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Rasa Shastra & Bhaishjya

Puta: Ardha Gaja Puta.

Dose: 125 to 250 mg.

Anupana: Guduchi Svarasa, Honey, Ghee, Haridra Ra.
Therapeutic Uses: Kasa, Shvasa, Kapharoga, Medodosh,
Prasveda, Kshaya, Pandu, Krimi, Prameha, Garb},
shayacyuti,Shveta Pradara, Raktapradara,Agnimandy,,
Aruchi, Buddhimandata, Vrana, Svapnadosha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Vanga Bhasma, derived from purified tin (Shudd},,
Vanga Jarita) and Shuddha Haritala, exhibj,,
versatile therapeutic properties.

2. Traditional indications include  respiratoy,
conditions (Kasa, Shvasa), disorders of Kapha
origin, obesity (Medodosha), excessive Sweating
(Prasveda), anaemia (Pandu), worms (Krimi)
diabetes (Prameha), female reproductive disorde;,
(Shveta Pradara, Raktapradara), digestive weaknes;
(Agnimandya), and cognitive impairment (Buddh;
mandata).

3. Its pharmacological actions may include anti-
inflammatory, anti-asthmatic, anti-diabetic
hematinic, and neuroprotective effects.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Administered orally at a dose of 125 to 250 mg,
Vanga Bhasma undergoes absorption in the
gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution throughout the body facilitates its
therapeutic effects on various organs and systems.

3. Metabolism and excretion pathways may vary
based on individual factors and the formulation’s
composition.

4. Anupana (adjuvant) of Guduchi Svarasa, Honey,
Ghee, or Haridra Rasa may enhance absorption and
therapeutic efficacy.

Result

present study reaffirms that Bh

asma are nano-sized particles
| Ayurveda. Specifically, Vanga Bhasma
is an organometallic compound containing a Sn-C bond and,
tin oxide (SnO,) as the major phase, The preparation process
incorporates various micro-elements essential for the body
sourced from herbal ingredients used in different sub-processes
of Bhasma preparation. |
This paper compiles different Bhasma preparation methods and
their analytical reports for future reference. Minor variations exist
in pharmaceutical methods across studies. Establishing a standard
Operating procedure for Vanga Bhasma is necessary to assess its
safety and efficacy and ensure global recognition of Ayurvedic
traditional methods.

the

----- PAGE 91 -----
Chapter 3 * Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

Pharmacetico-Analytical

Dr, Tanuj Bhatia, As
Study of Vanga Bhasma ) Assistant

Professor, Department of Rasa
Shastra, Saraswati Ayurved
Hospital and Medical College,
Gharuan, Mohali, Chandigarh.

3.8 Naga Bhasma

Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita, Madhyama Khanda,
11/ 38-39
Ade FATT!
aifosant ga feat Tele TeysT I
Tagua Ga: eset Bret aifsstas a
WA: Geeranaraa wisgerite: |
(Sha. S.M., 11/38-39)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Jarita Naga - 1 Part
Shuddha Manahshila - 1 Part

Kanjika = Q.S. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate Jarita
Naga and Shuddha Manahshila is triturate well. Add
with Kanjika as mardana drava dravya and triturate it
properly. Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under
the sun. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and
apply Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Puta. From the
2nd process shuddha manahshila is added only 1/4th
part. Repeat this process until the bhasma passes the
bhasma pariksha.

Note: from 2nd Puta onwards Manahshila is added in 1/4th.

RESEARCH UPDATES

(Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical
Sciences), Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Institute for Post
Graduate Teaching & Research
in Ayurveda (IPGT & RA),
Gujarat Ayurved University
(GAU), Jamnagar-361008,
Gujarat, India

Three batches of each group were

After Bhavana, Vanga experienced a weight gain of 15.7%,
attributed to solid sediments from Shuddha Hingula and Aloe
Vera svarasa. The application of parallel force during processing
breaks bonds between drug particles, forming new organometallic
compounds, leading to Vanga’s colour change from black to
dark purple. Repeated levigation reduces particle size through
comminution force, with liquid media volume varying by season,
levigation vigor, and material particle size. Marana yields Bhasma,
an assimilable form of metal and minerals for internal use. Specific
liquid media are recommended for bhavana in different Bhasma
preparations. Ten ardha gaja puta cycles were utilized to achieve
desired siddhi lakshanas.

Dose: 62.5 to 125 mg.

Anupana: Haridra Svarasa, Jambu Svarasa.

Therapeutic Uses: Atisara, Grahani, Gulma, Arsha,
Prameha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

+ Naga Bhasma, derived from Jarita Naga (processed
lead) and Manahshila, exhibits therapeutic
properties.

* Traditionally indicated for conditions like diarrhea,
gastrointestinal disorders, abdominal tumors,
hemorrhoids, and diabetes.

+ Its pharmacological actions may include anti-
diarrheal, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, and anti-
diabetic effects.

PHARMACOKINETICS

+ Administered orally at a dose of 62.5 to 125
mg, Naga Bhasma undergoes absorption in the
gastrointestinal tract.

+ Distribution throughout the body facilitates its
therapeutic effects on various organs and systems.

+ Metabolism and excretion pathways may vary based
on individual factors and the composition of the
formulation.

« Anupana (adjuvant) of Haridra Svarasa and Jambu
Svarasa may enhance absorption and therapeutic
efficacy.

Re

prepared. Following Shodhana,

Manahshila showed an average weight increase of 8.8396, with
levigation requiring 1600 ml of Adaraka Svarasa. NBAD and NBAS
groups exhibited average weight increases of 12.57% and 18.55%,
respectively. Bhavana necessitated an average of 181.33 ml of
Calatropis procera latex and 182.66 ml of leaf juice. Naga Bhasma, with
a grey color, was obtained after 10 Puta in EMF. Both latex and leaf juice
showed similar pharmaceutical and analytical characteristics. Thus,
using Arkapatra Svarasa for Naga Bhasma preparation is recommended
due to considerations of scale, cost, labour, and drug availability.

----- PAGE 92 -----
>

Seas Sree? «task Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapie, »

Pharmaceutico- Zade Shveta, The present study aims to analyze Naga Bhasma both qualitatively and
Analytical Study of Dept. of Rasa Shastra & quantitatively using modern physicochemical cote. Includin,
Naga Bhasma Bhaishajya Kalpana, M. S. metallography and X-ray testing, showing good results.

Ayurved College, Kudwa,

Gondia, India
A Metallurgical Study | Dev Nath Singh Gautam The metallographic study showed dark metallic phases in Asodhit;
of Naga Bhasma Department of Rasa Shastra, | and shodhita Naga (Lead metal). Shasthiputa Naga Bhasma from bot},

Faculty of Ayurveda, IMS, BHU, | traditional Puta (TPM) and electric muffle furnace Puta (EMFP1y)

Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India_ | methods exhibited a lead sulfide distribution, with no free lead present
The traditional Puta method yielded a more homogeneous lead sulfig.
distribution, suggesting it may be superior. Thus, metallography cap,
standardize metal-based preparations (Dhatu Bhasma) in Rasashastra

[3.9 Yashada Bhasma Therapeutic Uses: Grahani, Prasveda, Rajayakshma

Prameha, Shveta Pradara.
Reference: Rasatarangini, Tiranga- 19
Wise at we yao fraraaq |
waciegiant earene wat Farr + Yashada Bhasma, prepared from Jarita Yashad;
ee 1 Churana (processed zinc) and Kumari Rasa (Alo

Lah ae : Ss vera juice), exhibits therapeutic properties.
aoe ss * Traditionally indicated for conditions like

gastrointestinal disorders, excessive sweating

PHARMACODYNAMICS

(R.T, 19/114-115)

INGREDIENTS USED tuberculosis, diabetes, and white discharge.

% Its pharmacological actions may include ant.
Jarita Yashada Churna = 1 Part diarrheal, anti-perspirant, anti-tubercular, anti-
Kumari Rasa Uf. Qs. diabetic, and anti-leucorrhea effects.

Procedure: PHARMACOKINETICS

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate Jarita © * Administered orally at 125 mg dose, Yashada Bhasm:
Yashada with Kumari Svarasa for one day. Form thin, is absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract.

flat cakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place these + Distribution throughout the body allows its
chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi constituents to exert therapeutic effects.

Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.

* Metabolism and excretion pathways may var)

depending on individual factors and formulation.
Puta: Gajaputa. ‘

+ Anupana (adjuvant) of honey, Guduchi Svarasa
Dose: 125 mg. and Trikatu Kashaya may enhance absorption and
Anupana: Honey, Guduchi Svarasa, Trikatu Kashaya. efficacy.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Standardization Khobragade Vaishali Mahadeorao, In this study, Marana of Yashada was performed using th
of Prepared Associate Professor and Ph.D. Scholar,
Yashada Bhasma Department of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajyakalpana , R.A. Podar Ayurvedic
Medical College, Worli Mumbai,
‘Maharashtra, India.

e fourth
method from Rasatarangini. Pharmaceutical standardization
was applied to the preparation steps of Yashada Bhasma. Three
batches were compared for chemical and physical properties
using quality control tests, physico-chemical tests, XRF, and
Particle size analysis. These efforts aimed to standardize Yashada
Bhasma and scientifically validate Ayurvedic principles.

Yashada Bhasma is prepared through Shodhana, Jarana, and
Marana, with plant extracts enhancing its medicinal qualities
and reducing it to nano size. XRD shows a hexagonal ZnO phase
in Yashada Bhasma, while the raw metal has crystallite Zinc. DLS
and SEM reveal a significant reduction in particle size from 2063
nm (raw metal) to 339.8 nm and 324 nm, respectively. Zeta

Physico-chemical | Avani Pareek, Department of
characterization Chemistry, Manipal University, Jaipur,
of traditionally Rajasthan, India

prepared

Yashada bhasma

----- PAGE 93 -----
“Chapter3 * Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pisht

\rticle Name |

Pharmaceutical
Standardization of
Yashada Bhasma.

Saritha, PG Scholar Final year, Dept. of
Rasa Shastra and Bhaishajya

Kalpana, S.V, Ayurvedic

College, TTD, Tirupati,

Andhra Pradesh, India

potential confirms the stability of Yashada Bhasma, and EDAX
shows differences in Zinc and Oxygen concentrations, This study
uses advanced analytical tools to standardize Yashada Bhasma
and validate Ayurvedic principles scientifically.
Pharmaceutical standardization is crucial for ensuring the safety,
efficacy, and consistent biological activity of any drug. In the
preparation of Yashada Bhasma, procedures such as Shodhana,
Bhavana, and Marana are essential, These processes remove
toxins and enhance therapeutic efficacy, resulting in a safe and
effective Bhasma.

3.10 Kashisha Bhasma

Reference: Rasamrita, Adhyaya- 3

aria Frasier wefarar g ater: |

ala: PAT: TATYSRAT VTS: 11

Gi Oe: Yet eat Tag er Pare

qa aftenaut a IVT Usa | (Rasamrita, 3/159-160)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Kashisha = 1 Part
Nimbu Nira Fr. Q.S. for Mardana
Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Kashisha with Nimbu Svarasa for one day.
Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the
sun. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and
apply Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Puta, using
approximately 7.7 kg of vanopalas. Repeat this process
until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.

No. of Vanopala used for Bhasmikarana: 7.7 kgs (Approx)
(A.EL)

Dose: 250 mg.
Anupana: Bakuchi Churna, Triphala Kvatha, Madhu.

RESEARCH UPDATES

e Seay
rmaceutical and Shobhn:

a physicochemical study of | charge, Dhanvantari Unit,

| Kashisha Bhasma GSFDC Ltd., Vadodara,

Gujarat, India

Comparative Clinical Chouhan Sachin, PhD.
Study of Kashish Bhasma | Scholar, Mandsaur

and Phaltrikadi Kvatha _| Ayurved Medical College,
on Pandu Roga Mandsaur, M.P., India

The study
exhibits crystallites agglomerating into single particles. It results in
submicron-sized particle structures (1.22 1) according to TEM analysis.
Kashisha in the formulation is detected as iron oxide, reaching
nanocrystalline sizes (31-56 nm) based on XRD analysis. In conclusion,
Kashisha Bhasma is identified as a nanocrystalline substance with
submicron-sized particles.

In the clinical study, 60 anaemia patients aged 18 to 60 were divided into
two groups: Group A (n=30) treated with Kashisha Bhasma and Group B
(n=30) treated with Kashisha Bhasma along with Phaltrikadi kwath. Both
treatments significantly improved symptoms such as fatigue, weakness,
palpitations, exertional dyspnea, anorexia, and pain in the back and
lower limbs. Kashisha Bhasma notably affected Hb gm. %, RBC, MCV, PCV,
serum iron, and TIBC. Additionally, Kashisha Bhasma with Phaltrikadi
kvatha significantly influenced Hb gm. %, RBC, PCV, MCV, MCH, serum
iron, percent transferrin saturation, and TIBC. |

Therapeutic Uses: Pandu, Pliha Roga, Hikka, Visarpa,
Svitra, Kastartava, Vrana, Visa, Daurbalya, Netra Roga.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

+ Kashisha Bhasma, derived from Shuddha Kashisha
(purified green vitriol) and processed with Nimbu
Nira (lemon juice), offers versatile therapeutic
benefits.

* Traditionally indicated for anaemia,splenic disorders,
hiccup, skin diseases, irregular menstruation, wound
healing, poisoning, weakness, and eye disorders.

* Potential pharmacological actions include
hematopoietic, anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and
wound healing effects.

PHARMACOKINETICS

+ Administered orally at250mg dose, Kashisha Bhasma
undergoes absorption in the gastrointestinal tract.

+ Distribution throughout the body facilitates its
therapeutic effects on various organs and systems.

+ Metabolism and excretion pathways vary, influenced
by individual factors and formulation composition.

* Anupana (adjuvant) of Bakuchi Churna, Triphala
Kvatha.

demonst!

----- PAGE 94 -----
82

¥ : Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana Chapter 3

. This study is unique in its comparison of an Ayurvedic Rasashastra drup
with the prevailing treatment in Siddha medicine on a larger <:,),

involving 60 patients (30 each). It assessed the relative increase in blog
Hb% levels through a single-blind study design, with measureme,,

taken at intervals of 15, 30, and 45 days using Sahli’s Hemoglobinomet..,
Statistical analysis was conducted, revealing promising and cost-effecti,,
results for a developing country like India.

MD (Rasashastra and
Bhaishajyakalpana),
Assistant Professor,
Dr. DY Patil College of
Ayurveda and Research
Centre, Pimpri, Pune,
Maharashtra, India

3.11 Shuddha Shilajatu
Triphala Kvatha P. 1 Part

Reference: AFI, Part I, Appendix-II (Shodhana); R.T.

bhasma and Annabhedi
chenduram with
reference to Hb%

favarae fart axvitact west | Procedure:

Wer Reteanct worse | The powder of Shilajatu (stone) is vigorously mixe,

faaenta aise waar fatafitarhr with hot water to disengage the soluble matter. | ;

aaah fiesta aaart then allowed to settle, and the supernatant suspensio;
frais “al “Fa - is decanted and concentrated into a thick paste or so);

: - amorphous substance. The above-extracted Shilajat,
feqet yeux PrneTRMT TASH | or Shilajatu as available in the market, is subjected ;
ARS vera are Heeta dtaara further Shodhana as follows:
am fare faite faasta cerry Shilajatu is mixed with double the quantity of water anc
fafrara a freeita dtaat half the quantity of Triphala Kvatha, and then carefull

q ty 2)
HE craaaarnigaet AT WAT || boiled to dryness.
Fee Wiener aguta AGE Dose: 12- 48 gms (Acharya Charaka )
fagdia Farad Gq ASST Anupana: Godugdha, Takra, Mamsa Rasa, Jala, Gomutra
awa WM dda | Therapeutics: Jvara, Pandu, Prameha, Agnimandya
ad gnimandy
at it T11 Gulma, Hridshula, Tvak Roga.

USANA, gi
Hiciel ¢ Waa 4 Vay aca | PHARMACOLOGY
faedia aaad: wad FaTaar7: | Shuddha Shilajatu, processed with hot water and
leet Vaeeres UIT: West | Triphala Kvatha, is renowned for its multifaceted
Recetas fits eesa lt (R.T., 22/69-77) therapeutic properties. Traditionally indicated for :

INGREDIENTS USED wide array of health conditions, including weakness

- urinary disorders, diabetes, and respiratory ailments
its pharmacological actions may include adaptogenic
Shilajtu Exd. 2 Parts rejuvenating, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant
Hot Water = 4 Parts effects.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Broadly, the co

Comparative Pharmaceutico- Sudarshan K. Thakur,
analytical Study of Shilajatu Col- | Department of Rasa Shastra
lected from Himachal Pradesh | and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
with that Samples Obtained Faculty of Ayurveda,

from Standard Commercial Doon Institute of Medical
Sources and their In-vitro Anti- | Sciences, Dehradun,
oxidant Study: A Study Protocol | Uttarakhand, India.

tc. elements and compounds
like eighteen free amino acids, benzo acid, m —hydroxybenzoic
acid, sterols, tri-terpenes, ellagic acid, three bencoumarins and
also Fulvic acid & Humic acid.

In this study, a 10% loss was observed during pharmaceutical
Processing. Analytical results showed physical constants withi?
normal limits. Phytochemical analysis detected tannins, steroids
triterpenoids, flavonoids, proteins, saponins, and carotenoids

Pharmaceutico-Analytical Study | K. A. Patil, Assistant Professor,
of Shodhita Shilajatu Dept. of Rasashastra, BLDEA’s
AVS Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya,
Bijapur, Karnataka, India.

----- PAGE 95 -----
Chapter 3 « Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

imea

Namt \utho!

A Comparative Clinical Study on | Dr. Chandra Bhushan Sinha,
The Effect of Ashmarikhandana | Asst.Professor, Department
‘asa and Gomutra Shilajatu of Shalya Tantra, Ayurveda
_ | In The Management of Mahavidhyalaya, Hubli,
Mutrashmari Karnataka

[3.12 Shuddha Gandhaka

Reference: AFI, Part I, Appendix-II (Shodhana)
Teal Vala Ta I YNINAS AAT |
TaMieararmiaaat faite || (Rasamrita, 2/3)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Gandhaka = 1 Part

Go- Dugdha or as.
Bhringaraja Svarasa

(PI)

Procedure:

Gandhaka is melted in an iron pan smeared with ghee
and then poured into a pot containing godugdha or
bhringaraja rasa. Once cooled, it is collected, washed,
dried, and then kept for use.

For the purpose of Rasa Parpati preparation, 3 or
7 Bhavanas of Bhringaraja are given to powdered
Gandhaka. The Gandhaka is then melied in a ghee-
coated vessel and poured into Bhringaraja rasa.

Dose: 1- 8 Ratti.

Therapeutic Uses: Kushtha, Kandu, Visarpa, Dadru,
Amanashaka, Rasayana.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

4. Antimicrobial Activity. Gandhaka possesses strong
antimicrobial properties, which help in inhibiting
the growth of bacteria, fungi, and other pathogens
on the skin. This action is crucial in treating
skin infections such as acne, eczema, and fungal
infections.

2. Kerolytic Effect: Gandhaka helps in exfoliating the
outer layer of the skin, removing dead skin cells
and promoting the regeneration of new cells.
This keratolytic property is beneficial in treating
conditions like psoriasis and dandruff.

3. Anti-inflammatory Properties: Gandhaka reduces
inflammation by inhibiting the production of pro-

lations have shown highly significant result in

parameters and objective parameters. In

F i khandana Rasa was given to 15 patients. In

that 75% (marked relif) observed. In Group B Gomutra Shilajatu
was given to 15 patie

In that 75% (marked relif) observed.
Conclusion; Both Group A (Ashmari khandana Rasa) and Group
B (Gomutra Shilajatu) have shown highly significant outcomes.

inflammatory cytokines. This helps in alleviating
redness, swelling, and irritation associated with
various skin conditions.

4. Antipruritic Effect: It provides relief from itching,
a common symptom in many skin diseases.
By reducing itching, Gandhaka helps prevent
secondary infections caused by scratching.

5. Detoxifying Properties: Gandhaka aids in detoxifying
the skin by promoting the elimination of toxins
and impurities. This purifying action is beneficial
for maintaining healthy skin and preventing skin
disorders.

6. Wound Healing: Gandhaka promotes wound

healing by enhancing collagen synthesis and tissue

regeneration. This property is useful in treating
ulcers, sores, and other skin lesions.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: When applied topically, Gandhaka is
absorbed through the skin on GI track. Its absorp-
tion can be enhanced when used in combination
with a suitable vehicle such as Go-Dugdha (cow's
milk) or Bhringaraja Svarasa (Eclipta alba juice).

2. Distribution: After Gandhaka
distributed locally to the affected skin areas on

absorption, is
systematic pathway where it exerts its therapeutic
effects.

3. Metabolism: Gandhaka is metabolized locally in
the skin. Its exact metabolic pathways are not well-
documented, but it is known to interact with skin
proteins and cellular components to exert its effects
on in hepatic system.

4, Excretion: The metabolites of Gandhaka are excreted
through the skin. Any systemic absorption is
minimal and excreted via the kidneys on feces.

----- PAGE 96 -----
~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana - Chapter 3

Rc Result

RESEARCH UPDATES
A Critical study of
Gandhaka Shodhana

| ___ Author Name
Manisha Rathi, Professor &
HOD, Dept. of Rasa Shastra &
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Mansarovar
Ayurvedic Medical College
Hospital & Research Center,
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India

y = Js
Powdered Gandhaka, when melted in ghee |
toxic substances, facilitating the removal of fat-soluble impurities,
while milk effectively eliminates colloidal soluble impuritie,
Through Vastragalana, the process of filtering through a cloth,

stones and other physical impurities are retained in the filter cloth,

na pot, Ghee absorp,

Gandhaka purification was conducted using the Dalana (heating
and pouring) method, a classical technique, and evaluated fo,
organoleptic characteristics, In this study, gandhaka was heateg
until melted and then poured into milk three times, following
the Ayurvedic Dalana method. The initial quantity of gandhak;
taken was 500 g, resulting in an obtained quantity of 468 g. The
procedure outlined in the text was adhered to, and organoleptic
characteristics were assessed.

2. | Gandhaka Shodhana Ea Pardeshi, Dept. of
(Purification of Sulphur) Rasashastra & Bhaishajya
Kalpana, SDM College
of Ayurveda & Hospital,
Hassan-573201, Karnataka, India
at Development of standard | Dr. Sathe Ninad, Professor,

Department of Rasashastra

& Bhaishajya Kalpana, Dr.

G.D. Pol Foundation’s Y.M.T.
Ayurvedic Medical College, Navi
Mumbai, MHA

operating process (sop)
of Gandhaka shodhana as
per Ayurved prakash

The classical purification process from Ayurved Prakash effectively
removes impurities from gandhaka (S). Although traditionally
three cycles are recommended, 100% purity was achieved after
the second cycle in this study. A total weight loss of 17% was

observed after purification.

Gandhaka is vital for preparing Rasaushadha in Rasashastra, with
shuddha gandhaka required for medicines. The dalana process
using goghrita and godugdha is standard. Ayurved Prakash and
Rasayana sara recommend equal and one-fourth quantities of
goghrita, respectively. The shodhana process is crucial, comprising
half of the preparation procedure. Changes in material quantities
during shodhana can affect the entire process and alter the drug’s
structure.

4. | Applied Aspect of Dr. Monika Kashyap P.G.
Gandhaka Shodhana and__| Scholar Dept. of Rasa Shastra
It’s Importance. & Bheshijya Kalpana at
Rani Dullaiya Smt. Ayurved
P.G. College and Hospital,
Bhopal, M.P.
ss
5. | Effect of Different Dr. Ganti Basavaraj Y, Associate
Shodhana Media on Professor, Dept. of Rasashastra
Gandhaka. and Bhaishajya Kalpana, SDM

College of Ayurveda, Hassan,
Karnataka

This study examines shuddha Gandhaka using organoleptic
and preliminary chemical analysis. Purified Gandhaka should
be odorless, fragile, thin-flaked, and metallic-sounding. Post-
shodhana, it retains its yellow colour. The yield validates the
method for Rasa-Rasayana karmas. Gandhaka’s thermal properties
are Mandagni at 113-120°C and Madhyamagni at 360-400°C.

3.13 Shuddha Gairika
Reference: AFI, Part I, Appendix-II (Shodhana;
dite q tat geuifad afepesit 1 (R.RS., 3/49)
INGREDIENTS USED

Gairika 1 Part
Godugdha QS. For Bhavana

Procedure of Shodhana: Take Gairika and powder it using
a Khalva. Add godugdha and perform the Bhavana
procedure three times.

Dose: 250 mg.

Therapeutic Uses: Raktapitta, Hikka, Vamana, Visha,
Kandu, Shitapitta.

PHARMACOLOGY

Gairika, processed with cow’s milk (Godugdha), is
known for its therapeutic properties attributed to its

mineral composition and the properties imparted by
the milk. Traditionally indicated for conditions like
bleeding disorders, skin ailments, and digestive issues
its pharmacological actions may include hemosiatic,
dermatological, and gastrointestinal benefits.

RESEARCH UPDATES

sro. | Article Name | Author Name * Result |
Al,

An analytical ManjiriRanade, Shodhana of Gairika

study of Department of _ was performed using
Gairika by Rasashastra and two methods: Method
two different BK Institute Sri awith Godugdha and
methods of Sai Ayurvedic Method B with Goghri
shodhana Medical College, ta. Organoleptic and

Aligarh, Uttar
Pradesh, India

physicochemical char-
acteristics of Gairika
were studied before
and after shodhana.
ICP-AES analysis was
conducted on three

----- PAGE 97 -----
Chapter 3 * Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pisht)

85

sro. Article Name | Author Name | Resut |

samples. Results indi-
cated changes in pH,
Mohs hardness, spe-
cific gravity, and trans-
parency after shod-
hana with both Go-
dugdha and Goghrita,
ICP-AES data showed
mineral content within
permissible limits.

3.14 Shuddha Kankshi

Reference: AFI, Part J, Appendix-II (Shodhana)
aapitet Pitot fram wnat What (Rasamrita, 3/158)

INGREDIENTS USED
Kashisha = 1 Part
Bhringaraja Nira Pl. Q.S. For Bhavana

Procedure of Shodhana: Take Kankshi and powder it
using a Khalva. Add Bhringraja rasa and perform the
Bhavana procedure three times.

Dose: 1 Ratti.

Anupana: Sugar, Jala.

Therapeutic Uses: Kantha Roga, Keshya, Vishagana,
Shvitra, Kushtha, Tridoshashamaka.

PHARMACOLOGY

Kashisha, prepared from iron sulphide and processed
with Bhringaraja Nira (Eclipta alba juice), exhibits
therapeutic effects attributed to its iron content and the

properties imparted by the herb. Traditionally indicated

for conditions like anaemia, liver disorders, and skin
ailments, its pharmacological actions may include
hematinic, hepatoprotective, and dermatological
benefits.

3.15 Mukta Pishti

Reference: AFI, Part I, Pishti
Ayurveda Sara Sangraha, Sodhanamarana Prakarana.

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Mukta = 1 Part
Gulab Arka FA. Q.S. For Mardana

Procedure:
1. Wash Mukta with warm water and dry it.
2, Triturate Pravala with Gulaba Arka for 7 days.

3. Collect and store the final product.

Dose: 65 to 125 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Butter Milk.

Important Therapeutic Uses: Raktaatisara, Rakta Pitta,
Manodosha, Unmada, Hridroga.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Mukta Pishti, made from purified pearl and rose water,
is effective for conditions like bleeding disorders,
mental disorders, and heart ailments. [ts therapeutic
effects may include hemostatic, calming, and cardiac
tonic properties. Anupana ingredients like honey and
butter milk could enhance its efficacy.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Administered orally at doses ranging from 65 to 125 mg,
Mukta Pishti is absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract
and distributed throughout the body. Metabolism and
excretion pathways may vary, influenced by individual
factors and formulation composition. Anupana choices
such as honey and butter milk may influence absorption
and effectiveness.

RESEARCH UPDATES

'srNo.| Article Name | Author Name | Result |
a

Comparative Sawant R.S. The study indicates

study of Assistant that the particle size
mukta Professor, of Mukta Pishti is
bhasma Dept. of reduced more than
and mukta Rasashastra that of Mukta Bhasma.
pishti with &Bhaishajya This suggests that the
reference Kalpana, properties of Mukta are
to their Smt. K.G.M.P. preserved, as there isno
particle size  Ayurved direct contact with heat

Mahavidyalaya, during the preparation

Mumbai, of Mukta Pishti. This

M.H.A. preservation makes
it useful in diseases
vitiated by Pitta.

3.16 Mukta Bhasma

Reference: Rasatarangini, 23/ 71

FMMchy THA rseady |
fas fran yfed gitareteargrarq tt (R.T., 23/71)
INGREDIENTS USED
Shuddha Mukta = 1 Part
Sutapatrika = QS. for Mardana

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Mukta with Shatapatrika for one day. Form
thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun. Place
these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply Sandhi

----- PAGE 98 -----
86

j Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte, ;

Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this process
for three times or until the bhasma passes the bhasma
pariksha.

Puta: Gaja Puta- three times.

Dose: 125 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Butter, Milk.

Therapeutic Uses: Kasa, Shvasa, Kshaya, Jirna Jvara, Pittaja
Jvara, Dantobhava Jvara, Hridaurbalya, Manovikara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

It is indicated for various respiratory, febrile, and men,
disorders, along with cardiac weakness. These eff,
are attributed to its composition, which may modula,
immune responses and promote tissue repair.

PHARMACOKINETICS
Administration of Mukta Bhasma orally results j,
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract, followed },
distribution throughout the body. The specifics of j,
metabolism and excretion pathways are not extensively

documented. Anupana, such as honey, butter, and mil;
may influence its absorption, potentially enhancing its
therapeutic efficacy.

Mukta Bhasma, comprising purified pearl and rose
water, possesses diverse therapeutic effects, including
cooling, anti-inflammatory, and rejuvenating properties.

: Result ed
Three Mukta Bhasma (MB) samples underwent purification of Mukta
(pearl) and repeated calcinations. Organoleptic and Ayurvedic tests
were conducted. Mukta initially in aragonite form transformed into
stable calcite through calcinations. SEM studies showed particle size
reductions from 718.7—214.7 nm to 279.2-79.93 nm. EDAX analysis
revealed increasing calcium content from raw (34.11%) to purified
(37.5%) MB. $

The study aimed to pharmaceutically analyze Mukta Bhasma
prepared in Godugdha through physico-chemical tests and advanced
instrumental techniques such as XRD and XRF. From 300g of raw
Mukta, 208 g of dull white Mukta Bhasma was obtained, containing
43.86% w/w calcium by AAS and 45.07% Ca by XRF. Evaluation
included loss on drying (0.24% w/w), total ash (99.84% w/w), acid
insoluble ash (0.34% w/w), water-soluble ash (8.31% w/w), specific
gravity (1.0185), and particle size (20nm to 100nm by TEM). XRD
peaks confirmed the presence of calcium carbonate (Calcite). XRF
detected elements in Mukta Bhasma, with Ca (45.07%), O (41.52%),
and C (12.44%) being predominant. Other elements were present in
smaller percentages or traces.

Standardization
and quality contro!
parameters
for Mukta Bhasma

Department of Rasashastra
and B. K., Rishikul P. G.
Government Ayurveda
College, Haridwar,
Uttarakhand, India

a

Suman Lata,

Research Scholar, Dept.

of Rasashastra, B.M.J.
Ayurvedic Medical College,
Rajiv Gandhi University

of Health Sciences,
Karnataka, India

Pharmaceutico-Analytical
Study of Mukta Bhasma
Prepared in Godugdha

[ 3.17 Pravala Pishti

Reference: AFI, Part I, Pishti
Ayurveda Sara Sangraha, Sodhanamarana Prakarana.

Important Therapeutic Indication: Kasa,
Manodaurbalya, Ojakshaya, Hridroga.

Pittaroga,

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Pravala Pishti, composed of purified coral and rose
water, treats cough, Pitta disorders, mental weakness,
immune deficiency, and heart ailments. Its properties
include antitussive, cooling, and cardiac tonic effects,
likely due to its mineral content and soothing rose
water. Anupana ingredients like honey, butter, and ghee
may enhance its efficacy.

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Pravala = 1 Part
Gulaba Arka Fl. Q.S. For Mardana

Procedure:

1. Wash Pravala with warm water and dry it. .
HARMACOKINETIC:

2, Triturate Pravala with Gulaba Arka for 7 days. a :

Administered orally at250 mg, Pravala Pishtiis absorbed

in the gastrointestinal tract and distributed throughout
the body. Metabolism and exeretion pathways may
vary, influenced by individual factors and formulation

3. Collect and store the final product.
Dose: 250 mg.
Anupana: Honey, Butter, Ghee.

----- PAGE 99 -----
Chapter $ + Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishi)

composition. Anupana choices such as honey, butter,
and ghee may impact absorption and effectiveness.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Comparative Megha Satpute, Two formulations will be

Pharmaceu- Department Prepared from Praval
tical Stan- of Rasashastra (coral): Pravala Pishti i
dardization —_ and Bhaishajya triturating with Gulab
and Oral Kalpana, Jala and Pravala Bhas-
Bioavailabil- Mahatma ma by traditional Puta
ity Study on Gandhi method. They will un-
Praval Pishti = Ayurveda dergo assessment based
and Pra- College on Bhasma_ Pariksha
val Bhasma —_ Hospital and from Ayurveda, includ-
Research Ing organoleptic char-

Centre, Salod acters, physicochemi-

(H) Wardha, cal parameters, and

(MHA), Datta Particle size distribu-

Meghe Institute tion analysis, SEM-EDX,

of Medical FTIR, XRD, and GCMS. A

Sciences study in healthy volun-

(Deemed to teers will compare the

be University) relative oral _bioavail-

Wardha, ability of Pravala Pishti

(MHA), India. and Pravala Bhasma

with a standard calcium

supplement.

3.18a Praval Bhasma

Reference: Rasa Tarangini- 23/ 135
Wye ad: Heal ant yeahewn|
Wa Geran wae PTAA 1135 11

INGREDIENTS USED

Suddha Praval - 1 Part
Kumari Swarasa = Q.S. for Marana

PROCEDURE:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Praval with Kumari Swarasa for one day.
Form thin, flat cakrikas and dry them under the sun.
Place these cakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this
process three times or until the bhasma passes the
bhasma pariksha.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutico- Arati P Dubewar, Professor

analytical study of
Praval Bhasma (Coral
calax) with two
different herbs

HOD & PhD Guide, Dr D Y
PatilVidyapeeth deemed to be

University. Dr. D..Patil College
of Ayurved & Research Center,
Pimpri, Pune.

Dose: 125- 250mg

Anupana:; Loney, Ghrita.

Therapeutic Indication: Deepan, Pachana, Drishti Roga,
Kaphavatahara, Rakht-Pitta Shamaka, Vishahara.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Calcium Supplementation: Prayala Bhasma is an
excellent source of bioavailable calcium, which
helps maintain bone health, muscle function, nerve
transmissions, and cardiovascular health.

2. Digestive Stimulant (Deepana, Pachana): Used as
digestive stimulants, it stimulates the secretion of
digestive enzymes, thereby improving the digestion
process. Agnikeshya- Agni deepan — facilitates the
correct functioning of digestive fire and is beneficial
in indigestion problems, hyperacidity, and acid
reflux due to its antacid nature.

3. Anti-inflammatory and Anti-hemorrhagic: Used as anti-
hemorrhagic because it helps reduce inflammation
and bleeding.

Respiratory Health: Pravala Bhasma is useful
against poison.

=

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Pravala Bhasma is micronized by an
Ayurvedic process, which enhances its absorption
in the gastrointestinal tract. The bioavailability of
calcium from Pravala Bhasma is better than routine
calcium supplements.

2. Distribution: After absorption, bioavailable calcium
and other trace elements are distributed throughout
the body, especially in bones and teeth, to support
structural integrity and numerous physiological
purposes.

3. Metabolism: Being a mineral, its therapeutic action

takes place through the minerals in this Bhasma,

acting directly on tissues.
. Excretion: The unabsorbed portion of Pravala

Bhasma is excreted through feces, with excess

calcium being excreted through the kidneys.

Different drugs are used in Bhasmikarana based on their properties.
Shuddha Pravala is triturated with Aloe vera or Guduchi to form flat
cakes, which are dried and subjected to fire. Aloe vera enhances the
strength and shine of the cakes, and its anti-inflammatory, ulcer-
healing, and immune-modulatory properties may aid stem cell
growth. Guduchi, rich in immune-stimulating alkaloids and essential
elements, is also used for its Rasayana effects.

----- PAGE 100 -----
Chapter 3 * Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

composition, Anupana choices such as honey, butter,
and ghee may impact absorption and effectiveness

RESEARCH UPDATES

Article Name | Author Name

1. Comparative Megha Satpute, Two formulations will be

Pharmaceu- Department repared fro!
tical Stan- of Rasashastra (ear Breve: nae
dardization and Bhaishajya_triturating with Gulab
and Oral Kalpana, Jala and Pravala Bhas-
Bioavailabil- Mahatma ma by traditional Puta
ity Study on Gandhi method. They will un-
Praval Pishti Ayurveda dergo assessment based
and Pra- College on Bhasma_ Pariksha
val Bhasma —_ Hospital and from Ayurveda, includ-
Research ing organoleptic char-
Centre, Salod acters, _ physicochemi-
(H) Wardha, cal parameters, and
(MHA), Datta Particle size distribu-
Meghe Institute tion analysis, SEM-EDX,
of Medical FTIR, XRD, and GCMS. A
Sciences study in healthy volun-
(Deemed to teers will compare the
be University) relative oral bioavail-
Wardha, ability of Pravala Pishti
(MHA), India. and Pravala Bhasma
with a standard calcium

supplement.

3.18a Praval Bhasma

Reference: Rasa Tarangini- 23/ 135
Bue da: het Fan yeataae|
Ue Years Sat MTGSAI 135 1

INGREDIENTS USED

Suddha Praval - 1 Part
Kumari Swarasa - QS. for Marana
PROCEDURE:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Praval with Kumari Swarasa for one day.
Form thin, flat cakrikas and dry them under the sun.
Place these cakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this
process three times or until the bhasma passes the

bhasma pariksha.

RESEARCH UPDATES

h Name
\uthor Nami

Pharmaceutico- Arati P Dubewar,
analytical study of
Praval Bhasma (Coral
calax) with two

different herbs

Professor

HOD & PhD Guide, Dr D Y
PatilVidyapeeth deemed to be

University. Dr. D.Y.Patil College
of Ayurved & Research Center,
Pimpri, Pune.

Dose: 125- 250mg

Anupana: Honey, Ghrita.

Therapeutic Indication: Deepan, Pachana, Drishti Roga,
Kaphavatahara, Rakht-Pitta Shamaka, Vishahara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Calcium Supplementation: Pravala Bhasma is an
excellent source of bioavailable calcium, which
helps maintain bone health, muscle function, nerve
transmissions, and cardiovascular health.

2. Digestive Stimulant (Deepana, Pachana): Used as
digestive stimulants, it stimulates the secretion of
digestive enzymes, thereby improving the digestion
process. Agnikeshya- Agni deepan — facilitates the
correct functioning of digestive fire and is beneficial
in indigestion problems, hyperacidity, and acid
reflux due to its antacid nature.

3. Anti-inflammatory and Anti-hemorrhagic: Used as anti-
hemorrhagic because it helps reduce inflammation
and bleeding.

Respiratory Health: Pravala Bhasma is useful
against poison.
PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Pravala Bhasma is micronized by an
Ayurvedic process, which enhances its absorption
in the gastrointestinal tract. The bioavailability of
calcium from Pravala Bhasma is better than routine
calcium supplements.

2. Distribution: After absorption, bioavailable calcium
and other trace elements are distributed throughout
the body, especially in bones and teeth, to support
structural integrity and numerous physiological
purposes.

3. Metabolism: Being a mineral, its therapeutic action

takes place through the minerals in this Bhasma,

acting directly on tissues.
. Excretion: The unabsorbed portion of Pravala

Bhasma is excreted through feces, with excess

calcium being excreted through the kidneys.

Different drugs are used in Bhasmikarana based on their properties.
Shuddha Pravala is triturated with Aloe vera or Guduchi to form flat
cakes, which are dried and subjected to fire. Aloe vera enhances the
strength and shine of the cakes, and its anti-inflammatory, ulcer-
healing, and immune-modulatory properties may aid stem cell
growth. Guduchi, rich in immune-stimulating alkaloids and essential
elements, Is also used for its Rasayana effects.

----- PAGE 101 -----
———~—~“pushadha Prayoga Vijnanam * Chapter ;

Pravala Bhasma
formulations
in Bhaishajya
Ratnavali-
Critical review

of Rasashastra & Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Mahatma Gandhi
Ayurved College and Hospital
and Research Centre, Datta
Meghe Institute of Higher
Education (Deemed to be
University),  Sawangl  (M),
Wardha, Maharashtra, India.
Dr. Suman Lata Assistant
Professor in Department of Rasa-
Shastra, Ch. Devi Lal College of
Ayurveda and Hospital Jagadhri,
Haryana, India

Qualitative analysis
of praval bhasma
by namburi phased
spot test

3.18b Vajra Bhasma

Reference: Rasamrita, 8/8-9

Sh Ta Pet Wa A AHA
qrraeaaatas fiat pate!

ayes Ff VATA BG TYE: THT!

agegeta ttc Aitareqard || (Rasamrita, 8/8-9)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Hiraka = 1 Part
Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Manahshila - 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part
Shuddha Haritala = 1 Part
Kulatha Kvatha Sd. 1 Part
Procedure:
1. Take all the ingredients as required.

2. First, Shuddha Hiraka with Suddha Parada triturate

properly.

. Then add Shuddha Manahshila, Shuddha Haritala
and Shuddha Gandhaka triturate well.

Adding Kulatha Kvatha as drava dravya and
triturate until it become dry.

Place them in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa.

Then, administer Gajaputa.

Repeat this process for 14 times or until the bhasma
passes the bhasma pariksha,

Puta: 14 times.
Dose: 8 mg.

a total of 51 formulations containing Praya),, |

In the present review, |

Bhasma have been reviewed, which are indicated In various disorde,,
in the form of powder and tablet.

The Namburi Phased Spot Test (NPST) is used to assess the quality |

of Sindura and Bhasma. Praval was purified using sarjika-kshar
by Dolayantra vidhi, then processed Into Praval Bhasrna with cov,
milk (Godugdha). NPST was performed on the Praval Bhasma, and
results were consistent with NPST standards, confirming its quality, |

Turmeric, a natural pH indicator, showed the alkaline nature of

Praval Bhasma by turning from yellow to dark red. The Bhasma’s fine
particle size enhances calcium absorption, with calcium present in

the optimal Ca2+ form. NPST validated the fineness and quality of the

prepared Bhasma.

Anupana: Honey, Santaika.
Therapeutic Uses: Udara, Pandu, Medodosha, Prameha
Sotha, Rajayakshma, Netraroga, Valmika Arbuda.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Vajra Bhasma, composed of purified diamond and
other minerals, addresses a spectrum of conditions
including abdominal disorders, anaemia, obesity
diabetes, inflammation, tuberculosis, eye disorders,
and tumors. Its mineral combination, supplemented
by Kulatha Kvatha, potentially offers anti-inflamma-
tory, antioxidant, anti-diabetic, anti-tumor,
immunomodulatory effects.

and

PHARMACOKINETICS

Administered orally at 8 mg, Vajra Bhasma is absorbed in
the gastrointestinal tract and distributed throughout the
body, where its constituents exert therapeutic actions
While specific metabolism and excretion pathways ma}
vary, the suggested Anupana of honey and Santaika
could enhance absorption and efficacy.

RESEARCH UPDATES

| Sr.No. |ArticleName| AuthorName | Result a
al;

A Com- Upendra U. Zala, Analytically, — Hiraka

parative Associate Profes- Bhasma contains
Analytical sor, Department FeO, as a major
Study of Hi- ofRasaShastra compound, giving it @
taka Bhasma & Bhaishajya Malina Rakta colour.
oy Kalpana, J. S. The particle sizes of
Ayurveda Col- Hiraka Bhasma-! and

lege, Nadiad Il were found to be

_ (Gujarat) 113 um and 69.4 um

VMD, respectively.

----- PAGE 102 -----
Chapter 3 + Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti

3.19 Kaparda Bhasma

Reference: Ayurveda Prakasha, Adhyaya-2

argu ferat emer wera wieefeetat Tar |
Ralgeitar gat Tig Faget weary WalsaT I

(Ayurveda Prakasha 2/300)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Kapardika 1 Part

Procedure:
1. Place Shuddha Kapardika in a Sharava Samputa
and apply Sandhi Lepa.
2. Then, administer Gajaputa.
3. Repeat this process until the bhasma passes the
bhasma pariksha.
Dose: 250 mg
Anupana: Vasa Svarasa, Nimbu Svarasa, Trikatu Kshaya,
Udumbara Rasa.
Therapeutic Uses: Agnimandhya, Parinama Shula,
Grahani, Rajayakshma, Karna Srava, Netraroga, Sphota,
Raktavikara, Shukraksaya.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Dept. of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaisajya Kalpana, Rajiva
Lochana Ayurveda Medical
College and Hospital,
Chandkhuri, Chhattisgarh.
Khobragade Vaishali
Mahadeorao, Associate
Professor, Ph.D. Scholar,
Department of Rasashastra
and Bhaishajyakalpana, R.A.
Podar Ayurvedic Medical
College, Worli Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

Dr. C.S. Maladkar Professor a
HOD Shri J.G.C.H.S Ayurvedic

Kapardika Bhasma

Standardization of Kapardika
Bhasma Prepared with

the Classical Method of
Rasachandamshu

Pharmaceutico-Analytical
Study of Varatika Bhasma with
Special Reference to its Types
According to Rasatarangini

Karnataka, India

Kulshrestha, Mayank Krishna, :

Medical College Ghataprabha,

Precaution: After Preparing Bhasma, It should be kept in
water for 24 hours, to reduces Tikshnatva.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Kaparda Bhasma, derived from purified cowrie
shell, exhibits cooling and antacid properties, aiding
in balancing the Agni (digestive fire) and treating
conditions like indigestion, peptic ulcers, and
gastrointestinal disorders. Its potential anti-inflam-
matory and immunomodulatory effects extend its
utility to conditions such as tuberculosis, ear dis-
charge, eye disorders, and blood disorders. Anupana
ingredients like Vasa Svarasa, Nimbu Svarasa,
Trikatu Kshaya, and Udumbara Rasa may enhance its
therapeutic actions.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Administered orally at 250 mg, Kaparda Bhasma is
absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and distributed
throughout the body. While specific metabolism and
excretion pathways may vary, soaking the prepared
Bhasma in water aims to reduce its sharpness.
However, detailed pharmacokinetic data may be
limited.

contains 43.02% calcium, whereas Kaaprdika bhasma
(Gajaputa) contains 44.31% calcium. It can be concluded that
in pharmaceutical processing, Kapardika bhasma prepared by
the Gajaputa method is superior to Angara dhamana as it is
easier and yields higher calcium content.

This method of preparing Kapardika Bhasma is achievable and
less time-consuming than others. The shodhana procedure
tenders Kapardika lustreless and changes its color from yellow
to whitish. XRF analysis indicates a slight increase in calcium
content after shodhana and Marana.

nd | Analytical methods indicated that all three samples of Varatika
Bhasma displayed similar properties, suggesting insignificant
differences among them. Therefore, all samples can be utilized
for treatment purposes, Further research Is required to assess
the absorption extent and intrinsic effects at the tissue/cellular

level of these bhasmas on various experimental models.

Devanathan. R., Centre for
Advanced Research in Indian
System of Medicine (CARISM

Chemical Standardisation
Studies on Varatika Bhasma

613 401, Tamilnadu,

SHASTRA University, Thanjavur-

This study finds that:

1. Particle size decreases, likely due to purification processes,
supported by SEM data,

2, XRD patterns confirm the formation of more crystalline
compounds, attributed to purification and_ incineration
processes.

)

----- PAGE 103 -----
Aushadha Prayoga Vijnanam * Chapter 3

| 3.20 Shankha Bhasma

Reference: Rasatarangini, 12/17-19
USGS aves ya waa: |
wna ara seas WATT!
ee wag Wyler yee Te firey!
Wad: Vile Tage Ges USquidg fragt
ative fase wyeet aa: Gea!
We geste vigat yer
(Rasatarangini, 12/17-19)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Shankha ~ 1 Part

Kumari Svarasa Uf. Q.S. for Mardana

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Shankha with Kumari Svarasa for one day.
Form thin, flat chakrikas and dry them under the sun.
Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this
process until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Dose; 250- 300 mg.
Anupana: Kumari Svarasa, Triphala Kvatha.

Therapeutic Uses: Ajirna, Agnimantha, Grahanj,

Amalapitta, Parinama Shula, Yakritpliha vriddha, Vish,

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Shankha Bhasma, derived from purified conch shell,
exhibits antacid and digestive properties, making
effective for indigestion, peptic ulcers, acidity, ang
abdominal colic. The addition of Kumari Syarasa may
enhance its effects, possibly through anti-inflammatory
and gastroprotective mechanisms.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Administered orally at 250-300 mg, Shankha Bhasma
is absorbed and distributed throughout the body
However, detailed pharmacokinetic data is limited,
Metabolism and excretion pathways may vary
influenced by individual factors and formulation
composition. The suggested Anupana of Kumari
Svarasa and Triphala Kvatha could impact absorption
and therapeutic effectiveness.

Or. Arpita Sharma, P.G.
Department of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, R.G.G.P.G.
Ayurvedic College, Paprola,
H.P., India

Pharmaceutical
Study of Shankha
Bhasma by two
Different Methods

This study prepared
using Gajaputa Marana and Group B employing open Maran followed
by two Laghuputa. Both groups required a minimum of three Puta for
transformation. The color of Group A Bhasma was white, while Group 8
was off-white. EDAX analysis detected Ca, C, O, and Si in both Bhasmas

indicating similar composition despite differing preparation methods.

ics

six batches of Shankha Bhasma, with Group A

A Critical Review on
Therapeutic Uses of
Shankha Bhasma

Dr. Laxmi Narayan Gupta
Department of Rasa Shastra &
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Faculty of
Ayurveda, IMS, BHU, Varanasi,
U.P., India

The present study compiles and assesses relevant literature and
contemporary research on Shankha Bhasma (SB) preparation, focusing
on pharmaceutical and analytical parameters. It integrates ancient
Indian texts with modern research databases to offer insight into Sb’s

characterization and therapeutic potential, aiming to enhance human
well-being.

Physico-Chemical Dr. Mrunmayee Mahesh
Analysis of Shankha | Patil, Final Year PG Scholar,
Bhasma W.S.R. to Department of Rasashastra
Rasachandanshu Evum Bhaishajya Kalpana, YMT
(Dagdhikrita) Ayurvedic Medical College

and Hospital, Kharghar, Navi
Mumbai, MHA, India

In conclusion, Shankha Bhasma can be prepared following the method
outlined in Rasachandamshu (Dagdhikarana), with observed Bhasma
Siddhi lakshanas. This method proves to be simpler, more cost-effective
and feasible compared to other methods described in various texts.

Shankha Bhasma prepared through this method is ‘Suitable for external
application.

| 3.21 Godanti Bhasma INGREDIENTS USED

Reference: Rasataranagini, 11/ 240

Waa era tA Med Magners |
fred Ufed er sted wea (R.T., 11/240)

Shuddha Godanti = 1 Part
Kumari Svarasa Uf QS. for Marana

----- PAGE 104 -----
Chapter 3° Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti) 91

Procedure: PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Take all the ingredients as required. Godanti Bhasma, derived from purified gypsum,
2, First, triturate Shuddha Godanti with Kumari  Possesses cooling and _anti-inflammatory properties,
Svarasa for one day. Form thin, flat chakrikas and beneficial for conditions related to Pitta dosha imbalance
dry them under the sun. such as headaches, fevers, cough, and asthma. The addi-

Pl 1 Helnieee tion of Kumari Svarasa may enhance its effects, potentially
3. Place these chakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and through antioxidant and anti-inflammatory mecha-

apply Sandhi Lepa.

nisms.
4. Then, administer Gajaputa. PHARMACOKINETICS
5. Repeat ids passes until the bhasma passes the Aqministered orally at 500 mg, Godanti Bhasma is
EROS Mss expected to be absorbed and distributed throughout
Puta: Gajaputa. the body. However, detailed pharmacokinetic data

is limited. Metabolism and excretion pathways may

Dose: 500 mg.
vary, influenced by individual factors and formulation

Anupana: Honey, Tulasi S: : :

g : art : eee hee ea composition. The suggested Anupana, including honey,
Therapeutic Uses: Agnimandya, Sirashula, Pitta Jvara, Tulsi juice, ghee, or sugar, could impact absorption and
Jima Jvara, Kasa, Shvasa. therapeutic outcomes.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Sharma Arun, 1P G Scholar, | In modern Rasashastre, Godanti is used for Dehavada, not Dhattuvada. It
P.G. Department of Rasa undergoes Shodhana with Nimbu and Dronapushpi Svarasa, and Marana
Shastra & Bhaishajya kalpa- | with Neem or Grahitakumari Svarasa. Processing incurs only a 25% weight
na, Uttarakhand Ayurveda | loss and can be done traditionally or with an electric furnace. The resulting

mild alkaline Bhasma aids rapid absorption without antibiotic properties,

University,
Rishikul Campus, Haridwar, | effective for ulcer healing and as an antipyretic agent.

Uttarakhanda, India

Dr. Rudraxi A Malawad,
Professor, Dept. of
Rasashastra, Shri Veer
Pulikeshi Rural Ayurvedic
Medical College, Badami,
Karnataka, India

Updated Overview on
Godanti Bhasma (An
Ayurvedic Formulation
of Gypsum)

Ina study with 60 Shvetapradara patients, Group! received Godanti Bhasma
with lukewarm water, Group II received only lukewarm water, and Group II!
received Azostat kit for 30 days. Group | showed 90-100% symptom relief,
while Group Ill showed 50% relief with side effects. Pap smear reports
indicated Group | and III patients had negative infections post-treatment,
unlike Group Il. Godanti Bhasma provided significant symptom relief and
comparable antimicrobial activity to the Azostat kit.

After the Shodhana procedure of Godanti in Nimbu Svarasa, it becomes
white and brittle, with negligible loss. The pH shifts slightly acidic post-
Shodhana. Traditional method preparation requires more time and labor
compared to the furnace method. The pH of Bhasma is 6.58 for the furnace
method and 8.90 for the traditional method, indicating a marked reduction
in acidity for the latter. X-ray diffraction shows different phases for each
method, while XRF reveals similar elemental contents. Further study is
needed to determine their therapeutic effects, although both methods
yield similar analytical results.

Evaluation of the
efficacy of Godanti
Bhasma in Shweta
Pradara with

special reference

of Leucorrhoea—A
Clinical Study.
Preparation of Godanti
Bhasma (Gypsum) by
Muffle Furnace Using
Traditional Method
W.S.R. Rastarangini
and its Comparative
Physico Chemical
Analysis

Dr. Mahantesh B.
Rudrapuri Department

of Post Graduate Studies
in Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Shri
Shivayogeeshwar Rural
Ayurvedic Medical College
and Hospital, Inchal,
Belgavi, Karnataka, India

Procedure of Shodhana: Take Ashuddha Tankana and

| 3.22 Shuddha Tankana
place small pieces of it in a vessel over fire. Collect it

Reference; AFI, Part- 01, Appendix-II (Shodhana)

when dehydrated.

(Ayu.Pra., 2/244) Dose: 1- 2 Ratti.

INGREDIENTS USED Anupana: Honey, Ghrita.

Part Used Theraputic Uses: Kaphadravaka, Ashmari, Kasa, Shvasa,

Tankana = 1 Part Adymana, Varna nashaka.

----- PAGE 105 -----
gee | ; ae —_______ Aushadha Prayoga Vinanam * Chapter 3

PHARMACODYNaMiIcs PHARMACOKINETICS

i , ; stailed pharmacokinetic data for Shuddha Tankan;
Shuddha Tankana, purified borax, is believed to exert ata, ee ge anne ; mis 7 _
' may not be extensively documented in traditiona|
mucolytic and expectorant effects. These properties help Ayurvedic literature. However, upon adminis
in loosening and expelling mucus from the respiratory tration, absorption of borax is expected, followed
by distribution throughout the body. Metabolisr,
and excretion pathways may vary depending on the

formulation and route of administration.

tract, making it beneficial in conditions like cough

and asthma.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Physico-Chemical lsrinwacdluise
Standardization | P.G.Scholar, P.G. Dept.
of Tankana of Rasa-Shastra, Dr.
(Borax): An N.R.S. Govt. Ayurvedic
Ayurvedic College, Vijayawada,
Mineral Drug AP., India

The study aimed to (enaeie | a fingersaine for raw and purified Tankana using
techniques like X-ray Diffraction (XRD), SEM, EDAX, and chemical analysis to
determine structural and chemical compositions. XRD revealed that raw Tankana
contains Na,B,O, 10H,O and Na,B,0, 5H,0, while purified Tankana contains Na.8.0_
5H,0. SEM studies showed uniform agglomerates of 10 microns in purified Tankana
compared to raw Tankana’s 3-micron grains. Quantitative chemical analysis indicated
higher Boran content (13.48%) in purified Tankana compared to raw Tankana
(10.08%). This study highlights physicochemical changes during purification and its|
significance for further research.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

1. What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation c. Ayurveda Prakasha
of Abhraka Bhasma according to Rasatarangini? d. Charaka Samhita
a. Dhanyabhraka 7. What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation
b. Arka of Svarna Makshika Bhasma according to Rasendra
c. Nyagrodhamula Kvatha Sara Sangraha?
GL, IResasiha Resa a. Shuddha Suvarna Makshika
2. What is the recommended dosage range for b. Shuddha SARIN
Abhraka Bhasma? c. Eranda Taila
a. 50 mg to 100 mg c. 500 mg to 750 mg d. Nimbu Svarasa
b. 125 mg to 375 mg d. 1g to 2g 8. How many Putas are recommended for Svarna Makshika
i & . i Bhasma preparation according to Rasa Tarangini?
3. Which of the following therapeutic uses is NOT
a. 5 eS
mentioned for Abhraka Bhasma?
: : b. 10 d. 20
a. Agnimandya c. Raktapitta

9. Which therapeutic use is NOT mentioned for Svarna

b. Prameha d. Amavata Makshika Bhasma?
4. What is the recommended Anupana (adjuvant) for au [Bevavékin e Kass
taking Abhraka Bhasma? ih, Ausina an@rshant
a. Milk c. Honey 10. What is the recommended dosage range for Svarna
b. Water d, Lemon juice Makshika Bhasma?
5. What pharmacological action does Abhraka Bhasma a. 50 mg-100 mg ec. 500 mg-750 mg
exhibit? b. 125 mg-250 mg d. 1lg-2¢
a. Antibacterial c. Hematogenic 11. Which classical text provides the reference for the
b. Antifungal d. Antipyretic preparation of Rajata Bhasma?
6. Which classical text provides the reference for the a. Charaka Samhita
preparation of Svarna Makshika Bhasma? b. Rasendra Sara Sangraha
a. Rasatarangini c. Rasatarangini
b. Rasendra Sara Sangraha d. Ayurveda Prakasha

----- PAGE 106 -----
Chapter 3 + Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

12. Whatare the primaryingredients usedin the preparation

of Rajata Bhasma according to Rasatarangini?

a, Shuddha Rajata, Shuddha Parada, Shuddha
Gandhaka, Shuddha Hartala.

b. Shuddha Rajata, Shuddha Hingula, Nimbu Svarasa

¢. Shuddha Rajata, Shuddha Suvarna Maksika,
Nimbu Svarasa.

d. Shuddha Rajata, Shuddha Gandhaka, Nimbu
Svarasa.

13.

w

How many Putas are recommended for Rajata Bhasma
preparation according to Rasatarangini?
a. 10 c. 20
b. 14 d. 24
14. Which therapeutic use is NOT mentioned for
Rajata Bhasma?
a. Prameha c. Madatyaya
b. Pitta Roga d. Vata Roga
15. What is the recommended dosage for Rajata Bhasma?
a. 50 mg c. 125mg
b. 100 mg d. 250 mg

16. Which method of preparation for Lauha Bhasma
involves heating with Triphala Kvatha under sunlight?

a. Bhanu Paka c. Putapaka
b. Sthali Paka d. None of the above

17. How many times is the process of evaporating the fluid
repeated in the Bhanu Paka method?

a. 3 times c. 7 times
b. 5 times d. 9 times

18. What is the proportion of Triphala Kvatha to be added
in the Sthali Paka method?
a. 1 part
b. 2 parts

19. How many Putas are recommended in the Putapaka
method for Lauha Bhasma preparation?

c. 3 parts
d. 4 parts

EY / c. 14
b. 10 d. 21
20. Which therapeutic use is NOT mentioned for
Lauha Bhasma?
a. Amavata c. Jvara
b. Shula d. Svasa

21. How is Shuddha Tamra Patra prepared initially in the
preparation of Tamra Bhasma?
a. Grinding c. Svedana (Sudation)
b. Boiling d. Roasting

22. What is the function of Nimbu Rasa in the preparation
of Tamra Bhasma?
a, Grinding agent
b. Anti-inflammatory

c, Sudation
d. None of the above

23, What is the proportion of Shuddha Parada in the
preparation of Tamra Bhasma?
a, 1/4th Part c. 1/2 Part
b. 1 Part d. 1/3rd Part

24. What Is the role of Ghrita in the preparation of
Tamra Bhasma?
a, Grinding agent
b. Heating

25. Which therapeutic use
Tamra Bhasma?
a. Kustha c. Amavata
b. Gulma d. Daha

26. How many times is Shuddha Vanga Jarita subjected
to heating and grinding in the preparation of
Vanga Bhasma?
a. Once c. Three times
b. Twice d. Four times

27. Which ingredient is NOT used in the preparation of
Vanga Bhasma according to the Ayurveda Prakasha
reference?
a. Shuddha

Vanga Jarita

b. Shuddha Haritala d. Kumari Svarasa

28. What is the dosage range for Vanga Bhasma?
a. 62.5 to 125 mg c. 250 to 500 mg
b. 125 to 250 mg d. 500 to 1000 mg

29. Which therapeutic use is NOT mentioned for
Vanga Bhasma?
a. Prameha c. Mukhadushika
b. Garbhasayacyuti d. Raktapradara

30. Which pharmacological action is NOT attributed to
Vanga Bhasma?
a. Anti-inflammatory c. Hematinic
b. Anti-arthritic d. Antipyretic

31. What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation
of Naga Bhasma?
a. Shuddha Haritala c. Kumari Svarasa
b. Jarita Naga d. Gandhaka

32. Howmany timesis Manahshila added in the preparation
of Naga Bhasma from the second Puta onwards?

c. Sudation
d. None of the above
is NOT mentioned for

c. Nimbu Nira

a. 1/2 part c. 1/4 part
b. 1/3 part d. 1/5 part
33. What is the therapeutic use of Naga Bhasma?
a. Kasa c. Atisara
b. Shvasa d. Amlapitta
34, What is the recommended dosage range for

Naga Bhasma?
a, 31,25 to 62.5 mg e
b, 62.5 to 125 mg d.

125 to 250 mg
250 to 500 mg

----- PAGE 107 -----
35

36.

Sie

38.

skh

40.

41.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

48.

94

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter ;

. Which anupana is recommended for enhancing the

absorption and therapeutic efficacy of Naga Bhasma?

a. Guduchi Svarasa c. Brahmi Svarasa

b. Haridra Svarasa d. Triphala Kvatha

What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation

of Yashada Bhasma?

a. Jarita Yashada
Churana

b. Shuddha Haritala d. Kumari Rasa

How is Yashada Bhasma administered?

a. Intravenously ec. Topically

c. Gandhaka

b. Orally d. Sublingually

What is the recommended dosage of Yashada Bhasma?
a. 31.25 mg c. 125mg

b. 62.5 mg d. 250 mg

Which of the following therapeutic uses is NOT
associated with Yashada Bhasma?

a. Grahani c. Kasa

b. Prasveda d. Rajayakshma
Which anupana is recommended for Yashada Bhasma?
a. Guduchi Svarasa c. Brahmi Svarasa

b. Haridra Svarasa d. Trikatu Kashaya

What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation
of Kasisa Bhasma?

a. Shuddha Kasisa c. Shuddha Haritala
b. Gandhaka d. Kumari Rasa
How is Kasisa Bhasma administered?

a. Intravenously ce. Topically

b. Orally d. Sublingually
What is the recommended dosage of Kasisa Bhasma?
a. 31.25 mg c. 125mg

b. 62.5 mg d. 250 mg

. Which of the following therapeutic uses is associated
with Kasisa Bhasma?
a. Kasa d. Arsha
b. Vrana
c. Rajayakshma ©, |)

Which anupana is recommended for Kasisa Bhasma?
a. Guduchi Svarasa c. Bakuchi Churna
b. Haridra Svarasa d. Brahmi Svarasa

What is the primary ingredient used in the preparation
of Shuddha Shilajatu?

a. Triphala Kvatha ce. Shilajatu (Exd.)
b. Hot Water d. Shilajatu (Powder)

What is the role of hot water in the Shodhana process
of Shuddha Shilajatu?

a. To increase solubility ¢. To enhance color

b. To decrease viscosity _ d. To reduce pH

How many parts of hot water are used compared to
Shilajatu in the Shodhana process?

a. 1 Part c. 3 Parts

b. 2 Parts d. 4 Parts

49.

50.

Sis

52.

BEL

54.

55.

56.

EUs

58.

What therapeutic properties are associated wit,
Shudd¢ha Shilajatu?

a. Seclative and hypnotic

b. Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant

c. Antipyretic and analgesic

d. Diuretic and laxative

Which traditional indications are commonly treateg
with Shuddha Shilajatu?

a. Anxiety and depression

b. Cardiovascular diseases

c. Respiratory ailments and urinary disorders

d. Allergic reactions and skin disorders

What is the primary ingredient used in Shuddha
Gandhaka preparation?

a, Godugdha c. Gandhaka

b. Bhringaraja Svarasa d. Iron pan

How is Gandhaka melted during the purification
process?

a. Ina brass vessel

b. Inan iron pan with ghee

c. Inaclay pot

d. Ina steel container

What is added to Gandhaka during Rasa Parpati
preparation for Bhavanas?

a. Godugdha

b. Bhringaraja Svarasa

c. Triphala Kvatha

d. Honey

How many Bhavanas are given to powdered Gandhaka
for Rasa Parpati preparation?

a. lor2 ce. 50r6
b, 3 or 7 d. 8or9
Ans: b

What is the final step after Gandhaka is melted and
poured into Bhringaraja rasa during Rasa Parpati
preparation?

a. Cooling and washing

b. Drying and storing

c. Crushing and grinding

d. Packaging and labeling

What is the primary ingredient used in Shuddha Gairika
preparation?

a. Godugdha ce. Triphala Kvatha
b. Gairika d. Ghee

How many times is the Bhavana procedure performed
during Shodhana of Gairika?

a. Once c. Three times

b. Twice d. Four times

What is used to powder Gairika during the Shodhana
process?

a. Water
b. Ghee

e. Godugdha
d. Khalva

----- PAGE 108 -----
Chapter 3 + Single Drug (Bhasma, Shuddha & Pishti)

59.

60.

6

ray

62.

nN

63.

64.

65.

on

66.

67.

6

9

6

wo

What is the purpose of performing the Bhavana
procedure during Gairika Shodhana?

a. To add colour

b. To remove impurities

c. To enhance fragrance

d. To improve texture

What are the therapeutic properties traditionally

associated with Shuddha Gairika?

a. Respiratory benefits

b. Hemostatic, dermatological, and gastrointestinal
benefits

c. Cardiac benefits

d. Neurological benefits

. What is the primary ingredient used in Shuddha

Kankshi preparation?

a. Bhringaraja Nira c. Triphala Kvatha

b. Kashisha d. Ghee

How many times is the Bhavana procedure performed

during Shodhana of Kankshi?

a. Once c. Three times

b. Twice d. Four times

What is used to powder Kankshi during the Shodhana

process?

a. Water c. Bhringaraja Nira

b. Ghee d. Khalva

What is the purpose of performing the Bhavana

procedure during Kankshi Shodhana?

a. To add color

b. To remove impurities

c. To enhance fragrance

d. To improve texture

What are the therapeutic properties traditionally

associated with Shuddha Kankshi?

a. Cardiovascular benefits

b. Hematinic, hepatoprotective, and dermatological
benefits

c. Respiratory benefits

d. Neurological benefits

What is the primary ingredient of Mukta Pishti?
a. Shuddha Mukta c. Guggulu
b. Gulab Arka d. Saffron

What is the traditional therapeutic use of Mukta Pishti
for bleeding disorders called?

a. Rasa Rakta c. Rakta Pitta

b. Raktaatisara d. Rakta Shodhana
Which Anupana is recommended along with Mukta
Pishti to enhance its efficacy?
a. Milk

b. Water

c. Honey
d. Tea

. What are the therapeutic effects of Mukta Pishti?

a. Antipyretic and analgesic
b. Hemostatic, calming, and cardiac tonic

70.

ui,

2

73.

74,

75%

76.

77.

78.

79;

80.

81.

82.

c. Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory

d. Antimicrobial and antifungal

Where is Mukta Pishti absorbed in the body after oral
administration?

a. Respiratory tract

b. Urinary tract

c. Gastrointestinal tract

d. Circulatory system

What is the primary ingredient of Pravala Pishti?

a. Rose Water c. Gulaba Arka

b. Shuddha Pravala d. Ghee

What is the recommended dose of Pravala Pishti?

a. 100 mg c. 250 mg

b. 500 mg d. 1000 mg

Which of the following therapeutic indications is NOT
associated with Pravala Pishti?

a. Mental weakness c. Heart ailments

b. Skin disorders d. Immune deficiency
What are the properties of Pravala Pishti?

a. Antipyretic and analgesic

b. Antiseptic and diuretic

c. Cooling and cardiac tonic

d. Laxative and sedative

How is Pravala Pishti absorbed in the body after oral
administration?

a. Through the skin

b. Through the respiratory system

c. Through the gastrointestinal tract

d. Through the urinary system

Which mineral is the primary component of
Vajra Bhasma?

a. Gold c. Silver

b. Diamond d. Copper

How many times is Vajra Bhasma subjected to Puta?
a. 10 times c. 14 times

b. 12 times d. 16 times

What is the recommended dose of Vajra Bhasma?
a. 5mg c. 10mg

b. 8mg d. 15 mg

Which condition is NOT among the therapeutic uses of
Vajra Bhasma?

a. Anaemia c. Arthritis

b. Obesity d. Diabetes

What is the suggested Anupana for Vajra Bhasma?

a. Water ce. Honey and Santaika
b. Milk d. Ghee

What is the primary ingredient of Kaparda Bhasma?
a. Shuddha Gandhaka c. Shuddha Haritala
b. Shuddha Kapardika d. Shuddha Vajra
What is the recommended dose of Kaparda Bhasma?
a. 100 mg c. 500 mg

b, 250 mg d. 1000 mg

----- PAGE 109 -----
83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Cis

__Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana = Chapter 3

Which condition is NOT among the therapeutic uses of
Kaparda Bhasma?

a. Tuberculosis c. Ear discharge
b. Diabetes d. Indigestion

What precaution should be taken after preparing
Kaparda Bhasma?

a. Keep it exposed to sunlight for 24 hours
b. Store it in an airtight container

c. Keep itimmersed in water for 24 hours
d. Consume it immediately

Which Anupana is NOT recommended for
Kaparda Bhasma?
a. Vasa Svarasa c. Milk

b. Nimbu Svarasa d. Udumbara Rasa
What is the primary ingredient of Shankha Bhasma?
a. Shuddha Haritala c. Shuddha Manashila
b. Shuddha Sankha d. Shuddha Vajra

Which condition is NOT among the therapeutic uses of
Shankha Bhasma?

a. Indigestion

b. Acidity

c. Rheumatoid arthritis
d. Peptic ulcers

What is the recommended dose range of
Shankha Bhasma?

a. 100-150 mg c. 250-300 mg

b. 200-250 mg d. 400-500 mg

Which Anupana is NOT recommended for

Shankha Bhasma?
a. Nimbu Svarasa c. Milk
b. Triphala Kvatha d. Honey

What is the additional ingredient used in Shankha
Bhasma for preparation?

a. Guduchi Svarasa

b. Kumari Svarasa

c. Ashvagandha Svarasa

d. Brahmi Svarasa

What is the primary ingredient of Shuddha Tankana?
a. Gold c. Borax

b. Copper d. Iron

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

92.

93;

94,

OS.

11.
16.
2
26.
31.
36.
41.
46.
Sul,
56.
61.
66.
Tle
76.
81.
86.
91.

What effect does Shuddha Tankana primarily exert?
a. Antipyretic

b. Mucolytic and expectorant

c. Analgesic

d. Antihistaminic

In which conditions is Shuddha Tankana beneficia|?

a. Skin infections c. Cough and asthm,
b. Digestive disorders d. Hypertension
How is Shuddha Tankana prepared through Shodhana>
a. Boiling in water

b. Roasting over fire

c. Sun-drying

d. Grinding into powder

What is the expected pharmacokinetic behaviour o;
Shuddha Tankana?

a. Rapid metabolism
b. Slow absorption

c. Limited distribution
d. Extensive excretio;

ANSWERS KEYS

a Ds b 35 d 4. c 5. c
b 7. a 8. b 8), c 10. b
c AZ), a 13. b 14. d LS. c
a 17: c 18. b 19. c 20. a
c 225 c 235 a 24. b 25. d
b 27. d 28. b 29. c BO b
b 32: c 33. c 34. bee35- b
a 37. b 38. ¢c 39. c 40. d
a 42. b 43. d 44. b 45. c
c 47. a 48. d 49. b 50. c
c S25 b 53. b 54. b 55. a
b S75 c 58. d 59. b 60. b
b 62. c 63. d 64. b 65. b
a 67. b 68. c 69. b 70. c
b 2 c 3: b 74. c 2S. C
b Wis c 78. b 7S), c 80. c
b 82. b 83. b 84. c 85. c
b 87. c 88. © 89. c gay ob
€ 92. b 93. € 94. bees a5. ©) b

Long Answer Questions (SAQ)

Short note on Pravala Pishti.

Ingridents of Gandhaka Shodhana.
Probable Mode of Action of Rajata Bhasma.
Vanga Bhasma.

Describe Marana and write Svarna Mankshika Bhasma
Describle impotance of Bhasma Pariksha and write
Shatputi Abharka Bhasma.

Write the ingridents, Matra, probable mode of action
of Lauha Bhasma and its research updates.

----- PAGE 110 -----
/ CHAPTER \\

4

4.4 Kharaliya Rasayana

Kharaliya Rasayana is one of the most commonly
utilized Parad Murchchhita Aushadha Vargikarana
formulations in Ayurveda, recommended extensively
across various disease conditions. The formulations that
are prepared in a Kharala (mortar) by triturating until
they attain the chief desired characteristics are known
as Kharaliya Rasayana. It is a common dosage form in
Ayurvedic medicine, containing metals and minerals,
and is widely used in clinical practice. The principles
of Bhavana and Mardana Samskara form the backbone
of Kharaliya Rasayana preparation, ensuring both its
therapeutic efficacy and safety Bhavana, a Samskara
process, alters the original properties of raw drugs,
inducing new ones in the main drugs Mardana and
Bhavana Samskara play a pivotal role in ensuring the
intimate contact of material particles with the liquid
media, facilitating the impregnation of media properties
into the material, and transforming coarse powder into a
finer state to aid further processing. This process results
in unique and suitable physico-chemical changes that
enhance the efficacy of the material. The Mardana and
Bhavana processes thus contribute significantly to the
production of quality medicines, particularly Kharaliya
Rasayana. Kharaliya Rasayana, prepared in classical
ways, is both safe and effective for clinical practice in
therapeutic doses.

UNIQUE FEATURES
1. Prolonged Self Life
2. Increase Therapeutic Efficacy
3. Decrease Dosage
4. Decrease Duration of Treatment.
SELF LIFE
According to Drug and Cosmetic Rules Rule No. B
% Rasayoga containing Kaushthaushadhi along with
Rasa/ Uparasa etc. 5 Years

AUSHADHI KALPA - I
(COMPOUND FORMULATIONS)

+ Rasayoga Containing only Rasa, Uparasa etc.
10 Years

 Rasayoga containing Naga, Vanga and Tamra
bhasma — 5 Years

4.1.4 Arogyavardhini Gutika

Reference: A.FI.-I, Rasayoga, 20:4, R.R.S. Visarpa
Chi. 20/106

TATA MAAY AT AAT |

farnent fequr vieer frqorer feretsig |

Agia Ua faayei a aA

farat Hae aT Hes GV AeA: 11
Prageagemntiridtietetartata |

AAT lear rat UstehleHATAT UI

AMM STATA TAHT,
eat UBiet aa vat WT set BAT

(R.R.S. Visarpa Chi., 20/106-112)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part
Lauha Bhasma - 1 Part
Abhraka Bhasma = 1 Part
Tamra Bhasma = 1 Part
Haritaki P. 2 Parts
Bibhitaki P. 2 Parts
Amalaki > 2 Parts
Shuddha Shilajatu - 3 Parts

----- PAGE 111 -----
ee

Shuddha Guggulu = 4 Parts

Eranda Rt. 4 Parts

Katuki Rt. 22 Parts
QS. (2 Days)

Nimba Svarasa (For Mardana) Lf.

Procedure:
1. Collect all the ingridents of Arogyavardhini Gutika.
2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha Parada

and Suddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva Yantra).

3, Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to
ensure uniform mixing.

4. Add an appropriate quantity ©
Svarasa and continue triturate for two days.

5. Shape the mixture into pills the size of a big Badara
Phala (Raja Kola). However, Arogya Vardhini
Gutikas are usually prepared to weigh 3 Ratti each.

6. Dry the pills in the shade.

7. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.

Dose: 250-500 mg.

Anupana: Ardaraka Svarasa, Honey, Nimba Svarasa,

Water, Milk.

Indications:

Yakrit Vikara.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Detoxification and Purification: Haritaki, Bibhitaki,
and Amalaki, which help in eliminating toxins
from the body. This purification process aids in
the management of various disorders by removing
accumulated wastes and improving metabolic
functions.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of ingredients
in Arogyavardhini Gutika exhibits significant
anti-inflammatory properties. This helps in
reducing inflammation associated with conditions

f Nimba Patra

Jirnajvara, Medo Dosha, Kushtha,

RESEARCH UPDATES

Santosh Pal, PG Scholar, PG
Department of Dravyaguna
Vigyana, National Institute of
Ayurveda, Jaipur, (Raj) India

Arogyavardhini Vati: A
Theoritical Analysis

Dr. Gururaj S. Varnale, As-
sistant Professor, Department
of Rasashastra and Bhaisha-
jya Kalpana, Dhanwantari
Ayurved Medical College, Udgir
MHA, India

Role of Efficacy of Aro-
gyavardhinivati in Gas-
trointestinal Disorders

ara (chronic fever), Medo Dosh
disorders), and Kushtha ia,
ing relief from pain and sWellin,.

such as Jirnajy:
(fat metabolism

disorders), provid
immunomodulatory: Shuddha Parada and Shuda),
Gandhaka contribute to the immunomodulato,
effects of the formulation. They help in enhancin,
the body’s immune response, thereby aiding jn the

management of various infections and au toimmun,

disorders.

Hepatoprotective: Arogyavardhini Gutika Suppor
liver health and functionlt helps in Managin
Yakrit Vikara (liver disorders) by promoting ie
of hepatic cells, improving |i,

regeneration
protecting the liver from damay,

function, and
caused by toxins and free radicals.

Metabolic Regulation: The inclusion of Eranda a,
Katuki roots helps regulate metabolism, especia| :
fat metabolism. This can be beneficial in conditig,
related to lipid metabolism disorders and obesity

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: The active constituents

Arogyavardhini Gutika are absorbed primarily ;,
the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration

2. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal compoun;
undergo metabolism in the liver, where they m
be transformed into active metabolites or excrete;
as waste products.

3. Distribution: The metabolites and active compound
are distributed throughout the body via th;
bloodstream, reaching target organs such as th
liver, skin, and immune system.

4. Elimination: Any unutilized constituents
metabolites are primarily eliminated through urin:
and feces. The duration of action and eliminatio:
half-life may vary depending on the specifi
ingredients and individual factors.

Arogyavardhini vati harmonizes the three Doshas, detoxifies the live
aids in fatty liver conditions, and promotes a healthy digestive systen
without significant toxic effects. It facilitates assimilation of exces
oily substances, aids in liquid digestion, and reduces adipose ts
oiliness. To ensure efficacy, it should be taken with various adju
but self-medication must be avoided to prevent potential adves:
effects.

The study finds that Arogyavardhini vati enhances digestion, pr
nutrient absorption, balances body fats, and detoxifies without ('
effects on vital organs. It harmonizes Doshas, supports liver funct”
and sustains digestive health. Ingredients like Tamra bhasma bo
enzyme release, and Chitraka aids digestion. Arogyavardhin
regulates gastrointestinal processes for healing.

----- PAGE 112 -----
Clinical Study of Arog-
yavardhini Compound
and Lifestyle Modifica-
tion i) Management of
Metabolic Syndrome

Clinical Trial

A Double Blind Placebo
Controlled Randomized

Bharatkumar Ch hagan
bhai Padhar
Department of Kayachikitsa,
National Institute of Ayurveda,
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India

yavardhini Vati and
Phalatrikadi Kvatha
in Non-Alcoholic
Fatty Liver Disease —
Case Studies

The Effect of Arog-

Ashok Kumar Panda, Research
Officer, Department of Clinical
Research, National Institute of
Ayurveda Drug Development,
Kolkota, CCRAS, Ministry of
AYUSH, Government of

India.

S|

Seventy-five patients were randon
recelved lifestyle modification alo
modification along with Aro
Thirty-five patients completed each
lifestyle modification alone redu
serum triglycerides by 5.81%, and sys
while increasing fasting blood sugar
receiving Arogyavardhini comp
3.06%, 18.03%, and 6.89% in th

the combined treatment was more et
syndrome.
es

Arogyavardhini vati and Phalatrikadi kvatha were used to treat two
cases of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in a male and a female
patient over 12 weeks, Tests were conducted at baseline and at 4,
8, and 12 weeks, showing no side effects and normal liver function,
hematology, renal function, and cholesterol levels. Liver enzymes and
echogenicity returned to normal by the end of treatment. _

Conceptual study of
Arogyavardhini Vati

ar, PG Department of Rasasha-
tra and Bhaishajya Kalpana.

Vrushali Dipak Ghule, PG Schol-

ing Information and literature

ized in|

This study aims to consolidate existi ,
on the classical formulation “Arogyavarddhini Vati.” Recogn
the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, it is deemed safe and efficacious
for treating hyperlipidemia, ear discharge, and exhibiting
hepatoprotective and antioxidant properties. Additionally, it finds
utility in conditions such as jaundice, skin disorders, fevers, edema,
indigestion, and obesity. This article will provide a comprehensive
review of “Arogyavardhini Vati.”

Quality Control Param-
eters of Arogyavardhini
Rasa Prepared by
Classical Method

Yuga Raj Sapkota, Ph.D. (Ayu.)
Scholar, Dept. of Rasashastra &
Bhaishajya Kalpana, |.P.G.T. &
R.A., Gujarat Ayurved Univer-
sity, Jamnagar-361008,
Gujarat, India

The study evaluated the quality control parameters of
Arogyavardhini Rasa using one pilot and three main batches as per
Rasaratnasamucchaya, It analyzed physicochemical parameters,
functional groups, chromatography, and elemental estimation.
Results indicated that 2500 ml Svarasa was needed from 506 gms of
powdered raw drugs, yielding 605 gm with % yield of 119.56% and %
weight gain of 19.56%. Functional groups and HPTLC revealed 11 and
8 bands at 254 nm and 366 nm. Consistency across batches suggests
a standardized manufacturing process based on pharmaceutical
processes, physicochemical tests, and HPTLC profile.

A Literature Review of
Arogyavardhini Vati

Dr. Shivraj Singh, P.G. Scholar,
Madan Mohan Malviya Govt.
Ayurveda College, Udaipur
(Raj.) India.

Arogyavardhini Vati, a popular Ayurvedic remedy, effectively manages
various conditions: Its Kapha-Pitta Shamaka and Shothakara properties
treat skin diseases like Kushta and Mukhdushika. Vatanulomaka
and Rechana actions alleviate constipation (Malavashtambha).
Arogyavarddhini Vati reduces weight by eliminating Ama and waste
products from the body, addressing Medoroga. It efficiently manages
Annavaha Strotas disorders, including anorexia, by balancing Vata,
Pitta, and Kapha and enhancing digestion. Properties like Dipana,
Pachana, Pathya, Tridoshashamaka and Strotoshodhaka alleviate
symptoms of anaemia.

dardization and Physi-
cochemical Analysis of
Arogyavardhini Vati

Pharmaceutical Stan- _ | Dasi Padmaja, Assistant Profes-

sor & PhD Scholar, Dept. of
Kaya Chikitsa, Dr. NRS Govt.
Ayurvedic College, Vijayawada,
Andhra Pradesh, India

Arogyavardhini Gutika Results ’
Description— Black coloured round shaped tablet with beveled edges
Uniformity of weight— 96.63% to 104.7%

Disintegration time— 11min 48 sec

Total ash— 15.73% w/w

Acid insoluble ash - 5.197% w/w

Loss on drying at 105°C— 10.32% w/w

Water Soluble Extractive(WSE)— 34.78% w/w

Alcohol Soluble Extractive(ASE)— 37.55% w/w

Hardness— 2.4kg/cm?

----- PAGE 113 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter,

100

4.1.8 Kumara Kalyana Rasa

Reference: A.F1.-I, Rasayoga, 20:9, B.R. Balaroga
faat diftash ta catarat eatery

ararad wred Hatqerttat act

afeat afar at aatsarmt fafaet a1

efitor farrar ara arty fafratsraa |

TH: HAHN ATA APTA: I

(BR. Balaroga, 71/119-122)

INGREDIENTS USED

Rasa Sindura - 1 Part

Mauktika Bhasma = 1 Part

Hema Bhasma = 1 Part

Abharaka = 1 Part

Lauha Bhasma - 1 Part

Makshika Bhasma = 1 Part

Kumari Rasa Uf. Q.S. Mardana
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingridents of Kumara Kalyana Rasa.

2. Take Rasa sindura triturating properly by

Khalva Yantra.
3. Add the rest of the ingredients and mix well to

6.

ensure uniform mixing.

. Add an appropriate quantity of Kumari and

continue triturate until it becomes suitable for
making tablets or pills, then roll it in tablets
or pills.

. Shape the mixture into pills the size of a monga (62.5

mg). However, Kumara Kalyana Rasa are usually
prepared to weight 1/2 Ratti each.
Dry the pills in the shade and store it.

Dose: 62.5 mg.

Anupana: Milk, Honey, Sita.

Indications: Bala Roga, Atisara, Kamala, Jvara, Kasa,
Shvasa, Phakka Roga, Parigarbhika Roga, Stanyadvesha,
Graha Dosha, Krishata, Agni Vikriti.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

ih

Antipyretic and Immunomodulatory: Kumara Kalyana
Rasa contains ingredients like Rasa Sindura and
Hema Bhasma, which possess antipyretic properties.
These components help in reducing fever (Jvara)

. Res

. Obstetric

. Elimination:

by lowering body temperature. Additionally
j Ig

formulation may exert immunomodulatory effec,

enhancing, the body’s defense mechanisms aBaing

infections.

Hepatoprotective: The inclusion of Mauktika Bhasm,
2 a

and Abhraka contributes to the hepatoprotecty,
properties of Kumara Kalyana Rasa. This cay be
beneficial in managing liver disorders such ‘
Kamala (jaundice) by promoting liver health ang
improving liver function.

piratory Support: Kumara Kalyana Rasa 7
indicated for conditions like Kasa (cough) an
Shvasa (breathlessness), suggesting its Potent,
respiratory support properties. It may help allle.
viate respiratory symptoms and improve lunp

function.

_ Gastrointestinal Benefits: The formulation is bene.

ficial in addressing gastrointestinal disorders |jj.,
Atisara (diarrhea) and Phakka Roga (indigestion)
It may help regulate bowel movements, reduc,
diarrhea episodes, and improve digestive function,
and Gynecological Support: Kuma,
Kalyana Rasa is indicated for Parigarbhika Ro»,
(disorders during pregnancy) and Stanyadvesh;
(aversion to breast feeding). It may help manay,
complications associated with pregnancy anj
lactation, ensuring maternal and fetal well-being.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The bioavailability of the active

constituents in Kumara Kalyana Rasa may van
depending on their solubility and formulation
Oral administration facilitates the absorption of the
ingredients through the gastrointestinal tract.

. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal and miners!

components undergo metabolism in the liver and
other tissues. They may be converted into activ:
metabolites or excreted as waste products.

. Distribution: The active compounds are distributed

throughout the body via the bloodstream, reaching
target organs suchas the liver, lungs, gastrointestinal
tract, and reproductive system.

Any unutilized constituents 0!
metabolites are primarily eliminated through unne
and feces. The duration of action and eliminatio"
half-life may vary based on individual factors an!
the specific ingredients in the formulation.

----- PAGE 114 -----
Chapter 4 + Aushadhi Kalpa - 1 (Compound Formulations)

RESEARCH UPDATES

Ayurveda
Properties and
Therapeutics
Importance of
Kumarkalyan
Rasa

ita Nantel
No, | Article Name |

Vd Sangeeta
Vidhale (Rithe)
Associate Professor

and H.0,D. Kaumarb-
hritya, MUPS Ayurved

College Risod, Dist.
Washim, India,

Role of Kumar
Kalyana Rasa
and Sitopala-
di Churna

in Children’s
Development

ES

Meena Rekhraj, Prof.
&H.0.D., Dept. of
Sharir Kriya, M.M.M,
Govt., Ayurveda
College, Udaipur,
Rajasthan, India

=
Kumarakalyana Rasa, an Ayurvedic medicine for children, effectiy
problems, cough, jaundice, fever, diarrhea, and digestive Issues. |
Sindura, Moti Pishti, Svarna Bhasma, Abhraka Bhasma, Lauha Bhasma, i
Makshika Bhasma, This formulation provides Immune-stimulatory, adaptogenic, and
Rasayana effects, offering antitussive, anti-asthmatic, antibacterial, and digestive
stimulant effects, It pacifies Tridoshas, enhances Rasa, Rakta, Asthi, and Maja, benefiting
conditions like anaemia, rickets, diarrhea, and respiratory diseases, while also boosting
Mental strength,

The study Included 12 children selected from the O.P.D, and 1.P.D. of Vd. Prem Shankar
Ayurveda Hospital, Colleges Campus, and M.M.M. Government Ayurved College,
Udaipur. Kumara Kalyana Rasa and Sitopaladi Churna were administered at a dosage of
1-2 grams twice dally with honey before meals for three months. Follow-up occurred
every 15 days. Baseline assessment was conducted after selecting children based on
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Results Indicate that oral consumption of Kumara
Kalyana Rasa and Sitopaladi Churna with honey improves digestion, immunity, and
overall growth.

4.1.c Garbhapala Rasa

Reference: A.F.1.-II, Rasayoga, 16:14, R.T.Sa.Part I, 140

qh HUST Tel Gat ATH: |
quar yaa va autel cera a1
wale Wedeaert Papa a
ISAT SF Stes Gases asta I |
TAVITA AAMT A
aftoittrrened aioe: Ba:

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Hingula
Naga Bhasma
Vanga Bhasma
Tvak

Tejapatra

Ela

Shunthi

Maricha

Pippali
Dhanyaka
Krishna Jiraka
Chavya

Mridvika
Devadaru

Lauha Bhasma
Aparajita Svarasa

Procedure:

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for
Garbhapala Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is clean

(Rasachandashu, p. 614/667-640)

St.
Uf.
Sd.
Rz.
Fr.
Fr.
Fr.
Fr.
St.
Or.
Ht.

Bk.

Wd.

Pl.

and free from impurities.

. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) or a grinder, grind each ingredients from
Tvak to Devadaru separately into a fine powder.

. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

. Combine all the filtered powders and remaining
drugs together in a clean, dry container. Mix
thoroughly to ensure a uniform blend of all
ingredients.

. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

. Adding Aparajita Svarasa and triturate well, until
it becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then

12
a oa roll it into tablets or pills.
12. gms 7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
12 gms for several hours to days until the material is
12 gms completely dry.
12 gms 8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
12 gms final product is called Garbhapala Rasa.
12 gms 9. Store the Garbhapala Rasa in a clean, dry, airtight
azeInS container to preserve its potency.
ae Dose: 125 — 250 mg.
12 gms
ane Anupana: Draksha Jala (Take 30 gms Draksha amd grind
12.gms it in 120 gm of water for obtaining Draksha Jala).
12 gms Indications: Garbhapata, Grabhasrava, Grabhini
6 gms Roga, Pradara, Shula, Vibandha, Siro Roga, Chhardi,
Q.S.(Mardanafor  Agnimandya.
7 days)

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Abortifacient and Uterotonic: Garbhapala Rasa
contains ingredients like Shuddha Hingula, Naga
Bhasma, and Vanga Bhasma, known for their
abortifacient properties. These components help

----- PAGE 115 -----
102

TAh SS
Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter g

in inducing abortion (Garbhapata) and promoting
uterine contractions. The formulation may also
address conditions like Grabhasrava (excessive
vaginal discharge) and Grabhini Roga (disorders of
pregnancy).

- Digestive Stimulant: Herbs like Shunthi, Maricha,

PHARMACOKINETICS :
1. Absorption: The bioavailability of Garbhapa),

Rasa’s constituents depends on their solubility
and formulation. Oral administration facilitate,
absorption through the gastrointestinal tract.

_ Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal and miner,

Pippali, and Dhanyaka in Garbhapala Rasa act as
digestive stimulants. They help improve digestion
(Agnimandya), alleviate abdominal pain (Shula),
and relieve constipation (Vibandha).

- Antiemetic: Garbhapala Rasa may possess antiemetic
properties attributed to ingredients like Shunthi target organs such as the uterus, gastrointesting|

- Anti-inflammatory: The formulation may exhibit “a Fllmigaue a ie ee fone. ee
anti-inflammatory effects due to the presence of Pear ates ate Py are d eli s ae
herbs like Chavya and Devadaru. This action can and Sees. vite ees of ee eae
be beneficial in managing conditions like Siro Roga wells ey ee ee Woon a
(headaches) by reducing inflammation. the specific ingredients in °

components undergo metabolism in the liver and
other tissues. They may be metabolized into actiy,
compounds or excreted as waste products.

3. Distribution: The active compounds are distributeg
throughout the body via the bloodstream, Teaching

|
I

RESEARCH UPDATES

| __AuthorName | A Dane Rye Resulteei erin

Dr. Deepa Mishra IIC &| Thirty-six parturient women received ‘Garbhpala Rasa’ from the first trimester to
Lecturer; Department | the 8th month or from the second trimester until the last month of gestation. Cord
of Prasuti & Stri roga, | blood sampling was conducted for metal determination, alongside hematological and
A& UTibbia College | biochemical tests initially and in the last month of gestation. Normal blood parameters
and Hospital, Govt. indicated the drug’s non-toxic nature. Mercury (Hg) and lead (Pb) levels in maternal
of NCT of Delhi Karol _| serum were 8.78 ppm and 13.44 vg/dl, respectively. Among those who stopped the
Bagh, New Delhi. drug one month before delivery, umbilical cord blood showed Hg and Pb levels of
2.45 ppm and 10.101 ug/dl. Pregnant women who continued ‘Garbhapala Rasa’ until
delivery had levels of 4.92 ppm and 11.14 vg/dl, respectively. Despite detecting Hg and
Pb in both maternal and umbilical cord blood, levels were well below permissible limits.

Clinical study

of Garbhapala
Rasa for Metals
Determination,
Biochemical and
Hematological
Profiling Infeto-
Maternal Serum

q)

Effect of
‘Garbhpal Rasa’
on Pregnancy
Induced
Nausea &
Vomiting (NVP)

Dr. Deepa Mishra lIC &
Lecturer; Department
of Prasuti & Stri roga,
A & UTibbia College
and Hospital, Govt.

of NCT of Delhi Karol
Bagh, New Delhi.

Acharekar Gandhali,
M.S. Ayu(Prasutitantra
Streerog), Associate
Professor, B.R. Harne
Ayurved College,
Karav, Vangani,
Badalapur, Thane,
MHA, India

Shree
Dhootapapeshwar
Ayurvedic Research
Foundation, Panvel,
Raigad-410206,
Maharashtra.

Ninety-four pregnant women were divided into two groups: 55 received 120 mg twice
daily of ‘Garbhpala Rasa’ with folic acid, while 39 received folic acid only. The study
aimed to evaluate ‘Garbhpala Rasa’ efficacy in reducing pregnancy-related nausea and
vomiting, assessing subjective symptoms and hematological/biochemical parameters.
Promising results were observed in the ‘Garbhapala Rasa’ group.

Controlled
clinical Study

to Evaluate
Protective Role
of Garbhapalras
in Garbhini
Avastha.

In this study, 100 pregnant women beyond 20 weeks’ gestation were included. They
underwent assessment of various Parameters, including haematological, biochemical,
and ultrasonography measures like FL/AC ratio, fetal weight, AFI, and Umbilical artery
S/D ratio. Administration of Garbhapala Rasa at 125 mg BID with milk showed safe
haematological and biochemical profiles. The trial group demonstrated improved
hemoglobin levels. Garbhapala Rasa, with its Properties enhancing metabolism,

facilitated the production of high-quality Aahara rasa, supporting the generation of
essential Dhatu and Upadhatu in pregnant women.

Acute Oral
Toxicity Study
of Garbhapala
Rasa in Mice

The study aimed to evaluate the acute toxicity of Garbhapala Rasa in mice by
administering it orally at 10 times the therapeutic dose. Over 48 hours, there were
No instances of mortality or adverse effects observed, indicating its non-toxic nature.
Additionally, no abnormal behaviour, physical changes, or organ abnormalities were

noted. This confirms the safety of Garbhapala Rasa, even at higher doses, in mice.

----- PAGE 116 -----
Chapter 4» Aushadhi Kajpa -l (Compound Formulations) — SSS “403.
4.1.0 Chandra i
prabha Vati
Reference: A.F.1.-I, Vati Gutika, 12: 10, Sha.Sa.M Sarji Kshara = 3 gms
GSU Fa Tet YPTanyTETTaT | : pie Se - vit
AREUGIEKU frasitqafara auvareala Lavana - m:
— “ole ier rer it vias RE - 4 3.gms
ag I | Trivrita Rt. 12 gms
ig at at AVAL Danti Rt. 12 gms
uatts erroTeT ATA Welsh SAT gu: | Tejapatra Uf 12 gms
frqqritaadh @ iter ae Tvaka St. Bk. 12 gms
wees MATT Sales afer Ela Sd. = gms
fad eacile ms
ee eres areal Lea Se pais
uted EQ aS ss 7 seems
sR SE aaa UT Shilajatu = 96 gms
: ee | Guggulu Exd, 96 gms
weer fae Peg yaaa aT
Procedure:

1.

Take all the required dried ingredients for
Chandraprabha Vati. Ensure each ingredient is
clean and free from impurities.

zat tart St — 2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
aa S Sal Best) or a grinder, grind each ingredients from
Gat seta etary Peles Tar 1 Chandraprabha to sita separately into a fine powder.
ag fart ah eae Seat gen Tart | 3. Take a vessel add shuddha guggulu and water.
SUNT HUT UG: facta During heat guggulu is melted.

4. Add remaining ingredients and pounding properly
INGREDIENTSIUSED until it becomes suitable for making tablets or pills,
then roll it into tablets or pills.

5. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven

(Sha.S.M.K., 7/40-49)

Chandraprabha Sub. Ext. 3 gms for several hours to days until the material is
Vacha Rz. 3 gms completely dry.

Musta Rz. 3 gms 6. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
Kiratatikta Pl. 3 gms final product is called Chandraprabha Vati.

Suceeit S& Some 7. Store the Chandraprabha Vati ina clean, dry, airtight
pepoatl GusWas Sigur container to preserve its potency.

Hands Res 26m Dose: 250- 500 mg

Ativisha Rt. Tr. 3 gms ti p

_ a a ene Anupana: Water, Milk, Gungily Powder.

Pippali Rt. Same Indications: Vibandha, Anaha, Shula, Granthi, Pandu,
cee Rt. 3ems Kamala, Mutrakrichchhra, Prameha, Ashmari, Arsha,
ohantale ee Fem Arbuda, Mutraghata, Antra Vriddhi, Kandu, Pliha
Rene > Aq Roga, Bhagandara Roga, Danta Roga, Netra Roga,
aaa 2 Sanne Aruchi, Mandagni, Striroga, Artava Ruja, Shukra
a > 3 gms Dosha, Daurbalya.

Chavya St. 3 gms PHARMACODYNAMICS

Vidanga Fr. 3 gms 1. DiureticandLithotriptic: Chandraprabha Vaticontains
Gajapippali Fr. 3 gms herbs like Gokshura, Musta, and Daruharidra
Shunthi Rz. 3gms known for their diuretic properties, aiding in
Maricha Fr. 3 gms the elimination of urinary stones (Ashmari) and
Pippali Fr. 3. gms addressing urinary disorders (Mutrakrichchhra).
Maksika Bhasma = 3 gms It also acts as a lithotriptic, breaking down

Yava Kshara Pl. 3.gms kidney stones.

----- PAGE 117 -----
104

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter ¢

2. Anti-inflammatory and Analgesic: Ingredients such
as Haridra, Ativisha, and Devadaru possess anti-
inflammatory and analgesic properties, providing
relief from pain (Shula) and inflammation
associated with conditions like arthritis and urinary
tract infections.

3. Antimicrobial: Herbs like Chitraka, Pippali, and
Guduchi exhibit antimicrobial effects, helping
combat infections in the urinary tract and
reproductive system, thereby alleviating symptoms
of conditions like Prameha (diabetes) and Vibandha
(constipation).

gastrointestinal tract upon oral administration, The
absorption rate may vary based on the individuay.,
gastrointestinal health and other factors.

. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the active constituent,

undergo metabolism primarily in the liver. The
metabolism of herbal compounds may iNVolve
various enzymatic processes, leading to the
formation of metabolites with therapeutic activity,

. Distribution: The active ingredients are distributeg

throughout the body via the bloodstream, Teaching
target organs such as the kidneys, liver, and reproduc.

tive system The distribution process determines the
extent of the formulation’s therapeutic effects.
Elimination: Any unutilized
metabolites are primarily eliminated through urine
and feces. The duration of action and elimination
half-life may vary based on individual factors anq
the specific ingredients in the formulation. Regular
intake is often required to maintain therapeutic
levels in the body.

4. Hepatoprotective: Chandraprabha Vati’s formula-
tion, including herbs like Amalaki and Darvi, may
have hepatoprotective properties, protecting the 4.
liver from damage and improving its function. This
action is beneficial in managing liver disorders like
Pandu (anaemia) and Kamala (jaundice).

constituents 6;

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The herbal and mineral components
of Chandraprabha Vati are absorbed through the

RESEARCH UPDATES

Poornasri Jagani,

2nd year PG Scholar,
Department of
Kayachikitsa, Sri
Jayendra Saraswathi
Ayurveda College

and Hospital,
Nazarathpet, Chennai,
Tamilnadu, India

Pranaashini for its ability to treat various diseases. This article discusses 11 formulations
of Chandraprabha Vat, with different variations mentioned in various texts. Ingredients
vary across references, with some including Guduchi and others mentioning Karpura
or Shatavari. Its composition typically includes Katu, Tikta, Kashaya, and Madhura
Rasa, with effects mainly targeting urinary and genital systems. Chandraprabha Vat is
primarily prescribed for Prameha, although it also finds application in conditions like
Svitra Kushtha and Jvara according to different texts.

Review on

Chandraprabha
Vati—An
Ayurvedic
Formulation

Sushama.B,
Department of
Dravyaguna, Institute
for Post Graduate
Teaching and Research
in Ayurveda, Gujarat
Ayurveda University,
Jamnagar-361008,
Gujarat, India

Pharmaco-
Therapeutic
Profiles of Chan-
draprabhavati—
An Ayurvedic
Herbo-Mineral
Formulation

Chandraprabha Vati contains alkaline substances reducing urine acidity. Pippalimula|
and Vacha act as sedatives, aiding in managing hypertension, diabetes, and obesity.
Trikatu, Chavya, Musta, Elavaluka, Lavanas, and Ksharas relieve Mandagni, preventing
diabetic neuropathy and retinopathy. It addresses urinary issues like Mutraghata,
Mutrakrichhra, and Ashmari, and has anti-inflammatory properties benefiting
conditions like cystitis, BPH, and epididymitis. It acts as an analgesic for dysmenorrhea
and lumbago, promotes spermatogenesis, and boosts immunity with Triphala and
Guduchi. Chandraprabha Vati also protects the liver, acts as a hematopoietic agent,

and is suitable for hypertension and diabetes Management due to low salt and sugar
content per tablet.

This observational study aimed to assess the safety of Chandraprabha Vati, reviewing
dose-related adverse effects. Data from hospital records surveyed prescription
patterns and adverse reactions. Oral doses of 500-1000 me/day over 1-4 months

showed no serious adverse reactions or toxicity symptoms, indicating Chandraprabha
Vati’s safety within prescribed limits.

Observations on
Clinical Safety of
Chandraprabha
Vati-An
Ayurvedic
Metallo-

Herbo Mineral

AK Tripathi, 1
Dhanwantary
Ayurvedic College,
Sector 40B,
Chandigarh

Formulation

----- PAGE 118 -----
aera Ah lL ee
Chapter 4 + Aushadhi Kalpa -/ (Compound Formulations)

Evaluation of
Pharmacological
Activity of
Chadraprabha
Vati on Serum
of Albino Wistar
Strain Rats

V. Palanivel,
Department of
Pharmacology,
Mahathi College

of Pharmacy,
Madanapalle, Andhra
Pradesh, India

{| _—__—t

5. | Antidiabetic
Activity of
Chandraprabha
vati-A classical
Ayurvedic
Formulation

Quality Control

draprabha Vati

Studies on Chan-

Manish M. Wanjari,
National Research
Institute for
Ayurveda—Siddha
Human Resource
Development, Gwalior
474009, Madhya q
Pradesh, India

R.P. Saralla, Centre for
Advanced Research
in Indian System of
Medicine (CARISM),
SASTRA University,
Thanjavur, Tamil
Nadu, India.

The study aimed to assess the acute and sub-acute toxicity profiles of certain Ayurvedic
Bhasma, focusing on potential side effects from heavy metal presence. Chandraprabha
Vati pills were converted Into liquid form, administered to rats at doses of 50 and
500 mg/kg for 28 days. Doses were calculated based on human equivalents and given
orally, with blood collected on days 7, 14, and 28 for histopathological analysis post-
Sacrifice,

The study aimed to investigate Chandraprabha Vati's effects on experimentally-
induced hyperglycemia and lipid profile alterations. Fifty-five Wistar rats were used,
administered graded doses of Chandraprabha Vati orally for 7 days. Chandraprabha
Vati normalized impaired glucose tolerance and significantly reduced plasma glucose
levels in alloxan-hyperglycemic rats, along with lowering cholesterol and triglycerides.
Effects were comparable to metformin. These findings suggest Chandraprabha Vati's
potential as an anti-hyperglycemic agent and for correcting Prameha in clinical settings.

This study compares the quality of Chandraprabha Vati from market sources with an in-
house preparation following Vaidya Yoga Ratnavali standards. It assesses macroscopic
and microscopic features, HPTLC and GC-MS profiles, as well as parameters like
hardness, weight uniformity, disintegration time, physicochemical constants, heavy
Metal content, and microbial load. These findings aid in establishing standards for this
Ayurvedic drug and improving the quality of Ayurvedic preparations.

4.1.6 Pravala Panchamrita Rasa

Reference: A.F.I.-II, Rasayoga, 16:37, B.R.Gulma

Wate dea, avsres fara ye aaa asa |
ug faceratagtiaet a ager Tae farteRTs | A,

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Mukta Bhasma
Shankha Bhasma
Muktasukti Bhasma
Kapardika Bhasma
Pravala Bhasma
Arka Dugdha

Procedure:

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for Pravala
Panchamrita Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is clean

and free from im

(B.R., Gulma Roga,

, 32/139-143)

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) and mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

. Adding Arka Dugdha and triturate well, until it

becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then

roll it into tablets or pills.

Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven

for several hours to days until the material is

completely dry.

. Store the Pravala Panchamrita Rasa in a clean, dry,
airtight container to preserve its potency.

Dose: 250 mg.

Indications: Anaha, Gulma, Udara roga, Pliha Roga,

Kasa, Svasa, Agnimandya, Ajirna, Grahani, Atisara,

Hridroga.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1, Antacid and Digestive: Pravala Panchamrita Rasa,
with ingredients like Mukta Bhasma and Sankha

= a Bhasma, acts as an antacid, neutralizing excess
x i Part stomach acidIt aids in digestion by promoting the
= 1 Part secretion of digestive enzymes and improving
= 3 Parts gastrointestinal motility, making it effective in
Lf 7 Parts for Mardana treating conditions like Ajirna (indigestion) and

purities.

Grahani (irritable bowel syndrome).

2. Anti-inflammatory: The formulation contains
Pravala Bhasma, known for its anti-inflammatory
properties. It helps alleviate inflammation
associated with gastrointestinal disorders such

----- PAGE 119 -----
108 = Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter

as Udara roga (abdominal diseases), Pliha Roga and Shankha Bhasma are likely absorbed jj th
(spleen disorders), and Hridroga (heart diseases). gastrointestinal tract.

3. Carminative: Pravala Panchamrita Rasa has 2. Metabolism: Upon absorption, the Eomstituen ‘
carminative properties due to the presence of undergo metabolism ee Ee the live,
Kapardika Bhasma and Muktasukti Bhasma, Metabolic processes may invo a en Sf
which help relieve flatulence and abdominal minerals into bioactive forms an : oom
distension (Anaha) by expelling gas from the of herbal constituents into metabolites wig,
gastrointestinal tract. therapeutic effects. ;

4. Expectorant: The Arka Dugdha (milk of Calotropis 3. Distribution: The active ingredients are distributeg
procera) used for Mardana in this formulation may via the bloodstream to target organs such as the
act as an expectorant, helping to expel mucus and stomach, intestines, spleen, and lungs, where they
phlegm from the respiratory tract. This property is exert their pharmacological effects.
beneficial in managing respiratory conditions like 4, Elimination: Any unutilized constituents 9,
Kasa (cough) and Shvasa (asthma). metabolites are eliminated primarily through uring

PHARMACOKINETICS and feces. The duration of action and elimination

1. Absorption: The bioavailability of — Pravala half-life may vary based on individual factors ang

the specific ingredients in the formulation. Regular

Panchamri ‘ i i i intai
amrita Rasa’s constituents depends on their intake is often required to maintain therapeutic

solubility and the presence of other ingredients that (age eRRIet ody
may enhance or inhibit absorption. Mukta Bhasma oa y

RESEARCH UPDATES

I
I

ae soa RET
Usha Saaces professor Beals PanhaRiAes Rasa, campused of ingredients from the Shuddha Varga,
Panchamrita Rasa: | P.G. Department serves as a potent supplement for calcium deficiency. Its superior absorption and
A Natural Calcium | of Rasa Shastra & assimilation make it advantageous over synthetic calcium supplements. Unlike)
Supplement Bhaishajya Kalpana, synthetic alternatives, it retains efficacy regardless of gastrointestinal health,
Uttarakhand Ayurved making it beneficial for various disease conditions at therapeutic doses.
University, Rishikul
Campus, Haridwar,
Uttarakhand, India

Role of Praval Usha Sharma, Professor, | Thirty subjects aged 21-40, clinically diagnosed with Amlapitta, were randomly
Panchamrita in P.G. Department selected from our O.P.D. Exclusion criteria included hematemesis, bleeding ulcers,
Amlapitta of Rasa Shastra & pregnancy, and major systemic disorders. Administered at 1 tab bd for 30 days,

Bhaishajya Kalpana, Pravala Panchamrita tablets (procured from Dhutpapeshvara) yielded complete
Uttarakhand Ayurved remission in 46.6% of cases, particularly effective in cases with increased drava

Review on Pravala

University, Rishikul guna of pitta. Significant improvement was noted in symptoms like Aruchi,
Campus, Haridwar, amlodgar, chhardi, hritshul, and udarashula. Praval Panchamrut emerged as a cost-|
Uttarakhand, India effective, readily available, and easily prepared treatment for Amlapitta.

Analytical Stan- Julika, MD. Scholar P.G._|Two samples of Pravala panchamrita rasa were prepared, exhibiting an averege|

dardization of Deptt. of Rasa Shastra | percentage yield of 65% with 35.0% loss. The formulation’s average calcium
Pravala pancham- | and Bhaishajya Kalpana | percentage is 46.63, with an average pH of 12.55. Additional Parameters include}
rita Rasa Uttarakhand Ayurved an average loss on drying at 105°C of 0.04%w/w, loss on ignition of 3.93%w/w,
University, Rishikul acid insoluble ash of 0.52%w/w, water soluble extractive value of 1, OS%w/\w, |
Campus, Haridwar, and alcohol soluble extractive of 9.48%w/w. Despite the availability of various|

Uttarakhand medicines in the market, their standard parameters are lacking. Hence, this
research aims to develop a safe and effective Ayurvedic medicine.

| 4.1.f Anandabhairava Rasa adigd 7a arstt aiard Weret |

Reference: A.FI.-I, Rasayoga, 20:3, R.Sa.Sa. Jvara. varpfae eft desea: |
faqes fad card afte esui aur Viviseretsa tat Watgves: |
widtaraad yut sraittgaateaq AMSA fatMSa Aye tatencad: 11

Tam del Haid Greclenaaas |

(R.Sa.Sa. Jvara., 2/103-105)

----- PAGE 120 -----
Chapter 4 * Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

INGREDIENTS USED

407

PHARMACODYNAMICS

xhibits potent

Drug Name 1. Antipyretic: Anandbhairava Rasa ¢

shuddha Hingula 1 Part antipyretic properties, primarily attributed to

Shuddha Vatsanabha Rt. Tr. 1 Part ingredients like Shunthi (ginger), Pippali (long

shunthi Ra, 4 Part pepper), and Maricha (black pepper). These

Pippall Fr. 2 Parts ingredients possess thermogenic effects, inducing

Maricha Fr. 2 Parts sweating and reducing fever.

shuddha Tankana = 1 Part 2, Anti-inflammatory:; The combination of Shuddha

Jatiphala At, 1 Part Vatsanabha (purified aconite) and Shuddha Hingula

damblra’svalasa Fr. Q.S. For Mardana (purified cinnabar) provides anti-inflammatory
effects, alleviating inflammation associated with

Procedure: conditions like Amavata (rheumatoid arthritis) and

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for
Anandabhairava Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is
clean and free from impurities.

Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) ora grinder, grind each ingredients from
Shunthi to Jatiphala separately into a fine powder.
Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

LS)

iss)

>

. Digestive Stimulant: Shunthi, Pippali,

Sannipataja Jvara (fever due to a combination of

doshas).
and Maricha

enhance gastrointestinal
motility. This property aids in the management of
Jvara atisara (fever with diarrhea) and Prameha
(urinary disorders) by improving digestive function.

stimulate digestion and

| Diuretic: Anandabhairava Rasa may exhibit diuretic

effects, helping in the management of conditions

4, Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean, : ; P :
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform ike Mutrakrichchhra (dysux a) ; and Ahs Bee
blend of all ingredients (urinary calculi) by increasing urine output ani

F : promoting the expulsion of renal stones.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency. EHARMACOKINED ICS

6, Adding Jambira svarasa and triturate well, until it 1, Absorption: The ingredients in Anandabhairava

Rasa are likely absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract,

becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then
roll it into tablets or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Anandabhairava Rasa.

9, Store the Anandabhairava Rasa in a clean, dry,

airtight container to preserve its potency and
freshness.

ios}

with faster absorption facilitated by the liquid form
of Jambira Svarasa (lemon juice) used for Mardana.

. Metabolism: Upon absorption, the constituents

undergo hepatic metabolism, where they may be
metabolized into active metabolites or conjugated
with glucuronides for elimination.

. Distribution: The active compounds are distributed

via the bloodstream to various target organs,
including the liver, kidneys, and inflammatory sites,
where they exert their pharmacological effects.

ee

Elimination: Any unutilized constituents or

Dose: 250 mg. 4.
Anupana: Ardraka Svarasa, Honey.

Indications: Jvara, Jvaraatisara, Amavata, Sannipataja
Jvara, Ashmari, Prameha, Mutrakrichchhra.

metabolites are primarily eliminated through urine
and feces. The duration of action and elimination
half-life may vary based on individual factors and
the specific metabolism of each ingredient.

RESEARCH UPDATES

ticleName | Author Name
A Comparative Study of | Dr. Virendra Baburao Pawar M.D,
Ananda Bhairava Rasa Ph.D. Assistant Professor, Department
and Tribhuvana Kirti Rasa | of Kayachikitsa, Bharati Vidyapeeth
inthe Management of __| Ayurved College and Hospital, Pune,
Vata Kaphaja Jvara MHA, India.

In a comparative single-blind study, 40 patients were
randomly divided into two groups. Group A received Ananda
Bhairava Rasa 250 mg twice daily, while Group B received
Tribhuvanakirti Rasa 250 mg twice daily for 7 days, with daily
follow-ups. Conducted at BVDU College of Ayurveda and
Hospital affiliated with Bharati Medical Foundation in 2013
and 2014, results indicated both treatments equally

----- PAGE 121 -----
Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter j

A Review Article on
Ananda Bhairava Rasa

with Special Refrence to
Bhaishajya Ratnavali

Divya Rani Meghwa, P.G. Scholar,
Department of Rasashasta &

Malviya Govt. Ayurveda Collage,
Udaipur (Raj.), India

Bhaishajya Kalpana, Madan Mohan

effective in managing Vatakaphaja Jvara symptoms Group
B showed reduced Nidra compared to Group A. Statistica)
analysis confirmed the equal efficacy of both treatmen,,
Conclusion: Both Ananda Bhairava Rasa and Tribhuvanaki-,;
Rasa effectively manage Vatakaphaja Jvara symptoms.

Ananda Bhairava Rasa, classified as a Khalviya Rasayana
is a potent medicinal preparation used for treating ivara
and atisara. Due to its minimal, safe, and readily available
ingredients, the formulation described in Bhaisajya Ratnavaj)
is often selected for research and dissertation projects.

Critical Review on
Ananda Bhairava

Rasa W.S.R. to Rasa
Yoga Sagara

Dr, Sachin Sheth, Assistant

Mahavidyalaya, Sion, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

Professor, Dept. of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, APM’s Ayurved

This paper provides comprehensive insights into the contents
dosage, Bhavana, Anupana, Pathya, and clinical indications o¢
Ananda Bhairava Rasa, an essential formulation in Ayurvegi,
practice. It specifically reviews the 12 Pathabheda of Anand;
Bhairava Rasa outlined in Rasayogasagara.

Evaluation of Physio-
Chemical and Antipyretic
Activity of Ananda

Bhairava Rasa

Dr. Varsha N., Department of

Ramakrishna Ayurvedic Medical
College, Hospital and Research
Center, Bengaluru-560064,
Karnataka, India.

Rasashastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana,

Ananda Bhairavi Rasa shows antipyretic activity, comparable
to Paracetamol, making it a promising alternative for feve,
treatment across diseases. Physicochemical analysis confirms
its safety within normal limits, suggesting its potential as a
safer antipyretic option in clinical practice.

| 4.1.6 Yogendra Rasa

Reference: A.F.[.-I, Rasayoga, 20:31, B.R. Vatavyadhi
Waa Gicies AAAS AI

Suara arent fears

adt thagatat aet Hatfgaert: |

anata Tat Wa Va THeAhe I
aratarary Wry Wert aeqaary |

TATA WT STAT | |

Fees aa Waa Bahesay |

Veratandes eta areeceat aa

foanraarm year fadarst ar

waa wasnt aaa Fees: 1
SnrSren Tat aren seoraatatatia: 11

(B.R.Vatavyadhi, 21/160-166)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Rasa Sindura = 1 Parts
Svarna Bhasma = % Part
Lauha Bhasma = % Part
Abhraka Bhasma = % Part
Mukta Bhasma = % Part
Vanga Bhasma = % Part
Kumari Rasa Uf. QS. For Mardana

Procedure:
1. Collect all the ingridents of Yogendra Rasa.

2. Take Rasa _ sindura
Khalva Yantra.

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and mix well to
ensure uniform mixing.

triturating properly by

4. Add an appropriate quantity of Kumari Rasa
and continue triturate until it becomes suitable
for making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets
or pills.

5. Shape the mixture into pills the size of 1- 2 Ratti.

6. Dry the pills in the shade and store it.

Dose: 125- 250 mg.

Anupana: Triphala Kvatha, Honey.

Indications: Bahumutra, Prameha, Vataroga, Apasmara,
Pakshaghata, Bhagandara, Arsha, Vatapitta Roga

Mutraghata, Guda Roga, Murchchha,
Yakshma, Kshinendriya, Amlapitta.

Unmada

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antioxidant and Immunomodulatory: Yogendra Rasa
contains potent metallic and herbal ingredients like
Rasa Sindura, Svarna Bhasma, and Kumari Rasa
which possess antioxidant properties and help in
boosting the immune system, thereby aiding in the
management of various diseases.

2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of Lauha
Bhasma (iron calx) and Abhraka Bhasma (mica
calx) provides anti-inflammatory effects, which are

----- PAGE 122 -----
Chapter 4 * Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

beneficial in conditions like i i
ditions like Vataroga (diseases due

to vata imbalance) and Arsha (hemorrhoids).

. Hematopoietic: The presence of Mukta Bhasma
(pearl calx) and Vanga Bhasma (tin calx) helps in the
formation of blood cells and improves hemoglobin
levels, thereby addressing conditions like Anaemia
associated with Prameha (urinary disorders).

. Nervine Tonic: Kumari Rasa, derived from Aloe vera
leaves, acts as a nervine tonic, promoting nerve
healthand aiding in the management of neurological
disorders like Apasmara (epilepsy), Unmada

109

facilitated by the liquid form of Kumari Rasa used
for Mardana.

2. Metabolism: Upon absorption, the constituents

undergo hepatic metabolism, where they may be
metabolized into active metabolites or conjugated
with glucuronides for elimination.

. Distribution: The active compounds are distributed

via the bloodstream to various target organs,
including the liver, spleen, nervous system, and
gastrointestinal tract, where they exert their
pharmacological effects.

(psychosis), and Pakshaghata (hemiplegia).
PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The metallic and herbal components

of Yogendra Rasa are likely absorbed in
gastrointestinal

RESEARCH UPDATES

1. | Toxicological Studies
of an Ayurvedic
Medicine Yogendra
Rasa used in Epilepsy

Mustari Hossain,
Department of Pharmacy,
Jahangirnagar University,
Savar -1342, Dhaka,
Bangladesh

tract, with faster absorption

4. Elimination: Any unutilized constituents or
metabolites are primarily eliminated through urine
and feces. The duration of action and elimination
half-life may vary based on individual factors and

th .
E the specific metabolism of each ingredient.

Yogendra Rasa (YR), an Ayurvedic remedy for epilepsy, was chronically
administered to Sprague-Dawley rats at 40meg/kg for 28 days to assess
its toxicological characteristics. Throughout the study, YR-treated animals
maintained negligible changes in overall body weight. However, significant
decreases were observed in the absolute and relative weights of the male
rat liver (25.50% and 23.53% decrease, respectively), kidney (18.90% and
16.69% decrease, respectively), and spleen (31.10% and 30.48% decrease,
respectively). These findings indicate potential toxicity of YR on organ
weights in rats.

2. | Role of Yogendra
Rasa in Hridroga—A
Critical Review

Dr. Anusha V.K., PG Scholar,
Department of Rasashastra
& Bhaishajya Kalpana, SDM
College of Ayurveda, Udupi,
Karnataka, India.

Yogendra Rasa, composed of Parada, Gandhaka, Svarna bhasma, Kantha
loha bhasma, Mukta bhasma, Vanga bhasma, and Kumari svarasa,
exhibits properties such as tridoshahara, ojovardhaka, and lekhana. These
properties are believed to protect the heart from atherosclerosis and
cardiac hypertrophy. This study aims to elucidate the role of Yogendra Rasa
and its potential mode of action in heart diseases.

4.1.4 Lakshmivilasa Rasa

Reference: A.F.I.-I, Rasayoga, 20:39, B.R. Rasayana
Fee AERA Vent AAT

Feenaas ait Tee aI

Frieatasacist faentyeHa 1

ARH AA AMTaeT Ata AAT |

ate terest taet arse 1

Fifer afecrenrat PySscrara: |

Preheat aiararinars, Tart HTT AgetErt |

arnieary tfratya asc fra: sahad

Veiag Heald THAT AL
Aetidt aegte farsi HAAS
TAM AAG AA Faraury |
amard Tees foreredesy Tce
at HUTA A |
AUT: CALC ARTATAINTA: 1
afeet Wintaent Geet TATA
AU AHMET, I |
Gist THU TA MHA WaT: |
aa forges Sed 3 chem abet aaa
fgraaiert efestad wie: ae: 1
With; VaRNIsSa ASA Hele |

----- PAGE 123 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapte;

Lakshmiy; ag

110
Ta cantare aes ATTA I PHARMACODYNAMICS
TAT TET WTA AAT TeeTAT: 11 1. Strengthening and Rejuvenating:

(B.R. Rasayana, 73/55-68 )

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Abhraka Bhasma = 48 Gms
Shuddha Parada = 24 Gms
Shuddha Gandhaka = 24 Gms
Karpura Sub. Ext. 12 Gms
Jatiphala Ar. 12 Gms
Jatiphala Sd. 12 Gms
Vriddhadaraka Sd. 12 Gms
Dhattura Sd. 12 Gms
Vijaya Bija Sd. 12 Gms
Vudari Mula Rt. Tr. 12 Gms
Shatavari Rt. Tr. 12 Gms
Nagabala Rt. 12 Gms
Atibala Rt. 12 Gms
Gokshura Fr. 12 Gms
Nichula- bija Sd. 12 Gms
Nagavalli Lf. QS. For Mardana
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingridents of Lakshmivilasa Rasa.

2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha Parada
and Shuddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva Yantra).

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to
ensure uniform mixing.

4. Add an appropriate quantity of Nagavalli Patra
Svarasa and until it becomes suitable for making
tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets or pills.

5. Shape the mixture into pills the size of 250 mg.

6. Dry the pills in the shade.

7. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.

Dose: 250 mg.
Anupana: Tambula Svarasa, Honey, Milk.
Indications: Udara, Prameha, Dhatu  Kshaya,

Urddhvanga Roga, Nadivrana, Kushtha, Vrana, Guda
Roga, Bhagandara. All kind of Shlipada, Galashosha,
Antra Vriddhi, Atisara, Amavata, Jihvastambha,
Galagraha, Mukha-Karna-Nasa-Akshi Vikriti, Pinasa,

Yakshma, Arsha, Sthaulya.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Dr. Vidya Chandrasekaran
Thevar Post Graduate Scholar,
Dept. of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, APM’‘s
Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Sion,
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Critical Review
on Lakshmivilasa

Rasa W.S.R. to Rasa
Yoga Sagara

2. Anti-inflammatory:

Rasa is renowned for its rejuvenating proper;
attributed to ingredients like Abhraka Bhasm,
(mica calx) and Shuddha Parada (purified Mercury)
which strengthen various bodily tissues (Dhat,.
and promote overall health and vitality.
The presence of Shudqp,
Gandhaka (purified sulphur) and Karpur,
(camphor) imparts potent anti-inflammatory effec,
beneficial in conditions like Udara Roga (abdomin,) 1
disorders) and Nadivrana (sinus wip

3. Digestive Aid: Herbs like Shatavari (Asparagus

racemosus) and Nagavalli (Piper betle) included in
this formulation aid digestion, relieve symptoms , f
Atisara (diarrhea), and improve appetite.

4. Immunomodulatory: The combination of Nicchuls-

bija (seeds of Ocimum basilicum) and Nagabala
(Grewia populifolia) acts as an immunomodulato;
enhancing the body’s defense mechanisms against
infections and promoting overall immunity.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The powdered form of the ingredients
allows for efficient absorption in the gastrointestinal
tract, facilitated by the presence of digestive.
enhancing herbs like Shatavari and Nagavalli.

2. Metabolism: Mercury-based ingredients __ like
Shuddha Parada undergo metabolic transformation
in the liver, where they may be converted into
biologically active compounds or excreted in
the bile.

3. Distribution: Active constituents are distributed
throughout the body via the bloodstream, reaching
target organs such as the abdomen, skin, mucous
membranes, and joints, where they exert their
therapeutic effects.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized compounds
are primarily eliminated through urine and feces,
with the duration of action and elimination half-life
varying based on individual factors and the specific
metabolism of each ingredient.

Lakshmivilasa Rasa, a versatile herbo-mineral combination, is employed
in treating cough, fever, skin disorders, tuberculosis, diabetes, dysentery,
and piles. This discussion highlights 12 variations of Lakshmivilasa Ras@
from Rasa Yoga Sagara, detailing ingredients, trituration substances,
vehicles, dietary guidelines, dosage, and indications for each formulation.

»

----- PAGE 124 -----
Chapter 4.» Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

Pharmaco- Bharat Rathi, Depart:
Therapeutic Profile of | Rasashastra and oan
An Ayurvedic Herbo- | Kalpana, MGACH & RC, Salod
Mineral Formulation | (H), Wardha (Ha) ,
Lakshmivilasa Rasa

The study compiles modern research on Lakshmivilasa Rasa, showcasing
its effectiveness in treating diverse ailments including respiratory,
abdominal, anaemia, diabetes, tuberculosis, hepatitis, and Infertility. With
its unique ushna virya formulation, it’s potent yet limited In pittaja vitiated
conditions. This work sheds light on its therapeutic value, broad spectrum
activity, and utility in managing khaphaja vattaja disorders.

4.1., Vasantakusumakara Rasa

Reference: A-FI.-I, Rasayoga, 20:42, R.Sa.Sa.Rasayana

Vajikarana

fra Geb Wg Fat agente: |

ads TAGE VST

AIT ATTA eT: ||

ages PATA: 1

qarat frend aaa Ta: |

paige Hae: FAATAEATSTA TA: 11

ten: aibctesya re: eee |

adafededa Saas farang

Weel ArIAGA: YAMAHA: |

aa Gates tet STE aT
(R.Sa.Sa.Rasayana, 5/82-88 )

INGREDIENTS USED

Svarna Bhasma = 2 Parts

Rajata Bhasma = 2 Parts

Vanga Bhasma = 3 Parts

Naga Bhasma = 3 Parts

Lauha Bhasma = 3 Parts

Abhraka Bhasma = 4 Parts

Pravala Bhasma = 4 Parts

Mukta Bhasma = 4 Parts
Go-Dugdha - QS. For Mardana
Ikshu St. Q. S. For Mardana
Vasa Lf. Q. S. For Mardana
Laksha Gl. Q. S. For Mardana
Udichya Rt. Q. S. For Mardana
Rambha Kanda Rt. Tr. Q. S. For Mardana
Shata Patra Fl. Q. S. For Mardana
Jat FL. Q. S. For Mardana
Mrigamada - Q. S. For Mardana
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients for Vasanta-

kusumakara Rasa.

2. Triturate each ingredient individually using 4
Khalva Yantra and mix well.

3. Add an appropriate quantity of cow's milk (Go-
Dugdha) and perform bhavana (wet grinding) for
one day until the mixture becomes dry.

4. The next day, use Ikshu Rasa for the bhavana
process.

5. Repeat the bhavana process with the remaining
liquid ingredients (dravadravya).

6. Shape the mixture into pills of 1-2 Ratti size.

7. Dry the pills in the shade and store them.

Dose: 125 — 250 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Goghrita, Milk, Sita.

Indications: Meha, Vali Palita, Smriti Bhramsa, Kshaya,
Somaroga, Karshya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Rejuvenating and Aphrodisiac: Vasantakusumakara
Rasa is a potent Rasayana formulation known for
its rejuvenating properties. It acts as an aphrodisiac,
enhancing vitality, vigor, and sexual potency.
Ingredients like Svarna Bhasma (gold calx) and
Mukta Bhasma (pearl calx) contribute to these
effects.

2. Antidiabetic: The formulation is beneficial in
managing Meha (diabetes mellitus), helping to
regulate blood sugar levels. This effect is attributed
to the combination of various metallic and herbal
ingredients that aid in maintaining glucose
homeostasis.

3. Memory Enhancer: Vasanta kusumakara Rasa
has been traditionally used to improve memory
and cognitive functionsIt contains herbs like Jati
(Jasminum sambac) and Shata Patra (Nelumbo
nucifera), which possess neuroprotective properties
and enhance cognitive performance.

4. Anti-aging: Regular use of this formulation is
believed to retard the aging process, promoting
longevity and overall well-being. The presence of
Svarna Bhasma and Pravala Bhasma, along with
other ingredients, helps in maintaining youthful
vigor and vitality.

----- PAGE 125 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 4

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The powdered form of the ingredients
allows for efficient absorption in the gastrointestinal
tract, facilitated by the presence of digestive-
enhancing herbs like Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) and
Laksha (Laccifer lacca).

2. Metabolism: Metallic ingredients like Svarna
Bhasma and Rajata Bhasma undergo metabolic
transformation in the liver, where they may be

converted into biologically active compounds or
excreted in the bile.

RESEARCH UPDATES

3. Distribution: Active constituents are distribu,
throughout the body via the bloodstream, teachin,
target organs such as the reproductive systen
nervous system, and endocrine glands, where tho,
exert their therapeutic effects.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized compoung
are primarily eliminated through urine and fece,
with the duration of action and elimination half-|j¢,
varying based on individual factors and the specif;
metabolism of each ingredient.

Vasanta Kisansakard Rasa treatment restored serum lipid eTafile and
ameliorated oxidative stress in diabetic rats. It decreased lipid peroxidation
boosted endogenous antioxidants, and reduced levels of aldose reductase
and vascular endothelial growth factor in eye tissue. Additionally, it restoreg
the normal architecture of retinal tissue, suggesting protective effect;
against diabetic retinopathy through multiple biochemical pathways.
Vasanta Kusumakara Rasa effectively treats diabetes and related conditions
like malnutrition and sluggishness. However, herbal medicines, including
Rasashastra & Bhaishajya | Vasanta Kusumakara Rasa, may contain harmful heavy metals, isking
Kalpana, Dhanvantari health if levels exceed safe limits. Education for consumers and producers js
Ayurvedic Medical College | crucial to mitigate this risk. Following Rasa Shastra principles ensures proper
& Hospital, Bareilly, U.P. | processing of heavy metals. Furthermore, monitoring and discouraging
self-medication without prescriptions are essential.

A 64-year-old male presented with symptoms of diabetes mellitus. He
was treated with Vasanta Kusumakara Rasa alongside Phalatrikadi Kvatha,
dietary recommendations, and Yogasanas. Ayurvedic treatment effectively
managed Prameha (diabetes).

Sanjay Motilal Tamoll
R. A. Podar Ayurved
Medical College, Dr.
Annie Besant Road, Worli,
Mumbai, Maharashtra-
400018, India

Dr. Parul Rani, Reader

& HOD, Department of

Vasanta Riemer
Rasa, An Ayurvedic Her-
bo-Mineral Formulation
Prevents The Develop-
ment of Diabetic Reti-
nopathy in Rats

A Critical Interpetation
on the Safety and
Toxicity Standards

of Vasanta
Kusumakara Rasa

Clinical Efficacy of
Vasantakusumakara

Rasa with Phalatrikadi
Kvatha in Mangement

Jitendra Varsakiy,
Assistant Professor,
Department of
Kayachikitsa, Chaudhary

of Prameha (Diabetes
Mellites)—A Case Study

Brahma Prakash Ayurved
Charak Samsthan,
Najafgarh, Khera Dabar,
New Delhi - 110073.

| 4.1.5 Vasantamalati Rasa

Reference: A.F.I.-I, Rasayoga, 20:41, Si.Bhai.Ma.Ma.Jvara.
rat oar a ae ata unrated: |

Weta WraaaSa TA Agsat FAI
TAT WSaTgarar HUT Al Aha |
Wess waters |

(Si.Bhai.Ma.Ma.Jvara, 4/60-62)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Suvarna Bhasma - 1 Part

Mukta Bhasma = 2 Parts
Shuddha Hingula = 3 Parts
Maricha Fr. 4 Parts

Kharpara Bhasma = 8 Parts

Navanita - 18/16 parts

Nimbuka Svarasa Fr. Q.S. For Mardana
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients for Vasantamalati Rasa

2. Triturate each ingredient individually using a
Khalva Yantra and mix well.

3. Add 18/16th part of navanita and triturate properly.

4. Add an appropriate quantity of Nimbuka Svarasa
until the mixture has lost its greasiness.

5. Shape the mixture into pills of 1-2 Ratti size.
6. Dry the pills in the shade and store them.
Dose: 125-250 mg.
Anupana: Pippali Churna, Honey.
Indications: Jirna Kasa, Jirna Jvara.

----- PAGE 126 -----
Chapter 4 * Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations) z 113

BRARMACODNNAMICS tract, with enhanced bioavailability. This facilitates
1, Antipyretic: Vasantamalati Rasa is primarily rapid onset of action, making it effective in reducing
indicated for its antipyretic properties, effectively fever and associated symptoms,
reducing fever, The combination of ingredients 2, Metabolism: Metallic ingredients like Suvarna
like Suvarna Bhasma (gold calx) and Maricha Bhasma undergo metabolic transformation in the
(black pepper) helps in lowering body temperature ee ohare hey may be converted into biologi-

by acting on the hypothalamus, the body's

temperature-regulating center. cally active compounds or excreted in the bile.

Mukta Bhasma and Hingula may also undergo
metabolic processes to exert their therapeutic

nN

. Analgesic: The formulation possesses analgesic
properties, providing relief from pain associated

with fever and respiratory conditions. Mukta effects. bas
Bhasma (pearl calx) and Hingula (cinnabar) 3. Distribution: Active constituents are distributed
contribute to these analgesic effects. throughout the body via the bloodstream, reaching

target organs such as the brain, respiratory system,
and immune system, where they exert their

w

. Antitussive: Vasantamalti Rasa helps alleviate cough
symptoms by suppressing cough reflexes. Marica,

known for its bronchodilatory and expectorant pharmacological actions.

properties, aids in clearing respiratory passages 4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized compounds

and reducing cough severity. are primarily eliminated through urine and feces,
PHARMACOKINETICS with the duration of action and elimination half-life

varying based on individual factors and the specific

1. Absorption: The powdered form of the ingredients
metabolism of each ingredient.

allows for efficient absorption in the gastrointestinal

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Nam
Manisha B. Walunj, Ph.D.
Scholar, Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, |. P.G.T. & R.A.,
Gujarat Ayurved University,
Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

The study aims to compile references of Vasanta Malati Rasa from various
Rasa texts and compare them based on composition, preparation method,
dose, indications, and contributions of each text. Eight formulations were
identified, with Svarna Vasanta Malati Rasa and Laghu Malini Vasanta Rasa
being the most cited. Both formulations contain Rasaka and Maricha as
chief ingredients, known for their rejuvenating effects. Despite variations in
descriptions, both are classified as Kharaliya Rasayana, Indicating similarities
in preparation method. / A
Vasanta Malati Rasa, a Herbomineral formulation, acts as a Kharaliya
Rasayana. It promotes enzyme and hormone synthesis, tissue replacement,
and immune health. With ingredients like Svarna, Mukta, Shu. Hingula,
Maricha, and Shuddha Kharpara, it offers targeted action and enhanced
therapeutic efficacy with minimal toxicity.

Vasanta Malati
Rasa—A Her-
bomineral Product

Dr. Shabeen Ali, Final Year
P.G. Scholar, Dept. of Rasa
Shastra and Bhaishajya

Kalpana, N.K. Jabshetty

Ayurvedic Medical College
& PG, Centre, Bidar,
Karnataka, India.

Role of Vasanta
Malati Rasa—As An
Immunomodulator
—A Review

4.4.x Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa INGREDIENTS USED
Reference: A.F.l.-I, Rasayoga, 20:26, B.R., Vata-vyadhi

amad tauren feat Terma | SvarnaBhasma — 3 Parts
Gist Yate difach waaay! l Rajata Bhasma = 2 Parts
qed aes eae feria | AbhrakaBhasma - 2 Parts
aera set Tat frat: ufaetd: || Lauha Bhasma - 5 Parts
FATTATIAA AMAIA H A | E

Faista dural aevaAtaKe: | :

i: fageaard ah Frfecee | Rasa Sindura = 7 Parts

Kumarl Rasa Lf. Q.S. For Mardana (1 Day)

(B.R., Vatavyadhiroga., 26/145-148)

----- PAGE 127 -----
“114 : Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 4

(coral calx) contribute to these anti-inflammato,

Procedure:
properties, providing relief from pain and swellin,

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for Brihat
ata Chintamani Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is 3. Antioxidant: Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa contaj,
clean and free from impurities. potent antioxidants such as Lauha Bhasma (iro,

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and calx) and Mautika Bhasma (pearl calx), which hely
pestle) and mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform in neutralizing free radicals and oxidative str
blend of all ingredients. This antioxidant activity protects cells and tissi,

. 5 4 a d orts overall health
3. Adding Kumari rasa and triturate well, until it Helm Cetus intel Oe ‘ and

becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then vitality.
roll it into tablets or pills. PHARMACOKINETICS

4. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven 1. Absorption: The powdered form of the ingredien;
for several hours to days until the material is allows for efficient absorption in the gastrointesting
completely dry. Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa. tract, facilitating rapid onset of action. This ensure

timely relief from symptoms associated with Vat
and Pitta disorders.
2. Metabolism: Metallic ingredients like Syarp;

5. Store the Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa in a clean,
dry, airtight container to preserve its potency.

Dose: 125 mg. ;

Anupana: Guduchi Svarasa, Aja Kshira, Brahmi Svarasa, Biaema ani aja Eee und eree peel

Tambula Svarasa, Shankhapushpi Svarasa, Honey. iansfompation jnvthe liver where ey UBy b
f i converted into biologically active compounds

Indications: Vata Pittaja Roga, Bhrama, Pralapa. or excreted in the bile. Other ingredients may

PHARMACODYNAMICS also undergo metabolic processes to exert their

1. Nervine Tonic: Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa acts as therapeutic effects.

a potent nervine tonic, rejuvenating the nervous 3. Distribution: Active constituents are distributed
system and promoting overall neurological health throughout the body via the bloodstream, reaching
Ingredients like Svarna Bhasma (gold calx) and target organs such as the nervous system, liver
Rajata Bhasma (silver calx) possess neuroprotective and joints, where they exert their pharmacologica
properties, helping in the management of various actions.
neurological disorders. 4. Elimination: Metabolites and unutilized compounds
2. Anti-inflammatory: The formulation exhibits are primarily eliminated through urine and feces
significant anti-inflammatory effects, reducing infla- with the duration of action and elimination half-life
mmation associated with Vata and Pitta disorders varying based on individual factors and the specifi
Abhraka Bhasma (mica calx) and Pravala Bhasma metabolism of each ingredient.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Evaluation of Neuro-Protective
Activity of Brihatvata
Chinthamani Rasa

The study evaluated Brihatvata Chinthamani  Rasa’s
neuroprotective effects in stroke-induced rats. Treatment
led to reduced lipid peroxidation, increased catalase levels
and preserved brain tissue integrity compared to controls
highlighting its antioxidant properties and ability to maintain
normal brain structure.

Suvarnakalpa, akin to the mythical ‘Chintamani’, offers
comprehensive care, particularly in vatavikara and hrudroga
It demonstrates notable vatashamaka, rasayana, balya
and hridaya samrakshaka properties, making it effective
in cardiovascular conditions such as irregular pulse, heart
fate, anginal pain, and weakened heart muscle-related
circulation issues.

Dr. GVinay Mohan, In this clinical study, 40 subjects were split into two groups
Professor & HOD, Group A received Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa internally an¢
Department of Kayachikitsa, | Gandha Prasarini Taila externally for 28 days, while Group 8
Shri Shivayogeeshwar Rural | received Gaganadi Vati internally and Gandha Prasarini Talla
Ayurvedic Medical College | externally for the same duration. Treatment with Brihat Vato
& Hospital, Inchal, Belagavi, | Chintamani Rasa ylelded better results compared to Gaganad!
Karnataka, India. Vati in combination with Gandha Prasarini Taila. ‘|

A Review on Brihata Dr. Swati B. Chavan, PG
Vatachintamani Rasa Scholar, Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishjya
Kalpana, Govt. Ayurvedic

College, Osmanabad, MHA

Assessment of The Efficacy of Brihat
Vata Chintamani Rasa and Gaganadi
Vati with Gandhaprasarini Tailainthe
Management of Pakshaghata with
Special Reference to Hemiplegia
__| Comparative Clinical Study”,

----- PAGE 128 -----
Chapter 4 + Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

4.4... Shankha Vati

Reference: A.F.1.-I, Vati Gutika, 12:32, B.R. Agnimandya
fagrenae Ugastet Prae sfeac |
ce Tet AAA Beare vitor aR ||

(B.R. Agnimandya, 10/187)
INGREDIENTS USED

Chincha Kshara St. Bk. 48gms
Pancha Lavana =

Nimbu Svarasa Fr.

Shankha Bhasma =

Hingu Exd.

Shunthi Rz.

Maricha Fr a. |
Pippali Fr. That
Shuddha Parada -

Shuddha Vatsanabha ~~ Rt.Tr.

Shuddha Gandhaka -
Procedure:

=

. Collect all the ingridents of Shankha Vat.

First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha

Parada and Suddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva

Yantra).

Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to

ensure uniform mixing.

_ Add an appropriate quantity of Nimbu Svarasa and
until it becomes suitable for making tablets or pills,
then roll it into tablets or pills.

Shape the mixture into pills the size of 250
mg- 500 mg.

6. Dry the pills in the shade.
7. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.

Dose: 250- 500 mg.

Anupana: Honey, Warma Water, Butter- milk.

Grahni,

Nv

ww

=

uo

Indications: © Agnimandya, Arochaka,

Paktishula, Kshaya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Chincha Kshara: Acts as an alkaline agent,
neutralizing stomach acids and aiding in digestion.

2. Pancha Lavana (Five Salts): Includes Saindhava,
Samudra, Vida, Sauvarchala, and Romaka salts

which enhance digestion, stimulate appetite, and
improve metabolism.

3, Nimbu Svarasa: Rich in vitamin C and antioxidants,
it helps in detoxification and enhances the digestive
process.

4, Shankha Bhasma: Provides calcium and other
minerals, acting as an antacid and digestive tonic.

5. Hingu: Has carminative, digestive, and antispas-
modic properties.

. Shunthi: Possesses anti-inflammatory, carminative,
and digestive properties, enhancing gastrointestinal
motility.

7. Maricha: Improves digestion,
availability of otheringredients, and has carminative
properties.

8, Pippali: Stimulates digestion and metabolism, also
enhances the absorption of other ingredients.

9. Shuddha Parada: Used in a minute quantity, it is
believed to balance doshas and improve overall
efficacy.

10. Shuddha Vatsanabha: Used in very small amounts, it

acts as a stimulant and digestive aid.

11, Shuddha Gandhaka: Enhances metabolism and has

detoxifying properties.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1, Absorption: The bioavailability of the active

components is enhanced by ingredients like Pippali
and Maricha. The presence of acidic medium
(Nimbu Svarasa) may aid in the absorption of
alkaline substances like Shankha Bhasma.

2. Distribution: The minerals and active compounds
are likely distributed through the bloodstream to
the target sites, particularly the gastrointestinal
tract.

3. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi, Hingu,
and Pippali are metabolized in the liver, where
they undergo biotransformation to active
metabolites. Purified mercury and sulphur undergo
specific Ayurvedic processes ensuring they are
metabolized safely.

a

increases bio-

4. Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted through the kidneys (urine) and the
intestines (feces). The presence of detoxifying
agents like Nimbu Svarasa ensures that any resi-
dual substances are efficiently eliminated from
the body.

----- PAGE 129 -----
4.1. Shankha Vati which enhance digestion, stimulate appetite, and

reference: A.Fl.-I, Vati Gutika, 12:32, BR. Agnimand improve metabolism.
ee 3, Nimbu Svarasa: Rich in vitamin C and antioxidants,

afar WIgUa WITT w it helps in detoxification and enhances the digestive
ecal ‘ aa f taf process.
2 ustt| 4, Shankha Bhasma: Provides calcium and_ other
ae rayenteg tt minerals, acting as an antacid and digestive tonic.

(B.R. Agnimandya, 10/187) 5, Hingu: Has carminative, digestive, and antispas-
INGREDIENTS USED modic properties.

Be aye
6. Shunthi: Possesses anti inflammatory, carminati )
and digestive properties, enhancing gastrointestinal

Chincha Kshara St. Bk. 48 onsite

Pancha Lavana = motility.

Nimbu Svarasa Fr. J. Maricha; Improves digestion, increases bio-
Shankha Bhasma = availability of other ingredients, and has carminative
Hingu Exd. properties.

Shunthi Rz. 8. Pippali: Stimulates digestion and metabolism, also
Maricha Fr, 23 enhances the absorption of other ingredients.

Pippali Fr. 9. Shuddha Parada: Used in a minute quantity, it 1s
Shuddha Parada - : believed to balance doshas and improve overall
Shuddha Vatsanabha —Rt.Tr. i efficacy.

ShuddhaGandhaka = = 2 10, Shuddha Vatsanabha: Used in very small amounts, it

acts as a stimulant and digestive aid.

Procedure: 11. Shuddha Gandhaka: Enhances metabolism and has

1. Collect all the ingridents of Shankha Vati. detoxifying properties.

Parada and Suddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva 1. Absorption: The bioavailability of the active

2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha  pyarmacoKiNeTics

Yantra). components is enhanced by ingredients like Pippali
3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to and Maricha. The presence of acidic medium
ensure uniform mixing. (Nimbu Svarasa) may aid in the absorption of
4. Add an appropriate quantity of Nimbu Svarasa and alkaline substances like Shankha Bhasma.
until it becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, —_2, Distribution: The minerals and active compounds
then roll it into tablets or pills. are likely distributed through the bloodstream to
5, Shape the mixture into pills the size of 250 the target sites, particularly the gastrointestinal
mg- 500 mg. tract.
6. Dry the pills in the shade. 3, Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi, Hingu,

and Pippali are metabolized in the liver, where
they undergo biotransformation to active
metabolites. Purified mercury and sulphur undergo
specific Ayurvedic processes ensuring they are

7. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.
Dose: 250- 500 mg.
Anupana: Honey, Warma Water, Butter- milk.

Indications: i , Grahni,  Arochaka, :
pelccuons Agnimandya metabolized safely.
Paktishula, Kshaya. ;
4, Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
PHARMACODYNAMICS are excreted through the kidneys (urine) and the
1. Chincha Kshara: Acts as an alkaline agent, intestines (feces). The presence of detoxifying
neutralizing stomach acids and aiding in digestion. agents like Nimbu Svarasa ensures that any resi-
2, Pancha Lavana (Five Salts): Includes Saindhava, dual substances are efficiently eliminated from

Samudra, Vida, Sauvarchala, and Romaka salts the body.

----- PAGE 130 -----
me AiG | a

RESEARCH UPDaTES

Shankha Vati—A

Bishnupriya Mohanty,
Classical Review

Varieties in Shankha Vati
—An Ayurvedic Classical
Formulation for GIT

Disorders University, Jamnagar - 361008,

Gujarat, India

4.1.m Shvasakuthara Rasa

Reference: A.FI.-I, Rasayoga, 20:49, Yo.Ra., Shvasa.
TH wait faa aq egu a wafer
Wat egamntn afte apes

Sgae Scrat wanfeeutad i

frag

Sd OA a Wert aaycemrag a
aiuto yestarent tar YA: 11
aiaatecanast eat erat faeerar: |
TW: alegonisa ad aratacner

(Yo.Ra., Shvasa, p. 373/1-4)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Rasa = 4 ems

Shuddha Gandhaka - 4 gms

Shuddha Vatsanabha Rt. Tr. 4 gms

Shuddha Tankana - 4gms

Shuddha Manahshila - 4gms

Maricha Fr. 36 gms

Shunthi Rz. 4 gms

Pippali Fr. 4 gms

Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingridents of Shvasakuthara Rasa.

2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha Parada
and Shuddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva
Yantra).

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to
ensure uniform mixing.

4. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven,

5. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Shvasakuthara Rasa.

6

. Store the Shvasakuthara Rasa ina clean, dry, airtight

container to preserve its potency.

MD (Samhita), Ph.D. (Basic Principle)
Professor & Head of the Department
of Sanskrit Samhita and Siddhanta,

Naveena Kodlady, Dept. of Rasashastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana including Drug
Research, IPGT&RA, Gujarat Ayurved

Shankha Vati, a classical Ayurvedic formulation, addres..
conditions like hyperacidity, abdominal pain, ulcers, a,
constipation. Through extensive research, various formulation,
were compiled, with common ingredients including Shankh,

Bhasma, Hingu, Vatsanabha, Trikatu, Kshara, and Lavana.
This article presents a comprehensive literary search acros.
various Ayurvedic texts, compiling 15 varieties of Shankh
Vati along with their ingredients, proportions, and attribute,
Common ingredients found in most varieties include Shankh
Bhasma, Hingu, Vatsanabha, Trikatu, Kshara, and Lavana,

Dose: 125- 250 mg.
Anupana: Honey.

Indications: Agnimandya, Kasa, Shvasa, Vata Kaphaj
Roga, Sannipata Roga, Murchchha, Apasmara, Meha

PHARMACODYNAMICcsS

1.

N

Shuddha Rasa: Acts as a potent antimicrobial and
detoxifying agent. It helps in balancing the thre;
doshas (Vata, Pitta, Kapha) and enhances the Overal
efficacy of the formulation.

. Shuddha Gandhaka: Known for its detoxifying

and rejuvenating properties, it helps — in

improving metabolism and acts as a potent ant.
inflammatory agent.

- Shuddha Vatsanabha: Used in very small amounts

it acts as a stimulant, aiding in respiratory function
and reducing inflammation.

- Shuddha Tankana: Helps in liquefying mucus, easing

respiratory conditions like cough (Kasa) and asthma
(Shvasa).

- Shuddha Manahshila: Known for its respiratory

benefits, it helps in easing breathing difficulties and
reducing phlegm.

- Maricha: Enhances the bioavailability of other

ingredients, stimulates digestion, and acts as a
carminative.

- Shunthi: Has anti-inflammatory, carminative, and

digestive properties, aiding in reducing respiratory
and digestive issues.

. Pippali: Stimulates digestion and respirator)

functions, enhances metabolism, and increases the
absorption of nutrients.

PHARMACOKINETICS
i

Absorption: The ingredients are likely absorbed
efficiently due to the presence of bioavailability
enhancers like Maricha and Pippali. The acidic
medium (if combined with honey) can also aid in
the absorption of certain components.

----- PAGE 131 -----
Ghapter 4 + Aushadh Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

2. Distribution: The active compounds are distributed
via the bloodstream to the target tissues, easeail y
the respiratory and digestive Systems. Meceury et
sulphur are expected to disperse to tissues where
they exert their detoxifying effects,

3. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi
and Pippali are metabolized in the wen Mercur
and sulphur, after Ayurvedic purification, -

Marica,

RESEARCH UPDATES

Critical Review of
Shvasakuthara Rasa—
A Herbomineral
Formulation

Review Article
Component of
Shvaskuthara Rasa and
their Mode of Action in
Shvasa Roga

____ Author 4
Bhagyalakshmi, Institute

3
|

& Research In Ayurveda

Ir Kavita Saini,
Assistant Professor,
Prakash Institute of

& Research, Noida (U.P.)

A Systematic Review on
Therapeutic Potential
of Shvasakuthara Rasa

Paymalle L, Ph.D. Scholar,
Dept of Agadatantra,

College Hospital and
Research Centre, Salod
(Hirapur], MHA, India

$$ SE

Shvasakuthara Rasa, known by vario!
of Post Graduate Teaching | ingredients across formulations, with variations In ’
Shunthi quantities, First mentioned in the 15th century A
referred to as Shvasakuthara Rasa In texts, characterized
chief ingredient in many references. = :
The study aimed to explore the therapeutic potential of Shvasakuth
based on Ayurvedic principles and contemporary assessment parameters.
All ingredients of Shvasakuthara Rasa possess Ushna Virya (hot potency)
Ayurvedic Medical Science| and Vata-Kaphahara properties,
in Shvasa (Asthma), Recognized in Ayurveda for its efficacy in asthma
treatment, Shvasakuthara Rasa acts on Shvasa Roga by directly Impacting
the Pranavaha Srotas. _—__—————
A review of Shvasakuthara Rasa’s clinical effects across various diseases
found it safe and effective, either alone or as an adjunct therapy. However,
Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved | evidence is limited, with only seven small-scale studies available. Larger
trials comparing it with standard treat
levels are recommended to establish its clinical potential fully, particularly
in emergency asthma management.

metabolized safely in the body, ensuring they
provide therapeutic benefits without toxicity.

4, Excretion: The metabolites of the ingredients are
excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
and the intestines (feces). The detoxifying agents
ensure that any residual substances are efficiently
eliminated from the body.

ara Rasa

targeting the main Dosha involved

‘ments in different asthma severity

4.1.n Kamadudha Rasa

Reference: A.FI.-II, Rasayoga, 16:9, R.Ta.Sa.Kharaliya
Rasayana

Tired VET AMAIA |

quiere: Wget Tees hh Faw

ESUCAIR CIRCE

mA es >|

seated PRT Aist: HAGAN: |
(Rasayogasagara, 157, Ist Part, p. 260;
Aushadhaguna Dharma Shastra, 20)

INGREDIENTS USED

Mukta Pishti = 1 Part
Pravala Pishti - 1 Part
Sukti Bhasma - 1 Part
Kapardika Bhasma = 1 Part
Shankha Bhasma - 1 Part
Shuddha Svarnagairika = — 1 Part
Guduchi Svarasa St. 1 Part

Procedure:

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for
Kamadudha Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle), Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform blend
of all ingredients.

3. Adding Guduchi Svarasa and triturate well, until
it becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then
roll it into tablets or pills.

4. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

5. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Kamadudha Rasa.

6. Store the Kamadudha Rasa in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 125- 250 mg.
Anupana: Sita, Jiraka, Amalaki Churna, Ghrita.

Indications: Pittavikara, Amalapitta, Daha, Murchchha, °
Bhrama, Somaroga, Pradara, Raktapitta.

----- PAGE 132 -----
——.

Bic) FARE

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Mukta Pishti: Known for its cooling properties, it

N

w

helps in balancing Pitta dosha, reducing acidity, and
providing relief from burning sensations (Daha)
and dizziness (Bhrama).
Pravala Pishti: Acts as an antacid, helps in
reducing hyperacidity (Amlapitta), and has anti-
inflammatory properties.

. Sukti Bhasma: Provides calcium, acts as an antacid,

and helps in reducing gastric discomfort and
hyperacidity.

- Kapardika Bhasma: Known for its digestive benefits,

it helps in neutralizing stomach acids and treating
Pitta disorders.

- Shankha Bhasma: Acts as a potent antacid and

digestive aid, providing relief from acid reflux and
balancing Pitta dosha,

. Shuddha Svarnagairika: Used in small quantities, it is

believed to have balancing properties for all three
doshas and enhances the overall efficacy of the
formulation.

- Guduchi Svarasa: Known for its adaptogenic

and immunomodulatory properties, it helps in

RESEARCH UPDATES

AReview Study of The
Role of Kamadudha Rasa
In Mahastrotasa Vyadhi

PHARMACOKINETICS }
1. Absorption: The bioavailability of calcium and other

. Distribution: The active components are distributeg

. Metabolism: The

» Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients

and therapeutic efficacy. Storage in dry, sterile, airtight containers is|
recommended due to its hygroscopic nature.

Kamadudha Rasa is commonly used in Pittaja Vyadhi. It comprises
Shudha varga dravyas like Pravala, Mukta, Muktashukti, Shankha, and|
Kapardika, known for their cooling and Pitta-reducing properties. |t also
contains Suvarna Gairika, which has blood-coagulating and calming
effects. Kamadudha Rasa has effects on the digestive, cardiovascular,
Nervous, and urinary systems. It cools the body, regulates stomach acid, |
reduces inflammation in the digestive organs, and mitigates bleeding |
tendencies,

Natural alternative therapies like
favored for treating Peptic Ulcer Disease due to their perceived efficacy
and lower risk of side effects compared to allopathic drugs. Further,
pom Needed to understand Kamadugha Rasa’s mechanism of
action fully,

detoxification, balancing Pitta dosha, and IMProVing
overall health.

minerals is enhanced by the fine particulate natu;, |
of Pishti and Bhasma preparations. The presenq. |
of Guduchi Svarasa aids in the absorption of these
minerals.

through the bloodstream to the target tissues,
particularly the digestive system and areas affected
by Pitta imbalance.

ingredients undergo
biotransformation in the liver. Minerals like
calcium are metabolized and utilized in the body,
while Guduchi helps in enhancing the metabolic
processes.

are excreted through the kidneys (urine) and the
intestines (feces). The detoxifying agents ensure
efficient elimination of residual substances from

the body.

i

Kamadugha Rasa are increasingly

Reference: A.F.L-II, Rasayoga, 16:63, Yo.Ra. Amlapita
US ae ye raul ego aaa
Sarat a Tar TTA A wedetieeh ataypearraae: 11

----- PAGE 133 -----
Py oe = =
‘Chapter 4 * Aushadh Kalpa - | (Compound Formufations)

(Yo.Ra. Amlapita, p. 125/1-5)
INGREDIENTS USED

Pitta, Kapha) and enhances the overall efficacy of
the formulation.

. Svarna Bhasma; Known for its rejuvenating

and immunomodulatory properties. It helps in
improving strength, vitality, and balances doshas.

. Shuddha Tankana: Assists in liquefying mucus, easing

respiratory conditions, and balancing Pitta dosha.

. Shuddha Vatsanabha: Used in very small amounts,

_ Drug Name it acts as a stimulant, aiding in digestive and
a 3 = Una respiratory functions.
ae sar = ian 5. Shunthi, Maricha, and Pippali: Stimulate
bha digestion, improve metabolism, and enhance the
Shuddha Vatsana Rt. Tr. iipaee gestion, ir sare
Shunthi Rz. ipa bioavailability of other ingre ie e
Maricha Fr. iipart 6. Shuddha Dhattura: Used for its anti-inflammatory
Pippali Fr, 1 Part and analgesic properties.
Shuddha Dhattura Se 1 Part 7. Shuddha Gandhaka: Enhances metabolism and has
shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part detoxifying properties.
Sere = 1 Part 8. Tamra Bhasma; Known for its liver-protective and
—_— 34. aban anti-inflammatory properties.
i oe ta 9. Ela, Tvaka, and Patra: Improve digestion, reduce
ae - 1 Parti nausea, and have carminative properties.
—_ Sinn: : = 10. ESAs TELE Has anti-inflammatory and astringent
Bilva Majja Fr. P. 1 Part a as] properties.
Karchura. Rz. 1 Part 11. ShankhaBhasma: Acts as anantacid and digestive aid.
Bhringaraja Rasa Pl. QS. For Mardana 12. Bilva Majja: Known for its digestive and astringent
properties.
Pome 13. Karchura: Possesses digestive and anti-inflammatory
1. Collect all the ingridents of Sutashekhara Rasa. properties.
2. First, prepare Pishti by triturating Shuddha Parada _14. Bhringaraja Rasa: Known for its liver-protective and

and Svarna Bhasma in a mortar (Khalva Yantra).

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to
ensure uniform mixing.

a

Add an appropriate quantity of Bhringaraja Svarasa

and until it becomes suitable for making tablets or

pills, then roll it into tablets or pills.

. Shape the mixture into pills the size of 125
mg- 250 mg.

6. Dry the pills in the shade.

7. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.

wn

rejuvenating properties.

PHARMACOKINETICS

a,

Absorption: The bioavailability of minerals and
active compounds is enhanced by the presence
of Trikatu (Shunthi, Maricha, Pippali), which
stimulates digestion and absorption.

. Distribution: The active components are distributed

via the bloodstream to the target tissues, particularly
the digestive and respiratory systems.

. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi, Maricha,

and Pippali are metabolized in the liver. Purified
mercury, sulphur, and other minerals undergo
specific metabolic processes to provide therapeutic
benefits without toxicity.

Dose: 125- 250 mg.

Anupana: Ghee, Honey.

Indications: Amlapitta, Chhardi, Gulma, Kasa, Grahani,
Tridoshaja Atisara, Shula, Shvasa, Mandagni, Hikka,
Udavarta, Rajayakshma.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Shuddha Parada: Acts as a potent antimicrobial and
detoxifying agent. It balances all three doshas (Vata,

4, Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
and intestines (feces). Detoxifying agents ensure
efficient elimination of residual substances from
the body,

----- PAGE 134 -----
RESEARCH UPDATES

\uthor Name
Vd. Karunanidhi Sharma,
Research officer, Multani
Pharmaceutical Ltd.,
New Delhi,

Critical Review of
Sutashekhara Rasa

Ajay Kumar, Lecturer,

Dept. of Kayachikitsa &
Panchkarma, Government
Post Graduate Ayurveda
College and Hospital,
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Jagtap Pooja A., PG Scholar,
Shalyatantra Department,
Government Ayurved
College, Nagpur, MHA.

Scientific Explanation
of Mode of Action of
Sutshekhara Rasa in
Amlapitta with Special
Reference to Acid Peptic
Disorders: A Review

A Review on the Role
of Sutashekhara Rasa
as a Effective Ayurvedic
Formulation for
Amalapitta

Sutashekhara Rasa, from Yoga Ratnakara,
with 19 Ingredients, including gold, influe
Svarna Sutashekhara Rasa
(without gold), scholars have modifi
expenses while ma
effectiveness for various indications.

Sutashekhara Rasa effectively treats Am!

and promoting overall hea n
properties make it beneficial in managing
when combined with a tailored lifestyle regimen.

Sutashekhara Rasa rectifies the imb
overall digestion and promoting proper
that substances with dry (Ruksha), light (Laghu), pungent (Katu), and
hot (Ushna) properties can mitigate the vitiated
optimal Agni function. T
advancement in Amlapitta treatment.

is a renowned formulatio,,
ncing its cost. Available a,
(with gold) and Sada Sutashekhara Ras;
‘ed it to enhance safety and reduce
intaining efficacy. Its diverse ingredients sugges:

lapitta by alleviating symptoms
Ith. Its anticholinergic and direct antacig
the condition, especially

glanced state of pitta, enhancing |
Agni function. It’s theorized

form of pitta, ensuring
his study holds promise as a significant

Sourabh D. Chougule,
Department of Rasashastra
& Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Yashwant Ayurvedic Medical
College P.G.T & R.C Kodoli,
Panhala, Kolhapur-416114,
Maharashtra, India

Review on
Pharmacokinetic and

Pharmacodynamic
Action of
Sutashekhara Rasa

Sutashekhara Rasa,
Rogadhikara, belongs to Shamaka Chatushka. Its ingredients, primarily

Kashaya, Tikta & Madhura Rasatmaka, possess Laghu, Ruksha Guna &
Ushna virya. They exhibit Vatanulomana, Dipana, & Pachana properties,
making them effective in conditions like Amalapitta, Shula, Vanti
Panchakasa, Pancha gulma. Ginger juice, honey, sugar milk are used as
Anupana to enhance its effects. This article explores Sutashekhara Rasa
mechanism of action in these diseases.

found in Yogaratnakara under Amlapitta

| 4.1.e Navayasa Loha

Reference: A.F.I.-II, Lauha,17:2, Cha.Sa.Chi.16/70-71
FEUaacaetasg aac: AAT: |

Faraarat UTE Ur attgarear |

sera UU See MTHS HUTTE

aaraatad sur persaor arf! | (Cha.Chi. 16/70-71)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shunthi Rz. 1 Part
Maricha Fr. 1 Part
Pippali Fr. 1 Part
Hritaki P, 1 Part
Bibhitaki iP, 1 Part
Amalaki P. 1 Part
Musta Rz. 1 Part
Vidanga Fr, 1 Part
Chitraka Rt. 1 Part
Lauha Bhasma = 9 Parts
Procedure:

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for Navayasa
Loha. Ensure each ingredient is clean and free from
impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) or a grinder, grind each ingredients from
Shunthi to Chitraka separately into a fine powder.

3. Combine all the powders together in a clean and
add remaining dravyas. Mixing properly until it
becomes suitable for making tablets or pills, then
roll it into tablets or pills.

4. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air over
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

5. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Navayasa Loha.

6. Store the Navayasa Loha in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency.

Dose: 250 mg.
Anupana: Madhu, Ghrita.
Indications: Pandu, Hridroga, Kushtha, Arsha, Kamala
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Shunthi: Possesses anti-inflammatory, digestive

and carminative properties, helping to improve
digestion and reduce inflammation.
2. Maricha: Enhances digestion, increases bioavaila-

bility of other ingredients, and has carminativ’
properties.

----- PAGE 135 -----
Chapter 4» Aushadhi Kalpa - 1 (Compound Formulations)

3, Pippall: Stimulates digestion and me

tabolism, and
enhances the absorption of Nutrients
4, Hritaki; Known for its laxative, digestive, and anti.

. , ve
inflammatory properties.

5. ibhitaki: Has astringent, digestive, and detoxifying
properties.

6, Amalaki: Rich in vitamin C, it acts as a potent
antioxidant, supports digestion, and balances all
three doshas, particularly Pitta.

7. Musta: Known for its digestive, anti-inflamm
and carminative properties.

g. Vidanga: Has anthelmintic, digestive, and
carminative properties, and helps in detoxification.

9. Chitraka: Stimulates _ digestion, improves
metabolism, and has anti-inflammatory properties.

40. Lauha Bhasma: Provides elemental iron, which is
crucial for treating anaemia (Pandu), and improves

atory,

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption; The bioavailability of iron and other
active compounds is enhanced by the presence of
bioavailability enhancers like Maricha and. Pippali.
The fine particulate nature of Lauha Bhasma also
aids in its absorption.

. Distribution: The active components are distributed
via the bloodstream to various tissues, particularly
targeting the digestive system, blood, and skin.

. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi, Maricha, and
Pippali are metabolized in the liver. The iron from
Lauha Bhasma is incorporated into the hemoglobin
and other iron-containing proteins, while other
ingredients undergo biotransformation to provide
their therapeutic effects.

. Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
and intestines (feces). The detoxifying agents
ensure efficient elimination of residual substances

hemoglobin levels and overall vitality.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Effect of Navayasa

Lauha, An Ayurvedic
Herbomineral Formulation
on Experimentally-Induced
fron Deficiency Anaemia

Namrata Joshi, Depart. of
Rasashastra and B.K, FOA,
IMS, BHU, Varanasi, U.P.

from the body.

In a rat study on nutritional iron deficiency anaemia induced by
a rice milk diet, NL treatment for 45 days significantly improved
hemoglobin%, PCV, TRBC, MCV, MCH, and serum iron levels (P <
0.001), with a decrease in TIBC (P < 0.01). NL showed promise as a safe
herbomineral medicine for iron deficiency anaemia treatment, with no
gastrointestinal upset. The rise in serum iron and drop in TIBC suggest
NUs direct effect on iron stores.

Exploration of
Navayasaluha—A Literary
Scientific Study

Namrata Joshi, Depart. of

Rasashastra and B.K, FOA,
IMS, BHU, Varanasi, U.P.

The study examines different formulations of Navayas Lauha,
uncovering variations in composition and nomenclature. It discusses
differing perspectives, types of Lauha used, and traditional views.
Additionally, it covers herbal constituents, administration methods,
doses, durations, and indications, notably focusing on its use for
Panduroga (iron deficiency anaemia).

| Assess The Efficacy
of Navayasa Lauha
in Management of
Pittaja Pandu

Comparative Clinical
Study of Dhatri Lauha and
Navayasa Lauha in Garbhini
Panduroga with Reference
To Anaemia in Pregnancy.

ayy :

Dr. Milind G., Assistant
Professor Kayachikitsa
Vasantdada Patil
Ayurvedic Medical College
Sangli (MHA)

Dr. Bhagyashri Mahavir
Khot, Asso. Professor
Streerog-Prasutitantra
Dept.R.A.Podar
Medical College Worli,
Mumbai, MHA.

Ayurveda identifies “Pandu” as a condition akin to anaemia,
characterized by low hemoglobin or decreased RBC count. Both
Ayurveda and allopathic medicine prescribe iron-containing treatments
for anaemia. Many “lauha kalpas” in Ayurveda are effective for Pandu.
Hence, this study aimed to evaluate Navayase Loha’s efficacy in
treating Pandu.
In a study with 60 pregnant women aged 18 to 35, Dharti Lauha and
Navayasa Lauha effectively treated iron deficiency anaemia symptoms.
Dharti Lauha notably improved Hb gm%, RBC, MCV, PCV, serum iron
percent, transferrin saturation, and TIBC. Navayasa Lauha significantly
improved Hb gm%, RBC, PCV, MCV, MCH, serum iron, transferrin
\eeeee and TIBC. Dharti Lauha specifically addressed pregnancy-

related anaemia.

4.1. Ichchhabhedi Rasa

‘5, B.R.Udararoga

Reference: A.FI.-I, Rasayoga, 20

Wa aitarge TarraegzT |

WenRero: wie: waaa TAA |

seoridigren: Eafe We waa |
aratsieeiat: UlareTag Tg fara |
AMISTS ciceatreamvat ase |

(B.R.Udararoga, 40/84-85 )

----- PAGE 136 -----
eee eps sae Z “Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana = Chapter

122
INGREDIENTS USED
j detoxifying agentlt helps in balancing the Ss
doshas (Vata, Pitta, Kapha) and enhances the over,

Shunthi Rz. 1 Part

3, Shuddha Parada: Acts as a potent antimicrobial] an |

efficacy of the formulation.

SatanaTN “ — 4. Shuddha Gandhaka: Known for its detoxifying
Shuddha Gandhaka - 1 Part and rejuvenating properties, it helps jj,
Shuddha Tankana - 1 Part improving metabolism and acts as a potent ant;
Shuddha Jayaphala Enm. 3 Parts inflammatory agent.
5, Shuddha Tankana: Assists in liquefying mucus,

paced easing digestive issues, and balancing Pitta dosha
1. Collect all the ingridents of Ichchhabhedi Rasa. 6. Shuddha Jayaphala: Used in higher proportion, j
2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha Parada has digestive, carminative, and laxative properties,

and Shuddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva aiding in relieving constipation and abdomina|

Yantra). disorders.

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to
ensure uniform mixing.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The bioavailability of the active

4. Shape the mixture into pills the size of 2 ratti compounds is enhanced by the presence of

Coiime)- bioavailability enhancers like Maricha. The fine

5. Dry the pills in the shade. particulate nature of the purified ingredients also
6. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container. aids in their absorption.

Dose: 250 mg. 2. Distribution: The active components are distributed

Anupana: Cold Water. via the bloodstream to various tissues, particularly

targeting the digestive system.

3. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shunthi and Maricha are
metabolized in the liver. Purified mercury, sulphur,
and borax undergo specific metabolic processes to
provide therapeutic benefits without toxicity.

Indications: Anaha, Udara roga.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Shunthi: Possesses digestive, carminative, and
anti-inflammatory properties. It helps in reducing
abdominal bloating (Anaha) and _ enhancing

Say 4. Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
digestion.

: ees , are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
2. Maricha: Stimulates digestion, increases the and intestines (feces). Detoxifying agents ensure

bioavailability of other ingredients, and has efficient elimination of residual substances from
carminative properties. the body.

RESEARCH UPDATES

The study aimed to standardize Ichchhabhedi Rasa. Materials were sourced |
from Wardha’s local market and authenticated. Ichchhabhedi Rasa was|
Prepared according to traditional methods. Physico-chemical properties|
were assessed to ensure quality and safety, meeting pharmacopoeial
( sluded that 100g of Ichchhabhedi Rasa could be
obtained from 110 g of raw drugs, aligning with standards.
ichchhabhedi Rasa — Nanditha Kamath, 2nd “Ichchhabhedi Rasa, comprised of Shunthi, Maricha, Shuddha Parada, |
A Herbo- Mineral Year P.G Scholar, Dept. of |Shuddha Gandhaka, Shuddha Tankana, and Shuddha Jayapala, exhibits
Formulation Review Rasashastra & Bhaishajya | potent purgative effects when administered in appropriate doses and with
Kalpana, Taranath Govt. _| suitable anupana. This article alms to review its pharmacological properties |
Ayurvedic Medical and discuss its likely mode of action.”
College, Karnataka.

|4.1.n Krimikuthara Rasa eae ars qpestarennhte: |

AA ATAHTOTASTATaT fersecAy
Reference: A.F.I-IIl, Rasayoga, 16:12, R.Ta.Sa.Kharaliya ot AAU AAT UT |

Masayana'/ 1102 ge UO UHL YSN ETAT |

3

----- PAGE 137 -----
Chapter 4+ Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

(Rasayogasagara, Ist Part, 322, p- 328)
INGREDIENTS USED

Karpura = 8 Parts
Indrayava Sd 1 Part

Jrayemana Pl. 1Part

Ajamoda Fr. 1 Part

Vidanga Fr.

Shuddha Hingula -

Shuddha Vatsanabha _ Rt. i Pare
Nagakeshara Adr. 1 Part =
Vijaya Rasa Uf. QS. For Mardana ia
Palasha bija Churna Sd. 15 Parts
Mushakaarni Pl. _ QS. For Mardana z
Brahmi Rasa Pl. Q.S. For Mardana
Procedure:

j. Take all the required dried ingredients for
Krimikuthara Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. UsingaKhalva Yantra (traditional mortarand pestle)
ora grinder, grind each ingredient, from Karpura to
Nagakeshara, separately into a fine powder.

3, Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4, Combine all the filtered powders in a clean, dry
container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Add Vijaya patra leaf and soakit until itbecomes dry.

7. Add Palasha Bija Churna and triturate properly.

8. Add Musakarni and Brahmi Svarasa, then triturate
well until the mixture becomes suitable for making
tablets or pills. Roll it into tablets or pills.

9. Expose the tablets or pills to sunlight or place them
in a hot air oven for several hours to days until
completely dry.

10. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Krimikuthara Rasa.

1. Store the Krimikuthara Rasa in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency.

Dose: 125- 375 mg.

Anupana: Svarnakshiri Mula Kvatha, Madhu.

Indications: Krimi Roga (Worm Infestation)

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Karpura: Possesses antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory,
and carminative propertiesIt helps in relieving pain
and inflammation caused by worm infestations,

2. Indrayava: Known for its anthelmintic and
antimicrobial properties, it is effective in expelling
intestinal worms.

3. Trayamana: Has digestive, anti-inflammatory, and
anthelmintic properties, aiding in the elimination of
parasites.

4. Ajamoda: Exhibits carminative, digestive, and
anthelmintic properties, helping ' relieve
symptoms of worm infestation.

. Vidanga: Known for its potent anthelmintic action,
it is effective against a wide range of intestinal
parasites.

6. Shuddha Hingula: Acts as a potent antimicrobial and
detoxifying agent, enhancing the formulation’s
overall efficacy.

7. Shuddha Vatsanabha: Used in very small amounts,
it acts as a stimulant, aiding in digestive functions
and helping to expel parasites.

. Nagakeshara: Has  anti-inflammatory and
antimicrobial properties, aiding in the relief of
symptoms associated with worm infestations.

uw

eo

9. Vijaya Rasa: Known for its anti-inflammatory and
analgesic properties, helping to reduce pain and
inflammation.

10. Palasha Bija Churna: Possesses anthelmintic

properties, making it effective against
intestinal worms.

11. Mushakarani: Exhibits digestive and anthelmintic

properties, aiding in the elimination of intestinal
parasites.

12. Brahmi Rasa: Known for its neuroprotective and

cognitive-enhancing properties, it also helps in
reducing stress and inflammation.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: The bioavailability of active compounds
is enhanced by the presence of bioavailability
enhancers like Ajamoda. The fine particulate nature
of purified ingredients aids in their absorption.

2. Distribution: The active components are distributed
via the bloodstream to various tissues, particularly
targeting the digestive system where intestinal
worms reside.

3. Metabolism: Ingredients like Karpura, Ajamoda,
and Vidanga are metabolized in the liver. The

----- PAGE 138 -----
124

-Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 4

anthelmintic directly in the
gastrointestinal tract to expel worms.

components act

4. Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted primarily through the intestines (feces)
and kidneys (urine) Detoxifying agents ensure
efficient elimination of residual substances from
the body.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Study of R.G. Jani, Krimikuthara Rasa
Krimikuthara Department was administered
Rasa (A Herbal of Veterinary orally to 45 cow
Preparation) Medicine, College calves under

on Ascariasis of Veterinary six months old,
inCow Calves Science & Animal _ regardless of sex,

Husbandry, Anand at a dose of 13 mg/
Campus, Anand- kg body weight.
388 001, Gujarat, Parasitic load was
India qualitatively and

quantitatively
evaluated post-
administration. The
drug effectively
eliminated parasites
by the 14th day,
leading to complete
clinical recovery.

[4.2 Parpati Rasayana

Intoduction: Parpati was first formulated in the
th century under the name Rasa Parpati. It is a
Murchchhana variety known for its disease-destroying
properties (vyadhiharana) Mandagni, Gomaya, Kadali,
and Parpatakara each have their own significance in
the preparation of Parpati. Among the different types,
Mridu and Madhyama Paka Parpati are recommended
for use, while Kharapaka should be discarded.

Parpati holds prime importance in the treatment of
Grahni (digestive disorders). It is a prestigious and
reliable preparation in Rasa Shastra for managing
Grahani. The preparation of Parpati must be carried
out with great care, adhering to the guidelines provided
by various classical texts. This includes the purification
of mercury, sulphur, and other materials, as well as the
proper incineration of minerals and metals used in the
preparation of various Parpati formulations. Only then
does Parpati become safe, effective, and beneficial for
therapeutic purposes.

GENERAL METHOD OF PARPATI PREPARATION

1. Purification of Ingredients

~ Purify Parada (Mercury) and Gandhaka (Sulphur):
¢ Use traditional purification methods.

e Mix purified Parada and Gandhaka in an iro,
mortar to prepare Kajjali.

e Ensure Kajjali achieves the desired physical ang
chemical characteristics: blackish color, smooth
texture, collyrium-like appearance, minute
particle size, and filling the grooves of the fingers

2. Preparation of Mixture

“> Add Other Required Drugs:

e Depending on the type of Parpati Kalpana,
incorporate additional drugs.

e Triturate the mixture in an iron mortar until jt
becomes a uniform, homogeneous mixture.

3. Heating and Molding

“ Heat the Mixture:

e Place the mixture in a ghee-smeared iron pan.

e Heat over low fire (Mandagni) until it melts
uniformly.

4. Mold the Mixture:

e Transfer the melted contents onto a clean banana
leaf (Kadali Patra) placed over a bed of cow dung
(Gomaya).

e Cover with another banana leaf and spread a little
fresh cow dung over it.

e Press gently and allow it to cool.

5. Final Steps

“ Dry and Store:

e Remove and dry the Parpati flakes.

e Powder the flakes and store them in an airtight
glass bottle or jar.

Note : The color and appearance of the Parpati depend on
the ingredients used. Proper preparation is indicated
by the impression left on the Parpati from the
pressing of the banana leaf.

DOSAGE

Regarding the dosage (matra) and internal use of

Parpati preparations, there are basically two types of

intake regimens:

* Samanya Prayoga (General Use)

* Kalpa or Vardhamana Prayoga (Gradual Use)

1. Samanya Prayoga: Parpati is prescribed in a dose of
Ratti (125 mg) mixed with fried Jiraka (cumin seeds)
and Hingu (asafetida) in divided doses. In this
regimen, dietary restrictions are not necessary. For
conditions like Unmada (insanity) and Apasmara
(epilepsy), the starting dose mentioned is Ratti
per day.

----- PAGE 139 -----
“Chapter 4 + Aushadhi Kalpa =! (Compound Formulations)

2. Kalpa Prayoga or Vardhamana Prayoga: There are
many references for this regimen in classical texts
highlighted below: :
a. Reference from Rasa Tarangini: The text states that

Ratti (125 mg) of Parpati preparation is given as
a starting dose and is gradually increased up to
Ratti (125 mg). ;

: mg) and is then
gradually increased up to Ratti (125 mg).
PATHYA-APATHYA (DO’s AND DoNn’Ts) DURING PARPATI INTAKE

+ Pathya (Do’s):
According to Rasa Tarangini, the following should
be consumed during Parpati intake:
e Kakamachi (Black nightshade)
e Patola (Pointed gourd)
e Pugiphala (Betel nut)
e Aradraka (Ginger)
e Kadalipuspha (Banana flowers)
e Brinjal
e Old Shalidhanya (Aged rice)
e Godugdha with Sharkara (Cow’s milk with sugar)
« Apathya (Don’ts):
The following should be avoided:
e River water or well water (use buttermilk instead)
e Amla sevana (sour foods)
e Shita Jala Snana (cold water baths)
e Sita vayu sevana (exposure to cold winds)
e Krodha (anger) and Chinta (stress)
e Ushna dravya sevana (hot substances)
eTikta dravyas (bitter substances)
Nimba (neem)
e Sweet substances like Guda (jaggery)
e Anupa mamsa (aquatic/frozen meat)
e Stri sambhasana (sexual activities)
Additional Guidelines from Acharya Chakrapani:
e After taking Parpati, the patient should chew a lot
of betel nut.
e On the third day, the patient can consume meat,
ghee, and milk but should avoid.
e Vidahi anna (foods causing acidity)
e Sexual intercourse

like

e Banana root

¢ Mustard oil

¢ Small fish

e Aquatic birds

e Drink water upon waking up early in the morning.

4.2. Panchamrita Parpati
Reference: A.F.1.-I, Parpati, 16:1, B.R.Grahani Rogadhikara
aiBt wsendicrent Taree cite Tae WAT
alerts aes afanet ard reefer
ut tien a adafaet uiteatetcnd: |
zat ararateatsterygat eh ferfecataet |!
TU AY sea Tela TTT adetl
vara atayetbaat wetted Testes seat: 1!
ait udrarra: Blarct eaten citer |
Tpapragar frenfraford wares TAT
arrautrevaneraet

gear qeagtt aferafeent ate |
Te dhafteratts greta tach Tres ate
(B.R.Grahani Rogadhikara, 8/461-466)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Gandhakall Sinn 96gms
Shuddha Parada 48 gms

lauha Bhasma Se 24 gms

Abhraka Bhasma - 12 gms
TamraBhasma = 6 gms

Procedure:

1. Prepare Kaijjali with purified mercury (parada) and
sulphur (gandhaka) ina khalva.

2. Add the remaining ingredients one by one and mix
well ina khalva.

3. Place the mixture in an iron vessel and heat using a
Sikata yantra.

4. Make a shallow pit in fresh cow dung and line it
with a kadali or eranda leaf.

5. When the mixture melts and becomes liquid, pour
it onto the leaf.

6. Cover with another leaf and gently press with fresh
cow dung.

7. Allow the mixture to cool.

8. Remove and powder the flakes of the medicine.

9. Store in air tight glass container.
Dose: 125 to 250 mg.
Anupana: Honey, Ghee, Bhrishta Jiraka Churna.
Indications: Grahani, Arsha, Chardi, Atisara, Jvara,
Aruchi, Kshaya, Raktapitta.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1, Shuddha Gandhaka: Possesses antimicrobial, anti-
inflammatory, and detoxifying properties. It helps

----- PAGE 140 -----
es

ca, G18

P

s

in managing digestive disorders, infections, and
inflammatory conditions.

Shuddha Parada: Acts as a potent antimicrobial and
detoxifying agent. It enhances the efficacy of other
ingredients and helps in balancing the three doshas
(Vata, Pitta, Kapha).

lauha Bhasma: Provides essential iron, which
is crucial for treating anaemia and improving
hemoglobin levels. It also has rejuvenating
properties and enhances overall vitality.

Abhraka Bhasma: Known for its rejuvenating, anti-
aging, and adaptogenic properties. It supports
the respiratory system, improves digestion, and
enhances overall health.

- Tamra Bhasma (Copper Ash): Possesses antimicrobial,

ant-inflammatory, and hepatoprotective properties.
Tt aids in improving digestion, liver function, and
overall metabolic processes.

RESEARCH UPDATES

'|Dr. AshwiniJadhay,

Assistant Professor in

i chikitsa Department,
i Vidyapeeth Ayurved
ge and Hospital,

[ 4.2.8 Bola Parpati

Reference: A.FI.-I, Parpati, 16.2, YoR., Pradara
Weragasicaa: Wet Aga FATT] |
aiesuilated Witaral SIGS SAR TATE U1
arrange vised saga: feet ea:

TH esgieaitreranngy fattartadiet: 1 (Y.R., p. 447)

INGREDIENTS USED

Procedure:

1.

nN

Prepare Kajjali with purified mercury (parada) and
sulphur (gandhaka) in a khalva.

. Add the remaining ingredient— bola one by one

and mix well in a khalva.

. Place the mixture in an iron vessel and heat using a

Sikata yantra.

- Make a shallow pit in fresh cow dung and line it

with a kadali or eranda leaf.

PH

1)

2

This paper discusses a case study involving a 30-year-old male patient
-|presenting symptoms
Malapravrita, Udara Shula, Udara Gaurava, and Aruchi. Treatment with
Panchamrita Parpati resulted in significant symptom improvement after
45 days. The study explores the role of Panchamrita Parpati in Grahanj
Wyadhi and emphasizes lifestyle principles.

Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter ,

ARMACOKINETICS

Absorption: The bioavailability of active compouny

lis enhanced by the presence of bioavailabi)j,

| enhancers like Shuddha Parada and Shudq}
| Gandhaka. The fine particulate nature of th
bhasngas (ashes) aids in their absorption.

. Distribution: The active components are distribu,
via the bloodstream to various tissues, particular
targeting the digestive system, liver, and blood

. Metabolism: Ingredients like Lauha Bhasma an
Tamra Bhasma are metabolized in the liver. 7;
other ingredients undergo specific metabo!
processes to provide their therapeutic benefii
without toxicity.

. Excretion: The waste products of these ingredient
are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine
and intestines (feces). Detoxifying agents ensur
efficient elimination of residual substances from
the body.

of Muhurbaddam-Muhurdravam,  Apakva

. When the mixture melts and becomes liquid, pour
it onto the leaf.

. Cover with another leaf and gently press with fresh
cow dung.

7. Allow the mixture to cool.

9.

. Remove and powder the flakes of the medicine.
Store in air tight glass container.

Indications: Raktapradara, Raktapitta, Raktarsha.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1

. Shuddha Parada (Purified Mercury): Acts as a potent
antimicrobial, detoxifying, and rejuvenating
agent. It enhances the therapeutic efficacy of the
formulation and helps in balancing the three doshas
(Vata, Pitta, Kapha).

- Shuddha Gandhaka (Purified Sulphur): Possesses
anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and detoxifying
propertiesIt aids in reducing inflammation
managing infections, and purifying the blood.

- Bola (Commiphora myrrha Exudate): Known for its
astringent, antimicrobial, and anti-inflammator\
PropertiesIt is effective in stopping excessi\’

----- PAGE 141 -----
Chapter 4» Aushadhi Kalpa - 1 (Compound Formulations)

127

bleeding, managing infections

: ; » and promoting
tissue healing.

PHARMACOKINETICS

4, Absorption: The bioavailability of active compounds
is enhanced by the presence of bioavailability
enhancers like Shuddha Parada and Shuddha
Gandhaka. The fine particulate nature of the
ingredients aids in their absorption.
Distribution: The active components are distributed
via the bloodstream to various tissues, particularly
targeting the circulatory system
bleeding disorders.

. Metabolism: Ingredients like Shuddha Parada and
Shuddha Gandhaka undergo specific metabolic
processes to provide their therapeutic benefits

without toxicity. Bola is metabolized primarily in
the liver.

Lb?

and areas with

w

4, Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
and intestines (feces). Detoxifying agents ensure
efficient elimination of residual substances from
the body.

RESEARCH UPDATES

fe | se arene oe
No. Name
£

Compare-_ Dr. Monish Parada and Gandhaka un-

tive Phar- MarutiShinde, derwent purification fol-
maceutico- Assisstant lowing respective guide-
Analytical _ Professor, lines. Kajjali was prepared
Study of Department from purified Parada and
Self Pre- of Rasashastra Gandhaka. Bola parpati,
pared Bola and Bhaishajya prepared according to Yog-
Parpatiand Kalpana, Dr. aratnakara, was compared
Market Vedprakash- with market samples, as-
Sample of Patil Ayurveda sessing pharmaceutical
Bolaparpati College, Jalna, and analytical properties.
Maharashtra, Minor differences between
India self-prepared and market
samples were observed,
suggesting the need for
additional pre-clinical
and clinical research to
determine Bola parpati’s

efficacy.

4.3 Kupipakva Rasayana

In Rasa Chikitsa, numerous Rasaushadhis are

mentioned for controlling and curing diseases. Among
these, Kupipakva Rasayana is recognized as a potent
and effective medicine for treating various complicated
diseases. Its advantages include ease of palatability,

long-lasting effects, rapid onset of action, and desired
results, all contributing to its greater efficacy.
The name and indication of the preparation can change
based on modifications in procedure, ingredients,
Bhavana (levigation) drugs, and heating patterns.
Examples include Rasa Sindura, Makaradhvaja, Malla
Sindura, Tala Sindura, Rasa Karpura, and Rasa Pushpa.
When mercury is processed with metals, it forms an
amalgam that leads to an intermediate product. The
main chemical reaction promoters are Gandhaka
(sulphur) and Parada (mercury), where Gandhaka is
responsible for forming sulphides. Mercury reacts with
sulphur to form mercuric sulfide (HgS).
Kupipakva Rasayana preparations hold unique
importance in Rasashastra due to their quicker action
at minimal doses compared to other formulations. The
heating pattern and preparation of Kajjali are crucial
for maximizing yield and increasing the effectiveness
of the preparation without causing side effects. The
best heating pattern for Kupipakwa preparation,
as mentioned in classical texts, is Kramagni, which
involves heating in a gradual sequence.
The recommended heating sequence is as follows:
+ Mridu Agni (Mild Heat): 120-250°C for 6 hours.
+ Madhyama Agni (Moderate Heat): 250-450°C for
6 hours.

+ Tivra Agni (Intense Heat): 450-630°C for 6 hours.
The heating should be intermediate during the
preparation to ensure optimal results.
General Method of Preparation
PREPARATION OF KAJJALI AND KUPIPAKVA RASAYANA
1. Kajjali Preparation
“> Ingredients

e Shodhita Parada (purified mercury)

e Shodhita Gandhaka (purified sulphur)
“> Bhavana (Levigation):

e Herbal juice, such as Vatankura Svarasa or Semal

Svarasa, is used for levigation.

“» Process:

e The prepared Kaijjali is placed in a glass bottle
known as Aatishi Shishi, made with seven layers
of mud and cloth.

e The bottle is placed in a Baluka Yantra for heating.
. Role of Temperature Patterns

Nn

Three temperature patterns are used in the
preparation:
* Mild Heat (Mridu Agni):
e Temperature: 120-250°C

er

----- PAGE 142 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter 4

° Kajjali starts melting,

* Intense Heat (Madhyama Agni):

e Temperature: 250-450°C

¢ Kajjali starts boiling.

e After 12 hours of Mridu and Madhyama Agni,
yellow fumes of Gandhaka disappear,

* More Intense Heat (Tivra Agni):

e Temperature: 450-630°C

e Duration: 6 hours

e The preparation accumulates in the neck
(Galastha) or bottom (Talastha) of the Kupi,
depending on the type.

ADDITIONAL STEPS DURING HEATING

* An iron rod (shalaka) is inserted in the mouth of the
Kupi to avoid any obstruction.

* Perform the copper coin test to ensure the preparation
is ready.

* Stop heating and remove the Kupi from the Yantra.

* Allow the Kupi to cool naturally (svangashita).

EXTRACTION OF THE PREPARATION

+ Post-Cooling:

e Dip a thread in kerosene oil and tie it 2 cm
below the portion where the preparation has
accumulated.

e Burn the thread and cover the bottle with a wet
cloth to break the neck of the Kupi safely.

e Carefully collect the preparation from the neck of
the glass bottle.

e This method ensures that the Kajjali and
Kupipakva Rasayana are prepared effectively,

achieving maximal yield and effectiveness
without unwanted side effects.

|4.3.a Svarna Vanga

Reference: A.F.I.-I, Kupipakva, 15:9, Rasamrita
egunitad ag cat east AAI
faga a deed fe aa oa fafafaraq
wird fafa aeasa Prapittor toad
aaisy Hae fafse gu: acta: |
WR Walsh A Tage Wea
were aia VranTel qf AAT |
ured fant aqatanated: 1
ge saat a crept yet fara
Fan Feta a pat ya q faze
aap fafirena pfreractteady |
alas wautact fraraend HATE |

(Rasamrita, 3/95-100)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Vanga Bhasma = 144 gms
Shuddha Parada - 72 gms
Nimbu Svarasa Fr. Q.S Mardana
Shuddha Navasadara - 72 gms
Shuddha Gandhaka - 72 gms
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingredients of Svarna Vanga.

2. Heat Shuddha Vanga (tin) in an iron ladle until
it melts.

3. Add half the amount of purified mercury to th,
melted Shuddha Vanga.

4. Immediately pour the mixture into a mortar (khalva)
and grind it well until it becomes a fine powder.
5. Addasmall amount of Saindhava Lavana (rock salt)

6. Triturate the mixture with nimbu (Citrus Medica
Var. acida) juice.

7. Wash the mixture with water until the blackness
ceases and dry the mixture.

8. Add equal parts of navasadara (Ammonium
chloride) and Shuddha Gandhaka (sulphur) to the
mercury.

9. Grind well until a fine, smooth powder (Kajjali) is
prepared.

10. Fill the prepared powder into a glass bottle
(Kachakupi).

11. Place the Kachakupi in a sand bath (Baluka Yantra)
12. Apply heat for 4 Yamas (12 hours) carefully.

13. When fumes stop coming out of the Kachakupi,

Temove it from the furnace along with the
Valuka Yantra.

14. Place it on the earth to cool naturally.
15. Once cooled, take out the Kachakupi.
16. Clean and break it from the middle.

17. Carefully collect the golden-colored Svarna Vanga
from the bottom of the bottle.

Dose: 125 — 250 mg.
Anupana: Butter, Honey.

Indications: Jirna Kasa, Shvasa, Prameha,
Mutramarga Roga.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Vanga Bhasma: Possesses antimicrobial, anti-

diabetic, and anti-inflammatory propertiesIt 1s
beneficial in managing respiratory conditions
urinary disorders, and diabetes.

----- PAGE 143 -----
Chapter 4 » Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations) :

2. Shuddha Parada (Purified Mercury): Acts

ean : as a4 potent
antimicrobial, detoxifying, and

rejuvenating
agent. It enhances the therapeutic efficacy of the
formulation and helps in balanei ¢
! ‘ alancing the three doshas
(Vata, Pitta, Kapha), :

3. Shuddha Gandhaka (Purified Sulphur): Provides
antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and detoxifying
effects. It helps in managing infections, reducing
inflammation, and purifying the blood.

4, Shuddha Navasadara (Ammonium Chloride): Known
for its expectorant and diuretic properties. It aids
in clearing respiratory passages and promoting
urine flow.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: The bioavailability of active compounds
is enhanced by the presence of bioavailability
enhancers like Shuddha Parada and Shuddha

RESEARCH UPDATES

saa st erwin

AON,

Sa a a

Gandhaka, The fine particulate nature of the
bhasmas aids in their absorption.

2. Distribution: The active components are distributed
via the bloodstream (o various tissues, particularly
targeting the respiratory system, urinary tract, and
metabolic pathways.

3. Metabolism: Ingredients like Vanga Bhasma and
Shuddha Gandhaka undergo specific metabolic
processes to provide their therapeutic benefits
without toxicity. The other ingredients are
metabolized primarily in the liver.

4, Excretion: The waste products of these ingredients
are excreted primarily through the kidneys (urine)
and intestines (feces). Detoxifying agents ensure
efficient elimination of residual substances from
the body.

partment
of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, R.G.G.
P.G. Ayurvedic College,
Paprola, Distt. Kangra, H.P.

Svarna Vanga by Three
Different Methods

The stud’
Rasamritam and Rasa Tarangini, evaluating thelr therapeutic efficacy
for Dyslipidemia. Green bottles were chosen for Kupipakva preparation
due to heat tolerance and easy product collection. The final product,
found at the bottle’s base, had a golden-yellow color attributed to
Navasadar. Its light nature was due to the fine disintegration of metal
by Navasadara and Parada,
A 14-day animal experiment assessed Svarna-Vanga (SV) toxicity,
starting from 12.5 mg/100 gm b.wt./day, the therapeutic dose. No
tissue toxicity was seen at 12.5 mg and 25 mg/100 gm b.wt./day. At
50 mg/100 gm b.wt. And 100 mg/100 gm b.wt./day, one animal each
exhibited liver fatty vacuolization and small intestine mucosal necrosis.
Findings suggest the drug is non-toxic at therapeutic doses.

Resul

ly aimed to prepare Svarna Vanga using methods from

Kupipakva Rasayanas, including Svarna Vanga, undergo complex
chemical processes. Svarna Vanga's heating procedure, executed in
three stages (2% hours Mriduagni, 7% hours Madhyamagni, and 8
hours Tivraagni) within 600°C-650°C using a Baluka yantra, is crucial for
optimal reaction completion.

2. | Svarna —Vanga —A Short | Sharma,

Duration Toxicity Study | Dept. of Rasa Shastra,
Institute of Medical Sciences,
Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi - 221005,
U.P., India

3. | Pharmaceutical Namrata Joshi, Associate
Standardisation of Professor, Dept. of Rasa
Svarna Vanga—A Shastra Faculty of Ayurveda,
Traditional Ayurvedic Institute of Medical Science,
Preparation Banaras Hindu University,

veranas 221005, U.P,

4, | Systemic Review Amandeep Sharma, Assistant
of Svarna Vanga in Professor, Department
Ayurvedic classics—A of Rasa Shastra, Desh
Kupipakva Rasayana Bhagat Ayurvedic College

& Hospital, Mandi,
Gobindgarh, Punjab, India.

Svarna Vanga, a Kupipakva Rasayana, comprises Vanga (Tin), Parada
(Mercury), Gandhaka (Sulphur), Navasadara (Ammonium Chloride), and
Kalmi Shora (Potassium Nitrate), as per Rasa Tarangini. Its preparation
involves intricate chemical processes, emphasizing Kajjali preparation
and heating patterns. Indicated for conditions like Madhumeha (diabetes
mellitus), Svasa (respiratory disorders), and Pradara (menorrhagia), it
also serves as a Vrishya (aphrodisiac).

4.3.8 Makaradhvaja
Reference: A.FI.-I, Kupipakva, 15: 2, B.R. Vajikarana

ue Wa Acad Tah |
Uh Hreedet Hae AAA Sole |
ued Baleares dtarenfencorgay ||

AUIS ATTA: HALA AMAT: |
cag afta aicitact aU eATAaT ||
Herds HUTS TeV Ae: |
VeoUTUBT Tat ATA TTT HeHLEATST: |
deri Area ats APGeHaTHATT |
ergy Peret AHA |

----- PAGE 144 -----
~~ Rasashasira and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter 4

130 ‘
cs faararh Gre TTaAT STH 3. When flames cease, wait an additional half hou,
sual) an fafaert at ; : and the bottle's bottom will turn red.
ateatrad Yat actuate: | 14. Seal the bottle’s mouth with a clay cork and cove,
Fag Seas: HMA AE | | with a clay cloth.
nararaeae: Sito wrt Saher FAT: | 15. Remove sand up to the bottle’s neck and alloy
virearet Tat HUA: Heat TATA: 1 cooling overnight.

Be ATTA WAT APE IT: | 16. Remove the sandhi bandhana and break th
ah wrerfad aga adtant a1 bottle.

4 fran walt ras ITT 17. Collect the reddish substance (Makaradhvaja) fron
qa wana wate fer! the upper part of the bottle.

Fares ASA ATALOATTT: 1 Dose: 125 mg.

(B.R. Vajikarana, 74/237-246)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Suvarna = 12 gms
Shuddha Parada = 96 gms
Shuddha Gandhaka oS 288 gms

Karpasa Fl. QS. Mardana
Kumari Lf. Q.S. Mardana
Procedure:

1. First cut shuddha svarna Patra into fine pieces

(12 grams).

Mix 12 grams of Shuddha Svarna pieces and 12
grams of Shuddha Parada in a mortar. Grind firmly
for two days until a pishti or buttery paste forms.

. Mix in the remaining shuddha parada and continue

grinding.

. Add finely powdered Shuddha Gandhaka to

the paste.

. Grind for two more days to make a fine black

mixture (Kaijjali).

. Adding Drava Dravya and triturate until it

become dry.

. Divide of Kajjali into three clay-lined bottles and

Seal bottles with corks.

. Place bottles in a sand bath and fill with sand.

9. Perform worship of Lord Shiva, Parvati, fire, and

10.
11.

12.

Rasanakushi.

Ignite the fire in the furnace.

Start with a mandaagni (low flame), then Madhya
agni (medium), and after 5 hours, switch to a tivra
agni (high flame).

Smoke and blue flames (2 to 4 feet) will emit from
the bottles after 5 hours.

Anupana: Betel Leaf, Milk, Honey.
Indications: Hriddaurbalya, Aganimandya, Jara, Jvara
Vali Palitya, Vajikaranakara, Rasayana.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

al

. Shuddha

Shuddha Suvarna: Provides strength, vitality, and
longevity. It acts as a potent Rasayana, enhancing
overall health and vigor.
Parada: Boosts
digestion, and enhances the bioavailability of other
ingredients. It is known for its rejuvenating and
aphrodisiac properties.

immunity, improves

. Shuddha Gandhaka: Possesses antimicrobial, anti-

inflammatory, and detoxifying effects. It supports
respiratory health, promotes digestion, and purifies
the blood.

. Karpasa: Acts as a vehicle for the other ingredients

aiding in their trituration and assimilation.

. Kumari: Known for its cooling and soothing

properties. It supports digestive health, boosts
immunity, and aids in rejuvenation.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active components are absorbed

through the gastrointestinal tract, mucous
membranes, and skin (if topically applied).
. Distribution: The bioactive compounds are

distributed throughout the body via the

bloodstream, targeting various organs and tissues

. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism

primarily in the liver and are converted into
metabolites with enhanced bioactivity.

. Excretion: The waste products are eliminated

primarily through urine, feces, and sweat.

----- PAGE 145 -----
Chapter 4 » Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

RESEARCH UPDATES

Standard Manufactur-
ing Process of Ma-
karadhvaja prepared
by Svarna Patra —
Varkho and Bhasma

Sanjay Khedekar
Scholar, Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Institute for Post
Graduate Teaching and

| Research in Ayurveda, Gujarat

Ayurved University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat, India

In the study, Svarna, Parada, and Gandhaka were mixed |
ratio and heated for 12 hours with 400 g of Kajjali in
1/3rd full, Different batches of Makaradhvaja were pr using
Svarna Patra, Varkha, and Bhasma due to conten va SPT
form. Varkha yielded the highest quality product with 268 ppm gold, |
compared to Patra (131 ppm) and Bhasma (19 ppm). =

A Scientific Review
of Gold Containing
Herbo-mineral Prepa-
ration: Makaradhvaja

Sanjay B. Khedekar, Department
of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, SSAM & H, Hirawadi,
Nashik, Maharashtra, India

Efficacy of Makaradh-
vaja on Madhumeha
(Type 2 Diabetes)

ins

Vaibhav Charde, Department
of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya,
.P.G.T. & R.A., Gujarat Ayurved

Research affirms Makaradhvaja’s safety for therapy. Studies delve
into its pharmacology, emphasizing absorption and distribution.
Experiments establish its roles as an immunomodulator, antidiabetic,
and antioxidant. Clinical trials validate its efficacy, demonstrating
renoprotective effects, efficacy in diabetes mellitus treatment, and
relief in rheumatoid arthritis symptoms.
DM presents a global health threa Fs
Few studies on Makaradhvaja’s efficacy in DM exist. This study aims to
consolidate these findings. Both TBM and SBM variants show promise,
with SBM demonstrating superior outcomes in DM treatment.

t with complex metabolic disruptions.

— A Review through University, Jamnagar-361008,
Ayurvedic Studies Gujarat, India
Ninety Days Sachchidanand Upadhyay

Repeated Dose
Oral Toxicity Study
of Makaradhvaja in
Wistar Rats

Department of Pharmacology,
Central Ayurveda Research
Institute of Drug Development,
Kolkata, West Bengal, India

Male and female Wistar rats received Makaradhavaja for ninety days
at varying doses. Evaluations included biochemical, hematological
changes, necropsy, and histopathological assessments. High-dose
group displayed increased kidney weight, unrelated to histopathology
or serum biochemistry, deemed non-adverse. NOAEL was determined
at 27 mg/kg and NOEL at 13.5 mg/kg.

|4.3.c Samirapannaga Rasa

Reference: A.FI.-I, Kupipakva, 15:8, A.A.G.S. Part - 4,
Page 88/1-2
Waited We Teas forza
aap fatter argent AAT!
San Ted AAPA A Aga ||
(A.A.G.S. Part - 4, Page 88/1-2)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part
Shuddha Malla = 1 Part
Shuddha Hartala = 1 Part
Shuddha Manahshila - 1 Part

Procedure:
1. Mix Shuddha Parada and Shuddha Gandhaka in
Khalva Yantra to make Kajjali.
2. Adding remaining drugs one by one and triturate
for 3 days.
3. Fill the powdered mixture into a glass bottle
(Kachakupi).

4, Cover the bottle with cloth smeared in mud,
repeating seven times up to the neck.

5. Place the bottle in a sand bath (Baluka Yantra).

6. Apply slow heat, then moderate, and finally strong
heat, gradually increasing the temperature for 8
Yama (24 hrs).

7. After cooling, collect the sublimed product
(Samirapannaga Rasa) from the neck of the bottle.

Dose: 62% to 125 mg.

Anupana: Betel Leaf, Honey.

Indications: Sannipata _ Roga, Kaphonmada,
Kaphajasandhibandha Jvara, Shvasa, Kasa.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1, Shuddha Parada: Possesses antimicrobial, anti-infla-
mmatory, and rejuvenating properties. It enhances
metabolism and strengthens the immune system.

2: Shuddha Gandhaka: Exhibits antifungal, antibacterial,
and antiparasitic effects. It aids in detoxification
and promotes skin health.

3, Shuddha Malla: Known for its antipyretic and
analgesic properties. It helps in reducing fever and
alleviating pain.

4. Shuddha Hartala: Acts as an expectorant and
bronchodilator, It is beneficial in respiratory
disorders and promotes lung function.

----- PAGE 146 -----
132 ~__ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana = Chapter 4

5. Shuddha Manahshila: Possesses carminative and 2. Distribution: The bioactive compounds are dist,

digestive propertieslt aids in digestion and relieves buted throughout the body via the bloodstrea,,
gastrointestinal discomfort. targeting various organs and tissues.
PHARMACOKINETICS 3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolis,

primarily in the liver, where they are converted jn;

1. Absorption: The activ i ; ‘ aa
rp active constituents are absorbed metabolites with enhanced bioactivity.

through the gastrointestinal tract and mucous ; ae
membranes. 4. Excretion: The waste products are eliminat,

primarily through urine and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Standard Manufacturing Vani Gayathri PA, Samira Pannaga Rasa, an example of Talastha Kupipakva Rasayana
Process of Sameera Department of involves arsenic and mercurial preparation. Temperature control is crucia
Pannaga Rasa Rasashastra and during its gradual preparation stages. Following the Rasachandamsy
Bhaishajyakalpana, reference, it took 18 hours to complete. The yield was 185.8 gm from 409
Dr. Sarveppalli g Kajjali, with 66.7% obtained from the bottom of kupi. Samira Pannags
Radhakrishnan Rasa is indicated in Tamakasvasa, Amavata, and neurological diseases
Rajasthan Ayurveda
University, Jodhpur,
Rajasthan, India
Therapeutic Potential Dr. Vikas Kumar, Samira Pannaga Rasa (SPR), an arsenical compound cited in Rasa
of Sameera pannaga Department of Rasa Chandamshu, contains Parada (Hg), Gandhaka (S), Somala (As.0
rasa (An Arsenical Shastra and Bhaishajya | Haratala (As.S.), and Manahshila (As,S,). Variations exist in ingredients
Compound Formulation) Kalpana, IPGT and and heating duration across Rasa classics. This study aims to compile
A Versatile Kupipakva RA, GAU, Jamnagar - research from various Indian centers, databases, and literature to provide
rasayana 361008, Gujarat, India | concise insights into its pharmaceutical, analytical, pharmacological, and
clinical aspects.
Effect of Sameera Pannaga Mayur Mashru, In a study, 52 patients received Samira Pannaga Rasa at 30 mg twice
Rasa (Arsenomercurial Superintendent, daily for 4 weeks along with Nagavallidala. Results showed Significant
Formulation) in the Government Ayurved | improvement in asthma control, peak expiratory flow rate, and eosinoph
Management of Tamaka Hospital Popatpura, count. 33.33% experienced marked improvement, 44.44% moderate, and
Shvasa (Bronchial Asthma) Godhra, Gujarat, India | 20.00% mild. Sameera Pannaga Rasa emerges as an effective treatment
—Randomized double blind for bronchial asthma.
Clinical Study
Pharmaceutical Preparation | Neelam Choudhary, Samira Pannaga Rasa, from rasa classics, targets Tridoshagn, Sandhivata
of Sameera Pannaga Rasa Rasa Shastra & Unamada, Shvasa, Kasa, Jvara, Pneumonia, etc. Prepared under standard
under Standard Temperature | Bhaishajya Kalpana, conditions referencing AFI, it maintains specific temperatures and
Conditions Gaur Brahmin Precautions. Resulting in a brick-red product, it yielded 150 g, with 100 g
Ayurvedic Colleg Talastha and 50 g Kanthastha. The preparation emphasizes temperature
Rohtak, Haryana, india. | control.
Pharmaceutico Analytical Bibhakar Thakur. The drug, visually greenish-black, was analyzed by Energy-dispersive
Standardization X-ray, confirming arsenic, sulphur, carbon, and mercury as primary
and Preclinical Safety components. Subacute oral toxicity testing on rats (6, 12, and 25 me/kg

evaluation of Herbomineral
Formulation (Samira
Pannaga Rasa) in Rats

BW for 28 days) showed no adverse effects or mortality. Hematological
biochemical parameters, and histopathological examination indicated
safety, with only mild changes in intestinal villi at medium to high doses
The formulation is deemed safe at prescribed doses.

[4.4 Pottali Rasayana form of medication that exhibits maximum efficacy in

low dosages. Its unique characteristics lie in its specific
DEFINITION shape, form, and preparation methods.

The term ‘Pottali’ appears in classical Ayurvedic texts,
primarily referring to the bundling of various herbal
drugs in a piece of cloth for therapeutic use, particularly
for sedation in various diseases Pottali is a highly potent

HISTORICAL REFERENCES

* 12th Century: The first reference to the Putapaks
Vidhi (method) of Pottali Kalpana is found in the
Rasaratnakara.

----- PAGE 147 -----
“Chapter 4 + Aushadhi Kalpa - 1 (Compound Formulations)

» 13th Century: Rasa Prakasha Sudhakara first
mentioned the preparation of Pottali by Gandhaka
Drava Paka in the context of Vajra Pottali

sth Century: The Yogaratnakara text mentioned
Gandhaka Drava Paka using an iron vessel

<4

Bs

Later texts of the 18th and 19th centuries repeated
previously described Pottali Kalpas, with the
Rasayana Sangraha introducing five new Pottali
preparations.

igth and 20th Centuries: Texts like Bharat Bhaishajya
Ratnakara, Rasayoga Sagara, and Siddha Prayoga
Sangraha compiled many Pottali Yogas.

%

UNIQUE FEATURES OF POTTALI KALPANA

Preparation: Mercury treated with liquid sulphur
becomes more therapeutically efficacious, which may
have inspired the formulation of Pottali Kalpana.

Administration: Quick in action, requires low doses, and
js easy to transport.

Shelf Life: Long shelf life and easy to handle.
Temperature Control: Requires sustained heat patterns
and uses sulphur in liquid media to maintain
temperatures up to 250°C.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
1. Kajjali Preparation:
e Prepared using Shodhita Parada and Shodhita
Gandhaka.
e Bhavana is performed using herbal juices like
Vatankuru Svarasa or Semala Svarasa.
2. Filling and Heating:
e The Kajjali is placed in a glass bottle (Aatishi
Shishi) made with layers of mud and cloth.
e This is then placed in a Baluka Yantra for heating.
3. Temperature Patterns:

 Mridu Agni (Mild Heat): 120-250°C

e Madhyama Agni (Moderate Heat): 250-450°C

e Tivra Agni (Intense Heat): 450-630°C

e Sulphur bath is used to maintain the required
temperature during Pottali Paka.

4, Sulphur Bath and Paka

¢ The method of sulphur bath for Pottali Paka was
first mentioned by the author of Rasa Chintamani
in the 14th century.

e The preparation is done on Mridu Agni, using
indirect heat methods like Valuka Yantra and
Lavana Yantra.

5. Current Relevance

* Despite its potency and efficacy, the commercial

availability of Pottali Kalpana medicines is

ce ‘a |

minimal. ‘The formulation’s unique properties
and extensive historical background make it a
significant but underutilized aspect of Ayurvedic
medicine.

4.4., Hemagarbha Pottall

Reference: A.RI-II, Rasayoga, 16:66, Rasamrita
Rasavigyaniya

Wad aqui fret Tees a!

anTa Tauber Fea Yea A

Ufeat ares visser Fara: 1
aa fafaeatet car qt oa far aI
Wed wears Sear Sea aT TL
Taf werag arraut qf WH!
fated aat aera wart: |
Wect taraten ature Wasa |
AERA FoI WUaTSAS AT |

(Rasamrita Rasavigyaniya 9/218-222)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shuddha Parada Sia Parts

Shuddha Gandhaka = — 2 Parts

Suvarna Bhasma ESS 1 Part by

Tamra Bhasma a 3 Parts

Kumari Svarasa Lf QS. For Mardana (7 days)
Procedure:

1. Take Shuddha Parada in a Kharala and mix it with
Shuddha Gandhaka for the preparation of Kajjali.

2. Continue Mardana until all features of Kajjali are
present (i.e., the mixture becomes smooth, fine,
black, and lusterless).

. Stop Mardana when these features are achieved.

. Add Tamra Bhasma to the mixture.

. Add Svarna Bhasma afterward.

. Add Kumari Svarasa to the mixture fordaily
Mardana for seven days.

HD OF fF O

7. After seven days, ensure the paste becomes soft and
easily rolls into pill form without sticking to the
fingers.

. Shape the paste into Shikharakara/Pugphalakriti
(cone shape with a flat bottom and tapering
upwards) using honey.

. Place the Apakwa Pottali in Shuddha Gandhaka
powder over a silk cloth (four folded)

co

\o

10. Tie the Pottali and hang it ina porcelain glass beaker
containing Ashuddha Gandhaka.

----- PAGE 148 -----
134,

_ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter z

ll. Keep the setup on a hotplate with a low flame,
recording the temperature every 30 minutes to keep
Gandhaka in liquid form.

The next day, when the temperature of the Pottali
reaches room temperature, remove the outer
coverings of the Pottali.

Take out the Pottali, and scrape off any Gandhaka
adhered to the outer surface with a knife.

14. Store in air tight glass container.

Dose: 125 mg

Anupana: Ardraka Svarasa, Parnakhanda Rasa
Indications: Sannipata Jvara.

12.

13.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Shuddha Parada: Provides rejuvenating and
detoxifying effects, boosts immunity, and promotes
overall well-being.

2. Shuddha Gandhaka: Exhibits antimicrobial, anti-
inflammatory, and antioxidant properties,
supporting the body’s defense mechanisms.

RESEARCH UPDATES

uthor me

A Critical Review on | Divya Singh, PG Scholar, Dept.

Hemagarbha Pottali: | of RSBK, National Institute of

An Effective Ayurveda | Ayurveda DE-NOVO, Jaipur,
Formulation Rajasthan, India

Dr PV.N.R. Prasad, Ph.D. Scholar,
P.G. Dept. of Rasashastra &
Bhiashajya Kalpana, Dr.

NRS. Govt. Ayurvedic College,
Vijayawada, A.P., India.

Hemagarbha
Pottali— The Wonder
Drug of Ayurvedic
Critical Care

3, Suvarna Bhasma: Known for its anti-inflarmmat,,,
immunomodulatory, and cardioprotective eff;
enhancing vitality and strength.

4. Tamra Bhasma; Possesses
antipyretic, and hematinic properties, aiding ir
management of various disorders.

anti-inflamrat:,-

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents are absorb
through the gastrointestinal tract and muc
membranes.

2. Distribution: The bioactive compounds
distributed throughout the body
bloodstream, targeting various organs and tissues

3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolis:
primarily in the liver, where they are converted in:
metabolites with enhanced bioactivity.

via th

4. Excretion: The waste products are eliminated
primarily through urine and feces.

Hemagarbha Pottali Rasa, a potent blend of Parada and othe
Dhatus, is known for its fast-acting properties and enhanced effi
due to Agni Samskara. Despite underutilization, its Yogavahi nature
enables easy administration and absorption, advocating for wider
production and stringent quality control measures in pharmaceuticc
industries.

Hemagarbha Pottali Rasa, effective against Multi Drug Resistan:
bacteria, holds promise as an Ayurvedic alternative to modern
antibiotics. With proper recognition and widespread use, it could
be a breakthrough in treating serious conditions, restoring its
significance and glory in the medical field.

Sachinkumar Sahebrao Patil,
Department of Kayachikitsa,
M.A.M/s Sumatibhai Shah Ayurved

Role of Hemagarbha
Pottali Rasayana
Lehana in post
COVID-19 Lung

fibrosis: A Case Study | Pune - 411028, Maharashtra, India.

Sharma, Ved Bhushan
Medical officer, Dept. of
Agadtantra, Rishikul Govt. P.G.
Ayurveda College, Haridwar,
Uttarakhand, India.

Pharmaceutical
Study of Hemgarbha
Pottali Rasa

Mahavidyalaya, Malwadi, Hadapsar,

Hemagarbha pottali Rasayana, at 125 mg per day in divided doses
effectively complements post-COVID-19 Lung Fibrosis treatment. it
alleviates symptoms such as breathlessness, cough, and fever, while
reducing signs like elevated Respiratory Rate and crepitations.

Varka or Svarna tantu, certified by gold purity, compact the
Pottali. Temperature control alters properties from Guru to Laghu
Indirect, uniform heat gradually processes Pottali, enhancing
pharmacological effects. Excessive or direct heat causes melting
due to Gandhaka. Pottali Pakacana be determined by Vyomvarna of
Gandhaka, burning silk cloth, and distinctive tapping sound on mud
pot, aided by porous silk cloth to prevent Gandhaka adhesion.

----- PAGE 149 -----
“Chapter 4 = Aushadhi Kalpa - | (Compound Formulations)

MULTIPLE CHOICE Questions

3. Which of the following is NOT a therapeutic indication
of Arogyavarddhini Gutika?
a. Chronic Fever (Jirmajvara)
b. Skin Disorders (Kushtha)
¢. Respiratory Infections
a. Liver Disorders (Yakrit Vikara)
2. What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Arogyavarddhini Gutika?
a. Antibacterial
b. Detoxification and Purification
¢. Antihistaminic d. Anticoagulant
3. Which of the following is NOT a component of
Arogyavarddhini Gutika?
a, Haritaki
b. Shuddha Parada d. Katuki
4 What is the recommended dose
Arogyavarddhini Gutika?
a, 100-250 mg c. 250-500 mg
b. 500-750 mg d. 1000-1500 mg
5. Which part of the Nimba tree is used in the preparation
of Arogyavarddhini Gutika for the process of Mardana?
a. Bark c. Leaves
b. Flowers d. Fruits
6. What is the primary function of Eranda and Katuki
roots in Arogyavarddhini Gutika?

¢, Ginger (Ardaraka)

range for

a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Liver detoxification
c. Metabolic regulation
d. Enhancing immune response
7. Which of the following is NOT listed as an indication for
Kumara Kalyana Rasa?
a. Jaundice (Kamala)
b. Diabetes (Prameha)
c. Cough (Kasa)
d. Breathlessness (Shvasa)
8. What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Kumara Kalyana Rasa?
a, Antipyretic and Immunomodulatory
b. Anticoagulant
c. Diuretic
d. Hypoglycemic
9. Which component of Kumara Kalyana Rasa contributes
to its hepatoprotective properties?
a. Mauktika Bhasma c. Kumari Rasa
b. Abhraka d. Hema Bhasma

10.

11.

12.

ust

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

What is the recommended dose range for
Garbhapala Rasa?

a. 50-100 mg ¢. 125-250 mg

b, 250-500 mg d. 500-750 mg

Whatisthe primaryanupana (vehicle foradministration)
recommended for Garbhapala Rasa?

a. Ardaraka Svarasa (Ginger Juice)

b. Draksha Jala (Water decoction of grapes)

c. Nimba Svarasa (Neem Juice)

d. Honey

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Garbhapala Rasa?

a. Headaches (Siro Roga)

b. Nausea and Vomiting (Chardi)
c. Diabetes (Prameha)

d. Abdominal Pain (Shula)
Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in

Chandraprabha Vati?

a. Bibhitaki c. Brahmi

b. Guggulu d. Haritaki

What is the recommended dose range for

Chandraprabha Vati?

a. 100-250 mg c. 500-750 mg

b. 250-500 mg d. 750-1000 mg

Which of the following is NOT listed as an indication for
Chandraprabha Vati?

a. Anaemia (Pandu)

b. Heart Disease (Hridroga)

ce. Urinary Calculi (Mutrakrichchhra)

d. Weakness (Daurbalya)

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in
Pravala Panchamrita Rasa?
a. Pravala Bhasma

b. Shankha Bhasma d. Kapardika Bhasma
What is the recommended dose of Pravala
Panchamrita Rasa?

c. Vanga Bhasma

a. 125mg ce. 500 mg

b. 250 mg d. 750 mg

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Pravala Panchamrita Rasa?

a, Dysentery (Atisara)

b, Heart Disease (Hridroga)

ec. Anaemia (Pandu)

d. Respiratory Disorders (Kasa, Shvasa)

----- PAGE 150 -----
136,

19.

20.

21.

22:

23.

24.

25.

26.

20:

28.

Which of the following Is NOT an Ingredient used in

Anandabhairava Rasa?

a, Shuddha Hingula G:

b. Shuddha Vatsana-
bha

Shuddha Lauha

d. Shunthi

What is the recommended dose of Anandabhairava
Rasa?

a. 125mg c. 500 mg

b. 250 mg d. 750 mg

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Anandabhairava Rasa?

a. Joint Disorders (Amavata)

b. Kidney Stones (Ashmari)

c. Diabetes (Prameha)

d, Jaundice (Kamala)

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in
Yogendra Rasa?

a. Svarna Bhasma

b. Shuddha Vatsana-

c. Rasa Sindura

bha d. Mukta Bhasma
What is the recommended dose of Yogendra Rasa?
a. 125 mg c. 500 mg
b. 250 mg d. 750 mg

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Yogendra Rasa?

a. Insomnia (Unmada)

b. Hemorrhoids (Arsha)

c. Jaundice (Kamala)

d. Epilepsy (Apasmara)

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in
Lakshmivilasa Rasa?

a. Shuddha Gandhaka c. Atibala Root

b. Karpura d. Shuddha Parada
What is the recommended dose of Laxmivilas Rasa?
a. 125 mg c. 500 mg
b. 250 mg d. 750 mg

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Lakshmivilasa Rasa?

a. Kustha (Leucoderma)

b. Prameha (Diabetes)

c, Vata Roga (Diseases due to Vata Dosha)

d. Shula (Colic)

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in
Vasantakusumakara Rasa?

a. Rajata Bhasma c. Lauha Bhasma

b. Naga Bhasma d. Tamra Bhasma

~~ Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter 4

29. What Is the recommended dose range ,,

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

Vasantakusumakara Rasa?

a, 100-200 mg c. 300-400 mg

b. 200-300 mg d. 400-500 mg
Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as 4,
Indication for Vasantakusumakara Rasa?

a. Kshaya (Consumption)

b, Jvara (Fever)

c. Smriti Bhramsa (Memory Loss)

d. Karshya (Emaciation)

Which of the following is NOT an indication {.,
Vasantamalti Rasa?

a. Kasa (Cough) c. Netra Roga (|

b. Jvara (Fever) Disorders)
d. Shotha (Inflar
mation)

What is the primary pharmacodynamic property 0;
Vasantamalati Rasa?
a. Antihypertensive
b. Antipyretic

c. Anticoagulant

d. Antidepressant
How is Vasantamalati Rasa administered?

a. With water c. With ghee

b. With milk d. With honey
Which of the following is NOT an indication for Briha
Vata Chintamani Rasa?

a. Vata Pittaja Roga c. Pralapa

b. Bhrama d. Kasa (Cough)
What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa?

a. Antipyretic c. Nervine Tonic

b. Antidiabetic d. Antihistaminic
How is Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa administered?

a. With water

With milk

With ghee

With Guduchi Svarasa, Aja Kshira, Brahn
Svarasa, Tambula Svarasa, Shankhapushp
Svarasa, Honey

Which of the following is NOT an indication for
Shankha Vati?

a. Agnimandya

b. Arocaka

c. Vibandha (Constipation)

d. Kshaya

b.
G
d.

What is the primary ingredient responsible for the
antacid property of Shankha Vati?

a. Chincha Kshara
b. Pancha Lavana

ec. Shankha Bhasma
d. Nimbu Svarasa

----- PAGE 151 -----
“Chapter 4 * Aushadhi Kajpa - 1 (Compound Formulations)

39. How is Shankha Vati administered?
a. With water
b. With milk
c, With honey, warm water, buttermilk
d. With ghee

40. What is the primary indication for Shvaskuthara Rasa?
a. Agnimandya
b. Prameha

c. Shvasa

pan d. Netra Roga

41. Which ingredient in Shvasakuthara Rasa helps in
liquefying mucus and easing respiratory conditions?
a. Shuddha Rasa c. Shuddha Tankana
b. Shuddha Manah-

shila d. Shunthi

42, How is Shvaskutahara Rasa administered?
a. With honey c. With water
b. With milk d. With ghee

43. Which of the following is NOT an indication for
Kamadudha Rasa?

a. Pittavikara c. Kasa
b. Daha d. Murchchha

44, What is the primary function of Shankha Bhasma in
Kamadugdha Rasa?

a. Enhancing digestion
b. Balancing Pitta dosha
ce. Providing calcium
d. Improving immunity
45. How is Kamadudha Rasa administered?
a. With honey c. With water
b. With milk d. With ghee
46. Which of the following is NOT an indication for
Sutashekhara Rasa?
a. Gulma c. Vataja atisara
b. Mandagni d. Hikka
47. What is the primary function of Shunthi and Maricha in
Sutashekhar Rasa?
a. Providing calcium c. Enhancing digestion
b. Balancing Vata d. Improving immu-
dosha nity
48. How is Sutashekhara Rasa administered?
a. With milk c. With ghee
b. With water d. With honey
49. Which of the following is NOT an indication for
Navayasa Loha?
a. Kushtha
b. Pandu
50. What is the primary function of Lauha Bhasma in

c. Agnimandya
d. Kamala

Navayasa Loha?
a. Enhancing digestion

51;

52.

53.

54.

55s

56.

Wo

58.

5

wo

60.

61.

my

62.

b. Treating skin diseases

c. Providing iron supplementation

d. Balancing Pitta dosha

Which ingredient is NOT included in Navayasa Laccha?
a. Shunthi c. Musta

b. Bibhitaki d. Yashtimadhu
What is the primary indication for Ichchhabhedi Rasa?
a. Prameha c. Jvara

b. Anaha d. Sandhivata

Which of the following ingredients is NOT included in
Ichchhabhedi Rasa?

a. Maricha c. Shuddha Vatsana-

bha
b. Shuddha Parada d. Shuddha Gandhaka
How should Ichchhabhedi Rasa be administered?
a. With honey c. With warm water
b. With milk d. With ghee
Which of the following is NOT an ingredient in

Krimikuthara Rasa?
c. Shuddha Gandhaka

a. Karpura

b. Indrayava d. Ajamoda

What is the primary indication for Krimikuthara Rasa?
a. Pandu c. Krimi Roga

b. Vatarakta d. Arsha

How should Krimikuthara Rasa be administered?

a. With milk c. With ghee

b. With kvatha d. With honey

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient in
Panchamrita Parpati?

a. Shuddha Gandhaka

b. Shuddha Parada

c. Shuddha Vatsanabha

d. Lauha Bhasma

. Whatis the primary indication for Panchamrita Parpati?

a. Pandu c. Grahani

b. Kasa d. Atisara

How should Panchamrita Parpati be administered?

a. With milk c. With honey

b. With water d. With kvatha

Which of the following is NOT an indication for Bola
Parpati?

a. Raktapradara c. Vataja Roga

b. Raktapitta d. Raktarsa

Which of the following formulations is indicated for
Hriddaurbalya, Agnimandya, Jara, and Rasayana?

a. Svarna Vanga

----- PAGE 152 -----
63.

64.

65.

66.

b. Makaradhvaja
c. Bola Parpati
d. Sameera Pannaga Rasa

What is the primary indication of Sameerapannaga
Rasa?

a. Pandu
b. Jirna Kasa

c. Sannipata Roga
d. Arsha

What is the primary indication for Hemagarbha
Pottali?

a. Pandu
b. Kamala

ce. Sannipata Jvara

d. Kushtha

Which ingredient in Hemagarbha Pottali provides
rejuvenating and detoxifying effects?

a. Shuddha Parada c. Suwarna Bhasma
b. Shuddha Gandhaka d. Tamra Bhasma
Which metal bhasmais present in the lowest proportion
in Hemagarbha Pottali?
a. Suvarna Bhasma
b. Tamra Bhasma

c. Shuddha Parada
d. Shuddha Gandhaka

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana ‘ Chapter 4

67. What Is the recommended anupana (accompanying
substance) for Hemagarbha Pottali?

a. Milk c, Ardaraka Svaras
b. Honey d, Parnakhanda Rag,
ANswens Keys

at c 2. b of c 4, c 5; c
6. c 7. b 8. a ’ b 10. c
11. b Alp), c a3% c 14. b 15, b
16. c alg; b 18. b 195 c 20. b
21. d 22. b 23. b 24. c 25. b
26. b 27. d 28. d 29; b 30. b
31. c ey b 33. d 34. d 35. c
36. d 37, c 38. c a\2), c 40. c
41. c 42, a 43. b 44. c (cy ar
46. b 47. c 48. d 49. a 50. c
51. d 52. c 53. c 54. (e 55. c
56. c 57. b 58. c 593 c 60, (a
61. c 62. b 63. c 64. c 65. a
66. a 67. c

Long Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Short note on Arogyavardhini vati

e Ingridents of Navayasa Loha

e Probable Mode of Action of Shvasakuthara Rasa
e Panchamrita Vati

Describe Kupipakva Kalpana and write in detail
Sameera Pannaga Rasa.

Describle types and importance of Potalli Kalapna
and write Hemagarbha Pottali.

Write the ingridents, Matra, probable mode of action
of Chandraprabha vati and its research updates.

a ge

poe

----- PAGE 153 -----
5.1 Dashamoola Kvatha

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 55

Wage Sat AS A Wea |

fraritquidam arqcivd frags

Witt hatact Het fasten

fraeas High HA Aa a ee

usatet: Id at Hwei cy era |
MAAS ATA AAG! (B.R., Kasa., 15/13-15)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shalaparni Pl. 1 Part
Prishniparni PI. 1 Part
Brihati Pl. 1 Part
Kantakari Pl. 1 Part
Gokshura PI. 1 Part
Bilava Rt./St.Bk. 1 Part
Agnimantha Rt./St.Bk. 1 Part
Shyonaka Rt./St.Bk. 1 Part
Gambhari Rt./St.Bk. 1 Part
Patala Rt./St.Bk. 1 Part
Procedure:

1.

~»

=

Do

Obtain the necessary all the ingredients required for
Dashamula Kvatha. Ensure each ingredient is dried
and cleaned properly.

Grind each ingredient separately into a
coarse powder.

Mix all the coarse powders properly in a clean, dry
container.

. Add eight times the amount of water to the mixture

of coarse powders.

. Allow the mixture to soak in the water overnight.

The next morning, subject the mixture to mild heat.
Continue heating until the liquid reduces to 1/8th
of its original quantity.

AUSHADHIKALPA-I]
(COMPOUND DRUGS/ FORMULATIONS)

7. Once reduced, filter the mixture through a clean
cloth to remove the solid residues.
8. Collect the filtrate in a clean container. This filtrate
is known as Dashamula Kvatha.
Dose: 48 gms.
Prakshepa Dravya: Pippali Churna.
Indications: Parshva Shula, Jvara, Shvasa, Kaphaja Kasa.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory: The components of Dashamula
Kvatha, particularly those like Gokshura and Bilva,
possess anti-inflammatory properties, reducing
inflammation in conditions such as Parshva Shula
(pain in the flanks) and Jvara (fever).

2. Expectorant and Bronchodilator: Herbs like
Kanthakari and Brihati help in clearing mucus
from the respiratory tract and dilate the bronchial
passages, making it effective in treating conditions
like Shvasa (dyspnea) and Kaphaja Kasa (cough
with phlegm).

3. Antipyretic: The formulation has ingredients like
Agnimanthaand Patala which help in reducing fever.

4. Analgesic: Shalaparni and Prishniparni have
analgesic properties, helping in alleviating pain.

5. Immunomodulatory: Many components of
Dashamula, particularly those with Rasayana
(rejuvenating) properties, enhance the body's
immune response.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: Dashamula Kvatha, being a decoction,
is typically absorbed through the gastrointestinal
tract. The presence of Pippali Churna enhances
its absorption and bioavailability due to its bio-
enhancing properties.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active constituents
are distributed via the bloodstream to various

----- PAGE 154 -----
~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter :

140

tissues. The lipophilic (fat-loving) nature of some enzymes, break down the active compounds jn;

constituents aids in their distribution to lipid-rich
tissues.
. Metabolism: The herbal components undergo
metabolism primarily in the liver. Enzymatic
actions, including those involving cytochrome P

metabolites.

Excretion: The metabolites of Dashamula Kvatha a;,
excreted through the kidneys (urine) and, to a les<,,
extent, through the feces. Some volatile component
might be excreted via the lungs.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Comparative Study of
Dashamula Kvatha and
Dashamularishta with Special
Reference to their Method of
Preparation and Uses

BSMM Sooriyaarachchi, P.G.
Scholar, Institute for Post
Graduate Teaching and Research
in Ayurveda, Gujarat Ayurved
University, Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

Dashamularishta surpasses Dashamula Kvatha in efficacy
across various conditions due to its heightened activity |,
the body and prolonged therapeutic effects, simplifying

treatment for patients. Additionally, it offers a broader rang,

of therapeutic actions compared to Dashamula Kvatha.

A Critical Review on Different
Dashamuladi Kvatha Yoga

Standardization of Dasha-
mula Kvatha Churna: A Herba
Compound Drug Used For
Parisheka in Spastic Cerebral
Palsy

Dashamula Kvatha Dhara
Sveda in Knee Injuries —A
Review

Neha Parmar, Ph.D. Scholar,
Department of Dravyaguna,
LP.GT. & R.A., Gujarat Ayurveda
University, Jamnagar, Gujarat, India

This review assessed Dashamula Kvatha formulations
including those with added Prakshep dravya, from classica
texts Dashamula kvatha demonstrated effectiveness fo,
various conditions. Adding extra dravyas expanded jt;
efficacy and application spectrum.

GR Arun Raj Department of
Kaumarabhritya, Sri Dnarmasthala
Manjunatheshwara College of
Ayurveda and Hospital, Hassan,
Karnataka, India.

Standardization of Dashamula Kvatha Churna was conducted
through physicochemical studies following WHO guidelines
Indian Pharmacopoeia, and Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
These tests authenticated and ensured the quality of the
formulation.

Dr. Manmeet Kaur, P.G. Scholar,
Department of Panchakarma,

Dr DY. Patil College of Ayurved
and Research Centre, Dr DY.

Patil Vidyapeeth (Deemed to be
University) Sant Tukaram Nagar,
Pimpri, Pune , Maharashtra, India.

This review examines Kvatha Dhara Sveda, where Dashamula
Kvatha is applied directly to the affected area either
alone or alongside modern therapies Dashamula Kvatha
a combination of ten drugs, proves effective in reducing
inflammation, alleviating pain, and enhancing muscle tone

[5.2 Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha

Kutaja St. Bk. 1 Part

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 59 Guduchi St. 1 Part

TATE TSA ESATA: 1 Kushtha Rt 1 Part
urgiagtaantratengatacitacn: | Nagara Rz. 1 Part
Welter alasgTerteaah: ul Bharangi Rt. 1 Part
Vara pUT gaa: | Kantakari Pl. 1 Part
fs a: 1 Vacha Rz. 1 Part

‘ Nimba St. Bk. 1 Part

Frage Tetra Ugalg a Haridra Rz. 1 Part
Wrarearel ear eaaT aA: M Daruharidra St. 1 Part
sgaraforeerrarercarrd: wa: v Haritaki P. 1 Part
Ue: qa fad Fara HOM a | | Bibhitaki P, 1 Part
AUG BY Acad TA | Amalaki Pp 1 Part
Bren yee a WaT UaTaTa I Patola Pl. 1 Part
Herera Aart afsagte: wera Katuka Rz. 1 Part
(Sha. S.M. Kha., 2/137-1421%4) Mura RE EUs

INGREDIENTS USED wees ~ =
Asana Ht. Wd. 1 Part

chia Rt Par
Manjishtha Rt. 1 Part Shatavari Rt. Tr. 1 Part

Musta Rz. 1 Part Traymana Pl. 1 Part

----- PAGE 155 -----
Chapter 5 + Aushadhi Kalpa - il (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

Part Used

Pippall Fr. 1 Part
Kutaja Sd. 1 Part
Vasa Rt 1 Part
Bhringaraja Pl. 1 Part
Devadaru Ht. Wd. 1 Part
Patha Rt. 1 Part
Khadira Ht. Wd, 1 Part
Shveta Chandana Ht. Wd. 1 Part
Trivrt Rt. 1 Part
Varuna St. Bk, 1 Part
Kiratatikta Pl, apar
Bakuchi Sd 1 Part
Aragavadha Fr. 1 Part
Sakhotaka St. Bk. 1 Part
Maha Nimba St. Bk. 1 Part
Karanja St. Bk. 1 Part
Ativisha Rt. 1 Part
Hrivera Rt. 1 Part
Indravaruni Rt. 1 Part
Shvetasariva Rt. 4 Part
Krishna sariva Rt. 1 Part
Parpata Pl. 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Obtain the necessary herbs and _ ingredients
required for Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha. Ensure
each ingredient is dried and cleaned properly.

2. Grind each ingredient separately into a
coarse powder.
3. Mix all the coarse powders properly in a clean, dry

container.

Add sixteen times the amount of water to the

mixture of coarse powders.

Allow the mixture to soak in the water overnight.

The next morning, subject the mixture to mild heat.

Continue heating until the liquid reduces to 1/8th

of its original quantity.

Once reduced, filter the mixture through a clean

cloth to remove the solid residues.

Collect the filtrate in a clean container. This filtrate
is known as Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha.

Dose: 48 gms.

Indications: Vatarakta, Kushtha Upadamsha, Shlipada,

Ardita, Pakshaghata, Medodosha, Netra Roga.

=

oO

Sy

“

o

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory: Many ingredients such as
Manjishtha, Guduchi, and Haridra possess strong
anti-inflammatory properties, which help reduce

. Immunomodulatory:

inflammation in conditions like Vatarakta (gout)
and Kushtha (skin diseases).

Herbs like Guduchi and
Amalaki are known to boost the immune system,
helping the body fight against infections and
autoimmune conditions,

. Blood Purification: Manjishtha, Nimba, and Khadira

are traditional blood purifiers, helping to cleanse
the blood of toxins and improve skin conditions.

. Antioxidant; Several ingredients, including Amalaki

and Guduchi, have antioxidant properties, which
help in neutralizing free radicals and protecting
tissues from oxidative damage.

Analgesic: The formulation provides pain relief due
to the presence of anti-inflammatory and analgesic
herbs such as Devadaru and Kantakari.

. Antimicrobial: Ingredients like Haridra and Kutaja

possess antimicrobial properties, which are effective
against various pathogens causing skin diseases
and other infections.

PHARMACOKINETICS

il,

N

1.

Absorption: The decoction is absorbed through the
gastrointestinal tract. The presence of bio-enhancing
herbs such as Pippali enhances the absorption and
bioavailability of the active components.

. Distribution: After absorption, the active constituents

are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream. Lipophilic constituents can easily
penetrate lipid-rich tissues.

. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism

primarily in the liver, where they are broken down
into their active metabolites by hepatic enzymes,
including cytochrome P enzymes.

. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted primarily

through the kidneys (urine), and some components
might be excreted via the feces. Volatile components
might also be excreted through the lungs.

RESEARCH UPDATES

[srNo.|/ArticleName|AuthorName| Result
Physico- Kapil Thakur, This study aimed to stan-
chemical MGM School dardize Mahamanjisthadi
Character- of Biomedi-  kadha and evaluate its Dx
izationand _calSclences, antimicrobial properties —
Antimicroblal MGMIHS, against skin infection
Properties  Kamothe- pathogens. Physico-
of Maha- 410206, Navi chemical analysis covered
manjishthadi Mumbai, organoleptic tests, pH,
Kadha: An Maharashtra, alcohol content, Brix,
Ayurvedic India. and specific gravity Phy-
Formulation tochemical screening as-

sessed bioactive com-

----- PAGE 156 -----
142

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter «

Sr.No. [Article Name] Author Name| Result

pounds, while contami-
nants like heavy metals,
aflatoxins, and micro-
bial load were examined
HPTLC estimated lupeol,
ellagic acid, and gallic
acid Antimicrobial activ-
ity against five pathogens
was determined via the
well-diffusion method.

5.3 Pushyanuga Churna

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 113, Bhaishajyaratnavali,
Strirogadhikara

Sorte A A AAMT aA ATA
alot yararent aes Tee Prada!
got qergri ara feaurtagfarr
wap eantend Fora Ff AIL!
(B.R. Pradararogadhikara, 66/25-30)

INGREDIENTS USED

PartUsed | Amount

Patha (Rt.) 1 Part
Jambu-Bija majja (Enm.) 1 Part
Amre-bija majja (Enm.) 1 Part
Pashanabheda (Rz.) 1 Part
Daruharidra (St.Ext.) 1 Part
Ambastaki (Rt.) 1 Part
Mocharasa (Exd.) 1 Part
Lajjalu (Rt.) 1 Part
Kamala (Adr.) 1 Part
Kamkuma (Stl/Stg.) 1 Part
Ativisha (Rt.) 1 Part
Musta (Rz.) 1 Part
Bilva (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Lodhra (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Gairika 3 1 Part
Katphala (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Maricha (Fr.) 1 Part
Shunthi (Rz.) 1 Part
Mridvika (DrFr.) 1 Part

ingridents | Part Used | Amount

Rakta Chandana (Hd.Wd.) 1 Part
Katvanga (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Kutaja (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Shvetasariva (Rt.) 1 Part
Dhataki (Fl) 1 Part
Yashti (Rt.) 1 Part
Arjuna (St.Bk.) 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients
Pushyanuga Churna. Ensure each ingredient |
clean and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind ea
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clea;
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniforn,
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once agai;
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency

6. Store the final compound powder in sterilized
airtight glass containers to preserve its potency anc
freshness.

7. Label the containers with the name Pushyanug:
Churna and the preparation date.

Dose: 1 to 3 gms.
Anupana: Honey, Tandulodaka.

Indications: Asrigdara, Shveta Pradara, Rajodosha
Arsha, Yonidosha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Hemostatic: Herbs like Lodhra and Patha have
hemostatic properties, helping to reduce excessiv
bleeding, which is beneficial in conditions like
Asrigdara (excessive menstrual bleeding).

2. Astringent: Ingredients such as Amra-bija anc
Jambu-bija provide astringent action, which helps
in tightening tissues and reducing discharge in
conditions like Shveta Pradara (leucorrhea).

3. Anti-inflammatory: Herbs like Daruharidra and
Pasanabheda reduce inflammation, making the
formulation useful in treating inflammation-related
disorders.

4. Antimicrobial: Components like Maricha (black pep
per) and Shunthi (dry ginger) possess antimicrobial
properties, which help in combating infections

5. Analgesic: Ingredients such as Musta and Rakte
Chandana provide pain relief.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Chapter 5 + Aushadhi Kalpa - il (Con
PERO CL MMe

6, Uterine Tonic: Many herbs in the formulation act as
uterine tonics, supporting reproductive health and
normalizing menstrual cycles,

PHARMACOKINETICS

4, Absorption: The powdered form of p

Churnais typically taken with honey or tandulodak i

. thie 7 7 + : :
(rice water), which aids in its absorption through
the gastrointestinal tract. The fine particles ensure a
larger surface area for better absorption.

ushyanuga

RESEARCH UPDATES

pound Drugs/Formulations)

2. Distribution: After absorption, the active constituents
ave distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, targeting reproductive organs and
other affected tissues.

. Metabolism: The herbal components undergo meta-
bolism primarily in the liver, where they are broken
down into active metabolites by hepatic enzymes.

. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted primarily
through the kidneys (urine), and some components
might be excreted via the feces.

A Critical Review
on Pushyanuga
Churna: An Ayur-
vedic Polyherbal
Formulation

Vatsala Jain, PG Scholar; National
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur,
Rajasthan, India

A Review Study of
Effect of Pushyanug
Churna in Shveta
Pradara

Priyanka Salve, PG Scholar,
Department of Rognidan Avum Vikriti
Vigyan, D.M.MAyurvedCollege, Arni
Road, Yavatmal, Maharashtra, India.

__AuthorName

The present study highlights minimal var
uses, and Anupan of Pushyanuga Churna,
recommend Its use for diverse bleed

of diarrhea, dysentery, bleeding piles, at
children. ‘pe oh
Pushyanuga Churna, praised by Maharshi Atreya, comprises dravyas
with Tridosh Nashak properties. This study explores its effectiveness
in treating Shveta Pradara, gathering material from ancient
Ayurvedic texts, journals, and websites. Results show Its significant
efficacy in addressing Shveta Pradara.

5.4 Sudarshana Churna

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 116
Bhaishajyaratnavali, Jvararogadhikara
mcideed Writ Caaie Ta AA

WaT TAMAS “Tet get HATTA
ret area Yat Gest aeatear 1
fried Goad at atat Graty|

Ugdad Aicigt area GeTyaT AT |
aaraidiam fact Aha TAH |

amid aeag Pea arta a
WABad ged MEATY aT |

Wilert aged ed Eaves FAVA: ||
2 Gav en ear fez!
Aa var aaorttretrat frrtelct |
(B.R., Jvara., 5/308-317 )

INGREDIENTS USED

Ingridents Part Used | Amount |

Pita chandana (HtWd.) 1 part
Rajani (Rz.) 1 part
Devadaru (HtWd.) 1 part
Vacha (Rz.) 1 part
Musta (Rz.) 1 part
Haritaki (P.) 1 part
Dhanvayasa (Pl.) 1 part
Karkatshringl (Gl.) 1 part
Kantakari (PI.) 1 part
Shunthi (Rz.) 1 part
Trayamana (Pl.) 1 part
Parpata (PI.) 1 part
Nimba (St.Bk,) 1 part
Granthika (Rt.) 1 part
Hrivera (Rt.) 1 part 55
Sati (Rz.) 1 part
Pushkara (Rt) 1 part
Pippali (Fr.) 1 part
Murva (Rt) 1 part
Kutaja (St.Bk.) 1 part
Yashti (Rt) 1 part
Shigru (Sd.) 1 part
Indrayava (Sd.) 1 part
Shatavari (RtTr) 1 part
Daruharidra (St.) 1 part
Raktachandana (Ht.Wd,) 1 part

----- PAGE 158 -----
144

Pv ingridents | PartUsed | Amount |
Padmaka (Ht.Wd.) 1 part
Sarala (HtWd.) 1 part
Ushira (Rt.) 1 part
Tvak (St.Bk.) 1 part
Saurashtri - 1 part
Shalaparni (PI.) 1 part
Yavani (Fr) 1 part
Ativisha (RtTr.) 1 part
Bilva (Rt.) 1 part
Maricha (Fr.) 1 part
Gandhapatra (Lf) 1 part
Dhatri (Fr.P.) 1 part
Guduchi (St.) 1 part
Katuka (Rt.) 1 part
Chitraka (Rt.) 1 part
Patola (PI.) 1 part
Prishniparni (PI.) 1 part
Kiratatikta (PI.) 1 part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Sudarshana Churna. Ensure each ingredient is
clean and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Store the final compound powder in sterilized,
airtight glass containers to preserve its potency and
freshness.

7. Label the containers with the name Sudarshana
Churna and the preparation date.

Dose: 2 to4 gms.
Anupana: Warm Water.

Indications: Yakritplihavriddhi, Jvara, Vishmajvara,
Gulma, Jirnajvara.

RESEARCH UPDATES

__| A Critical Review on |
_| Sudarshana Churna Department of Rasa Shastra &
Bhaishajya Kal

Ayurved University, Rishikul

India

Sheenam Rani, PG Scholar, PG Sudarshana Churna, containing Swertia chirayita,

vedic remedy for fevers. Pharmacological studies confirm its efficacy
against fever, infections, and other conditions, making it a valuable
therapeutic option. This article reviews its Ayurvedic literature and|
pharmacological studies, underscoring its effectiveness.

a, Uttarakhand

PHARMACODYNAMICS

4. Antipyretic: Many ingredients such as Rajani (turm ,
G ric), Nimba, and Guduchi have strong, antipyret;,
,
properties, helping to reduce fever.
2. Anti-inflammatory: Herbs like Devadaru and Shunth;
reduce inflammation, which is beneficial in condj
tions like Jvara (fever) and inflammatory diseases
3, Antimicrobial: Ingredients such as Nimba and
Haritaki possess antimicrobial properties, whict
help in combating infections that cause fever anq

other ailments.
4. Hepatoprotective: Herbs like Katuka and Kutaja
protect the liver, supporting its function and helping

in conditions like Yakrit plihavriddhi (enlarged
liver and spleen).

5. Antioxidant: Several ingredients, including Guduchi
and Dhatri (Amla), have antioxidant properties
which help in neutralizing free radicals and
protecting tissues from oxidative damage.

6. Digestive Stimulant: Ingredients like Vacha and Mari
cha stimulate digestion, aiding in the management
of digestive disorders and improving overall
digestion.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The powdered form of Sudarshana
Churna is typically taken with warm water
enhancingits absorption through the gastrointestinal
tract. The fine particles ensure a larger surface area
for better absorption.

2. Distribution: After absorption, the active constituents
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, targeting various organs, especially
the liver and spleen.

3. Metabolism: The herbal components undergo
metabolism primarily in the liver, where they are
broken down into active metabolites by hepatic
enzymes, including cytochrome P enzymes.

4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted primarily
through the kidneys (urine), and some components
might be excreted via the feces. Volatile components
might also be excreted through the lungs.

is a notable Ayur-

———

----- PAGE 159 -----
"Article Name
Evaluation of

the /n Vitro and In
Vivo Antioxidant
Potentials

| clad Powder

Author Name
Weerakoon Achchige Selvi Saroja
Weerakoon, Department of
Ayurveda Paediatrics, Institute of
Indigenous Medicine, University
of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka

assay. In vitro, ig of SP equaled jig of TROLOX, with . + .% radical
Inhibitionin vivo, after days of dosing, SP significantly reduced
serum MDA levels compared to controls (p <), indicating potent
antioxidant effects.

3, | Pharmacodynamics of

Rajiv Kumar, Universi i
Sudarshana Churna ana

Delhi - 110007, India,

fw review explores the pharmacodynamics of Such, enhancing’
potential Ayurvedic medicine applications. It proposes innovative
methodologies based on recent research findings and elucidates
Such’s mode of action according to Ayurvedic principles. The
impact on disease control and treatment Is discussed, along with
the Influence of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic factors on
medication safety and effectiveness in geriatric patients.

4. | Standardisation of
Sudharshana Churna
Polyherbal Formulation

|

J. Karthi, Aadhibhagawan

College of Pharmacy, Rantham,
Tamilnadu, India

Sudarshana Churna was prepared following the Ayurvedic Formulary
of India. Through in-house preparation and standardization of
two marketed versions, it was assessed based on organoleptic,
physical, and physico-chemical characteristics, as well as preliminary
phytochemical analysis. These parameters establish sufficient
standards for quality control in pharmaceutical settings.

[5.5 Lavana Bhaskara Churna

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 114, Sharngadharasamhita,
Madhyamakhanda

ug Wade oe fas Sraeser
faoeit forcing qrorsiivearrTerH |
Areata TAT ||
Bite sites faaticheh spear ||
Uaeilad Aa Tau UTAH I
7 ugar at Tea: |
enact : CA
ayia TEU HE frat a TIT!
Vth Yet AeTATATAATA A VESTA
Facienfemara WeHUMead GAT
(Sha. S.M. Kha., 6/138-144)

INGREDIENTS USED

| ingridents | Partused | Amount

Samudra Lavana - 16 parts
Sauvarchala Lavana = 10 parts
Vida Lavana - 4 parts
Saindhava Lavana - 4 parts
Dhanyaka (Fr.) 4 parts
Pippali (Fr) 4 parts
Pippali Mula (Rt.) 4 parts
Krishna Jiraka (Fr.) 4 parts
Patraka (Lf) 4 parts

liiiingridents) |) Partused_— | Amount

Nagakesara (Stmn.) 4 parts
Talisa (Lf) 4 parts
Amlavetasa (Fr.) 4 parts
Maricha (Fr.) 2 parts
Jiraka (Fr.) 2 parts
Shunthi (Rz.) 2 parts
Dadima (Bija) (Fr.) 8 parts
Tvaka (St.Bk.) 1 part
Ela (Sd.) 1 part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for Lavana
Bhaskara Churna. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4, Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Store the final compound powder in sterilized,
airtight glass containers to preserve its potency and
freshness.

7. Label the containers with the name Lavana Bhaskara
Churna and the preparation date.

Dose: 3 gms.
Anupana: Mastu, Takra, Warm Water, Asava.

----- PAGE 160 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 5

a and Tvaka protect the body fron

146

Indications: Agnim
Arsha, Pliharoga,
Vibandha, Bhagandara, Sopha,
Amavata, Hridruja, Ajirna.

andya, Grahani, Vatakaphaja Gulma,
Udara Roga, Kshaya, Kushtha,

Shula, Shvasa, Kasa,

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Digestive Stimulation: S
Lavana, and Saindhava Lav
enzymes and gastric secretions,
and relieving symptoms of wea
(Agnimandya).

. Carminative and Antispasmodic: Dhanyaka, Maricha,
and Jiraka help in relieving gas and abdominal
spasms, reducing bloating and discomfort.

_ Laxative Effect: Lavana (salts) act as mild laxatives,
promoting bowel movements and relieving
constipation (Vibandha).

ali and Amlavetasa support

amudra Lavana, Sauvarchala
ana stimulate digestive
enhancing digestion
k digestive fire

4. Hepatoprotective: Pipp
liver function and protect against liver disorders,
aiding in detoxification.

5. Anti-inflammatory: Nagakesara, Talisa, and

duce inflammation, helping

Rakta Candana re
morrhoids (Arsha) and skin

in conditions like he

diseases (Kushtha).
6. Antimicrobial: Saindhava Lavana and Shunthi
possess antimicrobial properties, helping in treating

infections and preventing microbial growth.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Punam Kumari, MD

7. Antioxidant: El a |
oxidative stress by neutralizing free radicals.
and Dadima suppor

g. Cardiotonic: Nagakesara
cardiovascular health, improving heart functio;

and reducing cardiac pain (Hridruja).

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The powd
Churna, taken with a
water Or buttermilk),
the gastrointestinal tract,
of action.

Distribution: Th

via the bloodstream to various O

targeting the digestive system,

cardiovascular system.

. Metabolism: The components undergo hepati
metabolism, where they are converted into activ
metabolites. The presence of Pippali enhances
the bioavailability of other ingredients, ensuring
efficient metabolism.

_ Excretion: The metabolites are excreted mainl)
through urine and feces, ensuring the remova
of waste products from the body. Some volatile
components may be excreted through the lungs
aiding in respiratory conditions.

ered form of Lavana Bhaskar
nupana (vehicles like warr
is quickly absorbed throug
ensuring rapid ons

e active compounds are distributed
rgans, particular]
liver, spleen, and

Lavana Bhaskara Churna treats in

Lavana Bhaskara
Churna—An Ayurvedic
Formulation Used in the
Treatment of Gastric
Intestinal Disease: A
Review

appetitelts properties include Katu and Tikta Rasa, Laghu, Ruksha
Tikshna Guna, Katu Vipaka, Ushna Virya, and Dipana, Pachana, aiding
digestion and detoxificationlt alleviates respiratory and digestive issues
and lowers cholesterol and triglycerides. Despite limited research
it’s widely used for gastrointestinal conditions, urging further clinica
studies for global acceptance.

Lavanabhaskara Churna is a versatile Ayurvedic remedy used for
gastrointestinal issues such as digestive problems, malabsorption
syndrome, abdominal disorders, hemorrhoids, constipation, colicky
pain, and more. 4

The study aimed to prepare and standardize Bhaskara Lavana Churna
an Ayurvedic formulation used for various ailments. Parameters such as
physicochemical properties, phytochemical screening, and Na* and K”
content were evaluated following WHO guidelines and compared with
a marketed formulation, contributing to establishing pharmacopoeia!
standards for traditional medicines.

Scholar, P.G. Department of
Rasa Shastra & Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Uttarakhand
Ayurved University,
Rishikul Campus, Haridwar,
Uttarakhand, India.

Efficacy of Lavan Bhaskar Monoj Dash

Churna—Critical Review

Deepak Kumar Hati,
Assistant Professor,
Institute of Pharmacy and
Technology, Salipur, Odisha,
India

Standardization and
Estimation of Sodium and
Potassium of Marketed
Lavana Bhasker Churna

5.6 Bilvadi Gutika

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 188
telah Aas A TENA FAUT WAsAET |

eager eraarafeafaasitorssts |
SER Yotaeaha sy Tae aSSTAUTAATS!: U1
(A.H.U., 36/84

n

----- PAGE 161 -----
Chapter'S + Aushadh! Kalpa - I! (Compound Drugs/Formutalions)
INGREDIENTS USED

frugName | Part Used | proportion |

Bilva Rt. 1 Part

Tulasi Pushpa Fl. 1 Part

Karanja Sd, 1 Part

Tagara Rt. 1 Part

Oevadaru Ht. Wd. 1 Part

Haritaki P, 1 Part

Bibhitaki P. 1 Part

Amalaki P, 1 Part

Shunthi Rz. 1 Part

Maricha Fr. 1 Part

Pippali Fr. 1 Part

Haridra Rz. 1 Part
Daruharidra St. 1 Part

Basta Mutra = Q.S. for Mardana
Procedure;

1, Gather all the required dried ingredients for Bilvadi

IS)

iss)

cS

gor

>

a

g2

9.

Gutika. Ensure each ingredient is clean and free
from impurities.

Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clean,

dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.
Adding Basta Mutraas mardana dravya, until
it becomes a concentrated form and suitable for
making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets
or pills.

Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Bilvadi Gutika.

Store the Bilvadi Gutika in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Indications: Luta- Vrishchika, Sarpavisha, Vishuchika,
Ajirna, Garadosha, Jvara, Bhuta Badha.

RESEARCH UPDATES

ticle Nami z
Conceptual Study of

Action of Bilvadi Gutika in
PG, studies in Agadatantra,

SDM College of Ayurveda,
Udupi, Karnataka

Chemotherapy Induced
; Hepatotoxicity.

1;

[oy

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Antitoxic and Antivenom: Bilva and Tulasi have
properties that neutralize toxins and venoms,
aiding in the treatment of snake bites (Sarpavisha),
scorpion stings (Vrishchika), and insect bites (Luta).

. Digestive Stimulation: Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki

(Triphala) along with Shunthi, Maricha, and Pippali
enhance digestive function, relieve indigestion
(Ajirna), and promote bowel movements.

. Antimicrobial and Anti-inflammatory: Haridra and

Daruharidra possess strong antimicrobial and
anti-inflammatory properties, helping to manage
infections and reduce inflammation.

. Antipyretic: Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki (Triphala)

have antipyretic properties, reducing fever (Jvara)
and associated symptoms.

. Immunomodulatory and Detoxifying: Bilva, Haritaki,

and Tulasi help in modulating the immune response,
enhancing the body’s ability to fight infections and
detoxify harmful substances.

. Carminative and Antispasmodic: Pippali, Maricha,

and Shunthi relieve gas and spasms, reducing
abdominal discomfort and improving overall
digestive health.

PHARMACOKINETICS

ils

Absorption: Bilvadi Gutika, administered orally, is
absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. The
presence of Piperine from Pippali enhances the
absorption of other active constituents.

. Distribution: The active compounds are distributed

through the bloodstream, targeting the digestive
system, liver, immune system, and sites of infection
or inflammation.

. Metabolism: The herbs undergo hepatic metabolism,

where they are converted into active metabolites.
The involvement of Haritaki, Bibhitaki, and Ama-
Jaki (Triphala) ensures efficient liver function and
metabolism.

. Excretion: Metabolites are excreted primarily

through urine and feces. The use of Mutra (Goat's
urine) for processing helps in the detoxification
process and ensures effective elimination of waste
products from the body.

sult

Bilvadi Gutika has the potential to be a preferred treatment for
PG. Scholar, Department of| toxic pathologies resulting from chemotherapy drugs due to its

hepatoprotective properties. This formulation is recognized for its
anti-toxic effects, making it a potential remedy for chemotherapy-

induced hepatotoxicity.

]
1

----- PAGE 162 -----
~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter «

Bilvadi Agada” Singh, Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Agadatantra
evam Vidhi Vaidyaka
Chandrashekhar Singh
Ayurved Sansthan,

Kausambi, U.P.

Bilvadi A
for Its pleasant taste, longer shelf life, and easy dosage adjustmen,
It’s recommended for acute toxico-pathological conditions 3, A
contains multiple herbs such as Bilva, Surasa, Karanja, Nata, Suvaha
Haridra, Daruharidra, Triphala, Trikatu, etc. It’s commonly used for \,
properties in balancing vata-kapha, its pungent-bitter taste, ang }
heating potency.

Phytochemical Analysis of
Bilvadi Gutika

Anjali W.G., PG Scholar,
Department of Agada
Tantra, Sri Dharmasthala
Manjunatheshwara College
of Ayurveda and Hospital,
Hassan, Karnataka, India

Sanjana P, lV BAMS, Dept.of
PG Studies in Svasthavritta,
JSS Ayurveda Medical
College, Mysuru-570028,
Karnataka, India

An Open Label Single
Arm Interventional Study
to Evaluate the Efficacy

of Bilvadi Gutika on
Raised Level of ESR in
Musculoskeletal Disorders

The formulation contains alkaloids, steroids, tannins, flavonoig.
coumarins, resin, and quinones, which are also found in its ingredien;.
The extract of Bilvadi Gutika underwent phytochemical analys).
revealing these constituents. Their collective action contributes to th.
formulation’s effectiveness, despite potential variations in individu
ingredient profiles.

The study evaluated Bilvadi Gutika’s efficacy in reducing elevatey
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) in Musculoskeletal Disorder,
Despite significant symptom improvement, the paired t-test for Esp
showed a statistically insignificant result (p=.) Overall, Bilvadi Gutik;
moderately reduces elevated ESR levels and significantly alleviate;
associated symptoms in musculoskeletal disorders.

5.7 Chitrakadi Gutika

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 186
Teas frorcitae gt ant maui a1
aie fegasnitat a ei cena qotad
Tent agdses afer TA ar!
chet feos STAT, ATCT
(Cha.Chi., 15/96-97)
INGREDIENTS USED

Chitraka Rt. 1 Part
Pippali Rt. 1 Part
Yavakshara Pl. 1 Part
Sarji Kshara - 1 Part
Sauvarchala Lavana - 1 Part
Saindhava Lavana = 1 Part
Vida Lavana = 1 Part
Samudra Lavana = 1 Part
Audbhida Lavana = 1 Part
Shunthi Rz. 1 Part
Maricha Fr. 1 Part
Pippali lie, 1 Part
Hingu Exd. 1 Part
Ajamoda Fr, 1 Part
Chavya St. 1 Part
Matulunga Rasa Fr, QS. for Mardana
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Chitrakadi Gutika. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar anq

pestle) or a grinder, grind each ingredient separate!
into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clear

cloth to remove any coarse particles.
4. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clear

dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform

blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again

through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency

6. Adding Matulunga Rasa as mardana dravya

until it becomes a concentrated form and suitable
for making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets

or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is

completely dry.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This

final product is called Chitrakadi Gutika.

9. Store the Chitrakadi Gutika in a clean, dry, airtight

container to preserve its potency and freshness.
Dose: 2 gms.

Anupana: Warm water, Butter milk.

Indications: Agnimandya, Amadosha, Grahani.
PHARMACODYNAMICcS

1. Digestive Stimulation: Chitraka and Pippali Mula
enhance digestive fire (Agni), promoting efficient

digestion and metabolism.

----- PAGE 163 -----
“Chapter 5 » Aushadhi Kalpa - 1! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

2. Appetizer and Carminative: The combination of

Shunthi, Maricha, and Pippali stimulates appetite

a 3

reduces bloating, and relieves gas

. Laxative and Antacid: Yavakshara and Sarjikshara

act as mild laxatives and antacids, alleviating
constipation and hyperacidity,

. Mineral Support: Various salts (Lavana), including

Sauvarchala Lavana, Saindhava Lavana, Vida

;
Lavana, Samudra Lavana, and Audbhida Lavana
Ay

help balance electrolytes, improve digestion, and
prevent fluid retention. :

5, Carminative and Anti-flatulent: Hingu, Ajamoda, and
Chavya prevent the formation of gas and relieve

abdominal discomfort.

. Amelioration of Ama (Toxins): The overall formulation
works to digestand eliminate Ama (toxic undigested
material) from the gastrointestinal tract, enhancing
overall digestive health and preventing associated
disorders.

UPDATES
p|ArticleName | Author Name_
Role of Chitrakadi Santosh Girbide, Professor and

Gutika in HOD, Department of Roganidana
Gastrointestinal and Vikriti Vigyana, RA Podar
Disorders—A Review | Medical College, Worl, Mumbai,

PHARMACOKINETICS
1, Absorption; Chitrakadi Gutika, administered orally,
is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. The
presence of bio-enhancers like Pippali ensures
better absorption of active ingredients.

_ Distribution; The active compounds

distributed through the bloodstream, targeting

the gastrointestinal system, liver, and areas with
accumulated Ama.

Metabolism: The ingredients undergo hepatic

metabolism, where they are converted into active

metabolites, Shunthi, Maricha, and Pippali support
liver function and enhance metabolic processes:

_ Excretion; Metabolites are primarily excreted
through urine and feces. The use of salts (Lavana)
helps in maintaining fluid balance and ensures
effective elimination of waste products.

are

Chitrakadi Gutika, from Charakasamhita and Yogaratnakara, treats
gastrointestinal disorders, notably Grahani, by aiding Amapachana
with properties like lightness, dryness, pungent taste, and hot potency,
it targets Vata-Kapha imbalances, especially in Pittaja conditions.
Various anupanas enhance its effectiveness.

Maharashtra

Mahendra Ther, PG (Scholar) — 5
Swasthvritta Bhausaheb Mulak
Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya,
Nagpur, MHA, India

Conceptual Review
on Chitrakadi Vati
as a Agnidipana in
Mahasrotas

Chitrakadi Vati, formulated by Charaka, acts as an Agnidipana in
Mahasrotas Reviewing various Ayurvedic texts and clinical trials, it’s
found effective for enhancing digestion and treating anorexia and

indigestion.

| Dr. Sonal A Shah, HOD

and Professor at Loknete
Gutika in the Rajarambapu Patil Ayurved
Management of College, P.G. Institute and

Medoroga Reseach Centre, Islampur, Sangli,
MHA

Controlled Clinical
Study of Chitrakadi

The study aimed to evaluate Chitrakadi Gutika’s impact on obesity.
Forty patients received a daily dose of mg along with Tambul Lavang
before morning meals for three months, followed by a day follow-up.
Results showed significant reductions in weight, BMI, and obesity

symptoms.

A Critical Review: Vd Dipika Dongare, PG Scholar,
Probable Mode of Department of Rasashastra and
Action of Chitrakadi | Bhaishajya Kalpana.

Vati

The study aimed to investigate the potential mode of action of

Chitrakadi Vati.
Methodology: The study involved a critical review of the ingredients

of Chitrakadi Vati and their properties to elucidate its probable mode
of action.

Vineeta Khanvilkar, Bharati
Vidyapeeth’s College of
Pharmacy, C.B.D Belapur, Navi
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India

ih

Standardization of
Chitrakadi Vati: An
Ayurvedic Polyherbal
Formulation

The study developed a rapid HPTLC method to standardize Chitrakadi
Vati, an Ayurvedic remedy for various conditions Piperine and
plumbagin were identified as marker compounds, and the method
was validated per ICH guidelines. It successfully quantified these
compounds in both in-house and marketed formulations.

5,8 Sanjivani Vati

Reference: B.R. Jvaradhikara

foes an GUT quartet |
aa Yee erect afer ara AISA
wats fs aiepreta TH

adt Hasta Ae Pesitetate ATL
(B.R. Jvaradhikara, 5/1009-1011)

----- PAGE 164 -----
F Ty —— : Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana . Chapter 5

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used
Fr.

9, Store the Sanjivani Vati in a clean, dry, airtig}
container to preserve its potency and freshness

Dose: 125-250 mg.

es Rz. ae Anupana: Adaraka Svarasa, Warm Water.
Pippali Fr. 1 Part Indications: Jvara, Ajirna, Aruchi.
sats eter PHARMACODYNAMICS
<he : a is Antipyretic Activity: Shunthi, Pippali, and Vatsanabh
Vacha Rz. 1 Part possess antipyretic properties, reducing fever |
Guduchi St. 1 Part acting on the thermoregulatory center in the brair
Shuddha Bilva Fr. 1 Part 2. Immunomodulatory Effects: Guduchi boosts jmp,
Shuddha Vatsanabha Rz. 1 Part unity, enhancing the body’s defense mechanisr;,
Go- Mutra - Q:S. for Bhavana against infections associated with fever.

3. Digestive Support: Haritaki (Terminalia chebul,
Procedure:

Amalaki, and Bibhitaki aid in digestion and meta.

1. Take all the required dried ingredients for Sanjivani

Vati. Ensure each ingredient is clean and free from
impurities.

. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each

ingredient separately into a fine powder.

. Anti-inflammatory Action:

bolism, addressing gastrointestinal disturbance
often accompanying fever.

Vidanga and Vach:
possess anti-inflammatory properties, reducing
inflamm-ation and associated symptoms.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.
4. Combine all the filtered powders together in a clean,

dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active ingredients in Sanjivani Vat
are absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract after
oral administration.

2. Distribution: The components are distributed

through the bloodstream, targeting various organs

and tissues affected during fever and associated
symptoms.

Metabolism: Metabolism of the constituents occurs

primarily in the liver, where they are transformed

into active metabolites or undergo conjugation for
elimination.

Excretion: Metabolites and unmetabolized compon-

ents are excreted via urine and feces, withelimination

facilitated by the renal and gastrointestinal systems

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Adding Go- Mutra as bhavana, until it becomes a
concentrated form and suitable for making tablets 3.
or pills, then roll it into tablets or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry. 4.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Sanjivani Vati.

RESEARCH UPDATES

A Scientific Review
on Sanjivani Vati with
Special Reference to its
Pharmacological Actions,
Therapeutic Indications
and Pharmaceutics

Probable Mode of Action | Parul Rani, Assistant Professor

of Sanjivani Vati — A and Deputy C.M.S. of
Critical Review Pharmacy,

Deepika Tewari, Regional
Ayurveda Research Institute
for Infectious Diseases, Patna,
Bihar, India

Sanjivani Vati, a well-known Ayurvedic remedy, effectively treats’
gastrointestinal, respiratory, and inflammatory joint disorders, along
with fevers. This review offers insights into its pharmaceutical and
therapeutic aspects, showcasing its broad spectrum of uses supported
by pharmacological Properties of its ingredients,

The primary goal of this reviewisto explore the therapeutic applications
of Sanjivani Vati and delve into the varied pharmacological properties |
and therapeutic uses of its isolated constituent drugs. The focus lies
in identifying the key properties of these individual drugs and their
Potential impacts on the Prevention and treatment of diseases
according to the principles of Samprapti Vighatana.

——————E

----- PAGE 165 -----
—————

“Chapter 5 » Aushadhi Kalpa - ! (Compound Orugs/Formulations)

Vimal Tewari, Clinical
Research Section, Regional
Ayurveda Research Institute,
CCRAS, Ministry of AYUSH,
Government of India, Patna,
Bihar, India

3. |A Study of Microbial
Contamination in

Sanjivani Vati, A Cow
Urine Prepared Drug

In-vivo Study of the
Efficacy of Sanjeevani
Vati in Snake Venom

Poisoining

Pradip S. Mohurle,
Department of Agadatantra
Evum Vidhivaidyaka, North
Eastern Institute of Ayurveda
& Homeopathy (NEIAH),
Shillong, Meghalaya, India.

Reference: AFI, Part Ill, Page 253

aqeretaad wel acts far wa 6:
Site farsa a reat Hee
TT AO Se Ys: Read feea: | 7
arafutar v4 vrearcaratia
Braeatat Sala Wayarago STAT I

(Sha. S.M. Kha., 7/22-23) 8
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used 9.

Shunthi Rz. 4gms

Maricha Fr. 4gms

Pippali Fr. 4 gms

Amalavetasa St. 12 gms

Chavya St. 12 gms

Talisa Lf. 12 gms 1.
Chitraka Rt. 12 gms

Jiraka Fr. 12 gms

Tintidika Fr. 12 gms

Tvak St.Bk 3 gms 2
Ela Sd. 3 gms

Tejpatra Uf. 3 gms

Guda = 240 gms

3

Procedure:

1, Take all the required dried ingredients for Vyoshadi
Vati. Ensure each ingredient is clean and free from
impurities. 4

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

The main alm of this stu
Vati. Samples of Sanjiva
from a commercial phé
by an external laborato:
qualitative analysis of mit
Staphylococcus aureus,
count. Both samples exhi
microbes. si
Sanjivani Vati, an ophidi f
against Russell's viper venom by signifi
time. Notably, it does not interact with P
Serum (PVASVS). However, it does no
convulsions when administered orall
ingestion,

5.9 Vyoshadi Vati 5.

shows effeag

Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.
Adding Guda and pounding well, until it becomes
suitable for making tablets or pills, then roll it into
tablets or pills.

. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven

for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This

final product is called Vyoshadi Vati.

Store the Vyoshadi Vati in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 250-500 mg.
Indications: Pinasa, Kasa, Shvasa, Aruchi, Pratikshaya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Respiratory Support: Shunthi, Maricha, and Pippali
possess bronchodilatory properties, relieving respi-
ratory congestion and facilitating easier breathing.

. Expectorant Activity: Chavya and Talisa act as

expecto-rants, promoting the expulsion of mucus
from the respiratory tract, which is beneficial in
conditions like cough and congestion.

. Anti-inflammatory Action: Chitraka and Jiraka exhibit

anti-inflammatory effects, reducing inflammation
in the respiratory system and alleviating associated

symptoms.

. Antitussive Effects: Tintidika acts as an antitussive,

suppressing cough reflex and providing relief from
cough symptoms.

PHARMACOKINETICS
a

Absorption: The active constituents in Vyoshadi Vati
are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract after oral
administration.

----- PAGE 166 -----
152

_ Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana « Chapter «

2. Distribution: Components are distributed systemi-
cally, reaching the respiratory mucosa and exerting
their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism primarily occurs in the
liver, where the active ingredients may undergo
biotransformation into metabolites.

4

Excretion: Metabolites and unmetabolized compo-
unds are eliminated via renal and fecal routes,
with excretion facilitated by the kidneys and
intestines.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Seo) AuthorName | Result |

Role of VD Sarfaraz Vyoshadivati, a
Vyoshadi Iqbal Memon, traditional Ayurvedic
Vati in Rural Institute of | remedy known for

Management Ayurved Research relieving pratishyaya

of Pratishyaya Centre & Hospital, symptoms as per

in the Mayani, Satara, classical texts, was

Children MHA. assessed for its
efficacy in managing
pratishyaya in
children. The study
demonstrated
that Vyoshadivati
significantly
outperformed
chlorpheniramine
(CPM) in reducing
symptoms and signs
associated with
pratishyaya.

| 5.10 Bala Chaturbhadra Rasa

Reference: B.R. Balarogadhikara
WAMU Tetqo ator HAA |
fryisaduitare arenreraritery ||
(B.R., Chaturbhadra Rasa, 71/38)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Musta Dr, Rz. 1 Part
Pippali Fr. 1 Part
Ativisha Rt. 1 Part
Karkata shringi Galls 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for Bala
Chaturbhadra Rasa. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind ea
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clea,
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clea,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a unifor;
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once agai,
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency

6. Store the final compound powder in steriliz;
airtight glass containers to preserve its potency ar
freshness.

Dose: %- 1 gms.
Anupana: Madhu.
Indications: Jvara, Atisara, Kasa, Shvasa, Vamana.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antipyretic Activity; Musta and Pippali posses
antipyretic properties, reducing fever by acting or
the hypothalamus to lower body temperature.

2. Anti-inflammatory Effects: Ativisha exhibits ant)-
inflammatory activity, reducing inflammation asso-
ciated with various conditions such as respirator
disorders and fever.

3. Antidiarrheal Action: Musta is known for its antidia-
trheal effects, which can help alleviate symptoms of
diarrhea (Atisara).

4. Respiratory Support: Karkatashringi has been
traditionally used to treat respiratory ailments like
cough (Kasa) and dyspnea (Shvasa), suggesting its
respiratory support properties.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The ingredients in Bala Chaturbhadra
Rasa are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract after
oral administration.

2. Distribution: Components are distributed
systemically, reaching target organs such as the
hypothalamus (for antipyretic action) and the
respiratory tract (for respiratory support).

3. Metabolism: Metabolism may occur primarily 19
the liver, where the active constituents undergo
biotransformation into metabolites.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unmetabolized comp”
unds are eliminated via renal and fecal routes

with excretion facilitated by the kidneys an¢
intestines.

----- PAGE 167 -----
“Chapter 5 + Aushadhi Kalpa -! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

RESEARCH UPDATES

[5.11 Simhanada Guggulu

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 71

A Critical Review on
Balachaturbhadra
Churna: An Effective
Ayurveda Formulation
For the Pediatric Age

Abhishek Joshi,
Universitas Hindu
Indonesia, Denpasar,
Bali, Republic of
Indonesia.

This study compiled and reviewed references on Balachat

with five publications reaffirming its efficacy and :
findings demonstrated no toxic hazards even at high
therapeutic use. While some limitations were note
foundation for future clinical research.

Balchaturbhadra Churna
as a Potential Medicine
for SARS-Cov2 Infection
in Pediatric Setting: An in
Silico Study

Drug Dose
Modification of
Balachaturbhadra Syrup

Kuldeep, RRAP - Central
Ayurveda Research
Institute for Cancer
Mumbai, Central
Council for Research

in Ayurvedic Sciences,
New Delhi

This study assesses the antiviral potential of phytochemicals
SARS-CoV- through in silico analysis. Docking studies revealed pl

These findings suggest BC as a potential treatment for SAI R
in pediatric cases with multisystem inflammatory syndrome:

Rohit A. Gokarn, Asst.
Professor, Dept.of
Rasashastra and BK,
MGACHRC, Salod (H.),
Wardha, MHA

]

properties imine refractive index, pH, reducing sugal
and total solid content. Care must be taken Hed a

derivatives,

A Critical Analysis of
Balchaturbhadra Churna
in Management of
Childhood
Disorders—Evidences
From Ayurveda

Nitu Sinha, Assistant
Professor, Department
of Kaumarbhritya,
Shree Ram Ayurvedic
Medical College and
Hospital, Meerut, U.P.

Balchaturbhadra churna, analyzed through Nance classics and research,
exhibits Katu rasa, Laghu guna, and Usna virya properties, making It)
effective for childhood disorders like vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and
respiratory issues, Studies suggest its diverse therapeutic benefits, including
immunomodulation, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and hepatoprotective
effectslts safety profile encourages its use in children, potentially reducing
antibiotic misuse.

wead aoe farmer: Talia |
amped HHA TATA ||
ged fants HATTA ATT: |

aM aed tha are VafaeTaT |
UI Adee TACT TTUT |
Waeeaeant SRT ATTA |
Feira tare tas | |

faerte eta Taal Wa UTeaT |

Madicet: at teat ATSUTUTAT ||

(B.R. Amavata., 29/130-135)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Haritaki
Bibhitaki
Amalaki

Water for decoction
Reduced to

mu UD

48 gms
48 gms
48 gms
576 ml
144ml

Part Used

Shuddha Gandhaka - 48 gms
Shuddha Guggulu (O.R.) 48 ems
Eranda Taila Ol. 192 ml
Procedure:

1. Take the required quantity of Triphala (Haritaki,
Bibhitaki and Amalaki). Add four times the amount
of water to the Triphala and Boil the mixture until it
is reduced to 1/4th of its original volume.

2. Filter the Triphala Kvatha to remove solid residue.
3. Add the required amount of Shuddha Guggulu
to the filtered Triphala Kvatha and Boil the
mixture again until it reaches a thick consistency
(Guda Paka).
Addall the remaining drugs to the thickened mixture
and mix thoroughly to form a homogeneous mass.
5. Shape the mixture into a large bolus.
6. Roll the bolus into small, uniform pills.
7. Allow the pills to dry properly and store the dried
pills in a sterilized, airtight container.
Dose: 3 gms.
Anupana: Warm Water.

----- PAGE 168 -----
154
Indications:
Kushtha, Vataroga, Kapharoga, Pitta Roga, Pangu,

Shvasa, Kasa, Gulma Shula, Udara Shula, Palita,
Agnimandya.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte, «

Khanja, Pandu, Amavata, Vatarakta,

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Balancing Tridoshas: Simhanada Guggulu has a

potent effect in balancing the tridoshas (Vata, Pitta,
Kapha), making it beneficial for various disorders
associated with their imbalancelt effectively
alleviates Vata and Pitta aggravation, thereby
reducing symptoms related to these doshas such as
pain, inflammation, and digestive disturbances.

. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of Haritaki,

Bibhitaki, and Amalaki along with Shuddha
Gandhaka and Shuddha Guggulu provides potent
anti-inflammatory effectsThis action helps in
reducing inflammation associated with various
conditions like arthritis, skin disorders, and
respiratory ailments.

. Antioxidant: The presence of Haritaki, Bibhitaki,

and Amalaki in Simhanada Guggulu imparts
antioxidant properties, which help in scavenging
free radicals and preventing oxidative damage to
cells and tissues. This property contributes to its
anti-aging and rejuvenating effects.

. Immunomodulatory: Simhanada Guggulu enhances

the body’s immune response, making it effective
in combating infections and boosting overall

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Name

Vivid Action of Mishra, Meenu, Post Graduate
Simhanada Guggulu _| Scholar Kayachikitsa, Ayurveda
in the Management of | College and Institute, Bhopal,
Amavata (Rheumatoid | Madhya Pradesh, India
Arthritis): A Review
A Revised Mishra, Gauridutt, Ph.D., Scholar,
Pharmacognostical Department of Roga Nidana
and physico-chemical | Evam Vikriti Vijnana, Institute
analysis of Simhanada | for Post Graduate Teaching &
Guggulu Research in Ayurveda, Gujarat
Ayurved University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat, India

Comparative Brinda G M, Final Year PG
Therapeutic Effect of | Scholar, Dept. of PG Studies
Guduchi Rasayana and In Kaya Chikitsa and Manasa
Simhanada Guggulu in | Roga, Shree Dharmasthala
Amavata

4. Excretion:

immunity. This property is particularly usefy) ;,
conditions like recurrent respiratory infections a, d
autoimmune disorders.

5. Digestive Aid: The formulation aids digestion by
stimulating the digestive fire (Agni) and Promoting
proper assimilation and absorption of nutrient
It helps in relieving digestive disorders such ,
indigestion, bloating, and constipation.

6. Blood Purifier: It purifies the blood and helps ;
the elimination of toxins from the body, which
beneficial in skin diseases, metabolic disorders, ay,
rheumatic conditions.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The water decoction of Haritak
Bibhitaki, and Amalaki along with other ingredien;
facilitates the absorption of active constituents j;
the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Distribution: The active constituents are distribute,
throughout the body via the bloodstream, exerting
their therapeutic effects on various organs and
tissues.

3. Metabolism: The active compounds underg,
metabolism in the liver, where they may be
biotransformed into active metabolites or excreted
as waste products.

Metabolites and  unmetabolized

compounds are eliminated primarily through renal

excretion and to some extent through bile.

After reviewing various sources, it’s clear that Simhanada Guggulu
possesses properties like balancing doshas (Kapha and Vata)
increasing Pitta, enhancing digestion, and eliminating toxins. These
Suggest its potential as a Disease Modifying Anti Rheumatic Drus
(DMARD), making it a promising Ayurvedic remedy for managing
Rheumatoid Arthritis (Amavata).

The pharmacognostical analysis of Simhanada Guggulu confirmed
its authenticity and quality through characteristic features such as
Trichoma of Bibhitaki, Starch grain of Haritaki, Fibers of Amalaki
and Silica deposition of Amalaki without staining. Physicochemical
parameters were within acceptable limits, including weight variation
(.%), hardness (. kg/cm), and disintegration time (> hr)High Performance
Thin Layer Chromatography (HPTLC) revealed distinct spots at nm and
nm, supporting previous research on its pharmacological properties
In a comparative clinical trial, Guduchi Rasayana and Simhanada
Guggulu were assessed in Amavata patients. Guduchi Rasayana
administered for days, yielded .% major, .% moderate, and % mild
improvement Simhanada Guggulu, given for the same duration,
showed .% major, .% moderate, and .% mild improvement Both
treatments significantly alleviated symptoms, with Guduchi Rasayan2
demonstrating slightly superior efficacy.

----- PAGE 169 -----
ae TET Ey Pree
Chapter 5 + Aushadhi Kalpa - |! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

5.12 Yogaraja Guggulu Procedure: ae .

reference: AFI, Part I, Page 69 1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Yogaraja Guggulu except Suddha Guggulu. Ensure

5 foueitagt Tart
a a vith oor each ingredient is clean and free from tenes
ate ta as TRUTH | 2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
free et SS AT Far ne separately ae a ye a he
acid TAS VeeIT TTT ANAT | 3. Filter each powdered mae ‘ough a
garda SO aaa TAG cloth iB remove ay coarse particles. on
gare aida we fre as Framaq 4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina nae
at aa Wassita Basra | dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a unt ‘orm
aa erat art blend of all ingredients. :
amrameraraata arepann : 5, Filter the compound powder mixture once agai
darieregtiaht aoa M through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.
i astahe act 6. Melt the Guggulu by adding water and heating it
ah SoU over a “ailll ae one the Guggulu is melted,
PTASSTTAT AT remove it from the heat and add all the remaining
(B.R. Amavata., 29/90-95) homogenous churnas.

Mixed well untill suitable for tablets form.

Sl

INGREDIENTS USED

8. Allow the pills to dry properly and store the dried
Chitraka Rt. 1 Part pills ina sterilized, airtight container.

Pippali Mula Rt. 1 Part Dose: 3 gms.

Yavani Sd. 1 Part Anupana: _-Rasna Saptaka Kvatha, | Lashuna
Krishna Jiraka Fr. 1 Part Svarasa, Honey.

Vidanga Fr. 1 Part Indications: Udararoga, Amavata, Adhyavata, Krimi,
Ajamoda Fr. 1 Part Dushta Vrana, Pliha Roga, Gulma, Anaha, Arsha,
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 1 Part Agnimandya, Daurbalya, Sandhigata Vata, Majja-
Devadaru Ht. Wd. 1 Part gata Vata.

Chavya St. DFart PHARMACODYNAMICS

Ela Sib 2Yart 1, Balancing Doshas: Yogaraja Guggulu acts on the
Saindhava Lavana a Batt doshas, particularly Vata and Kapha, helping to
Kushtha Rt bela restore their balance. This property makes it effective
Rasana Rt /Lf. Tren in conditions where Vata and Kapha imbalances
Gokshura Fr. TVET are predominant, such as joint disorders, digestive
Dhanyaka Fr. 1 Part issues, and inflammatory conditions.

Haritaki P. lel 2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of herbs like
Bibhitaki P. 1 Part Chitraka, Pippali, Vidanga, and Musta possesses
Amalaki P. ail potent anti-inflammatory properties. These ingre-
Musta Rz. dian dients help alleviate inflammation in various
Shunthi Rz. 1 Part tissues and organs, providing relief from pain and
Maricha Fr, 1 Part swelling.

Pippali Fr. thar 3. Digestive Stimulant: Yogaraja Guggulu stimulates the
Tvak St.Bk. 1 Part digestive fire (Agni), thereby enhancing digestion
Ushira Rt. 1 Part and promoting the proper assimilation of nutrients.
Yava Kshara Pl. 1 Part Itaids in the management of digestive disorders like
Talisa Patra Lf 1 Part indigestion, bloating, and abdominal discomfort.
Patra Lf, abal 4. Detoxification: The formulation aids in detoxification
Shuddha Guggulu Exd. 1 Part by eliminating ama (toxins) from the body. This
Go- Ghrita - 1 Part property is beneficial in conditions associated with

----- PAGE 170 -----
156 : ~_ Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter s

toxin accumulation, such as rheumatic disorders, tract due to the presence of lipophilic compoung,
skin diseases, and metabolic imbalances. and digestive stimulant herbs.

5. Analgesic: It exhibits analgesic properties, which help 2. Distribution; Once absorbed, the active compound
alleviate pain associated with various musculos- are distributed throughout the body via (,
Keletal disorders, arthritis, and inflammatory bloodstream, exerting their therapeutic effects 0,

conditions. various organs and tissues.

6. Immunomodulatory: Yogaraja Guggulu modulates
the immune system, enhancing the body's defense
mechanisms against infections and diseases. This

3. Metabolism: The active constituents underp,
metabolism in the liver, where they may be biotran,

property contributes to its efficacy in treating formed into active metabolites or conjugated wit)
various infectious and autoimmune conditions. glucuronic acid for elimination.
PHARMACOKINETICS 4. Excretion: Metabolites and unmetabolized com.

1. Absorption: The active constituents in Yogaraja pounds are primarily excreted through urine and to
; : g

Guggulu are well-absorbed from the gastrointestinal a lesser extent through bile and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Bas barrage ees

KR Gopala Simha, Sodhana
Trust, Gautam Towers,
Sardar Patel Road,
Secunderabad-500003,
Andhra Pradesh.

ui std ‘3 b 2

The traditional preparation of Yogaraja Guggulu, an Ayurvedic medicine
has been standardized through the integration of modern scientific quality
control measures. The outcomes of this standardization process could
potentially inform the establishment of new pharmacopoeial standards
aimed at optimizing the efficacy of the medicine.

bet ne _
Standardization of
Yogaraja Guggulu—An
Ayurvedic Polyherbal
Formultion

A Critical Review on
Yogaraja Guggulu

Dr. Rohitakumar, PG
Scholar, Department of
R.S. & B.K. Government
Ayurvedic Medical College
and Hospital, Ballari,
Karanataka, India

Yogaraja Guggulu, utilized for osteoarthritis and other related conditions
comprises ingredients targeting vata accumulation in joints and muscles
This review delves into its therapeutic and pharmacological aspects
offering valuable insights for researchers studying this Ayurvedic remedy

Evaluation of The Anti-
Inflammatory Effect of
Yograj Guggul: An in

Vitro Study

Renuka Munshi, Dept. of
Clinical Pharmacology, TN
Medical College and BYL
Nair Charitable Hospital,
Mumbai Central, Mumbai,
MHA, India

The study evaluated YG’s anti-inflammatory effects by testing its inhibition
of COX- & COX- and -LOX enzymes in vitro using EIAYG, at concentrations of,
and ig/ml, significantly inhibited both COX enzymes at ig/ml, comparable
to aspirinlt also dose-dependently inhibited -LOX enzyme, with maximum
effect at ug/ml, surpassing aspirin. These findings underscore YG’s potential
as an anti-inflammatory agent and warrant further exploration for treating
inflammatory respiratory disorders,

Quality Assessment of
Different Variants of
Yogaraj Guggulu

A.K. Meena, National
Institute of Ayurvedic
Pharmaceutical Research,
Patiala - 147001, Punjab,
(India)

Two samples taken for study. Sample 1 had a loss on drying at 105°C of
3.84%w/w, while sample 2 showed 10.76%w/w. Total ash values were
7.02%w/w, with water soluble ash content at 8.87%w/w. Acid insoluble ash
values were 0.987%w/w and 1.09%w/w for samples 1 and 2, respectively.
Water soluble ext'active values indicated various compounds, including
sugar, acids, and inorganic compounds. Alcohol soluble extractive values
suggested the presence of polar constituents like phenols, alkaloids,

steroids, glycosides, and flavonoids. Additionally, TLC was performed using
a methanol extract of YRG.

| 5.13 Chyavanaprasha Avaleha Wot Ue Aa AISA I

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 37 US cecal Veraat fara

wig: fiorer: acer gertge | Teacrenge fepet derafiat: 11
Set aaetcht STAM Saat Tene | UetsTa Ne BAT eat areiget Ferra
AMAT AYA Fale cee cat PET || Hearse: Yaa cease MTA
Ued Gra Fer Hen aT | wauet Hea fragt ware |

faant qarentt chentett preter age grettat: frorctigae aa

----- PAGE 171 -----
a—— > =F
igen) Aste Kelp a= (Compound Drugs/Formulations)
aati PRES TTA TTT ;

ead ATTA: WAHT TAT: 11

Tat TE: Va Tee sitoti sf AC MIC Gl
quad SoS Ue fort ee Fate

(Cha.Chi., 1/1/62-74)
|NGREDIENTS USED

Bilva Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
Agnimantha Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
Shyonaka Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
Gambhari Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
Patala Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
Bala Pl. 48 gms
Shalaparni Pl. 48 gms
Prishniparni Pl. 48 gms
Mudgaparni Pl. 48 gms
Mashaparni Pl. 48 gms
Pippali Fr. 48 gms
Gokshura Pl. 48 gms
Brihati Pl. 48 gms
Kantakari Pl. 48 gms
Karkatashringi Gl. 48 gms
Tamalaki Pl. 48 gms
Draksha Dr-Fr. 48 gms
Jivanti Rt. 48 gms
Pushkara Rt. 48 gms
Agru Ht. Wd. 48 gms
Abhaya Pi 48 gms
Amrita St. 48 gms
Riddhi Sub. Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Jivaka Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Rishabhaka Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Sati Rz. 48 gms
Musta Rz. 48 gms
Punarnava (Rakta) PI. 48 gms
Meda Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Ela Sd. 48 gms
Chandana Ht. Wd. 48 gms
Utpala Fl. 48 gms
Vidari Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Vrishamula Rt. 48 gms
Kako Sub. Rt. 48 gms

157

Kakanasika Fr. 48 gms

Amlaka Fr.  500inno $
Water for Decoction - 12.288L
Reduced to - EWP) nate
Ghrita = 288 gms

Taila ol. 288 gms
Matsyandika - 2.400 kg
Madhu i 288 gms
Tugakshiri S.C. 192 gms
Pippali Fr. 96 gms

Tvak St. Bk. 48 gms

Ela Sd. 48 gms

Patra Lf. 48 gms

Kesara Stmn. 48 gms
Procedure:

1. Bundle ripened fresh Amalaki ina piece of cloth.

2.

w

on

Sy

N

99

BS

10.

11.

1,

Coarsely powder the ingredients from Bilva to
Kakanasika and place them in a vessel.

. Add 120 liters of water to the vessel. Suspend the

Amalakipottali in the vessel and boil the mixture
until the water is reduced to one-fourth (30 liters).
Remove the Amalaki bundle from the vessel and
strain the decoction and keep it separately.

Remove the seeds from the boiled Amalaki and
make a paste of the pulp.

Strain the paste through a piece of cloth or a 40-
mesh sieve over a wide-mouthed vessel to
remove fibers.

Fry the strained pulp with ghrita (ghee) and taila
(oil) until the moisture evaporates.

Add sugar to the strained decoction and boil
the mixture to the lehyapaka stage (semi-solid
consistency).

Add the fried pulp to the lehyapaka and boil the
mixture again until well combined.

Add the fine powders of ingredients from
Tugakshiri to Kesara to the lehya. Stir well and
allow the mixture to cool.

Once cooled, add madhu (honey) to the mixture
and mix thoroughly.

Store in air tight container.

Dose; 12- 24 gms.
Anupana: Water, Milk.
Therapeutic Indication: Kasa, Shvasa, Kshata Kshina,

Svarabheda,

Hridroga, | Mutraroga, —_ Uroroga,

Vatarakhta, Shukra Dosha, Pippasa, Rasayana, Medhya,
Smritiprada, Jara.

----- PAGE 172 -----
158 ear a Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana + Chapter

PHARMACODYNAMICS 6. Cardiovascular Health: Arjuna, Draksha, Pushkar,
1. Rejuvenation and Anti-aging: Amalaki, Gokshura, mula. Supports heark health Been Cardia,
Vidari, Meda, Kakoli. Rich in antioxidants and function, enhancing blooc circu a and
adaptogens, these ingredients combat oxidative providing antioxidant protection to cardiac tissu,

Stress, support cellular regeneration, and enhance
overall vitality.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: Chyavanaprasha is absorbed through,
the gastrointestinal tract. The presence of hong,
and ghee enhances the absorption of fat-solub),
vitamins and compounds.

2. Cognitive Enhancement: Amalaki, Vacha, Pippali, Ela.
These ingredients improve brain function, enhance
neurotransmitter activity, and protect neural tissue.

3. Immune Boosting: Amalaki, Guduchi, Pippali. Boosts
immune response, increases resistance to infections,
and supports overall immune health.

4. Respiratory Health: Pippali, Gokshura, Kantakari,
Brihati. These herbs have expectorant, broncho- . f ‘
dilator, and anti-inflammatory properties that clear  3- Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism,

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compound,
are distributed via the bloodstream to varioy.
tissues and organs where they exert their therapeut;
effects.

respiratory passages and alleviate congestion. primarily in atte liver. They are OLENT Os pied into
5. Digestive Health: Pippali, Musta, Haritaki. Enhances active metabolites that enhance their bioactivity.

digestion, improves nutrient absorption, and 4. Excretion: The metabolites are excreted through the

balances digestive fire (Agni). kidneys (urine) and the gastrointestinal tract (feces)

RESEARCH UPDATES

Rohit Sharma, Central Ayurveda
Research Institute for Drug mixing with honey, and adding aromatic powders. The final product
Development (CCRAS), Ministry resembles fruit jam, with a sweet, sour, and spicy taste. Scientific
of AYUSH, Government of India, _| exploration is needed to understand its therapeutic potential due
4-CN Block, Sector-V, Bidhannagar, | to scattered information. Efforts were made to compile data from
Kolkata-700091, India; various sources, including ancient texts and scientific literature, to
medamrao69@gmail.com highlight CP’s therapeutic role.

Chyawanprash: A
Traditional Indian
Bioactive Health

Supplement

Chyawanprash: An
Ayurvedic Bioactive
Immune & Curative
Health Supplement

Sneha Jadhav, Department of Chyavanaprasha, crafted from Ayurvedic herbs, is a popular dietary
Pharmaceutics Vasantidevi Patil supplement in India. It boosts muscle strength, rejuvenates cells,
Institute of Pharmacy, Kodoli Tal- | balances doshas, slows aging, enhances memory, and supports
Panhala, Dist. Kolhapur-416114 heart health, and aids digestion and respiratory functions.

(MHA)

Rohit Sharma, Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Faculty of Ayurveda,
Institute of Medical Sciences,
Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, Uttar Pradesh,
India

Bharat Rathi, Professor, Dept. of
RSBK, Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved
College, Salod, Maharastra, India.

Golden Ager
Chyawanprash with
Meager Evidential
Base from Human
Clinical Trials

The report aims to dispel Chyavanaprasha Usage misconceptions and
guide researchers in bioactive natural products, drug development,
functional foods, and nutraceuticals. National experts should
convene to establish standardized CP research protocols.

Pharmaceutical
standardization of
Chyawanprash
prepared by two
different methods

The study compared pharmacy and traditional Chawanaprash
Preparation methods, favouring the pharmacy approach due to
better outcomes in time, yield, and physicochemical properties
Notably, frying in non-polar media may alter ascorbic acid Considering
polarity’s impact on absorption, pharmacy-prepared Chyavanaprasha
may offer superior efficacy, pending further validation. |

5.14 Dadimavaleha AER trerctiye BUTT AeA |

; Sitaet stftaa afte site aT 11
Reference: Y.R. Jvaratisaradhyaya fi = ja ANE v
Seater ATA Tel | Aecataamn Wet ag a yaaa

Aquinas seer || Waet Aaa: Wea dete feraraad |

----- PAGE 173 -----
Ppapter 6 © Aushadhi Kalpa - f
Chapter S + Ausha hi Kalpa - Il (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

cere Sere

fa aTSATATTE: | (Y.R. Jvaratisaradhyaya, p. 127)

INGREDIENTS USED

Drug Name
Dadime Fr 768 gms
Jala = 30721
Reduced to = 1/4th
Sharkare = 768 gms
Shunthi Rz. 48 gms
Pippalimula Rt. 48 gms
Maricha Fr. 48 gms
Dhaniyaka Fr. 48 gms
Jatiphala Ar. 48 gms
Jatipatra Lf. 48 gms
Maricha Fr. 48 gms
Jiraka Fr, 48 gms
Tuga S.C. 48 gms
Vijaya Bk. 48 gms
Nimba Patra Lf. 48 gms
Samanga PI. 48 gms
Shalmali St. Bk. 48 gms
Aralu St.Bk 48 gms
Ativisha Rt. 48 gms
Patha Rt. 48 gms
lavanga FI. 48 gms
Honey ie 768 gms
Ghee a 768 gms
Procedure:

1. Take 768 grams of dadima fruit and add 4 parts
of water.

2, Boil the mixture until the water is reduced to one-
fourth of its original volume.

3. After boiling, filter the mixture to collect the filtrate,
which is the prepared dadima decoction.

4 Add 768 grams of sugar to this decoction and
heat it until it reaches a consistency of 2-3 threads
(pakalakshana).

5. Then, add 48 grams of the ingredients from Sunthi
to Lavanga. Also, add 768 grams of ghee to this
mixture.

6. Allow the mixture to cool down and then add honey.

7. Store in air tight container.

Dose: 5-10 gms.

Anupana: Warm Water, Milk.
Indications:
Sopha, Kshaya.

Shula,

Jvaraatisara, Aamavata,

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antipyretic: Dadimavaleha exhibits antipyretic
properties, helping to reduce fever by lowering
body temperature. This action is beneficial in
managing conditions characterized by fever, such
as infections and inflammatory disorders.

2. Anti-diarrheal: The combination of ingredients in
Dadimavaleha possesses anti-diarrheal properties,
which help alleviate symptoms of diarrhea by
reducing bowel motility and fluid loss from
the body.

3. Anti-inflammatory: Several components of

Dadimavaleha, such as Shunthi, Maricha, and

Jiraka, possess anti-inflammatory properties.

These ingredients help reduce inflammation in the

gastrointestinal tract and other tissues, providing

relief from conditions like colitis and inflammatory
bowel diseases.

. Digestive Stimulant: Dadimavaleha acts as a digestive
stimulant, enhancing the digestive fire (Agni) and
promoting proper digestion and assimilation of
nutrients. This property aids in the management of
digestive disorders like indigestion, bloating, and
abdominal discomfort.

>

uw

. Immunomodulatory: The formulation may have
immunomodulatory effects, helping to regulate the
immune response and strengthen the body’s defense
mechanisms against infections and diseases.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents of Dadimavaleha
are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, where
they exert their therapeutic effects.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, reaching target organs and tissues.

3. Metabolism: The ingredients undergo metabolism
in the liver, where they may be biotransformed into
active metabolites or conjugated with glucuronic
acid for elimination.

4. Excretion: Metabolites unmetabolized
compounds are primarily excreted through urine
and to a lesser extent through bile and feces.

and

----- PAGE 174 -----
160

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte, ;

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutico-Analytical |Vd Manish, Assistant | The study aims to establish a standardized manufacturing procedure ¢,,

Study of Dadimavaleha Professor, Department | Dadimavaleha by analyzing its pharmaceutico-analytical characterist,
of Rasashastra and It examines parameters such as pH, total ash, acid insoluble ash, wate,
Bhaishajyakalpana, soluble extractive, acid-soluble extractive, specific gravity, and Supa
Government Ayurved content. This research fills a gap in existing protocols and serves 3. :
College, Nagpur, MHA milestone in setting a standard manufacturing process for Dadimavaleh;

Efficacy of Dadima Vd Pushkaraj S. Valvi, The efficacy of Dadimavaleha in treating anaemia during pregnan.,
Avaleha in the P.G. Scholar, streerog- underscores the confidence that can be placed in Ayurvedic treatme,,
Management of Garbhini | prasutitantra, Dept., R.A. | principles. This case demonstrates the successful alapicsiven of Ayurved)-
Pandu with Special Podar Medical College | diagnosis and treatment, showcasing Dadimavaleha’s effectiveness 25
Reference toAnaemiain | (Ayu.), Worli, Mumbai, | an appetizer, antiemetic, and diuretic, as well as its ability to improy
Pregnancy. MHA, India hemoglobin levels and alleviate hyperacidity.

| 5.15 Panchagavya Ghrita

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 90
Tmmaeaaaietaga: Ta ea: 11

WSR Aenea fra! (A.H.U., 7/18-%4)

INGREDIENTS USED

Gomaya Svarasa = 3.072L

Go Dugdha = 3.072 L

Go Dadhi = 3.072 Kg
Go Mutra = 3.072L
Go Ghrita = 768 gms
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Collect the Gomaya Svarasa, Go- Dugdha, Dadhi,

and Go- Mutra as mentioned quantity.
2. Mixing:

e In a clean vessel, add Go Ghrita as mention

quantity along with Drava Dravya.
3. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir conti-
nuously to prevent the burning and ensure even
cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid
burning the ingredients. Heat the mixture until

the water content evaporates and sneha siddhi
Jakshanas.

4. Filtering:

e Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

5. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to roo;
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 12 gms.

Anupana: Warm Milk, Warm Water.

indications: Apasmara, Jvara, Unamada, Kamala.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antiepileptic (Apasmara): Panchagavya Ghrita’s
antiepileptic properties help manage conditions
like epilepsy by stabilizing neuronal activity and
reducing the frequency and severity of seizures.

2. Antipyretic (Jvara): It acts as an antipyretic
agent, reducing fever by modulating the body's
temperature-regulating mechanisms and alleviating
symptoms associated with pyrexia.

3. Sedative (Unmada): Panchagavya Ghrita exhibits
sedative effects, calming the mind and central
nervous system, which can be beneficial in
conditions like hysteria and psychosis.

4. Hepatoprotective (Kamala): The formulation may
have hepatoprotective properties, protecting the
liver from damage and promoting its healthy
function. This action is beneficial in managing
conditions like jaundice and other liver disorders

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The constituents of Panchagavy2
Ghrita are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
facilitated by the lipid-rich nature of ghee.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active components
are distributed throughout the body via th
bloodstream, reaching target organs such as the
brain, liver, and nervous system.

----- PAGE 175 -----
Chapter 5 + Aushadth Kalpa - Il (Compound Drugs/Formulations) me 161

pests
3, Metabolism: The ingredients undergo me
primarily in the liver, where they

tabolism 4. Excretion: | Metabolites and unmetabolized {
may be compounds are excreted primarily through bile and \\

lized into active ¢ ‘
metabc ip ae ne ety © compounds or undergo feces, with a minor portion excreted via urine. E
conjugation for elimination. ;

RESEARCH UPDATES

FseNo.| Article Name Author Name

i percasevy2 and i Ashutosh Pandey, PhD Scholar, The study complles literature on Panchagavya ghrita (PGG)
Panchagavya Ghrita: A Department of Rasa Shastra formulations, prepared from five cow products, traditionally used
un atly and Bhaishajya Kalpana, in Ayurveda for treating mental illness. Ayurvedic texts detall

Faculty of Ayurveda, Institute its preparation method and recent government publications

of Medical Sciences, Banaras _ outline the standard process. Testing parameters for PGG analysis

Hindu University, Varanasi, are defined in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopeia of India. Previous

ULP., India research has demonstrated its efficacy in treating CNS disorders,
suggesting its potential as a standalone or adjunct therapy with
modern medications.

Paeebemmaccdynamic Rupa Joshi The study found that Panchagavya ghrita (PG) effectively treated
and Pharmacokinetic Department of Pharmacology, seizures in rats induced by maximal electroshock (MES). When
Interaction of Panchagavya All india Institute of Medical combined with sub-therapeutic doses of phenytoin (PHT) and
Ghrita with Phenytoin and Sciences, New Delhi, India carbamazepine (CBZ), PG enhanced their antiepileptic effects,
Carbamazepine in Maximal improved cognitive function, and reduced oxidative stress. This
Electroshock Induced suggests PG’s potential as an adjunct therapy in epilepsy, with
Seizures in Rats enhanced efficacy and tolerability,

3.  Physico-Chemical Analysis Lakshmi, P.N., PG Scholar, The study found significant differences in organoleptic
of Panchagavya Ghrita Department of Rasa shastra characteristics and several physico-chemical parameters between
Prepared as per Ashtanga —_and Bhaishajya Kalpana, prepared and market samples. While all samples had an acidic
Hridaya Reference and Government Ayurveda College, pH, differences were observed in iodine value, saponification
Comparison with Market Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, __ value, peroxide value, pH, refractive index, and acid value. Specific
Samples India gravity showed minimal variance between the two groups.

4. Panchgavya: A Precious Komal K. Bajaj Panchagavya, comprising cow-derived products, holds medicinal
Gift to Human kind Depart of Pharmaceutical importance in Ayurveda as ‘Cowpathy.’ Revered as ‘Gaumata,

Sciences, RTM Nagpur the cow symbolizes nurturing qualities. Panchagavya treatment
University, Nagpur, offers diverse health benefits with minimal side effects, spanning
Maharashtra, India healthcare, energy, nutrition, poverty alleviation, pollution

control, and organic farming. It also enhances soil fertility and crop
protection. Scientific validation is crucial for its clinical efficacy.

5.16 Brahmi Ghrita

Trivrit Rt. 12 gms
Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 93 Sent ae ere
Awe erare aren gas TTA Shankapushpi Pl. 12 gms
anpamfageierg gearyagh: | Aragavadha FrP, 12 ems
Gaaepiaet: secnacaraterd: | Saptala Pl. 12. gms
Vidanga Fr. 12 gms

Wegge Mavi WE AAT TET!

FSU TATA | Procedure:

aR TAT, aa area a 1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

(A.HLU., 6/2325 %) e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Shunthi
to Vidanga) and grind them into a fine powder

INGREDIENTS USED

Coe .

Srahmi Svarasa Pl. 1,536 L e Addasufficient quantity of water to the powdered
Ghrita = 768 gms herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

Shunthi Rz. 12 gms 2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

Maricha Fr. 12 gms e Prepare the Brahmi Svarasa as per classical

Pippali Fr. 12 gms references.

----- PAGE 176 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapje, .

162
3. Mixi membranes, reducing neuronal excitability
. Mixing: oe y, a
z Y eeulating neurotransmitter release, the,
e ress -Ghrita as mention regu j : tet
ee oe scans : reducing the frequency and severity of seizure;

quantity along with Kalka Dravya and

Drava Dravya. 3. Antipsychotic (Unmada): Brahmi Gin:

4. Heating: antipsychotic properties help manage conditi,
‘i 3 ; : i chosis b ,
e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir conti- like hysteria alse Ey Polini y _balanci,
nuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking to the neurotransmitter levels in the brain and calm,
bottom and ensure even cooking.
e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

excessive neuronal activity.

4. Galactagogue (Vandhyatva): It may stimu
prolactin release and promote lactation in nursjp,
mothers, thereby addressing conditions of infert(;
or low milk supply.

5. Filtering:
© Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, removeit > Anti-inflammatory (Kushtha): The formulation m
from the heat. possess anti-inflammatory properties, which

= F help alleviate symptoms associated with s,
dry cloth t = i
ieee Oe ey a ee disorders like eczema and dermatitis.

remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.
6. Speech Improvement (Vakshvara Bhanga): Brahm

6. Cooling and Storage: ‘ ; : :
: a Ghrita’s use in speech disorders may be attribut,
e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room i os. s 5 ete
et eeatire to its ability to improve neuronal coordination an;
a . enhance speech-related brain functions.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee. 1. Absorption: The lipid-based formulation facilitate

the absorption of active constituents, especially fat-

soluble compounds, from the gastrointestinal tract

PHARMACOKINETICS

Dose: 12 gms.

Anupana: Warm Milk, Warm water.

Indications: Apasmara, Unmada, Vandhyatva, Kushtha,
Vakshvara Bhanga, Smriti Kshaya, Buddhi Daurbalya.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active ingredients

are distributed throughout the body, including the

OR IRCRUVNAMICS brain, where they exert their effects on cognitive

: ‘ ae ‘ and neurological functions.

= Noorpele (eect) PETE sm WLC erelea 3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the components ma
Ghrita’s primary action involves enhancing PR rg ae cat era th, a

cognitive functions such as learning, memory, and 4 P y Rat Avett icy are pols

concentration. It may achieve this by modulating own into meta olites that may contribute to th

neurotransmitter levels, promoting neurogenesis, observed therapeutic effects.

and protecting neurons from oxidative damage.

2. Antiepileptic (Apasmara): The formulation may

exert antiepileptic effects by stabilizing neuronal

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized constituents
are excreted mainly through bile and feces, with a
minor portion eliminated via urine.

RESEARCH UPDATES

= r

Aut ;

Three batches of Brahmi Ghrita were made, each using
Brahmi Svarasa Kalka, comprising powdered Vacha, Kushtha
Shankhapushpi, and Brahmi, was mixed with Brahmi Svares2
Murchchhana was performed before use as Sneha dravy2
The Ghrita was prepared over three days at mild heat, with
temperature and Siddhi lakshana recorded.

Standardization of Yadav, Kapil Deo, Junior Resident,
Brahmi Ghrita with Department of Rasa Shastra, Faculty
Special Reference tolts | of Ayurveda IMS, BHU, Varanasi, U.P.
Pharmaceutical Study

Brahmi Ghrita is extensively used for psychiatric disorde's
internally and externally. Its lipophilic nature suggests it m2)
have a significant impact on the blood-brain barrier. Howeve"
research on its potential neuroplasticity, nootropic, 2°
Neuroprotective effects is lacking. Further exploration coul?
revolutionize psychiatry, given its minimal side effects a"
palatability.

Prabhakar Manu, PG Scholar,
Department of Mano Vijyan evam
Manasa Roga, Shri Dharmasthala
Manjunatheshwara College of
Ayurveda & Hospital, Hassan,
Karnataka, India

Critical Review on Effect
of Brahmi Ghrita in
Psychiatric Disorders

----- PAGE 177 -----
le
of Brahmi Ghrita: A
Polyherbal Ayurvedic
Formulation

Jyoti S, Gubbannavar,

Gujarat, India

PG Scholar, Department of Roga
Nidana and Vikriti Vijnana, Institute
for Post Graduate Teaching and
Research in Ayurveda, Gujarat
Ayurved University, Jamnagar,

4, | Analytical Study
of Brahmi Ghrita

Karnataka

Or. Srinibash Sahoo, Research Officer
(Ay), Scientist-2, ACAMHNS (CCRAS),
NIMHANS, Bangalore, Ph.D. Scholar,

The study focuses on the pharm
and physico-chemical analysis of Br fim
features of the coarse powder met prescr

chemical analysis revealed an acid valu of
of Refractive Index of at room temperat
and Specific gravity of at room temy
identified up to distinct spots with m
in the alcoholic extract, indicating the:
constituents in Brahmi Ghrita. =
Analytical studies confirm the safety of Brahmi Ghrita from
Gopabandhu Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya, Puri, Orissa, for the
current trial. Selected based on its properties, it aims to treat
Kaphaja Unmada (Depressive Illness) and document its efficacy.

Role of Brahmi Ghrita
Lehana in Cerebral Palsy

MHA

Dr. A. P, Rana, Assistant Professor in
Kaumarbhritya, GAC, Osmanabad,

Brahmi Ghrita, first mentioned in the Charaka
adapted over time by various Acharyas to s
diseases, and contextual factors Acharya Kashyapa noted |
cognitive-enhancing properties in Lehana karma. Trac tionally
taken with honey before food, it has been studied forits effects
on learning, memory, epilepsy, CNS depression, memory
impairment, pain relief, depression, and ADHD in childre!
a focus on its neurocognitive benefits.

5.17 Narayana Taila

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 138
farce eae Ag eA |
aRUaHTM A Fed Vea ||
gat aidaen Aa ACT AGA |

Ta ere ATT AGaT ISH: Ta |

am at ate a ret at CoAT!
UA ae AaTSAS isa Ga WIAA ||
Bat A AAT AT Att AT Ate AT AT: |
Wg3 toma a cera fragata ||
waar & a aren: fea A
FAS SATE SAT TTS |

7a Yala cers wads a faeet|
aise: atoreret varaitoT gs A AT: |
ain cecal g Wena Ta AI

Fe a a ant ata Tet 7 facie |
Tat Gout saAgigs ae |
Wirierat ar ATT ATAU AAA |

(B.R. Vatavyadhi., 26/140-150)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Bilva Rt./ St. Bk. 480 gms
Agnimantha Rt./ St. Bk. 480 gms
Shyonaka Rt./ St. Bk. 480 gms
Patala Rt./ St. Bk. 480 gms
Paribhadra St, BK. 480 gms
Prasarini Pl. 480 gms
Ashvagandha Rt. 480 ems
Brihati Pl. 480 gms
Kantakari Pl. 480 gms
Bala Rt. 480 gms
Atibala Rt. 480 gms
Svadamshtra Pl. 480 gms
Punarnava Rt. 480 gms
Water for Decoction = 49.152L
Reduced to = 12.288L
Tila Taila Ol. 3.072 Kg
Shatapusha Fr. 96 gms
Devadaru Ht. Wd. 96 gms
Jatamansi Rt. 96 gms
Shaileya Pl. 96 gms
Vacha Rz. 96 gms
Chandana Ht. Wd, 96 gms
Tagara Rt. 96 gms
Kushtha Rt. 96 gms
Ela Sd. 96 gms
Shalaparni Pl. 96 gms
Prishniparni Pl. 96 gms
Mudgaparni Pl. 96 gms

----- PAGE 178 -----
=: 108 Bae Sent ae
Mashaparnl Pl. 96 gms
Rasna Rt. 96 gms
Ashvagandha Rt. 96 gms
Saindhava Lavana - 96 gms
Punarnava Rt. 96 gms
Shatavari Rt. Tr. 3.072 L
Go Dugdha = 12.288 L
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya
(Shatapushpa to Punarnava) and grind them into
a fine powder (Churna).

e Adda sufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the kvatha, by adding kvatha dravya from
Bilva to Punarnava as per classical references.

e Prepare the Shatavari Kvatha as per classical
reference.

e Take also Go - Dugdha as dravadravya.

3. Mixing:

e Inaclean vessel, add Tilataila as mention quantity

along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.
4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

e Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, move it
from the heat.

e Filter the taila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
the solid residues of the herbal paste.

Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a coo], dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 6 gms, externally used for Nasya, Abhayanga and
Anuyasana also.

Anupana: Warma Water, Milk.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

Sh

1. Anti-inflammatory: Narayana Taila contains
herbs like Bilva, Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Patala,

Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chaptp, .
and Paribhadra, which possess potent ,,,
inflammatory properties. These ingredients }
alleviate inflammation associated with Vario
conditions such as joint pain, arthritis,
inflammatory disorders.

i

ar

2. Analgesic: The combination of Prasarj;
Ashvagandha, Brihati, Kanthakari, Bala, and Ati},
provides analgesic effects, helping to relieve },
and discomfort. This is beneficial for conditions jj,
arthritis, muscular pain, and neuralgia.

3. Muscle Relaxant: Certain herbs like Ashvagand}
and Bala act as muscle relaxants, reducing mus
stiffness and spasms. This property is usefu|
conditions characterized by muscular tension a;
rigidity.

4. Nervine Tonic: Jatamamsi, Tagara, and Vaca presep,
in Narayana Taila act as nervine tonics, supportin,
the nervous system’s health and function. Th
help calm the nerves, reduce stress, and impro,
overall mental well-being.

5. Anti-arthritic: Punarnava possesses anti-arthri
properties, which help alleviate symptor
associated with arthritis, such as joint pain, swelling
and stiffness. It also aids in improving joint mobili
and flexibility.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When applied extemal;
Narayana Taila is absorbed through the skin
allowing its active constituents to exert their
pharmacological effects locally on the affected area |

2. Local Action: The herbal components of Narayana |
Taila act locally on the muscles, joints, and nerves
providing relief from pain, inflammation, and
stiffness.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of theabsorbedcompounds |
may occur locally in the skin or systemically in the |
liver, depending on the nature of the ingredients. _|

4. Elimination; Any metabolites or unutilized
constituents are eliminated primarily through
the skin or may undergo hepatic metabolism and
subsequent excretion via urine or feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Article
sso] fame | tetera |

Narayana Dr. Shalini Patel, Narayana Taila,

Taila: A M.S. Scholar, described by different

Classical Final year, Acharyas, consists of

Overview P.G. Dept. of 33 ingredients docu-
Shalya Tantra, mented in texts like
Rishikul Campus, Yogaratnakara and She
Haridwar, rangadhara. It’s named

Uttarakhand after Lord Vishnu,

----- PAGE 179 -----
Chapter + Aushadhi Kalpa - II (Compound Drugs/Formulations) SS

a = = a

a
Article
ne) tase | tortne |

Ayurved reflecting its potency in

University, Curing diseases. Used

Haridwar, Primarily to alleviate

Uttarakhand vitiated Vata dosha, this
article aims to compile
@ comprehensive over-
View of its uses and
indications.

2. Conceptual Bhusal Nirmal, Narayana Taila Nasya is
Study of PG Scholar Dept. a suitable treatment for
Narayana of Panchakarma, Manyastambha.
TailaNasya College of The alleviation of
inthe Man- Ayurved, Bharti cardinal signs such as
agement of Vidhapeeth Pain and stiffness in
Manyast- Deemed Manyastambha can be
ambha University, Pune- effectively achieved.

43, MHA, India

5.18 Nilibhringadi Taila

Reference: AFI, Part I, Page 139
a ee eecitanl

Say Hosta Ste rae AE: 1

(Sahasrayoga, Tail. 38)

INGREDIENTS USED

Lf.

Nili Svarasa 768 ml
Bhringeraja Svarasa Pil. 768 ml
Shatakratulata Pl. 768 ml
Amalaki P. 768 ml
Ajakshira = 768 ml
Narikela Kshira Kr. 768 ml
Mahishi Kshira = 768 ml
Go Dugdha = 768 ml
Tila Taila Ol. 768 ml
Yashti Rt. 32 gms
Gunja Mula Rt. 32 gms
Daruharidra St. Ext. 32 gms
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

¢ Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Yashti
to Daruharidra) and grind them into a fine
powder (Churna).

* Adda sufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

2, Preparation of Drava Dravya:

* Prepare the Nili Svarasa, Bhringaraja Svarasa,
Shatakratulata and Amalaki Svarasa as pcr
classical refernces.

. Anti-inflammatory:

* Collect the Ajakshira, Narikela Kshira, Mahishi
Kshira, Go-Dugdha as dravadravya.

3. Mixing:

© Inaclean vessel, add Tilataila as mention quantity
along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.

4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

¢ Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the taila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
the solid residues of the herbal paste.

6. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: Externally for Sirobhyanga.
Indications: - Keshapata, Palita.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Hair Growth Stimulant: Nilibhringadi Taila contains

potent hair growth stimulants like Bhringaraja,
which promote hair growth and improve hair
texture. These herbs nourish the hair follicles,
strengthen the roots, and prevent hair fall, thereby
promoting the growth of healthy hair.

. Scalp Nourishment: Ingredients like Nili Svarasa,

Shatakratulata, and Amalaki are rich in nutrients
and antioxidants. They nourish the scalp, improve
blood circulation to the hair follicles, and rejuvenate
the scalp tissues, promoting overall scalp health.

. Hair Pigmentation: The formulation includes herbs

like Yashti and Gunja Mula, which may help
restore natural hair colour by stimulating melanin
production in the hair follicles. This property is
beneficial in conditions like premature graying of
hair (Palita).

Daruharidra present in
Nilibhringadi Taila possesses anti-inflammatory
properties, which help soothe the scalp, reduce
itching, and alleviate scalp conditions like dandruff
and scalp inflammation.

----- PAGE 180 -----
166

es _ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter «

5. Moisturizing: Coconut milk (Narikela Kshira)
and buffalo milk (Mahishi Kshira) present in the
formulation act as natural moisturizers. They
hydrate the scalp and hair prevent dryness, and
promote healthy hair growth.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Topical Absorption: Nilibhringadi Taila is applied
externally to the scalp (Shirobhyanga). The active
constituents are absorbed through the skin and
penetrate the hair follicles, exerting their therapeutic
effects locally.

2. Local Action: The herbal extracts present in the oil
act locally on the scalp and hair follicles, providing
nourishment, promoting hair growth, and
improving hair health.

3. Metabolism: Any absorbed compounds may undergo
local metabolism within the scalp tissues. Some
constituents may also be absorbed systemically and
undergo hepatic metabolism.

4. Elimination: Metabolites or unutilized constituents
are likely eliminated through the skin or may
undergo hepatic metabolism and subsequent
excretion via urine or feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

|sr.No.|ArticleName] AuthorName | __Result |
al, Review on Vashishtha, PG Nilibhringadi Taila
Nilibhringadi Scholar, Dept. of is a widely used

Taila: An RSBK, National Ayurvedic herbal oil
Effective Institute of in India, renowned
Keshya Ayurveda, Deemed for enhancing hair

Medication _to be University, quality, treating split
Jaipur, Rajasthan, ends, preventing
India. premature greying,

and addressing
baldness. Its
ingredients are
potent hair growth
promoters, yet
further research is
needed to expand
our understanding
of its efficacy and
potential.

| 5.19 Panchaguna Taila

Reference: AFI, Part Il, Page 145, Siddhayogasangraha,
Vatarogadhikara; Adhyaya 20/17)

INGREDIENTS USED

Haritaki P 60 gms
Amalaki P. 60 gms

Part Used

Bibhitaki I, 60 gms
Nimba Patra Lf. 180 gms
Nirgundi Patra Lf. 180 gms
Water for Decoction = 4.320L
Reduced to o 1.080 L
Tila Taila Ol. 960 ml
Madhuchchhishta = 48 gms
Sarala Resin 48 gms
Shila Rasa Exd. 48 gms
Rala Exd. 48 gms
Shuddha Guggulu Exd. 48 gms
Karpura - 60 gms
Tarapina Taila = 30 ml
Nilagiri Taila = 30 ml
Kejoputi Taila = 30 ml
Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kvatha:
e Take Haritaki, Vibhitaki, Amalaki, Nimba, ang
Sambhalu.
e Add about4.320 liters of water to these ingredients
e Boil the mixture until it is reduced to 1.080 liters.
2. Preparation of Kalka:
e Take 48 grams each of Madhucchhishta
Gandhaphiroja, Shilarasa, Rala, and Gugeulu.
e Grind these ingredients into a fine paste.
3. Mixing and Boiling:
e Mix the prepared herbal kalka with the decoction

e Boil the mixture until all moisture is evaporated
leaving behind the medicated oil.

4. Filtering:

e Filter the taila to remove any solid residues from
the kalka.

5. Adding Essential Oils:

e Add Eucalyptus oil and Turpentine oil to the
filtered oil.

6. On self-cooling, also add Karpura.

7. Stir the mixture well to ensure all ingredients are
thoroughly combined.

Dose: External use only.
Indications: Sandhivata, Karna shula, Vranaopachara.

Since Panchaguna Taila is intended for external use only
its pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics would
primarily involve the interactions of its components
with the skin and underlying tissues.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Skin Penetration: The active constituents of Pancha
guna Taila, such as Haritaki, Amalaki, Bibhitaki

----- PAGE 181 -----
“Chapter ‘5 » Aushachi Kalpa - ll (Compound Orugs/Formulations)

rr P. J
Nimba Patra; and Nirgundi Patra, m
the skin barrier and exert pharm
Jocally.

ay penetrate
Acological effects

Nw

_ Anti-inflammatory — Activity: Components

a 5 Se like
Nirgundi Patra and Nimba Patra m

ay possess anti-
inflammatory properties, which can help alleviate
a

inflammation associated with conditions like
Sandhivata (osteoarthritis) and Vrana (wound) i

. Analgesic Eifects: The formulation may provide
analgesic effects due to the presence of ingredients
with pain-relieving properties, potentially beneficial
in conditions like Karna shula (earache).

yw

PHARMACOKINETICS

1, Absorption: The lipophilic nature of oils like Tila
Taila and essential oils (Tarapina Taila, Nilagiri
Taila, Kejoputi Taila) facilitates the sommen o!
active constituents through the skin.

2, Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
distribute locally within the tissues near the site of
application, exerting their effects.

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of externally applied
oils and plant extracts on the skin is limited
compared to systemic metabolism in the body.

4. Elimination: Since the formulation is applied
externally, any systemic absorption of its
constituents may undergo metabolism in the liver
and eventual elimination via urine or feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

scNo.| ArticleName | Author Name] Result

4. Pharmaceuti- Sveta Kumari, Physicochemical param-

calStandard- Department _ eters were consistent
ization of of Ayurvedic over 24, 48, and 72
Panchaguna Pharmacy, hours for PGT. PGT oint-
Taila (Medi- School of ment, gel, cream, and
cated oil) and | Pharmaceuti- physiowax formulations,
Product De- cal Sciences, _ containing PGT with
velopmentas Lovely various excipients, are
Ointment, Gel, Professional easily applied over af-
Cream, and University, fected areas. Rf values
Physiowax Punjab - ranged from 0,21 to
144411, India 0.84. PGT, ointment,

and physiowax exhibited
10 spots, while gel and
cream had 7, potentially
due to excipients. This
hints at the possibility of
developing alternative
PGT dosage forms for
improved convenience,
addressing issues like
staining and sticking.

5.20 Aravindasava

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 7
onfercuyiitss aad Aergerer |
Uisper cermdge yriitat frag
fariitenaarenat: yet varat HetferL|
Wee ude uel Heh Hah ATA
UTA ATT GIA: Meta
oat Wega Merete FIT
VTA Aa Tele THT A!
We Heads AUS Biraa HT |
ATCT PATE Area aa: |
orfararaa: ihe stash metre
(B.R., Balaroga., 17/185-189)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Kamala Fl. 48.gMS\ ot wk aD
Ushira Rt. 48 gms ;
Gambhari Fr. 48 gms
Utpala Fl. 48 gms
Manjishtha Rt. 48 gms
Ela Sd. 48 gms
Bala Rt. 48 gms
Jatamansi Rz. 48 gms
Musta Rz. 48 gms
Shveta Sariva Rt. 48 gms
Haritaki P. 48 gms
Bibhitaki i 48 gms
Vacha Rz. 48 gms
Amalaki P. 48 gms
Sati Rz. 48 gms
Trivrit Rt. 48 gms
Nili Lf 48 gms
Patola Pl. 48 gms
Parpata Pl. 48 gms
Arjuna St. Bk. 48 gms
Madhuka Fl. 48 gms
Yashti Rt. 48 gms
Mura Rt. 48 gms
Draksha Dr. Fr. 960 gms
Dhatari Fl. 768 gms
Water = 24.5761
Sharkara = 4.800 Kg
Madhu - 2.400 kg
Procedure:

1. Prepare a coarse powder of all the dravyas.

2. Take a Sandhana Patra (fermentation vessel) and
smear it with Sarshapa (mustard) oil. Pour the
water into the Sandhana Patra.

----- PAGE 182 -----
168

. Add Melted Guda (jaggery), Madhu, along with

all the remaining dravyas in the form of Yavakuta
Churna (coarse powder).

. Close the Sandhana Patra with Sandhi-bandhana

(sealing the lid) and allow the mixture to ferment
properly.

. Once it attain sandhana lakshana, then filter the

final product.

- Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep

the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency.

Dose: 3 to 12 ml.

Indications: Agnimandya, Karshya, Balakshaya, Sarva
Balaroga, Graha Dosha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

al

Nutritive and Rejuvenating: Aravindasava is rich in
various herbal ingredients like Kamala, Ushira,
Gambhari, Bala, and others, which are known for
their nutritive and rejuvenating properties. These
components help in nourishing the body tissues,
promoting growth, and enhancing vitality.

- Digestive Stimulant: Ingredients such as Haritaki,

Bibhitaki, Amalaki, and Musta possess digestive
stimulant properties, which aid in improving
appetite, digestion, and assimilation of nutrients.
This action is particularly beneficial in conditions
like Agnimandya (digestive impairment).

- Immunomodulatory: Some herbs present in

Aravindasava, like Manjishtha, Jatamansi, and
Shveta Sariva, exhibit immunomodulatory effects.
They help in enhancing the body’s defense
mechanisms, thereby providing protection against
various infections and diseases.

. Anti-inflammatory and Antioxidant: Certain

constituents like Arjuna and Patola have anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant properties, which
can help in reducing inflammation, oxidative stress,
and associated tissue damage.

- Tonic and Restorative: The formulation acts as a

tonic and restorative, promoting overall well-being,
strength, and vitality. It is particularly beneficial in

conditions of Karshya (emaciation) and Balakshaya
(loss of strength).

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The aqueous extract of Aravindasava

allows for the efficient absorption of active
constituents through the gastrointestinal tract.

Rasashasira and Bhalshajya Kalpana « Chapte, «

2. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal compono,
undergo metabolism in the liver and other tiss,
where they are broken down into metabolites

3. Distribution; The metabolites are then distribute,
various target tissues and organs, where they e,
their pharmacological effects.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and any unabso;}
constituents are eliminated primarily via
and feces.

Urin

RESEARCH UPDATES

Sr.No. | Article Name} Author Name
He

Experimental Muzaffer Aravindasava was pre.
Studies on Alam, Captain pared using traditiona|
the Fermen- Srinivasa Murti and modified Methods

tation of Drug Research The modified approach

Aravindasava_ Institute For using a glass vessel ang
Ayurveda, ino Aulation with yeasts
Arumbakkam, from Dashamularishta
Madras — and Pippaliasava, re-
600106, T.N., sulted in higher alcoho}
India production compared to

the classical earthen pot
method. Dashamularish
ta yeast II showed the
highest alcohol produc.
tion among the inoculat
ed organisms. Variations
in the utilization of sugars
were observed across
different preparation
methods.

| 5.21 Ashokarishta

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 8
MA TARAS Tet TAL
WISN TS Ue vita UeTTATR TTL
Fag TSS UGA: Weta Slots TA
Ses Gets Yuet credererrctAr ||
ame vite oat tars fatafarta
guitare weiss dat ares Freres |
TQS Uae TAT
SRS THE Haha
Hemtararaereayiea eater: |
(B.R., Striroga., 66/114-118
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Ashoka Fl.

4.800 kg
Water for Decoction = 49,1521
Reduced to - 12.288 |
Guda =

9.600 Kg

----- PAGE 183 -----
Ghapter 6 * Aushachi Kalpa - ll (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

a
Soe art Used PHARMACODYNAMics

Dhataki 768 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. AB EINE
Musta Rui 48 gms
shunthi Rz. 48 ems
Daruharidra St. 48 gms
Utpala a 48 gms
Haritaki p 48 gms
pibhitaki P, aseas
Amalaki P. 48 gms
Amra (Emn.) 48 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 48 ems
Vasa Rt. 48 gms
Shveta Candana Ht. Wd. 48 gms
Procedure:

1. Prepare a coarse powder of all the dravyas

2, Add water to the Ashoka coarse powders and soak
the mixture overnight.

3. The next morning, add 50 liters of water to the
soaked mixture.

4, Boil the mixture and reduce it to one-fourth of its
original volume and filter the kvatha (decoction).

5, Take a Sandhana Patra (fermentation vessel) and
smear it with Sarshapa (mustard) oil. Pour the
filtered kvatha into the Sandhana Patra.

6. Add melted Guda (jaggery) to the kwatha, along
with all the remaining dravyas in the form of
Yavakuta Churna (coarse powder).

7. Close the Sandhana Patra with Sandhi-bandhana
(sealing the lid) and allow the mixture to ferment
properly.

8 Once it attain sandhana lakshana, then filter the
final product.

9. Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency.

Dose: 12 to 24 ml.

Indications: Asrigdara Ruja, Yoniruja, Shveta Pradara,
Jara, Raktapitta, Arsha, Mandagni, Arochaka,
Meha, Shotha.

RESEARCH UPDATES

ie ss sll’
Soumya S. Fadnis, IInd
Yearn P.G. Scholar, Dept. of
Rasashastra & Bhalshajya
Kalpana, KLE Shri BMK
Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya

& PAGE Research Centre, a
constituent unit of KAHER,
Belagavi, Karnataka, India

1, Hemostatic: Ashokarishta contains Ashoka flowers,
which are renowned for their hemostatic properties.
This action helps in managing conditions like
Asrigdara Ruja (painful menstruation) and Yoniruja
(uterine disorders). ‘3

. Anti-inflammatory: Ingredients such as Daruharidra
possess potent anti-inflammatory properties, which
aid in reducing inflammation associated with
various conditions like Shyeta Pradara (leucorrhea),
Arsha (piles), and Shotha (inflammation).

. Digestive Stimulant: Compounds like Shunthi and
Shveta Jiraka act as digestive stimulants, enhancing
digestive fire (Agni) and thereby improving
digestion (Mandagni).

. Antipyretic: The formulation exhibits antipyretic
properties, which help in reducing fever (Jvara) by
lowering body temperature.

. Astringent and Uterine Tonic: Ashoka flowers have
astringent properties, beneficial in conditions like
Shveta Pradara. Additionally, Ashokarishta acts
as a uterine tonic, promoting uterine health and
regulating menstrual flow.

N

w

>

u

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The water-based decoction of Ashoka
flowers allows for efficient absorption of active
constituents in the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal compo-
nents undergo metabolism in the liver and other
tissues, where they are metabolized into active
compounds.

3. Distribution: The active compounds are then
distributed throughout the body, reaching target
organs such as the uterus, digestive system, and
blood vessels.

4, Elimination: Metabolites and any unutilized
constituents are primarily eliminated via urine
and feces.

Result

Ashokarishta, a traditional alcoholic preparation, is renowned for its
efficacy in treating gynecological disorders. This review article highlights
the importance of quality control parameters in ensuring its safety and
effectiveness. By examining various analytical methods, it underscores

the formulation’s reliability and versatility. Quality control measures
authenticate raw materials, validate preparation methods, and affirm
therapeutic efficacy, bolstering confidence in Ashokarishta’s utility, ‘fe

----- PAGE 184 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana = Chapter §

Akhilesh K. Mishra, Smt.
Vidyawati College of
Pharmacy, Jhansi, U.P., India.

Quality Assessment
of Different
Marketed Brands
of Ashokarishta:

An Ayurvedic

Stricter quality control is needed for traditional herbal medicines, This

study emphasizes the importance of standardized procedures and Quality |
parameters for formulations like Ashokarishta. Adherence to glob)
guidelines is crucial for ensuring safety and efficacy. Manufacturers my
ensure product quality, while regulatory bodies must implement stringent

of Different

Formulation policies.
Standardization Tekeshwar Kumar, urn T study aimed to assess various formulations of Ashokarishta, examining

Institute of Pharmacy,

Pt. Ravishankar Shukla
University, Raipur - 492010,
Chhattisgarh, India

Marketed Brands
of Ashokarishta:
An Ayurvedic
Formulation

four different marketed brands. Organoleptic properties such as color, odo;
and taste were evaluated, alongside physicochemical parameters including
pH, specific gravity, viscosity, density, surface tension, alcohol content,
and total solid content. This comprehensive analysis sought to establish
routine procedure for standardizing these Ayurvedic formulations.

[5.22 Kumaryasava
Reference: AFI, Part I, page 10
HAT Tag FS Ue TAT
delete Genet fasrat saraswat
Feaisraste ¥ ya dated |
AGAMSSeh Fra Ute TeUeMsaAy I
feraures fata neck Ga wermaq|
Wiithe Wag a agit A HaAHH |
alecraatat a siftaat Paced |
aa Yentet Oeics ot Oot UTI
Wei Opa Ten cite OHA WaT

(YR. Gulma, p. 527)

INGREDIENTS USED

Kumari Lf. 12.288 L
Guda = 4.800 Kg
Haritaki P. 1.200 kg
Water for Decoction — 12.288 L
Reduced to = 3.072L
Madhu = 3.072 L
Dhataki Fl. 768 Gms
Jatiphala Sd, 48 gms
Lavanga FI. Bd. 48 gms
Kankola Fr. 48 gms
Kababaka Fr. 48 ems
Jatamansi Rt. 48 gms
Chavya St. 48 gms
Eranda Rt. 48 gms
Jatiphala Ar. 48 gms
Karkatashringi Gl. 48 gms
Bibhitaki Pp 48 gms
Pushkara Rt. 48 gms
TamraBhasma = = 48gms
Lauha Bhasma = 24gms :

Procedure:

1. Prepare a coarse powder of all the dravyas except
draksha.

2. Add water to the Kutaja coarse powders and soak
the mixture overnight.

3. Take a vessel add draksha along with quanti,
sufficient water. Soak for 3- 4 hrs. Grind it properly
and to form paste of draksha

4. The next morning, add 50 liters of water to the
soaked mixture.

5. Boil the mixture and reduce it to one-fourth of its
original volume and filter the kvatha (decoction).

6. Take a Sandhana Patra (fermentation vessel) and
smear it with Sarshapa (mustard) oil. Pour the
filtered kwathaalong with pulp of draksha into the
Sandhana Patra.

7. Add melted Guda (jaggery) to the kvatha, along
with all the remaining dravyas in the form of
Yavakuta Churna (coarse powder).

8. Close the Sandhana Patra with Sandhi-bandhana
(sealing the lid) and allow the mixture to ferment
properly.

9. Once it attain sandhana lakshana, then filter the
final product.

10. Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency.

Dose: 12 to 24 ml.

Indications: Gulma, Kasa, Shvasa, Arsha, Vata Vyadhi
Apasmara, Kshaya, Udara, Manyaroga, Agnimandya
Koshtha Shula, Nasta Pushpa.

PHARMACODYNAMICcS
1. Digestive Stimulant: Kumaryasava contain
ingredients like Haritaki, which acts as a digesti’”
stimulant, enhancing appetite and improvils
digestion. This action helps in managing conditio™

— ee

----- PAGE 185 -----
“Chapter 5 + Aushaahi Kalpa - 1! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

like Agnimandya (digestive weakness)

g and Koshtha
Shula (abdominal colic).

_ Antitussive and Expectorant: Components like
Jatiphala, Lavanga, and Kankola Possess antitussive
properties, relieving cough Symptoms, while also
acting as expectorants, facilitating the expulsion
of mucus from the respiratory tract. This makes
Kumaryasava beneficial in conditions like Kasa
(cough) and Shvasa (breathing difficulty).

. Anti-inflammatory: The Presence of herbs like

Eranda and Bibhitaki confers anti-inflammatory

properties to Kumaryasava, which can help alleviate

inflammation associated with conditions like Arsha

(piles) and Udara (abdominal distension).

. Antispasmodic: Ingredients like Jatamansi and
Cavya exhibit antispasmodic actions, which can
help relieve spasms and cramps associated with
conditions like Manyaroga (abdominal disorders)
and Koshtha Shula.

ee

5. Hepatoprotective: Kumaryasava contains Kumari
(Aloevera), which is known for its hepatoprotective
properties. This can be beneficial in managing liver
disorders and promoting liver health.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The water-based decoction of Kumari
and other herbs allows for efficient absorption of
active constituents in the gastrointestinal tract.

. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal components
undergo metabolism in the liver and other tissues,
where they are metabolized into active compounds.

. Distribution: The active compounds are then
distributed throughout the body, reaching target
organs such as the digestive system, respiratory
system, liver, and abdominal organs.

. Elimination: Metabolites and any unutilized
constituents are primarily eliminated via urine
and feces.

+ ‘Author Name
Rahul Manmode, Depart.

Effet
Method on Antioxidant

values were 481.78 (DPPH) and 50.13 (hydrogen peroxide), indicating

hydrogen peroxide, with WFKA showing the highest efficacy. Its 1CS0

in the flowers likely contribute to this effect. Thus, the traditional
formulation, per Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia, demonstrates superior

Despite slower fermentation with W. fruticosa flowers, they notably
enhance Kumaryasava’s antioxidant activity. Phenolic compounds

Khan, Department of
Pharmacognosy and
Phytochemistry, Bioactive
Natural Product Laboratory,
Faculty of Pharmacy,
Hamdard University, New
Delhi, India

Potential of Kumaryasava
and Its Concentrate
Against CCI,-Induced
Hepatic Toxicity in Wistar
Rats

of Chemistry, University

Activity of Ayurvedic of Massachusetts,

Formulation Kumaryasava | Lowell-01854, USA superior antioxidant potential relative to others.
2. | Effect of Preparation Rahul Manmode,

Method on Antioxidant | Department of Chemistry,

Activity of Ayurvedic University of Massachusetts,

Formulation Kumaryasava | Lowell-01854, USA

antioxidant activity.

3. |Hepatoprotective Mohammad Ahmed

Animals were divided into groups: control (saline), toxicant (CCl),
and treatment (KS, KS concentrate, standard). After 10 days of oral

evidenced by reduced SGOT, SGPT, ALP levels, and increased albumin

allowing a dosage reduction to one-third of the recommended dose.

administration, blood and liver tissue were collected. Results showed
KS and its concentrate protected against CCl,-induced hepatic toxicity,

levels. Histopathological analysis supported these findings. KS concentrate
demonstrated potential as a hepatoprotective formulation, possibly

5.23 Kutajarishta

Reference: AFI, Part I, page 10

Fen Hear YsresR eT TA
HeTCRT TTA ATT, AACA AAT |
aren famtaaet ase a gett fared
Va Meer Hat atte TAA
Salet weuit efea Ter

(B.R., Atisara., 7/97-99)

INGREDIENTS USED
Kutaja St. Bk. 4.800 kg
Draksha Dr. Fr. 2.400 kg
Madhuka Kusuma Fl. 480 gms
Gambhari St. Bk. 480 gms
Water fordecoction ~— 49.1521
Reduced to 2 12.2881
Guda = 4.800 Kg
Dhataki Fl. 960gms

----- PAGE 186 -----
172

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana . Chapter 5

Procedure:
1, Prepare a coarse powder of all the dravyas except
draksha.

he

Add water to the Kutajacoarse powders and soak

the mixture overnight.

3. Take a vessel add draksha along with quantity
sufficient water. Soak for 3- 4 hrs, Grind it properly
and to form paste of draksha

4. The next morning, add 50 liters of water to the
soaked mixture.

5. Boil the mixture and reduce it to one-fourth of its
original volume and filter the kvatha (decoction).

6. Take a Sandhana Patra (fermentation vessel) and
smear it with Sarshapa (mustard) oil. Pour the
filtered kvatha along with pulp of drakshainto the
Sandhana Patra.

7. Add melted Guda (jaggery) to the kwatha, along
with all the remaining dravyas in the form of
YavakutaChurna (coarse powder).

8. Close the Sandhana Patra with Sandhi-bandhana
(sealing the lid) and allow the mixture to ferment
properly.

9. Once it attain sandhana lakshana, then filter the
final product.

10. Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency.

Dose: 12 to 24 ml.

Indications: Jvara, Grahani, Raktatisara, Agnimandya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antipyretic: Kutajarishta contains Kutaja
(Holarrhena antidysenterica) and Draksha (Vitis
vinifera), which possess antipyretic properties. This

RESEARCH UPDATES

ithor Nam

Sathyanarayana B, Principal,

An Experimental

2. Anti-diarrheal:

The. stu

action helps in reducing fever (Jvara) by lowerin,
body temperature.

Kutaja is well-known for its
anti-diarrheal properties. It helps in Managin,
conditions like Grahani (irritable bowel syndrome)
Raktatisara (bloody diarrhea), and Atisara (acut,
diarrhea) by regulating bowel movements and
reducing the frequency of loose stools.

3. Digestive Stimulant: The presence of Dhatakj

(Woodfordia fruticosa) in Kutajarishta acts ,.
a digestive stimulant, improving appetite ang
digestion. It helps in addressing Agnimandy,
(digestive weakness) and promoting overajj
gastrointestinal health.

4. Hematinic: Madhuka Kusuma (Madhuca longifo|i,

flowers) in the formulation provides hematin;
properties, contributing to the restoration of
hemoglobin levels in conditions associated wit)
blood loss, such as Raktatisara.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The water-based decoction of Kutaja
and other herbs allows for efficient absorption of
active constituents in the gastrointestinal tract.

2. Metabolism: Once absorbed, the herbal components
undergo metabolism in the liver and other tissues,
where they are metabolized into active compounds,

3. Distribution: The active compounds are then
distributed throughout the body, reaching target
organs such as the gastrointestinal tract and the
bloodstream.

4. Elimination: Metabolites and any unutilized
constituents are primarily eliminated via urine
and feces.

dy observed a delay in the onset of Kaolin

expulsion and

Study of Kutajarishta Muniyal Institute of Ayurveda | reduced intestinal motility in animal models treated with Kutajarishta.

(An Ayurvedic Herbal Medical Sciences, Manipal, | These findings suggest its effectiveness in managing conditions like,
Formulation) Forits Action | Karnataka, India diarrhea and dysentery, Kutajarishta appears promising forits potential |
‘in Intestinal Motility to modulate intestinal function and warrants further investigation for

j therapeutic use.

An Experimental Study of | Dineshchandra, Dept. of
Kutajarishta with Special | Rasa Shastra, Institute of
Reference to Amoebiasis | Medical Science, Banaras

Hindu University, Varanasi-
221 006, UP., India

Kutajarishta: An Anti- Kumar N. Sahu, M.D.
Diarrhoeal Remedy 2nd year Kayachikitsa), R.A. | treating various abdominal discomforts such as diarrhea, dysentery, |
i | Podar Medical College, Worli, | ulcerative colitis, sprue syndrome, IBS, and piles. With a content]
ie Mumbai-18, Maharashtra, of 5-10% self-generated alcohol, it utilizes water as a medium to

zh f effectively absorb active herbal components into the body. |

Therefore, it can be concluded that Kutajarista reduces the peripheral
levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine, thereby diminishing the virulence of E. |
histolytica. The three samples of Kutajarista exhibited similar effects,
with no observed amoebicidal action in vivo or in vitro.

Kutajarishta, a polyherbal Ayurvedic liquid formulation, is tailored for

—)

----- PAGE 187 -----
Chapter 9 » Aushadhi Kalpa - I! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)
; ame

Investigation of the
Central, Peripheral
Analgesic and Anti-
inflammatory Activity of
Kutajarishta, an Indian
Ayurvedic Formulation

Pan 4 2
Ninadh a,
Department of Pharmacy,
North South University,
Dhaka, Bangladesh

The study explored KTJ’s anti-nociceptive and anti-in
mechanisms. While it didn’t affect the CNS in noc
it showed significant results in peripheral analges' ‘and
inflammatory tests. KTJ effectively suppressed inflammate
but not neurogenic pain, indicating its: peripheral analgesic a1
inflammatory properties. :

5.24 Gandhakadya Malahara
Reference: AFI, Part Il, Page 165

faaadet Patel WadictHataray |

Zen HAM FA TH ATA TT |

ae es Ie rH Frerag,

Hat Heese WTR: |

FTAA Fe UTATAAETHUTL | (RT. 8/63-65)
INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Siktha Taila - 72
Shuddha Gandhaka =
Ghirisindura -
Shuddha Tankana -
Karpura =

NN DD

Procedure:

Collect all the ingredients of Gandhakadya Malahara.
All the ingredients except Sikta Taila should be taken
ina mortar and ground well. Then, Siktha Taila should
be mixed in thoroughly and ground continuously for
some hours. This mixture is known as Gandhakadya
Malahara and should be preserved in a glass container.
Dose: External use only.

Indications: Pama.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Antibacterial: Gandhakadya Malahara contains
Shuddha Gandhaka (purified sulfur) and
Girisindura, which possess potent antibacterial
properties. These components help in inhibiting the
growth of bacteria responsible for skin infections,
promoting wound healing, and preventing further
infection.

RESEARCH UPDATES
icle f Peal 3
Effect of Gandhaka _| Dr. Nirmala Chandrabhanj,
Malahara on Lecturer (Rachana Sharir) at
Padadari: A Case Bhausaheb Mulak Ayu. College,
Study Nandanwan, Nagpur, MHA, India

2. Anti-inflammatory: The combination of ingredients in
Gandhakadya Malahara exhibits anti-inflammatory
effects, reducing inflammation associated with skin
conditions such as Pama (scabies). This action helps
in alleviating redness, swelling, and discomfort.

3. Antipruritic: Karpura (camphor) present in the
formulation has antipruritic properties, providing
relief from itching and irritation associated with
skin disorders like scabies. It soothes the skin
and reduces the urge to scratch, preventing
further damage.

4. Astringent: Shuddha Tankana (borax) has astringent
properties, which help in tightening the skin and
promoting wound healinglt also aids in drying out
the lesions and reducing oozing, thus facilitating
the healing process.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When applied topically, the
herbal oils and other active constituents in
Gandhakadya Malahara are absorbed through the
skin barrier.

2. Local Action: Upon absorption, the active ingredients
exert their pharmacological effects locally on the
affected area, providing relief from symptoms
associated with Pama.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the absorbed
compounds may occur locally in the skin tissues or
systemically in the liver, depending on the nature of
the ingredients.

4. Elimination: Any metabolites or unutilized
constituents are eliminated primarily through
the skin or may undergo hepatic metabolism and
subsequent excretion via urine or feces.

Padadari, a prevalent issue characterized by painful, cracked, and dry
heels, is classified as a Kshudra Roga in Ayurveda. Treatment options
include internal administration of drugs, external applications,

and padabhyanga (foot massage). Gandhaka Malahara, known for
its healing properties, has shown promising results in alleviating
Padadari symptoms.

----- PAGE 188 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter ;

Analytical Study
of Gandhakadya

Malahara and Its
Modification with
(ngudi Taila

Gandhakadya Malahara, prepared traditionally, was modifieg by
substituting Ingudi talla to create Sikta taila. Both formulation,
showed similar physical and organoleptic characteristics, Analytics)
studies confirmed their genulne pharmaceutical quality, Setting ,
preliminary standard for future research,

Antimicrobial Activity
of Gandhakadya
Malahara in Vitro
Study

Gandhakadya Malahara, from Rasatarangini, includes f,.
ingredients prepared traditionally. Analytical findings: P-Anisigin.,
-8.497 mEq/kg, Peroxide -5.55 mEq/kg, Viscosity Index 1.1, pH
6.45, fatty matter 19.6. It effectively combats P. mirabilis and p. acne,
addressing skin disorders like Kushta, Pama, Sidma, and Kandu,

Conceptual Study of
Role of Gandhakadi
Malahara in Dadru

Author Name __
Dr. Vekariya Jigar Tulshibha, PG
Scholar, Department of PG studies
in Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Alva’s Ayurveda Medical
College, Moodbidri, Karnataka,
India.
Nighil Gigi, Post Graduate slr |
Dept. of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Ramakrishna
Ayurvedic Medical College, Hospital
and Research Centre, Bengaluru,
Karnataka, India.
Dr. Akanksha Tripathi, MD 2nd Year,
PG Department of Kayachikitsa,
Rishikul Campus, UAU, Haridwar,
Uttarakhand, India

Dadru, a common skin disease, lacks a complete cure due j,.
high recurrence rates and antibiotic resistance. It’s extensive,
mentioned in Ayurvedic texts, urging the need for effective, long.
lasting treatment to prevent recurrence. Developing promisino
Ayurvedic remedies for Dadru or tinea infections is crucial to addres,
this pressing issue.

| 5.25 Lepa Guti

Reference: AFI, Part III, page 232
CGHS Formulary, Anubhuta Yoga

INGREDIENTS USED

Rt.

Punarnava 800 gms
Lodhara St. Bk. 200 gms
Chitreka Rt. 200 gms
Shunthi Rz. 200 gms
Shuddha Guggulu OR. 5.0 kg

Haldi Rz. 200 gms
Triphala Kvatha = 9.6L

Gomutra = 3.0L

Procedure:
1. Collect all the ingredients of Lepa Guti and grind

them into a fine powder.

. Place all the ingredients in a vessel, add the
dravadravyas, and heat the mixture until it reaches
a semi-solid consistency.

Shape the mixture into guti or any feasible form,
and store it in an airtight container.

Before applying it to the body, grind it with water as
the medium for application.

Dose: External Application after grinding with water.
Indications: Amavata, Shotha, Vridharoga, Gandamala,
Arbuda, Yoniroga.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Anti-inflammatory: Lepa Guti contains ingredients
like Punarnava, Lodhara, Citraka, and Haldi,

which possess potent anti-inflammatory Properties
These components help reduce inflammatio;
associated with various conditions such a4:
Amavata (rheumatoid arthritis), Shotha (swelling)
and Vriddharoga (hydrocele). They alleviate pain
swelling, and discomfort.

- Antimicrobial: Shunthi (ginger) present in the
formulation exhibits antimicrobial effects, helping
to inhibit the growth of microorganisms. This
property is beneficial in treating skin infections like
Gandamala (goitre) and Yoniroga (genitourinan
disorders), where microbial overgrowth may
contribute to the pathology.

- Analgesic: The anti-inflammatory and analgesic |
properties of the herbs in Lepa Guti contribute to |
pain relieflt can help alleviate the pain associated |
with conditions like Amavata and hydrocele, |
enhancing the overall therapeutic effect. |

Detoxifying: Punarnava is known for its detoxifying |
properties, aiding in the elimination of toxins from
the body. This action is beneficial in conditions like |
Amavata, where the accumulation of ama (toxins)
aggravates joint inflammation and pain.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Topical Absorption: When applied externally as 4
paste (lepa) after grinding with water, the active

constituents of Lepa Guti are absorbed through
the skin.

2. Local Action: Upon absorption, theherbal compounds
exert their pharmacological effects locally on the

affected area, providing relief from inflammation
pain, and swelling.

----- PAGE 189 -----
Chapter 5 » Aushadhi Kalpa - II (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the absorbed com-
pounds may occur locally in the skin tissues or
systemically in the liver, depending on the nature
of the ingredients. :

Elimination: Any metabolites or unutilized
constituents are eliminated primarily through
the skin or may undergo hepatic metabolism and
subsequent excretion via urine or feces,

a

RESEARCH UPDATES

| st.No. | Article Name | Author Name

1. Pharmaceuti- Abhay
cal Develop- Jayprakash
ment and Gandhi,

To enhance usability
and taste, Lepa Guti was
Modified into gel,

Article Name | Author Name

Dosage Form M. Pharm ointment, and cream
Modification (Ayurved) forms. Pharmaceutical
of Lepa Guti; Scholar, studies favored the gel for

An Ayurvedic Department _ its superior spreadability

Topical of Quality and ease of preparation.

Formulation. Control, PGT All modified forms were
& RA, Gujarat more palatable than.
Ayurved the original Lepa Guti,
University, but further comparative
Jamnagar, studies are needed for

Gujarat, India confirmation.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

1. Which of the following conditions is Dashamula Kvatha
primarily indicated for?
a. Hypertension c. Parshva Shula
b. Diabetes mellitus d. Gastric ulcers

2. What is the recommended dose of Dashamula Kvatha?

a. 24 gms c. 48 gms
b. 36 gms d. 60 gms
3. Which herb is NOT a part of Dashamula Kvatha?
a. Gokshura c. Shyonaka
b. Pippali d. Gambhari

4. Which pharmacodynamic property of Dashamula
Kvatha makes it effective in treating cough with phlegm?

a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Analgesic d. Antipyretic
5. How does Pippali Churna contribute to the
pharmacokinetics of Dashamula Kvatha?
a. It enhances absorption and bio availability.
b. It increases metabolism in the liver.
c. It decreases distribution to various tissues.
d. It facilitates excretion through the lungs.
6. Which of the following conditions is Mahamanjishthadi
Kvatha indicated for?

ce. Expectorant

a. Digestive disorders
b. Respiratory infections
c. Skin diseases
d. Cardiovascular disorders

7, What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha?
a. Antipyretic
b. Antioxidant

c. Antimicrobial
d. Anti-inflammatory

8. Which part of the Mahamanjishtadi Kvatha formulation
contributes to its blood purifying properties?
a. Roots c. Pericarp
b. Fruits d. Stem bark
9. What role do herbs like Guduchi and Amalaki play in
Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha?
a. Boosting the immune system
b. Improving cognitive function
c. Regulating blood sugar levels
d. Stimulating appetite
10. How does Pippali enhance the pharmacokinetics of
Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha?
a. By enhancing liver metabolism
b. By improving gastrointestinal absorption
c. By accelerating urinary excretion
d. By reducing distribution to target tissues
11. Which of the following conditions is Pushyanuga
Churna primarily indicated for?
a. Gout
b. Respiratory infections
c. Excessive menstrual bleeding
d. Gastric ulcers
What is the pharmacodynamic property of Lodhra and
Patha in Pushyanuga Churna?
a. Anti-inflammatory
b. Antimicrobial
. Which part of the formulation provides astringent
action in Pushyanuga Churna?

12.

c. Hemostatic
d. Analgesic

c. Seed
d. Stem bark

a. Fruit
b. Root

----- PAGE 190 -----
176

14. How does Pushyanuga Churna help in treating
inflammation-related disorders?
a. By increasing bleeding
b. By tightening tissues
c. By reducing discharge
d. By reducing inflammation
15. What is the recommended dosage
Pushyanuga Churna?
a. 5to 10 grams
b. 10 to 20 grams
16. Sudarshana Churna is primarily indicated for the
treatment of:
a. Respiratory infections
b. Musculoskeletal disorders
c. Digestive disorders
d. Fever and inflammatory diseases

17. Which of the following herbs in Sudarshana Churna has
hepatoprotective properties?

range of

c. 1 to3 grams
d. 3 to 6 grams

a. Shunthi c. Katuka
b. Nimba d. Daruharidra
18. What is the recommended dosage range of

Sudarshana Churna?
a. 1 to2 grams
b. 3 to 5 grams

c. 5to 8 grams

d. 2to4 grams

19. Which of the following pharmacodynamic properties
of Sudarshana Churna helps in reducing fever?
a. Digestive stimulation
b. Antioxidant
c. Antipyretic
d. Antimicrobial

20. How does Sudarshana Churna aid in the management
of digestive disorders?
a. By reducing inflammation
b. By stimulating digestion
c. By protecting the liver
d. By neutralizing free radicals

21. Lavana Bhaskara Churna is primarily indicated for the
treatment of:
a. Respiratory infections
b. Cardiovascular disorders
c. Digestive disorders
d. Skin diseases

22. Which of the following ingredients in Lavana Bhaskara
Churna supports liver function and protects against
liver disorders?
a. Dhanyaka
b. Maricha

c. Pippali
d. Shunthi

23.

24.

25.

26.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapters

What is the recommended dose of
Bhaskara Churna?
a. 1 to2 grams
b. 3 to 5 grams
Which property of Lavana Bhaskara Churna help, a
relieving gas and abdominal spasms?

a. Antioxidant

b. Antimicrobial

c. Carminative and antispasmodic

d. Digestive stimulation

How does Lavana Bhaskara Churna aid in promotip,
bowel movements?
a. By reducing inflammation

b. By stimulating digestion

c. By exerting laxative effects

d. By supporting liver function

Lavan,

c. 5 to8 grams
d. 2 to 4 grams

Bilvadi Gutika is primarily indicated for the treatment of.
a. Respiratory infections

b. Skin diseases

c. Digestive disorders

d. Cardiovascular disorders

. Which property of Bilvadi Gutika helps in relieving gas

and abdominal spasms?

a. Antimicrobial

b. Immunomodulatory

c. Carminative and antispasmodic

d. Antitoxic

What is the role of Bilva and Tulasi in Bilvadi Gutika?
a. Enhancing digestive function

b. Neutralizing toxins and venoms

c. Reducing fever

d. Modulating the immune response

How does Bilvadi Gutika aid in promoting bowel
movements?

a. By reducing inflammation

b. By enhancing immune function

c. By exerting antipyretic effects

d. By stimulating digestive function
What role does Haridra play in Bilvadi Gutika?
a. Enhancing liver function

b. Relieving gas and spasms

c. Possessing antimicrobial and anti-inflammato!)
properties

d. Modulating the immune response

Chitrakadi Gutika is primarily indicated for th
treatment of :

a. Respiratory infections

----- PAGE 191 -----
Chapter 5 * Aushadhi Kalpa - I! (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

p. Skin diseases
c. Digestive disorders
d. Cardiovascular disorders

op. Which ingredient in Chitrakadi Gutika acts as a laxative
and antacid?

a, Pippali c. Yava kshara
b. Hingu d. Shunthi
33, How does Chitrakadi Gutika aid in enhancing appetite?
a. By reducing inflammation
p. By stimulating digestive fire
c By balancing electrolytes
d. By preventing the formation of gas
34, What role do salts (Lavana) play in Chitrakadi Gutika?
a. Enhancing liver function
b. Balancing electrolytes
c. Stimulating appetite
d. Preventing gas formation
35. Which part of the body is primarily targeted by
Chitrakadi Gutika’s pharmacokinetics?
a. Respiratory system
b. Skin
c. Gastrointestinal system
d. Cardiovascular system
36. What is the primary indication for Sanjivani Vati?
a. Skin diseases
b. Respiratory infections
c. Fever and associated symptoms
d. Cardiovascular disorders
37. Which ingredient in Sanjivani Vati possesses antipyretic
properties?
a. Vidanga ce. Shunthi
b. Guduchi d. Vatsanabha
38. How does Guduchi contribute to the pharmacodynamics
of Sanjivani Vati?
a. By reducing inflammation
b. By enhancing immunity
c. By improving digestion
d. By acting as an antipyretic
39. What role do Haritaki, Amalaki, and Bibhitaki play in
Sanjivani Vati?
a. Enhancing liver function
b. Boosting immunity
¢ Supporting digestion
d. Acting as antipyretics
4. How are the active ingredients in Sanjivani Vati
Primarily excreted from the body?
4. Through the skin

ee eS
b. Through the respiratory system
c. Via urine and feces
d. Through the kidneys
41. What is the primary indication for Vyoshadi Vati?
a. Skin diseases
b. Gastrointestinal disorders
c. Respiratory conditions
d. Cardiovascular diseases
42. Which ingredient in Vyoshadi Vati acts as an

expectorant?
a. Shunthi c. Chavya
b. Maricha d. Jiraka

43. What is the role of Tintidika in Vyoshadi Vati?
a. Anti-inflammatory c. Expectorant
b. Antitussive d. Bronchodilatory

44. How does Vyoshadi Vati exert its anti-inflammatory
effects?

a. Through the action of Shunthi
b. Through the action of Maricha
c. Through the action of Chitraka and Jiraka
d. Through the action of Pippali
45. How are the active constituents in Vyoshadi Vati
primarily excreted from the body?
a. Through the skin
b. Through the respiratory system
c. Via urine and feces
d. Through the kidneys

46. What is the primary
Chaturbhadra Rasa?

a. Cardiovascular diseases
b. Gastrointestinal disorders
c. Respiratory conditions
d. Musculoskeletal disorders
47. Which ingredient in Bala Chaturbhadra Rasa exhibits
antipyretic properties?
a. Musta c. Ativisha
b. Pippali d. Karkata Shringi
48. What is the traditional use of Karkata Shringi in Bala
Chaturbhadra Rasa?
a. To reduce inflammation
b. To treat diarrhea
c. To alleviate fever
d. To support respiratory health
49. How are the active constituents in Bala Chaturbhadra
Rasa primarily excreted from the body?
a. Through the skin
b. Through the respiratory system

indication for Bala

----- PAGE 192 -----
$0.

$1,

52.

Sh

55.

56.
SZ.

58.

59%

¢ Via urine and feces

a. Through the Kidneys
Which of the following is NOT a pharmacodynamic
property of Simhanada Guggulu?
a. Balancing Tridoshas Gs
b, Antimicrobial

Anti-inflammatory
a. Antioxidant

What is the primary function of Simhanada Guggulu in
the body's immune system?

a, Suppressing immune responses

b. Boosting overall immunity

¢. Inhibiting allergic reactions

d. Reducing inflammation

How does Simhanada Guggulu aid in digestion?

a. By reducing appetite

b. By promoting nutrient absorption

c. By slowing down gastrointestinal motility

d. By causing bloating and indigestion

Which doshas does Yogaraja Guggulu primarily act
upon for restoring balance?

a. Vata and Pitta c. Vata and Kapha

b. Pitta and Kapha d. Vata and Rakta
What is one of the pharmacodynamic properties of
Yogaraja Guggulu?
a. Antiemetic
b. Antipyretic
How does Yogaraja Guggulu aid in digestion?

a. By reducing appetite

b. By slowing down gastrointestinal motility
c. By inhibiting the digestive fire (Agni)

d. By stimulating the digestive fire (Agni)

c. Antihistaminic
d. Anti-inflammatory

What is one of the primary indications for
Dadimavaleha?

a. Asthma c. Fever and diarrhea
b. Diabetes d. Hypertension

Which property of Dadimavaleha helps in reducing
inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract?

a. Antipyretic c. Anti-inflammatory
b. Anti-diarrheal d. Digestive stimulant
How is Dadimavaleha administered?

a. Intravenously c. Orally

b. Sublingually d. Topically

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for Panchagavya Ghrita?

a. Epilepsy (Apasmara)

b. Jaundice (Kamala)

c. Diabetes (Prameha)

d. Fever (Jvara)

61.

62.

63.

64,

65.

66.

67.

68.

69,

— Rasashastra and Bhalshaya Kelpana + Chap

Sea soreness

60.

How does Panchagavya Ghrita exert its Sedatiy,
effects? :
a. By increasing neuronal activity

b, By inhibiting liver function

c. By calming the central nervous system

d. By stimulating the adrenal glands

What is the primary route of excretion for Metabolite,
and unmetabolized compounds of Panchagavya Gh)
c. Sweat

d. Saliva

a, Urine

b. Feces

Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as 4,

indication for Brahmi Ghrita?

a. Epilepsy (Apasmara)

b. Skin disorders (Kushtha)

c. Speech disorders (Vakshvara Bhanga)

d. Osteoporosis

How does Brahmi Ghrita primarily exert its nootropic

effects?

a. By reducing neurotransmitter levels

b. By promoting inflammation in the brain

c. By enhancing cognitive functions like memor
and concentration

d. By inducing neuronal excitability

What is the suggested anupana (vehicle) for

administering Brahmi Ghrita?

a, Warm milk, warm water

b. Cold water

c, Fresh fruit juice

d. Herbal tea

Which of the following properties is NOT associated

with Narayana Taila?

a. Anti-inflammiatory

ec. Analgesic
b. Antipyretic

d. Muscle relaxant

What is the suggested dose of Narayana Taila for
internal use?
a. 3 gms ec. 9 gms
b. 6gms d. 12 gms

Which of the following herbs is NOT included in the
composition of Narayana Taila?

a. Punarnava

b. Tulsi d, Ashvagandha
Which of the following herbs is NOT included in the
composition of Neelibhringadi Taila?

a. Bhringaraja e. Tulsi

b. Amalaki d. Shatakratulata

What is the primary indication for the external use of
Nilibhringadi Taila?

a. Digestive disorders

¢. Jatamansi

----- PAGE 193 -----
Chapter 5° Aushaghi Kalpa - Il (Compound Drugs/Formulations)

b. Hair growth disorders
c. Skin infections
d. Respiratory conditions

70. Which component of Nilibhringadi Taila helps in scalp
nourishment and hydration?

a. Gunja Mula c. Narikela Kshira
b. Yasthi d. Daruharidra

71. What is the primary indication for the external use of
Panchaguna Taila?

a. Digestive disorders
b. Joint pain and inflammation
c. Respiratory conditions
d. Skin infections
72. Which of the following ingredients in Panchaguna Taila
is known for its anti-inflammatory Properties?
a. Haritaki c. Nirgundi Patra
b. Amalaki d. Bibhitaki

73. How does the formulation of Panchaguna Taila facilitate
skin penetration?

a. Through the presence of water for decoction
b. Through the use of essential oils like Tila Taila

ce. Through the inclusion of Madhuchchhishta
and Sarala

d. Through the addition of Karpura and Rala
74. What is the primary indication for the use of
Aravindasava?
a. Respiratory infections
b. Skin disorders
c. Digestive impairment
d. Cardiovascular diseases
75. Which of the following herbs in Aravindasava contribute
to its immunomodulatory effects?
a. Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki
b. Manjishtha, Jatamansi, Shveta Sariva
c. Arjuna, Patola
d. Kamala, Ushira, Gambhari
76. How does Aravindasava promote overall well-being?
a. By reducing inflammation and oxidative stress
b. By enhancing the body’s defense mechanisms
e. By nourishing the body tissues and improving
vitality
d. By stimulating digestion and assimilation of
nutrients
77, What is the primary indication for the use of
Ashokarishta?
a. Skin disorders
b. Respiratory infections

c. Painful menstruation
d. Musculoskeletal injuries
78. Which of the following herbs in Ashokarishta contrib\
to its antipyretic properties?
a. Daruharidra c. Ashoka
b. Shunthi d. Bibhitaki ‘A
79. How does Ashokarishta promote uterine health?
a. By reducing inflammation in the uterus
b. By acting as a digestive stimulant
c. By regulating menstrual flow and acting as a
uterine tonic
d. By exerting hemostatic effects
80. Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for using Kumaryasava?,
a. Abdominal distension (Udara)
b. Joint disorders (Manyaroga)
c. Loss of appetite (Agnimandya)
d. Headache (Shirahshula)
81. What is the primary action of Haritaki in Kumaryasava?
a. Antitussive c. Antispasmodic
b. Digestive stimulant d. Anti-inflammatory
82. Which herb in Kumaryasava contributes to its
hepatoprotective properties?
a. Jatiphala c. Eranda
b. Chavya d. Kumari (Aloevera)
83. Which of the following conditions is NOT listed as an
indication for using Kutajarishta?
a. Fever (Jvara)
b. Irritable bowel syndrome (Grahani)
c. Headache (Shirahshula)
d. Bloody diarrhea (Raktatisara)
84. What is the primary action of Kutajarishta in managing
gastrointestinal disorders?

a. Antipyretic c. Anti-inflammatory
b. Digestive stimulant d. Antispasmodic
85. Which herb in Kutajarishta provides hematinic

properties?
a. Kutaja c. Madhuka Kusuma
b. Draksha d. Gambhari

86. Which of the following is NOT an indication for using
Gandhakadya Malahara?
a. Scabies (Pama) b.Acne (Yauvana Pidika)
c. Eczema (Vicharchika)  d. Psoriasis (Sidhma)
87. What is the primary pharmacodynamic action of
Karpura (camphor) in Gandhakadya Malahara?
a. Antibacterial c. Antipruritic
b. Antifungal d. Astringent

----- PAGE 194 -----
180

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter :

88. How does Shuddha Tankana (Borax) contribute to the
pharmacodynamics of Gandhakadya Malahara?
a. By promoting wound healing
b. By inhibiting bacterial growth
¢. By reducing inflammation
d. By tightening the skin
89. Which of the following conditions is NOT an indication
for using Lepa Guti?
a. Amavata (Rheumatoid arthritis)
b. Asthma (Shvasa)
c. Hydrocele (Vriddharoga)
d. Skin infections (Gandamala)
90. What is the primary pharmacodynamic action of
Punarnava in Lepa Guti?
a. Antimicrobial
b. Analgesic
c. Anti-inflammatory
d. Detoxifying
91. How does Shunthi (Ginger) contribute to the
pharmacodynamics of Lepa Guti?
a. By reducing inflammation
b. By providing analgesic effects

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

11.
16.
21.
26.
31.
36.
41.
46.
$1.
56.
61.
66.
7AL
76.
81.
86.
91.

a

. By exhibiting antimicrobial effects
d. By aiding in detoxification

ANSWERS KEYS

c 2. c as b 4. c 5. a
c Di d 8. d Gh a an
c 12. c 13. a 14. d 15. c
Ciena mCMISemedMetS ence 20, 4
@ | ah | ©] 2s [lb] 248 | a ee
iG 27. c 28. b 29. d 30. c
| SP Cia 3s by Be4a5 ab 2, 4
(geeyh c 38. b 39: (e 40.

ery Uy | © Cer Pleo ee GH) .45 ¢
c 47. a 48. d 49. c 50. 5
b |) Gal b |) | c | Sh) eae
c Sis c 58. c Se), c 60) “e
Die G2 Se excliel GSS MeCeN GS bea |) 65. 4
b 67. b 68. c 69. b 70. c
be 725 G | 74 b 74. c web
€ UUs c 78. c 79. c 80. gq
b 82. d 83. c 84. b 85. c
bereS7: c 88. d 89. b 90. d
c

Long Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Short note on Panchagavya Ghrita.

© Ingridents of Pushyanuga Churna.

© Probable Mode of Action of Bala Chaturabhadra Rasa.
e@ Mahamanjishthadi Kvatha.

Describe Avaleha Kalpana and write in detail Dadima
Avaleha.

Describle impotance of Sandhana Kalpana and write
Kumaryaasava.

Write the ingridents, Matra, probable made of action
of Chitrakaadhi Gutika and its research updates.

----- PAGE 195 -----
6.1 Introduction of Different Dosage Form

A drug is a substance designed for use in the diagnosis,
mitigation, treatment, cure, or prevention of diseases in
humans or animals. However, drugs are seldom given
in their pure form. Instead, they are administered in
various dosage forms, which are created by combining
the drug with other substances known as “additives.”
These additives serve multiple purposes:

1. Formulation Shape: Additives help to createa specific
shape for the drug, making it easier to handle,
administer, and consume. For instance, tablets,
capsules, and syrups all have distinct shapes and
consistencies that facilitate their use.

2. Stability Enhancement: Many drugs can degrade
over time due to factors such as light, heat, and
moisture. Additives can enhance the stability of the
drug, protecting it from degradation and thereby
extending its shelf life.

3. Palatability Improvement: Drugs often have a
bitter or unpleasant taste. Additives can mask these
tastes, making the medication more palatable and
increasing the likelihood of patient compliance,
especially in children.

4, Aesthetic Appeal: The appearance of a drug can
influence patient perception and compliance.
Additives can improve the color, texture, and
overall appearance of the medication, making it
more attractive and acceptable to users.

5. Insummary, the incorporation of additives into drug
formulations is essential for creating effective, stable,
and user-friendly medications. These additives
ensure that the drug is not only therapeutically
effective but also easy and pleasant to use.

6.2 Importance of Dosage Forms

Transforming a drug into various dosage forms is
crucial for several reasons:

. Accurate and Safe Dosage Delivery: Dosage forms

ensure that the patient receives the correct amount
of the drug in a safe and convenient manner. This
helps to prevent under-dosing or overdosing, which
can lead to ineffective treatment or adverse effects,
respectively.

. Easy Identification: Many dosage forms can be

easily recognized by their distinct color, shape,
or identifying markings. This helps in avoiding
medication errors and ensures that patients and
healthcare providers can easily distinguish between
different medications.

. Protection from Environmental Factors: Some drugs

are susceptible to degradation due to oxidation,
hydrolysis, or reduction. Dosage forms like coated
tablets and sealed ampoules protect the drug from
these environmental factors, thus maintaining the
drug’s efficacy and shelf life.

. Protection from Gastric Juices: Certain drugs can be

destroyed or inactivated by the acidic environment
in the stomach. Enteric-coated tablets are designed
to resist the acidic gastric juices and dissolve only
in the more neutral environment of the intestines,
ensuring the drug reaches its site of action intact.

. Taste and Odor Masking: Many drugs have a bitter,

salty, or otherwise unpleasant taste or odor. Dosage
forms such as capsules, coated tablets, and flavored
syrups mask these undesirable characteristics,
making the medication more palatable and impro-
ving patient compliance, especially among children.

. Insertion into Body Cavities: Some drugs are

administered through body cavities for local or
systemic effects. Dosage forms like rectal or vaginal
suppositories are designed for this purpose,
ensuring that the drug is delivered directly to the
site of action or absorbed through the mucous
membranes.

----- PAGE 196 -----
182

7, Inhalation Therapy: For drugs intended to act on the
respiratory system or to provide rapid systemic
effects, inhalation therapy is often used. Dosage
forms such as inhalation aerosols and inhalants
allow the drug to be delivered directly to the
lungs, providing quick onset of action and targeted
delivery.

. Maximum Drug Action from Topical Administration
Sites: Dosage forms like creams, ointments,
ophthalmic preparations, and ENT (Ear, Nose, and
Throat) preparations are designed for application
directly to the skin or mucous membranes. This
method ensures that the drug acts directly at the
site of application, providing targeted therapeutic
effects and minimizing systemic side effects.

9. Sustained Release Action through Controlled Release
Mechanisms: Sustained release tablets, capsules,
and suspensions are formulated to release the drug
gradually over an extended period. This helps
maintain a consistent drug concentration in the
bloodstream, enhancing therapeutic effectiveness
and reducing the need for frequent dosing.
Liquid Dosage Forms for Drugs Soluble in Suitable
Vehicles: Solutions are liquid dosage forms where
the drug is fully dissolved in a solvent. This form
ensures uniform distribution of the drug and is ideal
for patients who have difficulty swallowing solid
dosage forms or require rapid drug absorption.
Liquid Preparations for Drugs Insoluble or Unstable
in Different Vehicles: Suspensions are liquid
formulations where the drug particles are dispersed
ina liquid medium but not dissolved. This type of
dosage form is used for drugs that are insoluble or
unstable in solvents, ensuring that the drug remains
effective while providing an alternative to solid
dosage forms.

10.

11.

In summary, the transformation of drugs into various
dosage forms is essential for ensuring accurate dosing,
easy identification, and protection from environmental
and bodily factors, improved palatability, and effective
delivery through different routes of administration.
These considerations enhance the overall effectiveness
and acceptability of the medication.

| 6.3 Principles of Dosage Form Design

These principles provide guidelines for developing
pharmaceutical formulations that effectively, safely, and
conveniently deliver drugs to patients:
1. Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics:
Understanding the drug’s solubility, permeability,
and stability, as well as its absorption, distribution,

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 5

metabolism, and excretion, helps determine
appropriate route of administration,
regimen, and release kinetics.

the
dosag,

2. Patient-Centered Approach: Formulations shoulg
be user-friendly, pleasant-tasting (if applicable)
and tailored to meet the needs of different Patien;
populations (e.g., children, elderly) to enhang,
compliance and treatment outcomes. ;

3. Route of Administration: Selecting the suitable TOUte
(oral, parenteral, topical, inhalation) based on the
drug’s properties and desired therapeutic effect j.
crucial.

4. Release Kinetics: Controlling drug release profij..
(immediate-release, sustained-release, targeted
release) is essential for achieving Optimal
pharmacokinetic behavior and therapeutic effects

5. Excipient Selection and Compatibility: Excipients mug,
aid in drug delivery, improve stability, and provide
desirable formulation characteristics while being
compatible with the drug and other excipients {,
ensure a Stable, effective formulation.

6. Manufacturing and Quality Control: Robust
manufacturing processes and strict quality contro]
measures ensure consistency, reproducibility, ang
regulatory compliance.

7. Safety and Tolerability: Prioritizing patient safety by
minimizing adverse effects and toxicity, considering
the excipients’ safety profile, and the route of
administration.

8. Stability and Shelf-Life: Proper formulation and
packaging are necessary to maintain drug stability
throughout its shelf life, considering factors like
temperature, humidity, and light sensitivity.

. Cost-Effectiveness: Designing cost-effective dosage
forms ensures affordable and accessible medications

without compromising quality and efficacy.

Emerging Technologies and Personalized Medicine

Innovations such as nanotechnology, 3D printing

and personalized medicine based on patient

characteristics and genetic profiles are shaping the
future of pharmaceutical formulations.

| 6.4 Primary Reasons for Designing a Dosage Form

1, PROTECTION

10.

+ Environmental Protection: Shield medications from
ait, oxygen, temperature, and humidity (e.g., coated
tablets, capsules, ampoules).

Gastric Protection: Prevent acid-labile medications

from degrading in the stomach due to gastric acid
(e.g., enteric-coated tablets).

“

----- PAGE 197 -----
Chapter 6° Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products

Chemical Stability: Ensure the stability of drugs by
preventing chemical interactions,

Microbial Contamination: Design dosage forms to
prevent contamination, maintaining drug safety and
efficacy.

Mechanical Protection: Make dosage forms (eg.,
tablets with protective coatings) resilient to physical
stress during handling and transportation.

Inhalation Protection: Ensure metered-dose inhalers

and dry powder inhalers protect the medication

during administration.

Parenteral Protection: Maintain Sterility and avoid

contamination in parenteral dosage forms (eg,

ampoules, vials).

&

%

ee

s

<

2. IMPROVE THERAPEUTIC AcTiviTY

+ Targeted Action: Deliver the drug to the intended site
(e.g., transdermal patches, ointments).

Direct Insertion: Administer medications into body
orifices (e.g., rectal, vaginal suppositories).

Optimal Drug Action: Achieve the best drug action in
tissues or the bloodstream (e.g., injections, inhalants).
Prolonged Release: Provide controlled release
administration for sustained therapeutic effects.

eo

=

>

+ Increased Bioavailability: Enhance the absorption of
medications with a narrow absorption window (e.g.,
gastro retentive formulations).

3, PATIENT COMPLIANCE

Unit Dose: Ensure dose accuracy (e.g., tablets,

capsules).

% Reduced Dosage Frequency: Lower the frequency of

dosing (e.g., prolonged release, sustained release).

Masking Taste/Odor: Improve the palatability of

medicines (e.g., film-coated tablets, capsules,

suspensions).

Easy Administration: Facilitate administration and

handling (e.g., chewable tablets, liquid forms for

children).

By adhering to these principles, pharmaceutical dosage

forms are designed to meet patient needs, optimize drug

delivery, and improve therapeutic outcomes, ensuring
patient well-being and treatment efficacy.

6.5 Classification of Dosage Forms

Dosage forms can be classified based on the physical
form of the final product. The main categories are:

>

4

=

>

1 SOLID Dosace Forms
Solid dosage forms are those in which the drug is In
Solid state. These forms are highly stable, convenient

for storage and transportation, and allow for precise
dosing. Common solid dosage forms include:
* Tablets

° Compressed Tablets: Simple tablets formed by
compressing the drug and additives.

° Coated Tablets: Tablets covered with a coating to
protect the drug, mask taste, or control release.

° Effervescent Tablets: Contain ingredients that
release gas when in contact with water, aiding in
drug dissolution.

° Chewable Tablets: Designed to be chewed before
swallowing, often flavored to improve palatability.

© Sublingual Tablets: Placed under the tongue for
rapid absorption into the bloodstream.

¢ Buccal Tablets: Placed between the gum and cheek
for absorption through the mucous membranes.

* Capsules

e Hard Gelatin Capsules: Contain dry, powdered
ingredients or mini-pellets enclosed in a hard
gelatin shell.

© Soft Gelatin Capsules: Contain liquid or semi-solid
drugs enclosed in a soft, flexible gelatin shell.

Powders and Granules

© Bulk Powders: Drugs ina powdered form intended
to be measured and mixed with liquid before
administration.

e Granules: Larger, agglomerated particles often
used in sachets or as an intermediate for tablet
production.

ES

“> Lozenges and Pastilles

Lozenges: Solid preparations that dissolve slowly
in the mouth, delivering the drug locally or
systemically.

Pastilles: Soft, chewable, or gummy solid dosage
forms, often used for throat medications.

% Others
e Pills: An older form of solid dosage, typically
spherical.
e Troches: Compressed or molded discs that dissolve
slowly in the mouth.
e Implants: Small, sterile, solid forms placed under
the skin for long-term drug release.

2. LIQUID DOSAGE FORMS

Liquid dosage forms consist of a drug dissolved or
suspended in a suitable liquid medium. These forms
are particularly useful for patients who have difficulty
swallowing solids and can provide rapid drug
absorption. Common liquid dosage forms include:

----- PAGE 198 -----
———aiS

184

* Solutions
e Oral Solutions: Drugs dissolved in a suitable
solvent for oral administration.
¢ Syrups: Concentrated aqueous preparations of
sugar or sugar substitute containing the drug.
e Elixirs: Clear, sweetened, hydroalcoholic solutions
for oral use.
e Tinctures: Alcoholic or hydroalcoholic solutions
prepared from plant or chemical substances.
e Drops: Highly concentrated solutions administered
in small volumes, often using a dropper.
* Suspensions
e Oral Suspensions: Finely divided drug particles
suspended in a liquid medium for oral
administration.
e Topical Suspensions: Suspensions applied to the
skin for local action.

* Emulsions

Oral Emulsions: Mixtures of two immiscible liquids,
one dispersed in the other, for oral administration.

e Topical Emulsions: Emulsions applied to the skin,
often used in creams and lotions.

fe

Injections
e Intravenous (IV): Direct injection into a vein.
e Intramuscular (IM): Injection into a muscle.
e Subcutaneous (SC): Injection under the skin.

e intradermal (ID): Injection into the dermis layer of
the skin.

Other Liquid Forms

+

¢ Inhalations: Solutions or suspensions administered
through inhalation.

e Enemas: Solutions or suspensions introduced into
the rectum.

e Gargles and Mouthwashes: Solutions intended for
rinsing the mouth or throat.

3. SEMI-SOLID DOSAGE FORMS

Semi-solid dosage forms are intended for topical
application to the skin or mucous membranes. They
combine the properties of both solid and liquid dosage
forms, providing localized or systemic drug action.
Common semi-solid dosage forms include:

“ Ointments

e Hydrocarbon Base: Greasy, occlusive preparations
used for moisturizing.

¢ Absorption Bases: Allow incorporation of aqueous
solutions to form w/o emulsions.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte, ¢

e Water-Removable Bases: Non-greasy, €asy-to,
remove bases forming o/w emulsions.
e Water-Soluble Bases: Non-greasy bases that ae
completely water-soluble.
“ Creams
e Oil-in-Water (O/W) Creams: Non-greasy crea,
used for hydrating the skin.

 Water-in-Oil (W/O) Creams: Greasier reap,
providing an emollient effect.

* Gels
e Hydrogels: Contain water and provide

cooling effect.
e Organogels: Contain an organic liquid phase.
* Pastes
Stiffer than ointments: Contain a higher proportion o/
solid material, providing a protective layer.
“ Others
e Suppositories: Solid dosage forms designed to
melt at body temperature, administered rectally
or vaginally.
e Pessaries: Similar to suppositories but specifically
for vaginal administration. :
e Plasters: Semi-solid preparations applied to a
backing material for prolonged contact with
the skin.
Insummary, the classification of dosage forms into solid
liquid, and semi-solid categories helps in understanding
their distinct characteristics, applications,
advantages in drug delivery.

| 6.6 Cosmetic Products

The word “cosmetic” is derived from the Greek word
“kosmetikos,” which means to adorn. In ancient days
any material used for beautification or improvement of
appearance was known as a cosmetic.

A cosmetic, as per the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and
Rules, 1945, refers to any substance meant for cleansing
protecting, beautifying, enhancing attractiveness,
changing the appearance of the human body or an)
part thereof, whether applied by rubbing, pouring
sprinkling, spraying, or any other means. Soap s
excluded from this definition because it is considere*
more of a bodily necessity than a cosmetic. Similar!)
preparations such as room deodorants are not cosmeti¢s
but if the same deodorant is applied to the body, it
termed a cosmetic. Articles or devices used in apply!"
cosmetics, such as combs, brushes, razor blades
etc., should not be included in cosmetics. Genet!)
cosmetics are safe for use by almost all people, bul

and

----- PAGE 199 -----
Chapter 6 + Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products

adverse reactions may occur in certain individuals
when using many cosmetics, such as deodorants, hair
shampoos, hair sprays, hair removers, hair dyes, facial
creams, skin cleansers, lipsticks, and nail polishes,
Cosmetics serve one of the following functions:

¢ Maintain body health and hygiene.

¢ Avoid premature aging of the skin.

Provide a sense of well-being.

¢ Improve overall looks and personality.

e The raw materials used in the manufacture of
cosmetics should be of standard quality and
should be tested before use. Only distilled or
purified water should be used in the preparation
of cosmetics. The dyes used to give color to
cosmetics should be approved for FD&C to avoid
allergic reactions. The perfumes used should be
compatible with other ingredients in the cosmetic
preparation.

CLASSIFICATION

This classification helps in understanding the diverse
range of cosmetic products available and their intended
use, function, and physical characteristics. Additionally,
itaids inregulatory compliance and ensures appropriate
marketing and labeling of cosmetic products.

Cosmetics are classified into three main categories:

1, According to their use

e Skin Care: Includes creams, powders, lotions,
deodorants, and antiperspirants.

e Nail Care: Such as nail polish, polish removers,
and manicure preparations.

e Oral Care: Includes dentifrices and mouthwashes.

© Eye Care: Includes eye creams, lash products,
and liners.

© Hair Care: Including shampoos, dyes, tonics,
and sprays.

According to their functions:

° Curative or Therapeutic: Products with medicinal
properties like antiperspirants and certain hair
preparations.

® Protective: Such as face powders.

© Corrective: Including certain face powders.

® Decorative: Like lipsticks, nail polishes, and
mascaras.

. According to their physical nature:
® Aerosols: Such as hair perfumes and after-shave

lotions.

* Cakes: Including rouge and makeup compacts.

~

w

© Emulsions: Such as vanishing cream, cold cream,
and cleansing cream.

® Oils: Such as hair oils.
° Pastes: Like toothpaste and deodorant paste.

° Powders: Including face powder

talcum powder.

° Solutions: Such as after-shave lotions and hand —
lotions.

° Soaps: Including shaving soap, toilet soap, and
shampoo soap.

© Sticks: Like lipsticks and deodorant sticks.

6.7 Advantages and |
Available Dosage Fort

ibe =

Each dosage form has its own set of advantages and
disadvantages, making it suitable for specific medical
conditions, patient needs, and drug properties.
The choice of dosage form is crucial for optimizing
therapeutic outcomes, patient compliance, and overall
treatment effectiveness.

1. ORAL DOSAGE FORMS

TABLETS AND CAPSULES
* Advantages

¢ Convenient and easy to administer.

e Accurate dosing.

Long shelf life.

¢ Generally stable and easy to manufacture.
* Disadvantages

e Not recommended
swallowing challenges.

for individuals with
° Delayedonsetofactioncompared toinjectable forms.
¢ Possible gastrointestinal irritation.
e Variable absorption due to first-pass metabolism.
Liquids SOLUTIONS, SUSPENSIONS, SYRUPS
* Advantages
e Easier to swallow for children and elderly
patients.
e Faster absorption and onset of action compared
to solid forms.

¢ Flexible dosing.
* Disadvantages
e Less stable than solid forms.
e Shorter shelf life.
e Potential for dose inaccuracy.

e Often require preservatives.

----- PAGE 200 -----
——____

oS Gin

2. TOPICAL DOSAGE FORMS

CREAMS, OINTMENTS, GELS

* Advantages
¢ Direct application to the site of action.
e Reduced systemic side effects.

e Suitable for patients who cannot take oral
medications.

* Disadvantages

¢ Messy and inconvenient to apply.

e Limited to local effects.

° Possible skin irritation or allergic reactions.
TRANSDERMAL PATCHES
* Advantages

e Sustained and controlled release of medication.

e Avoids first-pass metabolism.

¢ Convenient and improves patient compliance.
« Disadvantages

e Skin irritation or allergic reactions.

e Limited to drugs that are effective at low doses.

e Slow onset of action.

3. PARENTERAL DOSAGE FORMS

INJECTABLES (INTRAVENOUS, INTRAMUSCULAR, SUBCUTANEOUS)
“ Advantages

e Rapid onset of action.

e Suitable for drugs that are poorly absorbed orally.

e Precise control over drug levels in the bloodstream.
~ Disadvantages

e Invasive and may induce discomfort or pain.

e Requires sterile techniques and trained personnel.

¢ Higher risk of infection.

e More expensive to manufacture and administer.

4. INHALATION DOSAGE FORMS

AEROSOLS, DRY POWDER INHALERS, NEBULIZERS
“ Advantages
e Quick absorption via the respiratory tract.

e Direct delivery to the lungs, useful for respiratory
conditions.

e Reduced systemic side effects.
“~ Disadvantages:

° Technique-dependent, requiring proper usage for
effectiveness,

e Irritation of the respiratory tract.
e Limited to drugs suitable for inhalation.

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter
5. RECTAL AND VAGINAL DOSAGE FORMS
aN Tat i A ee ar oa

SUPPOSITORIES, CREAMS, GELS
* Advantages
e Useful for patients who cannot take
medications.
e Bypasses first-pass metabolism.
e Local and systemic effects.

Ta

“ Disadvantages
e Inconvenient and discomforting for certa;,
patients.
e Variable absorption.
e Limited patient acceptance.

6. SUBLINGUAL AND BUCCAL DOSAGE FoRMS
SS

TABLETS, FILMS, SPRAYS
“* Advantages
e Rapid onset of action.
 Bypasses first-pass metabolism.
e Convenient and easy to administer.
“ Disadvantages:
e Limited to drugs that are effective at low doses.
© Potential for irritation of the oral mucosa.
e Unpleasant taste for some formulations.

6.8 Modification of Classical Ayurvedic Dosage

Adaptations and alterations are essential for the
advancement of any field of science, enabling it to
ascend to new levels of achievement. Ayurveda has
multiple effective basic formulations for treating
various diseases and disorders, but challenges such as
limited shelf life and poor palatability pose significant
hurdles to the administration of these drugs. Suitable
dosage forms are required to protect the drug from
the adverse effects of atmospheric changes and gastric
acid during oral administration, to mask the bitter taste
and foul odor, and to provide extended drug action
through controlled release mechanisms. To use these
formulations effectively in the present era, they require
modifications into new dosage forms that enhance shel!
life and palatability, suiting patients’ needs without
compromising the underlying basic principles.

Key AREAS FOR MODIFICATION

Primary preparations are mainly modified for
1. Increasing Palatability: Making the formulations
more pleasant to taste.
2. Extending Shelf Life: Enhancing the stability and
longevity of the formulations.

----- PAGE 201 -----
Chapter 6 » Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products

3. Achieving Global Acceptance: Ensuring

: : ‘ the
formulations meet international standards

>

. Ease of Administration: Making the dosage forms
simpler and more convenient to use.

5. Dose Fixation:

consistent dosing.

Ensuring accurate —_ and

BENEFITS OF MODIFICATIONS
Modifying traditional Ayurvedic formulations into new
dosage forms helps achieve public acceptance by:
1. Enhancing the appearance and form of the drugs.
2, Improving palatability.
3. Increasing shelf life.
4, Enhancing therapeutic utility or potency.
5. Simplifying dispensing.
6. Improving portability
TECHNIQUES AND ADDITIVES FOR MODIFICATION

The following agents can be added to achieve effective
modifications:

1, Suitable Vehicles: Used to dissolve or suspend drugs,
mask bad taste, and potentiate the drug. These are
used in Bhavana (impregnation), cooking drugs,
and Anupana (vehicle for drug administration).

nN

_ Harmless Coloring Agents: Make the drugs more
visually acceptable.

w

. Sweetening Agents: Such as sugarcane, used in
syrups to make them palatable, particularly for
conditions like Paittika Vikara (disorders related to
Pitta dosha), and suitable for pediatric use.

_ Flavoring Agents: Mask undesirable tastes, textures,
smells, and appearances. The addition of ingredients
like Trijata (a combination of three aromatic
substances) and Chaturjata (a combination of four
aromatic substances) enhances the taste and smell.

By incorporating these modifications, traditional

Ayurvedic formulations can be adapted to meet modern

needs and preferences, thereby increasing their efficacy,

acceptability, and therapeutic value.

| 6.9 Route of Drug Administration

The route of drug administration refers to the method
by which medications are introduced into the body to
achieve therapeutic effects. There are various routes,
including oral (by mouth), topical (applied to the skin),
injection (directly into the body), inhalation (via the
Iespiratory system), rectal, sublingual /buccal (under
the tongue or between the cheek and gum), transdermal
(through the skin), and intranasal (via the nose). Each
route has its advantages and disadvantages, impacting
factors such as the onset of action, bioavailability,

>

patient compliance, and ease of administration.

The selection of the appropriate route depends on
factors such as the drug’s properties, the patient's
condition, desired therapeutic outcomes, and patient
preference. Understanding the different routes of drug
administration is crucial for healthcare professionals to
ensure safe and effective medication delivery.

DIFFERENT ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION:
1. Oral Route: This is the most common route, ”
drugs are ingested through the mouth and absorbed
through the gastrointestinal tract. It includes tablets,
capsules, liquids, and powders. Advantages include ease
of administration and patient compliance. However,
absorption can be variable due to factors like stomach
acidity, food interactions, and first-pass metabolism in
the liver.

“« Advantages

e Convenience: Administering oral medications
is straightforward and does not necessitate
specialized training.

e Patient Compliance: Many patients find it easier
to take medications orally, leading to better
adherence to treatment regimens.

e Absorption: Some drugs are well absorbed through
the gastrointestinal tract, leading to predictable
and consistent blood levels.

e Versatility: Various dosage forms are available for
oral administration, including tablets, capsules,
liquids, and powders, accommodating different
patient needs.

« Disadvantages

e Variable Absorption: Absorption of oral
medications can be affected by factors like food,
pH of the stomach, and gastrointestinal motility,
leading to variable blood levels.

e First-pass Metabolism: Drugs absorbed orally may
undergo extensive metabolism in the liver before
reaching systemic circulation, reducing their
bioavailability.

e Irritation; Some medications can irritate the
gastrointestinal tract, causing symptoms like
nausea, vomiting, or gastric irritation.

e Inconvenience for Certain Patients: Patients with
swallowing difficulties, nausea, or vomiting may
find it challenging to take medications orally.

Slow Onset of Action: Oral medications may have a
slower onset of action compared to other routes,
such as injection or inhalation, which provide
more rapid effects.

----- PAGE 202 -----
188

2. Topical Route: Medications are applied directly to
the skin or mucous membranes for local effects. This
includes creams, ointments, gels, and patches. It’s
effective for skin conditions, pain relief, and localized
treatments. Absorption rates vary depending on skin
thickness, hydration, and blood flow to the area.

~ Advantages

e Localized Effect: Topical medications are applied
directly to the affected area, providing targeted
therapy and minimizing systemic exposure.
Reduced Systemic Side Effects: By bypassing
the digestive system and avoiding first-pass
metabolism in the liver, topical medications can
reduce systemic side effects.

Convenient Application: Topical medications are
often easy to apply and can be self-administered
by patients, increasing convenience and adherence
to treatment regimens.

Controlled Dosing: Topical formulations allow for
precise dosing, enabling healthcare providers
to adjust medication amounts according to
individual patient needs.

Potential for Extended Release: Certain topical
formulations, such as patches, can provide
sustained drug release over an extended period,
reducing the frequency of application.

« Disadvantages:

e Variable Absorption: Absorption of topical
medications can be inconsistent and influenced
by factors such as skin integrity, hydration, and
the presence of occlusive dressings.

e Limited Penetration: Some medications may have
difficulty penetrating the skin barrier, limiting
their effectiveness in treating deeper tissues or
systemic conditions.

e Skin Irritation: Topical medications may cause
skin irritation, allergic reactions, or sensitization
in some individuals, leading to discomfort or
adverse effects.

e Potential for Contamination: Improper application
or handling of topical medications can increase
the risk of contamination, infection, or unintended
exposure to others.

e Limited Use for Systemic Conditions: While effective
for localized conditions, the topical route may
not be suitable for treating systemic diseases
or conditions requiring widespread drug
distribution throughout the body.

3. Injection Route: Drugs are introduced into the body
via injection. This route offers rapid onset of action and

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter g

precise dosing. It includes subcutaneous (under 4,
skin), intramuscular (into muscle), and intraveng,,
(into a vein) injections. Intravenous injection,
provide immediate effects, while subcutaneous and
intramuscular injections offer sustained release.

« Advantages
e Rapid Onset of Action: Injections provide a faste,
onset of action compared to oral medication,
making them ideal for emergency situations o,
when immediate therapeutic effects are needeq

Precise Dosage: Injections allow for precise dosing,
ensuring accurate delivery of medication inj,
the body.

Bypassing First-Pass Metabolism: Injected drugs
bypass the digestive system and liver metabolism,
leading to higher bioavailability compared to ora|
administration.

e Predictable Blood Levels: Injection route often
results in consistent and predictable blood levels
of medications, optimizing therapeutic outcomes,

e Suitable for Non-Oral Administration: Injections
are useful for patients who are unable to take
medications orally due to factors such as nausea
vomiting, or impaired gastrointestinal function.

~ Disadvantages

e Invasive Procedure: Injections require piercing the

skin with a needle, which can be uncomfortable
or painful for patients and may cause anxiety.
Risk of Infection: Injection site infections can occur,
especially if proper aseptic techniques are not
followed during administration.
e Tissue Damage: Improper injection technique or
repeated injections at the same site can lead to
tissue damage, scarring, or localized reactions.
Specialized Training Required: Administration of
injections requires proper training and skills
ensure safety and effectiveness.
e Potential for Adverse Reactions: Some patients may
experience adverse reactions, such as allergic

reactions or injection site pain, swelling, or
redness.

0

4. Inhalation Route: Medications are administered
through inhalation into the respiratory system. This
route is used for conditions like asthma, COPD, and
respiratory infections. It allows for rapid absorption
into the bloodstream via the lungs. Inhalers, nebulizers
and vaporizers are common delivery devices.

« Advantages

e Rapid Onset of Action: Inhalation allows
medications to be absorbed directly into the

----- PAGE 203 -----
Chapter 6 + Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products

bloodstream through the lungs, resulting in rapid
onset of action.

Targeted Delivery: Inhalation delivers Medications
directly to the respiratory system, providing
targeted therapy for conditions such as asthma,
COPD, and respiratory infections.

e Lower Systemic Side Effects: By delivering
medications directly to the lungs, the inhalation
routecan ARIQERIS systemic side effects compared
to oral or injection routes.

° Reduced Dosage Requirement: Inhalation typically
requires lower doses of medication compared to
oral or injection routes, as drugs are delivered
directly to the site of action.

e Patient Preference: Many patients prefer inhalation
therapy over other routes due to its ease of use and
the perception of immediate relief for respiratory
symptoms.

~ Disadvantages

e Technique Dependency: Proper inhalation
technique is essential for effective drug delivery,
and some patients may struggle with using
inhalation devices correctly.

e Device Complexity: Inhalation devices can be
complex to use, requiring proper assembly, main-
tenance, and coordination between inhalation
and medication release.

e Limited Application: Inhalation therapy is primarily
suitable for respiratory conditions and may not
be suitable for medications targeting other areas
of the body.

e Irritation: Some medications delivered via
inhalation may cause irritation to the respiratory
tract, leading to coughing, throat irritation, or
bronchospasm in sensitive individuals.

e Cost: Inhalation devices and medications can be
more expensive compared to oral medications,
potentially limiting access for some patients.

5. Rectal Route: Drugs are inserted into the rectum for
absorption into the bloodstream. This route is used
when oral administration is not feasible, such as in
patients who are vomiting or unconscious. It can also
provide local effects for conditions like hemorrhoids
or nausea.
% Advantages
e Avoids First-Pass Metabolism: Drugs administered
rectally bypass the liver and enter the systemic
circulation directly via the rectal veins, avoiding
first-pass metabolism and potentially enhancing
bioavailability.

e Rapid Absorption: The rectal mucosa has a rich
blood supply, allowing for relatively rapid
absorption of medications into the bloodstream.
Useful in Nausea/Vomiting: The rectal route can be
used when oral administration is not feasible due
to nausea, vomiting, or impaired consciousness,
ensuring medication delivery in such cases.
Localized Therapy: Rectal medications can
provide localized therapy for conditions such
as hemorrhoids, anal fissures, or inflammatory
bowel disease.

Pediatric and Geriatric Use: The rectal route is often
preferred in pediatric and geriatric populations,
as it can be easier and more acceptable than oral
or injection routes for some patients.

* Disadvantages

e Lack of Patient Acceptance: Rectal administration
may be perceived as uncomfortable or invasive
by some patients, leading to reluctance or non-
compliance with treatment.

Variable Absorption: Absorption of rectally
administered drugs can be variable and
unpredictable due to factors such as rectal pH,
fecal matter, and rectal mucosal integrity.

Risk of Irritation: Some medications or excipients
used in rectal formulations may irritate the rectal
mucosa, leading to discomfort, bleeding, or local
irritation.

Limited Drug Selection: Not all medications are
available in rectal formulations, limiting the
options for rectal administration.

Inconvenience: Rectal administration may be
considered inconvenient compared to other
routes, requiring proper positioning and insertion
of suppositories or enemas.
6. Sublingual/Buccal Route: Medications are placed under
the tongue (sublingual) or between the cheek and gum
(buccal). This route allows for rapid absorption into
the bloodstream without passing through the digestive
system or first-pass metabolism in the liver. It’s commonly
used for drugs like nitroglycerin and some opioids.
« Advantages
e Rapid Absorption: Drugs administered via the sub-
lingual or buccal route are absorbed directly into
the bloodstream through the mucous membranes,
leading to rapid onset of action.
 Bypasses First-Pass Metabolism: Sublingual and
buccal medications bypass the liver and gas-
trointestinal tract, avoiding first-pass metabolism
and potentially enhancing bioavailability.

:
,
:

----- PAGE 204 -----
190

e Convenient Administration: Sublingual and buccal
medications are easy to administer and do not
require swallowing, making them suitable for
patients with difficulty swallowing or nausea.

e Patient Compliance: Many patients prefer subl-
ingual and buccal medications due to their ease
of use, convenience, and avoidance of needles or
swallowing pills.

e Precise Dosing: Sublingual and buccal formulations
allow for precise dosing, as medications are
directly absorbed into the bloodstream without
the need for gastrointestinal absorption.

+ Disadvantages

e Limited Drug Compatibility: Not all drugs are
suitable for sublingual or buccal administration,
as they may require specific formulations or
characteristics to be effectively absorbed through
the mucous membranes.

e Taste and Sensation: Some medications admi-
nistered sublingually or buccally may have an
unpleasant taste or cause irritation or discomfort

in the mouth, leading to patient dissatisfaction or
non-compliance.

Saliva Interference: Saliva production and com-
position can affect drug absorption via the
sublingual and buccal routes, potentially altering
drug effectiveness or bioavailability.

Limited Drug Stability: Sublingual and buccal
formulations may have limited stability, requiring
careful storage and handling to maintain drug
efficacy and integrity.

Inconvenience for Prolonged Use: Sublingual and
buccal administration may be inconvenient for
medications that require frequent or prolonged
dosing, as repeated administration may lead to
mucosal irritation or discomfort.

7. Transdermal Route: Medications are delivered through
the skin via patches or creams. The drug is absorbed into
the bloodstream through the skin for systemic effects.
This route provides continuous, controlled release over
an extended period.

“~ Advantages

e Controlled and Sustained Release: Transdermal
patches deliver medication through the skin in
a controlled and sustained manner, providing
continuous drug release over an extended period
(usually hours to days).

e Avoids First-Pass Metabolism: Transdermal delivery
bypasses the liver and gastrointestinal tract,

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter

avoiding first-pass metabolism and Potentia}),
enhancing drug bioavailability. }

Reduced Systemic Side Effects: Transde

Tma|
administration can minimize systemic

: : Side
effects by delivering medication directly into 4,

bloodstream while avoiding the digestive syst...

Convenient and Non-Invasive: Transdermal Patche,
are easy to apply and remove, offering a non
invasive and convenient option for medicatio,
administration.

Improved Patient Compliance: Transdermal Patches
provide a simple and user-friendly methog
of medication delivery, potentially improvin,
patient compliance compared to oral medication,
or injections.

* Disadvantages

e Limited Drug Absorption: Not all drugs are suitable
for transdermal delivery, as their molecular size
lipophilicity, and other factors can affect skin
permeability and absorption.

e Skin Irritation: Some individuals may experience
skin irritation, allergic reactions, or sensitization
at the application site, leading to discomfort o;
adverse effects.

Slow Onset of Action: Transdermal patches may
have a slower onset of action compared to other
routes of drug administration, as the medication
must first penetrate the skin barrier before
entering the bloodstream.

Size and Thickness Constraints: Transdermal patches
are restricted by the size and thickness of mole-
cules that can be effectively delivered through

the skin, limiting the range of drugs suitable for
this route.

Potential for Adhesion Issues: Transdermal patches
may not adhere well to all skin types or may be-
come displaced during activities such as bathing
or exercise, affecting drug delivery and efficacy.
8. Intranasal Route: Medications are administered through
the nose for rapid absorption into the bloodstream. It's
used for drugs like nasal sprays or drops for conditions
like allergies, congestion, or migraines.

“» Advantages:

e Rapid Absorption: Intranasal medications al?
absorbed directly through the nasal mucosa into
the bloodstream, resulting in rapid onset of action

e Non-Invasive: Intranasal administration does 10!
require needles or invasive procedures, making it
well-tolerated and suitable for patients who ma)
be averse to injections.

----- PAGE 205 -----
Pnapter 6 = Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products

Ree

e Convenient Administration: Intranasal medications
are easy to administer and do not ie
swallowing, making them suitable for p
with difficulty swallowing or nausea.

quire
atients

e Avoids First-Pass Metabolism: Intranasal drugs
bypass the liver and _ gastrointestinal tract,
avoiding first-pass metabolism and potentially
enhancing bioavailability.

e Targeted Delivery to the Brain: Intranasal admin-
istration can provide targeted delivery of drugs
to the central nervous system, bypassing the
blood-brain barrier and achieving therapeutic
concentrations in the brain.

Disadvantages:

e Nasal Irritation: Some individuals may experience
nasal irritation, dryness, or discomfort with intra-
nasal medications, leading to nasal congestion or
nose bleeds.

e Variable Absorption: Absorption of intranasal
medications can be variable and affected
by factors such as nasal mucosal integrity,
mucociliary clearance, and individual differences
in nasal anatomy.

e Limited Volume Capacity: The nasal cavity has
limited volume capacity, restricting the amount of
medication that can be administered intranasally
ina single dose.

e Nasal Administration Devices: Intranasal medica-
tions require specialized administration devices
such as nasal sprays, droppers, or atomizers,

which may be unfamiliar or challenging for some
patients to use correctly.

e Potential for Nasal Deposition: Some intranasal
medications may deposit in the anterior or
posterior nasal passages, leading to reduced drug
absorption or systemic side effects.

Each route of administration has its advantages,

disadvantages, and specific considerations

based on factors such as drug properties, patient
characteristics, and desired therapeutic outcomes.

6.10 Research Updates

* In the article titled “Recent Trends in Traditional
Medicine Dosage Forms and Present Status of Unani
and Ayurvedic Medicine” by Hamiduddin, a lecturer
in the Department of Ilmul Saidla at the National
Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India, published in the International Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research, various
innovations that can be adopted in Ayurvedic

medicine are discussed. These innovations include
the development of granules, tablets, capsules,
suspensions, syrups, linctus, emulsions, liposomes,
hair dyes, toothpaste, face packs, dentifrices, hand
wash, gel, sprays, shampoo, eye drops, suppositories,
ointments, liniments, and face powder.

+ In the study titled “Modification of Drug Dosage

fe

fe

Form of Arjuna Kshirapaka by Using Spray Drying
Technology” by Swapnil Talmale, published in
the Journal of Research in Traditional Medicine in
2017, Arjuna Kshirapaka was prepared following
guidelines from Acharya Yadavaji Trikamji’s
contemporary reference textbook. The preparation
involved using a Labultima spray dryer unit set
at standard thermoregulatory settings to create a
spray-dried powder. This method aims to modernize
traditional Ayurvedic formulations by enhancing
their stability, shelf life, and ease of use while
preserving their therapeutic properties.

In the study titled “Comparative GC-MS Analysis
of Gomutra Sadhita Triphala Kvatha and Gomutra
Sadhita Triphala Arka” by Neerja Thakur, a PG
Scholar in the Department of Rasa Shastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana at Parul Institute of Ayurved,
Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, published
in the Journal of Survey in Fisheries Sciences, it is
revealed that Gomutra Sadhita Triphala Kvatha
and Gomutra Sadhita Triphala Arka dosage forms
contain entirely different components. Arka is rich
in volatile compounds with anti-inflammatory
properties, whereas Kvatha contains components
that inhibit protein denaturation, thereby also acting
as an anti-inflammatory agent.

» Areview by ViraliJ. Parmar from Sardar Patel College

of Pharmacy, Bakrol Anand, Gujarat, India, published
in the Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry,
focuses on the preparation and evaluation of a herbal
nasal spray. The study aims to evaluate Tulsi distillate
prepared through various methods for use in a nasal
spray. The intranasal delivery system utilizes Tulsi
distillate in an aqueous solution. The formulation
includes Tulsi distillate, saline, sodium benzoate,
eucalyptus oil, glycerine, and purified water.
Distilling 250 g of Tulsi produced approximately 0.2
ml of slightly water-soluble and viscous distillate.
The study assessed various parameters, including
sterility, visual appearance, and stability.

In “Formulation and Evaluation of Herbal Transd-
ermal Patches,” Jyothsna Savula from the Department
of Pharmacognosy at Marri Laxman Reddy Institute
of Pharmacy, Dundigal, Hyderabad, Telangana,

----- PAGE 206 -----
ray

N

192

India, prepared various matrix-type patches with
different polymer combinations using Nelumbo
nucifera flowers. Phytochemical tests showed the
presence of alkaloids, glycosides, and amino acids
in the methanolic extracts. The herbal transdermal

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapte;»

patches exhibited good folding endurance, Misty,
uptake, and drug content uniformity. Over >,
hours, formulation F6, with a higher HPMc
PVA ratio, demonstrated the best drug release -

permeation.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

. Which of the following is NOT a purpose served by
additives in drug formulations?
a. Formulation Shape
b. Stability Enhancement
c. Taste and Odor Masking
d. Increasing the drug’s potency
. What is the primary function of enteric-coated tablets?
a. Enhancing the drug’s color
b. Protecting the drug from degradation by
gastric juices
c. Increasing the palatability of the drug
d. Expediting the drug’s absorption in the stomach

. Which dosage form is ideal for drugs that are insoluble

or unstable in solvents?
a. Capsules
b. Suspensions

c. Tablets
d. Solutions

. Whatis the purpose of sustained-release dosage forms?

a. To release the drug rapidly into the bloodstream

b. To maintain a consistent drug concentration in
the bloodstream over an extended period

c. To decrease the shelf life of the drug
d. To mask the unpleasant taste of the drug

. Which route of administration is associated with

dosage forms like rectal or vaginal suppositories?
a, Oral c. Topical
b. Inhalation d. Parenteral

. Which principle emphasizes understanding a drug’s

solubility, permeability, and pharmacokinetic behavior
to determine the appropriate dosage regimen and
release kinetics?

a. Patient-Centered Approach

b. Route of Administration

c. Release Kinetics

d. Biopharmaceutics and Pharmacokinetics

. Whatis a primary reason for designing dosage forms to

protect medications from microbial contamination?
a. Chemical Stability

b, Environmental Protection

c. Improve Therapeutic Activity

d. Patient Compliance

8.

10.

wal,

12.

13.

Which dosage form is designed to provide Controlle,
release administration for sustained therapeu),

effects?

a. Tablets

b. Capsules

c. Injections

d. Prolonged-release formulations

. What is the main objective of designing dosage form,

with improved palatability, such as film-coated tablet;
or flavored suspensions?

a. Environmental Protection

b. Targeted Action

c. Patient Compliance

d. Optimal Drug Action

Which principle focuses on selecting the most suitable
route of drug administration based on the drug's
properties and therapeutic effect desired?

a. Stability and Shelf-Life

b. Excipient Selection and Compatibility

c. Safety and Tolerability

d. Route of Administration

Which of the following is NOT a type of solid
dosage form?
a. Tablets
b. Solutions

ce. Capsules
d. Powders

What type of tablets are placed under the tongue for
rapid absorption into the bloodstream?

a. Chewable Tablets ¢. Sublingual Tablets
b. Effervescent Tablets d. Buccal Tablets
Which liquid dosage form consists of finely divided
drug particles suspended in a liquid medium?

a. Solutions c. Syrups
b. Elixirs d. Suspensions
Ans: d

. Which semi-solid dosage form is specifically designed

for rectal or vaginal administration and melts at body
temperature?

a. Ointments
b. Creams

c. Suppositories
d. Gels

----- PAGE 207 -----
een eonncana Eanne 2 PET Ra =
Chapter 6 + Dosage Forms & Cosmetic Products
SS

45. What is the purpose of using troches asa dovagetorn?
a. Toshield medications from eny
b. To provide controlled release
c. To facilitate administration

ironmental factors

administration

and handling

d. To dissolve slowly in the mouth for localized or

systemic drug action

46. According to the classification based on their use, which
category of cosmetics includes Products like creams
powders, lotions, deodorants, and antiperspirants?
a. Nail Care c. Skin Care
b. Eye Care d. Oral Care

47. Which classification of cosmetics includes products
with medicinal properties like antiperspirants and
certain hair preparations?

a. Curative or Therapeutic
b. Protective
c. Corrective
d. Decorative
4g. Among the physical nature classification of cosmetics,

which category includes products such as vanishing
cream, cold cream, and cleansing cream?

a. Oils
b. Emulsions

c. Pastes
d. Powders

19. Which type of cosmetic products are typically included
in the aerosols category?

a. Nail polishes
b. Face powders

c. Hair perfumes
d. Toothpaste

20. What physical nature category of cosmetics includes
products like lipsticks and deodorant sticks?

a. Sticks c. Solutions
b. Soaps d. Cakes
21, Which of the following is an advantage of oral tablets
and capsules as dosage forms?
a. Rapid onset of action
b. Reduced risk of gastrointestinal irritation
c. Long shelf life
d, Suitable for patients with swallowing challenges
22. What is a disadvantage of topical creams, ointments,
and gels?
a, Quick absorption and onset of action
b. Limited to local effects
c. Reduced systemic side effects
d. Convenient and easy to apply
23, Which advantage does the transdermal patch offer as a
dosage form?
a. Rapid onset of action

24,

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

b. Direct delivery to the lungs
c. Avoids first-pass metabolism

d. Suitable for drugs that are poorly absorbed orally
What is a disadvantage of parenteral injectables?

a. Limited to drugs that are suitable for inhalation

b. Quick absorption via the respiratory tract ee

c. Precise control over drug levels in the blood-
stream

d. Higher risk of infection :
Which disadvantage is associated with inhalation
dosage forms?

a. Quick absorption via the respiratory tract

b. Reduced systemic side effects

c. Limited to drugs that are suitable for inhalation
d. Bypasses first-pass metabolism

What is an advantage of the oral route of drug
administration?

a. Rapid onset of action

b. Avoids first-pass metabolism

c. Targeted delivery to the lungs

d. Suitable for patients with swallowing difficulties
Which route of drug administration provides controlled
and sustained release over an extended period?

a. Topical route

b. Inhalation route

c. Rectal route

d. Transdermal route

What is a disadvantage of the intranasal route of drug
administration?

a. Rapid absorption

b. Non-invasive administration

c. Nasal irritation

d. Avoids first-pass metabolism

Which advantage does the transdermal route offer
over oral administration?

a. Variable absorption

b. Slow onset of action

c. Reduced systemic side effects

d. Limited drug selection

What is a disadvantage of the injection route of drug
administration?

a. Precise dosage

b. Bypassing first-pass metabolism

c. Non-invasive procedure

d. Risk of infection

----- PAGE 208 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter

PNSWERSIKEYS) vil | okie), (oe bie) oth us ial Ea
i 8. b 9) c
Sane pee a ea j ms 24. d i.
. Cc Fs
8 c d 10. al 21, c Wed. 25. ;
UG ee te uo, c O30,

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Explain Different Dosage form and write its advantages and disadvantages.
e Write Cosmetic products and its classification.

e Write Short Note on Route of drug administration

© Write the ingredients of Phala Ghrita and its Research Updates.

e Research updates on modification of Ayurvedic dosage form.

----- PAGE 209 -----
A nutraceutical #2 product derived from food sources
that provides additional health benefits beyond the basic
nutritional value found in foods. These products can
include dietary supplements, fortified foods, functional
foods, and medical foods. The term “nutraceutical” isa
blend of the words “nutrition” and “pharmaceutical,”
and it refers to any product that combines nuttitional
and medicinal benefits. Nutraceuticals are similar to
the Ayurvedic principles of Aahara Kalpana, as they
have proven benefits in managing chronic illnesses.
For instance, consider the medicated food Moong-dal-
rice (Khichadi) made with Trikatu powder. It is often
given to patients with fever as a nutritional supplement
and to stimulate the digestive system when they have
Agni Mandya. Nutraceuticals can be connected to the
Ayurvedic concepts of Hita, Ahita, Satmya, Asatmya,
and Pathyapathya. Condiments like Ela, Maricha,
Dhanyaka, and Haridra, as well as Harit Varga Dravya
like Rasona and Ardraka, are used wisely. These
ingredients enhance food digestion, add micronutrients,
and hasten nutritional absorption. Specific preparation
techniques, the length of cooking time, the use of
medicinal water, banana leaves, particular tools, etc., all
boost the nutritional value. Nutraceuticals significantly
impact the development of treatments in the current
selfmedication environment. As people age, their
nutritional requirements may increase or decrease
depending on their age. Numerous studies have shown
that nutraceuticals made from fruit or plant extracts
reduce oxidative stress and promote healthy aging in
invertebrate models.

Advantages of Nutraceuticals:

. Agreeable to the palate or taste.

. Effectiveness.

. Targeted bioavailability.

. More nutrition in a smaller amount.

me WN

5. Increased safety. The development of Ayurveda will
benefit from a greater emphasis on the applications
of nutraceuticals.

[7.1 Kushmanda Avaleha

Reference: AFI, Part I

RU Shed Tait HeHeilchty |

Uriel FART Teas eel

Fal AGA: Weta GIS A!

Rua sama F Uct Sita a1

TACT AAI Teese |

ee itad Ty cot TgETT: 1

dcad Wig WTS areal aig Ycleaha |

WAM Aact Glegrhladt Aca |

MAAS eget asa: |

Fel Want acta ae

sipat Fit ves easaraea!

GUSMASAMITUNTT HA USAGaAT |

Ua Wea cietet Maras Ta Aaa
(B.R,, Raktapitta., 13/95-101)

INGREDIENTS USED

Kushamanda Fr. 4.800 kg
Ghrita = 768 gms
Khanda = 4.800 kg
Pippali Fr. 96 gms
Shunthi Rz. 96 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 96 gms
Tvak St. Bk. 24 gms
Ela Sd. 24 gms
Patra Lf. 24 gms
Maricha Fr. 24 gms
Dhanya Fr. 24 gms
Madhu > 384 gms

----- PAGE 210 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapj,,

196
Procedure: may help in improving digestion and relig,,_
; 4 s like cough, dyspnoea, and indigest;.
1. Take pieces of kushmanda (ash gourd) and boil eye One uke he ySP es Bestic
them in water until the volume is reduced by half. 3. Shveta Jiraka (cunt): eas : : = 4 we
2. Remove the well-cooked pieces of kushmanda and and may help in relieving flatu = JUG ; domi,
make a paste by piercing them multiple times. discomfort. They also possess antimicro}
e A erties.
3. Fry the kalka with ghee ina copper vessel. BEOR .
4. Add sugar to the decoction and cook the mixture 4. Tvak (Cinnamon), Bee ee oe ee
until it reaches a two thread consistency. Tamala), and Maricha (Blac ae NESE sp
= P : are known for their digestive and carmina;
5: ee an oe attains, add fine powder of properties. They may aid in digestion, red
: tulence, and enhance the bioavailability
6. Allow the content to cool down and then add honey ee f
Soe . 6 5. Madhu (Honey): Honey is a natural sweetener \;,
7. Store in air tight container. antimicrobial properties. It may help in soothj A
Dose: 6-12 gms. the throat and relieving cough symptoms.

Anupana: Water, Milk.

Therapeutic Indications: Kasa, Shvasa, Urahkshata,
Kshaya, Puranajvara, Raktapitta, Chardi, Trishna, Jvara,
Shukra Kshaya, Daurbalya, Karshya, Svarabedha,

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The active constituents of Kushmang
Avaleha, including various herbs and spices, a.
absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract.

Vaivarnya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS 2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the Bioactive
See oe a compounds are distributed to various tissues

1. Kushmanda (Ash Gourd): Rich in antioxidants an en nee ee eunemetects throushou

nutrients, Kushmanda helps in boosting immunity
and promoting overall health. It possesses anti-
inflammatory properties, which may aid in reducing
inflammation associated with various conditions
like cough (Kasa), dyspnoea (Shvasa), and bleeding

the body.

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of the ingredients
occurs primarily in the liver, where they undergo
biotransformation into metabolites. }

disorders (Raktapitta). 4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
2. Pippali (Long Pepper) and Shunthi (Dry Ginger): These are excreted mainly through urine and feces, while |
ingredients possess warming properties and are some may be eliminated through sweat and other |
known for their digestive stimulant effects. They bodily secretions.

Author R

Sheetal Sharma, Department
of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya
Kalpana, All India Institute of
Ayurveda, Sarita Vihar, New
Delhi - 110 076, India. E-mail:
ssheetalS04@ gmail.com

Adhave Swati Sheshrao, PG
Scholar, Depart. of RSBK,
Government Ayurved College
Nanded, Maharashtra, India.

Mukta Bariha, Department of
Kaumarabhritya, Shri Narayan
Prasad Awasthi, Government
Ayurved College, Raipur,
Chhattisgarh, India.

Based on a synthesis of literature from both traditional texts and
scientific journals, Kushmanda Avaleha, a polyherbal formulation
demonstrates varied quantities of its constituents and exhibits
pharmacological properties with therapeutic efficacy, particularly
in addressing respiratory ailments. It serves as a comprehensive
treatment option for respiratory disorders.

Kushmanda Avaleha comprises 4.44% fats, 1.05% proteins, and

82.10% carbohydrates. Additionally, it contains 60 mg/100 gm o!
sodium and 11 mg/100 gm of zinc, providing 372 Kcals/100 gm of
energy to the body.

Kushmanda Avaleha, for all ages, fights weakness post-illness,
acting as a tonic and Amlapitta remedy by reducing Pitta.
Bhavamishra notes its memory-enhancing properties. With
Nutrients aiding weight gain, nourishment, and immunity, it’s
endorsed for overall nourishment, strength, and weight gain by
Acharyas, offering holistic benefits.

Exploring potential of
Kushmanda Avaleha in
respiratory illness —A

comprehensive review

Evaluation of Nutritive Value
of Kushmanda Avaleha

Nutraceutical Value of
Kushmanda Avaleha and its
Importance for Children’s
Health and Growth: A
Review Article

----- PAGE 211 -----
Chapter 7 + Nutraceuticals:

An Clinical Study on RSet
Kushmanda Avleha and
Narikela Avaleha in the
Management of Amlapitta

br. Gane Gupta PG SHER
Dept. of Kayachikitsa, Major
S.D. Singh P.G. Ayurvedic
Medical College & Hospital,
Bewar Road, Farrukhabad, U.P.
Dr Akshatha, Ashwini
Ayurvedic Medical College

& PG Centre Davangere,
Karnataka

Pharmaceutical Modification
of Kushmandavaleha into
Candy

Pharmaceutico Analytical
Profile of Kushmanda
Avaleha and Its

Modified Dosage Form
as Kushmanda Granules

Dr. Neha Sudarshann Chavhan,
Deparment of Rasashastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Mahatma Gandhi Ayurveda
College Hospital and Research
Centre, Wardha - 442001,
Maharashtra, India

7.2 Preenana Modaka

Reference: Ashtanga Hridaya Uttarasthana

A

1 (ALU. 1/38)

INGREDIENTS USED

Priyala Enm. 1 Part
Yashtimadhu Rt. 1 Part
tajja (Parched Rice) 1 Part
Sharkara S 1 Part
Madhu = 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Preenana Modaka. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind first four
ingredients separately into a fine powder.

3. Then add all the fine powdered drugs with
adding madhu.

4 Stir well until suitable for tablets form
(Modaka shape).

5. Dry properly and store in a sterilized, airtight
container.

Dose: 12 gms.

Therapeutic Indications: Pacify Vata- Pitta, Malnourised

Children.

highlighting Ayurveda’s safety. Emphasizing healthy
prevention, Including diet, exercise, and mindfulness prac’
crucial for a healthier life.

alcohol-soluble ones. Microbi
limits, The avaleha was
candies of various nee :

during fruit pulp alco ‘
i

1 wit

soluble etacnnee pH, total sugar, reducing sugar, ni
sugar, and total fat and moisture content in the range ¢
0.7%, 0.103%, 71.22%, 77.12%, 4.2%, 78.15%, 68, 21%,
and 2.92%, respectively. For granules, the range
0.36%, 38.09%, 41.2%, 3.53, 80.17, 78.12, 4.5, 0.92, a
respectively.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Priyal (Indian Costus): Priyal is known for its
digestive stimulant properties. It helps in
improving digestion and relieving gastrointestinal
discomfort. Additionally, it possesses carminative
and anti-inflammatory properties, which may aid
in pacifying Vata and Pitta doshas.

. Yashtimadhu (Licorice): Yastimadhu is a well-known
herb in Ayurveda with various pharmacological
properties. It acts as a demulcent and expectorant,
soothing the respiratory tract and promoting the
expulsion of mucus. It also has anti-inflammatory
and immunomodulatory effects, contributing to its
therapeutic benefits.

. Lajja (Parched Rice): Parched rice serves as a source of
carbohydrates and energy, It is easily digestible and
may provide quick nourishment to malnourished
children.

. Sharkara (Sugar): Sugar acts as a sweetening agent
in Preenana Modaka. It provides sweetness and
enhances palatability, making it more acceptable,
especially for children.

. Madhu (Honey): Honey serves as a binding agent and
adds sweetness to the preparation. It also possesses
antimicrobial properties and may contribute to the
overall therapeutic effect of the formulation.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1, Absorption: The active constituents of Preenana
Modaka are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract,
where they are broken down into smaller molecules
for absorption into the bloodstream.

----- PAGE 212 -----
198 a Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 7

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the components NoTE: Preenana Modaka is a nutritive and digestive
are distributed throughout the body, providing formulation designed to pacify Vata and Pitta dosha,
nourishment and exerting their therapeutic effects. while providing nourishment to malnourisheg

3. Metabolism: The metabolism of the ingredients
occurs primarily in the liver, where they may
undergo biotransformation into metabolites.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted mainly through urine and feces. nutritional deficiencies in children.

children. The combination of Priyala, Yashtimadhu,
Lajja, Sharkara, and Madhu synergistically works
to improve digestion, boost immunity, and address

RESEARCH UEDATES)

This study transformed the Eaditonsl( preenana waedalG eoPnTeon into
prinana modaka biscuits using Buchanania lanzan, Glycyrrhiza glabra, puffed
rice, lump sugar, and jaggery as substitutes for honey. Nutritional analysis was
conducted on both forms, traditionally consumed during weaning and suitable
for malnourished children aged 1-5, addressing a significant health concern,
particularly among economically disadvantaged children in India.

Sh a Nutritional 'sheela EIperaunde HOD &
Values of Preenan | Professor, Rasa Shastra
Modak and Prinan | and Bhaishajya Kalpana
Modaka Biscuits Dept, YMT Ayurvedic
Medical College,
Kharghar, Navi Mumbai,
MHA, India.

7.3 Chyavanaprasha Avaleha INGREDIENTS USED

| brugname | PartUsed | Proportion
Reference: AFI, Part I, page 37 SEs a 2

Bilva Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
favaistaa-a: yalrten: aigae: ureferien | pennant Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
uudsicea: fours: Hea Fedtgaq | Shyonaka Rt./ St. Bk, 48 gms
Syst acta Gla Silereit Yee | Gambhari Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms
SET TGA sehguitaandsat yeti Patala Rt./ St. Bk. 48 gms

co a Pl. 48
sil war ss I a Pl 48 ae
fran FEB Tit aareatcit rea || Prishniparni Pl. 48 gms
Wat Weta, ATA Mudgaparni PL. 48 gms
Us caida Sergrot fara Mashaparni PI. 48 gms
Wet Maas Ft TAL Pippali Fr. 48 gms
deamerntecs Prepet serareat: 1 Gokshura Hl 48 gms

; cath Brihati Pl.
zy eee Pl 7 ane
te gms
aerafrsear: YMA CEA ATTA | Karkatashringi Gl. 48 gms
wane Hess faegvite Vera | Tamalaki Pl. 48 gms
uadaet Gretta: froreittgact cart Draksha DrFr. 48 gms
Uti Peet AeA INT | Jivanti Rt. 48 gms
Fae ASAT: UL RAT TATE: 1 Rushkata Ru 48 gms
Sq fayraviahesat Agru Ht. Wd. 48 gms

a A : Abhaya P.
atorerart qaert area aga: 11 = 48.gms
mee : Amrita Ste 48 gems
FRAGT BST AAMT ATT | Ridhi Sub. Rt. Tr 48 gms
Taoret Fayreneard ete srermrardta Jivaka Rt. Tr. 48 gms
Fe Wal Wassit AeA STA | Risabhaka Rt. Tr. 48 gms
FEA Vara: Wests yd Ursa || shat Rz. 48 gms

ai ion — fat: i Musta Rz. 48 gms
aw arate aul F . rr Punarnava (Rakta) Pl. 48 gms

Meda Rt. Tr.

WETS A: Vater situ str Eetwaera | Ela Sd a Fi
Wiad Sonne ue fautd mo vacant || Chandana Ht. Wd. 48 gms
(Cha.Chi., 1/1/62-74) _Utpala Fl.

48 gms

----- PAGE 213 -----
Chapter 7 * Nutraceuticals

199

Rt. Tr.

vidari 48 gms
Vrishamula Rt. 48 pms
Kakoli Sub. Rt. 48 gms
Kakanashika Fr. 48 gms
Amlaka Fr. Sooinhe
Water for Decoction — 12.288 L
Reduced to = 3.072 L
Ghrita = 288 gms
Taila Ol. 288 gms
Matsyandika - 2.400 kg
Madhu = 288 ems
Jugakshiri S.C. 192 gms
Pippali Fr. 96 gms
Twak St. Bk. 48 gms
Ela Sd. 48 gms
Patra Lf. 48 gms
Kesare Stmn. 48 ems
Procedure:

1. Bundle ripened fresh Amalaki in a piece of cloth.

2. Coarsely powder the ingredients from Bilva to
Kakanasika and place them in a vessel.

3. Add 120 liters of water to the vessel. Suspend the
Amalakipottali in the vessel and boil the mixture
until the water is reduced to one-fourth (30 liters).

4, Remove the Amalaki bundle from the vessel and
strain the decoction and keep it separately.

5. Remove the seeds from the boiled Amalaki and
make a paste of the pulp.

6. Strain the paste through a piece of cloth ora 40-mesh
sieve over a wide-mouthed vessel to remove fibers.

7. Fry the strained pulp with ghrita (ghee) and taila
(oil) until the moisture evaporates.

8. Add sugar to the strained decoction and boil
the mixture to the lehyapaka stage (semi-solid
consistency).

9. Add the fried pulp to the lehya paka and boil the
mixture again until well combined.

10. Add the fine powders of ingredients from
Tugakshiri to Kesara to the lehya. Stir well and
allow the mixture to cool.

Il. Once cooled, add madhu (honey) to the mixture
and mix thoroughly.

12. Store in air tight container.

Dose: 12- 24 pms.

Anupana: Water, Milk.

Therapeutic Indication: Kasa, Shvasa, Kshata Kshina,

Svarabheda, Hridroga, Mutraroga, Uroroga, Vatarakhta,

Shukra Dosha, Pippasa, Rasayana, Medhya, Smriti-
prada, Jara.

PHARMACODYNaMIcs

1. Bilva, Agnimantha, Shyonaka, Gambhari, Patala,
Bala, Shalaparni, Prshniparni, Mudgaparni,
Mashaparni, Pippali, Gokshura, Brihati, Kantakari,
Karkatashringi, Tamalaki, Draksha, Jivanti,
Pushkara, Agru, Abhaya, Amrita, Ridhi, Jivaka,
Rishabhaka, Shati, Musta, Punarnava (Rakta), Meda,
Ela, Chandana, Utpala, Vidari, Vrishamula, Kakoli,
Kakanasika (all in equal proportions). These herbs
collectively possess a wide range of pharmacological
activities. They exhibit  anti-inflammatory,
analgesic, expect-orant, bronchodilator, diuretic,
cardioprotective, immunomodulatory, antioxidant,
and adaptogenic properties. They are traditionally
used to treat respiratory disorders (Kasa, Shvasa),
cardiac ailments (Hridroga), urinary problems
(Mutraroga), and various other conditions related
to inflammation, pain, and weakness.

2. Amlaka (Emblica officinalis): Amlaka is a rich source
of vitamin C and antioxidants. It boosts immunity,
improves digestion, and has rejuvenating effects.
It also supports respiratory health and enhances
overall vitality.

3. Ghrita (Clarified butter) and Taila (Oil): Ghrita and
Taila serve as carriers for the active constituents of
the herbs. They aid in the absorption of fat-soluble
compounds and provide nourishment to the body
tissues. Additionally, Ghrita has cooling properties
and is beneficial for conditions involving Pitta
dosha imbalance.

4, Madhu (Honey): Madhu acts as a sweetening agent
and enhances the palatability of the formulation.
It also possesses antimicrobial properties and
supports respiratory health.

5. Tugakshiri: Tugakshiri has diuretic properties and
is beneficial for urinary disorders. It helps in flus-
hing out toxins from the body and maintains
renal health.

6. Tvak (Cinnamon), Ela (Cardamom), Patra (Cinna-
momum tamala), Kesara (Saffron): These spices add
flavor and aroma to the formulation. They also have
medicinal properties, including antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, and digestive stimulant effects.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The active constituents of the herbs are
absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract after ingestion.
Some components may undergo first-pass metabolism
in the liver before entering systemic circulation.

----- PAGE 214 -----
200

~~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana . Chapter 7

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the phytochemicals
are distributed throughout the body via the blood-

stream, reaching target

organs and tissues where

they exert their therapeutic effects.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
may occur in the liver, where they are broken down
into metabolites that are either active or inactive.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Traditional Indian
Bioactive Health
Supplement

ai

2. | Chyawanprash: An

Ayurvedic Bioactive
Immune & Curative
Health Supplement

Metabolites may undergo further biotransformatio,
before elimination.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted primarily through urine and feces. Th.
rate of excretion varies depending on the solubility

and molecular weight of the compounds.

Rohit Sharma, Central Ayurved,
Research Institute for Drug
Development (CCRAS), Ministry
of AYUSH, Government of

India, 4-CN Block, Sector-V,
Bidhannagar, Kolkata-700091, WB
India; medamrao69@gmail.com

Chyavanaprasha preparation involves decocting herbs, extracting,
mixing with honey, and adding aromatic powders. The final product
resembles fruit jam, with a sweet, sour, and spicy taste. Scientific
exploration is needed to understand its therapeutic potential due
to scattered information. Efforts were made to compile data from
various sources, including ancient texts and scientific literature, to
highlight CP’s therapeutic role.

Sneha Jadhav, Department of
Pharmaceutics Vasantidevi Patil
Institute of Pharmacy, Kodoli Tal-
Panhala, Dist- Kolhapur-416114,
MH

Chyavanaprasha, crafted from 50 Ayurvedic herbs, is a popular
dietary supplement in India. It boosts muscle strength, rejuvenates |
cells, balances doshas, slows aging, enhances memory, and supports |
heart health, and aids digestion and respiratory functions.

3. | Golden Ager
Chyawanprash with
Meager Evidential Base
from Human Clinical
Trials

4. | Pharmaceutical
standardization of
Chyawanprash
prepared by two
different methods

Rohit Sharma, Depart. of RSBK,
Faculty of Ayurveda, Institute of
Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi-221005,
Uttar Pradesh, India

The report aims to dispel Chyavanaprasha usage misconceptions and
guide researchers in bioactive natural products, drug development,
functional foods, and nutraceuticals. National experts should}
convene to establish standardized CP research protocols.

Bharat Rathi, Professor, Dept. of
RSBK, Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved
College, Salod, Maharashtra,
India.

The study compared pharmacy and traditional Chyavanaprasha
preparation methods, favoring the pharmacy approach due to better
outcomes in time, yield, and physicochemical properties. Notably,
frying in non-polar media may alter ascorbic acid. Considering
polarity’s impact on absorption, pharmacy-prepared Chawanaprash
may offer superior efficacy, pending further validation.

[74 Phata Ghrita

Reference: AFI, Part I

TisspEen ancy Tae: 11
3 fet ng At ciere: aguante,

fopatsansrgns Tacit ory |

we a5 = 5

Tactatthtes Sad Gor Ute taal ALI
Reanst o aftoieat a ofS
WA ot ae geet cea I

INGREDIENTS USED

(A.H.U., 34/63-67)

Manjishtha Pl.
Kushtha Rt.
Tagara Rt.

12 gms
12 gms
12 gms

Haritaki P. 12 gms
Bibhitaki P 12 gms
Amalaki PB 12 gms
Sharkara =— 12 gms
Vacha Rz. 12 gms
Haridra Rz. 12 gms
Daruharidra St. 12 gms
Yashti Rt. 12 gms
Meda Rt. Tr. 12 gms
Yavani Fr. 12 gms
Katuka Rt. 12 gms
Kshira vidari Rt. Tr. 12 gms
Hingu Exd. 12 gms
Kakoli Sub. Rt. 12 gms
Asvagandha Rt. 12 gms
Shatavari Rt. Tr. 12 gms
Go Ghrita - 768 gms
Go Dugdha -

3.0721

----- PAGE 215 -----
Chapter 7 ° Nutraceuticals

—_—

Procedure:
4. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:
e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya

(Manjishtha to Shatavari) and grind them into a
fine powder (Churna). ‘

e Adda sufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form)
2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Collect Go - Dugdha as drava dravya
3. Mixing:
e Inaclean vessel, add Go-Ghrita as mention quantity
along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.
4. Heating:
e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir

continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

5. Filtering:

e Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

6. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 12 gms.
Anupana: Warm Water.

201

Therapeutic Indications: Bala Roga, Bala Graha, Shukra
Vikara, Yoni Vikara, Vandhyatva, Garbhini Roga, Karshya.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Manjishtha, Kushtha, Tagara, Haritaki, Bibhitaki,
Amalaki, Haridra, Daruharidra, Yashti, Meda,
Yavani, Katuka, Kshira Vidari, Hingu, Kakoli,
Ashvagandha, Shatavari: These herbs collectively
exhibit various pharmacological actions including
anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, antio-
xidant, adaptogenic, nervine, and rejuvenating
properties. They are traditionally used in Ayurveda
to support overall health and vitality, enhance
immunity, and promote reproductive health.

2. Go Ghrita (Cow ghee) and Go-Dugdha (Cow
milk): These dairy products serve as the base for
the formulation, aiding in the absorption of lipid-
soluble constituents and providing nourishment
to the body. They also act as carriers for fat-soluble
vitamins and other bioactive compounds present in
the formulation.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents of the herbs
are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, where
they enter the bloodstream and exert their
pharmacological effects.

N

. Distribution: Once absorbed, the components
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, reaching various tissues and organs.

. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
occurs primarily in the liver, where they may
undergo biotransformation into active metabolites
or inactive forms for excretion.

w

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components are
excreted mainly through urine and feces, although
some may undergo entero-hepatic circulation.

Author Name

Development of Ovarian Follicle
Followed by Bijotsarga (Ovulation)
in Patients of Infertility Due to
Ovarian Factor in Comparison with
Clomiphene Citrate

Clinical Trial of Phala ghrita on Dr. S.P, Otta, Lecturer, in

Female Infertility

Jitendra Varsaklya,
Ph.D Scholar, Depart. of
Kayachikitsa, Ayurveda,

Phamacognostical and
Phramacuetical Analysis of Phala
Ghrita—An Ayurvedic Polyherble
Formulation

Gujarat.

Mohan Yende PhD (Scholar),
Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved
College and Research Centre,
Salod, MHA, Warddha, MHA

Prasuati & stree roga, N.K. J.
Ayurvedic medical college &
PG. Center, Bidar, Karnataka

Gujarat Ayurved University.
Gujarat University, Jamnagar,

Result
In a single-blind randomized controlled trial, 30 participants
in each group receive either Phala Ghrita (10 ml B.D. with
cow milk 100 ml Anupana) or Tab. Clomiphene citrate (S0 mg
0.D. from day 3 to 7 of menstrual cycle). Primary outcomes
assess follicle development and ovulation, with secondary
outcomes evaluating conception. The conclusion will address
Phala Ghrita’s observed effects.
The study involved 30 cases of female infertility treated
with intrauterine insufflation of Phalagritam. After three
consecutive cycles, encouraging results were observed,
detailed in the full paper.
Pharmacognostical study: Ashvagandha starch, Bibhitaki
tannic contents, Haridra oil resin, Manjishtha crystals,
Shatavari raphides and vessels, Tagar cells. Yashtimadhu
had compound starch. Pharmaceutical evaluation: 13% w/w
drying loss, pH 5.5. HPTLC: 8 spots at 254nm, 4 spots at 366
nm.

----- PAGE 216 -----
Infertility Depart. of Post Graduate
Studies in Prasooti Tantra &
Stree Roga, Major S.D. Singh
P.G. Ayurvedic Medical

College, Farrukhabad,

an Fu elAvthot Names en oes Result

4. | Efficacy of Phala Ghrita and Cow _| Varsakiya, Dept. of Ninety-nine males with pleceierme er count <15
Ghee in the Management of Kayachikitsa, CBPACS, New million/mL) underwent Ayurvedic aie, Using
Oligozoospermia— Dehli - 110073. Haritakyadi Yoga. PHG (n=51) and CG (n=42) received 10,
A Comparative Clinical Study twice daily with warm milk for 8 weeks, Both groups showed
significant improvements in sperm parameters, with PHG

demonstrating better outcomes except for semen volume.
5. _ | Efficacy of Phala Ghrita on Female | Shalini Biala, M.S. Scholar, Oral Phala-ghrita for three months resulted in 22% pregnancy |

in female infertility patients with no adverse effects. Despite|
encouraging results, conception rates are low. Further large.
scale studies with alternative administration methods are

needed for better outcomes.

(U.P.), India
| 7.5 Saubhagya Shunthipaka
Lauha Bhasma = 48 gms
Reference: AFI, Part I Abhraka Bhasma = 48 gms
auleTgleaene fgsittch wiftact warTy Shunthi Rz. 384 gms
a ao : wtf Ar Sita i 1.440 kg
i i = 384 gms
Ue Valet safer atrorch areorear ware | = - Pere
Waandate aig ce caret UTA
TAGS AUST Tenis Fighter Ta: | Procedure:
uci astaty ada wage atte vam! 1. First, Shunthi is taken and then cow's milk is
Uist: waretot Ulead mroTante ateTy | added to it.
ad ae AH Wed Tag St cafrar Ta: 11 2. Cooked thoroughly until it reaches a semi-solid
afer aferrearaet F Baihraraeuitet AI consistency (Mava/ Khoya).
(BR,, Striroga, 69/396-399) 3. Then paste of Sunthi is fried in ghee.
4. Separately, in a stainless steel utensil, required
INGREDIENTS USED ; =
water and sugar are mixed and cooked to form 4-5
thread consistency.
Kasheru Rt. Tr. 22605 5. Afterward, all the remaining drugs are added to
Shrigataka Fr. ZB 0S the syrup.
I Sd. 24 gms : e :
Kemale ul 6. Stir well until suitable for tablets form
Musta Rz. 24 gms
; (Modaka shape).
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 24 gms ;
Krishna Jiraka Fr. 24 gms 7. Allow the mixture to cool.
Jatiphala Sd. 24 gms 8. Store in air tight container.
Jatikosha Ar. 24 gms Dose: 12 gms.
Lavanga Fl. Bd 24 gms Anupana: Water, Milk.
Shaileya Pl. ZENS Therapeutic Indications: Agnimandya, Atisara, Grahani,
Nagakesara Stmn. 24 gms 6 en z
: Sutikaroga.
Tejapatra Lf. 24 gms
Tvak St. Bk. 24 gms PHARMACODYNAMICS
Shati Rz. 24 gms 1. Kasheru, Shringataka, Kamala, Musta, Shveta
Dhataki FL. 24 gms Jiraka, Krishna Jiraka, Jatiphala, Jatikosha, Lavanga,
Ela sd. 24 ems Shaileya, Nagakesara, Tejapatra, Tvak, Shati,
eee ie Zsiemns Dhataki, Ela, Shatahva, Dhanyaka, Gajapippali,
Hehe 2 " = zee Pippali, Maricha, Satavari: These herbs possess
= a i = <= ems various pharmacological properties such as
Maricha Fr 24 ae digestive stimulant, carminative, anti-diarrheal,
’ : BMS anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and anti-flatulent
Shatavari Rt. Tr. 24 gms :

activities. They work synergistically to improve

----- PAGE 217 -----
“ranter 7 = Nutraceuticals

203

digestion, relieve gastrointestinal symptoms, and
promote overall gut health.

2. Lauha Bhasma and Abhraka Bhasma: These
mineral preparations contribute to the formulation’s
therapeutic efficacy by providing bioavailable
jron and essential minerals, which play crucial
roles in maintaining hemoglobin levels, cellular
metabolism, and overall health.

3. Shunthi (Ginger) and Sita (Sugar): These
ingredients serve as carriers and enhancers,
aiding in the absorption and assimilation of active
constituents, and also imparting palatability to the
formulation.

4. Go-Ghrita (Cow ghee) and Kshira (Milk): These
dairy products serve as the base for the formu-
lation, enhancing the absorption of lipid-soluble
constituents and providing nourishment to the body.

RESEARCH UPDATES
| Article Name

_Author Name!

tee

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The active constituents of the herbs and
mineral bhasmas are absorbed in the gastrointestinal
tract, where they enter the bloodstream and exert
their pharmacological effects.

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the components
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, reaching various tissues and organs,
including the gastrointestinal tract.

3. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents
and mineral bhasmas occurs primarily in the liver,
where they may undergo biotransformation into
active metabolites or inactive forms for excretion.

4, Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted mainly through urine and feces,
although some may undergo enterohepatic
circulation.

The study aimed to standardize Saubhagya Shunthi Churna, a powdered
form of the traditional Ayurvedic Saubhagya Shunthi Paka. It enhances:
stability and simplifies preservation. Microbial load and nutrient values
were assessed using IS and AOAC methods. The Churna showed 17.64%
weight loss and higher energy content compared to Paka. Saubhagya
Shunthi Churna holds promise as a therapeutic and dietary option for
Indian women, easily prepared at home.

The article reviews the bioactive compounds in the herbal ingredients
of Saubhagya Shunthi Pak. It compares the desirable effects and
contributing bioactive components to conclude that consuming
Saubhagya Shunthi Pak as a dietary supplement can fulfill most of the
needs of a puerperal woman.

Khushbu Shukla
Department of Rasa Shastra,
Institute Medical Sciences
Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi - 221 005, U.P.,
India.

Pharmaceutical prepar-
ation of Saubhagya
Shunthi Churna: A
herbal remedy for
Puerperal women

Kamde Rahulkumar, Assistant
Professor (Prasutitantra &
Streeroga); KVTR Ayurved
College, Boradi, Dist. Dhule
425428, MHA, India

Theoretical
Establishment of
Maintenance of Health
of Sutika through
Bioactive Ingredients of
Saubhagya Shunthi Pak

7.6 Shatavari Ghrita

Reference: Chakradatta- Amalapitta Chikitsa.

Procedure:
1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:
e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Haritaki

Vaeiqercach FAME Ta: AA |
Taghat Hae at sea AGIA
Apaertudesl adam Ter |
Telit Gat Test Tare |
(Nighantu Ratnakara, Chakradatta, p. 300)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Haritaki I, 25 gms
Bibhitaki P, 25 gms
Amalaki P, 25 gms
Musta Rz. 25 gms
Haridra Rz. 25 gms
Nimbu Fr. Qs.

Go Ghrita - 600 ml
Jala Ss 2400 ml

to Haridra) and grind them into a fine powder
(Churna).

e Add a sufficient quantity of nimbu svarasa
to the powdered herbs to make a thick paste
(bolus form).

2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Jala as drava dravya.

3. Mixing:

e Inacleanvessel,add Go Ghritaas mention quantity

along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.
4. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.

----- PAGE 218 -----
204

_ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 7

RESEARCH UPDATES

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning

the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water

content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.
5. Filtering:

e Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove
it from the heat.

e Filter the ghrita through a clean, dry cloth to
remove the solid residues of the herbal paste.

6. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered Ghrita to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 12-24 ml.
Anupana: Luke Warm Water.
Therapeutic Indications: Vatarakta.

PHARMACODYNAMICs:

1. Haritaki, Bibhitaki, Amalaki: These three fruits,
collectively known as Triphala, exhibit a wide range
of pharmacological activities including antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, hepatopr-
otective, and digestive stimulant properties. They
are beneficial in detoxification, promoting digestion,
regulating bowel movements, and improving
overall health.

2. Musta: Musta possesses anti-inflammatory, anti-dia-
rrheal, anti-ulcer, and hepatoprotective properties.
It helps in reducing inflammation, promoting
gastrointestinal health, and protecting the liver.

. Distribution:

| Haridra (Turmeric): Haridra is well-known for its

anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antimicrobial, and
immunomodulatory properties. It helps in reducing
inflammation, boosting immunity, and supporting

overall health.

. Nimbu (Lemon): Lemon juice acts as a natural

preservative and enhances the palatability of the
formulation. It also provides a natural source of
vitamin C, which has antioxidant properties and
supports immune function.

. Go Ghrita (Cow ghee): Cow ghee serves as the base for

the formulation, enhancing the absorption of lipid-
soluble constituents and providing nourishment to

the body.

PHARMACOKINETICS
1. Absorption: The active constituents of the herbs

are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, where
they enter the bloodstream and exert their
pharmacological effects.

Once absorbed, the components
are distributed throughout the body via the
bloodstream, reaching various tissues and organs,
including the joints affected by Vatarakta.

. Metabolism: Metabolism of the herbal constituents

occurs primarily in the liver, where they may
undergo biotransformation into active metabolites
or inactive forms for excretion.

. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted mainly through urine and feces.

A Review on Shatavari Ghrita

Dr. Sourav Pal, Ph.
scholar, Department
of Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana,
SDM College of
Ayurveda & Hospital,
Hassan, Karnataka-
India

Svarasa as Drava Dravya, and various herbs as Kalka Dravya.
es

hirteen references to Shatavari Ghrita are found in Ayurvedic texts.
Murchcchita Go-Ghrita is consistently used as the base, with a standard
dose of 1 pala (48ml). Commonly indicated for various conditions, the
formulation includes Shatavari Mula Svarasa, cow milk, Shatavari Kvatha,
and water as Drava Dravya. Kalka Dravya varies, with Yashtimadhu and
Gokshura being common choices. Some formulations include additional
ingredients like Pippali Churna and honey. Sahasrayogam mentions
Shatavaryadi Ghrita, which features Shatavari Mula Svarasa and Gokshura

The Pharmaceutico-
Analytical Study of Shatavari
Ghrita

Sourav Pal, Depart-
ment of Agadtanta,
Dayanand Ayurvedic
P.G, Medicalcollege
& Hospital, Siwan,
Bihar, India

The aim was to prepare Shatavari Ghrita pharmaceutically and analyze its
materials. The formulation falls under sneha kalpana, prepared using the
general method for sneha preparation, and is indicated for Amlapitta. The

pharmaceutical study revealed no errors in its preparation, while analytical
parameters established preliminary standards for Shatavari Ghrita. Additionally,
GCMS analysis aided in identifying active components within the sample.

Effect of Shatavari Ghrita
(Polyherbal Formulation)
on Testicular Dysfunction
in Streptozocin Induced

Diabetes in Wistar Albino
Rats

Nishvanth F, College
of Pharmacy, Madras

Medical College,
Chennai-03, T.N.,
India

The study investigated Shatavari Ghrita’s impact on streptozocin-induced|
diabetic testicular dysfunction in rats. Doses were determined through
acute toxicity testing (400 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg). Thirty rats were divided
into control and treatment groups. After 60 days, SG at 400mg/kg showed
Improvements in sperm parameters, reproductive organ Weight, testosterone
level, antioxidant activity, and reduced blood glucose levels. These results
suggest SG’s potential in teversing diabetes-induced testicular dysfunction.

----- PAGE 219 -----
A comparative cli
of Shatavari Ghrita ashch-
yotana and Carboxy methyl!
cellulose 0.5% eye drop in
the management of dry eyes
with special reference to
smartphone users

Alm: Compare Shatavarl Ghrita Ashchyotana and Carboxymethylcellulose
0.5% eye drops for treating Shushkakshipaka (Dry eye syndrome). 70
Patients aged 20-30 with dry eye symptoms were randomly assigned to
ade either Shatavari Ghrita Aschyotana or Carboxymethylcellulose 0.5%

e drops,

Results: Shatavari Ghrita Aschyotana showed superior efficacy compared to
Carboxymethylcellulose 0.5% eye drops. a

7.7 Arjuna Kshirapaka Dose: 50 ml.

reference: B.R., Hridroga Therapeutic Indications: Hridroga.
agave wat fee at ahd wera PHARMACODYNAMICS
fadat USAT AT Aca AYSH ATI 1. Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna): Arjuna bark is rich in
(B.R., Hridroga, 33/11) bioactive compounds like flavonoids, tannins,
INGREDIENTS USED saponins, and minerals. It exhibits cardio protective
properties by strengthening the heart muscles,
Arjuna Bk. 20ems improving cardiac function, and reducing the
Go Kshira = 160 ml risk of cardiovascular diseases. Arjuna also has
Jala = 640 ml antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and hypolipidemic
Reduced to = 160 ml effects, which contribute to its therapeutic efficacy
in heart diseases.
Procedure: 2. Go Kshira (Cow’s milk): Cow’s milk serves as the base
1. Gather all the required ingredients, including for the formulation, providing essential nutrients

Arjuna bark and milk. Ensure the ingredients are

like calcium, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. It
clean and free from impurities.

nourishes the body, supports overall health, and
2. Inastainless steel vessel, combineall the ingredients. enhances the absorption of bioactive constituents
The primary ingredient should be Arjuna bark, and from Arjuna bark.
the liquid used will be a mixture of water and milk.
3. Add the required amount of water and milk to the
vessel. The typical ratio is 1 part (20 gms) of Arjuna
bark, 32 parts (640 ml) of water, and 8 parts (160 ml)

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The bioactive compounds from Arjuna
bark are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract,

d particularly in the stomach and intestines, and enter
of milk. _ : ; the bloodstream.

4. a heat and let it ee Re ie pe 2. Distribution: Once absorbed, these compounds are
until © WSs perton\evaporates’ an? on yaa distributed throughout the body, reaching the heart
milk portion is left.

; and other target tissues.
5. Stir the mixture occasionally to prevent the

ingredients from sticking to the bottom of the vessel 2: sebersi0. hae GORE UES undergo metabolism
se primarily in the liver, where they may undergo
and to ensure even boiling. i , : : ;
. biotransformation into active metabolites or
6. Once the water has evaporated and only the milk conjugated forms.
portion remains, remove the vessel from heat.
7. Filter the mixture through a clean cloth or a fine
sieve to remove the solid residues.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted mainly through urine and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Sinduja, V., Final Year PG
Development of Arjuna | Scholar, Dept. of Rasa
Kshirapaka Powder Shastra and Bhaishajya
Prepared From Different | Kalpana, Parul Institute
Methods & Its Analytical | of Ayurved, Parul
Evaluation University, Vadodara,
Gujarat, India,

Four met! to prepa
converted into powder using a spray drier. The percentages of powder
obtained were: Method 1 — 5%, Method 2 — 2.39%, Method 3 — 4.025%,
and Method 4 — 5.66%. High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography
(HPTLC) at 540nm revealed the number of unaltered chemical constituents:
Method 1 - 2, Method 2 - 3, Method 3 — 6, and Method 4 — 5, Physico-
chemical parameters and HPTLC analysis showed that Sharangdhara’s
method retained six chemical constituents from the raw drug in the
ksheerapaka powder.

Pharmaceutical

----- PAGE 220 -----
___ Rasashastra a id Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 7

2. Swapnil Talmale, PG The study prepared Arjuna Kshirapaka according to classical methods
dosage Form of Arjuna | Scholar, Rasashastra and converted It into spray-dried powder. Both forms showed similar
Kshirapaka by using & Bhaishajya Kalpana characteristics and chemical properties, The spray-dried powder exhibited
Spray Drying Technology |Department, Mahatma increased stability and convenience for storage and consumption

GandhiAyurved College, | compared to the traditional form.
Hospital & Research

Centre, Wardha,

Maharashtra, India

3 Ayurveda Management | Suguna K. In a Clinical study, 40 traumatic arthritis patients aged 35-65 were
of Traumatic Arthritis of | Ph.D. Scholar randomly assigned to receive Terminalia arjuna powder (TAP) or Terminalia
Knee (Janu Vata) with P.G. Department of arjuna Kshirapaka powder (TAKP). Both groups showed similar outcomes
Special Reference to Dravyaguna in fatigue, pain, and walking time, but Group I! exhibited better reduction
Arjuna Kshira Paka—A __| SV. Ayurvedic College in restricted movement, while Group | showed superior inflammation
Clinical Study Tirupati, A.P, reduction. Group II demonstrated significantly improved results, likely due

to synergistic effects of Arjuna’s properties and milk. No complications
were reported. The study highlights TAKP’s potential efficacy in managing
ke le traumatic arthritis.

4. A Pharmacological Study | K.Suguna, Ph.D. Scholar, |The study assessed Terminalia arjuna’s impact on rat tibia fractures. Rats
on Ayurveda Manag- P.G. Department received TAP (powder) boiled with milk (Group 1), TAKP (Group Il), or
ement on Healing of Dravyaguna, S.V. placebo (Group Ill). By day 30, Groups | and I] showed improved healing,
Process of Tibia Ayurvedic College, with Group Il exhibiting earlier calcification by day 20. TAKP demonstrated
of Rats with Special Tirupati, A.P., India. significant efficacy in calcification compared to other groups.

Reference to Arjuna
Kshira Paka

S: Evaluation of Combined | Athira Krishnan, PG The study analyzed Arjuna Kshirapaka’s bone healing effects in 30 patients.
Effect of Arjuna Kshira-| Scholar, Department of | Results showed an 80% cure rate with Kshirapaka versus 53.3% with
paka and Posterior Slab} Shalya tantra, Amrita standard treatment. Combining Kshirapaka with milk enhances Arjuna’s
with Standard of Care| School of Ayurveda, active principles, aiding bone tissue regeneration. Conclusion: Arjuna
in Radius Fracture: A} Kollam, Kerala, India. Kshirapaka, alongside POP posterior slab, significantly improves healing in
Comparative Clinical Trial radius fractures compared to standard care alone.

| 7.8 Rasona / Lashuna Kshira Paka

Reference: B.R., Gulma, Rogadhikara
MAT QEL AA AIA AAT |
anieneaiora eaters ward
aInyetqerad rare fraisay |

Used alfad ait Ritatara cad |

(B.R., Gulma Rogadhikara, 32/13-14)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Nishtusha Lashsuna

Go Kshira
Jala

Reduced to

Bud

Procedure:

1. Gather all the required ingredients, including

Lashuna/Garlic and milk. Ensure

Bud

192 gms
768 ml
768 ml
768 ml

ingredients are clean and free from impurities.

2. Inastainless steel vessel, combine all the ingredients.
The primary ingredient should be Lashuna, and the
liquid used will be a mixture of water and milk.

. Add the required amount of water and milk to
the vessel. The typical ratio is 1 part (192 gms) of
Nishtusha Lashuna, 8 parts (768 ml) of water, and 8
parts (768 ml) of milk.

. Reduce the heat and let it simmer. Continue to boil
until the water portion evaporates and only the
milk portion is left.

. Stir the mixture occasionally to prevent the
ingredients from sticking to the bottom of the vessel
and to ensure even boiling.

. Once the water has evaporated and only the milk
portion remains, remove the vessel from heat.

. Filter the mixture through a clean cloth or a fine
sieve to remove the solid residues.

Dose: 100 ml.

Therapeutic Indications: Gulma, Gridhrasi, Vishama
Jvara, Hridroga, Vidradi, Shotha.

PHARMACODYNAMICs:

1. Nishtusha Lahshuna (Garlic): Garlic contains
bioactive compounds like allicin and sulphur com-
pounds, which exhibit various pharmacological
effects. It has anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial,
antioxidant, and immunomodulatory properties.

the

----- PAGE 221 -----
Chapter 7» Nutraceuticals

Garlic also possesses vasodilatory effects, lowers
blood pressure, reduces cholesterol levels, and
improves cardiovascular health. Additionally, it has
antiplatelet and fibrinolytic activities, which help in
preventing clot formation and reducing the risk of
cardiovascular diseases.

2, Go Kshira (Cow's milk): Cow’s milk serves as a vehicle
for delivering the bioactive constituents of garlic. It
provides essential nutrients like proteins, vitamins,
and minerals, which support overall health and
enhance the absorption of garlic’s beneficial
compounds.

RESEARCH UPDATES

ess Stand Ardisation
and Selection of A Method
of Drying for the Industrial
Production of Rasona
Kshirapakam—A Dairy Based
Nutraceutical

P. Sudheer Babu Kerala
Agricultural University
Dairy Plant, Mannuthy,
Thrissur (Kerala) India

AuthorName |

207

$$$ —

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The bioactive compounds from garlic
are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, parti-
cularly in the stomach and intestines, and enter the
bloodstream.

2, Distribution: These compounds are distributed
throughout the body, reaching target tissues such as
the liver, heart, and blood vessels.

3. Metabolism: Garlic compounds may undergo
metabolism in the liver, where they are biotran-
sformed into active metabolites or conjugated forms.

4. Excretion: Metabolites and unutilized components
are excreted primarily through urine and feces.

An investigation was conducted to streamline unit operations for :
producing Rasona Kshirapaka, a dairy-based nutraceutical. Different
drying methods, such as roller, cabinet, and spray drying, were
tested, with spray drying emerging as the optimal choice based on
sensory evaluation for industrial-scale production.

Pharmaceutical and Analytical Nilesh Suryawanshi
Evaluation of Lashuna Dr. D. Y. Patil College
Kshirpaka W.S.R to Charaka of Ayurved & Research
and Sharangadhara Methods. | Institute, Nerul, Navi
Mumbai, MHA, India

Pl saranies prepared according to Charaka Samhita and Sharngadhara

Samhita were tested. Gas Chromatography showed higher Allin
retention in Charaka Samhita sample (C: 0.410 mg/gm) than in
Sharangadhara Samhita sample (S: 0.211 mg/gm). Thus, Charaka
Samhita’s Lasuna Kshirapaka better preserves Allin, enhancing
Garlic's medicinal properties compared to Sharngadhara Samhita.

7.9 Kharjuradi Mantha

Reference: Sha. Samhita Madhyam Khanda

Usreltettgrantatrstentttetenract: 1
WISa: Heal WA: Tamla! (Sha. S.M. Kha. 3/10)

INGREDIENTS USED

Khajura Fr. 1 Part

Dadima Sd. 1 Part
Munnaka Fr. 1 Part
Imali P. 1 Part
Changeri Lf. 1 Part
Amalaki Fr. 1 Part
Phalasha Fr. 1 Part
Jala - 4 Parts
Procedure:

1, Obtain all the required ingredients for Kharjuradi
Mantha. Ensure each ingredient is clean and free
from impurities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra, grind all the ingredients
together to make a fine paste.

3. Transfer the paste into a clean earthen pot and add
four times the amount of water to the paste.

4. Allow the mixture to soak in the water for 1 to
2 hours.

5. After soaking, churna the mixture thoroughly. Rub
the contents with your hands to ensure maximum
extraction of the medicinal properties.

6. Filter the mixture through a clean cloth to remove
the solid residues.

7. Collect the filtered liquid in a clean container. This
liquid is known as Kharjuradi Mantha.

Dose: 2 Pala.
Therapeutic Indications: Madhatya.

PHARMACODYNAMICcS

1. Kharjuradi Manthais a combination of several herbs,
each chosen for its specific properties and effects on
the body according to Ayurvedic principles.

2. Khajura (Dates), Dadima (Pomegranate), Munnaka
(Raisins), Imali (Tamarind), Changeri (Oxystelma
esculentum), Amalaki (Indian Gooseberry), and
Phalasa (Jackfruit) all possess various pharma-
cological properties such as anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant, digestive, and nervine tonic properties.

----- PAGE 222 -----
208 ey

~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter 7 i

3. When combined, these herbs work synergistically
to pacify disturbances associated with Madhatya
(a condition related to mental agitation). Dadima,
for instance, is known for its cooling and calming
properties, while Amalaki helps balance the mind
and improve mental clarity.

4. The formulation as a whole aims to restore balance
to the body and mind, alleviating symptoms
associated with Madhatya.

PHARMACOKINETICS
i. Upon ingestion, the herbs are digested and
metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract. The active

RESEARCH UPDATES

constituents are then absorbed and transported to
various tissues and organs via the bloodstream.

2. The absorption and distribution of the herbs may
be influenced by factors such as the individual’s
digestive capacity, metabolism, and the strength of
their agni (digestive fire) according to Ayurvedic
principles.

3. Once absorbed, the herbs exert their therapeutic
effects on the body, including the mind, to alleviate
symptoms of Madhatya.

4. Execute through urine on Feces on sweating.

A Review on peamraessvienics 5 PA. S. Nishan, Unit
Properties of the Ingredients of Allied Sciences,

of Kharjuradi Mantha and Uses _| Institute of Indigenous
of Kharjuradi Mantha For Ma- | Medicine, University
dathya (Alcoholism) in Ayurveda | of Colombo.

7.10 Brahma Rasayana
Reference: AFI, Part I
Tae PATA aT |
USM USGI ares Wega |
Sel SIT Tara SoA TAT TA |
ANA Heal Seat PaaS 1

Se eee ahd eae
fadtaerdunt a orartor afr afta: 1
Ba deat dent ced WAI

srt fei Fett: aftewrafeafi: |
ad: GoM Ala Peete FAAS I
Ol AeAeenach AAT AT SAAT |
Uiien: Uae UISa Set Ase |
TAMA Aca IAT ASA TAT: |

(A.H.U., 39/15-23)
INGREDIENTS USED

Haritaki P 1000 in number

Amalaki P. 3000 in number
Bilva Rt/St.Bk. 480 gms
Shyonaka Rt./St.Bk. 480 gms

Kharjuradi Mantha balances Doshas in alcoholism with Tridosha and
Pitta Shamaka properties, stimulates Jataragni for detoxification, and
enhances immunity through Rasayana effects. It’s effective in treating |
alcoholism and related disorders in Ayurveda, but further research is
needed for comprehensive evaluation.

Part Used

Gambhari Rt./St.Bk. 480 gms
Shalaparni Rt./St.Bk. 480 gms
Prishniparni Rt./St.Bk. 480 gms
Brihati Pl. 480 gms
Kantakari Pl. 480 gms
Gokshura Rt. 480 gms
Bala Rt. 480 gms
Rakta Punarnava Rt. 480 gms
Eranda Rt. 480 ems
Mashaparni Pl. 480 gms
Mudgaparni Pl. 480 gms
Shathavari Rt. 480 gms
Meda Rt. Tr. 480 gms
Jivanti Pl. 480 gms
Jivaka Rt. 480 gms
Risibhaka Rt. Tr. 480 gms
Shali Rt. 480 gms
Kasa Rt. 480 gms
Sara Rt. 480 gms
Darbha Rt. 480 gms
Ikshu Rt. 480 gms
Water for decoction — 120L
Reduced to = 12L
Tvak St. Bk. 192 gms
Ela Sd. 192 gms
Musta Rz. 192 gms
Haridra Rz. 192 gms
Pippali Fr. 192 gms
Agaru Ht. Wd. 192 gms
Chandana Ht. Wd.

192 gms

----- PAGE 223 -----
Chapter 7 ° Nutraceuticals

PHARMACODYNAMIC

Brahma Rasayana is a complex Ayurvedic

Mandukaparni Pl. 192 gms
Nagakesara Stmn. 192 gms
Shankhapushpi Pl. 192 gms
Vache Rz. 192 gms
Plava Rz. 192 gms
Yashti Rt. 192 gms
Vidanga Fr 192 gms
Sitopala a 48 kg
Ghrita = 9.219 kg
Talla Ol. 6.144 kg
Kshudra = 15.360 kg
Procedure:

j. Take 1000 no. of Haritaki and 3000 no. ripened fresh
Amalaki ina piece of cloth.

2. Coarsely powder the ingredients from Bilva to
Ikshu and place them in a vessel.

3. Add 120 liters of water to the vessel. Suspend the
Haritaki and Amalaki pottali in the vessel and boil
the mixture until the water is reduced to one-fourth
(12 liters).

4, Remove the Amalaki and Haritaki bundle from
the vessel and strain the decoction and keep it
separately.

5. Remove the seeds from the boiled Amalaki and
Haritaki and make a paste of the pulp.

6. Strain the paste through a piece of cloth or a 40-
mesh sieve over a wide-mouthed vessel to

remove fibers.

7. Fry the strained pulp with ghrita (ghee) and taila
(oil) until the moisture evaporates.

8. Add sugar (Sitopala) to the strained decoction and
boil the mixture to the lehya paka stage (semi-solid
consistency).

9. Add the fried pulp to the lehya paka and boil the
mixture again until well combined.

10. Add the fine powders of ingredients from Tvak
to Vidanga to the lehya. Stir well and allow the
mixture to cool.

11. Once cooled, add madhu (honey) to the mixture
and mix thoroughly.

12. Store in air tight container.

Dose: 12 gms,

Anupana: Water, Milk.

Therapeutic Indications: Tandra, Shrama, Klama, Mano-

daurbalya, Jara, Valitya, Palitya, Smritibhrama.

Ss

w

4,

formulation aimed at rejuvenating the body and
mind. Its ingredients are meticulously selected to
provide comprehensive benefits.

The combination of Haritaki, Amalaki, and
other herbs provides a rich source of bioactive
compounds, including antioxidants, vitamins,
and minerals, which collectively contribute to its
rejuvenating effects.

. Haritaki and Amalaki are potent rasayana (rejuve-

native) herbs known for their ability to promote
longevity, improve digestion, enhance cognitive
function, and strengthen the immune system.

The inclusion of various other herbs like Bala,
Shatavari, and Jivanti further supports the overall
rejuvenating and strengthening effects of Brahma
Rasayana.

Additionally, spices and aromatic substances like
Cinnamon, Cardamom, Turmeric, and Sandalwood
add flavor and also possess medicinal properties,
contributing to the formulation’s efficacy.

The formulation aims to address conditions such
as fatigue (Shrama), weakness (Klama), mental
fatigue (Manodaurbalya), aging-related issues
(Jara), hair fall (Palitya), and memory problems
(Smritibhrama), among others.

PHARMACOKINETICS

il,

Nn

uo

Ayurveda traditionally views pharmacokinetics
in terms of the process of digestion, absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and elimination of herbs
within the body.

. After ingestion, the herbs are digested in the

gastrointestinal tract, releasing their active
constituents, which are then absorbed into the
bloodstream and distributed to various tissues
and organs.

. The decoction of herbs and spices in water followed

by reduction concentrates the beneficial compounds,
enhancing their bioavailability and efficacy.

. Lipophilic compounds present in certain herbs may

be better absorbed in the presence of fats, which is
why Brahma Rasayana is traditionally administered
with milk or ghee (clarified butter).

. The formulation’s effects on tissues and organs

are gradual and holistic, aiming to restore balance
and vitality to the entire body rather than targeting
specific symptoms or organs.

----- PAGE 224 -----
210

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 7

RESEARCH UPDATES

Critical Review of
Brahma Rasayana
W.S.R, to its
immunomodulatory
Activity

Manoj Kumar Dash,
Department of Rasashastra
and B.K. Government
Ayurveda College, Raipur,
Chhattisgarh, India

The review investigates Brahma Rasayana’s immunomodulatory effects,
focusing on its constituent herbs. Through analysis of Ayurvedic texts
and online sources, several herbs within Brahma Rasayana exhibit
immunomodulatory properties, including antioxidant, anti-stress, anti-
inflammatory, anti-bacterial, vaccine adjuvant, and disease immunity
effects, thereby enhancing memory and immunity.

2. {A Clinical Study on the
Anabolic Potential of
Brahma Rasayana in
Geriatric Practice

Y.K. Sharma, Post

Graduate Department of
Kayachikitsa, Rajeev Gandhi
Government Post Graduate
Ayurvedic College, Paprola-
176115, Himanchal
Pradesh.

A clinical trial on Brahma Rasayana -1, comprising anabolic herbs like
Amalaki and Shatavari, involved 20 volunteers. Administered twice daily
with milk for 45 days, significant improvements were noted in objective
measures such as body weight and muscle strength, as well as subjective
criteria like well-being and sleep quality.

3. | Potential Therapeutic | Mini V.G, Associate

Benefits of Brahma
Rasayana in the
Management

of Tuberculous
Cerebrovascular
Disease—A Case

Professor, Department of
Kayachikitsa, Government
Ayurveda College,
Thiruvananthapuram,
Kerala.

This case study details the treatment of a 29-year-old male with
hemiparesis and sensory deficit post-tuberculous meningitis. Treatment
included various Ayurvedic therapies such as Dipana-pachana, snehapana,
Virechana, Abhyanga, Sveda, Churna pinda sveda, Jambira pinda sveda,
Yogavasti, Anuvasana basti, Murdhni taila prayoga, and Marsha nasya,
alongside physiotherapy. Upon discharge, Brahmi kalyanaka  ghrita
and Brahma Rasayana were recommended along with continued

Report physiotherapy.
1. Which of the following is true about nutraceuticals? 5. Which concept from Ayurveda can be connected to the

a. They only provide basic nutritional value.
b. They combine nutritional and medicinal benefits. a. Panchakarma

c. They are always synthetic products.
d. They are a type of pharmaceutical drug.
2. What is the role of Pippali and Shunthi in Kushmanda d. Shodhana

Avaleha?

a. They act as sweeteners.

b. They possess antimicrobial properties.

application of nutraceuticals?

b. Rasa Shastra
c. Hita, Ahita, Satmya, Asatmya, and Pathyapathya

6. What is the primary purpose of Preenana Modaka in
Ayurvedic treatment?

a. To treat joint pain

c. They have warming properties and stimulate b. To pacify Vata and Pitta doshas and nourish
digestion. malnourished children

d. They are primarily used for their antioxidant c. To improve skin health
effects.

d. To enhance mental clarity

3. Which of the following ingredients in Kushmanda 7. Which ingredient in Preenana Modaka acts as a
Avaleha is known for its antimicrobial properties?

a. Kushmanda (Ash Gourd)
b. Shveta Jiraka (Cumin)

c. Madhu (Honey)
d. Tvak (Cinnamon)

sweetening agent and enhances palatability?
a. Priyala (Indian Costus)

b. Yashtimadhu (Licorice)

ce. Sharkara (Sugar)

d. Lajja (Parched Rice)

4. What is the therapeutic indication of Kushmanda 8. What are the properties of Priyala in the formulation of

Avaleha?

a. Fever and headache

b. Cough, dyspnea, and bleeding disorders
c. Skin infections and rashes
d. Joint pain and arthritis

Preenana Modaka?

a. Demulcent and expectorant

b. Carminative and anti-inflammatory
c. Antimicrobial and binding agent

d. Source of carbohydrates and energy

----- PAGE 225 -----
Chapter 7° Nutraceuticals

g, Which ingredient in Preenana Modaka is known for its
demulcent and expectorant properties, soothing the
respiratory tract?

a. Priyala (Indian Costus)
b. Yashtimadhu (Licorice)
c. Lajja (Parched Rice)

d. Madhu (Honey)

40. What is the role of Madhu (Honey) in the preparation
of Preenana Modaka?

a. It acts as a demulcent and expectorant.
b. Itserves as a source of carbohydrates and energy.

c. It acts as a binding agent and possesses
antimicrobial properties.

d. It provides a digestive stimulant effect.

41. Which of the following is the primary therapeutic
indication for Chyavanaprasha?

a. Joint pain
b. Respiratory disorders
c. Skin infections
d. Digestive problems
42. What is the role of Amlaka (Emblica officinalis) in
Chyavanaprasha?
a. Acts as a diuretic
b. Boosts immunity and improves digestion
c. Provides sweetness and palatability
d. Serves as a carrier for active constituents
43. Which ingredient in Chyavanaprasha serves as a
sweetening agent and enhances its palatability?
a. Madhu (Honey)
b. Ghrita (Clarified butter)
c. Tugakshiri
d. Bilva
14. What properties do Tvak (Cinnamon), Ela (Cardamom),
Patra (Cinnamomum tamala), and Kesara (Saffron) add
to Chyavanaprasha?
a. Antimicrobial and binding agent properties
b. Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and digestive
stimulant effects
c. Carminative and anti-inflammatory properties
d. Diuretic and renal health benefits
15. How are the active constituents of the herbs in
Chyavanaprasha absorbed in the body?
a. Through the respiratory tract
b. Through the skin
c. In the gastrointestinal tract after ingestion
d. Through direct injection into the bloodstream

— + Cap ed

16.

17.

18.

19

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Which of the following is NOT an ingredient used in the
Preparation of Phala Ghrita?

a. Manjistha c. Turmeric

b. Kushtha d. Hingu

What is the primary function of Go Ghrita (Cow ghee)
in Phala Ghrita?

a. Acts as a sweetening agent

b. Provides a base for lipid-soluble constituents
and nourishment

c. Serves as a diuretic

d. Acts as an astringent

Which of the following properties do Manjishtha,

Kushtha, Tagara, Haritaki, Bibhitaki, and Amalaki share?

a. Carminative c. Laxative

b. Anti-inflammatory d. Antiseptic

. What is the Anupana (vehicle) recommended for

Phala Ghrita?

a. Milk c. Honey

b. Water d. Warm water

Which therapeutic indication is NOT associated with
Phala Ghrita?

a. Bala Roga c. Digestive issues
b. Bala Graha d. Shukra Vikara

Which of the following is the primary ingredient in
Saubhagya Shunthipaka?

a. Kasheru c. Shaileya

b. Shunthi d. Lavanga

What is the recommended Anupana (vehicle) for
Saubhagya Shunthipaka?

a. Honey c. Water or Milk

b. Warm Water d. Ghee

Which of the following is NOT a therapeutic indication
for Saubhagya Shunthipaka?

a. Agnimandya ce. Shukra Dosha

b. Atisara d. Sutikaroga

What is the proportion of Lauha Bhasma used in the
preparation of Saubhagya Shunthipaka?

a. 24 grams c. 96 grams

b. 48 grams d. 384 grams

Which of the following properties are shared by

Kasheru, Sringataka, Kamala, Musta, and other herbs
in this formulation?

a. Analgesic and antipyretic

b. Digestive stimulant and carminative

c. Sedative and hypnotic

d. Antiseptic and hemostatic

----- PAGE 226 -----
212

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ¢ Chapter 7

26. Which of the following herbs is NOT a part of the

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Bo:

36.

Be2

Triphala combination used in Shatavari Grita?

a. Haritaki c. Musta

b. Bibhitaki d. Amalaki

What is the therapeutic indication for Shatavari Ghrita?
a. Vatarakta c. Kasa

b. Shukra Dosha

What is the recommended Anupana (vehicle) for
Shatavari Grita?

d. Agnimandya

a. Milk c. Luke Warm Water
b. Honey d. Ghee

Which ingredient in Shatavari Ghrita provides
antioxidant properties and supports immune function?
a. Haritaki c. Musta

b. Nimbu d. Go Ghrita

What is the proportion of Go Ghrita used in the
preparation of Shatavari Ghrita?

a. 25 grams c. 600 ml

b. 100 grams d. 2400 ml

What is the primary therapeutic indication for Arjuna
Kshirapaka?

a. Vatarakta
b. Shukra Dosha

c. Hridroga
d. Agnimandya

Which part of the Arjuna plant is used in Arjuna
Kshirapaka?

a. Leaves c. Root

b. Bark d. Fruit

How much Go Kshira (cow’s milk) is used in the
preparation of Arjuna Kshirapaka?

a. 50 ml c. 160 ml

b. 100 ml d. 640 ml

What is the dose of Arjuna Kshirapaka a ver the
provided information?

a. 25 ml c. 100 ml

b. 50 ml d. 200 ml

Which of the following properties is NOT attributed to
Arjuna in the context of Arjuna Kshirapaka?

a. Cardioprotective c. Hypolipidemic

b. Antioxidant d. Hypoglycemic

What is the primary herbal ingredient used in Rasona/
Lashuna Kshira Paka?

a. Haritaki c. Musta

b. Garlic d. Arjuna

What is the proportion of garlic used in the preparation
of Rasona / Lashuna Kshira Paka?

a. 50 gms c. 192 gms
b. 100 gms d. 256 gms

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

What is the final volume of the prepared Rasona/
Lashuna Kshira Paka after reduction?

a. 192 ml c. 512 ml

b. 384 ml d. 768 ml

Which of the following therapeutic indications is Noy
mentioned for Rasona / Lashuna Kshira Paka?

a. Hridroga c. Gulma

b. Vatarakta d. Gridhrasi

What is the dose of Rasona / Lashuna Kshira Paka as
per the provided information?

a. 50 ml c. 100 ml

b. 75 ml d. 150 ml

What is the primary therapeutic indication for
Kharjuradi Mantha?

a. Vatarakta c. Hridroga

b. Madhatya d. Grahani

Which of the following ingredients is NOT used in the
preparation of Kharjuradi Mantha?

a. Khajura c. Haritaki

b. Dadima d. Phalasha

Whatis the ratio of Jala (water) to the herbal ingredients
in Kharjuradi Mantha?

fame lel Gil

Joy, il d. 4:1

What is the dose of Kharjuradi Mantha according to the
provided information?

a. 1 Pala ce. 3 Pala

b. 2 Pala d. 4 Pala

Which ingredient in Kharjuradi Mantha is known for its
cooling and calming properties?

a. Imali
b. Dadima

What is the primary therapeutic indication for Brahma
Rasayana?

ce. Munnaka
d. Changeri

a. Hridroga c. Shrama
b. Madhatya d. Vatarakta

How many Haritaki and Amalaki are used in the
preparation of Brahma Rasayana?

a. 500 Haritaki, 1500 Amalaki
b. 1000 Haritaki, 3000 Amalaki
c. 800 Haritaki, 2400 Amalaki

What is the total quantity of water used for the
decoction in Brahma Rasayana preparation?

a. 60L e100
b. 80L ad? 1205

----- PAGE 227 -----
49. hich ingredient in Brahma Rasayana is known for its
i potent rasayana (rejuvenative) properties?

a, Haridra ce. Haritaki
: b. Bala d. Nagakesara

y sh 50. What is the dose of Brahma Rasayana according to the

A On; provided information?

“a, Sgms c. 12. gms

au gms d. 15 gms

e What are Nutraceuticals and write
© Write tt t

----- PAGE 228 -----
\

CHAPTER \\

8.1 Kaishora Guggulu

Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda

Praciareaa: Wen: Wale UAT ASTI

ad: usted aa gaors fatafera
Wiest: MUTATAUT Fosaretareraera |
ago argent AT watszeT 1
Afesapleyd ata aHamad: TL!
Wad Fatter pers arate Freres
Waa Yeahs weefafsareta |
WHelatrali Mena zag gS | |
Sed Batra, Pera Tae: |
AUGUST: SAUleaeAIC: ||
atte Fate Teorey] TeUMEAT |
SAAT GlaTAMY AUTBRIA APTA ||
aed HAUT A Aa STATA |
(Sha. S.M. Kha., 7/72-81)
INGREDIENTS USED

Haritaki P. 1 Prastha
Bibhitaki P 1 Prastha
Amalaki BI 1 Prastha
Guduchi St. 1 Prastha
Water for Decoction = 6.1441

Shuddha Guggulu Exd. 1 Prastha

ANUPANA PRAYOGA FOR
AUSHADHI KALPA

Guduchi St.

48 gms

Trikatu Rz/ Fr./Fr. 72 gms

Vidanga Fr. 24 gms

Dantimula Rt. 12 gms

Nishotha Rt. 12 gms

Ghrita - Qs
Procedure:

1. Take the required quantity of Triphala (Haritaki,

Bibhitaki and Amalaki). Add two times the amount
of water to the Triphala and Boil the mixture until it
is reduced to half of its original volume.

nN

. Filter the Triphala Kvatha to remove solid residue.

Oo

. Add the required amount of Shuddha Guggulu to
the filtered Triphala Kvatha and Boil the mixture
again until it reaches a thick consistency.

4. Addalltheremaining drugs to the thickened mixture
and mix thoroughly to form a homogeneous mass.
5. Shape the mixture into a large bolus. Smear a clean

utensil with ghee to prevent sticking and place the
bolus in the greased utensil.

6. Roll the bolus into small, uniform pills.
7. Allow the pills to dry properly and store the dried
pills in a sterilized, airtight container.
Dose: 3 gms.
Anupana: Warm Water, Milk, Manjishthadi Kvatha.
Therapeutic Indications: Kushtha Roga, Varna, Vatarakta,
Gulma Roga, Prameha, Udara Roga.
PHARMACODYNAMICcS
1. Kaishora Guggulu is a traditional Ayurvedic
formulation renowned for its anti-inflammatory,
detoxifying, and rejuvenating properties.
2, The primary ingredients, Haritaki, Bibhitaki,
and Amalaki, collectively known as Triphala, are

----- PAGE 229 -----
cay)

oO

potent detoxifiers and antioxidants. The
eliminate toxins from the body, there
jnflammation and promoting healing.

Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) is a versatile herb
known forits immunomodulatory effects and ability
to purify the blood. It supports the body's n
defense mechanisms and aids in combating V
skin disorders and inflammatory conditions.

y help to
by reducing

atural
arious

Guggulu, the resin from the Commiphora mukul
tree, is a key ingredient in many Ayurvedic formul-
ations. It possesses anti-inflammatory and analgesic
properties, making it beneficial for conditions like
arthritis, gout, and skin disorders.

. Trikatu, a combination of Ginger, Black Pepper,

and Long Pepper, enhances digestion, metabolism,
and circulation, thereby aiding in the elimination of
toxins and promoting overall health.

. Vidanga (Embelia ribes) and Nishotha (Operculina

turpethum) have anthelmintic properties and
help in the elimination of Parasites from the body,

contributing to the cleansing and detoxifying effects
of Kaishora Guggulu.

- Other herbs like Dantimula (Root of Baliospermum

montanum) and Ghrita (Clarified butter) further
Support the formulation’s efficacy in managing
various skin disorders, metabolic disorders, and
digestive issues.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Ayurveda traditionally views pharmacokinetics

in terms of the process of digestion, absorption,
metabolism, and elimination of herbs within
the body.

. After ingestion, the herbs in Kaishora Guggulu are

digested in the gastrointestinal tract, releasing their
active constituents.

. These active compounds are absorbed into the
bloodstream and distributed to various tissues and
organs, where they exert their therapeutic effects.

. The elimination of toxins and waste products occurs
primarily through the urine, kidneys, and feces.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Amit lather, University :
Polyherbal Centre of Excellence

Formulation Kaishora | in Research, BFUHS,
Guggulu: A Review _| Faridkot, Punjab, India.

in the formulation. This resource aids researchers in delving deeper into the
significance of this crucial Ayurvedic formulation. ee aD

A comparative

study of Kaishora
Guggulu and Amrita
Guggulu in the
Management

of Utthana Vatarakta

Anju P., PhD Scholar,
Department of
Kayachikitsa, Institute for
Post Graduate Teaching
and Research in Ayurveda,
Gujarat Ayurved
University, Jamnagar,
Gujarat, India

In this single-blind comparative clinical trial, 30 patients aged 16 to 70 with
Utthana Vatarakta were randomly divided into two groups. Group A received
Tab Kaishora Guggulu, while Group B received Tab Amrita Guggulu, both at 1g
thrice daily. Efficacy was evaluated using subjective and objective parameters,
and statistical analysis was performed with the unpaired “t”-test. Notably,
80% of patients had diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or both. Both groups
showed significant improvement, indicating comparable efficacy between the
two formulations for managing Utthana Vatarakta.

Dr. Pramila Ahire MD (Sch)
(Chikitsa) (2nd Year), R.
A. Podar Medical College

(Govt.), Worli, Mumbai-18
MHA

Birendra Shrivastava,
School of Pharmaceutical
HPTLC Method Using | Sciences, Jaipur National
E-guggulsteroneas University, Jaipur-302017,
Marker Compound _| Rajasthan, India

Kaishore Guggulu: A
Precious Medicine

Standardisation of
Kaishora Guggulu by

Based on this clinical trial, it can be concluded that Kaishora Guggulu holds
significant value as an Ayurvedic medicine for combating skin disorders such as
Vicharchika (Eczema), Kilas (Psoriasis), and Dadru (Fungal Infection). Moreover,
its immunomodulatory properties contribute to enhancing immunity.

Kaishora Guggulu was quantified using an HPTLC method validated according
to ICH guidelines, revealing 0.87% content of E-guggulsterone. This method
ensures precise quality control testing and is applicable to various guggul-
containing formulations due to its simplicity, speed, and cost-effectiveness,
making it suitable for routine analysis by manufacturers.

8.2 Yogaraja Guggulu

Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita Madhyamkhanda

UR frareiye frereit seater |
Wp feraaarar a waot sivnga |
Serra: wat fares waft

agattaast Wet tat ya FATA: |
Yeh Vitvrent serrate faye: 1
gana: Taras fren fT Aad!
ufrguitge: Wa: Tat Sas TTC: |
(ag ta Ant a EA TINT
HAUSE Taheaegt Mele UTA |

----- PAGE 230 -----
~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter @

Setar Feig WATT | UTA!
Relais a yet oe rags atl
TASS Steal Bie Bei HUTTATALU
fractesraatedt Aarfd et erect
UAdaeaaas Saar aTT ara |

(Sha. S.M. Kha., 7/56-69)

INGREDIENTS USED

Shunthi Rz. 1 Part
Pippali Fr. i Part
Chavya St. 1 Part
Pippalimula Rt. 1 Part
Chitraka Rt. 1 Part
Hingu Exd. 1 Part
Yavani Fr. 1 Part
Sarshapa Sd. 1 Part
Krishna Jiraka Fr. 1 Part
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 1 Part
Renuka Sd. 1 Part
Indrayava Sd. 1 Part
Patha Rt. 1 Part
Vidang Fr. 1 Part
Gajapippali Rt. 1 Part
Kodha Rz. 1 Part
Aatisra Sd. 1 Part
Bharangi : Rt. 1 Part
Vaca 5 Se, 1 Part
Murva : Rt. 1 Part
Triphala _ ’ BIBS 40 Parts
Shuddha Guggulu Exd. 60 Parts
VangaBhasma = 16 Parts
Chandi Bhasma = 16 Parts
NagaBhasma = 16 Parts
Lauha Bhasma 16 Parts
‘Abbrala Bhasma 6 Parts

Part Used

Mandura Bhasma = 16 Parts

Rasa Sindura = 16 Parts
Procedure:

1. Gatherall the required dried ingredients for Yogaraja

Nm

ZS
. Allow the pills to dry properly and store the dried

Guggulu except Shuddha Guggulu. Ensure each
ingredient is clean and free from impurities.

. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each

ingredient separately into a fine powder.

. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean

cloth to remove any coarse particles.

Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,

dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

. Filter the compound powder mixture once again

through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

. Melt the Guggulu by adding water and heating it

over a mild flame. Once the Guggulu is melted,
remove it from the heat and add all the remaining
homogenous churnas.

Mixed well untill suitable for tablets form.

pills ina sterilized, airtight container.

Dose: 3 gms.

Anupana: Water, Honey, Go mutra, Triphala Kashaya.

Therapeutic Indications: Vataroga, Kushtha, Vibanda,
Prameha, Vatarakta, Gulma, Nabhishula, Bhagandara,
Apasmara, Mandagni, Kasa, Aruchi, Kshaya.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

ik,

Yogaraja Guggulu is a classical Ayurvedic
formulation known for its potent anti-inflammatory,
analgesic, and rejuvenating properties.

. The primary ingredients, such as Shunthi (Ginger),

Pippali (Long Pepper), Chavya (Java Long Pepper),
and Chitraka (Leadwort), possess heating and
digestive properties. They help to improve digestion,
stimulate metabolism, and alleviate digestive issues
such as bloating and abdominal discomfort.

. Hingu (Asafoetida) and Yavani (Carom seeds) aid

in digestion and relieve gas and bloating.

. Guggulu, the resin from the Commiphora mukula

tree, is a key ingredient known for its anti-
inflammatory and analgesic properties. It helps
to reduce inflammation and pain associated with
various musculoskeletal disorders.

. Triphala, a combination of three fruits (Haritaki,

Bibhitaki, and Amalaki), aids in detoxification,
supports digestive health, and provides antioxidant
protection.

----- PAGE 231 -----
Chapter 8 * Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa

6, Other ingredients like Bharngi, Vacha, Mury
Patha have specific actions on respiratory
digestive disorders, and inflammation,

7. Minerals like Vanga Bhasma, Chandi Bhasma, Naga
Bhasma, Lauha Bhasma, Abhraka Bhasma, and
Mandura Bhasma provide essential micronutrients
and contribute to the formulation’s overall effic

a, and
health,

acy

metabolism,
constituents,

its active

elimination of

and

No

. After ingestion, the herbs are digested in the
gastrointestinal tract, releasing their active
compounds.

. These active compounds are absorbed into the
bloodstream and distributed to various tissues and

in various metabolic disorders.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. The pharmacokinetics of Yogaraja Guggulu are
understood within the framework of Ayurvedic
principles, focusing on the digestion, absorption,

RESEARCH UPDATES

Standardization of
Yogaraja Guggulu—An
Ayurvedic Polyherbal
Formultion

{| Aut Me;
KR Gopala Simha,
Sodhana Trust, Gautam
Towers, Sardar Patel
Road, Secunderabad-
500003, Andhra Pradesh.

organs, where they exert their therapeutic effects.
. Elimination of waste products occurs primarily
through the liver, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract.
. The formulation’s effects are gradual and holistic,
aiming torestore balance to the body’s systems rather
than providing immediate symptomatic relief.

’ Re 1h

The traditional preparation of Yogaraja Guggulu, an Ayurvedi :
has been standardized through the integration of modern scientific q)
control measures. The outcomes of this standardization process could
potentially inform the establishment of new

aimed at optimizing the efficacy of the medicine. aS

2. |ACritical Review on
Yogaraja Guggulu

Dr. Rohitakumar, PG
Scholar, Department of
R.S. & B.K. Government
Ayurvedic Medical
College and Hospital,
Ballari, Karanataka, India

Yogaraja Guggulu, utilized for osteoarthritis and other related conditions,
comprises 29 ingredients targeting vata accumulation in joints and muscles.
This review delves into its therapeutic and pharmacological aspects, offering
valuable insights for researchers studying this Ayurvedic remedy.

Anti-Inflammatory
Effect of Yogaraja
Guggul: An In Vitro

Evaluation of the Renuka Munshi, Dept. of

Clinical Pharmacology,TN
Medical College and BYL
Nair CharitableHospital,

The study evaluated YG’s anti-inflammatory effects by testing its inhibi
COX-1 & COX-2 and 5-LOX enzymes in vitro using EIA. YG, at concentrati

Study Mumbai Central,

Mumbai, MHA, India

[ens

A K Meena, National
Institute of Ayurvedic
Pharmaceutical
Research, Patiala-
147001, Punjab (India)

maximum effect at 100 jig/ml, surpassing aspirin. These findings underscore
YG's potential as an anti-inflammatory agent and warrant further exploration
for treating inflammatory respiratory disorders. ,

Two samples taken for study. Sample 1 had a loss on drying at 105°C of
3.84%w/w, while sample 2 showed 10.76%w/w. Total ash values were 7.02%-
w/w, with water soluble ash content at 8.87%w/w. Acid insoluble ash values
were 0.987%w/w and 1.09%w/w for samples 1 and 2, respectively. Water
soluble extractive values indicated various compounds, including sugar, acids,
and inorganic compounds. Alcohol soluble extractive values suggested the
presence of polar constituents like phenols, alkaloids, steroids, glycosides, and
| flavonoids. Additionally, TLC was performed using a methanol extract of YRG.

EAST PI TTT: |
leaiNarayahaChua Sere Ul fatcaral MALTAUTIYT TA |

Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita Madhyamakhanda wt UUs Oa Ue Wet!
Teor Tat BE Weva aA AcE!

Quality Assessment
of Different Variants
of Yogaraja Guggulu

faach fataett care vitch SYST Fa! 5 R 3
awa feted AHA ST TT | TT
SATE st aT fearegy LACTATE | sorrafircsitel a qaret: uitehey |
lel tere yet at cra Bigraty sa aso aT TAN
3B ofa aaionts Fayre mare feet WRT AR eTSATPaT UTE |
faq fran faster eer Ta Ta! faferet a fare cere yo farrareTT

qa wae eq Havana FIAT | got anraor ara ELTON! (Sha. S.M. Kh. 6/83-91)

----- PAGE 232 -----
218

~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 6

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used
Rt.

Chitraka 12 gms
Haritaki B: 12 ems
Bibhitaki Pp 12 gms
Amalaki P. 12 gms
Shunthi Rz. 12 gms
Maricha Fr 12 gms
Pippali Fr 12 gms
Hapusha Fr. 12 gms
Vacha Rt. 12 gms
Yavani Fr. 12 gms
Pippalimula Rt. 12 gms
Saupha Sd. 12 gms
Yavani Fr. 12 gms
Ajamoda Fr. 12 gms
Kacchura Dr. Rz. 12 gms
Dhaniya Fr. 12 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 12 gms
Vidanga Fr. 12 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 12 gms
Pokhara Mula Rt. 12 gms
Yavakshara - 12 gms
Sarjikshara = 12 gms
Saindhava Lavana = 12 gms
Sauvarchala Lavana = — 12 gms
Vida Lavana - 12 gms
Samudra Lavana - 12 gms
Romaka Lavana = 12 gms
Kushtha Root 12 gms
Vishala Fr. 24gms
Nishotha Rt. 36 gms
Dantimula Rt. 36 gms
Shatala Rt. 48gms
Procedure:

7. Label the containers with the name Narayana
Churna and the preparation date.
Dose: 2- 4 gms, Virechana- 6 gms.
Anupana: Water.
Therapeutic Indications: Hridroga, Pandu,  Jvara,
Kushtha, Ajirna, Parikitika, Udarroga, Vibanda, Visha,
Dushta Varna.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Narayana Churna is a traditional Ayurvedic
formulation with potent therapeutic properties.

2. The combination of herbs in this churna is carefully
selected to address a wide range of health issues.

3. Chitraka, Haritaki, Bibhitaki, and Amalaki are
well-known for their digestive, detoxifying, and
rejuvenating properties. They help in improving
digestion, promoting bowel movements, and
eliminating toxins from the body.

4. Shunthi, Marich, and Pippali contribute to the
formulation’s digestive and carminative properties.
They help in relieving gas, bloating, and abdominal
discomfort.

5. Vacha, Ajamoda, Kachhura, and Dhaniya have anti-
inflammatory and digestive properties. They aid in
reducing inflammation in the digestive tract and
improving overall digestion.

6. The inclusion of various salts (Yavakshara,
Sarjikshara, Saindhava lLavana, Sauvarchala
Lavana, Vida Lavana, Samudra Lavana, and
Romaka Lavana) helps in balancing electrolytes
and enhancing digestive function.

7. Herbs like Vishala, Nishotha, Dantimula, and
Shatala contribute to detoxification and elimination
of toxins from the body.

1. Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Narayana Churna. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from imputities.

2. Using a Khalva Yantra or a grinder, grind each
ingredient separately into a fine powder.

3. Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

4. Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

5. Filter the compound powder mixture once again
through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

6. Store the final compound powder in sterilized,

airtight glass containers to preserve its potency and
freshness.

. Kushtha root in the formulation is known forits anti-

inflammatory and antibacterial properties, making
it beneficial for skin disorders and infections.

. Overall, Narayana Churna acts as a digestive

stimulant, detoxifier, and rejuvenator, promoting
overall health and well-being.

PHARMACOKINETICS

IL.

The pharmacokinetics of Narayana Churna are not
extensively studied in modern scientific terms but
are understood within the context of Ayurvedic
principles.

After ingestion, the herbs in the churna undergo

digestion and absorption in the gastrointestinal
tract.

----- PAGE 233 -----
Chapter 8 « Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kapa

<<

3, The active constituents of the herbs
distributed to various tissues and org
they exert their therapeutic effects,

are then
ans, where

4 Flimination of waste products occurs prim
through the urinary and gastrointestinal systems

219

The formulation’s effects are gradual and holistic,
aiming to restore balance to the body's systems
rather than providing immediate symptomatic

RESEARCH UPDATES

No Arie Name _|
Development and
Standardization

of Narayana
Churna—A
Polyherbal
Ayurvedic
Formulation

eA

uthor Name
Anupam K. Mangal

arily relief,
Thi = F ee
Is study establishes pharmacognostical standards, SOP, and analytical profiling for

N

slenev alee cae Ned formulation. It exhibits a grayish-brown color and

cells, endosperm za Suen analysis revealed various cellular structures like cork

and oil globules A ieee Ss, vessels, trichomes, calcium oxalate crystals, starch grains,

physicochemi fj ngerprint was developed, and standardized limits were set for
mical parameters, microbial count, aflatoxins, heavy metals, and pesticide

residues. This effort serves as a valu: {
able refer i
apes ci ence for Narayana Churna’s identification

Clinical Efficacy of
Narayan Churna in
Alcohol Addiction:
A Single-Blinded
Randomized
Clinical Trial

Sandeep Charak,
P.G. Department
of Agad Tantra,
National Institute
of Ayurveda, Jaipur,
Rajasthan, India

ees utilized a single-blinded random control method to compare Narayana
i S efficacy with Ashtanga Lavana Churna. Both groups received supportive drugs
‘© manage withdrawal effects. Alcohol withdrawal symptoms were assessed using the
CIWA-Ar scale, Results showed 13.3% of patients in each group experienced excellent
relief, while 26.6% and 13.3% in the control and study groups, respectively, showed

moderate relief, Overall, 36.66% of patients were de-addicted, highlighting Ayurvedic
science’s significant achievement.

8.4 Rasa Sindura

Reference: Rasa Tarangini Hindi commentary of Sri
Sadananda Sarma, Chaukhambha Surbharti Prakashan,
Murchchhana Vigyaniya Taranga, 6/ 203-234, PP. 125-127
aeta Gel fare Hosieht Wades aera: 1
FUT FPO chrecUtAry |

Aqralecqal ad Gel Aria: |

PSA HAGA et AeA: UIT |
afaghamisitorre ta tWeeelichd: CAR CANEKcE Al
agaiaad aregurgard terra At Fat aan
qamreniparartectditatencr Storr TH: 1

frava qe aleatfaent wert Heat WaTTA I

CAAT TAMA STE UI
Parad Tag Utada
Watt THT Catena aA |
Gea YMATSt Vetch Aksar
Wald a adse Ae Aa
atetaagiten & atau: |
Pra fatratta trae Preaordt
fir Paras 4 taata afetad!
aa fore aig faenterate safer: 11
eMeiela Wele aA Ae faratad: 11
PaGaL, STRUTT UAT AATL |
Awd Vetere ta: faeqreatae: 1

Ward Hae coro Fayre: 1
(R.T. Murchchhana Vigyaniya Taranga)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Parts
Nyagrodha/ Vantankura Lf. Bd. QS. Bhavana
Procedure:

1. Mix Shuddha Parada and Shuddha Gandhaka in
Khalva Yantra to make Kajjali.

2. Apply bhavana with Valankura drava once and dry
and powder the mixture.

----- PAGE 234 -----
220

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 8

3. Fill the powdered mixture into a glass bottle
(Kachakupi).

bas

Cover the bottle with cloth smeared in mud,
repeating seven times up to the neck.

ul

Place the bottle in a sand bath (Baluka Yantra).

S

Apply slow heat, then moderate, and finally strong

heat, gradually increasing the temperature.

7. Close the bottle's mouth with a cork made of chalk
or brick once the extra gandhaka burns off and
Gandhaka fumes (yellow colour) stop emitting.

8. Seal the joints of the cork and bottle mouth with a

paste of molasses and lime powder.

oO

. Apply strong heat for at least two more hours to
allow the prepared compound to sublime and
adhere to the neck of the bottle.

10. After cooling, collect the sublimed product (Rasa

Sindura) from the neck of the bottle.

11. The product should be red, similar to the rising sun.

Dose: 125 mg.

Anupana: Honey.

Therapeutic Indications: Kaphaja Roga, Balakshaya,

Dhatu Kshaya, Hrddaurbalya, Prameha, Shula,

Bhagandara, Shotha, Gulma, Rajayakshma, Pandu,

Sthulata, Vrana, Mandagni.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Rasa Sindura is a classical Ayurvedic formulation

prepared from purified mercury (Shuddha Parada)
and purified sulphur (Shuddha Gandhaka).

2. It is traditionally prepared through a series of
purification and calcination processes to remove
impurities and enhance its therapeutic efficacy.

3. The combination of purified mercury and sulphur

is believed to have potent therapeutic properties in

Ayurveda.

RESEARCH UPDATES

4.

Rasa Sindura is primarily indicated for conditions
caused by Kapha dosha imbalance, such as
respiratory disorders, digestive issues, and certain
skin conditions.

. It is also used to improve strength (Balakshaya),

treat tissue depletion (Dhatu Kshaya), alleviate
heart weakness (Hriddaurbalya), manage diabetes
(Prameha), relieve pain (Shula), treat anal fistula
(Bhagandara), reduce swelling (Shotha), manage
abdominal tumors (Gulma), address tuberculosis
(Rajayakshma), manage anaemia (Pandu), counter
obesity (Sthulata), promote wound healing (Vrana),
and improve digestion (Mandagni).

. Rasa Sindura is believed to work by balancing the

Kapha dosha and enhancing the body’s natural
healing mechanisms.

PHARMACOKINETICS

its

The pharmacokinetics of Rasa Sindura are not
extensively studied in modern scientific terms but
are understood within the context of Ayurvedic
principles.

. After oral administration, Rasa Sindura under-

goes digestion and absorption in the gastro-
intestinal tract.

. The purified mercury and sulphur constituents are

believed to be absorbed into the bloodstream and
distributed to various tissues and organs.

. Once in the body, Rasa Sindura is thought to exert

its therapeutic effects by balancing the doshas,
improving cellular metabolism, and enhancing
tissue nourishment.

. The elimination of Rasa Sindura from the body

occurs primarily through urine and feces.

. The dosage of Rasa Sindura is usually low, and it

is often administered with honey to enhance its
therapeutic efficacy and minimize potential side
effects.

Evaluation of Quality | Arjun Singh __| Equal quantities of purified mercury and sulphur were mixed to form a black
Characteristics of powder resembling collyrium. After Bhavana with vatankura svarasa, the
Rasa-sindura : An mixture was filed in a kancha kupi to obtain Rasa-sindura. Chemical analysis
Ayurvedic Classical revealed 81.7% mercury and 14.7% sulphur, with minor elements present.

Rasa-Aushadhi Particle size analysis showed microfine particles, and XRD analysis confirmed
Rasa-sindura as the tri/hexagonal (a-form) of mercury sulfide. Notably, free
sulphur was absent, typical of the Kupi Pakva procedure. These findings
establish quality assurance benchmarks and suggest potential pharmacopoeial
standards for further research. ‘

----- PAGE 235 -----
Chapter 8 « Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa a a

221

—A Mercurial

Review on Rasasindura

preparation of Indian
System of Medicine

Gokarn,
Department of
Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana,
IPGT & RA, Gujarat
Ayurved University,
Jamnagar, Gujarat,
India

The review notes the e

10th contieane Mergence of primitive Kupipakva Rasayana around the
inal conte ocumented In texts like Rasendra Chudamani and Siddhiprada
pubtiese ee by Siddhinandan Mishra, published by Choukhamba
cl ardineae aranasi, from the 3rd century onwards. Discrepancies exist
a t P andhaka proportion and Rasasindura preparation duration,
: ‘ 8 from 12 hours to 7 days. Advances in pharmaceutical and analytical
ec niques have facilitated newer manufacturing methods and Rasasindura
characterization. Toxicity studies confirm its safety in therapeutic doses.

a -

Analytical Study
of Samaguna,
Dviguna and

Rasasindura

Shadguna Balijarita

Rasa Sindura College, Mysore,
Karnataka, India
4. | Standardization of Nitin Mankar, PG

P. Hrishikesh
Department of
Rasashastra and
Bhaishajya Kalpana,
JSS Ayurveda Medical

The study compared Rasa Sindura formulations prepared with different
Proportions of Gandhaka; Samaguna (RS), Dviguna (2RS), and Shadguna (6RS).
XRD and FTIR analyses were conducted. Trituration durations were 70, 40, and
24 hours, while heating durations were 16, 16, and 19 hours, respectively. The
average yields of RS, 2RS, and 6RS were 54%, 34.44%, and 11.35%, respectively.
XRD showed increased crystallinity, and FTIR revealed decreased unsaturated
carbon and exchangeable proton with higher sulphur proportions. —

Student, Dept. of Rasa
Shastra & Bhaishajya
Kalpana, Y.M.1.
Ayurvedic Medical
College, Khraghar Sec.
4, Navi Mumbai, MHA,
India

1. Seven matka pad bottles with valuka yantra ensured heat resistance during
rasasindura preparation, aided by a sandbath for uniform heating.

2. Shalakasanchalana prevented bottle bursting from gandhaka condensation.

3. ICP-AES analysis indicated 83.23% mercury and 8.44% sulphur, revealing
gandhaka sublimation.

4. XRD analysis confirmed HgS with a hexagonal crystal structure.

5. Increasing agni sanskara enhances mercury-sulphur bonding, emphasizing
Jarana sanskara’s importance.

6. Standardizing rasasindur via modern parameters promotes acceptance and
dispels negative perceptions about parad-containing medicines.

8.5 Rasa Parpati

Reference: Rasa Tarangini of Sri Sadananda Sarma,
Chaukhambha Surbharti Prakashan, Murchchhana

Vigyaniya Taranga, 6/144-153, pp. 116-117
AGa STAT TSS TAAL |
Tauiecar AISA Mee ATA ||
MEA TTT TT |
Taudicer erat Parad

a at
TAUTdieaT YxHl VET eit STOUT |
Halegaatea aay ferareTeate| |

fopratgsraur erent alfa aI
MAHA TAT LeaaTIITT |

fatterafarrea ara ed aentterry | (R.T. 6/ 144-153)

INGREDIENTS USED

Part Used

Shuddha Parada = AiPart sade
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part
Procedure:

1. Prepare Kajjali with purified mercury (parada) and
sulphur (gandhaka) in a khalva.
2. Place the mixture in an iron vessel and heat using a
Sikata yantra.
3. Make a shallow pit in fresh cow dung and line it
with a kadali or eranda leaf.
4, When the Kajjali melts and becomes liquid, pour it
onto the leaf.
5. Cover with another leaf and gently press with fresh
cow dung.
6. Allow the mixture to cool.
7. Remove and powder the flakes of the medicine.
8. Store in air tight glass container.
Dose: 250 mg. Dose may be increased gradually upto
1125 mg.
Anupana: Milk, Butter milk, Bhrsta Jiraka Churna,
Hingu Churna.
Therapeutic Indications: Shula, Grahani, Atisara,
Pravahika, Gulma, Shotha, Kamala, Pandu, Jvara,

----- PAGE 236 -----
222

Amavata, Arsha, Kushtha, Amadosha, Pliha Roga,
Jalodhara, Bhasmaka Roga, Amlapitta.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Rasa Parpati is an Ayurvedic herbo-metallic prep-
aration made from purified mercury (Shuddha

Parada) and purified sulphur (Shuddha Gandhaka)
in equal parts.

Nm

It is traditionally prepared through a series of
purification and calcination processes to remove
impurities and enhance its therapeutic efficacy.

(o>)

. Rasa Parpati is believed to have potent therapeutic
properties due to the synergistic effects of its
constituents.

4. The combination of purified mercury and sulphur
is thought to balance the doshas, particularly Kapha
and Vata, thereby alleviating various health issues.

5. Rasa Parpati is primarily indicated for conditions

such as abdominal colic (Shula), malabsorption

syndrome (Grahani), diarrhea (Atisara), dysentery

(Pravahika), abdominal tumors (Gulma), swelling

(Shotha), jaundice (Kamala), anaemia (Pandu),

fever (Jvara), rheumatoid arthritis (Amavata),

piles (Arsha), skin diseases (Kushtha), metabolic
disorders (Amadosha), splenic disorders (Pliha

Roga), ascites (Jalodhara), acid reflux (Amlapitta),

and various other conditions.

RESEARCH UPDATES

_asashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 8

6. Rasa Parpatiis believed to exertits therapeutic effects
by improving digestion, enhancing metabolism,
reducing inflammation, and promoting overall]
health and well-being.

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. The pharmacokinetics of Rasa Parpati are not
extensively studied in modern scientific terms but
are understood within the context of Ayurvedic
principles.

2. After oral administration, Rasa Parpati undergoes
digestionand absorptionin the gastrointestinal tract.

3. The purified mercury and sulphur constituents are
believed to be absorbed into the bloodstream and
distributed to various tissues and organs.

4. Once in the body, Rasa Parpati is thought to exert
its therapeutic effects by balancing the doshas and
promoting cellular metabolism.

5. The elimination of Rasa Parpati from the body
occurs primarily through urine and feces.

6. The dosage of Rasa Parpati is typically low and may
be gradually increased under the supervision of an
Ayurvedic practitioner.

7. Rasa Parpati is often administered with milk,
buttermilk, or specific herbal powders (such as
Bhrishta Jiraka Churna and Hingu Churna) to
enhance its therapeutic efficacy and minimize
potential side effects.

Sr.No. | Article Name_
A Review of
Parpati Kalpana
W.S.R. To Rasa

Parpati

Paprola, H.P., India

Analysis of Rasa
Parpati through
Advanced Anal-
ytical Techniques

This paper outlines Rasa Parpati’s pr
Rasa Shastra & Bhaishajya across various formulations. Parpati, known for treating Grahani, dissociates
Kalpana, Rajiv Gandhi Govt. | at the intestinal level. Though the preparation method remains consistent,
P.G. Ayurvedic College, ingredient variations lead to diverse therapeutic effects, explored herein.

Seay

Result ey
eparation method and its therapeutic values

Ankesh Kumar Agrawal, Results show that both Rasa Parpati samples are organo-metallic compounds
Ayurveda Medical Officer, with organic matter coating the surface of inorganic matter. They contain
Govt. Ayush Wing, Guna mercury, sulphur, and trace elements like magnesium and iron. Mercuric sulfide
(MP) (HgS) is present in cubic and hexagonal forms, while free sulphur is in the

orthorhombic form within their crystal lattice. Analytical tests reveal minimal
differences between the two samples’ profiles.

Antiulcer Activity
of Rasa Parpati
Against Pylorus
Ligation Induced
Gastric Ulcer in
Rats

Anuroopa, H.K. Rasa Parpati reduced ulcer number and index while increasing ulcer inhibition

compared to controls. Histological analysis revealed less severe gastric
mucosa damage, edema, and leukocyte infiltration in Rasa Parpati-treated
rats. Additionally, Rasa Parpati lowered volume, free acidity, and total acidity,
raising pH. These findings suggest its significant anti-ulcer effects, likely via

cytoprotective actions, reduced gastric secretion, or enhanced gastric mucosa
reinforcement, bolstering mucosal defenses.

| 8.6 Kankayana Vati aart witch Get Heat fatterfoter

sramtetaepsit AGO: FAH GARI
Reference: Sharngadhara Samhita, Madhyamakhanda, BY

Chaukhamba Surbharti Prakashan ie ft *. Ben : .

----- PAGE 237 -----
Chapter 8 ° Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa

SS

gat at treat a farsy crfer fra
faatseTare: Yost WITT: SrSTAT: ye
Aaa Wert AAT Fa: |

gat TAT MATAR AT

fraq BIgan Yleat Tern
wea atte ges Mralttor = BiteaA

(Sha. S.M. Kha., 7/50-55)

INGREDIENTS USED

Yavani Fr. 6 gms
Shveta Jiraka Fr. 6 gms
Dhaniya Fr. 6 gms
Maricha Fr. 6 gms
Girikarnika (Aprajita) Rt. 6 gms
Ajamoda Fr. 6 gms
Krishna Jiraka Fr. 6 gms
Hingu Exd. 18 gms
Yavakshara - 6 gms
Sarjikshara - 6 gms
Pancha Lavana = 6 gms
Nishotha Rt. 6 gms
Danti Mula Rt. 6 gms
Kachura = 6 gms
Poshakaramula Rt. 6 gms
Vaividanga Fr. 6 gms
Dadima Fr. 6 gms
Haritaki P. 6 gms
Chitraka Rt. 6 gms
Amalavetasa Fr. 6 gms
Shunthi Rz. 6 gms
Bijora nimbu svarasa Fr. Q.S. For Bhavana
Procedure:

iL

i)

oS

ae

oT

Gather all the required dried ingredients for
Kankayana Vati. Ensure each ingredient is clean
and free from impurities.

Using a Khalva Yantra (traditional mortar and
pestle) ora grinder, grind each ingredient separately
into a fine powder.

Filter each powdered ingredient through a clean
cloth to remove any coarse particles.

Combine all the filtered powders together ina clean,
dry container. Mix thoroughly to ensure a uniform
blend of all ingredients.

. Filter the compound powder mixture once again

through a clean cloth to ensure a fine consistency.

g Adding Bijora Nimbu Svarasa as Mardana dravya,
until it becomes a concentrated form and suitable
for making tablets or pills, then roll it into tablets
or pills.

7. Expose the tray to sunlight or under hot air oven
for several hours to days until the material is
completely dry.

8. Once fully dried, collect the dried material. This
final product is called Kankayana Vati.

9. Store Kankayana Vati Rasa in a clean, dry, airtight
container to preserve its potency and freshness.

Dose: 3 gms.

Anupana: Milk, Ghrita, Nimbu rasa, Warm Water.

Therapeutic Indications: All types of Gulma Roga,

Hridroga, Shula, Krimi, Vibanda.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Danti Mula, Chitraka, and Poshakara Mula possess
anthelmintic properties, aiding in the expulsion of
intestinal worms (Krimi).

. Ajamoda, Haritaki, and Amalavetasa are known
for their laxative properties, which help in relieving
constipation and promoting bowel movements,
thus alleviating conditions like Vibanda.

3. Hingu acts as a carminative and digestive

stimulant, aiding in the expulsion of gas from the

gastrointestinal tract and improving digestion.

Nishotha and Vai Vidanga are known for their anti-

inflammatory and anti-flatulent properties, further

contributing to the relief of abdominal discomfort
associated with various digestive disorders.

5. The formulation is designed to balance the doshas,

particularly Vata and Kapha, thereby addressing
a wide range of digestive issues, including Gulma
Roga (abdominal tumors or masses), Hridroga
(heart diseases), Shula (abdominal colic), and
Vibanda (constipation).

N

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. The pharmacokinetics of Kankayana Vati are not
extensively studied in modern scientific terms but
are understood within the framework of Ayurvedic
principles.

2. After oral administration, the herbal ingredients of
Kankayana Vati undergo digestion and metabolism
in the gastrointestinal tract.

3. The active constituents of the herbs are absorbed into
the bloodstream and distributed to various tissues
and organs, where they exert their therapeutic
effects.

----- PAGE 238 -----
224

. The salts present in the formulation, such as
Yavakshara, Sarjikshara, and Pancha Lavana,
aid in improving digestion and regulating bowel
movements by stimulating digestive secretions and
promoting peristalsis.

oI

The formulation’s herbal ingredients act syner-
gistically to enhance gastrointestinal motility,

RESEARCH UPDATES

A. Ashi, Scientist,
Vaidyartanam
Ayurveda Research
Institute.

Efficacy of Kankayana Vati
and Pilovosointment, A
Novel Topical Agent, in the
Management of Second-
Degree hemorrhoids

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter §

relieve abdominal discomfort, and improve overal]
digestive function.
6. The dosage of Kankayana Vati is typically low, and
itis often administered with milk, ghee, lemon juice,
or warm water to enhance its therapeutic efficacy

and minimize potential side effects.

__ Resul eee ae hake
The combined use of Kankayana Vati and Pilovos ointment shows
promising outcomes in managing second-degree hemorrhoids.
This integrated approach effectively relieves symptoms and brings
significant improvements in patients’ conditions. This case study
underscores the significance of comprehensive treatment strategies |
for hemorrhoids, targeting both internal and external aspects of the
condition,

eral

Standardization of Kankayana
Vati: An Ayurvedic Polyherbal
Formulation

Vineeta Khanvilkar,
Bharati Vidyapeeth’s
College of Pharmacy,
C.B.D. Belapur, Navi
Mumbai, (MHA), India

A Clinical Study of Kankayana
Vati in the Management of
Arshas (Piles)

Kanchan M. Borkar,
International Journal of
Ayurvedic Medicine.

This study aimed to standardize Kankayana Vati, an Ayurvedic)
formulation for various ailments including piles, bloating, intestinal
worms, abdominal lumps, hemorrhoids, and heart diseases. Ferulic
acid from Ferula asafoetida and plumbagin from Plumbago zeylanica
were identified as key constituents. A rapid and precise HPTLCmethod
was developed for standardization, using TLC plates coated with silica
gel 60 F254 and a mobile phase of Toluene: Ethyl acetate: Formic
acid (6.5:3.5:0.1 v/v/v). Densitometric analysis at 281 nm revealed |
ferulic acid content (0.32+0.03) and plumbagin content (0.73+0.03),
Vaiidation followed ICH guidelines.

The study aimed to assess Kankayana Vati’s efficacy in treating
piles in 40 patients. They took 2 gm capsules daily with butter milk
for 21 days. Diagnosis involved inspection, per-rectal examination,
and proctoscopy. Symptoms were subjectively assessed, showing
significant relief with Kankayan Vati, highlighting its effectiveness in
managing arsha.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

. Which herb is NOT a part of the primary ingredients of
Kaishora Guggulu?

a. Haritaki c. Guduchi
b. Bibhitaki d. Vidanga
2. What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Guggulu in Kaishora Guggulu?
a. Immunomodulation
b. Detoxification
c. Antioxidation
d. Anti-inflammatory
3. Which of the following is NOT a therapeutic indication
of Kaishora Guggulu?
a. Kushtha Roga c. Asthma
b. Vatarakta d. Gulma Roga
4. Trikatu, an ingredient in Kaishora Guggulu, consists of

which combination of spices?

a. Turmeric, Cumin, Coriander

b. Ginger, Black Pepper, Long Pepper
c. Cinnamon, Cardamom, Clove
d. Fenugreek, Fennel, Mustard
. How is Kaishora Guggulu traditionally administered?
a. With cold water
b. With honey
. With grape juice
d. With warm water, milk, or Manjishthaadhi Kvatha

a

6. Which of the following is NOT a primary ingredient of
Yogaraja Guggulu?
a. Shunthi ec. Guduchi
b. Pippali d. Chitraka

7,

- What is the primary pharmacodynamic property of
Guggulu in Yogaraja Guggulu?

a. Immunomodulation
b. Antioxidation
c. Detoxification
d. Anti-inflammatory

----- PAGE 239 -----
Chapter 8» Anupana Prayoga for Aushadhi Kalpa

g. Which mineral is NOT included in the formulation of
Yogaraja Guggulu?
a. Vanga Bhasma
b. Chandi Bhasma

c. Mandura Bhasma
d. Arjuna Bhasma
9, What is the traditional dose of Yogaraja Guggulu?
a. 1 gms c. 5 gms
b. 3gms d. 10 gms
40. What is the recommended anupana (vehicle) for
administering Yogaraja Guggulu?
a. Milk

b. Triphala Kashaya

c. Grape Juice
d. Lemon Water

41. Which of the following herbs is NOT included in
Narayana Churna?

a. Shunthi c. Pippali
b. Tulasi d. Chitraka

42. What is the primary therapeutic indication of
Narayana Churna?
a. Cardiovascular disorders
b. Respiratory infections
c. Digestive issues
d. Musculoskeletal pain
43. How much quantity of Narayana Churna is recom-
mended for Virechana (therapeutic purgation)?
a. 1-2 gms c. 6-8 gms
b. 3-5 gms d. 10-12 gms
14. Which of the following salts is NOT included in
Narayana Churna?
e. Saindhava Lavana g. Vida Lavana
f. Kala Namaka
145. What is the traditional anupana (vehicle) for admin-
istering Narayana Churna?
a. Milk
b. Honey
16. What are the primary constituents of Rasa Sindoor?
a. Purified mercury and sulphur
b. Purified mercury and gold
c. Purified sulphur and gold
d. Purified mercury and arsenic
17. What is the traditional anupana (vehicle) for admin-
istering Rasa Sindura?
a. Milk c. Honey
b. Ghee d. Water
18. Which dosha imbalance is primarily targeted by Rasa
Sindura?

h. Samudra Lavana

c. Water
d. Lemon Juice

ce. Kapha
d. Tridosha

a. Vata
b. Pitta

19,

20.

21.

22.

23

24.

25.

26.

27.

» What is the therapeutic Indication of Rasa Sindura

related to tissue depletion?
a. Prameha

c, Dhatu Kshaya
d, Gulma

How is Rasa Sindura eliminated from the body?
a. Through respiration

b. Through sweat glands

c. Through urine and feces

d. Through the skin

b. Hriddaurbalya

What are the primary constituents of Rasa Parpati?

a. Purified gold and sulphur

b. Purified mercury and gold

c. Purified mercury and sulphur

d. Purified mercury and arsenic

Which dosha imbalance is primarily targeted by Rasa
Parpati?

a. Pitta ce. Kapha

b. Vata d. Tridosha

. What is the traditional anupana (vehicle) for admin-
istering Rasa Parpati?

a. Water

b. Honey

c. Milk, buttermilk, or specific herbal powders

d. Ghee

What are the therapeutic indications of Rasa Parpati?
a. Musculoskeletal disorders only

b. Respiratory disorders only

c. Gastrointestinal disorders, metabolic disorders,
and various other conditions

d. Skin disorders only

How is Rasa Parpati believed to exert its therapeutic

effects?

a. By balancing only Vata dosha

b. By promoting inflammation

c. By enhancing cellular metabolism and balancing
the doshas

d. By suppressing digestion

Which of the following herbs in Kankayana Vati is
primarily responsible for its anthelmintic properties?
a. Hingu c. Danti Mula

b. Chitraka d. Poshakara Mula
What therapeutic indications are addressed by
Kankayana Vati?

a. Respiratory disorders

b. Cardiovascular diseases

c. Digestive disorders

d. Skin conditions

----- PAGE 240 -----
226 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter g

28. How does Hingu contribute to the pharmacodynamics a. Milk
of Kankayana Vati? b. Ghrita
a. By promoting bowel movements c. Nimbu rasa (lemon juice)
b. By enhancing digestion d. Vinegar
c. By expelling intestinal worms ANsWeERs KEYS
d. By reducing inflammation ao se
29. What doshas does Kankayana Vati primarily aim to sls Cline | ick |e cl ee ay
balance? 6. c 7. d 8. d cy, byw 0") sib
a. Pitta and Kapha c. Vata and Kapha Hilo e alee es [SER fs cL Ee | eG
b. Vata and Pitta d. Tridosha AG alge 72 niche feel 8 21 Ca wt Le encom a0 ec ;
30. Which of the following is NOT an anupana (vehicle) for 24 ¢ 22 ¢ 23% © Zea een cad 12201
administering Kankayana Vati? D6 tdac. 27a Cu Gt28:0 ee Dan m2 crms wenn id

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Write the ingridents of Narayana Churna and its therapeutics uses.
e Write short answer on Kankayana Vati.

e Write short answer on Yogaraja Guggulu.

----- PAGE 241 -----
CHAPTER

9

9.1 Mukhya Prayogartha Kalpana

Mukhya prayogartha Kalpana in Ayurveda encom-

passes specific principles and treatment methodologies

for addressing oral diseases. It includes various proce-
dures such as Gandusha, Kavala, and Pratisarana

(application of medicinal paste or powder). These

practices are deeply rooted in Ayurvedic traditions and

are recognized for their preventive and therapeutic
benefits.

NEED FOR MUKHYAPRAYOGARTHA KALPANA
1. Rapid Absorption: The oral mucosa has a rich vascular

supply and lacks a stratum corneum epidermis,

offering minimal barriers to drug transport. This
results in a rapid increase in blood concentration.

Historical Use: The oral transmucosal route has

been used for many years to treat angina pectoris,

providing rapid blood nitrate levels.

Quick Onset: Medications administered through
this route appear in the blood within a minute
and usually reach peak blood levels within 10-
15 minutes, much faster compared to the oro-
gastric route.

4. Pediatric Advantage: Pediatric patients often swallow
medications administered orally, which can lead to
drug breakdown in the gastrointestinal system. Oral
transmucosal administration avoids immediate
destruction by entero-hepatic circulation and first-
pass effects of gastric acid or liver metabolism.

5. Prolonged Exposure: For significant drug absorption,
the medication needs to remain in contact with the
mucosal surface for a prolonged period.

6, Taste Consideration: The taste of the medication is a
major factor in determining the contact time with
the buccal or oral mucosa.

7. pH Influence: The ionization of the drug affects
absorption. Since saliva typically has a pH of 6.5

iS

w

to 6.9, absorption is optimized for drugs with a
higher pH.

8. Sustained Release: Prolonged contact canbe achieved
by keeping the drug in small portions under the
tongue or incorporating it into a sustained-release
lozenge.

9. Optimal Absorption Sites: Drug absorption from
the buccal or oral mucosa is higher than from the
tongue and gums.

Major Procedures are:

1, GANDUSHA

Definition:

AEB F A AAT WSR: G Vertfta: 11 (Su.Chi., 40/62)
In Ayurveda, the practice of Gandusha involves filling
the mouth with decoctions, juices, various oils, cow’s
milk, cow urine, kanji (a fermented drink), honey, and
warm water. These liquid substances are used in such
large quantities that they cannot be swirled or moved
around in the mouth (stationary). This practice is
specifically referred to as ‘Gandusha’.

Procedure: In this practice, a large quantity of oil or
medicinal liquid is held in the mouth for a specific
duration (usually 10-20 minutes) and then spat out.

Dose:
Sag Fay Ul A WEN HietAAGH| (Sha.S.M.U., 10/5)
For liquid preparations, the powder quantity used is
6 grams.
Types:
gtd: Are WOU: Eileen: ATTA |
iteat tase acta aige: 11 (Sha.S.M.U., 10/1)
1. Sneha
2, Shamana
3, Shodhana
4, Ropana

----- PAGE 242 -----
228

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 9

Samyaka Gandusha Lakshana:
SUT wayel Tea ||
FPGA Wee ST AIST Wfes tay |
(Sha. S., U.Kha., 10/20)

1. Vyadhi Apachaya (Disease Eradication): The treatment
helps in the elimination of diseases affecting the
oral cavity.

2. Tripti (Satisfaction): It provides a sense of satisfaction
and contentment in the oral cavity.

3. Vaktra Vaishadya (Oral Cleanliness): It enhances the
cleanliness of the mouth.

4. Vaktra Laghava (Lightness in the Mouth): It imparts a
feeling of lightness in the mouth.

5. Indriya Prasadana (Sensory Satisfaction): It promotes
the well-being of the sensory organs associated
with the oral cavity.

Benefits

* Detoxification of the Mouth: Helps in detoxifying the
oral cavity.

* Improvement of Oral Hygiene: Enhances oral hygiene
and prevents dental decay.

* Prevention of Oral Health Issues: Aids in preventing

various oral health problems such as gum

inflammation and bad breath.

Strengthening of Teeth, Gums, and Jaw: Strengthens

the teeth, gums, and jaw.

o
o

2. KAVALA

Definition:

Ue aaa a Gf Aa a cael: a: | (Su.Chi. 40/62)

In Ayurveda, the practice known as ‘Kavala Graha’
involves filling the mouth with a sufficient quantity of
medicinal decoctions, juices, various oils, co ‘s milk,
cow urine, kanji (a fermented drink), honey, ai. warm
water. These liquid substances are used in such amounts
that they can be easily swirled or moved around within
the mouth.

Procedure: In this practice, a smal] quantity of oil or
medicinal liquid is swirled around in the mouth for a
few minutes and then spat out.

Dose:

OMA: ens clad cael Fa: 11 (Sha.S.U. 10/5)
Kalka: - 12 gms.

Types:

ada dara fastatsa wenttia: 11 (Su.Chi. 40/59-60)

1. Snehana; Vata Doshahara, Snigdha,
Madhura-Amala- Lavana Rasa Pradhana.
2, Prasadana:; Pitta Doshahara, Shita, Madhura- Tikta
Rasa Pradhana.
3. Shodhana: Kapha Doshahara, Ushna, Ruksha, Amla
Rasa Pradhana.
4. Ropana: Varna prashasta, Kashaya- Tikta- Madhura-
Katu Rasa.
Benefits:
Similar to Gandusha, Kavala Graha helps in maintaining
oral hygiene, preventing dental decay, and managing
oral infections. Additionally, it is more suitable and
convenient for daily use.
Tauteh Texter forecaster |
Wadedatgelita acre: || (Cha.Chi., 26/204)
Maharshi Charaka has stated that in cases of Mukhapaka
(oral ulcers or inflammation of the mouth), one should
practice procedures such as Sirakarma (blood-letting),
Shirovirechana (nasal purgation), Kaya-virechana (body
purgation), and use Kavala (gargling) with substances
like urine, oil, ghee, honey, and milk.

Ushna,

POINT TO BE NOTE

TAB HEF YU Wea: HAVA: |

aa GAU WORE: echt Chalet: Ga: 11 (Sha. $.U., 10/4)
Acharya Sharngadhara a has provided a different
distinction regarding this topic. He mentioned that
Gandusha involves stationary holding of liquid
substances in the mouth, while Kavala Graha involves
swishing or moving powdered substances around in
the mouth. Specifically, Gandusha requires filling the
mouth with liquid substances, whereas Kavala Graha
involves filling the mouth with powders.

2. According to Acharya Sharngadhara, the procedure
involves placing the patient in a comfortable position
and gently steaming their forehead, neck, and shoulders
to induce mild sweating. Then, the patient is instructed
to hold liquid medicinal substances in their mouth until
the accumulated phlegm or other doshas are pacified,
or until nasal discharge occurs. This process may be
repeated 3, 5, or 7 times to alleviate the doshas.

It’s important to note that the use of Gandusha and
Kavala Graha is prohibited in children under five
years of age.

3. PRATISARANA

Definition:

Applying powdered or granular medicines inside the

mouth with the tip of the finger, as recommended for
Gandusha and Kavala, is termed as “Pratisarana.”

----- PAGE 243 -----
Chapter 9 » Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

Types:
agers @ aaa Gantry

1. Kalka RSE A)
2. Rasa Kriya

3, Shodra

4, Churna

(Sha.S.U., 10/17)

1. Kalka

2. Avaleha

3. Churna
Procedure: This includes applying medicinal paste,
powder, or liquid directly onto the gums and teeth
using a finger or brush.
Benefits: This provides targeted treatment for specific
oral conditions such as gum disease, toothache, and
mouth ulcers. It enhances localized treatment and
provides immediate relief from symptoms.
PREVENTION OF ORAL DISEASES
Incorporating Gandusha and Kavala as part of daily
routine can significantly reduce the risk of oral diseases.
These practices help maintain oral hygiene, reduce
plaque formation, and prevent infections of gums
and mouth.

THERAPEUTIC BENEFITS
Mukha Prayogartha Kalpana procedures are utilized for
treating existing oral conditions, enhancing treatment
outcomes, reducing inflammation, and alleviating pain.
These procedures assist in managing conditions such as
periodontitis, oral ulcers, and halitosis.

INCLUSION IN DAILY ROUTINE
Ayurvedic texts emphasize the importance of integrating
these practices into daily routines for overall oral health
and well-being. Gandusha and Kavala are considered
essential daily practices contributing to oral health and
overall wellness.
In Ayurveda, medicinal forms used for oral formulations
include:
1, Vati/Gutika (Tablets):

e Example: Danta Kantivati - A herbal tablet

containing ingredients like neem, cloves, and

babula, known for their antimicrobial and anti-
inflammatory properties. Used for promoting
oral hygiene, preventing dental decay, and

freshening breath.

N

« Churna (Powders):

¢ Example: Triphala Churna — A blend of three
fruits; Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Bibhitaki
(Terminalia bellirica), and Haritaki (Terminalia
chebula), Used as tooth powder or. mouthwash
to cleanse the mouth, support gum health, and
alleviate oral issues like bleeding gums.

3. Asava/Arishta (Liquid formulations):

Example: Irimedasava - A liquid herbal
preparation containing ingredients like Haritaki
(Terminalia chebula), Vidanga (Embelia tribes),
and Pippali (Piper longum). Used as a mouth
tonic to improve digestion, enhance oral health,
and address problems like bad breath.

. Kashaya (Decoctions):

e Example: Dashamula Kashaya - A herbal
decoction prepared from a mixture of ten roots,
including Bilva (Aegle marmelos), Agnimantha
(Premna integrifolia), and Shyonaka (Oroxylum
indicum etc.). Used as mouthwash or gargle
to reduce inflammation, relieve toothache, and
strengthen gums.

. Avaleha (Confections/Pastes):

e Example: Khadiradi Avaleha—A semi-solid herbal
preparation containing ingredients like Khadira
(Acacia catechu), Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa),
and Ela (Elettaria cardamomum). Used for
conditions like oral ulcers, bleeding gums, and
other oral inflammations.

. Khanda (Sugar-based formulations):

e Example: Lavangadi Khanda - A sugar-based
herbal preparation containing ingredients like
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum), Ela (Elettaria
cardamomum), and Tvyaka (Cinnamomum
verum). Used in the form of lozenges or candies
to alleviate throat irritation, freshen breath, and
relieve oral discomfort.

>

ui

a

In Modern Era:
Toothpaste and mouthwash are essential components of
oral hygiene routines.

TOOTHPASTE

1, Cleaning Agent: Toothpaste contains abrasives like
calcium carbonate or hydrated silica, which help
scrub away food Particles and plaque from the teeth
and gums.

2, Fluoride Content: Most toothpaste formulations
include fluoride, a mineral that helps strengthen
tooth enamel and prevent tooth decay.

----- PAGE 244 -----
230

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana ° Chapter 9

3. Antibacterial Properties: Some toothpaste varieties
contain antibacterial agents like triclosan or essential
oils to help reduce harmful bacteria in the mouth.

4. Flavoring and Sweeteners: Toothpaste often includes
flavoring agents like mint or fruit extracts to
improve taste and encourage regular brushing.
Sweeteners may also be added to enhance the
overall experience.

5. Consistency: Toothpaste comes in various forms
such as gel, paste, or powder, catering to individual
preferences.

MOUuTHWASH

1. Antiseptic Properties: Mouthwash typically contains
antiseptic ingredients like chlorhexidine or
cetylpyridinium chloride, which kill bacteria and
reduce plaque formation.

2. Fresh Breath: Many people use mouthwash as a
quick way to freshen their breath, especially after
meals or before social interactions.

3. Prevention of Gum Disease: Regular use of
mouthwash can help prevent gum disease by
reducing the buildup of bacteria along the gum line.

4. Alcohol Content: Some mouthwash formulations
contain alcohol, which can have a drying effect on
the mouth. This may not be suitable for individuals
with dry mouth conditions.

5. Flavoring and Coloring: Mouthwash often includes
flavoring agents like mint or eucalyptus for a
refreshing taste. Coloring agents may also be added
for aesthetic purposes.

9.2 Nasya Kalpana

Nasya therapy is a therapeutic procedure in Ayurveda

where medicinal substances are administered through

the nasal passage. It is a part of Panchakarma therapy

aimed at balancing the body and mind. Nasya

therapy has been practiced since ancient times as a

comprehensive approach to promoting health and

treating various diseases.

Definition:

arentataest at eat eat dha sh TAA
(Su.Chi. 40/21)

Tet ad Hea ettatarmea water |

Tet Tere eA AGA Ae (Sha. S.U. 8/1)

The term “nasya” is used to refer to those medicinal

substances that are administered through the nasal

passage. The process related to nasya is called “nasya

karma.” The herbal formulations used for nasya

karma are known as “nasya kalpana” or “nasa kalpa,”
emphasizing their administration through the nostrils,

Therapeutic effect of medication through nasya karma
therapy:

Tet: oH a odie fhe vrata |

BR fe fora aren aa ae eae eft ALI! (Cha.Si. 9/88)
Nasya karma is recommended in head disorders
according to the scriptures because the nasal passage
serves as the gateway to the head. In this way,
administering medicine through the nose spreads it into
the head and helps in treating the disease.

Nasya therapy is essential because it directly targets
the region up to the brain through the nasal passage,
which Ayurvedic texts consider as the gateway to the
head. The use of Nasya therapy is recommended to
deliver medicinal substances directly along this direct
pathway, reaching therapeutic agents into the upper
body, especially the head and neck areas. It is often
recommended for conditions affecting the head, such
as sinusitis, headache, migraine, neurological disorders,
and disorders of sensitive organs.

Synonyms for Nasya karma include:

* Shiroroga chikitsa

* Shirah shodhana

’

“ Murdha virechana

oe

* Nasa prachardhana
“ Navana
Types:
Teal feet uit ted Ged aa |
(Sha. S.U., 8/2)
2 types:
1. Rechana Nasya
2. Sneha Nasya
e Rehchana nasya includes Pradhamana nasya and
Aypisadan Nasya.
e Sneha Nasya
Pratimarsha Nasya.
Nashya Matra:

wea wart forge: weferiiuegata-gar: wera wnat, fete
Ule:, qdtar wforgth:, saat war geraeh water: 11

(Su.Chi., 40/28)

includes: Marsha and

1. Prathama Matra: — 8 Bindu
2. Shukti Matra: - 32 Bindu
3. Paani Shukti Matra: — 64 Bindu

These three measures should be taken as per the capacity.
The patient should not swallow Snehana Nasya because

et peters

----- PAGE 245 -----
Chapter 9 * Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

it can make the throat sticky and may enter the mouth
To avoid discomfort, it should be spit out.
BENEFITS

1. Clears nasal congestion: Removes mucus, toxins, and
5 . : 5 “i U
provides relief from sinus issues.

N

. Improves respiratory health: Strengthens
respiratory system, reduces swelling.

the

3. Enhances mental clarity: Balances doshas, enhances
cognitive function. ;

4. Provides relief from headaches and migraines: Reduces
pain, calms the nervous system.

5. Supports sinus health: Promotes drainage, prevents
infections.

6. Detoxification and rejuvenation: Eliminates toxins,
revitalizes the body.

Pashyat Karma :

(Su.S.Chi., 40/29-30)
. Perform steam inhalation for throat and head.
. Avoid smoking.
. Follow a non-irritating diet and lifestyle.

em OO NM Re

. Avoid excessive exposure to smoke, oily substances,
and heat.

. Avoid alcohol and excessive fluid intake.
6. Refrain from excessive head baths, overeating,

anger, ete

Samyaka Yoga Lakshana:

aad Prat ant Garratt |

faentag: Ufehttgaron HA: Fa!

oOo

(Su.Chi., 40/33)
1. fereat ea — Lightness of the head.
2. Fawaer waterty — Comfortable sleep and awakening.
3. facmniugta: — Alleviation of disorders.
4. stearon zfex — Purity of senses.

5. 4A: Way — Mental happiness.
Atiyoga Lakshana of Nasya Karma:
amu: forrat Tedgaraae: |
Maui yestfaharad wat Cara ||
(Su.Chi., 40/34)
1. ath Wah: — Phlegm secretion.
2. feat eat — Heaviness of the head.
3. $fea fawa: — Disturbance of the senses.

AYURVEDIC FORMULATIONS USED FOR NASAL THERAPY
(Nasya Karma)

1. Powders (Churna):

¢ Example: Brahmi Churna — Brahmi powder is
prepared by mixing it with a suitable liquid
medium to form a paste or suspension for
nasal administration. It is used to enhance
cognitive function, promote mental clarity, and
reduce stress.

2. Oils (Taila):

¢ Example: Anu Taila — Anu Taila is an herbal oil
preparation containing specific herbs like Tila
Taila (Sesame oil), Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri),
Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis), and
Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra). Anu Taila is
commonly used in Nasya Karma to support sinus
health, reduce nasal congestion, and improve
mental well-being.

3. Juices (Svarasa):

e Example: Arka Svarasa — Arka is a type of juice
obtained by extracting fresh parts of plants. For
Nasya Karma, Arka Svarasa prepared from herbs
like Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum), Adraka (Zingiber
officinale), or Neem (Azadirachta indica) can be
used. Arka Svarasa is beneficial for clearing nasal
passages, reducing inflammation, and enhancing
immune functions.

4. Distillates (Arka):

e Example: Ajavaina Arka — Arka is a distillate
obtained through the distillation process.
Ajavaina Arka, derived from Ajavaina seeds
(Trachyspermum ammi), is commonly used
in Nasya Karma. It helps in relieving nasal
congestion, promoting sinus drainage, and
alleviating respiratory issues when administered
through the nasal route.

9.3 Karna Kalpana

Karna Kalpana is an important Ayurvedic therapeutic
method focused on the health and treatment of ear
disorders. It is an ancient practice aimed at diagnosing
and treating ear-related ailments. Various medicinal
substances are used in Karna Kalpana, specially
prepared and administered into the ears. The primary
objectives of this method are to improve the structure
and function of the ears, prevent infections, and enhance
hearing ability.

Karna Kalpana predominantly utilizes medicated
oils or ghee, prepared through specific processes. It
encompasses several techniques such as Karna purna
(oil filling), Karna prakshalana (ear cleaning), and

—_— ——

‘

----- PAGE 246 -----
232

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

Karna dhupana (ear fumigation). The selection of these
techniques depends on the nature and severity of the ear
condition. According to Ayurveda, Karna K
only benefits local ear diseases but
impact on other parts of the body by maintaining the
balance of Tridoshas (Vata, Pitta, Kapha).

This method is used to treat v

alpana not
also has a positive

atious ear disorders
such as Karna shula (ear pain), Karna naada (sounds
in the ear), Badhirata (deafness), and Karna srava
(ear discharge). Karna Kalpana not only aids in the
treatment of diseases, but also plays a crucial role in
maintaining ear health and preventing future ailments.
The medicines used in Karna Kalpana include various
herbs and mineral substances such as Bilva, Licorice,
Triphala, Shankha Bhasma, and various types of oils
like sesame oil and mustard oil, chosen based on the
patient’s constitution and the condition of the disease.

The process of Karna Kalpana requires caution and skill
and should only be performed by trained Ayurvedic
practitioners. During this therapy, the patient is seated
in a specific posture, and the medicine is carefully
administered into the ear. In conclusion, Karna Kalpana
is an extremely significant and effective Ayurvedic
therapeutic method for the health and treatment of ear
disorders, harmoniously blending ancient wisdom with
modern medical science, remaining as relevant today as
it was centuries ago.

NEED FOR KARNAKALPANA

Ears play a crucial role in our sensitive perception and
balance, essential for overall well-being. To alleviate
various ear conditions such as infections, earwax
buildup, swelling, itching, and reduced hearing ability,
Karna kalpana becomes necessary. By directly delivering
medicinal compounds into the ears, Karnakalpana
provides targeted relief and supports the natural
healing processes of ear structures.

BENEFITS OF KARNAKALPANA

se

* Reduces pain, swelling, and discharge with its anti-
inflammatory and anti-microbial properties.

% Softens and dissolves earwax, making it easier to

remove and improving ear cleanliness.

+ Manages conditions like Otitis externa by reducing
swelling and discomfort.

>

Alleviates itching, burning sensation, and dryness in
the ears.

Enhances hearing ability.
Supports overall ear health by treating specific condi-

tions, promoting ear cleanliness, and preventing
future issues.

Bd

>

DOSAGE FORMS IN AYURVEDA
1. Taila:

e Example: Mullein Oil (Verbascum thapsus) _
Mullein oil is commonly used in ear oiling for
its soothing and anti-inflammatory properties. |,
helps alleviate ear pain, swelling, and discomfort
associated with various ear conditions.

2. Ghrita:

¢ Example: Bilva Ghrita — Bilva Ghrita is prepared
from the leaves of Aegle marmelos and medicinal]
ghee. It is used in ear oiling to treat ear infections,
reduce swelling, and promote the treatment of ear
canal. Bilva Ghrita also helps in soothing ear pain
and discomfort.

| 9.4 Akshi Kalpana

Akshi Kalpana is a therapeutic procedure in Ayurveda
aimed at enhancing eye health, treating eye-related
diseases, and maintaining optimal vision function,
It involves the preparation and use of various herbal
substances in different forms to support overall eye care.
Akshi Kalpana is rooted in ancient Ayurvedic Principles
and is considered an integral part of comprehensive
eye care,

Geurenisesrt Wit: caeiaquretd | (Sha. $.U. 13/1)

Ou B WN 3

2.

* According to Acharya Sushruta:
TUT Gens Heh SPSS |
wa datafenrhs aot cared Frater B11 (Su, 19/4)

“ Samaavastha Hetu Kriya Kalpa: Ashchyotana, Pindi,
Seka and Vidalaka.

* Pakvaavstha Hetu Kriya Kalpa: Tarpana, Anjana and
Putapaka.

NEED FOR AKSHI KALPANA

Eyes are crucial sensory organs responsible for vision
and experiencing the world around us. However,
prolonged screen exposure, environmental pollutants,
stress, and age-related changes can lead to discomfort,
strain, and vision problems. To alleviate these issues
and maintain eye health and well-being, Akshi
Kalpana becomes essential. By using natural and gentle

----- PAGE 247 -----
Chapter 9 * Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

ingredients, Akshi Kalpana nourishes, protects, and
provides therapeutic support to the eyes.

BENEFITS OF AKSHI KALPANA

1. Reducing Eye Strain: Akshi Kalpana can help reduce
eye strain caused by prolonged screen exposure,
reading, or exposure to bright light. Its soothing
and cooling properties help relax the eye muscles
and alleviate strain.

Improving Vision; Regular use of Akshi Kalpana
nourishes eye tissues, enhances blood circulation,
and promotes eye health, thereby supporting
sharpness and clarity of vision. Certain components
of Akshi Kalpana are known for their vision-
enhancing properties.

La

. Relief from Dry Eyes: Dry eye syndrome is a common
condition characterized by inadequate tear
production or poor tear quality. Akshi Kalpana’‘s use
of moisturizing and lubricating agents helps relieve
dryness, irritation, and discomfort in the eyes.

w

. Reducing Eye Inflammation: Conditions like conjunc-
tivitis (pink eye) or eyelid swelling (blepharitis)
can cause redness, swelling, and discomfort in
the eyes. Components in Akshi Kalpana with
anti-inflammatory properties aid in calming
inflammation and enhancing treatment.

. Preventing Eye Infections: Some ingredients used
in Akshi Kalpana possess antimicrobial and
antibacterial properties, helping protect the eyes
from infections and reducing the risk of bacterial or
viral eye conditions.

. Supporting Overall Eye Health: Akshi Kalpana not
only addresses specific eye issues but also enhances
overall eye health and well-being. Regular use of
these practices can maintain the integrity of eye
structures, protect against age-related changes, and
prevent eye diseases.

1. Ashchyotana:

>

uw

a

Bawah ares ga A AT
(Sha. $.U., 13/12)

Applying medicinal drops into open eyes from a height
of two finger widths is known as Ashchyotana. This
should only be done during the daytime and not at
night. In cold weather, the medicinal eye drops should
be warmed, whereas in hot weather, they should be
cooled. These principles apply universally to ensure
safe and effective use of medicinal eye drops.

% Ashchyotana Prayoga Kala:
Ashchyotana should never be performed at night
because it is considered inappropriate timing. It should

233
be done at any time during the day or when there is
discomfort in the eyes,
statvatrteh cred Frome a weet! (Sha. $.U. 13/12)

* All types of eye drops should be administered in
quantities up to 100 drops only.

* Adrop is measured as the time taken to blink, rotate
the hand around the knee, or pronounce a long
syllable.

Types, Kala, Matra of Ashchyotana

TSA Aer aUBt ot farea: Safes aT

AVANT Vale Fiesta gf Wat | (Su.U. 18/45)

LS

‘ile Snehana Aprahna Kala 10 drops
2, Ropana MadhyahnaKala  12drops_
3. Lekhana Puravahna Kala 7 or 8 drops

“+ Ashchyotana Dravya according to Dosha:
ord faa cor fare fit weet |
frrntoreet a cath aarp fer!
(Sha. $.U. 13/15)

Vataja Netra Roga Tikta- Snigdha Dravya
|Pittaja Netra Roga  Madhura- Shitala Dravya
Kaphaja Netra Roga __‘Tikta- Ushna- Ruksha Dravya

1
28
Examples:

1. Sarva Abhishyanda Nashaka : Triphala Svarasa or

Kashaya.

2. Rakta pitta vata janaya netra pida : Stri Stanya.

3. Vata rakta janya pida : Kshira sarpi or Ghrita.
2. Seka
Feed Genes: Bahra fer: |
iterates AAS WAG SaTeT

(Sha. $.U., 13/2)

Injecting a liquid substance into the eyes from a height
of four fingers is called Seka in Ayurveda (a fine stream
or trickle).
“ Types According to Dosha:
Mate Sleat arat Teh fet a TTT: |

Sarg ath Hee ATS eA I
(Sha. S.U., 13/3)

ak Snehana Vata
oF Ropana Pitta, Rakta
3. Lekhana Kapha

----- PAGE 248 -----
ae PSAs

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter Q

According to Matra Kala:
aaa fhe: ard: Vat Aaradfr
(Sha. S.U., 13/4)

| srNo | types | MaatraKala |

a Snehana 600
2. Ropana 400
Ss Lekhana 300

* Prayoga Kala:
ade feed Het wat aratach re |

(Sha. S.U., 13/5)
It should ideally be done during the day time, but in
emergency situations, it can also be done at night.
Example:

1. A paste is prepared by mixing powders of lac,
honey, manjishtha, lodhra, and pundarika with cold
water, filtering it. This mixture is used for Seka and
is beneficial in the treatment of bleeding disorders.

2. Sabara and ghee-fried honey, mixed in equal
proportions, boiled in goat's milk, prepared
as a powder, is used for Seka in the treatment
of Pittabhishyanda (bleeding disorders) and
inflamma-tory eye diseases.

3. Tarpana
Bq aur afar tag htt WAI (Sha. S.U. 13/38)
“Tarpana” refers to the Ayurvedic practice of nourishing
and satisfying the eyes for their health and well-being.
“ Tarpana Yogaya:
aga ugh a aa plecmacr
fatten rereeaaeh: |
enamramarat Ih aratagaa: |

(Sha. S.U., 13/38-40)
% Procedure:
STENT ora fata UTS CT |
Wag gaaesa facia Gates: 1
AAA Waa AUT aC AT
Pamrataaenter aranaenaee fe
Waster Aa Aa Sates: |

(Sha. S.U., 13/42-45)
The patient is asked to lie straight on a cot in a place
free from wind, sunlight, and dust. Around the eyes, a
circular wall about an inch high is made using a paste of

lentils (masura dala). This wall is filled with lukewarm

ghee or clarified butter, which envelops the closed

eyelids. Then, the patient is instructed to slowly open

their eyes.

4 Prayoga Kala and Matra:

raed a Gat cerarqeateta asta! (A.H.Su. 24/101)

i ae
alg

Vataja Netra Roga Daily

2. Pittaja and Rakhtaja Netra After 1 day
Roga

3. Kaphaja Netra Roga After 2 days

Uae at me asta ugie ead WA! (Su.U. 18/12)
Tarpana should be performed until satisfaction is
achieved, whether it be for one day, three days, five
days, or however many days necessary.

TAG ATSATATOT Bet FT: U1

eS Hh UR Haase fet

Uae SB Veg HOT UT ala ATA

weet arenig arte fe qa

(Sha. S.U., 13/45-47)

| Sr.No. | __Adhishthana Gata Roga

1. Vartamgata Roga 100
2 Sandhigata Roga S00
3}, Shuklagata Roga 600
4. Krishnagata Roga 700
S: Drishtigata Roga 800
6. Adhimantha 1000

According to Matra:

| stNo | Dosha | Matra Kala |
als Vataja 1000
2 Kaphaja 500

“> Samyaka Tarpana Lakshana:
Garrats a Ayre autateay |
Patraitntas frarcrrata a 11
(Sha. S.U., 13/50)
It promotes deep sleep, easy awakening, cleanliness and

sparkle of the eyes, relief from diseases, and enhances
the efficiency of eye functions.

« Aatitarpana Lakshana:

Aa Te Te era Aa erefrahary

1. Excessive Tears

(Sha. $.U., 13/51)

2. Heaviness (Guru)
3. Restlessness (Snigdha)

----- PAGE 249 -----
Chapter 9 * Aushaghi Prayoga Marga

~ Hina Tarpana Lakshana:
qeneiacd Bt Aa ATTA |

(Sha. S.U., 13/51)
1. Dry
2, Excessive Tears
3. Aggravating the root cause of the disease.
4, Putapaka
After applying Sneha (Oleation therapy) treatments like
Tarpana, the eyes also become relaxed and rejuvenated
similar to how the body feels relaxed and rejuvenated
after Sneha therapy. Therefore, after Tarpana treatment,
Netra Putapaka should be applied in diseases suitable
for Tarpana to support visual function. Netra Putapaka
should be used in those diseases when the proper
alignment of Tarpana therapy is achieved.

Procedure:

zaront facaara @ Fao Sat Ae: 11
Gena A TRA Yelarga Fa:

gene Fiea: Saleen: 1!
(Sha. $.U., 13/53-55)

This paste is prepared by mixing 2 parts ofboneless meat,
1 part liquid substance, and 1 part fermented liquid
substance. It is wrapped in leaves and packed in clay.
Exposed to heat, once dried, the clay layer is removed,
and juice is extracted from lime. This juice is used for
the eyes according to the described “Tarpana Kalpa”.
“ Types:
Bret carga Taste a Fra
fea: ferret sferseres Rerereata fe ere:

scfareifirat: ft

(Sha. S.U., 13/56-56%)
| sr.no. | Types |

ih Snehana__ Aati Ruksha Netra 200

2, Roapana __—rishtt bala, Pitta- Rakta 100
Netra Roga

3. Lekhana _— Snigdha Netra 300

PARIHARA VISHAYA AND KALA

“Double the number of days used for
Putapaka, practice Yantrena (appropria
lifestyle), which means consuming Pathya
foods) and avoiding Apathya (harmful foods). After
performing Tarpana on the eyes, avoid looking at objects
with intense light like fire, sun, etc., gaze towards the sky,

Tarpana and
te diet and
(beneficial

and refrain from looking at shiny objects. Additionally,
protect the eyes from wind.”
5. Vidalaka
feetetent afectat 43 wenfaatsia: 11
TEI Ara UR Hactaraearad |

(Sha. $.U., 13/30)
“Vidalaka is an external paste applied on the eyelids,
but not on the eyelashes. The quantity and method
of applying Vidalaka are similar to that of applying
Mukhalepa (facial paste).”
6. Pindi
fawdt mater Wim aead Ugaete: U1
Fahrerearar at aureata Fraead |

(Sha. $.U., 13/21)
“Pindi or Kavalika is a poultice placed on the eyes by
wrapping the substance in cloth. It is beneficial for eye
injuries and eye ulcers.
AKSHI KALPANA — DOSAGE FORMS USED IN AYURVEDA

(a) Taila:

1. Chandanadi Taila: This oil is prepared from
sandalwood, vetiver, usheer, and other cooling
substances. It is used to reduce eye burning,
inflammation, and infections. This oil provides
soothing to the eyes and enhances eye vision.

2. Anjana Taila: Anjana Taila is specifically formulated

for the eyes. It contains ingredients like triphala,
yashtimadhu, and other medicinal herbs. This oil is
used for eye cleansing, infection control, and vision
improvement.
Nilotpalaadi Taila: Nilotpalaadi Taila is made from
blue lotus, vetiver, sandalwood, and other cooling
substances. It helps in reducing eye heat, burning
sensation, and swelling. It is particularly used im
pitta-related eye disorders.

4. Narayana Taila: Narayan Taila is a versatile oil used
for various types of eye disorders. It strengthens
the eye muscles, enhances blood circulation, and
improves vision.

(b) Ghrita:

1. Triphala Ghrita: Triphala Ghrita is considered highly
beneficial for eye health. It is made from triphala
(amalaki, haritaki, and bibhitaki) and cow’s ghee.
It is used to alleviate eye fatigue, dryness, and
redness. It also aids in improving vision.

2, Jivantyadi Ghrita: This ghee is prepared from jivant,
shatavari, licorice, and other medicinal ingredients.
It is used in conditions like dry eyes, eye
inflammation (conjunctivitis), and weak eyesight.

fo

----- PAGE 250 -----
Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9
ama Ho Cen

236

3. Mahatriphaladi Ghrita: This is a special type of
ghee that includes triphala along with many other
medicinal herbs. Itis used in the treatment of serious
eye conditions like cataract (timira), night blindness
(rataundhi), and other chronic eye diseases.

4, Patoladi Ghrita; Patoladi Ghrita contains patola
leaves, neem, turmeric, and other herbs. This ghee
is beneficial for eye infections, eye swelling, and
pitta-related eye disorders.

5. Durvaadi Ghrita: Durvaadi Ghrita is made from
durva grass (couch grass), triphala, and other
cooling substances. It helps in reducing eye burning,
redness, and inflammation, especially useful in eye
disorders aggravated by heat.

| 9.5 Tvak Kalpana

Tvak Kalpana is a specific Ayurvedic medicinal
preparation method that focuses on the health and
beauty of the skin. It involves the formulation and use
of medicinal substances aimed at addressing specific
skin concerns and enhancing overall skin health. Tvak
Kalpana utilizes Ayurvedic principles to nourish and
rejuvenate the skin, providing natural solutions for
skin care.

NEED FOR TVAK KALPANA

The skin is the largest organ of the body and plays
a crucial role in protecting against environmental
stressors, regulating body temperature, and maintaining
overall health. However, factors such as pollution, sun
exposure, hormonal imbalances, stress, and aging can
affect skin health, leading to issues like acne, dryness,
pigmentation, wrinkles, and premature aging. Tvak
Kalpana becomes essential to address these concerns
and restore the skin’s natural balance, vitality, and
radiance.

BENEFITS OF TVAK KALPANA

1. Providing Nutrition and Moisture: Tvak Kalpana
formulations are rich in natural ingredients that
deeply nourish and hydrate the skin, replenishing
moisture and restoring its natural elasticity. These
formulations help prevent dryness, itching, and
roughness, leaving the skin soft, smooth, and
radiant.

2. Balancing Oil Production; For individuals with oily or
acne-prone skin, Tvak Kalpana formulations help
regulate sebum production, reduce excess oiliness,
and prevent clogged pores. This helps control acne
breakouts, reduce shine, and promote a clearer
complexion.

3, Soothing and Calming: Tvak Kalpana formulations
contain ingredients with soothing and calming
properties that help reduce skin irritation, redness,
and inflammation. These formulations are beneficial]
for sensitive skin types and conditions such as
eczema, rosacea, and dermatitis.

4, Brightening and Evening Skin Tone: Some Tvak
Kalpana formulations are crafted with ingredients
known for their brightening and skin tone-evening
properties. These formulations | help reduce the
appearance of dark spots, pigmentation, and
uneven skin tone, resulting in a brighter and more
uniform complexion.

5. Anti-Aging and Rejuvenation: Tvak Kalpana for-
mulations contain powerful antioxidants, vitamins,
and minerals that help combat free radical damage,
oxidative stress, and signs of aging. Regular use of
these formulations reduces the appearance of fine
lines, wrinkles, and age spots, promoting a youthful
and rejuvenated skin.

6. Promoting Overall Skin Health: Tvak Kalpana not only
addresses specific skin concerns but also enhances
overall skin health and vitality. By supporting the
skin’s natural functions, these formulations help
maintain its integrity, resilience, and youthful glow.

IN AYURVEDA—DOSAGE FORMS USED IN TVAK KALPANA
1. Lepa:
“> Definition:
gerng frente weh at Asa Wal
ae yea deca Spe aT: 1

(Dravyaguna Vigy.U. Yadavaji)
For external application on the body, fresh (recently
extracted-wet) or dry plants should be washed with
water and finely ground with liquids such as water on
a grinding stone. Dry plants should be pounded in a
mortar and pestle and sieved through a cloth to obtaina
fine powder. After that, according to the specified liquids
(water, juice, decoction, cold infusion, milk, buttermilk,
cow urine, kanji, alcohol, and oil, etc.), the plants should
be ground into a fine paste on the grinding stone. This
mixture, which is similar to a loose paste suitable for
application on the body, is called “Lepa Kalka” (paste
preparation).
“ Synonyms:
ares a ares feret eras SA (Sha. $.U., 11/1)
Aalepan, Lepa, Lepana.
* Classification of Lepa:

a fatag:— We: WeE:, BT |
(Su.Su., 18/6)

----- PAGE 251 -----
Chapter 9 * Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

ns

3. Pralepa —Shita Rakta- Pitta Vikriti
2. Pradeha —-Ushna Kapha and Vata
3. Aalepa Anushana Shita Samanya

aa at HteTs:

FATIMA ATS TTT: |
si. No:!| ses Ve pa ee

{._- etS®1e1F Doshaghana
2. fawricid Vishghana
3, qudehety Vranyakar

(Sha. $.U., 11/2)

One fourth Part of Angula
One third part of Angula
Half of Angula

Sneha Dravya Matra in Lepa:
SEU F Hel EAA Warr
(Su.Su. 18/10)

| srNo. | Dosha__| Sneha Matra

1. Vataja One fourth Part of Kalka
2 Pittaja One sixth part of Kalka
Bs Kaphaja One Eight Part of Kalka

PRECAUTIONS FOR THE USE OF LEPA

1, Do not use old lepa: The lepa prepared the previous
day should not be applied the next day.

Nn

. Sequential use: A second lepa should not be applied
without removing the first one. The lepa once
applied and removed should not be reused.

. Layers and drying: Depending on the purpose,
another lepa should be applied before the first one
dries, or it should be allowed to remain on even
after drying. In disorders related to blood and bile
and in wound inflammation, the lepa should be
removed before it dries and a fresh lepa should be
applied.

Injury and pain: In cases of injury and vata-related

pain, the applied lepa should be allowed to remain

even after it dries. :

. Avoid lepa at night: Lepa should not be applied at
night because its cooling effect prevents the release
of retained heat in the area, which can worsen the
disorder or lead to other diseases.

. Thickness of lepa: According to Maharshi Sushruta,
the thickness of the lepa should be equivalent to the
thickness of buffalo leather.

Example
1. Chandanadi Lepa: A paste made from sandalwood

and other ingredients such as turmeric, neem, and

manjishtha. Chandanadi Lepa is used for its cooling

w

=

uw

c=)

and soothing properties to alleviate skin irritation,
inflammation, and acne.

2, Kumkumadi Pralepa: A cream formulation containing,
Kumkumadi oil (an oil preparation) with saffron
and other skin-nourishing ingredients. Kumkumadi
Pralepa is renowned for its ability to brighten
the skin, reduce pigmentation, and promote a
radiant glow.

3. Jatyadi Alepa: An ointment made from Jatyadi oil
(a medicinal oil) and other ingredients such as
jatamansi and manjishtha. Jatyadi Alepa is used for
its antibacterial and wound-healing properties to
treat wounds, cuts, burns, and skin infections.

4. Yashtimadhu Pradeha: A powder made from the
root of Yashtimadhu (licorice) mixed with honey or
ghee. Yashtimadhu Pradeha is applied externally
to soothe skin inflammation, reduce redness, and
promote healing in conditions such as eczema and
psoriasis.

2. MALAHARA

“ Introduction:

The concept of Malahara Kalpana was first mentioned
in Ayurvedic pharmacology by Yogaratnakara. The
Sanskrit word ‘Malahara’ signifies the removal of debris,
waste products, and dead tissue from wounds, making
the term Malahara more appropriate and specific. In
modern pharmacology, it is very similar to ointment.

“ Method:

1. Take the base ingredients for the Malahara (such
as oil, ghee, wax, vaseline, gandhak, etc.) in the
specified quantities.

2. Heat the oils and other base ingredients ina stainless
steel pot.

3. After melting, strain the mixture througha fine cloth.

4, Add the prescribed powders such as camphor,
tuttha (copper sulfate), sulphur, sindura (vermilion),
manyal, alum, etc., and mix thoroughly with a
spatula.

5. Strain the mixture again through a cloth and store it
in a glass container in a cool place.

6. Apply to wounds as needed.

Uses
e Vrana Shodhana
e Vrana Ropana
e Vidradhi
e Arsha
e Tvak Vikara
e Shira shula
e Kati Shula

----- PAGE 252 -----
238

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapler 9

NoTE: Malahara Kalpana is an important component of
Ayurvedic medicine, used in the treatment of various
types of wounds and pain.

Example: Shalmali Malahara - Shalmali bark powder

mixed with water or herbal decoctions. Shalmali

Malahara is applied locally to reduce swelling, soothe

skin irritation, and promote wound healing.

3. UPANAHA

Upanaha is an important external application in

traditional medical systems, known in the Greek

system as a poultice. Detailed descriptions of Upanaha

are available in Sushruta Samhita under the context of

sudation therapy.

Ingredients

* Base Ingredients: Sesame oil, ghee, radish, carom
seeds, castor leaves, mustard seeds, ginger.

* Active Ingredients: Turmeric, garlic, neem leaves, rock
salt, jaggery, lime.

These ingredients are used in the preparation of

Upanaha to aid in therapeutic applications related to

sweating therapies.

“+ General Method

- Gather all the necessary ingredients for Upanaha.

any

2. Heat sesame oil and ghee.

3. Finely grind all other ingredients and mix them into
the warm sesame oil and ghee.

4. Cook this mixture until it becomes thick and ready
to be applied as a poultice.

5. Allow it to cool down and store it in a clean
container.

~ Application Method

1. Apply the prepared Upanaha poultice to the
affected area.

2. Cover it with a cloth to keep it in place.

3. Leave it on for some time to allow it to penetrate
the skin well and exhibit its therapeutic properties.

4. After the specified time period, wash it off with
clean water.

“ According to Sushruta Samhita

1. Apply a tolerably warm poultice prepared from
finely powdered herbs combined with a plentiful
quantity of salt and sneha (oleaginous substances)
in Kanji (fermented gruel). This helps in inducing
sweating after applying Upanaha.

2. Bind preparations like Kakolyadi, Eladi, Surasadi
Gana, paste of Sesame, Mustard, and Tila, Khichadi,
Khira, Lapsi, Veshvara, or Salvana on a clean cloth,
apply them on the body, and perform sweating.

Fae! (Su.Chi. 32/12)

Method:

1. Take equal parts of crushed flaxseed (Alasi/Tisi)
powder and barley or wheat flour (atta). Mix it wel]
in water, milk, Kanji (fermented gruel), cow urine,
or herbal juices.

2. Add turmeric powder (Haridra) and Dashanga
Lepa powder to this mixture along with a little
ghee. Cook it over a fire.

3. When it forms a thick paste like lapsi (porridge),
spread it thickly on a thick cloth.

4. Place this cloth-covered paste upside down on a
larger cloth and apply it hot on the swollen and
unripe wounds. This is called Upanaha.

5. In this method, the medicine of hot, cloth-covered
paste of Upanaha remains in both types of thick
cloth and in the middle.

Useful:

1. Swallowing

2. Pain

3. Joint Pain

4. Injury

5. Gout

6. Skin Diseases.

Note: The concept of Upanaha is an effective Ayurvedic
treatment method documented in the Sushruta
Samhita, which highlights its importance and
effectiveness in treating conditions like swelling,
pain, and various other ailments. Here’s an example:

Example: Eladi Upanaha - Eladi oil (a formulation

of oils) combined with substances like cardamom

and cinnamon, prepared into medicinal strips. Eladi

Upanaha is used for treating skin conditions such as

eczema, itching, and allergic reactions by providing

local nourishment and support.

This method illustrates how Upanaha utilizes local

applications to address specific skin conditions

effectively, as described in the Sushruta Samhita.

4. ABHYANAGA
Introduction:
Tvak Abhyanga is indeed a significant Ayurvedic
therapy that involves the application of oil through

massage on the entire body’s skin. It not only enhances
physical health, but also helps in balancing Vata dosha

----- PAGE 253 -----
“Chapter 9 + Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

and revitalizing the body. Regular Tvak Abhyanga is
believed to promote overall rejuvenation and emotional
balance according to Ayurveda,

Ingredients Used:
e Tila Taila
e Nariyala Taila
e Sarshapa Taila

e Ghrita

e Aushadhiya Taila
Procedure:

. Cleanse the body thoroughly and sitina comfortable
position.

Choose an appropriate oil based on the individual’s
needs and dosha (Vata, Pitta, Kapha).

. Gently warm the oil to ensure it penetrates the skin
effectively.

Begin applying the oil on the head and massage
gently in circular motions.

Use light strokes to massage the oil onto the face
and neck.

—

i)

ie)

-

gi

a

. Apply oil all over the body and massage with
circular motions. Cover each limb while massaging
towards the heart.

St

Allow the oil to remain on the body for some time
after the massage, then take a warm shower with
mild water.

. Tvak Abhyanga not only nourishes the skin but also
helps in balancing the doshas and promoting overall
well-being according to Ayurvedic principles.

fos}

Benefits:
1. It nourishes the skin deeply, making it soft and
radiant.

2. It enhances blood circulation and improves oxygen
supply to the body’s tissues.

3. It reduces stress and fatigue, promoting
mental peace.

4. Ithelps balance Vata dosha.

, It strengthens joints and muscles, improving their
flexibility.

. It enhances the quality of sleep, promoting deep
and restful sleep.

o1

a

Conclusion

Tvak Abhyanga is an ancient Ayurvedic practice that is
highly beneficial for both the body and mind. Regular
Abhyanga not only improves physical health but also
maintains mental and emotional balance. This practice
leads individuals towards overall health and well-being.
Example: Bhringaraja Abhyanga - Massage using
Bhringaraja oil infused with Bhringaraj and other herbs.
Bhringaraja Abhyanga is used to nourish and strengthen

239

the skin, improve blood circulation, and enhance overall
skin health.

5. UDVARTHANAM
Introduction:
Udvarthanam is indeed a significant therapy in
Ayurveda, involving the application of medicinal
powders for massage. It aims to expel toxins, improve
blood circulation, and nourish the skin. This therapy is
well-documented in ancient Ayurvedic texts and forms
an integral part of Panchakarma treatments.
Procedure:
1. Cleanse the body thoroughly before Udvartanam.
2. Choose appropriate medicinal powder based on the
individual’s needs and dosha (Vata, Pitta, Kapha).
3. Mix the medicinal powder with sesame oil to make
a paste. Apply this paste on the body and massage
in circular motions, always massaging towards
the heart.
4. After the massage, leave the paste on the body for
some time and then bathe with warm water.
“> Therapeutic use:
Seat HAR Hee: Wire|
Renters eametat WI (A.H.Su. 2/15)
1. Kaphahara
2. Medha Vilayana
3. Sthirikarana
4, Tvaka Prasadana
* Conclusion
Udvartanam is an effective Ayurvedic procedure that
assists in maintaining the health of both body and mind.
Its regular use helps to keep the body healthy, clean,
and rejuvenated. Ancient Ayurvedic texts provide
detailed descriptions of this procedure, which validate
its importance and effectiveness.
Example: Triphala Udvartanam involves a mixture made
from Triphala (a combination of three fruits: Amla,
Bibhitaki, and Haritaki) mixed with chickpea flour or
rice flour. Triphala Udvartanam is used to exfoliate the
skin, remove dead cells, eliminate toxins, and improve
the texture and complexion of the skin.

| 9.5.a Shirodhara

INTRODUCTION

Shirodhara is a traditional Ayurvedic therapy that
involves the continuous pouring of warm, herbal oil or
other liquids onto the forehead in a rhythmic and steady
stream. Derived from the Sanskrit words “shiro” (head)
and “dhara” (flow), this therapeutic technique aims

----- PAGE 254 -----
240

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 9

to balance the mind, body, and spirit by harmonizing
the flow of vital energies within the body. Shirodhara
is deeply rooted in Ayurvedic principles and has been
practiced for thousands of years as a holistic approach
to health and well-being.

NEED FOR SHIRODHARA

In today’s fast-paced world, many individuals
experience high levels of stress, anxiety, and mental
fatigue due to various factors such as work pressure,
lifestyle imbalances, and environmental stressors.
Shirodhara becomes necessary to address these issues
and provide/profound relaxation and rejuvenation for
the mind and body. By calming the nervous system,
reducing stress hormones, and promoting a sense of
inner peace, Shirodhara helps individuals cope with
the challenges of moder living and restore balance to
their lives.

BENEFITS OF SHIRODHARA

Stress Reduction: Shirodhara is renowned for its ability
to reduce stress levels and induce a deep state of
relaxation. The continuous flow of warm oil onto the
forehead calms the mind, soothes the nervous system,
and promotes feelings of tranquility and well-being.
Mental Clarity and Focus: Shirodhara helps clear the mind
and enhance mental clarity and focus. By calming the
overactive mind and balancing the neurotransmitters in
the brain, it improves cognitive function, concentration,
and memory.

Improved Sleep Quality: Individuals struggling with
insomnia or sleep disturbances can benefit from
Shirodhara. The therapy helps regulate the sleep-
wake cycle, promote relaxation, and induce restful
sleep, leading to improved sleep quality and overall
well-being.

Relief from Anxiety and Depression: Shirodhara has a
profound effect on mood and emotional balance. It
helps alleviate symptoms of anxiety, depression,
and mood swings by balancing the production of
neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine in
the brain.

Headache and Migraine Relief: The soothing and calming
effect of Shirodhara can help alleviate tension headaches,
migraines, and other types of headaches. It relaxes
the muscles ofthe head and neck, relieves tension, and
reduces the frequency and severity of headaches.
Detoxification and Rejuvenation: Shirodhara is often
used as part of Panchakarma therapy to detoxify and
rejuvenate the body, The warm oil penetrates the skin,
nourishes the tissues, and eliminates toxins, promoting
overall health and vitality.

Shirodhara therapy can be adapted to suit differen,
needs and preferences through various forms:

Taila dhara: In Taila dhara, warm herbal oil is gently
poured onto the forehead in a continuous stream.
This classic form of Shirodhara is deeply relaxing anq
nourishing, promoting mental clarity, and calming the
nervous system.

Takra dhara: Takradhara involves the continuous pouring
of medicated buttermilk (takra) onto the forehead,
Takradhara is particularly beneficial for pacifying Pitta
dosha, reducing inflammation, and soothing sensitive
or irritated skin.

Kshira dhara: Kshiradhara utilizes warm medicated milk
as the pouring liquid. The soothing properties of milk
help to nourish and moisturize the skin, reduce heat
and inflammation, and promote relaxation.

Jala dhara: Jala dhara involves the gentle pouring
of lukewarm water onto the forehead. This form of
Shirodhara is cooling and refreshing, making it suitable
for individuals with excess heat or Pitta imbalances.
Kvatha dhara: Kvatha dhara utilizes herbal decoctions
prepared by boiling medicinal herbs in water. The
herbal-infused water is poured onto the forehead,
delivering the therapeutic benefits of the herbs
directly to the nervous system and promoting balance in
the body.

9.5.8 Abhayanga

SAHACHARAADI TAILA

Reference: AFI, Part I

TITS VAAN Tel TAA STITT |

Ueitt UaTeNteds Urea faretgEsar |

nee x Sl

Tifederecheae: Aaa |

SETA TET ATA OeL Tew Ae) Ue ERAT
(A.H. Chi., 21/66-68)

INGREDIENT USED

Sahachara Pl.

4.800 kg
Bilva Rt./St.Bk 480 gms
Shyonaka Rt./St.Bk 480 gms
Gambhari Rt./St.Bk 480 gms
Patala Rt./St.Bk 480 gms
Agnimantha Rt./St.Bk 480 gms
Shalaparni Pl. 480 gms
Prishniparni Pl. 480 gms
Brihati Pl.

480 gms

----- PAGE 255 -----
Chapter 9 * Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

Drug Name
Kantakarl Pl, 480 ams
Gokshura Pl, 480 ams
Shatavart Rt. Tr, 2,400 kg
Water for Decoction 49.152 |
Reduced to 12.288 |
Ushira Ru 48 gms
Waghranakha Fr 48 gms
Kushtha Rt, 48 gms
Shveta Chandana Ht, Wd, 48 gms
Ela Sd, 48 gms
Sprik Pl. 48 gms
Priyangu Fl 48 gms
Nalika St. Bk. 48 gms
Hrivera Rt. 48 gms
Shalleya Pl. 48 gms
Manjishtha Rt. 48 gms
Jatamans! Rt. 48 gms
Agaru Rt. 48 gms
Devadaru Ht. Wd. 48 gms
Choraka Rz. 48 gms
Mishreya Fr 48 gms
Turushka Exd. 48 gms
Tagara Rt. 48 gms
Go Dugdha = 3.072 |
Tila Taila ol. 3.0721

Procedure:

1. Preparation of Kalka Dravya:
e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Ushira
to Tagara) and grind them into a fine powder

(Churna).

e Addasufficient quantity of water to the powdered

herbs to make a thick kalka (bolus form).

2M

5. Filtering:

* Onee the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

* Tiller the faila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
the solid residues of the herbal paste,

6. Cooling and Storage:

° Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
temperature,

* Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose: 6 -12 gms, Used externally for abhyanga also.
Anupana: Milk and Warm Water.

Therapeutic Indications; Vata Vyadhi, Kampha,
Gulma, Unmada, Pinasa, Yoniroga, Akshepa, Uru-
stambha, Shosha.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Mechanism of Action:

1, Anti-inflammatory: Many ingredients such as
Bilva, Gambhari, and Shatavari are known for
their anti-inflammatory properties, helping in
reducing inflammation associated with Vata Vyadhi
(disorders caused by the imbalance of Vata dosha).

2. Analgesic: Ingredients like Agnimantha and
Gokshura provide pain relief, which is beneficial for
conditions like Kampha (tremors) and Urustambha
(stiffness of the thighs).

3. Nervine Tonic: Herbs like Jatamansi and Shatavari
act as nervine tonics, supporting the nervous
system, which is crucial for treating conditions like
Unmada (psychosis) and Akshepa (convulsions).

4. Antispasmodic: Compounds in the formulation
exhibit antispasmodic effects, alleviating muscle
spasms and cramps.

5. Rejuvenative: Shatavari and other rejuvenative
herbs help in restoring and maintaining health,

. Preparation of Drava Dravya:
e Prepare the kvatha from Sahachara to Shatavari
dravyas as per classical references.
¢ Collect the Go-Dugdha as drava dravya.
. Mixing:
¢ Inaclean vessel, add Tilataila as mention quantity
along with Kalka Dravya and Draya Dravya.

4. Heating:

¢ Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir conti-
nuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking to the
bottom and ensure even cooking.

¢ Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

addressing Shosha (emaciation) and promoting
overall vitality.

PHARMACOKINETICS
Absorption:

e When applied externally, Sahacharadi Taila is
absorbed through the skin. The lipophilic nature
of sesame oil (Tila Taila) facilitates the absorption
of active constituents through the dermal layers.

Distribution:

e Once absorbed, the active compounds are
distributed to various tissues. The use of
massage (abhyanga) enhances the circulation
and distribution of the oil’s constituents, ensuring
deeper penetration into muscles and joints.

----- PAGE 256 -----
242

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter 9

Metabolism:

Excretion:

e The active ingredients are metabolized primarily
in the liver. Herbal components are biotrans-
formed into various metabolites, which then exert
their therapeutic effects.

RESEARCH UPDATES

© Metabolites of the active compounds are excreted
through the kidneys and, to a lesser extent,
through bile and sweat.

- ArticleName
Efficacy of Sahachara Taila
Matra Bastiin Themanagement
of Sandhigata Vata with Special
Refernece to Osteoarthritis

Ravibhushan Sadashiv

Author Name

Sonawane, Associate
Professor, SST Ayurvedic
College, Sangamner, M.H.A.
India

Result. 4 j

The use of Sahachara Taila Matra Basti significantly reduced
Sandhishula by up to 85.847% in Sandhigata Vata, resulting in
an overall relief of 87.84% in all symptoms. This treatment
demonstrated effective pain relief, inflammation reduction,
and nourishing properties without any adverse effects.
Additionally, it showed significant improvement in conditions
like Atop and Graha, highlighting its potency in managing
| Sandhigata Vata.

Standardization of Sahacharadi
Taila — A Compound Formulation
Used in Medicated Enema
Therapy

B. A. Lohith, Department of
PG studies in Panchakarma,
SDM College of Ayurveda
& Hospital Tanniruhalla,
BM Road, Hassan-573201,
Karnataka, India.

Sahacharadi Taila was meticulously. prepared using the
Snehapaka Vidhi method, combining a liter of Tila Taila and
Kvatha in a ratio of 1:4:16. Kalka, consisting of Sahachara,
Nagara, and Devadaru, was mixed with the oils and boiled
gently for five days. After filtration, detailed analyses were
conducted, revealing specific values: refractive index 1.47017,
weight per ml 0.916, acid value 14.233, saponification value
228.050, and unsaponifiable matter percentage 1.665.

Clinical Efficacy of Sahacharadi Tail
Basti In Management of Pcos —A
Case Study

Snehal Akhare, Assistant
Professor, Prasutitantra and
Striroga, SSVP Ayurveda
College, Hatta, Maharashtra.

A 19-year-old female diagnosed with PCOS sought Ayurvedic
treatment after allopathic options failed. Following Ayurvedic
principles, she received Sahacharadi tail basti for 7 days along
with Chandraprabha vati and Aarogyavardhini vati. After two
treatment cycles, her menstrual cycles normalized, and after
6 months, all symptoms disappeared with no PCOS detected
on scan. The treatment effectively managed PCOS without
adverse effects, offering relief during adolescence.

Role of Sahcharadi Taila Matra
Basti in Udavarta Yonivyapada

Dr. Rasika Ravikumar
Magdum, PG Scholar, Dept.
of Panchkarma, LRP Ayurved
Medical College Islampur
Taluka Walwa Dist, Sangali,
Maharashtra.

Basti, endorsed by ancient texts, is key in treating vitiated
Vata Dosha and effectively addresses Udavritta Yonivyapada
(Dysmenorrhoea). This hints at cost-effective Ayurvedic
solutions for this prevalent issue, which can be disruptive
and often requires long-term medication. No adverse effects
were noted during or after therapy. Further studies are
necessary to confirm the efficacy of Ayurvedic formulations,
with suggested modifications. Combined therapy showed
promising results, highlighting the potential to evaluate
Basti’s effectiveness using modern parameters.

9.5.c Ashti Bhagna

MURIVENNA TAILA

Reference:
Ayurveda College, Tiruvanthapuram.

The Pharmacopoeia

INGRIDENTS USED

;

Narikela Ol.
Tamula Lf
Sigru Lf.
Paribhadra Lf.
Kumari Lf.
Karanja Lf.
Buka Pl.

Palandu Bl. 3.072 |
Tandulamb
Cia, Government andulambu Sd. 768 ml
Shatavari Rt. 144 gms
Procedure:
SF : ae alll a herbal ingredients thoroughly and set
Fe can hem aside.
384 ems 2. Prepare plandu svarasas per classical references.
384 gms 3. Extract fresh juice from Aloe vera leaves.
384 ems 4, Prepare the kalka from the Shatavari leaves.
384 gms B. Tel :
ak - Jake coconut oil as a snehadravya in a large

bottom boiler.

----- PAGE 257 -----
Chapter 9 + Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

_ Add all the ingredients, swarasa, and the kalka to
the coconut oil.

Boil the mixture completely with occasional stirring.

_ Continue boiling until sneha siddhi lakshana.

. Filter the tailaand pour into a glass bottle.

10. Store the bottle in a cool, dry place for future use.

Dose: For External Application.

Therapeutic Indications Varna, Sandhishotha, Abhighata

Sopha, Asthi Bhagna

Pharmacodynamics

e Anti-inflammatory: Ingredients like Tamula, Sigru,
and Karanja have anti-inflammatory properties,
which help reduce swelling and inflammation
(Sandhishotha and Abhighata Sopha).

e Wound Healing: Kumari (Aloe vera) and Shatavari
promote wound healing (Varna) by enhancing
tissue repair and regeneration.

e Analgesic: The formulation provides pain relief,
aiding in conditions like joint swelling and
trauma-induced edema (Sandhishotha and
Abhighata Sopha).

e Bone Healing: The ingredients support bone health
and healing, beneficial for bone fractures (Asthi
Bhagna).

wonn oa

So

RESEARCH UPDATES

A Comprehensive
Review of Murivenna, an
Ayurveda Formulation

Central Ayurveda Research
Institute, CCRAS, Patiala, Punjab,
India

P1.A. Hepsibah, Drug
Standardization Unit, Ayurveda
College Unit, Poojappura,
Trivandrum — 695012, Kerala,
India.

Standardization
of Murivenna and
Hemajivanti Taila

Vaishali V, Department of

An Experimental
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya

Study to Evaluate Anti-

Inflammatory Activity Kalpana (Medicinal Chemistry
of Murivenna in Wistar | and Pharmacy), Amrita School
Albino Rats of Ayurveda, Amritapuri, Amrita

Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Clappana,
Vallickavu, Kollam - 690525,

| Kerala, India.

PHARMACOKINETICS
Absorption:

e Murivenna Taila is applied externally and
absorbed through the skin, The coconut oil
(Narikela) base facilitates deep penetration of
active ingredients.

Distribution:

e After absorption, active compounds are distri-
buted locally at the application site. Massage
enhances the distribution, ensuring the oil
reaches deeper tissues, including muscles
and joints.

Metabolism:

e The active ingredients are metabolized at the
local tissue level and, to some extent, systemically
in the liver, where they are converted into
metabolites that exert therapeutic effects.

Excretion:
e Metabolites are primarily excreted through the
kidneys and also through sweat.

Murivenna, an Ayurvedic oil, treats acute injuries like contusions,
wounds, and fractures. Originating from Agastyamarma Shastra,
it's modified in the Ayurveda Formulary of India. It's used for
fractures, sprains, osteoarthritis, and plantar fasciitis, and even
rectally for hemorrhoids. Future research may explore converting
it into user-friendly forms like ointments, gels, or patches.
Results of Murivenna Taila

Colour- Green

Odour- Pleasant Smell

Appearance- Viscous
Touch- Oily

Clarity- Clear

Loss of Drying- 0.13%
Acid Value- 2.17
Saponification Value mg/gm- 293.8
lodine Value gm/100 gm- 10.58
Murivenna, prepared per Trivandrum Pharmacopeia and
Ayurveda Formulary of India guidelines, underwent studies for
acute and chronic inflammation. Significant anti-inflammatory
activity was observed in acute inflammation, with reduced
granuloma formation suggesting potential use in such conditions.
In conclusion, Murivenna demonstrates stronger anti-
inflammatory effects in acute rather than chronic inflammation.

----- PAGE 258 -----
244 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

Ten patients received an 8-day treatment with Murivenna Talla,
Professor and PG Guide, selected for its Vatashamak sleet ee Vatasthana,
Rognidana Evam Vikriti Vigyan Significant improvements were observe: a Say rs Me
Department, Government Ayurved | including enhanced NE es eae ed aes Pain
College, Nanded, Maharashtra, intensity. The procedure also effectively p tala
India Vatakaphaja types of Katishula.

Gye ee Procedure:
Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

Clinical Efficacy of
Murivenna Tail Katibasti
in Katishula W.S.R.

Lumbar Spondylosis

Dr. Jyoti Meghdambar,

al.
ABOU TAILA e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya (Jat
Refenece: AFI, Part I to Karanja) and grind them into a fine powder
SUCCES ARATE WET: 11 (Churna).
feat wae Ge g fast weit e Addasufficient quantity of water to the powdered
HASSRT Uhh citar eT herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).
dae aa ate amare aaa | 2. Preparation of Drava Dravya:
tal erent faget dei fears e Collect jala as drava dravya.
FISaUT GAMA Bales HeRIATG | 3. Mixing:
Wel: WRAVERY, wareea wa fil e Inaclean vessel, add Tila taila as mention quantity
Waenad ce AT Ss WAM | along with Kalka Dravya and Drava Dravya.
(Sha. S.M., 9/168-171%) 4. Heating:
INGREDIENT USED e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir
continuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking
to the bottom and ensure even cooking.
Jati Lf Apo e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
Nimba Lf. 10.66 gms the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
Patola Uf 10.66 gms content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.
Karanja Lf 10.66 gms 5. Filtering:
MGdROCRCERERE x 10.66 gms e Once the Sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.
Yashti Rt. 10.66 gms
e Filter the taila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
Kushtha Rt. 10.66 gms 4
the solid residues of the herbal paste.
eatele fa AYO: 6. Cooling and Storage:
SEEN st ep eoems e Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
Katuka Rz. 10.66 gms temperature.
Manjishtha Rt. 10.66 gms e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
Padmaka Ht. Wd. 10.66 gms the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
Lodhra St. Bk. 10.66 gms potency of the medicated oil or ghee.
meet 3 10.66 gms Usage: Used externally for Abhyanga.
Utpala Fl. 10.66 gms Therapeutic Indications: Kachchu, Sphotaka, Nadivrana,
Shastraprahara Varna, Dagdha Vrana, Danta-Nakha
Tuttha B 10.66 gms Kshata, Dushta Vrana.
Shveta Sariva Rt. 10,66 gms PHARMACODYNAMICS
Karanja Sd. 10.66 gms % Anti-inflammatory: Ingredients like Nimba, Patola,
Taila Ol. 768 gms and Haridra have strong anti-inflammatory
Water 7 Bop properties, reducing swelling and redness in wounds

and skin conditions,

----- PAGE 259 -----
Chapter 9 + Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

« Antimicrobial: Herbs such as Nimba, Karanja, and
Madhuchchhishta provide antimicrobial effects,
helping to prevent infections in wounds and skin
diseases.

¢ Wound Healing: Manjishtha, Lodhra, and Haritaki
promote wound healing by enhancing tissue
regeneration and repair.

Astringent: Lodhra and Haritaki act as astringents,
which help to tighten tissues and reduce bleeding.
Analgesic: Ingredients such as Yasti and Kushtha

provide pain relief.

¢ Antiseptic: Haridra and Tuttha serve as antiseptics,

preventing microbial growth and promoting a clean

healing.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Absorption
+ The preparation is absorbed through the skin when
used externally. The base oil (Taila) facilitates the

RESEARCH UPDATES

Dr. Ma

A Review on Jatyadi Taila & its
Medicinal Properties

Rajasthan, India.

$$

Professor, PG Department of Shalya
Tantra, National Institute of Ayurveda
Deemed to University, Jaipur

a

245

absorption of the active compounds into the dermal
and subdermal layers.

Distribution

* The active compounds are distributed locally at the
site of application. The massage (Abhyanga) process
helps enhance the distribution of the ingredients to
the affected areas, ensuring deeper penetration into
the tissues.

Metabolism:

* Once absorbed, the active components are
metabolized in the local tissues and systemically in the
liver. Herbal constituents undergo biotransformation
into active metabolites.

Excretion:

* Metabolites of the active ingredients are excreted
through the kidneys and, to some extent, through
bile and sweat.

Jatyadi Taila, an ancient Ayurvedic oil, renowned for its
potent wound-healing properties, is traditionally used
to treat anal fissures and various wounds. It speeds up
healing, aids in rapid recovery, and alleviates itching,
inflammation, and burning. Effective for open wounds,
cuts, burns, abscesses, eczema, blisters, and non-healing
wounds, the review emphasizes its ingredients and
medicinal benefits.

-——_—

2. | Pharmaceutical
Standardization

of Prepared Form and Jatyadi
Taila Murchchhita and

Amurchchhita Tila Taila (H.), Wardha, MHA, India.

3, | Clinical Efficacy of Jatyadi Taila
in Parikartika (Fissure- in-Ano)

India.

Dhiraj Singh Rajput, Department of
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Mahatma Gandhi Ayurved College,

Hospital and Research Centre, Salod

Dr. Sanghamitra Samantaray,
Associate Professor, Department of
Shalya Tantra, SKSS Ayurveda Medical
College, Sarabha, Ludhiana, Punjab,

In this study, we aimed to standardize oils based on
references from Bhaishajya Ratnavali and Sharngadhara
Samhita. Yield after preparation averaged 94.49%, with
5.51% weight loss. Preparation times for MJT and AJT
were 7.49 hrs and 7.48 hrs, respectively, resulting in
8.5% and 7.83% weight losses. Heating spanned two
days, with slightly higher temperatures on the first day
(106°C for MIT, 98°C for AJT) than the second day (108°C
for MJT, 97°C for AJT). Mild heating and continuous
stirring were crucial for desired attributes in these oil
preparations.

Thirty patients diagnosed with Parikartika, irrespective of
socio-economic status, aged between 18-45 years, and
of any gender, were randomly chosen. They underwent
treatment with Jatyadi Taila through local application for
four weeks. The outcome demonstrated improved.

Se ee

(9.5. £ Smashru

SHANKHA BHASMA

Reference: AFI, Part I

UeNgel aves yea cage: |
wre farerears aca WeTTaA ||
ani waa digits gee Taye fis

aa: Vid MAG Bea Hoquiag HTH
cafotaara fara wees aa: eC
ud yegara wget wfarreqara tt (RT, 12/17-19)

INGRIDENTS USED

Suddha Shankha = 1 Part

----- PAGE 260 -----
246

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

Part Used

Kumari Svarasa (or) — Lf. QS. for Marana
Nimbu Svarasa Fr. Q\S. for Marana
Procedure:
Take all the ingredients as required. First, triturate
Shuddha Shankha with Nimbu Svarasa for one day.
Form thin, flat cakrikas and dry them under the sun.
Place these cakrikas in a Sharava Samputa and apply
Sandhi Lepa. Then, administer Gaja Puta. Repeat this
process until the bhasma passes the bhasma pariksha.
Puta: Gajaputa- 2 in number.
Dose: 250 to 300 mg.
Anupana: Nimbu Svarasa, Triphala Kvatha.
Therapeutic Indications: Ajirna, Agnimantha, Grahani,
Amalapitta, Parinama Shula, Yakritpliha Vriddhi, Visha.
Pharmacodynamics
1. Suddha Shankha (Purified Conch Shell):
° Main Component: Rich in calcium and other
minerals.
e Functions: Neutralizes acidity, improves
digestion, strengthens bones and teeth.
2. Kumari Svarasa (Aloe Vera Juice):
e Functions: Acts as a medium for purification
(Marana), enhances bioavailability, has anti-
inflammatory and digestive properties.

RESEARCH UPDATES

a Author Name
ge i Se ee
Dr. Arpita Sharma, P. G.
Department of Rasa Shastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,

Pharmaceutical Study of
Shankha Bhasma by Two
Different Methods

Paprola, H.P., India

A Critical Review on Dr. Laxmi Narayan Gupta,
Therapeutic Uses of Shankha

Bhasma

ULP., India

Shebina P. Rasheed,
College of Pharmacy,
Malappuram, Kerala, India

Synthesis and Charac-
terization of Shanku
Bhasma-an Antiulcer
Herbomineral Formulation

R.G.G.P.G. Ayurvedic College,

Department of Rasa Shastra &
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Faculty of
Ayurveda, IMS, BHU, Varanasi,

3. Nimbu Svarasa (Lemon Juice):
© Functions: Acts as a medium for purification
(Marana), enhances absorption, provides an
acidic environment for better conversion of the
shell to Bhasma, aids in detoxification.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Absorption:

e Shankha Bhasma is administered orally. The
fine particles are absorbed through the gastroin-
testinal tract.

Distribution:

e After absorption, the active components are
distributed systemically, reaching the liver,
stomach, and intestines where they exert their
therapeutic effects.

Metabolism:

e The components are metabolized in the liver. The
herbal juices (Kumari Svarasa and Nimbu Svarasa)
used in the preparation aid in bioavailability and
enhance the metabolic processes.

Excretion:

e Metabolites are excreted primarily through the
kidneys. Some excretion also occurs via the
intestines.

Bhasma were prepared: three in Group A and three in Group
B. Group A utilized Gajaputa at 900°C for preparation. Group B
employed an initial open Marana process. Further analysis could
reveal insights into Shankha Bhasma’s efficacy and properties.

The study aims to compile and evaluate all relevant work on
Shankha Bhasma preparation, including pharmaceutical and
analytical parameters standardization. It involves a thorough
search of ancient Indian Ayurvedic literature and contemporary
research databases. This effort seeks to offer insights into
Shankha Bhasma’s therapeutic potential, ultimately benefiting
human life.

Shankha Bhasma, prepared
standardization procedures.

traditionally, underwent
Organoleptic and __ physical
parameters confirmed proper preparation, minimizing impurity
risks. TGA identified the chemical form as calcium oxide,
while XRD and EDAX revealed oval-shaped crystals of micro to
nano size. AAS detected possible heavy metals. The observed
antiulcer effect may result from calcium and other additives’
synergistic action. Pharmacological studies affirmed its efficacy
In aspirin-induced ulcer models.

----- PAGE 261 -----
Chapter 9.» Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

g.5.- Kesha Ghanata

Kesha Ghanata is a term in Ayurveda referring to the
density or thickness of hair. It encompasses the overall
health and quality of hair, including its strength, texture,
and volume. According to Ayurvedic principles, Kesha
Ghanata is influenced by various factors, including
individual constitution (Prakriti), diet, lifestyle,
hormonal balance, and environmental influences.

In Ayurveda, maintaining Kesha Ghanata is considered
essential for promoting overall health and vitality. Hair
is seen as a reflection of one’s internal balance, and
Ayurvedic treatments aim to nourish and strengthen
hair from the roots to enhance its density and quality.
To support Kesha Ghanata, Ayurveda recommends
a holistic approach that includes proper nutrition,
stress management, scalp care, and herbal treatments.
This may involve the use of herbal oils, hair masks,
scalp massages, dietary supplements, and lifestyle
modifications tailored to individual needs and
imbalances.

BHRINGARAJA TAILA

Reference: - AFI, Part-I
Fai asitiael TA TST ATT
anfashideal: daca afar Pra
Trt dyna frre Agatwar |
Waves Wet a feta aT |
wag vad at aie BA TVS Prasad!
Semana HGS AAT ATE |
fremutfentry Tease a asad |
Siaataherary Har Haig Age |
Giratrcaars deride aatetd |

(B.R. Kshudraroga., 60/133-138)

INGREDIENTS USED:

Tila Taila ol. 768 ml
Bhringaraja PI. 3.072 L
Manjishtha Rt. 48 gms
Padmaka Ht. Wd 48 gms
Lodhra St. Bk. 48 gms
Raktachandana Ht. Wd. 48 ems
Gairika - 48 gms
Bala Rt. 48 gms

A ae

Haridra Rz. 3 48 gms

Daru Haridra St. 48 gms

Nagakeshara Stmn. 48 gms

Priyangu Fl, 48 gms

Yashti Rt. 48 gms

Prapaundarika Rt. 48 gms

Shveta Sariva Rt. 48 gms

Procedure;

ts,

np

Preparation of Kalka Dravya:

e Take all the ingredients for Kalka Dravya
(Manjishtha to Shveta Sariva) and grind them
into a fine powder (Churna).

e Adda sufficient quantity of water to the powdered
herbs to make a thick paste (bolus form).

. Preparation of Drava Dravya:

e Prepare the Kvatha, by whole plant of Bhringaraja
Kvatha as per classical references.

. Mixing:

e In a clean vessel, add Tila taila as mention

quantity along with Kalka Dravya and
Drava Dravya.
. Heating:

e Place the mixture over a low flame. Stir conti-
nuously to prevent the Kalka from sticking to the
bottom and ensure even cooking.

e Maintain a consistent low flame to avoid burning
the ingredients. Heat the mixture until the water
content evaporates and sneha siddhi lakshanas.

. Filtering:

e Once the sneha siddhi lakshana attains, remove it
from the heat.

e Filter the taila through a clean, dry cloth to remove
the solid residues of the herbal paste.

. Cooling and Storage:

e Allow the filtered taila to cool down to room
temperature.

e Store it in a clean, dry, airtight container. Keep
the container in a cool, dark place to preserve the
potency of the medicated oil or ghee.

Dose; Used Externally for Nasya, Sirobhyanga, and
Kavalagraha.

Therapeutic Indications: Keshapata, Netraroga, Karna
roga, Siroroga, Manya stambha, Galagraha, Khalitya,
Indralupta.

----- PAGE 262 -----
248

Rasashasira and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Hair Growth and Scalp Health: Ingredients like
Bhrngaraja and Manjistha promote hair growth,
prevent hair fall (Keshapata), and improve scalp
health (Khalitya, Indralupta).

2. Anti-inflammatory: Herbs like Haridra and Daru-
haridra have strong anti-inflammatory properties,
beneficial for conditions like Manya stambha (neck
stiffness) and Galagraha (throat disorders).

3. Nervine Tonic: Nagakeshara and Bala act as nervine
tonics, helping in neurological conditions like
Siro roga (head disorders) and Karna roga (ear
disorders).

4. Antimicrobial: Priyangu and Lodhra provide anti-
microbial properties, protecting against infections.

5. Antioxidant: Raktachandana and Shveta Sariva
are potent antioxidants, supporting overall tissue
health and reducing oxidative stress.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Pharmaceutico Analytical
Study of Bhringaraja Taila &
Its Modification Using Double
Concentration of Bhringaraja
W.S.R. to Heptle Analysis

Lata Melkan, MD Scholar
PG. Deptt. of Rasa Shastra
and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Uttarakhand Ayurved
University, Rishikul Campus
Haridwar, Uttarakhand,
India

Clinical Study on Effect of
Different Procedures of Nasya
with Bhringaraja Taila in

Khalitya

Rajani Thankan, MD
Scholar, Dept. of PG
Studies in Panchakarma,
AAMC, Moodbidri,
Karnataka

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: The preparation is applied externally and
absorbed through the skin and mucous membranes,
The sesame oil (Tila Taila) base facilitates deep
penetration of the active ingredients.

2. Distribution: After absorption, the active compounds
are distributed locally at the site of application.
Techniques like Nasya (nasal application) and
Sirobhyanga (head massage) enhance distribution
to the target tissues, including hair follicles, scalp,
and neural pathways.

3. Metabolism: Active components are metabolized
in the local tissues and systemically in the liver,
where they are converted into metabolites that exert
therapeutic effects.

4. Excretion: Metabolites are primarily excreted
through the kidneys and, to some extent, through
sweat and bile.

The study explored the pharmaceutical processing of Bhringaraja
Taila and its modification with double the concentration of
Bhringaraja, focusing on their HPTLC studies. Observations during
drug preparation were discussed, alongside the area estimation of
Bhringaraja Taila using HPTLC fingerprinting. Spot 1 of Bhringaraja
Taila (sample |) had an Rf value of 0.16, with an area percentage
of 8.71%. Sample Il (DBT) showed an area percentage of spot 1 at
11.47%.

Among the 30 patients, 10 (33.33%) experienced >61% relief, 18
(60%) had 31-60% relief, and 2 (6.66%) had 1-30% relief, with none
showing no response. Conclusion: Charakokta nasya vidhi with
Bhringaraja Taila provided better relief for Khalitya symptoms,
especially hair fall and breakage, compared to Vagbhatokta nasya
vidhi with Bhringaraja Taila.

3, Pharmaceutico - Analytical Ravibhushan Sadashiv

Study of Bhringaraja Oiland _| Sonawane, Associate

its Conversion into Lotion Professor, Dept. of
Panchakarma,
SST College, Sangamner,

Maharashtra, India

Bhringaraja Lotion Results
Appearance — Soft Creamy lotion, Free flowing
Colour — Buff colour

Odor — Characteristic

Taste — Bitter

Density - 0.9787 gm/ml

pla Shs)

Uniformity of Contents — Complies
Spreadiblity — Uniformly Spreading
Particle Size — 300 #

Thermal Stability — Melts at STC
Loss of Drying — 8.55%

| 9.5.c Akala Palita

Akala Palita, also known as premature graying of hair,
is a condition characterized by the premature loss of
natural hair color, resulting in gray or white hair
before the typical age of onset. This phenomenon
can occur due to various factors, including genetic

pre-disposition, oxidative stress, hormonal changes,
nutritional deficiencies, and environmental factors.
While graying of hair is a natural part of the aging
process, premature graying may be distressing for
affected individuals due to its perceived association
with aging. Management strategies for Akala Palita
may include addressing underlying health conditions,

----- PAGE 263 -----
Chapter 9 ° Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

adopting a healthy lifestyle, managing stress, and using
hair dyes or cosmetic treatments to conceal gray hair.
However, there is limited scientific evidence suppor-
ting the effectiveness of treatments for reversing
premature graying. Despite the cosmetic concern it
oses, Akala Palita generally does not indicate an
underlying health problem and is not associated with
significant health risks.
Hasti DANTA Masi
Reference: Su. Ch. 1/101
aS Fa TSI Ha TASH
Aawaad Mad STAT oT 1

INGRIDENTS USED:

Hasti Danta = 1 Part
Qs.

(Su. Chi, 1/101)

Appropriate Liquid Media -

Procedure:

Take all the ingredients as required. First, place Shuddha
Hasthi Danta in a Sharava and apply Sandhi Lepa. Then,
administer Laghu Puta. Repeat this process, adding any
necessary liquid media such as Kumari Svarasa, until
the masi is prepared.

Puta-Laghuputa- 2 in numbers.

Dose: External Application along with Rasanjana.
Therapeutic Indications: Khalitya, Palithya, Indralupta,
Romaksata.

PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Hair Growth Stimulation: The primary function of
Hasthi Danta, Masi, especially when combined with
Rasanjana, is to stimulate hair growth. Itis effective
in treating conditions like Khalitya (baldness),
Palitya (premature graying), Indralupta (alopecia),
and Romakshata (damage to hair follicles).

. Scalp Nourishment: The ash of elephant tusk is
believed to nourish the scalp, improve blood
circulation, and rejuvenate hair follicles, leading to
enhanced hair growth.

3. Anti-inflammatory and Healing Properties: The ash
helps reduce inflammation and promotes healing
of the scalp, which can be beneficial in treating
damaged hair follicles and scalp conditions.

nN

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: When applied externally, the fine
particles of Hasthi Danta Masi penetrate the scalp
through hair follicles and skin pores. The use of
Rasanjana (a form of collyrium) as a medium aids

249

an the deeper penetration of the active constituents
Into the scalp,

2. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
are distributed locally in the scalp tissues. The fine
nature of the ash ensures it reaches the hair follicles
and the surrounding areas, providing targeted
treatment.

35 Metabolism; The components are locally metabolized
within the scalp tissues. The mineral constituents
of the ash may undergo minor biochemical
transformations that aid in their therapeutic actions.

4. Excretion: Since Hasthi Danta Masi is used
externally, the primary mode of excretion is through
natural skin shedding and sweat. Any absorbed
constituents that enter systemic circulation are likely
to be excreted through renal and hepatic pathways.

| 9.5.4 Indralupta

Indralupta, commonly known as alopecia areata,
is a type of hair loss characterized by the sudden
appearance of one or more round bald patches on
the scalp or other hair-bearing areas of the body. This
condition occurs when the immune system mistakenly
attacks hair follicles, leading to hair loss. Indralupta can
affect individuals of any age, gender, or ethnicity and
may vary in severity from mild, localized patches to
extensive hair loss.
ICHCHHABHEDI RASA
Reference: A.EF.I., I, Rasayoga, 20:5, B.R., Udararoga
SUTRA: Wirat: Petia TIA
SOMlgot: aca Te WaT!
ariseda: Uaretag Me faraad
ApIeS citar Sasa I

(B.R., Udararoga, 40/84-85 )

INGREDIENTS USED

Rz.

Shunthi 1 Part
Maricha Fr. 1 Part
Shuddha Parada = 1 Part
Shuddha Gandhaka = 1 Part
Shuddha Tankana = 1 Part
Shudda Jayaphala Enm. 3 Parts
Procedure:

1. Collect all the ingridents of Ichchhabhedi Rasa.

----- PAGE 264 -----
290

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter 9

2. First, prepare Kajjali by triturating Shuddha Parada
and Shuddha Gandhaka in a mortar (Khalva

Borax) have antimicrobial and detoxifying effects,
helping in cleansing the gastrointestinal tract.

Yantra). PHARMACOKINETICS

3. Add the rest of the ingredients and grind well to 4.

ensure uniform mixing.

4, Shape the mixture into pills the size of 2 ratti
(250 mg).

5. Dry the pills in the shade.

6. Preserve the dried pills in a glass container.

Dose: 250 mg. 2.

Anupana: Cold Water.
Indications: Anaha, Udara roga.
PHARMACODYNAMICS
1. Laxative Effect: Ichchhabhedi Rasa has potent

laxative properties, primarily due to ingredients 3.

like Shunthi (Ginger), Maricha (Black Pepper),
and Jayaphala (Nutmeg), which stimulate the
gastrointestinal tract, promoting bowel movements
and relieving constipation (Anaha).

2. Digestive Stimulation: The combination of ingr-
edients enhances digestive fire (Agni), aids in the

digestion of food, and reduces abdominal disorders 4,

(Udararoga).

3. Antimicrobial and Detoxifying Properties: Shuddha
Parada (Purified Mercury), Shuddha Gandhaka
(Purified Sulphur), and Shuddha Tankana (Purified

RESEARCH UPDATES

Absorption: When taken orally, the ingredients of
Ichchhabhedi Rasa are absorbed in the stomach and
intestines. The bioactive compounds in Shunthi and
Maricha are absorbed quickly due to their small
molecular size and lipophilic nature, facilitating
rapid onset of action.

Distribution: After absorption, the active compounds
are distributed via the bloodstream to the
gastrointestinal tract, where they exert their primary
effects. Mercury and sulphur compounds may have
a longer retention time in the body due to their
ability to bind to proteins and other biomolecules.
Metabolism: Herbal components like Shunthi and
Maricha are metabolized in the liver, undergoing
biotransformation into active metabolites that
enhance their therapeutic effects. Mercury, sulphur,
and borax undergo limited metabolic transformation
and are primarily excreted unchanged or as
conjugates.

Excretion: The metabolites of the herbal ingredients
are excreted through the kidneys in urine and
through the intestines in feces. Mercury and sulphur
compounds are excreted slowly through bile and
kidneys, necessitating cautious use to avoid toxicity.

al, Pharmaceutical Standardization Darshana Mehkarkar, Senior

of Ichhabhedi Rasa— An Ayurvedic _ Research Fellow, Regional

The study aimed to standardize Ichchhabhedi Rasa.
Materials were sourced from Wardha’s local market

Formulation Ayurveda Institute for Mother and and authenticated. Ichchhabhedi Rasa was prepared
Child Health, Nandanvan, Nagpur, according to traditional methods. Physico-chemical

(MHA) properties were assessed to ensure quality and
safety, meeting pharmacopoeial standards. It was
concluded that 100 g of Ichchhabhedi Rasa could
be obtained from 110 g of raw drugs, aligning with
standards.

2. Ichchhabhedi Rasa—A Herbo - Nanditha Kamath, 2nd YearP.G. —“Ichchhabhedi Rasa, comprised of Shunthi, Maricha,
Mineral Formulation Review Scholar, Dept. of Rasashastra & Shuddha Parada, Shuddha Gandhaka, Shuddha
Bhaishajya Kalpana, Taranath Tankana, and Shuddha Jayaphala, exhibits potent

Govt. Ayurvedic Medical College,  purgative effects when administered in appropriate

Karnataka, India

doses and with suitable anupana. This article aims to
review its pharmacological properties and discuss its
likely mode of action.”

| 9.5.1 Lomashatana Pea Vaart weit craters TAT |

LOMASHATANA LEPA
Reference: B.R., Kshudrarogadhikara

Ul tefd faeries cet retharea i

(B.R., Kshudrarogadhikara, 60/ 169-170)

INGREDIENTS USED:

enunt etter arm aft
eo ee ar

Haratal

1 Part

----- PAGE 265 -----
errr ee

251

Chapter 9 ° Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

Drug Name Proportion 3. Astringent Action: The combination of these
Shankha Bhasma = 5 Parts ingredients also has astringent properties, which
cee ee ePane help to tighten the skin and close the pores after

hair removal,

Kadali Kanda Svarasa St. Q.S. for bhavana

PHARMACOKINETICS

1. Absorption: When applied externally, the paste is
absorbed through the skin. The active components
penetrate the outer layers of the skin to reach the
hair follicles. The absorption rate is influenced by
the viscosity and consistency of the paste, which
is adjusted with Kadali Kanda Svarasa (Banana
Stem Juice).

Procedure:
1. Collect all the ingredients of Lomashatana Lepa.
2. Grind them into a fine powder and Bhavana with

Kadali Kanda Svarasa.

3. Store it properly.

. Before applying it to the body, mix with water or
kadali kanda Svarasa as the medium to create a
soft paste.

=
N

. Distribution: Once absorbed, the active compounds
distribute locally at the site of application. They
specifically target hair follicles and the surrounding
skin tissue. The local application minimizes
systemic distribution, focusing the effects on the
area where the paste is applied.

Dose: For External use only.
Therapeutic Indications: Kshudra Roga.
PHARMACODYNAMICS

1. Depilatory Effect: The primary action of 3

ue . Metabolism: Thi ive i i i
Lomashatana Lepa is hair removal. Ingredients like e active ingredients. ial

undergo minimal metabolism as they act primarily

Haratal (Orpiment) and Plasha Kshara have strong
depilatory properties, which weaken the hair
follicles and facilitate the removal of hair.

. Antimicrobial and Anti-inflammatory: Shankha
Bhasma (Conch Shell Ash) possesses antimicrobial
and anti-inflammatory properties that help in
preventing infections and reducing any potential
inflammation caused by the application of the
paste.

at the site of application. Any absorbed components
are metabolized by the skin cells or may undergo
minimal hepatic metabolism if they enter the
systemic circulation in very small amounts.

. Excretion: The residual paste and the weakened hair

are removed through physical washing or rubbing
off after the specified application time. Minimal
systemic absorption means that the excretion
through urine or bile is negligible.

RESEARCH UPDATES

Author Name Result

Lomapatana lepa is a herbomineral
preparation formulated with Shodita haratala,
Shanka, and Palashakhara. Physico-chemical
analysis reveals a pH of 8.78, Arsenic content
of 2.33% w/w, and Calcium content of 22%
w/w. 2
Lomapatana Yoga contains Haratala, Shankha
bhasma, Kadali kshara, Sarshapa taila, and
Go-mutra. Shami provides Kashaya, Katu,
Tikta rasas, and Laghu Ruksha guna, aiding
Keshahrit and Pittavardhaka, Bhallataka has
Ushna virya and Pittala properties. Haritala
and Manahshila, sulphides of Arsenic, also
have Ushna virya and Pittala traits, potentially
weakening hair roots through Bhrajaka Pitta.
Palashakshara (pH 9.8) and Kadali kshara (pH
12), along with Shankha bhasma, are strong
alkalines. Excess Lavana and Kshara, as per
Charaka Samhita, can cause hair loss.

1. Pharmaceutico-Analytical Study of Dinesh Gupta, Assistant Professor,

Lomapatana Lepa Dept. of Rasashastra and Bhaishjya
Kalpana, Jammu Institute of Ayurveda
and Research, Nardani Raipur (Bantalab
Road), Jammu, J&K, India

Ashwini Benjarwad, PG Scholar, Deptt.

of Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana,
Sri Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara
College of Ayurveda and Hospital, Hassan,
Karnataka, India

2. Review on Lomapatana Yoga
— Ayurvedic Formulations for
Depilation

----- PAGE 266 -----
252

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter 9

Surabhi Chandra, Post Graduate Scholar,
Dept. of PG Studies in Shalya Tantra, Govt.
Ayurveda Medical College, Bengaluru,

3; Efficacy of Lomapatana
Yoga in Hypertrichosis
—A Conceptual Study
Karnataka, India.

4. Clinical Study of Lomapatana Lepa
W.S.R. to its Depilation Activity

[9.6 Guda Marga

INTRODUCTION

Guda Marga, or the anal route, refers to the anatomical
pathway associated with the rectum and anus in
the human body. In Ayurveda, Guda Marga plays a
significant role in the elimination of waste products
from the body, particularly stool. It is considered one of
the vital pathways for excretion and detoxification.

NEED

The proper functioning of Guda Marga is essential for
maintaining digestive health and overall well-being.
Efficient elimination of stool through the anal route
helps prevent the accumulation of toxins in the body,
supports proper digestion, and contributes to the
balance of the doshas (biological energies) according to
Ayurvedic principles. Any disruption or impairment in
Guda Marga function can lead to digestive disorders,
toxin buildup, and systemic imbalances.

BENEFITS

1. Elimination of Toxins: Guda Marga facilitates
the removal of waste products, toxins, and
undigested food material from the body, promoting
detoxification and cleansing.

2. Prevention of Constipation: Proper functioning of
Guda Marga helps prevent constipation by ensuring
regular and efficient bowel movements, thereby
supporting digestive health.

3. Regulation of Doshas: Ayurveda emphasizes
the importance of balanced doshas for overall
health. Healthy elimination through Guda Marga
contributes to the balance of Vata, Pitta, and
Kapha doshas.

4. Support for Digestive Health: The anal route is closely
linked to the digestive system. Keeping Guda Marga

healthy supports optimal digestion and absorption
of nutrients.

Dr. Dinesh Gupta, J.S.S. Ayurveda Medical
College, Mysore, Karnatka, India

5:

The study suggests that trivalent Arsenic
inhibits the PDH complex, disrupting lipoamide
regeneration and reducing citric acid cycle
activity, leading to decreased ATP production.
Additionally, it impacts sulfahydral-containing
enzymes involved in glucose uptake,
diminishing nutrient supply to hair follicles
and hindering hair growth.

The study found that Lomapatana Lepa
exhibited effective depilatory activity.
Additionally, no adverse effects were observed
throughout the study period.

Prevention of Anal Disorders: Maintaining the
health of Guda Marga helps prevent common anal
disorders such as hemorrhoids, anal fissures, and
anal fistulas.

In Ayurveda
Dosage form used in Guda Marga Aushadha Prayoga:

1.

. Kashaya

Vartis (Suppositories): Suppositories are solid
dosage forms inserted into the rectum, where
they dissolve or melt, releasing medication.
Example: Arshoghni Vati, used for the treatment of
hemorrhoids.

. Taila (Medicated Oils): Medicated oils are applied

topically or inserted into the rectum to lubricate
and soothe the anal passage. Example: Jatyadi Taila,
used for the management of anal fissures.

- Ghrita (Medicated Ghee): Medicated ghee formu-

lations are used for their lubricating and
nourishing properties in the anal region. Example:
Mahatiktaka Ghrita, used for treating anal itching
and inflammation.

. Kalka (Paste): Pastes made from herbal powders or

extracts are applied topically to the anal area for
their therapeutic effects. Example: Arsha Kuthara
Rasa, used for the treatment of hemorrhoids and
anal fistulas.

- Churna (Powders): Herbal powders are either

applied topically or inserted into the rectum for
their healing properties. Example: Triphala Churna,
used for promoting bowel movements and relieving
constipation.

(Decoctions): Herbal decoctions are
prepared by boiling medicinal herbs in water and
are administered as enemas or used for sitz baths
to alleviate anal discomfort. Example: Dashamula
Kvatha, used for reducing inflammation and pain
in the anal region.

----- PAGE 267 -----
Chapter 9 « Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

9.7 Mutra Marga

Urtara Basti
Uttara Basti is a therapeutic procedure in Ayurveda
where medicated oils or decoctions are administered
through the urinary tract or vaginal canal. It is a
specialized form of enema therapy targeted towards the
upper urinary and reproductive pathways. Uttara Basti
is primarily used for treating disorders related to the
urinary system, reproductive system, and gynecological
conditions in women.
The term “Uttara Basti” derives its name from the
administration through the superior passages (urinary
tract or vaginal canal), which are considered to
have superior qualities due to their ability to absorb
substances effectively. This therapy aims to leverage
these qualities for therapeutic benefits, making it a
specific treatment approach in Ayurveda.
saat casa feat sty Worar Sate: |

(Cha.Si. 9/50, Chakra.Tika)
Uttara Basti is so named because it is administered
through the superior passages (urinary tract or vaginal
canal), specifically after Niruha Basti or through the
Uttara Marga (urinary tract or vaginal canal). This
distinguishes it from other forms of Basti (enema)
therapies in Ayurveda, highlighting its targeted
approach towards treating disorders related to the
upper urinary and reproductive systems.
The need for Uttara Basti arises in various conditions
that affect the urinary and reproductive systems,
including urinary tract infections (UTIs), kidney stones,
menstrual disorders, and infertility. Uttara Basti proves
beneficial particularly in cases where oral medications
or other conventional treatments have not been effective.
It provides a targeted approach to deliver therapeutic
agents directly to the affected organs, thereby enhancing
treatment efficacy and alleviating symptoms.

BENEFITS OF UTTARA BASTI
1, Localized Treatment: Uttara Basti delivers medicinal
oils or decoctions directly to the affected organs,
providing localized therapy and maximizing
therapeutic effects.
2. Enhanced Absorption: Bypassing the digestive
system, Uttara Basti allows better absorption
of medicinal ingredients, ensuring effective
distribution in the urinary and reproductive organs.
. Symptom Reduction: By addressing the root causes
of conditions, Uttara Basti helps reduce symptoms
such as pain, swelling, urgency of urination,
recurrence, and reproductive disorders.

w

a

4. Nourishment and Rejuvenation: The medicinal
oils used in Uttara Basti contain nourishing and
Tejuvenating properties that enhance the health and
function of urinary and reproductive organs.

5. Minimal Side Effects: When administered by a skilled
practitioner, Uttara Basti is well tolerated compared
to conventional systemic medications, with minimal
side effects.

6. Comprehensive Approach: Uttara Basti is often
integrated with other Ayurvedic treatments like
dietary modifications, lifestyle changes, and herbal
supplements to provide a holistic approach to
treatment.

TYPES
Anuvasana (oil enema) is similar to Sneha Basti
(unctuous enema), but is primarily used for therapeutic
purposes. According to some scholars, Uttara Basti is
also used similarly for oleation and is considered similar
to Anuvasana for cleansing purposes.
1. According to Drava
a. Sneha Basti
b. Niruha Basti
2. According to Place
a. Mutramarga
b. Apatayamarga
Basti NETRA
A. For Males:
Gera Teh Aeaeaaa ety |
WATT GA MSA TT |
ee le 1. (Cha.Chi., 9/50-51)
1. It should be made of gold or silver metal.

2. The front part should resemble the flower bunch of
Malati (Jasmine) or Karvira (oleander).

3. It should have a shape resembling the curvature of
a cow's tail.

4, There should be a hole suitable for the release of
mustard seed (Siddhartha) inside and in the front
part of the eye.

5. It should be attached with two cartilage in the roots

and in the middle.

. The length of the eye should be twelve fingers
(Charaka) or fourteen fingers (Sushruta).

In the male Pushpanetra, the middle part of the
cartilage should be present

aD

SI

B. For Females:
YOAMAOT Ff WAST SMTSLTCTA |
Waa: wtore AeA sTatte AI (Cha. Si. 9/65-66)

----- PAGE 268 -----
254

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 9

—_

. Itshould be ten fingers long.

. The design of Pushpa netra should match the extent
of the urinary tract.

. The thickness of the eye should be equal to the
little finger.

4. The eye’s aperture should be wide enough for a

green gram to pass through.

i)

is)

5. Karnika (cartilage) should be four fingers long in
Pushpanetra.

6. The eye should have three cartilages - two for
binding and one in the front part.

. Some scholars consider the thickness of the eye
comparable to the iris.

POINT TO BE NOTED:
1. In the Yonimarga of females, Pushpa netra should
be inserted up to 4 fingers.

- Inthe Mutra marga of females, Pushpa netra should
be inserted up to 2 fingers.

. Only in the Mutra marga (under 10 years), Pushpa
netra should be inserted up to 1 finger.

SI

Nw

ow

UTTARA BASTI IN MALES
1. After bathing, oleation (snehana), and fomentation
(svedana), administer yavagu (a type of gruel made
from medicinal herbs).
2. Seat the patient comfortably in a straight posture on
a seat of knee height.

9

Perform gentle massage with warm oil over the

upper part of the basti area.

4. Excite the urinary organ (mutrendriya).

. Initially, use a ghee-coated mutra-shalaka (a small
rod used to explore the urethra) to locate the
urinary passage. Identify the passage and remove
the shalaka.

6. Introduce the ghee-coated push panetra into the
urinary organ in the same manner as bastinetra is
inserted into the rectum.

7. Insert the pushpa netra according to the measure of
the urinary organ. According to Sushruta, it should
be inserted up to six angulas (fingers).

8. During the application of basti, press the basti
pot with a steady and non-trembling hand to
administer the medicine inside comfortably and
with proper speed.

9. There should be no tremor in the hand while
removing the pushpa netra.

10. When the oil used for Uttarabasti has drained out,

administer another and then a third basti as needed.

11. Several bastis may be administered as per necessity.

UTTARA BASTI IN FEMALES

1. Seat the woman comfortably by lifting her buttocks,
bending both legs, raising the knees, and facing the
posterior part directly towards you.

2. Administer the pushpa netra (device) comfortably
into the apatya marga (vagina) or mutramarga
(urethra).

3. During the administration of basti, gently press
the yoni (vagina) with tenderness and gradually
introduce the pushpa netra with three karnikas
(petals) into the yoni mukha (entrance of the vagina)
and then press the basti.

4. Use oil 2, 3, or 4 times a day in a single ahora.

5. If the sneh (oil) of Uttara basti does not come out,
use Pipalyadi varti. The thickness of the varti should
be thicker according to the yonimukha.

6. Increasing the quantity of sneha,
Uttarabasti for three days.

7. Then keep an interval of three days and again
perform Uttara basti in the same manner for
three days.

UTTARA BASTI PRATYAGAMAN

1. Niruha Basti: It should be retrieved after 1 muhurta
(approximately 48 minutes) or immediately.

2. Sneha Basti: It should be retrieved after 3 yamas
(approximately 6 hours).

3. If the sneha (oil) used in Uttarabasti does not come
out, it should be ignored.

4. If the sneha does not come out even after passing
the night, then purified cleansing basti should
be administered again using the medicines of the
cleansing group.

perform

DOSAGE FORMS USED IN UTTARA BASTI

1, Taila: Example: Kshirabala Taila - This medicinal
oil contains Bala (Sida cordifolia) and Kshira (milk),
among other herbs. It is beneficial in conditions
like urinary tract infections, kidney stones, and
male reproductive disorders such as premature
ejaculation.

2. Ghrita; Example: Yoni Prakshalana Ghrita -
This medicinal ghee is prepared from Sariva
(Hemidesmus indicus) and Daruharidra (Berberis
aristata), among other ingredients. It is beneficial in
conditions related to menstrual disorders, vaginal
infections, and female infertility.

| 9.8 Yoni Marga

YONI DHARANA
INTRODUCTION

Yoni Dharana is an Ayurvedic therapeutic procedure
that involves applying herbal pastes or poultices to
the vaginal area (Yoni). It is a specialized form of local
treatment aimed at addressing various gynecological
issues, promoting reproductive health, and providing
relief from discomfort or inflammation in the genital
region.

----- PAGE 269 -----
Chapter 9 + Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

NEED FOR YONI DHARANA

Yoni Dharana is utilized in cases of synecological
disorders such as vaginal infections, inflammation
itching, and discharge. It is also beneficial for promoting
overall vaginal health, maintaining PH balance, and
supporting reproductive function. Yoni Dharana
provides targeted relief and healing to the delicate
tissues of the vagina, addressing specific concerns
related to hygiene, comfort, and well-being.

BENEFITS OF YONI DHARANA

. Relief from Vaginal Infections: Herbal pastes used
in Yoni Dharana have antimicrobial, antifungal,
and anti-inflammatory properties, which help
combat infections such as bacterial vaginosis, yeast
infections, and urinary tract infections.

. Soothing Irritation and Itching: Yoni Dharana helps
soothe irritation, itching, and discomfort in the
vaginal area, providing immediate relief and
promoting healing of inflamed tissues.

. Maintaining Vaginal pH Balance: Certain herbal
formulations used in Yoni Dharana help maintain
the natural pH balance of the vagina, preventing
the overgrowth of harmful microorganisms and
reducing the risk of infections.

4. Supporting Reproductive Health: Yoni Dharana is
beneficial for women experiencing menstrual
irregularities, vaginal dryness, or discomfort during
intercourse. It helps promote lubrication, improve
blood circulation, and support overall reproductive
health.

5. Postpartum Care: Yoni Dharana is often
recommended as part of postpartum care to

romote healing and soothe the vaginal area after
childbirth. It helps reduce inflammation, prevent
infections, and alleviate discomfort associated with
episiotomy or perineal tears.

EXAMPLES OF HERBAL FORMULATIONS FOR YONI DHARANA:

1. Yoni Prakshalana Churna: A herbal powder
formulation containing ingredients like Triphala,
Neem, and Lodhra, used for cleansing and
detoxifying the vaginal area.

2. Yoni Prakshalana Ghrita: A medicated ghee prepared
with herb like Sariva, Daruharidra, and Manjistha,
used for soothing inflammation, promoting healing,
and maintaining vaginal health.

. Yoni Kalka: Herbal pastes prepared with ingredients
like Haridra, Nimba, and Yashtimadhu, used
for relieving itching, reducing discharge, and
combating infections.

ray

N

w

w

YONI DHAVANA

Yoni Dhavana is an Ayurvedic practice that involves
washing or cleansing the vaginal area (Yoni) with herbal
decoctions or infusions. It is a traditional method used
to maintain vaginal hygiene, promote reproductive
health, and alleviate discomfort or symptoms associated
with various gynecological conditions.

NEED FoR Yon) DHAVANA

Yoni Dhavana is recommended for women experiencing
vaginal infections, inflammation, itching, excessive
discharge, or discomfort during menstruation. It
helps to cleanse the vaginal area, remove impurities,
and restore the natural balance of the vaginal flora.
Yoni Dhavana isalso beneficial for women seeking to
maintain overall vaginal health and hygiene.

BENEFITS OF YONI DHAVANA

1. Cleansing and Purification: Herbal decoctions used
in Yoni Dhavana have cleansing and purifying
properties, helping to remove dirt, bacteria, and
toxins from the vaginal area.

- Relief from Infections: Yoni Dhavana helps to alleviate
symptoms of vaginal infections such as itching,
burning, and unusual discharge by promoting a
healthy vaginal environment and inhibiting the
growth of harmful microorganisms.

3. Reduction of Inflammation: The soothing and anti-
inflammatory properties of herbal decoctions used
in Yoni Dhavana help to reduce inflammation and
swelling in the vaginal tissues, providing relief
from discomfort.

. Regulation of pH Balance: Yoni Dhavana helps to
maintain the natural pH balance of the vagina,
which is essential for preventing the over growth
of harmful bacteria and yeast that can lead to
infections.

5. Support for Menstrual Health: Yoni Dhavana may
help to alleviate menstrual cramps, discomfort, and
excessive bleeding by promoting relaxation and
improving blood circulation in the pelvic area.

nN

c=

HERBS USED IN YONI DHAVANA

1. Neem (Azadirachta indica)

2. Turmeric (Curcuma longa)

3. Triphala (A combination of three fruits: Amalaki,

Bibhitaki, and Haritaki)

4, Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa)

5. Daruharidra (Berberis aristata)

6. Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
These herbs are known for their antimicrobial, anti-
inflammatory, and soothing properties, making them
beneficial for vaginal health when used in Yoni Dhavana
preparations.

YONI PIcHU

Yoni Pichu is an Ayurvedic therapy that involves
applying medicated oil or herbal decoctions to the
vaginal area using a cotton pad or tampon. It is a
traditional practice aimed at promoting vaginal
health, relieving discomfort, and balancing the doshas
(energies) in the pelvic region.

Need for Yoni Pichu

Yoni Pichu is recommended for women experiencing
various gynecological issues such as vaginal dryness,
itching, inflammation, infections, or discomfort during

i Rea ls

----- PAGE 270 -----
2

56

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

menstruation. It is also beneficial for women seeking

to

maintain overall vaginal hygiene and promote

reproductive health.
Benefits of Yoni Pichu

1,

Her!
1.

2.
3:
4

Nn U1

Hydration and Lubrication: The application of
medicated oil or herbal decoctions in Yoni Pichu
helps to hydrate and lubricate the vaginal tissues,
relieving dryness and discomfort.

. Soothing and Healing: The herbal ingredients used

in Yoni Pichu formulations have soothing and
healing properties that help to reduce inflam-
mation, itching, and irritation in the vaginal area.

- Prevention of Infections: Yoni Pichu helps to maintain

the natural pH balance of the vagina, creating an
environment that is inhospitable to the growth of
harmful bacteria and yeast, thus reducing the risk
of infections.

. Balancing the Doshas: According to Ayurvedic

principles, imbalances in the doshas can contribute
to gynecological problems. Yoni Pichu helps to
balance the doshas in the pelvic region, promoting
overall well-being and reproductive health.

. Relief from Menstrual Discomfort: Yoni Pichu may

help to alleviate menstrual cramps, discomfort, and
excessive bleeding by promoting relaxation and
improving blood circulation in the pelvic area.
bs and Oils Used in Yoni Pichu:
Coconut oil

. Sesame oil

Neem oil

. Triphala decoction (A combination of three fruits:

Amalaki, Bibhitaki, and Haritaki)

. Aloe vera gel
. Daruharidra (Berberis aristata)

Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra)

. Which of the following practices involves holding a

large quantity of oil or medicated liquid in the mouth

for a specific period and then spitting it out?
a. Kavala c. Pratisarana
b. Gandusha

What is the primary benefit of Kavala (mouth rinsing)?

d. Nasya

a. Detoxifying the oral cavity
b. Targeted treatment for specific oral conditions
c. Maintaining oral hygiene

d. Relieving sinus issues

YON! DHUPANA

Yoni Dhupana is a traditional Ayurvedic practice that
involves fumigating the vaginal area with medicinal
smoke. The word ‘yoni’ refers to the female reproductive
organs, and ‘dhupana’ means fumigation. This practice
is often utilized for postpartum care, treating infections,
and maintaining vaginal health.

Need for Yoni Dhupana

ale

2.

. Menstrual

Postpartum Recovery: Helps in healing and cleansing
the vaginal area after childbirth.

Treating Infections: Used for treating and preventing
infections such as yeast infections and bacterial
vaginosis.

Disorders: Alleviates symptoms of
menstrual disorders like cramps, irregular periods,
and heavy bleeding.

. Vaginal Hygiene: Helps in maintaining cleanliness by

detoxifying the vaginal canal.

Benefits of Yoni Dhupana

ae

Antimicrobial Properties: The herbs used have
antimicrobial effects that help treat and prevent
infections.

. Anti-inflammatory Effects: Reduces inflammation

and soothes irritated tissues.

. Pain Relief: Provides relief from pain and discomfort

in the vaginal area.

. Hormonal Balance: Helps in balancing hormones,

beneficial for menstrual and menopausal symptoms.

. Enhanced Circulation: Improves blood circulation in

the pelvic area.

. Emotional Well-being: Has a calming effect and

reduces stress.

HERBS USED IN YON! DHUPANA

ils

Turmeric

2. Neem
3. Chandana, ete.

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

3. Which of the following is NOT a benefit of Nasya

Kalpana?

a. Clearing nasal congestion

b. Improving respiratory health

c. Treating gastrointestinal disorders
d. Enhancing mental clarity

. Which Ayurvedic dosage form used in Mukha Kalpana

is a powdered blend of threefruits?
a. Triphala Churna c. Dant Kanti Vati
b. Khadiradi Avaleha d. Arimedasava

. In Nasya Kalpana, which medicated oil is commonly

used to support sinus health and alleviate nasal
congestion?

----- PAGE 271 -----
Chapter 9 = Aushadhi Prayoga Marga

ba)

™

go

wo

10.

ads

12.

13.

14,

15,

c. Ajavaina Arka
d. Arka Svarasa

a. Brahmi Churna
b. Anu Taila
Which Ayurvedic practice involves the application
of medicated pastes or powders directly to the gums
and teeth?

a. Kavala c. Pratisarana

b. Gandusha d. Nasya

Which of the following is NOT a benefit of Karna
Kalpana?

a. Relief from ear infections

b. Improving hearing health

c. Enhancing cognitive function

d. Clearing earwax buildup

What is the primary purpose of Akshi Kalpana in
Ayurveda?

a. Promoting ear health

b. Detoxifying the oral cavity

c. Enhancing eye health and treating eye ailments
d. Improving respiratory health

Which formulation is used in Akshi Kalpana to nourish
and rejuvenate the eyes?

a. Triphala Ghrita c. Anu Taila

b. Bilva Ghrita d. Ajavaina Arka

In Mukha Kalpana, which practice helps in maintaining
oral hygiene and preventing tooth decay through
swishing oil or medicated liquid around the mouth?

a. Gandusha c. Pratisarana

b. Kavala d. Nasya

What is the main benefit of using medicated oils in
Karna Kalpana?

a. Reducing nasal congestion

b. Relieving ear pain and inflammation

c. Enhancing cognitive function

d. Treating eye disorders

Which Ayurvedic practice is part of the Panchakarma
therapies and involves theadministration of medicated
substances through the nasal route?

a. Mukha Kalpana c. Karna Kalpana

b. Nasya Kalpana d. Akshi Kalpana
What is a common ingredient in toothpaste that helps
strengthen tooth enamel andprevent tooth decay?

a. Calcium carbonate c. Fluoride

b. Hydrated silica d. Essential oils
Which Ayurvedic practice involves the preparation
and application of medicated substances to promote
overall ear health and address ear-related issues?

a. Mukha Kalpana c. Karna Kalpana

b, Nasya Kalpana d, Akshi Kalpana
What is the benefit of using Anu Tailain Nasya Kalpana?
a. Alleviating ear pain

b. Reducing eye strain

c. Supporting sinus health

16,

17.

18.

os

20.

21.

22)

23.

24.

25)

26.

27.

es er reeeecnens By Saas
d. Detoxifying the oral cavity
What Is the main therapeutic indication for
Sahacharadi Talla?

a, Sandhishotha c. Kshudra Roga

b. Khalitya d, Anaha

Which of the following ingredients in Murivenna Taila

contributes to its anti-inflammatory properties?

a. Narikela (Coconut Oil)

b. Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)

c. Sigru (Moringa oleifera)

d. Tandulambu (Rice bran)

What is the primary function of Jatyadi Taila?

a. Stimulate hair growth

b. Reduce inflammation and promote wound
healing.

c. Relieve constipation

d. Improve digestion

How is Shankha Bhasma traditionally administered?

a. Orally

b. Topically

c. Through nasal drops

d. Through eye drops

Which therapeutic indication is NOT associated with

Bhringaraja Taila?

a. Keshapata c. Netraroga

b. Kshudra Roga d. Khalitya

What is the primary therapeutic indication for Hasthi

Danta Masi?

a. Palitya c. Romakshata

b. Manya stambha d. Khalitya

Which of the following statements about Ichchhabhedi

Rasa is true?

a. It is primarily used to treat joint disorders.

b. It is administered with milk as an anupana.

c. It stimulates hair growth.

d. It has laxative properties.

What is the primary function of Lomapatana Lepa?

a. Stimulate hair growth

b. Relieve constipation

c. Promote wound healing

d. Facilitate hair removal

Which ingredient is NOT found in Ichchhabhedi Rasa?

a. Shunthi c. Shuddha Parada

b. Maricha d. Bhringaraja

What is the main therapeutic indication for Hasthi

Danta Masi?

a. Khalitya c. Indralupta

b. Palitya d. Keshapata

What is the primary therapeutic indication of

Sahacharadi Taila?

a. Kshudra Roga c. Sandhishotha

b. Vata Vyadhi d. Keshapata

Which herb is NOT an ingredient in Murivenna Taila?

a. Narikela c. Manjishtha

b. Karanja d. Shatavari

----- PAGE 272 -----
258

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 9

28. What is the primary mechanism of action of
Jatyadi Taila?
a. Laxative c, Antispasmodic
b. Antimicrobial d. Analgesic

29. Which drug is NOT used in the preparation of
Shankha Bhasma?
a. Shuddha Shankha c. Nimbu Svarasa
b. Kumari Svarasa d. Yashti

30. What is the primary therapeutic indication of
Bhringaraja Taila?
a. Ajirna ce. Keshapata
b. Sandhishotha d. Varna

31. What is the primary function of Hasthi Danta Masi?
a. Promoting hair growth
b. Laxative effect
c. Stimulating digestion
d. Relieving constipation

32. Which condition is NOT treated by Ichchhabhedi Rasa?
a. Anaha c. Khalitya
b. Udara roga d. Netraroga

33. What is the primary therapeutic indication of
Romashatana Lepa?
a. Udara roga c. Kshudra Roga
b. Khalitya d. Netraroga

34. Which herb is NOT used in the preparation of Hasthi
Danta Masi?
a. Bala ce. Nagakeshara
b. Haridra d. Bhringaraja

35. Which metal is NOT used in the preparation of
Ichchhabhedi Rasa?

a. Parada c. Tankana
b. Gandhaka d. Svarna

36. What is the primary function of Guda Marga in
Ayurveda?

a. Absorption of nutrients
b. Elimination of waste products
c. Regulation of blood pressure
d. Maintenance of body temperature
37. Which of the following is NOT a dosage form used in
Guda Marga aushadha prayoga?
a. Vartis (Suppositories)
b. Taila (Medicated Oils)
c. Churna (Powders)
d. Tablets (Pills)
38. Which herbal formulation is commonly used for the
treatment of hemorrhoids viaGuda Marga?
a. Triphala Churna
b. Jatyadi Taila
c. Arshoghni Vati
d. Mahatiktaka Ghrita

Short Questions

39. What is the main benefit of Uttara Basti in Ayurveda?
a, Enhancing digestive health
b. Treating respiratory disorders
c. Targeted therapy for urinary and reproductive
tract disorders
d. Balancing mental health
40. Which medicated oil is used in Uttara Basti for conditions
such as urinary tractinfections and kidney stones?
a. Jatyadi Taila
b. Kshirabala Taila
c. Mahatiktaka Ghrita
d. Arsha Kuthara Rasa
41. Which Ayurvedic practice involves applying herbal
pastes to the vaginal area?
a. Yoni Dhavana c. Yoni Dharana
b. Yoni Pichu d. Yoni Dhupana
42. What is the primary purpose of Yoni Dhavana in
Ayurveda?
a. Oral administration of herbs
b. Cleansing and maintaining vaginal hygiene
c. Balancing mental health
d. Enhancing skin complexion
43. Which herb is commonly used in Yoni Dhavana for its
antimicrobial properties?
a. Lodhra c. Daruharidra
b. Haridra (Turmeric) d. Neem
44. What benefit does Yoni Pichu primarily provide?
a. Hydration and lubrication of the vaginal tissues
b. Improving vision
c. Enhancing respiratory function
d. Balancing blood sugar levels
45. What is the main use of Yoni
postpartum care?
a. Enhancing lactation
b. Healing and cleansing the vaginal area
c. Promoting hair growth
d.

Increasing appetite
ANSWERS KEYS

Dhupana_ in

ils b 25 ¢c Sh c 4. a 5, b
6. c 7s c 8. c OF a HOS eeb
11. b 12. b 13) c 14. c AS. ¢c
16. a a7: c 18. b 19. a 20. b
ils | Oly fee Gls ee ol) A Glide 56)
26. b 27. d 28. b 28), d 30. c
Sid gilolea io 2) ea eS ay ees Gl op seb atl
36. b 37. d 38. c 39° c 40. b
41. G 42. b 43. d 44, a 45. b

Long Questions

1. Importance of Aushadhi Prayoga Marga.

2. Short Note on Uttara Basti and its dosage form.
3. Write short note on Shirodhara.

4. Probable Mode of action of Bhringaraja Taila.

1, Describe the importance of Mukha Kalpana and write the]
ingredients, probable mode of actionof Murvienna Taila.

2. Explain Nasya Kalpana in detailed and its dosage form with |
examples.

----- PAGE 273 -----
CHAPTER

oe

‘

(10.1 Introduction

The National Accreditation Board for Hospitals &
Healthcare Providers (NABH) sets comprehensive
guidelines to improve healthcare quality and ensure
patient safety in India. These guidelines encompass
various aspects of healthcare delivery, including rational
prescription and safe dispensing of medications, which
are crucial for preventing medication errors, optimizing
patient outcomes, and promoting efficient healthcare
delivery. When applied to Ayurvedic formulations,
these guidelines help integrate traditional practices
with modern standards of care, ensuring holistic and
safe patient treatment.

40.2 Rational Prescription

1. DEFINITION AND IMPORTANCE

Rational prescription involves the use of medications
that are appropriate to the patient's clinical needs, in
doses that meet their requirements, for an adequate
period, and at the lowest cost to them and their
community. This approach aims to ensure that patients
receive the most effective treatment while minimizing
the risk of adverse effects and medication errors. In
Ayurveda, this means selecting formulations that are
best suited to the patient’s unique constitution (Prakriti)
and disease condition (Vyadhi).

2. KEY GUIDELINES

NABH emphasizes several core principles for rational
prescription:

% Evidence-Based Prescribing:

e Physicians are encouraged to prescribe medications
based on the best available scientific evidence,
considering the effectiveness, safety, and cost.

e In Ayurveda, this includes using classical texts,
recent research, and clinical experience to guide
prescription.

RATIONAL PRESCRIPTION ALONG WITH SAFE
DISPENSING OF AYURVEDIC FORMULATIONS

“+ Patient-Centered Care

e Prescriptions should be tailored to individual
patient needs, considering factors such as age,
gender, co-morbidities, and allergies.

e In Ayurveda, this involves a thorough assessment
of the patient’s Dosha imbalance and Prakriti.

“- Comprehensive Documentation:

e Detailed documentation of prescribed
medications, including dosage, frequency, and
duration, is mandatory.

e In Ayurvedic practice, this includes documenting
the rationale for choosing specific formulations
and treatments based on patient assessment.

“ Regular Review and Monitoring:

e Periodic review of the patient's medication
regimen is recommended to assess efficacy and
make necessary adjustments.

e Monitoring for adverse drug reactions and
ensuring patient adherence to the prescribed
regimen are critical.

10.3 Safe Dispensing

1. DEFINITION AND IMPORTANCE

Safe dispensing involves the accurate preparation and
distribution of medications, ensuring that patients
receive the correct drugs in the appropriate dosage and
form. This process is vital for preventing dispensing
errors, which can lead to significant patient harm.

2. KEY GUIDELINES
NABH sets forth guidelines to enhance the safety and
accuracy of the dispensing process:
+ Qualified Personnel
e Dispensing should be performed by qualified
pharmacists or trained personnel under their
supervision.

----- PAGE 274 -----
260

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 10

¢ In Ayurvedic practice, this may involve trained
Ayurvedic pharmacists and practitioners.
* Verification Processes
* Double-checking the prescription against the medi-
cation being dispensed is crucial to prevent errors.
e This includes verifying the ingredients and prepa-
ration methods for Ayurvedic formulations.
Clear Labelling and Instructions
¢ Medications must be clearly labelled with the
patient’s name, drug name, dosage, instructions
for use, and expiry date.
e Ayurvedic formulations should also include
specific instructions on administration, dietary
restrictions, and lifestyle recommendations.

%

* Storage and Handling

e Proper storage conditions for medications must
be maintained to ensure their efficacy and safety.

e Ayurvedic medicines, often prepared with natural
ingredients, require specific storage conditions to
maintain their potency.

BS

Patient Education and Counselling

e Pharmacists should counsel patients on the
correct use of medications, potential side effects,
and the importance of adherence to the prescribed
regimen.

e This includes educating patients on the holistic
approach of Ayurveda, which combines medi-
cation with lifestyle and dietary modifications.

ENSURING PATIENTSAFETY AND IMPROVING HEALTHCARE QUALITY

1. Prevention of Medication Errors: By adhering to
NABH guidelines, healthcare provi-ders can signifi-
cantly reduce the risk of medication errors. Rational
prescribing practices ensure that patien’= receive
appropriate medications, while safe d. ensing
protocols prevent errors during the medication
preparation and distribution process.

2. Optimizing Patient Outcomes: Rational prescription
and safe dispensing practices contribute to better
patient outcomes by ensuring that patients receive
effective and safe treatments tailored to their
individual needs. Regular monitoring and patient
education further enhance treatment efficacy and
adherence.

3. Enhancing Healthcare Efficiency: Following NABH
guidelines promotes efficient use of healthcare
resources by minimizing wastage, reducing
adverse drug reactions, and preventing hospital
readmissions due to medication-related issues. This
efficiency ultimately contributes to cost savings for
both patients and healthcare systems.

4. Building Patient Trust and Satisfaction: Patients are
more likely to trust and be satisfied with healthcare
providers who adhere to high standards of care.
Clear communication, patient education, and perso-
nalized care foster a positive healthcare experience,
encouraging patients to adhere to their treatment
regimens and engage actively in their care.

CONCLUSION

The NABH guidelines on rational prescription
and safe dispensing play a crucial role in ensuring
patient safety and improving healthcare quality. By
promoting evidence-based prescribing, comprehensive
documentation, qualified dispensing personnel, and
patient education, these guidelines help to minimize
medication errors and optimize patient outcomes.
Adherence to these standards not only enhances the
efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare delivery but
also builds patient trust and satisfaction, ultimately
contributing to better health outcomes and a more
robust healthcare system.

10.4 Additional Guidelines for Rational Use of
Ayurvedic Formulations

Rational drug use encompasses administering the
appropriate medication to the right patient, in the correct
dose, at the proper time, through the suitable route, and
in an economically feasible manner. The World Health
Organization (WHO) defines it as ensuring patients
receive medications suitable for their clinical needs,
at adequate doses, for the necessary duration, and at
minimal cost to both them and their community :

1. Safety and Effectiveness: Drugs should be chosen
based on their safety profile and proven efficacy
for the patient's condition, considering factors like
disease severity and available treatment options.

2. Appropriateness: This involves prescribing drugs for
their approved indications, at the correct dosage,
and ensuring proper dispensing and duration of
treatment. Patient counseling is also crucial for
understanding medication use.

3. Economic Considerations: Rational drug use
doesn’t just focus on price but also considers cost-
effectiveness. It aims to minimize expenses for both
the patient and the community while providing
optimal treatment.

APPROACHES TO ACHIEVING RATIONAL DRUG USE

1. Patient Evaluation: Understanding the patient's
medical history, including past illnesses and
medication usage, is essential for accurate diagnosis
and treatment planning.

----- PAGE 275 -----
Chapter 10 « Rational Prescription along with Safe Dispensing of Ayurvedic Fo

2. Diagnosis: Accurate diagnosis is fundamental for
rational therapy. It relies on comprehensive assess-
ments, including laboratory findings, to identify the
underlying causes of the patient's condition.

. Therapeutic Objectives: Treatment goals may include
symptom relief, disease prevention, oracombination
of both, depending on the patient's needs.

. Treatment Options: Treatment may involve
medication, lifestyle changes, or a combination.
When medication is necessary, the selection should
prioritize drugs with proven efficacy, safety,
suitability, cost-effectiveness, ease of administration,
and appropriate storage requirements.

w

S

bal

Initiating Treatment: Once a drug is prescribed, it
should be administered as directe. Patient education
is crucial, informing them about both the benefits and
potential side effects of the medication. Patients should
also be equipped with knowledge on how to manage
any side effects that may occur. Planning a follow-up
visit allows for the assessment of treatment progress.

. Assessing Treatment Results: Evaluation of treatment
efficacy involves physical examination and
laboratory investigations. If the patient responds
positively to the therapy, it is deemed rational. If
not, the process returns to step 1 to reassess the
patient's condition.

7. Concluding Therapy: The success of therapy is
determined by assessing whether therapeutic goals
were achieved and if patient problems were resolve.
If these criteria aren’t met, factors such as patient
compliance and diagnostic accuracy should be re-
evaluated.

This structured approach ensures that treatment
decisions are continually reviewed and adjusted as
needed, optimizing patient outcomes and promoting
rational drug use. By adhering to these principles
and approaches, healthcare providers can ensure that
patients receive optimal therapy tailored to their clinical
needs while also considering economic factors and
minimizing the risks associated with medication use.

an

DRUG USE PROCESS INDICATORS
To ensure optimal drug therapy and rational drug use,
several key steps need to be followed:

1. Indication: Ensure there is a clear and appropriate
indication for its use before prescribing a drug.
Address all medical problems therapeutically.

2. Drug Selection: Choose the most suitable drug
based on its ability to achieve therapeutic goals,
considering patient variables, formulary status, and
therapy cost.

3. Regimen Selection: Determine the most appropriate
drug regimen that accomplishes therapeutic goals
at the least cost without compromising effectiveness
or causing toxicity.

4, Drug Provision: Facilitate the dispensing and supply
Process to ensure accurate preparation, dispensing
in ready-to-administer form, and timely delivery to
the patient.

5. Drug Administration: Ensure that appropriate devices
and techniques are used for drug administration
to optimize effectiveness and minimize adverse
effects.

6. Monitoring: Regularly monitor drug therapy
for effectiveness and adverse effects. Based on
monitoring results, decide whether to maintain,
modify, or discontinue the therapy.

7. Patient Counselling: Provide thorough counselling
and education to the patient or caregiver about
the prescribed therapy to ensure proper use of
medicines.

8. Effectiveness Evaluation: Evaluate the effectiveness of
the patient’s drug therapy by reviewing all previous
steps of the drug use process. Take appropriate
steps to ensure that therapeutic goals are achieved.

By diligently following these steps, healthcare profes-
sionals can ensure that drug therapy is rational,
effective, safe, and economical, ultimately leading to
improved patient outcomes.

| Chapter At a Glance

RATIONAL PRESCRIPTION

INTRODUCTION

NABH Guidelines: The National Accreditation Board for
Hospitals & Healthcare Providers (NABH) sets com-
prehensive guidelines to enhance healthcare quality and
ensure patient safety in India, integrating traditional
Ayurvedic practices with modern healthcare standards.
RATIONAL PRESCRIPTION

1. Definition and Importance

e Rational Prescription: Involves appropriate use of
medications tailored to patient needs, minimizing
adverse effects and costs.

e Ayurvedic Context: Selection based on the patient's
constitution (Prakriti) and disease condition
(Vyadhi).

2. Key Guidelines

Evidence-Based Prescribing

e Patient-Centered Care

----- PAGE 276 -----
ais Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter 10

¢ Comprehensive Documentation
¢ Regular Review and Monitoring
SAFE DISPENSING
1. Definition and Importance

Accurate preparation and distribution of medications
to prevent errors and patient harm.

2. Key Guidelines
* Qualified Personnel
¢ Verification Processes

° Clear Labelling and Instructions
° Storage and Handling
¢ Patient Education and Counselling
3. Ensuring Patient Safety and Improving Healthcare Quality
e Prevention of Medication Errors
¢ Optimizing Patient Outcomes
e Enhancing Healthcare Efficiency
¢ Building Patient Trust and Satisfaction

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

1. What is the primary goal of rational prescription?
a. Minimizing the cost of medications
b. Maximizing the profit for healthcare providers

c. Ensuring patients receive the most effective
treatment while minimizing risks and costs

d. Increasing the number of medications prescribed
2. Which principle emphasizes the use of medications
based on scientific evidence?
a. Patient-Centered Care
b. Evidence-Based Prescribing
c. Comprehensive Documentation
d. Regular Review and Monitoring
3. In Ayurveda, what should be considered to tailor
prescriptions to individual patients?
a. Age and gender only
b. Disease condition and available modern treatments
c. Dosha imbalance and Prakriti
d. Cost and availability of medications
4. What is a key aspect of comprehensive documentation
in rational prescription?
a. Using electronic health records only
b. Documenting dosage, frequency, and duration
of prescribed medications
c. Avoiding documentation to save time
d. Recording patient satisfaction levels
5. Why is regular review and monitoring of a patient’s
medication regimen important?
a. Toincrease the number of medications prescribed
b. Toassess efficacy and make necessary adjustments
c. To reduce the workload of healthcare providers
d. To ensure prescriptions are followed without change
6. What is the definition of safe dispensing?
a. Preparing and distributing medications without
labelling
b. Accurate preparation and distribution of medic-
ations to ensure patients receive the correct drugs

c. Dispensing medications to patients without
verifying prescriptions
d. Reducing the cost of medications during
dispensing
7. Who should perform the dispensing of medications
according to NABH guidelines?
a. Any healthcare staff member
b. Qualified pharmacists or trained personnel under
their supervision
c. Patients themselves
d. Administrative staff
8. What is crucial to prevent errors during the dispensing
process?
a. Single-checking the prescription
b. Double-checking the prescription against the
medication being dispensed
c. Skipping the verification process
d. Relying solely on automated systems without
human oversight
9. Why is clear labelling and instructions on medications
important?
a. To increase the price of the medication
b. To ensure patients know how to use their
medications correctly and safely
c. To comply with legal requirements only
d. To reduce the workload of healthcare providers
10. What should be included on the labels of Ayurvedic
formulations?
a. Just the drug name and dosage
b. Patient’s name, drug name, dosage, instructions
for use, and expiry date
c. Only the expiry date
d. Cost and manufacturing details
11. What is one of the benefits of patient education and
counselling?

a. Increasing the number of medications taken by
the patient

----- PAGE 277 -----
Chapter 10 * Rational Prescription along with S

12.

13:

14.

15.

16.

b. Enhancing patient adherence to the pres-
cribed regimen
c. Reducing the time healthcare providers spend
with each patient
d. Avoiding the need for follow-up visits
Which of the following is NOT a step in the rational
drug use process?
a. Patient Evaluation
b. Indication
c. Random Selection
d. Monitoring
What should be the basis for selecting a drug according
to rational drug use principles?
a. The drug with the highest price
b. Proven efficacy, safety, suitability, cost-
effectiveness, and ease of administration
c. Recommendations from non-medical staff
d. The latest drug in the market
Why is it important to understand a patient’s medical
history before prescribing medication?
a. To increase the number of medications prescribed
b. To ensure accurate diagnosis and treatment
planning
c. To avoid legal issues
d. To reduce the cost of treatment
Which step involves educating patients about their
medications and potential side effects?
a. Drug Administration
b. Patient Counseling
c. Indication
d. Drug Provision
What should be done if a patient does not respond
positively to therapy?
a. Continue with the same treatment

Safa Dicnaneing Af A eerie
afe Dispensing of Ayurvedic Formulations
nO

17,

18.

19.

20.

11.
16.

—_—_

263

b. Reassess the patient’s condition and adjust
treatment as necessary

c. Discontinue all medications

d. Avoid further monitoring

What is one consequence of irrational prescribing?

a. Enhanced patient trust and satisfaction

b. Serious morbidity and mortality

c. Improved healthcare efficiency

d. Reduced antimicrobial resistance

Which factor is NOT a cause of irrational drug use?

a, Unreliable drug supply

b. Lack of patient education

c. Adequate training of healthcare providers

d. Influence of pharmaceutical industry promotions

What is the significance of regular monitoring in drug

therapy?

a. To avoid unnecessary follow-ups

b. To ensure effectiveness and detect adverse effects

c. To increase the complexity of treatment

d. To reduce the cost of medications

Which approach involves using clinical guidelines to

guide prescribing decisions?

a. Randomized prescribing

b. Problem-Based Pharmacotherapy Training

c. Establishment of Drugs and Therapeutics
Committees

d. Development of Clinical Guidelines

ANSWERS KEYS

c 25 b Boe ec 4. b 53 b
b Zs b 8. b ¢), b 10. b
Dipl | 225s gad elon eam eel 4a ene eS
bei 2755 eb TSS Fee cle Obs Seb 2 Oe ae

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

e Write short note on Rational Prescription.
e Write short note on Rational Dispensing.

----- PAGE 278 -----
<a TRADITIONAL & LOCAL HEALTH

x
LQ

41.1 Introduction to Traditional and Local Health
Practices and Government Initiatives to preserve it

INTRODUCTION
Traditional and local health practices have been integral
to human societies for centuries, embodying a wealth
of knowledge passed down through generations.
These practices encompass a variety of healing
methods, including herbal medicine, acupuncture,
Ayurveda, traditional Chinese medicine (ICM),
indigenous healing, and many others. They are often
deeply embedded in the cultural and spiritual lives of
communities, offering holistic approaches to health and
well-being. Governments worldwide have recognized
the importance of preserving these practices, launching
various initiatives to ensure their survival and
integration into contemporary healthcare systems.

UNDERSTANDING TRADITIONAL AND LOCAL HEALTH PRACTICES

1. Definition and Scope:

Traditional health practices refer to health knowledge,

skills, and practices based on the theories, beliefs, and

experiences indigenous to different cultures. They
include:

¢ Herbal Medicine: Use of plant-based substances for
therapeutic purposes.

~ Ayurveda: An ancient Indian system of medicine
focused on balance within the body and with nature.

* Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM): Encompasses
acupuncture, herbal medicine, and Qigong,
emphasizing harmony within the body.

% Indigenous Healing Practices: Vary widely but often
include spiritual healing, shamanism, and the use of
local herbs.

2. Importance in Contemporary Health Systems:

Traditional and local health practices are crucial for
several reasons:

1 / PRACTICES & TKDL

~ Accessibility: Often more accessible and affordable,
especially in rural or low-income areas.

& Cultural Relevance: Align with the cultural and
spiritual beliefs of the communities, enhancing
acceptance and adherence.

Holistic Approach: Focus on overall well-being,
including mental, emotional, and spiritual health.

BENEFITS OF TRADITIONAL AND LOCAL HEALTH PRACTICES

1. Holistic and Preventive Care: Traditional practices
often emphasize preventive care and holistic
health, addressing not just physical ailments but
also emotional and spiritual aspects. For example,
Ayurveda and TCM focus on maintaining balance
and preventing disease.

2. Biodiversity and Sustainable Use: These practices
promote the use of local plants and natural reso-
urces, contributing to biodiversity conservation and
sustainable practices. They also preserve valuable
ethnobotanical knowledge.

3. Empowerment and Community Involvement:
Traditional health practices empower communities
by valuing their knowledge and promoting self-
reliance in healthcare. This can strengthen social
cohesion and cultural identity.

4. Complementary Role in Modern Medicine: When
integrated with modern healthcare, traditional
practices can complement conventional treatments,
enhancing their effectiveness and patient satis-
faction. For instance, acupuncture is widely used to
manage pain and side effects of chemotherapy.

CHALLENGES IN PRESERVING TRADITIONAL AND LOCAL HEALTH
PRACTICES

1. Scientific Validation: A major challenge is the lack of
rigorous scientific validation for many traditional
practices, which can hinder their acceptance and
integration into main stream healthcare.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Chapter 11 * Traditional & Local Health Practices & TKDL

® Professional Training and Certification: Certification
Programs for traditional healers ensure stand-
ardized practices and improve the quality of
care. The Ministry of AYUSH in India offers
Pre certification for practitioners of Ayurveda, Yoga,
the intellectual property rights of indigenous Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy.
communities and ensuring fair benefit-sharing from 4. Doc é
a a 6 + Documentatio F
the commercialization of traditional knowledge is ° Digitizati ere oe aie and
essential but complex. A A OF Oe eae Ea
‘ ality digitize traditional health ial
4. Knowledge Erosion: Globalization and modernization pe preservation. The Teac eee e
can lead to the erosion of traditional knowledge, as Digital Library (TKDL) invladiavaimento sir
younger Sener may adopt modern practices traditional knowledge from biopiracy and make
over traditional ones. it accessible for research.

az

2. Standardization and Regulation: The variability in the
preparation and use of traditional remedies poses
challenges for standardization and regulation.
Ensuring safety, quality, and efficacy is crucial,

w

. Intellectual Property and Ethical Issues: Protecting

GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES TO PRESERVE TRADITIONAL AND ¢ Intellectual Property Rights: Protecting the intell-
LOCAL HEALTH PRACTICES ectual property rights of traditional knowledge
1. Policy Development and Regulatory Frameworks: holders is vital. International agreements like the
e National Policies: Many countries have developed Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing
national policies to promote traditional medicine. support these efforts, ensuring that communities
For instance, China’s government has integrated benefit from their knowledge.
TCM into its national health system, supported by 5. Promotion and Awareness Campaigns:
the State Administration of Traditional Chinese e Public Health Campaigns: Governments run camp-
Medicine (SATCM). aigns to raise awareness about the benefits of
e Legal Frameworks: Governments have established traditional health practices. For instance, India’s
regulatory frameworks to ensure the safe and “Yoga for Health” campaign promotes the
effective use of traditional practices. The World practice of yoga for wellness.
Health Organization (WHO) provides guidelines e Cultural Festivals and Events: Cultural events
to help countries develop these frameworks. celebrating traditional health practices help
India’s Ministry of AYUSH regulates traditional preserve and promote them. The International
health systems, ensuring standards and safety. Day of Yoga, celebrated worldwide, highlights F
2. Research and Development: the significance and benefits of yoga.
e Funding for Research: Governments allocate funds  ¢gyciysion e,
for mesearciy to poenbteally validate Segion Traditional and local health practices are invaluable
health practices. The National Center for Com- fo ichaleerenitn Feri
cj Ith (NCCIH) in otros of globa ealt Seine, offering
P lemen lary gnd integranye Hea Ritonal accessible, culturally relevant, and holistic healthcare
ued Sates SUPP oe pea oa Sac solutions. Government initiatives play a critical role in
and complementary medicine. : . : sae :
. . preserving these practices, ensuring their integration
e Establishment of Research Institutions: Dedicated 5 gern healthcare. Through policy development,
research institutions study traditional health research funding, education, documentation, and
practices. In India, the Central Council for promotion, governments can protect and utilize
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (GERSS} and the ‘raditional Health knowledge, enhancing healthcare
Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine quality and accessibility for diverse populations. The
(CCRUM) conduct extensive research in their collaborative efforts of governments, communities,
respective fields. and international organizations are essential for the
3. Education and Training: sustainable preservation and integration of traditional

e Inclusion in Medical Curricula: Many medical and local health practices.
schools include traditional medicine in their

curricula. This integration ensures that healthcare | 11.2 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL)

iona ble about both
professionals are knowledgea inrhOUETOn

traditional and modern practices. For example, vi
Chinese medical esateaci TCM alongside The Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL)
is an initiative undertaken by the Government of

Western medicine.

----- PAGE 280 -----
Bes c6

India to document and protect traditional knowledge,
particularly in the domains of Ayurveda, Unani,
Siddha, and Yoga. The project aims to prevent the
misappropriation of India’s rich traditional knowledge

by creating a comprehensive database that can be

accessed and used to challenge patent applications that
attempt to wrongly claim such knowledge as novel
inventions.

Website: www.tkdLres.in

OBJECTIVES OF TKDL

1. Protection of Traditional Knowledge: TKDL seeks to
protect traditional knowledge from biopiracy and
misappropriation by documenting it in a stand-
ardized format that is accessible to international
patent offices.

2. Promotion of Traditional Knowledge: By documenting
and digitizing traditional knowledge, TKDL
promotes the use and appreciation of India’s
cultural heritage on a global platform.

3. Facilitation of Research and Development: The
database serves as a valuable resource for res-
earchers and practitioners of traditional medicine,
encouraging innovation and the development of
new therapies.

KEY FEATURES OF TKDL

1. Comprehensive Database: TKDL contains detailed
information on traditional medicinal formulations,
practices, and texts. It translates this knowledge into
multiple languages, including English, German,
French, Spanish, and Japanese, making it accessible
to a wider audience.

2. Collaboration with Patent Offices: TKDL collaborates
with major international patent offices to prevent
the grant of erroneous patents. It provides evidence
from its database to refute patent claims that lack
novelty or involve traditional knowledge.

3. Multi-Disciplinary Approach: The project involves
experts from various fields, including traditional
medicine practitioners, scientists, and information
technology professionals, to ensure accurate and
comprehensive documentation.

4. User-Friendly Interface: The digital library is
designed to be user-friendly, allowing easy access to
documented traditional knowledge for researchers,
patent examiners, and other stakeholders.

IMPACT OF TKDL

1. Preventing Biopiracy; TKDL has _ successfully
challenged and prevented several patent applic-

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 11

ations based on traditional knowledge, thereby
safeguarding India’s intellectual property.

. Global Recognition: The initiative has gained global

recognition for its innovative approach to protecting
traditional knowledge, serving as a model for other
countries.

. Encouraging Ethical Research: By providing a legi-

timate source of traditional knowledge, TKDL
encourages ethical research and development,
ensuring that benefits derived from traditional
knowledge are shared fairly with communities that
have preserved it.

TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY (TKDL) FOR INDIAN
SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE

ig

The TKDL project involves experts from various
fields including Traditional Medicine (such as
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Yoga), patent
examiners, IT specialists, scientists, and technical
officers.

_ TKDL serves as a crucial link between traditional

knowledge documented in local languages
and patent examiners at Intellectual Property
Offices (IPOs).

. By 2010, TKDL had transcribed 148 books on

Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Yoga, resulting in a
vast repository of 34 million pages of information.

. The information transcribed in the TKDL has been

translated into five languages: English, German,
French, Spanish, and Japanese, making it accessible
to a wider audience.

. Data on a significant number of formulations has

been included in the TKDL: 80,000 in Ayurveda,
1,000,000 in Unani, and 12,000 in Siddha.

. The TKDL integrates traditional knowledge with

modern systems, facilitating its preservation,
accessibility, and recognition on a global scale.

. This initiative helps prevent the misappropriation

of traditional knowledge by ensuring that it is
accessible to patent examiners, thus safe guarding
the rights of traditional knowledge holders.

. The success of TKDL highlights the importance

of collaboration between different stakeholders
including traditional medicine practitioners,
government agencies, and technical experts.

SOURCES OF INFORMATION

i

Database Content: The TKDL currently houses

codified and published literature from the Indian
Systems of Medicine.

----- PAGE 281 -----
Chapter 11 * Traditional & Local Health Practices & TKDL

2.

Formulations: It contains over 3.6 lakh formulations
derived from texts of traditional medicine systems
such as Ayurveda, Unani, and Siddha.

. Expert Selection: The selection of books included in

the TKDL is based on inputs from distinguished
experts representing each stream of traditional

medicine.

. Digitization Process: The digitization of medicinal

information began with the incorporation of openly
available knowledge found in published books.

. Time of Origin: The time of origin mentioned in the

TKDL corresponds to the lifespan of the authors of
the respective books.

. Compiled Books: For compiled books, the time of

origin is not specified, as it depends on the time
of origin of the back-references from which the
information is sourced.

HoW THE TKDL WORKS

1.

4.

Data Storage: The knowledge extracted from ancient
Indian texts is stored in a digital format comprising
34 million A4 size pages.

. Translation: The stored information is translated into

five foreign languages: Japanese, English, Spanish,
German, and French. This translation process is
not merely transliteration but a knowledge-based
conversion, ensuring accuracy and clarity across
languages. This is achieved using Unicode and
Metadata methodology.

. Access Agreements: TKDL has signed access and

non-disclosure agreements with the Indian patent
office and seven other global patent offices. This
ensures robust security measures to safeguard
India’s valuable bioresources against piracy.

Technical Expertise: The development and
maintenance of TKDL require not only advanced

technology but also the expertise of individuals
knowledgeable in ancient texts, modern medicine,
and technical terms of foreign languages.

. Global Effort: TKDL represents a significant global

undertaking, requiring substantial _ financial
investment. The project cost approximately Rs.
16 crore to develop and maintain this unique
proprietary system.

BENEFITS OF TKDL
1, Combatting Bio piracy: TKDL has successfully

identified 1,000 cases of biopiracy of India’s
traditional knowledge (IK) in the last three years.
Out of these, patent claims were withdrawn or
cancelled in 105 cases by the respective patent
offices. This is achieved at no cost to India and
within a significantly shorter time frame compared
to traditional legal battles.

. Cost and Time Efficiency: TKDL eliminates the need

for spending large sums of money and time in
legal battles against bio piracy. For instance, the
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority (APEDA) spent 7 years and
Rs 7.62 crore in legal fees to fight for the intellectual
property rights of basmati rice.

. Decline in Patent Claims: There has been a notable

decline of up to 44% in patent claims filed on Indian
systems of medicine, indicating the effectiveness of
TKDL in preventing wrongful patenting.

. Inclusion of Yoga Postures: TKDL has expanded its

database to include videos of the most common yoga
postures. This addition helps prevent the wrongful
granting of patents for yoga exercises in the West,
addressing an increasing trend in misappropriation
of traditional knowledge.

4s ee

----- PAGE 282 -----
268 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana « Chapter 11

%

ner
ol =

Council of Scientific & Industrial Research [CSIR]

Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

TKDL SEARCH |
AYURVEDA UNANI SIDDHA SOWARIGPA 2

Representative Database of Ayurvedic, Unani, Siddha and Sowarigpa Formulations More...

HOME PAGE OF TKDL

Access to the full database is available to Patent Offices only under TKDL Access Agreement
About TKDL Select Language v |

Initiative of
Council of Sdentific & Industrial Research (CSIR)
Ministry of Ayurveda. Yooa & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddba and Homeopathy (AYUSH)

Eest Viewed with Internet Explorer 6.0 with a resolution of 1024 x 768
General Information

SEARCH TYPES

Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

Representative 1250 Formulations

Multiple search terms including Keywords, Diseases and IPC Codes Gn be used simlutaneously
= searched mith the operetor ‘or' (‘and' Is not supported). The corresponding help menu provides al
Bee Se line concep tare acalistic in tha databaen and con ba acad th eclack existing search terms. Phrases
joc botanical names can be searched completely by enclosing in quotes, e.g. ‘withania somnifera’,
This is a more precise, exact, efficient and fast search option. This option allow use of operator ‘or’. Al
Advance Search complete search query may contain at least five search terms simultaneously including Keywords/IPC
= Code/Title/Bibliographic Code/Disease, each Individually specified.
TKRC (Traditional Knowledge Resource Classification) is designed to classity Indian Traditional
Knowledge documentation, The TKRC contains language independent symbols and is modeled on the
IPC. The various terms used have been put under different heads like plants, animals, diseases,
factions, etc. The search can be used to familiarize oneself with this system of classification since the
page also contains details of TKRC structure and allows search of various TKRC symbols from known
terms.

[= International Patent Classification (IPC) is a hierarchical system of symbols for the classificauon
‘of patents and utility models based on differant areas of technolagy of the patents. These cymbols
are language-independent and are used by more than 100 Patent offices and Regional offices for
Cassification of thelr patent data. Only those IPC symbols relevant to TKDL are used and are from
the 6th edition of the IPC. The appropriate IPC symbols may be selected from Ube IPC search menu
provided. The IPC search allows for single or multiple symbols to be searched.

In@iatire f
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR)

Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (avusH)

----- PAGE 283 -----
Chapter 11° Traditional & Local Health Practices & TKDL RES SS eS

SIMPLE SEARCH

=

Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

Simple Search

Representative 1250 Formulations

Advance Search | TKRC Search | IPC Search

Enter your query below:

|

OD with local names Tips for Searching | Disease Help!

Search Reset
« Search using keywords with or without space entered withi i
See aiae arrestee au within single quotes will not give desired results and the

i
i

+ Search on multiple keywords without Boolean operator is not accepted for eg: “curcuma”,"oil”
+ Use of special characters (~1@ #$90"&) in search text boxis notaccepted, |

Co

ADVANCE SEARCH

—

Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

Advance Search

Representative 1250 Formulations
Simple Search | TKRC Search | IPC Search

O with local nam Tips for Searching
for the formulation that_
[Should Contain | astheKeyword _ v|[OR~) [ Keyword Helpl
Should Coniain asthelPC Code v|[ORv] | PCHell |
[Snows Contain v asthe Title y][ORY) [tie Het
Should Conlin. ¥ iis > Tay ~———fastheBitio _—_¥ |[OR¥) [_BblioHelpt |
[Should Contain ¥ actheDicoaco (Dicoaco Holp!
“knowledge is known since and show along

Any Time v 10 Results Vv With Summary vi]

summary includes
_ Gc coe thle © siblography _ F pisease _E_Keyword

= Ecorch box on the top shoeld rot be loft empty
« Use of special characters (~1@2$%*8) in search text box Is sot allowed “

----- PAGE 284 -----
270 Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana + Chapter 11

TKRC SEARCH

2 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library 274

TKRC Search

Representative 1250 Formulotions

Simple Search | Advance Search | [PC Search

Enter your TKRC Code: [TRC ieeascaticd
J Ga

+ Oe not mca boolean eperstors In the caarch box above. Tips for
+ Search bones given below are nat editable. Searching

S.No. TKRC Code Descnpson

ORY
] (oaw

ORY
ORV
ORY

Lt)
8
VEC ECCT

Owith local names Sueams: All Oayurveca Ounani Osiddha

(ssa)

IPC SEARCH

Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

IPC Search

Representative 1250 Formulations

Simple Search | Advance Search | TKRC Search

Enter your IPC Code: TPC Identicatont

bow: = J

a eee Tips fer
Searching

S.No. IPC Code Desciption

fe
gi
Ig)

Bo

6

[eal

[3]

LJ
444 OO

b
a

QO
|
fo}

D
Jie

i

----- PAGE 285 -----
Chapter 11 + Traditional & Local Health Practices & TKDL

Chapter At A Glance

TRADITIONAL AND LOCAL HEALTH PRACTICES
4. Importance of Traditional and Local Health Practices
e Include herbal medicine, Ayurveda, traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM), and indigenous healing.
Offer holistic health solutions addressing physical,
mental, and spiritual well-being.
e More accessible and culturally relevant,
particularly in rural and low-income areas.
e Contribute to biodiversity conservation and
community empowerment.
e Complement modern medical treatments.
2. Challenges in Preservation
e Scientific Validation: Lack of rigorous scientific
validation.
e Standardization and Regulation: Variability in
preparation and use.
e Intellectual Property: Protecting rights and
ensuring fair benefit-sharing.
e Knowledge Erosion: Risk of losing traditional
knowledge due to globalization.
3. Government Initiatives
e Policy Development and Regulatory Frameworks:
e Establish national policies and legal frameworks.
e Examples: China’s integration of TCM, India’s
Ministry of AYUSH.
Research and Development
« Fund research to validate traditional practices.
« Establish institutions like India’s CCRAS
and CCRUM.
Education and Training
~ Integrate traditional medicine into medical curricula.
Provide certification programs for traditional healers.
Documentation and Knowledge Preservation
+ Digitize traditional knowledge (e.g.,
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library).
Protect intellectual property rights through intern-
ational agreements like the Nagoya Protocol.
¢ Promotion and Awareness Campaigns.
~ Run public health campaigns (e.g-, India’s “Yoga for
Health” campaign).
Celebrate traditional practices through cultural
events (e.g., International Day of Yoga).
Conclusion
+ Government initiatives are crucial for preserving
traditional health practices.

India’s

Dd

es

+ Ensuring their integration into modern healthcare
improves quality and accessibility.

Collaboration among governments, communities,
and international organizations is essential for
sustainable preservation and utilization of traditional
health knowledge.

TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE DIGITAL LIBRARY (TKDL)
Introduction

TKDL is an initiative by the Government of India
to document and protect traditional knowledge in
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Yoga.

Objective: Prevent misappropriation of India’s tradi-
tional knowledge by creating a comprehensive, acce-
ssible database to challenge wrongful patent claims.

Objectives of TKDL
1. Protection of Traditional Knowledge
2. Promotion of Traditional Knowledge
3. Facilitation of Research and Development
Key Features of TKDL
1. Comprehensive Database:
2. Collaboration with Patent Offices
3. Multi-Disciplinary Approach
4. User-Friendly Interface
Impact of TKDL
1. Preventing Biopiracy
2. Global Recognition
3. Encouraging Ethical Research
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) for Indian
Systems of Medicine
1. Expert Collaboration
. Linking Local and Global
. Extensive Documentation
. Multilingual Access
. Vast Repository
. Integration with Moder Systems
. Preventing Misappropriation
8. Collaborative Success
Sources of Information
1. Database Content
2. Formulations
3. Expert Selection
4. Digitization Process.
5. Time of Origin
How TKDL Works
1. Data Storage
2. Translation

%

ND OO £—& WD NY

SS ae aee

= wk bes

----- PAGE 286 -----
Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 17

3. Access Agreements
4. Technical Expertise
5. Global Effort
Benefits of TKDL
i. Combatting Biopiracy

2.
Be

4.

Cost and Time Efficiency
Decline in Patent Claims
Inclusion of Yoga Postures

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

1 Traditional health practices encompass:
a. Moder surgical techniques
b. Use of antibiotics
c. Herbal medicine
d. Radiation therapy

2. Ayurveda is an ancient system of medicine

originating from:
a. China c. India
b. Egypt d. Greece

3. The emphasis of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) is on:
a. Surgical procedures
b. Balancing the body’s energy
c. Antibiotic treatments
d. Radiation therapy
4. Traditional and local health practices are important for:
a. Being costly and inaccessible
b. Being culturally irrelevant
c. Being holistic and accessible
d. Focusing only on physical health
5. One of the challenges in preserving traditional health
practices is:
a. Lack of scientific validation
b. Over-regulation
c. Standardization of practices
d. Strong intellectual property protection
6. Which government agency in China supports Traditional
Chinese Medicine (TCM)?
a. World Health Organization (WHO)

b. State Administration of Traditional Chinese
Medicine (SATCM)

10.

c. National Center for Complementary and
Integrative Health (NCCIH)
d. Ministry of AYUSH

- The Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing

aims to:

a. Encourage biopiracy

b. Protect intellectual property rights of traditional
knowledge holders

c. Limit access to traditional knowledge

d. Exclude traditional knowledge
commercial use

from

. What does the National Center for Complementary and

Integrative Health (NCCIH) support?

a. Research on traditional and complementary
medicine

b. Regulation of traditional medicine

c. Standardization of traditional practices

d. Promotion of modem surgical techniques

. Which country’s Ministry of AYUSH regulates traditional

health systems?

a. China c. India

b. United States d. Brazil

What does the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

(TKDL) aim to achieve?

a. Promote biopiracy

b. Preserve traditional knowledge and protect from
biopiracy

c. Standardize traditional practices

d. Exclude traditional knowledge from research use

ANSWERS KEYS

ion wee ew Was Shs Rass es SSL 7S
Tee nib Weeds Gane Som ics 210. hk

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

© Short Note on Traditional and local Health Practices.
© Write short note on TKDL.

----- PAGE 287 -----
PHARMACOVIGILANCE FOR
AYURVEDA DRUGS

42.1 Introduction

Pharmacovigilance is a crucial aspect of clinical research,
involving the detection, assessment, understanding,
and prevention of adverse effects of medicines, both
short-term and long-term. It encompasses clinical trial
safety and post-marketing surveillance throughout a
product's lifecycle.

In India, pharmacovigilance is still developing, with
limited knowledge and progress compared to western
countries. Understanding its importance and impact
on the product lifecycle is essential for integrating
good practices, ensuring regulatory compliance, and
enhancing safety.

Pharmacovigilance aims to reduce the risk of drug-
related harms to patients. In India, the National
Pharmacovigilance Program, initiated in 2003 under the
Central Drug Standards Control Organization (CDSCO),
focuses on this goal. The WHO has emphasized
including traditional medicines in pharmacovigilance
systems and published guidelines on safety monitoring
of herbal medicines in 2004.

Etymology: The word ‘pharmaco’ comes from the
Greek ‘pharmacon’, meaning medicine, and ‘vigilance’
comes from the Latin ‘vigilantia’, meaning alertness
and attentiveness. Pharmacovigilance is about being
absolutely alert and watchful about the medicines we
give to patients.

Definition: Pharmacovigilance is the science and
activities related to detecting, assessing, understanding,
and preventing adverse effects or any other medicine-
related problems. It aims to ensure the safety and
effectiveness of medications, protecting patients from
harm and improving public health outcomes.

12.2 Important Terminology

Adverse Drug Reaction: ‘a response to a medicine which
is noxious and unintended, and which occurs at dose

normally used in man.’ or ‘any response to a drug that is
Noxious and unintended and that occurs at doses used
inman for prophylaxis, diagnostic or therapy, excluding
failure to accomplish the intended purpose.

Adverse Drug Event: ‘any untoward medical occurrence
that may present during treatment with a medicine, but
which does not necessarily have a causal relationship
with the treatment.’

Side Effect: Side effect is any unintended effect of a
pharmaceutical product occurring at doses normally
used in human which is related to the pharmacological
properties of the drug.

In Classical Ayurveda also prescribes metals and
minerals as medicines given as bhasmas or in combin-
ation with plants as herbo-mineral formulations (e.g.
Arogyavardhini).

12.3 History

* Thalidomide tragedy: 1960, German + 46 countries,
More than 20,000 affected- phocomelia.

+ India: On November 22, 2010, Hrithik Roshan
experienced an allergic reaction to antibiotics,
resulting in spasms in his lungs and throat.

Examples

1. Bromfenac (NSAID): Year of Marketing: - 1997, Year
of Withdrawal: - 1998, Reasons for Withdrawal: -
Serious Hepatotoxic Effects.

2. Benoxaprofen (NSAID): Year of Marketing: - 1982,
Year of Withdrawal: - 1982, Reasons for Withdrawal:
- Liver Necrosis.

12.4 Major Development in PV

+ 1962— Amendment to Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act- Required both safety and efficacy data.

* 1963— British Committee on Safety of Drug
Monitoring.

----- PAGE 288 -----
274

* 1964— UK Starts Yellow Cards System.
* 1964-1965— National Adr
uk, Australia, New
Germany, Swedan.

Reporting System

Zealand, Canada, West

Bs

1968— WHO:- Progrramme for international drug
monitoring.

OS

1978— WHO Center moved from Geneva to Uppsala.
In India

cg

1986— ADR monitoring system for indian proposed

1997— India Joined WHO- ADR monitoring
programme

Boy

,
"

* 2004-2008— National PV Programme overseen
by CDSCO

* 2010— Pharmacovigilance Programme of India.

12.5 PV Centers In India

1. PV centers: (2) Seth GS medical college Mumbai and
AIIMS, New Delhi.

2. RPV Centers: (5) Kolkata, Mumbai, Nagpur, New
Delhi and Pondicherry.

3. Peripheral PV centers: (28)

4. CDSCO zonal offices: North zone- Ghaziabad,
East zone- Kolkata, West zone- Mumbai, South
zone- Chennai, Zonal office - Ahmedabad and
Hyderabad.

National Pharmacovigilance Programme for ASU

Drugs (NPP-ASU) The National Pharmacovigilance

Programme for Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani (ASU)

drugs was initiated in December 2007, following a

workshop sponsored by the World Health Organization

(WHO) at IPGT and RA, Jamnagar, to explore the

implementation of pharmacovigilance for ASU

drugs. The protocol and adverse drug reaction (ADR)
reporting forms were developed and discussed by the

Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,

Siddha, and Homoeopathy (AYUSH), Government of

India, in August 2008. The final draft was released by

the Department of AYUSH on September 29, 2008. Since

then, IPGT and RA, Jamnagar, India, has served as the

National Pharmacovigilance Resource Centre for ASU

drugs in India.

Furthermore, on January 20, 2005, Schedule Y of the

Drugs and Cosmetics Act (DCA) was comprehensively

amended to include extensive pharmacovigilance

obligations for companies intending to manufacture
and market new drugs in India.

| 12.6 Adverse Drug Reaction in Ayurveda
Tosi ate qdany tent daera faery (Cha. Su. 1/ 126)

Rasashastra and Bhalshajya Kalpana * Chapter 12

aon fad gar yet aarshagtreter |
auraemfasrd feraratagyt FAT 11 (Cha. Su. 1/124)
aaunifuta ava faattd serra!

aga Fret q...... 11 (Cha. Chi. 1/ 25)

NEED OF PV IN ASU

In ancient times, Ayurvedic physicians prepared
medicines for their patients themselves. However,
today, this practice is followed by only a handful of
practitioners, as the production and sale of Ayurvedic
drugs have evolved into a formalized and thriving
industry. The manufacture and marketing of Ayurvedic
drugs are regulated by the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940.

Broadly, two categories of medicines labelled as
“Ayurvedic” are available in the market: Classical
Ayurvedic formulations, which adhere to descriptions
in Ayurveda samhitas (e.g., kutajarishta), and patentand
proprietary formulations made from herbal extracts.
There are 8,403 licensed Ayurvedic pharmacies, and
the industry’s approximate turnover is Rs. 4,000 crore,
accounting for nearly a third of the total pharmaceutical
business in India.
However, this commercialization has brought challenges
regarding the safe use of Ayurvedic medicines,
emphasizing the need for formal pharmacovigilance
programs in the field. Despite this, the number of
adverse reactions to Ayurvedic drugs reported or
recorded in the National Pharmacovigilance Program
in India is negligible. This is largely attributed to the
strong belief that Ayurvedic medicines are safe.
WHO CAN REPORT AN ADR?

1. Clinician

2. Nurses/ Drug Provider

3. Consumers

4. Pharmacist

5. Pharmaceutical Company.

BENEFITS OF PHARMACOVIGILANCE (PV)

1. Provides information about adverse drug reactions

(ADRs) to the general population.

- Knowledge of adverse effects helps in effective
treatment.

3. Helps to detect rare ADRs that may not be identified
in pre-marketing surveillance.

. Aids in collecting comprehensive data on ADRs
from all sections of society, including various
diseases and dietary traditions, which may not be
included in pre-marketing surveillance.

. Facilitates the development of a better system for
reporting ADRs.

----- PAGE 289 -----
Chapter 12 ° Pharmacovigilance for Ayurveda Drugs

ROLE OF PHARMACOVIGILANCE

1. Identifying, quantifying, and documenting drug-
related problems.

2. Contributing to reducing the risk of drug-related
problems in the healthcare system.

3. Increasing knowledge and understanding of factors
and mechanisms responsible for drug-related
injuries.

Pharmacovigilance is essential for ensuring the
safety, quality, and efficacy of drugs by identifying,
assessing, ensuring, and minimizing harmful effects, It
benefits society and the healthcare system by boosting
confidence in drug safety, ensuring the safety of drugs
to minimize adverse effects, and maintaining drug
efficacy to provide maximum benefit to patients.
Note: Schedule Y of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act (DCA) of
1945, which addresses drug safety, was thoroughly
amended on January 20, 2005. This amendment

275

introduced detailed pharmacovigilance obligations
for companies aiming to manufacture and market
new drugs in India.

SCHEDULE Y OF THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS AcT INCLUDES

REGULATIONS ON

* Preclinical and clinical studies for developing
new drugs.

* Clinical trial requirements for importing drugs.

* Manufacturing and obtaining marketing approvals
for new drugs in India.

* The continued commitment of the DCGI (Drugs
Controller General of India) to ensure pharmaceutical
companies comply with pharmacovigilance
obligations.

+ Clear responsibilities for pharmaceutical companies
regarding their marketed products and reporting
adverse events from clinical trials.

REPORTING FORM

Pharmacovigilance of Ayurveda,
siddha, Unani and Homoepathy (ASU & H) Drugs

Reporting form for Suspected Adverse Reaction

Note:

1. Personal information of the consumers/ patients/ ADR reporter's will be kept confidential.

2. All suspected reations are to be reported with relevent detailds.
3. All completed forms are to be submitted to the program coordinator of nearby centre.

Ay-NIA/ Code of peripheral
Centre/ADR Number/ year
Ay-IPGT/ Code of peripheral
Centre/ADR Number/ year
Un-NIUM/ Code of peripheral
Centre/ADR Number/ year
Si-NIS/ Code of peripheral
Centre/ADR Number/ year
Ho-NIH/ Code of peripheral
Centre/ADR Number/ year

1. Patient/consumer identification (please complete or tick boxes below as appropriate)
Patient Record Number (PRN)

Name

Place of Birth
Address
Village/ Town
Post / Via
District/ State
Diagnosis:

IPD/OPD

Constitution and temperament:

2. Description of the suspected adverse Reactions

Date and time of initial observation
Description of reaction

Age:
Sex: Male/ Female

----- PAGE 290 -----
Ce ee | ey —__ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana * Chapter 12

3. Whether the patient is Suffering with any chronic disorders?
Hepatic Renal Cardiac Diabetes Any others

4. Addictions, if any? If yes, Please Specify:

5. H/O previous allergies/ Drug reactions, if any: If yes, please specify:

6, List of all ASU & H drugs used by the patient during the period of one month:

aoe Any unwanted

Form/Route of
administration Stopped/ | Reason foruse | rrences
Continued

Name of the | Manufactures/
drug Batch ho.

7. List of other drugs used by the patient during the period of one month:

Form/Route of
administration Stopped/ Reason foruse | occurrences
Continued

Any unwanted

Name ofthe | Manufactures/

drug Batch no.

8. Details of the drug suspected to cause ADR:

« Name of the drug:

~ Manufacturing date and Expiry date (if available):

* Remaining pack/label (if available):

+ Consumed orally along with (water/milk/honey/or any other)
+ Whether any dietary precautions have been prescribed?
« If yes, please specify:
% Whether the drug is consumed under medical supervision or used as self medication.

+ Any other relevant information associated with drug use:

9. Management provided/taken for suspected adverse reaction

10. Please indicate outcome of the suspected adverse reaction (tick appropriate)

| _Recovered | NotRecovered | Unknown | Fatal: | itfatalDateofdeath |
Severe: yes/no Reaction abated after drug stopped or dose reduced

Reaction reappeared re administration of drug:

Was the patient admitted to hospital? If yes, give name and address of

hospital
11. Any abnormal findings of relevant laboratoryinvestigationds related to the episode done pre and post episode of ADR:
12. Particulars of ADR Reporter:

Please tick: Patient/Attendant/ Nurse/ Doctor/ Pharmacist/ Health worker/ Drug Manufacturer/ Any others (Please specify)

Name
Address
Telephone/ E-mail:

Signature of the reporter: Date:
Please send the completed form to: The centre from where the form is received or do All India Institute of
Ayurveda, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi-110076

----- PAGE 291 -----
acovigilanceayus @gmail.com

The SADR Probability Scale
(Program coordinator has to fill this scale)

Question

‘e Are there previous conclusive reports on the reactions?
2, (Did the ADR appeer after the suspected drug was adminstered?
3 Did the ADR improve when the drug was discontinued a specific antagonisit
administered? a
Did the adverse reaction reappear when the drug was readministered?
Are there alternatives causes that could solely have caused the ADR/
Was the drug detected in the blood (or other fluids) in a concentrationd Kno
Was the reaction more severe when the dose was increased, ar less severe

oi A call

wes decreased?

wes the adverse event confirmed by objective evidence?
Total Score

pp

Score> 9= Certain; 5S = probable;

1+= possible;

Central Sector Scheme and Centres of Pharmaco-
vigilance of ASU & H Drugs

The Central Sector Scheme for promoting
pharmacovigilance of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and
Homoeopathy (ASU&H) drugs is an initiative by the
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India. The scheme
aims to monitor the safety of traditional medicine
products and detect any adverse reactions or side
effects.
The Centres of Pharmacovigilance are institutions
established under this scheme to collect, analyze,
and disseminate information related to adverse drug
reactions (ADRs) of ASU&H drugs. These centers are
responsible for:

1. Monitoring and reporting ADRs

2 Conducting pharmacovigilance activities

3. Providing safety information to healthcare
professionals and consumers

4. Collaborating with national and international
pharmacovigilance agencies

The main objectives of the scheme are:

1. To establish a robust pharmacovigilance system for
ASU&H drugs

2 To ensure the safe use of traditional medicine
products

3. To promote rational use of ASU&H drugs

4. To contribute to the global pharmacovigilance
efforts.

Did the patient have a similar reaction to the same or similar drugs in any

0=Unlikely J.

| At A Glance
PHARMACOVIGILANCE (PV) OVERVIEW
* PV encompasses the detection,
” aneesteaes and prevention of ad) se effects of
medicines throughout their lifecycle. 55.
© Tt aims to reduce the risk of drug-related harms to
patients by ensuring the safety and effectiveness of
medications.
+ PV includes clinical trial safety and poctmatetng
surveillance and plays a cudal role in
regulatory compliance and enhancing safety.
ETYMOLOGY AND DEFINITION
* The term  “pharmacovigilance” combines
“pharmaco,” meaning medicine, with “vigilance,”
indicating alertness and attentiveness.
* PV is defined as the science and activities relat
detecting, assessing, understanding, and prev
adverse effects or any other medicanen
problems.
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT
+ Notable events like the thalidomide tragedy and the
establishment of monitoring systems like the Yellow
Cards System mark key milestones in PV history.
+ In India, initiatives such as the National Pharma
vigilance Program and the Pharmacovigila
Programme of India have been established.
KEY TERMINOLOGY
* Adverse drug reactions (ADRs), adverse drug
events, and side effects are essential terms In
pharmacovigilance.

9,
“Gp

----- PAGE 292 -----
——

278 Bo ee.

PV CENTERS AND PROGRAMS IN INDIA

* India has several PV centers and programs, including
the National Pharmacovigilance Programme for
Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani (ASU) drugs.

ROLE AND IMPORTANCE OF PHARMACOVIGILANCE

“

* PVplaysa critical role in identifying, quantifying, and
documenting drug-related problems, reducing risks
in healthcare systems, and increasing understanding
of factors responsible for drug-related injuries.

* It is essential for ensuring drug safety, quality, and
efficacy, maintaining confidence in drug safety, and
providing maximum benefit to patients.

____ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana » Chapter 12

REPORTING AND BENEFITS

* Reporting ADRs is crucial, and anyone from
clinicians to consumers can report them, contributing
to drug safety.

* PV provides information about ADRs, aids in
effective treatment, and helps detect rare ADRs.

REGULATIONS AND OBLIGATIONS

* Schedule Y of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act of India
includes regulations on preclinical and clinical
studies, clinical trial requirements, manufacturing,
and marketing approvals for new drugs, emphasizing
pharmacovigilance obligations for pharmaceutical

companies,

MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS

1. What is the primary goal of pharmacovigilance?
a. To develop new drugs
b. To market pharmaceutical products

c. To reduce the risk of drug-related harms to
patients

d. To increase drug sales

2. Which organization in India initiated the National
Pharmacovigilance Program in 2003?

a. Indian Medical Association

b. Central Drug Standards Control Organiza-
tion (CDSCO
c. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
d. World Health Organization (WHO)
3. When did India join the WHO Adverse Drug Reaction
(ADR) monitoring program?
a. 1986 c. 2004
b. 1997 d. 2010
4. What does the term ‘adverse drug
(ADR) mean?
a. A positive response to a medicine
b. Anoxious and unintended response to a medicine
at normal doses
c. A minor side effect of a drug
d. Any beneficial effect of a drug
5. Which amendment to the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act required both safety and efficacy data
for drugs?
a. 1962 c. 1964
b. 1963 d. 1965
6. What is the role of peripheral pharmacovigilance
centers in India?
a. To develop new drugs
b. To market pharmaceutical products

reaction’

c. To monitor adverse drug reactions
d. To manufacture Ayurvedic drugs

7. Which traditional medicine systems are included in
India’s National Pharmacovigilance Programme for
ASU Drugs?
a. Allopathic and Homeopathy
b. Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani
c. Chinese and Tibetan Medicine
d. Naturopathy and Yoga

8. What is the significance of the “Yellow Cards System”
initiated in the UK in 1964?

a. To identify fake medicines

b. To track drug efficacy

c. To report adverse drug reactions
d. To promote new drugs

9. Which adverse drug event led to the withdrawal of
Bromfenac (NSAID) from the market in 1998?

a. Liver necrosis

b. Cardiovascular issues

c. Serious hepatotoxic effects
d. Severe allergic reactions

10. What was the primary outcome of the comprehensive
amendment to Schedule Y of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act in 2005?

a. Reduction in drug prices

b. Introduction of pharmacovigilance obligations
for new drug manufacturers

c. Ban On certain herbal medicines
d, Increase in the number of clinical trials

ANSWERS KEYS

al, c 2 b Bs b 4. b Sx a
6. c 1, b 8. c 9. c 10% Be.0)

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

f © Short Note on Pharmacovigilance.

e Write short note on National Pharmacovigilance Programme for ASU Drugs |

----- PAGE 293 -----
APPENDICES

1, PANCHVIDHA KASHAYA KALPANA

The term “Panchavidha Kashaya Kalpana” describes
five fundamental methods for making herbal remedies.
These techniques seek to improve the medication’s
efficacy, palatability, and shelf life. It includes:

]. Svarasa Kalpana

2. Kalka Kalpana

3. Kvatha Kalpana

4, Hima Kalpana

5. Phanta Kalpana

4.1 Svarasa Kalpana

In Ayurveda, juice (Svarasa) is the liquid extract of fresh,
clean, green herbs obtained by squeezing, pressing, or
using any tool. This juice is fresh.

| 4.2 Kalka Kalpana

Herbal paste, often referred to as Kalka, is a paste created
by crushing and grinding fresh herbs. It also contains a
paste composed of water and dry herbs. It is also known
as Aavapa or Prakshepa. Nonetheless, herbal paste is
referred to be Prakshepa if it is prepared by combining
ghee, oil, or any other sour ingredient.

| 1.3 Kvatha Kalpana

The concoction made by boiling one part herbs in
sixteen parts water until it is reduced to one-eighth part
water is called a kvatha.

| 1.4 Hima Kalpana

In Ayurveda, the water obtained by soaking one part of
herbs in six parts of water for the entire night, followed
by cleaning and filtering in the morning, is called a cold
infusion, or Hima.

APPENDIX-I : BRIEF INTRODUCTION OF CLASSICAL DOSES FORM AND
THEIR METHOD OF PREPARATION

1.5 Phanta Kalpana

Phanta is the term for the water that remains after
adding hot water to herbs. Ratio of drug water is 1:4.

Shelf life: Instant Use (Saviryatavadhi)
2. CHURANA KALPANA

Churna is a dried form of Kalka Kalpana, often used
to create Kalka. It refers to the powdered form of a
single drug or a mixture of two or more drugs that
have been powdered separately and then blended
homogeneously. According to the Indian Ayurvedic
formulary, Churna is a fine powder of medication or
drug mixture. Sharngadhara lists synonyms for Chura
as raja or kshoda, and it is administered in the dose
of one karsha-parmana. Acharya Kashyapa describes
Churna as a fine powder used for treating grahani-roga
(digestive disorders), ama vikara (toxicity disorders),
vrana (wounds), and as an anjana (collyrium for eyes).
Acharya Sushruta also emphasizes the importance of
Churna Kalpana in treatment, as noted in the Ashtanga
Sameraha and Ashtanga Hridaya. The use of Churna ~
Kalpana continues to increase over time. 4

GENERAL METHOD OF PREPARATION OF CHURNA KALPANA
1. Selection of Raw Materials:
¢ Choose high-quality, pure, and properly identified
medicinal herbs.
e Ensure the herbs are free from contaminants, ditt,
and other impurities.
2. Cleaning:
Clean the selected herbs thoroughly to remove
dust, dirt, and foreign materials.
e Washing might be required for some herbs to
ensure cleanliness.

----- PAGE 294 -----
280.

~~ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana

3. Drying:

« Dry the cleaned herbs properly. This can be done
using sunlight or shade, depending on the nature
of the herb,

+ Ensure the herbs are completely dried to prevent
mold growth and to ease the grinding process.

4. Pulverization (Grinding):

+ Grind the dried herbs into a fine powder using a
Suitable grinder or pulverizer.

e Traditional methods use stone grinders, while
modern methods may use electric grinders.

5. Sieving:

e Sieve the ground powder to obtain a uniform and
fine consistency.

e Use a fine mesh sieve (typically 80-120 mesh) to
ensure the powder is of uniform particle size.

6. Mixing:

e If the Churna is a combination of multiple herbs,
mix the individual powders thoroughly to ensure
homogeneity.

e Usea clean, dry mixing vessel and mix in a well-
ventilated area.

7. Storage:

e Store the prepared Churna in a clean, dry, and
airtight container to protect it from moisture,
light, and insects.

e Label the container with the name of the Churna,
date of preparation, and expiration date.

8. Quality Control:

e Ensure the Churna is free from moisture and
contamination.

e Perform quality control tests to chock for
parameters like particle size, purity, ana bsence
of contaminants.

KEY POINTS TO REMEMBER
i. Cleanliness: Ensure all equipment and storage
containers are clean and dry.
2. Dryness: Herbs must be completely dried to prevent
microbial growth.
3. Uniformity: Achieve a uniform particle size for
consistent therapeutic efficacy.
4. Storage: Protect the Churna from moisture, light,
and pests to maintain its quality and efficacy.
3. VATI KALPANA
Vati Kalpana, as described in Ayurveda, is a potent
and stable dosage form that is extensively detailed in
the Sharngadhara Samhita. Acharya Sharngadhara has

included various forms like Guda (jaggery), Gutika

(pills), Vati (tablets), Pindi, Modaka, and Guggulu under

the single heading of Vati in one chapter, showcasing

their significance and versatility in Ayurvedic medicine.

Binding agents are crucial in the preparation of Vatj

formulations. The primary binding agents used include:
1. Guda (Jaggery)

. Sita (Sugar)

. Guggulu

. Madhu (Honey)

. Gomutra (Cow Urine)

. Svarasa (Fresh Juice)

. Kvatha (Decoction)

ND OF & WwW NO

THESE AGENTS SERVE MULTIPLE PURPOSES

1. Consistency: When subjected to heat, these binding

agents melt and achieve the consistency of Avaleha

(a semi-solid form). This ensures the powdered
herbs mix thoroughly and bind well.

2. Hardness and Friability: The sticky nature of these
agents provides the Vati with the required hardness
and reduces friability, ensuring the tablets do not
break easily.

3. Therapeutic Benefits: Many of these agents, such
as Guggulu and Gomutra, have their therapeutic
properties that complement the medicinal effects of
the herbs used.

PREPARATION PROCESS
The preparation process involves several steps to ensure
the stability and efficacy of the Vati:

1. Heating and Melting: Guda is often heated alone
or mixed in Kvatha and then heated. This melted
Guda is then mixed with the herbal powders.

2. Bhavana Dravya: Gomutra, Svarasa, and Kvatha are
used as Bhavana Dravya (wetting agents), which
act as binding agents when Guda, Sita, and Madhu
are not used. These agents help in faster dispersion
of the Vati due to their inability to achieve Avaleha
consistency.

3. Mixing and Cooling: The herbal mixture is added
to the melted binding agent and mixed properly.
Once the mixture cools down, it is shaped into Vati,
ensuring proper hardness and reduced friability.

TYPES OF VATI AND THEIR FORMULATION

Various formulations and their specific characteristics
are outlined by Acharya Sharngadhara:

Guggulu Formulations: Guggulu is melted, herbal
powders are added, and the mixture is shaped into

----- PAGE 295 -----
Appendices :
Pindakriti form and then into Gutika (pills) using
mechanical force (Kuttana).

Modaka: Typically made of 1 Pala (4 Tola).

sanjivani Vati: Made up of 1 Gunja.

THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND BENEFITS

Acharya Sharngadhara’s choice of binding agents
like Guda, Guggulu, and Gomutra was not random.
These agents were selected not only for their binding
properties but also for their therapeutic benefits:

Guda: Known for its demulcent properties and used to
treat conditions like cough and hoarseness of voice.
Guggulu: Renowned for its anti-inflammatory and lipid-

lowering effects.
Gomutra: Used forits detoxifying and diuretic properties.

VARIATIONS IN DOSAGE

The dosage of Vati formulations varies due to several

factors:

1, Characteristics of Dispersion: The choice of binding

agent affects how quickly the Vati disperses in

the body.

. Bioavailability: Different binding agents and
preparation methods impact the bioavailability of
the active ingredients.

3. Therapeutic Use: Depending on whether the Vati
is used for therapeutic purposes, as a Rasayana
(rejuvenative), or as a Vajikarana (aphrodisiac), the
dosage and formulation may vary.

Vati Kalpana represents a sophisticated approach
in Ayurvedic pharmaceutics, combining the art of
formulation with therapeutic efficacy. The detailed
procedures and thoughtful selection of ingredients
by Acharya Sharngadhara highlight the profound
understanding of herbal pharmacology and the
importance of dosage forms in achieving optimal
therapeutic outcomes.

4. GUGGULU KALPANA

Guggulu is a resin derived from Commiphoramukul,
a small tree known as Indian bedellium. The use of
guggulu is first documented in the Sushruta Samhita,
and it should be used one year after its collection.
Nava guggulu acts as a rasayana (rejuvenative), while
purana guggulu causes apakarshana (detoxification).
Pharmaceutically, guggulu is used as a binding agent in
the preparation of vati (tablets), in addition to its own
pharmacological properties. Bhava Mishra describes
five types of guggulu; the hiranyakshya variety should
be used for humans, while other varieties are for
veterinary purposes.

N

Guggulu is a suffix in many preparations, indicatin
suggulu kalpana (formulations) and its pi
quantity, such as in Yogaraja guggulu, Kaishora
guggulu, and Trayodasanga guggulu. Guggulu is also
an ingredient in many pharmaceutical forms, including
vati, gutika, rasa kriya, kvatha, dhupa, churna
taila, ghrita, avaleha, and modaka. It is also used in
preparations such as rasausadhies, lepa, and pradeha.
In the A.EL., Part I, Second Revised English Edition, by
the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Dept. of I. S. M. and H. New Delhi, we find
the authentic use of the following liquids for svedana
in ‘Dolayantra’:

1, Gomutra (cow’s urine)

2. Vasapatra svarasa or kashaya

3. Nirgundi svarasa with Haridra churna

GENERAL METHOD OF PREPARATION OF GUGGULU KALPANA
WITH AGNI

1. One part of purified guggulu and one part of
dravya churna (powdered ingredients) are mixed
for the preparation of guggulu kalpana.

2. Shodhita (purified) guggulu should be mixed with
the prescribed quantity of water and prepared
as paka by heating, similar to guda paka (jaggery
preparation).

3. It is then mixed with the powders of the prescribed
ingredients with constant stirring and rolled into
vati form by adding a small quantity of ghee to
maintain the soft consistency of the guggulu and to
prevent it from sticking to the hands while rolling
the pills.

WITHOUT AGNI

1. Shuddha guggulu is pounded rigorously, either
manually or ina pounding machine, by adding fine
powder of medicinal drugs little by little.

2. When all the medicinal drugs are evenly
incorporated into the guggulu and the mixture
turns smoother with the required consistency for
rolling the pills, the pills of desired size and shape
are rolled.

3. These pills are dried in the shade and stored in
airtight containers for further therapeutic use.

4. Nowadays, guggulu preparations are manufactured
using modern tablet methodologies.

5. AVALEHA KALPANA
hin
DEFINITION

Avaleha is a semi-solid preparation of drugs. It is made
with jaggery, sugar, or sugar-candy, and boiled with

281

a

----- PAGE 296 -----
—__.

282

prescribed drug juice or decoction. Also known as
modaka, guda, khanda, rasayana, leha, etc.

METHOD OF PREPARATION

1. Collect the essential ingredients like—
° Kashaya or other liquids.
* Jaggery, sugar, or sugar-candy.
* Powders or pulps of certain drugs.
° Ghee or oil and honey.

2. Dissolve jaggery, sugar, or sugar-candy in the liquid
and strain to remove foreign particles.

3. Boil the solution over moderate fire.

4. Check readiness by testing if the mixture is thready

(tantuvat) when pressed between fingers or sinks in
water without dissolving easily.

5. Remove from fire.

a

. Add fine powders of drugs in small quantities,
stirring continuously to form a homogenous
mixture.

7. Add ghee or oil while the mixture is still hot and

mix well.

oo

. Add honey when the preparation is cool and
mix well.

CHARACTERISTICS

Lehya should be neither too hard nor too fluid.

Should be rollable between fingers if pulp and ghee
or oil are present.

oc

oS

6

Signs of deterioration include growth of fungus or
fermentation.

Use bhasmas of metals when metals are mentioned.
* Include only purified drugs for items like bhallataka.

* Colour and smell depend on the drugs used.

»

a
rs

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE
* Store in glass or porcelain jars.
* Can also be kept in non-reactive metal containers.
* Normally used within one year.
6. SNEHA KALPANA (GHRITA/ TAILA)
DEFINITION
Tailas are medicinal oils prepared by boiling oil (taila)

with decoctions (kashayas) and pastes (kalkas) of drugs
to absorb their therapeutic properties.

GENERAL METHOD OF PREPARATION
1. Collect all the components like—
¢ Drava Dravya
¢ Kalka
¢ Sneha Dravya

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana

2. Mix kalka and drava, then add sneha.

3. Boil on mild fire, stirring continuously to prevent
sticking.

4, Add drava-dravyas _ sequentially,
evaporation of earlier additions.

5. When all drava-dravyas evaporate, moisture jn
kalka evaporates. Stir frequently to avoid sticking.
Test kalka to check paka stage.

allowing

PAKA STAGES

% Mridu Paka: Waxy kalka that rolls like lac.

“ Madhyama Paka: Harder kalka that
without noise.

* Khara Paka: Further heating to hard state; beyond
this, sneha becomes unfit. Correct stage is indicated
by froth.

burns

7. ASAVA ARISHTA

DEFINITION

Asavas and Arishtas are medicinal preparations. It is
made by soaking drugs in powder form or decoction
(kashaya) in a solution of sugar or jaggery. It undergo
fermentation, generating alcohol. Alcohol facilitates
extraction of active principles and acts as a preservative.
METHOD OF PREPARATION

Arishta

1. Drugs are coarsely powdered and kashaya is
prepared.

2. Kashaya is strained and placed in a
fermentation vessel.

3. Sugar, jaggery, or honey is dissolved, boiled,
filtered, and added.

4. Prakshepa dravyas are finely powdered and added.
5. Dhataki pushpa (if included) is cleaned and added.

6. Vessel is covered with an earthen lid and edges
sealed with clay-smeared cloth in seven layers.

7. Kept in a special room, underground cellar, or
paddy heap to maintain constant temperature.

8. After fermentation, lid is removed and contents
examined.

9. Fluid is decanted and strained after 2-3 days.

10. Strained again after fine particles settle and then
bottled.

Asava

1. Water and prescribed Jaggery or sugar are boiled
and cooled.

2. Poured into fermentation vessel.

3. Fine powder of drugs mentioned in the formula
is added.

----- PAGE 297 -----
Appendices

4 Vessel is co
lay smeared cloth in seven layers.
ciay~

5, Follow the same process as Arishta.

GENERAL PRECAUTIONS
Use old earthen vessels, not new ones.

vered with a lid and edges sealed with

:
; Boil water in vessel first.

Maintain absolute cleanliness.

» Fumigate inner surface with pippali churna and
smear with ghee before pouring liquids.

Large scale manufacture may use wooden vats,
porcelain jars, or metal vessels.

%

&

CHARACTERISTICS

Filtered Asava or Arishta should be clear without
froth at the top.

¢ Should not become sour (chukra).

* Should have an aromatic alcoholic odor.

PRESERVATION

& Can be kept indefinitely.

* Should be stored in well-stoppered bottles or jars.
8. BHASMA PRAKARANA

DEFINITION
Bhasma are calcined powder of metals, minerals, or
animal products, using cow dung cakes (puta).
METHOD OF PREPARATION

1. First Stage: Sodhana (Purification)

e Purpose: Eliminate harmful matter, modify
properties, convert characteristics, and enhance
therapeutic action.

Types:

e Samanya Shodhana: General purification (e.g.,
heating metal sheets, immersing in taila, takra,
gomutra).

e Vishesa Shodhana: Specific purification (e.g.,
bhavana, svedana, mardana).

2. Second Stage: Marana (Calcination)

e Preparation:

e Grind purified drug with plant juices or
kashayas.

¢ Form and sun-dry small cakes (chakrikas).

¢ Calcination:
¢ Seal cakes in earthen plates.
¢ Place ina pit filled with cow dung cakes, ignite,

cool, and grind into fine powder.

° Repetition: Repeat trituration, chakrikas making,
and puta process as needed.

TYPES OF Putas
1. Maha Puta
. Gaja Puta

wn

. Varaha Puta
. Kukkuta Puta
. Kapota Puta
6. Bhanda Puta

a >

TESTS FOR PROPER BHASMA

ie,

* No metallic luster,
* Fine enough for finger lines.

* Floats on water.

* Does not revert to original state.

Storage: Airtight glass or earthen containers, potency
maintained indefinitely.

9. PISHTI
DEFINITION
Medicines prepared by triturating the drug with
specified liquids and exposing it to sun or moonlight,
known as anagnitapta bhasma (bhasma prepared
without fire).
METHOD OF PREPARATION
1. Take Shodhita (Purified) drug.
2. The shodhita drug is placed ina khalva.
3. It is triturated with rose water (unless otherwise
specified) for a day.
4. The triturated drug is dried in the sun for
another day.
5. This process is repeated for seven days or more
until a fine powder, pisti, is obtained.
CHARACTERISTICS AND PRESERVATION
* Colour: Varies depending on the drug used.
“ Texture: As fineasbhasma, withsimilarcharacteristics.
+ Potency: Preserves potency indefinitely.
Storage: Stored in glass stoppered bottles.
10. KHARLIYA RASAYANA

Kharaliya Rasayana is one of the most commonly
utilized Parad Murchchhita Aushadha Vargikarana
formulations in Ayurveda, recommended extensively
across various disease conditions. The formulations that
are prepared in a Kharala (mortar) by triturating until
they attain the chief desired characteristics are known
as Kharaliya Rasayana. It is a common dosage form in
Ayurvedic medicine, containing metals and minerals,
and is widely used in clinical practice. The principles
of Bhavana and Mardana Samskara form the backbone

----- PAGE 298 -----
284

Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana

of Kharaliya Rasayana preparation, ensuring both its
therapeutic efficacy and safety. Bhavana, a Samskara
process, alters the original properties of raw drugs,
inducing new ones in the main drugs. Mardana and
Bhavana Samskara play a pivotal role in ensuring the
intimate contact of material particles with the liquid
media, facilitating the impregnation of media properties
into the material, and transforming coarse powder intoa
finer state to aid further processing. This process results
in unique and suitable physico-chemical changes that
enhance the efficacy of the material. The Mardana and
Bhavana processes thus contribute significantly to the
production of quality medicines, particularly Kharaliya
Rasayana. Kharaliya Rasayana, prepared in classical
ways, is both safe and effective for clinical practice in
therapeutic doses.

UNIQUE FEATURES

1. Prolonged Shelf Life

2. Increase Therapeutic Efficacy

3. Decrease Dosage

4. Decrease Duration of Treatment.
SHELF LIFE

According to Drug and Cosmetic Rules 2016 Rule
No. 161-B.

a. Rasayoga containing Kaushthaushadi along with
Rasa/ Uparasa etc- 5 Years.

b. Rasayoga Containing only Rasa, Uparasa Etc -
10 Years.

c. Rasayoga containing Naga, Vanga and Tamra
bhasma - 5 Years
11. PARPATI KALPANA
Liquefied Kajjali is poured over neatly arranged mocha
patra (shalmali patra) or another suitable leaf to create
a thin wafer (papada). This method, called pota bandha
of parada, produces Parpati.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
1. Triturate purified mercury and sulphur to make
Kajjali.
2. Mix other ingredients in the khalva.
3. Heat the mixture in an iron vessel using a
Sikata yantra.
4. Line a pit in cow dung with a leaf.
5. Pour the melted medicine onto the leaf.

6. Cover with another leaf and press gently with
cow dung.

7. Allow to cool.
8. Powder the cooled medicine for use.

PATHYA (FAVOURABLE FACTORS):
1. Kakamachi
. Patola
. Adraka (ginger)
. Vastu (hogweed)
. Kadali Pushpa (banana flower)
. Nava Vartaka
- Purana Dhanya (old grains)
8. Go-Dugdha (cow’s milk)

APATHYA (UNFAVOURABLE FACTORS)

ND oO - WN

During parpati kalpana therapy, it is advised to avoid
drinking river or well water for quenching thirst;
instead, consume plenty of buttermilk.

Storage: Kept in dark clour glass bottles.

12. KUPIPAKVA KALPANA
Kupipakva rasayana refers to formulations created by
applying specific heat to purified mercury (shuddha
parada), purified sulphur (shuddha gandhaka), and
other rasadravya in a chosen glass bottle, following
the distinctive preparation method outlined in
traditional texts.
GENERAL METHOD OF PREPARATION
Purva Karma

1. Collect all the essential equipments (Raw material,
Kupi, Kapada Mitti, Valuka Yantra, Shita shalaka,
Tapta Shalaka, Pyrometer, etc.).

Pradhana Karma

1. Shuddha parada and shuddha gandhaka are
triturated continuously in a khalva yantra for 4
to 5 days.

2. The resulting kajjali may undergo bhavana with
any mentioned bhavana dravya.

3. Metallic foils like svarnapatra, if included, are
carefully cut into smaller pieces and added to the
khalva yantra.

4. Equal quantities of shuddha parada are then added
to the mixture and triturated rigorously for 4 to 5
days until a fine drug paste is obtained.

5. The resulting drug mass is then triturated with the
specified quantity of gandhaka for 2 to 3 days.

6. Optionally, this kajjali_may undergo further
bhavana.

7. The bhavita kajali is carefully collected and filled
into a bottle (Kupi).

8. Seven layers of mritvastralepana must be applied
to the bottle.

----- PAGE 299 -----
Appendices

9, Ensure that only % to 1/3 of the bottle is filled with
kajjali.
10. Temporarily close the mouth of the bottle with a
cork and firmly place it in the Valuka yantra.

Pashchat Karma

1. Kupi Uddharana

2. Kupi Bhedana
Storage: Protect from moisture, light, and pests to
maintain its quality and efficacy.

13. POTTALI KALPANA

Pottali Kalpana is a consolidated form of mercurial
preparation incorporating the Pota Bandha of Parada.
Pottali is a type of preparation that results from Parada
Murchhana, a procedure where mercury is thoroughly
ground with other herbo-mineral drugs to enhance its
therapeutic efficiency.
GENERAL METHOD OF POTTALI KALPANA

1. Bhavana Samskara

e Purify, process, and incinerate (if adding Bhasma)
all ingredients.

e Finely powder the ingredients.

Subject the powdered ingredients to Bhavana ina
Khalva Yantra with herbal liquid media (usually
Kumari pulp if unspecified).

e Continue Bhavana until the mixture is viscous
and semisolid.

e Repeat the procedure 3 to 7 times, examining the
Subhavita Lakshana.

e Collect, dry, powder, and preserve the final
mixture.

2. Puta Paka Samskara

e Purify and incinerate metalo-mineral ingredients.

e Triturate with herbal media until uniform.

e Incinerate using techniques like Gaja Puta.

« Use Kaparda or Musha methods for specific
preparations.

3. Pottali Paka

e Select appropriate metals, minerals, and herbs.

e Use herbal extracts like Kumari Svarasa for
Bhavana.

Determine the Pottali shape (e.g. pyramid,
conical).

e Ensure proper drying of Pottali.

e Choose suitable storage containers.

285 He

———
— is

¢ Wrap Pottali in silk cloth for Gandhaka Paka

e Use prescribed sulphur i
) quanti -
times Pottali weight). ee

¢ Control and measure heat j i i
Pearl intensity (Agni

e Follow specified Paka Kala durations (1-8 hours
or until Vyoma Varna).

e Confirm Paka Lakshana by sulphur color change
and metallic sound.

e Remove and clean Pottali after Paka, store for
therapeutic use.
14. SATTAVA KALPANA
DEFINITION
Sattva is a water-extractable solid substance collected
from a drug.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
. Cut the drug into small pieces.
. Soak the pieces in water and leave them overnight.
Strain the mixture through a cloth.
Allow the solid matter to settle.
. Carefully pour off the supernatant liquid.
. Repeat the process by adding water, straining, and
decanting.

7. Allow the sedimented sattva to dry.
8. Once dry, powder the sattva.

Daf oN

PRESERVATION AND CHARACTERISTICS:
Store in a closed container and the color of sattva varies
depending on the drug used.

15, LEPA KALPANA

DEFINITION
Medicines in the form of a paste used for external
application.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
1. Drugs are ground into a fine powder.

2. Before use on the body, the powder is mixed with a
specific liquid or medium to form a soft paste.

3. Common media for mixing include water, cow's
urine, oil, and ghee.
RULE 161B OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULE, 1945
1. Lepa Churna: Self-life period is 1 year.
2. Lepa Malahara: Self-life period is 2 years.
3. Lepa Guti: Self-life period is 3 years.

----- PAGE 300 -----
eee 0206 aS:
1. Abhishyanda
2. Adhmana
3. Agnimandya
4. Amaatisara
5.  Amalapitta
6. Amaijvara
7. Amavata
8. Anaha
9. Anidra
10. Antra Vriddhi
11. Apachi
12. Apasmara
13. Arbuda
14. Arsha
15, Artava Ruja
16. Aruchi
17. Ashmari
18. Asrigdara
19. Asrgdara Ruja
20. Atisara
21. Bagandara
22. Bahumutra
23. Bala Roga
24. Badhiratva
25. Bhasmaka Roga
26. Bhrama
27. Bhuta Badha
28. Buddhi
Daurbalya
29. Chamkila
30. Chhardi
31. Dadru
32. Daha
33. Dantobhava
Jvara
34. Daurbalya
35. Dhatu Kshaya
36. Dushta Vrana
37. Galagraha
38. Galashosha
39. Gandamala
40. Garavisha
41. Garbhashaya-
chyuti
42. Graha Dosha
43. Grahani
44. Gulma
45. Hikka
46. Hridaurbalya
47. Hridshula

~_ Rasashastra and Bhaishajya Kalpana

APPENDIX-II : LIST OF DISEASE AND ITS ENGLISH EQUIVALENT TERMS

Conjunctivitis

Flatulence with gurgling sound
Digestive Impairment
Diarrhoea due to indigestion
Hyperacidity

Fever due to indigestion
Rheumatism

Distension of abdomen
Insomnia

Internal abscess

Chronic Lymphadenopathy
Epilepsy

Tumor

Piles

Dysmenorrhea
Tastelessness

Calculus

Menorrhagia or Metrorrhagia or
both

Dysmenorrhea

Diarrhea

Fistula-in-ano

Polyuria

Specific disorder of children
Deafness

Polyphagia with mascular wasting
Vertigo

Psychological Disorder

Weak Intelligence

Skin Disease
Emesis

Teaniasis

Burning Sensation
Dentitorial Fever

Weakness

Tissue Wasting

Non- Healing Ulcer
Difficulty in Swallowing
Dryness in Throat
Cervical Lymphadenitis
Accumulated Poison
Uterine Prolapse

Certain Psychotic Syndrome
Malabsorption

Abdominal Lump

Hiccup

Weakness of Heart

Angina Pectoris

48.
49,
50.
our
Sy
53.
54.
Dk
56.
57.

58.
SE);
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
Th,
2s
73.

74.
75.
76.
Ws
78.
79.

80.

81.

82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
Chil,
925
93)
94.
Os),
96.

Janu Stambha
Jalodara

Jara
Jihvastambha
Jirna Jvara
Jirna Kasa
Kamala
Kancha Roga
Kandu

Kaphajasandhi-
bandha

Karna Srava
Kasa

Kilasa

Krimi

Krisata

Kshaya
Kushtha
Madatyaya
Majjagata Vata
Mandagni
Manovikara
Medhya
Meha
Mukhashosha
Mutraghata

Mutrakri-
chchhra

Mutraroga

Nadi Vrana
Napumsakta
Netra Sarava
Netrakandu
Netraroga
Pakshaghata
Palitya

Pama

Pandu
Parinama Shula
Patala roga
Phakka Roga
Pinasa

Pippasa

Pittaja Unmada
Plihodara
Pralapa
Prameha
Prasveda
Pratikshaya
Rajahkrichchhra
Rajayakshma

Stiffness of knee
Ascites
Progeriasis
Glossy Plasy
Chronic fever
Chronic Cough
Jaundice
Cataract

Itching

Stiffness of joint due to Kapha
Dosha

Otorrhoea

Cough

Vitiligo

Worm Infestation
Emaciation

Phthisis

Psoriasis

Alcoholism

Bone Marrow Related Disorder
Dyspepsia

Mental Disorder

Brain Tonic

Excessive flow of urine
Dryness of Mouth
Urinary Obstruction
Dysuria

Urinary Disease
Sinus
Impotency
Epiphora
Itching in Eyes
Disease of eyes
Paralysis
Graying of Hairs
Eczema
Anaemia
Duodenal Ulcer
Disorders of Layers of eye
Rickets
Rhinitis/ Sinusitis
Thirst
Psychosis Due to Pitta Dosha
Splenomegaly
Delirium
Increased Frequency of Urine
Excessive Sweating
Coryza
Oligomenerrhoea
Tuberculosis

----- PAGE 301 -----
“opens

97.

99,

100.
101.
102.

103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
ill.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.

The following table of metric equivalents of weights
and measures in the Ayurvedic classics have been
approved by the Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia Committee

Raktapitta
Raktapradara

Raktarsha
Rasayana
Sandhigatea Vata
Sannipattaja
jvere

Sharire Varna
Shitapitta
Shotha
Smritiprada
Smrti Bhramsha
Snayudaurbalya
Somaroga
Shosha

Sphota
Stanyadvesha
Shukra Dosha
Shukrakshaya
Shula
Sutikaroga
Svitra
Svarabeda

Bleeding Disorder

Menorrhagia or Metrorrhagia or
both

Bleeding Piles
Rejuvenating Agents
Osteoarthropathy

High fever due to Vitiation of all
doshas

Loss of Body Complexion
Urticaria

Inflammation

Provides Memory
Dementia

Weakness of Ligament
Polyuria in Females
Cachexia

Boil

Aversion to breast milk
Vitiation of Sperm
Oligospermia

Pain

Puerperal Fever
Vitiligo

Hoarseness of Voice

APPENDIX-III : WEIGHT AND MEASURES
eA I

in consultation with Indian Standards Institution.

Classical Unit Metric Equivalent

1 Ratti or Gunja

1 Masha
12 Masha

1 Tola/ Karsha

2 Karsha
1 Pala
1 Prasriti

125 mg
igm
12 gms
12 gms
24 gms
48 gms
96 gms

119.
120.
121,
122.
123.
124,
125.
126.
127.

Svasa

Sveta Pradara
Tila Kalka
Timira
Trishna
Udara Roga
Unmada
Uroroga
Urusthambha
Roga

128.
129,
130.
131,
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.

Vaivarnya
Vaktra Ruja
Vali

Vamana
Vandhyatva
Vatarakhta
Vibandha
Vidradi
Viryakshaya
Visarpa

Visha vikara
Vrishya Shakti
Yakritpliha roga
Yoniruja

Classical Unit

1 Kudava

1 Manika

1 Prastha

1 Adhaka

1 Drona

1 Shurpa

1 Droni

1 Khari
iTula

20 Tula/ 1 Bhara

—

Dysponea

Leucorrhoea

Non- Elevated mole

Cataract

Thirst

Disease of Abdomen
Psychosis

Disease of thorax

Stiffness in the thigh muscles

Discolouration

Pain in Mouth

Wrinkles in the skin
Vomiting

Infertility

Gout

Constipation

Abscess

Azoospermia

Erysepales

Disorder due to poison
Aphrodisiac Strength
Disease of liver and Spleen
Pain in Female genital tract

} Metric Equivalent

192 gms
384 gms
768 gms
3 kg. 73 gms
12 kg.228 gms
24 kg. 576 gms
49 kg. 152 ems
196 kg. 608 gms
4 ke. 800 gms
96 kg.

287

—_—_—_

----- PAGE 302 -----
Wo). fed FS feng I

NNNNNNNNNPPPRP PP RPP BB
BRSBSASSRYUSRESNESHSHAUNAGDRANES

Abhraka Bhasma
Amalaki Svarasa
Amalakyadi Churna
Amalakyadi Gutika
Amritarishta

Amritadi Guggulu
Anandabhairava Rasa
Aravindasava

Arjuna Kshirapaka
Arogyavardhini Gutika
Ashokarishta

Aushadi Prayoga Vigyana
Aushadi Prayoga Marga
Bala Chaturbhadra Rasa
Bhallataka Avaleha
Bhallataka Ghrita
Bhallataka Guda
Bhallataka Modaka
Bhallatakadi Kvatha
Bhallatakadi Lepa
Bhallatakadi Taila
Bilvadi Gutika

Bola Parpati

Brahma Rasayana
Brahmi Ghrita

Brihat Vata Chintamani Rasa
Bhringaraja Taila
Chandraprabha Vati
Chavanaprasha Avaleha
Chitrakadi Gutika
Dadimavaleha
Dashamula Kvatha
Dhatri Lauha

Dosage Form and Cosmetic Products

Gairika Pradeha

ALPHABETIC INDEX

shal
2.2.4
2.2.8
BAG
2.1.4
2.1.6
ALF
5.20
Tha
4.1.0
521

5.10
2.3.£
ZScE
23:6
2.3.8
2.3.6
2.3.F
2.3.0
5.6
4.2.8
7.10
5.16
4.1.K
9.5.F
4.1.)
2.2.0, 7.3
52/
5.14
5.1
2.2.6

2.5.0

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49,
50.
$1.
52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
Bh
58.
5),
60.
61.
2.
63.
64,
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

Gairika rasakriya
Gairikadya Gutikanjana
Gairikadya Malahara
Gandhaka Druti
Gandhaka Rasayana
Gandhaka Taila
Gandhaka Vati
Gandhakadi Lepa
Gandhakadya Malahara
Garbhapala Rasa

Guduchi Ghana- Samshamani Vati

Guduchi Hima
Guduchi Kvatha
Guduchi Sattva
Guduchi Svarasa
Guduchyadi Churna
Hasthi Danta Masi
Hemagarbha Pottali

Ichchhabhedi Rasa
Jatyadi Taila

Kaishora Guggulu
Kamadudha Rasa
Kankayana Vati

Kashisha Bhasma
Kharjuradi mantha
Krimikuthara Rasa
Kumara Kalyana Rasa
Kumaryasava
Kushmanda Avaleha
Kutajarishta
Laghusutashekhara Rasa
Lauha Bhasma

Lavana Bhaskara Churna
Lakshmivilasa Rasa

Lepa Guti

25-E
2.5.D
2G
2.4.¢
2.4.8
2.4.0
2.4.G
2.4.F
2.4.
4.1.¢
2elne
2.1.0
AXE
2.1.5
2.1.4
2.1.8
9.5.6
4.4.4

4.1.9, 9.5.4
9.5.D
8.1
4.1.N
8.6
3.10
US)
4.1.R
4.1.8
5.22
Tal
v5}
2.5.B
35
55)
4.1.H
5.25

----- PAGE 303 -----
Aiphabetic Index

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

84.
85.
86.

87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.

98.
22)

Local Health Practices
Lomashatana Lepa
Makaradhvaja
Mahamanjishtadi Kvatha
Mukta Pishti
Murivenna Taila

Nage Bhasma
Narayana Churna
Narayana Taila
Navayasa Loha
Nilibhringadi Taila
Nutraceuticals
Panchagavya Ghrita
Panchaguna Taila
Panchamrita Parpati
Phala Ghrita
Phalatrikadi Kvatha
Pharmacovigilance
Pravala Panchamrita Rasa
Pravala Bhasma
Pravala Pishti

Prinana Modaka
Pushyanuga Churna
Rajata Bhasma

Rasa Parpati

Rasa Sindura

Rasona kshirapaka
Rational Prescription
Sahacharadi Taila

11
9.5.1
43.8
5.2
3.15
O5iG
3.8
8.3
$.17
4.1.P
6.18

5,15
§.19
4.2.0
7.4
2.2.6
12
41.E
3.16
3.16
We2:
5.3
3.4
8.5
8.4
7.8
10
9.5.8

100.
101,
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.

111.
112.

113.

114.
aS:
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.

Samirpannaga Rasa
Sanjivani Vati

Shankha Bhasma

Safe Dispensing

Shankha Vati

Shatavari Ghrita
Shuddha Gairika
Shuddha Gandhaka
Shuddha Shilajatu
Shvasakuthara Rasa
Simhanada Guggulu
Saubhagya Shuntipaka
Sudarshana Churna
Sutashekhara Rasa
Svarna Bhasma

Svarna Makshika Bhasma
Svarna Vanga

Tamra Bhasma
Traditional Health Practices
Triphala Ghrita

Triphala Rasayana

TKDL

Vanga Bhasma
Varnakara Lepa
Vasantakusumakara Rasa
Vasantamalati Rasa
Vyoshadi Vati

Yashada Bhasma
Yogaraja Guggulu
Yogendra Rasa

4.3.4

11

2.2.H
2.2.¢
11

3.7

2:5.F
4.11
4.45

5.9

3.9

5,12, 8.2
4.1.6

----- PAGE 304 -----
BIBLIOGRAPHY

ana |
Wicks, SRT |
BASS WT : STA, Aa, FEN Tera Wal faa, STA
UR AHA, ARTA |
algae An ae : A sea stad vas wife, APTI!
yay Aiea
Fast Yetaeit : aifers cig, Hed Wa THeh- Aes
faa, saca faencian, een MAM, eras Sit Sel, Fidei

Taenclah, saws Ariaccaea fatsa anew:
Glo Tatga aah, SSI SARA WAM, ARTEL |

WH, 1-5 FP, Sa ASA!

TAVaIT : ASS Tatas Wia:, IIS A aes
faa ment (2 am A) ahaa dea Fa, aR |
oR |
Ceaa, AVATER- so Fart faut, daa

iaverctiat (Het) : frad Horne Fat, saa
Herd wierd, aera |

THRU : WHA ars WS, ASA HOC AeA, ARTA |

Tantson wora-aerrsrion fartad, cara Slo Cala

Tage : aa areas feast ara, <i. cana fae ain,
aR |

TaarTan : eferas (1-2 9m) daca ones arereth,
ORTH |

aU BNE : TG FOI SA AE, PS a, Wey
TAH, 29, AIK CA, 73 fecett |

Tae Ande, to Ws WMS, ATE facta,

Sahasrayoga: Edited by Vailogha Kurup, SriRamvilasam
Press, Quilon.
faut, seran Gear THR, ATTA |

Sharangdhara Samhita of Acharya Sharangdhara,
Dr. Ravindra Angadi, Chowkhamba Surbharti
Prakashan, Varanasi (UP).

Sharngadhara Samhita of Acharya Sharngadhara, Prof.
R. Vidyanath, Prof. K. Niteshwar, Chowkhamba
Surbharti Prakashan, Varanasi.

fagiast ufumren, Ae IH, SST SHG Saree,
ana |

fag dae : aa aac Fea area, daa agse
Yad, Ach |
RMT |

Patten eto gad Wii, fest ae Slo sa TA
WAT (1-3 4M) Sara ERA Ya, SRO |
YAR, ART |

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India: Government
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Published by The Controller of Publication, Delhi.

The Ayurvedic Formulary of India: Government
of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Published by The Controller of Publication, Delhi.

Gogte, V.M.: Ayurvedic Pharmacology and Therapeutic
Uses of Medicinal Plants (Dravyagunavignyan).
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai (Maharashtra).

Mehta, R. M. : Pharmaceutics, Published by Vallabha
Prakashan.

----- PAGE 305 -----
Dr. Jyoti Sharma, B,A.M.S, M.D. (Rasashastra Evam Bhalshalya Kalpana), graduated

Ryanvedle Medical College & Hospital, Guru Ravidas Ayurved University, Punjab and ine
Post Graduate studies in the Department of Rasashastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana at Parul Instit her
Ayurved, Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat. She has published 12 articles in Scopus, Web of rae of
and Peer-Reviewed Journals. Additionally, she has authored a book titled "Herbal Preservatives”
Reformation in Ayurveda Pharmaceutics,” ; se z ves —
Dr. Jyoti Sharma has presented numerous papers and posters at National and Internati
Conferences and has been Involved in multiple projects such as MSME, M2M, and SSIP. She also showcased hy
innovative abilities and problem-solving skills by participating In a Hackathon, where she was a finalist inthe age
Hackathon 2023 and won ‘st Prize In the Vadodara Startup Idea Pitch held in Gujarat. IP
Currently, she serves as an Assistant Professor in the Department of RSBK at Dr. Vijay Ayurvedic Medical Colle
Hospital and Research Centre, Kalthi, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh. She assigned as an Editorial Board Member in Wosd
Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research and also as Advisory Board Member in World Journal of Pharmac:
and Pharmaceutical Sciences. ei y,
She can be reached through her email id <js226622@gmail.com>

About the Book :

Ayurvediya Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana (Part-2 of Textbook of Rasashastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana) encompasses
twelve chapters, meticulously aligned with the latest NCISM syllabus for BAMS second professional, It Offers a
comprehensive exploration of the basic principles of Ayurvediya Aushadhi Prayoga Vigyana, explained with clear
scientific rationale with aims to enhance the understanding and application of Ayurvedic formulations, blending
traditional wisdom with modern scientific insights. Additionally, the inclusion of multiple-choice questions (MCQs)
at the end of each chapter is designed to boost students’ confidence and ability to tackle examinations effectively.
The English edition of this bookis set to broaden the reach and impact of this field of knowledge, making it accessible
to a wider audience. We trust that this textbook will be an invaluable resource for everyone in the field of Ayurveda,
particularly for B.A-M.S. students and those Preparing for P.G. entrance examinations as well as P.G. students,

Other useful books for BAMS 2nd Professional

SARNGADHARA SAMHITA by SARNGADHARA : Text with Transcendence descriptive English commentary by

Prof. Ravindra Angadi

SARNGADHARA SAMHITA by SARNGADHARA: Text with English commentary by Prof. R. Vidyanath

BHAISAJYA RATNAVALI by GOVIND DAS SEN : Text with Transcendence descriptive English commentary by

Prof. Ravindra Angadi (in two parts)

A TEXT BOOK OF BHAISAJYA KALPANA (as per NCISM UG & PG Syllabus) by Prof. Ravindra Angadi

A TEXT BOOK OF RASASASTRA (as perNCISM UG &PG Syllabus) by Prof. Ravindra Angadi

VAIDYAKA PARIBHASA PRADIPA (The captivating magic of classical Ayurvedic terminologies) by Prof. Ravindra Angadi

RASARATNA SAMUCCAYA: Text with Transcendence descriptive English commentary by Prof. Ravindra Angadi

MADHAVA NIDANA (AYURVEDIC DIAGNOSTICS) Text with Madhukosh Sanskrit Tika and English commentary of

Madhukosh along with Modern perspectives) : Translated by Kanjiv Lochan (in Two Vols.)

ILLUSTRATED TEXTBOOK OF AGADA TANTRA & VIDHI VAIDYAKA (T. oxicology, Forensic Medicine & Medical

Jurisprudence) (Coloured) based on new NCISM Syllabus for BAMS by Dr. Jyothi Sajayan

10. RASATARANGINI OF SADANANDA SARMA (Ayurveda Pharmaceutics & Indian Alchemy) Text with Descriptive
English commentary by Prof. Ravindra Angadi

- COMPREHENSIVE TEXTBOOK OF AGADA TANTRA & VIDHI VAIDYAKA (Toxicology, Forensic Medicine & Medical
Jurisprudence) (Illustrated & Colored) based onnew NCISM Syllabus for BAMS by Prof. Vishnu Joglekar

. ILLUSTRATED TEXTBOOK OF RASASHATRA & BHAISHAJYA KALPANA (Part-1 Ayurvediya Aushadhi Nirmana
Vigyana) Based on new NCISM Syllabus forBAMS by Dr. Jyoti Sharma

13. ILLUSTRATED TEXTBOOK OF ROGA NIDANA & VRIKITI VIGYANA : Based on new NCISM Syllabus for BAMS by

Dr. Swagath N. (in two parts)

tre

LY

ee

PAA se

so

1

=

my
Nv

Website QR Code

Chaukhamba Surbharati Prakashan
Varanasi-221001
chaukhambasurbharatiprakashan@gmail.com
www.chaukhamba.co.in

|’ @chaukhambabooks © @chaukhambabooks

FOR ORDER
a

ISBN : 978-93-94829-72-5
}
3 UN

3
N
]

%650/- (Part-2)

www.chaukhamba.co.in f #@ Whatsapp scan


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: 96. Herbal Remedies_ Bridging Traditional Knowledge with Modern Science.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal Remedies: Bridging Traditional
Knowledge with Modern Science

----- PAGE 2 -----
Information contained in this work has been obtained by Career Point from sources believed to be reliable.
However, neither Career Point nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information
published herein, and neither Career Point nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or
damages arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the understanding that Career Point
and its authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render any professional services. If such
services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.

CAREER POINT

CP Tower, Road No.-1, IPIA, Kota (Raj.)
Email : publication@cpil.in

No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise or stored in a database or retrieval system without the prior written permission of the
Publishers. The program listings (if any) may be entered, stored and executed in a computer system, but they may not be
reproduced for publication.

This edition can be exported from India only by the publisher.

Published by Career Point Ltd.
CP Tower, Road No.-1, IPIA, Kota (Raj.)
Email : publication@cpil.in

Book No. : CPP-796

(ai)

----- PAGE 3 -----
Preface

Thank you for visiting "Herbal Remedies: Bridging Traditional Knowledge with Modern
Science." This book combines cutting-edge scientific discoveries with centuries-old customs to
demonstrate the perennial value of herbal treatment. It looks at how traditional Chinese
medicine, Ayurvedic medicine, and Native American healing traditions have influenced
modern healthcare viewpoints.

Modern science widens the uses of herbal therapies and proves their efficacy through
thorough study and clinical studies. This book functions as a thorough guide, providing insights
into the scientific underpinnings, historical roots, and useful application of herbal treatments
in daily life.

Safety factors, such as dose recommendations and possible interactions, guarantee that both
enthusiasts and practitioners are making well-informed decisions. Examining the future, we
look at how integrative healthcare is developing and how further research could lead to new
treatments.

Whether you are a healthcare professional or simply curious about natural remedies, this book
provides a balanced exploration of herbal therapy, merging tradition with scientific rigor to
foster a holistic approach to wellness.

(iii)

----- PAGE 4 -----
Book Description

"Herbal Remedies: Bridging Traditional Knowledge with Modern Science" is an insightful guide
exploring the historical roots and evolving future of herbal medicine, where tradition
intersects with innovation to yield remarkable discoveries. This book celebrates the enduring
wisdom of traditional healing practices alongside contemporary research that continues to
uncover new therapeutic applications for plants.

Key features include an exploration of herbal medicine's origins in Ayurvedic, Traditional
Chinese, and Native American traditions, highlighting their influence on modern health
perspectives. The book also delves into recent scientific research validating the efficacy of
herbal treatments, covering pharmacology, phytochemistry, and biological mechanisms.

Readers gain practical insights on integrating herbal remedies into daily life, supported by
detailed profiles of therapeutic herbs, their historical uses, scientific evidence, and preparation
guidelines. Safety considerations are emphasized with dosage recommendations, potential
interactions, and contraindications discussed.

Looking forward, the book examines the future of herbal medicine in integrative healthcare,
showcasing ongoing innovations and bridging gaps between traditional knowledge and
contemporary practices. Whether a practitioner, student, or enthusiast, this resource offers a
comprehensive roadmap to navigating the intersection of tradition and science in herbal
therapy, fostering a healthier future informed by both ancient wisdom and modern insights.

(iv)

----- PAGE 5 -----
Table of Contents

CHAPTERS TITLES Page No.
Chapter 1: Introduction to Herbal Medicine 1-6
Dr. Girish Kumar Vyas
Abstract:

An overview of herbal medicine is given in this abstract, which also examines how different
civilizations have used it in traditional healthcare systems. The text underscores the historical
importance and varied cultural viewpoints that have influenced its evolution, stressing the
perennial value of herbal treatments in contemporary complementary and alternative
medicine practices.

Chapter 2 : Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies 7-13
Dr. Harshita Jain
Abstract:

With a focus on native customs and herbal lore, this abstract explores traditional knowledge
and ancestral wisdom of herbal treatments. It draws attention to ethnobotany—the study of
plants in cultural contexts—highlighting the ways in which these customs maintain important
medical information and advance our understanding of how plants and cultures interact.

Chapter 3 : Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine 14-22
Dr. Nitin Nama

Abstract:

This abstract examines the relationship between contemporary science and conventional

medicine, with a particular emphasis on phytochemistry and how it relates to our
comprehension of herbal substances. It showcases herbal remedy clinical trials and evidence-

based research, showing how scientific validation improves traditional medicine's legitimacy
and integration with modern healthcare.

Chapter 4 : Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses 23-28
Dr. Girish Kumar Vyas
Abstract:

An overview of plant-based medicine is given in this abstract, which also highlights common
medicinal plants and their uses. It highlights the significance of important herbs in promoting
health and well-being in a variety of medical contexts and contains case studies of successful
herbal treatments that highlight the medicinal advantages and everyday applications of these
essential plants.

Chapter 5 : Mechanisms of Action: How Herbal Remedies Work 29-36
Dr. Harshita Jain
Abstract:

The pharmacodynamics of herbal substances and their interactions with human physiology are
the main topics of this abstract, which investigates the mechanisms of action of herbal
treatments. It delves into the ways in which these organic compounds have therapeutic
effects, augmenting our comprehension of their functions in fostering well-being and
addressing diverse disorders.

(v)

----- PAGE 6 -----
Chapter 6 : Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies
Mr. Rahul Kumar Ancheria
Abstract:

With an emphasis on dosage, toxicity, and side effects, this abstract assesses the effectiveness
and safety of herbal therapies. In order to guarantee the dependability and safety of herbal
goods, it addresses the significance of quality control and standardisation, emphasising the
necessity of thorough evaluation while using herbal medication.

Chapter 7 : Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies
Dr. Nitin Nama
Abstract:

This presentation examines integrative medicine and highlights the benefits of using both
pharmaceutical and natural remedies in tandem. It emphasises individualised approaches to
wellness and health, demonstrating how fusing conventional and traditional medicines can
improve treatment outcomes, lessen adverse effects, and advance patient-centered care.

Chapter 8 : Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations
Mr. Rahul Kumar Ancheria
Abstract:

With an emphasis on the preservation of therapeutic plants, this abstract discusses ethical
issues in herbal medicine as well as sustainable harvesting. It talks about fair trade and ethical
sourcing, highlighting how important it is to preserve biodiversity and treat people who
produce herbal treatments fairly.

Chapter 9 : Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research
Dr. Nitin Nama
Abstract:

This abstract highlights advancements in the creation of herbal drugs while examining
potential future paths in the study of herbal medicine. It talks about the progress made in the
field by biotechnology and genetics, highlighting the ways in which these technologies can
improve the identification, effectiveness, and use of herbal remedies in contemporary
medicine.

Chapter 10 : Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life
Dr. Harshita Jain
Abstract:

This abstract examines the useful uses of herbs in daily life, with an emphasis on common
applications and at-home cures. It emphasises the advantages of making herbal teas and
cooking with medicinal herbs, showing how these activities can improve wellness and
incorporate natural health solutions into daily activities.

i)

37-47

48-61

62-69

70-78

79-86

----- PAGE 7 -----
Editors

Authors

Dr. Harshita Jain, an experienced Associate Professor at Career Point University in Kota, brings
over 14 years of expertise in pharmaceutical sciences. With more than 25 papers in renowned
journals, including Scopus-indexed and UGC CARE publications, she is recognized for her
contributions. Holding a Ph.D. from Lords University, Alwar, Rajasthan, and an M. Pharm in
Pharmacognosy from B R Nahata College of Pharmacy, Dr. Jain actively participates in national
and international conferences, enriching discussions on pharmaceutical research. Her prolific
writing and patent publications in Intellectual Property Rights showcase her commitment to
advancing the field.

Dr. Nitin Nama, an esteemed Assistant Professor at Career Point University, Kota, brings over
8 years of extensive experience in Pharmaceutical Sciences to his role. With a robust academic
background, he holds a Master's degree in Pharmaceutics from MAIP, Manasarovar, Jaipur,
and earned his Ph.D. from Lords University, Alwar. Dr. Nama is widely recognized for his
authoritative contributions, boasting more than 30 publications in prestigious peer-reviewed,
UGC CARE, and Scopus-indexed journals. His active participation in national and international
conferences underscores his dedication to staying at the forefront of pharmaceutical research
and development.

Dr. Girish Kumar Vyas, an experienced Associate Professor at Career Point University, Kota,
possesses over 9 years of expertise in Pharmaceutical Sciences. With 30+ publications in
esteemed peer-reviewed, UGC CARE, and Scopus-indexed journals, he is a recognized
authority. Dr. Vyas holds an M. Pharm in Quality Assurance from B. N. College of Pharmacy and
a Ph.D. from Dr. K. N. Modi University, Jaipur. Actively contributing to national and
international conferences, he enriches scholarly discourse. Additionally, as an accomplished
author in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Pharmacotherapeutics, his innovative spirit shines
through patent publications, reflecting his commitment to advancing pharmaceutical
knowledge.

Mr. Rahul Kumar Ancheria is an Assistant Professor at Career Point University, Alaniya, Kota,
Rajasthan, India, with 4.5 years of teaching experience in B. Pharmacy, D. Pharmacy, and M.
Pharmacy. He holds an M. Pharmacy in Pharmaceutics from Arya College of Pharmacy and a B.
Pharmacy from Kota College of Pharmacy, both affiliated with the Rajasthan University of
Health Sciences, Rajasthan, India. He has guided students in research and has over 12
publications along with an Indian Patent grant.

(vii)

----- PAGE 8 -----
(viii)

----- PAGE 9 -----
a |

Introduction to Herbal Medicine
Dr. Girish Kumar Vyas

ABSTRACT

This chapter explores the multifaceted realm of herbal medicine, tracing its origins from ancient civilizations to its
integration into modern healthcare practices. Beginning with a historical overview, it highlights the foundational
contributions of cultures such as the Mesopotamians, Egyptians, Greeks, and Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM)
in documenting and refining herbal remedies. Ayurveda, the traditional medicine of India, and indigenous healing
practices further enrich the diverse landscape of herbal medicine, emphasizing holistic approaches to health
hrough the balance of mind, body, and spirit.

Fundamental principles of herbal medicine underscore its natural healing philosophy, utilizing various preparations
ike teas, tinctures, capsules, and essential oils to address a wide range of health conditions. Case studies and
success stories underscore its efficacy in managing chronic ailments and promoting overall well-being, positioning
herbal medicine as a complementary therapy alongside conventional treatments.

The scientific underpinnings of herbal medicine, rooted in phytochemistry and pharmacology, elucidate the
mechanisms through which active compounds interact with biological systems to produce therapeutic effects.
Safety and regulatory standards ensure the potency, purity, and proper labeling of herbal products, guided by
stringent guidelines from regulatory bodies like the FDA and EMA.

The future of herbal medicine is marked by ongoing innovations in cultivation techniques, formulation technologies,
and research methodologies. Challenges in regulation and standardization present opportunities for collaboration
and advancement, fostering sustainable healthcare solutions that integrate traditional wisdom with modern
scientific insights.

Herbal medicine represents a dynamic convergence of ancient wisdom and contemporary science, offering diverse
and sustainable approaches to health and wellness. Embracing both tradition and innovation, herbal medicine
continues to evolve, enriching therapeutic options and expanding global access to holistic healthcare solutions.

1. Introduction and Origins of Herbal Medicine

The history and origins of herbal medicine trace back to humanity's earliest civilizations, where plants
were revered for their medicinal properties and used in healing practices. Ancient Mesopotamians,
Egyptians, and Greeks documented the therapeutic benefits of herbs, laying foundational knowledge
that would influence medical traditions for millennia. In Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), herbs
like ginseng and astragalus were prescribed alongside acupuncture to restore balance and treat ailments

based on the principles of Yin-Yang and Qi. Similarly, Ayurveda, the traditional medicine of India,

Introduction to Herbal Medicine | 1

----- PAGE 10 -----
incorporates herbs such as turmeric and ashwagandha into personalized treatments aimed at
harmonizing mind, body, and spirit through the dosha system. Indigenous cultures worldwide, from
Native American tribes to Australian Aboriginals, developed intricate herbal knowledge passed down
through generations, using plants like echinacea and eucalyptus for healing purposes. Over centuries,
herbal medicine has evolved alongside scientific advancements, with ongoing research validating
traditional uses and exploring new applications. Today, the integration of ancient wisdom with modern
evidence-based practices continues to shape herbal medicine as a vital component of global healthcare,
offering diverse and sustainable approaches to well-being.
2. Fundamental Principles of Herbal Medicine
Herbal medicine operates on fundamental principles that emphasize natural healing and holistic well-
being. Basic concepts include understanding botanical terms like tinctures (alcohol extracts), infusions
(tea preparations), and herbal supplements (concentrated plant extracts). A holistic approach views
health as a balance of physical, mental, and emotional aspects, where herbs like chamomile and
lavender are used not only for physical ailments but also to promote relaxation and emotional well-
being. Herbalists aim to balance the body's systems by addressing root causes rather than just
symptoms, using herbs such as ginger for digestion or ginseng for energy, aligning with traditional
practices like Traditional Chinese Medicine's (TCM) emphasis on restoring harmony through herbs
and acupuncture. This integrative approach highlights the synergy between ancient wisdom and
contemporary healthcare, fostering personalized and sustainable methods to support overall health and
vitality.
3. Types of Herbal Preparations
Herbal preparations encompass a variety of forms tailored to the specific properties and intended uses
of medicinal plants. These preparations include:
> Teas and Infusions: Teas are perhaps the most familiar and accessible form of herbal
preparation, made by steeping dried or fresh herbs in hot water. Infusions involve steeping
herbs for a longer period to extract more potent medicinal properties. Examples include
chamomile tea for relaxation and peppermint tea for digestive relief.
> Tinctures and Extracts: Tinctures are concentrated herbal extracts typically made by soaking
plant material in alcohol or glycerin to extract active compounds. Tinctures provide a
convenient and potent way to administer herbs such as echinacea for immune support or

valerian for sleep aid. Extracts are similar but can vary in concentration and solvent used.

2 | Introduction to Herbal Medicine

----- PAGE 11 -----
> Capsules and Tablets: Herbal supplements are often encapsulated or compressed into tablets for

standardized dosing and convenience. This form is popular for herbs like turmeric, ginseng, or

milk thistle, which are taken orally to support joint health, enhance energy, or aid liver

function.

> Topical Applications: Herbal preparations for topical use include ointments, salves, creams,

and oils infused with herbs known for their skin-healing or pain-relieving properties. Examples

include calendula ointment for skin irritations, arnica salve for muscle aches, and lavender

essential oil for relaxation and skin care.

> Essential Oils: Essential oils are highly concentrated extracts from aromatic plants, obtained

through distillation or cold pressing. They are used in aromatherapy for their therapeutic effects

on the mind and body. Examples include tea tree oil for its antimicrobial properties, lavender

oil for relaxation, and eucalyptus oil for respiratory support.

Table 1: Types of Herbal Preparations

Type of Examples of
Description Examples of Uses
Preparation Herbs
Herbal teas made by steeping dried | Chamomile,
Teas and . . . Relaxation, Digestive
or fresh herbs in hot water. Infusions | Peppermint,
Infusions . . : relief, Immune support
involve longer steeping. Echinacea
Concentrated herbal extracts made Echinacea,

Tinctures and

Extracts

by soaking herbs in alcohol or

glycerin.

Valerian, Milk
Thistle

Immune support, Sleep

aid, Liver health

Capsules and

Herbal supplements encapsulated or

Turmeric,

Ginseng, Milk

Joint health, Energy

enhancement, Liver

Tablets compressed for standardized dosing.
Thistle support
Topical Ointments, salves, creams, and oils Calendula, Arnica, | Skin irritations, Muscle
Applications infused with herbs for external use. Lavender aches, Relaxation
Highly concentrated extracts from Tea Tree, Antimicrobial,
Essential Oils | aromatic plants used in Lavender, Relaxation, Respiratory
aromatherapy. Eucalyptus support

Each type of herbal preparation offers unique advantages in terms of absorption, potency, and

application method, allowing individuals to choose the most suitable form based on their health needs

Introduction to Herbal Medicine | 3

----- PAGE 12 -----
and preferences. It is essential to follow dosage recommendations and consult with healthcare
professionals or herbalists when incorporating herbal preparations into health routines, ensuring safe
and effective use.

4. Commonly Used Herbs and Their Benefits: Commonly used herbs such as Echinacea boost
immune function, ginger aids digestion and reduces inflammation, turmeric supports joint health and
has antioxidant properties, and ginseng enhances energy and cognitive function, illustrating their

diverse health benefits and utility in natural healing practices.

Table 2: Commonly Used Herbs and Their Benefits

Medicinal Properties
Herb Safety and Dosage Information
and Uses
Boosts immune Generally safe for short-term use. Avoid if allergic to plants in
function; reduces the daisy family. Typical dosage: 300-500 mg of extract, 2-3
Echinacea : . . oo
symptoms and duration | times daily. Consult a healthcare provider if pregnant,
of colds and flu. breastfeeding, or have autoimmune disorders.
Anti-inflammatory; aids | Generally safe; may cause mild gastrointestinal upset in high
Gi digestion; relieves doses. Typical dosage: 1-2 grams of dried ginger daily for
inger
nausea and motion nausea; lower doses for general health benefits. Consult a
sickness. healthcare provider if taking blood-thinning medications.
Anti-inflammatory; Generally safe; may cause gastrointestinal upset in high doses.
antioxidant; supports Typical dosage: 500-2,000 mg of curcumin (active compound)
Turmeric |. . . oo, .
joint health; aids daily. Consult a healthcare provider if pregnant, breastfeeding,
digestion. or have gallbladder issues.
Generally safe; may cause insomnia or gastrointestinal upset
Enhances energy; . : :
. . in high doses. Typical dosage: 200-400 mg of standardized
improves cognitive
Ginseng . extract daily. Avoid if pregnant, breastfeeding, or have high
function; supports . :
blood pressure. Consult a healthcare provider if taking
adrenal health. . . .
medications for diabetes or blood thinners.

5. Scientific Basis and Safety and Regulation of Herbal Medicine: Herbal medicine derives its
scientific credibility from phytochemistry, a field that delves into the active constituents of plants such
as curcumin in turmeric and echinacosides in Echinacea. These compounds are studied for their

interactions with biological systems, elucidating mechanisms that underpin their therapeutic effects.

4 | Introduction to Herbal Medicine

----- PAGE 13 -----
Extensive pharmacological research supports their efficacy across various health conditions, bolstered
by clinical studies that validate their benefits.Ensuring the safety of herbal medicine involves rigorous
quality control and standardization processes. These measures are essential for maintaining the potency
and purity of herbal products, mitigating risks associated with variability in plant composition and
processing methods. Despite herbs generally being considered safe, they can provoke side effects or
interact adversely with medications, highlighting the need for informed usage and professional
guidance. Regulatory agencies like the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and EMA (European
Medicines Agency) enforce guidelines that govern the manufacturing, labeling, and marketing of
herbal products. These regulations aim to safeguard consumer health by setting stringent standards for
product quality, safety, and efficacy, thereby promoting trust and confidence in the use of herbal
remedies within modern healthcare practices.

6. Herbal Medicine in Modern Healthcare: In modern healthcare, herbal medicine serves a pivotal
role as an integrative and complementary therapy, offering alternatives or enhancements to
conventional treatments. This approach is increasingly valued for its ability to address a wide spectrum
of health needs while promoting holistic well-being. Case studies and success stories underscore its
effectiveness in managing chronic conditions such as arthritis, digestive disorders, and anxiety,
showcasing its potential to improve patient outcomes and quality of life. As herbal remedies gain
recognition for their therapeutic benefits, they are becoming more integrated into mainstream medical
practices, alongside conventional treatments.

The cultivation and sustainable sourcing of medicinal herbs are foundational to ensuring their efficacy
and safety in healthcare applications. Ethical practices in wildcrafting, which honor ecological balance
and indigenous knowledge, contribute to preserving biodiversity and maintaining the cultural integrity
of traditional herbal medicine. Quality assurance measures, including rigorous testing for contaminants
and verification of active ingredient levels, are essential to uphold potency and safety standards. These
practices not only support consistent product quality but also foster transparency and consumer trust in
herbal products. By prioritizing sustainability and ethical sourcing, the herbal medicine industry can
continue to meet growing demand while safeguarding natural resources and cultural heritage.

7. Preparation and Use of Herbal Remedies at Home:Home herbalists employ fundamental
techniques like tea preparation, tincture crafting, and herbal infusions to address common health issues
such as digestive disorders or sleep disturbances. Recipes often blend herbs like ginger for alleviating
nausea or lavender for promoting relaxation, emphasizing proper storage and handling practices to

maintain their therapeutic potency over time.

Introduction to Herbal Medicine | 5

----- PAGE 14 -----
Looking ahead, the future of herbal medicine is characterized by continuous advancements in
cultivation methods, innovative formulation technologies, and in-depth phytochemical research. These
developments aim to enhance the efficacy and safety of herbal remedies while addressing regulatory
complexities and standardization challenges. Collaborative efforts on a global scale are pivotal in
integrating traditional herbal wisdom with modern scientific approaches, paving the way for
sustainable healthcare solutions and expanding accessibility to natural therapies. Embracing these
advancements promises to enrich therapeutic options and foster a harmonious synergy between
traditional knowledge and contemporary healthcare practices.

8. Conclusion: Herbal medicine represents a dynamic field rooted in centuries of traditional wisdom
and supported by modern scientific research. The scientific basis of herbal medicine, including
phytochemistry and pharmacology, elucidates the active constituents and mechanisms through which
herbs exert therapeutic effects. Safety and regulation are paramount, with stringent quality control
measures and regulatory oversight ensuring efficacy and consumer protection. Integrative into modern
healthcare systems, herbal medicine offers complementary approaches to conventional treatments,
supported by case studies demonstrating its efficacy in managing diverse health conditions.
Sustainable sourcing practices and ethical considerations in cultivation underscore its role in
environmental stewardship and cultural preservation. As interest in natural remedies grows, the future
of herbal medicine holds promise with ongoing innovations, addressing challenges through
collaborative efforts and enhancing global access to holistic healthcare solutions. Embracing both
tradition and innovation, herbal medicine continues to enrich therapeutic options, promoting wellness

through the harmonious synergy of nature and science.

6 | Introduction to Herbal Medicine

----- PAGE 15 -----
CHAPTER

Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies

Dr. Harshita Jain

ABSTRACT

The use of herbal remedies spans millennia, deeply rooted in ancient civilizations such as Egypt, China, and India,
where plants were integral to medicinal practices. This chapter explores the historical evolution and cultural
significance of herbal medicine, highlighting its integration of traditional wisdom with modern scientific validation. It
examines the classification of herbal remedies based on plant parts and therapeutic uses, emphasizing their
mechanisms of action and contemporary applications in healthcare. Challenges including standardization,
conservation, and ethical considerations are discussed, alongside the importance of preserving indigenous
knowledge. By bridging traditional practices with scientific rigor, herbal remedies offer promising avenues for
holistic healthcare solutions in the modern era.

1. Introduction

Herbal remedies, derived from plants, have been essential to human healthcare for thousands of years.
Ancient civilizations such as Egypt, China, and India relied heavily on the medicinal properties of
herbs, with knowledge passed down through generations forming the core of traditional medicine. Key
historical texts like the Ebers Papyrus and Ayurveda document the extensive use of plants for healing,
highlighting a holistic approach that integrates cultural, spiritual, and environmental aspects.
Indigenous cultures have preserved this traditional knowledge through oral transmission, with healers
and elders holding deep understanding of local flora. This knowledge encompasses the identification,
preparation, and use of medicinal plants, considering the physical, mental, and spiritual well-being of
patients.

In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in herbal remedies due to concerns over the side
effects and costs of conventional drugs, a preference for natural therapies, and a desire to reconnect
with traditional practices. Scientific research has started to validate many of the therapeutic claims of
herbal medicine, linking ancient wisdom with modern science.

However, integrating traditional herbal knowledge into modern medicine poses challenges, including
the need for standardization, quality control, conservation of medicinal plants, and protection of

indigenous intellectual property. Additionally, potential herb-drug interactions require careful study.

Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies | 7

----- PAGE 16 -----
This chapter explores the historical background, cultural significance, and variety of plants used in
traditional herbal remedies. It examines their mechanisms of action, contemporary applications, and
the challenges of integrating them into modern healthcare. By appreciating this traditional knowledge,
we can enhance our approach to holistic and sustainable healthcare solutions.

2. Historical Background

Herbal remedies have deep roots in ancient civilizations, with early evidence of their use found in
cultures such as Egypt, China, and India. The Ebers Papyrus from Egypt, dating back to 1550 BCE,
documents numerous medicinal plants and their applications, showcasing the advanced herbal
knowledge of that era. In China, texts like the Huangdi Neijing and the Shen Nong Ben Cao Jing
highlight the extensive use of herbal medicine, with Shen Nong, the "Divine Farmer," often credited
with cataloging hundreds of medicinal plants. In India, Ayurveda, with its comprehensive texts like the
Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita, details the therapeutic use of herbs, reflecting a sophisticated
understanding of plant-based medicine. Over centuries, herbal medicine evolved through a blend of
empirical observation and cultural practices, passing through the hands of influential figures such as
Hippocrates and Galen in the West, who further shaped the knowledge and application of medicinal
plants. This historical progression laid the foundation for modern herbal medicine, integrating

traditional wisdom with contemporary scientific validation.
3. Cultural Perspectives on Herbal Medicine

Herbal medicine practices vary widely among indigenous cultures, each with unique methods of
identifying, preparing, and using medicinal plants. Indigenous healers, or shamans, often act as
custodians of this knowledge, utilizing a holistic approach that considers the physical, mental, and
spiritual health of individuals. Comparative analysis reveals significant differences and similarities in
herbal remedies across cultures. For instance, while Chinese Traditional Medicine emphasizes balance
and harmony through herbs like ginseng and astragalus, Ayurvedic medicine in India focuses on
balancing bodily doshas with herbs such as turmeric and ashwagandha. Native American traditions
often incorporate plants like echinacea and sage for their healing properties. Oral traditions and the
field of ethnobotany play a crucial role in preserving and transmitting this knowledge, with
ethnobotanists documenting indigenous plant use and its cultural significance. These practices not only
maintain biodiversity but also offer valuable insights for modern pharmacology, highlighting the

importance of respecting and preserving traditional knowledge systems.

8 | Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 17 -----
4. Classification of Herbal Remedies

Categorization by Plant Part Used: Herbal remedies can be classified based on the specific parts of

the plant utilized for medicinal purposes, each part containing unique active compounds that offer

various health benefits:

>

Leaves: Leaves are often used for their rich content of vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals.
Common examples include peppermint leaves for digestive issues and eucalyptus leaves for

respiratory problems. Leaves are typically used in teas, extracts, and topical applications.

Roots: Roots tend to contain concentrated active compounds that can have powerful therapeutic
effects. For instance, ginger root is widely known for its anti-nausea and anti-inflammatory
properties, while ginseng root is used for its adaptogenic benefits. Roots are often used in

decoctions and tinctures.

Stems: Stems can be used similarly to leaves and roots but are less commonly utilized in herbal
medicine. For example, the stems of certain plants like bamboo have been used in traditional
Chinese medicine for their cooling properties. Stems are typically prepared through decoctions

or as part of compound formulas.

Flowers: Flowers are prized for their aromatic and therapeutic properties. Chamomile flowers,
for example, are used for their calming effects and to soothe digestive issues. Calendula flowers
are known for their skin-healing properties. Flowers are commonly used in infusions, topical
applications, and extracts.

Seeds: Seeds contain oils and nutrients that can be highly beneficial. Flaxseeds are used for
their high omega-3 fatty acid content, and fenugreek seeds are known for their lactation-
promoting effects. Seeds are often prepared as infusions, ground into powders, or used in oil

form.

Classification Based on Therapeutic Use: Herbal remedies can also be classified according to their

therapeutic applications, each category addressing specific health conditions or symptoms:

>

>

Antipyretic: Herbs that help reduce fever. Willow bark and feverfew are commonly used
antipyretic herbs, leveraging their natural salicylate content.

Anti-inflammatory: Herbs that reduce inflammation and soothe irritated tissues. Examples
include turmeric, which contains the active compound curcumin, and boswellia, which is

known for its anti-inflammatory properties.

Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies | 9

----- PAGE 18 -----
> Antimicrobial: Herbs with properties that inhibit the growth of or kill microorganisms. Garlic,
with its active component allicin, and oregano oil, rich in carvacrol, are well-known
antimicrobial herbs.

> Analgesic: Herbs that provide pain relief. White willow bark and cloves are examples of
natural analgesics, often used for their pain-relieving properties similar to modern painkillers.

> Digestive: Herbs that aid digestion and alleviate gastrointestinal issues. Peppermint and ginger
are popular choices for their ability to soothe the digestive tract and reduce nausea.

> Adaptogenic: Herbs that help the body resist stressors of all kinds, whether physical, chemical,
or biological. Ashwagandha and Rhodiola are prominent adaptogens used to enhance resilience
and reduce fatigue.

Preparation Methods: The method of preparation can significantly affect the efficacy and application
of herbal remedies:

> Infusions: Infusions are made by steeping herbs, usually leaves or flowers, in hot water to
extract their active ingredients. This method is common for making herbal teas, such as
chamomile tea for relaxation or peppermint tea for digestive relief.

> Decoctions: Decoctions involve boiling tougher plant materials, such as roots, bark, or seeds, to
extract their active compounds. This method is often used for herbs like ginger root or
dandelion root, creating a more concentrated and potent preparation.

> Tinctures: Tinctures are concentrated liquid extracts made by soaking herbs in alcohol or a
mixture of alcohol and water. This method preserves the active compounds and provides a
potent, easy-to-administer form of herbal medicine. Tinctures of echinacea or valerian root are
common examples.

> Poultices: Poultices involve crushing fresh or dried herbs and applying them directly to the
skin, usually with a cloth to hold them in place. This method is used for localized treatment of
conditions like bruises, inflammations, or infections. Examples include comfrey poultices for

sprains and arnica for bruising.

5. Commonly Used Medicinal Plants and Their Benefits
> Profiles of Key Medicinal Plants: Aloe vera is renowned for its soothing gel, used traditionally
for skin ailments and burns. Echinacea is commonly used to boost the immune system and fight
colds. Turmeric, rich in curcumin, is prized for its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant

properties. Ginseng is celebrated for its ability to enhance energy and reduce stress.

10 | Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 19 -----
> Active Compounds and Pharmacological Effects: The active compounds in these plants are
crucial to their medicinal properties. Aloe vera contains aloin and other polysaccharides that
promote skin healing. Echinacea has alkamides and polysaccharides that stimulate the immune
system. Turmeric's curcumin is a potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant. Ginseng contains

ginsenosides that contribute to its adaptogenic effects, improving resilience to stress.

> Traditional Uses vs. Modern Scientific Validation:Traditional uses of these plants often
align with modern scientific findings. Aloe vera's efficacy in treating skin conditions is well-
documented. Echinacea's role in boosting immune function has been supported by some
clinical studies. Turmeric's anti-inflammatory effects are widely recognized in both traditional
and modern medicine. Ginseng's adaptogenic properties have been validated through various
studies, confirming its benefits for energy and stress reduction. While some traditional uses
have been confirmed by science, ongoing research continues to explore and validate these

ancient remedies.

6. Mechanisms of Action

> Interaction with the Human Body: Herbal remedies interact with the human body through
various mechanisms, often involving specific receptors, enzymes, or cellular pathways. For
example, curcumin in turmeric interacts with inflammatory pathways, inhibiting molecules
involved in inflammation. Ginsenosides in ginseng interact with neurotransmitter receptors,
influencing stress response and cognitive function.

> Biochemical Pathways and Physiological Effects: The biochemical pathways of herbal
remedies translate into physiological effects. Aloe vera's polysaccharides promote wound
healing by enhancing cell proliferation and collagen synthesis. Echinacea's alkamides stimulate
immune cells, enhancing immune response against pathogens. These effects illustrate how
herbs exert their therapeutic actions through specific biochemical interactions in the body.

> Synergistic Effects of Combined Herbal Formulations:Combining herbs in formulations
often enhances their efficacy through synergistic interactions. For instance, combining turmeric
and black pepper (which contains piperine) increases the bioavailability of curcumin due to
piperine's ability to inhibit enzymes that metabolize curcumin. Such synergies amplify

therapeutic benefits and improve the overall effectiveness of herbal treatments.

Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies | 11

----- PAGE 20 -----
7. Contemporary Relevance, Applications, Challenges, Controversies, and Conservation of

Medicinal Plants

>

Integration in Modern Healthcare: Herbal remedies are increasingly integrated into modern
healthcare practices, complementing conventional treatments. They are utilized in various
forms, including teas, extracts, and supplements, to address a wide range of health conditions
from chronic illnesses to supporting overall wellness.

Herbal Supplements and Alternative Medicine: The popularity of herbal supplements
continues to grow as more people seek natural alternatives to pharmaceuticals. These
supplements are widely available and marketed for their perceived health benefits, ranging
from immune support to promoting cardiovascular health.

Case Studies of Modern Applications: Several case studies highlight the efficacy of
medicinal plants in clinical settings. For instance, studies have demonstrated the effectiveness
of St. John's wort in treating mild to moderate depression, and the use of ginkgo biloba for
improving cognitive function in elderly patients.

Challenges and Controversies: Standardization and Quality Control: Ensuring consistency in
the potency and purity of herbal products remains a challenge due to variability in plant
composition and preparation methods.Ethical Considerations and Intellectual Property Rights:
There are ongoing debates regarding the ethical sourcing of medicinal plants, respecting
indigenous knowledge, and protecting intellectual property rights of traditional remedies.Safety
Concerns and Potential Side Effects: While generally considered safe, herbal remedies can
interact with medications and cause adverse effects. Proper education and regulation are crucial
to mitigate risks.

Conservation of Medicinal Plants: Importance of Biodiversity and Conservation Efforts:
Preserving biodiversity is essential for maintaining a rich source of medicinal plants.
Conservation efforts aim to protect habitats and species threatened by habitat loss and
overharvesting.

Sustainable Harvesting Practices: Adopting sustainable harvesting practices ensures that
medicinal plants are harvested in ways that support their long-term availability and ecological
health.

Role of Traditional Knowledge in Conservation Strategies: Indigenous and_ local
communities play a vital role in conservation efforts by sharing traditional knowledge of

medicinal plants and advocating for sustainable practices.

12 | Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 21 -----
> These interconnected topics underscore the dynamic intersection of traditional herbal medicine
with modern healthcare systems, highlighting both opportunities and challenges in harnessing
the potential of medicinal plants for global health and conservation.
8. Conclusion
The exploration of medicinal plants and their applications in contemporary healthcare reveals a rich
tapestry of tradition, science, challenges, and conservation imperatives. Integrating herbal remedies
into modern healthcare reflects a growing recognition of their therapeutic potential and cultural
significance worldwide. Despite centuries of traditional use, ongoing scientific validation continues to
uncover the biochemical mechanisms behind their efficacy, bolstering their credibility in mainstream
medicine.
However, this integration is not without its challenges and controversies. Ensuring standardized quality
and safety, respecting ethical considerations in sourcing and intellectual property rights, and navigating
potential interactions with conventional treatments are critical areas for ongoing scrutiny and
regulation. Addressing these issues is essential to foster confidence among healthcare providers and
consumers alike.
Moreover, the conservation of medicinal plants remains paramount. Biodiversity loss threatens the
sustainable supply of these valuable resources, necessitating concerted efforts in habitat preservation,
sustainable harvesting practices, and the recognition of indigenous knowledge in conservation

strategies.

Traditional Knowledge: Ancestral Wisdom of Herbal Remedies | 13

----- PAGE 22 -----
BE 3

Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

Dr. Nitin Nama

ABSTRACT

Traditional medicine, rooted in cultural traditions and using natural remedies, represents humanity's earliest
healthcare practices. Global systems like Traditional Chinese Medicine and Ayurveda illustrate the diverse
approaches to health and healing. Recently, there's been a resurgence of interest in these practices due to
limitations of conventional medicine and rising chronic diseases. Integrating traditional and modern medicine offers
benefits like discovering new therapeutic agents and holistic patient care, but also faces challenges such as
standardizing remedies and respecting traditional knowledge. Phytochemistry plays a key role by elucidating the
medicinal properties of plants and providing a scientific foundation for these remedies. Evidence-based research is
crucial for validating traditional remedies, ensuring their efficacy, safety, and integration into modern healthcare.
Despite challenges, collaboration between traditional practitioners and scientists is essential for innovation and
preservation of traditional knowledge. Future prospects include advances in genomics and metabolomics,
promising new therapeutic discoveries from natural sources.

Keywords: Traditional medicine, natural remedies, phytochemistry, herbal medicine, evidence-based research,
integration, therapeutic agents, cultural heritage, healthcare.

Introduction

Traditional medicine encompasses the knowledge, skills, and practices that indigenous cultures have
developed over centuries to maintain health and treat diseases. This form of medicine is deeply rooted
in cultural traditions and often involves natural remedies, including plants, minerals, and animal
products. The historical significance of traditional medicine is profound, as it represents the earliest
forms of healthcare practiced by human societies. These remedies and practices have been passed
down through generations, often orally or through written texts, preserving the rich heritage of

ancestral wisdom.
Global Practices and Cultural Perspectives

Traditional medicine varies widely across the globe, reflecting the diverse environments and cultures
from which it originates. For instance, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) includes practices like

acupuncture, herbal medicine, and tai chi, focusing on balancing the body's energy (Qi) to promote

14 | Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

----- PAGE 23 -----
health. In India, Ayurveda emphasizes the balance of body, mind, and spirit through diet, herbal
treatment, and yogic practices. African traditional medicine often involves the use of medicinal plants,
spiritual practices, and community-based healing rituals. Indigenous cultures in the Americas,
Australia, and other regions also have their unique medicinal practices that incorporate local flora and

fauna, along with spiritual and community elements.

These global practices highlight the cultural perspectives that shape traditional medicine. Each system
is deeply intertwined with the cultural beliefs, social structures, and environmental contexts of its
community. This cultural diversity enriches the global healthcare landscape, offering a variety of

approaches to health and healing.
Integration with Modern Science

Rise of Interest in Traditional Remedies

In recent decades, there has been a growing interest in traditional remedies within the scientific
community and among the general public. This resurgence is driven by several factors, including the
limitations of conventional medicine, the increasing prevalence of chronic diseases, and the rising
interest in holistic and natural therapies. People are increasingly seeking complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM) options that align with their desire for more personalized and natural
healthcare solutions. Additionally, the globalization of knowledge has facilitated greater access to
traditional remedies from various cultures, sparking curiosity and appreciation for these age-old

practices.
Benefits and Challenges of Combining Traditional and Modern Approaches

The integration of traditional medicine with modern science offers numerous benefits. One significant
advantage is the potential to discover new therapeutic agents. Many modern pharmaceuticals are
derived from compounds initially found in traditional remedies. By scientifically validating the
efficacy and safety of these remedies, we can expand our pharmacopeia with effective treatments.
Furthermore, integrating traditional and modern approaches can enhance patient care by providing a
more holistic approach to health, addressing not only physical symptoms but also emotional, mental,

and spiritual well-being.

Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine | 15

----- PAGE 24 -----
However, this integration also poses challenges. One major challenge is the standardization of
traditional remedies. Unlike modern pharmaceuticals, which are produced under strict regulations to
ensure consistency and quality, traditional remedies can vary widely in composition and potency. This
variability makes it difficult to conduct rigorous scientific studies and obtain reliable results.
Additionally, there can be a tension between traditional knowledge holders and the scientific
community, particularly regarding intellectual property rights and the commercial exploitation of
traditional remedies. Ethical considerations, such as ensuring that traditional practitioners and

communities benefit from the commercialization of their knowledge, must be carefully navigated.

Moreover, there is the challenge of bridging different epistemological frameworks. Traditional
medicine often relies on holistic and intuitive approaches, which can be difficult to quantify and study
using conventional scientific methods. Therefore, interdisciplinary collaboration and innovative

research methodologies are required to effectively integrate these two systems of knowledge.

In conclusion, the integration of traditional medicine with modern science holds great promise for
advancing healthcare. By respecting and preserving traditional knowledge while applying rigorous
scientific methods, we can unlock new possibilities for improving health and well-being. The
following sections will delve deeper into the science of phytochemistry and the evidence-based
research that underpins the use of herbal remedies, illustrating the potential and challenges of this

integrative approach.

The Science of Phytochemistry

Phytochemistry is the branch of chemistry that studies the chemicals derived from plants. These plant-
derived compounds, known as phytochemicals, include a wide array of bioactive molecules that play
crucial roles in the growth, reproduction, and defense mechanisms of plants. Phytochemicals
encompass a diverse range of chemical classes, including alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, glycosides,
and many others. Understanding these compounds involves exploring their chemical structures,

biosynthesis, and the ways they can be extracted and analyzed.

16 | Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

----- PAGE 25 -----
Role in Understanding Medicinal Properties of Plants

The importance of phytochemistry lies in its ability to elucidate the medicinal properties of plants. By
identifying and characterizing the active compounds within plants, scientists can understand how these
substances contribute to the therapeutic effects observed in traditional medicine. This knowledge
enables the development of new drugs and therapeutic agents derived from natural sources.
Furthermore, phytochemistry aids in standardizing and regulating herbal medicines, ensuring their
efficacy, safety, and consistency. It also provides insights into the mechanisms through which these

compounds exert their biological effects, offering a scientific basis for the use of traditional remedies.

Key Phytochemicals in Herbal Medicine
Phytochemicals are classified into several major groups based on their chemical structures and

biological activities:

1. Alkaloids: These nitrogen-containing compounds often have potent pharmacological effects.
Examples include morphine from the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), caffeine from coffee

(Coffea spp.), and quinine from cinchona bark (Cinchona spp.).

2. Flavonoids: These polyphenolic compounds are known for their antioxidant properties. They are
widely found in fruits, vegetables, and other plant-based foods. Quercetin, found in onions and apples,

and catechins, present in green tea, are well-known flavonoids.

3. Terpenoids: Also known as isoprenoids, these are the largest class of phytochemicals. They include
compounds like menthol from mint (Mentha spp.) and artemisinin from sweet wormwood (Artemisia

annua), which has antimalarial properties.
4. Glycosides: These compounds consist of a sugar moiety bonded to a non-sugar moiety (aglycone).
Examples include digoxin from foxglove (Digitalis spp.) and salicin from willow bark (Salix spp.), the

precursor to aspirin.

5. Others: This category includes various other bioactive compounds such as tannins, saponins, and

polyphenols, each contributing to the medicinal properties of plants.

Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine | 17

----- PAGE 26 -----
Table 1. Examples of Common Medicinal Plants and Their Phytochemicals

Plant Name Key Phytochemicals

Therapeutic Uses

Opium Poppy  (Papaver | Morphine, Codeine

somniferum)

Pain relief, cough suppression

Green Tea (Camellia sinensis) | Catechins, Epigallocatechin

Antioxidant, anti-

gallate (EGCG) inflammatory, weight loss
Willow Bark (Salix spp.) Salicin Pain relief, anti-inflammatory
Turmeric (Curcuma longa) Curcumin Anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant
Foxglove (Digitalis spp.) Digoxin, Digitoxin Heart failure, arrhythmias

Mechanisms of Action

Phytochemicals exert their effects through various mechanisms of action, including:

1. Enzyme Inhibition or Activation: Many phytochemicals can inhibit or activate specific enzymes,

thereby modulating biochemical pathways. For example, alkaloids like morphine bind to opioid

receptors, inhibiting pain signals.

2. Antioxidant Activity: Flavonoids and other polyphenols can neutralize free radicals, reducing

oxidative stress and preventing cellular damage. This activity is crucial for preventing chronic diseases

such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.

3. Anti-Inflammatory Effects: Compounds like curcumin from turmeric exhibit anti-inflammatory

properties by inhibiting inflammatory cytokines and enzymes such as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2).

4. Antimicrobial Action: Many phytochemicals possess antimicrobial properties, making them

effective against a variety of pathogens. For instance, terpenoids in tea tree oil have broad-spectrum

antimicrobial activity.

18 | Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

----- PAGE 27 -----
Case Studies of Specific Phytochemicals and Their Effects

1. Artemisinin from Sweet Wormwood (Artemisia annua)

Mechanism: Artemisinin reacts with heme in the malaria parasite, producing reactive oxygen species
that damage and kill the parasite.

Effectiveness: Artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) are currently the most effective

treatments for malaria, significantly reducing mortality rates.

2. Quinine from Cinchona Bark (Cinchona spp.)
Mechanism: Quinine interferes with the parasite's ability to digest hemoglobin, leading to its death.
Effectiveness: Historically, quinine was the primary treatment for malaria, and it remains an important

drug in areas with chloroquine-resistant malaria.

3. Curcumin from Turmeric (Curcuma longa)

Mechanism: Curcumin modulates multiple signaling pathways involved in inflammation, cell
proliferation, and apoptosis.

Effectiveness: Studies have shown curcumin's potential in managing inflammatory conditions, such as

arthritis, and its possible role in cancer prevention.

In summary, phytochemistry provides a critical scientific foundation for understanding the medicinal
properties of plants. By studying phytochemicals, we can unlock the therapeutic potential of traditional
remedies and develop new treatments that benefit human health. The next section will delve into the
clinical trials and evidence-based research that validate the efficacy of these herbal remedies, further

bridging the gap between traditional medicine and modern science.
Clinical Trials and Evidence-Based Research on Herbal Remedies

Importance of Evidence-Based Research

Evidence-based research involves the systematic investigation and study of materials and sources to
establish facts and reach new conclusions. In modern medicine, it is the cornerstone for developing and
validating treatments, ensuring that healthcare practices are effective, safe, and based on solid
scientific evidence. Evidence-based research enables healthcare providers to make informed decisions

that improve patient outcomes, reduce harm, and optimize resource use.

Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine | 19

----- PAGE 28 -----
Need for Scientific Validation of Traditional Remedies

While traditional remedies have been used for centuries, their efficacy and safety often rely on
anecdotal evidence and historical use rather than rigorous scientific validation. Scientific validation
through evidence-based research is crucial to:

- Confirm the therapeutic benefits and identify any potential risks.
- Ensure consistent quality and potency of herbal preparations.
- Gain acceptance and integration into mainstream medical practice.

- Protect consumers from ineffective or harmful products.
Design and Implementation of Clinical Trials

Phases of Clinical Trials
Clinical trials are conducted in several phases, each with distinct objectives:

1. Preclinical Studies: Laboratory and animal studies to gather initial efficacy and safety data.

2. Phase I: Small-scale trials involving a few healthy volunteers to assess safety, dosage, and side
effects.

3. Phase II: Larger trials with patients to evaluate efficacy and further assess safety.

4. Phase III: Large-scale trials to confirm effectiveness, monitor side effects, and compare with
standard treatments.

5. Phase IV: Post-marketing studies to gather additional information on the drug's risks, benefits, and
optimal use.

Ethical Considerations and Regulatory Standards

Ethical considerations are paramount in clinical trials to protect the rights, safety, and well-being of
participants. Key ethical principles include:

Informed Consent: Participants must be fully informed about the trial and consent to participate
voluntarily.

Confidentiality: Protecting the privacy of participants’ data.

Minimizing Harm: Ensuring that potential benefits outweigh risks.

Regulatory standards are enforced by agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and the European Medicines Agency (EMA). These standards ensure that trials are conducted ethically

and that the data collected is reliable and valid.

20 | Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

----- PAGE 29 -----
Challenges in Research

Difficulties in Standardizing Herbal Preparations

Herbal remedies are derived from natural sources, which can vary significantly in their chemical
composition due to factors such as:

Plant Species and Varieties: Different species or varieties may contain different levels of active
compounds.

Growing Conditions: Soil, climate, and cultivation practices can affect the phytochemical content.
Harvesting and Processing: Timing of harvest, storage, and processing methods can alter the potency

and efficacy of the final product.
Variability in Plant Composition and Sourcing

This variability poses a challenge for researchers, as it can lead to inconsistent results in clinical trials.
Standardization of herbal preparations is essential to ensure reproducibility and reliability of research

findings.
Balancing Traditional Knowledge with Scientific Rigor

Integrating traditional knowledge with scientific research requires a delicate balance:

Respecting Traditional Practices: Researchers must respect and understand the cultural context and
traditional uses of herbal remedies.

Scientific Rigor: Applying rigorous scientific methodologies to validate traditional remedies without

dismissing the experiential knowledge of traditional practitioners.

In conclusion, evidence-based research on herbal remedies is crucial for validating their efficacy and
safety, ensuring their proper integration into modern medicine. Despite the challenges, such as
standardization and variability, ongoing research continues to bridge the gap between traditional
knowledge and scientific rigor, ultimately enhancing the healthcare landscape. The following case
studies will illustrate the successful integration of traditional and modern approaches, showcasing the

potential benefits of this collaborative effort.

Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine | 21

----- PAGE 30 -----
Conclusion

Throughout this chapter, we have explored how phytochemistry serves as a foundational discipline in
understanding the medicinal properties of plants. Phytochemicals, such as alkaloids, flavonoids, and
terpenoids, play crucial roles in the therapeutic effects observed in traditional medicine. Evidence-
based research provides the scientific validation necessary to confirm the efficacy, safety, and
mechanisms of action of herbal remedies. This validation is essential for integrating traditional
knowledge into modern healthcare practices, ensuring that treatments are effective, standardized, and
supported by robust scientific evidence.

Benefits of Integrating Traditional and Modern Approaches

The integration of traditional and modern medicine offers numerous benefits. It allows for a holistic
approach to health and healing, addressing not only physical symptoms but also emotional, mental, and
spiritual well-being. By combining the strengths of traditional knowledge with the rigor of scientific
research, healthcare providers can offer more personalized and culturally sensitive treatments.
Additionally, this integration promotes the preservation of cultural heritage and biodiversity, as
traditional medicinal plants and practices are recognized and valued in mainstream healthcare systems.

Future Prospects
Potential for Innovation and New Discoveries

The future of herbal medicine holds promising opportunities for innovation and discovery. Advances
in technology and scientific methodologies, such as genomics and metabolomics, are enabling
researchers to explore the intricate interactions between phytochemicals and human biology in greater
detail. This exploration may lead to the development of new therapeutic agents derived from natural
sources, addressing unmet medical needs and enhancing treatment options for various diseases.

Importance of Continued Collaboration between Traditional Practitioners and Modern
Scientists

Collaboration between traditional practitioners and modern scientists is crucial for advancing the field
of herbal medicine. Traditional healers possess valuable knowledge accumulated over generations,
offering insights into the uses and effects of medicinal plants. By collaborating with scientists,
traditional practitioners can contribute to evidence-based research, validate their traditional knowledge,
and ensure its preservation and continuation. Similarly, modern scientists can provide technical
expertise, research infrastructure, and regulatory guidance to support the safe and effective integration
of traditional remedies into healthcare systems.

22 | Modern Science Meets Traditional Medicine

----- PAGE 31 -----
__cuarrer I

Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses
Dr. Girish Kumar Vyas

ABSTRACT

Plant-based healing, also known as herbal medicine or phytotherapy, has a rich history rooted in ancient
civilizations such as China, India, Egypt, and Greece, where medicinal plants were integral to healthcare practices.
This chapter explores the foundational concepts and practical applications of plant-based healing, emphasizing its
evolution from traditional remedies to contemporary integrative medicine. Fundamental principles include holistic
health approaches that recognize the interconnectedness of physical, mental, and emotional well-being, utilizing
diverse botanical preparations like teas, tinctures, and supplements. Key herbs such as Echinacea, ginger, turmeric,
and ginseng are highlighted for their medicinal properties, addressing conditions from immune support and
inflammation to stress relief and cognitive enhancement. Scientific research supports the efficacy of these herbs,
validating their traditional uses and informing their integration into modern healthcare systems. Preparation
methods and safety considerations underscore the importance of quality control, ethical sourcing, and informed
usage. Looking forward, plant-based healing continues to advance with innovations in phytochemical research and
sustainable practices, offering promising avenues for holistic health enhancement and integration into global
healthcare frameworks.

1. Introduction to Plant-Based Healing

Plant-based healing, also known as herbal medicine or phytotherapy, refers to the use of plant-derived
substances for therapeutic purposes. This practice encompasses a broad range of healing traditions,
from ancient remedies to contemporary applications, leveraging the medicinal properties of various
plants to treat and prevent illnesses. Historically, plant-based healing dates back thousands of years,
with roots in ancient civilizations such as China, India, Egypt, and Greece, where herbs were integral
to daily healthcare practices. Traditional systems like Ayurveda, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM),
and Native American healing have long utilized botanicals for their efficacy in promoting wellness and
addressing ailments. In the modern healthcare landscape, the importance of plant-based healing has
resurged due to growing interest in natural and holistic treatment options. Scientific research has
validated many traditional uses of plants, leading to the integration of herbal remedies into mainstream
medicine and the development of phytopharmaceuticals. As a complement to conventional medicine,
plant-based healing offers a diverse and rich source of treatments that emphasize the synergy between
nature and human health, underscoring the ongoing relevance and potential of botanicals in

contemporary healthcare.

Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses | 23

----- PAGE 32 -----
2. Fundamental Concepts of Herbal Medicine

Herbal medicine, also known as herbalism or phytotherapy, operates on several fundamental principles
that guide its practice and efficacy. At its core, herbal healing emphasizes the use of plant-derived
substances for therapeutic purposes. One of the basic principles is the holistic approach to health,
which views the body as a complex system where physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual well-being
are interconnected. This holistic perspective aligns with the belief that plants contain not only chemical
compounds that directly affect physiological processes but also subtle energies that can harmonize and

support overall health.

The healing power of plants is attributed to their diverse chemical compositions, which include
alkaloids, glycosides, essential oils, and other bioactive compounds. These constituents interact with
the body in various ways, such as influencing metabolic functions, supporting immune responses, and
exerting antioxidant effects. Additionally, plants often contain phytonutrients and vitamins that

contribute to their therapeutic properties.

In the realm of herbal medicine, several common terminologies are used to describe plants and their
preparations. For instance, "botanicals" refer to plant-derived substances used in herbal remedies,
encompassing leaves, roots, bark, flowers, and seeds. "Tinctures" are alcoholic extracts of herbs, while
"infusions" and "decoctions" denote herbal teas made by steeping or boiling plant material,
respectively. "Herbal supplements" are products containing concentrated extracts or powdered forms

of herbs, often standardized for specific compounds.

The fundamental concepts of herbal medicine underscore its integrative approach to health and its
reliance on natural substances to support and promote well-being. This holistic perspective, combined
with the scientific understanding of plant chemistry and the traditional wisdom accumulated over
centuries, forms the basis for the continued relevance and popularity of herbal medicine in modern

healthcare practices.
3. Key Herbs and Their Medicinal Properties

Medicinal herbs have been utilized across cultures for centuries for their therapeutic properties. They
often contain bioactive compounds that contribute to their medicinal benefits, ranging from immune
support and anti-inflammatory effects to digestive aid and relaxation. Below table, explained into the

detailed profiles of key herbs widely recognized for their health-promoting properties:

24 | Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses

----- PAGE 33 -----
Table 1: Herbs and Their Medicinal Properties

Herb

Medicinal Properties

Examples of Uses

Echinacea

Known for its immune-stimulating
properties, Echinacea is often used to
support the immune system during colds
and flu. It may reduce the severity and

duration of symptoms.

Echinacea is commonly taken as a
tincture or tea during cold and flu season
to boost immunity. It can also be found

in supplements.

Ginger

Ginger is prized for its anti-inflammatory
effects and its ability to aid digestion. It can
alleviate nausea, reduce muscle soreness,

and support overall digestive health.

Ginger is used in teas, soups, and as a
spice in cooking. It's also available in
capsules for digestive support and in

ginger candies for nausea relief.

Turmeric

Turmeric contains curcumin, known for its
potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
properties. It supports joint health, aids

digestion, and promotes overall well-being.

Turmeric is commonly used in curries
and golden milk. It's also available in
capsules and extracts for its anti-

inflammatory benefits.

Ginseng

Ginseng is renowned for its ability to
enhance energy levels, cognitive function,
and physical endurance. It's used to combat
fatigue, improve focus, and support adrenal
health.

Ginseng is available in teas, extracts, and
supplements. It's often used to boost

energy and cognitive function.

Chamomile

Chamomile is prized for its calming effects,
making it a popular remedy for anxiety,
insomnia, and digestive discomfort. It
soothes the nervous system and supports

healthy digestion.

Chamomile is commonly consumed as a
tea before bedtime to promote relaxation
and improve sleep quality. It's also used

in topical products for skin inflammation.

Peppermint

Peppermint is well-known for its ability to
soothe digestive issues such as bloating,
indigestion, and gas. It also has analgesic
properties that can relieve headaches and

muscle pain.

Peppermint tea is widely used for
digestive relief. Peppermint oil is applied
topically or inhaled to alleviate

headaches and sinus congestion.

Lavender

Lavender is valued for its calming and
relaxing properties. It helps reduce stress,
anxiety, and insomnia. Additionally, it has
antiseptic and anti-inflammatory effects
beneficial for skin health.

Lavender essential oil is commonly used
in aromatherapy and applied topically for
relaxation and skin care. It is also used in
teas and bath products for its soothing
effects.

Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses | 25

----- PAGE 34 -----
These herbs exemplify the diverse therapeutic potentials found in nature, offering natural alternatives
and complementary approaches to support various aspects of health and well-being. Whether
consumed as teas, added to culinary dishes, or taken as supplements, these medicinal herbs continue to
be valued for their efficacy and holistic benefits in modern healthcare practices.

4. Medicinal Uses and Benefits:

Medicinal herbs like Echinacea, ginger, turmeric, ginseng, chamomile, peppermint, and lavender offer
diverse health benefits such as immune support, digestive relief, anti-inflammatory effects, stress
reduction, and enhanced energy and cognitive function, making them valuable for holistic wellness and
preventive care. Integrating these herbs into daily routines through teas, supplements, or culinary uses
supports natural healing and overall well-being. This following table provides a concise summary of

each herb's health benefits, common uses, ailments they treat, and their role in preventive health and

wellness.
Table 2: Medicinal Uses and Benefits
Herb Health Benefits Common Uses
. Boosts immune system; reduces Preventive during cold and flu season,
Echinacea . .
severity and duration of colds and flu shortens cold symptoms
Gi Anti-inflammatory; aids digestion; Digestive aid, nausea relief, anti-
inger
8 relieves nausea and muscle soreness inflammatory for muscle pain
. Anti-inflammatory; antioxidant; Reduces inflammation, supports joint
Turmeric . —_ ;
supports joint health health, antioxidant properties

_. Boosts energy, improves focus and
. Enhances energy and cognitive . .
Ginseng . . cognitive function, supports adrenal
function; supports physical endurance

health
Calming and relaxing; reduces stress, Promotes relaxation, improves sleep
Chamomile anxiety, and insomnia; soothes quality, reduces anxiety and digestive
digestive discomfort issues

Soothes digestive issues (bloating, . . ; .
. — ; . Digestive aid, relieves headaches, muscle
Peppermint indigestion); relieves headaches and : .
. pain relief
muscle pain

Calming and relaxing; reduces stress, Aromatherapy for relaxation, improves
Lavender anxiety, and insomnia; anti- sleep quality, topical application for skin
inflammatory for skin health inflammation

26 | Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses

----- PAGE 35 -----
Common Ailments Treated with Herbs

> Cold and Flu: Echinacea (preventive and symptom reduction).

> Digestive Issues: Ginger and peppermint (aid digestion, relieve discomfort).

> Inflammation: Turmeric and ginger (anti-inflammatory properties).

> Stress and Anxiety: Chamomile and lavender (calming effects, stress reduction).

> Fatigue and Cognitive Function: Ginseng (enhances energy, improves focus).
Preventive Health and Wellness
> Immune Support: Echinacea (boosts immunity).

> Digestive Health: Ginger and peppermint (digestive aid).

> Anti-inflammatory Support: Turmeric and ginger (reduce inflammation).
> Stress Management: Chamomile and lavender (promote relaxation).

> Energy and Vitality: Ginseng (enhances energy and cognitive function).

5. Scientific Research and Evidence

Scientific research into herbal medicine emphasizes understanding phytochemistry, which identifies
and explores the active compounds within herbs responsible for their therapeutic effects. These
compounds, such as curcumin in turmeric and echinacosides in Echinacea, have been extensively
studied in clinical trials to validate their efficacy. Numerous studies support the use of herbs like
ginger for anti-inflammatory properties, chamomile for calming effects, and ginseng for cognitive
enhancement. Integrating herbal medicine with conventional treatments involves recognizing their
complementary roles, where herbs can augment conventional therapies or provide alternatives for
patients seeking natural remedies. This integration underscores the importance of evidence-based
practice, bridging traditional knowledge with modern scientific validation to enhance healthcare
options and patient outcomes.

6. Preparation and Administration of Herbal Remedies

Preparation and administration of herbal remedies involve various forms tailored to the herb's
properties and intended use. Teas and infusions are popular for extracting medicinal compounds by
steeping herbs in hot water, ideal for internal consumption to promote relaxation or aid digestion.
Tinctures and extracts concentrate herbs in alcohol or glycerin, ensuring potent doses for therapeutic

benefits like immune support or pain relief. Capsules and tablets provide convenient oral delivery,

Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses | 27

----- PAGE 36 -----
standardized for consistent dosing of herbs such as ginseng for energy or turmeric for inflammation.
Topical applications, including creams and oils infused with herbs like lavender for skin care or
peppermint for pain relief, offer targeted relief and soothing effects. Methods of preparation often
involve careful extraction techniques to preserve efficacy, with usage instructions varying based on
herb type and condition treated. Dosage guidelines consider factors like age, health status, and herb
potency to ensure safety and effectiveness, emphasizing the importance of consulting healthcare
providers or herbalists for personalized recommendations. Safety considerations include potential
interactions with medications and allergies, highlighting the need for informed decision-making when
integrating herbal remedies into health routines.
> Sourcing and Quality Control: Sourcing and maintaining high-quality standards in herbal
medicine involve careful cultivation and harvesting practices to ensure potency and purity.
Ethical considerations in sourcing emphasize sustainable methods that preserve biodiversity
and support local communities. Quality control measures include rigorous testing for
contaminants and standardization of active ingredients to guarantee efficacy and safety in
herbal products.
> Case Studies and Practical Applications: Real-life examples illustrate the effectiveness of
herbal healing across diverse health conditions, showcasing success stories and testimonials
from individuals who have benefited from herbal remedies. Practical tips for integrating herbs
into daily life emphasize their versatility in teas, supplements, and topical applications,
promoting holistic well-being and personalized health management.
> Future Directions in Plant-Based Healing: Emerging trends in herbal medicine include
advancements in phytochemical research, exploring new therapeutic potentials and
formulations. Challenges such as regulatory frameworks and_ standardization present
opportunities for innovation and integration of herbal medicine into global healthcare systems.
The evolving role of herbal medicine in promoting public health underscores its potential to
complement conventional treatments and address contemporary health challenges worldwide.
7. Conclusion
Plant-based healing harnesses the therapeutic power of nature through key herbs known for their
diverse medicinal properties. From immune-boosting Echinacea to anti-inflammatory turmeric and
calming chamomile, these herbs offer effective alternatives or complements to conventional medicine.
Their historical use and modern scientific validation underscore their relevance in promoting holistic
health and wellness. As interest in natural remedies grows, understanding and integrating these herbs
into healthcare practices not only enriches treatment options but also supports sustainable, personalized
approaches to healing. Embracing the wisdom of traditional herbal medicine alongside ongoing
scientific exploration ensures that plant-based healing continues to play a pivotal role in enhancing

health outcomes and fostering a balanced relationship between humanity and nature.

28 | Understanding Plant-Based Healing: Key Herbs and Their Uses

----- PAGE 37 -----
___CHAPTER [Gy

Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work

Dr. Harshita Jain

ABSTRACT

Medicinal plants are crucial for global health, offering alternatives to conventional drugs, particularly in developing
countries where 80% of the population relies on plant-based treatments. Unlike single-mode conventional drugs,
herbal remedies often involve complex, synergistic actions impacting multiple physiological systems. Despite
funding limitations compared to pharmaceutical giants, substantial research has elucidated the pharmacological
mechanisms of several plants. This review explores the modes of action of various medicinal plants, including their
anti-inflammatory, CNS-affecting, anti-diabetic, anti-HIV, anti-cancer, and antimicrobial properties. Specific plants,
such as Cassia fistula, Piper methysticum, and Allium sativum, demonstrate significant therapeutic potentials
through diverse biochemical pathways. The integration of these findings into modern medicine emphasizes the
need for standardized herbal formulations and deeper pharmacological understanding to enhance credibility and
efficacy.

Keywords: Medicinal plants, herbal remedies, anti-inflammatory, CNS effects, diabetes treatment, HIV control,
cancer treatment, antimicrobial properties.

Introduction

Plants are authentic wellsprings of supplements and prescriptions for the world teeming population,
consequently adding to the prosperity of people and animals. Phytochemical and pharmacological
examinations have uncovered their huge potentials as far as medicaments and affirmed their persistent
use in traditional medication. The utilization of restorative plants as medication has expanded overall
due to drug disappointment, unfavorable responses and cost of meds. It is estimated that 3/4 of the total
populace living in the developing countries actually utilize restorative plant, in spite of colossal uses by
their government on drugs. World health organisation reports that due to the cost and their
reasonableness, 80% of the populace in developing countries depend on customary meds especially

those that are plant based.

Western medication is unequivocally subject to unambiguous and reproducible proof, especially their
pharmacological activity. A solitary ordinary medication by and large has one prevailing
pharmacological method of activity which represents its helpful adequacy, though a home grown cure
in view of the different dynamic specialists it contains, for the most part impacts a few biochemical or

potentially physiological frameworks present in the body. Distinguishing this consequently represents

Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work | 29

----- PAGE 38 -----
a few difficulties. They are significantly more complicated, what's more, the dynamic parts of a home
grown cure might act synergistically or cooperate in alternate ways. Albeit the need to decide methods
of activity has not been an essential worry of corresponding medical care specialists, there is
expanding strain to elaborate equitably on their pharmacological activity. Accordingly, there has been
a reassuring, and heightening, arrival of logical information reporting the method of activity of
numerous natural cures. A few we are familiar in impressive detail; of others we have a suspicion;
however for by far most the’ methods of activity still need to be clarified. This concise survey, in view
of a review of the accessible logical and clinical writing, looks at the methods of activity of a few
remedial spices which are being progressively utilized, whether casually or as a feature of correlative
or integrative clinical practice. It inspects a significant class of sub positions, the adaptogens, and the
different synthetic structures it embraces, like the saponins and triterpenes. The spices with regulate the
safe framework, for example garlic, turmeric and St John's Wort, are in like manner reviewed, similar
to the alkaloids and plant mitigating specialists. Spices which apply pharmacological activity through
their nitric oxide administrative properties are recorded, similar to those which give fundamental
miniature supplements, like nutrients and certain minerals. The survey finishes up with remark on the
significance of understanding natural cure methods of activity as a positive move toward their more

extensive reception in the cutting edge remedial armamentarium.

A significant and exceptionally important variable is that makers of natural meds have practically no
admittance to the monstrous subsidizing accessible to the exploration organizations and "Huge
Pharma" to complete enormous, very much controlled and arranged clinical investigations. A little,
twofold visually impaired, get over clinical preliminary costs a few million bucks to sort out, make
due, control, break down, and report. Thus, data on the methods of activity of natural cures is
gathering, yet at a generally sluggish speed. All things being equal, a lot is known about the
pharmacology of specific well known spices, particularly those utilized in the industrialized nations,

somewhat on the grounds that they have been around for quite a while .
Medicinal Properties of Some Plants —

Restorative plants are utilized for their clinical convenience in different ways. They can be synergistic
in real life by improving the impacts of other medicaments either inefficacy or antagonistic impacts.
Then again, they can be added substance basically thus strong clinically. Restorative plants can be
utilized in preventive medication, for example, decrease in unfriendly impacts or increased cell

reinforcement profile in patients utilizing them (Emeka et al., 2014). Thus, the utilization of restorative

30 | Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work

----- PAGE 39 -----
plants as food enhancements can likewise play an important job in sickness avoidance and fix (Hassan,
2012; Emeka et al.,2014). The facts confirm that plant parts utilized in medication display a complex
synergism and this reality has made drug organizations and scientists to decontaminate and blend what
they term dynamic mixtures. These may be related in real life or have comparative qualities to existing
compounds, with the desire for they will have same pharmacological profile and much expected
clinical result. Thusly, constant screening of plants for potential use as medication has prompted the
explanation of their component of action. WHO reminder in 1989, required the need to assess
elements of conventional medication particularly restorative plants in other to determine their
pertinence clinically as would be helpful specialists, in light of the fact that of their reasonableness and

overflow in nature.
Mechanism of action of some medicinal plants -

There is a wide assortment of restorative plants beginning from different geographical locales of the
world. A portion of these and their reported mechanism of activity in light of their purposes in the

treatment of differentialments are considered beneath.
Inflammatory Mediators —

The action of Cassia fistula, with watery and methanolic concentrates may be due to restraint of the go
betweens of aggravation, for example, histamine, serotonin and prostaglandin . The mitigating
movement of methanolic concentrate of Eclipta prostrataL. (Asteraceae) inhibitorily affects the arrival
of dynamic pain substance, for example, receptor, serotonin, polypeptides or prostaglandins . Murraya
koenigii (L) is a fragrant plant thathas been displayed to settle pole cell film. This activity will
preventthe arrival of provocative arbiters like receptor Medicinal ointment of Zingiber zerumbet was
accounted for to have hostile to nociceptiveaction through the restraint of glutamatergic framework,
TRPVI1 receptors andalso it actuates |-arginine/nitric oxide/protein kinase pathway. Trichosanthes
cucumerina L produces film adjustment uponadministration. It likewise goes about as Nitric oxide
(NO) inhibitory action which islinked to its mitigating activity The calming action of Asparagus
cochinchinensis with 70%ethanol concentrate might be because of barricade of supportive of fiery
cytokineproduction and neutrophil-interceded yeloperoxidase movement, hindrance and to the ensuing

bar of leukocyte gathering.

Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work | 31

----- PAGE 40 -----
Medicinal plants that effect the CNS —

A portion of the therapeutic plants which influence the focal sensory system andthe proposed

method of activity incorporate the following:

e Piper methystieum, ties to GABAU, hinders MAOb and re-take-up ofNA. In this way, its

utilization as an enemy of tension drug is legitimate

e  Passiflora incarnata has been portrayed as non-narcotic antianxietyagent and this activity was
assessed to be by means of GABA initiation. Likewise actsas benzodiazepines fractional
receptor agonist .

e Melissa officinalis as stimulant is said to be an inhibitor of MAO and GABA transaminase .

e Apocynum venetum is utilized in the treatment of hypertension anddocumented proof focuses
to the way that it produces vasodilation by means of endothelium-determined rexatation factor
Nitric corrosive (NO)). Apocynum venetum is additionally utilized as an anxiolytic specialist
andwas answered to create this outcome by acting by means of GABA and 5-HT1A receptors ).

Its belongings were viewed as offended byflumezanil, a benzodiazepine cure.

Tooth Ache Treatment —

Qualities Spilanthes comprises of north of 60 species dispersed hot and humidly andsub-hot and
humidly. It is local to Brazil,an yearly spice, developed all through the year as a decorative plant.
Species S. acmella have been utilized for people cure ofailments like toothache, fever and
rheumatic agony. S. acmella has been accounted for to comprise of an assortment ofcompounds of
which the major segregate are lipophilicalkylamides or alkamides which bear different number of
unsaturatedhydrocarbons (alkenes and alkynes), Ramsewak et al. (1999). The chewingof this plant
discharges alkamides which has an impactful taste coming about insalivation and tingle (Rios,
2012). Alkamides are basically connected with animalendo-cannabinoids and is profoundly
dynamic in the focal sensory system . An effective manufactured technique has been created
(Wang et al., 1998)with spilanthol being financially accessible in a type of alcoholic
extract.Spilanthol is the primary constituent disengaged from many pieces of S. acmella.The
calming action has been credited to its capacity to dually inhibit COX and LOX (Hernandez et al.,
2009). The noticed calming movement is said to start from flavonoids that are found inthe plant

removes

The presence of flavonoids inthe plant remove is proposed to cause a decline in prostaglandins,
PGE2and PGF2 the two of which are accounted for to be engaged with torment perception(Jyothi
et al., 2008). The component of activity of this plant has likewise beenattributed to the enactment

of opiodergic seroninergic GA-BAergic systemsas well as the K+ channel.

32 | Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work

----- PAGE 41 -----
Diabetic control —

Reports show that around 800 plants are being used customarily in thetreatment of diabetes
mellitus. Notwithstanding, Alarcon-Aguilara et al., (1998)reported that just 410 of this number
have been demonstrated tentatively aspossessing hostile to diabetic movement (Prabhakar and
Doble, 2008). Nigella sativa is an exceptionally famous plant utilized across Asia and
theMediterranean locales of the world (Ayed et al., 2009). The biologicalactivities of its various
parts have been embraced for variousdisease states which incorporate ulcer, disease, aggravation
and diabetesmellitus. As an enemy of diabetic, it restrains electrogenic gastrointestinal retention of
glucose and improving insulin responsiveness in the liver cells (Leet al., 2004; Wright et al., 2004;
Ducroc et al., 2005). Momordica charantia and Helicteres isora have been accounted for to
increasethe articulation of PPAR gamma which diminishes insulin opposition and isemployed in
the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Its activity is said to besimilar to the thiazolidinones class of
hostile to diabetic medications (Prabhakar andDoble, 2008; Chakrabarti et al., 2002). Insulin
secretagogues restorative plants like Panax ginseng, Allium cepa,Azadiracta indica, Eugenia
jambolana, Medicago sativa have been shownto follow up on the beta cells of langahan to cause

the arrival of insulin.

HIV Control - 36 plants containing 46 plant species which have realized enemy of HIVactive
mixtures have been recorded (Chinsembu and Hedimbi, 2009). Theiractive fixings as well as their
method of activity against HIV weredocumented by Chinsembu and Hedimbi (2009). These plants
contain activecompounds, for example, terpenoids, coumarins, polyphenols, tannins,
proteins,alkaloids and biflavonoids.Citrus paradisi, is utilized in the treatment of HIV and was
assessed toinhibit HIV protease and accordingly has comparative activity as
saquinavir(Kupferschmidt et al., 1998). Therapeutic plant Geum japonicum is said toshow against
HIV impact by repressing viral protease, as per Xu et al.( 1996). The plant family Euphorbiaceae,
Jatropha curcas, J. multifida andTrigonostema xithophyllous are found to have hostile to HIV
action byinhibiting viral passage especially HIV1 (Park et al., 2009). The customary Chinese
restorative plant Cynomorium songaricum isreported to have hostile to HIV movement and this
activity stops by its capacity as aproteases inhibitor in HIV | disease (Cui et al., 2013). Curcuma
comsa separates contain phytoestrogens which is accounted for topossess estrogenic action
(Suksamrarn et al., 2008); Winuthayanon et al.,2009). Its instrument of activity is supposed to be

the particular actuation of estrogenreceptor alpha as an agonist (Winuthayanon et al., 2009)

Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work | 33

----- PAGE 42 -----
Cancer Treatment - Andrographolide containing restorative plants like Andrographis
paniculataare answered to be valuable enemy of malignant growth specialists and have been
assessed assuch. Reported proof show that Andrographis paniculata is a cell cycle explicit
specialist which act by capturing the disease cell development at G0/Glphase (Rajagopal et al.,
2003). This activity is intervened through the inhibitionof protein p27 and by diminishing cyclin-
subordinate kinases 4 (CDK4)expression.Ononis serrata, Haplophyllum tuberculatum, Pulicaria
crispa, are saidto actuate apoptosis in disease cells by capturing the phone multiplication at
theG0/G1 stage (Kuete et al., 2013). It is portrayed as a cell cycle explicit andhence it legitimizes

its utilization as anticancer customarily.

Estrogen like medicinal plants - Trifolium pratense separate is utilized in the help of side effects
of menopause,such as hot-streaks. The component of activity for this movement is said tohave
great restricting fondness to narcotic receptors in the CNS and likewise upgrades the endorphin
levels . Part of theactions of narcotic framework is the guideline of female hormonal levels

whichaffects temperaments.

Ulcer Treatment - Ichornea triplinervia is a restorative plant of Brazilian beginning, utilized in
thetreatment of gastric ulcer. Its system of activity was assessed to bethrough expanding PGE2
discharge in the GIT, subsequently going about as protectiveagent . Coptis chinensis is utilized as
ulcerogenic specialist. It showedthat it stifles gastric corrosive emission and lessen of Nitric oxide

levels.

Lipid Control - The leaves, blossoms and cloves of Allium sativum L. have been being used
asmedicine in old development. It is accepted that this restorative plant hasexhibited helpful
impacts in malignant growth, cardiovascular sicknesses, bacterial,viral and parasitic diseases. The
utilization of Allium sativum L. (garlic) as against hyperlipidaemic specialist due to its capacity to
restrain hepatic HMG-COAreductase, (Brosche and Platt, 1991). Hydrastis canadensis which is
referred to all around as brilliant seal is aplant local to eastern district of North America.
Goldenseal has been usedin an assortment of infection states, for example, irritation and stomach
related disorders.However its utilization as lipid bringing down specialist comes from the
perception that itregulates cholesterol digestion (Mckenna et al., 2002). This is because of itsability
to enact extracellular Sign managed kinase (ERK) pathway inthe liver tissues. The initiation of this

pathway increments up-guideline ofLDLR articulations.

34 | Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work

----- PAGE 43 -----
Antimicrobial properties of some medicinal Plants —

The impact of restorative plants on pathogenic microorganisms is accounted for worldwide.
Antimicrobial properties of restorative plants change contingent upon themicrobial species, sort of
plant separate and the pieces of the plant. Grampositive microscopic organisms, for example,
Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus uberiswere answered to be more delicate to decoction of
‘Carqueja' (Baccharistrimera Less). Nonetheless, Gram negative microorganisms (Salmonella
gallinarumand Escherichia coli) didn't answer the plant decoction like their Grampositive partners

(Avancini et al., 2000). Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait is an individual from Vaccininum

genusrepresenting many consumable berries, grownjiffmostly in North Americaand eastern Asia.

jtési Concentrates of Vaccinium macrocarpon display antibacterialactivity, acting by upsetting the

Gram positive and Gram negative bacteriacell wall and layer (Diarra et al., 2013). Gaultheria
species are broadly dispersed overall and appreciate popularuse in customary medication. G.
yunnanensis has been displayed to demonstrateanti-fiery movement by restraining the arrival of
favorable to inflammatorycytokines, Nitric Oxide and receptive oxygen species (Zhang et al.,
2011). They contain methyl salicylates however shows inhibitory impacts oncyclooxygenase 2
(COX) without influencing COX | (Liu et al., 2013). Other plant concentrate, for example, Ruta
graveolens and Zingiber officinale bothof which are of Asian beginning have shown inhibitory
action against strainsof Bacillus cereus strains (Alzoreky and Nakahara, 2008). Ethyl acetateextract
of Punica granatum organic product (Pomegranate) and chloroform extricate ofT. avellanedae
wood (purple trumpet tree) were exhibited to inhibitthe action of MRSA. In any case, the

component of activity of these medicinalplants has not been researched, yet.

Antifungal Activity - Hibicuslide C, a constituent of Abutilon theophrati has been displayed to
possessantifungal action against Candida albicans. This activity is applied bydisrupting contagious
cell layer (Hwang et al., 2013). Flavonoids from Dorstenia plant species have been accounted for to
possesspotential therapeutic properties (Adjanohun et al., 1996). Their utilization ininfectious
illnesses is legitimate in that they are accounted for to disturb bacterialcell wall film and restrain
DNA, RNA and protein combination Rejuvenating balm from restorative plant Anethum
graveolens seeds is utilized inthe treatment of Candida albicans contamination (Chen et al., 2013).
Itsmechanism of activity remembers cytoplasmic film and mitochondriadysfunction for helpless

contagious living beings .

Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work | 35

----- PAGE 44 -----
They are progressively being involved these days as helpful specialists for some ongoing messes,
or joined with minerals and nutrients in wellbeing improving enhancements, or as strengthening
tonics and teas.[ 9] This has emerged for a few genuine and significant reasons. One of these is
expanding consciousness of the negative parts of some customary medications, especially
antagonistic medication responses, both in the short and long haul, and doubts about the genuine
degree to which they happen. This pattern likewise mirrors the inclination towards a more normal
way of life, and a newly discovered regard for regular or comprehensive recuperating. One more is
the instinctual need to manage the fundamental reasons for a specific illness, instead of only
stifling the disturbing side effects. Home grown cures frequently guarantee to do this, as opposed
to ordinary medication, which seems, by all accounts, to be more concerned with side effect

concealment and rebuilding of typical research center boundaries.

Over the course of the past ten years or so there has been a quick increment in the assemblage of
specialized writing on the component of activity of an enormous number of natural cures. This
newly discovered information has been created by dependable specialists, not just in scholarly
world and state-run foundations, yet additionally in a number of drug organizations. The reason for
compelling clinical activity of large numbers of these has been justified, and their wide use without
hesitation embraced. Numerous other home grown cures have, nonetheless, been demonstrated less
powerful than guaranteed by their followers, and their use conclusively dismissed and deserted.
There are three valid justifications for the look for demonstrated pharmacological activity. To start
with, the utilization of natural cures, either alone or joined with other treatment modalities, should
be founded on a strong comprehension of their pharmacology. In the event that this isn't accessible,
the validity of home grown treatment by and large endures, and its genuine worth reduced. Second,
the inquiry requires the normalization of the natural item as far as unambiguous character of home
grown parts, viability per unit weight, definition into standard dosages, and its compound stability.
Third, if and when natural cures are thought of as a component of integrative medication, their

methods of activity need to be perceived.

36 | Mechanism of Action : How Herbal Remedies Work

----- PAGE 45 -----
___ CHAPTER Ig

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

Mr. Rahul Kumar Ancheria

ABSTRACT

Herbal medicine, rooted in ancient practices and revered across traditional medical systems like Ayurveda,
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), and Native American remedies, remains integral to global healthcare.
Approximately 80% of the world's population utilizes herbal products, with the market projected to grow from USD
165.13 billion in 2023 to USD 386.07 billion by 2032. Despite its historical significance, the rise in herbal medicine's
popularity has introduced challenges such as adulteration, contamination, and variability in quality. The safety and
efficacy of herbal remedies necessitate rigorous toxicological evaluations and quality control measures. Issues like
species substitution and contamination highlight the need for accurate plant identification and standardized
practices. Regulatory guidelines, such as those from the World Health Organization, and advancements in analytical
techniques, like chromatography, are crucial for ensuring product safety and efficacy. Herbal medicines interact
with conventional drugs, potentially altering therapeutic outcomes, underscoring the importance of understanding
these interactions. Scientific validation of traditional herbs, such as turmeric and ginkgo biloba, demonstrates their
therapeutic potential. Integrating traditional knowledge with modern scientific methods is essential for optimizing
herbal medicine's benefits while ensuring consumer safety.

Keywords: herbal medicine, phytotherapy, traditional medicine, safety, efficacy, regulation, quality control, herbal-
drug interactions.

Introduction

Herbal medicine, otherwise called herbalism or phytotherapy, includes utilizing plant-based substances
for restorative purposes. This training traces all the way back to antiquated civic establishments, where
plants were venerated for their mending properties. Conventional clinical frameworks like Ayurveda,
Customary Chinese Medication (TCM), and Local American cures all take the stand concerning the

authentic meaning of home grown medication.

Natural medication has interminably addressed a vital component of essential medical services.
Around 80% of the worldwide populace is assessed to involve natural restorative items for their
remedial benefits. Starting around 2022, the worldwide Home grown Medication Market Size was
evaluated at USD 148.5 billion, and it is expected to climb from USD 165.13 billion of every 2023 to
arrive at USD 386.07 billion by 2032. This direction shows a build yearly development pace of
11.20% all through the estimated period from 2023 to 2032. The worldwide Coronavirus pandemic has

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 37

----- PAGE 46 -----
unfurled in an unmatched and wonderful way, bringing about an elevated interest for natural
medication in every single geological locale, outperforming prepandemic levels. The interest for
natural restorative products has developed as individuals have become more mindful of allopathic
meds' incidental effects and the benefits of utilizing home grown prescriptions all things being equal.
The extending populace, combined with an expansion in the commonness of constant illnesses, is

another market driver affecting business sector development.

Nonetheless, this rising interest has likewise seen an ascent in deceitful works on, including the
replacement of home grown material and the expansion of manufactured compounds.3,6 Subsequently,
normalization and quality control processes have become vital. Furthermore, a few unfriendly impacts
are not exclusively owing to corruption, defilement, or misidentification of plant species; they can
likewise come from the inborn poisonousness of specific plants. This requires an exhaustive
toxicological evaluation to moderate potential wellbeing concerns. Moreover, antagonistic impacts can
likewise be set off by unfamiliar impurities, for example, synthetic compounds like pesticide deposits
or weighty metals, or microbiological agents. These elements highlight the need for thorough
wellbeing conventions. While the verifiable utilization of home grown drugs highlights its true
capacity, the contemporary academic local area recognizes the basic for thorough security and viability
assessments. Not at all like drug drugs, home grown items frequently need normalized doses and can
communicate with other medications.Occurrences of unfriendly occasions connected to specific
natural arrangements highlight the requirement for careful clinical preliminaries and toxicological
evaluations. Administrative organizations are progressively focusing on the quality, wellbeing, and
adequacy of home grown items to shield general wellbeing. Logical headways over the long haul
prompted the seclusion and union of dynamic mixtures from plants, shaping the underpinning of
present day drugs. Be that as it may, the all encompassing methodology inborn in natural medication,
frequently using different plant constituents, keeps on holding its importance. The business of phyto-
arrangements has seen significant development over late many years, bringing about a different cluster
of items accessible on the lookout, which are used in other option and correlative medication settings.
In the midst of elevated shopper interest, there is mounting strain to evaluate item viability and to
guarantee their security. One of the fascinating features of natural medication lies in assorted cluster of
bioactive mixtures add to its helpful impacts. Intensifies like alkaloids, flavonoids, and terpenes
interface with organic frameworks, getting reactions that can address different wellbeing conditions.

Acquiring a complete comprehension of the systems through which these mixtures work is essential

38 | Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 47 -----
for enhancing definitions and creating designated therapies. Progresses in scientific methods,
genomics, and metabolomics play had an essential impact in distinguishing and describing these
bioactive parts. This survey article dives into urgent parts of guideline and quality control in home
grown medication creation, featuring the potential for harmfulness and after effects in regular cures,
the proficiency and bioactivity of natural items, and the meaning of grasping collaborations among
medications and spices. With the developing ubiquity of natural medication, taking on informed and
proof based approaches becomes fundamental for guaranteeing both security and adequacy in medical

care rehearses.
Safety assessment of herbal medicines

Herbal drugs and their preparations - Customary therapeutic natural medications incorporate
different plant parts like elevated parts, blossoms, organic products, leaves, seeds, stems, and
underground parts like roots, bulbs, tubers, and rhizomes. These materials exist in assorted structures,
including crude, new, dried, and removes, with periodic utilization of whole dried plants. They hold
huge worldwide significance in global exchange, highlighting essential clinical, monetary, wellbeing,
and drug esteem. The heightening acknowledgment of their value, regardless of whether legitimized, is
adding to a consistent extension of their market. Notwithstanding, far reaching information concerning
the quality, security, and adequacy of various plants, their concentrates, arrangements, and dynamic
mixtures stay restricted. Guaranteeing their quality is of vital significance to ensure their security and

viability.

Safety and potential toxicity of herbal remedies - The idea of "poisonousness" is innately affected
by individual viewpoints. Various regular food sources contain parts that could set off sensitivities or
may be delegated poisonous in light of explicit models. Along these lines, even life-supporting
substances, for example, water and oxygen can become deadly when polished off in exorbitant
amounts, highlighting the meaning of measurement as a vital component. Regardless, from a wellbeing
stance, ordering spices into three unmistakable groups is plausible. The principal bunch involves a
couple of spices that contain elevated degrees of possibly hurtful substances, similar to drug
compounds. These ought to never be ingested by undeveloped people, besides in homeopathic
arrangements. Models incorporate Atropa belladonna, Arnica spp., Aconitum spp., and Digitalis spp.
The subsequent gathering incorporates spices with intense impacts that may once in a while prompt

side effects like queasiness or regurgitating. In any case, these spices are protected when utilized

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 39

----- PAGE 48 -----
fittingly. Models incorporate Lobelia and Eonymus spp. Curiously, there are inconsistencies in the
guidelines of these spices across various nations; for example, Ephedra is confined in the UK yet
promptly accessible in the USA, potentially with substantial reasons. The third gathering comprises of
spices that show explicit sorts of poisonousness, upheld by logical proof. Strikingly, plants containing
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, like Comfrey (Symphytum), are notable for their hepatotoxicity. Different
models incorporate Dryopteris (Male Greenery), Viscum (Mistletoe), and Corynanthe (Yohimbe). It is
fitting for laypeople to stay away from inward utilization of spices from this gathering. In outline, the
grouping of a substance as poisonous depends on different elements; in the domain of natural
medication, various spices show fluctuating levels of harmfulness and likely dangers. It is vital with
practice alert, comply to proper utilization rules, and look for proficient counsel while thinking about
the ingestion of spices, especially those in the first and third gatherings, to guarantee security and limit
expected hurt. The presentation and far reaching accessibility of home grown meds and their
subordinates in numerous nations frequently happen without compulsory wellbeing or toxicological
evaluations, and administrative oversight of assembling practices and quality principles is frequently
deficient. Therefore, these home grown items are effectively open to purchasers without requiring
solutions. Tragically, the misjudged potential dangers related with inadequate natural items present

critical dangers.

Anticipating adverse effects and toxicities: understanding herbal medicine usage —

In the domain of home grown medication and dietary enhancements, the event of antagonistic impacts
and poison levels frequently comes from ill-advised utilization. These episodes can be ascribed to a
few elements, including the improper use of spices and enhancements, their inaccurate planning, over
the top measurements, or delayed usage. Thus, it is critical for doctors to stay cautious when patients
report a background marked by such use, as it might show the potential for poison levels. Accordingly,
when items guarantee to offer quick side effect help, it ought to raise worries among medical services
experts, as this could show purposeful debasement with drug substances. Such contaminated can
prompt inconveniences and harmful responses. These debased items are typically accessible as
ingestible or periodically effective completed items. Aside from this, other quality difficulties common
in the natural restorative items market fundamentally originate from species replacement and
defilement. Such pollutions and replacements can bring about unfavorable responses in customers. For
example, the presence of Senna alexandrina in Hypericum perforatum items prompted accidental

ingestion of sennosides, causing a diuretic impact. The disclosure of Juglans nigra in Ginkgo and

40 | Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 49 -----
Echinacea items raised worries because of the harmful compound juglone. Moreover, subbing
Stephania tetrandra with Aristolochia fangchi in TCM items might prompt renal poisonousness and
disease because of the presence of aristolochic corrosive. Corrupting Datura stramonium with
Brugmansia arborea in Ayurvedic medication additionally presents serious dangers. Considering the
previously mentioned difficulties, the exact recognizable proof of restorative plant materials is basic to
guarantee their wellbeing. Furthermore, numerous makers of natural prescriptions need information or
put deficient accentuation on the meaning of ordered natural science and documentation, which
presents novel difficulties during the recognizable proof and assortment of restorative plants utilized in
home grown cures. To address disarray originating from normal names, it is fundamental to embrace
generally acknowledged binomial names, including their equivalents, for restorative plants. For
example, Artemisia absinthium L., known for its dynamic opiate subordinate and potential to incite
focal sensory system issues and summed up mental disintegration, has no less than 11 unmistakable
normal names, with seven looking similar to its herbal name. Given the pervasiveness of normal
names, Heliotropium europaeum (heliotrope), containing intense hepatotoxic pyrrolidine alkaloids, is
habitually confused with Valerian officinalis (garden heliotrope), which contains narcotic and muscle
relaxant valepotriates, stressing the need of giving the exact logical name of the plant. Thus, the
capable oversight of home grown medication security requires strong participation among botanists,
phytochemists, pharmacologists, and other noticeable patrons. To defend customers, the verification of
both the underlying home grown constituents and a definitive marketed things stays basic. While
customary techniques, including morphological, tiny, and synthetic distinguishing proof, have
generally filled in as verification apparatuses, novel methodologies have arisen and accumulated
unmistakable quality throughout recent years. These advancements give new roads to ensuring the

wellbeing and validity of natural cures.

Regulation and quality control - Associations, for example, the World Wellbeing Association
assume a vital part in laying out rules and norms for the creation of home grown drugs. For instance,
"Rules for Evaluating Nature of Home grown Prescriptions Concerning Pollutants and Deposits" and
"Rules on Great Farming and Assortment Practices (GACP) for Restorative Plants" offer fundamental
experiences into quality control and development works on, guaranteeing the worldwide adherence to
somewhere safe and viability norms. The changeability in phytochemical constituents is impacted by

elements like environment, soil arrangement, and geological area, adding to difficulties in

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 41

----- PAGE 50 -----
normalization. Rising issues like contaminated and replacement of natural medications, frequently
connected to expanded deforestation, additionally compromise the security and adequacy of these
items The World Wellbeing Association has laid out rules for natural medication normalization,
consolidating basic assessment boundaries, for example, organoleptic properties, debris values,
dampness content, microbial pollution, and chromatographic and spectroscopic assessments.Modern
insightful strategies are irreplaceable for the worldwide acknowledgment of customary spices and
Ayurvedic items. An extensive and exact pharmacognostical evaluation shapes a logical starting point
for assessing the nature of customary spices and Ayurvedic items. Organoleptic tests, physicochemical
examinations, and pharmacognostic plans are fundamental for confirmation and normalization.
Minuscule and naturally visible examinations give information to forestall the debasement of true
home grown materials and aid their ID. Besides, the distinguishing proof of optional metabolites like
alkaloids, tannins, glycosides, saponins, and flavonoids fills in as an important device for
normalization. Current quality assessment of natural drugs frequently depends on a couple of markers
or pharmacologically dynamic parts. In any case, these may not give a far reaching comprehension of
an item's remedial impacts, as numerous constituents frequently work synergistically. Fluctuation in
synthetic piece because of elements like gather season, plant beginning, and drying processes further
convolutes appraisal. To guarantee pharmacological and clinical examination dependability and item
quality, it is proposed that a more extensive scope of phytochemical constituents ought still up in the
air, requiring chromatographic procedures like superior execution fluid chromatography, gas
chromatography, slender electrophoresis, and slight layer chromatography investigation.
Chromatographic fingerprints, addressing normal synthetic parts, can act as an all encompassing
quality evaluation instrument for home grown prescriptions. These fingerprints ought to show both the
consistency and contrasts in various examples. Joined chromatography-spectrometry draws near, for
example, elite execution fluid chromatography-diode-exhibit location, gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry, and narrow electrophoresis-diode-cluster identification, alongside chemometric methods,
offer improved detachment, selectivity, and accuracy for subjective and underlying examination. Such
chromatographic fingerprints, viewed as correspondingly invaluable, are significant for quality control.
The shortfall of vigorous guideline can bring about different issues inside the natural items industry,
including defilement, tainting, and irregularities in power. Administrative systems assume an essential
part in laying out rules for good assembling works on, guaranteeing that home grown medications
comply to explicit quality norms and advancing precise marking for informed customer decisions. Be

that as it may, administrative principles for natural prescriptions fluctuate broadly between nations,

42 | Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 51 -----
with some executing tough guidelines while others take on additional indulgent methodologies. This
dissimilarity can bring about abberations in item quality and wellbeing, where natural cures from
various nations may not adjust to similar quality norms. Blending worldwide administrative guidelines
stays a continuous test, requiring cooperation among global associations, administrative bodies, and
legislatures. To upgrade the verification of home grown items, future investigations ought to line up
with laid out plan processes, consolidating tiny and perceptible examinations, substance distinguishing
proof (for the two debasements and real parts), physicochemical boundary evaluations (e.g., dampness
content, corrosive insoluble debris, and water-solvent debris), and the joining of novel boundaries.
Drug-spice connections - The communications between home grown cures and regular meds can have
critical ramifications for patient wellbeing and treatment results. Certain spices can change the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of doctor prescribed drugs, possibly diminishing their
adequacy or causing unfavorable impacts. The normal particularity of substrates in biotransformational
ways is the essential driver of medication drug, food-medication, and spice drug communications
(HDIs). Pharmacokinetic HDIs include the enlistment or hindrance of metabolic catalysts, especially
the cytochrome P450 (CYP) chemical family, in the digestion tracts and liver, and comparable impacts
on drug carriers and efflux proteins.CYP and efflux proteins' presystemic movement can influence oral
bioavailability, causing co-directed home grown items to altogether lessen or increment drug levels.
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic HDIs are components that adjust gastrointestinal capabilities,
drug retention, metabolic compounds, transport proteins, and renal discharge of medications. HDIs
frequently include CYP oxidative digestion or P-glycoprotein efflux, influencing the oral
bioavailability of meds when joined with solvent and insoluble filaments like psyllium, tea,
pomegranate, cinnamon, and rhubarb. Grapefruit likewise has been found to essentially build the
serum drug focus because of its irreversible restraint of CYP3A4 action. The mix of spices and
medications can bring about different unfavorable impacts, including the accompanying: an expanded
gamble of draining with warfarin when utilized close by ginkgo, garlic, dong quai, or danshen; the
gamble of actuating lunacy in discouraged patients by consolidating antidepressants with Panax
ginseng; compounding of extrapyramidal impacts when neuroleptic drugs are matched with betel nut; a
raised hypertension risk when tricyclic antidepressants are joined with Yohimbine; expanded
corticosteroid power with licorice; diminished prednisolone blood fixations when matched with
Chinese natural items; and decreased phenytoin focuses when taken close by shankhapushpi, an
Ayurvedic definition. Ginko biloba and garlic have been found to prompt CYP2C19-subordinate

omeprazole digestion in sound people and creature models.78,79 moreover, grapefruit juice's flavonoid

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 43

----- PAGE 52 -----
content has been found to repress CYP, prompting further exploration in restorative herbs.80,81
Rotenone, a normally happening phytochemical found in plants like the jicama plant, additionally
hinders CYP movement by disrupting the electron move of heme iron.82,83 Natural concentrates have
shown potential in decreasing different chemicals and advancing HDIs. Curcumin, a home grown cell
reinforcement with mitigating and antitumor properties, has been displayed to increment glutathione S-
transferase and quinone reductase movement in the livers of ddY mice. Also, valerian, a home grown
supplement for treating a sleeping disorder, has shown the chance of prompting HDIs through the
restraint of uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase action. To additionally appreciate the systems
and remedial purposes of these natural medicines, more exploration is required.71 Anthranoid-
containing plants (e.g., cassia, cascara, and rhubarb) and dissolvable filaments can diminish drug
assimilation by expanding the gastrointestinal travel time and expanding gastrointestinal motility.
These plants may be inconvenient to the stomach epithelium (restrains Na+/K+ Adenosine
triphosphatase) and increment nitric oxide synthase action, prompting expanded digestive travel and
liquid amassing. Garlic-determined compounds have been found to upgrade the movement of quinone
reductase and glutathione transferase in the rodent gastrointestinal lot; in this manner, these mixtures
are thought of as chemoprotective against substance cancer-causing agents. Ginseng's pharmacokinetic
HDIs might be impacted by its gastrointestinal impacts, explicitly its inhibitory consequences for
gastric emission. In vitro examinations have exhibited the chance of rhein and danthron to upgrade the
assimilation of the least water-solvent medications like furosemide. Chinese natural plants, for
example, Polygonum paleaceum, have been displayed to decrease gastrointestinal motility and forestall
the poo reflex as well as gastroparesis. High-fiber natural items can decrease the ingestion of

medications through the sequestration of bile acids.

Efficacy of herbal medicines - For centuries, conventional natural medication has been a necessary
piece of human culture and medical care rehearses. Established in old insight, it envelops a rich history
of mending techniques went down through ages. Be that as it may, in the cutting edge period, the
adequacy of natural cures is progressively examined and tried against the afflictions of logical
examination. This advancing powerful between conventional information and logical proof features the
need to overcome any issues between old insight and contemporary medical services. Customary
natural medication has a broad and various history that stretches across societies and landmasses. Old
civilizations like the Egyptians, Chinese, Greeks, and Native people groups of different districts have

long depended on spices and botanicals to treat sicknesses and advance prosperity. These practices

44 | Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 53 -----
were much of the time in light of perceptions, experimentation, and gathered shrewdness passed down
orally or through composed texts. In customary frameworks like Ayurveda in India, TCM, and Local
American herbalism, spices are viewed as something other than cures; they are viewed as all
encompassing arrangements that think about the equilibrium of the body, psyche, and soul. This
comprehensive methodology stresses the interconnectedness of all parts of wellbeing and the

significance of keeping up with congruity inside the body.

Examples of some common herbs scientifically proven to be effective —

Turmeric, a staple in Indian Ayurvedic medication, contains curcumin, a strong mitigating and cell
reinforcement compound. Logical examinations have affirmed its adequacy in overseeing fiery
problems, like joint pain and stomach related issues. In a four-month randomized, twofold visually
impaired, fake treatment controlled preliminary, patients experiencing osteoarthritis of the knee
showed eminent enhancements in different wellbeing markers when treated with Curcuma longa
separate contrasted with the fake treatment bunch. These upgrades remembered critical decreases for
the degrees of biomarkers like interleukin (IL) 1b, receptive oxygen species (ROS), and
malondialdehyde, as well as improvements in their visual simple scale and Western Ontario and
McMaster College Osteoarthritis record scores.100 Another review, this time zeroing in on patients
with nonalcoholic greasy liver sickness, found that curcumin, a characteristic polyphenol got from
turmeric, significantly affected wellbeing. In a randomized fake treatment controlled preliminary,
curcumin was displayed to diminish the weight record and lower the serum levels of glucose, glycated
hemoglobin, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, fatty substances, and all out
cholesterol when contrasted with the fake treatment group.101 Curcumin was likewise researched in a
triple-blind, fake treatment controlled concentrate on zeroing in on young ladies experiencing
premenstrual condition and dysmenorrhea. The outcomes uncovered that curcumin essentially further
developed vitamin D and liver capability protein tests, however it affected the glucose levels.In like
manner, as per the consequences of a triple-blind, pilot randomized controlled preliminary, a
mouthwash containing 0.1% curcumin was found to successfully postpone the beginning of radiation-
prompted oral mucositis in patients with head and neck malignant growth, despite the fact that it
couldn't completely forestall it. Moving the concentration to emotional well-being, a 12-week
randomized, twofold visually impaired, fake treatment controlled review among sound subjects
showed that the utilization of C. longa remove brought about diminished ongoing second rate

aggravation and worked on psychological wellness and temperament disorders. Moreover, Ginkgo

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 45

----- PAGE 54 -----
biloba extricate was analyzed for tending to tinnitus and hearing loss potential. In a randomized-
controlled, twofold visually impaired, three-arm preliminary, patients with hearing misfortune
experienced critical upgrades in tinnitus clamor and power following 90 days of Ginkgo biloba remove
treatment. For mental issues and mental capability, a twofold visually impaired clinical review
uncovered that Ginkgo biloba separate prompted enhancements in patients' Small Mental State
Assessment and Wechsler Memory Scale Recipe II scores with practically no noticed secondary
effects, especially benefiting more established patients. Besides, Ginkgo biloba extricate was likewise
assessed for its viability, wellbeing, and unwavering quality in treating unsteadiness brought about by
cerebral arteriosclerosis in a multi-focus, twofold visually impaired, randomized controlled trial.
Comparably, a 24-week randomized, twofold visually impaired, positive-controlled, imminent
preliminary explored the capability of a fluid concentrate of Terminalia bellerica to bring down uric
corrosive and creatinine levels in people with constant kidney sickness and hyperuricemia. The
preliminary tracked down huge decreases in these markers. In one more clinical review, the fluid
concentrate of Terminalia chebula emphatically diminished the cardiovascular gamble factors in
patients with type 2 diabetes when contrasted with placebo.Garlic (Allium sativum) has a long history
of being used for its antimicrobial properties in different conventional frameworks. In an eight-week
randomized-controlled preliminary, it was explored for its capability to improve lipid markers in ladies
experiencing polycystic ovary disorder, proposing its true capacity as a corresponding treatment close
by standard care.Moreover, the utilization of a 30% garlic salve exhibited predominant injury
recuperating with less perceptible scars contrasted with Vaseline treatment. Furthermore, integrating
crude squashed garlic into a standard eating regimen was found to furnish advantages to people with
metabolic condition, making it a possible adjunctive solution for prevention.In a randomized, twofold
visually impaired, fake treatment controlled clinical review, matured garlic remove supplementation in
people with corpulence changed irritation and immunity. Developing this, the execution of matured
garlic extricate in the treatment of hypertensive patients ended up being a powerful and very much
endured approach in a 12-week twofold visually impaired, randomized, fake treatment controlled,
portion reaction trial. Ginseng, a noticeable spice in TCM, is known for its adaptogenic properties,
which can help the body in overseeing pressure while possibly supporting energy levels and working
on mental lucidity. In a randomized, twofold visually impaired, fake treatment controlled preliminary,
Korean red ginseng (Panax ginseng) displayed antifatigue impacts in people with idiopathic constant
fatigue. In one more randomized study, a joined treatment including improved Korean Red ginseng (P.

ginseng) and American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius) prompted enhancements in focal systolic

46 | Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies

----- PAGE 55 -----
circulatory strain and parts of heartbeat waveform, without straightforwardly influencing endothelial
capability in people with hypertension and type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, in a randomized, twofold
visually impaired, hybrid, fake treatment controlled preliminary, work out animated muscle harm in
genuinely dynamic guys was lessened by American ginseng through regulation of the fiery reaction
and lipid peroxidation.A different randomized, twofold visually impaired, hybrid, fake treatment
controlled preliminary was directed to survey the effect of P. ginseng on genitourinary condition in
postmenopausal ladies, uncovering an improvement in related side effects following a month of the
review. Furthermore, a four-week clinical preliminary showed that Korean red ginseng decreased
hypersensitive side effects and complete immunoglobulin E levels in patients with unfavorably
susceptible rhinitis contrasted with people getting a placebo. In synopsis, conventional natural
medication conveys with it an abundance of information and shrewdness that has served mankind for
quite a long time. In any case, its coordination into present day medical services requires thorough
logical approval to guarantee wellbeing and adequacy. The continuous coordinated effort between
conventional information and logical proof jelly old recuperating customs as well as extends how we
might interpret the remedial capability of spices. As we keep on investigating the cooperative energy
among custom and science, we open a more extensive range of recuperating opportunities to help

People and social orders around the world.

Safety and Efficacy: Evaluating Herbal Remedies | 47

----- PAGE 56 -----
CHAPTER I]

Integrative Medicine:
Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

Dr. Nitin Nama

ABSTRACT

Synergy in medicine refers to the enhanced effect achieved by combining treatments, such as herbal and
pharmaceutical therapies. This integration can boost efficacy, reduce medication doses, minimize side effects, and
improve patient outcomes. Herbal treatments like St. John's Wort can enhance antidepressant effects, while
turmeric can reduce NSAID dosages for arthritis. Case studies show ginger reducing chemotherapy-induced
nausea and garlic complementing statins for cardiovascular health. Personalized medicine, considering genetic,
environmental, and lifestyle factors, tailors treatments for optimal outcomes. Emerging technologies, such as
genomic sequencing and Al, promise advancements in integrative therapies. Collaboration and continued research
are essential for validating these synergistic approaches and ensuring safety and efficacy.

Keywords: Synergy, Integrative Medicine, Herbal Therapy, Pharmaceutical Therapy, Personalized Medicine, Genetic
Factors, Emerging Technologies.

Introduction

Synergy, in the context of medicine, refers to the phenomenon where the combined effect of two or
more treatments is greater than the sum of their individual effects. This concept is particularly relevant
when considering the integration of herbal and pharmaceutical therapies. Synergistic interactions can
enhance therapeutic efficacy, reduce the required doses of medications, minimize side effects, and

improve overall patient outcomes.
Explanation of How Herbal and Pharmaceutical Treatments Can Complement Each Other
Enhanced Efficacy

Herbal and pharmaceutical treatments can complement each other in various ways. For instance,
certain herbs may enhance the pharmacological actions of conventional drugs, leading to improved
therapeutic outcomes. This can be particularly beneficial in cases where the standard treatment alone is
insufficient. For example, the herb St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) has been shown to

enhance the effects of certain antidepressants by modulating neurotransmitter levels in the brain.

48 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 57 -----
Dose Reduction and Side Effect Mitigation

Another significant advantage of combining herbal and pharmaceutical treatments is the potential to
reduce the dosage of conventional medications while maintaining or enhancing their efficacy.
Lowering the dose of pharmaceuticals can lead to a decrease in side effects, making the treatment
regimen more tolerable for patients. For instance, the anti-inflammatory herb Turmeric (Curcuma
longa), containing the active compound curcumin, can be used alongside nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) to achieve effective pain relief with reduced NSAID dosages, thereby

minimizing gastrointestinal side effects.
Supporting Multi-Target Approaches

Herbal remedies often contain a complex mixture of bioactive compounds that can act on multiple
physiological pathways simultaneously. This multi-target approach can be particularly effective in
managing chronic and multifaceted conditions such as cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases.
For example, **Garlic (Allium sativum)**, known for its cardiovascular benefits, contains allicin and
other sulfur compounds that can complement antihypertensive and cholesterol-lowering drugs by

providing additional antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.
Complementary Mechanisms of Action

Herbs and pharmaceuticals can also complement each other through their distinct mechanisms of
action. While conventional drugs typically target specific biological pathways, herbs may offer broader
systemic effects. For instance, the adaptogenic herb ** Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)** can be
used alongside standard treatments for stress and anxiety disorders. Ashwagandha's ability to modulate
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and improve overall resilience to stress can enhance the

effects of pharmaceutical anxiolytics.

Case Studies of Successful Integrative Treatments

Ginger and Antiemetics for Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea

Case Study Overview:

A study involving patients undergoing chemotherapy demonstrated the synergistic effects of
combining ginger with standard anti-nausea medications (antiemetics). Chemotherapy-induced nausea

and vomiting (CINV) is a common and distressing side effect of cancer treatment, often leading to

poor patient compliance and reduced quality of life.

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 49

----- PAGE 58 -----
Treatment Protocol:

- Standard Treatment: Patients received standard antiemetic drugs, such as ondansetron or
metoclopramide.

- Integrative Approach: A subset of patients was also given ginger supplements (1-2 grams per day)

alongside their antiemetic medication.

Results:

- Patients who received ginger in addition to antiemetics reported significantly lower levels of
nausea and vomiting compared to those who received only the standard treatment.

- The reduction in CINV allowed for better adherence to chemotherapy schedules and improved

overall well-being.

Mechanisms of Action:

- Ginger: Contains bioactive compounds like gingerols and shogaols, which have antiemetic and
anti-inflammatory properties. These compounds act on the gastrointestinal system to reduce nausea
and improve gastric motility.

- Antiemetics: Work by blocking serotonin receptors in the brain and gastrointestinal tract,

preventing the vomiting reflex.

Synergistic Effect: The combination of ginger's broad-spectrum antiemetic properties with the

targeted action of pharmaceutical antiemetics results in enhanced control of nausea and vomiting.
Turmeric and NSAIDs for Arthritis

Case Study Overview:
Patients with osteoarthritis of the knee were enrolled in a study to assess the effectiveness of
combining turmeric (curcumin) supplements with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for

pain relief.

Treatment Protocol:

- Standard Treatment: Patients were prescribed NSAIDs like ibuprofen or diclofenac.

- Integrative Approach: A group of patients received additional curcumin supplements (500 mg twice
daily).

50 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 59 -----
Results:

- The group receiving the combined treatment reported greater pain reduction and improved joint
function compared to the NSAID-only group.

- Reduced dosage of NSAIDs was possible in the integrative treatment group, minimizing the risk of

gastrointestinal side effects.

Mechanisms of Action:

- Turmeric (Curcumin): Exhibits anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects by inhibiting the activity of
inflammatory enzymes (COX-2) and reducing oxidative stress in joint tissues.

- NSAIDs: Provide pain relief by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes, reducing the production

of inflammatory prostaglandins.

Synergistic Effect: The combined anti-inflammatory actions of curcumin and NSAIDs result in
enhanced pain relief and reduced inflammation, allowing for lower doses of NSAIDs and fewer side

effects.
Garlic and Statins for Cardiovascular Health

Case Study Overview:
A clinical trial explored the benefits of adding garlic supplements to statin therapy in patients with

hypercholesterolemia to improve cardiovascular health.

Treatment Protocol:
- Standard Treatment: Patients were treated with statins such as atorvastatin or simvastatin.

- Integrative Approach: A cohort of patients received garlic extract supplements (600-1200 mg per
day).

Results:

- Patients on the combined regimen showed a more significant reduction in LDL cholesterol levels
compared to those on statins alone.

- Improved lipid profiles were accompanied by enhanced antioxidant status and reduced markers of

oxidative stress.

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 51

----- PAGE 60 -----
Mechanisms of Action:

- Garlic: Contains allicin and other sulfur compounds that lower cholesterol levels, improve endothelial
function, and provide antioxidant benefits.

- Statins: Lower cholesterol by inhibiting the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase, reducing cholesterol

synthesis in the liver.

Synergistic Effect: The complementary lipid-lowering and antioxidant properties of garlic, along with

the potent cholesterol-lowering effects of statins, lead to improved cardiovascular outcomes.

Mechanisms by Which Herbs Enhance or Mitigate the Effects of

Pharmaceuticals

Enhanced Absorption and Bioavailability:
- Some herbs can improve the absorption and bioavailability of pharmaceuticals. For example, black
pepper (piperine) enhances the absorption of curcumin from turmeric, making it more effective when

used as an adjunct treatment.

Modulation of Enzyme Activity:
- Herbs can influence the activity of metabolic enzymes, affecting the pharmacokinetics of drugs. Milk
thistle (silymarin), for instance, can modulate liver enzymes, potentially enhancing the detoxification

and therapeutic effects of certain medications.

Reduction of Side Effects:
- Herbal remedies may help mitigate the side effects of pharmaceuticals. Aloe vera, known for its

soothing properties, can be used topically to alleviate skin irritation caused by certain medications.
Immune System Support:

- Herbs like Echinacea can boost the immune system, complementing conventional treatments for

infections and other immune-related conditions.

52 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 61 -----
Table 1. Synergistic Combinations

Herbal Remedy Pharmaceutical Condition Mechanisms of
Treatment Synergy
Ginger (Zingiber | Antiemetics Chemotherapy- Enhanced antiemetic
officinale) Induced Nausea effect, improved
gastric motility
Turmeric (Curcumin) | NSAIDs Arthritis, Pain Combined anti-
inflammatory action,
reduced NSAID
dosage
Garlic (Allium | Statins Hypercholesterolemia | Complementary lipid-
sativum) lowering and
antioxidant properties
Black Pepper | Curcumin (from | Various inflammatory | Enhanced absorption
(Piperine) Turmeric) conditions and bioavailability
Milk Thistle | Various Liver detoxification Modulation of liver
(Silymarin) pharmaceuticals enzyme activity,
enhanced
detoxification
Aloe Vera Topical medications Skin irritation Soothing properties,
mitigation of skin
irritation
Echinacea Immune therapies Infections, immune | Immune system
support enhancement,
complementary
effects in infection
management

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 53

----- PAGE 62 -----
Benefits and Challenges

Enhanced Efficacy and Reduced Side Effects
Enhanced Efficacy

The combination of herbal and pharmaceutical treatments can lead to enhanced therapeutic efficacy.
This synergy occurs when the bioactive compounds in herbs complement the mechanisms of action of
pharmaceuticals, resulting in more effective treatment outcomes. For example:

- Cancer Treatment: Integrating “turmeric (curcumin)” with chemotherapy drugs can enhance their
anticancer effects by sensitizing cancer cells to the treatment and inhibiting pathways that contribute to
drug resistance.

- Diabetes Management: Combining “fenugreek” with standard antidiabetic medications can improve
glycemic control by increasing insulin sensitivity and reducing blood glucose levels.

Reduced Side Effects

One of the significant benefits of combining herbal and pharmaceutical therapies is the potential to
reduce the side effects associated with conventional medications. Herbal remedies can allow for lower
doses of pharmaceuticals, which in turn can minimize adverse effects. For instance:

- Pain Management: Using “willow bark (salicin)” with NSAIDs can provide effective pain relief
while reducing the dosage and gastrointestinal side effects of NSAIDs.

- Cardiovascular Health: Supplementing statins with “Coenzyme Q10” (found in herbs like parsley and
spinach) can help mitigate the muscle pain and weakness often associated with statin therapy.

Potential Risks, Such as Herb-Drug Interactions

Herb-Drug Interactions

While the integration of herbal and pharmaceutical treatments offers numerous benefits, it also poses
potential risks, particularly herb-drug interactions. These interactions can alter the effectiveness of
medications and may lead to adverse effects. Common herb-drug interactions include:

- St. John’s Wort: This herb can induce liver enzymes that metabolize certain drugs, reducing the
effectiveness of medications such as oral contraceptives, anticoagulants, and some antidepressants.

- Ginkgo Biloba: Known to increase bleeding risk when taken with anticoagulants like warfarin or

antiplatelet drugs like aspirin.

54 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 63 -----
Table Common Herb-Drug Interactions

Herbal Remedy Pharmaceutical Potential Interaction
St. John’s Wort Oral contraceptives, warfarin, | Reduced drug efficacy,
SSRIs increased risk of breakthrough
bleeding
Ginkgo Biloba Warfarin, aspirin Increased bleeding risk
Garlic (high doses) Anticoagulants, HIV | Increased bleeding risk, reduced
medications effectiveness of HIV drugs
Echinacea Immunosuppressants Reduced effectiveness of
immunosuppressive therapy
Grapefruit Statins, calcium channel | Increased drug levels, risk of
blockers toxicity

Strategies for Minimizing Risks and Maximizing Benefits
Professional Guidance

One of the most effective strategies for minimizing risks and maximizing the benefits of integrative
treatments is to seek guidance from healthcare professionals who are knowledgeable about both herbal

and conventional medicines. This includes:

- Consultation with Integrative Medicine Specialists: These professionals can provide tailored
recommendations based on an individual’s medical history and current treatments.

- Pharmacists: They can offer insights into potential herb-drug interactions and appropriate dosing.

Patient Education
Educating patients about the potential benefits and risks of combining herbal and pharmaceutical

treatments is crucial. Key points include:

- Transparency: Patients should inform their healthcare providers about all the herbal supplements and
medications they are taking.

- Awareness: Understanding the potential interactions and side effects of both herbs and drugs.

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 55

----- PAGE 64 -----
Standardization and Quality Control

Ensuring the quality and consistency of herbal products is essential to minimize variability and risks.

Strategies include:

- Choosing Reputable Brands: Patients should use herbal supplements from reputable manufacturers
that adhere to good manufacturing practices (GMP).
- Standardized Extracts: Using standardized herbal extracts ensures consistent dosages of active

ingredients.
Monitoring and Adjustments

Regular monitoring and adjustments of treatment plans can help manage risks and optimize outcomes.

This involves:

- Regular Check-Ups: Routine monitoring of patient response and potential side effects.
- Dose Adjustments: Adjusting the doses of either the pharmaceutical or herbal treatment based on

patient response and emerging evidence.
Examples of Best Practices

- Integrative Pain Management: Combining “CBD oil” with traditional pain medications while
regularly monitoring liver enzymes and overall pain levels to adjust treatment as necessary.
- Cardiovascular Health: Using “hawthorn” alongside antihypertensives with careful blood pressure

monitoring to ensure optimal control without adverse interactions.

Principles of Personalized Medicine

Definition and Importance of Personalized Medicine

Personalized medicine, also known as precision medicine, is an innovative approach to healthcare that
tailors medical treatment to the individual characteristics of each patient. This approach takes into
account unique genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors to develop customized treatment plans that

optimize therapeutic outcomes.

56 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 65 -----
- Personalized Medicine: An approach to healthcare that uses information about an individual's genetic
makeup, environment, and lifestyle to design tailored treatment plans.

- Precision Medicine: Similar to personalized medicine, but often emphasizes the use of advanced
technologies and data analysis to identify the most effective interventions for specific patient

subgroups.

Importance of Personalized Medicine

The importance of personalized medicine lies in its potential to improve the effectiveness and safety of

medical treatments. By considering individual differences, personalized medicine can lead to:

- Enhanced Treatment Efficacy: Customizing treatments based on genetic and molecular profiles can
increase the likelihood of successful outcomes.

- Reduced Adverse Effects: Understanding a patient's genetic predisposition to drug reactions helps
minimize the risk of adverse effects.

- Better Disease Prevention: Identifying genetic risk factors allows for early interventions and
preventive measures tailored to the individual's needs.

- Informed Decision-Making: Personalized medicine empowers patients and healthcare providers to

make informed decisions about treatment options based on comprehensive data.

Role of Genetic, Environmental, and Lifestyle Factors in Individual Health

Table: Key Factors in Personalized Medicine

Factor Description Examples

Genetic Factors Individual genetic makeup | CYP450 enzyme variability
influencing health and | affecting drug metabolism

treatment response

Environmental Factors External influences impacting | Exposure to pollutants,
health socioeconomic status

Lifestyle Factors Personal habits and choices | Diet, physical activity, stress
affecting well-being management

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 57

----- PAGE 66 -----
Integrating Genetic, Environmental, and Lifestyle Factors

The integration of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors is essential for the successful
implementation of personalized medicine. This holistic approach requires:

- Comprehensive Assessments: Detailed evaluations of a patient's genetic profile, environmental
exposures, and lifestyle habits.

- Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Cooperation between geneticists, clinicians, nutritionists, and other
healthcare professionals to develop tailored treatment plans.

- Advanced Technologies: Utilization of technologies such as genomic sequencing, wearable health
devices, and data analytics to gather and interpret patient-specific information.

- Patient Engagement: Encouraging active patient participation in their healthcare by providing
education and resources to make informed choices.

Tailoring Integrative Therapies
Methods for Customizing Herbal and Conventional Treatments to Individual Needs
Personalized Treatment Plans

Customizing integrative therapies involves developing treatment plans that address the unique
characteristics of each patient. This approach ensures that both herbal and conventional treatments are
aligned with the individual's specific health needs, preferences, and biological factors.

1. Comprehensive Health Assessment:

- Medical History: Review the patient’s complete medical history, including past illnesses, surgeries,
and treatments.

- Current Medications: List all current conventional medications and herbal supplements to identify
potential interactions.

- Lifestyle Evaluation: Assess the patient’s diet, exercise habits, stress levels, and sleep patterns.

2. Individualized Herbal Therapies:

- Herb Selection: Choose herbs based on the patient’s specific health conditions and individual
response to previous treatments.

- Dosage Customization: Adjust the dosage of herbal remedies according to the patient’s age, weight,
and overall health.

- Formulation: Decide on the most appropriate form of herbal treatment (e.g., teas, tinctures,
capsules) based on patient preferences and convenience.
3. Integration with Conventional Medicine:

- Collaborative Care: Work with conventional healthcare providers to ensure that herbal treatments
complement and do not interfere with prescribed medications.

- Balanced Approach: Use herbs to enhance the effectiveness of conventional treatments or to
mitigate their side effects.

58 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 67 -----
Future Directions in Personalized Integrative Medicine

Emerging Technologies and Research in Personalized Medicine

The rapid advancements in genomic technologies are transforming personalized medicine. Techniques
such as next-generation sequencing (NGS) and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing are enabling more precise
identification and targeting of genetic variations that influence health and disease. Wearable devices
are becoming integral to personalized healthcare by continuously monitoring physiological parameters
and providing real-time data. AI and machine learning are revolutionizing personalized medicine by
analyzing vast amounts of data to identify patterns and predict treatment outcomes. The future of
integrative medicine lies in the development of new therapies that combine the best of herbal and
conventional treatments, tailored to individual patient profiles. The human microbiome plays a crucial
role in health and disease. Emerging research is focusing on developing microbiome-based therapies
tailored to individual microbiome compositions. Nutrition plays a pivotal role in personalized
medicine. Emerging technologies enable precise nutritional interventions based on individual genetic

and metabolic profiles.

Table: Emerging Technologies in Personalized Integrative Medicine

Technology Application Impact
Next-Generation Comprehensive genomic | Tailored treatments and preventive
Sequencing (NGS) analysis strategies
CRISPR-Cas9 Precise gene editing Potential cures for genetic disorders
Wearable Health Devices Continuous monitoring of health | Real-time data for personalized
parameters treatment adjustments|

Artificial Intelligence (AI) | Predictive analytics and | Enhanced precision and efficiency in
decision support healthcare

Personalized Herbal | Customizing herbal treatments | Improved efficacy and reduced side

Formulations effects

Precision Probiotics Tailored probiotic supplements | Enhanced gut health and immune

function

Nutrigenomics Gene-nutrient interaction | Optimized diet for disease prevention

studies and management|

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 59

----- PAGE 68 -----
Conclusion

Recap of the Synergy Between Herbal and Pharmaceutical Treatments

The integration of herbal and pharmaceutical treatments has demonstrated significant potential in
enhancing patient care. The synergistic effects of combining these two approaches can lead to
improved therapeutic outcomes, reduced side effects, and a more holistic approach to health and

wellness.

1. Enhanced Efficacy:

- Complementary Mechanisms: Herbs and pharmaceuticals often work through different pathways,
leading to a more comprehensive treatment effect. For example, combining ginger with anti-nausea
drugs for chemotherapy patients can enhance the overall efficacy in managing nausea and vomiting.

- Potentiation: Certain herbs can enhance the effectiveness of pharmaceutical drugs. For instance, St.

John’s Wort has been shown to potentiate the effects of antidepressants in some patients.

2. Reduced Side Effects:

- Mitigation: Herbs can help mitigate the side effects of pharmaceuticals. For example, using milk
thistle to support liver health during long-term medication use.

- Balancing Act: Integrating herbs can help balance the body’s response to pharmaceutical
treatments, leading to fewer adverse effects. For example, adaptogenic herbs like ashwagandha can

help mitigate the stress response associated with chronic illness.

3. Holistic Health Approach:

- Comprehensive Care: Combining herbal and pharmaceutical treatments addresses both the
symptoms and underlying causes of health issues. For example, using anti-inflammatory herbs
alongside NSAIDs in the treatment of arthritis can provide more comprehensive relief and improve
joint health.

- Personalized Medicine: This integrative approach allows for more personalized treatment plans

tailored to the individual’s unique health profile, preferences, and needs.

60 | Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies

----- PAGE 69 -----
Summary of the Benefits of Personalized Approaches to Health and Wellness

Personalized approaches to health and wellness consider the unique genetic, environmental, and
lifestyle factors of each individual, leading to more effective and targeted interventions.

1. Precision in Treatment:

- Genetic Insights: Utilizing genetic testing to understand an individual’s predisposition to certain
diseases and their response to various treatments. This allows for more targeted and effective
interventions.

- Customized Therapies: Developing treatment plans that are tailored to the individual’s unique
health profile, ensuring that therapies are more effective and less likely to cause adverse effects.

2. Improved Outcomes:

- Optimized Health: Personalized medicine leads to better health outcomes by addressing the specific
needs of the patient. For example, using personalized nutrition plans to manage chronic diseases like
diabetes and cardiovascular conditions.

- Increased Adherence: Patients are more likely to adhere to treatment plans that are tailored to their
preferences and lifestyles, leading to improved long-term health outcomes.

3. Empowerment and Engagement:

- Patient Education: Educating patients about their health and the rationale behind their personalized
treatment plans empowers them to take an active role in their healthcare.

- Informed Decisions: Involving patients in the decision-making process ensures that their values and
preferences are respected, leading to greater satisfaction and better adherence to treatment plans.

Continued Research and Collaboration in the Field of Integrative Medicine

Table: Key Components of Future Integrative Medicine

Component

Action

Goal

Continued Research

Conducting rigorous clinical
trials and leveraging emerging
technologies

Validating efficacy and safety,
developing new therapies

Collaboration

Fostering interdisciplinary
teams and knowledge sharing

Enhancing treatment plans,
sharing best practices

Education and Advocacy

Investing in patient education
and policy advocacy

Increasing awareness, access,
and support for integrative
medicine

In conclusion, the synergy between herbal and pharmaceutical treatments, combined with personalized
approaches to health and wellness, offers a promising pathway to improved healthcare outcomes.
Continued research, collaboration, and patient education are essential to realizing the full potential of
integrative medicine. By embracing these principles, we can create a more holistic, effective, and
patient-centered healthcare system.

Integrative Medicine: Combining Herbal and Conventional Therapies | 61

----- PAGE 70 -----
___CHAPTER [e,

Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Consideration

Mr. Rahul Kumar Ancheria

ABSTRACT

Sustainable exploitation of non-timber forest resources (NTFP) involves harvesting products like fruits and latex
without adversely affecting species regeneration or ecosystem health. Sustainable agriculture emphasizes
practices like crop rotation and soil amendments to maintain long-term productivity while minimizing non-
renewable resource use. Monoculture farming, which depletes soil nutrients, is contrasted with polyculture and
Integrated Farming Systems (IFS), which enhance biodiversity and soil health. Sustainable wildlife management
integrates socioeconomic needs with wildlife conservation, addressing challenges like species and habitat loss.
Marine resource management and aquaculture require sustainable practices to mitigate environmental impacts.
Key principles for sustainable harvesting include resource mapping, community participation, traditional knowledge
documentation, and development of sustainable harvesting protocols. Training, capacity building, and post-harvest
interventions enhance market linkages and stakeholder involvement in conservation. Ethical guidelines for wild
plant harvesting ensure population viability and ecosystem health.

Keywords: Sustainable harvesting, non-timber forest resources, sustainable agriculture, wildlife management,
marine resources, aquaculture, Integrated Farming Systems (IFS), resource conservation.

Introduction

A sustainable system for exploiting non-timber forest resources is one in which fruits, nuts, latexes,
and other products can be harvested indefinitely from a small amount of forest without having a

significant impact on the species being exploited.

The harvesting of NTFP does not have any negative effects on the regeneration of the target population
or any other species in the community, nor does it have any effect on the structure and functioning of
the ecosystem. Sustainable harvesting of a resource ensures that benefits from the resource continue to
flow to its users over time. Intergenerational equity, which refers to the opportunity for future use
options and the preservation of site values, are included in a broad definition of sustainability. More
than 8000 different plants are thought to be used for medicinal purposes by various Indian

communities and tribes. However, the Ayurvedic industry uses fewer than 500 medicinal plants.

Sustainable agriculture has been defined as “an integrated system of plant and animal production
practices having a site-specific application that will last over the long term’. The phrase ‘sustainable

agriculture’ was given by the Australian agricultural scientist Gordon McClymont.

62 | Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations

----- PAGE 71 -----
Methods of Sustainable Harvesting —

It is matter of choice to what grows where and how it is grown. Crop rotation and soil amendment are
two of the many possible practices of sustainable agriculture. Both practices designed to ensure that
crops can obtain the necessary nutrients for healthy growth. Soil amendments include using locally

available compost from farms and recycling centers.

Recycling centers utilize kitchen waste and commonly available resources. In the past these resources
were thrown away into large waste disposal sites. Now these are used to produce low cost organic
compost for organic farming. Growing a different number of perpetual yields in a solitary field, every
one of which would fill in discrete season so as not to contend with one another for normal assets is
another training. Nitrogen obsession from vegetables assists with permitting the land to be reused
every year. Vegetables will develop for a season and renew the dirt with ammonium and nitrate. In the
following season different plants can be cultivated and filled in the field. This framework would bring
about expanded protection from illnesses and diminished impacts of disintegration and loss of

supplements in soil.

Similar to forestry, sustainable harvesting is also applicable to agriculture too. Agricultural crops
productivity depends upon soil fertility and water availability. Every harvest of crops is literally
harvesting the nutrients from the soil and this has to be replenishment in the soil for maintaining
productivity. However, the present tillage and irrigation practices are not facilitating the nutrient
replenishment. The alternate approach is Sustainable agriculture which is an ecosystem approach. On
the whole, there is a minimized use or careful use of non-renewable resources; it may be fertilizers,
pesticides, etc. Crop Rotation, Soil amendment and Conservation Agriculture are some of the practices

that are in the realm of sustainable agriculture.

The repeat cultivation of the same crop again and again on the same piece of land is called
Monoculture farming. This can endanger the productivity and brings question on sustainability. As an
alternative to monoculture, Polyculture and Integrated Farming Systems (IFS) are now recommended.
This maintains crop diversity and ensures productivity. There is less nutrient loss and doesn’t endanger

the beneficial microorganisms.

Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations | 63

----- PAGE 72 -----
Multifunctional agriculture vs. ecosystem services —

Sustainable agriculture can be viewed through two distinct lenses: Multifunctional agriculture (MFA)
and Ecosystem services (ES). Ecosystem services are anthropocentric concept indicating the natural
functions and processes of ecosystems that provide the value to humans. It mainly focuses on the
intangible benefits like nutrient recycling, prevention of soil degradation, etc. Multifunctional
agriculture is a philosophical approach that focuses on the farm-centred approach and mostly
quantified based on the tangible products derived from the farm. The key idea is that agriculture as
such has numerous functions like biodiversity conservation and natural resource management apart
from food and fibre production. As such there exists no major difference, sometimes they tend to

overlap each other.

SUSTAINABLE WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT -

Sustainable wildlife management is the logical management of wildlife species to maintain their
populations and habitat over time, taking into consideration, the socioeconomic needs of human
populations. This requires that all stakeholders within the wildlife habitat to be aware of and consider

the effects of their activities on the wildlife resources.

Wildlife is a valuable renewable natural resource, with significance for areas such as rural
development, food supply, land-use planning, tourism, scientific research and cultural heritage.
Sustainably managed wildlife can provide unending nutrition, income and contribute towards the

alleviation of poverty as well as to protecting human and environmental health.

Wild animal hunting can be undertaken for commercial, recreational and subsistence purposes. The
benefits obtained from wildlife are directly consumed or used by the hunter and his family in
subsistence hunting. The food security and livelihoods of rural people in the tropics and subtropics

depends on the use and trade of wild animals.

64 | Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations

----- PAGE 73 -----
Expanded double-dealing of the asset has been driven by propels in hunting innovations, the rise of a
thriving business wild meat exchange and quickly developing human populaces. Maintainable untamed
life the board alludes to the reasonable administration of untamed life species to support their
populaces in nature after some time and taking into account the financial necessities of human

populaces.

Species and habitat loss —

Efforts to achieve Sustainable Wildlife Management have severe challenges. Many wildlife species are
under threat, and some have become extinct locally due to a variety of causes. Wildlife loss has
consequences for crucial ecological processes that support biodiversity and may have serious
socioeconomic impacts. As humans are encroaching and loss of habitat, nearby wildlife habitats also
results in human-wildlife conflict. These types of problems are often dealt with locally through the
unregulated killing of the animals. While such problems may be solved through wildlife conservation

and management and land-use planning.

Ensuring sustainable trade and consumption by raising public awareness —

Wildlife management could also benefit from the application of the REDD+ mechanism. It is forest
carbon stock conservation and restoration measures designed to mitigate climate change in developing
countries. Sometimes, legalization and taxation of the sales of wildlife species can help enable
communities to benefit from wildlife. In this regard, relevant organizations could also provide further
support to national capacity-building of law enforcement, judiciary, prosecution and legislation to
prevent illegal hunting. There are ample evidences for hunting regulations, law enforcements and
crime prevention which are more effective when communities to enforcing authorities work together
over the long term. Communities can be the “eyes and ears” of law enforcement by providing
actionable intelligence to an arresting authority, such as the police or the national park service or
Rangers, which ensures the anonymity of informants, reducing the risk of retribution. When
indigenous peoples and local communities benefiting from wildlife, see poaching as stealing from

them and are highly motivated to halt the illegal or illegitimate use of their wildlife.

Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations | 65

----- PAGE 74 -----
SUSTAINABLE USE OF MARINE RESOURCES - Over the last decade, fisheries have
considerably expanded on the high seas and currently represent approximately 5 % of total world
landings. The arrangements of the Assembled Countries Show on the Law of the Ocean, on the marine
living assets of the great oceans put forward privileges and commitments of States concerning
protection and usage of marine assets. Universally, the board of high oceans fisheries, including the
observing, reception and requirement of preservation measures, is lacking in and a few assets are over
used. There are issues of unregulated fishing, overcapitalization, gigantic armada size, ill-advised
particular stuff, problematic data sets and resistance between Partners, who are the primary recipients.
Such activity and participation can address fisheries measurements, deficiency in fishing practices and
improvement of frameworks for taking care of information. Multi-species the executives ought to be
underlined, and different methodologies ought to think about the connections among species,
particularly while managing exhausted species, and in distinguishing the capability of underutilized or
unutilized populaces. Marine living assets give a significant wellspring of protein in numerous
waterfront regions. The utilization of marine assets is frequently vital to neighborhood networks and
native individuals. Marine assets give food and vocations to a great many individuals. On the off
chance that reasonably used, it offers an expanded potential to meet wholesome and social

requirements, especially in emerging nations.

SUSTAINABLE HARVESING OF AQUACULTURE - The total world fisheries production was
158 million tons in 2012, of which aquaculture contributed 66.6 million tons, about 42%. The
development pace of hydroponics has been supported and fast around the world, averaging around 8%
each year for more than 30 years. The market of hydroponics was of $86 billion of every 2009.
“Aquaculture is the farming of aquatic organisms which includes fish, molluscs, crustaceans and
aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of invasion in the rearing process to enhance production,
such as regular feeding, stocking, protection from predators, etc”. Sometimes it is performed without
consideration for potential local environmental impacts. Local concerns with aquaculture may include
waste handling, side-effects of antibiotics, competition between farmed and wild animals or foreign
pathogens. It ought to be thought about especially on the off chance that natural fish are utilized to take
care of rapacious fishes which are more attractive. Fish squander is natural and made out of numerous
supplements which are fundamental in all parts of sea-going food networks. The waste gathers on the
sea base, harming or killing base dwelling life. Squanders can likewise diminish broke up oxygen

levels in the water section, coming down on wild creatures.

66 | Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations

----- PAGE 75 -----
Principle of sustainable harvesting —

Principle 1: Resource mapping, estimation and value analysesThis principle enables the local
community to understand the availability of resources, potential quantity that can be harvested,
their conditions in the wild and impacts of destructive harvesting. Further, it also provides for
understanding the value of products harvested through value chain and the benefits realised by
the different stakeholders involved and their roles and responsibilities in conservation of resources.
Through this Principe, include the neighborhood local area in assessment of assets, arrangement of
asset guide and worth chain evaluation. They ought to likewise notice the same old thing draws near,
effects of horrendous gathering and existing worth chains. Such activities empower them to foster
elective worth chain models alongside reasonable gathering of chosen species to get ready

participatory administration plan for its execution based on versatile administration system.

Principle 2: Participatory methodology including neighborhood local area in conservation
Participatory approach coordinates individuals of various financial status, lay out a need based and
objective situated nearby foundation, subsequently distinguishing jobs and obligations, their reliance
on the asset and their commitment towards preservation and economical utilization of wild assets. This
guideline empowers the neighborhood local area in the recognizable proof and determination of
species and site for reasonable assortment in light of the standards and, arranging the system for
maintainable gathering by thinking about the conventional information. The standards for
determination of species include: (a) species giving higher work open doors so the neighborhood local
area assumes liability in maintainable administration of the asset; (b) profoundly exchanged species;

(c) species with various parts reaped; (d) species gathered exclusively from wild; (e) endemic species.

Principle 3: Documentation, assimilation and application of traditional harvesting knowledge
Documentation of indigenous knowledge related to phenology of the species, distribution, climate and
productivity, animal interaction, regeneration, propagation, cultural. This principle helps the local
people for documentation of traditional knowledge related to harvesting practices, ensuring customary
rights of forest dwellers by involving them only without external labour forces, merging scientific
information with traditional knowledge to develop good harvesting practices, and recognising the

association between community and the resources.

Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations | 67

----- PAGE 76 -----
Principle 4: Development of sustainable harvesting protocols, tools and field implementationTo
evolve species specific and location specific sustainable harvesting practices/ good collection
practices/ best practices by consulting traditional knowledge and academic knowledge, that will
be implemented in the field by establishing institutional mechanisms. This rule empowers to foster
species explicit feasible gathering rehearses (SHPs) which are far reaching and all encompassing that

has environmental comprehension of species, its assortment, esteem expansion and advertising.

Principle 5: Training, Capacity building and dissemination This rule portrays different spread and
limit building programs for various partner bunches engaged with the cycle. They are designed to
develop and enhance the adaption of sustainable harvesting methodology. The importance of
developing a communication strategy for different stakeholder groups engaged in the process is
critically important. This enables sharing of information of methodology and its achievements to
seek their suggestions in order to reconsider the adaptive management strategy. Interpersonal
communication is useful at the local community level where as other stakeholders can be effective

reached through group/ mass communication.

Principle 6: Interventions for post harvesting techniques and market linkagesPost harvesting
techniques such as drying, storage, value addition, labelling and branding fetch higher price in the
market, also generate additional income and employment to the local people. Value added products
linked directly to the herbal industries to ensure supply of quality raw material and provide health
security. Showcasing is a significant mediation for reasonably reaped produces, as this is the main
accessible monetary motivator to the partners that makes up for their contribution in the practical

assortment exercises.

Principle 7: Linking trade, price and conservation principles and practicesIt is to integrate
stakeholders having different roles and responsibilities in the value chain of the resource collection,
value addition and marketing. The idea is to directly link the primary stakeholders (collectors and
village level institutions) from the resource base into marketing and trade of sustainably collected
resources by assimilating possible value addition technologies at the local level to generate
additional income and employment, thereby encouraging and enhancing the participation of
stakeholders in conservation of resources. The capacity of the primary stakeholders is built on
negotiation on price fixing and benefit sharing.

68 | Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations

----- PAGE 77 -----
Guidelines for the Ethical and Sustainable Harvesting of Wild Plants -

Wild plants are harvested for food, medicine, dyes and general well being. Harvesting can be done in a
sustainable way to ensure the continued viability of those plant populations. Wild plants can be reaped
for individual use on the San Juan Public Woods. Limited quantities of organic items, for example,
berries, leaves, dry cones and mushrooms might be gathered without a grant. Any movement that
includes killing the plant or includes incessant gather requires a license. Free use licenses are
accessible for up to $20.00 worth of item/individual/year. Free use or business grants are expected for
digging roots or cutting trees.

Any commercial collecting must be done under a permit. Permits can be obtained at any Forest Service
office. —

Prior to gathering from the wild, think about utilizing homegrown or developed plants. Are
there any elective plants that can be developed?

Prior to gathering, ensure you know your plant and make certain of its personality. Collecting
some unacceptable plant is inefficient and harming to the climate.

Understand what species are in danger in your bioregion. Never gather undermined, imperiled
or delicate plants. The San Juan Public Backwoods neighborhood workplaces can give you this
data.

Be artful and collect from regions that will be upset by logging or advancement. Nearby San
Juan Public Timberland workplaces can give you data.

Just collect what you really want or can sensibly utilize. Over reap is inefficient and
compromises the populace. Appropriately dried and put away spices have a time span of
usability of a half year to one year.

Try not to be in a rush. Investigate to check whether there is more than one populace. Verify
whether there are indications of others collecting nearby. Find the best populace that doesn't
seem to have been reaped.

Know about the strength of the climate, assuming the plants are focused on because of dry spell
or other aggravation, don't reap them.

To abstain from over gathering any one populace, move around gathering just a modest
quantity of plant material from any one populace.

Pass on solid seed creating plants in the populace to duplicate.

The guideline is to reap under 5% of the populace. Less assuming harvest has happened in a
similar region.

Do whatever it takes not to upset or minimized soils where you are working. Leave the region
as you tracked down it... fill in any openings and tiptoe.

When you harvest plants spread the seeds of the plant.

Remember that when you are harvesting roots or tubers, you are killing that plant. Don’t take
the whole root ofa plant or replant root crowns of plants such as osha to ensure regeneration.
Go back and monitor the effects of your harvest...become a steward and study the plants and
how they respond.

Sustainable Harvesting and Ethical Considerations | 69

----- PAGE 78 -----
CHAPTER Ae

Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

Dr. Nitin Nama

ABSTRACT

Herbal medicine, rooted in ancient traditions, has gained renewed significance due to the rising demand for natural
and holistic health solutions. This chapter explores key innovations in herbal drug development and the
transformative role of biotechnology and genomics in modern healthcare. Advances in extraction and purification
techniques, such as supercritical fluid extraction and ultrasound-assisted extraction, have enhanced the efficiency
of obtaining bioactive compounds. Nanotechnology has improved the bioavailability and targeted delivery of herbal
medicines. Standardization, quality control, and innovative formulations ensure consistent efficacy and safety.
Rigorous clinical trials and evidence-based research validate therapeutic claims. Biotechnology and genomics
enable the identification and enhancement of bioactive compounds through genetic engineering and plant cell
cultures. Metabolomics and systems biology provide comprehensive insights into the biochemical profiles and
interactions of herbal compounds. Personalized herbal medicine, driven by pharmacogenomics, tailors treatments
to individual genetic profiles. Collaborative research and open innovation platforms accelerate discoveries and
practical applications. These advancements promise to revolutionize healthcare by making herbal medicines more
effective, reliable, and accessible, offering safer, personalized, and holistic healthcare solutions.

Keywords: Genomics, extraction techniques, nanotechnology, standardization, clinical trials, pharmacogenomics,
metabolomics, systems biology, collaborative research, holistic healthcare.

Introduction

Overview of the Growing Interest and Importance of Herbal Medicine

Herbal medicine, rooted in ancient traditions, has experienced a resurgence in popularity and
significance in recent decades. With a growing interest in natural and holistic approaches to health,
more people are turning to herbal remedies for their therapeutic benefits. This shift is driven by an
increasing awareness of the potential side effects associated with synthetic drugs, a desire for more
sustainable and eco-friendly healthcare options, and a cultural inclination towards natural products.
Traditional systems of medicine, such as Ayurveda, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), and Native
American herbal practices, have gained global recognition, reinforcing the credibility and importance

of herbal medicine in contemporary healthcare.

70 | Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

----- PAGE 79 -----
The Potential of Herbal Medicine in Modern Healthcare

Herbal medicine offers a wealth of opportunities for modern healthcare, presenting both preventative
and therapeutic benefits. Many pharmaceutical drugs are derived from plant compounds, highlighting
the profound potential of botanicals in drug discovery and development. For instance, aspirin (derived
from willow bark) and quinine (from the bark of the cinchona tree) exemplify the significant

contributions of plants to modern medicine.

Herbal remedies are often seen as complementary or alternative options to conventional treatments,
providing holistic solutions that address not only physical symptoms but also emotional and mental
well-being. This holistic approach aligns well with integrative medicine, which combines conventional
and alternative therapies to optimize patient care. Furthermore, herbal medicines are generally
perceived as having fewer side effects and being more accessible and affordable, especially in low-

resource settings.
The Need for Innovation and Research in Herbal Drug Development

Despite the promising potential of herbal medicine, several challenges hinder its widespread adoption
and integration into mainstream healthcare. One of the primary challenges is the variability in the
quality and efficacy of herbal products. This variability can be attributed to differences in plant
species, growing conditions, harvesting techniques, and processing methods. Therefore, there is a
critical need for innovation in the standardization, quality control, and formulation of herbal medicines

to ensure consistent therapeutic outcomes.

Research and development in herbal medicine must also focus on understanding the mechanisms of
action of various plant compounds, identifying active constituents, and optimizing extraction and
purification techniques. Advanced technologies such as nanotechnology, genomics, and biotechnology

offer exciting possibilities for enhancing the efficacy, safety, and delivery of herbal medicines.

Moreover, rigorous scientific research, including preclinical studies and clinical trials, is essential to
validate the efficacy and safety of herbal remedies. Evidence-based research can bridge the gap
between traditional knowledge and modern medicine, fostering greater acceptance and trust in herbal

treatments among healthcare professionals and patients alike.

Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research | 71

----- PAGE 80 -----
Innovations in Herbal Drug Development

1. New Extraction and Purification Techniques

Advances in extraction methods have significantly improved the efficiency and effectiveness of
obtaining bioactive compounds from medicinal plants. Traditional extraction methods, such as
maceration and percolation, are now complemented by innovative techniques like supercritical fluid

extraction and ultrasound-assisted extraction.

- Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE): SFE utilizes supercritical fluids, often carbon dioxide, to extract
active compounds from plant materials. This method offers several advantages, including high
extraction efficiency, selectivity, and the ability to operate at relatively low temperatures, which

preserves the integrity of thermolabile compounds.

- Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction (UAE): UAE employs ultrasonic waves to disrupt plant cell walls,
facilitating the release of bioactive compounds. This technique enhances extraction yields, reduces

extraction time, and minimizes solvent usage.

Improved purification processes are equally important to isolate active compounds from crude extracts.
Techniques such as chromatography (e.g., high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)) and crystallization play crucial roles in ensuring the

purity and potency of herbal medicines.
2. Nanotechnology in Herbal Medicine

Nanotechnology offers groundbreaking possibilities for enhancing the bioavailability and targeted
delivery of herbal medicines. By formulating herbal compounds into nanoparticles, researchers can

overcome issues related to poor solubility, stability, and bioavailability.

- Nanoformulations for Enhanced Bioavailability: Nanoformulations, including nanocapsules,
nanospheres, and liposomes, protect bioactive compounds from degradation and facilitate their
absorption in the gastrointestinal tract. For example, curcumin, a compound with low bioavailability,
has shown improved therapeutic effects when delivered in nanoparticle form.

- Targeted Delivery: Nanotechnology enables the development of targeted delivery systems that direct
herbal compounds to specific tissues or cells, thereby enhancing therapeutic efficacy and reducing side
effects. An example is the use of nanoparticles to deliver anti-cancer compounds directly to tumor

cells.

72 | Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

----- PAGE 81 -----
3. Standardization and Quality Control

Standardization and quality control are essential to ensure the consistent efficacy and safety of herbal
medicines. Standardization involves establishing specific criteria for the composition, strength, and
quality of herbal products.

- Importance of Standardization: Without standardization, the variability in plant species, growing
conditions, and processing methods can lead to significant differences in the concentration of active
compounds, affecting therapeutic outcomes.

- Modern Analytical Techniques: Advanced analytical techniques such as HPLC and GC-MS are
employed to quantify and verify the presence of bioactive compounds in herbal products. These
techniques help in identifying contaminants, verifying authenticity, and ensuring batch-to-batch
consistency.

4. Formulation Innovations

Innovative formulations enhance the convenience, efficacy, and patient compliance of herbal
medicines. Traditional herbal preparations, such as teas and tinctures, are now being transformed into
modern dosage forms.

- Novel Dosage Forms: The development of novel dosage forms, including transdermal patches,
inhalers, and orally disintegrating tablets, offers new ways to deliver herbal medicines. For instance,
transdermal patches provide a controlled release of active compounds, ensuring sustained therapeutic
effects.

- Encapsulation and Controlled Release Systems: Encapsulation techniques, such as
microencapsulation and nanoencapsulation, protect bioactive compounds from degradation and allow
for controlled release. These systems ensure that the active compounds are released at the desired rate
and site of action, enhancing therapeutic efficacy.

5. Clinical Trials and Evidence-Based Research

Conducting rigorous clinical trials is crucial to validate the efficacy and safety of herbal medicines.
Evidence-based research bridges the gap between traditional knowledge and modern medicine,
fostering greater acceptance and trust.

- Conducting Rigorous Clinical Trials: Clinical trials for herbal medicines should adhere to stringent
protocols to ensure reliability and validity. These trials involve well-designed study designs, adequate
sample sizes, and appropriate controls.

Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research | 73

----- PAGE 82 -----
- Challenges and Strategies: Designing clinical trials for herbal medicines presents unique challenges,
such as variability in herbal preparations and placebo effects. Strategies to address these challenges
include using standardized extracts, employing blinding techniques, and utilizing appropriate

biomarkers.
Table: Key Innovations in Herbal Drug Development
Innovation Area Key Advancement

New Extraction and Purification Techniques Supercritical Fluid Extraction, Ultrasound-
Assisted Extraction, Chromatography,
Crystallization

Nanotechnology in Herbal Medicine Nanoformulations for Enhanced
Bioavailability, Targeted Delivery Systems

Standardization and Quality Control Importance of Standardization, Modern
Analytical Techniques (HPLC, GC-MS)

Formulation Innovations Novel Dosage Forms (Transdermal Patches,
Inhalers), Encapsulation and Controlled
Release Systems

Clinical Trials and Evidence-Based Research Conducting Rigorous Clinical Trials,
Addressing Challenges with Standardized
Extracts and Biomarkers

The Role of Biotechnology and Genomics
1. Genomic Approaches to Herbal Medicine

The application of genomic technologies to herbal medicine has revolutionized the identification and
characterization of bioactive compounds, providing deeper insights into the genetic basis of medicinal
plants.

- Use of Genomics to Identify and Characterize Bioactive Compounds: Genomic tools, such as high-
throughput sequencing and genome-wide association studies (GWAS), facilitate the discovery of genes
involved in the biosynthesis of therapeutic compounds. By sequencing the genomes of medicinal
plants, researchers can pinpoint specific genes that produce bioactive metabolites, enabling targeted
breeding and genetic engineering efforts.

- Genomic Studies on Medicinal Plants: Genomic studies reveal the genetic diversity within and
between species of medicinal plants, which is crucial for conservation and sustainable use.
Understanding genetic diversity helps in selecting superior genotypes with enhanced medicinal
properties and optimizing cultivation practices. For example, the genomic analysis of ginseng species
has provided valuable information on their medicinal components and evolutionary history.

74 | Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

----- PAGE 83 -----
2. Biotechnological Advances

Biotechnological advancements offer innovative methods for enhancing the production and quality of
phytochemicals in medicinal plants.

- Genetic Engineering of Plants: Genetic engineering techniques, such as CRISPR-Cas9 and RNA
interference (RNAi), allow the modification of plant genomes to increase the production of desired
compounds. For instance, metabolic engineering of Artemisia annua has led to increased yields of
artemisinin, an anti-malarial drug.

- Use of Plant Cell Cultures and Bioreactors: Plant cell cultures provide a controlled environment for
the large-scale production of phytochemicals, independent of environmental factors. Bioreactors are
employed to scale up the cultivation of plant cells, ensuring a steady supply of high-quality bioactive
compounds. This method is particularly useful for producing rare or endangered medicinal plants.

3. Metabolomics and Systems Biology

Integrating metabolomics and systems biology into herbal medicine research enhances our
understanding of the complex biochemical and physiological interactions of herbal compounds.

- Integration of Metabolomics: Metabolomics involves the comprehensive analysis of metabolites in
biological samples, providing a detailed biochemical profile of herbal medicines. This approach helps
in identifying active metabolites, understanding their mechanisms of action, and discovering potential
synergistic effects between compounds.

- Systems Biology Approaches: Systems biology combines computational and experimental methods
to study the interactions between various components within a biological system. By applying systems
biology to herbal medicine, researchers can model and predict the effects of herbal compounds on
different biological pathways, leading to a more holistic understanding of their therapeutic actions.

4. Personalized Herbal Medicine

Personalized medicine tailors treatments to individual genetic profiles, and this approach is
increasingly being applied to herbal medicine through pharmacogenomics.

- The Role of Pharmacogenomics: Pharmacogenomics studies how genetic variations affect individual
responses to drugs. By analyzing patients' genetic profiles, healthcare providers can predict which
herbal treatments will be most effective and safe for them. This personalized approach minimizes
adverse effects and maximizes therapeutic outcomes.

- Potential for Personalized Medicine Using Herbal Remedies: Personalized herbal medicine considers
not only genetic factors but also lifestyle, diet, and environmental influences. By integrating these
factors, personalized herbal treatments can be developed to address specific health conditions more
effectively. For example, herbal treatments for conditions like hypertension or diabetes can be tailored
based on a person's genetic predisposition and metabolic profile.

Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research | 75

----- PAGE 84 -----
5. Collaborative Research and Open Innovation

Interdisciplinary collaboration and open innovation are essential for advancing herbal medicine
research and translating scientific discoveries into practical applications.

- Importance of Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Collaboration between botanists, pharmacologists,
geneticists, biotechnologists, and clinicians is crucial for comprehensive research in herbal medicine.
Interdisciplinary teams can address complex research questions, share resources, and integrate diverse
expertise to accelerate the development of new herbal therapies.

- Examples of Successful Collaborations and Open Innovation Platforms: Collaborative initiatives,
such as the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) and the Open Source Seed Initiative
(OSSD, exemplify the power of collective efforts in advancing research. These platforms facilitate data
sharing, open access to research findings, and collaborative problem-solving, driving innovation in
herbal medicine.

Table: Role of Biotechnology and Genomics in Herbal Medicine

Aspect Key Advances and Applications

Genomic Approaches Identification of bioactive compounds, genetic

diversity studies, optimization of cultivation

Biotechnological Advances Genetic engineering for enhanced compound

production, plant cell cultures, and bioreactors

Metabolomics and Systems Biology Biochemical profiling, understanding
mechanisms of action, modeling interactions of
herbal compounds

Personalized Herbal Medicine Pharmacogenomics for tailored treatments,
integration of lifestyle and genetic factors

Collaborative Research and Open Innovation Interdisciplinary collaboration, open
innovation platforms (e.g., GA4GH, OSSD,

The integration of biotechnology and genomics into herbal medicine research is transforming the field
by enabling the identification of bioactive compounds, enhancing production methods, and paving the
way for personalized treatments. Collaborative efforts and open innovation are essential to harness the
full potential of these technologies, ultimately leading to safer, more effective, and individualized
herbal therapies.

76 | Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

----- PAGE 85 -----
Conclusion

This chapter has explored the future directions in herbal medicine research, highlighting key
innovations in herbal drug development and the transformative role of biotechnology and genomics.
We began by examining new extraction and purification techniques, such as supercritical fluid
extraction and ultrasound-assisted extraction, which have significantly enhanced the efficiency and
effectiveness of obtaining bioactive compounds from medicinal plants. Nanotechnology has emerged
as a pivotal innovation, enabling the development of nanoformulations that improve bioavailability and

targeted delivery of herbal medicines.

Standardization and quality control were emphasized as critical to ensuring consistent efficacy and
safety of herbal products, with advanced analytical techniques like HPLC and GC-MS playing a vital
role. Formulation innovations, including novel dosage forms and encapsulation systems, have further
advanced the delivery and efficacy of herbal medicines. Rigorous clinical trials and evidence-based
research are essential to validate the therapeutic claims of herbal remedies and integrate them into

mainstream healthcare.

Biotechnology and genomics have revolutionized herbal medicine research by providing tools to
identify and characterize bioactive compounds, enhance production through genetic engineering, and
use plant cell cultures for large-scale production. Metabolomics and systems biology offer
comprehensive insights into the biochemical profiles and complex interactions of herbal compounds,
while personalized herbal medicine leverages pharmacogenomics to tailor treatments to individual
genetic profiles. Collaborative research and open innovation platforms are crucial for advancing the

field and translating scientific discoveries into practical applications.
The Future Outlook of Herbal Medicine Research

The future of herbal medicine research is promising, driven by continuous advancements in technology
and an increasing demand for natural and holistic healthcare solutions. Genomic and biotechnological
tools will continue to play a pivotal role in identifying new bioactive compounds, optimizing
cultivation practices, and enhancing the production of medicinal plants. The integration of
metabolomics and systems biology will provide deeper insights into the mechanisms of action of

herbal compounds, leading to more effective and safer treatments.

Personalized herbal medicine is expected to become more prevalent, with pharmacogenomics enabling
tailored treatments that consider individual genetic profiles, lifestyle, and environmental factors. This
personalized approach will maximize therapeutic outcomes and minimize adverse effects, contributing
to more effective and patient-centered healthcare.

Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research | 77

----- PAGE 86 -----
The Potential Impact of Innovations and Biotechnological Advances on Healthcare

The innovations and biotechnological advances discussed in this chapter have the potential to
revolutionize healthcare by making herbal medicines more effective, reliable, and accessible.
Enhanced extraction and purification techniques ensure that patients receive high-quality herbal
products with consistent therapeutic effects. Nanotechnology and novel formulation methods improve
the delivery and bioavailability of herbal compounds, offering targeted and sustained therapeutic

benefits.

Standardization and quality control measures ensure the safety and efficacy of herbal medicines,
building trust among healthcare providers and patients. Rigorous clinical trials and evidence-based
research provide scientific validation for the therapeutic claims of herbal remedies, facilitating their

integration into mainstream healthcare.

Biotechnological advances, such as genetic engineering and plant cell cultures, enable the sustainable
and large-scale production of valuable phytochemicals, ensuring a steady supply of high-quality
medicinal plants. Personalized herbal medicine, supported by pharmacogenomics, offers tailored
treatments that address individual health needs, paving the way for a more personalized and holistic

approach to healthcare.

Collaborative research and open innovation platforms foster interdisciplinary collaboration and data
sharing, accelerating the pace of discovery and innovation in herbal medicine. By leveraging these
advancements, the potential impact on healthcare is profound, offering safer, more effective, and

personalized treatments that enhance patient outcomes and overall well-being.

The future of herbal medicine research is bright, with innovations and biotechnological advances
driving the field forward. By integrating traditional knowledge with modern scientific techniques, we
can unlock the full potential of herbal medicine, providing safer, more effective, and personalized

healthcare solutions for patients worldwide.

78 | Future Directions in Herbal Medicine Research

----- PAGE 87 -----
CHAPTER BAO

Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life

Dr. Harshita Jain

ABSTRACT

Incorporating herbs into daily life can transform health and enhance culinary experiences. Herbs, rich in vitamins,
minerals, and antioxidants, boost the immune system, improve digestion, and reduce inflammation, offering natural
alternatives to synthetic medications. Historically revered in various cultures for their medicinal and culinary uses,
herbs like basil, thyme, and oregano not only elevate the flavor of dishes but also provide health benefits. Creating a
herbal first aid kit, brewing medicinal teas, and using herbal infusions in cooking are effective ways to integrate
these plants into daily routines. Experimentation with different herbs and recipes can personalize and enrich one’s
health practices. Embracing herbs in everyday life honors ancient traditions and supports a holistic approach to
well-being.

Keywords: herbs, health, culinary, antioxidants, immune system, digestion, inflammation, natural remedies, herbal
first aid, medicinal teas, culinary herbs, holistic wellness.

Introduction

Incorporating herbs into daily life can be a transformative practice, enriching our health, culinary
experiences, and overall well-being. Herbs have been used for centuries across cultures not only to
enhance the flavor of food but also for their medicinal properties. Today, as we seek natural and
holistic approaches to health and wellness, the importance of these versatile plants is becoming more
apparent than ever.

Importance and Benefits of Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life

Herbs offer a multitude of benefits that make them invaluable in daily life. They are rich in vitamins,
minerals, and antioxidants, which can help boost the immune system, improve digestion, and reduce
inflammation. Using herbs can also reduce our reliance on synthetic medications, offering a natural
alternative for minor ailments and promoting a more balanced and holistic approach to health.

In the kitchen, herbs elevate our culinary creations, adding depth and complexity to flavors. From fresh
basil in a vibrant pesto to rosemary-infused olive oil, herbs can transform ordinary dishes into
extraordinary meals. Beyond their taste, the medicinal properties of herbs used in cooking can aid in
digestion, enhance circulation, and provide a sense of well-being.

Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life | 79

----- PAGE 88 -----
Historical Context and Traditional Uses of Herbs

Herbs have played a significant role in human history, revered for their healing properties and culinary
applications. Ancient civilizations, including the Egyptians, Greeks, and Chinese, documented the use
of herbs in their medical texts. The Egyptian Ebers Papyrus, dating back to 1550 BC, lists hundreds of
medicinal plants and their uses. Similarly, Hippocrates, known as the father of medicine, prescribed
herbs for various ailments, emphasizing their importance in health care.

In traditional Chinese medicine, herbs have been used for thousands of years to balance the body’s
energies and treat a wide range of conditions. Ayurvedic medicine, practiced in India, also relies
heavily on herbs to promote health and prevent disease. These ancient systems of medicine highlight
the enduring legacy and efficacy of herbal remedies.

Throughout history, herbs have been integral to home remedies and daily health practices. Families
passed down knowledge of herbal treatments through generations, creating a rich tapestry of folk
medicine. Simple home remedies, such as chamomile tea for relaxation or ginger for nausea, continue
to be popular and effective today.

In addition to their medicinal uses, herbs have been a staple in culinary traditions worldwide. The
Mediterranean diet, for example, is renowned for its use of herbs like oregano, basil, and thyme, which
not only enhance flavor but also contribute to the diet's health benefits. Similarly, in Asian cuisine,
herbs like cilantro, mint, and lemongrass are essential ingredients that add freshness and vitality to
dishes.

As we reconnect with these ancient practices, we can integrate the wisdom of our ancestors into
modern life. By incorporating herbs into our daily routines, we honor this rich history while reaping
the numerous benefits they offer. Whether through home remedies, cooking, or simply enjoying a cup
of herbal tea, herbs provide a natural, effective, and enriching way to enhance our health and well-
being.

Home Remedies and Everyday Uses
1. Herbal First Aid Kit

Creating an herbal first aid kit is an excellent way to ensure that you have natural remedies on hand for
minor injuries and ailments. Here are some essential herbs and their preparation and application
methods:

- Aloe Vera: Known for its soothing and healing properties, Aloe Vera gel can be applied directly to
minor burns, cuts, and sunburns. Simply cut a leaf from the plant, split it open, and apply the gel to the
affected area.

- Calendula: This herb is renowned for its anti-inflammatory and antiseptic properties. To make a
Calendula salve, infuse dried Calendula flowers in olive oil for a few weeks, strain, and then mix with
melted beeswax. Apply the salve to minor cuts and bruises.

- Lavender: Lavender essential oil can be used for minor burns and insect bites due to its antiseptic and
anti-inflammatory properties. Dilute a few drops of lavender oil in a carrier oil and apply to the skin.

80 | Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life

----- PAGE 89 -----
2. Natural Cold and Flu Remedies

Herbs can be powerful allies in boosting immunity and alleviating cold and flu symptoms. Here are
some effective herbs and recipes for herbal syrups, teas, and tinctures:

- Echinacea: This herb is known for its immune-boosting properties. Make a simple Echinacea tea by
steeping 1-2 teaspoons of dried Echinacea in hot water for 10-15 minutes. Drink 2-3 cups daily during
cold and flu season.

- Elderberry: Elderberry syrup is a popular remedy for colds and flu. To make the syrup, simmer | cup
of dried elderberries with 3 cups of water, | cup of honey, and a few slices of ginger for 45 minutes.
Strain and store in a jar. Take 1-2 tablespoons daily.

- Ginger: Ginger tea is excellent for soothing sore throats and reducing congestion. Slice fresh ginger
and simmer in water for 10-15 minutes. Add honey and lemon to taste.

3. Stress Relief and Sleep Aids
Certain herbs can help alleviate anxiety and promote restful sleep. Here are some calming herbs and
their methods of use:

- Chamomile: Chamomile tea is well-known for its calming effects. Steep 1-2 teaspoons of dried
chamomile flowers in hot water for 5-10 minutes. Drink a cup before bedtime to promote relaxation.

- Valerian: Valerian root is effective for treating insomnia. Make a valerian tincture by soaking the
dried root in alcohol for a few weeks, then strain. Take a few drops in water before bed.

- Lemon Balm: This herb can be used in teas, baths, or aromatherapy to reduce anxiety. For a relaxing
bath, add a handful of dried lemon balm to your bathwater.
4. Digestive Health

Herbs can support digestion and soothe stomach issues. Here are some helpful herbs and their uses:

- Peppermint: Peppermint tea can relieve indigestion and bloating. Steep fresh or dried peppermint
leaves in hot water for 10 minutes. Drink after meals.

- Fennel: Fennel seeds are known to aid digestion and reduce gas. Chew a teaspoon of fennel seeds
after meals or make a fennel tea by steeping the seeds in hot water.

- Licorice Root: Licorice root tea can soothe an upset stomach and reduce inflammation. Steep the
dried root in hot water for 10-15 minutes.

5. Skin and Hair Care

Herbs offer natural treatments for various skin conditions and can enhance hair health. Here are some
herbal remedies and DIY recipes:

- Tea Tree: Tea tree oil is effective for acne and other skin infections. Dilute a few drops in a carrier oil

and apply to the affected area.

Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life | 81

----- PAGE 90 -----
- Witch Hazel: Witch hazel is a natural astringent that can be used as a toner for oily skin. Apply witch

hazel extract to the skin with a cotton pad.

- Rosemary: Rosemary can promote hair growth and reduce dandruff. Make a rosemary hair rinse by
steeping fresh rosemary in hot water, let it cool, and then use it as a final rinse after shampooing.

Table: Herbal Remedies at a Glance

Herb Use Preparation Method Application

Aloe Vera Minor burns, cuts, | Apply gel directly from the leaf Topical
sunburns

Calendula Cuts, bruises, | Infuse in oil, mix with beeswax to | Topical
inflammation make a salve

Lavender Burns, insect _ bites, | Dilute essential oil in carrier oil Topical
relaxation

Echinacea Immune boost Steep dried herb in hot water Tea

Elderberry Cold and flu symptoms | Simmer dried berries with water and | Syrup

honey

Ginger Sore throat, congestion Simmer fresh slices in water Tea

Chamomile Relaxation, sleep aid Steep dried flowers in hot water Tea

Valerian Insomnia Soak dried root in alcohol Tea

Lemon Balm | Anxiety, relaxation Steep in hot water, add to bath Tea, Bath

Peppermint Indigestion, bloating Steep fresh or dried leaves in hot water | Tea

Fennel Digestive aid Chew seeds or steep in hot water Chewing _ seeds,

Tea

Liquorice Upset stomach, | Steep dried root in hot water Tea

Root inflammation

Tea tree Acne, skin infections Dilute essential oil in carrier oil Topical

Witch Hazel | Oily skin, astringent Apply extract with cotton pad Topical

Rosemary Hair growth, dandruff Steep fresh herb in hot water, cool and | Hair rinse

rinse hair

By incorporating these herbal remedies into your daily routine, you can enjoy the natural benefits they
offer for health and wellness. These simple, effective, and time-tested practices can help you maintain
a healthy and balanced lifestyle.

82 | Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life

----- PAGE 91 -----
Cooking with Medicinal Plants and Herbal Teas

Herbs are more than just flavor enhancers in the kitchen; they also bring a wealth of medicinal benefits
to our daily diet. Incorporating these powerful plants into our cooking routines can boost our health
and well-being in delicious and creative ways.

1. Herbs as Culinary Allies

Many culinary herbs possess medicinal properties that can promote overall health. Here are some key
herbs and tips on how to incorporate them into your everyday cooking:

- Basil: Known for its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, basil can be added to salads, pasta,
and pesto. Fresh basil leaves can also be used to garnish soups and pizzas for an extra burst of flavor
and health benefits.

- Thyme: Thyme has antiseptic and antibacterial qualities. Use it in marinades, roasts, and stews.
Thyme pairs well with meats and vegetables, adding depth to the flavor profile.

- Oregano: Rich in antioxidants and with strong antimicrobial properties, oregano is excellent in
tomato-based dishes, Mediterranean cuisine, and as a seasoning for meats and vegetables.

2. Herbal Teas and Infusions

Drinking herbal teas is a simple and effective way to benefit from the medicinal properties of herbs.
Here are some popular herbal teas and their recipes:

- Peppermint Tea: Known for its digestive benefits, peppermint tea can be made by steeping fresh or
dried peppermint leaves in hot water for 10 minutes. Enjoy after meals to aid digestion.

- Chamomile Tea: Chamomile is soothing and can help with relaxation and sleep. Steep 1-2 teaspoons
of dried chamomile flowers in hot water for 5-10 minutes.

- Hibiscus Tea: Hibiscus tea is rich in antioxidants and can help lower blood pressure. Steep dried
hibiscus flowers in hot water for 5-10 minutes. Add honey and a slice of lemon for extra flavor.
3. Infused Oils and Vinegars
Creating herbal-infused oils and vinegars can enhance your cooking while adding the medicinal
benefits of herbs. Here’s a step-by-step guide and recipes:
- Herbal Infused Oils:

1. Choose your herbs (e.g., rosemary, thyme, basil).

2. Wash and dry the herbs thoroughly.

3. Place the herbs in a clean, dry glass jar.

4. Pour olive oil over the herbs, ensuring they are fully submerged.

5. Seal the jar and store in a cool, dark place for 2-3 weeks.

6. Strain the oil through a fine mesh sieve or cheesecloth and transfer to a clean bottle.

Use these oils for cooking, salad dressings, or as a flavorful dip for bread.

Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life | 83

----- PAGE 92 -----
- Herbal Vinegars:
1. Choose your herbs (e.g., tarragon, dill, basil).
2. Wash and dry the herbs thoroughly.
3. Place the herbs in a clean, dry glass jar.
4. Pour vinegar (white wine vinegar or apple cider vinegar) over the herbs.
5. Seal the jar and store in a cool, dark place for 2-4 weeks.
6. Strain the vinegar through a fine mesh sieve or cheesecloth and transfer to a clean bottle.
Use herbal vinegars in salad dressings, marinades, and to add a zesty flavor to your dishes.
4. Herbal Soups and Broths
Using medicinal herbs in soups and broths not only enhances flavor but also boosts their nutritional
value. Here are some tips and recipes:
- Chicken Soup with Thyme and Sage:
- Ingredients: Chicken, carrots, celery, onion, garlic, thyme, sage, salt, and pepper.
- Instructions:
1. Sauté onions, garlic, and celery in olive oil until soft.
2. Add chicken pieces and brown slightly.
3. Add water, carrots, thyme, and sage.
4. Simmer until chicken is cooked through and vegetables are tender.

5. Season with salt and pepper to taste.

- Vegetable Broth with Rosemary and Bay Leaf:
- Ingredients: Carrots, celery, onion, garlic, rosemary, bay leaves, salt, and pepper.
- Instructions:
1. Sauté onions, garlic, and celery in olive oil until soft.
2. Add water, carrots, rosemary, and bay leaves.
3. Simmer until vegetables are tender.

4. Strain the broth and use as a base for soups or enjoy on its own.
5. Baking with Herbs

Incorporating herbs into baked goods adds a unique flavor and health benefits. Here are some recipes
and techniques:

84 | Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life

----- PAGE 93 -----
- Rosemary Bread:

- Ingredients: Flour, yeast, water, salt, olive oil, fresh rosemary.

- Instructions:
1. Mix flour, yeast, salt, and chopped rosemary in a bowl.
2. Add water and olive oil, and mix until a dough forms.
3. Knead the dough for 5-10 minutes.
4. Let the dough rise until doubled in size.
5. Shape into a loaf and bake at 375°F (190°C) for 25-30 minutes.

- Lavender Cookies:
- Ingredients: Flour, butter, sugar, eggs, dried lavender.
- Instructions:
1. Cream butter and sugar together.
2. Add eggs and mix well.
3. Stir in flour and dried lavender until combined.
4. Drop spoonfuls of dough onto a baking sheet.
5. Bake at 350°F (175°C) for 10-12 minutes.
By integrating these herbs into your cooking routine, you can enjoy their medicinal benefits while
creating delicious and nutritious meals. Experimenting with different herbs and recipes allows you to

discover new flavors and health benefits, making herbs an essential part of your culinary and wellness
practices.

Conclusion

Recap of the Benefits of Integrating Herbs into Daily Life

Incorporating herbs into our daily routines offers numerous benefits, both for our health and our
culinary experiences. Herbs are rich in essential vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants, which can boost
our immune system, improve digestion, and reduce inflammation. By using herbs, we can also reduce
our reliance on synthetic medications, opting for natural remedies for minor ailments. Additionally,
herbs add unique flavors and aromas to our meals, making everyday cooking more enjoyable and
nutritious.

Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life | 85

----- PAGE 94 -----
Throughout this chapter, we've explored various ways to incorporate herbs into daily life. From
creating a herbal first aid kit and brewing medicinal teas to cooking with culinary herbs and baking
delicious treats, herbs provide a wealth of opportunities to enhance our health and well-being.

Encouragement to Experiment and Find Personal Favorite Herbal Remedies and Recipes

One of the most exciting aspects of working with herbs is the opportunity for experimentation.
Everyone's body is different, and what works for one person may not work for another. This is why it's
important to explore and find the herbs and remedies that resonate with you personally. Try different
recipes, adjust ingredients to your taste, and observe how your body responds.

Start with a few herbs that you feel drawn to or that address specific health concerns you may have.
Gradually expand your herbal repertoire, and don't be afraid to get creative. Whether you're blending a
new tea, infusing oils, or adding fresh herbs to your meals, the process of discovery can be both fun
and rewarding.

86 | Practical Applications: Incorporating Herbs into Daily Life


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: A handbook of Native American Herbs.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
LRA Cw "he
AMERICAN

J a
ae et |

aT

ALMA R. HUTCHENS

The pocket guide to
125 medicinal plants
and their uses

white pia etch fan

----- PAGE 2 -----
RECOMMENDED BOOKS x

click image(s) to read/ download [Bgggiag

Sean Nalewanyj's

BODY TRANSFORMATION EAT sz FAT
BLUEPRINT

BIG

Natural Testicles

he

Increase Testicle Size
Boost Testosterone
Double Ejaculation Volume

bignaturaltesticles.com

JASON FERRUGGIA’S

MUSCLE GAINING ®

90D a

Skinny-todacked Transformation Plan \

SASON Ae
MAKE WOMEN
EB’ WANT YOU

----- PAGE 3 -----
ABOUT THE BOOK

This authoritative guide—based on the author’s classic reference work, Indian Herbalogy of North
America—is a portable illustrated companion for the professional and amateur herbalist alike. It
provides detailed descriptions of 125 of the most useful medicinal plants commonly found in North
America, along with directions for a range of uses, remedies for common ailments, and notes on the
herbal traditions of other lands. Entries include staples of folk medicine such as echinacea and
slippery elm as well as common kitchen herbs—such as parsley, thyme, and pepper—whose tonic
and healing properties are less widely known.

ALMA R. HUTCHENS, a close associate of the late herbalist N. G. Tretchikoff, has been a student
and practitioner of herbal medicine for many years.

----- PAGE 4 -----
Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Sign Up

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

----- PAGE 5 -----
A
HANDBOOK
OF
NATIVE

AMERICAN
HERBS

ALMAR.HUTCHENS

:

SHAMBHALA * Boston & London + 2012

----- PAGE 6 -----
Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Horticultural Hall

300 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
www.shambhala.com

© 1992 by Alma R. Hutchens

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hutchens, Alma R.
A handbook of native American herbs/Alma R. Hutchens.—Ist ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eISBN 978-0-8348-2422-5
ISBN 0-87773-699-5 (acid-free paper)
1. Indians of North America—Ethnobotany—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Herbs—North America—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3.
Ethnobotany—North America—Handbooks, manuals, etc. _ I. Title.
E98.B7H87 1992 92-50122
615'.321'097—de20 CIP

----- PAGE 7 -----
CONTENTS

Editor ’s Foreword

Ale Hoof
Alfalfa

Aloe
Angelica
Arnica
Arsesmart
Balsam Fir
Barberry
Bayberry
Bearberry
Beech
Beechdrops
Beth Root
Bilberry
Birch
Bitterroot
Bittersweet
Blackberry
Black Cohosh
Black Root
Black Walnut
Bloodroot
Blue Cohosh
Blue Flag
Blue Vervain
Burdock
Capsicum
Castor Bean
Catnip
Celandine
Centaury
Chaga
Chamomile
Cherry

----- PAGE 8 -----
Chestnut
Chickweed
Cleavers
Coltsfoot
Comfrey
Couch Grass
Crampbark
Creosote Bush
Damiana
Dandelion
Echinacea
Elder
Elecampane
Eucalyptus
Feverfew
Five Finger Grass
Fringe Tree
Ginger, Wild
Ginseng
Goldenseal
Goldthread
Hellebore
Hops
Horehound
Horseradish
Horsetail
Hydrangea
Hyssop
Juniper
Lady’s Slipper
Licorice
Life Root
Linden
Lobelia
Lungwort
Mandrake
Milkweed
Mint
Motherwort
Mugwort

----- PAGE 9 -----
Mullein

Nettle

Oak

Oats

Parsley
Plantain

Poke

Prickly Ash
Raspberry

Red Clover
Sage

Sanicle
Sarsaparilla
Sassafras
Senega

Senna

Skullcap
Slippery Elm
Solomon’s Seal
Spikenard

St. John’s Wort
Strawberry
Sumac

Sundew
Sunflower
Swamp Beggar’s Tick
Sweet Flag
Sweet Gum
Tamarack
Tansy

Thuja

Thyme

Turkey Corn
Valerian

Violet

Virginia Snakeroot
Watercress
Water Pepper
White Pine
White Pond Lily

----- PAGE 10 -----
Wild Carrot
Wild Yam
Willow, Black
Wintergreen
Witch Hazel
Wormseed
Wormwood
Yarrow
Yellow Dock
Yellow Parilla
Yerba Santa

Definitions
Index
E-mail Sign-Up

----- PAGE 11 -----
EDITOR’S FOREWORD

“Each book has its own fate and destiny,” Alma Hutchens observed in the preface to her classic, Indian
Herbalogy of North America. The prescience of that statement will be evident to those who have watched
Mrs. Hutchens’s work unfold in the thirty years since she began her research under the tutelage of her
mentor, the noted herbalist N. G. Tretchikoff. Indian Herbalogy, first published in the 1960s, came at a
time of burgeoning interest in folk medicine and natural healing methods, and it met the need for a detailed
reference book for North American herbalists. It has since become known as a standard work on the
subject in many countries and has gone through seventeen printings as of 1992.

As the years have gone by and interest in herbs and their uses has increased, the need for a “portable”
version of Indian Herbalogy has been felt. It is with this need in mind that Mrs. Hutchens has compiled
this Handbook of Native American Herbs. In it are found descriptions of 125 of the most useful medicinal
plants commonly found on the North American continent. Included are dosages, directions for use,
remedies for some common ailments, homeopathic methods, and lore from the folk medicine of other
countries—particularly Russia, China, India, and Pakistan—where the arts of herbal healing have
traditionally flourished.

The fate and destiny of Alma Hutchens’s work in herbology has proven to be its enduring influence in
the field. A Handbook of Native American Herbs represents the latest phase in that unique destiny.

----- PAGE 12 -----
ALE HOOF or GROUND IVY

Glechoma hederacea

COMMON NAMES: Cat’s foot, gill go by ground, gill creep by ground, turn hoof, hay maids. Various names
come from the many localities in which it grows.

FEATURES: The plant is common to North America and Europe. Found in shady places, waste grounds,
dry ditches, in almost every part of the land. The green, round leaves endure every season except when
the temperature falls below the freezing point.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, pectoral.

Uses: A singular herb for all inward wounds, ulcerated lungs, or other parts indicating the same
condition. Either by itself or boiled with other herbs and drinks.

In a short time it will ease all gripping pains, gas, and choleric conditions of the stomach and spleen.
Useful in yellow jaundice, as it opens the stoppage of the gall bladder and liver, and in melancholy, by
relieving obstructions of the spleen; expels poisons and also the plague; encourages a release of urine and
relieves women’s complaints.

A decoction of ale hoof and a good wine taken over a period of time will ease sciatica, hip gout, or
arthritic hands and knees. A decoction with honey and a little burnt alum is excellent as a gargle for sore
mouth or throat and to wash genital sores and ulcers. An infusion of the leaves is very beneficial in lead
colic. Painters who make use of it are seldom, if ever, troubled with this malady. The fresh juice snuffed
up the nose often takes care of most deep-rooted, long-established headaches.

This is one of the most wonderful of all herbs. The mineral content includes iron, copper, iodine,
phosphorus, and potassium. The ancient herbalists praised it greatly, saying it would cure insanity and
melancholia by opening the stopping of the spleen. It also regulates the heartbeat by making the blood
more fluid. An excellent assistant to aid glandular health and prevent premature aging.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cup boiling water; powder, 2 dram to | dram.

----- PAGE 13 -----
EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaf bruised and bound around a new wound will hasten an early recovery. Ale
hoof juice, honey, and marigold (Calendula) boiled together will clean fistulas and ulcers, control the
spreading or eating away of cancers and ulcers, and relieve itching scabs, weals, and other skin irritations
in any part of the body. The juice dropped into the ear has been used for treatment of ringing in the ears
and cleansing in cases of impaired hearing due to infection.

----- PAGE 14 -----
ALFALFA

Medicago sativa

COMMON NAMEs: Lucern, buffalo herb.

FEATURES: Alfalfa is native to Asia and did not reach North America until around 1850 or 1860. This
deep-growing plant is seen from Maine to Virginia and westward to the Pacific coast in the United States.

The Native Americans adapted alfalfa quickly for human use as well as for animals. In England and
South Africa it is called buffalo herb.

This is a perennial, herbaceous plant, with two stems. Leaflets: three-toothed above. Flowers: violet.
Calyx: five-toothed. Corolla: papilionaceous, six lines long. Stamens: nine united and one free. Pod:
spirally coiled and without spines. The small, violet-purple or bluish flowers bloom from June until
August. In some regions it is cut every month as cultivated food for both man and animal.

The organic salt of alfalfa is among the richest known, the depth and spread of its roots enabling it to
absorb its valuable nutrition as far as 125 feet below the earth’s surface.

Uses: Alfalfa was discovered by the Arabs and is one of the first known herbs. They called it the Father
of all Foods. It is only in recent years that we moderns are rediscovering its valuable nutritive properties,
which include organic minerals of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and potassium, plus all the known
vitamins, including vitamin K and the recently discovered vitamin B, and vitamin P.

It is helpful for every condition of the body, whether it be maintaining or regaining health, as the
contents are balanced for complete absorption. It may be used by itself or blended with other herbal teas
with or between meals.

Claudia V. James (1963) mentions that South African stock farmers have used it in feed to improve the
beauty of ostrich feathers and that cows gave richer milk, chickens laid more often, with the food content
of a better quality. A turkey farm in California has better stock after including alfalfa as part of the diet.

----- PAGE 15 -----
ALOE

Aloe socotrina

COMMON NAMES: Bombay aloe, turkey aloe, moka aloe, Zanzibar aloe.

FEATURES: Aloe, a genus of nearly two hundred species of mostly South African succulent plants. The
properties of this plant were known to the ancient Greeks, and it has been gathered on Socotra for more
than two thousand years.

Aloe thrives in warm regions and grows wild in Florida. It is much like succulent cactus in texture. The
leaves are usually elongated, of a deep brown or olive color, frequently pointed, blunt, or spiny-toothed,
sometimes blotched or mottled. The stem is commonly short, with a basal rosette of leaves. Taste:
peculiar and bitter. Powder: a bright yellow. The red or yellow tubular flowers are found on a stalk in
simple or branched clusters.

These properties change somewhat in the different varieties, some species being treelike with forked
branches. Aloe bainesii grows to heights of 65 feet, being 15 feet wide at the base. Other species of aloe
are often cultivated in gardens of succulents, including the miniature ones grown in homes; they require
strong light and careful watering. The “American aloe” is not an aloe, but Agave americana.

MEDICINAL PART: The insipid juice of the leaves, which is a greenish, translucent, salvelike substance.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, purgative, emmenagogue, anthelmintic.

Uses: Aloe is one of the most sovereign agents we have among the herbal medicines, being cleansing to
the morbid matter of the stomach, liver, spleen, kidney, and bladder. Does not gripe and is very healing
and soothing to all the tissue, blood, and lymph fluids it obliges.

Aloe should never be used in pregnancy, or by itself when one is suffering from hemorrhoids, as in
hemorrhoids it arouses and irritates the lower bowel. Much used in suppressed menstruation, dyspepsia,
skin lesions, disease of the liver, headaches, etc.

Dose: In constipation, in powder form, 2-2 grains, depending on age and condition; for obstructed or
suppressed menstruation, 5-10 grains twice daily; to expel thread-worms, dissolve the aloe in warm
water and use as an injection. The same mixture can be taken internally for several days.

EXTERNALLY: Powdered aloe made into a strong decoction and rubbed over the nipples will help wean a
nursing child, due to the disagreeable taste.

----- PAGE 16 -----
Aloe shows the same cleansing power for external application. Fresh wounds, as well as old ones, are
quickly closed when a piece of white linen or cotton saturated in aloe water is applied.

If ulcers progress to a running stage sprinkle aloe powder thick enough to cover the open wound and
secure with clean gauze, repeating daily. The powder will absorb the morbid, fluid matter, at the same
time encouraging healthy new replacement tissue.

The fresh juice, or solution made from dried leaves, is soothing to tender sunburns, insect bites,
overexposure to X ray, or other emollient needs.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Abdomen (plethora of), anus (affections of), bronchitis, colic, constipation,
cough, diarrhea, dysentery, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids, hysteria, lumbago, excessive masturbation,
phthisis, proctitis, prolapsed uterus, sacrum (pain in), tenesmus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Aloe vera is cultivated in Russia in many houses as a decorative and medicinal
plant. The Soviet government cultivated Aloe vera for commercial and industrial purposes in the Black
Sea coastal area. Uses: Medical science gives prominent place for this herb and others of the same
family. The famous academician B. R. Fillatow makes an extract of aloe for treatment of eye conditions
and injections for run-down organisms.

Extract of the leaves, sabur, is common in hospitals, and in all dispensaries is used as a laxative. The
influence stimulates the gallbladder by increasing its secretions. Externally: In radio and X-ray treatment
given on the skin it is important to remember that aloe leaves prepared with castor oil or eucalpytus oil
are healing and a moisturizer in prevention against further complications.

CAUTION: Do not give in cases of degeneration of the liver and gallbladder, during menstruation or
pregnancy, or for piles. As a rule it is safe to use aloe as it is established by folk medicine, but in all
complicated cases the advice of medical or trained practitioners in this field should be sought.

----- PAGE 17 -----
ANGELICA

Angelica atropurpurea

COMMON NAMES: Masterwort, purple angelica, alexanders, archangel.

FEATURES: Angelica, a genus of herbs of the family Ammiaceae. Several species are native to North
America. The name angelica, however, is popularly applied to various other members of the same family.

Angelica atropurpurea is perennial and grows in fields and damp places, developing greenish white
flowers from May to August. It is also cultivated in gardens from Canada to Carolina.

The plant has a peculiar but not unpleasant odor, a sweet taste, afterward pungent; but on drying it loses
much of these qualities. The cake decoration known as candied angelica is the dried stalks preserved with
sugar.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, herb, seed.

SOLVENT: Boiling water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, carminative, diaphoretic, expectorant, diuretic, emmenagogue.
Usss: The tea taken hot will quickly break up a cold. For general tonic, 1-3 cups a day. Angelica should
always be remembered in epidemics, as it is said to resist poisons by defending and comforting the heart,
blood, and spirits.

It is used in flatulent colic and heartburn. The condition of suppressed liver and spleen, causing various
digestive malfunctions, will yield to this medicinal herb whose longstanding results have gained it the
heavenly name archangel. Is also serviceable in diseases of the urinary organs.

Dose: 1 ounce of the seed or herb (less if powder is used) to | pint of boiling water, taken in '4-cup
amounts frequently during the day, or 1 cup after each meal.

EXTERNALLY: A tea made of angelica and dropped on old ulcers will cleanse and heal them. The dry
powdered root may also be used for this purpose.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature and pharmacopoeia, angelica occupies prominent attention,

prescribed in the form of tablets, extract, powder, all suitably compounded with other herbal ingredients.
Latest research and clinical experiments confirm long-established use of this herb in folk medicine. Uses:

----- PAGE 18 -----
Since ancient times Russian people have used angelica roots, leaves, and seeds in tea form for nervous
exhaustion, epilepsy, hysteria, as a sedative, an appetizer, for poor digestion, stomach and gas bloating,
indigestion, heartburn, atony of the intestines, and as a diaphoretic and expectorant. Extracted angelica oil
used as a pleasant aromatic and tonic. Industrial: Veterinary use, as diuretic and diaphoretic. The fresh
young leaves, twigs, and flowers are artfully used in the food industry for jams, candy, garnish for salad
decoration, and baked confections. Especially, angelica oil (some dry leaves and bark) is used as an
aromatic in the wine industry for many varieties of wine, vodka, and liquors. The flowering plant is
excellent for a good crop of honey, and for this purpose alone cultivation of Angelica archangelica is
encouraged.

----- PAGE 19 -----
ARNICA

Arnica montana

COMMON NAMES: Leopard’s bane, arnica.

FEATURES: Arnica is of the thistle family, found growing in the northern mountain states of the United
States and Canada.

A perennial herb, with a slender, blackish rhizome 1—2 inches long, from which are given off numerous
filiform roots. The stem, 10—12 inches high, is erect, pubescent, rough, striated, either simple or with one
pair of opposite branches. The leaves, 14-3 inches long, are few, entire, sessile, opposite, obovate; the
radical ones crowded at the base, the upper smaller than the rest. The heads, 2—2% inches wide, are large
and solitary at the summit of the stem and lateral branches. The involucre is cylindrical, dull green, with
purplish points and hairy. The disc flowers are yellow and numerous, with tumular corolla with five
spreading teeth. The ray flowers are about fifteen in number, yellow in color. It flowers in July and
August.

Arnica is a treasure indeed and has been sought diligently by people living in accessible localities. The
root of Arnica montana, the mountain tobacco, yields a small quantity of oil and resinous substance.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Rhizome, flowers.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant.

Usrs: The utmost care should be taken when given internally, as large amounts are poisonous. In
emergencies causing mental or physical shock, pain and swelling after a troublesome dental extraction,
sprains of joints, fractured bones, headaches (even concussions), good results follow the internal
administration of arnica. Persons recover much more rapidly than under morphine.

Administer no more than 5 drops of tincture (children less) every 3-4 hours, and continue as long as the
symptoms seem to require for the above mentioned.

Spirits of arnica can be made by putting the flowers in brandy or medicinal (internal uses) alcohol. In
about three days the tincture may be used: 5 drops every 3-4 hours.

----- PAGE 20 -----
Dose: For infusion put 2 teaspoonfuls of the flowers in 1 cup of boiling water, simmer for 10 minutes,
cool. To be taken in 5-drop amounts, children less according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The liquid solution is also used on any unbroken surface to stop pain, such as in
compresses over rheumatic joints, bruises, painful swollen feet, etc. If bleeding is present a solution of
one part arnica to ten parts calendula (marigold) is unsurpassed for all lesions or open wounds.

Arnica salve is made by heating 1 ounce of the flowers with 1 ounce of cold-pressed arnica oil for a
few hours. This is useful for chapped lips and inflamed nostrils, bruises, joint pain, skin rash, and acne.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plants, tincture of root for abscess, alienation,
apoplexy, back (pain in), baldness, bedsores, black eye, boils, brain (affections of), breath (fetid),
bronchitis, bruises, carbuncles, chest (the affections of), chorea, corns, cramp, diabetes, diarrhea,
dysentery, ecchymosis, excoriations, exhaustion, eyes (affections of), feet (sore), meningitis, miscarriage,
nipples (sore), nose (affections of), paralysis, pleurodynia, purpura, rheumatism, splenalgia, sprain,
stings, suppuration, taste (disorders of), thirst, traumatic fever, tumors, voice (affections of), whooping
cough, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: At one time Russia had to import arnica from central Europe (Germany, Hungary,
etc.) for domestic use. This arnica (Arnica chamissonic) was previously thought to be superior to North
American arnica.

Of late, Russian researchers scientifically observed both species, comparing their medicinal value and
cultivation. The North American variety was the same as, if not better in many respects than, the European
arnica. Uses: Arnica montana has been used since the days of old in Russian folk medicine. Russian
people know of astonishing additional internal uses. To stop bleeding, boils, inflammation of the genital
organs, heart weakness, stimulation of the central nervous system, to promote bile, reduce cholesterol.
Externally: Wounds, bruises (black eye), skin conditions, and many others, the same as above mentioned.
Commercial: From Russian literature we learn of their commercial plantations and find a very detailed
description of their practice. Arnica is perennial. Once you sow seed, you may harvest for a good many
years with little care except at flowering season, which requires some labor to collect. Each acre requires
about 5—6 pounds of seed. Total harvest cannot be estimated, as it depends on soil conditions, climate,
and time for collecting. Due to international demand the price is always increasing. The use of arnica is
limited by the shortage of supply. American herbal agriculture, and herbalists, can extend the benefits of
Native American and Russian experience from the garden to the patient.

----- PAGE 21 -----
ARSESMART
Polygonum hydropiper

COMMON NAMES: The hot arsesmart (polygonum hydropiper) is called water pepper. The mild arsesmart
(persicaria maculata) is called dead arssmare or peachwort because the leaves are just like the leaves of
a peach tree; also called plumbago.

FEATURES: A well-known plant in America, growing in lowlands and about brooks that in most parts are
dry in the summer. It flowers in the late summer or early autumn, and the seeds are ripe in August.

The arsesmart plants are very much alike, and both have a hot sensation if the broken leaf is touched to
the tongue. If seen together the mild water pepper has far broader leaves. Most herbalists use them
together.

The leaves contain essential oil, oxymethyl-anthraquinones; also polygonic acid, which has irritant
properties, a glycoside that promotes the coagulation of blood, and a polygonone-containing ethereal oil
that lowers blood pressure. The herb contains formic acid, acetic acid, and baldrianic acid, much tannin,
and a small amount of an essential oil. The fresh plant contains an acrid juice that causes irritation and
smarting when brought into contact with the nostrils or eyes. The bruised leaves as well as the seeds will
raise blisters if employed as a poultice, as in the case of mustard poultice.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, diaphoretic.

Uses: Effectual for putrid ulcers in man and beast (internally and externally), having a cooling and drying
quality. Swollen injuries, bruises, joint felons, or congealed blood will dissolve if the juice or the bruised
herb is applied. The cold tea will kill worms and cleanse putrefaction. Dilute tincture dropped in the ears
will kill worms therein. The root or seeds bruised and held on an aching tooth will relieve the pain.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb cut small or granulated to 1 cup of boiling water; drink cold 1 cup during
the day, a mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 30—60 drops.

----- PAGE 22 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Amenorrhea, antrum (pain in), blepharitis, colic (flatulent), cough, diarrhea,
dysentery, dysmenia, dysuria, eczema, epilepsy, gonorrhea, gravel, hemorrhoids, heart (affections of),
hysteria, laryngitis, spleen (affections of), strangury, ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Arsesmart (water pepper) is not cultivated commercially but the state encourages
its preservation in its natural habitat. In all Russian medical and herbal literature, including general and
medical encyclopedias, attention is given to several kinds of Polygonum, and one of them, Polygonum
hydropiper (water pepper—vodianoy peretz), is appraised for many things. Medical research and
clinical experiments show that Polygonum contains many minerals and oil, but especially rutin and
vitamins C and K. Uses: Folk medicine gives a good account of its use to stop bleeding, and sometimes
as a diuretic. As a dye that cannot be duplicated artificially for rich and beautiful yellow, golden yellow,
and golden green colors.

----- PAGE 23 -----
BALSAM FIR

Abies balsamea

COMMON NAME: Christmas tree.

FEATURES: There are nine species of fir in the United States, constituting the genus Abies of the pine
family (Pinaceae).

The common name fir is probably applied only to the forty or so species of pyramidal or cylindrical
evergreen trees found mostly in the mountainous regions of Europe, Asia north to the Himalayas, and
eastern North America, where it extends from Virginia and West Virginia in the United States to Labrador
and Newfoundland in Canada. It may be 40—60 feet or more tall, but appears dwarfed near mountaintops.

Members of this genus are characterized by erect cones tht mature in one season but drop their scales
when ripe (unlike other members of this family). The stems of the cones remain attached to the tree, and
fir cones are never found on the ground. The male and female flowers are located on different parts of the
same tree, occurring on branchlets of the previous year’s growth. The female cones are usually high; the
male flowers hang on the lower part of the tree. Both are purplish in color when young. The variable
leaves are sessile, are attached singly.

It is a popular Christmas tree due to its persistent leaves. Turpentine and resin are the popular products
from balsam fir.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, twigs.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant.

Uses: Very much like balm of Gilead in its action. The bark and twigs are filled with a season’s
storehouse of materia medica, produced only by the elements of nature.

As inall herbal practice we use the plant in its original state. The ancient recognition of balsam fir as a
treatment for rheumatism, kidney conditions, gleet, inflammation of the bladder, urinary difficulties,
typhoid fever, capillary bronchitis, etc., may give year-round meaning to its presence in your home other
than as a seasonal, Christmas adornment.

Dose: From Dr. J. H. Greer: Balsam fir, | ounce; glycerin, 4 ounces; honey, 4 ounces. Mix thoroughly, 1
teaspoonful four times a day. The bark and twigs may be added to other herbal teas for the above uses.

EXTERNALLY: The resin is healing to external wounds. Used as a liniment for rheumatic pain. The twigs,
bark, and leaves are a refreshing and beneficial addition to steam cabinets for sore muscles and sluggish
skin action.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Oil of turpentine for albuminuria, amblyopia, asthma, backache, bladder
(irritable), bronchial neuralgia, bronchitis, chordee, chorea, ciliary neuralgia, cystitis, dropsy, dysentery,
dysmenorrhea, enteric fever, epilepsy, erysipelas bullosa, erythema, fibroma, gallstone colic, glands
(inguinal swelling of), gleet, gonorrhea, hematuria, hemorrhoids, hernia (strangulated), herpes labialis
pudendi, hydrophobia, hypochondriasis, insanity, intestines (ulceration of), iritis, jaundice, kidneys
(congestion of), lumbago, neuralgia (supraorbital), ovaries (pain in, dropsy of), pityriasis, strangury,
stricture, tetanus, tympanites, uremia, urine (suppression of), worms (retention of).

----- PAGE 24 -----
BARBERRY

Berberis vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Barberry, pipperidge bush, berry.

FEATURES: One hundred and seventy-five species of shrubs make up this large family of Berberidaceae,
many of which are used in ornamental planting and for hedges. The plant is native to the temperate
climates and grows wild in the New England states and on the mountains of Pennsylvania and Virginia.

The flowers grow in small yellow clusters in April and May, are succeeded by red, dark blue, or black
fruit that in some species is used for making jellies of beautiful color and distinct taste; also used like
raisins when dry.

Barberry is an erect deciduous shrub, 3—8 feet high. The leaves are obovate, oval form, terminated by
soft bristle, about 2 inches long and one-third as wide. The yellow root was an important dye for baskets,
buckskins, and fabric among the Native Americans. The Spanish-Americans used the yellow root to make
neck crosses (crucifixes). The active principle is berberine.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, bark, berries.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, laxative, stimulant, tonic.

Usrs: Native Americans knew by experience the use of barberry for ulcers, sores, consumption,
heartburn, and rheumatism. Root tea was prepared as a blood tonic and cough medicine and for kidney
ailments.

Barberry is indicated in the chronic ills of the stomach and the early stages of tuberculosis, general
debility, liver and spleen derangements. The agent is excellent to cleanse the body of choleric humors and
free it from such diseases as cholera and its associated malicious oddities such as scabs, itch, tetters,
ringworm, yellow jaundice, bile, etc. It is also frequently prescribed in catarrhal conditions of the
bronchial tubes. Barberry has a history of being an “old woman’s medicine” because of its general use in
infusion as a stomach and liver agent. As a tonic it will help convalescent patients recuperate.

Barberry bark is the most active and is an intensely bitter stimulant. The berries can be eaten, and the
juice is an agreeably acrid refrigerant, useful in fevers and will generally stop the bloody flux and
diarrhea that often accompany typhus fevers.

Barberry can be effectively combined with goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), burdock (Actium lappa
and Actium minus), yellow dock (Rumex crispus), fringe tree (Chionanthus virginica) and wild cherry
(Prunus serotina).

----- PAGE 25 -----
Dose: 4 ounce to | pint of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes, 14 cups a day before meals, made fresh
daily. Of the tincture, %—1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: Liquid from chewed root was placed on injuries and on wounds, while cuts and bruises
were washed with a root decoction. A preparation of the bark or berries will be of service as a gargle for
sore mouth and chronic ophthalmia.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the bark of the root for biliary colic, bilious attack, bladder
affections, calculus, duodenum (catarrh of), dysmenorrhea, fevers, fistula, gallstones, gravel, herpes,
irritation, jaundice, joint affections, knee (pain in), leukorrhea, liver disorder, lumbago, ophthalmia,
oxaluria, polypus, renal colic, rheumatism, sacrum (pain in), side pain, spermatic cords (neuralgia of),
spleen (affections of), tumors, urine (disorders of), vaganismus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Since 1950 the official pharmacopoeia has recognized two species of barberry
—Berberis amerenis (amur barberry) and Berberis vulgaris (common barberry). In extract form for
female genital organs, pain and inflammation of gallbladder, and to increase bile. Also helpful to reduce
high blood pressure. Folk medicine: Since olden days Russian people have used the same two, now
recognized officially, for inflammation, excess of menstruation, and to stop bleeding in general and
gallbladder conditions.

----- PAGE 26 -----
BAYBERRY

Myrica cerifera

COMMON NAMES: American bayberries, candle berry, wax berry, wax myrtle, tallow shrub, American
vegetable wax.

FEATURES: From the Myricacea family we have bayberry, popular as an ornamental shrub because of the
attractive fruit masses that persist all winter. The stiff shrub or small slender tree can grow to 40 feet tall
but is usually low and spreading, forming dense thickets. Native in sandy swamps, marshes, and wet
woodlands from southern New Jersey to Florida and the West Indies, west to Arkansas and Texas.

The bark is brownish gray and smooth; leaves narrow at the base, oblong or lanceolate, 1—4 inches
long, much reduced toward the tip of the branch, often sparingly toothed, dark green and shiny above,
paler and sometimes hairy beneath. The flowers appear in early spring, March and April, before or with
the new leaves. The fruits are borne against the stems. The green berries are covered, when mature, with
microscopic rounded particles of pale blue, lavender, or grayish white aromatic wax that is used in
making candles that burn with a pleasing fragrance.

The root bark should be gathered in the fall. Cleanse it thoroughly, and while fresh separate the bark
with a hammer. Dry the bark completely and keep in a dry place; when dry enough to pulverize do so and
store ina dark glass or sealed pottery container.

The berry wax, which possesses mild astringent properties, can be obtained by boiling the berries. The
wax will come to the surface and can be removed when cool and hard. The fragrant wax makes a
delightful scented candle.

MEDICINAL PART: Root bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, stimulant, tonic.

Uses: Bayberry is considered one of the most useful in the medical herbal practice. It has had popular
respect for generations.

Myrica has the most effective influence in diseased mucous accumulation of the alimentary canal,
which in this morbid soil is an incubator for bronchopulmonic diseases, sore throat or scarlet fever,
dysentery, and symptoms such as chronic catarrhal diarrhea, cholera, goiter, scrofula, toxic seepage from
the stomach and intestinal tract, gastritis, leukorrhea, typhoid, etc. Myrica is both a general and special
stimulant to the mucous membranes without causing a rise in temperature; it is at the same time an aid for
digestion and nutrition and is blood building.

It is indispensable for female weakness and where better contraction is indicated in the uterus. This
applies in cases of uterine hemorrhage whether due to miscarriage or other causes. The uterus can be

----- PAGE 27 -----
packed with cotton saturated with a tea solution that will assist excessive menstruation and hemorrhage
from associated functions. In all hemorrhages, from the stomach, lungs, uterus, or bowels, bayberry should
be remembered. In case of coldness of the extremities, chills and influenza, a compound of the following
will encourage circulation and promote perspiration.

Bayberry bark (Myrica cerifera), 1 ounce
Wild ginger (Asarum canadense), '/4 ounce
Cayenne (Capsicum), '/2 ounce

One teaspoonful of the powdered compound to | pint of boiling water (sweetened with honey), taken in
mouthful amounts throughout the day. Be sure to stay indoors and away from drafts, as you may perspire,
and a draft or cold conditions at this time will only prolong treatment.

The Greek physician Galen mentions the berries as wonderfully helping all colds and rheumatic
distillations from the brain to the eyes, lungs, and other parts. Dr. P. O. Brown tells us “the wax possesses
mild astringent with narcotic properties.”

Dose: | teaspoonful to | cup of boiling water. Of the tincture, 4-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: For nasal stoppage or inflammation, sniff, holding one side of the nose and then the other.
Gargle the solution for sore throat and spongy bleeding gums. Skin ulcers and all kinds of sores, boils,
carbuncles will all benefit greatly if bathed often with the freshly prepared solution.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark of root for catarrh, conjunctivitis, heart (affections of),
jaundice, leukorrhea, liver (affections of), pharynx (affections), Achilles tendon (pain in), throat (sore),
urticaria.

----- PAGE 28 -----
BEARBERRY

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

COMMON NAMEs: Upland cranberry, arberry, mountain cranberry, mountain box, uva-ursi.

FEATURES: Found in dry, sterile, sandy soil and gravelly ridges of North America south to Mexico in
3000-9000-foot altitudes.

The perennial evergreen shrub is recognized by large mats of low-growing ground cover. The urn-
shaped flowers are white and sometimes tinged with red, flowering from June to September, followed by
red lustrous berries of the winter season. The green leaves should be picked and dried in the autumn.

The name is also applied to other plants, such as //ex decidua, a shrub of the southern United States.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: The leaves were mixed with tobacco leaves by Native Americans and called kinnikinnick. More
important was their use of it as medicine to treat inflammations of the urinary tract, especially cystitis.

Bearberry is among the herbs useful in diabetes for excessive sugar. Particularly useful in chronic
diarrhea, dysentery, profuse menstruation, piles, spleen, liver, and the pancreas. Outstanding curative
influence for diseases of the urinary organs, more especially in chronic affections of the kidneys, mucous
discharges from the bladder, and all derangements of the water passages. Old cases of leukorrhea and
chronic urethritis will be relieved by its use, a valuable assistant in the cure of gonorrhea of long
standing, whites, ulceration of the cervix uterus (neck of the womb), pain in the vesicle region, etc. Can
be used internally and also as a douche.

Cover and steep | heaped tespoonful in 1 pint of boiling water for 30 minutes, cool, strain, and use
warm as a douche for the above mentioned. If too strong, dilute as required.

Dose: Can be taken internally as follows. Soak the leaves in sufficient alcohol or brandy to cover, for one
week or more. Place | teaspoonful of the soaked leaves in 1 cup of cold, or boiling, water, drink 2—3
cups a day. Quantity of the tincture to be given in the same manner, 10—25 drops in water three or more
times a day, according to symptoms. The tea can be made without the brandy or alcohol, if desired,
preparing as you would ordinary tea. Effective if mixed with tincture of quaking aspen (Populus
tremuloides), 2-15 drops; tincture of bearberry (Arctostaphylos), 10-20 drops.

When used in the treatment of diabetes, Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry) should be combined with it.
Tincture of bilberry leaves (Vaccinium myrtillus) 20-40 drops, tincture of bearberry (Arctostaphylos)
10—20 drops in water three or more times a day.

----- PAGE 29 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Cystitis, dysuria, hematuria, urinary affections.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The pharmacopoeia uses uva-ursi (bearberry) extracts, or combines it with other
herbals as antiseptics or in diuretic conditions. Folk medicine: The tea of wva-ursi is used especially for
female complaints, kidney and bladder disorders. Veterinary: Successfully useful as indicated above.

----- PAGE 30 -----
BEECH

Fagus sylvatica

COMMON NAMES: European beech, beechnut tree.

FEATURES: The European or common beech (Fagus sylvatica) and the American beech (F. grandiflora)
are closely similar.

They are handsome forest trees of the family Fagaceae. Both species thrive in light, limey loams; they
do not grow in damp locations. (Blue or water beech, better known as American hornbean, Carpinus
caroliniana, is not a member of this genus.) F’ sylvatica has gray bark and shining leaves that persist
during most of the winter.

The tree scarcely bears fruit before the fiftieth year. When about 250 years old and matured to the fruit-
bearing age, both species yield pleasant edible, three-angled nuts in September, usually in pairs in prickly
involucres, nourishing and enjoyable to both human and animal. The beech tree is used in ornamental
planting for its symmetrical form.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, astringent, antiseptic.

Usrs: Beech is a medicinal tree of internal and external value. The bark and leaves contain effective
substance for action of the stomach, ulcers, liver, kidney, bladder, and the weakening inflammation of
dysentery. Beech is among the herbal tree medications for improving conditions of diabetes. The leaves
are soothing to the nerves and stomach and are astringent. As a tonic, used to clean and tone the entire
system and improve appetite.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the crushed leaves or ‘4 teaspoonful of the granulated bark to 1 cup of boiling
water, 3-4 cups daily.

EXTERNALLY: Culpeper: “The water found in the hollow places of decaying beeches will cure both man
and beast of any scurf, scap, or running tetter if they wash there with.”

The leaf tea is antiseptic, cleansing, cooling, and healing to old sores, feverish swellings, or skin
diseases. Bathe often with the fresh tea or apply the boiled leaves. Can be applied directly or made into
an ointment by boiling in coconut or other suitable oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration of the nuts for epilepsy, headache, hydrophobia, vertigo.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia beech tree is called buk (pronounced “book’). Medically the Russians
use creosote, distilled from beech tar, as antiseptic, cleansing, disinfectant. The odor is very aggressive,
and when given internally for catarrh of the lungs, throat, etc., it is combined with more acceptable tasting
herbs. Also used widely for industrial and commercial purposes.

----- PAGE 31 -----
BEECHDROPS

Epifagus americanus, Orobanche virginiana

COMMON NAME: Cancer root.

FEATURES: A parasite of the family Orobanchaceae (broomrape family). The name cancer root is applied
to several of the root parasites but more specifically to the beech-drops or cancer drops of the beech tree
roots.

The low wiry plant has pale brown, dull red, or light brown stems usually marked with fine brown
purple lines. The stem has leaf scales but no leaves. The root is scaly and tuberous. Altogether the taste is
disagreeably astringent. The August and September flowers are white in the upper corolla, about 1
centimeter long, striped with brown-purple, and sterile; the less conspicuous lower flowers bear seeds.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, stems, root.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent.

Uses: This plant has been used by folk medicine and homeopaths for cancer, hence the name is commonly

known as cancer root. It has other attributes, especially for asthma, and is valuable in the treatment of

obstinate ulcers of the mouth or stomach, and diarrhea.

Dose: Mainly a folk medicine, the amount to be taken is not mentioned in herbal practice in English or

Russian literature. Unless given by persons of experience, it is best prescribed by the medical profession.
Further research is needed both in North America and abroad. The long-established homeopathic

practice makes use of its properties in the form of extracts and tinctures.

EXTERNALLY: Of use for all dermatitis inflammations, broken or unbroken skin conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant in full flower for diarrhea, gonorrhea, headaches,

palpitations.

----- PAGE 32 -----
BETH ROOT

Trillium pendulum, Trillium erectum

COMMON NAMES: Birth root, wake-robin, Indian balm, American ground lily.

FEATURES: Trillium is a genus of the family Liliaceae, common to temperate North America and eastern
Asia. This flowering herb has twenty-five to thirty perennial species that thrive in the acid mold of rich,
moist woods.

The root has the faint fragrance of turpentine and a peculiar aromatic and sweetish astringent taste when
first chewed, but becomes bitter and acid, causing salivation. Its shape is remindful of the popular ginseng
root. The simple stems range for 3 to 30 inches high, rising from the apex of a blunt tuberlike rhizome —
1% inches thick. The leaves are 2-15 inches long and are net-veined and somewhat mottled. The three-
petaled flowers with three sepals are identified in May and June. Varying in color according to species,
they range from white to pink and sometimes rose-maroon, red-brown, purple, green, yellow-green, or
bright yellow. The fruit is a pink or red three- or six-angled berry.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, antiseptic, alterative, pectoral.

Uses: The Native Americans used beth root as an aid to lessen pain and difficulty at the time of delivery,
hence the synonym, birth root. Taken internally, beth root has a soothing tonic effect. The properties of
Trillium are due to its active principle; it is used for all forms of hemorrhages, such as bleeding from the
nose, mouth, stomach, bowels, and bladder.

In female disorders it is especially valuable as a general astringent to the uterine organs and should be
used in fluor albus, menorrhagia (profuse menstruation). It is considered almost a specific for female
weakness and leukorrhea, or whites.

Dose: Useful in pulmonary conditions, beth root with the accompanying herb slippery elm (Ulmus rubra)
and a small portion of lobelia seed (Lobelia inflata), in powder form 10-20 grains.

One teaspoonful of the powdered root boiled in | pint of milk is an expedient help in diarrhea and
dysentery. For the above mentioned, | teaspoonful of the powdered root to | cup of boiling water, 2—3
cups a day, or more often in wineglassful amounts as case requires.

EXTERNALLY: The root made into a poultice is very useful in tumors, indolent and offensive ulcers, stings
of insects, and to restrain gangrene. The leaves boiled in lard make a good external application in ulcers
and tumors.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh root for bladder (catarrh of), climacteric, diabetes,
dysentery, fainting (with flooding), fibroma (hemorrhages from), hemorrhages (postpartum, antepartum),
menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, writer’s cramp.

----- PAGE 33 -----
BILBERRY

Vaccinium myrtillus

COMMON NAMES: Huckleberry, whortleberry, hurrleberry.

FEATURES: Bilberry, any of the several species of shrubs belonging to the heath family Ericaceae, genus
Vaccinium. Some members are found in the cooler areas of both Eurasia and North America. One of the
principal species is V myrtillus, known simply as bilberry, which is found in acid soil in forests, heaths,
rocky barrens, bog, and tundra.

The blueberrylike bilberry is an edible fruit growing in twos or threes at the base of the leaves instead
of in clusters terminating the branches as in true blueberries. The seeds resemble currants in appearance,
with a dark blue or black color. The leaves are obovate, about 1 inch long, upper surface dark green and
shiny. Depending on location, May through July is the flowering season for the reddish pink, white, or
purplish blossoms.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, refrigerant, astringent.

Uses: The fresh berries are enjoyed by most as a cooling, healthful dessert. For medication out of season,
the dried berries have proven beneficial to cool feverish liver, and for stomach conditions; they are
arresting in vomiting and a useful agent for dropsy and gravel.

To make your own private stock, place 2—3 handfuls of bilberry in a bottle and pour a good brandy
over them. Secure with a tight-fitting cap or cork. The longer the tincture stays the more powerful a
medicine will this berry spirit be.

Violent, continuous diarrhea accompanied by great pain, sometimes with loss of blood, is stopped by
taking 1 tablespoonful of bilberry brandy in 4 pint of water; may be repeated in 8-10 hours. For diarrhea,
dysentery, and derangements of the bowels, a decoction of the leaf tea will bring relief. Also as a gargle
for sore throat, and feminine hygiene for leukorrhea.

At one time bilberries were used in the treatment of scurvy in Norway and other northern countries.

Dose: Of the leaves, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water. In The Herbalist, by J. E. Meyer: “A
mixture of equal parts of Bilberry leaves, Thyme, and Strawberry leaves makes an excellent tea.” Of the

----- PAGE 34 -----
tincture, 10-30 drops, varying according to severity of the case and age.
EXTERNALLY: The tea decoction is used for sores, wounds, and ulcers: apply the freshly made tea freely.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chernica (bilberry) in Russian folk medicine is used mainly as an astringent for
gastric colitis and other stomach conditions. It may be of interest to know that in Russia bilberry has a
well-established reputation as being similar to insulin for sugar diabetes. Used as fresh or dried berries
and leaves as tea, decoction, syrup, and for poultice. Clinically: Research and clinical experiments
confirm value as first recognized by folk medicine for practical home use. Extracts and tinctures are given
clinically alone or combined with other suitable herbs when a tonic and astringent are required. Dose, 1—
2 teaspoonfuls to | cup of boiling water, taken warm in %2-cup amounts four times a day on an empty
stomach. Industrial: A home and industrial leather dye of brown and yellow colors. Combined with other
chemicals to produce violet, red, green, and blue for wool, cotton, and linen material.

----- PAGE 35 -----
BIRCH
Betula alba

COMMON NAMES: White birch, cherry birch, sweet birch, mountain mahogany, spice birch.

FEATURES: Nearly forty species in the Betulaceae family of trees and shrubs are given the common name
of birch.

This is an ancient tree; in fossil form it goes back to the upper Cretaceous, and remains abundant and
widespread in the northern hemisphere in both the Old World and the New. In North America it ranges
from the Arctic Circle to Florida and Texas; usually found in woods; domestically in landscape decor
throughout the United States.

Birch, an eye-catching tree, reaches heights of 45—50 feet. It may be white, yellow, brown, or almost
black; frequently the trunk is smooth in young trees, later becoming marked with horizontal lines. The
alternate leaves are characteristically simple, bright green, and toothed. The flowers develop in wormlike
catkins of two types. The staminate appear near the ends of the branches in late summer or autumn and
elongate the following spring into pendulous structures, exposing the brownish bracts. The minute flowers
are located in the axils of these. Seen in the temperate zones in April and May. The ovaries mature into
minute winged nutlets that are scattered in autumn or may be seen flecked on the winter snow.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SoLvents: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, diaphoretic.

Uses: As a food and medicine; Native Americans tapped the birch for its sap as a beverage and syrup.
Oil of wintergreen is distilled from the inner bark and twigs.

The common birch has a purpose in our family of medicinal trees. When we see them used for
landscaping we may like to remember, with pleasure, their additional, healing properties.

Traditionally the birch is appropriate in treatment of diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, and all maladies of
the alimentary tract. The natural properties are cleansing to the blood, and it is used specifically for
rheumatism, dropsy, gout, stones in the kidneys and bladder, and to expel worms.

Dose: A teaspoonful of the leaves or bark or both infused in | cup of boiling water for 15 minutes, 3—5
cups daily; mixes well with other herbal teas.

----- PAGE 36 -----
EXTERNALLY: Drink the tea freely when troubled with boils or skin eruptions. The oil of birch is applied
to the skin for eczema and cutaneous diseases; the tea is effective when gargled for canker and mouth
sores.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Belaya berezci, birch, is inseparable from the Russian people, as it is their most
poetic tree. The birch is known to every Russian through history, literature, poetry, songs, art, and fairy
tales. They consider it the most attractive and beautiful of all trees in the world. Besides having emotional
and spiritual popularity, the association of birch with folk medicine goes back to the oldest tale of
Russian history. Folk medicine: For centuries folk medicine has used birch in many preparations for
therapeutic results, long before clinical recognition and approval in 1834. One of the serious conditions
being cardiac dropsy. Birch buds: Gathered and preserved with vodka (nastoika) for out-of-season use
as an invaluable home medication. This is used for colds, pain, rheumatic conditions, stomach ulcers and
pain, vitality, blood purifying, appetizer, avitaminosis, liver and gallbladder, to dissolve stones of kidney
and bladder, and for many other individual complaints. Birch charcoal: Used as an absorbent in cases of
poisoning, gas bloating, and indigestion. Birch sap: In the spring is prepared as tea and is considered a
vitamin treat as a tonic for anemia, gout, scurvy, rheumatism, etc. Externally: Extract of leaves, buds, and
bark is applied to ulcers, wounds, boils, eczema, and all skin conditions of broken and unbroken surfaces;
rheumatic pain, swelling, albuminuria.

Russian history and life are unthinkable without the steam bath or banya. Once a week this is the
accepted routine. These stouthearted people prepare the room by placing leaves over hot rocks. This
expels the cleansing vapors of moist heat as hot and as long as the person’s health will stand, and
Russians excel in physical endurance. When perspiration is established, if the leaves were not placed
over the rocks, a beresovy venic, birch broom is used to vigorously thrash the body. They know any
trouble will be taken care of, whatever it is, if the person can stand the heat and the thrashing. In our
condition we can do something similar, but not as severe. Boil 2-5 pounds of leaves with enough water to
cover for 1—2 hours in a pillowcase or cotton cloth; place this in the bathtub along with enough hot water
to reach the waist when seated. Drench the shoulders, neck, back, face, and arms for as long as you feel
comfortable, using the bag of leaves like a sponge. In this case your heart will be your doctor; if you feel
weak, or relaxed to the point of falling asleep, get out. This type of herbal bath done once or twice a week
for thirty times consecutively will prove most beneficial for internal and external complaints, as the
proper function for both will be improved.

----- PAGE 37 -----
BITTERROOT

Apocynum androsaemifolium

COMMON NAMES: Dogbane, milkweed, westernwall.

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America, growing in many of the states and Canada, depending on the
species, of which there are sixty in North America.

The large milky root is quite bitter (the bitter outside slips off when boiling, as for food), though
edible, starchy but nutritious, and was an important food among Native Americans. Bitterroot is
perennial, almot stemless, with a rosette of oblong fleshy leaves. The flower appears in the center, is rose
or white colored, and generally remains open only in the sunshine from May to August.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, though more especially water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, diaphoretic, tonic, laxative, expectorant.

UsEs: Bitterroot is a celebrated remedy among Native Americans for the treatment of venereal diseases
and is regarded as almost infallible. Has been recommended in the treatment of Bright’s disease. It is also
highly praised for rheumatic gout of the joints and has been known to relieve cardiac dropsy when
everything else has failed. Parkinson quotes it as a “sovereign remedy against all poisons and against the
bites of mad dogs”; hence it derives it’s name dogbane.

Bitterroot will help to rid the system of other impurities, including worms, and is influential in treating
diabetes.

Bitterroot is a very bitter stimulating tonic, acting chiefly on the liver, emptying the gall ducts, securing
a free discharge of bile, and thereby causing activity of the bowels. For jaundice, gallstones, and chronic
sluggish conditions of the liver bitterroot is unequaled. It should not be employed in irritable conditions
of the stomach.

When used as an alternative to act on the liver, or for dyspepsia, a dose would be 10 grains twice a day
(5—6 drops of the extract). This remedy has been employed by some practitioners for nervous headache,
for which it is said to be one of the most prompt and effective remedies in use. Large doses cause
vomiting but tendency to gripe can be eliminated by adding peppermint (Mentha piperita), calamus
(sweet flag), fennel (Foeniculum officinale), or other carminatives. Take 2—5 grains thrice daily as a

----- PAGE 38 -----
general tonic.

EXTERNALLY: In the spring the milk of bitterroot will remove unsightly warts (if the circulation is active
within the system) if applied fresh two or three times daily. Be sure to apply only on the raised area. You
will notice a burning and, perhaps, swelling; this is to be expected. If the area forms a scab, let it drop off
of its own accord; underneath will be a smooth, unelevated surface. (Do not regard moles as warts.)

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture from the root for diarrhea, dropsy, nausea, neuralgia of the face,
vomiting, wandering rheumatism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: American bitterroot does not grow wild in Russia. After extensive research on
medical purpose and cultivation, they commercially cultivate kendir konoplevy (bitterroot) in the
European part of Russia and West Siberia. In all herbal and agronomical publications they encourage and
promote the use of the rhizome and root for medical aid. Dr. A. Nelubin in his Pharmacography (Medical
Botanics) first described American bitterroot in 1850. This credit aroused interest and was clinically
proved in many cases of heart disease and dropsy. Until approximately 1930 it was imported from the
United States but since this time plantations have been cultivated that yield an estimated 500-700 pounds
of dried material for each acre. Clinically: No side effects can be found from the proper administration of
bitterroot. Clinically used in many cases of heart deficiencies, high blood pressure, cardiac sclerosis, and
blood circulation disturbance of second and third degree. It is prescribed in ampules only.

----- PAGE 39 -----
BITTERSWEET

Solanum dulcamara

COMMON NAMES: Bittersweet, nightshade, violet bloom, felonwort, mortal, fever twig.

FEATURES: Naturalized in the United States from native Europe and Asia. The zigzag, sprawling, slender
vine climbs along trees, hedges, thickets, and fences, especially in moist places, seldom exceeding 7 or 8
feet in length.

In June and July the purplish or blue flowers can be seen arranged in cymes that are succeeded in the
autumn by attractive bright red juicy berries that hang on the vine for several months. The attraction is for
decoration only, they should not be eaten. The leaves are acute and generally smooth, of a dull green
color. When fresh the leaf stems have an unpleasant odor, which is lost by drying. The root is long and
almost orange-colored. Twigs and root bark should be collected after the foliage has fallen. Taste is first
bitter, then sweet.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, bark, twigs.
SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diaphoretic, discutient, diuretic, deobstruent, narcotic, resolvent.

Uses: Known to the original people of North America, folk medicine, and herbalists for skin conditions
in which the symptom is obvious, but the source of the real culprit is usually largely in the glandular
system and bloodstream.

It is serviceable in cutaneous diseases and syphilitic conditions, as it excites the venereal functions,
and is in fact capable of wide application and use in leprosy, teeter and all skin diseases, eczema,
scrofula, etc. For rheumatic and cachectic affections, ill-conditioned ulcers, glandular swellings, and in
obstructed menstruation it also serves a good purpose.

Dr. O. P. Brown (1875): “The Complete Herbalist regard this plant as important as any in the Herbal
Kingdom, and too little justice is done to it by those under whose care the sick are intrusted.” Recent
information from Rodale Health Bulletin, September 1966: Dr. Kupchan said, “We’re using Folk
Medicine and Herbalism as source of leads. One of the plants we’re studying, Solanum dulcamara, also
called ‘Bitter sweet’ or Woody nightshade, was recommended by Galen in a.D. 150 as a treatment for
Tumours, Cancer and Warts.” He added, “A substance from red milkweed or ‘Cancerillo’ used for
centuries by Central American Indians to treat Cancer inhibits the growth of lab-cultured human cancer

----- PAGE 40 -----
tissue.” When asked whether the cure for cancer would come from the greenhouse rather than the
laboratory, Dr. Kupchan answered, “There probably won’t be a single cancer cure, but cancer cures for
the different types of cancer.” He told reporters that the possibility of cancer treatment from plants should
not be overlooked, particularly since “the synthetic medicinal chemists have almost exhausted the
possibilities for anti-cancer drugs.” Most herbalists combine bittersweet with other herbal agents as
individual case requires.

CAUTION: Large doses produce vomiting, faintness, vertigo, convulsive muscular movements, dryness
and constrictions of the throat, thirst, diarrhea, weakened heart action, paralysis.

Dose: Boil 1 teaspoonful of cut or powdered Solanum in | pint of water for a few minutes, cover and
steep for % hour, | teaspoonful in | cup of boiling water as required. Of the tincture alone, 10—20 drops
in water three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: One pound of the cut bark of bittersweet slowly heated in 1 pound of lard for 8 hours
makes an excellent ointment to scatter painful tumors and is one of the best preparations available for
application to ulcers, irritated skin conditions, piles, burns, scalds, etc., involving pain and social
embarrassment.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Not to be confused with deadly nightshade (belladonna) or with climbing
bittersweet (Celastrus). Tincture prepared from fresh green stems and leaves, gathered just before
flowering.

Uses: Adenitis, angina faucium, aphonia, bladder (affections of), blepharophthalmia, catarrh, cholera,
crusta lactea, diarrhea, dropsy, dysentery, emaciation, exostosis, hemorrhage, hemorrhoids, hayfever,
meningitis, myalgia, myelitis, nettlerash, neuralgia, ophthalmia, paralysis, pemphigus, rheumatism,
scarlatina, scrofula, stammering, stiff neck, tibia (pains in), tongue (affections of), tonsillitis, tumors,
typhoid, urine (difficulty in passing, incontinence of), warts, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Several kinds of the bittersweet family known as paslen kisoladky (Solanum
dulcamara, Solanum lacitum) are used for medical and industrial purposes. Uses: Home medicine for
many families favors palsenovaya nastoika (herbs with vodka) for heart disease, a few drops at a time.
One to two cups of the tea taken a mouthful at a time has proven successful for skin and hair diseases and
very effective for worms. Clinically: In use of disturbances of the liver, spleen, gallbladder, catarrh,
asthma, and chronic skin disease.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Solanum nigrum (garden nightshade) and their native Solanum
xanthocarpum, which in Indian is kantakari, kateli, katai—and the English name, Indian solanum—grow
throughout India and Pakistan. They find the whole plant useful as expectorant, bitter stomachic, aperient,
diuretic, astringent, anthelmintic, alterative, anodyne, febrifuge. The root used for fever, cough, asthma,
flatulence, costiveness, dropsy, heart disease, chest pain, gonorrhea, dysuria, stones in the bladder, liver
and spleen enlargement. Given in decoctions of 2-2 ounces, or its juice in doses of 2-2 drams; also as a
confection.

----- PAGE 41 -----
BLACKBERRY

Rubus villosus

COMMON NAMES: Dewberry, bramble berry, gout berry.

FEATURES: There are numerous species of Rubus (blackberry); two types are recognized—the trailing
blackberries or dewberries and the erect blackberries. However, both in the wild and under cultivation
there are many intermediate forms. This particular variety is native to the northern United States and
Canada, other areas being central and western Europe.

The blackberry has a root that lives for many years and a top that grows one year and fruits the next
with juicy, black, delicious berries. The berries adhere to the core when ripe rather than separating from
the receptacle as does the ripe raspberry. This trailing vine dies back to the ground when out of season.
Spring finds new, prickly tips forming rootlets in sandy or dry soil. The flowers are white.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic.

Uses: As a remedial agent blackberries are classed as astringents and are far more serviceable
medicinally than most of our generation is aware of. The berries were used as food and medicince by
Native Americans, and today we know by their experience, and by scientific proof, that the plant is
exceedingly valuable in chronic diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, and summer complaints of children and is
often the only thing that gets results.

A decoction of the root or leaves or both (the root being more astringent than the leaves) may be used
freely, four to five times a day.

Being pleasing to the taste, this agent is useful in excessive menstruation and very effective in fevers
and hot distempers of the body, head, eyes, and other parts.

The berries have cordial properties and can be made into aspics, brandy, jam, jelly, and also vinegar.
Dose: | teaspoonful of the root or leaves to 1 cup of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes; 3-4 cups a day
depending on age and condition. Of the tincture 2-1 dram, three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves, bruised and applied outwardly, will act as an astringent to hemorrhoids. For

sore mouth and inflamed throat, gargle the tea of the roots and leaves often; they can be used green or
dried.

----- PAGE 42 -----
BLACK COHOSH

Cimicifuga racemosa

COMMON NAMES: Bugbane, rattleroot, squawroot, snakeroot, black snakeroot.

FEATURES: The plant is a genus of the crowfoot family, comprising about twenty species, native to North
America, Asia, and Europe.

The best-known American species, because of its medicinal properties, is the bugbane (Cimicifuga
racemosa). Cimicifuga, from the Latin “to drive away,” so named because certain species are used to
drive away bugs and other insects. Can also be used as an antidote for the venom of serpents. Black
cohosh can be seen in upland woods and hillsides. A perennial herb with a large knotty root, having a few
short roots. The stem is simple, smooth, and furrowed, 3—9 feet high, with irregular leaves. The small
white flowers are numerous in wandlike racemes, flowering from May to August. The root contains a
resin known as cimicifugin (macrotin), starch, gum, tannic acid, etc.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENT: Boiling water enhances the properties of the root but dissolves only partially; alcohol
dissolves wholly.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmodic, sedative (arterial and
nervous), cardiac stimulant (safer than Digitalis), emmenagogue.

Usrs: Native American women knew of black cohosh for relieving pain during menstrual period and used
its properties extensively during childbirth.

Dr. Young introduced Cimicifuga racemosa to the medical world in 1831. It was adapted as a cardiac
tonic in fatty heart, chorea, acute and chronic bronchitis, rheumatism, neuralgia, hysteria, phthisis,
dyspepsia, amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, and seminal emission. It is also admirable treatment for scarlet
fever, measles, and smallpox. Regarded by some physicians as one of the best agents in use for whooping
cough.

2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

2 tablespoonfuls of syrup of squill (sea onion)

Dose: 15-30 drops every three or four hours

The above tinctures have been successfully employed in Saint Vitus’ dance and in asthma, delirium

----- PAGE 43 -----
tremens, consumption, acute rheumatism, scrofula, and leukorrhea. Large doses cause vertigo, tremors,
reduced pulse, vomiting, prostration.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: The tincture should be made from the fresh root, or that which has recently been dried; 2 ounces to
4 pint of alcohol (96 proof) taken 5—15 drops four times a day. As a tea 1 teaspoonful of the cut root to 1
cup of boiling water three times a day, or 15-30 drops of the tincture added to 1 cup of water, sweetened
with honey.

EXTERNALLY: The bruised root was used by the Native Americans as an antidote for snakebites, applied
to the wound; and the juice, in very small amounts, was taken internally.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Cimicifuga dahurica, not poetic in name, but known by all aborigines of the Far
East and Mongolia as klopogon daursky or bug chaser daurian. Lately Russians recognize the medical
value of native American black cohosh. Clinically: The extract or tincture, straight or in combination with
other herbs has of late been discovered and clinically approved for cardial asthma, high blood pressure,
anemia of the intestines, and as a tonic for the central nervous system. They vividly stress that even in
large doses it does not induce intoxication. Folk medicine: Used as a tea decoction and poultice for high
blood pressure, headache, tonic, sedative, hysteria, neuralgia, asthma, and migraine, in female disorders,
painful menstruation, and to ease labor pain.

----- PAGE 44 -----
BLACK ROOT

Veronicastrum virgin icum

COMMON NAMES: Culver’s physic, tall speedwell, leptandra, Culver’s root.

FEATURES: Black root is indigenous to North America and is from the figwort family.

The soil in which the plant is grown significantly affects its virtues. It can be seen in new soil, moist
woods, swamps, etc. Limestone soil improves the medicinal value, assuring the user of its attributed
influence. Taste: very bitter acrid. Autumn of the second year is the proper time for gathering. The dried
root is the most accepted procedure (fresh root being too irritable), but it has to be used with extreme
care.

The plant obtains heights of 2-5 feet with simple, straight, smooth, herbaceous stems. Leaves are short
and finely serrated, whorled in fours to sevens. The flowers are white, nearly sessile, and very numerous.
Calyx: four-parted corolla, small and nearly white. Stamens: two. The fruit is a many-seeded capsule.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetocathartic, cholagogue, alterative, tonic, antiseptic.

Uses: Black root is a long-established Native American remedy. As white man’s medicine it was
introduced as a medicinal agent by Dr. Culver and is admirably called Culver’s physic.

The leading significance of black root is as it acts on the intestines in chronic constipation when there
is insufficiency of biliary flow, and it is very much used in chronic hepatic diseases. It operates mildly
and without depressing the system, as is so common to other purgative medicines.

In fevers it removes the morbid matter from the bowels without weakening their tone or leaving behind
that poisonous sting so often remaining after the use of calomel. It is used very effectively in the care of
pleurisy and also in some forms of dyspepsia. As a cathartic in dysentery it is one of the best medicines
known when given in moderate doses. In such cases combine with a little rhubarb root (Rheum
palmatum) and give the decoction in doses of 3-4 tablespoons, repeating every three hours until
passively relaxed.

Formula for Liver Disorders

1 ounce of black root (Veronicastrum virginicum)
2 ounces of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

2 ounces of senna (Cassia marilandica)

2 pints of distilled or boiled water.

Boil until reduced to 1 pint. Take 2 tablespoons three or four times a day, increasing the quantity if it fails
to operate gently or decreasing if it operates too much. Bowel action should not be more than perceptible.

In this you have a herbal medicine superior to most of the popular preparations and one that has been
used for generations.

Dose: Leptandrin is the extract made from the root; it should be used in lesser amounts, from 4 to 1 grain,
adjusting according to age and case. Dose of the powder, as a cathartic, 20-40 grains.

----- PAGE 45 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of resinoid leptandrin, tincture of second-year fresh root, trituration of
dried root for ascites, bilious attack, bilious fever, constipation, diarrhea, dysentery, dyspepsia, headache,
jaundice, liver (affections of), remittent fever (infantile), yellow fever.

----- PAGE 46 -----
BLACK WALNUT

Juglans nigra

FEATURES: Six species of the walnut, genus Juglans, are native to the United States. Black walnut is
among them, widely distributed in the eastern states and extending to adjacent Canada. These deciduous
hardwoods have rough furrowed bark, alternate pinnately compounded leaves with a distinctive odor
when bruised, and greenish flowers, the male in drooping catkins.

Black walnut is one of the best-known, largest, and most valuable native hardwoods. Though not
plentiful, the tree grows rapidly in mixed forests on rich, moist, well-drained soil such as is found in
valleys. It sometimes exceeds 100 feet in height, with trunks 3 feet in diameter. Planted for roadside
shade, shelter belts, and as ornamentals.

The wood is figured beautifully and used as paneling, for cabinet making, and in salad bowls.

The nut is a popular food for candy, ice cream, and cake flavoring. The husk does not split open like
that of the hickory nut; it is covered with a green pulp coating, while on the tree, that turns black when on
the ground and in storage. This outside pulp is used for dyeing and tanning. If you have ever gathered or
hulled black walnuts you will recall the lingering walnut stains.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves, rind, green nut.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Vermifuge, tonic.

Uses: Materially, scrofula has had harmonious results with 1 cup of the leaves boiled in | quart of water,
made fresh daily and used often, with honey. This should be continued for several months. The dry leaves
may be used when the green cannot be had. A strong tincture of the leaves and nuts is highly extolled as a
remedy in the treatment of bilious and cramp colic.

Dose: |—2 teaspoonfuls every twenty or thirty minutes until relieved. Also a decoction as a vermifuge is
effective. The rind of the green fruit removes ringworm and tetter, and is given in diphtheria. The distilled
fresh walnuts in spirit alcohol will calm hysteria, cerebal, and pregnant vomiting.

The black walnut is one of the foods rich in manganese, important for nerves, brain, and cartilage.
Nutritionally, the Missouri black walnut is of high manganese content. All nut fruits should be fresh, as
rancid oil is detrimental.

One teaspoonful of the inner bark or leaves and rind, cut small or granulated, to 1 cup of boiling water.
Drink 1—4 cups a day often, a large mouthful at a time.

----- PAGE 47 -----
HOMOEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of leaves and of rind of green fruits for acne, anus (burning in),
auxiliary glands (suppuration of), chancre, ecthyma, eyes (pain over), favus, flatulence, headache, herpes,
herpes progenitalis, levitation (sensation of), menorrhagia, purpura, ringworm, scurvy, spleen (pain in),
syphilis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Black walnut is known in Russia by the common name of Greek nut (Juglans
regia), which grows in Caucasia and the middle Asian area. Uses: Long before vitamins were discovered
folk medicine knew by experience and results that botanical treatment was reliable. In Russia they
prepared a walnut jam in such a way that 90 percent of the vitamins were still intact. This pleasing food
as body repairing material is now known to contain a rich supply of vitamin C, carotene, and many
important minerals. As a tea (external and internal) in home medical use for scrofula, ulcers, wounds,
gargle, and rickets. Externally: Since the seventeenth century Russian military hospitals have used this
well-established folk medicine for cleansing and quick-healing medication of wounds and ulcers. Now
clinically it is used for many kinds of skin diseases, especially tuberculosis.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: By the local Indian name akhort or aks hot, the black walnut would
be a stranger to North Americans. Some of the uses are familiar, with advantageous additions. Bark:
Astringent, anthelmintic, detergent, lactifuge. Successfully used as a bark decoction in skin diseases.
Leaves: Astringent, alterative, tonic, detergent. A decoction of the leaves is specific in scrofula, sores,
herpes, eczema, syphilis, and intestinal worms. Green hull: (separated from the nut) Anthelmintic,
antisyphilitic. Kernel: Given in heartburn, colic, dysentery, and considered an aphrodisiac. Immature nut
rich in vitamin C. Walnut oil: Mild laxative cholagogue, anthelmintic. Especially effective for tapeworm
and as a dressing for leprous skin disease.

----- PAGE 48 -----
BLOODROOT

Sanguinaria canadensis

COMMON NAMES: Red puccoon, Indian plant, tetterwort, sanguinaria.

FEATURES: Indigenous to eastern North America, bloodroot, a monotypic genus of the Papaveraceae
family.

The small herb is often difficult to find in its woodland home, where sheltered places and leaf mold are
ideal for its survival. The thick, palmately lobed leaf is lapped around the bud, which swiftly outgrows its
protector, loses its two fugacious sepals, and opens into a star-shaped flower, one to each stem, with
several fleshy white petals and a mass of golden stamens in the center.

The flower closes at night or on shady days and is among the early spring flowers. Often cultivated in
gardens. The leaves continue to grow during the summer, becoming nearly 7 inches long. The seeds are
contained in spindle-shaped capsules.

The whole plant is very brittle and succulent and when broken, especially at its thick, fleshy root, an
acrid red juice bleeds from the divided sections. The root is about the size of a man’s little finger. The
taste is bitter and harsh. The whole plant is medicinal, the root being the part chiefly used. Age and
moisture impair the properties.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Systemic emetic, stimulating expectorant, sialagogue, alterative, tonic, diuretic,
febrifuge.

Usss: Used by the aborigines for all blood conditions and as a stain for their skin and dye for decoration.
The action of bloodroot varies according to administration. In small doses it stimulates the digestive
organs, acting as a stimulant and tonic; in large doses it is an arterial sedative. The properties are useful
in chronic bronchitis, laryngitis, croup, asthma, whooping cough, and any complaints of the respiratory
organs. The tincture has been used with success in dyspepsia and dropsy of the chest and in cases of
gastrointestinal catarrh or enlarged, morbid, or jaundiced liver conditions. Bloodroot excites the action of
this large glandular organ whose correct function is so necessary to the complete physical and mental
makeup of our everyday life.

CAUTION: Use only as directed. Large doses are toxic.

Dose: | level teaspoonful of grated root steeped in | pint of boiling water for 2 hour. Cool, strain, take a
teaspoonful three to six times a day. Powder as an emetic, 10-20 grains; powder as a stimulant and
expectorant, 3-5 grains; powder used as an alterative, 2-2 grains. Of the tincture, 20-60 drops.

EXTERNALLY: For leukorrhea and hemorrhoids, injections of strong tea is excellent. As an external
remedy the powdered root or tincture acts energetically in cases of fungoid tumors, ringworm, tetter,
warts, etc., at the same time to be taken internally as mentioned. Nasal polypus is often treated by using a
snuff of powdered bloodroot.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: The resin, leaves, seeds, capsules, powdered root, and expressed juice and
tincture of fresh root for alcoholism, aphonia, asthma, breast (tumor of), bronchitis, cancer, catarrh, chest

----- PAGE 49 -----
(pain in), cold, croup, deafness, diphtheria, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, ear (polypus of), flushes,
climacteric, gleet, granular lids, hemoptysis, headache, influenza, keratitis, liver cough, menstruation
(breasts painful during), nails (ulceration of), neuralgia, edema of glottis, ophthalmia, pharyngitis, phthisis
Florida, physometra, pneumonia (acute), polypus, pregnancy (affections during), pyrosis, quinsy,
rheumatism, rhus poisoning, shoulder (rheumatism of), smell (illusions of, loss of), stomach (necrosis of),
syphilis, tinnitus, tumors, vomiting, whitlow, whooping cough.

----- PAGE 50 -----
BLUE COHOSH
Caulophyllum thalictroides

COMMON NAMES: Pappoose root, squawroot, blue ginseng, yellow ginseng.

FEATURES: This handsome perennial grows in all parts of the United States near running streams and in
low moist rich grounds. The plant is 1-3 feet high, purple when young, with leaves 1—3 inches long.

May or June finds the yellowish green flowers in bloom, which ripen to seeds in August, these being
used for a decoction that closely resembles coffee. Its active principle is caulophyllin.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, diuretic, emmenagogue, demulcent, sedative, oxytocic, spasmodic,
dysmenorrhea, diaphoretic, parturient.

Uses: The established native American uses were for cramps during difficult menstruation periods,
promoting the flow and administering relief. It is especially valuable and has been found in many cases to
almost entirely relieve the patient of pain in childbirth and promote prompt delivery. For efficacy, a tea of
blue cohosh should be used for the last three or four weeks of pregnancy. A decoction is also useful for
colic (thus the common name of pappoose root), cramps, hysterics, and rheumatism.

In their book Vitalogy (1925) Drs. Wood and Ruddock found blue cohosh “especially valuable in
epileptic fits and ulcerations of the mouth and throat.” Among other therapeutic properties, blue cohosh
contains the following vital minerals: potassium, magnesium, calcium, iron, silicon, and phosphorus,
which helps to alkalize the blood and urine.

Dose: Steep 1 ounce of the root in | pint of boilding water; dose, 2 tablespoonfuls every 3 hours. For
nervous and sluggish cough it will act as an expectorant, for spasms it may be given more freely.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture or trituration of root for abortion, after pains, amenorrhea, barrenness,
bearingdown pains, chloasma, cholera morbus, dysmenorrhea, false conception, feet (affections of),
gonorrhea, hands (affections of), intramammary pain, labor (abnormal, false pains of), leukorrhea,
menstruation (disorders of), ovarian neuralgia, pityriasis, pregnancy (disorders of), rheumatic gout,
rheumatism, uterine spasm, uterine atony.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: On the Russian Amur River and Sakhalin Island the same family, called
Caulophyllum robustum, or in Russian, steblelist moshny, is found growing wild. Blue cohosh has many
good medical properties, including antibacterial properties for tuberculosis. Taspin (acetan) is used in
proportions of 1—1,000,000. This is a strong irritant and limited strictly to clinical use for female disorder
and as a tonic for blood circulation. Further experimental research required.

----- PAGE 51 -----
BLUE FLAG

Tris versicolor

COMMON NAMES: Iris, flag lily, liver lily, water flag, snake lily, flower de-luce.

FeaTurREs: This lily-like flower is recognized by most of us for beauty alone. About eight hundred
species belonging to more than fifty genera have been described from temperate and tropical climates,
mostly from South Africa and tropical America.

The common wild iris or flag Uris pseudacorus) is also found in the eastern United States and is
common in Europe. Several wild species are found in the United States. They are characterized by two
rows of leaves, the outer of which fit over and protect the inner. The flowers are various shades of blue
and purplish-blue, with yellowish markings at the base of the sepals, flowering from May through July. In
some areas the iris is cultivated for ornamental purposes and perfume, and some species have been used
as food in countries where they are native.

Beauty is not the only quality possessed by the iris. The underlying tissue of the root and rhizome
provides corrective influence on the human tissue. The root and rhizome should be sliced transversely,
dried and placed in a covered dark container in a dark place. This will preserve the oleoresin, which is
called irisin, its active principle.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, cathartic, sialagogue, vermifuge, diuretic, resolvent.

Uses: From the booklet Early Uses of California Plants, by Edward K. Balls: “It is said that long ago
the Yokia squaws of Mendocino Country wrapped their babies in the soft green leaves of J. douglasiana
while on the hot dry hillsides collecting Manzanita berries. This wrapping retarded perspiration and
saved the babies from extreme thirst.”

Blue flag has a special influence on the lymphatic glands, and active, pure lymphatic circulation is
necessary to longevity. Recognized for endrocrine physiological active fluid in thyroid imbalance,
scrofula, and is regarded by some practitioners as one of the most effective herbal medicines in treatment
of secondary syphilis.

Traditionally a valuable substance in treatment of all diseases of the blood and chronic hepatic, kidney,

----- PAGE 52 -----
and spleen affections. Has been known to relieve all symptoms of chronic hip disease. It should be
combined with mandrake (Podophyllum peltatum), poke (Phytolacca decandra), black cohosh
(Cimicifuga racemosa), ginseng (Panax quinquefolius), sarsaparilla (Aralia nudicaulis), yellow dock
(Rumex crispus), etc. If it causes salivation do not be apprehensive as it is distinguished from mercurial
salivation by absence of stench, sponginess of the gums, and loosening of the teeth.

In Nature s Healing Agents, Dr. Clymer says it’s one of the very few remedies that has any influence in
correcting milk-colored, clay-colored stools in adults.

Dose: Tincture alone, 10—25 drops in water three times a day. One teaspoonful of the powdered root to 1
pint of boiling water, drink cold, 2—3 tablespoonfuls six times a day, Iridin, 1 grain.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, collected in early spring or autumn; trituration of
resinoid, irisin for anus (fissure of), bilious attack, constipation, crusta lactea, diabetes, diarrhea,
dysentery, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, eczema, fistula, gastrodynia, intermittent headache, impetigo, liver
(affectins of), migraine, neuralgia, nocturnal emissions, pancreas (affections of), parotid glands
(affections of), pregnancy (morning sickness of), psoriasis, rectum (burning in), rheumatism, salivation,
sciatica, vomiting, whitlow, herpes zoster.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kasatik is the Russian name given to the iris with all their fondness and tender
love, of which the true meaning is difficult to convey by translation. Cultivation has been strongly
encouraged. Agro-technology skillfully developed agricultural methods for medicinal, commercial, and
industrial business. It is used for internal and external medicine, cosmetics, perfume, aromatic and flavor
in confectionery; widely used in wine industry; praised highly by gardeners and florists for floral decor.
Clinically: Recognized for bronchitis and teething babies. Folk Medicine: Used medically in Russia for
many serious cases of dropsy when the heart is involved, inflammation of the lungs, angina, calming to
reduce involuntary emission. Root and rhizome used by folk medicine as tea, decoctions, and poultice.
Externally: Successfully used in infected wounds, ulcers, fistula, and to take away freckles.

----- PAGE 53 -----
BLUE VERVAIN

Verbena bastata

COMMON NAMES: Wild hyssop, simpler’s joy, Indian hyssop.

FEATURES: Native to temperate and tropical America, the Mediterranean region, and the Near East;
introduced elsewhere in the Old World.

This complex perennial has 352 known specific and sub-specific natural and artificial hybrids.
Numerous species have been employed medicinally in various localities. The herb reaches heights of 3 or
4 feet, usually has a four-square stalk, has branching limbs, whitish flowers, followed by long slim tassels
of seeds.

Growing usually in dry, hard soils along roadsides and fields. For medicinal purpose vervain should
be collected when in flower, from June to September.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, expectorant, emetic, antiperiodic, nervine, tonic, sudorific,
antispasmodic.

Uses: Vervain expels worms and is a capable agent for all diseases of the spleen and liver. If given in
intermittent fever in a warm infusion of powder, the results are considerable. In all cases of cold, and
obstinate menstruation, it is a most complete and advantageous sudorific.

When the circulation of the blood is weak and languid, it will increase and restore it to proper
operation. The infusion, taken cold, is a good tonic in cases of constitutional debility and during
convalescence from acute diseases. It has been found to be valuable in scrofula, visceral obstructions,
stones, gravel, etc., but its virtues are even greater in its effects upon epilepsy, or falling sickness, and
fits.

Dr. O. P. Brown in The Complete Herbalist (1875): “I found after close investigation and elaborate
experiment that prepared in a certain way and compounded with Bone-set (Eupatroium perfoliatum),
Water pepper (Polygonum punctatum), Chamomile blossoms (Anthemis nobilis) in best whiskey has no
equal for the cure of fits, or falling sickness, or anything like fits; also for indigestion, dyspepsia and
Liver complaints of every degree. A more valuable plant is not found within the whole range of the

----- PAGE 54 -----
Herbal Pharmacopoeia.”
It is also an antidote to poke (Phytolacca americana).

Dose: 2 teaspoonfuls of the herb to 1 pint of boiling water. Drink cold 2 or 3 teaspoonfuls six times a
day. Of the tincture, 10-20 minims.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of entire fresh plant for ague (chronic), epilepsy, rhus poisoning.

----- PAGE 55 -----
BURDOCK
Archum lappa

COMMON NAMEs: Lappa, Lappa minor, thorny burr, beggar’s buttons, clothburr.

FEATURES: Naturalized in North America from Asia and Europe, this plant grows 2-5 feet; can be found
along roadsides and in all vacant lots. Hunters will find burdock burrs adhering to their clothes and their
game dogs. The stems are stout with wide spreading branches carrying alternately elongated heart-shaped
leaves. The purple flowers bloom in July and August, after which they dry out and the base becomes the
troublesome burr. The root, which should be dug in the autumn or early spring, is thick, brownish gray
externally, with white pith-like tissue inside. The root and seeds are slimy and have a sweetish taste, the
leaves and stems being bitter. Common burdock is sometimes planted in Japan, where it has been
improved by cultivation, for its enlarged parsniplike roots, which are eaten as a boiled vegetable.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, seed, leaves, stems, the whole herb.
SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Herbalists all over the world use burdock. Such an effective blood purifying plant has earned the
unpretentious claims made for it. The root and seed of Arctium lappa make a soothing demulcent, tonic,
alterative; it slowly but steadily cleanses skin, soothes the kidneys, and relieves the lymphatics;
eliminates boils, carbuncles, canker sores, styes, felons, etc. Soothing to the mucous membrane throughout
the entire system, and is also used for gout, rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, sciatica, gonorrhea, and kidney
diseases. It is best combined with more stimulating agents.

Tincture of burdock root (Arctium lappa), 10-20 drops

Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), 8-12 drops

Tincture of buchu (Barosma betulina), 10-15 drops

The above can be made into a herbal tea preparation, reducing the formula by one-fourth and using
ounces instead of drops. The leaves shredded fine in aged wine will help if bitten by a mad dog.
EXTERNALLY: The leaves will be found very useful in fever by bruising and applying to the forehead or to
the soles. For burns shred the bruised leaves fine and fold into a stiffly beaten egg white; it will relieve

----- PAGE 56 -----
the pain and hasten healing.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for acne, bunion, Dupuytren’s contracture, eczema
serpeginosa, eruptions, glands (affections of), gonorrhea, gout, impotence, leukorrhea, phosphaturia,
rheumatism, ringworm, scrofula, sterility, ulcers, uterus (prolapsus of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: As in North America, herbs have several common names. Burdock is very popular
scientifically and as a home medicine; it is known as repeinik or lopuh, very close to the official Latin
name of /appa. Burdock roots contain 27—45 percent inulin, up to 12 percent protein, and oils and other
trace minerals. Therefore it is easy to understand why they consider food as medicine and medicine as
food. It is best to collect the roots of one- or two-year-old plants in the autumn. Folk medicine: The use
of burdock in Russia can be traced back many generations as both a table herb and a medicinal herb.
Especially valued as a diaphoretic for dropsy, gout, and rheumatism. Clinically: Used in the form of
extracts, ointments, tinctures, and oils for the same purposes that folk medicine has used it for generations.
Food: If you happen to see persons digging a hole in Russia it could very well be they are preparing a pit
for fish or game to be wrapped in burdock leaves (they do not use any added seasoning). A fire is made in
the pit, and when the ground is hot enough they take away the ash and charcoal, place the carefully
wrapped morsel in the bottom, and cover with the surrounding sides, which have reached a very high
temperature. In a short time they have a delicacy that barbecuing cannot equal. As a kitchen preparation
the roots are roasted and used for coffee; the fresh root is used in soup instead of potatoes, in pancakes,
and is fried as cutlets. Cut very fine and boiled with apple cider vinegar and yellow dock with sour
cream, they make a tasty and nutritious jam. Externally: From the bygone days burdock oil, called
repeinoe masio, has a reputation as a hair tonic to strengthen and encourage the growth of new hair. This
can occur if the hair follicles are just dormant and not completely destroyed. It usually takes six to eight
months for a noticeable change. Many conditions of eczema-type skin diseases are relieved after several
applications of burdock externally and taking it internally. Persistent black- (comedo) and whiteheads
(milia) are treated with a facial steam bath. Also as a poultice for boils.

----- PAGE 57 -----
CAPSICUM

Capsicum minimum, C. frutescens

COMMON NAMES: Cayenne, red pepper, bird pepper, African pepper.

FEATURES: This plant is indigenous to Asia, Africa, and the parts of the United States beyond the southern
line of Tennessee. The African bird pepper is the purest and the best known medically. It is a small,
oblong, scarlet, membranous pod, divided internally into two or three cells containing numerous flat,
white, reniform seeds. It has no odor; its taste is hot and acrid.

SOLVENTS: 98 percent alcohol, considerable extent vinegar, boiling water.
MEDICINAL PART: Fruit
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, carminative, diaphoretic, rubefacient, condiment.

Usss: The stimulating effect of capsicum is the source of its internal effectiveness. Capsicum taken with
burdock, goldenseal, ginger, slippery elm, etc., will soon diffuse itself throughout the whole system,
equalizing the circulation in all diseases caused by obstruction of circulation. Unlike most of the
stimulants of allopathy, it is not narcotic.

It acts mainly on the circulation, having immediate effect on the heart and then extending to the
capillaries, toning the circulation without increasing the pulse.

Remember that it is an agent that is seldom used alone, as by itself it is soon extinguished. Cayenne is
useful in coughs, torpor of the kidneys, pneumonia, pleurisy, typhoid fever, and for cramps and pains in
the stomach and bowels causing perstaltic action of the parts previously contracted. Dr. R. Swinburne
Clymer has called it “the only natural stimulant worthwhile considering in diarrhea and dysentery with
bloody mucus stools and offensive breath.” Bleeding of the lungs is easily checked by the use of cayenne
and a vapour bath. By this method, circulation is promoted through the body, diminishing pressure on the
lungs and thus affording an opportunity for a coagulum to form around ruptured vessels. The unpleasant
feeling of indigestion or heartburn felt by some people after taking cayenne capsules or tablets will
disappear if followed by a cup of hot herb tea. Cayenne is usually not the cause of the unpleasantness. The
constitution, with all of its constructive ability, struggles against disease and occasions the unpleasant
feelings, and it is by this power of reaction that disease is overcome. Capsicum is not a cure-all and we
do not recommend its continual use (except for cooking) beyond the obtainable results.

EXTERNALLY: As a liniment for sprains, bruises, rheumatism, and neuralgia:

----- PAGE 58 -----
Tincture of capsicum, 2 fluidounce

Fluid extract of lobelia (Lobelia inflata), 2 fluidounce
Oil of wormwood (Artemisia obsinthiura), | fluidram
Oil of rosemary, | fluidram

Oil of spearment, | fluidram

According to the analysis in Back to Eden, by J. Kloss, capsicum contains the following: albumin,
pectin, a peculiar gum, starch, carbonate of lime, sesquioxide of iron, phosphate of potash, alum,
magnesia, and a reddish kind of oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the dried pods for amaurosis, asthma, brain (irritation of), delirium
tremens, cough, diarrhea, diphtheria, dysentery, ear affections, glandular swellings, hemorrhoids,
headache, heartburn, hernia, homesickness, intermittents, lungs (affections of), measles, mouth (ulcers in),
neuralgia, nose (affections of), obesity, esophagus (stricture of), paralysis, pleuro-pneumonia, pregnancy
(disorders of), rectum (diseases of), rheumatic gout, rheumatism, sciatica, scrofula, seasickness,
stomatitis, throat (sore), tongue (paralysis of), trachea (tickling in), urine (disorders of), whopping cough,
yellow fever.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Krasny peretz, kayansky peretz (red pepper) is common home medicine in many
families. Besides its use as a hot seasoning it is always handy as nastoika in vodka (one or two pods ina
bottle of vodka). Those tolerant of the kick of vodka spiked with the hot peretz drink it by the
wineglassful. Uses: Diaphoretic for colds, appetizer, rheumatism, and stomach disorders. Externally:
Nastoika is used as a poultice and liniment with other compounds. Clinically: There is a warning that
dose should not exceed 1-2 grains at a time, as it can produce a burning sensation in the stomach, and
other disorders, with an undesirable effect on the heart. The oil is clinically used; powder almost always
in composition with other herbals.

----- PAGE 59 -----
CASTOR BEAN

Ricinus communis

COMMON NAMES: Castor oil, palma christe (from supposed shape of leaves resembling Christ’s hand).

FEATURES: The variety is variable as to continent and conditions. In the United States the hollow stems
are tall, with purplish bloom above, bearing bluish green leaves that are one or two feet broad; flowers in
July; capsule expelling the variously tinted, shining bean. The plant is decorative and is regarded as a
mosquito repellent if planted in presumable direction of entry. Native to India, but cultivated extensively
in the United States.

MEDICINAL PARTs: The bean; the fixed oil, expressed from the seeds. The first settlers make a traditional
laxative from it; Europeans and Native Americans found it useful.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, purgative.

Usrs: Expect purging 4 to 6 hours after 1 tablespoonful, for adults, or 1 teaspoonful, for children, has
been taken, followed by a sedative effect on the intestines. The mildness of action is acceptable for young
children and childbearing women in cases of constipation, colic, diarrhea due to slow digestion, and
tapeworms and lumbricoid worms.

Not recommended for dyspeptics, where contraindicated, as it is oppressive to the digestive powers. If
the taste is disagreeable, flavor with equal parts of oil and either heavy sarsaparilla, peppermint, or
cinnamon syrup, and mix thoroughly. To relieve the lower bowel an injection of 4 tablespoonfuls is
thoroughly mixed with a mucilage of slippery elm bark.

CAUTION: It is important to note that according to M. L. Fernald, the large and handsome seeds are
dangerously poisonous to eat.

EXTERNALLY: For aid in ringworm, itch, and cutaneous complaints if applied assiduously. The leaves are
said to be galactagogic when applied to the breast. Canary Island women have used the leaves to increase
their secretion of milk for centuries.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Albuminuria, aphthae, cholera, cholera infantum, diarrhea, duodenum (catarrh
of), dysentery, eruptions, gangrene, gastroenteritis, jaundice, lactation, peritonitis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Castor oil has many uses in Russia and is know as kastorka. Used industrially for
lubricating oil in commercial equipment and airplanes, as it does not freeze in the severe Russian climate.

----- PAGE 60 -----
They use the stems in the textile industry, and oil for paints and cosmetics. Agro-technology has given
deserved attention to commercial cultivation. Depending on climate and soil they harvest 500—2,500
pounds of beans per acre. Folk medicine: As a laxative, and for gynecology, ulcers, eye treatment, and
hair-restoring preparations.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Castor Oil is used as a laxative in many varieties. One locally
named and easy-to-remember variety is called “Erand.” Uses: In general practice for constipation,
enteritis, peritonitis, dysentery, spasmodic diseases of the bowels, inflammatory disorders of the
urogential organs, gonorrhea, stricture of urethra, milk fever, amenorrhea, asthma, dropsy. The juice of the
leaves is a strong emetic and is very serviceable in cases of narcotic poisoning. Decoction of the leaves:
purgative, lactagogue, emmenagogue. The root bark: strong purgative. The seed contains the alkaloid
ricinine; also ricin, a potent vegetable toxin. This stays in the oil cake after the oil is extracted. The castor
oil plant is given in combination with carbonate of potash; if not available the kernels without the embryo
are boiled in milk and water and given for lumbago, rheumatism, and sciatica. Caution: When the patient
cannot strain at stool as in colitis, prolapsus, and weakened structural tissue, the oil is given in very small
doses. Can be used as an enema with soapsuds and water. Externally: Poultice of the leaves for boils and
swellings, also applied over the breasts of nursing mothers as a lactagogue, and over inflamed breasts
during lactation to soften the mammary glands. To relieve flatulence or to promote menstruation, cover the
abdomen with the boiled leaf poultice, and stay warm. The oil is locally applied in conjunctivitis.

----- PAGE 61 -----
CATNIP

Nepeta cataria

COMMON NAMES: Catnip, nep, catmint, cat’s wort.

FEATURES: This naturalized perennial herb is found in all parts of the United States. The square, erect,
branching stems are covered with fine whitish hairs; leaves 1—2’4 inches long with heart-shaped or
oblong pointed apex, the top side green with grayish green and whitish hairs underneath. Flowering in
June to September, with whitish corolla, purple-dotted, sectioned lips, and lobes making up the
conformation of the bloom. Faintly minty aroma, with bitter taste.

SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water.
MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Carminative, stimulant, tonic, diaphoretic, emmenagogue, antispasmodic,
aphrodisiac (cats).

Uses: When most of us think of catnip, we unfortunately associate it only with the cat family. Its uses are
many, and mild in the proper amounts, for both infants and adults. When troubled with flatulence and
digestive pains, the American physio-medical practice recommends “blood warm bowel injection of the
infusion for babies with intestinal flatulence.” All herbalists find catnip useful for feverish colds. It will
produce perspiration without increasing temperature, and induces sleep. It has proved efficacious in
nervous headache and for allaying hysteria, insanity, and other forms of nervous diseases of an acute
character, without any withdrawal effect when it is discontinued.

Equal parts of catnip and saffron are excellent in scarlet fever, smallpox, colds, etc. The fresh
expressed juice of the green herb taken in tablespoonful amounts three times a day will encourage
suppressed menstruation.

Due to its transient action, catnip is more serviceable in tea form. Always steep the herb in a closed
container, never boil.

Dose: | ounce catnip to | pint of boiling water. Adults, 2—3 tablespoonfuls; children, 2—3 teaspoonfuls,

----- PAGE 62 -----
frequently, for the above mentioned. When taken in very large doses when warm, it frequently causes

emesis.

EXTERNALLY: Culpeper states the green herb bruised and applied to the rectum for 2—3 hours eases the
pain of hemorrhoids. The juice made into an ointment is effective for the same purpose. There is an old
saying that if the root be chewed it will make the most quiet person fierce and quarrelsome.

----- PAGE 63 -----
CELANDINE

Chelidonium majus

COMMON NAMES: Garden celandine, greater celandine, tetterwort, chelidonium.
CAUTION: Large doses are poisonous.

FEATURES: Celandine is a pale green, evergreen perennial with stems 1—2 feet in height; leaves round and
smooth, 1-2 inches long; the flowers are bright yellow, umbellate, on long, often hairy, stocks.

Indigenous to Europe and naturalized in the United States. It grows wild along fences, roadsides, and in
waste places, etc., flowering from May to October. When the plant is cut or wounded a noticeable,
unpleasant yellow sap flows out; it is of offensive odor, nauseous, and bitter tasting with a biting
sensation when put to the mouth.

The fresh reddish brown root is the part most used; drying diminishes its activity.

Celandine is often considered the same as lesser celandine, which is pilewort; they are different
medicinally and botanically.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
MEDICINAL PARTS: Herb, root.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, cathartic, diuretic, diaphoretic, expectorant, purgative, vulnerary.

Uses: It is used internally in decoctions or tinctures for hepatic affections or liver complaints, and has a
special influence on the spleen. It is often used in dropsy and skin complaints.

Culpeper knew of its virtues long ago, and we quote: “The herb or root boiled in white wine and drunk,
a few aniseeds being boiled therewith, openeth obstructions of the liver and gall, helpeth the yellow
jaundice.”

Celandine has had much recognition. The herbalist of ancient times cleansed the eyes of film and
cloudiness that darkened the sight with the juice of this plant diluted with breast milk. Of the powdered
root, 4-1 dram; of the fresh juice, 20-40 drops (in some bland liquid); of the extract, 5—10 drops.

EXTERNALLY: Application for progressive spreading ulcers, malignant running sores, and other spreading
skin conditions such as tetters, ringworm, or cancers effects speedy recovery if used daily. The fresh juice

----- PAGE 64 -----
rubbed on warts will take them away. If persons of sensitive skin notice itching, equalize the area with
diluted vinegar and water.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Antrum of Highmore (inflammation of), cancer, chest (affections of), chorea,
constipation, cough, diarrhea, dyspepsia, gallstones, gonorrhea, hemoptysis, hemorrhoids, headache,
influenza, jaundice, lachrymal fistula, laryngismus, liver (affections of), nephritis, neuralgia, nosebleed,
pleurodynia, pneumonia, rheumatism, scald-head, stiff neck, taste (altered), tumors, warts, whooping
cough, yawning.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chistotel bolshoy (large clean body)—Chelidonium majus. Clinically the fresh
extract and compound complex is used in many cases of spasmodic condition involving the liver, and
closely associated with gallbladder, kidney, and bladder. For domestic use the above administration
should be in the hands of medical practitioners or carefully trained persons. Chelidonium is poisonous
and cannot be eaten by animals. Folk medicine: The effects of Chelidonium seem to be universal in the
treatment of liver, gallbladder, kidney, and bladder. The time-honored properties of this herb prompt use
for malignant swellings and stomach conditions, used in the form of tea. Externally: The fresh leaves and
stems have a milky juice that quickly turns orange-red when exposed to air. This iodine-colored fluid can
burn the skin, causing blisters that are very painful. Experimental treatments have shown excellent results
for stopping malignant swellings, and it is effective in tuberculosis, especially skin tuberculosis. For
small cuts, ulcers, and warts a special liniment or fresh juice can be used if very careful.

----- PAGE 65 -----
CENTAURY

Centaurium erytraea

COMMON NAMES: Rose pink, bitter bloom, bitter clover.

FEATURES: This plant is common to most parts of the United States. There are many species and colors;
the English distinguish between them by using the red centaury in diseases of the blood, the yellow in
choleric diseases, and the white in those of phlegm and water. Variety is not limited only to color; the
centaury family will grow in many soil conditions—moist meadows, among high grass, on the prairies,
and in damp ditch soil. It flowers from June to September and is best gathered at this time. The flowers
close at night, and the American variety is considered preferable to the European.

SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, febrifuge, diaphoretic.

Uses: Excellent old American remedy, bitter tonic, preventive in all periodic febrile diseases, dyspepsia,
and convalescence from fevers; it strengthens the stomach and promotes digestion. An aid to rheumatic
and all joint pains. The following in a warm infusion is a domestic remedy for expelling worms and to
restore the menstrual secretions: of the powder, %2—1 dram; of the extract, 2—6 grains.

The loose dried herb, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water. Although bitter, this effective herb is a
good accompaniment to all herbal teas and preparations. For taste, combine with other herbs such as
anise, cardamom, peppermint, ginger, fennel, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Used as tincture of root in cases as follows: coryza, diarrhea, inflammation of
the eyes, fever, homesickness, influenza intermittents, vanishing of sight.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian centaury, Centaurium erytraea, called “a thousand golden leaves” and
many other beautiful names. Official medicine very often prescribes centaury alone, but also with other
herbal preparations. Folk medicine: Centaury tea and a home extract, usually prepared with vodka, is
given in cases of high blood pressure and liver and gallbladder malfunctions. The bitter tonic is antiseptic
in stomach sickness, working with nature without destroying the necessary secretions that stimulate
desirable digestion and appetite. The parasitic tapeworm cannot maintain its circlet of hooks and suckers,

----- PAGE 66 -----
which enable it to gain livelihood in the mucous membrane of the intestines of its host, when centaury is
taken persistently.

----- PAGE 67 -----
CHAGA

Inonotus obliquus

COMMON NAMES: Chaga, birch mushroom.

FEATURES: In North America and Canada the birch is well known for its beauty alone. Its medical
purpose is served by a mushroom, or fungus-type growth, found in the older trees (also grows on beech
and other trees). This growth is rough, dry, porous, crusty, with deeply cut and crooked separations having
the appearance on the outside of dull charred wood. The surface is almost black in color. When this
projection is sawed off the tree it is as if the tree were having cosmetic surgery or the removal of an out-
ofcontrol wart. The matured and most desired chaga is 30-40 centimeters wide, 10—15 centimeters thick,
and may be 4-5 feet long, weighing 4-5 pounds. There are three layers: (1) the outside, rough with some
old bark and possibly twigs, must be cleaned; (2) the side, very close to the tree trunk, must be cut off;
and (3) the middle part, granulated and not spoiled, which is the part to use. It can be collected at any time
of the year.

Always keep chaga in a dry and dark place (dark covered jar) as dampness and strong light dissipate
its power.

MEDICINAL PART: Inside granulated parts of the three layers.
SOLVENTS: Boiled (not boiling) water, alcohol, vodka.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, blood purifying, anodyne, restorative.

Usss: It is well known that the Native Americans knew all plants and how they were best used—for food,
medicine, or if they be poisonous. In Anglo-American literature we know that treatments of many
sicknesses were kept as tribal knowledge. We know they used the properties of many fungi, but from our
research work we cannot find a definite record of chaga being identified; we are poorly informed.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The existence of chaga and its uses are mentioned in Russian literature and in such
sources as monographs, medical books, encyclopedias, and popular herbal books.

Folk medicine of European Russia and Siberia gives nearly unlimited credit to chaga, which for
generations has been thought of as magical. Chaga has a long list of uses by persons of experience and
faith in herbal folk medicine. It was used for all stomach complaints—gastritis, stomach pain, ulcers—
and for cancer, tuberculosis of the bones, and glandular organs where operations were not possible due to

----- PAGE 68 -----
the network of blood vessels.

While folk medicine may be unrestrained in its commendation of chaga, science is reserved and
cautious. From year to year scientific medical literature carefully gives it more credence. The apparent
value of this plant has warranted commitments to further research and to laboratory and clinical tests.

Since 1955 the Medical Academy of Science in Moscow has promoted chaga for clinical and domestic
medicine, encouraged it commercially, and collected it for medical use. In an atlas of medical plants
published in Moscow (Tzitzin 1963), chaga is carefully recommended but definitely approved for
administration as a tea, extract, or nastoika (chaga in vodka) for malignancies. It is recommended in
cases where the patient cannot undergo surgery or radiotherapy. Chaga is recognized as a very old folk
medicine for stomach gastritis and ulcers, and especially for cancer, tuberculosis, or conditions of
malignancy unfavorable to surgery.

It should be understood that not all advanced forms of cancer can be controlled, but chaga will reduce
pain, give comfort, and stop or slow growths. Some early and less-advanced cases of cancer are arrested,
and spreading may be prevented. In swelling of the lower bowel, chaga decoctions are prepared for
colonics in addition to oral medication.

Diet is very definitely restricted to milk products and vegetables—no meat, conserves, sausages, or
strong spices (Saratov University 1932). Chaga is blood purifying and regenerates deteriorated organs
and glands, Medical Encyclopedia (Moscow 1965). Time must be given for chaga to work.
Recommended treatment is for three to five months at seven-to-ten-day intervals. Domestic use: The bark
and middle portion, which have been carefully separated and cleaned, must be crushed or shredded, then
soaked in warm water (not over 50° Fahrenheit). When preparing chaga think of it as yeast, water too hot
will kill the living fungus. For 1 part of crushed chaga pour over 5 parts of boiled (not boiling) water, let
stand covered 48 hours, strain, pour in more boiled (not boiling) water, perhaps twice as much, then drink
three cups a day thirty minutes before each meal.

----- PAGE 69 -----
CHAMOMILE

Chamaemelum nobile

COMMON NAMES: German chamomile, garden chamomile, ground apple, pinheads.

FEATURES: The favored chamomile comes from southern Europe and is officially known as Anthemis
nobilis (Roman chamomile), possessing medicinal qualities superior to ours.

This yellow or whitish, small, daisylike perennial, with its strong fibrous root and pale green, thread-
shaped leaflets, has a very bitter taste, with the strong aromatic smell of the apple. It is interesting to note
that the name chamomile is derived from the Greek, meaning “ground apple.”

MEDICINAL PARTS: Flowers, herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Stomachic, antispasmodic, tonic stimulant (volatile oil), carminative, diaphoretic,
nervine, emmenagogue, sedative.

Uses: Chamomile is one of the widely known herbs. Perhaps its livelihood is established through its
early use in childhood ailments such as colds, infantile convulsions, stomach pains, colic, earache,
restlessness, measles, etc. If children were treated with chamomile today, we might have fewer of the
accumulative diseases that trouble us in later years.

When given warm, chamomile will favor perspiration and soften the skin. The cold infusion acts as a
tonic and is more suitable for stomach difficulties, and as a drink during convalescence from febrile
disease, dyspepsia, all causes of weak or irritable stomach, intermittent and typhoid fever. Take 2—3
tablespoonfuls, or cupfuls, adjusted according to age, two or three times a day.

Syrup made of the juice of chamomile, using the white flowers (fresh or dried) with a good white wine,
is a tonic for jaundice and dropsy. Old-fashioned but worth remembering for hysterical and nervous
affections in women, will promote menstrual flow, relieve dysmenorrhic spasms, and promote the menses
when delay is due to exposure to colds; for uterine spasms or nervous tension, bilious headache, and aid
to digestion. A specific for uterus pains of mother at nursing time.

EXTERNALLY: The flower of chamomile, beaten and made into oil, will comfort pain of liver and spleen;
at the same time drink the tea of the fresh or dried herb. Culpeper states: “A stone that hath been taken out
of the body of man, being wrapped in Chamomile, will in time dissolve, and ina little too.”

----- PAGE 70 -----
The flowers combined with crushed poppy head make a good poultice for allaying pains when other
means have failed. As a lotion it is also excellent for external application in toothache, earache,
neuralgia, etc.

A poultice of chamomile will often prevent gangrene and remove it when present. For sprains and
bruises, the herb bruised and moistened with vinegar is excellent. It may be made up with soapwort
(Saponaria) into shampoo, especially for keeping fair hair light and alive.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Acidity, anger, asthma (from anger), blepharospasm, catarrh, coffee (effects
of), colic, convulsions, cough, cramp, croup, dentition, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, earache, eyes
(blepharitis, ophthalmia), eructations erysipelas, excitement, excoriation, fainting fits, fevers, flatulence,
flatulent colic, gout, gum rash, headache, hernia, hysterical joint, influenza, jaundice, lienteria, labor
(disorders of, after-pains), mastitis, menstruation (disordered), miliary eruption, milk fever, miscarriage,
mumps, neuralgia, parotitis, perichondritis, peritonitis, pregnancy (disorders of), red-gum, rheumatism,
salivation (nocturnal), sciatica, screaming, sensitiveness, spasms, speech (affections of), toothache,
ulcers, uterus (disease of), waking (screaming on), whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia chamomile has the tender-sounding name of romashka. The demand is so
great that supplements are imported from Europe. Details on how to plant, cultivate, and prepare for
shipment have been determined. They estimate that one acre can yield 500—1,000 pounds of dried
romashka. The North American market depends on imports from Europe, and for the last decade the
demand has exceeded the supply. Chamomile damasky, or Persian chamomile, is highly praised. Uses:
No family can do without this simple aromatic home medicine. It is used as a tea from the cradle to the
grave for colds, stomach trouble, anemia, gargle, sedative, nervine, calming, colitis, eczema, and
antiseptic for all inflammations. Clinically: Widely used as oil extract in compositions.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: The rhythmic babunah or babuni-kephul is India’s local name.
Indian chamomile grows wild, and they consider the herb second-best to the European imported flower.
Uses: India’s knowledge finds extensive use for the popular miniature, daisylike flower. As a
carminative, stimulant, emmenagogue, diaphoretic, attenuation, discutient. Special interest is given to
chamomile for uterine reflex disturbance of women. Also for dyspepsia, flatulent colic, fever,
menstruation disorder, hysteria, and conditional debility. Popular as a children’s remedy for nervine and
sedative, tonic, stomach disorders, earache, neuralgia pain, convulsion, and teething. A weak infusion is a
tonic and febrifuge. Strong warm infusion as an emetic and for periodic headaches. Dose of the flower
oil, 1-3 drops for flatulence and colic. Externally: The oil is especially helpful applied to rheumatic
joint pain.

----- PAGE 71 -----
CHERRY

Prunus virginiana

COMMON NAMES: Wild black cherry, chokecherry.

FEATURES: This large fruit tree is native to North America and is found in Canada, Florida, Minnesota,
Nebraska, Kansas, Louisiana, Texas.

The outside bark is blackish and rugged. The young branches are smooth, red or purplish; flowers
appear after the leaves in May and June, followed by the delicious cherry in August. The bark has a
distinct aromatic odor resembling bitter almond when macerated in water; the taste is astringent and
agreeably bitter. The young, thin bark is the best; very large or small branches should be rejected. Stem
bark is collected in the autumn and carefully dried; sloughing dead tissue, if present, should be removed.
Will keep well in tightly closed container ina dark place.

SOLVENT: Hot or cold water.
MEDICINAL PART: Young thin bark.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild tonic, soothing astringent, sedative, pectoral.

Uses: Wild cherry bark is extensively used in cough medicines as a vehicle base. This agent is useful in
many other classes of disease. For diarrhea of children it is excellent in the form of syrup and may be
pleasantly combined with neutralizing cordial; indigestion caused by lack of stomach tone will be greatly
relieved. Will relieve cough, bronchitis, scrofula, heart palpitation (should not be used in dry cough),
dyspepsia, hectic fever, debility of protracted and enfeebled cases of congestion in the throat and chest. It
contains a small amount of hydrocyanic acid. The cherry contains malic acid and is high in life-giving
properties.

Dose: 15 drops in water. Cherry bark will dissolve kidney and bladder stones but should be combined
with other herbs and administered carefully and over a period of several months; when taken too fast the
stones will be expelled without being softened.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Cold infusion or tincture of inner bark; solution of concentrated resinous
extract, prunin for acidity, anorexia, dyspepsia, heart (weakness of, hypertrophy of, irritable), pyrosis.

----- PAGE 72 -----
CHESTNUT

Castanea dentata

COMMON NAMES: American chestnut, Spanish chestnut, sweet chestnut.

FEATURES: The stately chestnut tree grows in North America, western Asia, and southern Europe. The
species is usually self-sterile, requiring more than one tree for the production of chestnuts. The flowers
consist of long catkins that may contain the female, or fruit-bearing, organs at their base, or may be purely
male.

If the female flowers are fertilized they develop spiny burrs containing 1—5 one-seeded nuts. The
leaves are dark green above, light beneath; slightly broken, folded, or matted together; with a light odor
and an astringent taste. The chestnut is low in protein, high in carbohydrates and starch; contains minerals
such as phosphate of potash, magnesia, some sodium, and iron.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, inner bark.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild sedative, astringent, tonic.

Uses: Culpeper said the inner skin that contains the nut “is of so binding a quality that a scruple of it being
taken by a man or ten grains by a child, soon stops any flux whatsoever.”

The green or dried leaves can be used, and it is considered a specific for whooping cough or nagging
distressing coughs, controlling the paroxysm; and in frequent hiccups and other irritable and excitable
conditions of the respiratory organs. Fevers, ague respond to the soothing of the mucous surfaces and the
nervous system; acts as an antispasmodic. Lobelia inflata (lobelia), and Caulophyllum thalictroides
(blue cohosh) are most successfully combined for the above mentioned.

Dose: | ounce to | pint of boiling water, infused for 15 minutes. A wineglassful three times a day,
children half that amount. The fluid extract is convenient: dose 10 drops three times a day; 5 drops for
children.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of leaves gathered in summer for diarrhea, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Konsky cashtan (horse chestnut) does not grow wild but has long been cultivated
in European Russia, middle Asia, and Caucasia. Folk medicine: It is valued and used for arthritis,
rheumatism, female bleeding, hemorrhoids, and chronic inflammation of the intestines. Clinically:
Extracts used for bleeding hemorrhoids, varicose veins, arteriosclerosis.

CAUTION: In recent years, Castanea dentata has been extensively damaged by an imported blight. Do not
use the now more commonly found horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), which has a bitter and
mildly poisonous fruit.

----- PAGE 73 -----
CHICKWEED

Stellaria media

COMMON NAMES: Stitchwort, scarwort, satin flower, adder’s mouth, starweed.

FEATURES: There are about twenty-five species native and naturalized on the American continent. The
Native Americans used native chickweed for many years but also adopted naturalized species. It is
common in Europe and America, growing in fields and around dwellings, in moist shady places. The stem
is weak and straggling, freely branched; there is a line of white hairs along one side only, changing
direction at each pair of leaves. The very small white flowers bloom from the beginning of spring until
autumn. Taste slightly salty. The seeds are eaten by poultry and birds.

SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
MEDICINAL PART: Whole herb.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, emollient, pectoral, refrigerant.

Usrs: Many areas of internal inflammation are soothed and healed by this so-called troublesome garden
weed. The uses are many, from salad greens to preparations of poultices, fomentations, and salves from
fresh, dried, or powdered herb.

This herb is used for liver ailments (internally and externally), bronchitis, pleurisy, coughs, colds,
hoarseness, rheumatism, inflammation or weakness of the bowels and stomach, lungs, bronchial tubes,
scurvy, kidney trouble, to ease hemorrhoids; to release the small vessels that transmit blood from the liver
into the hepatic veins, making them more pliable. This so-called common plant could be included among
the all-purpose herbals.

Dose: | ounce of chickweed to 1% pints of water, simmered down to | pint. A wineglassful every 2-3
hours. Use externally as a poultice for inflamed surfaces, boils, and skin eruptions.

EXTERNALLY: Effective for all swellings, redness of face, weals, scabs, boils, burns, inflamed or sore
eyes (apply on cotton pads over closed eyes), erysipelas, tumors, hemorrhoids, cancer-swollen testes,
ulcerated throat and mouth. For broken or unbroken skin conditions, chickweed is an effective medicine.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Gout, liver (inflammation of), rheumatism, psoriasis.

----- PAGE 74 -----
CLEAVERS

Galium aparine

COMMON NAMES: Goose grass, catchstraw, bedstraw.

FEATURES: Common to Europe and the United States, growing in cultivated grounds, moist thickets, and
along river banks; flowering from June to September; stems rough and weak but very lengthy, with little
prickly hooks and many side branches, always in pairs; leaves small, 6-9 on the round stem, topped with
very small white flowers with petals arranged like a Maltese cross. Medicinally the green herb may be
used as well as the dry. The root is a permanent red dye.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Water (do not boil).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, tonic, refrigerant, alterative, aperient.

Uses: Notably one of our best-known herbs for obstructions of the urinary organs, especially when
combined with broom, uva-ursi, buchu, and marshmallow. It is particularly useful for stones or gravel
and seems to soften and reduce the calculus so it can be eliminated without impeding the bowels.

For children or adults suffering from scalding urine it is invaluable, and the refrigerant qualities are
soothing in cases of scarlet fever, measles, and all acute diseases. In Vitalogy (1925) Drs. Wood and
Ruddock say: “The cold infusion will remove freckles when it is drunk two or three times a day, for two
or three months and the parts frequently washed with it, and has recently been used with decided success
in treating children for bed wetting, it should be drunk three times a day.”

Claudia V. James (1963) gives us another use: “The juice mixed with oatmeal to the consistency of a
poultice and applied over an indolent tumour three times a day, keepng the bowels open and taking a
teaspoonful of the juice every morning, will often drive the tumour away in a few days. It is one of the
best known herbs for reducing.”

For weight loss, 4 cup of the fresh or dried herb in 4 pint of boiling water, one-third of the amount

----- PAGE 75 -----
taken three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Cleavers may be used in all acute diseases and deep perplexing psoriasis, eczema, cancer,
scrofula, ulcers, and all skin trouble. An infusion is prepared by macerating 1’ ounces of the herb in 1
pint of warm water for 2 hours.

Dose: 2-4 ounces given three or four times a day cold; may be sweetened with honey or brown sugar. Of
the tincture, 20-40 drops in water three or four times a day.

----- PAGE 76 -----
COLTSFOOT
Tussilago far fara

SY
ATES

COMMON NAMES: Coughwort, horse hoof, bull’s foot, foal’s foot, ginger root.

FEATURES: Naturalized in the United States from Europe, Siberia, and East Indies. Although found
growing in many areas, from the seashores to elevations of nearly 8,000 feet, coltsfoot prefers certain
clay soils. This low succulent perennial has smooth green leaves, with a white and cottony underside, that
appear in March. They do not appear until the large daisy-type, bright yellow flower has withered; they
are 5—8 inches long and like a colt’s foot in shape.

The stem is covered with a loose cottony down. The whole plant is used, more especially the leaves,
and they should be collected when they have almost reached maturity. Collect the root after the fullness of
the leaves, the flowers as soon as they open. When dried, all three have a faintly herbaceous, bitter taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emollient, demulcent, expectorant, slight tonic, pectoral.

Uses: For congestion of the pulmonary system, especially if inclined to consumption. For these symptoms
horehound, ground ivy, marshmallow, and elder flower have been successfully combined with coltsfoot,
making up half of the compound. However, the juice of coltsfoot by itself is effective in troublesome
coughs. The botanical name Tussilago means “cough dispeller”; this includes coughs, asthma, whooping
cough—in short, a chest and lung expectorant.

Dose: Steep | teaspoonful of the leaves in 1 cup of boiling water for 2 hour; drink ‘4 cupful at bedtime,
hot or cold, or a mouthful three times a day, or administer according to case, up to 2 cupfuls daily. Of the
tincture, 1—2 fluidrams.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves, bruised or steeped in hot water, may be applied to the chest for relieving fever,
feebleness, and easing the heart, also for open wounds to draw out the injurious matter. Use as a poultice
in scrofulous tumors. For sore feet, external bruises, fevered swelling, and skin irritations, apply fresh
and often.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the whole plant for corpulence, plethora.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mat i matcheha (mother and stepmother) is Russia’s name for coltsfoot. Folk
medicine: The leaves and flowers are first-aid home treatment for colds, acute and chronic lung

----- PAGE 77 -----
infections.

----- PAGE 78 -----
COMFREY
Symphytum officinale

COMMON NAMES: Gum plant, healing herb, knit bone, nipbone.

FEATURES: The genus includes some twenty-five species of herbs native to Europe, Asia Minor, Siberia,
and Iran. The common comfey is naturalized in much of North America. Comfrey is a perennial with a
stout spreading root, brownish black and wrinkled; the stem about 3 feet high; and large, coarsely hairy,
egg- or lance-shaped leaves with wavy edges.

The purplish-blue, yellow, white, or red tubular flowers, less than 1 inch long, are borne in coiled
clusters. They have five stamens; the fruit consists of four shiny brown to black nutlets that can be seen in
August. It flowers in May and June and grows by riversides and in most moist places. The root contains a
large amount of mucilage and is rich in easily assimilated organic calcium.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, astringent.

Use: Native Americans discovered the medical value of comfrey and used it with many other naturalized
plants. When internal functions are weakened or injured to the degree of showing bloody discharge,
whether in sputum, urine, or bowels, comfey will prevent serious complications by healing the tissue and
easing the pain of the involved areas of bones, tendons, ruptured lungs, and other delicate cells.

Comfrey has long been accepted as being of great value as a soothing demulcent, a general stimulant to
the mucous membrane of the respiratory organs, and to help increase expectoration, thus aiding the
bronchial tubes.

A syrup made of equal parts of comfey and elecampane roots is a most valuable agent for coughs,
consumption, and all affections of the lungs. In Nature's Healing Agents S. Clymer (1963) tells us of:
“numerous uncontradicted reports of lung cancer cured where all other means have failed and in which
the sole treatment consisted of infusion made from the whole green plant and, even in some instances, of
infusion made from the powder of entire plant.”

For the purpose of cleansing the entire system of impurities and establishing a normal condition,

----- PAGE 79 -----
comfrey is useful in arthritis, gallstones, stomach conditions, asthma, ulcerated tonsils, in some cases of
various forms of cancer, ulceration of the kidney, scrofula, anemia, dysentery, diarrhea, leukorrhea, and
female debility.

Dose: The entire fresh or powdered plant, | teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, steeped for 4 hour,
taken four times daily, 1 cup a day. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops four times daily, by prescription.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice of the fresh or dried leaves or powder for ruptures, sore breasts, fresh wounds,
ulcers, swellings, burns, or bruises.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh rootstock collected before flowering and in autumn. Tincture
of fresh plant. Homoeopaths highly praised Symphytum and used it in many cases, for abscess, backache
(from sexual excess), bone (cancer of, injuries of), breast (sore), eye (pains in, injuries of), fractures,
glands (enlarged), gunshot wounds, hernia, menses (arrested), peritoneum (sensitive, painful), psoas
abscess, sexual excess (effect of), sprains, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia comfrey, known as okopnik, is used less than it is abroad. In medicine
they consider an excess to be poisonous. However, they do admit that scientific and clinical analysis is
not complete. Folk medicine: Has a wide and varied reputation. They use the fresh or dried roots and
rhizomes in decoctions and teas as an astringent. In cases of internal and external bleeding, broken bones,
female complaints, ulcers, wounds, and many of the above mentioned.

----- PAGE 80 -----
COUCH GRASS

Agropyron repens

COMMON NAMES: Quack grass, dog grass, quick grass, durfa grass, twitch grass.

FEATURES: Known to farmers in Europe and North America as a pest. The spikes resemble wheat or rye
when in bloom, reaching heights of 1—3 feet; the pale yellow, smooth rootstock is long and trailing, with
each joint sending forth a shoot that becomes a new plant. It should be gathered in the spring and carefully
cleaned and dried. Culpeper says an acre of couch grass is worth ten acres of carrots.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Rootstock, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, aperient, demulcent.

Uses: Couch grass is recommended by Dr. Samuel Thompson for lessening the frequency and pain in
cases of excessive irritation of the bladder from any cause. It is a botanical for general catarrhal
treatment. The troublesome plant has been used by famous herbalists for gout, enlarged prostate gland
(with chronic gonorrhea), purulent cystitis, incipient nephritis. Some physicians trust its timely use in
dissolving small calculi. This being so, it is an herb to remember for all rheumatic and jaundice sufferers.
The accepted administration is in an infusion of 1 ounce of couch grass to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped
20 minutes and given in wineglassful doses every 2 hours. Or a decoction of the root made by boiling 1
ounce of the herb in | pint of water until reduced to % pint, 10-20 drops in water two or more times a
day.
Dr. Clymer gives the following from Nature s Healing Agents. In chronic gonorrhea:

Tincture of couch grass (agropyron repens), 5-20 drops
Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 9-15 drops
Tincture of sandalwood (Santalum album), 10—20 drops
Tincture of buchu (Barosma betulina), 10-20 drops
Doss: In water, three or more times a day.

----- PAGE 81 -----
For enlarged prostate (nonoperative):

Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 5—15 drops
Tincture of fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus), 3—7 drops
Tincture of saw palmetto (Sabal serrulata), 5—20 drops
Doss: In water, three or more times a day.

In rheumatism complicated with prostatic involvement:

Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 5—20 drops

Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 9-15 drops

Tincture of scurvy grass (Cocblearia officinalis), 7-15 drops

Tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), 1-15 drops

Dose: In water three or four times a day. Black cohosh should be used with caution.

Dose: Tincture of couch grass alone, 10—20 drops in water, two or more times a day. Specifically, one of
the most important symptoms for the prescribing of Agropyron is a burning sensation and constant desire
to urinate.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Bladder (irritation of), dysuria, urine (incontinence of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Familiar couch grass can be seen all over the country. Pirey polzutchy (couch
grass) by Russian translation means “fire of field.” Even in Latin they call it agros (“a field”) and pyr
(“fire”), hence Agropyron. To most, couch grass has a reputation as a troublesome, persistent weed.

Professor N. B. Tzitzin, member of the Russian Academy of Science, may be a blessing to mankind for
his awareness of this hearty plant. First he noticed how the plant could survive in any soil or weather
conditions and how it had a fantastic capacity to multiply. One plant can produce over thirty thousand
plants in one season, either by rhizomes or by seeds.

If one single plant settles in a cultivated field it overcomes the field in a very short time, and the more
you cut it the more it grows. Observing this great capacity for survival, Professor Tzitzin decided to take
advantage of this characteristic for the betterment of mankind. He gave new life to wheat (Zritioum) by
crossing it with couch grass. This much-improved hybrid adapts to any soil, resists disease and fungus
parasites, and resists frost, drought and wet periods. It is perennial and very durable, giving much-
improved, larger, and nutritious grain. Folk medicine: The tea is used in every part of the country for
serious cases of uncontrollable urination, to restore poor eyesight, tubercular lungs, chest pain, fever,
jaundice, rheumatism, lumbago, syphilis, and as a female corrective agent. Clinically: Couch grass is rich
in vitamin C, carotene, polysaccharide, inulin, glucose, and other nutritional elements. Used in extract
form and considered the best for blood purifying, kidney and bladder, stomach stimulant, and liver and
spleen. The thick extract is also used as a binder for medicinal tablets.

----- PAGE 82 -----
CRAMPBARK

Viburnum opulus

COMMON NAMES: High cranberry, snowball tree, guelder rose, squaw bush.

FEATURES: Indigenous to the northern part of the United States and Canada; a handsome shrub growing in
lowlands, rich woods, and borders of fields, presenting a showy appearance when flowering in June. The
flowers are succeeded by red, very acid berries resembling low cranberries and sometimes substituted
for them. They remain on the bush after the leaves have fallen and throughout the winter. The bark has no
smell but has a peculiar bitterish and astringent taste that leaves a clean feeling in the mouth. Viburnine is
the active principle found in the dried bark of the stem. The berries are a rich source of vitamins C and K.

MEDICINAL PART: Bark.
SOLVENTs: Water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, nervine, tonic, astringent, diuretic.
Uses: Known to American practitioners for the conditions the name implies, crampbark gives relief from
cramps and spasms from involuntary muscular contractions such as in asthma and hysteria, if taken during
pregnancy, prevents the attack entirely if used daily for the last two or three months of gestation.

Steep 1 teaspoonful of the cut bark in 1 cup of boiling water for % hour; drink 1 or 2 cupfuls, cold, a
day. Of the tincture, % fluidram. For spasmodic compounds, add to 2 quarts of good sherry wine:

2 ounces crampbark (Viburnum opulus)

1 ounce skullcap (Scutellaria)

1 ounce skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus)
2 ounce cloves (Eugenia caryophyllus)

2 drams capsicum

Combine ingredients in powder form, or coarsely bruised. Let stand in covered container at least 24
hours, shaking daily.

CAUTION: The berries of the plant are poisonous.
Dose: Half a wineglassful, two or three times a day.

----- PAGE 83 -----
EXTERNALLY: Seasonal but worth remembering. The low cranberry (and probably the high cranberry will
have the same results) is known to be direct medication for dangerous erysipelas. If applied early this
malady yields at once. Also for malignant ulcers and scarlet fever when applied to the throat. Pound the
berries and spread them in a fold of old cotton cloth and apply over the entire diseased surface; the
inflammation will speedily subside. Its usefulness is universally acknowledged.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark, collected in October or November, for after-pains,
cough (of pregnancy), cramps, dysmenorrhea (spasmodic, neuralgia, membranous), ears (painful),
epididymitis, headache, hysteria, labor pains (false), lumbago, menstruation (painful), miscarriage,
ovaries (pain in), paralysis, uterus (cramps in, bearing down in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: If you attend a Russian concert or listen to one on the radio you will hear a
beautiful heartfelt song that is touching to people in all corners of the globe. It will be Kalina or
Kalinushka, about the beautiful bush known to Native Americans as crampbark. Russians like kalina so
much they plant it in parks as well as for home garden decoration and medicinal use. They feel that its
beauty is only one of its merits, as its deeper significance is as a shrub for health. Ukraine, White Russia,
and Siberia supply the country commercially, but it is grown throughout the land. Folk medicine: In White
Russia, especially, it has a very impressive list of uses. Berries are rich in vitamins, especially C and K,
and minerals. They are used alone, fresh or dried, with honey for high blood pressure, heart conditions
(recommended with the seeds); cough, cold, tubercular lungs, shortness of breath; kidney, bladder, and
stomach conditions; bleeding stomach ulcers. A decoction of the flowers for coughs, cold, fever,
sclerosis, lung tuberculosis, stomach sickness (including stomach cancer). Externally: Children and
adults are bathed with a strong decoction of the flowers for tubercular skin, eczema, and various other
skin conditions. For scrofula a decoction of both berries and flowers in 1-10 parts, used as a tea.
Clinically: Prescribed in doses of 20-30 drops, two to three times a day, in cases of female bleeding,
hysteria, cramps, etc. Industrial: Supplied by commercial farms to the food industry, which uses an
extract and the berries for candy, fillers, pastry, marmalade, and aromatics. Pharmacy uses the bark; folk
medicine uses every part of kalina.

----- PAGE 84 -----
CREOSOTE BUSH

Larrea divaricata

COMMON NAMES: Chaparral, chaparro, creosote bush, greasewood, gobonadora, dwarf evergreen oak.

FEATURES: Chaparral is a Native American term referring to over one hundred different botanical plant
types growing in alkali soil in small, narrow strips to areas over one hundred square miles in the
southwestern part of the United States. Beginning at La Jolla, California, extends eastward through
California across Nevada, Arizona, and New Mexico.

The dark green stems and leaves (if drought season, pale or yellowish green) of creosote bush (Larrea
divaricata), one of the many chaparral species, create a 4-8 foot miniature desert-forest. Distinguished
from the usual gray-green color of the other desert species. The strong-scented leaves are opposite and
are divided into two leaflets. The bright yellow, five-petaled flowers, 2 or more inches across, appear in
spring and winter. The fruit is rounded, up to about 4 inch long, and is covered with white hairs.

The leaves and stems of creosote bush contain a generous supply of gums and resins, protein, partially
characterized esters, acids, alcohol, a small amount of mixture of sterols, sucrose, and a very small
amount of volatile oils. No alkaloids were detected and it is nontoxic.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Hot water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, diuretic, expectorant, tonic.

Users: In 1848 the U.S.-Mexican boundary commission is reported to have brought creosote bush to the
attention of the medical profession as treatment for internal conditions of rheumatism; mixed with
sarsaparilla for venereal nodes and chancre. Generations earlier the Native Americans of the
southwestern areas were using the plant for various symptoms. More recently, in October 1967, after
three previously surgically removed growths, an eighty-five-year-old man refused medical treatment on
the fourth, recurrent, growth, documented as malignant melanoma, in favor of “chaparral tea,” an old
Native American remedy. Of this tea he drank 2—3 cups a day. In September 1968 he was reexamined and
it was found that the growth had decreased from the size of a large lemon to that of a dime. No other
medication was used than the chaparral tea. In eleven months he had gained a needed 25 pounds, with
accompanying improvement in general health, as previous to the chaparral treatment he was pale, weak,
and lethargic.

The above case seems to suggest the rediscovery of the desert plant through publications of health
magazines advocating natural medicines.

Personal and professional cases appearing in the magazines have added to its modern list of uses: acne
and skin conditions of warts and blotches, arthritis, cancer, chronic backache, increase of hair growth,
improvement of eyesight, increase of bowel elimination (though not laxative), kidney infection, leukemia,
prostate gland trouble, skin cancer, sinus, stomach cancer, throat, bronchial and pulmonary conditions,
weight reducing.

CLINICALLY: Probable mechanism of anticancer action is thought to be the most active ingredient,
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), which has the qualities to convert fermentation processes thought to
be out of balance.

----- PAGE 85 -----
Ina few words, medical science believes creosote bush supports the system via the respiratory process
by inhibiting unwanted rapid growth.

The magazine articles suggested a dose ranging from one tablet with each meal to as many as ten tablets
every hour. Other instructions came from the following Native American use.

Dose: Place | tablespoonful of creosote bush leaves and small twigs into a glass screw-top jar. Pour 1
pint of boiling water over this, cover, and let stand overnight. Do not refrigerate, do not remove surface
sediment. Drink a quarter of the liquid % hour before each meal and at bedtime.

To those for whom the strong taste of creosote is unpleasant as a tea, tablets are available. When using

the loose tea in the above amounts, approximately 40 percent of the active ingredient is utilized with total
daily intake around 200-250 milligrams. Herbalists combine other herbs with creosote bush as case
requires.
EXTERNALLY: Papago, Pima, and Maricopa tribes of the southwestern states boiled the leaves and
branches for bruises and rheumatism. In some areas salt was added to the boiled herb for the above. The
dry heated leaves and branches were applied as a poultice for chest and other body pain. Young branches
were sharpened, placed in the fire until hot, then inserted into tooth cavities to relieve pain.

VETERINARY: After the resins have been obtained for Commercial use as a preservative, the leaf residue
is fed to livestock. It contains as much protein as alfalfa.

“Tn springtime if an old cow can pull through until the creosote bush puts out tender shoots she will get
fat, shed off her old rough winter coat, and be glossy and pretty in four weeks, and she will bring her calf
and be able to nurse it into a fine animal. This drama of life I have witnessed year after year for the past
50 or more.”—Ralph W. Davis, N.D.

----- PAGE 86 -----
DAMIANA

Turnera diffusa var. aphrodisiaca

FEATURES: Indigenous to Texas and found in Baja California, South America, and the West Indies. The
small yellow-flowered shrub has long, broad, obovate, light green leaves, with few hairs on the rib;
frequently with reddish twigs. The plant has an aromatic odor and contains a volatile oil (0.51 percent)
with a warm, bitter, camphorlike taste, two resins, a bitter principle (damianin), tannin, sugar, and
albuminoids.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.

SOLVENT: Diluted alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Aphrodisiac, tonic, stimulant, laxative.

Uses: Damiana has strong claims as a great sexual rejuvenator in lethargy of the sexual organs, whether
the result of abuse or senility. The use, or administration, should be with care, as the claims are justified
by many who know of its influence. For those who may use it, please remember that when the system is
run down, overworked, subject to nervous tensions, etc., damiana often stimulates beyond the limit of
safety and health; stimulation beyond our natural energy level may have ill effect on the heart.

Dr. W. H. Myers of Philadelphia writes concerning damiana: “I have given it quite an extensive trial in
my practice, and as a result I find that in cases of partial or other sexual debility, its success is universal. I
pronounce it the most effective and only remedy that in my hands had a successful result in all cases.”
There are some objections to its effect on the digestive system, but combination with phosphorus and nux
vomica partially obviates this tendency. The required strength will not be known immediately; usually one
portion once a day for ten days. Also given in nervous diseases.

Dose: Fluid extract, 15—30 drops once a day. Solid extract, 3-6 grains. Also used in pill form.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh part for amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, fatigue impotence,
leukorrhea, migraine, prostate (affections of), spermatorrhea, sterility, urine (incontinence of).

----- PAGE 87 -----
DANDELION

Taraxacum officinale

COMMON NAMEs: Blow ball, cankerwort, lion’s tooth, wild endive, etc.

FEATURES: This plant is a native of Greece but can now be found in most parts of the world almost year-
round. Zaraxacum is a genus of less than one hundred species of biennial or perennial herbs belonging to
the sunflower family (Compositae).

Dandelions are characterized by shiny green rosettes of leaves, nearly entirely or variously tooth-edged
ina slightly backward direction. The flower stem is longer than the leaves, 5—6 inches in height, bearing a
single yellow flower. The root and stem yield a milky fluid when cut. The root is the official part and
should be collected when the plant is in flower.

The spring leaves are used in salads and possess some slight narcotic properties. Can be found outside
of most doors throughout the United States, in bloom from April to November. Dry some of your once-
thought-of-as-worthless dandelion roots for winter use, they will aid you in many ways.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, tonic, stomachic, aperient, deobstruent. Native Americans realized the
great value of dandelion and used it as food and medicine.

Uses: The common dandelion had intelligent use as a medicinal plant long before science opened our
eyes to some of the contents of the shiny green leaves: they contain 7,000 units of vitamin A per ounce and
are an excellent source of vitamins B, C, and G. As a comparison, vitamin A content in lettuce is 1,200
units per ounce and in carrots 1,275 per ounce. A wise and easy addition to our diet.

The root is a constituent of many prescriptions for dropsical and urinary complaints and is indicated for
impostumes and inward ulcers in the urinary passage, atonic dyspepsia, and rheumatism. It is of an
opening and cleansing quality and therefore very effective for obstructions of the liver, gallbladder, and
spleen and the diseases that arise from the biliary organs. It is a splendid agent for skin diseases, scurvy,
scrofula, and eczema; has a beneficial effect on the female organs. Herbalists use dandelion more

----- PAGE 88 -----
generally than any other herb, as it combines well with other herbal preparations for the liver and is mild,
wholesome, and safe. Its prolonged use can only be beneficial in all rheumatic complaints. The natural
nutritive salt in dandelion is twenty-eight parts sodium; this type of organic sodium purifies the blood and
destroys the acids therein.

J. Kloss tells us in Back to Eden: “Anemia is caused by the deficiency of nutritive salts in the blood,
and really has nothing to do with the quality of the good blood.” Dandelion root cut up and dried is used
for coffee by health-minded people. From a health point of view, it is more desirable to drink than coffee
or tea. For this purpose it is frequently combined with roasted acorns and roasted rye in equal parts, or
according to taste. As a vegetable for salads it has no equal, being rich in many minerals. It is a medicinal
vegetable plant.

It is recorded that in Germany the roots were used as a sedative as early as the sixteenth century.
Arabian knowledge is much the same as that of other nations. The French use the fresh young leaves for
salads. To remove the bitter taste they soak the leaves in salt water for 30 minutes and use as a spicy
addition to mixed vegetables, at the same time getting natural protein, iron, calcium, phosphorus, and
inulin, which are all part of our human chemistry.

Dose: Of the tincture, 5—40 drops. For infusions, fill a cup with the green leaves, add boiling water, steep
% hour or longer. Drink when cold, three or four times a day. Or add 1 teaspoon of the cut or powdered
root to | cup of boiling water and steep 2 hour. Drink when cold three times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant just before the perfection of the flower for ague,
bilious attacks, debility, diabetes, gallstones, headaches (gastric), jaundice, liver (affections of),
neuralgia, nightsweats, rheumatism, tongue (mapped), typhoid fever.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Dandelion is known as oduvanchik or pushki in Russia. In ancient times
Taraxacum was used for yellow spots (liver spots) of the skin, and freckles. Uses: In Russia the root is
the most popular, prepared as an extract with vodka, as a tea, or coffee. Ancient home medicine calls it
“life elixir,’ and it has acceptance for blood purifying, liver treatment, jaundice, gallbladder, skin
conditions, digestive disturbance, and as an expectorant and sedative. Clinically: In the form of extracts,
tinctures, powders; loose and in tablets, for the long-established conditions above.

----- PAGE 89 -----
ECHINACEA

Echinacea angustifolia

COMMON NAMES: Purple coneflower, black Sampson.

FEATURES: Native to the prairie regions of America west of Ohio. This native herbaceous perennial
belongs to the aster family. The plant grows 2-3 feet high, with single, stout, bristly, hairy stems. Leaves
are thick, rough, hairy, broadly landscaped, 3-8 inches long, narrowed at the end, and strongly three-
nerved. The single, large flower head appears from July to October, the color varying from whitish rose
to pale purple. Taste is sweetish, then tingling, as in aconite, but without its persistent benumbing effect
when administered wrongly. Faint odor, aromatic, and should not be used after it has lost its characteristic
odor and taste. Contains inulin-bearing parenchyma tissue.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Dried rhizome, root.
SOLVENT: Alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, sialagogue, alterative.

Uses: Useful in all diseases caused by impurities in the blood. Thompsomian and physio-medical
practitioners and naturopaths have always maintained that Echinacea is a natural herbal antitoxin.
Orthodox physicians have not generally been willing to accept it as such, though many do. Controversy
being permitted, falsehood will appear more false, and truth more true.

“Echinacea is a corrector of the deprivations of the body fluids,” was Dr. Niederkorn’s opinion, and
this whether the morbific changes of the body fluids are internal or caused by external introductions.

Echinacea has an honored place for septic infections, septicemia in its various forms, blood poisoning,
adynamic fever, typhoid fever, cellular abscesses, salpingitis, carbuncles, cancerous cachexia, and in
fevers or conditions where there is a bluish discoloration of the mucous membranes; for any condition that
points to sepsis, internal or external.

The Sioux tribe used fresh scraped root for hydrophobia, snakebite, septicemia.

----- PAGE 90 -----
Dose: Steep | teaspoonful of the granulated root in 1 cup of boiling water for ’2 hour, strain, take 1
tablespoonful three to six times a day. Of the tincture, 5—10 minims.

EXTERNALLY: Steep as above and apply, or bathe parts concerned.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for appendicitis, bites of rabid animals, blood
poisoning, carbuncles, diphtheria, enteric fever, gangrene, poisoned wounds, pyoemia, rhus poisoning,
scarlatina, septicemia, snakebite, struma, syphilis, typhoid, ulcers, vaccination (effects of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Echinacea is not native to Russia. Careful study, research, and experiment have
given many opportunities for cultivation in Ukraine, Caucasia, and other places. They use the Latin name
Echinacea for identification, pronounced with a Russian accent. Uses: According to experiments it is not
toxic in large amounts, but has been known to cause salivation. They use it as an antiseptic, internally and
externally. Internally it is healing by reducing pain; improves the quality of blood to resist infection or
further spread of disease. Externally: Antiseptic and healing for skin conditions of carbuncles, boils,
wounds, ulcers, burns, and bedsores.

----- PAGE 91 -----
ELDER

Sambucus canadensis

COMMON NAMEs: Sambucus, American elder, sweet elder.

FEATURES: An indigenous shrub growing in all parts of the United States and Canada, in low, damp
grounds, thickets, and waste places. Elders are frequently cultivated for their ornamental foliage. They
grow 5-12 feet high, blooming in June and July, with star-shaped, fragrant flowers ‘4 inch across,
grouped in flat flower clusters about 8 inches across. Purple-black berries containing three or four round
seeds mature in September and October. The fruit is often made into jellies, pies, and wine. The
branching stems are covered with a rough, pitted gray bark; large central stems are smooth. The odor is
faintly sweet, aromatic. Taste: slightly bitter. The European elder, though larger than the American, is in
general characteristics and properties similar.

MEDICINAL PARTS: The roots, inner bark, leaves, berries, and flowers are all recognized as natural
medical treatment.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, hydragogue, cathartic. Flowers: diaphoretic, diuretic, alterative, emollient,
discutient, gentle stimulant.

Uses: No education is required regarding which part may be used. From the tree top to root’s end it
harbors medical properties. Often all that is needed is the virtue of necessity as a teacher. The flowers,
berries, leaves, inner bark, and roots have elicited gratitude from many in conditions of headache due to
colds, palsy, rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, jaundice, kidney problems, and epilepsy.

Dr. Brown (1875) gives us the following: “The inner bark of Elder is hydragogue, emetic and cathartic.
Has been successfully used in epilepsy by taking it from branches 1 or 2 years old, scraping off the grey
outer bark, and steeping 2 ounces of it in 5 ounces of boiling water for 48 hours. Strain and give a
wineglassful every 15 minutes when the fit is threatening, have the patient fast. Resume it every 6 to 8
days.” The tea of the flowers is quieting to twitching and inflammation of the eyes, taken internally. The
tea simmered for 10 minutes longer and cotton soaked in the solution provides an eye application over
closed lids. The berries are rich in organic iron and are therefore an excellent addition to the autumn

----- PAGE 92 -----
menu, especially if anemic. Combine elderberry and blackberry juice, 1 ounce three times a day.

The inner green bark is cathartic; an infusion of it in wine, or the expressed juice, in doses from % to 1
fluidounce will purge moderately. A large dose produces vomiting. In small doses it produces an
efficacious deobstruent, promoting all the fluid secretion, and is much used in dropsy to expel the water
from the engorged organism. It is scarcely excelled by any other medication. Can be used for children’s
diseases, such as liver derangements, erysipelas, etc., decreasing the amount according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The elder may be called the herbalist’s cosmetic tree, as every part will aid in complexion
beauty, removing spots, allaying irritation, removing freckles, and preserving and softening the skin if
applied faithfully, internally and externally.

For various swellings, tumors, joints, etc., simmer any or all parts of the elder; apply as a poultice, or
bathe when skin is broken. Also excellent mixed with coconut oil for a discutient ointment, used for burns
and scalds. Any part is useful to keep in dried form for out-of-season use.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaf and flower for albuminuria, angina pectoris, asthma,
larynx (dry), lumbago.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The decorative and medicinal yellow, red, and black elder grows in many parts of
Russia and has been used as home medicine from the time of early Russian history. However, they
consider the North American white elder superior. In the Middle Ages it was considered a holy tree,
capable of restoring good health, keeping good health, and, it is reasonable to say, as an aid to longevity.
Uses: The roots, bark, twigs, leaves, and berries are used alone or in combinations for every type of
infection or inflammation.

Flowers: contain oil, rutin, vitamins, and minerals extensively for treatment of dropsy, rheumatism,
appendix inflammation, bladder and kidney infections, intestinal conditions, eyes, and external skin
trouble.

Berries: Diuretic, astringent, diaphoretic, much used as a gargle.

Leaves: The young spring leaves boiled in honey are excellent in chronic constipation; boiled in milk
for inflammation of burns of the skin, and piles. Clinical: Used for conditions of above, in extracts,
tinctures, and powders. Food: Home and hospital foods are made from the flowers and berries, including
vitamin- and mineral-rich jam and marmalade used in many dietetic preparations. Elderberry wine, with
its pleasant aroma and taste, is familiar in the wine industry. Externally: Leaves, flowers, bark, and twigs
are excellent as a hot poultice, mixed equally with chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile), for soreness,
inflammations, joint stiffness, etc.

In a seventeenth-century botanic book there is a story about a king and a small hunting party: Most of
the day had passed away when the party realized they were lost in the thick timber brush. Wandering in
various directions they happily found a lonely farmhouse of prosperous condition. As they approached
closer they saw an old gentleman, who had been crying, sitting on the porch. When the king asked why, he
explained he had slipped and fallen while carrying his grandfather from one room to another, and his
father had been angry for such misbehavior and had beaten him.

The king listened suspiciously and then entered the house. To his surprise he observed elders of
advanced generations peacefully talking and going about their daily routine. After talking, and observing
the family, he inquired how they kept in such good health to advanced years. They told the king that for as
long as they could remember they had eaten only simple food, salt, home-prepared bread, milk, and
cheese, with emphasis on elderberries.

As in name, legend, and story, grateful people of all continents and in all times admire and appreciate
the virtues of herbs. The same herbs in different countries, and used, of course, by different people, have
come to the same purposes, whether useful or dangerous. Many such simple things will not be accepted by
stories or experience alone. It seems that only when herbs are tested scientifically and given allopathic

----- PAGE 93 -----
approval will attitudes be changed.

----- PAGE 94 -----
ELECAMPANE

Inula helenium

COMMON NAMEs: Elf dock, scabwort, velvet dock, aunee.

FEATURES: Native of Europe and north Asia, and now naturalized over much of eastern North America.
This stout perennial herb of the sunflower family (Compositae) thrives in moist, sandy, mountainous
areas. The stems are vigorous, 3—4 feet high, downy above, and branched. The leaves are large, ovate and
toothed, the upper ones clasping the stem, the lower ones stalked. The flower heads are golden yellow,
large, solitary, with narrow rays, blooming in July and August. The root is slightly gray, hard, horny, and
cylindrical, and should be dug in the autumn of the second year and split into longitudinal, oblique pieces
having one or more roots. The whole plant is similar in appearance to the horseradish.

The main component of the root is a carbohydrate, inulin, which in the autumn may comprise as much as
45 percent of its weight; its taste is bitter and acrid and the odor reminiscent of camphor.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant, emmenagogue, tonic.

Uses: Elecampane is a constitutional treatment for general catarrhal conditions such as chronic pulmonary
affections that have symptoms of cough, shortness of breath, wheezing in the lungs; a specific for
whooping cough in children, diseases of the breast, malignant fevers, hepatic torpor, dyspepsia, and the
feeling of stitches in the side caused by the spleen. The large amount of natural inulin contained in this
well-known root strengthens, cleanses, and tones the pulmonary and gastric membranes, encouraging a
more harmonious metabolism by assisting the pancreas; it is valued in incipient tuberculosis.

Culpeper also used elecampane for intestinal worms, retention of water, to lessen tooth decay, and for
firming the gums. A personal opinion, but one which we believe to be true, is that inulin decreases
excessive sugar in the blood—and sugar causes tooth decay.

Dose: Of the powder, from | scruple to 1 dram; the decoction, 1 ounce to | pint of boiling water taken in
wineglassful doses. Mixes well with other herbs.

----- PAGE 95 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root dug in autumn of the second year for backache, cough,
cramp, dysmenorrhea, erysipelas, leukorrhea, rectum (pain in), sciatica, toothache.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are many names for this gracious flower, but in 1804 inulin was discovered
to be a large part of the plant’s makeup. Since then /nu/a is the official name. In Russia they call it de-via-
sil, or deviat sil, which means nine powers. Also di-vasil, which means fair or magic power. This is how
the Russian people apprize elecampane as a medicine. At one time elecampane in Russia was almost
forgotten, but lately interest has been renewed and the government now encourages the collection and
growth of this flower. In ancient Greece and Rome elecampane had prominent recognition in medical
botanics, and in the Middle Ages it had the same strong reputation. Europe and Britain cultivate this
flower for medical purposes. In the Far East and isolated Tibet elecampane is extensively used, by their
own independent experience. Uses: In Russia today elecampane grows in many gardens. They preserve
the fresh root in vodka and keep this for winter use when in need of restoring health after sickness, or for
stomach trouble. Other preparations consist of tea, or powder for colds, chest colds, inflammations,
female trouble, skin conditions, especially itching, wounds, catarrh, indigestion, kidney and bladder
trouble, weak pancreas; in all a general blood builder. Bodily influence: Diaphoretic, diuretic, antiseptic,
blood builder. Clinically: Directly or in combination as drops, powder, or tablets. Externally: Poultice
or a strong tea is made and used for itching, skin rash, and wounds. Foodstuff: In confectionery to give
better aroma, color, and nutrition.

----- PAGE 96 -----
EUCALYPTUS
Eucalyptus globulus

COMMON NAME: Blue gum tree.

FEATURES: Approximately six hundred species belong to the family Myrtaceae. Although the majority are
trees, some forms, like the Australian mallees, are shrublike. They are largely confined to Australia;
however about ninety species grow in California, and a few can be seen in Florida. They are widely
planted for ornamental purposes.

The violet-brown trunk bark peels off in long thin strips, exposing the smooth underlayer. The simple
leaves are without teeth, smooth, and frequently have a waxy sheen. Depending on species, white, yellow,
or red flowers adorn the eucalyptus and attract honeybees, from which a distinctive eucalyptus honey is
enjoyed. The sepals are small or absent, and the petals stick together to form a cap that falls when the
flower opens. Looks much like an acorn cap.

The tallest known living specimen is 322 feet, found in 1956 in the Styx Valley, Tasmania.

As children we remember coming home with the tree’s gum on hands and clothing after having played
around a large eucalyptus.

The peppermint-lemon fragrance is most agreeable.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Oil, leaves, bark.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, antiseptic, antispasmodic.

Uses: A reliable medical journal of Europe gives credit to the power of the eucalyptus tree for destroying
miasmatic influence in fever-stricken districts, entirely abating the pestilent fever in areas where the trees
grow.

Among the diseases in which it is employed are croup, diphtheria, bronchitis, asthma, piles, neuralgia,
malarial diseases, catarrh, subacute or chronic inflammation of the genitourinary organs, ulcers, and
sores. It has been proven an effective remedy in some cases of rheumatism. For some the mode of using it
in asthma is to smoke the dried leaves.

----- PAGE 97 -----
In Britain the oil is the preparation best known and most widely used. It may be inhaled for asthma,
diphtheria, sore throat, etc.

For hemorrhoids the area is washed with a decoction of the leaves. As an agent for suspicious
leukorrhea and discharges, 1-2 drams in 14 pints of tepid water, injecting it slowly. For toning weakened
and prolapsed uterus, buchu leaves and bark is also effective combined with the above for strengthening,
quick healing, and diminishing offensive odors. Its efficiency depends chiefly upon its antiseptic
properties, which are extremely potent, though quite safe.

Dose: 15—30 drops of the fluid extract three times a day; 3-10 grains of the solid extract three times a
day. The leaves crushed and steeped can be used in tea form.

EXTERNALLY: As a local antiseptic, stimulant, and corrective when applied to ulcers and wounds, | ounce
of the extract to 1 pint of lukewarm water.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves, essential oil eucalyptol, for aneurysm, acritis, asthma,
bladder (affections of), bronchitis, diarrhea, dysentery, dyspepsia, dysuria, fistulas, gonorrhea, gout,
intermittent fever, kidney (diseases of), quinine cachexia, rheumatism, spleen (affections of), strychnine
poisoning, syphilis, tumors, typhoid, urethra (stricture of), urethral carbuncle, varicose ulcers, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two species of eucalyptus are cultivated for medical and decorative purposes,
Eucalyptus globulus, and Eucalyptus cinera. Dr. Ramel introduced eucalyptus to Europe in 1856, and
southern France soon followed with cultivation of this medicinal tree. Dr. Muller has written a valuable
monograph about Australian eucalyptus that has stimulated interest in this valuable plant. About eighty
years ago Russia started to cultivate eucalyptus for decorative purposes; later its interest was of a deeper
meaning. Today the Black Sea area has active plantations. About 15,000—18,000 seedlings are obtained
from | kilogram of seeds, which are then transplanted. The young trees yield leaves for oil extract, or are
cut and used as a tea. Uses: The tea, decoctions, oil, or nastoika with Russian vodka are on hand for all
conditions of respiratory malfunctions: colds, bronchitis, chest tightness, catarrh, etc. Externally: Skin
conditions of carbuncles, boils, wounds, ulcers.

----- PAGE 98 -----
FEVERFEW

Chrysanthemum parthenium

COMMON NAMES: Feather few, febrifuge plant, featherfoil, pyrethrum.

FEATURES: The plant is native to Europe but common in the United States. Found occasionally in a wild
state, but generally cultivated in gardens. The tapering root, with dark brown, furrowed bark, contains a
large percentage of inulin. The yellowish, porous wood has a distinct odor and a sweetish taste, very
pungent, acrid, tingling, with a sialagogue effect. The flower resembles chamomile with its yellow disk
and white petals, one to a stalk; flowering in June and July. The center stem grows to about 2 feet high
with serrated-edge alternate leaves; very short hairs.

Bees are said to dislike this plant very much, and a handful of the flower heads carried in their vicinity
will cause them to keep their distance.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SoLveEnts: Alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aperient, carminative, tonic, emmenagogue, vermifuge, stimulant.

Usrs: The warming infusion of feverfew upon the circulation influences the skin, nervous system, and the
genitourinary organs and relieves the head of dizziness, brain and nerve pressure, and tensions of
overexcitement.

Culpeper recommends it as “‘a special remedy against opium when taken too liberally.”

This garden herb provides relieving assistance of hyperemic conditions of the mucous membrane in
conditions of colic, flatulence, general indigestion, colds, suppressed urine, expelling worms, hysteria,
and in some febrile diseases. It is largely used in female correction of scanty or delayed monthly periods.
Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in their book Vitalogy, say that it is “an admirable remedy for St. Vitus dance.”
Dr. Clymer, dealing with nature’s healing agents, administers the following for fevers:

Tincture of feverfew (Chrysanthemum parthenium), 10-30 drops
Tincture of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia), 10-20 drops
Tincture of cayenne pepper (Capiscum), 10-20 drops

Taken every 2-3 hours, depending on symptoms. The cold infusion or extract makes a valuable tonic.
The warm infusion is nervine and very useful for hysteria and promoting perspiration in fevers.

Dose of feverfew alone: 10-30 drops in water every 2-3 hours, or as indicated by condition. Can be
used as tea, 1 teaspoonful to | cup of boiling water steeped for 2 hour; 2 cups a day in small mouthful
doses.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves boiled for hot compresses for pain of congestion or inflammation of the lungs,
stomach, and abdomen is beneficial.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant for convulsions, delirium, dysentery, fevers, loquacity,
rheumatism.

----- PAGE 99 -----
FIVE FINGER GRASS

Potentilla erecta

COMMON NAMES: Five leaves grass, rough-fruited cinquefoil, silvery cinquefoil.

FEATURES: Five finger is common to the United States, growing by roadsides, on meadow banks and in
waste ground. The herb grows like the strawberry, rooting at joints; the leaflets have five parts, scattered
hairs, veins prominent below. The bright yellow flowers bloom from June to September, extending on
long stalks from the stem. The root has a bitterish, styptic taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Water, milk, vinegar.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic.

Uses: The long-established, hidden talent of cinquefoil has many uses. Culpeper states: “Let no man
despise it because it is plain and easy, the ways of God are all such.” He gives us a preparation for
epilepsy, or as it used to be called, falling sickness: “The juice here of drunk, about 4 ounces at a time for
certain days together cureth the quinsey, and yellow jaundice; and taken for 30 days together, cureth the
falling sickness.”

It is a specific in all inflammations and fevers of infections, or mixed with other herbs to cool and
temper the blood and humors in the body. The root boiled in milk is effective for male and female
complaints to the extent of hemorrhage. The juice or decoction taken with a little honey clears hoarseness
of the throat and cough of the lungs, makes an excellent gargle for spongy, bleeding gums and ulcerated
mouth and throat.

EXTERNALLY: The root boiled in vinegar and applied to all kernels and hard swellings growing in any
part of the flesh will soften them, and is quietening to shingles and all sorts of running and foul scabs,
sores, itch, and bruises. At the same time, drink the tea of five fingers.

Dose: 20 grains in white wine, milk, or water in wineglassful amounts.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kalgan, lapchatka, kurinye lapke (chicken foot) and many other names are given
to this small but potentially useful plant. Used in Russia for medicinal and industrial purposes. Folk

----- PAGE 100 -----
medicine: Use the rhizome, which is collected late in the spring, before the leaves are overgrown, or in
late autumn. The decoction is a very strong astringent for inflammation of the mouth or stomach, colitis,
loose bowels, dyspepsia to stop bleeding of the stomach, or female disorders. Mostly used in folk
medicine (Saratov University, 1965). In some parts of Russia this home medicine is given as a tonic for
heart conditions, pains in the chest, inflammation (internal and external), amenorrhea, coughs (Bello-Russ.
Academy of Science, 1965). Dose: 1 tablespoonful of the crushed rhizome to 1 cup of boiling water;
drink 3—5 tablespoonfuls a day, 1-1’ tablespoonfuls before each meal. Industrial: Used to process
leather; also in the textile industry for red dye.

----- PAGE 101 -----
A Foolproof, Science-Based
Diet that's 100% Guaranteed
to Melt Away 8 to 16 Pounds
(4 to 8 kgs) of Stubborn Body
Fat in Just 14 Days!

THE [

) 2WEEK

DIET

RECOMMENDED BOOKS
click image(s) to read / download

x % ¥

he
—

Acne No More™

The Secrets To Curing
Your Holistically

A Unique Step By Step Holistic Acne
System Guaranteed To Eliminate
Your Acne From The Inside Out

Giving You Lasting Clear Skin

----- PAGE 102 -----
FRINGE TREE

Chionanthus virginicus

COMMON NAMES: Old man’s beard, snowdrop tree, white fringe, poison ash.

FEATURES: The species is native in the eastern United States from Pennsylvania to the Gulf of Mexico. A
shrub or small tree of the Oleaceae, or olive, family. The plants are 10-30 feet high, possess oval,
smooth, entire leaves, and bear snow-white flowers that hang down like a fringe, hence the common name
and synonyms. Fruit: fleshy, purple, ovoid drupe. They form an attractive feature in garden shrubbery,
growing well on river banks and on elevated places, presenting clusters of snow-white flowers in May
and June. Root about '% inch thick, dull brown with irregular concave scales on outer surface, inside
smooth, yellowish brown. The inner layer shows projecting bundles of stone cells. Very bitter taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Root bark.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, hepatic, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: Generally useful in stomach and liver disorders and in poor digestive functions by slightly
influencing all the organs engaged in digestion and blood making. A specific in spleen malfunction, and
for congestion of the liver when failure to excrete the residue from food results in constipation (one of the
reasons for gallstone, jaundice, and stomach inefficiency). In some the involuntary muscles of the heart
will also be impaired by the inactivity of the above mentioned.

In pregnancy, with indications of yellow skin, white of the eyes of a yellow color, bilious colic,
heartburn, etc., 5-10 drops in water before meals is indicated. Useful in malignant tumors of the stomach
or bowels, and in uterine tumors, also in most chronic conditions of the liver and spleen. Combine:

Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), 7-10 drops
Tincture of fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus), 3—7 drops
Dose: 10-20 drops in water before meals and at bedtime has proven effective.

In bilious colic it is best to first evacuate the stomach by giving an emetic dose of lobelia and then to
administer the above. The powdered root bark is used professionally; however, the cut root bark can be
infused in hot water for % hour and taken in small amounts throughout the day. Anemone pulsatilla is also
used in conjunction with fringe tree.

EXTERNALLY: The skin will respond to the application of an infusion of 1 ounce to | pint of water, when
other attempts have failed. Also as an injection.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the bark (which is the part employed and which contains saponin)
for constipation, debility, emaciation with liver disorder, gallstone colic, headache, jaundice, liver
(disease of, hypertrophy of), malaria, neurasthenia, nursing women (complaints of).

----- PAGE 103 -----
GINGER, WILD

Asarum canadense

COMMON NAMES: Canada snake root, Indian ginger, Vermont snake root.

FEATURES: Ginger, being of many species, differs in appearance according to habitat; Africa, India,
Pakistan, China, Jamaica, Japan, etc., have their own special native herb.

Native ginger is a beautiful little plant found growing in rich woods during April and May from Maine
to Michigan and southward. The root of the plant is round and fleshy, with dividing stem supporting a
heart-shaped, soft, woolly, and handsomely veined leaf, deep green above and light below, there being
two to a plant. The flower occurs one to a plant, small and of a brownish purple color, growing only a
few inches high and sometimes becoming covered by the dead leaves that carpet the woods. Odor:
gingerlike, or recalling serpentaria. Taste: pungent, bitter.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, carminative, tonic, diaphoretic, diuretic.

Uses: As a carminative it is useful in all painful spasms of the bowels and stomach, also to promote
perspiration, in all cases of colds, female obstructions, whooping cough, and fevers. Practitioners of the
American Physic Medical School hold that this root exerts a direct influence on the uterus and prescribe it
as a parturient when nervous fatigue is observed. It can be made into a tea and administered in small
doses, frequently repeated, as large doses are apt to nauseate the stomach.

Dose: As a cordial made with a tincture and syrup of molasses it is most agreeable; 1 teaspoonful of the
granulated root to 1 pint of boiling water, 2 tablespoonfuls at a time, as often as required. Of the tincture,
2-5 minims. Powder may be taken dry, 20-30 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of root and whole fresh plant (Asarum europum) for alcoholism, anus
(prolapse of), catarrh, cholerine, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, eyes (affections of, operations of), fidgets,
headache, hysteria, levitation (sensation of), typhus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kopiten (ginger) grows wild in West Siberia and European Russia, and the Far
East. There is a special time for collecting the different sections of the well-known plant. Leaves in the
early spring, rhizomes when the flower begins to form, roots in the fall. Folk medicine: The different
parts of the plant have important specific uses, or perhaps combinations for certain ailments. In
Bellorussia (White Russia) the properties of the rhizome are used as an expectorant, for jaundice and
dropsy, to promote milk for the nursing mother, for heart trouble, lung tuberculosis, nerve excitement,

----- PAGE 104 -----
migraine headache, and laxative. The rhizome as nastoika (with vodka) for scrofula (Cholousky 1882,
Antonov 1888), heart palpitation, weakness and lack of stamina of children (Werenko 1896), poisoning
with mushrooms, stomachic (Federevski 1897), migraine headache, alcoholism, scrofula (Nikolaeva
1964). The leaves are used for malaria. Clinically: Of late, use as tea from leaves for heart trouble, and
decoction of rhizome as expectorant for vomiting.

----- PAGE 105 -----
GINSENG

Panax quinquefolius

COMMON NAMES: Five finger root, American ginseng, sang, ninsin, panax, pannag, red berry.

FeATuRES; Indigenous to China, North America, East Asia, American ginseng grows naturally on the
slopes of ravines and other shady but well-drained places in hardwood forests, in varying abundance,
from eastern Canada to Maine and Minnesota and southward into the mountain regions of Georgia and
Carolina. In its wild state it grows 8-20 inches high, bearing three large leaflets at the top and two
smaller ones beneath.

Yellowish green clusters of flowers are produced in midsummer, followed by as many bright crimson
berries, which can be seen until the frost. They are edible and taste much like the ginseng root. The
berries contain 1-3 flattish wrinkled seeds the size of a small pea. The root is thick, spindle-shaped, 2-4
inches long, and 4-1 inch or more in thickness. The older specimens usually have branched protrusions
somewhat resembling a human form. It usually takes at least six years for the root to reach marketable
size. Can be cultivated from cracked or partly germinated seed. Ginseng is very shy and must be protected
from the sun. The roots should be dug in the autumn when they are not so full of sap.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENT: Water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, demulcent, stomachic, nervine, aphrodisiac.

Uses: In Ezekiel 27:17 we find ginseng was known to Judah in the marketplace of Israel. Trading was
done in wheat, honey, oil, balm, and “pannag,” or the all-healing ginseng. Certainly it has been known and
respected for centuries. Father Jartoux, in 1679, after he noticed Native Americans from the Ozarks and
Blue Ridge country employing ginseng as a medication, started exporting it to England. From there the
East India Company sent it around the Cape of Good Hope and on to the Orient.

Ginseng, combined with the juice of a good ripe pineapple, is superior as a treatment for indigestion. It
stimulates the healthy secretion of pepsin, thereby ensuring good digestion and forestalling the habit of
taking pepsin or other after-dinner pills to relieve the fullness and distress so common to the Americans.
Ginseng has the known ability to penetrate the delicate tissue our blood fails to oblige, thus arousing the
malfunction of the lymphatic glands.

----- PAGE 106 -----
It is a powerful antispasmodic and recommends itself in other spasmodic and reflex nervous diseases,
such as whooping cough and asthma. For many people ginseng has had beneficial results in the home for
general strengthening and appetite, as well as to relieve eructations from the stomach, neuralgia,
rheumatism, gout, irritation of bronchi or lungs from cold, gastroenteric indigestion, weak heart, spinal
and nervous affection.

Historically, ginseng has been periodically recognized and discounted in many continents when
laboratory technicians could not verify its apparent physiological and psychological accomplishments.
For the latest information on ginseng you must go abroad. Until about 1964 Anglo-American literature did
not pay much attention to the long-held belief in the useful properties of ginseng.

Dose: To make a tea, take 3 ounces of powder (ginseng 6—7 years old), add 1 ounce of honey and 60
drops of wintergreen, and blend. Use | teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, let it stay a little short of the
boiling point for 10 minutes, drink as hot as you can before each meal. To make tea from the dried leaves,
steep as you would for ordinary teas. Excellent for nervous indigestion.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration and tincture of the root for apendicitis, debility, headache, lumbago,
rheumatism, sciatica, sexual excitement.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: China has always been a good market for ginseng, the highest prices being paid for
old roots. Years ago a Chinese emperor sent a present of the best selected roots to a Russian czar. Being
unaware of its properties, and suspicious, the Russian official understandably thought it best to have it
analyzed to see why so much importance was given to this manlike root. The Military Academy of
Medicine was elected for this purpose, as the international diplomat was a military figure. The top staff,
heads of wisdom, could not find any health-giving properties after long and careful research. So at this
time ginseng was thought of as a Chinaman’s prejudice and was rejected because of insufficient evidence
for further scientific research.

This did not dampen the original enthusiasm of the Chinese, as they still went to the Russian Far East to
collect and buy Russian and Manchurian ginseng, which they considered the best. The price did not
restrict their demands, as they would pay ten to twenty times more than gold, or the traditional oriental
silver. Time and experience have led to developing plantations of ginseng in Korea, China, Manchuria,
and Japan.

The first recorded use of ginseng in Russia occurred in 1675, by Boyarin N. G. Sapfary; three hundred
years later we consider the Russians to be in the forefront of world research. Twenty-five years ago,
teams were sent to neighboring countries to study established plantations. The highly protected secret of
this culture is not given charitably. Today all information from observation and study leads us to Russia’s
own army of ginseng specialists in all parts of Russia, but particularly in the Far East. All work and
research is directed and coordinated by the Committee for Ginseng Research, which oversees
universities, institutes, laboratories, agro-technological methods, fieldwork, plantations, publications, etc.

There are plantations of ginseng in the Russian Far East, Moscow region, Byelorussia (White Russia),
and Caucasia (Bello-Russ. Acad, 1965). In the past, Russian ginseng was always collected from the wild,
but today the cultivated plant is exported, being gathered in August.

Lengthy study and research of Chinese folk medicine’s use of ginseng not only confirms fundamental
impressions but has opened new horizons to its proven value (Vishaya Scholla, Moscow, 1963).

In North America we think of ginseng as the slow-growing herb, as it takes five to seven years before
the root is considered usable. To find a plant fifty years old is considered sensational, as collectors
usually find the plants before they reach this age. The age is told by the rings around the root. Though the
older roots in North America are uncommon, theoretically, the older the root the smaller should be the
dose.

In the Far East there are plants that have reached the age of one hundred, two hundred and even four

----- PAGE 107 -----
hundred years. Some Hong Kong roots sell for five hundred dollars per ounce. A five-to-ten-year-old root
will weigh only a few ounces, but a two-hundred-to-three-hundred-year-old one will weigh nearly a
pound. The young ginseng is used in large amounts, | teaspoonful to each cup. The old ginseng requires
careful use, starting with 1 drop a day and adding extra drops day by day. If one drop too much is taken,
bleeding in the bowels or lungs can result, as the old root is very strong.

In Russia they recommend to all people over forty to have six weeks (forty-two days) of consecutive
daily intake of ginseng twice a year. This will regenerate the glands and invigorate the blood, thus
bringing the properties of ginseng to the endocrine system. This activates metabolism, improves blood
circulation, and positively activates the kidney, bladder, liver, etc. In general, an overall tonic.

Ginseng increases vitality by carefully improving the condition. The activating process improves the
mental, physical, and spiritual efficiencies of the brain, so inducing better feeling, sleep, appetite, and
well-being. Ginseng has a long list of accomplishments when other means have failed.

It is used not only as a physical restorative but acts psychologically as well; for tiredness of heart and
blood circulation, sugar diabetes, depressions, neurasthenia, neurosis, psychasthenia.

In Russia ginseng is used, of course, as nastoika (with vodka) and as tea and powder. Clinically, in the
form of extracts, pills, tablets, capsules.

----- PAGE 108 -----
GOLDENSEAL

Hydrastis canadensis

—"

COMMON NAMES: Yellow puccoon, ground raspberry, tumeric root, yellow root, orange root.

FEATURES: A perennial herb native to the moist woods and damp meadows of eastern North America.

The rough, wrinkled yellow root contains several alkaloids; odor is distinct, with a bitter taste. When
fresh it is juicy and is used by Native Americans to color their clothing, etc. The plant sends up a simple
hairy stem 8-20 inches tall with 3—5-lobed, dark green leaves that in the summer may become 4-10
inches broad. The May and June flower a solitary, small, white or rose colored, appearing in early spring
followed by a crimson head or small berries resembling raspberry, and consists of many two-seeded
drupes. The wild plant is scarce today and is cultivated for medicinal purposes.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvENT: Alcohol, diluted alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, alterative, laxative.

Usrs: The Cherokees introduced goldenseal as an agent for treating ulcers and arrow wounds. Since then
it has gained a reputation as one of the most powerful agents in the entire herb kingdom.

It is recognized as useful in congested conditions, sustaining the circulation of blood in the veins; this
attribute is valuable in heart affections where the extremities are usually cold and lips bluish. To
strengthen the weakened condition, it is best to combine | part each of capsicum and skullcap to 4 parts
goldenseal.

For debilitated conditions of mucous membrane of the stomach, goldenseal pulls rank. Can be used ina
wide range of illnesses ranging from the common cold to complicated advancements, grippe, ulcerated
stomach, dyspepsia, enlarged tonsils, diphtheria, chronic catarrh of the intestines, skin eruptions, scarlet
fever, and smallpox.

Combine 4 parts goldenseal to 1 part myrrh gum for a strong decoction that is valuable in gleet, chronic
gonorrhea, leukorrhea, incipient stricture, spermatorrhea, and inflammation and ulceration of the internal
coat of the bladder. The latter may be treated by goldenseal alone. It must be injected into the bladder and

----- PAGE 109 -----
held there as long as the patient can conveniently retain it. To be repeated three or four times a day
immediately after emptying the bladder. Should be injected by experienced persons.

It is a specific in passive hemorrhages from the pelvic tissue: 2 parts goldenseal to 1 part geranium or
cranesbill, simmer covered for 20 minutes. Goldenseal combined with skullcap and hops is a very fine
tonic for spinal nerves, including spinal meningitis. As a mouth medication for pyorrhea or sore gums,
make a solution and gently brush or massage teeth and gums. Goldenseal can be given alone in weak
proportions, but is most effective combined with other suitable medications.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: Of the powder, 10-30 grains; of the tincture, 1-2 fluidrams. Roots: place | teaspoonful of the
powdered root into 1 pint of boiling water, let stand until cold, drink 1—2 tablespoons three to six times a
day.

EXTERNALLY: It is used as a lotion in treatment of skin eruptions and eye affections, and as a general
cleansing application. Tired, irritated eyes will be relieved by saturating cotton with a weak solution and
applying to closed eyes.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for alcoholism, asthma, cancer, catarrh, chancroids,
constipation, corus, dyspepsia, eczema impetiginous, ears (affections of), faintness, fistula, gastric
catarrh, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids, jaundice, leukorrhea, lip (cancer of), liver (affections of), lumbago,
lupus, menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, mouth (sore), nails (affections of), nipples (sore), noises in the head,
nursing women (sore mouth of), ozena, placenta (adherent), postnasal catarrh, rectum (affections of),
sciatica, seborrhea, stomach (affections of), syphilis, taste (disordered), throat deafness, throat (sore),
tongue (affections of), typhus, ulcers, uterus (affections of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Goldenseal does not grow in Russia or any other known place except North
America. However, the value of this wonder plant is known to them medicinally. They use the Latin name
with Russian dialect—hydrastis kanadsky. Their studies and experiments suggest the possible cultivation
in Russia. Clinically: Not a home medicine in Russia. Only the extract is used, prescribed clinically in
hospitals. At the present time it is limited to female conditions of excess bleeding, disturbance, and pain
of monthly periods, etc. (Atlas, Moscow, 1965).

----- PAGE 110 -----
GOLDTHREAD

Coptis groenlandica

COMMON NAMES: Mouth root, yellow root, canker root, vegetable gold.

FEATURES: Goldthread is found growing in dark swamps and mossy woods in northern parts of the United
States, Canada, Iceland, Siberia, and India.

The plant has a small, creeping perennial root of many fibers and a bright yellow color, faint odor, and
bitter taste without astringency. The leaves are evergreen, on long, slender 1-foot-long stalks, growing
three together. The white and yellow starlike flowers grow ona separate stem, rising to the same height as
the leaves. They flower early in the spring to July, followed by oblong capsules containing many small
black seeds. Autumn is the proper season for collecting this creation from above.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic.

Uses: Exactingly helpful as a mouthwash for canker sores, gargle for sore throat, and for ulcers of both
stomach and throat. It may be beneficially used in all cases where a bitter tonic is required, such as
dyspepsia and chronic inflammation of the stomach. It is a good herb to give to children occasionally as a
tonic; it invigorates the stomach and is a preventive of pinworms. It may be given alone or in combination
with other suitable medicines; it promotes digestion, improves the appetite, and acts as a general
stimulant to the system. In convalescence it is highly beneficial. Made into a decoction, goldthread
(Coptis groenlandica) and goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) will often release the driving desire for
alcoholic beverages.

Dose: The tincture, made by adding 1 ounce of the powdered root to 1 pint of diluted alcohol, is
preferable to the powder. The dose is 20 drops to | teaspoonful, three times a day. As a tea, steep 1
teaspoonful of the granulated root in 1 cup of boiling water for 2 hour, strain, take 1 tablespoonful three
to six times a day.

----- PAGE 111 -----
HELLEBORE

Veratrum viride

COMMON NAMES: Hellebore, Indian poke, itch weed, green hellebore.

Features: American hellebore is native to North America and Canada, growing perennially in swamps,
low grounds, and moist meadows.

The thick and fleshy rhizome sends off a multitude of large whitish roots. The stem is 3—5 feet high,
lower leaves 6 inches to | foot long, decreasing in size alternately up the stem. June and July find the
numerous yellowish green flowers in bloom. The roots should be gathered in autumn, and as it rapidly
loses its virtues, it should be gathered annually and kept in a well-closed container. Has a very strong,
unpleasant odor when fresh, diminishing when dry.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SOLVENT: Alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Sedative, emetic, diaphoretic, sternutatory.

Usss: It is unsurpassed as an expectorant. As an arterial sedative it stands unparalleled. In small doses it
creates and promotes appetite beyond any agent known to medicine. As a diaphoretic it is one of the most
certain of the whole materia medica, often exciting great coolness and coldness of the surface, sometimes
rendering the skin moist and soft and in other cases producing free and abundant perspiration. In suitable
doses it can be relied upon to bring the pulse down from 150 beats per minute to forty or even thirty.

Protoveratrine, being the most active ingredient, slows the pulse by its powerful stimulating influence
on the vagus nerve, while nervine, constituting more than half of the total alkaloids, plays an important
part in lowering arterial tension by depressing powerfully the heart and vasomotor center. In fevers, in
some diseases of the heart, acute and inflammatory rheumatism, and in many other conditions that involve
an excited state of the circulation, it is of exceeding great value. Dr. Brown informs us: “As a deobstruent
or alterative it far surpasses iodine, and therefore used with great advantage in the treatment of cancer,
scrofula, and consumption.”

It is nervine and never narcotic, which property renders it of great value in all painful diseases, or such

----- PAGE 112 -----
as are accompanied by spasmodic action, convulsions, morbid irritability, and irritative mobility, as in
cholera, epilepsy, pneumonia (should never be given in the latter stages of pneumonia, as it lowers blood
pressure and is relaxant to muscles already in a weakened condition), puerperal fever, neuralgia, etc.,
producing these effects without stupefying the system or producing torpor, as opium is known to do.

As an emetic it is slow but certain and efficient, rousing the liver to action like other emetics, without
being cathartic. It is peculiarly adapted as an emetic in whooping cough, croup, asthma, scarlet fever, and
in all cases where there is much febrile or inflammatory action.

CAUTION: Poisonous in doses larger than those indicated below.

Dose: Veratrum is usually given in the form of a tincture, the formula being: dried root 8-16 ounces,
diluted (83.5 percent alcohol), macerated for two weeks, then expressed and filtered.

To an adult male 8 drops are given, which should be repeated every 3 hours, increasing the dose 1—2
drops each time until nausea or vomiting, or reduction of the pulse to sixty-five or seventy, ensues, then
reducing to half in all cases. Females and young people between fourteen and eighteen should commence
with 6 drops and increase as above. For children from two to five years, begin with 2 drops and increase
by | drop only. Below two years of age, | drop is sufficient. If taken in so large a dose as to produce
vomiting or too much depression, a full dose of morphine or opium, in a little brandy or ginger, is a
complete antidote.

In pneumonia, typhoid fever, and many other diseases, it must be continued for three to seven days after
the symptoms have subsided. Administration of this medicine should be closely watched, and when the
pulse begins to recede, or if nausea or vomiting occurs, it is a signal of alarm and the administration
should be stopped. In typhoid fever, while using Veratrum, quinia is absolutely inadmissible.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, gathered in autumn, for amaurosis, amenorrhea,
apoplexy, asthma, bunions, cecum (inflammation of), chilblains, chorea, congestion, convulsions,
diplopia, diaphragmitis, dysmenorrhea, erysipelas, headache (nervous, sick), heart (affections of), hiccup,
hyperpyrexia, influenza, malarial fever, measles, meningitic menses (suppressed), myalgia, esophagus
(spasm of), orchitis, pneumonia, proctalgia, puerperal convulsions, puerperal mania, sleep (dreamful),
spine (congestion of), spleen (congested), sunstroke, typhoid fever, uterus (congestion of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chemeritza lobelia is among the several kinds of hellebore growing in Russia.
American hellebore is valued highly and cultivation is possible. Folk medicine: Decoctions or nastoika
(vodka and hellebore) and preparations of ointments are used in painful rheumatic conditions, especially
in sciatica. A word of caution should be observed as it is poisonous in wrong amounts. Clinically: Used
very carefully and only under prescription. Veterinary: The agent is strong and effective if mixed with
agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) for parasites and pests. It is toxic, and personal protection should be
taken when preparing or spraying solution; a wet mask is advised.

----- PAGE 113 -----
HOPS

Humulus lupulus

FEATURES: The hop plant is a long-lived dioecious perennial propagated commercially from rhizome
sections, or ‘root cuttings’. The hop is one of the few crop plant species in which male and female
flowers are borne on different plants. Introduced and cultivated in the United States for its cones and
strobiles, which are used medicinally and in the manufacture of beer, ale, and porter.

Lupulin grains are preferred to the hops itself and are procured by beating or rubbing the strobiles and
then sifting out the grains, which form about one-seventh part of the hops. Lupulin is a globose, kidney-
shaped grain, golden yellow and somewhat transparent. This substance is the bitter principle of hops and
is used in aqueous solutions, also called lupulin.

The stem is rough, very long, and will twist around any adjacent support. Leaves in pairs, stalked,
serrated, cordate. Three- or five-lobed flowers or strobiles consisting of membranous scales are
yellowish green, round, reticulate, veined, nearly % inch long. Odor is peculiar and somewhat agreeable.
Taste: slightly astringent and exceedingly bitter.

MEDICINAL PARTS: The strobiles or cones.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, diuretic, nervine, anodyne, hypnotic, anthelmintic, sedative, febrifuge.

Uses: This old-time plant is an excellent agent for many conditions. The fluid extract of 10 drops is often
used in cough syrups where there is nervousness, and in heart palpitation.

The decoction of the hops cleanses the blood, making it useful in venereal diseases and all kinds of
skin abnormalities, such as itch, ringworm, spreading sores, tetters, and discolorations. It will tone the
liver, assist a sluggish gallbladder, and increase the flow of urine. Principally used for sedative or
hypnotic action, producing sleep, removing restlessness, and alleviating pain, especially so if combined
with chamomile flowers. Use both internally and externally.

The lupulin tincture is used in delirium tremens, nervous exhaustion, anxiety, worms; does not disorder
the stomach or cause constipation. Also useful in after-pains and to mitigate the pain attending gonorrhea.

A pillow made of the dried hops, sprinkled with alcohol to bring out the active principle, is used for
insomnia and generally induces sleep.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the flowers, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Drink cold 1
cupful during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5-20 minims.

EXTERNALLY: An ointment made by boiling 2 parts of stramonium (jimsonweed) and 1 part of hops, in
lard, is an excellent application in skin irritation and itching skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Seeded spikes for trituration. Tincture of cupuline for dyspepsia, dysuria,
gonorrhea.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hmel is the Russian name for hops, which is an expression for people that are
slightly drunk. This plant grows wild in many parts of the Russian territory and is cultivated for industrial
breweries. Folk medicine: The medical properties have long been appreciated as diuretic, sedative, and
calming. Used for inflammation of the bladder, tuberculosis, and as a hair tonic. The root decoction for
jaundice and dandruff. Dose: 1—20 minims, or decoction of 2 tablespoonfuls to 1 pint of water, a mouthful

----- PAGE 114 -----
three times a day; as a tea, 4 cup three times a day. Clinically: Used as extracts and compound tablets for
the purposes already mentioned.

----- PAGE 115 -----
HOREHOUND

Marrubium vulgare

COMMON NAMEs: Horehound, white horehound.

FEATURES: The most Common of the species of plants in the mint family (Labiatae). Horehound is native
to Europe but has escaped to waste places in temperate zones of North America, especially from Maine
southward to Texas and westward to California and Oregon. It grows on dry, sandy fields, waste grounds,
and roadsides. The most common horehound is Marrubium vulgare, originating from the Hebrew marrob,
meaning a bitter juice.

The entire plant is clothed in white, downy hairs, giving it a hoary appearance. Its stems are stout, four-
angled, and mainly erect, with opposite, ovate, rugose, crenately toothed and softly white hairy leaves.
The white flowers are small, strongly two-lipped, and densely crowded in the uppermost axils of the
stems. The whole herb is medicinal. The flowers appear in June to September and should be gathered
before opening. The plant yields a bitter juice of distinct odor and aromatically agreeable taste. The
extract is used by the candy houses for an old-time prescription as a cough candy. Can be used fresh or
dry.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, diluted alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, bitter stomachic, expectorant, resolvent, anthelmintic (large doses),
diuretic, diaphoretic, laxative.

Uses: Perhaps the most popular of herbal pectoral remedies for congestion of coughs, colds, and
pulmonary affections associated with unwanted phlegm from the chest. The warm infusion will produce
perspiration and flow of urine, and is used with great benefit in jaundice, asthma, hoarseness,
amenorrhea, and hysteria.

Taken in large doses it is laxative and will expel worms. The cold infusion is an excellent tonic for
some forms of dyspepsia. Some herbalists have found it of use for mercurial salivation. Culpeper used
horehound in various other ways: “To repel the afterbirth, as an antidote to poisons and for the bites of
venomous serpents.” Others used it for running sores. The hot infusion of tincture is more effective when

----- PAGE 116 -----
combined with other agents for the purpose intended.

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora), 2-15 drops
Tincture of pleurisy root (Asclepias tuberosa), 20-45 drops
Tincture of horehound (Marrubium vulgare), 5-40 drops

In warm water every 2—3 hours, according to symptoms. Tincture alone, 20-30 minims, as indicated by
age and condition, every 2—3 hours. For children with coughs or croup, steep 1 heaped tablespoonful in 1
pint of boiling water for 20 minutes, strain, add honey. Should be drunk freely.

----- PAGE 117 -----
HORSERADISH

Armoracia lapathifolia

FEATURES: Originally horseradish came to North America from eastern Europe. It has naturalized in the
United States and Canada and throughout most of the world.

The perennial root sends up numerous smooth, erect branch stems, growing 2-3 feet high. The large
leaves are lanceolate, waved, scalloped on the edges, and stand up on 1-foot-long stalks. The flowers are
numerous and white, followed by seed pods divided into two cells, each containing 4 to 6 seeds. The hot,
biting root is tapering, conical at the top, fleshy, whitish externally. The fresh root is much more powerful
than the dried.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, digestive.

Usss: Effective for promoting stomach secretions and is used as a digestive agent. It has been used by
herbalists of the past as a most worthy diuretic. Dr. Coffin used a preparation of 1 ounce fresh horseradish
root, sliced; % ounce mustard seed, bruised; | pint boiling water. Let it stand in a covered vessel for 4
hours, then strain. Dose: 3 tablespoonfuls three times a day. This preparation is especially useful for
retention of water in abnormal amounts. Dr. Coffin also states that the above formula is “especially useful
for dropsy occurring after fevers and intermittents.” Another cause of this fearful disease is the retention
of sulphur in our system, which interferes with the absorption and secretion of the endocrine glands and
central nervous system. Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in their book Vitalogy, give us more assurance of
horseradish as an agent in dropsy abnormalities. “A warm infusion of the fresh root in cider, drunk in
sufficient quantity to produce perspiration and repeated every night, has cured dropsy in two or three
weeks.”

Horseradish also has merit in rheumatism, neuralgia, paralysis, and in weak digestive organs,
particularly the function of the pancreas. A syrup made of grated horseradish, honey, and water will
control ordinary cases of hoarseness; | teaspoonful every 1—2 hours.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root to 1 cup of boiling water. Drink cold or hot, 1—2 cupfuls a day, a large
mouthful at a time; of the tincture, “%—1 fluidram.

----- PAGE 118 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for albuminuria, aphonia, asthma, cataract, colic, cornea
(spots on), eruptions, eyes (affections of), gonorrhea, gravel, headache, leukorrhea, lungs (edema of),
rheumatism, scurvy, strangury, toothache, ulcers, urinary disorders.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hren (horseradish) is a bitter spice found growing in most gardens for home use as
a food accompaniment and as folk medicine. This is a rich source of vitamin C and is given in cases of
scrofula, as a stomachic, and as a diuretic. The juice of the root mixed with honey aids a sluggish liver.
The whole root boiled in beer with juniper berries is used for dropsy. PRECAUTION: the beer should be
from the old-time, naturally aged process, not artificial, fast-cured beer (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965).

----- PAGE 119 -----
HORSETAIL

Equisetum arvense

COMMON NAMES: Shave grass, bottlebrush, pewterwort.

FEATURES: Equisetum arvense is among the many species of horsetail. A perennial plant rising from
creeping rootstocks, the numerous stems are furrowed, many-jointed; fructification in terminal conelike
spikes. The spikes are the first to appear in the spring (can be prepared like asparagus), but they die after
a few weeks and are followed by a clump of stems, the outer layer of which contains a quantity of silica.
The plant grows in sand and gravel, along roadsides and railway tracks, and in wet places.

Native Americans and Mexicans used the stems for scouring pots; can also be used for polishing
hardwood, ivory, and brass (hence the common name pewterwort).

MEDICINAL PART: The entire plant.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, astringent.

Users: Native Americans and early settlers used the stems as a stimulating diuretic in kidney and dropsical
disorders. Horsetail is very much used today by herbalists for eye and skin treatment because of the
considerable amount of silica. Homeopathic tablets of silica are used for catarrhal conditions with
offensive, puslike discharges of ear, nose, and throat; grandular discharge; skin disorders; and offensive
perspiration, especially of the feet. It is also found beneficial in dropsy, gravel, and all kinds of kidney
affections. It strengthens the heart and lungs and is an excellent tonic when the whole system is enfeebled.
For discomfort and difficulty in discharging urine, it is not to be replaced. A specific in bleeding of all
kinds, taken internally, but should be discontinued when cessation takes place.
Internally in all indicated conditions the following is used:

Tincture of shave grass (Equisetum arvense), 5—20 drops
Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 20-40 drops
Tincture of corn silk (Mays stigma), 10-20 drops

----- PAGE 120 -----
In water three or more times a day as required by condition. As a herbal tea by itself, or combined with
the above, steep | teaspoonful in 1 cup of boiling water for 45 minutes, in covered container. Cool, take a
mouthful four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: As a compress or sponge bath for old injuries, putrid wounds, gangrenous ulcers, or
external bleeding. Simmer covered for 2 hour, cool, and administer; make fresh daily.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant chopped and pounded to a pulp for cystitis, dropsy,
enuresis, general paralysis, gleet, gonorrhea, gravel, hematuria, urine (retention of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hvosh pokvoy (horsetail) is given medical recognition; many others are similar
but not valued as the same. Folk medicine: Use horsetail as a tea, nastoika (with vodka), and as a
powder, in many cases. Known as a diuretic in heart conditions due to dropsy (excess of water) and
deficiency of blood circulation. Is of use in kidney stones, but should not be used when the kidneys are
inflamed. When bleeding from the stomach or intestinal tract, horsetail is effective; also useful in
excessive female bleeding. Folk medicine has also found the properties valuable for blood purifying and
liver conditions. Experimentally, an important agent to cleanse the system of lead poisoning and as a
diuretic (Medical Literature, Moscow, 1962). Clinically: In use as an extract, tincture, tablets, and
powder. Externally: A powder for bleeding wounds and ulcers; also for veterinary use of the same
conditions.

----- PAGE 121 -----
HYDRANGEA

Hydrangea arborescens

COMMON NAMES: Wild hydrangea, seven barks (due to the seven separate layers of different-colored
bark).

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America and native to woodlands of rich, moist soil and some shade.
There are twenty-three species of Hydrangea related to the well-known cultivated hydrangea, widely
distributed in eastern Asia and North Central, and South America. The flowers are mostly white, often
tinged with pink or purple, and in a few are entirely colored depending on the acidity or alkalinity of the
soil. Because the flowers appear from July through September (later in milder climates), the plants are
highly valued for garden beauty and readily grown from cuttings or layering.

MEDICINAL PARTs: Dried root. (J. Kloss used the leaves as tonic, diuretic, sialagogue.)
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, diuretic, nephritic (relieving kidney disorders).

Uses: An old and admirable remedy for gravel, and is best known for relieving the excruciating pain
experienced when the gravelly formations pass through the ureters from the kidneys to the bladder. Also
recognized for inflamed tissue of the kidney and urinary organs. Will relieve backache caused by kidney
trouble, chronic rheumatism, parallelism scurvy, and dropsy.

Dose: A syrup or decoction of the root may be taken in teaspoonful doses several times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves and young shoots, fluid extract for bladder (catarrh of,
stone in), diabetes, gravel, prostatic affections, urine (incontinence of).

----- PAGE 122 -----
HYSSOP
Hyssopus officinalis

FEATURES: Native to southern Europe, sparsely naturalized in the United States. The common hyssop
(Hyssopus officinalis), of the mint family, is a perennial shrubby plant with square stems, woody at the
base, with rodlike branches reaching 2 feet in height. The leaves stand in pairs without petioles. They
have an agreeable aromatic odor; hot, spicy, and somewhat bitter taste. The flowers are bluish purple,
growing chiefly on one side of short verticillate spikes, flowering in July.

Hyssop is spoken of in the Bible (Psalms 51:7) in connection with cleansing and purifying the body.
There seems to be some controversy as to the particular plant. The Hebrew name ezeb has been translated
“hyssop,” and this is said to have grown out of the walls. It is quite possible the name is applied to
several plants of similar properties.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, aromatic, carminative, tonic, expectorant.

Usrs: Generally used in quinsy and other sore throats as a gargle, with sage. Valuable in asthma, colds,
grippe and all chest affections, and shortness of breath. Excellent as a blood regulator, both increasing the
circulation of the blood and reducing blood pressure. Is a fine tonic for the mucous tissue of both
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract in all weakened conditions. Serviceable in combination with
hygienic herbs for scrofula, gravel, various stomach complaints, jaundice, dropsy, spleen malfunction.
Has been used in herbal preparations for epilepsy.

Culpeper says: “Mixed with honey will kill worms of the belly.” The hot vapors of the decoction will
ease inflammation and singing noise of the ear if a funnel relays the vapors of simmering hyssop to this
area.

Dose: | ounce to | pint infusion is given in wineglassful doses throughout the day according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaves are valuable to relieve the pain and discoloration of bruises. Healing to
fresh wounds and old ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Take the first letter, 4, from hyssop and it will be a Russian name, yssop. It is not

----- PAGE 123 -----
considered a wild growing plant in Russia, but cultivation is profitable for medical, industrial, and
commercial uses. Folk medicine: Used as expectorant and stimulant for asthma and chronic bronchitis.
Externally: For healing wounds and ulcers. Commercial: From the second year after planting hyssop it
can be harvested for the next ten years, with each yield growing stronger and more plentiful. Every year
cutting of the dry herb and flowers can yield 1,500—3,000 pounds for each acre. Industrial: For medicinal
purposes hyssop is collected before flowering. For industrial oil extract, at the beginning of the flowering
season. Hyssop is used for its strong aromatic touch in the wine, food, confectionery, and cosmetic
industries. Bees like hyssop nectar; from one acre they can easily, even ina short Russian summer, collect
pollen for 60 pounds of honey. Hungary has special industrial plantations for hyssop oil extract.

----- PAGE 124 -----
JUNIPER

Juniperus communis

COMMON NAMES: Juniper bush, juniper berries.

FEATURES: An ornamental evergreen of the pine family with trees and shrubs of about forty species. The
common juniper (Juniper cornmunis) is a smaller species, usually less than 25 feet tall, and many of its
numerous varieties are less than 10 feet. This shrub is common on dry, sterile hills from Canada south to
New Jersey, west to Nebraska, and in the Rocky Mountains of New Mexico.

The leaves open in whorls of three, are glaucous and concave above, keeled underneath. Flowers in
May, with fleshy fruit of dark purplish color, ripening in the second year after the flower. Every part of the
shrub is medicinal, and the French peasantry prepare a sort of tar, which they call huile de cade, from the
interior reddish wood of the trunk and branches. This is our popular juniper tar.

MEDICINAL PART: Ripe, dry berries.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, stimulant, carminative.

Usss: If we may speak of the conditions of internal accumulative filth we would suggest juniper berries
as an agent used for fumigating the system to ward off contagion. Sebastian Kneipp, in My Water Cure
(1897), says this about the berries: “Those who are nursing patients with serious illness as Scarlet fever,
small pox, typhus, cholera, etc. and are exposed to contagion by raising, carrying, or serving the patient,
or by speaking with him, should always chew a few juniper-berries (6-10 a day). They give a pleasant
taste in the mouth and are of good service to the digestion, they burn up as it were, the harmful miasms,
exhalations, when these seek to enter through the mouth or nostrils.”

Persons with a weak stomach should chew five softened berries a few days in succession, increasing
the amount one a day until fifteen berries a day are taken. Then decrease the amount by one berry a day for
five more days. Obstinate stomach troubles have been relieved by releasing pressures that cause stomach
tissue weakness, indigestion—in general, poor assimilation. For sluggish conditions of the kidneys,
juniper berries will be found most serviceable; they increase the flow of urine but should not be used

----- PAGE 125 -----
alone in sensitive conditions. Small doses reduce irritation, while large doses may increase it, so it is
best to combine with peach leaves (Amygdalus persica), a little marshmallow root (Althaea officinalis),
uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos), parsley (petroselinum crispum), alfalfa (Medicago sativa), etc.

A useful agent for many ailments: expels wind and strengthens the stomach, for coughs and shortness of
breath, consumption, rupture, cramps, convulsions, gout, sciatica, dropsy, and ague. It will strengthen the
nerves and is an agent used for epilepsy; some causes are aggravated due to stomach, intestinal, and nerve
vibratory interference. Kills worms in children and adults. Dr. Coffin tells us: “If Juniper boughs are
burnt to ashes and the ashes put into water, a medicine will be obtained that has cured the dropsy in an
advanced stage.”

For fumigating a room that has been used by a patient with an infectious disease, a solution used as a
spray destroys all fungi.

Dose: To make an infusion, several tablespoonfuls of the berries are generally prepared by macerating
(softening by soaking), then adding them to | pint of boiling water for % hour or more. Cool and divide
the mixture into four portions, which are then taken morning, noon, afternoon, and evening. Dose of the
tincture, 10-30 drops.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh ripe berries for dropsy, dysmenorrhea, hemorrhage.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mozshevelnik obiknovennyi, or Juniper vulgaris, grows in many parts of Russia.
The berries and twigs are used for medicinal purpose with nastoika (in vodka) as diuretic, expectorant,
disinfectant, digestive, antiseptic (Atlas, Moscow, 1962). Junipers are direct in affect and the doses
should be kept very small; steep 1 teaspoonful in 1 cup of boiling water for 15 minutes, strain, take |
tablespoonful three times a day. WARNING: cannot be used when kidneys are inflamed. Used successfully in
colpatitis (vaginal inflammation) (Saratov University, 1962). The raw berries for stomach ulcers;
decoction of berries and twigs for menstrual restoration and diatheses (uric acid) retention throughout, or
specific parts of the body.

----- PAGE 126 -----
LADY’S SLIPPER
Cypripedium pubescens

COMMON NAMES: Nerve root, Noah’s ark, yellow lady’s sliper, American valprian, yellow moccasin
flower.

FEATURES: Lady’s slipper is among the primitive members of the family Orchidaceae and is among the
most beautiful and best-known orchids. Some fifty species comprise the genus Cypripedium, found in
Europe, Asia, and North America and as far south as the tropics. There are eleven species found in North
America. Professor Rainesque of the University of Pennsylvania says in Medical Botany. “All species
are equally remedial.”

The plant grows in North America in rich woods and meadows and flowers in May and June. The two
or more folded and prominently ribbed leaves are sheathed, located near the base of the plant or on the
stem. The usually showy flowers (numbering 1—12) are characterized by the sessile, inflated or pouch-
shaped, variously colored lip, from which the plant receives its general name, Aphrodite’s shoe. Native
Americans called the beautiful plant “mocassin flower’; its use was known to them for generations. The
empirics of New England, particularly Samuel Thompson, had much respect for mutual evidence. The
fibrous roots are the parts used in medicine, and they should be gathered and carefully cleaned in August
or September.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiperiodic, nervine, tonic.

Uses: This medicine is an excellent nervine and acts as a tonic to the exhausted nervous system,
improving by circulation and nutrition of the nerve centers. It relieves pain (if present) and produces a
calm and tranquil condition of body and mind. From the quick response and high attributions many
suppose it possesses narcotic properties, but to this the answer is “none present.”

It is of special value in reflex functional disorders or chorea, hysteria, nervous headache, insomnia,
low fevers, nervous unrest, hypochondria, and nervous depression accompanying stomach disorders.
During fevers its use is indicated for restlessness, and during the early fever stages of pneumonia,
combined with a little lobelia (Lobelia inflata) and ginger (Zingiber), it will often cut short the trouble.
Combine with skullcap (Scutellaria) in various nervous affections such as hysteria, headache, Saint
Vitus’ dance, or other diseases of this nature. For the feeling of depression due to stomach disorders,
lady’s slipper (Cypripedium) and chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile) should be taken before meals and
on retiring. As a home remedy the root is best roughly ground, 5 tablespoonfuls in | pint of boiling water;
steep for an hour, take 1 tablespoonful every hour, as needed. Of the tincture of Cypripedium alone, 5—30
drops, according to age and severity of condition.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture and infusion of fresh root gathered in autumn for brain affections,
chorea, convulsions, debility and sleeplessness, delirium tremens, ecstasy, epilepsy, mental despondency,
nervous debility, neuralgia, postinfluenza debility, sleeplessness, spermatorrhea, stye.

----- PAGE 127 -----
LICORICE
Glycyrrhiza glabra

COMMON NAME: Sweetwood.

FEATURES: A perennial species introduced into various countries from southern Europe and western Asia.
It grows 3-5 feet tall, bears imparipinnate dark green leaves in pairs of 4-7, ovate and smooth. The
yellowish white, pale blue, or purplish spike-shaped flowers are followed by 1—6-seeded, 1-inch-long,
brown, flat ova fruit pods. Root grayish brown or dark brown, wrinkled lengthwise, internally yellow,
and four times sweeter than cane sugar. The roots are dug when sweetest, in autumn of the fourth year,
preferably of plants that have not borne fruit, which exhausts the sweetness of the sap.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENT: Water, sparingly in alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, expectorant, laxative, pectoral.

Uses: Licorice is the well-known root extract for coughs and chest complaints. It is best combined with
some, or all, of the following: black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), wild cherry (Prunus serotina),
flaxseed (Linum), ginger root (Zingiber), and lemon and made into an infusion for wheezing or shortness
of breath, pains of the breasts and lungs, dry cough or hoarseness. Can be used alone, however, as the root
of this plant is greatly esteemed. Some of the latest research from Green Medicine Research Laboratories
in Long Island has found active materials in licorice root to have a molecular structure similar to that of
hormones from the adrenal cortex (a most important component of the endocrine glandular system),
besides being useful in treating chronic skin conditions. From M. B. Kreig’s Green Medicine:
“Derivatives from Licorice were given to patients with gastric ulcers, with the result that the ulcers
disappeared in 37 per cent of the cases, and were greatly reduced in the remainder according to the
researchers.” The reason being, licorice is a beneficial laxative and demulcent, thus removing gastric-
ulcer causing material from the intestinal tract and relieving the conditions of the unwanted ulcers.

Used since ancient times, it was considered a mild demulcent of little value except as a flavoring agent
until more recent research found the root to be valuable as a source of estrogenic hormones. Culpeper
used licorice for dropsy and to allay thirst, besides the already mentioned ailments. Too much licorice is

----- PAGE 128 -----
apt to sicken the stomach or even produce vomiting from its relaxing character.

Dose: | pound of licorice root boiled in 3 pints of water, reduced by boiling to 1 quart, is an all-purpose
decoction; 1 teaspoonful three times a day. 1 teaspoonful of the dried root to 1 cup of boiling water can be
taken as a herbal tea, made fresh daily. Of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Solodka gladkaya, smooth (polished) licorice, grows in many parts of Russia. It is
used for commercial, industrial, and medical purposes. Folk medicine: Domestically very old medicine
for cough, bronchitis, stomachic, including ulcers, diuretic for inflammation of kidney and bladder,
chronic constipation. Clinically: Preparations as extracts, powders, and syrups are used for a variety of
compounds, not only for its aromatic and sweetening properties; of late, clinically useful for regulating
water and salt metabolism (Medicina, Moscow, 1965). Externally: An ointment for eczema, psoriasis,
redness of skin, is made by adding 2 percent licorice juice to an antibiotic formula (Saratov University
1962). Industrial: Licorice is collected with tractors, transported by trainload, and exported by shipload
for the food and pharmaceutical industries. The uses are many: sweetening and flavoring in the candy and
canning industries: in soft drinks, beer, and liquor; by tobacco houses for taste and appeal in chewing
tobacco; in fire extinguishers, as it foams when mixed with water.

INDIAN EXPERIENCE: Jethi madh, madhoka, mithi lakdi are a few of the common names for licorice in
India. It grows wild in the northern and western sections of India and Pakistan. Folk medicine: Generally
used in doses of 10-30 grains for dysuria, throat conditions, hoarseness, of voice, bronchitis, coughs,
asthma, etc.; for catarrhal conditions of bowel, kidney, and bladder. Clinically: Alterative, expectorant,
emollient, demulcent, laxative, pectoral, sweet tonic, stomachic. In pharmacy the syrup is used for all
compounds that require aromatics and sweeteners.

----- PAGE 129 -----
LIFE ROOT

Senecio aureus

COMMON NAMES: Squaw weed, ragwort, false valerian, golden senecio, female regulator, cocash weed,
groundsel.

FEATURES: Life root and various other composite herbs of the genus Senecio are common in most parts of
the world. In North America they are found mostly in the eastern states. As these species possess the same
medicinal properties, they can be used interchangeably. These perennial, coarse, yellow-flowered plants
are allied to the thistles. Can be found in low marshy grounds and on the banks of creeks. The stems are
erect and smooth, 1—2 feet high; radical leaves are simple and rounded, upper leaves are few, dentate, and
sessile. Flowers in May and June. Popular with Native Americans, homeopaths, and herbalists.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, whole herb.
SOLVENT: Diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, emmenagogue, pectoral, astringent, tonic.

Uses: We of the modern age are bewildered by so many female abnormalities, from granddaughter to
grandmother. The time-honored “female regulator” (Senecio aureus), of specific use and without
complications, is still reliable. Senecio stimulates the pelvic organs relieving engorgement by removing
pressure stemming from the perineum, bladder, and rectum. A completely safe aid in gynecological
disorders such as dysmenorrhea (painful menstruation), menorrhagia (excessive menstruation),
suppressed menstruation, atonic leukorrhea (excessive mucous secretion), and other disturbances of the
pelvic organs, including various functional irregularities of menopause. It strengthens flabby uterine
ligaments and has a use for diseases of men when prostatic enlargement is of the soft, boggy, and atonic
type. It is also valuable in gravel, stones, and diarrhea.

In pulmonary complaints it is advisable to combine 1 teaspoonful of the fluid extract with other
pectorals in sweetened water. Life root is indicated for many different uses as a household remedy.

CAUTION: Toxic in doses larger than those indicated below.

----- PAGE 130 -----
Dose: Tincture of Senecio alone, 10—20 drops in water three or four times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for amenorrhea, ascites, coryza, cough,
dropsy, dysmenorrhea, dysuria, epistaxis, fainting, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhages, homesickness, hysteria,
kidney (inflammation of), lumbago, mania, menorrhagia, menstruation (delayed, early, profuse, obstructed,
vicarious), nails (brittle), nervousness, neurasthenia, phthisis, prostatitis, puerperal mania, renal colic,
sciatica, spermatic cord (pain in), wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Life root, Senecio platyphylus (broadleaf), grows in Russia’s Caucasus
Mountains; known in Russian as krestovnik. There is no folk medicine practice indicated in Russian
literature. Clinically: Extracts of the root and herb are used in powder form and ampoules (Atlas,
Moscow, 1962). Clinically given for stomach and intestinal spasm, spasmodic constipation, ulcers,
colitis, colic, liver malfunction, bronchial asthma, high blood pressure, angina pectoris, disturbance and
circulation of the blood stream due to spasmodic character. Also used in eye practice. Commercial: to
meet the demand for life root, successful plantations are located in many parts of central Russia,
Byelorussia, and Ukraine. For one acre they seed 5—6 pounds in square nest system; row system, 7—8
pounds. The first year’s collection of the dried herb is about 100-200 pounds per acre. The third year’s
harvest jumps to 800—1,000 pounds of the dried roots and herb for the same acre.

----- PAGE 131 -----
LINDEN

Tilia cordata

COMMON NAMES: Lime tree, common lime, linden flower, American basswood.

FEATURES: Linden is a common name for trees of the genus Zilia in the family Tiliaceae, which in Great
Britain are commonly called limes and in America basswood (the native species at least), which is Tilia
americana, a magnificent forest tree that reaches 130 feet in height. The genus comprises some thirty
species of handsome large- or medium-sized trees native to the north temperate zone whose taxonomy is
much confused because of free hybridization among many members. All lindens grow best in rich, moist
soil and shed their leaves early in dry locations.

The species is characterized by prominent winter buds and the lack of a terminal bud; the leaves, which
are mostly roundish ovate with oblique and more or less cordate bases, are always toothed and often have
tufts of down in the axils of the veins of the lower surface. Flowers are dull white or yellowish, about %
inch wide, with five sepals and petals and numerous stamens cohering in groups in many species. The
flowers appear in June and August and are very fragrant; they produce copious amounts of nectar, that is
very attractive to bees. The linden honey is of high quality and rather strong flavor. One of two varieties
produce substances poisonous to bees. The fruit is the size and shape of a pea and is commonly called
monkey nuts. The fine-grained wood is soft and light, making it ideal for carving, and it was used by the
Iroquois. Of no use in construction.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Flowers, leaves.

SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Nervine, stimulant, tonic.

Usgs: A well-known and much-used herb for domestic use in nervous conditions and disorders following
colds. Promotes perspiration in fevers and relieves cough and hoarseness, helps remove mucus from the
lungs and trachea, and provides relief from bronchial catarrh. Advisable to combine with coltsfoot
(Tussilago farfara) for this purpose. The infusion will also flush the kidney, bladder, and stomach of
unwanted mucus when present and prevent the development of serious abdominal conditions that are
sometimes the cause of lung and windpipe complaints. It is also excellent for female complaints and has
had a great reputation for aid in epilepsy.

Dose: Infusion of leaves or flowers—1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, steep ’2 hour, cool and
drink as frequently as required. Tincture, 15—20 drops as indicated by condition.

----- PAGE 132 -----
EXTERNALLY: Poultices on boils and other painful swellings.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh blossom for dentition, enuresis, epistaxis, leukorrhea, lichen,
neuralgia, peritonitis, rheumatism, toothache, urticaria, uterus (bearing down in, prolapses of,
inflammation of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian lippa (linden) is a most popular tree, there being eleven species
throughout Russia; they sometimes grow so closely that /ippa foliage is all that can be seen. It is estimated
that there are about 2 million acres of pure linden, besides many square miles of assorted trees. Folk
medicine: As diuretic (cool or warm), diaphoretic (hot with honey or raspberry syrup), conditions of
colds, inflamed lungs, headache, nerve tension or debility, sterility, amenorrhea. One teaspoonful of
linden charcoal and goat’s milk is given for tuberculosis. The leaves and flowers are steeped as a strong
tea for throat and cough soreness and as a gargle. Externally: Linden tar is used for eczema, the leaves as
poultice for boils and carbuncles. Industrial: Wine industry uses aromatic linden flowers; and honey,
which is considered the best. The soft elastic wood is excellent for all kinds of wooden kitchenware, and
furniture.

----- PAGE 133 -----
LOBELIA
Lobelia inflata

\

<

ay

Led

= g
y,
J

a

fis
PY)

COMMON NAMES: Indian tobacco, emetic weed, poke weed, asthma weed, gagroot, wild tobacco.

FEATURES: A genus of more than two hundred species of showy annual or perennial herbs or subshrubs of
tropical and temperate regions, belonging to the bellflower family (Campanulaceae). This plant grows
wild in most sections of the United States and is often known as Indian tobacco because of its taste.
However, it is inno way related to tobacco and does not contain nicotine or other poisonous properties.

In all species the tubular, five-lobed corolla is irregular with a split on the upper side, an upper lip
with two erect lobes, and a lower one with three spreading lobes. Lobelia flowers from July to
November; the flowers are small and numerous, pale blue in this species, and a variety of red, yellow,
white, or blue in others. The leaves are alternate, ovate, lanceolate, veiny, and hairy; it has a fibrous root
and an erect, angular, very hairy stem 6 inches to 3 feet in height. The fruit is a two-celled ovoid capsule
containing numerous small brown seeds. More than twenty species attain considerable heights (up to 15
feet in the high mountains of Africa and Asia). Some dwarf lobelia plants (Lobelia erina) are cultivated
as bedding plants or in hanging baskets.

The proper time for gathering is from the last of July to the middle of October. The plant should be
dried in the shade and then preserved in packages or covered vessels, especially if reduced to powder.
The people of New England used it long before the time of Samuel Thompson, its assumed discoverer.
Contains various alkaloids, lobeline and others. The milky juice is very poisonous to livestock. The
whole plant is active, and the stalks are used indiscriminately with the leaves by those who are better
acquainted with its properties. The root is supposed to be more energetic, medicinally, than any other part
of the plant.

----- PAGE 134 -----
MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems, root.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, stimulant, antispasmodic, expectorant, diaphoretic, relaxant, nauseant,
sedative (secondary cathartic and astringent).

Uses: Native Americans used the root and plant of red lobelia for syphilis and for expelling or destroying
intestinal worms. The Shoshones made a tea of lobelia for use as an emetic and physic.

Lobelia is dual in its activities; it is a relaxant and a stimulant. In small doses it stimulates, in large
doses it relaxes. Lobelia is one of the most valuable herbs used in botanic practice. Much has been
written regarding whether this herb is poisonous, but experience suggests that it is an antidote to poison,
whether of animal or vegetable variety. Lobelia is an antidote, chiefly used as an emetic, and may be
prescribed whenever one is indicated. It seems strange that though lobelia is an excellent emetic, when
given in small doses for irritable stomach it will stop spasmodic vomition. It tends to remove obstructions
from every part of the system and is felt even to the ends of the toes. It not only cleanses the stomach but
exercises a beneficial influence over every part of the body. It is very diffusable, however, and needs to
be used with capsicum or some other permanent stimulant to keep alive the blaze that it has kindled.

The action is different on different people, and given alone lobelia cannot cure but is very beneficial if
given in association with other measures. For irritable conditions of the nervous system it is invaluable
and can be relied upon in ordinary convulsions; it should be combined with some nervine, such as lady’s
slipper (Cypripedium pubescens). As an expectorant it may be used to great advantage in small doses for
colds, along with the decided pulmonary agent coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara). For spasmodic croup it is
invaluable; it has also gained a great reputation for asthma along with nervines such as blue cohosh
(Caulophyllum thalictroides) and skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia). It has been successfully used in
lockjaw. Large doses will relax the whole system, completely, so that even the smallest muscles cannot be
used. This condition is termed the “alarm,” and Dr. J. H. Greer tells us “it is uncomfortable although not
dangerous, unless poisons should be administered, which are in this condition quickly absorbed.” This is
not advisable administration for the lay public, however.

Lobelia, in fevers, is suited for phrenitis, meningitis, pneumonia, pleurisy, hepatitis, peritonitis,
nephritis, periostitis. This is not a continually used agent; the intention is to clean out, clean up, and keep
clean the many areas of congestion of the vertebral arteries to pave the way for the use of other remedial
nourishment. In bronchial and pulmonary complaints its action is speedily and wonderfully beneficial.
Can also be used to subdue spasms, epilepsy, tetanus, cramps, hysteria, chorea, and convulsions. Give
first of all an infusion of catnip (Nepeta) to the bowels, which of itself will do much to relieve the brain
and can be administered even when the patient is delirious. Give lobelia in small quantities as the case
may require, but clean out the waste material and relieve the locked-up condition of the body that is
causing the trouble. It is a temporary relief in any case when administered internally, if not used with great
skill and caution it may do as much harm as good.

CAUTION: Never administer lobelia where the system is relaxed or when there is congestion.

Dose: | ounce of the herb to | pint of boiling water makes an ordinary infusion, to be administered in
tablespoonful doses every hour or half-hour. A weak infusion given in teaspoonful doses every 10 minutes
(termed “broken doses”) will thoroughly relax the muscular system and prove a great aid in reducing
fractures and dislocations, especially if a cloth soaked in the warm infusion is applied over the seat of the
difficulty. For convulsions, injections of the herb as infusion is best.

EXTERNALLY: A salve or tincture of lobelia and other soothing barks and roots can be employed for
inflammations and swellings, not recommended for indolent ulcers or dark sores.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant, trituration of leaves only for alcoholism, alopecia,

----- PAGE 135 -----
amenorrhea, angina pectoris, asthma, cardialgia, cough, croup, deafness, debility, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea,
dyspepsia, emphysema, faintness, gallstones, gastralgia, hemorrhoidal discharge, hay asthma, heart
(affections of), hysteria, meningeal headaches, Millar’s asthma, morning sickness (of drunkards, of
pregnancy), morphia habit, palpitation, pleurisy, psoriasis, rigid as seborrhea, shoulders (pain in), tea
(effects of), urethra (stricture of), vagina (serious discharge from), vomiting (of pregnancy), wens,
whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The Russians pronounce lobelia the same as do the Americans. Lobelia is popular
as both a commercial and industrial cultivation in central Russia—Krasnodar, Voronezh, Moscow, and
Byelorussia. The use of folk medicine is not indicated in the available literature. Clinically: The whole
plant is used for many critical conditions. The all-important adrenal glands are aroused by stimulating
adrenalin into the blood stream; it is not accumulative and can be used repeatedly. Respiratory area is
soon relieved of symptoms of asthma and spasmodic conditions. Is useful in cases where first aid is
needed when shocked by electricity, sun- and heatstroke, to force vomiting when poisoned by narcotics,
food, or medicine, in carbon monoxide poisoning, and in infections (Atlas, Moscow, 1962).

----- PAGE 136 -----
LUNGWORT

Pulmonaria officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Spotted lungwort, maple lungwort, Jerusalem cowslip, spotted comfrey.

FEATURES: Lungwort may be any of several plants used as folk remedies for lung disease. One is a
widely distributed lichen (Lobaria pulmonaria), that grows usually on tree trunks. Others are hairy
perennials that belong to the genus Pulmonaria of the borage family (Boraginaceae) and have pink, blue,
purple, or white flowers; sometimes grown as ornamentals in northern latitudes. This particular perennial
species (P. officinalis) is a smooth plant with a stem about | foot high. The flowers are blue, funnel-
shaped, with a five-angled corolla with stigma, flowering in May. They are without any particular odor.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, mucilaginous, pectoral.

UsEs: Its virtues seem to be entirely expended upon the lungs, and it is certainly an efficaciously reliable
agent for all morbid conditions of these organs, especially when there is bleeding from the lung structure
and functions. Also valuable as a treatment for coughs, asthma, colds, bronchial and catarrhal affections.
Seems to seal the weakened tissue and take away inflammation.

Dose: The infusion of 2 ounces in | pint of boiling water is taken in frequent doses of a wineglassful.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two species of lungwort grow in Russia, lungwort obscura and Pulmonaria
angustifolia (narrow-leaf lungwort). Both species are used for the same purpose. In this case, as with
many other of our folk medicines around the world, the people have independently discovered the useful
properties of the plant and named the plant according to its most influential action on certain parts of the
body. Such is the attractive lungwort: in Latin, pulmonaria (pulm-lung); in Russian, legochnitza, (legkie-
lung); in English, lungwort (from the lung). Folk medicine: The medical properties of lungwort have long
been accepted as emollient, mild astringent, tonic, and a natural source of minerals for stomach and
intestinal sickness and lung and pulmonary conditions. There have been recent (1963) reports in medical

----- PAGE 137 -----
literature of lungwort being used with other compounds. Externally: Vulnerary for dressing and washing
wounds and swellings, and in treatment of amenorrhea, as it is antiseptic. Clinically: Moscow Medical
Institute has conducted experimental work, and the findings give support to folk medicine wisdom and
belief. To those of us who like to know what herbal medicine contains, and why it repairs the body’s ills,
perhaps the following itemization will help us realize that plants contain many of the elements we also are
made of, or that are necessary for healthy blood. Lungwort contains vitamins C and B and minerals—iron,
copper, silver, manganese, keratin, titan, nickel—to mention a few of the necessities. Further study by the
medical world is expected to produce significant findings.

----- PAGE 138 -----
MANDRAKE
Podophyllum peltatum

. L

COMMON NAMES: Mayapple, hog apple, American mandrake, Indian apple, raccoonberry, wild lemon.

FEATURES: In the United States the name mayapple is applied to Podophyllum peltatum, a herbaceous
member of the barberry family (Berberidaceae) that has a perennial and sometimes divided rootstock.
The American mandrake is an entirely different plant from white bryony, or English mandrake. American
mandrake is native to eastern North America and can be found growing throughout the States in moist
open woods and pastures.

The jointed, dark brown root, about half the size of a finger, is very fibrous and internally yellow. The
stem is simple, round, smooth, erect, about 1 foot high, divided at the top into two petioles 3—6 inches
long, each supporting two large, peltate, deeply lobed leaves and a solitary nodding white flower 1-2
inches across; flowers in spring and in flavor resembles the strawberry. The 2-inch fleshy berry is
yellow, edible when ripe only, and is sometimes used for preserves; rarely develops until July. In the
green state the rhizome, foliage, seeds, and green fruit are poisonous. The proper time for collecting the
root is the latter part of October or early part of November, soon after the fruit has ripened. Its active
principle is podophyllin, which acts upon the liver in the same manner as mercury but is far superior to
mercury; with intelligent physicians it has dethroned that noxious mineral as a cholagogue.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome and the resin extracted from it.
SoLvENts: Alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, hepatic, hydragogue, cholagogue, alterative, tonic, emetic, purgative.

Usss: Its usefulness covers a wide range, brought to our attention by the Native Americans. It seldom
fails in cases of urine incontinence or diseases associated with it. The influence is exercised on every
part of the system, stimulating glands to a healthy action, releasing obstructions such as those leading to
bilious and typhoid febrile disease. In chronic liver diseases it has no equal in the whole range of herbal
practice. For all chronic scrofulous, dyspeptic complaints it is highly valuable, acting upon the bowels
without disposing them to subsequent costiveness. In cases of determination of blood to the brain,
mandrake, given in cathartic doses, is prompt and will soon restore the equilibrium of the circulation. In

----- PAGE 139 -----
old cases of mecurial poisoning it acts promptly; as a tonic and alterative should always be combined
with other herbs. For children, smaller doses should be prescribed, according to age. This herb is
powerful in action and should be combined with a supporting herb such as black root (Veronicastrum),
senna leaves (Cassia senna), etc., for better results.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water. Take | teaspoonful at a time as
required. Of the tincture, 2—5 minims.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of root gathered after fruit has ripened, of whole fresh plant, of ripe
fruit. Solution of resinous extract, podophyllin, for acidity, amenorrhea, anus (prolapse of), asthma
(bronchial), bilious attack, bronchitis, cataract, cholera infantum, cornea (ulcer of), dentition, diarrhea
(cramp), duodenum (catarrh of), dysentery, dyspepsia (from calomel), fevers, flatulence, gagging,
gallstones, gastric catarrh, goiter, hemorrhoids, headache (sick, bilious), heart (pains in), hydrocephalus,
intermittents, jaundice, leukoma, liver (affections of), ophthalmia, ovaries (pain in, numbness in, tumor
of), palpitation, pneumonia, proctitis, prostatitis, pustules, sciatica, stomatitis, strabismus, taste (lost,
perverted, illusions of), tenesmus, tongue (burning in), urticaria, uterus (prolapse of), whooping cough,
worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian literature refers to the Latin name Podophyllum (podofil). Mandrake does
not grow wild in Russia, but they import American Podophyllum and find that the importance of this
medical plant warrants cultivation. Clinically: For chronic constipation, liver and gallbladder conditions,
to promote bile, malignancy of the skin (cancer) (Atlas, Moscow, 1963). For the lymphatic system,
spleen, blood conditions, skin malignancies and growths (Naukova dumka, Kiev, 1965). Commercial:
American mandrake, Podophyllum peltatum, and India’s Podophyllum emodi are under special agro-
technological supervision. American mandrake receives the most attention, being cultivated in two ways.
One is by planting root sections, which can produce twenty-five to thirty plants, and the other by seeding.
Harvest quantity is not revealed in literature to date. Mandrake does not flower before the third year.
Requires the correct soil, climate, cultivation, weeding and much attention to water, as it cannot stand

dryness.

----- PAGE 140 -----
MILKWEED

Asclepias syriaca

COMMON NAMES: Emetic root, snake milk, milk ipecac.

FEATURES: Most of the 150 species of the Asclepiadaceae family are erect perennial herbs 2-4 feet high.
The root is yellowish, large, and branching. The leaves are scattered, sessile, oblong, smooth in some
plants, very hairy in others, and 1—2 inches in length. The attractive flowers are white and purplish white,
with fruit in a three-celled capsule. The genus is named in honor of the Greek god Asclepius (god of
medicine).

Milkweed grows abundantly in Canada and the United States in dry fields and woods, and flowers
from June to September. When the leaves are pulled off, or the stem cut, a milky white liquid rushes to the
exposed surface. Asclepius is poisonous to cattle and sheep but rarely to horses. The Native Americans
used the inside fibers for rope and fishing nets; the milk was collected and rolled until firm enough to
make chewing gum. The boiled roots taste like asparagus. The green plant was collected when very small
and boiled in two waters to use as greens. We do not advise this for the general public, as the amount and
correct species is of importance when taken in quantity. (Many common plant names are duplicated; this
milkweed—Asclepius—is not the same as bitterroot—Apocynum androsaemifolium, dog-bane family—
often also called milkweed.)

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, expectorant.

Uses: Medicinally the Native Americans used Asclepias for inflammatory rheumatism. Today it is still
employed for rheumatism, dyspepsia, and scrofulous conditions of the blood. A helpful remedy for female
complaints, bowel and kidney trouble, asthma, and stomach complaints. Used for dropsy, as it increases
the flow of urine. Effective remedy for gallstones. J. Kloss (Back to Eden) says: “Take equal parts of
milkweed and marshmallow (Althaea), steep a teaspoonful in a cup of boiling water, take 3 cups daily,
and one upon retiring. It will expel gallstones in a few days, where combined with this. Fomentations
applied to the liver and the liver thoroughly massaged at the same time is very effective.”

Dose: Bruise 4 ounces of the root and boil in 3 quarts of water, reducing down to | quart or less, and take

----- PAGE 141 -----
4 teacupful three times a day. Of the saturated tincture, 1-2 teaspoonfuls three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh milky fluid that weeps from the cut stem will in most cases cause warts to
disappear if applied often to the elevated part only.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for abortion, bronchitis, catarrhal fever, dropsy,
dysmenorrhea, hay fever, headache, indigestion, influenza, pleurisy, rheumatism, uremia, uterine pains.

----- PAGE 142 -----
MINT
Mentha piperita

COMMON NAMES: Peppermint, brandy mint, curled mint.

FEATURES: The genus Mentha consists of probably not more than fifteen true species, but with numerous
transitional forms several hundred species have been described. Practically all are native to Eurasia or
Australia. The two best-known forms are M. spicata, the spearmint, with narrow, interrupted spikes of
pink to pale violet flowers and sessile leaves, and M. piperita, the peppermint, with thicker spikes of
purplish flowers and petiole, dark green leaves. This perennial herb is 1—3 feet high, smooth square stem,
erect and branching, generally smooth on both sides but sometimes hairy on the veins of the lower surface.
Both of these species have escaped from North America. They flower from July to September; blossoms
are small and purplish. Can be found in rich soils in northern Indiana and southern Michigan and in
Canada. Peppermint oil is distilled from the dried, upper portions of the plant and consists largely of
menthol, which is used medicinally and for flavoring confections, chewing gum, and toothpaste. Should be
collected in dry weather, August and September, just as the flowers appear. If for oil, just after the
flowers have expanded.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, stomachic, carminative.

Uses: A most agreeable and harmless herb for cramps and hiccups of infants, children, and adults. My
mother of eight children always had mint growing somewhere in the garden as a reliable preparation for
unpredictable tummy trouble. A wise and beneficial herbal tea to replace coffee; it will strengthen the
heart muscle rather than causing the digestive hindrance and weakening effect of coffee. Peppermint is
cleansing and strengthening to the entire system. A strong cup of peppermint tea and ten minutes of
relaxation may obviate the need of aspirin. Peppermint is a general stimulant and will act more
powerfully on the system than any liquor stimulant, without the degenerative possibilities. Useful to check
nausea and vomiting, to expel wind, relieve hysterics, and prevent the gripping effect of cathartics. The
fresh leaves may be bruised and applied to the stomach for the above mentioned and the tea taken
internally. Also an agent for suppressed menstruation and a remedy for seasickness.

----- PAGE 143 -----
Dose: | teaspoonful of mint, fresh or dried, to 1 cupful of boiling water, steep 3-10 minutes. Children
less, use as needed. Of the tincture, “2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The bruised leaves bound on the forehead will relieve most headaches.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant, dilutions of essence for cough (dry), headache,
hoarseness, influenza, pruritus, throat (sore), voice (weakness of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Miatta, mentol, common names for Russian peppermint. Mint does not grow wild
in Russia, but together with the United States, Japan, Italy, and France, Russia is among the largest
producers of peppermint for industrial and medical purposes. Clinically and home medicine: The leaves,
oil, and menthol are used as an anodyne for headaches, for stomach trouble—gas, bloating, wind,
heartburn—toothache, as an antiseptic, for inflammations of lungs, bronchitis, sinus, throat (sore), colds.
Relaxant and antispasmodic to stop vomiting, nausea, indigestion (nastoika with vodka). It is useful for
seasickness, dizziness, diaphoretic, and to promote bile. Used in many compounds as aromatic,
carminative, tonic, relaxant, in the form of teas, tablets, oil, extract (Saratov University, 1965). Industry:
Agro-technology has developed mechanized procedures for mint plantations in many parts of European
Russia and Byelorussia. Cultivation was started in the eighteenth century in the Medical Botanics
Gardens, for medical purposes only. Today, after much experimentation, mint is cultivated through
propagation, as seeds require especially favorable conditions and still only a small percentage will
thrive. For one acre they can collect, on an average, 1,000—2,000 pounds of dry herb, which is cut first in
July and August, the flowering season. In some districts it can be cut once again before the frost comes.

----- PAGE 144 -----
MOTHERWORT

Leonurus cardiaca

COMMON NAMES: Lion’s tail, lion’s ear, throwwort.

FEATURES: There are about ten Eurasian species of this plant, three of them having been introduced into
North America from Europe. The genus is of the mint family (Labiatae). Motherwort is an exotic
perennial found growing in pastures and fields, with pink or white flowers in dense auxiliary whorls,
from May to September. The upper lip of the corolla is shaggy; the calyx has stiff teeth. The rigid stem
grows up to 5 feet, bearing some resemblance to horehound but has much longer and darker leaves.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, emmenagogue, nervine, laxative.

Uses: Motherwort has been employed from time immemorial as a domestic remedy in infusion
preparations. It is especially strengthening to the heart when problem is of a palpitation nature. A valuable
bitter tonic for almost all conditions of the stomach. Being a true nervine it is excellent for suppressed
menstruation and other female trouble, hysteria, urinary cramps, albumin in the urine, and scanty muddy
urine of typhoid. The long-established hidden talent of Leonurus has yet to be scientifically explained.
Experience shows it has also given matchless benefits in rheumatism, sciatica, neuritis, sleeplessness,
convulsion, delirium, and chest colds. Motherwort seems to seek out and eliminate unwanted congested
material that is causing discomfort. S. Clymer, in Nature's Healing Agents, suggests Leonurus in small
doses for prevention of prenatal kidney complications, especially albumin in the urine. Also an agent for
unsuspected worms. Combines well with all herbs and is used for liver affections in combinations.

Dose: Of the decoction, 1—2 wineglassfuls every 2—3 hours; of the extract, 3—5 grains.

----- PAGE 145 -----
EXTERNALLY: Hot fomentations made from strong tea will relieve cramps and pain in menstruation, etc.
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture or infusion of fresh plant for dysentery, hemorrhage.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Pustirnik serdechny, ‘heart herb’, is one of the names for motherwort, of which
there are many species. It seems to be the forgotten herb of Europe. In the fifteenth century it was
prominent in herbal books, but in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries it seems to have been neglected.
Its popularity still holds good in folk medicine of Romania as an aid to heart conditions, goiter, and
epilepsy and also in Britain for hysteria, neuralgia, weakness of heart, shortness of breath. Folk
medicine: Considers the fresh leaves and flowers better than dried. The fresh juice is extracted and
prepared for winter use—2 parts of juice to 3 parts of alcohol (Vishaya Schkola, 1963). For female
complaints of amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, sleeplessness, nervousness, tuberculosis of the lungs (Bello-
Russ. Academy of Science, 1965). For heart neurosis, high blood pressure, goiter, epilepsy, used as a tea
(Moscow University, 1963). In place of valerian (Valeriana officinalis), the fresh juice of leaves and
flowers, 30-40 drops, for calming (Saratov University, 1963). Clinically: Extract and tablets are
combined with many other herbs for neurosis of the heart, high blood pressure (cardiosclerosis, sensitive
nerves), slight form of goiter. Experimentally, toxicity is not shown, but it is used for improving the
central nervous system and heart tone, and to regulate blood pressure (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Commercial: Commercial cultivation: 7-8 pounds of seed needed for row system; 3—4 pounds for square
net procedure. Plantation harvest runs four years, with about 1,000 pounds of dry leaves and flowers to an
acre from the first year’s crop. For the following three years, 2,000—3,000 pounds per acre are attained, if
maintained with loving care.

----- PAGE 146 -----
MUGWORT

Artemisia vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Mugwort, felon herb.

FEATURES: Mugwort grows wild in North America in hedges and waste places. A slender to moderately
stout herb 1—5 feet tall; the leaves are alternate, with 5—7 lobes, silvery white beneath, nearly smooth
above. Flowers are small, ovoid, yellow to purplish, in numerous clusters from July to August. Odor
aromatic, leaves slightly bitter.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emmenagogue, diuretic, diaphoretic.

Uses: Native Americans used the leaves medicinally in decoctions for colds, colic, bronchitis,
rheumatism, and fever. Safe for suppressed menstruation, also effective in female complaints of various
nature when combined with marigold (Calendula), crampbark (Viburnum opulus), black haw (Viburnum
prunifolium), and mint (Mentha). Of importance in kidney and bladder inflammations and their many
reflected ailments, gout, sciatica, water retention, etc. Culpeper used the herb for counteraction of opium.

CAUTION: Prolonged use can cause injury to the nervous system.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped for 20 minutes. To be taken in wineglassful
amounts.

EXTERNALLY: After using a poultice of slippery elm (Ulmus rubra), cleavers, and bear’s foot
(Helleborus foetidus), bathe the inflammatory swelling with a strong tea of mugwort. Some cases of
tumors have been known to disappear, as well as abscesses, carbuncles, and bruises, if repeated
faithfully. Culpeper states: “The fresh juice mixed with hog’s grease and whipped into an ointment takes
away wens and hard kernals that grow about the neck and throat, and eases the pain, more effective if
field daisies be up with it.” The Native Americans also used it externally for wounds, and the juice was
used for poison oak.

----- PAGE 147 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for catalepsy, chorea, convulsions, dysmenia, epilepsy,
hydrocephalus, hysteria, somnambulism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mugwort is common to Russian people as Polin obiknovennaya or chernobilnik,
which grows in all parts of Russia and was an accepted home medicine before being thought of as
material for books. Folk medicine: Uses the leaves, roots, and whole plant in female sickness of many
varieties—amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, cramps, labor pains; generally as calming, nervine for
convulsions, epilepsy, neurasthenia, and other nervous disorders (Atlas, Moscow, 1962); for colds,
stones (kidney, bladder, gallbladder) (Medicina, Moscow, 1965); roots and herb as decoction for
tubercular lungs, epilepsy (Moscow University, 1963); decoction of the whole plant for gastric
conditions, nervousness, fright, epilepsy, convulsions, female weakness; decoction of the plant in painful
and feverish labor after delivery; in female sickness as diuretic and abortive (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Externally: Decoction of nastoika (with vodka) for inflammations of mucous
membranes, wounds, and ulcers (Saratov University, 1962). Decoction of whole plant to bathe children
with rickets.

----- PAGE 148 -----
MULLEIN

Verbascum blattaria, V. thapsus

COMMON NAMES: Moth mullein, white mullein, verbascum flowers, woollen blanket herb, flannel
flower, cow’s lungwort, velvet leaf.

FEATURES: The genus comprises some three hundred species native to Europe, North Africa, and western
and central Asia. Some species have escaped and are common in the United States, growing in recent
clearings, sparsely inhabited fields, and along roadsides. They vary greatly in size and form, but most
have a columnar aspect, are hairy or woolly, and have yellow, red, purplish, or brownish red flowers
arranged in dense terminal spikes or in narrow panicles. The best-known species in America is the
common Verbascum thapsus, marked by a stout, erect, unbranched, woolly stem 2-3 feet tall, with basal
leaves narrowing at the base into wings that pass down the stem. This characteristic of V thapsus enables
it to be distinguished from the various other mulleins. The dense spikes of small yellow flowers bloom in
July and August; the fruit is a capsule or pod. The flowers and leaves have a faint, rather pleasant odor
and a somewhat bitterish, albuminous taste. Keeps well if properly dried and stored for winter use.

MEDICINAL PARTs: Leaves, flower (Culpeper used the root also).
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, diuretic, anodyne, antispasmodic, astringent, pectoral.

Uses: The dried leaves were smoked by Native Americans to relieve lung congestion, this being one of
their many uses. Herbalists of the space age know of its remedies for coughs, colds, and pectoral
complaints, including hemorrhages from the lungs, shortness of breath, and pulmonary complaints.
Mullein has been considered a treatment for hemorrhoids for several hundred years and is still used for
this purpose, both internally and as a fomentation. A decoction made with equal parts of horsemint
(Monarda punctata) and mullein (V. thapsus) and taken three times a day is excellent for kidney diseases.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the leaves or flowers to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—40 drops in
warm water every 2-4 hours, according to condition.

EXTERNALLY: A very early German remedy for deafness resulting from dried earwax, wax too soft, or

----- PAGE 149 -----
insufficient wax: mullein oil, sun distilled from green Mullein flowers, 3 to 5 drops twice a day until the
condition is corrected.

A fomentation of the leaves in hot vinegar and water forms an excellent local application for inflamed
piles, ulcers, tumors, mumps, acute inflammation of the tonsils, malignant sore throat, dropsy of the joints,
sciatica, spinal tenderness, etc. A mixture of simmered leaves can also be inhaled through a teapot spout
for many of the mentioned conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant gathered at the commencement of flowering for anus
(itching of), colic, constipation, cough, deafness, enuresis, hemorrhoids, neuralgia, brosopalgia, urine
(incontinence of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mullein, or koroviak visoky, is common in all parts of Russia. This herb is seldom
mentioned in ancient books but was a common medicine in the Middle Ages. Folk medicine: Leaves and
flowers are used as astringent, demulcent, expectorant, and tonic in the form of teas, extracts, as nastoika
(with vodka) either straight or in combinations. The uses are many, as most natural treatments improve or
assist the body as a complete unit rather than treating only specialized, isolated areas. Mullein is thought
of first for pulmonary conditions, colds, shortness of breath, asthma, thus improving heart conditions,
nervous disorders, kidney and bladder; female and venereal diseases with or without associated bleeding;
epilepsy and headache in children (Atlas, Moscow, 1962). Externally: The leaves and flowers simmered
and used as a wash for old wounds, broken skin, and to kill skin epidermis worms (Vishaya Shkolla,
Moscow, 1963). Fresh leaves bruised and applied to boils and carbuncles. Veterinary: For tapeworms
of cows the fresh leaves are given internally.

----- PAGE 150 -----
NETTLE

Urtica dioica

COMMON NAMES: Great stinging nettle, great nettle.

FEATURES: Nine of thirty species of Urtica, a herbaceous plant or shrub of the Urticaceae family, are
found in temperate regions of the United States and Canada, in waste places, beside hedges and gardens.
The most common is Urtica dioica, the stinging nettle, which grows to a height of almost 3 feet. The root
of this perennial is creeping and branching. The dull green stem is usually covered with stinging hairs that
pierce the skin and emit an acrid fluid when touched, causing pain. When the nettle is grasped in such a
way as to press the hairs to the stem, however, no stinging occurs. The leaves of stinging nettle are coarse,
opposite, and conspicuously acuminate. The small green flowers can be seen from June to September.
Always use the tender leaves. The Scots and Irish use the young leaves for greens, the French prepare
seven different dishes from the tops.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Roots, leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, astringent, tonic, pectoral.

Uses: The Native Americans used nettle as a counterirritant when in pain, by striking affected parts with
the branches. A root decoction was made to bathe rheumatic pains and joint stiffness. Pounded leaves
rubbed on limbs, and hot poultices of the bruised leaves were also used to dress rheumatic discomfort.
Nettle is an excellent styptic, checking the flow of blood from the surface almost immediately upon
application of the powdered root or leaves softened and bruised. (If the fresh leaves are left on too long
they will encourage water blisters.) For spitting of blood and all hemorrhages of the lungs, stomach, and
urinary organ, this is one of the most powerful agents in the vegetable materia medica.

Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in Vitalogy (1925), relay the following: “For haemorrhages the express juice
of the fresh leaves is regarded as more effective than the decoction, given in teaspoonful doses every hour
or as often as the nature of the case requires.” In decoction, nettle is valuable in diarrhea, dysentery, piles,
neuralgia, gravel, inflammation of the kidney. Tea made from the young or dried root is of great help in
dropsy of the first stages. A herbal nettle tea will expel phlegm from the lungs and stomach and will clean

----- PAGE 151 -----
the urinary canal. The seeds are used in coughs and shortness of breath.
Dose: Of the decoction, 2-4 fluidounces. Of the powdered root or leaves, 20-40 grains.

EXTERNALLY: J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, says: “Use nettle simmered for 30 minutes and massage into the
scalp after rinsing the hair to bring back the natural colour.” For those suffering from rheumatism without
relief, rub or stick the troubled part with fresh nettles for a few minutes daily. The relief of joint pain will
often justify a few moments of unpleasant stinging.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh plant in flower for agalactia, bee stings, burns, calculus
(prevention of), deltoid (rheumatism of), dysentery, erysipelas (vesicular), erythema, gout, gravel,
hemorrhage, intermittents, lactation, leukorrhea, menorrhagia, phlegmasia dolens, renal colic, rheumatism,
spleen (affections of), throat (sore), uremia, urticaria, nodosa, vertigo, whooping cough, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Krapiva (nettle) grows everywhere in Russia. After three hundred years modern
science has established and gives credit to nettle as an antiseptic. Folk medicine: Since the seventeenth
century Russian herbalists have given credit to nettle as antiseptic, astringent, and blood purifier, which
are only a few of its properties. Nettle ranks high in some of the first books on herbs and their uses and is
still recommended for treatment. Decoction of the whole plant for headache; decoction with honey or
sugar to improve the function of the heart, liver, kidney, anemia, blood purifying, gastritis, tubercular
lungs; taken cold after delivery for afterbirth, whooping cough; decoction of the root for whooping cough
and any internal bleeding; flower decoction for diabetes. Externally: “Decomposing flesh will be
cleansed, wounds and ulcers healed after treatments of Nettle. The boiled Herb is used to strengthen,
stimulate new growths and stop falling hair if used as a hair wash.” (Vishaya Schkolla, M., 1963).
Bruised fresh leaves are used for rheumatic pain, dropsy, and chest pain (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Clinically: As extracts and compounds. Food: The young spring leaves are among the
best used as garden greens and are a main ingredient in Caucasian national recipes.

INDIAN AND PAKISTAN EXPERIENCE: Local name bichu, chicru. Bodily influence: Diuretic, astringent,
emmenagogue, hemostatic, anthelmintic, lithotriptic, antiperiodic. Uses: Nettle decoctions are used for
kidney diseases and hemorrhage, especially from the uterus, and to treat kidneys, consumption, and
jaundice. Young tops as a fresh nettle tea are used for intermittent fever, gravel in the kidneys, and
excessive menstrual flow. Juice is very effective in checking bleeding from the nose, lungs, uterus, and
other internal organs. Externally: The pulverized dry herb is used to sniff for nose bleeding (J. F. Dastur,
Medical Plants of India and Pakistan, India, 1962).

----- PAGE 152 -----
OAK

Quercus robur

COMMON NAMES: English oak, tanners bark.

FEATURES: Approximately eighty species of the beech family (Fagaceae) are native to the United States,
of which fifty-eight are trees. These forest trees vary in size according to the climate and soil. The
pubescence of the leaves and twigs consists of fascicled hairs that are intricately branched. The April
flowers appear with, or after, the leaves and later develop into the cup of the fruit known as the acorn. In
some areas, Native Americans would gather 500 pounds per family, which was a year’s supply. These
were stored and later used for bread, pudding, soup, etc., prepared fresh from the ground acorn. White
oak (Quercus alba) bark is chiefly used in medicine. It has a brownish color, is faintly odorous, very
astringent, slightly bitter.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, acorn.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, hemostatic, antiseptic.

Usss: A decoction of acorns and bark added to milk and taken internally resists the forces of poisonous
medicines, or when the bladder becomes ulcerated by taking them and shows voidance of bloody urine.
The bark is an agent in chronic diarrhea, chronic mucous discharges, passive hemorrhages, and wherever
an internal astringent is required. White oak (Quercus alba) bark as an infusion is best known as a goiter
remedy, and is still being used for excess of stomach mucus, which causes the common complaint of sinus
congestion, postnasal drip, etc. It relieves the stomach by paving the way for better internal absorption
and secretion, thus improving metabolism. The distilled water of the buds before they become leaves can
be used either externally or internally for inflammation, burning fevers, and infections; also used for
leukorrhea, womb troubles, hemorrhoids, and prolapsed rectum (sitz bath). The oak bark tea acts like a
resin in a strengthening way on the outer vessels; often dangerous fistules on the rectum are dissolved and
healed by this method, occasionally by using the diluted tea as a colonic.

----- PAGE 153 -----
Dose: A decoction is made from | ounce of bark in 1 quart of water, boiled down to 1 pint, and taken in
wineglassful doses.

EXTERNALLY: Excellent as a gargle for sore or relaxed throat. For neck enlargements, fomentations are
beneficial if applied often. Native Americans are known to have allowed acorn meal to go moldy in a
dark, damp place and then scraped the mold off for application to boils, sores, and other inflammations.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of acorns (peeled and crushed or shredded), spirit distilled from
tincture (spiritus glandium quercus), water extract of acorn with addition of alcohol (aqua glandium
quercus) for alcoholism, breath (offensive), constipation, diarrhea, dropsy (splenic), fistula, dizziness,
gout, intermittent fever, leukemia splenica, spleen (affections of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Oak, or in Russian, dub, grows wild; besides being used medicinally it is also
widely used in industry, especially in the food and tanning trades. Folk medicine: Oak bark should be
collected in the early spring while the sap is active. The bark must be from young branches, twigs, and
thin young trunks. Decoctions are used for diarrhea, menstrual disturbance; tea and decoction with honey
for tubercular lungs, gastritis, bleeding from the bladder and bloody urine, and as a gargle for swollen or
irritated tongue; coffee of acorns for scrofula, children’s skin rash, hysteria. Externally: Antiseptic for
malignant wounds containing decayed cells. A tea solution prepared for painful bleeding and itching
hemorrhoids. Can also be used to stop falling hair and dandruff. Leaves and bark for inflammation of
burns.

----- PAGE 154 -----
OATS

Avena sativa

‘ As

\Wy
SA

\

i’

“IRA Y IS

COMMON NAME: Groats.

FEATURES: Widely distributed in most parts of the world, in field cultivation. The oats of commercial and
general use are the seeds of Avena sativa with the husk removed. The crushed or coarsely flaked grain is
known as oatmeal. The tincture and powder are used in herbal combinations of tonics and capsules.
MEDICINAL PART: Seeds.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Nervine, tonic, stimulant, antispasmodic.

Uses: Cheerfulness is health; its opposite, melancholy, is disease. The cliché “He’s feeling his oats”
usually refers to a spirited horse who has been fed on oats. It is a recognized natural food, appealing in
taste and nourishment, and has long been used as a family remedy in an infusion, usually accepted by
patients of weak digestion when other foods fail. The properties of Avena sativa in tincture of oats beards
has been recognized by people of all lands as a naturalizer to the sexual gland system. An important
restorative in nervous prostration and exhaustion after all febrile diseases, it seems to support the heart
muscles and urinary organs. Instead of coffee, a drink made from equal parts of oat beards, roasted
acorns, and chicory, in equal proportions, is a welcome and beneficial change.

Dose: The tea is made by steeping | teaspoonful of the beards in a cup of hot water for 10 minutes or
more, then straining and adding honey if desired. Taken a mouthful at a time throughout the day.
EXTERNALLY: Culpeper recommends oatmeal boiled in vinegar as an application for the removal of
freckles and spots on the face and body.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for alcoholism, cholera, debility, influenza,
neurasthenia, opium habit, palpitation, sexual excess, sleeplessness, tuberculosis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia oves (oats) are highly regarded for both human and domestic animal
consumption, having a great value as both food and medicine. Folk medicine: Employs its virtues in
decoctions and tea (grain and oat straw) as diuretic, diaphoretic, carminative, and febricide (to reduce

----- PAGE 155 -----
fever). Recommended as an all-around food for the sick, weak, and healthy. Externally: Hot oat straw
compresses applied to the painful areas of kidney stone attack will soon bring about welcome relief. Oat
straw and oak bark decoctions are used for excessive foot perspiration. Oat straw steam baths are used
for children with rickets and scrofula, and as a cosmetic aid to a fresh, healthy skin.

----- PAGE 156 -----
PARSLEY

Petroselinum crispum

COMMON NAMES: Parsley breakstone, garden parsley, rock parsley.

FEATURES: Parsley belongs to a small genus of the Mediterranean plant family Umbelliferae, cultivated
since antiquity and now grown in various forms in all of the civilized world. Parsley is a many-branched,
bright green, smooth-stemmed, biennial herb with ternately pinnate decompound, sometimes crisp, leaves;
greenish yellow flowers. The root is the official part. French chemists have succeeded in obtaining an
essential oil named apiol that has proved a good replacement for quinia in intermittent fever and for ergot
as a parturient.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, roots, seeds.
SOLVENTS: Leaves and powder in water, oil in alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, aperient, expectorant.

Usss: Is chiefly used for renal congestion, inflammation of the kidney and bladder, for gravel, stones, and
urine retention, the culprit of many malfunctions. The root or leaves are excellent for the liver and spleen
when jaundice and venereal diseases are present. Also useful in epilepsy. A worthy ingredient, combined
with other herbs such as buchu (Borosma), black haw (Viburnum prunifolium), crampbark (Viburnum
opulus), for female troubles. Drink as much as 3 cupfuls a day.

Parsley is high in vitamin B and potassium, a substance in which cancerous cells cannot multiply.
Should be considered among the preventive herbs. The seeds contain apiol, which is condidered a safe
and efficient emmenagogue and is used in amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea. Of assistance in intermittent
fever or agues.

Dose: Of the oil, for diuretic purposes, 3-4 drops a day. Of the infusion, 2-4 cupfuls.

EXTERNALLY: Often the bruised leaves are applied to swollen glands and swollen breasts to dry up milk.
Hot fomentations wrung out of the tea will relieve insect bites and stings.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant when coming into bloom for catheter fever,
cystitis, dysuria, gleet, gonorrhea, gravel, intermittent fever, night blindness, priapism.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Petrushka, parsley, a common vegetable in all gardens, is used as food and home
medicine. Preparations of tea and decoctions from the root, leaves, and seeds are administered for
dropsy, kidney and bladder, female corrective, indigestion, liver and spleen ailments, prostatitis.
Externally: The fresh juice is used as a nontoxic insect repellent in the summertime.

----- PAGE 157 -----
PLANTAIN

Plan tago major

COMMON NAMES: Broadleaved plantain, ripple grass, wagbread, white man’s foot.

Features: Most of the two hundred or more widely distributed species of plantain are weedy herbs or
subshrubs of the family Plantaginaceae. Plantago major is the best-known backyard plantain, abundant in
most of North America. It is native to Europe but was spread so rapidly by human explorers in America
that the Native Americans called it “white man’s foot.”

The leaves all radiate from the base but in some species are broader than in others (both are good).
They are dark green in color and strongly ribbed lengthwise. The flower stem is stiff and smooth and
attains heights of 6-18 inches. The head is short and studded with tiny four-parted dull white flowers with
long slender stamens.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, astringent, diuretic, antiseptic.

Uses: Plantain was used by the Native Americans both internally and externally; we have adopted their
uses of it for cooling, soothing, and healing. Plantain is agreeable to most people. It is excellent for
healing fresh or chronic wounds or sores, used both internally or externally. In the absence of scientific
names, the body still responds to the ingredients of organic treatments.

Plantain is a superior remedy for neuralgia—take 2—5 drops of the tincture every 20 minutes; usually a
few drops will give relief. The green seeds and stem boiled in milk will generally check diarrhea and
bowel complaints of children. Culpeper used the seeds as treatment for dropsy, epilepsy, and yellow
jaundice. The clarified juice, seeds or both, made into tea or jellylike water and taken by itself or mixed
with other herbs, relieves intestinal pain of ulcers, spitting of blood, excessive menstrual flow, and
inflammation of the intestines. For kidney and bladder trouble, including bed-wetting, and pain in the
lumbar region, plantain is of use; also to clear the ear of mucus. If venereal diseases are in the first stages
a strong decoction of plantain leaves and root, one or two times a day in wineglassful amounts, will often
leave the afflicted a new admirer on the long list of plantain users. It is also useful in scrofula,
hemorrhoids, leukorrhea. Make a strong tea and let steep 30 minutes; for hemorrhoids inject a

----- PAGE 158 -----
tablespoonful or more several times a day and after bowel evacuation. As feminine wash, 2
tablespoonfuls of plantain to 1 pint of water, simmer covered, cool, strain, add enough water to fill
container.

Dose: | teaspoonful of plantain to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The juice of the leaves will counteract the bite of rattlesnakes, poisonous insects, etc. Take
1 tablespoonful every hour, at the same time applying the bruised leaves to the wounds. Also to check
external bleeding, erysipelas, ulcers, eczema, burns, and scalds. Can be used as a strong tea to bathe the
area often. Apply poultice to rheumaticlike pain, or add large amount to bathwater for relief. The leaves
dipped in cider vinegar and dried overnight, then placed on the feet before putting stockings on, will aid
leg pains. An ointment can be made by slowly boiling for 2 hours 2 ounces of granulated plantain in | pint
of soy bean, coconut, peanut, or other soluble oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant, tincture of root for ciliary neuralgia, diabetes,
diarrhea, dysentery, earache, ear (inflammation of), emissions, enuresis, erysipels erythema, hemorrhoids,
impotence, neuralgia (of herpes), polyuria, snakebite, spleen (pains in), tobacco habit, toothache,
urination (delayed), worms, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Wild plantain is known to the Russians as Podoroshnik, meaning near the road or
along the road. Plantain grows easily in any climate and soil. Among almost thirty species Plantago
lanceolata is cultivated commercially in France, Spain, and the United States. This and Plantago major
are given the most credit. The herb has an old and honorable history as an Arabian and Persian medicine
for dysentery and all other stomach and intestinal trouble. Ancient Roman and Greek medicine valued and
gave credit to the healing power of Plantago. Folk medicine: Usually prepared as a tea from the fresh or
dried herb, or as conserved juice of freshly picked leaves and flowers with the faithful vodka (nastoika).
Seeds are used for inflammation of the stomach and intestines, for ulcers, and to reduce stomach pain.
Their use coincides with the uses of antiquity for all stomach conditions, gastritis, loose bowels, stomach
ulcers, internal wounds, abscesses, and internal bleeding. To induce appetite a drink of plantain is given,
also for kidney, bladder, and heart conditions, coughs, tuberculosis of the lungs, red inflamed skin,
headache, and snakebite. Plantain is rich in minerals and vitamins C, K, and factor “T,” which helps to
stop bleeding (Medicine, Moscow, 1963). Clinically: After observation of many cases of stomach
sickness, it was found that chronic ulcers responded to treatment with the fresh juice of plantain, or
nastoika. Also used for dysentery, dyspepsia, and to correct acid condition of the stomach, and regulate
secretion of the stomach. The Russian Ministry of Health recommends plantain for chronic colitis and
acute stomach conditions of gastritis, enteritis, enterocolitis. Externally: Extensive clinical research and
experiments have proved that fresh plantain juice is suitable for dressing wounds, ulcers, furnicles, boils
(M. P. Rasman), and as a powder for abscesses, ulcers, wounds of bleeding, and chronic skin conditions
(Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, 1965).

----- PAGE 159 -----
POKE

Phytolacca americana

COMMON NAMES: Pigeon berry, garget, scoke, coakum, inkberry, pocan.

FEATURES: Poke, a strong-smelling perennial herb of the family Phytolaccaceae. Poke is native to the
United States from Maine to Florida and westward to Minnesota and Texas. Found in dry fields, hillsides,
and roadsides. The root matures to a very large size; it is easily cut or broken; the fleshly fibrous tissue is
covered with a thin brownish bark. The stems are annual, about | inch in diameter, round, smooth, green
when young, and grow 3-12 feet in height. The small greenish white flowers appear in July and August,
surrounded by dense foliage, followed by dark purple berries that ripen in late summer and autumn and
are nearly globular, each containing ten carpels. The berries are only collected when fully matured. The
young shoots and seedlings are often eaten; the former like asparagus, the latter like spinach. Make sure
the root is scrupulously removed before using as a table vegetable. Phytolaccin is its active principle.
Poke has had a long history of usefulness in medicine; it is toxic in too large amounts, and persons using it
should understand both its value and its limitations.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, berries.
SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, cathartic, alterative, deobstruent.

Uses: Preparation and dosage vary considerably with the condition of the root. Thurston, Hammer, and
other physiomedical practitioners recommended that only the green root be used, owing to its rapid
deterioration. Poke helps greatly in detoxifying the system from poisonous congestions. It stimulates
metabolism and is useful for medication of the undernourished. Poke has creditable influence when the
lymphatic glands, spleen, and particularly the thyroid glands are enlarged (excellent in goiter, internally
and externally), and on hardening of the liver and reduced biliary flow. The root excites the whole
glandular system and is very useful in the removal of mercurio-syphilitic affection, scrofula, and chronic
skin diseases.

Very few, if any, of the alteratives have superior power to poke if properly gathered and prepared for
medicinal uses. Both the berries and root have high recognition for the treatment of rheumatism and
arthritis, especially when used with black cohosh (Cimicifuga) and prickly ash (Xanthoxylum
americanum). Poke is indicated, and should be combined in formulas, for throat conditions when
membrane dark in color, tonsils swollen, shooting pains through the ear with difficulty in swallowing.

CAUTION: Toxic in large amounts.

Dose: Tincture of Phytolacca alone, 2—5 drops, as frequently as indicated by symptoms. As a decoction,
1 tablespoonful of the root, leaves, or berries, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes.
Take a mouthful at a time several times a day. The juice of the ripe berries preserved in syrup may be
used in teaspoonful doses every 3 hours.

EXTERNALLY: Drs. Wood and Ruddock in Vitalogy (1925): “The juice of the berries dried in the sun until
it forms the proper consistency for a plaster, applied twice a day has cured cancer.” It is a dependable
agent in the treatment of mammillary swelling, from which so many women suffer following childbirth,
making nursing impossible. In such cases a mixture of 3 parts Phytolacca, to | part of glycerine will

----- PAGE 160 -----
abate the swelling in its beginning; or when suppuration has taken place it will help to bring about
granulation. In bone enlargements and bone growths from injuries, when in a chronic state, apply a
solution of poke root tea, made fresh daily. This will also relieve itching skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root dug in winter, tincture of the ripe berries, tincture of fresh
leaves, solution of the resinous extract phytolaccin for abortion (threatened), albuminuria, angina pectoris,
anus (fissure of), asthma, barber’s itch, boils, bone (disease of, tumors of), breasts (affections of), cancer,
cholera, cicatrix, ciliary neuralgia, constipation, corpulence, cough, dentition (difficulty), diarrhea,
diphtheria, diplopia, dysentery, dysmenia, ears (affections of), erythema nodosum, eustachian tubes
(affections of), glands (enlarged), gleet, glossitis, gonorrhea, gout, granular conjunctivitis, hemorrhoids,
headache, hearing (altered), heart (affection of, hyperthrophy of, fatty), impotence, influenza, intestinal
catarrh, itch, lactation (abnormal), laryngismus, leukorrhea, lichen, liver (affections of), lumbago, lupus,
mercury (effects of), mouth (ulcer), mumps, neuralgia, nipples (sore), nursing (painful), orchitis, ozena,
panophthalmitis, paralysis (diphtheritic), parotitis, prostatitis, prostate (affection of), rectum (cancer of),
respiration (abnormal), rheumatism (syphilitic, gonorrheal), ringworm, rodent ulcer, salivation, sciatica,
sewer gas poisoning, spinal irritation, spleen (pain in), stiff neck, syphilis, syphilitic eruptions, tetanus,
throat (sore: diphtheritic, herpetic, glandular), toothache, tumors, ulcers, uterus (affection of), warts,
wens.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Phytolacca americana is not native to Russia. Poke was brought from North
America to the Black Sea regions of Caucasia and Crimea. The natives have adopted fitalaka americana
(or from folk medicine, /akonos americana) as the identifying name.

----- PAGE 161 -----
PRICKLY ASH

Xanthoxylum americanum

COMMON NAMES: Yellow wood, toothache tree, suterberry.

FeATUuRES: This beautiful little tree grows 8-15 feet high and is native to North America from Canada to
Virginia and west to the Mississippi. This perennial shrub is of the rue family (Rutaceae) and grows in
woods, thickets, and on river banks. The branches are armed with sharp scattered prickles; when the bark
is cut it shows green in the outer part and yellow in the inner. The flowers appear before the leaves, in
April and May, and are small and greenish. The fruit is an oval capsule, varying from green to red and
blue-black in color, and grows in clusters on the top of the branches. The taste is very pungent, causing
salivation, and there is little odor when the tree is cut. Xanthoxylene is its active principle.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, berries.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, alterative, nervine, sialagogue.

Usss: Excellent innocent tonic used for convalescence from fevers and other diseases. It promotes general
perspiration, invigorates the stomach, and strengthens the digestive organs when slow, which permits
unwanted sluggish fermentation; at the same time equalizes the circulation. For more effectiveness the
infusion, or tincture preferably, of 5-10 drops prickly ash (Xanthoxylum), 3 drops goldenseal
(Hydrastis), and 1 drop capsicum should be given shortly before meals in warm water. In chronic cases
the tincture is more desirable than the infusion and may be used where there is lack of hepatic and
pancreatic activity, chronic muscular rheumatism, lumbago, scrofula, temporary paralysis, chronic female
trouble, and syphilis. J. Kloss in Back to Eden: “The berries are stimulant, antispasmodic, carminative
acting mostly on the mucous tissue removing obstructions in every part of the body.”

Prickly ash will increase the flow of saliva and moisten the dry tongue often found in liver
malfunctions, and is helpful in paralysis of the tongue and mouth. The fresh bark chewed will give relief
in the most inveterate cases of toothache; also if the inside bark is steeped in whiskey and the tincture
applied. In all the above mentioned, if the stomach is irritable and sensitive prickly ash may not be kindly
received and then the tincture should be given in warm water.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the bark, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink a mouthful at a

----- PAGE 162 -----
time throughout the day, more according to case. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops.

EXTERNALLY: The powdered bark is applied directly on indolent ulcers and old wounds. Coffin
recommends | ounce of the pulverized powder to 4 ounces of olive oil, heated and used as a massage
night and morning for rheumatic pain.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark for after-pains, asthma, coccygodynia, dysmenorrhea,
earache, fibroma, headache, hemiplegia, hysteria, jaw joint (pain in), lactation, menstruation (painful),
nerves (injured), nervousness, neuralgia, ophthalmia, sciatica, toothache, ulcers.

----- PAGE 163 -----
RASPBERRY

Rubus idaeus

COMMON NAMES: American raspberry, wild red raspberry.

FEATURES: A native to North America and Europe, the raspberry, due to popularity, has been cultivated
since the sixteenth century. Species of raspberries are seen in most temperate parts of the world. The
plants are perennial, but they have a characteristic biennial growth habit. The canes are generally erect,
freely branched, and prickly, 3-4 feet high and covered with small, straight, slender prickles. The leaves
are pale green above, gray-white beneath, doubly serrated with a rounded base, about 3 inches long and 2
inches broad. The small, white, pendulous flowers bloom in May or June in simple clusters, with the
ripening of the raspberry in June and July. The fruit is not a true berry but aggregates composed of a
number of drupelets.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, stimulant, tonic.

Uses: Raspberry has long been established as a remedy for dysentery and diarrhea, especially in infants.
It is mild, pleasant, soothing. It will remove cankers from mucous membranes, at the same time toning the
tissue involved, be it of the throat (as a gargle) or alimentary tract. It is much used in relief of urethral
irritation and is soothing to the kidneys, urinary tract, and ducts. Compound of:

Tincture of bayberry (Myrica cerifera), 5—10 drops
Tincture of raspberry (Rubus idaeus), 10-40 drops

In water three or four times a day is a useful solution for the uterus and to stop hemorrhages. Raspberry
leaf tea can be taken freely before and during confinement; it will strengthen and prevent miscarriage and
render parturition less laborious. The infusion will also relieve painful menstruation and aid the flow; if
too abundant it will decrease without abruptly stopping it. Infuse with prickly ash (Xanthoxylum
americanum) and blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides) and take '2 cup three times a day. Raspberry
leaves as a feminine douche for leukorrhea is made with | tablespoonful of the leaves simmered in | pint
of water for 10 minutes, covered, cooled, and added to container of room-temperature water.

Dose: Tincture of raspberry alone, 30—60 drops in water as required. Infusion, 1 teaspoonful to | cupful

----- PAGE 164 -----
of boiling water; steep at least 3 minutes.
EXTERNALLY: The infusion is a valuable wash in sores, ulcers, and raw surfaces, as an astringent.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Maiina (raspberry) is a most popular aromatic berry. This wild plant alone covers
vast areas of the country. It is used and also cultivated for wine, food, medicine (domestic and clinical).
Folk medicine employs the most common and simple things from the surroundings. Folk medicine: Tea,
decoction, nastoika (with vodka) are employed for colds, coughs, and as a diaphoretic, when required.
Berries are enjoyed by most and have a therapeutic value for grippe. Also stem twigs as tea for the above
and for difficulty in breathing. Clinically: Used in syrups to improve the taste of other compounds and as a
tonic itself.

----- PAGE 165 -----
RED CLOVER

Trzfohum pretense

COMMON NAMES: Purple clover, trefoil, cleaver grass, cow grass.

FEATURES: True clover, plants of the genus Trifolium, family Leguminosae, number about 250 species. It
is believed that the true clovers originated in southeastern Europe and southwestern Asia Minor, although
more than eighty species are listed as indigenous to North America. The clovers are herbaceous annuals
or perennials, depending on insect pests or climatic conditions.

Red clover is an upright perennial 18—36 inches in height that behaves as a biennial under most Eastern
conditions. The colors of the flowers of the many species include white, pink, purple, red, yellow, and
combinations of shades thereof. The flowers are borne on conspicuous heads, with 55—200 florets for
such species as red clover. The leaves, composed of three leaflets, grow on alternate sides of the stem.
The leaflets themselves are broad, oval, pointed, and frequently show a white spot. The hairy stem
supports the generous numbers of separate blossoms at the end of the flower stalk.

Common in pastures, lawns, roadsides, and meadows throughout the United States and Canada.
Harvesting varies, depending on the species. Agriculturally they are classified as winter annuals.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Blossoms, leaves.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, sedative, deobstruent.

Uses: A quote from herbalists of the past: “The likelihood is that whatever virtue the Red Clover can
boast for counteracting a scrofulous disposition and as antidote to cancer, resides in its highly elaborated
lime, silica and other earthy salts.” It is not recognized, however, by the orthodox medical profession as
being of use. It possesses very soothing and pleasant-tasting properties and promotes healthy granulation.
Admirable for malignant ulcers, scrofula, indolent sores, burns, whooping cough, and various spasm,

----- PAGE 166 -----
bronchial, and renal conditions. The warm tea is very soothing to the nerves. J. Kloss, in Back to Eden,
gives a splendid formula for the above. Combine Trifolium pratense with equal parts of:

Blue violet (Amara dulcis)

Burdock (Arctium lappa)

Yellow dock (Rumex crispus)
Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
Rock rose (Helianthemum canadensis)
Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

As you can see, red clover can be used alone or supported by many other effective herbs.

As a gargle for sore and inflamed throat, make a strong tea and gargle four to five times a day,
swallowing a fresh mouthful after each cleansing. Also of use for ectal and vaginal irritation, making sure
to hold in the solution for several minutes before releasing.

Dose: Internally as an infusion, 1 teaspoonful of clover to | cupful of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes
or more. Take 4-6 cupfuls a day, children less. Of the tincture, 5-30 drops in water, according to age and
purpose.

EXTERNALLY: Red clover blossoms have been long and successfully used in a form of a salve for the
removal of external cancer and indolent ulcers. A tea is also helpful to bathe the affected part, making it
fresh daily.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of flower heads for cancer, constipation, cough, mumps, pancreas
(affections of), throat (sore, mucus in), uvula (pain in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: For Russian clover change the o to e, clever, and your Russian friends will
recognize it and perhaps add to your knowledge of its use. Species grow wild in Russia, but severak are
cultivated. Folk medicine: Clever flowers are used as tea, decoctions, nastoika (with vodka) for children
of all ages when anemic, as the properties are nutritious, aiding relief from general weakness and
shortness of breath. Assists in stopping the bleeding of dysmenorrhea. Decoction of herbs for coughs.
Externally: Clover is known to Russians as being a strong natural antiseptic and is adaptable as poultices
for burns and abscesses. Fresh leaf juice is used for external eye wash. Decoction of leaves and salt as a
poultice for headache.

----- PAGE 167 -----
SAGE
Salvia officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Garden sage, wild sage.

FEATURES: Sage is a name covering both the common garden herb (Salvia officinalis) and other plants of
diverse families, that somewhat resemble it in color or odor. Sage is native to southern Europe but has
been naturalized in North America for the last three centuries as a garden and wild herbal shrub. This
perennial is erect, branched, semi-shrubby, hoary down. The majority of the leaves are gray-green,
opposite, entire, and reticulate veined, with the base leaves of a woolly white. The flowers, blue with
white and purple streaks, blossom in whorls of varying lengths, springing from a common stem, in June
and July, and this is the proper time to carefully gather the leaves and tops to dry for future use. Found in
stony places throughout the United States.

The strong, aromatic, camphorous odor is a characteristic of sage, and it has a warm, slightly bitter
taste. Highly prized as winter fodder for livestock. Sage is well known for seasoning, dressing, soups,
roasts, etc. A volatile oil can be obtained by distilling the plant.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.

SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).

BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, astringent, expectorant, diaphoretic.

Uses: An old English proverb: “He that would live for aye must eat sage in May.” The infusion is much
valued in cases of gastric debility, checking flatulence with speed and certainty. The warm infusion will
activate its diaphoretic tendency. In fevers it should be given in cold infusions as a substitute for fruit
juice. Use 2 teaspoonfuls in | pint of boiling water, steep 1 hour, cool, strain, and when cold take every
hour or two until sweating subsides.

The expressed juice taken for a considerable time is excellent in rheumatic pains and was formerly
used as an agent against venereal disease, but since the introduction of mercury that use has been set
aside.

When conditions advance to consumption quickly use 3 tablespoonfuls of the juice with a little honey;

----- PAGE 168 -----
this will usually stop the spitting of blood. For foul ulcers or old lesions use as indicated by case.

The infusion as a gargle for sore, ulcerated, strained, relaxed uvulva, etc., of the throat is worth
remembering, used alone or with cider vinegar, honey, sumac (Rhus glabra).

From Dr. Brown (1875): “It is called by some a most capital remedy for spermatorrhoea, and for
excessive venereal desire, and I am one of those who know from experience in my practice that it is grand
for what is termed sexual debility when its use is indicated.”

Dose: Tincture, 16—40 drops three or four times a day. Decoction, 1 teaspoonful of leaves to 1 cupful of
boiling water, hot or cold, depending on condition for which it is used.

EXTERNALLY: The decoction is used to cleanse old ulcers and wounds, and massaged into the scalp if
troubled with dandruff, falling hair, or loss of hair (if the root is dormant and not destroyed).

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves and blossom tip for cough (tickling), phthisis, mght
sweats.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In the Middle Ages much credit was given to the power of shalfey (sage) as a food
and medicine. Many couplets like the following have been written about it:

Contra vim mortis

Crescit salvia in hortis.
(Against power of death
Sage grows in the garden.)

Cur moriatur homo

cui salvia crescit in hortis.

(Why man would die

When sage grows in the garden.)

More than five hundred species grow wild, some being cultivated in south Russia and west Siberia as
food and medicine aromatics. Folk medicine and clinically: Aromatic, astringent, antiseptic, carminative,
disinfectant (against inflammations). Commercial: Seven to eight pounds of seed are sown per acre, and
in five years’ time they can harvest two or three times a season, gathering up to 600 pounds per acre the
first year and 1,200 pounds the following season. With exceptional climate conditions and care it is
possible to gain 3,000 pounds per acre.

----- PAGE 169 -----
SANICLE

Sanicula marilandica

COMMON NAMES: Black snakeroot, pool root, American sanicle, wood sanicle.

FEATURES: Sanicle, of the parsley family, is an indigenous perennial common to the United States and
Canada. The fibrous root is aromatic in taste and odor, with a smooth reddish furrowed stem, 1-3 feet
high. The leaves are digitate, mostly radical, and on petioles, 6-12 inches long, nearly 3 inches across,
glossy green above, less color underneath. The flowers bloom in June and July; they are mostly barren
white, sometimes yellowish, the fertile ones sessile.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Vulnerary, astringent, alterative, expectorant, discutient, depurative.

Uses: Used by Native Americans in intermittent fevers and for treating a variety of skin conditions. The
action upon the system very much resembles that of valerian, possessing (besides the previously
mentioned) nervine and anodyne properties.

J. Kloss in Back to Eden: “This is one of the herbs that could well be called a ‘Cure All’, because it
possesses powerful cleansing and healing virtues, both internally and externally.” It heals, stops bleeding,
diminishes tumors, whether of a recent or long-standing nature. The properties, when administered, seem
to seek the area most in distress, be it the throat, lungs, intestines, renal tract, reproductive organs. You
name it; sanicle will find it. Its qualifications are many as a cleansing and healing herb of both man and
animal.

For throat discomforts, gargle a strong tea with honey as often as necessary. The fresh juice can be
given in tablespoonful doses in treatment of dysentery; a strong decoction of the leaves made by boiling 1
ounce of the leaves in 1’% pints of water, reduced to 1 pint, can be taken constantly in wineglassful doses
till hemorrhage ceases.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root or leaves, cut small or crushed, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Take | cupful

----- PAGE 170 -----
% hour before meals. If hemorrhaging, it is best to refrain from food until bleeding stops. Of the tincture,
15-30 drops; of the powder, | dram.

EXTERNALLY: For cutaneous or subcutaneous skin conditions, chapped hands, or bleeding skin ulcerations
use a fresh preparation daily for chronic conditions until they improve. Internally and externally, can be
combined with other supporting herbs.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Amenorrhea, asthma, bee stings, boils (blind), borborygmus, coccyx (soreness
of), condyloma, conjunctivitis, constipation (of children), cornea (ulceration of), coryza, cough, dandruff,
debility, diabetes, diarrhea, digestion (slow), dropsy (during pregnancy), eczema, emaciation, enuresis,
excoriations, foot sweat, gastritis, gum (suppressed), itching, leukorrhea, liver (soreness of), lumbago,
melancholy, milk (thin), mouth (sore), neuralgia, neurasthenia, night terrors, nose (crusts in), ophthalmia
(tarsi), os uteri (dilated), ossification (too early), ozena, perspiration (excessive), potbellied children,
pregnancy (sickness of, dropsy of), rectum (cramp in), rheumatism, rickets, scurvy, seasickness, shoulders
(rheumatism of), throat (sore), tongue (ringworm of, burning), toothache, uterus (prolapse of, soreness of,
tumor of), vomiting (of milk, of water), wrist (boils on).

----- PAGE 171 -----
SARSAPARILLA

Aralia nudicaulis

COMMON NAMES: Red sarsaparilla, small spikenard, spignet, quay, quill.

FEATURES: There are several species of sarsaparilla that are indigenous to Central America, southern
Mexico, northern South America, and such West Indian islands as Jamaica. The name sarsaparilla is
derived from the Spanish zarza (shrub) and parrilla (little vine), known in the south as bamboo brier.
Aralia racemosa, American sarsaparilla, is a member of the ginseng family.

The sarsaparilla of commercial use consists of very long roots having a thick bark of a grayish or
brownish color, with many slender rootlets, deeply furrowed longitudinally. When cut, sections show a
brown, hard bark with a porous center portion. The roots that have a deep orange tint are the best, and the
stronger the acrid and nauseous qualities the better are the properties of the root. Height 1—2 feet, bearing
several bunches of yellowish green flowers, followed by clusters of small berries resembling, to some
extent, the common elderberry.

Chemically we know the root contains salseparin, a coloring matter; starch; chloride of potassium;
essential oil, basserin; albumin; and pectic and acetic acids; and the several salts of lime, potash,
magnesium, and oxide of iron. The taste is mucilaginous, with scarcely any odor.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, demulcent, stimulant, antiscorbutic.

Uses: Alfred Metraus, Swedish anthropologist, found Amazon Indians using sarsaparilla to cure general
debilities, and he said that it was invigorating to the entire system. Indian hunting expeditions subsisted
for long periods on sarsaparilla root.

In the mid-1800s sarsaparilla was something of a national phenomenon in the United States as a spring
tonic to eliminate poisons from the blood and purify the system from all leftover infections of winter. It is
dependably useful in rheumatism, gout, skin eruptions, ringworm, scrofula, internal inflammation, colds,
catarrh, fever, and to relieve gas from stomach and bowels.

When in need of an excellent antidote for deadly poisons, cleanse stomach with an emetic, causing

----- PAGE 172 -----
vomiting, and drink copiously of the tea. As an alterative tea it is best prepared with burdock (Arctium
lappa). One of the best herbs to use for infants infected with veneral diseases. They can be cleansed
without the use of mercurials. Also wash the pustules of sores with a tea made of the root and administer
inwardly by mixing the powdered root with food.

Dose: | ounce of the root boiled in | pint of water, taken in wineglassful amounts three times a day. For
colds, etc., it should be used as a syrup, | teaspoonful to | tablespoonful four times a day, depending on
age and condition. Of the tincture, 20-40 drops four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: As a strong tea for skin infections.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Triturations and tincture of the dried rhizome for asthma, bladder (affections
of), bones (affections of), breast (scirrhus of), Bright’s disease, calculi, climaxis, constipation, dyspepsia,
dysuria, enuresis, eruptions, eyes (affections of), faintness, glands (enlarged), gonorrhea, gout, gravel,
hands (chapped), headache, hernia, herpes (of prepuce), hiccup, intermittents, marasmus, masturbation
(effects of), melancholia, mercury (abuse of), mycosis, nipples (retracted), renal colic, rhagades,
rheumatism (gonorrheal), seborrhea, spermatic cords (swelling of), spermatorrhea, strangury, syphilis,
ulcers, warts.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In the Russian Far East a shrub known as Aralia manchuria is used as a general
tonic of nastoika (with vodka) for physical and mental exhaustion.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as country sarsaparilla, or Indian sarsaparilla, it grows in
many parts of India and Pakistan. The roots are considered a substitute for American sarsaparilla. Bodily
influence: Demulcent, alterative, blood purifier, diuretic, tonic, diaphoretic. Uses: As an appetizer and
for dyspepsia, fever, skin diseases, syphilis, leukorrhea, diseases of the genitourinary tract, chronic
cough, etc. Dose: Powdered roots, 10-60 grains with milk. Also used as syrup and decoctions from the
root. Externally: Ointment for swelling, rheumatic pains, boils, carbuncles.

----- PAGE 173 -----
SASSAFRAS

Sassafras albidum

COMMON NAMES: Saxifrax, saloop, ague tree, cinnamon wood.

FEATURES: Sassafras is the generic name of three species of trees, two native to eastern Asia, one to
eastern North America, in the laurel family Lauraceae. In the United States and Canada, sassafras extends
from Maine, southern Ontario, and Michigan to Texas and Florida. May approach 100 feet in height and 6
feet in diameter, but is usually smaller, sometimes shrubby.

The bark is dark red-brown, deeply furrowed, soft and brittle with short, corky, layered fractures, with
many oil cells. The young twigs are green. The heartwood of sassafras is dark or orange-brown and
resistant to decay. The leaves, bright green above, downy beneath, are 4-6 inches long, oval, especially
on older branches often mitten-shaped, or three-lobed on younger shoots or twigs. In autumn they turn
various shades of yellow, orange, pink, and deep red. The small greenish flowers appear in April or early
May before the leaves. The fruit pistil, which ripens into a blue drupe, is eagerly devoured by the birds.
The bark has an aromatic, agreeable taste and similar fragrance.

In the book Trees and Shrubs of Massachus, 1894, sassafras is given credit for having aided in the
discovery of America. The windswept fragrance of the trees encouraged Columbus to persuade his
mutinous crew that land was near.

Sold in some areas under the name of salap or saloop.
MEDICINAL PARTs: Root bark.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, aromatic, tonic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Early explorers and settlers in the New World were told by the Native Americans that it would
cure diverse ills, and it was eagerly sought and shipped to Europe. In domestic practice it enjoys a wide
field of application and use, especially as a so-called spring renovator to thin and purify the blood. J. H.
Greer tells us: “Sassafras should not be used by thin-blooded persons.” It would accentuate the positive.

It is used as corrective in rheumatism, varicose ulcers; given in painful menstruation it soon relieves
the sufferer, and is effective in afterpains of childbirth and in all skin eruptive diseases. It is antagonistic
to narcotic effect of alcohol. The essential oil will often relieve most painful toothache. Sassafras is used
with other compounds to improve their flavor and render their properties more cordial to the stomach.

----- PAGE 174 -----
CAUTION: Sassafrass oi] taken internally can cause liver and kidney damage.

Dose: Infusion of 1 ounce of crushed or chipped bark to | pint of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—30
minims.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice of the root is a good application for ill-conditioned uclers. The oil may be used
as an ingredient in liniment, and provides an excellent application for bruises and swellings.

----- PAGE 175 -----
SENEGA
Polygala senega

COMMON NAMES: Snakeroot, milkwort, rattlesnake root, mountain flax.

FEATURES: Polygala is a genus of more than five hundred annual and perennial herbs and shrubs of the
family Polygalaceae. Most species are subtropical, but nearly two hundred are North American. Polygala
senega, known as mountain flax or senega snakeroot, grows from New Brunswick to Alberta and
southward to Georgia and Arkansas. This indigenous plant has a perennial, firm, hairy, branching root,
with a thick bark, and sends up several annual stems that are erect, smooth, 8—14 inches high,
occasionally tinged with red. The leaves are alternate, nearly sessile lanceolate with a sharpish point,
smooth. The new, small white flowers consists of five sepals and three petals; the capsules are small,
two-celled, and two-valved.

Found in rocky woods and on hillsides, flowering in July. The English name is milkwort. The botanical
name means “much milk,” which has been applied to some species for their increase of milk flow. Its
chemical constituents are polygalic, virginic, pectic, and tannic acids, an oil, gum, albumin, salts of
alumina, silica, magnesium, and iron. For medicinal purposes, gather in the autumn just before the frost;
the taste is bitter, though somewhat sweet.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENTs: Water, dilute alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant; large doses emetic and cathartic.

Uses: In the early part of the eighteenth century Scottish physician Tennant heard from the Seneca tribe of
the use of senega in cases of snakebite and investigated its merits. He discovered that an infusion of the
dried roots would actively promote salivation, desirable in chronic catarrh, croup, asthma, and lung
disorders of pleurisy and pneumonia, but that it is too irritating for recent coughs of active inflammatory
diseases. It increases the secretions and circulation and is indicated where there is prostration from blood
poisoning, smallpox, asthma, diseases of the lungs, bronchitis, chronic catarrh, croup, dropsy, and

----- PAGE 176 -----
rheumatism.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—
20 drops; of the powder, 5—20 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of powdered dried root for ascites, asthma, bladder (irritable, catarrh
of), bronchitis, constipation, cornea (opacity of), cough, enuresis, facial paralysis, hay fever, influenza,
iritis, esophagus (stricture of, catarrh of), phthisis mucosa, pleurisy, pneumonia, snakebite, sneezing (fits
of, at the end of cough), throat (sore), whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Senega is known and pronounced the same as in North America. Cultivated in
south Russia for experimental observation and study of the medicinal roots and rhizomes for expectorant
influence in chronic bronchitis and long-established respiratory illness.

----- PAGE 177 -----
SENNA

Cassia marilandica

COMMON NAMES: Wild senna, locust plant.

FEATURES: Cassia is a genus of leguminous plants inhabiting the tropical parts of the world, consisting of
trees, shrubs, or herbs. American senna is to be found from New England to Carolina growing in rich
soils.

The leaves have long petioles, ovate at the base; each petiole has eight or ten leaflets that are oblong,
smooth, 1—2 inches long, and quite narrow. The flowers are a bright yellow, and the leaves are gathered
while in bloom from June to September. The fruit is a legume, 2—4 inches long, and contains a quantity of
thick pulp that is mildly laxative and cathartic and is used in the composition of the confection of cassia
and of senna. It belongs to the sugar class of laxatives, its properties being due, for the most part, to the
water-attracting properties of the sugar while in the intestinal canal.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Laxative, vermifuge, cathartic.

Usgs: Senna sometimes causes griping effects. To modify this, combine senna leaves with one of the
aromatic herbs: ginger, anise, caraway, fennel, or coriander. Can also be used in combination with pink
root (Spigelia marilandica). Should not be used in cases of inflammation of the stomach.

Dose: Of the tincture, 1—2 tablespoons; of the powder, 10—20 grains; of the infusion, 2-1 cupful steeped
30 minutes.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Colic (flatulent) of infants, exhaustion, nitrogenous waste, sleeplessness,
sneezing, with heat.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia senna leaves are known as Alexandre leaves, or cassia. The species
Cassia acutifolia grows in Russia, having the same properties as the American variety. Use: For treating
conditions of constipation they prefer the buds with oils; this can be used repeatedly without side effect.
The leaves alone are rather harsh, so a compound of Cassia with similar herbs is recommended.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Many varieties of senna grow in India and Pakistan, one being
Cassia angustifolia (Indian senna). Uses: Their traditional use is not only as a laxative but also for
biliousness, gout, and rheumatism, in the form of decoctions, infusions, powder, and confections.
WARNING: it should not be administered for inflammatory conditions of the alimentary canal, fever, piles,
menorrhagia, prolapse of the rectum and uterus, or pregnancy. Externally: For skin diseases and pimples
use a paste of the dried leaves made with vinegar.

----- PAGE 178 -----
SKULLCAP

Scutellaria laterifolia

COMMON NAMES: Blue skullcap, blue pimpernel, hoodwort, mad-dog weed, side flower, skullcap helmet
flower, American skullcap.

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America, this little herb is very abundant throughout the land, growing in
damp places, meadows, ditches, and by the sides of ponds from Connecticut south to Florida and Texas.

This small perennial, with fibrous yellow roots, has an erect and very branching square stem, 1-3 feet
in height. The tooth-edged leaves grow opposite each other on short stalks. It derives its common name
from the helmet-shaped upper lid of its small seedpods; the pale blue flowers bloom in pairs just above
the leaves in July and August.

The whole plant is medicinal and should be gathered while in flower, dried in the shade, and kept in
well-closed tin vessels, as it deteriorates rapidly from age and heat. Chemically it contains essential oil,
yellowish green fixed oil, a volatile matter, albumin, an astringent principle, lignin, chloride of soda, salts
of iron, silica, etc.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, nervine, antispasmodic, slightly astringent.

Usss: Skullcap, by its action through the cerebrospinal centers, is a most valuable remedy for controlling
nervous irritation. In many cases of hydrophobia it has been known to eventually render the patient free
from disturbances; also in cases of insomnia, excitability, restlessness, wakefulness, Saint Vitus’ dance,
hysteria, epilepsy convulsions, shaking palsy, rickets, bites of poisonous insects and snakes, and all
nervous affections. It supports the nerves, quietening and strengthening the system. It is also effective in
reducing temperature and inducing perspiration in feverish children.

Skullcap was known to the original inhabitants of the New World and country people as hoodwort or
mad-dog weed.

For persons troubled by undue sexual desires, skullcap taken freely and persistently will prove a most
efficient regulator without damage of any sort. When given with pennyroyal (Hedeoma pulegioides) as a
tea it is successfully used as a female remedy for cramps and severe pain caused by suppressed
menstruation due to colds.

The following formulas have been proved effective by prominent herbalists and doctors of both the
past and present.

For weakness of the heart:

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia) 3-15 drops
Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrostis conadensis), 7-10 drops
Tincture of cayenne pepper (Capsicum) 2-4 drops

In warm water as often as required.

For irritable and nervous conditions:

----- PAGE 179 -----
Tincture of lady’s slipper (Cypripedium pubescens), 10-20 drops
Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-15 drops
In warm water every 2—4 hours.

For hydrophobia and bites of poisonous snakes:

Tincture of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia), 15—20 drops
Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-15 drops
In water, in doses as frequently as indicated.

For insomnia or exhaustion, whether from excessive application to business or due to alcoholism:

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-12 drops
Tincture of passion flower (Passiflora incarnata), 15-40 drops
In water every 3 hours, or more frequently depending on age and condition.

Dose: Tincture alone, 3—12 drops in water as indicated. As an intrusion, | teaspoonful of the cut or
powdered herb steeped in 1 cupful of boiling water for 2 hour; take every 3-4 hours for adults; in
proportion for children.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plants for ardor urinae, brain (irritation of), chorea, delirium
tremens, dentition, flatulence, headache (nervous), hiccup, hydrophobia, hysteria, night terrors,
sleeplessness, tobacco heart.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Scutellaria baikalensis georgi is one species of skullcap growing in Siberia, the
Russian Far East, north China, Mongolia, and Japan. In Russia shlemnic baikalski (skullcap) is not
mentioned in medical folk medicine literature, but a lot of interest is shown in it because Chinese,
Mongolian, and Tibetan practice accept the properties. Chinese medicine administers skullcap as
stimulant, tonic, sedative, and nervine in the treatment of cramps, convulsions, epilepsy, and heart
conditions, to reduce fever, for severe rheumatism and pain, and to expel tapeworms. Extensive study and
experiments confirm Tibetan and Chinese practice (Tomsk University, Siberia, Russia). Clinically: To
reduce high blood pressure, heart conditions (including pains in the heart), slowly progressive disorders
of the central nervous system, headaches, head noise, sleeplessness. All experiments indicate that the
preparation is not toxic.

----- PAGE 180 -----
SLIPPERY ELM

Ulmus rubra

COMMON NAMES: Slippery elm, red elm, Indian elm, American elm, moose elm.

FeATuRES: The deciduous elm can be found in Central and North America and Asia. There are about
twenty species belonging to the elm family (Ulmaceae). Slippery, or red, elm is smaller than the rest of
the elm family (60 feet or less), with a wide-open crown. The bark and leaves are characteristically
rough, deeply furrowed, underlayers ruddy brown, protecting the white aromatic fibers used medicinally.
Odor, distinct; taste, mucilaginous. The leaves are extremely rough on top, deep yellowish olive-green,
lighter, and sometimes rusty beneath; flowering in March or April before the leaves appear; fruit nearly
round in outline, winged without hairy fringe, ripening in the spring at intervals of two to four years.

MEDICINAL PART: The inner bark (fresh or dried).
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, emollient, nutritive.

Uses: Slippery elm is an agreeable emulsive drink in any disease. The finely powdered bark prepared as
an ordinary gruel has shown definite results as a demulcent in catarrhal affection of the entire digestive
and urinary tracts, and in all diseases involving inflammation of the mucous membrane of the stomach,
bowels, and kidneys, and will sustain ulcerated and cancerous stomach when nothing else will. The bark
may be chewed and the fluid swallowed for irritation of the throat. It has remarkable soothing, cleansing,
and healing qualities on all the parts (internally or externally) it comes in contact with. It is interesting to
learn that its nutritional value is equivalent to oatmeal.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, gives us another use for slippery elm bark: “An excellent treatment in female
troubles in the following: Make a thick paste with powdered Slippery elm with pure water, shape into
pieces about one inch long and one inch thick. Place in warm water for a few minutes. These are called
vaginal suppositories. Insert three, afterwards inserting a sponge with a string attached. Let it remain two
days, then remove the sponge and give douche which will remove the Slippery elm. This is an excellent
treatment for cancer and tumours of the womb, all growths in the female organs, fallen womb,
leucorrhoea, or inflammation and congestion of any part of the vagina or womb and as a rectal
suppository, renewed after bowel elimination.”

As a nourishing gruel for children and adults, take 1 teaspoonful of the powder, mix well with the same
quantity of honey or maple syrup, add 1 pint of boiling water, soya bean milk, nut milk, or milk, slowly
mixing as it is poured on. May be flavored with cinnamon or nutmeg to suit the taste. As a tea, |
teaspoonful of the inner bark to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped for 1 hour or overnight. Can be
simmered, strained, and then used. This will be like a thick syrup; use small amounts often.

EXTERNALLY: For poultice the ground powder or bark should be used, softened with water containing a
little glycerine. As a mixture: 2 parts slippery elm, 2 parts cornmeal, | part each of bloodroot, blue flag,
ragweed, chickweed, and burdock. Mix well, add warm water to required consistency, and use on
abscesses, fresh wounds, inflammation, congestion, eruptions, enlarged prostate, swollen glands of the
neck, groin, etc. If applied to a hairy surface, coat the face of the poultice with olive oil. Always use
clean white cotton and change often if drainage is noticed.

----- PAGE 181 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Pounded dried inner bark, decoction of dried bark, tincture of fresh bark for
constipation, deafness, hemorrhoids, herpes, pain, syphilis.

----- PAGE 182 -----
SOLOMON’S SEAL

Polygonatum commutatum, P. multiflorum

COMMON NAMES: Drop berry, sealwort, seal root.

FEATURES: Solomon’s seal consists of about thirty species of usually hardy perennial herbs of the
Liliaceae family. Native to moist, shady woods in the north temperate zone. They grow in colonies, each
simple (in some species branched) arching stem 12—18 inches, arising in the spring from a thick, fleshy,
many-jointed white rhizome on which, when the stem dies away in the winter, a round scar is left, the
“seal” (though this name may derive from the pattern of a cross-section of the stem). The leaves are
simple, linear to ovate, sometimes in whorls but mostly alternate, opposite, and in two close ranks. The
small white or greenish bell-shaped, three-partite flowers are seen in May and June; later the globular
bluish black berries. Taste is mucilaginous, sweet, then acrid.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, demulcent, tonic.

Uses: From herbalists of the past: “If any of what age or sex so ever chance to have any bones broken in
what part of their bodies so ever their refuse is to stamp the root here of and give it unto the patient, in ale
to drink, which sodereth and glues together the bones in very short space and very strongly, yea though the
bones be but slenderly and unhandsomely placed and wrapped up.”

As a successful decoction used for pectoral affections, menorrhagia, female debilities, whites,
inflammation of the stomach and intestines. Will relieve pain and heal hemorrhoids if a tea solution is
injected three or four times a day. An agent for obvious conditions such as erysipelas, itch, etc.; also of
use in neuralgia and ruptures when taken internally, and as an external poultice applied to painful area.

Dose: | ounce of the root to | pint of boiling water, taken in wineglassful amounts.

EXTERNALLY: The extract from the root is used to diminish freckles and discoloration of the skin. If the
fresh root is used, proceed with caution and dilute with water until you find individual acceptance. Used
for congested blood caused from bruises, and will close fresh and bleeding wounds.

----- PAGE 183 -----
RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Koopena medical, Solomon’s seal, grows throughout the country. Folk medicine
has used its properties for many centuries. Recently modern science of Russia has been interested
(Zemlinsky, 1951, Hoppe 1958). Folk Medicine and Clinically: Decoction of the dried rhizome for
stomach and duodenal ulcer (Popov 1964, Bello-Russ. Academy of Science 1965). Externally: The fresh
juice of the rhizome and decoction of it dried is useful for old and fresh wounds. Fresh juice for freckles
(Cholovsky 1888).

----- PAGE 184 -----
SPIKENARD

Aralia racemosa

COMMON NAMES: Indian spikenard, American spikenard, petty morrel, like of man, spignet, old man’s
root, wild licorice.

FEATURES: Spikenard is a perennial plant of the ginseng family Araliaceae. Found from Quebec to
southeastern Manitoba, south to Georgia and Kansas, in rich wooded areas. The root stalk is light brown,
thick, and fleshy, with prominent stem scars and furnished with numerous long, thick roots that have a
spicy taste and have been used in flavoring root beer. The large, compound, rather imposing leaves,
sometimes nearly 3 feet long and with broad leaflets, grow alternately from a slightly zigzag stem; they
are light green with deeply furrowed indentations the length of the leaf. The flowers are small and
greenish yellow or greenish white and are in many-branched, long clusters. The dark purple berries are
pleasantly flavored and can be made into jelly.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diaphoretic, expectorant.

Usrs: Native Americans used the whole root as food. For many years spikenard has been used as an
addition to cough syrups, with other agents according to the nature of the cough. For irritable conditions,
combine with | ounce of wild cherry syrup (Prunus serotina); for old coughs, with 1 ounce of
elecampane (/nula helenium); for relaxed coughs, with | ounce coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara). Any one of
the above to be mixed with 1—2 ounces of the tincture of spikenard (Aralia racemosa) in syrup form. The
alterative properties are of use in general uric acid disorders of rheumatic conditions. Often used by
Native American women a few months before the time of delivery to shorten pain and delivery; every
misery prevented is a new blessing. Spikenard is combined with many other well-known herbs to build or
purify the bloodstream, the true source of pimples, acne, eruptions, etc.

Dose: The infusion of % ounce in | pint of boiling water is taken in wineglassful doses. Of the tincture,
1-2 fluidrams.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh wild plant in bloom for asthma, cough, diarrhea,
hemorrhoids, hay fever, leukorrhea, prolapsus ani.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In far eastern Russia, Manchuria, and China, a shrub known as Aralia manchuria
grows up to 15 feet in height and is of the same family as the American spikenard. Uses: The properties of
the plant are very close to ginseng. They use the roots as a general tonic and stimulant, especially for
physical and mental exhaustion. Clinically: In Khabarovsk, far eastern Russia, they produce the extract for
clinical use.

----- PAGE 185 -----
ST. JOHN’S WORT

Hypericum perforatum

COMMON NAMES: Johnswort, St. John’s grass, klamath weed.

FEATURES: This plant grows abundantly in the United States and Europe. An ornamental herb to our
meadows, often considered a pest when too freely mingled in corn and wheat fields. It is said that St.
John’s wort is well known among bakers, as a small quantity added to the flour improves the quality of
bread.

The upright, woody, slender stem reaches a height of 1—2 feet. The leaves are stalkless, 2 inches long,
growing in pairs on opposite sides of the stem. The dark green leaves are full of transparent holes, which
can be plainly seen when the leaf is held up to the light, and are sometimes marked with black spots on the
underside. From June to August, at the tops of the stalks and branches stand the yellow flowers of five
petals apiece, rather close-clustered, with many yellow threads in the middle, which when bruised yield a
reddish juice like blood, after which come small round heads wherein are contained small blackish seeds
smelling like resin. The fruit is a three-celled capsule.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, flowers.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Expectorant, diuretic, astringent, sedative.

Uses: An old custom of Native Americans was to dry Hypericum and use it as a meal, as they did acorn.
They were also known to eat the fresh leaves for their soothing effect. In many cases of bronchitis, has
been known to eliminate all signs of the condition. A family remedy to overcome bedwetting if taken
every night before going to bed. Dose, 4 teaspoonful of leaves and flowers to 4-1 cupful of boiling
water, steeped | hour.

St. John’s wort can be administered to all, whatever age or sex, and was at one time found in almost
every country household. For treatment of dysentery, diarrhea, bleeding of the lungs, worms, jaundice,
suppressed urine, pus in the urine, hysteria, and nervous irritability. It will help correct irregular

----- PAGE 186 -----
menstruation along with a proper diet. A specific for deep, low pain of the coccyx (the vertebra at the
base of the spine), head complaints arising from watery matters of obstructions of phlegm in the head, or
from the gases rising to the head, stomach spasm; slight obstructions of phlegm on the chest and lungs are
healed at once by tea made of St. John’s wort. The tea with a small amount of aloe powder is of special
influence on the liver. This can be observed chiefly in the urine; whole flakes of morbid matter are
sometimes washed away with it.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, gives us the following: “The seeds steeped in boiling water will expel
congealed blood from the stomach caused by bruises, falls, or bursting veins. For this purpose use a
heaping teaspoonful of the seeds to a cup of boiling water, and take a large mouthful of the tea often,
throughout the day.”

Dose: Of the tincture, 8-15 drops in water before meals. As a tea, 1 teaspoonful of the tops and flowers,
cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; sweeten to taste with honey.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh bruised flowers added to olive oil and placed in a glass container to age in the
sun for ten days to two weeks, after which time fresh flowers replace the old ones, and simmered in the
original container on a bed of straw (to keep the glass from breaking) is excellent for swollen breasts and
hard tumors, sciatic pain, ulcers, old sores, and all wounds. Can be applied as a fomentation of boiled
flowers and tops for the above mentioned when caught unprepared.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for after-pains, asthma, bites, brachial neuralgia,
breast (affections of), brain (concussion of), bruises, bunions, compound fractures, corns, coxalgia,
diarrhea, gunshot wounds, hemorrhoids, headache, hydrophobia, hypersensitiveness, impotence, labor
(effects of), meningitis, mind (affections of), neuralgia, operations (effects of), panaritium, paralysis,
rheumatism, scars, sciatica, spastic paralysis, spinal concussion, spinal irritation, stiff neck, tetanus,
ulceration, whooping cough, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Zveroboi, “killing the beast,” or “beast killer,” grows in many parts of Russia.
After eating zveroboi (Hypericum) in the summertime, sheep, cattle, horses, and pigs develop white spots
and become extremely sensitive to sunshine, eventually developing skin eruptions. The animals will
recover if kept in a dark place, but a successful precaution is to paint them with nontoxic dark dye. This
can also happen with dry Hypericum (Medicine, Moscow, 1963). We are pleased to say human skin is not
sensitive in this way. This is a very old herbal remedy that has been on the forgotten list for too long. Folk
medicine: For generations folk medicine has used Zveroboi in many serious cases of acute and chronic
stomach disorders, gastroenteritis, liver, jaundice, kidney and bladder, ulcers, tuberculosis anemia,
scrofula, rheumatism, boils, carbuncles, hemorrhoids, coughs, and all inflamed processes. In many female
disorders, including excessive bleeding, preventive in bleeding and to dry wounds, ulcers (Bello-Russ.
Academy Minsk, 1965). To break bedwetting, 1 cupful of tea before retiring (Naukova Dumka, Kiev,
1963). A strong decoction of mouthwash to heal gums and offensive mouth odor. Simmer 1 tablespoonful
of the flowers in % glassful of water for 10 minutes, cool, strain, and gargle a mouthful before meals,
three times a day. Externally: The Medical Academy of Russia introduced a special external preparation,
“Tmanin,” for skin conditions and burns, which is now used nationwide (Vishaya Schkola, Moscow,
1963). Extract with sunflower or sweet almond oil for skin ulcers and skin conditions: 1 part flowers to 2
parts of oil; keep at least three weeks. The fresh crushed flowers or juice can be used for skin conditions
of recent lesions, broken skin, bruises, eruptive skin, etc. Clinically: Used as astringent, disinfectant,
antiseptic, styptic, tonic, in the forms of extracts, tinctures, decoctions, and tea. Industrial: Depending on
strength, colors of yellow, green, red, and pink are made and used for fabric dyes. Collection of wild
Hypericum cannot keep up with the growing demand, so in Russia they have special plantations. Two or
three months before spring seeding they mix the seeds with wet sand and keep in freezing compartments at
0°C. They plan on 3-4 pounds of seed per acre. Once it is planted, the plant is good for four or five years.

----- PAGE 187 -----
Zveroboi is harvested when the flower is in full bloom; after thirty to forty-five days it can again be
harvested, sometimes yielding a larger and richer crop than the first. The first year they collect on the
average up to 2,000 pounds of dry herb; in following years 3,000—4,000 pounds. It comes to the state
collecting stations and is processed as tea, extracts, and other preparations.

----- PAGE 188 -----
STRAWBERRY

Fragaria vesca, F- Americana

FeATuRES: A member of the Rosaceae family, one of several native species of North America highly
prized for their fruit. Fragaria vesca, or wood strawberry, is a perennial herb, highly aromatic but with
small fruit. Strawberries vary in size, shape, color, texture, etc.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, root, berries.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild astringent, diuretic.

Usrs: The common strawberry leaf is still recognized as an effective blood-purifying and blood-building
agent and treatment for eczema, the outward appearance of acute or chronic blood contamination. Use a
strong tea or decoction of leaves or roots sweetened with honey freely for children and adults for
intestinal malfunctions of diarrhea, dysentery, weakness of the intestines, affections of the urinary organs;
will also prevent night sweats, acting as a general tonic. A strong tea used as a gargle will strengthen the
gums.

Dose: | teaspoonful of fresh or dried herb to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes. Take 4-5
cupfuls a day; children wineglassful amounts. For a more effective agent, combine with equal parts of
dandelion (Taraxacum), burdock (Arctium), and just enough rhubarb (Rheum) to assure regular bowel
evacuation. Dose of the tincture, 5—15 drops in water three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: A strong decoction to cleanse and heal eczema and other skin conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the ripe fruit, in fusion of the root for anasarca, biliousness,
chilblains, convulsions, erysipelas, gonorrhea, psilosis (or sprue), tapeworm, tongue (strawberry,
swollen), urticaria, weaning.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Zemlianika, strawberry, grows in wooded settings throughout Russia and is highly
praised as foodstuff and medicine. However, some people’s systems cannot tolerate strawberries, and
they can cause skin rash, itching, redness, etc. If there are indications of this, consumption should be
avoided in any form: tea, jam, pie, etc. Folk medicine: Uses the fresh and dried leaves and berries for

----- PAGE 189 -----
anemia, general weakness, bleeding, tapeworm, kidney and bladder, children’s diarrhea (Atlas, Moscow,
1963). Also of use for kidney and liver stones, female bleeding, scurvy, and vitamin deficiency. To some
extent for reducing high blood pressure.

----- PAGE 190 -----
SUMAC
Rhus glabra

COMMON NAMES: Smooth sumac, Indian salt (powder on the berries), scarlet sumac, mountain sumac,
dwarf sumac.

FEATURES: There are several species of sumac, care should be taken in their identification, as some are
poisonous. But this, the blue glabra, may be easily distinguished by the color, acidity of the berries, and
their appearance in cone-shaped bunches. Rhus glabra is a shrub 6-15 feet tall, consisting of many
straggling branches covered with a pale gray bark having occasionally a reddish tint. The leaves are
alternate, consisting of 6-15 lanceolate, acuminate leaflets, shining and green above, whitish beneath,
turning red in the autumn. When the green leaves or limbs are cut or broken, a milky juice exudes. The
flowers are greenish red on spikes, followed by long bunches of hard, red down-covered berries,
extremely sour to the taste, which is due to malate of lime.

They can be found growing in thickets and waste grounds of Canada and the United States, flowering
June to July, the fruit maturing in September and October. The berries should be gathered before the rain
washes away the acid properties that reside in the external, downy efflorescence.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, fruit.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Bark is astringent, tonic, antiseptic; berries are refrigerant, diuretic.

Uses: Native Americans crushed the fruit to make a refreshing drink, and also dried the berries for winter
use. For application to skin diseases, they made a poultice of the bruised leaves and fruit. Where
conditions of irritated mucous membranes, as in dysentery, scalding of the urinary passage, sumac is
appreciably reliable. The infusion as an injection of the bark (being stronger), and tea taken internally,
will give prompt relief in leukorrhea, rectal conditions, chronic diarrhea, and rectal hemorrhage. Of use
in malaria and all kinds of fevers, canker in the mouth, and as a gargle for sore throat. Sumac is often
combined with slippery elm (U/mus rubra) and white pine bark (Pinus strobus) for scrofula. The tea is
cleansing to the system, and sumac berries with blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) are most effective in
diabetes. A syrup may be made with the berries by covering them with boiling water, steeping for | hour,

----- PAGE 191 -----
straining, adding honey, boiling into a syrup, and bottling for future use.

Dose: | teaspoonful of either the bark, leaves, or berries steeped % hour in 1 cupful of boiling water.
When cool, 2-4 cupfuls a day. Of the tincture, 10—20 drops.

EXTERNALLY: For old sores and skin ulcers and wounds apply poultice of bruised leaves and fruit, or a
strong tea, and bathe area as needed.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark, roots, or berries for debility, diarrhea, dreams
(annoying), dysentery, epistaxis, hemorrhages, headache, mouth (ulcers in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The sumac species Rhus cariaria grows in south Russia and south Asiatic Russia.
From the raw material, the extract contains an estimated 33 percent tannin (Medicine, Moscow, 1965).
Sumac can be very irritating, especially on hot summer days, when a simple touch of the leaves can
inflame the skin in various ways. Uses: Russian homeopaths and Chinese medicine use sumac for
rheumatism (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963) and for internal bleeding, diarrhea, enteritic colitis
(Atlas, Moscow, 1963). Externally: Tannin extracts are used for burns, fresh wounds, chronic ulcers,
eczema, and as a gargle for inflammation of the throat (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 192 -----
SUNDEW

Drosera rotundifolia

COMMON NAMES: Round leaf, sundew, flytrap, dew-plant.

FEATURES: Drosera is a genus of carnivorous plants with ninety species throughout the world. Drosera
rotundifolia is common in North America in damp, sandy soil near bogs from Labrador to Florida,
Alaska to California; sometimes so abundant the dew-beds are aglow with glistening red.

The fibrous black rootlets are reddish inside. The leaves are round on long stems extending from the
root; the top side of each leaf bears as many as two hundred red tentacles, each tipped with a gland
exuding an exceedingly sticky drop of fluid. The flat little rosette of spatulate leaves is formed around a
dainty white flower on a stem 1-2 inches tall. The tentacles are expanded until the pressure of a small
insect’s body, held by the sticky drops, causes them to bend over the prey, enclosing it in a sort of
stomach. Digestive juices, analogous to pepsin, are excreted, and the insect is dissolved and absorbed.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant, demulcent, antispasmodic.

Uses: In the conditions for which sundew is used it is almost as if the dewdrops are quenching the dry
and tickling condition of the respiratory organs. Considered a prophylactic (prevents the spread of
disease) in whooping cough, and controls the spasms and characteristic coughs; also indicated in
laryngitis, for tobacco cough, some types of asthma, chronic bronchitis, and catarrh, when attended with
dryness of the mucous membranes and irritable states of the nervous system. Excellent in the early stages
of consumption when attended with a harassing cough without expectoration.

S. Clymer gives us a formula that proves very effective:

Tincture of sundew (Drosera rotundifolia), 2-5 drops
Tincture of queen’s root (Stillingia sylvatica), 1-40 drops
Tincture of passionflower (Passiflora incarnata), 3-10 drops

----- PAGE 193 -----
In water as frequently as necessary.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water; take a mouthful at a time as
required. Of the tincture alone, 3-6 drops in water as indicated. External application may cause water
blisters on the skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the active fresh plant for amblyopia, asthma, bronchitis, catarrh,
consumption, cough, coxalgia, epilepsy, hemorrhage, headache, laryngitis, measles, nausea, sciatica,
vomiting, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Rossianka, “round leaf’ (Drosera), grows in many parts of Russia including the
Far East and Siberia. Commercially collected in Belorussia, Siberia, and northern Russia in June and July
when the plant is in full flower. Long orange needles are used to extract crystalline plumbagin. Plumbagin,
which suppresses some pathogenic fungus and bacterial growths, was discovered in other plants in 1828.
In northern Russia farmers used the plant in boiling water to disinfect milk containers. The plant also
contains peptic ferment of antispasmodic properties, which explains the calming effect for spasmodic and
whooping cough. Folk medicine: For nervous headache, sickness, and disorders due to nerve
maladjustment, plague, diphtheria, and as nastoika (with vodka) for malaria (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Prepared as extracts, decoctions, tea, and nastoika. Dose: 10-20 drops of extract three
times daily. As a tea, 1 teaspoonful steeped in cupful of boiling water, three times a day in tablespoonful
amounts. Externally: Fresh juice for warts (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 194 -----
SUNFLOWER

Helianthus annuus

FEATURES: This plant belongs to a large composite genus, Helianthus, so called because its golden-rayed
flowers are likened to the sun. Perhaps the sunflower seed’s nutritional richness is due to the flower’s
amazing ability to follow and face the sun from morning to night. Scientists call this ability heliotropism.
The robust annuals (Helianthus annuus) are never known in the wild state; they existed in cultivation in
pre-Columbian America. The root system of the sunflower is quite extensive and goes down deep, thus
extracting many of the trace minerals not always present in topsoil.

The leaves are numerous, rough, very large, and somewhat heart-shaped. The disk is very broad and
brownish, and its tubular florets develop four-sided, very oily achenes (a small dry carpel containing a
single seed that does not burst when ripe). The yellow petals are daisylike in pattern. The plant reaches
15 feet in height and is often planted as a concealing border. The sunflower is the state flower of Kansas
and a floral symbol of Peru.

MEDICINAL PART: Seed.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, expectorant, nourishing.

Uses: Native Americans used the mineral-grasping root in combination with other roots for snakebite and
a warm decoction was used as a wash for rheumatism and inflammations. They boiled the flower heads to
extract the oil and used it as a hair tonic. As a nourishing meal, the roasted shells or seeds were crushed
and sifted; the same was also made into a hot beverage; the parched and crushed seed was used for bread
meal. Herbalists use the plant in syrup or infusions for coughs, bronchitis, clergyman’s sore throat,
pulmonary difficulties, early stages of consumption, and disease of the kidneys. Infusion of the pith stalk
used as a wash will often act effectively in early stages of inflammatory sore eyes, the same being taken
internally. Sunflower leaves have also been used for the treatment of malaria. The sun-drenched,
deeprooted sunflower is known to contain the following: Phosphorus: Essential for building bones, teeth,
activating and regulating enzymes, proper fat and carbohydrate digestion, and is a vital building material

----- PAGE 195 -----
for all body cells. Calcium: Our bodies need calcium for building strong bones, hard teeth, good muscle
and tissue tone, well-being of nerves, and proper clotting of blood. Iron: Found in good amount, and
while iron is most essential for the formation of healthy, red blood corpuscles, evidence also points to the
necessity of copper being present, even though in minute quantities, for the proper utilization of iron.
There are very few foods in which copper is found in any amount; however, sunflower seeds present a
rich source. Fluorine, iodine: Iodine has always been associated with seafoods, sea salt, and sea moss or
vegetation, but it is also found in sunflower seeds. Natural fluorine, so essential for hard tooth enamel
formation, is present in amounts of 2.6 parts per million. Fluorine is also needed in the development of
the skeleton, since no normal bony substance can be formed without it. Potassium: Without potassium life
as we know it would not exist. It is very predominant in brain tissue and appears to be vital in the proper
functions of this organ and of the nervous system. Magnesium: Magnesium contributes to the formation of
the albumin of the blood and is also found in greater amounts than calcium in muscular tissues, brain and
nervous tissue, and lungs. Sodium: It is interesting to note that sunflower seeds are unusually low in
sodium, containing only 0.4 milligrams. Protein: Sunflower seeds contain up to 30 percent protein, plus
all of the amino acids needed for building and repairing the body cells. This protein is 98 percent
digestible, has a biological or utilization value of 64.5 percent, and does not putrefy, as does animal
protein. Thiamine: Sunflower seeds contain a good amount of vitamin B, this being essential for normal
growth and metabolism, maintenance of appetite, nerve functioning, and for good mobility and tone of the
stomach and intestines. Niacin: Niacin is another important vitamin that is also known as the pellagra-
preventive vitamin. A lack of this vitamin affects the skin and digestive and nervous systems of the body.
Sunflower seeds are a very good source of this vitamin. Vitamin D: Every 100 grams of sunflower seeds
contain 92 U.S.P. units, or 23 percent of an adult minimum daily requirement of vitamin D. This vitamin is
necessary for controlling the metabolism of calcium and phosphorus in bone building and teeth formation.
While no definite minimum daily requirement has been established, it has been shown that this vitamin
appears to be important in the prevention of sterility and for increasing endurance. Further tests have also
indicated its value in heart conditions, and in some countries it is used to treat heart trouble (due to the
unsaturated fatty acids, the opposite of which, saturated fats, form high cholesterol in the bloodstream).
Sunflower seeds are used by those who know and respect this vital source of natural nourishment for
snacks, soups, meatless loaves, and desserts.

Dose: Prepared as medication, 2 ounces of sunflower seeds to | quart of water; boil down to 12 ounces
and strain; add 6 ounces of gin and 6 ounces of honey. The dose is 1—2 teaspoonsfuls three or four times a
day. Make sure the seeds are fresh, as old and rancid oil is detrimental.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The Russian name is podsolnechnik, “under the sun.” Sunflowers are inseparable
from Russian daily life as a plant of decoration, food, and medicine.

The sunflower originated in North America. Archaeological discovery reveals sunflower seeds found
in clay containers over three thousand years old, indicating that the original people of this continent knew
how to cultivate and use this essential plant. In 1510 the Spaniards were the first to bring the sunflower
species to Spain, where Madrid Botanic Garden started its cultivation for decorative purposes only, as
the flowers resembled giant chamomile and daisys. Botanist Lobelius, in the sixteenth century, gave us the
first botanical description, named Helenithus annuus, which was also grown for decoration only. Russian
czar Peter the Great first observed the sunflowers while visiting Holland. His orders for seed supplies
were filled and Russia soon started cultivation, at first experimentally in St. Petersburg Botanic Garden;
but soon small farms in Ukraine and central Russia were producing comparatively larger and healthier
species due to the rich black soil. The plants grew to over 15 feet. A pleasant discovery soon found
persons of all ages enjoying the seed meat as dried or roasted tidbits when entertaining. The pressed oil
was found to be superior, and thus the handsome plant soon had another purpose. The practical usefulness

----- PAGE 196 -----
of the sunflower brought about The Academy of Science Review in 1779. There botanical and
commercial descriptions of Russia’s sunflower were established.

In 1835 a practical gardener in Ukraine cultivated the first commercial sunflower plantation. Within
fifteen to twenty years the waste areas of central Russia, Ukraine, south Russia, and many parts of Siberia
were covered. It is now hard to imagine a garden without a sunflower plant (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow,
1963). For the past one hundred years the Russians have known the sunflower as a source of nourishment
as well as a decorative flower. Folk medicine: In Byelorussia the whole head (basket) of the sunflower
is used when the seeds begin to ripen. They cut this into small pieces, add soap chips, nastoika (vodka),
and place in the sun for nine days. The aged liniment is used externally for rheumatic pain. Decoctions
made from the flowers are taken internally as nastoika, | part flowers to 5 parts vodka, 30-40 drops
three times a day. Soft, pulpy stem parts are used as tea for fevers (Bogdanovich 1895). Clinically: Many
oil preparations of ointments, liniments, and medical compounds; decoction of the seeds for jaundice,
malaria, heart conditions, diarrhea, kidney and bladder (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965);
oil as foodstuff is a part of daily life; decoction or tea from flowers and leaves for malaria (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

The sunflower serves as an illustration of how a native plant can travel around the world and gain
recognition as a new-found food. Nutrition takes many forms and sources, and the towering sunflower is
one of the almost perfectly balanced foods, yet to be experienced by the majority.

----- PAGE 197 -----
SWAMP BEGGAR’S TICK

Bidens connata

COMMON NAMES: Cockhold herb, beggar’s tick, Spanish needles, devil’s pitchfork.

FEATURES: This is a common weed, found in wet grounds, rich fields, swamps, and ditches from New
England to Missouri. The herb has a smooth stem, 1-3 feet high. The leaves are lanceolate, opposite,
serrate, acuminate, and decurrent on the petiole. The terminal florets are yellow and can be seen in
August; the fruit is a wedge-formed achenium.

MEDICAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emmenagogue, expectorant, antispasmodic, diaphoretic.

Usss: Dr. Brown (1857): “The root and seeds are emmenagogue and expectorant; the seeds, in powder or
tincture have been used in amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, and some other uterine derangements, and an
infusion of the root has proved beneficial in severe cough.” It has been used with great success for
palpitation of the heart and for croup. For the latter affliction a strong infusion of the leaves sweetened
with honey and administered in tablespoonful doses every 15 minutes until vomiting is produced is
regarded as a cure. The leaves, heated to the form of a poultice and laid upon the throat and chest in cases
of bronchial and laryngeal attacks from exposure to cold, etc, are very beneficial.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Drink cold 1 cupful
during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops. Either Bidens bipinnata (Spanish
needles) Bidens connata, or B. frondosa (beggar’s tick) can be employed, both having the same medical
properties.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Some variety of Bidens connata grows throughout Russia. Chereda (B. tripartita)
has the most attention medicinally and commercially. The well-dried leaves keep their natural color and
have a specific aroma and an astringent, slightly bitter taste. Folk medicine: Employed Chereda long
before it was written about. Decoctions were used for tension of fear, blood purifying, liver trouble,

----- PAGE 198 -----
colds, inflammation of the bladder, headache, eczema (internally as tea, decoction, extracts), external
bathing for skin irritations, nervous upset in children to induce sleep (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science,
Minsk, 1965). Tea used for scrofula, rickets, diathesis, gout, and as a diuretic and diaphoretic. For
improved metabolism, 1 tablespoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes and strained.
Dose, | tablespoonful eight times a day (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963). Clinically: In the form of
nastoika, extracts, and decoctions in combinations of compounds for treatment of internal and external
ailments. Pharmacopoeias of late have given attention to B. tripartita (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Commercial: The wild collection of Bidens falls short of the demand. Cultivation is very successful: they
seed 12—14 pounds per acre and harvest up to 2,500 pounds of dry herb. Cutting starts just before the buds
flower and when the plant is about 50 centimeters high, using only the leaves and tops (Medicine,
Moscow, 1965). Industrial: Beautiful creamy shades of brown, orange, and yellow are used for dyeing
wool and silk.

----- PAGE 199 -----
SWEET FLAG

Acorus calamus

COMMON NAMES: Calamus, myrtle flag, sweet grass, sweet sedge, sweet rush root.

FEATURES: Sweet flag resembles blue flag (/ris versicolor). It is not an iris, however, and may be
distinguished from it by its corm and the pungent taste of the leaves. This perennial herb grows throughout
the United States on the borders of ponds and marshes where the soil is constantly moist and rich.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SoLveENts: Alcohol, hot water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, carminative, stomachic, stimulant, tonic.

Usss: The first candied root was used by Indians and Turks for dyspepsia. It is also frequently used for
heartburn caused by distention of the stomach by gas. In many instances those suffering from stomach
discomfort from some unknown cause found calamus a remedy by chewing the root or using the tea
several times a day. The uncomfortable feeling of burning water from the stomach into the throat is usually
brought under control by this ancient method. Useful in flatulence, wind, colic, ague, upset or sour
stomach, dyspepsia, etc. Taken at regular intervals, it is a most innocent and effecive stomach conditioner,
the ill health of which more than half of our illnesses stem from. The Egyptians used sweet flag for the
legendary disease of scrofula, but it should be combined with supporting, more effective herbs for this
chronic condition.

Doses: Infusion of | ounce of the cut or granulated herb to 1 pint of boiling water. May be taken
frequently in cupful amounts. Tincture of calamus alone, 10-40 drops in water, according to age and
severity of condition.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are many insinuating names for sweet flag (Acorus calamus) in Russia, two
of which are Mongolian poison and bitter poison. Originally China and India were the motherland of
calamus, which was first brought to Russia in the eleventh century when the Mongolians overcame the
Russian territory. Tatars believed that calamus purified the water. When they planned on settling in a new
territory, calamus was always planted near the watering place to ensure pure drinking water for the
horses. The Mongolians brought many new adapataions from China to Russia. Around this time in history

----- PAGE 200 -----
China was on a very high cultural standard and medicine, particularly herbal, was in great favor (Vishaya
Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Folk Medicine: Soon discovered calamus was anything but Mongolian poison
and praised it highly as a healing agent. Decoction or tea for stomach condition, liver, gallbladder, kidney
and bladder, stones in the kidney and bladder, malaria; nastoika (with vodka) as a gargle for mouth
irritations and toothache. The country people kept the fresh leaves in the house as aromatic, disinfectant,
and insecticide. The roots were burned to clear the air when sickness from cholera, typhus, flu, etc., were
present. It is used as an aromatic bitter to improve appetite and the digestive system, to relieve the central
nervous system, in decoctions, nastoika, and extracts. Decoctions and tea for kidney and bladder, liver,
gallbladder, and general tonic. Powder used internally and externally (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Externally: Nastoika (with vodka) is used for bathing wounds, infected ulcers, shingles, scurvy, children
with rickets, scrofula, and various skin conditions. Powder for wounds and ulcers. A hair decoction of
calamus, burdock, and hops is a preventative for falling hair and improves the hair and scalp if
application is massaged regularly. Veterinary: For stomach, liver, and various internal ailments. The
powder for external wounds, ulcers, etc. Commercial and industrial: One ton of raw rhizomes when dry
yields about 500 pounds (Naukova Dumca, Academy of Science, Ukraine, Kiev, 1963). Sweet flag oil is
used medicinally, in the food industry, and as a wine aromatic.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as Bacha or Vacha, it has been used for generations. Bodily
influence: aromatic, antispasmodic, aphrodisiac, bitter tonic, carminative, diuretic, expectorant, emetic,
emmenagogue, laxative, nauseant, stimulant. Uses: Diarrhea, dysentery, bronchitis, and chest affections.
Infusion for epilepsy of children. In small doses for flatulence, colic, chronic diarrhea and dysentery, loss
of appetite, bronchitis and catarrh, fevers, ague, hemorrhage. As an emetic, 30 grains is effective, used
instead of ipecac. For asthma, 10 grains every 3 hours. Externally: The burned root mixed with some
bland oil is used as a poultice for flatulence and colic. Also for paralyzed limbs and rheumatic swellings.
Dry powdered root is dusted over foul and indolent ulcers and wounds. The above mentioned are the
most popular, but use varies individually and by location (Medical Plants, India, Pakistan, J. F. Dastur,
Bombay, 1962).

----- PAGE 201 -----
SWEET GUM
Liquidambar styraciflua

COMMON NAME: Red gum, star-leaved gum.

FEATURES: Sweet gum, a tree of the witch hazel family (Hamamelidaceae), native of the eastern United
States, Mexico, and Central America. Along the rivers of the southeastern United States, sweet gums
exceed 125 feet in height and 4 feet in diameter. The deeply cut gray or brownish gray bark forms winged
projections on the twigs. The alternate, palmate, shiny leaves usually have five-pointed, finely toothed
lobes and are fragrant when bruised. In the autumn the starshaped leaves turn brilliant red to purple,
making a valuable ornamental tree. The staminate flowers are inconspicuous, the pistillate in spherical
heads maturing into long-stalked, globose masses of spiky-tipped capsules. The wood is fine-grained,
moderately hard, and fairly strong; the heartwood is known as red gum and hazelwood, is variously
colored red and brown; the sapwood is paler. From incisions made in the tree a gum (storax) exudes that
is resinous and adhesive and somewhat like white turpentine in appearance; it eventually hardens.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, juice.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water (bark, partially), warm alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, antispetic, disinfectant.

Uses: As a remedy for catarrhs of genitourinary passages, coughs of pulmonary affection generally,
gonorrhea, gleet, amenorrhea, leukorrhea, phthisis (wasting disease, tuberculosis of the lung,
consumption), and asthma. Also excellent for bloody flux, dysentery, and all bowel complaints of
children.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the cut or granulated bark to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink 1 or 2 cupfuls a
mouthful at a time during the day; adjust for condition and age.

EXTERNALLY: The balsamic juice may be melted with equal parts of olive oil or tallow as a detergent
ointment when conditions of indolent ulcers, frostbite, scabies, itch, ringworm, fistula, scrofula, fever
sores, and hemorrhoids are present.

----- PAGE 202 -----
TAMARACK

Larix laricina

COMMON NAMEs: American larch, black larch, hackmatack, salisb.

FEATURES: Larch, the common name of a small genus (Larix) of medium-sized coniferous trees of the pine
family (Pinaceae). They differ from other coniferous genera in being deciduous and in bearing short,
green, needlelike leaves on dwarf and long shoots. The sprucelike, erect cones with thin, persistent scales
and long, accuminate bracts mature in one season. Most species are 40-80 feet high except when growing
near the timberline. Of the ten species now recognized, American larch (Larix americana), also known as
black larch or tamarack, is the most common in the eastern United States and Canada, extending west to
the Rocky Mountains and northwest to the Yukon River in Alaska, where it is sometimes called L.
alaskensis; grows in the southern parts of this area in swamps and sphagnum bogs. The gummy sap that
seeps from the tree has a very good flavor when chewed.

MEDICINAL PART: The inner bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, laxative.

Uses: Because of its astringent and gently stimulating qualities the inner bark is especially useful for
melancholy that is often caused by the enlarged, sluggish, hardened condition of the liver and spleen,
which inactivate various other functions of the metabolism. For domestic use in emergencies, or long-
standing bleeding of any kind in lungs, stomach, bowels, or too profuse menstruation. Also for diarrhea,
rheumatism, bronchitis, asthma, and poisonous insect bites. J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, recommends the
weak tea as an eyewash and the warm tea dropped in the ear to relieve earache. A decoction of the bark,
combined with spearmint (Mentha spicata), juniper (Juniperus communis), horseradish (Armoracia
lapathifolia), and taken in wineglassful doses has proven valuable in dropsy.

Doss: As a tea, | teaspoonful of the inner bark to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 30 minutes.

EXTERNALLY: As a wash used to cleanse ulcerated sores of long standing if the condition has progressed
to the bone, combine with comfrey (Symphytum officinale) fresh or dried (taken internally too). As a
poultice, dress often and continue until new skin seals the areas. Also used for hemorrhoids as a salve, or
sitz bath.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Listvennitza sibirsky, larix siberia (tamarack), grows 150 feet tall in Siberia and
the Far East. The very wide branching tree is one of the most beautiful and magnificent to adorn the
countryside. Turpentine of Larix, known in Russia as venetian terpentain, is one of the byproducts.
Externally: The oil in compound is used for rheumatism, neuralgia, gout; new twigs and bark made into
an antibiotic and antispetic is used as an inhalant steam for catarrh of the lungs, abscesses, gangrene of the
lungs, throat, bronchitis. Also of help to kidney and bladder. Clinically: As oil of turpentine.

----- PAGE 203 -----
TANSY

Tanacetum vulgare

GREEK NAME: Alhanasia, “immortality.”

FEATURES: Tansy, of a perennial, creeping root, was introduced into America from the northern Old
World. The tough, slightly ribbed stems reach a height of 2—3 feet, terminating in flat, buttonlike, gold-
colored heads of rayless florets. The plant may be easily recognized in July and August, as the flower
heads look as if all the petals have been pulled off, leaving only the central florets. It is a handsome plant,
with dark green, deeply cleft and pinnatifid, fernlike leaves, being 6-8 inches long and 4 inches broad. A
familiar herb of wastelands and roadsides. The crushed leaves and flowers give a pronounced aromatic
smell and have a bitter taste.

Tansy contains volatile oil, wax, stearin, chlorophyll, bitter resin, yellow coloring matter, tannin with
gallic acid, bitter extractive gum and tanacetic acid, which is crystallizable, and precipitate lime, baryta,
and oxide of lead.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, emmenagogue, diaphoretic, stimulant.

Usrs: Large doses cause vomiting, convulsions, coma, feeble respiration and pulse, and may induce
abortion. In small doses the cold infusion will be found useful in convalescence from exhausting diseases,
dyspepsia, and jaundice. The warm infusion is diaphoretic and emmenagogue and is used for colds,
fevers, grippe, and agues. The herb is also used for treatment of hysteria and certain other of the nervous
disorders of women. For this purpose take | tablespoonful of the infusion frequently, when needed.

Tansy seeds are vermifuge and should be steeped, 1/4 ounce to | pint of boiling water, and taken after
night and morning fast, previously cleansing the alimentary tract with a herbal laxative. You may like to
know the creatures respond more favorably when the moon is full.

A good remedy to promote menstruation, but should be used only when the suppression is due to

----- PAGE 204 -----
conditions other than pregnancy. Tansy is a capable and useful herb in the hands of the experienced when
prescribed for daily use.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: Of the tincture, 5—10 drops, the larger dose only in extreme cases of hysteria and suppression of the
menses due to causes other than pregnancy. Of the infusion, 1 teaspoonful of tansy steeped in | pint of
boiling water for % hour; 1 teaspoonful every three hours.

EXTERNALLY: Hot fomentations wrung out of tansy tea are excellent for swellings, tumors, inflammations,
sciatica, bruises, freckles, and sunburn, and will check palpitation of the heart in a very short time, (J. L.
Kloss, Back to Eden).

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh plant in flower, attenuations of the oil for abortion,
amenorrhea, chorea, dysmenorrhea, epilepsy, eyes (sclerotica inflamed), hydrophobia, labia (abscess of),
paralysis, strabismus (right inward), worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Riabinka obiknovennaya, or Pishma, grows everywhere in Russia except the
extreme north. Folk medicine: Used as a tea and powder with honey or sugar for worms; decoction in
stomach sickenss, diarrhea, nervous disroders, liver, headache, tuberculosis of the lungs. Children are
bathed in a solution when frightened (BelloRuss. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965); 5 percent of the
flowers with vodka (Nastoika) for stomach and duodenal ulcers (Moscow University, Moscow, 1965).
Clinically: Flowers, and in some cases the whole plant, are used. Oil for worms is very effective but
toxic. Powder, decoction, oil for ascaris and various other worms, diarrhea, liver, and stomach (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963). Industrial: Powder used as insecticide (Moscow University, 1965).

----- PAGE 205 -----
THUJA

Thuja occidentalis

COMMON NAMES: Arborvitae, yellow cedar, tree of life, false white cedar.

FEATURES: The name white cedar is often applied to the arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis), a well-known,
handsome ornamental American evergreen. It attains heights of 70-80 feet, with a trunk diameter of 2-6
feet, which is sometimes distorted. The erect spreading branches have thin and flat pendulous twigs,
fragrant green leaves, and tiny bluish purple cones covered with bloom, turning reddish brown, with 6—12
pointless thin oblong scales. Found growing in wet ground from New Hampshire to Florida. There are
various species of cedar found in Africa, India, Australia, and Alaska.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Branchlets, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, irritant, expectorant, emmenagogue, anthelmintic.

Uses: Thuja is useful as a counterirritant in the relief of muscular aches and pains, chronic coughs with
association of shortness of breath, fevers, sudden attacks of acute pain in the joints that may last for a few
days or weeks, and associated gout (uric acid retention). The pain of menstruation due to the cessation of
flow is relieved by the hot tea taken frequently.

Dose: Infusion of | teaspoonful to 1 pint of boiling water taken in teaspoonful to wineglassful amounts.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves and twigs boiled with oil make an excellent salve. Also for removal of warts
and fungoid growths.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh green twigs for abdomen (distended), abortion, angina
pectoris, anus (fistula in, fissure of), asthma, balanitis, cancer, catalepsy, chorea, clavus, condyloma,
constipation, convulsions, coxalgia, diarrhea, disparunia, dysmenorrhea, ear (polypus of), enuresis,
epilepsy, epulis, eyes (tumors of, granular inflammation of), fatty tumors, feet (fetid), flatus
(incarcerated), frontal sinuses (catarrh of), ganglion, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhage, hemorrhoids, hair
(affections of), headache, hernia, herpes zoster, ichthyosis, intussusception, jaw (growth on), joints
(cracking in), levitation, Morvan’s disease, mucous patches, muscae volitantes, myopia, naevus, neck
(chronic catarrh of, polypus of), paralysis, pemphigus, polypus, postnasal catarrh, pregnancy (imaginary),
prostate (disease of), ptosis, ranula, rheumatism (gonorrheal), rickets, sciatica, seminal emissions,
nocturnal sycosis, syphilis, tea (effects of), teeth (caries of), tongue (ulcers of, biting of), toothache,
tumors, vaccination, vaccinosis, vaginismus, warts, whooping cough.

----- PAGE 206 -----
THYME

Thymus vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Garden or common thyme, tomillo, mother of thyme, serpyllum.

FEATURES: Originating in the Old World, thyme is recognized around the world as an aromatic, flavoring
herb, or for ornamental decor. The small shrubby perennial herb Thymus vulgaris is an erect or somewhat
decumbent plant, 1-3 feet high, has sessile linear lanceolate leaves with revolute margins. The pale lilac
flowers are small, in interrupted, whorled spikes at the end of the branches. It has a strong, pungent, spicy
taste and odor. In preparing the herb for out-of-season use, it should be collected in the summer when in
blossom and thoroughly dried in the shade. Thyme is favored by bees, and the honey is a superior
replacement for sugar.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, carminative, emmenagogue, antispasmodic.

Uses: Culpepper states: “It is under the domination of Venus and under the sign of Aries and therefore
chiefly appropriated to the head.” Astrology or not, we agree with Culpeper, as we use thyme for hysteria,
headache, nervous disorders of giddiness, and weakening nightmares. This unsuspecting herb is
admirable for strengthening the lungs and for children’s colic, colds, irritable stomach, dyspepia,
flatulence, and ill disposition. To sooth the throat of bronchial irritation and in spasms of whooping
cough, thyme has been most reliable; it induces free perspiration, important to the beginning of a cold and
in ordinary fever. (Make sure the person is free from draft and is kept warm.) Also of use in suppressed
menstruation. Use the cold tea freely in small amounts for stomach complaints.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of thyme to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 2 hour. Of the tincture, 20-50
drops in hot water.

EXTERNALLY: The oil of thyme is used for toothache, neuralgia, and painful swellings.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: This plant’s name is easily recognizable in three languages: Thymus is Latin,

----- PAGE 207 -----
Timian Russian, and thyme English. The extreme north is too cold for this herb, but it grows elsewhere in
Russia. Clinically: In a pharmacopoeial preparation, thymol, a volatile oil, is extracted and used as
antiseptic and disinfectant. Combined with other herbs for congested chest, bronchitis, whooping cough,
worms, and skin conditions (Atlas, Moscow, 1963). Commercial: Plantations in Ukraine, Moldavia, and
the Don River regions have been assisted by agro-technology. They seed 4-5 pounds per acre and collect
1—2 tons of dry herb. Once seeded, plantations can be harvested for three or four years (Medicine,
Moscow, 1965).

----- PAGE 208 -----
TURKEY CORN

Corydalis canadensis

COMMON NAMES: Wild turkey corn, stagger weed, choice dielytra, squirrel corn.

FEATURES: This indigenous perennial plant is a beautiful little herb that grows in North America, Canada
to Kentucky, in rich soil, on hills, among rocks and old decayed timber. The plant grows 6—12 inches high.
It has small, tender stalks and small, fine leaves of bluish green color; a round bulbous root about the size
of a large pea, 2-4 of these peas to a stalk, attached to small roots that are hard and of yellowish color; is
quite bitter and nearly odorless. The 6-10 small, reddish purple, nodding flowers are seen very early in
the spring, and the root should be gathered while the plant is in flower. The fruit is a pod-shaped, many-
seeded capsule. The alkaloid corydaline is the active principle.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Do not discount the value of this herb because of the barnyard sound of its common name (the root
growth resembles a corn kernel). Turkey corn is one of the best alterative agents in the herbal kingdom. It
is usually combined with other remedies such as burdock (Arctium lappa), queen’s delight (Stillingia), or
prickly ash (xanthoxylum americanum). A Philadelphia professor has this to say about the small root:
“There is no fact better established than that this medicine, judiciously administered, has the power to
remove syphilis from the system.” The tincture should be prepared from the fresh herb and given in doses
of 20-30 drops, three times a day. Also admirable for scrofula and all skin diseases. Recommended in
menstrual complaints, as its tonic properties render it as an alterative in all enfeebled conditions.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep %
hour; drink a cold wineglassful three or four times a day. Of the powder, 5—10 grains; of the tincture, 20—
30 drops three or four times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of bulbous root gathered when plant is in flower, trituration of dried
root, trituration of corydaline for gastric catarrh, scrofula, syphilis, ulcerations.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The most interesting Russian reference is to one kind of turkey corn, Corydalis,
commonly caled chochlatka, which means in folk language hens or chickens cackling indiscriminately.
The shadowy bush or brush growth of central and south Russia is an ideal setting for survival. Indication
of past use as folk medicine is not mentioned, only Atlas (1963) giving botanical description and medical
details. Clinically: As extracts of corydil, and in combinations, for trembling, nerve paralysis, and nerve
disorders, it stimulates and increases muscle tone. Experiments on animals show positive effect on the
central nervous system. Physiologically iscoriaodine is calming to the central nervous system.

This brief information is given with the thought that the local knowledge of the Native Americans and
folk medicine in North America has been confirmed scientifically and clinically by scientists in other
countries.

----- PAGE 209 -----
VALERIAN

Valeriana officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Great wild valerian, setwell, capon’s tail.

FEATURES: The genus Valeriana incorporates many species of herbs or shrubs growing in Africa, Britian,
Greece, the United States, etc. The flowers have five-parted perianths and funnel-shaped, shortspurred
corollas that are generally of a pale rose color, flowering June to August. The calyx, which is
rudimentary, when in flower becomes a feathery pappus at the top of the fruit. The plant is often cultivated
in gardens for its flowers and its root. It has an erect, round, pale greenish stem, 2—5 feet long. The leaves
are simple or pinnate, without stipules; ascending rhizome, with many fibrous roots. Has a warm,
camphoraceous, slightly bitter, somewhat acrid, and nauseous taste growing stronger with age. Cats are
very fond of the odor of valerian and tear the plant to pieces and roll in it. They are said even to dig up
the roots and devour them. The root as trap bait attracts rats if you don’t have a cat around to catch them.

Found in many damp places, low-lying meadows and woods, along banks of rivers and lakes, and in
marshy, swampy ground generally. The carrotlike roots of Valeriana edulis, a tall glabrous plant of the
western United States with undivided stem leaves and yellowish-white flowers in elongated panicles, are
eaten by Native Americans either raw or dried. The Piautes even grind them into flour to use in the form
of bread or mush. To this day in northern England the dried root is used in broths, porridge, and meats as
a counterpoison and medicinal preservative against pestilence, as are treacles, mithridates, etc. Besides
valerianic acid the root contains starch, albumin, valerian yellow extractive matter, balsamic resin,
mucilage, valerianate of potash, malates of potash, lime, phosphate of lime, and silica.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, calmative, stimulating tonic, nervine.

Uses: Valerian is used by herbalists today as a nerve tonic. Is best combined with skullcap (Scutellaria),
blue vervain (Verbena hastata), and mistletoe (Viscum album). Gentian (Gentiana lutea) and peppermint

----- PAGE 210 -----
(Mentha piperita) increase the promptness of its action, which is more effective than when combined
with bromide. Employed in epileptic fits, Saint Vitus’ dance, nervous derangement or irritations, debility,
hysterical affections (especially female), restlessness, and in wakefulness during fever. Valerian excites
the cerebrospinal system. In medicinal doses it acts as a stimulating tonic, antispasmodic, and calmative.
In large doses it causes headaches, mental excitement, visual illusions, giddiness, restlessness, agitation,
and even spasmodic movement.

Dose: Of the tincture, 1-2 teaspoonfuls three times a day; of the infusion, a wineglassful; of the extract, 3—
6 grains; of the oil, 5 drops.

EXTERNALLY: An infusion of 2 cupful of the root can be used in the bath to relieve nervous exhaustion.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Vaieriana is known to folk medicine as having a general calming and sedative
effect on the central nervous system, to induce sleep and rest, for spasms of the stomach, intestines, and
blood vessels, nervous heart conditions. Further acknowledgement as appetizer, for headache relief,
hysteria, epilepsy, tapeworm, diarrhea, loose stomach, fever. Externally: Vapor baths given to children
will quieten and encourage restful sleep (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Clinically:
Extracts of valerian are used in compounds of tablets, tinctures, etc.

----- PAGE 211 -----
VIOLET

Viola odorata

COMMON NAME: Sweet violet.

FEATURES: The violets have a large family tree of some four hundred species, predominantly perenmal
herbs but with a few annuals. Violets are found in damp woods and other shady places and are among the
best-known wild plants, with characteristically scented and colored flowers. They are highly adapted to
cross-pollination by insects. Some species are indigenous to North America; however, Viola odorata is
native to Europe but has been naturalized in the United States. Violet leaves contain certain glucosidal
principles of distant antiseptic properties; the flowers are expectorant and have been used for generations
in syrup form for coughs, colds, etc.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, flowers.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, expectorant.

Usss: Violets are mostly thought of as decorative, or to commemorate a tender occasion. Their admirable
qualities as an herb are never realized by out-of-touch-with-nature modern society.

The influence of the dissolving properties seems to reach places only the blood and lymphatic fluids
penetrate. For difficulty in breathing when conditions are caused from a morbid accumulation of material
in the stomach and bowels causing gas, distention, and pressure, violet tea taken daily for some time will
make you feel that the beauty of the plant is of secondary importance. It is cooling to any high temperature
of the body, internally or externally. Of service in headaches and heat to the head; a specific for ear
disturbances, having a soothing and healing effect on inflamed mucal surfaces. Colds, sore throat,
inflammation of lungs, hoarseness, whooping cough, etc., of children and adults is greatly controlled by a
handful of dried or fresh violet leaves and flowers in 4 pint of water, steeped for % hour; administer 2—3
tablespoons (more for adults) every 2—3 hours, and a mouthful to gargle (make sure the bowels eliminate

properly).

----- PAGE 212 -----
Dose: As a tea | teaspoonful of the herb to 1 cupful of boiling water.

EXTERNALLY: Crushed violet bound as compress on inflamed tumors, sore throat, swollen breasts, to the
back of the neck for headache, or the cloth saturated in violet tea will often give surprising results, if
applied assiduously. Keep a supply of the dried leaves and flowers for out-of-season use.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for cancer, choroiditis, cough (spasmodic, by
day), hoarseness, hysteria, neuralgia (supraorbital), otorrhea (suppressed), rheumatism, seminal
emissions, styes, whooping cough, wrist (rheumatism of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Fialka polevaya, violet is a popular all-year-round decoration, in the fields in the
summertime and as a house plant in winter. Tricolor violets are formally and tenderly called Anutini
glazki, “eyes of Annie,” but much sentiment is lost in the English translation. The country folk are less
revealing in speech, calling them Ivan and Mary, Ivan da Maria. Medical properties and uses are carried
over from ancient history (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Folk medicine: Uses decoctions, tea,
nastoika (with vodka), internally and externally, as diuretic, diaphoretic, blood purifer. For diathesis,
coughs, eczema, tuberculosis of the skin, and other skin conditions (Byelorussia). Decoction for female
condition, toothache, chest pain of cold (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Externally:
Decoction to drink and as poultices, or for complete bath immersion, for chronic and persisting skin
conditions, scrofula, eruptions, children’s eczema (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, 1965). Clinically:
Special preparations of the whole plant are administered for lung and chest trouble, as expectorant in
chronic catarrhal accumulation (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as banaf shah, the flowers are emollient, demulcent,
astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic, laxative. Used in cases of prolaps of the uterus and rectum, nervous
disorders, biliousness, epilepsy, inflamed swellings. For diaphoretic use when needed for colds, coughs,
kidney and bladder disorders. In large doses the flowers are emetic; 2 ounces of stem will act as
purgative, emetic; juice will cause nausea, vomiting, and nervous conditions. The underground stem is
emetic and purgative and is valuable if used instead of ipecac. Also used as antipyretic and febrifuge. In
Medical Plants of India (by J. F. Dastur, Bombay, India, 1962) credit is given for the control of cancer in
the following way: “The fresh leaves are a reputed drug for the treatment of Cancer: they relieve pain of
cancerous growths, especially in the throat; two and a half ounces of the fresh leaves are infused in a pint
of boiling water in a covered stone jar for 12 hours; the strained liquid is taken in the course of a day, in
doses of a wineglassful at a time; for treatment of cancer of the tongue only half the quantity is taken in a
day; the other half is used to foment the tongue; a liquid extract of the fresh leaves, in teaspoonful doses, is
equally efficacious. On cancerous growths either the hot infusion or an extract of the fresh leaves is
applied as a compress.” Dose: | part of flower to 100 parts of water or a syrup; 30-50 gram doses. As
emetic, dose 40—50 grains. Externally: For eczema.

----- PAGE 213 -----
VIRGINIA SNAKEROOT

Anstolochza serpentaria

COMMON NAMES: Red River snakeroot, Texas snakeroot, sangrel, sangree root, birthwort, serpentaria.

FEATURES: Virginia snakeroot is a perennial plant found in hilly woods of Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio,
Indiana, and Kentucky, and the southern states of Louisiana and Texas. The root is fibrous and of a brown
color, has numerous stem scars, and bears a dense tress of branching roots about 3 inches long with a
gingery, aromatic, identifiable fragrance, bitter taste. The one or more erect, zigzag, jointed stems are 1—2
feet high, with a purplish color near the plant’s base. The leaves are oblong and about 3 inches long and 1
inch wide. June and July find the few purple or dull brown flowers in bloom, attached to short stems that
come from the root.

SoLveEnts: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, anodyne, antispasmodic, tonic, nervine.

Uses: The action of Virginia snakeroot is so prompt that it has a great reputation for snakebite, hence its
name. This is a pure stimulant whose action is mainly employed in diverting the flow of blood outward;
for this reason it is largely employed in eruptive diseases before the appearance of outward
manifestations are noticed. It rids the system of any offending matter by producing perspiration and
supporting the vital forces. As a nerve stimulant it acts very promptly and is much used in depressed or
exhausted conditions of the nervous system, especially in the latter stages of smallpox, scarlet fever, and
pneumonia. The influence on the circulation will also be felt by the whole arterial system as the heart’s
impulse becomes stronger and fuller. Suppressed menstruation due to colds will be brought about by 5—10
drops of Virginia snakeroot tincture in pennyroyal tea. Also for cold extremities of hands and feet due to
general receding of blood from the surface. The cold infusion is used for strengthening purposes; it may
be drunk freely and is often employed with good effect in dyspepsia, croup, throat and kidney congestion,
and renal torpor. In proper doses it stimulates appetite and digestion in indicated conditions.

CAUTION: Large doses can cause vomiting, vertigo, and respiratory paralysis.

----- PAGE 214 -----
Dose: Of the tincture, 5—20 drops three times daily. As an infusion, 1 teaspoonful of the granulated root to
1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes. Take in tablespoonful amounts three to six times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration of dried roots for dyspepsia, flatulence.

----- PAGE 215 -----
WATERCRESS

Nasturtium officinale

COMMON NAMES: Tall nasturtium.

FEATURES: Watercress is of the mustard family, native to Europe, but has migrated to most of North
America and is found in moist banks and running waters below 8,000 feet. The branching stems are 1-3
feet long and generally extended with leaves above the water. The leaves are somewhat fleshy, elliptic,
and in pairs of 3—7 with small white flowers in enlongated racemes; pods 2-1 inch long. Watercress is
most popular as a garnish only, the mineral-rich plant is an excellent addition to daily salads. Has been
thus in use since ancient times.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, stimulant, blood purifying.

Usrs: Native Americans used the herb for liver and kidney trouble and to dissolve kidney stones.
Parkinson, in 1640, says: “The leaves of juice applied to the face or other parts troubled with freckles,
pimples, spots or the like at night and washed away in the morning. The juice mixed with vinegar to the
forehead is good for lethargy or drowsy feeling.” For the above, use the fresh herb daily for skin
improvement. The high vitamin and mineral content is a preventive for scurvy and a blood builder in
every sense of the word. The Romans considered it as excellent food for those who have deranged minds.

J. E. Meyers, Botanical Gardens of Hammond, Indiana, informs us that watercress is one of the best
sources of vitamin E. This is the fertility vitamin (it was discovered by Professor Herbert Evans of the
University of California), helping the body use oxygen, which increases physical endurance and stamina
and improves heart response. Tests and research by professors of science show that dried watercress
contains three times as much vitamin E as does dried lettuce. (Researchers Mendel and Vickery worked
with Dr. Karl E. Mason, of Vanderbilt University.)

Dose: Infusion of the fresh or dried herb, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, then steeped. Drink
3-4 cupfuls daily.

----- PAGE 216 -----
Be sure to wash watercress carefully if there is possible drainage from farmyards. Also be cautious of
polluted water.

----- PAGE 217 -----
WATER PEPPER

Polygonum punctatum

COMMON NAMES: Smartweed, American water smartweed, arsesmart, pepperwort.

FEATURES: This annual plant is a member of the buckwheat family, growing in England and America in
ditches, lowlands, among rubbish, and around brooks and water courses.

The herb has a smooth stem, 1—2 feet, with a reddish or greenish brown color of the often decumbent
base. The leaves are alternate, lanceolate, petiolate, with dots of thin skin throughout. The small greenish
white or greenish pink flowers are loose, slender, and drooping with erect spikes. It flowers in August
and September. The taste is bitter, pugnent, and acrid. Water pepper should be collected and made into
tincture or tea while fresh, as age decreases its properties and results.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, diuretic, diaphoretic, emmenagogue.

Uses: The infusion in cold water has been found serviceable in gravel, colds and coughs, and in milk
sickness. For the pain of suppressed menstruation, taken internally; fomentations wrung from the hot tea
and applied to the lower back, where there is usually pain, will soon bring relief. Of use in female
obstruction as a feminine douche when in pain, itching, or leukorrhea. In cholera, if the patient is wrapped
in a sheet moistened with a hot decoction, it will aid recovery; also taken internally but making sure the
bowels are active. The infusion in cold water forms an excellent local application in the sore mouth of
nursing mothers and in mercurial salivation.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb, cut small, to 1 cupful of warm water; taken in wineglassful, or teacupful,
amounts. The decoction or infusion in hot water is not so active as when prepared in cold or warm water.
Of the tincture, 30-60 minims.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaves bruised with the leaves of plantain (Plantago major) and moistened with
oil of turpentine and applied to the skin will speedily relieve chronic erysipelatous inflammations.

----- PAGE 218 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for amenorrhea, antrum (pain in), blepharitis,
colic (flatulent), cough, diarrhea, dysentery, dysuria, eczema, epilepsy, gonorrhea, gravel, hemorrhoids,
heart (affections of), hysteria, laryngitis, nephritis, neuralgia, orchitis, prostatitis, sciatica, spermatic cord
(pain in), spleen (affections of), strangury, ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Vodianoy peretz, water pepper, grows in Siberia and other parts of Russia, but
more abundantly in European Russia. Russian literature credits for medical, commercial, and industrial
properties are prominent. The fresh leaves when used as food are bitter, burning, and spicy (Vishaya
Schkolla, Moscow, 1965). The whole plant is used and collected in late autumn when in full flower. It is
cut 10-20 centimeters from the ground, with attention given to proper species, as it is easily mistaken for
other Polygonum species with less benefit. Folk medicine: As a tea for bleeding of the stomach, female
complaints, hemorrhoids. Externally: The fresh leaves slightly bruised and applied to the back of the
neck instead of mustard poultice for headaches. Simmer, covered, % pound of leaves | hour and add to
sitzbath for bleeding hemorrhoids. Clinically: Strong warning is given about using the extract:
recommended for use by medical practitioners only. Extracts, nastoika (with vodka), and in preparations
with other ingredients for female bleeding, bleeding hemorrhoids, and to stop pain (Atlas, Moscow,
1963). Recent study and experiment show that the plant is a rich source of vitamin K (coagulating
substance), vitamin P, vitamin C, and rutin. Industrial: For textile dye, Polygonum can be collected from
spring to autumn for beautiful shades of golden green, gold steel, and camouflage shading of green.

----- PAGE 219 -----
WHITE PINE

Pinus strobes

COMMON NAMES: Eastern white pine, soft pine, deal pine.

FEATURES: Pine is the common name of the largest and economically most important genus (Pinus) of the
pine family (Pinaceae). Of the ninety or more species of pines, thirty are native to North America,
distributed from north of Mexico to eastern, northern, and western states.

The outstanding characteristics of the genus are: mostly erect, much branched, twigs with long shoots
with scaled leaves, and dwarf branched, bearing long needles surrounded by scaled leaves at the base;
the leaves are either primary, solitary, scalelike, or spirally arranged, and usually deciduous some weeks
after their appearance. The unisexual flowers (cones, strobile) appear in the spring on the same tree.
Conifers often produce twin trees, resulting from the presence of more than one embryo in a single ovule.
Traditionally the genus Pinus is subdivided into two main groups: (1) the soft, or white, pines and (2) the
hard, or yellow, pines.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Inner bark, sprigs.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Expectorant.

Uses: Pine trees played an important part in the domestic life of Native Americans. They used pine
needles for sewing, resins as cement, and the nuts as food and decoration. The use as medicine and food
is, to us, the most outstanding. Pine nuts were made into a paste consistency and added to soups for infants
and adults. They chewed the gum resin for sore throats; the same was also dried, powdered, and applied
to the throat with a swab. The resin and parts of some other plants, such as small twigs of juniper
(Juniperus osterosperma), were used as a tea for colds, rheumatism, tuberculosis, influenza, chronic
indigestion, kidney trouble, etc. The bark and new sprigs are useful as an expectorant, to modify quality
and quantity of mucous secretions, and to favor its removal in bronchial and catarrhal trouble,
rheumatism, scurvy, all chest affections, tonsilitis, laryngitis, croup, and the like.

It is best to combine | teaspoonful of each of the following with 2 teaspoons white pine and | pint of
water: wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina), sassafras (S. albidum) and spikenard (Aralia racemosa);
steep 2 hour; administer 2 teaspoonful to a mouthful every hour, depending on age and condition. Of use
in diabetes with bearberry (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi), marshmallow (Althaea), and poplar bark
(Populuas tremuloides). Prepare as above and take 3-4 cupfuls daily; of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The heated resin is used as a dressing to draw out imbedded splinters or to bring boils to a

----- PAGE 220 -----
head; sores, cuts, swellings, and insect bites also respond favorably. The hot resin can be spread on a hot
cloth and applied as you would a mustard plaster for treating pneumonia, sciatic pains, and any general
muscular soreness.

----- PAGE 221 -----
WHITE POND LILY
Nymphaea odorata

COMMON NAMES: Water nymph, water cabbage, sweet scented pond lily, cow lily.

FEATURES: The lily family embraces many economically important genera, including sources of fibers,
food (onion, garlic), spices, resins, medicines, soap, poisons, and essential oils. However, the so-called
water lily (Nymphaea) and calla lily (Calla palustris) are not members of the lily family. White pond lily
grows in ponds, with large, round, dark green leaves floating in the water, bearing a large white flower
that looks like a large gardenia in shape. Growing from Canada to Florida and Louisiana.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, astringent, demulcent, discutient.

Uses: An old-fashioned home remedy brought into use by Native Americans, the knowledge of which has
been passed down for generations. There are few remedies that act more promptly than this in old cases
of leukorrhea, where there is chronic inflammation of the womb or abrasion of the vagina; and for
ulceration of the womb it has proven efficacious, having completely cured the disease after all other
available means have failed. It should be used locally, by injection of the infusion to the neck of the
womb, and taken internally. Very accommodating in cases of dropsy and kidney trouble, catarrh of the
bladder, irritation of the prostate. Has been used largely for diarrhea and bowel complaints, excellent for
infant diarrhea, scrofula, and diseases of the lungs. The infusion is healing to sores, ulcerated mouth,
inflamed gum, canker, sore throat.

Dose: | ounce of the root boiled in 1 pint of water for 20 minutes, taken in wineglassful to teacupful
amounts two or three times a day. Of the fluid extract, 10-15 drops, morning and night.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh juice of the root mixed with lemon juice is excellent for removing freckles,
pimples, and dark discolorations of the skin. Make a strong tea for use as a local application applied with
Turkish towels, or white cotton, for painful swellings, boils, ulcers, etc. The bruised leaves are healing to
wounds and cuts, applied as poultice.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for back (pain in), coryza, diarrhea, throat (sore).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature mention is made of two kinds of pond lily, kuvshinka—

----- PAGE 222 -----
Nymphaea alba and Nymphaea candida. They are slightly different but used the same way medically. In
some undisturbed areas of ponds, lakes, and slow-running water up to 6 feet deep, lilies will cover the
peaceful surface. Folk medicine: Uses both species as astringent for female trouble of amenorrhea.

Clinically: The rhizome is used medically for papilloma of the kidney and acidic gastritis (Bello-Russ.
Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965).

----- PAGE 223 -----
WILD CARROT

Daucus carota

COMMON NAMES: Bird’s nest, Queen Anne’s lace, devil’s plague.

Features: Daucus, from the Greek daukos or daukon—a kind of carrot or parsnip—a genus of about
sixty species of annual, biennial, or perennial herbs mainly of Mediterranean and African distribution,
belonging to the parsley family (Umbelliferae). The biennial wild carrot is an herb naturalized in
America, found growing in old meadows and pastures.

The fleshy root is tapered, yellowish white, sweetish, and faintly aromatic. Its erect, branching, bristly-
hairy stem is usually 1-5 feet high. The leaves are basal or alternate and pinnately compound. The
flowers are usually white or roseate to purplish and arranged in flat-topped compound umbels with a
central flower that is usually dark red or deep purple; blooms in June or July. The seeds are of a dull
brown color, flat on one side and convex on the other. The wild carrot cannot be transplanted to gardens
to produce an edible product. It taints milk with a bitter flavor if cattle eat too much of it, although it is not
poisonous.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, deobstruent, stimulant.

Uses: Culpeper comments “Wild Carrot belongs to Mercury, and therefore breaketh wind, and removeth
stitches in the sides, provoketh urine and women’s courses, and helpeth to break and expel the stones.”
Wild carrot blossoms are used as a tea and are effective as a remedy for dropsy when all other treatment
fails. The root and seeds are often ground and used for colic, liver, kidney and bladder, painful urination,
to increase the menstrual flow, and in expelling worms from the bowels. Some physicians believe that the
bruised seeds steeped (not boiled) are more effective in kidney diseases, dropsy, inflammation of the
bladder, and in gravel. You will find that improvement in some of the above conditions will relieve
rheumatic pain.

----- PAGE 224 -----
Dose: Infusion of seeds, herb, or both, 1 teaspoonful to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes, 3-4
cupfuls daily.

EXTERNALLY: Grated root made into a poultice is recommended for ulcers, abscesses, carbuncles,
scrofula, cancerous sores, and bad wounds. The leaves bruised and applied with honey are also cleansing
to running sores or ulcers. Apply according to severity, fresh with each application.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Markov, wild carrot, grows everywhere in Russia except the extreme north. Folk
medicine: Decoctions of the plant for worms and as laxative; decoction of the whole plant for liver,
gallbladder, and jaundice conditions. Roots along for anemia (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk,
1965). Externally: For swelling and abscesses crush the whole plant. Decoctions to bathe children when
skin becomes yellow (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Clinically: Doucorin extract is
one of the many properties found in carrots. Clinically prepared as a mild laxative, antispasmodic, and
for avitaminosis, arterisclerosis, and coronary deficiences with the symptoms of stenocardia (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 225 -----
WILD YAM

Dioscorea villosa

COMMON NAMES: Colic root, China root, rheumatism root.

FEATURES: Yam is the common name for plants of the genus Dioscorea of the family Dioscoreaceae
(called the yam family), or for their tubers. Yams are herbaceous vines whose stems twine consistently to
the right or left, depending on the species, of which about six hundred are known; four are native to the
United States and Canada. Yams are among the most important tropical root crops, some kinds being
baked, boiled, fried, used in soup, or dried and ground into meal. Most species are nutritious. The variety
differs greatly in shape, color, and size of tubers.

Dioscorea is thought to have sixty-seven species in Mexico alone. The complicating resemblance of the
leaves is misleading. This delicate, twining vine grows in thickets and hedges of Canada and the United
States, more prolific in the south. The vine and leaves resemble a philodendron with a reddish brown
stem. One has to be very observant to find the small greenish white flowers in June and July. Botanically
the potato is long, branched, crooked, and weighs about 4 pounds, the average size collected. The flesh
inside is moist, fibrous, and faintly rose colored. Referred to as a rhizome, or underground stem, as is the
iris. From this a preparation of dioscorein is made containing its active qualities.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, antibilious, diaphoretic.

Uses: Aztec records show that chipahuacxibuitl, or “the graceful plant,” known to us as Dioscorea, was
used for skin treatment of scabies and poultice for boils. Mexican yam is a source of the male sex
hormone testosterone and is used for rejuvenating effects. The Chinese use the wild yam to brighten the
eyes and as an elixir. North American herbalists employ its properties for bilious colic and spasm of the
bowels. To relieve the nauseous symptoms of pregnancy, dioscorein is the very best and is prompt in
action. Given in small, frequent doses during pregnancy and until the woman is a mother.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden: “Combined with Ginger (Asarum canadense) will greatly help to prevent
miscarriage.” Can be combined with squaw vine (Mitchella repens) and raspberry leaves (Rubus
ideaus) for the above mentioned, given every 2 hour or a mouthful of the tea as needed throughout the

----- PAGE 226 -----
day.

Herbalists of the past and present combine the root in many formulas for a variety of ailments. It
stimulates the removal of accumulated wastes and congestions in the system, relieving pain and joint
stiffness. Natures Healing Agent, by C. Clymer, recommends the following:

Tincture of burdock root (Arctium lappa), 10-40 drops
Tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), 2-15 drops
Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 10-20 drops
Tincture of rheumatism root (Dioscorea villosa), 20-40 drops
In water three or four times a day.

In large doses wild yam is regarded as diuretic and as an expectorant. For this it is always best to
combine with other material of a similarly excellent character. Valued in hepatic congestion and rheumatic
pains.

Dose: Of the decoction, 2—4 ounces; of the tincture, 20-60 drops; dioscorein, 1-4 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, or trituration of resinoid, dioscorein, for abdomen
(distended), acne, angina pectoris, biliousness, cholerine, chorea, colds, colic, constipation, cough,
cramps, diarrhea, dysentery, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, enteralgia, flatulence, gallbladder (affection of),
gastralgia, hemorrhoids, headache, knee (pain in), legs (pain in), liver (disorders of), lumbago, mind
(affection of), neuralgia, paronychia, parotitis, pregnancy (pyrosis of), renal colic, rheumatism, sciatica,
side (pain in), spinal irritation, spleen (pain in), smell (disordered), spermatorrhea, tea (effect of),
toothache, whitlow.

----- PAGE 227 -----
WILLOW, BLACK

Salix nigra

COMMON NAMES: Pussywillow, catkin willow.

Features: Willow of the family Salicaceae and genus Salix, has many trees and shrubs; three hundred
species vary from less than | inch in height to trees of 100 feet or more, depending on local and climatic
conditions. In North America we can claim over 100 of the various species. Largest of the willows of
eastern North America is the black willow, Salix nigra. It has dark brown, ridged bark, reddish to orange
twigs, and long, narrow leaves that are taper-pointed. The flowers are in elongated clusters—aments, or
catkins—either male or female; however, in rare instances the flowers are bisexual. The “precocious”
catkins are ornamental. Among flowering plants willow is ancient, fossils extending back to the
Cretaceous period.

MEDICINAL PART: Bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aphrodisiac, tonic, astringent, detergent, antiperiodic.

Uses: Willow is very similar in action to quinine; the active principle is salicin and is believed to be far
more valuable than quinine for ague and low grades of fever. These salicylic acids are found in a number
of herbal remedies used throughout the world, some dating as far back as the Stone Age. We do not know
how the willow first became known to the Native Americans, we only know that when they were in need
of a fever-reducing agent willow-bark tea was given.

In 1763 the Reverend Edward Stone made an old-fashioned deduction: three things occurred together—
low, marshy regions, rheumatism, willow trees. So he tried a decoction of willow bark on sufferers of
rheumatic complaints and thus rediscovered the effectiveness of salicylic acid (salix is Latin for willow).
It wasn’t long before experimentally inclined chemists began synthesizing this substance from common
coal tar and petroleum derivatives, according to a standard recipe given in many elementary chemistry
textbooks. Today it is known as common aspirin. The amount swallowed annually in the United States is
approaching 35 million pounds, or five tablets a week for every man, woman, and child. Modern aspirin
is of human invention rather than from nature’s goodness. Willow is highly recommended and largely used
in the treatment of spermatorrhea, nocturnal emissions, etc. Also relieves ovarian pain.

Dose: Combine 3 grains willow (Salix nigra) and ‘2 grain Capsicum (cayenne) when there is great

----- PAGE 228 -----
prostration. Add % grain goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) when the heart as well as the nervous system
needs sustaining. To be given in gelatin capsule three times daily before meals. Of the infusion, 1 ounce of
bark to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes, taken in wineglassful amounts three of four times
daily.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice made by simmering the powdered bark in cream is most effective in gangrene,
indolent ulcers, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark for diarrhea, emissions, fever, gonorrhea, impotence,
masturbation, night sweats, nymphomania, prostatitis, satyriasis, spermatorrhea.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are several kinds of willow, Eva, in Russia, Salix alba, S. caprea, S.
fragilis, and others. The willow, especially weeping willow, so artistically portrayed in melancholy
expressions of poetry and music, is extremely popular in parks and private gardens. Folk medicine: No
preference is shown as to the species used for medical purposes. A decoction is prepared for fevers,
rheumatism, worms, and to stop bleeding (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Industrial:
The willow is not capricious as to soil conditions and is used to control eroding soil, as it is fast growing
(Moscow University, Moscow, 1963). The wood is used in many farm implements and household items.
The bark is used in the leather tanning industry.

----- PAGE 229 -----
WINTERGREEN

Gaultheria procumbens

COMMON NAMES: Teaberry, boxberry, checkerberry.

FEATURES: Wintergreen is a name applied to several plants of the family Ericaceae that retain their
foliage during winter. In eastern North America the aromatic little Gaultbeira procumbens is the one most
often referred to. This low-growing barley, 6 inches high, has glossy, leathery, broad leaves with creeping
stems from which arise erect reddish branches. They bear solitary white flowers, usually below the
leaves, followed by the rather generous fruit (considering the size of the plant), which encloses the seed
capsules and assumes the form of a bright scarlet, edible, mealy, and spicy berry. The whole plant is
pungent in taste the spiciness due to the volatile oil. Collection is somewhat difficult in its scattered wild
state. Cultivation requires specially constructed shade such as goldenseal and ginseng provide. Wild
plants may be used for propagation; divisions of these may be set in the autumn or spring, about 6 inches
apart each way, in permanent beds. The soil, which should be thoroughly mixed with a 4-inch depth of
leaf mold, will give a fairly good growth. Collection is usually at the end of the growth season, around
October.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCES: Astringent, stimulant, anodyne.

Uses: Distilled wintergreen oil is chiefly used for flavoring confectionery or pharmaceutical
preparations. Native Americans employed the plant for rheumatic conditions, internally and externally.
Compared to the size of willow (Salix nigra) or birch (Betula alba), wintergreen is a very small plant,
but they all have a common agent, salicylate, which is most useful in relieving pains of rheumatism and as
a stimulating nervine. May be employed in diarrhea and as an infant’s carminative. Adjust dose according
to age.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the plant, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink 1 cupful, cold
or hot, during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5-20 minims. Too large an amount can
cause vomiting.

EXTERNALLY: Oil of wintergreen may be added to the bath or steam cabinet. The fresh or dried herb put
into a white cotton bag and simmered in a large vessel, adding liquid and container bag to the bathwater,
is effective for joint paints and swellings. Do not immerse the whole body, just waist deep; if the

----- PAGE 230 -----
shoulders and neck are also rheumatic, squeeze the simmered bag over this area. If you feel drowsy, too
relaxed, or have heart palpitations, get out. Continue once or twice a week for thirty times consecutively.
Other suitable herbs can also be used and combined in this type of bath. It is wise to drink a herbal
diuretic tea mixture during this period so that the uric acid, or deposits will not relocate.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves for gastritis, neuralgia, pleurodynia, rheumatism,
sciatica.

----- PAGE 231 -----
WITCH HAZEL

Hamamelis virginiana

COMMON NAMES: Spotted adler, snapping hazel nut, winter bloom.

FEATURES: Witch hazel is of the family Hamamelidaceae, or of the extract of Hamamelis virginiana. The
genus includes five species, of which two are native to eastern and central North America and three to
eastern Asia. H. virginiana, the common witch hazel of eastern North America, is a shrub or small tree
found growing in bunches like the alder in damp woods in nearly all parts of the United States.

In appearance it comprises several crooked branching stems, 2—6 inches in diameter and 10-12 feet
high, covered with a smooth gray bark with brown spots. The leaves are alternate, oval, wavy-margined,
and turn yellow in the autumn. They possess a degree of fragrance and when chewed are at first somewhat
bitter, very sensibly astringent, and then leave a pungent sweetish taste that remains for a considerable
time. Its flowers have four yellow, strap-shaped petals, four fertile stamens and four staminoid; blooms
mostly in November and December after the leaves have fallen. The fruit, ripening the next autumn, is a
nutlike capsule or pod. Witch hazel is unusual, especially among trees and shrubs, in its time of flowering.
Twigs and crotches of H. virginiana have been used as divining rods.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, sedative.

Uses: Another medicinal tree used by Native Americans for various irritations. To check internal
bleeding it is among the best, especially for excessive menstruation, hemorrhages from the lung, stomach,
uterus, bowels, etc. There is hardly an inflamed condition, internally or externally, that does not respond
to the properties of this product. It is useful for weakening and pain of diarrhea, dysentery, excessive
mucus, and is seldom surpassed for hemorrhoids. If bleeding, inject 2 ounce solution into the rectum and
retain as long as possible; repeat after every bloody discharge. Make the ointment from the boiled leaves,
bark, and coconut oil; chill and make into suppostories. A solution can be used also as enema in diarrhea
and dysentery, and as a douche for leukorrhea, simple vaginitis, and falling of the womb. Has been valued
in incipient tuberculosis and painful tumors. A mouthwash is useful for bleeding gums and inflamed
conditions of the mouth and throat; also as a cotton application for inflamed eyes. The leaves, twigs, and
bark may be made into an infusion and are stronger than the distilled extract.

CAUTION: Tincture from the bark should not be applied directly to the skin. It is extremely astringent and
can cause disfiguration.

Dose: Simmer 10 minutes 1 ounce of the leaves or bark to 1 pint of water. Take in wineglassful doses
three or four times daily. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops. Children according to age.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used witch hazel in poultice form for all external irritations of broken or
unbroken skin conditions. Has been mixed with flax seed for inflamed swelling and tumors of a painful
character. For varicose veins an extract of the fresh leaves and young twigs of witch hazel is applied on a
loosely woven white cotton cloth and kept constantly moist, for relief and to arouse circulation.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark of twigs and root (a resinoid, hamamelin, is also

----- PAGE 232 -----
prepared) for abortion (threatened), ankles (weak), black eye, bruises, burns, cancer, chilblains,
constipation, enteric fever, gastric ulcer, hematemesis, hematuria, hemorrhages, hemorrhagic diathesis,
hemorrhoids, leuckorrhea, menstruation (disorders of, vicarious), nipples (sore), noises in the head, nose
(bleeding from), ovaries (affections of), pelvic hematocele, phimosis, phlegmasia alba dolens, purpura,
rheumatism, scapula (rheumatism of), scurvy, smallpox, testicles (inflamed), ulcers, uterus (affections of),
vagina (spasm of), varicocele, veins (varicose), wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature close attention is given to witch hazel; they use the same Latin
name with a Russian accent. Witch hazel does not grow wild in Russia. Hamamelis virginiana, native of
North America, and Japonica, of Japan, are cultivated commercially. Folk medicine: Is not indicated.
Clinically: Extracts used in unwanted, excessive, bleeding; bleeding hemorrhoids; and other similar cases
(Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 233 -----
WORMSEED

Cheno podium ambrosioides var. anthelmintium

COMMON NAMES: American wormseed, Jerusalem oak, chenopodium, Mexican tea.

FEATURES: Wormseed is the common name given to various plants and their derivatives. American
wormseed, Chenpodium ambrosioides, also known as C. anthelmintium, is in the goosefoot family
Chenopodiaceae, which is a native of the American tropics but has widely escaped to waste places in
almost all parts of the United States (cultivated in Maryland).

The plant grows 2-4 feet high and has yellowish green flowers that are oval and gland-dotted on the
underside; they flower from July to September. The glossy black seeds ripen in the autumn, at which time
they should be collected. The entire plant and seeds are distinguished by a peculiar disagreeable smell.
The oil is the best form of administration.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Seeds, top.
SOLVENTS: Distilling with water or superheated steam; 70 proof alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Anthelmintic, antispasmodic.

Uses: Chiefly used to expel intestinal worms, the cause of many mistreated symptoms. The infusion of the
plant is often employed to promote menstruation, and to overcome uterine colic and cases of hysteria, if
used in small amounts daily.

Dose: Of the oil, 4-20 drops with honey or molasses, for children according to age. The infusion of the
tops and pulverized seeds, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 15 minutes, administer in
wineglassful amounts. To expel worms with more success plan to give the above during a full moon, as
the tenants are more active at this time. Omit the evening meal, give the prescribed dose, and give again in
the morning before breakfast, followed by a herbal cathartic; repeat for three days to make sure the larvae
are expelled.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant, solution of oil seed for aphasia, apoplexy, asthma,
cerebral deafness, convulsions, dropsy, epilepsy, headache, hemicrania, hemiplegia, leuckorrhea, menses
(suppressed), paralysis, scapula (pain in), tinnitus, tonsilitis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two kinds of mar (wormseed), Cheno podium anthelmintium and Cheno podium

----- PAGE 234 -----
ambrosioides, are cultivated. Russian literature attests to the properties of healing as well as its being a
prophylactic agent for several types of worms. There is no indication from available books of its being
used as folk medicine. Clinically: Chenopodium oil is used for worms: ascariasis, ancylostomiasis
(hookworms), and others. For children the oil is prepared with castor oil (laxative) and given
occasionally in small doses; it has no side effect in this amount. Usually after expelling the worms most
people are relieved of the sometimes visible worm eggs and larvae as well. They do warn that an
overdose can cause headache, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, etc. May also affect the liver, kidney,
bladder, blood pressure, breathing. Commercial: Russian agro-technology instructions may get you off to
a faster start. Since the seeds are slow growing (14-16 days) they are mixed with seeds of some fast-
growing plant like lettuce, about 15—20 pounds per acre. Wormseed harvest is %2—1 ton per acre. For
industrial oil extraction, cutting machines are set to harvest the plant just to the lower stem, which does
not have leaves. This is done when the plant becomes brownish and seeds are mostly ripened, which is
the time of maximum content for volatile oil, chenopodium and ascaridol. Seed harvest alone is by a
selected method.

----- PAGE 235 -----
WORMWOOD

Artemisia absinthium

COMMON NAMES: Absinth, ajenjo, old woman.

FEATURES: Wormwood is native to Eurasia and has been introduced into North America, where it occurs
as a casual weed in waste places in the northern United States and southern Canada. Michigan,
Wisconsin, and Oregon grow this herb commercially. There are various other species of Artemisia;
common wormwood, sea wormwood, and Roman wormwood, similar in appearance but different in
properties. A. absinthium, of the Compositae family, is a perennial, commonly 2—4 feet tall, with
clustered stems and silvery gray herbage. The leaf blades are up to about 4 inches long and are divided
into numerous blunt or rounded small segments, the basal leaves being long-stalked and larger than those
of the stem. The numerous flower heads, which are scattered along branches that have reduced leaves, are
small, yellowish, and individually rather inconspicuous, being hardly 4 inches wide, flowering from June
to September. Odor, aromatic; taste, very bitter. It yields what is known to druggists as absinthin.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTS: Diluted alcohol, water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, stomachic, stimulant, febrifuge, anthelmintic, narcotic.

Uses: Wormwood ranks first for conditions of enfeebled digestion and debility. Often melancholy is due
to liver inactivity, and it is impious for a good man to be sad. A small amount of wormwood daily will
decrease the yellowness of the skin, revealing the improvement of the gallbladder.

This herb is used for intermittent fever, jaundice, worms, want of appetite, amenorrhea, chronic
leukorrhea, diabetes, obstinate diarrhea, swelling of the tonsils, and quinsy. Travelers who are much
troubled with indigestion and nausea should take with them as a faithful companion their little bottle of
wormwood in tincture form, mixed with enough alcohol to ensure that it will last as a traveling
companion for a long time.

CAUTION: Taken too strong and too often it will irritate the stomach and dangerously increase the action
of the heart and arteries. It can also result in intoxication and delirium.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the tops and leaves, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; take in
wineglassful amounts three or four times a day. Of the tincture, 5-30 drops three or four times a day,

----- PAGE 236 -----
according to age and condition; of the powder, 3-4 grains twice a day.

EXTERNALLY: The oil of wormwood is an effective ingredient in liniment for sprains, bruises, lumbago,
etc. Fomentation from the hot tea is excellent for rheumatism, swellings, sprains, and local inflammations.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for catalepsy, chorea, convulsions, epilepsy,
hydrocephalus, hysteria, somnambulism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Wormwood, known in Russia as polin, is considered the most bitter plant in the
world; 10,000 parts water to 1 part wormwood will still have a bitter taste. It used to be thought that the
bitter taste of wormwood was due to the plant’s absorption of bitter human sufferings and the dissolution
of mankind, therefore its properties would drive sickness from the body and restore peace and calmness
to the soul (similia similibus curantur). In the eighteenth century a toast to joy, happiness, and pleasure
was accompanied by a drop of wormwood in a cup.

It is written by the most ancient that wormwood has many healing properties. Today science confirms
that it contains absentine and anabsentin, vitamin C, and volatile oil. Lonicerius wrote: “The herb, leaves
and flowers added to food and beverage is useful for the stomach, promotes bile, warms the body and
expels poison.” Folk medicine: Uses the medicine straight or in compound with sage, mint, sunflower
leaves, etc., depending on conditions being treated. Nastoika (with vodka), tea, decoctions for
indigestion, appetizer, gastritis, stomach ulcers, dysentery, tuberculosis of the lungs, liver and spleen
conditions, kidney and bladder, headache, purifying poisoned blood, fever, bleeding, etc. Decoction of 1
teaspoonful to 1 cupful of water, steeped and cooled, used as an enema, will kill intestinal worms.
Externally: Many centuries ago Pliny wrote: “If pedestrians keep some Wormwood on his body,
especially the feet, he will not be tired.” Russians in the seventeenth century used the juice for wounds
and foul ulcers. (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Can be used as compresses and poultices for bruises,
injuries, or insect bites. Green bruised leaves for corns. Flowers and leaves scattered on the floor and
furniture will discourage unwanted house insects (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965).
Clinically: Extract for spasm, bronchial asthma, rheumatism, eczema, burns (X ray or other) (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Called afsantin or vilayati afsantin, the plant is used much as in the
United States and Russia. They use the whole herb but prefer the leaves, and consider the fresh plant more
effective than the dried. As tonic, aromatic, anthelmintic. Uses: It is praised highly for round- and
tapeworms. Powder, 10-60 grains. Small doses are used for dispersing the yellow bile of jaundice from
the skin, and for liver and spleen conditions. A tonic for the stomach, digestive system, anemia, female
complaints, amenorrhea, general debility, wasting diseases. A decoction as an enema for intestinal
worms, which will kill them instantly. The oil is anthelmintic; they mix one part of it with eight parts olive
oil and give it in 50-100-gram doses.

----- PAGE 237 -----
YARROW
Achillea millefolium

FEATURES: A perennial plant of the composite family (Compositae), yarrow inhabits Europe and North
America. It is found in pastures, meadows, and along roadsides, flowering from May to October. Yarrow
has a rough angular stem and grows to heights of 3 feet; the alternate leaves are 1-6 inches long,
pinnatifid, slightly woolly, cut into very fine segments, and clasp the stem at the base. The flowers are
white (if you are lucky you may find pink yarrow), borne in flat-top daisylike clusters up to 1 foot across.
The plant possesses a faint, pleasant, peculiar fragrance and an ether-sharp, rough, astringent taste, which
properties are due to tannic and achilleic acid, essential oil, and bitter extractive achilleine. The genus to
which yarrow belongs was named after Achilles, who supposedly discovered the medicinal virtues of the
plant.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, alterative, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: Yarrow as a useful agent was known to the Native Americans as a tonic for run-down conditions
and indigestion. The juice put in the eye will take away redness. Herbalists know that yarrow, together
with plantain (Plantago lanceolata) and comfrey (Symphytum), will stop hemorrhages of the lungs,
bowels, hemorrhoids, and other internal bleeding. Yarrow is most useful in colds, influenza, measles,
smallpox, chickenpox, fevers, and acute catarrhs of the respiratory tract. The properties have the ability to
keep up strength and act as a blood cleanser, at the same time opening the pores to permit free
perspiration, which takes along with it unwanted waste and relieves the kidneys; more effective than
quinine for the above mentioned when combined with elder flowers (Sambucus canadensis) and
peppermint (Mentha piperita).

Yarrow exercises influence over many ailments, including incontinence of urine and instances of
mucous discharge from the bladder, dyspepsia, amenorrhea, suppressed or restrained menses, and
menorrhagia or profuse continued menstruation; as a feminine solution for administration for leukorrhea

----- PAGE 238 -----
(whites). An internal decoction of yarrow boiled with white wine is used to stop the running of the reins
in men and discharge in women. Chewing the leaves when troubled by toothache will frequently ease the
pain.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water is given in wineglassful to cupful amounts,
three or four times a day. The essential oil, 5-20 drops three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used the leaves as a poultice for skin rash. It is currently used for
treatment of skin wounds, ulcers, and fistulas in an ointment or poultice application; both are soothing for
hemorrhoids. The oil or decoction will prevent hair from falling out, if taken internally and applied to the
scalp.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Tisiachelistnik and krovavnik means “one thousand leaves” and “blood plant.”
Achillea millefolium, also translated as “one thousand leaves” in Russia, A. asiatica, and A. setacea are
only three of the species of yarrow to be found there. The leaves, flowers, and unseparated tops are
usually called yarrow, as known in North America. Folk medicine: Since the fifteenth century Russian
herbalists have used and recommended yarrow. As tea, decoction, nastoika (with vodka) for bleeding,
stomach sickness, gastritis, ulcers, dysentery, diarrhea, female bleeding, inflamed processes, cold, cough,
liver, anemia, headache, tuberculosis of the lungs, shortness of breath, nervousness, high blood pressure,
tabes of spinal marrow. Externally: Decoctions and poultice for surface or subcutaneous skin conditions:
Clinically: Recently recognition has been given to extracts and decoctions for stomach sickness,
especially ulcers, and for bleeding and gastritis. Also as an appetizer and externally as styptic (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 239 -----
YELLOW DOCK

Rumex crispus

COMMON NAMES: Curled dock, narrow dock, sour dock, rumex, garden patience.

FEATURES: The docks are members of the buckwheat family, native to Europe (except the blunt-leaved,
which is indigenous); they have been introduced into the United States. There are four varieties of dock
that may be used in medicine: Rumex aquaticus (great water dock), R. britannica (water dock), R.
obtusifolius (blunt-leaved dock), and R. crispus (yellow dock). They all possess similar medicinal
qualities, but yellow dock is the only one entitled to extensive consideration.

The yellowish spindle-shaped root has scarcely any odor but has an astringent, bitter taste. The plant
grows 2-3 feet high with slender, crisped-edged leaves that are lanceolate, acute, and of a light green
color; the leaves and stalk have a sour taste. The flowers are numerous, pale green, drooping, and
interspersed with leaves below; can be seen in June and July.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, astringent, laxative, anti-scorbutic, tonic.

Usss: A favorite herb of Native Americans, old-time doctors, early settlers, and herbal practitioners. For
some conditions it has no equal, especially if compounded with other supporting herbs. Rich and easily
digested iron so essential for human, animal, and plant, is one of the main contents of yellow dock. This
common herb has valuable ingredients for conditions of the blood and glandular system and is indicated
in scrofula, ulcerated eyelids and skin conditions, itch, scurvy, and eruptive diseases, especially when
discharges are experienced, as in running of the ears.

When accumulation of waste matter progresses to swelling or tumors, yellow dock is of service both
internally and externally. Many herbalists use the mineral-rich plant for cancer, leprosy, bleeding of the
lungs and bowels, and for rheumatic conditions. It also has much merit in dyspepsia, chronic bronchitis,
ulcers, and conditions affected by the spleen and lymphatic glands; also for female weakness when due to
iron deficiency.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the grated or crushed root to | cupful of boiling water; drink 3-4 cupfuls daily. A

----- PAGE 240 -----
syrup may be made by boiling 4 pound of the crushed root in | pint of syrup; taken in teaspoonful doses
three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Ulcers, hard tumors, eruptive skin diseases, etc., have been removed by the application of
the bruised root in poultice form. An ointment made with the root simmered in oil (coconut oil will
harden when cold and can be used for rectal suppositories) is also used for the above external care.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for abortion, aphonia, asthma, borborygmus, bronchitis,
catarrh, corns, coryza, cough, diarrhea, dyspepsia epistaxis, feet (tender), gastralgia, heart (pain in,
affections of), indigestion, irritation, lichen, mouth (ulceration of), phimosis, phthisis, prurigo,
rheumatism, throat (sore, ulcerated), trachea (affections of), urticaria.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Several species of Rumex can be found in Russia. In literature most attention is
given to R. rumicis, or konsky shavel, which means “horse dock.” Folk medicine: Use the roots and fruit
as astringent to check bleeding of lungs, female bleeding, hemorrhoids, bleeding diarrhea; also for
tubercular lungs and skin conditions. In Byelorussia a decoction of the flowers is used for diarrhea,
dysentery, kidney and bladder, stomach sickness; a decoction of the root for pain after heavy lifting.
Externally: Decoctions used for ulcers, burns, and skin diseases. Fresh leaves for foul wounds and
ulcers, shingles or itching skin (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1966).

----- PAGE 241 -----
YELLOW PARILLA

Menispermum canadense

COMMON NAMES: Vine-maple, moonseed, Canadian moonseed, Texas sarsaparilla, yellow sarsaparilla.

FEATURES: A perennial member of the moonseed family, yellow parilla grows from Canada to Carolina
and west to the Mississippi. The horizontal, very long, woody root of a beautiful yellow color thrives in
moist woods, hedges, and near streams. The taste is bitter, and it is nearly odorless.

The stem is round and climbing and about | foot in length, with roundish smooth leaves, 4—5 inches in
diameter, green above, paler beneath. The small yellow flowers are in clusters in the month of July
followed by one-seeded fruit that is thick, black, and resembles grapes. Its active principle, menispermin,
is sometimes used as a substitute for sarsaparilla.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, alterative, diuretic, laxative.

Uses: Dr. O. P. Brown (1875): “Yellow Parilla seems to possess one virtue which is paramount to all
others, it is essentially and particularly antisyphilitic, anti-scrofulous, anti-mercurial.” Achieving this, it
is of much merit for all diseases arising from either hereditary or acquired impurities of the system. It
exerts its influence principally on the gastric and salivary glands and is found expressly beneficial in
cases of adhesive inflammation and where it is necessary to break up organized deposits and hasten
disintegration of unwanted tissue. It is believed by some to be superior to sarsaparilla as a blood purifier
for scrofula, blood disorders, gout, rheumatism, and cutaneous skin diseases generally. Also acts as a
tonic and nervine and may be given in all cases of debility and dyspepsia.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes; take 1-4 cupfuls a day. Of the
tincture, 5—20 minims; of the powder, 1-4 grains. If it produces vomiting, reduce the dosage.
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root, trituration of menispermin for backache, headache, itching,
tongue (swelling of).

----- PAGE 242 -----
YERBA SANTA

Eriodictyon californicum

COMMON NAMES: Mountain balm, bear’s weed, consumptive’s weed, tarweed, gum bush.

FEATURES: This evergreen shrub is a member of the water leaf family (Hydrophyllaceae), of which many
species are known. It is somewhat branching and attains a height of 2-4 feet. The stems are smooth and
exude a gummy substance. Leaves are 3-4 inches in length, distinctively woolly on the undersides,
containing a network of prominent veins, and the resinous substance causes the woolly fibers to appear
varnished; upper surface is smooth, with depressed veins. The flowers are terminal, appearing in shades
of dark lavender through pale shades of lavender to white, forming funnel-shaped clusters at the top of the
plant. Yerba santa honey is amber, with a slightly spicy flavor. If one follows bees to this plant it will be
found growing on dry California mountain slopes and ridges throughout the coastal ranges and up into the
foothills of the Sierra Nevada from Monterey and Tulare counties northward. The capsule fruit is oval,
grayish brown, and contains small brown shriveled seeds.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, tonic, stimulant, expectorant.

Uses: The name yerba santa (holy weed) was given by the Spanish fathers who became aware of this
corrective substance through the Native Americans. They boiled the fresh or dried leaves for colds,
coughs, sore throat, catarrh, stomachaches, vomiting, and diarrhea. Yerba santa is known to physicians as
a leading agent for all respiratory conditions and has a reputation for healing hemorrhoids when other
sources fail. Also used in kidney conditions and rheumatic pain. For more effective results some
physicians recommend that gum plant (Grindelia robusta) be combined with yerba santa in syrup form. It
should be used in small amounts, as too large doses of G. robusta will irritate the kidneys. Make a
mixture of three parts yerba santa to one part gum and take in fluid extract, 10-30 drops, three or four
times a day.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of crushed leaves to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped ’2 hour; take 1-4
cupfuls daily. Of the solid extract, 3-6 grains. Fluid extract '2—1 teaspoonful three to four times daily.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used the fresh or dried leaves as a poultice for broken and unbroken skin
of both humans and animals when in pain from rheumatism, fatigued limbs, swelling, sores, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant for asthma, bronchitis, catarrh, influenza, phthisis.

----- PAGE 243 -----
DEFINITIONS

Alterative Producing a healthful change without perception.
Anodyne_ Relieves pain.

Anthelmintic A medicine that expels worms.

Antibilious Acts on the bile, relieving biliousness.
Antiemetic Stops vomiting.

Antihilitic Prevents the formation of stones in the urinary organs.
Antileptic Relieves fits.

Antiperiodic Arrests morbid periodic movements.
Antirheumatic Relieves or cures rheumatism.
Antiscorbutic Cures or prevents scurvy.

Antiseptic A medicine that aims at stopping putrification.
Antispasmodic Relieves or prevents spasms.
Antisyphilitic Having affect on or curing venereal diseases.
Aperient Gently laxative without purging.

Aromatic A stimulant, spicy.

Astringent Causes contraction and arrests discharges.
Carminative Expels wind from the bowels.

Cathartic Evacuating from the bowels.

Cephalic Remedies used in diseases of the head.
Cholagogue Increases the flow of bile.

Condiment Improves the flavor of foods.

Demulcent Soothing, relieves inflammation.
Deobstruent Removes obstruction.

Depurative Purifies the blood.

Detergent Cleansing to boils, ulcers, and wounds.
Diaphoretic Produces perspiration.

Discutient Dissolves and heals tumors.

Diuretic Increases the secretion and flow of urine.
Emetic Produces vomiting.

Emmenagogue Promotes menstruation.

Emollient Softens and soothes inflamed parts.

Esculent Edible.

Exanthematous Remedy for skin eruptions and diseases.
Expectorant Facilitates expectoration.

Febrifuge Abates and reduces fevers.

Hepatic A remedy for diseases of the liver.

Herpetic A remedy for skin diseases of all types.
Laxative Promotes bowel action.

Lithotriptic Dissolves calculi in the urinary organs.
Maturating Ripens or brings boils to a head.
Mucilaginous Soothing to all inflammation.

----- PAGE 244 -----
Nauseant Produces vomiting.

Nervine Acts specifically on the nervous system, stops nervous excitement.
Ophthalmicum A remedy for eye diseases.

Parturient Induces and promotes labor at childbirth.
Pectoral A remedy for chest affections.

Refrigerant Cooling.

Resolvent Dissolves boils and tumors.

Rubefacient Increases circulation and produces red skin.
Sedative A nerve tonic, promotes sleep.

Sialagogue Increases the secretion of saliva.

Stomachic Strengthens the stomach. Relieves indigestion.
Styptic Arrests bleeding.

Sudorifile Produces profuse perspiration.

Tonic A remedy that is invigorating and strengthening.
Vermifuge Expels worms from the system.

----- PAGE 245 -----
INDEX

Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been included for use as search terms.
They can be located by using the search feature of your e-book reader.

Abdomen, plethora of
Abortion; threatened
Abscess. See also Boil; Carbuncle
Absentine

Achilles tendon, pain in
Acne. See also Skin

Acritis

Adder’s mouth

Adrenal glands

Adynamic fever

African pepper

Aging. See Longevity
Agropyron

Ague

Ajenjo

Albumin

Albuminuria

Alcoholism. See also Delirium tremens
Alimentary tract, ailments of
Alopecia

Alteratives

Alum

Amaurosis

Amblyopia

Amenorrhea

Anabsentin

Anasarca

Anemia

Aneurysm

Angina, pectoris. See also Heart
Animal bites

Ankles, weak

Anodyne

Anorexia

Anthelmintic

Antibilious

Antibiotic

Antidote

Antiperiodic

Antiscorbutic

Antiseptic

Antispasmodic

Antitoxin

Antrum, pain in

Anus; affections of; burning; fissure of; itching of; prolapse of. See also Rectum
Aperient

Aphasia

Aphonia

Aphrodisiac

----- PAGE 246 -----
Aphthae
Apiol
Apoplexy
Appendicitis
Appetite
Arberry
Arborvitae
Archangel
Aromatic
Arsemart
Arteriosclerosis
Arthritis
Ascites
Asthma
Astham weed
Astringent
Aunee

Backache; kidneys and

Balanitis

Baldness. See also Hair

Bear’s weed

Bedsores

Bedstraw

Bed wetting. See also Enuresis

Beechnut tree

Bee stings. See also Insect bites; Stings
Beggar’s buttons

Beggar’s tick

Berry

Biliary colic

Bilious attack

Biliousness

Birch mushroom

Bird pepper

Bird’s nest

Birth root

Birthwort

Bites. See also Insect bites; Snakebite

Bitter bloom

Bitter clover

lack eye

lack larch

lack sampson

lack snakeroot

ladder; inflammation; irritable; stones; ulcerated
leeding, internal; stopping. See also Hemorrhages
lepharitis

lood: builder; circulation; cleansing of; coagulation; conditions; disease; poisoning; purifying; regulator
lood pressure, high

low ball

lue ginseng

lue gum tree

lue pimpernel

lue skullcap

Boil. See also Abscess; Carbuncle; Skin
Bombay aloe

Bone; cancer; disease; fractured. See also Fractures
Borborygmus

Bottlebrush

Bowel, bleeding; children’s; cramps; spasms of
Boxberry

Brachial neuralgia

Brain; concussion of

WDWWWBWBDDWDWBBTOD

----- PAGE 247 -----
Bramble berry

Brandy mint

Breast

Breast cancer

Breast feeding; sore mouth of mother; weaning from
Breath, offensive

Breathing difficulties
Bright’s disease
Broadleaved plantain
Bronchial: complaints; tubes
Bronchitis

Bruises

Buffalo herb

Bugbane

Bull’s foot

Bunions

Burns

Calamus

Calcium

Calculus; dissolving
Calmative

Canada snake root
Canadian moonseed
Cancer; breast; skin; stomach; throat; womb. See also Tumors
Cancer root

Candle berry
Canker root

Canker sores
Cankerwort
Capon’s tail
Capillary bronchitis
Carbonate of lime
Carbuncles. See also Abscess; Boil; Skin
Cardiac stimulant
Cardialgia
Carminative
Carotene

Castor oil

Catalepsy

Cataract

Catarrh; respiratory
Catchstraw
Cathartic

Catheter fever
Catkin willow
Catmint

Cat’s foot

Cat’s wort

Cayenne

Cecum

Cedar, yellow
Celandine

Cervix, ulceration of
Chamomile
Chancre. See also Syphilis; Venereal disease
Chancroids
Chaparral

Chaparro

Chapped lips
Chapped skin. See also Skin
Checkerberry
Chelidonium
Chenopodium

----- PAGE 248 -----
Cherry birch

Cherry, wild black

Chest, affections of; pain
Chicken pox

Chilblains

Childbirth; afterbirth; after pains; pain relief; pains; postpartum; hemorrhages
China root

Chloasma

Choice dielytra
Chokecherry

Cholagogue

Cholera

Cholerine

Cholesterol, reducing
Chordee

Chorea

Choroiditis

Christmas tree

Ciliary neuralgia
Cimicifugin

Cinnamon wood
Circulation

Cleaver grass

Clothburr

Coagulation, blood. See also Hemorrhages
Coakum

Cocash weed
Cocecygodynia

Coccyx pain

Cockhold herb

Colds

Colic; bilious; cramp; infant
Colic root

Colitis

Colpatitis

Complexion. See also Skin
Compresses

Concussion

Congestion

Conjunctivitis. See also Eyes
Constipation; of children; chronic. See also Laxative
Consumption
Consumptive’s weed
Convalescence
Convulsions, infantile
Copper

Cornea, ulceration of. See also Eyes
Corns

Corus

Coryza

Cough

Coughwort

Cow grass

Cow lily

Cow’s lungwort

Coxalgia

Cramps

Creosote bush

Croup

Crusta lactea

Culver’s physic

Culver’s root

Curled dock

Cystitis

----- PAGE 249 -----
Dandruff. See also Hair
Dead arsemart
Deafness, cerebral. See also Ears
Deal pine

Debility

Delirium

Delirium tremens. See also Alcoholism
Demulcent

Dentition

Deobstruent
Depression

Depurative

Dermatitis

Detergent

Devil's pitchfork

Devil's plague
Dewberry

Dewplant

Diabetes

Diaphoretic
Diaphagmitis

Diarrhea of children
Digestion, enfeebled
Digestive

Diphtheria

Diplopia

Discutient

Disinfectant

Diuretic

Dizziness

Dog bane

Dog grass

Drop berry

Dropsy

Duodenum

Dupuytren's contracture
Durfa grass

Dwarf evergreen oak
Dwarf sumac
Dysentery, cathartic
Dysmenia
Dysmenorrhea
Dyspepsia. See also Indigestion
Dysuria

Ear; disturbances; hearing; mucus; polypus of; ringing; tympanites; wax; worms in. See also Deafness
Earache

Eastern white pine

Ecchymosis

Eczema. See also Skin

Edema

Elf dock

Elm, red

Emetic

Emetic root

Emetic weed

Emetocathartic

Emissions

Emmenagogue. See also Menstruation
Emollients

Emphysema

Endive, wild

Endocrine system. See also Glands

----- PAGE 250 -----
English oak

Enteric fever

Enuresis

Epididymitis

Epilepsy, fits

Epistaxis

Erysipelas

Erythema

Esophagus, spasm of; stricture of

Estrogenic hormones

European beech

Eustachian tubes

Exhaustion

Expectorant

Eye; black; cataract; conjunctivitis; cornea; ulceration of; improvement of sight; inflamed; myopia; night blindness; pain over; pains; redness;
sclerotica inflamed; styes; tumors of; twitching; wash

Eyelids, ulcerated

Eyesight, restoration of

Face, neuralgia of; paralysis of; redness of
Fainting

Faintness

Falling sickness

False valerian

False white cedar
Fatigue

Favus

Feather few
Featherfoil

Febrifuge

Febrile diseases

Feet; fetid; perspiration of; sore; swollen; tender
Felon herb

Felonwort

Fertility

Fever; remittent infant
Fever sores

Fever twig

Fibroma

Fistulas

Five finger root

Five leaves grass

Flag lily

Flannel flower
Flatulence

Fluorine

Flytrap

Foal’s foot

Fractures. See also Bones
Freckles. See Skin
Frostbite

Fumigation

Fungoid growths

Gagroot

Galactagogic

Gallbladder

Gallstones

Ganglion

Gangrene

Garget

Gargle

Gas. See also Flatulence
Gastralgia

----- PAGE 251 -----
Gastric ulcer

Gastritis

Gastrodynia
Gastroenteritis
Gastrointestinal catarrh
Gill go by ground
Ginger root

Ginseng, yellow
Glands; enlarged; swollen
Gleet

Glossitis

Glucose

Gobonadoraz

Goiter

Golden senecio
Gonorrhea. See also Venereal disease
Goose grass

Gout

Gout berry

Gravel

Greasewood

Grippe

Groats

Ground apple

Ground raspberry
Groundsel

Guelder rose

Gum

Gum bush

Gum plant

Gums; bleeding; inflamed; sore
Gynecological disorders

Hackmatack

Hair color, restoration of; diseases of; falling; growth of; loss prevention; tonic. See also Dandruff
Halitosis

Hands, chapped, cold

Hayfever

Headeaches; bilious; migraine; nervous
Heart; affections of; conditions; disease; pain in; palpitations; strengthener; weakness. See also Angina; Pulmonary
Heartburn

Hellebore green

Hematemesis

Hematuria

Hemicrania

Hemoptysis

Hemorrhage; internal; postpartum. See also Bleeding
Hemorrhoids; loss prevention. See also Piles
Hemostatic

Hepatic

Hepatic diseases

Hepatitis

Hernia; strangulated

Herpes; labialis pudendi; zoster

Hiccups

High cranberry

Hip disease

Hoarseness

Hog apple

Hoodwort

Hormones estrogenic

Horse chestnut

Horse hoof

Huckleberry

----- PAGE 252 -----
Hurtleberry
Hydragogue
Hydrangea wild
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocyanie acid
Hyperpyrexia
Hypnotic

Hyssop wild
Hysteria

Ichthyosis

Impetigo

Impotence

Incontinence

Indian apple

Indian balm

Indian elm

Indian ginger

Indian hyssop

Indian plant

Indian poke

Indian salt

Indian spikenard

Indian tobacco

Indigestion. See also Dyspepsia
Infections septic

Influenza

Injuries swollen. See also Swellings
Inkberry

Insect bites; bee stings; stings
Insect repellent

Insomnia

Intestines; chronic inflammation of; inflammation of; ulceration of; ulcer pain
Tnulin

Todine

Iris

Iritis

Tron

Itching

Itch weed

Jaundice
Jerusalem cowslip
Jerusalem oak
Johnswort

Joint affections
Joint stiffness
Juniper

Keratin

Keratitis

Kidney; backache and; congestion; inflammation; prenatal problems and; stones; ulceration of
Klamath weed

Knee pain

Knit bone

Labor. See Childbirth

Lactation; ending

Lady’s slipper, yellow

Lappa

Laryngitis

Larynx

Laxatives. See also Constipation
Lead colic

----- PAGE 253 -----
Lead poisoning
Leg pain

Lemon wild
Leopard’s bane
Leprosy
Leptandra
Leukemia
Leukemia splenica
Leukoma
Leukorrhea
Lichen

Licorice wild

Like of man

Lime tree

Linden flower
Lion’s ear

Lion’s tail

Lion’s tooth

Lips, cancer of; chapped
Liver; disorders; feverish; suppressed. See also Jaundice
Liver lily

Liver spots
Lockjaw

Locust plant
Longevity

Lucern

Lumbago
Lumbricoid worms
Lungs; bleeding; disease; disorders of; edema of; inflammation of; strengthening of; ulcerated. See also Consumption
Lupus

Lymphatic glands
Lymphatic relief

Macrotin

Maddog weed

Magnesia

Magnesium

Malaria

Malarial fever

Malic acid

Malignancy. See Cancer; Tumors
Manganese

Maple lungwort

Masterwort

Mayapple

Measles

Melancholia

Melancholy

Melanoma. See also Cancer
Meningitis

Menorrhagia

Menstruation; difficult; disorders of; flow; obstructed; painful; profuse; promotion of; suppressed. See also Emmenagogue
Mercurial poisoning

Mercury

Metabolism

Metrorrhagia

Mexican tea

Migraine. See also Headache
Milk ipecac

Milkweed

Milkwort

Minerals

Mint curled

Miscarriage; prevention of. See also Childbirth; Pregnancy

----- PAGE 254 -----
Moka aloe
Moonseed

Moose elm
Morning sickness. See also Pregnancy
Mortal

Mother of thyme
Moth mullein
Mountain balm
Mountain box
Mountain cranberry
Mountain flax
Mountain mahogany
Mountain sumac
Mouth sores; ulcers
Mouth root
Mouthwash
Mucilaginous
Mucus, treatment of diseased. See also Catarrh
Mumps

Muscles sore
Muscle tone
Myalgia

Myelitis

Myopia

Myrica

Myrtle flag

Nails; brittle
Narcotic

Narrow dock

Nasal polypus

Nasal stoppage
Nasturtium, tall
Nausea

Nauseant

Neck, stiff

Nephritic

Nephritis

Nerve root

Nerves; strengthener
Nervine

Nervous diseases
Nervous exhaustion
Nervous irritation
Nervousness
Nervous system; calming of
Nettle, great stinging
Nettlerash

Neuralgia

Neuritis

Niacin

Nickel

Night blindness
Nightshade

Night sweats

Ninsin

Nipbone

Nipples, sore

Noah’s ark

Nose

Nosebleeds; polypus; stoppage
Nursing. See Breastfeeding
Nutrients

Nutritive

----- PAGE 255 -----
Oil

Old man’s beard
Old man’s root
Old woman
Ophthalmia
Orange root
Ovarian neuralgia
Ovaries; pain in
Oxytocic

Ozena

Pain

Palma christie
Palpitation; heart. See also Heart
Palsy

Panax

Pancreas

Pannag

Pappoose root
Paralysis; facial
Paronychia

Parsley

Parturient

Patience garden
Peachwort

Pectin

Pectoral; affections
Pectorals

Pectoris

Pelvic hematocele
Peppermint

Pepper, red
Pepperwort

Pepsin

Perineum
Peritoneum
Peritonitis. See also Stomach
Perspiration; foot; promotion of. See also Feet
Petty morrel
Pewterwort
Pharyngitis

Pharynx

Phimosis

Phosphate of potash
Phosphaturia
Phosphorus

Phrenitis

Phthisis

Pigeon berry

Piles. See also Hemorrhoids
Pinheads

Pinworms
Pipperidge bush
Pityriasis

Pleurisy

Pleurodynia
Plumbago
Pneumonia

Pocan

Poison ash
Poisoning; antidote; antitoxin; mercurial; rhus; strychnine
Poison oak

Poke weed
Polysaccharide

----- PAGE 256 -----
Polyuria

Pool root

Postpartum hemorrhages

Potassium

Pregnancy; disorders of; kidney problems with; miscarriage, prevention; morning sickness; vomiting. See also Childbirth
Proctitis

Prostate; enlarged; irritation of
Prostatitis

Protein

Psilosis

Psoriasis

Puerperal fever

Pulmonary complaints. See also Heart
Pulse

Purgative

Purple angelica

Purple clover

Purple coneflower

Purpura

Pussy willow

Pustules. See also Abscess Boil; Carbuncle
Putrefication

Pyoemia

Pyorrhea. See also Gums

Pyrethrum

Pyrosis

Quack grass

Quay

Queen Anne’s lace
Quick grass

Quill

Quinsy

Raccoonberry
Ragwort

Raspberry, wild red
Rash. See also Skin
Rattleroot
Rattlesnake bite
Rattlesnake root
Rectum; cancer of; cramp in; irritation of; prolapsed. See also Anus
Red berry

Red elm

Red gum

Red puccoon

Red river snakeroot
Refrigerant
Relaxant

Renal colic

Renal congestion
Renal torpor

Renal tract
Reproductive organs
Resolvent
Respiratory, organs, dry, tickling
Restlessness
Restorative
Rheumatism; deltoid
Rheumatism root
Rhus poisoning
Rickets

Ringworm

Ripple grass

----- PAGE 257 -----
Rock parsley

Rose pink
Rough-fruited cinquefoil
Round leaf

Rubefacient

Rumex

Rutin

Sacrum, pain in

Sage

Saint John’s grass

Saint Vitus’ dance

Salisb

Salivation; promotion of

Saloop

Salpingitis

Sambucus

Sang

Sangree root

Sangrel

Sanguinaria

Sarsparilla, red; yellow

Satin flower

Saxifrax

Scabies

Scabs

Scabwort

Scapula

Scarlatina

Scarlet fever

Scarlet sumac

Scars

Scarwort

Sciatica

Sclerosis

Scoke

Scrofula

Scurvy

Seal root

Sealwort

Seasickness

Seborrhea. See also Skin

Sedative

Senna wild

Septicemia

Serpeginosa

Serpentaria

Serpullum

Setwell

Seven barks

Shave grass

Shingles

Shock

Sialagogue

Side flower

Silicon

Silver

Silvery cinquefoil

Simpler’s joy

Sinus congestion

Siplas

Skin; cancer; chancre; chancroids; complexion; conditions; discolorations; disease; eruptions; freckles, removal of; lesions; psoriasis; rash;
redness of; seborrhea; ulcers. See also Acne; Boils; Carbuncles; Eczema

Skullcap helmet flower

----- PAGE 258 -----
Sleeplessness. See also Insomnia
Smallpox

Small spikenard
Smartweed
Smooth sumac
Snakebite

Snake lily

Snake milk
Snakeroot
Snapping hazel nut
Sneezing
Snowball tree
Snowdrop tree
Sodium

Soft pine
Somnambulism
Sores

Sour dock

Spanish chestnut
Spanish needles
Spasmodic
Spasms; bowel
Speedwell tall
Spermatorrhea
Spice birch
Spignet

Spinal, concussion
Spleen; choleric conditions; suppressed
Splenalgia
Splinters

Spotted adler
Spotted comfrey
Spotted lungwort
Sprains

Squaw bush
Squawroot

Squaw weed
Squirrel corn
Stagger weed
Starch
Star-leaved gum
Starweed

Sterility
Sternutatory
Stimulants; carminative
Stings, bee. See also Insect bites
Stitchwort
Stomach; choleric conditions; conditions; cramps; hemorrhages; inflammation of; pains; spasms; ulcers. See also Peritonitis
Stomachic; bitter
Stones

Stools

Strangury
Strychnine poisoning
Stuma

Styes

Styptic

Subacute

Sudorific

Sunburns

Sundew

Sunstroke
Suterberry

Sweet birch
Sweet chestnut

----- PAGE 259 -----
Sweet elder

Sweet grass

Sweet rush root

Sweet scented pond lily
Sweet sedge

Sweet violet
Sweetwood

Swellings

Swollen glands

Swollen injuries
Syphilis. See also Venereal disease
Systemic emetic

Tallow shrub

Tanners bark

Tannic acid

Tapeworms

Tarweed

Taste disorders

Teaberry

Teeter

Teeth; calculus; prevention of. See also Toothache
Tenesmus

Testes, cancer of

Testicles, inflamed

Tetanus

Tetters

Tetterwort

Texas sarsaparilla

Texas snakeroot

Thiamine

Thorny burr

Throat; cancer; congestion; gargle; sore
Throwwort

Thyme, common

Thyroid, imbalance

Thyroid, gland enlarged

Tibia pains in

Tinnitus

Titan

Tobacco, wild

Tomillo
Tongue; burning; mapped; strawberry; swelling of
Tonsillitis

Tonsils; swollen

Toothache

Toothache tree

Trachea

Tree of life

Trefoil

Tuberculosis. See Consumption
Tumeric root

Tumors; fungoid. See also Cancer
Turkey aloe

Turkey corn wild

Turn hoof hay maids

Twitch grass

Tympanites. See also Ear
Typhoid fever

Typhus

Ulcers; external; gastric; pain; spreading; stomach
Upland cranberry
Uremia

----- PAGE 260 -----
Urethra; stricture of

Urethritis

Uric acid disorders

Urinary organs; hemorrhages

Urinary tract; inflammations of

Urination; delayed; difficulties; disorders; flow; increase of; painful; retention; suppressed. See also Enuritis
Urticaria

Uterine colic

Uterus; pains in; prolapse; prolapsed

Uva-ursi

Uvula

Vaginismus

Vagina: discharge; inflammation of; irritation of; spasm of
Vaginismus

Vaginitis

Valerian, great wild

Varicocele

Varicose veins

Vegetable gold

Velvet dock

Velvet leaf

Venereal disease; infants with. See also Gonorrhea Syphilis
Verbascum flowers

Vermifuge

Vermont snake root

Vinemaple

Violet bloom

Vitality

Vitamins, A; B; Bg; C; D; E; G; K; P; thiamine
Vomiting

Vulnerary

Wagbread
Wake-robin
Warts

Water cabbage
Water flag
Water nymph
Water pepper
Water retention
Wax berry

Wax myrtle
Weaning

Weight loss
Wens

Wheezing

White birch
White fringe
White man’s foot
White mullein
Whitlow
Whooping cough
Whortleberry
Winter bloom
Wood sanicle
Woollen blanket herb
Worms; intestinal; retention of
Wounds; chronic

Yellow fever

Yellow jaundice. See Jaundice
Yellow moccasin flower
Yellow puccoon

----- PAGE 261 -----
Yellow root
Yellow wood

Zanzibar aloe

----- PAGE 262 -----
Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Sign Up

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

----- PAGE 263 -----
RECOMMENDED BOOKS. lick image(s) to read / download

THE
) 2WEEK

A DIET )

CARLOS CAVALLO

FOREVER

A Step-By-Step Guide To Understanding
How Men Think, Act And Behave

Acne No More™

The Secrets To Curing PSELEITE Dh
Your Acne Holistically Al goal ever need. to

Lean Toned. &

Emotional
INA Formula

.bikinibod ‘kouts..
www.bikinibodyworkouts.com By: Eline Chase

How to go from

“flello” to “1 do” fev
as fast as womanly possible f
EVEN IF He's a hard to land man to get the

ae

Lovetraction
Lines ii


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: B4572.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal medicines constitute the main component of traditional medicine,
which have been used since thousands of years. They have made
significant contribution to human health through their health promotive,
curative and rehabilitative properties and in the prevention of illnesses.
Indeed, many herbal remedies used traditionally have become modern
medicines through drug development. Digoxin, morphine, colchicine, and
artemisinin are some notable examples. Long tradition of use of many
herbal remedies and experiences passed on from generation to generation
has brought about reliance by the people on herbal remedies. At present,
the use of medicinal plants for health benefits is increasing worldwide.

This publication contains 28 monographs on common ailments which
can be readily treated with simple herbal remedies. They can be prepared
easily and used within the ambit of primary health care. Each monograph
provides description of the ailment, the form of traditional preparation, its
composition, English name, Latin name and family of the plant, plant part
used, main chemical constituents, quality standards, method of
preparation, dosage form, therapeutic properties, indications and uses,
dose and mode of administration, precautions and safety aspects, and
important references.

It is an attempt to promote the rational, safe and appropriate use of
herbal medicines and mainstreaming of traditionally used herbal
remedies. This manual can be used by health planners, policy makers,
national and district health authorities and others involved in the health
sector development and reform. It is also an attempt to increase
availability and accessibility to cost-effective treatment of commonly
encountered health problems with herbal remedies. It will be useful for
education and training of community health workers as well. These efforts
would eventually promote ‘health for all’ in the context of primary health
care.

EIN
G My World Health
@) Organization ISBN 978 92.9022 382 5

revioral Office for South-East Asia
World Health House
Indraprastha Estate,

Mahatma Gandhi Marg,

New Delhi-110002, India

Website: www.searo.who.int 78929012238

are) yWeeH Avewiig 10j solpewey jequdyH JeEUONIpPesL

y) World Health
B Organization

resign Office for South-East Asia

Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 2 -----
Captions for photographs in the front cover:

Upper row, Left to Right: Pods of Elettaria cardamomum Linn. and Holarrhena
antidysenterica Roxb. ex Flem.

Lower row, Left to Right: Fruits of Phy/lanthus emblica Linn. and Terminalia chebula Retz.
XX /

----- PAGE 3 -----
Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care

(G\) World Health
WY Organization
Regional Office for South-East Asia

----- PAGE 4 -----
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication data

World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia.
Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care.

1. Medicine, Herbal. 2. Medicine, Traditional. 3. Complementary Therapies.
4. Plants, Medicinal. 5. Primary Health Care.
ISBN 978-92-9022-382-5 (NLM classification: WB 925)

© World Health Organization 2010
All rights reserved.

Requests for publications, or for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications
— whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution — can be obtained from Publishing
and Sales, World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia, Indraprastha
Estate, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, New Delhi 110 002, India (fax: +91 11 23370197;
e-mail: publications@searo.who. int).

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health
Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted
lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full
agreement.

The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply
that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify
the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility
for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the
World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

This publication does not necessarily represent the decisions or policies of the World
Health Organization.

Printed in India

----- PAGE 5 -----
ACKNOWIECGEMENKS 1... . eee eeee cece e nett erent eaten nena tenant ea nent ed Vv
(C) [0)-\<1-] ee eer vii
me) R=) (0) 6 ee ee eran viii
1. Acidity and gastritis Amalaki POWdE?D .....ccceeceeee eee ee ee ee eee eeee 1
2. Common cold TrikatU POWER? ...ceeeece cece eee tees teeta ee eee 7
3. Conjunctivitis Daruharidra decoction..........:20:eeeeeeee 13
4. Constipation Haritaki POWCED .....ccecees cece eee ee ee eee eees 17
5. Cough Pippali POWCEL .....cceeeeeeeeeee eee ee enna ees 23
6. Diarrhoea Kutaja POWCEL ....cceeeceeseeeeeeeeeee eee eees 31
7. Earache LASAUNA Oil... cece cece cece eee ee ee ee eens 37
8. Eczema Shirisha POWELD .....cccceeeee cece eee eee eens 43
9. Eye discharge Triphala AeCOCtION .........::ceeeeeeeee eee ee 49
10. Fever Kiratatikta POWdEDr......cccceeeeee ee ee eee 55
11. Fungal dermatosis Karanja POWER? ....ccceceeeeeee eee ee enna eees 61
12. Headache Pippalimoola POWCEL........eceeeeeeeeee eee 67
13. Indigestion Chaturbhadra decoction .........:::::0e 71
14. Jaundice Katuka POWELS......ccceceeeeeee eee ee eee ee eees 79

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 6 -----
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Joint Pain
Leucorrhoea

Lice Infestation
Malaise

Painful menstruation
Parasitic infestation
Piles (haemorrhoids)
Scabies

Sexual dysfunction
Sprain

Toothache

Urinary disorder
Vomiting

Wound

Ajam0da POWCEL .......ccceeseeeee eee eee eees 85
LOdhra POWEL..... cece eceee cece eee ee ee eee eees 91
Dhattura Paste.....cccceceeeeeeeeeee eee eees 97
Ashvagandha PoOWde?r......sceseseeseeeees 105
Shatpushpa POWde?.......:::sceeeeeeee eee 111
Palasha POWEDS......ccceceeeeeee tees teenies 117
SUrANAG POWCET ee eeeeee ee eee teen eee ee 125
Gandhaka OiIntMent .........cceeeeeeee ees 129
Kapikacchu POwdelr......cccceseeeeeeeeeees 135
Haridra powder and paste ............05 141
LAVANGA! Oil... ceecceec eee ee eee teen eee ee ees 147
GOkKSHUra POWCEL oc. ee eeeeeeeee teen eee ees 151
Ela POWEL oo. cee cece cece ee eee eee eee ee ees 157

Haridra POWEL ........0:cceeeeeeee teen ee eee 163

----- PAGE 7 -----
3> Acknowledgements te

The World Health Organization gratefully acknowledges the active
participation and technical contributions of various collaborators in
the preparation of this publication. These include:

Editors: Dr D.C. Katoch, National Consultant (Traditional Medicine
& Homeopathy), WHO Country Office for India and Dr K. Shein,
Traditional Medicine Programme, WHO Regional Office for South-East
Asia, New Delhi.

Project Operational Officers: Prof. M.S. Baghel and Dr A. B.
Thakar, Institute of Postgraduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda
(IPGTRA), Jamnagar (Gujarat).

Experts for Technical Review and Finalization of Monographs:
Prof. Gurdip Singh, Hassan (Karnataka); Prof. E. Surendran, Kottakal
(Kerala); Prof. R.R. Dwivedi, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Prof H.M. Chandola,
Jamnagar (Gujarat); Prof. B.L. Mehra, Paprola (Himachal Pradesh);
Dr A. B. Thakar, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr (Mrs.) Surinder Katoch,
New Delhi; Dr Shilpa Donga, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr Mandeep Kaur,
Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr P.K. Debnath, Kolkata (West Bengal); Dr
A.B. Dey, New Delhi; Dr K. Shein (Traditional Medicine Programme,
WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia, New Delhi; and Dr D. C.
Katoch, WHO Country Office for India, New Delhi.

Contributors for Monographs Development: Dr D.C. Katoch,
WHO Country Office for India, New Delhi and Dr A. B. Thakar, Prof.
K.S. Dhiman, Dr R. Manjusha, Dr R.N. Acharya, Dr S.K. Gupta, Dr
H.A. Vyas, Dr B.R. Patel, Dr Shilpa Donga, Dr D.B. Vaghela, Dr Galib,
Dr Darshana Pandya, Dr V.K. Kori, Dr T.S. Doodhamal, Dr Mandeep
Kaur and Dr Rajgopal Bhatt from IPGTRA, Jamnagar.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 8 -----
vi

For Photographs: Institute of Postgraduate Teaching & Research
in Ayurveda, Jamnagar; National Medicinal Plants Board, New Delhi;
State Medicinal Plants Garden (State Medicinal Plants Board), Nadia
(West Bengal); Ramakrishna Mission Herbal Garden Unit, Kolkata;
Foundation for Revitalization of Local Health Traditions, Bangalore;
Dr Sanjeev Lale, Indore; Dr T.K. Biswas, Kolkata; Dr A.K. Mitra,
Kolkata; Dr P.K. Debnath, Kolkata; Mr B. Pramanik; Kolkata; Dr P.M.
Varrier, Kottakal; Dr Y.K. Sharma, Paprola; Dr G.V.R. Joseph, New
Delhi; and Dr A. Saraswathy, Chennai.

Facilitation and guidance: Mr Sunil Nandraj, National
Professional Officer (Health Systems Development), WHO Country
Office for India, New Delhi.

The WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia is also grateful
to all other contributors in the preparation and publication of these
monographs.

----- PAGE 9 -----
Churna

Ghrita

Kvatha

Lepa

Malahara

Taila

vii

3> Glossary e

Fine powder of the medicine.

Ghrita or Ghee is obtained by heating butter at high
temperature and it is almost anhydrous milk fat.

Kvatha is a liquid prepared by boiling a herbal drug in
water till one fourth of water remains and filtered.

Local application of paste of the medicine.

Semisolid preparation containing a medicine for external
application.

Oil extracted from seeds of the plants.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 10 -----
viii

3> Foreword e

Traditional systems of medicines, including
herbal medicines, have been used for many
centuries for health care by people in countries
of the South-East Asia Region as well as in
other parts of the world. Traditional medicine
continues to be a valuable source of remedies
that have been used by millions of people
around the world to secure their health. It has
been developed from empirical experiences
and from observations made by people who
use them. It embodies age-old wisdom and knowledge accrued over
thousands of years, and forms an integral part of the social and
cultural heritage of peoples and countries. The system has been
inherited and handed down from one generation to the next by
custom and tradition.

Since the concept of “Health for All” through primary health care
(PHC) was launched at the International Conference on Primary Health
Care at Alma-Ata in 1978, there has been a global movement to
realize universal health-care coverage. However, in spite of advances
made in the health sector, equitable health care coverage; availability,
accessibility and affordability to conventional health care and services
are quite often beyond the reach of people who are indigent,
marginalized and underserved. Moreover, the present upsurge in
the use of traditional medicines or complementary and alternative
medicine - generated after the Alma-Ata International Conference
- has become a global phenomenon. This development portends
well for a more comprehensive health care delivery and health
sector reform in facing new challenges in PHC due to demographic,
economic, environmental, and social changes that have a negative
impact on health development.

----- PAGE 11 -----
The revitalization of primary health care in 2008 was yet another
clarion call for governments, all health and development workers
and the world community to protect and promote the health of all
people. In these efforts, the rich resources of traditional and herbal
remedies are available and accessible to all who choose to use them
- by tradition or cultural acceptance in the far and remote corners
of countries or by choice of those in the affluent urban communities
where there is a desire to return to nature and to use natural remedies
in taking care of their own health.

The global health scenario is facing new challenges due to global
warming and economic down-turn that are now threatening health
development. It is therefore crucial that all systems of medicine -
whether conventional or traditional - in so far as they are beneficial
and not deleterious to the health and well-being of the people must
play their respective roles in promoting health, in preventing disease,
in curing the sick, and in rehabilitating the infirm. It is through these
concerted efforts that tangible gains can be achieved.

It is envisaged that this publication will be instrumental in
revitalizing primary health care in empowering community participation
in self-care, in promoting the application of appropriate technology
that is socially and culturally acceptable to the people, in making
the health system more people-centered, and in improving equitable
access to national health systems.

Sembee (SGonbans +

Dr Samlee Pliangbangchang
Regional Director

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 12 -----


----- PAGE 13 -----
aA gle

Amalaki powder for acidity and gastritis

Heartburn is due to excessive secretion of gastric acid or its reflux to
the food pipe along with delayed gastric emptying and fermentation of
food. Gastric acidity and inflammation of the stomach is called gastritis,
which produces a common symptom of burning sensation in the middle
part of the upper half of the abdomen, while acid reflux causes throat
and heartburn and delayed gastric emptying with fermentation leads
to gaseous distension of abdomen and belching. These abnormalities
lead to symptoms like nausea, loss of appetite, indigestion and mild
to moderate upper abdominal pain and distress.

Frequent dietary irregularities and ingestion of irritant materials
like too spicy and sour foods, alcohol and analgesic drugs like
aspirin are the common causes of acidity and gastritis. Mental stress
significantly aggravates the symptoms of acidity and gastritis.

Ayurveda designates the symptom complex of acid peptic disease
as Amlapitta attributed to the impairment of digestive juices and
protective lining of stomach. Improperly treated acidity may lead to
peptic ulcer due to damage in the mucosal lining of the stomach and
duodenum. Judicious use of Amalaki powder is effective in successful
management of acidity and gastritis with certain do’s and dont’s
described in the Ayurvedic texts:

(1) It is advisable not to overeat and have long gaps between
meals. Small frequent meals of soft and easily digestible food
items should be taken.

(2) Consumption of raw and leafy vegetables, fried, spicy, sour,
salty, heavy and improperly cooked food, sheep’s milk, alcohol,
curd, sesame seeds should be avoided.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 14 -----
(3) Use of vegetables with bitter taste such as bitter gourd, banana
flowers, and pumpkin, pomegranate, honey, boiled and cooled
water and food grains like wheat, rice and barley is beneficial
in patients with acidity and gastritis.

(4) Suppression of natural urges, particularly of vomiting and
passing stools should be avoided.

Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica Linn.)

The formulation is made from the dried mature fruits of Amalaki,
which is a small or medium-sized tree found abundantly in mixed
deciduous forests and cultivated in gardens and home yards. Ripe
fruits are collected in late winter or early summer and are dried
in shade. Dried fruits are then separated from the seeds and are
kept in airtight plastic bags or boxes under dry storage conditions.
Extensive uses of Amalaki as medicine and tonic are described in
Indian Medicine and the medicinal plant is included in the Ayurvedic
Pharamacopoeia of India’.

Composition: The formulation is a fine powder made of single herbal
ingredient Amalaki.

English name Indian gooseberry
Latin name Phyllanthus emblica (Linn.)
Family Phyllanthaceae

Plant part used Fruit

A leafy branch of Amalaki with fruits.

Dried fruits of Amalaki.

Main chemical constituents: Vitamin C, minerals and amino-
acids.

----- PAGE 15 -----
Quality standards?

Purity and strength of dried mature fruits of Amalaki is determined
on the basis of:

Foreign matter Not more than 3%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 2%

Acid-soluble extractive Not less than 40%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 50%

Method of preparation

(1) Seedless dried fruits of Amalaki are cleaned and ground into
fine powder using a grinder or pulverizer.

(2) Powder is sieved through mesh 80 to remove coarse particles
and fibers.

(3) The powder should be kept in a dry airtight container to prevent
exposure to moisture.

(4) Potency of the properly preserved dried fruits lasts for one
year.

Dosage form: Fine, sour-tasting grayish to blackish powder.

Therapeutic properties*: Antacid, anti-ulcer, anti-emetic, anti-
inflammatory, antioxidant, immunomodulator, rejuvenator and a rich
source of vitamin C.

Dose and mode of administration

In adults, the dose of Amalaki powder is 3 to 6 grams and in children
500 mg to 1 gram, twice a day, to be swallowed on an empty stomach
or just before meals with water.

Indications and uses

(1) Hyperacidity, gastritis, anorexia, vomiting during pregnancy
and anaemia associated with chronic acid peptic disease are
the common indications for Amalaki powder.

(2) Clinical trials have proven Amalaki to be effective in the
management of acidic gastritis, non-ulcer dyspepsia and duodenal
ulcer with significant prevention of recurrence of symptoms.

(3) Amalaki powder can also be used as a natural supplement of
vitamin C in nutritional deficiencies, pregnancy and chronic
diseases.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 16 -----
Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Amalaki powder is generally a safe medicine. No toxic or
adverse effects are reported even with continuous use. Assay
study for cellular toxicity of crude alcoholic extract of Amalaki
has proved it safe. Safety of Emblica officinalis is attributed
to its anti-mutagenic, anti-microbial, anti-inflammatory, anti-
carcinogenic, anti-oxidant, anti-tumour and immuno-modulatory
activities and numerous indications for its use in children and
pregnant women. It is also safe to the baby if the nursing
mother is taking this medication.

Individuals sensitive to sour taste should add sugar to the
formulation or consume it in capsule form. Mixing it in warm
water or with sugar or honey makes ingestion of Amalaki
powder easy.

Amalaki has a cooling property and hence individuals intolerant
to cold should consume it with ginger powder and warm water
or honey. Even then if symptoms worsen, medication with
Amalaki powder may be stopped.

It is advisable for patients of acidity and gastritis to avoid the
intake of spicy, hard, heavy, dry and raw foods, particularly
leafy vegetables and salad. Tendency of overeating and frequent
munching and use of alcoholic beverages should be avoided.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy,
New Delhi, India, Reprinted Edition, 2001 Part I, Vol. I, p. 5-6.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants Used
in Ayurveda, Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, New
Delhi, 2001, Vol. 3, p. 14.

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy,
New Delhi, India, Reprinted Edition, 2001, Part I, Vol. I, p. 5.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants Used
in Ayurveda, Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, New
Delhi, 2001, Vol. 3, p. 12, 14.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

Kirtikar KR & Basu BD. Indian Medicinal Plants, reprinted edition. L.M.
Basu, Allahabad, India, Vol. III. 1988.

Kurup PNV, Ramdas VNK & Joshi P. Hand Book of Medicinal Plants
(revised and enlarged). Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and
Siddha, New Delhi. 1979.

----- PAGE 17 -----
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Mathew SM, Rao SB, Nair GRS. Anti-ulcer activity of Amla extract.
Int. Seminar on Recent Trends in Pharm. Sci., Ootacamund, Abstr.
No. A 7. 1995.

Parvathavarthini S et al. Anti-ulcer activity of Emblica officinalis (Indian
gooseberry). Proc. Int. Cong. “Ayurveda 2000”, Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
India, 28-30 Jan. 2000.

Rastogi RP & Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants,
reprinted edition. Publications and Information Directorate, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, Vol. 1, 2 & 3. 1993.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Chaukhambha Bharati Academy,
Varanasi, Vol. II. 1981.

Sharma PV. Classical Uses of Medicinal Plants. Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, Varanasi, India. 1996.

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthana,
Varanasi, India. 1981.

Varma MD et al. Amalaki rasayana in the treatment of chronic peptic
ulcer. J. Res. Indian Med. Yoga & Homeop., Vol. 12(4). 1977.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 18 -----


----- PAGE 19 -----
ad

Trikatu powder for common cold

Common cold or coryza is a common respiratory problem caused by
a variety of viral infections; commonest among them is the influenza
virus and its variants. Individuals show considerable variation in
susceptibility and environmental exposure is a contributory factor.

The word “cold” is a catch-all term that describes symptoms
such as sneezing, wet nose, running nose, scratchy throat, heaviness
in head, body ache, headache, indigestion, nausea, stomach ache,
vomiting, diarrhoea and fever.

Frequent attacks of cold are a reflection of a temporary dip in
immunity that is most often caused by insufficient rest; too many rich
foods, stress and exposure to cold and dampness can also precipitate
its occurrence. Frequent colds can make the individual vulnerable
to secondary lower respiratory tract infections. Early and consistent
attention, along with adequate time for convalescence, keeps all colds
from becoming problematic.

Trikatu is a simple herbal preparation with which common cold
can be managed successfully taking prescribed precautions:

(1) Patients suffering from common cold should prevent direct
exposure to cold wind, intake of heavy meals, drinking of cold
water, suppression of natural urges of stools, urine and flatus,
sleeping on the floor and during daytime.

(2) Light meals with spicy, sour and salty taste, curd, garlic, frequent
drinking of warm water, fresh radish, brinjal (eggplant), and hot
soup of green gram are helpful in common cold.

(3) Covering head with cap or any warm cloth, steam bath, head
massage, gargles with warm water and avoidance of anger
facilitate recovery from the common cold.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 20 -----
Trikatu powder

Trikatu powder is a simple formulation made by mixing fine powders
of three commonly used herbal drugs in equal quantity namely dry
ginger (Shunthi), black pepper (Maricha) and long pepper (Pippali).
Trikatu, literally means ‘three pungents,’ because all the three
ingredients are predominantly of pungent taste. All the three are
spices used commonly in the kitchen and traded widely from India
since ancient times.

Composition

Trikatu powder consists of fine powder of three pungent drugs viz.
Shunthi, Maricha and Pippali in equal proportion. Shunthi is the
dried rhizome of ginger. Maricha is the dried fruit of black pepper
and Pippali is the dried fruit of long pepper.

Fame aa | tannane | romiy [Petes

Zingiber officinale

Shunthi Dry ginger Rosa, Zingiberaceae Rhizome
Maricha Black pepper Piper nigrum Linn. Piperaceae Fruit
Pippali Long pepper Piper longum Linn. Piperaceae Fruit

Dried rhizomes of Dried fruits of Maricha. Dried fruits of Pippali.
Shunthi.

Main chemical constituents of Shunthi': Essential oil, pungent
constituents (gingerol and shogoal), resinous matter and starch.

Main chemical constituents of Maricha?: Alkaloids (piperine,
chavicine, piperidine and piplartine) and essential oil.

Main chemical constituents of Pippali*: Essential oil and alkaloids
(piperine, sesamin and piplartine).

----- PAGE 21 -----
Quality standards

Water rca Water F 5
Ingredients | Total ash soluble e iE soluble oreign
ash solu extractive HEISE
extractive
Shunthi* Not more Not more Not less than Not less Not more
than 6% than 4.5% than than 2%
1.7% 10%
Maricha° Not more Not more = = Not more
than 6% than 1% than 2%
(acid
soluble ash)
Pippali® Not more Not more Not less than Not less Not more
than 5% than 6% 12% than 11% than 2%
(acid
soluble ash)

Method of preparation

(1) Take 50 grams of each of the three ingredients, dry them further
to remove the moisture for easy powdering.

(2) Take an equal quantity of each drug of Trikatu and mix well
in a dry container.

(3) Grind the mixture in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.

(4) Sieve the powder through 85 size mesh to remove the coarse
fibers and other particles if any.

(5) Keep Trikatu powder in an air-tight dry container of glass or food
grade plastic; store in a dry cool place away from direct sunlight.
It is good to use the powder within one year.

Dosage form: Blackish-brown fine powder.

Therapeutic properties: Anti-inflammatory, analgesic, expectorant,
digestive, carminative.

Dose and mode of administration

Adult dose of Trikatu is 2 grams given three times a day preferably
with warm milk or water or honey. In children the dose may be
reduced according to the age and can be given in a dose of 125 mg
to 500 mg thrice a day. Another way is - add Trikatu powder to one
cup of milk, boil it for a few minutes and take it warm.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 22 -----
ag

10

Indications and uses

Trikatu is used in combination with honey to alleviate diseases
such as colds, rhinitis, cough, breathlessness, asthma, dyspepsia
and obesity’. It also improves the digestive power.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

No side effect or toxic effect of Trikatu has been mentioned
in the classical literature. Clinical studies have also shown no
adverse effects in patients treated with recommended dose
of Trikatu powder alone as well as in combination with other
herbal preparations.

Since Trikatu powder is hot in nature, large dose should be
avoided as the patient may complain of burning sensation,
burning micturition, etc. In such conditions, the use should be
stopped immediately and the patient should be advised to take
cooling agents and milk in plenty till the complaints subside
completely.

Take simple diet with warm, light, soft and liquid foods. Avoid
cold drinks, cold juices, ice cream, spicy, oily and too dry
foodstuff. Stay in a warm and well ventilated room.

Warm saline gargles, steam inhalation and fomentation help in
relieving cold symptoms.

Medication with Trikatu is not advisable for pregnant women.
However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking
this medication.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 104.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 117.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3 New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 474.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 103.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 116.

----- PAGE 23 -----
(6)

(7)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 91.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. 2nd revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003. p. 110.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Pandey GS, ed. Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

Dhanukar SA, Karandikar SM. Evaluation of anti-allergic activity of
piper longum. Indian Drugs. 21(9) 1984.

Sarin YK. Illustrated manual of herbal drugs used in Ayurveda. New
Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research & Indian Council
of Medical Research, 1996.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2002.

National Institute of Science Communication. The useful plants of India.
New Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

11

----- PAGE 24 -----


----- PAGE 25 -----
aA gle

Daruharidra decoction for conjunctivitis

Inflammation of conjunctiva causing redness of the eye is conjunctivitis.
Conjunctiva is a thin, transparent mucous membrane covering the
under surface of the eye lids and it extends from the eye lids to cover
the anterior part of the eyeball up to the margin of the cornea.

Common symptoms of conjunctivitis are redness, itching,
stickiness, foreign body sensation, irritation, watering from the eyes
and sometimes intolerance to light. Vision is generally normal but a
slight blurring may occur if excess secretions form a film over the
cornea. Conjunctivitis may begin in one eye but often spreads to
involve both eyes.

Conjunctivitis is most commonly due to viral and sometimes
bacterial infections. But it can also result from allergic reactions
or from chemical irritants, air pollution, smoke, shampoos, dirt,
swimming pool chlorine or noxious fumes. Rarely, underlying chronic
inflammatory conditions can also cause a persistent conjunctivitis.
The infectious form of conjunctivitis is very common in children and
is highly contagious.

Traditionally, home remedies have been successfully used
for soothing inflamed eyes with uncomplicated symptoms, minor
infections, or allergies. Treatment consists primarily of cleansing
the eyes and preventing the condition from spreading. Daruharidra
decoction is a popular traditional formulation mentioned in Ayurvedic
texts for the management of uncomplicated conjunctivitis.

Daruharidra (Berberis aristata D.C.)

Daruharidra (Indian berberry) is a shrub or small tree, distributed
in the temperate and subtropical parts of Asia, Europe and America.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

13

----- PAGE 26 -----
14

Daruharidra has been in use (as eye drops/ointment) for centuries
for prophylactic as well as curative purposes in common eye ailments
like conjunctivitis. It is an important ingredient of many traditionally
used formulations meant for local ophthalmic use, commonly as
decoction and solidified water extract called Rasanjana. These drug
forms are used orally, locally as well as for topical ocular preparation.
Antimicrobial activity of B. aristata is well demonstrated against
a variety of bacteria, fungi, protozoas, helminths, chlamydia and
viruses. The alkaloid berberine is known to possess anti-microbial
properties against gram positive and gram negative bacteria.

Composition

The formulation consists of the decoction or solidified water extract
of the stem or root of Daruharidra (Berberis aristata D.C.) termed
as Rasanjana.

English name Indian berberry

Latin name Berberis aristata D.C.
Family Berberidaceae
Part used Stem and root.

Flowering shoot of Daruharidra. Roots of Daruharidra.

Main chemical constituents‘

Alkaloids like berberine, berbamine, aromoline, karachine, palmitine,
oxyacanthine and oxyberberine.

----- PAGE 27 -----
Quality standards”:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 14%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 5%

Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 8%

Method of preparation

(1)

(2)
(3)

Soak overnight 5 grams of coarse powder of Daruharidra in
100 ml of water.

Boil the mixture till half of the water remains and filter it.

Use the filtrate at room temperature to irrigate the inflamed
eye(s).

Dosage form: Yellowish coloured liquid.

Therapeutic properties?

Anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anti-diarrhoeal, anti-trachoma
activity, and antipyretic.

Indications and uses

Conjunctivitis, trachoma and eye infection resulting from Chlamydia
trachomatis, and chronic ophthalmic inflammation.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

(3)

Patient is made to lie down on the back with the neck slightly
extended. Daruharidra is poured on the eye as thin stream with
undine or with syringe without injection needle or canula. This
procedure can be repeated twice or thrice in a day depending
upon the severity of the symptoms.

Generally the eye should be kept closed but in case of eye discharge,
pulling the lids apart and irrigating the eye may be required.

In cases where redness and burning sensation in the eye are
prominent, irrigating fluid should be cold. When pain and discharge
are prominent, then lukewarm decoction should be used.

Daruharidra decoction can also be applied in the form of eye drops
in conjunctivitis. For this purpose keep 2 ml of the filtered decoction
mixed with equal quantity of pure honey in an eye dropper vial
and use this mixture within 12 hours by instilling 1 to 2 drops in
each affected eye 4 to 6 times a day at regular intervals.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

15

----- PAGE 28 -----
16

Precaution and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Decoction and eye drops solution must be prepared fresh daily
and kept in a sterile vessel.

Infection can be easily transmitted by touching or rubbing your
eyes, make an effort to avoid it.

Protect the eyes from dirt, sunlight, other irritating substances
and from repeated rubbing.

Avoid the use of cosmetics while suffering from conjunctivitis.
Remove contact lens, if it is worn.

For cleansing and soothing the eyes dip a clean cloth in warm
water, wring it out and place it on the eye till it becomes cool.
Then apply another cloth in the same way.

Avoid prolonged work under artificial light and excessive use
of the eyes.

If eye symptoms aggravate or are not relieved within two-three
days, seek doctor’s advice for necessary treatment.

Strictly avoid sharing clothes, handkerchiefs and towels and
wash such items separately.

(10) On coming in contact with a person suffering from conjunctivitis,

wash your hands with soap and water properly.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2000. p. 121.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 34.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2000. p. 120-123.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

The Wealth of India. Raw materials. New Delhi: Public Information
Department, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, 1988.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry and pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashana, 2006.

Singhal GD, Sharma KR. Ophthalmic and otorhinolaryngological
considerations in ancient Indian surgery. Allahabad: Singhal
Publications, 1976.

Acharya JT. ed. Sushruta samhita. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Orientalia,
1980.

----- PAGE 29 -----
aA gle

Haritaki powder for constipation

Constipation is a common problem which usually refers to persistent,
difficult, infrequent, or seemingly incomplete defecation. Other
expressions of constipation include passage of unduly dry and hard
faeces, sluggish action of bowel, etc. It is important to note that it
is virtually impossible to define what constitutes a “normal bowel
movement” in terms of frequency. Generally, frequency of bowel
evacuation varies from person to person. As per a person’s tendency,
lifestyle and dietary habit, frequency of defecation of 1-2 per day to
thrice a week is considered as normal bowel habit for that individual,
unless it creates any discomfort or disturbs his routine life. The volume
of stool passed differs greatly in different races.

Unsatisfactory bowel evacuation is the chief condition for diagnosis
of constipation. Some other symptoms which accompany or result from
constipation are indigestion, flatulence, abdominal pain or discomfort,
headache and sleeplessness. The retention of hard faecal masses
may give rise to spurious diarrhoea and in extreme situations can
lead to intestinal obstruction especially in frail and bed-ridden older
individuals.

Various causative factors for constipation are given below.
(1) Irritable bowel syndrome
(2) Related to diet factors:
e Too bland food, e.g. with low fibre residue
e Too dry and astringent food
e Inadequate fluid intake
(3) Intake of hard water
(4) Metabolic disease like hypothyroidism

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

17

----- PAGE 30 -----
18

(5) Obstructive diseases of lower gastrointestinal tract
(6) Drugs: opium, iron, blood pressure medicines

(7) Irregular bowel habit

(8) Sedentary lifestyle

(9) Depressive disorders

(10) Old age

(11) Suppression of natural urge of defecation

In Ayurveda, various laxative drugs are mentioned to treat such
conditions. Out of these Haritaki powder is a simple herbal laxative
which is frequently used for treating constipation following certain
lifestyle changes. Some do’s and don’ts given in the Ayurvedic texts
are helpful in preventing constipation:

(1) Persons suffering from constipation should not ignore defecation
urge nor should they strain for a long time to pass out
stools.

(2) Drinking of warm water and milk improves intestinal movements
and is beneficial in relieving constipation.

(3) Much deviation from the normal timing of meals and quantity of
food should be avoided. It is beneficial to take soft, digestible
and semi-solid food.

(4) Heavy and untimely meals, eating food before the digestion of
earlier food, and intake of dry, astringent and cold foods hamper
intestinal movements adding to constipation.

(5) Regular walking, physical activity and deep breathing and certain
edibles like, ginger, lemon, resins, dates, figs and almond oil
help in alleviating constipation.

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula Retz.)

Haritaki powder is a simple formulation made of its dried ripe fruits.
The plant is also named as Pathya, owing to its beneficial effect for
the channels (patha) of the body. It is not only used for constipation
but for various gastrointestinal and systemic problems. Scientific
studies have established?’” its stomachic, laxative and anti-flatulence
actions!. Judicious use of Haritaki with necessary dietary and lifestyle
changes can treat constipation successfully as well as improve the
physiological status of the gut.

----- PAGE 31 -----
19

Composition

Haritaki powder is fine powder of dried ripe fruits of Terminalia
chebula.

English name Chebulic myrobalan, Ink nut

Latin name Terminalia chebula Retz.
Family Combretaceae
Part used Dried fruits without seeds

A fruit-bearing branch of Haritaki tree. Dried fruits of Haritaki.

Main chemical constituents”

Anthraquinone, glycoside, chebulinic acid, chebulagic acid.

Quality standards?

Identity, purity and potency of Haritaki fruits for its oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 1%
Total ash Not more than 5%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 5%
Alcohol soluble extractive Not less than 40%
Water soluble extractive Not less than 60%

Method of preparation

(1) Take dried fruits of Haritaki, remove their seeds and dry them
further in the shade avoiding direct sunlight. Fruits should not
have been harvested more than six months ago.

(2) Make fine powder in a grinder or pulverizer.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

ay

----- PAGE 32 -----
20

(3) Sieve the powder through 85 size mesh to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.

(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air tight plastic or glass container
and consume it within six months or before the next rainy
season, whichever is earlier.

Dosage form

Brownish fine powder.

Therapeutic Properties*

Haritaki has laxative, carminative, digestive, antispasmodic,
anthelmintic, anti-microbial, anti-stress and endurance promoting
properties.

Dose and mode of administration

To achieve laxative action of Haritaki, adult dose of powder is 3 to
6 grams and for children, the dose of Haritaki is 500 mg to 1 gram,
to be taken with lukewarm water once a day on an empty stomach.
It is preferably taken early in the morning or minimum three hours
after dinner.

Indication and uses

Haritaki is useful in constipation, haemorrhoids, stomatitis, hyperacidity
and associated gastrointestinal disorders.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) No side or toxic effect of Haritaki is reported in classics with
its recommended dose. Clinical studies have also shown no
adverse effect in patients treated with Haritaki alone or with
formulations.

(2) It should not be prescribed to pregnant women. It is safe for
the baby if the nursing mother is taking this medication.

(3) The astringent and dry property of Haritaki may induce nausea
in sensitive individuals. This may be masked by consuming it
in tablet form or by preparing its decoction and adding jaggery
to it.

(4) Dose of Haritaki as a laxative varies from person to person
according to their constitution, digestive power and bowel habit.
Administration of Haritaki should be stopped if the desired effect
is not achieved.

----- PAGE 33 -----
(5)

(6)

Sudden altered bowel habit, alternate diarrhoea and constipation
or persistence of the constipation in spite of proper administration
of Haritaki, are the signs of some serious pathological conditions
inside the gut. Therefore, the underlying cause must be properly
investigated and treatment should be taken under medical
supervision only.

Too dry a diet should be avoided and a diet with higher fibre
content and liquids is advisable for the patient. Regular and
proper lifestyle plays an important role in keeping the gut
healthy.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 283.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 47.

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 284.

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi, Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 283-284.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Chatterjee A, Pakrashi SC. The treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 5. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1997.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1999.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: }Chaukhambha
Sanskrit Sansthana, 1981.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati Academy, 1996.

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Santhana, 1981.

Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, National Institute of
Science Communication and Information Resources. The useful plants
of India. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication,
2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

21

----- PAGE 34 -----


----- PAGE 35 -----
ads

Pippali powder for cough

Cough is a reflex phenomenon characterized by a sudden, violent
expulsion of air from the mouth, with or without sputum, after
deep inspiration and closure of the glottis. This is the most frequent
respiratory symptom. Coughing is an important way to keep the throat
and airways clear. However, involuntary excessive coughing means
there is an underlying cause that compels the person to cough.

The cough may be dry or productive. In dry cough there is only
explosive sound with no or little material coming out from the airways.
Whereas a productive cough is one that brings up phlegm or sputum,
at times mixed with pus or blood or both. Cough can be either acute
or chronic. Acute cough usually appears suddenly, goes away within
2-3 weeks and is often due to common cold, flu, or sinus infection.
Chronic cough lasts longer than 2 to 3 weeks and is a symptom
mostly of respiratory tract disease.

Besides respiratory infections namely tuberculosis, other common
causes of cough include chronic tobacco smoking, naso-bronchial
allergy, bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis with or without airway
obstruction, lung abscess, bronchiectasis and bronchogenic tumours,
reflux disease of gastrointestinal system, air pollution, heart failure,
valvular heart disease and certain medicines used for the treatment of
high blood pressure. The diagnosis of the cause of cough is essential
before definitive therapy is initiated.

Painful cough in association with fever indicates respiratory tract
infection. Intermittent, ineffectual and exhausting cough occurs in
chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma and it is generally worst at
night or on waking. Cough may be loose and readily productive of
sputum in bronchiectasis and early stages of bronchial cancer. Sputum

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

23

----- PAGE 36 -----
24

production may be a relatively late development in lung tuberculosis.
Loud and harsh cough without explosive character called stridor is
found in whooping cough and in the presence of laryngeal or tracheal
obstruction. Cough usually aggravates with change in temperature or
weather. The explosive character of normal cough is lost in laryngeal
paralysis. A short troublesome cough of old people due to chronic
bronchitis recurs every winter and it is called winter cough. Cough
due to smoking is usually dry and irritating. Clinical and radiological
evaluation is usually diagnostic in a large majority of cases. While
definitive therapy may wait diagnosis, symptomatic treatment usually
provides relief.

Ayurveda considers Kasa (cough) as a disease for which a specific
line of treatment and various remedies are prescribed. Simple herbal
remedies such as Pippali can successfully treat uncomplicated cough,
if patients observe the prescribed precautions along with medication.
These are:

(1) Exposure to fumes and dust, sudden change of temperature in
the surrounding, dry and spicy foods, chilled water and food,
leafy vegetables and heavy meals should be avoided.

(2) Soft, hot and easily digestible meals, edibles like honey, small
cardamom, fresh ginger, radish, meat soup, goat milk and resins
help to control cough.

(3) It is advisable to resort to sleeping during the day and not
to suppress urges of stools, urination and belching. Cough
symptom can be controlled easily with frequent drinks of warm
water, mental relaxation and with less talking.

Pippali (Piper longum Linn.)

Pippali powder is a single-ingredient herbal formulation made from
the fruits of long pepper, an aromatic climber with perennial woody
roots. The fruits are harvested around January while still green and
unripe, as they are most pungent at this stage and of high medicinal
value. Harvested fruits are dried in the sun till they turn grey or
blackish. Use of Pippali as a multipurpose drug is first documented
in Charaka Samhita, where it is listed among Rasayana (rejuvenative
and immuno-enhancer) drugs and largely mentioned for the treatment
of cough, respiratory distress, gastro-intestinal disorders, pulmonary
tuberculosis etc. Besides codified knowledge about its uses, Pippali
is largely used as a home remedy and in folk medicine. Long pepper

----- PAGE 37 -----
is a commonly used spice in India and other Asian countries and
its medicinal usage is quite popular, particularly for the treatment
of common ailments of childhood. Regarded as a drug of choice for
cough of different origins, Pippali powder is widely used by Ayurvedic
practitioners in India not only for symptomatic control but also for
the treatment of root causes of cough affecting the naso-respiratory,
digestive and blood systems. This popular plant medicine is even
indicated for naso-respiratory allergy and tuberculosis of lungs and
for immunodeficiency conditions. Pippali is described in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia and in formulations in Ayurvedic Formulary of
India?. Being simple, the formulation can be easily prepared at home
for personal use. Scientific studies have proven its bio-availability
enhancing, liver protective and immuno-stimulatory actions?.

Composition

Pippali powder is made from dried fruits of Piper longum.

English name Long pepper

Latin name Piper longum Linn.
Family Piperaceae
Part used Fruits

A twig with unripe fruits of Pippali. Dried fruits of Pippali.

Main chemical constituents*

Essential oil and alkaloids — piperine, sesamin and piplartine.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

25

----- PAGE 38 -----
26

Quality standards!

As per the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, quality standards
determining the identity, purity and strength of long pepper fruits
are based on the following aspects:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 0.5%

Acid-soluble extractive Not less than 5%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7%

Pepper powder under the microscope shows deep, moss-green
colour, fragments of parenchyma, oval or elongated stone cells, oil
globules and starch grains.

Method of preparation

(1) Dried long pepper fruits are cleaned and powdered in a grinder
or mortar.

(2) Powder is sieved through mesh of 85 size and kept in an air-
tight plastic or glass container.

(3) Exposure to moisture should be avoided. It is advisable to
prepare at least 50 grams of powder at a time.

Dosage form

Blackish green powder with aromatic odour and pungent taste.

Therapeutic properties>

Pippali powder has anti-inflammatory, anti-phlegmatic, decongestant,
anti-spasmodic, expectorant, anti-allergic, appetizer, anthelmintic,
immunostimulatory and tonic properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The adult dose of the formulation is 1 gram to 3 grams and the
children’s dose is 125 mg to 250 mg, two or three times a day, mixed
with honey or warm water. Honey is the best vehicle for consuming
Pippali powder. Jaggery or liquorice root powder may be used in
place of honey, if the cough is dry, irritating and persistent. Warm
water should be taken after consuming the medicine to facilitate its
swallowing and fast absorption.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Indications and uses

(1)

(2)

(3)

Pippali powder is indicated for acute and chronic cough due to
common cold, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, naso-respiratory
catarrh, respiratory allergy, asthma and smoking.

Non-specific cough is adequately manageable with Pippali
Churna.

The formulation is also effective in controlling symptoms
associated with cough-like sneezing, hiccough, nasal discharge,
fever, poor appetite, indigestion, etc.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Pippali is regarded as safe in recommended doses. Ayurvedic
literature does not specifically mention any toxicity or adverse
effects from the use of Sitopaladi powder like formulations,
which include Pippali. However, long-term use of Pippali alone
is not recommended in Charaka Samhita. Scientific studies
have shown 750-800 mg/kg dose as LD-50 value of piperine
in mice.

Do not consume Pippali powder without mixing properly with
honey or warm water.

Fried and spicy foods, chilled drinks, curd, yogurt, smoking
and exposure to cold should be avoided while suffering with
cough. Frequent sipping of warm water helps a lot to facilitate
the effect of the medicine in controlling cough whether dry or
productive.

Patients with cough lasting over 10-15 days should take proper
medical advice for exact diagnosis of underlying cause and for
needful treatment.

Patients with diabetes mellitus and obesity should use the
formulation without honey or jaggery. Similarly, sugar and
jaggery should not be taken with Pippali for long-term use
in overweight and obese individuals suffering from chronic
cough.

The formulation could alleviate cough resulting from lung
tuberculosis and tumour or cancer of respiratory tract, but it
is not the remedy for these underlying conditions.

If the sputum is mixed with blood or frank blood is coughed
out, do not attempt to treat cough with Pippali powder.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

27

----- PAGE 40 -----
28

(8)

(9)

Stop medication with Pippali powder, if symptoms aggravate
and dryness of mouth, excessive thirst and burning sensation
in the body and urine appear.

Owing to the hot and lubricating nature of Pippali, its excessive
and long-term use is contraindicated in Ayurvedic literature.
Ignorance about this fact may lead to untoward symptoms.

(10) Individuals with heat-dominating temperament and body

constitution and menstruating and pregnant women should
be careful in observing any unwanted effects while consuming
Pippali powder. In case of adverse effects medical advice should
be sought promptly.

(11) Proper medical advice should be taken, if cough accompanies

difficulty in breathing, swelling of face or feet, high grade
fever, expectoration with foul-smelling yellowish-green phlegm,
blood in sputum, difficulty in lying down, night sweating and
unintentional weight loss.

(12) Pippali powder has a potent antifertility activity; therefore, it

must be used with caution in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Women planning for pregnancy should avoid use of Pippali
powder. However, the baby is not harmed if a lactating mother
is taking this medication.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2004 p. 91-92.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2000. p. 49-56.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, New Delhi, 2001. p. 475.

Sharma PC. Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 474.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 473, 475.

----- PAGE 41 -----
Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Annamalai AR, Manavalan R. Effects of trikatu and its individuals
components and piperine on gastrointestinal tract, trikatu. Indian
Drugs. 27, 1990.

Dhanukar SA & Karandikar SM. Evaluation of anti-allergic activity of
piper longum. Indian Drugs. 1984; 21: 377-83.

Dhanukar SA, Karandikar SM, Desai M. Efficacy of piper longum in
childhood asthma. Indian Drugs. 21, 1984.

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

Kirtikar KR & Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Allahabad:
LM Basu, 1988.

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 1996.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

29

----- PAGE 42 -----


----- PAGE 43 -----
ped

Kutaja powder for diarrhoea

Diarrhoea is defined as the passage of abnormally liquid or unformed
stools at an increased frequency, and denotes a change in the usual
bowel movement. It is a symptom of various disease conditions of
the gastrointestinal system and is often considered as a disease itself.
Diarrhoea can be acute and chronic as per its causes.

Acute diarrhoea lasts for hours or days and the number of bowel
movements usually exceeds three per day. The causes of acute
diarrhoea can be infectious or non-infectious. The usual clinical
features of acute infective diarrhoea are frequent stools, sometimes
with blood and mucous, pain during passing stools, abdominal pain,
vomiting and fever. Severe diarrhoea leads to dehydration, which
manifests itself as apprehension, cold clammy skin, rapid pulse, deep
and rapid respiration, inelastic skin, sunken eyeballs, dry tongue,
scanty urine and low blood pressure. Untreated acute diarrhoea can
be fatal. The non-infectious category of diarrhoea can be caused
by drugs such as antibiotics, certain antidepressants, antacids,
bronchodilators, chemotherapeutic agents, laxatives, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, etc., and spurious diarrhoea, which follows
chronic constipation especially in older people and in association with
psychological stress.

Chronic diarrhoea lasts for weeks or months and may be either
persistent or recurrent. The aetiology of chronic diarrhoea is usually
related to structural and functional disorders of the gastrointestinal
tract. The clinical features of chronic diarrhoea are either persistent
or recurrent with intervening periods of normalcy or constipation.
Stool volume may be large or small and may be watery, loose,
bulky or frothy. Diarrhoea may be accompanied by abdominal pain

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

31

----- PAGE 44 -----
32

or discomfort and abdominal distension. Systemic symptoms such
as fever, anorexia, weight loss, generalized weakness and malaise
may also be present. Untreated chronic diarrhoea can lead to mal-
absorption syndrome and malnutrition.

It is always important to understand the underlying cause of
diarrhoea so that the right treatment can be planned. However,
uncomplicated diarrhoea due to indigestion and infection can be
managed with Ayurvedic formulation such as Kutaja powder along
with necessary dietary precautions.

Kutaja [Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roxb. ex Flem.)
Wall.]

Kutaja powder is a simple formulation prepared from the stem
bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roxb. ex Flem.) Wall., a small
to medium-sized tree, found throughout India. The stem bark is
collected from 8-12 years old trees during the middle of rainy season
(July to September) and again at the end of winter by hewing
and peeling and separating it from the attached wood. The stem
bark is bitter in taste and used in Ayurveda for the treatment of
gastrointestinal disorders, particularly diarrhoea and dysentery. Most
of the Ayurvedic formulations described in literature and various
commercially marketed formulations for diarrhoea essentially contain
Kutaja as one of their ingredients. Kutaja is mentioned in the Indian
Ayurvedic Pharmacopeias* as well as Formulary?. Apart from the
preferred use of Kutaja in the treatment of diarrhoea, scientific
studies have established its anti-protozoal, anti-giardia and anti-
amoebic properties.?

Composition

Kutaja powder is prepared from the stem bark of Kutaja.

English name Kurchi, Tellicherry bark

Latin name Holarrhena antidysenterica Roxb. ex Flem.
Wall.

Family Apocynaceae

Parts used Stem bark

----- PAGE 45 -----
33

Leafy shoots with flowers of Kutaja. Dried stem bark of Kutaja.

Main chemical constituents*

Conessine, conessemine, kurchine, kurchicine, etc.

Quality standards?

Identity, purity and potency of Kutaja Churna for its oral use are
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%
Alcohol (60%) soluble Not less than 18%
extractive

Water soluble extractive Not less than 10%

Method of preparation

(1) Take 50 grams of dried stem bark of Kutaja and further dry it
in the shade to remove moisture for easy powdering.

(2) Grind stem bark in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.

(3) Filter the powder through 85 mesh to remove coarse particles
and fibers.

(4) The shelf life of the powder is four months but it can retain its
potency for at least six months, if kept in an air tight container
and protected from direct sunlight and heat.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 46 -----
34

Dosage form

Bitter brownish powder.

Therapeutic properties®

The bark of Kutaja has anti-diarrhoeal, constipating, astringent, anti-
dysenteric, anthelmintic, carminative and digestive properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The adult dose of Kutaja powder is 3-5 g and for children 500 mg
to 1 g, twice or thrice daily with warm water, before meals.

Indication and uses

Kutaja bark is useful in various kinds of diarrhoea and dysentery.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) No side effect or toxic effect of Kutaja powder has been
mentioned in the classical Ayurvedic literature. Clinical studies
have also shown no adverse effects in patients treated with
Kutaja powder within the recommended dose alone as well as
in combination with other home remedies. Kutaja may cause
distension of the abdomen after using for a few days.

(2) As prolonged use of Kutaja powder may produce constipation,
hence as soon as the diarrhoea is checked the dose of Kutaja
powder should be tapered off.

(3) A study on the side effects of Holarrhena antidysenterica in
patients has revealed that it can lead to subjective symptoms
as well as hypertension’. Hence hypertensive patients should
take Kutaja powder under medical supervision.

(4) Prolonged use of Kutaja powder during pregnancy should be
done under medical supervision. However, it is safe for the baby
if a nursing mother is taking this medication.

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 78-79.

(2) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part-II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2000. p. 66.

----- PAGE 47 -----
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB,& Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 349.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 79.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 78.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 348.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 350.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Bhattacharjee SK. Handbook of medicinal plants. Jaipur: Pointer
Publishers, 1998.

Chopra RN, Chopra IC, Varma BS. Supplement to glossary of Indian
medicinal plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1992.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Dinesh Chandra, Dixit SK, Sen PC, Joshi D. An experimental study of
Kutajarishta with special reference to amoebiasis. Ancient Sci. Life.
1988; 8(2).

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1966.

Janot MM, Cavier R. Anthelmintic properties of conessine hydrochloride.
Ann. Pharm. Franc. 1949; 7: 549-552; Chem. Abstr., 44(5), 1950.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

35

ay

----- PAGE 48 -----


----- PAGE 49 -----
br de

Lashuna oil for earache

Pain in the ear is a very uncomfortable symptom, which may be due
to the local causes in the ear or may relate to external causes. The
earache may increase on lying down due to increased blood supply
to the ear in recumbent position. The general causes of earache are
as follows:

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

(9)

Exposure to extreme cold weather.

Exposure to pressure changes during diving or swimming and
air travel.

Picking or probing the ear canal.

Improper instrumentation during the examination or treatment
of ear.

Exposure to very high-pitched sounds.
Injury to the head especially the temporal bone.
Entry of water into auditory canal during bathing.

Local bacterial or fungal infection such as furuncles and
otomycosis.

Impacted wax.

(10) Referred pain due to carious tooth, impacted molar, ulcerative

lesions in the oral cavity and tongue, osteoarthritis of temporo-
mandibular joint, tonsillitis, etc.

The earache can also be functional, which needs to be carefully
observed. Management of earache requires proper evaluation
and treatment before complications develop. Ayurveda prescribes
instillation of medicated oil and juice of certain medicinal plants in

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

37

----- PAGE 50 -----
38

the affected ear. One of the simple formulations for earache used in
traditional medicine is mustard oil prepared with garlic.

Lashuna (Allium sativum Linn.)

Lashuna oil comprises of cloves of garlic heated in mustard oil. Both
Lashuna and mustard oil are commonly used drugs almost in every
Indian kitchen and are well known for their medicinal properties in
the traditional medicine of the Asian region. Lashuna comprises of
bulbs of Allium sativum Linn., a perennial bulbous plant, cultivated
as an important condiment crop in India. It is mainly used for facial
paralysis, lock-jaw, flatulence, colic, arthralgia and dental caries. The
oil of Lashuna is used for skin rashes and as an ear drop?. Sarshapa
consists of dried seeds of Brassica campestris Linn., an erect, stout,
simple or branched, glaucous, annual herb, 50 to 60 cm tall, commonly
cultivated in Bengal, Bihar and Punjab, also found occasionally in
wastelands and fields. The oil of Sarshapa is also used in the form
of gargle and is also applied with rock salt for dental caries.” In
addition, it is also used for massage for increasing muscular strength
and enhancing the colour and complexion of skin.

Composition

Lashuna oil comprises of Lashuna and mustard oil.

Lashuna Garlic Allium sativum Liliaceae Bulb
Linn.

Sarshapa Mustard Brassica Brassicaceae Seed (Oil)
compestris
Linn.

Cultivated plants of garlic. Garlic bulbs.

----- PAGE 51 -----
Main chemical constituents

(1) Lashuna?: Volatile oil containing allyl disulphide, diallyl disulphide
and also allin, allicin, mucilage and albumin.

(2) Sarshapa oil?: Fixed oil and the glycerides of palmitic, stearic,
oleic, linoleic, linolenic, eicosenoic, etc.

Quality standards

Identity, purity and potency of Lashuna and Sarshapa are estimated
on the basis of the following physical constants.

Foreign Total Acid Alcohol Water Volatile
Ingredient 9 insoluble soluble soluble oil/ Fixed
matter ash = . A
ash extractives | extractives oil
Lashuna? Not more Not more Not more Not less _ Not less
than 2%  than4% than 1% than 2.5% than 0.1%
Sarshapa* Not more Not more Not more Not less Not less Not less
than 2%  than5% than 0.5% than 8% than 16% than 35%

Preparation of mustard oil with garlic

(1) Take about 20 ml (4 teaspoonsful) of mustard oil in a vessel
and add 5-6 pieces of peeled and slightly crushed fresh garlic
cloves.

(2) Put the mixture on a slow fire for about 5 -10 minutes till garlic
becomes brown and stop further heating.

(3) Filter the mixture through cotton cloth to obtain clear oil and
keep it in a clean glass bottle.

Dosage form

Lukewarm, pungent, yellowish-brown oil.

Dose and mode of administration

(1) Instill medicated oil in the affected ear drop by drop by tilting
the head to opposite side and retain it for about 30 minutes
by plugging the ear with cotton swab.

(2) Repeat the process for other ear if affected.

(3) Instillation of oil in the ears can be done twice daily for 2-3
days.

Therapeutic properties

pis

Fresh garlic is anti-inflammatory, anti-fungal, anti-bacteria anti-

viral, and anthelmintic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

39

----- PAGE 52 -----
ag

40

Indication and use

Earache.

Precaution and safety aspects

(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)

Local application of Lashuna oil is traditionally considered to
be safe, but application on inflammatory lesions may produce
burning sensation or slight irritation.

While using the oil, it should neither be too hot nor too cold.
The oil instillation should be avoided if there is ear discharge.

If there is no relief within three days, seek medical advice.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Billore KV et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VI. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2004. p. 158.

Lavekar GS et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 313.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 109.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 193.

Lavekar GS et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 314.

Further reading

Ahsan M, Islam SN. Garlic: a broad spectrum antibacterial agent
effective against common pathogenic bacteria. Fitoterapia. 67(4),
1996.

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra LC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 2002.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. I. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

Nadkarni AK. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bombay:
Popular Prakashana, 1976.

Nagatsu A, Sugitani T, Mori Y, Okuyama H, Sakakibara J, Mizukami H.
Antioxidants from grape (Brassica campestris viv. Japonica hara) oil
cake. Nat. Prod. Res. 18(3), 2004.

----- PAGE 53 -----
(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian medicinal plants
(1960-1969). Vol. 1. Lucknow: Central Drug Research Institute, and
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science
and Industrial Research, 1993.

Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian medicinal plants
(1970-1979). Vol. II. Lucknow: Central Drug Research Institute and
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council for Science
and Industrial Research, 1993.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plantsi: chaukhamba
vishvabharati. Varanasi: Orient Publishers and Distributors, 1996.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna-vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Sanskrit Bharati Academy, 1978.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

41

----- PAGE 54 -----


----- PAGE 55 -----
ped

Shirisha powder for eczema

Eczema is a term that denotes different types of allergic skin
inflammation usually of chronic origin. The symptoms of eczema
commonly include itching, reddened and dry skin. Since the skin is
itchy, prolonged scratching leads to a leathery thickening of the skin.
Cracking and weeping of the skin may also occur and open sores
may become infected.

Causes of eczema

Though the causes of eczema have not been fully determined, the
following list provides some insight as to the triggers for eczema:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Family history: there is a genetic component to this disease.

Irritants: exposure to industrial solvents, chemicals, vehicle
lubricants, soaps, cement, detergents, cleaning products, rubber
gloves and even cosmetic lotions and creams, etc.

Allergy: strong reactions to some allergens can cause violent
skin eruptions.

Chronic dry skin: dry skin that is left un-moisturized can develop
into eczema especially in cold weather.

Poor circulation: more common in the elderly and affecting
lower limbs.

Obsessive compulsive disorder: habitually rubbing or scratching
skin.

Reaction to an infection: some fungal, parasitic, bacterial and
viral infections can cause localized eczema.

Stress: stress causes the immune system to be compromised
causing increased susceptibility to skin conditions.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

43

----- PAGE 56 -----
44

(9) Diet: some have found modification to diet extremely useful in
maintaining remission periods.

(10) Unknown factors: some forms of eczema are triggered by
unknown reactions of the immune system.

Though eczema is very difficult to control, allergic component of
eczema can be controlled to an extent by regular internal and external
use of Shirisha, which is widely mentioned in Ayurvedic classics and
used in clinical practice at large by traditional practitioners. Some
do’s and don’ts include:

(1) Excessive intake of sour, salty and pungent foods and drinks,
curd, milk, jaggery, sesame seeds, black gram and alcoholic
beverages should be avoided.

(2) If there is oozing from the eczema site, efforts should be made
to keep the site clean and dry. Whereas in dry eczema it is
always advisable to keep the affected area moist and smooth
with vaseline or an oily preparation.

(3) Avoidance of aggravating factors of eczema, and eating simple,
soft, easily digestible food helps. Edible items of bitter taste;
regular use of honey and peace of mind help in management
of eczema.

Shirisha (Albizzia lebbeck Benth.)

Shirisha consists of the powder of the bark of A/bizzia lebbeck, a large,
deciduous tree, which is found all over India up to 900 meters in the
Himalayas. It grows wild especially in the moist and dry deciduous
forests. The bark of the tree is thick and dark or brownish grey with
numerous short irregular cracks. The seeds are oval or oblong, pale
brown, smooth with a hard testa. Shirisha is described as one of the
best Vishaghna (anti-toxin) drugs in Ayurvedic texts!. Clinical studies
show that Shirisha acts as an antidote to animal poisons which are
histaminic in nature and are also responsible for the production of
allergic dermatitis, urticaria and anaphylactic shock?.

Composition

Shirisha powder is prepared from its bark for oral use and decoction for
washing the affected skin.

----- PAGE 57 -----
English name Siris tree, East Indian walnut, Kokko
Latin name Albizzia lebbeck Benth.
Family Fabaceae

Plant part used Stem bark

Leafy branches of a Dried stem bark of Shirisha.
Shirisha tree.

Main chemical constituents?

Condensed tannins and d-catechin, lebbecacidin, isomers of
leucocyanidin, friedelin-3-one.

Quality standards?

The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Shirisha which are based on the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 1%
Total ash Not more than 8%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive Not less than 12%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6%

Method of preparation

(1) The powder of the bark is prepared by grinding dried bark in
a grinder or pulverizer and then filtering it through mesh size
85.

(2) The powder should be kept in a dry container and stored in
a moisture-free area. Properly kept powder holds its potency
for 4-6 months.

(3) For making decoction, coarse powder is used.

(4) It is good to use the powder within four months of its
preparation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

45

----- PAGE 58 -----
46

Dose and mode of administration

(1) Shirisha bark powder is given orally to adults in a dose of 3
to 6 g and to children in a dose of 1 to 2 g twice daily after
meals with lukewarm water.

(2) The decoction is prepared by adding 16 times water to 10 g
coarse powder of bark of Shirisha and then boiling on slow
fire till about one fourth of water remains. The dose of the
freshly prepared decoction is 40 ml twice a day after meals.
For better relief add 5 g of turmeric powder in the decoction
of Shirisha just before taking it. To mask the taste sugar may
be added to the decoction. Fresh decoction is to be prepared
for every dose.

(3) The lesions may be washed with the decoction prepared from
the bark of Shirisha.

(4) The treatment may be continued for 3 to 4 weeks or till cure
is achieved, if relief of the symptoms is sustained.

(5) If the condition gets worse, seek doctor’s advice and check for
allergic reactions.

Dosage form

Grayish-brown powder or warm dark brown liquid having bitter
taste.

Therapeutic properties”

Shirisha bark is anti-protozoal, anti-histaminic, anti-allergic, anti-
fungal, analgesic, anti-anaphylactic, anti-bacterial, central nervous
system depressant and bronchodilator.

Indications and uses

The bark is useful in allergic and chronic skin diseases including
various kinds of eczema.

Precaution and safety aspects

(1) Clinical and experimental studies have indicated the absence of
any serious toxicity if normal dose of Shirisha is used.

(2) Its safety in pregnancy is not proven. Therefore, it must be
used cautiously. However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing
mother is taking this medication.

(3) As it has mild spermicidal activity, its use in oligospermic persons
should be avoided.

----- PAGE 59 -----
(4) The following measures can help to prevent and treat

eczema

(a) Moisturize your skin regularly.

(b) Protect skin from strong winds.

(c) Protect skin from temperature extremes (hot or cold).
(d) Keep the area clean especially if skin cracks.
(e) Keep bathing and shower times short.

(f) Keep your diet healthy and add vitamins.
(g) Use medications strictly as directed.

(h) Try to reduce stress.

(i) Do not vigorously scratch or irritate skin.

(j) Do not bathe with hot water.

(k) Do not expose skin to harsh chemicals, solvents, vehicle
lubricants, etc.

(1) Do not wear woolen clothing.

(m) Avoid wearing tight fitting clothing especially made of
synthetic fibers.

(n) Do not apply hydrocortisone creams without medical advice
for long periods.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

Shastri KN et al. Charaka samhita commentary. Sootrasthana 25, 40.
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 2005. p. 468.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha. 2002. p. 447.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 202.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

Chatterjee A, Prakashi SC. The treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 2. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council
of Science and Industrial Research, 1992.

Chopra RN et al. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi:
Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science and
Industrial Research, 1956.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

47

----- PAGE 60 -----
48

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

Ganguli NB, Bhatt EM. Mode of action of active principles from stem
bark of Albizzia lebbeck (L.) Benth. Indian Journal of Exptl. Biol.
31(2), 1993.

Warrier, PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 1. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. I.
New Delhi: ICMR, 1976.

Mitra Roma. Bibliography on pharmcognosy of medicinal plants.
Lucknow: National Botanical Research Institute, 1985.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Pharmacological
investigations of certain medicinal plants and compound formulations
used in Ayurveda and Siddha New Delhi: Central Council of Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Phytochemical
investigations of certain medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. New Delhi:
Central Council of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1990.

Sharma AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali, chaukhambha. Varanasi: Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.

Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Wealth of India: raw
materials. Vol. I, A (Rev.). New Delhi: CSIR, 1985.

Tripathi P. Steriodgenic effect of Albizzia lebbeck Benth. in Guinea pigs.
Ancient Science of Life. 2(3), 1983.

Tripathi RM, Sen PC, Das PK. Studies on mechanism of action of Albizzia
lebbeck, an Indian indigenous drug in the treatment of atopic allergy.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 1(4), 1979.

Tripathi RM, Sen PC, Das PK. Further studies on the mechanism of
anti-anaphylactic action of Albizzia lebbeck, an Indian indigenous drug.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 1(4), 1979.

----- PAGE 61 -----
aA gle

Triphala decoction for eye discharge

Liquid discharge from the eye other than tears, with or without
burning and itching, is found in many eye conditions and can also be
due to environmental pollutants. Mostly, eye discharge is a common
symptom in the inflammatory and allergic conditions of the eye. In
viral conjunctivitis, the eye becomes red or bloodshot and irritation
causes discharge but this condition does not last more than 10 days
or so, if uncomplicated and proper hygienic care is taken. Bacterial
conjunctivitis is not common, but when it develops as thick eye
discharge of white, yellow or greenish colour; it is advisable to seek
medical advice.

Cigarette smoke, chlorine in swimming pool water and chemicals in
make-up materials are some of the uncommon causes of eye discharge.
In such cases, eye discharge and other associated symptoms appear
on contact with the irritant and do not last long. Specific medication
is not required but the cause of eye irritation should be avoided.

Thin watery discharge coupled with itching and burning in the
eyes is due to allergy and it is sometimes very uncomfortable. This
condition necessitates determination of the cause of allergy.

For eye discharge, the simple principle of treatment recommended
in Ayurvedic literature is to avoid the causative factor and palliate
the symptom with medicines having antagonistic properties. Triphala
decoction is one such medicine which is widely popular and considered
to be quite effective in alleviating various eye symptoms including
discharge, inflammation and irritation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

49

----- PAGE 62 -----
50

Triphala decoction

Fruits of three myrobalans are collectively designated as Triphala
in Ayurveda, meaning the three specific fruits put together. This
formulation is included in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India and
the ingredients are described in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia’. It finds
vivid description in Ayurveda literature and is frequently used by
practitioners inter alia in the treatment of eye diseases, particularly
conjunctivitis and vision disorders. Both Kvatha (decoction) and
Churna (powder) of Triphala are indicated respectively for external
and internal use in eye disorders.

Triphala decoction is mainly used for washing inflamed eyes with
purulent discharge or as eye drops in controlling conjunctivitis. Apart
from providing relief in inflammation-induced eye symptoms with its
decongestant, anti-inflammatory and soothing effects, instillation of
Triphala decoction in eyes is proven to have prophylactic value for
preventing viral conjunctivitis during epidemics.

Composition

Decoction of Triphala is prepared by boiling together in water
the coarse powder of dried fruits of the following three medicinal
plants.

. . Parts
Local Name | Latin Name Family
Used

Haritaki Terminalia Chebulic Combretaceae Fruit
chebula Retz. myrobalan

Bibhitaki Terminalia Belliric Combretaceae — Fruit
belerica myrobalan
Roxb.

Amalaki Phyllanthus Emblic Euphorbiaceae — Fruit

emblica Linn. myrobalan

Main chemical constituents
Triphala as a whole is rich in vitamin C, gallic acid and tannins.

Ingredient-wise the main chemical constituents are:

HaritakP: Tannins, anthraquinones and polyphenolic compounds.
Bibhitaki*: Gallic acid, tannic acid and glycosides.
Amalaki: Vitamin C, carotene, nicotinic acid, riboflavin and tannins.

----- PAGE 63 -----
51

Haritaki fruits and leaves. Dried fruits of Haritaki.

Amalaki fruits and leaves. Dried fruits of Amalaki.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 64 -----
52

Quality standards

Simple quality parameters for selection of raw materials could be
followed for having desired efficacy from Triphala decoction.

Forelan Acid Alcohol Water
Ingredient Mattor Total Ash | Soluble Soluble Soluble
Ash Ash Extractives

Haritaki® Not more Not more Not more Notless _ Not less than
than 1% than 5% than 5% than 40% 60%

Bibhitaki’ Not more Not more Not more Notless_ Not less than
than2%  than7% thani% than 8% 35%

Amalaki® Not more Not more Not more Notless _ Not less than
than 3% than 7% than 2% than 40% 50%

Method of preparation
Triphala decoction for cleansing eyes is prepared the following
way:

(1) Clean the dried fruits and remove the seeds.

(2) Take the required amount of each ingredient that is sufficient
for the course of treatment. For 15 days’ treatment, 500 grams
of each ingredient is needed.

(3) Make coarse powder separately of the three dried fruits.

(4) Mix together the three powders in equal amounts to form a
uniform mixture.

(5) Take 10 to 50 grams of the mixture for one application and soak
it for about an hour in 16 times water. Then boil till half of the
water remains. Filter the decoction through fine cotton cloth and
keep in a clean bowl or jug. Slightly warm decoction should be
used for washing eyes at the earliest after its preparation.

(6) For use in children and sensitive individuals, soak 50 grams
of powdered Triphala in 200 milliliters of hot water for half an
hour, filter and use it lukewarm.

Dosage form
Slightly warm, dark-brownish coloured liquid.

Therapeutic properties*

Anti-inflammatory, decongestant, soothing and wound healing
properties.

----- PAGE 65 -----
Dose and mode of administration

Sufficient quantity of Triphala decoction, say about 100 to 200
milliliters, is required to wash eyes in one of the following ways:

(1)

(2)

(3)

Dip a small piece of sterilized cotton in slightly warm Triphala
decoction and clean with it each eye 3-5 times from nasal side
outwards; each time with separate cotton. Wipe the eyes with
clean and sterilized cotton or soft cloth. Do this procedure two
to three times a day.

Ask the patient to lie down on the back. Irrigate the open eyes,
one by one, with Triphala decoction poured through a clean
and sterilized dropper. The procedure may be done twice or
thrice a day.

Akshi Tarpana: With patient lying down on back, first clean
the eyes with cotton or soft cloth soaked in clean water and
then make rings of wheat-flour dough around both eyes. Put
Triphala decoction in the rings in such a way as it may not spill
out. Keep this position for 5 to 10 minutes and ask the patient
to blink eyes and move eye balls in between. This procedure
should be done at least twice a day.

Indications and uses

Triphala decoction is used for washing eyes in acute and chronic
infections and inflammatory diseases of eye including trachoma,
where watery or purulent discharge is the main symptom. It is also
recommended for oral use in various eye diseases.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Due care must be taken to make and keep the decoction in a
clean utensil. Do not keep the decoction uncovered and in an
unhygienic place. Dipping fingers in the decoction to judge its
temperature should be strictly avoided.

Too hot and too cold decoctions should not be used as they
may not yield the desired results.

Frequency of eye wash should be determined on the basis of
the severity of symptoms. It is advisable to wash the affected
eye at least twice a day and for each application fresh decoction
should be prepared.

Warm compresses should be applied to soften and remove
crusts in the eyelids, before washing the eyes. Softened crusts
can be removed with cotton.

Medical advice must be sought, if vision is decreased, the eye
pain gets severe, the discharge is thick and frankly purulent or
greenish or bloody and light sensitivity is intense.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

53

----- PAGE 66 -----
54

(6) Do not continue using Triphala decoction in case eye symptoms

(7)

of itching, discharge, redness etc. worsen or do not improve
in one to two weeks.

Haritaki, Bibhitaki and Amalaki fruits are traditionally considered
safe in the prescribed doses and no adverse effects are reported
in the literature.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary of
India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homeopathy, 2000. p. 72.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 5, 26, 47.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 48.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 26.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 14.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 47.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 26.

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 5.

Further reading

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Juss SS. Triphala - the wonder drugs. Indian Med. Gaz., 1997.

Mehta BK, Shitut S, Wankhade H. In vitro antimicrobial efficacy of
Triphala. Fitoterapia. 1993.

Mitra AK, Gupta AK, Debdas M. Clinical observations on an herbal eye
drops preparation. Antiseptic. 1986.

Tambvekar NR. Ayurvedic drugs in common eye conditions. J. Nat.
Integ. Med. Assoc., 1985.

Thakare RP. Studies on the anti-bacterial activity of some plant extracts.
Indian Drugs. 1979-80.

----- PAGE 67 -----
spo de

Kiratatikta powder in fever

Fever, also known as pyrexia, is a common medical symptom as well
as a sign that indicates an increase in internal body temperature to
levels above normal. Fever results from a temporary elevation in the
body’s thermoregulatory set-point, which is usually set at a normal
temperature of 37°C (98.6° F). Body temperature varies with time
of the day, with lower levels in the morning and higher levels in the
evening.

Fever is present if oral temperature is over 37.2°C (98.96° F) in
the morning and 37.7°C (99.86°F) in the evening, the corresponding
rectal temperature (in anal canal) would be 0.4°C (0.72°F) higher. In
addition to diurnal variations, body temperature is also influenced by
age and gender (especially women in reproductive age group). Fever
is not considered medically significant until body temperature is above
38° C (100.4° F). There are different accompanying symptoms of fever,
which depend on its underlying causes. These include chills, rigors,
malaise, arthralgia, anorexia, fatigue, dizziness, sweating, etc.

Fever serves as one of the body’s natural defense against
microbes. For that reason, low fevers should normally go untreated,
unless accompanied by troubling symptoms. Fever is termed as low
grade if it is between 38°-39° C (100.4°-102.2° F), moderate if it
ranges within 39°-40°C (102.2° -104.0° F) and high grade if it is
over 40° C (104.0° F). Depending upon the course of fever, fever
can be:

(1) Continuous fever, if the temperature remains above normal
throughout the day and does not fluctuate more than 1°C
(1.8° F) in 24 hours; e.g. urinary tract infections, typhoid, lobar
pneumonia.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

55

----- PAGE 68 -----
56

(2) Intermittent fever, if fever touches base line for several hours
of the day. If the spike occurs every day it is quotidian, spike
every alternate day is called tertian and if this occurs after every
third day then it is quartan intermittent fever; e.g. malaria.

(3) Remittent fever, if the temperature remains above normal
throughout the day with fluctuations of more than 1 degree
Celsius; e.g. infective endocarditis.

(4) Irregular fever if the pattern does not fit into any of the patterns
indicated above.

Causes of fever

(1) Infectious diseases: viral infections, malaria, influenza,
sore throat, typhoid, pneumonia, measles, chickenpox,
tuberculosis.

(2) Tissue injury.
(3) Cancers of liver, kidney, lymph nodes.

(4) Immuno-inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, vasculitis.

(5) Drugs and toxins.
(6) Exposure to high environmental temperature.
(7) Fever of unknown cause.

The main risk of moderate to high fever is dehydration. Patients
with fever need more fluids than usual. Body temperature greater
than 41.67° C (107° F), can result in brain damage and possibly
death. Whatever may be the cause, uncomplicated mild to moderate
fever can be managed with a simple herbal preparation mentioned
in Ayurvedic classics such as Kiratatikta.

Kiratatikta [Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming)
H. Karst]

Kiratatikta powder consists of dried, matured pieces of whole plant
of Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming) H. Karst, an erect, annual,
herbaceous plant. It is about 0.6-1.25 metres high, found in temperate
Himalayas at an altitude of between 1200-3000 metres from Kashmir
to Bhutan and Khasia Hills in Meghalaya. The plant is collected when it
flowers during July to October and dried in the shade. The formulation
is mentioned in classical Ayurvedic texts, Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
and Ayurvedic Formulary of India for various types of fever.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Composition

The formulation is a powder made from dried, matured pieces of
whole plant of Swertia chirata.

English name Chiretta, Chirata, Brown chiretta, white chiretta

Latin name Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming) H. Karst
Family Gentianaceae
Part used Whole plant

Wie 7 nue

Dried Swertia chirata plants.

xe a!

A Swertia chirata plant.

Main chemical constituents?

Xanthones, xanthone glycoside and mangiferine (flavonoid).

Quality standards?

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 6%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%
Alcohol (60%) soluble Not less than 10%
extractive

Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10%

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

57

----- PAGE 70 -----
58

Method of preparation

Take dried whole plant of Kiratatikta and further dry it in the shade
to remove moisture for easy powdering or making coarse powder
for decoction.

(1) Grind the material in a grinder or pulverizer until fine powder
or coarse powder is obtained.

(2) For obtaining the fine powder filter it through mesh size 85.
Coarse powder is used as such for decoction, there is no need
to filter it.

(3) The shelf life of the powder is four months but it can retain
its potency if kept in an air-tight container and protected from
direct sunlight and heat.

Dosage form

Dark-brownish bitter powder or warm, dark brownish bitter liquid.

Therapeutic properties”

Anti-pyretic, anti-malarial, anthelmintic, anti-leishminial, anti-
inflammatory, anti-tubercular, cholagogue, hepatoprotective, anti-
diabetic, laxative, stomachic, tonic.

Dose and mode of administration

The dose of Kiratatikta powder for adults is 1-3 grams and for children
it is 250 mg to 500 mg, with water. The dose of decoction for adults
is 25-30 ml and for children, it is 5 ml to 10 ml, to be taken twice
a day after meals.

Indications and uses

Fevers of known and unknown causes.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) Although no toxic effects are reported with Kiratatikta, the
patient taking oral hypoglycemic drugs should take the medicine
under medical supervision as Kiratatikta may interact with oral
hypoglycemic drugs potentiating its hypoglycaemic action.

----- PAGE 71 -----
(2)

(3)

Medication with Kiratatikta should be stopped, if the intensity of
fever does not decrease within a few hours and the symptoms
aggravate. Chronic and severely feverish patients should
consume Kiratatikta under medical supervision.

Pregnant women should take this medication under medical
supervision. However, it is safe for the baby if the nursing
mother is taking this medication.

References

(1)

(2)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 72.

Billore KV et al. Database on Medicinal Plants Used in Ayurveda, Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005. p. 227, 229.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Duke JA, Godwin MJB, Du Cellier J and Duke PAK. Duke JA. Eds.
Handbook of medicinal herbs. Washington DC, CRC Press, 2002.

Gogte VM. Ayurvedic pharmacology & therapeutic uses of medicinal
plants. Mumbai: Bharatiya Vidyabhavana, 2000.

Goyal H, Sukumar S, Purushothaman KK. Antimalarials from Indian
medicinal plants. J. Res. Ayur. Sid. 1981.

Grover J, Yadav S, Vats V. Medicinal plants of India with anti-diabetic
potential. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2002.

Henriette’s herbal homepage. http://www.henriettesherbal.com (accessed
19 February 2010).

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry & pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Amar Bharati Prakashana, 2006.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna-vijnana. Vol. II, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 1981.

National Institute of Science Communication and Information
Resources, The useful plants of India. New Delhi: Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

59

----- PAGE 72 -----


----- PAGE 73 -----
aA gle

Karanja powder for fungal dermatosis

Chronic fungal infection of the skin, hair, or nails is caused by
specific species of fungi such as Trichophyton, Microsporum and
Epidermophyton. In layman’s terms, the condition is called “ringworm”
or tinea infection which is extremely common in general practice.
Ringworm is characterized by round lesions (rings) and there are
multiple terms for ringworm infection of various body sites such as;
tinea corporis (body), tinea paedis (feet), tinea unguium (nail), tinea
capitis (scalp) or tinea cruris (groin).

It is highly contagious and can spread through contact with an
infected person, animal, and objects like contaminated toilet articles,
clothing, pool surfaces, showers, locker rooms and even soil. Acquisition
of ringworm appears to be favoured by minor trauma (including that
incurred during wrestling), maceration and poor hygiene of the skin.
Heat and moisture help fungi grow and thrive, which makes them
more common in areas of frequent sweating as well as skin folds in
groins or between toes.

The signs and symptoms vary with the site of infection and the
fungal species involved. Foot infection (athlete’s foot, tinea paedis) may
present as fissuring of the toe webs, scaling of the plantar surfaces or
vesicles around the toe webs and soles. Inter-digital lesions may be
itchy but become painful when bacterial superinfection occurs. Hand
infection is less common but it resembles foot infection. Scalp infection
(tinea capitis) is characterized by areas of alopecia and scaling. Nail
infection (tinea unguium) presents as a white discoloration of the
nails or as thickening, chalkiness and crumbling of the nails. Tinea
of the groin (‘jock itch’) tends to have a darkening of skin colour and
extends from the folds of the groin down onto one or both thighs.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

61

----- PAGE 74 -----
62

Though skin fungal infection like ringworm is not so easy to treat,
recent uncomplicated infection can be checked by one of the most
popular herbal powders and oil made from a single drug, Karanja,
and also by maintaining hygiene and following certain do’s and don’ts
given in the Ayurvedic literature.

(1) Keep the affected part clean, wash it daily with warm water
and wipe dry.

(2) Local application of simple medicaments like neem oil, turmeric
paste made with water or sulphur ointment can provide added
effect.

(3) It is always advisable to continue the treatment for sometime,
even if symptoms come under control.

(4) The cloth once used at the affected part should be reused only
after washing and dipping in an antiseptic solution.

(5) Curd and heavy foods should be avoided. Food items with bitter
taste are beneficial.

Karanja (Pongamia pinnata Linn. Merr.)

Karanja botanically known as Pongamia pinnata Linn., is a medium-
sized tree with a short bole and spreading crown and found almost
throughout India up to an altitude of 1200 metres. Karanja seeds
are used internally as well as externally in various types of skin
aliments including fungal skin disease. Seed oil is highly esteemed for
medicinal purposes and is indicated for local application in scabies,
herpes, leucoderma and other cutaneous diseases. This remedy is
also enlisted in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India for management
of various skin diseases’.

Composition

Pongamia oil is extracted from Karanja seeds for local application
on affected parts.

English name Indian beech, smooth leaved pongamia, Pongam

oil tree
Latin name Pongamia pinnata Linn.
Family Fabaceae

Part used Seeds

----- PAGE 75 -----
1_¥ a.
A flowering Pongamia pinnata branch Dried Pongamia pinnata fruits
with pods. and seeds.

Main chemical constituents?

Karanja seeds contain fixed oil, flavones and traces of essential
oil.

Quality standards?

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 11%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 3.5%
Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 10%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 16%

Method of preparation
(1) Preparation of powder:

e Clean the dried fruits of Karanja by removing dust and
other foreign particles. Remove the seeds from the shells
and grind them into powder form.

e Filter the powder through sieve. Store in air-tight container,
away from direct sunlight and in a cool and dry place.

e It is always good to use fresh Karanja seed powder for
better results. It can be used only up to four months.

(2) Preparation of oil:

e Pongamia oil is extracted by crushing seeds of Karanja.
Purified Pongamia oil available in the market can also be
used.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

63

----- PAGE 76 -----
64

Dosage form

Dusty powder and yellowish orange oil.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

The adult dose of Karanja seed powder is 250 mg and for
children the dose is 30 mg to 60 mg, to be taken orally twice
daily with lukewarm water after meals.

Simultaneously, Pongamia oil is to be applied on the affected
skin as per the requirement. Pongamia oil can be applied alone
or in combination with sesame oil or neem oil.

Therapeutic properties”

Karanja has anthelmintic, insecticidal, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal,
nematocidal, and wound-healing properties.

Indications and uses*

Karanja is indicated for skin diseases such as ringworm, scabies,
eczema, urticaria, erysipelas, leucoderma, leprosy, gonorrhoea,
herpes (shingles or herpes zoster and also against herpes genitalis),
impetigo and pityriasis versicolor.

Precaution and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Overdose of Karanja seed powder should be avoided. If any
adverse effect is observed, stop taking it further.

Internal use of Pongamia oil is reported to have adverse effects
due to its toxic components? and hence should be avoided.

Adverse effects with external use of Pongamia oil are not
reported but be observant while using this medicament.

Internal use of Karanja is not advisable for pregnant women
and nursing mothers.

References

(1)

(2)

India. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 63-64.

India. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 63.

----- PAGE 77 -----
(3)

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 295.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 293-296.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Aneja R, Khanna RN, Seshadri TR. Six-methoxyfuroflavone, a new
component of the seeds of Pongamia glabra. J. of Chem. Soc. 1996.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1984.

Warrier P.K. et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

Phyto-chemical investigations of certain medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and
Siddha, 1990.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vigyana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukahambha
Bharati Academy, 1996.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

65

----- PAGE 78 -----


----- PAGE 79 -----
aA gle

Pippalimoola powder for headache

Headache is defined as a pain in the head or upper neck. Headache
can be a symptom of an underlying serious disease or it can be a
disease itself. Headache can be due to many causes. Common benign
causes of headache include: migraine, refractory error, mental tension,
sinusitis, flu, viral fever, typhoid, etc. Some of the serious and life-
threatening causes of headache include cerebral haemorrhage, sub-
arachnoid haemorrhage, intracranial space occupying lesions (tumour),
acute and chronic meningitis, brain abscess, etc. Trigeminal neuralgia
can be a difficult and intractable cause of headache though not life
threatening. Sudden and severe headache associated with symptoms
like high fever, vomiting, convulsion, visual symptoms, stiffness in the
neck and loss of consciousness warrant urgent medical attention.

Mild to moderate headache without any specificity can be
managed with simple remedies such as Pippalimoola, which is
specifically documented for the management of headache in Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia, Ayurvedic formulary and in various classical texts.

Pippalimoola (Root of Piper longum Linn.)

Pippalimool means roots of Pippali (long pepper) plant. The roots are
perennial, woody, and aromatic and are used in powder form with
warm water, milk or preferably with ghrita (clarified butter). Many
references regarding the therapeutic use of Pippalimoola are available
in ancient classical Ayurvedic texts for its carminative, antispasmodic
and sedative actions. Use of ghrita with Pippalimool is emphasized
because of its ability to negate hot and dry properties of Pippalimool
and facilitate drug action for alleviation of vitiated Vata dosha, which is

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

67

----- PAGE 80 -----
68

considered as the underlying bio-humour responsible for the causation
of headache. Ghrita is also known to be beneficial for mental faculties
and recommended for use alone or with medicinal formulations for
psychological problems including stress-induced headache, disturbed
sleep and impaired mental concentration.

Composition

Pippalimoola powder consists of roots of Pippali

English name Long Pepper

Latin name Piper longum Linn.
Family Piperaceae
Part used Fruit

A flowering Pongamia pinnata branch Dried Pongamia pinnata fruits
with pods. and seeds.

Main chemical constituents?

Alkaloids (Piperine, Piperlongumine, Piperlonguminine, etc.), essential
oils.

Quality standards?

Foreign matter Not more than 2%

Total ash Not more than 5.5%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 0.2%
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4.0%

Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12%

----- PAGE 81 -----
69

Method of preparation

(1) Take 40 grams of dried roots of Pippali. Dry it further for
removing moisture for easy powdering. Roots should not have
been collected more than one year ago.

(2) Grind the roots in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.

(3) Filter the powder through mesh size 85.
(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight plastic or glass
container.

Dosage form

Reddish-brown to creamy-grey bitter powder.

Therapeutic properties?

The roots of Pippali have thermogenic, tonic, diuretic, purgative
expectorant, anthelmintic, stomachic, digestive, emmenagogue,
anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory, central nervous system stimulant,
antispasmodic, and analeptic properties.

Indication and uses

Headache, insomnia, cough, cold, and chronic bronchitis.

Dose and mode of administration

Dose of the powder for adults is 2 to 3 grams and for children it is
250 mg to 500 mg, to be taken twice daily, preferably on an empty
stomach mixed with 3 to 5 gm of ghee or butter or honey and
followed by warm water or milk.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) No toxic effect or adverse reaction is reported with recommended
dose of Pippali root powder.

(2) Pippali root should be used with caution in the first trimester of
pregnancy. However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing mother
is taking this medication.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 82 -----
70

(3)

(4)

Pippalimool is hot in nature, so should be used with caution in
summer and by hot temperament individuals and menstruating
women.

During medication with Pippalimool, diet should be simple, easily
digestible and free from spicy and pungent-bitter-astringent
food items.

References

(1)

(2)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 134.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 473.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Atmaram et al. The Wealth of India. Vol. 8. New Delhi: Council of
Scientific & Industrial Research, 2003.

Shastri Brahmashankar, Vaishya Ruplal. Eds. Bhavaprakasha nighantu.
Part 1. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthana, 1999.

Gupta AK. Quality standards of Indian medicinal plants. Vol.1. New
Delhi: Indian Council of Medical Research, 2003.

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Allahabad:
L.M. Basu, 1981.

----- PAGE 83 -----
a 13 de

Chaturbhadra decoction for indigestion

Improper digestion of food usually results from over eating, frequent
eating without having the feeling to eat, untimely eating, emotional
outbursts and improper sleep. Decreased secretion of digestive juices is
a relatively less common cause of indigestion. Usually there is a relative
deficiency of digestive enzymes, an imbalance of gastrointestinal
environment and impaired movement of the intestines. In order to
facilitate proper digestion, food should be taken on time, in the right
amount and should be of proper contents.

Individuals with a stressful lifestyle mostly suffer from persistent
low-grade indigestion with acute attacks in between because of dietary
indiscrimination. Indigestion can also result from gastrointestinal
infection, consumption of contaminated food or due to certain
medicines, which cause irritation in the stomach and in the upper
part of the intestine.

Indigestion becomes apparent with a feeling of fullness or
heaviness in the abdomen, low appetite, nausea, abnormal taste in
mouth and disturbed bowel movements in the form of constipation
or loose motions. In acidic indigestion, sour eructation or belching
and water brash are usually present. Indigestion is primarily a self-
limiting condition manageable with avoidance of solid food for a day
or two followed by intake of soft, light and easily digestible food for
a couple of days.

Severe and prolonged indigestion, however, always needs
medication and can be effectively managed with simple digestive
herbal formulations such as Chaturbhadra decoction.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

71

----- PAGE 84 -----
72

Chaturbhadra decoction

Chaturbhadra decoction is a herbal formulation listed in the Ayurvedic
Formulary of India? for management of indigestion and indigestion-
induced gastro-intestinal problems. Its ingredients are individually
described in the Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia and are reported to have
therapeutic properties useful for management of bowel disorders
including impaired digestion, diarrhoea, vomiting, loss of appetite
and protozoal infection. The formulation is carminative and astringent
and it improves the digestive and gastro-intestinal functions.

Composition

Chaturbhadra decoction is made from the following four ingredients
in equal parts.

Name of Part
Ei the Drug SRY | tun name | ramiy | oS |

Ativisha Indian Aconitum Ranunculaceae Root
Atis heterophyllum
Wall.ex.Royle
2. Guduchi Tinospora Tinospora Menispermaceae Stem
cordifolia (Willd.)
Miers. ex. Hk.f.
& Th.
3 Mustaka Nut grass Cyperus rotundus Cyperaceae Rhizome
Linn.
4 Shunthi Ginger Zingiber officinale Zingiberaceae Rhizome
Rosc.

Ativisha twig. Dried Ativisha roots.

----- PAGE 85 -----
73

Dried Shunthi rhizomes.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 86 -----
74

Main chemical constituents

(1) Ativisha? : Alkaloids like atisine, dihydroatisine, hetisine,
etc.

(2) Guduchi? : Terpenoids, alkaloids, etc.

(3) Mustaka?: Volatile oil.

(4) Shunthi* : Essential oil, pungent constituents: gingerols and
shogaols, resinous matter and starch.

Quality standards

For quality assurance, physical constants of the ingredients used in
the formulation should be as under.

Acid Alcohol Water

Ingredient LORIE Soluble Soluble Soluble Noletile
Matter - - Oil
Extractive | Extractive
Ativisha> Not more Not more = Not more Not less Not less 2
than 2% than 4% than 1% than 6% than 24%
Guduchi? Not more Not more 2 Not more Not less Not less 2
than 2% than 16% than 3% — than 3% than 11%
Mustaka’: Not more Not more = Not more Not less Not less Not less
than 2% than 8% than 4% than 5% thanii% than 1%
Shunthi* Not more Not more Not less 2 Not less Not less 2
than 1% than 6% than than 3% than 10%
1.5%

Method of preparation

The decoction is prepared as follows:
(1) First dry and clean all the four ingredients.
(2) Make coarse powder of each ingredient.

(3) Take the coarse powder of all the four drugs in equal quantity
and mix properly.

(4) The mixture should be stored in an air-tight container for use
within one year, after which its potency is reduced.

(5) Boil 10 grams of the mixture in 160 millilitres of water till one
fourth water remains.

(6) Filter the liquid.

(7) Add 1-2 grams of fine powder of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.)
and cumin seeds (Cuminum cyminum Linn.) in the decoction
just before taking, to make it more effective.

----- PAGE 87 -----
Dosage form

Warm, light-brownish decoction.

Therapeutic properties?

Chaturbhadra decoction has digestive, appetizing, anti-emetic,
stomachic, carminative and anti-diarrhoeal properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The dose of Chaturbhadra decoction for adults is 40 millilitres of
freshly prepared warm decoction and 5-10 ml for children, to be
administered twice a day before meals. It is advisable to sip the
decoction instead of swallowing it in one lot.

Indications and uses

(1)

(2)

(3)

The decoction is mainly used for the management of indigestion
resulting from overeating, untimely meals and consumption of
heavy food items and from liver dysfunction.

Other indications include poor appetite, vomiting, flatulence,
nausea and indigestion associated with diarrhoea and
dysentery.

Gastro-intestinal upsets due to giardia and amoebic infections
can also be managed with Chaturbhadra decoction®.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Freshly prepared decoction should be used always. Stale
decoction may not be useful.

Individuals not liking the taste of the formulation can add sugar
or honey.

To facilitate recovery, patients should consume soft, light and
semisolid or liquid diet and avoid cold and heavy foods and
raw vegetables.

If indigestion is induced or aggravated due to stress, mental
relaxation must be achieved.

The formulation is traditionally considered to be safe in the
recommended doses and side effects are mostly unlikely.
However, due to presence of Ativisha and Shunthi in the
formulation, an overdose may cause symptoms like dryness
of mouth, tremor, nervous depression, etc.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

75

----- PAGE 88 -----
76

(6) Pregnant women should use the formulation under medical
supervision.

(7) It is safe for the baby if the nursing mother is taking this
medication.

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Second revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003. p. 54.

(2) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 42.

(3) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 23.

(4) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 104.

(5) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p.130.

(6)  Billore KV et al. Database on Medicinal Plants Used in Ayurveda, Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005. p. 40.

Further reading

(1) Bhatt AD, Bhatt NS. Indigenous drugs and liver disease. Indian J.
Gastroenterology, 15(2), 1996.

(2) Billore KV et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005.

(3) Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd, 2007.

(4) Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines: a guide for
health care professionals. London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

(5) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2001.

(6) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2002.

(7) Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthan, 1999.

----- PAGE 89 -----
77

(8) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

(9) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 90 -----


----- PAGE 91 -----
2 14 :

Katuka powder for jaundice

Jaundice is yellowish discolouration of the sclera (white part of the
eyes) and skin caused by high levels of bilirubin in the blood. It is a
major symptom and sign of serious disease of many organ systems;
most important among them being the liver. Jaundice is often
associated with yellow urination which reflects excessive excretion
of bilirubin in the urine as well. There is a direct correlation between
the blood levels of bilirubin and the extent of tissue discoloration.

Jaundice reflects a deranged state of bilirubin metabolism.
Bilirubin is a waste product produced in the body from the globin
part of haemoglobin, which is released from the destruction of old
red blood cells and remains in the blood after iron is removed. It is
the liver that is responsible to remove bilirubin from the blood by
conjugating it and then secreting bilirubin containing bile into the
intestine via bile ducts. Jaundice may result from the following three
main conditions:

(1) Due to over-production of bilirubin exceeding the capacity of
the liver to remove it from the blood. This kind of jaundice
is found in excessive breakdown of red blood cells due to
their defective formation, or due to the effect of toxins or
certain drugs when a large amount of bilirubin is released
into blood.

(2) Due to functional disturbance of the liver that prevents removal,
conversion and secretion of bilirubin. It is characteristic of
hepatitis.

(3) Due to blockage of the bile ducts causing reduced flow of
bile and bilirubin from the liver into the intestines. It is seen
in conditions in which bile ducts get obstructed due to gall
stones, cancer or inflammation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

79

----- PAGE 92 -----
80

Symptoms

If the jaundice is due to liver disease - hepatitis, the patient apart
from yellowish colouration of eyes and skin may have symptoms like
loss of appetite, mild fever, fatigue, weakness and exhaustion. The
liver may be slightly enlarged and tender. The stool may be light in
colour but the urine is yellow. In haemolytic jaundice, the patient
suffers from anaemia and both the urine and stool are of orange
colour. In jaundice caused by blockage of the bile ducts, bile does
not enter the intestines so there is impairment of fat digestion and
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. This condition leads to fatty stools
and deficiency symptoms of fat-soluble vitamins. The stool is clay-
coloured in obstructive jaundice because of the absence of bilirubin
that normally gives stool its brown colour. A troublesome symptom
found in patients with this type of jaundice is itching, which may be
as severe as to cause scratching and disturbed sleep.

The patient’s history can suggest the possible cause for jaundice.
For example, excessive use of alcohol is suggestive of alcoholic liver
disease, whereas use of hepatotoxic drugs suggests drug-toxicity-
induced jaundice and sharing of syringes for injection of drugs points
towards viral hepatitis. Attacks of abdominal pain in a patient with
jaundice suggests blockage of the bile ducts usually by gallstones.
Bulky and clay coloured stools and dark urine suggests obstruction
in the passage of bile.

Judicious use of Katuka powder along with necessary dietary
precautions can successfully treat uncomplicated jaundice.

Katuka (Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.)

Katuka is a perennial hairy herb grown in alpine regions with
temperate climatic conditions. The medicinal plant in Indian medicine
is named as Katuka or Katuki owing to its immense bitter taste. The
rhizome of the plant is a bitter tonic used for the treatment of febrile
and liver disorders. Uses of Katuka are documented in the ancient
classical texts - Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita. Most of
the Ayurvedic remedies described in literature and commercially
manufactured for jaundice and liver disorders essentially contain
Katuka as one of the ingredients. Katuka and its formulations find
mention in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia and the Ayurvedic Formulary
of India. Apart from highly preferred use of Katuka in the treatment
of jaundice and related diseases by Indian practitioners, scientific
studies have established that it has an anti-inflammatory property,
provides liver protection and improves bilirubin excretion.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Composition

Katuka powder is made from dried rhizomes and roots of the plant
for oral use.

English name Picrorhiza, Hellebore

Latin name Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.
Family Scrophulariaceae

Part used Rhizome with roots

FY vex? Woes:

_ ogre

Katuka plants with flowering shoots. Dried Katuka roots.

Main chemical constituents?

Glucosides: picrorhizin and kutkins (mixture of kutkoside and
picroside).

Quality standards*

Identity, purity and potency of Katuka rhizome for its oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants.

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1%
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20%

Method of preparation

(1) Take 50 grams of dried rhizomes of Katuka. Dry them further
to remove moisture for easy powdering. Rhizomes should not
have been harvested more than one year ago.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

81

----- PAGE 94 -----
82

(2) Grind rhizomes in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.

(3) Filter the powder through mesh size 85 to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.

(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight plastic or glass container
and consume it before the next rainy season.

Dosage form

Dusty grey fine powder.

Therapeutic properties

Katuka is a bitter tonic with cooling, laxative, carminative, digestive,
stomachic, cholagogue, hepato-protective, anti-viral, anti-pyretic,
immunomodulating, free-radical scavenging, anti-spasmodic and anti-
inflammatory properties®. In large doses, it acts like a purgative.

Dose and mode of administration

The dose of Katuka powder for adults is one to three grams and
for children 500 mg to 1 gram, to be taken twice daily with water,
preferably after meals. Consuming the medicine on an empty stomach
should be avoided as it may cause nausea and vomiting due to its
highly bitter taste.

Indications and uses

Katuka is useful in jaundice, liver and spleen dysfunctions, decreased
appetite, flatulence, constipation and piles. It is also used in
intermittent febrile conditions and skin diseases.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) No side or toxic effects are reported in literature with the
recommended dose of Katuka. Clinical studies have shown no
adverse effects in patients treated with Katuka alone and with
formulations containing Katuka.

(2) Katuka being a purgative, large doses should be used carefully
in patients with loose motions and in pregnant women. The
dose should be reduced; if stools are watery and associated
with abdominal pain.

(3) Bitter taste of the medicine may induce nausea and vomiting in
sensitive individuals. This tendency can be masked by consuming
the medicine mixed with honey or sweet syrup.

----- PAGE 95 -----
(4)

(5)

(6)

Medication with Katuka should be stopped if the intensity of
jaundice does not decrease within three to five days and the
symptoms get aggravated. Chronic and severely jaundiced
patients should consume Katuka under medical supervision.

Jaundice with complications such as body itching, bleeding,
anaemia, edema, loss of weight etc. should be properly
investigated and treated under medical supervision.

Hot, spicy, pungent, sour, fatty and heavy foods should be
avoided. It is advisable to take a soft, semi-solid or liquid
diet during and after medication till normal digestive power is
restored and the blood bilirubin level becomes normal.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 1999. p. 85-87.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2003. p. 258.

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2005. p. 181-182.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 1999. p. 86.

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 7. New Delhi: India Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2005. p. 180, 182.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Antarkar DS et al. Double blind clinical trial of Arogyavardhini, an
Ayurvedic drug in acute viral hepatitis. Indian J. Med. Res. 1980.

Chatterjee A, Pakrashi SC. The Treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 5. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1997.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1999.

Doreswamy R, Sharma D. Plant drugs for liver disorders management.
Indian Drugs. 1995.

Warrier, PK et al Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 4. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Private
Limited, 2007.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

83

----- PAGE 96 -----
84

(7) Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India Vol. II.
New Delhi: 1987.

(8) Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.

(9) Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhabha
Visvabharati. 1996.

(10) Vaidya AB et al. Picrorhiza kurroa (Kutaki) royle ex benth as a
hepatoprotective agent - experimental & clinical studies. J. Postgrad.
Med. 1996.

----- PAGE 97 -----
2 15 :

Ajamoda powder for joint pain

Joint pain or arthralgia is caused by inflammation or degeneration
of tissues in one or more joints. When associated with stiffness,
swelling and painful joint movement it is called arthritis. Joint pain
can be a manifestation of acute febrile illnesses, trauma, excessive
mechanical stress, a variety of medical conditions elsewhere in the
body or a more serious form of disabling arthritis which may be
infective, non-infective or degenerative. The common non-infective
joint diseases with joint pain as a major symptom are rheumatoid
arthritis, osteoarthritis, gout, and non-specific inflammatory arthritis
such as psoriatic arthritis.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disorder
that may affect many tissues and organs, but principally attacks the
joints producing an inflammatory synovitis that often progresses
to destruction of the articular cartilage and ankylosis of the joints.
Although the cause of rheumatoid arthritis is unknown, auto-immunity
plays a pivotal role in its chronicity and progression. The onset of
rheumatoid arthritis in a majority of patients is insidious. Morning
stiffness is its characteristic feature and before the involvement of the
joints the patient may complain of tiredness, fatigue, general malaise,
low grade fever, etc. Generally the small joints of fingers or toes are
initially involved, then it spreads to the wrists, elbow, shoulders, ankles
and knee. The temporo-mandibular joint and sterno-clavicular joint
may also be affected. As the disease progresses, the pain and swelling
of the joints increases. Swelling of the proximal inter-phalangeal joint
and muscular atrophy gives rise to spindled shape of the fingers.
Suggestive clinical features with consistent radiological changes, high
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and a positive rheumatoid factor test
usually help in diagnosing the disease.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

85

----- PAGE 98 -----
86

Osteoarthritis is a degenerative arthritis resulting from excessive
mechanical stress on a diseased or degenerated joint. It generally
involves big weight-bearing joints such as the knee, hip, spine but
in women it may involve the terminal joints of the fingers. The
patients are frequently obese. Pain in joints initially is intermittent
and appears after using the joints and is relieved by rest. With the
progression of the disease, movement in the affected joints becomes
increasingly limited. Crepitus are felt or heard in the affected joints.
Bony outgrowth may appear on the joint margins.

Gouty arthritis is a form of arthritis which is caused by
accumulation of uric acid crystals inside the joint which evokes an
acute inflammatory response. It is one of the most painful joint
diseases. Gouty arthritis usually strikes a single joint, most commonly
the big toe, however, it can also affect the ankles, knees, wrists,
fingers and elbows. Elderly males are more likely to develop gouty
arthritis than women.

Psoriatic arthritis is a prototype of a group of chronic non-specific
arthritis secondary to a primary immuno-inflammatory disease
elsewhere like skin psoriasis. The exact causes are not yet known,
but several genetic associations have been identified. Psoriatic arthritis
can develop at any stage. However, on average it tends to appear
about 10 years after the first signs of psoriasis. For the majority of
people this is between the ages of 30 and 50, but it can also affect
children. Men and women are equally affected by this condition and
the arthritis symptoms may occur before any skin involvement.

Of the many drugs and preparations for arthritis documented
in Ayurveda, Ajamoda powder is a simple and effective remedy. It
is used internally as well as on the affected joints of the patient in
the form of poultice.

Ajamoda (Apium leptophylium) (Pers.) F.V.M. ex
Benth.

Ajamoda consists of dried, aromatic fruits of Apium /eptophyllum, an
annual herb cultivated in the central and southern states of India.
It is collected by thrashing plants on a mat and dried in shade or
in drying sheds. Ajamoda is a well-known drug for rheumatism and
gout. Ajamoda is one of the chief ingredients in many formulations

----- PAGE 99 -----
useful in rheumatoid arthritis. Poultice of crushed fruits can also be
applied to painful joints along with oral use.

English name Slender celery, Wild celery

Latin name Apium leptophylium (Pers.) F.V.M. ex Benth
Family Apiaceae/Umbelliferae

Parts used Fruit

Terminal twigs of Ajamoda plant. Dried Ajamoda seeds.

Main chemical constituents?

Essential oil and fixed oil.

Quality standards?

As per the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, quality standards
determining the identity, purity and strength of Ajamoda fruits are
based on the following:

Foreign matter Not more than 5%
Total ash Not more than 14%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 14%
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 14%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3%
Volatile oil Not less than 2% v/w

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

87

----- PAGE 100 -----
88

Method of preparation

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

Clean the dried fruits of Ajamoda by removing the stalks, dust
and other foreign matters.

Grind in a pulverizer or in a mortar and pestle to make a fine
powder.

Filter through a fine sieve of mesh size 85.

Store in an air-tight container and consume within one year.

Dosage form

Aromatic, slightly bitter yellowish-brown powder giving a sensation
of warmth to the tongue.

Therapeutic properties”

Seeds have antiseptic, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic,
anthelmintic, and anti-spasmodic properties.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

The dose of the formulation for adults is 1 to 3 grams and for
children 125 to 500 mg, two or three times a day, with warm
water.

For local application as poultice, make a paste of the powdered
seeds in warm water and apply on the affected joint.

Indications and uses

(1)

(2)

(3)

For relief from joint pain in arthritis such as osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, gouty arthritis, and non-specific
arthritis.

It is useful in dyspepsia and colic with or without joint pain,
when taken with salt and warm water.

Local application of the paste or poultice of Ajamoda seeds is
recommended in painful joint condition.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

Ajamoda powder should not be used during pregnancy
and nursing mothers are advised to take it under medical
supervision.

The diuretic action of Ajamoda works by irritating the kidneys
and therefore should be used with caution in cases of renal
disorder.

----- PAGE 101 -----
(3) Where joints are without swelling or inflammation but pain is
dominantly present, massage with warm sesame oil can also
be done following fomentation with Ajamoda seed powder.

(4) Persons having arthritis should avoid eating sour and cold
items.

(5) Excessive use of the affected joints should be avoided.

(6) If pain does not subside within two to three days or joints
develop effusion of fluid, medical advice should be sought.

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India. Part 1 Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 2.

(2) Sharma PC, Yelne MB and Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants

Used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 475.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sri Brahmasankara Shastri. ed. Yogaratnakara. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Sanskrit Sansthan, 2005.

Mishra Pd. Sri Brahma Shankara. eds. Bhavaprakasha. Part I. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 2000.

Nadkarni KM. Indian materia medica. Vol. I. Mumbai: Popular
Prakashan, 2005.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanas: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 2004.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

89

----- PAGE 102 -----


----- PAGE 103 -----
spisde

Lodhra powder for leucorrhoea

Leucorrhoea is a whitish mucous discharge from the female genital
tract. The basic cause of this problem is overproduction of secretions
from the genital tract due to continuous irritation. Mostly there is a
change in the vaginal flora due to change in pH. Vaginal infection is
the most common cause, which usually results from poor hygiene.
Other causes of leucorrhoea are ill health, under-nourishment, marital
disharmony, psychological, and endocrine disturbances, genital tract
inflammation, any growth in the uterus and use of contraceptives.

Leucorrhoea without any underlying pathological condition is seen
in early pregnancy, sexual excitement and at puberty. This type of
leucorrhoea needs no medication but assurance as it may correct
itself though excessive secretions are sometimes enough to keep the
vulva moist and stain the under-clothing.

Differentiation of the underlying causes of leucorrhoea can be
grossly done according to the period of a woman's life.

(1) Leucorrhoea at an early age, up to puberty usually occurs due
to inflammation of the vagina.

(2) Post-puberty leucorrhoea up to marriage usually occurs from
poor genital hygiene, vaginal infection, ill health and anaemia.

(3) Post-childbirth leucorrhoea occurs mainly due to vaginal or
cervical tear. Leucorrhoea during the childbearing age after the
birth of the first child usually occurs due to cervical erosion
or chronic infective inflammation of the cervix and vagina,
use of contraceptives, excessive vaginal medication or use of
tampons.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

91

----- PAGE 104 -----
92

(4) Pre-menopausal leucorrhoea results from uterine polyps, fibroid,
carcinoma and prolapse. Post-menopausal leucorrhoea is mainly
the result of genital tract growth, uterine prolapse or senile
changes in the vagina.

Leucorrhoea without severe pathologic conditions can be
successfully managed with a simple remedy such as a powder made
from Lodhra bark and by following certain do’s and don’ts in the
Ayurvedic texts. These are:

(1) Nutritious diet, proper physical activity, mental relaxation,
regular bowel habits and local hygiene are the key to effective
management of leucorrhoea.

(2) Excessive intake of water, unripe fruits, sweet foods and drinks
made of sugar, sedentary lifestyle and indulgence in fear, anger
and grief are the negative factors for leucorrhoea patients and
should be avoided.

Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa Roxb.)

Lodhra powder is a single-ingredient powder made from dried
stem bark of an evergreen tree Symplocos racemosa Roxb., which
is 6 to 8.5 metres tall, found abundantly in the plains and lower
hills throughout India. The bark of Lodhra tree is used orally as
well as for topical application in the form of a vaginal douche. The
formulation is mentioned in classical Ayurvedic texts and in the
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India for use in conditions with increased
discharge like diarrhoea, dysentery, leucorrhoea, excessive menstrual
bleeding, haemorrhagic disorders, conjunctivitis, etc.t. The bark has
astringent, styptic, cooling, anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial
properties and is used in various Ayurvedic formulations meant for
the management of excessive vaginal discharge. Scientific studies
have shown that Lodhra bark has an inhibitory effect on the growth
of Micrococcus pyogenes var. aureus, E. coli, and enteric groups of
microorganisms?.

Composition

The formulation consists of finely powdered stem bark of Symplocos
tree.

English name Symplocos bark

Latin name Symplocos racemosa Roxb.
Family Symplocaceae

Part used Dried stem bark

----- PAGE 105 -----
93

Leafy shoot with flowers of Dried stem bark of Lodhra.
Lodhra tree.

Main chemical constituents?

Alkaloids (loturine, loturidine and colloturine) and red colouring matter.

Quality standards?

The bark of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. used for making medicinal
powder should adhere to the following physical constants.

Foreign matter Nil
Total ash Not more than 12%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive Not less than 9%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15%

Method of preparation

(1) Properly dried stem bark of Lodhra is cleaned first to remove
foreign matters and then powdered and sieved through 85 mesh.
Exposure to moisture should be avoided during preparation of
the powder and it should be kept in an air-tight container in
a dry place. Properly kept powder retains its potency for one
year.

(2) For preparing a decoction for vaginal wash, the stem-bark of
Lodhra is cleaned and coarsely powdered. The decoction is
prepared by boiling 20 to 30 grams of coarse powder of Lodhra
bark in 300 to 500 ml of water till 100 to 125 ml remains. The
decoction is filtered and the liquid thus obtained is used warm
for vaginal douche. Fresh decoction should be prepared for the
wash every day.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 106 -----
94

Dosage form

Grayish-brown powder for oral use and decoction for vaginal wash.

Therapeutic properties*

Lodhra bark has astringent, styptic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-
microbial properties.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

(3)

Lodhra powder is given orally in the dose of 3 to 5 gram, twice
a day, with rice water or warm water. Rice water is prepared
by soaking one tablespoon of raw rice in 50 ml plain water for
an hour and then taking out the liquid part. Alternatively, a
mixture of the given dose of powder with the equal amount of
honey can be swallowed with warm water or rice water.

Vaginal wash with the decoction of Lodhra bark should be
done daily for two to three weeks till local symptoms are
adequately controlled. Thereafter, only oral medication should
be continued.

Concomitant use of powder orally and decoction for vaginal
wash helps in speedy and better control of leucorrhoea.

Indications and uses®

(1)
(2)

Leucorrhoea.

Menorrhagia or metrorrhagia.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

It is advisable to diagnose the cause of leucorrhoea before
starting treatment with Lodhra.

Overdose and empty-stomach consumption of Lodhra powder
may cause abdominal heaviness, nausea and constipation in
individuals prone to gastro-intestinal upsets. These symptoms
can be avoided by taking light or liquid diet.

Decoction of Lodhra bark for vaginal wash should be prepared
fresh and should not be left uncovered for a long time. It is better
to use the decoction within an hour or so of preparation.

A smaller dose of Lodhra powder may be taken, if menstrual
flow gets diminished.

----- PAGE 107 -----
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Excessive use of spicy and sour food items, curd and yoghurt
should be avoided during medication.

Mental stress aggravates the symptoms of leucorrhoea and
hence an attempt should be made to remain stress-free, relaxed
and physically active.

If significant control of symptoms is not achieved in three to
four weeks, medical opinion must be sought.

No adverse effect of Lodhra powder is reported when taken in
recommended doses.

It is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking this
medication. However, Lodhra powder should not be used for a
long duration during pregnancy.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 83.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2002. p. 166.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 82.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 164, 166.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 165.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

Pandey G.S., ed. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Sri Bhavamishra
Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999.

Chopra RN, Chopra IC, Varma BS. Supplement to glossary of Indian
medicinal plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1992.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

95

----- PAGE 108 -----
96

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Bhattacharjee SK. Handbook of medicinal plants. Jaipur, Pointer
Publishers, 1998.

Chopra RN, Chopra Nayar, SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal
plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1986.

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. India medicinal plants. Vol. II. Allahabad: L.M.
Basu, 1989.

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants. Vol.
III. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1993.

----- PAGE 109 -----
aA gle

Dhattura paste for lice infestation

Pediculosis is an infestation of the skin, hair or genital region caused
by small insects called lice, which live directly on the body or in
garments. The lice are small wingless parasites with sucking mouth
parts that feed on human blood and lay their eggs on body hairs
or in clothing. Lice infestation itself is not dangerous but a serious
public health problem because some lice can carry microorganisms
that cause diseases like relapsing fever, trench fever and epidemic
typhus.

Lice infestation usually occurs due to poor upkeep and hygiene
of hairy body parts for want of adequate facilities for bathing and
washing of clothes, particularly undergarments. Any individual could
get lice infestation; children with long hair are however more prone
to suffer.

The most common site for lice infestation is the scalp, and it
is transmitted from one person to another by close contact and by
sharing of combs and hair brushes. Head lice infestation in epidemic
form is common in school-going children. Adult lice can be seen on
the patient’s scalp close to the base of hairs and around the ears and
these may spread from the scalp to the eyebrows, eyelashes, and
beard in adults, although they are more often limited to the scalp
in children. Grayish-white eggs called nits may also be visible along
with lice. Nits are premature forms of lice, which take 3 to 14 days to
hatch. Infestations of body lice and pubic lice are seen in individuals
who maintain poor personal hygiene, wear the same clothes and vests
continuously without laundering, do not bathe regularly and share
bedding or clothes or towels with infected persons.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

97

----- PAGE 110 -----
98

The common symptom of lice infestation irrespective of body
location is itching, usually with injury to the skin caused by scratching
or scraping. The itching may be intense, and may be followed by
bacterial infection of skin that has been scratched open. The itching
results from an allergic reaction to a toxin that is present in the
saliva of the lice. Diffuse skin eruption or inflammation can result
with repeated bites of lice.

Another common complication in head lice infestation is swelling
or inflammation of the neck glands. Patients with body lice often have
intense itching with deep scratches around the folds of shoulders,
flanks or neck. The bites first appear as small red pimples but may
cause a generalized skin rash. If the infestation is not treated, the
patient may develop complications that include headache, fever, and
bacterial infection with scarring. Pubic lice may sometimes produce
small bluish spots on the patient’s trunk or thighs.

Prevention of lice infestation and re-infestation is tedious
requiring avoidance of close contacts with infected persons, sharing
of garments, towels, etc. and maintenance of adequate body hygiene
is more important than the treatment. Local application of the paste
of certain medicinal plants and medicated oils is in practice in India
for the treatment of lice infestation.

Some commonly used formulations are documented in the
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia and Ayurvedic Formulary of India. Dhattura
paste is one such formulation that is widely used in rural areas
because of its effectiveness in killing lice.

Dhattura (Datura mete! Linn.)

Dhattura is a popular medicinal plant of India documented for its
anti-lice efficacy in the classical Ayurvedic literature. Bhavamishra*
describes the use of Dhattura seeds for the treatment of Yuka
(lice) and Liksha (nits). The plant is enlisted in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India? providing pharmacopoeial standards and
uses of the whole plant and seeds.

Dhattura plant grows as a weed throughout India. The plant is an
erect and succulent annual herb or shrub about one metre in height
with often purplish branches and triangular ovate leaves, bell-shaped
flowers having purplish colour outside and white inside and round,
thorny fruits. Dhattura seeds are light brown to yellowish brown in
colour, odourless, kidney shaped, about 0.6 centimetre in length
and 0.4 centimetre in width, compressed, flattened and thickened
towards the curved edge with a bitter and acrid taste.

----- PAGE 111 -----
99

Composition

The paste for application over lice-infested parts consists of Dhattura
seeds.

English name Thorn apple

Latin name Datura mete! Linn.
Family Solanaceae
Part used Leaf and seeds

ba.

Cut-opened fruit
of Dhattura.

Leafy shoot of Dhattura with flower and Dry seeds of Dhattura.
thorny fruit.

Main chemical constituents?

Tropane alkaloids such as hyoscyamine, atropine, scopolamine, etc.
and fixed oil.

Quality standards?

Quality of Dhattura is estimated on the basis of the following physical
constants.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 112 -----
100

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 6%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive Not less than 5%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7%

Method of preparation

(1) Fresh mature leaves of Dhattura are plucked and ground in
a mortar or grinder with a little water. The juice is expressed
from the ground leaves for application the same day.

(2) For making a paste, dry seeds are first finely powdered and
then mixed properly with an equal amount of water or mustard
oil.

(3) Adding mustard oil to the leaf juice or seed powder enhances
the anti-lice effect of Dhattura.

(4) The body-part, where juice or paste of Dhattura is to be applied
should not be wet and it is better to use the medicament at
night to derive optimal effect.

Dosage form

Greenish juice of leaves and yellowish-brown oily powder of seeds.

Therapeutic properties*

Dhattura is known to have strong nematicidal, analgesic, anti-viral,
anthelmintic and anti-spasmodic properties by virtue of which it is
useful in treating lice infestation and associated symptoms.

Dose and mode of administration

(1) The amount of leaf juice or seed powder required for application
depends upon the size of the affected area. Usually 25 to 30
millilitres of leaf juice or paste of seeds, 5 to 10 grams, made
with 15 to 20 millilitres of water or mustard oil is required for
a single application on the scalp. The paste of powdered seeds
is preferred over leaf juice in case lice infestation is confined
to the head.

(2) Fresh juice of Dhattura leaves or paste of seeds is to be applied
uniformly over the affected area with hands and left for at
least three to four hours and then washed with plain water.

----- PAGE 113 -----
(3)

(4)

(5)

The juice or paste should be applied against the direction of
hairs to provide maximum exposure to the insects. The longer
the medicine remains in contact with the body, the better
the results seen. Due care must be taken to ensure that the
medicine is applied close to the base of the hair on the scalp
and other parts of the body.

Washing the hair with shampoo before or after applying
the medicine should be avoided as it dilutes the medicine’s
effectiveness.

Dead lice or nits should be removed manually or with a comb
after the paste or juice has dried.

Application of Dhattura leaf juice or paste of seed powder
should be done consecutively for three to five days till all lice
and nits are killed and removed. Further hair wash should be
done at least two days after the completion of the course of
treatment.

Indications and uses

Lice infestation with or without nits in the head, pubic and other
regions of the body and associated symptoms of itching and skin
rash is the main indication for the use of Dhattura paste or juice on
affected parts.

Precautions and safety aspects

It is important to observe the following precautions:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Dhattura is a poisonous medicinal plant and hence it should
be used with care.

While applying or removing leaf juice or seed paste of Dhattura,
due care must be taken that the medicine does not get into
the eyes, mouth, ear, nose and other natural openings of the
human body.

Remove the dead or partially inactivated lice with a narrow-
tooth comb or manually.

Mixing Dhattura medication with other drugs with similar action
is not desirable as drug to drug interaction is unknown.

The most important step in treating head lice infestation is
to treat the person and other family members simultaneously
with medication to kill the lice and prevent re-infestation and
cross-infection.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

101

----- PAGE 114 -----
102

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Wash clothes and bedsheets used by the infested person two
days before the treatment is started.

The lice-infested person should wear clean clothing after each
application of Dhattura medication.

In case a few live lice are found after two to three applications
of medicine, but are moving more slowly than before, there
is no need for further treatment. Comb the hair to remove
such lice and wait for a day or two for the medicine to kill the
remaining lice on the head.

Whereas no dead lice are seen and lice are as active as before,
the medicine may not be working. In such a situation seek
medical opinion and follow doctor’s advice.

(10) After a course of 2-3 days treatment, check the hair bases and

comb hair with a nit-comb to remove nits and lice on alternate
days. Continue to check for 2 to 3 weeks until it is assured
that all lice and nits are killed and removed.

(11) To kill lice and nits present in the clothing and bed linen that

was used during two days before treatment, wash them using
hot water with not less than 130°F temperature or dry laundry
using high heat for at least 20 minutes. Similarly, combs and
hair brushes should be dipped in hot water and washed with
soap.

(12) Clothes such as coat, scarf, cap, etc. should be dry cleaned.

(13) In order to prevent re-infestation, all such activities should

be avoided that are likely to spread lice such as head-to-head
contact during play and at home; sharing of clothes and towels,
hair brushes and combs; and lying on beds, sofas, couches,
pillows, carpets, or stuffed animals that have recently been in
contact with an infested person.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr GS Pandey.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999. p. 317-320.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 43-44.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 44.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 2. p New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. 203.

----- PAGE 115 -----
Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Division of Parasitic Diseases. Web site http://
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dpd/index.htm (accessed 21 February 2010).

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

Nadkarni AK. Dr K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bombay:
Popular Book Depot, 1976.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 1996.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2004.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

103

----- PAGE 116 -----


----- PAGE 117 -----
18 de

Ashvagandha powder for malaise

Malaise is a symptom of psychosomatic origin characterized by a
general feeling of illness or lack of well-being and may be accompanied
by discomfort, fatigue, lassitude, restlessness, loss of strength and
lack of interest and drive. This symptom is usually a vague sense of
ill-being and exhaustion seen in patients suffering from any significant
febrile infection and metabolic or chronic disease.

The mechanism of development of malaise is not fully understood
and probably it may result from excessive presence of reactive
molecules called free radicals. These molecules cause oxidant injury
to the body cells and inadequate supply of antioxidants in the diet
lead to a decline in the levels of antioxidants with increasing age.
The onset of malaise may be sudden or staggering depending upon
the nature of the underlying disease.

Malaise associated with other symptoms indicates significant
illness. The following is the list of conditions that mostly cause
malaise:

(1) Acute infectious diseases like pneumonia, influenza, and viral
fever.

(2) Chronic infectious diseases like AIDS, parasitic disease, hepatitis
and tuberculosis.

(3) Organ-specific chronic diseases like heart failure, obstructive
lung disease, kidney failure and liver disease.

(4) Autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, and
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

105

----- PAGE 118 -----
106

(5) Endocrinal disorders like diabetes mellitus, dysfunction of the
thyroid and adrenal glands.

(6) Various cancers like leukaemia, lymphoma, colon cancer and
solid malignant tumours.

(7) Severe anaemia.
(8) Mental illness such as depression.

(9) Medication with anti-convulsant, anti-histaminic, psychotropic
and beta-blocker drugs and multi-drug treatments.

Certain herbal medicines called Rasayana in Ayurveda are proven
to have excellent anti-oxidant, immune-enhancer, anti-infective,
anti-degenerative and anti-stress effects. Ashvagandha is one such
medicinal herb, which helps in many ways in the restoration and
maintenance of health and vitality and to reinforce the psychosomatic
mechanisms involved in preventing and treating malaise of varied
origin.

Ashvagandha Powder (Withania somnifera Dunal.)

Ashvagandha is a perennial shrub, found in waste lands, cultivated
fields and open grounds throughout India. It is widely cultivated
in India. The roots are collected in winter, washed and cut into
short pieces. Ashvagandha is one of the most commonly used
medicinal plants in Indian medicine for a varied range of physical
and psychological ailments. It finds mention in almost all classical
compendia of Indian medicine, particularly in the context of
rejuvenation therapy. The plant is best known for its tonic, anti-
stress and vigour- and vitality-enhancing properties. The root of
the plant is used as such in powder form or in combination with
other medicinal plants in various kinds of formulations mentioned
in official formularies and pharmacopoeia of India. A lot of scientific
work has been done on Ashvagandha proving it to be useful as an
immunomodulator, antioxidant and adaptogenic’. Due to these very
beneficial effects, Ashvagandha is preferred for adjuvant use in the
management of various psychosomatic, infectious and drug-induced
ailments and nutritional deficiency states with malaise as a main
symptom. Ashvagandha improves tissue vitality, physical and mental
endurance and neuromuscular strength.

----- PAGE 119 -----
107

Composition

Ashvagandha powder consists of dried mature roots of Withania
somnifera Dunal.

English name Winter cherry

Latin name Withania somnifera Dunal.
Family Solanaceae

Parts used Root

Ashvagandha plant with unripe and Dry Ashvagandha roots.
ripe fruits.

Main chemical constituents”

Alkaloids and withanolides.

Quality standards?

Identity, purity and strength of Ashvagandha root are determined
on the following basis:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1%
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 15%
Assay of total alkaloids Not less than 0.2%

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 120 -----
108

Method of preparation

(1)

(2)

(3)

Dried roots of Ashvagandha are cleaned and ground into fine
powder.

The powder is filtered through mesh size 85 to remove fibers
and coarse particles and then kept in an airtight jar or polythene
bag away from moisture.

The potency of well-preserved Ashvagandha powder is retained
for one year.

Dosage form

Cream-coloured fine powder.

Therapeutic properties*

(1)

(2)

Ashvagandha is a tonic, anti-stress, adaptogenic, somniferous,
stimulant, vitalizer, aphrodisiac and immuno-enhancer.

Pharmacological studies have confirmed its immuno-modulatory,
cyto-protective, anti-oxidant and anti-ageing properties.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

The dose for adults of Ashvgandha powder is three to six grams
and for children the dose is 500 mg to 1g to be taken twice a
day, with honey or warm milk before meals. It is advisable to
first mix Ashvagandha powder properly with an equal amount
of honey and the mixture to be swallowed with sips of milk.

Alternatively, boil a single dose of Ashvagandha powder in four
times milk and eight times water till milk remains. If needed,
add sugar to the medicated milk and drink it lukewarm. Every
dose of Ashvagandha powder has to be freshly boiled with milk
and water.

Indications and uses

Ashvagandha powder is useful in malaise, debility, impotence,
neurasthenia, mental stress and fatigue.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

Malaise persisting for more than a week must be properly
investigated and the underlying cause should be ascertained
before starting Ashvagandha.

----- PAGE 121 -----
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Concomitant use of alcohol and psychotropic drugs should
preferably be avoided while using Ashvagandha powder.

Individuals with hot constitution should take a smaller dose of
Ashvagandha and should avoid excessive consumption of hot
beverages, sour, spicy and stimulant foods.

Ashvagandha powder is generally considered as safe. Used in
a dose of up to 9 grams per day for four weeks, it is reported
to be well-tolerated.

Larger doses of Ashvagandha may possess abortifacient
property and thus contraindicated during pregnancy. Even
normal dose should be given to pregnant women under medical
supervision.

It is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking
Ashvagandha.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 91-92.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol.1. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 16.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part1 Vol.1. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p 15.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 89, 91-92.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science
and Industrial Research, 1986.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia: a joint publication of Regional Research
Laboratory, Jammu Tawi. Vol. I. Mumbai: Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, 1998.

Warrier, PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. V. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: India Springer (India)
Pvt. Ltd., 2007.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

109

----- PAGE 122 -----
110

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 3. Allahabad: LM
Basu, 1988.

Panda S, Kar A. Evidence for free radical scavenging activity of
Ashvagandha root powder in mice. Indian J. Physiol. Pharmacol.
41(4), 1997.

Puri HS. Rasayana: Ayurvedic herbs for longevity and rejuvenation.
London: Taylor & Francis. 2003.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati,1996.

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.

Singh RH, et al. Depressive illness: a therapeutic evaluation with herbal
drugs. J. Res. Edu. Ayur. Siddha. 11, 1990.

----- PAGE 123 -----
ab 19 de

Shatpushpa powder for painful menstruation

Painful menstruation, also known as dysmenorrhoea, is a common
problem of women in the reproductive age group. There are several
causes attributed to this condition; such as congenital malformation
of the genital tract, mechanical obstruction, infection, vascular
congestion and sometimes psychogenic causes. The nature, severity
and time of pain vary from individual to individual depending on the
underlying cause, tolerance capacity and the individual’s perception
of the condition.

Pain may occur before, during and after menstrual flow.
Sometimes, it may occur between the menstrual periods. The pain
can be dull and continuous with a sense of heaviness in the pelvic
region and not infrequently intermittent and spasmodic. Anxiety, stress
and unsatisfied sexual stimulation contribute significantly to induce
or aggravate dysmenorrhoea without any structural or pathologic
cause.

Primary dysmenorrhoea is present from the time of menarche,
i.e. from the onset of menstruation and is also termed as congenital
or essential, while secondary dysmenorrhoea results from congestive,
inflammatory, obstructive and functional conditions of the genital
tract.

Painful menstruation without pathologic conditions can be
successfully managed with simple remedies such as powder of
Shatpushpa and observing certain do’s and don’ts:

(1) Food intake around menstual period should be light, soft and
easy to digest. Heavy meals, overeating and dry, spicy, and cold
foods should be avoided. If the appetite is weak, switch over to
liquid or semi-solid diet.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

111

----- PAGE 124 -----
112

(2) Women should maintain a relaxed state of mind before and
during menstrual days keeping away aggression, anger,
frustration and irritation. Proper sleep and deep breathing with
relaxed mind help to improve tolerance and alleviate pain.

(3) Suppression of defecation and urination urges should be
avoided.

(4) Sipping of warm water and hot water fomentation over lower
abdomen give relief from pain.

(5) Excessive physical or mental exertion, dietary irregularities
and mental irritation should be avoided and due care should
be taken to have proper meals and rest.

Shatpushpa (Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.)

Tribal communities use dried ripe fruits of Shatpushpa in the
form of a decoction or powder or boiled with milk alone or mixed
with other herbs for female health problems resulting during
menstruation and after child birth. The formulation is listed with
given indications in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of Indiat. The
plant is cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions and its fruits
are collected near the end of winter, dried in the shade and kept in
dry conditions. Properly preserved fruits are dark brown and rich
in essential oil with a faintly aromatic odour, warm and slightly
sharp taste resembling that of caraway. Optimal potency of the
herb and its powder lasts for about one year.

Composition

The formulation consists of powdered dry fruits of Shatpushpa.

English name Dill
Latin name Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.
Family Apiaceae

Part used Dried ripe fruits

----- PAGE 125 -----
113

Unripe Shatpushpa fruits.

Flowering Shatpushpa plant. Dried, ripe Shatpushpa fruits.

Main chemical constituents?

Essential oil, aromatic glycosides, monoterpenoid, ketodiols.

Quality standards?

Foreign matter Not more than 5%
Total ash Not more than 14%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1.5%
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15%
Volatile oil Not less than 3%

Method of preparation

(1) Clean Shatpushpa dried fruits by removing dust and other
foreign particles.

(2) Grind fruits in a dry grinder or pulverizer.
(3) Filter the powder through sieve with mesh size 85.

(4) Store the powder in an air-tight glass or food-grade plastic
container and store in a dry, cool place away from direct
sunlight.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 126 -----
114

(5) Soft decoction or infusion is prepared by boiling 2 to 3 grams
of Shatpushpa in 50 ml of water until half of it remains. Or,
soak Shatpushpa fruits in 25 to 30 ml of hot water for half an
hour and then filter the contents to obtain infusion.

Dosage form

Brownish powder and decoction is light brown liquid.

Therapeutic properties*

The preparation has anti-spasmodic, stomachic, carminative, anti-
flatulent and emmenagogue properties.

Dose and mode of administration

Two to three grams of the powder is to be taken twice a day with
warm water, preferably after meals. The powder can be mixed with
an equal amount of honey and swallowed with warm water or milk.
Or, 25 to 30 ml of decoction or infusion can be taken twice or thrice
daily. For continous pain or heaviness use of 2-3 teaspoonsful (10-
15 ml) infusion is recommended at hourly intervals.

Indications and uses
(1) Painful menstruation with or without abdominal symptoms.

(2) Shatpushpa is also indicated for improving menstrual flow and
lactation after delivery.

(3) Itis also used as a household remedy for first-hand management
of common ailments like diarrhoea, flatulence, indigestion, acute
abdominal pain and fever?.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) Hot (pungent) spicy and sour food items should be avoided
during menstruation and medication with Shatpushpa powder.
In summer either the dose of Shatpushpa should be reduced or
should be taken with some cooling, soft and soothing liquid.

(2) Use of Shatpushpa may be discontinued if menstrual blood flow
increases and symptoms of giddiness, heat, burning, excessive
thirst and dryness appear. These symptoms usually appear in
women with hot body-mind constitution, i.e. Paittik constitution
and can be negated by consuming soft, lubricating, soothing,
semisolid and juicy food items.

----- PAGE 127 -----
(3) Toxic or adverse effects of Shatpushpa are not reported in the
literature.

(4) Deep-fried, oily foods that may cause abdominal heaviness,
indigestion and constipation, etc. should be avoided.

(5) Cold water bath, dry massage, night awakening, irregularity in
sleep, excessive walking, excessive coitus, strenuous exertion
and mental stress, etc. should be avoided.

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999. p. 153-154.

(2) Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
8. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2007. p. 360.

(3) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999. p. 154.

(4) Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
8. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2007. p. 357.

(5) Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr G.S. Pandey.

Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999. p. 35-36.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

National Academy of Ayurveda. Medicinal plants used in Ayurveda.
New Delhi: INAA, 1998.

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr GS Pandey.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

115

----- PAGE 128 -----


----- PAGE 129 -----
ab 20 de

Palasha powder for parasitic infestation

Parasites are organisms that live on or inside humans or other
organisms from which they obtain nutrients to survive. There can be
many different types of parasite worms living in human bodies. Some
are microscopic while others can be seen quite easily. These parasites
or their eggs can be found in the environment, in the air we breathe,
in the water we drink, or in the food we eat. These parasites may be
pathogenic or non-pathogenic.

Pathogenic parasites cause harm because they consume the
nutrient of the host, invade body tissues and cells, and produce toxic
waste, which makes people sick. Moreover, most parasites also require
a host to complete their life cycle. One third of the world’s population
is infected with one or more species of intestinal parasites - easy
victims being children. These infections impair children’s growth and
development. Studies have shown an association between parasitic
infection and under-nutrition, iron deficiency anaemia, stunted growth,
poor school attendance and poor performance in cognition tests.

Modes of transmission

People can become infested by intestinal parasites through:

(1) Walking barefoot on soil contaminated with faeces of humans,
dogs, cats, etc.

(2) Eating raw or undercooked pork, beef or fish that are
infected.

(3) Eating contaminated raw food, fruits and vegetables.

(4) Eating food prepared by infected handlers.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

117

ay

----- PAGE 130 -----
118

(5) Drinking contaminated water.
(6) Poor hygiene or sanitation.

(7) Contact with infected persons (sexual contact, kissing, sharing
drinks, shaking hands, or sharing toys).

(8) Inhaling dust that contains parasitic eggs or cysts.

(9) Playing with or picking up pet litter contaminated with parasitic
eggs or cysts.

Portal of entry into the body

In the case of internal parasites, the most common portal of invasion
is through the mouth. This is the entrance for the intestinal protozoa
and helminths such as round warm, pin worm, etc. in the fully
embryonated egg stage. A few important infestations, viz. species of
hookworms, strongyloides and dog tape worm enter the body from
the soil via the skin route.

The symptoms and signs of intestinal parasitic infestation can
be variable and include: dyspepsia, diarrhoea, weight loss, fatigue,
abdominal cramping and pain, constipation, nausea, vomiting, loss
of appetite, irritable bowel syndrome, anaemia, joint and muscle
aches, fever, rash, frequent colds and influenza, cough, itching anus,
blood and/or mucus in the stools or foul smelling stools and visible
worms in the stools, itching on the genitals and grinding of teeth in
sleep. Sometimes these parasitic infestations can be life-threatening
in people with severe impairment of immune function.

Intestinal parasitic infestation
The most common intestinal parasites to infect humans are:
(1) Protozoa: Giardia intestinalis (Giardia lamblia), Entamoeba
histolytica, cryptosporidium species, etc.
(2) Intestinal helminths: roundworm, hookworm, pinworm,

threadworm, whipworm, and tapeworm.

These parasitic infestations, particularly roundworm, threadworm
and giardia can be treated with a single herbal drug named Palasha
beeja powder along with maintenance of hygiene and following
certain do’s and don'ts:

----- PAGE 131 -----
(i) Persons suffering from worm infestation should avoid excess
intake of sweet and sour foods, milk, leafy vegetables, and
non-vegetarian diet.

(ii) Suppression of natural urges of vomiting, passing stools and
day-sleeping should be avoided.

(iii) Foods made up of bitter, pungent and astringent items, honey,
alcoholic beverages, garlic, chenopodium leaves, sesame oil
and mustard oil are beneficial.

(iv) Keeping digestive fire proper is essentially required to prevent
the development of intestinal medium favourable for parasites
and worms, for which healthy eating habits and timely meals
are important.

Palasha [Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze]

Palasha is a deciduous, medium-sized tree with somewhat crooked
trunk and irregular branches, found in the dry deciduous forests,
open grasslands and scrub forests of tropical zones. Its mature
fruits are collected before the rains commence, either from the
tree or off the ground, dried in the shade and kept dry. Properly
preserved seeds are flat, kidney-shaped, dark reddish brown, thin,
glossy; and rich in fixed oil with a faint odour and slightly acrid and
bitter taste. Optimal potency of the seed and its powder lasts for
about four months. It is used as a remedy for common ailments
like worm infestation, skin diseases, etc. The formulation is listed
with given indications in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India’.
Tribal communities make use of fresh or dried seeds of Palasha
in the form of a decoction or powder and mixed with other herbs
for the management of parasitic worm infestation?.

Composition

The formulation consists of dried powdered seeds of Palasha.

English name Flame of forest, Bengal kino tree,
Bastard teak

Latin name Butea monosperma Lam. Kuntze.

Family Fabaceae

Parts used Seeds

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

119

----- PAGE 132 -----
120

Palasha flowers.

—

Palasha seed.

Palasha tree in bloom.

Main chemical constituents?

Fixed oil (yellow, tasteless), enzymes (proteolytic and lypolytic)
and small quantities of resins and alkaloids, glucose, butrin, and
palasonin.

Quality standards*

The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Palasha seeds based on the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 1%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 0.5%
Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 9%
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 25%
Hexane soluble extractive Not less than 15 %

Method of preparation

(1) Clean the dried seeds of Palasha, and grind them in grinder
or pulverizer.

----- PAGE 133 -----
121

(2) Filter the powder through sieve mesh size 85.

(3) Keep the powder in an air-tight, dry container of glass or food-
grade plastic and store in a dry, cool place away from direct
sunlight.

(4) It is always good to use fresh Palasha seed powder for better
results. However, it can be used up to four months after
preparation.

Dosage form

Yellowish-brown powder.

Therapeutic properties?

Palasha seeds have anthelmintic, purgative, rubefacient and tonic
properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The dose for adults is 2 to 3 grams twice a day. Children may be
given 500 mg to 1 gram of the drug twice a day. This dosage form
may be given on an empty stomach for 5 to 7 days continuously with
honey or jaggery, rice water, butter-milk or warm water. It may also
be given in a single dose up to a maximum of six grams in adults
and three grams to children on an empty stomach.

Indications and uses

The Palasha seeds are internally administered as anthelmintic® © mainly
for roundworm’ and threadworm® ® and also for giardiasis*°.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) No side or toxic effects are reported in literature with
recommended dose of Palasha seed.

(2) Women desirous to conceive and pregnant women should not
use this drug.

(3) As Palasha seed powder is bitter, astringent and hot in potency,
large doses should be avoided. Large doses may cause nausea,
vomiting and abdominal colic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 134 -----
122

(4)

(5)

A high dose can occasionally cause nephrotoxicity and anaemia.
Liver, lungs and spleen congestion can also occur with a very
high dose.

The seed suspension has shown teratogenic effects in rats®;
therefore in pregnant women it should not be used. However,
short term use of this medication may be safe for the baby if
a nursing mother is taking it.

The following measures can help prevent parasitic infestation:

(1)
(2)

(3)

Washing hands before eating and after using the toilet.

Wearing gloves when gardening or working with soil or sand
because soil can be contaminated with eggs or cysts of
Parasites.

Do not allow children to be licked or kissed by pets that are
not de-wormed regularly.

(4) Wash fresh vegetables and fruits thoroughly.
(5) Avoid eating raw meat, which may contain Giardia lamblia.
(6) Very sweet food items should not be taken in excess and
regularly.
References
(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 82-83.

Joshi P. Herbal drugs used in guinea worm disease by tribals of
Southern Rajasthan (India). International Journal of Pharmacognosy.
1991; 29(1): 33-38.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 338.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 83.

Prashant D, Asha MK, Amit A, Padmaja R. Short report: anthelmintic
activity of butea monosperma. Fitoterapia. 2001; 72(4): 421-422.

Jain JP, Nauvi SMA. A clinical trial of palasha (butea monosperma
(Lam.) Kuntze. Syn. B. Frondosa Koen. ex Roxb.) in worm infestations
(Krimi Roga). J. Res. Ay. Sid. 1986; 7(1-2): 13-22.

Sharma BP, Ojha D. The management of Gandupada Krimi Ascaris
lumbricoides with indigenous drugs. Aryavaidyan, 1992; Vol.5 (3):
170-2.

Dixit SK, Lalit OD. Hymenolepis in childhood and its treatment by
indigenous drugs. Indian J. Med. Res. 1970; 58: 616-21.

----- PAGE 135 -----
(9)

Agarwal AK et al. Management of giardiasis by an immuno-modulatory
herbal drug Pippali Rasayana, 1. Ethnopharmacology. 1994; 1.44 (3):
143-16.

(10) Kaleysaraj R, Kurup PA. Anthelmintic activity, toxicity & other

pharmacological properties of Panasonin, the active principle of Butea
frondosa seeds & its piperazine salt. Indian J. Med. Res. 1968; 56(12):
1818-25.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. I.
New Delhi: 1976.

The wealth of India - raw materials. New Delhi: Publications and
Information Directorate, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
1982.

Chunekar K.C. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Jawaharlal SC, Sabir M. Modified method for isolation of palasonin -
the anthelmintic principle of Butea frondosa seeds. Indian J. Pharma.
Sciences. 40, 1978.

Sharma PV. Drayagunvijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati
Academy, 1981.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

123

----- PAGE 136 -----


----- PAGE 137 -----
ab a de

Surana powder for piles (haemorrhoids)

Piles (haemorrhoids) are dilated veins within the anal canal. The
precipitating causes of haemorrhoidal disease are chronic constipation,
strain during defecation, sedentary life, pregnancy, chronic liver
disease and abnormal bowel habits due to long-term use of low-fibre
and fat-rich diet.

Piles may be internal, that is, above the internal anal sphincter or
external, that is, below the sphincter; dry or with bleeding. The main
and earliest symptom of piles is painless bleeding which is usually
after and some times before defecation. Pain is not characteristic of
haemorrhoids unless it is associated with infection, thrombosis or
fissure-in-ano. Mucus discharge is a particular symptom of prolapsed
haemorrhoids and anal itching may follow the discharge. Anaemia is
seen in long-standing cases due to persistent and profuse bleeding.

Though piles are the most common cause of painless rectal
bleeding, it is important that rectal and anal cancer must be excluded
by proper physical examination and investigation before the condition
is treated as piles.

In Ayurveda, various drugs are mentioned to treat piles. Of these,
Surana powder is a simple herbal medicine which is frequently used
for treating piles following certain life-style changes. The following
do’s & don’ts are to be observed by patients with haemorrhoids:

(1) Avoid heavy foods, untimely meals and food items that cause
constipation and indigestion.

(2) Old rice, barley, garlic, black pepper, lemon, gooseberry, and
ginger and judicious use of medicinal beverages are beneficial
in the patients with piles.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

125

----- PAGE 138 -----
126

(3) Regular use of goat’s milk and yoghurt is beneficial.

(4) Avoid overeating and dry and spicy foods.

Surana [Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.)
Blume.]

Surana powder is a simple formulation made from dried corm of
Amorphophallus campanulatus, a stout, herbaceous plant cultivated
throughout the plains of India. This medicinal plant is named so
owing to its ability to combat diseases like piles. Surana is mentioned
in Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia as well as the Ayurvedic Formulary of
India*. Its daily use is considered beneficial in relieving piles.

Composition

Surana powder consists of finely powdered dried corm of Surana
for oral use.

English name Elephant foot

Latin name Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Blume.
Family Araceae

Part used Corm or rhizome

Unripe corm with roots.

Full Surana plant. Mature corm.

----- PAGE 139 -----
127

Main chemical constituents?

Betulinic acid, beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, lupeol, glucose, galactose,
rhamnose and xylose.

Quality standards?

Identity, purity and potency of Surana corm for its oral use are
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants.

Foreign matter Not more than 1%
Total ash Not more than 8%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 2%

Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 3%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 9%

Method of preparation

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Cut Surana corm into small pieces and dry them in sunlight
or oven.

Take 50 grams of dried pieces of Surana. Dry them further to
remove moisture for easy powdering.

Grind the corms in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.

Filter the powder through 85 size mesh to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.

Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight food-grade plastic or
glass container.

Dosage form

Creamish-grey fine powder.

Therapeutic properties*

Surana has carminative, appetizing, digestive and analgesic
properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The dose of Surana powder for adults is 2 to 10 grams and for
children 1 to 5 grams, twice daily to be swallowed with water.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 140 -----
128

Indications and uses

Surana is useful in piles, liver disorders, abdominal pain and
constipation.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) Raw Surana corm may cause itching which can be relieved by
its antidotes such as lemon and tamarind taken orally.

(2) Hot, spicy, fried, sour, pungent, fat-rich and heavy foods should
be avoided during medication with Surana.

(3) The patient should take plenty of water, properly cooked green
vegetables, fruits and milk in daily diet.

(4) Straining during defecation should always be avoided.

(5) Diet should be soft and digestible and not causing consti-
pation.

(6) Itis not advisable for pregnant and nursing mothers to consume
Surana.

References
(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic

(2)

(3)

(4)

pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 205-206.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homeopathy, 2000. p. 341.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 206.

Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 401.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Warrier PK et. al. Ed. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. I. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Sanskrit Bharati Academy, 1978,

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Vishvabharati and Orient Publishers and Distributors, 1996.

----- PAGE 141 -----
2 22 :

Gandhaka ointment for scabies

Scabies is a contagious skin disease caused by infestation with itch
mite (Sarcoptes scabiei). It spreads by skin-to-skin contact with a
person who carries the mite. Less commonly, scabies can spread
through sharing of clothes and bedding. Scabies is most common
among household members and sexual partners of affected individuals.
It is also common in congested areas such as hostels, dormitories,
army camps, prisons, nursing homes and hospitals. In people with
compromised immune systems and malnutrition, scabies can be
an extensive disease of skin thickening and a scaly rash; and the
syndrome called crusted scabies or Norwegian scabies.

The scabies mite cannot live more than three days without a
human host, but it can survive up to a month when living on a human
being and lays eggs on human skin, which hatch and grow into adult
mites. The initial phase of infestation is asymptomatic. Subsequently,
the disease manifests with intense itching especially at night or while
taking a hot water bath. The itching is due to allergic reaction to the
mites and their excreta or deposit in skin burrows. The skin lesion
includes red rashes and raised spots. Due to scratching the skin may
become crusty or scaly as the infection progresses. Early scabies
rash may show little red bumps like hives, pimples and tiny bites.
Scabies usually begins in the body’s folds and crevices such as arm
pits, around the nipples of women, on the penis of men, belt line,
between the fingers, buttocks, elbows, inner thighs, wrist, and skin
under rings, bracelets or watch bands. Except in infants and small
children; the face, scalp, neck, palm and scalp are usually spared.
The child may also have irritability, sleeplessness and tiredness due
to itching. Secondary bacterial infection may occur over the scabies
lesions and in many cases children are treated because of infected

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

129

----- PAGE 142 -----
130

skin lesions rather than for the scabies itself. Secondary skin
infection with Streptococcus bacteria can sometimes lead to acute
glomerulonephritis which is a serious complication of scabies.

Curing scabies needs several precautions and effort. A local
application made from Gandhaka described in classical texts
of Ayurveda can check the infection and reduce the spread of
scabies.

Gandhaka ointment (ointment of sulphur)

Gandhaka ointment is an effective preparation made form Gandhaka
(sulphur), Tila oil (sesame oil) and Siktha (bee wax). Both internal
and external use of purified Gandhaka is mentioned in Ayurvedic
classics as well as the Ayurvedic Formulary of India’. External use of
sulphur possesses parasiticidal and fungicidal property attributed to
the formation of hydrogen sulphide and pentatonic acid?. Tila consists
of dried seeds of Sesamum indicum Linn. a herb extensively cultivated
throughout the plains of India. Ti/a oil extracted from sesame seeds
is used in skin diseases such as erysipelas, vitiligo, haemorrhoids,
gout, gonorrhea, alopecia, dental disease, burn, etc.? Bee wax is
obtained from the honey comb of the bees. In pharmaceuticals, it
is an ingredient of paraffin ointment. Dermatological and cosmetic
applications are probably the most common uses for bee wax and its
extracts. Its effects on tissue regeneration and renovation have been
well studied. Together with its bactericidal and fungicidal properties
bee wax provides many benefits in various applications in cosmetics.
In plastic surgery too bee wax extracts are used for improved wound
healing and reduced scar tissue development.

Composition
Gandhaka ointment comprises of Gandhaka, Tila oil and Siktha.

fname | enaan name [tain ame | Fam

Gandhaka Sulphur

Siktha Bee Wax Obtained from bees Apidae
Apis mellifera
Tila oil Sesame oil Sesamum indicum Pedaliaceae

Linn.

----- PAGE 143 -----
131

Main chemical constituents:
(a) Gandhaka: Sulphur (S,).
(b) Tila Taila: Fixed oil, natural lipids,
glycolipids, phospholipids*.
(c) Siktha: Myricin, free cerotic
acid, small quantity of melissic

acid and aromatic substance
cerolin.

Raw Sulphur.

Quality standards

Quality of Gandhaka and sesame oil is determined on the basis of
following parameters:

1. Gandhaka
Parameters Impure Pure
Gandhaka Gandhaka
Carbon disulphide extract % w/w 100.00 95.7

Successive extract with % w/w

1. Carbon disulfide 92.93 81.37
2. Chloroform 4.93 9.02
3. Hexane 2.69 5.36

2. Sesame oil?

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 9%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1.5%

Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 20%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 4%
Fixed oil Not less than 35%

Preparation of Gandhaka ointment
Step 1: Method of purification of Gandhaka

(1) Take fine powder of Gandhaka in a ladle, add a little amount of
clarified butter or ghee, melt it and pour into the vessel which
contains cow’s milk.

(2) This process is repeated seven times.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 144 -----
132

(3) Collect the purified Gandhaka on cooling to room temperature
and wash with plenty of luke-warm water.

(4) After drying, prepare the fine powder of purified Gandhaka and
preserve it for further use.

Step 2: Take the ingredients in following proportion.

1 Gandhaka powder 25 grams 1/4th part
2 Siktha (bee wax) 100 grams 1 part
3 Tila oil 500 grams 5 parts

Apparatus required for preparing ointment comprises mortar and
pestle, steel vessel, spoon, gas stove or heating plate, weighing
balance, and thermometer. The procedure is as follows:

(1) Tila oil is taken in a steel vessel and heated up to 130 °C and
then cooled to 70° C.

(2) Dissolve small pieces of Siktha (bee wax) into the oil with
continuous stirring till a homogenous mixture called siktha
taila is obtained.

(3) Siktha taila is taken in mortar and triturated with pestle adding
Gandhaka powder till ointment-like consistency is achieved.

Precautions
(1) Over-heating of the oil should be avoided.

(2) The trituration should be firm enough to avoid formation of
gritty particles.

Dosage form

The preparation has ointment-like consistency with light-yellow colour
and a peculiar strong smell.

Therapeutic properties

Gandhaka ointment has parasiticidal, fungicidal, and antiseptic
properties.

Indications and uses

Gandhaka ointment is useful in fungal infections of skin, scabies,
eczema, and for application over chronic infective lesions.

----- PAGE 145 -----
Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)
(3)

Gandhaka ointment is applied externally on the affected parts
of the body once or twice daily and left on the lesions for an
hour or so.

Thereafter, the lesions should be cleaned with warm water.

Repeat the procedure daily for 7 to 10 days or till all the lesions
disappear.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Gandhaka should not be used in formulations without subjecting
it to purification.

Persons sensitive to sulphur should not use this application.

If the skin lesions do not heal within a few days of application,
proper medical guidance should be sought.

Gandhaka ointment should not be used on open wounds and
lesions.

Persons with scabies having secondary bacterial infection should
avoid the use of Gandhaka ointment.

Persons known to have scabies should avoid having close skin-
to-skin contact until they have been cured.

If a member of a family has scabies, all other household
members, sexual partners and close contacts should be treated
simultaneously.

Use gloves and gowns when treating others with a suspicious
rash and itching.

Wash all clothing, towels and bed linens that were used in the
last three days by the affected person, with hot water.

(10) Use the dryer at high heat rather than air drying. Since the mites

cannot survive on nonliving objects for several days, therefore
place the objects that are not machine-washable such as coats
and stuffed toys into a bag and store for a week.

(11) Cut nails and clean them thoroughly to remove any mites or

eggs.

(12) Try to avoid scratching and keep all open sores clean and

aseptic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

133

----- PAGE 146 -----
134

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2003. p. 217-219.

(2) Tripathi KD. Essentials of medical pharmacology, 6" ed. Delhi: Jaypee
Brothers Publishers, 2008.

(3) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. 4. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2004. p.145.

(4) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda &
Siddha, 2002. Vol. 5. p. 419.

Further reading

(1) Shastri Ambikadatta. Rasaratna samuchya. Chapter 3. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Amarbharati Prakashana Publishers, 9" edition, 1995.

----- PAGE 147 -----
3 23 .

Kapikacchu powder in sexual dysfunctions

Sexual dysfunctions are characterized by disturbance in sexual desire
and in the psycho-physiological changes that comprise sexual response
cycle. Such disturbances can cause marked distress and interpersonal
difficulty in enjoying sexual intercourse. The sexual response cycle
can be divided into the following phases:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Desire: This phase consists of fantasies about sexual activity
and the desire to have sexual activity.

Excitement: This phase consists of a subjective sense of sexual
pleasure and accompanying physiological changes. The major
changes in the male consist of penile tumescence and erection.
The major changes in the female consist of vasodilatation in
the pelvis, vaginal lubrication and expansion and swelling of
the external genitalia.

Orgasm: This phase consists of a peaking of sexual pleasure,
with release of sexual tension and rhythmic contraction of the
perineal muscles and reproductive organs. In the male, there
is a sensation of ejaculatory inevitability, which is followed by
ejaculation of semen. In the female there are contractions (not
always subjectively experienced as such) of the wall of the
outer third of the vagina. In both genders, the anal sphincter
rhythmically contracts.

Resolution: This phase consists of a sense of muscular
relaxation and general well being. During this phase, males are
physiologically refractory to further erection and orgasm for a
variable period of time. In contrast, females may be able to
respond to additional stimulation almost immediately.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

135

----- PAGE 148 -----
136

The sexual dysfunctions include:

(1) Sexual desire disorders: hypoactive sexual desire disorder,
sexual aversion disorder;

(2) Sexual arousal disorders: female sexual arousal disorder, male
erectile disorder;

(3) Orgasmic disorders like female orgasmic disorder, male orgasmic
disorder, premature ejaculation; and

(4) Sexual pain disorders like dyspareunia, and vaginismus.

The sexual dysfunction may be lifelong when it is present since
the onset of sexual functioning. Acquired type of sexual dysfunction
develops only after a period of normal functioning. Psychological
factors play a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or
maintenance of the sexual dysfunction.

Kapikacchu is one of the famous herbal drugs mentioned in
Ayurvedic classics for various types of sexual disorders.

Kapikacchu [Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) D.C.]

Kapikacchu is an herbaceous, and twinning annual climber found
throughout India in the hills ranging up to 3000 ft. height. Hairs on
the pods of this climber are similar to that of monkey, that’s why
synonyms like Kapikacchu, Kapiloma, Kapi, Markati and Vaanari are
used for it. Most of the Ayurvedic remedies described in literature
for treating sexual dysfunctions and infertility contain Kapikacchu
seeds as one of the ingredients. Two types of Kapikacchu seeds are
described — wild and cultivated. The wild variety has better utility in
clinical practice than the cultivated one and black seeds are considered
better than white ones.

Composition

Kapikacchu powder consists of powdered seeds of Mucuna pruriens
(Linn.) DC.

English name Cow hedge
Latin name Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) D.C.
Family Fabaceae

Parts used Seeds

----- PAGE 149 -----
Pod of Kapikacchu. Dried seeds of Kapikacchu.

Main chemical constituents?

Mucuna pruriens is a good source of L-dopa, it also contains a number
of amino acids.

Quality standards?

Quality standards of Kapikacchu seeds are based on the following
physical constants:

Total ash Not more than 3.45%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 0.33%
Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 10%
Water-soluble ash Not less than 0.4%

Method of preparation

(1) Clean the dried seeds of Kapikacchu by removing dust and other
foreign particles and grind them into a fine powder.

(2) Filter the powder through 85 mesh sieve and store in an air-
tight glass or plastic food container, away from direct sunlight
and in a cool place.

(3) The potency of Kapikacchu powder is best retained up to four
months after preparation.

Dosage form

Light-brownish powder.

Therapeutic properties?

Kapikacchu powder has aphrodisiac, nervine tonic, anti-parkinsonism,
anti-inflammatory, and hypocholesterolaemic properties.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

137

----- PAGE 150 -----
138

Dose and mode of administration

Seed powder in the dose of 3 to 5 grams once a day with warm
milk at night.

Indications and uses

Kapikacchu is useful in various sexual disorders including loss of
libido, erectile dysfunctions, night emission, premature ejaculation,
spermatorrhoea and oligospermia. It is also used in Parkinson’s
disease and hypercholesterolaemic conditions.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

The use of Mucuna pruriens for a prolonged period causes
weight loss. The protein fraction is said to be responsible for
this effect.

Judicious use in recommended dose is well tolerated.

Persons consuming Kapikacchu may suffer from diarrhoea which
if not controlled with dietery changes and normal medication
may require discontinuation of Kapikacchu intake.

Spicy, dry, sour and stimulant food items and emotional outbursts
should be avoided during medication with Kapikacchu.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry and pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants (with organic structure & natural photographs). Varanasi:
Chaukhamba Amarbharati Prakashana, 2006. p. 232-233.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 201.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2001. p. 202.

Further reading

Ahuja PC, Singh G. A clinical study on the role of Vajikarana in the
Shukra Dushti. Jamnagar: India Gujarat Ayurved University, 1992.

Amin YMN et al. Sexual function improving effect of Mucuna pruriens
in sexually normal male rats. Fitoterapia. 1996.

Dongarwar LA, Sharma JM. A study on Vajikarana karma of certain
Ayurvedic drugs with special reference to its effect on Shukra Vardhana.
Jamnagar: Gujarat Ayurved University, 1987.

Herbal aphrodisiacs: the premier collection. http://www.indigo-herbs.
co.uk/acatalog/Aphrodisiac.html (accessed 22-02-2010).

----- PAGE 151 -----
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Influence of drugs on male sex behaviour and its pharmacological
aspect. Indian drugs. 1982.

Jani UB. Effect of certain Ayurvedic drugs in various Shukradoshas
in relation to male infertility. Jamnagar: Gujarat Ayurved University,
1981.

Jayatilak PG et al. Effect of an indigenous drug on accessory
reproductive function of mice. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology.
4(2), 1976.

Kapikacchu. Web site http://www.herbalayurveda.com/downloads/
kapikacchu.pdf (accessed 22 February 2010).

Mehra BL, Skandhan KP, Singh G. Studies on Klaibya (male sexual
dysfunction) and its management with Vajikarana. Jamnagar: Gujarat
Ayurved University, 1995.

Pharmacological study - Aphrodisiac activity of the seeds of Mucuna
pruriens. Indian Drugs. 31(7), 1994.

Raja Reddy G, Sharma PP. A comparative pharmaco-therapeutic
study of Erandamula and Kapikacchu beeja with special reference
to Vrushya karma. Jamnagar: Department of Dravyaguna, Gujarat
Ayurved University, 1999.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

139

----- PAGE 152 -----


----- PAGE 153 -----
a 24 de

Haridra powder and paste for sprain

The stretch or tear of soft tissues around a joint such as ligament
is known as sprain. Common symptoms and signs of sprain include
pain, swelling, bruising, instability and loss of function. One or more
ligaments can be injured at the same time. The severity of the pain
will depend on the extent of injury, i.e. whether a tear is partial or
complete and the number of ligaments involved.

A sprain can result from a fall, a sudden twist, or a blow to the
body that forces a joint out of its normal position. This results in an
overstretching or tear of the ligaments supporting that joint. Typically,
sprains occur when people fall and land on an outstretched arm, land
on the side of their foot, or twist a knee.

Haridra powder mentioned in Ayurvedic classics is a simple
formulation which is effective when taken internally as well as applied
locally.

Haridra (Curcuma longa Linn.)

Haridra is a dried rhizome of a plant that grows to 2 to 3 feet in
height with funnel-shaped yellow flowers. Haridra or turmeric powder
is bright yellow in colour. It has an earthy aromatic and spicy fragrance
with slightly bitter taste. Turmeric is an important spice in India with
medicinal value. Plants are gathered annually for their rhizomes
which are used fresh or in powder form. Turmeric is traditionally used
locally and orally in sprain and swelling resulting from it. It is known
to have anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects, and may be used

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

141

----- PAGE 154 -----
142

in inflammation induced joint pain and related symptoms. In recent
studies, the three major curcuminoids found in turmeric have been
found to limit the activity of chemicals and enzymes responsible for
inducing and maintaining inflammation. Curcumin is found to be a
powerful pain reliever in injuries and inflammatory conditions.

Composition

Haridra powder made from rhizomes is used orally as well as for
local application.

English name Turmeric

Latin name Curcuma longa Linn.
Family Zingiberaceae

Parts used Rhizome

Fresh turmeric rhizomes.

A bunch of turmeric plants. Dried turmeric rhizomes.

Main chemical constituents?

Curcuminoids including yellow colouring principal - curcumin, and
an essential oil with high content of bisabolane derivatives.

----- PAGE 155 -----
Quality standards?

The identity, purity and potency of Haridra rhizome for oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 9%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 8%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 12%
Volatile oil Not less than 4%

Method of preparation

(1) Take 50 grams of dried rhizomes of Haridra and dry them further
to remove moisture for easy powdering. Rhizomes should have
been harvested not more than one year ago.

(2) Grind rhizome in grinder till fine powder is obtained.

(3) Filter the powder through 85 mesh sieve to remove coarse
fibers and other particles.

(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight glass or plastic container
away from sunlight.
Dosage form

Dusty, yellow-coloured fine powder.

Therapeutic properties!

Tumeric powder has anti-bacterial, insecticidal, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-arthritic properties.

Indications and uses

(1) Sprain, inflammatory conditions of joints and burns are the
main indications for local application of Haridra paste. Haridra
powder is used internally for blood purification, skin blemishes
and allergic conditions.

Dose and mode of administration

(1) For oral use, the dose of turmeric powder for adults is 2 to 5
grams and for children it is 1 to 2 grams. The dose of fresh
turmeric juice is 10 to 20 millilitres in adults and 5 to 10
millilitres in children. Normally two doses a day should be taken
with water or mixed with honey.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

143

----- PAGE 156 -----
144

(2)

A paste made from rhizomes, mixed with lime and salt, is applied
to the sprained area and removed when it gets dried.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Turmeric being regularly used as a food item is considered
safe and no adverse effects are reported of its long-term use.
However, its oral use in children and pregnant women should
be done under medical supervision. Turmeric or its alcoholic
extract administered respectively in the dose of 2.5 grams per
kilogram body weight and 300 milligrams per kilogram body
weight on different species of animals proved non-toxic. It is
safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking this medicine.

Turmeric’s side effects may occur with the use of more than
the recommended doses. In that case, it may cause stomach
upset or other gastrointestinal problems like diarrhoea.

As turmeric is bitter in taste, it is better not to take its powder
or juice on empty stomach.

Persons suffering from bile duct blockage, blood-clotting disorder
and stomach ulcers should not take turmeric in excessive
quantity.

Treatment with turmeric may be stopped if it does not yield
beneficial effects in a couple of days and medical advice should
be sought.

Proper rest to the affected part should be given along with the
application of medicament.

Persons receiving aspirin or warfarin should take turmeric
with caution since their combined use may aggravate bleeding
tendency.

The following measures can help to prevent or aggravate
sprain:

e Avoid exercising or playing sports when tired or in pain.

e Maintain a healthy, well-balanced diet to keep muscles
strong.

e Practice safety measures to prevent falls.
e Wear shoes that fit properly.
e¢ Do stretching exercises daily.

e Warm up and stretch before engaging in any sport or
exercise.

e Avoid running or fast walking on uneven surfaces.

----- PAGE 157 -----
References

(1)

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2000. p. 154.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 45.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Arora RB, Basu N, Kapoor V, Jain AP. Anti-inflammatory studies on
Curcuma longa (Turmeric). Indian J. Med. Res. 59(8), 1971.

Ayurveda and its scientific aspects. New Delhi: Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy and Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 2006.

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Pandey, GS.
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. II. Jammu-Tawi: Regional Research
Laboratory, and Mumbai: Indian Drug Manufacturers Association,
1998.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

Khung N, Rastogi G, Grover JK. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic
activities of Curcuma longa. Indian J. Pharmacology. 1998.

Kundu S et al. Turmeric (Curcuma longa) rhizome paste and honey
show similar wound healing potential: a preclinical study in rabbits.
Int. J. of Low Extreme Wounds. (4), 2005.

Potnis VV & Grampurohit ND. Anti-inflammatory activity of the creams
containing turmeric and red sandalwood. Indian Drugs. (31), 1984.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vignana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

Yano S et al. Antiallergic activity of extracts from Curcuma longa:
active components and mechanism of actions. Phytomedicine. 3
(Suppl. 1), 1996-97.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

145

ay

----- PAGE 158 -----


----- PAGE 159 -----
2 25 :

Lavanga oil for toothache

Toothache is a commonly encountered problem. Any inflammatory
condition affecting the gums and tooth pulp gives rise to pain. Enamel
of tooth is insensitive to pain, toothache occurs only when the enamel
is eroded. In most cases toothaches are caused by problems in the
teeth or gums, such as cavities, gum disease, the emergence of
wisdom teeth, a cracked tooth, infected or inflamed dental pulp,
jaw disease or exposed tooth root. After having one or more teeth
extracted, a condition known as dry socket can develop, leading
to extreme pain. The severity of a toothache can range from mild
discomfort to excruciating pain, which can be chronic or sporadic.
This pain can often be aggravated by chewing or by hot or cold
temperatures. Severe pain may be considered a dental emergency.

Toothache is a common symptom of an acute tooth abscess. It is
associated with persistent throbbing pain at the site of the infection.
Putting pressure or warmth on the tooth may induce extreme pain. In
some cases, a tooth abscess may perforate bone and start draining
into the surrounding tissues creating local facial swelling. In some
cases, the lymph nodes in the neck get swollen and tender in response
to the infection.

Though the cause of the toothache should be established before
starting the treatment, topical application of clove oil to the affected
area can be a first-aid management which is well-documented as an
effective remedy in Ayurvedic classics.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

147

----- PAGE 160 -----
148

Lavanga [Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.)
Merr. & Perry]

Lavanga is the dried flower bud of Syzygium aromaticum, a tree
cultivated in many parts of the world and also to a considerable
extent in South India. Flower buds are collected twice a year, in
the months of October and February when they change colour from
green to crimson, and are dried carefully and separated from their
peduncles. Clove is a fragrant floral bud, black or brown in color,
widely used in Indian cuisines. Its pungent aroma and flavour is
very familiar from its use as a culinary herb. The oil extracted from
cloves is used as a home remedy for toothache. It is an ingredient
of tooth powders, gargles and chewing gums. The oil is also used
as a local analgesic for hypersensitive dental cavities; a mixture of
clove oil and zinc oxide is used in dentistry as a temporary filling
for tooth cavities.

Composition

Lavanga oil is extracted from the buds of clove.

English name Clove

Latin name Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.) Merr. & Perry
Family Myrtaceae

Parts used Flower buds

Gir oa my

Leafy branch of Lavanga and unripe Dried cloves.
cloves in inset.

----- PAGE 161 -----
149

Main chemical constituents?

Eugenol, eugenol acetate and caryophyllene.

Quality standards?

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Lavanga based on the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 7%
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Alcohol soluble extractives Not less than 3%
Water soluble extractives Not less than 9%
Volatile oil Not less than 15%

Method of preparation

Clove oil is usually available in grocery and medical shops. It is
prepared by water distillation of clove buds containing the desired
percentage of eugenol.

Dosage form

Clove oil has a warm, strong, spicy smell and the oil is colourless to
pale yellow with a medium to watery viscosity.

Therapeutic properties?

Clove oil is analgesic, anaesthetic, antiseptic, refrigerant, digestive,
carminative, stomachic, anti-spasmodic and rubefacient.

Dose and mode of use

(1) Cotton swab soaked in clove oil should be kept on the affected
tooth without touching the gums.

(2) Clove oil-soaked tissue paper can also be applied directly to the
affected site of the tooth. It may be used 2 to 3 times a day.

(3) Gargles with one to two drops of clove oil in a cup of warm
water are useful as a mouth wash for toothache and gum
problems.

Indications and uses

Clove oil is useful in toothache, halitosis, cephalalgia, dental caries,
and painful condition after tooth extraction.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 162 -----
150

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Clove oil is irritant and pungent. Therefore, it is advised to
prevent the oil from touching the tongue and gums.

If topical application of clove oil fails to relieve the pain, take
dental consultation.

Clove oil application in deep dental cavities should be done
carefully.

Clove is toxic, its oral use in large amounts (i.e. more than
3.7 g/kg body weight) may be life threatening.

Enough information about safety is unavailable for the oral
use of cloves and clove supplelments in pregnant and breast
feeding women.

Undiluted clove oil may cause allergic itching, rash and even
burns, so its local application should be done carefully.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part 1. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 81.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
harmacopoeia of India. Part.1. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 80.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 4: New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 359.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. 2" revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy 2003.

Sharma P V. Dravyaguna Vigyana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukahambha
Bharati Academy, 1996.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 1982.

Indian Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Vol. II. A joint publication of Regional
Research Laboratory, Jammu Tawi and Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, Mumbai, 1999.

Warrier PK et al. ed. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 5. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd. 1994.

Meena MR, Sethi V. Antimicrobial activity of essential oils from spices.
J. Food Sci. Technol. 1994.
Sarin YK. Illustrated manual of herbal drugs used in Ayurveda. New

Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research & Indian Council
of Medical Research, 1996.

----- PAGE 163 -----
ab 26 de

Gokshura powder for urinary disorder

Difficult urination or dysuria is a general term referring to disturbances
of varied nature in urinary flow and consistency, but by and large
this condition represents difficulty in passing urine. Other problems
in the urinary system include kidney failure, urinary tract infections,
stone in kidney, ureter and urinary bladder, prostate enlargement
and impaired bladder control. These problems usually manifest in
the form of difficulty in urination, incontinence of urine, retention of
urine or abnormally altered amount of urine. Urinary problems may
be caused by the following:

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

Increasing age: As one gets old; changes appear in the
structure and capability of kidneys, ureters, bladder and
urethra. These age-related changes tend to bring about
disturbances in the production and flow of urine.

Urinary Infections.

Urine incontinence: Decrease in the strength of pelvic muscles
and bladder sphincters usually associated with age, can cause
incontinence, i.e. inability to hold urine.

Functional damage to kidneys: Any illness or injury to the
kidney and other parts of the urinary tract can impair urine
formation and proper passing of urine.

Uncontrolled high blood pressure, diabetes, chronic obstruction
in the path of urine and untreated prostate enlargement
usually lead to a disturbance in kidney function.

Symptoms of various urinary disorders include frequent urination,
particularly at night; burning or difficulty during urination; infrequent
urination and presence of blood or any other abnormal component
in the urine.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

151

----- PAGE 164 -----
152

Depending upon the extent and nature of the underlying condition,
the following symptoms may be associated with the main urinary
disorder indicating failure of renal functions including: loss of appetite,
nausea and vomiting, fatigue, puffiness around eyes, swelling of hands
and feet, darkening of skin, muscle cramps, high blood pressure,
frequent headache, and itching all over the body.

Whatever may be the cause of a urinary disorder, it is always
important to treat the symptom. Judicious use of Gokshura, a
traditionally used medicinal herb, is effective in successful management
of urinary disorders and should be resorted to, in case proper medical
facility is not readily available and the patient is not suffering from
severe symptoms of urinary disorder.

Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris Linn.)

Gokshura is a prostrate, annual or biennial weed of the pasture lands
growing in hot, dry and sandy regions in the rainy season. The herb
has natural occurrence but it can be propagated by seeds. The fruits
are small, rounded and spiny consisting of five woody chambers, each
with many seeds. Harvesting should be done preferably in winter
when the properly dried ripe fruits could be preserved to retain
potency till the next rainy season. Fruits, roots and the whole plant
alone or in combination with other medicinal plants are extensively
used in Ayurvedic medicine for the treatment of genito-urinary
disorders ranging from difficulty in urination to urinary stones and
sexual weakness. Simple and multi-ingredient formulations made of
Gokshura are listed in the Ayurvedic Formulary? and Pharmacopoeia
of India‘ and scientific studies have provided enough evidence of its
varied usefulness in urinary and other diseases.

Composition

The powder and decoction of Gokshura are made from dried ripe
fruits or the entire plant.

English name Land caltrops, Puncture vine.
Latin name Tribulus terrestris Linn.
Family Zygophyllaceae

Parts used Fruits and whole plant

----- PAGE 165 -----
Dried Gokshura fruits.

and fruits.

Main chemical constituents?

Potassium nitrate, sterols, sapogenin, diosgenin, chlorogenin.

Quality standards*

Quality standards of Gokshura fruits as per Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
are based on the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 15%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 2%
Alcohol-insoluble extractives Not less than 6%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 10%

Microscopically, the fruit shows small epidermal cells in each
coccus with rosette of calcium oxalate crystals in abundance.

Method of preparation

Depending upon the duration of treatment take 50 to 100 grams of
dried fruits or whole plant harvested not more than one year before.
The raw material should be dried further by keeping it in sunlight
or in a drier.

Make fine powder in grinder and filter it through a 85 mesh sieve to
remove coarse woody particles and fibers. Keep the powder in an air-
tight glass or plastic food container away from moist surroundings.

Decoction of Gokshura is prepared by boiling 20 to 30 grams of
the coarse powder of the raw material in 160 to 240 milliliters water
till one fourth liquid remains. Decoction has to be prepared daily and
consumed fresh same day.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

153

----- PAGE 166 -----
154

Dosage form

Fine, pale-coloured powder and straw-coloured decoction.

Therapeutic properties?

Gokshura has cooling, diuretic, anti-urolithiatic, styptic, antimicrobial,
muscle relaxant, aphrodisiac, emollient, anti-inflammatory and cyto-
protective properties.

Dose and mode of administration

The adult dose of Gokshura powder is 3 to 6 grams, twice a day,
with water before meals. The dose of decoction for adults is 40 to
50 milliliters and it should be taken lukewarm.

Indications and uses

Gokshura is indicated for burning urination, difficulty in passing
urine, decreased urination, urinary crystals and stones, albuminuria,
haematuria and spermaturia.

It is useful for improving the urinary function and management of
urinary complaints resulting from inflammation, infection, ulceration,
calculi and abnormal discharge‘.

Benign prostate enlargement and erectile dysfunction are the
other indications where Gokshura alone or in combination with other
medicinal herbs is used>.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1) Gokshura is conventionally regarded as safe. No side effects or
toxic symptoms and contraindications are reported in Ayurvedic
literature. However, in experimental studies seeds of the plant
are found to be toxic to the liver of rats. Therefore, patients
with liver dysfunction should use Gokshura without seeds and
continue medication under medical supervision.

(2) As Gokshura is cooling in nature and the indicated urinary
disorders result from predominance of dry and hot contents in
urinary system, it is always advisable to avoid during medication
alcoholic beverages and diet rich in spicy, pungent, sour, acidic,
hot and dry food items. Indulgence in aggression, anger, furious
states of mind and suppression of natural urges of urination,
passing stools and flatus should be avoided.

(3) Simple, soft, digestible and liquid-rich diet is recommended
while suffering from and medicating for urinary disorder. Old

----- PAGE 167 -----
155

rice, barley, butter-milk, pumpkin and aloe are useful articles
of diet for patients of urinary disorder.

(4) Patients suffering from urinary disorder should abstain from
strenuous exertion, excessive thirst and frequent sexual
intercourse.

(5) Severe urinary symptoms with presence of pus and blood in
the urine and inability to urinate should be properly treated
under medical advice. If the patient’s symptoms get aggravated
or do not respond, medication with Gokshura may be stopped
and medical advice should be sought.

(6) Urinary symptoms usually worsen, if constipation is concomitantly
present. In such cases due care should be taken to treat
constipation with modification in diet or with the use of a soft,
lubricating laxative.

(7) The symptoms of urinary disease may mimic other medical
conditions. Therefore, if empirical treatment with a given
formulation fails, it is always advisable to consult medical expert
for diagnosis and proper management

(8) Use of Gokshura is safe during pregnancy and lactation.

References

(1) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 40.

(2) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. 2nd revised English edition. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2003. p. 67, 68.

(3) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 229-230, 232.

(4) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 229-230.

(5) Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 232.

Further reading

(1) Anand R, Patnaik GK, Kulshreshtha DK, Dhawan BN. Activity of certain
fractions of Tribulus terrestris fruits against experimentally induced
urolithiasis in rats. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 32(8), 1994.

(2) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Bhartiya Ayurved yog
sangraha. New Delhi, 1989.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 168 -----
156

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Dipak P. et al. Evaluation of tribulus terrestris (Chotagokhru). Indian
Drugs. 22(6), 1985.

Handbook of domestic medicine and common Ayurvedic remedies. 2"
ed. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
1999.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India), Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1966.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijanana. Part II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1981.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. 2nd revised English ed. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003.

----- PAGE 169 -----
2 27 :

Ela powder for vomiting

Vomiting is the oral expulsion of upper gastrointestinal contents
resulting from contractions of the gut and thoraco-abdominal wall
musculature. Vomiting is coordinated by the centres in brain and is
effected by neuromuscular responses in the gut, pharynx and thoraco-
abdominal wall.

The causes of vomiting are diverse and include gastritis,
indigestion, gastrointestinal infection, worm infestation, obstruction in
the gastrointestinal tract, inflammatory diseases of abdominal organs,
myocardial infarction, raised intracranial pressure, motion sickness,
pregnancy, uraemia, drugs, acute hepatitis and liver failure and may
be psychogenic.

Psychogenic vomiting without any gastrointestinal cause is seen
in persons suffering from anxiety and it usually occurs in the morning
on awakening. Early morning vomiting is a frequent symptom in
hypersensitive pregnant women in early pregnancy. This type of
vomiting rarely occurs in the later part of the day. Water brash
(regurgitation of stomach juices into the mouth), nausea, loss of
appetite, salty taste in the mouth, etc. are the common associated
symptoms of vomiting resulting from gastrointestinal causes. These
symptoms do not accompany vomiting of psychogenic origin. By and
large, this type of vomiting is a short-lived symptom and manageable
with diet regulation and simple medication. Acute vomiting causes
dehydration, fluid and electrolyte imbalance. Weight loss may result
from chronic vomiting.

Ascertaining the cause of vomiting is essential so as to rule out
serious illnesses. However, irrespective of the cause and nature of
vomiting, it is always important to treat this symptom to prevent fluid

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

157

----- PAGE 170 -----
158

and electrolyte imbalance in the body system and untoward effects
on the functioning of vital organs.

Judicious use of simple home remedies such as cardamom (Ela)
is effective in successful management of vomiting and should be
resorted to, in case proper medical care is not readily available.

Ela [Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton]

Ela (Cardamom) is one of the common spices found in almost every
Indian kitchen and is known for its medicinal properties in traditional
medicine. It is a stout large perennial herb that grows naturally and
also cultivated in many parts of south India at elevations from 750 to
1500 metres. Ela seeds are used for aromatic and appetizing property
in various food preparations and for chewing alone or along with other
aromatic spices as a mouth freshener and appetizer. It is an effective
home remedy for many common ailments of the digestive system.
Many Ayurvedic formulations described in classical literature have
powdered Fla seeds as one of the ingredients. Powder of cardamom
seeds alone is specifically indicated for the treatment of symptoms
resulting from excess heat or acidity in the body system. Easy
accessibility, cost effectiveness, long history of safe use, palatable
taste and small dose are attributes that make this formulation a
simple but ideal home remedy for first-hand management of common
ailments like vomiting, loss of appetite, indigestion, gastric irritation,
nausea, burning sensation, thirst, giddiness, burning urination, bad
smell from mouth, etc. This herbal drug is described as Sukshmaila
in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India? and is widely used by
the people in self-health-care. Eladi powder described in ancient
classical Ayurvedic texts is a popular formulation made of Ela seeds
and other herbal ingredients for the management of different kinds
of vomiting?.

Composition

Ela powder consists of finely powdered seeds of dried fruits of
cardamom.

English name Cardamom
Latin name Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton
Family Zingiberaceae

Parts used Seeds

----- PAGE 171 -----
Ela plants. Ela fruits.

Main chemical constituents?

Essential oils (a-terpineol, myrcene, etc.).

Quality standards*

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Ela seeds based on the following physical constants:

Foreign matter Nil

Total ash Not more than 6%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 4%
Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 2%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 10%
Volatile oils Not less than 4%

Method of preparation

(1)

(2)

Not more than one-year-old dried cardamom fruits with
adequate aroma are taken in as much quantity as is required
for making powder for medicinal use. Remove dust and any
other foreign matter and the outer skin of the fruits before
grinding the seeds to make powder. About 10 grams of seeds
are sufficient for a treatment period of seven to 10 days.

Grind the seeds in a clean grinder or mortar to make a fine
powder and filter it through a metallic sieve. It is difficult
to make powder, if the seeds are not properly dried due to
presence of high moisture content. The powder should not be
filtered through coarse cloth as it absorbs the essential oil,
which contains aromatic and bio-active chemical constituents.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 172 -----
160

(3)

Seed powder is then kept in a dry air-tight small bottle, away
from direct sunlight where the temperature normally does not
exceed average room temperature. Keeping the powder in hot
surroundings should be avoided as it facilitates loss of volatile
content leading to reduced therapeutic potency.

Dosage form

Brownish powder with strongly aromatic odour and characteristic
taste. The powder can be filled into capsules.

Therapeutic properties

(1)

(2)

Ela has cooling, anti-emetic, stimulant, carminative, digestive,
stomachic and appetizing properties?.

Pharmacological studies have proven Ela seeds to have anti-
inflammatory, analgesic, anti-spasmodic, anti-microbial and
anti-fungal properties®.

Dose and mode of administration

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Seed powder of Ela (Cardamom) is recommended in a dose
of 250 milligrams to 500 milligrams (about 3-4 pinches), for
adults and 60-120 mg for children, two to three times a day
with a little warm water or any soft, sweet syrup, e.g. honey.
It is advisable to consume the powder on an empty stomach
or half-an-hour before eating meals.

The best way to consume Ela powder for control of vomiting
is to swallow it with a small amount of water or syrup. Intake
with a large amount of water or any other liquid should be
avoided.

In cases of vomiting due to indigestion, gastritis, pregnancy
and high levels of blood urea in kidney failure, it is advisable
to administer concoction of Ela powder in small frequent doses
for fast absorption of the medicine.

Concoction is prepared by putting half to one teaspoonful (2.5
to 5 grams) of Ela powder in 30 milliliters of warm water and
kept as such for 30 minutes and then it is filtered on getting
cooled. Infusion is given in the dose of 5 to 10 milliliters (one
to two teaspoonfuls) at regular intervals and is to be consumed
the same day.

Indications and uses

Nausea, vomiting, gastritis, indigestion, anorexia, excessive thirst,
giddiness and bad taste of mouth.

----- PAGE 173 -----
Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Traditionally, cardamom seeds are regarded as safe owing to
their use as a home remedy and a common spice in various food
items and beverages. No adverse effect and toxicity is reported
in the literature. However, there are reports that cardamom
seeds can trigger gallstone colic and hence not recommended
for self-medication in patients with gallstones.

Patients with vomiting as a major symptom should take small
meals in liquid or semi-solid forms made of soft easily digestible
materials. Overeating, irregular eating and heavy, fiber-rich and
spicy foods should be avoided.

Fresh concoction of cardamom seeds as described above should
be used if the patient does not find seed powder palatable.

Strenuous work, anxiety and stress should be avoided for
successful management of vomiting. Adequate bed rest
and sleep at proper time help a lot to enhance the effect of
medication.

Medical advice should be sought if vomiting is drastic and
is not controlled with Ela powder and the patient’s condition
deteriorates rapidly. The underlying cause of vomiting must be
properly treated with suitable medication.

Mere symptomatic relief of vomiting should not be attempted, if
the condition gets severe and non-responsive to self-medication
with Ela powder and similar other home remedies.

Medication with Ela powder should be restricted to mild to
moderate vomiting mainly resulting from gastrointestinal causes
and pregnancy. Specific treatment of the underlying cause is
required in kidney failure, cancer of stomach, worm infestation,
brain tumour and psychogenic vomiting.

Ela powder is safe during pregnancy and for breast-fed
children.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 101-102.

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. 19 ed. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Prakashana. 2008. p. 490.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 101.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

161

----- PAGE 174 -----
162

(4)

(5)

(6)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 102.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 392.

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 393.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1986.

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Vol. 2. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati, 1982.

Warrier PK et al. eds. Indian medicinal plants. Madras: Orient Longman
Ltd., 1995.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Private
Limited, 2007.

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Allahabad: LM
Basu, 1989.

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Vishvabharati, 1996.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Bharati Academy, 2001.

----- PAGE 175 -----
ap 28 de

Haridra powder for wound

Wounds are commonly encountered. Though extremely common,
without proper and timely intervention, they may get complicated
leading to sepsis, septicaemia and scarring. Wounds are due to
various types and intensity of physical injury wherein the skin is torn
or punctured or a contusion is formed due to blunt force. Accordingly,
a wound is called open when the skin is breached due to injury
and closed when there is no tearing or cutting of skin. A wound is
considered minor when it is superficial, away from natural orifices,
with minor or no bleeding and not caused by a tool or instrument
or animal.

Other types of wounds including stab and gunshot wounds and
those with doubtful background are considered as major or severe
and must receive proper medical attention. In severe open wounds,
the risk of blood loss and infection is high. Such wounds need to be
cleaned and covered until medical help is provided. Internal wounds
are comparatively dangerous as the extent of damage to the tissues
is not known.

Here, the term wound is confined to external and superficial injuries
including incised wounds, lacerations, abrasions, puncture wounds,
contusions and mild haematoma. If not severe and complicated,
wounds can be successfully managed with simple traditional medical
care making use of Haridra.

Haridra (Curcuma longa Linn.)

Haridra is a well established medicinal plant of Indian medicine
known for its wound healing properties. Classical medical literature is
replete with the uses of turmeric and adequate evidence is available

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

163

----- PAGE 176 -----
164

for its antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial and anti-allergic
properties?. The earliest reference to turmeric with its indications
for skin diseases and wounds is found in Ayurvedic text Charaka
Samhita. Use of turmeric is recommended for facilitating wound
healing in para-surgical procedures prescribed in Ayurveda such
as leech therapy for chronic wounds and Kshara Sutra therapy for
piles and fistula. Turmeric is the most common household medicine
for first-hand management of injuries and wounds. Its juice, paste,
powder, decoction and various formulations are used externally and
internally. Haridra is dried rhizome, like that of ginger, of a perennial
herb of Zingiberaceae plant family, which is extensively cultivated
in all parts of India and harvested between October to April when
the lower leaves of the plant turn yellow. The rhizomes are boiled
and then dried and the skin peeled off. Turmeric is available in the
market both in raw and powder forms. Powdered Haridra is an
essential commodity in Indian homes used as a condiment in almost
all sorts of cooking.

Composition

Haridra powder is made of a single herbal ingredient Haridra.

English name Turmeric
Latin name Curcuma longa Linn.
Family Zingiberaceae

Plant part used Rhizome

Whole plants of Haridra with rhizomes. Dried rhizomes of Haridra.

----- PAGE 177 -----
165

Main chemical constituents?

Curcuminoids including yellow colouring principal, curcumin, and an
essential oil with high content of bisabolane derivatives.

Quality standards?

For quality assurance of turmeric rhizome, the following parameters
are recommended in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India.

Foreign matter Not more than 2%
Total ash Not more than 9%
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractives Not less than 8%
Water-soluble extractives Not less than 12%
Volatile oil Not less than 4% volume/weight.

Quality testing of turmeric is done by adding concentrated
sulphuric acid or mixture of concentrated sulphuric acid and alcohol to
the powdered turmeric. Appearance of deep crimson colour confirms
the quality.

Method of preparation

(1) Powder of turmeric is prepared by grinding dried rhizomes in
a grinder or pulverizer and then sieved through mesh size 80.
The powder should be kept in a clean container and stored in
a dry area away from direct sunlight.

(2) Decoction of turmeric for washing wounds is made by boiling
10 grams of powder in 200 millilitres of water till one fourth
liquid remains.

(3) Paste for application over the wound is prepared by mixing 5
to 10 grams of turmeric powder in an equal amount of clean
water.

Dosage form

Yellow-coloured fine powder, decoction, and paste.

Therapeutic properties?

Haridra has anti-inflammatory, blood purifying, anti-allergic, anti-
bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-protozoal, demulcent and wound-healing
properties.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

----- PAGE 178 -----
166

Dose and mode of administration

Haridra may be used simultaneously for washing the wound,
application as paste on wound and orally in the following ways and
dose schedule:

(1)

(2)
(3)

For oral use the dose of turmeric powder for adults is 2 to
5 grams and for children it is 1 to 2 grams or juice of fresh
turmeric in the dose of 10 to 20 millilitres for adults and 5 to
10 ml for children. It is administered twice daily with water
or honey.

Wash the wound twice daily with turmeric decoction.

Apply a thin paste of turmeric over the wound and keep it for
8 to 10 hours and then remove by gently washing the affected
part with luke warm water. Alternatively, the wound is dressed
with gauze soaked in turmeric decoction or juice or mixture of
turmeric and mustard oil or honey. A new dressing should be
used after cleansing the wound.

Indications and uses

(1)

(2)

External and internal use of turmeric is indicated in acute and
chronic wounds with not much damage to the tissues.
Sepsis, allergic reaction, inflammation and skin discoloration
around the wound are also manageable with oral use and topical
application of turmeric.

Precautions and safety aspects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Due care must be taken to keep the wound clean and dry. It is
advisable to use turmeric decoction for washing the wound.

Frank bleeding and pus discharge from the wound should be
attended to properly.

Treatment with turmeric may be stopped if it does not yield
beneficial effects in a couple of days.

Being regularly used as a food item, turmeric is considered safe
and no toxic or adverse effects are reported of its long-term
use. However, its oral use in children and pregnant women
should be done under medical supervision. It is safe for the
baby if a nursing mother is taking this medication.

Persons receiving aspirin and warfarin should take turmeric with
caution since their combination may cause bleeding.

Side effects with turmeric may occur with use of more than the
recommended doses. In that case, it may cause stomach upset
or other gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhoea.

----- PAGE 179 -----
(7)

(8)

As turmeric is bitter in taste and may induce nausea or
vomiting, it is better not to consume the powder on an empty
stomach.
Persons suffering from bile duct blockage, blood-clotting disorder
and stomach ulcers should not take turmeric in excessive
quantity.

References

(1)

(2)

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2000. p. 154.

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 45.

Sharma PC, Yelne M.B, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2000. p. 152, 154.

Further reading

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Ayurveda and its scientific aspects. New Delhi: Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy and Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 2006.

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Pandey GS. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. I. Jammu-Tawi: Regional Research
Laboratory, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research; Mumbai:
Indian Drug Manufacturers Association, 1998.

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

Khung N, Rastogi G, Grover JK. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic
activities of Curcuma longa. Indian J. Pharmacology. 18(1), 1998.

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vignana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

167

----- PAGE 180 -----


----- PAGE 181 -----
Herbal medicines constitute the main component of traditional medicine,
which have been used since thousands of years. They have made
significant contribution to human health through their health promotive,
curative and rehabilitative properties and in the prevention of illnesses.
Indeed, many herbal remedies used traditionally have become modern
medicines through drug development. Digoxin, morphine, colchicine, and
artemisinin are some notable examples. Long tradition of use of many
herbal remedies and experiences passed on from generation to generation
has brought about reliance by the people on herbal remedies. At present,
the use of medicinal plants for health benefits is increasing worldwide.

This publication contains 28 monographs on common ailments which
can be readily treated with simple herbal remedies. They can be prepared
easily and used within the ambit of primary health care. Each monograph
provides description of the ailment, the form of traditional preparation, its
composition, English name, Latin name and family of the plant, plant part
used, main chemical constituents, quality standards, method of
preparation, dosage form, therapeutic properties, indications and uses,
dose and mode of administration, precautions and safety aspects, and
important references.

It is an attempt to promote the rational, safe and appropriate use of
herbal medicines and mainstreaming of traditionally used herbal
remedies. This manual can be used by health planners, policy makers,
national and district health authorities and others involved in the health
sector development and reform. It is also an attempt to increase
availability and accessibility to cost-effective treatment of commonly
encountered health problems with herbal remedies. It will be useful for
education and training of community health workers as well. These efforts
would eventually promote ‘health for all’ in the context of primary health
care.

EIN
G My World Health
@) Organization ISBN 978 92.9022 382 5

revioral Office for South-East Asia
World Health House
Indraprastha Estate,

Mahatma Gandhi Marg,

New Delhi-110002, India

Website: www.searo.who.int 78929012238

are) yWeeH Avewiig 10j solpewey jequdyH JeEUONIpPesL

y) World Health
B Organization

resign Office for South-East Asia

Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Barnes - Herbal Medicines (Pharmaceutical Press, 2007).txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal Medicines
Third edition

Joanne Barnes, Linda A Anderson
and J David Phillipson

----- PAGE 2 -----
y Herbal Medicines

----- PAGE 3 -----


----- PAGE 4 -----
Herbal Medicines

THIRD EDITION

Joanne Barnes
BPharm, PhD, MRPharmS, RegPharmNZ, MPSNZ, FLS

Associate Professor in Herbal Medicines
School of Pharmacy

University of Auckland

New Zealand

Linda A Anderson
BPharm, PhD, FRPharmS

Principal Pharmaceutical Assessor
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
London, UK

J David Phillipson
BSc (Pharm), MSc, PhD, DSc, FRPharmS, FLS

Emeritus Professor

Centre for Pharmacognosy & Phytotherapy
The School of Pharmacy

University of London, UK

aP)

London e Chicago Pharmaceutical Press

----- PAGE 5 -----
Published by the Pharmaceutical Press
An imprint of RPS Publishing

1 Lambeth High Street, London SE1 7JN, UK
100 South Atkinson Road, Suite 200, Grayslake, IL 60030-7820, USA

© Pharmaceutical Press 2007

All photographs © Plantaphile, Germany 2007, with the exception of blue flag (Iris
versicolor) figure 2 © Brian Mathew 2007 and nettle (Urtica dioica) figure 2 ©
Tom Cope 2007. Photographs reproduced with permission.

(P ) is a trade mark of RPS Publishing

RPS Publishing is the publishing organisation of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society
of Great Britain

First edition 1996
Second edition 2002
Reprinted 2003, 2006
Third edition 2007

Text design by Eric Drewery, East Molesey, Surrey
Typeset by Data Standards Ltd, Frome, Somerset
Printed in Great Britain by Butler and Tanner, Frome, Somerset

ISBN 978 0 85369 623 0

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior
written permission of the copyright holder.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Front cover images (from top I-r): Echinacea, Hops, Calendula, Echinacea root
(dry), Milk Thistle, Calendula (dry), Passionflower, German Chamomile (dry),
German chamomile

All cover photographs © Plantaphile, Germany 2007, with the exception of
Echinacea root Digital Vision, Getty Images and German chamomile ©
Photodisc, Getty Images.

Disclaimer

Inclusion of a substance or preparation in Herbal Medicines is not to be
considered a recommendation for use, nor does it confer any status on the
substance or preparation. Although considerable efforts have been made to check
the material in Herbal Medicines, the authors and publisher make no
representation, express or implied, with regard to the accuracy of the
information contained in this book and cannot accept any legal responsibility
or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. Also, the reader is
assumed to possess the necessary knowledge to interpret the information provided.

The views expressed in this book are those of the authors and do not represent
those of the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, European
Medicines Agency, World Health Organization, or any other institution or
organisation mentioned. Mention of specific product names is for clarity and
identification purposes and does not represent endorsement.

----- PAGE 6 -----
¥ Contents

Preface to the Third Edition viii
About the Authors x

How to Use Herbal Medicines
Introduction 3

Chemical Constituents of Plants
Used as Herbal Medicines 29

General References 34

The monographs

TA)

Agnus Castus 36
Agrimony 42

Alfalfa 45
Aloe Vera 48
Aloes 50
Angelica 53
Aniseed 57
Apricot 61
Arnica 64

Artichoke 67
Asafoetida 72

Avens 75
®

Bayberry 77
Bilberry 79

Bloodroot 84
Blue Flag 87
Bogbean 89
Boldo 91
Boneset 94

Borage 96
Broom 98
Buchu 100
Burdock 102
Burnet 105

Butterbur 107

1

@

Calamus 118
Calendula 121
Capsicum 125

Cascara 128

Cassia 130

Cat’s Claw 132
Celandine, Greater 136
Celery 146

Centaury 149

Cereus 151
Chamomile, German 152
Chamomile, Roman 156
Chaparral 159
Cinnamon 162

Clivers 164

Clove 166

Cohosh, Black 168
Cohosh, Blue 180

Cola 183

Coltsfoot 185

Comfrey 188

Corn Silk 191
Couchgrass 193
Cowslip 195

Cranberry 197

®

Damiana 201
Dandelion 204
Devil's Claw 207
Drosera 215

@

Echinacea 217
Elder 237
Elecampane 240

Ephedra 243

Eucalyptus 247
Euphorbia 249
Evening Primrose 251
Eyebright 256

@

False Unicorn 258
Fenugreek 260
Feverfew 263
Figwort 268
Frangula 270
Fucus 273
Fumitory 276

@

Garlic 279
Gentian 290
Ginger 293

Ginkgo 299

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
Ginseng, Panax 325
Golden Seal 337
Gravel Root 340
Ground lvy 342

Guaiacum 344

@

Hawthorn 346

Holy Thistle 352

Hops 354

Horehound, Black 358
Horehound, White 361
Horse-chestnut 363
Horseradish 367
Hydrangea 369
Hydrocotyle 371

oO

Ispaghula 374

315

----- PAGE 7 -----
wi Contents

oO

Jamaica Dogwood 379
Java Tea 381
Juniper 386

@

Kava 389

@

Lady’s Slipper 403
Lemon Verbena 405

Liferoot 407
Lime Flower 409
Liquorice 411
Lobelia 416

@

Marshmallow 418
Maté 421
Meadowsweet 423

Melissa 425

Milk Thistle 429
Mistletoe 436
Motherwort 447

Myrrh 449
®
Nettle 452
CP)

Parsley 456
Parsley Piert 459
Passionflower 461
Pennyroyal 470
Pilewort 472
Plantain 474

Pleurisy Root 477
Pokeroot 479

Poplar 482

Prickly Ash, Northern 484
Prickly Ash, Southern 486
Pulsatilla 489

@
Quassia 491
Queen’s Delight 493

CR)

Raspberry 495
Red Clover 498
Rhodiola 500
Rhubarb 506
Rosemary 508

CS]

Sage 512
Sarsaparilla 515
Sassafras 518

Saw Palmetto 521
Scullcap 530
Senega 533

Senna 537
Shepherd’s Purse 541
Skunk Cabbage 543
Slippery Elm 545
Squill 547

St John’s Wort 549
Stone Root 570

oO

Tansy 572
Thyme 574

CU)

Uva-Ursi 577

@

Valerian 580
Vervain 591

®

Wild Carrot 593
Wild Lettuce 596
Willow 598
Witch Hazel 601

LY)

Yarrow 604
Yellow Dock 608

Yucca 610
Appendices
oO

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions
612

(2)

Pharmacological Activities and
Constituents of Herbal Ingredients
616

C3]

Council of Europe — Categories for
Natural Sources of Flavourings 622
(4)

Preparations Directory 623

6

Suppliers Directory 660

Index 690

----- PAGE 8 -----
This book is dedicated to the memory of
the late Dr W Gwynne Thomas,
former Director of Pharmaceutical Sciences at the
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.
The inspiration for the book came from him and
it is due to his efforts that the necessary funding
was obtained.

----- PAGE 9 -----
- Preface to the Third Edition

This third edition of Herbal Medicines: A guide for healthcare
professionals comes a little over ten years after publication of the
first edition, and reflects continuing public, professional, research,
commercial and other interests in medicinal plants. At the same
time, there have been ongoing concerns surrounding the quality,
safety and efficacy of herbal medicinal products, and heightened
awareness of the need to protect the public against poor-quality
and unsafe products. Pharmacists, doctors, nurses, herbal-
medicine practitioners and other healthcare providers should be
knowledgeable about these is
patients and the public on the safe, effective and appropriate use
of herbal preparations; this book aims to provide pharmacists and
other healthcare professionals with summarised, yet sufficiently
detailed, scientific information to enable them to do so.

Herbal medicines continue to be a popular
with the general public not only for health maintenance and well-
being, minor ailments (e.g. coughs and colds), chronic conditions
(e.g. back pain) and serious chronic diseases (e.g. asthma, cancer,
depression, diabetes), but also for 'enhancement'
processes, such as the use of Ginkgo biloba products for memory
enhancement. The general public receives information on herbal
medicines through various sources, including popular magazines
and newspaper articles, as well as television, internet and other
sources of advertising literature provided by manufacturers. Much
of this information is presented uncritically, and targeted to the
consumer along with details of substantial price reductions on
products, including continuous sales promotions, that often are
the main recommendations for the products. There is an
increasing number of products that respond to the public demand
for so-called ‘lifestyle’ medicines, and manufacturers market, for
example, herbal alternatives to Viagra (sildenafil), 'slimming/
weight-loss' preparations, 'hangover' cures, and_breast-enlarge-
ment products. Typically, these types of products are sold over the
internet without any assurance of their quality, safety and efficacy.

The last decade h en several important developments with
respect to herbal medicines. The most significant of these has been
the introduction of a new regulatory framework for traditional
herbal medicines in the UK and the 27 other member states of the
European Union (EU) following the implementation in 2005 of the
EU Directive on Traditional Herbal Medicinal Product:
other countries worldwide have introduced new legislation to
regulate herbal medicinal products: Australia and Canada, for
example, have been particularly active in this respect. That the
regulatory landscape for herbal medicines has changed substan-
tially has required a full revision of the ‘Introduction to the
Monographs’, which in this edition can be found under 'How to
Use Herbal Medicines'; this now includes details of new
legislation in Europe and a summary of regulations for herbal
medicines in several other countries.

Although there are new regulations, in Europe there is a
transitional period until 2011 to allow manufacturers time to
comply with the new requirements, so issues relating to the
quality, safety and efficacy of herbal medicines are likely to
continue, even beyond the next edition of this book! Therefore,
with respect to quality, consumers and healthcare professionals
should be aware that the labels of unlicensed (unregulated) herbal

ues and should be able to advise

ealthcare choice

of functions or

Several

medicines may not reflect their actual contents, and that the
precise constituents of herbal medicines containing the same
herbal ingredient(s) but produced by different manufacturers are
likely to differ. The quality of herbal medicines (i.e. uniformity of
dose) is important for their efficacy: clinical trial results for a
particular herbal medicinal product cannot necessarily be
extrapolated to other products containing the same ingredient,
since their precise contents may differ. Details of herbal medicinal
products tested in clinical trials are provided in individual
monographs in this book. There is an increasing amount of
research comprising qualitative (i.e. the profile of chemical
constituents) and quantitative (quantity of chemical constituents)
analysis of herbal medicines and showing variations in the
contents of different manufacturers' products. For those herbal
ingredients for which there is substantial information, and for
commonly encountered herbal ingredients, we have summarised
the findings of these analyses
monographs on Quality of plant material and commercial
products (for examples, see the monographs on St John's wort
and Echinacea).

The quality of herbal medicines is also important as regards
their safety, and safety concerns with herbal medicines, including
intrinsic toxicity as well as problems due to adulteration and
contamination, continue to arise. This edition includes new
monographs on kava (Piper methysticum) and greater celandine
(Chelidonium majus) and a fully revised monograph on black
cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), all of which have been associated
with hepatotoxic reactions. The concurrent use of herbal and
other medicines remains a major concern for healthcare profe:
sionals because of the potential for important drug interactions.
Evidence of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions
between St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) and 'conven-
tional’ medicines emerged in the year 2000 and, since then, reports
have been made of interactions between other herbal medicines
and conventional medicines, typically those with a low therapeutic
index. At present though, there has been little formal clinical
research into interactions between herbal and other medicines,
and information relies mainly on spontaneous reports and, to
some extent, findings of in-vitro studies of the effects of certain
rbal medicines on cytochrome P450 drug-metabolising enzymes.
Information on known and potential interactions is summarised
in the Appendices to this book, and further information and detail
is provided in the individual monographs.

Continual vigilance and reporting of adverse effects, including
interactions and problems related to poor quality, associated with
herbal medicines is essential in order to detect safety issues as
soon as possible. In the UK, pharmacists and other  state-
registered healthcare providers and, since 2005, patients and
consumers, can report suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs)
associated with herbal medicines directly to the Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) using ‘yellow
card' report forms. These forms are included in the British
National Formulary and available on-line (see www.mhra.gov.uk),
and for the first time several are included in this book so that they
may be more readily at hand to healthcare professionals using this
book for information on adverse effects experienced and reported

in a new section in some

>
e

----- PAGE 10 -----
to them by consumers and patients. Many other countries have an
ADR reporting scheme similar to that of the UK and encourage
reporting of suspected herbal ADRs, at least by healthcare
professionals. The World Health Organization's Uppsala Mon-
itoring Centre in Sweden receives such reports from over 70
countries, including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, New
Zealand, UK and the USA, an
information for a number of herbal medicines for which there
have been important safety concerns (see individual monographs).

The effects of herbal medicines are, of course, brought about by
their chemical constituents. It may not be fully recognised by some
individuals that while, for example, aspirin tablets contain a
measured quantity (within narrow limits) of a single active
chemical compound, tablets (and indeed other dosage forms) of a
herbal medicine typically contain a complex mixture of many
(hundreds or more) chemical compounds. In order to appreciate
the quality control and quality assurance procedur
essential for herbal medicinal products and to understand their
pharmacological and toxicological effects, it is necessary to be
aware of the different types of chemical constituents,
kaloids, glycosides, flavonoids, etc, that may be present, as
well as the individual constituents in specific herbal medicines.
This edition includes two new features which provide this
information: chemical structural formulae are included with
virtually every monograph to supplement the textual information
on constituents, and a new chapter 'Chemical Constituents of
Plants Used as Herbal Medicines' has been added, which
summarises the different groups of natural product compounds
(e.g. alkaloids, glycosides, flavonoids, terpenes) that are present in
medicinal plants.

The first edition of this book provided information on herbal
medicines available in pharmacies in the UK, whereas we have
expanded the scope of this third edition to include new
monographs on herbal medicines that may not necessarily be
found in UK pharmacies but which are of public or professional
interest. Hence, this edition includes new monographs on

we have summarised this

that are

eS

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the following Pharmaceutical Press staff for
their active help and encouragement with this book: Tamsin
Cousins, Simon Dunton, Louise McIndoe, Karl Parsons, Linda
Paulus, Paul Weller and John Wilson. We also thank Marion
Edsall for her proofreading work, and Lida Teng, PhD student at
the School of Pharmacy, University of London, for administrative
assistance.

Photographs are included with kind permission of Thomas
Brendler (www.plantaphile.com, Germany). Some of the photo-
graphs were supplied to Plantaphile by Larry Allain, Pierre
Cabalion, Alvin Diamond, Ulrich Feiter, Trish Flaster, Nigel
Gericke, Michael Guiry, MJ Hatfield, Gary Kauffman, Diane
Robertson, Joachim Schmitz, Stan Shebs and Michael Wink.

In addition, the photograph of blue flag is reproduced with kind
permission of Brian Mathew, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK,
Honorary Research Associate, and the photograph of nettle with
kind permission of Dr Tom Cope, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew,
UK.

Preface to the Third Edition

butterbur (Petasites hybridus), greater celandine (Chelidonium
majus), kava (Piper methysticum) and rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea).
Kava has been prohibited in the UK since 2002 because of its
association with hepatotoxic reactions; we include a monograph
here as it is possible that consumers and patients in the UK may
obtain supplies from overseas. At least 10 existing monographs on
popular herbal medicines have been completely revised, sub-
stantial updates and revisions have been made to over 20 other
monographs, and minor amendments have been made to all
remaining monographs. In addition, in response to comments
from practising pharmacists, academics and other users of this
ook, this edition includes photographs of the crude herbal drugs
which feature in the monographs as well as, for many
monographs, the plants from which they originate. Also for the
first time the individual monographs contain information from
several countries on marketed products containing the respective
erbal ingredients. We hope that these new features will be both
useful and pleasing to the eye! As always, keeping a book up to
date is a never-ending task, and the explosion in the scientific
iterature on herbal medicines makes this ever more difficult. In
the last five years, there have been over 500 scientific papers
published on St John's wort alone, and it is impossible and
undesirable to describe each of them. The need for a book that
reviews and summarises all this information has, perhaps, never
en greater and we hope that this edition will provide healthcare
professionals with the information they need to be able to advise
their patients, competently and confidently, on the safe, effective
and appropriate use of herbal medicines.

Constructive criticism of the contents of Herbal Medicines is
welcome and may be used to assist in the preparation of any
future editions. The reader is asked to send any comments to the
publisher by post or email (pharmpress@rpsgb.org).

Joanne Barnes, Linda Anderson, David Phillipson
Auckland and London
May 2007

Most of the herbal plant photographs were taken in major
European botanical gardens. Photographs of the drug material
were taken from materials supplied by reputable German herbal
medicinal product suppliers.

We are also very grateful to Dr Christine Leon (Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, UK), who provided helpful advice and suggestions
on appropriate botanical names and synonyms to include. Dr
Leon was able to call on the specialist advice of the following
colleagues, whom we thank. Staff at the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, UK: Dr Tom Cope, Dr Aaron Davis, Dr Nicholas Hind, Dr
Sven Landrein, Dr Gwilym Lewis, Eve Lucas, Dr Alan Paton, Dr
Nigel Taylor. Kew Honorary Research Associates: Jill Cowley, Dr
Phillip Cribb, Dr David Frodin, Brian Mathew. Dr Leon and
colleagues also provided helpful comments on the photographs.

We thank all of the above individuals for their support with this
publication. If there are any errors or omissions in the content of
this book, then they are our responsibility.

----- PAGE 11 -----
- About the Authors

Dr Joanne Barnes
BPharm, PhD, MRPharmS, RegPharmNZ, MPSNZ, FLS

Joanne Barnes obtained a degree in Pharmacy from the University
of Nottingham in 1988, a postgraduate Certificate in Pharma-
covigilance and Pharmacoepidemiology from the London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in 1999, and a PhD in
Pharmacy from the School of Pharmacy, University of London in
2001. She has been registered as a pharmacist with the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain since 1989, was made a
Fellow of the Linnean Society of London in 2003 and achieved
registration as a pharmacist in New Zealand in 2007. She was
Research Fellow in Complementary Medicines in the Department
of Complementary Medicine, University of Exeter (1996-1999),
Research Fellow (1999-2002) and Lecturer in Phytopharmacy
(2002-2005) in the Centre for Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy,
School of Pharmacy, University of London, UK and, since 2005,
has been Associate Professor in Herbal Medicines, School of
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, New Zealand. Her research focuses on the utilisation,
efficacy and safety of herbal medicines, particularly in exploring
issues related to pharmacovigilance. Before embarking on an
academic career, she practised as a hospital clinical pharmacist, as
a medical information pharmacist in the pharmaceutical industry
and worked in pharmaceutical publishing.

She was Editor (1996-1999) and a co-founder of the journal
Focus on Alternative and Complementary Therapies (FACT), Co-
editor (2003-2005) of Complementary Therapies in Medicine and
is an Associate Editor of Phytochemistry Letters and a member of
the editorial boards of Phytotherapy Research, Drug Safety and
the International Journal of Pharmacy Practice. She is a member
of the Health Canada Natural Health Product Directorate's
Expert Resource Group, the RPSGB's complementary medicine
working group, and was a member of the UK Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency's Independent Review
Panel for the Classification of Borderline Products (2000-2005).

Dr Linda A Anderson
BPharm, PhD, FRPharmS

Linda Anderson obtained her first degree in Pharmacy and her
PhD in Pharmacognosy at the Welsh School of Pharmacy in
Cardiff. She was a postdoctoral research and teaching fellow at the
School of Pharmacy, University of London from 1981 to 1987.

Dr Anderson joined the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA, Department of Health, UK;
formerly Medicines Control Agency) in 1987.

Within the MHRA, she was initially involved in the assessment
of new chemical entities and is now mainly involved with abridged
applications and has specific responsibility for herbal products.
She is Principal Assessor to the Committee on Safety of
Medicine's (CSM) Expert Advisory Group on Chemistry,
Pharmacy and Standards (CPS) and is UK delegate to the
European Committee on Human Medicinal Products (CHMP)
Quality Working Party. Dr Anderson is also UK Delegate to the
European Medicines Agency (EMEA) Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC), a member of the Herbal Medicines
Advisory Committee (HMAC) of the MHRA, and is Vice-Chair

of the British Pharmacopoeia Expert Advisory Group on Herbals
and Complementary Medicines. She is a member of the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society's Science Committee's working group on
complementary/alternative medicine.

Linda Anderson has been awarded a Fellowship of the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (2001).

Professor J David Phillipson
BSc(Pharm), MSc, PhD, DSc, FRPharmS, FLS

David Phillipson graduated BSc in Pharmacy (1956), MSc (1959),
and DSc (1979) from the University of Manchester, and PhD (1965)
from the University of London. He was Lecturer in Pharmacognosy
(1961-1972) at the Department of Pharmacy, Chelsea College,
London, and Senior Lecturer (1973-1979), Reader in Phytochem-
istry (1979-1981), and Professor and Head of the Department of
Pharmacognosy (1981-1994) at the School of Pharmacy, University
of London. On retirement he became Emeritus  Profe:
Pharmacognosy. In 1995 he was appointed as Wilson T S Wang
Distinguished International Visiting Professor at the Chinese
University of Hong Kong from January to June. His research
included investigations of the chemistry and biological activities of
natural products from higher plants with special interests in indole
and isoquinoline alkaloids, and plants used in traditional
medicines for the treatment of malaria and other protozoal
diseases. Collaboration with the pharmaceutical industry included
the application of radioligand—receptor binding assays in the search
for natural products with activity in the central nervous system.
David Phillipson has received awards from the Phytochemical
Society of Europe including the Tate and Lyle Award (1982), Medal
(1994), and the Pergamon Prize for Creativity in Plant Biochemistry
(1996). He was awarded the Korber Foundation Prize for
Achievement in European Science (1989) in collaboration with
Professor MH Zenk of the University of Munich and four other
European colleagues, was presented with the Harrison Memoria
Medal of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (1999),
and with the Sir Hans Sloane Medal of the Faculty of the History
and Philosophy of Medicine and Pharmacy, Society of Apothecaries
(2001). In 1985 he was Science Chairman of the British
Pharmaceutical Conference and has been Secretary (1977-1982),
Vice-Chairman (1982-1984, 1986-1988) and Chairman (1984—
1986) of the Phytochemical Society of Europe. He has been awarded
Fellowships of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
(1980) and of the School of Pharmacy, University of London (1998).
He has supervised 33 PhD students and 11 postdoctoral
researchers, publishing some 222 full research papers, 150 short
communications, 42 review articles, and has edited six books on
natural products. Collaborative research was established with
scientists in many countries world-wide and in 1989 he was
appointed Honorary Professor of the Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences at the Institute of Medicinal Plant Research
and Development, Beijing, China. For 19 years he was a member of
the Natural Products Group of the International Foundation for
Science, Sweden, helping to award research grants to individual
young scientists in developing countries. He has been a member of
a number of national and international committees, including the
Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee (HMAC) of the MHRA.

or of

----- PAGE 12 -----
= How to Use Herbal Medicines

Purpose and Scope

Herbal Medicines is intended to serve as a reference work for
pharmacists, doctors, nurses and other healthcare professionals,
sting in their provis
medicines to members of the public. Herbal Medicines is not
intended to represent a guide to self-diagnosis and self-treatment
with herbal medicines, and should not be used as such.

The term ‘herbal medicine! or ‘herbal medicinal product' (or,
less frequently, ‘herbal remedy!) is used to describe a marketed
product, whereas ‘herbal ingredient! refers to an individual herb
that is present in a herbal medicine.
describe a specific chemical constituent of a herbal ingredient.
Thus, as examples, Valerian Tablets are a herbal product, valerian
root is a herbal ingredient, and valtrate is a herbal constituent of
valerian.

The main criterion for inclusion of a herbal ingredient in the
text is its presence in herbal medicines that are used in the UK,
particularly those which are sold through pharmacies. In addition,
herbs that have recently been the subject of media or scientific
interest have been included. The aim of Herbal Medicines is to
draw the attention of the reader to the reputed actions and uses of
herbal ingredients, and to whether or not these have been
substantiated by evidence from preclinical and/or clinical studies.
In addition, any known or potential toxicities of herba
ingredients, and how these may influence the suitability for
inclusion in herbal medicines or for use with conventiona

on of advice on the use of herbal

a

‘Herbal constituent! is used to

medicines, are also discussed.

Introduction to the Monographs

The introductory section to the 152 monographs on the individua
herbal ingredients contained in Herbal Medicines di s the
legal aspects of herbal medicines including licensed medicines and
non-licensed products in the UK and within the European Union
(EU). All medicines are a: ed for their quality, safety and

Sus

efficacy and, in the context of herbal medicines, there are often
ssment of

specific criteria which are not encountered in the as
other medicines. As a first line in ensuring the safety and efficacy
of herbal medicines there is a series of guidelines for quality
ssment and this is briefly discussed. In terms of safety, it is a
popular conception that because herbs are 'natural' then they must
also be safe. This is a misconception, and it is emphasised that
se

a

some herbal ingredients have the capability to cause advet
effects, whilst some are decidedly toxic. Within the context of the
152 monographs on herbal ingredients, most have documented
adverse effects, or the potential to interact with other medication,
and few can be recommended for use during pregnancy.

Tables in the Introduction and appendices at the end of the
monographs summarise the safety aspects of these herbal
ingredients and give information on biologically active herbal
ingredients and their active principles. Clinical efficacy has not
been established for the majority of the herbal ingredients
described in this handbook and, in some instances, there is a
lack of documentation for chemical constituents and for
pharmacological actions.

The Herbal Monographs

Some 152 monographs on individual herbal ingredients found in
herbal products are included, the title used for the monograph
being their preferred common name. A data sheet-type format
was chosen for the monographs because it was felt important to
arrange the relevant information in a format familiar to
pharmacists, doctors, nurses and other healthcare prof
Although conventional data sheets are written for products, it was
decided to draw up the data sheets for herbal ingredients and not
for specific products, although where possible details are provided
of the specific products assessed in the studies discussed.

The headings used in the herbal monographs are listed below
ith a brief explanation of the information provided under them.

ionals.

w

Monograph title

Common name for the herbal ingredient; if more than one common name exists,
this is the chosen preferred name.

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

This section is designed to give the reader an overall summary of the monograph
contents, indicating the extent of phytochemical, pharmacological and clinical
data available for the herbal ingredient, whether or not proposed herbal uses are
justified, concerns over safety and, based on this information, whether or not the
herbal ingredient is considered suitable for use as a herbal medicine

Species (Family)

Preferred botanical name with authority, together with the plant family.

Synonym(s)

Other common or botanical names.

Part(s) Used

Plant part(s) traditionally used in herbal medicine.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Key pharmacopoeial monographs and texts on herbal medicines.

UK Legal Category

Legal category of the herb with respect to licensed products. For the majority of
herbal ingredients this will be the General Sales List (GSL).

Constituents

Main documented chemical constituents grouped into categories such as alkaloids
(type specified), flavonoids, iridoid glycosides, saponins, tannins, triterpenes,
volatile oil and other constituents for miscellaneous and minor chemical
components.

table continues

----- PAGE 13 -----
w How to Use Herbal Medicines

Chemical structural formulae
Quality of plant material and commercial products
Food Use

Herbal Use

Photographs

Dosage

Pharmacological Actions
Side-effects, Toxicity
Contra-indications, Warnings

Preparations

References

Chemical structural formulae are included for key constituents of herbal ingredients
for virtually every monograph. This information supplements the textual
information on constituents.

This section has been included for several herbal ingredients commonly
encountered in commercial products. It describes studies examining the variation
in phytochemical content of crude plant material and marketed products and other
aspects relating to product quality, such as differences between actual and labelled
content of commercial products.

Provides an indication as to whether the herbal ingredient is used in foods. The
Council of Europe (COE) category, which reflects the opinion of the COE on the
suitability of the herbal ingredient for use as a food flavouring, is quoted where
applicable.

States the reputed actions and uses of the herbal ingredients, based on information
from several sources. In some instances, current investigations of particular interest
are included.

Provided for most of the monographs for the crude drug substance and the plant
from which it originates. As we do not provide botanical, macroscopical or
microscopical descriptions, these photographs are for illustrative purposes only and
are not intended to be used for identification purposes.

States the traditional dose of the herbal ingredient, mainly from the British Herbal
Pharmacopoeia (BHP), German Commission E and European Scientific Co-
operative on Phytotherapy (ESCOP) monographs, giving doses for plant part used
(e.g. herb, rhizome, leaf), liquid extract and infusion. Where possible, dosages
typically used in clinical trials are included.

Describes any documented pharmacological actions for the herbal ingredient. This
is further divided into a section on In vitro and animal studies and a Clinical studies
section, which describes studies involving humans.

Details documented side-effects to the herbal ingredient and toxicological studies.
If side-effects or toxicity are generally associated with any of the constituents in the
herbal ingredient, or with its plant family, then these are mentioned here. See also
Table 1 and Table 2 in the Introduction.

Describes potential contra-indications and potential side-effects, and individuals
who may be more susceptible to a particular side-effect. This section should be
used in conjunction with Appendices 1-3. Comments on Pregnancy and lactation
are included; a summary is provided in Table 3 of the Introduction.

Describes product information from over 35 countries. Arranged in two sections,
the first section lists by country the proprietary names (product names) of
preparations containing the single herbal ingredient described in the monograph.
The second section lists by country products that contain multiple ingredients
including the herbal ingredient described in the monograph. Specific suppliers of
preparations are shown in Appendix 4 along with the supplier contact information
in Appendix 5.

References are included at the end of the text on each monograph. There is
considerable literature on herbal plants and general references have been selected
for use with the handbook. These General References, referred to as G1 to G88, are
listed after the Introduction. For some well-known herbal ingredients only general
references are cited. The majority of the monographs also contain specific
references which are cited at the end of each monograph.

----- PAGE 14 -----
Introduction

A general disillusionment with conventional medicines, coupled
with the desire for a 'natural' lifestyle has resulted in an increasing
utilisation of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)
across the developed world.

A study of long-term trends in the use of CAM therapies in the
United States of America reported that the use of CAM therapies
has increased steadily since the 1950s.) Use of CAM. has
increased independent of gender, ethnicity and level of education,
but is more common in younger people. The use of herbal
medicine increased particularly in the 1970s and then again in the
1990s. The report concluded that the continuing demand for
CAM will affect delivery of healthcare for the foreseeable future.
More recent studies have confirmed that the prevalence of CAM
use has remained stable with about a third of US adults reported
to use CAM therapies.) The ten top-selling herbal products in
the US in 2004 have been reported as garlic, echinacea, saw
palmetto, ginkgo, soy, cranberry, ginseng, black cohosh, St John's
wort and milk thistle. The continuing use of CAM has also been
reported in South Australia where in 2004, CAMs were reportedly
used by over 50% of the population. Several other studies have
documented the growing use of CAM in the United Kingdom,
with the most common complementary therapies reported as
acupuncture, homeopathy, herbal medicine and manipulative
therapies, chiropractic and osteopathy.

Estimates of the prevalence of CAM utilisation amongst the
general population in the UK range from 10.6%, for use of a
limited list of CAM therapies, to 46.6% for use of CAM therapies
or over-the-counter (OTC) CAM products. In its report on
complementary and alternative medicine, the House of Lords
Select Committee on Science and Technology's Subcommittee on
Complementary and Alternative Medicine highlighted the lack of
comprehensive information on the use of herbal medicines in the
UK. Estimates of herbal medicine use are available, but it is

difficult to gauge usage accurately as many products are
considered to be food supplements. Nevertheless, a national
telephone survey of a nationally representative sample of 1204
British adults found that around 7% of those contacted had used
herbal medicines in the previous year." In another cross-
sectional study, over 5000 randomly selected adults in England
were sent a postal questionnaire on their use of CAM.” Around
20% of the respondents had bought an over-the:
remedy in the previous 12 months.

Estimates of expenditure on herbal medicines vary, but data
generally show that the global market for herbal products has
grown rapidly in the past decade. In the USA, annual retail sales
of herbal medicines were estimated to be US$ 1.6 billion in
1994," and almost US$ 4 billion in 1998.2) However, since then
there have been reports that the US market has levelled off and in
some cases declined.» Retail sales of herbal products in the
European Union (EU) were estimated to be US$ 7000 million in
1996." A detailed analysis of the European herbal medicines
market reported that Germany and France make up more than
70% of the market share.''”’ In 1997, total sales of herbal products
(using wholesale prices) were US$1.8 billion in Germany and US
$1.1 billion in France. In the UK, retail sales of herbal products
are reported to have increased by 43% in the period from 1994 to

counter herbal

1998, with retail sales of licensed herbal medicinal products
reported to be £50 million in 1998.

Market reports from 2003 indicated a growth in the UK sales of
complementary medicines of almost 60% over the previous five
years with an estimated value of £130 million. Herbal medicines
were reported to represent 60% of the market.''®
indicate that the UK market has continued to expand by 45%
from 1999 to 2004, with sales of herbal medicines accounting for
more than 50%, having risen by 16% since 2002.”

These figures demonstrate that herbal medicinal products are
being used increasingly by the general public on a self-selection
basis to either replace or complement conventional medicines.
Against this background of increasing usage of herbal medicines
by the public, a number of major public health issues have raised
concerns about these products and have highlighted the need for
healthcare professionals to have up-to-date scientific information
on the quality, safety and efficacy of these products. The
substitution of toxic Aristolochia species in traditional Chinese
medicines (TCM) has resulted in cases of serious renal toxicity
and renal cancer in Europe, China and America.''®) The
emergence of interactions between Hypericum perforatum (see
St John's wort) and certain prescription medicines has necessitated
regulatory action world-wide.”

Serious cases of liver damage including a number of fatalities
associated with the use of Piper methysticum (see Kava) have led
to restrictions on its use in many countries.2” Frequent reports of
the presence of toxic heavy metals and pharmaceutical substances
in Ayurvedic and traditional Chinese medicines reflect a global
problem of poor quality of many herbal products.?"

Pharmacis
rational and safe use of all medicines. Studies in the UK, Australia
and the US show that pharmacists are frequently involved in the
supply of herbal medicines.°**

In order to fulfil this role, pharmacists need to be knowledge-
able about herbal medicines and should have ac
information in order to advise patients and the public on the safe,
effective and appropriate use of herbal preparations. The need to
be reliably informed of the quality, safety and efficacy of herbal
medicines has been highlighted.°” 7” Also, many other healthcare
professionals are becoming increasingly aware of their patients!
use of herbal medicines and need to be informed of the suitability
of these products for use as medicines.

This handbook brings together in one text a series of
monographs on 152 herbs commonly present in herbal medicina
products sold through pharmacies in the UK. Three appendices
are also presented, grouping together herbs with specific actions,
and highlighting potential interactions with conventional medi-
cines.

As a preface to the monographs, an overview of UK an
European legislation concerning herbal products is provided,
together with issues pertaining to their quality, safety and efficacy.
In addition to retail purchase, herbs can be obtained by picking
the wild plant or from a herbal practitioner. This handbook does
not discuss the self-collection of plant material for use as a herba
remedy or the prescribing of herbal medicines by herba
practitioners.

» Recent reports

s need to be able to advise the consumer on the

s to reliable

----- PAGE 15 -----
Introduction

Herbal Medicines and Phytotherapy

Herbal medicines are also referred to as herbal remedies, herbal

products, herbal medicinal products, phytomedicines, phytother-
apeutic agents and phytopharmaceuticals. The use of herbal
medicines in an evidence- or science-based approach for the
treatment and prevention of disease is known as (rational)
phytotherapy. This approach to the use of herbal medicines
contrasts with traditional medical herbalism which uses herbal
medicines in a holistic manner and mainly on the basis of their
empirical and traditional uses. Although these two approaches —
traditional/holistic and rational/evidence-based — are entirely
different, in some instances they use the same terminology. For
example, traditional herbalism is also described as 'phytotherapy'
and refers to preparations of plant material as 'herbal medicines’.
Today, a continuum between these approaches exists and many
herbalists also use scientific evidence to support their traditional
use of herbal medicines. Plants have been used medicinally for
thousands of years by cultures all over the world. According to the
World Health Organization, 80% of the world's population uses
plant-based remedies as their primary form of healthcare; in
some countries, herbal medicines are still a central part of the
medical system, such as Ayurvedic medicine in India and
traditional Chinese medicine in China. Herbal medicine has a
long history and tradition in Europe.

Herbal homeopathic remedies are
mistaken by the layperson to be similar. However, homeopathy
is based on the principle of ‘like should be treated by like', and
involves the administration of minute doses of remedies that, in
larger doses, produce symptoms in a healthy person mimicking
those expressed by people who are ill. Many, but not all,
homeopathic remedies originate from plants. By contrast, herbal
medicine (phytotherapy) involves the use of dried plant material
or extracts of plant parts in therapeutic doses to treat the
symptoms exhibited. In this latter respect, it is similar to
conventional medicine.

medicines and often

Regulatory Controls on Herbal Medicines

Herbal medicinal products in Europe

Herbal products are available in all Member States of the
European Union (EU), although the relative size of their markets
Since the late 1980s, the regulation of
herbal products has been a major issue within the EU because of
the differences between Member States in the way herbal products
are classified and the difficulties this might present in the
completion of the single market for pharmaceuticals.

According to Council Directive 2001/83/EEC, as amended, a
medicinal product is defined as 'any substance or combination of
substances presented as having properties for treating or
preventing disease in human beings or any substance or
combination of substances which may be administered to human

varies between countrie:

beings with a view to restoring, correcting or modifying
physiological functions by exerting a pharmacological, immuno-
logical or metabolic action, or to making a diagnosis.'°”
Herbal products are considered as medicinal products if they
fall within the definition of the Directive. However, the legal
ification is complicated by the fact that in most Member
States herbal products are available both as medicinal products
with therapeutic claims and also as food/dietary supplements
without medicinal claims. The situation is further complicated in
that some Member States, including the UK (see Current
regulatory position of herbal products in the UK), have national

clas

provisions which permit certain herbal medicinal products to be
exempt from the licensing provisions under specific conditions. In
general, in all Member States, herbal products are classified as
medicinal products if they claim therapeutic or prophylactic
indications.

The advent of the new pan-European marketing authorisation
system in 1993 raised questions with regard to herbal products
and, in particular, concerns that major differences
classification/assessment would hinder free circulation within
the EU. The new systems for marketing authorisations involve
three procedures: centralised, decentralised (mutual recognition)
and national.°***) The centralised procedure is mandatory for
biotechnology products and since November 2005 was mandatory
for orphan medicinal products and any medicinal product for
human use containing new active substances (i.e. one not
previously authorised in the Community) for the treatment of
AIDS, cancer, neuro-degenerative disease and diabetes.° The

in their

decentralised procedure or mutual recognition system involv
agreement of assessment between the Member States involved;

this procedure became compulsory from January 1998, for
products requesting authorisation in more than one Member
State. Since then, simultaneous national applications have been
possible, but the mutual recognition system automatically
becomes involved once an authorisation has been granted in the
first Member State. The original intention was to retain existing
national procedures for medicinal products requesting authorisa-
tion in a single Member State only. However, the European
Commission agreed that national procedures could continue for
bibliographic applications, including those for herbal products
until the harmonisation issues could be resolved.

In 1997, upon the initiative of the European Parliament, the
European Commission and the (then) European Medicines
Evaluation Agency (EMEA), now European Medicines Agency,
an ad hoc Working Group on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPWG) was established at the EMEA. The main thrust of
the HMPWG was the protection of public health by preparing
guidance to help facilitate mutual recognition of marketing
authorisations in the field of herbal medicines, and to minimise
CHMP (Committee on Human Medicinal Products) formerly the
Committee on Proprietary Medicinal Products (CPMP) arbitra-
tions.

A major study undertaken by the AESGP (Association of the
European Self-medication Industry) in 1998 at the request of the
European Commission confirmed the different approaches taken
by Member States in the regulation of herbal medicinal
products." Different traditions in the therapeutic use of herbal
preparations, coupled with different national approaches to their
sment, have resulted in differences in the availability of some
herbal medicines. For example, ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) is available
as a prescription-only medicine in some EU countries, but as a
food supplement in others. Similarly, St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum) is accepted as a treatment for depression in some
Member States, but not in others.

The AESGP study revealed that, in general, herbal medicinal
products were either fully licensed with efficacy proven by clinical
trials or by bibliography (in accordance with Article 10.1 a (i) of
Council Directive 2001/83/EC), or that herbal products had a
more or less simplified proof of efficacy, according to their
national use. Furthermore, the study found major discrepancies
between Member States in the classification of individual herbal
preparations and products into one of these categories, as well as
in the requirements for obtaining a marketing authorisation
(product licence). The report highlighted the need for clarification

----- PAGE 16 -----
of the regulatory framework and harmonisation of the regulatory
requirements to ensure that herbal medicinal products could have
access to the single market for pharmaceuticals.

An important initiative in the harmonisation proce:
the formation of the European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy (ESCOP), an organisation representing national
associations for phytotherapy. ESCOP was founded in 1989 by six
EU national scientific associations with the objective of establish-
ing a scientific umbrella organisation to provide harmonised
criteria for the assessment of herbal medicinal products, to
support scientific research and contribute to the acceptance of
phytotherapy in Europe.°°*”

ESCOP now comprises 13 national associations across Europe,
and the American Botanical Council. The ESCOP Scientific
Committee has published 80 monographs for individual herbal
drugs; the monographs follow the European Summary of Product
Characteristics (SPC) format.°*) The EMEA Herbal Medicinal
Products Working Party (HMPWP) formerly used the ESCOP
monographs as a basis for its work in developing core SPCs from
ESCOP monographs. The HMPWP has now been superseded by
the Herbal Medicinal Products Committee (HMPC) as discussed
below and the collaboration with ESCOP continues in accordance
with the new EU regulations.

s has been

New regulations for traditional herbal medi

in the EU

al products

From the late 1980s, the need for a new regulatory framework for
herbal products has been under discussion supported by the
European Parliament and the European Commi
generally accepted that a significant number of herbal medicina
products did not fulfil the requirements for marketing authoriza-
tions. In September 1999, the European Pharmaceutical Commit-
tee set up a working group of Member States to investigate the
possibility of a directive for traditionally used medicines. Work
commenced in April 2000 and a new EU Directive on Traditiona
Herbal Medicinal Products 2004/24/EC came into force in Apri
2004 requiring Member States to implement registration schemes
by October 2005.°?) The aim is to remove the differences which
create obstacles to the free movement of medicinal products in the
EU, while ensuring protection for public health. For unlicensed
herbal medicines legally on the market on 30 April 2004, the
Directive provides a seven-year transitional period to allow
companies time to meet the new requirements. The new Directive
provides a framework for the regulation of traditionally used
herbal medicinal products requiring them to meet specific and
appropriate standards of safety and quality and for the product to
be accompanied by suitable information to ensure its safe use.
Registered products are required to be suitable for self-medication
without the need for the intervention of a medical practitioner.
The normal requirement for medicines to be proven to be
efficacious, as required under Directive 2001/83/EC for a market-
ing authorisation, is replaced by a requirement to demonstrate 30
years’ traditional use for the required medicinal indication; at least
15 years of this usage must have been within the EU.
Registration applications have to include a bibliographic review
of the safety data associated with the use of the herbal product in
a particular indication. In addition, this review will need to be
accompanied by an expert report on the safety data submitted.
The normal quality requirements applicable to licensed medicines
will apply, including good manufacturing practice (GMP) and
European Pharmacopoeia standards. Labelling and package
leaflets for registered products will be required to include

on. It was

Introduction

information and instructions about the safe use of the product
and will include a statement to the effect that the product is based
on long-standing use. In addition to the herbal ingredients,
vitamins and minerals can be added provided that they are
ancillary to the herbal active ingredients. Manufacturers will be
required to have in place an adequate pharmacovigilance system
to maintain records of all suspected adverse drug reactions
(ADRs) occurring world-wide and will have to report all ADRs to
the national regulatory licensing authority.

The Directive established a new European Committee at the
EMEA, the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)
with responsibilities to prepare Community monographs and a
Community list of herbal substances. A Community herbal
monograph comprises the committee's scientific opinion on a
given herbal medicinal product, based on its evaluation of
available scientific data (well-established use) or on the historic
use of that product in the European Community (traditional use).
For some herbal medicinal products, the Community monograph
established use and traditional use. The

will cover both well

Community monographs are intended to assist harmonisation of
requirements for bibliographic! marketing authorisation applica-
tions. When the HMPC has produced a draft Community
monograph it is released for public consultation on the EMEA
website, usually for a period of three months. The comments
ved are subsequently reviewed and the final version of the
mmunity herbal monograph is published.

The Community list will contain, for each herbal substance or
preparation, the indication, the specified strength and the
posology, the route of administration and any other information
necessary for the safe use of the herbal substance or preparation
used as an ingredient of a traditional medicinal product. The
Community list will provide a harmonised approach at EU level
for providing information on substance(s) or preparation(s) that
constitute traditional herbal medicinal products. The list will
cover substances and preparations that have been in medicinal use
for a sufficiently long time, and therefore considered not to be
harmful under normal conditions of use. List entries are also
released for public consultation on the EMEA website, usually for
a period of three months. Applicants for traditional registrations
can refer to the list rather than have to provide evidence of
traditional use and safety thus further simplifying the registration
procedure. Draft and adopted Community monographs are
available on the EMEA website.“

A simplified registration scheme was introduced in the UK in
October 2005 for traditional herbal medicinal products. A new
advisory committee, the Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee
(HMAC), has been established to advise Health Ministers on
issues relating to registration of traditional herbal medicinal
products and the safety and quality of unlicensed herbal remedi

rec

Current regulatory position of herbal products in the UK

Herbal products are available in the UK through various retail
outlets, such as pharmacies, health-food shops, mail order
companies, supermarkets, department stores and, increasingly,
via the internet. Some herbal products con solely of loose,
dried plant material; others are presented as pre-packaged
formulated products in a variety of pharmaceutical forms for
both internal (tablets, capsules, liquids) and external use (creams,
ointments) and may contain one or several herbal ingredients
which may be dried herbs or their extracts. The current regulatory
position is complicated by the fact that herbal products can fall
into one of three categories: licensed herbal products, those

----- PAGE 17 -----
Introduction

exempt from licensing and those marketed as food supplements.
In addition, from November 2005, the registration procedure for
traditional herbal medicinal products has introduced a further
category, that of 'registered products’.

The majority of herbal products are marketed without
medicinal claims either exempt from licensing (see Herbal
remedies exempt from licensing) or as food supplements. Those
supplied as food supplements are controlled under food legislation
whilst those exempt from licensing are controlled under medicines
legislation. Difficulties in defining the status of produc
occupying the borderline between medicines and foods have
resulted in similar products being marketed in both these
categories. Provided the products were marketed without reference
to medicinal claims, the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA; formerly Medicines Control Agency
(MCA)), the government body responsible for regulating medic-
inal products has, in the past, generally been satisfied that the
products were not subject to medicines legislation.“ However,
implementation of the definition of a medicinal product in
accordance with EC Directives has meant that greater emphasis is
now being placed on the nature of the herbal ingredients being
supplied as food supplements.

ensed herbal medicinal products

Almost all of the licensed herbal medicines on the UK market have
been available for some time and most originally held Product
Licences of Right (PLR). Following the implementation of the UK
Medicines Act in 1971, Product Licences of Right were issued to
all medicinal products already on the market in September 1971,
however, scientific assessment was not undertaken at the time the
PLR was granted. A subsequent review of all PLRs for safety,
quality and efficacy took place culminating in 1990. During the
UK review of herbal medicinal products holding a PLR, the
Licensing Authority agreed to accept bibliographic evidence of
efficacy for herbal medicinal products which were indicated for
minor, self-limiting conditions.) No evidence was required from

new clinical trials provided the manufacturers agreed to label their
products as 'a traditional herbal remedy for the symptomatic relief
of and to include the statement 'if symptoms persist consult
your doctor'. The Licensing Authority considered it inappropriate
to relax the requirements for proof of efficacy for herbal medicinal
products indicated for more serious conditions. Thus, evidence
was required from controlled clinical trials for herbal medicinal
products indicated for conditions considered inappropriate for
self-diagnosis and treatment. Many features of the new traditional
use registration scheme are similar to those applied during the
review of PLRs.

The MHRA regulates medicinal products for human use in
accordance with The Medicines (Marketing Authorisations etc.)
Amendment Regulations 2005, (The Regulations) and the
Medicines Act 1968.) The Medicines Act and secondary
legislation made under it remain the legal basis for other aspects
of medicines control including manufacturer and wholesale
dealers' authorisations, controls on sale and supply and controls
on promotion. Further explanation may be obtained by reference
to a chapter on herbal remedies in Dale and Appelbe's Pharmacy
Law and Ethics.

e

Applications for marketing authorisations (product licences)
for new herbal products are assessed by the MHRA for quality,
safety and efficacy in accordance with EC and UK legislation.
Specific EC guidelines exist on the quality, specifications and

34048) Few

manufacture of herbal medicinal product applications
for new marketing authorisations are successful and the
difficulties faced by herbal manufacturers in fulfilling the
regulatory requirements have led to the development of the new
simplified traditional use registration scheme outlined above. It
will continue to be possible to obtain a marketing authorisation
for a herbal medicinal product provided that the required data on
safety, quality and efficacy can be demonstrated.

Herbal remedies exempt from licensing

Under the Medicines Act, herbal remedies manufactured and sold
or supplied in accordance with specific exemptions set out in
Sections 12(1) or (2) or Article 2 of the Medicines (Exemptions
from Licences) (Special and Transitional Cases) Order 1971 (SI
1450) are exempt from the requirement to hold product
licences. The exempt products are those compounded and
supplied by herbalists on their own recommendation, those
comprised solely of dried, crushed or comminuted plants sold
under their botanical name with no written recommendations as
to their use, and those made by a holder of a Specials
Manufacturing Licence on behalf of a herbalist.

The exemptions are intended, for example, to give herbal
practitioners the flexibility they need to prepare their own
remedies for individual patients without the burden of licensing,
and to enable simple dried herbs to be readily available to the
public. Supply of herbal remedies by herbal practitioners is not
affected by the new regulations on traditional medicines.
Proposals for the reform of the regulation of unlicensed herbal
remedies made up to meet the needs of individual patients are
currently under consideration.”

At the present time, most manufactured over-the-counter herbal
medicines in the UK are sold under the exemptions provided for
by Section 12(2) of the Medicines Act. It has been recognised for
some time that the arrangements for unlicensed herbal medicinal
products do not afford sufficient protection for public health and
that there is a need to improve the regulatory position. The
MHRA is now of the view that the present regulatory
arrangements for unlicensed herbal medicines have significant
weaknesses.” The regime for unlicensed herbal products is
considered not to provide sufficient protection or information for
the public and there are no specific safeguards in place to ensure
adequate product quality and safety.”

The all party House of Lords Select Committee on Science and
Technology concluded: 'We are concerned about the safety
implications of an unregulated herbal sector and we urge that
all legislative avenues be explored to ensure better control of this
unregulated sector in the interests of public health."

Evidence of the risks to public health have continued to emerge
and in September 2004 the Committee on Safety of Medicines
(CSM) repeated an earlier warning about their concerns in
relation to the poor quality of some traditional Chinese medicines
on the UK market.”

The MHRA has indicated that it is the Government's intention
that, following the transitional period of the Traditional Use
Directive, Section 12 (2) would cease to provide a regulatory route
by which manufactured herbal medicinal products can reach the

market place without a traditional registration or product
(53)

licence.

Control of herbal ingredients in the UK

Most of the herbal ingredients used in licensed herbal medicines
have been used as traditional remedies for centuries without major

----- PAGE 18 -----
safety problems, and the majority is included in the General Sales
List (GSL).°* Potentially hazardous plants such as digitalis,
rauwolfia and nux vomica are specifically controlled under the
Medicines Act as prescription only medicines (POM), °°) and thus
are not available other than via a registered medical practitioner.
In addition, certain herbal ingredients are controlled under The
Medicines (Retail Sale and Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order
1977 SI 2130.°° This Order (Part I) specifies 25 plants which
cannot be supplied except via a pharmacy, and includes well-
known toxic species, such as Areca, Crotalaria, Dryopteris and
Strophanthus. In Part Il, the Order specifies plant species, such as
Aconitum, Atropa, Ephedra and Hyoscyamus, which can be
supplied by ‘herbal practitioners', and in Part III defines the
dosages and routes of administration permitted.

Legislation has been introduced to prohibit the use of
Aristolochia species or species likely to be confused with
Aristolochia in unlicensed medicin

37)
©” These measures were

introduced in the wake of cases of serious toxicity and evidence
showing widespread substitution of certain ingredients in
traditional Chinese medicines with Aristolochia (see Quality,
Safety and Efficacy of Herbal Medicines).

Following cases of serious liver damage suspected to be
associated with its consumption Piper methysticum (see Kava)
was prohibited in unlicensed herbal medicines in January 2003.°°
The MHRA has also announced the need to update the list of
herbal ingredients subject to restrictions or prohibitions
unlicensed medicines to take account of the herbal ingredients
used in traditional Chinese and Ayurvedic medicines.”

in use in

Regulatory control of herbal medicines world-wide

The World Health Organization (WHO) has conducted a recent
global survey on the regulatory control of herbal medicines and
has reported findings from 141 countries." This work provides a
valuable update to the earlier WHO reviews and illustrates the
wide differences in the approach to regulation between these
(61,62) The recent survey confirms that during the past
four years many countries have established, or initiated, the
process of establishing national policy and regulations regarding
herbal medicines. The most important challenges faced by
countries were those related to regulatory status, ass
safety and efficacy, quality control and safety monitoring. In
response to requests from Member States, WHO has resolved to
provide technical support for the development of methodology to
monitor or ensure product safety, efficacy and quality, preparation
of guidelines, and promotion of information exchange. WHO
guidelines have recently been developed in a number of important
areas including consumer information, pharmacovigilance and
good agricultural and collection practices (GACP).'°* ®)

Herbal products are well established as phytomedicines in some
countries, whereas in others they are regarded as foods, and
therapeutic claims are not allowed. In the context of this book, it
should be noted that many of the herbs included in the
monographs are of economic importance in some non-European
countries, particularly Australia, Canada and the USA.

In Australia, therapeutic goods for human use which are
imported or manufactured are subject to the Therapeutic Goods
Act, 1989 and all therapeutic goods imported into, supplied in or
exported from Australia must be included in the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG).® Herbal medicines,
including traditional medicines such as Ayurvedic medicines and
traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) are regulated as comple-
mentary medicines. For the purpose of labelling requirements,

countries

S.

sment of

Introduction

herbs are included in the List of Australian Approved Names for
Pharmaceutical Substances, which is published by the Therapeutic
Goods Administration. The Australian system has a two-tiered
approach based on risk. Low risk medicines, which include most
complementary medicines, are included in the ARTG as listed
medicines. These medicines are not evaluated before they are
market, but are checked to ensure that they
comply with certain legislative requirements. Listed medicines
have limited therapeutic indications, for example health enhance-
ment, reduction in risk of a disease, disorder or condition,
reduction in frequency of a discrete event, aiding or assisting
management of a symptom, disease, disorder or condition, relief
of symptoms. Indications and claims referring to treatment,
management, cure or prevention of a disease, disorder, or
condition or reference to a serious form of a disease are generally
not permitted for listed medicines. Those medicines deemed to be
higher risk are assessed individually for safety, quality and efficacy
prior to marketing.

In Canada, new regulations, the Natural Health Products
Regulations, came into force in January 2004.” Products that fall
within the new regulations include herbal remedies, homeopathic
medicines, vitamins, minerals, traditional medicines, probiotics,
amino acids and essential fatty acids. The new regulations
introduce a system of product licensing, site licensing, GMP,
adverse reaction reporting and requirements for labelling. Persons
marketing products before January 2004 have a transition period
of two years to comply with the site licence requirements of the
regulations and those products with a valid Drug Identification
Number, from the previous regulatory regime, have six years to
obtain a product licence under the new regulations. Product
licence applications are assessed for safety and efficacy and
different types of claims can be proposed, e.g. therapeutic claims,
risk reduction claims or structure-function claims supported by
traditional use or non-traditional use.

In the USA, the majority of medicinal herbs and their products
are regulated like foods as dietary supplements, under the 1994
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA).*%?
Whilst medicinal claims cannot be made for the products,
labelling may describe effects on general well-being. Unlike new
medicines, dietary supplements do not generally have to go
through review by the Food and Drug Administration for safety
and effectiveness or be approved before they can be marketed.
However, manufacturers must provide premarket notice and
evidence of safety for any supplements they plan to sell that
contain dietary ingredients that were not on the market before
DSHEA was passed. Concerns have been raised about the
effectiveness of the DSHEA legislation following the emergence
of major safety issues arising with unsafe ingredients e.g. ephedra,
lack of GMP, poor labelling and inadequate reporting of adverse
(67) Th response, the FDA has announced the
development of strategies to monitor and evaluate product and
ingredient safety; to assure product quality (current good
manufacturing practice regulations (CGMP); and to improve
product labelling.” 7”)

It is apparent that not only is the regulation of medicinal herbs
different from one country to another, but also that the regulatory
processes are not necessarily ideal and are under current review.

released on to the

se!

reactions.

Quality, Safety and Efficacy of Herbal Medi

In order to ensure public health, medicinal products must be safe,
efficacious and of suitable quality for use. To obtain a marketing
authorisation (product licence) within the EU, manufacturers of

es

----- PAGE 19 -----
Introduction

herbal medicinal products are required to demonstrate that their
products meet acceptable standards of quality, safety and efficacy.

Quality

Over the past decade the quality of herbal products has continued
to be a major concern. The importance of quality in ensuring the
safety and efficacy of herbal products has been reviewed
“ved, (2573-78)
extensively.

Problems with unregulated herbal products
The vast majority of quality-related problems are associated with
unregulated herbal products. There is substantial evidence that
many ethnic medicines, in particular, those used in traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM) and traditional Asian medicines
(Ayurvedic and Unani), lack effective quality controls and may
give rise to serious public health concerns. The problems include
deliberate or accidental inclusion of prohibited or restricted
ingredients, substitution of ingredients, contamination with toxic
substances and differences between the labelled and actual
contents. These problems are further compounded by demand
outstripping supply of good quality ingredients, confusing
nomenclature over plant species, cultural difference:
over toxicity and traditional practices such as substituting one
ingredient for another having a reportedly similar action.

Although individual herbs present in traditional Chinese
medicines and traditional Asian medicines are not the subject of
monographs in this book, they do illustrate the problems that may
be associated with the quality and safety of herbal medicines.

of view

Substitution and adulteration

Aristolochia Exposure to Aristolochia species in unlicensed herbal
medicines has resulted in cases of nephrotoxicity and
carcinogenicity in Europe, China, Japan and the USA."*
Concerns were first raised about the effects of products
containing aristolochic acids in Belgium where, since 1993,
over 100 cases of irreversible nephropathy have been reported
in young women using a preparation claimed to aid weight
loss. The nephrotoxicity was traced to the inadvertent use of
the toxic Aristolochia fangchi root in the formulation as a
substitute for Stephania tetrandra. Aristolochic acids, the toxic
components of Aristolochia spec
nephrotoxic, carcinogenic and mutagenic. The International
Agency for Research on Cancer classifies products containing
Aristolochia species as human carcinogens.” Several of the

Belgian patients have subsequently developed urothelial cancer
80-84)

s, are known to be

as a result of exposure to the toxic aristolochic acids."
Seven cases of nephropathy involving substitution of
Aristolochia fangchi and Stephania tetrandra have been
reported in France.) Toxicity has also resulted from the

substitution of Aristolochia manshuriensis stem for the stem of
Clematis and Akebia species.''® In the UK, two such cases of
end-stage renal failure were reported in 1999.59 Other cases
have been reported in China (17 cases with 12 fatalities) and
Japan (ten cases of renal failure). Also, the FDA has
reported two cases of serious renal disease due to Aristolochia
being substituted for Clematis species in a dietary supple-
ment.”

Substitution of one plant species for another, often of a
completely different genus, is an established practice in TCM.
Furthermore, herbal ingredients are traded using their
common Chinese Pin Yin names, and this can lead to
confusion. For example, the name Fang ji can be used to
describe the roots of Aristolochia fangchi, Stephania tetrandra

or Cocculus species, and the name Mu Tong can be used to
describe the stem of Aristolochia manshuriensis, Clematis or
Akebia species. The widespread substitution with Aristolochia
species in TCM products available in the UK was shown in a
MHRA study which reported the presence of aristolochic acids
in at least 40% of TCM products containing Fang ji and Mu
Tong.*)

The problems associated with Aristolochia have prompted
regulatory action world-wide and new legislation has been
introduced in the UK to prohibit the use of Aristolochia species
in unlicensed medicines in the UK.°”

Despite warnings and an import alert issued by the US FDA
in 2001, products containing aristolochic acid were found to be
available on US websites in 2003.°”) The MHRA has reported
that it continues to find products containing Aristolochia on
the UK market. In 2003, a product called Xie Gan Wan was
found to contain aristolochic acids and in December 2004,

tablets called Jingzhi Kesou Tanchuan were found to contain
Aristolochia fructus.°° Also in December 2004, the Hong
Kong authorities alerted other health authorities to a product
Shen Yi Qian Lie Hui Chin that contained aristolochic acids. In
December 2005, MHRA issued a warning about the possible
presence of Aristolochia species in African herbal remedies
available in the UK.

Digitalis Cases of serious cardiac arrhythmias were reported in the
USA in 1997 following the accidental substitution of plantain
with Digitalis lanata.°" Subsequent investigation revealed that
large quantities of the contaminated plantain had been shipped
to more than 150 manufacturers, distributors and retailers over
a two-year period.

Podophyllum Fourteen cases of podophyllum poisoning have been
reported from Hong Kong following the inadvertent use of the
roots Podophyllum hexandrum instead of Gentiana and
Clematis species.°”) It is reported that this accidental
substitution arose because of the apparent similarity in
morphology of the roots.

Aconitum Cases of cardiotoxicity resulting from the ingestion of
Aconitum species used in TCM have been reported from Hong
Kong.”) In TCM, Aconitum rootstocks are processed by
soaking or boiling them in water in order to hydrolyse the
aconite alkaloids into their less toxic aconine derivatives.
Toxicity can, however, result when such processes are
uncontrolled and unvalidated. In the UK, the internal use of
aconite is restricted to prescription only.

Star Anise The dangers of confusing Chinese (Illicium verum
Hook.f.) and Japanese star anise (Illicium anisatum L.), have
been known for many years as the dried fruits cannot be
distinguished through visual examination. Japanes
is similar to the Chinese variety but has been reported to cause
neurologic and gastrointestinal toxicities due to the presence of
anisatin.°) In 2001 cases of poisoning were reported in the
Netherlands, Spain and France where Japanese star anise had
been accidentally used in place of Chinese star anise.°°?®
Several cases were epileptic-type seizures in babies who had
been given star anise infusions. This led to over 50 cases of
poisoning being reported, but there was no evidence that the
affected products had been imported into the UK. In the US,
seven cases of adverse neurologic reactions have been reported
among infants aged two weeks to three months who were
exposed to star anise tea.)

> star anise

----- PAGE 20 -----
Adulteration with heavy metals/toxic elements and synthetic
drugs

The adulteration of ethnic medicines with heavy metals/toxic
elements and synthetic drugs continues to be a major interna-
tional problem. A comprehensive review in 1992 summarised test
results on products and case histories of patients who had
experienced toxic effects.” Similar findings continue to be
reported and the potential impact on public health is signifi-
cant.” In most cases involving synthetic drugs, the drugs are
undeclared in the product and only come to light when the user
experiences adverse effects which are sufficiently serious to
warrant medical intervention. Exposure to the undeclared drug
is revealed in the subsequent investigation of the clinical case. Of
particular concern is the deliberate addition of closely related
derivatives of pharmaceutical drugs, for example the use of

nitrosofenfluramine instead of fenfluramine in weight-loss pro-
)

situation with the heavy metals/toxic elements differs in
that whilst these ingredients may arise from the plant ingredients
themselves or be introduced as trace contaminants during
processing, they are also frequently added intentionally and
declared as ingredients within some TCM and Asian medicine
formulations. The Chinese Pharmacopoeia, for example, includes
monographs for realgar (arsenic disulfide), calomel (mercurous
chloride), cinnabaris (mercuric sulfide) and hydrargyri oxydum

rubrum (red mercuric oxide), and includes formulations for nearly
00)

50 products that include one or more of these substances. !

A US survey in 1998 reported widespread inconsistencies and
adulterations in imported Asian medicines."° Of 260 imported
products tested, at least 83 (32%)
pharmaceuticals (most commonly ephedrine, chlorphenamine,
methyltestosterone and phenacetin) or heavy metals (lead, arsenic
or mercury). Another survey found evidence of a continuing
problem, with 10% of 500 OTC products testing positive for
undeclared drugs and/or toxic amounts of lead, mercury or
arsenic.)

contained undeclared

Elsewhere, health departments have reported similar conclu-
sions based on their findings. A survey conducted in Singapore
between 1990 and 1997 on TCM products reported that 42
different products were found to contain excessive amounts of
heavy metals (mercury, lead, arsenic) and that 32 different TCM
products were found to contain a total of 19 drugs." In total, 93
cases of excessive content of toxic heavy metals and undeclared
drugs were detected. The drugs detected included
antihistamines (chlorphenamine, promethazine, cyproheptadine),
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (diclofenac, indometacin,
ibuprofen), analgesic antipyretics (paracetamol, dipyrone), corti-
costeroids (prednisolone, dexamethasone, fluocinonide), sym-
pathomimeti agents (ephedrine), bronchodilators
(theophylline), diuretics (hydrochlorthiazide) and the antidiabetic
phenformin. A study in Taiwan found that more than 20% of
2609 products were found to be adulterated with synthetic drugs,

most commonly caffeine, paracetamol, indometacin and hydro-
chlorthiazide."

erberine,

Other examples of adulterated products come from a report
from the Singapore Ministry of Health which identified sildenafil
in two Chinese proprietary medicines,"'° and a report from the
USA FDA which described the recall of a herbal product after
traces of chlordiazepoxide were found in the capsules. In 2001,
the UK MCA reported presence of mercury (due to the inclusion
of cinnabaris) in samples of the product Shugan Wan on the UK
market.”

Cases of toxicity associated with synthetic drugs present in

Introduction

ethnic medicines include a case of poisoning in Hong Kong
resulting from the use of a TCM product containing antic-
onvulsant agents (phenytoin, carbamazepine and valproate).°”
In 2000, the USA FDA issued a public health warning on five
herbal products following adverse effects in patients.°* The
products were found to contain the antihyperglycaemic prescrip-
tion drugs glibenclamide and phenformin. In March 2001, the UK
MCA reported a serious case of hypoglycaemic coma in a patient
who had taken a TCM product, Xiaoke Wan, which contained
glibenclamide."

Cases of toxicity associated with heavy metals in ethnic
medicines include a patient from Taiwan who developed a unique
syndrome of multiple renal tubular dysfunction after taking a
Chinese herbal medicine contaminated with cadmium." In the
USA, two cases of alopecia and sensory polyneuropathy resulting
from thallium in a TCM product have been reported.''"” In the
UK, cases have been reported of two patients with heavy metal
intoxication following ingestion of an Indian remedy containing
inorganic arsenic and mercury,''” and of a patient with lead
poisoning after exposure to an Indian medicine containing toxic
3) In a case reported from
Macau, death of a 13-year-old girl from arsenic poisoning has
been linked with a Chinese herbal product Niu Huang Chieh Tu
Pien.“1!

Evidence of this international problem continues to grow and a
substantial body of literature is now available. The adulteration of

Chinese and Ayurvedic herbal medicines with synthetic drugs and
21, 22, 115-119)

amounts of lead, arsenic and mercury.

toxic metals has been extensively reviewed.
A survey of 70 Ayurvedic herbal medicinal products available in
Boston-area stores (US) found that 20% contained potentially
harmful concentrations of lead, mercury and/or arsenic.‘!?°) In
response to the many issues arising with herbal products the
MHRA has introduced a specific web page Herbal Safety News to
provide information on safety alerts.°° Regular notifications
concerning the presence of heavy metals/toxic elements and
pharmaceutical drugs in TCM/Ayurvedic products and steroids in
dermatological preparations are posted. Of particular concern in
recent years has been the discovery of TCM slimming products
containing potentially harmful ingredients such as fenfluramine,
nitrosofenfluramine, sibutramine, methylphenidate. In March
2004, the Agency was made aware of a UK case of irreversible
liver failure suspected to be caused by a product called 'Shubao-
Slimming Capsules’. The patient required a liver transplant. The
product was labelled as only containing botanical ingredients but
was found to contain undeclared nitrosofenfluramine, a drug
closely related to the prescription only medicine (POM),
fenfluramine. Nitrosofenfluramine is known to be toxic to the
liver. Other samples of Shubao tested were found to contain
nitrosofenfluramine and/or fenfluramine.
The MHRA has issued guidance to the public alerting them to
e specific concerns with TCM. slimming products.°° In
September 2004, MHRA issued a press statement warning
consumers that the poor quality of some TCM products could
pose a health risk to those using them. The MHRA emphasised
that it continued to find examples of products containing the
prohibited ingredients Aristolochia and Ephedra as well as
products containing heavy metals/ toxic elements, prescription
rugs as well as human placenta and bat excreta.”

o

Quality of regulated herbal products

Compared with conventional preparations, herbal medicinal
products present a number of unique problems when quality
aspects are considered. These arise because of the nature of the

----- PAGE 21 -----
Introduction

herbal ingredients, which are complex mixtures of constituents,
and it is well documented that concentrations of plant
constituents can vary considerably depending on environmental
and genetic factors. Furthermore, the constituents responsible for
the claimed therapeutic effects are frequently unknown or only
partly explained and this precludes the level of control which can
routinely be achieved with synthetic drug substances in conven-
tional pharmaceuticals. The position is further complicated by the
traditional practice of using combinations of herbal ingredients,
and it is not uncommon to have five herbal ingredients or more in
one product.

In recognition of the special problems associated with herbal
medicinal products, the CHMP (formerly CPMP) has issued
specific guidelines dealing with quality, specifications and
manufacture. These guidelines have recently been updated.“
The EMEA HMPC has also issued guidance on Good Agricul-
tural and Collection Practice (GACP) for starting materials of
herbal origin."?"” The CHMP guidelines highlight the need for
good control of both the starting materials and the finished
product, and emphasise the importance of good manufacturing
practice in the manufacture of herbal medicinal products.

The WHO has also published guidelines dealing with the
quality control of medicinal plant materials and on good
agricultural and collection practices (GACP).'°> '”)

European Pharmacopoeia

Since its creation in 1964, the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph Eur)
has devoted part of its work to the establishment of monographs
on herbal drugs which are used either in their natural state after
drying or extraction, or for the isolation of natural active
ingredients. The Ph Eur includes over 120 monographs on herbal
drugs, and a similar number of monographs are under develop-
ment. Many general methods of analysis are also described in the

Ph Eur, including te: for pesticides and for microbial
(123)

&

contamination.

Herbal ingredients

Control of the starting materials is essential in order to ensure
reproducible quality of herbal medicinal products.°*”* 74 The
following points are to be considered in the control of starting
materials.

Authentication and reproducibility of herbal ingredients The
problems associated with unregulated herbal products, as
illustrated above, highlight the major public health issues that
can arise when their herbal ingredients have not been
authenticated correctly. Herbal ingredients must be accurately
identified by macroscopical and microscopical comparison
with authentic material or accurate descriptions of authentic
herbs.‘ It is essential that herbal ingredients are referred to
by their binomial Latin names of genus and species; only
permitted synonyms should be used. Even when correctly
authenticated, it is important to realise that different batches
of the same herbal ingredient may differ in quality due to a
number of factors.
Inter- or intraspecies variation For many plants, there is
considerable inter- and intraspecies variation in constituents,
which is genetically controlled and may be related to the
country of origin.
Environmental factors The quality of a herbal ingredient can
be affected by environmental factors, such as climate, altitude
and growing conditions.

Time of harvesting For some herbs the optimum time of
harvesting should be specified as it is known that the
concentrations of constituents in a plant can vary during the
growing cycle or even during the course of a day.

Plant part used Active constituents usually vary between plant
parts and it is not uncommon for a herbal ingredient to be
adulterated with parts of the plant not normally utilised. In
addition, plant material that has been previously subjected to
extraction and is therefore 'exhausted' is sometimes used to
increase the weight of a batch of herbal ingredient.
Post-harvesting factors Storage conditions and_ processing
treatments can greatly affect the quality of a herbal ingredient.
Inappropriate storage after harvesting can result in microbial
contamination, and processes such as drying may result in a
loss of thermolabile active constituents.

adult-
erated with other plant material and conventional medicines,

Adulteration/substitution Instances of herbal remedi

and the consequences of this, have been discussed above. In
particular, the serious public health consequences that may
arise from the substitution of herbal ingredients by toxic
Aristolochia species have been highlighted. Reports of herbal
products devoid of known active constituents have reinforced
the need for adequate quality control of herbal remedies.

Identity tests In order to try to ensure the quality of licensed
ential not only to establish the
botanical identity of a herbal ingredient but also to ensure
batch-to-batch reproducibility. Thus, in addition to macro-
scopical and microscopical evaluation, identity tests are
ssary. Such tests include simple chemical tests, e.g. colour
or precipitation and chromatographic tests. Thin-layer chro-
matography is commonly used for identification purposes but
for herbal ingredients containing volatile oils a gas-liquid
chromatographic test may be used. Although the aim of such
tests is to confirm the presence of active principle(s), it is
frequently the case that the nature of the active principle has
not been established. In such instances chemical and chroma-

herbal medicines, it is es

nec

tographic tests help to provide batch-to-batch comparability
and the chromatogram may be used as a 'fingerprint’ for the
herbal ingredient by demonstrating the profile of some
common plant constituents
Assay For those herbal ingredients with known active
principles, an assay should be established in order to set the
criterion for the minimum accepted percentage of active
substance(s). Such assays should, wherever possible, be specific
for individual chemical substances and high-pressure liquid
chromatography or gas-liquid chromatography are the meth-
ods of choice. Where such assays have not been established
then non-specific methods such as titration or colorimetric
assays may be used to determine the total content of a group of
closely related compounds.

such as flavonoids.

Contaminants of herbal ingredients Herbal ingredients should

be of high quality and free from insects, other animal matter
and excreta. It is not possible to remove completely all
contaminants and hence specifications should be set in order to
limit them:
Ash values Incineration of a herbal ingredient produces ash
which constitutes inorganic matter. Treatment of the ash with
hydrochloric acid results in acid-insoluble ash which consists
mainly of silica and may be used to act as a measure of soil
present. Limits may be set for ash and acid-insoluble ash of
herbal ingredients.

----- PAGE 22 -----
Foreign organic matter It is not possible to collect a herbal
ingredient without small amounts of related parts of plant or
other plants. Standards should be set in order to limit the
percentage of such unwanted plant contaminants.

Microbial contamination Aerobic bacteria and fungi are
normally present in plant material and may increase due to
faulty growing, harvesting, storage or processing. Herbal
ingredients, particularly those with high starch content, may
be prone to increased microbial growth. It is not uncommon
for herbal ingredients to have aerobic bacteria present at 107
10° colony forming units per gram. Pathogenic organisms
including Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Clostridium, Pseudo-
monas, Shigella and Streptococcus have been shown to
contaminate herbal ingredients. It is essential that limits be
set for microbial contamination and the Ph Eur now gives non-
mandatory guidance on acceptable limits.”

Pesticides Herbal ingredients, particularly those grown as
cultivated crops, may be contaminated by DDT (dichlorodi-
phenyltrichloroethane) or other chlorinated hydrocarbons,
organophosphates, carbamates or polychlorinated biphenyls.
Limit tests are necessary for acceptable levels of pesticide
contamination of herbal ingredients. The Ph Eur includes
details of test methods together with mandatory limits for 34
potential pesticide residues.''??)

Fumigants Ethylene oxide, methyl bromide and phosphine have
been used to control pests which contaminate
ingredients. The use of ethylene oxide as a fumigant with
herbal drugs is no longer permitted in Europe.
Toxic metals Lead, cadmium, mercury, thallium and arsenic
have been shown to be contaminants of some

herbal

herbal
ingredients. Limit tests for such toxic metals are essential for
herbal ingredients.
Other contaminants As standards increase for the quality of
herbal ingredients it is possible that tests to limit other
contaminants such as endotoxins, mycotoxins and_radio-
nuclides will be utilised to ensure high quality for medicinal
purposes.

Herbal products

Quality assurance of herbal products may be ensured by control of
the herbal ingredients and by adherence to good manufacturing
practice standards. Some herbal products have many herbal
ingredients with only small amounts of individual herbs being
present. Chemical and chromatographic tests are useful for
developing finished product specifications. Stability and shelf life
of herbal products should be established by manufacturers. There
should be no differences in standards set for the quality of dosage
forms, such as tablets or capsules, of herbal medicines from those

of other pharmaceutical preparations.
The quality of an unregulated herbal remedy will not have been
assessed by a Regulatory Authority and may thus potentially affect
the safety and efficacy of the product. In view of this, it may be
concluded that a pharmacist should only sell or recommend
herbal medicinal products that hold a product licence or a
traditional herbal medicine registration. However, the majority of
herbal medicinal products are only available as unlicensed
products. When deciding upon the suitability of such products,
a pharmacist should consider the intended use and the
manufacturer. It is highly likely that unlicense
manufactured by an established pharmaceutical company will
have been subjected to suitable in-house quality control proce-
dures.

herbal remedies

Introduction

Safety

As with all forms of self-treatment, the use of herbal medicinal
products presents a potential risk to human health.°*!7° There
are concerns that the patient may be exposed to potentially toxic
substances either from the herbal ingredients themselves or as a
result of exposure to contaminants present in the herbal product.
Furthermore, self-administration of any therapy in preference to
orthodox treatment may delay a patient seeking qualified advice,
or cause a patient to abandon conventional treatment without
first seeking appropriate advice. Emerging evidence suggests that
herbal medicinal products may in some cases compromise the
efficacy of conventional medicines, for example through herb—
drug interactions.

The safety of all medicinal products
importance. All applications for marketing authorisations for
new medicines undergo extensive evaluation of their risks and
benefits and, once granted, licensed products are closely
monitored for the occurrence of suspected adverse effects. The
safety of herbal medicinal products is of particular importance as
the majority of these products is self-prescribed and is used to
treat minor and often chronic conditions.

is of the utmost

The extensive traditional use of plants as medicines has enabled
gns of toxicity to be well
recognised and their use avoided. However, the premise that
traditional use of a plant for perhaps many hundreds of years
establishes its safety does not necessarily hold true.2? 2% ?”) The
more subtle and chronic forms of toxicity, such as carcinogenicity,
mutagenicity and hepatotoxicity, may well have been overlooked
by previous generations and it is these types of toxicities that are
of most concern when assessing the safety of herbal remedies.

A UK Medical Toxicology Unit conducted a study of
potentially serious adverse reactions associated with exposure to
traditional medicines and food supplements during 1991 to
1995.8) Of 1297 enquiries from healthcare professionals, a total
of 785 cases were identified as possible (n = 738), probable (n =
35) or confirmed (1 = 12) cases of poisoning caused by traditional
medicines or food supplements. The report concluded that the
overall risk to public health from these types of products was low.
However, clusters of cases were identified that gave cause for

those medicines with acute and obvious

concern. Twenty-one cases of liver toxicity, including two deaths,
were associated with the use of traditional Chinese medicines,
although no causative agent was identified.

Potential hepatotoxicity associated with herbal medicines has
(29,150) Hepatotoxicity has been
reported with a number of herbal medicines (see monographs on
Black Cohosh, Chaparral, Comfrey, Ephedra, Kava). Teucrium
species (see Scullcap) have also been implicated in hepatotoxicity.
Following reports of serious cases of liver toxicity associated with
the use of Piper methysticum (see Kava), P. methysticum has been
prohibited in unlicensed medicinal products in the UK since
January 2003.°°)

At the time of writing, MHRA was aware of 79 cases of liver
damage associated with the consumption of kava that have been
reported worldwide.” Cases of hepatotoxicity associated with
the use of Black Cohosh have also been reported (see Black
Cohosh).°°

been discussed for some time.

Intrinsically toxic constituents of herbal ingredients

Limited toxicological data are available on medicinal plants.
However, there exists a considerable overlap between those herbs
used for medicinal purposes and those used for cosmetic or
culinary purposes, for which a significant body of information
exists. For many culinary herbs used in herbal remedies, there is

----- PAGE 23 -----
Introduction

no reason to doubt their safety providing the intended dose and

route of administration is in line with their food us

intended for use in larger therapeut
herbs requires re-evaluation.

When
tic doses the safety of culinary

Culinary herbs Some culinary herbs contain potentially toxic

constituents. The safe use of these herbs is ensured by limiting
the amount of constituent permitted in a food product to a
concentration not considered to represent a health hazard.

Apiole The irritant principle present in the volatile oil of
parsley is held to be responsible for the abortifacient
action.3" Apiole is also hepatotoxic and liver damage has
been documented as a result of excessive ingestion of parsley,
far exceeding normal dietary consumption, over a prolonged
period (see Parsley) ."3"
B-Asarone Calamus rhizome oil contains B-asarone as the
major component, which has been shown to be carcinogenic in
animal studies." Many other culinary herbs contain low
levels of B-asarone in their volatile oils and therefore the level
of B-asarone permitted in foods as a flavouring is restricted.
The EMEA HMPC has concluded that in view of the toxicity
of a-and f-asarone, their concentration in herbal medicinal
products should be reduced to minimum and diploid varieties
should always be preferred. In analogy with the food
regulation (limitation of the intake of B-asarone from food
and alcoholic beverages), a limit of exposure from herbal
medicinal products of approximately 115 tg/day, i.e. about

2 ug/kg body weight/day could be accepted temporarily until a
(132)

full benefit—risk assessment has been carried out.
Estragole (Methylchavicol) Estragole is a constituent of many
culinary herbs but is a major component of the oils of
tarragon, fennel, sweet basil and chervil. Estragole has been
reported to be carcinogenic in animals.“3" The level of
estragole permitted in food products as a flavouring is
restricted. The EMEA HMPC has concluded that the present
exposure to estragole resulting from consumption of herbal
medicinal products (short time use in adults at recommended
posology) does not pose a significant cancer risk. Nevertheless,
further studies are needed to define both the nature and
implications of the dose-response curve in rats at low levels of
exposure to estragole. In the meantime exposure of estragole to
sensitive groups such as young children, pregnant and
breastfeeding women should be minimised. Toxicological
assessment of preparations for topical and external use needs
further investigation because data on absorption through the
skin are missing.“3»

Safrole Animal studies involving safrole, the major component
of sassafras oil, have shown it to be hepatotoxic and
carcinogenic.''* The permitted level of safrole as a flavouring
in foods is 0.1 mg/kg.
Methyleugenol Methyleugenol is a constituent of many
culinary herbs and is present in small amounts in cassia bark
oil and clove oil (see Cassia, Clove). Chronic toxicity data on
methyleugenol show the compound to be a_ genotoxic
carcinogen. The EMEA HMPC has concluded that the present
exposure to methyleugenol resulting from consumption of
herbal medicinal products (short time use in adults at
recommended posology) does not pose a significant cancer
risk. Nevertheless, further studies are needed to define both the

nature and implications of the dose-response curve in rats at
low levels of exposure to methyleugenol. In the meantime,
exposure of sensitive groups, such as young children, pregnant
and breastfeeding women, to methyleugenol should be

minimised. Toxicological assessment of preparations for
topical and external use needs further investigation because
data on absorption through the skin are missing.‘'*

Other intrinsically toxic constituents Aristolochic acids are

reported to occur only in the Aristolochiaceae family. They
have been reported in Aristolochia species, and appear to occur
throughout the plant in the roots, stem, herb and fruit. The
aristolochic acids are a series of substituted nitrophenanthrene
carboxylic acids. The main constituents are 3,4-methylene-
dioxy-8-methoxy-10-nitrophenanthrene-1-carboxylic acid. Low
concentrations of aristolochic acids have been reported in
Asarum species, another member of the Aristolochiaceae
family. Aristolochic acids have been shown to be nephrotoxic,
carcinogenic and mutagenic. ''%)

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are present in a number of plant
genera, notably Crotalaria, Heliotropium and Senecio. Many
of these plants have been used in African, Caribbean and South
American countries as food sources and as medicinal 'bush
Hepatotoxicity associated with their consumption is well
documented and has been attributed to the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid constituents.” Pyrrolizidine alkaloids can be
divided into two categories based on their structure, namely
those with an unsaturated nucleus (toxic) and those with a
saturated nucleus (considered to be non-toxic).

Several herbs currently used in herbal remedies contain
pyrrolizidines; they include liferoot, borage, comfrey, coltsfoot
and echinacea (see individual monographs).

In addition to preclinical data, cases of human hepatotoxi-
city associated with the ingestion of comfrey have been
documented (see Comfrey). The concentrations of pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids present in borage and coltsfoot are thought to be
too low to be of clinical significance, although the dangers
associated with long-term low-dose exposure are unclear. The
use of borage oil as a source of gamma-linolenic acid and as an
alternative to evening primrose oil is currently very popular.
The pyrrolizidine alkaloids identified in echinacea to date have
been of the non-toxic saturated type. In 2002, MHRA raised
concerns about a TCM product known as Qianbai Biyan Pian
available on the UK market containing Senecio scandens which
is reported to contain the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
iphylline.°”

Benzophenanthridine alkaloids are present in bloodroot and
in prickly ash. Although some of these alkaloids have exhibited
cytotoxic properties in animal studies, their toxicity to humans
as been refuted (see Bloodroot).

Lectins are plant proteins that pos haemagglutinating
and potent mitogenic properties. Both mistletoe and pokeroot
contain lectins temic exposure to pokeroot has resulted in
aematological aberrations. Mistletoe lectins may also inhibit
protein synthesis."3® (see Mistletoe and Pokeroot).
Viscotoxins, constituents of mistletoe, are low molecular
weight proteins which possess cytotoxic and cardiotoxic
properties." For many years, mistletoe preparations have
een used in Europe as cancer treatments. Clinical tria
carried out with Iscador, a product produced from the
naturally fermented plant juice of mistletoe, have concluded
that Iscador may exhibit some weak antitumour effects but
should only be used alongside conventional therapy in the
ong-term treatment of cancer.

Lignans. Hepatotoxic reactions reported for chaparral have
en associated with the lignan constituents (see Chaparral).

teas!

senecionine and sene

Ss

----- PAGE 24 -----
Table 1
Potential adverse effect

Allergic (see Appendix 2, Table 11)
Hypersensitive

Phototoxic

Immune

Cardiac (see Appendix 2, Table 2)
Endocrine

Hypoglycaemic (see Appendix 2, Table 8)
Hyperthyroid

Hormonal (see Appendix 2, Table 9)
Mineralocorticoid

Oestrogenic; Anti-androgen

Irritant (see Appendix 2, Table 12)

Gastrointestinal

Renal
Toxic

Hepatotoxic/carcinogenic

Mitogenic
Cyanide poisoning

Convulsant

Saponins. Pokeroot also contains irritant saponins which
have produced severe gastrointestinal irritation involving
intense abdominal cramping and haematemesis. Systemic
exposure to these saponins has resulted in hypotension and
tachycardia. In May 1979, the US Herb Trade Association
requested that all its members should stop selling pokeroot as a
rbal beverage or food because of its toxicity,*”)
Diterpenes. The irritant properties of many diterpenes are
well documented and queen's delight contains diterpene esters
which are extremely irritant to all mucosal surfaces (see
Queen's Delight).

Cyanogenetic glycosides are present in the kernels of a
number of fruits including apricot, bitter almond, cherry, pear
and plum seeds. Gastric hydrolysis of these compounds
following oral ingestion results in the release of hydrogen
cyanide (HCN), which is rapidly absorbed from the upper
gastrointestinal tract and which can lead to respiratory failure.
It has been estimated that oral doses of SOmg of HCN,
equivalent to about 50-60 apricot kernels, can be fatal‘! (
Apricot). However, variation in cyanogenetic glycoside content
of the kernels could reduce or increase the number required for
a fatal reaction. In the early 1980s a substance called amygdalin
promoted ‘natural’
Amygdalin is a cyanogenetic glycoside that is also referred to
as laetrile and ‘vitamin B,7'. Two near-fatal episodes of HCN
poisoning were recorded in which the patients had consumed
apricot kernels as an alternative source of amygdalin, due to
the poor availability of laetrile. Scientific research did not
support the claims made for laetrile, although a small number
of anecdotal reports suggested that laetrile may have some

>
e

see

was as a non-toxic cure for cancer.

Introduction

Examples of adverse effects that may occur with herbal ingredients

Constituent/Herbal ingredient

Sesquiterpene lactones: arnica, chamomile, feverfew, yarrow
Furanocoumarins: angelica, celery, wild carrot
Canavanine: alfalfa

Cardiac glycosides: pleurisy root, squill

Alfalfa, fenugreek

lodine: fucus

Triterpenoids: liquorice

lsoflavonoids: alfalfa; red clover
Saponins: ginseng, saw palmetto.

Numerous compounds including anthraquinones (purgative),
capsaicinoids, diterpenes, saponins, terpene-rich volatile oils

Aescin: horse-chestnut; terpene-rich volatile oils

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: comfrey, liferoot; B-asarone: calamus; lignans:
chaparral; safrole: sassafras; hepatotoxic constituents unconfirmed:
black cohosh, kava

Proteins: mistletoe, pokeroot
Cyanogenetic glycosides: apricot

Camphor/thujone-rich volatile oils

slight anticancer activity. As a result, legislation drawn up in
1984") restricted the availability of cyanogenetic substances
so that amygdalin can only be administered under medical
supervision.

Furanocoumarins are found predominantly in the families
Umbelliferae (e.g. parsley, celery), Rutaceae (e.g. bergamot,
Citrus species), Moraceae and Leguminosae. The furanocou-
marins and branched forms:
commonly reported linear furanocoumarins are 8-methoxy-
psoralen, 5-methoxypsoralen (bergapten) and psoralen. The
furanocoumarins are phototoxic. Severe phototoxic reactions
have been reported in humans following the use of bergamot
oil in topical preparations. Severe phototoxic burns have been
reported in a Swedish patient following a visit to a suntan
parlour after ingestion of a large quantity of celery soup.) In
the UK, a patient developed severe phototoxicity during oral
photochemotherapy with psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA)
after eating a large quantity of soup made from celery, parsley
and parsnip.''*» The authors highlighted the potential hazards
of eating foods containing psoralens during PUVA therapy. In
the UK, the MCA received two reports describing severe skin
burns in patients who had been treated with TCM prepara-
tions derived from Psoralea corylifolia fruit.‘'

Volatile oils. See Precautions in specific patient groups,
Pregnant/breastfeeding mothers, below.

occur as linear the most

Herbal ingredients that may cause adverse effects

Examples of adverse effects that have been documented in humans
or animals for the herbal ingredients described in the monographs
are summarised in Table 1. These adverse effects include allergic,

----- PAGE 25 -----
ace Introduction

Table 2 Potential adverse effects of herbal ingredients listed in the monographs

Herb

Agnus Castus
Alfalfa

Aloes

Angelica

Aniseed

Apricot

Arnica®

Artichoke
Asafoetida
Bayberry

Blue Flag

Bogbean

Boldo

Borage

Broom

Buchu

Butterbur
Calamus
Capsicum

Cascara

Cassia

Celery

Cereus
Chamomile, German
Chamomile, Roman
Chaparral
Cinnamon

Clove

Cohosh, Blue

Cola

Coltsfoot
Comfrey
Corn Silk
Cowslip

Damiana

Dandelion

Echinacea
Elecampane
Eucalyptus

Evening Primrose Oil
Eyebright

Feverfew

Frangula

Adverse effect

Allergic reactions

Systemic lupus erythematosus syndrome
Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Phototoxic dermatitis

Contact dermatitis

Cyanide poisoning, seed

Dermatitis, irritant to Gl tract
Allergenic, dermatitis

Dermatitis, irritant

Carcinogenic to rats

Nausea, vomiting, irritant to Gl tract and eyes

Purgative, vomiting

Toxicity, irritant

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Cardiac depressant

Irritant to Gl tract, kidney

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Carcinogenic, nephrotoxic, convulsions
Irritant

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Allergenic, irritant

Phototoxic, dermatitis

Irritant to Gl tract

Allergic reactions

Allergic reactions

Dermatitis, hepatotoxic

Allergenic, irritant

Irritant

Irritant to Gl tract

Sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Allergenic, dermatitis

Allergenic

Convulsions

Allergenic, dermatitis
Allergenic, irritant
Allergenic, irritant
Nausea, vomiting

Mild indigestion, increased risk of epilepsy

Mental confusion, raised intraocular pressure

Allergenic, dermatitis

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Reasons/Comments

Canavanine, toxic amino acid
Anthraquinones
Furanocoumarins

Anethole in volatile oil
Cyanogenetic glycosides
Sesquiterpene lactones
Sesquiterpene lactones

Gum, related species

Fresh root, furfural (volatile oil)
In large doses

Volatile oil

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Sparteine (alkaloid)

Volatile oil

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
B-Asarone in oil
Capsaicinoids
Anthraquinones
Cinnamaldehyde in volatile oil
Furanocoumarins

Fresh juice

Sesquiterpene lactones
Sesquiterpene lactones
Lignans

Cinnamaldehyde in volatile oil
Eugenol in volatile oil

Seeds poisonous

Caffeine

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Quinones

High dose (one report only), quinones,
cyanogenetic glycosides

Sesquiterpene lactones
Polysaccharide
Sesquiterpene lactones

Volatile oil

Schizophrenic patients taking phenothiazines

Tincture
Sesquiterpene lactones

Anthraquinones

table continues

----- PAGE 26 -----
Table 2 continued

Herb

Fucus
Garlic

Ginseng

Golden Seal
Gravel Root
Greater Celandine
Ground Ivy
Guaiacum

Hops

Horehound, White
Horse-chestnut
Horseradish
Hydrangea
Hydrocotyle
Ispaghula

Jamaica Dogwood
Juniper

Lady’s Slipper
Liferoot
Liquorice

Lobelia

Maté

Mistletoe
Motherwort
Nettle

Parsley
Pennyroyal
Pilewort®
Plantain

Pleurisy Root
Pokeroot

Prickly Ash, Southern
Pulsatilla®
Queen’s Delight
Red Clover
Rhubarb
Rosemary

Sage

Sassafras

Scullcap

Senega

Senna
Shepherd's Purse
Skunk Cabbage

Adverse effect
Hyperthyroidism
Irritant to Gl tract, dermatitis

Mastalgia, vaginal bleeding, insomnia

Gastric upset

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Hepatotoxic

Irritant to Gl tract, kidneys
Allergenic, dermatitis

Allergenic, dermatitis

Dermatitis, irritant

Nephrotoxic

Allergenic, irritant

Dermatitis, irritant to Gl tract
Phototoxic, dermatitis

Oesophageal obstruction, flatulence
Irritant, numbness, tremors

Irritant, abortifacient

Allergenic, dermatitis, hallucinations
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Hyperaldosteronism

Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
Sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor
Hepatitis, hypotension, poisonous
Phototoxic dermatitis

Irritant

Irritant, hepatitis, phototoxic, abortifacient
Irritant, nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic
Irritant

Allergenic, dermatitis, irritant
Dermatitis, irritant, cardiac activity
Mitogenic, toxic, nausea, vomiting, cramp
Toxic to animals

Allergenic, irritant

Irritant to Gl tract

Oestrogenic

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Convulsions

Toxic, convulsant

Carcinogenic, genotoxic

Hepatotoxicity

Irritant to Gl tract
Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Irritant

Itch, inflammation

Introduction 1s

Reasons/Comments

lodine content
Sulfides

Various effects reported but species
unconfirmed (see Ginseng, Eleutherococcus)

Berberine, potentially poisonous
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Alkaloids

Pulegone in volatile oil

Lignans

Oleo-resin

Plant juice

Aescin

Glucosinolates

If swallowed with insufficient liquid
High doses

Volatile oil, confusion with savin
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Excessive ingestion

Lobeline (alkaloid)

Caffeine

Mixed herbal preparation
Volatile oil

Amines

Apiole in volatile oil, excessive ingestion
Pulegone in volatile oil
Protoanemonin

Mustard-type oil

Cardenolides

Lectins

Protanemonin

Diterpenes

Isoflavonoids

Anthraquinones

Camphor in volatile oil
Thujone, camphor in volatile oil
Safrole in volatile oil

Due to adulteration with hepatotoxic Teucrium
spp.

Saponins

Anthraquinones

Isothiocyanates

table continues

----- PAGE 27 -----
Introduction

Table 2 continued

Squill Irritant, cardioactive Saponins

St. John’s Wort Phototoxic Hypericin

Tansy Severe gastritis, convulsions Thujone in volatile oil
Thyme Irritant to GI tract Thymol in volatile oil
Wild Carrot Phototoxic, dermatitis Furanocoumarins
Yarrow Allergenic, dermatitis Sesquiterpene lactones

Yellow Dock Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Anthraquinones

*Not recommended for internal use.

cardiac, hepatic, hormonal, irritant and purgative effects, and a
range of toxicities. Some of the potential adverse effects of the
herbal ingredients which are the subject of the 152 monographs
are listed in Table 2. For further detailed information, including
literature references, the reader should consult individual mono-
graphs. The following few examples are illustrative of some of the
adverse effects caused by herbal ingredients.

Comfrey, coltsfoot Hepatotoxic reactions have been documented
for comfrey and coltsfoot. Both of these herbal ingredients contain
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, compounds known to be hepatotoxic.
However, it was later reported that the reaction documented for
coltsfoot may have in fact involved a herbal tea containing a
Senecio species rather than coltsfoot.”” The Senecio genus is
characterised by its pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents.
Mistletoe, scullcap A case of hepatitis has been reported for a
woman who was taking a multi-constituent herbal product (see
Mistletoe). Based on the known toxic constituents of mistletoe
and other herbal ingredients present in the product, it was
concluded that mistletoe was the component responsible for the
hepatitis. Lectins and viscotoxins, the toxic constituents in
mistletoe, are not known to be hepatotoxic and no other reports
of liver damage associated with mistletoe ingestion have been
documented. The product also contained scullcap, which is
recognised to be frequently adulterated with a Teucrium species.
Hepatotoxic reactions have been associated with germander
(Teucrium chamaedrys) (see Scullcap).

Pokeroot Severe gastrointestinal irritation and haematological
abnormalities documented for pokeroot can be directly related to
the saponin and lectin constituents of pokeroot.”*

Sassafras Hepatotoxicity has been associated with the consump-
tion of a herbal tea containing sassafras. The principal component

of sassafras volatile oil is safrole, which is known to be
(127)

hepatotoxic and carcinogenic.

Excessive ingestion

Ginseng Excessive doses of ginseng have been reported to cause
agitation, insomnia, and raised blood pressure and have been
referred to as abuse of the remedy. Side-effects have also been
reported for ginseng following the ingestion of recommended
doses, and include mastalgia and vaginal bleeding. However, the
reports are in the older literature, the products are poorly
described and a causal association with ginseng has not been
established (see Ginseng, Panax).

Liquorice Excessive ingestion of liquorice has resulted in typical
corticosteroid-type side-effects of oedema and hypertension (see
Liquorice).

Parsley Parsley volatile oil contains apiole which is structurally
related to the recognised hepatocarcinogen, safrole. Ingestion of
apiole has resulted in a number of cases of fatal poisoning.‘'*”

Hypersensitivity reactions

Chamomile Sesquiterpene lactones are known to possess aller-
genic properties. They occur predominantly in herbs of the
Compositae (Asteraceae) family, of which chamomile is a member.
Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported for chamomile and
other plants from the same family (see Chamomile, German,
Chamomile, Roman). Cross-sensitivity to other members of the
Compositae family is well recognised. The EMEA HMPC has
issued a public statement proposing the following SPC statement
for chamomile products: 'Hypersensitivity reactions to (German)
chamomile (e.g. contact dermatitis) are very rare. Cross reactions
may occur in people with allergy to compositae (e.g. artemisia/
mugwort). Very rarely severe allergic reactions (anaphylactic
shock, asthma, facial oedema and urticaria) following internal use
have been reported.'"'*

Feverfew The sesquiterpene lactones present in feverfew are
considered to be the active principles in the herb. It is unknown
whether documented side-effects for feverfew, such as mouth
ulcers and swollen tongue, are also attributable to these
constituents (see Feverfew).

Phototoxic reactions

Parsley Furanocoumarins, compounds known to cause phototoxic
reactions, are constituents of parsley. Excessive ingestion of
parsley has been associated with the development of photo-
sensitive rash which resolved once parsley consumption ceased
(see Parsley).(3”

Precautions in specific patient groups

Pregnant/breastfeeding mothers Few conventional medicines have
been established as safe to take during pregnancy and it is
generally recognised that no medicine should be taken unless the
benefit to the mother outweighs any possible risk to the foetus.
This rule should also be applied to herbal medicinal products.
However, one of the major problems is that herbal products are
often promoted to the public as being 'natural’ and completely
'safe' alternatives to conventional medicines. A survey of 400
pregnant Norwegian women found that 36% had used herbal
products during pregnancy.) This finding was higher than in
other published studies from western countries. Of those women
having used herbal products in pregnancy, nearly 40% used herbal
products that the authors considered possibly harmful or where
information on safety in pregnancy was missing. Interestingly,
43% of the women used herbal galactagogues and this is of
concern as there is limited information on the safety of such
products to the mother or infant (see Breastfeeding mothers
below). The lack of information about the safety of herbal
medicines during pregnancy is recognised.)

----- PAGE 28 -----
Introduction 7

Table 3 Herbal ingredients best avoided or used with caution during pregnancy. Absence of a herbal ingredient from this list does not signify
safety and, as with all medicines, herbal remedies should only be used where the perceived benefit outweighs any possible risk. For a number of
herbs the chemistry and pharmacology are poorly documented and their use in pregnancy should be avoided. Some of the herbs listed are
reputed to be abortifacient or to affect the menstrual cycle although no recent clinical or experimental data exist. In view of the potential serious
effects caution in their use is advised.

Herb Effect

Agnus Castus Hormonal action

Aloes Cathartic, reputed abortifacient

Apricot Cyanide toxicity

Asafoetida Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Avens Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Blue Flag Irritant oil

Bogbean Irritant, possible purgative

Boldo Irritant oil

Boneset Cytotoxic constituents (related species)

Borage Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Broom Sparteine is oxytoxic

Buchu Irritant oil

Burdock Uterine stimulant, in vivo

Butterbur Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Calendula Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine stimulant, in vitro
Cascara Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided
Chamomile, German Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine stimulant with excessive use
Chamomile, Roman Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle with excessive use
Chaparral Uterine activity, hepatotoxic

Cohosh, Black Uterine oestrogen receptor binding in vitro, potential hepatotoxicity
Cohosh, Blue Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Cola Caffeine, consumption should be restricted

Coltsfoot Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Comfrey Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Cornsilk Uterine stimulant, in vivo

Damiana Cyanogenetic glycosides, risk of cyanide toxicity in high doses
Eucalyptus Oil should not be taken internally during pregnancy
Euphorbia Smooth muscle activity, in vitro

Fenugreek Oxytoxic, uterine stimulant, in vitro

Feverfew Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Frangula Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided
Fucus Thyroid gland activity, possible heavy metal contamination
Gentian Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus Hormonal activity

Ginseng, Panax Hormonal activity

Golden Seal Alkaloids with uterine stimulant activity, in vitro

Ground Ivy Irritant oil

Hawthorn Uterine activity, in vivo, in vitro

Hops Uterine activity, in vitro

Horehound, Black Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Horehound, White Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle
Horseradish Irritant oil; avoid excessive ingestion

table continues

----- PAGE 29 -----
18 Introduction

Table 3 continued

Herb Effect

Hydrocotyle Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Greater Celandine Hepatotoxic

Jamaica Dogwood Uterine activity, in vitro, in vivo; irritant

Juniper Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle. Confusion over whether oil is toxic

Kava Hepatotoxic

Liferoot Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Liquorice Oestrogenic activity, reputed abortifacient

Lobelia Lobeline, toxicity

Maté Caffeine, consumption should be restricted

Meadowsweet Uterine activity, in vitro

Mistletoe Toxic constituents, uterine stimulant, in vivo

Motherwort Uterine activity, in vitro, reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Myrrh Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Nettle Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Passionflower Harman, harmaline uterine stimulants, in vivo

Pennyroyal Abortifacient, irritant oil (pulegone)

Plantain Uterine activity, in vitro; laxative

Pleurisy Root Uterine activity, in vivo; cardioactive constituents

Pokeroot Toxic constituents, uterine stimulant, reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Poplar Conflicting reports over use of aspirin in pregnancy; salicylates excreted in breast milk may cause
rashes in babies

Prickly Ash, Northern Pharmacologically active alkaloids and coumarins

Prickly Ash, Southern Pharmacologically active alkaloids

Pulsatilla Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine activity, in vitro, in vivo; irritant (fresh plant)

Queen’s Delight Irritant diterpenes

Raspberry Uterine activity, in vitro, traditional use to ease parturition

Red Clover Oestrogenic activity

Rhubarb Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

Sage Reputed abortifacient

Sassafras Abortifacient (oil), hepatotoxic (safrole)

Scullcap Traditional use to eliminate afterbirth and promote menstruation; potential hepatotoxicity

Senna Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

Shepherd’s Purse Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Skunk Cabbage Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Squill Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

St John’s Wort Slight uterine activity, in vitro

Tansy Uterine activity, abortifacient (thujone in oil)

Uva-Ursi Large doses, oxytocic

Vervain Reputed abortifacient, oxytocic, utero-activity in vivo

Wild Carrot Oestrogenic activity, irritant oil

Willow Conflicting reports over use of aspirin in pregnancy; salicylates excreted in breast milk may cause
rashes in babies

Yarrow Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle (thujone in oil)

Yellow Dock Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

----- PAGE 30 -----
Table 3 lists some herbal ingredients taken from the following
152 monographs that specifically should be avoided or used with
caution during pregnancy. As with conventional medicines, no
herbal products should be taken during pregnancy unless the
benefit outweighs the potential risk.

Volatile oils Many herbs are traditionally reputed to be
abortifacient and for some this reputation can be attributed to
their volatile oil component."*!
the genito-urinary tract if ingested and may induce uterine
contractions. Herbs that contain irritant volatile oils include
ground ivy, juniper, parsley, pennyroyal, sage, tansy and yarrow.
Some of these oils contain the terpenoid constituent, thujone,
which is known to be abortifacient. Pennyroyal oil also contains
the hepatotoxic terpenoid constituent, pulegone. A case of liver
failure in a woman who ingested pennyroyal oil as an abortifacient
has been documented (see Pennyroyal).
Utero-activity A stimulant or spasmolytic action on uterine
muscle has been documented for some herbal ingredients
including blue cohosh, burdock, fenugreek, golden seal, hawthorn,
Jamaica dogwood, motherwort, nettle, raspberry and vervain.
Raspberry is a popular remedy taken during pregnancy to help
promote an easier labour by relaxing the uterine muscles. The
pharmacological activity exhibited by raspberry may vary between
different preparations an
Raspberry should not be used during pregnancy unless under
medical supervision (see Raspberry).
Herbal teas Increased awareness of the harmful effects associated
with excessive tea and coffee consumption has prompted many
individuals to switch to herbal teas. Whilst some herbal teas may
offer pleasant alternatives to tea and coffee, some contain
pharmacologically active herbal ingredients, which may have
unpredictable effects depending on the quantity of tea consumed
and strength of the brew. Some herbal teas contain laxative herbal
ingredients such as senna, frangula and cascara. In general
stimulant laxative preparations are not recommended during
pregnancy and the use of unstandardised laxative preparations is
particularly unsuitable. A case of hepatotoxicity in a newborn
baby has been documented in which the mother consumed a
herbal tea during pregnancy as an expectorant.''**) Following
analysis the herbal tea was reported to contain pyrrolizidine
alkaloids which are known to be hepatotoxic.
Breastfeeding mothers A medicinal product taken by a breastfeed-
ing mother presents a hazard if it is transferred to the breast milk
in pharmacologically or toxicologically significant amounts.
Limited information is available regarding the safety of conven-
tional medicines taken during breastfeeding. Mucl
ists for herbal ingredients, and generally the use of herbal
is not recommended during lactation.

) Several volatile oils are irritant to

from one individual to another.

less informa-

Paediatric use Herbal medicines have traditionally been used to
treat both adults and children. The belief that natural remedies
may be safer than conventional medicines may influence
parents in choosing herbal medicines for their children. Herbal
medicines may offer a milder alternative to some conventional
medicines, although the suitability of a herbal remedy needs to
be carefully considered with respect to quality, safety and
efficacy. Herbal medicines should be used with caution in
children and medical advice should be sought if in doubt. The
administration of herbal teas to children is generally unwise
unless used according to professional advice.”
surveys indicate that herbal use in children is increasing and
it has been estimated that 28-40% of children may be exposed
to herbal preparations for the management of asthma, anxiety,

Several

Introduction

attention deficit hyperactivity disorders, insomnia and respira-

: : 150, 151
tory infections. SY

A survey of 503 chi

dren attending the Royal Children's

Hospital, Melbourne, found that the use of CAM by children is

common. Herbal produ
surveyed and a further

cts were used by 12% of the group
8% were taking echinacea products

Sixty-three percent of those reporting CAM use had not
discussed this with their treating doctor. The authors
concluded that given the potential risk of adverse events
associated with the use of CAM or
conventional management, doctors should ask about their
use as a part of routine history taking.”

A review has been carried out of some of the most
commonly used herbal products subjected to randomised
controlled clinical trials in children including Andrographis
paniculata, cranberry, echinacea, evening primrose oil, garlic,
ivy leaf, and valerian. The authors concluded that whilst some
of the studies showed promising results others suffered from
methodological flaws such as small sample size, lack of product
quality control, improper placebo and dose issues. Further
well-designed randomised, controlled clinical trials are needed
to evaluate these therapies for the paediatric population."

Systematic reviews of the risks associated with the use of

interactions with

herbal medicines in children and adolescents have been carried
(54155) The findings show that many of the reports of
adverse effects are associated with products of poor quality
where the adverse effect is caused by adulteration with heavy
metals or conventional pharmaceutical drugs. In many cases it
is not possible to demonstrate a causal relationship between
the product taken and the adverse effect. The need for further
investigations in the paediatric population is clear.

out.

Older patients Surveys show that the use of herbal medicinal
products by older patients is increasing and that typically more
than one herbal product is used at a time, often concomitantly
with prescription medicines. Older patients are reluctant to tell
their doctor that they are taking herbal products and so are at
risk of potential drug-herb interactions.'°° '*)

A review has considered the available evidence on the use of
medicinal products (St John's wort, valerian,
ginkgo, horse-chestnut, saw palmetto and yohimbe) by older
‘ the treatments may offer considerable
for a range of conditions, there is a need for caution,
particularly with regard to potential drug—herb interactions
and possible adverse effects, when herbal medicinal products
are used by older patients.

several herba

Patients with cardiovascular disease Concerns have been raised
about the use of herbal medicinal products for the treatment of
(and by patients with) cardiovascular di >, in particular,
because of the lack of scientific assessment and the potential
for toxic effects and major drug-herb interactions (see Herb—
drug interactions).

A systematic review of the literature covering 1990-2001
found evidence mostly from case reports and case series that
herbal medicinal products could lead to serious cardiovascular
adverse events. The adverse effects were attributed not only to
the toxicity of the herbal products but in some cases to
contamination of the products with substances such as

prescription medicines, as well as to drug—herb interac-
(161)

tions.

A systematic review of the literature between January 1996
and February 2003 has been undertaken to determine the
possible interactions between herbal medicines and cardiovas-

----- PAGE 31 -----
Introduction

cular drugs. Forty-three case reports and eight clinical trials
were identified. Warfarin was the most common cardiovascular
drug involved. It was found to interact with boldo, curbicin,
fenugreek, garlic, danshen, devil's claw, dong quai, ginkgo,
papaya, lycium, mango, PC-SPES (resulting in over-antic-
oagulation) and with ginseng, green tea, soy and St John's wort
(causing decreased anticoagulant effect). Gum guar, St John's
wort, Siberian ginseng and wheat bran were found to decrease
plasma digoxin concentration; aspirin interactions include
spontaneous hyphema when used concurrently with ginkgo
and increased bioavailability if combined with tamarind.
Decreased plasma concentration of simvastatin or lovastatin
was observed after co-administration with St John's wort and
wheat bran, respectively. Other adverse events reported were
hypertension after co-administration of ginkgo and a diuretic
thiazide, hypokalaemia after liquorice and antihypertensives
and anticoagulation after phenprocoumon and St John's wort.
The authors concluded that interaction between herbal
medicines and cardiovascular drugs is a potentially important
safety issue with patients taking anticoagulants at the highest
risk.''%) The potential for herb-drug interactions is discussed
further below (see Herb-drug interactions).

The British Heart Foundation has produced a Factfile
entitled Herbs and the Heart in association with the British
Cardiac Society which informs patients about the use of herbal
products. The Factfile highlights possible cardiotoxicity that
might occur with certain herbal ingredients, such as black
hellebore, figwort, hawthorn, ephedra and yohimbe. The
potential for drug—herb interactions is also discussed, in
particular with warfarin, simvastatin, ciclosporin§ and

digoxin.)
Patients with cancer Studies have shown that CAM use in
patients with cancer is high in many countries.°*! Surveys

indicate that this use is increasing and, interestingly, that
patients with breast cancer appear to use more CAMs than
individuals with other types of malignancy." Studies in
Europe have reported use of CAM in 23.6% of lung cancer
patients, 32% of colorectal cancer patients and 44.7% of
breast cancer patients after the diagnosis of cancer. In all of
these surveys use of herbal medicine was the most common
therapy used in over 40% of patients using CAM."7°'7)) A
survey carried out at the Royal Marsden Hospital in 2004
found that 164 (51.6%) of 318 patients were taking some
complementary alternative medicine during their cancer
treatment. Of these, 10.4% were taking herbal medicines,
42.1% were taking food supplements and 47.6% were taking a
combination of the two. Of these patients, 30% were unsure
why they were taking the remedies and 50% had not discussed
the use with their doctor.”

In view of the prevalence of use of herbal products by cancer
patients it is
and seek information from patients. It is well known that
patients are often reluctant to discuss their use of CAM with
their doctors.''”?) In most cases the impact of herbal medicines
on the patient's treatment is unknown and the potential for
drug-herb interactions exists as shown by the effect of St
John's wort on irinotecan used in the treatment of colon
cancer.’ There is also potential for other herbal ingredients
such as garlic, ginkgo, echinacea, ginseng and kava to interact
with anticancer agents (see also Herb-drug interactions).””

ential that healthcare professionals are aware

Peri-operative use Concerns about the need for patients to

discontinue herbal medicinal products prior to surgery have

Menopausal women Many studies

been highlighted.''”* '”?) Studies in the US have shown that the
use of herbal medicines is common among. surgical
patients." In one study of 2186 patients, 38% had taken
herbal medicines in the two years before surgery and 16%
continued the use of herbal medicines in the month of surgery.
Herbal medicine use was found to be higher in patients
undergoing gynaecologic (52%) and urologic (45%) proce-
dures and lower amongst patients undergoing vascular (10%)
surgical procedures."®° A study of herbal medication use in
paediatric surgical patients found that the prevalence of use
was higher in children of parents who used herbal medications
and children whose parents considered them to be chronically
ill."8) Whilst 21% of the parents were users of herbal
medicines only 4% of their children used them. The most
common herbal medicines used were echinacea, chamomile
and aloe. Forty-two per cent of the children using herbal
medicines were also taking prescription medicines concur-
rently. Interestingly, the study found that only 10% of parents
reported that the surgeon enquired about patient herbal
medication use.

From the available evidence, it has been suggested that the
potential exists for direct pharmacological effects, pharmaco-
dynamic interactions and pharmacokinetic interactions with
eight commonly used herbal medicinal products (echinacea,
ephedra, garlic, ginkgo, ginseng, kava, St John's wort,
valerian). The need for phys
standing of the herbal medicinal products being used by
patients and to take a detailed history was highlighted."”” The
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has reported that
several anaesthesiologists have noted significant changes in
heart rate or blood pressure in some patients who have been
taking herbal medicinal products, including St John's Wort,
ginkgo and ginseng. The ASA has produced information
leaflets for both patients and physicians advising patients to
tell their doctor if they are taking herbal products before
surgery and emphasising the need for physicians to specifically
ask patients if they are using herbal medicines." '**)

The Royal College of Anaesthetists (RCA) and The
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
(AAGBI) has produced an information leaflet specifically
targeted for patients which advises patients to bring any herbal
remedies along with them to hospital. Patients are advised that
they may need to discontinue the use of herbal remedies prior
to their operation.“'*) The MHRA has advised patients due to
have a surgical operation to always tell their doctor about any
herbal remedy they are taking.°”

ians to have a clear under-

show that use of herbal
medicines by women is greater than men and in some recent
surveys this use appears to be increasing significantly.»
Women often try herbal medicines around the time of their
menopause.‘'*>!8” Use of conventional hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) products has declined since 2002 following
reports that HRT increas
lism, stroke, endometrial cancer and breast cancer. In the wake
of these reports, the use of herbal products for the relief of
menopausal symptoms has increased substantially. Results of a
national survey in the USA of 750 women aged 40 to 65 years

revealed that 29% of the women had taken herbal remedies or

s the risk of venous thromboembo-

soya products to ease menopause symptoms. The vast majority
of the women had not discussed the use of the herbal products
with their doctors but many were frustrated that their doctors
did not provide enough information about herbal and dietary

----- PAGE 32 -----
supplements to relieve menopause symptoms. Some 70% of the
women expressed at least some concern or uncertainty about
the safety of the products they were taking. The r
highlighted the lack of patient—physician communication and

called for more education for women about these treat-
(188)

searchers

ments.

The main herbal ingredients found in products for
menopausal symptoms are those containing isoflavones (red
clover, soya), black cohosh, dong quai, ginseng, evening
primrose oil and wild yam.\'*?) Isoflavones are members of a
group of polyphenolic non-steroidal plant compounds known
as phytoestrogens. Other phytoestrogens include flavonoids,
stilbenes and lignans. Epidemiological and experimenta
studies have shown that the consumption of phytoestrogen-
rich diets may have protective effects on menopausa
symptoms, diseas
osteoporo:

Concerns have been raised about the use of isoflavone
containing herbal medicines particularly in women with
oestrogen-sensitive cancers. Limited data are available but
some studies have shown that certain extracts of red clover and
soya may induce cell proliferation in MCF-7 cells, an
established in vitro oestrogen-dependent mammary tumour
model." In the same study, extracts of black cohosh tested
did not cause cell proliferation. The authors concluded that
preparations containing red clover and soya should be used
with caution in the treatment of menopausal symptoms in
women at risk of, or with a history of, oestrogen-sensitive
breast cancer. Similar advice has been included in a fact sheet,
Herbal Medicines and Breast Cancer Risk prepared by the US
Program on Breast Cancer and Environmental Risk Factors
(BCERF) at Cornell University.’ A recent study of 452
women with family histories of breast cancer who were
enrolled in a cancer risk assessment programme found that
32% reported soy food consumption.” The authors
concluded that these women would benefit from clear messages

such as prostate and breast cance
(190)

Sy

and cardiovascular diseases.

regarding the health effects of soy.

Concerns have been raised about the potential for drug—herb
interactions, known or theoretically associated with herbal
medicines commonly used by women for the relief of

menopausal symptoms.'!?”

Herb-drug interactions
The evidence of significant problems associated with the ingestion
of grapefruit juice concurrently with certain medicines has
emphasised the fact that clinically relevant interactions between
drugs and natural products, both herbs and foods, may occur.‘!?~
') The potential for interactions between herbal and conven-
tional medicines has been recognised for some time but awareness
has increased considerably since the emergence of clinically
significant interactions between St John's Wort and a range of
prescribed medicines.°*7° The potential for drug-herb inter-
actions has been reviewed extensively.(1?7°? 7°

Concerns have been raised in the literature about herbal
medicines interfering with breast cancer treatment, antirheumatic
treatment and potential interactions between herbal products and
cardiac drugs.?°” 7!

Generally, information on herb-drug interactions, particularly
in the clinical setting, is limited and in most cases there has been

little formal clinical investigation. Instances of drug interactions
have been tentatively linked, retrospectively, to the concurrent use
of herbal medicine:
difficult to explain if knowledge regarding the phytochemical

The rationale for such interactions is often

Introduction

constituents of the herbal product, their pharmacological activity
and metabolism are poorly understood. As with conventional
drug interactions, herb—drug interactions may be pharmacody-
namic or pharmacokinetic. Pharmacodynamic interactions could
result when a herbal drug and a conventional drug have similar or
antagonistic pharmacological effects or adverse effects. These
interactions are usually predictable from a knowledge of the
pharmacology of the interacting herb and drug. Pharmacokinetic
interactions could occur when a herb alters the absorption,
distribution, metabolism or elimination of a drug (and vice versa).
These interactions are not easy to predict. In addition, there is
also the potential issue of herb-herb interactions where
combinations of herbal ingredients are used or where patients
take a number of herbal products together. Little is known about
the pharmacokinetics of herbal ingredients and whether or not
they can, for example, induce their own metabolism.

As with all potential drug interactions there are particular
concerns when patients are stabilised on conventional medicines,
igoxin, anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin) and
ciclosporin that are known to have a narrow therapeutic window.
Potential herb-drug interactions are considered for each herb
under the individual monographs.

A recent review has illustrated the difficulties in assessing the
significance of herb-drug interactions using four commonly used
herbal substances, namely St John's wort, ginseng, ginkgo and
liquorice.?!” The authors concluded that conclusive evidence of
herb-drug interactions is often lacking and where clinical
observations have been made or studies conducted, issues with
respect to the type, quality and content of the herbal products are
often not described. There is a need for rigorous studies to assess
the mechanism and clinical significance of potential interactions
in order to guide healthcare profes:

In the absence of a comprehensive evidence b:

such as warfarin,

ionals and consumers.

5 patients
receiving drugs with a narrow safety margin (e.g. immunosup-
pressants, anticoagulants, digoxin,) and those patients most at
risk of serious drug interactions (i.e. patients who are elderly, have
chronic illness, have organ dysfunction and those receiving
multiple medicines) should be closely monitored to avoid the
possible adverse consequences of herb-drug interactions. As
highlighted in this review, the importance of the quality of the
herbal product in terms of its phytochemical profiles should be
emphasised. In view of the significant variability in herbal
products, extrapolation of findings with a specific extract to
other extracts may not be valid. For example, recent investiga-
tions reporting no alteration in bleeding time in elderly patients
and no interactions with anticoagulant medicines with the
specific ginkgo extract EGB 761 may not be valid for other
ginkgo extracts.2!77!9)

St John’s wort Since 1998 evidence has emerged from sponta-
neous reports and published case reports of the interactions
between St John's wort and certain prescribed medicines
leading to a loss of or reduction in therapeutic effect of these
prescribed medicines (see St John's Wort).°?° Drugs that
may be affected include indinavir, warfarin, ciclosporin,
digoxin, theophylline and oral contraceptives. There have
also been reports of increased serotonergic effects in patients
taking St John's wort concurrently with selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (e.g. sertraline, paroxetine). Results of drug
interaction studies have provided some evidence that St John's
Wort may induce some cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug-
metabolising enzymes in the liver as well as affecting P-
glycoprotein (a transport protein). Regulatory Authorities

----- PAGE 33 -----
Introduction

throughout the EU and elsewhere have
and healthcare profe:

ued advice to patients
sionals.

Interactions with warfarin Several herbal ingredients have been
reported to potentially interfere with warfarin, including
devil's claw, dong quai, feverfew, garlic, ginkgo, ginseng and
St John's wort.20% 710214)

A survey of 1360 patients in the UK found that 8.8% were
taking one or more herbal remedies thought to interact with
warfarin. Complementary or homeopathic treatments not
specified in the survey questionnaire were taken by 14.3% of
responders.*!°) Overall, 19.2% of the patients were taking one
or more such medicines. Of these patients, 28.3% thought that
herbal medicines might or definitely could interfere with other
drugs prescribed by their doctor, however, patients taking any
non-prescribed medication were less likely to believe this The
use of herbal medicines had not been discussed with a
conventional healthcare professional by 92.2% of patients.

Another UK study which conducted a retrospective analysis
of the pharmaceutical care plans for 631 patients attending an
outpatient anticoagulation clinic found that 26.9% of patients
were using some form of CAM; of the CAM users, 58% were
taking a CAM that could interfere with warfarin. The authors

stressed the importance of taking a full drug history to avoid
6)

M-warfarin interactions.”!
The CSM has issued advice to health profe:
possibility of interaction between warfarin and cranberry
juice.?!77!8 By October 2004, the MHRA had received 12
reports of suspected interactions involving warfarin and
cranberry juice; eight ca in INR and/or
bleeding episodes, in three cases the INR was reported to be
unstable and in one case the INR decreased. The CSM has
advised that it is not possible to define a safe quantity or brand
of cranberry juice and therefore patients taking warfarin
should avoid this drink unless the health benefits are
considered to outweigh any risks (which is unlikely). It is not
known whether other cranberry products, such as capsules or
concentrates, might also interact with warfarin. Therefore
similar caution should be observed with these products.

The evidence for and understanding of most drug—herb
interactions is limited. An attempt can be made, however, to
identify herbal ingredients that have the potential to interfere
with specific categories of conventional drugs, based on known
phytochemical information and pharmacological properties of
the constituents of the herb, and on any documented adverse
effects. For example, prolonged or exc
diuretic may potentiate existing diuretic therapy, interfere with
existing hypo-/hypertensive therapy, or potentiate the effect of
certain cardioactive drugs due to hypokalaemia. Herbs which
have been documented to lower blood sugar concentrations
may cause hypoglycaemia if taken in sufficient amounts and
interfere with existing hypoglycaemic therapy. An individual
receiving antihypertensive therapy may be more susceptible to
the hypertensive adverse effects that have been documented
with, for example, ginseng or which are associated with the
ive ingestion of plants such as liquorice. This approach
has been used in drawing up Appendix 1, Table 1 and
Appendix 2, Tables 1-12, which provide information on
potential drug-herb interactions. Appendix 1, Table 1 groups
together various therapeutic categories of medicines that may
be affected by a particular herb or group of herbs. Appendix 2,
Tables 1-12 list herbal ingredients that are claimed to have a
specific activity alphabetically within each table, including

ionals about the

involved increase

ive use of a herbal

exc

laxative, cardioactive, diuretic, hypo-/hypertensive, anticoagu-
lant/coagulant, hypo-/hyperlipidaemic, sedative, hypo-/hyper-
glycaemic, hormonal, immunostimulant, allergenic or irritant.
Some commonly occurring groups of natural products found
within these 152 herbal ingredients contribute towards their
ies or adverse effects. Appendix 2, Tables 13—
21 list those herbal ingredients that contain amines, alkaloids
or have sympathomimetic anti-inflammatory or antispasmodic
activities, coumarins, flavonoids, iridoids, saponins, tannins or
volatile oils.

activities, toxic

Interactions of herbal products in therapeutic drug
monitoring

There are also examples of herbal medicinal products which
appear to cross-react with diagnostic markers in therapeutic drug
monitoring, e.g. with a digoxin assay (see Ginseng, Eleuther-
ococcus) 7°

Reporting of adverse reactions to herbal medicinal products
It is essential that information on the risks associated with the use
of herbal products is systematically collected and analysed in
order to protect public health. There is an increasing awareness of
the need to develop pharmacovigilance practices for herbal
22,219) The WHO has recently produced guidelines on
safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance
systems.“ The current arrangements for pharmcovigilance of
herbal medicinal products in the UK have been reviewed.*!”)

In 1996, the UK MHRA extended its 'Yellow Card Scheme’ for
adverse drug reaction reporting to include reporting of suspected
adverse reactions to unlicensed herbal products. This followed a
report from a UK Medical Toxicology Unit on potentially serious
adverse reactions associated with herbal remedies. Twenty-one
cases of liver toxicity, including two deaths, were associated with
the use of TCMs.'!?*)

The need to further improve pharmacovigilance on herbal
products was highlighted in a study of patients’ perceived
behaviour towards reporting adverse reactions. The study found
that patients would be less likely to consult their doctor for
suspected adverse drug reactions (minor or severe) to herbal
remedies than for similar adverse reactions to conventional over-
the-counter medicines. This illustrates the need for greater public
awareness that adverse reactions can occur and that such reactions
should be reported. It also highlights the need for healthcare
professionals to take a detailed medical history including use of
herbal products and to be aware that patients may be reluctant to
provide information. The UK Yellow Card scheme has recently
been extended to include reporting from patients and carers for
prescribed and OTC medicines as well as herbal and comple-
mentary medicines.”7° The Uppsala Monitoring Centre (UMC)
of the World Health Organization plays an important role in the

international monitoring of adverse health effects associated with
(221)

medicines."

herbal medicines.

The UMC recognises the problems inherent in adverse drug
reaction reporting for herbal medicines and has established a
Traditional Medicines project to stimulate reporting in this area
and to standardise information on herbal medicines, particularly
with regard to nomenclature. For example, a special set of herbal
anatomical—therapeutic-chemical (ATC) codes has been devel-
oped which is fully compatible with the regular ATC classification
system for conventional medicines.”””) Another important project
has focused on developing a herbal substance register for use in
the international drug monitoring programme.'~*) Comprehen-
sive guidelines issued by UMC for setting up and running a

----- PAGE 34 -----
pharmacovigilance centre are included in the recent WHO
publication.“

Efficacy

Despite the growing popularity of herbal medicines world-wide
there is a dearth of scientific evidence of efficacy for most herbal
medicines. Indeed, many of the herbs used medicinally in Europe
have a traditional reputation for their uses, but there is little
scientific documentation of their active constituents, pharmaco-
logical actions or clinical efficacy.°°**3" Examples of this group
include avens, boneset, burdock, clivers, damiana, Jamaica
dogwood, parsley piert, pulsatilla and wild lettuce. For other
herbs, documented phytochemical data or pharmacological data
from animal studies may provide a plausible basis for their
traditional uses, but evidence of efficacy from clinical studies is
limited.

The current emphasis on evidence-based medicine requires
evidence of efficacy from rigorous randomised controlled trials.
Where possible, the evidence is best evaluated by systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of available clinical trial data, as such
approaches minimise both selection bias and random error.

Such approaches are now being applied to herbal medicines.
Systematic reviews have been undertaken for a number of herbal
ingredients, e.g. aloe vera, artichoke, echinacea, evening primrose,
feverfew, garlic, ginger, ginkgo, ginseng, hawthorn, horse-chest-
nut, mistletoe, peppermint, saw palmetto, St John's wort and
(231-239) (see individual monographs). Several reviews have
been prepared by the Cochrane Collaboration (the international
association dedicated to preparing and maintaining systematic
reviews of the effects of healthcare interventions).°” Most

reviews highlight that, in many cases, the evidence base is weak
235, 236)

valerian

and studies are often flawed. ) In other cases, studies have
been methodologically sound and evidence of efficacy is strong.

St John's wort, a widely used herbal product, has been
investigated in many clinical studies (see St John's Wort). A
recent systematic review of the evidence from 37 randomised
controlled trials has concluded that extracts seem more effective
than placebo and as effective as standard antidepres
treating mild-to-moderate depr
highlighted that these findings apply only to the preparations
tested in the trials as marketed preparations vary considerably.?>*
There is, however, a need for further studies to evaluate efficacy
compared with that of standard treatments, particularly newer
antidepressant agents, in well-defined patient groups and
conducted over longer time periods.

One of the fundamental problems characteris
medicinal products is that the individual herbal ingredients
contain a vast array of chemical constituents. Further, herbal
medicines traditionally involve mixtures of different herbal
ingredients, although in developed countries, recent trends
indicate that single-ingredient herbal products are becoming
increasingly popular. Herbalists would argue that combinations of
ingredients are designed to provide the best therapeutic outcome
while reducing adverse effects and toxicity. Evidence is emerging
that different constituents within a herbal preparation may
contribute to the overall therapeutic effect of the product and
that in some cases synergistic and additive effects play an
important role.3?4

In most cases there is a lack of knowledge of the phytochemical
constituents responsible for the claimed therapeutic effects of
many herbal ingredients. To further complicate matters, it is well
known that herbal products derived from the same herbal drug

ants for

ion. However, the authors

ic of herbal

Introduction

can vary considerably in terms of their phytochemical constituents
depending on the source of plant material, the manufacture of the
extracts and formulation of the dosage forms. As a result, efforts
to establish clinical efficacy are hampered by how far results for a
specific product can be extrapolated to other products containing
the same plant but different extracts. Where the active
constituents of a herbal ingredient are known it is possible and,
in most cases, desirable to standardise the extract/product. The
aim of standardisation is to obtain an optimum and consistent
quality of a herbal drug preparation by adjusting it to give a
defined content of a constituent or a group of constituents with
nown therapeutic activity. Examples of herbal drugs with
constituents with accepted, known therapeutic activity are few.
Herbs with documented activities (and known active constituents)
include: senna, frangula (hydroxyanthracenes); belladonna (alka-
oids) and horse-chestnut (saponins).

In the case of St John's wort, early studies concentrated on the
ypericin constituents but more recent work suggests that
yperforin and possibly flavonoids also contribute to the
antidepressant properties.) Studies analysing St John's wort
products have reported differing contents of hypericin and
yperforin.**! 9) Furthermore, some products showed consis-
tent batch-to-batch concentrations of hypericin and hyperforin,
whilst others exhibited significant interbatch variability.-*?

Despite the dearth of documented clinical evidence for the
effects of the majority of herbal ingredients, there is no reason
why herbal medicinal products should not be available for use in
minor conditions, providing that these are consistent with
traditional uses and that the herbal ingredients are of suitable
quality and safety. It would seem to be more appropriate to use
those herbal ingredients for which documented phytochemical and
pharmacological data support the traditional u Herbal
medicines intended for use in more serious medical conditions
require evidence of efficacy to support their use.

Conclusion

The use of herbal medicinal products continues to increase and
there is growing evidence that herbal medicines are used widely by
all groups of society including children, pregnant and breastfeed-
ing mothers, women, especially during the menopause, and the
elderly. Of particular importance is the use of herbal medicines by
patients with a wide range of conditions many of whom are
stabilised on prescription medicines and findings that patients are
reluctant to tell their doctors about herbal products they are
taking. Over the last five years the significance of herb-drug
interactions has been recognised and with this the realisation that
healthcare professionals need to be aware that patients may be
taking herbal medicinal products, and need to understand their
effects and be aware of the potential problems associated with
their use. This handbook provides the reader with factual
information on 152 herbal ingredients present in herbal medicinal
products in European and other developed countries. Herbal
medicinal products can offer an alternative to conventional
medicines in non-life-threatening conditions, providing they are
of adequate quality and safety, and are used in an appropriate
manner.

References

1 Kessler RC et al. Long-term trends in the use of complementary and
alternative medical therapies in the United States. Ann Intern Med
2001; 135: 262-268.

----- PAGE 35 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24
25

26

27

28

29

30

31

Introduction

Barnes P et al. Complementary and alternative medicine among
adults: United States, 2002. Adv Data 2004; 343: 1-19.

Tindle HA et al. Trends in use of complementary and alternative
medicine by US adults: 1997-2002. Alt Ther Health Med 2005; 11(1):
42-49.

Blumenthal M. Herb sales down 7.4 percent in mainstream market.
Herbalgram 2005; 66: 63.

MacLennan AH et al. The continuing use of complementary and
alternative medicine in South Australia: costs and beliefs in 2004. MJA
2006; 184: 27-31.

Barnes J. Herbal medicine. Pharm J 1998; 260: 344-348.

Thomas KJ e¢ al. Use and expenditure on complementary medicine in
England: a population based survey. Complement Ther Med 2001; 9:
2-11.

Dixon A. et al. Complementary and Alternative Medicine in the UK
and Germany — research and evidence on supply and demand. Anglo-
German Foundation for the Study of Industrial Society 2003. http://
www.agf.org.uk December 2005.

House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology Session
1999-2000, 6th Report. Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 21
November 2000.

Ernst E, White AR. The BBC survey of complementary medicine use
in the UK. Complement Ther Med 2000; 8: 32-36.

Brevoort P. The US botanical market — an overview. Herbalgram 1996;
36: 49-57.

Brevoort P. The booming US botanical market. A new overview.
Herbalgram 1998; 44: 33-46.

Rogers G. Herb consumers' attitudes, preferences profiled in new
market study. Herbalgram 2005; 65: 60-61.

Blumenthal M. Herbs and phytomedicines in the European
Community. In: Blumenthal M, ed. The Complete German
Commission E Monographs. Therapeutic Guide to Herbal Medicines.
Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998.

Institute of Medical Statistics (IMS) Self-Medication International.
Herbals in Europe. London: IMS Self-Medication International, 1998.
Complementary Medicines — UK. Mintel International Group Ltd.
April 2003.

Complementary Medicines — UK. Mintel International Group Ltd.
March 2005.

EMEA Herbal Medicinal Products Committee. Public statement on
the risks associated with the use of herbal products containing
Aristolochia species. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpc/
13838105en.pdf November 2005.

Barnes J et al. St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.): a review of
its chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2001; 53: 583-600.

O'Sullivan HM, Lum K. The poisoning of ‘awa: the non-traditional
use of an ancient remedy. Pac Health Dialog. 2004; 11(2): 211-215.
Ernst E. Contamination of herbal medicines. Pharm J 2005; 275: 167—
168.

De Smet PAGM. Health risks of herbal remedies: An update. Clinical
Pharmacology Therapeutics 2004; 76(1): 1-17.

Barnes J, Abbot NC. Experiences with complementary remedies: a
survey of community pharmacists. Pharm J 1999; 263 (Suppl. Suppl.)
R37-R43.

Kayne S. A helping hand? Chemist and Druggist 2002; 12: 26-28.
Naidu S et al. Attitudes of Australian pharmacists toward
complementary and alternative medicines. Annals Pharmacotherapy
2005; 39: 1456-1461.

Welna EM et al. Pharmacists’ personal use, professional practice
behaviours, and perceptions regarding herbal and other natural
products. Journal American Pharmacists Association 2003; 4.
602-611.

Ernst E. Complementary medicine pharmacist. Pharm J 2004; 273:
197-198.

Ernst E. Recommended information sources. Pharm J 2005; 275: 348.
Nathan JP et al. Availability of and attitudes toward resources on
alternative medicine products in the community pharmacy setting. ]
Am Pharm Assoc 2005; 45(6): 734-739.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans' Pharmacognosy, 15th edn. London: WB
Saunders, 2001.

Council Directive 2001/83/EC. Official Journal of the European
Communities 2001; 311: 67-128.

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

Britt R. The New EC Systems in the UK, Regulatory Affairs ] 1995; 6:
380-384.

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. The European marketing authorisation
system. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart: medpharm GmbH
Scientific Publishers, 2003: 81-88.

Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the
Council Official Journal of the European Communities 2004; 136: 1-
33.

AESGP (Association of the European Self-medication Industry).
Herbal Medicinal Products in the European Union, 15 March 1999.
http://www.aesgp.be

Steinhoff B. The contribution of the European Scientific Cooperative
on Phytotherapy and World Health Organisation monographs. Drug
Inform J 1999; 33: 17-22.

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. Legal provisions relating to the efficacy and
safety of herbal medicinal products: Attempts to harmonise the
assessment criteria. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart:
medpharm GmbH Scientific Publishers, 2003:117-130.

ESCOP Monographs (European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy). The Scientific Foundation for Herbal Medicinal
Products, Exeter. 2nd edition (2003).

Council Directive 2004/24/EC. Official Journal of the European
Communities 2004, 136: 85-90.

EMEA Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC).
Community Herbal Monographs. www.emea.curopa.eu/htms/human/
hmpc/hmpcmonographsadopt.htm March 2007.

Medicines Act Leaflet (MAL) 8. A Guide to the Status under the
Medicines Act of Borderline Products for Human Use. London:
Medicines Control Agency.

Medicines Act Leaflet (MAL 2). Guidelines on Safety and Efficacy
Requirements for Herbal Medicinal Products. Guidance Notes on
Applications for Product Licences; 1989, 53-54.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2005:2759. The Medicines (Marketing
Authorisations etc.) Amendment Regulations 2005.

The Medicines Act, 1968. London: HM Stationery Office.

Appelbe GE, Wingfield J. Dale and Appelbe's Pharmacy Law and
Ethics, 8th edn. London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2005.

CPMP/QWP 2819/00 (EMEA/CVMP 814/00) Guideline on Quality of
Herbal Medicinal Products. EMEA website: www.emea.curopa.cu/
pdfs/human/qwp/281900en.pdf October 2006.

CPMP/QWP 2820/00 (EMEA/CVMP 814/00) Guideline on
Specifications: test procedures and acceptance criteria for herbal
drugs, herbal drug preparations and herbal medicinal products.
EMEA website: www.emea.europa.cu/pdfs/human/qwp/282000en.pdf
October 2006.

CPMP/CVMP Note for Guidance on Manufacture of Herbal
Medicinal. Products. The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the
European Union 1992, vol. 1V: 127-129.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 1971: 1450. The Medicines (Exemptions
from Licences) (Special and Transitional Cases) Order.

MHRA Consultation Letter MLX 299. Proposals for the reform of the
regulation of unlicensed herbal remedies in the United Kingdom made
up to meet the needs of individual patients. March 2004.

Holder S. Regulatory aspects of herbal medicines: a global view. The
Regulatory Review 2001; 4; 13-17.

Reminder: Safety of Traditional Chinese Medicines and herbal
remedies. Current Problems 2004; 30: 10.

Traditional Herbal Medicines Registration Scheme: Future changes to
Section 12(2) of the Medicines Act? MHRA website: http://www.
mhra.gov.uk February 2006.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 1984: 769, The Medicines (Products Other
than Veterinary Drugs) (General Sales List) Order, 1984, as amended
by SI 1985:1540, SI 1987: 910, SI 1989: 969 and SI 1990: 1129.
Statutory Instrument (SI) 1983: 1212, The Medicines (Products Other
than Veterinary Drugs) (Prescription Only) Order 1983, as amended.
Statutory Instrument (SI) 1977: 2130, The Medicines Retail Sale or
Supply of Herbal Remedies Order, 1977.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2001:1841, The Medicines (Aristolochia and
Mu Tong etc) (Prohibition) Order, 2001.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2002:3170, The Medicines for Human Use
(Kava-kava) (Prohibition) Order, 2002.

----- PAGE 36 -----
59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

Medicines Control Agency. Review of herbal ingredients for use in
unlicensed herbal medicinal products.. www.mhra.gov.uk September
2001

Anon. National Policy on Traditional Medicine and Regulation of
Herbal Medicines: Report of a WHO global survey. Geneva: WHO,
2005S.

Anon. Regulatory Situation of Herbal Medicines — a Worldwide
Review. Geneva: WHO, 1998.

Anon. Legal Status of Traditional Medicine and Complementary/
Alternative Medicine: A Worldwide Review. Geneva: WHO, 2001.
World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines for Developing
Consumer Information on Proper Use of Traditional Medicines and
Complementary/Alternative Medicines. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization, 2004.

World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on Safety Monitoring
of Herbal Medicines in Pharmacovigilance Systems. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2004.

World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on Good Agricultural
and Collection Practices (GACP) for Medicinal Plants. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2003.

Briggs D. The regulation of herbal medicines in Australia. Toxicology
2002; 181-182: 565-570.

Natural Health Products Directorate. A Regulatory Framework for
Natural Health Products. www.he-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/prodnatur/about-
apropos/glance-apercu_e-html February 2006.

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act 1994 Pub L No.
103-417 Washington.

FDA Centre for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. Dietary
supplements. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/supplmnt.html

Marcus DM, Grollman AP. Botanical medicines — the need for new
regulations. N Engl J Med 2002; 347(25): 2073-2076.

Wechsler J. Standards for supplements. Pharmaceutical Technology
Europe 2003; March: 18-20.

Food and Drug Administration. FDA announces major initi
dietary supplements. 4 November 2004. www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/
2004/NEW01130.html

De Smet PAGM. Toxicological outlook on quality assurance of herbal
remedies. In: Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer
Verlag, 1992.

De Smet PAGM. Overview of herbal quality control. Drug Inform J
1999; 33: 717-724.

Bauer R. Quality criteria and standardization of
phytopharmaceuticals: Can acceptable drug standards be achieved?
Drug Inform J 1998, 32: 101-110.

Busse W. The significance of quality for efficacy and safety of herbal
medicinal products. Drug Inform J 2000, 34: 15-23.

Corbin Winslow L. Herbs as medicines. Arch Intern Med 1998: 158:
2192-2199,

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. Quality assurance of herbal medicinal
products. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart: medpharm GmbH
Scientific Publishers, 2003: 37-66.

IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of
Chemicals to Humans. Lyons, France: IARC Press, 2002 Volume 82.
Vanherweghem JL, et al. Rapidly progressive interstitial renal fibrosis
in young women: association with slimming regimen including
Chinese herbs. Lancet 1993; 341: 135-139.

Cosyns JP et al. Chinese herbs nephropathy: A clue to Balkan endemic
nephropathy. Kidney Int 1994; 45: 1680-1688.

Van Ypersele C, Vanherweghem JL. The tragic paradigm of Chinese
herb nephropathy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1995; 10: 157-160.
Cosyns J-P et al. Urothelial lesions in Chinese-herb nephropathy. Am J
Kidney Dis 1999; 33: 1011-1017.

Nortier JL et al. Urothelial carcinoma associated with the use of a
Chinese herb (Aristolochia fangchi). N Engl ] Med 2000; 342: 1686—
1692.

Lord G et al. Nephropathy caused by Chinese herbs in the UK. Lancet
1999; 354: 481482.

Lord GM et al. Urothelial malignant disease and Chinese herbal
nephropathy. Lancet 2001; 358: 1515-1516.

FDA Press Release. Vital Nutrients Recalls Joint Ease & Verified
Quality Brand Joint Comfort Complex because of adverse health risk
ciated with aristolochic acid. www.fda.gov-USA June 2001.

ives for

as:

Introduction

88 Charvill A. Investigation of formulated Traditional Chinese Medicines
(TCM) and raw herbs for the presence of Aristolochia species. British
Pharmaceutical Conference Science Proceedings 2001. London:
Pharmaceutical Press, 2001: 295.

89 Gold LS, Slone TH Aristolochic acid, an herbal carcinogen, sold on
the Web after FDA alert. N Engl J] Med 2003; 349: 1576-1577.

90 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
Herbal Safety News. www.mhra.gov.uk

91 Slifman NR. Contamination of botanical dietary supplements by
Digitalis lanata. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339: 806-811.

92 But PPH et al. Adulterants of herbal products can cause poisoning.
BM] 1996; 313: 117.

93 Tai YT et al. Cardiotoxicity after accidental herb-induced aconite
poisoning. Lancet 1992; 340: 1254-1256.

94 Read BE Bastard anise poisoning and its antidotal measures. Chinese ]
Physiol 1926; 1: 15-22.

95 Biessels GJ et al. Epileptic seizure after a cup of tea: intoxication with
Japanese star anise. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 2002; 146: 808-811.

96 L'Agence francaise de sécurité sanitaire des produits de santé
(Afssaps). Badiane et risque convulsive, 2001. Available at: http://
agmed.sante.gouv.fr/htm/10/filcoprs/011103c.htm February 2006.

97 Laboratoires de la DGCCRE. Mise en évidence de la contamination de
la badiane de Chine (Illicium verum Hoocker f.) par d'autres espéces
de badiane, Marseille, France; 2003. Available at: www.finances.gouv.
fr/DGCCR F/activites/labos/2001/badiane.htm. Accessed April 22,
2003.

98 2002/75/EC: Commission Decision of 1 February 2002 laying down
special conditions on the import from third countries of star anise
(text with EEA relevance) (notified under document number C(2002)
379). Off ] Eur Commun 2002; L: 33-34.

99 Diego Ize-Ludlow MD et al. Neurotoxicities in infants seen with
consumption of star anise tea. Pediatrics 2004; 114 (5): e653-e656.

100 Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China (English edition).
Chemical Industry Press, 2005.

101 Ko R. Adulterants in Asian patent medicines. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339:
847.

102 Au AM et al. Screening methods for drugs and heavy metals in
Chinese patent medicines. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 2000; 65:
112-119.

103 Koh H-L, Woo S$-O. Chinese Proprietary Medicine in Singapore:
Regulatory control of toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs. Drug
Safety 2000; 23: 351-362.

104 Huang WF et al. Adulteration by synthetic substances of traditional
Chinese medicines in Taiwan. J Clin Pharmacol 1997; 37: 344-350.

105 Singapore Ministry of Health Press Statement. Chinese Proprietary
Medicine Found Adulterated with Sildenafil. 3 March 2001.

106 FDA Press Release. Anso Comfort Capsules Recalled by Distributor.
13 February 2001. www.fda.gov-USA.

107 Lau KK et al. Phenytoin poisoning after using Chinese proprietary
medicines. Hum Exp Toxicol 2000; 19: 385-386.

108 FDA Press Release. State Health Director Warns Consumers about
Prescription Drugs in Herbal Products. 15 February 2000. www.fda.
gov-USA.

109 Medicines Control Agency. Hypoglycaemia following the use of
Chinese herbal medicine Xiaoke Wan. Curr Probl Pharmacovigilance
2001; 27: 8.

110 Wu M-S. Multiple tubular dysfunction induced by mixed Chinese
herbal medicines containing cadmium. Nephrol Dialysis Transplant
1996; 11: 867-870.

111 Schaumburg HH e¢ al. Alopecia and sensory polyneuropathy from
thallium in a Chinese herbal medication. JAMA. 1992; 268: 3430-
3431.

112 Kew J et al. Arsenic and mercury intoxication due to Indian ethnic
remedies. BMJ 1993; 306: 506-507.

113 Sheerin NS et al. Simultaneous exposure to lead, arsenic and mercury
from Indian ethnic medicines. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1994; 48: 332-333.

114 Cuncha J et al. Arsenic and acute lethal intoxication. Hong Kong
Pharm J] 1998; 7: 50-53.

115 Ernst E. Adulteration of Chinese herbal medicines with synthetic
drugs: a systematic review. Journal of Internal Medicine 2002; 252:
107-113.

116 Ernst E. Heavy metals in traditional Indian remedies. Eur J Clin Phar
2002; 57: 891-896.

----- PAGE 37 -----
Introduction

117 Ernst E. Toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs in Asian herbal
medicines. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2002; 23(3): 136-139.

118 Cole MR, Fetrow CW. Adulteration of dietary supplements. Am J]
Health-Syst Pharm 2003; 60: 1576-1580.

119 Ernst E. Risks of herbal medicinal products. Pharmacoepidemiology
Drug Safety 2004; 13: 767-771

120 Saper RB et al. Heavy metal content of Ayurvedic herbal medicine
products. JAMA 2004; 292: 2868-2873.

121 EMEA Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). Guideline
on Good Agricultural and Collection Practice for starting materials of
herbal origin. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpc/2468 1605en.
pdf August 2006.

122 World Health Organization. Quality Control of Medicinal Plant
Materials. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1998.

123 European Pharmacopoeia, 5th edn. 2005. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe, 2005.

124 Phillipson JD. Quality assurance of medicinal plants. In: Franz C et al.
First World Congress on medicinal and aromatic plants for human
welfare, WOCMAP, quality, phytochemistry, industrial aspects,
economic aspects. Acta Horticult 1993; 333: 117-122.

125 Houghton P. Establishing identification criteria for botanicals. Drug
Inform ] 1998; 32: 461469.

126 De Smet PAGM. Health risks of herbal remedies. Drug Safety 1995;
13: 81-93.

127 De Smet PAGM. Adverse effects of herbal remedies. Adverse Drug
React Bull 1997; 183: 695-698.

128 Shaw D et al. Traditional remedies and food supplements. A 5-year
toxicological study (1991-1995). Drug Safety 1997; 17: 342-356.

129 Chitturi S, Farrell GC. Herbal hepatotoxicity: an expanding but
poorly defined problem. Journal Gastroenterology and Hepatology
2000; 15: 1093-1099.

130 Pittler MH, Ernst E. Systematic review: hepatotoxic events associated
with herbal medicinal products. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2003; 18:
451-471.

131 Tisserand R, Balacs T. Essential Oil Safety. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1995.

132 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing asarone. www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/
hmpc/13921505en.pdf November 2005.

133 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing estragole. www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/
hmpce/13721205en.pdf November 2005.

134 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing methyleugenol. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/
human/hmpe/1383630Sen.pdf November 2005.

135 De Smet PAGM. Aristolochia species. In: Adverse Effects of Herbal
Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1992.

136 D'Arcy PE. Adverse reactions and interactions with herbal medicines.
Part 1. Adverse reactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 1991; 10:
189-208.

137 Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
New York: Academic Press, 1986.

138 Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Mistletoe — the magic herb. Pharm J
1982; 229: 437-439.

139 Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal, 3rd edn. New York: Howarth Press,
1993.

140 Chandler RF et al. Controversial laetrile. Pharm J 1984; 232: 330-332.

141 Statutory Instrument (SI) 1984:87. The Medicines (Cyanogenetic
Substances) Order 1984.

142 Ljunggren B. Severe phototoxic burn following celery ingestion. Arch
Dermatol 1990; 126: 1334-1336.

143 Boffa MJ et al. Celery soup causing severe phototoxicity during PUVA
therapy. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135: 330-345.

144 Medicines Control Agency. Psoralea corylifolia fruit in Traditional
Chinese Medicines causing severe skin reaction. Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2001; 27: 12.

145 EMEA HMPC. Public statement on chamomilla containing herbal
medicinal products. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpe/
1383090Sen.pdf March 2006.

146 Nordeng H, Havnen G. Use of herbal drugs in pregnancy: a survey
among 400 Norwegian women. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug
safety 2004; 13: 371-380.

147 Gallo M et al. The use of herbal medicine in pregnancy and lactation.
In: Koren G, ed. Maternal-fetal toxicology. A clinician's guide. 3rd ed.
New York: Marcel Dekker; 2001; 569-601.

148 Roulet M et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

149 Allen JR et al. Are herbal teas safe for infants and children? Aust
Family Physician 1989; 18: 1017-1019.

150 Sawini-Sikand A et al. Use of complementary/alternative therapies
among children in primary care pediatrics. Ambul Pediatr 2002; 2: 99-
103.

151 OttoliniMC et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use
among children in Washington, DC area. Ambul Pediatr 2000; 1: 122—
125.

152 Lim A et al. Survey of complementary and alternative medicine use at
a tertiary children's hospital. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health
2005; 41(8): 424-427.

153 Hrastinger A et al. Is there clinical evidence supporting the use of
botanical dietary supplements in children? Journal of Pediatrics 2005;
146: 311-317.

154 Ernst E. Herbal medicines for children. Clin Pediatr 2003; 42: 193-196.

155 Ernst E. Serious adverse effects of unconventional therapi
children and adolescents: a systematic review of recent evidence. Eur ]
Pediatr 2003; 162: 72-80.

156 Foster D et al. Alternative medicine use in older Americans. ] Am
Geriatr Soc 2000; 48: 1560-1565.

157 Canter PH, Ernst E. Herbal supplement use by persons aged over 50
years in Britain. Drugs Aging 2004; 21(9): 597-605.

158 Raji MA et al. Ethnic differences in herb and vitamin/mineral use in
the elderly. Annals of Pharmacotherapy 2005; 39: 1019-1023.

159 Ernst E. Herbal Medications for common ailments in the elderly.
Drugs Ageing 1999; 15: 423-428.

160 Mashour NH. Herbal medicine for the treatment of cardiovascular
di e. Arch Intern Med 1998; 158: 2225-2234.

161 Ernst E. Cardiovascular adverse effects of herbal medicines: a
systematic review of recent literature. Canadian Journal of Cardiology
2003; 19(7): 818-827.

162 Izzo AA et al. Cardiovascular pharmacotherapy and herbal medicines:
the risk of drug interaction. Int J Cardiol 2005; 98(1):1-14.

163 British Heart Foundation. Herbs and the heart. 28 July 2003 (www.
bhf.org.uk January 2006).

164 Ernst E. A primer of CAM commonly used by cancer patients. MJA
2001; 174: 88-92.

165 Richardson MA, Straus SE. Complementary and alternative medicine:
Opportunities and challenges for cancer management and research.
Semin Oncol 2002; 29: 531-

166 Lowenthal RM. Public illne:
CAM for a prominent polit
576-S79.

167 DiGianni LM et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use
among women with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2002 (Suppl.
Suppl.18); 20: 345-388.

168 Girgis A et al. The use of complementary and alternative therapies by
patients with cancer. Oncol Res 2005; 15(5): 281-289.

169 Morris KT et al. A comparison of complementary therapy use
between breast cancer patients and patients with other primary tumor
sites. Am J Surg 2000; 179: 407-411.

170 Scott JA et al. Use of complementary and alternative medicine in
patients with cancer: a UK survey. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2005; 9(2): 131-
137.

171 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
lung cancer patients in eight European countries. Conrplement Ther
Clin Pract 2006; 12(1): 34-39.

172 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
colorectal cancer patients in seven European countries. Complement
Ther Med 2005; 13(4): 251-257.

173 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
breast cancer patients in Europe. Support Care Cancer 2006; 14(3):
260-267.

174 Werneke U et al. Potential health risks of complementary alternative
medicines in cancer patients. British Journal of Cancer 2004; 90: 408-
413.

175 Richardson MA et al. Discrepant views of oncologists and cancer
patients on CAM. Support Care Cancer 2004; 12: 797-804.

for

iow the community recommended
an with cancer. MJA 2005; 183 (11/12):

----- PAGE 38 -----
176 Mathijssen RH et al. Effects of St John's Wort on irinotecan
metabolism. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002; 94: 1247-1249.

177 Sparreboom A et al. Herbal remedies in the United States: Potential
adverse interactions with anticancer agents. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22:
2489-2503.

178 McLesky CH et al. The incidence of herbal and selected nutraceutical
use in surgical patients. Anaesthesiology 1999; 91 (3A): A1168.

179 Ang-lee MK et al. Herbal medicines and peri operative care. JAMA
2001; 286: 208-216.

180 Adusumilli P e¢ al. The prevalence and predictors of herbal medicine
use in surgical patients. J Am Coll Surg 2004: 198(4): 583-590.

181 Noonan K et al. Herbal medication use in the pediatric surgical
patient. Journal Pediatric Surgery 2004; 39(3): 500-503.

182 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). What you should know
about herbal and dietary supplement use and anesthesia. www.asahq.
org/patientEducation/herbPatient.pdf February 2006.

183 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). What you should know

nes and other dietary

ion/herbPhysician.pdf

about your patients’ use of herbal medi

supplements. www.asahq.org/patientEduca
February 2006.

184 Royal College of Anaesthetists. You and Your Anaesthetic. 2nd
edition. www.rcoa.ac.uk/docs/yaya.doc January 2003.

185 Armato P, Marcus DM. Review of alternative therapies for the
treatment of menopausal symptoms. Climacteric 2003; 6: 278-284.

186 Mahady GB et al. Botanical dietary supplements usage in peri- and
postmenopausal women. Menopause 2003; 10: 65-72.

187 Barnes J. Women's health. Pharm J 2003; 270: 16-18.

188 Stafford RS et al. Women's decision-making concerning alternative
menopause treatments post WHI: Results from national on-line
survey [abstract]. Washington, DC: North American Menopause
Society 2004 Annual Meeting; October 6-9, 2004. Abstract P-125.

189 Mason P. How effective are complementary therapies for menopausal
symptoms? Pharm ] 2004; 273: 59-61.

190 Cos Pet al. Phytoestrogens: recent developments. Planta Medica 2003;
69: 589-599.

191 Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Influence of marketed herbal menopause
preparations on MCEF-7 cell proliferation. Menopause 2004; 11(3):
281-289.

192 Program on breast cancer and environmental risk factors. Herbal
medicines and breast cancer risk. http://envirocancer.cornell.edu/
factsheet/diet/fs53.herbal.cfm (accessed January 2006).

193 Fang CY et al. Correlates of soy food consumption in women at
increased risk for breast cancer. J Am Diet Assoc 2005; 105(10):1552—
1558.

194 Huntley A. Drug-herb interactions with herbal medicines for
menopause. Journal British Menopause Society 2004; 10(4): 162-165.

195 Anon. Grapefruit and drug effects. Drugs Q 1999; 3: 25-28.

196 Huang SM et al. Drug interactions with herbal products and
grapefruit juice: A conference report. Clinical Pharmacology
Therapeutics 2004; 75(1): 112.

197 Fujita KI. Food-drug interactions via human cytochrome P450 3A
(CYP3A). Drug Metabol Drug Interact 2004; 20(4): 195-217.

198 Ernst E. Possible interactions between synthetic and herbal medicinal
products. Perfusion 2000; 13: 4-15.

199 Fugh-Berman A. Herb-drug interactions. Lancet 2000; 355: 134-138.

200 Miller L. Selected clinical considerations focusing on known and
potential drug-herb interactions. Arch Intern Med 1998; 158: 2200—
2211.

201 Brown R. Potential interactions of herbal medicines with
antipsychotics, antidepressants and hypnotics. Eur J Herb Med 1997;
3: 25-28.

202 Barnes J et al. Herbal interactions. Pharm J 2003; 270: 118-121.

203 Williamson EM. Drug interactions between herbal and prescription
medicines. Drug Safety 2003; 26(15): 1075-1092.

204 Mannel M. Drug interactions with St John's Wort. Drug Safety 2004;
27(11): 773-797.

205 Hu Z et al. Herb-drug interactions. Drugs. 2005; 65(9); 1239-1282.

206 Williamson EM. Interactions between herbal and conventional
medicines. Expert Opinion Drug Safety. 2005; 4(2): 355-378.

207 Boyle F. Herbal medicines can interfere with breast cancer treatment.
Med J Aust 1997; 167: 286.

208 Holden W. Use of herbal remedies and potential drug interactions in
rheumatology outpatients. Ann Rheum Dis 2005; 64: 790.

Introduction

209 Cheng TO. Herbal interactions with cardiac drugs. Arch Intern Med
2000; 160: 870-871.

210 Izzo AA, Ernst E. Interactions between herbal medicines and
prescribed drugs. A systematic review. Drugs 2001; 61(15): 2163-2175.

211 Coxeter PD et al. Herb-drug interactions: an evidence based approach.
Current Medicinal Chemistry 2004; 11: 1513-1525.

212 Halil M e¢ al. No alteration in the PFA-100 in vitro bleeding time
induced by the Ginkgo biloba special extract, Egb 761, in elderly
patents with mild cognitive impairment. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
2005; 16: 349-35.

213 Gaus W et al. Identification of adverse drug reactions by evaluation of

a prescription database, demonstrated for 'risk of bleeding’. Methods
Inf Med 2005; 44: 697-703.

214 Stenton SB et al. Interactions between warfarin and herbal products,
minerals and vitamins: a pharmacist's guide. Can J Hosp Pharm 2001;
54: 184-190.

215 Smith L et al. Co-ingestion of herbal medicines and warfarin. Br ] Gen
Pract 2004; 54(503): 439-441.

216 Ramsay NA. Complementary and alternative medicine use among
patients starting warfarin. British Journal Haematology 2005; 130(5):
777-780.

217 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Possible
interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice. Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2003; 29: 8.

218 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Interaction
between warfarin and cranberry juice: new advice Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2004; 30: 10.

219 Barnes J. Pharmacovigilance of herbal medicines: a UK perspective.
Drug Safety 2003; 26(12): 829-851.

220 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Patient
reporting of suspected adverse drug reactions. www.mhra.gov.uk
February 2006.

221 Farah MH et al. International reporting of adverse health effects
associated with herbal medicines. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Safety
2000; 9: 105-112.

222 World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for International
Drug Monitoring. Draft guidelines for herbal ATC classification.
Uppsala: The Uppsala Monitoring Centre, 2002.

223 Fucik H et al. Building a computerised herbal substance register for
implementation and use in the WHO international drug monitoring
programme. Drug Information Journal 2002; 36: 839-854.

224 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (1). An introduction to herbal medicinal
products. Pharm J 2002; 268: 804-806.

225 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (2). Depression. Pharm J 2002; 268:
908-910.

226 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (3). Cognitive deficiency and dementia.
Pharm J, 2002; 269: 160-162.

227 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (4). Hyperlipidaemia. Pharm J 2002;
269: 193-195.

228 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (5). Insomnia. Pharm J 2002; 269: 219-
221.

229 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (6). Benign prostatic hyperplasia. Pharm
J 2002; 269: 250-252.

230 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (7). Colds. Pharm J 2002; 269: 716-718.

231 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (8). Gastrointestinal system and liver
disorders Pharm J] 2002; 269: 848-850.

232 Ernst E, Pittler MH. The efficacy of herbal drugs. In: Herbal
Medicine: a Concise Overview for Professionals. London:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000: 69-81.

233 Ernst E. The clinical efficacy of herbal treatments: an overview of
recent systematic reviews. Pharm J 1999; 262: 85-87.

234 Ernst E. Herbal medicines: where is the evidence? BMJ 2000; 321:
395-396.

235 Linde K et al. Systematic reviews of herbal medicines — an annotated
bibliography: Forsch Komplementarmed Klass Naturheilkd 2003; 10
(Suppl. Suppl.1): 17-27.

236 Ernst E. The efficacy of herbal medicine — an overview. Fundam Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 19(4): 405-409.

237 The Cochrane Library. www.update-software.com/cochrane/

238 Linde K et al. St John's Wort for depression. The Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 1.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Introduction

239 Williamson EM. Synergy — myth or reality? In: Herbal Medicine: a
Concise Overview for Professionals. London: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2000: 43-8.

240 Williamson EM. Synergy and other interactions in phytomedicines.
Phytomedicine 2001; 8(5): 401-409.

241 Wurglics M et al. Comparison of German St John's wort products
according to hyperforin and total hypericin content. J Am Pharm
Assoc 2001; 41: 560-566.

242 Bergonzi MC et al. Variability in the content of the constituents of
Hypericum perforatum L. and some commercial extracts. Drug Dev
Indust Pharm 2001; 26: 491-497.

243 Chandrasekera DH et al. Quantitative analysis of the major
constituents of St John's wort with HPLC-ESI-MS. J] Pharm
Pharmacol 2005; 57(12):1645-1652.

----- PAGE 40 -----
- Chemical Constituents of Plants Used
as Herbal Medicines

All living organisms produce numerous chemical substances that
are termed natural products. Those natural products that are
common to all life forms are known collectively as primary
metabolites and are exemplified by carbohydrates, proteins and
fats. Thus, many of the chemical building blocks of primary
metabolism are found in all medicinal plants (e.g. amino acids,
common sugars, such as glucose, and fatty acids). In addition to
primary metabolites, plants also produce other compounds with a
more restricted distribution and these are referred to collectively
as secondary metabolites. Plants are a rich source of secondary
metabolites and some of these are of such limited distribution that
they are found only in a particular genus (e.g. Papaver), or even in
only a single species (e.g. Papaver somniferum). On the other
hand, some secondary metabolites are widely distributed through-
out many of the plant families. It is not always understood why
particular plants produce specific secondary metabolites, but
some of them are known to have definite functions; for example,
some are toxic and form a defence against predators, while some
are attractive to insects and aid pollination. W hatever their roles
are within plants, many of them have pharmacological actions and
this has been exploited to provide medicinal drugs such as
codeine, morphine, digoxin and quinine. Some secondary
metabolites have proved to be too toxic for human use (e.g.
aconitine from aconite), but investigations of their mode of action
have stimulated research into synthetic analogues as potential
therapeutic agents.

For more details of plant secondary metabolites, the reader is
recommended to consult specialist texts, for example on the
biosynthesis of medicinal natural products (e.g. Dewick, 2002"),
on scientific background to herbal medicines (e.g. Evans, 2002;
Heinrich et al., 2003) and on specific chemical structures (e.g.
Harborne and Baxter, 1993; Dictionary of Natural Products
CD-ROM”).

Numerous secondary metabolites are derived from a common
biosynthetic precursor; for example, shikimic acid is involved in
the formation of coumarins, lignans, phenylpropanes and tannins.
Although each of these groups of secondary metabolites is
different chemically they all contain a common structural feature,
namely a C6-C3 moiety. Among the most prevalent of secondary
metabolites are alkaloids, glycosides and phenols. Examples of
these types of secondary metabolite can be found in many of the
medicinal plants.

e

Alkaloids

A typical alkaloid is chemically basic (alkaline) and contains a
secondary or tertiary amine function within a heterocyclic ring
(e.g. codeine). Alkaloids may be classified by their chemical
skeleta (Figure 1) into the following major types: pyrrolidine (e.g.
betonicine from white horehound); pyridine (e.g. gentianine from
gentian); piperidine (e.g. lobeline from lobelia); pyrrolizidine (e.g.
symphytine from comfrey); quinolizidine (e.g. sparteine from
broom); quinoline (e.g. quinine from cinchona); isoquinoline (e.g.
boldine from boldo); indole (e.g. harman from passionflower);

tropane (e.g. hyoscine from belladonna); imidazole (e.g. pilocar-
pine from jaborandi); and xanthine (e.g. caffeine from maté).
Biosynthetically related compounds that do not follow the above
definition of an alkaloid may also be referred to as alkaloids, for
example phenylalkylamines that do not contain an N-heterocyclic
ring (e.g. ephedrine from ephedra), or that are not basic (e.g.
colchicine from colchicum). Examples of medicinal plants that
contain alkaloids are given in Appendix 2, Table 15. For further
information on alkaloids the reader is referred to other texts (e.g.
references 1, 3 and 6).

Glycosides

A glycoside consists of two components, an aglycone (non-sugar)
part and a sugar part. The aglycone portion may be of several
different types of secondary metabolite (Figure 2), including
coumarin (e.g. scopolin from horse-chestnut, see also Appendix 2,
Table 16), flavonoid (e.g. rutin from buchu, see also Appendix 2,
Table 17), or hydroxyanthracene (e.g. cascaroside A from cascara,
see also Appendix 2, Table 1). The sugar moiety is linked to the
aglycone by a direct carbon-to-carbon bond (C-glycoside), or
through an oxygen-to-carbon bond (O-glycoside). Cyanide glyco-
sides, (e.g. amygdalin from apricot) release toxic hydrogen cyanide
when cells are damaged and act as a defence mechanism.
Glucosinolates (e.g. sinigrin from horseradish) contain nitrogen
and sulfur and are pungent. Hydroxyanthracene glycosides are the
active principles of the laxative herbs c

Appendix 2, Table 1).

ara and senna (see also

H

Pyrrolidine Pyridine Piperidine
CO CO Cr
N N a
N
Pyrrolizidine Quinolizidine — Quinoline

»

H
lsoquinoline Indole Tropane

H fe)
N H
cI HN ‘
uy,
oN N

H
Imidazole Xanthine

Figure 1 Examples of alkaloid skeleta.

----- PAGE 41 -----
CHO ~

Glucose-O ie) [e)

Scopolin

Glucose-O

QO OH
: : : CH20H

HY “Glucose

Cascaroside A

Figure 2. Examples of glycosides.

Phenolics

Many of the aromatic constituents of plants contain hydroxy
substituents and are phenolic. There is a wide variety of phenolics
in medicinal plants and they range in chemical structure from
simple phenolic acids (Figure 3), e.g. caffeic acid from artichoke,
to complex tannins (see Appendix 2, Table 20).

Where chemical structures are included in a monograph they
may be the active principles or they may be compounds that can
be used as chemical markers for that plant, i.e. they are present in
significant quantities or are otherwise characteristic for a
particular plant. As some compounds are of common occurrence
in medicinal plants, their chemical structures are not necessarily
included within a monograph. Some of the commonly encoun-
tered natural products, including mono-, sesqui-, di- and
triterpenes, flavonoids and tannins, are briefly summarised below.

Rt COOH
R2

R? R! R?_ | RS
p-Hydroxybenzoic acid H OH

it

Protocatechuic acid OH OH

Vanillic acid OCH3; | OH | H
Gallic acid OH OH | OH
Rt SS - COOH
R? RI R2
p-Coumaric acid H OH
Caffeic acid OH OH
Ferulic acid OCH3 | OH

Figure 3. Examples of simple phenolic acids.

Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines

Terpenes

Terpenes are derived from two CS units (isopentane), dimethy-
lallylpyrophosphate and isopentenylpyrophosphate. The mono-
terpenes contain two isopentane units (C10) and are constituents
of many volatile oils (see Appendix 2, Table 21). Some of the more
common monoterpenes are shown in Figure 4. Sesquiterpenes
contain three isopentane units (C15) and occur as different
skeletal types, e.g. eudesmane, germacrene, guaiane (Figure 5). A
large number of sesquiterpenes contain a y-lactone ring and these
are known as sesquiterpene lactones. Some sesquiterpene lactones
are allergenic (see Appendix 2, Table 11). Examples of different
skeletal types of molecule, including eudesmolide, germacranolide
and guaianolide (e.g. constituents of comfrey) and pseudoguaia-
nolide (e.g. matricine, chamomile), are illustrated in Figure 5.
Diterpenes are derived from four isopentane units (C20) and
examples of abietane (e.g. carnosic acid from sage), daphnane,
kaurene, labdane (e.g. rotundifarine from agnus castus), taxane
and tigliane are given in Figure 6. The ginkgolides from ginkgo are
examples of complex diterpenes. Triterpenes are derived from six
isopentane units (C30), and some commonly occurring com-
pounds are illustrated in Figure 7, e.g. campesterol, f-sitosterol,
stigmasterol, #- and B-amyrin, oleanoic and ursolic acids. Cardiac
glycosides (cardenolides, see Appendix 2, Table 2) and saponins
(see Appendix 2, Table 19) are examples of triterpenes that are less
widely distributed in plants than the triterpenes illustrated in

Figure 7.
5

a-Terpineol

OL,
aN

(-)-Menthol

oO
ie)
SS

(+)-Linalool

1,8-Cineole

oO

(+)-Menthone

(-)-Thujone (+)-Carvone {-)-Piperitone
OH
a-Pinene Camphor Carvacrol

Figure 4 Some common monoterpenes from volatile oils.

----- PAGE 42 -----
Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines on

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are biosynthesised from a phenylpropane unit (C6-
C3), derived via shikimic acid and phenylalanine, and a C6 unit
from three molecules of malonyl-CoA. They are widely
distributed in the plant kingdom and occur in many medicinal
plants (see Appendix 2, Table 17). There are five major types:
chalcones, flavanones, flavones, flavonols and anthocyanins
(Figure 8). The flavones and their 3-hydroxy analogues (flavonols)
are the most widespread. The five aglycones kaempferol,
quercetin, myricetin, apigenin and luteolin, as well as the
quercetin glycosides quercitrin and rutin are among the most
commonly present in medicinal plants (Figure 9).

Tannins

Tannins are also common constituents of many medicinal plants
(see Appendix 2, Table 20) and they occur as two major types —
the hydrolysable tannins and the non-hydrolysable (condensed)
tannins. The hydrolysable tannins are esters of sugars with
phenolic acids and they are either gallotannins (galloyl esters of
glucose), e.g. pentagalloyl glucose, or ellagitannins (hexahydrodi-
phenic acid, derived from two units of gallic acid, esters with
glucose), e.g. agrimoniin from agrimony. Non-hydrolysable
tannins, also known as condensed tannins or proanthocyanidins,

RQ

?

Eudesmane Germacrene
°
. [e)
Guaiane Eudesmolide
[e)
[e}
[e)
fe)
Germacranolide Guaianolide

eo

Pseudoguaianolide

Figure 5
lactones.

Some skeletal types of sesquiterpenes and sesquiterpene

are polymers of catechin or gallocatechin linked by C-C bonds
(e.g. cola tannins). Examples of some chemical structures of
hydrolysable and non-hydrolysable tannins are given in Figure 10.

A KP

Abietane Kaurane
Labdane Tigliane
Daphnane Taxane

Figure 6 Examples of some different skeletal types of diterpenes.

,

B-Sitosterol

,

Campesterol

MN

Stigmasterol

B-Amyrin CH3
Oleanolic acid COOH

Figure 7 Examples of some common triterpenes.

a-Amyrin CH3
Ursolic acid COOH

----- PAGE 43 -----
ry Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines

Chalcone Flavanone

CT
O. SS
OH
[e) [e}
Flavone Flavonol

@
s
»
OC
Anthocyanin

Figure 8 Examples of some flavonoid skeleta.

Kaempferol H OH
Quercetin H OH
Myricetin OH | OH

Rt | R2
Apigenin OH|H
Luteolin OH] OH

Figure 9 Examples of some common flavonoids.

OH
HO. fo) O
16em
OR

OH O R
Quercitrin Rhamnosyl

Rutin Rutinosyl

"Do

----- PAGE 44 -----
Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines iB

Hydrolysable tannins Non-hydrolysable tannins
HO OH

fe)
2 OH
HO HO. Qo 6 OH Cx

HO OH HO 0 |
H
HO. OH °
HO. ON oo OH
HO OH

OH
1,2,6-Trigalloyl glucose

OH
HO

Trimer of epicatechin

fe)
e] OH
Onan
HO [e)
le)
Ellagic acid

Figure 10 Examples of components of tannins.

References

1 Dewick PM. Medicinal Natural Products. A Biosynthetic Approach,
2nd edn. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2002.

2 Evans WC. Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, 15th edn. Edinburgh,
London: WB Saunders, 2002.

3 Heinrich M et al. Fundamentals of Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy.
Edinburgh, London: Churchill Livingstone, 2004.

4 Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary. London: Taylor
and Francis, 1993.

5. Dictionary of Natural Products (CD-ROM). London: Chapman &
Hall/CRC, 2003.

6 Cordell GA. Introduction to Alkaloids: a Biogenetic Approach. New
York: Wiley Interscience, 1981

----- PAGE 45 -----
- General References

General references are cited with the prefix

in the monographs

(e.g. 'G1').

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic Compendium.
Analytical, quality control and therapeutic monographs. Santa Cruz,
California: American Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1997-2005.

Bisset NG, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals (Wichtl M,
ed., German edition). Stuttgart: medpharm, 1994.

Blumenthal M e¢ al., eds. The Complete German Commission E
Monographs. Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998.
Blumenthal M et al., eds. Herbal Medicine. Expanded Commission E
Monographs. Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 2000.
Boon H, Smith M. The Botanical Pharmacy. The Pharmacology of 47
Common Herbs. Kingston: Quarry Press, 1999.

Bradley PR, ed. British Herbal Compendium, vol 1. Bournemouth:
British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Keighley: British Herbal Medicine
Association, 1983.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1990, vol 1. Bournemouth: British
Herbal Medicine Association, 1990.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1996. Exeter: British Herbal Medicine
Association, 1996

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1934. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1934.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1949. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1949.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1973. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1973.

British Pharmacopoeia 1993. London: HMSO, 1993.

British Pharmacopoeia 1999. London: The Stationery Office, 1999
British Pharmacopoeia 2001. London: The Stationery Office, 2001.
Council of Europe. Flavouring Substances and Natural Sources of
Flavourings, 3rd edn. Strasbourg: Maisonneuve, 1981.

Council of Europe. Natural Sources of Flavourings. Report No. 1.
Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2000.

Cupp MJ, ed. Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology of Herbal
Products. Totawa, New Jersey: Humana Press, 2000.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 1.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 2.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1993.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 3.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997.

Duke JA. Handbook of Medicinal Herbs. Boca Raton: CRC, 1985.
European Medicines Evaluation Agency. Herbal Medicinal Products
Working Party Draft Core Summary of Product Characteristics for
Valerian and Ispaghula (accessed 20 February 2002).

European Pharmacopoeia, 2nd edn. Strasbourg: Maisonneuve, 1980.
European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn. Strasbourg: Council of Europe,
1997.

European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn, 1998 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 1998.

European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn, 1999 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 1999.

European Pharmacopoeia, 4th edn, 2002. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe, 2002.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans' Pharmacognosy, 14th edn. London: WB
Saunders Company, 1998.

Farnsworth NR. Potential value of plants as sources of new
antifertility agents I. J Pharm Sci 1975; 64: 535-598.

Fetrow CW, Avila JR. Professional's Handbook of Complementary
and Alternative Medicines. Springhouse: Springhouse Corporation,
1999.

Foster S, Tyler VE. Tyler's Honest Herbal, 4th edn. New York: The
Haworth Herbal Press, 1999.

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Plants. London:
Wolfe, 1984.

Grieve M. A Modern Herbal. Thetford, Norfolk: Lowe and Brydon,
1979.

Gruenwald J et al., eds. PDR for Herbal Medicines, 1st edn.
Montvale: Medical Economics Company, 1998.

Gruenwald J et al., eds. PDR for Herbal Medicines, 2nd edn.
Montvale: Medical Economics Company Inc, 2000.

The Medicines (Products other than Veterinary Drugs) (General Sales
List), SI No.769: 1984, as amended SI No.1540: 1985; SI No.1129:
1990; and SI No.2410: 1994.

Guenther E. The Essential Oils, six volumes. New York: Van
Nostrand, 1948-1952.

Hamon NW, Blackburn JL. Herbal Products — A Factual Appraisal for
the Health Care Professional. Winnipeg: Cantext, 1985.

Hoppe HA. Taschenbuch der Drogenkunde. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1981.
Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in
Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. New York-Chichester: Wiley, 1980.
Mabey R., ed. The Complete New Herbal. London: Elm Tree Books,
1988.

Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 32nd edn. (Parfitt K, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1999.

Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1982.

Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 29th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1989.

Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia: 30th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1993.

Martindale. The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

The Merck Index. An Encyclopedia of Chemicals, Drugs and
Biologicals, 11th edn. Rahway, NJ: Merck, 1989.

Mills SY. The Dictionary of Modern Herbalism. Wellingborough:
Thorsons, 1985.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy. Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone, 2000.

Mitchell J, Rook A. Botanical Dermatology — Plants and Plant
Products Injurious to the Skin. Vancouver: Greengrass, 1979.
Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs, Fascicules 1 and 2
(1996), Fascicules 3, 4 and 5 (1997), Fascicule 6 (1999). Exeter:
European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.

Morelli I et al. Selected Medicinal Plants. Rome: FAO, 1983.
Robbers JE, Tyler VE. Tyler's Herbs of Choice. New York: The
Haworth Herbal Press, 1999.

Schulz V, Hansel R, Tyler V. Rational Phytotherapy. A Physicians’
Guide to Herbal Medicine. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1998.

Schulz V, Hansel R, Tyler V. Rational Phytotherapy. A Physicians’
Guide to Herbal Medicine, 4th edn. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
Simon JE et al. Herbs — An Indexed Bibliography, 1971-80. Oxford:
Elsevier, 1984.

Tisserand R, Balacs T. Essential Oil Safety. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1995.

Trease GE, Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 13th edn. London: Baillitre
Tindall, 1989.

Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Strickley, 1993.
United States Pharmacopeia 24 and National Formulary 19 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US: United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2000.

Wagner H et al. Plant Drug Analysis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983.
World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on Selected
Medicinal Plants, vol 1. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1999.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations (revised, Williamson EW, Evans FJ). Saffron Walden:
Daniel, 1988.

----- PAGE 46 -----
65

66

67

68

69

70

71
72

73

74
75

76

77

78

www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/eafus.html (US Food and Drug
Administration).

British Herbal Medicine Association. A Guide to Traditional Herbal
Medicines Bournemouth: British Herbal Medicine Association
Publishing, 2003.

Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 33nd edn. (Sweetman S,
ed.). London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 2002.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, 15nd edn. Edinburgh:
WB Saunders, 2002.

Williamson EM. Potter's Herbal Cyclopaedia. Saffron Walden: CW
Daniel Co., 2003.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on Selected
Medicinal Plants, vol 2. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2002.
British Pharmacopoeia 2002. London: The Stationery Office, 2002.
European Pharmacopoeia, 4th edn, 2004 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 2004.

United States Pharmacopoeia 26 and National Formulary 21 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US: United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2003.

British Pharmacopoeia 2004. London: The Stationery Office, 2004.
Wichtl M (ed.). Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. A handbook
for practice on a scientific basis. 3rd edition. Stuttgart: medpharm
Scientific publishers, 2004.

European Scientific Co-operative on Phytotherapy. ESCOP
monographs. 2nd edition. Exeter, Stuttgart, New York: ESCOP, Georg
Thieme Verlag, Thieme New York, 2003.

Martindale. The complete drug reference. 34th edn. (Sweetman S, ed.)
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2005.

British National Formulary 49. London: British Medical Association
and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, 2005.

79

80

81

82

83

84
85
86

87

88

General References

Stockley IH (editor in chief). Stockley's Drug Interactions. 6th edn.
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2002.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Valeriana officinalis L.,
radix. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/340719/
2005.

European Pharmacopoeia, 5th edn, and Supplements 5.1-5.7.
Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2004-2007.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Plantago ovata Forssk.,
seminis tegumentum. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/
HMPC/340857/2005.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Plantago ovata Forssk.,
semen. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/340861/
2005.

British Pharmacopoeia 2007. London: The Stationery Office, 2007.
Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 35th edn. (Sweetman S,
ed.) London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2007.

United States Pharmacopeia 29 and National Formulary 24 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US, United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2006.

Majerus PW, Tollefsen DM. Anticoagulant, thrombolytic and
antiplatelet drugs. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LE (eds). Goodman &
Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 10th edn. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2001: 1519-1538.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Aloe barbadensis Miller
and on Aloe (various species, mainly Aloe ferox Miller and its
hybrids). London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/76310/
2006.

----- PAGE 47 -----
Agnus Castus

prolactin concentrations following treatment with certain
agnus castus preparations, although further research is
needed to confirm these findings.

Similarly, only limited data relating to the safety of agnus
castus preparations are available, and further investigation of
safety aspects is required. The available evidence indicates
that certain agnus castus preparations are well-tolerated
when used according to recommended dosage regimens. In
view of the lack of data, the use of agnus castus preparations
should be avoided in pregnancy and breastfeeding. As there is
pharmacological evidence that agnus castus has
dopaminergic activity, agnus castus should not be used with
dopamine receptor agonists or antagonists.

Species (Family)

Vitex agnus-castus L. (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)
Agni Casti, Chasteberry, Chaste Tree, Monk's Pepper

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?!

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'°8)

BHMA 2003'¢°®

Complete German Commission E”
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

PhEur 20078”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G75.

Diterpenes  Labdane-type, including rotundifuran 0.04-0.3%,
vitexilactone 0.02-0.17%, 6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-
8,14-diene 0.02-0.15%,'"” vitexlactam A (6f-acetoxy-9a-
hydroxy-13(14)-labden-16,15-amide.

Flavonoids Casticin  (3',5-dihydroxy-3,6,7,4'-tetramethoxy-
flavone) 0.02-2.0%, penduletin, chrysoplenol. C-glycosides orien-
tin, isoorientin and isovitexin.*°°7"° The total flavonoid
content of three Croatian samples varied from 0.05 to 0.08%.

Iridoids Agnuside (p-hydroxybenzoylaucubin) 0.6% and aucubin
0.3%. The agnuside content of eight samples of dried fruits
varied from 0.01-0.21%" and a standard of 0.02-0.40% has
been proposed.“©”

Polyphenols Seven Croatian samples analysed contained tannin
0.24-1.6% and total polyphenols 6.92-13.24%.")

Essential oil 0.8-1.8%; 85 compounds identified.” There are
two distinct chemotypes, one containing a-pinene and the other o-
terpinylacetate.") Comminution, maturity of fruit, length of
distillation and extraction method markedly affect yields and
composition of the oil: sabinene 16.4-44.1%, 1,8-cineole 8.4—
15.2%, B-caryophyllene 2.1-5.0% and trans-B-farnesene 5.0—
11.7%." A yield of 0.5% volatile oil containing 35%
monoterpenes (mainly -pinene, sabinene, B-phellandrene and
4-terpineol) and 52% sesquiterpenes (mainly f-caryophyllene,
allo-aromadendrene, germacrene B, spathulenol and t-cadinol)
has been reported.”

Other constituents Fatty acids, including oleic, stearic, palmitic,
a-linolenic and linoleic acids.'©’®

Other parts of the plant ‘The flowering stems contain the
iridoids 6'-O-foliomenthoyl-mussaenosidic acid (agnucastoside
A), 6'-O-(6,7-dihydro-foliomenthoyl-mussaenosidic acid (agnu-
castoside B), 7-O-trans-p-coumaroyl-6'-O-trans-caffeoyl-8-epilo-
ganic acid (agnucastoside C), aucubin, agnuside, mussaenosidic
acid and 6'-O-p-hydroxybenzoylmussaenosidic acid together with
a phenylbutanone glucoside (myzodendrone).\'*)

Material from agnus castus contains the flavonoids luteolin,
artemetin, isorhamnetin, luteolin-6-C-(4’’-methyl-6”-O-trans-caf-
feoylglucoside), luteolin-6-C-(6"-O-trans-caffeoylglucoside),
luteolin-6-C-(2''-O-trans-caffeoylglucoside) and luteolin-7-O-(6"-
p-hydroxy-benzoylglucoside).""” The source of the material
concerned is unclear: the experimental section of the paper refers
to the fruit, whereas other sections of the paper mention the root

bark.

----- PAGE 48 -----
Flavonoids

Rr R? Re Rt RS
quercetagetin OH OH OH OH OH

casticin OCH3 OCH; OCH; OH OCH;
chrysopleno|D OCH; OCH; OCH; OH OH

Iridoids Diterpenes
HO H
Sy
ROCH, 4
HOCH, °
HO
HO. ‘OH
R
aucubin H vitexilactone
agnuside p-hydroxybenzyl
vitexlactam A
vitexilabdine A
rotundifuran
Figure 1 Selected constituents of agnus castus.
Food Use

Agnus castus is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, agnus castus has been used for menstrual problems
resulting from corpus luteum deficiency, including premenstrual
symptoms and spasmodic dysmenorrhoea, for certain menopausal
conditions, and for insufficient lactation.{°+°” The German
Commission E approved it for internal use for irregularities of the

. . (G3)
menstrual cycle, premenstrual complaints and mastodynia.'°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Fruit 0.5-1.0g three times daily;‘@*)

corresponding to 30-40 mg daily of dried crushed fruit.

aqueous—alcoholic extracts
(G3)

Tincture 1:5 (g/mL), 50-70% ethanol (v/v) 0.15-0.2 mL.‘C®

Agnus Castus

Figure 3 Agnus castus — dried drug substance (fruit).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Previously it was thought that agnus castus does not contain any
oestrogenic constituents, although new findings are conflicting on
this point. In an in vitro assay, a methanol extract of V. agnus-
castus fruits showed competitive binding to both oestrogen
receptors of the a- (ER-«) and B-subtypes (ER-B), with mean
(standard deviation) ICso values of 46 (3) and 64 (4) [g/mL,
respectively.*” In vitro ligand binding assays showed that a 68%
ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus dried fresh fruits bound to ER-B
in a concentration-dependent manner with an ECso of around
10pg/mL, but binding to ER-% was not observed." Bioassay-
guided fractionation revealed that apigenin was the constituent
with the greatest affinity for ER-B (ECso = 0.08 ptg/mL), whereas
penduletin and vitexin had ECso values of 0.25 and 10,1g/mL,
respectively. The compounds were all found to be selective for ER-
8. In contrast, in in vitro experiments using a recombinant cell

----- PAGE 49 -----
Agnus Castus

bioassay, a methanol extract of agnus castus (not further specified)
strogenic activity,°”

Extracts of agnus castus act at dopamine receptors and affect
prolactin release. Dopamine D,-receptor binding of extracts has
been demonstrated for three different dopamine receptors (rat
striatum, calf striatum and human recombinant receptors) and for
two separate ligands (sulpiridine and spiroperidol).""?*74 The
active compounds acted as dopamine agonists and were
characterised as labdane diterpenes. The two most active
diterpenes, rotundifuran and 68,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-
8,14-diene, had ICso values (calf striatum preparation, *H-
spiroperidol ligand) of 45,1g/mL (124nmol/mL) and 79 pg/mL
(194nmol/mL), respectively.*? A lyophilised extract of agnus
castus (5mg/mL) was similar in activity to 10~* mol/L dopamine
in receptor-ligand binding assays, displacing *H-spiroperidol
from calf brain striatal preparations.

An extract of agnus castus inhibited release of acetylcholine
from *H-choline loaded rat brain striatal cells on electrical
stimulation, and had an ICso value of 30 ptg/mL.°”

Hexane fractions of agnus castus bind to human opiate
receptors with ICso values of 20p1g/mL (,-receptors) and 10 p1g/
mL (-receptors).'>?

Similar properties have been described for several different 60%
ethanol extracts of Vitex agnus-castus dried fruits that contained
at least 0.08% casticin. In radioligand binding studies, mean ICso
values for binding to dopamine-D receptors ranged from 40 to
70 utg/mL for the five ethanolic extracts tested, and the ICs value
was 32 g/mL for a hexane subfraction (containing diterpenes and
fatty acids) of an 80% methanol extract.°® The chemical profile
of the ethanolic extracts varied quantitatively and extracts were
characterised with respect to the constituents casticin (0.54—
1.22%), rotundifuran (1.04-2.23%), vitexilactone (0.34-1.01) and
6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-8,14-diene (0.18-0.80%).

In in vitro experiments using rat pituitary cells, an ethanolic
extract of agnus castus (not further specified) inhibited basal and
thyroxine releasing hormone-stimulated prolactin secretion in a
concentration-dependent manner at concentrations of 115-460 1g/
mL.°” The effect was blocked by addition of a dopamine receptor
agonist to the system, indicating that the inhibition of prolactin
secretion by agnus castus was brought about through a
dopaminergic effect of constituents of the agnus castus extract.
Other experiments using rat pituitary cells have demonstrated
inhibition of basal and thyroxine releasing hormone-stimulated
prolactin secretion by a 60% ethanol extract of agnus
seeds.°® Further experiments showed that the inhibition of
prolactin release was not due to a cytotoxic effect on rat pituitary
cells, and that the agnus castus extract had no effect on
gonadotrophin release.

An ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit significantly
inhibited phorbol-ester-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early antigen
(EBV-EA) activation in vitro.°?) This assay is used to identify
potential cancer chemopreventive substances. Cytotoxic effects
have been described for an ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit
against various non-cancer (human uterine cervical canal
fibroblast, HCF) and cancer cell lines (gastric signet ring
carcinoma (KATO-III), colon cancer (COLO-201), small-cell
lung carcinoma (Lu-134-A-H), ovarian cancer (MCF-7), cervical
carcinoma (SKG-3a) and breast carcinoma (SKOV-3)). The
cytotoxic effect correlated significantly with the growth rate of
the respective cells and, therefore, was greatest in those cells with
a higher growth rate (HCK MCF-7, SKG-3a and SKOV-3);
cytotoxic activity did not appear to be selective for cancer cells.°”
Further work using KATO-III cells suggested that V. agnus-castus

had no measurable o:

castus

extract may bring about apoptosis through a mechanism involving
oxidative stress." These findings, however, cannot be extra-
polated to the clinical setting, and further investigation of the
potential cytotoxic effects of V. agnus-castus fruit extract,
including with respect to normal cells, is required. Several
flavonoid compounds with cytotoxic activity against P388
lymphocytic leukaemia cells have been isolated from the root
bark of V. agnus castus."”)

Antimicrobial activity has been described for extracts of V.
agnus-castus fruits in in vitro assays using a disc-diffusion
method. Ethanol, methanol, n-hexane and aqueous extracts
inhibited the growth of Escherichia coli ATCC29998, E. coli
ATCC11230, Staphylococcus aureus ATCC29213, S. epidermidis
ATCC12228 and Salmonella typhimurium CCM5445 (zone of
inhibition including disc >6 mm). The ethanol, n-hexane and
aqueous extracts also inhibited the growth of S. aureus
ATCC6538P and Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC27853. None
of the extracts, however, was active against the yeast Candida

albicans. Ether and ethanol extracts of the leaves of V. agnus-
33)

castus have also shown antibacterial activity in vitro."

A carbon dioxide extract of the seeds of V. agnus-castus at a
concentration of 1-3% in a formulation containing human skin
care substances provides protection against ticks, fleas, mosqui-
toes and biting flies in various animal models for up to eight
hours, according to a preliminary report.

cli

cal studies

Clinical trials of agnus castus preparations have focused on
assessing effects in premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and mastalgia,
although rigorous clinical investigations are limited. In addition,
studies have tested different agnus castus preparations, including
combination herbal preparations containing agnus castus extract.
At present there is insufficient evidence to support definitively the
efficacy of specific agnus castus products.

One of the most robust studies was a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial in which 170 women with PMS received a
casticin-standardised agnus castus extract (ZE-440) 20 mg daily, or
placebo, for three menstrual cycles. At the end of the third
menstrual cycle, self-a: sd improvements in PMS symptoms
(irritability, mood alteration, anger, headache, breast fullness,
bloating) were significantly greater in the agnus castus group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.001). Clinical global
impression (CGI) scores for severity of condition, global
improvement and the overall benefit-harm profile were also
significantly better for agnus castus, compared with placebo (p <
0.001).°°

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 37 women with
deficiencies in corpus luteal phase and latent hyperprolactinaemia
received an agnus castus preparation (1 = 17) or placebo (n = 20)
for three menstrual cycles. In the treated group, the luteal phase
was extended to 10.5 days from an initial 3.4-5.5 days.°

A small number of other trials has compared the effects of
agnus castus preparations with those of other agents. In a
randomised, double-blind trial, 41 women aged 24-45 years with
regular menstrual cycles and who were diagnosed with pre-
menstrual dysphoric disorder received a V. agnus-castus extract
20-40 mg daily (not further specified), or fluoxetine 20-40 mg
daily, for eight weeks. At the end of the study, daily symptom
record scores, Hamilton depression scale scores and psychiatrist-
assessed clinical global impression scores were significantly
improved for both groups, compared with baseline values, and
there were no statistically significant differenc

s between the two

----- PAGE 50 -----
groups (p > 0.05 for all at the 8-week endpoint). However,
these findings can only be considered preliminary as the study has
several methodological limitations: at present, there is insufficient
evidence that fluoxetine is efficacious in premenstrual dysphoric
disorder and, as a placebo arm was not included in the study, a
placebo response in both the fluoxetine and the agnus castus
groups cannot be excluded; a sample size calculation does not
appear to have been carried out; the statistical analysis appears to
have been carried out with the 'per protocol’ population, and an
intention-to-treat analysis using last available measurements for
participants who withdrew was not reported; and the study
involved treatment over two menstrual cycles only. Further
randomised, controlled trials that include a placebo arm and
have sufficient statistical power are required.

Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial involving
women with PMS (n = 175) compared the effects of an agnus
castus fruit extract (Agnolyt capsules; drug to extract ratio 9.6—
11.5:1, equivalent to 3.5—4.2 mg extract per capsule) two capsules
daily with those of pyridoxine (vitamin B,) over three me
cycles. essed and physician-assessed
PMS scores were reported for both groups.* However, the results
of this study should be interpreted with caution as evidence for
pyridoxine in reducing PMS symptoms is at present inconclusive,
therefore, a placebo response in both groups cannot be excluded.

Results of randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
involving women with mastalgia alone who received a combina-
tion preparation (Mastodynon) containing agnus castus extract
and five other herbal ingredients (at various dilutions) have
provided some evidence of efficacy for this product although
definitive studies are still required. One such study which involved
104 women who received the preparation formulated as a solution,
or as tablets, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles found that
breast pain was reduced to a significantly greater extent with
agnus castus than with placebo (p = 0.0067 and p = 0.0076 for
solution and tablets, respectively, versus placebo)."” Basal
prolactin concentrations were reduced significantly in the agnus
castus groups, compared with the placebo group (reductions of
4.35, 3.7 and 0.57ng/mL for the solution, tablets and placebo
group; p = 0.04 and 0.02 for solution versus placebo and tablets
versus placebo, respectively).

A similar trial involving 97 women with cyclic mastalgia who
received Mastodynon solution 30 drops twice daily (equivalent to
32.4mg V. agnus-castus fruit extract daily), or placebo, found
statistically significant differences in reduction of breast pain
intensity as measured by visual analogue scale scores between
treatment and placebo after one and two menstrual cycles (p =
0.018 and p = 0.006, respectively), but no statistically significant
difference (p = 0.064) after three menstrual cycles.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study,
30 women aged 24-46 years who had tried unsuccessfully to
conceive for 6-36 months received a combination preparation
containing extracts of agnus castus and green tea (not further
specified), L-arginine and several vitamins and minerals, three
capsules daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles.“ After
three months, four women in the treatment group had become
pregnant whereas none had done so in the placebo group (p =
0.02). During an open-label extension in which all participants
received the combination preparation, another woman became
pregnant. The pregnancies resulted in four healthy live births; one
pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage.

Several open, uncontrolled studies involving small numbers of
women with fertility disorders, hyperprolactinaemia and men-
strual disorders have explored the effects of treatment with

strual

Similar reductions in self-ass

Agnus Castus

preparations containing extracts of agnus castus (e.g. Mastodynon
and Agnucaston; Bionorica), administered orally, generally at
doses equivalent to 30-40 mg drug daily for several months. These
studies report decreased prolactin concentrations at the end of
treatment, compared with baseline values.” *» By contrast, in an
open-label study involving 50 women who received a casticin-
standardised preparation of agnus castus (Ze-440, containing
20mg of a 60% ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit; drug to
extract ratio 6-12:1) during three menstrual cycl
statistically significant difference in plasma concentrations of
prolactin at the end of treatment, compared with baseline values (p
> 0.05). However, the design of these studies does not allow the
observed effects to be attributed definitively to the intervention.

The effects of agnus castus have also been investigated in men.
In an open, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 20 healthy men
were given a commercial preparation of agnus castus fruit extract
(BP-1095E1) at doses of 120, 240 and 480 mg extract (3-12 times
higher than doses used in women) for 14 days, with a wash-out
period of at least one week between each study phase. A
statistically significant increase in serum prolactin concentrations
was observed with the lowest dose tested, compared with placebo
(p = 0.033) whereas the higher dose decreased prolactin
concentrations (p = 0.016).

In an open, placebo-controlled, crossover study designed to
effects on melatonin secretion, 20 healthy male volunteers
ved a 70% ethanol-water extract of V. agnus-castus fruit 120,
240 and 480 mg daily in three divided doses for 14 days, with a
wash-out period of at least one week between each treatment
phase.“ During treatment with agnus castus extract, the area
under the serum concentration curve of melatonin was signifi-
cantly higher than during placebo administration (p < 0.005). The
effects of agnus castus on melatonin secretion require further
investigation in randomised, double-blind, controlled experi-
ments.

2s, there was no

Preliminary reports describe the use of agnus castus prepara-
tions in the treatment of acne,” although randomised controlled
trials assessing the effects of agnus castus in this indication are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical data relating to safety aspects of V. agnus-castus
preparations are from including
controlled clinical trials, post-marketing surveillance studies and
spontaneous reports of suspected adverse reactions associated
with agnus castus preparations.

Only limited data relating to the safety of agnus castus
preparations are available from randomised controlled trials. In
a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 170 women
with PMS received a casticin-standardised agnus castus extract
(ZE-440) 20 mg daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles, the
frequency of adverse events was similar in the agnus castus and the
placebo groups (4.7 and 4.8%, respectively).°°
reported for agnus acne, multiple abscesses,
intermenstrual bleeding and urticaria, and for placebo, acne,
early menstrual period and gastric upset; all adverse events were
considered to be mild and resolved without discontinuation of

available several sources,

) Adverse events

castus were

treatment. Adverse events were either not observed or not reported

in other placebo-controlled trials of agnus castus preparations.
In a randomised, double-blind trial, 41 women aged 24-45

years with regular menstrual cycles and who were diagnosed with

----- PAGE 51 -----
Agnus Castus

premenstrual dysphoric disorder received a V. agnus-castus extract
20-40 mg daily (not further specified), or fluoxetine 20-40 mg
daily, for eight weeks.°” During the study, 17 participants (nine in
the fluoxetine group and eight in the agnus castus group) reported
a total of 36 adverse events (20 and 16 with fluoxetine and agnus
castus, respectively), most commonly nausea and headache in
both groups. Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial
involving women with PMS (n = 175) compared the effects of an
agnus castus fruit extract (Agnolyt capsules; drug to extract ratio
9.6-11.5:1, equivalent to 3.5-4.2mg extract) with those of
pyridoxine (vitamin Bg) over three menstrua cycles.°% Adverse
events were reported for five agnus castus recipients (persistent
gastroenteritis, nausea, acneiform facial inflammation, allergic
rashes (2)), and four placebo recipients (sensation of a lump in the
throat, abdominal discomfort, recurrence of ulcerative colitis,
persistent bleeding of unknown origin). Although current desire
to conceive was an exclusion criterion for the study, five women,
all from the agnus castus group, became pregnant during the
trial.

A systematic review of publications containing data relating to
adverse events associated with agnus castus preparations included
five post-marketing surveillance studies of an agnus castus fruit
extract (Agnolyt) formulated as a tincture.“*) The studies involved
a total of over 7500 patients who received the agnus castus
preparation at a dose of around 40 drops daily, typically for
around four to six months, although in one study the duration of
administration ranged from one week to 19 months. Four studies,
involving a total of 7152 participants, reported the number of
participants withdrawing from the respective studies because of
adverse events (total 7 = 71; 1.0%). Adverse events reported most
frequently included nausea and other gastrointestinal distur-
bances, such as diarrhoea.

In another post-marketing surveillance study in Germany in
which 1634 women with premenstrual syndrome received a dried
extract of V. agnus-castus fruit (Femicur capsules containing 1.6-
3.0 mg extract, corresponding to 20 mg drug; drug to extract ratio,
6.7-12.5:1) for around three months, 37 participants reported a
total of 45 adverse events, most commonly skin complaints and
hair loss (7 = 13) and gastrointestinal symptoms (7 = 6), none of
which were considered serious. Of these, 23 adverse events
occurring in 20 participants were considered to be related to
treatment with agnus castus.“”’ During treatment with the agnus
castus preparation, 23 participants became pregnant and for 12 of
these women treatment with agnus castus was stopped because of
the pregnancy. A report of the study does not state whether
pregnancy was intended or unintended (although it was stated
that 19 of the 23 women had previously tried unsuccessfully to
become pregnant), whether or not they were concurrently taking
oral contraceptives, for how long during pregnancy agnus castus
was taken, or what were the outcomes of the pregnancies in
women who consumed agnus castus while pregnant.

In an open-label study, 50 women received a casticin-
standardised preparation of agnus castus (Ze-440, containing
20 mg of a 60% ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit; drug to
extract ratio 6-12:1) during three menstrual cycles. During the
study, 20 participants reported 37 adverse events, most commonly
acne (n = 7), headache (6), 'spotting' (5) and gastrointestinal
symptoms (5).

Preclinical data

Cytotoxic effects have been described for an ethanol extract of V.
agnus-castus fruit against various non-cancer (human uterine

cervical canal fibroblast, HCF) and cancer cell lines (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).°

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None have been described for agnus castus
preparations. However, as there is pharmacological evidence that
agnus castus has dopaminergic activity, agnus castus should not be
used with dopamine receptor agonists or antagonists. As with
other herbal medicines, the potential for preparations of V. agnus
castus to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the documented pharma-
cological actions and lack of toxicity data, the use of agnus castus
during pregnancy should be avoided. Agnus castus has been
reported to stimulate milk secretion without altering the composi-
tion of the breast milk.” Nevertheless, agnus castus should be
avoided during breastfeeding until further information is available.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study,
30 women aged 24-46 years who had tried unsuccessfully to
conceive for 6-36 months received a combination preparation
containing extracts of agnus castus and green tea (not further
specified), L-arginine and several vitamins and minerals, three
capsules daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles.“" After
three months, four women in the treatment group had become
pregnant whereas none had done so in the placebo group (p =
0.02). During an open-label extension in which all participants
received the combination preparation, a further woman became
pregnant. The pregnancies resulted in four healthy live births; one
pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. In another placebo-controlled
study, current desire to conceive was an exclusion criterion for the
study, yet five women, all from the agnus castus group, became
pregnant during the trial.°* The effects of agnus castus contain-
ing preparations on fertility and on resulting pregnancies require
further investigation.

An isolated case report describes a 32-year-old woman with
tubal infertility who was undergoing unstimulated in vitro
fertilisation (IVF) treatment and who took a V. agnus-castus
preparation at the beginning of a fourth IVF treatment cycle.°”
The woman developed multiple follicles (7 = 4), whereas previous
IVF treatment cycles, and two subsequent cycles, resulted in the
development of a single follicle. In addition, the woman's serum
gonadotrophin and ovarian hormone concentrations were dis-
ordered during ingestion of agnus castus. None of the six cycles of
IVF treatment (i.e. three before the woman took agnus castus, one
during and two afterwards) resulted in a pregnancy.

ton; Evana. Germany: Agno-Sabona; Agnolyt; Agnucaston;
Agnufemil; Biofem; Castufemin; Cefanorm; Femicur N;
Feminon A; Femisana mens; Gynocastus; Hevertogyn; Sarai;
Strotan; Valverde Monchspfeffer bei Menstruationsbeschwer-
den. Hungary: Agnucaston; Cefanorm; PreMens. Mexico:
Cicloplant. Russia: Agnucaston (Arnykacron). Spain: Disme-
gyn; Femiplante. Switzerland: Agnolyt; Emoton; Oprane;
Prefemine; PreMens. Thailand: Agnucaston. UK: Herbal
Premens.

----- PAGE 52 -----
Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women's Formula; PMT
Complex; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3. Canada:
Natural HRT. Singapore: Phytoestrin. USA: Women's Meno-

pause Formula.

References

1

2

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Hoberg E et al. Diterpene aus agni-casti fructus und ihre analytik. Z
Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Hoberg E e¢ al. Quantitative high performance liquid
chromatographic analysis of diterpenoids in Agni-Casti Fructus.
Planta Med 2000; 66: 352-355.

Li S-H et al. Vitexlactam A, a novel labdane diterpene lactam from the
fruits of Vitex agnus-castus. Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 43: 5131-5134.
Belic I et al. Constituents of Vitex agnus castus seeds. Part 1. Casticin.
J Chem Soc 1961; 2523-2525.

Gomaa CS et al. Flavonoids and iridoids from Vitex agnus castus.
Planta Med 1978; 33: 277.

Wollenweber E, Mann K. Flavonols from fruits of Vitex agnus castus.
Planta Med 1983; 48: 126-127.

Male¥ Z. Determination of the content of the polyphenols of Vitex
agnus-castus L. f. rosea. Acta Pharm 1998; 48: 215-218.

Rimpler H. Verbenaceae. Iridoids and ecdysones from Vitex species.
Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 2653-2654.

Gérler K, et al. Iridoidfithrung von Vitex agnus-castus. Planta Med
1985; 530-531.

Hoberg E et al. An analytical high performance liquid
chromatographic method for the determination of agnuside and p-
hydroxybenzoic acid contents in Agni-casti fructus. Phytochem Anal
2000; 11: 327-329.

Antolié A, Male’ Z. Quantitative analysis of the polyphenols and
tannins of Vitex agnus-castus L. Acta Pharm 1997; 47: 207-211.
Senatore F et al. Constituents of Vitex agnus-castus L. essential oil.
Flav Frag Journal 1996; 11: 179-182.

Novak J et al. Essential oil composition of Vitex agnus-castus —
comparison of accessions and different plant organs. Flav Frag
Journal 2005; 20: 186-192.

Sorensen JM, Katsiotis STh. Parameters influencing the yield and
composition of the essential oil from Cretan Vitex agnus-castus fruits.
Planta Med 2000; 66: 245-250.

Kustrak D et al. The composition of the volatile oil of Vitex agnus
castus. Planta Med 1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): A681.

Zwaving JH, Bos R. Composition of the essential fruit oil of Vitex
agnus castus. Pharm World Sci 1993; 15 (Suppl. Suppl.H): H15.
Zwaving JH, Bos R. Composition of the essential fruit oil of Vitex
agnus-castus. Planta Med 1996; 62: 83-84.

Kuruiiziim-Uz A et al. Glucosides from Vitex agnus-castus.
Phytochemistry 2003; 63: 959-964.

Hirobe C et al. Cytotoxic flavonoids from Vitex agnus-castus.
Phytochemistry 1997; 46: 521-524.

Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the
potential treatment of menopausal symptoms. J Agric Food Chem
2001; 49: 2472-2479.

Jarry H et al. Evidence for estrogen receptor B-selective activity of Vitex
agnus-castus and isolated flavones. Planta Med 2003; 69: 945-947.
Oerter Klein K et al. Estrogen bioactivity in Fo-Ti and other herbs
used for their estrogen-like effects as determined by a recombinant cell
bioassay. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003; 88: 4077-4079.

Jarry H et al. Auf der suche nach dopaminergen substanzen in agni-
casti-fructus-praparaten: warum eigentlich? Z Phytother 1999; 20:
140-158.

Berger D et al. Rezeptorbindungsstudien mit extrakten und daraus
isolierten substanzen. Z Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Brugisser R e¢ al. Untersuchungen an opioid-rezeptoren mit Vitex
agnus-castus L. Z Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Meier B et al. Pharmacological activities of Vitex agnus-castus
extracts in vitro. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 373-381.

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

Agnus Castus

Sliutz G e¢ al. Agnus castus extracts inhibit prolactin secretion of rat
pituitary cells. Horm Metab Res 1993; 25: 253-255.

Jarry H et al. In vitro prolactin but not LH and FSH release is
inhibited by compounds in extracts of agnus castus: direct evidence for

a dopaminergic principle by the dopamine receptor assay. Exp Clin
Endocrinol 1994; 102: 448-454.

Kapadia GJ et al. Inhibitory effect of herbal remedies on 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early
antigen activation. Pharmacol Res 2002; 45(3): 213-220.11884218
Ohyama K et al. Cytotoxicity and apoptotic inducibility of Vitex
agnus-castus fruit extract in cultured human normal and cancer cells
and effect on growth. Biol Pharm Bull 2003; 26: 10-18.

Ohyama K et al. Human gastric signet ring carcinoma (KATO-III) cell
apoptosis induced by Vitex agnus-castus fruit extract through
intracellular oxidative stress. Int ] Biochem Cell Biol 2005; 37: 1496—
1510.

Kiveak B et al. Antimicrobial and cytotoxic activities of Vitex agnus-
castus L. J Fac Pharm Gazi 2002; 19: 55-59.

Pepeljnjak § e¢ al. Antibacterial and antifungal activities of the Vitex
agnus-castus L. extracts. Acta Pharm 1996; 46: 201-206.

Mehlhorn H et al. Extract of the seeds of the plant Vitex agnus castus
proven to be highly efficacious as a repellent against ticks, fleas,
mosquitoes and biting flies. Parasitol Res 2005; 95: 363-365.
Schellenberg R. Treatment for the premenstrual syndrome with agnus
castus fruit extract: prospective, randomised, placebo controlled study.
BM] 2001; 322: 134-137.

Milewicz A et al. Vitex agnus castus extract in the treatment of luteal
phase defects due to latent hyperprolactinaemia. Results of a
randomized placebo-controlled double blind study.
ArnzneimittelForsch 1993; 43: 752-756.

Atmaca M et al. Fluoxetine versus Vitex agnus castus extract in the
treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Human
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2003; 18: 191-195.

Lauritzen CH et al. Treatment of premenstrual tension syndrome with

Vitex agnus castus — Controlled, double-blind study versus
pyridoxine. Phytomedicine 1997; 4: 183-189.

Wuttke W et al. Behandlung zyklusabhangiger Brustschmerzen mit
einem Agnus-castus-haltigen Arzneimittel. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd

1997; 57: 1-14.

Halaska M et al. Treatment of cyclical mastalgia with a solution
containing a Vitex agnus castus extract: results of a placebo-controlled
double-blind study. The Breast 1999; 8: 175.

Westphal LM et al. A nutritional supplement for improving fertility in
women. A pilot study. J Reproductive Med 2004; 49: 289-293.
Gorkow C. Klinischer Kenntnisstand von Agni-casti fructus: Klinisch-
pharmakologische Untersuchungen und Wirksamkeitsbelege. Z
Phytother 1999; 20: 159-168.

Gorkow C et al. Evidence of efficacy of Vitex agnus castus
preparations. In: Loew D, Blume H, Dingermann TH, eds.
Phytopharmaka V, Forschung und Klinische Anwendung. Darmstadt:
Steinkopf Verlag, 1999: 189-208.

Berger D et al. Efficacy of Vitex agnus-castus L. extract Ze 440 in
patients with pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS). Arch Gynecol Obstet
2000; 264: 150-153.

Merz PG et al. The effects of a special Agnus castus (BP1095E1) on
prolactin secretion in healthy male subjects. Exp Clin Endrocrinol
Diabetes 1996; 104: 447-453.

Dericks-Tan JSE et al. Dose-dependent stimulation of melatonin
secretion after administration of agnus castus. Exp Clin Endocrinol
Diabetes 2003; 111: 44-46.

Amann W. Akne vulgaris und Agnus castus (Agnolyt®). Z Allg Med

1975; 51: 1645-1648.

Daniele C et al. Vitex agnus castus: a systematic review of adverse
events. Drug Safety 2005; 28: 319-332.

Loch E-G et al. Treatment of premenstrual syndrome with a
phytopharmaceutical formulation containing Vitex agnus castus. ]
Women's Health Gender-Based Med 2000; 9: 315-320.

Bruckner C. In mitteleuropa genutzte heilpflanzen mit

milchsekretionsférdernder wirkung (galactagoga). Gleditschia 1989;
17: 189-201.

Cahill DJ et al. Multiple follicular development associated with herbal
medicine. Hum Reprod 1994; 9: 1469-1470.

----- PAGE 53 -----
A = Agrimony

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment agrimony can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the

Limited information is available on the chemistry and final product."

pharmacological properties of agrimony. Clinical .

investigation of agrimony is extremely limited and rigorous

studies are needed to establish the efficacy of agrimony. The Herbal Use

tannin constituents may justify the astringent activity ————

attributed to the herb. In view of the lack of toxicity data, Agrimony is stated to possess mild astringent and diuretic
excessive use of agrimony and use during pregnancy and properties." It has been used for diarrhoea in children, mucous
breastfeeding should be avoided. The potential for colitis, grumbling appendicitis, urinary incontinence, cystitis, and
preparations of agrimony to interfere with other medicines as a gargle for acute sore throat and chronic nasopharyngeal
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or catarth,(0* ©?)

opposing effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)

Agrimonia eupatoria L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Agrimonia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996 ‘“”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 2007'08)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including Figure 1 Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria).
References 1 and 2, and General Reference G2.

Acids Palmitic acid, salicylic acid, silicic acid and stearic acid.
Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, luteolin-7-glucoside, quercetin,
quercitrin, kaempferol and glycosides.)

Tannins = 3-21%. Condensed tannins in herb; hydrolysable

tannins (e.g. ellagitannin).

Vitamins Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), nicotinamide complex
(about 100-300 g/g leaf), thiamine (about 2 g/g leaf) and
vitamin K.

Other constituents Bitter principle, triterpenes (e.g. o&-amyrin,
ursolic acid, euscapic acid), phytosterols and volatile oil 0.2%.

Food Use

Agrimony is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of .
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that Figure 2 Agrimony - dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 54 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 24g by infusion three times daily.(©”
Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Significant uricolytic activity has been documented for agrimony
infusions and decoctions (15% w/v), following their oral
administration to male rats at a dose of 20 mL/kg body weight
(equivalent to 3g dry drug). Diuretic activity was stated to be
minimal and elimination of urea unchanged. A hypotensive effect
in anaesthetised cats has been documented for an agrimony
extract given by intravenous injection; blood pressure was lowered
by more than 40%.°

Marked antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus
and a-haemolytic streptococci has been reported for agrimony.

An aqueous ethanol extract of the herb was tested for
immunomodulative activity in the peritoneal cavities of mice.”
Immunostimulant activity resulted in an increase in phagocytic
activity and increases in the activities of lysozyme and peroxidase.
Agrimonia eupatoria given in the diet of mice for 12 days prior to
intraperitoneal administration of streptozotocin resulted in a
reduction in hyperglycaemia. Further investigation revealed
stimulation of 2-deoxyglucose transport, glucose oxidation and
incorporation of glucose into glycogen in mouse abdominal
muscle. An aqueous extract (0.25-1 mg/mL) stimulated insulin
secretion from a BRIN-BD11 pancreatic B cell line.” These
findings demonstrate that A. eupatoria aqueous extract given
orally to mice has antihyperglycaemic, insulin-releasing and
insulin-like activity.”

A related species, A. pilosa, has also been investigated. In vivo
antitumour activity in mice has been attributed to the tannin
agrimoniin"” which has not been reported as a constituent of A.
eupatoria. Agrimoniin was administered intraperitoneally into
ascites-type and solid tumours in rodents." At doses of greater
than 10 mg/kg, given before or after intraperitoneal inoculation
with MM? cells, it completely rejected tumour growth in mice."
Solid tumours of MH134 and Meth-A were inhibited by
agrimoniin, and the number of peripheral blood cells was
increased, indicating that agrimoniin has antitumour activity
and that it exerts its effect by enhancing the immune response. In
vitro studies have reported that agrimoniin induces the cytotoxi-
city of murine peritoneal exudate cells,” and that it induces
interleukin 1 in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in
mouse adherent peritoneal exudate cells in vivo." Several
phloroglucinols isolated from A. pilosa have demonstrated
activity against Staphylococcus aureus, and a methanol extract
of the herb inhibited HIV-1 protease activity.) An aqueous
suspension of A. pilosa herb (1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg) given orally or
intraperitoneally significantly reduced blood glucose concentra-
tions in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

An aqueous extract of the aerial parts of A. eupatoria inhibited
the secretion of hepatitis surface antigen in an in vitro system
using HepG2.2.15 cells, which produce complete virion particles
and viral proteins.‘

Agrimony

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of agrimony is extremely
limited and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
needed. The use of agrimony infusions to treat cutaneous
porphyria in a group of 20 patients has been described.
Improvements in skin eruptions, and a decrease in serum iron
concentrations and urinary porphyrins were observed,"®) although
the methodological limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do
not allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of agrimony.

A combination herbal preparation containing agrimony has
been used in 35 patients suffering from chronic gastroduodeni-
tis.) After 25 days of therapy, 75% of patients claimed to be free
from pain, 95% from dyspeptic symptoms and 76% from
palpitation pains. Gastroscopy was said to indicate that previous
erosion and haemorrhagic mucous changes had healed. However,
the methodological limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do
not allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of agrimony.

Side-effects, To

None documented for A. eupatoria. A polar fraction containing
flavonoids and triterpenes, but not tannins, produced a negative
result in the Ames test.”

In mice, agrimoniin has been documented to cause stretching
and writhing reactions when administered by intraperitoneal
injection, and cyanosis and necrosis at the site of intravenous
injection.{!” These reactions were considered to be inflammatory
reactions. The LDso of agrimoniin in mice has been estimated as
33 mg/kg (by intravenous injection), 101 mg/kg (by intraperitoneal
injection), and greater than 1g/kg (by mouth)."” Cytotoxic
activity has been reported for A. pilosa''® (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the tannin constituents, excessive use of agrimony
should be avoided.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of agrimony, the potential for preparations of agrimony to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently (parti-
cularly those with similar or opposing effects) should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Agrimony is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.(@??) In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of
agrimony should be avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Austria: Amersan; Gallen- und Lebertee St Severin; Novocho-

lin. Czech Republic: Amersan; Cynarosan; Eugastrin;
Hemoral; Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Nontusyl; Species
Cholagogae Planta; Stomaran; The Salvat; Ungolen; Zlucni-
kova Cajova Smes. France: Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt.
Russia: Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Cep6uon Kaman
2Keaueronnsie). Spain: Natusor Astringel; Natusor Farinol.
UK: Piletabs.

----- PAGE 55 -----
A

Agrimony

References

1

2

10

Bilia AR et al. Constituents and biological assay of Agrimonia
eupatoria. Fitoterapia 1993; 64: 549-550.

Carnat A et al. L'aigremoine: étude comparée d'Agrimonia eupatoria
L. et Agrimonia procera Wallr. Plantes médicinales et phytothérapie
1991; 25: 202-211.

Sendra J, Zieba J. Flavonoids from Agrimonia eupatoria L. Diss
Pharm Pharmacol 1971; 24: 79-83.

Giachetti D et al. Ricerche sull'attivita diuretica ed uricosurica di
Agrimonia eupatoria. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper 1986; 62: 705-711.
Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.
Petkov V. Bulgarian traditional medicine: A source of ideas for
phytopharmacological investigations. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15:
121-132.

Bukovsky M, Blanarik P. Immunomodulative effects of ethanolic-

aqueous extracts of herba Agrimoniae, flos Chamomillae and flos
Calendulae cum calyce. Farmaceutiky Obzor 1994; 63: 149-156.
Swanston-Flatt SK e¢ al. Traditional plant treatments for diabetes in
normal and streptozotocin diabetic rats. Diabetologia 1990; 33: 462—
464,

Gray AM, Flatt PR. Actions of the traditional anti-diabetic plant,
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony): effects on hyperglycaemia, cellular
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion. Br J Nutr 1998; 80: 109-
114.

Miyamoto K e¢ al. Isolation of agrimoniin, an antitumour constituent,
from the roots of Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo)
1985; 3977-3981.

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

Miyamoto K et al. Antitumour effect of agrimoniin, a tannin of
Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb., on transplantable rodent tumors. Jpn J
Pharmacol 1987; 43: 187-195.

Miyamoto K et al. Induction of cytotoxicity of peritoneal exudate cells
by agrimoniin, a novel immunomodulatory tannin of Agrimonia
pilosa Ledeb. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1988; 27: 59-62.
Murayama T et al. Agrimoniin, an antitumour tannin of Agrimonia
pilosa Ledeb., induces interleukin-1. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1471-
1474,

Yamaki M et al. Antimicrobial activity of naturally occurring and
synthetic phloroglucinols against Staphylococcus aureus. Phytother
Res 1994; 8: 112-114.

Min BS et al. Screening of Korean plants against human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 680-
682.

Hsu F-L, Cheng J-T. Investigation in rats of the antihyperglycaemic
effect of plant extracts used in Taiwan for the treatment of diabetes
mellitus. Phytother Res 1992; 6: 108-111.

KwonDH et al. Inhibition of hepatitis B virus by an aqueous extract of
Agrimonia eupatoria L. Phytother Res 2005; 19: 355-358.

Patrascu V et al. Rezultate terapeutice favorabile in porfiria cutanata
cu Agrimonia eupatoria. Dermato-venerologia 1984; 29: 153-157.
Chakarski | et al. Clinical study of a herb combination consis

ing of
Agrimonia eupatoria, Hipericum perforatum, Plantago major,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria chamomila for the treatment of patients
with chronic gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10: 78-84.

----- PAGE 56 -----
Alfalfa

ly
the seeds, also suggests that excessive ingestion is not

advisable. In view of the reports of arthralgia, alfalfa should
not be recommended for the treatment of arthritis. Coumarin
compounds detected so far in alfalfa do not possess the
minimum structural requirements (a C-4 inpelroxsil substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©®” for
anticoagulant activity.

Species (Family)

Medicago sativa L. (Fabaceae/Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Lucerne, Medicago, M. afganica (Bord.) Vass, M. grandiflora
(Grossh.) Vass, M. ladak Vass, M. mesopotanica Vass, M.
orientalis Vass, M. polia (Brand) Vassi, M. praesativa Sinsk, M.
sogdiana (Brand) Vass, Purple Medick, Trigonella upendrae
Chowdh. and Rao

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)
Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G19, G22 and G41.

Acids Lauric acid, maleic acid, malic acid, malonic acid, myristic
acid, oxalic acid, palmitic acid and quinic acid.

Alkaloids Pyrrolidine-type (e.g. stachydrine, homostachydrine);
pyridine-type (e.g. trigonelline) in the seeds only.

Amino acids Arginine, asparagine (high concentration in seeds),
cystine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenyl-
alanine, threonine, tryptophan and valine. The non-protein toxic

amino acid canavanine is present in leaves (0.9—-1.2 mg/g), stems
(0.6-0.9 mg/g) and seeds (5—14 mg/g).'°!”)

Coumarins Medicagol.

Isoflavonoids Coumestrol, biochanin A, daidzein, formononetin
and genistein.

Saponins 2-3%. Hydrolysis yields aglycones, medicagenic acid,
soyasapogenols A-F and hederagenin.'” Sugar chain components
include arabinose, galactose, glucuronic acid, glucose, rhamnose
and xylose.

Steroids Campesterol, cycloartenol, B-sitosterol (major compo-
nent), o&-spinasterol and stigmasterol.

Other constituents Carbohydrates (e.g. arabinose, fructose,
sucrose, xylose), vitamins (A, By, Be, Biz, C, E, K), pectin
methylesterase, pigments (e.g. chlorophyll, xanthophyll, B-caro-
tene, anthocyanins), proteins, minerals and trace elements.

Food Use

Alfalfa is widely used in foods and is listed by the Council of
Europe as a source of natural food flavouring (categories N2 and
N3). These categories indicate that alfalfa can be added to

Pterocarpans \soflavonoids

R' Re
daidzein H H
formononetin H CH3
genistein OH H

Coumestans

coumestrol

Triterpenes

hederagenin

soyasapogenin
Selected constituents of alfalfa.

Figure 1

----- PAGE 57 -----
Alfalfa

foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.'°'?
Previously, alfalfa has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).‘64)

Herbal Use

The herb was not valued by ancient civilisations and is not
detailed in classical herbals. Herbal use probably developed in the
USA where claims have been made for it in the treatment of
arthritis, high cholesterol, diabetes and peptic ulcers.%°!S”)
Reputedly, the herb has bactericidal, cardiotonic, diuretic, emetic,
emmenagogue and oestrogenic properties.” Commercial prepara-
tions including teas, tablets and capsules are available.'©!” Alfalfa
is stated to be a source of vitamins A, C, E and K, and of the
minerals calcium, potassium, phosphorus and iron. It has been
used for avitaminosis A, C, E or K, hypoprothrombinaemic
purpura, and debility of convalescence.'(67 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 5-10 as an infusion three times daily.©”
Liquid extract
daily.'6”

5-10mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Alfalfa top (stem and leaves) saponins have been reported to
decrease plasma cholesterol concentrations without changing
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol concentrations,
decrease intestinal absorption of cholesterol, increase excretion
of neutral steroids and bile acids, prevent atherosclerosis and
induce the regression of atherosclerosis.)

Hypocholesterolaemic activity has been reported for root
saponins, when given to monkeys receiving a high-cholesterol
diet.” Alfalfa herb fed to monkeys reduced hypercholesterolae-
mia and atherosclerosis; the effect may be partially due to the
saponin constituents.'©!” In mice fed with alfalfa (6.25% of diet)
for 12 days before administration of streptozotocin, hyperglycae-
mia was reduced compared with values for control animals."

Figure 2 Alfalfa — dried drug substance (herb).

Oestrogenic activity in ruminants has been documented for
coumestrol and the isoflavone constituents.'(°7” “*

An investigation into the effect of various herbs on hepatic drug
metabolising enzymes in the rat, showed that alfalfa potentiated
the activity of aminopyrine N-demethylase but had no effect on
glutathione S-transferase or epoxide hydrolase activities.

The seeds are reported to contain trypsin inhibitors."
Saponins isolated from the aerial parts have been reported to
stimulate the lipolytic activity of neopancreatinum (a mixture of
porcine pancreatic enzymes including lipase, amylase and
proteases).

Alfalfa root saponins have been documented to exhibit selective
toxicity towards fungi.'"** A medicagenic acid glycoside with
low haemolytic activity, isolated from alfalfa root, was found to
exhibit both strong inhibitory and fungitoxic activities towards
several medically important yeasts including Candida species,
Torulopsis species, Geotrichum canadidum and Rhodotorula
glutinis.© It has been proposed that the antimycotic activity of
alfalfa saponins is related to their ability to complex steroids and
that fungi sensitive to the saponins may contain relatively more
steroids in their membranes. Antifungal properties have also
been documented for alfalfa.‘C*”

The saponin constituents are documented to be haemolytic and
to interfere with vitamin E utilisation, and are believed to be one
of the causes of ruminant bloat.'(C* Haemolytic activity is
associated with the medicagenic acid glycosides and not the
hederagenin and soyasapogenol glycosides.

The effects of polysaccharides from alfalfa on mice lympho-
cytes in vitro indicated immunopotentiating activity,

(G41)

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of alfalfa is extremely limited
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. In
a short-term study involving three normolipidaemic individuals
given alfalfa seeds (60-80 g daily), serum cholesterol concentra-
tions were reported to be reduced.'@'” In another small study in
which heat-treated alfalfa seeds (40g three times daily for eight
weeks) were taken by eight type-IIA hyperlipoproteinaemic
patients and three type IIB patients, a significant decrease was
noted in total serum cholesterol concentrations, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and apolipoprotein B. The LDL
cholesterol concentration fell by less than 5% in two of the 11
patients.) The methodological limitations of this small,
uncontrolled study do not allow any conclusions to be made on
the effects of alfalfa.

The manganese content of alfalfa (45.5 mg/kg) is reported to be
the active principle responsible for a hypoglycaemic effect
documented for the herb.) A case report descibes a diabetic
patient, treated with soluble insulin but poorly controlled, in
whom control of diabetes was achieved following use of an alfalfa
extract. When administered separately, only small doses of
manganese chloride (5-10 mg) were required to have a hypogly-
caemic effect. However, no effect was seen on the blood sugar
concentrations of non-diabetic controls or of other diabetic
patients, who were also administered manganese.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Both alfalfa seed and herb have been reported to induce a systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like syndrome in female monkeys. '*
G1°,632) This activity has been attributed to canavanine, a non-
protein amino acid constituent which has been found to have
effects on human immunoregulatory cells in vitro." Reactivation

----- PAGE 58 -----
of quiescent SLE in humans has been associated with the ingestion
of alfalfa tablets which, following analysis, were found to contain
canavanine.") It was not stated whether the tablets contained
seed or herb material. Canavanine is known to be toxic to all
animal species because it is a structural analogue of arginine and
may interfere with the binding of this amino acid to enzymes and
its incorporation into proteins." ©!” Alfalfa seeds are reported
to contain substantial quantities of canavanine (8.33-13.6 mg/kg),
whereas the herb contains considerably less.{'% '7)

Pancytopenia has been associated with human ingestion of
ground alfalfa seeds (80-160 g/day), which were taken to lower
plasma cholesterol concentrations."

Dietary studies using alfalfa top saponins (ATS) in the diet of
rats and monkeys showed no evidence of toxicity and serum lipid
concentrations were lowered. !?° In addition, when ATS were
given to cholesterol-fed animals, a reduction in serum lipid
concentrations was observed. '?7 ATS are reported to be free
of the SLE-inducing substance that is present in the seeds.)

Coumarin compounds detected so far in alfalfa do not possess
the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)'C*” for anticoagulant
activity.

Negative results were documented for alfalfa when tested for
mutagenicity using Salmonella strains TA98 and TA100.°”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with a history of SLE should avoid ingesting alfalfa.
Ingestion of large amounts of alfalfa (exceeding amounts
normally consumed in the diet) should be avoided in view of the
documented pharmacological activities. Alfalfa may affect blood
sugar concentrations in diabetic patients because of the manga-
nese content.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of alfalfa the potential for preparations of alfalfa to
interfere with those of other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, such as
medicines with hormonal activity, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Alfalfa seeds are reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and to be lactogenic.'(©®” Although the safety of
alfalfa herb has not been established, it is probably acceptable for
use during pregnancy and lactation provided that doses do not
exceed the amounts normally ingested as a food. Alfalfa seeds
should not be ingested during pregnancy or lactation.

8 ip)
Zine Zenith. Chile: Calcio 520. France: Gonaxines Gynosoja.
USA: B-100 Complex; My Favorite Multiple Energizer; My
Favorite Multiple Take One; My Favorite Multiple Take One
Iron-Free; Natural Herbal Water Tablets; Zero Flush Niacin
400mg.

Alfalfa

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Oleszek W, Jurzysta M. Isolation, chemical characterization and
biological activity of alfalfa (Medicago media Pers.) root saponins.
Acta Soc Bot Pol 1986; 55: 23-33.

Berry M. Alfalfa. Pharm J 1995; 255: 353-354.

Malinow MR et al. Lack of toxicity of alfalfa saponins in cynomolgus
macaques. J Med Primatol 1982; 11: 106-118.

Malinow MR et al. Prevention of elevated cholesterolemia in monkeys
by alfalfa saponins. Steroids 1977; 29: 105-110.

Swanston-Flatt SK e¢ al. Traditional plant treatments for diabetes in
normal and streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Diabetologia 1990; 33: 462—
464.

Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

Sroka Z et al. Stimulation of pancreatic lipase activity by saponins
isolated from Medicago sativa L. Z Naturforschung, Section C, ]
Biosci 1997; 52: 235-239.

Polacheck I et al. Activity of compound G2 isolated from alfalfa roots
against medically important yeasts. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1986; 30: 290-294.

Jurzysta M, Waller GR. Antifungal and haemolytic activity of aerial
parts of alfalfa (Medicago) species in relation to saponin composition.
Adv Expl Med Biol 1996; 404: 565-574.

Zhao WS et al. Immunopotentiating effects of polysaccharides
isolated from Medicago sativa L. Acta Pharmacol Sinica 1993; 14:
273-276.

Mélgaard J et al. Alfalfa seeds lower low density lipoprotein
cholesterol and apolipoprotein B concentrations in patients with type
II hyperlipo proteinemia. Atherosclerosis 1987; 65: 173-179.
Rubenstein AH et al. Manganese-induced hypoglycaemia. Lancet
1962; ii: 1348-1351.

Malinow MR et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome in
monkeys fed alfalfa sprouts: role of a nonprotein amino acid. Science
1982; 216: 415-417.

Alcocer-Varela J et al. Effects of L-canavanine on T cells may explain
the induction of systemic lupus erythematosus by alfalfa. Arthritis
Rheum 1985; 28: 52-57.

Roberts JL, Hayashi JA. Exacerbation of SLE associated with alfalfa
ingestion. N Engl J Med 1983; 308: 1361.

Natelson $. Canavanine to arginine ratio in alfalfa (Medicago sativa),
clover (Trifolium), and the jack bean (Canavalia ensiformis). ] Agric
Food Chem 1985; 33: 413-419.

Natelson S. Canavanine in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Experientia 1985;
41: 257-259.

Malinow MR et al. Pancytopenia during ingestion of alfalfa seeds.
Lancet 1981; i: 615.

Malinow MR et al. The toxicity of alfalfa saponins in rats. Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1981; 19: 443-445.

René M et al. Lack of toxicity of alfalfa saponins in rats. Cholesterol
Metab 1981; 40: 349.

White RD et al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 25-31.

----- PAGE 59 -----
A - Aloe Vera

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Aloe vera is obtained from the mucilaginous tissue in the centre
of the Aloe vera leaf and consists mainly of polysaccharides and
lipids. It should not be confused with aloes, which is obtained
by evaporation of water from the bitter yellow juice that is
drained from the leaf. Unlike aloes, aloe vera does not contain
any anthraquinone compounds and does not, therefore, exert
any laxative action. Studies have reported an anti-
inflammatory and anti-arthritic action for total leaf extracts but
the activity seems to be associated with anthraquinone
compounds. Hypoglycaemic activity has been reported for
aloe vera extract. Aloe vera is a source of gamolenic acid. The
literature on burn management with aloe vera gel preparations
is confused and further studies are required.

Species (Family)

*Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f., (Xanthorrhoeaceae)
A, africana Mill.

Synonym(s)

*Aloe barbadensis Mill.,
Aloe Gel

Part(s) Used

Leaf gel

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'@*”
WHO volume 1 1999'C%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Aloe vera is not included in the GSL.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Aloe vera is reported to contain mono- and polysaccharides,
tannins, sterols, organic acids, enzymes (including cyclooxygen-
ase), saponins, vitamins and minerals.)

Carbohydrates Glucomannan and other polysaccharides con-
taining arabinose, galactose and xylose.

Lipids Includes cholesterol, gamolenic acid and arachidonic acid."

Food Use

Aloe vera is not used in foods.

Herbal Use
Traditionally, aloe vera has been used in ointments and creams to

assist the healing of wounds, burns, eczema and psoriasis.'C” °®
Gal, G64)

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

Aloe vera refers to the mucilaginous tissue located in the leaf
parenchyma of Aloe vera or related Aloe species. However, many
documented studies for Aloe vera have utilised homogenised leaf
extracts which therefore combine aloe vera with aloes, the laxative
preparation obtained from the bitter, yellow juice also found in
the leaf (see Aloes). Unless otherwise specified, the following
refers to a total leaf extract.

In vitro and animal studies

Gel preparations have been reported to be effective against
radiation burns, skin ulcers and peptic ulcers.) However, the gel
was also found to be ineffective against drug- and stress-induced
gastric and peptic ulcers in rats.)

Anti-inflammatory activity has been observed in various rat and
mouse models that received subcutaneous injections of Aloe vera

Figure 1 Aloe vera (Aloe vera).

Figure 2 Aloe vera — dried drug substance (leaf gel).

----- PAGE 60 -----
leaf extract. A positive response was noted in wound-healing
(10 mg/kg, rat; 100mg/kg, mouse), mustard oedema (10 mg/kg,
rat) and polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration (2 mg/kg,
mouse) tests, although no activity was demonstrated in the
antifibrosis test (cotton pellet granuloma) (400 mg/kg, rat).

Anti-arthritic and anti-inflammatory activity have been docu-
mented for a cream containing homogenised Aloe africana leaves,
ribonucleic acid, and ascorbic acid, following topical application
to rats which had been injected (day 0) with Mycobacterium
butyricum to cause adjuvant arthritis.” This model is considered
a good experimental tool for studying rheumatoid arthritis.” The
cream was found to be active when applied both as a prevention
(days 1-13) and as a regression (days 21-35) treatment.
Subsequent work suggested that anthraquinone compounds
(anthraquinone, anthracene and anthranilic acid) may be the
active components in the aloe leaf mixture.’ These compounds
are, however, constituents of aloes rather than aloe vera (see
Aloes). Aloe vera juice (presumably containing the anthraquinones
contained in aloe preparation) has been applied directly to open
pressure sores to assist in their healing. The aloe vera extract
exhibited an anaesthetic reaction, antibacterial action and
increased local microcirculation.

Endogenous cyclooxygenase in Aloe vera has been found to
convert endogenous arachidonate to various prostanoids, namely
PGE) (major), TXB, PGD2, PGF», and 6-keto-PGF 3." The
production of these compounds, especially PGE, has been
associated with the beneficial effect of an aloe vera extract on
human bronchial asthma) (see Clinical studies).

Hypoglycaemic actions have been documented for aloes extracts
(see Aloes).

Clinical studies

Enhancement of phagocytosis in adult bronchial asthma has been
attributed to a non-dialysable fraction of the extract, consisting of
active components that are a mixture of polysaccharide and
protein or glycoprotein.” Despite the nature of these proposed
active components, it has been proposed that activity of the
fraction may be related to the previous observation that aloe vera
synthesises prostaglandins from endogenous arachidonic acid
using endogenous cyclooxygenase.” In this study,” activity of the
aloe vera extract required dark storage at 4-30°C for a period of
3-10 days. These conditions are reported to be favourable for
the hydrolysis of phospholipids, thus releasing arachidonic acid
for synthesis of prostanoids.” In addition, activity was dependent
on patients not having received prior treatment with a
corticosteroid.

The gel has been reported to be effective in the treatment of
mouth ulcers.

The literature on burn management with aloe vera gel
preparations is confused and further studies are required.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for an aloe vera
extract, although it is unclear whether this is associated with the
true aloe vera gel or aloes extract."

Aloe Vera

Pregnancy and lactation The external application of aloe vera
gel during pregnancy is not thought to be any cause for concern.
However, products stated to contain aloes extracts or aloe vera
may well contain gastrointestinal stimulant anthraquinone
components that are well recognised as the active constituents in
aloes (laxative). As such, ingestion of such preparations during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Ecoschiuma; Ninfagin; Vicks Baby Balsam; Vulnopur. Malay-
sia: Lorasil Feminine Hygeine; Neo-Healar. Mexico: Gelco-
nordin; Hipoglos Cremoso. New Zealand: Chap Stick; Odor
Eze. Portugal: Alkagin; Antiacneicos Ac-Sal; Multi-Mam
Compressas. Singapore: Desitin Creamy. UK: Herbal Laxative
Tablets. USA: Aloe Grande; Biotene with Calcium; Bodi Kleen;
Dermtex HC with Aloe; Entertainer's Secret; Geri-Lav Free;
Gold Bond Medicated Triple Action Relief; Hawaiian Tropic
Cool Aloe with I.C.E.; Hemorid For Women; MSM with
Glucosamine Creme; Maximum Strength Flexall 454; Nasal-
Ease; OraMagicRx; Solarcaine Aloe Extra Burn Relief.

References

1 Afzal M et al. Identification of some prostanoids in Aloe vera extracts.
Planta Med 1991; 57: 38-40.

2. Parmar NS et al. Evaluation of Aloe vera leaf exudate and gel for
gastric and duodenal anti-ulcer activity. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 380-381.

3 Davis RH et al. Biological activity of Aloe vera. Med Sci Res 1987; 15:
235.

4 Davis RH et al. Topical effect of aloe with ribonucleic and vitamin C
on adjuvant arthritis. J Am Pod Med Assoc 1985; 75: 229-237.

5S Davis RH et al. Antiarthritic activity of anthraquinones found in aloe
for podiatric medicine. J Am Pod Med Assoc 1986; 76: 61-66.

6 Cuzzell JZ. Readers’ remedies for pressure sores. Ant J Nurs 1986; 86:
923-924.

7 Shida T et al. Effect of Aloe extract on peripheral phagocytosis in
adult bronchial asthma. Planta Med 1985; 51: 273-275.

8 Plemons JM e¢ al. Evaluation of acemannan in the treatment of
aphthous stomatitis. Wounds 1994; 6: 40-45.

9 Marshall JM. Aloe vera gel: What is the evidence? Pharm ] 1990; 244:
360-362.

10 Ghanam N et al. The antidiabetic activity of aloes: preliminary clinical

and experimental observations. Hormone Res 1986; 24: 288-294.

----- PAGE 61 -----
methods, but is obtained from the mucilaginous tissue in
centre of the leaf and does not contain anthraquinones (see
Aloe Vera). Aloes is a potent purgative which has been
superseded by less toxic drugs such as senna and cascara.
Generally, the use of unstandardised preparations containing
anthraquinone glycosides should be avoided, since their
pharmacological effect is unpredictable and they may cause
abdominal cramp and diarrhoea. In particular, the use of
products containing combinations of anthraquinone laxatives
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Aloe vera (L.) Burm. f.
Aloe ferox Mill. (Xanthorrhoeaceae)

Synonym(s)
*Aloe barbadensis Mill.

Part(s) Used

Dried leaf juice

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996'C*)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 1997 (Cape Aloes)'‘@*”)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708

USP29/NE24'¢8)

WHO volume 1 1999'°°?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1-7, and General References G2, G20 and G32.

Anthranoids Cape aloes anthranoids are qualitatively identical
to leaf exudate of A. ferox.? Anthrones (up to 30%), mainly the
C-glycosides aloins A and B (= barbaloin, isobarbaloin, stereo
isomers of 10-glucosyl-aloe-emodin anthrone); other glycosides
include 8-O-methyl-7-hydroxy aloins A and B, aloinosides A and
B (aloin-11-O-a-L-rhamnosides). Small quantities of 1,8-dihy-
droxyanthraquinoid aglycones, including aloe-emodin and chry-
sophanol are also present.

Chromones Major constituents are aloesin (2-acetonyl-5-methyl-
8-glucosyl chromone) and aloeresin E. Lesser quantities of
isoaloeresin D, 8-C-glucosyl-7-O-methyl-aloesol and related
glycosides, which may be esterified at the glucose moiety by
either cinnamic, p-coumaric or ferulic acids, are also present.
Non-glycosylated chromones include 7-hydroxy-2,5-dimethylchro-
mone, furoaloesone, 2-acetonyl-7-hydroxy-8-(3-hydroxyacetonyl)-
5-methyl chromone and 2-acetonyl-8-(2-furoylmethyl)-7-hydroxy-
5-methylchromone.*”

Phenyl pyrones Glycosides include aloenin and aloenin B.""”

Other constituents Cinnamic acid and 1-methyltetralin.“@”

Food Use

Aloes is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3).'©'® This category indicates that
aloes can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity. The concentration of
aloin present in the final product is limited to 0.1 mg/kg; 50 mg/kg
in alcoholic beverages.'“!® Previously, aloes has been listed as
GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘“4”

Herbal Use

Aloes is recommended for the treatment of atonic constipation
and suppressed menstruation. ‘©? “46%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried juice 50-200 mg or equivalent three times daily.'C%

In view of potential adverse effects, the dose recommended for
adults and children aged over 10 years is 10-30mg_ of
hydroxyanthracene derivatives (calculated as barbaloin) once daily
at night.(?) Use of aloes as a laxative in self-treatment of
constipation for more than two weeks is not recommended.‘

Pharmacological Actions

The activity of aloes can be attributed to the anthranoid glycoside
content. The glycosides are metabolised by glycosidases in the
intestinal flora to form active anthrones. The laxative action is due
to an increase in motility of the large intestine by inhibition of the
Na*/K* pump and chloride ion channels; enhanced fluid secretion

occurs due to stimulation of mucus and chloride ion secre-
+ (G52)
tion.

In vitro and animal studies

Nine hours after oral administration, aloes produced diarrhoea at
doses of 5 g/kg (in 20% of rats) and 20 g/kg (in 100% of rats).
Pretreatment of rats with the nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor
N-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester given intraperitoneally reduced
diarrhoea induced by aloes (20g/kg) nine hours after oral

----- PAGE 62 -----
administration. The results suggest that endogenous NO
modulates the diarrhoeal effects of Cape aloes.”

Inhibitory effects of aqueous extracts of five species of Aloe,
including A. ferox and A. barbadensis, and aloe powder (Japanese
Pharmacopoeia) on histamine release from rat peritoneal mast
cells induced by antigen were investigated in vitro. All extracts
tested inhibited histamine release in a concentration-dependent
Aloe ferox extract, Japanese
Pharmacopoeia aloes and barbaloin strongly inhibited histamine
release (ICs 0.16, 0.07 and 0.02 jtg/mL, respectively).

Aqueous extracts of aloes are said to elevate the rate of ethanol
oxidation in vivo.) Oral administration of aloin (300 mg/kg) to
rats 12 hours prior to administration of alcohol (3 g/kg) resulted

manner under the test condition:

Anthracene glycosides
OH O OH

‘ ‘CH,OH
AY Re
R' R2
aloinA H Glucosyl
aloinB Glucosyl H
OH O OH
; ‘CH20-Rhamnosy
RY OR?
R! Re
aloinoside AH Glucosyl

aloinosideB Glucosyl H

Chromones
HOQH

RO. CH;

R! R?
aloesin A p-coumarate
aloesin B H H
aloesin C p-coumarate Glucosyl

Phenylpyrones

HO. O.
‘Glucosyl

ICH3

aloenin A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of aloes.

Aloes

in a significant decrease (40%) in blood alcohol concentration.”

Treatment with intraperitoneal aloe-emodin two hours prior to
alcohol administration significantly reduced blood alcohol con-
centrations; it was hypothesised that aloin is metabolised to aloe-
emodin which exerts its effect on alcohol metabolism.” Activity-
guided fractionation of the leaves of A. aborescens resulted in the
isolation and characterisation of elgonica-dimers A and B
(dimeric C-glycosides of anthrone emodin-10'-C-B-p-glucopyra-
noside and aloe-emodin) as potent inhibitors of cytosolic alcohol
dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase activities in vitro."

Aloe-emodin and an alcoholic extract of aloes have been
reported to possess antitumour activity.C4)

Hypoglycaemic activity has been shown in alloxan-diabetic
mice for aloes and in diabetic rats for an aloe gum
extract.(1%!®

Barbaloin is active in vitro against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and Bacillus subtilis (minimum inhibitory concentration 0.125 mg/
mL and 0.25 mg/mL, respectively).'°!®

Clinical studies

The purgative action of the anthraquinone glycosides is well
recognised (see Senna), although aloes is reported to be more
potent than both senna and cascara.‘“4"S*) Orally ingested
anthranoid glycosides are not metabolised until they reach the
colon. In humans, the intestinal flora break down O-glycosides
readily and C-glycosides to some extent. The main active
metabolite is aloe-emodin-9-anthrone.'¢)

An aloes extract in doses too small to cause abdominal cramps
or diarrhoea had a significant hypoglycaemic effect in five patients
with non-insulin-dependent diabetes." However, the methodo-
logical limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do not allow
any conclusions to be drawn on the effects of aloes.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Aloes is a potent purgative that may cause abdominal pains,
gastrointestinal irritation leading to pelvic congestion and, in
large doses, may result in nephritis, bloody diarrhoea and
haemorrhagic gastritis.4"°*” Like all stimulant’ purgativ
prolonged use of aloes may produce watery diarrhoea with
excessive loss of water and electrolytes (particularly potassium),
muscular weakness and weight loss.‘

Tests of the possible carcinogenicity of hydroxyanthraquinones
and their glycosides showed that exposure to certain aglycones
and glycosides may represent a human cancer risk.''”) Most of the
aglycones tested were found to be mutagenic and some, such as
emodin and aloe-emodin, were genotoxic in mammalian cells.

Administration of dried aloes extract 50 mg/kg per day for 12
weeks to mice did not result in the development of severe
pathological symptoms, although a raised sorbitol dehydrogenase
concentration was suggested to be indicative of liver damage.‘©?”
No mutagenic effects in Salmonella typhimurium and Va7 cells, or
DNA repair induction in rat hepatocytes, were observed. These
negative results are due to the inability of the test systems to
release mutagenic anthranoids from the C-glycosides.(©” Retro-
spective and prospective studies have shown no causal relationship
between anthranoid laxative use and colorectal cancer.‘°)

>

Contra-indications, Warnings

Aloes has been superseded by less toxic laxatives.‘°*) The drastic

purgative action of aloes contra-indicates its use in individuals
with haemorrhoids and existing kidney disease. In common with

----- PAGE 63 -----
Aloes

all purgatives, aloes should not be given to patients with
inflammatory disease of the colon (e.g. Crohn's disease, ulcerative
colitis), appendicitis, intestinal obstruction, abdominal pain,
nausea or vomiting. Aloes colours alkaline urine red. Long-term
use should be avoided and a doctor should be consulted within
two weeks of treatment initiation if symptoms persist.

Drug interactions Hypokalaemia resulting from laxative abuse
potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides, interacts with anti-
arrhythmic drugs, and with drugs which induce reversion to sinus
rhythm, e.g. quinidine. Concomitant use with thiazide diuretics,
adrenocorticosteroids and liquorice may aggregate electrolyte
imbalance.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the irritant and cathartic
properties documented for aloes, its use is contra-indicated during
pregnancy.) Anthraquinones may be secreted into breast milk
and, therefore, aloes should be avoided during lactation (see
Senna).

Aloes is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle.

(G22)

Mom (Aoxrop Mom); Original Grosser Bittner Balsam
(Opurmmaapnerit Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa). South Africa:
Helmontskruie; Lewensessens; Moultons Herbal Extract;
Turulington Tincture; Wonderkroonessens. Spain: Alofedina;
Crislaxo; Cynaro Bilina; Laxante Sanatorium; Nico Hepato-

Vagisil.

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

Park MK et al. Analysis of 13 phenolic compounds in Aloe species by
high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochem Anal 1998; 9:
186-191.

Okamura N et al. High-performance liquid chromatographic
determination of phenolic compounds in Aloe species. | Chromatogr
A 1996; 746: 225-231.

Van Wyk E-E et al. Geographical variation in the major compounds of
Aloe ferox leaf exudate. Planta Med 1995; 61: 250-253.

Reynolds T. Chromatographic examination of some old samples of
drug aloes. Pharmazie 1994; 49: 524-529.

Rauwald HW, Sigler A. Simultaneous determination of 18 polyketides
typical of Aloe by high performance liquid chromatography and
photodiode array detection. Phytochem Anal 1994; 5: 266-270.
Rauwald HW, Beil A. High-performance liquid chromatographic
separation and determination of diastereomeric anthrone-C-glucosyls
in Cape aloes. J Chromatogr 1993; 639: 359-362.

Rauwald HW et al. Three 8-C-glucosyl-5-methyl-chromones from
Aloe barbadensis (Ph. Eur. 1997). Pharmazie 1997; 52: 962-964.
Speranza G et al. Studies on aloe, 12. Furoaloesone, a new 5-
methylchromone from Cape aloe. J Nat Prod 1993; 56: 1089-1094.
Speranza G et al. Studies on aloe, 15. Two new 5-methylchromones
from Cape aloe. J Nat Prod 1997; 60: 692-694.

Izzo AA et al. The role of nitric oxide in aloe-induced diarrhoea in the
rat. Eur J Pharmacol 1999; 368: 43-48.

Yamamoto M et al. Inhibitory effects of aloe extracts on antigen- and
compound 48/80-induced histamine release from rat peritoneal mast
cells. Jpn ] Toxicol Environ Health 1993; 39: 395-400.

Chung J-H et al. Acceleration of the alcohol oxidation rate in rats
with aloin, a quinone derivative of aloe. Biochem Pharmacol 1996; 52:
1461-1468.

Shin KH et al. Elongica-dimers A and B, two potent alcohol
metabolism inhibitory constituents of Aloe arborescens. J Nat Prod
1997; 60: 1180-1182.

Ghannam N et al. The antidiabetic activity of aloes: preliminary and
experimental observations. Horm Res 1986; 24: 288-294.

Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.
Al-Awadi FM e¢ al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

Westendorf J et al. Possible carcinogenicity of anthraquinone-
containing medical plants. Planta Med 1988; 54: 562.

----- PAGE 64 -----
Angelica

intake should be avoided. Angelica contains furanocoumarins
which are known to possess photosensitising properties.
Coumarin compounds detected so far in A. archangelica do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4
hydroxyl substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon
substituent)“®” for anticoagulant activity.

Species (Family)
Angelica archangelica L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Angelicae Radix, Archangelica officinalis Hoffm., Garden Angel-
ica

Part(s) Used

Fruit, leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
cL O—OS

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.
The literature mainly refers to constituents of the root.

Coumarins Over 20 furanocoumarins, including angelicin,
archangelicin, bergapten, isoimperatorin and xanthotoxin." ©)
Also the coumarins osthol (major constituent in rhizome/root,
0.2%) and umbelliferone.““?) The root also contains the
furanocoumarins 2/-angeloyl-3'-isovaleryl vaginate,”” heraclenol-
2'-O-senecioate and heraclenol-2'-O-isovalerate.

Volatile oils 0.35—1.3% in root and fruit. 80-90% monoterpenes,
including «- and B-phellandrene, «%- and B-pinene, sabinene, «-
thujene, limonene, linalool, borneol" and four macrocyclic
lactones.

Other constituents Archangelenone (a flavonoid), palmitic acid,
caffeic and chlorogenic acids, sugars (fructose, glucose, sucrose,
umbelliferose).

The chemistry of A. sinensis is similar to that of A.
archangelica, with coumarins and volatile oil being major
components. In addition, a series of phthalides (e.g. ligustilide,
butylphthalide, butylidenephthalide) have been isolated.

Food Use

Angelica is widely used in foods.’ ) Angelica is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (stem:
category 1; other parts and preparations: category 4, with limits
on coumarin and furanocoumarin) (see Appendix 3).(1)
Previously, angelica has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘C*?

1, G32)

Coumarins
BS
fe) fe) fe)
angelicin
OR
V =
9 07 So
R

bergapten Cl

Hg
isoimperatorin wk

fo) le}
Oo o So
an:
OCH3
xanthotoxin archangelicin
Flavonoids
ae
HO. ; 0.
OH O

archengelenone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of angelica.

----- PAGE 65 -----
sa Angelica

Herbal Use

Angelica is stated to possess antispasmodic, diaphoretic, expec-
torant, bitter aromatic, carminative, diuretic and local anti-
inflammatory properties. It has been used for respiratory catarrh,
psychogenic asthma, flatulent dyspepsia, anorexia nervosa,
rheumatic diseases, peripheral vascular disease, and specifically
for pleurisy and bronchitis, applied as a compress, and for
bronchitis associated with vascular deficiency,'67 0 9°” The
German Commission E monograph states that angelica can be
used for lack of appetite and dyspeptic complaints such as mild
stomach cramps and flatulence.‘“?

Many related species, including A. sinensis (dong quai), are
traditionally used in Chinese medicine.'(“” A
about 70% of all traditional Chinese medicine prescriptions to
treat dysmenorrhoea, postnatal disturbances, anaemia, constipa-
tion and chronic pelvic infections.) Western naturopaths
recommend the use of dong quai in hypertension, for modification
of high blood sugar concentrations, regulation of the immune
system, liver detoxification, anaemia and to relieve allergic
conditions. Several unlicensed over-the-counter (OTC) products
containing dong quai are readily available.

. sinensis occurs in

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried leaf 2-5 g by infusion three times daily.'C”

Leaf liquid extract 2-SmL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily'©”

Leaf tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘©”

Dried rhizome/root Daily dose 4.5g'°” or 1-2g by infusion
three times daily,'(C+S”

Rhizome/root liquid extract 0.5—2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol)
G7)

three times daily.‘

Figure 2 Angelica (Angelica archangelica).

Rhizome/root tincture 0.5—2mL (1:5 in 50% alcohol) three
times daily.'C”

Fruit 1-2.g.0)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Minimal anti-inflammatory activity (1% inhibition of carragee-
nan-induced rat paw oedema) has been documented for fruit
extracts (100mg/kg body weight by mouth) given 45 minutes
This was compared with 45%
inhibition by indometacin (5 mg/kg by mouth).

Angelica is reported to possess antibacterial and antifungal
properties.©4" 9 Antibacterial activity against Mycobacterium
avium has been documented, with no activity exhibited against
Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus faecalis or
Salmonella typhi.” Antifungal activity was reported in 14 of 15
fungi tested.”

A methanolic extract of A. archangelica root showed anti-
spasmodic activity against spontaneous contractions of circular
smooth muscle (ICso 265 g/mL) and inhibited acetylcholine- and
barium chloride-induced contractions of longitudinal smooth
muscle (ICs9 values 242 and 146 g/mL, respectively).

Extracts of A. archangelica root exhibit calcium channel-
blocking activity.” A series of isolated coumarins showed activity,
the most active being archangelicin with an ICso 1.2 g/mL
(verapamil 2.0 g/mL) as a calcium channel antagonist as assessed
by inhibition of depolarisation in GH4C, rat pituitary cells.

Sixteen coumarin compounds isolated from A. archangelica
were tested for activity in cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and 5-
lipoxygenase (5-LO) inhibition assays in vitro. None of the
compounds demonstrated activity against COX-1, but osthol and
oxypeucedanin isovalerate were active in the 5-LO assay.

In rabbits, a uterotonic action has been documented for
Japanese angelica root following intraduodenal administration
of a methanolic extract (3 g/kg).''” A. sinensis is reported to have
‘S57. Pharmacological

before eliciting oedema.

induced uterine contraction and relaxation.

investigations have shown that phthalides and coumarins found in
A. sinensis have antispasmodic activity. The volatile constituents
generally exert a hypotensive effect. A polysaccharide component
is active against Ehrlich ascites tumours in mice and_ has
immunostimulating activity,
against ethanol- and indometacin-induced damage.

) and protects the gastric mucosa

(14)

Figure 3. Angelica - dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 66 -----
Clinical studies

None documented for angelica (A. archangelica). The furanocou-
marin constituent bergapten (5-methoxypsoralen) has been used
in the PUVA (psoralen (P) and high-intensity long-wavelength
ultraviolet irradiation) treatment of psoriasis.'“*?

Clinical investigation has failed to support the claims for A.
sinensis with respect to relieving menopausal symptoms.) A.
sinensis has been reported to be effective in improving abnormal
protein metabolism in patients with chronic hepatitis or hepatic
cirrhosis."

Side-effects, Toxicity

Both angelica and the root oil have been reported to cause
photodermatitis and phototoxicity, respectively, following external
contact.(7 ©3658) Angelica contains furanocoumarin consti-
tuents which are known to cause photosensitisation. Concern has
been expressed at the possible carcinogenic risk of the furano-
coumarin bergapten. Seven species of plants known to cause
dermatitis were analysed for psoralen, 8-methoxypsoralen
(xanthotoxin) and 5-methoxypsoralen (bergapten). The highest
total yield was obtained from A. archangelica."”

The root oil has been reported to be non-irritant and non-
sensitising on animal and human skin."

Root and fruit oils obtained by steam distillation are claimed to
be devoid of furanocoumarins, although extracts may contain
them.'@*

Coumarin compounds detected so far in A. archangelica do not
possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)©*” for
anticoagulant activity.

Toxicity studies have been documented for the root oil.” Acute
LDs5o values have been reported as 2.2 g/kg body weight (mouse,
by mouth) and 11.16 g/kg (rat, by mouth). Death was attributed to
liver and kidney damage, although animals surviving for three
days completely recovered with a reversal of organ damage. An
acute LDso (rabbit, dermal) value was reported to be greater than
Sg/kg. Subacute toxicity studies, lasting eight weeks, suggested
that the tolerated dose in the rat was 1.5 g/kg, although at lower
doses the animals weighed less than the controls.”

Furanocoumarins isolated from another related Chinese
species, Angelica koreana, have been reported to affect the hepatic
metabolism of hexobarbitone. The compounds were found to
cause a marked inhibition of drug metabolism in the first phase
and an acceleration in the second phase, and were thought to be
drug-metabolising enzyme inhibitors rather than enzyme indu-
cers. Furanocoumarins investigated included imperatorin and
oxypeucedanin, which are also documented as constituents of A.
archangelica.

An extract of dong quai administered subcutaneously to rabbits
did not affect prothrombin time given alone, but did after
concurrent administration of a single dose of warfarin.®
Elevation of prothrombin time was noted in a patient stabilised
on warfarin who began taking dong quai.''”) Coagulation values
returned to normal one month after discontinuing use of dong

quai.

Contra-indications, War

gs
Angelica may provoke a photosensitive allergic reaction because of
the furanocoumarin constituents.

The use of bergapten in cosmetic and suntan preparations is

stated to be ill-advised by some regulatory authorities,'“*” in view

Angelica

of the concerns regarding the risk of skin cancer. The Interna-
tional Fragrance Association recommended that angelica root oil
be limited to a maximum of 0.78% in products applied to skin
which is then exposed to sunshine.'“**

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of angelica to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Angelica root is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle. In view of this and
the photosensitising constituents, the use of angelica during
pregnancy and lactation in amounts exceeding those used in foods
should be avoided.

Theiss Schwedenbitter; Stomaran; Valofyt Neo. France:
Dystolise; Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3. Germany:
Abdomilon; Abdomilon N; Gastritol; Iberogast; Klosterfrau
Melisana; Melissengeist; Schwedentrunk Elixier. Italy: Flor-
elax. Russia: Doppelherz Melissa (Aormeasrepy Meancca);
Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapuerit Boapmoit
Baavsam burruepa). South Africa: Melissengeist; Spiritus
Contra Tussim Drops. Spain: Agua del Carmen; Himelan.
Switzerland: Gastrosan; Iberogast. UK: Melissa Comp..

References

1 Czygan F-C. (Root of the holy ghost or Angelica root — Angelica
archangelica). Z Phytother 1998; 19: 342-348.

2 Harmala P et al. A furanocoumarin from Angelica archangelica.
Planta Med 1992; 58: 287-289.

3 Sun H, Jakupovic J. Further heraclenol derivatives from Angelica
archangelica. Pharmazie 1986; 41: 888-889.

4 Holm Y et al. Enantiomeric composition of monoterpene
hydrocarbons in n-hexane extracts of Angelica archangelica L. roots
and seeds. Flavour Fragrance J 1997; 12: 397-400.

5 Awang DVC. Dong quai. Can Pharm J 1999; 132: 38-41.

6 Zielinska-Jenczylik J et al. Effect of plant extracts on the in vitro
interferon synthesis. Arch Immunol Ther Exp 1984; 32: 577.

7 Opdyke DLJ. Angelica root oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 713.

8 Izzo AA et al. Spasmolytic activity of medicinal plants used for the
treatment of disorders involving smooth muscles. Phytother Res 1996;
10: $107-S108.

9 Harmala P et al. Choice of solvent in the extraction of Angelica
archangelica roots with reference to calcium blocking activity. Planta
Med 1992; 58: 176-183.

10 Harmala P et al. Isolation and testing of calcium blocking activity of
furanocoumarins from Angelica archangelica. Planta Med 1991; 57:
AS8-AS9.

11 Roos G et al. Isolation, identification and screening for COX-1 and 5-
LO inhibition of coumarins from Angelica archangelica. Pharmaceut
Pharmacol Lett 1997; 7: 157-160.

12. Harada M et al. Effect of Japanese angelica root and peony root on
uterine contraction in the rabbit in situ. J] Pharm Dyn 1984; 7: 304-
311.

----- PAGE 67 -----
13

14

15

Angelica

Choy YM et al. Immunological studies of low molecular weight
polysaccharide from Angelica sinensis. Am ] Chin Med 1994; 22: 137—
145.

Cho CH et al. Study of the gastrointestinal protective effects of
polysaccharides from Angelica sinensis in rats. Planta Med 2000; 66:
348-351.

Hirata JD et al. Does dong quai have oestrogenic effects in
postmenopausal women? A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Fertil Steril 1997; 68: 981-986.

16

17

18

19

Chang H-M, But PP-H. Pharmacology and Applications of Chinese
Materia Medica, vol 1. Singapore: World Scientific, 1986: 499.
Zobel AM, Brown SA. Dermatitis-inducing psoralens on the surface
of seven medicinal plant species. J Toxicol Cutan Ocul Toxicol 1991;
10: 223-231.

Lo ACT et al. Dong quai (Angelica sinensis) effects the
pharmacodynamics but not the pharmacokinetics of warfarin in
rabbits. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1995; 20: 55-60.

Page RL, Lawrence JD. Potentiation of warfarin by dong quai.
Pharmacotherapy 1999; 19: 870-876.

----- PAGE 68 -----
Aniseed

ealth when it is consumed in amounts normally encountered
in foods. Anethole was reaffirmed as GRAS (Generally
Regarded As Safe) in 1997 on the basis of the recognised
metabolic detoxication of trans-anethole in humans at low
levels of exposure (1 mg/kg body weight).“” For medicinal
use, it is recommended that treatment should not be
continued for extended periods.

Species (Family)

Pimpinella anisum L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Anise, Anisi Fructus, Anisum, Anisum officinarum Moench.,
Anisum vulgare Gaertn.

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 1997)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Coumarins Scopoletin, umbelliferone, umbelliprenine; bergapten
(furanocoumarin).

Flavonoids Flavonol (quercetin) and flavone (apigenin, luteolin)
glycosides, e.g. quercetin-3-glucuronide, rutin, luteolin-7-gluco-
side, apigenin-7-glucoside; isoorientin and isovitexin (C-gluco-
sides).

Volatile oils 26%. Major components are trans-anethole (80-
95%), with smaller amounts of estragole (methyl chavicol) ,“¢
anise ketone (p-methoxyphenylacetone) and f-caryophyllene.

Minor components include anisaldehyde and anisic acid (oxida-
tion products of anethole), linalool, limonene, -pinene, pseudo-
isoeugenol-2-methyl butyrate, acetaldehyde, p-cresol, cresol,
hydroquinone, B-farnesene, o-, B- and y-himachalene, bisabolene,
d-elemene, ar-curcumene and myristicin.”

Other constituents Carbohydrate (50%), lipids 16% (saturated
and unsaturated), B-amyrin (triterpene), stigmasterol (phyto-
sterol) and its palmitate and stearate salts.

Food Use

Aniseed is used extensively as a spice and is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2).
This category allows small quantities of aniseed to be added to
foodstuffs, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©'® Previously, aniseed has been
listed as GRAS.(0 C4?

Phenylpropanoids

OCH; OCH;
5
trans-anethole methyl chavicol
(estragole)
Aromatic aldehyde
OCH3
HO
anisaldehyde
Coumarins
1
Bool
R' fe) le)

R' Re
umbelliferone H OH
scopoletin OCH; OH

OCH;
Vi =
0 o~ So
bergapten

Figure 1 Selected constituents of aniseed.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Aniseed

Herbal Use

Aniseed is stated to possess expectorant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native and parasiticide properties. Traditionally, it has been used
for bronchial catarrh, pertussis, spasmodic cough, flatulent colic;
topically for pediculosis and scabies; its most specific use is for
bronchitis, tracheitis with persistent cough, and as an aromatic
adjuvant to prevent colic following the use of cathartics.'°> ©” 0
Modern use of aniseed is mainly for the treatment of dyspeptic
complaints and catarrh of the upper respiratory tract.(@4h @* 979)

Aniseed has been used as an oestrogenic agent.) It has been
reputed to increase milk secretion, promote menstruation,
facilitate birth, alleviate symptoms of the male climacteric and
increase libido.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults, unless otherwise stated)
for traditional uses recommended in older and contemporary
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried fruit Adults: 1.0-5.0 g crushed fruits in 150 mL water as an
infusion several times daily.“°*” Children: 0-1 year old, 1.0g of
crushed fruits as an infusion; 1-4 years of age, 2.0g; over four
years, use adult dose.‘@”)

Oil 0.05-0.2 mL three times daily.“©”
Spirit of anise (BPC 1949) 0.3-1.0mL three times daily.
Distilled anise water (BPC 1934) 15-30 mL three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological effects of aniseed are largely due to the
presence of anethole, which is structurally related to the
catecholamines adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine. Aneth-
ole dimers closely resemble the oestrogenic agents stilbene and
diethylstilbestrol.

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial, antifungal and insecticidal activities |The
volatile oil has antibacterial, antifungal and insecticidal activi-
(G41,G52) A nethole, anisaldehyde and myristicin have exhibited
mild insecticidal properties.(“*”

ties.

Figure 2 Aniseed (Pimpinella anisum).

Antispasmodic activity Anise oil (200mg/L) was shown to
antagonise carbachol-induced spasms in a guinea-pig tracheal
muscle preparation.“°)

Secretolytic and expectorant effect Application of aniseed
(6.4¢/140mL) to isolated ciliated epithelium of frog trachea
induces small increases in transport velocity.” Dilutions of
anise oil increased respiratory tract fluid in anaesthetised guinea-
pigs, rats and cats. A similar action was observed in anaesthetised
rabbits inhaling anise oil.'°*” The reputed lactogogic action of
anise has been attributed to anethole, which exerts a competitive
antagonism at dopamine receptor sites (dopamine inhibits
prolactin secretion), and to the action of polymerised anethole,
which is structurally related to the oestrogenic compounds
stilbene and diethylstilbestrol.

CNS activities Whole plant aqueous infusions have been reported
to delay (but not prevent) the onset of picrotoxin-induced seizures
and to reduce the mortality rate in mice following intraperitoneal
injection.” Aniseed has also been found to slightly elevate y-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentrations in brain tissue. The
anticonvulsant effect is much weaker with aniseed than with
conventional drug treatment and therefore its use as an anti-
convulsant in Arabic folklore is not supported. Anise oil diluted
in sesame oil (0.25-1.0 mL/kg) given intraperitoneally to mice
increased in a dose-dependent manner the dose of pentylene-
tetrazole needed to induce clonic and tonic seizures.) Activity
was also observed against tonic seizures induced by maximal
electric shock. Motor impairment was observed at higher doses of
anise oil. Pentobarbital-induced sleeping time was prolonged by
intraperitoneal administration of anise oil (50 mg/kg) to mice.'C”

Other activities Oral administration of anethole (250-1000 mg/
kg) to Swiss albino mice with Ehrlich ascites tumour in the paws
indicated antitumour activity.) The conclusions were based on
biochemical changes (nucleic acids, proteins, malondialdehyde,
glutathione), survival rate and tumour weight. Anise oil given to
rats (100 mg/kg given subcutaneously) stimulated liver regenera-
tion after partial hepatectomy.'°”)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of documented clinical research involving aniseed
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Figure 3. Aniseed — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 70 -----
Side-effects, Toxicity

Contact dermatitis reactions to aniseed and aniseed oil have been
attributed to anethole.” "°°" Reactions have been reported
with products, such as creams and toothpastes, flavoured with
aniseed oil.'“*") The volatile oil and anethole have been stated to
be both irritant and sensitising.(©?" “>” Two female workers in a
cake factory developed severe dermatitis, and patch tests indicated
sensitivity to anise oil and to anethole. Soreness, dryness and
cracking of lips and perioral skin occurred in an individual using a
herbal (fennel) toothpaste; anethole was reported to be the
sensitising agent. Bergapten is known to cause photosensitivity
reactions and concern has been expressed over the possible
carcinogenic risk of bergapten.'“*)

Ingestion of as little as 1-5 mL of anise oil can result in nausea,
vomiting, seizures, and pulmonary oedema.”

The LDso values per kg body weight for anise oil and trans-
anethole are 2.7g and 2-3 g, respectively.(©” Mild liver lesions
were observed in rats fed repeated anethole doses (695 mg/kg) for
an unspecified duration." Hepatic changes have been described in
rats fed anethole in their daily diet (1%) for 15 weeks,'C?”
although at a level of 0.25% there were no changes after one year.
Rats fed with 0.1% trans-anethole in their diet for 90 days showed
no toxic effects, but higher concentrations (0.3%, 1.0% and 3.0%)
resulted in liver oedema.“°”) In therapeutic doses, anethole is
reported to cause minimal hepatotoxicity.©? Trans-anethole
given orally to rats (50-80 mg/kg) resulted in dose-dependent anti-
implantation activity." Significant oestrogenic activity was
observed, but no anti-oestrogenic, progestational, anti-progesta-
tional, androgenic or antiandrogenic activity.”

Oral administration (1% of diet) of trans-anethole to rats
resulted in induction of parathion-degrading drug enzymes.'°)
Male Wistar rats were treated with trans-anethole (125 or 250 mg/
kg) by gavage for 10 days and the activities of liver microsome and
cytosol phase I and II biotransformation enzymes were deter-
mined.) There was no effect on cytochrome P450, but UDP-
glucuronyltransferase activity in the cytosol towards the sub-
strates 4-chlorophenol and 4-hydroxyphenol was significantly
increased for both doses. It was concluded that trans-anethole
preferentially induces phase II biotransformation in rat liver in
vivo."
The safety of trans-anethole (4-methoxy propenylbenzene) has
been reviewed by the Expert Panel of the Flavour and Extract
Manufacturer Association (FEMA).”) The evaluation was based
on whether the hepatotoxic metabolite anethole epoxide is
produced. At low levels of exposure, trans-anethole is efficiently
detoxicated in rodents and humans, primarily by O-demethylation
and @-oxidation, respectively, while epoxidation is only a minor
pathway. At higher doses in rats, a metabolic shift occurs resulting
in epoxidation and formation of anethole epoxide. The contin-
uous intake of high doses of trans-anethole induces a continuum
of cytotoxicity, cell necrosis and cell proliferation. In chronic
dietary studies in rats, hepatotoxicity resulted when the daily
production of anethole epoxide exceeded 30 mg anethole epoxide
per kg body weight. Neither trans-anethole nor anethole epoxide
showed any evidence of genotoxicity. The Expert Panel concluded
that the hepatocarcinogenic effects in female rats occur via a non-
genotoxic mechanism and are secondary to hepatotoxicity caused
by continuous exposures to high hepatocellular concentrations of
anethole epoxide. Trans-anethole was reaffirmed as GRAS, based
on a thorough study of the scientific literature." Because trans-
anethole undergoes efficient metabolic detoxication in humans at
low levels of exposure, the neoplastic effects in rats associated

Aniseed

with dose-dependent hepatotoxicity are not indicators of any
significant risk to human health from the use of trans-anethole as
a flavouring substance.‘

Coumarin compounds detected so far in aniseed do not possess
the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)'©*” for anticoagulant
activity.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Aniseed may cause an allergic reaction. It is recommended that the
use of aniseed oil should be avoided in dermatitis, and
inflammatory or allergic skin conditions."*"°® Aniseed should
be avoided by persons with known sensitivity to anethole.“°”)
Bergapten may cause photosensitivity in sensitive individuals. In
view of the structural similarity reported between anethole and
myristicin, consumption of large amounts of aniseed may cause
neurological effects similar to those documented for nutmeg.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of aniseed to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar (e.g.
hormonal therapies) or opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Traditionally, aniseed is reputed to be
an abortifacient'©” and also to promote lactation. The safety of
aniseed taken during pregnancy and lactation has not been
established; however, there are no known problems provided that
doses taken do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods. It
has been proposed that aniseed and preparations used at
recommended dosages may be used during pregnancy and
lactation.'©”

No 3; Mucinum a I'Extrait de Cascara. Germany: Em-medical;
Floradix Multipretten N; Majocarmin-Tee; Ramend Krauter.
Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Israel: Jungborn. Italy:
Cadifen; Cadimint; Dicalmir; Lassatina; Tisana Kelemata.
Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuramaapunii
Boasmoit Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Clairo; Cough
Elixir. Spain: Crislaxo; Digestovital; Laxante Sanatorium;
Laxomax. Switzerland: Kernosan Elixir; Kernosan Heidelber-
ger Poudre; Tisane favorisant l'allaitement. UK: Herb and
Honey Cough Elixir; Revitonil. Venezuela: Neo-Atropan.

References

1 Newberne P et al. The FEMA GRAS assessment of trans-anethole
used as a flavouring substance. Food Chem Toxicol 1999; 37: 789-811.

2. Burkhardt G et al. Terpene hydrocarbons in Pimpinella anisum L.
Pharm Weekbl (Sci) 1986; 8: 190-193.

3. Albert-Puleo M. Fennel and anise as estrogenic agents. J
Ethnopharmacol 1980; 2: 337-344.

4 Abdul-Ghani A-S et al. Anticonvulsant effects of some Arab medicinal
plants. Int J Crude Drug Res 1987; 25: 39-43.

5 Pourgholami MH et al. The fruit essential oil of Pimpinella anisum
exerts anticonvulsant effects in mice. J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 66:
211-215.

----- PAGE 71 -----
Aniseed

6 Al-Harbi MM e¢ al. Influence of anethole treatment on the tumour 9 Franks A. Contact allergy to anethole in toothpaste associated with
A induced by Ehrlich ascites carcinoma cells in paw of Swiss albino loss of taste. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38: 354-355.
mice. Eur J Cancer Prevent 1995; 4: 307-318. 10 Dhar SK. Anti-fertility activity and hormonal profile of trans-anethole
7 Chandler RE, Hawkes D. Anisced — a spice, a flavor, a drug. Can in rats. Indian ] Physiol Pharmacol 1995; 39: 63-67.
Pharm J 1984; 117: 28-29. 11 Rompelberg CJM et al. Effects of the naturally occurring
8 Garcia-Bravo B et al. Occupational contact dermatitis from anethole alkenylbenzenes eugenol and trans-anethole on drug-metabolising

in food handlers. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37: 38. enzymes in the rat liver. Food Chem Toxicol 1993; 31: 637-645.

----- PAGE 72 -----
Apricot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Interest in apricot kernels was generated as a result of claims
in the late 1970s that laetrile, a semi-synthetic derivative of
the naturally occurring constituent amygdalin, was a natural,
non-toxic cure for cancer. Apricot kernels were seen as an
alternative source for this miracle cure. These claims have
since been disproved and it has been established that laetrile
(amygdalin) is toxic, particularly if administered orally. Fatal
cases of cyanide poisoning have been reported following the
ingestion of apricot kernels. Amygdalin was made a
prescription-only medicine in the UK in 1984.“

Species (Family)

Armeniaca vulgaris Lam. var. vulgaris

Synonym(s)

Ku Xing Ren (seed/kernel), Prunus armeniaca L., Prunus tiliifolia

Salisb.

Part(s) Used

Kernel (seed), expressed oil

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Apricot is not included in the GSL. Amygdalin (a cyanogenetic
glycoside) is classified as a POM.”

Constituents

Acids Phenolic. Various quinic acid esters of caffeic, p-coumaric
and ferulic acids.” Neochlorogenic acid major in kernel,
chlorogenic in fruit.

Glycosides Cyanogenetic. Amygdalin (mandelonitrile digluco-
side). Cyanide content of kernel varies from 2 to 200 mg/100g.°

Tannins Catechins, proanthocyanidins (condensed).

Other constituents Cholesterol, an oestrogenic fraction (0.09%)
containing estrone (both free and conjugated) and a-estradiol.

Other plant parts

Leaves and fruit contain various flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin)
glycosides including rutin (major).°)

Food Use

Apricot fruit is commonly eaten. Apricot is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (categories N1
and N2). These categories limit the total amount of hydrocyanic
acid permitted in the final product to 1 mg/kg. Exceptions to this
are 25 mg/kg for confectionery, 50 mg/kg for marzipan and 5 mg/

kg for fruit juices.““'® Previously, apricot kernel extract has been
listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°°

Herbal Use

Traditionally, the oil has been incorporated into cosmetic and
perfumery products such as soaps and creams.'“*

Cyanogenetic glycosides

HOH,C
fe}
HQi9 °
Ong A
H
HQ Oye _C
OH
amygdalin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of apricot.

Figure 2 Apricot (fruit).

Figure 3. Apricot - dried drug substance (kernel).

----- PAGE 73 -----
Apricot

Dosage

None documented. Traditionally, apricot kernels have not been
utilised as a herbal remedy.

Pharmacological Actions

During the late 1970s and early 1980s considerable interest was
generated in apricot from claims that laetrile (a semi-synthetic
derivative of amygdalin) was an effective treatment for cancer.
Two review papers” discuss these claims for laetrile together
with its chemistry, metabolism and potential toxicity.

The claims for laetrile were based on three different theories.
The first claimed that cancerous cells contained abundant
quantities of B-glucosidases, enzymes which release hydrogen
cyanide from the laetrile molecule as a result of hydrolysis.
Normal cells were said to be protected because they contained low
concentrations of -glucosidases and high concentrations of
rhodanese, an enzyme which converts cyanide to the less toxic
thiocyanate. However, this theory was disproved when it was
shown that both cancerous and normal cells contain only trace
amounts of B-glucosidases, and similar amounts of rhodanese. In
addition, it was thought that amygdalin was not absorbed intact
from the gastrointestinal tract.'°”

The second theory proposed that following ingestion, amygda-
lin was hydrolysed to mandelonitrile, transported intact to the
liver and converted to a B-glucuronide complex. This complex was
then carried to the cancerous cells, hydrolysed by B-glucuroni-
dases to release mandelonitrile and subsequently hydrogen
cyanide. This theory was considered to be untenable.”

A third theory proposed that laetrile is vitamin By7, that cancer
It of a deficiency of this vitamin, and that chronic
administration of laetrile would prevent cancer. Again this was
not substantiated by any scientific evidence.”

is a re

Clinical studies

A Cochrane systematic review that aimed to assess the efficacy of
laetrile in cancer reported that there were no controlled clinical
trials available in this indication.) The review concluded,
therefore, that there is no evidence from controlled clinical trials
to support the alleged beneficial effects of laetrile as an anticancer
agent, or as an adjunctive agent in cancer chemotherapy.

A retrospective analysis of the use of laetrile by cancer patients
reported that it may have slight activity.'>”
subsequent clinical trial concluded that laetrile was ineffective in
cancer treatment. Furthermore, it was claimed that patients
taking laetrile reduced their life expectancy as a result of lack of
proper medical care and chronic cyanide poisoning.”

However, a

Side-effects, Toxicity

Laetrile and apricot kernel ingestion are the most common
sources of cyanide poisoning, with more than 20 deaths
reported.©” Apricot kernels are toxic because of their amygdalin
content. Hydrolysis of the amygdalin molecule by B-glucosidases,
heat, mineral acids or high doses of ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
yields hydrogen cyanide (HCN), benzaldehyde, and glucose. B-
Glucosidases are not generally abundant in the gastrointestinal
tract, but they are present in the kernels themselves as well as
certain foods including beansprouts, carrots, celery, green peppers,
lettuce, mushrooms and sweet almonds. Hydrolysis of the
amygdalin molecule is slow in an acid environment but much
more rapid in an alkaline pH. There may therefore be a delay in
the onset of symptoms of HCN poisoning as a result of the transit

time from the acid pH of the stomach to the alkaline environment
of the small intestine.

Acute poisoning

Cyanide is rapidly absorbed from the upper gastrointestinal tract,
diffuses readily throughout the body and promptly causes
respiratory failure if untreated. Symptoms of cyanide toxicity
progress rapidly from dizziness, headache, nausea, vomiting and
drowsin to dyspnoea, palpitations, marked hypotension,
convulsions, paralysis, coma and death, which may occur from
1-15 minutes after ingestion. Antidotes for cyanide poisoning
include nitrite, thiosulfate, hydroxocobalamin, cobalt edetate and
aminophenol.'%7)

Chronic poisoning

Principal symptoms include increased blood thiocyanate, goitre,
thyroid cancer, lesions of the optic nerve, blindness, ataxia,
hypertonia, cretinism and mental retardation.') These symptoms
may develop as a result of ingesting significant amounts of
cyanide, cyanogenetic precursors in the diet, or cyanogenetic drugs
such as laetrile. Demyelinating lesions and other neuromyopathies
reportedly occur secondary to chronic cyanide exposure, including
long-term therapy with laetrile. Agranulocytosis has also been
attributed to long-term laetrile therapy.”

Individual reports of adverse reactions and cyanide poisoning in
patients using laetrile have been documented.‘“*”

Normally, low concentrations of ingested cyanide are controlled
naturally by exhalation or by rapid conversion to the less toxic
thiocyanate by the enzyme rhodanese. Oral doses of 50mg of
hydrogen cyanide (HCN) can be fatal. This is equivalent to
approximately 30g kernels which represents about 50-60 kernels,
and approximately 2mg HCN/g kernel. Apricot seed has also
been reported to contain 2.92mg HCN/g."”) A 500-mg laetrile
tablet was found to contain between 5 and 51mg HCN/g.

There may be considerable variation in the number of kernels
required to be toxic, depending on the concentration of amygdalin
and f-glucosidases present in the kernels, the timespan of
ingestion, the degree of maceration of the kernels, individual
variation in hydrolysing, and detoxifying ab

Systemic concentrations of B-glucosidases are low and therefore
toxicity following parenteral absorption of amygdalin is low.
However, cyanide poisoning has been reported in rats following
intraperitoneal administration of laetrile, suggesting another
mechanism of hydrolysis had occurred.'%”)

It is thought that cyanogenetic glycosides may possess
carcinogenic properties. Mandelonitrile (amygdalin = mandeloni-
trile diglucoside) is mutagenic and guanylate
cyclase.”

es.

stimulates

Contra-indications, Warnings

Apricot kernels are toxic due to their amygdalin content.
Following ingestion hydrogen cyanide is released and may result
in cyanide poisoning. Fatalities have been reported following the
ingestion of apricot kernels. Contact dermatitis has been reported
following contact with apricot kernels.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation Apricot kernels are toxic and should
not be ingested. The ingestion of cyanogenetic substances may
result in teratogenic effects.
reported where no acute toxicity was noted in the infant when

However, one case has been

----- PAGE 74 -----
laetrile was used during the third term of pregnancy. It was
unknown whether chronic effects would be manifested at a later
date.’ Breeding rats fed ground apricot kernels had pups with
normal birth weights, but with lower survival rates and lower
weaning weights.”

References

1 The Medicines (Cyanogenetic Substances) Order, SI 1984 No. 187,
London: HMSO, 1984.

2 Moller B, Herrmann K. Quinic acid esters of hydroxycinnamic acids
in stone and pome fruit. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 477-481.

3. Miller KWet al. Amygdalin metabolism and effect on reproduction of
rats fed apricot kernels. J Toxicol Environ Health 1981; 7: 457-467.

10

Apricot

Awad O. Steroidal estrogens of Prunus armeniaca seeds.
Phytochemistry 1973; 13: 678-690.

Henning W, Herrmann K. Flavonol glycosides of apricots (Prunus
armeniaca L.) and peaches (Prunus persica Batch). 13. Phenolics of
fruits. Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 1980; 171: 183-188.

Chandler RF et al. Laetrile in perspective. Can Pharm J 1984; 117:
517-520.

Chandler RF et al. Controversial laetrile. Pharm J 1984; 232: 330-332.
Milazzo S$ et al. Laetrile treatment for cancer. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, issue 2, 2006. London: Macmillan.

Holzbecher MD et al. The cyanide content of laetrile preparations,
apricot, peach and apple seeds. Clin Toxicol 1984; 22: 341-347.
G6ransson K. Contact urticaria to apricot stone. Contact Dermatitis
1981; 7: 282.

----- PAGE 75 -----
Arnica

constituents. Arnica is not suitable for internal use, although it
is present in some homeopathic products. External use of
arnica tincture, which is included as an ingredient in some
cosmetics, hair shampoos and bath preparations, may cause
an allergic reaction. The pyrrolizidine alkaloids tussilagine and
isotussilagine, reportedly present in arnica, are non-toxic.
Moreover, they are artefacts produced during the extraction
process with methanol.

Species (Family)

Arnica montana L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)
Arnica chamissonis Less. subsp. foliosa (Nutt.) Maguire also
allowed in German Pharmacopoeia.“

Synonym(s)

Arnicae Flos, Leopard's Bane, Mountain Tobacco, Wolf's Bane

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

ESCOP 1997'C>*)
Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL, for external use only.@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1-3, and General References G2 and G52.

Alkaloids = Traces of non-toxic alkaloids tussilagine and
isotussilagine™ but these are reportedly artefacts produced during
extraction.)

Amines Betaine, choline and trimethylamine.
Carbohydrates Mucilage, polysaccharides including inulin.

Coumarins Scopoletin and umbelliferone.

Flavonoids  Betuletol, eupafolin, flavonol glucuronides,"

hispidulin, isorhamnetin, kaempferol, laciniatin, luteolin, patule-
tin, quercetin, spinacetin, tricin and 3,5,7-trihydroxy-6,3’,4/-
trimethoxyflavone.

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones of the pseudoguaianolide-
type, 0.2-0.8%.'°”) Pharmacopoeial standard not less than
0.4% ("C8 Helenalin, 110,13-dihydrohelenalin and_ their
esters with acetic, isobutyric, methacrylic, tiglic and other
carboxylic acids.'°*”) Diterpenes including z-labda-13-ene-80,15-
diol.

Volatile oils Up to 1%, normally about 0.3%. Thymol and
thymol derivatives.

Other constituents Amino acid (2-pyrrolidine acetic), bitter
principle (arnicin), caffeic acid, carotenoids, fatty acids, phytos-
terols, polyacetylenes, resin, tannin (unspecified).

Food Use

Arnica is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that arnica
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“!® Previously, arnica has been listed by the Food and
Drugs Administration (FDA) as an ‘unsafe herb!,““?” and is only
approved for food use in alcoholic beverages.'@*

Herbal Use

Arnica is stated to possess topical counter-irritant properties. It
has been used for unbroken chilblains, alopecia neurotica, insect
bites, gingivitis, aphthous ulcers, rheumatoid complaints and
specifically for sprains and bruises.'C* 676%

German Commission E approved external use for injuries and
consequences of accidents, e.g. haematoma, dislocation, contu-
sions, oedema due to fracture, rheumatoid muscle and joint pains,
inflammation of oral and throat region, furuncolosis, inflamma-
tion caused by insect bites and superficial phlebitis.'°> ©?

Arnica is mainly used in homeopathic preparations; it is used to
a lesser extent in herbal products.

Sesquiterpene lactones

Hé
0. OH

helenalin

Hi
0. OH

11,13-dihydrohelenalin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of arnica.

----- PAGE 76 -----
Dosage

Recommendations for external use (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Tincture of arnica flower
application only.

(BPC 1949) 2-4mL for external

Preparations Ointments, creams, gels, compresses made with 5—
25% v/v tinctures, S—25% v/v fluid extracts, diluted tinctures or

fluid extract (1:3-1: 10), decoctions 2.0g drug/100 mL water.'°*
G4)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity Arnica has been reported to exhibit
bactericidal properties against Listeria monocytogenes and
Salmonella typhimurium.“* Helenalin and related sesquiter-
penes from arnica have antimicrobial activity against Bacillus
subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus, Corynebacterium insido-
sum, Micrococcus roseus, Mycobacterium phlei, Sarcinia lutea
and Proteus vulgaris.° Antifungal activity against Trichophy-
ton mentagrophytes, Epidermaphyton spp. and Botrytis cinerea is
reported for helenalin.“ °°)

Antitumour activity The cytotoxicity of 21 flavonoids and five
sesquiterpene lactones from Arnica spp. has been investigated in
vitro in studies using GLC, (a human small cell lung carcinoma)
and COLO 320 (a human colorectal cancer) cell lines.’ The most
potent compound, helenalin, had an ICs value of 0.44 tmol/L
against GLC, and 1.0 mol/L against COLO 320 after two hours!
exposure.” Some of the individual flavonols and flavones of
arnica at non-toxic concentrations significantly reduced helenalin-
induced cytotoxicity in vitro."

Anti-inflammatory activity Moderate (29%) anti-inflammatory
effect in the carageenan rat paw model has been reported for
arnica." Helenalin is a potent inhibitor in this test and in
chronic adjuvant arthritis tests in rats."'?) The o-methylene-y-
lactone moiety of sesquiterpenes is required for activity, and the
potency of helenalin is enhanced by the presence of the 6-hydroxy
group." The mode of action of sesquiterpene lactones as anti-
inflammatory agents is at multiple sites. At a concentration of 5 x
10-4 mol/L, the compounds uncoupled oxidative phosphorylation
of human polymorphoneutrophils, elevated cyclic adenosine

Arnica 65

monophosphate (cAMP) levels of rat neutrophils, and rat and
mouse liver cells, and inhibited free and total lysosymal enzyme
?) Human polymorphonuclear neutrophil chemotaxis
was inhibited at 5 x 10°*mol/L, whereas prostaglandin
synthetase activity was inhibited at concentrations of 10-* mol/
L. Helenalin and 11e-13-dihydrohelenalin inhibited collagen-
induced platelet aggregation, thromboxane formation and 5-

hydroxytryptamine secretion in a concentration-dependent man-
(14)

activity.!

ner.

Other activities Helenalin has potent activity in the hotplate tail
flick analgesic test in mice."

Helenalin has also been reported to possess immunostimulant
activity in vitro," while high molecular weight polysaccharides
have been found to exhibit immunostimulant activity in vivo in
the carbon clearance test in mice." '®
Arnica contains an adrenaline-like pressor substance and a

cardiotonic substance.'((*)

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of arnica is limited, and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. A gel
preparation of arnica flowers applied externally to the limbs of 12
male volunteers was more effective than placebo in the treatment
of muscle ache.“ In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study, 89 patients with venous insufficiency received
arnica gel (20% tincture) or placebo.'©™ It was reported that
arnica treatment produced improvements in venous tone, oedema
and in feeling of heaviness in the legs.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Arnica is poisonous if taken internally. It is irritant to mucous
membranes and ingestion may result in fatal gastroenteritis,
muscle paralysis (voluntary and cardiac), increase or decrease in
pulse rate, palpitation of the heart, shortness of breath, and may
even lead to death.'©**°*) Helenalin is stated to be the toxic
principle responsible for these effects.3 Thirty millilitres of a
20% arnica tincture, taken by mouth, was reported to produce
serious, but not fatal, symptoms.'@*) The topical application of
arnica has been documented to cause dermatitis."”°°" Arnica is
a strong sensitiser, with the sesquiterpene lactone constituents
implicated as the contact allergens: they possess an «-methylene
group exocyclic to a y-lactone ring, which is recognised as an
immunological prerequisite for contact allergy.''”'® Helenalin is
also reported to possess cytotoxic activity and this has been

Figure 2. Arnica (Arnica montana).

Figure 3 Arnica — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 77 -----
Arnica

attributed to its ability to alkylate with sulfhydryl groups.'©*?

Helenalin was not mutagenic in the Salmonella typhimurium

assay. (C)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Arnica should not be taken internally except in suitable
homeopathic dilutions.'(C”

Externally, arnica is poorly tolerated by some people,
precipitating allergic reactions in sensitive individuals.'C) It
should only be applied to unbroken skin and withdrawn at the
first sign of reaction.'“” Toxic allergic skin reactions have
occurred following application of the tincture.'©*?)

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of arnica preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and
their use should be avoided during these periods.

Stullmaton; Trauma-cyl; Varicylum-S; Venengel. Hong Kong:
New Patecs A. Italy: Flebolider. Mexico: Reudol. South Africa:
Combudoron; Dynexan; Lotio Pruni Comp cum Cupro;
Muscle Rub; Wecesin. Spain: Arnicon. Switzerland: Combu-
doron; Euceta avec camomille et arnica; Fortacet; Onguent aux
herbes Keller; Perskindol Cool Arnica; Topaceta. UK:

References

1 Merfort I, Wendisch D. Flavonoidglycoside aus Arnica montana und
Arnica chamissonis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 434-437.

2 Merfort I. Flavonol glycosides of Arnicae flos DAB 9. Planta Med
1986; 52: 427.

3 Merfort I, Wendisch D. Flavonolglucuronide aus den bliiten von
Arnica montana. Planta Med 1988; 54: 247-250.

4 Passreiter CM et al. Tussilagine and isotussilagine: two pyrrolizidine
alkaloids in the genus Arnica. Planta Med 1992; 58: 556-557.

5 Passreiter CM. Co-occurrence of 2-pyrrolidine acetic acid with the
pyrrolizidines tussilaginic acid and isotussilaginic acid and their 1-
epimers in Arnica species and Tussilago farfara. Phytochem 1992; 31:
4135-4137.

6 Leven W, Willuhn G. Spectrophotometric determination of
sesquiterpenlactone ($1) in 'Arnicae flos DAB 9' with m-dinitro-
benzene. Planta Med 1986; 52: 537-538.

7 Schmidt Th e¢ al. First diterpenes from Arnica. Planta Med 1992; 58:
A713.

8 Lee K-H et al. Structure—antimicrobial activity relationships among
the sesquiterpene lactones and related compounds. Phytochemistry
1977; 16: 117-118.

9 Woerdenbag HJ et al. Cytotoxicity of flavonoids and sesquiterpene
lactones from Arnica species against the GLC, and the COLO 320 cell
lines. Planta Med 1994; 60: 434-437.

10 Woerdenbag HJ et al. Decreased helenalin-induced cytotoxicity by
flavonoids from Arnica as studied in a human lung carcinoma cell line.
Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 127-132.

11 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

12. Hall 1H et al. Mode of action of sesquiterpene lactones as anti-
inflammatory agents. J Pharm Sci 1980; 69: 537-543.

13. Hall IH et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of sesquiterpene lactones
and related compounds. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68: 537-542.

14 Schréder H et al. Helenalin and 11¢,13-dihydrohelenalin, two
constituents from Arnica montana L., inhibit human platelet function
via thiol-dependent pathways. Thrombosis Res 1990; 57: 839-845.

15 Chang HM et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Philadelphia: World Scientific, 1985.

16 Puhlmann J, Wagner H. Immunologically active polysaccharides from
Arnica montana herbs and tissue cultures. Planta Med 1989; 55: 99.

17, Rudzki E, Grzywa Z. Dermatitis from Arnica montana. Contact
Dermatitis 1977; 3: 281-282.

18 Hausen BM. Identification of the allergens of Arnica montana L.
Contact Dermatitis 1978; 4: 308.

----- PAGE 78 -----
Artichoke

treatment of hyperlipidaemia generally report positive results.
However, further rigorous clinical trials are required to
establish the benefit of globe artichoke leaf extract as a lipid-
and cholesterol-lowering agent. Hepatoprotective and
hepatoregenerating activities have been documented for
cynarin in vitro and in animals (rats). However, these effects
have not yet been documented in clinical studies.

Species (Family)

Cynara scolymus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Globe Artichoke.

Globe artichoke should not be confused with Jerusalem
artichoke, which is the tuber of Helianthus tuberosus L.

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2, and General Reference G41.

Acids Phenolic, up to 2%. Caffeic acid, mono- and dicaffeoyl-
quinic acid derivatives, e.g. cynarin (1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acids)
and chlorogenic acid (mono derivative).

Flavonoids 0.1-1%. Flavone glycosides, e.g. luteolin-7B-rutino-

side (scolymoside), luteolin-7B-p-glucoside and_ luteolin-4B-p-
glucoside.

Volatile oils  Sesquiterpenes -selinene and caryophyllene
(major); also eugenol, phenylacetaldehyde, decanal, oct-1-en-3-
one, hex-1-en-3-one, and non-trans-2-enal.

Other constituents Phytosterols (taraxasterol and f-taraxa-
sterol), tannins, glycolic and glyceric acids, sugars, inulin, enzymes
including peroxidases,” cynaropicrin and other sesquiterpene
lactones, e.g. grosheimin, cynarotriol.“ The root and fully
developed fruits and flowers are devoid of cynaropicrin; highest
content reported in young leaves.”

Food Use

Artichoke is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
artichoke can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the

Hydrolysable tamnins

or*
HOQC. y a~OR®
y 2 fs

Rt IR?

R! R? R° RY
chlorogenic acid H H H_— caffeoyl
(5-O-catfeoyl
quinic acid)
cynarin caffeoyl caffeoyl) H H
(1,3-dicaffeoyl
quinic acid)

Phenylpropanoids
Sore
HO’

caffeic acid

Sesquiterpene lactones

ot
‘CH.OH

ot

HO'

[e}
cynaropicrin

grosheimin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of artichoke.

----- PAGE 79 -----
Artichoke

final product.'©!® Previously, in the USA, artichoke leaves were
approved for use in alcoholic beverages only, with an average
maximum concentration of 0.0016% (16 ppm).(“*”

Herbal Use

Artichoke is stated to possess diuretic, choleretic, hypocholester-
olaemic, hypolipidaemic, and hepatostimulating properties.”
Modern use of artichoke is focused on its use in the treatment of
hyperlipidaemia, hyperlipoproteinaemia, non-ulcer dyspepsia and
conditions requiring an increase in choleresis. There is also
interest in the potential hepatoprotective properties of globe
artichoke, although this has not yet been tested in controlled
clinical trials." '?

Dosage

The German Commission E recommended an average daily dose
of 6g drug, or an equivalent dose of extract (based on the herb-to-
extract ratio) or other preparations, for dyspeptic problems.'C*
58) 4 recommended dosage regimen for liquid extract (1:2) is 3-
8 mL daily.“

Dosages used in clinical trials of globe artichoke leaf extract
have assessed the effects of dosages of up to 1.92 g daily in divided
doses for up to six months.‘?)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological properties have been documented for
artichoke leaf, including inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis,
hypolipidaemic, antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity. It
remains unclear which of the constituents of artichoke are
responsible for its pharmacological activities. The dicaffeoylquinic
acids, which include cynarin, are likely to be an important group
of constituents in this respect." °° The sesquiterpene lactones,
such as cynaropicrin, and flavonoids, such as luteolin glycoside,
may also exert biological effects.”

Figure 2. Artichoke (Cynara scolymus).

In vitro and animal studies

Hypolipidaemic, hypocholesterolaemic and choleretic activity
Hypolipidaemic, hypocholesterolaemic and choleretic activities
are well documented for globe artichoke leaf extract and
particularly for the constituent cynarin.“°'” Globe artichoke
leaf extract not only increases choleresis and, therefore, choles-
terol elimination, but also has been shown to inhibit cholesterol
biosynthesis."° Preparations of globe artichoke leaf extract
inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis in a concentration-dependent
manner in studies in cultured rat hepatocytes." '?
concentrations (<0.1 mg/mL) of globe artichoke extract achieved
around 20% inhibition, whereas 65% inhibition was noted with
concentrations of 1 mg/mL. Luteolin was considered to be one of
the most important constituents for this effect, and it was
suggested that a possible mechanism of action might be indirect
inhibition of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-
CoA)."® Other in vitro studies have documented a concentra-
tion-dependent inhibition of de novo cholesterol biosynthesis in
cultured rat and human hepatocytes for globe artichoke leaf
extract 0.03-0.1 mg/mL."

Several other experimental studies have documented lipid-
lowering effects for globe artichoke leaf extract and cynarin in
vivo."°'» A study in rats explored the hypocholesterolaemic,
hypolipidaemic and choleretic effects of purified (containing 46%

Low

reductase

caffeoylquinic acids, calculated as chlorogenic acid) and total
extracts of globe artichoke leaf (containing 19% caffeoylquinic

Figure 3 Artichoke.

Figure 4 Artichoke - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 80 -----
acids, calculated as chlorogenic acid). The purified extract was
found to be more potent than the total artichoke extract: purified
extract 25 mg/kg intraperitoneally reduced plasma triglyceride and
cholesterol concentrations by 33% and 45%, respectively, whereas
reductions of only 18% and 14%, respectively, were observed with
the total extract (100 mg/kg intraperitoneally).” Both purified
(25 mg/kg intraperitoneally) and total extract (200 mg/kg intraper-
itoneally) significantly enhanced bile secretion following treat-
ment, compared with baseline values; the increase in bile
seen with the purified extract was still statistically s
three hours after treatment. The more potent pharmacologica
activities observed with the purified extract were attributed to the
higher concentration of monocaffeoylquinic acids (e.g. chloro-
genic, neochlorogenic) compared with dicaffeoylquinic acids (e.g.
cynarin) present.

Another study investigated the effects of cynarin on total
cholesterol concentrations in serum and liver of rats given ethano
(6g/kg/day by gavage over three days). In rats given ethanol
alone, serum cholesterol concentrations rose significantly by 44%,
compared with controls (p < 0.01). Rats given ethanol plus
cynarin (30mg/kg intraperitoneally 30 minutes before gavage)
showed a significant reduction in serum cholesterol concentra-
tions, compared with controls (p < 0.05).

Antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity In vitro, a luteolin-
rich globe artichoke leaf aqueous extract (flavonoid content
around 0.4% w/w) retarded low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
oxidation in a concentration-dependent manner (determined by
a prolongation of the lag phase to conjugated diene formation).
The same tests carried out with the pure aglycone luteolin at
concentrations of 0.1-1 ftmol/L showed that this constituent had a
similar concentration-dependent effect on LDL oxidation in this
model. Luteolin-7-O-glucoside also demonstrated a concentra-
tion-dependent reduction in LDL oxidation, but was less potent
than luteolin.

Several in vitro and in vivo studies have investigated the
antioxidative and hepatoprotective properties of globe artichoke
leaf extracts, and their constituents, against liver cell damage
induced by different hepatotoxins.

The hepatoprotective effect of polyphenolic compounds
isolated from artichoke has been investigated in vitro using rat
hepatocytes. Cynarin was the only compound reported to
exhibit significant cytoprotective activity, with a lesser action
demonstrated by caffeic acid. A standardised extract of globe
artichoke (Hepar-SL forte) significantly inhibited the formation of
malondialdehyde induced by tert-butylhydroperoxide (t-BHP) in a
concentration-dependent manner within 40 minutes of incuba-
tion, compared with control.''*) The protective antioxidant effect
of globe artichoke was reported to be significant, compared with
control, even at a concentration of 1 ttg/mL. A reduction in ¢-BHP-
induced cell death with globe artichoke extract was also observed.
Further studies assessed the antioxidative and protective potential
of the same extract (Hepar-SL forte) in cultures of primary rat
hepatocytes exposed to t-BHP."” Incubation of cultured hepato-
cytes with globe artichoke extract and t-BHP inhibited ¢-BHP-
induced malondialdehyde formation in a concentration-dependent
manner. Globe artichoke extract was significantly effective,
compared with control, at concentrations down to 0.001 mg/mL.
Furthermore, concentrations of globe artichoke extract down to
0.005 mg/mL significantly enhanced hepatocyte survival. The
antioxidative effect of the extract was not affected by various
pretreatments (including tryptic digestion, boiling and acidifica-
tion), although it w:

nsitive to alkalinisation. Incubation with

Artichoke

the globe artichoke constituents chlorogenic acid and cynarin
resulted in significant inhibition, and incubation with both
compounds was reported to have a synergistic effect, although
an additive effect may
findings. Chlorogenic acid and cynarin were not solely responsible
for the antioxidant effect, as reduction of malondialdehyde
formation by the extract was at least twofold that seen with the
chlorogenic acid and cynarin.") The antioxidative and hepato-
protective potential of globe artichoke extract was confirmed in

other studies which also indicated that several constituents of the
)

© a more accurate description of the

extract may contribute to the effects.7°

The effects of globe artichoke leaf extract and its constituents
have also been investigated for activity against oxidative stress in
studies using human leukocytes.?" Globe artichoke leaf extract
demonstrated a concentration-dependent inhibition of oxidative
stress induced by several agents, such as hydrogen peroxide and
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate, that generate reactive oxygen
species. The constituents cynarin, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid
and luteolin also showed concentration-dependent inhibitory
activity in these models.

In vivo hepatoprotectivity against tetrachloromethane-induced
epatitis has been documented for globe artichoke leaf extract
(500 mg/kg) administered orally to rats 48 hours, 24 hours and one
our before intoxication.) Concentrations of liver transaminases
were significantly lower in rats given globe artichoke leaf extract,
compared with those in controls. A hepatoregenerating effect has
also been described for an aqueous extract of globe artichoke leaf
administered orally to rats for three weeks following partial
epatectomy.”) Regeneration was determined by stimulation of
mitosis and increased weight in the residual liver when animals
were sacrificed in globe artichoke-treated rats, compared with
controls. In a similar study, aqueous extract of globe artichoke leaf
(0.5 mL daily for five days preceding hepatectomy) was found to
more potent than a root extract.)

Clinical studies

Several clinical trials have explored the choleretic and hypolipi-
daemic properties of globe artichoke leaf extract, and its effects in
patients with symptoms of dyspepsia. A randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 20 male
volunteers as:

sed the choleretic effects of a single intraduodenal
dose (1.92 g in 300mL water) of the globe artichoke leaf extract
Hepar-SL forte.° Intraduodenal bile secretion, the primary
outcome variable, was measured using multichannel probes
starting 30 minutes after drug administration and continuing for
up to four hours afterwards. An increase in bile secretion was
observed in both groups; maximal increases for globe artichoke
leaf extract and placebo were 152% at 60 minutes after drug
administration, and 40% at 30 minutes, respectively. Differences
between globe artichoke leaf extract and placebo were statistically
significant at 30, 60 and 90 minutes after drug administration (p <
0.01) and at 120 and 150 minutes after drug administration (p <
0.05). In another randomised controlled trial, 60 patients with
dyspepsia received a combination preparation containing extracts
of globe artichoke 50mg, boldo (Peumus boldus) 30mg and
chelidonium (Chelidonium majus) 20mg per tablet, or placebo,
three times daily for 14 days.**) The volume of bile secreted,
measured using a duodenal probe, increased significantly in the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.01).
Also, an improvement in symptoms was reported for 50% of the
treatment group, compared with 38% of the placebo group. There
are also clinical studies in the older literature (some of which were

----- PAGE 81 -----
Artichoke

placebo-controlled trials, whereas others were open, uncontrolled
studies) which report choleretic effects with globe artichoke leaf

These trials have been
(10, 24, G50)

extract. summarised in several

reviews.

The effects of globe artichoke leaf extract have also been
monitored in several postmarketing surveillance (phase IV) studies
in patients with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints, includ-
ing dyspepsia,” functional biliary tract complaints, constipation
and gastric irritation.") The studies monitored the effects of
globe artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; one capsule contains
320 mg standardised aqueous extract; drug-extract ratio: 3.5 to
5.5:1) up to six capsules daily for six weeks''” or six months.”
Both studies reported improvements in clinical symptoms and
reductions in serum total cholesterol and triglyceride concentra-
tions, compared with baseline values. A subgroup analysis of 279
patients with at least three of five symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome reported significant reductions in the severity of
symptoms and favourable evaluations of overall effectiveness by
both physicians and participants.°® The findings from post-
marketing surveillance studies provide supporting data for the
effects of globe artichoke leaf extract, but these are open studies
and do not include a control group and, therefore, are not
designed to assess efficacy.

The efficacy of globe artichoke leaf extract in patients with
hyperlipoproteinaemia has been assessed in a randomised, dou!
blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial involving 143 patients
with initial total cholesterol concentrations of >7.3 mmol/L
(>280mg/dL).°” Participants received globe artichoke leaf
extract (CY450; drug-extract ratio: 25 to 35:1) 1800 mg daily
in two divided doses, or placebo, for six weeks. At the end of the
study, mean total cholesterol concentrations had decreased by
18.5% to 6.31 mmol/L and by 8.6% to 7.03 mmol/L in the CY450
and placebo groups, respectively (p < 0.0001). CY450 treatment
also led to a significant reduction in LDL cholesterol, compared
with placebo (p = 0.0001). There was no difference between
CY450 recipients and placebo recipients in blood concentrations
of the liver enzyme gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).

A published abstract reports the findings of a previous
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a globe
artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; 640 mg three times daily
for 12 weeks) involving 44 healthy volunteers. Mean baseline
total cholesterol concentrations for participants in this study were
low (placebo group: 203.0 mg/dL; globe artichoke extract group:
204.2 mg/dL). Subgroup analysis suggested lipid-lowering effects
with globe artichoke extract for participants with baseline total
cholesterol concentrations of >200 mg/dL. However, numbers of
participants included in this analysis were small. The study
indicates only that trials in patients with hyperlipoproteinaemia
are required.

As
administration of pressed globe artichoke juice (obtained from
fresh leaves and flower buds) 10 mL three times daily for up to 12
weeks to a total of 84 patients with secondary hyperlipidaemia
(total cholesterol >260mg/dL).°* After six weeks' treatment,
total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations
decreased, whereas high-density lipoprotein cholesterol tended to
increase. Another uncontrolled study involved the administration
of cynarin to 17 patients with familial type Ila or type IIb
hyperlipoproteinaemia for whom blood lipid concentrations were
maintained with dietary treatment alone.?” Cynarin was taken 15
minutes before meals at either 250 mg or 750 mg daily dose. Over a
period of three months, cynarin was reported to have no effect on
mean serum cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.” The

le-

ries of three open, uncontrolled studies involved the

results were in agreement with the findings of some previous
workers, but also in contrast to other studies that have reported
cynarin to be effective in lowering serum concentrations of
cholesterol and triglycerides when taken in daily doses ranging
from 60 mg to 1500 mg.?”

A Cochrane systematic review” of randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled studies of artichoke preparations for hyper-
cholesterolaemia included two studies (see above).{!>?” The
review concluded that there is limited evidence from randomised
controlled trials to support the use of artichoke leaf preparations
in hypercholesterolaemia and that such preparations cannot be
recommended as a treatment option.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
143 patients with hyperlipoproteinaemia reported a similar
frequency of adverse events for globe artichoke leaf extract
(CY450) and placebo groups.” A total of 28 adverse events were
reported during the study, 26 of which related to mild changes in
laboratory values. The relationship to the globe artichoke was
considered to be ‘unlikely’ in all cases.

Postmarketing surveillance (phase IV) studies have monitored
patients with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints receiving
treatment with globe artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; up to
1.92g daily for six weeks" or six months''”)). In one study
involving 533 patients with non-specific gastrointestinal com-
plaints, including dyspepsia, functional biliary tract complaints,
constipation and gastric irritation, seven adverse events (weak-
ness, hunger, flatulence) were reported (1.3% of participants).
No serious adverse events were reported. A second postmarketing
surveillance study involved 203 patients with symptoms of
dyspepsia who received globe artichoke leaf extract up to 1.92¢
daily for up to six months.” It was reported that no adverse
events were recorded during the study, and that the physi
overall judgement of tolerability was given as 'good' or ‘excellent’
in 98.5% of cases.

Allergic contact dermatitis, with cross-sensitivity to other
Compositae plants, has been documented for globe artichoke.°"
SS) A case of occupational contact urticaria syndrome in a 20-
year-old woman has been reported in association with globe
artichoke. The woman developed acute generalised urticaria,
angioedema of the hands, forearms and face, and respiratory
symptoms after handling globe artichokes. The clinical history
and results of skin-prick tests indicated that the woman had
developed type I allergy to globe artichoke antigen(s).°” An
isolated case of allergy to ingested globe artichoke has also been
described.

Cynaropicrin and other sesquiterpene lactones with allergenic
potential have been isolated from globe artichoke.°'°*) Purified
globe artichoke extract is more toxic than a total extract. LDso
values (rat, by intraperitoneal injection) have been documented as
greater than 1000 mg/kg (total extract) and 265 mg/kg (purified
extract).

clan's

Contra-indications, Warnings

Globe artichoke yields cynaropicrin, a potentially allergenic
quiterpene lactone.‘@*” Individuals with an existing hypersen-
sitivity to any member of the Compositae family may develop an
allergic reaction to globe artichoke.

se

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of artichoke to interact with other medicines

----- PAGE 82 -----
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or

opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of globe artichoke should be avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

Spark; Hepaclem; Hepax. Germany: Carmol Magen-Galle-
Darm; Cynarzym N; Gallexier; Gallexier. Hong Kong:
Hepatofalk. Italy: Colax; Digelax; Epagest. Malaysia: Dande-
lion Complex. Mexico: Chofabol; Hepedren; Ifuchol. Russia:
Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Pep6uon Kanan
2Keaueronnsie). Spain: Cynaro Bilina; Lipograsil; Menabil
Complex; Nico Hepatocyn. Switzerland: Bilifuge; Boldocy-
nara; Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Heparfelien;
Strath Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Tisane hepatique et
biliaire. UK: Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula; Boots Alternatives
Easy Digest. USA: Ultimate Antioxidant Formula.

References

1 Brand N. Cynara scolymus L. — Die Artischocke. Z Phytother 1990;

11: 169-175.
2 Hammouda FM et al. Quantitative determination of the active

constituents in Egyptian cultivated Cynara scolymus. Int ] Pharmacog

1993; 31: 299-304.

3 Kamel MY, Ghazy AM. Peroxidases of Cyanara scolymus (global
artichoke) leaves: purification and properties. Acta Biol Med Germ
1973; 31: 39-49.

4 Jouany JM et al. Dosage indirect de la cynaropicrine dans la Cynara

scolymus (Compositae) par libération de sa chaine latérale
hydroxyméthylacrylique. Plant Méd Phytothér 1975; 9: 72-78.

5 Barbetti P et al. Grosulfeimin and new related guaianolides from
Cynara scolymus L. Ars Pharmac 1992; 33: 433-439.

6 Schneider G, Thiele Kl. Die Verteilung des Bitterstoffes Cynaropicrin

in der Artischocke. Planta Med 1974; 26: 174-183.
7 Lietti A. Choleretic and cholesterol lowering properties of two
artichoke extracts. Fitoterapia 1977; 48: 153-158.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Artichoke

Adzet T et al. Hepatoprotective activity of polyphenolic compounds
from Cynara scolymus against CCl, toxicity in isolated rat
hepatocytes. J Nat Prod 1987; 50: 612-617.

Adzet T et al. Action of an artichoke extract against CCly-induced
heptotoxicity in rats. Acta Pharm Jugosl 1987; 37: 183-187.

Kraft K. Artichoke leaf extract — recent findings reflecting effects on
lipid metabolism, liver and gastrointestinal tracts. Phytomedicine
1997; 4: 369-378.

Fintelmann V, Menssen HG. Artichoke leaf extract. Current
knowledge concerning its efficacy as a lipid-reducer and antidyspeptic
agent. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1996; 136: 1405-1414.

Fintelmann V, Petrowicz O. Long-term administration of an artichoke
extract for dyspepsia symptoms. Results of an observational study.
Natura Med 1998; 13: 17-26.

Gebhardt R. Artischockenextrakt. In vitro Nachweis einer
Hemmwirkung auf die Cholesterin-Biosynthese. Med Welt 1995; 46:
348-350.

Gebhardt R. Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis in primary cultured
rat hepatocytes by artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) extracts. ]
Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998; 286: 1122-1128.

Petrowicz O et al. Effects of artichoke leaf extract (ALE) on
lipoprotein metabolism in vitro and in vivo. Atherosclerosis 1997; 129:
147.

Wojcicki J. Effect of 1,5-dicaffeylquinic acid (Cynarine) on cholesterol
levels in serum and liver of acute ethanol-treated rats. Drug Alcohol
Depend 1978; 3: 143-145.

Brown JE, Rice-Evans CA. Luteolin-rich artichoke extract protects
low density lipoprotein from oxidation in vitro. Free Radic Res 1998;
29: 247-255.

Gebhardt R. Protektive antioxidative Wirkungen von Artischocken-
extrakt an der Leberzelle. Med Welt 1995; 46: 393-395.

Gebhardt R. Antioxidative and protective properties of extracts from
leaves of the artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) against hydroperoxide-
induced oxidative stress in cultured rat hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 1997; 144: 279-286.

Gebhardt R, Fausel M. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective effects of
artichoke extracts and constituents in cultured rat hepatocytes.
Toxicology in Vitro 1997; 11: 669-672.

Perez-Garcia F et al. Activity of artichoke leaf extract on reactive
oxygen species in human leukocytes. Free Radic Res 2000; 33: 661—
665.

Maros T et al. Wirkungen der Cynara scolymus-Extrakte auf die
Regeneration der Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1966; 16: 127—
129.

Maros T et al. Wirkungen der Cynara scolymus-extrakte auf die
Regeneration der Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1968; 18: 884-
886.

Kirchhoff R e¢ al. Increase in choleresis by means of artichoke extract.
Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 107-115.

Kupke D e¢ al. Priifung der choleretischen Aktivitat eines pflanzlichen
Cholagogums. Z Allg Med 1991; 67: 1046-1058.

Walker A et al. Artichoke leaf extract reduces symptoms of irritable
bowel syndrome in a post-marketing surveillance study. Phytother Res
2001; 15: 58-61.

Englisch W et al. Efficacy of artichoke dry extract in patients with
hyperlipoproteinemia. Arzneim-Forsch/Drug Res 2000; 50: 260-265.
Dorn M. Improvement in raised lipid levels with artichoke juice
(Cynara scolymus L.). Br J Phytother 1995/96; 4: 21-26.

Heckers H et al. Inefficiency of cynarin as therapeutic regimen in
familial type II hyperlipoproteinaemia. Atherosclerosis 1977; 26: 249-
253.

Pittler MH et al. Artichoke leaf extract for treating
hypercholesterolaemia (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews issue 3, 2002. London: Macmillan.

Meding B. Allergic contact dermatitis from artichoke, Cynara
scolymus. Contact Dermatitis 1983; 9: 314.

Quirce § e¢ al. Occupational contact urticaria syndrome caused by
globe artichoke (Cynara scolymus). J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996; 97:
710-711.

Romano C et al. A case of allergy to globe artichoke and other clinical
cases of rare food allergy. J Invest Allergol Clin Immunol 2000; 10:
102-104.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Asafoetida

Asafoetida is commonly used in foods but little scientific
evidence is available to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
known pharmacologically active constituents, asafoetida
should not be taken in amounts exceeding those used in
foods.

Species (Family)
There are reportedly 172 species of Ferula. The main source is

believed to be from Ferula assafoetida L. and Ferula foetida
(Bunge) Regel.

Synonym(s)

Asafetida, Asant, Devil's Dung, Ferula foetida (Bunge) Regel,
Gum Asafetida

Part(s) Used

Oleo gum resin obtained by incising the living rhizomes and roots.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G59 and G62.

Gum fraction 25%. Glucose, galactose, L-arabinose, rhamnose
and glucuronic acid.

Resins 40-64%. Ferulic acid esters (60%), free ferulic acid
(1.3%), asaresinotannols and farnesiferols A, B and C, coumarin
derivatives (e.g. umbelliferone), coumarin-sesquiterpene com-
plexes (e.g. asacoumarin A and asacoumarin B).") Free ferulic
acid is converted to coumarin during dry distillation.

Volatile oils = 3-17%.
disulfides as major components, various monoterpenes.

The oleo gum resins of different Ferula species are not identical
and many papers have documented their phytochemistry,? 1?
reporting polysulfanes,?"'" complex acetylenes,® phenylpropa-
noids” and many sesquiterpene derivatives." *° *”)

C-3 prenylated 4-hydroxycoumarin derivatives (e.g. ferulenol)
are thought to represent the toxic principles in the species Ferula
communis,”

Sulfur-containing compounds with
a

Food Use

Asafoetida is used widely in foods. Asafoetida (essential oil, fluid
extract and gommo-oleoresin) is listed by the Council of Europe
as a source of natural food flavouring (category 5) (see Appendix
3).6!” Previously, asafoetida was approved for food use in the
USA.(C4)

Herbal Use

Asafoetida is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic and
expectorant properties. It has been used for chronic bronchitis,
pertussis, laryngismus stridulus, hysteria and specifically for
intestinal flatulent colic.'C%°”

Phenylpropanoids
HO’
ferulic acid

Coumarins

farnesiferol A

Saeco
AnKKK~ 0” So
OH

asacoumarin A

Disulfides
HgCH2C._H

ZN,
H3C S—S—C=CHCHs
H
2-butyl-1-propenyl disulfide

H3CH2C.

HsC—S* ‘s-S-C=cHCH,
H

1-(1-methylthiopropyl)-
1-propenyl disulfide

Figure 1 Selected constituents of asafoetida.

----- PAGE 84 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Powdered resin 0.3-1g three times dailyC*°”

Tincture of asafoetida (BPC 1949) 2-4mL

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Asafoetida has been reported to possess anticoagulant and
hypotensive properties,'“*" although the scientific basis for these
statements is not clear; coumarin constituents detected so far in
asafoetida do not possess minimum structural requirements for
anticoagulant activity. Asafoetida is an ingredient of a plant
mixture reported to have antidiabetic properties in  rats.'!)
However, when the individual components of the mixture were
studied asafoetida was devoid of antidiabetic effect with myrrh
and aloe gum extracts representing the active hypoglycaemic
principles.”

Oestrogenic activity in rats has been documented for carotane
sesquiterpenes and ferujol (a coumarin) isolated from Ferula
jaeschkeana."\>'®

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of asafoetida is limited and rigorous
randomised controlled clinical trials are required. A protective
action against fat-induced hyperlipidaemia has been documented
for asafoetida and attributed to the sulfur compounds in the
volatile oil fraction of the resin."'” Two double-blind studies have

reported significant effects for asafoetida in the treatment of
18, 19)

irritable bowel syndrome‘

Figure 2 Asafoetida (Ferula assafoetida).

Asafoetida

Side-effects, To

Asafoetida is documented to be relatively non-toxic; ingestion of
15g produced no untoward effects.'“*) A report of methaemo-
globinaemia has been associated with the administration of
asafoetida (in milk) to a five-week-old infant for the treatment of
colic." Asafoetida was found to exert an oxidising effect on fetal
haemoglobin but not on adult haemoglobin.

Coumarin constituents detected so far in asafoetida do not
possess minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘C*” for
anticoagulant activity.

A weak sister chromatid exchange-inducing effect in mouse
spermatogonia?” and clastogenicity in mouse spermatocytes”
has been documented for asafoetida. Chromosomal damage by
asafoetida has been associated with the coumarin constituents.

Toxic coumarin constituents of a related species, Ferula
communis, have been documented to reduce prothrombin
concentrations and to cause haemorrhaging in livestock.2*

Two other species, Ferula galbaniflua and Ferula rubicaulis, are
stated to contain a gum that is rubefacient and irritant, causing
contact dermatitis in sensitive individuals.(7 °C)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Asafoetida should not be given to infants because of the oxidising
effect on fetal haemoglobin resulting in methaemoglobinaemia.?”
The gum of some Ferula species is reported to be irritant and
therefore may cause gastrointestinal irritation or induce contact
dermatitis in some individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of asafoetida to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Asafoetida has a folkloric reputation
as an abortifacient and an emmenagogue.(“*” However the use of
asafoetida during pregnancy is probably acceptable, provided
doses do not exceed amounts normally ingested in foods. In view
of the toxic effect to infants (e.g. methaemoglobinaemia),
asafoetida should be avoided during breastfeeding.

Figure 3 Asafoetida — dried drug substance (resin).

A

----- PAGE 85 -----
Asafoetida

India: Tummy Ease. South Africa: Entressdruppels HM;
Stuidruppels. Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence. UK: Daily
Tension & Strain Relief; Nerfood Tablets.

References

1 Kajimoto T e¢ al. Sesquiterpenoid and disulphide derivatives from
Ferula assa-foetida. Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 1761-1763.

2 Dawidar A-A et al. Marmaricin, a new sesquiterpenoid coumarin
from Ferula marmarica L. Chem Pharm Bull 1979; 27: 3153-3155.

3. de Pascual Teresa J et al. Complex acetylenes from the roots of Ferula
communis. Planta Med 1986; 52: 458-462.

4 Miski M. Fercoperol, an unusual cyclic-endoperoxynerolidol
derivative from Ferula communis subsp. communis. ] Nat Prod 1986;
49: 916-918.

5 Garg SN et al. Feruginidin and ferugin, two new sesquiterpenoids
based on the carotane skeleton from Ferula jaeschkeana. ] Nat Prod
1987; 50: 253-255.

6 Garg SN et al. New sesquiterpenes from Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta
Med 1987; 53: 341-342.

7 Gonzalez AG et al. Phenylpropanoid and stilbene compounds from
Ferula latipinna. Planta Med 1988; 54: 184-185.

8 Miski M. New daucane and germacrane esters from Ferula orientalis
var. orientalis. | Nat Prod 1987; 50: 829-834.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

Miski M. New daucane esters from Ferula tingitana. ] Nat Prod 1986;
49: 657-660.

Samimi MN and Unger W. Die gummiharze afghanischer asa foetida-
liefernder ferula-arten. Beobachtungen zur herkunft und qualitat
afghanischer asa foetida. Planta Med 1979; 36: 128-133.

Zhi-da M et al. Polysulfanes in the volatile oils of Ferula species.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 300-302.

Valle MG et al. Prenylated coumarins and sesquiterpenoids from
Ferula communis. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 253-256.

Al-Awadi FM et al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.
Singh MM et al. Contraceptive efficacy and hormonal profile of
ferujol: a new coumarin from Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta Med 1985;
S1: 268-270.

Singh MM et al. Antifertility and hormonal properties of certain
carotane sesquiterpenes of Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta Med 1988; 54:
492-494.

Bordia A, Arora SK. The effect of essential oil (active principle) of
asafoetida on alimentary lipemia. Indian ] Med Res 1975; 63: 707-
711.

Rahlfs VW, Méssinger P. Zur Behandlung des Colon irritabile.
Arzneimittelforschung 1976; 26: 2230-2234.

Rahlfs VW, Méssinger P. Asafoetida bei colon irritabile. Dtsch med
Wochenschr 1978; 104: 140-143.

Kelly KJ et al. Methemoglobinemia in an infant treated with the folk
remedy glycerited asafoetida. Pediatrics 1984; 73: 717-719.

Abraham SK, Kesavan PC. Genotoxicity of garlic, turmeric and
asafoetida in mice. Mutat Res 1984; 136: 85-88.

Walia K. Effect of asafoetida (7-hydroxycoumarin) on mouse
spermatocytes. Cytologia 1973; 38: 719-724.

Aragno M et al. Experimental studies on the toxicity of Ferula
communis in the rat. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1973; 59:
399-402.

----- PAGE 86 -----
- Avens

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited phytochemical or pharmacological data are available
for avens, although reported tannin constituents would
indicate an astringent action thus supporting the traditional
use in diarrhoea and haemorrhage. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, excessive use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Geum urbanum L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Benedict's Herb, Colewort, Geum, Herb Bennet, Wood Avens

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1983'°”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

G37)

Avens is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40, G49, G64.

Limited information is available on the herb. Constituents
reported include bitter principles, resin, tannins and volatile oil.

Other plant parts

The root has been more extensively studied and is reported to
contain a phenolic glycoside (gein), yielding eugenol as the
aglycone and vicianose (disaccharide) as the sugar component;\”)
30% tannin, including gallic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids
(pseudotannins generally associated with condensed tannins);“?
a bitter substance, a flavonoid, and volatile oil.

Food Use

Avens is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that avens
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘@!

Phenylpropanoids

“Or
HO
eugenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of avens.

Herbal Use

Avens is stated to possess antidiarrhoeal, antihaemorrhagic, and
febrifugal properties. It has been used for diarrhoea, catarrhal
colitis, passive uterine haemorrhage, intermittent fevers, and
specifically for ulcerative colitis.'(C7°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A 20% aqueous decoction of avens, administered by intravenous
injection, has been reported to produce a reduction in blood

Figure 3 Avens — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 87 -----
Avens

pressure in cats.”

astringent properties.

Tannins are generally known to possess

Clinical studies

None documented.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the reported tannin constituents and the lack of toxicity
data, it is advisable to avoid excessive use of avens.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation Avens is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.“ In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicological data, the use of avens during
pregnancy should be avoided.

References

1 Psenak M et al. Biochemical Study on Geum urbanum. Planta Med
1970; 19: 154-159.

2. Petkov V. Plants and hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

----- PAGE 88 -----
7 Bayberry

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for bayberry.
Documented tannin constituents justify some of the herbal
uses. In addition, mineralocorticoid activity has been reported
for one of the triterpene constituents. In view of this and the
tannin constituents, excessive use of bayberry should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Myrica cerifera L. (Myricaceae)

Synonym(s)

Candleberry Bark, Myrica, Southern Bayberry, Southern Wax
Myrtle, Wax Myrtle Bark

Part(s) Used
Root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41, G48 and Gé4.

Flavonoids Myricitrin.

Tannins 3.9% (bark), 34.82% (total aqueous extract).

Terpenoids Myricadiol, taraxerol and taraxerone.'”

Other constituents Albumen, red dye, gum, resin, starch, wax
containing palmitic, myristic and lauric acid esters.

Food Use

Bayberry is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Bayberry is stated to possess antipyretic, circulatory stimulant,
emetic and mild diaphoretic properties. It has been used for
diarrhoea, colds and specifically for mucous colitis. An infusion
has been used as a gargle for a sore throat, and as a douche for
leucorrhoea. Powdered root bark has been applied topically for
the management of indolent ulcers.(7 4" °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Powdered bark 0.6-2.0g by infusion or decoction three times
daily.'C”

Liquid extract 0.6-2.0mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Myricitrin has been reported to exhibit choleretic, bactericidal,

paramecicidal, and spermatocidal activity; myricadiol has miner-
Gal

alocorticoid activity.“*? Tannins are known to possess astringent

properties.

Figure 1 Bayberry (Myrica cerifera).

Figure 2 Bayberry — dried drug substance (root bark).

----- PAGE 89 -----
Bayberry

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical investigation with bayberry and rigorous
randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A total aqueous extract, tannin fraction, and tannin-free fraction
from bayberry were all reported to produce tumours in NIH black
rats, following weekly subcutaneous injections for up to 75
weeks.) The number of tumours that developed were stated to
be statistically significant for the tannin fraction and tannin-free
fraction. Analysis of the tannin-free fraction revealed the presence
of four phenolic compounds, one of which was identified as
myricitrin. No tumours were reported in a later study, in which
rats were given subcutaneous injections of total aqueous extract
for 78 weeks.

Large doses may cause typical mineralocorticoid side-effects
(e.g. sodium and water retention, hypertension).

Contra-indications, Warnings
Excessive use of tannin-containing herbs is not recommended.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bayberry to interact with other medicines

administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects (e.g. steroids or those with hypo-/hypertensive
activity), should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of bayberry has not been
established. In view of the possible mineralocorticoid activity and
the reported carcinogenic activity, the use of bayberry during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: EP&C Essence; Peerless Composition Essence.

References

1 Paul BD et al. Isolation of myricadiol, myricitrin, taraxerol, and
taraxerone from Myrica cerifera L. root bark. J Pharm Sci 1974; 63:
958-959,

2. Kapadia GJ et al. Carcinogenicity of Camellia sinensis (tea) and some
tannin-containing folk medicinal herbs administered subcutaneously
in rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1976; 57: 207-209.

3. Kapadia GJ et al. Carcinogenicity of some folk medicinal herbs in
rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1978; 60: 683-686.

----- PAGE 90 -----
a Bilberry

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of bilberry is well documented and there is
good evidence that the anthocyanin constituents are
responsible for the pharmacological effects of bilberry.

Data from in vitro and animal studies provide supportive
evidence for some of the uses of bilberry. There have been
several clinical studies investigating the effects of bilberry in a
range of conditions. However, many studies have been
uncontrolled, involved only small numbers of patients and
had other methodological flaws. Further, well-designed
clinical trials are required to establish the efficacy of bilberry.

There are some limited toxicity and safety data for bilberry
which together with data on adverse effects reported in
clinical trials provide some support for the safety of bilberry
when used at recommended doses in the short term.
However, further data on the long-term safety of bilberry use
are required and, therefore, excessive use of bilberry should
be avoided.

Several of the intended uses of bilberry are not suitable for
unsupervised self-treatment.

Species (Family)

Vaccinium myrtillus L. (Ericaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blueberry, bogberry, huckleberry, Myrtilus niger Gilib., whortle-
berry

Part(s) Used

Fruit (berries), leaves

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'C
Martindale 35th edition (Myrtillus)‘“*
Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Bilberry is not included in the GSL.

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G55.

Berries

Flavonoid glycosides Anthocyanins (particularly glycosides of
delphinidin, cyanidin, petunidin, peonidin, malvidin),“"” querce-
tin-3-glucuronide and hyperoside.”?)

Polyphenols Catechin, epicatechin and tannins.

Other constituents Pectins and vitamin C.

Leaves

Flavonoids
trin).{)

Quercetin and its glycosides (hyperoside, querci-

Phenolic acids Caffeic, p-coumaric, p-hydroxybenzoic, proto-
catechuic and melilotic.

Other constituents Tannins and iridoids.'?

Food Use

Bilberries are used in foods.” Bilberry is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N1). This
category indicates that there are no restrictions on the use of

bilberry in foods.'¢!®

Flavonoids

(+)-catechin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bilberry.

Figure 2 Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus).

----- PAGE 91 -----
Bilberry

Herbal Use

Bilberry is stated to possess astringent, tonic and antiseptic
properties and has traditionally been used in the treatment of
diarrhoea, dysentry, haemorrhoids, gastrointestinal inflamma-
tions, mouth infections, scurvy and urinary complaints.” Tt has
also been used in diabetes, gout and rheumatism and applied
locally in eye inflammation, burns and skin infections.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried fruit 20-60 g daily as a decoction for the treatment of
diarrhoea.‘©”)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for
bilberry, including ophthalmic activity and anti-inflammatory,
wound-healing, anti-ulcer, anti-atherosclerotic and vasoprotective
properties.”

In vitro and animal studies

An anthocyanidin extract of V. myrtillus has been reported to act
as a superoxide anion scavenger’) and as an inhibitor of lipid
peroxidation in rat liver microsomes‘? **®
in vivo,” and to inhibit potassium ion loss induced by free radicals
in human erythrocytes." V. myrtillus extract is stated to have a
potent protective antioxidant action on human low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs) in vitro during copper-mediated oxidation.”
Oxidative activity is recognised as a major process in tissue damage
in a variety of pathological conditions, such as atherosclerosis and
carcinogenesis. In addition, oxidative stress is thought to be
involved in brain ageing and age-related neurodegenerative disease.
A study in rats reported that, compared with rats fed a control diet,
dietary supplementation of blueberry (bilberry) extract for eight
weeks reversed age-related deficits in several neuronal and
behavioural parameters, such as enhancement of dopamine release
from striatal slices and a water maze performance test.

V. myrtillus anthocyanins inhibit aggregation of human
platelets in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner” and, in
rats, V. myrtillus anthocyanins administered orally at doses
ranging from 5-400 mg/kg prolong bleeding time markedly.‘!?
Inhibition of platelet aggregation has also been reported in

’ and in mouse liver tissue

humans treated with V. myrtillus anthocyanins (see Clinical
studies)“

In vitro inhibition of elastase, a proteolytic enzyme involved
with elastic fibre and connective tissue degeneration and with
some pathological vascular conditions, has been demonstrated in
studies using anthocyanins extracted from V. myrtillus.”

The hypolipidaemic activity of oral administration of extracts
of V. myrtillus leaves has been demonstrated in rats."'°!4 In
genetically hyperlipidaemic rats, plasma triglyceride and choles-
terol concentrations, but not free fatty acids, decreased signifi-
cantly." In streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, plasma glucose
concentrations as well as plasma triglyceride concentrations
decreased significantly compared with values in control rats.‘
In further experiments using bilberry and clofibrate, both
preparations reduced plasma triglyceride concentrations in a
dose-dependent manner in rats fed a hyperlipidaemic diet and in
ethanol-treated normolipidaemic rats." Bilberry, however, did
not prevent fructose-elicited increases in plasma _ triglyceride
concentrations. Other studies in glucose-loaded mice failed to
demonstrate hypoglycaemic activity following oral administration
of bilberry leaf extract!)

Several in vitro studies have demonstrated the relaxing effects of
V. myrtillus anthocyanins on isolated vascular smooth muscle
preparations, including the thoracic vein and splenic and coronary
arteries."°"'® There is evidence that the mechanism for this
smooth muscle relaxant effect is via stimulation of prostaglandin
release within vessel walls.’

Effects of V. myrtillus anthocyanins on enhancing arterial
vasomotion (rhythmic variation of arteriole diameter in the
microvasular network which influences microvascular blood flow
and the formation of interstitial fluid) have been shown in
experimental models, including the cheek pouch microcirculation
of hamsters.?° This model has also been used to investigate the
effects of V. myrtillus anthocyanins on ischaemia—reperfusion
injury.°”) Oral administration for two and four weeks of
Myrtocyan, a commercially available product comprising bilberry
anthocyanin complex, reduced the increase in capillary perme-
ability, decreased leukocyte adhesion and improved capillary
perfusion compared with controls. In rats, oral administration of
V. myrtillus anthocyanins for 12 days before the induction of
hypertension (by ligature of the abdominal aorta) limited the
increase in vascular permeability and maintained a normal blood—
brain barrier permeability.°”

Components of bilberry exhibit potential anticarcinogenic
activity in vitro as demonstrated by inhibition of the induction

Figure 3 Bilberry — dried drug substance (leaves).

Figure 4 Bilberry — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 92 -----
of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) by the tumour promoter
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (TPA).?

Myrtocyan and one of its anthocyanin constituents have
displayed anti-ulcer activity in various experimental models of
acute gastric ulcer and in chronic ulcer induced by acetic acid.?”
The mechanism for this may be by potentiation of the defensive
barriers of the gastrointestinal mucosa, such as the secretion of
gastric mucus or stimulation of cellular regeneration."

Extracts of V. myrtillus leaves have antibacterial activity against
several species, including Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia
coli, as determined by the hole-plate diffusion method and the
microdilution broth method.?° Y, myrtillus fruit extracts were

less active.

The pharmacokinetics of V. myrtillus anthocyanins have been
studied in rats.°% Following a single oral administration, plasma
anthocyanin concentrations peaked after 15 minute:
rapidly within two hours. No hepatic first-pass
observed; elimination occurred mostly through the urine and bile.

and declined

effect was

Clinical studies

Clinical studies with extracts of V. myrtillus fruits (berries) have
focused mainly on its therapeutic applications in certain
ophthalmological conditions and in altered microcirculation and
peripheral venous insufficiency.”

A study involving 30 healthy subjects with normal platelet
aggregation investigated the effects of administration of V.
myrtillus anthocyanins (Myrtocyan) (480mg) daily, ascorbic acid
3g daily and V. myrtillus anthocyanins plus ascorbic acid on
collagen- and ADP-induced platelet aggregation."!" Platelet
aggregation in blood samples taken from participants after 30
and 60 days' treatment was reduced in all subjects compared with
baseline values. The reduction in platelet aggregation was greater
in subjects who received V. myrtillus anthocyanins alone than in
those who received ascorbic acid alone and was most marked in
subjects who received both preparations. Platelet aggregation
returned to baseline values when tested 120 days after disconti-
nuation of treatment.”

Early studies involving healthy subjects and patients with visual
disorders who received V. myrtillus extracts alone or in
combination with B-carotene and vitamin E reported improve-
ments in night vision and faster adjustment to darkness and
restoration of visual acuity following exposure to a bright flash of
light." Other studies reported improvements in retinal sensitivity
and the visual field in patients with myopia or glaucoma following
short- or long-term (six months) treatment with V. myrtillus
anthocyanins. included a control
group, and so the observed effects cannot be attributed to bilberry
treatment. Other uncontrolled studies in small numbers of
patients with retinal pathologies have reported improvements in
retinal function, compared with pretreatment values (e.g. ref. 27).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 40
patients with diabetic and/or hypertensive retinopathy received
Myrtocyan (160mg) twice daily or placebo for one month.”® At
the end of the study, the placebo group received Myrtocyan for one
month. It was reported that 77-90% of treated patients
experienced improvement compared with the pretreatment period,
as determined by ophthalmoscopy and fluorescein fundus
angiography.) However, there does not appear to have been a
statistical comparison between the treatment and placebo groups.
A similar placebo-controlled trial involving 40 patients with early-
phase diabetic retinopathy who received Myrtocyan for 12 months
also reported improvements in Myrtocyan-treated patients.?”

) However, none of these studi

Bilberry

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 51 patients with
mild senile cortical cataract who received V. myrtillus anthocya-
nins plus vitamin E twice daily for four months, treated patients
showed significant improvements in lens opacity compared with
placebo recipients.°”

Studies involving patients with peripheral vascular disorders of
various origins are stated to have demonstrated clinical benefits
with V. myrtillus extracts.) Other studies in patients with
ulcerative dermatitis secondary to post-thrombotic or venous
capillary fragility secondary to liver disorders and
other conditions, or chronic venous insufficiency have been
reported to have shown improvements in clinical signs and
symptoms.) However, several of these studies appear to have
been uncontrolled (e.g. refs 31-33) and/or included only small
numbers of patients (e.g. refs 31 and 32). A double-blind, placebo-
controlled study involving 47 patients with peripheral vascular
disorders reported reductions in subjective symptoms, such as
paraesthesia, pain and heaviness and improved oedema in patients
treated with Myrtocyan (480 mg/day) for 30 days.” A single-blind
study involving 60 patients with venous insufficiency who received
Myrtocyan (480mg/day) or placebo for 30 days reported
significant improvements in oedema, paraesthesia, cramp-like
pain and pressure sensation in Myrtocyan-treated patients
compared with pretreatment values in these patients.”

V. myrtillus anthocyanins have been investigated in a variety of
other disordei

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of V.
myrtillus anthocyanins (320 mg/day) taken for three days before
menstruation was conducted involving 30 patients with chronic
primary dysmenorrhoea.” Significant differences between the
active treatment and placebo groups were reported for several
symptoms investigated, including nausea and vomiting and breast
tenderness; there was no effect on headache.

In a trial involving 60 patients who had undergone haemor-
rhoidectomy, participants were randomised to receive V. myrtillus
anthocyanins (320-480 mg/day) postoperatively in addition to
usual medical care or to no additional treatment. Reductions in
itch and oedema occurred in bilberry recipients, but there were no
effects on other symptoms.)

Other studies, all of which were uncontrolled, have reported
beneficial effects following administration of V. myrtillus extracts
in patients with fibrocystic mastopathy®® and type II diabetes
mellitus,°” in infantile dyspepsia®® and in pregnant women with
lower limb venous insufficiency and acute-phase haemor-
rhoids.°”

varicose sta

Side-effects, Toxicity

A review of clinical trials of V. myrtillus extracts stated that no
adverse effects had been observed, even following prolonged
‘) However, most trials involved relatively small
numbers of patients and, therefore, would only be able to detect
very common acute adverse effects.

The same review summarised the results of an unpublished
postmarketing surveillance study which had involved 2295 subjects
who had taken Myrtocyan, usually 160mg twice daily for 1-2
months, for lower limb venous insufficiency, capillary fragility,
functional changes in retinal microcirculation or haemorrhoids.
Ninety-four subjects reported side-effects, mainly relating to the
skin and gastrointestinal and nervous systems.”

Long-term consumption of bilberry leaves may lead to toxicity.
Chronic administration of doses of 1.5 g/kg per day or more to
animals has been reported to be fatal.'©?)

treatment.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Bilberry

Animal toxicity data indicate that in mice and rats, the LD so for
Myrtocyan is over 2g/kg and, in dogs, single doses of 3 g/kg
produced no adverse effects other than marked darkening of urine
and faeces (demonstrating absorption). Oral daily doses to rats
and dogs of 125-500 mg/kg and 80-320 mg/kg, respectively, for six
months did not induce mortality or toxic effects.” Pharmaco-
kinetic studies of V. mzyrtillus anthocyanins in rats demonstrated
that anthocyanins are removed rapidly from the systemic
circulation within two hours of oral administration.°%

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bilberry to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. For example, there is
evidence from preclinical studies that V. myrtillus anthocyanins
inhibit platelet aggregation and prolong bleeding time, although
clinical evidence is limited. It is not known whether or not the use
of bilberry preparations concurrently with antiplatelet or antic-
oagulant agents carries an increased risk of bleeding; concurrent
use of bilberry with such agents, and initiation or cessation of
bilberry treatments, should be monitored

Pregnancy and lactation In an uncontrolled study, V. myrtillus
anthocyanin extract (Tegens) (80 or 160 mg) twice or three times
daily for three months was administered to pregnant women with
lower limb venous insufficiency and acute-phase haemorrhoids
with no apparent adverse effects." However, the safety of
bilberry has not been established and, in view of the lack of
toxicity data, the use of bilberry during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Italy: Alvear con Ginseng; Angioton; Api Baby; Bebimix;
Biolactine; Capill; Dermilia Flebozin; Evamilk; Memovisus;
Mirtilene; Mirtilux; Mirtilux; Neomyrt Plus; Nerex; Pik Gel;
Retinovit; Tussol; Ultravisin; Varicofit. Netherlands: Difrarel.
Spain: Antomiopic; Mirtilus. UK: I-Sight, Nature's Garden; Se-
Power. USA: Bilbery 40mg; Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend;
Healthy Eyes; Mental Clarity; My Favorite Multiple Iron-Free;
My Favorite Multiple Original; My Favorite Multiple Prime
Multi Vitamin; My Favorite Multiple Take One; My Favorite
Multiple Take One Iron-Free; Ultimate Antioxidant Formula;
Ocusense.

References

1

2

10

cae

12

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Vaccinium myrtillus L. Fitoterapia 1996;
66: 3-29.

Di Pierro K Morazzoni P. Reaping the benefits: the role of two edible
plants (Vaccinium myrtillus and Glycine max). Proceedings of the
Herbal Medicine in the New Millennium Conference, Lismore, NSW,
Australia, 1999: 146-150.

Fraisse D et al. Composition polyphénolique de la feuille de myrtille.
Ann Pharm Fr 1996; 54: 280-283.

Dombrowicz E et al. Phenolic acids in leaves of Arctostaphylos uva
ursi L., Vaccinium vitis idaea L. and Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie
1991; 46: 680-681.

Martin-Aragon S et al. In vitro and in vivo antioxidant properties of
Vaccinium myrtillus. Pharm Biol 1999; 37: 109-113.

Martin-Aragon S et al. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium myrtillus L.
Phytother Res 1998; 12 (Suppl. Suppl.): $104-S106.

Laplaud PM et al. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium myrtillus extract
on human low-density lipoproteins in vitro: initial observations. Fund
Clin Pharmacol 1997; 11: 35-40.

Joseph JA et al. Reversals of age-related declines in neuronal signal
transduction, cognitive, and motor behavioral deficits with blueberry,
spinach, or strawberry dietary supplementation. J Neurosci 1999; 19:
8114-8121.

Bottecchia D et al. Preliminary report on the inhibitory effect of
Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on platelet aggregation and clot
retraction. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 3-8.

Morazzoni P, Magistretti MJ. Activity of Myrtocyan, an anthocyanin
complex from Vaccinium myrtillus (VMA), on platelet aggregation
and adhesiveness. Fitoterapia 1990; 61: 13-21.

Pulliero G et al. Ex vivo study of the inhibitory effects of Vaccinium
myrtillus anthocyanosides on human platelet aggregation. Fitoterapia
1989; 60: 69-75.

Jonadet M et al. Anthocyanosides extraits de Vitis vinifera, de Vaccinium
myrtillus et de Pinus maritimus. J Pharm Belg 1983; 38: 41-46.
Cignarella A et al. Hypolipidaemic activity of Vaccinium myrtillus
leaves on a new model of genetically hyperlipidaemic rat. Planta Med
1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): AS81—A582.

Cignarella A et al. Novel lipid-lowering properties of Vaccinium
myrtillus L. leaves, a traditional antidiabetic treatment, in several
models of rat dyslipidaemia: a comparison with clofibrate. Thromb
Res 1996; 84: 311-322.

Neef H et al. Hypogylcaemic activity of selected European plants.
Phytother Res 1995; 9: 45-48.

Bettini V et al. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
vascular smooth muscle. Fitoterapia 1984; 55: 265-272.

Bettini V et al. Interactions between Vaccinium myrtillus
anthocyanosides and serotonin on splenic artery smooth muscle.
Fitoterapia 1984; 55: 201-208.

Bettini V et al. Mechanical responses of isolated coronary arteries to
barium in the presence of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides.
Fitoterapia 1985; 56: 3-10.

Morazzoni P, Magistretti MJ. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus
anthocyanosides on prostacyclin-like activity in rat arterial tissue.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 11-14.

Colantuoni A et al. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
arterial vasomotion. Arzneimittelforschung 1991; 41: 905-909.
Bertuglia S et al. Effect of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
ischaemia reperfusion injury in hamster cheek pouch microcirculation.
Pharmacol Res 1995; 31: 183-187.

Detre Z et al. Studies on vascular permeability in hypertension: action
of anthocyanosides. Clin Physiol Biochem 1986; 4: 143-149.
Bomser J e¢ al. In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts from
Vaccinium species. Planta Med 1996; 62: 212-216.

Magistretti MJ et al. Antiulcer activity of an anthocyanidin from
Vaccinium myrtillus. Arzneimittelforschung 1988; 38: 686-690.
Brantner A, Grein E. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts used
externally in traditional medicine. J Ethnopharmacol 1994; 44: 35-40.
Morazzoni P et al. Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides
pharmacokinetics in rats. Arzgneimmittelforschung 1991, 41: 128-131.
Forte R et al. Fitotherapy and ophthalmology: considerations on
dynamized myrtillus retinal effects with low luminance visual acuity.
Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1996; 122: 325-333.

----- PAGE 94 -----
28

29

30

31

32

33

Perossini M et al. Diabetic and hypertensive retinopathy therapy with
Vaccinium myrtillus anthocianosides (Tegens) double-blind placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1988; 113: 1173-1190.
Repossi P et al. The role of anthocyanosides on vascular permeability
in diabetic retinopathy. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1987; 113: 357-361.
Bravetti GO et al. Preventive medical treatment of senile cataract with
vitamin E and Vaccinium myrtillus anthocianosides: clinical
evaluation. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1989; 115: 109-116.

Coget J, Merlen JE. Etude clinique d'un nouvel agent de protection
vasculaire le difrarel 20, composé d'anthocyanosides extraits du
Vaccinum myrtillus. Phlebologie 1968; 21: 221-228.

Piovella F et al. Impiego di antocianosidi da Vaccinium myrtillus al
25% come antocianidine nel trattamento della diatesi emorragica da
deficit dell'emostasi primaria. Gaz Med It 1981; 140: 445-449.

Tori A, D'Errico F. Gli antocianosidi da Vaccinium myrtillus nella
cura delle flebopatie da stasi degli arti inferiori. Gaz Med It 1980; 139:
217-224.

34

36

37

38

39

Bilberry

Colombo D, Vescovini R. Studio clinico controllato sull'efficacia degli
antocianosidi del mirtillo cel trattamento della dismenorrea
essenziale. Giorn It Ost Gin 1985; 7: 1033-1038.

Pezzangora V et al. La terapia medica con antocianosidi del mirtillo
nei pazienti operati di emorroidectomia. Gaz Med It 1984; 143: 405-
409.

Leonardi M. Il trattamento della mastopatia fibrosa con antocianosidi
di mirtillo. Minerva Ginecol 1993; 45: 617-621.

Ionescu-Tirgoviste C et al. Efectul unui amestec pe plante asupra
echilibrului metabolic la bolnavii cu diabet zaharat de tip 2. Med
Intern 1989; 41: 185-192.

Tolan L et al. Utilizarea prafului de afine in dispepsiile sugarului.
Pediatria 1969; 18: 375-379.

Teglio L et al. Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides in the treatment

of venous insufficiency of inferior limbs and acute piles in pregnancy.
Quaderni Clin Osterica Ginecol 1987; 42: 221-231.

----- PAGE 95 -----
= Bloodroot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Bloodroot is characterised by isoquinoline alkaloid
constituents (benzophenanthridine-type), predominantly
sanguinarine. A wide range of pharmacological activities has
been documented for this class of compounds including
antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antihistaminic, cardiotonic
and antiplaque. Other benzophenanthridine alkaloids have
been associated with cytotoxic activities. However, recent
interest over the potential use of bloodroot in oral hygiene
has stimulated considerable research into both sanguinarine
and bloodroot extracts. Results have indicated that products
such as oral rinses and toothpastes containing either
sanguinaria extracts or sanguinarine may be of value in dental
hygiene.

Species (Family)

Sanguinaria canadensis L. (Papaveraceae)

Synonym(s)

Red Indian Paint, Red Root, Sanguinaria, S$. australis Greene, S.
canadensis var. rotundifolia (Greene) Fedde, S. dilleniana Greene,
Tetterwort

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 198307)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Alkaloids

0.
See
fe)
(S)

OR?
R! Re
sanguinarine —CH,—
chelerythrine CHs CHs

protopine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bloodroot.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Bloodroot is not included in the GSL.‘“”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G41.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline type. 3.0-7.0%.'? Sanguinarine (approx.
1%), sanguidimerine, chelerythrine, protopine; others include
oxysanguinarine, &- and B-allocryptopine, sanguilutine, dihydro-
sanguilutine, berberine, coptisine and homochelidonine.

Other constituents Resin, starch, organic acids (citric, malic).
Alkaloid content of other plant parts recorded as 0.08% (leaf),
1.8% (root).

Food Use

Bloodroot is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
bloodroot can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an

: . (G16
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(©'?

Herbal Use

Bloodroot is stated to act as an expectorant, spasmolytic, emetic,
cathartic, antiseptic, cardioactive, topical irritant and escharotic
(scab-producing). Traditionally it is indicated for bronchitis
(subacute or chronic), asthma, croup, laryngitis, pharyngitis,
deficient capillary circulation, nasal polyps (as a snuff), and
specifically for asthma and bronchitis with feeble peripheral

circulation.“©”

Figure 2 Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis).

----- PAGE 96 -----
Figure 3 Bloodroot - dried drug substance (rhizome).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Rhizome 0.06-0.5 g (1-2 g for emetic dose) three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.06-0.3 mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) (1-2 mL for
emetic dose) three times daily.“©”

Tincture 0.3-2 mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) (2-8 mL for emetic dose)
three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

Activities documented for bloodroot are principally attributable to
the isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, in particular sanguinarine.
Interest has focused on the use of sanguinarine in dental hygiene
products. Unless otherwise stated, the following actions refer to
sanguinarine.

In vitro and animal studies

Considerable antimicrobial activity has been documented against
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, Candida and
dermatophytes (fungi), and Trichomonas (protozoa). In addi-
tion, anti-inflammatory activity has been described against
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema."

Prolongation of the ventricular refractory period has been
attributed to an inhibition of NatK* ATPase.‘+*) However, a
single intravenous injection of sanguinarine to anaesthetised dogs
reportedly exerted no effect on cardiovascular parameters
monitored.

In vitro inhibition of bone resorption and collagenase has been
documented.”

Clinical studies

Many studies have investigated the efficacy of bloodroot extracts
in oral hygiene.” Preparations containing bloodroot extracts,
such as oral rinses and toothpastes, have been reported to
significantly lower plaque, gingival and bleeding indices.”
Alteration of the oral microbial flora, or development of resistant
microbial strains has not been observed with the use of bloodroot
extracts.)

Bloodroot

Side-Effects, Toxicity

None documented for bloodroot. Much has been documented
concerning the potential toxicity of the alkaloid constituents in
bloodroot, in particular of sanguinarine.

Conclusions reached in the 1960s over the carcinogenic
potential of sanguinarine have more recently been disproved.
In addition, negative mutagenic activity has been observed in the
Ames test (microbial, with and without activation).

Sanguinarine is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
This is reflected in stated acute oral LDso values (rat) of 1.7 g/kg
(sanguinarine) and 1.4 g/kg (sanguinaria extract), compared with
an acute intravenous LDso (rat) value of 28.7 mg/kg (sanguinar-
ine). Symptoms of diarrhoea, ataxia and reduced activity were
observed in animals receiving high oral doses of sanguinarine.”
The acute dermal toxicity (LD5o) of sanguinarine is stated to be
greater than 200 mg/kg in rabbits.” The first experimental study
of sanguinarine toxicity (1876) reported prostration and severe
respiratory distress as the most marked signs of oral toxicity.’
However, in more recent short-term toxicity studies no toxic signs
were observed in the fetuses of rats following maternal
administration of 5-30 mg/kg/day of sanguinarine. ‘?

The reproductive and developmental toxicity potential of an S.
canadensis extract has been evaluated in rats and rabbits.'®
Developmental toxicity (increase in postimplantation loss, slight
decrease in fetal and pup body weights) was only evident at
maternally toxic doses. No effect was reported on reproductive
capabilities, on parturition or on lactation. It was concluded that
oral ingestion of sanguinaria extract has no selective effect on
fertility, reproduction, or on fetal or neonatal development.

Hepatotoxicity has been documented in rats following a single
intraperitoneal administration (10mg/kg) of sanguinarine.)
Toxicity was indicated by an increase in serum alanine
aminotransferase and serum asparate aminotransferase activity,
and by a significant reduction in microsomal cytochrome P450
and benzfetamine N-demethylase activities.’ Macroscopic lesions
were also observed but the authors stated that the two events
could not be conclusively directly related.) No hepatotoxicity has
been observed in short-term toxicity studies involving oral
administration of sanguinarine.)

Animal studies have indicated sanguinarine to be non-irritant
and to exhibit no allergenic or anaphylactic potential. Human
patch tests have shown sanguinarine to be non-irritant and non-
sensitising.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bloodroot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There is limited evidence from animal
studies that bloodroot is non-toxic during pregnancy (see above).
However, in view of its pharmacologically active constituents and
lack of clinical data on safety, use of bloodroot during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Lexat. Canada: Mielocol; Viadent; Wampole
Bronchial Cough Syrup. Italy: Dentosan Carie & Alito.

----- PAGE 97 -----
1

Bloodroot

References

Becci PJ et al. Short-term toxicity studies of sanguinarine and of two
alkaloid extracts of Sanguinaria canadensis. ] Toxicol Environ Health
1987; 20: 199-208.

Godowski KC. Antimicrobial action of sanguinarine. J Clin Dent
1989; 1: 96-101.

Lenfield J et al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary

benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

Schwartz HG. Safety profile of sanguinarine and sanguinaria extract.
Compend Cont Educ Dent Suppl 1986; 7: S212-S217.

Dalvi RR. Sanguinarine: its potential as a liver toxic alkaloid present
in the seeds of Argemone mexicana. Experientia 1985; 41: 77-78.
Keller KA. Reproductive and developmental toxicological evaluation
of Sanguinaria extract. J Clin Dent 1989; 1: 59-66.

----- PAGE 98 -----
y Blue Flag

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Little is known about the phytochemical, pharmacological or
toxicological properties of blue flag and its constituents,
although related species are known to be toxic. In view of
these factors, the use of blue flag is not recommended.

Species (Family)

Iris versicolor L.

Synonym(s)

Iris caroliniana Watson, Iris virginica L.

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19926
BHP 1996”

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G40, G48 and Gé4.

Acids Isophthalic acid 0.002%, salicylic acid, lauric acid, stearic
acid, palmitic acid and 1-triacontanol.

Volatile oils 0.025%. Furfural.

Other constituents Iridin, B-sitosterol, iriversical'? and tannin.

Food Use

Blue flag is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Blue flag is stated to possess cholagogue, laxative, diuretic,
dermatological, anti-inflammatory and antiemetic properties. It
has been used for skin diseases, biliousness with constipation and

liver dysfunction, and specifically for cutaneous eruptions.(67°*
Triterpenes
HOHZC. OH
OHC. 4

a

X

iriversical

Figure 1 Selected constituents of blue flag.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

G6, G7,

Dried rhizome 0.6-2.0g as a decoction three times daily.‘
G10)

Liquid extract
daily.(* G7, G10)

1-2mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Side-effects, Toxicity

It has been stated that the fresh root of blue flag can cause nausea
and vomiting.) Therefore, dosage recommendations relate to

small doses of dried root.
Furfural, a volatile oil constituent, is known to be irritant to
mucous membranes causing lachrymation, inflammation of the

Figure 2 Blue flag (Iris versicolor).

Figure 3 Blue flag — dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 99 -----
Blue Flag

eyes, irritation of the throat, and headache.‘°**) Whether these
irritant properties are attributable to the volatile oil of blue flag
has not been established. Acute oral toxicity (rat, LDso) for
furfural has been documented as 127 mg/kg body weight.'°*
Iridin has been reported to be poisonous in both humans and
livestock.'©?”) However, it is unclear whether this substance is the
same iridin documented as a constituent of blue flag.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the possible irritant nature of the volatile oil, blue flag
may not be suitable for internal use.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of blue flag has not been
established. In view of this, together with the documented irritant

properties of some of the constituents, blue flag should not be
taken during pregnancy.

UK: Catarrh Mixture; HRI Clear Complexion; Napiers Skin
Tablets; Skin Eruptions Mixture.

References

1 Krick W e¢ al. Isolation and structural determination of a new
methylated triterpenoid from rhizomes of Iris versicolor L. Z
Naturforsch 1983; 38: 689-692.

----- PAGE 100 -----
- Bogbean

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of bogbean is well studied, but no
pharmacological information is available to justify the herbal
uses. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive doses
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Menyanthes trifoliata L. (Menyanthaceae)

Synonym(s)

Buckbean, Marsh Trefoil, Menyanthes

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Iridoids
S
CH2OH
C—O, fe) oO
4
fe)

H
O-Glucosyl O-Glucosyl

dihydrofoliamenthin menthiafolin

H
\_sO-Glucosyl

H3CO2C

O-Glucosy!
loganin

sweroside
Coumarins
HO’ [e) [e)
scopoletin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bogbean.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G62 and G64.

Acid Caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, ferulic acid, p-hydroxyben-
zoic acid, protocatechuic acid, salicylic acid, vanillic acid;‘"”) folic
acid and palmitic acid.)

Alkaloids Gentianin and gentianidine (pyridine-type); choline.”
Coumarins Scopoletin.”

Flavonoids Hyperin, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin and trifolio-
24 (1,2)

side.

Iridoids

ee oy (2
menthiafolin and sweroside.?

7',8'-Dihydrofoliamenthin, foliamenthin, loganin,
)

Other constituents Carotene, ceryl alcohol, enzymes (e.g.
emulsin, invertin), o-spinasterol, an unidentified substance with
haemolytic properties.
mixture of five sterols with o-spinasterol and stigmast-7-enol as
major components.)

) y-Spinasterol has been reported to be a

Food Use

Bogbean is
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
bogbean can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
G16)

sted by the Council of Europe as a natural source of

final product."

Herbal Use

Bogbean is stated to pos bitter and diuretic properties. It has
been used for rheumatism, rheumatoid arthritis, and specifically

for muscular rheumatism associated with general asthenia.(C> ©”
G8, G64)

Figure 2. Bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata).

----- PAGE 101 -----
Bogbean

Figure 3. Bogbean - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 1-2 or by infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Tincture 1-3 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A choleretic action has been described for caffeic acid and ferulic
acid; a stomachic secretive action has been reported for
protocatechuic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid. The iridoids
possess bitter properties.” The bitter index (BI) of bogbean is
stated to be 4000-10000 (compared to gentian BI 10000-
30.000).“” Bogbean extracts have antibacterial activities.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Large doses of bogbean are stated to be purgative and may cause
vomiting. An unidentified substance with haemolytic activity
has been isolated from bogbean.”)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses may be irritant to the gastrointestinal tract,
causing diarrhoea, griping pains, nausea and vomiting.”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
bogbean to interact with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of bogbean has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and possible
purgative action, the use of bogbean during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Czech Republic: Naturland Grosser
Swedenbitter. France: Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt. Germany:
Gallexier. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
naApnpiit Boapmoit Baansam Burruepa). UK: Modern Herbals
Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain Relief;
Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Rheumatic Pain Tablets; Sciatica
Tablets; Vegetex.

References

1 Swiatek L et al. Content of phenolic acids in leaves of Menyanthes
trifoliata. Planta Med 1986; 52: 530.

2. Giaceri G. Chromatographic identification of coumarin derivatives in
Menyanthes trifoliata L. Fitoterapia 1972; 43: 134-138.

3 Battersby AR et al. Seco-cyclopentane glucosides from Menyanthes
trifoliata: foliamenthin, dihydrofoliamenthin, and menthiafolin. Chem
Commun 1968; 1277-1280.

4 Loew P et al. The structure and biosynthesis of foliamenthin. Chem
Commun 1968; 1276-1277.

5 Popov S. Sterols of the Gentianaceae family. Dok! Bolg Akad Nauk
1969; 22: 293-296.

6 Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of Far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.

7 Bishop CJ, MacDonald RE. A survey of higher plants for antibacterial
substances. Can J Bot 1951; 29: 260-269.

8 Todd RG, ed. Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 25th edn.
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 1967.

----- PAGE 102 -----
Boldo

studies are required to establish this. The reputed diuretic an
mild urinary antiseptic properties of boldo are probably
attributable to the irritant volatile oil. In view of the toxicity
data and the irritant nature of the volatile oil, excessive and/or

long-term use of boldo should be avoided.“¢5®

Species (Family)

Peumus boldus Molina (Monimiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Boldi Folium, Boldus

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 1996'°)
Martindale 35th edition!
Ph Eur 2007'°8”

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G52 and G62.

Alkaloids soquinoline-type. 0.25—0.7%. Pharmacopoeial stan-
dard not less than 0.1% alkaloid calculated as boldine.(@#"°*
Boldine 0.06% (major, disputed), isoboldine, 6a,7-dehydrobol-
dine, isocorydine, isocorydine-N-oxide, norisocorydine, laurolit-
sine,  laurotetanine, | N-methyllaurotetanine — (aporphines),
reticuline; (—)-pronuciferine (proaporphine) and _ sinoacutine
(morphinandienone)."~?

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. isorhamnetin) and their glycosides."
Volatile oils 2.5%. Some 38 components have been identified,
including p-cymene 28.6%, ascaridole 16.1%, 1,8-cineole 16.0%,
linalool 9.1%, terpinen-4-o1 2.6%, o-terpineol 0.9%, fenchone
0.8% and terpinolene 0.4%.

Other constituents Coumarin 0.5%, resin and tannin.

Food Use

Boldo is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that boldo
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although insufficient information is available for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.““'® Previously, in the USA, boldo
was approved for food use in alcoholic beverages only.'°*?

Herbal Use

Boldo is stated to possess cholagogue, liver stimulant, sedative,
diuretic, mild urinary demulcent, and antiseptic properties. It has
been used for mild digestive disturbances, constipation, gallstones,
pain in the liver or gall bladder, cystitis, rheumatism, and
specifically for cholelithiasis with pain.'C?°7°° The German
Commission E approved use for treatment of dyspepsia and mild
spastic gastrointestinal complaints.“

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Alkaloids
Rt HgCO.
C1.
Re HO Fy, CHg
H
HO. ;
H3CO HgCO
(S)-reticuline
R! R?
boldine OH OCHs
isoboldine OCH3 OH
Monoterpenes
.
p-cymene 1,8-cineole

Y-

linalool ascaridole

Figure 1 Selected constituents of boldo.

----- PAGE 103 -----
92 Boldo

Dried leaf 60-200 mg as an infusion three times daily;‘@” 2-5 g as

(G52)
a tea,“C)

Liquid extract 0.1-0.3mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily©”

Tincture 0.5-2.0 mL (1:10 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Boldo has exhibited choleretic (highest activity in rats), diuretic,
stomachic and cholagogic properties.(“4"% The choleretic
activity may be due to synergy between flavonoids and
alkaloids.“ Experiments in rats have failed to demonstrate
choleretic activity after oral administration of 400 or 800 mg/kg
aqueous ethanolic extract, intraduodenal administration of
200mg or 800 mg/kg, and intravenous administration of 32.5—
130 mg/kg of a dry ethanolic extract.”

An aqueous ethanolic extract (equivalent to 0.5-1.0 mg/mL
dried ethanolic extract) and also boldine (33p1g/mL) gave
significant hepatoprotection against t-butyl hydroperoxide-
induced hepatotoxicity in rat hepatocytes in vitro. Boldine at
a concentration of 0.015 mol/L inhibited microsomal lipid
peroxidation in a rat liver preparation by 50%. A dried aqueous
ethanolic extract (0.06-0.115%) of boldine at a dose of 500 mg/kg
gave 70% protection against carbon tetrachloride-induced hepa-

Figure 2 Boldo (Peumus boldus).

nyu l

13

iL pee LAL uF ft. Wf ym
vole 23 OM 18 1% MN

Figure 3 Boldo — dried drug substance (leaf).

18

totoxicity in mice, and boldine alone (10mg/kg) gave 49%
protection.” An aqueous ethanolic extract of boldo at doses of 50
and 100 mg/kg administered intraperitoneally showed anti-inflam-
matory activity in the rat paw carrageenan-induced oedema test,
whereas boldine alone appeared to be inactive.”

Boldine showed concentration-dependent relaxant activity on
isolated rat ileum (ECso 1.7 x 10°*mol/L), and acted as a
competitive antagonist of acetylcholine and as a non-competitive
antagonist of barium.) Boldine at low micromolar concentra-
tions prevented oxidation in rat brain homogenate and lipid
peroxidation of red cell plasma membranes, led to inactivation of
lysozymes, indicating high reactivity of free radicals."

Boldo essential oil contains terpinen-4-ol, the irritant and
diuretic principle in juniper oil.

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of boldo is extremely limited
and rigorous randomized controlled clinical trials are required. In
a controlled trial, boldo, in combination with cascara, rhubarb
and gentian, had a beneficial effect on a variety of symptoms such
as loss of appetite, digestion difficulties, constipation, flatulence
and itching“! Rhubarb and gentian were found to be more
effective with respect to appetite-loss related symptoms, and
boldo and cascara more effective in relieving constipation-related
symptoms.

Two preparations containing extracts of boldo and cascara have
been documented to increase biliary flow without altering the
lithogenic index or bile composition.» Treatment of 12 human
volunteers with boldo dry extract resulted in prolongation of
intestinal transit time.'“* However, the methodological limita-
tions of this small, uncontrolled study do not allow any
conclusions to be drawn on the effects of boldo.

Ascaridole, a component of the volatile oil, previously found a
clinical use as an anthelmintic agent." However, this use has
declined with the development of synthetic compounds with lower
toxicity and a wider range of activity.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Boldo volatile oil is stated to be one of the most toxic oils.'**)

Application of the undiluted oil to the hairle:
an irritant effect." The oil contains irritant terpenes, including
terpinen-4-ol, the irritant principle in juniper oil.

An acute oral LDso value for boldo oil has been given as 0.13 g/
kg body weight in rats, with doses of 0.07 g/kg causing
convulsions.) The acute dermal LDso in rabbits has been
reported as 0.625-1.25 g/kg." No acute toxicity was observed in
rats given oral doses of 3 g/kg of dry aqueous ethanolic extract,
and in mice, an aqueous ethanolic extract (1:1) had an LDso of
6 g/kg (intraperitoneal administration).'©° The LDso values of
total alkaloids and of boldine in mice were 420 and 250 mg/kg
(intraperitoneal administration), re pectively,'°*) Total alkaloids
(intraperitoneal administration) given to dogs produced vomiting,

diarrhoea and epileptic symptoms with a recovery after 50
(G52)

backs of mice has

minutes.

Boldine was not genotoxic as indicated by the SOS chromotest
with Escherichia coli, or in the Ames test, and did not induce
mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae." Boldine did not induce
an increase in the frequency of chromosome aberrations in human
lymphocytes in vitro, or in mouse bone marrow cells in vivo.
There were no signs of genotoxicity in mouse bone marrow, as

(16)

assessed by the micro nucleus test.

----- PAGE 104 -----
Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses of boldo may cause renal irritation, because of the
volatile oil, and should be avoided by individuals with an existing
kidney disorder. Boldo is contra-indicated in individuals with
obstruction of bile duct or severe liver disease. Boldo should only
be used in patients with gallstones after consultation with a
physician.“ Ascaridole is toxic and use of the oil is not
recommended. '“**)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of boldo to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of boldo taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the potential
irritant nature of the volatile oil, the use of boldo during
pregnancy should be avoided.

loerdt. Verdauungstee
Solu-Lipar. Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Italy: Amaro
Medicinale; Caramelle alle Erbe Digestive; Coladren; Colax;
Confetti Lassativi CM; Critichol; Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex;
Eparema-Levul; Eparema; Eupatol; Hepatos B12; Hepatos;
Magisbile; Mepalax; Solvobil. Mexico: Chofabol; Hepedren

2

10

1

12

13

14

15
16

Boldo

References
1

Urztia A, Acuiia P. Alkaloids from the bark of Peumus boldus.
Fitoterapia 1983; 4: 175-177.

Urzua A, Torres R. 6a,7-Dehydroboldine from the bark of Peumus
boldus. J Nat Prod 1984; 47: 525-526.

Hughes DW e¢ al. Alkaloids of Peumus boldus. Isolation of
laurotetatine and laurolitsine. J Pharm Sci 1968; 57: 1619-1620.
Hughes DW et al. Alkaloids of Peumus boldus. Isolation of (+)-
reticuline and isoboldine. J Pharm Sci 1968; 57: 1023-1025.
Bombardelli E et al. A new flavonol glycoside from Peumus boldus.
Fitoterapia 1976; 46: 3-S.

Krug H, Borkowski B. Neue Flavonol-Glykoside aus den Blattern von
Peumus boldus Molina. Pharmazie 1965; 20: 692-698.

Lanhers MC e¢ al. Hepatoprotective and anti-inflammatory effects of
a traditional medicinal plant of Chile, Pnewmus boldo. Planta Med
1991; 57:110-115.

Cederbaum AI e¢ al. Inhibition of rat liver microsomal lipid
peroxidation by boldine. Biochem Pharmacol 1992; 44: 1765-1772.
Speisky H et al. Activity of boldine on rat ileum. Planta Med 1991; 57:
519-522.

Speisky H et al. Antioxidant properties of the alkaloid boldine in
systems undergoing lipid peroxidation and enzyme inactivation.
Biochem Pharmacol 1991; 41: 1575-1581.

Borgia M et al. Pharmacological activity of a herbs extract: A
controlled clinical study. Curr Ther Res 1981; 29: 525-536.

Borgia M et al. Studio policentrico doppio-cieco doppio-controllato
sull'attivita terapeutica di una nota associazione di erbe
medicamentose. Clin Ter 1985; 114: 401-409.

Salati R et al. Valutazione delle proprieta coleretiche di due preparati
contenenti estratti di boldo e cascara. Minerva Dietol Gastroenterol
1984; 30: 269-272.

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Boldo leaf oil. Food Chem Toxicol 1982; 20 (Suppl. Suppl.B): 643.
Moreno PRH et al. Genotoxicity of the boldine aporphine alkaloid in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Mutat Res 1991; 260: 145-152.

----- PAGE 105 -----
= Boneset

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The constituents of boneset are fairly well documented and
include many pharmacologically active classes such as
flavonoids, sesquiterpene lactones (typical for the Asteraceae
family) and triterpenes. Immunostimulant activity (in vitro)
has been reported for sesquiterpene lactone and
polysaccharide components, but there is a lack of rigorous
clinical research assessing the efficacy of boneset. Many
pharmacological studies have focused on the cytotoxic/
antitumour actions of sesquiterpene lactone components of
various Eupatorium species, although these actions have not
been reported for sesquiterpene lactones isolated from
boneset. Little is known regarding the toxicity of boneset.
Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which have been
documented for other Eupatorium species, have not been
reported for boneset.

Species (Family)

Eupatorium perfoliatum L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Common Boneset, Eupatorium chapmanii Small, Feverwort,
Thoroughwort. Snakeroot has been used to describe poisonous
Eupatorium species.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

GSL — as Boneset and Eupatorium.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides including
astragalin, hyperoside and rutin; eupatorin (flavone) and
dihydroflavonols."?

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones including euperfolin and
euperfolitin (germacranolides), eufoliatin (guianolide), eufolia-
torin (dilactone guaiane) and euperfolide.” Sesquiterpenes,
diterpenes (dendroidinic acid, hebeclinolide), triterpenes (a-
amyrin, dotriacontane) and sterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol).

Other constituents Volatile oil, resin, wax, tannic and gallic
acids, bitter glucoside, inulin, polysaccharides and sugars.

Food Use

Boneset is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Boneset is stated to possess diaphoretic and aperient properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for influenza, acute bronchitis,
nasopharyngeal catarrh, and specifically for influenza with deep
aching, and congestion of the respiratory mucosa.(C7°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Herb 1-2 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture 1-4 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Figure 1 Boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum).

Figure 2 Boneset — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 106 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Immunostimulant activity (in vitro stimulation of granulocyte
phagocytic activity) has been demonstrated by high dilutions
(10°-°-10~’ g/100 mL) of various sesquiterpene lactones isolated
from E. perfoliatum.® In addition, immunostimulating actions
(granulocyte, macrophage and carbon clearance tests) have been
documented for polysaccharide fractions from E. perfoliatum.°>

An ethanol extract of the whole plant has exhibited weak anti-
inflammatory activity in rats.(“*” Many activities, including anti-
inflammatory activity, have been documented for flavonoid
compounds.

Clinical studies

None documented. Rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
assessing the effects of boneset are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Contact dermatitis has been reported for Eupatorium species, but
not specifically for boneset (E. perfoliatum).°? Cytotoxic
properties have been documented for a related species, E.
cannabinum, and are attributed to the sesquiterpene lactone
eupatoriopicrin. This compound has not been documented as a
constituent of boneset. Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs)
have been isolated from various Eupatorium species, although
none have been documented as constituents of boneset (E.
perfoliatum).”

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions have been
associated with the sesquiterpene lactone constituents in German
chamomile, although no reactions specifically involving boneset
have been documented.

The US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has classified
boneset as a herb of undefined safety.(¢?”

Boneset

Contra-indications, Warnings

The allergenic potential of sesquiterpene lactones is well
recognised. Individuals with a known hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae family (e.g. chamomile, feverfew,
ragwort, tansy) should avoid using boneset. Individuals with
existing hypersensitivities/allergies should use boneset with
caution.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of boneset to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of boneset taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data and the possibility of constituents with allergenic activity, the
use of boneset during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Flavons. UK: Catarrh Mixture.

References

1 Herz W et al. Dihydroflavonols and other flavonoids of Eupatorium
species. Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 2859-2863.

2 Herz W et al. Sesquiterpene lactones of Eupatorium perfoliatum. ]
Org Chem 1977; 42: 2264-2271.

3. Wagner H. Immunostimulants from medicinal plants. In: Chang HM
et al, eds. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985: 159-170.

4 Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroglycans)
of higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 1069.

5 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1988.

----- PAGE 107 -----
- Borage

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on the constituents of borage.
No documented pharmacological data were located to
support the traditional uses, although the mucilage content
supports the use of borage as a demulcent. Interest has
focused on the volatile oil as a source of gamolenic acid.
Borage contains known toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids, although
at concentrations considerably lower than those found in
comfrey for which human toxicity has been documented.
However, it would seem wise to avoid excessive or prolonged
ingestion of borage. It is unclear whether borage oil, currently
available in food supplements, contains any pyrrolizidine
alkaloids.

Species (Family)

Borago officinalis L. (Boraginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Beebread, Bee Plant, Burrage, Starflower (oil)

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007 :
Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078?

Legal Category (Licensed Product)

Borage is not included in the GSL.‘@*”

Alkaloids

lycopsamine

CH,
HOA 2a

intermedine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of borage.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and Gé4.

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. Lycopsamine, intermedine, acet-
yllycopsamine, acetylintermedine, amabiline, supinine and thesi-
nine (unsaturated).” Concentrations reported as 0.01% and 2-
10ppm for commercial dried samples. Alkaloid concentrations
reportedly the same for fresh and dried samples; fresh samples
revealed alkaloids as the free base in the roots and mainly as N-

oxides in the leaves.
Mucilages 11.1%. Yielding glucose, galactose and arabinose.
Oil Rich in fatty acids, in particular gamolenic acid.

Other constituents Acids (acetic, lactic, malic, silicic),
cyanogenetic compounds and tannins (up to 3%).

Food Use

Borage is occasionally used in salads and soups.

Herbal Use

Borage is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant, tonic, anti-
Traditionally,
borage has been used to treat many ailments including fevers,
coughs and depression. & ° Borage is also reputed to act as a
restorative agent on the adrenal cortex. Borage oil (starflower
oil) is used as an alternative source to evening primrose oil for
gamolenic acid.

inflammatory and_ galactogogue properties.

Figure 2 Borage (Borago officinalis).

----- PAGE 108 -----
Figure 3 Borage — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Infusion Two 5-mL spoonfuls of dried herb to one cup boiling
water three times daily.

Tincture 1—4mL three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Borage oil has been reported to attenuate cardiovascular reactivity
to stress in rats.

Clinical studies

The effect of borage seed oil on the cardiovascular reactivity of
humans to acute stress has been studied in 10 individuals, who
each received a total daily dose of 1.3g for 28 days. The
individuals were required to undertake an acute psychological task
requiring sensory intake and vigilance (Stroop colour test). Borage
oil was found to attenuate cardiovascular reactivity to stress,
indicated by a reduction in systolic blood pressure and heart rate
and by increased task performance. The specific mechanisms by
which borage exerts this effect were unknown, but a central
mechanism of action of the fatty acids was suggested in view of
the simultaneous reduction in heart rate and blood pressure.“

Borage

Side-effects, Toxicity
None documented. However, borage contains low concentrations
of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are known to be

hepatotoxic in both animals and humans (see Comfrey).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Evening primrose oil is recommended to be used with caution in
epileptic patients, especially in those with schizophrenia and/or
those taking phenothiazines (see Evening Primrose); on the basis
that borage oil, like evening primrose oil, also contains high
concentrations of gamolenic acid, borage oil should also be used
with caution in these patient groups. In view of the known toxic
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents, excessive or prolonged inges-
tion of borage should be avoided. In particular, infusions (e.g.
herbal teas) containing borage should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of borage to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

In view of the documented

Pregnancy and _ lactation
pyrrolizidine constituents and lack of toxicity data, borage should
not be used during pregnancy or lactation.

roprietary single-i
Chile: Dexol.

ingredient preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Chile: Celltech Gold. Italy: Sclerovis H. New Zealand: Mr
Nits. USA: Borage Oil; Omega-3 Complex; Omega-3 Gluco-
samine.

References

1 Luthry J e¢ al. Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloide in Arzneipflanzen der
Boraginaceen: Borago officinalis and Pulmonaria officinalis. Pharm
Acta Helv 1984; 59: 242-246.

2. Larsen KM et al. Unsaturated pyrrolizidines from Borage (Borage
officinalis) a common garden herb. J Nat Prod 1984; 47: 747-748.

3 Hoffman D. The Herb Users Guide, the Basic Skills of Medical
Herbalism. Wellingborough: Thorsons, 1987.

4 Mills DE. Dietary fatty acid supplementation alters stress reactivity
and performance in man. J Hum Hypertens 1989; 3: 111-116.

5 Mattock AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986.

----- PAGE 109 -----
- Broom

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of broom is reasonably well documented. The
pharmacological actions are primarily due to the alkaloid
constituents. Sparteine, the major alkaloid component, is a
cardiac depressant with actions similar to those of quinidine.
Although these actions support some of the documented
traditional herbal uses, there is a lack of rigorous clinical
research assessing the effects of broom. The intended uses of
broom are not suitable for self-medication.

Species (Family)

Cytisus scoparius (L.) Link

Synonym(s)

Hogweed, Sarothamnus scoparius (L.) Koch, Scoparius, Spartium
scoparium L.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Broom is not included in the GSL.“@?”

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40, G41, G48, G62 and Gé4.

Alkaloids Quinolizidine-type. 0.8-1.5%. Sparteine 0.3-0.8%
(major component); minor alkaloids include cytisine (presence
disputed), genisteine (d-c-isosparteine), lupanine, oxysparteine
and sarothamine.

Alkaloids

H

no

H

(-)-sparteine

(+)-lupanine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of broom.

Amines Epinine, hydroxytyramine and tyramine.
Flavonoids Scoparin and vitexin.

Other constituents Amino acids, bitter principles, carotenoids,
fat, resin, sugars, tannin, wax and volatile oil.

Food Use

Broom is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that broom
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(@'?

Herbal Use

Broom is stated to possess cardioactive, diuretic, peripheral
vasoconstrictor and antihaemorrhagic properties. It has been used
for cardiac dropsy, myocardial weakness, tachycardia, profuse

menstruation and specifically for functional palpitation with
lowered blood pressure.
possess emetic and cathartic properties.

(C2676) Broom is also reported to

(G41)

Figure 2 Broom (Cytisus scoparius).

Figure 3. Broom — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 110 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried tops 1-2 as a decoction.'°”

Liquid extract 1-2mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).'©?
Tincture 0.5-2.0mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol).'°”

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological actions of broom are primarily due to the
alkaloid constituents.

In vitro and animal studies

Sparteine is reported to exhibit pharmacological actions similar to
those of quinidine. Low doses administered to animals result in
tachycardia, whereas high doses cause bradycardia and may lead
to ventricular arrest. Sparteine has little effect on the central
nervous system (CNS), but peripherally, paralyses motor nerve
terminals and sympathetic ganglia as a result of a curare-like

action.‘

Clinical studies

None documented for broom. The major alkaloid constituent
sparteine is known to decrease the irritability and conductivity of
cardiac muscle and has been used to treat cardiac arrhyth-
mias,“““ restoring normal rhythm in previously arrhythmic
patients.” Sparteine is reported to have a quinidine-like action
rather than a digitalis-like action.'©” Sparteine is also stated to be
a powerful oxytocic drug, which was once used to stimulate
uterine contractions.

Broom

Side-effects, Toxicity

The alkaloid constituents in broom are toxic. Sparteine sulfate has
been reported to be a cardiac depressant and can also produce
respiratory arrest.'(“®® Symptoms of poisoning are characterised
by tachycardia with circulatory collapse, nausea, diarrhoea,
vertigo and stupor.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Broom is stated to be inappropriate for non-professional use.‘°?)

Its use is contra-indicated in individuals with high blood
ressure) or a cardiac disorder, because of the alkaloid
constituents.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
reparations of broom to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Sparteine is contra-indicated during
regnancy; therefore, broom should not be used during pregnancy
in view of its sparteine content.'“™ Sparteine is stated to be a
owerful oxytocic drug and is cardiotoxic. Broom should not be
taken during lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

France: Creme Rap.

----- PAGE 111 -----
= Buchu

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical data are available for buchu. No scientific
evidence was found to justify the herbal uses, although
reputed diuretic and anti-inflammatory activities may be
attributable to the irritant nature of the volatile oil and the
flavonoid components, respectively. In view of the lack of
documented toxicity data, together with the presence of
pulegone in the volatile oil, excessive use of buchu should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Agathosma betulina (Berg.) Pillans (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Barosma betulina, Folia Bucco, Hartogia betulina Berg., Round
Buchu, Short Buchu

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Flavonoids

Rutinosyl-O.

OH O

diosmin (diosmetin-7-rutinoside)

Monoterpenes

OH
ra
° °
H
diosphenol (-)-pulegone
S
°
-—aN
(+)-menthone limonene

Figure 1 Selected constituents of buchu.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G22, G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Diosmetin, quercetin, diosmin, quercetin-3,7-diglu-
coside, rutin.

Volatile oils 1.0-3.5%. Over 100 identified compounds, including
diosphenol, limonene, menthone and pulegone as the major
components.

Other constituents Mucilage, resin. Coumarins have been
reported for many other Agathosma species.”

Food Use

Buchu is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category allows buchu to be
added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner, although
there is insufficient information available for an adequate

assessment of potential toxicity.C'? In the USA, buchu volatile

oil is approved for food use with concentrations usually up to
about 0.002% (15.4 ppm).“C1% 4)

Herbal Use

Buchu is stated to possess urinary antiseptic and diuretic
properties. It has been used for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis,
and specifically for acute catarrhal cystitis.'C? 67% So

Fd

Figure 2 Buchu (Agathosma betulina).

----- PAGE 112 -----
Figure 3 Buchu - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.
Dried leaf 1-2 g by infusion three times daily.“C%°”
Liquid extract 0.3-1.2 mL (1:1 in 90% alcohol).“0%°”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol).“C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for buchu. Diosmin has documented anti-
inflammatory activity against carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema, at a dose of 600 mg/kg body weight.”

Clinical studies

None documented. Rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
assessing the effects of buchu are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for buchu. The volatile oil contains pulegone, a
known hepatotoxin (see Pennyroyal).(©? The oil may cause
gastrointestinal and renal irritation.

Buchu

Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses of buchu should not be taken in view of the
potential toxicity of the volatile oil. It has been stated that buchu
should be avoided in kidney infections, although the scientific
basis for this is not clear.”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of buchu to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of buchu has not been
established. In view of this, together with the potential toxicity
and irritant action of the volatile oil, the use of buchu during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Support; Serenoa Complex; Urinase; Uva-Ursi Complex.
Canada: Herbal Diuretic. Czech Republic: Epilobin. France:
Urophytum. New Zealand: De Witts Pills. South Africa:
Borstol Cough Remedy; Doans Backache Pills; Docrub.
Switzerland: Heparfelien; Urinex. UK: Antitis; Backache;
Backache Relief; Buchu Backache Compound Tablets; De
Witt's K & B Pills; Diuretabs; Fenneherb Cystaid; HRI Water
Balance; Kas-Bah; Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets;
Skin Eruptions Mixture; Watershed. USA: Water Pill.

References

1 Campbell WE e¢ al. Coumarins of the Rutoideae: tribe Diosmeae.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 655-657.

2 Farnsworth NR, Cordell GA. A review of some biologically active
compounds isolated from plants as reported in the 1974-1975
literature. Lloydia 1976, 39: 420-455.

----- PAGE 113 -----
Burdock

erbal uses and there is a lack of rigorous clinical researc!
assessing the effects of burdock. Documented bitter
constituents, however, may explain the traditional use of
burdock as an orexigenic. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of burdock should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Arctium lappa L.

Synonym(s)

Arctium majus Bernh., Bardanae Radix, Greater Burdock

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®
BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G75.

Acids Acetic acid, butyric acid, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid,
gamma-guanidino-n-butyric acid, %-guanidino-n-isovaleric acid,
trans-2-hexenoic acid, isovaleric acid, lauric acid, linoleic acid,
linolenic acid, myristic acid, oleic acid, palmitic acid, propionic
acid, stearic acid and tiglic acid.‘

Aldehydes Acctaldehyde, benzaldehyde, butyraldehyde, caproic-
aldehyde, isovaleraldehyde, propionaldehyde and valeraldehyde.'?

Carbohydrates Inulin (up to 45-50%), mucilage, pectin and
sugars.

Polyacetylenes 0.001-0.002% dry weight. Fourteen identified
compounds include  1,11-tridecadiene-3,5,7,9-tetrayne (50%),
1,3,11-tridecatriene-5,7,9-triyne (30%) and 1-tridecen-3,5,7,9,11-
pentayne as the major components.”

Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes arctiol, B-eudesmol, fukinone, costus
acid, dehydrocostus lactone, arctiopicrin.”

Thiophenes — Arctinone-a, arctinone-b, arctinol-a, arctinol-b,
arctinal, arctic acid-b, arctic acid-c, methyl arctate-b and
arctinone-a acetate (sulfur-containing acetylenic compounds).'°”

Sesquiterpenes

arctiol

H

fukinone

le}
dehydrocostus lactone

Thiophenes

H3C—==

arctinone-a
arctinol
arctinal
arctic acid

-CH20H
-CHOHCH20H
-CHO

-COOH

Polyenes
ner SS cu (Geel cote
H H

trideca-1,11-diene-3,5,7,9-tetrayne
Lignan

HCO

CT

OCH3

R-O

‘OCH;

R
arctiin glucosyl
arctigenin H

Figure 1

B-eudesmol

O2H

costus acid

Polysaccharide

HO. oO

HO
Sd
inulin
(30-35 D-fructose residues)

Selected constituents of burdock.

----- PAGE 114 -----
Other constituents Fats (0.4-0.8%), fixed and volatile oils (0.07—

0.18%), bitters (lappatin), resin, phytosterols (sitosterol and

stigmasterol), tannin® and arctiin, arctigenin and other lig-
_ (9-12)

nans.

Other species Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides are
present in Arctium minus (Hill) Bernh.)

Food Use

Burdock is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
burdock can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“@!

Herbal Use

Burdock is stated to possess diuretic and orexigenic properties. It
has been used for cutaneous eruptions, rheumatism, cystitis, gout,

anorexia nervosa, and specifically for eczema and psoriasis.‘
G6, G7, G8, G60)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried root 2-6g by infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 2-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 8-12 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(@”)

Decoction 500 mL (1:20) per day.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The roots and leaves of burdock plants not yet flowering are stated
to possess diuretic, hypoglycaemic and antifurunculous proper-
ties.” A burdock extract (plant part not stated) was reported to
cause a sharp, long-lasting reduction in the blood sugar
concentration in rats, together with an increase in carbohydrate
tolerance and a reduction in toxicity.

The antimicrobial activity documented for burdock has been
attributed to the polyacetylene constituents, although only
traces of these compounds are found in the dried commercial

Figure 2 Burdock (Arctium lappa).

Burdock

herb.'C® Furthermore, arctiopicrin is stated to be a bitter with
antibiotic activity against Gram-positive bacteria.” Antibac-
terial activity against Gram-positive (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis) and Gram-negative
(Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri, Shigella sonnei) bacteria has
been documented for burdock leaf and flower, whereas the root
was only found to be active towards Gram-negative strains.'!)
In vivo uterine stimulant activity has been reported.'@*”
Protection against mutagenic activity has also been documented
for burdock.!%'” Burdock reduced the mutagenicity to
Salmonella typhimurium (TA98, TA100) of mutagens both
requiring and not requiring $9 metabolic activation." A
lignan-like structure was proposed for the desmutagenic factor.)
In vivo studies have shown that fresh or boiled plant juice from
burdock may cause a significant reduction in DMBA-induced
chromosome aberrations."
Burdock has been reported to exhibit antitumour activity."'*
The addition of dietary fibre (5%) from burdock roots to the
diet of rats has been documented to provide protection against the
toxicity of various artificial food colours.”

)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of burdock
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A single report of human poisoning initially associated with
burdock has been documented.°” The patient exhibited symp-
toms of atropine-like poisoning following the ingestion of a
commercially packaged burdock root tea. However, atropine is
not a constituent of burdock, and subsequent analysis indicated
that the tea was contaminated with a herbal source of solanaceous
alkaloids, possibly belladonna leaf. This report served to highlight
the problems which may arise with inadequate quality control of
herbal preparations.
The carcinogenicity of burdock was investigated in 12 rats fed
dried roots (33% of diet) for 120 days, followed by a normal diet
until 480 days.°" Ten of the 12 rats survived 480 days and no
tumours were detected. A urinary bladder papilloma and an
oligodendroglioma were observed in one rat, but these were
considered to have been induced spontaneously.

Burdock has been reported to exhibit antitumour properties
(see In vitro and animal studies).

----- PAGE 115 -----
Burdock

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
burdock to interact with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered. For example, there is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that burdock (not further specified) has
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation In vivo uterine stimulant action has
been reported.(@*”) In view of this, and the lack of toxicity data,

the use of burdock during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Cascade; Catarrh Mixture; GB Tablets; Gerard House Skin;
Gerard House Water Relief Tablets; HRI Clear Complexion;
Modern Herbals Water Retention; Napiers Skin Tablets;
Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Skin Cleansing; Skin Eruptions
Mixture; Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets; Water Naturtabs. USA:
Liver Formula Herbal Blend; Skin Hair Nails.

References

1 Obata S e¢ al. Studies on the components of the roots of Arctium
lappa L. Agric Biol Chem 1970; 34: A31.

2 Yamada Y e¢ al. y-Guanidino-n-butyric acid from Arctium lappa.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 582.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

Saleh NAM, Bohm BA. Flavonoids of Arctium minus (Compositae).
Experientia 1971; 27: 1494.

Schulte KE et al. Polyacetylenes in burdock root.
Arzneimittelforschung 1967; 17: 829-833.

Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic action. O J
Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

Washino T et al. New sulfur-containing acetylenic compounds from
Arctium lappa. Agric Biol Chem 1986; 50: 263-269.

Washino T et al. Structures of lappaphen-a and lappaphen-b, new
guaianolides linked with a sulfur-containing acetylenic compound,
from Arctium lappa L. Agric Biol Chem 1987; 51: 1475-1480.
Nakabayashi T. Tannin of fruits and vegetables. III. Polyphenolic
compounds and phenol-oxidising enzymes of edible burdock. Nippon
Shokuhin Kogyo Gakkaishi 1968; 15: 199-206.

Morita K et al. Chemical nature of a desmutagenic factor from
burdock (A. lappa L.). Agric Biol Chem 1985; 49: 925-932.

Ichihara A e¢ al. Lappaol A and B, novel lignans from Arctium lappa
L. Tetrahedron Lett 1976; 44: 3961-3964.

Ichihara A et al. New sesquilignans from Arctium lappa L. The
structure of lappaol C, D and E. Agric Biol Chem 1977; 41: 1813—
1814.

Liu S et al. Isolation and identification of arctiin and arctigenin in
leaves of burdock (Arctium lappa L.) by polyamide column
chromotography in combination with HPLC-ESI/MS. Phytochemical
Anal 2005; 16: 86-89.

Lapinina LO, Sisoeva TE. Investigation of some plants to determine
their sugar lowering action. Farmatsevt Zh 1964; 19: 52-58.
Cappelletti EM et al. External antirheumatic and antineuralgic herbal
remedies in the traditional medicine of North-eastern Italy. J
Ethnopharmacol 1982; 6: 161-190.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Morita K et al. Desmutagenic factor isolated from burdock (Arctium
lappa L.). Mutat Res 1984; 129: 25-31.

Ito Y et al. Suppression of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a) anthracene-induced
chromosome aberrations in rat bone marrow cells by vegetable juices.
Mutat Res 1986; 172: 55-60.

Dombradi CA, Foldeak $. Anti-tumor activity of A. lappa ext. Tumori
1966; 52: 173-175.

Tsujita J et al. Comparison of protective activity of dietary fiber
against the toxicities of various food colors in rats. Nutr Rep Int 1979;
20: 635-642.

Bryson PD et al. Burdock root tea poisoning. Case report involving a
commercial preparation. JAMA 1978; 239: 2157-2158.

Hirono | et al. Safety examination of some edible plants, Part 2. J
Environ Pathol Toxicol 1977; 1: 72-74.

----- PAGE 116 -----
- Burnet

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of burnet herb does not appear to have been
studied, although data are available for the underground
plant parts. If present in the herb as well as the root, the
tannin constituents would support the reputed astringent and
antihaemorrhagic actions of burnet. In view of the lack of
toxicity data and the possible high tannin content of the herb,
excessive use of burnet should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Sanguisorba officinalis L. (Rosaceae)
Synonym(s)

Garden Burnet, Greater Burnet, Poterium officinale A. Gray,
Sanguisorba, Sanguisorba polygama F. Nyl

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Sanguisorba)'”

Figure 1

Burnet (Sanguisorba officinalis).

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G40.

All phytochemical data located refer to the underground plant
parts and not to the herb.

Flavonoids Flavones, unstable flavonol derivatives.

Saponins Ziyu glycosides I and II (major glycosides), pomolic
acid as aglycone (not tomentosolic acid as documented in earlier
work), sanguisorbin 2.5-4.0%.

Tannins Numerous compounds (condensed and hydrolysable)
have been isolated, including 3,3,4-tri-O-methylellagic acid.? ”

Other constituents Volatile oil, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in the
fresh plant.

Food Use

Burnet is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Burnet is stated to possess astringent, antihaemorrhagic, styptic
and antihaemorrhoidal properties. It has been used for ulcerative
colitis, metrorrhagia, and specifically for acute diarrhoea.'C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 2-6 g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-6 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Figure 2 Burnet — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 117 -----
Burnet

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for burnet. The roots have been reported to

contain an antihaemorrhagic principle, 3,3,4-tri-O-methylellagic
id.2

acid.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of burnet
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of research assessing
the safety and toxicity profile of burnet.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, there is a lack of research assessing
the safety and toxicity profile of burnet.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of burnet to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of burnet during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Canada: Swiss Herb Cough Drops. Czech Republic: Tormen-
tan.

References

1 Yosioka I et al. Soil bacterial hydrolysis leading to genuine aglycone.
Ill. The structures of glycosides and genuine aglycone of Sanguisorbae
radix. Chem Pharm Bull 1971; 19: 1700-1707.

2. Kosuge T et al. Studies on antihemorrhagic substances in herbs
classified as hemostatics in Chinese medicine. II]. On the
antihemorrhagic principle in Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm
Bull 1984; 32: 4478-4481.

3 Nonaka G-I et al. Tannins and related compounds. XVII.
Galloylhamameloses from Castanea crenata L. and Sanguisorba
officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull 1984; 32: 483-489.

4 Nonaka G-I et al. A dimeric hydrolyzable tannin, sanguiin H-6 from
Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 2255-2257.

5S Tanaka T et al. Tannins and related compounds. XVI. Isolation and
characterization of six methyl glucoside gallates and a gallic acid
glucoside gallate from Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull
1984; 32: 117-121.

6 Tanaka T et al. 7-O-galloyl-(+)-catechin and 3-O-galloylprocyanidin
B-3 from Sanguisorba officinalis. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 2575-2578.

----- PAGE 118 -----
- Butterbur

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of butterbur is well documented. There is
evidence from preclinical studies to indicate that the
eremophilane sesquiterpene constituents (e.g. petasin and
isopetasin), found in the petasin chemovar, are important for
activity. However, there are some conflicting reports and it is
not clear precisely which constituents are most active.
Furthermore, certain activities have been documented for the
furanoeremophilane sesquiterpenes found in the
furanopetasin chemovar of Petasites hybridus.

There is evidence from preclinical studies of the anti-
inflammatory, anti-allergic and antispasmodic properties of
butterbur extracts and/or their constituents, hence
supporting some of the traditional uses. Precise mechanisms
of action have not yet been elucidated, although inhibition of
leukotriene synthesis, phospholipase A activity and 5-
lipoxygenase translocation, and effects on intracellular
calcium ion concentrations have been documented in in vitro
studies. The implications of binding of certain butterbur
constituents at dopamine Dz, histamine H; and muscarinic
receptors, described following in vitro studies, require further
investigation.

There is a paucity of well-designed, randomised clinical
trials of butterbur extracts. Existing trials generally have
involved individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and
migraine and have tested the effects of only a small number
of herbal medicinal products containing butterbur extracts.
While most of these studies have reported beneficial effects
for butterbur extracts, methodologically rigorous
investigation of efficacy in allergic rhinitis and migraine
prophylaxis is limited and large, well-designed clinical trials
are required. Similarly, at present, there is insufficient
evidence from randomised clinical trials to support the use of
butterbur extracts in patients with asthma and bronchitis.

There is also only limited information on the safety of
butterbur extracts and further investigation in this area is
required. On the basis of small, randomised clinical trials,
certain butterbur extracts appear to be well-tolerated when
taken at recommended doses for relatively short periods
(clinical studies have involved ingestion for up to four
months); adverse events reported most frequently are
gastrointestinal symptoms. Chronic toxicity studies are
lacking, and there is a lack of clinical information on the safety
of long-term use. Against this background, butterbur should
not be used for long periods, nor at higher than
recommended doses (see below). Spontaneous reports of
liver damage associated with the use of a butterbur root
extract have been received in Germany. On the basis of this
information, the Swiss regulatory authority for medicines
revoked the licences for certain butterbur products marketed
in Switzerland.

No drug interactions have been reported for butterbur
extracts. Based on data from preclinical studies, there is a
theoretical possibility that butterbur extracts potentially could
interact with hypertensive and antihypertensive medicines,

leukotriene receptor antagonists and agonists/antagonists at
dopamine Dz, histamine H; and muscarinic M3 receptors.

Both chemotypes (petasin and furanopetasin) of P. hybridus
contain unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, and these
compounds occur in low concentrations throughout all parts
of the plant.'® These constituents are known to be
hepatotoxic in humans, and have been shown to be
carcinogenic and mutagenic in preclinical studies (see
Comfrey). Several manufacturers of products containing
butterbur include in their manufacturing processes steps to
remove the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids to
concentrations below the detectable limit (e.g. <35 parts per
billion). However, there remains the possibility that toxic
quantities of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids may be
present in poorly processed products, and any products
which contain Petasites species as a result of botanical
misidentification or adulteration.

There is a view that butterbur is unsuitable for use as a tea
or infusion.% This is because the N-oxides of unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which can be formed from unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids during storage of plant material but
which can also be present in raw plant material, are more
water soluble than the parent compounds and are, therefore,
extracted more easily during preparations of herbal teas and
infusions.(¢'?

The dose of butterbur should be such that the daily intake
of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, including their N-
oxides, is not greater than 1 ,g.“C» The duration of use of
butterbur should not exceed a total of 4-6 weeks in a year.“©»

Species (Family)

Petasites hybridus (L.) P. Gaertn., B. Meyer et Scherb. (Asteraceae/
Compositae).

Synonym(s)

Blatterdock, Bogshorns, Bog rhubarb, Butterdock, Butterfly Dock,
Capdockin, Flapperdock, P. officinalis Moench, P. ovatus Hill, P.
sabaudus Beauv., P. vulgaris Desf., Umbrella Plant'‘C™

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts, leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
G3)

German Commission E (root and leaf).
. < (G85
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Butterbur is not on the GSL. There are no licensed products
containing butterbur available in the UK.

Constituents

Two chemovars of P. hybridus have been described, which differ
markedly in the profile of sesquiterpenes present in the root/

----- PAGE 119 -----
Butterbur

rhizome and leaf. The furanopetasin chemovar contains furanoer-
emophilane sesquiterpenes, whereas the petasin chemovar con-
tains esters of the eremophilane sesquiterpenes petasol, isopetasol
and neopetasol.'') The furanopetasin chemovar contains exclu-
sively furanoeremophilane sesquiterpenes: petasin sesquiterpenes
are not found in this chemovar.**) Eremophilanlactones have
been reported as constituents of the furanopetasin chemovar,\”
but it has been shown that they are produced by rearrangement of
9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes during storage of raw plant
material.

Both chemotypes contain unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
and these compounds occur throughout all parts of the plant.‘@!”)

Leaf

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine type, mainly senecionine and integerri-
Content may vary from 0.02-1.50 parts per million
(ppm), or <0.1-3.9 or 27.7ppm (for leaves and leafstalks,
respectively).

mine.

Flavonoids Astragalin, isoquercitrin, quercetin.'©”
Sesquiterpenes Furanopetasin chemovar: furanoeremophilane
type, including 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes and 9-oxo-fura-
noeremophilanes.” Petasin chemovar: eremophilane type, mainly
petasin and neopetasin (2.8 and 1.9 mg/g of dried plant material,
respectively), also isopetasin, and the sulfur-containing com-
pounds neo-S-petasin, S-petasin and iso-S-petasin (= S-isopetasin;
trace).

Other constituents Tannins, mucilage, volatile oil (about 0.1%),
triterpenoid saponins (traces).'°?

Rhizome, root

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine type, mainly senecionine, its isomer
integerrimine and senkirkine."?) Concentration can vary from 2-
500 ppm."!? Values reported following specific investigations
include 5-90 ppm and 6-105 (mean 49.2) ppm (calculated as
senecionine) Aa
been reported as 11.3 and 25.8 ppm, respectively.')

concentrations of senecionine and senkirkine have

Sesquiterpenes Furanopetasin chemovar: furanoeremophilane
type,” mainly furanopetasin and 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilane
(approximately 16-21% and 30-37%, respectively), as well as
furanoeremophilane, 2-senecioyl-furanopetasol, 2-tigloyl-furano-
petasol and 2-methylthioacryloyl-furanopetasol (6-10%). Peta-
sin chemovar: eremophilane type, mainly petasin (9.4, 7.0 and
7.0 mg/g of dried plant material for rhizomes, roots and runners,
respectively), also isopetasin, neopetasin, iso-S-petasin, neo-S-
petasin and S-petasin.") Minor compounds include 3-methylcro-
tonyl- and methacryloyl-esters of petasol, neopetasol, isopetasol,
3-desoxyneopetasol and 3-desoxyisopetasol.”

Volatile oil A mixture of at least 26 compounds of which 1-
nonene, 1-undecene, albene, furanoeremophilane and fukinano-
lide are major components; minor compounds include the novel
sesquiterpene hydrocarbons petasitene and pethybrene.

Quality of crude material and marketed products

As with other medicinal plants, the profile of constituents in
different parts of P hybridus can vary both qualitatively and
quantitatively depending on various factors, and this has
implications for safety and efficacy. The petasin content of the
underground parts of plants (petasin chemovar) grown in four

different locations in Switzerland ranged from 6.6-13.8 mg/g
across regions. Furthermore, although plants showed an
approximately similar relative distribution of the six main petasin
uiterpenes (petasin, isopetasin, neopetasin, iso-S-petasin, neo-
S-petasin and S-petasin), there were exceptions: for example, in
plants grown in the Krauchthal region, the content of S-petasin
was approximately half that of neo-S-petasin, whereas in plants
grown in the Chessiloch region, S-petasin content was greater
than that of neo-S-petasin. Raised temperatures and storage
conditions also affect the profile of constituents in P hybridus
(petasin chemovar) roots. Under moderate drying conditions
(40°C in the dark), isomerisation occurs: sesquiterpene esters with
petasol and neopetasol skeletons form the corresponding esters
with isopetasin skeletons.!) The isomerisation of neopetasin to
petasin occurs more readily than that of petasin to isopet;
(half-life for neopetasin and petasin: 49 and 205 days, respec-
tively). In the furanopetasin chemovar, 9-hydroxy-furanoeremo-
philanes rearrange to the corresponding eremophilanlactones
during drying and storage of raw plant material.

Some manufacturers of herbal medicinal products containing
butterbur state that the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids are
removed from the product before it is released for sale." One
method used to achieve acceptably low concentrations (the
German Commission E advised that the maximum daily intake
is 1pg)'C? of these alkaloids is by multiple applications of a
method involving a cation-exchange resin;'”) other methods of
separating pyrrolizidine alkaloids from several plants, including P.
hybridus, containing these compounds have been described." A
different approach to achieving extremely low concentrations of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids is to cultivate clones of wild-type plants
previously selected for almost absence of these constituents.
Achievement of an initial step — in vitro propagation of wild-type
plants — in this approach has been documented."'®”

sin

Food Use

Butterbur is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Butterbur root has been used traditionally for the treatment of
fevers, wheezing and colds and as a diuretic and vermifuge.'?
It is also reputed to be a heart stimulant, cardiac tonic and
antispasmodic, and to promote menstruation. It has been used
externally for treating persistent sores and other skin problems.

Butterbur root was approved by the German Commission E for
use as supportive therapy for acute spastic pain in the urinary
tract, particularly if urinary stones were present.“ Modern-day
use of butterbur and clinical trials of products containing
butterbur have focused on its use in seasonal allergic rhinitis
and migraine prophylaxis.

Dosage

The German Commission E advised that the dose of butterbur
should be such that the daily intake of unsaturated pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, including their N-oxides, is not greater than 1 pg.'(@?)
The duration of use of butterbur should not exceed a total of 4-6
weeks in a year.)

As an antispasmodic and for other traditional uses

Dosages described in the herbal literature are typically prepara-
tions equivalent to 4.5—7 g dried butterbur root daily in the form
of an ethanolic or lipophilic extract.'(©>

----- PAGE 120 -----
Butterbur

Sesquiterpenes
Petasin chemovar

Eremophilanes

Act . Ack
° ° R

petasol neopetasol isopetasol OH

petasin neopetasin isopetasin angeloyl

S-petasin S-neopetasin Sisopetasin cis-3-thio-
methylacryloyl

Other esters include 3-methylcrotonoyl, methacryloyl, trans-3-thiomethylacroyl

poompes

3-desoxyneopetasol 3-desoxyisopetasol

Furanopetasin chemovar
Furanoeremophilanes

R! Re

furanoeremophilane H H
Vi 9-hydroxyeremophilane H OH
} a¢ furanopetasin ang OH
2 H RI 2-senecioylfuranopetasol sen OH
Re 2-tigloylfuranopetasol tig OH
2-methylthioacryloylpetasol mta OH

9-oxofuranoeremophilane H fe}

9-oxofuranopetasin ang O°

Eremophilanlactones

9-hydroxyturano- _dtying >=
eremophilanes storage
° R
H H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of butterbur.

Alkaloids

Esterifying acids of sesquiterpenes

° °
wy Ne \ \
N N

angelic acid tiglic acid intergerrimine
dA i
HO 4 HO
methylcrotonic acid isobutyric acid
0 sm °
H we H KAN 37
cis-thiomethy! trans-thiomethyl!
acrylic acid acrylic acid senkirkine

Figure 2 Selected constituents of butterbur. Figure 3 Selected constituents of butterbur.

----- PAGE 121 -----
Butterbur

Figure 4 Butterbur (Petasites hybridus).

Figure 6 Butterbur - dried drug substance (leaf)

Dosages of butterbur extract used in clinical trials have varied.
In trials involving adults with seasonal allergic rhinitis, one study
used a butterbur root extract (containing not less than 15%
petasins calculated as isopetasin; Petaforce) (D Martin, Bioforce
(UK) Ltd, personal communication, 10 June 2004) 50mg twice
daily for two weeks,?” whereas another study tested a butterbur
leaf extract (ZE-339) one tablet four times daily (equivalent to
32mg petasins daily) for two weeks.°” Trials of butterbur in
migraine prophylaxis have tested a carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur rhizome (Petadolex) at doses of 50 or 75 mg twice daily

(equivalent to at least 15 or 22.5 mg petasins daily, respectively) for
12 or 16 weeks.°**)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities, including anti-inflammatory,
anti-allergic and antispasmodic effects, have been described for
butterbur root/rhizome and leaf following preclinical studies.
Extracts of butterbur have been tested clinically in patients with
seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis (hayfever), bronchial
asthma and chronic obstructive bronchitis, and in prophylaxis
of migraine headaches. The precise chemical constituents
responsible for the documented effects of butterbur are not
clearly understood, although several preclinical studies have
shown that the petasin constituents, such as petasin and
isopetasin, are important for certain pharmacological activities.
These compounds may have several intracellular targets, and there
is some evidence that the stereoisomers may have different
affinities at these, even bringing about different effects.)
However, other in vitro studies have reported that petasin is
inactive,**) and activities for the furanoeremophilane and
eremophilanlactone constituents have been documented.?”

Published papers and texts often use the words root and
rhizome interchangeably, although this is not strictly correct. This
monograph uses terms exactly as published in the reference
material, since it is not possible to say otherwise with certainty
precisely which plant part was meant. Published reports also often
fail to state which chemovar of P. hybridus was used.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Petasins have been shown to be bioavailable
following studies in rabbits fed butterbur leaf extract (containing
50 mg petasin) twice daily for seven days; petasins were detected
by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) within the
low nanogram range.°”

Anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties Inhibition of
peptido-leukotriene (LT) biosynthesis in murine peritoneal
macrophages has been documented following in vitro experiments
using several different extracts of butterbur root and leaf.?57) A
petroleum ether extract of PR hybridus ground root showed the
greatest inhibitory activity of LT synthesis from mouse peritoneal
macrophages stimulated with calcium ionophore A23187
(10~° mol/L): 12.6, 95.1 and 100% inhibition at concentrations
of P. hybridus extract of 6.3, 31.0 and 94.0 g/mL, respectively (p
< 0.01 versus control).°°) By contrast, a pyrrolizidine alkaloid-
free extract showed no activity in this assay, and the addition of
the pyrrolizidine alkaloids senkirkine and senecionine to this
extract and to the macrophage-containing tissue culture system
also failed to result in inhibition of LT synthesis.°) A report of
this work does not describe the constituents of the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid-free extract, so the latter results for lack of activity are
difficult to interpret.

Further work involving fractions of the active PR. hybridus root
extract indicated that isopetasin and the oxopetasan esters (=
eremophilanlactones, the presence of these is due to rearrange-
ment of 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes during drying and
storage as stated above) were important for activity: the content
of isopetasin and oxopetasan esters in the fractions correlated
with inhibition of LT synthesis in a concentration-dependent
manner.@) By contrast, petasin was not important for activity, but
appeared to reduce the activity of isopetasin in this assay.

----- PAGE 122 -----
Other in vitro studies, however, have reported that petasin is
one of the major active compounds of P. hybridus extract. Isolated
petasin and a standardised high-pressure carbon dioxide extract of
P. hybridus (containing 14.1% petasin; ZE-339, Zeller) inhibited
the synthesis of cysteinyl-LTs in eosinophils and LTB, in
neutrophils which had been primed with granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor and subsequently stimulated with
platelet-activating factor (PAF) or the anaphylatoxin CS5a.°”
Petasin, ZE-339 and the positive control zileuton (a 5-lipoxygenase
inhibitor) achieved similar inhibition of cysteinyl-LTs and LTB, in
eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively, in these models (ICso
(concentration for 50% inhibition) < 24 1g/mL in each case).

In other in vitro studies using a similar model of eosinophil
stimulation, ZE-339 showed greater inhibition of cysteinyl-LT
synth a fraction containing petasin, isopetasin and
neopetasin.°°) When each of these latter compounds was te:
separately in this model, all inhibited C5a- and PAF-induced
cysteinyl-LT synth in a concentration-dependent manner and
to the same extent as zileuton (positive control). However, the
release of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) from eosinophils (a
measure of eosinophil degranulation) was inhibited by petasin,
but not by isopetasin, neopetasin or zileuton. Similarly, petasin,
but not isopetasin, neopetasin or zileuton, suppressed cytosolic
phospholipase A> activity, S-lipoxygenase translocation and PAF-
and CSa-induced increases in intracellular calcium ion concentra-
tions. These findings suggest that the different petasin constitu-
ents of butterbur may act upon different intracellular signalling
molecules.°” Extracts of PB. bybridus rhizomes with different
petasin and isopetasin contents (2.1 and 0.4, 0.2 and 0.1, 12.1 and
6.1, and 21.9 and 9.4% petasin and isopetasin respectively) are
weak inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase 1 (COX-1) in vitro (ICso >
400 g/mL) and strong inhibitors of the inducible isoform COX-2
(ICs9 20 to 30.4tg/mL), apart from the extract with the lowest
petasin and isopetasin content (ICs 60.6 ptg/mL).° The former
three extracts also inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced and,
therefore, COX-2-mediated prostaglandin E, release in primary
rat microglial cells in a concentration-dependent manner (ICso <
6 .g/mL); this effect was also independent of the petasin and
isopetasin contents. The extract containing petasin 12.1% and
isopetasin 6.1% completely inhibited COX-2 synthesis
glia at a concentration of 5 jig/mL whereas COX-1 synthesis was
unaffected. Overall, these findings suggest selective inhibition of
COX-2 and its expression.”

s than di

ed

in micro-

Gastroprotective effects A petroleum ether extract of P. hybridus
ground root protects against gastrointestinal damage induced by
ethanol and indometacin (indomethacin) in vivo.* P. hybridus
root extract 0.83, 2.5 and 7.5 mg/kg administered intragastrally to
fasted rats 30 minutes before intragastral administration of 1.5 mL
ethanol significantly reduced gastric mucosal damage in a dose-
dependent manner, compared with control (p < 0.05). In an
experiment involving normally fed rats, indometacin (8 mg/kg
orally) was administered with P. hybridus root extract (6.3, 12.5 or
25 mg/kg orally), cimetidine (50 mg/kg orally) or control, followed
by a second dose six hours later, and sacrifice after a further 16
hours. Compared with control, all doses of PR hybridus root
extract significantly inhibited indometacin-induced intestinal
damage (p < 0.05), and P. hybridus root extract 2 x 25 mg/kg
inhibited intestinal damage to a greater extent than did cimetidine
(p < 0.05).°8)

Other activities Extracts of butterbur rhizome from both petasin
and furanopetasin chemovars of P. hybridus have been reported to
inhibit the binding of radioactive ligands at dopamine D, and

Butterbur

histamine H, receptors to a similar extent. The greatest inhibition
was observed for extracts with the highest content (>60%) of
eremophilane constituents. For example, for a rhizome extract
from the petasin chemovar, mean (standard error of mean; SEM)
ICso values for inhibition of dopamine D2 and histamine H;
radioligand binding were 38 (3) and 155 (52), respectively.?
Fractions of the petasin chemovar extract inhibited radioligan:
binding in a concentration-dependent manner, with the highest
affinities displayed by the petasin and desoxyneopetasol fractions.
This was confirmed in assays with individual constituents in
which the lowest ICs values were determined for petasin ani
isopetasin. The furanopetasin chemovar constituents hydroxy-
furanoeremophilane and furanopetasin also inhibited radioligan:
binding, as did the eremophilanlactones eremophilanolide ani
hydroxy-eremophilanolide, albeit with markedly lower affinities
than the eremophilanes.°°

Petasin, isopetasin, S-petasin and iso-S-petasin, isolated from
Petasites formosanus, a species related to PR. hybridus, relaxed
histamine-, carbachol-, potassium chloride- and LTD,-induce:
precontractions of isolated guinea-pig trachea in a concentration-
dependent manner.” $-Petasin was more potent than petasin an
isopetasin for precontractions induced by all four reagents. S-
Petasin relaxed the precontractions induced by all four reagents in
manner, with ICso values of <10 mol/L, whereas
iso-S-petasin selectively relaxed precontractions induced by
carbachol and potassium chloride, with ICs values of aroun
10pmol/L for each. The reason for these differences in the
respective profiles of activity, and the influence of isomerisation
(S-petasin to iso-S-petasin) is not clear. The documented relaxant
effects of S-petasin and iso-S-petasin from P formosanus on
precontracted guinea-pig trachea may be due to antispasmodic
and antimuscarinic properties, respectively.°*) Following a study
using isolated guinea-pig atria, it has been reported that iso-S-
petasin may act preferentially on tracheal muscarinic M3
receptors, rather than cardiac My receptors.

Hypotensive activity has been documented for S-petasin and
iso-S-petasin isolated from P. formosanus. In rats, a dose-
dependent hypotensive effect occurred following intravenous
administration of S-petasin or iso-S-petasin (0.1-1.5 mg/kg body
weight for each); in vitro experiments indicated that these
compounds have a relaxant effect on precontracted rat aortic
ring segments and that this may be due in part to blockade of
calcium ion (Ca**) channels in vascular smooth muscle cells by S-
petasin and iso-S-petasin.°°*9

S-Petasin from P. formosanus has been shown to have negative
chronotropic activity in vivo. In anaesthetised rats, S-petasin (1.0-
1.5 mg/kg body weight, intravenously) induced bradycardia in a
dose-dependent manner within a few seconds of administration
and the effect persisted for up to 11 minutes after administra-
tion.°” The highest administered dose of $-petasin (1.5 mg/kg
body weight intravenously) evoked a
rate of approximately 25%. S-Petasin had a negative inotropic
effect in isolated rat atria and depressed the amplitude of
contraction of rat cardiac myocytes. Iso-S-petasin also depresses
cardiac contraction as demonstrated by in vitro studies involving
ventricular myocytes.°*) The mechanism for the observed negative
cardiac chronotropic and inotropic effects of S-petasin and iso-S-
petasin may be through inhibition of cardiac L-type voltage-
dependent Ca** channels.°7"**) Further work has shown that S-
petasin decreases the amplitude of L-type Ca™~
NG108-15 cells (a mouse neuroblastoma and rat glioma hybrid
cell Line) in a concentration-dependent manner (ICso = 11 fmol/
L).

a non-selective

maximal reduction in heart

currents in

----- PAGE 123 -----
Butterbur

Clinical studies

Several clinical trials of butterbur extracts have been conducted
and have involved individuals with, for example, seasonal and
perennial allergic rhinitis and migraine. While many of these
studies have reported beneficial effects with butterbur, rigorous
investigation of the efficacy of butterbur extracts is limited and
further large, well-designed clinical trials are required.

Pharmacokinetics There are limited pharmacokinetic data for
the constituents of butterbur extracts. The bioavailability of
petasin has been reported following a study involving healthy
volunteers who received a single dose of two (7 = 24) or four
tablets ( = 24) of butterbur leaf extract (ZE-339) orally; each
tablet contained 8 mg petasins.?” The time to maximal petasin
concentrations (tmax) Was around 1.6 hours in each group (mean
(standard deviation, SD): 1.62 (0.50) and 1.61 (0.93) hours for the
lower and higher dose groups, respectively), whereas the mean
(SD) half-life was 7.16 (4.61) and 7.62 (3.34) hours for the lower
and higher dose group, respectively. Maximal mean (SD) petasin
concentrations were 25.5 (14.8) and 58.1 (26.7) ng/mL for the
lower and higher dose groups, respectively°” In a proof-of-
principle study in which six patients with seasonal (7 = 4) and
perennial (1 = 2) allergic rhinitis each received butterbur extract
(ZE-339) three tablets twice daily, serum petasin concentrations
reached steady state after five days' treatment (mean (SD) 15.1
(2.3) ng/mL (A Brattstrém, Zeller AG, personal communication,
19 July 2004).

Another study described monitoring compliance by measuring
serum petasin concentrations using an enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay,“ but these results were not reported.

Therapeutic effects

Seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis In a randomised,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study involving
125 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis, the effects of a
carbon dioxide extract of butterbur leaf (ZE-339) one tablet
four times daily (equivalent to 32mg petasins daily) were
compared with those of the non-sedating antihistamine
cetirizine 10mg each evening. At the end of the two-week
study, butterbur recipients (7 = 61) achieved similar scores to
cetirizine recipients on the SF-36 (Short Form 36; a self-
assessment scale for medical and health outcomes), the

primary outcome measure.?" There were also no differences
between groups with respect to secondary outcome measures,
including the clinical global impre:
frequency of adverse events was similar in both groups (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

The statistical power of the study only allowed the
conclusion to be drawn that butterbur was not inferior to
cetirizine (i.e. the study does not demonstrate equivalence of
the two preparations),
its choice of subjective outcome measures and interpreta-
tion.

A subsequent study used an objective outcome measure — the
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) nasal provocation test
(AMP is important in the pathway leading to the release of
allergic inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, cysteinyl
leukotrienes and prostaglandins) — to as the effects of
butterbur. In a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial, 20
individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis ceased any existing
treatment for the condition (antihistamines and/or intranasal
corticosteroids) one week before starting treatment with
butterbur 50 mg (Petaforce; Bioforce), or placebo, twice daily

sion score. The overall

” and the study has been criticised for

for two weeks. No further details of the preparation were
provided in the report of the study, although Petaforce
marketed in the UK contains butterbur root extract 25mg
per capsule (containing not less than 15% petasins calculated
as isopetasin).

At the end of each treatment period, participants underwent
AMP challenge (described as two applications to each nostril
of a 400 mg/mL solution delivered via a pump actuator spray
device) and spontaneous recovery was monitored by measuring
peak nasal inspiratory flow (PNIF) at regular intervals over one
hour. Time to recovery was significantly attenuated and the
maximum fall in PNIF was significantly less in butterbur
recipients compared with placebo recipients (p = 0.028 and
0.036, respectively).?° The study design did not incorporate a
wash-out period between the two phases of the study, and it is
not clear whether there could have been any carry-over effect in
patients who received butterbur during the first phase of the
study and what influence, if any, this may have had on the
results.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel group, controlled
trial, 330 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and a
istory of seasonal allergic rhinitis for at least two seasons in
consecutive years, received a carbon dioxide extract of
utterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets standardised for 8.0 mg total
petasins per tablet) one tablet three times daily (” = 110),
fexofenadine (Telfast) 180mg each morning (7 = 113), or
placebo (1 = 107), for two weeks; double dummy preparations
were used to achieve blinding.“ At the end of the study, both
utterbur extract and fexofenadine were superior to placebo
with respect to the primary outcome variable (the change in
evening total symptom scores, determined for the previous 12-
our period, from baseline values to the 2-week endpoint) (p <
0.001), and there was no statistically significant difference
tween the two active treatment groups (p = 0.37). With
respect to secondary outcome variables, responder rates were
significantly higher in the butterbur extract and fexofenadine
groups (p < 0.001 for both versus placebo), and there was no
statistically significant difference between the two active
treatment groups (p = 0.88). Outcomes of statistical
analyses for the other secondary outcome variables were not
reported. In a similar randomised, double-blind, parallel group
trial, 186 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and a
history of seasonal allergic rhinitis for at least two seasons in
consecutive years, received a carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets standardised for 8.0 mg total
petasins per tablet) one tablet three times daily (1 = 60), one
tablet twice daily (1 = 65), or placebo (1 = 61), for two weeks
to assess the relationship between dose and response. At the
end of the study, changes in symptom scores from baseline were
significantly greater for both butterbur groups when compared
with placebo (p < 0.001) and the change in symptom scores for
the higher-dose butterbur group was significantly greater than
that for the lower-dose butterbur group (p = 0.02). The effects
of butterbur extract (Petaforce) 50 mg twice daily in perennial
allergic rhinitis were compared with those of fexofenadine
180mg daily in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled, crossover study involving 16 individuals. Participants
stopped their existing treatment for allergic rhinitis
before starting their randomised treatment; treatments were
taken for one week, with a one-week wash-out period between
each randomised treatment. At the end of the study, the
maximum percentage fall from baseline values in PNIF after
nasal AMP challenge was significantly attenuated in the

one week

----- PAGE 124 -----
butterbur and fexofenadine groups, compared with the placebo
group (mean (SEM) for butterbur, fexofenadine and placebo:
34 (3), 39 (3) and 46 (3), respectively; p < 0.05).° The total
nasal symptom score, a secondary outcome measure, was also
significantly improved for the butterbur and fexofenadine
groups, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05). This
study is limited in that the duration of treatment was short,
and the sample size calculation was not based on detecting
differences in nasal symptom scores, so a larger study is needed
to confirm the latter result.

Asthma and bronchitis At present, there is insufficient evidence

from well-designed randomised controlled trials to support the
efficacy of butterbur extracts in asthma and bronchitis.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 16 patients
with atopic asthma who had been stabilised on inhaled
corticosteroid therapy for at least three months before the
study received butterbur (Petaforce) 25mg twice daily (no
further details stated in the report although Petaforce marketed
in the UK contains not less than 15% petasins calculated as
isopetasin), or placebo, for one week.” Participants stopped
any treatment with long-acting B2-agonists one week before
and for the duration of the study. At the end of the study,
bronchial hyper-responsiveness in response to AMP bronchial
challenge was significantly improved in butterbur recipients
compared with placebo recipients (p < 0.05), and concentra-
tions of inflammatory markers (exhaled nitric oxide, serum
eosinophil cationic protein and peripheral blood eosinophi
count) were significantly suppressed in the butterbur group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05 for each).?

In a preliminary trial, 80 individuals (aged 6-85 years) with
mild or moderate asthma received a lipophilic carbon dioxide
extract of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex; standardised to
contain at least 15% petasins) 50mg three times daily
(equivalent to 22.5 mg petasins daily; dose reduced for children
depending on age) for a minimum of two months following a
two-week run-in phase. A report of this study attributes several
improvements to administration of butterbur, including reduc-
tions in the number, duration and severity of asthma attacks,
increases in peak flow and forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV), and reduced use of existing asthma medica-
tions.* However, such conclusions may be flawed because of
the design and methodological limitations of the study and
because no statistical analysis was undertaken.

Allergic skin reactions A randomised, double-blind, double-

dummy, controlled, crossover trial assessed the effects of
butterbur on the histamine and allergen cutaneous response in
20 atopic patients with asthma or allergic rhinitis and
sensitisation to at least one common household allergen,
such as house dust mite, on skin prick testing.” Participants
received butterbur (Petaforce) 50mg twice daily (no further
details given), fexofenadine 180mg daily, montelukast 10mg
daily, or placebo, for one week; existing treatment with
antihistamines and leukotriene receptor antagonists was
stopped one week before and for the duration of the study,
although existing treatment for asthma or allergic rhinitis was
continued. Each day, approximately two hours after taking the
first daily dose of study medication, each participant under-
went skin prick testing with the allergen that had previously
been shown to provoke the greatest response in that individual,
as well as with histamine (1.7mg/mL; no further details
reported) and 0.9% sodium chloride as control. Mean
histamine and allergen wheal and flare responses were

Butterbur

significantly attenuated by fexofenadine, compared with
1 (49)
placebo, but not by butterbur or montelukast.

Migraine prophylaxis The rationale for the use of butterbur in

migraine prophylaxis is centred around the understanding that
vasoconstrictive and neurogenic inflammatory processes are
involved in the generation of migraine headaches, and that
butterbur and certain of its isolated constituents have been
shown in preclinical studies to have anti-inflammatory proper-
ties.°?) However, at present, rigorous clinical investigation of
the effects of butterbur extracts in preventing migraine is
limited.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group trial, 60
hospital outpatients with migraine (minimum of three attacks
per month for the three months prior to the study and a
minimum of two attacks in the four-week run-in phase)
received a carbon dioxide extract of P hbybridus rhizome

(Petadolex) two capsules twice daily (equivalent to 100mg
extract or 15mg petasins daily), or placebo, for 12 weeks.
None of the participants were previous users of the butterbur
extract.'”) Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study were
in accordance with the International Headache Society guide-
lines. The frequency of migraine attacks in the last four
weeks of the study was significantly lower in the butterbur
group, compared with the placebo group: the mean (SD)
numbers of attacks during the month were 1.7 (0.9) and 2.6
(1.1), for the butterbur and placebo groups, respectively; p <
0.05). The number of days with migraine during the last four
weeks of the study also decreased significantly in the butterbur
group, compared with the placebo group (mean (SD) number
of days at baseline and weeks 8-12: 3.4 (1.6) and 1.7 (0.9)
us 3.0 (1.3) and 2.6 (1.2), for butterbur and placebo,
respectively; p < 0.05). There were no statistically significant
differences between the two groups in the duration and
intensity of migraine headaches at the end of the study.”

The study has several limitations which should be con-

ver:

sidered when interpreting the results. A sample size calculation
was not carried out, baseline characteristics (apart from age
and variables relating to migraine attacks) of participants were
not provided in a report of the study, so it is not clear if the
randomisation was successful (i.e. whether or not the two
groups were similar at baseline) and differences at baseline in
the frequency of migraine attacks are not considered in the
analysis. There are further flaws in the statistical analysis, for
example, the analysis was carried out only with those
participants who adhered to the protocol (i.e. an intention-
to-treat analysis was not carried out), efficacy parameters were
not defined a priori,°” the results are reported without 95%
confidence intervals and precise p-values are not provided.

Against this background, an independent re-analysis of the
data from this study was undertaken. Data entry from original
case report forms was completely repeated under the principles
of good clinical practice (which includes double data entry and
consistency checks), and all four primary efficacy criteria and
data from all three time points (four, eight and 12 weeks) were
evaluated equally weighted in an attempt to avoid bias by post-
hoc selections of efficacy criteria.°") All analyses were
undertaken with data from the intention-to-treat population
(ie. all patients who were randomised and took the study
medication at least once).

The new analysis confirmed the findings of the original
analysis and stated that all 12 primary efficacy criteria (number
of attacks, number of days with attacks, mean duration and

----- PAGE 125 -----
Butterbur

mean intensity of attacks at all three time points) were
significantly reduced in the butterbur group, compared with
the placebo group, and the most conservative analysis showed
that seven of these 12 variables were still statistically
significant.°"” However, the possibility of bias in this retro-
spective re-analysis cannot be excluded entirely, and other
methodological issues remain, such as the lack of a sample size
calculation.
A larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of a butterbur extract for migraine prophylaxis has since been
conducted. In the trial, 245 patients with migraine (two of six
attacks per month for the three months prior to the study and
a minimum of two attacks in the four-week run-in phase; with
or without aura and meeting International Headache Society
criteria) received an extract of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex)
50mg twice daily, 75mg twice daily, or placebo, for 16
weeks.?» Overall, 202 participants completed the study (per-
protocol analysis) and 229 were included in the intention-to-
treat analysis. At the end of the study, the mean number of
migraine attacks was reduced by 45%, 32% and 28%,
compared with baseline values, for the butterbur extract
150mg daily, 100mg daily and placebo groups, respectively.
This finding was statistically significant for butterbur extract
150mg daily versus placebo (p = 0.005; intention-to-treat
analysis).°*) The proportion of 'responders' (proportion of
participants with > 50% reduction in mean attack frequency
per month relative to baseline) was significantly higher for the
butterbur 150mg group when compared with the placebo
group (p < 0.05), but there was no statistically significant
difference in this outcome for butterbur 100mg, compared
with placebo.
The effectiveness of a carbon-dioxide extract of P. hybridus
rhizome (Petadolex) at doses ranging from 50-150 mg,
depending on participant's age, were explored in 108 young
people (aged 6-17 years) with a history of migraine for at least
one year diagnosed according to International Headache
Society criteria, in a prospective, open-label, multi-centre,
four-month trial.°” At the end of the study, the frequency of
migraine attacks was reduced by 63%, compared with baseline
values, and 77% of participants experienced a reduction in the
frequency of migraine attacks of at least 50%. As this study did
not involve a control group, the effects cannot be attributed to
treatment with butterbur, and the hypothesis that butterbur
rhizome extract reduces the frequency of migraine attacks in
this patient population requires testing in rigorous randomised
controlled trials involving sufficient numbers of participants.

Side-effects, Toxicity

As with many herbal medicines, the safety of butterbur
preparations has not yet been adequately assessed: only limited
preclinical and clinical safety and toxicity data are available (see
below). One of the main issues regarding the clinical use of
butterbur extracts concerns the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid
constituents which are known to be hepatotoxic in humans, and
have been shown to be carcinogenic and mutagenic in preclinical
studies (see Comfrey). These alkaloids may be present in low
concentrations in all parts of the plant (see Constituents).
Several manufacturers of products containing butterbur include
in their manufacturing processes steps to remove the unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids to concentrations below the detectable
limit (e.g. <35 parts per billion).°*) However, there remains the
possibility that toxic quantities of unsaturated pyrrolizidine

alkaloids may be present in poorly processed products, and any
products which contain Petasites species as a result of botanical
misidentification or adulteration.

Butterbur is a member of the Asteraceae family, and members
of this family may cause allergic reactions in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/Compositae. No reports of allergic
reactions to butterbur were identified.

‘al data

Swissmedic, the competent authority for licensing medicines in
Switzerland, has revoked the licences for certain products
containing butterbur root extract following spontaneous reports
received in Germany of liver damage associated with their use.)
At the time of writing, the German authority had not taken any
regulatory action, but was monitoring the situation.

There is only limited information available for butterbur from
long-term postmarketing surveillance studies. Clinical trials
reported to date generally have involved only small numbers of
participants, mostly with allergic rhinitis or migraine who are
generally otherwise healthy, and have involved ingestion of
butterbur preparations for relatively short periods of time (up
to four months). Some clinical trials have not adequately reported
data on safety, and two randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials involving individuals with seasonal allergic
rhinitis or asthma who received butterbur extracts and in which
participants continued to take their existing medication (inhaled
or intranasal ong-or short-acting 2-ago-
nists) 47"? ed or not reported data on
safety parameters at all.

In a randomised, double-blind, trial involving 125 individuals
with seasonal allergic rhinitis who received butterbur extract (ZE-
339) equivalent to 32 mg petasins daily, or cetirizine 10 mg daily,
for two weeks, the frequency of adverse events was similar in both
groups (proportions of butterbur and cetirizine recipients who
reported adverse events were 10% and 11%, respectively). Eight
of the 12 adverse events reported by cetirizine recipients and two
of the 10 adverse events reported by butterbur recipients were
classified as fatigue or drowsiness. Raised liver enzyme activity (no
further details provided) and pruritus were reported for one
butterbur recipient each, but not for cetirizine recipients.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, 20 patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis stopped taking
any existing treatment one week before receiving butterbur
(Petaforce) 50mg twice daily for two weeks (no further details
of the preparation were provided in a report of the study, although
Petaforce marketed in the UK contains not less than 15% petasins
calculated as isopetasin). At the end of the study, liver function
test values (blood concentrations of alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and albumin) were
reported to be similar for butterbur and placebo groups,”
although no statistical analysis was carried out. Furthermore, this
study involved only small numbers of participants and was
conducted over a short time period and, therefore, cannot provide
adequate data on safety.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel group, controlled trial
in which 330 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis received a
carbon dioxide extract of butterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets
standardised for 8.0 mg total petasins per tablet) one tablet three
times daily (m = 110), fexofenadine (Telfast) 180 mg each morning
(n = 113), or placebo (n = 107), for two weeks, the frequency of
similar in all three groups (9.1, 7.1 and 6.5%

corticosteroids,

) have either not as:

adverse events was

----- PAGE 126 -----
for the butterbur, fexofenadine and placebo groups, respi
tively). between the three groups
with respect to changes in mean liver function test values at the
end of treatment from baseline values,“ although no statistical
analyses were reported. This finding is of limited value because of
the short treatment period. Furthermore, it would be more useful
to know whether or not liver function test values were raised in
any individual butterbur recipients, rather than reporting mean
values for the group.

Open, uncontrolled studies of butterbur extracts (ZE-339 and
Petadolex) in patients with seasonal and/or perennial allergic
rhinitis or asthma have reported that butterbur was well
tolerated,“°'*® although the design of these studies renders
them unsuitable for an adequate assessment of safety. In one of
these studies, in which participants (aged 6-85 years) with mild or
moderate asthma received a lipophilic carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur rhizome (Petadolex; standardised to contain at least
15% petasins) 50mg three times daily (reduced for children
depending on age) for a minimum of two months, seven
participants reported 11 adverse events.*) These included
abdominal pain, flatulence, sneezing, allergic conjunctivitis,
allergic rhinitis and halitosis (reported by children) and hair
loss, coughing, dyspnoea, difficulty exhaling and depression
(reported by adults). None of these was judged by the study
physician to be causally related to butterbur ingestion and none
led to withdrawal of participants from the study.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 60 individuals with migraine who received a carbon dioxide
extract of P. hybridus rhizome (Petadolex) two capsules twice
daily (equivalent to 100mg extract daily), or placebo, for 12
weeks, no adverse events were reported for the butterbur group
and no statistically significant change:
reported for vital signs and physical examination results.°”
However, two butterbur recipients withdrew from the study, one
because of a suspected pregnancy; the other participant did not
provide a reason. An independent re-analysis of the data from this
trial added that, at the end of the study, three butterbur recipients
had liver function test (ALT, aspartate transaminase (AST)) values
which were higher than normal ranges and significantly higher
than baseline values, and that
erythrocyte count were significantly higher than baseline values
for the butterbur group, compared with the placebo group.”
These changes were not regarded as being clinically relevant,°”
although no numerical data were provided to support this
judgement.

In a larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
245 patients with migraine received an extract of butterbur
rhizome (Petadolex) 50mg twice daily, 75mg twice daily, or
placebo, for 16 weeks.?) Data from 230 participants were
included in a safety analysis. The most frequently reported adverse
events that were considered possibly related to treatment were
gastrointestinal symptoms (not specified), which occurred in 22,
26 and 7% of participants in the butterbur extract 75mg,
butterbur extract 50mg and placebo groups, respectively. There
were no statistically significant differences in the frequencies of
adverse events for the butterbur groups, compared with placebo,
except for belching. No differences in liver function test values
were observed between the three groups. 7

A review of safety data for a specific preparation of butterbur
rhizome — an extract (Petadolex) standardised to contain a
minimum of 15% petasins and processed to achieve a concentra-
tion of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids of less than 0.08 ppm —
includes data from four postmarketing surveillance studies

4) :
» There were no differences

from baseline values were

ilirubin concentration and

Butterbur

involving a total of 188 patients (145 with migraine, including
50 children and adolescents aged 6-17 years). Adverse events
deemed to be possibly or probably causally related to ingestion of
the butterbur product included eructations (belching; n = 7), bad
taste/smell of the product (2) and skin rash (1).°°) However, it is
unclear why these four studies included such a small number of
participants: a single postmarketing surveillance study would
normally be expected to include many more participants.

The review also refers to 93 spontaneous suspected adverse drug
reaction (ADR) reports (75 of which originated from Germany,
where the manufacturer is located) received by the product
manufacturer from 1976 to the end of June 2002. In total, 27 of
these reports were determined to be possibly (1 = 19) or probably
(8) causally related to butterbur administration; the latter
included one case of reversible cholestatic hepatitis. The review
states an overall frequency of suspected ADRs, calculated on the
basis of sales figures and the total number of spontaneous ADR
reports received by the manufacturer. However, for several
reasons, these types of data should not be used to calculate
frequencies of suspected ADRs.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of spontaneous reports
of suspected adverse drug reactions from national pharmaco-
vigilance centres of over 70 countries worldwide. At the end of
2005, the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of
10 reports, describing a total of 22 adverse reactions, for products
reported to contain P. hybridus only as the active ingredient.
Reactions reported included hepatic enzymes increased (n = 2),
hepatic necrosis (2), hepatitis (1), cholestatic hepatitis (1) and
hepatocellular damage (1) from three case reports. Nine of the
reports originated from Germany and one from Switzerland. In
six of the 10 reports, PR hybridus was the suspected drug.
(These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by
the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitor-
ing, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at
least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

sole

Preclinical data

There are limited data from animal toxicity studies for butterbur
preparations, although a_ review”) data from
unpublished toxicity studies. Acute toxicity studies in rats yielded
LDso values for a single-dose oral administration and single-dose
intraperitoneal administration of > 2.5 and approximately 1 g/kg
body weight, respectively. A chronic toxicity study in rats (” =
200) carried out over 26 weeks established a no adverse effect level
for the lower dose range tested (oral administration; no further
details provided).

Information on mutagenicity and genotoxicity of butterbur
is limited to summaries of unpublished data. An extract
of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex) produced a negative result in the
Ames test for mutagenicity using several strains of Salmonella
typhimurium.©” In an in vitro test for clastogenic activity in
which the butterbur extract was incubated with cultured human
peripheral lymphocytes, the mean number of chromosomal
aberrations was within the reference range of the negative
control.® This result was obtained irrespective of whether or
not the test included metabolic activation using a rat liver
postmitochondrial fraction. In contrast, mitomycin C and

summarises

extracts

----- PAGE 127 -----
Butterbur

cyclophosphamide, as positive controls, induced chromosomal
damage.

There is some evidence from preclinical studies that S-petasin,
a constituent of butterbur root, rhizome and leaf, has effects on
certain endocrine systems. In rats, S-petasin (10 pg/kg body
weight, intravenously) reduced basal plasma corticosterone
concentrations to a significantly greater extent than did control
at 30 minutes after administration (p < 0.05), although there
were no statistically significant differences between groups when
corticosterone concentrations were measured at one, two and
three hours after administration.°”) The same dose of S-petasin
also significantly reduced adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH)-induced
increases in plasma corticosterone concentrations at 30 minutes,
but not longer intervals, after administration, compared with
Similar effects were observed following in vitro
experiments: S-petasin significantly reduced basal, ACTH- and
forskolin (an adenylyl cyclase activator)-stimulated corticoster-
one release from rat adrenal gland cells (zona fasciculata
reticularis) in a concentration-dependent manner. Results of
further in vitro experiments suggested that the mechanism for
the observed effects is in part through inhibition by S-petasin of
the enzymes adenylyl cyclase (which catalyses the formation of
cyclic AMP), and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage and 11f-

hydroxylase, which are important in the biosynthesis of
(59, 60)

control.

corticosterone.

S-Petasin (1 ttg/kg body weight, intravenously) administered as
a single dose to small numbers of adult male rats reduced basal
plasma testosterone concentrations, compared with control
(mean (SEM): 0.81 (0.06) and 1.31 (0.21) ng/mL for S-petasin
and control, respectively; p < 0.05).{°) Incubation of S-petasin
at concentrations of 0.14-14.4,1g/mL with rat testicular inter-
stitial cells led to a concentration-dependent inhibition of
testosterone release. S-Petasin also inhibited forskolin-, human
chorionic gonadotrophin- and androstenidione-induced stimula-
tion of testosterone secretion from rat testicular interstitial cells
im vitro.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the known toxicity, the German Commission E
recommended that the maximum daily intake of unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids is 1 tg, and that the duration of use should
not exceed 4-6 weeks in a year.©> In Switzerland, there are
concerns regarding reports in Germany of hepatotoxicity
associated with the use of certain products containing butterbur
root extract (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Drug interactions No reports of drug interactions with
butterbur extracts were identified. Certain constituents of
butterbur have been documented in preclinical studies to have
hypotensive activity and negative chronotropic and_ negative
inotropic effects. Against this background, and on a theoretical
basis, the possibility of interactions with hypertensive and
antihypertensive medicines should be considered. Likewise,
several constituents of butterbur have been documented to
displace the binding of ligands at dopamine D, and histamine
H, receptors, so there is a theoretical possibility of interactions
with medicinal agents acting at these receptors.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of safety data and
the possible hepatotoxic effects of poorly processed butterbur
extracts, the use of products containing butterbur is contra-
indicated in pregnancy and by breastfeeding women.

Tesalin.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Switzerland: Dragees aux figues avec du sene; Dragees pour la
detente nerveuse; Relaxane; Valverde Constipation dragees;
Valverde Detente dragees; Wala Pulmonium suc contre la toux.

References

1 Novotny L et al. Substances from Petasites officinalis Moench.
Tetrahedron Lett 1961; 20: 697-701.

2. Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Sesquiterpenes from Petasites
hybridus (furanopetasin chemovar): separation, isolation and
quantitation of compounds from fresh plant extracts. Pharm Acta
Helv 1997; 72: 57-67.

3 Debrunner B et al. Sesquiterpenes of Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et
Sch.: distribution of sesquiterpenes over plant organs. Pharm Acta
Helv 1995; 70: 167-173.

4 Novotny L et al. Contribution to the chemotaxonomy of some
European Petasites species. Phytochemistry 1966; 5: 1281-1287.

5 Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Analytic investigations of
sesquiterpenes of Petasites albus (L.) and Petasites hybridus
(furanopetasin chemovar). Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 362-364.

6 Chizzola R. Distribution of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids senecionine
and integerrimine within the Petasites hybridus plant. Planta Med
1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): A693-A694.

7 Langer T et al. A competitive enzyme immunoassay for the
pyrrolizidine alkaloids of the senecionine type. Planta Med 1996; 62:
267-271.

8 Wildi E e¢ al. Quantitative analysis of petasin and pyrrolizidine
alkaloids in leaves and rhizomes of in situ grown Petasites hybridus
plants. Planta Med 1998; 64: 264-267.

9 Liithy J et al. Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloide in Petasites hybridus L. und P.
albus L. Pharm Acta Helv 1983; 58: 98-100.

10 Chizzola R. Distribution of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in crossing
progenies of Petasites hybridus. ] Herbs Spices Med Plants 2002; 9:
39-44,

11 Mroczek T et al. Simultaneous determination of N-oxides and free
bases of pyrrolizidine alkaloids by cation-exchange solid-phase
extraction and ion-pair high-performance liquid chromatography. J
Chromatogr A 2002; 949: 249-262.

12 Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Furanoeremophilane und
Eremophilanlaktone. Z Phytother 1994; 15: 270-271.

13 Saritas Y et al. Sesquiterpene constituents in Petasites hybridus.
Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 795-803.

14 Debrunner B et al. Sesquiterpenes of Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et
Sch.: influence of locations and seasons on sesquiterpene distribution.
Pharm Acta Helv 1995; 70: 315-323.

15 Debrunner B. Influence of temperature and storage on the stability of
some eremophilane esters in Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et Sch.
(petasin chemovar). Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 364-365.

16 Anon. Safety concerns over butterbur. Pharm J 2002; 268: 126.

17. Mauz Ch et al. Methode zur Entfernung von Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloiden
aus Arzneipflanzenextrakten. Pharm Acta Helv 1985; 60: 256-259.

18 Wildi E et al. In vitro propagation of Petastites hybridus with high
petasin and low pyrrolizidine alkaloid content. Pharm Acta Helv
1998; 72: 371-373.

19 Tobyn G. Culpeper's Medicine. A Practice of Western Holistic
Medicine. Shaftesbury: Element, 1997.

20 Lee DKC et al. Butterbur, a herbal remedy, attenuates adenosine
monophosphate induced nasal responsiveness in seasonal allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2003; 33: 882-886.

21 Schapowal A for the Petasites Study Group. Randomised controlled
trial of butterbur and cetirizine for treating seasonal allergic rhinitis.
BMJ 2002; 324: 1+.

----- PAGE 128 -----
22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Grossmann M, Schmidramsl H. An extract of Petasites hybridus is
effective in the prophylaxis of migraine. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther
2000; 38: 430-435.

Lipton RB et al. Petasites hybridus root is an effective preventive
treatment for migraine. Neurology 2004; 63: 2240-2244.

Thomet OAR, Simon H-U. Petasins in the treatment of allergic
diseases: results of preclinical and clinical studies. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2002; 129: 108-112.

Bickel D et al. Identification and characterization of inhibitors of
peptido-leukotriene synthesis from Petasites hybridus. Planta Med
1994; 60: 318-322.

Berger D et al. Influence of Petasites hybridus on dopamine-D, and
histamine-H, receptors. Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 373-375.
Brattstrém A. Mode of action and pharmacological data of Petasites
extract Ze 339. In: Chrubasik $, Roufogalis B, eds. Herbal Medicinal
Products for the Treatment of Pain. Lismore: Southern Cross
University Press, 2000.

Brune K et al. Gastro-protective effects by extracts of Petasites
hybridus: the role of inhibition of peptido-leukotriene synthesis.
Planta Med 1993; 59: 494-496.

Thomet OA et al. Role of petasin in the potential anti-inflammatory
activity of a plant extract of Petasites hybridus. Biochem Pharmacol
2001; 61: 1041-1047.

Thomet OA et al. Differential inhibition of inflammatory effector
functions by petasin, isopetasin and neopetasin in human eosinophils.
Clin Exp Allergy 2001; 31: 1310-1320.

Fiebich BL et al. Petasites hybridus extracts in vitro inhibit COX-2 and
PGE2 release by direct interaction with the enzyme and by preventing
p42/44 MAP kinase activation in rat primary microglial cells. Planta
Med 2005; 71: 12-19.

Ko W-C et al. Relaxant effects of petasins in isolated guinea pig
trachea and their structure-activity relationships. Planta Med 2000; 66:
650-652.

Ko W-C et al. Mechanisms of relaxant action of S-petasin and S-
isopetasin, sesquiterpenes of Petasites formosanus, in isolated guinea
pig trachea. Planta Med 2001, 67: 224-229.

Ko W-C et al. S-isopetasin, a sesquiterpene of Petasites formosanus,
allosterically antagonized carbachol in isolated guinea pig atria.
Planta Med 2002; 68: 652-655.

Wang G-J et al. Calcium channel blockade in vascular smooth muscle
cells: major hypotensive mechanism of S-petasin, a hypotensive
sesquiterpene from Petasites formosanus. ] Pharmacol Exp Ther 2001;
297: 240-246.

Wang G-J et al. Ca?* blocking effect of iso-S-petasin in rat aortic
smooth muscle cells. Eur J Pharmacol 2002; 445: 239-245.

Wang G-J et al. Calcium-antagonizing activity of S-petasin, a
hypotensive sesquiterpene from Petasites formosanus, on inotropic
and chronotropic responses in isolated rat atria and cardiac myocytes.
Naunyn-Schmeideberg's Arch Pharmacol 2004; 369: 322-329.

Esberg LB et al. Iso-S-petasin, a hypotensive sesquiterpene from
Petasites formosanus, depresses cardiac contraction and intracellular
Ca** transients in adult rat ventricular myocytes. J Pharm Pharmacol
2003; 55: 103-107.

Wu S-N et al. The mechanism of inhibitory actions of $-petasin, a
sesquiterpene of Petasites formosanus, on L-type calcium current in
NG108-15 neuronal cells. Planta Med 2003; 69: 118-124.

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

Butterbur

Thomet OAR et al. Anti-inflami
Petasites hybridus in allergic rhi
997-1006.

Schapowal A. Author's reply [letter]. BMJ 2002; 324: 1277.

Shuster S. Well designed experiments should have been used [letter].
BMJ 2002; 324: 1277.

McArthur CA, Arnott N. Trial does not show that there is no
difference between butterbur and cetirizine [letter]. BMJ 2002; 324:
1277.

Schapowal A, on behalf of study group. Treating intermittent allergic
rhinit prospective, randomized, placebo and antihistamine-
controlled study of butterbur extract Ze 339. Phytotherapy Res 2005;
19: 530-537.

Schapowal A, for the Petasites Study Group. Butterbur Ze339 for the
treatment of intermittent allergic rhinitis. Dose-dependent efficacy in
a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004; 130: 1381-1386.

Lee DKC et al. A placebo-controlled evaluation of butterbur and
fexofenadine on objective and subjective outcomes in perennial allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2004; 34: 646-649.

Lee DKC et al. Butterbur, a herbal remedy, confers complementary
anti-inflammatory activity in asthmatic patients receiving inhaled
corticosteroids. Clin Exp Allergy 2004; 34: 110-114.

Danesch U. Petasites hybridus (butterbur root) extract in the treatment
of asthma — an open trial. Altern Med Rev 2004; 9: 54-62.

Jackson CM et al. The effects of butterbur on the histamine and
allergen cutaneous response. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2004; 92:
250-254.

Tfelt-Hansen P et al. for the International Headache Society Clinical
Trials Subcommittee. Guidelines for controlled trials of drugs in
migraine, second edition. Cephalalgia 2000; 20: 765-786.

Diener HC et al. The first placebo-controlled trial of a special
butterbur root extract for the prevention of migraine: reanalysis of
efficacy criteria. Eur Neurol 2004; 51: 89-97.

Pothmann R, Danesch U. Migraine prevention in children and
adolescents: results of an open study with a special butterbur root
extract. Headache 2005; 45: 196-203.

Brattstrém A. A newly developed extract (Ze 339) from butterbur
(Petasites hybridus L.) is clinically efficient in allergic rhinitis (hay
fever). Phytomedicine 2003; 10 (Suppl. Suppl.IV): 50-52.

NN. Praparate aus Petasitesrhizom in der Schweiz vom Markt.
Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung 2004; 144: 64-66.

Danesch U, Rittinghausen R. Safety of a patented special butterbur
root extract for migraine prevention. Headache 2003; 43: 76-78.
Vigibase. WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre. (accessed January 13, 2006).

Koch V, Danesch U. Response to Fox and DeSousa [letter]. Headache
2001; 41: 325-326.

Danesch U, Rittinghausen R. Response from Danesch and
Rittinghausen [letter]. Headache 2003; 43: 822-823.

Chang L-L et al. Effects of S-petasin on corticosterone release in rats.
Chin ] Physiol 2002; 45: 137-142.

Chang L-L e¢ al. Effects of S-petasin on cyclic AMP production and
enzyme activity of P450scc in rat zona fasciculata-reticularis cells. Eur
J Pharmacol 2004; 489: 29-37.

Lin H et al. Inhibition of testosterone secretion by S-petasin in rat
testicular interstitial cells. Chin J Physiol 2000; 43: 99-103.

‘ory activity of an extract of
s. Int Immunopharmacol 2002; 2:

----- PAGE 129 -----
= Calamus

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The phytochemistry of calamus, especially the oil, is well
documentated. Three genotypes (diploid, triploid and
tetraploid) have been identified which are chemically distinct
with respect to the B-asarone content. Spasmolytic and anti-
ulcer effects documented for the oil support the traditional
herbal uses of calamus. In addition, bitter principles
documented as constituents may account for the use of the
root in anorexia. However, in view of the toxic properties
documented for the oil and associated with B-asarone, it has
been recommended that only fB-asarone-free calamus root
should be used in phytotherapy. Use of the oil is not
recommended due to its carcinogenic activity and its ability
to cause kidney damage, tremors and convulsions.“>®)
Studies carried out to investigate the mutagenic potential of
calamus have produced conflicting results.

Species (Family)
Acorus calamus L. (Acoraceae)

Various genetic species (7 = 12): diploid North American,
triploid European, tetraploid Asian, Eastern, Indian.
Synonym(s)

Sweet Flag
Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General

References G19, G22, G41 and G58.

Amines
choline.

Dimethylamine, methylamine, trimethylamine and

Volatile oil 1.5-3.5%. B-Asarone content varies between genetic
species: 96% in tetraploid (Indian), 5% in triploid (European) and
0% in the diploid (North American) species." Other identified
components include calamenol (5%), calamene (4%), calamone
(1%), methyl eugenol (1%), eugenol (0.3%) and the sesquiter-
penes acolamone, acoragermacrone and isoacolamone. Consider-
able qualitative and quantitative differences have been reported
between the volatile oil from different genetic species, and
between the volatile fraction of an alcoholic extract and the
essential oil from the same variety (European).

Tannin 1.5%.

Other constituents Bitter principles (e.g. acorin), acoric and
palmitic acids, resin (2.5%), mucilage, starch (25-40%), sugars.

Food Use

The level of B-asarone permitted in foods is restricted to 0.1 mg/kg
in foods and beverages, 1 mg/kg in alcoholic beverages and in
foods containing Acorus calamus or Asarum europaeum.'%
Calamus is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of natural
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
calamus can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity©'!® Previously, calamus
was classified as an ‘unsafe herb! by the US Food and Drugs
Administration (FDA),‘C?” and the use of the rhizome and its

derivatives (oil, extracts) was prohibited from use in human
food.'C4?

Herbal Use

Calamus is stated to act as a carminative, spasmolytic and
diaphoretic. Traditionally it has been indicated for acute and

Phenylpropanoids Sesquiterpenoids
H3CO. NN %,
°
H3CO OCH3
B-asarone fo)
acorone
“Ty
tn,
RO a
R
eugenol H
methyleugenol CH3 fe)
shyobunone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of calamus.

Figure 2 Calamus (Acorus calumus).

----- PAGE 130 -----
Figure 3. Calamus — dried drug substance (rhizome).

chronic dyspepsia, gastritis and gastric ulcer, intestinal colic and
anorexia.'°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Rhizome 1-3¢ as an infusion three times daily.©”
Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Numerous documented studies have concentrated on activities
associated with the oil.’ Unless specified, all of the following
actions refer to those exhibited by the oil.

Spasmolytic action in vitro versus various spasmogens in
different smooth muscle preparations including tracheal, intest-
inal, uterine, bronchial and vascular has been reported for
European and Indian varieties.°* In one study, activity was
associated with a lack of B-asarone, whereas oils with either low
or high concentrations of f-asarone have also exhibited
activity"? The pattern of spasmolytic activity has been
compared to that of papaverine, and a direct musculotropic
action has been proposed." Unlike papaverine, an acetylcholine-
like action has also been observed with low dilutions of the oil and
asarone.

Inhibition of monoamine oxidase activity and a stimulation of
p- and L-amino oxidase has been reported.) The mechanism for
this activity, involving serotonin and adrenaline, has been
disputed, and an alternative mechanism involving depression of
hypothalamic function has been proposed.”

Oil rich in B-asarone has been reported to reduce phenylbu-
tazone-induced ulcers in the rat by 560%, although no effect was
observed on stress- or ethanol-induced ulcers.) No spasmolytic
activity was reported for oil free from or containing only low
concentrations of B-asarone.

A sedative action and a potentiation of barbiturate effect
(increased sleeping time, reduction in body temperature) have
been described in a number of small animals (mice, rats, rabbits
and cats) following intravenous or intraperitoneal administration
of European (alcoholic and aqueous extracts) and Indian

Calamus

varieties.°) Dexamfetamine has been found to block the

potentiating action of the Indian variety on barbiturate sleeping
time. Potentiation of morphine activity has been reported for
the European variety.

The Indian oil has been reported to deplete serotonin and
noradrenaline in the rat brain following intraperitoneal adminis-
tration. The mechanism of action was suggested as similar to
that of reserpine, and a potentiation of the amfetamine-
detoxifying effect of reserpine has also been described.) In
contrast, the central action of the European variety has been
stated not to resemble that of reserpine. Anti-adrenergic activity
demonstrated by antagonism of dexamfetamine-induced agita-
tional symptoms has been reported for the Indian variety in
various small animals.”

Anticonvulsant, anti-arrhythmic (like quinidine) and hypoten-
sive (apparently not due to a nervous mechanism) activities in
small animals have also been reported for the Indian variety.”

a-Asarone, isolated from Asarum europaeum (Aristolochia-
ceae), has a local anaesthetic activity similar to that of
benzocaine."”

Weak antifungal activity has been documented for B-asarone'
and for the oil."°) Insecticidal and leech repellant properties have
been reported for the oil and may be synergised by synthetic pine
oil. Antibacterial activity primarily versus organisms respon-
sible for gut and throat infections has been documented,”
although a lack of antibacterial activity has also been reported.)

(11)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of calamus,
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-Effects, Toxicity©'? ©

Concerns over the toxicity of calamus centre around the volatile
oil and in particular on the B-asarone content. The level of B-
asarone in the oil varies considerably between the different genetic
species of calamus (see Constituents).

Feeding studies (rat) using the Indian oil (high B-asarone
concentration) have shown death, growth depression, hepatic and
heart abnormalities, and serous effusion in abdominal and/or
peritoneal cavities."*'* A two-year study involving diet supple-
mented with calamus oil at 0, 500, 1000, 2500 and 5000 ppm,
reported growth depression, and malignant duodenal tumours
after 59 weeks at all levels of dietary supplementation.>
Tumours of the same type were not noted in the controls.

Genotoxic activity (strong induction of chromo somal aberra-
tions, slight increase in the rate of sister chromatid exchanges) has
been exhibited by B-asarone in human lymphocyte cultures in the
presence of microsomal activation.) Mutagenic activity (Ames)
has been documented for root extracts, a tincture and B-asarone in
one (TA100) of the various Salmonella typhimurium strains
(TA98, 100, 1535, 1537, 1538) tested, but only in the presence of a
microsomal activation mix." Lack of mutagenicity has also been
reported for an organic extract, when tested in the above
Salmonella typhimurium strains (except TA1538) with and
without activation.”

Acute toxicities (LD59) quoted for the volatile oil from the
Indian variety (high B-asarone content) include 777 mg/kg (rat,
oral), >5 g/kg (guinea-pig, dermal), 221 mg/kg (rat, intraperito-
neal). The oleoresin is stated to be toxic at 400 and 800 mg/kg
(mouse, intraperitoneal). The LDso of asarone in mice is stated
to be 417 mg/kg (oral) and 310 mg/kg (intraperitoneal).

----- PAGE 131 -----
Calamus

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for calamus
and investigation of these aspects is required. Generally the oil is
considered to be non-irritant, non-sensitising and non-photo-
toxic.'°® However, bath preparations containing the oil have
reportedly caused erythema, and dermatitis has been reported in
hypersensitive individuals.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The toxicity of calamus oil has been associated with the B-asarone
content.''® It has therefore been advised that only roots free from,
or with a low content of B-asarone should be used in human
phytotherapy."® In foods and beverages, the concentration of B-
asarone permitted in the final product is restricted (see Food use).

Use of the isolated oil is not recommended.'“*”“**) In general,
topical application of any undiluted volatile oil is not recom-
mended; external contact with calamus oil may cause an irritant
reaction in sensitive individuals.

Drug interactions None documentated. However, the potential
for preparations of calamus to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. For example, calamus has
amine constituents, and there is limited evidence from in vitro
studies that calamus has monamine oxidase inhibitory activity;
however, the clinical significance of this, if any, is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the toxic properties
associated with calamus, it should not be used during pregnancy
or lactation. It is not known whether f-asarone is excreted into the
breast milk.

Austria: Abdomilon N; Original Schwedenbitter. Czech
Republic: Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Eugastrin; Stomaran.
France: Jouvence de |'Abbe Soury. Germany: Abdomilon;

Tisane pour I'estomac; Urinex. UK: Pegina.

References

1

2

10

cae

12

13

14

1s

16

17

Stahl E, Keller K. Zur Klassifizierung handelsiiblicher Kalmusdrogen.
Planta Med 1981; 43: 128-140.

Keller K, Stahl E. Zusammensetzung des atherischen Oles von B-
asaronfreiem Kalmus. Planta Med 1983; 47: 71-74.

Mazza G. Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric studies of the
constituents of the rhizome of calamus. I. The volatile constituents of
the essential oil. J Chromatogr 1985; 328: 179-194.

Mazza G. Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric studies of the
constituents of the rhizome of calamus. II. The volatile constituents of
alcoholic extracts. J Chromatogr 1985; 328: 195— 206.

Opdyke DJL. Calamus oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1977; 15: 623-626.
Keller K et al. Spasmolytische wirkung des isoasaronfreien kalmus.
Planta Med 1985; 6-9.

Keller K et al. Pharmacological activity of calamus oil with different
amount of cis-isoasaron. Naunyn Schmiedeberg's Arch Pharmacol
1983; 324 (Suppl. Suppl.): R55.

Das PK e¢ al. Spasmolytic activity of asarone and essential oil of
Acorus calamus, Linn. Arch Int Pharmacodyn 1962; 135: 167-177.
Calamus. Lawrence Review of Natural Products. St Louis, MO: JB
Lippincott, 1989.

Gracza L. The active substances of Asarum europaeum. 16. The local
anaesthetic activity of the phenylpropanoids. Planta Med 1983; 48:
153-157.

Ohmoto T, Sung Y-I. Antimycotic substances in the crude drugs II.
Shoyakugaku Zasshi 1982; 36: 307-314.

Jain SR et al. Antibacterial evaluation of some indigenous volatile oils.
Planta Med 1974; 26: 196-199.

Taylor JM et al. Toxicity of oil of calamus (Jammu Variety). Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 1967; 10: 405.

Gross MA et al. Carcinogenicity of oil of calamus. Proc Am Assoc
Cancer Res 1967; 8: 24.

Abel G. Chromosome damaging effect on human lymphocytes by B-
asarone. Planta Med 1987; 251-253.

Géggelmann W, Schimmer O. Mutagenicity testing of B-asarone and
commercial calamus drugs with Salmonella typhimurium. Mutat Res
1983; 121: 191-194.

Riazuddin § et al. Mutagenicity testing of some medicinal herbs.
Environ Mol Mutagen 1987; 10: 141-148.

----- PAGE 132 -----
Calendula

inflammatory effect is due to the triterpenoid constituents,
although flavonoids may contribute to the activity. The
reputed antispasmodic effect may be attributable to the
volatile oil fraction. In addition, immunostimulant activity has
been reported for high molecular weight polysaccharide
components. Clinical research assessing the effects of
calendula preparations is limited, and rigorous randomised
controlled clinical trials are required.

Species (Family)

Calendula officinalis L. (Asteraceae)

Synonym(s)
Gold-bloom, Marigold, Marybud, Pot Marigold

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 2003079

Martindale 35th edition\*»

Ph Eur 20078?

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (external use only)'@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G48, G62 and G76.

Flavonoids Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 0.4%
flavonoids.“8S* Flavonol (isorhamnetin, quercetin) glycosides
including isoquercitrin, narcissin, neohesperidoside, and rutin.)

Polysaccharides Three polysaccharides PS-I, -II and —III have a
(1-3)-B-p-galactan backbone with short side chains at C-6,
comprising o-araban-(1—3)-araban, o-L-rhamnan-(1—3)-araban
or simple &-L-rhamnan moieties.)

Terpenoids Many components, including «- and f-amyrin,
lupeol, longispinogenin, oleanolic acid, arnidiol, brein, calendu-

ladiol, erythrodiol, faradiol, faradiol-3-myristic acid ester, far-
adiol-3-palmitic acid ester,°) helantriols Al, BO, Bl and B2,
lupeol, maniladiol, urs-12-en-3,16,21-triol, ursadiol; oleanolic
acid saponins including calendulosides C-H; campesterol,
cholesterol, sitosterol, stigmasterol and taraxasterol (sterols).

Volatile oils }Terpenoid components include menthone, iso-
menthone, caryophyllene and an epoxide and ketone derivative,
pedunculatine, %- and B-ionone, a B-ionone epoxide derivative,
dihydroactinidiolide.

Other constituents Bitter (loliolide),'” arvoside A (sesquiterpene
glycoside),'® carotenoid pigments” and calendulin (gum)."”’
Food Use

Calendula is not used in foods. Previously, calendula has been
listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°°

Herbal Use

Calendula is stated to possess antispasmodic, mild diaphoretic,
anti-inflammatory, anti-haemorrhagic, emmenagogue, vulnerary,

Saponins

R
faradiol-3-O-laurate laurate maniladiol-3-O-laurate laurate
faradiol-3-O-myristate myristate — maniladiol-3-O-myristate —_ myristate
faradiol-3-O-palmitate palmitate

Calendulosides
At Re

glucose (1-—4)—
galactose (1-—3)—
glucose (1-~4)—
galactose (1--3)—
galactose (1-~3) glucuronic acid
galactose (1-~4) ——glucuronic acid
glucose (1-~4)——glucuronic acid H
glucuronic acid H

glucuronic acid

glucuronic acid H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of calendula.

----- PAGE 133 -----
Calendula

styptic and antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has been used to
treat gastric and duodenal ulcers, amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea
and epistaxis; crural ulcers, varicose veins, haemorrhoids, anal
eczema, proctitis, lymphadenoma, inflamed cutaneous lesions
(topically) and conjunctivitis (as an eye lotion). The German
Commission E approved internal and external use for inflamma-
tion of oral and pharyngeal mucosa and external use in treatment
of poorly healing sores.““?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) and directions for
external use (where stated) for traditional uses recommended in
older and contemporary standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried florets 1-4 g by infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 40% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Calendula Tincture (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.2 mL (1:5 in 90% alcohol)
three times daily.'C”

External use Tincture—liquid extract (1:1) in 40% alcohol or
tincture 1:5 in 90% alcohol. Apply to wounds as such and dilute
1:3 with water for compresses. Ointment 2.5%.'°)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral activities have been
reported for calendula.“”’ Weak anti-inflammatory activity in rats
(carrageenan-induced oedema) has been reported. 2) An
aqueous ethanolic extract had mild dose-dependent action in the
mouse croton oil test with 20% inhibition being reached at a dose
of 1200g/ear, whereas a carbon dioxide extract exhibited 70%
inhibition at the same concentration.” ') The activity was shown
to be due to the triterpenoids, the most active being a monoester

Figure 2 Calendula (Calendula officinalis).

of faradiol. Further separation of the triterpenoids has shown that
the three most active compounds in the croton oil mouse test are
faradiol-3-myristic acid ester, faradiol-3-palmitic acid ester and 4-
taraxosterol.)

A polysaccharide enriched extract showed strong concentra-
tion-dependent adhesive properties on porcine buccal membranes
ex vivo. Fluorescent labelled rhamnogalacturan indicated the
presence of polysaccharide layers on buccal membranes, leading to
the suggestion that irritated buccal membranes may be smoothed
by mucilage.

The formation of new blood vessels is an essential part of the
wound-healing process. Angiogenic activity has been shown for a
freeze-dried aqueous extract of calendula utilising the chick
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay.\') The number of
microvessels in calendula-treated CAMs was significantly higher
than in the control (p < 0.0001). Furthermore, calendula-treated
CAMs were positive for the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA)
associated with neovascularisation. The presence of HA was not
demonstrated in control CAMs.

A combination of allantoin and calendula extract applied to
surgically induced skin wounds in rats has been reported to
stimulate physiological regeneration and epithelisation." This
effect was attributed to a more intensive metabolism of
glycoproteins, nucleoproteins and collagen proteins during the
regenerative period in the tissues.‘ Allantoin applied on its own
was found to exert a much weaker action."

A proprietary cream containing a combination of plant
extracts, including calendula, has been reported to be effective
in dextran and burn oedemas and in acute lymphoedema in rats.
Activity against lymphoedema was primarily attributed to an
enhancement of macrophage proteolytic activity’? Slight
increases in foot oedema were attributed to a vasodilatory action.
The trichomonacidal activity of calendula has been associated
with the essential oil terpenoid fraction.
An in vitro uterotonic effect has been described for calendula
extract on rabbit and guinea-pig preparations.''*)
Immunostimulant activity, assayed using granulocyte and
carbon clearance tests, of calendula extracts has been attributed
to polysaccharide fractions of high molecular weight.''”) Poly-
saccharides PS-I, -II and -III have immunostimulant activity at
concentrations of 10-° to 10° mg/mL, stimulating phagocytosis
of human granulocytes in vitro.” A dry 70% ethanolic extract
was not directly mitogenic, and was inhibitory in the mitogen-
induced lymphocyte assay, causing stimulation at concentrations
of 0.1-10 pg/mL, and inhibition at higher concentrations.”

Figure 3 Calendula — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 134 -----
A 70% methanolic extract of calendula was successively
extracted with ether, chloroform, ethyl acetate and n-butanol,
leaving a residual aqueous extract. Each of the five extracts were
concentrated and dissolved in 50% ethanol to produce 6% (w/v)
solutions which were assessed for activity on liposomal lipid
peroxidation induced by Fe** and ascorbic acid. The ether,
butanol and water extracts showed antioxidant activity.°”

The triterpenoid constituents of calendula are reported to be
effective as spermicides and as antiblastocyst and abortion
agents. ‘@>)

In vitro cytotoxic activity and in vivo antitumour activity
(against mouse Ehrlich carcinoma) have been documented for
calendula extracts.” The most active fraction in vivo (saponin-
rich) was not the most active in vitro.

A 70% aqueous ethanolic extract had marked antiviral activity
against influenza virus and herpes simplex virus.“ A dichlor-
omethane—methanol (1:1) extract exhibited potent anti-HIV
activity in an in vitro MTT/tetrazolium-based assay.”” Un-
infected Molt-4 cells were completely protected for up to 24 hours
from fusion and subsequent death caused by co-cultivation with
persistently infected U-937/HIV-1 cells. The organic extract
caused a significant concentration- and time-dependent reduction
of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.”

In a study in mice fed for three weeks with a diet containing
either 0.1% or 0.4% of a calendula extract (containing 37% of
esters of the carotenoid lutein), mammary tumour cells were
infused into the mammary glands. Tumour latency increased, and
tumour growth was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by
dietary lutein. In addition, dietary lutein was reported to enhance
lymphocyte proliferation.?»

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of calendula preparations is
limited, and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A proprietary cream preparation containing several plant
extracts, including calendula, has been reported to reduce pain
associated with postmastectomy lymphoedema, although there
was no significant clinical difference in the reduction of oedema
between controls and experimental groups.” Calendula tincture
20% has been used in the treatment of chronic suppurative
otitis,” and calendula extracts are used to accelerate healing and
to reduce inflammation.” However, the efficacy of calendula
preparations in these indications has not been assessed in
randomised controlled clinical trials. In an open, uncontrolled
pilot study, 30 patients with burns or scalds were treated three
times daily with a hydrogel containing 10% aqueous ethanolic
extract of calendula for 14 days.? Improvement was noted for
reddening, swelling, blistering, pain, soreness and heat sensitivity.
However, the methodological limitations of this study do not
allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of calendula.

Side-effects, To:

An aqueous extract of calendula had an LDso9 of 375 mg/kg
(intravenous administration) and an LDjo9 of 580 mg/kg (intra-
peritoneal administration) in mice.'°*?) Aqueous ethanolic
extracts (drug/extract ratio 1:1 and 0.5:1, 30% ethanol) had
LDso values of 45mg/mouse (subcutaneous administration) and
526 mg/100g in rat (intravenous administration). An aqueous
extract was not toxic following chronic administration to mice.
Six saponins at doses of 400 1g were non-mutagenic in the Ames
test using Salmonella typhimurium TA98 with and without S9

Calendula

activation mixture.'©*) In vitro cytotoxicity has been reported for

calendula extracts." Extracts have been reported to be non-
carcinogenic in rats and hamsters.'°*”)

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for calendula
and investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Calendula may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/Compositae.

Drug interactions None documentated. However, the potential
for preparations of calendula to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Calendula is traditionally reputed to
affect the menstrual cycle. An uterotonic effect (in vitro) has been
reported, and the triterpenoid constituents are reported to be
effective as spermatocides and as antiblastocyst and abortion
agents. In view of the lack of toxicity data, the use of calendula is
best avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Hemorrogel. Germany: bioplant-Kamillenfluid; Cefawell;
Nephronorm med; Unguentum lymphaticum. Italy: Alkagin;
Babygella; Decon Ovuli; Lenirose; Nevril; Proctopure. Mexico:
Sanicut; Supranettes Naturalag. Portugal: Alkagin; Alkagin;
Alkagin; Cicaderma. South Africa: Heilsalbe; Oleam Rhinale
Nasal Oil; Wecesin. Spain: Banoftal; Menstrunat. Switzerland:
Gel a la consoude; Onguent aux herbes Keller; Urinex; Wala
Echinacea. UK: Calendula Nappy Change Cream; Massage
Balm with Calendula; Napiers Echinacea Tea. USA: Nasal-
Ease; Ultimate Antioxidant Formula. Venezuela: Biomicovo;
Supranettes.

References

1 Vidal-Ollivier E et al. Flavonol glycosides from Calendula officinalis
flowers. Planta Med 1989; 55: 73.

2 Varljen J et al. Structural analysis of a rhamnoarabinogalactan and
arabinogalactans with immuno-stimulating activity from Calendula
officinalis. Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 2379-2383.

3. Zitterl-Eglseer K et al. Anti-oedematous activities of the main
triterpendiol esters of marigold (Calendula officinalis L.). J
Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 139-144.

4 Pizza C et al. Plant metabolites. Triterpenoid saponins from
Calendula arvensis. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 927-931.

----- PAGE 135 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

Calendula

Della Loggia R et al. The role of triterpenoids in the topical anti-
inflammatory activity of Calendula officinalis flowers. Planta Med
1994; 60: 516-520.

Gracza L. Oxygen-containing terpene derivatives from Calendula
officinalis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 227.

Willuhn G, Westhaus R-G. Loliolide (Calendin) from Calendula
officinalis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 304.

Pizza C, de Tommasi N. Plants metabolites. A new sesquiterpene
glycoside from Calendula arvensis. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 784-789.
Fleischner AM. Plant extracts: To accelerate healing and reduce
inflammation. Cosmet Toilet 1985; 100: 45.

Boucard-Maitre Y et al. Cytotoxic and antitumoral activity of
Calendula officinalis extracts. Pharmazie 1988; 43: 220.

Peyroux J e¢ al. Propriétés anti-oedémateuses et anti-hyperhémiantes
du Calendula officinalis L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1981; 15: 210-216.
Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Della Loggia R e¢ al. Topical anti-inflammatory activity of Calendula
officinalis extracts. Planta Med 1990; 56: 658.

Schmidgall J et al. Evidence for bioadhesive effects of polysaccharides
and polysaccharide-containing herbs in a ex vivo bioadhesion assay on
buccal membranes. Planta Med 2000; 66: 48-53.

Patrick KFM et al. Induction of vascularisation by an aqueous extract
of the flowers of Calendula officinalis L. the European marigold.
Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 11-18.

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Kioucek-Popova E et al. Influence of the physiological regeneration
and epithelization using fractions isolated from Calendula officinalis.
Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg 1982; 8: 63-67.

Casley-Smith JR, Casley-Smith JR. The effect of 'Unguentum
lymphaticum' on acute experimental lymphedema and other high-
protein edemas. Lymphology 1983; 16: 150-156.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 4: 94-98.

Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroglycans)
of higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 1069.

Amirghofran Z et al. Evaluation of the immunomodulatory effects of
five herbal plants. J Ethnopharmacol 2000; 72: 167-712.

Popovié M et al. Combined effects of plant extracts and xenobiotics
on liposomal lipid peroxidation. Part 1. Marigold extract-
ciprofloxacin/pyralene. Oxidation Commun 1999; 22: 487-494.
Kalvatchev Z et al. Anti-HIV activity of extracts from Calendula
officinalis flowers. Biomed Pharmacother 1997; 51: 176-180.

Chew BP et al. Effects of lutein from marigold extract on immunity
and growth of mammary tumors in mice. Anticancer Res 1996; 16:
3689-3694.

Shaparenko BA. On use of medicinal plants for treatment of patients
with chronic suppurative otitis. Zh Ushn Gorl Bolezn 1979; 39: 48-51.
Baranov von AP. Calendula — wie ist die wirksamkeit bei
verbrennungen und verbrithungen? Disch Apotheker Zeitung 1999;
139: 2135-2138.

----- PAGE 136 -----
= Capsicum

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Capsicum is commonly used in both foods and medicinal
products. The capsaicinoids are principally responsible for the
biological activity of capsicum. These pungent principles are
thought to stimulate and aid digestion and to act as a
counter-irritant when applied externally. Capsaicin has also
been used as a neurochemical tool for studying sensory
neurotransmission. Topical creams containing capsaicin
0.025% and 0.075% are licensed in the UK for symptomatic
relief of osteoarthritis, and post-herpetic neuralgia,
respectively. Capsicum oleoresin and capsaicin are
ingredients of a number of over-the-counter (OTC) topical
preparations for relief of pain in muscle, tendon and joints.
Conflicting reports have been documented concerning the
effect of capsicum on acid secretion and on ulcer healing.
Capsaicin-sensitive areas of the gastric and duodenal mucosa
are thought to provide protection against mucosal damage. It
has been suggested that this protection is lost if the sensory
fibres are desensitised. Whether oral consumption of
capsicum by humans can cause desensitisation is unclear. The
toxicity of capsicum extracts observed in animals is
considered to be due to the capsaicinoid components.
However, ingestion of capsicum in the diet is not thought to
represent a health risk. Capsicum should not be ingested in
doses greatly exceeding amounts normally used in foods.

Species (Family)

Capsicum spe (Solanaceae) including C. annum L., C.
baccatum L., C. chinense Jacq., C. frutescens L., C. pubescens

Ruiz & Pavon, C. minimum Roxb.

Synonym(s)
Cayenne, Chilli Pepper, Hot Pepper, Paprika, Red Pepper, Tabasco
Pepper

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E (Paprika’
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'08

USP29/NF24'0*°)

H,C\
H

HO

\@)

capsaicin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of capsicum.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G41.

Capsaicinoids Up to 1.5%, usually 0.11%. Major components
capsaicin (48.6%), 6,7-dihydrocapsaicin (36%), nordihydrocapsai-
cin (7.4%), homodihydrocapsaicin (2%) and homocapsaicin

(2%).

Volatile oils Trace. Over 125 components have been isolated with
d.

at least 24 characteri

Other constituents Carotenoid pigments (capsanthin, capsor-
ubin, carotene, lutein), proteins (12-15%), fats (9-17%), vitamins
including A and C.

Other plant parts The plant material contains solanidine,
solanine and solasodine (steroidal alkaloidal glycosides) and
scopoletin (coumarin).

Food Use

Capsicum (chilli) peppers are widely used as a spice. Capsicum is
listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that capsicum
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘@!® Previously, capsicum has been stated to be GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C*”

Figure 2 Capsicum (Capsicum annum).

----- PAGE 137 -----
Capsicum

Herbal Use

Capsicum is stated to possess stimulant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native, diaphoretic, counterirritant, antiseptic and rubefacient
properties.°*°7° Traditionally, it has been used for colic,
flatulent dyspepsia without inflammation, chronic laryngitis (as a
gargle), insufficiency of peripheral circulation and externally for
neuralgia including rheumatic pains and unbroken chilblains (as a
lotion/ointment). The German Commission E approved external
use for treatment of painful muscle spasms in shoulder, arm and

spine; arthritis, rheumatism, lumbago and chilblains.'C»

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Fruit 30-120 mg three times daily.”

Capsicum Tincture (BPC 1968) 0.3-1.0mL; capsaicin content
0.005-0.01%

Stronger Tincture of Capsicum (BPC 1934) 0.06-2.0 mL.

Oleoresin 0.6-2.0 mg.'°*

Oleoresin, internal 1.2 mg (maximum dose), 1.8 mg (maximum
daily dose).(”

Oleoresin, external 2.5% maximum strength.'@*”

Creams, ointments 0.02-0.05%.'*

Pharmacological Actions

Capsaicin has effects on nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory,
thermoregulatory and gastrointestinal systems.) Capsaicin has
been used as a neurochemical tool for studying sensory

neurotransmission."?

In vitro and animal studies

Infusion of capsaicin (200,1g/kg, by intravenous injection) has
been reported to evoke dose-dependent catecholamine secretion
(adrenaline, noradrenaline) from the adrenal medulla of pento-
barbitone-anaesthetised rats.)

The addition of capsaicin (0.014%) to a high-fat (30%) diet fed
to rats was found to reduce serum-triglyceride concentrations but
to have no effect on serum cholesterol or pre-f-lipoprotein

Figure 3. Capsicum — dried drug substance (fruit).

concentrations.°) Capsaicin was thought to stimulate lipid

mobilisation from adipose tissue. Lipid absorption was unaffected
by capsaicin supplementation.

Activities of two hepatic enzymes, glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase and adipose lipoprotein lipase, were elevated in rats
when capsaicin was added to the diet.°) Capsicum extracts fed
orally to hamsters have been reported to significantly decrease
epatic vitamin A concentrations. Serum vitamin A concentra-
tions were not affected.

Both the gastric and duodenal mucosae are thought to contain
capsaicin-sensitive’ areas which afford protection against acid-
and drug-induced ulcers when stimulated by hydrochloric acid or
by capsaicin itself. Stimulation causes an increase in mucosal
blood flow and/or vascular permeability, inhibits gastric motility,
and activates duodenal motility.’ Desensitisation of these areas,
using a regimen involving subcutaneous or oral administration of
capsaicin, is thought to remove the protection.”
capsaicin desensitisation was found to have little effect on
peripheral responses to stress (i.e. ulcer formation) but did
enhance central responses (increase in plasma corticosterone
concentration) in rats. The increase in plasma corticosterone
concentration observed in capsaicin-desensitised rats was similar
in stressed and non-stressed animals.”

Capsaicin was found to influence adrenal cortical activity
independently of the presence of a stress factor and may represent
a stressor in itself.'9 Capsaicin desensitisation was not found to
influence basal gastric acid secretion in non-stressed rats, but did
lower pentagastrin-stimulated gastric output. However, other
results have reported that capsaicin desensitisation does increase
acid secretion.

Capsicum (leaf and stem) has been reported to exhibit uterine
stimulant activity in animal studies.(@

Pharmacokinetic studies in rats have reported that capsaicin is
readily transported via the gastrointestinal tract and absorbed
through non-active transport into the portal vein.° Capsaicin is
partly hydrolysed during absorption and the majority is excreted
in the urine within 48 hours.” Dihydrocapsaicin-hydrolysing
enzyme is present in various organs of the rat but principally in
the gastrointestinal tract and the liver. The biotransformation
pathway of dihydrocapsaicin in the rat has been studied.”
Metabolites are mainly excreted as glucuronide conjugates in the
urine.

1

However,

Clinical studies

Ingestion of red chillies (10g in wheatmeal) by patients with
duodenal ulcers and by control patients does not have a significant
effect on acid or pepsin secretion, or on sodium, potassium and
chloride concentrations in the gastric aspirate."®) No apparent
change (qualitative or quantitative) in mucous and gastric mucosal
erosion was evident.'*) However, in contrast, capsicum has been
shown to increase acid concentration and DNA content (indicat-
ing exfoliation of epithelial cells) of gastric aspirates in both
control subjects and patients with duodenal ulcers." A study
involving 18 healthy volunteers suggested that chilli (20g in
200 mL water) protected against aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
mucosal injury, compared with control (water).

Capsicum is applied externally as a counter-irritant in many
preparations used for rheumatism, arthritis, neuralgia and
lumbago. Clinical studies of topical preparations containing
capsaicin have investigated its effectiveness in the treatment of
chronic post-herpetic neuralgia, shingles, diabetic neuropathy,
rhinopathy and neuropathic pain in cancer patients.“ A

----- PAGE 138 -----
systematic review of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of topical capsaicin included 13 trials involving
patients with diabetic neuropathy, osteoarthritis, post-herpetic
neuralgia, postmastectomy pain and psoriasis." All the included
trials reported that capsaicin was superior to placebo. However,
the review drew cautious conclusions because blinding may have
been compromised by the irritant effects of capsaicin.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Capsicum contains pungent principles (capsaicinoids) that are
strongly irritant to mucosal membranes. Inhalation of paprika can
produce a form of allergic alveolitis.“@°”

Chronic administration of capsicum extract (0.5 fg capsaicin/
kg body weight) to hamsters has been reported to be toxic.
Treated animals did not survive beyond 17 months whereas all
untreated controls survived beyond this period. In addition, eye
abnormalities were observed in the treated animals. This effect
was attributed to the depletion of substance P in primary afferent
neurons by capsaicin, causing a loss of corneal pain sensation and
subsequently the loss of protective corneal reflexes.”

It is thought that metabolism of capsaicin and related analogues
may reduce their acute toxicity.” LDso values stated for capsaicin
in mice include 0.56 mg/kg (intravenous), 7.56 mg/kg (intraper-
itoneal), 9.00 mg/kg (subcutaneous) and 190 mg/kg (oral). In rats,
an intraperitoneal LDs9 of 10mg/kg has been reported for
capsaicin.” The toxicity of capsaicinoids has reportedly not
been ascribed to any one specific action but may be due to their
causing respiratory failure, bradycardia and hypotension.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Capsicum may cause gastrointestinal irritation, although it has
been stated that capsicum does not influence the healing of
duodenal ulcers and does not need to be avoided by patients with
this condition."

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of capsicum to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

There is limited evidence from preclinical studies that capsicum
can stimulate catecholamine release and that it can induce activity
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and adipose lipoprotein
lipase in the liver. However, the clinical significance of this, if any
(particularly for topical preparations), is not known.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of capsicum during pregnancy, although it may cause
gastrointestinal irritation and should therefore be used with
caution. Doses should not greatly exceed amounts normally
ingested in foods. It is not known whether the pungent
components in capsicum are secreted into breast milk.

Capsicum

Medalginan. Russia: Efcamon (9¢dpkamon); Espol (2ctio.
South Africa: Muscle Rub; Tandpyndruppels. Spain: Dolokey;
Embrocacion Gras; Linimento Naion. Switzerland: Midalgan.
Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence; Meloids. UK: Allens Dry
Tickly Cough; Buttercup Syrup; Catarrh Mixture; Hactos;
Hansaplast Herbal Heat Plaster; Honey & Molasses; Indian
Brandee; Indian Brandee; Indigestion Relief; Jamaican Sarsa-
parilla; Kilkof; Life Drops; Rheumatic Pain Relief; Sanderson's
Throat Specific; Sanderson's Throat Specific; Vegetable Cough
Remover. USA: MSM with Glucosamine Creme; Throat Discs.
Venezuela: Ehrlich Balsamo.

References

1 Locock RA. Capsicum. Can Pharm J 1985; 118: 517-519.

2 Watanabe T et al. Capsaicin, a pungent principle of hot red pepper,
evokes catecholamine secretion from the adrenal medulla of
anesthetized rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1987; 142: 259-264.

3 Kawada T et al. Effects of capsaicin on lipid metabolism in rats fed a
high fat diet. J Nutr 1986; 116: 1272-1278.

4 Agrawal RC et al. Chilli extract treatment and induction of eye lesions
in hamsters. Toxicol Lett 1985; 28: 1-7.

5 Maggi CA et al. Capsaicin-sensitive mechanisms and experimentally
induced duodenal ulcers in rats. | Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39: 559—
S61.

6 Dugani A, Glavin GB. Capsaicin effects on stress pathology and
gastric acid secretion in rats. Life Sci 1986; 39: 1531-1538.

7 Kawada T, Iwai K. In vivo and in vitro metabolism of
dihydrocapsaicin, a pungent principle of hot pepper in rats. Agric Biol
Chem 1985; 49: 441-448.

8 Pimparkar BND et al. Effects of commonly used spices on human
gastric secretion. J Assoc Physicians India 1972: 20: 901-910.

9 Yeoh KG et al. Chili protects against aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
mucosal injury in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1995; 40: 580-583.

10 Zhang WY et al. The effectiveness of topically applied capsaicin. Eur J
Clin Pharmacol 1994; 46: 517-522.

----- PAGE 139 -----
Cascara

been superseded by bulk-forming laxatives. However, the use
of non-standardised anthraquinone-containing preparations
should be avoided since their pharmacological effects will be
variable and unpredictable. In particular, the use of products
containing combinations of anthraquinone laxatives is not
advisable.

Species (Family)

Rhamnus purshiana DC. (Frangula purshiana (DC). A. Gray ex J.
C. Cooper) (Rhamnaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cascara Sagrada, Rhamni Purshianae Cortex, Rhamnus

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EO
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G52, G59 and Gé2.

Anthracene glycosides Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
8% hydroxyanthracene glycosides.“'°® Cascarosides A and B
are anthrone C- and O-glycosides being 8-O-B-p-glucosides of 10-
S-deoxyglucosyl aloe-emodin anthrone (aloin A) and of 10-R-
deoxyglucosyl aloe-emodin anthrone (aloin B), respectively.
Cascarosides C and D are the 8-O-B-p-glucosides of 10-(R)-(S)-
deoxyglucosyl chrysophanol anthrone (chrysaloin A and B,
respectively). Cascarosides E and F are the 8-O-B-p-glucosides
of 10-deoxyglucosyl emodin-9-anthrone. The cascarosides com-
prise 60-70% of the total hydroxyanthracene complex. Aloins A
and B, chrysaloins A and B account for 10-30% of the total
hydroxyanthracene complex. The remaining 10-20% is a mixture
of hydroxyanthracene O-glycosides including monoglucosides of
aloe-emodin, chrysophanol, emodin and physcion.

Other constituents Linoleic acid, myristic acid, syringic acid,
lipids, resin and tannin.

Food Use

Cascara is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that while
the use of cascara for flavouring purposes is recognised, it cannot
be classified into the categories N1, N2 or N3 because of
insufficient information.'©!® Previously, in the USA, cascara has
been approved for food use.'“*”

Herbal Use

Cascara is stated to possess mild purgative properties and has
been used for constipation. The German Commission E approved
use for treatment of constipation.'°®

Anthracene glycosides
oR' O OH

R! R? Re R*

cascaroside A $-D-glucose OH H B-D-glucose
cascaroside B f-D-glucose OH f-D-glucose H

cascaroside C f-D-glucose H H B-D-glucose
cascaroside D B-D-glucose H  -D-glucose H
OH O- OH
, CH2R'
RR?
R' Re Re
aloin A OH H B-D-glucose
aloin B OH -D-glucose H
(+)-11-desoxyaloin H H B-D-glucose

(-)-11-desoxyaloin H — B-D-glucose H

Anthraquinones

OH O OH
ALLA,
°

R' Re
emodin OH CH3
aloe emodin H CH2OH
chrysophanol H CH3
physcion OCH3 CHg3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cascara.

----- PAGE 140 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.3-1g as a single daily dose."
Infusion 1.5-2.g of dried bark in 150 mL hot water.'©°®
Cascara Liquid Extract (BP 1980) 2-5 mL.

G3, G76)

Preparations Equivalent to 20-30 mg hydroxyanthracene deriva-
tives calculated as cascaroside A, daily.'C>°

Cascara is not recommended for use in children under 10 years
of age.'C

Pharmacological Actions

The laxative action of anthraquinone glycosides is well recognised
(see Senna). Cascara has a laxative action.{C4 97

Clinical studies
Studies involving elderly patients suggest that cascara treatment,

compared with placebo, leads to relief of constipation and
a

increased bowel movements.
Side-effects, Toxicity

The side-effects and toxicity documented for anthraquinone
glycosides are applicable (see Senna).

Figure 3 Cascara — dried drug substance (bark).

Cascara

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contra-indications and warnings described for antraquinone
glycosides are applicable (see Senna).

Cascara is contra-indicated for patients with intestinal
obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflamatory diseases of the colon
(e.g. Crohn's disease, colitis), appendicitis, abdominal pain of
unknown origin, severe dehydration states with water and
electrolyte depletion and in children under 10 years.'°” Cascara
should not be used over an extended period of time — use for more
than two weeks requires medical supervision.

Drug interactions Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term
laxative abuse) potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides and
interacts with antiarrhythmic drugs or with drugs that induce
reversion to sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomittant use of
cascara with other drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide-
diuretics, andrenocorticosteroids, liquorice root) may aggravate
electrolyte imbalance.'°”

Pregnancy and lactation Cascara should not be used during
pregnancy and lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Natulax. France: Peristaltine. Germany: Legapas.
Portugal: Laxolen; Mucinum.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Bilidren; Cascara Sagrada Bouzen; Veracolate; Yuyo.
Australia: Colax; Colax; Peritone. Austria: Cascara-Salax;
Silberne. Belgium: Grains de Vals; Vethoine. Brazil: Bilifel;
Boldopeptan; Chofranina; Composto Emagrecedor; Emagrevit;
Eparema; Jurubileno; Pilulas De Witt's; Prisoventril; Solvobil;
Ventre Livre. Canada: Bicholate; Cholasyn II; Control; Doulax;
Herbal Laxative; Herbalax; Herborex; Laxaco; Laxative;
Mucinum. Chile: Bulgarolax. France: Dragees Fuca; Dragees
Vegetales Rex; Grains de Vals; Imegul; Mucinum a I'Extrait de
Cascara. Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Italy: Amaro
Medicinale; Coladren; Confetti Lassativi CM; Critichol;
Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex; Draverex; Eparema-Levul; Epar-
ema; Eupatol; Fave di Fuca; Grani di Vals; Hepatos B12;
Hepatos; Lassatina; Magisbile; Mepalax; Solvobil; Stimolfit.
Norway: Cosylan. South Africa: Moultons Herbal Extract.
Spain: Crislaxo; Lipograsil; Menabil Complex; Nico Hepato-
cyn; Pildoras Zeninas. Sweden: Emulax. Switzerland: Padma-
Lax; Padmed Laxan. Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence; Hemo-
lax; Veracolate. UK: Dual-Lax Extra Strong; Dual-Lax Normal
Strength; Jacksons Herbal Laxative; Laxative Tablets; Modern
Herbals Laxative; Modern Herbals Pile; Natural Herb Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Pileabs; Piletabs; Rhuaka; Skin Eruptions Mix-
ture. USA: Citrimax Plus with ChromeMate; Concentrated
Milk of Magnesia-Cascara. Venezuela: Gameral.

Reference

1 Petticrew M et al. Epidemiology of constipation in the general adult
population. Health Technol Assess 1997; 1: 1-52.

----- PAGE 141 -----
= Cassia

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Cassia is similar in composition to cinnamon and both are
widely used as flavouring agents in foods, and in
pharmaceutical and cosmetic preparations. Cassia oil is stated
to be inferior in flavour to cinnamon oil. The reputed herbal
uses of cassia have been attributed to the oil. Cassia contains
an irritant and sensitising principle in the oil,
cinnamaldehyde, and should not be used in amounts
generally exceeding those used in foods. It has been
recommended that the oil should never be applied topically.

Species (Family)

Cinnamomum cassia Pressl. (Lauraceae)

Synonym(s)

Cassia Bark, Cassia Lignea, Chinese Cinnamon, Cinnamomum
aromaticum Nees, Cinnamomum pseudomelastoma auct. non
Liao, False Cinnamon

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Martindale 35th edition'°*”
PhEur 2007”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (oil) ‘6?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G41, G58, G59 and G62.
Phenylpropanoids
CHO
Za

HCO
OCH

cinnamaldehyde methyleugenol

Phenols
CHO
OH

salicylaldehyde

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cassia.

Volatile oils 1-2%. Mainly composed of cinnamaldehyde (75—
90%). Other major components include salicylaldehyde, methyl-
salicylaldehyde, and methyleugenol. Eugenol is reported to be
a oil contains no monoterpenoids or sesquiterpe-

absent. C
noids."

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, coumarin, mucilage (higher
content compared to cinnamon), resins, sugars and tannins
(condensed). Complex diterpenoids have been isolated from
cinnamomi cortex, for which C. cassia is used as a source.‘

Food Use

Cassia bark and oil are extensively used as food flavourings. A
temporary estimated acceptable daily intake of cinnamaldehyde is
700 g/kg body weight. Previously, cassia has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).“*?

Herbal Use

Cassia is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, anti-
emetic, antidiarrhoeal and antimicrobial properties. It has been
used for flatulent dyspepsia, flatulent colic, diarrhoea, the
common cold, and specifically for colic or dyspepsia with flatulent
distension and nausea.'©” Cassia bark is also documented to
possess astringent properties.(C4h 6% Carminative and antiseptic
properties are documented for the oil.(@*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried bark 0.5-1g as an infusion three times daily.'©”?

Oil of cassia (BPC 1949) 0.05-0.2 mL three times daily.'°”

Figure 2 Cassia (Cinnamomum cassia).

----- PAGE 142 -----
Figure 3 Cassia — dried drug substance (bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-ulcerogenic properties have been described for two propionic
derivatives isolated from cassia.?) An in vivo study using rats
reported activity against a variety of ulcerogens including
serotonin, phenylbutazone, ethanol, water immersion and stress.
The compounds were thought to act by improving gastric blood
flow rather than by inhibiting gastric secretion.

Many pharmacological investigations have been carried out on
cinnamomi cortex (bark), for which sources include C. cassia
(cassia) and Cinnamomum zeylanicum (cinnamon). These studies
have either examined the volatile oil, in particular the major
constituent cinnamaldehyde, or parts excluding the oil."

Activities documented for cinnamaldehyde include CNS
stimulation (low dose), sedation (high dose), hypothermic and
antipyretic actions;‘*°* antibacterial and antifungal activity,
acceleration of catecholamine (mainly adrenaline) release from the
adrenal glands, weak papaverine-like action, increase in peripheral
blood flow, hypotension, bradycardia and hyperglycaemia have
also been reported.' However, these actions are of low potency
and, in addition, much of the cinnamaldehyde content of cassia is
thought to be lost by evaporation and auto-oxidation during
decoction of the crude drug. The contribution of cinnamaldehyde
to the overall therapeutic efficacy of cassia has, therefore, been
questioned.”

Actions observed for essential oil-free aqueous extracts have
been reported to be weak, and the only appreciable effects are
prolongation of barbiturate-induced sedation and a_ slight
reduction of acetic acid-induced writhing.”

In vivo inhibitory activity against complement formation has
been documented and attributed to the diterpenoid and condensed

Cassia

tannin constituents. Anti-inflammatory activity exhibited by the
Japanese plant Cinnamomum sieboldii Meisn (also used as a
source for cassia bark), has been attributed to a series of
condensed tannin constituents. Antiplatelet aggregation and
antithrombotic actions have also been reported. These actions,
together with the documented anti-inflammatory activity, are
thought to contribute to the suppression of thrombus formation
in certain diseases."

Antitumour activity has been described and the activity depends
on the plant source used.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cassia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Allergic reactions, mainly contact sensitivity, to cassia oil and bark
have been reported.‘ °® Cinnamaldehyde in toothpastes and
perfumes has also been reported to cause contact sensitivity.“0*)
Cassia oil is stated to cause dermal and mucous membrane
irritation.°**) The irritant and sensitising properties of cassia oil
have been attributed to cinnamaldehyde.““® The dermal LDso
value for cassia oil is stated as 320 mg/kg body weight.‘

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for cassia
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contact with cassia bark or oil may cause an allergic reaction.
Cassia oil is stated to be one of the most hazardous oils and
should not be used on the skin in concentrations of more than
0.2% (08)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cassia to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cassia during pregnancy, provided that amounts taken
do not exceed those generally used in foods. It is not known
whether the constituents of cassia are secreted into breast milk.

References

1 Hikino H. Oriental medicinal plants. In: Wagner H et al., eds.
Economic and Medicinal Plants, vol 1. London: Academic Press, 1985:
69-70.

2. Tanaka S e¢ al. Antiulcerogenic compounds isolated from Chinese
Cinnamon. Planta Med 1989; 55: 245-248.

----- PAGE 143 -----
= Cat’s Claw

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of cat’s claw is well documented. Reported
pharmacological activities are mainly associated with the
oxindole alkaloids and the quinovic acid glycosides.

The two species Uncaria tomentosa and U. guianensis may
be confused. In addition, there are two chemotypes of U.
tomentosa, one predominantly producing pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids, and the other tetracyclic oxindole
alkaloids. Since the tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids have been
reported to antagonise the immunostimulant effect of the
pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids on human cells in vitro, it has
been stated that mixtures of the two chemotypes of cat’s claw
are unsuitable for therapeutic use unless certified to contain
less than 0.02% tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids.

Documented scientific evidence from in vitro and, to a
lesser extent, animal studies provides some supportive
evidence for some of the uses of cat’s claw. However, there is
a lack of clinical data, and well-designed clinical trials
involving adequate numbers of patients and using
standardised preparations manufactured from the
appropriate chemotype are necessary.

In view of the lack of toxicity and safety data, excessive use
of cat’s claw should be avoided. Individuals wishing to use
cat’s claw concurrently with conventional medicines should
first seek advice from an appropriate healthcare professional.

Species (Family)
Uncaria tomentosa (Willd. ex Schult.) DC., Uncaria guianensis
(Aubl.) Gmel. (Rubiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Life-giving Vine of Peru, Savéntaro, Ujia de gato

Part(s) Used

Roots, root bark, stem bark and leaves

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

None

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cat's claw is not included in the GSL.'@”

Constituents

Alkaloids Both U. tomentosa and U. guianensis yield oxindole
alkaloids, including isorhynchophylline and rhynchophylline and
their N-oxides, mitraphylline and the indole alkaloids dihydro-
corynantheine, hirsutine and hirsuteine." Glucoalkaloids includ-
ing 3,4-dehydro-5-carboxystrictosidine, carboxystrictosidine and
lyaloside are also present. U. tomentosa also contains isomitra-
phylline, its N-oxide, dihydrocorynantheine N-oxide and hirsutine
N-oxide.)

There are two chemotypes of U. tomentosa which differ
markedly in their patterns of alkaloids present in the root bark;
in addition, the alkaloidal pattern of individual plants changes
2:3) One chemotype primarily contains the pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids pteropodine, isopteropodine, mitraphylline,
isomitraphylline, uncarine F and speciophylline,“ whereas the
other chemotype primarily contains the tetrac
alkaloids rhynchophylline and isorhynchophylline."? Although a
particular plant may contain either tetracyclic or pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids predominantly, both types of alkaloids can co-

with time.

ic oxindole

occur in the same plant.'>*

Other constituents Quinovic acid glycosides have been isolated
from both  species.~”) Polyhydroxylated  triterpenes"!? and
steroids (B-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol)'!) occur in U.
tomentosa. An unidentified South American species of Uncaria
(presumably either U. guianensis or U. tomentosa) contains
polyphenols ((—)-epicatechin and procyanidins).

Food Use

Cat's claw is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Cat's claw is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antiviral,
antioxidant, immunostimulating, antirheumatic and anticancer
properties.“ It is native to the Amazon and has been used
traditionally to treat gonorrhoea, dysentry, arthritis, rheumatism,
gastric ulcers and various tumours.'!”) It is also reputed to be a
contraceptive.

Dosage

None documented in standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts.

Commercial products (tablets, capsules) contain varying
amounts of material, ranging from 25-300mg_ standardised
extract and from 400 mg to 5g of plant material.(©?”

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for cat's
claw, including anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic, antitumour,
antioxidant and immunostimulating properties. '?)

In vitro and animal studies

Certain oxindole alkaloids isolated from U. tomentosa (isopter-
opodine, pteropodine, isomitraphylline, isorhynchophylline) have
been shown to enhance phagocytosis markedly in vitro.‘
Pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids from U. tomentosa have been
reported to induce the release of a lymphocyte proliferation-
regulating factor from human endothelial cells; tetracyclic
oxindole alkaloids were found to reduce the activity of pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids on these cells in a concentration-dependent
manner.” !) Stem bark extracts of U. tomentosa have also been
shown to stimulate interleukin 1 (IL-1) and interleukin 6 (IL-6)
production in vitro in rat alveolar macrophages in a concentra-

----- PAGE 144 -----
R Configuration

dihydrocorynantheine ethyl normal
hirsutine ethyl pseudo
hirsuteine vinyl pseudo

R_ Configuration

rhynchophylline ethyl B, normal
isorhynchophylline ethyl! A, normal
corynoxeine vinyl B, normal
isocorynoxeine vinyl A, normal
COOH
N
ny &
H
sO-B-D-glucosy!
H”
SS
Hyco,0~ S~

3,4-dehydro-5-carboxy-strictosidine

a
sO-B-D-glucosyl

H,c0,07 S~
lyaloside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cat’s claw.

tion-dependent manner (range 0.025—0.1 mg/mL) and to potenti-
ate the production of IL-1 and IL-6 in lipopolysaccharide-
stimulated macrophages."

Extracts and fractions of U. tomentosa bark have shown no
mutagenic effect but demonstrated a protective antimutagenic
effect in vitro against 8-methoxypsoralen- and UVA-induced
photomutagenesis in Salmonella typhimurium TA102."7) This
antimutagenic activity may be due to an antioxidant effect of U.
tomentosa."

In vitro antioxidant activity of stem bark and root extracts of U.
tomentosa has been demonstrated in an assay using tert-
butylhydroperoxide-initiated chemoluminescence in rat liver
homogenates." Extracts also prevented free radical-mediated
DNA sugar damage.''*)

In vitro antitumour activity of water extracts of U. tomentosa
(C-Med-100) has been shown in a human leukaemic cell line (HL-

Cat’s Claw

H
CH

HsCO2
R

tetrahydroalstonine allo

akuammigine epiallo

Configuration

mitraphylline B, normal
isomitraphylline A, normal
pteropodine B, allo
isopteropodine A, allo
uncarine F B, epiallo
speciophylline A, epiallo

carboxystrictosidine

60) and a human Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B
lymphoma cell line (Raji). The suppressive effect of U.
tomentosa extracts on tumour cell growth appear to be mediated
through induction of apoptosis."”) The pentacyclic oxindole
alkaloids uncarine C and uncarine E from U. guianensis have been
identified as cytotoxic and DNA-damaging agents in a yeast-based
assay.?° These alkaloids also showed moderate cytotoxicity to
several mammalian cell lines, including human lung carcinoma.”
In vitro, aqueous extracts of U. tomentosa bark appear to interact
with oestrogen receptor-binding sites.°”

Rhynchophylline has been reported to inhibit rat” and rabbit
platelet aggregation ex vivo.*) Studies in cats and dogs have
reported that rhynchophylline has a negative inotropic effect
which can contribute to a hypotensive effect.° Rhynchophylline
and isorhynchophylline have been reported to have negative
chronotropic and inotropic effects in isolated guinea-pig atria.°°)

----- PAGE 145 -----
Cat's Claw

Isorhynchophylline has been reported to have hypotensive effects
in rats and dogs.°

Trichloromethane/methanol and aqueous extracts of cat's claw
(U. tomentosa) bark have demonstrated anti-inflammatory activity
in the rat paw carrageenan-induced oedema test; a quinovic acid
glycoside was identified as one of the active principles.© An
aqueous extract of cat's claw (U. tomentosa) bark was reported to
protect against oxidant-induced stress in vitro and to attenuate
indometacin-induced chronic intestinal inflammation in rats.°”
Cat's claw extract was found to prevent the activation of the

Triterpenes

R! Re RS
quinovic acid glycosides Gic (3+1)-Fuc Gic H

Glc (3>1)-Fuc H
Glc (3+1)-Fuc Gie

(Gc = glucosyl; Fuc = fucosyl)

Procyanidins

OH OH
HO. OW ws
. ‘OH
OH
OH

"OH

“OH
OH
epicatechin

OH

cinchonainta BH
cinchonain 1b o-H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of cat’s claw.

Figure 3 Cat’s claw — dried drug substance (stem bark).

transcription factor NF-KB, which suggests a mechanism for the
anti-inflammatory activity of cat's claw.”

Quinovic acid glycosides have demonstrated antiviral activity in
in vitro tests against the RNA virus vesicular stomatitis virus.”
Two quinovic acid glycosides also demonstrated in vitro activity
against rhinovirus type 1B.”

Receptor-binding assays using dihydrocorynantheine isolated
from the branchlet and hook of Uncaria sinensis (and also found
in U. tomentosa) have shown that this alkaloid is a partial agonist
for serotonin receptors.?*)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cat's
claw and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A decoction of U. tomentosa bark ingested daily for 15 days by
a smoker decreased the mutagenicity induced in S. typhimurium
TA98 and TA100 by the subject's urine; urine from a non-smoker
who ingested the same regimen of U. tomentosa did not show any
mutagenic activity before, during or after treatment.''”

In an uncontrolled study, 13 HIV-positive individuals who
refused to receive other therapies ingested 20mg daily of an
extract of U. tomentosa root (containing 12 mg total pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids per gram) for 2.2-5 months.” The total
leukocyte number in the group was unchanged, compared with
pretreatment values, whereas the relative and absolute lymphocyte
count increased significantly. No significant changes in T4/TS8 cell
ratios were observed.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for cat's claw and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

There has been an isolated report of acute renal failure in a
Peruvian woman with systemic lupus erythematosus who had
added a product containing cat's claw (one capsule four times
daily, obtained from a local herbal shop) to her regimen of
prednisone, atenolol, metolazone, furosemide and nifedipine.)
The patient had a serum creatinine concentration of 3.6 mg/dL
and was diagnosed with acute allergic interstitial nephritis. She
was advised to discontinue cat's claw and, one month later, her
renal function had improved (serum creatinine 2.7 mg/dL).

Data on the acute oral toxicity of U. tomentosa aqueous root
extract (containing 35 mg total pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids per
gram) in mice and four-week oral toxicity of an aqueous extract of
U. tomentosa root (containing 7.5 mg total oxindole alkaloids per
gram) in rats administered 1000 mg/kg/day have been sum-
marised.''?) The acute median LDsy to mice was found to be
greater than 16 g/kg body weight. In the study in rats, a slight but
statistically significant increase in the percentage of lymphocytes
and a decrease in the percentage of neutrophil granulocytes were
seen. In addition, an increase in the relative weight of the kidneys
in rats of both sexes was noted, although kidney histology was
normal.

In vitro, extracts of U. tomentosa have been shown to possess
antitumour activity and to stimulate production of the cytokines
IL-1 and IL-6, both of which are known to initiate a cascade of
defence activities of the immune system. Oxindole alkaloids from
U. tomentosa have been reported to enhance phago cytosis in vitro
(see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

The in vitro toxicity of aqueous extracts of U. tomentosa has
been evaluated in bioassays using Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells and bacterial cells (Photobacterium phosphoreum).° At the

----- PAGE 146 -----
concentrations used (10-100 mg/mL), the extracts did not show a
significant cytotoxic effect in CHO cells and demonstrated a non-
toxic effect in the bacterial cells used.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cat's claw to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that cat's claw has immunostimulant
properties, and it is advised that extracts of the pentacyclic
chemotype of U. tomentosa should be avoided where there is a risk
of organ rejection in patients undergoing transplants; this includes
bone marrow transplants."

There is also limited evidence from preclinical studies that
rhynchophylline inhibits platelet aggregation°*?? and that
rhynchophylline** and isorhynchopylline*® have hypertensive
effects. However, the clinical significance of these, if any, is not
known.

It has been stated that mixtures of the two chemotypes of cat's
claw are unsuitable for therapeutic use unless certified to contain
less than 0.02% tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids.°”

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cat's claw has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of cat's claw
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided. In addition,
use in children (<3 years) is not advised.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
USA: Cran Support.

References

1 Hemingway SR, Phillipson JD. Alkaloids from South American
species of Uncaria (Rubiaceae). J Pharm Pharmacol 1974; 26 (Suppl.
Suppl.): P113.

2 Laus G, Keplinger D. Separation of stereoisomeric oxindole alkaloids
from Uncaria tomentosa by high performance liquid chromatography.
J Chromatogr 1994; 662: 243-249.

3 Laus G et al. Alkaloids of Peruvian Uncaria tomentosa.
Phytochemistry 1997; 45: 855-860.

4 Montenegro de Matta § et al. Alkaloids and procyanidins of an
Uncaria sp. from Peru. Il Farmaco-Ed Sci 1976; 31: 5227-5235.

5 Phillipson JD e¢ al. Alkaloids of Uncaria. Part V. Their occurrence and
chemotaxonomy. Lloydia 1978; 41: 503-570.

6 Cerri R et al. New quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria tomentosa. ]
Nat Prod 1988; 51: 257-261.

7 Aquino R et al. Plant metabolites. Structure and in vitro antiviral
activity of quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria tomentosa and
Guettarda platypoda. J Nat Prod 1989; 52: 679-685.

10

1

12

14

15

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Cat’s Claw

Aquino R e¢ al. Plant metabolites. New compounds and anti-
inflammatory activity of Uncaria tomentosa. J] Nat Prod 1991; 54:
453-459.

Yepez AM et al. Quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria guainensis.
Phytochemistry 1991; 30: 1635-1637.

Aquino R et al. New polyhydroxylated triterpenes from Uncaria
tomentosa. ] Nat Prod 1990; 53: 559-564.

Senatore A et al. Richerche fitochimiche e biologiche sull'Uncaria
tomentosa. Boll Soc It Biol Sper 1989; 65: 517-520.

Keplinger K et al. Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) DC. — ethnomedicinal
use and new pharmacological, toxicological and botanical results. J
Ethnopharmacol 1999; 64: 23-34.

Reinhard K-H. Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) D.C.: cat's claw, Uita de
gato, Savéntaro. J Alt Complement Med 1999; 5: 143-151.

Wagner H et al. Die alkaloide von Uncaria tomentosa und ihre
Phagozytose-steigernde Wirkung. Planta Med 1985; 51: 419-423.
Wurm M et al. Pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids from Uncaria tomentosa
induce human endothelial cells to release a lymphocyte-proliferation-
regulating factor. Planta Med 1998; 64: 701-704.

Lemaire | et al. Stimulation of interleukin-1 and -6 production in
alveolar macrophages by the Neotropical liana, Uncaria tomentosa
(Ufa de gato). J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 64: 109-115.

Rizzi R et al. Mutagenic and antimutagenic activities of Uncaria
tomentosa and its extracts. ] Ethnopharmacol 1993; 38: 63-77.
Desmarchelier C et al. Evaluation of the in vitro antioxidant activity
in extracts of Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) DC. Phytother Res 1997; 11:
254-256.

Sheng Y et al. Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of proliferation in

human tumor cells treated with extracts of Uncaria tomentosa.
Anticancer Res 1998; 18: 3363-3368.

Lee KK et al. Bioactive indole alkaloids from the bark of Uncaria
guianensis. Planta Med 1999; 65: 759-760.

Salazar E, Jayme V. Depletion of specific binding sites for estrogen
receptor by Uncaria tomentosa. Proc Western Pharmacol Soc 1998; 41:
123-124.

Jin RM et al. Effect of rhynchophylline on platelet aggregation and
experimental thrombosis. Acta Pharm Sin 1991; 26: 246-249.

Chen C-X et al. Inhibitory effect of rhynchophylline on platelet
aggregation and thrombosis. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1992; 13: 126-130.
Zhang W, Liu G-X. Effects of rhynchophylline on myocardial
contractility in anesthetized dogs and cats. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1986;
7: 426-428.

Zhu Y et al. Negatively chronotropic and inotropic effects of
rhynchophylline and isorhynchophylline on isolated guinea pig atria.
Chin ] Pharmacol Toxicol 1993; 7: 117-121.

Shi JS et al. Hypotensive and hemodynamic effects of
isorhynchophylline in conscious rats and anesthetised dogs. Chin J
Pharmacol Toxicol 1989; 3: 205-210.

Sandoval-Chacon M et al. Antiinflammatory actions of cat's claw: the
role of NF-KB. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998; 12: 1279-1289.
Kanatani H et al. The active principles of the branchlet and hook of
Uncaria sinensis Oliv. examined with a 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor
binding assay. J Pharm Pharmacol 1985; 37: 401-404.

Hilepo JN et al. Acute renal failure caused by ‘cat's claw' herbal
remedy in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. Nephron
1997; 77: 361.

Santa Maria A et al. Evaluation of the toxicity of Uncaria tomentosa
by bioassays in vitro. ] Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 183-187.

Laus G, Keplinger K. Radix Uncariae tomentosae (Willd.) DC. Z
Phytother 1997; 18: 122-126.

----- PAGE 147 -----
dependent effect and variable latent period in the report
cases, an idiosyncratic reaction may be the most plausible
explanation.

On the basis of the available evidence, and in view of the
intended uses for greater celandine, C. majus preparations
appear to have a negative benefit-harm profile. In May 2003,
the Complementary Medicines Evaluation Committee, which
advises the Australian Government's Therapeutic Goods
Administration, recommended that preparations of C. majus
for oral administration should include on their label
statements advising consumers to use such products only
under the supervision of a healthcare professional, to seek
advice from a healthcare professional before using the
product if the potential user has a history of liver disease, and
to stop using C. majus preparations if symptoms associated
with liver disease occur.

Celandine, Greater

licensed C. majus products available in the UK, so the quality
of commercially available products is not assured.

Species (Family)

Chelidonium majus L. (Papaveraceae)

Synonym(s)
Common celandine, garden celandine, swallow wort. Greater

celandine should not be confused with Lesser celandine (Ranun-
culus ficaria L., Ranunculaceae) which is unrelated.

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts (herb), collected at the time of flowering, root, latex
(juice/sap) from leaves, stems, roots.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHMA 20030

BP 2007 (herb) ‘C8

Complete German Commission E ‘““*)
ESCOP 2003 ‘©7®)

Martindale 35th edition ‘©*

Ph Eur 2007 (aerial parts) ‘“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Greater celandine is not on the GSL. Chelidonium majus is listed
in Parts 2 and 3 to the Medicines (Retail Sale or Supply of Herbal
Remedies) Order 1977 (Statutory Instrument 1977/2130) which
restricts its sale or supply to that by a registered pharmacist from
a registered pharmacy, or that by a herbal practitioner in response
to a one-to-one consultation, provided maximum daily dosage is
not exceeded.”

Constituents

The plant is particularly well known for the presence of alkaloids
which are located in laticiferous vessels. The latex is yellow-
orange due to the presence of benzophenanthridine and proto-
berberine alkaloids.

Aerial parts

Acids Chelidonic, malic, citric;"C” caffeic (0.4%), ferulic
(0.02%), p-coumaric (0.06%), gentisic and p-hydroxybenzoic
(traces, < 0.01%).

Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives (-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl-p-glyceric
acid, (-)-4-(E)-caffeoyl-t-threonic acid, (-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl threonic
acid lactone, (++)-(E)-caffeoyl-L-malic acid).

----- PAGE 148 -----
Alkaloids Benzylisoquinoline type, 0.1-1%.'°”) More than 20
have been identified including benzophenanthridines (e.g. cheler-
ythrine, chelidonine, sanguinarine, isochelidonine), protoberber-
ines (e.g. berberine, coptisine, sylopine), protopines (e.g.
protopine).° 97

Others A saponin, carotenoids,”

cystatin), flavonoids. °””

a phytocytostatin (chelido-

Root

Alkaloids Benzylisoquinoline type, up to 3%,'°”) including
benzophenanthridines (e.g. chelerythrine, sanguinarine, chelido-
nine (0.2-0.4%)), protoberberines (e.g. coptisine),” protopines
(e.g. protopine, cryptopine, o-allocryptopine =B-homochelido-
nine (0.01-0.06%)).

Others Choline, histamine, tyramine, saponins, flavonol,
chelidoniol, vitamin C, carotene.

Sap (from leaves/roots)

Glycoproteins, including a lectin.”

In addition to the above, the alkaloids (-)-turkiyenine"™” and
(+)-norchelidonine" have been isolated from material compris-
ing the whole plant.

(10

Quality of plant material and commercial products

The European Pharmacopoeia defines greater celandine as
consisting of the dried aerial parts collected during flowering

Acids
fe)

HOOC fe) COOH
chelidonic acid

Caffeic acid esters

COOH
COOH HC—OH
We —OR HO—CH
desi bees

(-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl-
D-glyceric acid

(-)-4-(E)-caffeoyl-
L-+threonic acid

Oo. 0 COOH
IH |
R— vi
OR CH.
COOH
(-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl- (+)-(E)-caffeoyl-
L-threonic acid lactone L-malic acid

R= co—
HO U
HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of greater celandine.

Celandine, Greater

Benzylisoquinoline alkaloids
Benzophenanthridines

be
O NL
R'O 7° ~CHs

OR? R' FR
sanguinarine —CH2,—
chelerythrine CH3 CH3

chelidonine

Protoberberines

coptisine —CH2,— stylopine
berberine CH3 CH3
Protopines

protopine

Figure 2 Selected constituents of greater celandine.

and containing not less than 0.6% of total alkaloids, expressed as
chelidonine and calculated with reference to the dried drug.“C*”
The alkaloids are found in both the aerial parts and the roots,
although there are differences in the total alkaloid content and the
relative proportions of the individual alkaloid constituents.”
The concentrations of the alkaloids chelerythrine, chelidonine,
coptisine and sanguinarine in the latex undergo daily variations,
reaching a maximum in the summer in the evening and in the
middle of the day in the winter.» The increases in concentration
during the day are probably due to light and temperature, and
decreases in concentration during the night are probably due to
catabolism rather than translocation."!» In contrast, the concen-
tration of berberine appears to be relatively stable.

Food Use

Greater celandine is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Greater celandine is stated to have antispasmodic, laxative,
diuretic and alterative properties.“°*°” It has been used
traditionally in Western countries in eczema and scurvy, as a
cholagogue, in jaundice, gall bladder and biliary diseases, and in
preparations intended to remove obstructions of the liver and gall
bladder.““* The German Commission E approved greater
celandine herb for use in spastic discomfort of the bile ducts
and gastrointestinal tract.'©*) Topical preparations of the roots
and aerial parts have been used in the treatment of piles.“ The
fresh latex has been used externally for the treatment of warts and

----- PAGE 149 -----
38, Celandine, Greater

other skin conditions, such as corns, Tinea infections, eczema,
(G66)
and tumours of the skin.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

Spastic discomfort of the bile ducts and gastrointestinal
tract

Aerial parts Daily dosage 2-5 g, equivalent to 12-30 mg total
alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine.'°”

Gall stones, gall bladder and biliary diseases

Aerial parts 1-2¢ dried herb three times daily.’ Modern
standard herbal reference texts recommend the following dosages
for oral administration (adults).

Figure 3. Greater celandine (Chelidonium majus).

Figure 4 Greater celandine — dried drug substance (herb).

Liver and gall bladder disorders, cramp-like pain of the
gall ducts and gastrointestinal tract

Liquid extract 1-2 mL of a 1:2 preparation daily or 1-2mL
of a 1: 1 preparation three times daily\©”

Tincture 2-4 mL of a 1: 5 preparation daily‘6 or 2-4 mL of a
1: 10 preparation three times daily.(@”

A clinical trial of a monopreparation containing greater
celandine (tablets containing 66-167.2mg dry extract (5.3-
7.5: 1), equivalent to 4mg total alkaloids calculated as chelido-
nine) tested the effects of two tablets taken three times daily
(equivalent to 24 mg total alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine) in
patients with functional epigastric complaints."

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological properties, including antispasmodic,
choleretic, anti-inflammatory, cytotoxic and antimicrobial activ-
ities, have been described for preparations of C. majus following
preclinical studies, providing some supporting evidence for the
traditional uses. However, there has been little rigorous clinical
investigation of C. majus and further studies are required to
determine its clinical efficacy and safety.

In-vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics No information on the pharmacokinetics of
constituents following ingestion of C. majus preparations was
found. However, there is a limited amount of data on the
pharmacokinetics of individual constituents found in C. majus. In
a randomised controlled experiment involving swine fed sangui-
narine and chelerythrine (isolated from Macleya cordata (Wild.),
Papaveraceae) in their feed (mean daily intake 0.1 or 5 mg/kg body
weight), or a standard diet, for 90 days, plasma concentrations of
the alkaloids remained constant during the study when assessed at
days 30, 60 and 90," although data to support this were not
provided in a report of the study. At the 90-day time point for both
groups of animals fed the alkaloids (i.e. 0.1 or Smg/kg body
weight daily), sanguinarine was detected in plasma, faeces and all
tissues tested (liver, gingival, tongue, stomach, intestine) with the
exception of muscle tissue. Mean (standard deviation, SD)
concentrations (ng/g) in plasma were 4 (1) and 108 (4) and in
faeces 1180 (72) and 16 110 (2604) for the low and high intakes of
alkaloids, respectively. Chelerythrine was detected in plasma (high
alkaloid intake only), faeces, liver, gingival and intestinal tissues.
Mean (standard deviation, SD) concentrations (ng/g) in plasma

Figure 5 Greater celandine — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 150 -----
were 24 (4) (not detected in low alkaloid intake group) and in
faeces 834 (120) and 8412 (1705) for the low and high intakes of
alkaloids, respectively. These results indicate that, in swine,
sanguinarine and chelerythrine are mostly excreted in the faeces
and that a small proportion is absorbed and retained to different
extents by different tissues."

Antispasmodic activity Antispasmodic activity has been
documented for an aqueous-methanolic extract of the flowering
aerial parts of C. majus and for the isolated constituents coptisine
and (+)-caffeoylmalic acid following in vitro experiments
involving isolated rat ileum.® The extract (containing 0.81%
alkaloids, 2.00% flavonoids, 1.20% hydroxycinnamic acid deriva-
tives and 0.06% (+)-caffeoylmalic acid) displayed a mean
(standard error of mean; SEM) antispasmodic activity of 12.7%
(4.0) relative to that of control (acetylcholine), whereas values for
coptisine at a concentration of 1.0 x 10° g/mL organ bath and
(+)-caffeoylmalic acid 2.5 x 10 g/mL organ bath were 16.5 (3.0)
and 6.9 (standard error = 2.6), respectively, indicating that these
two constituents contribute to the total antispasmodic activity of
the extract. A lower concentration of coptisine (0.5 x 107° g/mL
organ bath) did not exhibit any statistically significant anti-
spasmodic activity," although no p values for this, or any of the
other results, were given.

In isolated guinea-pig ileum, two hydroalcoholic (ethanol 70%
w/w) extracts of C. majus herb (at a concentration of 5 x 107 g/
mL organ bath for both) relaxed barium-chloride (10° g/mL)-
induced contractions: mean (SEM) per cent relaxation values were
53.5 (4.1) and 49.0 (3.7), for extracts one and two, respectively.”
The alkaloid content, determined by high-pressure liquid
chromatography, for extract one was chelidonine 0.38%, proto-
pine 0.41% and coptisine 0.32% and for extract two, 0.59%,
0.48% and 0.26%, respectively. Mean (SEM) per cent relaxation
values for the individual constituents chelidonine (both at a
concentration of 1 x 10~° g/mL organ bath) and protopine were
68.8 (11.2) and 54.8 (5.8), respectively, whereas coptisine (up to 3
x 10° g/mL) was ineffective. Values for papaverine hydrochloride
(1 x 10° g/mL) under the same conditions were 87.2 (7.4).
Further experiments using the two extracts and the individual
alkaloids produced concentration-dependent reductions in carba-
chol- and_ electric-field-induced contractions. Together, these
results indicate that the antispasmodic effects of C. majus herb
preparations comprise both musculotropic and neurotropic
mechanisms.”

In vitro studies have demonstrated effects of an extract of C.
majus herb and certain constituent alkaloids at GABAg receptors.
In radioreceptor assays, high concentrations (more than 160 tg/
assay) of a dry ethanolic extract of C. majus herb inhibited 50%
of specific 3H]-muscimol binding, whereas at lower concentra-
tions (around 90 g/assay), specific binding of 115% was
observed, indicating induction of positive co-operation." The
alkaloid content (mg/100mg dry extract) of the extract was
determined as: allocryptopine 0.076, chelerythrine 0.009, proto-
pine 0.465, sanguinarine 0.003 and stylopine 0.154. Further
binding studies indicated that the alkaloids allocryptopine,
stylopine and protopine are responsible for the positive coopera-
tive effect and that, of these, the effect is mainly due to protopine;
the content of chelerythrine and sanguinarine was considered to
be too low to account for the effect."®

The individual protopine-type alkaloids protopine, cryptopine
and allocryptopine (plant or synthetic source not stated)
enhance [*H]-GABA binding to rat brain synaptic membrane
receptors.”

Celandine, Greater

Analgesic activity Several in vitro experiments have proposed
mechanisms for analgesic activity for C. majus, although analge:
effects for C. majus preparations have yet to be demonstrated in
preclinical (animal) studi
explored which constituents of C. majus are involved in these
mechanisms.

The effects of C. majus on GABA receptors have also been
investigated with respect to determining analgesic activity. In
patch-clamp experiments using fresh periaqueductal grey (PAG)
neurons isolated from rats, an aqueous extract of Chelidonii
herba (C. majus, and other details of authentication and
preparation, not specified) applied every two minutes at
concentrations of over 0.3—10 mg/mL elicited chloride ion current
in a concentration-dependent manner.”°) This effect was inhibited
in a reversible manner by the GABA, receptor antagonist
bicuculline. Low concentrations of Chelidonii herba (0.03 and
0.1 mg/mL) inhibited GABA-activated chloride current; this effect
was abolished by the application of the opioid antagonist
naltrexone in a proportion of PAGs and potentiated by naltrexone
in other PAGs. As inhibition of the inhibitory influence of GABA
on neurons involved with descending antinociceptive pathways is a
mechanism of action of opioid analgesics, the inhibitory action of
Chelidonii herba on GABA may provide a mechanism for
analgesic activity?”

Further experiments using similar methods have demonstrated
that low concentrations (0.03 and 0.1mg/mL) of an aqueous
extract of Chelidonii herba (C. majus, and other details of
authentication and preparation, not specified) suppress glycine-
activated and increase glutamate-activated ion current in PAG
°) (Glycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter and
glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter, so these eff
suggestive of increased PAG neuronal excitability and activation of
antinociceptive pathways.) In these studies, the inhibitory effect of
Chelidonii herba on glycine-activated ion current was partially
abolished by naltrexone, and the effect on glutamate-activated ion
current was not affected by naltrexone.

Furthermore, to date, studies have not

neurons.

are

Choleretic activity A dry total extract (extraction solvent 70%
ethanol) of the aerial parts of C. majus harvested during flowering
(total alkaloid content 1.6%; caffeic acid esters 1.9%; after
hydrolysis: caffeic acid 1.1%, p-coumaric acid 0.11%, ferulic acid
0.02%) administered at a concentration of 10 mg/mL/minute for
30 minutes led to a statistically significant increase in bile flow in
isolated perfused rat liver, compared with control (p < 0.025).°?
There were no statistically significant increases in bile flow
following administration of a phenolic fraction (1 mg/mL/minute)
and an alkaloid fraction (0.4mg/mL/minute), separately and in
combination. This suggests that all components of the total
extract are necessary for activity, rather than a single constituent,
or group of constituents.

Anticancer activity There are some preliminary data suggesting
that C. majus herb extract may have preventive effects against
certain cancers, although this requires further research; there are
conflicting results regarding cytotoxic properties and antitumour
activity of C. majus preparations.

In an in vivo study, rats were given the carcinogenic agent N-
methyl-N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG; 200 mg/kg body
weight by gavage) and saturated sodium chloride solution (to
mimic a high-salt diet), or 0.9% saline, over three weeks, followed
by treatment with a water—methanol extract of C. majus herb (0.1
or 0.2% in the diet for 16 weeks), or no further treatment; animals
were killed at 20 weeks.?” At the end of the study, preneoplastic
pepsinogen-1-altered glands (PPAGs) in the pyloric mucosa of the

----- PAGE 151 -----
Celandine, Greater

stomach occurred in all groups of rats, but the mean number of
PPAGs was significantly lower in animals treated with 0.1% C.
majus herb extract, compared with animals treated with MNNG
and saturated sodium chloride alone (p < 0.02). However, there
was no statistically significant difference in the mean number of
PPAGs in animals treated with 0.2% C. majus herb extract,
compared with this control group. There were also no statistically
significant differences between any groups in the numbers of
animals with papilloma and squamous cell carcinoma lesions of
the forestomach.*)

An ethanol-water (1:1) dry extract of C. majus roots and
rhizomes was inactive in animal models of leukaemia (L-1210,
mice) and carcinosarcoma (Walker 256, rats).°") However, the
extract did exhibit cytotoxic activity in an assay utilising Eagle's
9KB carcinoma of the nasopharynx (EDs9 < 15 jtg/mL). Coptisine
chloride and a s
cytotoxic activity.** A polysaccharide fraction (CM-Ala) from a
water extract of C. majus ‘herbs' inhibited the proliferation of
several tumour cell lines in vitro. At a concentration of 100 g/mL,
CM-Ala showed over 50% cytotoxicity for the P815 and B16F10
cell lines.)

Sanguinarine intercalates with DNA,® and structure-activity
relationship studies with alkaloids of the protoberberine and
benzophenanthridine types have shown that intercalation is
influenced by substitutions on rings C and D of the alkaloid
molecules.?” The antiproliferative effects of C. majus have been
explored in vitro in studies using a rapidly multiplying human
keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT cells). C. majus herb dry extract
(containing 0.68% alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine) inhibited
HaCaT cell growth, determined by direct counting of cells, with
an ICso value of 1.9pumol/L. The alkaloids sanguinarine,
chelerythrine and chelidonine gave ICso values in the micromolar
range (0.2, 3.2 and 3.3mol/L, respectively). The potency of
sanguinarine was similar to that of the antipsoriatic agent
anthralin (ICso = 0.7 mol/L), whereas berberine showed a low
potency (ICs) = 30pmol/L).°* Further work (measurement of
lactate dehydrogenase release into the culture medium as an
indicator of plasma membrane damage) indicated that the
mechanism of action of C. majus extract was due to cytostatic,
rather than cytotoxic, activity.

A substantial amount of preclinical research has explored the
effects of a preparation (Ukrain) comprising a semi-synthetic
iophosphoric (triaziridide) derivative of the purified alkaloid
chelidonine isolated from C. majus. The molecule is reported to
be a trimer of chelidonine, with the alkaloid linked to thio-
phosphoric acid; the chemical name of this preparation has been
stated to be Tris{2{(SbS-(Sba,6B,12bc))-5b,6,7,12b, 13, 14-hexa-
hydro-13-methyl(1,3)-benzo-dioxolo(5,6-c)-1,3-dioxolo(4,5-i) phen-
anthridinium-6-ol} ethane-aminy]} phosphine-sulphide.6hydro-
chloride.” However, chemical analyses of Ukrain using a range
of techniques were unable to confirm the existence of the
proposed trimeric molecule and indicated that the preparations
tested simply contained a mixture of C. majus alkaloids, including
chelidonine.°°

‘ond, unnamed, alkaloid were also shown to have

ao

a

5

It has been reported that Ukrain has antitumour activity in
vitro against various cancer cell lines an
experimental models of cancer, as well as immunomodulatory
properties.° It has also been reported to induce cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in human epidermoid cancer cell lines, but not in
normal human keratinocytes,°” and to protect normal human
fibroblasts, but not various types of human tumour cells, against
ionising radiation in in vitro experiments;°) radioprotective
effects have also been reported following in vivo (preclinical)

in vivo in several

(34)

studies. Other properties reported include effects on bone

35)

tissue in vivo (rats).'

Subsequent research in some of these areas has, however, failed
to replicate the findings. In vitro studies using normal,
transformed and malignant cell lines have shown that there was
no difference in the effects of Ukrain on cell growth, cell cycle
progression and morphology for the different cell lines, indicating
that there is no selective toxicity towards malignant cells.°° Other
in vitro research by the same authors has also raised doubts about
claims of a lack of adverse effects with Ukrain.°”
Immunomodulatory activity
protein-bound polysaccharide fractions from a water extract of C.
majus ‘herbs' for 5 days increased the lytic activity of spleen
lymphocytes to Yac-1 tumour cells from 0.9% to 30.0% and
34.2% for the fractions CM-Al and CM-Ala, respectively (p
values not given).? The optimal concentration for generation of
activated killer cells was 5 tig/mL for both fractions. Similarly,
peritoneal macrophages cultured with CM-Ala (10-100 pg/
mL) show increased cytotoxicity, compared wit!
determined by the degree of inhibition of radiolabelled thymidine
uptake by tumour cells. CM-Ala contains around 30% protein
and 70% carbohydrate.°°)

Further work suggested that CM-Ala may have a radio-
protective effect in vivo. In experiments involving mice given CM-
Ala 50 mg/kg intraperitoneally 24 hours before sublethal doses of
irradiation, platelet numbers were significantly increased in CM-

Incubation of spleen cells with

mous

control, as

Ala treated mice, compared with control, five days post-
irradiation, and white blood cell count was significantly increased
in CM-Ala treated mice, compared with control, nine days post-
irradiation (p < 0.001 and < 0.01, respectively), indicating
haematopoietic recovery.°* In other experiments involving mice
given lethal doses of irradiation (9 Gy), the survival rate for mice
treated with CM-Ala 50 or 100mg/kg intraperitoneally before
irradiation was 80% at 30 days post-irradiation, whereas all mice
in the control group were dead by day 15 post-irradiation.

Anti-inflammatory activity Various effects related to anti-
inflammatory activity have been documented for C. majus extract
and for certain alkaloids isolated from the plant.

In in vitro experiments using mouse peritoneal macrophages,
nitric oxide production was
treated with a water extract of C. majus dried ‘herbs! (plant part
not stated precisely) at concentrations of 0.01, 0.1 and 1 mg/mL
together with murine recombinant interferon-gamma (rIFN-y),
compared with treatment with rIFN-y alone (p < 0.05), indicating
a cooperative induction of NO production.” NO production in
mouse peritoneal macrophages induced by C. majus extract plus
rIFN-y was progr
amounts (p < 0.05 for 0.01 and 0.1mM, compared with control)
of N°-monomethyl-L-arginine (N°MMA) and by addition of the
antioxidant compound pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) at a
concentration of 100M. Furthermore, incubation of mouse

ignificantly increased when cells were

ively inhibited by incubation with increasing

peritoneal macrophages with C. majus extract (1 mg/mL) plus
rIFN-y increased tumour-necrosis-factor-alpha (TNF-%) produc-
tion in a concentration-dependent manner; adding the nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-kB) inhibitor PDTC significantly decreased
the production of TNF-o, indicating that C. majus extract
TNF-« production via NF-KB activation.”
Anti-inflammatory activity has also been described for the
alkaloids sanguinarine and chelerythrine isolated from C. majus
root following studies involving the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test. Greatest inhibition of oedema was observed with
subcutaneous (rather than oral) administration of sanguinarine

increas

----- PAGE 152 -----
(rather than chelerythrine) 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight, compared
th control (no p values stated).

An extract of C. majus herb and the alkaloids sanguinarine and
chelerythrine (isolated from C. majus root in this study) inhibited
5-lipoxygenase (S-LO) in isolated bovine polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNL) with ICs values of 1.9, 0.4 and 0.8 mol/L,
respectively." Sanguinarine and chelerythrine also inhibited 12-
lipoxygenase (12-LO) obtained from mouse epidermis (ICs9 = 13
and 33mol/L, respectively), whereas C. majus herb extract
(170 pg extract/mL test solution) was inactive. Chelidonine was
inactive against both lipoxygenase enzymes (ICs9 = >100 pmol/L
for each). The enzymes 5-LO and 12-LO are involved with
leukotriene By and 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid synthesis.

w

Antimicrobial activity A glycoprotein isolated from the juice of
C. majus leaves and roots is active against drug-resistant
staphylococci and enterococci in vitro.” Minimum bactericidal
concentration (MBC) values against several strains (including
clinical isolates) of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
(MSSA), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), mupirocin-
resistant MRSA, aminoglycoside-resistant Enterococcus faecalis
and aminoglycoside-resistant E. faecium were 31-125, 31-250, 31-
125, 125-500 and 250-500 mg/L, respectively.

Chelerythrine and the quaternary benzophenanthridine alka-
loid fraction (containing chelerythrine and sanguinarine 7:3 with
traces of chelirubine) isolated from C. majus root were ineffective
in vitro against several Gram-negative bacterial strains, including
Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneu-
moniae.“ In contrast, substantial activity was observed in vitro
for the alkaloid fraction against Gram-positive bacteria, including
Staphylococcus aureus, beta-haemolytic streptococci and alpha-
haemolytic streptococci, and against Candida albicans (minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) values: 5, 10, 20 and Sig/mL,
respectively). MBC values for the alkaloid fraction against these
species were 40, 10, 40 and >160 ug/mL, respectively.

e findings are supported to some extent by those of other
In tests using the liquid dilution method, crude ethanolic
extracts of the aerial parts of C. majus were inactive against E.
coli, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus cereus, Salmonella enteritidis and
Candida albicans. In contrast, an ethanolic extract of C. majus
roots had MIC values of 15.63, 62.50 and 62.50mg dry plant
material/mL for B. cereus, S. enteritidis and C. albicans, but was

inactive against E. coli and P. aeruginosa.

Berberine chloride and chelerythrine chloride, isolated from
another plant species (Fagara zanthoxyloides, Rutaceae), have
activity against S. aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus pneu-
moniae, E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, Proteus sp.
and C. albicans.”

Antifungal activity in vitro has also been documented for C.
majus extracts against Fusarium strains. In liquid medium assays,
a methanolic extract of the whole plant harvested at the flowering
stage appeared to display the greatest antifungal activity: five days
after inoculation, growth of two Fusarium strains tested was
reduced to less than 40% of that seen with control, whereas this
was achieved for only one strain with an ethanolic extract and not
at all with an aqueous extract.” E oxysporum f. sp. cubense was
the strain most sensitive to the methanolic extract, and E solani
In contrast, F
culmorum was insensitive to all three extracts. Methanolic

was the most sensitive strain to all three extract

extracts of C. majus roots achieved greater inhibition of fungal
growth than did methanolic extracts of C. majus shoots: growth

Celandine, Greater

of E oxysporum f. sp. cubense, E oxysporum f. sp. melonis and FE
solani was reduced to less than 30% of that seen with control,
although growth of FE culmorum was unaffected.

Further experiments used alkaloids isolated from C. majus
roots and shoots: chelerythrine and sanguinarine were reported to
be active against both E solani and EF culmorum, berberine was
active against F solani, and chelidonine was inactive against both
strains. However, data supporting these statements were not
provided in the published report.

Antifungal activity against Cladosporium herbarum has been
described for the alkaloids chelidonine, dihydrochelerythrine and
dihydrosanguinarine isolated from a methanolic extract of C.
majus fresh root: minimum quantities of these compounds for
inhibition of growth of C. herbarum on thin-layer chromato-
graphy (TLC) plates were 10, 6 and 41g, respectively.

Other work has shown little variation in the antimycotic
activity of C. majus plant material collected during different
months. Ethanolic extracts of C. majus plants collected in late
July or early September were active against Candida pseudotro-
picalis, M. gypseum, T. mentagrophytes, M. canis and E.
floccosum (zone of inhibition from 21 to 30 or more millimetres
in diameter). Ethanolic extracts of C. majus plants collected in
early September were also active against C. albicans.

Antiviral activity In vitro activity against adenoviruses and
herpes simplex virus type I (HSV-1) has been documented for the
squeezed sap and a sodium chloride extract of the aerial parts of
C. majus.“” Subsequent bioassay-guided fractionation of extracts
of the aerial parts and the root of the plant produced several
fractions of which one in particular at a concentration of 35 ,g/
mL showed antiviral activity when incubated with cells infected
with adenovirus type 12. This fraction also showed virucidal
action against HSV-1, achieving 100% loss of virus infectivity
after 90 minutes! incubation, although adenoviruses types 5 and 12
were less sensitive, retaining 50% infectivity after 120 minutes!
incubation with the fraction.

An extract obtained from the 'green' parts of mature C. majus
plants was found to have inhibitory activity against cysteine, but
not serine, proteinases. The phytocystatin chelidocystatin, iso-
lated from the extract, inhibited the activity of the cysteine
proteinases cathepsin L, papain and cathepsin H (inhibition
constant, K; values: 5.6 x 10°'' mol/L, 1.1 x 10°!° mol/L and 7.5
x 10°? mol/L, respectively).

The pure compound chelidonine has weak inhibitory activity
(ICs9 around 200 pg/mL) against human immunodeficiency virus
type-1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT), whereas berberine
chloride has moderate inhibitory activity against this enzyme
(ICs9 = 100 g/mL). “*)

Other activities A liquid alcoholic extract of C. majus herb,
containing 0.64 mg/mL total alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine,
protected against indometacin-induced (10 mg/kg body weight)
gastric damage in a dose-dependent manner (2.5—10 mL/kg) when
administered orally one hour before indometacin to rats.” Doses
of C. majus herb extract of 5 and 10 mL/kg body weight afforded
over 50% protection against the development of ulcers, compared
with control.

Antioxidant activity, determined using the FRAP (ferric
reducing and antioxidant power) method, has been reported for
20% and 40% alcohol-water (type not stated) extracts of the

fresh aerial parts of C. majus collected in Hungary.°”

----- PAGE 153 -----
Celandine, Greater

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics No information relating to the clinical
pharmacokinetics of C. majus preparations was found.

Therapeutics Clinical investigation of C. majus preparations is
limited. The few clinical trials available have investigated the
effects of proprietary products containing C. majus, often in
combination with other herbal ingredients, in patients with
functional epigastric disorders. Further investigation of the
efficacy and effectiveness of C. majus preparations is required.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 60
patients with functional epigastric complaints, including cramp-
like pains in the biliary and gastrointestinal tracts, received
tablets containing C. majus extract (comprising 66.0 to 167.2 mg
native dry extract, equivalent to 4mg total alkaloids, calculated
as chelidonine), or placebo, at a dosage of two tablets three
At the end of the study, the
reduction in symptom score (one of the primary outcome
variables), assessed using the Zerssen list, was significantly
greater in the C. majus group, compared with the placebo group
(p = 0.003). Also, the physician's assessment of efficacy was that
18/30 patients in the treatment group were improved or
symptom-free, compared with 8/30 in the placebo group (p =
0.0038).

The effects of a combination preparation (Iberogast) containing
extract of C. majus herb (as well as extracts of bitter candy tuft,
chamomile flower, peppermint leaves, caraway fruit, liquorice
root, lemon balm leaves, angelica root and milk thistle fruit) were
investigated in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving 60 patients with functional dyspepsia.” Partici-
pants received Iberogast, a preparation similar to Iberogast but
lacking bitter candy tuft extract, or placebo, 20 drops three times
daily for four weeks. At the end of the study, participants who
received one of the two combination preparations, compared with
those in the placebo group, had a significant improvement in
gastrointestinal symptom scores, one of the primary outcome
variables (p < 0.001).

Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the

times daily for six weeks.'')

effects of a combination preparation (Cholagogum F Nattermann)
containing dry extracts of C. majus and Curcuma longa in
patients with upper abdominal pain due to biliary system
dysfunction.” Participants received the herbal preparation (n =
39), or placebo (n = 37), one capsule three times daily for three
weeks. Capsules of the herbal preparation were standardised to
contain 4 mg total alkaloids calculated as chelidonine. During the
first week of treatment, reductions in the frequency of cramp-like
pain were reported for both the treatment and placebo groups,
although the difference between the groups was not statistically
significant (p = 0.069). There was, however, a. statistically
significant difference in the frequency of episodes of dull/hollow
pain between the treatment and placebo groups (p = 0.009).°”

A small number of other clinical investigations has explored the
effects of a preparation (Ukrain) comprising a semi-synthetic
thiophosphoric (triaziridide) derivative of the purified alkaloid
from C. majus (see Pharmacological
Actions). Most of these investigations, typically case series and
small studies of varying methodological quality, have involved
patients with different types of cancer, including lung cancer,°>)
Kaposi's sarcoma,” (54)
and children from are:
after the Chernobyl accident with recurrent bronchopulmonary
pathology.”

chelidonine isolated

. 56)
rectal or ovarian cancer, breast cancer,

s contaminated with radioactive material

stematic review of seven randomised controlled trials of
Ukrain in patients with different types of cancer found that all
included trials reported beneficial effects for Ukrain, but that as
most of the trials had methodological limitations, their re:
were not definitive and further investigation in the form of well-
designed randomised controlled trials is required.

In one study, a randomised, controlled trial involving 90
patients with pancreatic cancer, participants received gemcitabine
alone, Ukrain (NSC-631570) alone, or gemcitabine followed by
Ukrain.”) Survival rates after six months were reported to be 26,
65 and 74% for the gemcitabine, Ukrain, and gemcitabine plus
Ukrain groups, respectively (p < 0.01 for gemcitabine plus Ukrain
versus gemcitabine alone). A further study has assessed the effects
of Ukrain in patients with hepatitis C virus infection.

sults

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a limited amount of information relating to the safety
and toxicity of preparations of C. majus.

Clinical data

Only limited data relating to safety aspects of C. majus are
available from clinical trials. Such studies in any case are not
designed primarily to assess safety, and generally have the
statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse events.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
60 patients with functional epigastric complaints who received
tablets containing C. majus extract (comprising 66.0 to 167.2 mg
native dry extract, equivalent to 4 mg total alkaloids, calculated as
chelidonine), or placebo, at a dosage of two tablets three times
daily for six weeks reported a similar number of adverse events for
both groups (three and five for the C. majus preparation and
placebo, respectively).{' In another double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial, no adverse events occurred in patients (7 = 39) with
upper abdominal pain due to biliary system dysfunction who
received a preparation (Cholagogum F Nattermann) containing
dry extracts of C. majus and Curcuma longa one capsule
(standardised to contain 4mg total alkaloids calculated as
chelidonine) three times daily for three weeks.”

Hepatotoxicity Several case reports have described hepatotoxic
effects, including severe hepatitis, severe cholestasis and fibrosis,
associated with the use of preparations of C. majus.” One report
describes ten cases of acute hepatitis in women who had ingested
preparations containing C. majus extract for one to nine months
before the onset of symptoms of hepatotoxicity.” In all ten cases,
other common causes for hepatitis were excluded, and liver

function test values before intake of C. majus were normal for the
seven patien
concerned use of five different German manufacturers' prepara-
tions of C. majus, three of which formulations include only C.
majus extract as the active component; such preparations are
usually standardised for content of chelidonine. A mechanism for
C. majus induced hepatotoxicity has not been established,
although because of the apparent lack of a dose-dependent effect
and variable latent period in the reported cases, an idiosyncratic
reaction may be the most plausible explanation.”

Two further cases describe a 39-year-old woman and a 69-year-
old man who both presented with symptoms of acute hepatitis,
including dark brown urine and jaundice; laboratory tests revealed
that both patients had highly elevated liver function test values.»
The woman had been taking a preparation containing C. majus
for four weeks before the onset of symptoms, and the man had

s for whom these data were available. The ten cases

----- PAGE 154 -----
taken capsules containing C. majus (each capsule standardised for
4mg chelidonine) and Curcuma longa for six weeks before
symptom onset; other possible causes of hepatotoxicity were
excluded. Both patients recovered after stopping treatment with C.
majus.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. At the end of June 2005,
the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 47
reports, describing a total of 147 adverse reactions, for products
containing C. majus only as the active ingredient (see Table 1). All
but one (Belgium) of these reports originated from Germany.

The specific products (manufacturer) associated with the
reactions were: Ardeycholan N (Ardeypharm), two reports;
Chol 4000 (Lichtenstein), six reports; Chol Sabona (Sabona),
two reports; Cholarist (Steiner), ten reports; Gallopas (Pascoe),
four reports; Panchelidon (Kanoldt), eight reports; Panchelidon N
(Boots Pharmaceuticals), ten reports; Siosol Febna (one report);
celandine/chelidonium extract (specific product not stated), four
reports. In seven cases, the patient concerned was taking other
medicines, although C. majus extract was the sole suspected drug
in five of these seven reports.

Six of the total number of reports provided information on
dechallenge; in all six cases, the reaction(s) had abated on
stopping C. majus extract. The outcomes for the 47 reports were
stated as: died (one report); not recovered (six reports); recovered
(ten reports); unknown (30 reports). (These data were obtained
from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating
Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The
information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or
likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not
represent the opinion of the World Health Organization.)

Table 1

Celandine, Greater

In May 2003, the Complementary Medicines Evaluation
Committee, which advises the Australian Government's Thera-
peutic Goods Administration, recommended that preparations of
C. majus for oral administration should include on their label
statements advising consumers to use such products only under
the supervision of a healthcare professional, to seek advice from a
healthcare professional before using the product if the potential
user has a history of liver disease, and to stop using C. majus
preparations if symptoms associated with liver disease occur.'°?
Healthcare professionals who identify suspected adverse drug
reactions associated with C. majus preparations should report
these using the appropriate spontaneous reporting form.

Other reactions Contact dermatitis has been reported in a 64-
year-old woman who had used C. majus juice externally to treat
warts. Within a few hours of applying the preparation, the
woman experienced severe itching and erythema, with papules, at
the application site. Six weeks later, the woman experienced the
same symptoms after applying the juice to a facial wart. In both
instances, the reaction resolved within a few days without
treatment. Subsequently, the woman displayed positive reactions
to patch testing with C. majus juice and to extracts of C. majus
branch, stem and root at concentrations of 0.1, 1 and 10 mg/
mL. A case report describing this reaction does not state the
source of the plant material and authentication and phytochem-
ical analysis of the materials do not appear to have been
undertaken.

Preclinical data

In vitro inhibition of rat liver alanine aminotransferase (ALT) has
been described for the benzophenanthridine alkaloids sanguinar-
ine and chelerythrine. Sanguinarine was a more powerful inhibitor
than was chelerythrine (IDso values: 3.4 x 10 °mol/L and 4.0 x
10 mol/L, respectively)."°” In other experiments, sanguinarine,
chelerythrine, berberine and coptisine inhibited oxygen uptake by

Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 47) of adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Chelidonium majus preparations
held in the Vigisearch database of the World Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up to end of June 200.

5 (@, 64)

Central nervous system. Paraesthesia (1) 1
Foetal. Biliary atresia (1) 1
General. Asthenia (3); death (1); fatigue (2); malaise (1); necrosis ischaemic (1) 8
Gastrointestinal. Abdominal pain (4); diarrhoea (2); faeces, discoloured (3); mouth dry (1); nausea (6); 21
pancreatitis (1); tongue oedema (1); vomiting (3)

Liver-biliary. Bilirubinaemia (11); cholelithiasis (1); gamma-GT increased (6); hepatic enzymes increased 95
(13); hepatic failure (1); hepatic function abnormal (1); hepatitis (19); hepatitis, cholestatic (8); hepatitis,

viral (1); hepatocellular damage (4); jaundice (16); SGOT increased (7); SGPT increased (7)

Metabolic. Cholinesterase decreased (1); LDH increased (2); phosphatase alkaline, increased (5) 8
Psychiatric. Anorexia (1); insomnia (1); nervousness (2) 4
Respiratory. Dyspnoea (1); larynx oedema (1) 2
Skin. Pruritus (3); skin discoloration (1) 4
Urinary. Urine abnormal (3) 3
Total number of adverse drug reactions 147

Key: GT = glutamyl transferase; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; SGO

serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (= aspartate transaminase/aspartate

aminotransferase); SGPT = serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase (= alanine transaminase/alanine aminotransferase)

*Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala,
Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 155 -----
Celandine, Greater

mitochondria obtained from mouse liver, whereas chelidonine had
virtually no effect.‘

In a randomised controlled experiment, swine were fed
sanguinarine and chelerythrine (isolated from Macleya cordata
(Wild.), Papaveraceae) in their feed (mean daily intake 0.1 or 5 mg/
kg body weight), or a standard diet, for 90 days (n = 3 per
group)."') At the 30-, 60- and 90-day assessments, there were no
statistically significant differences between the alkaloid-fed
groups and the control group with respect to the following
haematological and biochemical parameters: haemoglobin, hae-
matocrit, erythrocyte and leukocyte counts, total protein,
albumin, glucose, cholesterol, triacylglycerols, creatinine, urea,
total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). However, at day
90, statistically significant differences were observed for ALT,
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and gamma-glutamy] transfer-
ase (GGT) for the higher alkaloid intake group, compared with
control and, for GGT, for the lower alkaloid intake group (p <
0.05 for all).

There are conflicting results regarding possible cytotoxicity of
C. majus preparations (see Pharmacological Actions, In-vitro and
animal studies, Anticancer activity). Sanguinarine—intercalates
with DNA.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Greater celandine is contraindicated in patients with biliary
obstructions, existing or previous liver disease.‘©” In view of the
evidence of hepatotoxicity, use of C. majus extracts at dosages
higher than those recommended (see Dosage) and/or for longer
periods should be avoided. Monitoring of liver enzyme activity is
recommended for patients using C. majus preparations for longer
than four weeks.'°””

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for C.
majus. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
and used concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of C. majus has not been
established. In view of the lack of information on the use of C.
majus during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided
during these periods.

References

1 Medicines Act 1968, Statutory Instrument 1977 No. 2130 (Retail Sale
or Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order, 1977.

2 Hahn R, Nahrstedt A. Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives,
caffeoylmalic and new caffeoylaldonic acid esters, from Chelidonium
majus. Planta Med 1993; 59: 71-75.

3 De Rosa S$, Di Vincenzo G. Isochelidonine, a benzophenanthridine
alkaloid from Chelidonium majus. Phytochemistry 1992; 31: 1085—
1086.

4 Rogelj B et al. Chelidocystatin, a novel phytocystatin from
Chelidonium majus. Phytochemistry 1998; 49: 1645-1649.

5 Kim HK et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants. V:
isolation of two cytotoxic alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. J
Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 372-374.

6 Chang H-M, But PP-H (eds). Pharmacology and applications of
Chinese materia medica. Volume 1. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing Co, 1986.

7 Fik E et al. New plant glycoprotein against methicillin resistant
Staphylococci and Enterococci. Acta Microbiologica Polonica 1997;
46: 325-327.

8 Fik E et al. Isolation and characterisation of glycoproteins from milky
juice levaes [sic] and roots of Chelidonium maius [sic] L. Herba Pol
1995; 41: 84-95.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

32

33

Fik E et al. Comparative biochemical analysis of lectin and nuclease
from Chelidonium majus L. Acta Biochim Pol 2000; 47: 413-420.
Kadan G et al. (—)-Turkiyenine, a new alkaloid from Chelidonium
majus. ] Nat Prod 1990; 53: 531-532.

Kadan G et al. (+)-Norchelidonine from Chelidonium majus. Planta
Med 1992; 58: 477.

Colombo ML, Bosisio E. Pharmacological activities of Chelidonium
majus L. (Papaveraceae). Pharm Res 1996; 33: 127-134.

Tome FE, Colombo ML. Distribution of alkaloids in Chelidonium
majus and factors affecting their accumulation. Phytochemistry 1995;
40: 37-39.

Ritter R et al. Clinical trial on standardised celandine extract in
patients with functional epigastric complaints: results of a placebo-
controlled double-blind trial. Complement Ther Med 1993; 1: 189-
193.

Kosina P et al. Sanguinarine and chelerythrine: assessment of safety on
pigs in ninety days feeding experiment. Food Chem Tox 2004; 42: 85-
91.

Boegge S et al. Reduction of ACh-induced contraction of rat isolated
ileum by coptisine, (+)-caffeoylmalic acid, Chelidonium majus, and
Corydalis lutea extracts. Planta Med 1996; 62: 173-174.

Hiller K-O et al. Antispasmodic and relaxant activity of chelidonine,
protopine, coptisine, and Chelidonium majus extracts on isolated
guinea-pig ileum. Planta Med 1998; 64: 758-760.

Haberlein H et al. Chelidonium majus L.: components with in vitro
affinity for the GABA, receptor. Positive cooperation of alkaloids.
Planta Med 1996; 62: 227-231.

Kardos J et al. Enhancement of y-aminobutyric acid receptor binding
by protopine-type alkaloids. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1986; 36(1):
939-940.

Kim Y et al. Modulation of Chelidonii herba on GABA activated
chloride current in rat PAG neurons. Am J Chin Med 2001; 29: 265—
279.

Shin M-C et al. Modulation of Chelidonii herba on glycine-activated
and glutamate-activated ion currents in rat periaqueductal gray
neurons. Clin Chim Acta 2002; 337: 93-101.

Vahlensieck U et al. The effect of Chelidonium majus herb extract on
choleresis in the isolated perfused rat liver. Planta Med 1995; 61: 267—
271.

Kim DJ et al. Potential preventive effects of Chelidonium majis [sic] L.
(Papaveraceae) herb extract on glandular stomach tumor development
in rats treated with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)
and hypertonic sodium chloride. Cancer Lett 1997; 112: 203-208.
Kim HK et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants V:
isolation of two cytotoxic alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. J
Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 372-374.

Song J-Y et al. Immunomodulatory activity of protein-bound
polysaccharide extracted from Chelidonium majus. Arch Pharm Res
2002; 25: 158-164.

Smékal E et al. Interaction of benzophenanthridine alkaloid
sanguinarine with DNA. Stud Biophys 1984; 101: 125-132.

Smékal E, Kubova N. Alkaloids of protoberberine and
benzophenanthridine groups as intercalating drugs with DNA. Stud
Biophys 1984; 101: 121-123.

Vavretkova C et al. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids of Chelidonium
majus: Il. Potent inhibitory action against the growth of human
keratinocytes. Planta Med 1996; 62: 491-494.

Bruller W. Studies concerning the effect of Ukrain in vivo and in vitro.
Drugs Exp Clin Res 1992; 18 (Suppl. Suppl.): 13-16.

Panzer A et al. Chemical analyses of Ukrain™, a semi-synthetic
Chelidonium majus alkaloid derivative, fail to confirm its trimeric
structure. Cancer Lett 2000; 160: 237-241.

Jagiello-W6jtowicz E et al. Ukrain (NSC-631570) in experimental and
clinical studies: a review. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1998; 14: 213-219.
Roublevskaia IN et al. Induced G2/M arrest and apoptosis in human
epidermoid carcinoma cell lines by semisynthetic drug Ukrain.
Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 3163-3168.

Cordes N et al. Ukrain", an alkaloid thiophosphoric acid derivative
of Chelidonium majus L. protects human fibroblasts but not human
tumour cells in vitro against ionizing radiation. Int J Radiat Biol 2002;
78: 17-27.

----- PAGE 156 -----
34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

Boyko VN et al. Action of Ukrain, a cytostatic and
immunomodulating drug, on effects of irradiation. Drugs Exp Clin
Res 1996; 22: 167-171.

Jabloriski M. Ukrain (NSC-631570) influences on bone status: a
review. Drugs Exp Clin Res 2000; 26: 317-320.

Panzer A et al. Ukrain™, a semisynthetic Chelidonium majus alkaloid
derivative, acts by inhibition of tubulin polymerization in normal and
malignant cells. Cancer Lett 2000; 160: 149-157.

Panzer A et al. The antimitotic effects of Ukrain™, A Chelidonium
majus alkaloid derivative, are reversible in vitro. Cancer Lett 2000;
150: 85-92.

Song J-Y et al. Radiation protective effect of an extract from
Chelidonium majus. Int ] Hematol 2003; 78: 226-232.

Chung H-S e¢ al. Water extract isolated from Chelidonium majus
enhances nitric oxide and tumour necrosis factor-% production via

nuclear factor-«B activation in mouse peritoneal macrophages. ]
Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56: 129-134.

Lenfeld J e¢ al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary
benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

Vavretkova C et al. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids of Chelidonium
majus: 1. Inhibition of S- and 12-lipoxygenase by a non-redox
mechanism. Planta Med 1996; 62: 397-401.

Kokoska L et al. Screening of some Siberian medicinal plants for
antimicrobial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 82: 51-53.

Odebiyi OO, Sofowara EA. Antimicrobial alkaloids from a

Nigerian chewing stick (Fagara zanthoxyloides). Planta Med 1979; 36:
204-207.

Matos OC et al. Sensitivity of Fusarium strains to Chelidonium majus
L. extracts. J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 66: 151-158.

Ma WG et al. Fungitoxic alkaloids from Hokkaido Papaveraceae.
Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 527-534.

Vukuiié I et al. Investigation of the antimycotic activities of
Chelidonium majus extract. Planta Med 1991; 57 (Suppl. Suppl.2):
1459.

Kéry A et al. Antiviral alkaloid in Chelidonium majus L. Acta Pharm
Hung 1987; 57: 19-25.

Tan GT et al. Evaluation of natural products as inhibitors of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase. ] Nat
Prod 1991; 54: 143-154.

Khayyal MT et al. Antiulcerogenic effect of some gastrointestinally
acting plant extracts and their combination. Argneim-Forsch/Drug
Res 2001; 51: 545-553.

Then M e¢ al. Examination on antioxidant activity in the greater
celandine (Chelidonium majus L.) extracts by FRAP method. Acta
Biol Szegediensis 2003; 47: 115-117.

Madisch A et al. Ein Phytotherapeutikum und seine modifizierte
Rezeptur bei funktioneller Dyspepsie. Ergebnisse einer doppelblinden
plazebokontrollierten Vergleichstudie. Z Gastroenterol 2001; 39: 511-
517.

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

Celandine, Greater

Niederau C, Gépfert E. Die Wirkung von Schéllkraut- und
Curcumawurzelstock-Extrakt auf Oberbauch-beschwerden infolge
funktioneller Stérungen des ableitenden Gallensystems. Ergebnisse
einer plazebokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Med Klinik 1999; 94:
425-430.

Staniszewski A et al. Lymphocyte subsets in patient with lung cancer
treated with thiophosphoric acid alkaloid derivatives from

Chelidonium majus L. (Ukrain). Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1992; 18
(Suppl. Suppl.): 63-67.

Nowicky JW et al. Evaluation of thiophosphoric acid alkaloid
derivatives from Chelidonium majus L. (“Ukrain”) an an
immunostimulant in patients with various carcinomas. Drugs Exptl
Clin Res 1991; 17: 139-143.

Voltchek IV et al. Potential therapeutic efficacy of Ukrain (NSC
631570) in AIDS patients with Kaposi's sarcoma. Drugs Exptl Clin
Res 1996; 22: 283-286.

Nowicky JW et al. Ukrain both as an anticancer and
immunoregulatory agent. Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1992; 18 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 51-54.

Zahriychuk O. Ukrain, a thiophosphoric acid derivative of alkaloids
of Chelidonium majus L., is effective in the treatment of recurrent
bronchopulmonary pathology in children from areas contaminated
after the Chernobyl accident. Int J Immunotherapy 2003; 19: 47-53.
Ernst E, Schmidt K. Ukrain — a new cancer cure? A systematic review
of randomised clinical trials. BMC Cancer 2005; 5: 69.

Gansuage F et al. NSC-631570 (Ukrain) in the palliative treatment of
pancreatic cancer. Results of a phase II trial. Langenbeck's Arch Surg
2002; 386: 570-574.

Sologub TV e¢ al. Efficacy and safety of the drug Ukrain in chronic
hepatits C patients. Int J Immunother 2003; 19: 55-59.

De Smet PAGM. Safety concerns about kava not unique. Lancet 2002;
360: 1336.

Benninger J et al. Acute hepatitis induced by Greater Celandine
(Chelidonium majus). Gastroenterology 1999; 117: 1234-1237.
Stickel F et al. Acute hepatitis induced by Greater Celandine
(Chelidonium majus). Scand J] Gastroenterol 2003; 5: 565-568.
Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre (accessed June 27, 2005).

Therapeutic Goods Administration. Greater celandine (Chelidonium
majus). Proposed labelling advisory statement for the herb greater
celandine (Chelidonium majus). http://www.tga.gov.au/docs/html/
celandine.htm (accessed 29 June 2005).

Etxenagusia MA et al. Contact dermatitis from Chelidonium majus
(greater celandine). Contact Dermatitis 2000; 43: 47.

Walterova D et al. Inhibition of liver alanine aminotransferase activity
by some benzophenanthridine alkaloids. J Med Chem 1981; 24: 1100-
1103.

Barreto MC et al. Inhibition of mouse liver respiration by
Chelidonium majus isoquinoline alkaloids. Tox Lett 2003; 146: 37-47.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Celery

the celery stems, especially diseased plant material. Limited
scientific evidence is available to justify the herbal uses of
celery, although bacteriostatic activity has been documented
for the oil. Celery fruit should be used cautiously in view of the
documented allergic reactions.

Species (Family)

Apium graveolens L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)
Apii Fructus, Celery Fruit, Celery Seed, Smallage, Wild Celery

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G48 and G58.

Flavonoids Apigenin, apiin, isoquercitrin and others.”

Coumarins — Apigravin, apiumetin, apiumoside, bergapten,
celerin, celereoside, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin, osthenol,
rutaretin, seselin, umbelliferone and 8-hydroxy-5-methoxypsora-
len.

Low concentrations (not exceeding 1.3 ppm) of furanocoumar-
ins have been identified in commercial celery,‘ although
concentrations are reported to rise considerably in diseased
stems."

Volatile oils 2-3%. Many components including limonene (60%)
and selenine (10-15%), and various sesquiterpene alcohols (1—
3%), e.g. a-eudesmol and B-cudesmol, santalol.\'*'%) Phthalide
compounds, 3-2-butyl phthalide and sedanenolide, provide the
characteristic odour of the oil (presence of sedanolide and
sedanonic anhydride disputed). ')

Other constituents Choline ascorbate,\'® fatty acids (e.g linoleic,
myristic, myristicic, myristoleic, oleic, palmitic, palmitoleic,
petroselinic and stearic acids).

Volatile oil constituents
limonene (a monoterpene) -selinene (a sesquiterpene)

CH2CH2CH2CH3 CH2CH2CH2CH3
fe} oO
3-n-butylphthalide sedanenolide

je)
°
sedanolide
Coumarins
HO. NN
HgCO’ O° °
celerin
osthenol H
apigravin OCH
Rt R'
S VA S
OH oO o~ So ° a)
Re Re
Ri oR A! Re
celereoin OH H bergapten OCH, H
nodakenetin H H Haudhe
Ba H OH isoimperatorin fe) A H
isopimpinellin OCH; OCH3
8-hydroxy-5-methoxy- OCH; OH
psoralen
Figure 1 Selected constituents of celery.
Food Use

Celery is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that celery
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“! Celery stem (not the fruit) is commonly used in
foods. Previously, celery seed has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).(6*”

----- PAGE 158 -----
Herbal Use

Celery is stated to possess antirheumatic, sedative, mild diuretic
and urinary antiseptic properties. It has been used for arthritis,
rheumatism, gout, urinary tract inflammation, and specifically for

(G2, G6, G7, G8, God
rheumatoid arthritis with mental depression."

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried fruits 0.5-2.0g as a decoction 1:5 three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.3-1.2mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times
daily.‘6”

Liquid Extract of Celery (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.2 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In mice, sedative and antispasmodic activities have been
documented for the phthalide constituents."”"°” Celery seed
oil has been reported to exhibit bacteriostatic activity against
Bacillus subtilis, Vibrio cholerae, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphy-
lococcus albus, Shigella dysenteriae, Corynebacterium diphther-
iae, Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus faecalis, Bacillus pumilus,
Streptococcus pyogenes and Pseudomonas solanacearum.” No
activity was observed against Escherichia coli, Sarcina lutea or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Apigenin has exhibited potent antiplatelet activity in vitro,
inhibiting the aggregation of rabbit platelets induced by collagen,
ADP, arachidonic acid and platelet-activating factor (PAF), but
not that induced by thrombin or ionophore A23187.""

Studies with celery plant extracts have demonstrated anti-
inflammatory activity in the mouse ear test and against
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema,"”) and a hypotensive effect

Figure 2 Celery (Apium graveolens).

Celery

(G4) Ty

in rabbits and dogs after intravenous administration.

addition, hypoglycaemic activity has been documented.'©?”
Celery juice has been reported to exhibit choleretic activity and

the phthalide constituents are stated to possess diuretic activity.)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of celery
fruit and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for celery fruit and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Photosensitivity reactions have been reported as a result of
external contact with celery stems.?%7"°” These reactions have
been attributed to the furanocoumarin constituents which are
known to possess photosensitising properties."'’?”) The concen-
trations of these compounds are reported to increase considerably
in diseased celery stems.''"” It is thought that psoralen, the most
potent phototoxic furanocoumarin, acts as a transient precursor
for other furanocoumarins and does not accumulate in celery. !)

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions to celery have
also been documented» following oral ingestion of the stems.

Celery allergy is reported to be mediated by IgE antibodies and an
association between pollen and celery allergy has been postulated,

Figure 3 Celery — dried drug substance (root).

Figure 4 Celery — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 159 -----
Celery

although the common antigen has not been determined. Cross-
sensitivities to celery have been documented in patients with
existing allergies to dandelion and wild carrot.”

Acute LDso values (rats, by mouth; rabbits, dermal) have been
reported as greater than 5 g/kg body weight.°® Celery seed oil is
stated to be non-irritant, non-phototoxic and non-sensitising in
humans.°% 05®)

Contr.

indications, Warnings

Celery fruit contains phototoxic compounds, furanocoumarins,
which may cause photosensitive reactions. Celery fruit may
precipitate allergic reactions, particularly in individuals with
existing plant, pollen or food allergies. Diseased celery stems
(indicated by a browning of the stem) should not be ingested.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of celery to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Celery fruit is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and to be abortifacient.“©*” Uterine stimulant
activity has been documented for the oil,‘©?*° and the use of
celery fruits is contra-indicated during pregnancy.'©*” This does
not refer to celery stems that are commonly ingested as a food,
although excessive consumption should be avoided. It is not
known whether constituents of celery fruit appear in breast milk.

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid. Canada: Herbal
Diuretic. India: Flexi-muy. Malaysia: Celery Plus. UK: Mixed
Vegetable Tablets; Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain; Napiers
Backache Tea; Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain Tablets;
Sciatica Tablets; Vegetex.

References

1 Garg SK et al. Glucosides of Apium graveolens. Planta Med 1980; 38:
363-365.

2. Garg SK et al. Apiumetin — a new furanocoumarin from the seeds of
Apium graveolens. Phytochemistry 19783 17: 2135-2136.

3 Garg SK et al. Celerin, a new coumarin from Apium graveolens.
Planta Med 1980; 38: 186-188.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

18

19

20

21

24

26

Garg SK et al. Minor phenolics of Apium graveolens seeds.
Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 352.

Dall'Acqua et al. Biosynthesis of O-alkylfurocoumarins. Planta Med
1975; 27: 343-348.

Garg SK et al. Apiumoside, a new furanocoumarin glucoside from the
seeds of Apium graveolens. Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 1764-1765.
Garg SK et al. Coumarins from Apium graveolens seeds.
Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 1580-1581.

Innocenti G et al. Investigations of the content of furocoumarins in
Apium graveolens and in Petroselinum sativum. Planta Med 1976, 29:
165-170.

Kar A, Jain SR. Investigations on the antibacterial activity of some
Indian indigenous aromatic plants. Flavour Industry 1971; February.
Beier RC et al. Hple analysis of linear furocoumarins (psoralens) in
healthy celery (Apium graveolens). Food Chem Toxicol 1983; 21: 163—
165.

Chaudhary SK et al. Increased furocoumarin content of celery during
storage. J Agric Food Chem 1985; 33: 1153-1157.

Fehr D. Untersuchung tiber aromastoffe von sellerie (Apiunt
graveolens L.). Pharmazie 1979; 34: 658-662.

Stahl E. Drug Analysis by Chromatography and Microscopy. Ann
Arbor, Michigan: Ann Arbor Science, 1973.

Bjeldanes LF, Kim I-S. Phthalide components of celery essential oil. J
Org Chem 1977; 42: 2333-2335.

Bos R et al. Composition of the volatile oils from the roots, leaves and
fruits of different taxa of Apium graveolens. Planta Med 1986; 52:
S31.

Kavalali G, Akcasu A. Isolation of choline ascorbate from Apium
graveolens. J] Nat Prod 1985; 48: 495.

Gijbels MJM et al. Phthalides in roots of Apium graveolens, A.
graveolens var. rapaceum. Bifora testiculata and Petroselinum crispum
var. tuberosum. Fitoterapia 1985; 56: 17-23.

Teng CM et al. Inhibition of platelet aggregation by apigenin from
Apium graveolens. Asia Pac ] Pharmacol 1988; 1: 85-89.

Lewis DA et al. The anti-inflammatory activity of celery Apium
graveolens L. (Fam. Umbelliferae). Int ] Crude Drug Res 1985; 23: 27—
32.

Berkley SF et al. Dermatitis in grocery workers associated with high
natural concentrations of furanocoumarins in celery. Ann Intern Med
1986; 105; 351-355.

Austad J, Kavli G. Phototoxic dermatitis caused by celery infected by
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Contact Dermatitis 1983; 9: 448-451.
Ashwood-Smith MJ et al. Mechanisms of photosensitivity reactions to
diseased celery. BMJ 1985; 290: 1249.

Déchamp C et al. Choc anaphylactique au céleri et sensibilisation a
l'ambroisie et a l'armoise. Allergie croisée ou allergie concomitante?
Presse Med 1984; 13: 871-874.

Forsbeck M, Ros A-M. Anaphylactoid reaction to celery. Contact
Dermatitis 1979; 5: 191.

Pauli G et al. Celery sensitivity: clinical and immunological
correlations with pollen allergy. Clin Allergy 1985; 15: 273-279.
Opdyke DLJ. Celery seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 849-850.

----- PAGE 160 -----
- Centaury

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is little published information specifically concerning
Centaurium erythraea. Bitter components support the
traditional use of centaury as an appetite stimulant, although
it is said to be less active than comparable bitter herbs, such
as gentian. In view of the lack of pharmacological and
toxicological data, excessive use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Centaurium erythraea Rafn. (Gentianaceae)

Synonym(s)
Centaurium minus auct., C.

umbellatum Gilib., Common Centaury, Erythraea centaurium
(L.) Pers. subsp. centaurium

minus auct. subsp. minus, C.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E!
ESCOP 2003
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007'0*?

G3)

G85)

lridoids

H H
O-Glucosyl O-Glucosyl

swertiamarin gentiopicrin

HOH2C
OH OR?

R! R?
sweroside H H

centapicrin m-hydroxybenzoyl acetyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of centaury.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Acids Phenolic. Protocatechuic, m- and_ p-hydroxybenzoic,
vanillic, syringic, p-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic and caffeic, hydro-
xyterephthalic and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acids among others.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Traces of gentianine, gentianidine,
gentioflavine and others.

Monoterpenoids _Iridoids (bitters).""? Gentiopicroside (about
2%) as major, others include centapicrin, gentioflavoside, swero-
side and swertiamarin; intensely bitter m-hydroxybenzoylesters of
sweroside and catapicrin.

Triterpenoids Includes %- and B-amyrin, erythrodiol, crataegolic
acid, oleanolic acid and sitosterol.

Xanthones Highly methylated xanthones, including eustomin
and 8-demethyleustomin.

Other constituents Flavonoids, fatty acids, alkanes and waxes.

Food Use

Centaury is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
centaury can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'©! Previously, the bitter properties of centaury
were utilised in alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages with
maximum permitted doses between 0.0002% and 0.0008%.‘*?)

Herbal Use

Centaury is reputed to act as a bitter, aromatic and stomachic.
Traditionally, it has been used for anorexia and dyspepsia.(C* ©”
G52)

Figure 2 Centaury (Centaurium erythraea).

----- PAGE 161 -----
Centaury

Figure 3 Centaury — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Herb 2-4g as an infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented in two rat
models; subchronic inflammation (air pouch granuloma and
polyarthritis) test, and the carrageenan rat paw oedema test
(19% compared to 45% with indometacin).“ Antipyretic activity
has also been exhibited by a centaury extract against experimen-
tally induced hyperthermia in rats, although pretreatment with
the extract did not prevent hyperthermia;) antipyretic activity is
stated to be due to the phenolic acid constituents.'“* In the same
study, no analgesic activity could be demonstrated in mice
(writhing syndrome and hotplate models). Gentiopicroside
(30 mg/kg/day intraperitoneally) inhibited tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) production in carbon tetrachloride-induced and bacillus
Calmette—Guérin/lipopolysaccharide-induced models of hepatic
injury in mice.‘@?)

In rats, anticholinesterase activity has been demonstrated for
swertiamarin in a dose-dependent manner following oral admin-
istration, demonstrated by inhibition of carbachol-induced
contraction of proximal colon.'°) In mice, gentianine has central
nervous system (CNS)-depressant activity at oral doses of 30 mg/
kg, demonstrated by inhibition of spontaneous movement and
prolonged hexobarbital-induced sleeping time.'©” Anti-ulcero-
genic and inhibitory gastric secretion in rats (100 mg/kg) have been
shown for gentianine.'“”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of centaury
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for centaury and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

An alcoholic extract of centaury (200 mL/plate) was antimuta-
genic in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA8 and TA100.'°

Contra-indications, Warnings

Centaury is contra-indicated for individuals with — peptic

ulcers,‘

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of centaury to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of centaury taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data, use of centaury during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Czech Republic: Nat Zemezluce.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Montana N; China-Eisenwein; Eryval; Magentee St
Severin; Mariazeller. Czech Republic: Naturland Grosser
Swedenbitter; Stomaran. France: Diacure; Tisane Hepatique
de Hoerdt. Germany: Amara-Tropfen; Canephron; Stullma-
ton. Russia: Canephron N (Kanecppon H); Herbion Drops for
the Stomach (Pep6uon 7Keayaounsie Karan); Original Grosser
Bittner Balsam (Opurmmaapneii Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa).
South Africa: Amara; Clairo. Spain: Natusor Hepavesical;
Odisor. Switzerland: Gastrosan; Tisane pour l'estomac.

References

1 Van der Sluis WG, Labadie RP. Onderzok naar en van secoiridoid
glucosiden en zanthonen in het gescglacht Centaurium. Pharm Weekbl
1978; 113: 21-32.

2 Van der Sluis WG, Labadie RP. Secoiridoids and xanthones in the
genus Centaurium. Part 3. Decentapicrins A, B and C, new m-
hydroxybenzoyl esters of sweroside from Centaurium littorale. Planta
Med 1981; 41: 150-160.

3 Berkan T et al. Antiinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic effects of
an aqueous extract of Erythraea centaurium. Planta Med 1991; 57: 34—
37.

4 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

----- PAGE 162 -----
y Cereus

Little phytochemical or pharmacological information has
been documented for cereus, although the presence of
tyramine, a cardiotonic amine, may support the traditional
use of cereus as a cardiac stimulant. Cardiac complaints are
not considered to be suitable for self-medication.

Species (Family)

Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose (Cactaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cactus grandiflorus L., Cereus grandiflorus (L.) Mill., Night
Blooming Cereus

Part(s) Used

Stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cereus is not included in the GSL.'“@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G40.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Unidentified alkaloids.”

Amines ©
cactine.

Tyramine”’, hordenine,® previously referred to as

Flavonoids Rutin, kaempferitrin, hyperoside, isorhamnetin-3-B-
(galactosyl)-rutinoside.

Other constituents Resin

Food Use

Cereus is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Cereus is reputed to act as a cardiac stimulant and as a partial
substitute for digitalis, although there is no proof of its

Amines
tyramine hordenine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cereus.

therapeutic value. Cereus has been used in cases of dropsy and
various cardiac disorders.'@!® °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.

Liquid extract of cereus (BPC 1934) 0.06-0.6 mL.
Tincture of cereus (BPC 1934) 0.12-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for cereus. Cereus is reported to contain a
cardiotonic amine, tyramine, which has positive inotropic activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cereus
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for cereus
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

The fresh juice of cereus is irritant to the oral mucosa, causing
a burning sensation, nausea and vomiting. Diarrhoea has also
been reported following cereus consumption.'C~)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Cereus is stated to contain tyramine; on this basis, whether or

not it is appropriate for use by patients with cardiac disorders
should be considered.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cereus to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Cereus is stated to contain
tyramine;”
patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors should be
avoided.

until further information is available, its use in

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cereus has not been
established. In view of the limited information available on cereus,
its use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Brown SD et al. Cactus alkaloids. Phytochemistry 1968; 7: 2031-2036.

2 Wagner H, Grevel J. Neue herzwirksame drogen II, nachweis und
isolierung herzwirksamer amine durch ionenpaar-HPLC. Planta Med
1982; 44: 36-40.

3. Petershofer-Halbmayer H et al. Isolierung von Hordenin (Cactin) aus
Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose und Selenicereus
pteranthus (Link & Otto) Britt. & Rose. Sci Pharm 1982; 50: 29-34.

----- PAGE 163 -----
research assessing the effects of German chamomile is
limited, and randomised controlled clinical trials are required
to establish the reported anti-inflammatory, wound-healing

and sedative effects. Toxicity studies to date have indicated

chamomile to be of low toxicity, although allergic reactions

are documented.

Species (Family)

Matricaria recutita L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Chamomilla recutita (L.) Rauschert, Hungarian Chamomile,

Matricaria Flowers, Scented Mayweed, Sweet False Chamomile,
Wild Chamomile

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007 (Matricaria Flower) ‘°*)
Complete German Commission E ‘?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Ph Eur 2007 (Matricaria Flower)@*”)
USP29/NF24'89)

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G32.

Coumarins Umbelliferone and its methyl ether, heniarin.

Flavonoids  Apigenin, apigetrin, apiin, luteolin, quercetin,
quercimeritrin and rutin.

Volatile oils 0.24-1.9%. Pharmacopoeial standard not less than
4 mg/kg blue oil.'“** Main components are (—)-o-bisabolol (up to
50%) and chamazulene (1-15%). Others include (—)-0-
bisabolol oxide A and B, (—)-a-bisabolone oxide A, spiroethers
(e.g. cis- and trans-en-yn-dicycloether), sesquiterpenes (e.g.

Chamomile, German

anthecotulid), cadinene, farnesene, furfural, spathulenol and
proazulenes (e.g. matricarin and matricin).

Chamazulene is formed from matricin during steam distillation
of the oil. It varies in yield depending on the origin and age of the
flowers.”

Other constituents Amino acids, anthemic acid (bitter), choline,
polysaccharide, plant and fatty acids, tannin and_ triterpene
hydrocarbons (e.g. triacontane).

Sesquiterpenes
H OH OH
H
O°
(-)-a-bisabolol (-)-a-bisabolol oxide B

.sOH

chamazulene

spathulenol
Acetylenes
o—= ==
2 4
cis-enynedicycloether
0 = H
hd ==
trans-enynedicycloether
Coumarins Flavonoids
Sy
R
umbelliferone H

umbelliferone methyl ether CH3

OH O
apigenin-7-glucoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of German chamomile.

----- PAGE 164 -----
Food Use

German chamomile is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that chamomile can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.‘@'?
commonly used in herbal teas. Previously, German chamomile has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C*”

German chamomile is

Herbal Use

German chamomile is stated to possess carminative, antispasmo-
dic, mild sedative, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic and anticatarrhal
properties. G2 C4 66 G7, G8, G43, G52, G64) J
flatulent nervous dyspepsia, travel sickness, nasal catarrh, nervous
diarrhoea, restlessness and specifically for gastrointestinal dis-
turbance with associated nervous irritability in children. It has
been used topically for haemorrhoids, mastitis and leg ulcers.
German Commission E approved use for gastrointestinal spasms
and inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and
externally for skin and mucous membrane inflammation and
bacterial skin diseases including oral cavity and gums. It is also
approved for inflammations and irritations of the respiratory tract
(by inhalation) and ano-genital inflammation (baths and irriga-
tion).{C®

has been used for

Figure 3. German chamomile - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Chamomile, German 153

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

)

Dosage

Dried flowerheads 2-8 g as an infusion three times daily©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A wide range of pharmacological activities has been documented
for German chamomile, including antibacterial, anti-inflamma-
tory, antispasmodic, anti-ulcer, antiviral and hypo-uraemic
activities.

Anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic activity Anti-allergic and
anti-inflammatory activities"?
chamomile. The azulene components of the volatile oil are
thought to contribute by inhibiting histamine release and they
have been reported to prevent allergic seizures in guinea-pigs.”
Aqueous alcoholic extracts inhibited 5-lipoxygenase and cyclo-
oxygenase activity, and oxidation of arachidonic acid, and a
supercritical carbon dioxide extract had ICs values of 6-25 jtg/mL
for these three activities.'©
included apigenin, chamazulene, cis-en-yn spiroether and (—)-c-
bisabolol.““*?) Matricin, the precursor to chamazulene, is
reported to be a more effective anti-inflammatory agent than
4) Anti-inflammatory activity has also been
documented for the sesquiterpene bisabolol compounds, with
greatest activity reported for (—)-a-bisabolol,'** and for cis-
spiroether.) Anti-inflammatory activity (rat paw carrageenan
test) has also been documented for a cis-spiroether against
dextran induced oedema; no activity was observed against oedema
induced by serotonin, histamine or bradykinin."° In addition,
s anti-inflammatory activity.

are well documented for German

°2) The active compounds identified

chamazulene.

flavonoids are known to poss:

Sedative activity Apigenin competitively inhibited binding of
flunitrazepam to the central benzodiazepine receptor, but lacked
activity at other receptors, including muscarinic, %-adrenorecep-
tor and GABA,.'©” High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) fractions of a methanol extract displaced flunitrazepam
from its receptors in rat cerebellum membranes and muscimol
from GABA receptors in rat cortical membranes, due to the
presence of GABA in the fractions. Prolongation of hexobarbital-
induced sleeping time and reduction in activity of mice have been
documented.)

Anti-ulcerogenic activity Anti-ulcerogenic activity in rats has
en reported for (—)-a-bisabolol; the development of ulcers
induced by indometacin, stress or ethanol was inhibited.”

Antimicrobial and antiviral activities German chamomile oil
as been reported to have antifungal activity and antibacterial
activity against Gram-positive bacteria.“©°” The coumarin
erniarin has antibacterial and antifungal activities in the
presence of UV light. Antibacterial activity has been documented
for the coumarin constituents.” An ethanolic extract of the entire
plant has been reported to inhibit the growth of poliovirus and
erpesvirus.

Antispasmodic activity Antispasmodic activity on the isolated
guinea-pig ileum has been documented for the flavonoid and
isabolol constituents.” Greatest activity was exhibited by the
flavonoids, especially apigenin which was found to be more than

----- PAGE 165 -----
Chamomile, German

three times as potent as papaverine.” (—)-o-Bisabolol activity was
found to be comparable to that of papaverine, while the total
volatile oil was considerably less active." Smooth muscle relaxant
properties have also been documented for a cis-spiroether.?*% !?

Enhancement of uterine tone in the guinea-pig and rabbit has
been reported for an aqueous extract at a concentration of 1-2 mg
extract/em?,")
Other activities High molecular weight polysaccharides with
immunostimulating activity have been isolated from German
chamomile.” The oil has been reported to increase bile secretion
and concentration of cholesterol in the bile, following the
administration of 0.1mL/kg by mouth to cats and dogs.) A
dose of 0.2 mL/kg was stated to exhibit hypotensive, and cardiac
and respiratory depressant properties.

The ability of the volatile oil to regenerate liver tissue in

partially hepatectomised rats has been attributed to the azulene
2)

constituents.
The volatile oil has been documented to reduce the serum
concentration of urea in rabbits with experimentally induced

uraemic conditions.”

Clinical studies

Rigorous clinical research assessing the effects of German
chamomile is limited and large randomised controlled clinical
trials are required.

Anti-inflammatory and wound-healing effects Clinical studies
investigating the anti-inflammatory effects and wound-healing
properties of German chamomile preparations have been
reviewed.“ A summary of this information is given below.
Many of the studies and reports mentioned below have important
methodological limitations (e.g. no control group, small numbers
of participants) and this should be considered when interpreting
the results.

A cream containing German chamomile extract was reported to
have effects equivalent to 0.25% hydrocortisone, and superior
effects to 0.1% diflucortolone and 5% bufexamax in inflamma-
tory dermatoses, as assessed in 161 patients. Studies involving
healthy volunteers who received German chamomile preparations
have reported that German chamomile ointment was superior to
0.1% hydrocortisone acetate in dermatitis, and German chamo-
mile cream (20 mg/g) reduced visual sores and redness of skin in
an adhesive-tape stripping test. A randomised, double-blind trial
involving 25 participants indicated that a cream containing an
aqueous alcoholic extract of German chamomile was more
effective than hydrocortisone against UVB-induced erythema.

In an open study involving 98 patients with cancer, an extract
preparation (containing 50mg a-bisabolol and 150-300mg
apigenin-7-glucoside/100 g) used three times daily was reported
to reduce oral mucositis caused either by irradiation or
chemotherapy. However, a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 164 patients showed that a mouthwash containing
German chamomile did not decrease 5-fluorouracil-induced
stomatitis.

The healing effects of German chamomile ointment and
dexapanthenol 5% cream administered for six days were reported
to have comparable effects in a study involving 147 female patients
who underwent episiotomy during childbirth. A standardised
extract (50mg a-bisabolol and 3mg chamazulene/100 g) signifi-
cantly decreased weeping wound area and drying of wound in 14
patients following removal of tattoos. An ointment preparation

improved haemorrhage, itching, burning and oozing due to
haemorrhoids in a study involving 120 patients.

Sedative effects Oral administration of a German chamomile
extract was reported to induce a deep sleep in 10 of 12 patients
undergoing cardiac catheterisation.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for German
chamomile and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Reports of allergic reactions to chamomile are common,
although in the majority of cases the plant species is not
specified." Patients with an existing hypersensitivity to German
chamomile have demonstrated cross-sensitivities to other mem-
bers of the family Asteraceae/Compositae"® @!
celery (family Umbelliferae).“°? There are reports of anaphylac-
tic reactions to chamomile (spe unspecified)!” !® and in both
cases the individuals concerned had an existing hypersensitivity to
ragweed (member of Asteraceae/Compositae). The symptoms
they experienced included abdominal cramps, thickness of the
tongue and a tight sensation in the throat," angioedema of the
lips and eyes, diffuse pruritus, a full sensation of the ears,
generalised urticaria, upper airway obstruction, and pharyngeal
oedema."'”) Both patients made a full recovery following medical
treatment.

Allergic skin reactions have been documented following
external contact with German chamomile.” °°!) Consumption
of chamomile tea may exacerbate existing allergic conditions and
the use of a chamomile enema has been documented to cause
asthma and urticaria.(@?

The allergenic properties documented for chamomile have been
attributed to anthecotulid, a sesquiterpene lactone present in low
concentrations,'!) and to matricarin, a proazulene which has
produced positive patch tests in patients with an existing
sesquiterpene lactone hypersensitivity.'“> Sesquiterpene lactones
have been implicated in the allergenic activity of many plants,
especially those belonging to the Asteraceae/Compositae family
(see Feverfew). The prerequisite for allergenic activity is thought
to be an exocyclic a-methylene group.2”

The flowerheads contain anthemic acid, which is reported to act
as an emetic in large doses.'C”

The acute toxicity of chamomile oil (German and Roman) is
reported to be low." Oral and dermal LDso values in rabbits have
been documented as greater than 5 g/kg," and the application of
undiluted oil to the hairless backs of mice, to rabbit skin, and to
human skin was not found to produce any observable irritation.)
An LDspo value (mouse, by mouth) for German chamomile oil has
been documented as 2.5 mL/kg.''*) The acute oral toxicity of (—)-
a-bisabolol in mice and rats is reported to be low at
approximately 15 mL/kg.°” The subacute oral toxicity of (—)-o-
bisabolol has been estimated to be between 1.0 and 2.0 mL/kg in
rats and dogs.” An LDso value (mouse, intraperitoneal injection)
for cis-spiroether has been stated as 670 mg/kg.

) and also to

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the documented allergic reactions and cross-
itivities, German chamomile should be avoided by individuals
with a known hypersensitivity to any members of the Asteraceae/
Compositae family. In addition, German chamomile may
precipitate an allergic reaction or exacerbate existing symptoms
in susceptible individuals (e.g. asthmatics).

sel

----- PAGE 166 -----
The use of chamomile preparations for teething babies is not
recommended.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of German chamomile to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered (particularly
where oral preparations of German chamomile are used).
Coumarin compounds detected so far in German chamomile do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©*” for
anticoagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation German chamomile is reputed to
affect the menstrual cycle*” and extracts are reported to be
uterotonic.”*!) Teratogenicity studies in rats, rabbits and dogs
have been documented for (—)-a-bisabolol, with the oral toxic
dose stated as 1-3 mL/kg.°” A dose of 3mL/kg was found to
increase the number of fetuses reabsorbed and reduce the body
weight of live offspring.°?) (—)-o-Bisabolol administered orally
(250 and 500 mg/kg) to pregnant rats has been reported to have no
effect on the fetus.) There are insufficient data on the use of
German chamomile preparations during pregnancy and breast-
feasting, and excessive use (particularly oral preparations) should
be avoided during these periods.

UK: Culpeper After Dinner Tea; Napiers Monthly Calm Tea.
USA: Hot Flashex; Kavatrol; Laci Throat Care Soothing
Citrus; MSM with Glucosamine Creme.

References

1 Isaac O. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile I. On the pharmacology of (—)-a-bisabolol and bisabolol
oxides (review). Planta Med 1979; 35: 118-124.

2 Mann C, Staba EJ. The chemistry, pharmacology, and commercial
formulations of chamomile. In: Craker LE, Simon JE, eds. Herbs,
Spices, and Medicinal Plants: Recent Advances in Botany,
Horticulture, and Pharmacology, vol 1. Arizona: Oryx Press, 1986:
235-280.

3 Tubaro A e¢ al. Evaluation of antiinflammatory activity of a
chamomile extract after topical application. Planta Med 1984; 50: 359.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

Chamomile, German

Jakovlev V et al. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile VI. Investigations on the antiphlogistic effects of
chamazulene and matricine. Planta Med 1983; 49: 67-73.

Jacovlev V et al. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile II. New investigations on the antiphlogistic effects of (—)-
a-bisabolol and bisabolol oxides. Planta Med 1979; 35: 125-140.
Breinlich VJ, Scharnagel K. Pharmakologische Eigenschaften des EN-
IN-dicycloathers aus Matricaria chamomilla. Arzneimittelforschung
1968; 18: 429-431.

Szelenyi I et al. Pharmacological experiments with compounds of
chamomile III. Experimental studies of the ulcerprotective effect of
chamomile. Planta Med 1979; 35: 218-227.

Suganda AG et al. Effets inhibiteurs de quelques extraits bruts et semi
purifiés de plantes indigénes frangaises sur la multiplication de
l'herpesvirus humain 1 et du poliovirus humain 2 en culture cellulaire.
J Nat Prod 1983; 46: 626-632.

Achterrath-Tuckermann U e¢ al. Pharmacological investigations with
compounds of chamomile. V. Investigations on the spasmolytic effect
of compounds of chamomile and Kamillosan on the isolated guinea
pig ileum. Planta Med 1980; 39: 38-50.

Holz] J et al. Preparation of '*C-spiro ethers by chamomile and their
use by an investigation of absorption. Planta Med 1986; 52: 533.
Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Wagner VH et al. Immunstimulierend wirkende polysaccharide
(heteroglykane) aus héheren pflanzen. Arzneimittelforschung 1985;
35: 1069.

Ikram M. Medicinal plants as hypocholesterolemic agents. /PMA
1980; 30: 278-282.

Grochulski VA, Borkowski B. Influence of chamomile oil on
experimental glomerulonephritis in rabbits. Planta Med 1972; 21:
289-292.

Hausen BM et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 229-234.

Hausen BM. The sensitising capacity of Compositae plants. III. Test
results and cross-reactions in Compositae-sensitive patients.
Dermatologica 1979; 159: 1-11.

Casterline CL. Allergy to chamomile tea. JAMA 1980; 4: 330-331.
Benner MH, Lee HJ. Anaphylactic reaction to chamomile tea. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1973; 52: 307-308.

Kettel WG. Allergy to Matricaria chamomilla. Contact Dermatitis
1987; 16: SO-S1.

Mitchell JC, Dupuis G. Allergic contact dermatitis from
sesquiterpenoids of the Compositae family of plants. Br J Derm 1971;
84: 139-150.

Opdyke DLJ. Chamomile oil German. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
851-852.

Habersang S et al. Pharmacological studies with compounds of
chamomile IV. Studies on toxicity of (—)-a-bisabolol. Planta Med
1979; 37: 115-123.

----- PAGE 167 -----
chemical compositions, many of the activities described for
German chamomile are thought to be applicable to Roman
chamomile and thus support the traditional herbal uses.
However, rigorous clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of preparations of Roman chamomile is required.
Roman chamomile is stated to be of low toxicity, although
allergic reactions (mainly contact dermatitis) have been
reported.

Species (Family)

Chamaemelum nobile (L.) All. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Anthemis nobilis L., Chamomile, ormenis nobilis (L.) J. Gay ex
Coss. & Germ.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078
USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Coumarins Scopoletin-7-glucoside.

Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, quercetin and their glycosides
(e.g. apiin, luteolin-7-glucoside and rutin).

Volatile oils 0.4-1.75%. Angelic and tiglic acid esters (85%);
others include 1,8-cineole, [-trans-pinocarveol, [-trans-pinocar-
vone, chamazulene, farnesol, nerolidol; germacranolide-type
sesquiterpene lactones (0.6%), including nobilin, 3-epinobilin,
1,10-epoxynobilin, 3-dehydronobilin; various alcohols including
amyl and isobutyl alcohols, anthemol.~ Chamazulene is formed
from a natural precursor during steam distillation of the oil, and
varies in yield depending on the origin and the age of flowers.”

Chamomile, Roman

Other constituents Anthemic acid (bitter), phenolic and fatty
acids, phytosterol, choline and inositol.

Food Use

Roman chamomile is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that Roman chamomile can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©'® Chamomile is commonly
used as an ingredient of herbal teas. Previously, Roman chamomile
has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘“4?

Herbal Use

Roman chamomile is stated to possess carminative, anti-emetic,
antispasmodic, and sedative properties. It has been used for
dyspepsia, nausea and vomiting, anorexia, vomiting of pregnancy,
dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for flatulent dyspepsia associated

with mental stress.(C* 6% 67 C8: Go)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowerheads 1—4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times daily.”

Volatile oil esters

H CH3
fe}

Sesquiterpenes

m-butylangelate
HC. CH3
‘alas
fe}
mbutyltigliate
Coumarins Flavonoids
Glucosyl-O fe) [e)
scopoletin-7-glucoside
(scopolin)
R
apigenin H
luteolin OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Roman chamomile.

----- PAGE 168 -----
Pharmacological Actions

German and Roman chamomile possess similar pharmacological
activities (see Chamomile, German for a fuller description of
documented pharmacological actions).

In vitro and animal studies

Few studies have been documented specifically for Roman
chamomile. The azulene compounds are reported to possess
anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties; their mechanism
of action is thought to involve inhibition of histamine release (see
Chamomile, German). The volatile oil has been documented as
having anti-inflammatory activity (carrageenan rat paw oedema
test), and antidiuretic and sedative effects following intraperito-

neal administration of doses up to 350mg/kg body weight to
(5)

rats.

The azulenes have been reported to stimulate liver regeneration
following oral, but not subcutaneous, administration.

The sesquiterpenoids nobilin, 1,10-epoxynobilin and 3-dehy-
dronobilin have demonstrated in vitro antitumour activity against
human cells.” The concentration of hydroxyisonobilin required
for cytotoxic activity is reported to be low enough to warrant
further investigations (EDs, 0.56ug/mL versus HeLa; EDso
1.23 ,tg/mL versus KB; arbitrary acceptable test level 4 g/mL).

Clinical studies

Clinical research ass

sing the effects of Roman chamomile is
limited, and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for Roman
chamomile and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions to chamomile
have been documented (see Chamomile, German) The allergenic
principles in chamomile are thought to be the sesquiterpene

Figure 2 Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile).

Chamomile, Roman 157,

Roman chamomile yields nobilin, a sesquiterpene
lactone that is reported to be potentially allergenic.” However,
Roman chamomile oil has also been reported to be non-irritant
sitising to human skin.
indicated the oil to be either mildly or non-irritant, and to lack
any phototoxic effects.”

Large dos

emetic“ and this has been attributed to the anthemic acid
)

lactones.”

and non: Animal studies have

s of Roman chamomile are stated to act as an

content.

The acute toxicity of Roman chamomile in animals is reported
) Acute LDso values in rabbits (dermal) and
rats (by mouth) have been stated to exceed 5 g/kg.)

to be relatively low."!

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the documented allergic reactions and cross-sensitivities
(see Chamomile, German), Roman chamomile should be avoided
by individuals with a known hypersensitivity to any members of
the Asteraceae/Compositae family. In addition, Roman chamomile
may precipitate an allergic reaction or exacerbate existing
symptoms in susceptible individuals (e.g. asthmatics).

The use of chamomile preparations in teething babies
recommended.

is not

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of Roman chamomile to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered (particularly
where oral preparations of Roman chamomile are used).
Coumarin compounds detected so far in Roman chamomile do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent) for antic-
oagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Roman chamomile is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.‘°* In view of this
and the potential for allergic reactions, the exce:
chamomile during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

ive use of Roman

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: Summertime Tea Blend.

Figure 3 Roman chamomile - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

C

----- PAGE 169 -----
C

Chamomile, Roman

References

1 Mann C, Staba EJ. The chemistry, pharmacology, and commercial
formulations of chamomile. In: Craker LE, Simon JE, eds. Herbs,
Spices, and Medicinal Plants: Recent Advances in Botany,
Horticulture, and Pharmacology, vol 1. Arizona: Oryx Press, 1986:
235-280.

2 Opdyke DLJ. Chamomile oil roman. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974: 12:

853.

Casterline CL. Allergy to chamomile tea. JAMA 1980; 4: 330-331.
Hausen BM et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 229-234.

Melegari M et al. Chemical characteristics and pharmacological
properties of the essential oils of Anthemis nobilis. Fitoterapia 1988;
59: 449-455,

Achterrath-Tuckermann U et al. Pharmacologisch Untersuchungen
von Kamillen-Inhaltestoffen. Planta Med 1980; 39: 38-50.

----- PAGE 170 -----
= Chaparral

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of chaparral is well studied and extensive
literature has been published on the principal lignan
component nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA). However,
little documented evidence is available to justify the herbal
uses of chaparral. In view of the concerns over the hepatic
toxicity, the use of chaparral as a herbal remedy cannot be
recommended.

Species (Family)

Larrea tridentata Cov. var. glutinosa Jepson (Zygophyllaceae)

Synonym(s)

Creosote Bush. L. tridentata (south-western USA and northern

Mexico) is now regarded as a separate species to Larrea divaricata
5 ee

Gay. (north-western Argentina).

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
85)

Martindale 35th edition

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Chaparral is not included in the GSL.“@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G22.

Amino acids Arginine, aspartine, cystine, glutamic acid, glycine,
isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine and
valine.

Flavonoids More than 20 different compounds reported,
including isorhamnetin, kaempferol and quercetin and_ their
glycosidic and ether derivatives; gossypetin, herbacetin, and their

acetate derivatives;'"” two C-glucosyl flavones.

Lignans Major constituent nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA)
(up to 1.84%), norisoguaiacin, dihydroguaiaretic acid, partially

demethylated dihydroguaiaretic acid, 3’-demethoxyisoguaia-
<i (8-10)
cin.

Lignans

HO OH
NF
Hi a

HO. / « y OH

nordihydroguaiaretic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of chaparral.

Resins 20%. Phenolic constituents on external leaf surfaces of L.
divaricata and L. tridentata are reported to be identical, contain-
ing a number of flavone and flavonol glycosides, and two lignans
(including NDGA).

Volatile oils | Many identified terpene components include
calamene, eudesmol, limonene, %- and B-pinene, and 2-rossa-

(
lene"?

(12)

Other constituents Two pentacyclic triterpenes,"” saponins.

Other plant parts A cytotoxic naphthoquinone derivative,
larreantin, has been isolated from the roots.‘

Food Use

Chaparral is not used in foods, although a related species, Larrea
mexicana Moric., also termed creosote bush, is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that creosote bush can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.(@'® In the
USA, NDGA is no longer permitted to be used as an antioxidant
in foods following the results of toxicity studies in animals (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

Herbal Use

Chaparral has been used for the treatment of arthritis, cancer,

venereal disease, tuberculosis, bowel cramps, rheumatism and

colds,'6&

Figure 2 Chaparral (Larrea tridentata).

C

----- PAGE 171 -----
Chaparral

Figure 3. Chaparral - dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Amocebicidal action against Entamoeba histolytica has been
reported for a chaparral extract (0.01%). This action may be
attributable to the lignan constituents, which are documented as
both amoebicidal and fungicidal.” NDGA has been reported to
have antimicrobial activity against a number of organisms
including Penicillium spp., Salmonella spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and various other pathogens and moulds.'* !*

NDGA is an antioxidant, and has been
inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzyme function.

locumented to cause
(15-17)

Clinical studies

Medical interest in chaparral increased following claims that
ingestion of an aqueous infusion of the herb was associated with
regression of a malignant melanoma in the cheek of an 85-year-old
man.\!®) However, an isolated care report is not adequate scientific
evidence, results of a subsequent study that investigated the
antitumour action of chaparral, as a tea, were inconclusive.‘©%

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for
chaparral and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Acute hepatitis has been associated with chaparral inges-
tion"? Contact dermatitis to chaparral has been
reported.°**) Chaparral-induced toxic hepatitis has been
reported for two patients in different parts of the USA. The
adverse effects were attributed to ingestion of a herbal nutritional
supplement derived from the leaves of chaparral. Five cases of
serious poisoning in the USA and another three in Canada have
been linked to chaparral-containing products.?°* Some patients
have developed irreversible reno-hepatic failure. Initially, NDGA
was thought to have low toxicity: doses of up to 400 mg/kg body
weight by intramuscular injection had been administered to
humans for 5-6 months, with little or no toxicity reported.
Documented oral LDso values for NDGA include 4 ¢/kg (mouse),
5.5 g/kg (rat) and 830 mg/kg (guinea-pig)."' Results of chronic
feeding studies (two years, 0.25-1.0% of diet) in rats and mice

reported no abnormalities in histological tests of the liver, spleen
and kidney. Inflammatory caecal lesions and_ slight cystic
enlargement of lymph nodes near the caecum were observed in
rats at the 0.5% feeding level. At this point NDGA was considered
to be safe for food use. However, two later studies in rats (using
NDGA at up to 3% of the diet) reported the development of
cortical and medullary cysts in the kidney.’ On the basis of these
findings, NDGA was removed from GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe) status in the USA and is no longer permitted to be used
as an antioxidant in foods.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the reports of acute hepatitis associated with chaparral
ingestion, and the uncertainty regarding NDGA toxicity, con-
sumption should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of chaparral to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Chaparral has amino acid
constituents and, therefore, may not be suitable for use by patients
receiving treatments with monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro utero activity has been
documented for chaparral.'©* In view of the concerns regarding
toxicity, chaparral should not be ingested during pregnancy or
lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Proyeast.

References

1 Bernhard HO, Thiele K. Additional flavonoids from the leaves of
Larrea tridentata. Planta Med 1981; 41: 100-103.

2 Sakakibara M et al. 6,8-Di-C-glucosylflavones from Larrea tridentata
(Zygophyllaceae). Phytochemistry 1977; 16: 1113-1114.

3 Sakakibara M e¢ al. A new 8-hydroxyflavonol from Larrea tridentata.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 2097-2098.

4 Sakakibara M et al. New 8-hydroxyflavonols from Larrea tridenta.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 849-851.

5 Sakakibara M et al. Flavonoid methyl ethers on the external leaf
surface of Larrea tridentata and L. divaricata. Phytochemistry 1976;
15: 727-731.

6 Chirikdjian JJ. Isolation of kumatakenin and 4’ ,5-dihydroxy-3,3',7-
trimethoxyflavone from Larrea tridentata. Pharmazie 1974; 29: 292—
293.

7 Chirikdjian JJ. Flavonoids of Larrea tridentata. Z Naturforsch 1973;
28: 32-35.

8 Gisvold O, Thaker E. Lignans from Larrea divaricata. ] Pharm Sci
1974; 63: 1905-1907.

9 Fronczek FR et al. The molecular structure of 3/-
demethoxynorisoguaiacin triacetate from creosote bush (Larrea
tridentata). ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 497-499.

10 Page JO. Determination of nordihydroguaiaretic acid in creosote bush.
Anal Chem 1955; 27: 1266-1268.

11 Bohnstedt CF, Mabry TJ. The volatile constituents of the genus Larrea
(Zygophyllaceae). Rev Latinoam Quim 1979; 10: 128-131.

12 Xue H-Z et al. 3-B-(3,4-Dihydroxycinnamoy!)-erythrodiol and 3B-(4-
hydroxycinnamoyl)-erythrodiol from Larrea tridentata.
Phytochemistry 1988; 27: 233-235.

13 Luo Z et al. Larreatin, a novel, cytotoxic naphthoquinone from Larrea
tridentata. ] Org Chem 1988; 53: 2183-2185.

14 Segura JJ et al. In-vitro amebicidal activity of Larrea tridentata. Bol
Estud Med Biol 1979; 30: 267-268.

----- PAGE 172 -----
15

16

17

18

Oliveto EP. Nordihydroguaiaretic acid. A naturally occurring
antioxidant. Chem Ind 1972: 677-679.

Burk D, Woods M. Hydrogen peroxide, catalase, glutathione
peroxidasequinones, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, and phosphopyridine
in relation to X-ray action on cancer cells. Radiation Res Suppl 1963;
3: 212-246.

Pardini RS e¢ al. Inhibition of mitochondrial electron transport by
nor-dihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA). Biochem Pharmacol 1970; 19:
2695-2699.

Smart CR e¢ al. An interesting observation on nordihydroguaiaretic
acid (NSC-4291; NDGA) and a patient with malignant melanoma—a
preliminary report. Cancer Chemother Rep Part 1 1969; 53: 147.

19

20

21

22

23

24

Chaparral

Katz M, Saibil F. Herbal hepatitis: subacute hepatic necrosis
secondary to chaparral leaf. J Clin Gastroenterol 1990; 12: 203-206.
Clark F, Reed R. Chaparral-induced toxic hepatitis — California and
Texas, 1992. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1992; 41: 812-814.

Gordon DW et al. Chaparral ingestion — the broadening spectrum of
liver injury caused by herbal medicines. JAMA 1995; 273: 489-490.
Leonforte JE Contact dermatitis from Larrea (creosote bush). J Am
Acad Dermatol 1986; 14: 202-207.

Shasky DR. Contact dermatitis from Larrea tridentata (creosote
bush). J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15: 302.

Anon. Toxic tea. Pharm J 1993; 250: 366.

C

----- PAGE 173 -----
7 Cinnamon

probably attributable to the volatile oil. The astringent
properties of tannins may account for the claimed
antidiarrhoeal action. However, rigorous clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of cinnamon preparations is
required. Cinnamon should not be used in amounts greatly
exceeding those used in foods.

Species (Family)

Jinnamomum zeylanicum Bl. (Lauraceae)
t+Cinnamomum loureirii Nees
+Cinnamomum burmanii (Nees) Bl.

Synonym(s)

*Ceylon Cinnamon, Cinnamomum verum J.S. Presl., True
Cinnamon

+Cinnamomum obtusifolium Nees var. loureirii Perr. & Eb.,
Saigon Cassia, Saigon Cinnamon

fBatavia Cassia, Batavia Cinnamon, Padang-Cassia, Panang
Cinnamon

Part(s) Used

Inner bark

Pharmacopo

BHP 1996”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission EO)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 20078

WHO volume 1 1999

| and Other Monographs

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G58, G59 and G62.

Tannins Condensed.

Volatile oils Up to 4%. Cinnamaldehyde (60-75%), benzalde-
hyde and cuminaldehyde; phenols (4-10%) including eugenol, and
methyleugenol, pinene, phellandrene, cymeme and caryophyllene
(hydrocarbons), eugenol acetate, cinnamyl acetate and benzyl
benzoate (esters), linalool (an alcohol). Of the various types of
cinnamon bark the oil of C. zeylanicum is stated to contain the
highest amount of eugenol. Cinnamon oil differs from the closely
related cassia oil in that the latter is reported to be devoid of
eugenol, monoterpenoids and sesquiterpenoids (see Cassia).

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, cinnzeylanin, cinnzeylanol,
coumarin, gum, mucilage, resins and sugars.

Other plant parts Cinnamon leaf oil contains much higher
concentrations of eugenol, from 80 to 96% depending on the
species. A cinnamon leaf oil of Chinese origin, Cinnamomum
japonicum Sieb., contains a high concentration of safrole (60%)
and only about 3% eugenol.

Food Use

Cinnamon is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
cinnamon can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.‘©'® It is commonly used as a spice in cooking,
although at levels much less than the stated therapeutic doses. The
acceptable daily intake of cinnamaldehyde has been temporarily
estimated as 700 t1g/kg body weight.‘C* Previously, cinnamon has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).(C*?

Herbal Use

Cinnamon is stated to possess antispasmodic, carminative,
orexigenic, antidiarrhoeal, antimicrobial, refrigerant and anthel-
mintic properties. It has been used for anorexia, intestinal colic,
infantile diarrhoea, common cold, influenza, and specifically for
flatulent colic, and dyspepsia with nausea.“ Cinnamon bark is
also stated to be astringent, and cinnamon oil is reported to
possess carminative and antiseptic properties.'C” C4» OC

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.5-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Phenylpropanes

CHO
fa
OCH; of
on a “oO
cinnamaldehyde — eugenol H safrole
methyleugenol CH3
CO2H
oa

trans-cinnamic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cinnamon.

----- PAGE 174 -----
Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture of Cinnamon (BPC 1949) 2-4mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Cinnamon oil has antifungal, antiviral, bactericidal and larvicidal
properties.'“4 A carbon dioxide extract of cinnamon bark
(0.1%) has been documented to suppress completely the growth
of numerous microorganisms including Escherichia coli, Staphy-
lococcus aureus and Candida albicans.'“*) (See Cassia for details
of the many pharmacological actions documented for cinnamal-
dehyde and cinnamomi cortex (cinnamon bark).)

Antiseptic and anaesthetic properties have been documented for
eugenol and two insecticidal compounds, cinnzeylanin and
cinnzeylanol, have been isolated.“ Tannins are known to
possess astringent properties.

Figure 2. Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum).

Figure 3. Cinnamon - dried drug substance (inner bark).

Cinnamon

Weak tumour-promoting activity on the mouse skin and weak
cytotoxic activity against HeLa cells has been documented for
eugenol.(C4”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
cinnamon and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for cinnamon bark. However, clinical safety
data and toxicity data for cinnamom are limited and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Cinnamon oil contains
cinnamaldehyde, an irritant and sensitising principle.'(°*® The
dermal LDso of the oil is reported to be 690 mg/kg body weight

(see Cassia). The accepted daily intake of eugenol is up to 2.5 mg/
kg.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contact with cinnamon bark or oil may cause an_ allergic
reaction.“ Cinnamon oil is stated to be a dermal and mucous
membrane irritant, and a dermal sensitiser.“@** It is a hazardous
oil and should not be used on the skin.‘ The oil should not be
taken internally.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cinnamon during pregnancy and lactation, provided
that doses do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Paratonico. Czech Republic: Blahungstee N; Dr Theiss
Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Magen- und
Darmtee N. France: Elixir Grez; Quintonine. Germany:
Amara-Pascoe; Gastrosecur; Klosterfrau Melisana; Melissen-
geist; Schwedentrunk Elixier; Sedovent. India: Carmicide.
Israel: Davilla. Italy: Biophase Shampoo; Dam. Russia:
Doppelherz Melissa (Aommeanrep. Meancca); Himcolin
(Xumkoaun). South Africa: Melissengeist; Rooilavental; Spir-
itus Contra Tussim Drops. Spain: Agua del Carmen;
Vigortonic. Switzerland: Odontal; Tisane pour les problemes
de prostate. Thailand: Meloids. UK: Melissa Comp.. Vene-
zuela: Aftil.

Reference

1 Wagner H, Wolff P (eds). New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer
Verlag, 1977.

C

----- PAGE 175 -----
- Clivers

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for clivers. No
scientific evidence was found to support the herbal uses,
although documented tannin constituents may account for
the reputed mild astringent action. In view of the paucity of
toxicity data, excessive use of clivers should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Galium aparine L. (Rubiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cleavers, Galium, Goosegrass

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Acids Caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, gallic acid, p-hydroxyben-
zoic acid, salicylic acid and citric acid.)

Coumarins Unspecified. Scopoletin and umbelliferone reported
for related species Galium cruciata and Galium tauricum.”

Iridoids Asperuloside (rubichloric acid), monotropein.'>*

lridoids

fe}
Glucosyl-O a

asperuloside

Glucosyl-O nm

monotropeine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of clivers.

Tannins Unspecified; gallic acid is usually associated with
hydrolysable tannins.

Other constituents Alkanes (Cjy—C3,), flavonoids.

Other plant parts Anthraquinones have been documented for
the roots, but not for the aerial parts.'!

Food Use

Clivers is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Clivers is stated to possess diuretic and mild astringent properties.
It has been used for dysuria, lymphadenitis, psoriasis, and

specifically for enlarged lymph nodes.\6% 07 G86

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Figure 3 Clivers — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 176 -----
Liquid extract
daily. ©

24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Expressed juice 3-15 mL three times daily.C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for clivers. Asperuloside and monotropein have
been reported to elicit a mild laxative action in mice. The action
was stated to be approximately 15 times less potent than that of
senna, and of shorter duration.

Clinical studies

None documented. Tannins are known to possess astringent
activities.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that diabetics should only use the expressed
juice with caution'©* although no pharmacological data were
located to support this statement.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of clivers to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Clivers

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of pharmacological
and toxicological information, the use of clivers during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Relief Tablets; HealthAid Boldo-Plus; Kas-Bah; Modern
Herbals Menopause; Modern Herbals Water Retention;
Napiers Breathe Easy Tea; Psorasolv; Sciargo; Skin Cleansing;
Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets; Water Naturtabs; Watershed.

References

1 Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, vol 6. Basel and
Stuttgart: Birhauser Verlag, 1973: 158-159.

2 Borisov MI. Coumarins of the genus Asperula and Galium. Khim Prir
Soedin 1974; 10: 82.

3 Grimshaw J. Structure of asperuloside. Chem Ind 1961: 403-404.

4 Corrigan D et al. Iridoids and alkanes in twelve species of Galium and
Asperula. Phytochemistry 1978; 17: 1131-1133.

5 Buckova A et al. Contents of tannins in some species of the Asperula
and Galium genera. Acta Fac Pharm Univ Comeniana 1970; 19: 7-28.

6 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glucosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

----- PAGE 177 -----
- Clove

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The pharmacological properties documented for cloves are
associated with the volatile oil, in particular with eugenol
which has local anaesthetic action. However, rigorous clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of clove
preparations is required. Cloves should not be taken in doses
greatly exceeding those used in foods and caution should be
exerted in patients taking anticoagulant or antiplatelet
therapy.

Species (Family)

Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae)

Synonym(s)

Caryophyllus aromaticus L., Eugenia aromatica (L.) Baill.,
Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb., Eugenia caryophyllus (Spreng.)
Bull. & Harr.

Part(s) Used

Clove (dried flowerbud), leaf, stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'¢°?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G58.
Volatile oils Clove bud oil (15-18%) containing eugenol (80-
90%), eugenyl acetate (2-27%), B-caryophyllene (5-12%). Others
include methylsalicylate, methyleugenol, benzaldehyde, methyla-
myl ketone and o-ylangene.

Leaf oil (2%) containing eugenol 82-88%.

Phenylpropanes

OCH3
OH
eugenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of clove.

Stem oil (4-6%) with eugenol 90-95%. A more comprehensive
listing is provided elsewhere. ‘©?”)

Other constituents Campesterol, carbohydrates, kaempferol,
lipids, oleanolic acid, rhamnetin, sitosterol, stigmasterol and
vitamins.

Food Use

Clove is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that clove
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘“'® Clove is commonly used in cooking, and as a
flavouring agent in food products. Previously, clove has been listed
as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘°*”

Herbal Use

Clove has been traditionally used as a carminative, anti-emetic,
toothache remedy and counter-irritant.C? “4h 6°

Clove oil is stated to be a carminative, occasionally used in the
G5) and is commonly used topically

treatment of flatulent colic
for symptomatic relief of toothache.'“*

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard pharmaceutical reference texts
are given below. In dentistry, clove oil is applied undiluted using a
plug of cottonwool soaked in the oil and applied to the cavity of
the tooth (see Contra-indications, Warnings).

Clove 120-300 mg.‘“*

Clove oil 0.05-0.2 mL.‘°*”

Figure 2 Clove (Syzygium aromaticum).

----- PAGE 178 -----
Figure 3 Clove - dried drug substance (flowerbud).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The anodyne and mild antiseptic properties documented for clove
oil have been attributed to eugenol.'“*” Clove oil is stated to
possess antihistaminic and antispasmodic properties.'C* Euge-
nol, eugenol acetate and methyl acetate are reported to exhibit
trypsin-potentiating activity.4

Antibacterial, hypoglycaemic and potent CNS-depressant
activities have been documented for Syzygium cuminii L., a
related species cultivated in India.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cloves
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, To

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for clove oil
and further investigation of these aspects is required. Clove oil is
stated to be a dermal and mucous membrane irritant;‘C>”
dermatitis, cheilitis, and stomatitis have been reported for clove
oil.) The irritant nature of the oil can be attributed to the
eugenol content. Eugenol is also stated to have sensitising
properties.'°*)) An LDso (rat, by mouth) value for clove oil is

stated as 2.65 g/kg body weight.(C?”

contact

Clove

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for the bud, leaf or stem. It is recommended
that clove oil should be used with caution orally and should not be
used on the skin.'©**) Repeated application of clove oil as a
toothache remedy may result in damage to the gingival tissue.“
In view of the irritant nature of the volatile oil, concentrated clove
oil is not suitable for internal use in doses larger than those
recommended.

There is limited evidence from in vitro investigations that
eugenol inhibits prostaglandin synthesis,” and coagulation
disorders have been reported following childhood ingestion of
clove oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of clove oil to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Eugenol, a major
consituent of clove oil, inhibits prostaglandin synthesis, although
the clinical relevance of this, if any, is unclear.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of clove during pregnancy or lactation, provided that doses
taken do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Brazil: Balsamo Branco. Czech Republic:
Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Stomatosan. Germany:
Inconturina; Klosterfrau Melisana; Melissengeist. Italy: Bio-
phase Shampoo; Saugella Uomo. Portugal: Midro. Russia:
Doppelherz Melissa (Aormeasrepy Meancca); Maraslavin
(Mapacaasun); Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurn-
naapnpiit Boapmoi Baapsam burruepa). South Africa: Clairo;
Melissengeist; Spiritus Contra Tussim Drops. Switzerland:
Odontal; Tisane pour les problemes de prostate. UK: Melissa
Comp.; Revitonil.

References

1. Chakraborty D et al. A new neuropsychopharmacological study of
Syzygium cumini. Planta Med 1986; 52: 139-143.

2 Rasheed A et al. Eugenol and prostaglandin biosynthesis. New Eng J
Med 1984; 310(1): 50-51.

3 Brown SA et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and
hepatocellular necrosis due to clove oil. Blood Coag Fibrinol 1992; 3
(5): 665-668.

4 Hartnoll G et al. Near fatal ingestion of oil of cloves. Arch Dis
Childhood 1993; 69(3): 392-393.

----- PAGE 179 -----
Cohosh, Black

unwell or experience new symptoms, particularly those
associated with liver disease, should be advised to stop taking
black cohosh and to consult their doctor. Patients with
previous or existing liver disorders should be advised not to
take black cohosh without first consulting their doctor. In
view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy of black
cohosh, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using black cohosh.

Use of black cohosh preparations at doses higher than
those recommended for therapeutic effects and/or for
excessive periods (exceeding three months)“°® should be
avoided until further information is available on the safety of
black cohosh with long-term use. In view of the documented
pharmacological actions of black cohosh preparations, the
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)

Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Actaea racemosa L., A. monogyna Walter, Black Snakeroot,
Cimicifuga, Macrotys Actaea

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHP 2002”

BHC 1992'°®

BHP 19960”)

BHMA 2003

BPC 1934'6!

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@**

WHO volume 1 (1999)'C°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘C??

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G1 and G75.

Alkaloids Quinolizidine-type, including cytisine, N-methylcyti-
sine and other unidentified compounds.'°””

Flavonoids Formononetin (isoflavonoid),‘"”) although it was not
detected in 13 samples analysed.

Phenylpropanoids Phenylpropanoid esters cimiracemates A-D,
isoferulic and ferulic acids, methylcaffeate.

Terpenoids ‘Complex mixture of 9,19-cycloartenol-type

triterpene glycosides with either xylose or arabinose. The isolated
compounds include actein"’*''S® and related compounds
cimicifugoside (cimigoside), 26-deoxycimicifugoside, cimiacero-
side A, cimiracemosides A-H,''” ™) cimicifugosides H-3, H-4 and
H-6," cimigenol,(“%)_ 26-deoxyactein, 23-epi-26-deoxyactein
(revised structure proposed for 27-deoxyactein),"') cimiracemo-
sides I-P and thirteen other cimiracemosides: 25-anhydrocimi-
genol-3-O-B-p-xyloside, 25-anhydrocimigenol-3-O-c-L-
arabinoside, cimigenol-3-O-B-b-xyloside, cimigenol-3-O-a-L-ara-
binoside, 25-O-acetylcimigenin-3-O-B-p-xyloside, 25-O-acetyl-
cimigenol-3-O-a-L-arabinoside, 23-O-acetylshengmanol-3-O-c-L-
arabinoside, cimifugosides H-1 and H-2, 24-O-acetylshengma-
nol-o-arabinoside, 26-deoxycimicifugoside,"® '” and actaeaepox-
ide-3-O-B-D-xylopyranoside." Daucosterol-6’-lineolate. The
major triterpene glycosides of this complex mixture appear to
be cimicifugoside, actein, 23-epi-26-deoxyactein and cimiracemo-
sides A, C and F079)

----- PAGE 180 -----
Other constituents Acetic acid, butyric acid, formic, palmitic
and salicylic acids, hydroxycinnamic acid esters of fukiic and
piscidic acids (e.g. fukinolic acid, cimicifugic acids A, B, E, F),"”
glyceryl-L-palmitate."

Related species 23-epi-26-deoxyactein (formerly 27-deoxyactein)
is present in C. dahurica and C. foetida. The triterpenoid pattern

differs in seven species.?”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of black cohosh crude
plant material and commercial black cohosh  root/rhizome
preparations.

Analysis of methanol extracts of black cohosh rhizomes using
thin-layer chromatography and fluorometry found the content of
formononetin to be in the range 3.1-3.5 g/g dry weight (detection
limit 0.08 parts per million). Contents of isoferulic acid and
total triterpene glycosides, analysed using other techniques, were
within the range 1.22-1.35 and 20.1-22.1mg/g dry weight,
respectively. By contrast, formononetin was not detected in any
of 13 samples of black cohosh root and rhizome collected in the
year 2000 from various locations in the Eastern United States of
America and extracted with 80% methanol, according to thin-
layer chromatographic and high-performance liquid chromato-
graphic techniques.” Similarly, formononetin and ononin (for-
mononetin-7-glucoside) were not detected in two commercial
products (Remifemin and CimiPure) available in the USA.
However, the method for determination of the limits of detection
used in this study, and the reliability of the results, have been
questioned.” Another analytical study of commercial prepara-
tions of black cohosh also did not detect formononetin in the
products tested, although other flavonoids were present."*!)

In another analytical study, a sample of black cohosh plant
material and six commercial products purchased from shops in
North Carolina, USA, and labelled as containing black cohosh,
were examined for content of 23-epi-26-deoxyactein and other
triterpene glycosides using LC/TIS-MS (liquid chromatography/
turbo-ion spray-mass spectrometry). The crude plant material,
extracted with chloroform—methanol (1: 1, v/v), contained 0.8 mg/
g 23-epi-26-deoxyactein (10.6% of total triterpene glycosides) and
had a total triterpene glycoside content of 7.2 mg/g.” The 23-epi-
26-deoxyactein and total triterpene glycoside contents of com-
mercial products varied, ranging from 0.1-0.4 mg/capsule and 1.3—
3.0 mg/capsule, respectively, for the three products formulated as
capsules, and were 0.3 mg/mL and 3.6mg/mL, respectively, for a
liquid extract, 0.1 mg/tablet and 0.4 mg/tablet, respectively, for a
tablet product, and 0.1 mg/tablet and 0.5 mg/tablet, respectively,
for a sublingual tablet product. The actual total triterpene
glycoside content also varied from that stated on the product
labels for the five products providing this information; in three
cases, the actual content was substantially higher than the
quantity stated on the labels (3.0, 1.6 mg/capsule and 3.6 mg/mL
versus 1.0, 1.0 mg/capsule and 2.0 mg/mL), and for the two other
products, was substantially lower than that stated on the labels
(0.38 and 0.45 versus one mg/tablet for both).

Contamination of C. racemosa products with other species,
such as C. foetida, C. dahurica and C. heracleifolia, has
occurred.) While some of these other species do contain 23-
epi-26-deoxyactein and certain other constituents of C. racemosa,
the phytochemical profile of different Cimicifuga species differs

qualitatively and quantitatively.

Cohosh, Black

Detailed descriptions of C. racemosa rhizome for use in
botanical, microscopic and macroscopic identification have been
published, along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the
assessment of C. racemosa rhizome raw material.'°!)

Food Use

Black cohosh is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Black cohosh is stated to poss
sedative and emmenagogue properties. It has been used for
intercostal myalgia, sciatica, whooping cough, chorea, tinnitus,
dysmenorrhoea, uterine colic, and specifically for muscular
rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis.“C% C7 C* 2% Modern
use of black cohosh is focused on its use in treating peri- and
postmenopausal symptoms.

ss antirheumatic, antitussive,

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 40-200 mg daily.(©®

Liquid extract Ethanolic extracts equivalent to 40mg dried

rhizome/root daily.\C* ©
Alkaloids
R
cytisine H
N-methylcytisine CH3
Flavonoids
HO.
formononetin
Phenylpropanoids
° R°
SS (e)
fe}
R'O OH
OR? OH
R! R2 R?
cimiracemate A CH3 H H
cimiracemate B H CH3 H
cimiracemate C CH3 H OCH;
cimiracemate D H CH3 OCH;
Rt COOH HO. COOCH:
NN oan OCH
R2 Rt R? HO
ferulic acid OCH3 OH methyl caffeate
isoferulic acid OH OCH;

Figure 1 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

----- PAGE 181 -----
Cohosh, Black

Triterpenoids

actein OH
26-deoxyactein H

cimicifugoside OH
26-deoxycimicifugoside H

23-epi-26-deoxyactein

Figure 2 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

RO’ ¢
i. R

cimiracemoside J a-L-ara

cimiracemoside K  -D-xyl

23-0-acetylshengmanol- xyl
3-0-f-D-xylopyranoside

23-0-acetylshengmanol- ara
3-O-a-L-arabinopyranoside

Ac = acetyl, ara = arabinosyl, xyl = xylosyl

Figure 3 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

Tincture 0.4-2mL (1:10 in 60% ethanol) daily.®

Controlled clinical trials assessing black cohosh preparations
for the treatment of menopausal symptoms typically have used an
aqueous-isopropanolic standardised extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin; each 20 mg tablet contains 1 mg triterpene
glycosides, calculated as 27-deoxyactein (now known as 23-epi-26-

cimigenol

OAc sO

RO

cimiracemoside L 4-O-acetyl-w-L-ara
cimiracemoside M 4’-O-acetyl-f-D-xyl

RO 4
ms R
shengmanol-3-O- ara

a-L-arabinopyranoside
shengmanol-3-0- xyl
B-D-xylopyranoside

deoxyactein)) 40 mg twice daily for up to 24 weeks, or an aqueous-
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (Klimadynon/Meno-
fem/BNO-1055; not further specified) at doses equivalent to 40 mg
crude drug daily; treatment in clinical trials typically has been for
12 weeks.

----- PAGE 182 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical research with black cohosh preparations has focused
on exploring hormonal activity, and there are conflicting results
on this. Several other pharmacological activities, including anti-
inflammatory and analgesic activities, have been documented for
black cohosh extracts and/or their constituents. The triterpene
glycosides and flavonoids are considered to be important for
activity, although as a mechanism of action for black cohosh has
not been established, whether or not other known or as yet
undocumented constituents contribute to the observed effects is
unclear.

Hormonal activity There are conflicting results regarding
oestrogenic activity of black cohosh root/rhizome preparations.
There is evidence from older in vitro and in vivo studies that black
cohosh preparations have oestrogenic activity, although more
recent research has indicated a lack of oestrogenic activity,
antioestrogenic activity and, in some studies, antioestrogenic
activity and selective oestrogen receptor activity. A review of 15 in
vitro and 15 in vivo (animals) experiments assessing the effects of
different extracts and fractions of black cohosh material
concluded that C. racemosa does not have hormonal effects and
that it may act by a central mechanism,?» although data to
support the latter are limited at present. Further research using
well-characterised extracts is required to determine the precise
mechanism(s) of action of black cohosh rhizome. The following is
a summary of some of the preclinical
pharmacological effects of black cohosh extracts and their
constituent compounds.

A methanolic extract of the rhizome of black cohosh reduced
ing hormone (LH) in
ovariectomised rats, and exhibited a binding affinity to oestrogen
receptors in isolated rat uterus. In vivo, the activity of the
methanolic extract was significantly reduced following enzymatic
hydrolysis of glucosides present. Subsequent in vitro studies

research on the

the serum concentration of luteini

Figure 4

Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa).

Cohosh, Black

isolated three compounds with endocrine activity, including an
isoflavone, formononetin. Formononetin was found to exhibit
competitive oestrogen receptor activity, but did not cause a
reduction in serum concentrations of LH.©

In ovariectomised rats, administration of a lipophilic extract of
black cohosh (140 mg by intraperitoneal injection for three days)
led to a significant reduction in serum LH concentrations,
compared with control (p < 0.01), whereas no effect was observed
with a hydrophilic extract (216mg intraperitoneally for three
days). Subsequent studies using fractions of the lipophilic
extract demonstrated that constituents inhibited LH secretion
and/or exhibited activity in an oestrogen receptor-binding assay.
Oestrogenic activity has been documented in vitro for fukinolic
acid, a hydroxycinnamic acid ester of fukiic acid, in oestrogen-
dependent MCF-7 cells (a breast cancer cell line)."?) Fukinolic
acid at concentrations of 5 x 10~’ mol/L and 5 x 10~* mol/L led
to significantly increased cell proliferation (mean (standard
deviation): +120 (6%) and +126 (5%), respectively), compared
with control. These ctfects were reported to be equivalent to those
of estradiol at 107 '° mol/L.

By contrast, in animal models of cancer, black cohosh extracts
have not demonstrated oestrogenic activity. An isopropanolic
extract of black cohosh rhizome administered by gavage at doses
of 0.71, 7.1 and 71.4 mg/kg body weight daily (estimated to be 1-,
10- and 100-fold times the therapeutic dose used in humans) for
six weeks did not stimulate growth of chemically induced breast
tumours in ovariectomised rats (tumours were induced five to nine
weeks before ovariectomy), whereas rats treated with mestrano
450 jtg/kg/day for six weeks had a significantly higher number of
tumours, compared with control (p < 0.01).° Similarly, in an
animal model of endometrial cancer, an isopropanolic extract of
black cohosh rhizome administered via animals' drinking water to
achieve a dose of 60mg herbal drug/kg body weight daily an

initiated on the same day as inoculation of animals with RUCA-I
(26)

rat endometrial adenocarcinoma cells,7 mean tumour mass after
five weeks was reported to be similar in black cohosh treate
animals and control animals, although no statistical tests were
reported to support this

Several in vitro studies using black cohosh preparations have
also described a lack of oestrogenic activity and inhibition, or lack
of promotion, of proliferation of breast cancer cells. A methano
extract of black cohosh rhizomes and roots did not demonstrate
oestrogenic activity in several assays, including binding affinity for
oestrogen receptors & and f, stimulation of pS2 mRNA expre:
in $30 cells ($30 is a subclone of an oestrogen receptor-negative

ion

Figure 5 Black cohosh — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 183 -----
Cohosh, Black

breas

cancer cell line), and induction of alkaline phosphatase in
an oestrogen receptor-positive endometrial adenocarcinoma cell
line,”

In studies using the oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer
cell lines MCF-7 and T47D, hexane, ethyl acetate and aqueous
extracts of black cohosh dried roots and rhizomes (obtained from
crude plant material initially extracted with 80% methanol which
was then fractionated),’*) and phenolic esters from a 50%
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizomes” did not have
oestrogenic activity and did not lead to proliferation effects in
these cell lines. An ethyl acetate extract was found to be more
potent than hexane and water extracts in inhibiting growth of
MCEF-7 cells and oestrogen receptor-negative MDA-MB-453 cells,
with ICso values of 20 and 10 1g/mL, respectively.°”

In another in vitro study using oestrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer cells, black cohosh extract did not stimulate cancer
cell growth and, at a concentration of 2.5 tg/mL, led to a marked
inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation.“ Inhibition of
MCF-7 cell proliferation has also been described for an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome in vitro, and
further experiments indicated that the black cohosh extract at
certain dilutions enhanced the proliferation-inhibiting effect of
tamoxifen in the same system.°” Further work has suggested that
extracts of black cohosh root and rhizome activate caspase
enzymes and induce apoptosis in both MCF-7 oestrogen receptor-
positive breast cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 oestrogen receptor-
negative breast cancer cells.» Triterpene glycoside and cinnamic
acid ester fractions inhibited growth of MCF-7 cells with ICso
values of 59.3 and 26.1 |tg/mL, respectively, and induced apoptosis
at concentrations of 25 and 5jg/mL, respectively.° An ethyl
acetate fraction of black cohosh rhizome extract induced cell-cycle
arrest at the Gl and G2/M phases at concentrations of 30 and
60 g/mL, respectively, in MCF-7 cells.°°

Anti-oestrogenic activity and a lack of oestrogenic activity have
been described for ethanolic and isopropanolic extracts of black
cohosh rhizome (not further specified) in three experimental
systems. Oestradiol-induced stimulation of proliferation of MCF-
7 cells was inhibited by black cohosh extract at a concentration of
1ug/mL and, in two assays based on oestradiol-induced gene
expression, black cohosh extract at concentrations ranging from
100-1000 tg/mL suppressed gene expression.°°) An anti-oestro-
genic effect would require binding of constituents of black cohosh
to oestrogen receptors, yet previous research has found that a
methanol extract of black cohosh rhizomes and roots did not
display binding affinity for either & or B oestrogen receptors.?”

Other in vitro experiments have shown that an aqueous-ethanol
extract of black cohosh rhizomes inhibited the proliferation of
LNCaP (androgen-sensitive human prostate carcinoma) cells in a
concentration-dependent manner. A significant reduction in cell
growth was observed with the extract at concentrations over the
range 0.05-10 g/mL, when compared with control (p < 0.05 for
all).°9 An isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome
activated caspase enzymes and induced apoptosis in both
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells and androgen-insensitive PC-3
and DU-145 prostate cancer cells.°” ICs values for the extract
were 37.1, 53.2 and 62.7 g/mL for LNCaP, DU-145 and PC-3
cells, respectively.

Further work has suggested that black cohosh extract has
selective oestrogen receptor modifying effects. In ovariectomised
rats given an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome
or 17f-estradiol in their food for three months, uterine weight
increased significantly in the 17B-estradiol group, but not in
animals given black cohosh extract, compared with control (p <

0.05). Black cohosh extract and 17B-estradiol reduced the
extent of loss of bone mass from the metaphysis of the tibia,
compared with control, three months after ovariectomy (p < 0.05
for both versus control). Similar results were obtained from
another experiment in ovariectomised rats given a black cohosh
rhizome extract (Remifemin) in their diet (equivalent to 4500 pg/
kg body weight triterpene glycosides daily, calculated as 27-
deoxyactein (now known as 26-deoxyactein)) for 12 weeks. At the
end of the study, bone mineral density and a score for bone quality
significantly greater in the black cohosh and raloxifene (a
selective oestrogen receptor modulator; positive control) groups,
compared with those for the control group (p < 0.05 for both).°”
Bone-sparing effects have also been described for an aqueous-
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome in orchidectomised rats
when given in the diet at a dose of around 133 mg extract daily for
three months.”

An alternative mechanism for the activity of black cohosh
extract, which does not involve oestrogenic pathways, has been
proposed (see Pharmacological Actions, Other Activities).

were

Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities Anti-inflammatory
and analgesic activities have been described for constituents of
black cohosh following in vitro and in vivo studies (mice and
rats).

In vitro, caffeic acid, fukinolic acid and cimicifugic acids A, B,
E and F inhibited the activity of neutrophil elastase in a
concentration-dependent manner.“ (Raised plasma concentra-
tions of neutrophil elastase are a typical feature of active
inflammation. Neutrophil elastase contributes to the destruction
of basement membranes during inflammation.) Caffeic acid
inhibited the enzyme with an ICso of 16,1g/mL (93 mol/L),
whereas fukinolic acid had an ICso of 0.1 g/mL (0.23 mol/L),
relative to controls. Of the cimicifugic acids, A and B were the
strongest inhibitors of the enzyme, with ICso values of 2.2 pmol/L
and 11.4 mol/L, respectively.

Compared with controls, a methanol extract, a butanol-soluble
fraction and a water-soluble fraction obtained from Cimicifuga
rhizome inhibited carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema by 73-
76%, 80-84% and 46-54%, respectively, compared with controls,
30-120 minutes after injection of 0.1 mL carrageenan 1%.” The
same fractions (100 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection), compared
with controls, demonstrated analgesic activity determined by
significant reductions in acetic acid-induced writhing in mice, and
the methanol extract and butanol-soluble fraction also displayed
analgesic activity in a tail-flick test (demonstrated by increased
latency time upon infrared light exposure). All three fractions
(40 g/mL) inhibited bradykinin and histamine receptor-mediated
contractions of guinea-pig ileum, and all inhibited lipopolysac-
charide-induced 6-keto prostaglandin F,, (PGF,,) formation in
macrophages. Incubation of macrophages with lipopolysaccharide
and the water-soluble fraction 10pg/mL almost completely
blocked (99% inhibition) lipopolysaccharide-induced 6-keto-
PGF,,, formation. Lipopolysaccharide-induced 6-keto-PGF,,, for-
mation in macrophages is related to selective expression of
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). The inhibitory effects of fractions of
Cimicifuga rhizome in this model, and their inhibitory effects on
bradykinin and histamine receptor-mediated reactions are po
ble mechanisms for the observed anti-inflammatory and analg,
activities.

Other activities A mechanism for the activity of black cohosh
extract that does not involve oestrogenic pathways has been
described following in vitro experiments. In radioligand binding
studies, constituents of a 40% isopropanol extract of black

----- PAGE 184 -----
cohosh roots/rhizomes were found to bind to serotonin receptors,
particularly those of the S-HT,,, S-HTp and S-HT> subtypes.
Subsequent experiments showed that the isopropanol extract
inhibited the binding of [*H]-lysergic acid diethylamide to the
human 5-HT> receptor with an ICso value of 2.4p1g/mL, but
inhibited the binding of a ligand to the S-HT;, receptor with less
affinity (ICso 13.9g/mL). A methanol extract inhibited the
binding of ligands to these receptor subtypes with equal affinities
(ICso values: 2.5 and 2.2ug/mL for the 5S-HT,, and 5-HT>
subtypes, respectively). Further work indicated that a constituent
(s) of the methanol extract was a mixed competitive ligand for the
5-HT> receptor and behaved as a partial agonist.”

In vitro studies using rat aortic strips have investigated the
vasoactive effects of constituents of Cimicifuga species.“
Cimicifugic acid D and fukinolic acid (3 x 10°*mol/L) caused
a sustained relaxation of aortic strips precontracted with
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in preparations with or without
endothelium. By contrast, cimicifugic acid C inversely caused a
weak contraction, and fukiic acid and cimicifugic acids A, B and E
showed no vasoactivity at the concentration tested.

Triterpene compounds in black cohosh have been shown to
possess hypocholesterolaemic activity in vivo, and an inhibitory
effect on phytohaemagglutin-induced proliferative response in
vitro. These activities were thought to be linked to molecular

characteris

ics between the identified triterpenes and intermedi-
ates in cholesterol biosynthesis.)

Triterpenoid constituents from several Cimicifuga species,
including actein from C. racemosa, have been investigated for
antimalarial activity using Plasmodium falciparum in vitro.“®
Cimicifugoside (isolated from C. simplex) and actein were among
the compounds with potent antiplasmodial activity (ECso
5.0 mol/L and 10.0 mol/L, respectively), although activity was
fold less than that of positive controls (quinine,
chloroquine and pyrimethamine).

Actein, isolated from black cohosh rhizome, has been reported
to exhibit anti-HIV activity in vitro (ECs) = 0.375 pg/mL).

The root of a related species, Cimicifuga dahurica, has been
reported to exhibit antibacterial activity towards Gram-positive
(Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Staphylococcus
aureus), and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri,
Shigella sonnei) organisms.**)

In ovariectomised rats, ethyl acetate-soluble fractions from the
rhizome of the related species Cimicifuga heracleifolia and C.
foetida administered orally at doses of 100 mg/kg/day for 42 days
led to a significant increase in bone mineral density of the lumbar

spine, compared with that in untreated ovariectomised control
(49)

two- to thre:

rats.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of extracts of black cohosh preparations mainly
have investigated effects in women with peri- and/or postmeno-
pausal symptoms.

Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic data for preparations of
black cohosh are extremely limited. In a phase I study involving
six perimenopausal women who ingested single doses (32, 64 or
128 mg) of a 70% ethanol extract of black cohosh (not further
specified), mercapturate conjugates of certain constituents of
black cohosh (fukinolic acid, fukiic acid, caffeic acid and
cimiracemate B) were not detected in urine samples collected
from participants over the following 24 hours (see also Side
Effects, Toxicity, Preclinical data).

Cohosh, Black

Menopausal symptoms In a randomised (2:1 to the active
treatment group), double-blind, controlled trial, 127 women aged
45-60 years who were in the peri or early menopausal period and
were experiencing climacteric disorders, including at least three
hot flushes per day during the six weeks prior to commencement
of the study, received capsules containing a 60% ethanol extract of
black cohosh rhizome (Cr-99, each capsule contained 6.5 mg
extract; drug to extract ratio, 4.5-8.5:1, equivalent to 29-55 mg
crude drug) one daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks." At the end of
the study, data from 122 participants were available for an
intention-to-treat analysis (7 = 81 and 41 for the black cohosh and
placebo groups, respectively). There were no statistically sig-
nificant differences between the two groups with respect to the
two primary outcome variables (weekly weighted score for hot
flushes, and the change in the Kupperman Menopausal Index
score, a tool which measures major menopausal symptoms).
Subgroup analysis of participants with a Kupperman Index score
of at least 20 at baseline showed that the Kupperman Index score
and the Menopause Rating Scale score were significantly improved
in black cohosh recipients, compared with placebo recipients (p =
0.018 and 0.009, respectively). However, as the study was not
designed primarily to assess the effects of black cohosh in women
with moderate to severe (rather than mild) symptoms, the
hypothesis that black cohosh is effective in women with moderate
or severe menopausal symptoms requires testing in further
randomised controlled trials involving sufficient numbers of
participants.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 80
women (mean (standard deviation) age: 51.2 (3.1) years) with
menopausal symptoms received standardised black cohosh extract
(Remifemin; each 20-mg tablet contained 1 mg triterpene glyco-
sides, calculated as 27-deoxyactein) 40 mg twice daily, conjugate
oestrogens 0.625 mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks.°”) At the en
of the study, somatic and psychological symptoms, measured by
the Kupperman Menopausal Index and the Hamilton Anxiety
Scale, had improved significantly only in women who receive
black cohosh, compared with those who received oestrogen or
placebo. Similarly, a significant increase in proliferation of vagina
epithelium was noted only in the black cohosh group. However,
there is a view that the dose of oestrogen used in the study was too
low to provide a useful comparison.

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled  tria
compared the effects of an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black
cohosh rhizome (Klimadynon/Menofem/BNO-1055), correspond-
ing to 40mg herbal drug daily for three months, with those of
conjugated oestrogens 0.6mg daily for three months, in
postmenopausal women (last menstrual bleed at least six months
ago) aged 40-60 years with serum FSH concentrations at least
25mU/mL and experiencing at least three hot flushes daily.
Initially, 97 women were randomised to one of the three study
groups, although the analysis included only 62 participants as two
women withdrew before any post-baseline data were collected and
data for 33 women were excluded as it was subsequently found
that they did not meet the inclusion criteria with respect to having
masked ovulatory or anovulatory cycles and oestrogen production
in fatty tissue.)

The results of the study showed that Menopause Rating Scale
scores (the primary outcome variable) were reduced in both the
black cohosh extract and conjugated oestrogen groups, compared
with baseline values, although neither of these reductions was
statistically significant when compared with the reduction
observed in the placebo group (p = 0.051 for both). It was
also reported that the black cohosh extract had no effect on

----- PAGE 185 -----
Cohosh, Black

endometrial thickness, whereas endometrial thickn

was sig-
nificantly increased, compared with placebo, in the conjugated
oestrogens group (p < 0.05). Black cohosh extract did have
beneficial effects on parameters relating to bone metabolism:
serum concentrations of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase
(indicating increased activity of osteoblast cells, which are
responsible for bone formation) were significantly increased in
the black cohosh group, but not in the conjugated oestrogens
group, compared with placebo. These findings were interpreted as
being indicative of selective oestrogen receptor modulatory effec
for black cohosh extract,» although this hypothesis requires
testing in further clinical studies.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
85 women with a history of breast cancer assessed the effects of
black cohosh (no details of extract provided) one tablet twice daily
for 60 days on the frequency and intensity of hot flushes.)
Participants were stratified according to whether or not they were
using tamoxifen. Both treatment and placebo groups reported
decreases in the number and intensity of hot flushes, compared
with baseline values. There were no statistically significant
differences between the two groups, and subgroup analysis of
tamoxifen users and non-users did not reveal any statistically
significant differences. Changes in other parameters measured
during the study (other menopausal symptoms, serum concentra-
tions of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and _luteinising
hormone (LH)) were also not statistically significant between
groups.

Another study specifically assessed the effects of black cohos
extract on gonadotrophin secretion. In a placebo-controlled trial
involving 110 women with menopausal symptoms, black cohos!
extract (Remifemin) two tablets daily for two months significantly
reduced serum LH concentrations, compared with placebo (p <
0.05).°" There was no significant difference betw
groups with respect to serum FSH concentrations.

The effects of an aqueous-isopropanolic extract of black cohos
rhizome (Remifemin) on menopausal symptoms were compared
with those of low-dose transdermal estradiol treatment in a
randomised controlled trial. In the study, 64 women wit!
menopausal status for at least six months, serum FSH concentra-
tions of > 30 mIU/L and experiencing at least five hot flushes per
day received the black cohosh extract 40mg daily for three
months, or transdermal estradiol patches 25 ug every seven days
for three months plus dihydrogesterone 10 mg daily for the last 12
days of the 3-month period of estradiol treatment.) At the end
of the study, the number of hot flushes experienced by women was
significantly reduced for both groups, compared with baseline
values (p < 0.001 for both) and there was no statistically
significant difference between groups, although details of
statistical tests for the latter were not provided in a report of
the study. There were no statistically significant changes in serum
FSH and LH concentrations in either group at the end of the study
(p > 0.05). The study has several methodological limitations, such
as lack of a placebo arm, and apparent lack of blinding (the use of
dummy patches and tablets was not mentioned), and the
equivalence of black cohosh extract with standard treatment for
menopausal symptoms requires further investigation.

In an open study, 60 women with at least one intact ovary who
had undergone hysterectomy and who were experiencing meno-
pausal symptoms were randomised to receive estriol (1 mg daily),
conjugated oestrogens (1.25mg daily), oestrogen—progestagen
sequential therapy (dose not specified), or black cohosh extract
(Remifemin) 40 mg twice daily, for 24 weeks. At the end of the
study, improvements in Kupperman Index scores were significantly

sn the two

lower, compared with baseline values, in all groups. There were no
statistically significant differences between groups.

Another open, controlled study involving women with meno-
pausal symptoms (1 = 60) assessed the effects of black cohosh
extract administered as a tincture (80 drops daily), compared with
oestrogen (0.625 mg daily) or diazepam (2 mg daily), over a 12-
week period.” Cytological responses (proliferation and matura-
tion of vaginal epithelial cells) were observed for participants in
the black cohosh and oestrogen groups, but not in the diazepam
group. For all three groups, improvements in neurovegetative and
psychological symptoms (e.g. self-assessed depression) were
reported.

Other studies of black cohosh extracts involving women wit!
menopausal symptoms lack control groups and, therefore, do not
provide an unbiased assessment of effects. Generally, these studies
report significant improvements in menopausal symptoms,
compared with baseline values, after at least four weeks'
treatment; some studies involved administration of black cohos

extract for up to 24 weeks,"

In a randomised, double-blind trial, 152 peri- and postmeno-
pausal women received an isopropanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin) at a dose equivalent to 39 or 127 mg crud
drug daily for 24 weeks.© At the 12-week and 24-weel
endpoints, data from 149 and 116 participants, respectively, were
available for intention-to-treat analyses. Kupperman Index scores
decreased significantly in both the low- and high-dose groups,
compared with baseline values, and there was no statistically
significant difference between groups (p = 0.73). No statistically
significant differences were observed for either group in the degree
of vaginal cell proliferation, and serum concentrations of FSH,
LH, prolactin and 17B-oestradiol, compared with baseline values.
The results of this study provide some supporting clinical evidence
for a lack of oestrogenic activity of black cohosh extract, and raise
the possibility of tissue-selective effects,°” although the design of
this study (no placebo or oestrogen control groups) precludes
definitive conclusions.

e

Other conditions In an open trial, 136 women who had
undergone segmental or total mastectomy, radiation therapy and/
or adjuvant cancer chemotherapy were randomised to receive
tamoxifen 20mg orally daily for five years with (7 = 90) or
without (7 = 46) an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (BNO-1055), corresponding to 20mg herbal drug daily
for 12 months, to assess the effects of treatment with black cohosh
on hot flushes caused by tamoxifen. At the end of the study,
significantly fewer women in the tamoxifen plus black cohosh
extract group were experiencing severe hot flushes than were
women in the tamoxifen alone group (25% versus 74%) and more
women in the tamoxifen plus black cohosh extract group were not
experiencing hot flushes at all (47% versus 0%); proportions of
women experiencing hot flushes of moderate severity were similar
(29% versus 26%). The
groups was reported to be statistically significant (p < 0.01)
although as baseline values for the proportions of women in each
group experiencing hot flushes of different severities were not
reported, and as the study used an open-label design, it is not
possible to draw firm conclusions from this finding.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed
the prophylactic effects of a combination preparation (tablets
containing 75mg soy extract, standardised for 40% isoflavones,
50mg dong quai extract, standardised for 1% ligustilide, and
25 mg black cohosh extract, standardised for 8% triterpenes; not
further specified) in 49 women who experienced migraine attacks

ifference in outcome between the two
(60)
>

----- PAGE 186 -----
sociated with menstruation.'*”

as: Participants took one tablet
twice daily, or placebo, for 24 weeks. At the end of the study, the
mean number of menstrual migraine attacks was significantly
lower in the treatment group, compared with the placebo group (p
< 0.01). The contribution of black cohosh to the observed effect is
unclear in view of recent studies that have described a lack of
oestrogenic activity for black cohosh extracts. (There is evidence
of an association between oestrogen concentrations and menstrual
migraine attacl fe)

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 82 patients with
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis received a proprietary
combination herbal preparation containing black cohosh 35 mg
(other ingredients: white willow bark, guaiacum resin, sarsaparilla
and poplar bark; Reumalex), or placebo, two tablets daily for two
months. At the end of the study, there was a small, but
statistically significant improvement in pain symptoms (as
assessed by the Arthritis Pain Scale) in the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of black
cohosh preparations from clinical trials and post-marketing
surveillance-type studie:

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of black
cohosh preparations in women with menopausal symptoms have
reported that the frequency of adverse events was similar for the
black cohosh and placebo groups. Clinical trials, however, are
designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have the
statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects. In a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 127 women
aged 45-60 years in the peri- or early menopausal period received
capsules containing a 60% ethanol extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Cr-99, each capsule contained 6.5 mg extract; drug to
extract ratio, 4.5-8.5:1, equivalent to 29-55 mg crude drug) one
daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks, 20 and 23% of participants in the
black cohosh and placebo groups, respectively, reported adverse
S) In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial in which postmenopausal women received an
aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (BNO-1055),
corresponding to 40 mg herbal drug daily, conjugated oestrogens
0.6mg daily, or placebo, for three months, no serious adverse
events occurred and the frequency of mild or moderate non-
serious adverse events was stated to be similar in all three
groups.) Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving women with menopausal symptoms (1 = 80) who
received standardised black cohosh extract (Remifemin) 40 mg
twice daily, conjugated oestrogens, or placebo, for 12 weeks
reported that non-specific adverse events, such as headaches, not
considered to be treatment-related, occurred in all three
groups.)

In a further randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
which involved 85 women with a history of breast cancer who
received black cohosh (no details of extract provided) one tablet
twice daily, or placebo, for 60 days, ten adverse events occurred in
the treatment group, compared with three in the placebo group.
Three events were considered serious (treatment group: hyster-
ectomy, recurrence of breast cancer; placebo group: appendect-
omy) all of which occurred in women who were also receiving
tamoxifen. Minor adverse events (including constipation, weight

events.

Cohosh, Black

gain, cramping, indigestion, vaginal bleeding) were not thought to
be treatment related.

Post-marketing surveillance studies involving over 2500 women
with menopausal symptoms have reported few serious adverse
events for black cohosh extracts, although these studies have been
of relatively short duration (up to 12 weeks) and have monitored
the effects of different black cohosh preparations. In view of this,
further, large, long-term drug monitoring studies of well-
characterised black cohosh extracts are required to provide data
on the safety of these preparations. In a post marketing
surveillance study involving 629 women with menopausal
symptoms who received standardised black cohosh extract as a
tincture (40 drops twice daily for 6-8 weeks, tolerability was rated
as 'good' in 93% of patients; mild, transient adverse events, such
as nausea, vomiting, headache and dizziness, were noted in 7% of
patients.) In a post-marketing surveillance study involving 2016
Hungarian women with menopausal symptoms who received an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (Remifemin) for up
to 12 weeks, 24% of participants found the treatment to be
ineffective, 16% did not attend a final assessment, and 12%
reported ‘unexpected adverse effects’. Overall, 35 participants
reported specific adverse effects, most commonly stiffening of the
extremeties (7 = 8), gastric pain (7) and allergic reactions (6).
Other adverse effects reported included breast tenderness,
bleeding disturbances (not further specified) and gastrointestinal
complaints. A report of the study indicates that the:
collected using postal questionnaires, although it is not clear how
questions regarding safety aspects were phrased, including
whether participants were asked to report adverse effects or
adverse events.

Systematic reviews, conducted during 2001 and 2002,"
information concerning safety aspects of black cohosh prepara-
tions have concluded that on the basis of the available limited
evidence, certain black cohosh preparations (i.e. those that have
been the subject of clinical investigations and/or have otherwise
been subject to safety monitoring) are well-tolerated when used
according to recommended dosage regimens.

e data were

(65,66) of

Hepatotoxicity Several case reports describe hepatoxic reactions
associated with the use of preparations containing black cohosh.
One report describes a 47-year-old woman who developed
jaundice and raised liver function test values one week after
eginning treatment with a product stated to contain black
cohosh for menopausal symptoms.” Biopsy confirmed severe
epatitis and the woman underwent liver transplantation. In a
‘ond case, a 43-year-old woman was reported to have taken a
combination herbal preparation containing black cohosh as well
as skullcap, valerian and five other herbal ingredients. The woman
developed jaundice ani
oth of these cases, descriptions of the products taken lack
important details, and it appears that samples of the products
were not available, therefore, analysis of the preparations
implicated was not undertaken. Causality in these cases has not
een established.

In a randomised controlled trial in which 64 menopausal
»propanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin) 40 mg daily for three months, or low-dose
estradiol treatment (transdermal patches delivering 25g every
seven days for three months plus dihydrogesterone 10 mg daily for
the last 12 days of the 3-month period of estradiol treatment),
there were no statistically significant differences in liver function
test values (aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase

Ss

raised liver function test values.” For

women received an aqueous-

----- PAGE 187 -----
176 Cohosh, Black

concentrations) in the black cohosh group at the end of the study,
compared with baseline values.”

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 143 reports,
describing a total of 328 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain C. racemosa only as the active ingredient (see Table
1).{69 This number may include the case reports described above.
Reports originated from several 13 different countries. The total
number of reports included 31 reports, originating from five
countries (18 reports originated from the UK), describing a total
of 46 reactions associated with liver and biliary system disorders
(see Table 1), including two cases of hepatic failure. Where the age
and gender of the cases were known (” = 30 reports), all were

Table 1

female and aged between 38 and 66 years. Where the outcome of
the case was documented (7 = 24 reports), ten cases recovered and
14 had not recovered. Causality had been ass
for these, a causal association with black cohosh use was
determined to be 'possible' in five cases and 'certain' in two cases.
(These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by
the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitor-
ing, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at
least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization).

By March 2006, the UK's spontaneous reporting scheme for
suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs) had received 21 reports
of suspected ADRs describing reactions in the liver associated
with the use of preparations containing black cohosh rhizome/
root; the total number of reports received in the UK for all

sed for seven cases;

Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 143) of suspected adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Cimicifuga racemosa

preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up to end of 2005.@> 68)

System organ class. Adverse drug reaction name (number) Total
Body as a whole - general disorders. Including back pain (5); chest pain (3); malaise (3); pain (7) 40
Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension (5) 6
Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including convulsions (5); dizziness (3); headache (6) 17
Collagen disorders. 2
Endocrine disorders. 1
Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal pain (8); diarrhoea (5); dyspepsia (3); nausea (10) 44
Hearing and vestibular disorders. 1
Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including tachycardia (3) 9
Liver and biliary system disorders. \ncluding hepatic function abnormal (13); hepatitis (12); jaundice (3); hepatic 46
enzymes increased (4); SGPT increased (4)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including diabetes mellitus (3) 8
Musculo-skeletal system disorders. 4
Myo-endopericardial and valve disorders. 1
Neoplasm. Including breast, neoplasm benign female (3) 7
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 7
Psychiatric disorders. 15
Red blood cell disorders. 1
Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including menstrual disorder (3); breast enlargement (5); breast pain (4); 40
breast pain, female (6); post-menstrual bleeding (5)

Resistance mechanism disorders. 1
Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (5) 8
Skin and appendages disorders. Including angioedema (4); pruritus (7); rash (7); rash, erythematous (5) 35
Special senses other, disorders. 1
Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4); urinary tract infection (3) 15
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders.

Vision disorders.

White cell and res. disorders. Including granulocytopenia (3) 1
Other reactions described using terms not included in database 11
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 328

Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala,
Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 188 -----
1.) After ass

reactions associated with black cohosh was 3

ment, 14 reports were considered to support a relationship

between use of black cohosh rhizome and liver damage: hepatitis

(n = 4); abnormal liver function test values (9); jaundice (1). For

ten of these cases, black cohosh use was considered to have

‘probably’ led to liver damage. For a further six cases, the

relationship could not be assessed because of limited available

information.)

On the basis of these data, in July 2006, the UK Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) issued recom-
mendations that warnings should be added to preparations
containing black cohosh rhizome/root regarding the association
between such products and liver ADRs, and advised that
patients taking black cohosh preparations and who feel unwell
and/or experience new symptoms (particularly those indicative of
liver di:
previously experienced liver complaints or other serious health
conditions should not use black cohosh preparations without first
consulting their doctor.

The European Medicines Agency undertook a similar assess-
ment of reports originating within the European Union, and
issued the following advice:

e patients should stop taking preparations containing black
cohosh rhizome/root and consult their doctor immediately if
they experience signs and/or symptoms indicative of liver injury,
such as tiredness, loss of appetite, yellowing of the skin, and
eyes, severe upper stomach pain with nausea and vomiting, dark
urine

e healthcare professionals should ask patients about use of
preparations containing black cohosh rhizome/root."”?

-ase) should consult their doctor.” Individuals who have

Preclinical data

In an in vitro study in which a 70% ethanol extract of black
cohosh (not further specified) was incubated with GSH (glu-
tathione), NADPH and a preparation of rat liver microsomes, the
formation of eight electrophilic metabolites, including quinoid
metabolites of fukinolic acid, fukiic acid, caffeic acid and
cimiracemate B, was described.

In mice, LDso values for a black cohosh extract following
intragastric and intravenous administration have been found to be

7.7 and 1.1 g/kg body weight, respectively.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

There are reports of hepatotoxic reactions associated with the use
of black cohosh rhizome/root preparations. Patients should be
advised to stop taking black cohosh preparations, and to consult
their doctor if they experience symptoms that may indicate liver
injury.

Until further information is available, it is appropriate to advise
that black cohosh preparations should not be taken by individuals
with oestrogen-sensitive tumours, such as breast cancer. The
scientific basis for this statement is that there are conflicting

results from preclinical studies regarding oestrogenic activity of
black cohosh preparations. There is evidence from older in vitro
and in vivo studies that black cohosh preparations have
oestrogenic activity, although more recent research has indicated
a lack of oestrogenic activity and a small number of studies has
described selective oestrogen receptor activity or anti-oestrogenic
activity. On balance, preclinical research seems to indicate that
extracts of black cohosh root/rhizome do not have hormonal
effects, but further study is required to confirm this and to

Cohosh, Black

elucidate the mechanism(s) of action of black cohosh constituents.
Evidence from clinical studies is also unclear: some studies have
described effects for black cohosh preparations indicative of
oestrogenic activity, whereas in other studies such effects have not
been observed, or selective effects (e.g. effects on bone but not
uterine tissue) have been described.

There is concern that the use of herbal medicines with
oestrogenic activity by women with breast cancer might stimulate
the growth of breast cancer cells and interfere with the effects of
competitive oestrogen receptor antagonists such as tamoxifen”
(although, in general, preclinical studies have not observed breast
cancer cell proliferation and one in vitro study found that black
cohosh extract enhanced the proliferation inhibiting effect of
tamoxifen on breast cancer cells.°”) In a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 85 women with a history
of breast cancer, one woman receiving both black cohosh and
tamoxifen experienced a recurrence of breast cancer, although it
was reported that the woman had an increase in carcinoembryonic
antigen concentration when she entered the trial (this had not
been reported to the referring physician).

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of black cohosh the potential for preparations of black
cohosh to interfere with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered.

In a randomised, crossover study, 12 healthy volunteers received
a black cohosh root extract (stated to be standardised for 0.2%
triterpene glycosides; not further specified) 1090 mg twice daily
for 28 days to assess effects on cytochrome P450 enzyme activity.
Presence of 27-deoxyactein (now known as 23-epi-26-deoxyac-
tein), actein and cimiracemoside was confirmed using reversed-
phase HPLC with light scattering detection. It was reported that
black cohosh extract significantly inhibited CYP2D6 activity, but
the extent of inhibition may not be clinically relevant.”

In vitro experiments using EMT6 mouse mammary tumour
cells have shown that black cohosh extracts at concentrations
equivalent to 2.5 times recommended therapeutic dos
the cytotoxicity of doxorubicin when the two substances were
added to the cell system.” In similar experiments, black cohosh
extracts also increased the cytotoxicity of docetaxel and decreased
the cytotoxicity of cisplatin. The clinical relevance of these
findings, particularly with respect to the effects of increased
doxorubicin sensitivity in bone marrow and myocardial cells, is
unknown.

es increased

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of black cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding,
and the use of such preparations is contraindicated during these
periods.

There are conflicting data on oestrogenic activity of black
cohosh, including the effects of black cohosh preparations on
uterine tissue (see Pharmacological Actions).

There is an isolated report of a child born with no spontaneous
breathing and who subsequently experienced brain hypoxia and
seizures following the oral administration of black cohosh and
blue cohosh by a midwife in an attempt to induce labour in a
woman who had had an uneventful pregnancy.""® The report has
been criticised as it did not provide any further details of the dose
or formulation of the herbs, and as the authors of the report make
several assumptions about the clinical activity of the herbs on the
basis of studies in animals.”

7)

----- PAGE 189 -----
Cohosh, Black

Formula; Medinat Esten; PMT Cannella Proesten; Soy Forte
with Black Cohosh; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3.

Austria: Remifemin plus. Canada: Natural HRT. Czech
Republic: Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schwedenbit-
ter. Germany: Remifemin plus. Italy: Climil Complex; Climil-
80; Hiperogyn. Singapore: Phytoestrin. UK: Gerard House
Reumalex; Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain; St Johnswort
Compound; Vegetable Cough Remover; Vegetex. USA: Black
Cohosh; Estrocare; Hot Flashex; Menopause Relief; Meno-
pause Support; Natrol Complete Balance for Menopause AM/
PM Formula; Women's Menopause Formula.

References

1 Jarry H et al. Untersuchungen zur endokrinen wirksamkeit von
inhaltsstoffen aus Cimicifuga racemosa 2. In vitro-bindung von
inhaltsstoffen an éstrogenrezeptoren. Planta Med 1985; 51: 316-319.

2 Panossian A et al. Methods of phytochemical standardisation of
rhizoma Cimicifugae racemosae. Phytochemical Anal 2004; 15: 100-
108.

3. Kennelly EJ et al. Analysis of thirteen populations of black cohosh for
formononetin. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 461-467.

4 Chen S-N et al. Cimiracemates A-D, phenylpropanoid esters from the
rhizomes of Cimicifuga racemosa. Phytochemistry 2002; 61: 409-413.

5 Jarry H, Harnischfeger G. Untersuchungen zur endokrinen
wirksamkeit von inhaltsstoffen aus Cimicifuga racemosa 1. Einfluss
auf die serum spiegel von hypophysenhormonen ovariektomierter
ratten. Planta Med 1985; 51: 46-49.

6 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 2. Mitt.: zur
struktur des acteins. Arch Pharm 1967; 300: 885-892.

7 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 3. Mitt.: iiber die
konstitution der ringe A, B and C des acteins. Arch Pharm 1967; 300:
982-992.

8 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 4. Mitt.: actein:
der ring D und seitenkette. Arch Pharm 1968; 301: 120-138.

9 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 5. Mitt.: 27-
desoxyacetylacteol. Arch Pharm 1968; 301: 335-341.

10 Radics L et al. Carbon-13 NMR spectra of some polycyclic
triterpenoids. Tetrahedron Lett 1975; 48: 4287-4290.

11 Chen S-N e¢ al. Isolation, structure elucidation, and absolute
configuration of 26-deoxyactein from Cimicifuga racemosa and
clarification of nomenclature associated with 27-deoxyactein. J Nat
Prod 2002; 65: 601-605.

12. Bedir E, Khan IA. Cimiracemoside A: a new cyclolanostanol xyloside
from the rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa. Chem Pharm Bull 2000; 48:
425-427.

13. Shao Y et al. Triterpene glycosides from Cimicifuga racemosa. J Nat
Prod 2000; 63: 905-910.

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

Bedir E, Khan IA. A new cyclolanostanol arabinoside from the
rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa. Pharmazie 2001; 56: 268-269.
Sakurai N et al. Studies on the Chinese crude drug 'Shoma.' X. Three
new trinor-9,19-cyclolanostanol xylosides, cimicifugosides H-3, H-4
and H-6, from Cimicifuga rhizome and transformation of
cimicifugoside H-1 into cimicifugosides H-2, H-3 and H-4. Chem
Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 1475-1482.

Chen S-N et al. Cimiracemosides I-P, new 9,19-cycloanostane
triterpene glycosides from Cimicifuga racemosa. ] Nat Prod 2002; 65:
1391-1397.

Hamburger M et al. Cycloartane glycosides from Cimicifuga
racemosa. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 2001; 2: 98-100.

Wende K et al. Actaeaepoxide 3-O-B-D-xylopyranoside, a new
cycloartane glycoside from the rhizomes of Actaea racemosa
(Cimicifuga racemosa). ] Nat Prod 2001; 64: 986-989.

Kruse SO et al. Fukiic and piscidic acid esters from the rhizome of
Cimicifuga racemosa and the in vitro estrogenic activity of fukinolic
acid. Planta Med 1999; 65: 763-764.

‘Wang H-K et al. LC/TIS-MS fingerprint profiling of Cimicifuga
species and analysis of 23-epi-26-deoxyactein in Cimicifuga racemosa
commercial products. J Agric Food Chem 2005; 53: 1379-1386.
Struck D et al. Flavones in extracts of Cimicifuga racemosa. Planta
Med 1997; 63: 289.

Halliday J. AHPA urges black cohosh, caffeine action. USA
Nutralngredients.com. http://www.nutraingredients-usa.com/news/
(accessed August 22, 2005).

Borrelli F e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of Cimicifuga racemosa. Life
Sci 2003; 73: 1215-1229.

Diiker E-M et al. Effects of extracts from Cimicifuga racemosa on
gonadotropin release in menopausal women and ovariectomized rats.
Planta Med 1991; 57: 420-424.

Freudenstein J et al. Lack of promotion of estrogen-dependent
mammary gland tumors in vivo by an isopropanolic Cimicifuga
racemosa extract. Cancer Res 2002; 62: 3448-3452.

Niélein T, Freudenstein J. Concomitant administration of an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh and tamoxifen in the in vivo
tumor model of implanted RUCA-I rat endometrial adenocarcinoma
cells. Toxicol Lett 2004; 150: 271-275.

Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the
potential treatment of menopausal symptoms. J Agric Food Chem
2001; 49: 2472-2479.

Lupu R et al. Black cohosh, a menopausal remedy, does not have
estrogenic activity and does not promote breast cancer cell growth. Int
J Oncology 2003; 23: 1407-1412.

Stromeier S et al. Phenolic esters from the rhizomes of Cimicifuga
racemosa do not cause proliferation effects in MCF-7 cells. Planta
Med 2005; 71: 495-500.

Einbond LS e¢ al. Growth inhibitory activity of extracts and purified
components of black cohosh on human breast cancer cells. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2004; 83: 221-231.

Nesselhut T et al. Untersuchungen zur proliferativen Potenz von
Phytopharmaka mit éstrogenahnlicher Wirkung bei
Mammakarzinomzellen. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1993; 254: 817-818.
Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Influence of Cimicifuga racemosa on the
proliferation of estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cells.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002; 76: 1-10.

Hostanska K et al. Cimicifuga racemosa extract inhibits proliferation
of estrogen receptor-positive and negative breast carcinoma cell lines
by induction of apoptosis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2004; 84: 151-160.
Hostanska K et al. Evaluation of cell death caused by triterpene
glycosides and phenolic substances from Cimicifuga racemosa extract
in human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27: 1970-
1975.

Zierau O et al. Antiestrogenic activities of Cimicifuga racemosa
extracts. | Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2002; 80: 125-130.

Jarry H et al. Cimicifuga racemosa extract BNO 1055 inhibits
proliferation of the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP.
Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 178-182.

Hostanska K et al. Apoptosis of human prostate androgen-dependent
and -independent carcinoma cells induced by an isopropanolic extract
of black cohosh involves degradation of cytokeratin (CK) 18.
Anticancer Res 2005; 25: 139-148.

----- PAGE 190 -----
38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

Seidlova-Wuttke D et al. Evidence for selective estrogen receptor
modulator activity in a black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) extract:
comparison with estradiol-17B. Eur J Endocrinol 2003; 149: 351-362.
Niflein T, Freudenstein J. Effects of an isopropanolic extract of
Cimicifuga racemosa on urinary crosslinks and other parameters of
bone quality in an ovariectomized rat model of osteoporosis. J Bone
Miner Metab 2003; 21: 370-376.

Seidlova-Wuttke D et al. Effects of estradiol-17B, testosterone and a
black cohosh preparation on bone and prostate in orchidectomized
rats. Maturitas 2005; 51: 177-186.

Léser B et al. Inhibition of neutrophil elastase activity by cinnamic
acid derivatives from Cimicifuga racemosa. Planta Med 2000; 66: 751—
753.

Kim S-J, Kim M-S. Inhibitory effects of Cimicifugae rhizoma extracts
on histamine, bradykinin and COX-2 mediated inflammatory actions.
Phytother Res 2000; 14: 596-600.

Burdette JE e¢ al. Black cohosh acts as a mixed competitive ligand and
partial agonist of the serotonin receptor. ] Agric Food Chem 2003; 51:
5661-5670.

Noguchi M et al. Vasoactive effects of cimicifugic acids C and D, and
fukinolic acid in Cimicifuga rhizome. Biol Pharm Bull 1998; 21: 1163—
1168.

Resing K, Fitzgerald A. Crystal data for 15-o-acetylacerinol and two
related triterpenes isolated from Japanese Cimicifuga plants. ] Appl
Crystallogr 1978; 11: 58.

Takahara M e¢ al. Antimalarial activity and nucleoside transport
inhibitory activity of the triterpenic constituents of Cimicifuga spp.
Biol Pharm Bull 1998; 21: 823-828.

Sakurai N et al. Anti-AIDS agents. Part 57: actein, an anti-HIV
principle from the rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh),
and the anti-HIV activity of related saponins. Bioorganic Med Chem
Lett 2004; 14: 1329-1332.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of Far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Li JX et al. Effects of Cimicifugae rhizoma on serum calcium and
phosphate levels in low calcium dietary rats and on bone mineral
density in ovariectomized rats. Phytomedicine 1996/97; 3: 379-385.
Johnson BM, van Breemen RB. In vitro formation of quinoid
metabolites of the dietary supplement Cimicifuga racemosa (black
cohosh). Chem Res Toxicol 2003; 16: 838-846.

Frei-Kleiner § et al. Cimicifuga racemosa dried ethanolic extract in
menopausal disorders: a double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Maturitas 2005; 51: 397-404.

Stoll W. (Phytopharmacon influences atrophic vaginal epithelium:
double-blind study, Cimicifuga vs estrogenic substances).
Therapeuticon 1987; 1: 23-31.

Wuttke W et al. The Cimicifuga preparation BNO 1055 vs conjugated
estrogens in a double-blind placebo-controlled study: effects on
menopause symptoms and bone markers. Maturitas 2003; 44 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): S67-S77.

Jacobson JS et al. Randomized trial of black cohosh for the treatment
of hot flashes among women with a history of breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2001; 19: 2739-2745.

Nappi RE et al. Efficacy of Cimicifuga racemosa on climacteric
complaints: a randomized study versus low-dose transdermal
estradiol. Gynecol Endocrinol 2005; 20: 30-35.

Lehman-Willenbrock E, Riedel H-H. Klinische und endokrinologische
Untersuchungen zur Therapie ovarieller Ausfallserscheinungen nach

57

58

59

60

61

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

Cohosh, Black

Hysterektomie unter Belassung der Adnexe. Z Gyndkol 1988; 110:
611-618.

Warnecke G. Beeinflussung klimakterischer Beschwerden durch ein
Phytotherapeutikum. Erfolgreiche Therapie mit Cimicifuga-Mono
extrakt. Med Welt 1985; 36: 871-874.

Mahady G. Black cohosh (Actaea/Cimicifuga racemosa). Review of
the clinical data for safety and efficacy in menopausal symptoms.
Treat Endocrinol 2005; 4: 177-184.

Liske E et al. Physiological investigation of a unique extract of black
cohosh (Cimicifugae racemosae rhizoma): a 6-month clinical study
demonstrates no systemic estrogenic effect. J Women's Health
Gender-Based Med 2002; 11: 163-174.

Hernandez Mujioz G, Pluchino S. Cimicifuga racemosa for the
treatment of hot flushes in women surviving breast cancer. Maturitas
2003; 44 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $59-S65.

Burke BE et al. Randomized, controlled trial of phytoestrogen in the
prophylactic treatment of menstrual migraine. Biomed Pharmacother
2002; 56: 283-288.

SY et al. Effect of a proprietary herbal medicine on the relief of
chronic arthritic pain: a double-blind study. Br J Rheumatol 1996; 35:
874-878.

Stolze H. Der andere Weg, klimakterische Beschwerden zu behandeln.
Gyne 1982; 3: 14-16.

Vermes G et al. The effects of Remifemin™ on subjective symptoms of
menopause. Adv Ther 2005; 22: 148-154.

Huntley A, Ernst E. A systematic review of the safety of black cohosh.
Menopause 2003; 10: 58-64.

Low Dog T et al. Critical evaluation of the safety of Cimicifuga
racemosa in menopause symptom relief. Menopause 2003;10: 299-
313.

Whiting PW et al. Black cohosh and other herbal remedies associated
with acute hepatitis. Med J Aust 2002; 177: 440-443.

Vigibase. WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre (accessed January 20, 2006).

Black Cohosh. UK Public Assessment Report. Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, July 2006. Available at http://
www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed September 25, 2006).

Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) — risk of liver problems.
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, July 2006.
Available at http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed September 25, 2006).
EMEA public statement on herbal medicinal products containing
Cimicifugae racemosae rhizome (black cohosh, root) — serious hepatic
reactions. European Medicines Agency, 18 July 2006. Doe. Ref.:
EMEA/269259/2006.

Beuscher N. Cimicifuga racemosa L. Black cohosh. Z Phytother 1995;
16: 310-310.

Boyle FM. Adverse interaction of herbal medicine with breast cancer
treatment. Med J Aust 1997; 167: 286.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

Rockwell S e¢ al. Alteration of the effects of cancer therapy agents on
breast cancer cells by the herbal medicine black cohosh. Breast Cancer
Res Treat 2005; 90: 233-239.

Gunn TR, Wright IMR. The use of black and blue cohosh in labour.
N Z Med J 1996; 109: 410-411.

Baillie N, Rasmussen P. Black and blue cohosh in labour. N Z Med J
1997; 110: 20-21.

----- PAGE 191 -----
Cohosh, Blue

plant parts. In view of the potential toxicity associated with
blue cohosh, it should be used with caution. The potential for
preparations of blue cohosh to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. The use of blue
cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (L.) Mich. (Berberidaceae)

Synonym(s)

Caulophyllum, Leontice thalictroides L., Papoose Root, Squaw
Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'C”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41 and G48.

Alkaloids — Quinolizidine and isoquinoline-types. Anagyrine,
baptifoline, magnoflorine, methylcytisine (caulophylline). Other
unidentified minor tertiary alkaloids.”

Saponins Caulosaponin and cauloside D yielding hederagenin on
hydrolysis.”

Other constituents
phytosterol and starch.

Citrullol, gum, resins, phosphoric acid,

Other Caulophyllum species A related species, C. robustum
Maxim., is rich in triterpene glycosides (caulosides A-G), most of
which possess hederagenin as their aglycone.

Food Use

Blue cohosh is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Blue cohosh is stated to possess antispasmodic, emmenagogue,
uterine tonic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for amenorrhoea, threatened miscarriage, false labour
pains, dysmenorrhoea, rheumatic pains, and specifically for
conditions associated with uterine atony.'C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 0.3-1.0g as a decoction three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times
daily‘?
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A blue cohosh extract exhibited stimulant properties on the
isolated guinea-pig uterus, although subsequent in vivo studies in
cats, dogs and rabbits demonstrated no uterine activity.

Alkaloids

anagyrine H
baptifoline OH

HCO.

HCO

magnoflorine

N-methylcytisine

Triterpenes

hederagenin (aglycone of several saponins)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of blue cohosh.

----- PAGE 192 -----
Antifertility actions documented in rats were reported to be
caused by inhibition of ovulation” and by interruption of
implantation.)

Smooth muscle stimulation has been documented for a
crystalline glycoside constituent on the uterus (i7 vitro), the small
intestine (in vitro), and the coronary blood vessels (in vivo) of
various small mammals. The glycoside was also reported to
cause erythrolysis and to be of an irritant nature. An earlier study
that used a crystalline glycoside identified as caulosaponin,
reported a variety of actions including an oxytocic effect on the
isolated rat uterus, constriction of coronary and carotid blood

vessels, a toxic action on cardiac muscle, and a spasmogenic
(6)

action on the isolated intestine.
Methylcytisine is stated to have a nicotinic-like action, causing

an elevation in blood pressure and stimulating both respiration
G60)

and intestinal motility.

Figure 2 Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides).

Figure 3 Blue cohosh — dried drug substance (root).

Cohosh, Blue

An alcoholic extract of the aerial parts of blue cohosh produced
up to 55% inhibition of inflammation in the carrageenan rat paw
ot (7)
test.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of blue
cohosh and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for blue cohosh
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Powdered blue cohosh is stated to be irritant, especially to
“5)) The leaves and seeds are reported to
contain methylcytisine and some glycosides that can cause severe
stomach pains. Children have been poisoned by eating the bright
blue bitter-tasting seeds.‘“?? Caulosaponin is reported to be
cardiotoxic, causing constriction of coronary blood vessels, to
produce intestinal spasms, and to possess oxytocic properties.

There is an isolated report of tachycardia, diaphoresis, muscle
weakness and fasciculations in a 21-year-old woman who ingested
blue cohosh tincture in an attempt to induce an abortion. The
woman's symptoms, which resolved over the following 24 hours,
were considered to be consistent with those of nicotine toxicity.

mucous membranes."

Preclinical data

N-methylcytisine isolated from blue cohosh root material
demonstrated teratogenic activity in rat embryo culture, an in-
vitro system used to detect potential teratogens.) The clinical
significance of this finding has not been established.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Blue cohosh may irritate gastrointestinal conditions. It is not
known whether excessive doses of blue cohosh may cause a rise in
blood pressure, because of the methylcytisine content.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
limited information on the chemistry of blue cohosh, and
documented pharmacological actions, the potential for prepara-
tions of blue cohosh to interfere with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of blue cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding,
and the use of blue cohosh should be avoided during these periods.

Blue cohosh is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle.”

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Dyzco; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women's
Formula; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3.

----- PAGE 193 -----
Cohosh, Blue

References

1 Flom MS et al. Isolation and characterization of alkaloids from
Caulophyllum thalictroides. ] Pharm Sci 1967; 56: 1515-1517.

2. Strigina LI et al. Cauloside D a new triterpenoid glycoside from
Caulophyllum robustum. Maxim. Identification of cauloside A.
Phytochemistry 1976; 15: 1583-1586.

3. Pilcher JD et al. The action of various female remedies on the excised
uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

4 Chaudrasekhar K, Sarma GHR. Observations on the effect of low and
high doses of Caulophyllum on the ovaries and the consequential
changes in the uterus and thyroid in rats. J Reprod Fertil 1974; 38:
236-237.

5S Chaudrasekhar K, Raa Vishwanath C. Studies on the effect of

Caulophyllum on implantation in rats. J Reprod Fertil 1974; 38: 245—
246.

Ferguson HC, Edwards LD. A pharmacological study of a crystalline
glycoside of Caulophyllum thalictroides. ] Am Pharm Assoc 1954; 43:
16-21.

Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants
XIV. Anti-inflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 393: 160-171.

Rao RB, Hoffman RS. Nicotinic toxicity from tincture of blue cohosh
(Caulophyllum thalictroides) used as an abortifacient. Vet Hum
Toxicol 2002; 44: 221-222.

Kennelly EJ et al. Detecting potential teratogenic alkaloids from blue
cohosh rhizomes using an in vitro rat embryo culture. J Nat Prod
1999; 62: 1385-1389.

----- PAGE 194 -----
- Cola

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The principal active constituent in cola is caffeine. The
reputed herbal uses of cola can be attributed to the actions of
caffeine, and precautions associated with other xanthine-
containing beverages are applicable to cola.

Species (Family)

Cola nitida (Vent.) Schott & Endl. (Sterculiaceae)
*Cola acuminata (P. Beauv.) Schott & Endl.

Synonym(s)

Cola Seed, Guru Nut, Kola Nut
*Sterculia acuminata Beauv.

Part(s) Used

Cotyledon

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'©**

Ph Eur 2007°°8

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and Gé2.

Alkaloids Xanthine-types. Caffeine (0.6-3.0%), theobromine (up
to 0.1%).

Tannins Condensed type, catechins.

Other constituents Betaine, cellulose, enzyme, fats, a glucoside,
protein, red pigment and sugars.

Purines
O CHa
/
Ry N
N
xx )
ow *N N
CH3
R
caffeine CH3

theobromine H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cola.

Food Use

Cola is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (cola and cola nut extract: category N4, with limits on
caffeine) (see Appendix 3).'°!” Cola is commonly used in foods.
Previously, cola has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).“04

Herbal Use

Cola is stated to poss CNS stimulant, thymoleptic, antide-
pressant, diuretic, cardioactive and antidiarrhoeal properties. It
has been used for depressive states, melancholy, atony, exhaustion,
dysentery, atonic diarrhoea, anorexia, migraine and specifically
for depressive states associated with general muscular weak-

ness,(G% G7. G8, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Figure 2. Cola (Cola nitida).

Figure 3 Cola — dried drug substance (cotyledon).

----- PAGE 195 -----
Cola

Powdered cotyledons 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily.C®

G7)

Liquid Extract of cola
alcohol).

Tincture of cola (BPC 1934) 14mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol).

(BPC 1949) 0.6-1.2mL (1:1 in 60%

Pharmacological Actions

The xanthine constituents, caffeine and theobromine, are the
active principles in cola. The pharmacological properties of
caffeine are well documented and include stimulation of the CNS,
respiratory system and skeletal muscle, cardiac stimulation,
coronary dilatation, smooth muscle relaxation and diuresis.'“*”

Cola-containing beverages are stated to provide active doses of
(G45)

caffeine.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Side-effects commonly associated with xanthine-containing bev-
erages include sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor, palpitations and
withdrawal headache.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

Consumption of cola should be restricted in individuals with
hypertension or cardiac disorders, because of the caffeine
content.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cola to interact with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects,
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation It is generally recommended that
caffeine consumption should be restricted during pregnancy,
although conflicting reports have been documented regarding the
association between birth defects and caffeine consumption. In
view of this, excessive consumption of cola during pregnancy
should be avoided. Caffeine is excreted in breast milk, but at
concentrations considered too low to represent a hazard to
breastfed infants.'“* However, as with all xanthine-containing
beverages, excessive consumption of cola by lactating mothers

should be avoided.

----- PAGE 196 -----
- Coltsfoot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The majority of the traditional uses associated with coltsfoot
can be attributed to the mucilage content. However, coltsfoot
also contains toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids albeit at a low
concentration. The risk of exposure to low concentrations of
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids is unclear although
hepatotoxicity following prolonged exposure has been
documented (see Comfrey). The regular or excessive
consumption of coltsfoot, especially in the form of herbal
teas, should therefore be avoided.

Species (Family)

Tussilago farfara L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Farfara

Part(s) Used

Flower, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 19830”

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids

I
CHg

senecionine senkirkine
Ox OCH
N ‘CH
tussilagine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of coltsfoot.

Acids Caffeic acid, caffeoyltartaric acid, ferulic acid, gallic acid,
p-hydroxybenzoic acid, and tannic acid (phenolic); malic acid and
tartaric acid (aliphatic).

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. Senkirkine 0.015% and senecionine
(minor) (unsaturated) and tussilagine (saturated).

Carbohydrates Mucilage (water-soluble polysaccharides) 7-8 %
yielding various sugars following hydrolysis (e.g. arabinose,
fructose, galactose, glucose, uronic acid and xylose); inulin
(polysaccharide).

Flavonoids
glycosides.”

Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and their

Tannins Up to 17% (type unspecified).

Other constituents Bitter (glycoside), choline, paraffin (fatty
acid), phytosterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol, taraxasterol), triter-
pene (amyrin), tussilagone (sesquiterpene) and volatile oil.

Food Use

Coltsfoot is not commonly used as a food but it is listed by the
Council of Europe as a source of natural food flavouring (category
N4). This category indicates that although coltsfoot is permitted

for use as a food flavouring, there are insufficient data available
for an assessment of toxicity to be made.‘@!®
Herbal Use

Coltsfoot is stated to possess expectorant, antitussive, demulcent
and anticatarrhal properties. It has been used for asthma,
bronchitis, laryngitis and pertussis.(> 07 CO"

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Go)

Dried herb 0.6-2.0g by decoction three times daily.

Figure 2 Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara).

----- PAGE 197 -----
Coltsfoot

Figure 3 Coltsfoot — dried drug substance (leaf).

Liquid extract 0.6-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Syrup 2-8 mL (liquid extract 1:4 in syrup) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity has been documented for coltsfoot against
various Gram-negative bacteria including Staphylococcus aureus,
Proteus hauseri, Bordetella pertussis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Proteus vulgaris.”

Anti-inflammatory activity comparable to that of indometacin,

determined in Selye's experimental chronic inflammation test, has
been attributed to water-soluble polysaccharides in coltsfoot."
Weak acute anti-inflammatory activity has been reported for
coltsfoot when tested against carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema." ?)
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is known to be involved in
various inflammatory, respiratory and cardiovascular disorders.
The aggregating action of PAF is known to be weaker if
intracellular concentrations of calcium are low. A sesquiterpene,
L-652469, isolated from coltsfoot buds has been reported to be a
weak inhibitor of both PAF receptor binding and calcium channel
blocker binding to membrane vesicles." This combination of
actions was found to effectively block PAF-induced platelet
aggregation. L-652469 was also found to be active orally,
inhibiting PAF-induced rat paw oedema.'') Interestingly, L-
652469 was reported to interact with the cardiac calcium channel
blocker receptor complex (dihydropyridine receptor), but was also
found to be a calcium channel blocker.‘

Tussilagine has been reported to be a potent cardiovascular and
respiratory stimulant.*'® Dose-dependent pressor activity fol-
lowing intravenous injection has been observed in the cat, rat and
dog." The pressor effect is stated to be similar to that of
dopamine, but without tachyphylaxis. A significant stimulation of
respiration was also observed.’ Cardiovascular and respiratory
effects are thought to be mediated by peripheral and central
mechanisms, respectively.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of coltsfoot
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for coltsfoot and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Coltsfoot has been reported to be phototoxic in guinea-pig
skin.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an unsaturated pyrrolizidine
nucleus are known to be hepatotoxic in both animals and humans
(see Comfrey). Of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids documented for
coltsfoot, senecionine and senkirkine are unsaturated. Chronic
hepatotoxicity has been described in rats following the incorpora-
tion of coltsfoot into their diet at concentrations ranging from 4—-
33%." After 600 days, it was found that rats fed more than 4%
coltsfoot had developed hepatic tumours (haemangioendothelial
sarcoma) while none were observed in the control group.
Furthermore, histological changes associated with pyrrolizidine
alkaloid toxicity, such as centrilobular necrosis of the liver and
cirrhosis, were observed in many of the rats who had ingested
coltsfoot ad not developed tumours. The hepato-
toxicity of coltsfoot was attributed to senkirkine, which is present
at a concentration of only 0.015%, thus highlighting the dangers
associated with chronic exposure to low concentrations of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Newborn rats have been found to be more susceptible than
weanlings to the hepatotoxic effects of senkirkine despite lacking
the hepatic microsomal enzymes required for the formation of the
toxic pyrrolic metabolites."'” Fatal hepatic veno-occlusive disease
has been documented in a newborn infant whose mother had
regularly consumed a herbal tea during pregnancy.'® Analysis of
the herbal tea revealed the presence of 10 different plants including
coltsfoot and a Senecio species (known source of pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, see Liferoot). The mother exhibited no signs of hepatic
damage, suggesting an increased sensitivity of the fetal liver to
pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicity.

Pre-blooming coltsfoot flowers are reported to contain the
highest concentration of alkaloids. Considerable loss of both
senkirkine and senecionine has been observed upon prolonged
storage of the dried plant material.) Senkirkine and senecionine
are both easily extracted into hot water and, therefore, would
presumably be ingested in a herbal tea prepared from the fresh
plant.°) A cup of tea prepared from 10 g pre-blooming flowers has
been estimated to contain a maximum of 701g senecionine and
1.4mg senkirkine. Tea from the young leaves or mature plant
would presumably contain considerably lower concentrations of
alkaloids. These concentrations are not considered to represent
a health hazard compared to the known hepatotoxicity of
senecionine (intravenous LDsy 64mg/kg body weight, mice).°)
However, prolonged exposure to low concentrations of pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids has resulted in hepatotoxicity (see Comfrey).

Tussilagine LDso (mice, intravenous injection) has been
determined as 28.9 mg/kg."

ut who

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the known pyrrolizidine alkaloid content, excessive or
prolonged ingestion should be avoided. In particular, herbal teas
containing coltsfoot should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of coltsfoot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that tussilagine, a constituent of coltsfoot,

----- PAGE 198 -----
has pressor activity. However, the clinical significance of this, if
any, is not known.

Pregnancy and lactation Coltsfoot should not be taken during
pregnancy or lactation in view of the toxicity associated with the
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents. Coltsfoot is reputed to be an
abortifacient.

(G30)

Argentina: Arceligasol; Negacne. Czech Republic: Perospir;
Species Pectorales Planta. Italy: Lozione Same Urto. Spain:
Llantusil. UK: Antibron; Chesty Cough Relief.

References

1 Didry N et al. Phenolic compounds from Tussilago farfara. Ann
Pharm Fr 1980; 38: 237-241.

2 Culvenor CCJ et al. The occurrence of senkirkine in Tussilago farfara.
Aust J Chem 1976; 29: 229-230.

3 Rosberger DF et al. The occurrence of senecione in Tussilago farfara.
Mitt Geb Lebensm Hyg 1981; 72: 432-436.

4 Réder E et al. Tussilagine — a new pyrrolizidine alkaloid from
Tussilago farfara. Planta Med 1981; 41: 99-102.

5 Haaland E. Water-soluble polysaccharides from the leaves of
Tussilago farfara L. Acta Chem Scand 1969; 23: 2546-2548.

6 Yi-Ping L, Wang Y-M. Evaluation of tussilagone: a cardiovascular-
respiratory stimulant isolated from Chinese herbal medicine. Gen
Pharmacol 1988; 19: 261-263.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Coltsfoot

Didry N et al. Components and activity of Tussilago farfara. Ann
Pharm Fr 1982; 40: 75-80.

Didry N, Pinkas M. Antibacterial activity of fresh leaves of Tussilago
spp. Bull Soc Pharm (Lille) 1982; 38: 51-52.

leven M et al. Screening of higher plants for biological activities I.
Antimicrobial activity. Planta Med 1979; 36: 311-321.

Engalycheva E-I et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of polysaccharides
obtained from Tussilago farfara L. Farmatsiya 1982; 31: 37-40.
Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants.
XIV. Antiinflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 39: 160-171.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Hwang S-B et al. L-652,469 — a dual receptor antagonist of platelet
activating factor and dihydropyridines from Tussilago farfara L. Eur ]
Pharmacol 1987; 141: 269-281.

Wang Y-M. Pharmacological studies of extracts of Tussilago farfara L.
Il Effects on the cardiovascular system. Acta Pharm Sin 1979; 5: 268—
276.

Masaki H et al. Primary skin irritation and phototoxicity of plants
extracts for cosmetic ingredients. J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1984; 18:
47-49.

Hirono | et al. Carcinogenic activity of coltsfoot, Tussilago farfara L.
Gann 1976; 67: 125-129.

Schoental R. Hepatotoxic activity of retrorsine, senkirkine and
hydroxysenkirkine in newborn rats, and the role of epoxides in
carcinogenesis by pyrrolizidine alkaloids and aflatoxins. Nature 1970;
227: 401402.

Roulet M et al Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

----- PAGE 199 -----
= Comfrey

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Comfrey is characterised by its pyrrolizidine alkaloid
constituents. The hepatotoxicity of these compounds is well
known, and cases of human poisoning involving comfrey
have been documented. Human hepatotoxicity with
pyrrolizidine-containing plants is well documented,
particularly following the ingestion of Crotalaria, Heliotropium
and Senecio species. Comfrey has traditionally been used
topically for treating wounds. Percutaneous absorption of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids present in comfrey is reported to be
low, although application of comfrey preparations to the
broken skin should be avoided.

Licensed herbal products intended for internal use are not
permitted to contain comfrey. The inclusion of comfrey in
products intended for topical application is permitted,
provided the preparation is only applied to the unbroken skin
and that its use is restricted to ten days or less at any one time.

As a result of a 1993 report by the Committee on Toxicity
of Chemicals in Food to the Food Advisory Committee and
the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (UK), the
health food trade voluntarily withdrew all products, such as
tablets and capsules, and advice was issued that the root and
leaves should be labelled with warnings against ingestion. It
was considered that comfrey teas contained relatively low
concentrations of pyrrolizidine alkaloids and did not need any
warning labels.

Species (Family)

Symphytum officinale L. (Boraginaceae)

Synonym(s)
Symphytum Radix

Related species include Prickly Comfrey (Symphytum asperum),
Quaker and Russian Comfrey (Symphytum uplandicum, hybrid of
S. officinale x S. asperum)

Part(s) Used

Leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'“*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

GSL (external use only)
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. 0.3%. Symphytine, symlandine,
echimidine, intermidine, lycopsamine, myoscorpine, acetyllycop-
samine, acetylintermidine, lasiocarpine, heliosupine, viridiflorine
and echiumine.''~

Carbohydrates Gum (arabinose, glucuronic acid, mannose,
rhamnose, xylose); mucilage (glucose, fructose).

Tannins Pyrocatechol-type. 2.4%.

Triterpenes Sitosterol and stigmasterol (phytosterols), steroidal
saponins and isobauerenol.

Other constituents Allantoin 0.75-2.55%, caffeic acid, carotene
0.63%, chlorogenic acid, choline, lithospermic acid, rosmarinic
acid and silicic acid.

Food Use

Comfrey is occasionally used as an ingredient of soups and salads.
It is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of food
flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that although
comfrey is permitted for use as a food flavouring, insufficient data
are available to assess toxicity.“C'

Herbal Use

Comfrey is stated to possess vulnerary, cell-proliferant, astringent,
antihaemorrhagic and demulcent properties. It has been used for
colitis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, haematemesis, and has been

applied topically for ulcers, wounds and fractures.'C?O% °7C*

G49, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in standard herbal reference
texts are given below. Note: internal use is no longer advised.

Alkaloids
0. oO
R'O CHs
HON-C—CR?
Yy 4 4
(CH R®
H3C  CHs
R! Re oR?
intermedine H H OH
echimidine angelyl OH
acetylechimidine acetyl H OH
lycopsamine H OH H
symphytine tiglyl OH H

acetylsymphytine acetyl OH H

H
On _UN
NH
LL
om NN
allantoin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of comfrey.

----- PAGE 200 -----
Figure 3 Comfrey — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dried root/rhizome 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.”

Root, liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.‘°”

Ointment symphytum root 10-15% root extractive in usual type
ointment basis applied topically three times daily.'©”

Dried leaf 2-8 g or by infusion three times daily.‘©”

Leaf, liquid extract 2-8mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.‘°”

Pharmacological Actions

The classical pharmacology of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is over-
shadowed by the well-recognised toxicity of this class of
compounds. Consequently, the majority of data documented for
comfrey involve toxicity. Many useful reviews have been published
on the toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in humans (see
below).0'»

In vitro and animal studies

Wound-healing and analgesic activities have been documented in
rats administered comfrey extract orally.” Percutaneous absorp-
tion of pyrrolizidine alkaloids obtained from comfrey is reported
to be low in rats, with minimal conversion of the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid N-oxides to the free pyrrolizidine alkaloids in the urine

Comfrey

(reduction of the N-oxides is required before they can be
metabolised into the reactive pyrrolic esters).'>'

Rosmarinic acid has been isolated from comfrey (S. officinale)
as the main constituent with anti-inflammatory
activity.’ Biological activity was determined by inhibition of
malonic dialdehyde formation in human platelets. Minor
components, chlorogenic and caffeic acids, were not found to
exhibit any significant activity. The pyrrolic esters have been
reported to possess mild antimuscarinic activity, which is more
pronounced in the non-hepatotoxic esters of saturated amino
alcohols."® Conversely, the free amino alcohols are reported to
exert indirect cholinomimetic action involving the release of
acetylcholine from postganglionic sites in the guinea-pig ileum."

Comfrey has been reported to stimulate the activity of the
hepatic drug-metabolising enzyme aminopyrine N-demethylase in
rats.)

A comfrey extract has been reported to enhance uterine tone in
vitro." The action of comfrey was reported to be weaker than
that exhibited by German chamomile, calendula and plantain, but
stronger than that shown by shepherd's purse, St. John's wort and
uva-ursi.

in vitro

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of comfrey

and rigorous randomised control
The antimuscarinic properties

ed clinical trials are required.
of certain pyrrolic esters have

been utilised. Two non-hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids,

sarracine and platyphylline, have
gastrointestinal hypermotility an

been used for the treatment of
peptic ulceration."

Side-effects, Toxicity

Two reports of human hepatotoxicity associated with the
ingestion of comfrey have been documented."??° One case
involved a 13-year-old boy who had been given a comfrey root
preparation in conjunction with acupuncture to treat Crohn's
disease. ”’ The boy was diagnosed with veno-occlusive disease of
the liver and the authors concluded comfrey to be the only
possible causal factor of the liver disease. The second case
involved a 49-year-old woman diagnosed with veno-occlusive
disease.°° She had been taking various food supplements
including a herbal tea and comfrey-pepsin pills. Pyrrolizidine
alkaloids were identified in both the tea (stated to contain
ginseng) and the comfrey-pepsin pills. The authors estimated that
over a period of six months the woman had ingested 85 mg of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, equivalent to 15 pg/kg body weight per
day. This report highlighted the potential toxicity associated with
chronic ingestion of relatively small amounts of pyrrolizidine
alkaloids.

The toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is well recognised.
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an unsaturated pyrrolizidine nucleus
are metabolised in the liver to toxic pyrrole metabolites. Acute

toxicity results in hepatic necrosis, whereas chronic toxicity
typically results in veno-occlusive disease characterised by the
presence of greatly enlarged liver cells."°!

Reports of human hepatotoxicity associated with pyrrolizidine
alkaloid ingestion have been documented. *!°7!%° Many of
these reports have resulted from crop (and subsequently flour and
bread) contamination with Crotalaria, Heliotropium and Senecio
species and from the use of pyrrolizidine-containing plants in
medicinal 'bush' teas. In addition, pyrrolizidine alkaloid poisoning
has been associated with the use of herbal teas in Europe and the
United States.2%?9*”

) The diagnosis of veno-occlusive disease in a

----- PAGE 201 -----
Comfrey

newborn infant who subsequently died highlights the suscept-
ibility of the fetus to pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicity.°” In this case,
the mother had consumed a herbal tea as an expectorant during
pregnancy. The tea, which was purchased from a pharmacy in
Switzerland, was analysed and found to contain pyrrolizidine
alkaloids. The mother did not exhibit any signs of hepatotoxicity.

Interestingly, liver function tests in 29 chronic comfrey users
have been reported to show no abnormalities.°”

The hepatotoxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is well documen-
ted in animals. In addition, carcinogenicity has been described
in rats fed a diet supplemented with comfrey.” The mutagenicity
of comfrey has been attributed to lasiocarpine,* which is known
to be mutagenic and carcinogenic. However, other workers have
reported a lack of mutagenic activity for comfrey following
assessment using direct bacterial test systems (Ames), host
mediated assay (Legator), liver microsomal assay and the
micronucleus technique.°**”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the hepatotoxic properties documented for the
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents, comfrey should not be taken
internally. The topical application of comfrey-containing prepara-
tions to broken skin should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of comfrey to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of comfrey has not been
established. In view of the toxicity associated with the alkaloid
constituents, comfrey should not be taken during pregnancy or
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Czech Republic: Dr Theiss Beinwell Salbe; Stomatosan.
Germany: Kytta-Balsam f; Rhus-Rheuma-Gel N. Israel:
Comfrey Plus. Switzerland: Gel a la consoude; Keppur;
Keppur; Kytta Baume. USA: MSM with Glucosamine Creme.

References

1 Culvenor CCJ et al. Structure and toxicity of the alkaloids of Russian
comfrey (Symphytum x uplandicum Nyman), a medicinal herb and
item of human diet. Experientia 1980; 36: 377-379.

2 Smith LW, Culvenor CCJ. Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. J Nat
Prod 1981; 44: 129-152.

3 Huizing HJ. Phytochemistry, systematics and biogenesis of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids of Symphytum taxa. Pharm Weekbl (Sci) 1987;
9: 185-187.

4 Mattocks AR. Toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids in comfrey. Lancet 1980;
ii: 1136-1137.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

26

27

29

30

31

32

33

34

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

Abbott PJ. Comfrey: assessing the low-dose health risk. Med J Aust
1988; 149: 678-682.

Awang DVC. Comfrey. Can Pharm J 1987; 120: 101-104.

McLean EK. The toxic actions of pyrrolizidine (Senecio) alkaloids.
Pharmacol Rev 1970; 22: 429-483.

Huxtable RJ. Herbal teas and toxins: novel aspects of pyrrolizidine
poisoning in the United States. Perspect Biol Med 1980; 24: 1-14.
Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986.

Jadhav SJ et al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: A review. J Food Sci Technol
1982; 19: 87-93.

Goldman RS et al. Wound healing and analgesic effect of crude
extracts of Symphytum officinale. Fitoterapia 1985; 6: 323-329.
Brauchli J et al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Symphytum offinale L.
and their percutaneous absorption in rats. Experientia 1982; 38: 1085—
1087.

Brauchli J e¢ al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in Symphytum officinale L. and
their dermal absorption in rats. Experientia 1981; 37: 667.

Gracza L et al. Biochemical-pharmacological investigations of
medicinal agents of plant origin, I: Isolation of rosmarinic acid from
Symphytum officinale L. and its anti-inflammatory activity in an in-
vitro model. Arch Pharm (Weinheim) 1985; 318: 1090-1095.
Culvenor CCJ. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: some aspects of the Australian
involvement. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1985; 6: 18-22.

Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: Chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Weston CFM e¢ al. Veno-occlusive disease of the liver secondary to
ingestion of comfrey. Br Med J 1987; 295: 183.

Ridker PM et al. Hepatic venocclusive disease associated with the
consumption of pyrrolizidine-containing dietary supplements.
Gastroenterology 1985; 88: 1050-1054.

Anderson C. Comfrey toxicity in perspective. Lancet 1981; i: 944.
Huxtable RJ et al. Toxicity of comfrey-pepsin preparations. N Engl ]
Med 1986; 315: 1095.

Furmanowa M et al. Mutagenic effects of aqueous extracts of
Symphytum officinale L. and of its alkaloidal fractions. J App! Toxicol
1983; 3: 127-130.

Ridker PM, McDermott WV. Comfrey herb tea and hepatic veno-
occlusive disease. Lancet 1989; i: 657-658.

Lyford CL et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease originating in
Ecuador. Gastroenterology 1976; 70: 105-108.

Kumana CR et al. Herbal tea induced hepatic veno-occlusive disease:
quantification of toxic alkaloid exposure in adults. Gut 1985; 26: 101—
104.

Stillman AE et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease due to pyrrolizidine
(Senecio) poisoning in Arizona. Gastroenterology 1977; 73: 349-352.
McGee JO'D et al. A case of veno-occlusive disease of the liver in
Britain associated with herbal tea consumption. J] Clin Pathol 1976;
29: 788-794.

Datta DV et al. Herbal medicines and veno-occlusive disease in India.
Postgrad Med J] 1978; 54: 511-515.

Roulet M et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

Anderson PC, McLean AEM. Comfrey and liver damage. Hum
Toxicol 1989; 8: 55-74.

Hirono I et al. Carcinogenic activity of Symphytum officinale. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1978; 61: 865-869.

Lim-Sylianco CY et al. Mutagenicity studies of aqueous extracts from
leaves of comfrey (Symphytum officinale Linn). NRCP Res Bull 1977;
32: 178-191.

White RD e¢ al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 23-31.

----- PAGE 202 -----
- Corn Silk

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on the constituents of corn
silk. Extracts have been reported to exhibit diuretic actions in
both humans and animals, thus justifying the reputed herbal
uses. However, no additional data were located to support
these reported actions. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of corn silk should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Zea mays L. (Gramineae)

Synonym(s)

Stigma Maydis, Maize, Zea

Part(s) Used

Stigma, style

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)
BHP 1996”)

Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL.

Corn silk is not included in the G!

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Amines 0.05%. Type not specified, although hordenine is listed
for the genus Zea.

Fixed oils 1.85-2.25%. Contain glycerides of linoleic, oleic,
palmitic and stearic acids.

Saponins 3% (unspecified).
Tannins Up to 11.5-13% (unspecified).

Other constituents Allantoin, bitter glycosides (1%), cryptox-
anthin, cyanogenetic compound (unidentified), flavone (may-
sin), gum, phytosterols (e.g. sitosterol, stigmasterol), pigments,
resin, vitamins (C and K).

Flavonoids

/ OH O
a-rhamnosyl
maysin

O” HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of corn silk.

Food Use

Corn silk is listed as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that corn silk can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.
i y, corn silk has been listed as GRAS (Generally
d As Safe).(C*) The fruits are classified as category
S16) Corn (maize) oil and

Recogni:
NI1 with no restriction on their use.
flour are commonly used in cooking.

Herbal Use

Corn silk is stated to possess diuretic and stone-reducing
properti itis, urethritis, nocturnal

enuresis, prostatitis, and specifically for acute or chronic
(G2, G6, G7, G8, G64)

s. It has been used for

inflammation of the urinary system.
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried style/stigma 4-8 g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid Extract of Maize Stigmas (BPC 1923) 4-8 mL.

Tincture 5-15 mL (1:5 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Figure 2 Corn silk (Zea mays).

----- PAGE 203 -----
Corn Silk

Figure 3 Corn silk — dried drug substance (stigma).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Corn silk is stated to possess cholagogue, diuretic, hypoglycaemic,
and hypotensive activities in laboratory animals. 4) Utilising
aqueous extracts, a methanol-insoluble fraction has been reported
to exhibit diuretic activity in rabbits,C*? and an_ isolated
crystalline component has been documented to have a hypotensive
action and to stimulate uterine contraction in rabbits. The latter
two actions were thought to involve a cholinergic mechanism. The
action of corn silk extract on experimental periodontolysis in
hamsters has been documented.

Cryptoxanthin is stated to possess vitamin A activity,"
tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

G48) and

Clinical studies
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of corn silk
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
It has been stated that an aqueous extract is strongly diuretic in
humans,“ and that clinical studies have indicated corn silk to
be effective in kidney and other diseases.“*? No further
information on human studies was located to support these
statements.

Side-effects, Toxi

ity
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for corn silk and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Allergic reactions including contact dermatitis and urticaria
have been documented for corn silk, its pollen and for starch
derived from corn silk.(©°? Cornstarch is considered to be a
known allergen.(@°) The toxicity of a methanol-insoluble fraction
of an aqueous corn silk extract has been reported to be low in
rabbits. The effective intravenous dose for a diuretic action was
documented as 1.5 mg/kg body weight compared to the lethal
intravenous dose of 250mg/kg.“4? Corn silk contains an
unidentified toxic principle,” and is listed as being capable of
producing a cyanogenetic compound.”

Contra-indications, Warnings
Corn silk may cause an allergic reaction in susceptible individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of corn silk to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that corn silk has hypoglycaemic and
hypotensive activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Corn silk has been documented to
stimulate uterine contractions in rabbits. In view of this, doses of
corn silk greatly exceeding amounts used in foods should not be
taken during pregnancy or lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations
UK: Protat.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Spain: Diurinat; Renusor. UK: Elixir Damiana and Saw
Palmetto; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Roberts Black Willow
Compound Tablets. USA: Cran Support.

References

1 Seigler DS. Plants of the northeastern United States that produce
cyanogenic compounds. Economic Bot 1976; 30: 395-407.

2 Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic action. Q J
Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

3. Hahn SJ. Pharmacological action of Maydis stigma. K’at'ollik Taehak
Uihakpu Nonmunjip 1973; 25: 127-141.

4 Chaput A et al. Action of Zea mays L. unsaponifiable titre extract on
experimental periodontolysis in hamsters. Med Hyg (Geneve) 1972;
30: 1470-1471.

----- PAGE 204 -----
y Couchgrass

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical data are available for couchgrass and little
scientific evidence was located to justify the traditional herbal
uses. Agropyrene is regarded as the main active principle in
couchgrass on account of its antibiotic effect, although the
presence of agropyrene in the volatile oil has been disputed.
In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive ingestion should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Elymus repens (L.) Gould [Elytrigia repens (L.) Desv. Ex Nevski]
(Gramineae)

Synonym(s)

Agropyron, Agropyron repens Beauv., Dogs Grass, Quackgrass,
Triticum, Triticum repens L., Twitch, Twitchgrass

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

WHO volume 1 19990)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Agropyron)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G7.

Carbohydrates Fructose, glucose, inositol, mannitol, mucilagi-
nous substances (10%), pectin, triticin.

Cyanogenetic glycosides Unspecified.
Flavonoids Tricin and other unidentified flavonoids.
Saponins No details documented.

Volatile oils 0.05%. Agropyrene (95%). Presence of agropyrene
has been disputed,'” with the oil reported to consist mainly of the
monoterpenes carvacrol, ¢rans-anethole, carvone, _ thymol,
menthol, menthone and p-cymene and three sesquiterpenes.

Other constituents Fixed oil, vanillin glucoside.

Food Use

Couchgrass is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
couchgrass can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'@' Previously, couchgrass has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘@*”

Herbal Use

Couchgrass is stated to possess diuretic properties. It has been
used for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis, benign prostatic hyper-
trophy, renal calculus, lithuria, and specifically for cystitis with
irritation or inflammation of the urinary tract.(C 67°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 4-8 g as an decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 4-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Tincture 5-15 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

In vitro and animal studies
Couchgrass is stated to exhibit diuretic and sedative activities in
rats and mice, respectively.'“*” Broad antibiotic activity has been
documented for agropyrene and its oxidation product.'“* An
ethanolic extract was found to exhibit only weak inhibition (14%)
of carrageenan-induced inflammation in the rat paw.”
Couchgrass has been reported to be phytotoxic with flavonoid
components implicated as the active constituents.)

Figure 1 Couchgrass (Elymus repens).

C

----- PAGE 205 -----
Couchgrass

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
couchgrass and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for couchgrass and further investigation of these
aspects is required. An unspecified cyanogenetic glycoside has
been reported as a constituent of couchgrass, although no further
details were located.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of couchgrass to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. The clinical relevance of
the reputed diuretic action is unclear.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the limited pharmacological
and toxicological data, the use of couchgrass during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Kelemata. Spain: Diurinat; Renusor. UK: Antitis; Fenneherb
Cystaid; Kas-Bah; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea. USA: Natural Herbal
‘Water Tablets.

References

1 Boesel R, Schilcher H. Composition of the essential oil of Agropyrum
repens rhizome. Planta Med 1989; 55: 399-400.

2 Mascolo N. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for anti-
inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-29.

3 Weston LA et al. Isolation, characterization and activity of phytotoxic
compounds from quackgrass [Agropyron repens (L.) Beauv.]. | Chem
Ecol 1987; 13: 403-421.

----- PAGE 206 -----
- Cowslip

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of cowslip is not well-documented and it is
unclear whether saponins reported as constituents of the
underground plant parts are also present in the flowers. Little
pharmacological information has been documented to justify
the herbal uses of cowslip. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of cowslip should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Primula veris L. (Primulaceae)

Synonym(s)
Paigle, Peagle, Primula, Primula officinalis (L.) Hill.

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Complete German Commission E (Primrose flower)'©?)
ESCOP 1997'0

Martindale 35th edition'C®

)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G59.

Carbohydrates Arabinose, galactose, galacturonic acid, glucose,
rhamnose, xylose and water-soluble polysaccharide (6.2-6.6%).

Flavonoids  Apigenin, gossypetin, isorhamnetin, kaempferol,
luteolin and quercetin.

Phenols Glycosides primulaveroside (primulaverin) and prim-
veroside.

Quinones Primin and other quinone compounds.

Saponins Primula acid in sepals but saponins absent from other
parts of the flower.

Flavonoids

OH O

gossypetin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cowslip.

Tannins Condensed (e.g. proanthocyanidin B2), pseudotannins
(e.g. epicatechin, epigallocatechin).“?

Other constituents Silicic acid and volatile oil (0.1-0.25%).

Other plant parts Saponins have been documented for the
underground parts. 'Primulic acid' is a collective term for the
saponin mixture.” Primulic acid A glycoside (5-10%) yields
primulagenin A as aglycone together with arabinose, galactose,
glucose, glucuronic acid, rhamnose and xylose.'>*) The saponin
content of the roots is stated to peak at two years.) After five
years of storage the saponin content was reported to have
decreased by 45%.

Food Use

Cowslip is not commonly used in foods. A related species,
Primula eliator, is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that Primula eliator can be added to foodstuffs, provided that the
concentration of coumarin does not exceed 2mg/kg.'“' Cou-
marins, however, are not documented as constituents of Primula
veris, the subject of this monograph.

Herbal Use

Cowslip is stated to possess sedative, antispasmodic, hypnotic,
mild diuretic, expectorant and mild aperient properties. It has
been used for insomnia, nervous excitability, hysteria and
specifically for anxiety states associated with restlessness and
irritability.(C* 970%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowers 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.‘©”?

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Figure 2 Cowslip (Primula veris).

----- PAGE 207 -----
Cowslip

Contra-indications, Warnings

Cowslip may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cowslip to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that cowslip has hypo- and hypertensive
activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cowslip has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of cowslip
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Figure 3 Cowslip — dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The saponin fraction has been reported to cause an initial
hypotension followed by a long-lasting hypertension in anaes-
thetised animals.'®

In vitro, the saponins have been documented to inhibit
prostaglandin (PG) synthetase, but to a lesser extent than aspirin

Germany: Bronchicum Elixir $; Bronchicum; Bronchipret;
Brust- und Hustentee; Cardiodoron; Drosithym-N; Equisil
rs rn oan . : N; Expectysat N; Harzer Hustenloser; Heumann Bronchialtee
because of insignificant protein binding; to exhibit a slight anti- Gollibtiie Thy Kinder [mcalal Hleicmnaiy Biyizolbyomdltyion

inflammatory effect against carrageenan rat paw oedema; to
contract isolated rabbit ileum; and to possess analgesic and
antigranulation activity.

Flavonoid and tannin constituents have been documented for
cowslip. A variety of activities has been reported for flavonoids
including anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic effects. The
tannins are known to be astringent.

Sinuforton; Sinuforton; Sinupret; Solvopret; Tussiflorin Hus-
tensaft; Tussiflorin Hustentropfen; TUSSinfant N. Hong Kong:
Sinupret. Hungary: Sinupret. Netherlands: Bronchicum. Rus-
sia: Bronchicum  (Bponxuxym); — Bronchicum —_Husten
(Bpouxuxym Cupon or Kamas); Sinupret (Cunymper). South
Africa: Cardiodoron. Singapore: Sinupret. Switzerland: Demo-
Pectol; Kernosan Elixir; Pectoral N; Sinupret; Sirop pectoral
contre la toux $; Sirop $ contre la toux et la bronchite; Strath
Gouttes contre la toux; Strath Gouttes pour les veines; Strath
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cowslip Gouttes Rhumatisme; Tisane pectorale pour les enfants.
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. Thailand: Sinupret; Solvopret TP. UK: Bio-Strath Willow
Formula; Onopordon Comp B.

Clinical studies

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for cowslip and References
further investigation of these aspects is required. ——_
Allergic contact reactions to related Prinuda species have been 1 Katl C et al. Die flavonoide in den bliiten von Primula officinalis,

documented; quinone compounds are stated to be the allergenic Planta Med 1981; 41: 96-99.
principles with primin described as a strong contact allergen. 2 Grecu L, Cucu V. Saponine aus Primula officinalis und Primula elatior.

bs saa en : Planta Med 1975; 27: 247-253.
Wo positive patch test reactions to cowslip have been recorded, " : .

oe (G51) . 3 Kartnig T, Ri CY. Diinnschichtchromatographische untersuchungen
although allergenicity was not proven. An LDso value (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) for the saponin fraction is documented
as 24.5 mg/kg body weight compared to a value of 9.5 mg/kg for
reparil (aescin). Haemolytic activity has been reported for the

an den zuckerkomponenten der saponine aus den wurzeln von Primula
veris und P. elatior. Planta Med 1973; 23: 379-380.

4 Grecu L, Cucu V, Primulic acid aglycone from the roots of Primula
officinalis. Farmacia (Bucharest) 1975; 23: 167-170.

saponins, and an aqueous extract of cowslip is stated to contain 5 Jentzsch K et al. Saponin level in the radix of Primula veris. Sci Pharm

saponins that are toxic to fish. Saponins are stated to be irritant to 1973: 41: 162-165.

the gastrointestinal tract. 6 Cebo B et al. Pharmacological properties of saponin fractions from
The toxicity of cowslip seems to be associated with the saponin Polish crude drugs. Herb Pol 1976; 22: 154-162.

constituents. However, these compounds have only been docu- 7 Hausen BM. On the occurrence of the contact allergen primin and

mented for the underground plant parts, and not for the flowers other quinoid compounds in species of the family of Primulaceae.

which are the main plant parts used in the UK. Arch Dermatol Res 1978; 261: 311-321.

----- PAGE 208 -----
Cranberry

suitably trained health care professional for advice.

There are several reports of an interaction between
cranberry juice and warfarin. Most reports have involved
increases in patients’ international normalised ratios (INR)
and/or bleeding episodes. It is not possible to indicate a safe
quantity or preparation of cranberry juice, and it is not known
whether or not other cranberry products might also interact
with warfarin. Patients taking warfarin should be advised to
avoid taking cranberry juice and other cranberry products
unless the health benefits are considered to outweigh the
risks. In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy
of cranberry, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using cranberry.

Doses of cranberry greatly exceeding the amounts used in
foods should not be taken during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

*Vaccinium macrocarpon Aiton (Ericaceae)
Vaccinium oxycoccus L.

Synonym(s)

*Large Cranberry Oxycoccus macrocarpus (Aiton) Pursh. is the
species grown for commercial purposes."
}European Cranberry, Mossberry, Oxycoccus palustris Pursh.

Part(s) Used

Fruit (whole berries)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cranberry is not included in the GSL.'C*”

Constituents

Acids Citric, malic, quinic and benzoic acids are present.”

Carbohydrates Fructose and oligosaccharides.
Phenolics Anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins.

Other constituents Trace glycoside has been isolated from V.
oxycoccus.” Cranberries are also a good source of fibre.
Cranberry juice cocktail contains more carbohydrate than do
products (i.e. soft or hard gelatin capsules) based on cranberry
powder (prepared from rapidly dried fruits), whereas the latter
contain more fibre.” Alkaloids (N-methylazatricyclo type) have
been isolated from the leaves.”

Food Use

Cranberries are commonly used in foods; cranberry juice
cocktail (containing approximately 25% cranberry juice) is widely
available.?*) Cranberry is listed by the Council of Europe as a
natural source of food flavouring (fruit: category N1) (see
Appendix 3).'¢'7

Herbal Use

Cranberry juice and crushed cranberries have a long history of use
in the treatment and prevention of urinary tract infections.)
Traditionally, cranberries have also been used for blood disorders,
stomach ailments, liver problems, vomiting, loss of appetite,

scurvy and in the preparation of wound dressings.”

Dosage

The doses used in clinical trials of cranberry for prevention of
urinary tract infections have been variable. One study used 300 mL
cranberry juice cocktail (containing 30% cranberry concentrate)
daily for six months.

Pharmacological Actions

Documented activity for cranberry is mainly of its use in the
prevention and treatment of urinary tract infections.”

Initially it was thought that the antibacterial effect of cranberry
juice was due to its ability to acidify urine and, therefore, to
inhibit bacterial growth. However, recent work has focused on the
effects of cranberry in inhibiting bacterial adherence and on
determining anti-adhesion agents in cranberry juice. Bacterial
adherence to mucosal surfaces is considered to be an important
step in the development of urinary tract infections; it is
facilitated by fimbriae (proteinaceous fibres on the bacterial cell

----- PAGE 209 -----
Cranberry

wall) which produce adhesins that attach to specific receptors on
uroepithelial cells.

In vitro and animal studies

In in vitro studies using human urinary tract isolates of
Escherichia coli, cranberry cocktail (which contains fructose and
vitamin C in addition to cranberry juice) inhibited bacterial
adherence to uroepithelial cells by 75% or more in over 60% of
the clinical isolates. In addition, urine from mice fed cranberry
juice significantly inhibited E. coli adherence to uroepithelial cells
when compared with urine from control mice.) However, these
studies did not define the bacteria tested in terms of the type of
fimbriae they might have expressed (specific fimbriae mediate
bacterial adherence to cells).

Irreversible inhibition of adherence of urinary isolates of E. coli
expressing type 1 and type P fimbriae has been demonstrated with
cranberry juice cocktail." It was thought that fructose might be
responsible for the inhibition of type 1 fimbriae”
unidentified high molecular weight substance responsible for type
P fimbriae inhibition.“ Further in vitro studies in which
cranberry juice was added to the growth medium of P-fimbriated
E. coli duplicated immediate inhibition of adherence, but also
showed the loss of fimbriae with cellular elongation after long-
term exposure; such changed bacteria are unable to adhere to
urothelium.”)

Proanthocyanidins extracted from cranberri
to inhibit the adherence of P-fimbriated E. coli to uroepithelial
cell surfaces at concentrations of 10-50 1g/mL, suggesting that
proanthocyanidins may be important for the stated effects of
cranberry in urinary tract infections.)

The effects of a high molecular weight constituent of cranberry
juice on adhesion of bacterial strains found in the human gingival
crevice have also been investigated.‘ A non-dialysable
derived from cranberry juice concentrate used at concentrations of
0.6-2.5 mg/mL reversed the interspecies adhesion of 58% of 84
bacterial pairs. Gram- negative dental plaque bacteria appeared to
be more sensitive to the inhibitory effects of the cranberry
constituent on adhesion."

Crude extracts of cranberry have been reported to exhibit
potential anticarcinogenic activity in vitro as demonstrated by
inhibition of the induction of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) by
the tumour promoter phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (TPA).
The greatest activity appeared to be in the polymeric proantho-
cyanidin fraction which had an ICs9 for ODC activity of 6.0 pg.
The anthocyanidin fraction and the ethyl acetate extract were
either inactive or relatively weak inhibitors of ODC activity.

A cranberry extract with a polyphenolic content of 1548 mg
gallic acid equivalents per litre inhibited low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) oxidation in vitro."

Cranberry juice has demonstrated marked in vitro antifungal
activity against Epidermophyton floccosum and against several
Microsporum and Trichophyton species, but had no effect against
Candida albicans." Benzoic acid and/or other low molecular
weight constituents of cranberry juice were reported to be
responsible for the fungistatic action.

and an

have been shown

material

Clinical studies

Clinical trials investigating the use of cranberries for the
prevention and treatment of urinary tract infections have been
subject to Cochrane systematic reviews; both of these systematic
reviews sought to include all randomised or quasi-randomised
controlled trials." !”

Prevention of urinary tract infections Seven trials were included
in a Cochrane s
urinary tract infections; six trials compared the effectiven
cranberry juice (or cranberry—lingonberry juice) versus placebo or
water and two trials compared cranberry tablets or capsules with
placebo.''®) Studies differed in the formulations of cranberry,
doses and treatment periods used.

In the two trials assessed as being of good methodological
quality, use of cranberry was associated with a statistically
significant reduction in the incidence of urinary tract infections
after 12 months (relative risk (95% confidence interval): 0.61
(0.40-0.91)). One of these trials involved the administration of
cranberry concentrate 7.5g daily (in SOmL) and the other
assessed the effects of cranberry concentrate (1:30) in tablet
form or in 250mL juice. Apart from these two trials, the
methodological quality of the trials was found to be poor and
the reliability of their results questionable. The concl
the review were that there was some evidence to support the
efficacy of cranberry juice for the prevention of urinary tract
infections in women with symptomatic urinary tract infections.
However, there was no clear evidence as to the quantity and
concentration of cranberry juice that should be consumed, or as
to the duration of treatment." In addition, rigorous rando-
mised controlled trials are required to determine the efficacy of
cranberry juice in other populations, including children and
older men and women.

The largest study of cranberry juice for the prevention of
urinary tract infections was a double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving 153 women (mean age 78.5 years) randomised to
receive 300mL cranberry juice cocktail (n = 72)
indistinguishable placebo (n = 81) daily for six months. The
odds of experiencing bacteriuria with pyuria were significantly
lower in cranberry-treated subjects than in those who received a
placebo beverage (p = 0.004). The validity of the results of this
trial have been questioned because of methodological short-

comings in the study design, particularly the method of
(20,21)

stematic review of cranberries for prevention of

oss of

sions of

or an

randomisation.

Several of the other studies included in the review are
summarised below. These also have methodological limitations,
for example, several controlled studies claiming to involve random
assignment to treatment?” either did not employ true
°3) or the method of randomisation was not

randomisation
stated.°?*)

A randomised, controlled, crossover study was conducted
involving 38 persons (mean age 81 years) who had had hospital
treatment and were waiting to be transferred to a nursing
home.) Subjects received cranberry juice (15mL) mixed with
water or water alone twice daily for four weeks before crossing
over to the alternative regimen. Seventeen participants completed
the study and, of the seven from whom data were suitable for
comparison, there were fewer occurrences of bacteriuria during
the period of treatment with cranberry juice.?”

The role of cranberry in the prevention of urinary tract
infections in younger women has been explored in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 19 non-
pregnant, sexually active women aged 18-45 years. Participants
received capsules containing 400 mg cranberry solids daily (exact
dose not stated) or placebo for three months before crossing over
to the alternative regimen. Ten subjects completed the six-month
study period. Of the 21 incidents of urinary tract infection
recorded among these participants, significantly fewer occurred
during periods of treatment with cranberry than with placebo (p
< 0.005).

----- PAGE 210 -----
A randomised, physician-blind, crossover study investigated the
efficacy of cranberry cocktail (30% cranberry concentrate) (15 mL/
kg/day) for six months in 40 children (age range 1.4-18 years,
mean age 9.35 years) with neuropathic bladder and managed by
clean intermittent catheterisation; water was used as a control.
No benefit was reported for cranberry compared with control.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
of the effects of consumption of cranberry concentrate on the
prevention of bacteriuria and symptomatic urinary tract infection
has been carried out in children (7 = 15) with neurogenic bladder
receiving clean intermittent catheterisation.? Children drank
2oz of cranberry concentrate or placebo daily for three months
before changing to the alternative regimen. At the end of the study,
the number of urinary tract infections occurring under each
regimen was identical (7 = 3). There was no significant difference
between cranberry treatment and placebo with regard to the
number of collected urine samples testing positively for a
pathogen (75% of samples for both cranberry and placebo) (p =
0.97). It was concluded that cranberry concentrate had no effect
on the prevention of bacteriuria in the population studied.?

Treatment of urinary tract infections Although several trials
investigating the effectiveness of cranberry juice and cranberry
products for treating urinary tract infections were found, none of
these trials met all the inclusion criteria for systematic review.”
Two of the studies identified??” did report a beneficial effect

with cranberry products, although both contained methodological
19)

flaws and no firm conclusions can be drawn from these studies.
Thus, it was stated that there was no evidence to suggest that
cranberry juice or other cranberry products are effective in
treating urinary tract infections.”

Other studies Early s involving the administration of large
amounts of cranberry juice to human subjects reported reductions
in mean urinary pH values.?*” A crossover study involving eight
subjects with multiple sclerosis reported that administration of
cranberry juice and ascorbic acid was more effective than orange
juice and ascorbic acid in acidifying the urine. However, neither
treatment consistently maintained a urinary pH lower than 5.5,
the pH previously determined as necessary for maintaining
bacteriostatic urine.°” Inhibition of bacterial adherence (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies
observed with urine from 22 human subjects who had ingested
cranberry cocktail 1-3 hours previously’) Protection against
bacterial adhesion has also been reported in a study involving
urine collected from ten healthy male volunteers who had ingested
water, ascorbic acid (500 mg twice daily for 2.5 days) or cranberry
(400 mg three times daily for 2.5 days) supplements.°” Urine
samples were used to determine uropathogen adhesion to silicone
rubber in a parallel plate flow chamber; urine obtained after
ascorbic acid or cranberry supplementation reduced the initial
deposition rates and numbers of adherent E. coli and Enter-
ococcus faecalis, but not Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococ-
cus epidermidis or C. albicans.

Other preliminary studies have explored the use of cranberry
juice in reducing urine odours,” in improving peristomal skin
conditions in urostomy patients®* and in reducing mucus
production in patients who have undergone entero-uroplasty.°

The ingestion of cranberry juice by subjects with hypochlorhy-
dria due to omeprazole treatment or atrophic gastritis has been
shown to result in increased protein-bound vitamin By) absorp-
tion, although the clinical benefit of ingesting cranberry juice
along with a meal (i.e. with the buffering action of food) remains
to be determined. Possible mechanisms by which the ingestion

udi

has been

Cranberry

of an acidic drink such as cranberry juice could result in improved
protein-bound vitamin By) absorption include increased release of
vitamin By) from protein by direct action of acid on the vitamin
By-protein bond and a pH-sensitive bacterial binding activity of

vitamin By) that is altered in an acidic environment.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

A Cochrane systematic review of cranberry products for the
prevention of urinary tract infections reported that the drop-out
rates in the seven studies included were high (20-55%)."'® In one
of these studies, of 17 withdrawals during cranberry treatment (a
further two occurred during the control period), nine participants
gave the taste of cranberry as the reason for withdrawal.’

It has been claimed that ingesting large amounts of cranberry
juice may result in the formation of uric acid or oxalate stones
secondary to a constantly acidic urine and because of the high
oxalate content of cranberry juice.’ However, it has also been
stated that the role of cranberry juice as a urinary acidifier has not
been well established. The use of cranberry juice in preventing
the formation of stones which develop in alkaline urine, such as
those comprising magnesium ammonium phosphate and calcium
carbonate, has been described. °*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

The calorific content of cranberry juice should be borne in mind.
Patients with diabetes who wish to use cranberry juice should be
advised to use sugar-free preparations. Patients using cranberry
juice should be advised to drink sufficient fluids in order to ensure
adequate urine flow.“ Although a constituent of cranberry juice
has been reported to have potential for altering the subgingival
microbiota, some commercially available cranberry juice cocktails
may not be suitable for oral hygiene purposes because of their high
dextrose and fructose content.‘

Drug interactions There are several reports of an interaction
between cranberry juice and warfarin. By October 2004, the UK
Committee on Safety of Medicines had received 12 such reports, of
which eight involved increases in patients' international normal-
ised ratios (INR) and/or bleeding episodes, three involved unstable
INR and one a decrease in INR.” These reports include a death
in a man whose INR rose to over 50 six weeks after starting to
drink cranberry juice. The man experienced gastrointestinal and
pericardial haemorrhage and died.**) It is not possible to indicate
a safe quantity or preparation of cranberry juice, and it is not
known whether or not other cranberry products might also
interact with warfarin.

Against this background, patients taking warfarin should be
advised to avoid taking cranberry juice and other cranberry
products unless the health benefits are considered to outweigh the
risks.) In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy
of cranberry, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using cranberry.

The mechanism for the interaction between cranberry consti-
tuents and warfarin is not known. The suggestion that it may
involve inhibition of the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2C9 (by
which warfarin is predominantly metabolised),°* requires
investigation.

While not a drug interaction, it is reasonable to provide the
following information here. Interference with dipstick tests for

----- PAGE 211 -----
Cranberry

glucose and haemoglobin in urine has been reported in a study
involving 28 patients who had drunk 100 or 150 mL of low-sugar
or regular cranberry juice daily for seven weeks; ascorbic acid
in cranberry juice was reported to be the component responsible
for interference resulting in negative test results.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cranberry during pregnancy. Doses of cranberry greatly
exceeding the amounts used in foods should not be taken during
pregnancy and lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Cranbiotic Super; Cranberry Complex;
Cranberry Complex; Extralife Uri-Care. Canada: Cran-C;
Prostease. Hong Kong: Prostease. USA: CranAssure; Cran-
berry; Cran Support; Calcium with Magnesium; My Defense.

References

1 Kingwatanakul P, Alon US. Cranberries and urinary tract infection.
Child Hosp Q 1996; 8: 69-72.

2 Hughes BG, Lawson LD. Nutritional content of cranberry products.
Am J Hosp Pharm 1989; 46: 1129.

3. Jankowski K, Paré JRJ. Trace glycoside from cranberries (Vaccinium
oxycoccus). | Nat Prod 1983; 46: 190-193.

4 Jankowski K. Alkaloids of cranberries V. Experientia 1973; 29: 1334—
1335.

5. Siciliano AA. Cranberry. Herbalgram 1996; 38: 51-54.

6 Avorn J et al. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria after ingestion of
cranberry juice. JAMA 1994; 271: 751-754.

7 Reid G, Sobel JD. Bacterial adherence in the pathogenesis of urinary
tract infection: a review. Rev Infect Dis 1987; 9: 470-487.

8 Beachey EH. Bacterial adherence: adhesin—receptor interactions
mediating the attachment of bacteria to mucosal surface. J Infect Dis
1981; 143: 325-345.

9 Sobota AE. Inhibition of bacterial adherence by cranberry juice:
potential use for the treatment of urinary tract infections. J Urol 1984;
131: 1013-1016.

10 Zafiri D et al. Inhibitory activity of cranberry juice on adherence of
type 1 and type P fimbriated Escherichia coli to eucaryotic cells.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1989; 33: 92-98.

11 Ofek I et al. Anti-Escherichia coli adhesin activity of cranberry and
blueberry juices. Adv Exp Med Biol 1996; 408: 179-183.

12 Ahuja S et al. Loss of fimbrial adhesion with the addition of
Vaccinium macrocarpon to the growth medium of P-fimbriated
Escherichia coli. J Urol 1998; 159: 559-562.

13 Howell AB et al. Inhibition of the adherence of P fimbriated
Escherichia coli to uroepithelial-cell surfaces by proanthocyanidin
extracts from cranberries. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339: 1085-1086.

14 Weiss El et al. Inhibiting interspecies coaggregation of plaque bacteria

with a cranberry juice constituent. J Am Dent Assoc 1998; 129: 1719—
1723.

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27
28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Bomser J et al. In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts from
Vaccinium species. Planta Med 1996; 62: 212-216.

Wilson T et al. Cranberry extract inhibits low density lipoprotein
oxidation. Life Sci 1998; 62: 381-386.

Swartz JH, Medrek TE, Antifungal properties of cranberry juice. Appl
Microbiol 1968; 16: 1524-1527.

Jepson RG et al. Cranberries for preventing urinary tract infections
(Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001321.pub3.

Jepson RG et al. Cranberries for treating urinary tract infections
(Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
1998, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD001322.

Hopkins WJ et al. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria using
cranberry juice (letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 589.

Katz LM. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria using cranberry juice
(letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 589.

Foda MM ef al. Efficacy of cranberry in prevention of urinary tract
infection in a susceptible pediatric population. Can J Urol 1995; 2: 98—
102.

Haverkorn MJ, Mandigers J. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria
using cranberry juice (letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 590.

Walker EB et al. Cranberry concentrate: UTI prophylaxis. J Family
Pract 1997; 45: 167-168.

Schlager TA et al. Effect of cranberry juice on bacteriuria in children
with neurogenic bladder receiving intermittent catheterization. ]
Pediatr 1999; 135: 698-702.

Papas PN et al. Cranberry juice in the treatment of urinary tract
infections. Southwest Med 1966; 47: 17-20.

Rogers J. Pass the cranberry juice. Nurs Times 1991; 87: 36-37.
Kahn HD et al. Effect of cranberry juice on urine. J Am Diet Assoc
1967; 51: 251-254.

Kinney AB, Blount M. Effect of cranberry juice on urinary pH. Nurs
Res 1979; 28: 287-290.

Schultz A. Efficacy of cranberry juice and ascorbic acid in acidifying
the urine in multiple sclerosis subjects. J Commun Health Nurs 1984;
1: 159-169.

Habash MB et al. The effect of water, ascorbic acid, and cranberry
derived supplementation on human urine and uropathogen adhesion
to silicone rubber. Can J Microbiol 1999; 45: 691-694.

DuGan CR, Cardaciotto PS. Reduction of ammoniacal urine odors by
sustained feeding of cranberry juice. J Psych Nurs 1966; 8: 467-470.
Tsukada K et al. Cranberry juice and its impact on peri-stomal skin
conditions for urostomy patients. Ostomy/Wound Manage 1994; 40:
60-67.

Rosenbaum TP et al. Cranberry juice helps the problem of mucus
production in entero-uroplasties. Neurol Urodynamics 1989; 8: 344—
345.

Saltzman JR et al. Effect of hypochlorhydria due to omeprazole
treatment or atrophic gastritis on protein-bound vitamin By
absorption. J Am Coll Nutr 1994; 13: 584-591.

Soloway MS, Smith RA. Cranberry juice as a urine acidifier. JAMA
1988; 260: 1465.

Anon. Interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice: new advice.
Curr Prob Pharmacovigilance 2004; 30: 10.

Anon. Possible interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice. Curr
Prob Pharmacovigilance 2003; 29: 8.

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Herbal Safety
News. Cranberry. http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed January 9, 2006).
Kilbourn JP. Interference with dipstick tests for glucose and
hemoglobin in urine by ascorbic acid in cranberry juice. Clin Chem
1987; 33: 1297.

----- PAGE 212 -----
Damiana

herbal uses, and the reputation of damiana as an aphrodisiac
is unproven. In view of the lack of toxicity data and reported
cyanogenetic and arbutin constituents, excessive use of
damiana should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Turnera diffusa Willd. ex Schult. (Turneraceae)

Synonym(s)

Turnera aphrodisiaca Ward, T. diffusa var. aphrodisiaca (Ward)
Urb.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Carbohydrates Gum 13.5%, starch 6%, sugars.
Cyanogenetic glycosides Tetraphyllin B."?
Phenolic glycoside Arbutin (up to 0.7%).
Tannins 3.5%. Type unspecified.

Volatile oils 0.5-1.0%. At least 20 components including 1,8-
cineole (11%), p-cymene (2%), #- and B-pinene (2%), thymol, «-
copaene, 6-cadinene and calamene. The presence of 1,8-cineole
and p-cymene has been disputed.”

Other constituents Acids (fatty, plant), alkanes (e.g. hexacosa-
nol-1 and triacontane), damianin (7%) (a bitter principle), flavone
(gonzalitosin-1), B-sitosterol, resin (6.5%).

Food Use

Damiana is used in foods and is listed by the Council of Europe as
a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This category
indicates that damiana can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“'® Previously in the USA,
damiana has been approved for food use.'“*”

Herbal Use

Damiana is stated to possess antidepressant, thymoleptic, mild
purgative, stomachic and reputedly aphrodisiac properties.” It

Phenolic glycosides
HOH2C

ae Ol
OH

arbutin

Monoterpenes

5 : OH

1,8-cineole p-cymene thymol

Sesquiterpenes

@-copaene

5-cadine

calamene
Cyanogenic glycoside

HOH2C.

HP\0

tetraphyllin B

Flavonoids
OCH;
HgCO. 0. O
So ‘OCH
OH O

gonzalitosin 1

Figure 1 Selected constituents of damiana.

----- PAGE 213 -----
Damiana

has been used for depression, nervous dyspepsia, atonic constipa-
tion, coital inadequacy, and specifically for anxiety neurosis with a
predominant sexual factor.(C% C7 CC)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard reference texts
are given below.

Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily©%°?

Liquid Extract of Damiana (BPC 1934) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypoglycaemic activity has been reported in mice following both
oral and intraperitoneal administration of damiana.°) An
ethanolic extract was stated to exhibit CNS-depressant activity
although no other experimental details were available.

Figure 3 Damiana - dried drug substance.

Antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus has been
documented for a mixed herbal preparation, with some of the
activity attributed to damiana.” The same herbal preparation was
also reported to inhibit acetylcholine-induced spasm of the
isolated guinea-pig ileum, although none of the antispasmodic
activity was attributed to damiana.”

Arbutin is stated to be responsible for the urinary antiseptic
properties (see Uva-Ursi). However, the arbutin content of
damiana is much less than that quoted for uva-ursi (0.7% and 5
to 18%, respectively).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of damiana
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

A herbal preparation containing damiana as one of the
ingredients was reported to have a favourable effect on the
symptoms of irritable bladder associated with functional and
neurohormonal disorders, and on bacterial bladder infections.”
However, because of the methodological limitations of this study,
these effects cannot be attributed to damiana.

Side-effects, Toxi

ity
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for damiana and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Tetanus-like convulsions and paroxysms resulting in symptoms
similar to those of rabies or strychnine poisoning have been
described in one individual following the ingestion of approxi-
mately 200g damiana extract; cyanide poisoning was considered
to be a possible cause. No other reported side-effects for damiana
were located.

High doses of arbutin (e.g. 1g) are considered to be toxic,
although the concentration of arbutin documented for damiana
(1g arbutin is equivalent to more than 100g plant material) is
probably too low to warrant concerns over safety.

Contra

dications, Warnings

Excessive use should be avoided because of the presence of
cyanogenetic glycosides and arbutin.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of damiana to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that damiana has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of damiana has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and possible
cyanogenetic constituents, doses greatly exceeding amounts used
in foods should not be taken during pregnancy or lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover; Bioglan The Blue
One; Medinat Esten; Nevaton. Canada: Damiana-Sarsaparilla
Formula. Italy: Dam; Four-Ton. Malaysia: Total Man. Spain:
Energysor. UK: Daily Fatigue Relief; Damiana and Kola
Tablets; Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto; Regina Royal
Concorde; Strength; Strength Tablets; Supa-Tonic Tablets;
VitAmour; Zotrim. USA: Women's Menopause Formula.

----- PAGE 214 -----
1

2

3

References

Spencer KC, Siegler DS. Tetraphyllin B from Turnera diffusa. Planta
Med 1981; 43: 175-178.

Auterhoff H, Haufel H-P. Inhaltsstoffe der damiana-droge. Arch
Pharm 1968; 301: 537-544.

Dominguez XA, Hinojosa M. Mexican medicinal plants. XXVIII
Isolation of 5-hydroxy-7,3’ ,4/-trimethoxy-flavone from Turnera
diffusa. Planta Med 1976; 30: 68-71.

Damiana

Braun JK, Malone MH. Legal highs. Clin Toxicol 1978; 12: 1-31.
Pérez RM et al. A study of the hypoglycemic effect of some Mexican
plants. J Ethnopharmacol 1984; 12: 253-262.

Jiu J. A survey of some medical plants of Mexico for selected
biological activity. Lloydia 1966; 29: 250-259.

Westendorf J. Carito-In-vitro-Untersuchungen zum Nachweis
spasmolytischer und kontraktiler Einfliisse. Therapiewoche 1982; 32:
6291-6297.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Dandelion

leaf and root. Dandelion has also been used in foods for many
years. Animal studies indicate dandelion to be of low toxicity.
However, excessive ingestion of dandelion, particularly in
amounts exceeding those normally consumed in foods,
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Taraxacum officinale Weber (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Lion's Tooth, Taraxacum palustre (Lyons) Lam & DC., Leonto-
don taraxacum L., Taraxacum

Part(s) Used
Leaf, root

Phenols

JOG
HO

p-hydroxyphenyl acetic acid

HO.
eS
OH 4

taraxacoside fe)

Triterpenes

R
taraxasterol H
arnidiol OH
Selected constituents of dandelion.

Figure 1

tetrahydroridentin B

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission EC”
ESCOP 2003”

Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G64.

Acids and phenols Caffeic acid, p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid,
chlorogenic acid," cichoric acid, monocaffeoyl tartaric acids,”
taraxacoside, linoleic acid, linolenic acid, oleic acid and palmitic
acid.

Coumarins Cichoriin and aesculin.”
Flavonoids Luteolin-7-glucoside and luteolin-7-diglucosides.”)

Minerals Potassium 4.5% in leaf, 2.45% in root.)

Sesquiterpenes

OH O-Glucosyl

°

°
taraxacolide-
B-D-glucoside
Glucosyl-O. fe)

°
taraxinic acid
B-D-glucoside

w-taraxasterol H
faradiol OH

----- PAGE 216 -----
Resin Undefined bitter complex (taraxacin).

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones taraxinic acid (germacrano-

lide) esterified with glucose, and eudesmanolides.”)

Vitamins Vitamin A 14000iu/100g leaf (compared with
11.000 iu/100 g carrots).

Other constituents Carotenoids, choline, inulin, pectin,
phytosterols (e.g. sitosterol, stigmasterol, taraxasterol, homotar-
axasterol), sugars (e.g. fructose, glucose, sucrose), triterpenes (e.g.
B-amyrin, taraxol, taraxerol).

Food Use

Dandelion is used as a food, mainly in salads and soups. The
roasted root and its extract have been used as a coffee

substitute."

S) Dandelion is listed by the Council of Europe as
a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This category
indicates that dandelion can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.''® Previously in the USA,
dandelion has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe) (C4)

Herbal Use

Dandelion is stated to po: diuretic, laxative, cholagogue and
antirheumatic properties. It has been used for cholecystitis,
gallstones, jaundice, atonic dyspepsia with constipation, muscular
rheumatism, oliguria, and specifically for cholecystitis and
dyspepsia. The German Commission E approved use of root and
herb for disturbance of bile flow, stimulation of diuresis, loss of
appetite and dyspepsia.'(“*) Root is used in combination with
celandine herb and artichoke for epigastric discomfort due to
functional disorders of the biliary system.'C?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 4-10 as an infusion three times daily,“ °”

Leaf, liquid extract 4-10 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.“C%

Leaf tincture 2-5 mL.”

Dandelion 205,

Leaf, fresh juice 510 mL.'‘°”

Dried root
daily.'C® G7)

2-8¢g or by infusion or decoction three times
Root, tincture
daily.'6%°?
Liquid Extract of Taraxacum (BPC 1949) 2-8 mL.
Juice of Taraxacum (BPC 1949) 4-8 mL.

5-10mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A diuretic effect in rats and mice has been documented for
dandelion extracts, following oral administration. Herb extracts
were found to produce greater diuresis than root extracts; a dose
of 50mL (equivalent to 2g dried herb/kg body weight) produced
an effect comparable to that of furosemide 80 mg/kg. By contrast,
no significant increases in urine volume or sodium excretion were
observed in mice following oral administration of either leaf or
root extracts, or of purified fractions.°) Similarly, oral and
intravenous administration of an ethanolic extract of dandelion

root failed to produce a diuretic effect in laboratory animals.”
Moderate anti-inflammatory activity against carrageenan-

induced rat paw oedema has been documented for a dandelion

root extract. An 80% ethanol extract of root (100 mg/kg orally)

Ai HLT

Wt? 3341S 19

1

Figure 3. Dandelion — dried drug substance (leaf).

Figure 2 Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale).

13 15

Figure 4 Dandelion — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 217 -----
Dandelion

inhibited oedema by 43% in the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test at 3 hours.”

Bile secretion was doubled in dogs by a decoction of fresh root
(equivalent to 5g dried plant); similar activity has been observed
for rats,‘C)

Hypoglycaemic activity has been described in normal, but not
in diabetic rabbits, following oesophageal administration of
dandelion. Doses greater than 500 mg/kg produced a significant
blood glucose concentration which had returned to normal after
24 hours. The maximum decrease produced by a dose of 2 g/kg
was reported to be 65% of the effect produced by tolbutamide
500 mg/kg. Sulfonylureas (e.g. tolbutamide) act by stimulating
pancreatic beta-cells and a similar mechanism was proposed for
dandelion.

In vitro antitumour activity has been documented for an
aqueous extract of dandelion, given by intraperitoneal injection,
in the tumour systems ddY-Ehrlich and C3H/He-MM46." The
mechanism of action was thought to be similar to that of tumour
polysaccharides such as lentinan.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
dandelion and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for dandelion
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Contact allergic reactions to dandelion have been documen-
ted"! and animal studies have reported dandelion to have a
weak sensitising capacity.” Sesquiterpene lactones are thought to
be the allergenic principles in dandelion.“ These compounds
contain an exocyclic o&-methylene B-lactone moiety, which is
thought to be a prerequisite for allergenic activity of sesquiterpene
lactones.

The acute toxicity of dandelion appears to be low, with LD so
values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) estimated at 36.8 g/kg and
28.8 g/kg for the root and herb, respectively. No visible signs of
toxicity were observed in rabbits administered dandelion 3, 4, 5
and 6g/kg body weight by mouth for up to seven days.” In
addition, no behavioural changes were recorded.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Treatment with dandelion is contraindicated for patients with
occlusion of bile duct, gall bladder empyema and obstructive
ileus.“ Dandelion may precipitate an allergic reaction in
susceptible individuals, although no reports following the
ingestion of dandelion have been documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of dandelion to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that dandelion has diuretic and hypo-
glycaemic activities.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of dandelion during pregnancy, provided that doses do not
greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Hepatofalk. Italy: Varicofit. Malaysia: Dandelion Complex.
Russia: Tonsilgon N (Tousuaron H). South Africa: Amara.
Spain: Diurette. Switzerland: Boldocynara; Demonatur
Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Gastrosan; Heparfelien; Strath
Gouttes pour les reins et la vessie; Tisane hepatique et biliaire.
UK: Adios; Aqualette; Aqualette; Backache; Boldex; Culpeper
DeTox Tea; Fenneherb Slim Aid; HealthAid Boldo-Plus;
Herbulax; HRI Water Balance; Napiers Slimming Tablets;
Natravene; Natural Herb Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Reducing (Slimming) Tablets; Rheumatic Pain;
Stomach Mixture; Uvacin; Uvacin; Weight Loss Aid; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Liver Formula Herbal Blend.

References

1 Clifford MN et al. The chlorogenic acids content of coffee substitutes.
Food Chem 1987; 24: 99-107.

2 Williams CA et al. Flavonoids, cinnamic acids and coumarins from the
different tissues and medicinal preparations of Taraxacum officinale.
Phytochem 1996; 42: 121-127.

3 Hook | e¢ al. Evaluation of dandelion for diuretic activity and
variation in potassium content. Int J Pharmacog 1993; 31: 29-34.

4 Hausen BM. Taraxinsaure-1/-O-B-p-glucopyranosid, das
kontaktallergen des l6wenzahns (Taraxacum officinale Wiggers).
Dermatosen 1982; 30: 51-53.

5 Hansel R et al. Sequiterpenlacton-B-b-glucopyranoside sowie ein
neues eudesmanolid aus Taraxacum officinale. Phytochem 1980; 19:
857-861.

6 Racz-Kotilla et al. The action of Taraxacum officinale extracts on the
body weight and diuresis of laboratory animals. Planta Med 1974; 26:
212-217.

7 Tita B et al. Taraxacum officinale W.: Pharmacological effect of
ethanol extract. Pharmacol Res 1993; 27: 23-24.

8 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-29.

9 Akhtar MS et al. Effects of Portulaca oleracae (kulfa) and Taraxacum
officinale (dhudhal) in normoglycaemic and alloxan-treated
hyperglycaemic rabbits. J Pak Med Assoc 1985; 35: 207-210.

10 Baba K e¢ al. Antitumor activity of hot water extract of dandelion,
Taraxacum officinale — correlation between antitumor activity and
timing of administration. Yagugaku Zasshi 1981; 101: 538-543.

11 Hausen BM, Schulz KH. Allergische kontaktdermatitis durch
léwenzahn (Taraxacum officinale Wiggers). Dermatosen 1978; 26: 198.

12 Davies MG, Kersey PJW. Contact allergy to yarrow and dandelion.
Contact Dermatitis 1986; 14: 256-257.

----- PAGE 218 -----
Devil’s Claw

On the basis of randomised controlled trials involving
patients with arthritic and rheumatic disorders, devil’s claw
extracts appear to have a favourable short-term adverse effect
profile when taken in recommended doses. Mild, transient
gastrointestinal effects, such as diarrhoea and flatulence, may
occur. Chronic toxicity studies and clinical experience with
prolonged use are lacking, so the effects of long-term use are
not known. On this basis, and in view of the possible
cardioactivity of devil’s claw, devil’s claw should not be used
for long periods of time at doses higher than recommended.
Further studies involving large numbers of patients are
required.

Species (Family)

Harpagophytum procumbens (Burch.) DC. ex Meissn. (Pedalia-
ceae)

Synonym(s)

Harpagophytum, Harpagophytum burchelii Decne, Grapple
Plant, Wood Spider

Part(s) Used

Secondary root tuber

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHMA 20030

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 2003079

Martindale 35th edition'©**

Ph Eur 20078?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Devil's claw is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

See also General Reference G2.

Carbohydrates Fructose, galactose, glucose and myo-inositol
(monosaccharides), raffinose, stachyose (46%) and sucrose
(oligosaccharides) .\?

Diterpenes (+)-8,11,13-totaratriene-12,13-diol and (+)-8,11,13-
abietatrien-12-ol.”)

Iridoids Harpagoside (1-3%), harpagide, 8-p-coumaroylharpa-
gide, 8-feruloylharpagide, 8-cinnamylmyoporoside, 6’-O-p-cou-
maroylharpagide, 6'-p-coumaroylprocumbide, and pagoside.°~)
p-Coumaroyl esters occur as E and Z isomers.”

Phenylpropanoids Acteoside and isoacteoside, 6-O-acetylacteo-
side,* 2,6-O-diacetylacteoside.”

Other constituents Amino acids, flavonoids (e.g. kaempferol,
luteolin), triterpenoids, sterols,“4 97)

Other plant parts The flower, stem and ripe fruit are reported to
be devoid of harpagoside; the leaf contains traces of iridoids.®

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, devil's

claw root consists of the cut and dried tuberous secondary roots
of H. procumbens DC. It contains not less than 1.2% of
harpagoside, calculated with reference to the dried drug.(@8" O*
As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial devil!
claw root preparations.

Some commercial extracts of devil's claw root may have been
prepared not only from the roots of H. procumbens, but also from
the roots of H. zeyheri, which are similar macroscopically.)
However, the two species differ in the concentration of the
constituents harpagoside and 8-p-coumaroylharpagide. On this
basis it has been stated that the species can be distinguished
chemically by determining the ratio harpagoside : 8-p-coumaroyl-
harpagide. The ratio is stated to be near one for H. zeyheri and
between 20 and 38 for H. procumbens which has a low 8-p-
coumaroylharpagide content.’ While this ratio may be sufficient
for chemotaxonomic differentiation, it may not be adequate for
quality control.

Other studies have demonstrated that the harpagoside content
of several powdered dry extracts of devil's claw from different
manufacturers varies, and that each extract has a unique profile of
other constituents." The harpagoside content of commercial
extracts of H. procumbens has been reported to range from 0.8—
2.3%.

oe

----- PAGE 219 -----
Devil’s Claw

Food Use
Devil

claw is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Devil's claw is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic,
analgesic, sedative and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has

Diterpenes
OH
no R! R?
14 > (+)-8,11,13-totaratriene OH isopropyl
eR “12,13-diol
(+)-8,11,13-abietatrien isopropyl H
-12-0l
Iridoids
OH OH
oO
ROW:
O-glucose R O-glucose
harpagoside trans-cinnamoy! procumbide
harpagide H
fe)
N OH
R? ‘OR®
Re R' Re R? Ri RS Re
8-p-coumaroylharpagide OH OH H OH H H
8-feruloylharpagide OH OH OCH; OH H H
8-cinnamoylmyoporoside H H H H OH H
6’-p-coumaroylharpagide OH OH H OH H — p-coumaroyl
fe) OH
0.
Os OH
HO’ OH
Ppagoside °
Figure 1 Selected constituents of devil’s claw.
Phenylpropanoids
OH
R906
R°0" OH
°
oR!
CHg (e)
HO.
ot OH R! R2 RS
acteoside H caffeoyl H
isoacteoside H H caffeoyl
6-O-acetyl-acteoside H caffeoyl acetyl
2,6-di-O-acetyl-acteoside acetyl caffeoyl acetyl

Figure 2 Selected constituents of devil’s claw.

been used as a stomachic and a bitter tonic, and for arthritis, gout,
myalgia, fibrositis, lumbago, pleurodynia and rheumatic disea-
se,(C? GCS, G32,G6) Modern use of devil's claw is focused on its
use in the treatment of rheumatic and arthritic conditions, and
low back pain.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
and more contemporary standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Painful arthrosis and tendonitis

1.5-3 g dried tuber as a decoction, three times daily; 1-3 g drug or
equivalent aqueous or hydroalcoholic extracts;‘” liquid extract

1-3 mL (1:1, 25% ethanol) three times daily.'C®

Figure 3 Devil’s claw (Harpagophytum procumbens).

Figure 4 Devil’s claw — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 220 -----
Loss of appetite or dyspepsia

Dried tuber 0.5 g as a decoction, three times daily.'°

Tincture 1 mL (1:5, 25% ethanol) three times daily.'C®

Clinical trials of devil's claw root extracts for the treatment of
low back pain typically have tested oral doses ranging from 2000-
4500 mg daily, in two or three divided doses (equivalent to less
than 30mg up to 100mg harpagoside daily, depending on the
particular extract), for four to 20 weeks.'* In a clinical trial in
osteoarthritis, participants received capsules containing powdered
cryoground devil's claw root 2610 mg daily for four months."

Pharmacological Actions

The active constituents of devil's claw are widely held to be the
iridoid glucosides although, of these, it has not been definitively
established whether harpagoside is the most important pharma-
cologically active constituent of the whole extract. Other
compounds present in the root may contribute to the pharmaco-
‘51 Tt has also been sugge:
that harpagogenin, formed by in vivo acid hydrolysis of
harpagoside, may have biological activity.”

ogical activities of devil's claw. ed

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Transformation of the iridoids harpagide,
harpagoside and 8-O-(p-coumaroyl)-harpagide into the pyridine
monoterpene alkaloid aucubinine B, chemically or by human
intestinal bacteria in vitro, has been documented.'!* !”) However,
it is not known if aucubinine B is formed in vivo by intestinal
bacteria and, therefore, whether it contributes to the pharmaco-
ogical activity of devil's claw.”

Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities Animal studies of
the anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities of devil's claw have
reported conflicting results. Activity appears to differ depending
on the route of administration of devil's claw, and the model of
inflammation, whether acute or subacute. Also, studies have
assessed the effects of different preparations of H. procumbens
(e.g. aqueous extracts and ethanolic extracts) and it is important
to consider this when interpreting the results.

In controlled experiments in rats, a 60% ethanol extract of H.
procumbens roots injected (compartment and site not specified) at
doses of 25, 50 and 100mg/kg body weight daily for four days
beginning five days after sub-plantar injection of Freund's
adjuvant produced a significantly greater antinociceptive response
in the hot-plate test and significantly reduced paw oedema than
did control (distilled water) on days 6-8 after induction of
experimental arthritis (p < 0.01 for all).°° Similar results were
obtained when administration of H. procumbens extract was
initiated 20 days after sub-plantar injection of Freund's adjuvant
and continued for 20 days, with tests for antinociceptive and anti-
inflammatory activity performed on four occasions during this
period.

Pretreatment with a dried aqueous extract of devil's claw root at
doses of 100mg/kg and above, administered intraperitoneally,
resulted in peripheral analgesic activity demonstrated by a

significant reduction in the number of writhings induced by
16}

acetic acid in mice.''® However, no effect was observed in the hot-
plate test, indicating a lack of central analgesic activity with
devil's claw extract.

The peripheral analgesic properties of intraperitoneal dried
aqueous extract of devil's claw have been confirmed in other

Devil’s Claw

s of 400 mg/kg and above. A subsequent series of
experiments found that administration of an aqueous extract of
H. procumbens root at doses of 200-800 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally resulted in significantly greater antinociceptive
effects than did control in both the hot-plate and acetic-acid
induced writhings tests in mice (p < 0.05 versus control) and, at a
dose of 400 or 800 mg/kg body weight, in a significant reduction in
egg-albumin induced hind-paw inflammation in rats, compared
with control (p < 0.05).

In contrast, other studies have reported that dried aqueous
extract of devil's claw administered orally had no effect on
carrageenan- or Mycobacterium butyricum- (Freund's adjuvant)
induced oedema in rat paw, whereas both indometacin and aspirin
isplayed significant anti-inflammatory activity.°??>
ried aqueous extract of devil's claw administered by intraper-
itoneal injection demonstrated significant activity in the carra-
geenan-induced oedema test in rats, an acute model of
inflammation." The effect on oedema was dose-dependent for
of devil's claw extract 100-400 mg/kg, and reached a
maximum three hours after carrageenan injection. Other studies
n rats have reported significant reductions in oedema using the
same model following pretreatment with intraperitoneal’? and

intraduodenal, but not oral, dried aqueous extract of devil's
(24)
aw.

studies for dos

However,

los

C

Anti-inflammatory activity of harpagoside has been demon-
strated in experimental models, including the croton oil-induced
granuloma pouch test, and for harpagogenin, the aglucone of
harpagoside, in the croton oil-induced granuloma pouch test and
in formalin-induced arthritis in rats.°°)

Studies have also reported peripheral analgesic and anti-
inflammatory properties for the related species Harpogophytum
zeyheri.°) Animal studies using aqueous extracts of devil's claw
have suggested that the extract may be inactivated by passage
through the acid environment of the stomach.''** One study
compared the anti-inflammatory activities of aqueous devil's claw
extract administered by different routes. Intraperitoneal and
intraduodenal administration led to a significant reduction in
the carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema test, but there was no
effect following oral administration.” In another study, aqueous
levil's claw extract pretreated with hydrochloric acid to mimic
acid conditions in the stomach showed no activity in pharmaco-
logical models of pain and inflammation."

A clear mechanism of action for the purported anti-inflamma-
tory effects of devil's claw has yet to be established. In vitro, devil's
claw (100 mg/mL) had no significant effect on prostaglandin (PG)
synthetase activity, whereas indometacin (316 ,1g/mL) and aspirin
(437 pg/mL) caused 50% inhibition of this enzyme.? In other in
vitro studies in human whole blood samples, devil's claw extracts
and fractions of extracts were tested for their effects
thromboxane B2 (TXB,) and leukotriene (LT) biosynthesis.
TXB, is an end-product of arachidonic acid metabolism by the
cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) pathway. Inhibition appeared to be
lependent on the harpagoside content of the extracts or
fractions.°° An aqueous extract of H. procumbens inhibited

(26)

lipopolysaccharide-induced enhancement of cyclooxygenase-2
activity, resulting in suppression of PGE synthesis
experiments using the mouse fibroblast cell line L929.°” In the
same system, the extract inhibited inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) mRNA expression, resulting in suppression of nitric oxide
production. Inhibition of iNOS expression by an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens roots, resulting in suppression of nitrite
production, has also been described following experiments in rat
renal mesangial cells. The effect was observed with a harpagoside-

in in-vitro

----- PAGE 221 -----
Devil’s Claw

free extract and with an extract containing a high concentration
(27%) of harpagoside, but not with extracts containing around
2% harpagoside, indicating that high concentrations of harpago-
side as well as other concentrations are necessary to bring about
the effect.°*)

Harpagoside (100,1mol/L), but not harpagide (100 mol/L),
inhibited calcium ionophore A23187-stimulated release of TXB»
from human platelets.” However, harpagoside and harpagide
had no significant inhibitory effect on calcium ionophore A23187-
stimulated release of PGE, and LTC, from mouse peritoneal
macrophages.)

Other preclinical studies have described effects for devil's claw
extracts and/or isolated constituents on other pathways involved
in inflammatory processes. In vitro inhibition of tumour-necrosis-
factor-a (TNF-«) synthesis in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated
human monocytes by a hydroalcoholic extract of devil's claw
(SteiHap 69) has also been documented.® Inhibitory activity
against human leukocyte elastase (a serine proteinase involved in
inflammatory processes) has been reported for an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens roots (drug to extract ratio 1.5-2.5:1) and the
isolated constituents 6’-O-acetylacteoside, isoacteoside, 8-p-cou-
maroylharpagide, pagoside and caffeic acid, with ICso values of
542, 47, 179, 179, 154 and 86 g/mL, respectively. The ICso values
for several other constituents, including acteoside and harpagoside
were higher than 300ug/mL (4). An ethanol extract of H.
procumbens significantly reduced IL-1B-induced production of
several matrix metalloproteinase enzymes (MMPs) in human
chondrocytes.°” (In inflammatory diseases, there is increased
production of cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-a, which results
in an increased production of MMPs which breakdown the
extracellular cartilage matrix.)

Other activities Crude methanolic extracts of devil's claw have
been shown to be cardioactive in vitro and in vivo in animals. A
protective action against ventricular arrhythmias induced by
aconitine, calcium chloride and epinephrine (adrenaline)/chloro-
form has been reported for devil's claw given intraperitoneally or
added to the reperfusion medium.°?> The crude extract was
found to exhibit greater activity than pure harpagoside.°” In
isolated rabbit heart, low concentrations of a crude methanolic
extract had mild negative chronotropic and positive inotropic
effects,’ whereas high concentrations caused a marked negative
inotropic effect with reduction in coronary blood flow.°?) In
anaesthetised dogs, harpagoside administered orally by gavage
caused a decrease in mean aortic pressure and arterial and
pulmonary capillary pressure.)

In vitro, harpagoside has been shown to decrease the contractile
response of smooth muscle to acetylcholine and barium chloride
on guinea-pig ileum and rabbit jejunum. Harpagide was found to
increase this response at lower concentrations, but antagonised it
at higher concentrations.°* On the basis of these studies in
isolated smooth muscle, it was suggested that the constituents of

devil's claw may influence mechanisms regulating calcium
G5)

influx.

Methanolic extracts have also exhibited hypotensive properties
in normotensive rats, causing a decrease in arterial blood pressure
following oral doses of 300 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg body weight.)

Aqueous fractions derived from an extract of devil's claw root
(drug to extract ratio 2:1 containing 2.6% harpagoside) showed
antioxidant activity in an in-vitro assay based on ability to
scavenge 2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic —acid)-
derived radicals.°° However, harpagoside showed only weak
antioxidant activity. In mice, a methanol extract of H. procum-

bens root tubers applied topically to shaven skin 30 minutes before
application of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), a
stimulator of COX-2 expression, led to a significant reduction
in COX- 2 protein when assessed four hours after TPA adminis-
tration.°” The extract did not have any effect on TPA-induced
activation of nuclear factor-KB, but inhibited TPA-induced
activation of activator protein-1, which is involved in the
regulation of COX-2 in mouse skin. Overexpression of COX-2
is thought to be involved in tumour promotion.

Antidiabetic activity has been described for an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens root in in vivo experiments in rats with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus.? The extract signifi-
cantly reduced blood glucose concentrations in both fasted
normoglycaemic rats and fasted diabetic rats when administered
intraperitoneally at doses of 800 mg/kg body weight.

Two diterpene constituents ((+)-8,11,13-totaratriene-12,13-diol
and (+)-8,11,13-abietatrien-12-ol) isolated using bioassay-guided
fractionation from a petroleum ether extract of H. procumbens
root were found to be active against a chloroquine-sensitive (D10)
and a chloroquine-resistant (K1) strain of Plasmodium falciparum
in vitro (ICso < 1 pg/mL).

Devil's claw extracts possess weak antifungal activity against
Penicillium digitatum and Botrytis cinerea.°*

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There is little published information on the
pharmacokinetics of devil's claw extracts in humans. A pharma-
cokinetic study involving a small number of healthy male
volunteers 3) measured plasma harpagoside concentrations
after oral administration of devil's claw extract (WS1531 contain-
harpagoside) 600, 1200 and 1800mg as film-coated
» Maximal plasma concentrations of harpagoside were
reached after 1.3-1.8 hours, and were 8.2ng/mL and 27.8 ng/mL
for doses of harpagoside of 108 and 162mg, respectively
(corresponding to 1200 and 1800mg devil's claw extract,
respectively). Other studies involving small numbers of healthy
male volunteers indicated that the half-life ranged between 3.7 and
6.4 hours. Other results suggested that there may be low oral
absorption or a considerable first-pass effect with devil's claw
extract, although this needs further investigation.°

n

Pharmacodynamics A _ study involving healthy volunteers
investigated the effects on eicosanoid production of orally
administered devil's claw (four 500-mg capsules of powder,
containing 3% glucoiridoids, daily for 21 days). No statistically
significant differences on PGE, TXB, 6-keto-PGF,,, and LTBy
were observed following the period of devil's claw administration,
compared with baseline values. By contrast, in a subsequent study
involving whole blood samples taken from healthy male
volunteers, a biphasic decrease in basal cysteinyl-leukotriene
(Cys-LT) biosynthesis, compared with baseline values, was
observed following oral administration of devil's claw extract
(WS1531 containing, Of harpagoside) 600, 1200 and 1800 mg as
film-coated tablets.”

Therapeutic activity The efficacy and effectiveness of devil's claw
have been investigated in around 20 clinical studies involving
patients with rheumatic and arthritic conditions, and low back
pain."!* These studies have involved different methodological
designs, including several uncontrolled studies, and different
preparations of devil's claw, including crude drug and aqueous
extracts. Evaluating the evidence is further complicated as
preparations tested in clinical trials typically have been standar-

----- PAGE 222 -----
dised for their harpagoside content and, although harpagoside is
believed to contribute to activity, it is not yet clear to what extent
and which other constituents are important. Therefore, at present,
there is insufficient evidence to draw definitive conclusions
regarding the efficacy of specific devil's claw preparations, and
because of the differences in the pharmaceutical quality of
individual preparations, general conclusions on efficacy cannot be
drawn.)

A systematic review of the quality of clinical trials involving
devil's claw found that although the results of some studies have
provided evidence for the effectiveness of certain devil's claw
preparations, the quality of evidence was not sufficient to support
the use of any of the available products.”

A systematic review of 12 controlled, randomised or quasi-
randomised trials of H. procumbens preparations in patients with
osteoarthritis (5 trials), low back pain (4 trials) and mixed pain
conditions (3 trials) found differing levels of evidence for the
ifferent H. procumbens preparations assessed. There was
evidence (from two trials involving a total of 325 participants)
that an aqueous extract of H. procumbens administered orally at a
dose equivalent to harpagoside 50 mg daily for four weeks was
iS
e

d

superior to placebo in reducing pain in patients with acute
»pisodes of chronic non-specific low-back pain.''*) There was also
vidence (from one trial for each) that the same extract
administered orally at a dose equivalent to harpagoside 100 mg
daily for four weeks was superior to placebo, and at a dose
equivalent to harpagoside 60mg daily for six weeks was not
inferior to rofecoxib 12.5 mg daily, in reducing pain in patients
ith acute episodes of chronic non-specific low-back pain. There
was evidence that powdered H. procumbens plant material at a
dose equivalent to 57 mg harpagoside daily for 16 weeks was not
inferior to diacerhein. Overall, however, the limited amount of
data and heterogeneous nature of the available studies, indicate
that further randomised controlled trials assessing well-charac-
terised H. procumbens preparations and involving sufficient
numbers of patients are required.
Several of the trials mentioned above are discussed in more

z

detail below.
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
118 patients with acute exacerbations of chronic low back pain
igated the effects of devil's claw extract 800 mg three times
daily (equivalent to 50mg harpagoside daily) for four weeks.“
There was no statistically significant difference between the devi
claw and placebo groups in the primary outcome measure —
consumption of the opioid analgesic tramadol over weeks 2-4 of
the study — among the 109 patients who completed the study. This
was an unusual choice of primary outcome measure as it gives no
direct indication of the degree of pain experienced by participants.
There was a trend towards improvement in a modified version of
the Arhus Low Back Pain Index (a measure of pain, disability and
physical impairment) for devil's claw recipients compared with
placebo recipients, although this did not reach statistical
significance. A greater proportion of patients in the devil's claw
group were pain-free at the end of the study, although this was
only a secondary outcome measure.

On the basis of these findings, a subsequent randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 197 patients with
exacerbations of low back pain tested the effects of two doses of
devil's claw (WS1531) extract against placebo.“ Participants
received devil's claw extract 600 mg or 1200 mg daily (equivalent to
50mg and 100 mg harpagoside daily, respectively), or placebo, for
four weeks. There was a statistically significant difference (p =
0.027) between devil's claw and placebo with respect to the

inves

Devil’s Claw

primary outcome measure — the number of patients who were
pain-free without tramadol for at least five days during the last
week of the study. However, numbers of patients who were pain-
free were low (3, 6 and 10 for placebo, devil's claw 600 mg daily
and devil's claw 1200 mg daily, respectively). Furthermore, this is a
non-standard outcome measure. Arhus Low Back Pain Index
scores improved significantly in all three groups, compared with
baseline values, although there was no statistically significant
difference between groups.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving patients with non-specific low back pain, 65 participants
received devil's claw extract (LI-174, Rivoltan), or placebo, 480 mg
twice daily (equivalent to 24mg harpagoside daily) for four
weeks. There was a significant improvement (p < 0.001) in
visual analogue scale (VAS) s
claw group, but not the placebo group, compared with baseline
" treatment. Differences in VAS
scores between the two groups were statistically significant after
four weeks' treatment (p < 0.001). Significant differences between
the two groups in favour of devil's claw after four weeks’ treatment
were also observed with several other parameters, including
muscle stiffness and muscular ischaemic pain.

A small number of studies has compared the efficacy of devil's
claw with that of conventional pharmaceutical agents in the
treatment of low back pain. In a randomised, double-blind, pilot
trial, 88 participants with acute exacerbations of low back pain
received an aqueous extract of devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug to
5:1) 2400mg daily in three divided doses
(equivalent to 60mg harpagoside daily), or rofecoxib (Vioxx)
12.5mg daily for six weeks.“° At the end of this period,
compared with baseline values, there were improvements in Arhus
Low Back Pain Index scores, health assessment qu
in the numbers of pain-free patients for both
groups. There were no statistically significant differences between
groups for any of the outcome measures but, because the study
did not include sufficient numbers of patients, these findings do
not demonstrate clinical equivalence between the two treat-

‘ores for muscle pain in the devil's

values, after two and four weeks

extract ratio 1.5.

ionnaire

scores, and increase:

ments.“

A randomised, double-blind, pilot trial in which 88 participants
with acute exacerbations of low back pain received an aqueous
extract of devil's claw (Doloteffin), or rofecoxib (Vioxx) for six
weeks offered participants continuing treatment with devil's claw
aqueous extract two tablets three times daily for up to one year
after the six-week pilot study. Participants were not aware of their
initial study group (i.e. devil's claw extract or rofecoxib) until
towards the end of the one-year follow-up study.” In total, 38
and 35 participants who had previously received devil's claw and
rofecoxib, respectively, participated in the follow-up study, and
underwent assessment every six weeks. After 24 and 54 weeks, 53
and 43 participants, respectively, remained in the study. There were
no convincing differences between the two groups (i.e. those who
previously received devil's claw and those who received rofecoxib)
with respect to pain scores, use of additional analgesic medica-
tion, Arhus Index scores and health assessment questionnaire
scores.

Furthermore, the uncontrolled design of the follow-up study
would have precluded any definitive conclusions regarding
differences between the two groups.

A randomised, double-blind trial compared the efficacy of
devil's claw extract with that of diacerein in 122 patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee and_hip.''
powdered cryoground devil's claw (Harpadol) 2.61¢ daily, or
diacerein 100 mg daily, for four months.

Participants received

----- PAGE 223 -----
Devil’s Claw

VAS scores for spontaneous pains improved significantly in
both groups, compared with baseline values, and there were no
differences between devil's claw and diacerein with respect to VAS
scores. In a placebo-controlled study involving 89 patients with
rheumatic complaints, devil's claw recipients (who received
powdered crude drug 2 g daily for two months) showed significant
improvements in sensitivity to pain and in motility (as measured
by the finger-to-floor distance), compared with placebo recipi-
ents, 4®)

Several, open, uncontrolled, post-marketing surveillance stu-
dies“? have assessed the effects of devil's claw preparations in
patients with rheumatic and arthritic disorders, and back pain.
These studies typically have reported improvements in pain scores
at the end of the treatment period, compared with baseline values.
However, the design of these studies (i.e. no control group) does
not allow any concl
claw in these conditions as there are alternative explanations for
the observed effects.

Another study involved 45 patients with osteo- or rheumatoid
arthritis who received devil's claw root extract 2.46 g daily for two
weeks in addition to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) treatment, followed by devil's claw extract alone, for
four weeks. It was reported that there were no statistically
significant changes in pain intensity and duration of morning
stiffness during the period of treatment with devil's claw extract
alone. In subgroups of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and
those with osteoarthritis, small decreases were observed in
concentrations of C-reactive protein and creatinine, respectively.
The design of this study in terms of the treatment regimen
(NSAID followed by devil's claw extract without a wash-out
period), also precludes definitive conclusions about the effects of
devil's claw preparations.

sions to be drawn on the effects of devil's

Side-effects, Toxicity

The mechanism of action of devil's claw remains unclear, in
particular, whether it has significant effects on the mediators of
acute inflammation. Data from in vitro and clinical studies in this
regard do not yet give a clear picture (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies and Clinical studies,
Pharmacodynamics). It has been stated that adverse effects
associated with the use of NSAIDs are unlikely to occur with
devil's claw, even during long-term treatment.'0% ©’ While there
are no documented reports of gastrointestinal bleeding or peptic
ulcer associated with the use of devil's claw, the latter statement
requires confirmation. Use of devil's claw in gastric and duodenal
ulcer is contraindicated, although this appears to be because of
the drug's bitter properties.'©"°

Clinical data

Randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving patients with

devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug to extract ratio 1.5-2.5:1) 2400 mg
daily in three divided doses (equivalent to 60mg harpagoside
daily), or rofecoxib (Vioxx) 12.5mg daily for six weeks.“ In
total, 28 (32%) participants (14 in each group) experienced
adverse events, most commonly gastrointestinal complaints (9 in
each group).

In a follow-up study, participants in the six-week pilot study
were offered continuing treatment with devil's claw aqueous
extract two tablets three times daily for up to one year.
Participants were not aware of their initial study group (
devil's claw extract or rofecoxib) until towards the end of the one-
year follow-up study.” In total, 38 and 35 participants who had
previously received devil's claw and_ rofecoxib, respectively,
participated in the follow-up study and, after 24 and 54 weeks,
a total of 53 and 43 participants, respectively, remained in the
study. Overall, 17 (23%) of the 73 participants in the follow-up
study experienced a total of 21 adverse events. Of these, the
causality for three events was classified (by a physician not
involved in the study) as ‘likely’ (one allergic skin reaction) or
‘possible’ (diarrhoea, acid 'hiccup') with respect to devil's claw
treatment. Five participants (7%) withdrew from the study
because of adverse events.

In a randomised, controlled trial comparing devil's claw extract
with diacerein in patients with osteoarthritis, numbers of patients
ending the study prematurely because of suspected adverse drug
reactions were 8 and 14 for devil's claw and diacerein recipients,
respectively." In total, 26 diacerein recipients and 16 dev
recipients reported one or more adverse events (p = 0.042). The
numbers of adverse events attributed to the treatment was
significantly lower for devil's claw than for diacerein (10 versus
21; p = 0.017). The most frequently reported adverse event,
diarrhoea, occurred in 8.1% and 26.7% of devil's claw and
diacerein recipients, respectively.

Several, open, uncontrolled studies,°! >?
the effects of devil's claw preparations in patients with arthritic
disorders and back pain, have reported data on adverse events. In
an open, uncontrolled, multicentre, surveillance study involving
patients with arthrosis of the hip or knee, 75 participants received
tablets containing an aqueous extract of the secondary tubers of
devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug extract ratio = 1.5-2.5:1) at a
dosage of two 400mg tablets three times daily (equivalent to
50 mg_ iridoidglyco: as harpagoside) for 12
During the study, four (5%) participants experienced
adverse events (dyspeptic complaints, 2; sensation of fullness, 1;
panic attack, 1), although none stopped treatment with devil's
claw. Causality was assessed as ‘possible’ for two of these events.
In a similar open, uncontrolled, multicentre study, 130 partici
pants with chronic non-radicular back pain received tablets
containing 480 mg devil's claw extract (LI-174; drug extract ratio
= 4.4-5: 1) at a dosage of one tablet twice daily for eight weeks.°”)
Overall, (10%) participants withdrew from the study for

claw

which have assessed

des, calculated

weeks.)

rheumatic and arthritic conditions who have received devil's claw

for four weeks have reported mil.

events were reported, although one
study because of tachycardia."
A small number of reports of ran

extracts or powdered drug at approximately recommended doses

, transient gastrointestinal

symptoms (such as diarrhoea, flatulence) in a small proportion
(less than 10%) of devil's claw recipients.

845) No serious adverse

patient withdrew from one

omi:

od trials comparing the

effects of devil's claw preparations with those of standard

pharmaceutical agents has included

randomised, double-blind, pilot trial,

data on adverse events. In a
88 participants with acute

exacerbations of low back pain received an aqueous extract of

various reasons, including no apparent improvement in
condition. No serious adverse events were reported, but

their
three

partipants reported minor adverse events (bloating, insomnia and
outbreaks of sweating). In a post-marketing surveillance study, 250
patients with non-specific low back pain or osteoarthritic pain of
the knee or hip received an aqueous extract of H. procumbens
(Doloteffin) at an oral dose equivalent to harpagoside 60 mg daily
in three divided doses for eight weeks in addition to any existing
treatment and/or additional analgesic medicines as required. Fifty
participants experienced adverse events; most commonly gastro-
intestinal complaints (1 = 22); two participants experienced
allergic skin reactions.” In 27 participants, the adverse event was

----- PAGE 224 -----
Devil’s Claw

considered by an independent investigator to be possibly (n = 11),
likely (15) or certainly (1) related to ingestion of devil's claw.

In another open, uncontrolled study, one patient withdrew after
four days' treatment with devil's claw aqueous extract 1.23 g daily
because of several symptoms, including frontal headache, tinnitus,
anorexia and loss of taste.°”

There is an isolated report of conjunctivitis, rhinitis and Thali AniitCars Guetaamn Comply letsbal Auiviiat
respiratory symptoms in a 50-year-old woman who hy ad experi- Formula; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid; Prost-1.
enced chronic occupational exposure to devil's daw. Czech iRejinellten Reinemmenidis; Ci, Feazen Aviarliyann,
Germany: Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum. Italy: Bodyguard;
Nevril; Pik Gel. Malaysia: Celery Plus. Spain: Dolosul;
Acute and subacute toxicity tests in rodents have demonstrated Natusor Harpagosinol.
low toxicity of devil's claw extracts. In a study in mice, the acute
oral lethal dose (LD) LDo and LDso were greater than 13.5 g/kg

Preclinical data

body weight.?) In rats, clinical, haematological and gross References
pathological findings were unremarkable following administration 1 Ziller KH, Franz G. Analysis of the water-soluble fraction from the
of devil's claw extract 7.5 g/kg by mouth for seven days. Hepatic roots of Harpagophytum procumbens. Planta Med 1979; 37: 340-348.

2. Clarkson C et al. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of abietana and
totarane diterpenes isolated from Harpagophytum procumbens
(Devil's claw). Planta Med 2003; 69: 720-724.

effects (liver weight, and concentrations of microsomal protein
and several liver enzymes) were not observed following oral

treatment with devil's claw extract 2 g/kg for seven days.“ Other Kikuchi T et al. New itidoid glucosides from Harpagophytum
studies in mice have reported acute oral acute intravenous LDo procumbens DC. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31: 2296-2301.

values of greater than 4.64g/kg and greater than 1g/kg, 4 Boje K et al. New and known iridoid- and phenylethanoid glycosides
respectively.°” For an extract containing harpagoside 85%, acute from Harpagophytum procumbens and their in vitro inhibition of
oral LDo, acute intravenous LDg and acute intravenous LDso human leukocyte elastase. Planta Med 2003; 69: 820-825.

values were greater than 4.64g/kg, 395 mg/kg and 511 mg/kg, 5. Seger C et al. LC-DAD-MS/SPE-NMR hyphenation. A tool for the
res ectively. 5”) analysis of pharmaceutically used plant extracts: identification of

isobaric iridoid glycoside regioisomers from Harpagophytum
sos . procumbens. Anal Chem 2005; 77: 878-885.15679357
Contra-indications, Warnings 6 Burger JEW et al. Iridoid and phenolic glycosides from

Harpagophytum procumbens. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1453-1457.

Devil's claw is stated to be contra-indicated in gastric and

duodenal ulcers,(S#©” and in gallstones should be used only 7 Munkombwe NM. Acetylated phenolic glycosides from

: Se wt BS} Harpagophytum procumbens. Phytochemistry 2003; 62: 1231—
after consultation with a physician. 1234.12648542
Drug interactions None have been described for devil's claw 8 Czygan FC, Krueger A. Pharmaceutical biological studies of the genus
preparations. However, on the basis of pharmacological evidence Harpagophytum. Part 3 Distribution of the iridoid glycoside

a : Bn a ; harpagoside in the different organs of Harpagophytum procumbens
of devil's claw's cardioactivity, the possibility of excessive doses and Harpagophytum zeyheri. Planta Med 1977; 31: 305-307
interfering with existing treatment for cardiac disorders or with 9 Baghdikian B ef al. An analytical study, anti-inflammatory and
hypo/hypertensive therapy should be considered. Inhibitory effects analgesic effects of Harpagophytum procumbens and Harpagophytum
on certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising enzymes zeyheri. Planta Med 1997; 63: 171-176.
have been documented for a devil's claw root extract (Bioforce) in 10 Eich J et al. HPLC analysis of iridoid compounds of Harpagophytum
vitro using a technique involving liquid chromatography-mass taxa: quality control of pharmaceutical drug material. Pharmac

spectrometry and automated online extraction.°*) Mean (stan-

dard deviation) ICso values for the devil's claw extract when tested

Pharmacol Lett 1998; 8: 75-78.
11 Chrubasik $ e¢ al. Zum Harpagosidehalt verschiedener
Trockenextraktpulver aus Harpagophytum procumbens. Forsch

in assays with individual CYP enzymes were 997 (23), 254 (17), Komplementiirmed 1996; 3: 6-11.
121 (8), 155 (9), 1044 (80) and 335 (14) for the CYPs 1A2, 2C8, 12 Chrubasik $ e¢ al. Zum Wirkstoffgehalt in Arzneimitteln
2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4, respectively. Harpagophytum procumbens. 1996, 3: 57-63.

13. Gagnier JJ et al. Harpagophytum procumbens for osteoarthritis and

Pregnancy and lactation It has been stated that devil's claw has low back pain: a systematic review. BMC Complementary and

oxytocic properties,” although the reference gives no further Alternative Medicine 2004; 4: 13.

details and the basis for this statement is not known. In addition, 14 Chantre P et al. Efficacy and tolerance of Harpagophytum

there is no further evidence to substantiate the statement. procumbens versus diacerhein in treatment of osteoarthritis.
However, given the lack of data on the effects of devil's claw Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 177-183.

taken during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided 15 Wegener T. Devil's claw: from African traditional remedy to modern

analgesic and antiinflammatory. Herbalgram 2000; 50: 47-54.

16 Lanhers M-C et al. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of an
aqueous extract of Harpagophytum procumbens. Planta Med 1992;
58: 117-123.

17. Vanhaelen M et al. Biological activity of Harpagophytum
procumbens. 1. Preparation and structure of Harpagogenin. J Pharm
Belg 1981 36: 38-42.

18 Baghdikian B et al. Two new pyridine monoterpene alkaloids by

Arthrosetten H; Arthrotabs; Bomarthros; Cefatec; Dolo- chemical conversion of a commercial extract of Harpagophytum

Arthrodynat; Dolo-Arthrosetten H; Doloteffin; flexi-loges; procumbens, J Nat Prod 1999; 62: 211-213, ;

Harpagoforte Asmedic; HarpagoMega; Harpagosan; Jucurba; 19 Baghdikian B et al. Formation of nitrogen-containing metabolites

a. . . 0A i from the main iridoids of Harpagophytum procumbens and H.
Matar hargo: ee Rheutermiebytos Se Rheuma;Sern,eRivoltan, zeyheri by human intestinal bacteria. Planta Med 1999; 65: 164-166.

during these periods.

----- PAGE 225 -----
20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

Devil’s Claw

Andersen ML. Evaluation of acute and chronic treatments with
Harpagophytum procumbens on Freund's adjuvant-induced arthritis
in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 2004; 91: 325-330.

Mahomed IM Analgesic, antiinflammatory and antidiabetic
properties of Harpagophytum procumbens DC (Pedaliaceae)
secondary root aqueous extract. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 982-989.
McLeod DW et al. Investigations of Harpagophytum procumbens
(devil's claw) in the treatment of experimental inflammation and
arthritis in the rat. Br | Pharmacol 1979; 66: P140.

Whitehouse LW et al. Devil's claw (Harpagophytum procumbens): no
evidence for anti-inflammatory activity in the treatment of arthritic
disease. Can Med Assoc J 1983; 129: 249-251.

Soulimani R et al. The role of stomachal digestion on the
pharmacological activity of plant extracts, using as an example
extracts of Harpagophytum procumbens. Can J Physiol Pharmacol
1994; 72: 1532-1536.

Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological, Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

Loew D et al. Investigations on the pharmacokinetic properties of
Harpagophytum extracts and their effects on eicosanoid biosynthesis
in vitro and ex vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2001; 69: 356-364.

Jang MH. Harpagophytum procumbens suppresses
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated expressions of cyclooxygenase-2 and
inducible nitric oxide synthase in fibroblast cell line L929. J
Pharmacol Sci 2003; 93: 367-371.

Kaszkin M. Downregulation of iNOS expression in rat mesangial cells
by special extracts of Harpagophytum procumbens derives from
harpagoside-dependent and independent effects. Phytomedicine 2004;
11: 585-595.

Benito PB et al. Effects of some iridoids from plant origin on
arachidonic acid metabolism in cellular systems. Planta Med 2000; 66:
324-328.

Fiebich BL et al. Inhibition of TNF-a synthesis in LPS
primary human monocytes by Harpagophytum extract SteiHap 69.
Phytomedicine 2001; 8: 28-30.

Schulze-Tanzil G, Wirkung des Extraktes aus Harpagophytum
procumbens DC auf Matrix-Metalloproteinasen in menschlichen
Knorpelzellen in vitro. Arzneim Forsch 2004; 54: 213-220.

Circosta C et al. A drug used in traditional medicine: Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. Il. Cardiovascular activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;
11: 259-274,

Costa de Pasquale R et al. A drug used in traditional medicine:
Harpagophytum procumbens DC. Ill. Effects on hyperkinetic
ventricular arrhythmias by reperfusion. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13:
193-199.

Occhiuto F, De Pasquale A. Electrophysiological and haemodynamic
effects of some active principles of Harpagophytum procumbens DC
in the dog. Pharmacological Res 1990; 22: 72-73.

Occhiuto F et al. A drug used in traditional medicine: Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. IV. Effects on some isolated muscle preparations. J
Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 201-208.

Betancor-Fernandez A, Screening pharmaceutical preparations
containing extracts of turmeric rhizome, artichoke leaf, devil's claw
root and garlic or salmon oil for antioxidant capacity. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2003; 55: 981-986.

Kundu JK Inhibitory effects of the extracts of Sutherlandia frutescens
(L.) R. Br. and Harpagophytum procumbens DC. on phorbol ester-
induced COX-2 expression in mouse skin: AP-1 and CREB as
potential upstream targets. Cancer Lett 2005; 218: 21-31.

mulated

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

Guérin J-C, Réveillére H-P. Activité antifongique d'extraits végétaux a
usage thérapeutique. II. Etude de 40 extraits sur 9 souches fongiques.
Ann Pharmaceut Fr 1985; 43: 77-81.

Moussard C et al. A drug used in traditional medicine,
Harpagophytum procumbens: no evidence for NSAID-like effect on
whole blood eicosanoid production in human. Prostaglandins Leukot
Essent Fatty Acids 1992; 46: 283-286.

Wegener T, Wiedenbriick R. Die Teufelskralle (Harpagophytum
procumbens DC.)in der Therapie rheumatischer Erkrankungen. Z
Phytother 1998; 19: 284-294.

Chrubasik S$. Effectiveness of devil's claw for osteoarthritis.
Rheumatology 2002; 41: 1332-1333.

Chrubasik S$. The quality of clinical trials with Harpagophytum
procumbens. Phytomedicine 2003; 10 :613-623.

Chrubasik S et al. Effectiveness of Harpagophytum procumbens in
treatment of acute low back pain. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 1-10.
Chrubasik $ eg al. Effectiveness of Harpagophytum extract WS 1531 in
the treatment of exacerbation of low back pain: a randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blind study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 1999; 16:
118-129.

Gobel H et al. Harpagophytum extract LI 174 (Devil's claw) for
treating non-specific back pain. Effects on sensory, motor and vascular
muscle response. Schmerz 2001; 15: 10-18.

Chrubasik §. A randomized double-blind pilot study comparing

Doloteffin and Vioxx in the treatment of low back pain.
Rheumatology 2003; 42: 141-148.

Chrubasik S. A 1-year follow-up after a pilot study with Doloteffin for
low back pain. Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 1-9.

Lecomte A, Costa JP. Harpagophytum dans I'arthrose: étude en
double insu contre placebo. Le Magazine 1992; 27-30.

Pinget M, Lecomte A. Die Wirkung der 'Harpagophytum Arkocaps'
bei degenerativem Rheuma. Naturheilpraxis 1992; 50: 267-269.
Bélaiche P. Etude clinique de 630 cas d'arthrose traités par le nébulisat
aqueux d'Harpagophytum procumbens (Radix). Phytothérapy 1982; 1:
22-28.

Wegener T, Liipke NP. Treatment of patients with arthrosis of hip or

knee with an aqueous extract of devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens DC.). Phytotherapy Res 2003; 17: 1165-1172.

Laudahn D, Walper A. Efficacy and tolerance of Harpagophytum
extract LI 174 in patients with chronic non-radicular back pain.
Phytotherapy Res 2001; 15: 621-624.

Chrubasik § Comparison of outcome measures during treatment with
the proprietary Harpagophytum extract Doloteffin in patients with
pain in the lower back, knee or hip. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 181-194.
Szczepariski L. (Efficacy and tolerability of 'Pagosid' (Harpagophytum
procumbens root extract) in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and
osteoarthritis). Reumatologia 2000; 38: 67-73.

Grahame R, Robinson BY. Devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens): pharmacological and clinical studies. Ann Rheum Dis
1981; 40: 632.

Altmeyer N et al. Conjonctivite, rhinite et asthme rythmés par
l'exposition professionelle a I'Harpagophytum. Arch Mal Prof Med
Trav Soc 1992; 53: 289-291.

Erdés A et al. Beitrag zur pharmakologie und toxikologie
verschiedener extrakte, sowie des harpagosids aus Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. Planta Med 1978; 34: 97-108.

Unger M, Frank A. Simultaneous determination of the inhibitory
potency of herbal extracts on the activity of six major cytochrome
P450 enzymes using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and
automated online extraction. Rapid Comm Mass Spectrometry 2004;
18: 2273-2281.

Abramowitz M. Toxic reactions to plant products sold in health food
stores. Med Lett Drugs Ther 1979; 21: 29-30.

----- PAGE 226 -----
- Drosera

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for drosera.
Documented animal studies support some of the herbal uses.
Reported immunostimulant and immunosuppressant
activities may warrant further research into the
pharmacological activities of drosera. In view of the lack of
chemical and toxicity data, excessive use of drosera should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Drosera rotundifolia L. (Droserceae)

Synonym(s)

Round-leaved Sundew, Sundew

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Complete German Commission E (Sundew
Martindale 35th edition'**)

)(G9)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Drosera is not included in the GSL.'C*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, myricetin, quercetin and hyperoside.

Quinones Plumbagin,” hydroplumbagin glucoside) and rossoli-
side (7-methyl-hydrojuglone-4-glucoside).

Other constituents Carotenoids, plant acids (e.g. butyric acid,
citric acid, formic acid, gallic acid, malic acid, propionic acid),
resin, tannins (unspecified) and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).
Food Use

Drosera is not used in foods.

Quinones

R fe] fe}

Oy OO

OH O OH O
R

plumbagin H ramentaceone

ramentone OH (7-methyllugione}

Figure 1 Selected constituents of drosera.

Herbal Use

Drosera is stated to pos antispasmodic, demulcent and
expectorant properties. It has been used for bronchitis, asthma,
pertussis, tracheitis, gastric ulceration and specifically for asthma

and chronic bronchitis with peptic ulceration or gastritis.“C* ©”
G64)

S

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried plant 1-2g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 0.5-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'©”

Tincture 0.5-1.0mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Drosera is reported to prevent acetylcholine- or histamine-induced
bronchospasm, and to relax acetylcholine- or barium chloride-
induced spasm of the isolated intestine. Drosera is stated to
possess antitussive properties and has been reported to prevent
coughing induced by excitation of the larynx nerve in the rabbit.
These antispasmodic actions have been attributed to the
naphthoquinone constituents.'@*)

Antimicrobial properties have also been documented for the
naphthoquinones.? In vivo, plumbagin is reported to exert a
broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria, influenza viruses, pathogenic fungi, and
parasitic protozoa. In vitro, a plumbagin solution (1:50000)
was reported to exhibit activity against staphylococci, streptococci
and pneumococci (Gram-positive bacteria), but to lack activity
against Haemophilus pertussis (Gram-negative bacteria). Plum-
bagin administered orally to mice for five days, was found to be
ineffective against Lamblia muris and tuberculosis infection.

Figure 2. Drosera — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 227 -----
Drosera

Microsporum infections in guinea-pigs were treated successfully
by local applications of 0.25—0.5% solutions (in 40% alcohol) or
of 1% emulsions.

An aqueous drosera extract was reported to possess pepsin-like
activity.)

In vitro, drosera extracts and plumbagin, in concentrations of
0.01-1.0 mg/mL, have been documented to exert a cytotoxic or
immunosuppressive effect in human granulocytes and lympho-
cytes.°’ Lower concentrations were reported to exhibit immuno-
stimulating properties. Plumbagin possesses chemotherapeutic
Properties, but is irritant when administered at therapeutic
doses.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of drosera
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for drosera and further investigation of these aspects
is required. Plumbagin is stated to be an irritant principle” and
an LDso (mice, intraperitoneal injection) has been reported to be
15 mg/kg body weight.'C**)

Cytotoxic properties have been documented for drosera and
plumbagin (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal
studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of drosera to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of drosera has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, the use of drosera
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

pectoral N; DemoTussil; Escotussin; Famel; Gouttes contre la
toux "S"; Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives; Makaphyt Sirop;
Nican; Pastilles bronchiques $ nouvelle formule; Pastilles
pectorales Demo N; Sirop pectoral contre la toux S$; Sirop S
contre la toux et la bronchite. Venezuela: Codebromil; Pi-
Fedrin.

References

1 Ayuga C et al. Contribucién al estudio de flavonoides en D.
rotundifolia L. An R Acad Farm 1985; 51: 321-326.

2 Wagner H et al. Immunological investigations of naphthoquinone-
containing plant extracts, isolated quinones and other cytostatic
compounds in cellular immunosystems. Phytochem Soc Eur Symp
1986; 43.

3 Vinkenborg J et al. De aanwezigheid van hydroplumbagin-glucoside in
Drosera rotundifolia. Pharm Weekbl 1969; 104: 45-49.

4 Sampara-Rumantir N. Rossoliside. Pharm Weekbl 1971; 106: 653-664.

5 Oliver-Bever B. Plants in Tropical West Africa. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, 1986: 129.

6 Vichkanova SA et al. Chemotherapeutic properties of plumbagin. In:
Aizenman BE, ed. Fitontsidy Mater Soveshch, 6th 1969. Kiev:
Naukova Dumka, 1972: 183-185.

----- PAGE 228 -----
- Echinacea

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of echinacea is well documented (see
Constituents). The three species are chemically dissimilar.
Echinacea purpurea and E. angustifolia both contain alkamides
as their major lipophilic constituents, but of differing
structural types. By contrast, the lipophilic fraction of E. pallida
is characterised by polyacetylenes and contains only very low
concentrations, if any, of alkamides. The alkene constituents
are stated to be susceptible to auto-oxidation, resulting in the
formation of artefacts during storage.¢”

Commercial echinacea samples and marketed echinacea
products may contain one or more of the three echinacea
species mentioned above. Analysis of commercial samples of
raw echinacea material and marketed echinacea products has
shown that in some cases the echinacea species assigned to
the sample or product was incorrect, and that the
pharmaceutical quality and labelling of some finished
products was inadequate (see Constituents, Quality of plant
material and commercial products). Users and potential users
of echinacea products should be made aware of the possible
differences between products and the implications of this for
efficacy and safety.

Evidence from in vitro and animal studies supports some of
the uses for echinacea, particularly the reputed
immunostimulant properties, although immunostimulant
activity has been disputed following one series of studies (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies,
Immunomodulatory activity). Reported pharmacological
activities have been documented for the polyene and high
molecular weight polysaccharide constituents, as well as the
alkamides and caffeic acid derivatives.

Several, but not all, clinical trials of echinacea preparations
have reported effects superior to those of placebo in the
prevention and treatment of upper respiratory tract infections
(URTIs). However, evidence of efficacy is not definitive as
studies have included different patient groups and tested
various different preparations and dosage regimens of
echinacea. As such, there is insufficient evidence to
recommend any specific echinacea products, or to advise on
optimal dose and treatment duration (see Clinical studies).
Further well-designed clinical trials using well-defined,
standardised preparations are necessary in order to establish
efficacy.

There is a lack of clinical research on the anti-inflammatory
and wound-healing properties of echinacea preparations
documented in vitro and in animal studies. Several other areas
of interest, related to the immunostimulant effects of
echinacea, such as prevention of recurrence of genital herpes
and other infections, and reduction of adverse effects
associated with antineoplastic treatment, also require further
clinical investigation.

Another area that requires further study is whether certain
groups of constituents, such as the polysaccharides, are active
after oral administration and, if so, what is the mechanism of
action since polysaccharides usually would be broken down

into simple inactive sugars. There is a lack of data on the
pharmacokinetics of echinacea preparations, although very
preliminary studies have reported transportation of
isobutylamides across Caco-2 cells, an in vitro model of
intestinal absorption, and detection of alkamides in blood
taken from healthy volunteers who ingested echinacea
preparations (see Clinical studies, Pharmacokinetics).

On the basis of the available (limited) safety data, which
come mostly from short-term clinical trials of echinacea
preparations for the prevention and treatment of URTIs in
otherwise generally healthy individuals, echinacea appears to
be well-tolerated. However, firm conclusions cannot be
drawn from these limited data, and further investigation is
required to establish the safety profile of different echinacea
preparations. At present, the main safety issues are the
possibility of allergic reactions, and concern about the use of
echinacea by patients with progressive systemic diseases,
such as tuberculosis, leukaemia, collagen disorders, multiple
sclerosis and other autoimmune diseases (see Side-effects,
Toxicity and Contra-indications, Warnings). In view of the
lack of toxicity data, excessive use of echinacea should be
avoided. In placebo-controlled trials of echinacea
preparations for the prophylaxis of URTIs, treatment was
taken typically for 8-12 weeks.

As with other herbal medicines, the potential for echinacea
preparations to interact with conventional medicines should
be considered. As E£. purpurea root can inhibit CYP1A2 and
selectively modulate CYP3A, echinacea should be used with
caution in patients receiving therapeutic agents with a narrow
therapeutic range and which are substrates for these CYP
enzymes.

Species (Family)

*Echinacea angustifolia DC. (Asteraceae/Compositae)
tEchinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt.

$Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench

Synonym(s)

Black Sampson, Coneflower

*E. angustifolia var. strigosa

tRudbeckia pallida Nutt., Brauneria pallida (Nutt.) Britton, E.
angustifolia Hook. f.

$Rudbeckia purpurea L., sp., R. serotina (Nutt.) Sweet, R. hispida
Hoffm., E. intermedia Lindl., E. purpurea (L.) Moench var.
arkansana Stey., E. purpurea var. purpurea f. liggettii

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root. E. purpurea herb (aerial parts) is also used

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHP (E. purpurea root)‘

BHC 1992'°®
BHMA 20030
BHP 1996'@”)

----- PAGE 229 -----
Echinacea

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E 19980?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Expanded German Commission E 2000'°*)
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24'68°

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL(@?)

Constituents

Alkamides At least 20, mainly isobutylamides of straight-chain
fatty acids with olefinic and/or acetylenic bonds, e.g. isomeric
dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic isobutylamide, present in
the roots and aerial parts of Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea
purpurea, but mainly absent from Echinacea pallida. Isobutyl-
amides from the roots of E. purpurea contain mainly 2,4-dienoic
units whilst those of E. angustifolia contain mainly 2-monoene
units.” The synthesis of the acetylenic amide N-(2-methylpro-
pyl)-2E-undecene-8,10-diynamide, a constituent of E. angustifolia
root, has been reported.” E. purpurea root reportedly contains
0.01-0.04% alkamides.'(°”

Phenylpropanoids Caffeic acid glycosides (e.g. echinacoside,®
verbascoside, caffeoylechinacoside), caffeic acid esters of quinic
acid (e.g. chlorogenic acid = 5-caffeoylquinic acid, isochlorogenic
acid = 3,4- and 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, cynarin = 1,3-
dicaffeoylquinic acid) and of tartaric acid (e.g. caftaric acid =
2-caffeoyltartaric acid, cichoric acid = 2,3-dicaffeoyltartaric
acid). Varying mixtures of caffeic acid derivatives are present
in the three species, with echinacoside being the major component
of the roots of E. angustifolia and E. pallida (0.5-1.0%),‘@”
and cichoric acid being a major component of E. purpurea roots
(0.14-2.05%)," and aerial parts (1.2-3.1%)."° Cynarin is
reportedly present in E. angustifolia root,” but not in the roots
of the other two species.

Polysaccharides Polysaccharides PS1 (a methylglucuronoarabi-
noxylan, mol. wt 35kDa),"'?) PS2 (an acidic rhamnoarabino-
galactan, mol. wt 450kDa) and a xyloglucan (mol. wt 79kDa)
have been isolated from E. purpurea herb. '*°) Polysacchar-
ides and glycoproteins are present in E. purpurea herb and E.
pallida root.” The pressed juice from the aerial parts of E.
purpurea (and the herbal medicinal product Echinacin prepared
from the juice) contain heterogeneous polysaccharides (mol. wt
<10kDa), inulin-type fractions (mol. wt 6kDa) and an acidic
highly branched arabinogalactan polysaccharide (mol. wt
70kDa)."') The pressed juice of E. purpurea aerial parts has
yielded an arabinogalactan-protein (AGP) comprising 83%
polysaccharide (galactose—arabinose 1.8: 1), uronic acids (4-5%)
and protein (7%) with high concentrations of serine, alanine and
hydroxyproline." The AGP (mol. wt 1.2 x 10°Da) has a highly
branched polysaccharide core of 3-, 6-, and 3,6-linked galactose
residues with terminal arabinose and glucuronic acid units."

Volatile oils E. pallida root (0.2-2.0%)'° mainly contains
polyenes and polyacetylenes including pentadeca-1,8Z-diene and a
range of ketoalkenes and ketoalkenynes (ketopolyacetylenes),
principally pentadeca-8Z-ene-2-one, pentadeca-8Z,11Z-diene-2-
one, pentadeca-8Z,13Z-diene-11-yne-2-one, _ tetradeca-8Z-ene-

(G52) These alkenes are unstable

11,13-diyne-2-one and others.
and readily oxidise to 8-hydroxy derivatives.©”) The alkenes of E.
pallida and E. purpurea root are distinctly different from those of
E. angustifolia which are mainly alkylketones. The volatile oil
from the aerial parts of the three species contains borneol, bornyl

acetate, germacrene D, caryophyllene and other components.°”
G52)

Other constituents A series of other constituents has been
reported including the saturated pyrrolizidine-type alkaloids
tussilagine and isotussilagine (0.006%) from E. angustifolia and
E. purpurea."® Flavonoids, including quercetin, kaempferol,
isorhamnetin and their glycosides” and also anthocyanins,
are present in the aerial parts of E. purpurea (0.48%).?) The
major flavonoid of the aerial parts of E. angustifolia has been
identified as patuletin-3-rutinoside,''”) and not rutin as previously
reported. Free phenolic acids, including p-coumaric, p-hydro-
xybenzoic and protocatechuic acids, have been isolated from the
aerial parts of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea.?" Other
miscellaneous compounds reported include betaine, fatty acids,
simple sugars, sterols and vanillin. The presence of 'melanin' in
material from cultured E. angustifolia plants has been
reported.°” Phytomelanin deposits are stated to be present in
the roots of E. pallida and E. angustifolia, but absent from E.
purpurea roots.(07>)

Quality of plant material and commercial products

Alkamide concentrations vary between species and between
different parts of the plant.??) Commercial root samples of E.
purpurea have been shown to vary in their alkamide content (0.12—
1.2%).") In Germany, 25 commercial echinacea preparations
were assayed for their alkamide (dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetra-
enoic acid isobutylamide) and cichoric acid contents.?” Some
products were highly concentrated, whereas others had no
detectable concentrations of alkamide or cichoric acid. Large
differences were observed between comparable products from
different manufacturers.

Several commercial echinacea products have performed poorly
in examinations of their quality. Of 25 commercial echinacea
products purchased in the USA only 14 (56%) passed assessments
for their quality.?> Six were inadequately labelled, three of them
not stating the species used, one not stating the plant part and two
liquid preparations had no concentrations given for their
echinacea content. The remaining 19 products were assessed for
their stated content of particular species and for claimed
concentrations of phenols. Twelve of these products were labelled
as containing only E. purpurea and two of them failed, as one
contained only 54% of the expected concentration of phenols and
the other had three times the accepted concentration of microbes
as set out in World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. Two
products were allegedly prepared from E. angustifolia and both
failed, one having only one-third of the stated phenolic content
and the other having no detectable echinacoside. Five further
products allegedly containing a mixture of species were also
as:
detected. Analysis of 59 commercial products available in the
US revealed that 10% had no measurable echinacea content, 48%
were not consistent with their labels in respect of the species
present, and of 21 standardised preparations, 57% did not meet
the standards stated on their labels; often products did not contain
the species stated.

A fresh plant product of echinacea herb has been shown to
possess three times the amount of alkamide than a product

ed and one failed because echinacoside could not be

----- PAGE 230 -----
prepared from dried plants and tl
drying.°” The alkamide and
commercial preparations of E.
been shown to
respectively) 2° Ten commercial!

be variable

his has been attributed to loss on
cichoric acid contents of six
purpurea expressed juice have
(0.1-1.8mg/mL and 0.0-0.4%,

preparations of echinacea were

analysed for their betaine content and concentrations ranged from
0.04-0.64%

The concentrations of some constituents may be affected during
growing, drying or storage of the plant material. The yields of
some constituents are affected when plants are grown under
conditions of drought stress.°” Analysis of roots of E. angustifolia
dried at a range of temperatures between 23°C and 60°C indicated
that there were no significant changes in the alkamide content,
whereas 25% and 45% of the echinacoside content was lost at
30°C and 60°C, respectively?" By contrast, roots of E. purpurea
at —18°C in deep-freeze for 64 weeks were found to have lost 40%
of their alkamide content.°” An aqueous-alcoholic extract of E.

purpurea and its dried extract were stored at different tempera-
tures for seven months and then assayed for their alkamide and
phenylpropanoid content.°*) The amount of the major alkamide
(dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid isobutylamide) in the
liquid preparation was not significantly affected by storage at

Phenylpropanoids

HO
° OH
HO. fe}
\ Nad \ OH
©  €00H
cichoric acid (2,3-dicaffeoyltartaric acid)
(cafartic acid = 2-caffeoyltartaric acid)
oR*
3
Hooc OR
R! IR
Rt Re Re Rt
chlorogenic acid H H H caffeoyl
(5-caffeoylquinic acid)
isochlorogenic acid H caffeoyl caffeoyl H
(3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid)
isochlorogenic acid H caffeoyl H caffeoyl
(3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid)
cynarin caffeoyl caffeoyl H H
o R'OH2C
Hi
0. N o
2,
RO OH
HO’
HO’
1H
R' R?

echinacoside glucose (16) rhamnosyl (13)

rhamnosyl (1-3)

verbascoside H
caffeoyl- 6-caffeoylglucosyl (1> 6) —rhamnosyl (1>3)
echinacoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of echinacea.

Echinacea

25°C and 40°C, whereas the cichoric acid content declined.
However, the reverse occurred for the dried extract when there was
a significant loss of alkamide at storage temperatures of 25°C and
40°C but no significant loss of cichoric acid content.

The effects of drying temperatures on the constituents of all
three echinacea species have been investigated.°” The results
showed that there was an increase in cichoric acid for E. purpurea
and E. pallida. Furthermore, increased moisture content resulted
in higher concentrations of echinacoside for E. angustifolia and E.
pallida and of chlorogenic acid in E. angustifolia. The poly-
saccharide contents were significantly decreased by raised
moisture levels in the roots of E. angustifolia and E. pallida.

The presence of colchicine in commercial echinacea products in
the USA has been reported,” although subsequent analysis of 17
commercial echinacea products purchased in pharmacies in
Chicago, USA, did not detect colchicine in any of the samples.°”

Detailed descriptions of E. purpurea root for use in botanical,
microscopic and macroscopic identification have been published,
along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the assess-
ment of E. purpurea root raw material.”

Herbal Use

Echinacea has a long history of medicinal use for a wide variety of
conditions, mainly infections, such as syphilis and septic wounds,
but also as an 'anti-toxin' for snakebites and blood poisoning.°*
©) ‘Traditionally, echinacea was known as an ‘anti-infective'
agent, and was indicated in bacterial and viral infections, mild
septicaemia, furunculosis (persistent recurring episodes of painful
nodules in the skin) and other skin conditions, including boils,
carbuncles and abscesses.“©% 97°) Other traditional uses
listed include naso-pharangeal catarrh, pyorrhoea (periodontitis)
and tonsillitis, and as supportive treatment for influenza-like
infections and recurrent infections of the respiratory tract and
lower urinary tract and, externally, for poorly healing superficial
wounds.'°%

Current interest in the medicinal use of echinacea is focused on
its immunostimulant (increasingly described as immunomodula-
tory) effects, particularly in the treatment and prevention of the
common cold, influenza and other upper respiratory tract
infections (see Pharmacological Actions; Clinical studies).

Dosage

In standard herbal reference texts

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts'C®°”
indications; examples are given below.

are the same for several

E. angustifolia root and/or E. pallida root For various
indications, including chronic viral and bacterial infections, skin
complaints, prophylaxis of colds and influenza, mild septicaemia,

furunculosis, naso-pharyngeal catarrh, pyorrhoea and tonsillitis.

Dried root/rhizome 1¢ by infusion or decoction three times
daily.'CS”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily,°® or 0.25-1.0mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.(6?

Tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily, or 1-
2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

----- PAGE 231 -----
Echinacea

In more recent texts

Dosages for oral administration (adults) described in more recent
texts are provided for more specific indications.

As adjuvant therapy and for prophylaxis of recurrent infections
of the upper respiratory tract (common colds); treatment should
not exceed eight weeks’ duration.'(C°)

E. pallida root Hydroethanolic extract corresponding to 900 mg
crude drug daily,"©* e.g, tincture (1:5 in 50% ethanol by volume)
from dry extract (7-11: 1 in 50% ethanol).‘©?

E. purpurea herb 6-9 mL expressed juice dailyC# 9)
E. purpurea root 3 x 60 drops of tincture (1:5 in 55% ethanol),
equivalent to 3 x 300mg crude drug daily.'(°

E. angustifolia root 1-3 g daily

Echinacea preparations (i.e. containing different echinacea
species and plant parts) and, therefore, dosage regimens tested
in clinical trials have varied widely (see Pharmacological Actions,
Clinical studies). Trials of echinacea preparations for the
prevention of upper respiratory tract infections have typically
involved an 8- or 12-week duration of treatment; trials of
echinacea preparations for the treatment of upper respiratory
tract infections typically involve administration of the study
medication for 6-10 days.

Alkamides

peer e

dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,102Z-tetraenoic acid isobutylamide

H
FA
Ew S A
°

undeca-2E-enoic-8,10-diyne acid isobutylamide

Polyenes

CH3
pentadeca-1,8Z-diene
fe)
HgC S CH;
pentadeca-8Z-ene-2-one
fe)
HgC SS CHs

ZA
pentadeca-8Z,11Z-diene-2-one

Figure 2 Selected constituents of echinacea.

Pharmacological Actions

There ie pharmacological
activities of Echinacea species based on in vitro and in vivo
(animal) studies. Research has focused on investigating the
immunomodulatory activity of echinacea preparations, although
other activities, such as antiviral, antifungal, anti-inflammatory
and antioxidant properties have also been explored. Effects on the
immune system may play a role in some of these other activities.

The pharmacological activities of echinacea preparations
cannot be attributed to a single constituent or group of
constituents. Rather, groups of constituents — the
alkamides, caffeic acid derivatives, polysaccharides and alkenes
— appear to contribute to activity.

However, it has been reported that following oral administra-
tion in man, alkamides are bioavailable, whereas caffeic acid
derivatives are not and, therefore, cannot contribute to activity
(see Clinical studies, Pharmacokinetics).°”

is a vast scientific literature on tl

several

In vitro and animal studies

Immunomodulatory activity Currently, there is a view that
immunomodulatory, rather than immunostimulatory, is the most
appropriate term to describe the immunological effects of
echinacea,” although 'immunostimulatory' is still used and is
ubiquitous in the earlier scientific literature on echinacea. It has

H3C S

pentadeca-8Z,13Z-diene-11-yne-2-one

fe)

HC SS

S
S

pentadeca-8Z-ene-11,13-diyne-2-one CH

----- PAGE 232 -----
been suggested that broad stimulation of the various highly
complex components of the immune sys
beneficial, since some immune responses are harmful.

The immunological effects of a wide range of echinacea
preparations comprising different species, plant parts and types
of extract, have been investigated extensively in vitro and in vivo.
Collectively, the data indicate that echinacea preparations do have
(9.4) although at
present there is no clear picture as to which specific preparations
have the greatest activity. A summary of some of the scientific
literature on the immunological effects of echinacea is given below.

Enhancement of macrophage function has been documented for
various preparations of echinacea in vitro and in vivo in studies
using a range of methods, such as the carbon clearance test and
measurement of cytokine production, as indicators of macrophage
activity?) In vitro experiments with human macrophages
found that fresh pressed juice and dried juice from the aerial parts
of E. purpurea stimulated production of cytokines, including
interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-10, and tumour necrosis factor o%
(TNFa).

Other studies have reported that purified polysaccharides from
E. purpurea induced macrophage production of IL-1,“ and that
a polysaccharide arabinogalactan isolated from plant cell cultures
of E. purpurea induced TNFo and interferon B2 production by
murine macrophages.” Polysaccharides obtained from plant cell
cultures of E. purpurea have also been shown previously to have
immunological activity in vitro.“®) In another series of in vitro
experiments, E. purpurea induced macrophage activation (as
assessed by TNFa production) following simulated digestion
(incubation of echinacea with gastric fluid) in an attempt to mimic
effects following oral administration.“?) Other work has demon-
strated that E. purpurea dry root powder (containing 1.5% total
polyphenols, calculated as chlorogenic acid) increased the
resistance of splenic lymphocytes to apoptosis; splenic lympho-
cytes were obtained from mice administered the echinacea
preparation orally at dosages of 30 or 100mg/kg daily for 14
days.

In an in vitro study, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from healthy individuals and from patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome and acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) incubated with increasing concentrations of extracts of E.
purpurea led to enhanced natural killer function of PBMCs.°? In
vivo, oral administration of E. purpurea root extract has been
reported to increase numbers of natural killer cells in normal,”
3) and ageing mice.°”

A subsequent in vivo study, conducted using a rigorous
randomised, double-blind design, assessed the effects of an
echinacea product (Nature's Resource, CVS Pharmacy, USA;
capsules containing echinacea aerial parts 1.05 g and cichoric acid
10.5 mg) in 16 ageing male rats.°° Animals received echinacea
(species and method of preparation were not stated although, as
aerial parts were used, the species may have been E. purpurea)
50 mg/kg body weight (equivalent to cichoric acid 0.5 mg/kg), or
placebo, orally as a bolus dose in peanut butter each morning for
eight weeks. Mean circulating total white cell counts were
significantly higher in echinacea-treated rats than in the control
group for the first two weeks (p < 0.05), although baseline counts
for the two groups and a precise p value or confidence intervals
were not given in a report of the study, and concentrations of IL-2
were significantly higher in echinacea-treated rats, compared with
the control group, for the last five weeks of the study (p < 0.05).
Differential white cell counts were significantly altered throughout
the 8-week study period in the echinacea group, compared with

effects on certain indices of immune function,

leukaemic,

Echinacea

the control group: proportions of lymphocytes and monocytes
increased while those of neutrophils and eosinophils decreased
with echinacea, compared with placebo. There were no changes
in the phagocytic activity of circulating leukocytes, as assessed by
ability to ingest latex particles, in either group during the study.

Other in vivo studies (rats) have shown that administration of
water-—ethanol extracts (100 tL twice daily by oral gavage for four
days) of E. purpurea roots and aerial parts containing defined
concentrations of cichoric acid, polysaccharides and alkamides
stimulated phagocytic activity of macrophages; activity was
increased with increasing concentrations of the three compo-
nents.°% Subsequently, an increase in lipopolysaccharide-stimu-
lated nitric oxide release was observed by macrophages obtained
from the spleens of rats previously treated with the echinacea
extracts. A similar set of experiments demonstrated stimulation of
alveolar macrophage function by alkamides administered to
healthy rats.”

A proprietary preparation containing E. purpurea root extract
and liquorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) root extract stimulated
phagocytosis in vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated by the carbon
clearance test, following oral administration to mice.°* The
combination product produced a greater immunostimulatory
effect in this test than did either extract tested alone. Another
combination preparation, comprising aqueous-ethanol extracts of
E. purpurea and E. pallida root, Baptisia tinctoria root and Thuja
occidentalis herb, administered orally via the diet or drinking
water to mice for seven days enhanced the antibody response to
sheep red blood cells.”

In contrast with the extensive body of research supporting the
immunostimulatory effects of echinacea preparations, some recent
work has reported a lack of effect. No evidence of natural killer
cell activity or antibody formation was found in studies involving
rats fed various preparations of echinacea, including an alcoholic
extract of E. purpurea root and an alcoholic extract of the roots of
E. angustifolia, E. purpurea and E. pallida, in their diet.‘

A concentration-dependent and cell-type specific de novo
synthesis of TNF-% mRNA in primary human CD14+ mono-
cytes/macrophages in vitro has been described for an E. purpurea
extract (Echinaforce, Bioforce).! The alkamide constituents
appeared to be responsible for this effect, at least in part,
mediated via the cyclic AMP and other pathways and involving
activation of NF-«B. Further experiments using these cells and an
anti-cannabinnoid-2 (CB2) polyclonal antibody and the CB2
antagonist SR-144528 resulted in inhibition of the induction of
TNF-x mRNA.

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity has been described for
various different preparations of echinacea following in vitro
studie
ments involving addition of glycoprotein-containing fractions
obtained from E. purpurea root to mouse spleen cell cultures.”
Interferon-% and -B produced by the cells were then tested for
activity against vesicular stomatitis virus. These glycoprotein-
containing fractions were also tested directly against herpes
simplex virus (HSV) and were reported to reduce the number of
plaques by up to 80%, although raw data were lacking and
statistical tests do not appear to have been carried out.

In other in vitro studies, the antiviral activity of an aqueous
solution of E. purpurea herb was tested against aciclovir-
susceptible and aciclovir-resistant strains of HSV-1 and HSV-
2.9) In aciclovir-susceptible strains of HSV-1 and HSV-2, median
EDso (effective dose) values for the echinacea preparation were
1: 100 (range 1:25 to 1:400) and 1:200 (range 1:50 to 1: 1600),

An ‘indirect’ antiviral effect was documented in experi-

----- PAGE 233 -----
Echinacea

respectively. Similarly, for aciclovir-resistant HSV-1 and HSV-2,
median EDso values (range) were 1:100 (1:50 to 1:400) and
1:200 (1:50 to 1: 3200), respectively.

An n-hexane extract of E. purpurea root, an ethanolic extract of
E. pallida var. sanguinea herb and the isolated constituent cichoric
acid were the most potent inhibitors of HSV-1 in in vitro studies
designed to assess light-activated antiviral activity“? The
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) for these preparations
were 0.12, 0.026 and 0.045 mg/mL, respectively.

Other in vitro studies using mouse fibroblasts found that
preincubation with E. purpurea herb juice and methanolic and
aqueous extracts of E. purpurea root resulted in resistance to
influenza A2, herpes, and vesicular stomatitis virus infection for
24 hours.”

Antifungal and antibacterial activities Activity against several
yeast strains, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida
albicans, has been described for n-hexane extracts of E. purpurea
roots. Antifungal activity was observed under near ultraviolet
light irradiation and, in some cases, was also light independent.
The pure polyacetylenic compound trideca-1-ene-3,5,7,9,10-pen-
tayne, isolated from E. purpurea root extracts, demonstrated
marked light-mediated inhibition of growth of S. cerevisiae.
Anti-Candida activity for E. purpurea extracts has also been
described previously.“

In contrast, n-hexane extracts of the fresh roots of E. pallida
var. pallida and E. pallida var. angustifolia (identified according to
a revised taxonomy” showed no measurable inhibition of C.
albicans, but an amphotericin-B-resistant strain (D10) of C.
albicans and Tricophyton mentagrophytes were susceptible to E.
pallida var. pallida root extract in the presence of UV light.‘

Studies in mice have described a dose-dependent protective
effect for polysaccharide fractions from E. purpurea plant cell
cultures against lethal-dose infection with C. albicans and Listeria
monocytogenes when administered intravenously within less than
18 hours of the infection dose. A similar finding was reported
when such polysaccharide fractions were administered to
immunosuppressed mice both before and after lethal dose
infection with C. albicans and L. monocytogenes.”

Antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus has been
demonstrated for a multi-herbal preparation containing E.
purpurea root extract, although it was stated that the observed
antibacterial effects were most likely attributable to one of the
other ingredients, extract of onion.”

Anti-inflammatory activity In vivo anti-inflammatory activity
has been reported for a polysaccharide fraction (PSF) obtained
from E. angustifolia roots in the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test and in the croton oil mouse ear test, with the PSF
administered intravenously and_ topically, respectively.” The
isolated PSF was twice as active as the total aqueous extract in
the carrageenan-induced oedema test, and about half as active as
indometacin in the croton oil test. An aqueous extract of E.
angustifolia roots was also reported to be more effective than
benzydamine (a topical non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID)) in the croton oil test.” Further work using fractions
of an aqueous extract of E. angustifolia roots administered
topically to mice in the croton oil test attributed the observed
anti-inflammatory activity mainly to intermediate and high
molecular weight fractions.”

Oral administration of higher (100mg/kg) but not lower
(30 mg/kg) doses of E. purpurea dry root powder (containing
1.5% total polyphenols, calculated as chlorogenic acid) inhibited

carrageenan-induced paw oedema in mice; the effect was stated to
be similar to that of indometacin 0.25 mg/kg, although this was
not tested statistically.” Further exploration suggested that the
observed effect may be due to downregulation of cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2) expression by the echinacea preparation. In vitro
inhibition of cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and, to a lesser extent,
COX-2 has been described for alkamides isolated from E.
purpurea roots,”® and in vitro inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase (5-
LO) and cyclooxygenase (from sheep seminal microsomes) has

been reported for polyunsaturated alkamides from E. angustifolia
(77)

roots.

Inhibition of 5-LO has also been described for extracts of roots
of E. purpurea, E. pallida var. pallida and E. pallida var.
angustifolia (identified according to a revised taxonomy).'”
ICs values (tg root/mL assay volume) were 0.642, 1.08 and 0.444,
respectively, and corresponding alkamide concentrations in the
root of each species were 0.05%, trace, and 0.2%, respectively.)

Anti-inflammatory and cicatrising activities have been reported
for gel preparations containing echinacoside 0.4 mg and E. pallida

root extract 100 mg following studies in rats with experimental
78)

skin abrasions and excision wounds.'® These effects were
observed 48 and 72 hours after topical administration, and were
stated to be greater than those observed for E. purpurea root
extract and control. However, no statistical analysis was reported.

The wound-healing properties documented for echinacea have
been attributed in part to a polysaccharide fraction, which is
thought to inhibit the action of hyaluronidase.” Ethanol extracts
of E. purpurea roots and aerial parts have been reported to inhibit
fibroblast-induced collagen contraction, although the significance
of this activity for wound healing needs to be investigated.”
Other studies have documented a protective effect for echinaco-
side, isolated from E. angustifolia root, and other caffeoyl esters
against free radical-induced degradation of collagen, an experi-
mental model for skin damage caused by exposure to ultraviolet
light.@”

Other activities A long-chain alkene from E. angustifolia is
stated to po antitumour activity in vivo, inhibiting the
growth of Walker tumours in rats and lymphocytic leukaemia
(P388) in mice.°”

In an assay of the mosquitocidal activity of alkamides isolated
from dried E. purpurea roots, a mixture of dodeca-2E,4E,8Z, 10E-
tetraenoic acid isobutylamide and dodeca-2E,4Z,8Z,10Z-tetra-
enoic acid isobutylamide at a concentration of 100 ttg/mL achieved
87.5% mortality of Aedes aegyptii L. mosquito larvae within 15
minutes. Several other alkamides assayed also demonstrated

mosquitocidal activity, but required longer incubation periods
(76)

and were less effective.

Free radical-scavenging activity has been documented for
alcoholic extracts of the roots and leaves of E. purpurea, E.
angustifolia and E. pallida in vitro.

Dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic isobutylamides found in
Echinacea species (but isolated in this experiment from Echinacea
atrorubens root) were transported across Caco-2 monolayers, an
in vitro model for intestinal absorption, over a 6-hour period.)
Transport kinetics did not differ significantly following modi
tion of the model (by preincubation of Caco-2 cells with
lipopolysaccharide and phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate) to mimic
inflammation.

A similar study explored the transport of 12 alkamides and 5
caffeic acid conjugates from a proprietary preparation of
echinacea (Echinacea Premium Liquid; MediHerb, Australia),
which contains a 60% ethanol/water extract of E. angustifolia

a-

----- PAGE 234 -----
root (200 mg/mL) and E. purpurea root (300 mg/mL). Almost
all of the caffeic acid conjugates permeated poorly through the
Caco-2 monolayers: their uptake was no better than that of
control (mannitol, which is poorly absorbed); only cinnamic acid
diffused readily (apparent permeability coefficient, P,,,, = 1 x
10° * cm/second). By contrast, both 2,4-diene and 2-ene alkamides
readily diffused through the monolayers, although P,,) values
varied (range: 3 x 10° to 3 x 10°*cm/second), depending on
structure. Saturated compounds and those with N-terminal
methylation had lower permeability coefficients. These findings
suggest that alkamides, but not caffeic acid conjugates, are likely

to cross the intestinal barrier and thus be bioavailable following
(84)

oral administration.

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the clinical
pharmacokinetics of echinacea preparations (see also Pharmaco-
logical Actions, In vitro and animal studies, Other activities). One
study reported that dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid iso-
butylamide (alkamide) was detectable in blood one hour after oral
administration of 65 mL of a concentrated ethanolic extract of E.
purpurea herb (containing 4.3 mg isobutylamides) on an empty
stomach to a single healthy volunteer.**

In a study involving nine healthy volunteers who ingested four
Echinacea Premium tablets (MediHerb, Australia; each tablet
contains E. angustifolia root extract 150mg, containing 2.0 mg
alkamides, and E. purpurea root extract 112.5 mg, containing
2.1mg alkamides) after a high-fat breakfast, alkamides were
detected in plasma obtained from blood samples taken 20 minutes
after ingestion and some alkamides were detectable for 12 hours
post echinacea ingestion. The mean (standard error of mean)
maximum plasma concentration (Cyax) for total alkamides was
336 (131), time to Cyyax Was 2.3 (0.5) hours and the area under the
plasma concentration time curve (AUC,) was 714 (181) pg
equivalent/h/L. Most alkamides found in echinacea were detected
in plasma. In contrast, caffeic acid conjugates could not be
detected and therefore were reported not to be bioavailable.®”

In a randomised, open, crossover study, in which 11 healthy
volunteers received a single oral dose of 2.5 mL of a 60% ethanolic
extract of E. angustifolia roots (containing 2.0 mg tetraene per
2.5mL) in the morning following an overnight fast, C,,,, for
tetraene (a polyene) was reported to be around 11 ng/mL.”

Therapeutic effects Clinical trials of preparations containing
echinacea have focused on testing effects in preventing and
treating the common cold and other upper respiratory tract
infections (URTIs); some preliminary studies have explored the
effects of echinacea in other infections, such as genital herpes, and
as an adjunctive treatment in cancer chemotherapy. The rationale
for the use of echinacea in these conditions is for its
immunomodulatory activity. Collectively, the findings of studies
of echinacea are difficult to interpret as studies have assessed
preparations containing different species of echinacea and/or
different plant parts of echinacea, administered as monoprepara-
tions or in combination with other herbal ingredients, and
products manufactured by different processes and with different
dosage forms. Hence, the different preparations tested will vary
quantitatively and qualitatively in their chemical composition (i.e.
will contain different profiles and concentrations of chemica
constituents).

Immunomodulatory activity One of the first systematic reviews
of studies of echinacea-containing preparations ass

Echinacea

evidence of their immunomodulatory effects.** The review
included 26 controlled clinical trials, of which six investigated
the treatment of URTIs and influenza-like syndromes, seven
explored the treatment of other infections, such as sinusitis,
bronchitis and candida, six studied the prophylaxis of URTIs
and influenza-like syndromes, four tested the reduction by
echinacea of adverse effects of antineoplastic treatment and
three explored the effects on immunological parameters in
patients with infections or malignancies.”

Most studies reported that echinacea-containing prepara-
tions were superior to placebo in the indications tested.
However, trials included in the review tested different species,
parts and preparations (e.g. pressed juice, extract) of echinacea
administered via different routes (including oral and parent-
eral) and with different dosage regimens. In addition, many
studies were of poor methodological quality (only eight
achieved more than 50% of the maximum
a ment of quality), several preparations tested included
other herbs in addition to echinacea, and the review included

core in an

trials involving patients with a range of conditions, so evidence
for the immunomodulatory activity of echinacea from this
review can only be considered tentative at best.

The same research group carried out another systematic
review of five of their randomised, placebo-controlled studies
(four were also conducted double-blind) which investigated the
immunomodulatory activity of preparations of echinacea in
healthy volunteers. Again, there were marked differences
between the preparations tested in the studies included in the
review: combination homeopathic preparations containing E.
angustifolia at potencies of D1 and D4 (which can be
considered to contain reasonable quantities of starting
material) for intravenous administration; ethanolic extracts
of E. purpurea root and E. pallida root for oral administration;
ethanolic extract of 95% E. purpurea herb and 5% E. purpurea
root. In two of the five studies, phagocytic activity of
polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes (the primary out-
come measure) was significantly increased in the echinacea

groups, compared with the placebo groups, although no such
89)

effects were noted in the other studies."
Recent studies investigating the immunomodulatory activity
of echinacea species administered to healthy volunteers have
reported different findings. In a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, compared with a placebo group,
volunteers who received extracts of E. purpurea and E.
angustifolia with or without the addition of an arabinoga-
lactan extracted from Larix occidentalis (larch) for four weeks
were found to have increased concentrations of complement
properdin (thought to be an indication of immune system
stimulation).°° Other small placebo-controlled studies have
reported stimulatory effects following 28 days' oral pretreat-
ment with pressed juice of E. purpurea on the exercise-induced
immune response in athletes,°") and of administration of
purified polysaccharides from cell cultures of E. purpurea to
healthy volunteers.°” By contrast, a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover study involving 40 healthy volunteers
found that oral administration of freshly expressed juice of E.
purpurea herb, or placebo, for two weeks did not enhance
phagocytic activity of polymorphonuclear leukocytes or
monocytes, or affect TNFa and IL-1 production.)
Preliminary studies have assessed the effects of a combina-
tion preparation containing extracts of E. angustifolia,
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset) and Thuja occidentalis
(thuja) on cytokine production in patients who have undergone

----- PAGE 235 -----
Echinacea

curative surgery for various solid malignant tumours,” and
the immunostimulatory effects of a regimen comprising
intramuscular E. purpurea extract, low-dose intramuscular
cyclophosphamide and intravenous thymostimulin in patients
5) Tn another study, the
effects of a polysaccharide fraction of E. purpurea herb
obtained from cell cultures in reducing the adverse effects of
cancer chemotherapy were explored in patients with
advanced gastric cancer receiving palliative therapy with
etoposide, leucovorin and 5-fluorouracil.°° Although these
studies reported some positive findings with echinacea, no
firm conclusions can be drawn because of the nature of the
study designs, therefore further research in this area is
required.

with advanced colorectal cancer.

Upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) Numerous studies

have explored the effects

of echinacea preparations in
preventing or treating the common cold and other URTIs.
Overall, several, but not all, studies have reported beneficial
effects for certain echinacea preparations, compared with
placebo, for the prevention and treatment of URTIs. However,
for the reasons given (see Pharmacological Actions, Therapeu-
tic effects), current consensus is that there is insufficient
evidence to recommend any specific echinacea preparations, or
to advise on optimal dose and treatment duration.

Prophylaxis A Cochrane systematic review included 16
randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials —
involving a total of almost 3400 participants — of extracts
of echinacea for preventing (7 = 8) or treating (1 = 8)
URTIs."”) The eight 'prevention' trials comprised five which
were placebo-controlled (2 = 1272 participants), and which
largely were considered to be of adequate methodological
quality, and three (7 = 1139 participants) in which the
control group received no treatment. The five placebo-
controlled trials tested combination echinacea preparations
(1 = 2) or monopreparations of E. purpurea herb or root, or
E. angustifolia root (n = 3), administered orally typically for
8-12 weeks. Two of these studies reported a statistically
significant reduction in the incidence of URTIs in echinacea
recipients, compared with placebo recipients (odds ratios,
95% confidence interval (CI): 0.45, 0.22-0.92 and 0.27,
0.11-0.66). One of these studies also found that in
participants who did acquire infections, the duration was
significantly shorter in those who had received echinacea
compared with placebo recipients, although two other
studies reported no difference in this outcome.

The three other 'prevention' trials all involved children
and compared a combination preparation containing
extracts of E. angustifolia and E. pallida root, Baptisia
tinctoria root and Thuja occidentalis herb, as well as several
homeopathic dilutions, with no treatment. All three studies
reported that the frequency of infection was significantly
lower in the treatment compared with no treatment group
(pooled odds ratio 0.36; 95% CI 0.28-0.46), although the
methodological quality of all three studies was considered
inadequate.°”

An updated Cochrane review used more restrictive
inclusion criteria for trials (e.g. randomised controlled
trials only, trials assessing multi-herb products excluded),

such that the revised review included only five trials that
(98)

had been included in the earlier review, and 11 new trials.
Two of the 16 included trials involving children, and the
others, adults; 15 trials used a placebo control design, one

compared an echinacea preparation with another herbal
product and no treatment, three trials involved two
echinacea arms, and one involved comparisons with both
placebo and no treatment, thus the total number of
comparisons in the review was 22.

In contrast with the earlier review, only three compar-
isons (from two trials?!) investigated echinacea pre-
parations for the prevention of colds, and none of these
found statistically significant differences between the
echinacea and placebo groups with respect to proportion
of participants experiencing one or more colds.°® Details

(99, 100)

of the two prevention trials included in the review,
well as those of several excluded trials, are given below.
These trials did not show beneficial effects for echinacea
preparations, compared with placebo, on main outcome
measures,(101 10)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involved 302 healthy volunteers recruited from military
institutions and an industrial plant who received an
ethanolic extract of E. purpurea root or E. angustifolia
root (drug: extract ratio, 1: 11 in 30% alcohol), or placebo,
50 drops twice daily on five days per week (Monday to
Friday) for 12 weeks.” In an intention-to-treat analysis (1
= 289), the proportion of participants who experienced at
least one URTI was 32% (95% CI: 23-41%) for E.
angustifolia recipients, 29% (95% CI: 20-38%) for E.
purpurea recipients, and 37% (95% CI: 27-47%) for
placebo recipients; these differences were not statistically
significant (p = 0.55). Similarly, there were no statistically
significant differences between groups in time to occurrence
of the first URTI (p = 0.49), or in the duration of infections
(p = 0.29), although it is possible that the study was not
large enough to detect differences. However, a greater
proportion of echinacea recipients believed they had
benefited from the study medication than did placebo
recipients (78%, 70% and 56% for E. angustifolia, E.
purpurea and placebo, respectively; p = 0.04).

In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, involving 109 individuals who had experienced more
than three colds or respiratory infections in the previous
year, a fluid extract of E. purpurea prepared from the aerial
parts of fresh flowering plants, administered at a dose of
4mL twice daily for eight weeks, had no statistically
significant effect compared with placebo on the incidence of
colds and URTIs (rate ratio for number of participants in
each group with at least one cold or URTI = 0.88, 95% CI:
0.60-1.22)."° Likewise, there was no statistically signifi-
cant difference between groups in the duration and severity
of occurring colds or URTIs.

Three further studies"! tested the effects of
echinacea for the prevention of colds due to experimental
rhinovirus infection. In one study, adult volunteers (m = 117
enrolled) with a serum titre of neutralising antibody to
rhinovirus of <1:4 received echinacea (300 mg) or placebo
three times daily for 14 days prior to and for five days after
challenge with rhinovirus (7 = 92 challenged due to study
withdrawals). It is not stated in a report of the study”
whether random allocation to study group was undertaken,
or whether participants were masked (blind) to treatment
allocation, although a blinding check before virus challenge
found that 30 (60%) of the 50 echinacea recipients and 19
(45%) of the 42 placebo recipients thought they were
receiving the ‘active’ treatment (p = 0.21).

----- PAGE 236 -----
The study did not provide evidence to suggest that
echinacea had effects over those of placebo: rhinovirus
infection occurred in 22 (44%) of echinacea recipients and
in 24 (57%) of placebo recipients (rate ratio = 0.77; p =
0.3), ‘clinical’ colds developed in 50% and 59% of echinacea
and placebo recipients, respectively (p = 0.77), and there
was no difference in mean total symptom scores (11.4, 95%
CI 3.9-18.9 and 13.6, 95% CI 7.5-19.7 for echinacea and
placebo, respectively). However, the study involved small
numbers of participants and a sample size calculation was
not reported, hence it is possible that the study was not
large enough to be able to detect a difference if one existed.
Additionally, information on the species of echinacea, plant
part used, type of preparation (e.g. extract) and route of
administration used was not provided in a report of this
study."!°) Tt was stated that the preparation contained
cichoric acid 0.16% and almost no echinacosides or
alkamides, but with this limited information, it is not
possible to say with certainty which species is likely to have
been used, although it may have been E. purpurea.

In a subsequent study" a randomised, double-blind
trial, 48 healthy adults received a preparation containing the
pressed juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea in a 22%
alcohol base (EchinaGuard) 2.5mL three times daily, or
placebo, for seven days before and after inoculation with
rhinovirus (RV-39) by intranasal administration in two
inocula about 30 minutes apart (total dose: 0.25mL per
nostril). The proportions (95% confidence intervals (CI)) of
participants with laboratory evidence of infection (at least a
fourfold increase in RV-39 neutralising antibody titre and/or
recovery of rhinovirus on viral culture), the primary
outcome measure, were 92% (95% CI: 73-99) and 96%
(95% CI: 77-100) for echinacea recipients and placebo
recipients, respectively, and with clinical illness (presence of
a cold defined as a five-day total symptom score of five or
more and three successive days of rhinorrhea or partici-
pant's positive self-report of a cold) 58% (95% Cl: 37-78)
and 82% (95% Cl: 60-94) for the echinacea and placebo
groups, respectively (p = 0.114). Thus, the results indicate
that, in this study, echinacea was no more effective than
placebo in preventing rhinovirus infection. However, it is
possible that the study did not have sufficient statistical
power to detect a difference between the two groups.”

The lack of effect observed in these two studies raises the
question whether or not the durations of administration (14
and seven days in the respective studies?" !)) of echinacea
prior to experimental rhinovirus infection were sufficient.
On the other hand, the observed lack of effect may simply
be because the studies were not large enough to be able to
detect a difference between the treatment and placebo
groups.
The effects of three different extracts of E. angustifolia
root on the prevention and treatment of experimental
rhinovirus infections were assessed in a randomised,

double-blind, placebo controlled trial involving 437 young
healthy volunteers." In the 'prevention' phase of the study,
volunteers received one of the three echinacea extracts
1.5mL three times daily, or placebo, for 7 days before
challenge with 100 50% tissue culture infectious doses of
rhinovirus type 39 (asymptomatic participants only). The
chemical profile of the extracts was reported to be:
supercritical carbon dioxide extract, alkamides 74%,
polysaccharides not present; 60% ethanol extract, poly-

Echinacea

saccharides 49%, alkamides 2.3%, cynarin 0.16 mg/mL;
20% ethanol extract, polysaccharides 42%, alkamides
0.1%; echinacoside was not detected in any of the extracts.
At the end of the seven-day period, there were no
statistically significant differences between the echinacea
and placebo groups with respect to the proportion of
participants in each group who developed an infection
following rhinovirus challenge (p > 0.05 for all compar-
isons). Participants who were challenged with rhinovirus
remained in the study for a 'treatment' phase (see Clinical
studies, Treatment).

A further 'prevention' trial assessed the effects of a
combination preparation containing extracts of aerial parts
of E. purpurea and roots of E. angustifolia (Chizukit,
Hadas Corporation Limited, Israel) 50mg/mL, propolis
50mg/mL and vitamin C 10mg/mL in children. In this
randomised, double-blind study, 430 children aged one to
five years received 5mL of the preparation (7.5mL for
children aged four to five years), or placebo, twice daily for
12 weeks over a winter period. If a respiratory tract
infection (RTT) occurred, the dosage was increased to four
times daily for the duration of the episode. In total, 328
children completed the study. According to an efficacy
analysis, the total number of episodes of illness, the mean
number of episodes per child and the proportion of children
with one or more episodes of illness were all significantly
lower in the echinacea group, compared with the placebo
group (reductions of 55%, 50% and 43%, respectively; p <
0.001 for each).

The authors' justification for not carrying out an
intention-to-treat analysis was that all dropouts occurred
in the first week of the trial; however, this decision should
have been made a priori and not because of high dropout
5) Other methodological limitations of the study are
that baseline data, other than mean age, for the two groups
are lacking, so it is not possible to assess the success of
randomisation, and several, rather than one, primary
105) Additionally, there is a lack
of detail regarding the preparation studied (e.g. types of
extracts, content of active constituents).

rates.

outcomes were assessed.'

Treatment The earlier Cochrane systematic review described
above (see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis) included eight
randomised, placebo-controlled trials of echinacea prepara-
tions for the treatment of URTIs.°” These trials tested
three different combinations of echinacea extracts and two
monopreparations, taken orally typically for 6-10 days. Six
studies reported statistically significant beneficial effects for
echinacea recipients, compared with placebo recipients, on
outcome measures such as duration of illness or symptoms
(e.g. 'running nose’). However, heterogeneity of the studies
precluded any further summary of the results. In addition,
several of the studies had methodological flaws or their
methodological quality could not be determined due to a
lack of detail about the study designs in published reports.
For these reasons, although the majority of the studies
described reported positive results for echinacea prepara-
tions, it was not possible to recommend any _ specific

product for the treatment of the common cold and further
)

: (97
research was considered necessary.
An updated Cochrane review used more restrictive

inclusion criteria for trials (see Clinical studies, Prophy-

----- PAGE 237 -----
226 Echinacea

Table 1 Summary of recent trials of echinacea preparations in the prevention and treatment of the common cold and other URTIs

Ref

Prevention
trials

99

100

101

102

103

104

Study
design

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

DB, PC

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

Participants; n

Healthy adults
from military/
industrial
organisations in
Germany; n = 302
enrolled, n = 289
ITT analysis

Adults from a
large general
practice in
Germany who had
>3 colds/URTIs in
the previous year;
n= 109 enrolled,
n= 108 treated,
ITT analysis

Healthy adults
from university
community in
USA; n= 117
enrolled, n = 92
treated, analysed

Healthy adults; n=
48 enrolled

Healthy young
adults from
university
community in
USA; n = 437
enrolled, n = 419
treated, n = 399
analysed; this
study included
both a prevention
and a treatment
phase

Children aged 1-5
years; n = 430
enrolled, n = 328
efficacy analysis

Treatment group(s) —_ Control
regimen; n group; n
(ITT analysis) (ITT analysis)

Ethanolic extract (DER Placebo

1:11 in 30% alcohol) of: (coloured

(a) Ep root (n = 99) or ethanolic

(b) Ea root (n= 100); 50 solution); n =
drops bd on 5 days/ 90

week for 12 weeks

Fluid extract of Ep herb Placebo
4mL bd for 8 weeks; n= (coloured

55 ethanolic
solution); n =
54

Echinacea (0.16% Placebo; n=

cichoric acid; species, 42
plant part not stated)

300 mg tds for 14 days
before rhinovirus

challenge and for 5 days
after; n= 50

Pressed juice of aerial Placebo; n=
parts of Ep in 22% 24

alcohol, 2.5 mL tds for 7

days before rhinovirus

inoculation and for 7

days afterwards; n = 24

(a) Carbon dioxide Ea Placebo; n =
root extract; (b) 60% 274 for
ethanol Ea root extract; prevention
or (c) 20% ethanol Ea__ phase; n = 109
root extract; 1.5 mL for treatment
three times daily for phase

each, for 7 days before

virus challenge and for

5 days after; n = 163

randomised for

prevention phase; n =

328 for treatment phase

Combination Placebo; n=
preparation containing 168
extracts of aerial parts of

Ep and roots of Ea, 5mL

(7.5 mL for 4-5 year-

olds) bd for 12 weeks; n

= 160

Primary outcome Results (primary outcome
measure(s) measure)

Time to first URTI No statistically significant difference
between groups: mean time (95%
Cl) in days to first URTI 69 (64-74),
66 (61-72) and 65 (59-70) for Ep, Ea
and placebo, respectively; p = 0.49

Investigator- No statistically significant differences
assessed between groups: mean number
incidence, severity colds/URTI per subject 0.78 and 0.93
of colds/URTI for Ep and placebo, respectively

(difference = 0.15; 95% Cl -0.12,
0.41, p = 0.33); severity of infections
(p = 0.15)

Incidence of colds No statistically significant differences
between groups: proportions with
rhinovirus infection = 44 and 57% for
echinacea and placebo, respectively
(p = 0.3); proportions with clinical
colds = 50 and 59% for echinacea
and placebo, respectively (p = 0.77)

Frequency of No statistically significant differences
rhinovirus between groups: proportions (95%
infection as Cl) with laboratory evidence of
assessed by rhinovirus infection = 92% (73-99)
laboratory and 96% (77-100) for Ep and
evidence; placebo, respectively (p value not

incidence of colds reported); proportions (95% Cl) with
clinical colds = 58 (37-78) and 82
(60-94) for Ep and placebo,
respectively (p = 0.114)

Proportions of No statistically significant differences
participants who __ between echinacea and placebo
developed clinical groups: difference with respect to
colds (prevention proportions of participants who
phase) and total developed clinical colds (prevention
symptom scores _ phase) and total symptom scores
(treatment phase) (treatment phase) (p > 0.05 for

both)
Several stated, Total number of episodes of illness,
including total mean number of episodes per child,
number of proportion of children with one or

episodes of illness, more episodes of illness were

mean number of _ significantly lower (reductions of 55,
episodes per child, 50 and 43%, respectively) in the Ep/
proportion of Ea group compared with the placebo
children with one group (p < 0.001)

or more episodes

of illness

table continues

----- PAGE 238 -----
Table 1 continued

Ref Study
design

Treatment

trials

106 R, DB,
PC

107 R, DB,
PC

108 R, DB,
PC

109 QR,
DB, PC

110 R, DB,
PC

111 R, DB,
PC

112 R, DB,
PC

Participants; n Treatment group(s) Control
regimen; n group; n
(ITT analysis) (ITT analysis)
University Capsules containing Placebo
students in USA — dried Ea root 123mg, __ (alfalfa
with colds of Ep root 62mg andEp 333mg); n=
recent onset; n= herb 62mg plus 73
148 enrolled, n= flavourings, 4 capsules 6
142 analysed (no times during first 24
post-enrolment hours of cold onset,
data available for then 4 capsules tds until
6 participants) symptoms resolved
(max 10 days); n= 69
Healthy adults Tablets containing Placebo; n=
‘prone’ to crude extract of:(a) Ep 64
common cold in 6.78mg herb (95%),
Sweden; n= 559 root (5%), n = 55; (b)
enrolled, n= 246 Ep 48.27 mg herb
who took study (95%), root (5%), n=
medication ITT 64; (c) Ep 29.6 mg root
analysis (100%), n = 63; 2
tablets tds at cold onset
until symptoms
resolved (max 7 days)
Adults with EC31J0 (pressed juice of Placebo; n =
symptoms of a Ep herb) 5mL bd for 10 39
cold in Germany; days; n = 41
n= 80 enrolled
and analysed
Adults with cold Tea comprising Ep and Placebo —
onset employed at Ea herb and extract of herbal tea
nursing home in — Ep root (equivalent to containing 7
USA; n= 95 1275 mg dried herb and _ herbal
root per tea bag); 5-6 _ ingredients,
cups of teaon day 1, __ including
titrating down to 1 cup peppermint
per day over next 5 leaf and
days; n= 48 ginger
rhizome; n=
47
Adults within 24 — Capsules containing Placebo
hours of first 100 mg freeze-dried
symptoms of a pressed juice of Ep; one
cold in USA; n= _ tds until symptoms
128 resolved or max imum
of 14 days)
Adults with history Echinilin (standardised Placebo; n =
of colds in Ep extract)10 x 4mL 69
Canada; n= 282, on day 1 then 4 x 4mL
of whom 128 for next 6 days; n= 59
contracted a cold
Children aged 2— Dried pressed juice of — Placebo; n=
11 years; n= 524 aerial parts of Ep in 261

enrolled syrup; n = 263

Primary outcome
measure(s)

Self-reported
duration, severity
of colds

Physician-assessed
reduction in
symptom index

Duration of illness
(full picture of
common cold
based on self-
reported
symptoms)

No primary
outcome stated;
measures included
self-reported
symptoms and
duration

Modified Jackson
method for
severity of
symptoms; time
to resolution of
symptoms

Change in total
daily symptom
scores (TDSS) for
7-day treatment
period, duration
of symptoms

Duration and
severity of
symptoms

Echinacea cr

Results (primary outcome
measure)

No statistically significant differences
between groups: difference (95% Cl)
in duration = -0.52 days (-1.09 to
0.22); global severity (numerical data
not shown)

Treatments a and b, but not
treatment c, significantly more
effective than placebo: mean (95%
Cl) relative reduction in symptoms =
58.7% (48.7, 68.7), 58.1% (47.7,
69.7), 46.1% (30.1, 62.1) and
33.6% (16.6, 50.6), for a, b, c and
placebo, respectively (p = 0.045,
0.027 and 0.133 for a, b and c versus
placebo, respectively)

Duration significantly shorter in
echinacea group compared with
placebo group (6 and 9 days,
respectively; p = 0.0112)

Self-reported mean (SD)
‘effectiveness score’ significantly
higher for echinacea compared with
placebo (4.125 (0.959) and 2.787
(0.954), respectively; p < 0.001) but
self-reported mean duration of
symptoms significantly longer (4.33
(0.930) and 2.34 (1.09), respectively;
p < 0.001)

No statistically significant differences
between groups for total symptom
scores, mean individual symptom
scores and duration of symptoms (p
range = 0.29-0.90, prange = 0.09-
0.93, p = 0.73, respectively)

Mean TDSS were significantly lower
for E recipients, compared with
placebo recipients (p < 0.05), but
there was no statistically significant
difference in duration of symptoms,
according to ITT analysis (n = 128) (p
> 0.05 for all symptoms)

No statistically significant differences
between groups for duration and
severity of symptoms (p = 0.89 and
0.69, respectively)

bd = twice daily; DB = double-blind; DER = drug:extract ratio; E = Echinacea; Ea = E. angustifolia; Ep = Echinacea purpurea; ITT = intention-to-treat; PC = placebo-
controlled; QR = quasi-randomised; R = randomised; tds = three times daily; URTIs = upper respiratory tract infections

----- PAGE 239 -----
Echinacea

19 comparisons) investigating echinacea preparations for
the treatment of colds.°*) Most of the included trials were
considered to be of 'reasonable to good quality'. However,
trials assessed a variety of different preparations of
echinacea, administered according to different dosage
regimens, and more than one trial was available only for
preparations of pressed juice obtained from the aerial parts
of E. purpurea. In these two placebo-controlled trials,
treatment was taken at the first signs of a cold; the number
of participants developing a full cold was significantly lower
in the echinacea group, whereas in the other trial, the
difference did not reach statistical significance.» Details of
eight trials included in the review (all are new trials
published since the earlier Cochrane review) are sum-
marised below. Collectively, the findings of available trials
are difficult to interpret because of the wide variations in
preparations tested; many marketed preparations of echi-
nacea have not been tested at all in clinical trials.°" Future
trials should report the chemical composition of the
echinacea material tested, and ideally assess the effects of
standardised preparations.

Several new trials of echinacea preparations in the
treatment of URTIs have been completed since the
Cochrane review (Table 1) and have reported conflicting
results, 071!)

The effects of capsules containing 100 mg freeze-dried
pressed juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea, standardised
for 2.4% -1,2-p-fructofuranosides, were explored in a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 128 adults enrolled into the study within 24 hours of
their first symptoms of a cold.‘'!° Participants ingested one
capsule three times daily until symptoms resolved, or for a
maximum of 14 days. At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between groups with
respect to time to resolution of symptoms, daily  self-
recorded symptom scores, and frequency of adverse events.
It is unclear why the preparation was standardised for
content of -1,2-p-fructofuranosides rather than, for
example, alkamides, and why content of other constituents
was not reported. Thus, it is difficult to interpret these
results in the context of the findings of other studies.

In a larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, 282 adults with a history of two or more colds in the
previous year received a standardised preparation of
echinacea (Echinilin), or placebo, taken at the start of a
cold (ten 4-mL doses over day 1, then four 4-mL doses daily
for the next six days)."' The echinacea preparation
contained concentrated water-ethanol extracts of alka-
mides, cichoric acid and polysaccharides, obtained from
various parts (no further details provided) of freshly
harvested E. purpurea plants, and combined in 40% ethanol
to provide concentrations of 0.25, 2.5 and 25.5mg/mL,
respectively. At the end of the study, according to an
intention-to-treat analysis for the 128 participants who
contracted a cold, self-assessed mean total daily symptom
scores (TDSS; the primary efficacy parameter) were
significantly lower for echinacea recipients than for placebo
recipients (mean TDSS (95% CI) were 16.3 (13.6-19.0) and
19.9 (17.5-22.5), respectively for the echinacea and placebo
groups; p < 0.05).

A report of this study lacks several important details.
Numbers of participants initially randomised to the
echinacea and placebo groups, and demographic data (e.g.

mean age, gender etc) are not provided for the 282
participants who entered the study, so it is not possible to
judge whether or not the randomisation process was
successful in balancing the two groups with respect to
these variables. These data are reported for the intention-to-
treat analysis, and the placebo group has a markedly higher
proportion of females than does the echinacea group (75%
versus 54%, respectively). However, it is not possible to
establish whether the placebo group originally comprised a
greater proportion of females simply by chance through
randomisation, or whether a markedly greater proportion
of women in the placebo group perceived that they
contracted a cold. This imbalance, and the implications it
may have for the results, has not been considered adequately
in the analysi:

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, com-
munity-based trial involving 148 students with common
colds of recent onset, assessed the effects of capsules
containing unrefined E. purpurea herb (62mg), root
(62mg) and E. angustifolia root (123 mg). Analysis of
samples of the preparation by independent laboratories
found that they contained cichoric acid and alkamides
(0.5% to <1.0%), and echinoside, chlorogenic acid and
caffeoyltartaric acid (all >0.1% to <0.5%). Participants
took four capsules six times during the first 24 hours of the
onset of a cold, followed by four capsules three times daily
until symptoms resolved, or for up to 10 days. Among the
142 participants who completed the study, there was no
difference in the mean duration of cold symptoms (6.27
and 5.75 days for the echinacea and placebo groups,
respectively; difference: —0.52 days, 95% CI —1.09 to 0.22
days), even though the study had an adequate sample siz
with a sample size of 150 participants, the study would
have had 80% power to detect a benefit of two days'
duration.

Three different preparations and doses of E. purpurea
were tested in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial in healthy adults.{!°” The four arms of the
study were: 6.78mg E. purpurea crude extract, based on
95% herb and 5% root (Echinaforce); 48.27 mg E. purpurea
crude extract, based on 95% herb and 5% root; 29.60 mg E.
purpurea crude extract, based on root only; and placebo. In
total, 246 participants experienced symptoms typical of the
onset of a common cold and took their allocated study
medication two tablets three times daily until they felt
better, or for up to seven days. According to an intention-to-
treat anal. prepared from
both E. purpurea herb and root were significantly more
effective than E. purpurea root extract and placebo in
reducing symptoms as assessed by the investigator (the
primary outcome measure): the relative reductions in the
mean complaint index for these preparations were 58.7%
(95% CI 48.7-68.7; p = 0.045 versus placebo) and 58.1%
(95% CI 47.7-69.7; p = 0.027 versus placebo).!'”

Statistically significant effects for an extract of E.
purpurea herb (Echinacin) on median duration of illness
were reported in another randomised, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial involving 80 adults who experienced
onset of a cold (median duration six and nine days for
echinacea and placebo, respectively; p = 0.0112).'°%
Participants started taking their allocated medication on
first experiencing symptoms, and continued treatment
(SmL twice daily) until symptoms resolved.

, the two echinacea extrac

----- PAGE 240 -----
A further placebo-controlled study involving adults with
early symptoms of a cold (7 = 95) explored the effects of a
combination preparation containing E. purpurea and E.
angustifolia herb and extract of E. purpurea root, as well as
lemongrass leaf and spearmint leaf as flavourings, for-
mulated as a tea." When prepared as directed, tea
prepared from one bag was stated to provide 31.5 mg of
phenolic compounds, calculated as caftaric acid, cichoric
acid, chlorogenic acid and echinacoside. The results
suggested a statistically significant difference between the
treatment and placebo groups in self-rated effectiveness —
mean (standard deviation, SD) effectiveness score 4.13
(0.96) and 2.78 (0.95) for echinacea tea and placebo,
respectively (p < 0.001) — although the mean (SD) duration
of symptoms was significantly longer in the echinacea
group, compared with the placebo group (4.33 (0.93) and
2.34 (1.09) for echinacea tea and placebo, respectively; p <
0.001). In addition, the study had several methodological
limitations. For example, although stated to be rando-
mised, the study did not involve true randomisation
(participants were allocated to groups alternately), the
‘placebo! tea contained low doses of several herbs
(peppermint leaf, sweet fennel seed, ginger rhizome, papaya
leaf, alfalfa leaf and cinnamon bark), and outcomes were
self-assessed only.
The effects of three different extracts of E. angustifolia
root on the prevention and treatment of experimental
rhinovirus infections were assessed in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo controlled trial involving 437 young
healthy volunteers."°” In the 'prevention' phase of the study
(see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis), volunteers received one
1.5mL three times daily, or
placebo, for 7 days before challenge with 100 50% ti
culture infectious doses of rhinovirus type 39 (asympto-
matic participants only). Participants who were challenged
with rhinovirus remained in the study for a 'treatment'
phase during which they continued with their initial
treatment allocation (i.e. one of the three echinacea extracts
or placebo) or, having received placebo during the
‘prevention’ phase, received one of the three echinacea
extracts during the treatment phase. Treatment was given
according to the same dosage regimen for five days after
virus challenge.

At the end of the study, there were no statistically
significant differences between the echinacea and placebo
groups with respect to total symptom scores and propor-
tions of participants who developed clinical colds.

The chemical profile of the extracts was reported to be:
supercritical carbon dioxide extract, alkamides 74%,
polysaccharides not present; 60% ethanol extract, poly-
saccharides 49%, alkamides 2.3%, cynarin 0.16 mg/mL;
20% ethanol extract, polysaccharides 42%, alkamides
0.1%; echinacoside was not detected in any of the extracts.
It remains possible that other constituents or combinations
of constituents have pharmacological effects," although
bioavailability would need to be demonstrated. The
alkamide constituents of E. angustifolia root and E.
purpurea root have been detected in plasma following

administration of an echinacea product to healthy volun-
86)

of the three echinacea extrac

ue

teers.

Two other studies have assessed the effects of echinacea
preparations in the treatment of URTIs in children. In a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 524

Echinacea

children aged two to eleven years received dried pressed
juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea (harvested at
flowering) combined with syrup, or placebo (syrup only)
3.75mL (SmL for 6 to 11 year olds) twice daily during a
URTI and until all symptoms had resolved up to a
maximum of 10 days.'!?) Data were available for 707 of
759 (94%) URTIs that occurred during the study period;
370 and 337 of these occurred in the placebo and echinacea
groups, respectively. A significantly greater proportion of
children in the placebo group had more than one URTI,
when compared with the echinacea group (64.4% vs 52.3%
for placebo and echinacea, respectively; p = 0.015). There
were no statistically significant differences between groups
for the primary outcome measures duration (p = 0.89) and
severity of symptoms (P = 0.69) or for secondary outcome
measures, including peak severity of symptoms, number of
days of peak symptoms and number of days with fever (p >
0.08 for all). This study has been criticised, in particular,
because the preparation tested was not analysed to
determine its chemical composition; in response, the
authors stated that the constituent(s) responsible for the
putative clinical effects have not been definitively estab-
lished."!!) While this is indeed the case, it is nevertheless
important to describe the chemical composition of the
product tested (e.g. its alkamide and polysaccharide
content) so that the findings of the study can be considered
in the context of other research.

The effects of a preparation containing expressed juice
(80 mL/100 mL preparation) from freshly collected flowering
E. purpurea plants (Immunal, SIA International, Volgograd,
Russia) were compared with those of a preparation (SHA-
10, Swedish Herbal Institutue, Gothenburg, Sweden)
containing a standardised extract of Andrographis panicu-
lata (5.25mg andrographolide and deoxyandrographolide
per tablet) and extract of Eleutherococcus senticosus
(9.7mg per tablet) in a randomised, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial involving 133 children aged four to
eleven years with uncomplicated URTI for whom treatment
could begin within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms.(!!>
The dosage regimens were 10 drops three times daily for the
echinacea preparation, and two tablets three times daily for
the A. paniculata preparation; the duration of treatment
was 10 days for both. The interventions were given in
addition to standard treatment (warm drinks, throat
gargles, nose drops and paracetamol 500mg three times
daily if required), and a control group received standard
treatment alone.

At the end of the study, A. paniculata recipients had
recovered more quickly than had participants in the other
two groups (p < 0.002), and the amount of nasal secretion
was significantly lower in the A. paniculata group,
compared with the echinacea group, from day five of the
study (p < 0.01)."')) This study, however, has several
methodological flaws: there was no pre-specified primary
outcome measure, and a sample size calculation does not
appear to have been carried out; the study was reported to
be double-blind, although it is not stated that placebo drops
and tablets were used; a doctor helped the children with
their self-assessment of symptoms, and it is not clear if and
how blinding was maintained throughout these interac-
tions; the study was focused on A. paniculata and analyses
comparing the echinacea and placebo groups were not
carried out.

----- PAGE 241 -----
Echinacea

Several trials of echinacea preparations in the prevention
of URTIs provide data on duration and severity of infections
occurring in participants (see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis).
While these data have some relevance to treatment, they
should not be grouped together, since the dosage regimens
are entirely different — in 'prevention' trials, participants
may have received study medication for several weeks or
more before experiencing an infection, whereas in 'treat-
ment’ trials, participants usually start study medication
immediately after the onset of symptoms.

Other infections A randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled, crossover trial assessed the effects of an extract of E.
purpurea herb (95%) and root (5%) (Echinaforce) on the
incidence and severity of recurrent genital herpes in 50 patients
who had not been exposed to aciclovir or similar medicines
within 14 days of enrollment into the study and who had had at
least four recurrences of genital herpes within the previous 12
months."'!® Study medication, or placebo, was taken orally
800 mg twice daily for six months. The study did not show any
significant difference between the two groups on the outcomes
measured (frequency and duration of recurrences, pain score,
CD4 cell count, neutrophil count), although there was a high
drop-out rate during the study.

A systematic review of studies exploring the immunomodu-
latory effects of echinacea-containing preparations included
seven controlled clinical trials in infections such as sinusitis,
bronchitis and candida (see Clinical studies, Immunomodula-
tory activity).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Frequency and type of adverse events Data on numbers of
participants experiencing adverse events were provided by several
studies included in a Cochrane systematic review of 16
quasi-randomised controlled trials of extracts
of echinacea for preventing or treating URTIs (see Clinical studies,
Prophylaxis, and Treatment).°°”) Four placebo-controlled 'preven-
tion’ trials of echinacea reported these data: in three trials,
involving a total of around 1000 participants, the frequency of
adverse events in the echinacea group was similar to that in the
corresponding placebo group; in one trial, adverse events did not
occur in either the echinacea or placebo groups. Three 'treatment'
trials provided adverse event data: in two studies, adverse events
were not observed in either the echinacea or the placebo groups,
and in one, numbers of patients experiencing adverse events in the
echinacea and placebo groups were similar (four and_ five,
respectively)?”

New clinical trials published since the Cochrane review also
report that there was no statistically significant difference in the
frequency of adverse events noted for echinacea preparations and
placebo."?"!” with the exception of one study which reported a
significantly higher frequency of rash in the echinacea group,
compared with the placebo group (7.1% vs 2.7% for echinacea
and placebo, respectively; p = 0.008).‘''? The updated Cochrane
review drew similar conclusions that data from the available
randomised controlled trials indicated that adverse effects or
events associated with the use of the echinacea preparations
assessed were infrequent, minor and similar to those noted for
placebo.”

Where adverse events were reported, most commonly these were
mild gastrointestinal symptoms,"0% 14 106 107116122) Another
review of clinical data, mostly from clinical trials, concluded

randomised an

that oral administration of the expressed juice of E. purpurea herb
is well-tolerated."'” The review included data from an unpub-
lished post-marketing surveillance study involving over 1200
individuals aged 2-20 years who used oral E. purpurea lozenges
for 4-6 weeks for URTIs, and which indicated that unpleasant
taste was the most frequently reported adverse event.

On the basis of these limited data, it seems that the risk of acute
adverse effects with echinacea is very small. However, it is not
possible to draw firm conclusions from these data for several
reasons — different echinacea preparations and regimens were
tested, different patient populations (adults, children) were
involved, and echinacea preparations were administered for only
a short time period, particularly in the ‘treatment’ trials.“'®) In
addition, since clinical trials usually have the statistical power only
to detect common, acute adverse effects and, as there is a lack of
data on the safety of the longer term use of echinacea
preparations, there is a need for further evaluation of the safety
of different echinacea preparations.

The low number of reports of suspected adverse reactions
associated with echinacea preparations set against estimates of the
high frequency of use of echinacea has been used as an argument
for the safety of echinacea.° However, this argument is flawed
since it fails to consider that under-reporting of suspected adverse

reactions associated with herbal medicines is likely at several
(119, G21

levels, ) and that in general reporting systems for herbal
medicines are not well-established. The use of sales data to
estimate the frequency of an adverse reaction can be misleading at
best and, in addition, the argument takes no account of the
differences in preparations of echinacea.

The UK Committee on Safety of Medicines (CSM) and
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) spontaneous reporting scheme (the 'yellow card' scheme)
for suspected adverse drug reactions (ADR) reporting received 34
reports describing 64 suspected ADRs associated with echinacea
preparations for the period 1 July 1963 to 1 June 2004 (see Table
2).29 For the majority of these cases, echinacea had been
administered orally; details of specific products, species of
echinacea, type of extract and other details are not available.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. To the end of the year
2004, the WHO-UMC had received a total of 259 reports,
describing a total of 537 adverse reactions, for products contain-
ing a single species of Echinacea.) The vast majority of these
reports describes reactions associated with E. purpurea, most
commonly (reaction listed 10 times or more): abdominal pain (7 =
10); angioedema (10); dyspnoea (18); nausea (14); pruritus (17);
rash (18); rash, erythematous (23); urticaria (23). (These data were
obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO
Collaborating Centre for Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least
with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

Medicines

International

Allergic reactions

Echinacea species belong to the Asteraceae (Compositae, daisy)
family, members of which are known to cause allergic reactions.
Individuals with allergic tendencies, particularly those with

----- PAGE 242 -----
Echinacea 2

Table 2 Spontaneous reports of suspected adverse drug reactions associated with echinacea preparations submitted to the UK Committee on
Safety of Medicines/Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency for the period 01/07/1963 to 01/06/2004 (Adverse Drug Reactions

On-line Information Tracking 2004).“12

System organ class. Reaction names

Blood and lymphatic system disorders. Aplastic anaemia (1), coagulopathy (1), idiopathic thrombocytic purpura (1)
Cardiac disorders. Supraventricular tachycardia (1), ventricular arrhythmia NOS (1), palpitations (1)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including convulsions (5); dizziness (3); headache (6)

Endocrine disorders. Basedow’s disease (1)

Eye disorders. Blurred vision (1)

Gastrointestinal disorders. Faecal incontinence (1), irritable bowel syndrome (1), dysphagia (1), nausea (1), tongue oedema (1)

General disorders and administration site conditions. Rigors (1), drug interaction NOS (3), drug interaction potentiation (1), fatigue

(1), malaise (1), feeling abnormal (1)
Hepatobiliary disorders. Sclerosing cholangitis (1)

Infections and infestations. Parotitis (1)

Investigations. Blood pressure increased (1), INR increased (2), liver function test abnormal (1), weight increased (1)

Metabolism and nutrition disorders. Hyponatraemia (1)

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders. Arthralgia (2), myalgia (1), muscle twitching (1)

Nervous system disorders. Central pontine myelinolysis (1), memory impairment (1), ataxia (1), abnormal co-ordination NOS (1),

Total

onus = = ww

o| pa] =| uw] =| =

loss of consciousness (1), burning sensation NOS (1), dysarthria (1), epilepsy NOS (1)

Psychiatric disorders. Agitation (1), panic reaction (1), confusional state (2), insomnia (1), sleep disorder NOS (1)
Renal and urinary disorders. Pollakiuria (1), urinary incontinence (1), haematuria (1)
Respiratory , thoracic and mediastinal disorders. Asthma NOS (1), dyspnoea (1), dry throat (1), pharyngolaryngeal pain (1)

Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders. Face oedema (1), urticaria NOS (3), erythema multiforme (1), erythema (1),

pruritus (1), rash NOS (1)
Vascular disorders. Flushing (1), hypertension NOS (1)
Total number of reactions

INR = international normalised ratio; NOS = not otherwise stated

known allergy to other members of the Asteraceae family (e.g.
chamomile) should be advised to avoid echinacea preparations
containing aerial parts.(0

Isolated spontaneous reports of suspected ADRs associated
with the use of echinacea preparations include allergic skin
reactions (see also Side-effects, Toxicity, Frequency and type of
adverse events).‘!!” In Australia, detailed a:
of allergic reactions temporally
(anaphylaxis, 2; acute asthma attack in an echinacea-naive
individual, 1; recurrent mild asthma, 1; macropapular rash, 1),
three of which reported positive rechallenge, revealed that three
patients had positive skin-prick test results for echinacea.‘ One
case report described a 37-year-old woman with atopy who
experienced anaphylaxis 30 minutes after ingesting several dietary
supplements (vitamins B,) and E, an iron preparation, ‘folate’,

ssment of five cases

associated with echinacea

vitamin B complex, a multivitamin preparation, zinc, antiox-
idants, a garlic and onion preparation, evening primrose oil) and
15 minutes after taking 5 mL of an echinacea preparation, stated
to be equivalent to E. angustifolia whole plant extract 3825 mg and
E. purpurea dried root 150 mg."'? The woman took prometha-
zine and was observed in an emergency department for 2 hours,
and her symptoms resolved without further treatment. Two weeks
later she gave a positive skin-prick test to the echinacea product,
but not to ‘crude’ extracts of the other supplements she had taken.
She had been taking echinacea for 2-3 years and had previously
taken the same product without experiencing any adverse effects.
A causal association in this case has been questioned."

oh Wn

64

Positive skin-prick test results for echinacea were also reported
for 20% of 100 echinacea-naive atopic individuals, and over 50%
of 26 Australian suspected ADR reports of hypersensitivity
associated with echinacea involved individuals with atopy.”
Echinacea has previously been reported to have produced positive

patch test reactions in four individuals with a previous history of
plane dermatitis.“©°” These reports raise hypotheses that require
testing in formal studies.

An isolated report describes a 41-year-old man who experienced
four episodes of erythema nodosum after using an echinacea
preparation at each onset of an influenza-like illness." The man
had been using echinacea intermittently for 18 months, as well as
loratadine on an as required basis and St John's wort for the
previous six months. Each episode of erythema nodosum
responded to conventional treatment including prednisone. The
man was advised to discontinue treatment with echinacea and,
after one year, had not experienced any further recurrences.
However, the report does not provide any details (species, plant
part, formulation, dosage regimen) of the echinacea preparation
involved and therefore is difficult to interpret. Causality has not
been established.

Other reactions

A case of hypokalaemic renal tubular acidosis due to Sjégren's
syndrome (a symptom complex of unknown aetiology, marked by
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostamia, with or without lachrymal

----- PAGE 243 -----
Echinacea

and salivary gland enlargement, respectively, and presence of
ase, usually rheumatoid arthritis, but
sometime systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or poly-
myositis) has been reported in a 36-year-old woman.‘ She was
stated to have begun taking echinacea, St. John's wort and kava
two weeks before becoming ill, but the report does not provide
any further
product(s), nor of the types of preparations, formulations, dosages
and routes of administration of any of the herbal medicines listed.
The woman was _hospitalise:
weakness and tests revealed she had a serum potassium ion
concentration of 1.3 mEq/L. She was given electrolyte replacement
for four days, after which the muscle weakness resolved, and was
started on hydroxychloroquine 200mg daily for ‘probable!
Sjégren's syndrome. The authors suggested that ingestion of
echinacea may have aggravated an autoimmune disorder, although
rechallenge with echinacea was not undertaken, and causality has
not been established.”

Another report describes a 49-year-old woman who presented
with a five-day history of numbness and weakness in her right
arm.” For the previous seven weeks she had received echinacea
comp 2mL mixed with 5mL of her venous blood intramuscularly
twice weekly to prevent infections and 'boost' her immune system.
The injection was stated to contain E. angustifolia D2 1.1mL,
Aconitum D4 0.3 mL and Lachesis (bushmaster snake venom) D8
0.3mL. (D nomenclature relates to a homeopathic dilution step;
D2 is equivalent to a 1 in 100 dilution, whereas D8 is equivalent to
a 1 in 100000000 dilution.)‘'2* The woman was admitted to
hospital with mild spastic paresis and fluctuating numbness of the
right arm and was described as having acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis; symptoms resolved after treatment with

connective tissue d

etails of the echinacea species contained in the

with severe generalised muscle

B

methylprednisolone 500 mg daily by intravenous infusion. Caus-
ality has not been established.

There is an isolated report of exacerbation of pre-existing
pemphigus vulgaris (a chronic, serious skin disorder characterized
by the development of easily ruptured blisters on skin and mucous
membranes) in a 55-year-old man who began taking an echinacea
product orally after developing an upper respiratory tract
infection.) Within a week, he developed blisters on his trunk,
head and oral mucosa; partial disease control was achieved after
discontinuing the product. It is possible that this exacerbation was
part of the natural course of disease, and causality in this case has
not been established. Furthermore, no further details of the
product, including species of echinacea, plant part, type of
preparation, and dosage were provided, and it is not stated
whether or not a sample of the product was retained. Without
verification that the product implicated did contain echinacea
material and was free of other ingredients or adulterants, this
report adds little to the debate on the safety of use of echinacea by
individuals with autoimmune disorders.

Toxicology

In general, animal studies with different preparations and
fractions of echinacea species have indicated low toxicity,“ In
acute toxicity studies involving polysaccharide fractions from E.
purpurea administered by intraperitoneal injection to small
numbers of mice, the LDso (lethal dose) for female mice was
2500 mg/kg.'°° Other acute toxicity studies using a preparation
comprising pressed juice from E. purpurea herb have provided
LDs5o values in mice of >30000 mg/kg and >10000 mg/kg for oral
and intravenous administration, respectively, and in rats of
>15 000 mg/kg and >5000 mg/kg or oral and intravenous admin-

istration, respectively.'3"'3?) Further experiments showed no

evidence of mutagenic activity in bacteria and mammalian cells
in vitro and in vivo in mice.

High concentrations of E. purpurea (8mg/mL) have been
reported to reduce sperm motility, sperm penetration of hamster
oocytes and to be associated with sperm DNA denaturation in
vitro; no such effects were observed with low concentra-
tions.{'> 54) These findings are difficult to interpret since there
is a lack of detail regarding the preparation of E. purpurea, and
their clinical relevance is questionable.

The pyrrolizidine alkaloids isotussilagine and tussilagine have
been documented for echinacea, although they possess a saturated
pyrrolizidine nucleus and are not thought to be toxic.

In vivo antitumour activity and in vitro stimulation of TNFa
secretion have been reported for echinacea. In addition to its
antitumour effects, TNF i:
and the manifestations of endotoxic shock.

stated to be a mediator of cachexia

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that echinacea is contra-indicated in patients
with progressive systemic diseases, such as tuberculosis, leukae-
mia and leukaemia-like diseases, collagen disorders, multiple
sclerosis and other autoimmune diseases."°*® In the UK, some
products also advise against use in AIDS and HIV infections. The
basis for these statements appears to be a theoretical one, based
on evidence that echinacea preparations have immunomodulatory
activity; there is an opposing view that echinacea is not harmful in
autoimmune diseases.‘ At present, there is a lack of reliable
clinical evidence to support these views, although in view of the
riousness of the conditions listed, it is appropriate to avoid use
in these disorders until further information is available.

Interactions There are no reported drug interactions for
echinacea, although on the basis of its documented immunomo-
dulatory activity, as a general precaution, echinacea should only
be used with caution in patients taking immunosuppressant drugs.

A study involving 12 healthy non-smoking volunteers assessed
the effects of E. purpurea root (Nature's Bounty, Bohemia, New
York, USA) on the activity of the cytochrome P450 enzymes
CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 and CYP3A using caffeine,
tolbutamide, dextromethorphan and midazolam, respectively, as
probe drugs (i.e. substrates for the respective CYP enzymes).''*)
After a control phase in which volunteers received all of the probe
drugs orally (with the exception of midazolam which was given
intravenously and, later, orally), participants took E. purpurea
root 400 mg four times daily for eight days; the product was stated
to contain more than 1% phenols (caftaric acid, chlorogenic acid,
echinacoside and cichoric acid). On the sixth day, the probe drugs
were administered and blood and urine samples were collected as
during the control phase.

The clearance of caffeine after oral administration was reduced

significantly during echinacea administration compared with
values obtained during the control phase (mean (SD): 6.6 (3.8)
L/hour and 4.9 (2.3) L/hour for echinacea and control periods,
respectively; p = 0.049), although the half-life (ty,) of caffeine,
area under the curve (AUC) and maximum concentration (Cyyax)
were not significantly altered. Time to maximum concentration
(tmax) Was significantly increased for both caffeine and tolbuta-
mide during echinacea administration, compared with baseline
values (p = 0.015 and 0.004, respectively). Dextromethorphan
pharmacokinetics were unaltered during echinacea administration
in the 11 participants who were extensive metabolisers. The

----- PAGE 244 -----
clearance of midazolam following intravenous, but not oral,
administration was significantly increased during echinacea
administration, compared with baseline values (mean (SD): 43
(16) L/hour and 32 (7) L/hour, respectively; p = 0.003).

These findings suggest that E. purpurea root inhibits CYP1A2,
but not CYP2C9 and CYP2D6, and that CYP3A activity is
selectively modulated: intestinal CYP3A activity is inhibited and
hepatic CYP3A activity is induced. There are several possible
explanations for the selective effects of E. purpurea root on
CYP3A activity: the constituent(s) of echinacea responsible for
CYP3A inhibition may not be systemically available, thus avoiding
hepatic CYP3A_ inhibition; the constituent(s) of echinacea
responsible for CYP3A induction may be rapidly absorbed, thus
intestinal CYP3A induction is avoided; hepatic CYP3A may be
induced by a systemically formed metabolite of a constituent of
echinacea; CYP3A induction may involve tissue-specific activators
which are differentially influenced by constituents of echina-
cea.‘

In a subsequent, similar study, 12 healthy volunteers received
capsules containing a whole plant extract of E. purpurea
(containing cichoric acid 13.7 mg; chlorogenic acid and echinaco-
side were not detected by HPLC analysis) 800 mg twice daily for
28 days. Participants also received three other herbal products
(Citrus aurantium, Serenoa serrulata and Silybum marianum),
each administered separately for 28 days; the four herbal products
were administered in random sequence, with a 30-day wash-out
period between each, until each participant had received all four
herbal products. It was stated that there were no statistically
significant differences between serum ratios of probe drugs and
their respective metabolites obtained before and after administra-
tion of E. purpurea extract and, therefore, that the extract had no
significant effect on CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 or CYP3A4
activities. The authors' conclusions, however, included the caveat
that the effects of E. purpurea extract on CYP enzyme activity,
particularly that of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, merit further
study, ‘3

The effects of echinacea products available in Canada on
inhibition of the human cytochrome P450 drug metabolising
enzyme CYP3A4 have been tested in vitro using a fluorometric
mitrotitre plate assay."” In the study, 10mL samples of
preparations of E. angustifolia roots, E. purpurea roots and
herb, and a 1:1 blend of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea
(plant parts not specified) were standardised to contain
ethanol 55% and used as stock solutions. Samples of serial
dilutions of these preparations, as well as different concentra-
tions of the pure compounds echinacoside and cichoric acid,
were assayed. The blend of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea,
and E. purpurea herb showed ‘moderate’ inhibition of
CYP3A4: median (95% CI) inhibitory concentration (ICs)
values (% of full strength preparation) were 6.73 (4.75, 10.09)
and 8.56 (5.95, 13.05), respectively. Echinacoside also showed
moderate inhibitory activity (median ICs9 values (95% CI) 6.29
(2.07, 71.56)), whereas cichoric acid showed low inhibitory
activity.”

A study in mice fed both melatonin and an extract of E.
purpurea root in their diet reported reduced numbers of
proliferating myeloid cells in the spleen and bone marrow.'**)

Further research is needed to determine whether these findings
are clinically important.

Pregnancy and lactation There is a lack of data on the safety of
echinacea preparations taken during pregnancy and lactation and,
given that the benefits of specific echinacea preparations have not

Echinacea

been established definitively, excessive use during these periods
should be avoided as a general precaution.

A cohort study compared numbers of live births, and
spontaneous and therapeutic abortions occurring among women
who had taken echinacea preparations during pregnancy (n = 206,
112 of whom took echinacea during the first trimester) with those
occurring among a control group of 206 women matched for
disease (URTI), maternal age and alcohol and cigarette use.‘??
The exposed group of women had telephoned a hospital teratogen
information service regarding the use of echinacea during
pregnancy; the unexposed group had also telephoned the service
for this reason, but subsequently did not use echinacea or used a
non-teratogenic antibiotic instead.

There were no statistically significant differences between the
two groups in assessed outcomes including number of live births,
spontaneous and therapeutic abortions, gestational age, birth
weight and rates of malformations. In the exposed group there
were six major and six minor malformations, compared with
seven major and seven minor malformations in the control
group.''*) The study has several limitations, particularly the small
sample size, meaning that the study would have the statistical
power only to detect common malformations, and self-report of
exposure, since it is possible that misclassification could have
occurred (e.g. exposed women reported as unexposed). In
addition, participants used a range of different preparations of
echinacea at different dosage regimens, so the study does not
provide adequate evidence for any specific preparation. Further
study is required to establish the safety profile of echinacea during
pregnancy.

Argentina: Parodontax Fluor; $SX-22. Australia: Andrographis
Complex; Andrographis Compound; Astragalus Complex;
Broncafect; Cats Claw Complex; Cold and Flu Relief; Cough
Relief; Digest; Echinacea 4000; Echinacea ACE + Zinc;
Echinacea Complex; Echinacea Lozenge; Euphrasia Complex;
Flavons; Galium Complex; Gartech; Herbal Cleanse; Herbal
Cold & Flu Relief; Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 8
Echinacea; Logicin Natural Lozenges; Odourless Garlic;
Proyeast; Sambucus Complex; Urgenin; Urinase. Austria:
Parodontax; Parodontax; Spasmo-Urgenin; Urgenin. Belgium:
Urgenin. Brazil: Malvatricin Natural Organic; Malvatricin
Natural; Parodontax. Canada: Bentasil Licorice with Echina-

----- PAGE 245 -----
Echinacea

esiston avec vitamine C; Esberitop; Gel a la consoude; Prosta-
Caps Chassot N; Spagymun; Spagyrom; Wala Echinacea.
Thailand: Spasmo-Urgenin. UK: AllerClear; Antifect; Catarrh
Tablets; Echinaboost; Echinacea; Goodypops; Hay Fever &
Sinus Relief; Hayfever & Sinus Relief; Héfels Echinacea and
Rosehip; Immune Insurance; Modern Herbals Cold &
Catarrh; Napiers Echinacea Tea; Revitonil; Sinotar; Sinus
and Hay Fever Tablets. USA: Echinacea Golden Seal; Laci
Throat Care Soothing Citrus; Laci Supplement Power Time;
Immune Support; TriMune.

References

1 Bauer R et al. Alkamides from the roots of Echinacea angustifolia.
Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 505-508.

2 Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea. In: Ein Handbuch fiir Arzte,
Apotheker und andere Naturwissenschaftler. Stuttgart:
Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1990: 182.

3 Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea — Der Sonnenhut — Stand der
Forschung. Z Phytother 1988; 9: 151-159.

4 Bauer R, Remiger P. TLC and HPLC analysis of alkamides in
Echinacea drugs. Planta Med 1989; 55: 367-371.

5. Lienert D et al. Gas chromatography-mass spectral analysis of roots
of Echinacea species and classification by multivariate data analysis.
Phytochem Anal 1998; 9: 88-89.

6 Sloley BD et al. Comparison of chemical components and antioxidant
capacity of different Echinacea species. ] Pharm Pharmacol 2001; 53:
849-857.

7 Kraus GA, Bae J. Synthesis of N-(2-methylpropyl)-2E-undecene-8,10-
diynamide, a novel constituent of Echinacea angustifolia. Tetrahedron
Lett 2003; 44: 5505-5506.

8 Becker H et al. Structure of echinoside. Z Naturforsch 1982; 37c: 351-
353.

9 Pietta P, Mauri P, Bauer R. MEKC analysis of different species. Planta
Med 1998; 64: 649-652.

10 Wills RBH, Stuart DL. Alkylamide and cichoric acid levels in
Echinacea purpurea grown in Australia. Food Chem 1999; 67: 385—
388.

11 Niisslein B et al. Enzymatic degradation of cichoric acid in Echinacea
purpurea preparations. J Nat Prod 2000; 63: 1615-1618.

12 Proksch A, Wagner H. Structural analysis of a 4-O-
methylgluconoarabinoxylan with immunostimulating activity from
Echinacea purpurea. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1989-1993.

13 Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating action of polysaccharides
(heteroglycans) from higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35:
1069-1075.

14 Bauer R. Echinacea — Pharmazeutische qualitat und therapeutischer
wert. Z Phytother 1997; 18: 207-214.

15 Blaschek W et al. Echinacea — Polysaccharide. Z Phytother 1998; 19:
255-262.

16 Classen B et al. Characterisation of an arabinogalactan-protein
isolated from pressed juice of Echinacea purpurea by precipitation
with the B-glucosyl Yariv reagent. Carbohydrate Res 2000; 327: 497-
504.

17. Bauer R et al. TLC and HPLC analysis of Echinacea pallida and E.
angustifolia root. Planta Med 1988; 54: 426-430.

18 Réder E et al. Pyrrolizidine in Echinacea angustifolia DC und
Echinacea purpurea M. Arzneimittelforschung 1984; 124: 2316-2317.

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

Lin L et al. Patuetin-3-O-Rutinoside from the aerial parts of
Echinacea angustifolia. Pharm Biol 2002; 40: 92-95.

Bauer R et al. New alkamides from Echinacea angustifolia and E.
purpurea roots. Planta Med 1988; 563-564.

Glowniak K et al. Solid phase extraction and reversed-phase high-
performance liquid chromatography of free phenolic acids in some
Echinacea species. | Chromatogr A 1996; 730: 25-29.

Pugh N et al. Elusive immunostimulatory compound discovered in
Echinacea and other immune enhancing botanicals. International
Congress on Natural Product Research. Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 44
[abstract].

Perry NB et al. Alkamide levels in Echinacea purpurea: a rapid
analytical method revealing differences among roots, rhizomes, stems,
leaves and flowers. Planta Med 1997; 63: 8-62.

Osowski S$ et al. Zur pharmazeutischen Vergleichbarkeit von
therapeutisch verwendeten Echinacea-Praparaten. Forsch
Komplementirmed Klass Naturheilk 2000; 7: 294-300.
ConsumerLab. Product review: Echinacea. [accessed September 23,
2003]

Gilroy CM et al. Echinacea and truth in labeling. Arch Intern Med
2003; 163: 699-704.

Tobler M et al. Characteristics of whole fresh plant extracts. Schweiz
Zschr GanzheitsMedizin 1994; 6: 257-266.

Bauer R. Standardization of Echinacea purpurea expressed juice with
reference to cichoric acid and alkalamides. J Herbs Spices Med Plants
1999; 6: 51-62.

Ganzera M et al. An improved method for the determination of
betaine in Echinacea products. Pharmazie 2001; 56: 552-553.

Gray DE e¢ al. Acute drought stress and plant age effects on
alkalamide and phenolic acid content in purple coneflower roots.
Planta Med 2003; 69: 50-55.

Kabganian R et al. Drying of Echinacea angustifolia roots. ] Herbs
Spices Med Plants 2002; 10: 11-19.

Perry NB et al. Alkamide levels in Echinacea purpurea: effects of
processing, drying and storage. Planta Med 2000; 66: 54-56.

Livesey J et al. Effect of temperature on stability of marker
constituents in Echinacea purpurea root formulations. Phytomedicine
1999; 6: 347-349.

Li TS, Wardle DA. Effects of root drying temperature and moisture
content on the levels of active ingredients in Echinacea roots. ] Herbs
Spices Med Plants 2001; 8: 15-22.

Petty HR et al. Identification of colchicine in placental blood from
patients using herbal medicines. Chem Res Toxicol 2001; 14: 1254-
1258.

Li Wet al. Evaluation of commercial ginkgo and echinacea dietary
supplements for colchicine using liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry. Chem Res Toxicol 2002; 15: 1174-1178.

Upton R (ed). Echinacea purpurea root. Echinacea purpurea (L.)
Moench. Standards of analysis, quality control, and therapeutics.
Scotts Valley: American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium, 2004.

Hobbs C. Echinacea. A literature review. HerbalGram 1994; 30
(Suppl): 33-47.

Matthias A e¢ al. Echinacea — what constituents are therapeutically
important? International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 43 [abstract].

Barrett B. Medicinal properties of Echinacea: a critical review.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 66-86.

Bauer R et al. [Pressaft aus dem Kraut von Echinacea purpurea: ein
allopathisches Phytoimmunstimulans]. Wien med Wschr 1999; 149:
185-189.

Schulte KE et al. Das Vorkommen von Polyacetylen-Verbindungen in
Echinacea purpurea Mnch. und Echinacea angustifolia DC.
Arzneimittelforschung 1967; 17: 825-829.

Bauer R et al. Immunologische in-vivo und in-vitro Untersuchungen
mit Echinacea Extracten. Arzneimittelforschung 1988; 38: 276-281.
Voémel T. Der einfluss eines pflanzelischen Immunostimulans auf die
Phagozytose von Erythozyten durch das retikulohistozytare System
der isoliert perfundierten Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35:
1437-1439.

Burger A et al. Echinacea-induced cytokine production by human
macrophages. Int J Immunopharmacol 1997; 19: 371-379.

----- PAGE 246 -----
46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

Stimpel M et al. Macrophage activation and induction of macrophage
cytotoxicity by purified polysaccharide fractions from the plant
Echinacea purpurea. Infect Immun 1984; 46: 845-849.

Luettig B et al. Macrophage activation by the polysaccharide
arabinogalactan isolated from plant cell cultures of Echinacea
purpurea. J] Natl Cancer Inst 1989; 81: 669-675.

Wagner H et al. Immunologically active polysaccharides of Echinacea
purpurea cell cultures. Phytochemistry 1988; 27: 119-126.

Rininger JA et al. Immunopharmacological activity of Echinacea
preparations following simulated digestion on murine macrophages
and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Leukoc Biol 2000;
68: 503-510.

Di Carlo G et al. Modulation of apoptosis in mice treated with
Echinacea and St John's wort. Pharmacol Res 2003; 48: 273-277.
See DM et al. In vitro effects of echinacea and ginseng on natural
killer and antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity in healthy subjects and
chronic fatigue syndrome or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
patients. Immunopharmacology 1997; 35: 229-235.

Sun LZ-Y et al. The American coneflower: a prophylactic role
involving nonspecific immunity. J Altern Complement Med 1999; 5:
437-446.

Currier NL, Miller SC. Echinacea purpurea and melatonin augment
natural-killer cells in leukemic mice and prolong life span. J Altern
Complement Med 2001, 7: 241-251.

Currier NL, Miller SC. Natural killer cells from aging mice treated
with extracts from Echinacea purpurea are quantitatively and
functionally rejuvenated. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35: 627-639.

Cundell DR et al. The effect of aerial parts of Echinacea on the
circulating white cell levels and selected immune functions of the aging
male Sprague-Dawley rat. International Immunopharmacol 2003; 3:
1041-1048.

Goel V et al. Echinacea stimulates macrophage function in the lung
and spleen of normal rats. | Nutr Biochem 2002; 13: 487-492.

Goel V et al. Alkylamides of Echinacea purpurea stimulate alveolar
macrophage function in normal rats. Int Inmmunopharmacol 2002; 2:
381-387.

Wagner H, Jurcic K. Immunological studies of Revitonil”, a
phytopharmaceutical containing Echinacea purpurea and Glycyrrhiza
glabra root extract. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 390-397.

Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Effects of an orally applied aqueous-
ethanolic extract of a mixture of Thujae occidentalis herba, Baptisiae
tinctoriae radix, Echinaceae purpureae radix and Echinaceae pallidae
radix on antibody response against sheep red blood cells in mice.
Planta Med 1999; 65: 695-699.

South EH, Exon JH. Multiple immune functions in rats fed echinacea
extracts. Inmmunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 2001; 23: 411-421.
Gertsch J et al. Echinacea alkylamides modulate TNF-alpha gene
expression via cannabinoid receptor CB2 and multiple signal
transduction pathways. FEBS Lett 2004; 577: 563-569.

Bodinet C, Beuscher N. Antiviral and immunological activity of
glycoproteins from Echinacea purpurea radix. Planta Med 1991; 57
(Suppl 2): A33-34.

Thompson KD. Antiviral activity of Viracea" against acyclovir
susceptible and acyclovir resistant strains of herpes simplex virus.
Antiviral Res 1998; 39: 55-61.

Binns SE e¢ al. Antiviral activity of characterized extracts from
Echinacea spp. (Heliantheae: Asteraceae) against herpes simplex virus
(HSV-1). Planta Med 2002; 68: 780-783.

Wacker A, Hilbig W. Virus inhibition by Echinacea purpurea. Planta
Med 1978; 33: 89-102.

Binns SE et al. Light-mediated antifungal activity of Echinacea
extracts. Planta Med 2000; 66: 241-244.

Binns SE et al. A taxonomic revision of the genus Echinacea
(Helianthae; Asteraceae). Systematic Bot 2002; 27: 610-632.

Merali S e¢ al. Antifungal and anti-inflammatory activity of the genus
Echinacea. Pharmaceutical Biol 2003; 41: 412-420.

Roesler J et al. Application of purified polysaccharides from cell
cultures of the plant Echinacea purpurea to mice mediates protection
against systemic infection with Listeria monocytogenes and Candida
albicans. Int J Immunopharmacol 1991; 13: 27-37.

Steinmiiller C et al. Polysaccharides isolated from plant cell cultures of
Echinacea purpurea enhance the resistance of immunosuppressed mice

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

Echinacea

against systemic infection with Candida albicans and Listeria
monocytogenes. Int ] Immunopharmacol 1993; 15: 605-614.
Westendorf J. Carito" — in-vitro Untersuchungen zum Nachweiss
spasmolytischer und kontraktiler Einfliisse. Therapiewoche 1982; 32:
6291-6297.

Tubaro A et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of a polysaccharidic
fraction of Echinacea angustifolia. | Pharm Pharmacol 1987,
569.

Tragni E et al. Evidence from two classical irritation tests for an anti-
inflammatory action of a natural extract, echinacea B. Food Chem
Toxicol 1985; 23: 317-319.

Tragni E et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Echinacea angustifolia
fractions separated on the basis of molecular weight. Pharmacol Res
Commun 1988; 20(Suppl V): 87-90.

Mattace Raso G et al. In-vivo and in-vitro anti-inflammatory effect of
Echinacea purpurea and Hypericum perforatum. ] Pharm Pharmacol
2002; 54: 1379-1383.

Clifford LJ et al. Bioactivity of alkamides isolated from Echinacea
purpurea (L.) Moench. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 249-253.
Miiller-Jakic B e¢ al. In vitro inhibition of cyclooxygenase and S-
lipoxygenase by alkamides from Echinacea and Achillea species.
Planta Med 1994; 60: 37-40.

Speroni E e¢ al. Anti-inflammatory activity and cicatrizing activity of
Echinacea pallida Nutt. root extract. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 79:
265-272.

Busing K. Hyaluronidasehemmung durch echinacin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1952; 2: 467-469.

Zoutewelle G, van Wijk R. Effects of Echinacea purpurea extracts on
fibroblast populated collagen lattice contraction. Phytother Res 1990;
4: 77-81.

Facino RM et al. Echinacoside and caffeoyl conjugates protect
collagen from free radical-induced degradation: a potential use of
Echinacea extracts in the prevention of skin photodamage. Planta
Med 1995; 61: 510-514.

Voaden DJ, Jacobson M. Tumour inhibitors. 3. Identification and
synthesis of an oncolytic hydrocarbon from American coneflower
roots. | Med Chem 1972; 15: 619-623.

Jager H et al. Transport of alkamides from Echinacea species through
Caco-2 monolayers. Planta Med 2002; 68: 469-471.

Matthias A et al. Permeability studies of alkylamides and caffeic acid
conjugates from Echinacea using a Caco-2 cell monolayer model. J
Clin Pharm Ther 2004; 29: 7-13.

Dietz B et al. Absorption of dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid
isobutylamides after oral application of Echinacea purpurea tincture.
Planta Med 2001; 67: 863-864.

Matthias A et al. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of alkylamides
from Echinacea. International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: p57, p133 [abstract].

Wolkart K et al. Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of alkamides
from the roots of Echinacea angustifolia in humans after oral
application. International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 44 [abstract].

Melchart D et al. Immunomodulation with Echinacea — a systematic
review of controlled clinical trials. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 245-254.
Melchart D e¢ al. Results of five randomized studies on the
immunomodulatory activity of preparations of echinacea. J Altern
Complement Med 1995; 1: 145-160.

Kim LS et al. Immunological activity of larch arabinogalactan and
Echinacea: a preliminary, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Altern Med Rev 2002; 7: 138-149.

Berg A et al. Influence of Echinacin (EC31) treatment on the exercise-
induced immune response in athletes. J Drug Assessment 1998; 1: 625—
638.

Roesler J et al. Application of purified polysaccharides from cell
cultures of the plant Echinacea purpurea to test subjects mediates
activation of the phagocyte system. Int J Immunopharmacol 1991; 13:
931-941.

Schwarz E et al. Oral administration of freshly expressed juice of
Echinacea purpurea herb fail to stimulate the nonspecific immune
response in healthy young men: results of a double-blind, placebo-
controlled crossover study. J Immunother 2002; 25: 413-420.

567—

----- PAGE 247 -----
Echinacea

94 Elsasser-Beile U et al. Cytokine production in leukocyte cultures
during therapy with echinacea extract. J Clin Lab Anal 1996; 10: 441-
445,

95 Lersch C et al. Nonspecific immunostimulation with low doses of
cyclophosphamide (LDCY), thymostimulin, and Echinacea purpurea
extracts (Echinacin) in patients with far advanced colorectal cancers:
preliminary results. Cancer Invest 1992; 10: 343-348.

96 Melchart D et al. Polysaccharides isolated from Echinacea purpurea
herba cell cultures to counteract undesired effects of chemotherapy — a
pilot study. Phytother Res 2002; 16: 138-142.

97  Melchart D et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common
cold (Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2003.
Oxford: Update Software.

98 Linde K et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold
(Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 1.
Art. No.: CD000530.

99 Melchart D et al. Echinacea root extracts for the prevention of upper
respiratory tract infections. A double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomized trial. Arch Kam Med 1998; 7: 541-545.

100 Grimm W, Miiller H-H. A randomized controlled trial of the effect of
fluid extract of Echinacea purpurea on the incidence and severity of
colds and respiratory infections. Am J] Med 1999; 106: 138-143.

101 Turner RB et al. Ineffectiveness of echinacea for prevention of
experimental rhinovirus colds. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;
44: 1708-1709.

102 Sperber SJ et al. Echinacea purpurea for prevention of experimental
rhinovirus colds. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38: 1367-1371.

103 Turner RB et al. An evaluation of Echinacea angustifolia in
experimental rhinovirus infection. N Engl ] Med 2005; 353: 341-348.

104 Cohen HA et al. Effectiveness of an herbal preparation containing
Echinacea, propolis, and vitamin C in preventing respiratory tract
infections in children. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, multicenter study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004; 158:
217-221.

105 Christakis DA, Lehmann HP. Can an herbal preparation of echinacea,
propolis, and vitamin C reduce respiratory illnesses in children? Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004; 158: 222-224.

106 Barrett BP et al. Treatment of the common cold with unrefined

echinacea. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann
Intern Med 2002; 137: 939-946.

107 Brinkeborn RM et al. Echinaforce” and other Echinacea fresh plant
preparations in the treatment of the common cold. A randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Phytomedicine 1999; 6:
1-S.

108 Schulten B et al. Efficacy of Echinacea purpurea in patients with a
common cold. A placebo-controlled, randomised, double-blind
clinical trial. Arzneimittelforschung 2001; 51: 563-568.

109 Lindenmuth GE, Lindenmuth EB. The efficacy of echinacea compound
herbal tea preparation on the severity and duration of upper
respiratory and flu symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. J Altern Complement Med 2000; 6: 327-334.

110 Yale SH, Liu K. Echinacea purpurea therapy for the treatment of the
common cold: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Arch Intern Med 2004; 164: 1237-1241.

111 Goel V et al. Efficacy of a standardized echinacea preparation
(Echinilin) for the treatment of the common cold: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Pharm Ther 2004; 29:
75-83.

112 Taylor JA et al. Efficacy and safety of Echinacea in treating upper
respiratory tract infections in children. A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2003; 290: 2824-2830.

113 Spasov AA et al. Comparative controlled study of Andrographis
paniculata fixed combination, Kan Jang" and an Echinacea
preparation as adjuvant in the treatment of uncomplicated respiratory
disease in children. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 47—

114 Firenzuoli F, Gori L. Echinacea for treating colds in children [letter].
JAMA 2004; 291: 1323-1324.

115 Taylor JA et al. Echinacea for treating colds in children [letter]. JAMA
2004; 291: 1324.

116 Vonau B et al. Does the extract of the plant Echinacea purpurea
influence the clinical course of recurrent genital herpes? Int ] STD
AIDS 2001; 12: 154-158.

117 Parnham MJ. Benefit-risk assessment of the squeezed sap of the
purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) for long-term oral
immunostimulation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 95-102.

118 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (7). Colds. Pharm J 2002; 269: 716-718.

119 Barnes J et al. Different standards for reporting ADRs to herbal
remedies and conventional OTC medicines: face-to-face interviews
with 515 users of herbal remedies. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1998; 45: 496—
500.

120 Barnes J et al. Echinacea species (Echinacea angustifolia (DC.) Hell.,
Echinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt., Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench): a
review of their chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2005; 57: 929-954.

121 Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed 3 February 2005].

122 Mullins RJ, Heddle R. Adverse reactions
the Australian experience. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002; 88:
42-51.

123 Mullins RJ. Echinacea-associated anaphylaxis. Med J Aust 1998; 168:
170-171.

124 Myers SP, Wohlmuth H. Echinacea-associated anaphylaxis. Med J
Aust 1998; 168: 583.

125 Soon SL, Crawford RI. Recurrent erythema nodosum associated with
echinacea herbal therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001; 44; 298-299.

126 Logan JL, Ahmed J. Critical hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis due
to Sjégren's syndrome: association with the purported immune
stimulant echinacea. Clin Rheumatol 2003; 22: 158-159.

127 Schwarz S et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after parenteral
therapy with herbal extracts: a report of two cases. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000; 69: 516-518.

128 Kayne SB. Homoeopathic Pharmacy. An Introduction and Handbook.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.

129 Lee AN, Werth VP. Activation of autoimmunity following use of
immunostimulatory herbal supplements. Arch Dermatol 2004; 140:
723-727.

130 Lenk M. Akute Toxizitat von verschieden Polysacchariden aus
Echinacea purpurea an der Maus. Z Phytother 1989; 10: 49-51.

131 Mengs U et al. Toxicity studies with Echinacin [abstract presented at
Third International Conference on Phytomedicine, Munich Germany,
October 2000]. Phytomedicine 2000; 2(Suppl): 32.

132 Mengs U et al. Toxicity of Echinacea purpurea. Acute, subacute and
genotoxicity studies. Arzneimittel Forschung 1991; 41: 1076-1081.

133 Ondrizek RR et al. An alternative medicine study of herbal effects on
the penetration of zona-free hamster oocytes and the integrity of
sperm deoxyribonucleic acid. Fertil Steril 1999; 71: 517-522.

134 Ondrizek RR et al. Inhibition of human sperm motility by specific
herbs used in alternative medicine. ] Assist Reprod Genet 1999; 16:
87-91.

135 Gorski JC et al. The effect of Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea root) on
cytochrome P450 activity in vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 89—
100.

136 Gurley BJ et al. In vivo assessment of botanical supplementation on
human cytochrome P450 phenotypes: Citrus aurantium, Echinacea
purpurea, milk thistle, and saw palmetto. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 428-440.

137 Budzinski JW et al. An in vitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450
3A4 inhibition by selected commercial herbal extracts and tinctures.
Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 273-282.

138 Currier NL et al. Deleterious effects of Echinacea purpurea and
melatonin on myeloid cells in mouse spleen and bone marrow. J
Leukoc Biol 2001; 70: 274-276.

139 Gallo M et al. Pregnancy outcome following gestational exposure to
echinacea: a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160:
3141-3143.

ociated with echinacea:

----- PAGE 248 -----
Elder

- b
effects have been observed in in vivo studies, thus supporting
the herbal uses of elder. No documented studies in humans
were found. Potentially toxic compounds have been reported
for the bark (lectins) and the leaves (cyanogenetic
glycosides); the flowers are suitable for use as a herbal
remedy.

Species (Family)

Sambucus nigra L. (Caprifoliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Black Elder, European Elder, Sambucus
Sambucus canadensis L. refers to American Elder

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
CSL”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G41, G62 and G75.

Flavonoids Flavonols (kaempferol, quercetin), quercetin glyco-
sides (1.5-3.0%) including hyperoside, isoquercitrin and rutin.

Triterpenes x- and B-amyrin, oleanolic and ursolic acids.

Volatile oils 0.3%. 66% fatty acids (primarily linoleic, linolenic
and palmitic) and 7% alkanes (Cy, C21, C23 and Cs). Numerous
other constituent types have been identified including ethers and
oxides, ketones, aldehydes, alcohols and esters."

Other constituents Chlorogenic acid, tannin, mucilage, plasto-
cynin (protein), pectin and sugar.

Other plant parts Leaf Sambunigrin (0.042%), prunasin, zierin
and holocalin (cyanogenetic glycosides), choline, flavonoids
(rutin, quercetin), sterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol, campes-
terol), triterpenes (a- and B-amyrin palmitates, oleanolic and
ursolic acids), alkanes, fatty acids, tannins and others.'@*”)

Bark Lectin (mol. wt 140000) rich in asparagine/aspartic acid,
glutamine/glutamic acid, valine and leucine,“ phytohaemag-
glutinin, triterpenoids (o%-amyrenone, o&-amyrin, betulin,
oleanolic acid, B-sito sterol).

Food Use

Elder is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of natural food
flavouring (categories N1 and N2). Category N1 refers to the fruit
and indicates that there are no restrictions on quantities used.
Category N2 refers to the restrictions on the concentrations of
hydrocyanic acid that are permitted, namely 1 mg/kg in beverages
and foods, 1 mg/kg for every per cent proof of alcoholic beverages,
5 mg/kg in stone fruit juices, 25 mg/kg in confectionery and 50 mg/
kg in marzipan.’ Previously, the flowers have had a regulatory
status of GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C*

Herbal Use

Elder is stated to possess diaphoretic and anticatarrhal properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for influenza, colds, chronic nasal
catarrh with deafness and sinusitis.(“* Elder is also stated to act

as a diuretic, laxative and local anti-inflammatory agent.'°? °°
8, G41, G49, God)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flower 2-4 g by infusion three times dailyC*°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

Phenylpropanoids

O°
O° ZA OH
HOOC. ‘OH
OH
OH OH

chlorogenic acid (5-caffeoylquinic acid)

Triterpenes

a-amyrin CHs
ursolic acid COOH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of elder.

----- PAGE 249 -----
238 Elder

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Elder is stated to possess diuretic and laxative properties.'“4”

Moderate (27%) anti-inflammatory action in carrageenan-
induced rat paw oedema has been documented for an elder
preparation given one hour before carrageenan (100 mg/kg, by
mouth).'” Indometacin as a control exhibited 45% inhibition at a
dose of 5mg/kg.

An infusion made from the flowers of elder, St John's wort herb
and root of soapwort (Saponaria officinalis) has exhibited
antiviral activity against influenza types A and B (in vivo and in
vitro) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (in vitro).

A diuretic effect in rats exceeding that exerted by theophylline
has been reported for elder. An infusion and extracts rich in
potassium and in flavonoids all caused diuresis. Greatest activity
was exerted by the combined potassium- and flavonoid-rich
extracts.

In vitro antispasmodic activity (rat ileum, rabbit/guinea-pig
intestine) and spasmogenic activity (rat uterus) have been reported
for lectins isolated from elder."

A lectin isolated from elder bark was found to be a lactose-
specific haemagglutinin with a slightly higher affinity for
erythrocytes from blood group A.“ Unlike many other plant
lectins, the lectin did not inhibit protein synthesis.“ The
carbohydrate-binding properties of a lectin isolated from elder
bark have been studied.”

Phytohaemagglutinins are biologically active extracts isolated
from various plants and represent a class of lectin. They are
associated with haemagglutination and mitogenic, antigenic and
immunosuppressant properties.” In vitro, phytohaemagglutinin
has been found to stimulate production of an interferon-like
substance in human leukocytes.'@*>

Hepatoprotective activity against carbon tetrachloride-induced
toxicity has been reported for triterpenes isolated from Sambucus
formosana Nakai.”

Figure 2. Elder (Sambucus nigra).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research as
rigorous randomised controlled cl
Phytohaemagglutinin extracts have been used clinically to treat
drug-induced leucopenia and some types of anaemia.” The
blastogenic response of lymphocytes to phytohaemagglutinin has
been used extensively as a measure of immunocompetence.‘“*

ing the effects of elder and
inical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

No reported side-effects specifically for elder were located.
However, there is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for
elder and further investigation of these aspects is required. Human
poisoning has occurred with Sambucus species.) The roots,
stems and leaves and, much less so, the flowers and unripe berries,
are stated to contain a poisonous alkaloid and cyanogenic
glycoside causing nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.''*) The flowers
and ripe fruit are stated to be edible without harm."'?)

The effects of a lectin isolated from elder bark on mammalian
embryonic and fetal development has been studied. The lectin
exerted mainly a toxic effect and, to a lesser degree, a teratogenic
effect when administered subcutaneously to pregnant mice. In
view of the high doses administered, the authors stated that the
results did not indicate a potential hazard to human fetuses
exposed to lectins.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Plant parts other than the flowers are reported to be poisonous
and should not be ingested. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that elder has a diuretic effect; the clinical
relevance of this, if any, is unclear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of elder to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of elder taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data, the use of elder during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Figure 3 Elder — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 250 -----
Herbs; EP&C Essence; Hay Fever & Sinus Relief; Hayfever
Sinus Relief; Herb and Honey Cough Elixir; Life Drops; Lion
Cleansing Herbs; Lustys Herbalene; Modern Herbals Cold &
Catarrh; Sinotar; Summertime Tea Blend; Tabritis; Tabritis
Tablets. USA: Liquid Elderberry with Ester-C.

References

1 Toulemonde B, Richard HMJ. Volatile constituents of dry elder
(Sambucus nigra L.) flowers. J Agric Food Chem 1983; 31: 365-370.

10

cay

12

13

Elder

Scawen MD et al. The amino-acid sequence of plastocyanin from
Sambucus nigra L. (elder). Eur J] Biochem 1974; 44: 299-303.

Jensen SR, Nielsen BJ. Cyanogenic glucosides in Sambucus nigra L.
Acta Chem Scand 1973; 27: 2661-2685.

Broekaert WF et al. A lectin from elder (Sambucus nigra L.) bark.
Biochem J] 1984; 221: 163-169.

Paulo E. Effect of phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) from the bark of
Sambucus nigra on embryonic and foetal development in mice. Folia
Biol (Krakow) 1976; 24: 213-222.

Lawrie W et al. Triterpenoids in the bark of elder (Sambucus nigra).
Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 267-268.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28.

Serkedjieva J et al. Antiviral activity of the infusion (SHS-174) from
flowers of Sambucus nigra L., aerial parts of Hypericum perforatum
L., and roots of Saponaria officinalis L. against influenza and herpes
simplex viruses. Phytother Res 1990; 4: 97.

Rebuelta M et al. Etude de l'effet diurétique de différentes
préparations des fleurs du Sambucus nigra L. Plant Méd Phytothér
1983; 17: 173-181.

Richter A. Changes in the motor activity of smooth muscles of the rat
uterus in vitro as the effect of phytohaemagglutinins from Sambucus
nigra. Folia Biol 1973; 21: 33-48.

Shibuya N e¢ al. The elderberry (Sambucus nigra L.) bark lectin
recognizes the NeuSAc(«2-6)Gal/GalNAc sequence. J Biol Chem
1987; 262: 1596-1601.

Lin C-N, Tome W-P. Antihepatotoxic principles of Sambucus
formosana. Planta Med 1988; 54: 223-224.

Hardin JW, Arena JM, eds. Human Poisoning from Native and
Cultivated Plants, 2nd edn. North Carolina: Duke University Press,
1974.

----- PAGE 251 -----
Elecampane

e demulcent action of mucilage and reported in vivo
antispasmodic activity of the volatile oil support the
traditional uses of this remedy in coughs. In addition,
alantolactone has been utilised as an anthelmintic. A number
of interesting cardiovascular activities have been documented
for a related species, /. racemosa. Whether the constituents
responsible for these actions are also present in elecampane is
unclear. In view of the paucity of toxicity data for
elecampane, excessive or prolonged use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Inula helenium L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Alant, Horseheal, Inula, Scabwort, Tu Mu Xiang, Yellow
Starwort

An elecampane extract has been referred to as helenin.
Alantolactone is also known as elecampane camphor, alant
camphor, helenin and inula camphor.'©*)

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G75.

Carbohydrates Inulin (up to 44%), mucilage.

Terpenoids {- and y-sitosterols, stigmasterol and damaradienol
(sterols), friedelin.

Volatile oils 1-4%. Mainly contains sesquiterpene lactones
including alantolactone, isoalantolactone and dihydroalantolac-
tone (eudesmanolides), alantic acid and azulene.

Other constituents Resin.

Food Use

Elecampane is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
elecampane can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.““'®

Previously in the USA, elecampane was only approved for use in
alcoholic beverages.'@*”

Herbal Use

Elecampane is stated to possess expectorant, antitussive, dia-
phoretic and bactericidal properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for bronchial/tracheal catarrh, cough associated with
pulmonary tuberculosis and dry irritating cough in children.‘C*
G6, G7, G8, G64)

Alantolactone has been used as an anthelmintic in the
treatment of roundworm, threadworm, hookworm and whip-

worm infection.'(C**

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Rhizome/root 1.5-4.0g as a decoction three times daily,'(C% °”

Liquid extract 1.5-4.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Elecampane infusion has exhibited a pronounced sedative effect in
mice.(“* Alantolactone has been reported to exhibit hypotensive,
hyperglycaemic (large doses) and hypoglycaemic (smaller doses)
actions in animals.'“*" Antibacterial properties have also been
documented. Alantolactone and isoalantolactone have been
reported to exhibit high bactericidal and fungicidal properties in
vitro?

The volatile oil has been reported to exert a potent smooth
muscle relaxant effect in vitro on guinea-pig ileal and tracheal
muscle.

Various activities have been documented for Inula racemosa: an
extract lowered plasma insulin and glucose concentrations in rats
75 minutes after oral administration,”
induced hyperglycaemia in rats,”) exhibited negative inotropic and
chronotropic effects on the frog heart,” and provided a
preventative and curative action against experimentally induced
myocardial infarction in rats. Pretreatment was found to be
most effective.”

Sesquiterpene lactones with antitumour activity have been
isolated from Helenium microcephalum.>*

counteracted adrenaline-

Clinical studies

There is a lack of rigorous clinical research assessing the effects of
elecampane and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Alantolactone has been used as an anthelmintic in the
treatment of roundworm, threadworm, hookworm and whip-

worm infection.'(C**

----- PAGE 252 -----
Sesquiterpenes

alantolactone

mnie}

germacrene-D-lactone

Monoterpenes

°

8,9-epoxy-10-isobutyryloxy-
thymol isobutyrate

Triterpenes

dammaranedio!

Polysaccharide

HO oO

HO

inulin
(30-35 D-fructose residues)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of elecampane.

Inula racemosa has been reported to prevent ST-segment
depression and T-wave inversion in patients with proven ischaemic
heart disease,” and to have a beneficial effect on angina
pectoris.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for elecampane
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Elecampane has been reported to cause allergic contact
dermatitis.“ Sensitising properties have been documented for
the volatile oil,{6°!%* and for alantolactone and isoalantolac-
tone.” In vitro cytotoxicty has been reported for alantolactone
and isoalantolactone.

Elecampane

isoalantolactone

Polyacetylene
HsG—C=C—C=C-C=C—C=C—C=C—C=Chy

H
C-13 polyacetylene

Contraindications, Warnings

Elecampane may cause an allergic reaction, particularly in
individuals with an existing allergy or sensitivity to other plants
in the Asteraceae family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of elecampane to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that alantolactone, a constituent of
elecampane, has hypotensive and hypo- and hyperglycaemic
activities.

----- PAGE 253 -----
ey Elecampane

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Brust- und Hustentee St Severin. Czech Republic:
Species Cholagogae Planta. France: Mediflor Tisane Digestive
No 3; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5. Germany: Klosterfrau
Melisana. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
naapuptit Boapmoii Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Won-
derkroonessens. Spain: Bronpul; Natusor Asmaten; Natusor
Broncopul. Switzerland: Hederix; Padmed Laxan. UK: Cat-
arrh-eeze; Cough-eeze; Horehound and Aniseed Cough
Mixture; Vegetable Cough Remover.

References

Figure 2. Elecampane (Inula helenium). 1 Reiter M, Brandt W. Relaxant effects on tracheal and ileal smooth
muscles of the guinea pig. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 408-414.

2. Tripathi YB et al. Assessment of the adrenergic beta-blocking activity
of Inula racemosa. ] Ethno pharmacol 1988; 23: 3-9.

3 Patel V et al. Effect of indigenous drug (puskarmula) on

experimentally induced myocardial infarction in rats. Act Nerv Super
(Praha) 1982; (Suppl 3): 387-394.

4 Sims D et al. Antitumor agents 37. The isolation and structural

elucidation of isohelenol, a new antileukemic sesquiterpene lactone,
and isohelenalin from Helenium microcephalum. J Nat Prod 1979; 42:
282-286.

5S Imakura Y et al. Antitumor agents XXXVI: Structural elucidation of
sesquiterpene lactones microhelenins-A, B, and C, microlenin acetate,
and plenolin from Helenium microcephalum. J Pharm Sci 1980; 69:
1044-1049.

6 Tripathi SN et al. Beneficial effect of Inula racemosa (pushkarmoola)
in angina pectoris: a preliminary report. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol
1984; 28: 73-75.

7 Stampf JL et al. The ser ng capacity of helenin and two of its

Figure 3 Elecampane — dried drug substance (rhizome). main constituents the sesquiterpene lactones alantolactone and

isoalantolactone: a comparison of epicutaneous and intradermal

sensitising methods in different strains of guinea pig. Contact

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of elecampane taken during Dermatitis 1982; 8: 16-24.
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity Woerdenbag HI. In vitro cytotoxicity of sesquiterpene lactones from
data, the use of elecampane during pregnancy and lactation Eupatorium cannabinum L. and semi-synthetic derivatives from

should be avoided. eupatoriopicrin. Phytother Res 1988; 2: 109-114.

----- PAGE 254 -----
Ephedra

In view of the safety concerns regarding the use of ephedra
products, individuals wishing to use these products should be
advised to consult an appropriately trained health care
professional. Pharmacists and other health care professionals
should be aware that ephedra may be included in unlicensed
herbal products and food supplements under the name Ma
Huang. Such products will not include reference to ephedra
in the labelling.

Species (Family)

*Ephedra sinica Stapf (Ephedraceae)
E. equisetina Bunge

E. intermedia Shrenk ex Meyer
SE. gerardiana Wallich ex Meyer

E. major Host

Synonym(s)
*Cao Ma Huang, E. mahuang Liu
E. shennungiana Tang
Zhong Ma Huang
SE. gerardiana var. congesta C.Y. Cheng, Shan Ling Ma Huang
|E. scoparia Lange, E. nebrodensis Tineo ex Guss
Ephedra (and some other herbs) has also been referred to as
erbal ecstasy’.

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'*®
WHO volume 1 19990)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Ephedra is not included in the GSL.“©*”

Ephedra is included in Parts II and III of SI 2130." This allows
supply of ephedra (maximum dose of 600mg and a maximum
daily dose of 1800 mg) following a one-to-one consultation with a
practitioner.

Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are not included on the GSL.
Both are prescription-only medicines (POM), but can be supplied
through pharmacies at certain permitted doses, as follows.
Ephedrine for internal preparations: maximum dose 30mg,
maximum daily dose 60mg; nasal preparations, ephedrine 2%.
Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride for internal preparations: max-
imum dose 60 mg, maximum daily dose 240 mg; prolonged-release

preparations: maximum dose 120mg, maximum daily dose
240 mg. Pseudoephredine sulfate for internal preparations: max-
imum dose 60 mg, maximum daily dose 180 mg.

Constituents

Alkaloids 0.5-2.0%. Mainly (—)-ephedrine (30-90% in most
species, except E. intermedia) and (+)-pseudoephedrine, also (—)-
norephedrine, (+)-nor pseudoephedrine, (—)-methylephedrine
and (+)-methylpseudoephedrine. °°)

Volatile oil Mainly terpenoids (e.g. «&-terpineol, limonene,
tetramethylpyrazine, terpinen-4-ol, linalol).

Other constituents Tannins (catechin, gallic acid), ephedrans
(glycans) and acids (citric, malic, oxalic).

Roots

Alkaloids Ephedroxane, ephedradines A to D, feruloylhistamine
and maokonine.

Flavonoids A flavonoflavonol (ephedrannin A), bisflavonols
(mahuannins A to D).“

Food Use

Ephedra is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Ephedra has traditionally been used for the treatment of bronchial
asthma, hayfever, coughs and colds, fever, urticaria, enuresis,
narcolepsy, myasthenia gravis, chronic postural hypotension and
rheumatism, (32 G34 G36, G49, G54, G63, God)

It is stated to have vasoconstricting, bronchodilating and
central stimulating properties.‘ Modern interest in ephedra is
focused on its use in cough and bronchitis,@* and in nasal
congestion due to hayfever, allergic rhinitis, common cold and

Alkaloids

(-)-norephedrine H
(-)-ephedrine CH3

(+)-norpseudoephedrine H
(+)-pseudoephedrine CHg

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ephedra.

----- PAGE 255 -----
Ephedra

sinusitis.) There is also interest in the potential of ephedra as

an appetite suppressant.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Herb 1.2-2.3g cut herbs containing approximately 1.3% (13 mg/
g) total alkaloids.‘

Extract Adults: 15—30mg alkaloids (maximum daily dose
300 mg), calculated as ephedrine.‘

Tincture 6-8 mL (1:4) three times daily.“

In 1997, the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)
proposed restrictions on the use of ephedra. The FDA proposals
included a restriction on the maximum dose of ephedrine: 8 mg
taken every six hours to a maximum daily dose of 24mg for no
more than seven days.‘

Figure 3. Ephedra — dried drug substance (herb).

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological properties of ephedra are due to the
presence of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and other ephedra
alkaloids (see Constituents). Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are
sympathomimetic agents that have direct and indirect effects on
both «- and B-adrenoceptors, as well as stimulating the central
nervous system (CNS).(¢#> 9?) Pseudoephedrine is stated to have
less pressor activity and fewer CNS effects than ephedrine.'“*”

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacological activities documented for ephedrine and/or
pseudoephedrine in vitro or in vivo (animals) include smooth
muscle relaxant, cardiovascular, anti-inflammatory, immuno-
modulatory, CNS stimulatory and antimicrobial effects. The
pharmacology of ephedra and its constituent alkaloids has been
reviewed."*°®)

Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine have been stated to have a
relaxant effect on bronchial smooth muscle in isolated rabbit lung
and bronchi.) Relaxant effects on gastrointestinal smooth muscle
have also been noted.“+®

Ephedrine has been shown to cause vasoconstriction and to
have hypertensive effects in several animal models.“*° Maoko-
nine, a constituent of ephedra root, has been reported to have
hypertensive effects in anaesthetised rats.’ By contrast, other
constituents of ephedra roots, such as ephedrannin A and
feruloylhistamine, have been reported to have hypotensive
activity"! An aqueous extract of ephedra and its alkaloid
fraction increased blood pressure, heart rate and blood glucose
concentration in anaesthetised dogs following intravenous admin-
istration.”

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for ephedrine
and pseudoephedrine in carrageenan-induced hind-paw oedema in
3) Oral administration of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine
also inhibited hind-paw oedema induced by histamine, serotonin,
bradykinin and prostaglandin E;. Crude extracts of ephedra have
been reported to inhibit complement in vitro." Further
investigation, using an aqueous extract of E. sinica leaves, showed
at the complement-inhibiting component of ephedra inhibited
the classical complement pathway in sera from several species,
including human, pig, guinea-pig, rat and rabbit."

In vitro antibacterial activity against several species, including
Staphylococcus aureus, has been reported.

In vitro studies have assessed the cytotoxicity of extracts of
ephedra prepared under various conditions (e.g. using ground or
unground material boiled for 0.5 or 2 hours) against a range of
cell lines, including a human hepatoblastoma cell line (HepG2), a
mouse neuroblastoma cell line (Neuro-2a) and a mouse fibro-
blastoma cell line.) Ephedrine and ephedra extracts prepared
from ground material appeared to be significantly more cytotoxic
in these cell lines than did preparations from unground material.
Also, Neuro-2a cells were more sensitive to ephedra extracts than
were the other cell lines tested. Findings of this in vitro work also
indicated that ephedra contains toxins other than ephedrine, as
ICso values were lower (i.e. indicating greater cytotoxicity) for
ephedra extracts than for ephedrine alone.

mice.

ao

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are readily
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and are excreted, largely
unchanged, in the urine.'“* Small amounts of metabolites
following hepatic metabolism may be produced. The half-lives

----- PAGE 256 -----
of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine range from 3-6 hours and from
5-8 hours, respectively, depending on urinary pH.'(“*”

In a study involving 12 healthy volunteers aged 23-40 years,
four capsules of an ephedra product were administered twice, nine
hours apart. Each capsule contained ephedra 375 mg (E. sinica),
with a mean (standard deviation (SD)) ephedrine content of 4.84
(0.45) mg." The half-life was reported to be 5.2 hours, maximum
plasma concentration (Cy,ax) was 81.0ng/mL, the time to reach
Cmax (tmax) Was 3.9 hours, and clearance was 24.3 L/hour.

In a randomised, crossover study, 10 healthy volunteers received
ephedrine 25 mg or one of three ephedrine-containing nutritional
supplements on one day during different phases of the study, each
) Following single-dose
administration of ephedrine 25mg, mean (SD) half-life, Cyaxs
tmax and clearance were found to be 5.37 (1.67) hours, 86.5 (15.4)
ng/mL, 2.81 (1.35) hours and 28.5 (5.92) L/hour, respectively.

with a one-week wash-out period.”

Therapeutic effects The pharmacological properties of ephedrine
and pseudoephedrine in humans have been documented and
include cardiovascular, bronchodilator and CNS stimulant
effects, (43653)

Ephedrine is stated to raise blood pressure by increasing cardiac
output and also by peripheral vasoconstriction. Ephedrine relaxes
bronchial smooth muscle, reduces intestinal tone and motility,
relaxes the bladder wall and reduces the activity of the uterus.
Ephedrine is a CNS stimulant; this has led to its investigation for
use in assisting weight loss.

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
ephedra and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed
the effects of a herbal combination preparation which included
ephedra and other herbal ingredients.*’ In the study, 67
overweight to obese individuals (body mass index 29-35 kg/m”)
received the ephedra-containing preparation, or placebo, for eight
weeks. Among the 48 participants who completed the study (24 in
each group), a greater mean (SD) weight loss was noted for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (4.0 (3.4) kg
versus 0.8 (2.4) kg, respectively; p < 0.006).

Side-effects, Toxicity

The most common adverse effects of ephedrine and pseudoephe-
drine are tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness and insomnia.‘¢*
Tremor, dry mouth, impaired circulation to the extremities,
hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias may also occur with
ephedrine, and skin rashes and urinary retention have been
reported for pseudoephedrine.'“*? There are isolated reports of
hallucinations in children following use of pseudoephedrine.(“*)
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for ephedra
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

In the US, adverse effects have been reported following self-
treatment with products containing ephedra alkaloids marketed
for several uses, including as an aid to weight loss, to increase
athletic performance, and as an alternative to illegal drugs of
abuse.(1? S49)
A review assessed 140 reports of adverse events related to the
use of products containing ephedra alkaloids, usually combined
th caffeine, submitted to the US FDA between June 1997 and
March 1999." The main reasons for use of these products were
weight loss (59%) and to increase athletic performance (16%); the
reason for use was unknown in 17% of cases. Thirty-one per cent
of cases (n = 43) were considered to be ‘definitely! or ‘probably!

w

Ephedra

related to the use of products containing ephedra alkaloids, and a
further 31% (n = 44) were judged to be ‘possibly! related; for 29
cases, insufficient information was available to assess causation,
and 24 ca:
products. In several cases, individuals were thought to be ingesting
up to 60mg ephedra alkaloids daily. Of the 87 cases where
causality was assessed, cardiovascular symptoms (mainly hyper-
tension, palpitations, tachycardia) were the most common adverse
events (47%). The most common CNS events were stroke (7 = 10)
and seizures (1 = 7). Where events were ‘definitely’ or ‘probably!
related (n = 43), clinical outcomes were death (three cases),
permanent impairment (seven) and ongoing treatment (four); a
full recovery occurred in 29 cases.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a
herbal supplement containing ephedra (72 mg/day) and guarana
(240 mg/day), as well as other herbal ingredients, 23% (” = 8) of
participants in the treatment group withdrew from the study
because of adverse events (e.g. dry mouth, insomnia, headache)

that may have been treatment-related; there were no withdrawals
(18)

were deemed to be 'unrelated' to use of these

among placebo recipients.

There are isolated reports of myocarditis,~”
autoimmune hepatitis,” acute hepatitis,”
and psychiatric complications?”
ephedra-containing products. There is a report of sudden death
associated with ephedrine toxicity in a 23-year-old man.) Several
other reports also document psychosis and renal calculi following
chronic use or misuse of ephedrine.“@'*)

In a study involving 12 normotensive adults who ingested four
capsules each containing 375 mg powdered ephedra, followed by
four more capsules nine hours later, a statistically significant
increase in heart rate, compared with baseline values, was noted in
six participants, although effects on blood pressure were
variable."

» exacerbation of

nephrolithiasis?”
associated with the use of

Preclinical data

A study involving 47 dogs who were considered to have
accidentally ingested herbal products containing ephedra and
guarana reported that most dogs (80%) developed clinical signs of
toxicosis, within eight hours of ingestion, which persisted for up
to 48 hours.°% Hyperactivity, tremors, seizures and behaviour
changes were reported in 83% of dogs; other signs and symptoms

included vomiting, tachycardia and hyperthermia.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Ephedra is stated to be contra-indicated in coronary thrombosis,
diabetes, glaucoma, heart disease, hypertension, thyroid disease,
phaeochromocytoma and enlarged prostate.“
states that ephedrine (and, therefore, ephedrine-containing
products) should be used with caution in patients with diabetes,
ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, hyperthyoidism, renal
impairment and angle-closure glaucoma, and that in patients
with prostate enlargement, ephedrine may increase difficulty with
micturition.'°*) Tt has been recommended to redu
discontinue treatment if nervousness, tremor, sleeplessness, loss of
appetite or nausea occur with use of ephedra preparations.'(“)
There is a report of a professional sportsman who tested
positive for norpseudoephedrine after having consumed a liquid
herbal product listing ephedra as one of the 15 ingredients.”

) Another source

the dose or

Drug interactions
applicable.

Warnings documented for ephedrine are

----- PAGE 257 -----
Ephedra

Ephedrine-containing products should be avoided in patients

receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors as concomitant treatment
may lead to a hypertensive crisis.'(“4) Ephedrine should also be
avoided or used with caution in patients undergoing anaesthesia
with cyclopropane, halothane or other volatile anaesthetics. There
may be an increased risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving
ephedrine together with cardiac glycosides, quinidine or tricyclic
antidepressants, and there is an increased risk of vasoconstrictor
or pressor effects in patients receiving ergot alkaloids or
oxytocin. '04)
Pregnancy and lactation There are no reliable data on the use
of ephedra during pregnancy and lactation. The safety of ephedra
during pregnancy and lactation has not been established and its
use should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
Canada: Herbal Cold Relief. Germany: Cefadrin.

References

1 Medicines Act 1968, Statutory Instrument 1977 No. 2130 (Retail Sale
of Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order, 1977.

2 Dewick P. Medicinal Natural Products. A Biosynthetic Approach.
Wiley: Chichester, 1997.

3 Miyazawa M et al. Volatile components of Ephedra sinica Stapf.
Flavour Fragrance J 1997; 12: 15-17.

4 Tang W, Eisenbrand G. Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin. Chemistry,
Pharmacology and Use in Traditional and Modern Medicine. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1992: 481-490.

5S Blumenthal M. Ephedra update: industry coalition asks FDA to adopt
national labeling guidelines on ephedra; offers co-operative research
with NIH. Herbal Gram 2000; 50: 64-65.

6 Chang H-M, But PP-H, eds. Pharmacology and Applications of
Chinese Materia Medica, vol 2. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing, 1987: 1119-1124.

7 Kalix P. The pharmacology of psychoactive alkaloids from Ephedra
and Catha. J Ethnopharmacol 1991; 32: 201-208.

8 Bowman WC, Rand MJ. Textbook of Pharmacology, 2nd edn. Oxford:
Blackwell, 1980.

10

1

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

23

24

26

27

Tamada M et al. Maokonine, hypertensive principle of Ephedra roots.
Planta Med 1978; 34: 291-293.

Hikino H et al. Structure of feruloylhistamine, a hypotensive principle
of Ephedra roots. Planta Med 1983; 48: 108-110.

Hikino H et al. Structure of ephedrannin A, a hypotensive principle of
Ephedra roots. Tetrahedron Lett 1982; 23: 673-676.

Harada M, Nichimura M. Contribution of alkaloid fraction to
pressor and hyperglycemic effect of crude ephedra extract in dogs. J
Pharm Dyn 1981; 4: 691-699.

Kasahara Y et al. Antiinflammatory actions of ephedrines in acute
inflammations. Planta Med 1985; 51: 325-331.

Ling M et al. A component of the medicinal herb ephedra blocks
activation in the classical and alternative pathways of complement.
Clin Exp Immunol 1995; 102: 582-588.

Lee MK et al. Cytotoxicity assessment of Ma-huang (Ephedra) under
different conditions of preparation. Toxicol Sci 2000; 56: 424-430.
White LM et al. Pharmacokinetics and cardiovascular effects of ma-
huang (Ephedra sinica) in normotensive adults. J Clin Pharmacol
1997; 37: 116-122.

Gurley BJ et al. Ephedrine pharmacokinetics after the ingestion of
nutritional supplements containing Ephedra sinica (ma huang). Ther
Drug Monitoring 1998; 20: 439-445.

Boozer CN et al. An herbal supplement containing Ma-Huang-
Guarana for weight loss: a randomised, double-blind trial. Int J
Obesity 2001; 25: 316-324.

Haller CA, Benowitz NL. Adverse cardiovascular and central nervous
system events associated with dietary supplements containing ephedra
alkaloids. N Engl J Med 2000; 343: 1833-1838.

Zaacks SM et al. Hypersensitivity myocarditis associated with
ephedra use. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1999; 37: 485-489.

Borum ML. Fulminant exacerbation of autoimmune hepatitis after
the use of Ma Huang. Am J Gastroenterol 2001; 96: 1654-1655.
Nadir A et al. Acute hepatitis associated with the use of a Chinese
herbal product, ma-huang. Am J Gastroenterol 1996; 91: 1436-1438.
Powell T et al. Ma-Huang strikes again: ephedrine nephrolithiasis. An
] Kidney Dis 1998; 32: 153-159.

Jacobs KM, Hirsch KA. Psychiatric complications of Ma-huang.
Psychosomatics 2000; 41: 58-62.

Theoharides TC. Sudden death of a healthy college student related to
ephedrine toxicity from a ma huang-containing drink. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1997; 17: 437-439.

Ooms TG et al. Suspected caffeine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting
from ingestion of an herbal supplement containing guarana and ma
huang in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999). ] Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218:
225-229.

Ros JJW et al. A case of positive doping associated with a botanical
food supplement. Pharm World Sci 1999; 21: 44.

----- PAGE 258 -----
u Eucalyptus

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Eucalyptus is characterised by its volatile oil components.
Antiseptic and expectorant properties have been attributed to
the oil, in particular to the principal component eucalyptol.
The undiluted oil is toxic if taken internally. Essential oils
should not be applied to the skin unless they are diluted with
a carrier vegetable oil.

Species (Family)
Eucalyptus globulus Labill. (Myrtaceae)

Synonym(s)

E. maidenii subsp. globulus (Labill.) Kirkp., Fevertree, Gum Tree,
Tasmanian Bluegum

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G75.

Flavonoids Eucalyptrin, hyperoside, quercetin, quercitrin and
rutin.

Volatile oils 0.5-3.5%. Eucalyptol (cineole) 70-85%. Others
include monoterpenes (e.g. %-pinene, B-pinene, d-limonene, p-
cymene, &-phellandrene, camphene, y-terpinene) and sesquiter-
penes (e.g. aromadendrene, alloaromadendrene, globulol, epiglo-
bulol, ledol, viridiflorol), aldehydes (e.g. myrtenal) and ketones
(e.g. carvone, pinocarvone).

Monoterpenes

oO

1,8-cineole
(eucalyptol)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of eucalyptus.

Other constituents Tannins and associated acids (e.g. gallic acid,
protocatechuic acid), caffeic acid, ferulic acids, gentisic acid,
resins and waxes.

Food Use

Eucalyptus is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (leaves, flowers and preparations: category N4,
with limits on eucalyptol) (see Appendix 3).'©'” Both eucalyptus
and eucalyptol (cineole) are used as flavouring agents in many
food products.“ Previously in the USA, eucalyptus was
approved for food use and eucalyptol was listed as a synthetic
flavouring agent.'@*

Herbal Use

Eucalyptus leaves and oil have been used as an antiseptic, febrifuge
and expectorant.

(G2, G41, God)

=
Figure 2 Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus).

Figure 3 Eucalyptus — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 259 -----
Eucalyptus

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in older standard reference texts
are given below.

Eucalyptol (cineole BPC 1973) 0.05-0.2 mL.
Eucalyptus Oil (BPC 1973) 0.05-0.2 mL.
Fluid extract 24g.

Oil for local application 30 mL oil to 500 mL lukewarm water.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypoglycaemic activity in rabbits has been documented for a
crude leaf extract rich in phenolic glycosides. Purification of the
extract resulted in a loss of activityC4? Expectorant and
antibacterial activities have been reported for eucalyptus oil and
for eucalyptol.'“4” Various Eucalyptus species have been shown to
possess antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative organisms. Gram-positive organisms were found
to be the most sensitive, particularly Bacillus subtilis and
Micrococcus glutamious.

In vitro antiviral activity against influenza type A has been
documented for quercitrin and hyperoside.‘@*?

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
eucalyptus and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Eucalyptus oil has been taken orally for catarrh, used as an
inhalation and applied as a rubefacient.(“**) A plant preparation

containing tinctures of various herbs including eucalyptus has
been used in the treatment of chronic suppurative otitis.”

Side-effects, To y

Externally, eucalyptus oil is stated to be generally non-toxic, non-
sensitising and non-phototoxic.“® Undiluted eucalyptus oil is
toxic and should not be taken internally. A dose of 3.5 mL has
proved fatal.'“*9) Symptoms of poisoning with eucalyptus oil
include epigastric burning, nausea and vomiting, dizziness,
ular weakness, miosis, a feeling of suffocation, cyanosis,
delirium and convulsions.

mu:

Contra-indications, Warnings
Eucalyptus oil should be diluted before internal or external use.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of eucalyptus to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that constituents of eucalyptus have
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Eucalyptus oil should not be taken
internally during pregnancy or lactation.

References

1 Kumar A et al. Antibacterial properties of some Eucalpytus oils.
Fitoterapia 1988, 59: 141-144.

2 Shaparenko BA e¢ al. On use of medicinal plants for treatment of
patients with chronic suppurative otitis. Zh Ushn Gorl Bolezn 1979;
39: 48-51.

----- PAGE 260 -----
a Euphorbia

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is little published information concerning euphorbia,
although documented actions observed in animals support
the traditional herbal uses. There is a lack of information
concerning toxicity and excessive or prolonged ingestion
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Chamaesyce hirta (L.) Millsp. (Euphorbiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Euphorbia capitata Lam., E. hirta L., Pillbearing Spurge, Snake-
weed

Part(s) Used

Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Leucocyanidin, quercetin, quercitrin and xanthor-
hamnin.

Terpenoids «- and B-Amyrin, taraxerol and esters, friedelin;
campesterol, sitosterol and stigmasterol (sterols).

Other constituents Choline, alkanes, inositol, phenolic acids
(e.g. ellagic, gallic, shikimic), sugars and resins.
Food Use

Euphorbia is not used in foods.

Herbal Use
Euphorbia is stated to be used for respiratory disorders, such as

asthma, bronchitis, catarrh and laryngeal spasm. It has also been

used for intestinal amoebiasis.'C7°™

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.

Herb 120-300 mg as an infusion.‘©”?
Liquid Extract of Euphorbia (BPC 1949) 0.12-0.3 mL.
Euphorbia Tincture (BPC 1923) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Euphorbia has been reported to have antispasmodic and
histamine-potentiating properties.“C*) Smooth muscle relaxing

Triterpenes

B-amyrin

taraxerol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of euphorbia.

Figure 2 Euphorbia (Chamaesyce hirta).

----- PAGE 261 -----
Euphorbia

Figure 3. Euphorbia — dried drug substance (herb).

and contracting activities have been exhibited by euphorbia in
vitro (guinea-pig ileum) and have been attributed to shikimic acid
and to choline, respectively.”

In vivo antitumour activities have been documented for
euphorbia.'(C*?

Antibacterial activity in vitro versus both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria has been documented for euphorbia.”
Stem extracts were slightly more active than leaf extracts. In vitro
amoebicidal activity versus Entamoeba histolytica has been
reported for a euphorbia decoction.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
euphorbia and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for euphorbia and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Carcinogenic properties in mice have been

reported for shikimic acid, although no mutagenic activity was
: G41
observed in the Ames assay.“

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of euphorbia to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of euphorbia has not been
established. Euphorbia has been reported to cause both contrac-
tion and relaxation of smooth muscle. In view of the lack of
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of euphorbia during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Asa Tones; Euphorbia Complex; Procold; Sambucus
Complex. Canada: Sirop Cocillana Codeine. Hong Kong:
Cocillana Christo; Cocillana Compound; Cocillana Com-
pound; Cocillana Compound; Mefedra-N. UK: Antibron.

References

1 El-Naggar L et al. A note on the isolation and identification of two
pharmacologically active constituents of Euphorbia pilulifera. Lloydia
1978; 41: 73-75.

2 Ajao AO et al. Antibacterial activity of Euphorbia hirta. Fitoterapia
1985; 56: 165-167.

3. Basit N et al. In vitro effect of extracts of Euphorbia hirta Linn. on
Entamoeba histolytica. Riv Parasitol 1977; 38: 259-262.

----- PAGE 262 -----
associated with its use. Evening primrose oil may have the
potential to make manifest undiagnosed temporal lobe
epilepsy, especially in schizophrenic patients and/or those
who are already receiving known epileptogenic drugs, such as
phenothiazines (see Contra-indications, Warnings). Evening
primrose oil should be used with caution by such patients and
those with a history of epilepsy. In view of the lack of safety
data, evening primrose oil should not be taken during
pregnancy. As LA and gamolenic acid occur naturally in breast
milk, it is reasonable to expect that evening primrose oil can
be taken during breastfeeding, although whether or not
concentrations of LA and gamolenic acid in breast milk of
mothers ingesting high doses of evening primrose oil can
reach levels that may be harmful to the neonate should be
considered.

Species (Family)
Oenothera biennis L. (Onagraceae)
Synonym(s)

Common Evening Primrose, King's Cureall, Onagra biennis (L.)
Scop.

Part(s) Used
Seed oil

Evening Primrose

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007'¢8
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
Ph Eur 20078”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Evening primrose is not included in the GSL.‘“?” Gamolenic acid

is a prescription-only medicine. Product licences for the products
Epogam and Efamast (which contain gamolenic acid derived from
evening primrose oil) were withdrawn in the UK on 7 October,
2002.”

Constituents

Fixed oils 14%. cis-Linoleic acid (LA) 72% (65-80%), cis-
gammalinolenic acid (gamolenic acid, GLA) 2-16%, oleic acid
9%, palmitic acid 7% and stearic acid (3%).°-”

Food Use

Evening primrose root has been used as a vegetable with a peppery
flavour.) The seed oil has been used as a food supplement for
many years. LA and gamolenic acid are both essential fatty acids
(EFAs), with LA representing the main EFA in the diet, whilst
gamolenic acid is found in human milk, in oats and barley, and in
small amounts in a wide variety of common foods.”

Herbal Use

An infusion of the whole plant is reputed to have sedative and
astringent properties, and has traditionally been used for
asthmatic coughs, gastrointestinal disorders, whooping cough
and as a sedative painkiller.” Externally, poultices were reputed to
ease bruises and to speed wound-healing.”

Evening primrose oil (EPO) was licensed in the UK for the
treatment of atopic eczema, and cyclical and non-cyclical

Fatty acids

COOH

a-linolenic acid

COOH

linoleic acid

COOH

S
linolenic acid
Figure 1 Selected constituents of evening primrose.

----- PAGE 263 -----
252. Evening Primrose

mastalgia, but product licences for two products were withdrawn
in 2002 due to a lack of data sufficient to support efficacy in these
‘.258) Other conditions in which evening primrose oil
has been used include premenstrual syndrome, psoriasis, multiple

conditions.

sclerosis, hypercholesterolaemia, rheumatoid arthritis, Raynaud's
phenomenon, Sjégren's syndrome, postviral fatigue syndrome,
asthma and diabetic neuropathy.”

Dosage

Dosages recommended for previously licensed evening primrose
oil products in the UK are given below; doses were based on a
standardised gamolenic acid content of 8%. However, evening
primrose oil products licensed in the UK had their product
licences withdrawn in 2002 due to a lack of data sufficient to
support efficacy’ Thus, there is no evidence that the dosages
described below are efficacious in the conditions stated.

Atopic eczema: 6-8¢g daily (adults); 24g daily (children);
cyclical and non-cyclical mastalgia: 34 g daily. The manufacturer

advised that treatment for three months may be necessary before a
clinical response is observed.”

Pharmacological Actions

The actions of evening primrose oil are attributable to the
ential fatty acid content of the oil and to the involvement of

these compounds in prostaglandin biosynthetic pathways.°>”

In vitro and animal studies

Gamolenic acid and its metabolite dihomogamma-linolenic acid
(DGLA) are precursors of both the inflammatory prostaglandin
E, (PGE») series via arachidonic acid (AA), and of the less
inflammatory prostaglandin E; (PGE;) series. Actions attributed
to PGE; include anti-inflammatory, immunoregulatory and

vasodilatory properties, inhibition of platelet aggregation and
cholesterol biosynthesis, hypotension and elevation of cyclic AMP
(inhibits phospholipase A, see below).°

Dietary supplementation with gamolenic acid has been noted to
have a favourable effect on the DGLA: AA ratio. Although an
increase in arachidonic acid concentrations is also seen, this is
much smaller and less consistent compared with the increase
for DGLA."”) Contributory factors to this negative effect on
arachidonic acid are PGE, and 15-hydroxy-DGLA. The latter
inhibits conversion of arachidonic acid to inflammatory lip-
oxygenase metabolites including leukotrienes, whilst PGE;

en,

Figure 2 Evening primrose (Oenothera biennis).

inhibits the enzyme phospholipase A, which is required for the
mobilisation of arachidonic acid from phospholipid membrane
stores. In addition, DGLA desaturation to arachidonic acid is a
rate-limiting step in humans and proceeds very slowly.

Gamolenic acid is not normally obtained directly from dietary
sources and the body relies on metabolic conversion from dietary
LA. This conversion is readily saturable and is considered to be
the rate-limiting step in the production of gamolenic acid. A
reduced rate of LA conversion to gamolenic acid has been
observed in a number of clinical situations including ageing,
diabetes, cardiovascular disorders and high cholesterol concentra-
tions, high alcohol intake, viral infections, cancer, nutritional
deficits, atopic eczema and premenstrual syndrome.°~ Direct
dietary supplementation with gamolenic acid effectively bypasses
this rate-limiting conversion step and has a beneficial effect on the
ratio of inflammatory:non-inflammatory prostaglandin com-
pounds.

Gamolenic acid, administered as evening primros
prevent or reverse diabetic neuropathy in animal models.

Administration of gamolenic acid to animals has been reported
to prevent or attenuate renal damage. Gamolenic acid decreases
blood pressure and platelet aggregation in animals.) In vitro
studies have observed that malignant cells die following exposure
to gamolenic acid and related fatty acids at concentrations that
are non-lethal to normal cells. In vitro studies have shown
gamolenic acid to inhibit the growth of various human cancer cell
ines, and in vivo studies have described an inhibitory effect of
gamolenic acid on tumour growth.
Evening primrose oil represents a good source of both LA and,
more importantly, of gamolenic acid. There is a large body of
iterature on the biochemical rationale for the therapeutic uses of
evening primrose oil.) Alternative natural oil sources
blackcurrant or borage that offer a higher gamolenic acid yield
compared with that of evening primrose oil have been identified,
although th

biological effects as those observed for evening primrose oil."

oil, can

uch as

ese oils have not been found to exhibit the same

Clinical studies

There is a large body of literature on the effects of evening
primrose oil and gamolenic acid in various diseas
associated with low concentrations of gamolenic acid. For the
most part, the available data are inconclusive, and/or arise from
studies with methodological limitations. The efficacy of evening
primrose oil in these conditions, therefore, has not been

states

Figure 3 Evening primrose — dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 264 -----
established and further, rigorous research is required. The
following is a summary of some of the clinical studies of evening
primrose oil and gamolenic acid.

Atopic eczema An inherited slow rate of 6-desaturation (LA to
gamolenic acid conversion) has been documented in_ this
condition. Normal or elevated concentrations of LA are
associated with reduced concentrations of their metabolites.
Some randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
suggested gamolenic acid improves features of atopic eczema,
especially in itch.?*!°') However, two large trials have not

415) A review of the available evidence

shown evidence of benefit.
to support the efficacy of evening primrose oil preparations in
atopic eczema concluded that there were insufficient data, and
product licences for evening primrose preparations licensed in the
UK for atopic eczema were withdrawn in 2002.°*)

Cyclical/non-cyclical mastalgia and premenstrual syndrome
PGE, is thought to modulate the action of prolactin. Abnormal
concentrations may result in an excessive peripheral action of
prolactin.) The use of evening primrose oil for the treatment of
premenstrual syndrome has been rationalised on the grounds that
hypersensitivity to prolactin is due to low levels of PGE,.'® High
levels of linoleic acid and low levels of gamma-linolenic acid have
been observed for patients with premenstrual syndrome.

Several placebo-controlled studies in the older literature have
reported that gamolenic acid is better than placebo in the
treatment of premenstrual syndrome and/or breast pain.°>!”
However, conflicting results have been obtained from other clinical
studie: assessing the effects of
evening primrose oil preparations have concluded that there are no
reliable data on their efficacy in relieving symptoms of
premenstrual syndrome, including mastalgia,"®) and product
licences for evening primrose preparations licensed in the UK
for the treatement of mastalgia were withdrawn in 2002.7"

Authoritative reviews of studi

Diabetic neuropathy Diabetes has been associated with reduced
ability to desaturate essential fatty acids, with deficits resulting in
abnormal neuronal membrane structure. A double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial has described reversal of diabetic neuropathy by
gamolenic acid."

Multiple sclerosis The results of clinical trials on the use of
evening primrose oil for the treatment of multiple sclerosis are
contradictory.*> Patients with recent onset or le:
the disease are more likely to respond. Linoleic acid may have a
beneficial effect on the severity and duration of relapses and on
the progression of the disease.” It is suggested that linoleic acid is
involved in the immunosuppressive effect at the cellular level and
may be of use when combined with a low animal fat/high
polyunsaturated fat diet.

vere forms of

Rheumatoid arthritis A randomised, double-blind trial has
demonstrated a significant improvement in subjective symptoms
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (indicated by a reduction in required
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug treatment) in the active
group receiving evening primrose oil compared with the placebo
group. However, no objective changes were observed in any of the
biochemical indicators of RA.

Sjogren’s syndrome This disease is associated with the loss of
secretions from exocrine glands throughout the body, but
especially from the salivary and lacrimal glands. One of the
features of EFA deficiency is exocrine gland atrophy. Placebo-
controlled trials have shown a modest improvement in tear flow

Evening Primrose

together with relief of lethargy, a prominent feature of the
syndrome.)

Coronary heart disease Abnormal intake and metabolism of
EFAs (both 1-3 and 1-6) are thought to be important risk factors
for coronary heart disease (CHD), resulting in enhanced
cholesterol and_ triglyceride biosynthesis, enhanced platelet
aggregation and elevated blood pressure. Dietary supplementation
with foods or oils rich in LA (1-6) or in marine (n-3) EFAs have
significantly the risk of CHD, although it
is considered that an optimum balance between n-3 and n-6 EFAs
may well be important."* >” gamolenic acid has been reported to

decrease blood pressure and platelet aggregation in humans.)

been found to decre:

Renal disease Renal tissue is especially rich in EFAs, and
prostaglandins of the E series are believed to be important in
maintaining adequate renal blood flow. A single placebo-
controlled trial involving postrenal transplant patients demon-
strated better graft survival rate for the group receiving evening
primrose oil (45 patients) compared with the placebo group (44
patients).

Gastrointestinal disorders A double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover trial has indicated a beneficial effect of evening primrose
oil on irritable bowel syndrome exacerbated by premenstrual
syndrome. A beneficial effect superior to that of fish oil or
placebo has been reported for evening primrose oil in ulcerative
colitis.

Viral infections/postviral fatigue A single placebo-controlled
study has demonstrated significant beneficial effects in patients
with well-defined postviral fatigue (PVF) receiving evening
primrose oil compared with those receiving placebo. Symptoms
arrested were muscle weakness, aches and pains, lack of
concentration, exhaustion, memory loss, depression, dizziness
and vertigo.'>*

Endometriosis A _placebo-controlled trial has shown that
gamolenic acid in combination with eicosapentaenoic acid (n-3
EFA metabolite) reduced symptoms of endometriosis in 90%
women, whereas 90% of the placebo group reported no relief
from symptoms.)

Schizophrenia It is believed that EFAs, in particular PGE,,
antagonise the excessive central dopaminergic activity that is
thought to be a possible cause of schizophrenia. Low concentra-
tions of LA in plasma phospholipids have been observed in
populations of schizophrenics from Ireland, England, Scotland,
Japan and the USA. It is thought that a poor recovery rate from
the disease is associated with the presence of saturated fats in the
diet, but not with unsaturated fats. Various open and placebo-
controlled trials of gamolenic acid and DGLA supplementation
have reportedly produced mixed results. Administration of
evening primrose oil with co-factors known to be important in
EFA metabolism (zinc, pyridoxine, niacin and vitamin C)
enhanced the improvements in memory loss, schizophrenic
symptoms and tardive dyskinesia that were observed in evening

primrose oil-treated compared with placebo-treated patients.°~

Alcoholism Evening primrose oil has been documented to reduce
symptoms in the first three weeks of withdrawal, indicated by a
reduced requirement for tranquillisers, and to significantly
improve the rate of return to normal liver function. However, in
the longer term, evening primrose did not affect the relapse rate.)

Dementia Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia are
associated with low serum concentrations of EFAs. A single

----- PAGE 265 -----
24 Evening Primrose

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 187) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Oenothera
biennis preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of 2005.2”

jody as a whole — general
reaction (4); therapeutic response decreased (5);
condition aggravated (5); fatigue (4); fever (6); malaise
(7); pain (7); withdrawal syndrome (3)

isorders. Including allergic

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including 5
hypertension (3)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. 84
Including convulsions (16); convulsions, aggravated (8);
dizziness (5); headache (27); paraesthesia (9)

Endocrine disorders. 2
Foetal disorders.

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal 74
pain (18); constipation (3); diarrhoea (12); dyspepsia

(7); eructation (3); flatulence (5); nausea (19); vomiting

G)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. 2

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatic 11
function abnormal (4); hepatitis (3)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including thirst (3); 15
weight decrease (3)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders. Including arthralgia 8
(3); myalgia (3)

Neoplasm. 2
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. Including 13
purpura (3)

Psychiatric disorders. Including nervousness (4); 38
aggressive reaction (3); confusion (3)

Red blood cell disorders. 1
Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including 17

menorrhagia (4); menstrual disorder (3)

Resistance mechanism disorders. 1

Respiratory system disorders. Including bronchospasm, 18
aggravated (4); dyspnoea (4)

Skin and appendages disorders. Including acne (4); 96
alopecia (3); eczema (5); pruritus (11); skin exfoliation

(4); sweating increased (4); rash (9); rash, erythematous

(11); rash, macropapular (5); urticaria (16)

Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (5) 13
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. Including flushing (4) 6
Vision disorders. Including abnormal vision (4) 12
White cell and res. disorders. 1
Other reactions described using terms not included in 4
database

Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 489

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

‘Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

placebo-controlled trial in patients with Alzheimer's disease
reported improvements in cerebral function in the evening
primrose oil group compared with the placebo group.

Hyperactivity in children Hyperactive children tend to have
abnormal levels of essential fatty acids. No improvements in
behavioural patterns and no changes in blood fatty acids were
observed in one trial with evening primrose oil.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for evening
primrose and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Limited clinical data on safety aspects of evening primrose oil
preparations are available from clinical trials.

Evening primrose oil appears to be well tolerated when taken at
recommended dosages." Mild gastrointestinal effects, indiges-
tion, nausea and softening of stools and headache have
occasionally occurred.” It has been noted that there may be
an increased risk of temporal lobe epilepsy in schizophrenic
patients being treated with epileptogenic drugs such as phe-
3°) In cases of overdosage, symptoms of loose stools
and abdominal pain have been noted; no special treatment is
required. The two principal components in evening primrose oil
are LA and gamolenic acid. LA is commonly ingested as part of
the diet. It has been estimated that the concentration of gamolenic
acid provided by evening primrose oil is comparable to that
metabolised in the body from normal dietary LA.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 291 reports,
describing a total of 489 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain Oenothera biennis only as the active ingredient (see
Table 1).°? Reports originated from 12 different countries. (These
data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the
WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least
with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

nothiazines

Preclinical data

Toxicity studies have indicated evening primrose oil to be non-
toxic.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Evening primrose oil may have the potential to make manifest
undiagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy, especially in schizophrenic
patients and/or those who are already receiving known epilepto-
genic drugs such as phenothiazines.” Evening primrose oil should
be used with caution by such patients and those with a history of
epilepsy.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of evening primrose oil, the potential for preparations of
evening primrose oil to interfere with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing

----- PAGE 266 -----
effects, should be considered. Evening primrose oil may increase
the risk of seizure in patients receiving phenothiazines.

Pregnancy and lactation Animal studies have indicated evening
primrose oil to be non-teratogenic."”) However, data on the safety
of evening primrose oil during human pregnancy are not available
and therefore patients should be advised not to take evening
primrose oil during pregnancy unless the potential benefits
outweigh the potential harms. In view of the lack of conclusive
evidence for the efficacy of evening primrose oil, it is unlikely that
the benefit-harm balance would be in favour of patients using
evening primrose oil.

Both LA and gamolenic acid are normally present in breast
milk (see Side-effects, Toxicity) and it has been calculated that a
breastfed infant receives a higher proportion (mg/kg) of LA and
gamolenic acid from human milk than from evening primrose oil
ingested by the breastfeeding mother. It is reasonable to assume,
therefore, that evening primrose oil may be taken while
breastfeeding, although whether or not concentrations of LA
and gamolenic acid in breast milk of mothers ingesting high doses
of evening primrose oil can reach levels that may be harmful to the
neonate should be considered.

Italy: Sclerovis H. UK: Boots Alternatives Premenstrual; Seven
Seas Evening Primrose Oil and Starflower Oil. USA: Evening
Primrose Oil; PMS Control.

References

1 Anon. Withdrawal of Epogam and Efamast. Curr Prob
Pharmacovigilance 2002; 28: 12.

2 Anon. What's new. Epogam and Efamast (gamolenic acid) —
withdrawal of marketing authorisations. www.mca.gov.uk/whatsnew/
epogam.html [accessed November 19, 2002]

3 Li Wan Po A. Evening primrose oil. Pharm J 1991; 246: 670-676.

ND

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

18

19

20

21

Evening Primrose

Barber HJ. Evening primrose oil: a panacea? Pharm J 1988; 240: 723-
725.

Horrobin DE. Gammalinolenic acid: an intermediate in essential fatty
acid metabolism with potential as an ethical pharmaceutical and as a
food. Rev Contenrp Pharmacother 1990; 1: 1-45.

Carter JP. Gamma-linolenic acid as a nutrient. Food Technol 1988; 72.
Briggs CJ. Evening primrose. Rev Pharm Can 1986; 119: 249-254.
Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (9). Women's health. Pharm J 2003; 270:
16-18.

Anon. Data Sheet Compendium 1994-95, 1520-1. Efamast, Epogam,
Epogam Paediatric (Searle).

Lovell CR et al. Treatment of atopic eczema with evening primrose oil.
Lancet 1981; 1: 278.

Schalin-Karrila M et al. Evening primrose oil in the treatment of
atopic eczema: effect on clinical status, plasma phospholipid fatty
acids and circulating blood prostaglandins. Br J Dermatol 1987; 117:
11-19.

Wright S, Burton JL. Oral evening primrose seed oil improves atopic
eczema. Lancet 1982; ii: 1120-1122.

Stewart JCM et al. Treatment of severe and moderately severe atopic
dermatitis with evening primrose oil (Epogam); a multicentre study. J
Nutr Med 1991; 2: 9-15.

Bamford JTM et al. Atopic eczema unresponsive to evening primrose
oil (linolenic and gamma-linolenic acids). J Am Acad Dermatol 1985;
13: 959-965.

Berth-Jones J, Graham-Brown RAC. Placebo-controlled trial of
essential fatty acid supplementation in atopic dermatitis. Lancet 1993;
341: 1557-1560.

Brush MG. Efamol (evening primrose oil) in the treatment of the
premenstrual syndrome. In: Horrobin DK, ed. Clinical Uses for
Essential Fatty Acids. Buffalo, New York: Eden Press, 1982: 155.

Pye JK et al. Clinical experience of drug treatments for mastalgia.
Lancet 1985; ii: 373-377.

Bandolier. Evening primrose oil for premenstrual syndrome. www,jr2.
ox.ac.uk/bandolier/booth/alternat/AT058.html [accessed November
19, 2002]

Jamal GA et al. Gammac-linolenic acid in diabetic neuropathy. Lancet
1986; i: 1098.

Horrobin DE, Manku MS. How do polyunsaturated fatty acids lower
plasma cholesterol levels?. Lipids 1983; 18: 558-562.

Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 20, 2006]

----- PAGE 267 -----
Eyebright

uses, although tannin constituents would provide an
astringent effect. The use of home-made preparations for
ophthalmic purposes should be avoided. Little is known
regarding the toxicity of eyebright and, in view of the
reported presence of unidentified alkaloids, it should be used
with caution and excessive doses and prolonged treatment
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Euphrasia officinalis L. (Scrophulariaceae)

Other Euphrasia species, including E. rostkoviana Hayne, are
used and these may differ in their chemical constituents. The
genus Euphrasia consists of around 450 Euphrasia species and
their wild hybrids and these are difficult to identify botanically.

Synonym(s)
Euphrasia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Eyebright is not included in the GSL.'‘C*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40 and G75.
Unless otherwise stated, constituents listed are for E. officinalis.

Acids Caffeic acid, ferulic acid.?

Alkaloids Unidentified tertiary alkaloids, choline, steam volatile
bases."

Amino acids Glycine, leucine and valine.

Flavonoids Four compounds (unidentified). Quercetin and rutin
stated to be absent." Quercetin, quercitrin and rutin have been
documented for E. rostkoviana.

Iridoids —Aucubin 0.05%. Additional glycosides have been
reported for related Euphrasia species including catalpol, euphro-
side, eurostoside, geniposide, ixoroside and mussaenoside for E.
rostkoviana.°

Phenethyl glycosides —Dehydroconiferyl alcohol-4-B-p-gluco-
side® and eukovoside (3,4-dihydroxy-4-phenethyl-O-a-L-rhamno-
side(13)-4-O-isoferuoyl-B-p- glucoside) from E. rostkoviana.

Tannins About 12%. Condensed and hydrolysable; gallic acid is
among the hydrolysis products.”

Volatile oils About 0.2%. Seven major and numerous minor
components, mainly unidentified; four of the major compounds
are thought to be aldehydes or ketones."

Other constituents Bitter principle, B-carotene, phytosterols
(e.g. B-sitosterol, stigmasterol),") resin, carbohydrates (e.g.
arabinose, glucose, galactose) and vitamin C.

Food Use

Eyebright is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
eyebright can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'°!®

Herbal Use

Eyebright is stated to possess anticatarrhal, astringent and anti-
inflammatory properties. Traditionally it has been used for nasal
catarrh, sinusitis and specifically for conjunctivitis when applied
locally as an eye lotion.'6? 97 9°

Iridoids
HQ oy
SS
oO
HoH,c 4
2 O-Glucosy!
aucubin
CHO

H
O-Glucosyl
euphroside

Phenethylglycosides

co HOH2C,
Hef
S fe) OL
Pon
HO H3C7——O
HO
HO yg HO
eukovoside OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of eyebright.

----- PAGE 268 -----
Eyebright

Figure 3 Eyebright — dried drug substance (herb).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of eyebright to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of eyebright has not been
established. In view of the lack of pharmacological and toxicity
data, the use of eyebright during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations
UK: Snore Calm.

Figure 2 Eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Euphrasia Complex; Euphrasia Compound; Eye

Health Herbal Plus Formula 4; Lifesystem Herbal Plus
(1) Formula 5 Eye Relief; Sambucus Complex. Italy: Eulux; Iridil.
Malaysia: Eyebright Plus. Switzerland: Collypan; Oculosan;
Tendro. UK: Se-Power; Summertime Tea Blend; Vital Eyes.
USA: Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend.

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for eyebright. Caffeic acid is bacteriostatic,
and a purgative action in mice has been documented for iridoid
glycosides. The purgative action of aucubin is approximately
0.05 times the potency of sennosides, with onset of diarrhoea
stated to occur more than six hours after aucubin administra-
tion. Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies
References

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of eyebright

and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. 1 Harkiss KJ, Timmins P. Studies in the Scrophulariaceae Part VIII.

Phytochemical investigation of Euphrasia officinalis. Planta Med 1973;
23: 342-347.

Side-effects, Toxicity 2. Sticher O, Salama O. Iridoid glucosides from Euphrasia rostkoviana.
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for eyebright and Planta Med 1981; 42: 122-123.

oO.

further investigation of these aspects is required. Information in

der literature states that doses of as little as 10-60 drops of

eyebright tincture could lead to adverse effects, including mental
confusion,

‘S22) although this requires confirmation.

Contra-indications, Warnings

TI

discouraged."

use of eyebright for ophthalmic application has been
G60)

3 Salama O et al. A lignan glucoside from Euphrasia rostkoviana.
Phytochemistry 1981; 20: 2003-2004.

4 Sticher O et al. Structure analysis of eukovoside, a new
phenylpropanoid glycoside from Euphrasia rostkoviana. Planta Med
1982; 45: 159.

5 Salama O, Sticher O. Iridoidglucoside von Euphrasia rostkoviana 4.

Mitteilung tiber Euphrasia-Glykoside. Planta Med 1983; 47: 90-94.
Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

----- PAGE 269 -----
= False Unicorn

The chemistry of false unicorn is poorly documented and no
scientific evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In
view of this and the lack of toxicity data, the use of false
unicorn should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Chamaelirium luteum (L.) A. Gray (Melanthiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blazing Star, Chamaelirium carolianum Wild., Devil's-bit, Helo-
nias, Helonias dioica (Walter) Pursh., Helonias lutea (L.) Ker
Gawl., Starwort, Veratrum luteum L.

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'@®

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40 and G48.

Limited chemical information is available on false unicorn. It is
stated to contain a steroidal saponin glycoside, chamaelirin, and
another glycoside helonin.

Food Use

False unicorn is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

False unicorn is stated to possess an action on the uterus.
Traditionally it has been used for ovarian dysmenorrhoea,
leucorrhoea and specifically for amenorrhoea. It is reported to

be useful for vomiting of pregnancy and threatened miscarria-
gels C8, G64)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.(©”)

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of centaury
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for false unicorn
and further investigation of these aspects is required. It is stated

Figure 1 False unicorn (Chamaelirium luteum).

Figure 2 False unicorn — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 270 -----
that large doses of false unicorn may cause nausea and
vomiting.”

Contra-indications, Warnings
None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
lack of phytochemical and pharmacological information for false
unicorn, the potential for preparations of false unicorn to interact
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those
with similar or opposing effects, should still be considered.

False Unicorn

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of false unicorn has not
been established. In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, and its reputed action as a
uterine tonic, the use of false unicorn during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Australia: Nervatona Plus. UK: Period Pain Relief.

----- PAGE 271 -----
Fenugreek

y' y
effect on cholesterol metabolism, cholesterol absorption and
bile acid excretion by the saponin components. Toxicity
studies indicate fenugreek seeds to be relatively non-toxic,
although the presence of pharmacologically active
constituents would suggest that excessive ingestion is
inadvisable.

Species (Family)

Trigonella foenum-graecum L. (Leguminosae)
Synonym(s)

Bockshornsame

Steroids

H
CHs

diosgenin
yamogenin

f-D-glucose 1-8 p-p-glucose
1-2
a-L-rhamnose

Amino acids

°
N coo
sm
ve
CHs

trigonelline

Figure 1 Selected constituents of fenugreek.

Part(s) Used
Seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'°*)

Ph Eur 2007°°8

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Gentianine, trigonelline (up to 0.13%),
choline (0.05%).

Proteins and amino acids Protein (23-25%) containing high
quantities of lysine and tryptophan. Free amino acids include 4-
hydroxyisoleucine (0.09%), histidine, lysine and arginine.

R!

2

foenugraecin

trigofoenoside A

----- PAGE 272 -----
Flavonoids Flavone (apigenin, luteolin) glycosides including
orientin and vitexin, quercetin (flavonol).

Saponins 0.6-1.7%. Glycosides yielding steroidal sapogenins
diosgenin and yamogenin (major), with tigogenin, neotigogenin,
gitogenin, neogitogenin, smilagenin, sarsasapogenin, yucca-
genin;‘ fenugreekine, a sapogenin-peptide ester involving dios-
genin and yamogenin;”) trigofoenosides A-G  (furostanol
glycosides).

Other constituents Coumarin,” lipids (5-8%),"® mucilaginous
fibre (50%), vitamins (including nicotinic acid) and minerals.

Food Use

Fenugreek is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
fenugreek can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'(©!® Previously fenugreek extracts have been
permitted in foods at concentrations usually below 0.05%. In
addition, fenugreek has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Fenugreek is stated to possess mucilaginous demulcent, laxative,
nutritive, expectorant and orexigenic properties, and has been
used topically as an emollient and vulnerary. Traditionally, it has
been used in the treatment of anorexia, dyspepsia, gastritis and
convalescence, and topically for furunculosis, myalgia, lympha-
denitis, gout, wounds and leg ulcers.{C% 670 6%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

G49)

Seed 1-6g or equivalent three times daily.

Figure 2 Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum).

Fenugreek

Figure 3 Fenugreek — dried drug substance (seed).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypocholesterolaemic activity has been reported for fenugreek in
rats°°S*) and alloxan-diabetic dogs.” Activity has been
attributed to the fibre and saponin fractions, and not to lipid or
amino acid fractions."""'° Studies have reported a reduction in
cholesterol but not triglyceride concentrations,”’ or in both
cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, but without signifi-
cant alterations in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) concentrations."

Hypoglycaemic activity has been observed in rabbits, rats and
dogs, and attributed to the defatted seed fraction (DSF),
trigonelline, nicotinic acid and coumarin.7!? Oral administra-
tion of DSF reduced hyperglycaemia in four alloxan-diabetic dogs,
and reduced the response to an oral glucose tolerance test in eight
normal dogs, whereas the lipid fraction had no effect on serum
glucose and insulin concentrations. The high fibre content
(50%) of DSF was thought to contribute to its antidiabetic effect
although the initial rate of glucose absorption was not affected.)
Nicotinic acid and coumarin were reported to be the major
hypoglycaemic components of fenugreek seeds, following admin-
istration to normal and alloxan-diabetic rats.” The hypoglycae-
mic action exhibited by coumarin was still significant 24 hours
post administration.” In addition, a slight antidiuretic action was
noted for coumarin.” Trigonelline inhibited cortisone-induced
hyperglycaemia in rabbits if administered (250 mg/kg) concomi-
tantly or two hours before, but not two hours after, cortisone.’
In addition, trigonelline exhibited significant hypoglycaemic
activity in alloxan-diabetic rats (50 mg/kg), lasting 24 hours."”

A. stimulant action on the isolated uterus (guinea-pig),
especially during late pregnancy, has been noted for both aqueous
and alcoholic extracts.'“* An aqueous extract is stated to
increase the number of heart beats in the isolated mammalian
heart.“

In vitro antiviral activity against vaccinia virus has been
reported for fenugreekine, which also possesses cardiotonic,
hypoglycaemic, diuretic, antiphlogistic and antihypertensive
properties.

¢

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
fenugreek and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

----- PAGE 273 -----
Fenugreek

A transient hypoglycaemic effect was observed in 5 of 10
diabetic patients who received 500mg oral trigonelline whilst
fasting.” Increasing the dose did not increase this effect, and
500 mg ingested three times a day for five days did not alter the
diurnal blood glucose concentration.) Hypoglycaemic activity in
healthy individuals has been reported for whole seed extracts,
with slightly lesser activity exhibited by gum isolate, extracted
seeds and cooked seeds.''?) The addition of fenugreek to an oral
glucose tolerance test reduced serum glucose and_ insulin
concentrations. Chronic ingestion (21 days) of extracted seeds
(25g seeds daily incorporated into two meals) by non-insulin-
dependent diabetics improved plasma glucose and_ insulin
responses (no control group), and reduced 24-hour urinary
glucose concentrations.” Furthermore, in two diabetic insulin-
dependent subjects, daily administration of 25g fenugreek seed
powder reduced fasting plasma-glucose profile, glycosuria and
daily insulin requirements (56-20 units) after eight weeks. A
significant reduction in serum cholesterol concentrations in
diabetic patients was also noted.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for fenugreek and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Acute toxicity values (LDs9) documented for
fenugreek alcoholic seed extract are 5 g/kg (rat, oral) and 2 g/kg
(rabbit, dermal).' The alcoholic seed extract is reported to be
non-irritating and non-sensitising to human skin and non-
phototoxic (mice, pigs). Coumarin is a toxic seed compo-
nent.) Acute LDso (rat, oral) values per kilogram documented for
various seed constituents are 5g (trigonelline), 8.8g¢ (nicotinic
acid), 7.4g (nicotinamide) and 0.72 g (coumarin)."?

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fenugreek to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical and preliminary clinical studies that fenugreek
has hypoglycaemic activity. Caution may be advisable in patients
receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), hormonal or
anticoagulant therapies in view of amine, steroidal saponin and
coumarin constituents, respectively, although their clinical sig-
nificance is unclear. Cardioactivity has been documented in vitro.
The absorption of drugs taken concomitantly with fenugreek may
be affected (high mucilaginous fibre content).

Pregnancy and lactation  Fenugreek is reputed to be
oxytocic'*” and in vitro uterine stimulant activity has been
documented. In view of this, and the documented pharmacolo-
gically active components, the use of fenugreek during pregnancy
and lactation in doses greatly exceeding those normally encoun-
tered in foods is not advisable.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex; Panax
Complex. India: Happy'tizer. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus.

References

1 Gupta RK et al. Minor steroidal sapogenins from fenugreek seeds,
Trigonella foenum-graecum. ] Nat Prod 1986; 49: 1153.

2 Ghosal S e¢ al. Fenugreekine, a new steroidal sapogenin-peptide ester
of Trigonella foenum-graecum. Phytochemistry 1974; 13: 2247-2251.

3 Gupta RK et al. Two furostanol saponins from Trigonella feonum-
graecum. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 2205-2207.

4 Varshney IP et al. Saponins from Trigonella foenum-graecum leaves. ]
Nat Prod 1984; 47: 44-46.

5S Gupta RK et al. Furostanol glycosides from Trigonella foenum-
graccum seeds. Phytochemistry 19843 23: 2605-2607.

6 Gupta RK et al. Furostanol glycosides from Trigonella foenum-
graecum seeds. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 2399-2401.

7 Shani J et al. Hypoglycaemic effect of Trigonella foenum graecum and
Lupinus termis (Leguminosae) seeds and their major alkaloids in
alloxan-diabetic and normal rats. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1974;
210: 27-37.

8 Ribes G et al. Hypocholesterolaemic and hypotriglyceridaemic effects
of subfractions from fenugreek seeds in alloxan diabetic dogs.
Phytother Res 1987; 1: 38-42.

9 Ribes G et al. Effects of fenugreek seeds on endocrine pancreatic
secretions in dogs. Ann Nutr Metab 1984; 28: 37-43.

10 Sharma RD. An evaluation of hypocholesterolemic factor of fenugreek
seeds (T. foenum graecum) in rats. Nutr Rep Int 1986; 33: 669-677.

11 Mishkinsky J et al. Hypoglycaemic effect of trigonelline. Lancet 1967;
2: 1311-1312.

12 Sharma RD. Effect of fenugreek seeds and leaves on blood glucose and
serum insulin responses in human subjects. Nutr Res 1986; 6: 1353-
1364.

13 Opdyke DLJ. Fenugreek absolute. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16
(Suppl. Suppl.): 755-756.

----- PAGE 274 -----
5 Feverfew

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Feverfew is characterised by the sesquiterpene lactone
constituents, in particular by parthenolide which is thought to
be the main active component. /n vitro studies provide some
evidence to support the reputation of feverfew as a herb used
to treat migraine and arthritis. Some clinical studies have
suggested that feverfew leaf preparations may be a useful
prophylactic remedy against migraine, although further
research is deemed necessary to establish the benefits. It has
been recommended that feverfew should only be used by
sufferers who have proved unresponsive to conventional
forms of migraine treatment. Those using feverfew as a
remedy for migraine should preferably do so under medical
supervision.

Results of a study that investigated the usefulness of
feverfew in treating rheumatoid arthritis were less
encouraging: feverfew provided no additional benefit when
added to existing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory treatment.
Feverfew products currently available are unlicensed and vary
in their recommended daily doses. Furthermore, variation
between the stated and actual amount of feverfew in
commercial products (based on their ability to inhibit platelet
secretion) has been reported.

Species (Family)

Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz Bip. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Altamisa, Chrysanthemum parthenium (L.) Bernh., non (Lam.)

Gaterau, Leucanthemum parthenium (L.) Gren & Godron,
Pyrethrum parthenium (L.) Sm.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, aerial parts

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition!
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
L (637)

Feverfew is not included in the GS

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Terpenoids
guaianolides (GU) and eudesmanolides

Sesquiterpene lactones: germacranolides (GE),
(EU). The structural

feature common to all three types is an o-unsaturated y-lactone
moiety, and examples of each type include parthenolide, 3-B-
hydroxy-parthenolide, costunolide, 3-f-hydroxycostunolide, arte-
morin, 8-o-hydroxyestafiatin and chrysanthemonin (novel dimeric
nucleus) (GE); artecanin, chrysanthemin A (canin) and B
(stereoisomers), chrysanthemolide, partholide, two chlorine-con-
taining sesquiterpene lactones (GU); magnolialide, reynosin,
santamarine, 1-B-hydroxyarbusculin and 5-B-hydroxyreynosin
(EU).!-

Volatile oils (0.02-0.07%). Various monoterpene and se:
pene components (e.g. camphor, borneol, «%-pinene derivatives,
germacrene, farnesene and their esters).

Other constituents Pyrethrin, flavonoids, tannins (type unspe-
cified) and melatonin.

Food Use

Feverfew is not generally used in foods.

Herbal Use

Feverfew has traditionally been used in the treatment of migraine,
tinnitus, vertigo, arthritis, fever, menstrual disorders, difficulty
during labour, stomach ache, toothache and insect bites. Modern
use of feverfew is focused on its effects in the prevention and
treatment of migraine.'”®

Feverfew products currently available are unlicensed adn vary in

their recommended daily doses.”

Dosage

Limited information is available regarding the traditional dose of
feverfew. The doses (oral administration, adults) that have been
recommended for migraine prophylaxis are as follows.

Leaf (fresh) 2.5 leaves daily with or after food.

Sesquiterpenes

“ue

a
parthenolide H canin artecanin
3-f-hydroxy- OH

parthenolide

°

costunolide seco-tanapartholide A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of feverfew.

----- PAGE 275 -----
Feverfew

Leaf (freeze-dried) 50mg daily with or after food.

Aerial parts (dried) 50-200 mg daily; equivalent to 0.2-0.6 mg
parthenolide daily.(¢%

Clinical trials of feverfew for the prevention of migraine have
assessed the effects of, for example, 143 mg of a dried alcoholic
extract of feverfew daily (equivalent to 0.5 mg parthenolide),“
and capsules containing powdered feverfew leaf 50 mg daily,‘!' '?)
for one to six months.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Feverfew extracts have been documented to inhibit platelet
aggregation and prostaglandin, thromboxane and _ leukotriene
production, although feverfew has also been reported to have no
effect on cyclooxygenase (the mechanism by which non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit prostaglandin production).‘'*')
Instead, feverfew is thought to act by inhibiting the enzyme
phospholipase Az, which facilitates the release of arachidonic acid
from the phospholipid cellular membrane. '® The clinical
significance of this action has been questioned.” In addition, in
vitro experiments have shown that feverfew extracts inhibit the
interaction of human platelets with collagen substrates.‘!* '”)
Feverfew has been shown to inhibit granule secretion in blood
platelets and neutrophils, which has been associate;
aetiology of migraine and rheumatoid arthritis, respectively.
Feverfew was also found to inhibit the release of vitamin By-
binding protein from polymorphonuclear leukocytes, but to be
ineffective against platelet and polymorphonucleocyte secretion
induced by calcium ionophore A2318.°” Sesquiterpene lactone
constituents of feverfew containing an 4-methylene butyrolactone
unit are thought to be responsible for the antisecretory activity,”
Their inhibitory effect on platelet aggregation is thought to
involve neutralisation of sulfhydryl groups on specific enzymes of

with the
(20)

proteins that are necessary for platelet aggregation and secre-
tion.°?) A similar mode of action has been proposed for the
inhibitory action of feverfew on polymorphonuclocyte  secre-
°3) In addition, feverfew extracts have been reported to
produce a concentration-dependent inhibition of anti-IgE-induced
histamine release from mast cells.°* The authors concluded that
the mechanism of action of the feverfew extract was different to
that of both cromoglycate and quercetin.
Parthenolide markedly interfered with contractile and relaxant
mechanisms in blood vessels.'“*” An aqueous extract of feverfew

tion.

inhibited
G52)

administered intravenously — significantly
induced bronchoconstriction in guinea-pigs.

The presence of large numbers of lymphocytes and monocytes
in the syi novium is considered to be of significance in rheumatoid
arthritis.° Feverfew extract and parthenolide have been docu-
mented to inhibit mitogen-induced proliferation of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and mitogen-induced pros-
taglandin E (PGE ) production by synovial cells.” The feverfew
extract and parthenolide also proved to be cytotoxic to mitogen-
treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and the authors
considered that this cytotoxicity was responsible for the actions
observed.*) In vitro studies using crude feverfew extracts and
parthenolide have documented other activities that may contribute
to the reported anti-inflammatory effects of feverfew. Pretreatment
of human synovial fibroblasts with feverfew extract and with
purified parthenolide inhibited cytokine-induced expr
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1)
reduction in T cell adhesion to the treated fibroblasts also
occurred. In other in vitro studies, parthenolide inhibited
lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin-12 (IL-12) production by
mouse macrophages in a concentration-dependent manner.”
Parthenolide has also been shown to inhibit promoter activity of
the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene in a human monocyte cell
line, THP-1, in a concentration-dependent manner.) (Excess
nitric oxide production in inflammatory cells is thought to be a
causative factor in cellular injury in inflammatory disease.) Anti-
inflammatory activity of feverfew has also been attributed to the
presence of flavonoids, e.g. santonin.”)

Anti-inflammatory properties have also been documented for
feverfew extract and parthenolide in vivo. Oral administration of
feverfew extract (10, 20 and 40mg/kg) reduced carrageenan-
induced oedema in rat paw in a dose-dependent manner.°”
Intraperitoneal parthenolide (1 and 2 mg/kg) also demonstrated
anti-inflammatory effects in this model.

Parthenolide has been documented to have cytotoxic activity in
Eagle's 9KB carcinoma of the nasopharynx cell culture system, the
activity being associated with the presence of an o&-methylene-y-
lactone moiety in the molecule.°” In vitro, parthenolide has been
shown to inhibit growth of mouse fibrosarcoma (MN-11) and
human lymphoma (TK6) cell lines.” The effect appeared to be
reversible.

Antinociceptive properties have been reported for feverfew and
parthenolide in vivo. Oral administration of feverfew extract (10,
20 and 40 mg/kg) and intraperitoneal administration of parthe-

collagen-

ive

Figure 2 Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium).

Figure 3 Feverfew — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 276 -----
nolide (1 and 2 mg/kg) led to reductions in acetic acid-induced
writhing in mice.“

Antimicrobial properties against Gram-positive bacteria, yeasts
and filamentous fungi in vitro have been documented for
parthenolide.°*) Gram-negative bacteria were not affected.

Clinical studies

Migraine Several placebo-controlled clinical trials have assessed
the effects of preparations of feverfew in the prevention of
migraine.(!0-'> 34)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involved
17 patients who had been successfully controlling their migraine
by eating raw feverfew leaves for at least three months.'!” Patients
either continued to receive feverfew (50mg daily) or were given
placebo for six periods of four weeks. The authors reported that
the placebo group experienced a significant increase in the
frequency and severity of headache. Those given feverfe
no change. It was suggested that the placebo group was in fact
suffering withdrawal symptoms from feverfew and a_ 'post-
feverfew syndrome' was described (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Another study, a randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover trial involved 72 adults who had experienced migraine
for more than two years and who had at least one attack per
month.° The only concurrent medication allowed was the oral
contraceptive pill. Patients completed a one-month, single-blind,
placebo run-in phase, followed by four months' administration of
placebo/active and four months! crossover. It was reported that
patients experienced a 24% reduction in the number of attacks
during feverfew treatment (one capsule daily; 70-114 mg feverfew
equivalent to 2.19 tg parthenolide) although the duration of each
individual attack was not significantly affected. Patients allocated
to the active and then placebo group did not experience the
withdrawal symptoms documented in another study,"'” although
patients involved in the previous study had used feverfew over a
longer period of time.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 57
patients received capsules of dried, powdered feverfew leaves
(parthenolide 0.2%) 100 mg daily for 60 days (open-label phase),
followed by randomisation to feverfew or placebo (ground
parsley) for 30 days then crossover to the other arm for 30
days.'?) There was no wash-out between crossover. At the end of
the open-label phase (i.e. during which all participants received
feverfew), there was a significant reduction in pain intensity and
symptoms, such as vomiting and sensitivity to light, compared
with baseline values (p < 0.001). At the end of the double-blind,
crossover phase, it was reported that pain intensity was
significantly lower during feverfew administration, compared
with placebo administration (p < 0.01).

Thus, these three studies reported bene!
as demonstrated by fewer and/or less severe migraine episodes
and/or reductions in pain intensity, compared with placebo.{')!7
* However, one double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
50 feverfew-naive patients who experienced migraine attacks at
least once a month reported no difference in the number of
migraine attacks between placebo recipients and participants who
received capsules containing a dried alcoholic extract of feverfew
equivalent to 0.5mg parthenolide daily for nine months.“
Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
trial involving 20 patients with migraine assessed the effects of
feverfew 100 mg daily for two months on serotonin uptake and
platelet activity.“ This trial found no effect for feverfew in the
prevention of migraine attacks and also reported that feverfew

showed

icial effects for feverfew,

Feverfew

administration had no effect on the uptake of serotonin by
platelets.

The authors of a Cochrane systematic review of five
ed, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials (four studies
10°12.34) plus one another) concluded that
although some trials suggest that feverfew preparations are
superior to placebo in preventing migraine, further well-designed
clinical trials are required to establish the beneficial effects of
feverfew for migraine prophylaxis.°° Furthermore, the trials
included in the review as: d the effects of different feverfew
preparations (e.g. fresh or dried leaves), administered according to
ifferent dosage regimens (e.g. approximately 50-143 mg pow-
lered feverfew leaf daily for one to six months). Many other
marketed preparations of feverfew leaf have not been assessed at

randomis

nentioned above,

3

all in controlled clinical trials.

Rheumatoid arthritis A double-blind, placebo-controlled, non-
crossover trial studying the use of feverfew in rheumatoid arthritis
has also been documented.” Forty-one female patients with
inflammatory joint symptoms inadequately controlled by non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were given either one feverfew
capsule (70-86 mg equivalent to 2-3 mol parthenolide) daily, or
one placebo capsule, for six weeks. Current non-steroidal therapy
was maintained. It was concluded that patients in the trial had
experienced no additional benefit from feverfew.°” The authors

commented that while concomitant non-steroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug therapy has been stated to reduce the effectiveness of
feverfew, the majority of rheumatoid arthriti
feverfew to supplement existing therapy.

sufferers will use

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical safety and toxicity data for feverfew is limited, and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
documented the following adverse effects during feverfew admin-
istration, although most effects were also reported (sometimes
more frequently) during placebo administration: mouth ulcers
(reported more frequently during placebo administration in one
study), sore mouth, abdominal pain and indigestion, diar-
rhoea, flatulence, nausea, dizziness and skin rash.°!'* On
balance, adverse effects reported for feverfew are mild and
transient, are similar to those reported during placebo adminis-
tration and occur with a similar frequency.

A 'post-feverfew syndrome’ has been described on stopping
‘") (see Pharmacological Action, Clinical
such as nervousness, tension headaches,

feverfew administration’
studies) with symptom:
insomnia, stiffness/pain in joints and tiredness.

The onset of side-effe reported to vary, with
symptoms becoming apparent within the first week of treatment,
or appearing gradually over the first two months.

Sesquiterpene lactones that contain an o%-methylene butyrolac-
tone ring are known to cause allergic reactions.°* °°) Com-

pounds with this structure are present in feverfew and reports of
09-2

s with feverfew is

contact dermatitis have been documente No documented
allergic reactions following oral ingestion were located.

No chronic toxicity studies have been reported. However,
detailed haematological analys
whom had used feverfew for more than one year, did not show any
significant differences when compared with analysis of con-
trols.“ A human toxicity study has investigated whether the
sesquiterpene lactones in feverfew induce chromosomal or other
changes in normal human cells of individuals who have taken the

of 60 feverfew users, some of

----- PAGE 277 -----
Feverfew

herb.“ The study compared 30 chronic female feverfew users
(leaves, tablets or capsules taken daily for more than 11
consecutive months) with matched non-users. The results of
lymphocyte cultures established from blood samples taken over a
period of several months were stated to indicate that feverfew
affects neither the frequency of chromosomal aberrations nor the
frequency of sister chromatid exchanges in the circulating
peripheral lymphocytes.

Preclinical data

An LDso value for feverfew has not been estimated. No adverse
effects were reported for rats and guinea-pigs receiving feverfew at
doses 100 and 150 times the human daily dose, respectively.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Feverfew is contra-indicated in individuals with a known
hypersensitivity to other members of the family Compositae
(Asteraceae), such as chamomile, ragweed and yarrow. Feverfew
should not be ingested by individuals who develop a rash on
contact with the plant.

Feverfew should only be considered as a treatment for migraine
that has proved unresponsive to conventional forms of medication.
Although traditionally recommended as a remedy for rheumatic
conditions, self-medication with feverfew should not be under-
taken without first consulting a doctor.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of feverfew, the potential for
preparations of feverfew to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Feverfew is contra-indicated during
pregnancy. It is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle. It is documented to modify menstrual flow, cause
abortion in cattle and induce uterine contraction in full-term
women.‘

ustralia: Herbal Headache
Canada: Tanacet. UK: Tanacet.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Albizia Complex; Extralife Arthri-Care; Extralife
Migrai-Care; Guaiacum Complex.

References

1 Stefanovic M et al. Sesquiterpene lactones from the domestic plant
species Tanacetum parthenium L. (Compositae). J Serb Chem Soc
1985; 50: 435-441.

2 Bohlmann F, Zdero C. Sesquiterpene lactones and other constituents
from Tanacetum parthenium. Phytochemistry 1982: 21: 2543-2549.

3 Osawa T, Taylor D. Revised structure and stereochemistry of
chrysartemin B. Tetrahedron Lett 1977; 13: 1169-1172.

4 Hylands DM, Hylands PJ. New sesquiterpene lactones from feverfew.
Phytochem Soc Eur Symp 1986: 17.

5 Wagner H et al. New chlorine-containing sesquiterpene lactones from
Chrysanthemum parthenium. Planta Med 1988; 54: 171-172.

6 Murch SJ et al. Melatonin in feverfew and other medicinal plants.
Lancet 1997; 350: 1598-1599.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

33

Awang DVC. Feverfew fever — a headache for the consumer.
Herbalgram 1993; 29: 34-36.

Berry M. Feverfew. Pharm J 1994; 253: 806-808.

Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about feverfew.
Pharm J] 1987; 239: 237-238.

De Weerdt CJ, Bootsma HPR, Hendriks H. Herbal medicines in
migraine prevention. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover trial of a feverfew preparation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 225—
230.

Johnson ES et al. Efficacy of feverfew as prophylactic treatment of
migraine. BM] 1985; 291: 569-573.

Palevitch D et al. Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) as a prophylactic
treatment for migraine: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
Phytother Res 1997; 11: 508-511.

Collier HOJ et al. Extract of feverfew inhibits prostaglandin
biosynthesis. Lancet 1980; ii: 922-973.

Makheja AM, Bailey JM. The active principle in feverfew. Lancet
1981; ii, 1054.

Capasso F. The effect of an aqueous extract of Tanacetum parthenium
L. on arachidonic acid metabolism by rat peritoneal leucocytes. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 71-72.

Makheja AM, Bailey JM. A platelet phospholipase inhibitor from the
medicinal herb feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium). Prostaglandins
Leukot Med 1982: 8: 653-660.

Biggs MJ et al. Platelet aggregation in patients using feverfew for
migraine. Lancet 1982; ii: 776.

Loesche W et al. Feverfew — an antithrombotic drug? Folia Haematol
1988; 115: 181-184.

Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall S. Amounts of feverfew in commercial
preparations of the herb. Lancet 1986; i: 44-45.

Heptinstall S et al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit granule secretion in
blood platelets and polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Lancet 1985; i:
1071-1073.

Groenewegen WA et al. Compounds extracted from feverfew that have
anti-secretory activity contain an a-methylene butyrolactone unit. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 709-712.

Heptinstall S e¢ al. Extracts of feverfew may inhibit platelet behaviour
via neutralization of sulphydryl groups. J Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39:
459-465.

Lésche W et al. Inhibition of the behaviour of human polynuclear
leukocytes by an extract of Chrysanthemum parthenium. Planta Med
1988; 54: 381-384.

Hayes NA, Foreman JC. The activity of compounds extracted from
feverfew on histamine release from rat mast cells. J Pharm Pharmacol
1987; 39: 466-470.

O'Neill LAJ e¢ al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit mitogen-induced human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation and cytokine
mediated responses: a cytotoxic effect. Br J Clin Pharmac 1987; 23:
81-83.

Piela-Smith TH, Liu X. Feverfew extracts and the sesquiterpene
lactone partenolide inhibit intercellular adhesion molecule-1
expression in human synovial fibroblasts. Cell Immunol 2001; 209:
89-96.

Kang BY et al. Inhibition of interleukin-12 production in
lipopolysaccharide-activated mouse macrophages by parthenolide, a
predominant sesquiterpene lactone in Tanacetum parthenium:
involvement of nuclear factor-kappa-B. Immunol Lett 2001; 77: 159-
163.

Fukuda K e¢ al. Inhibition by parthenolide of phorbol ester-induced
transcriptional activation of inducible nitric oxide synthase gene in a
human monocyte cell line THP-1. Biochem Pharmacol 2000; 60: 595—
600.

Williams CA et al. A biologically active lipophilic flavonol from
Tanacetum parthenium. Phytochemistry 1995; 38: 267-270.

Jain NK, Kulkarni SK. Antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory effects
of Tanacetum parthenium L. extract in mice and rats. J
Ethnopharmacol 1999; 68: 251-259.

Berry MI. Feverfew faces the future. Pharm J 1984; 232: 611-614.
Ross JJ et al. Low concentrations of the feverfew component
parthenolide inhibit in vitro growth of tumor lines in a cytostatic
fashion. Planta Med 1999; 65: 126-129.

Blakeman JP, Atkinson P. Antimicrobial properties and possible role in
host—pathogen interactions of parthenolide, a sesquiterpene lactone

----- PAGE 278 -----
34

35

36

37

38

isolated from glands of Chrysanthemum parthenium. Physiol Plant
Pathol 1979; 15: 183-192.

Murphy JJ e¢ al. Randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
feverfew in migraine prevention. Lancet 1988; ii: 189-192.

Kuritzky A et al. Feverfew in the treatment of migraine: its effects on
serotonin uptake and platelet activity. Neurology 1994; 44(Suppl 2):
A201.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Feverfew for preventing migraine (Review).
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 1. Art. No.
CD002286

Pattrick M et al. Feverfew in rheumatoid arthritis: a double blind,
placebo controlled study. Ann Rheum Dis 1989; 48: 547-549.
Rodriguez E et al. The role of sesquiterpene lactones in contact
hypersensitivity to some North and South American species of

39

40

41

42

2B
44

Feverfew

feverfew (Parthenium — Compositae). Contact Dermatitis 1977; 3:
155-162.

Burry J. Compositae dermatitis in South Australia: Contact dermatitis
from Chrysanthemum parthenium. Contact Dermatitis 1980; 6: 445.
Mitchell JC eg al. Allergic contact dermatitis caused by Artemisia and
Chrysanthemum species. The role of sesquiterpene lactones. J Invest
Dermatol 1971; 56: 98-101.

Schmidt RJ, Kingston T. Chrysanethemum dermatitis in South Wales;
diagnosis by patch testing with feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)
extract. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 13: 120-127.

Mensing H et al. Airborne contact dermatitis. Der Hautarzt 1985; 36:
398-402.

Johnson S. Feverfew. London: Sheldon Press, 1984.

Johnson ES et al. Investigation of possible genetoxic effects of feverfew
in migraine patients. Hum Toxicol 1987; 6: 533-534.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Figwort

evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
lack of toxicity data and possible cardioactive properties,
excessive use of figwort should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Scrophularia nodosa L. (Scrophulariaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Figwort, Scrophularia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19830”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Figwort is not included in the GSL.‘3”
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G62.

Amino acids Alanine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, phenylalanine,
threonine, tyrosine and valine.”

Flavonoids Diosmetin, diosmin and acacetin rhamnoside.”
lridoids
OH

H
S

fe) A

H
HOCH?” 0-Glucose
aucubin

H

harpagoside

O-Glucose

Flavonoids

OH O

diosmetin
(luteolin-4’-methylether)
diosmin rutinose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of figwort.

Iridoids — Aucubin, acetylharpagide, harpagide, harpagoside,
isoharpagoside, procumbid and a catalpol glycoside.’ Figwort
is stated to have the same qualitative iridoid composition as devil's
claw, but about half the content of harpagoside.

Acids Various acids, including caffeic acid, cinnamic acid, ferulic
acid, sinapic acid and vanillic acid, present as both esters and
glycosides.”

Food Use

Figwort is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Figwort is stated to act as a dermatological agent and a mild
diuretic, and to increase myocardial contraction. Traditionally, it
has been used for chronic skin disease, and specifically for eczema,
psoriasis and pruritus.(C7°%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-8 g by infusion.'(©”
Liquid extract 2-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).‘©”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol).'©”

Figure 2 Figwort (Scrophularia nodosa).

----- PAGE 280 -----
Figure 3 Figwort — dried drug substance (herb).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The iridoid glycosides aucubin and catalpol have been documen-
ted to exert a purgative action in mice.'®) Cardioactive properties
and anti-inflammatory activity have been claimed for harpagide
and the other iridoid constituents (see Devil's Claw).‘@%”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of figwort
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The iridoids
are stated to be bitter principles.'C°

Side-effects, To y

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for figwort and further investigation of these aspects
is required.

Figwort

Contra-indications, Warnings

Figwort should be avoided in ventricular tachycardia."©”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of figwort to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of figwort has not been
established. In view of the lack of pharmacological and toxicity
data, use of figwort during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

References

1 Toth Let al. Amino acids in Scrophulariaceae species. Bot Kozl 1977;
64: 43-52.

2° Marczal G et al. Flavonoids as biologically active agents and their
occurrence in the Scrophulariaceae family. Acta Pharm Hung 1974: 44
(Suppl. Suppl.): 83-90.

3 Swann K, Melville C. Iridoid content of some Scrophularia species. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1972; 24: 170P.

4 Swiatek L. Iridoid glycosides in the Scrophulariaceae family. Acta Pol
Pharm 1973; 30: 203-212.

5 Weinges K, Von der Eltz H. Natural products from medicinal plants.
XXIIL Iridoid glycosides from Scrophularia nodosa L. Justus Liebigs
Ann Chem 1978; 12: 1968-1973.

6 Swiatek L. Phenolic acids of underground parts of Scrophularia
nodosa. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 461-464.

7 Swiatek L. Pharmacobotanical investigations of some
Scrophulariaceae species. Diss Pharm Pharmacol 1970; 22: 321-328.

8 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glucosides. Planta Med
1974; 25:285— 288.

----- PAGE 281 -----
u Frangula

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of frangula is characterised by the
anthraquinone glycoside constituents. The laxative action of
these compounds is well recognised and supports the herbal
use of frangula as a laxative. The use of non-standardised
anthraquinone-containing preparations should be avoided,
since their pharmacological effect will be variable and
unpredictable. In particular, the use of products containing
combinations of anthraquinone laxatives should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Frangula alnus Mill. (Rhamnaceae)

Synonym(s)

Alder Buckthorn, Rhamnus frangula L., Frangula nigra Samp.

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E (Buckthorn) ‘©
ESCOP 2003'07

EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph”
Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078?

Anthraquinones
R°O le} OH

8
fe) R! Re
frangulin A a-L-rhamnose H
frangulin B B-D-apiose H
glucofrangulin A a-L-rhamnose B-D-glucose
glucofrangulin B B-D-apiose p-D-glucose
frangula emodin H H
physcion CH3 H
chrysophano!l (unsubstituted) H

Dihydroanthracenes
OH

fe} OH
H H

frangula emodin anthrone

CHs

Figure 1 Selected constituents of frangula.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G59 and G62.

Anthraquinones 3-7%. Frangulosides as major components
including frangulin A and B (emodin glycosides) and glucofran-
gulin A and B (emodin diglycosides); emodin derivatives including
emodin dianthrone and its monorhamnoside, palmidin C (see
Rhubarb) and its monorhamnoside, emodin glycoside; also
glycosides of chrysophanol and physcion, and various free
aglycones.

Other constituents Flavonoids and tannins.

Food Use

Frangula is
food flavouring (category N4). While this category recognises the
use of frangula as a flavouring agent, it indicates that there is
insufficient information available to classify it further into
categories N1, N2, or NBC!)

sted by the Council of Europe as a natural source of

Herbal Use

Frangula is stated to possess mild purgative properties and has
; iti sonetimation (G2s Gb: G7, G8, G64)
been used traditionally for constipation.

The European Medicines Agency Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted a Community Herbal
monograph for frangula. The monograph includes indications for
short-term use of frangula in cases of occasional constipation.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.52.5 g.'°°

Figure 2 Frangula (Frangula alnus).

----- PAGE 282 -----
Figure 3 Frangula - dried drug substance (bark).

Liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of frangula can be attributed to the
anthraquinone glycoside constituents. The laxative action of these
compounds is well recognised (see Senna).

Side-effects, Toxicity

See Senna for side-effects and toxicity associated with anthraqui-
nones.'©7

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula includes the following information." There are no
studies on single dose toxicity, on repeated dose toxicity, on
reproductive toxicity or on carcinogenicity. Different frangula
extracts were shown to be genotoxic in several in vitro systems
(bacterial mutation, chromosomal aberration and DNA-repair in
mammalian cells). No increases in mutations were observed in a
gene mutation assay with mammalian cells. For emodin, the main
laxative principle of frangula, signs of a genotoxic potential were
observed in several systems (bacteria and mammalian cells in
vitro). Other anthraquinone constituents also gave positive results
in limited experiments.

Contra-indications, Warnings
See Senna for contra-indications and warnings associated with
anthraquinones.

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula states the following contra-indications and warnings."

Contra-indications Not to be used in cases of intestinal
obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory colon diseases (e.g.
Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis), appendicitis, abdominal pain
of unknown origin, severe dehydration states with water and
electrolyte depletion.

Precautions As with all laxatives, frangula bark should not be
given when any undiagnosed acute or persistent abdominal
symptoms are present. If laxatives are needed every day, the cause
of the constipation should be investigated. Long-term use of
laxatives should be avoided. Use for more than two weeks requires
medical supervision. Chronic use may cause pigmentation of the
colon (pseudomelanosis coli) which is harmless and _ reversible
after drug discontinuation.

Frangula

Abuse, with diarrhoea and consequent fluid and electrolyte
losses, may cause: dependence, with possible need for increased
dosages, disturbance of the water and electrolyte (mainly
hypokalaemia) balance, an atonic colon with impaired function.
Intake of anthranoid containing laxatives exceeding short-term
use may result in an aggravation of constipation.

Hypokalaemia can result in cardiac and neuromuscular
dysfunction, especially if cardiac glycosides, diuretics or corticos-
teroids are taken. Chronic use may result in albuminuria and
haematuria.

In chronic constipation, stimulant laxatives are not an
acceptable alternative to a changed diet.

Interaction with other medicaments and other forms of
interaction. Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term laxative
abuse) potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides and interacts
with antiarrhythmic drugs and drugs which induce reversion to
sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomitant use with other drugs
inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide diuretics, adrenocorticoster-
oids and liquorice root) may enhance electrolyte imbalance.

Pregnancy and lactation The use of stimulant laxatives,
particularly unstandardised preparations, is not generally recom-
mended during pregnancy (see Senna).

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula includes the following information on use during
pregnancy and lactation.

Pregnancy Frangula is not recommended during pregnancy.”
There are no reports of undesirable or damaging effects
during pregnancy and on the foetus when used at the
recommended dosage schedule. However, experimental data
concerning a genotoxic risk of several anthranoids, e.g. emodin
and physcion, and frangula extract are not counterbalanced by
sufficient studies to eliminate a possible risk.”

Lactation Frangula is not recommended during breast feeding, as
there are insufficient data on the excretion of its metabolites in
breast milk. Excretion of the active principles of frangula in
breast milk has not been investigated. However, small amounts
of active metabolites (e.g. rhein) from other anthranoids are
known to be excreted in breast milk. A laxative effect in
breastfed babies has not been reported.”

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

France: Depuratif des Alpes. Switzerland: Elixir frangulae
compositum.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Granocol; Normacol Plus. Austria: Artin; Gallesyn;
Gallesyn; Laxalpin; Laxolind; Mag Kottas Krauterexpress
Abfuhrtee; Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee; Planta Lax; Waldheim
Abfuhrdragees mild. Belgium: Grains de Vals; Normacol Plus.
Canada: Constipation; Herbalax. Czech Republic: Abfuhr-
Heilkrautertee; Cholagol; Reduktan; The Salvat. Denmark:
Ferroplex-frangula. France: Dragees Fuca; Dragees Vegetales
Rex; Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No 2; Mediflor
Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany: Abdomilon.
Hong Kong: Hepatofalk; Normacol Plus. Hungary: Cholagol.
India: Kanormal. Ireland: Normacol Plus. Israel: Encypalmed;
Rekiv. Italy: Draverex; Fave di Fuca; Lactolas; Neoform.

----- PAGE 283 -----
Frangula

Reference

1 European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Rhamnus frangula L.,
Cortex. London, 26 October 2006. Doc Ref. EMEA/HMPC/76307/
2006

Normacol Plus.

----- PAGE 284 -----
Fucus

presumably attributable to the iodine content, although the
self-diagnosis and treatment of these conditions with a herbal
remedy is not suitable. There have been no documented
studies supporting the traditional use of kelp in rheumatic
conditions. In view of the iodine content and potential
accumulation of toxic elements, excessive ingestion of kelp is
inadvisable. Doubt over the quality of commercial seaweed
preparations has been reported.

Species (Family)

Fucus vesiculosus L. and other Fucus species (Fucaceae)

Synonym(s)

Black Tang, Bladderwrack, Kelp, Kelpware, Rockweed, Seawrack

Brown seaweeds refer to species of Fucus, Ascophyllum,
Laminaria and Macrocystis. 'Kelps' refer to species of Laminaria
and Macrocystis, although kelp is often used in reference to
species of Fucus.

Part(s) Used
Thallus (whole plant)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007 (kelp) '°*”
Martindale 35th edition’@*»
Ph Eur 2007 (kelp)‘C*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides: alginic acid (algin) as the major
component; fucoidan and laminarin (sulfated polysaccharide
esters).

lodine Content of various Laminaria species has been reported as
0.07-0.76% of dry weight.”

Other constituents Various vitamins and minerals, particularly
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (0.013-0.077% of fresh material)”

Food Use

Seaweeds are commonly included in the diet of certain popula-
tions. The gelling properties of alginic acid, the major
polysaccharide in brown seaweeds, including fucus, are extensively
utilised in the dairy and baking industries to improve texture,
body and smoothness of products." Fucus is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2).
This category indicates that fucus can be added to foodstuffs in
small quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle
(as yet unspecified) in the final product.'C!®

Herbal Use

Fucus is stated to possess antihypothyroid, anti-obesity and
antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for

lymphadenoid goitre, myxoedema, obesity, arthritis and rheuma-
tism (G2 65.67, G8, Gos)

Polysaccharides
HOOC OH
° -Q Ho °
HO ) +o

HOOC OH fi

alginic acid (240 kD)
£1 4 linked mannuronic acid polymer

?
9° 9° o=s=o
o=s=o o=s=0 $
| | a CHg
cH, 9 cH, 9
° ° OH
OH ao oO
O° O°
n n
fucoidin (133 kD)
sulphated L-fucose
HOH CH,OH HOH
HO | Ho Q |Ho °
HO. ie} Le}
OH OH 1, OH
laminarin
B 1 3 linked glucose polymer
with branching

Figure 1 Selected constituents of fucus.

----- PAGE 285 -----
Fucus

Figure 2 Fucus (Fucus vesiculosus).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried thallus 5-10 g as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Liquid extract
daily'C°

48mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

There is a paucity of information documented specifically for
Fucus vesiculosus, although pharmacological activities are
recognised for individual constituents and other brown seaweed
spe

Alginic acid is a hydrophilic colloidal substance that swells to
approximately 25-35 times its original bulk in an alkaline
environment and as such exerts a bulk laxative action.” It is

es.

stated to compare favourably with the carboxylic type of cation
exchange resins. The colloidal properties of alginates have been
utilised in wound dressings and skin grafts.

Anticoagulant properties have been
seaweeds. The glucose polymer laminarin has been identified as
the anticoagulant principle in a Laminaria species. A fucoidan
fraction has been isolated from Fucus vesiculosus with 40-50%
blood anticoagulant activity of heparin.)

The iodine content of seaweeds is well recognised. The low
incidence of goitre amongst maritime people has been attributed
G4) Similarly, the

thought
)

jocumented for brown

to the inclusion of seaweeds in their diet.
traditional use of Fucus vesiculosus in 'slimming teas' i:
to be attributable to the effect of iodine on hypothyroidism.“

Extracts of various brown seaweeds including Ascophyllum
nodosum and Fucus vesiculosus have been reported to exhibit a
high in vitro inhibitory activity towards mammalian digestive
enzymes (0-amylase, trypsin and lipase) isolated from the porcine
pancreas. Activity was attributed to high molecular weight
(30.000-100 000) polyphenols.

Inhibitory effects of laminarin sulfate on lipidaemia and
atherosclerosis (in vivo, rabbit) have been partially attributed to
the in vitro inhibition of lipid synthesis observed in cultured chick
aortic cells.”

Hypotensive activity observed in rats intravenously adminis-
tered extracts of commercial seaweed (Laminaria species)
preparations has been attributed to their histamine content.
However, histamine concentrations varied considerably between

preparations, and authentic specimens of the Laminaria speci
were devoid of histamine.

Kelp extracts have antiviral activity and laminarin is reported
to have exhibited some tumour-inhibiting actions.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of fucus
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for fucus
preparations and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hyperthyroidism has been associated with the ingestion of kelp
and is attributable to the iodine content in the plant."!°'” Typical
symptoms of hyperthyroidism (weight loss, sweating, fatigue,
frequent soft stools) were exhibited by a 72-year-old woman
following ingestion of a commercial kelp product for six
months.” Laboratory tests confirmed the hyperthyroidism
although no pre-existing evidence of thyroid disease was found
and the condition resolved in six months following discontinua-
tion of the tablets. Analysis of the kelp tablets reported an iodine
content of 0.7 mg/tablet representing a daily intake of 2.8-4.2 mg
iodine." Clinically evident hyperthyroidism developed in an
otherwise healthy woman following the daily ingestion of six 200-
mg kelp tablets.") Symptoms gradually resolved on cessation of
therapy.

The association between halogen salts and acneiform eruptions
is well established.” Ingestion of kelp products has been
associated with the worsening of pre-existing acne and the
development of acneiform eruptions, which improved following
withdrawal of the tablets.'?)

The ability of marine plants to accumulate heavy metals and
other toxic elements is recognised, and the uptake of various
radioactive compounds by seaweeds has been reported." '*')
Fifteen samples of kelp-containing dietary supplements have been
analysed for their iodine and arsenic contents.’ The levels of
arsenic were low in all but one product. The iodine levels varied
widely, even between different samples of the same product, and in
some products the iodine levels were high in relation to safe daily
intake.

Brown algae (Ascophyllum nodosum and Fucus vesiculosus)
have been found to be capable of synthesising volatile halogenated
organic compounds (VHOCS).''%) VHOCs are considered to be
troublesome pollutants because land plants and animals have
difficulty in degrading the compounds which consequently persist
in terrestrial ecosystems.'') VHOCs released into the seawater
predominantly contain bromine with iodine-containing com-
pounds showing a slower rate of turnover. Concentration of
iron by brown seaweeds has been attributed to fucoidan, and
alginic acid exhibits a high specificity for the binding of
strontium." Elevated urinary arsenic concentrations (138 and
293 ttg/24 hour) in two female patients have been associated with
the ingestion of kelp tablets. Subsequent analysis of the arsenic
content of various kelp preparations revealed concentrations
ranging from 16 to 58 ug/g product.''” '®) The botanical source of
the kelp in the products was not stated."

Ascophyllum nodosum is commonly added to animal foodstuffs
as a source of vitamin and minerals, with beneficial results
reported for dairy cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry.) Feeding
studies using A. nodosum have highlighted an atypical toxic
response for rabbits compared with that of rats and pigs.‘'>!”)
Addition of A. nodosum to the diet of rabbits (at S—10%) caused a

----- PAGE 286 -----
severe drop in haemoglobin content, serum iron concentrations
and packed cell volume, leading to weight loss and death in two-
thirds of the animals.!» No differences in renal and liver function,
and in lipid metabolism were found between test and control
animals.) Similar, but much milder, toxicity has also been
observed in rabbits fed Fucus serratus.) Subsequent studies
incorporating A. nodosum into the feed of rats and pigs failed to
demonstrate the toxic effects observed in rabbits.” The toxic
components in A. nodosum have been reported to be non-
extractable with chloroform, ethanol, water and 20% sodium
carbonate solution, remaining in the insoluble residue.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The iodine content in kelp may cause hyper- or hypothyroidism.
In view of this, ingestion of kelp preparations by children is
inadvisable. The iodine content in kelp has also been associated
with acneiform eruptions and aggravation of pre-existing acne. In
general, brown seaweeds are known to concentrate various heavy
metals and other toxic elements. Elevated urinary arsenic
concentrations have been traced to the ingestion of kelp tablets.
Prolonged ingestion of kelp may reduce gastrointestinal iron
absorption (binding properties of fucoidan), resulting in a slow
reduction in haemoglobin, packed cell volume and serum iron
concentrations. Prolonged ingestion may also affect absorption of
sodium and potassium ions (alginic acid) and cause diarrhoea.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fucus to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Because of its iodine content, fucus
should be used with caution in individuals receiving treatment for
existing abnormal thyroid function.

Pregnancy and lactation The safe use of kelp products during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of the
potential actions on the thyroid gland and possible contamination
with toxic elements, the use of kelp should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: Fenneherb Slim Aid; Napiers Slimming Tablets; Reducing
(Slimming) Tablets.

Fucus

References

1 Wood CG. Seaweed extracts. A unique ocean resource. J Chem Ed
1974; 51: 449-452.

2. Algae as food for man. In: Chapman VJ, ed. Seaweeds and their Uses.
London: Methuen, 1970: 115.

3 Whistler RL, ed. Industrial Gums, 2nd edn. New York: Academic
Press, 1973: 13.

4 Burkholder PR. Drugs from the sea. Armed Forces Chem ] 1963; 17:
6, 8, 10, 12-16.

5 Doner LW. Fucoidan. In: Whistler RL, ed. Industrial Gums, 2nd edn.
New York: Academic Press, 1973: 115-121.

6 Barwell CJ et al. Inhibitors of mammalian digestive enzymes in some
species of marine brown algae. Br Phycol J 1983; 18: 200.

7 Murata K. Suppression of lipid synthesis in cultured aortic cells by
laminaran sulfate. J Atheroscl Res 1969; 10: 371-378.

8 Funayama $, Hikino H. Hypotensive principle of Laminaria and allied
seaweeds. Planta Med 1981; 41: 29-33.

9 Kathan RH. Kelp extracts as antiviral substances. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1965; 130: 390-397.

10. Shilo S, Hirsch HJ. lodine-induced hyperthyroidism in a patient with
a normal thyroid gland. Postgrad Med J 1986; 62: 661-662.

11 Smet PAGM de et al. Kelp in herbal medicines: hyperthyroidism. Ned
Tijdschr Geneeskd 1990; 134: 1058-1059.

12 Harrell BL, Rudolph AH. Kelp diet: A cause of acneiform eruption.
Arch Dermatol 1976; 112: 560.

13 Blunden G, Jones RT. Toxic effects of Ascophyllum nodosum as a
rabbit food additive. In: Food — Drugs from the Sea Proceedings 1972.
Washington: Marine Technology Society, 1972: 267-293.

14 Hodge VF et al. Rapid accumulation of plutonium and polonium on
giant brown algae. Health Phys 1974; 27: 29-35.

15 Norman JA et al. Human intake of arsenic and iodine from seaweed-
based food supplements and health foods available in the UK. Food
Additives Contaminants 1987; 5: 103-109.

16 Halocarbons. Natural pollution by algal seaweeds. Chem Br 1985:
513-514.

17 Walkiw O, Douglas DE. Health food supplements prepared from kelp
—a source of elevated urinary arsenic. Can Med Assoc J 1974; 111:
1301-1302.

18 Walkiw O, Douglas DE. Health food supplements prepared form
kelp —a source of elevated urinary arsenic. Clin Toxicol 1975; 8: 325—
331.

19 Jones RT et al. Effects of dietary Ascophyllum nodosum on blood
parameters of rats and pigs. Botanica Marina 1979; 22: 393-394.

----- PAGE 287 -----
Fumitory

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'°*)

Ph Eur 2007°°8

of fumitory. Fumitory should not be used in home-made .

ophthalmic preparations. In view of the active constituents Legal Category (Licensed Products)
and the lack of safety data, excessive ingestion of fumitory GSL'@”)

should be avoided.

Constituents
Species (Family) The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Fumaria officinalis L. (Fumariaceae) References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids —Isoquinoline-type. Protopines including protopine
Synonym(s) (fumarine) as the major alkaloid and cryptopine,’” proto-
a berberines including aurotensine, stylopine, sinactine and N-
methylsinactine,®) spirobenzylisoquinolines including fumaritine,
fumaricine and fumariline,** benzophenanthridines including

sanguinarine, and indenobenzazepines including fumaritridine

Common Fumitory, Fumitory

Part(s) Used

Herb and fumaritrine.°”

Flavonoids Glycosides of quercetin including isoquercitrin, rutin
Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs and quercetrin-3,7-diglucoside-3-arabinoglucoside.*”
BHC 1992'°° Acids Chlorogenic, caffeic and fumaric acids.

om
OCH3

protopine OCH; OCH3 aurotensine

cryptopine O-CH2—O

fumariline fumaritine fumaricine

fe}
2N—CHg
fe} ©

‘Lo

sanguinarine
Figure 1 Selected constituents of fumitory.

----- PAGE 288 -----
Other constituents Bitter principles, mucilage and resin.

Food Use

Fumitory is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
fumitory can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'C!®

Herbal Use

Fumitory is stated to possess weak diuretic and laxative properties
and to act as a cholagogue. Traditionally, it has been used to treat
cutaneous eruptions, conjunctivitis (as an eye lotion) and,
specifically, chronic eczema.(C* S% G7 G& Ge#)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Figure 3. Fumitory — dried drug substance (herb).

Fumitory
Herb 2-4¢ as an infusion three times daily,“C%°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In in vivo (rats) studies, preparations of the herb had no effect on
normal choloresis but modified bile flow that had been artificially
increased or decreased." Antispasmodic activity on smooth
muscle has been reported." Extracts inhibited formation of gall-
bladder calculi in animals.‘'?) The major alkaloid protopine has
antihistaminic,''” hypotensive, bradycardic and sedative activities
in small doses, whereas larger doses cause excitation and
“ Bactericidal activity against the Gram-positive
organisms Bacillus anthracis and Staphylococcus have been
reported."

convulsions.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of fumitory
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Clinical studies involving 105 patients with biliary disorders
claimed favourable results." However, the methodological
limitations of these studies do not allow the reported effects to
be attributed to administration of fumitory.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for fumitory and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings
None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fumitory to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of fumitory during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of
lack of pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of fumitory
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

roprietary single-ingredient preparations

Austria: Bilobene; Oddibil. Brazil: Oddibil. France: Oddibil.
Germany: Bilobene. Hungary: Bilobene.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Hepabene; Oddispasmol. Czech Republic: Hepabene.
France: Actibil; Bolcitol; Depuratif Parnel; Depuratum;
Schoum. Hungary: Hepabene. Italy: Soluzione Schoum.
Russia: Hepabene (lena6ene). Spain: Natusor Hepavesical;
Odisor; Solucion Schoum. UK: Echinacea; Skin Cleansing.

----- PAGE 289 -----
1

Fumitory

References

Sener B. Turkish species of Fumaria L. and their alkaloids. VII
Alkaloids from Fumaria officinalis L. and E. cilicica Hansskn. Gazi
Univ Eczacilik Fak Derg 1985; 2: 45-49.

Hermansson J, Sandberg F. Alkaloids of Fumaria officinalis. Acta
Pharm Suec 1973; 10: 520-522.

Mardirossian ZH et al. Alkaloids of Fumaria officinalis.
Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 759-761.

MacLean DB et al. Structure of three minor alkaloids of Fumaria
officinalis. Can ] Chem 1969; 47: 3593-3599.

Murav'eva DA et al. Isolation of fumaritine from Fumaria officinalis.
Khim Farm Zh 1974; 8: 32-34.

Forgacs P et al. Alcaloides des Papavéracées II: Composition chimique
de dix-sept especes de Fumaria. Plantes Med Phytother 1986; 20: 64—
81.

Forgacs P et al. Composition chimique des Fumariacées. Alcaloides de
quatorze especes de Fumaria. Plantes Med Phytother 1982; 16: 99-115.
Massa V et al. Sur les pigments phenoliques du Fumaria officinalis L.
Trav Soc Pharm Montpellier 1971; 31: 233-236.

10

1

12

13

14

15

Torck M et al. Flavonoids of Fumaria officinalis L. Ann Pharm Fr
1971; 29: 591-596.

Boucard M, Laubenheimer B. Action du nébulisat de fumeterre sur le
debit bilaire du rat. Therapie 1966; 21: 903-911.

Reynier M et al. Action du nébulisat de fumeterre officinal sur la
musculature lisse. Contribution a l'étude du mécanisme de son
activité thérapeutique. Trav Soc Pharm Montpellier 1977; 37: 85—
102.

Lagrange E, Aurousseau M. Effect of spray-dried product of Fumaria
officinalis on experimental gall bladder lithiasis in mice. Ann Pharm
Fr 1973; 31: 357-362.

Abdul Habib Dil. Activité anti-histaminique de la fumarine. Therapie
1973; 28: 767-774.

Preininger V. The pharmacology and toxicology of the papaveraceae
alkaloids. In: RHF Manske, ed. The Alkaloids XV. London: Academic
Press, 1975: 207-261.

Fiegel G. Die amphocholoretische Wirkung der Fumaria officinalis. Z
Allgemeinmed Landarzt 1971; 34: 1819-1820.

----- PAGE 290 -----
Garlic

secondary alliin metabolites, such as ajoene. However, it i:
unclear to what extent these secondary compounds are
formed in the body following the ingestion of garlic and
whether, therefore, these products exhibit the
pharmacological actions of fresh garlic.

Fermented garlic preparations are considered to be
practically devoid of the active sulfur-containing compounds.
Many ‘odourless’ garlic preparations are available: obviously
one should establish if these products are odourless due to the
formulation of the product or because they are devoid of the
odoriferous, active principles. Further randomised controlled
clinical trials with standardised preparations are required to
establish the true usefulness of garlic in reducing serum lipids,
blood pressure, platelet aggregation and exerting an
antimicrobial effect. Therapeutic doses of garlic should not be
given to those whose blood clots slowly and caution is
recommended for patients on anticoagulant therapy.

Species (Family)

Allium sativum L. (Alliaceae/Liliaceae)

Synonym(s)
Ajo, Allium

Part(s) Used
Bulb (clove)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 194961)

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8”

USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO year volume 1'°°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

This material is compiled from several sources including
References 1-3 and General References G6 and G52.

Enzymes  Allinase, peroxidases, myrosinase and others (e.g.
catalases, superoxide dismutases, arginases, li pases) ..2°>)

Volatile oils 0.1-0.36%. Sulfur-containing compounds including
alliin, compounds produced enzymatically from alliin including
allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate), allylpropyl disulfide, diallyl dis-
ulfide, diallyl trisulfide; ajoene and vinyldithiines (secondary
products of alliin produced non-enzymatically from allicin); S-
allylmercaptocysteine (ASSC) and S-methylmercaptocysteine
(MSSC); terpenes include citral, geraniol, linalool, «- and p-
phellandrene.

Other constituents Proteins (e.g. glutamyl peptides), amino
acids (e.g. arginine, glutamic acid, asparagic acid, methionine,
threonine), minerals, vitamins, trace elements, lipids, prostaglan-
dins (Ay, D5, Es, Fy4s Fs).

Allicin and other sulfur-containing compounds are formed
from alliin by the enzyme alliinase when garlic is crushed or
chopped. (Alliin and alliinase are separated while the cells of a
garlic bulb are intact, but crushing and chopping damage the cells
of the bulb, allowing alliin and alliinase to come into contact with
each other.) It is considered that 1 mg alliin is equivalent to
0.45 mg allicin.©*” Commercial garlic preparations are often
standardised on content of sulfur-containing constituents, parti-
cularly to alliin, or on allicin yield.

Garlic powder contains not less than 0.45% allicin calculated
with reference to the dried drug.‘©**)

----- PAGE 291 -----
Garlic

Food Use

Garlic is used extensively as a food and as an ingredient in foods.
It is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N1). This category indicates that there are no
restrictions on the use of garlic in foods.““"” Previously, garlic has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C4?

Herbal Use

Garlic is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmo-
dic, antiseptic, bacteriostatic, antiviral, hypotensive and anthel-
mintic properties, and to be a promoter of leukocytosis.
Traditionally, it has been used to treat chronic bronchitis,
respiratory catarrh, recurrent colds, whooping cough, bronchitic
asthma, influenza and chronic bronchitis.'C% 6% 3% 634 6%; G6)
Modern use of garlic and garlic preparations is focused on their
reputed antihypertensive, anti-atherogenic, antithrombotic, anti-
microbial, fibrinolytic, cancer preventive and_ lipid-lowering
effects.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and older pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried bulb 2-4¢ three times daily;‘©® fresh garlic 4 g daily.(@?
Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C®
Oil 0.03-0.12 mL three times daily.“©

Juice of Garlic (BPC 1949) 2-4mL.'C!)

Syrup of Garlic (BPC 1949) 2-8 mL.‘C!)

Clinical trials assessing the effects of garlic powder tablets on
various parameters, including total serum cholesterol concentra-
tions, triglyceride concentrations, blood pressure, platelet aggre-
gation, vascular resistance, fibrinolysis and measures of peripheral
arterial occlusive disease, have generally involved the administra-

Sulfur compounds °
i
9 s s
I Se NH> Aw 8s NF
ZN. cooH (B)-ajoene
alliin °
(S-allyl-L-cysteine i ‘
sulfoxide) BvV POS s° aN
(2-ajoene
allinase
i
Fw 8-H Aw ss F
allylsulfenic acid allicin
thioacrolein

Aw 8ss-~\F

diallyldisulfide s ZA
2-vinyl-4H- 3-vinyl-4H-
1,3-dithiin 1,2-dithiin

ows 8° SLAY,
diallyltrisulfide

Figure 1 Selected constituents of garlic.

tion of doses of 600-900mg daily for 424 weeks.(©°° For
prophylaxis of atherosclerosis, ESCOP (European Scientific Co-
operative on Phytotherapy) states a dosage 0.5-1.0g dried garlic
powder daily (approximately equivalent to alliin 6-10mg and
allicin 3-5 mg).'”)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Many pharmacological properties have been documented for
garlic and its constituents in vitro and in vivo (animals), including
antihypertensive, lipid-lowering, anti-atherogenic, antithrombo-
tic, fibrinolytic, antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, antitumorigenic,
immunomodulatory and antimicrobial activities. The pharmaco-
logical properties of garlic are attributed mainly to its sulfur-
containing compounds. An extensive review of the pharmacolo-
gical properties of garlic and its constituents is beyond the scope
of this monograph, although many studies are summarised below.

Figure 3 Garlic — dried drug substance (bulb).

----- PAGE 292 -----
s of garlic and its constituents have
(3, 5-21, GS, G56)

The pharmacological activiti
been summarised in many reviews.

Pharmacokinetics The available literature on the metabolism
and pharmacokinetics of the constituents of garlic in animals has
been reviewed.'>!®)

In an ex vivo study, allicin showed a marked first-pass clearance
effect in isolated perfused rat liver. In rats, alliin and allicin were
administered orally at doses of 8mg/kg.°” Absorption of alliin
and allicin was complete after 10 minutes and 30-60 minutes,
respectively. The mean total urinary and faecal excretion of allicin
after 72 hours was 85.5% of the dose. No unchanged alliin or
allicin was detected in urine, suggesting rapid and extensive
metabolism of these constituents. Pharmacokinetic studies of
the garlic constituent S-allyl-L-cysteine administered orally to rats
at doses of 12.5, 25 and 50 mg/kg have reported bioavailability of
64%, 77% and 98%, respectively.°*) Peak plasma concentrations
of S-allyl-L-cysteine occurred at one hour, and the half-life of S-
allyl-t-cysteine was 2.33 hours following oral administration of
50 mg/kg to rats.

Anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and _ lipid-lowering
effects The effects of garlic and its constituents on cholesterol
biosynthes in animal models of hypercholester-
olaemia are well documented.”

Several in vitro studies have shown that garlic and its sulfur-
containing constituents inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis in cultured
hepatocytes.?*7* In other in vitro studies, garlic extracts were
shown to inhibit fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis.°?*”
The step(s) in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway inhibited by
garlic, and the constituents of garlic causing inhibition have not
been definitively established. Several mechanisms of action for the
effects of garlic constituents on cholesterol and lipid synthesis
have been proposed, including inhibition of hydroxymethylglu-
taryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase activity and other enzymes,
such as lanosterol-14-demethylase, involved in cholesterol bio-
synthesis." Other proposed mechanisms include reduction in
triacylglycerol biosynthesis via a reduction in tissue concentra-
tions of NADPH, increase in hydrolysis of triacylglycerols via
increased lipase activity and inactivation of enzymes involved in
lipid synthesis via an interaction with enzyme thiol groups.*3"
More recently, fresh garlic extract and the constituents S-
allylcysteine, diallyl trisulfide and diallyl disulfide were shown
to inhibit human squalene monooxygenase, an enzyme catalysing
a step in cholesterol biosynthesis.°” Another in vitro study
reported that S-allylcysteine, S-propylcysteine and S-ethylcysteine
inhibit triglyceride biosynthesis in part by decreasing de novo fatty
id synthesis via inhibition of fatty acid synthase.°”
The anti-atherogenic, anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and
lipid-lowering effects of garlic and its constituents have been
documented in several animal models (e.g. rabbits, rats, chickens,
pigs) of atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolaemia and hyperlipidae-
mia. For example, a reduction in both blood and tissue lipid
concentrations in hypercholesterolaemic animals fed a diet
supplemented with dried garlic powder, garlic oil, or allicin has
® 33) Garlic has also been reported to reduce
hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations in rats, and to
reduce aortic lipid deposition and atheromatous lesions in rabbits
fed a high-fat diet.‘® Several studies have reported hypolipidaemic
effects for garlic oil following administration to rats and rabbits
fed a fat-rich diet to induce hyperlipidaemia.) Administration of
aged garlic extract to rabbits fed a 1% cholesterol-enriched diet
for six weeks reduced the surface area of the thoracic aorta
covered by fatty streaks (atherosclerosis) and significantly reduced

s in vitro an

ac

a

been documented.‘

Garlic

aortic arch cholesterol, although plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions were not reduced.“ Allicin administration has been
reported to reduce significantly the formation of fatty streaks in
mice fed a cholesterol-rich diet, compared with control mice (no
allicin treatment).°°

The cholesterol-lowering effect of garlic is thought to be dose-
related; proposed mechanisms of action include inhibition of lipid
synthesis )
An in vitro study reported that aged garlic extract may exert its
anti-atherogenic effects via inhibition of smooth muscle prolifera-
tion and phenotypic change, and by an effect on lipid accumula-
tion in the artery wall.°”

and increased excretion of neutral and acidic sterols.°*

Antithrombotic and fibrinolytic activities | Antithrombotic
activity is well documented for garlic in both in vitro and in
vivo (animal) 3) Antithrombotic effects have been
documented for fresh garlic, garlic powder and garlic oils."°)

Increased serum fibrinogen concentrations together with a
decrease in blood coagulation time and fibrinolytic activity are
associated with a high-fat diet and enhance thrombosis.‘ Garlic
has been shown to have a beneficial effect on all of these
parameters. Garlic has been shown to inhibit platelet aggrega-
tion®*?” caused by several inducers such as ADP, collagen,
arachidonic acid, adrenaline (epinephrine) and calcium ionophore
A23187.°*) Antiplatelet activity has been documented for garlic in
using human platelets.”

Several mechanisms have been proposed by which garlic is
thought to exert an anti-aggregatory action. These include
inhibition of thromboxane synthesis via cyclooxygenase and
lipoxygenase inhibition,” inhibition of membrane phospholipase
activity and incorporation of arachidonic acid into platelet
membrane phospholipids,” intraplatelet mobilisation of calcium
uptake and inhibition of calcium uptake into platelets.* Garlic
oil has been reported to reduce artificial surface adhesion of
platelets in vitro.“ Certain garlic constituents also affect
processes preceding platelet aggregation, such as activation of
platelets.

Garlic is thought to contain more than one inhibitor of platelet
aggregation and release; allicin is considered to be the major
inhibitor.” Other studies have investigated the role of ajoene (a
secondary degradation product of alliin) as an inhibitor of platelet
aggregation and release.°*?) Ajoene inhibits platelet aggregation
caused by various inducers.“*>
dependent and reversible both in vitro and in vivo.) It has been
suggested that this latter feature may be of clinical significance in
instances where a rapid inhibition of platelet aggregation is
required with subsequent reversal, such as chronic haemodialysis
and coronary bypass surgery.) It has been proposed that ajoene
exerts its anti-aggregatory effect by altering the platelet membrane
via an interaction with sulfhydryl groups.“ The inhibitory action
of ajoene on granule release from platelets is thought to involve
alteration of the microviscosity in the inner part of the plasma
membrane.” Ajoene is reported to synergistically potentiate the
anti-aggregatory action of prostacyclin, forskolin, indometacin
and dipyridamole,“* and to potentiate the inhibitory action of
prostaglandin I, (PGI) on platelet aggregation." Approximately
96% inhibition of prostaglandin synthetase and 100% inhibition
of lipoxygenase has been described for ajoene in vitro.“
Structure—activity investigations suggested that an allylic structure
in the open disulfide ring is required for activity.”

studies.

in vitro studi

) Its action is noted to be dose-

Antioxidant effects Antioxidant properties have been documen-
ted for garlic in vitro and in vivo (animals). Garlic constituents
inhibit the formation of free radicals, support endogenous radical-

----- PAGE 293 -----
Garlic

scavenging mechanisms, enhance cellu
(e.g. superoxide dismutase, catalase,

ar antioxidant enzymes
glutathione peroxidase),

protect low-density lipoprotein from oxidation by free radicals,
and inhibit the activation of the oxidant-induced transcription
factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-KB). !®)

Garlic powder was reported to inhibit the production of
superoxide by phorbol ester-activated human granulocytes in vitro
(ICso 390 pg/mL), whereas alliin did not inhibit superoxide
production in this model. It was suggested that allicin may be the
constituent of garlic responsible for the observed oxygen-radical
scavenging properties. In vitro, aged garlic extract and S-
allylcysteine inhibited low-density lipoprotein oxidation and
protected pulmonary artery endothelial cells against injury
induced by oxidised low-density lipoprotein. In subsequent
studies using bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells and
murine macrophages, it was shown that aged garlic extract
inhibited oxidised low-density lipoprotein-induced rele
peroxides.°" In vivo studies have reported reductions in liver
lipid peroxidation and inhibition of ethanol-induced mitochon-
drial lipid peroxidation in rats fed garlic oil.

The antioxidant properties are of interest in relation to the
antiarteriosclerotic, antihepatotoxic and anticancer effects of
garlic and its constituents. For example, oxidation of low-density
lipoprotein plays an important role in the initiation and
progression of atherosclerosis.

se. of

Antihypertensive effects Several studies involving animal models
(e.g. dogs, rats) of hypertension have reported hypotensive effects
of garlic preparations.” A hypotensive effect in dogs administered
garlic extract has been documented; prior administration of
antagonists to known endogenous hypotensive substances such as
histamine, acetylcholine, serotonin and kinins did not affect the
hypotensive effect.” Spontaneously hypertensive rats fed stan-
dardised dry garlic powder 1 mg/kg for nine months exhibited
lower blood pressure than control rats (150 versus 205mmHg,
respectively).°*) By contrast, an ethanolic extract of garlic (1-2. g
and 4-8 g daily) fed to spontaneously hypertensive rats did not
lead to a reduction in blood pressure.
Anticarcinogenic and antitumorigenic activities Many in vitro
and animal studies have documented anticancer activities of garlic
and its constituents.°!*') These studies indicate that allicin,
allicin-derived compounds and other compounds unrelated to
allicin contribute to the anticancer effects of garlic.

In several animal models, garlic has been shown to inhibit
carcinogenesis and to protect against the development of
experimentally induced tumours.* +!) For example, aged garlic
extract significantly inhibited the growth of Sarcoma-180 and LL/
2 lung carcinoma cells transplanted into mice. Garlic powder
and its constituents S-allylcysteine and diallyl disulfide inhibited
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mammary carcinogenesis in
rats, and fresh garlic (250 mg/kg orally, three times weekly)
suppressed 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide—induced carcinogenesis in rat
tongue.” Inhibition of benzo[a]pyrene-induced neoplasia of the
fore stomach and lung in female mice has been documented for
four allyl group-containing derivatives in garlic.°*
activity requirements underlined the importance of the unsatu-
rated allyl groups for activity. Saturated analogues containing
propyl instead of allyl groups were devoid of activity.

In vitro studies using human tumour cell lines have reported
that garlic powder and garlic extract inhibited the growth of a
human lymphatic leukaemia cell line (CCRF CEM) in a
concentration-dependent manner at concentrations down to
30 ptg/mL.°”) Also, a combination of garlic extract and garlic

Structure—

powder inhibited the growth of human hepatoma (HepG02) cells
and human colorectal carcinoma (Caco2) cells in a concentration-
dependent manner, although no activity was observed on these
tumour cell lines with garlic extract or powder alone.©) Synthetic
diallyl disulfide inhibited tumour cell growth in four human
‘6 Growth inhibition occurred regardless
of oestrogen receptor status.

Evidence indicates that there are several mechanisms by which
garlic and its constituents may exert anticancer effects, such as
inhibition of carcinogen formation, modulation of carcinogen
metabolism, inhibition of mutagenesis and genotoxicity, increased

breast cancer cell lines.

apoptosis and inhibition of angiogenesis.

Garlic has been shown to inhibit the synthesis of N-nitroso
compounds (there is a view that N-nitroso compounds are
possible carcinogens for humans). Also, in rats pretreated with
dimethylbenz[aJanthracene (DMBA) and fed a diet supplemented
with garlic powder, the occurrence of DNA adducts in mammary
tissue was significantly inhibited, compared with control.'°?
(DMBA initiates and promotes cancer, and alkylation of DNA is
thought to be an important step in carcinogenesis.) Dietary garlic
has also been shown to suppress the occurrence of DNA adducts
caused by N-nitroso compounds.’

Another possible explanation is that garlic constituents may
modify drug-metabolising enzymes, which would have the effect of
altering the bioactivation of carcinogens." Glutathione-S-
transferase activity has been shown to increase in rat and mouse
tissues after administration of garlic powder or its sulfur-
containing constituents.°?!'9) Certain garlic constituents, e.g.
diallyl sulfide, may depress the activity of some hepatic
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, such as CYP2E1 and
CYP2A6,"> 4 '5:®) although other studies have shown that garlic
constituents induce the activity of other CYP enzymes. !? In
rats, the antimutagenic properties of sulfur-containing com-
pounds from garlic, e.g. diallyl disulfide and diallyl sulfide,
against the carcinogens styrene oxide and 4-nitroquinoline-1-
oxide and a benzo[a]pyrene compound have been shown to be
associated with induction of phase II enzymes.“

A study in mice with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the

bladder reported that injection of liquid extract of garlic at the site
of tumour transplantation led to a significant reduction in the
incidence of TCC in this model. Furthermore, garlic extract
together with suicide-gene therapy significantly inhibited tumour
growth (as determined by evidence of apoptosis following
istomorphological and immunohistochemical studies) compared
with control (no gene therapy).
Effects of garlic constituents on the immune system have been
documented in vitro and in vivo; these effects may contribute, at
east in part, to the anticancer effects of garlic (see Pharmaco-
logical Actions, Immunomodulatory activity).

Immunomodulatory activity Immunostimulant activity has
been described for a high molecular weight protein fraction
obtained from an aged garlic extract.” The fraction was found to
strongly stimulate mice peritoneal macrophages in vitro, and to
stimulate carbon clearance in mice in vivo. It has been suggested

that garlic may suppress tumour cell growth by the stimulation of
55, 66, 67)

immunoresponder cells."

In vitro and/or in vivo (animal) studies have found that garlic
has several immune-enhancing effects, such as stimulation of
lymphocyte proliferation and macrophage phagocytosis, induc-
tion of macrophage- and lymphocyte-infiltration into trans-
planted tumours, and stimulation of interferon-y release.‘
Other effects on the immune system documented for garlic and/

----- PAGE 294 -----
or its constituents include increased natural killer cell activity and
increased interleukin-2 production by garlic fractions in vitro,
and increased numbers of antibody-forming cells in mice spleens
following administration of standardised garlic powder. Other
studies demonstrated that, in vitro, aged garlic extract, compared
with control, enhanced the proliferation of spleen cells in a
concentration-dependent manner, increased production of cyto-
kines (including interleukin-2 and tumour necrosis factor %) and
enhanced natural killer cell activity of a T cell fraction of mouse
splenic cells against YAC-1 after incubation for 24 hours.” Also,
compared with control, aged garlic extract significantly inhibite
the growth of sarcoma-180 and LL/2 lung carcinoma cells
transplanted into mice, and significant increases in natural killer
cell activity of spleen were observed in splenic cells from sarcoma-

bearing mice treated with aged garlic extract, compared with
(55, 69)

those from control mice.

Antimicrobial activity Antimicrobial activity (including anti-
bacterial, antiviral, antifungal, antiprotozoal and antiparasitic
activites) is well documented for garlic.” The in vitro
antimicrobial activity of garlic is considered to be mainly due to
allicin.)

In vitro studies have demonstrated that bacteria sensitive to
garlic include species from Staphylococcus, Escherichia, Proteus,
Salmonella, Providencia, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Hafnia, Aero-
Vibrio and Bacillus genera.” In these studies,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa was found not to be sensitive to

monas,

garlic.” In vitro studies have also shown that allicin has
significant antibacterial activity against several species, including
Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus faecalis,
Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Salmonella typhi and Vibrio

(70)

cholerae.

In other in vitro studies, garlic oil and four diallyl sulfide
constituents, including diallyl disulfide, showed activity against
antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneu-
moniae,” and against S. aureus, methicillin-resistant S. aureus,
Candida spp. and Aspergillus spp.”

Garlic has also been documented to inhibit growth in 30 strains
(consisting of 17 species) of mycobacteria, including Mycobacter-
ium tuberculosis.”*) In vitro, both aqueous garlic extract and
ethanolic garlic extract inhibited the growth of M. avium complex
(MAC) strains isolated from patients with or without acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).'”” Aqueous garlic extract at
concentrations of 2—Smg/mL inhibited the growth of clinical
isolates of Helicobacter pylori from patients with chronic gastritis
or duodenal ulcer.“ The minimum inhibitory concentration to
inhibit 90% of growth (MICo9) was 5 mg/mL. Sulfur-containing
compounds from garlic (diallyl sulfide and diallyl disulfide,

produced from alliin) were shown to decrease growth of H. pylori

isolates from patients with peptic ulcer.
that garlic inhibits bacterial cell growt!
RNA synthesis.”

Broad-spectrum activity against fungi
garlic including the genera Microsp:

) Tt has been proposed

by primarily inhibiting

has been documented for
orum, Epidermophyton,

Trichophyton, Rhodo torula, Torulopsis, Trichosporon, Crypto-
coccus neoformans and Candida, including Candida albicans.”

Garlic extract has been reported to be more effective than
nystatin against pathogenic yeasts, especially Candida albicans.”
Inhibition of lipid synthesis is thought to be an important factor
in the anticandidal activity of garlic, with a disulfide-containing
component such as allicin thought to be the main active
component.”® Garlic has been found to inhibit the growth and
toxin production of Aspergillus parasiticus.””

Garlic

Allicin produced from synthetic alliin with alliinase isolated
from garlic cloves inhibited the destruction of baby hamster
kidney cells by trophozoites of the protozoan parasite Entamoeba
histolytica in vitro.®° Allicin also inhibited the cysteine
proteinase activities of intact E. histolytica trophozoites. In vitro
activity against Giardia intestinalis has also been documented for
whole garlic extract (ICso 0.3mg/mL) and for several of its
constituents, particularly allyl alcohol and allyl mercaptan (ICs
7 g/mL and 37 pg/mL, respectively)”

In vitro antiviral activity against parainfluenza type 3, herpes
simplex type 1 and influenza B has been documented.“ *)
Activity was attributed to allicin or an allicin derivative. Garlic

was reported to be ineffective towards coxsackie B1 virus."

Antihepatotoxic effects Antihepatotoxic activity in vitro and in
vivo has been reported for garlic and its constituents.) Garlic
oil® and some of its constituents, namely alliin, $-allylmercap-
tocysteine (ASSC) and S-methylmercaptocysteine (MSSC) reduced
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)- and galactosamine-induced hepato-
toxicity in vitro.°°) Other in vitro studies have shown that S-
allylcysteine, S-propylcysteine and S-allylmercaptocysteine neu-
tralised CCly-induced hepatotoxicity, and that S-allylcysteine and
S-allylmercaptocysteine prevent liver damage induced by hepato-
toxins in acute hepatitis in mice.‘ *®

An in vitro study in rat hepatocytes found that diallyl sulfide
(0.5 and 2mmol/L) and diallyl disulfide (0.5 and 1mmol/L)
protected against DNA damage induced by aflatoxin By,
) In this model, diallyl sulfide and
diallyl disulfide appeared to exert a hepatoprotective effect via
increased activity of glutathione-S-transferase and glutathione
peroxidase activity.

compared with control.”

Other activities Garlic oil and juice have been reported to protect
against isoprenaline-induced myocardial necrosis in rats.) Oral
administration of garlic extract 100, 200 or 400 mg/kg to rats given
oral lead acetate 5 mg/kg daily for six weeks was found to reduce
tissue lead concentrations, compared with those in control rats.)
A diet containing 2% aged garlic extract was reported to protect
against intestinal damage induced by oral methotrexate and 5-
fluorouracil administered to rats for 4-5 days, compared with a
control diet.”

A study in senescence-accelerated mice found that S-allylcys-
teine, present in aged garlic extract, administered in the diet for
eight months (40 mg/kg/diet daily) significantly attenuated the
decrease in the conditioned avoidance response, compared with a
diet lacking S-allylcysteine.”” It was suggested that the findings
indicate that dietary supplementation with S-allylcysteine may
reduce age-related learning disabilities and cognitive disorders in
senescence-accelerated mice.

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for an alcoholic
garlic extract following oral administration to rabbits (dose
equivalent to 50g dry garlic powder). Fifty-nine per cent activity
compared to that of 500mg tolbutamide was observed.”

Garlic has been documented to cause both smooth muscle

. . te 37,52,84) oe

relaxation and contraction. Garlic oil has been reported
to depress gastrointestinal movements induced by charcoal meal
and castor oil.‘°” In mice, garlic has also inhibited acetylcholine-
and PGE,-induced contraction of the rat gastric fundus, with the
most active components exhibiting the weakest antiplatelet
aggregatory activity.” Garlic has also elicited contractions on
the rat uterus and the guinea-pig ileum in vitro.°?) Both actions
were blocked by flufenamic acid, but not by atropine or
cyproheptadine, indicating a prostaglandin-like mode of action.

----- PAGE 295 -----
Garlic

In vitro, ajoene was found to inhibit the release of lipopoly-
prostaglandin E, in macrophages in a
concentration-dependent manner.» This effect was reported to
be due to inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) activity by
ajoene.

saccharide-induced

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics The available literature on the metabolism
and pharmacokinetics of the constituents of garlic in humans has
been reviewed.°°*°!®)

Addition of allicin to fresh whole blood results in conversion of
allicin to allyl mercaptan and other compounds produced from
allicin, such as diallyl trisulfide and ajoene, have also been shown
to form allyl mercaptan in blood.” Sulfur-containing compounds,
such as diallyl disulfide, diallyl sulfide, dimethyl sulfide and
mercapturic acids, have been isolated and identified in human
urine following the ingestion of garlic.°*?) A subsequent study
detected N-acetyl-S-allyl-t-cysteine (allylmercapturic acid) in the

involving patients with a range of disorders (such as hyperlipi-
daemia, coronary heart disease and hypertension) as well as
healthy volunteers, and compared garlic preparations (e.g. fresh
garlic, garlic oil, garlic extract, dried garlic powder) with garlic-
free diet, placebo or other agents (two studies
a_reserpine/diuretic combination as the comparator treat-
ment)."°?) This analysis reported a mean difference of
—0.77 mmol/L (95% confidence interval (CI) —0.65, —0.89) in
reduction of total serum cholesterol concentrations between garlic
recipients and those receiving placebo or a garlic-free diet (net
reduction over placebo: 12%). Analysis of data from the eight
trials that assessed garlic powder preparations indicated that
garlic powder administration significantly reduced serum trigly-
ceride concentrations, compared with placebo (net reduction:
13%). It was stated, however, that several trials had methodolo-
gical flaws, and that there was not enough evidence to recommend
garlic as an effective lipid-lowering agent for routine use. The
results of a subsequent randomised placebo-controlled trial
involving 115 patients with moderate hyperlipidaemia (which
showed no difference between garlic and_ placebo)!”

used bezafibrate or

were

urine of volunteers (7 = 6) who

ad ingested two garlic tablets

containing 100mg garlic extract (Kwai).° The mean (standard
deviation) elimination half-life of allylmercapturic acid was
estimated to be 6 (1.3) hours.

It has been reported that the flavour of human breast milk is

altered when lactating women consume foods containing sulfur-
containing compounds, such as garlic (see Contra-indications,
Warnings; Pregnancy and lactation).°” Also, garlic ingestion by
pregnant women significantly alters the odour of their amniotic
fluid (see Contra-indications, Warnings; Pregnancy and lacta-
tion),°® suggesting that the odorous components of garlic are
present. Evidence for this comes from a placebo-controlled study
involving 10 healthy pregnant women undergoing routine
amniocentesis. The odour of samples of amniotic fluid from
women who ingested capsules containing garlic extract was
judged to be 'stronger’ or more 'garlic-like' than that of samples
from women who had ingested placebo capsules.

Pharmacodynamics Several of the pharmacological activities
documented for garlic and its constituents in vitro and in vivo
(animals) have also been reported in clinical studies (see
Pharmacological Actions, Therapeutic effects).

1

included in a re-analysis
above.''?) This analysis s
reducing serum cholesterol

3) of the meta-analysis described

owed that the effect of garlic in
concentrations remained statistically

Numerous studies have ass
tion of garlic preparations in
not all, of these studies hav

essed the effects of the administra-
ypercholesterolaemia. Many, but
> documented the effects of garlic

administration in lowering serum cholesterol and triglyceride
concentrations. Clinical studies have also documented fibrinolytic
activity associated with garlic administration and effects on
platelet function.°? !

Therapeutic effects

Anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and lipid- lowering
effects Numerous studies have investigated the effects of garlic
preparations in lowering raised serum cholesterol concentrations,
and the findings of these studies have been reviewed in several
meta-analyses, (1011)

A meta-analysis of five randomised, placebo-controlled trials
involving mostly patients with serum cholesterol concentrations
greater than 5.17mmol/L who received preparations of garlic
extract at doses of 600-1000 mg daily for 8-24 weeks reported
that garlic significantly reduced total serum cholesterol concen-
trations by about 9% (net reduction over placebo), compared with
placebo (p < 0.001)."°? Another meta-analysis included 16 trials

significant, compared with placebo, but that the size of the effect
was reduced.
Several randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials‘!
'8) have been published since the meta-analyses described above.
One of these studies''°* has been criticised for its choice of garlic
preparation."
Several of these trials‘ were included in the most recent
meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials of garlic preparations
involving patients with hypercholesterolaemia.“°) This meta-
analysis included 13 randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of garlic monopreparations involving 796 patients
with coronary heart disease (7 = 1 trial), hyperlipoproteinaemia
(2), hypercholesterolaemia (7), hypertension (1), familial hyperli-
pidaemia in children (1) and healthy volunteers (1). Ten of the
trials assessed the effects of a standardised garlic powder
preparation (Kwai) at doses of 600-900 mg daily for 8-24 weeks;
the other three trials tested garlic oil or spray dried powder. Ten
trials reported differences favouring garlic over placebo in the
reduction of total serum cholesterol concentrations, although
t
Si

105-107)

ese differences were statistically significant in only three
studies. Overall, meta-analysis indicated a significant difference
in the reduction of total cholesterol concentrations favouring
garlic over placebo (—0.41mmol/L; 95% CI —0.66mmol/L,
—0.15 mmol/L; p < 0.01), equivalent to a net reduction in total
cholesterol concentrations of 5.8%. It was stated that although
these findings indicated that garlic is more beneficial than
placebo in reducing serum cholesterol concentrations, the size of
the effect is small. Furthermore, several studies had methodolo-
gical limitations.”

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial has
been published since the meta-analysis described above. This
study assessed the effects of garlic powder (tablets) 500mg and
1000 mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks in 53 patients with
moderate hypercholesterolaemia (baseline low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C) 130-190 mg/dL)."") At the end of the study
there were no significant differences in the absolute mean change
in LDL-C between the three groups (mean (SD) values were: 0.0
(4.3) mg/dL, 1.4 (4.8) mg/dL and —10.1 (6.8) mg/dL for the
placebo, garlic powder 500 mg and garlic powder 1000 mg groups,
respectively).

cho.

----- PAGE 296 -----
Another meta-analysis, which aimed to summarise the evidence
for the effects of garlic on several cardiovascular-related factors,
considered 45 randomis
(19 Tr was reported that after one and three months,
garlic treatment may lead to small reductions in total cholestero
concentrations (0.03-0.45 mmol/L and 0.32-0.66 mmol/L, respec-
tively). However, no effect was noted for pooled six-month data.
Changes in cholesterol concentrations were paralleled by changes
in low-density lipoprotein and triglyceride concentrations.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial explored
the anti-atherosclerotic effect of garlic powder 900 mg daily for 48
months in 280 patients with advanced atherosclerotic plaques and
an established risk factor for arteriosclerosis (e.g. high systolic
blood pressure, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes mellitus, smok-
ing)."'! It was reported that continuous garlic intake significantly
reduced the increase in arteriosclerotic plaque volume, compared
with placebo. However, the robustness of the findings of this study
is difficult to assess independently as no exact p-value is given.

d controlled trials of at least four weeks'

duration.

A Cochrane systematic review of gar

ic for the treatment of

peripheral arterial occ

usive disease identified only one eligible

randomised, placebo-controlled trial."!'?) The trial involved 78

participants with perip!

eral arterial occlusive disease (lower limb

atherosclerosis) who received garlic, or p
the end of the study, the difference in tl

acebo, for 12 weeks. At
¢ increase in pain-free

walking distance between the two groups was found to be
statistically non-significant.
An open study involved 101 healthy adults aged 50-80 years
who had taken a standardised garlic powder preparation at a dose
of at least 300 mg daily for at least two years and 101 age- and sex-
matched subjects."!')) Measures of the elastic properties of the
aorta were compared for the two groups. Pulse-wave velocity and
elastic vascular resistance were reported to be reduced signifi-
cantly in the garlic group, compared with the control group. These
findings suggest that long-term use of garlic powder to attenuate
age-related increases in aortic stiffness is worth further study.

Antithrombotic and fibrinolytic effects Several placebo-
controlled studies have documented fibrinolytic effects for garlic
preparations in clinical studies involving patients with coronary
heart disease, hyperlipidaemia and hypercholesterolaemia, and
healthy volunteer:
of ether-extracted garlic oil 20 mg daily for up to 90 days, whereas
several others involved the administration of garlic powder 600-
1500 mg daily for up to 28 days. Most, but not all, of these studies
reported significant increases in fibrinolytic activity in garlic
recipients, compared with placebo recipients.

An open, uncontrolled study explored the effects of garlic
consumption (one fresh chopped clove daily for 16 weeks) in eight
healthy male volunteers.''® After 16 weeks, garlic consumption
was reported to reduce significantly serum thromboxane B, and
cholesterol concentrations, compared with baseline values.

) Several studies involved the administration

Antioxidant effects Blood samples from 31 individuals who
participated in a randomised, placebo-controlled trial involving
115 patients with moderate hyperlipidaemia who received a
standardised garlic powder preparation 900mg daily for six
months (which showed no difference between garlic and
placebo)? were analysed to explore the effects of garlic
treatment on the resistance of low-density lipoprotein to
‘15) There were no significant differences between
garlic and placebo recipients in low-density lipoprotein composi-
tion. Thus, garlic administration did not reduce the susceptibility
of low-density lipoprotein to oxidation. This finding contrasts
with some of the results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled

oxidation.

Garlic

study involving 23 patients with coronary artery disease who
received a standardised garlic powder preparation (Kwai tablets)
300 mg three times daily, or placebo, for four weeks."''® The study
reported that garlic powder administration reduced the ather-
ogenicity of low-density lipoprotein. At the end of the study, the
ability of low-density lipoprotein to induce intracellular choles-
terol accumulation was decreased by 38%, compared with
baseline values. Decreases in the susceptibility of low-density
lipoprotein to oxidation and in low-density lipoprotein-stimulated
cell proliferation (an indicator of low-density lipoprotein
atherogenicity) were also documented.

The effects of standardised garlic powder tablets (Sapec; alliin
1.3%, allicin 0.6%) 900mg daily for two months on oxidative
stress status were explored in an open, uncontrolled study
involving 25 healthy volunteers.'''” At the end of the study, a
reduction in serum malondialdehyde concentrations was observed,
compared with baseline values. It was stated that this finding
indicates that standardised garlic powder may have antioxidant
activity in humans.

Antihypertensive effects A meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials of garlic preparations assessed the evidence for
the effects of garlic on blood pressure."'!® Eight trials involving
415 participants were included in the review, all of which ha
tested the effects of an allicin-standardised garlic powder
preparation (Kwai tablets) at doses of 600-900 mg daily for 4-52
weeks. Overall, the absolute change in mean systolic bloo:
pressure was 7.7mmHg greater for the garlic group, compare
with the placebo group (95% CI 4.3-11.0). However, only three
trials specifically involved subjects with hypertension and, as
reported by other meta-analyses of trials of garlic preparations,
several trials had methodological limitations. Thus, it was state
that there was insufficient evidence to recommend § garlic
management of hypertension.

Another overview of trials reported that the effects of garlic
treatment on blood pressure are 'insignificant'."!

A Cochrane systematic review that aimed to assess the efficacy
of garlic preparations in preventing pre-eclampsia and_ its
complications found only one placebo-controlled trial.|!? The
study investigated the effects of a dry garlic powder preparation
800 mg daily (equivalent to 2000 ig allicin daily) taken orally for
eight weeks by 100 primigravid women at 28 to 32 weeks!
gestation and who were deemed to be at moderate risk for pre-
eclampsia. There was no statistically significant difference
between the garlic and placebo groups in gestational hypertension
or pre-eclampsia. Further, the trial was deemed to be of uncertain

quality as the method of random allocation to treatment group
19)

treatment for routine

was not describe

Anticancer effects The protective effects of garlic consumption
against various cancers (including colon, stomach, larynx, breast
and endometrial) have been explored in several epidemiological
studies, and their findings have been summarised. 2° Most, but
not all, of these studies suggest that garlic consumption may have
a protective effect, particularly against cancers of the gastro-
G20) However, the findings should be interpreted
cautiously, as bias and/or confounding cannot be excluded, and
there are other methodological issues, for example, most studies
did not distinguish between consumption of raw or cooked garlic.

intestinal tract.

Antimicrobial effects An epidemiological study comprising a
dietary interview and measurement of serum H. pylori antibodies
was conducted among 214 adults in a low-risk area of Shandong

----- PAGE 297 -----
Garlic

a2t

) The findings suggested a protective effect
of garlic consumption against H. pylori infection.

An open, uncontrolled study involving 34 patients with tinea
pedis explored the effectiveness of ajoene cream (0.4% w/w).‘??)
After seven days' treatment, complete cure of the infection was
recorded for 27 (79%) participants. The remaining seven patients
experienced complete cure after a further seven days' treatment.
All patients were evaluated for recurrence of infection 90 days
after the end of treatment; all found to be infection free as
determined by negative cultures for the fungus.

Province in China.

Other effects A reduction in blood sugar concentrations and an
increase in insulin have been observed following allylpropyl
disulfide administration to normal volunteers, whereas another
study reported that garlic exhibits hypoglycaemic actions in
diabetic patients but not in controls. It has also been reported
that garlic can prevent tolbutamide- and adrenaline-induced
hyperglycaemia.)

A randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 100
Swedish participants working in a tick-endemic area found that
administration of garlic powder 1200 mg daily for eight weeks
resulted in fewer tick bites than did placebo administration."?”

An open, uncontrolled study involving 15 patients with
hepatopulmonary syndrome explored the effects of treatment
with capsules containing a standardised garlic powder preparation
for at least six months.''*4) Improvements in arterial oxygenation
and symptoms were documented for several participants. The
effects of garlic powder treatment in patients with hepatopul-
monary syndrome require further study.

Side-effects, Toxi

Clinical data

Garlic is generally considered to be non-toxic. !? Adverse
effects that have been documented in humans include a burning
sensation in the mouth and gastrointestinal tract, nausea,
diarrhoea and vomiting.”

A meta-analysis of 13 randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials of garlic monopreparations, 10 of which assessed
the effects of a standardised garlic powder preparation (Kwai) at
doses of 600-900 mg daily for 8-24 weeks (see Pharmacological
Actions; Therapeutic effects) reported that few adverse events
(9) The frequency and
nature of adverse events reported for garlic were similar to those
for placebo. The most common adverse events reported were
'garlic breath’, body odour and gastrointestinal symptoms.

The allergenic potential of garlic is well recognised, and
allergens have been identified as diallyl disulfide, allylpropyl
sulfide and allicin (the latter may be an irritant). A garlic
antigen in the serum of affected patients has also been
identified.“ Cases of contact dermatitis resulting from occupa-

were documented in the included trials.

tional exposure to garlic have been reported." 77% A case of
garlic allergy associated with ingestion of raw or cooked garlic has
been documented."'”® There is an isolated report of multifaceted
dermatitis artefacta associated with local application of garlic by
a 19-year-old individual."?” Garlic burns following local
application of garlic have also been documented (see Contra-
indications, Warnings).(8° 8)

Garlic may enhance existing anticoagulant therapy; a potential
interaction between garlic and warfarin has been documented (see
Contra-indications, Warnings; Drug interactions) .{3% 8)
reports have suggested that garlic supplementation may increase
the risk of bleeding in patients undergoing surgery.‘C?”

Case

Preclinical data

Erratic pulse rates, abnormal ECGs, weight loss, lethargy and
weakness, soft faeces, dehydration and tender skin on fore- and
hindlimbs have been observed in spontaneously hypertensive rats
administered garlic extract at 0.25 and 0.5 mL/kg every 6 hours for
28 days.) The effects were most pronounced in animals

receiving doses two or three times a day. Conversely, acute
toxicity studies for garlic extract in mice and rats have reported
LDso values for various routes of administration (by mouth,
intraperitoneal injection, intravenous injection) as all greater than
30 mL/kg." Early studies, in 1944, reported LDso values for
allicin in mice as 120 mg/kg (subcutaneous injection) and 60 mg/kg
(intravenous injection)."*) Results of chronic toxicity studies are
stated to be conflicting.“ High doses are reported to cause
anaemia due to both decreased haemoglobin synthesis and
haemolysis.“ A chronic toxicity study in rats given a garlic
extract (2 g/kg) five times a week for six months, reported no toxic
symptoms.'!*”) High doses were found to decrease food consump-
tion slightly, but did not inhibit weight gain. There were no
significant differences in urinary, haematological or serological
examinations, and no toxic symptoms in histopathological
examinations. Genotoxicity studies using the micronucleus test
have reported both po (136

® and negative” findings. No
evidence of mutagenicity has been reported when assessed using
the Ames and Ree assay,‘

Slight cytotoxic signs have been observed at high doses in Hep2
and Chinese hamster embryo primary cultured cells.‘

tive

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the pharmacological actions documented for garlic,
there may be an increased risk of bleeding with use of garlic
supplements in patients undergoing surgery.“@?) Gastrointestinal
irritation may occur particularly if the clove is eaten raw by
individuals not accustomed to ingesting garlic.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of garlic, the potential for preparations of garlic to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, parti-
cularly those with similar (such as antiplatelet and anticoagulant
agents) or opposing effects, should be considered.

Other interactions A study involving healthy volunteers detected
N-acetyl-S-allyl-t-cysteine (allylmercapturic acid) in their urine
following ingestion of garlic tablets (see Clinical studies,
Pharmacokinetics)..°° As allylmereapturic acid is used as a
biomarker for monitoring human exposure to allylhalides and
ther chemicals leading to allylmercapturic acid excretion, it was
suggested that garlic consumption may interfere with and
confound this monitoring proc

fe

Pregnancy and lactation Garlic is reputed to act as an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle, and is also
reported to be utero-active.'@
been documented. (see Contra-indications, Warnings; Preg-

30) . . :
) In vitro uterine contraction has

nancy and lactation)

Studies have shown that consumption of garlic by lactating
women alters the odour of their breast milk and the suckling
behaviour of their infants.°” Further evidence for this comes from
a blinded, placebo-controlled study involving 30 nursing
women.'!**) The results indicated that infants who had no prior
exposure to garlic odour in their mothers' milk spent more time
breast feeding after their mothers ingested garlic capsules than did
infants whose mothers had repeatedly consumed garlic. Findings

----- PAGE 298 -----
from a placebo-controlled study involving 10 healthy pregnant
women undergoing routine amniocentesis indicate that the
odorous components of garlic can be found in amniotic fluid
following garlic consumption.”*) The odour of samples of
amniotic fluid from women who ingested capsules containing
garlic extract was judged to be 'stronger' or more 'garlic-like' than
that of samples from women who had ingested placebo capsules.
The effects of in utero exposure to garlic odour and on the
neonate's behaviour towards exposure to garlic-flavoured human
breast milk are not known.

There are no experimental or clinical reports on adverse effects
during pregnancy or lactation.(©’”) In view of this, doses of garlic

greatly exceeding amounts used in foods should not be taken
during pregnancy and lactation.

Kyolic 101; Kyolic 102; Kyolic 103; Kyolic 104; Kyolic 106.
France: Arterase. Germany: Ilja Rogoff; Lipidavit. Malaysia:
Echinacea Plus; Horseradish Plus; Total Man. Mexico:
Supravital. Switzerland: Allium Plus; Keli-med; Triallin. UK:
AllerClear; Antifect; Cardioace; Clogar; Fishogar; Hay Fever
& Sinus Relief; Hayfever & Sinus Relief; Héfels One-A-Day
Cardiomax; Héfels One-A-Day Garlic; Héfels One-A-Day
Garlic with Parsley; Héfels One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and
Garlic; Lane's Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy; Napiers Cold
Tablets; Sinus and Hay Fever Tablets. USA: GarLife; Heart
Health.

References

1 Block E. The chemistry of garlic and onions. Sci Am 1985; 252: 114—
119.

2 Sendl A. Allium sativum and Allium ursinum: Part 1. Chemistry,
analysis, history, botany. Phytomedicine 1995; 4: 323-339.

3 Koch HP, Lawson LD, eds. Garlic. The Science and Therapeutic
Application of Allium sativum L. and Related Species, 2nd edn.
Baltimore, Maryland: Williams and Wilkins, 1996.

4 Al-Nagdy SA et al. Evidence for some prostaglandins in Allium
sativum extracts. Phytother Res 1988: 2: 196-197.

5 Ernst E. Cardiovascular effects of garlic (Allium sativum): a review.
Pharmatherapeutica 1987; 5: 83-89.

6 Lau BHS et al. Allium sativum (garlic) and atherosclerosis: a review.
Nutr Res 1983; 3: 119-128.

7 Adetumbi M, Lau BHS. Allium sativum (garlic) — a natural antibiotic.
Med Hypoth 1983; 12: 227-237.

8 Fulder S. Garlic and the prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cardiol
Pract 1989; 7: 30-35.

9 Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. A Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle,
WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

10
1
12
13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36
37

Garlic

Hamon NW. Garlic and the genus Allium. Can Pharm J 1987; 120:
493-498.

Fenwick GR, Hanley AB. The genus Allium. CRC Crit Rev Food Sci
Nutr 1985; 22: 199-376 and 23: 1-73.

McElnay JC, Li Wan Po A. Garlic. Pharm J 1991; 246: 324-326.
Reuter HD. Allium sativum and Allium ursinum: Part 2.
Pharmacology and medicinal application. Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 73-
91.

Milner JA, Garlic: its anticarcinogenic and antitumorigenic
properties. Nutr Rev 1996; 54: S82-S86.

Lea MA. Organosulfur compounds and cancer. In: American Institute
for Cancer Research. Dietary Phytochemicals in Cancer Prevention
and Treatment. New York: Plenum Press, 1996.

Ali M e¢ al. Garlic and onions: their effect on eicosanoid metabolism
and its clinical relevance. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids
2000; 62: 55-73.

Yang CS et al. Mechanisms of inhibition of chemical toxicity and
carcinogenesis by diallyl sulfide (DAS) and related compounds from
garlic. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1041-S1045.

Borek C. Antioxidant health effects of aged garlic extract. J Nutr
2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1010-S1015.

Yeh Y-Y, Liu L. Cholesterol-lowering effect of garlic extracts and
organosulfur compounds: human and animal studies. J Nutr 2001;
131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $989-S993.

Le Bon A-M, Siess M-H. Organosulfur compounds from Allium and
the chemoprevention of cancer. Drug Metab Drug Interact 2001; 17:
51-79.

Afzal M et al. Garlic and its medicinal potential.
Inflammopharmacology 2000; 8: 123-148.

Lachmann G e¢ al. Untersuchungen zur Pharmakokinetik der mit 35S
markierten Knoblauchinhaltsstoffe Alliin, Allicin und Vinyldithiine.
Arzneimittelforschung 1994; 44: 734-743.

Nagae S et al. Pharmacokinetics of the garlic compound S-
allylcysteine. Planta Med 1994; 60: 214-217.

Qureshi AA et al. Inhibition of cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis
in liver enzymes and chicken hepatocytes by polar fractions of garlic.
Lipids 1983; 18: 343-348.

Gebhardt R. Multiple inhibitory effects of garlic extracts on
cholesterol biosynthesis in hepatocytes. Lipds 1993; 28: 613-619.
Gebhardt R et al. Inhibition of cholesterol biosyntheis by allicin and
ajoene in rat hepatocytes and Hep G2 cells. Biochim Biophys Acta
1994; 1213: 57-62.

Gebhardt R. Amplification of palmitate-induced inhibition of
cholesterol biosynthesis in cultured rat hepatocytes by garlic-derived
organosulfur compounds. Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 29-34.

Gebhardt R, Beck H. Differential inhibitory effects of garlic-derived
organosulfur compounds on cholesterol biosynthesis in primary rat
hepatocytes. Lipids 1996; 31: 1269-1276.

Yeh Y-Y, Yeh S-M. Garlic reduces plasma lipids by inhibiting hepatic
cholesterol and triacylglycerol synthesis. Lipids 1994; 29: 189-193.
Liu L, Yeh Y-Y. Water-soluble organosulfur compounds of garlic
inhibit fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis in cultured rat hepatocytes.
Lipids 2001; 36: 395-400.

Adoga GI. The mechanism of the hypolipidemic effect of garlic oil
extract in rats fed on high sucrose and alcohol diets. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1987; 142: 1046-1052.

Gupta N, Porter TD. Garlic and garlic-derived compounds inhibit
human squalene monooxygenase. J Nutr 2001; 131: 1662-1667.
Kamanna VS, Chandrasekhara N. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum
Linn.) on serum lipoproteins and lipoprotein cholesterol levels in
Albino rats rendered hypercholesterolemic by feeding cholesterol.
Lipids 1982; 17: 483-488.

Campbell JH et al. Molecular basis by which garlic suppresses
atherosclerosis. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1006-S1009.
Abramowitz D. Allicin-induced decrease in formation of fatty streaks
(atherosclerosis) in mice fed a cholesterol-rich diet. Coronary Artery
Dis 1999; 10: 515-519.

Boullin DJ. Garlic as a platelet inhibitor. Lancet 1981; i: 776-777.
Gaffen JD et al. The effect of garlic extracts on contractions of rat
gastric fundus and human platelet aggregation. J Pharm Pharmacol
1984; 36: 272-274.

----- PAGE 299 -----
38

39

40

41

42

43

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

Garlic

Srivastava KC, Winslows JB. Evidence for the mechanism by which
garlic inhibits platelet aggregation. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1986;
22: 313-321.

Apitz-Castro A et al. Effects of garlic extract and of three pure
components isolated from it on human platelet aggregation,
arachidonate metabolism, release reaction and platelet ultrastructure.
Thromb Res 1983; 32: 155-169.

Wagner H et al. Effects of garlic constituents on arachidonate
metabolism. Planta Med 1987; 53: 305-306.

Sharma CP, Nirmala NV. Effects of garlic extract and of three pure
components isolated from it on human platelet aggregation,
arachidonate metabolism, release reaction and platelet ultrastructure
— comments. Thromb Res 1985; 37: 489-490.

Mohammad $F, Woodward SC. Characterization of a potent inhibitor
of platelet aggregation and release reaction isolated from Allium
sativum (garlic). Thromb Res 1986; 44: 793-806.

Symposium on the chemistry, pharmacology and medicinal
applications of garlic. Cardiol Pract 1989; 7: 1-15.

Srivastava KC, Tyagi OD. Effects of a garlic-derived principle (ajoene)
on aggregation and arachidonic acid metabolism in human blood
platelets. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1993; 49: 587-595.
Jamaluddin MP e¢ al. Ajoene inhibition of platelet aggregation:
possible mediation by a hemoprotein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1988; 153: 479-486.

Block E et al. Antithrombotic organosulfur compounds from garlic:
structural, mechanistic, and synthetic studies. J Am Chem Soc 1986;
108: 7045-7055.

Rendu F et al. Ajoene, the antiplatelet compound derived from garlic,
specifically inhibits platelet release reaction by affecting the plasma
membrane internal microviscosity: Biochem Pharmacol 1989; 38:
1321-1328.

Apitz-Castro R et al. Ajoene. The antiplatelet principle of garlic,
synergistically potentiates the antiaggregatory action of prostacyclin,
forskolin, indomethacin and dypiridamole on human platelets.
Thromb Res 1986; 42: 303-311.

Siegers C-P et al. Effects of garlic preparations on superoxide
production by phorbol ester activated granulocytes. Phytomedicine
1999; 6: 13-16.

Ide N, Lau BHS. Garlic compounds protect vascular endothelial cells
from oxidised low density lipoprotein-induced injury. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1997; 49: 908-911.

Ide N, Lau BHS. Aged garlic extract attentuates intracellular oxidative
Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 125-131.

Rashid A, Khan HH. The mechanism of hypotensive effect of garlic
extract. J Pak Med Ass 1974; 35: 357-362.

Jacob J et al. Antihypertensive und Kardioprotektive Effekte von
Knoblaucherpulver (Allium sativum). Med Welt 1991; 42: 39-41.
Kiviranta J et al. Effects of onion and garlic extracts on spontaneously
hypertensive rats. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 132-135.

Kyo E et al. Immunomodulation and antitumour activities of aged
garlic extract. Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 259-267.

Schaffer EM et al. Garlic and associated allyl sulfur components
inhibit N-methyl-N-nitrosourea induced rat mammary carcinogenesis.
Cancer Lett 1996; 102: 199-204.

Balasenthil S$ e¢ al. Prevention of 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide-induced rat
tongue carcinogenesis by garlic. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 524-531.
Sparnins VL et al. Effects of organosulfur compounds from garlic and
onions on benzo[a]pyrene-induced neoplasia and glutathione S-
transferase activity in the mouse. Carcinogenesis 1988; 9: 131-134.
Siegers C-P et al. The effects of garlic preparations against human
tumor cell proliferation. Phyto medicine 1999; 6: 7-11.

Nakagawa H et al. Growth inhibitory effects of diallyl disulphide on
human breast cancer cell lines. Carcinogenesis 2001; 22: 891-897.
Liu JZ et al. Inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene induced
mammary tumours and DNA adducts by garlic powder.
Carcinogenesis 1992; 13: 1847-1851.

Lin X-Y et al. Dietary garlic suppresses DNA adducts caused by N-
nitroso compounds. Carcinogenesis 1994; 15: 349-352.

Fujita K-I, Kamataki T. Screening of organosulfur compounds as
inhibitors of human CYP2A6. Drug Metab Disposition 2001; 29: 983—
989.

stres

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

Guyonnet D e¢ al. Antimutagenic activity of organosulfur compounds
from Allium is associated with phase II enzyme induction. Mutat Res
Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen 2001; 495: 135-145.

Moon D-G et al. Allium sativum potentiates suicide gene therapy for
murine transitional cell carcinoma. Nutr Cancer 2000; 38: 98-105.
Hirao Y et al. Activation of immunoresponder cells by the protein
fraction from aged garlic extract. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 161-164.
Lamm DL, Riggs DR. Enhanced immunocompetence by garlic: role in
bladder cancer and other malignancies. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl.
Suppl.3): $1067-S1070.

Burger RA et al. Enhancement of in vitro human immune function by
Allium sativum L. (garlic) fractions. Int J Pharmacog 1993; 31: 169—
174.

Kyo E et al. Immunomodulatory effects of aged garlic extract. J Nutr
2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1075-S1079.

Ahsan M, Islam SN. Garlic: a broad spectrum antibacterial agent
effective against common pathogenic bacteria. Fitoterapia 1996; 67:
374-376.

Tsao S-M, Yin M-C. In vitro activity of garlic oil and four diallyl
sulphides against antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Klebsiella pneumoniae. ] Antimicrob Chemother 2001; 47: 665-670.
Tsao S-M, Yin M-C. In vitro antimicrobial activity of four diallyl
sulphides occurring naturally in garlic and Chinese leek oils. J Med
Microbiol 2001; 50: 646-649.

Delaha ED, Garagusi VE. Inhibition of mycobacteria by garlic extract
(Allium sativum). Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1985; 27: 485-486.
Deshpande RG et al. Inhibition of Mycobacterium avium complex
isolates from AIDS patients by garlic (Allium sativum). J Antimicrob
Chemother 1993; 32: 623-626.

Cellini L et al. Inhibition of Helicobacter pylori by garlic extract
(Allium sativum). FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 1996; 13: 273-277.
Chung JG et al. Effects of garlic compounds diallyl sulfide and diallyl
disulfide on arylamine N-acetyltransferase activity in strains of
Helicobacter pylori from peptic ulcer patients. Am J] Chin Med 1998;
26: 353-364.

Feldberg RS et al. In vitro mechanism of inhibition of bacterial cell
growth by allicin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1988; 32: 1763-1768.
Adetumbi M et al. Allium sativum (garlic) inhibits lipid synthesis by
Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1986; 30: 499-501.
Graham HD, Graham EJF. Inhibition of Aspergillus parasiticus
growth and toxin production by garlic. J Food Safety 1987; 8: 101-108.
Ankri S e¢ al. Allicin from garlic strongly inhibits cysteine proteinases
and cytopathic effects of Entamoeba histolytica. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1997; 41: 2286-2288.

Harris JC et al. The microaerophilic flagellate Giardia intestinalis:
Allium sativum (garlic) is an effective antigiardial. Microbiology 2000;
146: 3119-3127.

Hughes BG et al. Antiviral constituents from Allium sativum. Planta
Med 1989; 55: 114.

Tsai Y et al. Antiviral properties of garlic: In vitro effects on influenza
B, Herpes simplex and Coxsackie viruses. Planta Med 1985; 51: 460—
461.

Joshi DJ et al. Gastrointestinal actions of garlic oil. Phytother Res
1987; 1: 140-141.

Hikino H et al. Antihepatotoxic actions of Allium sativum bulbs.
Planta Med 1986; 52: 163-168.

Nakagawa S et al. Prevention of liver damage by aged garlic extract
and its components in mice. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 50-53.

Sheen L-Y et al. Effect of diallyl sulfide and diallyl disulfide, the active
principles of garlic, on the aflatoxin By-induced DNA damage in
primary rat hepatocytes. Toxicol Lett 2001; 122: 45-52.

Saxena KK et al. Effect of garlic pretreatment on isoprenaline-induced
myocardial necrosis in albino rats. Indian ] Physiol Pharmacol 1980;
24: 233-236.

Senapati SK et al. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum L.) extract on tissue
lead level in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 2001; 76: 229-232.

Horie T et al. Alleviation by garlic of antitumor drug-induced damage
to the intestine. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1071-S1074.
Nishiyama N et al. Ameliorative effect of S-allylcysteine, a major
thioallyl constituent in aged garlic extract, on learning deficits in
senescence-accelerated mice. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3):
$1093-S1095.

----- PAGE 300 -----
92 Brahmachari HD, Augusti KT. Orally effective hypoglycaemic agents
from plants. J Pharm Pharmacol 1962; 14: 254-255.

93 Dirsch VM, Vollmar AM. Ajoene, a natural product with non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-like properties? Biochem
Pharmacol 2001; 61: 587-593.

94 Koch HP. Metabolismus und pharmakokinetik der Inhaltsstoffe des
Knoblauchs: was Wissen wir dariiber? Z Phytother 1992; 13: 83-90.

95 Jandke J, Spiteller G. Unusual conjugates in biological profiles
originating from consumption of onions and garlic. | Chromatog
1987; 421: 1-8.

96 De Rooij BM et al. Urinary excretion of N-acetyl-S-allyl-L-cysteine
upon garlic consumption by human volunteers. Arch Toxicol 1996; 70:
635-639.

97 Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. Maternal diet alters the sensory
qualities of human milk and the nursling's behavior. Pediatrics 1991;
88: 737-744.

98 Mennella JA et al Garlic ingestion by pregnant women alters the odor
of amniotic fluid. Chem Senses 1995; 20: 207-209.

99 Bordia A et al. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum) on blood lipids, blood
sugar, fibrinogen and fibrinolytic activity in patients with coronary
artery disease. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998; 58:
257-263.

100 Steiner M, Lin RS. Changes in platelet function and susceptibility of
lipoproteins to oxidation associated with administration of aged garlic
extract. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1998; 31: 904-908.

101 Warshafsky S et al. Effect of garlic on total serum cholesterol. A meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med 1993; 119: 599-605.

102 Silagy C, Neil A. Garlic as a lipid lowering agent — a meta-analysis. J
R Coll Phys Lond 1994; 28: 2-8.

103 Neil HAW et al. Garlic powder in the treatment of moderate
hyperlipidaemia: a controlled trial and meta-analysis. J R Coll Phys
Lond 1996; 30: 329-334.

104 Stevinson C et al. Garlic for treating hypercholesterolaemia. A meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2000; 133: 420—
429.

105 Berthold HK et al. Effect of a garlic oil preparation on serum
lipoproteins and cholesterol metabolism. A randomized controlled
trial. JAMA 1998; 279: 1900-1902.

106 Issacsohn JL e¢ al. Garlic powder and plasma lipids and lipoproteins.
A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Intern Med
1998; 158: 1189-1194.

107 Adler AJ, Holub BJ. Effect of garlic and fish-oil supplementation on
serum lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in hypercholesterolaemic
men. Am J Clin Nutr 1997; 65: 445-450.

108 Gardner CD et al. The effect of a garlic preparation on plasma lipid
levels in moderately hypercholesterolaemic adults. Atherosclerosis
2001; 154: 213-220.

109 Lawson LD. Effect of garlic on serum lipids. JAMA 1998; 280: 1568.

110 Ackermann RT et al. Garlic shows promise for improving some
cardiovascular risk factors. Arch Intern Med 2001; 161: 813-824.

111 Koscielny J et al. The anti-atherosclerotic effect of Allium sativum.
Atherosclerosis 1999; 144: 237-249.

112 Jepson RG et al. Garlic for peripheral arterial occlusive disease
(Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software.

113 Breithaupt-Grégler K et al. Protective effect of chronic garlic intake on
elastic properties of aorta in the elderly. Circulation 1997; 96: 2649—
2655.

Garlic

114 Ali M, Thomson M. Consumption of a garlic clove a day could be
beneficial in preventing thrombosis. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids 1995; 53: 211-212.

115 Byrne DJ et al. A pilot study of garlic consumption shows no
significant effect on markers of oxidation or sub-fraction composition
of low-density lipoprotein including lipoprotein(a) after allowance for
non-compliance and the placebo effect. Clin Chim Acta 1999; 285: 21—
33.

116 Orekhov AN et al. Garlic powder tablets reduce atherogenicity of low
density lipoprotein. A placebo-controlled double-blind study. Nutr
Metab Cardiovasc Dis 1996; 6: 21-31.

117 Grune T et al. Influence of Allium sativum on oxidative stress status —
a clinical investigation. Phytomedicine 1996; 2: 205-207.

118 Silagy CA, Neil HAW. A meta-analysis of the effect of garlic on blood
pressure. J Hypertens 1994; 12: 463-468.

119 Meher S, Duley L. Garlic for preventing pre-eclampsia and its
complications (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2006, Issue 3. Art. No. CD006065.

120 Ernst E. Can Allium vegetables prevent cancer? Phytomedicine 1997;
4: 79-83.

121 You W-C et al. Helicobacter pylori infection, garlic intake and
precancerous lesions in a Chinese population at low risk of gastric
cancer. Int ] Epidemiol 1998; 27: 941-944.

122 Ledezma E et al. Efficacy of ajoene, an organosulphur compound from
garlic, in the short-term therapy of tinea pedis. Mycoses 1996; 39:
393-395.

123 Stjernberg L, Berglund J. Garlic as an insect repellant. JAMA 2000;
284: 831.

124 Abrams GA, Fallon MB. Treatment of hepatopulmonary syndrome
with Allium sativum L. (Garlic): a pilot trial. J Clin Gastroenterol
1998; 27: 232-235.

125 Nakagawa S et al. Acute toxicity test of garlic extract. J Toxicol Sci
1984; 9: 57-60.

126 Papageorgiou C et al. Allergic contact dermatitis to garlic (Allium
sativum L.) Identification of the allergens: The role of mono-, di-, and
trisulfides present in garlic. Arch Dermatol Res 1983; 275: 229-234.

127 Lautier R, Wendt V. Contact allergy to Alliaceae/case-report and
literature survey. Dermatosen 1985; 33: 213-215.

128 Asero R et al. A case of garlic allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;
101: 427-428.

129 Hallel-Halevy D et al. Multifaceted dermatitis caused by garlic. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 1997; 9: 185-187.

130 Farrell AM, Staughton RCD. Garlic burns mimicking herpes zoster.
Lancet 1996; 347: 1195S.

131 Rafaat M, Leung AKC. Garlic burns. Pediatr Dermatol 2000; 17: 475—
476.

132 Sunter W. Warfarin and garlic. Pharm J 1991; 246: 722.

133 Baxter K, ed. Drug Interactions, 7th edn. London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 2006.

134 Ruffin J, Hunter SA. An evaluation of the side-effects of garlic as an
antihypertensive agent. Cytobios 1983; 37: 85-89.

135 Sumiyoshi H et al. Chronic toxicity test of garlic extract in rats. J
Toxicol Sci 1984; 9: 61-75.

136 Yoshida S et al. Mutagenicity and cytotoxicity tests of garlic. | Toxicol
Sci 1984; 9: 77-86.

137 Abraham SK, Kesavan PC. Genotoxicity of garlic, turmeric and
asafoetida in mice. Mutat Res 1984; 136: 85-88.

138 Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. The effects of repeated exposure to
garlic-flavoured milk on the nursling's behavior. Pediatr Res 1993; 34:
805-808.

----- PAGE 301 -----
Gentian

available on the other compounds present. The herbal uses o1
gentian are supported by the known properties of the bitter
principles present in the root. Excessive doses should be
avoided in view of the lack of toxicity data.

Species (Family)

Gentiana lutea L. (Gentianaceae)

Synonym(s)

Bitterwort, Bitter Root, Gentiana, Yellow Gentian
Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'¢°

Iridoids

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003”
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007°°8

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Gentianine 0.6-0.8%, gentialutine.

Bitters Major component is secoiridoid glycoside gentiopicroside
(also known as gentiamarin and gentiopicrin) 2%, with lesser
amounts of amarogentin (0.01-0.04%) and swertiamarine.
Gentianose (a trisaccharide bitter principle). The glycosides

H
O-glucose O-glucose
gentiopicroside HOCH, swertiamarin
(gentiopicrin)
HO yg HO.
amarogentin
Xanthones
1 2
0. OR? a A
gentisin H CH3
isogentisin CH H
R'O
gentioside CH3 primeverosyl
fe} OH
Sugars
CH20H
per)

HO
O~oy,

gentianose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of gentian.

HO Ho
HO.
HO

°

HOH

O.

CH,OH

HO

----- PAGE 302 -----
amaropanin and amaroswerin are reported to be present in the
related species Gentiana pannonica, Gentiana punctata and
Gentiana purpurea, but are absent from Gentiana lutea.

Xanthones Gentisein, gentisin (gentianin), isogentisin and 1,3,7-
trimethoxyxanthone.

Other constituents Carbohydrates (e.g. gentiobiose, sucrose and
other common sugars), pectin, tannin (unspecified), triterpenes
(e.g. B-amyrin, lupeol) and volatile oil (trace).

Food Use

Gentian (root, herbs and preparations) is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N4, with
limits on xanthones) (see Appendix 3, Table 1).'S' Previously, in
the USA, gentian has been approved for food use.“C*?

Herbal Use

Gentian is stated to possess bitter, gastric stimulant, sialogogue
and cholagogue properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
anorexia, atonic dyspepsia, gastrointestinal atony, and specifically
for dyspepsia with anorexia. The German Commission E
approved use for digestive disorders such as loss of appetite,
fullness and flatulence.“ Gentian is used in combination with
angelica root and caraway fruit or with ginger and wormwood for
loss of appetite and peptic discomfort.'(°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 0.6-2g as an infusion or decoction three
times daily.“°®

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©®

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The pharmacological activites of gentian root have been
©52) & summary of this information is provided below.

Root extracts have antifungal activity, and are reported to
stimulate phagocytic activity of human lymphocytes, indicating
immunostimulant activity.” Choleretic properties have been
documented for gentian,““*” and gentianine has been reported to
possess anti-inflammatory activity.°?”” The bitter principles
stimulate secretion of gastric juices and bile, thus aiding appetite
and digestion. Elevation of gastric secretion by up to 30% has
been reported following the administration of gentian tincture to
dogs. An infusion given orally to sheep as a single daily dose (5 g)
stimulated enzyme secretion in the small intestine. A root extract
(12 mg/kg/day) applied by gavage to rats for three days elevated
bronchosecretion. A standardised extract perfused into the
stomachs of anaesthetised rats increased gastric secretion in a
dose-dependent manner. Lower doses caused no changes in gastric
pH, whereas higher doses increased pH from 4.25 to 4.85. A dose
of 0.5 mL/kg did not affect the incidence of gastric ulceration in
rats.

reviewed.‘

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of gentian
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Gentian

In an open, uncontrolled study, a single dose of an alcoholic
extract of gentian (equivalent to 0.2g), given to 10 healthy
volunteers, was reported to result in a stimulation of gastric juice
secretion.”) Gall-bladder emptying was increased and prolonged
whilst protein and fat digestion was enhanced. Nineteen patients
with inflammatory conditions of the gastrointestinal tract (colitis,
Crohn's disease, non-specific inflammation) and elevated secre-
tory immunoglobulin A (IgA) concentrations and eight healthy
individuals were treated with gentian tincture (3 x 20 drops/day)
for eight days.‘C°?) IgA concentrations decreased in both
groups.'°?) However, the methodological limitations of these
studies do not allow the observed effects to be attributed to
administration of gentian.

Side-effects, To:

Extracts of gentian are considered to be non-toxic, and are
generally well-tolerated,(©” although clinical safety and toxicity
data for gentian are limited and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Preclinical data

An acute oral LDs9 value in mice was reported to be 25 mL/kg of
extract (37% ethanol, bitterness value: 200 Swiss Pharmacopoeia
units/g), and was the same as that of 37% ethanol. Rabbits treated
with gentian extract (12.6 mg/day for three days) showed no toxic
or abnormal concentration of serum parameters, with the
exception of slightly higher erythrocyte concentrations in treated
animals. Gentian may occasionally cause headache in some
individuals.‘°? Mutagenic activity in the Ames test (Salmonella
typhimurium TA100 with S9 mix) has been documented for
gentian, with gentisin and isogentisin identified as mutagenic
components."” Gentian root 100g was reported to yield
approximately 100mg total mutagenic compounds, of which
gentisin and isogentisin comprised approximately 76 mg.”

(3)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Gentian is stated to be contra-indicated in individuals with high
blood pressure,“ although no rationale is given for this
statement, and in individuals with hyperacidity, gastric or

duodenal ulcers.(@?°)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of gentian to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Gentian is reputed to affect the
» and it has been stated that gentian
should not be used in pregnancy.“°® In view of this and the
documented mutagenic activity, gentian is best avoided in
pregnancy and lactation.

menstrual. cycle,'C?* °

Germany: Enziagil Magenplus.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Calmo; Digest; Digestaid; Digestive Aid; Extralife
Sleep-Care; Pacifenity; Relaxaplex. Austria: Abdomilon N;
Brady's-Magentropfen; China-Eisenwein; Mariazeller; Mon-

----- PAGE 303 -----
G

Gentian

Wonderkroonessens. Singapore: Sinupret. Spain: Depurativo

References
1

Verotta L. Isolation and HPLC determination of the active principles
of Rosmarinus officinalis and Gentiana lutea. Fitoterapia 1985; 56:
25-29.

Glatzel vonH, Hackenberg K. Réntgenologische untersuchungen der
wirkungen von bittermitteln auf die verdauunogsorgane. Planta Med
1967; 15: 223-232.

Morimoto I et al. Mutagenic activities of gentisin and isogentisin from
Gentianae radix (Gentianaceae). Mutat Res 1983; 116: 103-117.

----- PAGE 304 -----
j Ginger

inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis, all of which require
further investigation. The use of ginger as a prophylactic
remedy against motion sickness is contentious. It seems likely
that ginger may act by a local action on the gastrointestinal
tract, rather than by a centrally mediated mechanism.

Species (Family)

Zingiber officinale Roscoe (Zingiberaceae)

Synonym(s)
Gan Jiang, Zingiber

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Phenylpropanoids

CHO. Cl
(CHa)

HO
gingerols
[6]-gingerol

[8]-gingerol
[10]-gingerol

e2orpD

Sesquiterpenes
bag
(-)-zingiberene ar-curcumene
Sp
B-bisabolene
Figure 1 Selected constituents of ginger.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢®

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 19730)

ESCOP 2003'°79
Martindale 35th edition\@*”
Ph Eur 20078”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO 1999 volume 16%?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2 and G6.

Carbohydrates Starch (major constituent, up to 50%).

Lipids 6-8%. Free fatty acids (e.g. palmitic acid, oleic acid,
linoleic acid, caprylic acid, capric acid, lauric acid, myristic acid,
pentadecanoic acid, heptadecanoic acid, stearic acid, linolenic
acid, arachidic acid); triglycerides, phosphatidic acid, lecithins;
gingerglycolipids A, B and C.”

O°
CHz0O. CH.
. A™~ CH)"

HO

shogaols
[6]-shogaol
[8]-shogaol
[10}-shogaol

e2norps

#-sesquiphellandrene

----- PAGE 305 -----
Ginger

Oleo-resin Gingerol homologues (major, about 33%) including
derivatives with a methyl side-chain,” shogaol homologues
(dehydration products of gingerols), zingerone (degradation
product of gingerols), 1-dehydrogingerdione,®) 6-gingesulfonic
acid”) and volatile oils.

Volatile oils 1-3%. Complex, predominately hydrocarbons. B-
Bisabolene and zingiberene (major); other sesquiterpenes include
zingiberol, zingiberenol, ar-curcumene, f-sesquiphellandrene, B-
sesquiphellandrol (cis and trans); numerous monoterpene hydro-
carbons, alcohols and aldehydes (e.g. phellandrene, camphene,
geraniol, neral, linalool, d-nerol).

Other constituents Amino acids (e.g. arginine, aspartic acid,
cysteine, glycine, isoleucine, leucine, serine, threonine and valine),
protein (about 9%), resins, diterpenes (galanolactone),'°
(especially nicotinic acid (niacin) and vitamin A), minerals.)
The material contains not less than 4.5% of alcohol (90%)-

soluble extractive and not less than 10% of water-soluble
(G15)

vitamins

extractive.

Food Use

Ginger is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that ginger
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.““!® It is used widely in foods as a spice. Previously,
ginger has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe).“~"

Herbal Use

Ginger is stated to possess carminative, diaphoretic and
antispasmodic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for colic,
flatulent dyspepsia, and specifically for flatulent intestinal
colic.( 67 6% SG) Modern interest in ginger is focused on its
use in the prevention of nausea and vomiting, particularly motion
(travel) sickness, as a digestive aid, and as an adjunctive treatment
for inflammatory conditions, such as osteoarthritis and rheuma-
toid arthritis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Figure 2 Ginger — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Anti-emetic

Powdered rhizome Single dose of 1-2g,'°® 30 minutes before
travel for prevention of motion sickness,“ or 0.5 g, two to four
times daily.‘C°

Other uses

Powdered rhizome 0.25-1g, three times daily.“©

Tincture 1.5-3 mL (1:5) three times daily,'® 1.7—5 mL daily.“C

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities, including anti-emetic, antith-
rombotic, antimicrobial, anticancer, antioxidant and anti-inflam-
matory properties, have been documented for preparations of
ginger in in vitro and/or animal studies. Also, ginger has been
reported to have hypoglycaemic, hypo- and hypertensive, cardiac,
prostaglandin and platelet aggregation inhibition, antihyper-
cholesterolaemic, cholagogic and stomachic properties.

Clinical studies have focused mainly on the effects of ginger in
the prevention of nausea and vomiting.

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro studies have demonstrated that constituents of ginger,
such as 6-, 8- and 10-gingerols and galanolactone, have

antiserotonergic activity.'°*

Anti-emetic activity and effects on gastrointestinal motility
The older literature contains examples of studies documenting the
antiemetic effects of ginger extract in vivo (e.g. dogs). Oral
administration of constituents of ginger (certain shogaols and
gingerols at doses of 100mg/kg body weight) inhibited emesis
induced by oral administration of copper sulfate in leopard and
ranid frogs." Emetic latency was reported to be prolonged by
over 150% by a trichloromethane extract of ginger at a dose of 1 g/
kg body weight.

The anti-emetic activity of ginger extracts has also been
assessed in dogs."'") Acetone and ethanolic extracts of ginger,
administered intragastrically at doses of 25, 50, 100 and 200 mg/
kg, protected against cisplatin-induced emesis (3 mg/kg adminis-
tered intravenously 30 minutes before ginger extract), compared
with control. However, ginger extracts were less effective in
preventing emesis than the 5-HT; receptor antagonist granisetron,
and were ineffective against apomorphine-induced emesis.

Compared with control, an acetone extract of ginger at doses of
200 and 500mg/kg administered orally reversed the delay in
gastric emptying induced by intraperitoneal cisplatin 10 mg/kg in
rats.) Ginger juice (2 and 4mL/kg) had a similar effect. A 50%
ethanolic extract of ginger also reversed the cisplatin-induced
delay in gastric emptying, although only at a dose of 500 mg/kg. In
mice, oral administration of an acetone extract of ginger (75 mg/
kg), 6-shogaol (2.5 mg/kg) and 6-, 8- and 10-gingerol (5 mg/kg)
enhanced the transportation of a charcoal meal, indicating
enhancement of gastrointestinal motility."'?)

Anti-ulcer activity The effect of ginger (acetone extract) and
zingiberene on hydrochloric acid/ethanol-induced gastric lesions
in rats has been examined.” 6-Gingerol and zingiberene, both
100 mg/kg body weight by mouth, significantly inhibited gastric
lesions by 54.5% and 53.6%, respectively. The total extract
inhibited lesions by 97.5% at 1g/kg. Oral administration of both

----- PAGE 306 -----
aqueous and methanol ginger extracts to rabbits has been
reported to reduce gastric secretions (gastric juice volume, acid
and pepsin output). Both extracts were found to be comparable
with cimetidine (50 mg/kg) with respect to gastric juice volume;
the aqueous extract was comparable with cimetidine and superior
to the methanol extract for pepsin output, and the methanol
extract superior to both the aqueous extract and comparable to
cimetidine for acid output. In rats, 6-gingerol, 6-shogaol and 6-
gingesulfonic acid at doses of 150mg/kg protected against
hydrochloric acid/ethanol-induced gastric lesions, compared with
6-Gingesulfonic acid 300 mg/kg provided almost 100%
protection against gastric lesions in this model. Other studies in
rats found that oral administration of an ethanolic extract of
ginger (S00 mg/kg) inhibited gastric lesions induced by ethanol
(80%), hydrochloric acid (0.6 mol/L), sodium hydroxide (0.2 mol/
L), and 25% sodium chloride, compared with control. The
same dose of extract protected against gastric mucosal damage
induced by the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
indometacin and aspirin in rats. In pylorus-ligated rats, oral
administration of acetone and ethanol extracts of ginger inhibited
gastric secretion."!”) These extracts, at doses of 62 mg/kg, also
protected against the development of stress-induced lesions,
although to a lesser extent than cimetidine.

control.)

Antiplatelet activity 6-Gingerol, 6- and 10-dehydrogingerdione,
6- and 10-gingerdione have been reported to be potent inhibitors
of prostaglandin biosynthesis (PG synthetase) in vitro, with the
latter four compounds stated to be more potent than indometa-
cin.) Concentration-dependent inhibition of platelet aggrega-
tion, in vitro, induced by ADP, adrenaline, collagen and
arachidonic acid has been described for an aqueous ginger
extract.!”) Ginger was also found to reduce platelet synthesis of
prostaglandin-endoperoxides, thromboxane and prostaglandins.
A good correlation was reported between concentrations of the
extract required to inhibit platelet aggregation and concentrations
necessary to inhibit platelet thromboxane synthesis.”

Anti-atherosclerotic and antioxidant activity Ginger oleo-
resin, by intragastric administration, has been reported to inhibit
elevation in serum and hepatic cholesterol concentrations in rats
by impairing cholesterol absorption.2” Antihypercholesterolae-
mic activity has also been documented for dried ginger rhizome
when given to both rats fed a cholesterol-rich diet and those with
existing hypercholesterolaemia.?" Fresh ginger juice was not
found to have an effect on serum cholesterol concentrations within
four hours of administration. In addition, serum cholesterol
concentrations were not greatly increased within four hours of
cholesterol administration.

An ethanol (50%) extract of ginger administered orally at a
dose of 500 mg/kg to hyperlipidaemic rabbits led to a significant
reduction in blood serum cholesterol concentrations, compared
with those in control rabbits.°? In a study in rabbits fed
cholesterol for 10 weeks, administration of an ethanolic extract of
ginger (200mg/kg orally) decreased raised serum and_ tissue
concentrations of cholesterol, serum triglycerides and serum
lipoproteins.?»

An ethanolic ginger extract, standardised to contain 40 mg/g
gingerols, shogaols and zingerone, and 90 mg/g total polyphenols,
was reported to inhibit low-density lipoprotein oxidation and to
reduce the development of atherosclerosi:
when compared with control. In rats fed a high-fat diet for 10
weeks, an aqueous preparation of ginger powder administered
orally at doses of 35 and 70mg/kg demonstrated antioxidant
activity, as measured by raised tissue concentrations of thiobarbi-

in atherosclerotic mice,

Ginger

turic acid reactive substances and hydroperoxides, and reduced
activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase.?)
The antioxidant activity of ginger constituents has been

. 26
documented in vitro.‘

Anti-inflammatory activity Constituents of ginger have been
shown to have anti-inflammatory activity in vitro. In a study in
intact human airway epithelial cells (A549 cells), 8-paradol and 8-
shogaol inhibited cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) enzyme activity in a
concentration-dependent manner (ICs) values ranged from 1 to
25mol/L).°” In other studies, an acetone extract of ginger
inhibited inflammation of the chorioallantoic membrane of
fertilised hen's eggs in a concentration-dependent manner.?*) In
another assay, the extract exhibited anti-inflammatory properties
by inhibiting the release of nitric oxide in a concentration-
dependent manner.?*) Ginger oil has demonstrated anti-inflam-
matory activity in a study in rats with severe chronic adjuvant
arthritis induced by injection of 0.05 mL of a suspension of dead
Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacilli.°? Ginger oil 33 mg/kg
administered orally for 26 days caused a significant suppression
of paw and joint swelling, compared with control (no ginger oil).

Several other studies describe anti-inflammatory activity for
ginger constituents.”

Antimicrobial activity In vitro activity against rhinovirus IB has
been reported for sesquiterpenes isolated from ginger rhizomes.”
The most active compound was f-sesquiphellandrene (ICso
0.44 mol/L). In vitro anthelmintic activity against Ascaridia galli
Schrank has been documented for the volatile oil of Zingiber
purpureum Roxb.®° Activity exceeding that of piperazine citrate
was exhibited by the oxygenated compounds fractionated from
the volatile oil.

Anticancer activity Extracts of ginger or constituents of ginger
have been shown to have cancer chemopreventive and cytotoxic or
cytostatic activity in vitro and in vivo (animals). Application of an
ethanolic extract of fresh ginger in a mouse skin tumorigenesis
model (SENCAR mice) resulted in significant inhibition of 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced induction of epi-
dermal ornithine decarboxylase, cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
activities in a concentration-dependent manner."” Preapplication
of ginger extract also inhibited TPA-induced epidermal oedema
and hyperplasia. Application of ginger extract 30 minutes before
application of two tumour inducers to the skin of SENCAR mice
protected against skin tumour incidence, compared with control.
In another mouse model, topical application of 6-gingerol or 6-
paradol before application of tumour inducers attenuated skin
papillomagenesis."°”
chemopreventive potential of ginger and its constituents.

In vitro, incubation of 6-gingerol with human promyelocytic
leukaemia (HL-60) cells resulted in inhibitory effects on cell
viability and DNA synthesis.” Microscopic examination of the
incubated cells provided evidence of the induction of apoptosis by
6-gingerol.

Other studies also describe the cancer
(26)

Other activities In rats, the anxiolytic effects of pretreatment
with a combination preparation of standardised extracts of ginger
and Ginkgo biloba administered intragastrically at doses between
0.5 and 100 mg/kg were assessed in the elevated plus-maze test.°”
The combination was found to have an anxiolytic effect at lower
doses, but appeared to have an anxiogenic effect at higher doses.

A hypoglycaemic effect in both non-diabetic and alloxan-
induced diabetic rabbits and rats has been documented for fresh
ginger juice administered orally. The effect was stated to be
significant in the diabetic animals.°”

----- PAGE 307 -----
Ginger

The pharmacological actions of 6-shogaol and capsaicin have
been compared.“ Both compounds caused rapid hypotension
followed by a marked pressor response, bradycardia, and apnoea
in rats after intravenous administration. The pressor response was
thought to be a centrally acting mechanism. Contractile responses
in isolated guinea-pig trachea with both compounds, and positive
inotropic and chronotropic responses in isolated rat atria with 6-
shogaol were thought to involve the release of an unknown active
substance from nerve endings.“® A potent, positive inotropic
action on isolated guinea-pig atria has been documented and
gingerols were identified as the cardiotonic principles.°”

A cholagogic action in rats has been described for an acetone
extract of ginger administered intraduodenally.°*) 6-Gingerol and
10-gingerol were reported to be the active components, the former
more potent with a significant increase in bile secretion still
apparent four hours after administration.

Utero-activity has been described for a phenolic compound
isolated from Zingiber cassumunar Roxb.°” The compound was
found to exhibit a dose-related relaxant effect on the non-

pregnant rat uterus in situ; the uterine response from pregnant
rats was stated to vary with the stage of pregnancy, the post-
implantation period being the most sensitive. The compound was
thought to act by a similar mechanism to that of papaverine.”

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of ginger have focused mainly on its effects on the
prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting of various
causes. Other clinical studies have assessed the effects of ginger
preparations on gastrointestinal motility and on platelet function,
and in vertigo and inflammatory conditions, such as osteo-

arthritis. Several of these studies are described below.

Nausea and vomiting and effects on gastrointestinal motility
Ginger has been reported to be effective as a prophylactic against
(44) Ingestion of powdered ginger root 1 g was found
to significantly reduce the tendency to vomit and experience cold
sweating in 40 naval cadets, compared with 39 cadets who received
placebo. Powdered ginger root 1.88 g has been reported to be
superior to dimenhydrinate 100 mg in preventing the gastrointest-
inal symptoms of motion sickness induced by a rotating chair.(*”)
However, a second study reported ginger (500 mg powdered, 1 ¢
powdered/fresh) to be ineffective in the prevention of motion
sickness induced by a rotating chair.“? The study concluded
hyoscine 600 fig and dexamfetamine 10 mg to be the most effective

combination, with dimenhydrinate 50 mg as the over-the-counter
(42)

seasickness.

motion sickness medication of choice.

A systematic review of six randomised controlled trials of
ginger preparations included three trials involving patients with
post-operative nausea and vomiting, and three further trials in
patients with seasickness (motion sickness), morning sickness
(emesis of pregnancy) and cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea
(one trial in each condition).“*’ Two of the three studies assessing

the effects of ginger in post-operative nausea and vomiting found
that ginger was more effective than placebo and as effective as
metoclopramide in reducing nausea. However, when the data from
the three studies were pooled, the difference between the ginger
and placebo groups was statistically non-significant.”

A randomised, double-blind, crossover trial involving women
with nausea of pregnancy assessed the effects of capsules of
powdered ginger root 250 mg, or placebo, administered orally four
times daily for four days.“ It was reported that symptom relief
was significantly greater during treatment with ginger than with
placebo, and that significantly more women stated a preference

for ginger treatment than for placebo (as later disclosed). A more
recent randomised, double-blind trial involving 70 women with
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy assessed the effectiven
capsules of powdered fresh ginger root 250 mg four times daily, or
placebo, for four days. At the end of the study, ginger recipients
had significantly lower scores for nausea and fewer vomiting
episodes than did the placebo group.

Studies involving healthy volunteers have investigated the effects
of ginger on gastric emptying as a possible mechanism for the
anti-emetic effects of ginger. A randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, involving 16 volunteers
assessed the effects of capsules containing powdered ginger 1g

for one week, followed by a one-week wash-out period before
(46)

oss of

crossover — trial

crossing over to the opposite arm of the study. Gastric
emptying was measured using a paracetamol absorption technique
by comparing the effects of ginger administration on mean and
peak plasma paracetamol concentrations. The results indicated
that the rate of absorption of oral paracetamol was not affected by
simultaneous ingestion of ginger. Another randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 12 healthy volunteers
assessed the effects of ginger rhizome extract on fasting and
postprandial gastroduodenal motility.” The results of this study
indicated that oral administration of ginger improved gastro-
duodenal motility in both the fasting state and after a test meal.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cro
involving eight healthy volunteers tested the effects of powdered
ginger root 1g on experimentally induced vertigo.) One hour
after ginger or placebo administration, participants’ vestibular
system was stimulated by water irrigation of the left ear. It was
reported that ginger significantly reduced vertigo, when compared
with placebo.

over trial

Other effects In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover trial involving 75 patients with osteoarthritis of the knee
or hip, the effects of capsules of ginger extract 170 mg three times
daily were compared with those of ibuprofen 400 mg three times
daily, or placebo, for three weeks with a one-week wash-out
period between each treatment period. At the end of the study,
data for the 56 evaluable participants indicated that there was no
strong evidence of an effect for ginger extract over that of placebo
on parameters of pain.

A reduction in joint pain and improvement in joint movement
in seven rheumatoid arthritis sufferers has been documented for
ginger, with a dual inhibition of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
pathways reported as a suggested mechanism of action.)
Patients took either fresh ginger in amounts ranging from 5-50 ¢
or powdered ginger 0.1-1.0 g daily.

A placebo-controlled study assessed the effects of two doses of
ginger powder (4¢ daily for three months, and 10g as a single
dose) on platelet aggregation and fibrinolytic activity in patients
with coronary artery disease (CAD). The results indicated that
long-term administration of ginger powder did not affect ADP-
and epinephrine (adrenaline)-induced platelet aggregation and
had no effects on fibrinolytic activity or fibrinogen concentra-
tions, compared with placebo administration. By contrast,
administration of a single dose of ginger powder to 10 patients
with CAD produced a significant reduction in platelet aggrega-
tion, compared with placebo administration (7 = 10 patients with
CAD).

In a study involving seven women, oral raw ginger 5 g reduced
thromboxane By concentrations in serum collected after clot-
ting,°” thus indicating a reduction in eicosanoid synthesis
(associated with platelet aggregation).

----- PAGE 308 -----
Ginger

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for ginger and further investigation of these aspects is
required. Ginger oil is stated to be non-irritating and non-
sensitising although dermatitis may be precipitated in hypersensi-
tive individuals. Phototoxicity is not considered to be of
significance.

Preclinical data

Ginger oil is stated to be of low toxicity’ with acute LDso
values (rat, by mouth; rabbit, dermal) reported to exceed 5 g/
kg.

Mutagenic activity has been documented for an ethanolic
ginger extract, gingerol and shogaol in Salmonella typhimurium
strains TA100 and TA1535 in the presence of metabolic activation
(S9 mix) but not in TA98 or TA1538 with or without $9 mix.”
Zingerone was found to be non-mutagenic in all four strains with
or without $9 mix, and was reported to suppress mutagenic
activity of gingerol and shogaol. Ginger juice has been reported to
exhibit antimutagenic activity, whereas mutagenic activity has
been described for 6-gingerol in the presence of known chemical References

One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and Garlic; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Indian Brandee; Indigestion Relief; Napiers Diges-
tion Tablets; Napiers Monthly Calm Tea; Neo Baby Gripe
Mixture; Neo Gripe Mixture; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets;
Traveleeze; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief; Zinopin. USA: Herbal
Energy; Heart Health; My Favorite Multiple; Liver Formula.
Venezuela: Jengimiel; Jengimiel.

mutagens."°” It was suggested that certain mutagens may activate 1 Denyer CV et al. Isolation of antirhinoviral sesquiterpenes from ginger
the mutagenic activity of 6-gingerol so that it is not suppressed by (Zingiber officinale). ] Nat Prod 1994; 57: 658-662.

antimutagenic components present in the juice. 2 Lawrence BM, Reynolds RJ. Major tropical spices — ginger (Zingiber

Cs . officinale Rosc.). Perf Flav 1984; 9: 1-40.
Contra-indications, Warnings 3. Yoshikawa M et al. 6-Gingesulfonic acid, a new anti-ulcer principle,
and gingerglycolipids A, B and C, three new

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological monoacyldigalactosylglycerols from Zingiberis rhizoma originating in
actions of ginger, the potential for preparations of ginger to Taiwan. Chem Pharm Bull 1992; 40: 2239-2241.

4 Chen C-C et al. Chromatographic analyses of gingerol compounds in
ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) extracted by liquid carbon dioxide.
J Chromatogr 1986; 360: 163-174.

interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, parti-
cularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be

considered. oo 5 Charles R et al. New gingerdione from the rhizomes of Zingiber
Ginger has been reported to possess both cardiotonic and officinale. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 716-718.

antiplatelet activity in vitro and hypoglycaemic activity in in vivo 6 Huang Q et al. Anti-5-hydroxytryptamine3 effect of galanolactone,

studies. An oleo-resin component, 6-shogaol has been reported to diterpenoid isolated from ginger. Chem Pharm Bull 1991; 39: 397-399.

7 Langner E et al. Ginger: history and use. Adv Ther 1998; 15: 25-44.

8 Yamahara J et al. Active components of ginger exhibiting anti-
serotonergic action. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 70-71.

Pregnancy and lactation Ginger is reputed to be an 9 Chang H-M, But PP-H, eds. Pharmacology and Applications of

abortifacient(@ and utero-activity has been documented for a Chinese Materia Medica, vol 1. Singapore: World Scientific

related species. Doses of ginger that greatly exceed the amounts Publishing, 1986: 366-369.
P . sing 8s Y exe w 10 Kawai T e¢ al. Anti-emetic principles of Magnolia obovata bark and

used in foods should not be taken during pregnancy or lactation. Zingiber officinale rhizome. Planta Med 1994; 60: 17-20.

11 Sharma SS et al. Antiemetic activity of ginger (Zingiber officinale)
against cisplatin-induced emesis in dogs. J Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57:
93-96.

12 Sharma $S, Gupta YK. Reversal of cisplatin-induced delay in gastric
emptying in rats by ginger (Zingiber officinale). J Ethnopharmacol
1998; 62: 49-55.

13. Yamahara J et al. Gastrointestinal motility enhancing effect of ginger
and its active constituents. Chem Pharm Bull 1990; 38: 430-431.

14 Yamahara J et al. The anti-ulcer effect in rats of ginger constituents. J
Ethnopharmacol 1988; 23: 299-304.

15 Sakai K et al. Effect of extracts of Zingiberaceae herbs on gastric
secretion in rabbits. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 215-217.

16 Al-Yahya MA et al. Gastroprotective activity of ginger Zingiber
officinale Rosc., in albino rats. Am J Chin Med 1998; 17: 51-56.

17. Sertie JAA et al. Preventive anti-ulcer activity of the rhizome extract of

Feminine Herbal Complex; Ginkgo Plus Herbal Plus Formula Zingiber officinale. Fitoterapia 1992; 63: 55-59.

10; Herbal Cleanse; Herbal Digestive Formula; Lifesystem 18 Kiuchi F et al. Inhibitors of prostaglandin biosynthesis from ginger.

A 8 Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 754-757.

Herbal Plus Formula 11 Ginkgo; PC Regulax; Peritone; PMS

. . . 19 Srivastava KC. Effects of aqueous extracts of onion, garlic and ginger
Support; SEMI) | Complex,) Trayelaides Austria: )Mariazeller, on platelet aggregation and metabolism of arachidonic acid in the

Brazil: Broncol. Canada: Cayenne Plus; Chase Kolik Gripe blood vascular system: in vitro study. Prostaglandins Leukot Med
1984; 13: 227-235.

affect blood pressure (initially decrease then increase) in vivo. The
clinical significance of these findings, if any, is unclear.

----- PAGE 309 -----
20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

Ginger

Gujral § et al. Effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) oleorosin
on serum and hepatic cholesterol levels in cholesterol fed rats. Nutr
Rep Int 1974; 17: 183-189.

Giri J et al. Effect of ginger on serum cholesterol levels. Indian J Nutr
Diet 1984; 21: 433-436.

Sharma I et al. Hypolipidaemic and antiatherosclerotic effects of
Zingiber officinale in cholesterol fed rabbits. Phytother Res 1996; 10:
517-518.

Bhandari U et al. The protective action of ethanolic ginger (Zingiber
officinale) extract in cholesterol fed rabbits. J Ethnopharmacol 1998;
61: 167-171.

Fuhrman B e¢ al. Ginger extract consumption reduces plasma
cholesterol, inhibits LDL oxidation and attenuates development of
atherosclerosis in atherosclerotic, apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. J
Nutr 2000; 130: 1124-1131.

Jeyakumar SM et al. Antioxidant activity of ginger (Zingiber officinale
Rosc) in rats fed a high fat diet. Med Sci Res 1999; 27: 341-344.
Surh Y-J et al. Chemoprotective properties of some pungent
ingredients present in red pepper and ginger. Mutat Res 1998; 402:
259-267.

Tjendraputra E et al. Effect of ginger constituents and synthetic
analogues on cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme in intact cells. Bioorg Chem
2001; 29: 156-163.

Schuhbaum H et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Zingiber officinale
extracts. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 2000; 2: 82-85.

Sharma JN et al. Suppressive effects of eugenol and ginger oil on
arthritic rats. Pharmacology 1994; 49: 314-318.

Taroeno et al. Anthelmintic activities of some hydrocarbons and
oxygenated compounds in the essential oil of Zingiber purpureum.
Planta Med 1989; 55: 105.

Katiyar SK et al. Inhibition of tumor promotion in SENCAR mouse
skin by ethanol extract of Zingiber officinale rhizome. Cancer Res
1996; 56: 1023-1030.

Surh Y-J e¢ al. Anti-tumor-promoting activities of selected pungent
phenolic substances in ginger. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1999;
18: 131-139.

Lee E, Surh Y-J. Induction of apoptosis in HL-60 cells by pungent
vanilloids, [6]-gingerol and [6]-paradol. Cancer Lett 1998; 134: 163—
168.

Hasenohrl RU e¢ al. Anxiolytic-like effect of combined extracts of
Zingiber officinale and Ginkgo biloba in the elevated plus-maze.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1996; 53: 271-275.

Sharma M, Shukla S. Hypoglycaemic effect of ginger. J Res Ind Med
Yoga Homoeopath 1977; 12: 127-130.

Suekawa M et al. Pharmacological studies on ginger. V.
Pharmacological comparison between (6)-shogaol and capsaicin. Folia
Pharmac Jpn 1986; 88: 339-347.

37

38

39

41

42

43

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53
54

5S

Shoji N et al. Cardiotonic principles of ginger (Zingiber officinale
Roscoe). J Pharm Sci 1982; 71: 1174-1175.

Yamahara J et al. Cholagogic effect of ginger and its active
constituents. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 217-225.

Kanjanapothi D e¢ al. A uterine relaxant compound from Zingiber
cassumunar. Planta Med 1987; 53: 329-332.
Grontved A et al. Ginger root against seasickness. A controlled trial
on the open sea. Acta Otolaryngol 1988; 105: 45-49.

Mowrey DB, Clayson DE. Motion sickness, ginger, and
psychophysics. Lancet 1982; i: 655-657.

Wood CD et al. Comparison of efficacy of ginger with various
antimotion sickness drugs. Clin Res Pract Drug Reg Affairs 1988; 6:
129-136.

Ernst E, Pittler MH. Efficacy of ginger for nausea and vomiting. A
systematic review of randomised clinical trials. Br J] Anaesthesia 2000;
84: 367-371.

Fischer-Rasmussen W et al. Ginger treatment of hyperemesis
gravidarum. Eur ] Obs Gyn Reprod Biol 1990; 38: 19-24.
Vutyavanich T e¢ al. Ginger for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy:
randomised, double-masked, placebo-controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
2001; 97: 577-582.

Phillips S et al. Zingiber officinale does not affect gastric emptying
rate. A randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Anaesthesia
1993; 48: 393-395.

Micklefield GH et al. Effects of ginger on gastroduodenal motility. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1999; 37: 341-346.

Grontved A, Hentzer E. Vertigo-reducing effect of ginger root. A
controlled clinical study. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol 1986; 48: 282-286.
Bliddal H et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study of
ginger extracts and ibuprofen in osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 2000; 8: 9-12.

Srivastava KC. Effect of onion and ginger consumption on platelet
thromboxane production in humans. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids 1989; 35: 183-185.

Srivastava K et al. Ginger and rheumatic disorders. Med Hypoth 1989;
29: 25-28.

Bordia A et al. Effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) and
fenugreek (Trigonella foenumgraecum L.) on blood lipids, blood sugar
and platelet aggregation in patients with coronary artery disease.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1997; 56: 379-384.

Opdyke DLJ. Ginger oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 901-902.
Nagabhushan M et al. Mutagenicity of ginergol and shogaol and
antimutagenicity of zingerone in salmonella/microsome assay. Cancer
Lett 1987; 36: 221-233.

Nakamura H, Yamamoto T. Mutagen and anti-mutagen in ginger,
Zingiber officinale. Mutat Res 1982; 103: 119-126.

----- PAGE 310 -----
Ginkgo

disorders unless the potential benefits outweigh the poten
harms. In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the
efficacy of ginkgo leaf in the various conditions for which it is
used, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using ginkgo leaf preparations.

In view of the documented pharmacological actions of
ginkgo, the potential for preparations of ginkgo leaf to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar (such as anticoagulant and
antiplatelet agents) or opposing effects, should be
considered.

Ginkgo should not be used during pregnancy and
breastfeeding. In view of the intended uses of ginkgo and the
documented pharmacological actions of ginkgo, it is not
suitable for self-treatment.

Species (Family)
Ginkgo biloba L. (Ginkgoaceae)

Synonym(s)
Fossil Tree, Kew Tree, Maidenhair Tree, Yin Xing (whole plant),

Yin Xing Ye (leaves), Bai Guo (seeds), Salisburia adiantifolia Sm.,
S. biloba (L.) Hoffmans

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

Complete German Commission E‘
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Ginkgo is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2.

Leaf

Amino acids 6-Hydroxykynurenic acid (2-carboxy-4-one-6-
hydroxyquinoline), a metabolite of tryptophan.

Flavonoids Dimeric flavones (e.g. amentoflavone, bilobetin,

ginkgetin, isoginkgetin, sciadopitysin); flavonols (e.g. quercetin,

kaempferol) and their glycosides” and coumaroyl esters.

Proanthocyanidins Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes (e.g. bilobalide),
diterpenes (e.g. ginkgolides A, B, C, J, M, which are unique
cage molecules,*”°** and triterpenes (e.g, sterols).

Other constituents Benzoic acid, ginkgolic acids, 2-hexenal,

polyprenols (e.g. __ di-trans-poly-cis-octadecaprenol), sugars,
waxes,!) a peptide.

Seeds

Alkaloids Ginkgotoxin (4-O-methylpyridoxine).'”

Amino acids Cyanogenetic glycosides Ginkgolic acids.
Ginkbilobin.(”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, ginkgo
consists of the dried leaves of Ginkgo biloba L. It contains not less
than 0.5% of flavonoids expressed as flavone glycosides (M, 757)
and calculated with reference to the dried drug.

----- PAGE 311 -----
Ginkgo

Standardised extracts of G. biloba leaves are standardised on
the content of ginkgo flavonoid glycosides (22-27%; determined
as quercetin, kaempferol and isorhamnetin), and terpene lactones
(S-7%; comprising around 2.8-3.4% ginkgolides A, B and C, and
2.6-3.2% bilobalide, and less than 5 ppm ginkgolic acids).(C>

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of ginkgo leaf crude
plant material and commercial ginkgo leaf preparations.

An analytical study of 27 products containing ginkgo leaf
available in the USA including 24 products that were stated to be
‘standardised’. For 17 of these, the content of ginkgo flavonoid
glycosides and/or terpene lactones was greater than the stated
amount. Also, only seven products contained ginkgolic acids at a
concentration of < 500 parts per million (ppm); the concentration
of ginkgolic acids in nine products was > 25000 ppm. Differences
in pharmaceutical quality between different ginkgo leaf products
lead to varying in vitro dissolution and in vivo bioavailability (see
Pharmacological Actions, Pharmacokinetics).

Food Use

Ginkgo biloba is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Ginkgo has a long history of medicinal use, dating back to
2800 Bc. Traditional Chinese medicine used the seeds (kernel/nuts)

Diterpenes

R?
ginkgolide A OH H H
ginkgolide B OH OH
ginkgolide C OH OH
ginkgolide J OH H
ginkgolide M H OH

Flavonoids

OH O R
kaempferol H
quercetin OH

Amino acids
le}

HO.
N COOH
H

6-hydroxykynurenic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ginkgo.

for therapeutic purposes. The seed is used in China as an
antitussive, expectorant and anti-asthmatic, and in bladder
inflammation.“ ''°° In China, the leaves of Ginkgo biloba
were also used in asthma and in cardiovascular disorders,”
although the leaves have little history of traditional use in the
West. Today, standardised concentrated extracts of G. biloba
leaves are marketed in several European countries, and are used in
cognitive deficiency, intermittent claudication (generally resulting
from peripheral arterial occlusive disease), and vertigo and

tinnitus of vascular origin (see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical
ctidiae) (G3: G32, G56, G63)
studies).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Cognitive deficiency

Leaf extract
divided doses.

120-240 mg dry extract orally in two or three
(G3)

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease and vertigo/tinnitus

Leaf extract
divided doses.

120-160 mg dry extract orally in two or three
(G3)

°

we 9

‘oO OH
bilobalide

amentoflavone

----- PAGE 312 -----
Figure 2 Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba).

ye BMWS 6 n eB 8

Figure 3 Ginkgo — dried drug substance (leaf).

Clinical trials of standardised extracts of G. biloba leaves (EGb-
761, Willmar Schwabe GmbH and LI-1370, Lichtwer Pharma
GmbH) in patients with cognitive deficiency have generally used
oral doses ranging from 120-240 mg daily, usually for 8-12 weeks,
although some studies have continued treatment for up to 24 or 52
5° Clinical trials in peripheral arterial occlusive disease
used oral doses of 120-160 mg extract daily for 3-6 months.'°*?

weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

There is a vast literature describing basic scientific research
relating to the effects of ginkgo. Several pharmacological activities
have been documented for ginkgo leaf extracts and/or their
constituents. These include effects on behaviour, learning and
memory, cardiovascular activities, effects on blood flow and
antioxidant activity. The most important active principles of
ginkgo extract include the ginkgo flavonoid glycosides and the
terpene lactones." Ginkgo has been described as having
polyvalent action, i.e. the combined activity of several of its
constituents is likely to be responsible for its effects."

The pharmacological activities of ginkgo have been
18,9,15-17) and other texts bring together several studies
in specific areas, e.g. neuroprotective effects."®’ A summary of
some of the literature on the in vitro and in vivo (animals) effects
of ginkgo leaf is given below.

reviewed, '

Ginkgo 301

Effects on behaviour, learning and memory The effects of a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) on learning and
memory, and on behaviour in relation to ageing and in recovery
from brain injury, have been well studied.“ Animal models (rats
and mice) designed to test aspects of learning and memory (e.g.
acquisition and retention) have documented improvements in
animals treated with oral, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous EGb-
761, compared with controls.) Studies involving rats reported
improvements in acquisition and retention in older (24-month-
old), but not younger (eight-month-old) rats. Other experiments
involving rats of different ages have found that older rats (12- and
18-months old) showed improved performance in an eight-arm
radial maze test following oral administration of EGb-761 30 or
60 mg/kg/day, whereas performance was stable among young rats
(eight weeks old) following EGb-761 administration.""”) EGb-761
200 mg/kg administered orally to rats aged more than 26 months
old led to significant improvements in aspects of cognitive
behaviour.” In-vivo studies have also shown that oral adminis-
tration of EGb-761 (50 or 100 mg/kg/day for three weeks) to rats
prevented the short-term memory-impairing effects of scopola-
mine administered intraperitoneally (0.125 mg/kg).

The anxiolytic effects of a range of doses (0.01-10 mg/kg) of
combination preparations containing different mixture ratios of
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf and ginger root have been
tested in rats using the elevated plus-maze test.?° Compared with
controls, rats treated with the combination preparation (mixture
ratio of ginger extract to ginkgo extract, 2.5:1; Img/kg,
intragastrically) spent increased amounts of time in the open
arms of the maze, whereas the behaviour of rats treated with
preparations of a mixture ratio of 1:1 and 1:2.5 did not change.

Several studies have reported that treatment with EGb-761,
compared with control, aids recovery of function following brain
injury, as demonstrated by behavioural tests in rats who had
undergone bilateral frontal lobotomy or septohippocampal deaf-
ferentation, and in rat models of cortical hemiplegia.”

It has been suggested that the effects of EGb-761 in the
experimental animal models described above may involve aspects
of neuronal plasticity, e.g. neuronal regeneration." Studies in
rats have investigated, for example, the effects of EGb-761
administration on expression of neurotrophins and apolipopro-
tein E, and on behavioural recovery, following entorhinal cortex
lesions, and on regeneration of primary olfactory neurons
following olfactory bulbectomy. Research investigating the effects
of EGb-761 on neuronal plasticity has been summarised. !*?))

Cardiovascular and haemorheological activities Studies
investigating the molecular mechanisms that may contribute to
the vasoregulatory (vasodilatation and vasoconstriction) effects of
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) have been
described.” In vitro experiments using isolated rabbit aorta
suggested that possible mechanisms include effects on cyclic-GMP
phosphodiesterase, prostaglandin I, and nitric oxide (NO). Ex
vivo studies using isolated guinea-pig heart showed that EGb-761
led to a concentration-dependent increase in coronary blood flow.
In studies involving isolated rat heart and in anaesthetised rabbits,
EGb-761 administration has been reported to protect against
myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury; the antioxidant and
free-radical scavenging effects of EGb-761 (see Pharmacological
Actions, Antioxidant activity) may be important in this regard.)
One study using isolated rat hearts suggested that the cardiopro-
tective effects were due to the terpenoid constituents of EGb-761,
and that the mechanism was independent of direct free radical-
scavenging activity.*? An in vitro study with endothelial cells

G

----- PAGE 313 -----
Ginkgo

suggested that the anti-ischaemic activity of EGb-761 may be due
partly to the effects of the constituent bilobalide in protecting
mitochondrial activity.”

The effects of ginkgo leaf extract have been studied in normal
rats and those with ischaemic brain damage with middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Oral administration of ginkgo extract 100 mg/
kg was reported to increase cerebral blood flow in normal rats,
but the increase was less marked in rats with cerebral artery
occlusion.

In-vitro studies using human blood cells have documented
effects of EGb-761 on several haemorheological parameters.»
For example, in vitro, EGb-761 normalised changes in erythrocyte
viscosity and in the viscoelastic properties of the erythrocyte
membrane induced by standard metabolic challenge (pH 6.8;
380 mosmol/L) in six human blood
experiments, EGb-761 protected against hydrogen peroxide-
induced damage in human erythrocytes. In studies using blood
from patients with circulatory disorders, incubation with EGb-761
was reported to decrease erythrocyte aggregation. In vitro
experiments using human neutrophils have found that EGb-761
at a concentration of 10,mol/L inhibits release of hydrogen
peroxide from these cells. The effects of EGb-761 on inhibition of
human platelet aggregation elicited by substances such as
thrombin and collagen have been documented." A study using
blood donated by healthy volunteers (7 = 35) reported that a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf inhibited ADP- and collagen-
induced platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma, gel-filtered
platelets and in whole blood in a concentration-dependent
manner.”

onors. In other in vitro

Platelet-activating factor antagonism Ginkgolides have been
reported to competitively inhibit the binding of platelet-activating
factor (PAF) to its membrane receptor. 7”

Ginkgolide B antagonises thrombus formation induced by PAF
and, in guinea-pigs, it also induces a rapid curative thrombolysis.
A protective effect is exerted by ginkgolides on PAF-induced
bronchoconstriction and airway hyperactivity in immunoanaphy-
laxis and in antigen-induced bronchial provocation tests. Oral or
intravenous injection of ginkgolide B antagonises cardiovascular
impairments and bronchoconstriction induced by PAF. Ginkgolide
B does not appear to interfere with cyclooxygenase, but at an
earlier step involving PAF receptors and phospholipase activation.
Eosinophil infiltration occurs in asthma and in allergic reactions,
the number of eosinophils increasing during late phase. Since PAF
is a potent activator of eosinophil function, it has been argued that
ginkgolide B may interfere with the late-phase response.”

Pre-administration of ginkgolide B (1-5 mg/kg, intravenous) to
rats has been reported to reduce PAF-induced decreases in
diastolic and systolic arterial blood pressure in anaesthetised
normotensive rats; this effect has also been reported in this animal

model when ginkgolide B is administered shortly after PAF
15)

administration."

Ginkgolide B has also been documented to have some beneficial
effects in endotoxic shock; PAF is believed by some to be
implicated in shock states. In anaesthetised guinea-pigs, intrave-
nous administration of ginkgolide B (1 or 6mg/kg) prior to
injection of Salmonella typhimurium endotoxin reduced the initial
rapid decrease in blood pressure, and intravenous administration
of ginkgolide B during the prolonged phase of shock (1 hour after
endotoxin administration) immediately and dose dependently
reversed the decrease in blood pressure." Other studies have
found that ginkgolide B reduced arterial blood pressure in the

secondary, but not the early, phase following administration of

2 LS
Escherichia coli endotoxin."

Antioxidant activity The free radical-scavenging effects and
antioxidant activity of EGb-761 in vitro are well documented.)
EGb-761 scavenges several reactive oxygen species, including
hydroxyl, superoxide and peroxyl radicals.‘'>7*7?
bellar neurons and cerebellar granule cells, ginkgo extract was
reported to protect against oxidative stress induced by hydrogen
peroxide, another reactive oxygen species.°°*" In cultures of rat
hippocampal cells, incubation with EGb-761 protected against cell
death induced by B-amyloid, protected against toxicity induced by
hydrogen peroxide, and blocked B-amyloid-induced events, such
as accumulation of reactive oxygen species.” Bilobalide has also
been documented to protect neurons against oxidative stress
induced by reactive oxygen species in vitro.°>) Experiments in

gerbils have suggested that the neuroprotective effects of gingko
)

) In rat cere-

extract may be due to inhibition of nitric oxide formation."

Other studies which have described neuroprotective effects of
EGb-761 have suggested that antioxidant activity may be
involved."'9 In vitro, a standardised ginkgo leaf extract was
found to inhibit photo-induced formation of cholesterol oxides in
a concentration-dependent manner.°°)

Antioxidant activity has been documented for EGb-761 in vivo.
In rats, treatment with EGb-761 increased the concentrations of
circulating and cellular polyunsaturated fatty acids, and reduced
erythrocyte cell lysis induced by hydrogen peroxide.°% Also in
rats, oral administration of EGb-761 was reported to increase
activity of the enzymes catalase and superoxide dismutase in the
hippocampus, striatum and substantia nigrum.” Other data
collected in this study suggested a decrease in lipid peroxidation in
rat hippocampus in EGb-761-treated rats. In another study in rats,
EGb-761 (200 mg/kg/day for four weeks) protected against carbon
tetrachloride-induced (1.5 mL/kg) liver damage, as determined by
malondialdehyde concentrations (a breakdown product of lipid
peroxidation).°*)

Other activities In-vivo studies have suggested that EGb-761 may
protect against chemically induced carcinogenesis. In mice, oral
administration of EGb-761 (150mg/kg daily for two weeks),
compared with control, was reported to reduce tumour multi-
plicity; however, the inhibitory effect was not statistically
significant.” It was also reported that EGb-761-treatment
reduced the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin.

EGb-761 and ginkgolide B have been shown to inhibit
peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR) expression and
cell proliferation in the human breast cancer cell line MDA-231,
which is known to be rich in PBR.“ By contrast, the proliferation
of MCF-7 breast cancer cells, which are low in PBR, was not
affected.

In rats, oral administration of standardised ginkgo leaf extract
300 mg/kg was shown to ameliorate nephrotoxicity induced by
administration of gentamicin 80 mg/kg."

In-vitro studies have shown that ginkgolic acids have cytotoxic
activity.” Incubation of a human keratinocyte cell line with a

preparation of ginkgolic acids (containing 99% ginkgolic acids) at
concentrations of > 30mg/L for 18 hours increased the
proportion of apoptotic cells from around 6% to around 80%.)

Mean (95% confidence interval) ICso values for ginkgolic acids
and a standardised ginkgolic-acid-free (< Sppm) extract of ginkgo
leaf (EGb-761) for human keratinocyte cells and rhesus monkey
kidney tubular epithelial cells, respectively, were: ginkgolic acids,
21.8 mg/L (20.6-23.0) and 4.6 mg/L (3.7—5.6), respectively; ginkgo
extract, 889 mg/L (859-938) and 1481 mg/L (1439-1523), respec-

----- PAGE 314 -----
tively.“ The ginkgolic acid mixture (containing five alkylphenols
at concentrations of 47%, 43% and 3% for three compounds) was
obtained from the heptane-soluble fraction of a 60% w/w acetone
extract of G. biloba leaf.

Oestrogenic activity in vitro has been documented for a G.
biloba leaf extract (Meditec Korea Pharm. Co Ltd, Korea; not
further specified) and several of its flavonoid constituents. In
competitive radiolabelled ligand binding assays, ginkgo leaf
extract and the flavonoid constituents quercetin, kaempferol and
isorhamnetin bound to both oestrogen receptor (ER) ER-alpha
and ER-beta receptors, although they showed a greater affinity for
ER-beta receptors. At certain concentrations, ginkgo extract and
the flavonoid constituents induced the proliferation of ER-positive
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells; this effect was blocked by
incubation with tamoxifen.” The clinical relevance of these
findings has not been established.

Aqueous extracts of dried ginkgo leaves have been reported to
inhibit. monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B.A study
investigating the effects of bilobalide on gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) concentrations and on glutamic acid decarboxylase
activity in mouse brain found that GABA concentrations and
glutamic acid decarboxylase activity were significantly higher in
animals treated orally with bilobalide 30 mg/kg daily for four
days.“ However, there were no differences between treated and
control mice with regard to glutamate concentrations.

Several in-vivo studies have documented adaptive effects for
EGb-761.°”

A peptide isolated from the leaves of Ginkgo biloba has been
reported to have antifungal activity against several fungi,
including Pellicularia sasakii and Alternaria alternata.

Three long-chain phenols, anacardic acid, bilobol and cardanol,
isolated from seeds of G. biloba are active against Sarcoma 180
ascites in mice.”

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics of constituents of
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf are reasonably well
documented." '7**S?) Mean bioavailabilities of ginkgolide A,
ginkgolide B and bilobalide following oral administration of
ginkgo extract 120mg to fasting healthy volunteers were 80%,
88% and 79%, respectively. Food intake increased the time taken
to reach peak concentration (suggesting slower absorption), but
did not affect bioavailability.“ °'*
ginkgolides A and B and bilobalide observed in fasting volunteers
ranged from 16.5 to 33.3ng/mL, and from 11.5 to 21.1 ng/mL in
volunteers who had consumed food.”

Maximum plasma concentrations of total ginkgolides A and B
and bilobalide following oral administration of a ginkgo leaf
extract (Ginkgoselect) and a phospholipid complex of ginkgo leaf
(Ginkgoselect Phytosome), both providing 9.6mg total terpene
lactones, were 85.0 and 181.8 |tg/mL, for ginkgo extract and the
phospholipid complex, respectively.”
concentration were 120 minutes and 180-240 minutes for ginkgo
extract and the phospholipid complex, respectively, whereas the
mean elimination half-life of each of the terpene lactones
investigated was within the range 120-180 minutes.

In a randomised, crossover study, 12 healthy individuals
received ginkgo leaf extract 40mg twice daily and 80mg once
daily for 7 days, with a wash-out period of 21 days between the
different dosage regimens. It was reported that the twice-daily
dosage regimen, compared with the once-daily regimen, resulted
in a significantly longer half-life and mean residence time for

Peak concentrations of

Times to maximum

Ginkgo

ginkgolide B, although the maximum plasma concentration was
higher with the once-daily dosage regimen. Time to maximum
plasma concentration for ginkgolide B was 2.3 hours for
administration of ginkgo leaf extract according to either dosage
regimen. In another study involving healthy individuals given a
single oral dose of ginkgo leaf extract, mean values for the
absorption rate constant, elimination rate constant, absorption
half-life, elimination half-life and time to maximum plasma
concentration for the flavonoid constituents quercetin an
kaempferol were 0.61 and 0.55 per hour, 0.37 and 0.30 per hour,
1.51 and 1.56 hours, 2.17 and 2.76 hours, and 2.30 and 2.68 hours,
respectively. °!)

Urinary excretion of ginkgolides A and B, and bilobalide, is
around 70%, 50% and 30%, respectively, of the dose administere
orally(C'®)

Different ginkgo leaf extracts have different in-vitro dissolution
rates resulting in differences in bioavailability in humans.'')

Therapeutic effects Most clinical trials of ginkgo have explore
its effects in the treatment of cognitive deficiency or cerebra
insufficiency,°* °° a term used to de:
symptoms thought to arise from an age-related reduction in
cerebral blood flow. These symptoms include forgetfulness, poor
concentration, poor perception, debilitation, dizziness, fatigue,
sleep disturbances, listlessness, depressed mood, headache, moo:
swings, rest] , anxiety, hearing loss and disorienta-
tion.°* °%® Several studies have tested the effects of standardis

ribe a collection of

ness, tinnit

ginkgo leaf extracts on cognitive function in patients with
Alzheimei (3) and/or multi-infarct dementia.°* Both
are conditions which share several symptoms (e.g. memory
impairment) with cerebral insufficiency. Several other trials have
explored the effects of ginkgo extracts on cognitive ability in
individuals with no history of significant cognitive impairment. A

few studies have explored the effects of ginkgo on tinnitus
(55)

disease’

alone.
Clinical research with ginkgo extracts has also focused on
effects in improving pain-free walking distance in patients with
intermittent claudication/peripheral arterial occlusive disease.
S59 Other studies have explored the effects of ginkgo in patients
with chronic venous insufficiency, antidepressant-related sexual
dysfunction, seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and symptoms of
depres:
Almost all clinical trials of ginkgo have investigated the effects
of the standardised ginkgo leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370.

ion.

Cognitive deficiency, dementia in Alzheimer’s disease, multi-
infarct dementia A Cochrane systematic review of studies
assessing G. biloba leaf preparations in cognitive impairment and
dementia included 33 randomised, double-blind, controlled
trials.” All but one of the included studies investigated the
effects of standardised ginkgo leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370
at oral doses ranging from 80-600 mg daily and typically 200 mg
daily. The study that did not use either of these preparations
assessed an ethanolic extract of ginkgo leaves (drug-to-extract
ratio 4:1, standardised for total flavone glycosides 0.20 mg/mL
and total ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL) at doses lower than those used
in the other 32 studies.

Meta-analyses showed that ginkgo at doses less than 200 mg
daily for less than 12 weeks, compared with placebo, was
associated with benefits in clinical global improvement as assessed
by physicians: odds ratio (OR; 95% confidence interval (CI))
15.32 (5.90-39.80; p < 0.0001); a similar result was found for
ginkgo > 200 mg daily for 24 weeks (OR 2.16, 95% CI 1.11-4.20;
p = 0.02). Significant improvements in cognition, assessed using

----- PAGE 315 -----
Ginkgo

various scales, were also found for ginkgo (any dose) at 12, 24 and
52 weeks, when compared with placebo (p = 0.0008, 0.03 and <
0.01 for 12, 24 and 52 weeks, respectively), and significant
improvements in ability to perform activities of daily living were
seen with ginkgo (doses < 200 mg daily), compared with placebo,
at 12, 24 and 52 weeks (p < 0.01, p = 0.05 and p < 0.01,
respectively). The conclusions of the review were that there is
some evidence of improvements in cognition and function
associated with treatment with a standardised extract of ginkgo
leaf. However, many of the early trials included in the review had
methodological limitations, and the three most recent trials
showed inconsistent results. There is a need for a large rigorous
randomised, placebo-controlled trial to establish the benefits of
ginkgo in cognitive impairment.°”
A review of controlled clinical trials of ginkgo in patients wit
cerebral insufficiency identified 40 studies.°” Generally, trials
tested oral doses of standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf of 120 mg

iS.

y

daily administered for at least four to six weeks. Most trial
reported significant results or positive (but not. statistical
significant) trends in favour of ginkgo, compared with control.
However, it was reported that most trials were of poor
methodological quality; only eight studies were considered to be
well-conducted. All of these eight studies reported statistically
significant results for ginkgo, compared with placebo. Never-
theless, further randomised, double-blind, controlled trials
involving larger numbers of patients were deemed necessary.”
Many controlled studies of the ginkgo extracts EGb-761 and LI-
1370 were conducted before new guidelines for testing the efficacy
of nootropic drugs were developed.'C™ Details of two studies that
did meet the methodological criteria described in the guidelines
(both of which were included in the Cochrane systematic review
described above) are given below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, after a
four-week placebo run-in period, 216 patients with mild-to-
moderate primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer type,
or multi-infarct dementia, received standardised ginkgo leaf
extract (EGb-761) 120mg orally twice daily, or placebo, for 24
weeks." At the end of the study, data for 156 patients were
eligible for analysis. There were significantly more responders to
treatment (defined as a response to at least two of the three
primary outcome measures — a psychopathological assessment, an
assessment of cognitive performance and a behavioural as:
of activities of daily life) in the ginkgo group, compared with the
placebo group (28% versus 10% of ginkgo and placebo recipients,
respectively; p = 0.005). The difference was also statistically
significant in an intention-to-treat analysis (23% versus 10% of
ginkgo and placebo recipients, respectively; p = 0.005).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involved
327 patients with mild-to-severe dementia related to Alzheimer's
disease or multi-infarct dementia.) Participants received stan-
dardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) 40 mg orally three times
daily (1 = 166), or placebo (n = 161), for 52 weeks, and underwent
a battery of a ments at 12, 26 and 52 weeks. The primary
outcome measures were the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale

sment

Cognitive Subscale (Adas-Cog), the Geriatric Evaluation by
Relative's Rating Instrument (GERRI) and the Clinical Global
Impression of Change (CGIC). In an intention-to-treat analysis (1
= 309), ginkgo recipients scored significantly better than did
placebo recipients on the Adas-Cog and the GERRI (p = 0.04 and
p = 0.004, respectively). A slight worsening on the CGIC was
observed for both groups. The average end-points for the
intention-to-treat analysis were 38.6 and 34.6 weeks for the
ginkgo and placebo groups, respectively.

Another systematic review of randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials assessing the effects of standardised
ginkgo leaf extracts on cognitive function in patients with
Alzheimer's disease, characterised according to recognised cri-
teria, included four studies.°*) These involved oral administration
of ginkgo extract 120 or 240mg daily for 12-26 weeks, and
involved a total of 212 patients each in the ginkgo and placebo
groups. A meta-analysis of the results of the four studies indicated
a modest effect for ginkgo, compared with placebo (difference of
3% on the Adas-Cog).

Another systematic review included nine randomised, double-

blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised ginkgo leaf
extracts in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type and/or
multi-infarct dementia.“ The review included two studies
described above.**) Studies generally involved the administra-
tion of oral doses of ginkgo extract 120 or 240 mg daily for 6-12
weeks, although two studies involved a 24-week"* or 52-week'”)
administration period. One study involved the administration of
intravenous infusions of ginkgo extract 200mg four times per
week for four weeks. It was reported that, overall, the studies
provided evidence to support the efficacy of standardised ginkgo
leaf extracts in the symptomatic treatment of dementia. However,
methodological limitations of several of the included studies (e.g.
poorly defined inclusion and exclusion criteria and method of
randomisation, treatment period less than six months, small
sample sizes) were also emphasised. It was concluded that further
studies are required to establish the benefits of ginkgo
dementia.°”
The study included in the Cochrane review described above that
did not assess the effects of EGb-761 or LI-1370 assessed the
effects of an alcohol/water extract of fresh leaves of ginkgo (drug
extract ratio 1:4; total flavonoid glycosides 0.20mg/mL, total
ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL) in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving patients with age-related impairment of
memory and/or concentration. Participants received undiluted
ginkgo extract (7 = 77), diluted ginkgo extract (1:1 with placebo)
(n = 82), or placebo (7 = 82), 40 drops (1.9 mL) three times daily
for 24 weeks. At the end of the treatment period, a check for
blinding indicated that participants were unable to identify the
treatment they received. There were no statistically significant
differences between the three groups in subjective perceptions of
memory and concentration, and in the following objective
measures: the Expended Mental Control Test (a measure of
attention and concentration), and Rey test parts 1 and 2 (which
measure short-term memory and learning curve, and long-term
memory and recognition, respectively). However, a significant
difference between groups was observed in the Benton test of
visual retention-revised (a measure of short-term visual memory)
— increases in baseline scores of 18%, 26% and 11% were
recorded for the high-dose ginkgo, low-dose ginkgo and placebo
groups, respectively (p = 0.0076).°”

n

Cognitive enhancement in healthy volunteers Ginkgo has been
tested for its cognitive enhancing effects in healthy (i.e. cognitively
intact) individuals in addition to investigations into its effects in
patients with cognitive deficiency.

A systematic review of double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
sing the effects of preparations of G. biloba leaf on cognitive
function in healthy individuals included nine such trials.‘°!) The
trials were considered to be of good methodological quality. The
review found no evidence of substantial or consistent effects for
ginkgo, compared with placebo, on objective measures of
cognitive function. Several of the studies included in the review,

as:

----- PAGE 316 -----
as well as new trials published since, and those sing
combination preparations containing G. biloba leaf extract, are
summarised below.

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study, 20
healthy volunteers aged 19-24 years received a standardised
extract of ginkgo leaf (GK501) at doses of 120mg, 240mg and
360 mg.'°”) A battery of tests used to assess cognitive performance
was carried out immediately before and at 1, 2.5, 4 and 6 hours
after ginkgo administration. It was reported that with doses of
ginkgo extract of 240 and 360mg, there was a statistically
significant improvement in 'speed of attention’ (a measure of
reaction time) from 2.5 hours up to 6 hours (the last measurement
point) after ginkgo administration.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, eight healthy female volunteers (mean age 32 years) were
given a standardised extract of G. biloba leaf at doses of 120, 240
and 600 mg.°» One hour after treatment, volunteers undertook a

series of psychological tests. Memory was found to be signifi-
cantly improved with G. biloba leaf 600mg, compared with
placebo.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
involving 31 volunteers aged 30-59 years tested the effects of a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (LI-1370) 50mg three times
daily, 100 mg three times daily, 120 mg each morning, 240 mg each
morning, and placebo, each taken for two days followed by a
wash-out period of at least five days. A battery of tests to as:
memory and cognitive and psychomotor performance was carried
out 30 minutes before ginkgo administration and then hourly for
12 hours. It was reported that there was a ‘marginally significant!
effect of treatment, compared with placebo, in a test assessing
short-term memory, although the p-value given for this was
greater than 0.05 (p = 0.053). Post-hoc analyses suggested that
ginkgo extract 120mg each morning was associated with better
performance in this test than other doses of ginkgo extract
(including ginkgo extract 50mg three times daily) and placebo.
There were no statistically significant effects of treatment on
immediate and delayed word recall and choice reaction time.

In two separate randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
studies, healthy individuals received a single 120mg dose of
ginkgo leaf extract (LI-1370), or placebo (n = 52) or ginkgo leaf
extract 120mg daily, or placebo, for six weeks (1 = 40) before
undergoing tests to assess cognitive function.'°’) Single-dose
ginkgo extract significantly improved performance in tests of
attention (p < 0.05), when compared with placebo, but no
significant improvements were observed following longer-term
administration. Similarly, in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study involving healthy individuals who received ginkgo
leaf extract (mean dose 185 mg/day, determined subsequently
when the preparation was found to contain only 65% of the
content stated) for 13 weeks, no improvements were observed in
alleviation of post-prandial state decrement ('post-lunch dip') and
chemosensory function with ginkgo, compared with placebo.
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 15
healthy individuals, G. biloba leaf extract 360 mg as a single oral
dose had significant effects on certain aspects of electroencepha-
logram recordings, such as reductions in frontal theta and beta
activity, when compared with placebo.” These findings suggest
that G. biloba leaf extract can directly modulate cerebroelectrical
activity. (67)

Other studies have assessed the effects of a combination
preparation of G. biloba leaf and Panax ginseng on cognitive
function in healthy younger individuals. In a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study, 20 healthy individuals

S

Ginkgo

received single doses of G. biloba leaf extract (GK501) 120, 240
and 360mg, or placebo, and a combination of G. biloba leaf
extract and P. ginseng root extract at doses of 120 and 200, 240
and 400, and 360 and 600mg, respectively, or placebo.'°*
Statistically significant improvements in one cognitive perfor-
mance test (serial threes) were observed with all three ginkgo
doses, compared with placebo (p < 0.05 for each), but there were
no statistically significant improvements in other tests. Following
administration of the combination preparation, there were
statistically significant improvements in certain tests at certain
timepoints, but these results were not consistent for all doses
tested and across all timepoints measured in the study.

Other studies have assessed the cognitive-enhancing effects of
ginkgo extracts in older volunteers. In a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial, 48 cognitively intact individuals
aged over 55 years received a standardised ginkgo leaf extract
(EGb-761) 60 mg three times daily, or placebo, for six weeks.” A
battery of neuropsychological tests was carried out before
treatment and at the end of the study. Ginkgo extract recipients
experienced a significant improvement in tests assessing speed of
processing abilities, compared with placebo recipients (p < 0.03).
However, no statistically significant differences between the
ginkgo extract and placebo groups were evident for tests assessing
memory.

In a questionnaire survey, the effects of administration of a
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (LI-1370) 120 mg daily for four
months on the activities of daily living were assessed in volunteers
aged 32-97 years (mean (SD) 68.9 (8.4) years). Volunteers were
recruited via a magazine editorial. Of 8557 initial respondents,
5028 were eligible for the survey. In total, 1000 volunteers (who
were not currently using any ginkgo products) were said to be
randomly allocated to receive ginkgo extract; all other respon-
dents were allocated to the no-treatment control group, unless
they had stated that they only wished to receive ginkgo. It was
reported that ginkgo extract recipients achieved significantly
better scores than the control group on a scale assessing ability to
perform activities of daily living, self-assessment of ability to
cope, and visual analogue scales for mood and sleep. However, for
several reasons, the results of this study should be interpreted
cautiously. For example, the study was carried out by post,
therefore investigators did not meet participants at any time, the
study was not truly randomised, the study was open, the control
group did not receive placebo tablets, and there was no check on
compliance.

At the end of the study, 1570 individuals continued in a follow-
up study in which they selected whether or not to receive ginkgo
treatment.” After six months, data collected using a postal
questionnaire indicated that there were statistically significant
differences between groups (individuals received ginkgo or no
treatment during the initial four-month study, and ginkgo or no
treatment during the six-month follow-up study, creating four
groups) in scores for activities of daily living and mood; benefits
were associated with longer use of ginkgo. The design of this
study, however, does not allow definitive conclusions to be drawn.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
group trial in which 64 healthy volunteers with neurasthenic
complaints received a combination preparation containing G.
biloba \eaf extract and P. ginseng root extract at doses of 30 and
50mg, respectively, 60 and 100mg, respectively, and 120 and
200mg, respectively, or placebo, twice daily, for 12 weeks,
participants in the higher-dose ginkgo-ginseng group, compared
with the placebo group, achieved significantly higher scores in
tests designed to assess cognitive function (p = 0.008).

----- PAGE 317 -----
Ginkgo

In contrast, several other studies assessing the effects of
combination preparations containing G. biloba leaf extract and
other herbal ingredients on cognitive function have reported no
statistically significant effects.

The effects of a combination preparation of G. biloba and P.
ginseng on memory were assessed in a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multicentre, parallel group trial involving 256
healthy volunteers aged 38 to 67 years (mean (SD), 56 (7)
years).”» Participants received a preparation containing G. biloba
leaf extract 60 mg and P. ginseng root extract 100 mg, twice daily,
120 and 200 mg, respectively, once daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks.
Assessments were undertaken at weeks 4, 8, 12 and 14 of the study.
At the end of the study, the primary outcome variable the Quality
of Memory Index was significantly improved in the treatment
group, compared with the placebo group (p = 0.026). No
statistically significant effects were seen with respect to the
secondary outcome variables power and continuity of attention,
and speed of memory processes.”

A lack of effect for a combination preparation containing G.
biloba leaf extract and P. ginseng (Gincosan), administered at
doses of 120 and 200 mg daily, respectively, for 12 weeks, was also
reported following a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial involving 57 post-menopausal women. A rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 85 healthy
individuals aged 19 to 68 years (mean age 41.8 years) found no
statistically significant effects on cognitive function for a
combination preparation containing G. biloba leaf extract and
Bacopa monniera, when compared with placebo.”

Tinnitus and hearing loss Tinnitus and hearing loss are two of
the symptoms of dementia.“ ed the
effects of ginkgo on these conditions alone.

A meta-analysis of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of G. biloba leaf preparations for tinnitus included
six such trials involving a total of 1318 participants.” Four
studies involved oral administration of tablets of ginkgo leaf
extract at doses of 30 to 150 mg daily typically for 12 weeks, one
study used a liquid preparation of ginkgo leaf and one study
involved administration of a ginkgo leaf preparation 200mg by
intravenous infusion followed by oral administration of 80mg
twice daily for 12 weeks. The review did not find any statistically
significant difference between ginkgo and placebo with respect to
the proportion of participants experiencing benefit.9 A
Cochrane systematic review of G. biloba for tinnitus used stricter

°®) Several studies have as

inclusion criteria and hence included only two trials.”” The
conclusions of the review were that the limited evidence available
did not demonstrate that G. biloba leaf was effective for the
treatment of tinnitus.

A new randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
assessing G. biloba in tinnitus has been published since the
Cochrane review. This trial was included in the broader review
described above. In the study, 66 adults with tinnitus as their
only or main presenting complaint to a general otolaryngology
outpatient clinic received a sustained-release G. biloba leaf
preparation 120mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks. Among the
60 individuals who completed the study, there were no statistically
significant improvements in the primary outcome measures
(Tinnitus Handicap Inventory, Glasgow Health Status Inventory,
average hearing threshold) for the ginkgo group, compared with
the placebo group (p > 0.1 for each).

A previous systematic review of randomised, controlled trials of
ginkgo extracts in tinnitus included five studies — four studies

compared ginkgo extracts with placebo, and one study compared
ginkgo extract with conventional drugs. Three trials tested the
standardised ginkgo leaf extract EGb-761; full details of other
extracts tested in the other studies are not given in the review. The
review concluded that, overall, the studies identified provided
evidence to support ginkgo extracts as a treatment for tinnitus,
but that further investigation was required to fully establish the
benefits. Typically, at least two of the studies had methodological
flaws.

Two of the reviews described above included a double-blind,
controlled trial that tested the effects of a standardised ginkgo leaf
extract (LI-1370) 50 mg, or placebo, three times daily for 12 weeks
in 1121 individuals, aged 18-70 years, with tinnitus who were
otherwise healthy.® Participants were recruited via advertise-
ments placed in the UK national press and in a British Tinnitus
Association's publication. The main outcome measure was
participants’ self-assessment of tinnitus (loudness and ‘how
troublesome’) before, during and after treatment, carried out via
postal questionnaires and telephone calls. Participants were paired
where possible (489 pairs, i.e. 978 of 1121 participants were
matched) and then randomly allocated to active or placebo. At the
end of the study, the results indicated that ginkgo extract (LI-1370)
50mg three times daily was 'no more effective than placebo in
treating tinnitus'."" The design of this study has been criticised.
For example, participants did not have face-to-face contact with
an investigator at any time during the study.”

In a randomised, controlled trial, 28 patients with untreated
sudden loss of hearing received intravenous infusions of 6%
hydroxyethyl starch (HES), or intravenous and oral ginkgo extract,
for 10 days.®” There were no statistically significant differences
between the two groups in improvements in hearing. Further
studies involving larger numbers of participants are required.”

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease/intermittent claudication
The effects of standardised extracts of ginkgo have been
investigated in patients with Fontaine stage II peripheral arterial
>. This condition is characterised by the onset of
pain, as a result of oxygen deficit in the leg muscles, on walking
distances greater than around 30-300 metres.(@°® The rationale
for using ginkgo in this condition is for its effects in improving
blood flow.

A meta-analysis of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of ginkgo extract for the treatment of intermittent
claudication included eight studies that assessed effects on walking
°9 The trials involved a total of 415 patients who
received a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf at doses of 120 or
160 mg daily, or placebo, for 6, 12 (one trial each) or 24 weeks.
The pooled results from all trials indicated a. statistically
significant increase in pain-free walking distance for ginkgo-
treated patients, compared with placebo recipients (weighted
mean difference (WMD): 34 metres; 95% confidence intervals
(CI): 26-43 metres). A similar result was obtained when results for
the six studies of good methodological quality were pooled
(WMD: 37 metres; 95% Cl: 26-47 metres). It is questionable
whether the extent of these increases in pain-free walking distance
is clinically relevant.

occlusive di

2a

distance.

Chronic venous insufficiency and venous ulcers A randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the protective
effects of a combination preparation (Ginkgor Forte) containing
a standardised extract of ginkgo (2.3%), troxerutine (48.85%) and
heptaminol (48.85%) against venous wall injury in 48 female
patients with chronic venous insufficiency.) Ginkgor Forte

----- PAGE 318 -----
625 mg daily, or placebo, was given for four weeks. In total, 42
patients completed the study, but only 28 were included in the
final analysis because of protocol violations. Circulating endothe-
lial cell (CEC) count was used as a measure of injury to the
vascular endothelium (CEC counts are raised in patients with
chronic venous insufficiency)“ After four weeks’ treatment,
CEC counts decreased significantly in both the treatment and
placebo groups (by 14.5% and 8.4%, respectively), compared with
baseline values (p = 0.0021 and p = 0.0146, respectively). The
mean change in CEC count after four weeks' treatment was
reported to be significantly greater for the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (p = 0.039).

In another double-blind trial, 213 patients with chronic venous
or mixed ulcers located at the malleolus (rounded protuberance
on ankle joint) received ginkgo extract 160 mg daily, or placebo,
together with standard care (elastic stockings, local dressings and
cleansing of ulcers) for 12 weeks." At the end of the study, ginkgo
extract recipients, compared with placebo recipients, showed a
significant reduction in ulcer area.

Asthma, PAF antagonism Intradermal injections of PAF induce
a biphasic inflammatory response similar to that observed in
sensitised individuals subjected to moderate doses of allergen. A
single dose of a mixture of ginkgolides has been reported to
antagonise this response.“ Oral administration of ginkgolides
resulted in a reduction of eosinophil infiltration in atopic patients
given intracutaneous injections of PAE)

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 80 and 120 mg
capsules containing a standardised mixture of ginkgolides A, B
and C (ratio of 40:40:20) were given as a single oral dose two
hours before challenge by intradermal PAF/histamine. Both dos
ranges inhibited flare which was maximal
Within 15-30 minutes wheal volume was reduced, with the
greatest effect being observed for the higher dose treatments. The
protection was still present eight hours after oral dosing. Similar
inhibition of PAF was observed for platelet aggregation with
single oral doses of 80 and 120 mg extract which were given two
hours before blood withdrawal. The ginkgolide mixture given
orally also blocked PAF-induced airway hyper-responsiveness.
Antagonism of the effects of PAF by a standardised mixture of
ginkgolides was assessed in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study in six healthy subjects aged 25-35 years.**) Wheal
and flare responses to PAF examined two hours after ingestion of
80 mg and 120 mg of ginkgolide mixture were inhibited in a dose-
related manner. Both doses significantly inhibited PAF-induce
platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma.*?)
A randomised, double-blind, crossover study involved patients
with atopic asthma who were challenged with their specific dust
or pollen antigen. After 6.5 hours, participants were subjected
to a provocation test with acetylcholine so that the treatment of
later stages of an asthma attack could
ginkgolide standardised extract, 40mg three times daily, or
placebo, were given during the three days before the test and a
final single dose of 120 mg of extract was given two hours before
the challenge. The results suggested that ginkgolides were effective
in both the early phase and the late phase of airway
hyperactivity.

A study involving six patients with a history of exercise-induced
asthma assessed the effects of a specific PAF antagonist (BN
52063, a standardised mixture of ginkgolides A, B and C, ratio of
40:40:20) on the response to isocapnic hyperventilation with dry
cold air.“* Participants were randomised to receive BN 52063
240 mg orally two hours before cold air challenge, 2.4mg by

after five minutes.

e assessed. Mixed

Ginkgo

metered dose inhaler 30 minutes before cold air challenge, or
placebo. It was reported that oral BN 52063 did not reduce
bronchoconstriction during challenge. A significant increase in
airways resistance was observed after inhalation of BN 52063. In
another study, six patients with a history of exercise-induced
asthma received BN 52063 120mg orally twice daily, 1mg by
spinhaler three times daily, or placebo, for three days, then, on the
test day, 240 mg orally three hours before exercise challenge, 5 mg
by spinhaler one hour before challenge, or placebo, respectively.
With oral treatment, the prolonged reduction in peak expiratory
flow was significantly attenuated (p < 0.05).°

Antidepressant-related sexual dysfunction Two randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have assessed the effects of
ginkgo leaf preparations on sexual function in individuals with
antidepressant-related sexual dysfunction. One study involved
administration of ginkgo leaf extract (120 mg daily for weeks one
to two, 160 mg daily for weeks three to four and 240 mg daily for
weeks five to eight; n = 37 participants),'*”) and another study
240 mg daily for 12 weeks (n = 24).°° Neither of the
s found statistically significant differenc
between participants in the ginkgo and placebo groups.

Two open, uncontrolled studies have explored the effects of
ginkgo extract in sexual dysfunction associated with treatment
with antidepressant drugs.°” *®)

involve:

studi s in sexual function

Acute ischaemic stroke A Cochrane systematic review of
randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials assessing the
effects of G. biloba leaf preparations in acute ischaemic stroke
identified 14 such studies of which ten, involving a total of 792
participants, provided outcome data.) Meta-analysis of the nine
trials that used a dichotomous outcome variable (improvement or
no improvement in neurological deficit) showed a_ higher
proportion of ginkgo recipients experienced neurological improve-
ment than did placebo recipients (odds ratio, 95% Cl: 2.66, 1.79-
3.94; p < 0.00001). However, all of these trials were deemed to be
of poor methodological quality. The one trial that was of good
methodological quality used a continous scale for outcome; this
showed no statistically significant improvement in neurological
deficit for ginkgo recipients compared with placebo recipients
(weighted mean difference (fixed effects model), 95% CI: 0.81,
—8.9-10.52). The conclusions of the review were that there is no
evidence from high-quality clinical trials to support the use of G.

biloba extract in the treatment of patients with acute ischaemic
(89)

stroke.

Visual disorders A Cochrane review of the effects of ginkgo
extract in age-related macular degeneration identified one
d, controlled trial involving 20 patients.°° The study
design did not include blinding of the assessment of outcome. The
review concluded that the effects of ginkgo extract in preventing
progression of age-related macular degeneration had not yet been
adequately assessed.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
involving 27 participants with bilateral visual field damage
resulting from normal tension glaucoma assessed the effects of
oral administration of a standardised ginkgo leaf extract
(flavonoid glycosides 24%, terpene lactones 6%) 40mg three
times daily for four weeks.°! The trial reported statistically
significant improvements in visual field indi with ginkgo
treatment, compared with baseline values, but did not report
statistical analyses comparing ginkgo with placebo.

randomi

Other conditions Several randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials have assessed the effects of ginkgo leaf prepara-

----- PAGE 319 -----
Ginkgo

tions in preventing acute mountain sickness, and have reported
conflicting results. In a four-arm study in which 614 participants
received a standardised ginkgo leaf extract (flavonoid glycosi
24%, terpene lactones 6%) 120mg twice daily, acetazolamide
250mg, both agents, or placebo, for three to four doses before
ascent, ginkgo was no better than placebo in preventing acute
mountain sickness among the 487 participant who completed the
trial (incidence for ginkgo, acetozolamide, ginkgo plus acetazola-
mide, and placebo: 35, 12, 14 and 34%, respectively).°” A similar
study also found no statistically significant differences in outcomes
between ginkgo (120 mg twice daily for five days before mountain
ascent) and placebo recipients.”*) In contrast, in a randomis
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 26 individuals who
received ginkgo leaf extract 60mg, or placebo, three times daily
starting 24 hours before rapid mountain ascent a significantly
lower proportion of ginkgo recipients compared with placebo
recipients developed severe acute mountain sickness (17% vers’
64%, respectively; p = 0.021), although there was no statistically
significant difference between the ginkgo and placebo groups in
ss (58.3% versus 92.9%
for ginkgo and placebo, respectively; p = 0.07).° The study,
however, involved only small numbers of participants and it is
possible that it did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference between the two groups if one existed.

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 27 patients with
seasonal affective disorder (SAD) received standardised extract of
ginkgo leaf (Bio-Biloba, containing flavone glycosides 24mg and
terpene lactones 6 mg) one tablet twice daily (7 = 15), or placebo
(n = 12), for 10 weeks or until development of depression
requiring treatment. All participants began the trial during
October to December; a
and on termination of study medication. Six of the 15 ginkgo
recipients and two of the 12 placebo recipients terminated the
study treatment because of emerging symptoms of SAD (‘winter
depression’). It was reported that this difference between groups
was not statistically significant, according to Fisher's exact test.
Also, there were no statistically significant differences between
groups on the Montgomery—Asberg Depression Rating Scale, the
ATYP scale (for symptoms of hypersomnia, hyperphagia and
carbohydrate craving) and on self-assessed symptoms (energy,
tiredness, appetite, carbohydrate craving, depressed mood). The
results of this study cannot be considered definitive because of the
small sample size of the study and other limitations.°”

A placebo-controlled trial involving 165 women with pre-
menstrual syndrome explored the effects of standardised ginkgo
leaf extract (EGb-761) 160 mg daily, or placebo, taken from day 16
of the menstrual cycle to day 5 of the following cycle, for two
cyeles.°® Both groups experienced improvements in symptoms,
compared with baseline values, although ginkgo recipients,
compared with placebo recipients, were reported to experience
significantly greater improvements in breast tenderness (as
evaluated by the physician).

The effects of ginkgo extract have been explored in patients
with schizophrenia. The rationale for this is based on the theory
that excess free radical formation may occur in patients with
schizophrenia, since superoxide dismutase (SOD) concentrations
have been reported to be higher in certain tissues in such patients.
(SOD is an enzyme that detoxifies superoxide radicals.) In a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 82 inpatients with chronic
schizophrenia (illness for at least five years) were ‘divided
randomly’ to receive haloperidol 0.25 mg/kg daily, with or without
ginkgo extract 360 mg daily, for 12 weeks.°” At the end of the

2S

overall incidence of acute mountain sickne:

ments were carried out at baseline

&

study, mean SOD concentrations (expressed as ng/mL haemoglo-
bin) were reported to be significantly lower, compared with
baseline values, for ginkgo recipients (mean (SD): 815.8 (697.8)
and 596.7 (148.3), respectively; p = 0.021). In participants who
received haloperidol only, mean (SD) SOD concentrations fell
from 780.4 (605.4) at baseline to 617.6 (189.7) at the end of the
study, although this decrease was reported to be statistically non-
significant. A between-group comparison was not reported. Mean
(SD) SOD concentrations in a group of 30 age- and sex-matched
healthy volunteers were 515.8 (70.4).”)

The effects of a preparation comprising Ginkgo biloba dimeric
flavonoids in a 1:2 complex with phosphatidylcholine (GBDF-
Phytosome) on the microcirculation of the skin have been
investigated using various techniques including, infrared photo-
pulse plethysmography, laser doppler flowmetry, high-perfor-
mance contact thermography and computerised videothermogra-
phy.”® In a controlled study, small numbers of healthy individuals
and volunteers with acrocyanosis or cellulitis were treated with
0.5 mL of a cream (oil-in-water emulsion) containing 3% GBDF-
Phytosome or an oil-in-water emulsion of 2% phosphatidylcho-
line (control). Participants who received the GBDF-Phytosome
preparation were reported to experience significant increases in
capillary blood flow and skin temperature, compared with
baseline values, whereas no significant changes were observed
for the control group. No between-group comparisons were
reported.) These preliminary findings suggest that the effects of
this preparation on skin microcirculation may deserve further
investigation.

The effects of ginkgo have been assessed in Raynaud's disease.
In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial under-
taken in wintertime, 22 participants (mostly women) aged 18 to 52
years and with primary Raynaud's disease (i.e. without associated
connective tissue disease) received a standardised (not further
specified) G. biloba leaf extract (Seredrin, Health Perception Ltd,
UK) 120mg, or placebo, three times daily for ten weeks. Data
from three participants were excluded from the analysis for
legitimate reasons. Analysis of data from the remaining 19
participants showed that ginkgo treatment, compared with
placebo, was associated with a greater reduction in the mean
number of attacks of Raynaud's disease per week (mean (standard
deviation) number of attacks before and after treatment,
respectively: ginkgo, 13.2 (16.5) and 5.8 (8.3); placebo, 14.6
(10.7) and 10.7 (12.3); p = 0.000005). No statistically
significant differences between the two groups were observed for

haemorheological parameters, including mean fibrinogen plasma
concentrations and platelet aggregation.

Ginkgo has been investigated for its effects in treating vitiligo;
the rationale for this is centred around the antioxidant (oxidative
stress is now thought to be involved in pathogenesis of vitiligo)
and anti-inflammatory properties of ginkgo.” In a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 52 patients with slow-
spreading vitiligo received G. biloba leaf extract 40 mg (standar-
dised for flavonoid glycosides 9.6 mg; Ginkocer, Ranbaxy, India)
three times daily. Treatment was continued where response was
considered adequate (arrest of disease progression in participants
with unstable disease, and some repigmentation in existing
lesions) for up to six months. Data from 47 participants were
included in the analysis; a report of the study does not describe
adequately why or when five participants withdrew from the
study. Cessation of active progression of depigmentation occurred
in a greater proportion of ginkgo recipients than placebo
recipients (p = 0.006).

----- PAGE 320 -----
A preliminary study explored the effects of ginkgo in the
treatment of cocaine dependence, the rationale for this being that
chronic cocaine use is associated with cognitive deficits and that
the use of nootropic agents, such as ginkgo, may improve cognitive
function and reduce the frequency of relapse.''°? In a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 44 cocaine-dependent
individuals aged 18 to 60 years received a standardised ginkgo
leaf extract (EGb-761) 120mg, or placebo, twice daily for eight
weeks; a third arm of the study received piracetam 2.4¢ twice
daily. At the end of the study, there were no statistically significant
differences between the ginkgo and placebo groups with respect to
any of the outcome measures assessed, including physician-
assessed clinical global impression scores, Addiction Severity
Index scores, urine toxicology screens and treatment retention.°”)
As the study involved only small numbers of participants and as a
sample size calculation was not performed, it is possible that the
study did not have sufficient statistical power to be able to detect a
difference between the groups if one existed.

In a study involving patients with end-stage renal disease who
had been undergoing peritoneal dialysis for at least six months,
participants were randomised to receive ginkgo leaf extract
(Ginexin, SK Pharmaceuticals, Korea; not further specified)
160 mg daily for eight weeks, or no treatment.” At the end of
the study, ginkgo treatment was associated with a statistically
significant reduction in plasma D-dimer concentrations (a marker
of intravascular coagulation), compared with baseline values,”
although no statistical comparison with the no-treatment control
group was reported. No statistically significant changes in other
haemostatic factors, including plasma fibrinogen concentrations,
international normalised ratio (INR), von Willebrand's factor and
albumin were observed following ginkgo treatment, compared
with baseline values, although again, no statistical comparisons
with the no-treatment control group were reported. The
hypothesis that ginkgo treatment improves the coagulation profile
without changing other haemostatic factors in patients with end-
stage renal disease who undergo peritoneal dialysis requires
testing in rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials.

A phase II (open, uncontrolled) study explored the effects of
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) given in combination
with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in 44 patients with advanced progres-
sive colorectal cancer who had previously received 5-FU."° The
rationale for including ginkgo extract in the regimen was based on
its reputed ability to increase local blood flow. Thus, it was
hypothesised that ginkgo extract might 'enhance local tumour
blood flow and thus improve the distribution of 5-FU'. In the
study, participants received ginkgo extract 350 mg in 250 mL saline
intravenously over 30 minutes on days 1-6, and 5-FU 500 mg/m? in
250 mL saline intravenously over 30 minutes on days 2-6. The
regimen was repeated every three weeks until recurrence of
tumour progression. Data from 32 patients who had received at
least two courses of treatment were eligible for analysis. Of these
patients, 69% experienced progression of disease, 25% experi-
enced no change, and 6.3% (2 = 2) were in partial remission. (°”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical data on safety aspects of G. biloba leaf preparations are
available from several sources, including clinical trials, post-
marketing surveillance-type studies and spontaneous reports of
suspected adverse drug reactions. Available data indicate that
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf are well tolerated when used

Ginkgo

(52, G21)

at recommended doses and according to other guidance.
However, there are reports of bleeding associated with the use of
ginkgo leaf preparations (see Side-effects, Toxicity; Haemor-
rhage).

A Cochrane systematic review of studies assessing G. biloba leaf
preparations in cognitive impairment and dementia included 33
randomised, double-blind, controlled trials.°” All but one of the
included studies investigated the effects of standardised ginkgo
leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370 at oral doses ranging from 80-
600 mg daily and typically 200 mg daily. The study that did not use
either of these preparations assessed an ethanolic extract of
ginkgo leaves (drug-to-extract ratio 4:1, standardised for total
flavone glycosides 0.20 mg/mL and total ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL)
at doses lower than those used in the other 32 studies. Meta-
analyses showed that there were no statistically significant
ifferences between ginkgo (any dose) treatment and placebo in
the proportion of trial participants experiencing adverse events,
and the numbers of participants withdrawing from the
A systematic review of nine randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials of standardised ginkgo leaf extracts in patients
with dementia of the Alzheimer type and/or multi-infarct
lementia concluded that, overall, the frequency of adverse effects
reported for ginkgo was not markedly different than that for
placebo. The largest trial included in this review involved 327
patients with mild-to-severe dementia related to Alzheimer's

isease or multi-infarct dementia who received standardised
ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) 40 mg orally three times daily (
= 166), or placebo (n = 161), for 52 weeks.” It was reported that
there was no statistically significant differences between ginkgo
and placebo in the number of participants reporting adverse
events, or in the frequency and severity of adverse events. Of 188
adverse events reported during the study, 97 were reported by
ginkgo recipients and 91 by placebo recipients. However, clinical
trials generally only have the statistical power to detect common,
acute adverse effects.

Similar findings were reported in another systematic review/
meta-analysis which included eight randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of ginkgo extract for the treatment of
intermittent claudication, involving a total of 415 patients who
received standardised extract of ginkgo leaf at doses of 120 or
160 mg daily, or placebo, for up to 24 weeks. Five of the eight
studies included reported (rarely) mild, transient adverse events
occurring in ginkgo recipients; the remaining three studies,
comprising almost 50% of the total number of patients, did not
report any adverse events.

A postmarketing surveillance study involving 10 815 patients
a standardised extract (LI-1370) of ginkgo leaf
reported that the frequency of adverse effects was 1.7%.'0%
Adverse effects reported with standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf
are generally mild, and include nausea, headache, gastrointestinal

upset and diarrhoea; allergic skin reactions occur rarely.!!0hC?">
G56)

who receive:

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 594 reports,
describing a total of 1178 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain G. biloba only as the active ingredient (see Table 1).
This number may include case reports described below. Reports
originated from 23 different countries. The total number of
reactions (i.e. not individual cases; one case may describe several

----- PAGE 321 -----
310 Ginkgo

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 594) of suspected

adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Ginkgo
biloba preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World

Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up

to end of 2005. !

System organ class.
Adverse drug reaction name (number)

Application site disorders.

Body as a whole - general disorders. Including allergic
reaction (4); asthenia (6); back pain (5); fatigue (8); fever
(22); hyperpyrexia (4); malaise (13); pain (3); pallor (3);
rigors (28); syncope (4); therapeutic response decreased

G)

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension
(15); hypotension (8); hypotension, postural (4);
circulatory failure (13)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including
ataxia (5); coma (5); convulsions (11); convulsions, grand
mal (3); dizziness (21); headache (35); neuropathy (3);
paraesthesia (9); paralysis (3); tremor (3); vertigo (10)

Collagen disorders.
Endocrine disorders.
Foetal disorders.

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal
pain (19); diarrhoea (33); dyspepsia (9); flatulence (3);
gastrointestinal haemorrhage (4); gastric ulcer,
haemorrhagic (3); haematemesis (4); melaena (4); nausea
(37); vomiting (30)

Hearing and vestibular disorders. Including tinnitus (4)
Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including arrhythmia (5);
bradycardia (5); palpitation (4); tachycardia (15)

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including gamma-GT
increased (6); hepatic function abnormal (4); hepatic
cirrhosis (4); hepatitis (11); hepatocellular damage (4);
bilirubinaemia (3); jaundice (6); hepatic enzymes
increased (10); SGOT increased (7); SGPT increased (14)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including acidosis (3);
hyponatraemia (7)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders. Including arthralgia
(11); myalgia (4); skeletal pain (3)

Myo-endo pericardial and valve disorders.
Neonatal and infancy disorders.
Neoplasm.

Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. Including
haematoma (6); haemorrhage NOS (4); prothrombin
decreased (8); prothrombin increased (4); purpura (19);
purpura thrombocytopenic (3); thrombocytopenia (10)

Psychiatric disorders. Including aggressive reaction (5);
agitation (5); amnesia (3); anxiety (3); anorexia (5);
confusion (17); depression (8); hallucination (10);
insomnia (8); somnolence (3)

Red blood cell disorders. Including anaemia (10);
pancytopenia (3)

Reproductive disorders, female and male.

Resistance mechanism disorders.

Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (8);
epistaxis (9)

Total

130

48

137

166

73

58

18

Table 1 continued

System organ class. Total
Adverse drug reaction name (number)

Skin and appendages disorders. Including angioedema 165
(8); bullous eruption (3); eczema (7); epidermal necrolysis

(3); erythema multiforme (4); Stevens-Johnson syndrome

(6); photosensitivity reaction (5); pruritus (28); rash (13);

rash, erythematous (34); rash, maculopapular (5); rash,
psoriaform (3); sweating increased (8); urticaria (15)

Special senses other, disorders. 1
Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4) 16
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. Including cerebral 36

haemorrhage (7); cerebrovascular disorder (3);
haemorrhage, intracranial (5); flushing (6)

Vision disorders. Including conjunctivitis (5); vision 26
abnormal (10)

White cell and res disorders. Including agranulocytosis (5); 25
leucopenia (6); leukocytosis (11)

Other reactions described using terms not included in 30
database
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 1178

Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

reactions) included 58 reactions associated with platelet, bleeding
and clotting disorders (see Table 1); other reactions include
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, haematemesis and melaena (n = 4
each), bloody diarrhoea (1), haemorrhagic gastric ulcer (3),
epistaxis (9), haemoptysis (2), post-operative haemorrhage (3),
cerebral, subarachnoid or intracranial haemorrhage (13), cerebral
infarction or cerebrovascular disorder (5) and ocular or retinal
haemorrhage (3). (These data were obtained from the Vigisearch
database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International
Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not
homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the
pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion
of the World Health Organization.)

Haemorrhage_ Reports of bleeding and associated disorders
included in the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database are disc
above. There are several case reports in the literature of bleeding
associated with ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extracts. A systematic
review of published case reports describing bleeding associated
with ginkgo use identified 15 published case reports (including a
new report published in the same paper by the authors of the
systematic review). Most of the cases involved serious adverse

sed

effects, including intracranial bleeding (1 = 8 episodes, two
required surgical evacuation, two patients experienced permanent
neurologic defects, and one patient died), and ocular bleeding (n =
4, all returned to baseline vision although one patient required
surgery).{!° Where stated, the duration ginkgo exposure before
onset of the adverse event varied from less than two weeks'
exposure for the two cases of spontaneous hyphema, less than two
months' exposure for two cases of intracranial bleeding, and more
than six months' exposure for eight other cases. In most cases,
there were other risk factors for bleeding, including clinical risk
factors and use of other medicines known to increase the risk of
bleeding.“° In addition, most of the case reports do not

----- PAGE 322 -----
adequately describe the ginkgo preparation implicated and,
typically, in the rare cases that a sample of the product is
available, no chemical analysis of the product is undertaken. Since
most of the reports originate from countries where ginkgo
products are sold as unlicensed dietary supplements, the
possibility that poor or variable pharmaceutical quality of
products plays a role in these cases cannot be ruled out.

Reports identified by the review include those describing a 70-
year-old man who experienced spontaneous bleeding from the iris
into the anterior chamber of the eye one week after he began taking
standardised ginkgo extract 80mg daily;"!? a 61-year-old man
who had taken ginkgo extract 120mg or 160mg daily for six
months who experienced a subarachnoid haemorrhage;‘'™ a 33-
year-old woman who began experiencing increasingly severe
headaches, as well as double vision and nausea and vomiting,
over several months, and who had been consuming standardised
ginkgo extract 120mg daily for two years; a 59-year-old man
who experienced vitreous haemorrhage after undergoing a liver
transplant and who had been consuming a ginkgo product before
and during his operation and subsequent recovery period;\!!” a 34-
year-old man who experienced post-operative bleeding following a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy and who had been taking two ginkgo
tablets daily (not further specified);"'” a 56-year-old man who
experienced a cerebral haemorrhage and who had been taking
ginkgo leaf extract 40 mg three times daily for 18 months;"!!’ a 65-
year-old woman who experienced retrobulbar haemorrhage and
who had been taking ginkgo leaf extract 40 mg three times daily for
two years."'!) A causal relationship between ginkgo ingestion and
bleeding in these cases has not been definitively established.

A new report published since the systematic review describes a
77-year-old woman who experienced persistent post-operative
bleeding from the wound after undergoing a total hip arthro-
plasty.‘'' Four weeks post-operatively it was found that the
woman had been taking ginkgo leaf extract (not further specified)
120 mg daily. Ginkgo use was stopped and the patient's wound
healed within ten weeks.

Other effects There is a report of acute myoglobinuria in a 29-
year-old man who was a regular weight-trainer and who had been
taking a combination preparation containing extracts of ginkgo
(200mg), guarana (Paullinia cupana, 500mg) and kava (Piper
methysticum, 100 mg).\'') The man was admitted to an intensive
care unit with severe muscle pain and blood creatine kinase and
myoglobin concentrations of 100 500IU/L (normal values: 0-195)
and 10000ng/mL (normal values: 0-90), respectively. Signs and
symptoms subsided within six weeks. The relevance, if any, of
ginkgo ingestion to the man's condition, is unclear.

Contact or ingestion of the fruit pulp has produced severe
allergic reactions including erythema, oedema, blisters and
itching.*” The seed contains the toxin 4-O-methylpyridoxine
which is reported to be responsible for 'gin-nan' food poisoning in
Japan and China." The main symptoms are convulsion and loss
of consciousness and lethality is estimated in about 27% of cases
in Japan, infants being particularly vulnerable.

Contra-indications, War

gs

In view of the intended uses of ginkgo and the documented
pharmacological actions of ginkgo, it is not suitable for self-
treatment.

There are reports of haemorrhagic reactions associated with the
use of ginkgo leaf preparations. Until further information is
available, it is reasonable to advise that ginkgo should not be used
in patients with previous or existing bleeding disorders unless the

Ginkgo

potential benefits outweigh the potential harms. In view of the
lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy of ginkgo leaf in the
various conditions for which it is used, and the serious nature of
the potential harm, it is extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm
balance would be in favour of such patients using ginkgo leaf
preparations. Oestrogenic activity in vitro has been documented
for a G. biloba leaf extract.“ The clinical relevance of this
finding has not been established.

The fruit pulp has produced severe allergic reactions and should
not be handled or ingested. The seed causes severe adverse effects
when ingested.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of ginkgo the potential for preparations of ginkgo leaf to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, particu-
larly those with similar or opposing effects, should be considered.
In particular, ginkgo extract should only be used with caution in
patients taking anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet agents.

Inhibition of the activity of certain human cytochrome P450
(CYP) drug metabolising enzymes, particularly CYP2C9 and, to a
lesser extent CYP1A2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4, has been described
for a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) in in-vitro
studies,"' and other in vitro experiments have reported
moderate inhibition of CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 activity by G.
biloba and/or its isolated constituents."'”'!® A flavonoid fraction
and most of its subfractions showed strong inhibition of the CYP
enzymes CYP2C9, CYPIA2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 (ICsp < 40 tig/
mL), whereas a terpenoid fraction inhibited activity of CYP2C9
only."'® The flavonol aglycones kaempferol, quercetin, apigenin
and others, but not the terpene lactone and flavonoid glycoside
constituents of ginkgo leaf, were found to be potent inhibitors of
CYP1A2 and CYP3A."")

An in vivo (rats) study found that a standardised extract of
ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) 100 mg/kg body weight administered orally
for four days was associated with increased CYP P450 enzymes in
the liver and increased the metabolism of endogenous steroids.”
The latter finding, however, has not been confirmed in drug
interactions studies involving healthy volunteers. A standardised
extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) administered orally at a dose of
240 mg daily for 28 days,'”° and a ginkgo leaf extract 240mg
daily for 14 days,? had no statistically significant effects,
compared with baseline values, on the profile of endogenous
steroids in healthy individuals."?° '?”

Other drug interaction studies involving healthy individuals
report conflicting results with respect to the inhibition or induction
of CYP enzymes by ingestion of ginkgo leaf preparations. Studies
have found that ginkgo leaf extract was associated with certain
changes in the pharmacokinetics of nifedipine,” and omepra-
zole,"?» but not digoxin,'' donepezil,“?*) and warfarin.

In a drug-interaction study involving 12 healthy individuals,
administration of a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761)
administered orally at a dose of 120 mg twice daily for 14 days was
not associated with any statistically significant changes, compared
with baseline values, in the pharmacokinetics of the probe CYP
2D6 substrate dextromethorphan; ginkgo administration was
associated with a statistically significant change, compared with
baseline values, in the area under the plasma concentration time
curve for the CYP3A4 substrate alprazolam, but as there was no
statistically significant change in the elimination half-life of
alprazolam, it is unlikely that ginkgo had an inductive effect on
cyp3a4.°?

Pregnancy and lactation No studies appear to have been
reported on the effects of G. biloba leaf extracts or ginkgolides

----- PAGE 323 -----
Ginkgo

in pregnant or lactating women. In view of the many

References
pharmacological actions documented and the lack of toxicity

Van Beek TA et al. Ginkgo biloba L. Fitoterapia 1998; 69: 195-244.

an

data, use of ginkgo during pregnancy and breastfeeding should 2 Van Beek TA, ed. Ginkgo. The Genus Ginkgoaceae. Amsterdam:

be avoided.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

Harwood Academic Publishers, 1998.

Victoire C et al. Isolation of flavonoid glycosides from Ginkgo biloba
leaves. Planta Med 1988; 54: 245-247.

Schenne A, Holzl J. 6-Hydroxykynurensaure, die erste N- haltige
Verbindung aus den Blattern von Ginkgo biloba. Planta Med 1986, 52:
235-236.

Nasr C, et al. 2-Quinoline carboxylic acid-4,6-dihydroxy from Ginkgo
biloba. Paper presented at the Phytochemical Society of Europe
Symposium: Biologically Active Natural Products, Lausanne, 1986, p.
9.

Briancon-Scheid F e¢ al. HPLC separation and quantitative
determination of biflavones in leaves from Ginkgo biloba. Planta Med
1983; 49: 204-220.

Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. Kaempferol-3-O-B-glucoside
(astragalin) from Ginkgo biloba. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: S11.

Braquet P. The ginkgolides: potent platelet-activating factor
antagonists isolated from Ginkgo biloba L.: Chemistry, pharmacology
and clinical applications. Drugs of the Future 1987; 12: 643-699.
Anonymous. Extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761). Presse Med 1986;
15: 1438-1598.

Huang X et al. Characteristics and antifungal activity of a chitin
binding protein from Ginkgo biloba. FEBS 2000; 478: 123-126.
Wada K et al. Studies on the constitution of edible medicinal plants. 1.
Isolation and identification of 4-O-methylpyridoxine, toxic principle
from the seed of Ginkgo biloba L. Chem Pharm Bull 1988; 36: 1779-
1782.

Wang H, Ng TB. Ginkbilobin, a novel antifungal protein from Ginkgo
biloba seeds with sequence similarity to embryo-abundant protein.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000; 279: 407-411.

Kressmann S. Pharmaceutical quality of different Ginkgo biloba
brands. J Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 661-669.

Kressmann § et al. Influence of pharmaceutical quality on the
bioavailability of active components from Ginkgo biloba preparations.
J Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 45(11): 1507-1514.

DeFeudis FV. Ginkgo biloba. From Chemistry to Clinic. Wiesbaden,
Germany: Ullstein Medical, 1998.

Clostre FE, De Feudis FV, eds. Cardiovascular Effects of Ginkgo biloba
Extract (EGb761). Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol 3.
Paris: Elsevier, 1994: 1-162.

17 Reuter HD. Ginkgo biloba — botany, constituents, pharmacology and
clinical trials. Br J Phytother 1995/6; 4: 3-20.
18 Christen Y, ed. Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761) as a Neuroprotective
Agent: From Basic Studies to Clinical Trials. Advances in Ginkgo
biloba Extract Research, vol 8. Paris: Elsevier, 2001.
19 Winter JC. The effects of an extract of Ginkgo biloba, EGb-761, on
cognitive behaviour and longevity in the rat. Physiol Behav 1998; 63:
425-433.
20 Hasenérhl RU e¢ al. Dissociation between anxiolytic and hypomnestic
effects for combined extracts of Zingiber officinale and Ginkgo
biloba, as opposed to diazepam. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1998; 59:
527-535.
tive Solaire; Traumed. 2 Gi b 8 21 Christen Y et al., eds. Effects of Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761) on
Gincosan; Mentania; Sebium AKN. Czech Republic: Ginco- Neuronal Plasticity. Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol
san; Ginkor Fort. France: Ginkor Fort; Ginkor; Parogencyl 5. Paris: Elsevier, 1996. . | |
. a . 22 Papadopoulos V et al. Adaptive Effects of Ginkgo biloba Extract
prevention gencives; Photoderm Flush. Germany: Perivar. a! : .
. . (EGb-761). Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol 6. Paris:
Hong Kong: Flavo-C; Ginkor Fort. Hungary: Ginkor Fort. Elsevier, 1997
Italy: Angioton; Forticrin; Ginkoba Active; Ginkoftal; Gin- 23 Liebgott T e¢ al. Complementary cardioprotective effects of flavonoid
koret; Memoactive,; Memorandum; Pik Gel; Pulsalux; Varico- metabolites and terpenoid constituents of Ginkgo biloba extract
fit; Vasobrain Plus; Vasobrain; Vasopt; Vertiginkgo. Malaysia: (EGb-761) during ischemia and reperfusion. Basic Res Cardiol 2000;
Ginkor Fort; Total Man. Russia: Ginkor Fort (Cmm«op @opt); 95: 368-377. ; oo ,
Ginkor Gel (Tunxop Teas). Singapore: Ginkgo-PS. Switzerland: 24 Janssens D et al. Protection by bilobalide of the ischaemia-induced
. , 4 a alterations of the mitochondrial respiratory activity. Fund Clin
Allium Plus; Arterosan Plus; Capsules-vital; Gincosan; Trial- Pharmacol 2000; 14: 193-201
lin. Thailand: Ginkor Fort. UK: Actimind; Boots Alternatives 25 Zhang WR et al. Protective effect of Ginkgo extract on rat brain with
Sharp Mind; [-Sight; Nature's Garden; ProBrain; Rutin transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Neurol Res 2000; 22: 517—
Compound Tablets. USA: Dorofen; Gentaplex; Healthy Eyes; S21.
Mental Clarity. 26 Dutta-Roy AK e¢ al. Inhibitory effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on

human platelet aggregation. Platelets 1999; 10: 298-305.

----- PAGE 324 -----
27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

Hosford D, et al. Natural antagonists of platelet-activating factor.
Phytother Res 1988; 2: 1-17.

Maitra I et al. Peroxyl radical scavenging activity of Ginkgo biloba
extract EGb-761. Biochem Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1649-1655.

Lee S-L et al. Superoxide scavenging effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on
serotonin-induced mitogenesis. Biochem Pharmacol 1998; 56: 527—
533.

Oyama Y et al. Ginkgo biloba extract protects brain neurons against
oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide. Brain Res 1996; 712:
349-352.

Wei T et al. Hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative damage and
apoptosis in cerebellar granule cells: protection by Ginkgo biloba
extract. Pharmacol Res 2000; 41: 427-433.

Bastianetto § et al. The ginkgo biloba extract (EGb-761) protects
hippocampal neurons against cell death induced by B-amyloid. Eur J
Neurosci 2000; 12: 1882-1890.

Zhou L-J, Zhu X-Z. Reactive oxygen species-induced apoptosis in
PC12 cells and protective effect of bilobalide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
2000; 293: 982-988.

Calapai G et al. Neuroprotective effects of Ginkgo biloba extract in
brain ischaemia are mediated by inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis.
Life Sci 2000; 67: 2673-2683.

Rasetti MF et al. Extracts of Ginkgo biloba L. leaves and Vaccinium
myrtillus L. fruits prevent photo-induced oxidation of low density
lipoprotein cholesterol. Phytomedicine 1996/97; 3: 335-338.

Drieu K et al. Effect of the extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761) on the
circulating and cellular profiles of polyunsaturated fatty acids:
correlation with the anti-oxidant properties of the extract.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2000; 63: 293-300.

Bridi R et al. The antioxidant activity of standardized extract of
Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761) in rats. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 449-451.
Bahcecioglu IH et al. Protective effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on
CCly-induced liver damage. Hepatol Res 1999; 15: 215-224.

Agha AM et al. Chemopreventive effect of Ginkgo biloba extract
against benzo(a)pyrene-induced fore stomach carcinogenesis in mice:
amelioration of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. J Exp Clin Cancer Res
2001; 20: 39-50.

Papadopoulos V et al. Drug-induced inhibition of the peripheral-type
benzodiazepine receptor expression and cell proliferation in human
breast cancer cells. Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 2835-2848.

Naidu MUR et al. Ginkgo biloba extract ameliorates gentamicin-
induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 191-197.
Siegers CP. Cytotoxicity of alkylphenols from Ginkgo biloba.
Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 281-283.

Hecker H et al. In vitro evaluation of the cytotoxic potential of
alkylphenols from Ginkgo biloba L. Toxicology 2002; 177: 167-177.
Oh SM, Chung KH. Estrogenic activities of Ginkgo biloba extracts.
Life Sci 2004; 74: 1325-1335.

White HL et al. Extracts of Ginkgo biloba leaves inhibit monoamine
oxidase. Life Sci 1996; 58: 1315-1321.

Sasaki K et al. Effects of bilobalide on gamma-aminobutyric acid
levels and glutamic acid decarboxylase in mouse brain. Eur J
Pharmacol 1999; 367: 165-173.

Itokawa H et al. Antitumour principles from Ginkgo biloba L. Chem
Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 3016-3020.

Biber A. Pharmacokinetics of Ginkgo biloba extracts.
Pharmacopsychiatry 2003; 36 (Suppl. Suppl.1):$32-37.

Mauri P et al. Liquid chromatographic/atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization mass spectrometry of terpene lactones in plasma of
volunteers dosed with Ginkgo biloba L. extracts. Rapid Comm Mass
Spec 2001; 15(12): 929-934.

Drago F et al. Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of a Ginkgo biloba
extract. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther 2002; 18(2): 197-202.

Wang FM et al. Disposition of quercetin and kaempferol in human
following an oral administration of Ginkgo biloba extract tablets. Eur
J Drug Metab Pharmacokinetics 2003; 28(3): 173-177.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Ginkgo biloba for cerebral insufficiency. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 1992; 34: 352-358.

Oken BS et al. The efficacy of Ginkgo biloba on cognitive function in
Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 1409-1415.

Ernst E, Pittler MH. Ginkgo biloba for dementia. A systematic review
of double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Clin Drug Invest 1999; 17:
301-308.

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

Ginkgo

Ernst E, Stevinson C. Ginkgo biloba for tinnitus: a review. Clin
Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 164-167.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba extract for the treatment of
intermittent claudication: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am ]
Med 2000; 108: 276-281.

Birks J, Grimley Evans J. Ginkgo biloba for cognitive impairment and
dementia. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002, Issue
4. Art. No. CD003120.

Kanowski S et al. Proof of efficacy of the Ginkgo biloba special extract
EGb-761 in outpatients suffering from mild to moderate primary
degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer type or multi-infarct
dementia. Pharmacopsychiatry 1996; 29: 47-56.

Le Bars P et al. A placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial
of an extract of Ginkgo biloba for dementia. JAMA 1997; 278: 1327—
1332.

Brautigam MRH et al. Treatment of age-related memory complaints
with Ginkgo biloba extract: a randomized double blind placebo-
controlled study. Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 425-434.

Canter PH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba: a smart drug? A systematic
review of controlled trials of the cognitive effects of ginkgo biloba
extracts in healthy people. Psychopharmacology Bull 2002; 36(3): 108-
123.

Kennedy DO et al. The dose-dependent cognitive effects of acute
administration of Ginkgo biloba to healthy young volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 151: 416-423.

Subhan Z, Hindmarsh I. The psychopharmacological effects of
Ginkgo biloba extract in normal healthy volunteers. Int J Clin
Pharmacol Res 1984; 4: 89-93.

Rigney U et al. The effects of acute doses of standardized Ginkgo
biloba extract on memory and psychomotor performance in
volunteers. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 408-415.

Elsabagh S e¢ al. Differential cognitive effects of Ginkgo biloba after
acute and chronic treatment in healthy young volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2005; 179: 437-446.

Mattes R, Pawlik MK. Effects of Ginkgo biloba on alertness and
chemosensory function in healthy adults. Human Psychopharmacol
2004; 19: 81-90.

Kennedy DO et al. Electroencephalograph effects of single doses of
Ginkgo biloba and Panax ginseng in healthy young volunteers.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75: 701-709.

Scholey AB, Kennedy DO. Acute, dose-dependent cognitive effects of
Ginkgo biloba, Panax ginseng and their combination in healthy young
volunteers: differential interactions with cognitive demand. Hum
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2002; 17: 3544.

Mix JA, Crews WD. An examination of the efficacy of Ginkgo biloba
extract EGb-761 on the neuropsychological functioning of cognitively
intact older adults. J Altern Complement Med 2000; 6: 219-229.
Cockle SM et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extract (LI-1370)
supplementation on activities of daily living in free living older
volunteers: a questionnaire survey. Hum Psychopharmacol 2000; 15:
227-235.

Trick L et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extract (LI-1370)
supplementation and discontinuation on activities of daily living and
mood in free living older volunteers. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 531—
537.

Wesnes KA et al. The cognitive, subjective, and physical effects of a
Ginkgo biloba/Panax ginseng combination in healthy volunteers with
neurasthenic complaints. Psychopharmacol Bull 1997; 33(4): 677-683.
Wesnes KA et al. The memory enhancing effects of a Ginkgo biloba/
Panax ginseng combination in healthy middle-aged volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 152: 353-361.

Hartley DE et al. Gincosan (a combination of Ginkgo biloba and
Panax ginseng): the effects on mood and cognition of 6 and 12 weeks'
treatment in post-menopausal women. Nutritional Neurosci 2004; 7:
325-333.

Nathan PJ et al. Effects of a combined extract of Ginkgo biloba and
Bacopa monniera on cognitive function in healthy humans. Human
Psychopharmacol 2004; 19: 91-96.

Rejali D et al. Ginkgo biloba does not benefit patients with tinnitus: a
randomized placebo-controlled double-blind trial and meta-analys
of randomized trials. Clin Otolaryngol 2004; 29: 226-231.

----- PAGE 325 -----
Ginkgo

77 Hilton M, Stuart E. Ginkgo biloba for tinnitus. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003852.
pub2.

78 Drew S, Davies E. Effectiveness of Ginkgo biloba in treating tinnitus:
double blind, placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2001; 322: 73-75.

79 Ernst E. Marketing studies and scientific research must be distinct.
BMJ 2001, 322: 1249.

80 Bukovics K et al. Vergleich von Ginkgo biloba und 6% HES 200/0,5 in
der Behandlung des akuten Horsturzes. J Pharmakol Ther 1999; 2: 48—
56.

81 Janssens D e¢ al. Increase in circulating endothelial cells in patients
with primary chronic venous insufficiency: protective effect of Ginkor
Fort in a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1999; 33: 7-11.

82. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. A Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle,
WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

83 Chung KE Effect of a ginkgolide mixture (BN 52063) in antagonising
skin and platelet responses to platelet activating factor in man. Lancet
1987; i: 248-251.

84 Wilkens JH et al. Effects of a PAF-antagonist (BN 52063) on
bronchoconstriction and platelet activation during exercise-induced
asthma. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990; 29: 85-91.

85 Kang BJ et al. A placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of Ginkgo
biloba for antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction. Human
Psychopharmacol 2002; 17: 279-284.

86 Wheatley D. Triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial of Ginkgo biloba in
sexual dysfunction due to antidepressant drugs. Human
Psychopharmacol 2004; 19: 545-548.

87 Cohen AJ, Bartlik B. Ginkgo biloba for antidepressant-induced sexual
dysfunction. J Sex Marital Ther 1998; 24: 139-143.

88 Wheatley D. Ginkgo biloba in the treatment of sexual dysfunction due
to antidepressant drugs. Hum Psychopharmacol 1999; 14: 511-513.

89 Zeng X et al. Ginkgo biloba for acute ischaemic stroke. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 4. Art. No. CD003691.
pub2.

90 Evans JR. Ginkgo biloba extract for age-related macular degeneration
(Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software, 2001.

91 Quaranta L et al. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on preexisting visual
field damage in normal tension glaucoma. Ophthalmology 2003; 110:
359-364.

92 Gertsch JH et al. on behalf of the Prevention of High Altitude Illness
Trial Research Group. Randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled
comparison of ginkgo biloba and acetazolamide for prevention of
acute mountain sickness among Himalayan trekkers: the prevention of
high altitude illness trial (PHAIT). BMJ 2004; 328: 797.

93 Chow Tet al. Ginkgo biloba and acetazolamide prophylaxis for acute
mountain sickness. Arch Intern Med 2005; 165: 296-301.

94 Gertsch JH et al. Ginkgo biloba for the prevention of severe acute
mountain sickness (AMS) starting one day before rapid ascent. High
Alt Med Biol 2002; 3(1): 29-37.

95 Lingjaerde O et al. Can winter depression be prevented by Ginkgo
biloba extract? A placebo-controlled trial. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1999;
100: 62-66.

96 Tamborini A, Taurelle R. Rev Fr Gynecol Obstet 1993; 88: 147. Cited
by Bone K. Treatment of congestive symptoms of premenstrual
syndrome with ginkgo. Br ] Phytother 1995/96; 4: 46.

97 Zhang XY et al. The effect of extract of Ginkgo biloba added to
haloperidol on superoxide dismutase in inpatients with chronic
schizophrenia. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2001; 21: 85-88.

98 Bombardelli E et al. Activity of phospholipid-complex of Ginkgo
biloba dimeric flavonoids on the skin microcirculation. Fitoterapia
1996; 67: 265-273.

99 Muir AH. et al. The use of Ginkgo biloba in Raynaud's disease: a
double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Vascular Med 2002; 7: 265-267.

100 Parsad D et al. Effectiveness of oral Ginkgo biloba in treating limited,
slowly spreading vitiligo. Clin Exp Dermatol 2003; 28: 285-287.

101 Kampman K et al. A pilot trial of piracetam and Ginkgo biloba for the
treatment of cocaine dependence. Addictive Behav 2003; 28: 437-448.

102 Kim SH et al. Effects of Ginkgo biloba on haemostatic factors and
inflammation in chronic peritoneal dialysis patients. Phytotherapy Res
2005; 19: 546-548.

103 Hauns B et al. Phase II study of combined 5-fluorouracil/Ginkgo
biloba extract (GBE 761 ONC) therapy in 5-fluorouracil pretreated
patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 34~
38.

104 DeFeudis FV, Safety of EGb-761-containing products. In: DeFeudis FV,
ed. Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761). Pharmacological Activities and
Clinical Applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991.

105 Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 20, 2006].

106 Bent S et al. Spontaneous bleeding associated with Ginkgo biloba. A
case report and systematic review of the literature. J Gen Intern Med
2005; 20: 657-661.

107 Rosenblatt M, Mindel J. Spontaneous hyphema associated with
ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extract. N Engl ] Med 1997; 336: 1108.

108 Vale S. Subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with Ginkgo biloba.
Lancet 1998; 352: 36.

109 Rowin J, Lewis SL. Spontaneous bilateral subdural hematomas
associated with chronic Ginkgo biloba ingestion. Neurology 1996; 46:
1775-1776.

110 Hauser D e¢ al. Bleeding complications precipitated by unrecognized
Ginkgo biloba use after liver transplantation. Transpl Int 2002; 15:
377-379.

111 Fessenden JM et al. Ginkgo biloba: a case report of herbal medicine
and bleeding postoperatively from a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
American Surg 2001; 67: 33-35.

112 Benjamin J et al. A case of cerebral haemorrhage — can Ginkgo biloba
be implicated? Postgrad Med J 2001; 77: 112-113.

113 Fong KCS, Kinnear PE. Retrobulbar haemorrhage associated with
chronic Ginkgo biloba ingestion. Postgrad Med J 2003; 79: 531-532.

114 Bebbington A e¢ al. Persistent bleeding after total hip arthroplasy
caused by herbal self-medication. J Arthroplasty 2005; 20(1): 125-126.

115 Donadio Vet al. Myoglobinuria after ingestion of extracts of guarana,
Ginkgo biloba and kava. Neurol Sci 2000; 21: 124.

116 Gaudineau C et al. Inhibition of human P450 enzymes by multiple
constituents of the Ginkgo biloba extract. Biochem Biophys Res
Comm 2004; 318: 1072-1078.

117 Yale SH, Glurich I. Analysis of the inhibitory potential of Ginkgo
biloba, Echinacea purpurea, and Serenoa repens on the metabolic
activity of cytochrome P450 3A4, 2D6, and 2C9. J Alt Comp Med
2005; 11(3): 433-439.

118 He N, Edeki T. The inhibitory effects of herbal components on
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 catalytic activites in human liver microsomes.
Am J] Therapeut 2004; 11(3): 206-212.

119 Von Moltke LL et al. Inhibition of human cytochromes P450 by
components of Ginkgo biloba. ] Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56(8): 1039—
1044.

120 Chatterjee SS et al. Influence of the Ginkgo extract EGb-761 on rat
liver cytochrome P450 and steroid metabolism and excretion in rats
and man. J Pharm Pharmacol 2005; 57(5): 641-650.

121 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on plasma steroid
concentrations in healthy volunteers: a pilot study. Pharmacotherapy
2005; 25(10): 1337-1340.

122 Yoshioka M et al. Studies on interactions between functional foods or
dietary supplements and medicines. IV. Effects of Ginkgo biloba leaf
extract on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of nifedipine
in healthy volunteers. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27(12): 2006-2009.

123 Yin OQ et al. Pharmacogenetics and herb-drug interactions:
experience with Ginkgo biloba and omeprazole. Pharmacogenetics
2004; 14(12): 841-850.

124 Mauro VF et al. Impact of Ginkgo biloba on the pharmacokinetics of
digoxin. Am ] Therapeut 2003; 10: 247-251.

125 Yasui-Furokori N et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extracts on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of donepezil. J Clin
Pharmacol 2004; 44(5): 538-542.

126 Jiang X et al. Effect of ginkgo and ginger on the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy subjects. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 59: 425-432.

127 Markowitz JS et al. Multiple-dose administration of Ginkgo biloba
did not affect cytochrome P-450 2D6 or 344 activity in normal
volunteers. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2003; 23(6): 576-581.

----- PAGE 326 -----
h
results difficult. At present there is insufficient evidence to
support definitely the efficacy of specific E. senticosus
preparations in the various indications for which it is used
and/or has been tested.

Similarly, there are only limited clinical data on safety
aspects of E£. senticosus preparations. The clinical trials of E.
senticosus root preparations available have typically involved
only very small numbers of patients and been of short
duration, so have the statistical power only to detect very
common, acute adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of
safety aspects of well-characterised E. senticosus root
preparations administered orally at different dosages,
including the effects of long-term treatment, is required.

In view of the many pharmacological actions documented
for ginseng, and the lack of safety and toxicity data, the use of
E. senticosus during both pregnancy and breastfeeding should
be avoided.

Species (Family)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. & Maxim.) Maxim. (Araliaceae)
Synonym(s)

Acanthopanax senticosus (Rupr. & Maxim.) Maxim., Devil's
Shrub, Eleuthero, Hedera senticosa Rupr. & Maxim., Siberian
Ginseng, Touch-Me-Not, Wild Pepper

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®

BHMA 2003‘

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'°8)

WHO volume 2°”

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Eleutherococcus ginseng is not included in the GSL.'‘@”

Constituents

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides (glycans); some have been
referred to as eleutherans." Galactose, methyl-a-p-galactose
(eleutheroside C), glucose, maltose, sucrose.

Coumarins _Isofraxidin-7-glucoside (eleutheroside By), 7-ethyl-
umbelliferone.”

Lignans (—)-Syringaresinol-4’,4’”-di-O-B-p-glucopyranoside
(eleutheroside E), episyringaresinol-4/’-O-B-p-glucopyranoside
(eleutheroside E), 7SR,8RS-dihydrodehydroconiferyl alcohol,
dehydrodiconiferyl alcohol, 7,8-trans-diconiferylalcohol-4-O-B-D-
glucopyranoside, meso-secoisolariciresinol, (—)-syringaresinol-4-
O-B-p-glucopyranoside,” sesamin.

Phenylpropanoids Syringin (cleutheroside B), coniferyl alcohol,
coniferyl aldehyde, 5'-O-caffeoylquinic acid (chlorogenic acid),
1',5'-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 4! ,5’-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid.

Triterpenoids Daucosterol (eleutheroside A), f-hederin
(eleutheroside K),'°°°® 3B-{O-B-p-glucopyranosyl-(1+3)-O-B-
p-galactopyranosyl-(1—4)-[O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—2) ]-O-
B-p-glucuronopyranosy]}-16a-hydroxy-13B,28-epoxyoleanane,")
3B-{O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—4)-O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-
(1—4)-[O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—2) ]-O-B-p-glucopyranosyl-
(1—x)-O-B-b-glucuronopyranosy]}-160-hydroxy-13f,28-epoxy-
oleanane.

Essential oil 0.8%. Individual components not documented.

Other parts of the plant

Stem (—)-Sesamin, isofraxidin, syringaresinol, eleutheroside B,
eleutheroside E, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, isovanillin.®

Leaves Flavonoids, including hyperin (quercetin-3-O-B-galacto-
side), quercetin, quercitrin, rutin,” and four 3,4-seco-lupan-type
triterpenoids."

----- PAGE 327 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, Eleuther-
ococcus ginseng consists of the whole or cut, dried, underground
organs of E. senticosus (Rupr. Et Maxim.) Maxim, (C8) 68)
Eleutherosides A to G are present in roots at concentrations of
0.6-0.9% and in stems at concentrations of 0.6-1.5%. An
HPLC method for determining the eleutheroside content of E.
senticosus roots, which involves the use of ferulic acid rather than
eleutherosides B and E (which are very expensive) as an external
standard, has been developed and validated.) Methods pre-
viously reported for the isolation and quantitative analysis of E.
senticosus root material include centrifugal partition chromato-
graphy with HPLC,” and reversed-phase HPLC."!

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial
eleutherococcus preparations. Analysis of 25 'ginseng’ products

Carbohydrates
OH CH.OH CH;O.
O°
HO: glc-O"
Hi
° OCH;

methyl-a-D-galactose
(eleutheroside C)

Lignans
OCH;
OH
H
ro
. OCH;
Hi oH
CHO. Po
H
glc-O
OCH;
(+)-syringaresinol
-O-B-D-glucoside
(eleutheroside E)
Phenylpropanoids
OR*,
oR?
Hooc—17-3#—~_/,
oR' OR?
R'

5-O-caffeoylquinic acid H
(chlorogenic acid)
1,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid caffeoyl
3,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid H
4,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid H

R'O. R*
‘S coniferylalcohol
RO coniferylaldehyde
Bs caffeic acid
syringin

(eleutheroside B)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Eleutherococcus ginseng.

available for purchase from a health-food store in the USA
included 11 products labelled as containing E. senticosus. All 11
products contained the correct species, as determined by LC-MS/
MS (liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry) analysis identify-
ing the presence of eleutherosides B and E and absence of
ginsenosides (apart from the two products which were labelled as
also containing Panax ginseng). However, there was wide variation
between products in the content of these eleutherosides, as
determined by HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy). In products containing powdered E.  senticosus,
eleutheroside B and E content per 100g of product ranged from
0.009-0.155% and from 0.032-1.122%, respectively, thus total
eleutheroside content (B plus E) varied 43-fold between products.
With liquid preparations, there was a 200-fold variation in total (B
plus E) eleutheroside content between products (0.003—0.551%
per 100g product). For the six products which provided

Coumarins

S

[e) [e)
ICH

isofraxidin-7-glucoside
(eleuthroside B1)

Hive
CHO. "
gic-O"
OCH;
episyringaresinol-
4”-O-B-D-glucoside
(eleutheroside E2)
Re R® Rt
H H caffeoyl
H H caffeoyl
caffeoyl H caffeoyl
H caffeoyl —_caffeoyl
R' Re Re R*
CH3 H H CH20OH
CH; =H H CHO
H H H COOH
CH3 glucosyl) OCH; CH,0H

----- PAGE 328 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Triterpenes

OH arabinose

O°
HO °
daucosterol P
(eleutheroside A) CH3 fe)
HO
OH
OH

rhamnose

f-hederin
(eleutheroside K)

R! = O-f-D-glc-(1— 3)-0-A-gal

R? = a-L-rha

R! = O-w-L-tha-(1— 4)-O-a-L-rha-(1— 4)-
[O-a-L-rha-(1— 2)]-f-D-gle

R?=H

gic = glucopyranosyl, gal = galactopyranosyl, rha = rhamnosyl

Figure 2 Selected constituents of Eleutherococcus ginseng.

quantitative information on the product label, the actual
eleutheroside content varied from 12-328% of that stated on
the label. Earlier work involving analysis of commercial products
purchased in the USA and Canada found that the eleutheroside B
concentrations in E. senticosus capsules, powder and liquid
preparations varied from 0.01-0.03% w/w, 0.01-1.00% wiw, and
0.03-0.13 mg/mL, respectively, and that eleutheroside E concen-
trations varied from 0.04-0.16% w/w, 0.06—-0.66% w/w, and 0.01—
1.62 mg/mL, respectively."'?)

Food Use

Eleutherococcus ginseng is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Eleutherococcus ginseng does not have a traditional herbal use in
the UK, although it has been used for many years in the former
Soviet Union. Like Panax ginseng, Eleutherococcus ginseng is
claimed to be an adaptogen in that it increases the body's
resistance to stress and builds up general vitality.“C% °C

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts are the same for several traditional
uses. Dry root 0.6-3g daily for up to one month has been
recommended.'(C% “”) Russian studies in healthy human subjects
have involved the administration of an ethanolic extract in doses
ranging from 2-16mL one to three times daily, for up to 60
consecutive days.

Clinical trials of E. senticosus have assessed the effects of
different preparations administered orally according to different

dosage regimens. A rigorous trial involving individuals with
chronic fatigue investigated the effects of a standardised extract of
E. senticosus root providing 2.24 mg eleutherosides (B and E) daily
for two months." Studies conducted in Russia and involving
healthy human subjects have involved the administration of an
ethanolic extract (not further specified) at doses ranging from 2—
16mL one to three times daily, orally, for up to 60 consecutive
days.) Doses administered to non-healthy individuals ranged
from 0.5-6.0 mL given one to three times daily for up to 35 days.
In both groups, multiple dosing regimens were separated by an
extract-free period of two to three weeks.)

Figure 3 Eleutherococcus ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus).

----- PAGE 329 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Figure 4 Eleutherococcus ginseng — dried drug substance (root).

Pharmacological Actions

The so-called adaptogenic properties of eleutherococcus were first
extensively investigated in the countries of the former USSR.
Pharmacological studies on extracts of eleutherococcus started in
the 1950s. The majority of the early literature on eleutherococcus
has been published in Russian and therefore difficulty is
encountered in obtaining translations. A review of the literature
up to the early 1980s describes the chemistry and toxicity of
eleutherococcus and documents results of in vitro, in vivo and
human studies involving the oral administration of an ethanolic
extract. More recently, the concept of adaptogens as it relates to
chemical
reviewed." Preparations of eleutherococcus root and/or their
isolated constituents have been reported to have several properties
in vitro and/or in vivo, including anticancer, antiviral, hypogly-
caemic and immunomodulant activities, although robust evidence
of these effects from clinical studies is generally lacking.

eleutherococcus and __ its constituents has been

In vitro and animal studies

The following represents a summary of the results of preclinical
studies investigating the effects of eleutherococcus. It draws on
‘) as well as on more recent papers
published in English. Used here, 'ginseng' refers to eleutherococcus
unless indicated otherwise.

data included in a review

Antiviral and antibacterial activities In vitro antiviral activity
against RNA-type viruses (human rhinovirus, respiratory syncy-
tial virus and influenza A virus) has been demonstrated with an
ethanolic extract of ginseng root. No effect was noted in cells
infected with DNA-type viruses (adenovirus 5 and herpes simplex
type 1 virus).

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity has been
documented both in normal animals and in those with induced
hyperglycaemia (rabbit, mouse), but with little effect on alloxan-
induced hyperglycaemia (rat).>'®) Hypoglycaemic activity (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) of an aqueous ginseng extract has been
attributed to polysaccharide components termed eleutherans A—
G.

Central nervous system effects Sedative actions (rat, mouse),
CNS-stimulant effects (intravenous/subcutaneous injection, rab-
bit), and a decrease/increase in barbiturate sleeping time has been
reported using an aqueous extract of ginseng root.°?”

Immunostimulant, antitoxic actions Numerous in vitro and in
vivo studies have examined the immunomodulatory effects of
ginseng. Oral administration of eleutherococcus root prepared as
a decoction inhibited mast-cell dependent anaphylaxis in mice.°”
Similar results were obtained using the same animal model for a
water extract of ginseng obtained from cell culture.?” An ethanol
extract of E. senticosus root inhibited the release of interleukin
(IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-12 from human peripheral blood lymphocytes
in in vitro experiments using human whole blood.*» The release
of IL-6 was stimulated by higher concentrations of the ginseng
preparation and inhibited with lower concentrations, suggesting
that ginseng root has immunomodulatory rather than immuno-
suppressive or immunostimulant activity?
experiments using human peripheral blood, lower concentrations
of an ethanol extract of ginseng root enhanced the proliferation of
human lymphocytes, whereas higher concentrations had an
antiproliferative effect.”

In contrast to the findings described above, in-vitro studies
using mouse macrophages found that an aqueous extract of
ginseng root did not stimulate the expression of a range of
cytokines investigated.?” Increased resistance to induced lister-
iosis infection (mouse, rabbit) with prophylactic ginseng admin-
istration and
administration, stimulation of specific antiviral immunity (gui-
nea-pig, mouse), regulation of complement titre and lysozyme
activity post immunisation have been documented.” In vitro, a
combination preparation containing E.
(11.6 mg, standardised for eleutheroside E 1mg) and Androgra-
phis paniculata extract (plant parts not specified) enhanced
phytohaemagglutin-induced proliferation of human peripheral
blood lymphocytes, whereas the preparation inhibited the
spontaneous proliferation of human peripheral blood lympho-
cytes.°9)

Immunomodulatory effects have been reported for polysacchar-
ide components isolated from E. senticosus (plane part not
stated),°” and from cell culture of E. senticosus.°*) Polysacchar-
ide administration (100 mg/kg for six days) stimulated phagocytic
activity in mice and (following repeated administration of 40 mg/
kg) suppressed propogation of human tubercular bacillus in two
animal models.°” Polysaccharide isolated from cell culture
increased the proliferation and differentiation of B-cells and
increased the cytokine production of macrophages in vitro.°®)
Immunostimulant activity in vitro (using granulocyte, carbon
clearance and lymphocyte-transformation tests) has been docu-

mented for other high molecular weight polysaccharide compo-
(29, 30)

In other in-vitro

reduced — resistance with — simultaneous

senticosus extract

nents.

Effects on overall performance A _ beneficial action on
parameters indicative of stress or on overall work capacity in
mice has been reported for eleutherococcus root bark," although
a lack of adaptogenic response has also been shown in mice
receiving ginseng infusions." In one study, mice receiving a
commercial concentrated extract of ginseng exhibited significantly
more aggressive behaviour.” Ginseng is claimed to result in a
more economical utilisation of glycogen and high-energy phos-
phorus compounds, and in a more intense metabolism of lactic
and pyruvic acids during stress.°) The adaptogenic effect of
ginseng may involve regulation of energy, nucleic acid, and protein
metabolism in tissues." It may also be that ginseng limits the
binding of stress hormones to their receptors by inhibiting
catechol-O-methyltransferase.) These hypotheses requires test-
ing in order to elucidate possible mechanisms of action for
constituents of ginseng root.

----- PAGE 330 -----
Cardiovascular activity 3,4-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DBA) has
been identified as an anti-aggregatory component in Eleuther-
ococcus ginseng.) Compared with aspirin, activity of DBA was
comparable to collagen- and ADP-induced platelet aggregation,
but less potent versus arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggrega-
tion." Ginseng root also showed an endothelium-dependent
vasorelaxant effect in vitro. Depending on the vessel size, this was
mediated either by nitrous oxide or endothelium-derived hyper-
polarising factor.°>

Effect on reproductive capacity Ginseng has been reported to
improve the reproductive capacity of bulls and cows, and to have
no adverse effects on the various blood parameters (haemoglobin,
total plasma protein, albumin and globulin, protein coefficient)
measured. A preparation of ginseng root increased the motility
of human sperm in vitro.°°

Anticancer and cytotoxic effects An aqueous extract of ginseng
root showed additive antiproliferative effects with cytarabine in
vitro against leukaemia cells.°” In in-vitro experiments using
human peripheral blood, an ethanol extract of ginseng root
displayed cytotoxic activity against human lymphocytes when
applied to the system at a high concentration.?”

Steroidal activity Gonadotrophic activity in immature male mice
(intraperitoneal injection), oestrogenic activity in immature
female mice, and an anabolic effect in immature rats (intraper-
itoneal injection) has been reported.)

Other activities An aqueous extract of ginseng root administered
orally to rats for 30 days (100 or 200 mg/kg body weight daily)
before intravenous administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) led
to reductions in LPS-induced increase:
tions and lipid peroxidation, and reduced concentrations of
indicators of renal dysfunction.°* An aqueous extract of ginseng
cell culture was found to reduce weight gain, serum LDL
cholesterol concentrations and triglyceride accumulation in obese
mice.*) Ginseng root stimulated erythropoiesis during paradox-
ical sleep deprivation in mice by modulation of brain neuro-
transmitters.

Other actions documented for ginseng include an increase in
catecholamine concentrations in the brain, adrenal gland and
urine, and a variable effect on induced hypothermia (rabbit, rat,
mouse).

in nitric oxide concentra-

Other parts of the plant

Several of the activities described above for eleutherococcus root
have also been described for other parts of the plant, such as leaves
and stem bark.

The antibacterial activity of three compounds isolated by
methanolic extraction from the dried leaves of ginseng was tested
against various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
Chiisanogenin, but not hyperin or chiisanoside, demonstrated
moderate antibacterial activity against Bacillus subtilis, Staphy-
lococcus epidermidis, S. aureus, Proteus vulgaris and Salmonella
typhimurium, with minimum inhibitory concentrations ranging
from 50-100 jg/ml.4?

Oral administration of eleutherococcus stem prepared as a
decoction inhibited mast-cell dependent anaphylaxis in mice.” A
beneficial action on parameters indicative of stress or on overall
work capacity in rats has been reported for phenolic compounds
isolated from eleutherococcus stem bark.)

Preparations of other parts of the plant and/or their isolated
constituents have also been reported to have certain cardiovascular

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

efffects. The triterpenoid chiisanogenin from the leaves of E.
senticosus has been shown to be 50 times as potent as aspirin in
inhibiting U46619-induced platelet aggregation and 10-20 times
as potent in inhibiting adrenaline- and arachidonic acid-induced
aggregation.“ An aqueous extract of ginseng stem bark
protected against the effects of transient focal cerebral ischaemia
in rats, an effect apparently mediated by microglial activation and
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2.%) An increase in lipoprotein
lipase activity was observed in adipocytes cultured with an
aqueous extract of dried ginseng leaves.

Aqueous or alcoholic extracts of the stem of ginseng have
shown hepatoprotective” ** (47)

» and antioxidant properties” in
vivo. Anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive effects were noted
with an ethyl acetate extract of ginseng stem bark in rats: these
were attributed to the in vivo conversion of liriodendrin to
syringaresinol.“ Preparations of other parts of the plant and/or
their isolated constituents have been reported to have certain
anticancer effec

s. Fractionated glycoproteins from an aqueous
extract of ginseng stem bark inhibited lung metastasis in mice
both prophylactically and therapeutically. This effect was
mediated by activation of macrophages and natural killer (NK)
5) In studies using a stem bark extract, sesamin was

identified as the component with antitumour activity in vitro in
2)

cells.‘

human stomach cancer cells.

Ethanol-induced apoptosis
(SK-N-MC) was inhibited by an aqueous extract of ginseng (plant
part not stated) in vitro. In rats, an ethanolic extract of ginseng
stem bark and one of its components, sesamin, showed
cytoprotective properties against Parkinson's disease induced by

1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or rote-
(54, 55)

in a human neuroblastoma cell line

none.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of E. senticosus preparations have focused on
assessing effects related to the reputed adaptogenic properties of
this herbal medicinal product, although rigorous clinical investi-
gations are limited. Studies have tested different E. senticosus
preparations, including combination herbal preparations contain-
ing E. senticosus, which vary qualitatively and quantitatively in
their phytochemical composition. Furthermore, different prepara-
tions have been administered according to different dosage
regimens, and to different study populations (e.g. healthy
volunteers, older patients with hypertension), making interpreta-
tion of the results difficult.

A large body of clinical re: as been published in the
Russian literature, making ac difficult,“ although considera-
tion of a review of some of this work indicates that these clinical
trials are unlikely to meet contemporary standards in terms of
their design, analysis and reporting. Therefore, at present there is
insufficient evidence to support definitively the efficacy of specific
E. senticosus preparations in the various indications for which it is
used and/or has been tested. Details of clinical trials of E.
senticosus preparations published in the English literature are
summarised below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, trial, 96
individuals with chronic fatigue (unexplained fatigue of at least
six months' duration and a Rand Vitality Index score of 12 or less)
recruited using newspaper adverstisements and via chronic fatigue
syndrome (CFS) support groups, received capsules containing a
standardised extract of E. senticosus root providing 2.24mg
eleutherosides (B and E) daily, or placebo, for two months."!) At
the end of the study, Rand Vitality Index scores had improved in

earch

----- PAGE 331 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

both groups and there were no statistically significant differenc:
between groups (p > 0.05). Sub-group analy: suggested that
there was a treatment effect depending on duration and severity of
fatigue at baseline, but this requires testing in larger randomised
controlled trials. In a two-month, open-label extension to the
initial study, all remaining participants received E. senticosus,
although they were still unaware of their initial treatment
allocation and the likely time to onset of action of E. senticosus.
During this phase, participants who received placebo during
months one and two showed a statistical gnificant improve-
ment in mean Rand Vitality Index score when assessed at month
four, compared with month two (p = 0.02), whereas participants
who had received E. senticosus during months one and two, did
not show any statistically significant improvements in Rand
Vitality Index scores during the open-label phase of the study.\'?)

Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial a: sed the
effects of an E. senticosus dry extract (Centofiori, Italy; not
further specified) 300mg daily (x = 10), or placebo, for eight
weeks on quality of life in 20 participants aged 65 years or more
with hypertension and who were undergoing treatment with
digitalis (not further specified). After four weeks! treatment,
improvements in the social functioning and mental compartment
summary scores (p < 0.05 for both) of the SF-36 general health
status questionnaire were observed, but at the eight-week
endpoint, there were no statistically significant differences
between groups. The study, however, has several methodological
limitations, including the small sample size and lack of a priori
hypotheses for sub-group analys Participants in the E.
senticosus group were more likely than those in the placebo
group to state that they had received verum (70% versus 20%); p
< 0.05), so it is possible that unblinding occurred during the study,
and this may have biased the results towards a more positive effect
for E. senticosus. Also, total SF-36 scores were not reported, and it
is possible that there was no statistically significant difference
between these at the four-week assessment, thus a placebo
response in both groups cannot be ruled out. A report of the study
states that no statistically significant differences in blood pressure
control and serum digoxin concentrations were
although supporting data were not provided.

Several clinical trials have explored the reputed adaptogenic
effects of E. senticosus preparations in athletes. A placebo-
controlled trial involved ten groups each comprising three male
endurance athletes matched for training duration and frequency.
Participants (7 = 30) were assessed for steroidal hormone indices
of stress and lymphocyte subset counts before and after six weeks!
treatment with a 35% ethanolic extract of E. senticosus root 8 mL
daily (equivalent to 4g dried root), a 60% ethanolic extract of
Panax ginseng root 4mL daily (equivalent to 2g dried root), or
placebo.) Participants were randomly assigned to treatment
within groups of three. Six groups of three completed the study,
although data from laboratory tests of blood samples were
available for only five groups of three athletes. At the end of the
study, E. senticosus recipients had a significantly greater decrease
in the testosterone to cortisol ratio, than did placebo recipients (p
< 0.05); this appeared to be due to increased cortisol concentra-
tions (which would suggest increased, rather than decreased,
stress), rather than decreased testosterone concentrations. There
were no significant differences between the three groups in any of
the lymphocyte parameters measured, such as lymphocyte count,
CD3+ cell, natural killer cell and B-cell CD20+ counts (p > 0.05
for all).©” It is not clear whether the observed change in
testosterone to cortisol ratio in E. senticosus recipients represents
a genuine effect, or whether it is a spurious finding, and the effects

<

observed,

of E. senticosus on steroid hormone concentrations require
further investigation.

In another double-blind, controlled trial, 20 highly trained
distance runners received a 30-40% ethanol extract of E.
senticosus (not further specified) 60 drops daily, or placebo, for
six weeks. Participants were matched by sex, body weight and ten-
kilometre race pace and then randomly assigned as matched pairs
to one of the treatment groups.°* During the study, participants
undertook five 15-minute trials of a submaximal treadmill run (at
their ten-kilometre race pace) and one maximal treadmill run (i.e.
to exhaustion; Ty,ax). Data available for eight matched pairs did
not show any statistically significant differences between groups
in heart rate, oxygen consumption (VOz), expired minute volume
(VE), VE/VOs:, respiratory exchange rate, Tax, serum lactate
concentrations and participants’ rating of perceived exertion.
However, because of the small sample size, the study lacked the
statistical power to detect any differences between the two
groups.°"

Significant improvements in maximal oxygen uptake and
oxygen pulse (p < 0.05 for both, compared with a no-treatment
control group), and in total work capacity and maximum
exhaustion time (p < 0.05, compared with placebo and a no-
treatment control group) were observed with an ethanolic extract
of E. senticosus 2 mL twice daily (1 mL contained 0.53 mg syringin
(eleutheroside B) and 0.12mg_ syringaresinol diglucoside
(eleutheroside E)) in a single-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-
over study involving six healthy male athletes who underwent a
series of physical exercises.°” However, the methodological
limitations of the study (small sample size, no apparent random
allocation to treatment, single-blind nature of assessments)
preclude definitive conclusions.

A small number of other studies has assessed the effects of E.
senticosus in healthy, young, non-athlete volunteers. In a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 45 volunt
E. senticosus (Fon Wan Blu Giuliani, Milan, Italy; not further
specified) two 'vials' daily for 30 days, and undertook the Stroop
Colour-Word test as a challenge stressor before and after
‘© A report of the study describes statistically
significant reductions in test-induced increases in systolic blood
pressure and heart rate after E. senticosus treatment, compared
with baseline values. However, the study is flawed as no statistical
comparisons were reported for the E. senticosus group compared
with the placebo group.

A further study in 50 healthy volunteers compared the effects of
a 35% ethanol extract of E. senticosus roots (Taigutan; 1 g extract
equivalent to 1g root, not further specified) 25 drops three times
daily for 30 days (2 = 35) with those of Echinacin (containing 80g
Echinacea purpurea herb fresh juice in 100g final product) 40
drops three times daily for 30 days (2 = 15).'°? Blood samples
taken from participants before and after treatment were subjected
t Statistically significant reductions in
concentrations of triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol
and free fatty acids, an increase in polymorphonuclear leukocyte
phagocytic activity, and increases in other components related to
cellular defence were described following E. senticosus treatment,
compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), but not
following treatment with the echinacea preparation. In a second
phase of the study, 20 of the participants were randomly selected
to also undertake assessment of physical fitness before and after
treatment. Statistically significant increases in oxygen consump-
tion during maximal effort and in exhaled volume were described
following E. senticosus treatment, compared with baseline values
(p < 0.01 for each), but not in other parameters of physical fitness

rs received

treatment.

» biochemical tests.

----- PAGE 332 -----
nor for any of these parameters following treatment with the
echinacea preparation. However, this study is also flawed as no
statistical comparisons were reported for the E. senticosus group
compared with the echinacea group, the study did not include a
placebo arm, and no corrections were made for multiple statistical
tests.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 93 individuals with herpes, a greater proportion of recipients
of a standardised extract of E. senticosus root (400 mg daily for
six months) experienced improvements in the frequency, severity
and duration of episodes of herpes, than did placebo recipients
(75% versus 34%; p = 0.0002 for each).'

Immunomodulatory activity has been documented for an
ethanolic extract of E. senticocus 30-40 mL extract (eleutheroside
B 0.2% w/v) daily in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving healthy volunteers. A significant increase in the total
lymphocyte count, particularly in the T lymphocyte cell count,
was observed for ginseng recipients, compared with placebo
recipients. Specificity of action on the lymphocytes was confirmed
by the fact that neither granulocyte nor monocyte counts were
significantly altered.

Several other double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, some of
which involved random allocation to treatment, have investigated
the effects of combination herbal preparations containing E.
senticosus as well as Andrographis paniculata with or without
other herbal ingredients (Schizandra chinensis and Glycyrrhiza
glabra) in the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections*°
and in patients with Familial Mediterranean fever. Another
study assessed the effects of a combination preparation containing
E. senticosus root extract, Adhatoda vasica leaf extract and
Echinacea purpurea extract (plant part not specified).” Reports
of these studies have claimed beneficial effects for the combination
preparations, compared with placebo, on the various outcome
measures assessed. However, the lack of randomisation in several
of these studies, and the lack of critical analysis of the results by
the authors, indicate that further research is required to confirm
or refute these findings. A meta-analysis of the trials of a
preparation containing standardised extracts of E. senticosus root
and A. paniculata herb concluded that there was evidence that the
combination was effective in relieving symptoms of acute upper

respiratory tract infections, but that further research was required
(68)

before firm recommendations could be made.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over
trial involving 24 healthy volunteers who received a preparation of
E. senticosus root 625mg twice daily, a standardised Ginkgo
biloba preparation equivalent to 28.2 mg flavonoid glycosides and
7.2 mg terpene lactones daily, a vitamin preparation, or placebo,
for three months, selective memory was significantly improved in
E. senticosus recipients compared with placebo recipients at the
end of the study (p < 0.02)‘

Several other studies involving small numbers of participants
have assessed the effects of a preparation of the leaves of E.
senticosus (Endurox™) which contain ciwujianosides, a series of
triterpenoid glycosides chemically distinct from the eleutherosides.
One uncontrolled, open-label study”
on parameters of physical endurance, compared with baseline
values, in eight men who had taken a preparation containing
800 mg E. senticosus leaf extract for two weeks, but three other
studies with more rigorous designs (randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover trials) found no effects for E.
senticosus leaf extract at doses of 800 or 1200 mg taken orally
for seven to ten days.”'"”» The latter three studies included only
ten or fewer participants, so it is possible that they lacked the

reported beneficial effects

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

statistical power to detect any differences between the treatment
and placebo groups. The available evidence indicates that E.
senticosus leaf extract administered according to the dosage
regimens tested has no beneficial effects on perfomance during

exercise lasting up to two hours.'”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of E.
senticosus preparations. No  post-marketing surveillance-type
studies were identified, and there are only a small number of
clinical trials of E. senticosus, the majority of which are of poor
methodological quality. Trials have assessed the effects of different
E. senticosus preparations, including combination herbal pre-
parations containing E. senticosus, which vary qualitatively and
quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Furthermore,
different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
(e.g. healthy volunteers, older patients with hypertension),
making interpretation of the results difficult. The clinical trials
of E. senticosus root preparations available have typically involved
only very small numbers of patients and been of short duration,
so have the statistical power only to detect very common, acute
adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of safety aspects of well-
characterised E. senticosus root preparations administered orally
at different dosages, including the effects of long-term treatment,
is required.

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 96
individuals with chronic fatigue received capsules containing a
standardised extract of E. senticosus root providing 2.24mg
eleutherosides (B and E) daily, or placebo, the proportions of
participants experiencing adverse effects were 24% and 28% for
the E. senticosus and placebo groups, respectively.) After one
month's treatment, adverse effects reported by the greatest
proportions of E. senticosus and placebo recipients were headache
(10% and 8%, respectively), breast tenderness (7% and 3%,
respectively) and nervousness (7% and 3%, respectively). There
were no statistically significant differences in changes in mean
systolic and diastolic blood pressure measurements. The fre-
quency of adverse effects was reported to be lower for both groups
during the second month of treatment.

Other studies, which involved only small numbers of partici-
pants and which had other methodological flaws, have provided
conflicting data on the effects of E. senticosus root preparations
on blood pressure measurements. One randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of an E. senticosus dry extract 300mg
daily for eight weeks study involved 20 participants aged 65 years
or more with hypertension and who were undergoing treatment
with digitalis (not further specified); it was stated that no
statistically significant differences in blood pressure control and
serum digoxin concentrations were observed, although supporting
data were not provided. Further study of the effects of well-
characterised preparations of E. senticosus root extracts on blood
pressure in different patient groups is required.

Several other clinical trial reports either did not provide any
data on frequency and type of adverse effects, or stated that no
adverse effects occurred during the study.

Preclinical data

Results of various animal toxicity studies have indicated ginseng
to be non-toxic. Many species have been exposed to extracts

----- PAGE 333 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

including mice, rats, rabbits, dogs, minks, deer, lambs, and
piglets.” Documented acute oral LDso9 values for various
preparations include: 23 mL/kg and 14.5 g/kg (mice), and greater
than 20mL/kg (dogs) for a 33% ethanolic extract; '® 31 g/kg
(mice) for the powdered root; greater than 3 g/kg (mice) for an
aqueous extract (equivalent to 25g dried roots/kg)."'*) No deaths
occurred in mice administered single 3 g/kg doses of a freeze-dried
aqueous extract.°”) Symptoms observed in dogs receiving 7.1 mL/
kg doses of an ethanolic extract (sedation, ataxia, loss of righting
reflex, hypopnoea, tremors, increased salivation and vomiting)
were attributed to the ethanol content of the extract. A chronic
toxicity study reported no toxic manifestations or deaths in rats
fed 5 mL/kg of an ethanolic extract for 320 days."

Teratogenicity studies in male and female rats, pregnant minks,
rabbits and lambs have reported no abnormalities in the offspring
and no adverse effects in the animals administered the extracts.
Premature death in parent female rabbits fed 13.5 mL/kg ethanolic
extract daily was attributed to ethanol intoxication.”

Mutagenicity studies using Salmonella typhimurium TA100
and TA98, and the micronucleus test in mice have reported no
activity for ginseng.”*) Differences in various serum biochemical
parameters have been reported between test (ginseng) and control
groups. Parameters affected included alkaline phosphatase and
gamma-glutamyl transferase enzymes (increased), serum trigly-
cerides (decreased), and creatinine and blood urea nitrogen
(increased). No pathological changes were found in rats
receiving a ginseng extract.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The Russian literature on E. senticosus includes several contra-
indications and warnings with respect to its use, although the
scientific basis and evidence for many of these statements is not
clear, and some contradict recent research. These Russian
recommendations include the advice that ginseng should be
avoided by premenopausal women, healthy individuals aged less
than 40 years, and individuals who are highly energetic, nervous,
tense, hysteric, manic or schizophrenic,” which at least appear
to conflict with clinical research on the effects of E. senticosus
preparations when taken by athletes (i.e. highly energetic
individuals). It is also advised that E. senticosus should not be
taken with stimulants, including coffee, antipsychotic drugs or
during treatment with hormones, and that individuals considered
suitable to use ginseng should abstain from alcoholic beverages,
sexual activity, bitter substances and spicy foods during ginseng

6 It is also stated that E. senticosus is unsuitable for
(5)

us
individuals with high blood pressure (180/90 mmHg or greater).
In general, and in view of the lack of safety data, it is appropriate
to advise against the long-term or otherwise excessive use of
ginseng. Some clinical studies involving long-term administration
of ginseng have involved ginseng-free periods of 2-3 weeks every
30-60 days.

Drug interactions In view of the constituents of E. senticosus,
and the pharmacological actions of E. senticosus preparations and
their isolated constituents described following preclinical and, to a
lesser extent, clinical studies, the potential for preparations of E.
senticosus to interfere with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with anticoagulant, hypoglycae-
mic and/or hypo/hypertensive activity, should be considered.

A study involving healthy volunteers (7 = 12) who received a
preparation containing a standardised extract of E. senticosus
root in addition to ground root material (one 485 mg capsule,

containing approximately 2mg_ eleutheroside B and 4mg
eleutheroside E, twice daily for 14 days) found that, at the end
of the study, there were no statistically significant differences in
the pharmacokinetic parameters of the cytochrome P4503A4
probe substrate dextromethorphan and of the CYP2D6 probe
substrate alprazolam, when compared with baseline values. These
findings suggest that this E. senticosus preparation administered
according to this dosage regimen does not affect CYP3A4 and
CYP2D6 activity.”

There is an isolated report of raised serum digoxin
concentrations in a 74-year-old man who had been taking
digoxin for over ten years to control atrial fibrillation. His serum
digoxin concentration had been stable during this time in the
range 0.9 to 2.2nmol/L, but at a routine check-up (day 0) was
found to be 5.2nmol/L and remained high for a further two
weeks despite reductions in digoxin dose and, on day 10,
cessation of digoxin treatment.® On day 26, the patient revealed
he had been taking ‘Siberian ginseng! capsules since the previous
summer (duration of use not specified but was at least two
months) and stopped taking the product that day. His serum
digoxin concentration returned to within the normal therapeutic
range by day 33 (seven days after stopping the ginseng product),
and digoxin treatment was restarted. A positive rechallenge was
reported during which the patient's serum digoxin concentration
rose to 3.2nmol/L 52 days after re-starting the ginseng product.
Positive dechallenge occurred again with the serum digoxin
concentration falling to 1.2nmol/L six days after stopping
ginseng treatment. It is not stated in the report whether the
patient took the same or a different ginseng product during the
second episode of use, and no analysis of the product(s)
concerned was carried out. For this reason, the validity of the
report has been questioned.”

Some interference with a serum digoxin immunoassay (the
fluorescence polarisation immunoassay) has been reported in vitro
and in vivo (mice), leading to artificially raised measurements. °°”)

Pregnancy and lactation Teratogenicity studies in various
animal species have not reported any teratogenic effects for
ginseng. However, in view of the many pharmacological actions
documented for ginseng, the use of ginseng during both pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided. It is unknown whether the

pharmacologically active constituents in ginseng are secreted in
the breast milk.

okokk; Konstitutin. UK: Elagen.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Sigmafem. Australia: Astragalus Complex; Bacopa
Complex; Bioglan Ginsynergy; Gingo A; Ginkgo Biloba Plus;
Medinat Esten; Tyroseng. Spain: Energysor; Natusor Low
Blood Pressure; Tonimax. USA: Energy Support; Menopause
Support.

References

1 Yun-Choi HS e¢ al. Potential inhibitors of platelet aggregation from
plant sources, III. J Nat Prod 1987; 50: 1059-1064.

----- PAGE 334 -----
9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Makarieva TN et al. Lignans from Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng). Pharm Sci 1997; 3: 525-527.

Li XC et al. A new lignan glycoside from Eleutherococcus senticosus.
Planta Med 2001; 67: 776-778.

Tolonen A et al. Identification of isomeric dicaffeoylquinic acids from
Eleutherococcus senticosus using HPLC-ESI/TOF/MS and 'H-NMR
methods. Phytochem Anal 2002; 13: 316-328.

Farnsworth NR e¢ al. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus):
Current status as an adaptogen. In: Wagner H et al., eds. Economics
and Medicinal Plant Research, vol 1, London: Academic Press, 1985:
155-209.

Phillipson JD, Anderson LA. Ginseng — quality, safety and efficacy?
Pharm J] 1984; 232: 161-165.

Segiet-Kujawa E, Kaloga M. Triterpenoid saponins of Eleutherococcus
senticosus roots. ] Nat Prod 1991; 54: 1044-1048.

Ryu J et al. A benzenoid from the stem of Acanthopanax senticosus.
Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 912-914 .

Chen M et al. Analysis of flavonoid constituents from leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus Harms by electrospray tandem mass
spectrometry. Rapid Comm Mass Spectrom 2002; 16: 264-271.

Park SY et al. New 3,4-seco-lupane-type triterpene glycosides from
Acanthopanax senticosus forma inermis. ] Nat Prod 2000; 63: 1630-
1633.

Apers S et al. Quality control of roots of Eleutherococcus senticosus
by HPLC. Phytochem Anal 2005; 16: 55-60.

Slacanin I et al. The isolation of Eleutherococcus senticosus
constituents by centrifugal partition chromatography and their
quantitative determination by high-performance liquid
chromatography. Phytochem Anal 1991; 2: 137-142.

Yat PN et al. An improved extraction procedure for the rapid,
quantitative high-performance liquid chromatographic estimation of
the main eleutherosides (B and E) in Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Eleuthero). Phytochem Anal 1998; 9: 291-295.

Harkey MR et al. Variability in commercial ginseng products: an
analysis of 25 preparations. Am J Clin Nut 2001; 73: 1101-1106.
Hartz AJ et al. Randomized controlled trial of Siberian ginseng for
chronic fatigue. Psychological Med 2004; 34: 51-61.

Davydov M, Krikorian AD. Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. &
Maxim.) Maxim. (Araliaceae) as an adaptogen: a close look. J
Ethnopharmacol 2000; 72: 345-393.

Glatthaar-Saalmiiller B et al. Antiviral activity of an extract derived
from roots of Eleutherococcus senticosus. Antiviral Res 2001; 50: 223—
228.

Medon PJ et al. Hypoglycaemic effect and toxicity of Eleutherococcus
senticosus following acute and chronic administration in mice. Acta
Pharmacol Sin 1981; 2: 281-285.

Hikino H et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of eleutherans A,
B, C, D, E, F, and G: Glycans of Eleutherococcus senticosus roots. J
Nat Prod 1986; 49: 293-297.

Medon PJ et al. Effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus extracts on
hexobarbital metabolism in vivo and in vitro. J] Ethnopharmacol 1984;
10: 235-241.

Yi JM et al. Acanthopanax senticosus root inhibits mast cell-
dependent anaphylaxis. Clinica Chimica Acta 2001; 312: 163-168.
Jeong HJ et al. Inhibitory effects of mast cell-mediated allergic
reactions by cell cultured Siberian ginseng. Immunopharmacol
Immunotoxicol 2001; 23: 107-117.

Schmolz MW et al. The synthesis of Rantes, G-CSF, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-12 and IL-13 in human whole-blood cultures is modulated by an
extract from Eleutherococcus senticosus L. roots. Phytother Res 2001;
15: 268-270.

Borchers ATet al. Comparative effects of three species of ginseng on
human peripheral blood lymphocyte proliferative responses. Int J
Immunother 1998; XIV: 143-152.

Wang H e¢ al. Asian and Siberian ginseng as a potential modulator of
immune function: an in vitro cytokine study using mouse
macrophages. Clinica Chimica Acta 2003; 327: 123128.

Panossian A et al. Effect of andrographolide and Kan Jang — fixed
combination of extract SHW-10 and extract SHE-3 - on proliferation
of human lymphocytes, production of cytokines and immune
activation markers in the whole blood cells culture. Phytomedicine
2002; 9: 598-605.

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Shen ML et al.. Immunopharmacological effects of polysaccharides
from Acanthopanax senticosus on experimental animals. Int J
Immunopharmacol 1991; 13: 549-554.

Han SB et al. Toll-like receptor-mediated activation of B cells and
macrophages by polysaccharide isolated from cell culture of
Acanthopanax senticosus. Int Immunopharmacol 2003; 3: 1301-1312.
Wagner H e¢ al. Immunstimulierend wirkende Polysaccharide
(heteroglykane) aus hoheren Pflanzen. Arzneimittelforschung 1985;
35: 1069.

Wagner H. Immunostimulants from medicinal plants. In: Chang HM
et al., eds. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985: 159.

Kimura Y, Sumiyoshi M. Effects of various Eleutherococcus senticosus
cortex on swimming time, natural killer activity and corticosterone
level in forced swimming stressed mice. ] Ethnopharmacol 2004; 95:
447-453.

Lewis WH et al. No adaptogen response of mice to ginseng and
Eleutherococcus infusions. J Ethnopharmacol 1983; 8: 209-214.
Martinez B, Staba EJ. The physiological effects of Aralia, Panax and
Eleutherococcus on exercised rats. Jpn J] Pharmacol 1984; 35: 79-85.
Gaffney BT et al. Panax ginseng and Eleutherococcus senticosus may
exaggerate an already existing biphasic response to stress via
inhibition of enzymes which limit the binding of stress hormones to
their receptors. Medical Hypotheses 2001; 56: 567-572.

Kwan CY et al. Vascular effects of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus): endothelium-dependent NO- and EDHF-mediated
relaxation depending on vessel size. Naumyn Schmiedebergs Arch
Pharmacol 2004; 369: 473-480.

Liu J et al. Effects of several Chinese herbal aqueous extracts on
human sperm motility in vitro. Andrologia 2004; 36: 78-83.

Hacker B, Medon PJ. Cytotoxic effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus
aqueous extracts in combination with N°-(A?-isopentenyl)-adenosine
and 1-f-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine against L1210 leukemia cells. J
Pharm Sci 1984; 73: 270-272.

Yokozawa T et al. Protective effects of Acanthopanax Radix extract
against endotoxemia induced by lipopolysaccharide. Phytotherapy Res
2003; 17: 353-357.

Cha YS et al. Acanthopanax senticosus extract prepared from
cultured cells decreases adiposity and obesity indices in CS7BL/6]
mice fed a high fat diet. ] Med Food 2004; 7: 422-429.

Provalova NV et al. Mechanisms underling the effects of adaptogens
on erythropoiesis during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol
Med 2002; 133: 428-432.

Lee S$ et al.. Antibacterial compounds from the leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus. Arch Pharm Res 2003; 26: 40-42.

Yi JM et al. Effect of Acanthopanax senticosus stem on mast cell-
dependent anaphylaxis. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 79: 347-352.
Nishibe S et al. Phenolic compounds from stem bark of Acanthopanax
senticosus and their pharmacological effect in chronic swimming
stressed rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1990; 38: 1763-1765.

Jin JL et al. Platelet anti-aggregating triterpenoids from the leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus and the fruits of A. sessiliflorus. Planta Med
2004; 70: 564-566.

Bu Y e¢ al. Siberian ginseng reduces infarct volume in transient focal
cerebral ischaemia in Sprague-Dawley rats. Phytother Res 2005; 19:
1167-1169.

Yang JY et al. Effect of Acanthopanax senticosus on lipoprotein lipase
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 160-163.

Lee S et al. Anti-oxidant activities of Acanthopanax senticosus stems
and their lignan components. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 106-110.
Park EJ, et al. Water-soluble polysaccharide from Eleutherococcus
senticosus stems attenuates fulminant hepatic failure induced by D-
galactosamine and lipopolysaccharide in mice. Basic Clin Pharmacol
Toxicol 2004; 94: 298-304.

Jung HJ et al. In vivo anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive effects of
liriodendrin isolated from the stem bark of Acanthopanax senticocus.
Planta Med 2003; 69: 610-616.

Yoon TJ et al. Anti-metastatic activity of Acanthopanax senticosus
extract and its possible immunological mechanism of action. ]
Ethnopharmacol 2004; 93: 247-253.

Ha ES et al. Anti-metastatic activity of glycoprotein fractionated from
Acanthopanax senticosus, involvement of NK-cell and macrophage
activation. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 217-224.

----- PAGE 335 -----
52

53

54

SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Hibasami H et al. Induction of apoptosis by Acanthopanax senticosus
HARMS and its component, sesamin in human stomach cancer
KATO III cells. Oncol Rep 2000; 7: 1213-1216.

Jang MH et al. Protective effect of Acanthopanax senticosus against
ethanol-induced apoptosis of human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-
MC. Am J Chinese Med 2003; 31: 379-388.

Fujikawa T et al. Acanthopanax senticosus Harms as a prophylactic
for MTMP-induced Parkinson's disease in rats. J Ethnopharmacol
2005; 97: 375-381.

Fujikawa T et al.. Effect of sesamin in Acanthopanax senticosus
HARMS on behavioral dysfunction in rotenone-induced parkinsonian
rats. Biol Pharm Bull 2005; 28: 169-172.

Cicero AFG et al.. Effects of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus Maxim.) on elderly quality of life: a randomized clinical
trial. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2004; 9 (Suppl. Suppl.): 69-73.

Gaffney BT et al. The effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus and Panax
ginseng on steroidal hormone indices of stress and lymphocyte subset
numbers in endurance athletes. Life Sciences 2001; 70: 431-442.
Dowling EA et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus on
submaximal and maximal exercise performance. Med Sci Sports
Exercise 1996; 28: 482-489.

Asano K et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus extract on human
physical working capacity. Planta Med 1986; 52: 175.

Facchinetti F et al.. Eleutherococcus senticosus reduces cardiovascular
stress response in healthy subjects: a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. Stress Health 2002; 18: 11-17.

Szolomicki S et al. The influence of active components of
Eleutherococcus senticosus on cellular defence and physical fitness in
man. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14: 30-35.

Williams M. Immunoprotection against herpes simplex type II
infection by eleutherococcus root extract. Int J Alt Conrp Med 1995;
13: 9-12.

Bohn B et al. Flow-cytometric studies with Eleutherococcus senticosus
extract as an immunomodulatory agent. Arzneimittelforschung 1987;
37: 1193-1196.

Melchior J et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot and phase III
study of activity of standardized Andrographis paniculata herba Nees
extract fixed combination (Kan Jang) in the treatment of
uncomplicated upper-respiratory tract infection. Phytomedicine 2000;
7: 341-350.

Gabrielan ES et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of
Andrographis paniculata fixed combination Kan Jang in the treatment
of acute upper respiratory tract infections including sinusitis.
Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 589-597.

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

Amaryan G et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, pilot
clinical trial of ImmunoGuard" —a standardized fixed combination of
Andrographis paniculata Nees, with Eleutherococcus senticosus
Maxim, Schizandra chinensis Bail. and Glycyrrhiza glabra L. extracts
in patients with familial Mediterranean fever. Phytomedicine 2003; 10:
271-285.

Narimanian M et al. Randomized trial of a fixed combination of
herbal extracts containing Adhatoda vasica, Echinacea purpurea and
Eleutherococcus senticosus in patients with upper respiratory tract
infections. Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 539-547.

Poolsup N et al. Andrographis paniculata in the symptomatic
treatment of uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection: a
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. C Clin Pharm Ther
2004; 29: 37-45.

Winther K et al. Russian root (Siberian ginseng) improves cognitive
functions in middle-aged people, whereas Ginkgo biloba seems
effective only in the elderly. J Neurol Sci 1997; 150: $90.

Wu YN et al. Effect of ciwujia (Radix acanthopanacis senticosus)
preparation on human stamina. J Hyg Res 1996; 25: 57-61.
Cheuvront SN e¢ al. Effect of Endurox’ on metabolic responses to
submaximal exercise. Int J Sport Nut 1999; 9: 434-442.

Plowman SA et al. The effects of Endurox on the physiological
responses to stair-stepping exercise. Res Q Exercise Sport 1999; 70:
385-388.

Eschbach LC The effect of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) on substrate utilization and performance during prolonged
cycling. Int J Sport Nut Exercise Metab 2000; 10: 444-451.

Goulet EDB, Dionne IJ. Assessement of the effects of Eleutherococcus
senticosus on endurance performance. Int ] Sport Nut Exercise Metab
2000; 14: 75-83.

Hirosue T et al. Mutagenicity and subacute toxicity of Acanthopanax
senticosus extracts in rats. J Food Hyg Soc Jpn 1986; 27: 380-386.
Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about ginseng.
Pharm J] 1986; 237: 583.

Donovan JL et al. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus)
effects on CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activity in normal volunteers. Drug
Metabolism Disposition 2003; 31: 519-522.

McRae S. Elevated serum digoxin levels in a patient taking digoxin
and Siberian ginseng. Can Med Ass J 1996; 155: 293-295.

Awang DVC. Siberian ginseng toxicity may be case of mistaken
identity. Can Med Ass J 1996; 155: 1237.

Dasgupta A. Effect of Asian and Siberian ginseng on serum digoxin
measurement by five digoxin immunoasays. Am J] Clin Pathol 2003;
119: 298-303.

----- PAGE 336 -----
Ginseng, Panax

aspects of Panax species preparations. Clinical trials of Pan
species root preparations typically have involved small
numbers of patients and been of short duration, so have the
statistical power only to detect very common, acute adverse
effects. The available evidence suggests that preparations of
Panax species root are well-tolerated when used for limited
periods of time at recommended doses. Rigorous
investigation of safety aspects of well-characterised Panax
species root preparations administered orally at different
dosages, including the effects of long-term treatment, is
required. In view of the many pharmacological actions
documented, the potential for preparations of Panax species
to interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be
considered. In general, and in view of the lack of safety data, it
is appropriate to advise against the long-term or otherwise
excessive use of Panax species.

The use of Panax species during both pregnancy and
breastfeeding should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Various Panax species (Araliaceae) including:
*Panax ginseng Meyer
tPanax quinquefolius L.
+Panax notoginseng (Burk.) Chen ex C.Y. Wu
This monograph focuses on P. ginseng, although some
information on other Panax species is also included.

Synonym(s)

*P. quinquefolius var. coreensis Sieb., P. schin-seng T. Nees, P.
schin-seng var. coraiensis T. Nees, P. versus Oken, Ren Shen, Asian
Ginseng, Chinese Ginseng, Korean Ginseng, Oriental Ginseng
+P. quinquefolius var. americanus Raf., P. quinquefolius var.
obovatus Raf., P. cuneataus Raf., P. americanus var. elatus Raf.,
American Ginseng

$Aralia quinquifolia var. notoginseng (Burk.), P. pseudoginseng
var. notoginseng (Burk.) Hoo & Tseng, San Qi, Sanchi Ginseng,
Tienchi Ginseng

Part(s) Used

Root. White ginseng represents the peeled and sun-dried root
whilst red ginseng is unpeeled, steamed and dried.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢®

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'°*)

Complete German Commission E‘
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Terpenoids Complex mixture of compounds (ginsenosides or
panaxosides) involves three aglycone structural types — two
tetracyclic dammarane-type sapogenins (protopanaxadiol and
protopanaxatriol) and a pentacyclic triterpene oleanolic acid-
type. Different naming conventions have been used for these
compounds. In Japan, they are known as ginsenosides and are
represented by Rx where 'x' indicates a particular saponin. For
example, R,, Ry, Re, Ra, Rei. In Russia, the saponins are
referred to as panaxosides and are represented as panaxoside X
where 'X' can be A-F. The suffixes in the two systems are not
equivalent and thus panaxoside A does not equal R, but Rg.”
The saponin content varies between different Panax species. For
example, in P. ginseng the major ginsenosides are Ry.;, R. and Ry.
whereas in P. quinquefolis Ry. is the only major ginsenoside."’

----- PAGE 337 -----
Ginseng, Panax

Other constituents Volatile oil (trace) mainly consisting of
sesquiterpenes including panacene, limonene, terpineol, eucalyp-
tol, o-phellandrene and citral,”’ sesquiterpene alcohols including
the panasinsanols A and B, and ginsenol,* polyacetylenes,*®
sterols, polysaccharides (mainly pectins and glucans), starch (8—
32%), B-amylase, free sugars, vitamins (B,, Bz, Bia, panthotenic
acid, biotin), choline (0.1-0.2%), fats, minerals.

The sesquiterpene alcohols are stated to be characteristic
components of Panax ginseng in that they are absent from the
volatile oils of other Panax species.”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, Panax
ginseng consists of the whole or cut dried root, designated as
white ginseng, treated with steam and then dried, designated red
ginseng, of Panax ginseng C.A.Meyer.'($8'°% As with other
herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the qualitative and
quantitative composition of crude plant material obtained from
Panax species and commercial Panax ginseng preparations and
those derived from other Panax species.

Thirty seven commercial samples of root from P. ginseng (n =
22), P. quinquefolius (n = 10) and P. notoginseng (n = 5) obtained
from herbal outlets in Taiwan were analysed to determine their
respective chemical profiles.” The saponin content of P
notoginseng and P. quinquefolius was higher than that of P.
ginseng, although statistical analyses to support this were not

Sterols

Rb,
1
R'O Rb2
Re
20 S-protopanaxadiol
R'=R2=H i
OR?

OH
H

Ginsenoside

performed. Mean total saponin (Ry1, Ry-2, Re Ray Res Re Ry)
contents for P. notoginseng, P. quinquefolius wild, P. quinquefolius
cultivated, P. ginseng white, and P. ginseng red were 118.7, 58.0,
43.1, 5.2 and 5.9mg/g, respectively. Variations in total saponin
content within species and types of ginseng were also found: P.
notoginseng 23.8-30.7, P. quinquefolius wild 8.7-24.0, P. quinque-
folius cultivated 8.4-19.5, P. ginseng white 3.5-9.0, and P. ginseng
red 3.9-7.2 mg/g.) In another analytical study, the saponin
content of 47 samples of ginseng obtained from 12 Panax taxa was
examined using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromato-
graphy. Material from P. ginseng was found to have the lowest
total saponin content (5.8-15.6 mg/g).

Analysis using gas chromatography (GC) and GC-mass
spectrometry of best-selling commercial preparations of Panax
species purchased from pharmacies and health-food stores in
European countries, Argentina, Canada, China and the USA
found variations in their saponin content: P. ginseng, pure root
preparations, 1.9-8.1% (mn = 14); P. ginseng, extract preparations,
4.9-13.3% (n = 20); P. quinquefolius, 5.2% (n = 1); P. notoginseng,
7.5% (n = 1).

Analysis of 25 'ginseng' products available for purchase from a
health-food store in the USA included eight products labelled as
containing Panax ginseng, four labelled as containing P. quinque-
folius, one labelled as containing P. notoginseng, and three labelled
as containing mixtures of different species.” All of the products
labelled as containing Panax species contained ginsenosides,
although total ginsenoside content varied: monopreparations of

R! R?

p-D-Gic 2. g.p-Gic| p-D-Gle +*- ¢-0-Gle

1

B-D-Gic 8+ g.p-Gic} a-t-Ara + g.0.Gic

1-2

p-D-Gle 2+ g.p-Gic} a-t-At +8 p.p-Gic
p-D-Gle +%, .p-Gic} f-D-Gie

Ginsenoside Re
Re | a-L-Rha sees B-D-Glc| B-D-Gle

HO rt | #0-Glc 2+ ¢.0-Gle| 4
or' Rg; | A-D-Gle -D-Gie

20 S-protopanaxatriol © Rgp | «-t-Rha+®. g.p.Glc| H

Rl=R=H

Glc = glucose, Ara = arabinose, Arf = arabinofuranoside, Rha = rhamnose

Triterpenes

oleanolic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Panax ginseng.

----- PAGE 338 -----
powdered P. ginseng, 0.29-3.36mg/100g product (n = 6);
monopreparations of powdered P. quinquefolius, 1.24-2.91 mg/
100g product (2 = 2); monopreparation of powdered P.
notoginseng, 4.27 mg/100 g product (m = 1); liquid monoprepara-
tions of P. ginseng, 0.44-0.69 mg/100 mL product (” = 2); liquid
monopreparations of P  quinquefolius, 0.78-1.30 mg/100 mL
product (m = 2). Of the 16 products containing Panax species,
seven were labelled as containing a specific concentration of
ginsenosides, yet the actual content deviated from the labelled
amount, containing 18.0-136.8% of the amount stated on the
label.” All but one of these products contained a lower
concentration of ginsenosides than the labelled amount.

In 2005, the USA Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife
Service determined that wild P. quinquefolius root must be at least
ten years old and have four 'prongs' or leaves before it can be
legally exported from the USA.) This decision extended the
previous five-year minimum age limit determined by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
(CITES).

Food Use

Ginseng (P. ginseng) is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that ginseng can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(@!®

Herbal Use

Ginseng (P. ginseng) is stated to possess thymoleptic, sedative,
demulcent and stomachic properties, and is reputed to be an
aphrodisiac. Traditionally, it has been used for neurasthenia,
neuralgia, insomnia, hypotonia, and specifically for depressive
states associated with sexual inadequacy.(C* 0% S% 6

P. ginseng and other Panax species have been used traditionally
in Chinese medicine for many thousands of years. Uses include as
a stimulant, tonic, diuretic and stomachic,“> but typically the
different species have different clinical uses. Traditionally, use has
been divided into two categories: short-term — to improve
stamina, concentration, healing process, stress resistance, vigi-
lance and work efficiency in healthy individuals, and long-term —
to improve well-being in debilitated and degenerative conditions
especially those associated with old age.

Dosage

Traditionally, dosage recommendations differ for short-term use
by healthy individuals and long-term use by elderly or debilitated
persons.

Short-term (for younger and healthy individuals) 0.5-1.0g
root daily, as two divided doses, for a course generally lasting 15—
20 days and with a treatment-free period of approximately two
weeks between consecutive courses. Doses are recommended to be
taken in the morning, two hours before a meal, and in the evening,
not less than two hours after a meal.

Long-term (for older individuals and those with poor health)
0.4-0.8 g root daily. Doses may be taken continuously.”

In China, doses used traditionally and currently are typically 3—
9g root powder daily taken as a decoction."'?

Dosages used in clinical trials vary depending on the Panax
species, type of preparation and indication under investigation.
Several studies have assessed the effects of a standardised extract

Ginseng, Panax

Figure 2 Panax ginseng — dried drug substance (root).

of P. ginseng root (G115) at doses of 100-400 mg daily for 4-12
weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In the 1950s, early studies on ginseng reported its ability to
improve both physical endurance and mental ability in animals
and humans.'” In addition, the 'tonic' properties of ginseng were
confirmed by the observation that doses taken for a prolonged
period of time increased the overall well-being of an individual,
measured by various parameters such as appetite, sleep and
absence of moodiness, resulting in an increased work efficiency.”
Since then, numerous studies have investigated the complex
pharmacology of ginseng in both animals and humans. The
saponin glycosides (ginsenosides/panaxosides) are generally
recognised as the main active constituents in ginseng, although
pharmacological activities have also been associated with non-
saponin components.

The following sections on preclinical and clinical studies are
intended to give an indication of the type of research that has been
published for ginseng rather than to provide a comprehensive
bibliography of ginseng research papers.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of the constituents of P. ginseng. Ginsenosides
R,-1, Rp-1 and Ry2 have been detected in the gastrointestinal tract
of rats following oral administration of P. ginseng root, although
absorption rates are low.‘'**?

Corticosteroid-like activity Many of the activities exhibited by
Panax ginseng have been compared with corticosteroid-like
actions and results of endocrinological studies have suggested
that the ginsenosides may primarily augment adrenal steroidogen-
esis via an indirect action on the pituitary gland.°”’ Ginsenosides
have increased adrenal cAMP in intact but not in hypophysecto-
mised rats and dexamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid that

----- PAGE 339 -----
Ginseng, Panax

provides positive feedback at the level of the pituitary gland, has
blocked the effect of ginsenosides on pituitary corticotrophin and
°) Hormones produced by the
pituitary and adrenal glands are known to play a significant role in
the adaptation capabilities of the body. Working capacity is one
of the indices used to measure adaptation ability and ginseng has
been shown to increase the working capacity of rats following
single (132%) and seven-day (179%) administration (intraperito-
neal). Furthermore, seven-day administration of ginseng decreased
the reduction seen in working capacity when the pituitary—
adrenocortical system is blocked by prior administration of
ydrocortisone.?

adrenal corticosterone secretion.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity has been
documented for ginseng and attributed to both saponin and
polysaccharide constituents. In vitro studies using isolated rat
pancreatic islets have shown that ginsenosides promote an insulin
release which is independent of extracellular calcium and which
utilises a different mechanism to that of glucose.?” In addition, in
vivo studies in rats have reported that a P. ginseng extract
increases the number of insulin receptors in bone marrow and
reduces the number of glucocorticoid receptors in rat brain
homogenate.” Both of these actions are thought to contribute to
the antidiabetic action of P ginseng, in view of the known
diabetogenic action of adrenal corticoids and the knowledge that
the number of insulin receptors generally decreases with
ageing.)

Hypoglycaemic activity observed in both normal and alloxan-
induced hyperglycaemic mice administered P ginseng or P.
quinquefolium (intraperitoneal) has also been attributed to non-
saponin but uncharacterised principles?*~” or to glycan (poly-
saccharide) components.°° > Glycans isolated from Korean or
Chinese P ginseng (A-E) were found to pos: stronger
ypoglycaemic activity than those isolated from Japanese P.
ginseng (Q-U).°” Proposed mechanisms of action have included
elevated plasma insulin concentration due to an increase of insulin

secretion from pancreatic islets, and enhancement of insulin
sensitivity.” However, these mechanisms do not explain the total
ypoglycaemic activity that has been exhibited by the poly-
saccharides and further mechanisms are under investigation.°””
The effect of panaxans A and B from P. ginseng roots on the
activities of key enzymes participating in carbohydrate metabo-
ism has been studied.°?) DPG-3-2, a non-saponin component,
as been shown to stimulate insulin biosynthesis in pancreatic
preparations from various hyperglycaemic (but not normoglycae-
mic) animals; ginsenosides Ry; and R,_; were found to decrease
islet insulin concentrations to an undetectable level.°”

Cardiovascular activity Individual saponins from P. notoginseng
have been reported to have different actions on cardiac
haemodynamics.°° For instance R,, Rg and total flower
saponins have increased cardiac performance whilst Rj, and total
leaf saponins have decreased it; calcium antagonist activity has
been reported for Ry, but not for R,; Ry but not R, has produced a
protective effect on experimental myocardial infarction in
rabbits.°° Negative chronotropic and inotropic effects in vitro
have been observed for ginseng saponins and a mechanism of
action similar to that of verapamil has been suggested.° In vitro
studies on the isolated rabbit heart have reported an increase in
coronary blood flow together with a positive inotropic effect.°”
Anti-arrhythmic action on aconitine and barium chloride (rat)
and adrenaline (rabbit)-induced arrhythmias, and prolongation of
RR, PR and QT, intervals (rat), have been documented for
saponins R.., and Rg; from P. notoginseng. The mode of action

was thought to be similar to that of amiodarone.°* Ginsenosides
(i.p.) have been reported to protect mice against metabolic
disturbances and myocardial damage associated with conditions
of severe anoxia.)

P. notoginseng has produced a marked hypotensive response
together with bradycardia following intravenous administration to
rats. The dose-related effect was blocked by many antagonists
suggesting multi-site activity.°”) Higher doses were found to cause
vasoconstriction rather than vasodilation in renal, mesenteric and
femoral arteries.°”

The total ginseng saponin fraction (Panax species not specified)
has been reported to be devoid of haemolytic activity. However,
individual ginsenosides have been found to exhibit either
haemolytic or protective activities. Protective ginsenosides include
R., Ry.2 and R,, whereas haemolytic saponins have included Ry,
Ry and R¢.° The number and position of sugars attached to the
sapogenin moiety was thought to determine activity.“ Haemo-
static activity has also been documented.”

Oral administration of P. ginseng to rats fed a high cholesterol
diet reduced serum cholesterol and triglycerides, increased high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, decreased platelet adhe-
siveness, and decreased fatty changes to the liver.” P. ginseng has
also been reported to reduce blood coagulation and enhance
fibrinolysis.“ Panaxynol and the ginsenosides R., Rga and Ry»
have been documented as the main antiplatelet components in P.
ginseng inhibiting aggregation, release reaction and thromboxane
formation in vitro.“ Anti-inflammatory activity and inhibition
of thromboxane B, have previously been described for panax-
ynol.8) Anticomplementary activity in vitro (human serum) has
been documented for P. ginseng polysaccharides with highest
activity observed in strongly acidic polysaccharide fractions.”

Effects on neurotransmitters Studies in rats have shown that a
standardised P. ginseng extract (G115) inhibits the development of
morphine tolerance and physical dependence, of a decre
hepatic glutathione concentrations, and of dopamine receptor
sensitivity without antagonising morphine analgesia, as _pre-
viously documented for the individual saponins.“ The inhibition
of tolerance was thought to be associated with a reduction in
morphinone production, a toxic metabolite which irreversibly
blocks the opiate receptor sites, and with the activation of
morphinone-glutathione conjugation, a detoxication process. The
mechanism of inhibition of physical dependence was unclear but
thought to be associated with changed ratios of adrenaline,
noradrenaline, dopamine and serotonin in the brain.”

A total ginsenoside fraction has been reported to inhibit the
uptake of various neurotransmitters into rat brain synaptosomes
in descending order of gamma-aminobutyrate and noradrenaline,
dopamine, glutamate and serotonin.“*”’ The fraction containing
ginsenoside Rg was most effective. Uptake of metabolic substrates
2-deoxy-p-glucose and leucine was only slightly affected and
therefore it was proposed that the P. ginseng extracts were acting
centrally rather than locally as surface active agents.

Studies in rats have indicated that the increase in dopaminergic
receptors in the brain observed under conditions of stress is
prevented by pretreatment with P. ginseng.®

se in

Hepatoprotective activity Antoxidant and detoxifying activities
have been documented.” Protection against carbon tetrachlor-
ide- and galactosamine-induced hepatotoxicity has been observed
in cultured rat hepatocytes for specific ginsenosides (oleanolic

“1 series) (49°59) i ses
acid and dammarane series). However, at higher doses
certain ginsenosides from both series were found to exhibit
simultaneous cytotoxic activity.

----- PAGE 340 -----
Cytotoxic and antitumour activity Cytotoxic activity (EDso
0.5 g/mL) versus L1210 has been documented for polyacetylenes
isolated from P. ginseng root.°*®*" The antitumour effect of
ginseng polysaccharides in tumour-bearing mice has been
associated with an immunological mechanism of action.°)
Ginseng polysaccharides have been reported to increase the
lifespan of tumour-bearing mice and to inhibit the growth of
tumour cells in vivo, although cytocidal action was not seen in
vitro.» Antitumour activity in vitro versus several tumour cell
lines has been documented for a polyacetylene, panaxytriol, from
P ginseng.»

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity (versus Semliki forest virus;
34-40% protection) has been documented for P. ginseng extract
(G115, Pharmaton) administered orally to rats.°* The extract
also enhanced the level of protection afforded by 6-MFA, an
interferon-inducing agent of fungal origin.” P. ginseng has been
found to induce in vitro and in vivo production of interferon and
to augment the natural killer and antibody dependent cytotoxic
activities in human peripheral lymphocytes.°* > In addition, P.
ginseng enhances the antibody-forming cell response to sheep red

blood cells in mice and stimulates cell mediated immunity both in
(54, 55)

vitro and in vivo. ) In view of these observations, it has been
proposed that the antiviral activity of P ginseng may be

immunologically mediated.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of preparations of P ginseng and other Panax
species have focused on assessing effects related to the reputed
adaptogenic properties of this herbal medicinal product, although
rigorous clinical investigations are limited. Studies have tested
different Panax species preparations, including combination
herbal preparations containing P. ginseng, which vary qualitatively
and quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Further-
more, different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
making interpretation of the results difficult. A large body of
clinical research has been published in the Chinese and other
Asian literature, making access difficult, although many of these
studies are unlikely to meet contemporary Western standards in
terms of their design, analysis and reporting.’ Therefore, at
present there is insufficient evidence to support definitively the
efficacy of specific Panax species preparations in the various
indications for which they are used and/or have been tested.

Details of several clinical trials of ginseng (Panax spp.) prepara-
tions published in the English literature are summarised below.

Effects on physical performance Several studies have found that
preparations of P. ginseng do not improve physical performance in
healthy adults. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, 38 healthy adults received an aqueous extract of P. ginseng
(G115, Pharmaton SA, Lugano, Switzerland) 200 mg twice daily
for eight weeks.°°
testing before and after the intervention; recovery from exercise
was also monitored. At the end of the study, data from 27
participants were available for analysis. No statistically significant
differences in physical performance and heart rate recovery were
detected between the ginseng and placebo groups.°° Similar
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have found
that treatment with P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 mg daily for
eight weeks had no statistically significant effects on maximal
work performance, oxygen uptake during resting, exercise and
recovery, respiratory exchange ratio, minute ventilation, heart rate

Participants underwent exhaustive exercise

Ginseng, Panax

and blood lactic acid concentrations in 19 healthy adult females (p
> 0.05 for each),°” and no effect on oxygen consumption,
respiratory exchange ratio, minute ventilation, heart rate, blood
lactic acid concentrations and perceived exertion in 36 healthy
adult males who received P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 or
400 mg daily for eight weeks.°*) In a further randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 28 healthy adults,
administration of P ginseng root extract (not further specified)
200 mg daily for three weeks had no statistically significant effects
on maximal exercise capacity, total exercise time, work load,
plasma
perceived exertion.” As all of these studies involved only smal
numbers of participants it is possible that they did not have
sufficient statistical power to detect a difference between the
treatment and placebo groups if one exists.

actate concentrations, haematocrit, heart rate an

Effects on cognitive performance Several studies have examine:
the effects of preparations of P. ginseng root, typically the
commercial product G115, alone, or in combination with other
herbal ingredients, on cognitive performance. Generally, these
studies have involved healthy volunteers, and trials evaluating the
effects of P. ginseng root preparations on patients with impaire
cognitive function are lacking. Further research examining the
effects of acute and longer-term administration of preparations of
P. ginseng and other Panax species in both healthy individuals ani
patients with impaired cognitive function are required. In a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 15
healthy individuals, P ginseng root extract (G115) 200mg as a
single oral dose had significant effects on certain aspects of
electroencephalogram recordings, such as reductions in fronta
theta and beta activity, when compared with placebo.) These
findings suggest that P. ginseng root extract can directly modulate
cerebroelectrical activity.(°”

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 30
healthy individuals received capsules containing P. ginseng extract
(G115) 200 or 400 mg as a single dose before undergoing a battery
of tests designed to assess cognitive performance. A statistically
significant improvement in one test of cognitive performance
(serial sevens) was observed with the lower ginseng dose,
compared with placebo, but no statistically significant difference
was observed with the higher dose, and there were no statistically
significant differences in other tests of cognitive performance for
‘© There was a statistically significant improvement in
scores for mental fatigue for both doses when measured after the
third battery of tests, but this finding was not consistent when
measured at other timepoints.

In another double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 28
healthy individuals received single doses of P. ginseng root extract
(G115) 200 mg, an ethanolic extract of guarana (Paullinia cupana)
75mg, both herbal preparations, or placebo, with a one-week
wash-out period between each; participants undertook a battery
of cognitive performance tests before and after treatments.’
Administration of P. ginseng root extract, compared with placebo,
led to statistically significant improvements in some (e.g. speed of
attention, speed of memory, secondary memory) but not all (e.g.
accuracy of attention, working memory, Bond-Lader mood scales)
tests of cognitive performance, although improvements were not
observed at every timepoint measured after administration. In
some tests, administration of both ginseng and guarana led to
greater improvements than did ginseng alone.) In. similar
experiments, 20 healthy individuals received single doses of P.
ginseng root extract (G115) 200, 400, 600 mg, or placebo, and a
combination of P. ginseng root extract and Ginkgo biloba leaf

either dose.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Ginseng, Panax

extract at doses of 200 and 120, 400 and 240, 600 and 360 mg,
respectively, or placebo." Statistically significant improvements
in one cognitive performance test (serial sevens) were observed
with administration of P. ginseng root extract 400 mg, compared
with placebo, but reduced performance in this test was seen
following administration of the 200mg dose. Following admin-
istration of the combination preparation, statistically significant
improvements in certain tests at certain timepoints, but these
results were not consistent for all doses tested and across all
timepoints measured in the study.

The effects of the same combination preparation of P. ginseng
and G. biloba on memory were assesse: d, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, parallel group trial invol-
ving 256 healthy volunteers aged 38-67 years (mean (SD), 56 (7)
years). Participants received a preparation containing P. ginseng
root extract and G. biloba leaf extract 100 and 60 mg, respectively,

in a randomis

blinded, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving non-diabetic
individuals, no effect on post-prandial glycaemia was observed
following oral administration 40 minutes before glucose challenge
of 6g of the same commercial P. quinquefolius preparation, but
obtained from a different batch.” This conflicting result may be
due to the lower ginsenoside content of the latter product
(containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 0.65%, Ry-2 0.02%, R. 0.11%,
Rg 0.12%, and protopanaxatriols R,.1 0.08%, R. 0.67%).
Other similar studies involving non-diabetic individuals have
reported different and less consistent results for preparations of P.
ginseng. In two randomised, single-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover studies, 11 individuals received capsules containing
500mg three-year-old powdered whole root of P ginseng
(containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 0.18%, Ry2 0.09%, Re
0.07%, Rg 0.02%, and protopanaxatriols R,., 0.16%, R, 0.17%
and R,¢ 0.12%) at a single dose of 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9g 40 minutes

twice daily, 200 an
for 12 weeks. Ass'
14 of the study. At
variable the Quality
in the treatment grc
0.026). No statistica'

ssments were undertaken at weel

120 mg, respectively, once daily, or placebo,
s 4, 8, 12 and
the end of the study, the primary outcome
of Memory Index was significantly improved
yup, compared with the placebo group (p =
ly significant effects were seen with respect to

before glucose challenge.” No statistical
were observed for the treatment versus p!
more, when results for all P. ginseng grou
hour plasma glucose concentration was

ly significant differences
lacebo groups. Further-
ups were pooled, the 2-
igher in the P. ginseng

group than in the placebo group. These findings are in contrast to

effects observed for P. quinquefolius, an

could be explained by

the secondary outcome variables power and continuity of
attention, and speed of memory processes.'°

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
group trial, 64 healthy volunteers with neurasthenic complaints
received a combination preparation containing P. ginseng root
extract and G. biloba leaf extract at doses of 50 and 30mg,
respectively, 100 and 60mg, respectively, 200 and 120mg,
respectively, or placebo, twice daily, for 12 weeks. At the end
of the study, participants in the higher-dose ginseng—ginkgo group,
compared with the placebo group, achieved significantly higher
scores in tests designed to assess cognitive function (p = 0.008).

Hypoglycaemic activity Most studies investigating hypoglycae-
mic activity of ginseng preparations have a: ed effects in
healthy (non-diabetic) individuals. In a randomised, single-blind
(the study may have been conducted double-blind but this was not
specifically stated), placebo-controlled, crossover trial, nine
individuals with type-2 diabetes mellitus (mean (standard
deviation, SD) glycosylated haemoglobin HbA,. 0.08 (0.005);
reference range for well-controlled type-2 diabetes mellitus, 0.065—
0.075) received a capsule containing 'American' ginseng (P.
quinquefolius, containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 1.53%, Rp2
0.06%, R. 0.24%, Rg 0.44%, and protopanaxatriols R,; 0.1%,
R. 0.83%" Chai-Na-Ta Corp, British Columbia, Canada) as a
single dose both 40 minutes before a 25g oral glucose challenge
and, on a separate occasion, at the same time as the oral glucose
challenge.‘ Incremental glycaemia at 45 minutes was signifi-
cantly lower following ginseng treatment with either regimen (i.e.
given with or before glucose challenge) than it was following
placebo administration (p < 0.05 for both). In similar experiments
involving non-diabetic individuals, a statistically significant
reduction in incremental glycaemia was only observe
ginseng was administered 40 minutes before glucose challenge.
Further experiments in non-diabetic individuals indicated that the
effect on postprandial glycaemia was not dose-dependent as
glucose tolerance was similar following administration of doses of
ginseng ranging from 1-9g.°7 However, the effect of P.
quinquefolius was time-dependent as reductions in postprandial
glycaemia were observed only with administration of PR. quinque-
folius 40, 80 and 120 minutes," but not 0, 10 and 20 minutes,
before glucose challenge.” In another similar randomised,

when
(68)

differences in the ginsenoside content of preparations derived
from the two species.”

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in which
30 non-diabetic individuals received capsules containing P. ginseng

extract (G115) 200 or 400 mg as a single dose before undergoing a
(62)

battery of tests designed to assess cognitive performance,

statistically significant reductions in blood glucose concentrations
occurred for both doses of ginseng at all measured post-treatment
timepoints (p < 0.01 for all).

Immunomodulatory activity In a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, 38 healthy adults received an aqueous
extract of P. ginseng (G115, Pharmaton SA, Lugano, Switzerland)
200mg twice daily for eight weeks.“ Participants underwent
exhaustive exercise testing before and after the intervention in
order to effect immunosuppression. At the end of the study, data
from 27 participants were available for analysis. No statistically
significant differences in secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA; the

primary immunoglobulin contained in secretions of the mucosal
immune system) parameters were detected between the P. ginseng
and placebo groups, indicating that the P. ginseng preparation had
no effect on mucosal immunity.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
60 healthy individuals assessed the effects of two different extracts
of P. ginseng on immune parameters.” Participants received an
aqueous extract of P. ginseng (not further specified) 100mg, a
standardised extract of P ginseng (G115) 100mg, or placebo,
twice daily for eight weeks. Analysis of participants’ blood
samples taken before and after four and eight weeks of treatment
indicated that both extracts had statistically significant effects on
various immune parameters, compared with baseline values,”
although from a report of the study, it is not clear whether or not
these changes were statistically significant when compared with
values for the placebo group.

Cancer prevention A small number of epidemiological studies
have explored the effects of ginseng use on prevention of cancer. A
case-control study involving all cases of newly diagnosed cancer
during a one-year time period at a major hospital cancer centre in
Korea included 905 cases and 905 age, sex and date of admission
matched controls.) Of the 905 cases, 62% had a history of
'ginseng’ (not further specified) use (determined by face-to-face

----- PAGE 342 -----
interviews using a structured questionnaire), compared with 75%
in the control group (p < 0.01). The odds ratio (95% confidence
interval) (OR; 95% CI) for cancer in relation to ginseng intake
was 0.56 (0.45 to 0.69). This study was subsequently extended to
include a total of 1987 case-control pairs.” Ginseng users had a
lower risk of cancer, compared with non-users (OR 0.50; 95% CI
0.44 to 0.58); ORs (95% CI) for being diagnosed with cancer
differed for use of different types of ginseng; the lowest being for
fresh ginseng extract 0.37 (0.29 to 0.46), white ginseng powder
0.30 (0.22 to 0.41) and red ginseng extract 0.20 (0.08 to 0.50). No
decrease in risk was seen with use of fresh ginseng slices, fresh
ginseng juice and white ginseng tea: OR (95% CI), 0.79 (0.63—
1.01), 0.71 (0.49-1.03), 0.69 (0.45-1.07), respectively:(74) ORs
were lowest for ovarian (0.15), larynx (0.18), oesophageal (0.20)
and panceatic (0.22) cancers.

The questionnaire used in the case-control studies described
above was used to determine ginseng use in a cohort study
involving 4634 people aged over 40 years.” In this study, 54.7%
of cancer cases had a history of ginseng use, compared with 71.2%
of individuals without cancer. The relative risk (RR; 95% CI) for
cancer was reduced with ginseng intake (0.40, 0.28-0.56; p <
0.05). When evaluted by intake of type of ginseng, the RR was
significantly reduced with ginseng extract (0.31, 0.13-0.74) and
multiple combinations of ginseng preparations (0.34, 0.20-0.53),
but not for other types of ginseng.) The available evidence for
the cancer preventive effect of ginseng preparations in humans is
inconclusive, and further methodologically rigorous research is
required.”

Quality of life The effects of different preparations of P. ginseng
root on quality-of-life measures have been asssessed in several
randomised, controlled trials involving different participant
groups, including healthy individuals, post-menopausal women
and patients with diabetes. A systematic review of trials published
by the end of the year 2002 included nine studies, of which eight
involved a placebo control group, four involved the administration
of monopreparations of P. ginseng root, and five involved
combination preparations of P. ginseng and vitamins/minerals.”
The review did not provide details of the specific P ginseng
preparations tested in the trials, only that doses ranged from 80-
400 mg daily and that studies lasted from two to nine months.
These variations in products tested, together with differences in
study design, outcome measures evaluated, and participant groups
involved, make overall interpretation of the results difficult and, to
some extent, invalid. All but one of the included studies reported
improvement in at least one quality-of-life measure, or a subscale,
but there were conflicting findings. In essence, at present, evidence
of a beneficial effect for P ginseng on quality-of-life measures is
inconclusive. Further research is needed to establish the effects, if
any, of preparations of P. ginseng root and other Panax species on
quality of life. Furthermore, results of trials should be considered
in the context of the chemical profile of individual preparations,
since this is likely to differ qualitatively and quantitatively between
products. One of the studies included in the review described
above found that P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 or 400 mg
daily for eight weeks had no statistically significant effects on
psychological well-being, as assessed using the Positive Affect
Negative Affect Scale, in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving 83 healthy younger adults (mean age 26
years) (”?)

Other effects The effects of an aqueous extract of P. ginseng roots
on blood alcohol clearance were assessed in an open study
involving 14 healthy men aged 25-35 years; each participant

Ginseng, Panax

served as his own control. Participants consumed a single dose
of alcohol (25% ethanol 72g per 65kg body weight) over 45
minutes with and without P ginseng root extract 3 g/kg body
weight. Blood samples taken 40 minutes after the end of the
period of alcohol ingestion showed blood alcohol concentrations
of 0.18% and 0.11% for the control and treatment periods,
respectively (p < 0.001). The design of this study does not allow
the observed effects to be attributed to ginseng administration,
and the hypothesis that P. ginseng increases blood alcohol
clearance requires testing in methodologically rigorous rando-
mised, controlled trials.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of
preparations of P. ginseng and other Panax species. There is a
lack of formal post-marketing surveillance-type studies, and
existing pharmacoepidemiological studies typically have assessed
potential benefits and not risks of harm(s). There is a substantial
number of placebo-controlled clinical trials of preparations of P.
ginseng and other Panax species, although many of these have
methodological limitations, including lack of randomisation and/
or double-blinding. Trials have assessed the effects of different
preparations, including combination herbal preparations contain-
ing different Panax species, which vary qualitatively and
quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Furthermore,
different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
(e.g. healthy volunteers, patients with hypertension), making
interpretation of the results difficult. The clinical trials of Panax
species root preparations available typically have involved small
numbers of patients and been of short duration (typically four to
12 weeks), so have the statistical power only to detect very
common, acute adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of safety
aspects of correctly identified, well-characterised Panax species
root preparations administered orally at different dosages,
including the effects of long-term treatment, is required.

A systematic review of data available up to May 2001 relating to
adverse events of monopreparations of P. ginseng preparations
identified 48 placebo-controlled trials, 14 trials with an active
control group, and 20 uncontrolled studies." Of these, 42 trials
involved healthy individuals and athletes, and the remainder
involved older individuals, postmenopausal women or patients
with hypertension, respiratory diseases, hepatitis, erectile dys-
function. Thirteen placebo-controlled studies provided sufficiently
detailed information on reported adverse events. Six of these
studies, mostly involving healthy individuals, had assessed the
effects of a P. ginseng root extract (G115) typically at a dose of
200 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, although one study lasted for
two years. Five other placebo-controlled studies assessed the
effects of red P. ginseng root taken for around two to 12 weeks
(one study involved administration for one year), and in two other
studies, the species and type of ginseng were not clearly specified.
Adverse events reported generally were similar in type and
frequency to those reported for the placebo groups.*!) Nine
placebo-controlled trials, four of which assessed a P. ginseng root
extract (G115), stated that no adverse events occurred during the
study period.

Placebo-controlled trials of P. ginseng publishe
systematic review was conducted, and placebo-controlled trials
assessing the effects of preparations of P. quinquefolius, typically

since the

----- PAGE 343 -----
Ginseng, Panax

have not provided detailed information on the occurrence of
adverse events. One study stated that there was no difference in
symptoms, mostly gastrointestinal adverse events, between the P.
quinquefolius and placebo groups reported during the study,”
whereas another study assessing P. quinquefolius stated that no
adverse effects occurred during the study.’

The systematic review also identified publications describing 27
case reports associated with the use of 'ginseng’, although for 22
reports no information was provided on the type (i.e. red or white
P. ginseng), preparation and dosage of P. ginseng ingested, and it is
unlikely that any chemical analysis of the products ingested was
undertaken. Four cases of agranulocytosis initially attributed to
use of P. ginseng-containing products, were later attributed to
ingredients (aminopyrine and phenylbutazone)
detected in the products.*” For many of the cases, there were
other factors, including concurrent medications and
treatment effects, that could explain the observed effects. The
cases included six reports of mastalgia, two of post-menopausal
vaginal bleeding and one of metrorrhagia (uterine bleeding at
irregular intervals, usually for prolonged period of time) in
women who had ingested or applied (one case of vaginal bleeding
was associated with use of a ‘ginseng’ face cream“) ‘ginseng!
products. Several of the reports describe positive dechallenge and/
or rechallenge. Most of these reports, however, are from the older
literature and involved the use of unlicensed, poorly described
products; a causal association with Panax species has not been
established, and the relevance of these reports to products
marketed currently is not clear. Two cases of mania have also
been described. One involved a 35-year-old woman with depressive
illness who was stabilised on treatment with lithium and
amitriptyline and who stopped lithium treatment and began
taking ginseng (not further specified).“ The second report
described a 26-year-old-man with no history of psychiatric illness
who experienced a manic episode two months after starting
treatment with red P. ginseng root 500 to 750 mg daily on five days
per week. Analysis of the product found no evidence of notable

undeclared

ation of

contaminants.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. A systematic review of information available
up to May 2001 relating to adverse effects associated with P.
ginseng summarised reports from the WHO-UMC database
describing a total of 168 adverse reactions associated with
monopreparations of ginseng.°") However, this number of reports
relates to unspecified 'ginseng' preparations, not necessarily
preparations of P. ginseng. To the end of the year 2005, the
WHO-UMC's database contained only nine reports, describing a
total of 20 adverse reactions, for monopreparations specified as P.
ginseng.®

In a phase 1 study involving healthy males aged 18-35 years
who received an extract of P ginseng root (21.4mg/mL;
standardised for ginsenosides 10.5%) 20mL twice daily for ten
days, no adverse effects on fertility parameters, including volume
of ejaculate, number of spermatozoids per millilitre, and
proportions of active, inactive, normokinetic, dyskinetic and
akinetic spermatozoids, were observed, compared with baseline
values. °9

In 1979, two studies referred to a ‘ginseng abuse syndrome!
(GAS) which emphasised that most side-effects documented for
'ginseng' were associated with the ingestion of large doses together
with other psychomotor stimulants, including tea and coffee. GAS

was defined as diarrhoea, hypertension, nervousness, skin
eruptions and _ sleepless other symptoms occasionally
observed included amenorrhoea, decreased appetite, depression,

87,88) However, these two

euphoria, hypotension and oedema.’
studies have been widely criticised over the variety of ginseng and
other preparations used, and over the lack of authentication of the
ginseng species ingested.(!

A review of the Russian literature describes symptoms of
overdose as those exhibited by individuals allergic to ginseng,
namely palpitations, insomnia and pruritus, together with heart
pain, decrease in sexual potency, vomiting, haemorrhagic
diathesis, headache and epistaxis, and that ingestion of very large
doses has been reported to be fatal." The primary publications
upon which these statements are based have not been used here, so
the quality of the reports, including their descriptions of the
ginseng preparations implicated, has not been

ed here.

Preclinical data

Results documented for toxicity studies carried out in a number of
animal species using standardised extracts (SE) indicate P. ginseng
to be of low toxicity. °*

Single doses of up to 2 g SE have been administered to mice and
rats with no toxic effects observed.°” LDso values (p.o.) in mice
and rats have been estimated at 2 g/kg and greater than 5 g/kg."®”)
In addition, LDso values (i.p., mice) have been estimated for
individual ginsenosides as 305mg/kg (Ry.2), 324mg/kg (Ra),
405 mg/kg (R.), 410mg/kg (R.), 1110 mg/kg (Ry), 1250 mg/kg
(Rg-1), and 1340 mg/kg (Rg); an LDspo (i.v., mice) of 3806 mg/kg has
been estimated for the saponins R..; and Rg.°”

Doses of approximately 720 mg of a P. ginseng extract (G115)
have been administered orally to rats for 20 days with no
toxicological effects documented.°”

Daily doses of up to 15mg G115/kg body weight have been
administered orally to dogs for 90 days with no toxic effects
documented. An initial increase in excitability which disappeared
after two to three weeks was the only observation reported in rats
fed 200 mg G115/kg body weight for 25 weeks.”

P. quinquefolius has been reported to be devoid of mutagenic
potential when investigated versus Salmonella typhimurium strain

M677.)

Contra-indications, Warnings

The older literature includes statements that the use of P. ginseng
is contra-indicated during acute illness, haemorrhage and during
the acute period of coronary thrombosis,‘ and it has been
recommended that P. ginseng should be avoided by individuals
who are highly energetic, nervous, tense, hysteric,
schizophrenic, and that P ginseng should not be taken with
stimulants, including coffee, antipsychotic drugs or during
treatment with hormones." ©” The scientific basis and evidence
for many of these statements is not clear. However, in view of their
documented pharmacological activities, Panax species prepara-
tions should be used with caution in patients with diabetes and
cardiovascular disorders. In general, and in view of the lack of
safety data, it is appropriate to advise against the long-term or
otherwise excessive use of Panax species.

manic or

Drug interactions In view of the pharmacological actions of
Panax species preparations and their isolated constituents
described following preclinical and, to a lesser extent, clinical
studies, the potential for preparations of Panax species to interfere
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those

----- PAGE 344 -----
with anticoagulant, hypoglycaemic and/or cardiovascular activity,
should be considered.

Two cases of a suspected interaction between ‘ginseng’ and
phenelzine have been documented. One report described insom-
nia, headache and tremulousness in a 64-year-old woman who
began taking a 'ginseng' tea in addition to her existing phenelzine
treatment; the woman previously had used 'ginseng' tea alone
without experiencing any adverse effects,°*) and three years after
the first epidsode of concurrent use of phenelzine and ‘ginseng!
tea, the woman ingested 'ginseng' capsules and experienced similar
symptoms." A second report described a 42-year-old woman for
whom treatment with phenelzine was initiated because of major
depressive illness. The woman was also receiving triazolam and
lorazepam and began self-treatment with unspecified preparations
of ginseng and bee pollen.” She experienced headaches,
irritability and visual hallucinations. A causal relationship with
use of Panax species in these cases cannot be established.

There is an isolated case report of a suspected interaction
between P. ginseng and warfarin involving a 47-year-old-man with
an aortic heart valve who was receiving warfarin for thrombo-
prophylaxis. Two weeks after the man began treatment with a P.
ginseng root extract (Ginsana), his international normalised ratio
(INR) fell to 1.5, having previously been stable for nine
months.°* On stopping use of the P. ginseng preparation, his
INR returned to within the target range.

In a randomised, open-label, crossover study, 12 healthy male
individuals received a single dose of warfarin 25 mg alone or after
seven days' treatment with capsules containing P ginseng root
(containing extract equivalent to 500mg root; standardised for
ginsenosides 8.93 mg, as ginsenoside R,;) two or three times
daily.°” There were no statistically significant differences in area
under the plasma-concentration time curve (AUC), elimination
half-life (t,/:), total clearance, volume of distribution, maximal
plasma concentration (Cy,ax) and time to maximal concentration
for either R-warfarin or S-warfarin when warfarin was taken
following P. ginseng treatment, compared with values for ingestion
of warfarin alone. There were also no statistically significant
differences in protein binding of R- and S-warfarin, or in warfarin
pharmacodynamics as assessed using INR values, following P.
ginseng administration. By contrast, another drug interaction
study involving healthy volunteers found that a preparation of P.
quinquefolius root reduced the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. In
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 20 healthy
individuals received powdered root of P. quinquefolius (containing
Ry-1 1.93%, Ry-2 0.20%, Re 0.61%, Ra 0.42%, Re 1.68% and Ry 1
0.35%) 1g twice daily, or placebo, for three weeks; treatment was
taken for a total of three weeks, beginning four days after oral
administration of warfarin 5 mg daily for three days, concurrently
with a second three-day period of warfarin administration, and
for four days after the second period of warfarin exposure.
There was a significantly greater reduction in the magnitude of the
INR, the primary outcome measure, in the P. quinquefolius group,
compared with that in the placebo group (p = 0.0012).

The contrasting findings for P. ginseng root and P. quinquefolius
root preparations could be explained by differences in their
chemical composition, particularly ginsenoside content. The
effects of different Panax species preparations on warfarin
pharmacokinetics in patients receiving warfarin treatment or
prophylaxis require investigation.

In another drug interaction study involving healthy individuals
(n = 20), participants received a P. ginseng root extract
preparation (Ginsana, Pharmaton, Connecticut, USA; standar-
dised for ginsenosides 4%) 100mg twice daily for 14 days.°

Ginseng, Panax

Data collected over a one-week period before P ginseng
administration provided a within-subject control group. At the
end of the study, there were no statistically significant changes in
the 6-B-hydroxycortisol: cortisol ratio following P ginseng
administration, compared with baseline values, suggesting that
P. ginseng did not induce CYP3A enzyme activity.'°" By contrast,
in in vitro experiments, a P. ginseng root extract (G115;
standardised for 4% ginsenosides) and a P. quinquefolius root
extract (standardised for 10% total ginsenosides) both inhibited
CYPIA1, CYP1A2 and CYPIBI1 activities in a concentration-
dependent manner." P. quinquefolius root extract was 45-fold
more potent than P ginseng root extract in inhibiting CYP1A2.
The ginsenosides Ry_1, Ry_2, Re, Ra, Re, Re and Ry, added to the
system either individually or as a mixture, at concentrations
reflecting those at which the ginseng extracts caused inhibition,
did not affect CYP1A and B enzyme activities. These findings led
to the suggestion that other ginsenosides could be responsible for
the inhibitory effects on the CYP enzymes investigated, or that the
effects could be due to other compounds, such as tannins, as these

were not removed from the extracts.”

Pregnancy and lactation No fetal abnormalities have been
observed in rats and rabbits administered a standardised P. ginseng
extract (40 mg/kg, p.o.) from day 1 to day 15 of pregnancy.” P
ginseng has also been fed to two successive generations of rats in
doses of up to 15mg G115/kg body weight/day (equivalent to
approximately 2700mg P. ginseng extract) with no teratogenic
effects observed.” However, the safety of P. ginseng during
pregnancy has not been established in humans and therefore its
use should be avoided. Similarly, there are no published data
concerning the secretion of pharmacologically active constituents
from P. ginseng into the breast milk and use of P. ginseng during
lactation is therefore best avoided. However, a more recent study
which investigated the effect of ginsenoside R,; on the
development of rat embryos during organogenesis in vitro found
that median total morphological scores were significantly lower
for embryos exposed to ginsenoside Ry; at concentrations of
30 pg/mL, compared with those for control embryos (p <
0.05)."°) The clinical relevance of these findings is not known.
The effects of ginsenoside Ry; and other ginsenosides, including
the possibility of additive effects, on embryogensis requires further
investigation.

The safety of P ginseng during pregnancy has not been
established in humans. Similarly, there are no published data
concerning the secretion of pharmacologically active constituents
from P. ginseng into the breast milk. In view of the lack of safety
data and the findings described above, and until further
information is available, the use of P. ginseng preparations during
pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided.

Herbal Stress Relief. Austria: Ginsana. Belgium: Ginsana.
Brazil: Ginsana; Ginsex. Canada: Ginsana. Czech Republic:
Ginsana. France: Gerimax Tonique. Germany: Ardey-aktiv;
Coriosta Vitaltonikum N; Ginsana; Hevert-Aktivon Mono; IL
HWA; Orgaplasma. Italy: Ginsana. Malaysia: Ginsana.
Mexico: Raigin; Rutying; Sanjin Royal Jelly. Portugal: Ginsana.
Russia: Gerimax Ginseng (fepumaxc 7Kenpurenn); Ginsana
(Tuncana). Singapore: Ginsana. Spain: Bio Star. Switzerland:

----- PAGE 345 -----
Ginseng, Panax

b US;
Adult Citrex Multivitamin + Ginseng + Omega 3; Total Man.
Russia: Doppelherz Ginseng Aktiv (Aonmeaprepy, 7Kenpmen
Axrus); Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aommeanrepu Buraaorouun).
South Africa: Activex 40 Plus. Singapore: Gin-Vita. Spain:
Energysor; Redseng Polivit; Ton Was; Vigortonic. Switzerland:
Biovital Ginseng; Burgerstein TopVital; Geri; Gincosan;
Imuvit; Supradyn Vital 50+; Triallin. Thailand: Imugins;
Imuvit; Multilim RG; Revitan. UK: Actimind; Red Kooga
Co-Q-10 and Ginseng; Regina Royal Concorde; Seven Seas
Ginseng; Vitegin Capsules; Wellman. USA: Energy Support;
Mental Clarity.

References

1 Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about ginseng.
Pharm J] 1986; 237: 583-586.

2 Chung BS. Studies on the components of Korean ginseng (II) On the
composition of ginseng essential oils. Kor J Pharmacog 1976; 7: 41-44.

3 Iwabuchi H et al. Studies on the sesquiterpenoids of Panax ginseng C.
A. Meyer II. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 509-510.

4 Iwabuchi H et al. Studies on the sesquiterpenoids of Panax ginseng C.
A. Meyer II. Isolation and structure determination of ginsenol, a novel
sesquiterpene alcohol. Chem Pharm Bull 1988; 36: 2447-2451.

5 Ahn B-Z et al. Acetylpanaxydol and panaxydolchlorohydrin, two new
poly-ynes from Korean ginseng with cytotoxic activity against L1210
cells. Arch Pharm (Weinheim) 1989; 322: 223-226.

6 Fujimoto Y, Satoh M. A new cytotoxic chlorine-containing
polyacetylene from the callus of Panax ginseng. Chem Pharm Bull
1988; 36: 4206-4208.

7 Gao Q-Pet al. Chemical properties and anti-complementary activities
of polysaccharide fractions from roots and leaves of Panax ginseng.
Planta Med 1989; 55: 9-12.

8 Yamasaki K et al. Purification and characterization of B-amylase from
ginseng. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 973-978.

9 Chuang WC et al. A comparative study on commercial samples of
ginseng radix. Planta Med 1995; 61: 459-465.

10 Zhu S et al. Comparative study on triterpene saponins of Ginseng
drugs. Planta Med 2004; 70(7): 666-677.

11 Cui JE. Identification and quantification of ginsenosides in various
commercial ginseng preparations. Eur J Pharm Sci 1995; 3: 77-85.

12 Harkey MR et al. Variability in commercial ginseng products: an
analysis of 25 preparations. Am J Clin Nutr 2001; 73: 1101-1106.

13. United States Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service.
Convention permit applications for wild American ginseng harvested
in 2005. August 3, 2005.

14 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora. Notification to the Parties. No. 2000/018. Geneva, 29
February 2000.

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Baranov Al. Medicinal uses of ginseng and related plants in the Soviet
Union: recent trends in the Soviet literature. J Ethnopharmacol 1982;
6: 339-353.

Dharmananada S. The nature of ginseng. Traditional use, modern
research and the question of dosage. HerbalGram 2002; 54: 34-51.
Brekhman II. Panax ginseng-1. Med Sci Service 1967; 4: 17-26.
Takino Y et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. I. Quantitative analysis of
ginsenoside Rgl in rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30(6): 2196-2201.
Odani T et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. III. The absorption, distribution and
excretion of ginsenoside Rb1 in rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31(3):
1059-1066.

Odani T et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. IV. Decompostion of ginsenoside
Rgl and -Rb1 in the digestive tract of rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31
(10); 3691-3697.

Karikura M et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion
and metabolism of ginseng saponins. V. The decomposition products
of ginsenoside Rb2 in the large intestine of rats. Chem Pharm Bull
1990; 38(10): 2859-2861.

Li TB et al. Effects of ginsenosides, lectins and Momordica charantia
insulin-like peptide on corticosterone production by isolated rat
adrenal cells. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 21: 21-29.

Filaretov AA et al. Role of pituitary-adrenocortical system in body
adaptation abilities. Exp Clin Endocrinol 1988; 92: 129-136.
Guodong L, Zhonggi L. Effects of ginseng saponins on insulin release
from isolated pancreatic islets of rats. Chin J Integr Trad Western
Med 1987; 7: 326.

Yushu H, Yuzhen C. The effect of Panax ginseng extract (GS) on
insulin and corticosteroid receptors. J Trad Chin Med 1988; 8: 293—
295.

Kimura M et al. Pharmacological sequential trials for the
fractionation of components with hypoglycemic activity in alloxan
diabetic mice from Ginseng radix. J Pharm Dyn 1981, 4: 402-409.
Waki I et al. Effects of a hypoglycemic component of Ginseng radix on
insulin biosynthesis in normal and diabetic animals. | Pharm Dyn
1982; 5: 547-554.

Avakian EV et al. Effect of Panax ginseng extract on energy
metabolism during exercise in rats. Planta Med 1984; 50: 151-154.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots: effects on the key
enzymes of glucose metabolism in the liver of mice. Phytother Res
1989; 3: 15-19.

Oshima Y et al. Isolation and hypoglycemic activity of quinquefolans
A, B, and C, glycans of Panax quinquefolium roots. J Nat Prod 1987;
50: 188-190.

Konno C, Hikino H. Isolation and hypoglycemic activity of panaxans
M,N, O and P, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. Int ] Crude Drug Res
1987; 25: 53-56.

Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots: effects of plasma
level, secretion, sensitivity and binding of insulin in mice. Phytother
Res 1989; 3: 20-24.

Konno C et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of panaxans A, B,
C, D and E, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. Planta Med 1984; 50: 434—
436.

Konno C et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of panaxans Q, R,
S, T and U, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. J Ethnopharmacol 1985;
14: 69-74.

Manren R et al. Calcium antagonistic action of saponins from Panax
notoginseng (sanqi-ginseng). J Trad Chin Med 1987; 7: 127-130.

Wu J-X, Chen J-X. Negative chronotropic and inotropic effects of
Panax saponins. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1988; 9: 409-412.

Lei X-L et al. Cardiovascular pharmacology of Panax notoginseng
(Burk) EH. Chen and Salvia militiorrhiza. Am ] Chin Med 1986; 14:
145-152.

Li XJ, Zhang BH. Studies on the antiarrhythmic effects of panaxatriol
saponins (PTS) isolated from Panax notoginseng. Acta Pharm Sin
1988; 23: 168-173.

Yunxiang F, Xiu C. Effects of ginsenosides on myocardial lactic acid,
cyclic nucleotides and ultrastructural myocardial changes of anoxia on
mice. Chin J Integr Trad Western Med 1987; 7: 326.

----- PAGE 346 -----
40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Namba T e¢ al. Fundamental studies on the evaluation of the crude
drugs. (I). Hemolytic and its protective activity of ginseng saponins.
Planta Med 1974, 28: 28-38.

Kosuge T et al. Studies on antihemorrhagic principles in the crude
drugs for hemostatics. I. On hemostatic activities of the crude drugs
for hemostatics. Yakugaku Zasshi [J Pharm Soc Jpn] 1981; 101: 501-
503.

Yamamoto M, Kumagai M. Anti-atherogenic action of Panax ginseng
in rats and in patients with hyperlipidemia. Planta Med 1982; 45: 149-
166.

Kuo S-C et al. Antiplatelet components in Panax ginseng. Planta Med
1990; 56: 164-167.

Kim H-S et al. Antinarcotic effects of the standardized ginseng extract
G115 on morphine. Planta Med 1990; 56: 158-163.

Tsang D et al. Ginseng saponins: Influence on neurotransmitter
uptake in rat brain synaptosomes. Planta Med 1985; 51: 221-224.
Kobayashi § et al. Inhibitory actions of phospholipase Ay and
saponins including ginsenoside Rb, and glycyrrhizin on the formation
of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor clusters on cultured mouse
myotubes. Phytother Res 1990; 4: 106-111.

Tsang D e¢ al. Ginenoside modulates K* stimulated noradrenaline
release from rat cerebral cortex slices. Planta Med 1986; 52: 266-268.
Saksena AK et al. Effect of Withania somnifera and Panax ginseng on
dopaminergic receptors in rat brain during stress. Planta Med 1989;
SS: 9S.

Nakagawa S et al. Cytoprotective activity of components of garlic,
ginseng and ciuwjia on hepatocyte injury induced by carbon
tetrachloride in vitro. Hiroshima ] Med Sci 1985; 34: 303-309.
Hikino H et al. Antihepatotoxic actions of ginsenosides from Panax
ginseng roots. Planta Med 1985; 51: 62-64.

Ahn B-Z, Kim SI. Heptadeca-1,8¢-dien-4,6-diin-3,10-diol, ein weiteres,
gegen 11210 — Zellen cytotoxisches Wirkprinzip aus der Koreanischen
Ginsengwurzel. Planta Med 1988; 54: 183.

Qian B-C et al. Effects of ginseng polysaccharides on tumor and
immunological function in tumor-bearing mice. Acta Pharmacol Sin
1987; 8: 277-288.

Matsunaga H et al. Studies on the panaxytriol of Panax ginseng C.A.
Meyer. Isolation, determination and antitumor activity. Chem Pharm
Bull 1989; 37: 1279-1281.

Singh VK et al. Combined treatment of mice with Panax ginseng
extract and interferon inducer. Planta Med 1983; 47: 235-236.

Singh VK e¢ al. Immunomodulatory activity of Panax ginseng extract.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 462-465.

Engels HJ et al. Effects of ginseng on secretory IgA, performance, and
recovery from interval exercise. Med Sci Sports Exercise 2003; 35(4):
690-696.

Engels HJ et al. Failure of chronic ginseng supplementation to affect
work performance and energy metabolism in healthy adult females.
Nutrition Res 1996; 16(8): 1295-1305.

Engels HJ, Wirth JC. No ergogenic effects of ginseng (Panax ginseng
C.A.Meyer) during graded maximal aerobic exercise. J Am Diet Assoc
1997; 97: 1110-1115.

Allen JD et al. Ginseng supplementation does not enhance healthy
young adults’ peak aerobic exercise performance. J Am Coll Nut 1998;
17(5): 462-466.

Kennedy DO, Scholey AB. Ginseng: potential for the enhancement of
cognitive performance and mood. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75:
687-700.

Kennedy DO et al. Electroencephalograph effects of single doses of
Ginkgo biloba and Panax ginseng in healthy young volunteers.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75: 701-709.

Reay JL et al. Single doses of Panax ginseng (G115) reduce blood
glucose levels and improve cognitive performance during sustained
mental activity. J Psychopharmacol 2005; 19(4): 357-365.

Kennedy DO et al. Improved cognitive performance in human
volunteers following administration of guarana (Paullinia cupana)
extract: comparison and interaction with Panax ginseng. Pharmacol
Biochem Behav 2004; 79: 401-411.

Scholey AB, Kennedy DO. Acute, dose-dependent cognitive effects of
Ginkgo biloba, Panax ginseng and their combination in healthy young
volunteers: differential interactions with cognitive demand. Hum
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2002; 17: 35-44.

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

Ginseng, Panax

Wesnes KA et al. The memory enhancing effects of a Ginkgo biloba/
Panax ginseng combination in healthy middle-aged volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 152: 353-361.

Wesnes KA et al. The cognitive, subjective, and physical effects of a
Ginkgo biloba/Panax ginseng combination in healthy volunteers with
neurasthenic complaints. Psychopharmacol Bull 1997; 33(4): 677-683.
Sievenpiper JL et al. Variable effects of American ginseng: a batch of
American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) with a depressed
ginsenoside profile does not affect postprandial glycemia. Eur J Clin
Nut 2003; 57: 243-248.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) reduces
postprandial glycemia in nondiabetic subjects and subjects with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160: 1009-1013.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng improves glycemia in individuals

with normal glucose tolerance: effect of dose and time escalation. J
Am Coll Nut 2000; 19(6): 738-744.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) attenuates
postprandial glycemia in a time-dependent but not dose-dependent
manner in healthy individuals. Am J Clin Nutr 2001; 73: 753-758.
Sievenpiper JL et al. Null and opposing effects of Asian ginseng
(Panax ginseng C.A.Meyer) on acute glycemia: results of two acute
dose escalation studies. | Am Coll Nutr 2003; 22(6): 524-532.
Scaglione F e¢ al. Immunomodulatory effects of two extracts of Panax
ginseng C.A.Meyer. Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1990; 16(10): 537-542.
Yun TK, Choi SY. A case-control study of ginseng intake and cancer.
Int ] Epidemiol 1990; 19(4): 871-876.

Yun TK, Choi SY. Preventive effect of ginseng intake against various
human cancers: a case-control study on 1987 pairs. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1995; 4(4): 401-408.

Yun TK, Choi SY. Non-organ specific cancer prevention of ginseng: a
prospective study in Korea. Int ] Epidemiol 1998; 27: 359-364.

Yun TK Panax ginseng — a non-organ-specific cancer preventive.
Lancet Oncol 2001; 2: 49-55.

Shin HR et al. The cancer-preventive potential of Panax ginseng: a
review of human and experimental evidence. Cancer Causes Control
2000; 11: 565-576.

Coleman CI et al. The effects of Panax ginseng on quality of life. J
Clin Pharm Ther 2003; 28: 5-15.

Cardinal BJ, Engels H-J. Ginseng does not enhance psychological well-
being in healthy young adults: results of a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, randomized clinical trial. J Ant Diet Assoc 2001; 101: 655—
660.

Lee FC et al. Effects of Panax ginseng on blood alcohol clearance in
man. Clin Exp Pharmac Physiol 1987; 14: 543-546.

Coon JT, Ernst E. Panax ginseng. A systematic review of adverse
effects and drug interactions. Drug Safety 2002; 25(5): 323-344.
Hopkins MP et al. Ginseng face cream and unexplained vaginal
bleeding. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 159: 1121-1122.
Gonzalez-Seijo JC et al. Manic episode and ginseng: report of a
possible case. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1995; 15: 447-448.

Engelberg D et al. A case of ginseng-induced mania. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 2001; 21(5): 535-537.

Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 24, 2006].

Mkrtchyan A et al. A phase I clinical study of Andrographis
paniculata fixed combination Kan Jang™ versus ginseng and valerian
on the semen quality of healthy male subjects. Phytomedicine 2005;
12: 403-409.

Siegel RK. Ginseng abuse syndrome — problems with the panacea.
JAMA 1979; 241: 1614-1615.

Siegel RK. Ginseng and high blood pressure. JAMA 1980; 243: 3.
Berté E. Toxicological investigation of the standardized ginseng extract
G115 after unique administration [LDso]. Manufacturer's data, on file.
1982, pp. 1-12.

Hess FG et al. Reproduction study in rats of ginseng extract G115.
Food Chem Toxicol 1982; 20: 189-192.

Hess FG et al. Effects of subchronic feeding of ginseng extract G115 in
beagle dogs. Food Chem Toxicol 1983; 21: 95-97.

Trabucchi E. Toxicological and pharmacological investigation of
Geriatric Pharmaton. Manufacturer's data on file. 1971, pp. 1-22.
Savel J. Toxicological report on Geriatric Pharmaton. Manufacturer's
data on file. 1971, pp. 1-31.

----- PAGE 347 -----
94

95

96

97

98

99

Ginseng, Panax

Chang YS et al. Evaluation of the mutagenic potential of American
ginseng (Panax quinquefolius). Planta Med 1986; 52: 338.

Shader RI, Greenblatt DJ. Phenelzine and the dream machine:
ramblings and reflections [abstract]. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1985; 5:
65.

Shader RI et al. Bees, ginseng and MAOIs revisited. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1988; 8: 235.

Jones BD et al. Interaction of ginseng with phenelzine. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1987; 7: 201-202.

Janetzky K, Morreale AP. Probable interaction between warfarin and
ginseng. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1997; 54: 692-693.

Jiang X et al. Effect of St John's wort and ginseng on the

pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy
subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57(5): 592-599.

100 Yuan CS et al. American ginseng reduces warfarin's effect in healthy
patients. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:
23-27.

101 Anderson GD e¢ al. Drug interaction potential of soy extract and
Panax ginseng. J Clin Pharmacol 2003; 43: 643-648.

102 Chang TKH et al. In vitro effect of standardized ginseng extracts and
individual ginsenosides on the catalytic activity of human CYP1A1,
CYPI1A2, and CYP1B1. Drug Metab Disp 2002; 30: 378-384.

103 Chan LY et al. An in-vitro study of ginsenoside Rb1-induced
teratogenicity using a whole rat embryo model. Human Reproduction
2003; 18(10): 2166-2168.

----- PAGE 348 -----
- Golden Seal

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Golden seal is characterised by the isoquinoline alkaloid
constituents. These compounds, primarily hydrastine and
berberine, represent the main active components of golden
seal. Several activities have been documented for the alkaloid
constituents and many of these support the traditional herbal
uses of the root. However, rigorous clinical investigations of
efficacy and safety are limited. In view of the pharmacological
properties of the alkaloid constituents, excessive use of
golden seal should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Hydrastis canadensis L. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Xanthorhiza simplicissima Marsh., Yellow Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Martindale 35th edition\*»
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSLiC*?

Alkaloids

OCH;

OCH;

canadine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of golden seal.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G40 and G62.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. 2.5-6.0%. Hydrastine (major, 1.5—
4.0%), berberine (0.5-6.0%), berberastine (2-3%), and canadine
(1%), with lesser amounts of related alkaloids including candaline
and canadaline.''~)

Other constituents Chlorogenic acid, carbohydrates, fatty acids
(75% saturated, 25% unsaturated), volatile oil (trace), resin,
meconin (meconinic acid lactone).

Food Use

Golden seal is not used in foods, although it is reported to be used
in herbal teas.(“*? The concentration of berberine permitted in
foods is limited to 0.1mg/kg, and 10mg/kg in alcoholic
beverages.“@!

Herbal Use

Golden seal is stated to be a stimulant to involuntary muscle, and
to possess stomachic, oxytocic, antihaemorrhagic and laxative
properties. Traditionally it has been used for digestive disorders,
gastritis, peptic ulceration, colitis, anorexia, upper respiratory
catarrh, menorrhagia, post-partum haemorrhage, dysmenor-
rhoea, topically for eczema, pruritus, otorrhoea, catarrhal deaf-
ness and tinnitus, conjunctivitis, and specifically for atonic
dyspepsia with hepatic symptoms.'©% 97 °®)

Figure 2 Golden seal (Hydrastis canadensis).

----- PAGE 349 -----
Golden Seal

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 0.5-1.0 g as a decoction three times daily'C*°”

Liquid extract of Hydrastis (BPC 1949) 0.3-1.0 mL.
Tincture of Hydrastis (BPC 1949) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of golden seal is attributed to the
isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, primarily hydrastine and
berberine,*** which are reported to have similar properties.(“*?
Antibiotic, immunostimulant, anticonvulsant, sedative, hypoten-
sive, uterotonic, choleretic and carminative activities have been
described for berberine.”

In vitro and animal studies

Limited work has been documented for golden seal, although the
pharmacology of berberine and hydrastine is well studied.

The total alkaloid fraction of golden seal has been reported to
exhibit anticonvulsant activity in smooth muscle preparations
(e.g. mouse intestine, uterus). However, in vitro, canadine is
reported to exhibit uterine stimulation in guinea-pig and rabbit
tissues. Berberine, canadine and hydrastine are all stated to
exhibit utero-activity.(@”

Berberine and hydrastine have produced a hypotensive effect in
laboratory animals following intravenous administration.” °*
High doses of hydrastine are documented to produce an increase
in blood pressure.” In vitro, berberine has been reported to
decrease the anticoagulant action of heparin in canine and human
blood.”

Berberine is reported to exert a stimulant action on the heart
and to increase coronary blood flow, although higher doses are
stated to inhibit cardiac activity.”

Antimuscarinic and antihistamine actions have been documen-
ted for berberine.”

In rats, berberine has exhibited antipyretic activity three times
as effective as aspirin.

Berberine potentiated barbiturate sleeping time, but did not
exhibit any analgesic or tranquillising effects.”

A broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity against bacteria,
fungi, and protozoa has been reported for berberine. Sensitive

Figure 3 Golden seal — dried drug substance (rhizome, root).

organisms include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Chlamydia aureus, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Salmonella
typhi, Diplococcus pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Shi-
gella dysenteriae, Trichomonas vaginalis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
Neisseria meningitidis, Treponema pallidum, Giardia lamblia and
Leishmania donovani.” Berberine is reported to be effective
against diarrhoeas caused by enterotoxins such as Vibrio cholerae
and Escherichia coli.” In vivo and in vitro studies in hamsters
and rats have reported significant activity for berberine against
Entamoeba histolytica.

Anticancer activity has been reported for berberine in B1, KB
and PS tumour systems.'©”” In addition, berberine sulfate was
found to inhibit the action of teleocidin, a known tumour
promoter, on the formation of mouse skin tumours initiated with
7,12-dimethylbenz{a]anthracene.”’

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of golden
seal and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required. Berberine is stated to be effective in the treatment of
acute diarrhoea on the basis of data from several clinical
studies.” It has been found effective against diarrhoeas caused
by Escherichia coli, Shigella dysenteriae, Salmonella paratyphi B,
Klebsiella, Giardia lamblia and Vibrio cholerae. Berberine has
been used to treat trachoma, an infectious ocular disease caused
by Chlamydia trachomatis, which is a major cause of blindness
and impaired vision in developing countries.)

Clinical studies have shown berberine to stimulate bile and
bilirubin secretion and to improve symptoms of chronic
cholecystitis, and to correct raised concentrations of tyramine in
patients with liver cirrhosis.)

Further investigation is required to determine whether or not
the effects described for berberine also occur with golden seal.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for golden seal
and further investigation of these aspects is required. The alkaloid
constituents are potentially toxic and symptoms of golden seal
poisoning include stomach upset, nervous symptoms and depres-
sion; large quantities may even be fatal.’ High doses of
hydrastine are reported to cause exaggerated reflexes, convulsions,
paralysis and death from respiratory failure. The root may cause
contact ulceration of mucosal surfaces.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Golden seal is contra-indicated in individuals with raised blood
pressure.(67 ©? S®) The alkaloid constituents of golden seal are

potentially toxic and excessive use should be avoided.

fey

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of golden seal and the
alkaloid constituents, the potential for preparations of golden seal
to interact with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Golden seal is contra-indicated for use
during pregnancy.°”°*”) Berberine, canadine, hydrastine and
hydrastinine have all been reported to produce uterine stimulant

tivity) Tei aa : :
activity. Tt is not known whether the alkaloids are excreted in
breast milk. The use of golden seal during lactation should be
avoided.

----- PAGE 350 -----
vance: maXO!

. Spain: B joum. UK:
Digestive; Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Immune Support.

References

1 Gleye J et al. La canadaline: nouvel alcaloide d'Hydrastis canadensis.
Phytochemistry 1974; 13: 675-676.
2 El-Masry S et al. Colorimetric and spectrophotometric determination

Golden Seal

of Hydrastis alkaloids in pharmaceutical preparations. ] Pharm Sci
1980; 69: 597-598.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Hydrastis canadensis, Berberis vulgaris,
Berberis aquitolium and other berberine containing plants. In:
Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle: John Bastyr College
Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

Genest K, Hughes DW. Natural products in Canadian
pharmaceuticals iv. Hydrastis canadensis. Can J Pharm Sci 1969; 4:
4144S.

Nishino H et al. Berberine sulphate inhibits tumour-promoting
activity of teleocidin in two-stage carcinogenesis on mouse skin.
Oncology 1986; 43: 131-134.

Wisniewski W, Gorta T. Effect of temperature on the oxidation of
hydrastine to hydrastinine in liquid extracts and rhizomes of Hydrastis
canadensis in the presence of air and steam. Acta Pol Pharm 1969; 26:
313-317.

Preininger V. The pharmacology and toxicology of the Papaveraceae
alkaloids. In: Manske RHE, Holmes HL, eds. The Alkaloids, vol 15.
New York: Academic Press, 1975: 239.

Hardin JW, Arena JM. Human Poisoning from Native and Cultivated
Plants, 2nd edn. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press,
1974.

G

----- PAGE 351 -----
Gravel Root

The chemistry of gravel root is poorly studied and no mn

evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
very limited information on the chemistry and
pharmacological and toxicological effects of gravel root,
excessive use and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Eupatorium purpureum L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
E. trifoliatum L., Joe-Pye Weed, Kydney Root, Purple Boneset

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G20 and G40.

Little information is available on the chemistry of gravel root. It
is stated to contain euparin (a benzofuran compound), eupatorin
(a flavonoid), resin and volatile oil.

Other plant parts The herb is reported to contain echinatine, an
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid.”

Food Use

Gravel root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Gravel root is stated to possess antilithic, diuretic and antirheu-
matic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for urinary
calculus, cystitis, dysuria, urethritis, prostatitis, rheumatism,
gout, and specifically for renal or vesicular calculi.'°7 °

Benzofurans
CH;
g \
HO °
euparin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of gravel root.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.”
(G7)

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of gravel
root and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Figure 3. Gravel root — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 352 -----
Side-effects, To:

None documented although there is a lack of clinical safety an
toxicity data for gravel root and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are constituents of
many species of Eupatorium.'” © Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an
unsaturated pyrrolizidine nucleus are reported to be hepatotoxic
in both animals and humans (see Comfrey). An unsaturate
pyrrolizidine alkaloid, echinatine, has been reported for the aeria
parts of gravel root.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, there is very limited chemical an
pharmacological information available for gravel root and this
should be considered when assessing whether or not use of grave
root is appropriate.

Drug interactions None documented. However, there is very
limited chemical and pharmacological information available for

Gravel Root

gravel root and the potential for preparations of gravel root to
interact with other medicines administered concurrently should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of gravel root has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicological information the use of gravel root during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

UK: Backache.

Reference

1 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

----- PAGE 353 -----
. Ground Ivy

support some of the herbal uses, although there is a lack of
clinical research assessing the effects of ground ivy and

rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. In
view of the lack of safety and toxicity data, and the reported
cytotoxic activity of ursolic acid, excessive use of ground ivy
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Glechoma hederacea L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)
Nepeta hederacea (L.) Trevis, N. glechoma Benth.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Amino acids Asparagic acid, glutamic acid, proline, tyrosine and
valine.

Flavonoids Flavonol glycosides (e.g. hyperoside, isoquercitrin,
rutin) and flavone glycosides (e.g. luteolin diglucoside, cosmosyin,
cynaroside and cosmoriin).?

Steroids -Sitosterol.

Terpenoids Oleanolic acid, o-ursolic acid, B-ursolic acid.”
Volatile oils — 0.03—0.06%. Various terpenoid components
including p-cymene, linalool, limonene, menthone, &-pinene, B-
pinene, pinocamphone, pulegone and terpineol; glechomafuran (a
sesquiterpene).

Other constituents Palmitic acid and other fatty acids, rosmarinic
acid, succinic acid, bitter principle (glechomin), choline, gum,
diterpene lactone (marrubiin), saponin, tannin and wax.

Food Use

Ground ivy is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
ground ivy can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted

manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'°!®

Herbal Use

Ground ivy is stated to possess mild expectorant, anticatarrhal,
astringent, vulnerary, diuretic and stomachic properties. Tradi-
tionally, it has been used for bronchitis, tinnitus, diarrhoea,
haemorrhoids, cystitis, gastritis, and specifically for chronic
b - (G6, G7, G8, G49, Ge4)

ronchial catarrh.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vivo anti-inflammatory activity has been reported for an
ethanolic extract of ground ivy, which was stated to exhibit a
moderate inhibition (27%) of carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema.

Ursolic acid analogues, 2¢- and 2B-hydroxyursolic acid, have
been documented to provide significant ulcer-protective activity in
mice.)

The astringent activity documented for ground ivy has been
attributed to rosmarinic acid, a polyphenolic acid.

Glechomin and marrubiin are stated to be bitter principles, and

a-terpineol is known to be an antiseptic component of volatile
oils, (C48 G4)

Flavonoids

glucosyl-O.

cynaroside OH
(luteolin-7-glucoside)

cosmoriin H
(apigenin-7-glucoside)

Fatty acids

es COOH

9-hydroxy-10-trans-12-cis
-octadecadienoic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ground ivy.

----- PAGE 354 -----
Figure 2 Ground ivy (Glechoma hederacea).

Anti-inflammatory and astringent properties are generally
associated with flavonoids and tannins, respectively. Anti-inflam-
matory properties have been documented for rosmarinic acid (see
Rosemary).

In vitro antiviral activity against the Epstein—Barr virus has
been documented for ursolic acid.” Both oleanolic and ursolic
acids were found to inhibit tumour production by TPA in mouse
skin, with activity comparable to that of retinoic acid, a known
tumour-promoter inhibitor.”

Significant cytotoxic activity has also been reported for ursolic
acid in lymphocytic leukaemia (P-388, L-1210) and human lung
carcinoma (A-549), and marginal activity in KB cells, human
colon (HCT-8), and mammary (MCF-7) tumour cells.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of ground
ivy and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for ground ivy
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Poisoning in cattle and horses has been documented in Eastern
Europe.” Symptoms include accelerated weak pulse, difficulty in
breathing, conjunctival haemorrhage, elevated temperature, dizzi-
ness, spleen enlargement, dilation of the caecum, and gastro-
enteritis revealed at post-mortem. Antitumour and cytotoxic
activities have been reported for oleanolic and ursolic acids (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Ground ivy volatile oil contains many terpenoids and terpene-
rich volatile oils are irritant to the gastrointestinal tract and
kidneys. Pulegone is an irritant, hepatotoxic, and abortifacient
principle of the volatile oil of pennyroyal. However, in comparison
with pennyroyal the overall yield of volatile oil is much less (0.03-—
0.06% in ground ivy and 1-2% in pennyroyal).

Figure 3. Ground ivy - dried drug substance (herb).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Ground ivy is contra-indicated in epilepsy” although no

rationale for this statement has been found. Excessive doses may
be irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa and should be avoided
by individuals with existing renal disease.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of ground ivy to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of ground ivy has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the possible
irritant and abortifacient action of the volatile oil, the use of
ground ivy during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Gerard House Water Relief Tablets; Water Naturtabs.

References

1 Zieba J. Isolation and identification of flavonoids from Glechoma
hederacea. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 593-597.

2 Zieba J. Isolation and identification of nonheteroside triterpenoids
from Glechoma hederacea. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 587-592.

3. Stahl E, Datta SN. New sesquiterpenoids of the ground ivy (Glechoma
hederacea). Justus Liebigs Ann Chem 1972; 757: 23-32.

4 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

5 Okuyama E et al. Isolation and identification of ursolic acid-related

compounds as the principles of Glechoma hederacea having an
37: 52-55.
6 Okuda T et al. The components of tannic activities in Labiatae plants.

antiulcerogenic activity. Shoyakugaku Zasshi 1983;

I. Rosmarinic acid from Labiatae plants in Japan. Yakugaku Zasshi
1986; 106: 1108-1111.

7 Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleanolic acid on skin
tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Cancer
Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

8 Lee K-H et al. The cytotoxic principles of Prunella vulgaris,
Psychotria serpens, and Hyptis capitata: Ursolic acid and related
derivatives. Planta Med 1988; 54: 308.

9 MAFE. Poisonous Plants in Britain. London: HMSO, 1984: 139.

----- PAGE 355 -----
Guaiacum

was found to justify the herbal use of guaiacum as an
antirheumatic or anti-inflammatory agent. In view of the lack
of toxicity data, excessive use of guaiacum and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Guaiacum officinale L. (Zygophyllaceae)
Guaiacum sanctum L.

Synonym(s)

Guaiac, Guajacum, Guayacar, Lignum Vitae, Palo Santo

Part(s) Used

Resin obtained from the heartwood

(-)-guaiaretic acid

(-)-dihydroguaiaretic acid CH3

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
cL

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Resins = 15-20%. Guaiaretic acid, dehydroguaiaretic acid,
guaiacin, isoguaiacin, o%-guaiaconic acid (lignans), furoguaiacin
and its monomethyl ether, furoguaiacidin, tetrahydrofuroguaia-
cin-A and tetrahydrofuroguaiacin-B (furano-lignans), furoguaia
oxidin (enedione lignan).

Steroids {-Sitosterol.

“my

OCH
R OCH3
(+)-guaiacin

(-)-nordihydroguaiaretic acid H

CH;0O.
HO’
furoguaiaoxidin
Sesquiterpenes
guaiol guaiazulene

Figure 1 Selected constituents of guaiacum.

I \

Caa6
OH

furoguaiacin

OCH3

Simple phenols

OC
OCH;

guaiacol

----- PAGE 356 -----
Terpenoids Saponins, oleanolic acid.® Sesquiterpenes, includ-
ing guaiol and guaiazulene.

Food Use

Guaiacum is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
guaiacum can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“@!

Herbal Use

Guaiacum is stated to possess antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory,
diuretic, mild laxative and diaphoretic properties. Traditionally, it
has been used for subacute rheumatism, prophylaxis against gout,

and specifically for chronic rheumatism and rheumatoid arthri-
tis, (OO 7.8, Got)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and/or pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried wood 1-2 g as a decoction three times daily,(C%°”

1-2mL (1:1 in 80% alcohol) three times

Liquid extract
daily."

G6, G7)

Figure 2. Guaiacum (Guaiacum officinale).

Figure 3. Guaiacum - dried drug substance (wood).

Guaiacum

Tincture of Guaiacum (BPC 1934) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented. Antimicrobial properties are associated with
lignans and much has been documented for nordihydroguaiaretic
acid, the principal lignan constituent in chaparral (see Chaparral).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
guaiacum and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for guaiacum
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Guaiacum resin has been reported to cause contact dermati-
tis.(©°) The resin is documented to be of low toxicity; the oral
LDso in rats is greater than 5 g/kg body weight.'°*

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is recommended that guaiacum is avoided by individuals with
(G49)

hypersensitive, allergic or acute inflammatory conditions.
Drug interactions None documented. However, there is limited
pharmacological information for guaiacum, and the potential for
preparations of guaiacum to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of guaiacum during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of this, and the overall
lack of pharmacological and toxicological data, the use of
guaiacum during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Boswellia Compound; Guaiacum Complex. Switzer-
land: Pommade au Baume. UK: Gerard House Reumalex;
Rheumatic Pain Relief; Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Rheumatic
Pain.

References

1 King FE, Wilson JG. The chemistry of extractives from hardwoods.
Part XXXVI. The lignans of Guaiacum officinale L. ] Chem Soc 1964;
40114024.

2 Kratochvil JF et al. Isolation and characterization of o-guaiaconic acid
and the nature of guaiacum blue. Phytochemistry 1971; 10: 2529-3251.

3 Majumder PL, Bhattacharyya M. Structure of furoguaiacidin: a new
furanoid lignan of the heartwood of Guaiacum officinale L. Chem Ind
1974; 77-78.

4 Majumder P, Bhattacharyya M. Furoguaiaoxidin — a new enedione
lignan of Guaiacum officinale: a novel method of sequential
introduction of alkoxy functions in the 3- and 4-methyl groups of 2,5-
diaryl-3,4-dimethylfurans. JCS Chem Commun 1975; 702-703.

5 Ahmad VU et al. Officigenin, a new sapogenin of Guaiacum
officinale. J] Nat Prod 1984; 47: 977-982.

6 Ahmad VU et al. Guaianin, a new saponin from Guaiacum officinale.
J Nat Prod 1986; 49: 784-786.

----- PAGE 357 -----
Hawthorn

surveillance studies suggest that the hawthorn preparations
assessed are well-tolerated when taken at recommended
dosages. However, results cannot necessarily be extrapolated
to other hawthorn products, which may differ qualitatively
and quantitatively in their chemical content. Further well-
designed post-marketing surveillance studies are required to
assess the safety of hawthorn extracts, including with long-
term use. In view of the documented pharmacological actions
of hawthorn the potential for preparations of hawthorn to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, including
antihypertensive, antihypotensive, and inotropic agents,
should be considered. Hawthorn fruit or hawthorn leaf and
flower are contraindicated during pregnancy and
breastfeeding.

Species (Family)

*Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC. (Rosaceae)
Crataegus monogyna Jacq.

Synonym(s)

*C. oxyacanthoides Thuill., C. oxyacantha auct.
+Crataegus oxyacantha L., nom. ambig.

Part(s) Used

Fruit, leaf, flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?!

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08)

BHMA 20030°

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 200307

Martindale 35th edition'©*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8?

WHO volume 2'¢7°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Hawthorn is not included in the GSL.‘C*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General

References G1 and G2.

Amines Phenylethylamine, O-methoxyphenethylamine and tyr-
ine“)

amine.

Flavonoids Up to 1%.“ Flavonol (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin)

and flavone (e.g. apigenin, luteolin) derivatives, rutin, hyperoside,
vitexin glycosides, orientin glycosides.?~ The fruits contain
relatively more hyperoside and the leaves relatively more vitexin
glycosides.'@”)

Tannins Proanthocyanins (catechin-type oligomers).”)

Other constituents Cyanogenetic glycosides and saponins.

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there can be variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of hawthorn crude
plant material and commercial preparations of hawthorn fruit
and/or leaf with flower. According to the British and European
Pharmacopoeias, hawthorn leaf with flower consists of the whole
or cut, dried flower-bearing tops of C. laevigata or C. monogyna
(or rarely certain other Crataegus species), and contains not less
than 1.5% of flavonoids, expressed as hyperoside and calculated
with reference to the dried drug.“@*"°* Detailed descriptions of
hawthorn berry and leaf with flower for use in botanical,
microscopic and macroscopic identification have been published,
along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the assess-
ment of hawthorn berry and leaf with flower raw material.'¢!)
Aqueous-alcoholic (40-70% ethanol or methanol) extracts of
hawthorn leaf with flower obtained from several different
manufacturers were reported to have a similar profile of
constituents (procyanidins, flavonoids, total vitexin and_ total
phenols) both qualitatively and quantitatively, whereas an aqueous
extract was stated to have a lower concentration of procyanidins,
flavonoids and total phenols, and a similar total vitexin content.
However, no statistical analyses were described to support these
findings and there were in fact also substantial quantitative
variations between aqueous-alcoholic extracts in content of
procyanidins (8.7-13.5%), flavonoids calculated as hyperoside
(1.1-3.4%), vitexin-2"-O-rhamnoside and hyperoside (5.7—7.9%),
total vitexins (4.1-4.9%) and total phenols (19.5-25.6%); values
for these constituents for the aqueous extract were 8.0%, 0.7%,
5.6%, 4.1% and 14.0%, respectively. Further work showed that all

----- PAGE 358 -----
the extracts had a relaxant effect on norepinephrine (noradrena-
line)-induced contractions of guineapig aortic rings in vitro,
achieving relaxations of 29-44% of baseline values. ECso (effective
concentration) values were between 4.2-9.8mg/mL for the
aqueous-alcoholic extracts and 22.4mg/mL for the aqueous
extract, although maximum effects were similar for all extracts.”
The positive control milrinone had a significantly greater effect
than any of the extracts (ECso 1.3mg/mL). Basic statistical
analyses indicated that there were no statistically significant
differences between the aqueous-alcoholic extracts in terms of
their relaxant effects, indicating pharmacological equivalence.
However, more sophisticated analysis allowing for multiple
analyses indicated that the effects of the 40% ethanol and 55%
methanol extracts differed significantly from those of the other
aqueous-alcoholic extracts. These findings provide some support
for the equivalence of 40-70% ethanol or methanol extracts of
hawthorn leaf with flower,\*) although this would be strengthened
by more consistent results in further studies. The equivalence of
preparations of hawthorn fruit also requires investigation.

Food Use

Hawthorn is not commonly used in foods. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that hawthorn can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.'©!®

Herbal Use

Hawthorn fruit is stated to possess cardiotonic, coronary
vasodilator and hypotensive properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for cardiac failure, myocardial weakness, paroxysmal
tachycardia, hypertension, arteriosclerosis and Buerger's disea-
se.(° The German Commission E did not approve therapeutic
use of the fruit.“©?) Modern interest in hawthorn is focused on the

use of hawthorn leaf with flower in reduced cardiac performan-
~e (@B)
ce.

Flavonoids OH OH
glucose
HO. HO. ZA 0.
S
OH O OH O
hyperoside vitexin (apigenin-8-C-glucoside)
Procyanidins OH

a ‘OH “ ‘OH

OH "0H
ow OH
F ‘OH
“OH
OH
4,8-2,3-cis-procyanidin
(dimeric procyanidin B2)

‘OH

OH
4,6-2,3-cis-procyanidin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hawthorn.

Hawthorn

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Fruit

Dried fruit 0.3-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.”
Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture 1-2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Leaf with flower For the treatment of decreasing cardiac
efficiency corresponding to functional stage II of the New York
Heart Association 160-900 mg aqueous-alcoholic extract (ethanol
45% v/v or methanol 70% v/v; drug to extract ratio 4-7: 1, with
defined flavonoid and/or procyanidin content corresponding to
3.5-19.8 mg flavonoids, calculated as hyperoside, and 30-168.7 mg

Figure 2 Hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata).

Figure 3. Hawthorn - dried drug substance (fruit and leaf).

----- PAGE 359 -----
Hawthorn

procyanidins, calculated as epicatechin) daily, in two to three
divided doses.“

Clinical trials of hawthorn leaf with flower in patients with
different stages of heart failure (according to the NYHA
classification) mainly have assessed the effects of a standardised
extract (WS-1442, containing 18.8% oligomeric procyanidins)
administered orally at doses ranging from 160-1800 mg daily for
up to 16 weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data available on the
pharmacokinetics of constituents of hawthorn preparations. In
male rats given an 80% ethanol extract of the fruits of C.
pinnatifida Bge. var major N.E.Br. containing (—)-epicate-
in15.8%, chlorogenic acid 3.4%, hyperoside 2.7% and iso-
uercitrin 2.0% at a dose of 220 mg/kg by intravenous injection,
armacokinetic parameters for these compounds were (expressed
s mean (standard deviation)): plasma drug concentration, 142.8
16.2), 33.1 (6.1), 38.8 (6.0) and 26.7 (4.9), respectively;
elimination half-life (ty), 74.2 (10.0), 18.9 (1.8), 18.1 (1.1) and
11.1 (2.2) minutes, respectively; area under the plasma-concentra-
ion time curve (AUC), 2204.5 (261.0), 526.1 (37-4), 358.8 (18.0)
and 216.0 (11.5) ug/min/mL, respectively; clearance, 16.0 (2.0),
14.3 (1.0), 16.7 (0.8) and 20.9 (1.1) mL/min/kg, respectively.’ The
plasma drug concentration, tj2, AUC and urinary excretion were
significantly higher, and the volume of distribution and total body
clearance were significantly lower, following intravenous injection
of the extract than following intravenous injection of the
individual four compounds at doses matching those in the extract
(p < 0.05 for all). Following oral administration of a similar dose
of the extract and the individual compounds, only epicatechin was
absorbed, and there were no statistically significant differences in
its pharmacokinetic parameters after administration as part of an
extract or as the pure compound. A possible explanation for these
findings is that other constituents of hawthorn extract may
influence the pharmacokinetics of the constituents studied.”)

pu oo

4

Cardiovascular activity Cardiovascular activity has been
documented for hawthorn and attributed to the flavonoid
components, in particular the procyanidins.

A dry ethanol (45%) extract of hawthorn leaf with flower (drug-
to-extract ratio 4-6.6 : 1, standardised for oligomeric procyanidins
18.75%; WS-1442) at a dose 100 mg/kg orally by gavage daily for
seven days significantly improved cardiac function and reduced
infarct size in a rat model of prolonged ischaemia and reperfusion,
compared with control (p < 0.05). In other experiments,

awthorn extracts and/or isolated constituents increased coronary
blood flow both in vitro (in the guinea-pig heart) and in vivo (in
the cat, dog and rabbit), reduced blood pressure in vivo (in cat,
dog, rabbit and rat models), increased (head, skeletal muscle and
idney) and reduced (skin, gastrointestinal tract) peripheral blood
flow in vivo (in the dog) and reduce peripheral resistance in vivo
(in the dog).'° ''' The hypotensive activity of hawthorn has been
attributed to a vasodilation action rather than via adrenergic,
muscarinic or histaminergic receptors.) Beta-adrenoceptor
blocking activity (versus adrenaline-induced tachycardia) has
been exhibited in vivo in the dog and in vitro in the frog heart
using flower, leaf and fruit extracts standardised for their
procyanidin content.
the concentration of procyanidin and observed actions.

) A direct relationship was found between

Negative chronotropic and positive inotropic actions have been
observed in vitro using the guinea-pig heart and attributed to
flavonoid and proanthocyanidin fractions.) A positive inotropic
effect has also been exhibited by amine constituents in vitro using
guinea-pig papillary muscle.”

Hawthorn extracts have also been reported to lack any effect on
the heart rate and muscle contractility in studies that have
observed an effect on blood pressure in the dog and rat.‘'!9)
Hawthorn extracts have exhibited some prophylactic anti-
arrhythmic activity in rabbits administered intravenous aconi-
tine.""® Extracts infused after aconitine did not affect the induced
arrhythmias. In vitro, vitexin rhamnoside has been reported to
have no effect on the action of ouabain and aconitine. A crude
extract of Crataegus pinnatifidia Bge. var major N.E.Br. and the
flavonoid vitexin rhamnoside have been reported to exert a
protective action on experimental ischaemic myocardium in
anaesthetised dogs.''”) The extracts were observed to decrease
left ventricular work, decrease the consumption of oxygen index,
and increase coronary sinus blood oxygen concentrations,
resulting in a decrease in oxygen consumption and balance of
oxygen metabolism. In contrast to other studies, an increase in
coronary blood flow was not observed. The authors attributed
these opposing results to the variation in concentrations of active
constituents between the different plant parts. In vitro, vitexin
rhamnoside has been reported to exert a protective action towards
cardiac cells deprived of oxygen and glucose.”

Other activities A mild CNS-depressant effect has been
documented in mice that received oral administration of hawthorn
flower extracts.?" An increase in barbiturate sleeping time and a
decrease in spontaneous basal motility were the most noticeable
effects.

Free radicals have been linked with the ageing process. When
fed to mice, a hawthorn fruit (C. pinnatifidia) extract has been
reported to enhance the action of superoxide dismutase (SOD),
which promotes the scavenging of free radicals.“ An inhibition
of lipid peroxidation, which can be caused by highly reactive free
radicals, was also documented.'‘~’ The pharmacological actions of
leaf with flowers include increase in cardiac contractility, increase
in coronary blood flow and myocardial circulation, protection
from ischaemic damage and decrease of peripheral vascular

. 352)
resistance.'(C

Clinical studies

Heart failure and other cardiovascular disorders Clinical trials
of preparations of hawthorn mainly have assessed the effects of
standardised extracts of the leaf and flower in patients with
different stages of heart failure, according to the NYHA
classification. There have been at least 13 randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trials of hawthorn extracts involving
patients with NYHA heart failure classes I to III. The results of at
least ten other studies have been published, but these have a: ed
the effects of combination preparations of hawthorn or were not
conducted according to a randomised, placebo-controlled design.
Most randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
assessed the effects of a dry 45% ethanol extract of hawthorn
leaves with flowers (WS-1442; drug-to-extract ratio 4-6:1,
containing 18.8% oligomeric procyanidins). Several other trials
have compared the effects of another extract of hawthorn leaf
with flower (LI-132; standardised for 2.2% flavonoids) with those
of placebo, or the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
captopril.

----- PAGE 360 -----
A systematic review and meta-analysis included 13 randomised,

double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised extracts of
hawthorn leaf and flower in patients with chronic heart failure.
Ten trials tested the extract WS-1442 administered orally at doses
ranging from 160 to 1800 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, whereas
the other three trials assessed the extract LI-132 at doses of 300,
600 or 900mg daily for four or eight weeks; in several trials,
participants were also receiving concurrent standard treatments,
such as diuretics, although a number of trials excluded patients
who were already receiving diuretics, glycosides, calcium antago-
nists and ACE inhibitors, and in some studies it was not clear
whether or not participants received concomitant medications.?
Eight trials, involving a total of 632 participants, provided data
that were suitable for meta-analysis. Data from four trials (n =
310 participants), which assessed maximal workload, showed that
hawthorn extracts were superior to placebo (weighted mean
difference (WMD), 95% confidence interval (CI): 7 Watt, 3 to 11
Watt; p < 0.01), and data from six trials which as: d the
systolic blood pressure-heart rate product (systolic blood pressure
in mmHg multiplied by heart rate per minute divided by 100)
showed that this outcome was reduced to a greater extent in
hawthorn recipients than placebo recipients (WMD, 95% CI: -20,
-32 to -8). Of the five trials that were not included in the meta-
analysis, three reported statistically significant effects for haw-
thorn extracts, compared with placebo, with respect to primary
outcome measures, and two reported no statistically differences
for hawthorn extracts, compared with placebo.
The review concluded that hawthorn extracts are beneficial as
adjunctive treatments in patients with chronic heart failure, but
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of hawthorn
extract alone in the treatment of chronic heart failure.
some of the trials did not score highly in an
sment of their methodological quality and as, overall, the
studies involved relatively small numbers of patients, further well-
designed randomised controlled trials are necessary to confirm the
findings. Also, the observed effects cannot necessarily be
extrapolated to hawthorn preparations other than those tested
in the trials described above.

The largest trial included in the meta-analysis was a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial initially invol-
ving 209 patients with chronic stable NYHA class III heart failure
who received hawthorn extract WS-1442 900 or 1800 mg daily, or
placebo, for 16 weeks. At the end of the study, for the 139 patients
who were eligible for analysis, the maximum tolerated workload
during bicycle exercise was significantly greater for the higher dose
hawthorn group, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05).°

In another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 40
patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA class II) received a
combination preparation containing extracts of hawthorn and
passionflower (standardised on flavone and proanthocyanidin
content) 2mL three times daily, or placebo, for 42. days.?>
Significant improvements were noted for the treatment group,
compared with placebo, in exercise capacity, heart rate at rest,
diastolic blood pressure during exercise, and concentrations of
total plasma cholesterol and low-density lipids (p < 0.05 for each).
There were no statistically significant differences between groups
in maximum exercise capacity, breathlessness, and_ physical
performance.

In a non-randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, the effects
of a standardised extract of hawthorn leaf and flower (LI-132)
900mg daily were compared with those of the ACE inhibitor
captopril 37.5mg daily for eight weeks in 132 patients with
chronic stable NYHA class II heart failure. During the study,

Furthermore, as

asse!

Hawthorn

exercise tolerance increased significantly in both groups, com-
pared with baseline values (p < 0.001), and the blood pressure—
art rate product and incidence and severity of symptoms
decreased in both groups; there were no statistically significant
differences between the groups.

The effectiveness (i.e. effects when used in general practice) of a
awthorn extract (WS-1442) were assessed in a prospective, non-
interventional, cohort study involving 952 patients with heart
failure (NYHA class II). Of these, 588 patients received the
awthorn extract either alone or in addition to standard
treatment, and 364 patients received standard treatment alone.
Interim results for 533 patients from whom 130 pairs of patients
matched for certain cardiac and demographic characteristics at
aseline suggested that fatigue (p = 0.036), stress dyspnoea (p =
0.020) and, marginally, palpitations (p = 0.048) were significantly
ess marked in the hawthorn extract cohort than in the
comparative cohort.°” However, final results of the study are
required before conclusions can be drawn.

A preliminary randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial assessed the effects of a hawthorn extract 500 mg daily, alone
and in combination with a magnesium supplement 600 mg daily,
for ten weeks in 36 patients with mild hypertension. Reductions in
systolic and diastolic blood pressure were observed in all groups,
and there were no statistically significant differences between
groups.*) However, it is possible that as the study involved only
small numbers of participants that it did not have adequate
statistical power to detect any differences between groups.

Data pooled from two randomised, controlled, crossover
studies each involving 24 participants with orthostatic dysregula-
tion who received one of three doses of an oral combination
preparation containing an ethanol extract of hawthorn berries, D-
camphor and menthol on four separate days indicated a
statistically significant effect for higher dose of the combination
preparation, compared with placebo, with respect to mean arterial
pressure, and systolic and diastolic blood pressure.?”

Other conditions The effects of a combination preparation
containing C. oxyacantha, Eschscholtzia californica and magne-
d in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving 264 participants with mild-to-moderate
anxiety disorders with associated functional disturbances. Parti-
cipants received the combination preparation (1 = 130), or
placebo (m = 134), two tablets twice daily for three months. At the
end of the study, reductions in Hamilton anxiety scale scores were
significantly greater for the treatment group than for the placebo
group.’

sium were as:

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Data from randomised controlled trials and post-marketing
surveillance studies suggest that hawthorn preparations are well-
tolerated when taken at recommended dosages. While these
studies provide some useful data for the hawthorn products
assessed, their results cannot necessarily be extrapolated to other
manufacturers’ hawthorn products, which may differ qualitatively
and quantitatively in their chemical content. In addition, clinical
trials are designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.
Further well-designed post-marketing surveillance studies are
required to assess the safety of hawthorn extracts, including with
long-term use.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Hawthorn

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 13 randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised extracts of
hawthorn leaf and flower in patients with chronic heart failure
(see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies), of which 12 trials
reported data on adverse events. Of these, nine trials tested the
extract WS-1442 administered orally at doses ranging from 160—
1800 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, whereas the other three trials
assessed the extract LI-132 at doses of 300, 600 or 900 mg daily for
four or eight weeks.°) The systematic review reported that in five
trials no adverse events occurred in the hawthorn groups and that
in the seven other trials, 39 adverse events, most commonly,
dizziness/vertigo (mn = 8 cases), occurred among around 300
hawthorn recipients. However, the review did not state whether or
not the number and type of adverse events occurring in the
hawthorn groups were different to those for the placebo groups. In
the largest trial included in the systematic review, the frequency of
dizziness was lower in the higher dose hawthorn group than in the
lower dose hawthorn and placebo groups.”

In two post-marketing surveillance studies involving over 4500
patients with NYHA class I or II heart failure who received
hawthorn extract (WS-1442°) 900mg daily for eight or 24
weeks, adverse events were reported by 1.3% and 1.4%°" of
participants. Adverse events reported included hot flushes,
stomach complaints, palpitations, dizziness, dyspnoea, headache
and epistaxis.”

Preclinical data

General symptoms of acute toxicity observed in a number of
animal models (e.g. guinea-pig, frog, tortoise, cat, rabbit, rat)
have been documented as bradycardia and respiratory depression
leading to cardiac arrest and respiratory paralysis." ' Acute
toxicity (LDso) of isolated constituents (mainly flavonoids) has
been documented as 50-2600 mg/kg (by intravenous injection) and
6g/kg (by mouth) in various animal preparations."'' The
documented acute toxicity of commercial hawthorn preparations
has also been reviewed."

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the nature of the actions documented for hawthorn,
there is a view that preparations of hawthorn berries and leaves
with flowers are not suitable for self-medication.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of hawthorn, the potential for preparations of hawthorn
to interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, including
antihypertensive, antihypotensive, and inotropic agents, should be
considered.

In an open-label, randomised, crossover study involving healthy
volunteers who received digoxin 0.25 mg for ten days and digoxin
0.25 mg in addition to an extract of hawthorn leaves and flowers
(WS-1442) 450 mg twice daily (equivalent to 168.6 mg oligomeric
procyanidins) for three weeks with a three-week wash-out period,
there were no statistically significant differences between digoxin
alone and digoxin plus hawthorn extract in any of the measured
pharmacokinetic parameters.°*) Digoxin concentrations were
lower in the digoxin plus hawthorn group and, although this
did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.054), it is possible that
the study did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference. Furthermore, the study involved healthy volunteers,
and the effects of co-administration of digoxin and hawthorn
extract in patients with heart failure requires investigation.

Pregnancy and lactation Certain hawthorn extracts exhibit
activity on uterine tissue (reductions in tone and motility) in vitro
and in vivo (animals)."''"!») The clinical relevance of these findings
is not known. In view of the these and other pharmacological
activities described for hawthorn, together with the lack of
information on the use of hawthorn during pregnancy and
breastfeeding, preparations containing hawthorn fruit or haw-
thorn leaf and flower are contra-indicated during these periods.

Passin; Protecor; Salus Herz-Schutz-Kapseln; Septacord; Tc
nix. Hungary: Biovital; Biovital. Israel: Nerven-Dragees;
Passiflora. Italy: Anevrasi; Lenicalm; Noctis; Parvisedil;
Passiflorine; Sedatol; Sedatol; Sedofit; Sedopuer F Mexico:
Ifupasil. Monaco: Neuropax. Portugal: Neurocardol. Russia:
Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aommeaprepu Buraaotonnx); Herbion
Drops for the Heart (Mep6uon Cepacunsie Kanan). Spain:
Natusor High Blood Pressure; Natusor Somnisedan; Passi-
florine; Sedasor; Sedonat; Tensiben. Switzerland: Arterosan
Plus; Cardiaforce; Circulan; Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs;
Dragees sedatives Dr Welti; Ipasin; Phytomed Cardio; Strath
Gouttes pour le coeur; Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation;
Triallin; Valverde Coeur. UK: Tranquil. Venezuela: Cratex;
Equaliv; Eufytose; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Passiflorum. USA:
Heart Health; My Favorite Multiple.

----- PAGE 362 -----
1

9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

References

Wagner H, Grevel J. Cardioactive drugs IV. Cardiotonic amines from
Crataegus oxyacantha. Plant Med 1982; 45: 99-101.

Nikolov N et al. New flavonoid glycosides from Crataegus monogyna
and Crataegus pentagyna. Planta Med 1982; 44: 50-53.

Ficarra P et al. High-performance liquid chromatography of flavonoids
in Crataegus oxyacantha L. Il Farmaco Ed Pr 1984; 39: 148-157.
Ficcara P et al. Analysis of 2-phenyl-chromon derivatives and
chlorogenic acid. Il — High-performance thin layer chromatography
and high-performance liquid chromatography in flowers, leaves and
buds extractives of Crataegus oxyacantha L. Il Farmaco Ed Pr 1984;
39: 342-354,

Pietta P et al. Isocratic liquid chormatographic method for the
simultaneous determination of Passiflora incarnata L. and Crataegus
monogyna flavonoids in drugs. J Chromatogr 1986; 357: 233-238.
Racz-Kotilla E et al. Hypotensive and beta-blocking effect of
procyanidins of Crataegus monogyna. Planta Med 1980; 39: 239.
Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. TLC-densitometric determination
of 2,3-cis-procyanidin monomer and oligomers from hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata and C. monogyna). ] Pharm Biomed Anal 1989;
7: 1871-1875.

Vierling W et al. Investigation of the pharmaceutical and
pharmacological equivalence of different hawthorn extracts.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 8-16.

Chang Q et al. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of hawthorn
phenolics in extract versus individual pure compound. J Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 45: 106-112.

Veveris M et al. Crataegus special extract WS’ 1442 improves cardiac
function and reduces infarct size in a rat model of prolonged coronary
ischemia and reperfusion. Life Sci 2004; 74: 1945-1955.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part I: Toxicity. Planta Med 1981; 43: 105-120.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part Il: Pharmacodynamics. Planta Med 1981; 43: 209-239.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part III: Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Planta Med 1981;
43: 313-322.

Liévre M et al. Assessment in the anesthetized dog of the
cardiovascular effects of a pure extract (hyperoside) from hawthorn.
Ann Pharm Fr 1985; 43: 471-477.

Abdul-Ghani A-S et al. Hypotensive effect of Crateagus oxyacantha.
Int ] Crude Drug Res 1987; 25: 216-220.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am ] Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

Leukel A et al. Studies on the activity of Crataegus compounds upon
the isolated guinea pig heart. Planta Med 1986; 52: 65.

Thompson EB e¢ al. Preliminary study of potential antiarrhythmic
effects of Crataegus monogyna. ] Pharm Sci 1974; 63: 1936-1937.

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Hawthorn

Lianda L et al. Studies on hawthorn and its active principle. I. Effect
on myocardial ischemia and hemodynamics in dogs. | Trad Chin Med
1984; 4: 283-288.

Lianda L et al. Studies on hawthorn and its active principle. II. Effects
on cultured rat heart cells deprived of oxygen and glucose. J Trad Chin
Med 1984; 4: 289-292.

Della Loggia R et al. Depressive effect of Crataegus oxyacantha L. on
central nervous system in mice. Sci Pharm 1983; 51: 319-324.

Dai Y-R et al. Effect of extracts of some medicinal plants on
superoxide dismutase activity in mice. Planta Med 1987; 53: 309-310.
Pittler MH, e¢ al. Hawthorn extract for treating chronic heart failure:
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med 2003; 114: 665-674.
Tauchert M. Efficacy and safety of crataegus extract WS" 1442 in
comparison with placebo in patients with chronic stable New York
Heart Association class-III heart failure. An Heart J 2002; 143: 910-
915.

von Eiff M et al. Hawthorn/Passionflower extract and improvement in
physical exercise capacity of patients with dyspnoea Class II of the
NYHM functional cla: cation. Acta Ther 1994; 20: 47-66.
Tauchert M et al. [Effectiveness of the hawthorn extract LI 132
compared with the ACE inhibitor captopril. Multicentre, double-blind
study in 132 patients with NYHA stage II cardiac insufficiency].
Miinch Med Wochenschr 1994; 136 (Suppl. Suppl.1):527-$33
[German].

Habs M. Prospective, comparative cohort studies and their
contribution to the benefit assessments of therapeutic options: heart
failure treatment with and without hawthorn special extract WS"
1442. Forsch Komplementiirmed Klass Naturheilkd 2004; 11 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): 36-39.

Walker AF Promising hypotensive effect of hawthorn extract: a
randomized, double-blind, pilot study of mild essential hypertension.
Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 48-54.

Belz GG et al. Camphor-Crataegus berry extract combination dose-
dependently reduces tilt induced fall in blood pressure in orthostatic
hypotension. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 581-588.

Hanus M, et al. Double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study
to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fixed combination containing
two plant extracts (Crataegus oxyacantha and Eschscholtzia
californica) and magnesium in mild-to-moderate anxiety disorders.
Curr Med Res Opinion 2004; 20(1): 63-71.

Tauchert M et al.. High-dose crataegus (hawthorn) extract WS" 1442
in the treatment of NYHA stage II heart failure. Herz 1999; 24: 465—
474,

Schmidt U, et al. High dosed therapy with crataegus extract in
patients suffering from heart failure NYHA stage I and II. Z
Phytother 1998; 19: 22-30.

Tankanow R, et al. Interaction study between digoxin and a
preparation of hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha). J Clin Pharmacol
2003; 43: 637-642.

----- PAGE 363 -----
7 Holy Thistle

available pharmacological data support most of the stated
uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research assessing
efficacy and safety of preparations of holy thistle. In view of
the lack of toxicity data, excessive use of holy thistle and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Cnicus benedictus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Blessed Thistle, Carbenia Benedicta, Carbenia benedicta (L.)
Arcang., Carduus Benedictus, Cnicus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G30, G40 and G62.

Lignans
and trachelogenin.

Arctigenin, nortracheloside, 2-acetyl nortracheloside
ed)

Polyenes Several polyacetylenes.”

Steroids Phytosterols (e.g. m-nonacosan, sitosterol, sitosteryl
glycoside, stigmasterol).

Tannins Type unspecified (8%).

Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes including cnicin 0.2-0.7%,“ yielding
salonitenolide as aglycone,” and artemisiifolin. Shoot and
flowering head are reported to be devoid of cnicin. Triterpenoids
including o&-amyrenone, %-amyrin acetate, o&-amyrin, multiflor-
enol, multiflorenol acetate and oleanolic acid.

Volatile oils Many components, mainly hydrocarbons.

Other constituents Lithospermic acid, mucilage, nicotinic acid
and nicotinamide complex, resin.

Food Use

Holy thistle is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that holy

thistle can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(“'% Previously in the USA, holy thistle was
permitted for use in alcoholic beverages.(“%”

Herbal Use

Holy thistle is stated to possess bitter stomachic, antidiarrhoeal,
antihaemorrhagic, febrifuge, expectorant, antibiotic, bacterio-
static, vulnerary and antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for anorexia, flatulent dyspepsia, bronchial catarrh,
topically for gangrenous and indolent ulcers, and specifically for
atonic dyspepsia, and enteropathy with flatulent colic.'C% °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowering tops
daily(CoO

Liquid extract 1.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%°”

1.5-3.0g as an infusion three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity has been reported for an aqueous extract of
the herb, for cnicin, and for the volatile oil.“ Activity has been

Sesquiterpenes

CH2OH

‘OCH
OR?

R' R? R°
(-)-arctigenin H H CHg
trachelogenin OH H CH;
nortracheloside OH Glucose H
2-acetylnor- O-Acetyl Glucose H

tracheloside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of holy thistle.

----- PAGE 364 -----
Holy Thistle

Figure 2 Holy thistle (Cnicus benedictus).

documented against Bacillus subtilis, Brucella abortus, Brucella
bronchoseptica, Escherichia coli, Proteus species, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus faecalis.
The antimicrobial activity of holy thistle has been attributed to
cnicin and to the polyacetylene constituents.”

Cnicin has exhibited in vivo anti-inflammatory activity
(carrageenan-induced rat-paw oedema test) virtually equipotent
to indometacin. Antitumour activity has been documented in
mice against sarcoma 180 for the whole herb, and against
lymphoid leukaemia for cnicin;') cnicin has also been reported to
exhibit in vitro activity against KB cells." An o-methylene-y-
lactone moiety is thought to be necessary for the antibacterial and
antitumour activities of cnicin.®

Lithospermic acid is thought to be responsible for the
antigonadotrophic activity documented for holy thistle.‘ The
sesquiterpene lactone constituents are stated to be bitter
principles.'@

Tannins are generally known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of holy
thistle and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for holy thistle and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

The toxicity of cnicin has been studied in mice: the acute oral
LDso9 was stated to be 1.6-3.2mmol/kg body weight and
intraperitoneal administration was reported to cause irritation
of tissue. In the writhing test, cnicin was found to cause
abdominal pain with an EDso estimated as 6.2 mmol/kg.

Antitumour activity has been documented for the whole herb
and for cnicin (see Pharmacological Actions; I vitro and animal
studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for holy thistle. Plants containing sesquiter-
pene lactones with an #-methylene-y-lactone moiety are generally
considered to be allergenic, although no documented hypersensi-

Figure 3 Holy thistle - dried drug substance (herb).

tivity reactions to holy thistle were located. Holy thistle may cause
an allergic reaction in individuals with a known hypersensitivity
to other members of the Compositae (e.g. chamomile, ragwort,
tansy).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of holy thistle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of holy thistle has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use of
holy thistle during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi

gredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Brazil: Digestron. Czech Republic:
Ungolen. Germany: Gallexier; Gastritol. Russia: Original
Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapupii Boanmoii Baansam
Burrnepa). South Africa: Essens Amara of Groen Amara.
Switzerland: Gastrosan. UK: Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula;
Sure-Lax (Herbal).

References

1 Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Lactonic lignans from Cnicus
benedictus. Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 2709.

2 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Constituents polyacetyleniques de Cnicus
benedictus L. Planta Med 1974; 25: 47-59.

3 Ulubelen A, Berkan T. Triterpenic and steroidal compounds of Cnicus
benedictus. Planta Med 1977; 31: 375-377.

4 Schneider G, Lachner I. A contribution to analytics and pharmacology
of Cnicin. Planta Med 1987; 53: 247-251.

5 Vanhaelen-Fastré R, Vanhaelen M. Presence of saloniténolide in
Cnicus benedictus. Planta Med 1974; 26: 375-379.

6 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Constitution and antibiotical properties of the
essential oil of Cnicus benedictus. Planta Med 1973; 24: 165-175.

7 Cobb E. Antineoplastic agent from Cnicus benedictus. British Patent
1,335,181 (CI.A61k) 24 Oct 1973, Appl.54,800/69 (via Chemical
Abstracts 1975; 83: 48189}).

8 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Antibiotic and cytotoxic activities of cnicin
isolated from Cnicus benedictus. ] Pharm Belg 1972; 27: 683-688.

9 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Cnicus benedictus: Separation of antimicrobial
constituents. Plant Med Phytother 1968; 2: 294-299.

----- PAGE 365 -----
Documented pharmacological activities support the herbal
uses, although evidence from robust clinical studies is limited.
Excessive use of hops and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided in view of the limited toxicity data.

Species (Family)

Humutlus lupulus L. (Cannabaceae/Moraceae)

Synonym(s)

Humulus, Lupulus

Part(s) Used

Strobile

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996'C*)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

Flavonoids Astragalin, kaempferol, quercetin, quercitrin and
rutin.

Chalcones_ Isoxanthohumol, xanthohumol, 6-isopentenylnarin-
genin, 3/-(isoprenyl)-2', 4-dihydroxy-4’, 6’-dimethoxychalcone,
2/,6'-dimethoxy-4, 4/-dihydroxychalcone.”

Oleo-resin 15-30%. Bitter principles (acylphloroglucides) in a
soft and hard resin. The lipophilic soft resin consists mainly of o-
acids (e.g. humulone, cohumulone, adhumulone, prehumulone,
posthumulone), B-acids (e.g. lupulone, colupulone, adlupulone),
and their oxidative degradation products including 2-methyl-3-
buten-2-ol®*°°) The hard resin contains a hydrophilic 8-resin
and y-resin.

Tannins 2-4%. Condensed; gallocatechin identified.”

Volatile oils 0.3-1.0%. More than 100 terpenoid components
identified; primarily (at least 90%) B-caryophyllene, farnescene
and humulene (sesquiterpenes), and myrcene (monoterpene).

Other constituents Amino acids, phenolic acids, gamma-linoleic
acids, lipids and oestrogenic substances (disputed).

Tt has been stated that only low amounts of 2-methy]l-3-buten-2-
ol, the sedative principle identified in hops, are present in sedative
tablets containing hops.) However, it is thought that 2-methyl-3-
buten-2-ol is formed in vivo by metabolism of the «-bitter acids
and, therefore, the low amount of 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol in a
preparation may not indicate low sedative activity. Interestingly,
relatively high concentrations of 2-methy]l-3-buten-2-ol were found
in bath preparations, suggesting that high concentrations of 2-
methyl-3-buten-2-ol may be achieved in both tea and bath
products containing hops.”

Food Use

Hops are listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that hops
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'©!® Previously, hops has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).(@°

Modified phloroglucinols

humulone lupulone
Sesquiterpenes Aliphatic alcohols
1s
OH
2-methylbuten-3-en-2-ol
humulene
Chalcones
HO. OH OH
CL
CH;0 =O
xanthohumol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of hops.

----- PAGE 366 -----
Herbal Use

Hops are stated to possess sedative, hypnotic and topical
bactericidal properties. Traditionally, they have been used for
neuralgia, insomnia, excitability, priapism, colitis,
topically for crural ulcers, and specifically for restlessness
associated with nervous tension headache and/or indigestion.
The German Commission E approved use for mood disturbances
such as restlessness and anxiety as well as sleep disturbances.'©?)
Hops are used in combination with valerian root for nervous
sleeping disorders and conditions of unrest.(@?)

mucous

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in contemporary standard herbal reference texts are
given below.

Dried strobile 0.5 g as an infusion two to four times daily.”

Liquid extract 0.5-2.0 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) up to three times
daily.'6

Tincture
G76)

1-2mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) up to three times
daily.’

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity, mainly against Gram-positive bacteria, has
been documented for hops, and attributed to the humulone and
lupulone constituents.” The activity of the bitter acids against
Gram-positive bacteria is thought to involve primary membrane
leakage. Resistance of Gram-negative bacteria to the resin acids is
attributed to the presence of a phospholipid-containing outer
membrane, as lupulone and humulone are inactivated by serum
phospholipids.” Structure-activity studies have indicated the
requirement of a hydrophobic molecule and a six-membered
central ring for such activity.

Figure 2. Hops (Humulus lupulus).

Hops

The humulones and lupulones are thought to possess little
activity towards fungi or yeasts. However, antifungal activity has
been documented for the bitter acids towards Trichophyton,
Candida, Fusarium and Mucor species. Flavonone constituents
have also been documented to possess antifungal activity towards
Trichophyton and Mucor species, and antibacterial activity
towards Staphylococcus aureus.

Antispasmodic activity has been documented for an alcoholic
hops extract on various isolated smooth muscle preparations."
Hops have been reported to exhibit hypnotic and_ sedative
properties.‘“*) 2-Methyl-3-buten-2-ol, a bitter acid degradation
product, has been identified as a sedative principle in hops.**?) 2-
Methyl-3-buten-2-ol has been shown to possess narcotic proper-
ties in mice and motility depressant activity in rats, with the latter
not attributable to a muscle-relaxant effect.” It has also been
suggested that isovaleric acid residues present in hops may
contribute towards the sedative action. In mice, hops extract
administered intraperitoneally (100, 250, 500 mg/kg) 30 minutes
prior to a series of behavioural tests, resulted in a dose-dependent
suppression of spontaneous locomotor at doses of 250 mg/kg for
up to one hour.'!?) The time for mice to be able to remain on a
rota rod was decreased by 59% and 65% at doses of 250 mg/kg
and 500 mg/kg, respectively. The time of onset of convulsions and
survival time after administration of pentylenetetrazole (100 mg/
kg) was significantly lengthened. Hops extract (35 mg/kg,
intraperitoneal administration) produced a dose-dependent
increase in sleeping time in mice treated with pentobarbitol. An
antinociceptive effect was noted by increased latency of licking
forepaws in hotplate tests and hypothermic activity observed from
a time-dependent fall of rectal temperature at a dose of 500 mg/
kg.)

Hops have previously been reported to possess oestrogenic
constituents.) However, when a number of purified components,
including the volatile oil and the bitter acids, were examined using
the uterine weight assay in immature female mice, no oestrogenic
activity was found.

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of hops is limited and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
Clinical studies have generally assessed hops given in combina-
tion with one or more additional herbs. For example, hops has
been reported to improve sleep disturbances when given in
combination with valerian (see Valerian, Clinical studies).{!”

Figure 3 Hops — dried drug substance (strobile).

----- PAGE 367 -----
Hops

Hops, in combination with chicory and peppermint, has been
documented to relieve pain in patients with chronic cholecystitis
(calculous and non-calculous)."!°) A herbal product containing a
mixture of plant extracts, including hops and uva-ursi, and alpha-
tocopherol acetate was reported to improve irritable bladder and
urinary incontinence." However, these observations require
confirmation in robust clinical studies.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for hops and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Respiratory allergy caused by the handling of hop cones has
been documented; a subsequent patch test using dried, crushed
flowerheads proved negative. Positive patch test reactions have
been documented for fresh hop oil, humulone, and lupulone.
Myrcene, present in the fresh oil but readily oxidised, was
concluded to be the sensitising agent in the hop oil.“C) Contact
dermatitis to hops has long been recognised'**” and is attributed
to the pollen.‘@*”

Small doses of hops are stated to be non-toxic.'°) Large doses
administered to animals by injection have resulted in a soporific
effect followed by death, with chronic administration resulting in
weight loss before death.‘

Contra-indications, Warnings

Allergic reactions have been reported for hops, although only
following external contact with the herb and oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hops to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There are some conflicting data on
the estrogenic activity of hops,” although 8-prenylnaringenin,
documented as a constituent of hops, has been shown to have
oestrogenic activity in preclinical studies.“ Concern has been
expressed that herbs with oestrogenic effects may stimulate breast
cancer growth and oppose action of competitive oestrogen
receptor antagonists such as tamoxifen.''®) However, this requires
confirmation.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro antispasmodic activity on the
uterus has been documented. In view of this and the lack of
toxicity data, the use of hops during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

ervenruh; Nerventee St Severin; Sedadom;
Wechseltce St Severin. Canada: Herbal Sleep Aid; Herbal Sleep
Well. Chile: Valupass. Czech Republic: Baldracin, Detsky Caj s
Hermankem; Fytokliman Planta; Novo-Passit; Sanason; Schlaf-
Nerventee N; Species Nervinae Planta; Valofyt Neo; Visinal.

Herbal Tablets; Calmanite Tablets; Fenneherb Newrelax;
Gerard House Serenity; Gerard House Somnus; HRI Calm
Life; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Kalms; Napiers Sleep Tablets;
Napiers Tension Tablets; Natrasleep; Newrelax; Nodoff;
Nytol Herbal; Quiet Days; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Quiet
Tyme; Relax B+; Sleepezy; Slumber; Sominex Herbal; Stress-
less; Unwind Herbal Nytol; Valerina Night-Time; Ymea.
Venezuela: Lupassin; Nervinetas.

References

1 Song-San § et al. Chalcones from Humulus lupulus. Phytochemistry
1989; 28: 1776-1777.

2 Hansel R et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of hops. 3.
Communication: Contents of 2-methyl-3-butene-2-ol in hops and hop
preparations. Planta Med 1982; 45: 224-228.

3 Wohlfart R et al. Detection of sedative—hypnotic hop constituents, V:
Degradation of humulones and lupulones to 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, a
hop constituent possessing sedative-hypnotic activity. Arch Pharm
(Weinheim) 1982; 315: 132-137.

4 Gorissen H e¢ al. Separation and identification of (+)-gallocatechin in
hops. Arch Int Physiol Biochem 1968; 76: 932-934.

5 Fenselau C, Talalay P. Is oestrogenic activity present in hops? Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1973; 11: 597-603.

6 Hansel R, Wohlfart R. Narcotic action of 2-methyl-3-butene-2-ol
contained in the exhalation of hops. Z Naturforsch 1980; 35: 1096-
1097.

7 Teuber M, Schmalreck AF. Membrane leakage in Bacillus subtilis 168
induced by the hop constituents lupulone, humulone, isohumulone
and humulinic acid. Arch Mikrobiol 1973; 94: 159-171.

8 Schmalreck AF eg al. Structural features determining the antibiotic
potencies of natural and synthetic hop bitter resins, their precursors
and derivatives. Can J Microbiol 1975; 21: 205-212.

9 Mizobuchi S, Sato Y. Antifungal activities of hop bitter resins and
related compounds. Agric Biol Chem 1985; 49: 399-405.

10 Mizobuchi $, Sato Y. A new flavanone with antifungal activity isolated
from hops. Agric Biol Chem 1984; 48: 2771-2775.

11 Caujolle F et al. Spasmolytic action of hop (Humulus lupulus).
Agressologie 1969; 10: 405-10.

12 Wohlfart R et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of hops. 4.
Communication: Pharmacology of 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol. Planta Med
1983; 48: 120-123.

13. Lee KM et al. Effects of Humulus lupulus extract on the central
nervous system in mice. Planta Med 1993; 59: A691.

14 Miiller-Limmroth W, Ehrenstein W. Untersuchungen iiber die Wirkung
von Seda-Kneipp auf den Schlaf schlafgestérter Menschen. Med Klin
1977; 72: 1119-1125.

15 Chakarski | e¢ al. Clinical study of a herb combination consisting of
Humulus lupulus, Cichorium intybus, Mentha piperita in patients

----- PAGE 368 -----
16

Hops

with chronic calculous and non-calculous cholecystitis. Probl Vatr 17 Newmark FM. Hops allergy and terpene sensitivity: An occupational
Med 1982; 10: 65-69. disease. Ann Allergy 1978; 41: 311-312.

Lenau H e¢ al. Wirksamkeit und Vertraglichkeit von Cysto Fink bei 18 Baxter KB, ed. Stockley's Drug Interactions, 7th edn. London:
Patienten mit Reizblase und/oder Harninkontinenz. Therapiewoche Pharmaceutical Press, 2006.

1984; 34: 6054.

----- PAGE 369 -----
and clinical research into the effects of preparations of black
horehound. In view of the lack of data on pharmacological
effects, efficacy and safety, the appropriateness of medicinal
use of black horehound should be considered. Excessive use,
at least, should be avoided. The use of black horehound
during pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided. The
potential for black horehound to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)
Ballota nigra L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)

Ballota, Ballota foetida Lam.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)
BP 2007'08#

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Black horehound is not included in the GSL.‘@*”

Constituents

Diterpenes Ballotinone (7-oxomarrubiin),“? ballotenol,” pre-
leosibirin,®) 13-hydroxyballonigrinolide, ballonigrin,“*) and 7-a-
acetoxymarrubiin.

Flavonoids Lactoylated flavonoids 7-O-(2S-B-p-glucopyranosyl-
oxypropanoyl)-luteolin and 7-O-(2S-hydroxypropanoy])-luteolin
(luteolin-7-lactate),.” apigenin-7-glucoside, vicenin-2.)

Phenylpropanoids Verbascoside (acteoside), forsythoside B,
arenarioside, ballotetroside, alyssonoside, _ lavandulifoliside,
5,7, 9-12)

angoroside, caffeoylmalic acid.

Essential oil B. nigra ssp. foetida 0.02%, major components B-
caryophyllene and germacrene p.''”

Related species Diterpenes from B. africana, B. andreuzziana, B.
aucheri, B. hispanica, B. inaequidens, B. pseudodictamnus, B.
lanata, B. rupestris and B. saxatilis, and flavonoids from B.
acetabulosa, B. glandulissima, B. hirsuta, B. inequidens, B.
pseudodictamnus and B. saxatilis.'?

Horehound, Black

Food Use

Black horehound is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that black horehound can be added to foodstuffs in the
traditionally accepted manner, although insufficient information
is available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'©!®

Herbal Use

Black horehound is stated to possess anti-emetic, sedative and
mild astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
nausea, vomiting, nervous dyspepsia, and specifically for vomiting
of central origin.(C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

There is a lack of basic experimental and clinical research into the
effects of preparations of black horehound, although a small

Diterpenes

CH2OH OH
ballotenol

©" ballotinone
(7-oxo-marrubiin)

ras

SF

AcO’

OH
CH,OAc fey

preleosibirin

°

ballonigrin

7-a-acetoxymarrubiin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of black horehound.

----- PAGE 370 -----
number of studies has investigated pharmacological properties of
isolated constituents.

In-vitro and animal studies

Certain phenylpropanoid derivatives isolated from the aerial parts
of black horehound show pharmacological properties in vitro,
including antibacterial, antioxidant and neurosedative activities.
The phenylpropanoid glycosides arenarioside, forsythoside B and
verbascoside, and the non-glycosidic phenylpropanoid caffeoyl-
malic acid bind to benzodiazepine, dopaminergic and morphinic
receptors in vitro." In radiolabelled ligand receptor binding
assays using rat brain preparations, ICso (concentrations required
for 50% inhibition of radioligand binding) values for these
compounds for each of the three receptor types were all < 5.0 mg/
mL. By contrast, ballotetroside did not show any affinity for
binding to the receptors studied.

Arenarioside, forsythoside B and verbascoside inhibited the
growth of one strain of the Gram-negative bacterium Proteus
mirabilis and two strains of the Gram-positive bacterium
Staphylococcus aureus, including a methicillin-resistant strain of
S. aureus (minimum inhibitory concentration to prevent visible
growth = 128 ptg/mL)."? Arenarioside also inhibited the growth
of one strain of P. mirabilis when incubated at a concentration of
64tg/mL. The compounds tested did not show any activity
against Enterococcus faecalis, and the Gram-negative bacteria
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aero-
genes, Klebsiella pneumoniae and K. oxytoca.''”)

Flavonoids
RO
AP
°
OH O
R
luteolin-7-lactate H
luteolin-7-(2-glucosy! lactate) gic
Phenylpropanoids
1
° OR
R80. O°
Se OG ° OH
IH
HO CHs 3S Ol
HO OH
OM oR?
R' Re RS
verbascoside H H H
(acteoside)
forsythoside B B-D-apioside H H
arenarioside B-D-xyloside H H
ballotetroside B-D-apioside a-L-arabinoside H
alyssonoside f-D-apioside H CHg
lavandulifoliside H a-L-arabinoside H
angaroside A a-L-arabinoside H H
COOH
HO. x
SS O—CH
S
CH2COOH
HO

caffeoylmalic acid

Figure 2 Selected constituents of black horehound.

Horehound, Black

Figure 3 Black horehound (Ballota nigra).

Arenarioside, forsythoside B and verbascoside, as well as
ballotetroside, another phenylpropanoid glycoside isolated from
the aerial parts of black horehound, have antioxidant properties i1
vitro.) These compounds inhibited copper ion-induced oxida-
tion of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) with EDso (efficacious
concentration) values of 1.8, 1.0, 1.0 and 7.5 jumol/L, respectively.
(LDL oxidation may be involved in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis.) By comparison, quercetin, a known inhibitor of
copper ion-induced LDL oxidation had an EDso value of 2.3 ,umol/
L. Further experiments showed that whereas quercetin chelated
copper ions, the phenylpropanoid glycosides tested did not,
indicating that their inhibition of copper ion-induced LDL
oxidation is independent of any capacity for copper ion
chelation”

In further experiments involving cell-free systems, arenarioside,
ballotetroside, forsythoside B and verbascoside, as well as the non-
glycosidic phenylpropanoid caffeoylmalic acid, demonstrated a
concentration-dependent scavenging capacity towards several
reactive oxygen species (ROS). For each of the compounds, the

Figure 4 Black horehound — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 371 -----
Horehound, Black

greatest ROS scavenging activity was seen for hydrogen peroxide
and hypochlorous acid (concentrations required for 50% inhibi-
tion were < 5.0 mg/L for all compounds, except ballotetroside, <
12 mg/L). Concentration-dependent inhibitions of ROS produc-
tion by phorbol ester-stimulated PMNs were also seen in cellular
systems following incubation with forsythoside B, verbascoside
and caffeoylmalic acid, whereas arenarioside and ballotetroside
showed little or no activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of black
horehound and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for black horehound and further investigation of
these aspects is required.

In in vitro experiments, the release of lactate dehydrogenase
from polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN), an indicator of
toxicity, was maintained below 20% following incubation with
arenarioside, ballotetroside, forsythoside B, verbascoside and
caffeoylmalic acid at concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 200 mg/
L. A report of the study states that this effect was not significant
(p < 0.01), although it is not clear what was the control.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential
for preparations of black horehound to interact with other

medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Black horehound is reputed to affect
the menstrual cycle although the scientific basis for this statement
is not clear.“ In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of black horehound
during pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided.

References

1 Savona G et al. Structure of ballotinone, a diterpenoid from Ballota
nigra. ] Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1976; 1607-1609.

2 Savona G et al. The structure of ballotenol, a new diterpenoid from
Ballota nigra. ] Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1977; 497-499.

3 Bruno M et al. Preleosibirin, a prefuranic labdane diterpene from
Ballota nigra subsp. foetida. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 538-539.

4 Seidel V et al. Isolation from Ballota nigra L. of 13-
hydroxyballonigrinolide, a diterpene useful for the standardization of
the drug. J Pharm Belg 1996; 51: 72-73.

5 Seidel V et al. Diterpéne esters hétérosidiques phénylpropanoiques de
Ballota nigra L. Ann Pharm Franc 1998; 56: 31-35.

6 Savona G et al. Structures of three new diterpenoids from Ballota
species. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1997; 5: 322-324.

7 Bertrand MO et al. Two major flavonoids from Ballota nigra. Biochem
Syst Ecol 2000; 28: 1031-1033.

8 Daels-Rakotoarison DA e¢ al. Neurosedative and antioxidant
activitites of phenylpropanoids from Ballota nigra. Arzneim Forsch
2000; 50: 16-23.

9 Seidel V et al. Phenylpropanoid glycosides from Ballota nigra. Planta
Med 1996; 62: 186-187.

10 Seidel V et al. A phenylpropanoid glycoside from Ballota nigra.
Phytochemistry 1997; 44(4): 691-693.

11 Seidel V, et al. Phenylpropanoids from Ballota nigra L. inhibit in vitro
LDL peroxidation. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14: 93-98.

12 Didry N et al. Isolation and antibacterial activity of phenylpropanoid
derivatives from Ballota nigra. ] Ethnopharmacol 1999; 67: 197-202.

13 Bader A et al. Composition of the essential oil of Ballota undulata, B.
nigra ssp. foetida and B. saxatilis. Flavour Frag Journal 2003; 18: 502—
504.

14 Sever Yilmiz B, Saltan Citoglu G.[Chemical constituents of Ballota L.
species]. Ankara Ecz Fak Derg 2003; 32: 37-53 [Turkish].

----- PAGE 372 -----
- Horehound, White

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of white horehound is well documented.
Limited pharmacological information is available, although
expectorant properties have been reported which support
some of the herbal uses. There is a lack of robust clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of white horehound.
In view of the lack of toxicity data and suggested cardioactive
properties, excessive use of white horehound and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Marrubium vulgare L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)

Common Hoarhound, Hoarhound, Horehound, Marrubium

Part(s) Used

Flower, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EO)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL ©)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Diterpenes

vulgarol

marrubenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of white horehound.

Alkaloids

turicine.

Pyrrolidine-type. Betonicine 0.3%, the cis-isomer

Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, quercetin, and their glycosides.”

Terpenoids Diterpenes including marrubiin 0.3—-1.0%, a lactone,
as the main component with lesser amounts of various alcohols
(e.g. marrubenol, marrubiol, peregrinol and vulgarol). Marrubiin
has also been stated to be an artefact formed from a precursor,
premarrubiin, during extraction.”

Volatile oils Trace. Bisabolol, camphene, p-cymene, limonene, B-
pinene, sabinene and others,” a sesquiterpene (unspecified).

Other constituents Choline, saponin (unspecified), B-sitosterol
(a phytosterol), waxes (C2¢-C34 alkanes).

Food Use

White horehound is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that white horehound can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©!® Previously, white horehound
has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°

Herbal Use

White horehound is stated to possess expectorant and antispas-
modic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for acute or
chronic bronchitis, whooping cough, and specifically for bron-
chitis with non-productive cough.'©? 6% C7 G8: 6%)

Figure 2. White horehound (Marrubium vulgare).

----- PAGE 373 -----
Horehound, White

Figure 3. White horehound — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract
daily(CoO

24mL (1:1 in 20% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Aqueous extracts have been reported to exhibit an antagonistic
effect towards 5-hydroxytryptamine in vivo in mice, and in vitro
in guinea-pig ileum and rat uterus tissue.) Expectorant and
vasodilative properties have been documented for the volatile
oil.” However, the main active expectorant principle in white
horehound is reported to be marrubiin, which is stated to
stimulate secretions of the bronchial mucosa.‘“® Marrubiin has
also been stated to be cardioactive, possessing anti-arrhythmic
properties, although higher doses are reported to cause arrhyth-
mias.'(C° Marrubin acid (obtained from the saponification of
marrubiin) has been documented to stimulate bile secretion in
rats, whereas marrubiin was found to be inactive.©’ White
horehound is stated to possess bitter properties (BI 65000
compared to gentian BI 10000-30000) with marrubiin as the
main active component.'°®

Large doses of white horehound are purgative.
volatile oil has antischistosomal activity.

(G10, G60) Tho

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of white
horehound and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for white
horehound and further investigation of these aspects is required.
The plant juice of white horehound is stated to contain an
irritant principle, which can cause contact dermatitis.“@°”
No documented toxicity studies were located for the whole
plant, although an LD so (rat, by mouth) value for marrubin acid is
reported as 370 mg/kg body weight.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. Cardioactive properties and an antagonism of
5-hydroxytryptamine have been documented in animals. However,
the clinical relevance, if any, of these findings is unclear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of white horehound to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation White horehound is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ Uterine
stimulant activity in animals has been documented.‘°* In view
of this and the lack of safety data, the use of white horehound
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Rob-Bron Tablets.

(G30)

References

1 Kowalewski Z, Matlawska I. Flavonoid compounds in the herb of
Marrubium vulgare L. Herba Pol 1978; 24: 183-186.

2 Henderson MS, McCrindle R. Premarrubiin. A diterpenoid from
Marrubium vulgare L. ] Chem Soc 1969; (C): 2014.

3 Cahen R. Pharmacologic spectrum of Marrubium vulgare. C R Soc
Biol 1970; 164: 1467-1472.

4 Karryev MO et al. Some therapeutic properties and phytochemistry of
common horehound. Izv Akad Nauk Turkm SSR Ser Biol Nauk 1976;
3: 86-88.

5 Krejci I, Zadina R. Die Gallentreibende Wirkung von Marrubiin und
Marrabinsaure. Planta Med; 1959; 7: 1-7.

6 Saleh MM, Glombitza KW. Volatile oil of Marrubium vulgare and its
anti-schistosomal activity: Planta Med 1989; 55: 105.

----- PAGE 374 -----
Horse-chestnut

attributed to the saponin and flavonoid constituents in ho
chestnut. The traditional use of horse-chestnut in peripheral
vascular disorders is supported by data from preclinical
studies in which anti-inflammatory and capillary stabilising
effects have been observed. There is evidence from
randomised, double-blind, controlled clinical trials to support
the use of horse-chestnut seed extract in the treatment of
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency but confirmation
from more robust studies is required. In view of the limited
information on safety and toxicity, excessive use of horse-
chestnut and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Aesculus hippocastanum L. (Hippocastanaceae)

Synonym(s)

Aesculus

Part(s) Used
Seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition‘
USP29/NF24‘C80)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(637)

GSL (for external use only

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G52, G59 and G62.

Coumarins  Aesculetin, fraxin (fraxetin glucoside), scopolin
(scopoletin glucoside).

Flavonoids Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides including
astragalin, isoquercetrin, rutin; leucocyanidin (quercetin deriva-
tive).

Saponins French pharmacopoeial standard, not less than 3%
aescin. A mixture of saponins collectively referred to as ‘aescin' (3—
10%); a- and B-aescin as major glycosides.

Tannins Type unspecified but likely to be condensed in view of
the epicatechin content (formed during hydrolysis of condensed
tannins).

Other constituents Allantoin, amino acids (adenine, adenosine,
guanine), choline, citric acid, phytosterol.

Food Use

Horse-chestnut is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, horse-chestnut has been used for the treatment of
varicose veins, haemorrhoids, phlebitis, diarrhoea, fever and
enlargement of the prostate gland. The German Commission E
approved use for treatment of chronic venous insufficiency in the

legs.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Fruit 0.2-1.0g three times daily.'C*”

Preparations
calculated as aescin, in divided doses.'

Extracts equivalent to 50-150 mg_ triterpenes
G52)

Pharmacological Actions

Documented studies have concentrated on the actions of the
saponins, in particular, aescin.

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory and anti-oedema effects Anti-inflamma-
tory activity in rats has been documented for both a fruit extract
and the saponin fraction.“ Anti-inflammatory activity in the rat
has been reported to be greater for a total horse-chestnut extract
compared to aescin. In addition, an extract excluding aescin also
exhibited activity, suggesting that horse-chestnut contains anti-
inflammatory agents other than aescin.") No difference in activity
was noted when the horse-chestnut extracts were administered
prior to and after dextran (inflammatory agent). It has been
proposed that aescin affects the initial phase of inflammation by
exerting a ‘sealing’ effect on capillaries and by reducing the
number and/or diameter of capillary pores.

Effects on venous tone Horse-chestnut extract (16% aescin,
0.2 mg/mL) and also aescin (0.1 mg/mL) induced contractions in
isolated bovine and human veins.'©°?) Concentration-dependent
contractions of isolated canine veins were observed with a horse-
chestnut extract (16% aescin, 5 x 10°-*mg/mL).(C” A standar-
dised extract (16% aescin, 50mg, given intravenously) increased
femoral venous pressure in anaesthetised dogs, and decreased
cutaneous capillary hyperpermeability in rats (200 mg/kg, given
orally).

----- PAGE 375 -----
Horse-chestnut

Triterpenes

R' R2
- 1-4
aescin glucose ———> glucuronic acid angeloyl
(major glycoside)
2
F
glucose
CH20H
HO 4 COOH
HO ) fo) a
CH,0H,OX_ i
fe)
HO OH
HO:

Other glycosides glucuronic acid moiety angeloyl, tigloyl,
substituted at C-4 with 2-methylbutyryl or
galactose or xylose isobutyryl

Coumarins
R' R? R®
Rt N aesculin O-glucose OH H
aesculetin OH OH H
R ° ° scopolin OCH3 O-glucose H
. scopoletin OCH; OH H
Ri fraxin OCH; OH O-glucose
fraxetin OCH; OH OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of horse-chestnut.

In addition, the saponin fraction has been reported to exhibit
analgesic and antigranulation activities in rats,” to reduce
capillary permeability, and to produce an initial hypotension
followed by a longer lasting hypertension in anaesthetised
animals. Prostaglandin production by venous tissue is thought
to be involved in the regulation of vascular reactivity.”
Prostaglandins of the E series are known to cause relaxation of
venous tissues whereas those of the F, series produce contraction.
Increased venous tone induced by aescin in vitro was found to be
associated with an increased PGF>,, synthesis

in the venous tissue.

Other activities In vitro, aescin has been documented to inhibit
hyaluronidase activity (ICs 150 mol/L).'@°?)
A saponin fraction of horse-chestnut has been reported to
contract isolated rabbit ileum.”
Antiviral activity in vitro against influenza virus (A>/Japan 305)
has been described for aescin.)
Metabolism studies of aescin in the rat have concluded that
aescin toxicity is reduced by hepatic metabolism.”
Flavonoids and tannins are generally recognised as having anti-
inflammatory and astringent properties, respectively.

Clinical studies

Chronic venous insufficiency Several studies have assessed the
effects of horse-chestnut seed extract in patients with chronic
venous insufficiency, a common condition which causes oedema of
the lower leg.

A Cochrane systematic review of randomised, double-blind,
controlled trials of horse-chestnut seed extract in chronic venous
insufficiency included 17 studies: ten placebo-controlled trials and
seven studies comparing horse-chestnut seed extract with
reference medication (O-B-hydroxyethylrutosides, pycnogenol) or
compression therapy." Trials involved the administration of
horse-chestnut seed extract equivalent to 50-150 mg aescin daily
for two to 16 weeks. Collectively, results of placebo-controlled
studies indicated that horse-chestnut seed extract was superior to
placebo with respect to leg pain (weighted mean difference (95%
confidence interval (CI)) in 100mm visual analogue scale scores:
42.40 mm (34.90-49.90; six trials), oedema and pruritus resulting
from chronic venous insufficiency." Trials comparing horse
chestnut seed extract with other treatment approaches indicated
that the herbal preparation was as effective in relieving symptoms
of chronic venous insufficiency. The review concluded that horse-
chestnut seed extract is an effective short-term treatment for
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency, but that because of
methodological limitations of existing studies, further well-

designed clinical trials are required for confirmation of the
(10)

observed effects.

Other effects | Glycosaminoglycan hydrolyses are enzymes
involved in the breakdown of substances (proteoglycans) that
determine capillary rigidity and pore size (thus influencing the
passage of macromolecules into the surrounding tissue). Proteo-
glycans also interact with collagen, stabilising the fibres and
regulating their correct biosynthesis."!") The activity of these

----- PAGE 376 -----
enzymes was found to be raised in patients with varicosis,
compared with healthy patients. In a study involving 15 patients
with varicosis treated with horse-chestnut extract (900 mg daily)
for 12 days, the activity of these enzymes was significantly
reduced.) However, this observation requires confirmation in
larger, robust clinical studies.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving 70 healthy individuals with haematomas, a topical gel
(2% aescin) reduced sensitivity to pressure on affected areas.‘

The cosmetic applications of horse-chestnut have been
reviewed;''” these effects are attributed to properties associated
with the saponin constituents.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for horse-
chestnut and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Two incidences of toxic nephropathy have been reported and
were stated as probably secondary to the ingestion of high doses
of aescin.''?) In Japan, where horse-chestnut has been used as an
anti-inflammatory drug after surgery or trauma, hepatic injury
has bi

en described in a male patient who received an

intramuscular injection of a proprietary product containing
horse-chestnut.‘" Liver function tests showed a mild abnormality
and a diagnosis of giant cell tumour of bone (grade 2) by bone
biopsy was made. Other side-effects stated to have been reported
for the product include shock, spasm, mild nausea, vomiting and
urticaria.“ However, a causal association with horse-chestnut

shed.

use in this case has not been estab!

Preclinical data

A proprietary product containing horse-chestnut (together with
phenopyrazone and cardiac glycoside-containing plant extracts)
has been associated with the development of a drug-induced
autoimmune dis called 'pseudolupus syndrome! in Germany

Figure 2 Horse-chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum).

Horse-chestnut

and Switzerland." '!® The individual component in the product
sible for the syndrome was not established.

The effect of aescin, both free and albumin-bound, on rena
tubular transport processes has been studied in the isolated,
artificially perfused frog kidney.” Aescin was found to primarily
affect tubular, rather than glomerular, epithelium and it was noted
that binding to plasma protein (approximately 50%) protects
against this nephrotoxicity. Aescin was thought to be neither
secreted nor reabsorbed in the tubules, and the concentration of
unbound aescin filtered through the kidney (13%) was considered
to be too low to have toxic effects. The authors commented that
the symptoms of acute renal failure in humans are caused
primarily by interference with glomeruli and in view of this, the
nephrotoxic potential of aescin is probably only relevant when the
kidneys are already damaged and also if the aescin is displaced
from its binding to plasma protein.”

It has been noted that death occurs rapidly in animals given

in, due to massive haemolysis.

respor

Death is more
(4)

prolonged in animals given smaller doses of aescin.

LDso values for aescin have been estimated in mice, rats and
guinea-pigs and range from 134 to 720mg/kg (by mouth) and
from 1.4 to 15.2mg/kg (intravenous injection).“*” The tota
saponin fraction has been reported to be less toxic in mice
(intraperitoneal injection) compared to the isolated aescin mixture
(LDso 46.5 mg/kg and 9.5 mg/kg, respectively).°’ The haemolytic
index of horse-chestnut is documented as being 6000, compared
with 9500 to 12 500 for aescin.'°” Daily doses in rats (100 mg/kg,
orally) of a standardised extract of horse-chestnut (16% aescin)
did not produce teratogenic effects, and the extract was negative

in the Ames test with Salmonella typhimurium TA98 without
(G52)

actuation.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Horse-chestnut may be irritant to the gastrointestinal tract due to
the saponin constituents. Saponins are generally recognised to
possess haemolytic properties, but are not usually absorbed from
the gastrointestinal tract following oral administration. As a
precaution, horse-chestnut should be avoided by patients with
existing renal or hepatic impairment.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of horse-chestnut to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Horse-chestnut has
coumarin constituents, although those detected so far do not

Figure 3 Horse-chestnut — dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 377 -----
Horse-chestnut

possess the minimum structural requirements for anti-coagulant
activity. There is evidence from preclinical studies that aescin, the
main saponin component in horse-chestnut, binds to plasma
protein. However, it is not clear if this has clinical relevance in
terms of affecting binding of other drugs.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of horse-chestnut during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of the
pharmacologically active constituents present in horse-chestnut,
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12; Opo-Veinogene;
Phlebosedol; Phytomelis; Veinophytum; Veinostase; Veinoto-
nyl. Germany: Aescusan; Amphodyn; Cefasabal; Cycloven
Forte N; Diu Venostasin; Fagorutin Rosskastanien-Balsam N;
Heparin Comp; Intradermi; PC 30 V; Sportupac M; Trauma-
cyl; Varicylum-S; Venen Krauter NT; Venen-Salbe N; Venengel;
Weleda Hamorrhoidalzapfchen. Italy: Capill Venogel; Capill;
Centella Complex; Centella Complex; Centeril H; Centeril H;

References
1

10

1

12

13

14

1s
16

17

Farnsworth NR, Cordell GA. A review of some biologically active
compounds isolated from plants as reported in the 1974-75 literature.
Lloydia 1976; 39: 420-455.

Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants.
XIV. Antiinflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 39: 160-171.

Cebo B et al. Pharmacological properties of saponin fractions from
Polish crude drugs: Saponaria officinalis, Primula officinalis, and
Aesculus hippocastanum. Herba Pol 1976; 22: 154-162.

Vogel G et al. Untersuchungen zum Mechanismus der therapeutischen
und toxischen Wirkung des Rosskastanien-saponins aescin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1970; 20: 699-705.

Tsutsumi S, Ishizuka S. Anti-inflammatory effects of the extract
Aesculus hippocastanum and seed. Shikwa-Gakutto 1967; 67: 1324-
1328.

De Pascale V et al. Effect of an escin-cyclonamine mixture on capillary
permeability. Boll Chim Farm 1974; 113: 600-614.

Longiave D e¢ al. The mode of action of aescin on isolated veins:
Relationship with PGF,«. Pharmacol Res Commun 1978; 10: 145-153.
Rao SG, Cochran KW. Antiviral activity of triterpenoid saponins
containing acylated B-amyrin aglycones. J Pharm Sci 1974; 63: 471.
Rothkopf M. Effects of age, sex and phenobarbital pretreatment on
the acute toxicity of the horse chestnut saponin aescin in rats.
Naunyn-Schmied archpharm 1977; 297 (Suppl. Suppl.): R18.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse-chestnut seed extract for chronic venous
insufficiency (Review). 2006, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD003230.10.1002/
14651858.CD003230.pub2

Kreysel HW et al. A possible role of lysosomal enzymes in the
pathogenesis of varicosis and the reduction in their serum activity by
Venostasin®. Vasa 1983; 12: 377- 382.

Proserpio G et al. Cosmetic uses of horse-chestnut (Aesculum
bippocastanum) extracts, of escin and of the cholesterol/escin
complex. Fitoterapia 1980; 51: 113-128.

Grasso A, Corvaglia E. Two cases of suspected toxic tubulonephrosis
due to escine. Gazz Med Ital 1976; 135: 581-584.

Takegoshi K e¢ al. A case of Venoplant®-induced hepatic injury.
Gastroenterol Japonica 1986; 21: 62-65.

Grob P et al. Drug-induced pseudolupus. Lancet 1975; ii: 144-148.
Russell AS. Drug-induced autoimmune disease. Clin Immunol Allergy
1981; 1: 57-76.

Rothkopf M et al. Animal experiments on the question of the renal
toleration of the horse chestnut saponin aescin. Arzneimittelforschung
1977; 27: 598-605.

----- PAGE 378 -----
Horseradish

anzvmec vais al aqacalleciie AEE WEB

located, although the isothiocyanates and peroxidases
probably account for the reputed circulatory stimulant and
wound-healing actions, respectively. The oil is one of the
most hazardous of all essential oils and it is not recommended
for either external or internal use.‘¢5® Horseradish should not
be ingested in amounts exceeding those used in foods.

Species (Family)

Armoracia rusticana P. Gaertin., B. Mey. & Scherb.

Synonym(s)

Armoracia lapathifolia, Cochlearia armoracia L., Nasturtium
armoracia (L.) Fr.

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
CSL”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40, G58 and G62.

Coumarins Aesculetin, scopoletin.

Phenols — Caffeic acid derivatives and lesser amounts of
hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives. Concentrations of acids are

: : 1
reported to be much lower in the root than in the leaf.”

Volatile oils Glucosinolates (mustard oil glycosides) gluconas-
turtiin and sinigrin (S-glucosides), yielding phenylethylisothiocya-
nate and _ allylisothiocyanate after hydrolysis. Isothiocyanate
content estimated as 12.2-20.4 mg/g freeze dried root.?") Other
isothiocyanate types include isopropyl, 3-butenyl, 4-pentenyl,
phenyl, 3-methylthiopropyl and benzyl] derivatives.

Other constituents Ascorbic acid, asparagin,
enzymes, resin, starch and sugar.

peroxidase

Other plant parts
documented for the leaf.

Kaempferol and quercetin have been

Food Use

Horseradish is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that

horseradish can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(©'® Previously horseradish has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'¢” Horseradish is commonly
used as a food flavouring.

Herbal Use

Horseradish is stated to possess antiseptic, circulatory and
digestive stimulant, diuretic and vulnerary properties.'(C 9? 0%
Traditionally, it has been used for pulmonary and urinary
infection, urinary stones, oedematous conditions, and externally
for application to inflamed joints or tissues.‘

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older herbal reference texts are given below.

Root (fresh) 2-4 g before meals.'“*?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A marked hypotensive effect in cats has been documented for
horseradish peroxidase, following intravenous administration.)
The effect was completely blocked by aspirin and indometacin,
but was not affected by antihistamines. It was concluded that
horseradish peroxidase acts by stimulating the synthesis of
arachidonic acid metabolites.

Glucosinolates

q
p-s-0 °
Ho CHAOH, \ ae Hydrolysis =§S~Sy—=c=s
HO 2 allylisothiocyanate
HO
sinigrin B
(prop-2-enylglucosinolate) —CH2,CH=CH2
gluconasturtin
(2-phenylethyiglucosinolate) © —CH2CH2CsHs
Coumarins
HO [e} [e}
R
aesculin glucose

aesculetin H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of horseradish.

----- PAGE 379 -----
Horseradish

Figure 2 Horseradish (Armoracia rusticana).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
horseradish.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for horseradish
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Isothiocyanates are reported to have irritant effects on the skin
and also to be allergenic.“©°"°® Animal poisoning has been
documented for horseradish. Symptoms described include inflam-
mation of the stomach or rumen, and excitement followed by
collapse.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is stated that horseradish may depress thyroid function, and
should be avoided by individuals with hypothyroidism or by those
receiving thyroxine."©4*°) No rationale for this statement is
included, except that this action is common to all members of the
cabbage and mustard family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of horseradish to interact with other medicines

Figure 3 Horseradish — dried drug substance (root).

administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Allylisothiocyanate is extremely toxic
and a violent irritant to mucous membranes.‘@**) In view of this,
use of horseradish should be avoided during pregnancy and
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex; Garlic,
Horseradish, A & C Capsules; Procold. Germany: Angocin
Anti-Infekt N. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus. Switzerland:
Kernosan Elixir; Sanogencive. UK: Mixed Vegetable Tablets.

References

1 Stoehr H, Herrman K. Phenolic acids of vegetables. III.
Hydroxycinnamic acids and hydroxybenzoic acids of root vegetables.
Z Lebensm-Unters Forsch 1975: 159: 219-224.

2 Hansen H. Content of glucosinolates in horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana). Tidsskr Planteavl 1974; 73: 408-410.

3 Kojima M. Volatile components of Wasabia japonica. II. Volatile
components other than isothiocyanates. Hakko Kogaku Zasshi 1971;
49: 650-653.

4 Kojima M et al. Studies on the volatile components of Wasabia
japonica, Brassica juncea, and Cocholearia armoracia by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Yakugaku Zasshi 1973; 93: 453-
459.

5 Sjaastad OV et al. Hypotensive effects in cats caused by horseradish
peroxidase mediated by metabolites of arachidonic acid. J Histochem
Cytochem 1984; 32: 1328-1330.

----- PAGE 380 -----
- Hydrangea

hydrangea, allinene|p related species have been investigated
more thoroughly.““*” No scientific evidence was located to
justify the herbal uses. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of hydrangea and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Hydrangea arborescens L. (Saxifragaceae)

Synonym(s)

Mountain Hydrangea, Seven Barks, Smooth Hydrangea, Wild
Hydrangea

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G40.

Limited information is available on the chemistry of hydrangea.
It is stated to contain carbohydrates (e.g. gum, starch, sugars),
flavonoids (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin, rutin), resin, saponins,
hydrangin and hydrangenol, a stilbenoid, and to be free from
tannins.

Food Use

Hydrangea is not used in foods. Previously in the USA, hydrangea
has been listed as a 'Herb of Undefined Safety'.'©?”

Herbal Use

Hydrangea is stated to possess diuretic and antilithic properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis, urethritis, urinary

Coumarins Stilbenes
SO.
HO’ [e} ie)
OH O
umbelliferone
(hydrangin) hydrangenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hydrangea.

Figure 2 Hydrangea (Hydrangea arborescens).

calculi, prostatitis, enlarged prostate gland, and specifically for
urinary calculi with gravel and cystitis.'67 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.'C”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Tincture 2-10 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for hydrangea. Synthesised hydrangenol
derivatives have been reported to possess anti-allergic properties,

Figure 3. Hydrangea — dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 381 -----
Hydrangea

exhibiting a strong inhibitory action towards hyaluronidase
activity and histamine release.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
hydrangea and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

e-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for hydrangea
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hydrangea has been reported to cause contact dermatitis,
and it is stated that hydrangin may cause gastroenteritis.
Symptoms of overdose are described as vertigo and a feeling of
tightness in the chest.(©?”)

(G51)
(G22)

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hydrangea to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of hydrangea has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicity data, the use of hydrangea during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

UK: Antiglan; Backache.

References

1 Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary. London: Taylor
and Francis, 1993.

2 Kakegawa H et al. Inhibitory effects of hydrangeol derivatives on the
activation of hyaluronidase and their anti-allergic activities. Planta
Med 1988; 54: 385-389.

----- PAGE 382 -----
Hydrocotyle

triterpenoid constituents. Documented preclinical studies
support the herbal use of hydrocotyle as a dermatological
agent although robust clinical studies are lacking. In view of
the lack of toxicity data, excessive ingestion of hydrocotyle
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Centella asiatica (L.) Urban (Apiaceae Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Asiatic Pennywort, Centella, Gotu Kola, Hydrocotyle asiatica L.,
Hydrocotyle lurida Hance, Indian Pennywort, Indian Water
Navelwort, Ji Xue Cao

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?
Martindale 35th edition‘
WHO volume 1 1999°%)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (for external use only)'*”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G60.

Amino acids Alanine and serine (major components), amino-
butyrate, aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and threonine.”
The root contains greater quantities than the herb.”

Flavonoids Quercetin, kaempferol and various glycosides.

Terpenoids ‘Triterpenes, asiaticoside, centelloside, madecasso-
side, brahmoside and brahminoside (saponin glycosides). Agly-
cones are referred to as hydrocotylegenin A-E;“’ compounds A-D
are reported to be esters of the triterpene alcohol R,-
barrigenol.* Asiaticentoic acid, centellic acid, centoic acid
and madecassic acid.

Volatile oils Various terpenoids including B-caryophyllene, trans-
B-farnesene and germacrene D (sesquiterpenes) as major compo-
nents, o-pinene and f-pinene. The major terpenoid is stated to be
unidentified.

Other constituents Hydrocotylin (an alkaloid), vallerine (a bitter
principle), fatty acids (e.g. linoleic acid, linolenic acid, lignocene,
oleic acid, palmitic acid, stearic acid), phytosterols (e.g.
campesterol, sitosterol, stigmasterol),"” resin and tannin.

The underground plant parts of hydrocotyle have been reported

to contain small quantities of at least 14 different polyacetyl-

enes.1

Food Use

Hydrocotyle is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Hydrocotyle is stated to possess mild diuretic, antirheumatic,
dermatological, peripheral vasodilator and vulnerary properties.
Traditionally it has been used for rheumatic conditions, cutaneous
affections, and by topical application, for indolent wounds,
leprous ulcers, and cicatrisation after surgeryC” °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 0.6 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Sesquiterpenes

AWK SN

B-farnesene

A-caryophyllene germacrene B

Triterpenes

asiatic acid
asiaticoside is a triglycoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hydrocotyle.

----- PAGE 383 -----
Hydrocotyle

Figure 2 Hydrocotyle (Centella asiatica).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The triterpenoids are regarded as the active principles in
hydrocotyle."? Asiaticoside is reported to possess wound-healing
ability, by having a stimulating effect on the epidermis and
promoting keratinisation."'? Asiaticoside is thought to act by an
inhibitory action on the synthesis of collagen and mucopolysac-
charides in connective tissue.”

Both asiaticoside and madecassoside are documented to be
anti-inflammatory, and the total saponin fraction is reported to be
active in the carrageenan rat paw oedema test.”

In vivo studies in rats have shown that asiaticoside exhibits a
protective action against stress-induced gastric ulcers, following
“3) and accelerates the healing of
chemical-induced duodenal ulcers, after oral administration.“ It
was thought that asiaticoside acted by increasing the ability of the
rats to cope with a stressful situation, rather than via a local effect
on the mucosa.'!?)

In vivo studies in mice and rats using brahmoside and
brahminoside, by intraperitoneal injection, have shown a CNS-
depressant effect."*) The compounds were found to decrease
motor activity, increase hexobarbitone sleeping time, slightly
decrease body temperature, and were thought to act via a
cholinergic mechanism." A hypertensive effect in rats was also
observed, but only following large doses.'') In vitro studies with
brahmoside and brahminoside indicated a relaxant effect on the
rabbit duodenum and rat uterus, and an initial increase, followed
by a decrease, in the amplitude and rate of contraction of the
isolated rabbit heart.‘') Higher doses were found to cause cardiac
arrest, although subsequent intravenous administration in dogs
caused no marked change in an ECG."

Fresh plant juice is reported to be devoid of antibacterial
activity,” although asiaticoside has been reported to be active
versus Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Bacillus leprae and Enta-
moeba histolytica, and oxyasiaticoside was documented to be
active against tubercle bacillus.“%!” The fresh plant juice is also
stated not to exhibit antitumour or antiviral activities, but to
Possess a moderate cytotoxic action in human ascites tumour
cells."°

subcutaneous administration,

Clinical studies

Several studies describing the use of hydrocotyle to treat wounds
and various skin disorders have been documented. However, these

studies have important methodological limitations and preclude
definitive conclusions on the effects of hydrocotyle. Robust clinical
studies are required. A cream containing a hydrocotyle extract
was found to be effective in the treatment of psoriasis in seven
patients to whom it was applied.) An aerosol preparation,
containing a hydrocotyle extract, was reported to improve the
healing in 19 of 25 wounds that had proved refractory to other
forms of treatment.” A hydrocotyle extract containing asiatico-
side (40%), asiatic acid (29-30%), madecassic acid (29-30%) and
madasiatic acid (1%) was stated to be successful as both a
preventive and curative treatment, when given to 227 patients with
keloids or hypertrophic scars.'” The effective dose in adults was
reported to be between 60 and 90 mg. It was proposed that the
triterpene constituents in the hydrocotyle extract act in a similar
manner to cortisone, with respect to wound healing, and interfere
with the metabolism of abnormal collagen.

Pharmacokinetics There are only very limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of constituents of hydrocotyle.

The triterpene constituents are reported to be metabolised
primarily in the faeces in a period of 24-76 hours, with a small
percentage metabolised via the kidneys.''” An extract containing
asiatic acid, madecassic acid, madasiatic acid and asiaticoside
reached peak plasma concentrations in 2-4 hours, irrespective of
whether it is administered in tablet, oily injection or ointment
formulations.”

le-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
ydrocotyle and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A burning sensation was reported by four of 20 patients during
the period of application of an aerosol preparation containing
ydrocotyle."'? However, it is not clear whether other components
in the formulation contributed to this reaction. Ingestion of

ydrocotyle is stated to have produced pruritus over the whole
body.'05!

Preclinical data

In vitro antifertility activity against human and rat sperm has been
described for the total saponin fraction.” Asiaticoside and
brahminoside are thought to be the active components, although
no spermicidal or spermostatic action could be demonstrated for

Figure 3 Hydrocotyle — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 384 -----
the pure saponins.” A crude hydrocotyle extract has been
reported to significantly reduce the fertility of female mice when
administered orally." No mechanism of action was investigated.

Teratogenicity studies in the rabbit have reported negative
findings for a hydrocotyle extract containing asiatic acid,
madecassic acid, madasiatic acid and asiaticoside.\!”

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is stated that hydrocotyle may produce photosensitisation.'©”
Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hydrocotyle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that brahmoside and brahminoside,
constituents of hydrocotyle, have CNS depressant activity."

Pregnancy and lactation Hydrocotyle is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.‘ Relaxation of
the isolated rat uterus has been documented for brahmoside and
brahminoside.) Triterpene constituents have been reported to
lack any teratological effects in rabbits.) However, in view of the
lack of toxicity data, the use of hydrocotyle during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Moragen; No-Gras; Ovumix; Pentol; Redudiet; Vagicural Plus;
Venoful; VNS 45. Australia: Extralife Leg-Care. Brazil:
Composto Anticelulitico; Composto Emagrecedor; Derm'at-
tive 10; Emagrevit. Chile: Celulase Con Neomicina; Cicapost;
Dermaglos Plus; Escar T-Neomicina; Madecassol Neomicina.
France: Calmiphase; Fadiamone; Madecassol Neomycine

Hydrocotyle

Monaco: Akildia. Portugal: Antiestrias. Spain: Blastoestimu-
lina; Blastoestimulina; Blastoestimulina; Cemalyt; Nesfare.

References

1 George VK, Gnanarethinam JL. Free amino acids in Centella asiatica.
Curr Sci 1975; 44: 790.

2 Rzadkowska-Bodalska H. Flavonoid compounds in herb pennywort
(Hydrocotyle vulgaris). Herba Pol 1974; 20: 243-246.

3. Voigt G et al. Zur Struktur der Flavonoide aus Hydrocotyle vulgaris L.
Pharmazie 1981; 36: 377-379.

4 Hiller K e¢ al. Isolierung von Quercetin-3-O-(6-O-a-L-
arabinopyranosyl)-B-b-galaktopyranosid, einem neuen Flavonoid aus
Hydrocotyle vulgaris L. Pharmazie 1979; 34: 192-193.

5S Hiller K et al. Saponins of Hydrocotyle vulgaris. Pharmazie 1971; 26:
780.

6 Hiller K et al. Zur Struktur des Hauptsaponins aus Hydrocotyle
vulgaris L. Pharmazie 1981; 36: 844-846.

7 Asakawa Y et al. Mono- and sesquiterpenoids from Hydrocotyle and
Centella species. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 2590-2592.

8 Bohlmann F, Zdero C. Polyacetylenic compounds. 230. A new polyyne
from Centella species. Chem Ber 1975; 108: 511-514.

9 Schulte KE et al. Constituents of medical plants. XX VII.
Polyacetylenes from Hydrocotyle asiatica. Arch Pharm (Weinheim)
1973; 306: 197-209.

10 Gotu Kola. Lawrence Review of Natural Products, 1988.

11 Morisset T et al. Evaluation of the healing activity of hydrocotyle
tincture in the treatment of wounds. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 117-121.

12. Jacker H-J et al. Zum antiexsudativen Verhalten einiger
Triterpensaponine. Pharmazie 1982; 37: 380-382.

13. Ravokatra A, Ratsimamanga AR. Action of a pentacyclic triterpenoid,
asiaticoside, obtained from Hydrocotyle madagascariensis or Centella
asiatica against gastric ulcers of the Wistar rat exposed to cold (2°). C
R Acad Sci (Paris) 1974; 278: 1743-1746.

14 Ravokatra A et al. Action of asiaticoside extracted from hydrocyte on
duodenal ulcers induced with mercaptoethylamine in male Wistar
rats. C R Acad Sci (Paris) 1974; 278: 2317-2321.

15 Ramaswamy AS et al. Pharmacological studies on Centella asiatica
Linn. (Brahma manduki) (N.O. Umbelliferae). J Res Indian Med 1970;
4: 160-175.

16 Lin Y-C et al. Search for biologically active substances in Taiwan
medicinal plants. 1. Screening for anti-tumor and anti-microbial
substances. Chin J Microbiol 1972; 5: 76-81.

17 Oliver-Bever B. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1986.

18 Natarajan S, Paily PP. Effect of topical Hydrocotyle asiatica in
psoriasis. Indian J Dermatol 1973; 18: 82-85.

19 Bossé J-P et al. Clinical study of a new antikeloid agent. Ann Plast
Surg 1979; 3: 13-21.

----- PAGE 385 -----
Ispaghula

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The characteristic component of ispaghula is the mucilage
which provides it with its bulk laxative action. Many of the
herbal uses are therefore supported, although no published
information was located to justify the use of ispaghula in
cystitis or infective skin conditions. Adverse effects and
precautions generally associated with bulk laxatives apply to
ispaghula. Clinical evidence exists for hypocholesterolaemic
activity.

The EMEA Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPC) draft Community Herbal Monographs for ispaghula
husk‘©®2) and seed©®) include the following therapeutic
indications: (a) treatment of habitual constipation; (b)
conditions in which easy defecation with soft stools is
desirable, e.g. in cases of painful defecation after rectal or anal
surgery, anal fissures and haemorrhoids;‘©®” ©» and for
ispaghula husk, (c) in patients for whom an increased daily
fibre intake may be advisable, e.g. as an adjuvant in
constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome, and as
an adjuvant to diet in hypercholesterolaemia.‘°®” Bulk
laxatives lower the transit time through the gastrointestinal
tract and may affect the absorption of concurrently
administered drugs. Concomitant use with thyroid hormones
and medicines known to inhibit peristalsis should only be
under medical supervision.‘¢°” °°)

Ispaghula seed and husk may be used during pregnancy
and lactation.

Species (Family)

Plantago ovata Forssk. (Plantaginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blond Psyllium, Indian Plantago, Ispagol, Ispaghul, Pale Psyllium,
Spogel

Part(s) Used
Seed, husk

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E (Psyllium, Blonde)
EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs‘“*” “*)
ESCOP 2003079)

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8”

WHO volume 1 19999

USP29/NF24°8°

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G52 and G59.

Alkaloids Monoterpene-type. (+)-Boschniakine (indicaine), (+)-
boschniakinic acid (plantagonine) and indicainine.

Mucilages 10-30%. Mucopolysaccharide consisting mainly of a
highly branched arabinoxylan with a xylan backbone and
branches of arabinose, xylose and 2-O-(galacturonic)-rhamnose
moieties. Present mainly in the seed husk.

Other constituents Aucubin (iridoid glucoside), sugars (fructose,
glucose, sucrose), planteose (trisaccharide), protein, sterols
(campesterol, B-sitosterol, stigmasterol), triterpenes (o- and B-
amyrin), fatty acids (e.g. linoleic, oleic, palmitic, stearic), tannins.

Food Use

In food manufacture, ispaghula may be used as a thickener or
stabiliser.(C4

Herbal Use

Ispaghula is stated to possess demulcent and laxative properties.
Traditionally, ispaghula has been used in the treatment of chronic
constipation, dysentery, diarrhoea and cystitis,(C7 6% O° C% 6
643,652,664) Tonically, a poultice has been used for furunculosis.
The German Commission E approved use for chronic constipation
and disorders in which bowel movements with loose stools are

desirable, e.g. patients with anal fistulas, haemorrhoids, preg-
Alkaloids

OHC N

| Z
N
boschniakine
(indicaine)
Iridoids

HO

S
oO

HOCH, H
glucose

aucubin

Polysaccharides
gal

ara rha ara xyl

bf bf

—> 4) = xyl - (1 —= 4) - xyl - (1 = 3) - xyl - (1 = 4) - xyl = (1 4) = xyl- (1

ara=arabinose gal=galacturonicacid rha=rhamnose  xyl=xylose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ispaghula.

----- PAGE 386 -----
Figure 2 Ispaghula (Plantago ovata).

nancy, secondary medication in the treatment of various forms of
diarrhoea and in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.“

The European Medicines Agency (EMEA) Committee on
Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted a Community
Herbal Monograph for ispaghula husk‘°*” and seed.‘©*) The
draft monographs include the following therapeutic indications
under well-established use: (a) treatment of habitual constipation;
(b) conditions in which easy defaecation with soft stools is
desirable, e.g. in cases of painful defaecation after rectal or anal
surgery, anal fissures and haemorrhoids;“**°*) and for ispa-
ghula husk, (c) in patients for whom an increased daily fibre
intake may be advisable, e.g. as an adjuvant in constipation-
predominant irritable bowel syndrome, and as an adjuvant to diet
in hypercholesterolaemia.‘“*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Seeds 5-10¢ (3g in children) three times daily;@*°” 12-40 g per
day, husk 4-20 g;'9 3-5 g.'C) Children 6-12 years, half adult
dose. Children under six years, treat only under medical
supervision.“ Seeds should be soaked in warm water for
several hours before taking.

Liquid extract
daily. (G6, G7)

24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Husk 3-5 g.‘“* Seeds and husk should be soaked in warm water
for several hours before administration.

Ispaghula as

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs advise the
following dosages.

Ispaghula husk, indications (a) and (b) (see Herbal Use)‘“*”)
Adults, elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 7-11 ¢ daily in
divided doses. Children aged 6-12 years: 3-8 g daily in divided
doses.

Ispaghula husk, indication (c) (see Herbal Use)'C*? Adults,
elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 7-20 g daily in one to three
divided doses.

Ispaghula seed, indications (a) and (b) (see Herbal Use’
Adults, elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 25—40g daily in
one to three divided doses. Children aged 6-12 years: 12-25 g daily
in one to three divided doses.

) (G83)

Pharmacological Actions

The principal pharmacological actions of ispaghula can be
attributed to the mucilage component.

In vitro and animal studies

An alcoholic extract lowered the blood pressure of anaesthetised
cats and dogs, inhibited isolated rabbit and frog hearts, and
stimulated rabbit, rat and guinea-pig ileum.'C*) The extract
exhibited cholinergic activity." A mild laxative action has also
been reported in mice administered iridoid glycosides, including
aucubin. Four-week supplementation of a fibre-free diet with
ispaghula seeds (100 or 200 g/kg) was compared with that of the
husks and wheat bran in rats.” The seeds increased faecal fresh
weight by up to 100% and faecal dry weight by up to 50%. Total
faecal bile acid secretion was stimulated, and -glucuronidase
activity reduced, by ispaghula. The study concluded that ispaghula
acts as a partly fermentable, dietary fibre supplement increasing
stool bulk, and that it probably has metabolic and mucosa-
protective effects.

Ispaghula husk depressed the growth of chickens by 15% when
added to their diet at 2%.'©*?

Ispaghula seed powder is stated to have strongly counteracted
the deleterious effects of adding sodium cyclamate (2%), FD & C
Red No. 2 (2%), and polyoxyethylene sorbitan monostearate (4%)
to the diet of rats.(C*?

Clinical studies

(G3, G43, G52)

Ispaghula is used as a bulk laxative. ) The swelling

properties of the mucilage enable it to absorb water in the
gastrointestinal tract, thereby increasing the volume of the faeces

Figure 3. Ispaghula - dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 387 -----
Ispaghula

and promoting peristalsis. Bulk laxatives are often used for the
treatment of chronic constipation and when excessive straining
must be avoided following ano rectal surgery or in the manage-
ment of haemorrhoids. Ispaghula is also used in the management
of diarrhoea and for adjusting faecal consistency in patients with
colostomies and in patients with diverticular disease or irritable
bowel syndrome.

Laxative effect Ispaghula increases water content of stools and
total stool weight in patients, thus promoting peristalsis and

reducing mouth-to-rectum transit
42 adults with constipation (<3

time. In a short-term study,
bowel movements per week)

received either ispaghula (7.2 g/day) or ispaghula plus senna

(6.5¢+ 1.5 g/day). Both treatments increased defecation fre-
quency, and wet and dry stool weights, improved stool consistency,
and gave subjective relief.

A randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre study
involved 170 subjects with chronic idiopathic constipation. The
study included a two-week baseline (placebo) phase, followed by
two weeks' treatment with ispaghula (Metamucil) 5.1g, twice
daily or docusate sodium 100mg twice daily. Compared with
docusate, ispaghula significantly increased stool water content
(0.01% versus 2.33% for docusate and ispaghula, respectively; p =
0.007), and total stool output (271.9 g/week versus 359.9 g/week
for docusate and ispaghula, respectively; p = 0.005). Furthermore,
bowel movement frequency was significantly greater for ispaghula,
compared with docusate. It was concluded that ispaghula has
greater overall laxative efficacy than docusate in patients with
chronic constipation.

Antidiarrhoeal effect An open, randomised, crossover trial
involving 25 patients with diarrhoea compared the effects of
loperamide with those of ispaghula and calcium.” Nineteen
patients completed both periods of treatment. The results
indicated that both treatments halved stool frequency. Ispaghula
and calcium were reported to be significantly better than
loperamide with regard to urgency and stool consistency.”

Nine volunteers with phenolphthalein-induced diarrhoea were
treated in random sequence with placebo, ispaghula (Konsyl),
calcium polycarbophyl or wheat bran.) Wheat bran and calcium
polycarbophy] had no effect on faecal consistency or on faecal
viscosity. By contrast, ispaghula made stools firmer and increased
faecal viscosity. In a dose-response study involving six subjects, 9,
18 and 30g ispaghula per day caused a near-linear increase in
faecal viscosity.”

The effects of ispaghula have been explored in children. In an
open, uncontrolled study, 23 children with chronic non-specific
diarrhoea were treated with an unrestricted diet for one week, and
then treated with ispaghula (Metamucil) for two weeks (one
tablespoonful twice daily). Seven patients responded to the

unrestricted diet and 13 were said to respond to ispaghula
(9)

treatment.

Hypocholesterolaemic effects In a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group study, 26 men with mild-to-moderate
hypercholesterolaemia (serum cholesterol concentration: 4.86-
8.12 mmol/L) received ispaghula (Metamucil) 3.4g, or cellulose
placebo, three times daily at meal times for eight weeks." At the
end of the study, serum cholesterol concentrations were reduced by
14.8% in the treated group, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol by 20.2% and ratio of LDL to high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol by 14.8%, compared with baseline values.
There were no significant changes in serum lipid concentrations
with placebo treatment, compared with baseline values. Differ-

ences in serum cholesterol concentrations between the two groups
were statistically significant after four weeks (p-value not
reported).

A double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel trial study com-
pared the effects of ispaghula (Metamucil 5.1 g, daily) and placebo
in 118 patients (aged 21-70 years old) with primary hypercholes-
terolaemia (total serum cholesterol >5.7 mmol/L). Thirty-
seven participants maintained a high-fat diet and 81 a low-fat diet.
Treated patients in both low- and high-fat diet groups showed
small significant decreases (p < 0.05) in total cholesterol and LDL
cholesterol levels (5.8% and 7.2%, respectively, for high-fat diets;
4.2% and 6.4%, respectively, for low-fat diets). No significant
differences were seen in LDL cholesterol response for treated
patients on either diet.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 20 males
(mean (SD) age 44 (4) years) with moderate hypercholester-
olaemia (mean (SD) total cholesterol concentration 265 (17) mg/
dL, LDL 184 (15) mg/dL) were randomised to receive a 40-day
course of ispaghula (Metamucil) 15g daily, or placebo (cellu-
lose). There was a wash-out period of more than 10 days
between treatments. Ispaghula lowered LDL cholesterol (168 mg/
dL) more than did cellulose placebo (179mg/dL), decreased
relative cholesterol absorption, and increased the fractional
turnover of both chenodeoxycholic acid and cholic acid. Bile acid
synthesis increased in subjects whose LDL cholesterol was
lowered by more than 10%. It was concluded that ispaghula
lowers LDL cholesterol primarily by stimulation of bile acid
synthesis.”

A meta-analysis of eight published and four unpublished
studies carried out in four countries reviewed the effect of
consumption of ispaghula-enriched cereal products on blood
cholesterol, and LDL and HDL cholesterol concentrations.»
Overall, the trials included 404 adults with mild-to-moderate
hypercholesterolaemia (5.17—7.8 mmol/L) who consumed low-fat
diets. The meta-analysis indicated that subjects who consumed
ispaghula cereal had lower total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol
than subjects who ate control cereal concentrations (differences of
0.31mmol/L (5%) and 0.35mmol/L (9%), respectively). HDL
cholesterol concentrations were not affected in subjects eating
ispaghula cereal.

Another meta-analysis included eight studies involving a total
of 384 patients with hypercholesterolaemia who received ispaghula
and 272 subjects who received cellulose placebo." Compared
with placebo, consumption of 10.2 g ispaghula per day for >8
weeks lowered serum total cholesterol concentrations by 4% (p <
0.0001) and LDL cholesterol by 7% (p < 0.0001), but did not
affect serum HDL cholesterol or triacyl glycerol concentrations.
The ratio of apolipoprotein (apo) B to apo A-1 was lowered by
6% (p < 0.05), relative to placebo, in subjects consuming a low-
fat diet.“ It was concluded that ispaghula is a useful adjunct to a
low-fat diet in individuals with mild-to-moderate hypercholester-
olaemia.

A randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre study evaluated
the long-term effectiveness of ispaghula husk as an adjunct to diet
in treatment of primary hypercholesterolaemia." Men and
women with hypercholesterolaemia followed the American Heart
Association Step 1 diet for eight weeks prior to treatment.
Individuals with LDL cholesterol concentrations between 3.36 and
4.91 mmol/L were randomly assigned to receive either ispaghula
(Metamucil 5.1 g) or cellulose placebo twice daily for 26 weeks
whilst continuing diet therapy. Overall, 163 participants com-
pleted the full protocol, 133 receiving ispaghula and 30 receiving
cellulose placebo. Serum total and LDL cholesterol concentrations

e

----- PAGE 388 -----
were 4.7% and 6.7% lower, respectively, in the ispaghula group
than in the placebo group after 24-26 weeks (p < 0.001).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial
assessed the effects of ispaghula in lowering elevated LDL
cholesterol concentrations in 20 children (aged 5-17 years).
Children with LDL cholesterol concentrations of >2.84 mmol/L
after three months on a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet received five
a ready-to-eat cereal containing water-
soluble ispaghula husk (6 g/day) or placebo. The results indicate
that there were no significant differences in total cholesterol, LDL

weeks' treatment wit!

cholesterol or HDL cholesterol concentrations between the two
groups.
In a similar 12-week study, 50 children (aged 2-11 years) with
LDL cholesterol concentrations > 110 mg/dL received either cerea
enriched with ispaghula (3.2 g soluble fibre per day) or plain cerea
whilst maintaining a low-fat diet.”
by 21 mg/dL for the ispaghula group in comparison with 11.5 mg/
dL for the control group (p < 0.001). LDL cholesterol also
decreased by 23 mg/dL for the treated group in comparison with
8.5 mg/dL for the placebo group (p < 0.01).

The effect of adding water-soluble fibre to a diet low in tota
fats, saturated fat and cholesterol to treat hypercholesterolaemic
children and adolescents
summarised that reductions in LDL cholesterol concentrations
ranged from 0-23%. This wide range may be related to dietary
intervention and to clinical trial conditions. It was proposed that
additional trials with larger numbers of well-defined subjects are
needed.

) Total cholesterol decreased

as been reviewed.'*) The review

Hypoglycaemic effect Several studies have shown that
ispaghula husk lowered blood glucose concentrations due to
delayed intestinal absorption.'(© In over study, 18
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes received ispaghula
(Metamucil) or placebo twice (immediately before breakfast
and dinner) during each 15-hour crossover phase." For meals
eaten immediately after ispaghula ingestion, maximum post-
prandial glucose elevation was reduced by 14% at breakfast and
20% at dinner, relative to placebo. Postprandial serum insulin
concentrations measured after breakfast were reduced by 12%,
relative to placebo. Second-meal effects after lunch showed a
31% reduction in postprandial glucose elevation, relative to
placebo. No significant differences in effects were noted
between patients whose diabetes was controlled by diet alone
and those whose diabetes was controlled by oral hypoglycaemic
drugs. It was concluded that the results indicate that ispaghula
as a meal supplement reduces proximate and second-mea
postprandial glucose and insulin in non-insulin dependent
diabetics.“

one cross

Other effects Ispaghula husk has been used to treat smal
numbers of patients with left-sided diverticular disease. Marked
motility was observed for the right colon, but was not as
pronounced for the left colon. The effects of ispaghula in this
condition may be worth further investigation.

In an open, randomised, multicentre trial, 102 patients with
ulcerative colitis (three months in remission, salicylate-treated,
colitis over 20cm) received ispaghula (10g twice daily; 7 = 35),
oral mesalazine (500mg three times daily; 1 = 37) or ispaghula
plus mesalazine (2 = 30) for one year.?” Assessment, including
endoscopy, was carried out at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. The results
suggested that ispaghula may be equivalent to mesalazine in
maintaining remi:
further investigation in a randomised, double-blind study.

ion in ulcerative colitis. However, this requires

Ispaghula

Side-effects, Toxicity

In common with all bulk laxatives, ispaghula seed and husk may
increase or cause flatulence, although this usually disappears in
the course of treatment. There is a risk of abdominal distension
and intestinal or oesophageal obstruction, particularly if ispa-
ghula seed or husk is swallowed dry or without sufficient fluid.

Allergic reactions, including (rarely) anaphylactic reactions, may
(G3, G83, G84)

occur.

Contra-indications, Warnings

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs include the
following information. Ispaghula seed and husk should not be
used by patients with: a sudden change in bowel habit that persists
for more than two weeks; undiagnosed rectal bleeding; failure to
defecate following the use of a laxative; abnormal constrictions in
the gastrointestinal tract; diseases of the oesophagus and cardia;
potential or existing intestinal blockage (ileus); paralysis of the
intestine or megacolon; poorly controlled diabetes mellitus;
known hypersensitivity to ispaghula seed or husk.'@8 C5
Ispaghula seed and husk should not be used by patients with
faecal impaction and undiagnosed abdominal symptoms, abdom-
inal pain, nausea and vomiting (unless advised by a doctor).(C™
Where ispaghula seed or husk is used in constipation, the use of
ispaghula husk should be discontinued and medical advice sought
if the constipation does not resolve within three days of starting
treatment, if abdominal pain occurs and/or if there is any
irregularity in the faeces. Where ispaghula seed or husk is used as
an adjuvant to diet in hypercholesterolaemia this should be under
medical supervision.'(“*” Ispaghula seed and ispaghula husk
should always be taken with a sufficient amount of fluid: for
each 1g of the herbal substance, at least 30 mL of fluid (water,
milk or fruit juice) should be used to prepare a mixture. Taking
these preparations without adequate fluid may cause them to swell
and block the throat or oesophagus and may cause choking.
Intestinal obstructions may occur if an adequate fluid intake is not
maintained. Ispaghula should not be taken by anyone who has had
difficulty in swallowing or any throat problems. If chest pain,
vomiting or difficulty in swallowing or breathing is experienced
after taking the preparation, immediate medical attention should
be sought. The treatment of the debilitated patient requires
medical supervision. The treatment of elderly patients should be
supervised. Preparations of ispaghula seed and ispaghula husk

should be taken during the day and at least 30 minutes away from
(G82, G83)

intake of other medicines.

Drug and other interactions Bulk laxatives lower the transit
time through the gastrointestinal tract and therefore may affect
the absorption of other drugs.‘°* Absorption of concurrently
administered drugs may be delayed. The EMEA HMPC Commu-
nity Herbal Monographs include the following information.
Enteral absorption of concomitantly administered medicines
such as minerals (e.g. calcium, iron, lithium, zinc), vitamins
(By), cardiac glycosides and coumarin derivatives may be delayed.
For this reason the product should not be taken within 0.5—1 hour
of other medicines. If the product is taken together with meals in
the case of insulin-dependent diabetics, it may be necessary to
reduce the insulin dose. Ispaghula seed and husk should only be
used concomitantly with thyroid hormones under medical super-
vision as the dose of thyroid hormones may need to be adjusted.
In order to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal obstruction,
ispaghula seed and husk should only be used with medicines

----- PAGE 389 -----
Ispaghula

known to inhibit peristalsis (e.g. loperamide, opioids and opioid-

like agents) under medical supervision. 8 C8)

Pregnancy and lactation Ispaghula seed and husk may be used
during pregnancy and lactation.

Soury; Parapsyllium; Schoum; Spagulax au Citrate de Pota
sium; Spagulax au Sorbitol. Germany: Agiolax. Hong Kong:
Agiolax. Ireland: Fybogel Mebeverine. Israel: Agiolax. Italy:
Agiolax; Duolaxan; Fibrolax Complex; Sedatol; Sedatol;
Soluzione Schoum. Mexico: Agiolax. Netherlands: Agiolax.
Norway: Agiolax. Portugal: Agiolax; Excess. South Africa:
Agiolax. Spain: Agiolax; Solucion Schoum. Sweden: Agiolax;
Vi-Siblin S$. Switzerland: Agiolax; Mucilar Avena. Thailand:
Agiolax. UK: Anased; Fibre Dophilus; Fibre Plus; Fybogel
Mebeverine; HRI Calm Life; Manevac; Nodoff; Nytol Herbal;
Slumber. USA: Perdiem; Senna Prompt. Venezuela: Agiolax;
Avensy]; Fiberfull; Fibralax; Senokot con Fibra.

References

1

2

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

Leng-Peschlow E. Plantago ovata seeds as dietary fibre supplement:
physiological and metabolic effects in rats. Br J Nutr 1991; 66: 331—
349.

Stevens J et al. Comparison of the effects of psyllium and wheat bran
on gastrointestinal transit time and stool characteristics. | Am Diet
Assoc 1988; 88: 323-326.

Thorburn HA et al. Does ispaghula husk stimulate the entire colon in
diverticular disease? Gut 1992; 33: 352-356.

Marlett JA et al. Comparative laxation of psyllium with and without
senna in an ambulatory constipated population. Am J Gastroenterol
1987; 82: 333-337.

McRorie JW ez al. Psyllium is superior to docusate sodium for
treatment of chronic constipation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998; 12:
491-497.

Qvitzau S e¢ al. Treatment of chronic diarrhoea: loperamide versus
ispaghula husk and calcium. Scand J Gastroenterol 1988; 23: 1237—
1240.

Eherer AJ e¢ al. Effect of psyllium, calcium polycarbophil, and wheat
bran on secretory diarrhea induced by phenolphthalein.
Gastroenterology 1993; 104: 1007-1012.

Smalley JR e¢ al. Use of psyllium in the management of chronic
nonspecific diarrhea of childhood. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1982;
1: 361-363.

Anderson JW et al. Cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium
hydrophilic mucilloid for hypercholesterolemic men. Arch Intern Med
1988; 148: 292-296.

Sprecher DL et al. Efficacy of psyllium in reducing serum cholesterol
levels in hypercholesterolemic patients on high- or low-fat diets. Ann
Intern Med 1993; 119: 545-554.

Everson GT et al. Effects of psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid on LDL-
cholesterol and bile acid synthesis in hypercholesterolemic men. ]
Lipid Res 1992; 33: 1183-1192.

Olson BH e¢ al. Psyllium-enriched cereals lower blood total
cholesterol and LDL cholesterol, but not HDL cholesterol, in
hypercholesterolemic adults: results of a meta-analysis. J Nutr 1997;
127: 1973-1980.

Anderson JW et al. Cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium intake
adjunctive to diet therapy in men and women with
hypercholesterolemia: meta-analysis of 8 controlled trials. Am J Clin
Nutr 2000; 71: 472-479.

Anderson JW et al. Long-term cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium
as an adjunct to diet therapy in the treatment of
hypercholesterolaemia. Am J Clin Nut 2000; 71: 1433-1438.
Dennison BA, Levine DM. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, two-period crossover clinical trial of psyllium fiber in
children with hypercholesterolemia. J Pediatr 1993, 123: 24-29.
Williams CL et al. Soluble fiber enhances the hypocholesterolemic
effect of the step I diet in childhood. J Am College Nutr 1995; 14: 251—
257.

Kwiterovich Jr PO. The role of fiber in the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia in children and adolescents. Pediatrics 1995; 96:
1005-1009.

Pastors JG et al. Psyllium fiber reduces rise in postprandrial glucose
and insulin concentrations in patients with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr 1991; 53: 1431-1435.

Fernandez-Baiares F et al. Randomised clinical trial of Plantago ovata
efficacy as compared to mesalazine in maintaining remission in
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1997; 112: A971.

----- PAGE 390 -----
herbal uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of Jamaica dogwood.
Although Jamaica dogwood is reported to be of low toxicity
in various animal species, it is also documented as toxic to
humans.‘©>" In view of this, excessive use of Jamaica
dogwood and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Piscidia piscipula L. Sarg. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Erythina piscipula L., Fish Poison Bark, Ichthyomethia communis
S.E Blake, I. piscipula (L.) Hitche., I. piscipula (L.) Hitche., var.
typica Stehle & L. Quentin, P. inebrians Medik, P. erythina L., P.
toxicaria Salisb., Robinia alata Mill., West Indian Dogwood

Part(s) Used
Root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G40.

Acids Piscidic acid (p-hydroxybenzyltartaric) and its mono and
diethyl esters," fukiic acid and the 3/-O-methyl derivative; malic
acid, succinic acid, and tartaric acid.

Isoflavonoids Ichthynone, jamaicin, piscerythrone, piscidone and
others. Milletone, isomillettone, dehydromillettone, rotenone and
sumatrol (rotenoids), and lisetin.?~>

Glycosides Piscidin, reported to be a mixture of two compounds,
saponin glycoside (unidentified).

Other constituents Alkaloid (unidentified, reported to be from
the stem), resin, volatile oil 0.01%, B-sitosterol, tannin (unspe-
cified).

Jamaica Dogwood

Food Use

Jamaica dogwood is stated by the Council of Europe to to be

toxicologically unacceptable for use as a natural food flavour-
«| (G16)
ing.

Herbal Use

Jamaica dogwood is stated to possess sedative and anodyne
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for neuralgia, migraine,
insomnia, dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for insomnia due to
neuralgia or nervous tension, (6% 67% Ge)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried root bark 1-2 as a decoction three times daily.'C% °”

Liquid extract
daily.C%

Liquid Extract of Piscidia (BPC 1934) 2-8 mL.

1-2mL (1:1 in 30% alcohol) three times

Isoflavonoids

erythbigenin prenyl OH  prenyl

prenyl OH H

icthynone OCH3

piscidone jamaicin H

piscerythrone OH _prenyl H

lisetin rotenone H

sumatrol OH

Acids
OH A
R mf COOH 5
cr " piscidic acid H
fukii IH
HO HO”: “COOH uticacia 0
H 3’-O-methylfukiic OCH
acid
Figure 1 Selected constituents of Jamaica dogwood.

----- PAGE 391 -----
Jamaica Dogwood

Figure 2 Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia piscipula).

Figure 3 Jamaica dogwood - dried drug substance (root bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Results of early studies reported Jamaica dogwood to possess
weak cannabinoid and sedative activities in the mouse, guinea-pig
and cat.* In addition, in vitro antispasmodic activity on rabbit
intestine, and guinea-pig and rat uterine muscle’!
and in vivo utero-activity in the cat and monkey were
documented.'%”'°! In some instances, in vitro antispasmodic
activity was found to be comparable to, or greater than, that
observed for papaverine.

More recent work has supported these findings and reported
that the antispasmodic activity of Jamaica dogwood on uterine
smooth muscle is attributable to two isoflavone constituents, one
being equipotent to papaverine."

Jamaica dogwood extracts have also been documented to
exhibit antitussive, antipyretic, and anti-inflammatory activities in
various experimental animals.”

were noted

Rotenone is an insecticide that has been used in agriculture for
the control of lice, fleas, and as a larvicide.‘“* Jamaica dogwood
has been used extensively throughout Central and South America
as a fish poison; the wood contains two piscicidal principles,
rotenone and ichthynone.

Rotenone has reportedly exhibited anticancer activity towards
lymphocytic leukaemia and human epidermoid carcinoma of the
nasopharynx.(©”)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of Jamaica
dogwood and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for Jamaica
dogwood and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Symptoms of overdose are stated to include numbness, tremors,
salivation and sweating.'(¢?”

Jamaica dogwood has been found to be toxic when adminis-
tered parenterally to rats and rabbits, but non-toxic when given
orally, with doses exceeding 90 g dried extract/kg tolerated. An
LDso (mice, intravenous injection) of an unidentified saponin
constituent has been reported as 75 pg/kg body weight.” Oral
doses of up to 1.5 mg/kg were stated to have no effect.

Jamaica dogwood is stated to be irritant and toxic to

humans.'©*) Rotenone is documented to be carcinogenic. ©?”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, in view of the available information,
Jamaica dogwood should be used with caution.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of Jamaica dogwood to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited
evidence from preclinical studies that Jamaica dogwood has
sedative activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Jamaica dogwood has been reported
to exhibit a potent depressant action on the uterus both in vitro
and in vivo. In view of this and the general warnings regarding the
use of Jamaica dogwood, it should not be used during pregnancy
and lactation.

References

1 Bridge W et al. Constituents of ‘Cortex Piscidiae Erythrinae’. Part I.
The structure of piscidic acid. |] Chem Soc 1948; 257.

2 Falshaw CP et al. The Extractives of Piscidia Erythrina L. Ill. The
constitutions of lisetin, piscidone and piscerythrone. Tetrahedron
1966; Suppl 7: 348.

3 Redaelli C, Santaniello E. Major isoflavonoids of the Jamaican
dogwood Piscidia erythrina. Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2976-2977.

4 Delle Monache F et al. Two isoflavones from Piscidia erythrina.
Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2945-2947.

5 Harborne JB, Mabry TJ, eds. The Flavonoids. New York: Chapman
and Hall, 1982: 606.

6 Costello CH, Butler CL. An investigation of Piscidia erythrina
(Jamaica Dogwood). J Am Pharm Assoc 1948; 37: 89-96.

7 Aurousseau M et al. Certain pharmacodynamic properties of Piscidia
erythrina. Ann Pharm Fr 1965; 23: 251-257.

8 Della-Loggia R et al. Evaluation of the activity on the mouse CNS of
several plant extracts and a combination of them. Riv-Neurol 1981;
S1: 297-310.

9 Pilcher JD et al. The action of the so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

10 Pilcher JD, Mauer RT. The action of female remedies on the intact
uteri of animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 97-99.

11 Della Loggia R et al. Isoflavones as spasmolytic principles of Piscidia
erythrina. Prog Clin Biol Res 1988; 280: 365-368.

----- PAGE 392 -----
Java Tea

elr Mechanisms o1

specific pharmacological activities an
action are necessary.

There have been reports of adulteration/botanical
substitution occurring with Orthosiphon.?

In view of the lack of toxicity and safety data, excessive use
of Java tea, and use during pregnancy and lactation, should

Species (Family)
Orthosiphon aristatus var. aristatus (Blume) Mig. (Labiatae/
Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Kumis Kucing (Indonesian, Malay), Orthosiphon aristatus Miq.,
Orthosiphon spicatus (Thunb.) Bak., O. stamineus Benth.

Part(s) Used

Fragmented dried leaves, tops of stems

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)
BP 2007'¢8

be avoided. Complete German Commission EC”
Benzochromenes
OH fe)
SS SS
CH30’ fo) R fe}
OCH; OCH3 R
orthochromene A methylripariochromene A OCH;
acetovanillochromene H
Flavonoids

OCH;

Re icy R? R®
sinensetin OCH; OCH; OCH;
tetramethyl-
scutellarin OCH = OCH H
eupatorin OH OCH3 OH
5-hydroxy-6,7,3’,4’-
tetramethylflavone OH OCHs OCH;
3'-hydroxy-5,6,7,4’-
tetramethoxyflavone OCrs §=OCHs = 10H
salvigenin OH OCH; H
trimethylapigenin OCH3 H H
tetramethyllutein OCH; H OCH

Phenylpropanoids
0 fe)
OH OH
HO. 1
Son, 8
OH a
HO’ HOOC fe)
rosmarinic acid OH R' Re
caffeoyl tartrate caffeoyl H
di-caffeoyl tartrate caffeoyl _caffeoyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of java tea.

----- PAGE 393 -----
Java Tea

ESCOP 20030” :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
Ph Eur 20078?

Legal category (Licensed Products)

Java tea is not included in the GSL.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Benzochromenes Orthochromene A,'” methylripariochromene
A® and acetovanillochromene.‘"?)

Diterpenes Numerous closely related pimarane-type diterpenes,
including orthosiphonones A and B,\? orthosiphols A, B, E to I,
M,N,BR, S, T,“>* staminol A® neo-orthosiphols A and B°%”
neo-orthosiphone A,“ norstaminolactone A, norstaminols B and
C, norstaminone A,” and seco-orthosiphols A to C.”

Essential oil 0.02-0.7%. Various compounds including p-
elemene, f-caryophyllene, %-humulene, B-caryophyllene oxide,
can-2-one and palmitic acid.”

Flavonoids  Sinensetin, tetramethylscutellarein, eupatorin, 5-
hydroxy-6,7,3’,4/-tetramethoxyflavone, 3/-hydroxy-5,6,7,4’-tetra-
methoxyflavone, salvigenin, trimethylapigenin, tetramethoxylute-
olin nine flavonoids which are methylated derivatives of
scutellarein (5,6,7,4’-tetramethoxyflavone) or 6-hydroxyluteolin
(5,6,7,  3',4/-pentahydroxyflavone),  quercetin-3-O-glucoside,
kaempferol-3-O-glucoside,“* 2"! _4/,5,6,7-tetramethoxyflavone,
3!,4/,5,6,7-pentamethoxyflavone."”

Phenylpropanoids Rosmarinic acid (major), caffeoyl tartrate,
dicaffeoyltartrate, four caffeic acid depsides (1-4)."

Other constituents Inositol, phytosterols (e.g. B-sitosterol) 1b!
esculetin (a coumarin), potassium salts.

Food Use

Java tea is not used in foods.

Phenylpropanoids

HO.

caffeic acid depsides
R' Re RS Rt
1/2 OH OH OH OH

3 OH OH OH H
°' HOH OH OH
4 H OH OH H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of java tea.

Diterpenes

AcO,,_

B20"

R'O,,,

RO"

orthosipholA Ac 4H
orthosiphol B

orthosiphol F Ac H Bz
orthosipholG Ac H H
orthosipholH Ac Ac Bz

neoorthosiphol B
neoorthosiphol A H

staminol A Ac

Figure 3 Selected constituents of java tea.

Herbal Use

Java tea has traditionally been used in Java for the treatment of
hypertension and diabetes.‘"® 7°?) It has also been used in folk
medicine for bladder and kidney disorders, gallstones, gout and

rheumatism. Java tea is stated to have diuretic properties.'®)

Dosage

Dosage for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in contemporary standard herbal reference texts
are given below.

Dried material 2-3 g in 150 mL water two to three times daily as

an infusion.'C

Pharmacological Actions
In vitro and animal studies

Diuretic effects Several studies in rats have reported diuretic
activity of extracts of O. stamineus and O. aristatus''*° and of
flavonoids (sinensetin and a tetramethoxyflavone) isolated from O.
aristatus.°” Intraperitoneal administration of a hydroalcoholic
extract of O. stamineus to rats caused a significant diuresis over the
following 2-24 hours compared with controls." The effect was
similar to that observed following intraperitoneal administration
of hydrochlorothiazide (10 mg/kg). Oral administration of an
aqueous extract of O. aristatus increased ion excretion to a similar
extent as did furosemide, although no diuretic action was noted.2”

----- PAGE 394 -----
Oral administration of methylripariochromene A (100 mg/kg)
has been shown to increase urinary volume in fasted rats for three
hours after oral administration; the increase in urine volume was
similar to that observed with oral administration of hydrochloro-
thiazide (25 mg/kg). Sodium, potassium and chloride ion
excretion was increased with methylripariochromene A (100 mg/
kg), although urinary sodium ion excretion did not increase. A
mechanism for the diuretic action of methylripariochromene A
has not yet been elucidated, although it appears to have a different
mode of action to that of hydrochlorothiazide.'”

Hypoglycaemic effects In normoglycaemic rats, oral adminis-
tration of an aqueous extract of O. stamineus (0.5 g/kg) had no
significant effect on fasting blood glucose concentrations over a 7-
hour period, although administration of 1g/kg produced a
significant decrease in blood glucose concentration compared
with that in a control group.°” A hypoglycaemic effect was also
observed following administration of O. stamineus extract (1 g/kg)
to rats loaded with glucose (1.5 g/kg) and in  streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats; the effect of O. stamineus extract in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats was similar to that observed
with glibenclamide (10 mg/kg).'”

Antihypertensive effects Methylripariochromene A has been
reported to have several pharmacological actions related to
antihypertensive activity.

In stroke-prone, spontaneously hypertensive rats, subcutaneous
administration of methylripariochromene A (100 mg/kg) produced
a continuous reduction in systolic blood pressure and a decrease in
heart rate. Methylripariochromene A also suppressed agonist-
induced contractions in the rat thoracic aorta and decreased the
contractile force in isolated guinea-pig atria without significantly
affecting the beating (heart) rate. The mechanism of action for
these antihypertensive effects of methylripariochromene A is,
however, unclear.“!””

Migrated pimarane-type diterpenes (neo-orthosiphols A and
B), isopimarane-type diterpenes (orthosiphols A and B, orthosi
phonones A and B), benzochromenes (methylripariochromene,
acetovanillochromene, orthochromene A) and flavones (tetra-
methylscutellarein, sinensetin) isolated from O. aristatus have

Diterpenes

HO
RO.

fe)

norstaminone A

secoorthosiphol AH

Java Tea

been reported to exhibit a suppressive effect on contractile
. : 3}
responses in the rat thoracic aorta.”

Cytostatic effects Sinensetin and tetramethylscutellarein have
been reported to demonstrate in vitro cytostatic activity towards
Ehrlich ascites tumour cells.°*) Growth inhibition appears to be
dose dependent, with 50% inhibition occurring at concentrations
of approximately 30 and 15,1g/mL for sinensetin and_tetra-
methylscutellarein, respectively. Orthosiphols A and B have been
reported to inhibit inflammation induced by the tumour promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) on mouse ears.

Fractions of O. stamineus leaves have been reported to have
activity against a melanoma cell line in vitro.°*

Antimicrobial effects An aqueous extract of O. aristatus has
demonstrated antibacterial activity against two serotypes of
Streptococcus mutans (MIC 7.8-23.4mg/mL).2 Other in vitro
studies have reported a lack of antibacterial activity for flavonoids
(sinensetin, tetramethylscutellarein and a tetramethoxyflavone in
concentrations of 10 and 100 pg/mL) isolated from O. aristatus
leaves against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus.°”

O. stamineus extract has also been shown to inhibit spore
germination in six out of nine fungal species tested: Sacchar-
omyces pastorianus, Candida albicans, Rhizopus nigricans,
Penicillium digitatum, Fusarium oxysporum and Trichophyton
mentagrophytes.°©

Other effects In vitro, O. spicatus has been shown to inhibit 15-
lipoxygenase, an enzyme thought to be involved in the develop-
ment of atherc “D Burthermore, the flavonoids
and tetramethylscutellarein demonstrate dose-dependent inhibi-
tion with ICso values of 114+ 5 and 110+3 mol/L, respectively,
although other flavonoids from O. spicatus appear to be less
efficient inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase. The inhibitory activity of
the whole extract was greater than could be expected from the
activities of each of its flavonoid constituents, and it has been
suggested that synergism may be occurring." More recent in
vitro studies have shown that flavonoids from O. spicatus prevent
oxidative inactivation of 15-lipoxygenase, with trimethylapigenin,

lerosi sinensetin

norstaminolactone A

secoorthosiphol C R=H

secoorthosiphol B CH3

Figure 4 Selected constituents of java tea.

----- PAGE 395 -----
Java Tea

eupatorin and tetramethylluteolin showing the strongest enzyme-
ayes 27) i

stabilising effects.°” However, there was no correlation between

enzyme stabilisation and enzyme inhibition.?”

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of preparations of Java tea is extremely
limited. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-
over study reported no effect on 12- and 24-hour urine output or
on sodium excretion in 40 healthy volunteers who received 600 mL
of an infusion of Orthosiphon leaves daily (equivalent to 10g
dried leaves) for four days.°*) A small number of uncontrolled
studies has explored the effects of preparations of Java tea and
reported conflicting findings. The design of such studies does not
allow the observed effects to be attributed definitively to the
intervention. A study involving six healthy volunteers who drank
Orthosiphon tea (250 mL) every six hours for one day reported an
increase in urine acidity six hours after ingestion.°”

A study involving 67 patients with uratic diathesis who received
Java tea for three months reported that no effects were observed
on diuresis, glomerular filtration, osmotic concentration, urinary
pH, plasma content and excretion of calcium, inorganic
phosphorus and uric acid.°”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None known. In view of the lack of clinical data on the use of Java
tea, excessive or long-term use should be avoided. It has been
recommended that adequate fluid intake (2L or more per day)
should be ensured whilst using Java tea,(“** although the
scientific basis for this statement is not clear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of Java tea, the potential for
preparations of Java tea to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no data available on the use
of Java tea in pregnancy and lactation. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, use of Java tea during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

France: Dellova; Tealine.

Solubitrat.
Aqualibra; BioCyst; Canephron novo; Dr. Scheffler Bergischer
Krautertee Blasen- und Nierentee; Harntee STADA; Harntee-

Austria: Germany:

Steiner; Hevert-Blasen-Nieren-Tee N; Heweberberol-Tee;
Nephronorm med; Nephrubin-N; Nephrubin-N. Spain: Lepi-
sor; Urisor. Switzerland: Bilifuge; Demonatur Dragees pour les
reins et la vessie; Prosta-Caps Chassot N; Tisane pour les reins
et la vessie.

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

8

24

Shibuya H et al. Indonesian medicinal plants. XXII. 1) Chemical
structures of two new isopimarane-type diterpenes, orthosiphonones
A and B, and a new benzochromene, orthochromene A from the leaves
of Orthosiphon aristatus (Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1999; 47:
695-698.

Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Orthosiphon stamineus as a potent source
of methylripariochromene A. J Nat Prod 1989; 52: 171-173.

Ohashi K et al. Indonesian medicinal plants. XXIII. 1) Chemical
structures of two new migrated pimarane-type diterpenes,
neoorthosiphols A and B, and suppressive effects on rat thoracic aorta
of chemical constituents isolated from the leaves of Orthosiphon
aristatus (Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 2000; 48: 433-435.

Masuda T et al. Orthosiphol A and B, novel diterpenoid inhibitors of
TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate)-induced inflammation,
from Orthosiphon stamineus. Tetrahedron 1992; 48: 6787-6792.
Stampoulis P et al. Staminol A, a novel diterpene from Orthosiphon
stamineus. Tetrahedron Lett 1999; 40: 4239-4242.

Shibuya H et al. Two novel migrated pimarane-type diterpenes,
neoorthosiphols A and B, from the leaves of Orthosiphon aristatus
(Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1999; 47: 911-912.

Awale § et al. Norstaminane- and isopimarane-type diterpenes of
Orthosiphon stamineus from Okinawa. Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 58:
5503-5512.

Awale § et al. Neoorthosiphonone A; a nitric oxide (NO) inhibitory
diterpene with new carbon skeleton from Orthosiphon stamineus.
Tetrahedron Lett 2004; 45: 1359-1362.

Awale § et al. Secoorthosiphols A-C: three highly oxygenated
secoisopimarane-type diterpenes from Orthosiphon stamineus.
Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 43: 1473-1475.

Schut G, Zwaving JH. Content and composition of the essential oil of
Orthosiphon aristatus. Planta Med 1986; 52: 240-241.

Lyckander IM, Malterud KE. Lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon
spicatus as inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase. Acta Pharm Nord 1992; 4:
159-166.

Schneider G, Tan HS. Die lipophilen Flavone von Folia Orthosiphonis.
Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1973; 113: 201.

Sumaryono W et al. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the
phenolic constituents from Orthosiphon aristatus. Planta Med 1991;
57: 176-180.

Proksch P. Orthosiphon aristatus (Blume) Miquel—der Katzenbart.
Pflanzeninhaltsstoffe und ihre potentielle diuretische Wirkung. Z
Phytother 1992; 13: 63-69.

Pietta PG et al. High-performance liquid chromatography with diode-
array ultraviolet detection of methoxylated flavones in Orthosiphon
leaves. | Chromatog 1991; 547: 439-442.

Bombardelli E et al. Flavonoid constituents of Orthosiphon stamineus.
Fitoterapia 1972; 43: 35.

Matsubara T et al. Antihypertensive actions of
methylripariochromene A from Orthosiphon aristatus, an Indonesian
traditional medicinal plant. Biol Pharm Bull 1999; 22: 1083-1088.
Beaux D et al. Effect of extracts of Orthosiphon stamineus Benth,
Hieracium pilosella L., Sambucus nigra L., and Arctostaphylos uva-
ursi (L.) Spreng, in rats. Phytother Res 1998; 12: 498-501.
Casadebaig-Lafon J. Elaboration d'extraits végétaux adsorbés,
réalisation d'extraits secs d'Orthosiphon stamineus Benth. Pharm
Acta Helv 1989; 64: 220-224.

Englert J, Harnischfeger G. Diuretic action of aqueous Orthosiphon
extract in rats. Planta Med 1992; 58: 237-238.

Schut GA, Zwaving JH. Pharmacological investigation of some
lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon aristatus. Fitoterapia 1993; 64:
99-102.

Mariam A et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of the aqueous extract of
Orthosiphon stamineus. Fitoterapia 1996; 67: 465-468.

Malterud KE et al. Flavonoids from Orthosiphon spicatus. Planta
Med 1989; 55: 569-570.

Estevez NA. Fractions of Orthosiphon stamineus Benth. leaves with
antitumour activity: Preliminary results. Rev Cuba Farm 1980; 14: 21.
Chen C-P et al. Screening of Taiwanese drugs for antibacterial activity
against Steptococcus mutans. ] Ethnopharmacol 1989; 27: 285-295.

----- PAGE 396 -----
26

27

28

Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. II. Study of 40 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Franc 1985; 43: 77-81.

Lyckander IM, Malterud KE. Lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon
spicatus prevent oxidative inactivation of 15-lipoxygenase.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1996; 54: 239-246.

Du Dat D et al. Studies on the individual and combined diuretic
effects of four Vietnamese traditional herbal remedies (Zea mays,

29

30

Java Tea

Imperata cylindrica, Plantago major and Orthosiphon stamineus). J

Ethnopharmacol 1992; 36: 225-231.

Nirdnoy M, Muangman V. Effects of Folia orthosiphonis on urinary
stone promoters and inhibitors. J Med Assoc Thailand 1991; 74: 319-
321.

Tiktinsky OL, Bablumyan YA. The therapeutic effect of Java tea and
Equisetum arvense in patients with uratic diathesis. Urol Nefrol 1983;
48: 47-50.

----- PAGE 397 -----
Juniper

juniper. There is evidence that the berries are abortifacient
and since this is believed not to be due to the oil there must
be other toxic constituents present. In view of this, use of
juniper should not exceed levels specified in food legislation.
Juniper is contra-indicated during pregnancy and should not
be used during lactation.

Species (Family)

Juniperus communis L. (Cupressaceae)

Synonym(s)

Baccae Juniperi, Common Juniper, Geniévre, Wacholderbeeren,
Zimbro

Part(s) Used
Fruit (berry)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007?

Complete German Commission E@)
ESCOP 20030”)

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G58 and G62.

Acids Diterpene acids, ascorbic acid and glucuronic acid.

Flavonoids Amentoflavone,'!
and various glycosides.

quercetin, isoquercitrin, apigenin

Tannins —Proanthocyanidins (condensed), gallocatechin and
epigallocatechin.”

Volatile oils 0.2-3.42%. Primarily monoterpenes (about 58%)
including o&-pinene, myrcene and sabinene (major), and camphene,
camphor, 1,4-cineole, p-cymene, o&- and y-cadinene, limonene, B-
pinene, Y-terpinene, terpinen-4-ol, terpinyl acetate, o-thujene,
borneol; sesquiterpenes including caryophyllene, epoxydihydro-
caryophyllene and B-elemem-7a-ol.°®

Other constituents Geijerone (Cy) terpenoid), junionone

(monocyclic cyclobutane monoterpenoid),’ desoxypodophyllo-
toxin (lignan),'® resins and sugars.

Food Use

Juniper berries are widely used as a flavouring component in gin.
Juniper is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (fruit N2, leaf and wood N3). Category N2
indicates that the berries can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product. Category N3 indicates that there
is insufficient information available for an adequate assessment of
potential toxicity to be made." Previously, in the USA, extracts
and oils of juniper were permitted for food use.‘°°)

Herbal Use

The German Commission E approved use for dyspepsia.
Juniper is stated to possess diuretic, antiseptic, carminative,
stomachic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for cystitis, flatulence, colic, and applied topically for
rheumatic pains in joints or muscles.(C? 7°

(G3)

Monoterpenes
a-pinene B-pinene sabinene terpin-4-ol
Sesquiterpenes

a-cadinene #-cadinene

Flavonoids OH

OH O
amentoflavone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of juniper.

----- PAGE 398 -----
Figure 2

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried ripe fruits 100 mL as an infusion (1:20 in boiling water)

three times daily.'©”

Fruit 1-2 g or equivalent three times daily; 2-10 g (equivalent to
20-100 mg of volatile oil).(@?

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

Pharmacological actions that have been documented for juniper
are primarily associated with the volatile oil components.

In vitro and animal studies

The volatile oil is stated to possess diuretic, gastrointestinal
antiseptic and irritant properties. 'C*)

The diuretic activity of juniper has been attributed to the
volatile oil component, terpinen-4-ol, which is reported to
increase the glomerular filtration rate. Terpenin-4-ol is no
longer thought to be irritant to the kidneys.'°”

An antifertility effect has been described for a juniper extract,
administered to rats (300 or 500mg, by mouth) on days 1-7 of
pregnancy.” An abortifacient effect was also noted at both doses
when the extract was administered on days 14-16 of pregnancy.”
No evidence of teratogenicity was reported. Anti-implantation
activity has been reported as 60-70%'® and as being dose
dependent.” Juniper is reported to have both a significant”

no“ antifertility effect. A uterine stimulant activity has been

(G30)

” and

documented for the volatile oil.

A potent and non-toxic inhibition of the cytopathogenic effects
of herpes simplex virus type 1 in primary human amnion cell
culture has been described for a juniper extract.°' The active

Juniper 387

component isolated from the active fraction was identified as a
lignan, desoxypodophyllotoxin. Antiviral activities documented
for the volatile oil have also been partly attributed to the flavonoid
amentoflavone."”
Anti-inflammatory activity of 60% compared to 45% for the
indometacin control has been reported for juniper berry
extract.(1)
rats (100 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg respectively) one hour before eliciting
foot oedema.
A transient hypertensive effect followed by a more prolonged
hypotensive effect has been reported for a juniper extract in rats
(25 mg/kg, intravenous injection)."”
A fungicidal effect against Penicillium notatum has been
documented.”
Astringent activity is generally associated with tannins, which
have been documented as components of juniper. An aqueous
decoction of the berries has a hypoglycaemic effect in rats.“ In
rats, oral administration of an aqueous infusion (5 mL) increased
chloride ion secretion by 119% and by 45% in similar experiments
with rabbits.'0”)

Both test and control were administered orally to

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for juniper and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

The volatile oil is reported to be generally non-sensitising and
non-phototoxic, although slightly irritant when applied externally
to human and animal skin.*"°®

Dermatitic reactions have been recognised with juniper and
positive patch test reactions have been documented.’ °° The
latter are attributed to the irritant nature of the juniper extract.)
Adverse effects following external application of the essential oil

are described as burning, erythema, inflammation with blisters
(G22)

and oedema.

Preclinical data

The acute toxicity of juniper has been investigated in rats who
were administered extracts for seven days. An oral dose of
2.5 g/kg was tolerated with no mortalities or side-effects noted. A
dose of 3 g/kg induced hypothermia and mild diarrhoea in 10-
30% of animals.“ An LDso value (mice, intraperitoneal
injection) has been stated as 3 g/kg." There is evidence from

Figure 3 Juniper — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 399 -----
Juniper

preclinical studies that juniper has antifertility and abortifacient
effects (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Juniper is contra-indicated in individuals with acute or chronic
inflammation of the kidney.‘©”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of juniper to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that juniper has diuretic and hypogly-
caemic effects.

Pregnancy and lactation A juniper fruit extract has exhibited
abortifacient, antifertility and anti-implantation activities (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies). In view of
this, juniper is contra-indicated in pregnancy.'C” °°) Juniper
should not be used during lactation.

France: Depuratum; Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No
2. Germany: Amara-Tropfen. Italy: Broncosedina. South
Africa: Amara. Switzerland: Heparfelien; Kernosan Heidelber-
ger Poudre; Tisane pour les reins et la vessie. UK: Backache;
Watershed. USA: Natural Herbal Water Tablets; Water Pill.

1

2

14

1s

References

Chandler RE. An inconspicuous but insidious drug. Rev Pharm Can
1986; 563-566.

Friedrich H, Engelshowe R. Tannin producing monomeric substances
in Juniperus communis. Planta Med 1978; 33: 251-257.

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, 2nd edn. Boca Raton:
CRC Press, 1975.

Thomas AF, Ozainne M. 'Junionone' [1-(2,2-Dimethylcyclobutyl)but-
1-en-3-one], the first vegetable monocyclic cyclobutane
monoterpenoid. J C § Chem Commun 1973; 746.

Markkanen T et al. Antiherpetic agent from juniper tree

(Juniperus communis), its purification, identification, and testing in
primary human amnion cell cultures. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1981; 7:
691-697.

Agrawal OP et al. Antifertility effects of fruits of Juniperus communis.
Planta Med 1980; 40 (Suppl. Suppl.): 98-101.

Prakash AO e¢ al. Anti-implantation activity of some indigenous
plants in rats. Acta Eur Fertil 1985; 16: 441-448.

Prakash AO. Biological evaluation of some medicinal plant extracts
for contraceptive efficacy. Contracept Deliv Syst 1984; 5: 9.
Marrkanen T. Antiherpetic agent(s) from juniper tree (Juniperus
communis). Preliminary communication. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1981; 7:
69-73.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
antiinflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Lasheras B et al. Etude pharmacologique préliminaire de Prunus
spinosa L. Amelanchier ovalis Medikus, Juniperus communis L. et
Urtica dioica L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1986; 20: 219-226.
Hejtmankova N et al. The antifungal effects of some Cupressaceae.
Acta Univ Palacki Olomuc Fac Med 1973; 60: 15-20.

Sanchez de Medina F et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of Juniper berries.
Planta Med 1994; 60: 197-200.

Mathias CGT et al. Plant dermatitis — patch test results (1975-78).
Note on Juniperus extract. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5: 336-337.

----- PAGE 400 -----
- Kava

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of kava is well documented (see Constituents)
and there is strong evidence that the kavalactone constituents
are responsible for the observed pharmacological activities.

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials
of certain standardised kava preparations have shown
beneficial effects on measures of anxiety, although because of
methodological limitations of some studies, further well-
designed trials are required to confirm the anxiolytic effects.
Also, most trials have been carried out with one particular
standardised kava extract (containing 70% kavalactones) and
it cannot be assumed that the effects shown in these studies
will be produced by other kava extracts. Clinical trials
involving patients with anxiety have also compared well-
defined standardised kava preparations with certain standard
anxiolytic agents. While these studies have suggested that the
kava extracts tested may be as effective as certain standard
anxiolytic agents, further investigation is necessary. Data from
pharmacological studies provide supporting evidence for the
anxiolytic effects of kava, although many of the other
traditional uses of kava (see Herbal use) have not been tested
scientifically. Many pharmacological studies involving
individual kavalactones have investigated the effects of the
synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain, rather than the natural
compound (-+)-kavain. Some studies have used both the
natural compound and the synthetic racemate and have
reported a lack of stereospecific effect.

In placebo-controlled clinical trials, standardised kava
extracts generally have been well tolerated; reported adverse
events have been mild and transient and similar in nature and
frequency to those reported for placebo. Clinical trials,
however, can provide only limited information on the safety
profile of a medicine. Spontaneous reports of hepatotoxicity
associated with the use of kava preparations have arisen since
the year 2000. Although the risk of serious liver toxicity is
thought to be low, the reaction is idiosyncratic. Against this
background, kava was prohibited in unlicensed medicines in
the UK in 2003, and in the EU, all licensed kava products were
removed from the market. In 2005 in the UK, evidence
relating to hepatotoxicity associated with kava was reviewed
and the Expert Working Group’s report concluded that there
was insufficient new evidence to support a change in the
regulatory position, i.e. the inclusion of kava in unlicensed
medicines remains prohibited. Regulatory action has also
been taken in Canada and Australia (voluntary recall), and in
the USA, consumers were warned of the risk of liver toxicity
with use of kava-containing products.

Other adverse reactions documented for kava preparations
include an ichthyosiform (scaly, non-inflammatory) skin
condition, termed ‘kava dermopathy’, usually associated with
the traditional method of preparing and ingesting kava (see
Side-effects, Toxicity, Skin reactions).

In view of the documented pharmacological actions of kava
and in view of the reported inhibitory activity against certain
cytochrome P450 drug metabolising enzymes, the potential

for preparations of kava root/rhizome to interfere with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered.

Use of kava should be avoided during pregnancy and
breastfeeding.

Although kava is prohibited in the UK and several other
countries, individuals may obtain kava preparations over the
Internet. Healthcare professionals should be aware that
patients may be taking herbal medicinal products containing
kava. Healthcare professionals should enquire about use of
kava in patients presenting with symptoms of hepatotoxicity
(see Side-effects, Toxicity, Hepatotoxicity). Adverse reactions
have been reported in association with use of ‘herbal ecstasy’
tablets, which often contain ephedrine alkaloids, although
healthcare professionals should be aware that some products
have been stated to contain kava.

Species (Family)

Piper methysticum Forst. f. (Piperaceae)
Fourteen different varieties are used throughout Oceania
(Polynesia, Melanesia, Micronesia).

Related species

Cultivars of P. methysticum have been developed in some Pacific
Islands from Piper wichmannii C. DC (syn: Piper erectum C. DC,
Piper arbuscula Trelease).°>»

Synonym(s)

Intoxicating Pepper, Kava-kava, Kawa, Kawa-kawa, Macropiper
methysticum (G. Forst.) Hook. & Arn., M. latifolium Migq.,
Waghi, Wati, Bari (Irian Jaya), Koniak, Keu, Oyo (Papua New
Guinea)

Part(s) Used

Peeled dry rhizome (sometimes referred to incorrectly as the root)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHMA 2003'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission E 199g)
Expanded German Commission E 2000‘
Martindale 35th edition'*”

WHO volume 2 20020”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Prohibited in unlicensed medicines in the UK.

Constituents

Kavalactones Kawalactones, kavapyrones, 2-pyrones, 5-lactones
with styryl or dihydrostyryl substituents.“ %*?® Dried

rhizomes should contain at least 3.5% kavalactones'‘®
good-quality material 5.5-8.3%." Ethanol-water extracts con-

and

----- PAGE 401 -----
Kava

tain 30% kavalactones, whereas acetone—water extracts contain
70%. The kavalactones occur as a complex mixture of at least
18 compounds,” which are of three main types: styryl enolide
pyrones (e.g. kawain (= kavain), dimethoxykawain, methysticin),
styryl dienolide pyrones (e.g. yangonin, desmethoxyyangonin),
and dihydrostyryl enolide pyrones (e.g. dihydrokawain, dimethoxy-
dihydrokawain, dihydromethysticin). The four major kavalactones
of the rhizome are kawain (1-2%), dihydrokawain (0.6-1%),
methysticin (1.2-2%) and dihydromethysticin (0.5-0.8%).'C
Smaller quantities (<0.1%) of dimeric kavalactones (e.g. trux-
yangonins I, II, III) have also been isolated.»

Alkaloids/amides Cepharadione A (aporphine-type) is a minor
component (4kg yielded 1mg)."' Small quantities of N-
cinnamoylpyrrolidine and its O-methoxy analogue are also
present. !2"19)

Chalcones Flavokawains A, B and C.?!®)

Flavonoids Pinostrobin, 5,7-dimethoxyflavanone.'®

Kavalactones

Steroids Sitosterol, stigmasterol, stigmastanol.'~ '?)

(3)

Esters Bornyl cinnamate?) and bornyl 3,4-methylenedioxycin-

namate.‘"?

Aliphatic alcohols Docosan-1-ol, dodecan-1-ol, eicosan-1-ol,
hexacosan-l-ol, hexadecan-1-ol, octadecan-1-ol, -tetradecanol,
transphytol.

Other constituents Cinnamylideneacetone,) long-chain fatty
sids,
acids.

Other parts of the plant

Stem peelings may be included as raw material in kava commerce
due to the high demand for the rhizome; leaves and branches are
used in folk medicine. Pipermethystine (a piperidone amide) is
present in stem peelings (traces to 0.85%).') 30,40-Epoxy-5B-
pipermethysticin (0.93%) was isolated from stem peelings of one
cultivar, but was absent from 10 other cultivars, and the related

Ri RR
kawain H H
dimethoxykawain OCH; OCH3
methysticin —OCH,0O—
OCH;
S
S fe) [e)
CHO
yangonin
Flavonoids
R! R?
pinostrobin OH OCH;
5,7-dimethoxyflavanone OCH; OCH3
Amides
fe}
R
pipermethystine

fo)
—N )
—n >.
[o} lity
°

R! R?
dihydrokawain H H
dimethoxydihydrokawain OCH3 OCH;
dihydromethysticin —OCH,0—
R
OAc

Ac

3a,4a-epoxy-5f-pipermethystine

awaine
= OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of kava.

----- PAGE 402 -----
alkaloid awaine was present in the unopened leaves of 11 cultivars
(0.16-2.67%). 7,8-Dihydrokawain, 7,8-dihydromethysticin and
5,6,7,8-tetrahydroyangonin are present in stem peelings.

Other species

Kavalactones occur in PR. wichmanni and P. sanctum. The latter
species contains several cinnamoyl butenolides (piperolides), e.g.
methylenedioxypiperolide and 7,8-epoxypiperolide.

Food Use

Kava is used as an intoxicant drink, on either informal or
ceremonial occasions, by Pacific Islanders e.g. from Fiji, Samoa
and Tonga.'"” Some claim that it has a pleasant, cooling,
aromatic taste with numbing on the tongue and is stimulating,
while others refer to great bitterness with a burning sensation in
the mouth. It is reputed to reduce fatigue, allay anxieties and
produce a cheerful and sociable attitude. Unpleasant effects
reported include dizzin sleeping disorders, stomach pains,
lethargy and skin reactions. These reported effects are taken from
a wide geographical area and any differences may be due to a
number of reasons including plant varieties or growing conditions.

Herbal Use

In many parts of the Pacific it is believed that kava is beneficial to
health by soothing nervous conditions, inducing relaxation and
sleep, counteracting fatigue, and reducing weight. Medicinal uses
also include treatment of urinary tract infections, asthma,
rheumatism, headache, fever, gonorrhoea and syphilis, and use

‘“7C39 The medicinal use of kava is

as a diuretic and stomachic.
now widespread, e.g. across Europe, North America and
Australia, where it is used to treat anxiety, nervous tension,
restlessness, mild depression and menopausal symptoms.'@? “7
G50, G56,G60,G67) Te has also been adopted by the Aboriginal
community in parts of Australia as an intoxicating drink."
The German Commission E recommended kava for the

treatment of nervous anxiety, stress and restlessness.“ Tradi-

Figure 2 Kava (Piper methysticum).

jure 3— Kava — dried drug substance (rhizome).

tional uses listed for kava rhizome in other standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts include cystitis, urethritis, infection
or inflammation of the genitourinary tract, rheumatism and,

topically, for joint pains.(C%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for treatment of anxiety
recommended in older and contemporary standard herba
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 1.5-3g per day.@*

kavalactones per day.‘

) Equivalent to 60-120 mg

Liquid extract 3-6 mL per day (1:2 liquid extract, unspecifie
solvent).

Standardised preparations
day.(@ 60 mg kavalactones 2-4 times per day in tablet form.
60-120 mg kavalactones per day,‘

Kava exists in numerous varieties of differing potency”) ani

100-200 mg kavalactones per
(G50)

only preparations with standardised kavalactone content shoul
be used for medicinal purposes. Medicinal extracts prepared with
ethanol-water yield dry extracts with about 30% kavalactones
content, whereas acetone-water prepared dry extracts contain
about 70% kavalactones.'°*

Dosages (adults) used in clinical trials have varied widely, but
typically are those equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily by
oral administration in divided doses (see Pharmacological
Actions, Clinical studies). Duration of use of kava extracts
generally should not exceed three months.‘ “°

Pharmacological Actions

Kava has been investigated mostly for its anxiolytic effects
although other central nervous s}

onvulsant and analgesic properties, and other effects have been

ystem activities, such as antic-

documented following preclinical studies. The kavalactones are
believed to be the major active constituents of kava.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Uptake of the kavalactones kavain, dihydro-
kavain, yangonin and desmethoxyyangonin into brain tissue has
been documented following intraperitoneal administration of each
of these compounds at a dose of 100 mg/kg to mice." Maximum
concentrations of kavain and dihydrokavain were noted five
minutes after administration, and these compounds were rapidly

----- PAGE 403 -----
Kava

eliminated. In contrast, yangonin and desmethoxyyangonin were
eliminated more slowly. All four compounds were also detected in
mouse brain tissue following intraperitoneal administration of
in 120 mg/kg (containing kavain 36.7%, dihydrokavain
19.2%, yangonin 15% and desmethoxyyangonin 13.3%), although
the concentrations of kavain and yangonin were higher than was
noted following individual administration of these constituents.

kava res

Central nervous system activities Anxiolytic properties for kava
extract and isolated kavalactones have been documented in an
experimental model of anxiety, the chick social separation-stress
procedure. In a series of experiments, kava extract (containing
30% kavalactones; 30 mg/mL per kg body weight), dihydrokavain
(30 mg/mL per kg body weight) and chlordiazepoxide (5 mg/mL
per kg body weight) administered intraperitoneally 30 minutes
before testing significantly reduced the separation-stress effect (p
< 0.05 for each substance).''®) However, the isolated kavalactones
kavain, methysticin, dihydromethysticin, yangonin and des-
methoxyyangonin administered according to the same regimen
did not have a statistically significant effect. Further work using
the same experimental model confirmed these findings and found
that total kavalactone content was not predictive of outcome, but
that a dihydrokavain content of at least 15% was necessary for
anxiolytic activity.” In this study, the kava samples and fractions
that demonstrated anxiolytic activity were reported to be without
sedative effects.

In contrast, previous studies have reported sedative effects for
ava extract. In mice, kava extract (containing 7% kavalactones)
at doses of at least SOmg/kg body weight (by intraperitoneal
injection) reduced spontaneous motility to a greater extent than
did control.°” The effect was enhanced by the addition of (+)-
avain (ratio of kava extract to (+)-kavain, 1: 0.12), although this
compound had no sedative effect when administered alone. In
another experimental model, kava extract 100 mg/kg body weig!
and (+)-kavain 12 mg/kg body weight, each administered alone,
ad no sedative effect, whereas a combination of the two
substances significantly reduced amphetamine (Smg/kg body
weight subcutaneously)-induced hypermotility. Sedative effects
ave also been documented for an ethanolic extract of kava
rhizome (containing 50% kavalactones) 100 mg/kg body weig]
administered by gastric tube and 200mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally in the amphetamine-induced hypermotility test
and barbiturate-induced sleeping time, respectively.?”

In studies utilising the conditioned avoidance response test in
rats, an experimental model used to test for antipsychotic activity,
aqueous (kavalactone-free) kava extract 30-500 mg/kg body
weight intraperitoneally had no statistically significant effect.”
in at doses of 125 mg/kg
intraperitoneally significantly inhibited the conditioned avoidance
response, although to a lesser extent than did chlorpromazine and
haloperidol.

In cats, a kava extract in arachis oil (50-100 mg kavalactones
per kg body weight intraperitoneally) and the individual
kavalactone (-)-kavain (10-50mg per kg body weight intraper-
itoneally) were reported to be active in the amygdala complex
region of the brain.?>)

Receptor binding studies with kava extracts and individual
kavalactones have reported conflicting results.
experiments found that kava resin and individual kavalactones
displayed only weak activity on GABAg- and no activity on
GABA,-binding sites in rat brain membranes in vitro, and that
there was no significant effect on benzodiazepine receptors
following intraperitoneal administration of kava resin 150 mg/kg

3

3

However, administration of kava r

One series of

body weight to mice.?” A marked effect of kavain on GABA has
also been stated to be unlikely) By contrast, a kavalactone-
enriched ethanol/aqueous extract of kava rhizome (containing
58% kavalactones and 42% other lipid-soluble compounds)
increased the density of GABA-binding sites in certain brain
Other experiments have shown concentration- and
structure-dependent effects of kavalactones on binding of bicucul-
line methochloride (BMC) to GABA, receptors from rat cortex
preparations.?” (+)-Kavain, (+)-methysticin and (+)-dihydro-
methysticin enhanced BMC binding by 18-28% at a concentration
of 0.1pmol/L, whereas (+)-dihydrokavain did so only at a
concentration of 10 mol/L, and yangonin at a concentration of
1pumol/L; desmethoxyyangonin had no effect. Further radio-
receptor assays demonstrated that these six kavalactones had no
effect on the binding of flunitrazepam to benzodiazepine receptors
in rat cortex preparations, indicating that the influence of
kavalactones on GABA, receptors was not based upon an
interaction with benzodiazepine receptors.””

Other in vitro studies have investigated the effects of kava
extracts and individual kavalactones on other transmitters in the
central nervous system (CNS). A kavalactone-rich kava rhizome
extract (containing 68% kavalactones) was a reversible inhibitor
of monoamine-oxidase B (MAO-B) in intact and disrupted
platelets (inhibitory concentration ICso 24 tmol/L and 1.2 mol/
L, respectively), although there were differences in MAO-B
inhibition among the different synthetic kavalactones with
desmethoxyyangonin and (+)-methysticin being the most potent
inhibitors.°*) Differences between kavalactones in inhibition of
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) uptake in synaptosomes prepared
from rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus have also been
documented: (+)- and (+)-kavain gave approximately equal values
and both were more potent inhibitors than (+)-methysticin,
although none of the compounds inhibited serotonin uptake.?” It
has been suggested, following in vitro studies involving ipsapirone
(a serotonin-1, receptor agonist)-induced field potential changes
in guinea-pig hippocampal slices, that kavain and dihydromethys-
ticin may modulate serotonin-1, receptor activity, although
further work is needed to identify the precise mechanism for

In vivo studies in rats administered a single oral dose of (+)-
dihydromethysticin 100 mg/kg body weight or fed (+)-kavain in
the diet over a 78-day period showed that neither kavalactone
regimen affected brain tissue concentrations of dopamine and
serotonin, although since extracellular neurotransmitter concen-
trations were not measured in this study, receptor-mediated effects
of kavalactones on dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons could
not be excluded." In vivo (rats), kava extract 20 and 120 mg/kg
body weight intraperitoneally increased dopamine concentrations
sus accumbens, although a dose of 220 mg/kg body
weight led to an initial decrease followed by an increase above
baseline values.” It was suggested that this ceiling effect may be
due to yangonin which may have dopamine antagonist activity.

The development of physiological tolerance to an aqueous
extract of kava administered intraperitoneally to mice has been
documented, although there was no clear evidence of development
of physiological or learned tolerance to kava resin.°»

regions.?°

in the nuc

Anticonvulsant and neuroprotective activities Studies
described in the older literature have documented anticonvulsant
: ; (34, G50)

effects for kavalactones in several experimental models.
The anticonvulsant properties of (+)-methysticin im vitro may
arise from a direct membrane action on the excitability of
34) ays have shown that (+)-methysti

neurons, and in vitro

----- PAGE 404 -----
(36 Bt

kavain

cin, (+)-kavain® and the synthetic kavalactone
*® appear to interact with voltage-dependent sodium channels,
and that (+)-kavain also interacts with voltage-dependent calcium
*) Inhibition by (+)-kavain of veratridine-activated

voltage-dependent sodium ion channels in synaptosomes from
(38)

channels.‘
rat cerebral cortex, and veratridine-induced increase in
intracellular calcium ion concentrations has been described
following in vitro studies utilising rat cerebrocortical synapto-
somes, °”)
following (+)-kavain administration has been reported both in
vitro®) and in vivo in freely moving rats.“ Substances which

Reduction in veratridine-induced glutamate release

reduce extracellular glutamate concentrations are of interest for
their potential as anticonvulsant agents.

Some of the mechanisms describe
certain kavalactones may also be important in neuroprotective
effects reported for the synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain. For
example, the role of sodium-ion channel blockade in the
neuroprotective effect of (+)-kavain against anoxia in vitro has
been described,“ and (4)-kavain (50, 100 or 200mg/kg
intraperitoneally) has been shown to protect nigrostriatal
dopaminergic neurons against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahy-
dropyridine (MPTP)-induced toxicity in mice, an experimental
model of Parkinson's disease.” A neuroprotective effect against

above documented for

ischaemic brain damage in mice and rats has been demonstrated
for kava extract (WS-1490 containing 70% kavalactones) and the
individual kavalactones methysticin and dihydromethysticin, but
not for kavain, dihydrokavain and yangonin. Kava extract 150 mg/
kg given orally as an emulsion (polyethyleneglycol 400 and water;
20:80) one hour before experimentally induced ischaemia, and
methysticin and dihydromethysticin (both 10 and 30mg/kg
intraperitoneally 15 minutes before induction of ischaemia),
compared with control, significantly reduced the size of the
infarct area in mice brains (p < 0.05). In rats, kava extract
administered according to the same regimen as used in mice
significantly reduced infarct volume compared with control (p <

0.05).

Analgesic activity Antinociceptive activity in vivo (mice) in the
tail immersion test has been documented for kava resin (150 mg/kg
intraperitoneally) and for the individual kavalactones dihydroka-
wain, dihydromethysticin, kavain and methysticin at doses of 150,
275, 300 and 360 mg/kg (intraperitoneally), respectively, compared
with controls.” Yangonin, tetrahydroyangonin, desmethoxyyan-
gonin and dehydroyangonin had no or only a weak effect. Both
kava resin (200 mg/kg, orally) and aqueous kava extract (250 mg/
kg, intraperioneally) displayed antinociceptive activity in the
acetic acid-induced writhing test, also in mice. In further tests
using both models, naloxone failed to reverse the antinociceptive
effects of kava resin or aqueous kava extract, indicating that
analgesic activity of kava is achieved via non-opiate pathways.“
Analgesic activity of dihydrokawain and dihydromethysticin has
been reported previously.)

Other activities Kava extract has been reported to have a muscle
relaxant effect in isolated frog muscles, thought to be due to a
direct effect on muscle contractility.“ Reductions in contractions
of isolated guinea-pig ileum induced by carbachol and by raised
extracellular potassium ion concentrations have been documented
for the synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain, although the compound
had no effect on caffeine-induced contractions of ileum strips or
on calcium ion-induced contractions of skinned muscles.” (+)-
Kavain has also been reported to relax maximally contracted
murine airway smooth muscle and to reduce carbachol- and
potassium chloride-induced airway smooth mus (48)

> contraction.

Kava

Further investigation indicated that nitric oxide and cyclooxygen-
ase-mediated events did not play a role in kavain-induced
relaxation.

In contrast, a previous study found that (+)-kavain inhibited
human platelet aggregation in a concentration-dependent manner
in vitro.” The formation of prostaglandin Ey and thromboxane
By was also inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner,
suggesting that (+)-kavain is an inhibitor of cyclooxygenase.

An ethanol extract of kava and the isolated kavalactones
dehydrokavain, dihydrokavain, kavain, yangonin and methysticin
inhibited tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) release in vitro
from BALB/3T3 cells incubated with okadaic acid and suppressed
lipopolysaccharide-induced TNFa production in vivo in diabetic
mice following intraperitoneal administration.”

Antifungal activity against several microorganisms, including

Candida albicans, has been described for a 10% aqueous kava
(51)

extract.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of kava preparations have focused on investigating
anxiolytic effects in various patient groups. Several trials have
assessed effects in healthy volunteers, and others have explored the
effects of kavain, a constituent of kava.

A Cochrane systematic review of monopreparations of kava for

the treatment of anxiety included 12 randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials involving a total of 700 participants.”
All but one of these trials tested the effects of a standardised (70%
kavalactones) preparation of kava rhizome (WS-1490) at various
losages but typically equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily
for four weeks. Only two trials were conducted for longer than
four weeks; both used a dose equivalent to 210mg kavalactones
aily given for eight weeks in one study and 24 weeks in the
other.°”
Seven of the 12 trials, involving a total of 380 participants, used
the total score on the Hamilton Anxiety Scale as their primary
outcome measure, and provided data suitable for meta-analysis.
Meta-analysis showed a reduction in anxiety scale scores in kava
recipients, compared with placebo recipients (weighted mean
: 3.9; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.1-7.7; p = 0.05).
All except one of these trials included participants with non-
psychotic anxiety; one study involved women with anxiety
associated with the climacteric (perimenopausal period). Remov-
ing this trial and the trial that did not assess the kava extract WS-
1490 from the meta-analysis indicated a statistically significant
reduction in anxiety scores for kava recipients compared with
placebo recipients (weighted mean difference: 3.4; 95% CI, 0.5—
6.45 p = 0.02).

The five studies not included in the meta-analysis reported
statistically significant improvements for kava recipients, com-
pared with placebo recipients, on outcomes (e.g. response rates,
reduction in scores on various anxiety scales). These five
studies were heterogeneous in that they involved different patient
groups, such as women with anxiety associated with the
perimenopausal period, individuals with preoperative anxiety,
and outpatients with neurotic anxiety. Consequently, dosage
regimens of kava varied widely (e.g. equivalent to kavalactones
60mg in the evening and 1 hour preoperatively, to 140mg
kavalactones daily for four weeks).

The conclusions of the review were that kava extract is an
effective symptomatic treatment for anxiety, but that limitations
of the studies included meant that further rigorous trials were
needed.” A similar meta-analysis, which included six rando-

ifferenc

----- PAGE 405 -----
Kava

mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials assessing the effects
of the kava extract WS-1490 in patients with non-psychotic
anxiety disorders reached a similar conclusion.°*

Some other research has been published, but has added little to
the evidence base because of methodological issues. In a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial,
61 patients with sleep disturbances associated with anxiety,
sness states of non-psychotic origin received a
kava extract (WS-1490) 200mg daily, or placebo, for four
6% At the end of the study, statistically significant
improvements in the two primary outcome measures quality of
sleep and recuperative effect after sleep were observed for kava
recipients, compared with the placebo group (p = 0.007 and 0.018,
respectively; intention-to-treat analysi

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial con-
ducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least 40
points on the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) State scale and
who reported having sleeping problems on at least two occasions
received capsules containing kava extract (each containing total
kavalactones 100 mg) one three times daily, two capsules contain-
ing valerian extract (each containing valerenic acids 3.2 mg; no
further details of preparation provided) one hour before bedtime,
or placebo, for 28 days.” At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between kava and placebo with
respect to the primary outcome measures changes from baseline in
STAI-state anxiety scores and Insomnia Severity Index scores.

For example, a study involving 68 perimenopausal women
reported that kava extract 100mg (containing 55% kavain) or
200 mg daily improved anxiety compared with no treatment, but
participants were not masked as to their treatment allocation.

Results from some clinical studies have suggested that kava
extracts may be as effective as certain standard anxiolytic agents,
although this requires further investigation and confirmation. In a
six-week, randomised, double-blind trial involving 172 patients
with non-psychotic anxiety, the standardised kava extract WS-
1490 (containing 70% kavalactones) 100 mg three times daily was
as effective as oxazepam 5 mg and bromazepam 3 mg, each taken
three times daily.°?) Another randomised, double-blind, multi-
centre trial, involving 129 outpatients with generalised anxiety
disorder, reported that the kava extract LI-150 400 mg (standar-
dised to 30% kavapyrones = 120mg) each morning for eight
weeks was as effective as buspirone Smg twice daily and
opipramol (a tricyclic antidepressant) 50 mg twice daily.‘

A randomised, placebo-controlled study involving 40 post-
menopausal women with anxiety assessed the effects of a kava
extract 100 mg daily (containing 55% kavain) given in addition to
hormone replacement therapy (oestrogens plus progestogens or
oestrogens alone).°" It was reported that women who received
kava showed greater reductions in anxiety scores than women who
received placebo. However, the study had various methodological
limitations.

In a randomised, controlled study involving 54 healthy
volunteers, kava extract (LI-150, equivalent to 120mg kavalac-
tones; 2 = 18) and valerian extract 600 mg (LI-156; 1 = 18), taken
daily for one week, significantly reduced systolic blood pressure
following mental stress tests, compared with baseline values,
whereas no such reduction was observed in the no-treatment
control group (p < 0.001 for both kava and valerian). No effect
on diastolic blood pressure was recorded for either herbal
preparation, and valerian, but not kava, appeared to reduce heart
rate following mental stress tests. These findings require
confirmation in placebo-controlled studies, and their relevance
to everyday stress needs to be investigated.

se!

tension and restle:

weeks.

Several other randomised, double-blind, controlled trials
involving patients with anxiety have compared the effects of the
synthetic kavalactone, (-)-kavain, administered at a dose of
200 mg three times daily for 3-4 weeks, with those of placebo,»
or benzodiazepines, such as oxazepam.? One trial assessed the
effects of kavain, or placebo, 200mg three times daily for three
weeks in 83 outpatients who had been treated with benzodiaze-
pines for at least six weeks and who were undergoing
benzodiazepine withdrawal. Generally, these studies have
reported beneficial effects for kavain, but typically have involved
only small numbers of patients.

A preliminary study involving healthy individuals assessed the
effects of a single 300mg dose of a kava extract on cognitive
performance and mood in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Some improvements in mood (in trait cheerful
participants only) and cognitive performance were observed
during the study, although further assessment of the effects of
kava on these parameters is required.

A case series described improvements after administration of a
kava extract (WS-1490) in extrapyramidal side-effects experienced
by 42 patients with various psychiatric diagnoses who were
receiving neuroleptic drugs. The hypothesis that kava extract
can reduce extrapyramidal side-effects requires testing in rigorous
randomised controlled trials.

Pharmacokinetics Little is known about the clinical pharmaco-
kinetics of kava preparations. Several metabolites of kavalactones
have been detected and identified in human urine following
ingestion of around 1L of kava (prepared by the traditional
method of aqueous extraction of kava rhizome) over 1 hour by
healthy male volunteers before sleeping.® Urine samples were
collected before sleeping and on rising in the morning. Kawain,
dihydrokawain, desmethoxyyangonin, tetrahydroyangonin, dihy-
dromethysticin, 11-methoxytetrahydroyangonin, —yangonin,
methysticin and dehydromethysticin were detected unchanged in
human urine; metabolic transformations observed included
reduction of the 3,4-double bond and/or demethylation of the 4-
methoxyl group of the kavalactone ring. The Cy) hydroxy
analogue of yangonin (12-hydroxy-12-desmethoxyyangonin) was
also detected, and it may have been formed by demethylation of
yangonin and/or C,) hydroxylation of desmethoxyyangonin.
Dihydroxylated metabolites of the kavalactones and products
from ring opening of the kavalactone ring were not detected.

Side-effects, Toxicity

In randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving different
patient groups with anxiety, kava extracts generally have been
well tolerated; adverse events reported, and their frequencies, are
similar to those reported for placebo. However, clinical trials have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.

Spontaneous reports of suspected adverse drug reactions
associated witl

kava preparations have raised concerns over
hepatotoxic reactions (see Hepatotoxicity).

A systematic review of eight placebo-controlled trials of kava
extracts administered at doses equivalent to 55-240 mg kavalac-
tones daily for two days to 24 weeks found that adverse events
reported for both kava and placebo were most commonly
gastrointestinal symptoms, tiredness, restlessness, tremor and
headache.” Three trials included in the review, one of which
tested kava extract 100mg daily (equivalent to 55mg kavalac-
tones) for 24 weeks,'°" reported that adverse events were not
observed in either the kava or placebo groups.

----- PAGE 406 -----
A similar finding was reported by a more recent Cochrane
systematic review of monopreparations of kava for the treatment
of anxiety (see Clinical studies).°” This review comprised seven
of the eight placebo-controlled trials from the earlier review”
(the other trial was excluded from the Cochrane review because it
tested kava extract in addition to hormone replacement ther-
apy)°? and five new trials.

Four of the trials, involving 30% of the total number of
participants in the trials included in the review, reported that
adverse events were not observed during treatment with kava
2) Randomised, double-blind clinical trials comparing
kava extracts with certain benzodiazepines and other anxiolytic
agents have also found kava to be well tolerated. In a six-week
trial involving 172 patients with non-psychotic anxiety, gastro-
intestinal disturbances occurred in one of 57 participants who
received WS-1490 100 mg three times daily (equivalent to 210 mg
kavalactones daily), whereas tiredness, vertigo and_ pruritus
occurred in seven of the remaining 115 participants who received
oxazepam Smg or bromazepam 3mg, both taken three times
daily.” In an eight-week trial involving 129 outpatients with
generalised anxiety disorder, 14 of 43 (33%) participants who
received the kava extract LI-150 400mg (standardised to 30%
kavalactones = 120 mg) each morning experienced adverse events,
compared with 10 (24%) and 11 (26%) participants who received
buspirone 5mg twice daily and opipramol 50mg twice daily,
respectively. A total of 27 adverse events was reported in the
kava group, compared with 16 and 14 for buspirone and
opipramol, respectively. Adverse events reported for kava included
upper respiratory tract infections, gastrointestinal disorders,
weight changes, skin reactions and tachycardia, all of which
were also reported for buspirone and/or opipramol.

These clinical trials and systematic reviews, however, provide
only limited evidence to support the safety of kava extracts since
they involved only small numbers of participants, involved
different patient groups, tested different doses of kava extract
(typically equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily), and most
were of relatively short duration, usually around four weeks.
Further, most trials investigated preparations of the kava extract
WS-1490, and other standardised extracts of kava and kava
preparations supplied by herbal medicine practitioners have
undergone considerably less assessment.

Two post-marketing surveillance studies published in the early
to mid-1990s involving patients treated in one study with WS-1490
150 mg daily (equivalent to 105 mg kavalactones; n = 4049) and in
the other with Antares 120 (equivalent to 120 mg kavalactones; n
= 3029) reported that the frequenc 2 1.5%
and 2.3%, respectively.” In both studies, adverse events
commonly reported were mild gastrointestinal disorders and
allergic reactions and, in the latter study, headaches and vertigo,
which stopped when kava treatment was discontinued. A rather
higher frequency of adverse events was reported during a post-
marketing surveillance study carried out in Brazil." Among 850
participants with anxiety who received WS-1490 100mg three
times daily (equivalent to 210mg kavalactones daily), 16.7%
reported adverse events, most commonly fatigue/tiredness, nausea,
confusion and gastrointestinal upset.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 91 reports,
describing a total of 189 adverse reactions, for products reported

extract.

of adverse events we

Kava

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 91) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Piper
methysticum preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the
World Health Organization’ s § Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the
period up to end of 2005(7""*

Body as a whole — general disorders. 16

Cardiovascular disorders, general. 1

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including 15
dizziness (4); headache (4)

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal 18
pain (4); nausea (6); vomiting (3)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including tachycardia (3) 3
Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatic failure 55
(3); hepatic function abnormal (3); hepatitis (13);

hepatocellular damage (6); bilirubinaemia (4); jaundice
(8); hepatic enzymes increased (6)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. 3
Musculo-skeletal system disorders. 1
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 3
Psychiatric disorders. Including anxiety (5) 15
Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (3) 7

Skin and appendages disorders. Including dermatitis (3); 41
pruritus (8); rash, erythematous (8); rash, maculopapular
(4); urticaria (6)

Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4) 5
Vision disorders. Including vision abnormal (4) 6
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 189

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

to contain P. methysticum only as the active ingredient (see Table
1).”” This number may include some of the case reports described
in the sections below. Reports originated from nine different
countries. The total number of reactions included reports
describing a total of 55 reactions associated with liver and biliary
system disorders (see Table 1), including three cases of hepatic
failure and two of hepatic coma. (These data were obtained from
the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre
for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The
information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin
or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not
represent the opinion of the World Health Organization.)

Hepatotoxicity

Clinical data None of the clinical trials and post-marketing
surveillance studies described above reported hepatotoxicity as an
observed adverse event, although not all studies carried out liver
function tests on participants. Seven of the 11 trials included in the
Cochrane review of the kava extract WS-1490 for the treatment of
anxiety (see Clinical studies) did involve monitoring participants!
liver function (e.g. serum aspartate transaminase and alanine

----- PAGE 407 -----
Kava

transaminase concentrations) and did not report any abnormal-
ities or clinically significant changes in values obtained.”

Over the years 2000 and 2001, a safety concern arose regarding
cases of hepatoxicity reported in association with the use of kava
extracts. The signal first emerged in Switzerland, following a
cluster of spontaneous reports to the medicines' regulatory
authority, and was strengthened a year or so later following
further spontaneous reports from Switzerland and Germany. By
July 2002, a total of 68 reports of liver toxicity ass
of kava had been received by regulatory authorities in Canada,
France, the UK and USA, as well as in Switzerland and
Germany,” and by the end of January 2005, 79 cases of liver
damage associated with use of kava had been identified world-
wide.'”» The severity of the liver damage described in the reports
varied from abnormal liver function test results to irreversible liver
failure and death; at least six patients received liver transplants,
one of whom, as well as at least two other individuals,

ociated with use

subsequently died.

Cases reported in the UK included two of raised liver function
test values in men aged 40 and 48 who had taken unspecified kava
preparations for three months and eight years, respectively.
Both stopped taking kava and their liver function test values
normalised. Another UK case related to a woman (age not stated)
who had taken kava 150 mg three times daily for two months, in
addition to fluoxetine, and who experienced jaundice and raised
liver function test values and was hospitalised for seven week:

In the UK, evidence relating to the hepatotoxicity associated
with kava was reviewed in 2005 in a public consultation and later
that year by the Expert Working Group set up to consider the
evidence. The Expert Working Group's report was published in
July 2006 and concluded that there was insufficient new evidence
to support a change in the regulatory position, hence the inclusion
of kava in unlicensed medicines in the UK remains prohibited.”
The report also identified several new questions and issues that
may be important with respect to hepatotoxicity of kava,
including the possibility that other alkaloid and/or amide
constituents may be present, and their possible contribution to
hepatotoxicity, and the need for a systematic evaluation of all
marketed kava products and their source material, and of the
variation in the phytochemistry of kava cultivars.

Earlier reviews of German data relating to hepatotoxicity
associated with kava have produced conflicting opinions on
causality. One review emphasised that there was no dose-response
relationship for kava-associated hepatotoxicity, and that crude
estimates of incidence based on primary care data suggest that any
risk of hepatotoxicity is similar to that of benzodiazepines.
However, this conclusion is questionable since estimates of this
nature can be inaccurate and misleading.

By contrast, a review of seven previously published and 29
unpublished case reports of kava-associated hepatotoxicity
concluded that these data clearly showed the potential for severe,
unpredictable kava-related hepatotoxicity.) Cases included nine
individuals who developed fulminant hepatic failure, of whom six
underwent successful liver transplantation (one only after
retransplantation), two died after transplantation due to post-
operative infectious complications, and one who was too old to
undergo transplantation also died. All other cases, which
comprised mostly cholestatic or necrotising hepatitis, underwent
full recovery after withdrawal of kava treatment. Among these 36
reports, the relationship between kava ingestion and hepatotoxi-
city was considered 'certain' in three cases and ‘probable’ in 21.”
Most individuals were concurrently using other medication and
several were regular consumers of alcohol.

A case report from Australia describes a 56-year-old woman
who developed fatigue, nausea and jaundice after taking a
preparation named 'Kava 1800 Plus! one tablet three times daily
for around 10 weeks.)
avalactones 60mg, Passiflora incarnata 50mg and Scutellaria
lateriflora 100mg, although the latter ingredient was not
identified in the product, so the precise composition of the
product is unknown. She presented two weeks after first
experiencing these symptoms and was hospitalised. Five days
ater, a biopsy revealed non-spe severe acute hepatitis with
pan-acinar necrosis and collapse of hepatic lobules. She under-
went liver transplantation on day 17 after admission, but the
procedure was complicated and she died from progressive blood
loss and circulatory failure. Subsequent examinations confirmed
massive hepatic necrosis.

Until the year 2003, it was thought that kava-associated
epatoxicity occurred only with ethanolic and acetonic kava
extracts. However, recent reports described hepatoxic effects
associated with consumption of traditional aqueous extracts of
ava root. Two cases in New Caledonia involved women aged in
their fifties who started consuming kava prepared in the
traditional manner as an aqueous preparation.) Both women
developed signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity, including icterus
and raised liver function test values four or five weeks after
starting kava. Neither patient consumed alcohol. Kava consump-

stopped; both patients recovered and liver function test
9)

Each tablet was stated to contain

tion was
values normalised over the following three months.”
quently, in a cross-sectional study, blood samples were collected
from 27 individuals who were chronic
from kava bars in New Caledonia. Participants had been
consuming kava regularly for at least five years and had a mean
intake equivalent to around 32 g kavalactones weekly or 70 mg/kg
daily; 12 participants also consumed alcohol.” Transaminase
concentrations were more than 1.5 times the upper limit of normal
in three participants, and 23 participants had incre
concentration of GGT (which is not necessarily a specific marker
of liver injury); alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin concentrations
were within normal ranges for all subjects. Another cross-
sectional study, involving indigenous people from an Arnhem
Land community (Northern Territory, Australia), included 98
participants, of whom 36 had never used kava.®° Of the 62 kava
users, 14 had ingested kava within the previous 24 hours, and 10
and 15 had used kava within the previous one or two weeks, or
one or two months, respectively. Investigation of liver function test
values indicated that changes appeared to be reversible and started
to normalise after one or two weeks of kava abstinence.”

Inhibition of certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising
enzymes has been shown in vitro and in vivo for kava extracts and
individual kavalactones (see Contra-indications, Warnings). The
relevance of this for the hepatotoxic effects described for kava is
not known; further work is needed to determine whether the
inhibition of CYP enzymes by kava can lead to raised plasma
concentrations of concurrently ingested drugs with hepatotoxic
effects.

Subse-

ava drinkers, recruited

ses in

Skin reactions

An ichthyosiform (scaly, non-inflammatory), usually yellowish or
whitish, skin condition termed kava dermopathy has been
documented among kava users in Polynesia, Micronesia and
Melanesia where powdered kava rhizome is prepared as a drink
with cold water or coconut milk.” The condition is reversible on
stopping kava. Initially, it was thought that the condition was

----- PAGE 408 -----
related to niacin deficiency, but this hypothesis was rejected
following a small randomised, placebo-controlled trial of
nicotinamide 100mg daily for three weeks which showed no
difference between groups.”

Measures of health among 39 users of kava (prepared as a cold
water infusion of powdered kava rhizome) were compared with
those of 34 age-matched non-users of kava in an Aboriginal
community in the Northern Territory in Australia.®? Most (n =
35) were ‘heavy’ or 'very heavy' users of kava (310g or more per
week). It was reported that kava users were more likely to
complain of poor health, and to have a scaly skin rash. However,
the study had several methodological limitations (e.g. no
correction for multiple statistical tests) and potential biases.

Several cases of allergic skin reactions have been reported in
association with kava use. One case described a man who
presented with oedema and severe non-pruritic erythema invol-
ving his upper body, head and neck, the morning after drinking
several cups of 'kava tea’. It was reported that the man had
previously had a similar reaction to kava tea three months earlier
whilst overseas and for which he was hospitalised and treated with
intravenous corticosteroids. A case of systemic contact-type
dermatitis following several weeks' use of kava extract (Antares),
chlorprothixene (an antipsychotic agent with properties similar to
those of chlorpromazine) and diazepam has been described.
described a 70-year-old man and a 52-year-old
woman who experienced skin eruptions (erythematous plaques
and/or papules) in sebaceous gland-rich areas after using kava
extract (no further details provided) for two to three weeks.
Both patients were reported to display reactions to kava in
diagnostic allergy or skin patch tests. Generalised erythema and
papules with severe itching were described in a 36-year-old woman
who had taken kava extract (Antares) 120mg daily for three
weeks.°” The rash, but not the itching, responded to short-term
treatment with systemic corticosteroids, and six weeks later,
patch test results for Antares were positive one day after
application.

Two further cases

Central nervous system effects

Four cases of involuntary movements and dyskinesia associated
with use of kava extracts have been reported, although causality
has not been established; it has been stated that these symptoms
suggest that constituents of kava may have antagonistic effects on
central dopaminergic pathways.* In three cases, involuntary
movements involving the neck, head and/or trunk, and involuntary
oral and lingual dyskinesia began within a few minutes to 4 hours
after ingestion of kava extracts (Laitan 100 mg or Kavasporal forte
150 mg) for anxiety. One of these cases involved a 28-year-old man
who had previously experienced three episodes of acute dystonic
reactions following exposure to promethazine and fluspirilene,
although he denied having used these medicines in relation to the
current episode. The fourth case report described a 76-year-old
woman being treated with levodopa 500mg and benserazide
125 mg for Parkinson's disease and who experienced an increase in
the duration and frequency of her 'off! periods 10 days after
starting Kavasporal forte 150mg twice daily, prescribed by her
physician for tension. (The 'on—off! phenomenon — sudden swings
in mobility-immobility — occurs with long-term use of levodopa.)
In all four cases, symptoms resolved on stopping kava or following
treatment with biperiden administered intravenously.

Two other cases describe neurological symptoms following
sive use of traditional preparations of kava, i.e. as a beverage.
A 27-year-old Aboriginal Australian man experienced generalised

ex

Kava

severe choreoathetosis (characterised by chorea and athetosis, a
form of dyskinesia) without impairment of consciousness
occasions after drinking large amounts of kava (precise quantity
not specified).°”) Routine investigations were normal, apart from
raised liver function test values (serum alkaline phosphatase
162 IU/L, normal range 35-135 TU/L; gamma-glutamyltransferase
426 IU/L, normal range <60IU/L). His symptoms responded to
treatment with diazepam administered intravenously. Disorienta-
tion was reported in a 34-year-old Tongan man, a heavy user of
kava (40 bowls daily for 14 years), who had ingested further
ive amounts of kava over the previous 12 hours.°° The man
was treated in hospital with Plasmalyte intravenously and
intramuscular thiamine and five hours after admission his
symptoms had resolved.

In a controlled study, individuals intoxicated following kava
consumption (205g powder) experienced ataxia, tremors, seda-
tion, blepharospasm and reduced accuracy performing a visual
search task, when compared with control subjects who had not
ingested kava. These results suggest that kava intoxication results
in specific abnormalities of movement co-ordination and visual
attention, but normal performance of complex cognitive func-

tions.°?”)

on three

exce:

Effects on mental performance

The effects of kava extracts and the synthetic kavalactone (
kavain on mental performance have been explored in studies

involving healthy volunteers. Preliminary studies involving small
numbers of volunteers have suggested that kava extract (WS-1490
200 mg three times daily for five days) did not appear to impair
memory as assessed by certain tests (e.g. word recognition) carried
out under laboratory conditions.” In another series of tests,
designed to as:
extract, Antares 120 (standardised to 120mg kavalactones per
tablet), one tablet daily, diazepam 10mg daily, or placebo. It
was reported that the experiments provided evidence that kava did
not cause drowsiness or lack of concentration, for example,
reaction time was reduced in placebo recipients, but not kava
recipients. Other research involving volunteers found that a single
dose of kava extract 600 mg (LI-158; drug-extract ratio, 12.5: 1)
led to a 'moderate' increase in tiredness, compared with placebo,
and as assessed using visual analogue scale scores, although
statistical analysis was not reported. Confirmation of these
findings is required. In a battery of psychometric and other tests
following administration of a range of single doses of the
synthetic kavalactone (-)-kavain (200, 400 and 600mg) and
clobazam 30mg to healthy volunteers, (+)-kavain appeared to
have a sedative effect which was stated to be different to that
observed with clobazam.°* Compared with placebo, (+)-kavain,
but not clobazam, improved intellectual performance, attention,
concentration and reaction time.

mental alertness, volunteers received kava

Other reactions

There are isolated reports of myopathy and myoglobinuria
associated with the use of kava preparations, although causality
in these cases has not been established.

One report described dermatomyositis associated with use of
kava for anxiety by a 47-year-old woman. The woman, who
had also been taking valproic acid for 18 months and sertraline
occasionally over two years for bipolar disorder, developed a rash
involving her back, neck and face, as well as muscle weakness, two
weeks after taking kava (dosage not specified). She improved
initially following treatment with methylprednisolone, but then

----- PAGE 409 -----
Kava

developed a fever which prompted her to attend a_ hospital
emergency department. Investigations revealed a raised serum
creatine kinase concentration (8654U/L, normal values stated as
24-170U/L) and myopathic patterns in various muscles, and
biopsy samples showed changes indicative of dermatomyositis.
The woman was treated initially with parenteral prednisone,
after which her creatine kinase concentration returned to normal,
and also received methotrexate for five months and hydroxy-
chloroquine. Prednisone treatment was reduced over the follow-
ing year, and at one year of follow-up the woman remained
symptom-free.

Another isolated report describes a 29-year-old man who
experienced severe muscle pain and passed dark urine one
morning a few hours after having taken a herbal product said
to contain kava 100mg, Ginkgo biloba extract 200mg and
guarana (which contains methylxanthines) 500 mg (daily dosage
was not stated), for the first time.°”) The man was admitted to an

intensive care unit and was found to have highly elevated serum
creatine kinase (100 SOOIU/L, normal range given as 0-195 IU/L)
and myoglobin (10000ng/mL, normal range stated as 0-90 ng/
mL) concentrations, but no renal complications. Investigations
excluded metabolic myopathy as a possible cause; his signs and
symptoms subsided over six weeks.

Disturbances of visual function have been reported following a
study involving a 30-year-old kava-naive male volunteer who
ingested 600mL of aqueous extract of pulverised kava 'root'
(rhizome)."°*) Measurements involving the man's right eye only
indicated reductions in near point of accommodation and
convergence, an increase in pupil diameter, and disturbance of
oculomotor balance, but no effects on visual or stereoacuity or
ocular refractive error. The experiment was not carried out
according to a double-blind, controlled design and, therefore, the
findings require further investigation.
A case of hypokalaemic renal tubular acidosis due to Sjégren's
syndrome (a symptom complex of unknown aetiology, marked by
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostamia, with or without lachrymal
and salivary gland enlargement, respectively, and presence of
connective tissue disease, usually rheumatoid arthritis, but
sometimes systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or poly-
myositis) has been reported in a 36-year-old woman.” She was
stated to have begun taking kava, echinacea and St John's wort
two weeks before becoming ill, but the report does not provide
any further details of the echinacea speci
product(s), nor of the types of preparations, formulations, dosages
and routes of administration of any of the herbal medicines listed.
The woman was hospitalised with severe generalised muscle
weakness and tests revealed she had a serum potassium ion
concentration of 1.3 mEq/L. She was given electrolyte replacement
for four days after which the muscle weakness resolved, and was
started on hydroxychloroquine 200mg daily for ‘probable!
Sjégren's syndrome. The authors suggested that ingestion of
echinacea may have aggravated an autoimmune disorder (see
Echinacea, Side-effects, Toxicity) although causality has not been
established.°”

No clear evidence of an association between kava consumption

s contained in the

and ischaemic heart disease (IHD) was found in a case-control
study (using up to four randomly selected control subjects)
involving 83 individuals from Aboriginal commun: in Arnhem
Land (Northern Territory, Australia) who were diagnosed with
IHD for the first time during 1992-1997." In a similar case-
control study involving 115 individuals (and 415 control subjects)

with pneumonia, no association between kava use and pneumonia
101)

was found.'

Toxicology

Incubation of the kava alkaloid pipermethystine, which occurs
mostly in kava leaves and stem peelings, with human hepatoma
cells resulted in a 90% loss in cell viability within 24 hours when
applied at a concentration of 100 ,tmol/L and 65% cell death at a
concentration of 50pmol/L."" Further experiments indicated
that pipermethystine causes cell death in part by disrupting
mitochondrial function. It has been suggested that pipermethys-
ticine could be involved in hepatoxicity associated with kava root
(12) although since hepatotoxicity has been associated
both with authorised commerical products (therefore made
according to the principles of good manufacturing practice) and

extracts,

traditional aqueous extracts (which might be more easily
contaminated with leaves and stem peelings) this suggestion
requires further examination.

A study involving small numbers of rats administered an
aqueous (water) extract of kava 'root' equivalent to kavalactones
200 or 500 mg/kg/day for 2-4 weeks found that serum concentra-
tions of the enzymes alanine aminotransferase, aspartate amino-
transferase, alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase were
not elevated following kava administration, compared with

103 - So
) The clinical relevance of these findings is not known.

control."

In other toxicological studies, LDso values for a standardised
kava extract containing 70% kavalactones have been reported as
370 mg/kg and 16 g/kg for intraperitoneal and oral administration,
respectively, in rats, and 380 mg/kg and 1.8 g/kg for intraperitoneal
and oral administration, respectively, in mice.“

An ethanolic extract of kava root was reported to be cytotoxic
(ECso approximately 50 pmol/L) in an in vitro system a ing
viability of human hepatocytes. The kavalactones methysticin,
desmethoxyyangonin and yangonin also displayed cytotoxicity in
this system, with methysticin having the greatest cytotoxic
activity! In vitro cytotoxicity of kavalactones has also been
described in a human lymphoblastoid cell line; the cytotoxic effect

appears to be due to the parent compound and not as a result of
05)

activation of kava constituents to toxic metabolites.'!

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that kava is contra-indicated in endogenous
depression.“C
recommended dosage regimens, kava may adversely affect motor
reflexes, and may affect ability to drive and/or operate machi-
nero G9

It has been reported that there is no evidence that use of kava
extracts has the potential for physical or psychological depen-
dency to develop.’
extracts have been of short duration, typically around four weeks
(maximum 24 weeks) and/or usually have involved only small
numbers of participants, further study is required before definitive
statements are made on the potential for dependency with kava.

” Even when administered in accordance with

» However, as most clinical studies of kava

Drug interactions There is an isolated report of a 54-year-old
man who was taking alprazolam, cimetidine and terazosin and
who became lethargic and disoriented three days after he began
taking kava purchased from a health-food store (no further details
(8) The man was
hospitalised and his symptoms resolved after several hours. He

of the kava preparation were provided).

tested negatively for alcohol, and positively for benzodiazepines;
the man stated he had not taken overdoses of either alprazolam or
kava. The clinical importance and role of kava in this reaction is

not known, although there is a view that concurrent use of kava

----- PAGE 410 -----
and substances with central nervous system effects could lead to
enhanced activity.“¢* °

The effects on performance of a kava extract given in
combination with bromazepam have been explored in a rando-
mised, double-blind, controlled crossover trial involving 18
healthy volunteers. Participants received a kava extract (Antares)
equivalent to 120mg kavalactones twice daily, or bromazepam
4.5mg twice daily, or both agents, for 14 days.” Significant
reductions in indicators of performance, such as motor coordina-
tion, were reported for recipients of both kava and bromazepam,
compared with recipients of kava alone, but there was no
difference between kava plus bromazepam compared with
bromazepam alone.

Isolated case reports of extrapyramidal symptoms associated
with use of kava extracts have led to the suggestion that
constituents of kava may have dopamine antagonist effects (see
Side-effects, Toxicity, Central nervous system effects).°*) On this
basis, the potential for kava to interact with dopamine agonists or
antagonists should be considered.

Inhibition of certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising
enzymes has been shown in vitro and in vivo for kava extracts and
individual kavalactones. In a randomised, open-label, crossover
study, 12 healthy volunteers received kava root extract 1000 mg
twice daily (subsequently found to be equivalent to total
kavalactones 138mg daily) for 28 days; probe drugs were
administered before and after kava administration to assess
effects on CYP enzymes." Administration of the kava extract
according to this dosage regimen inhibited CYP2E1, but not
CYP3A4/5, CYP2D6 and CYP1A2.

In in vitro studies, methanolic, acetone and ethyl acetate
extracts of kava rhizome significantly inhibited CYP3A4 activity,
compared with control, at concentrations as low as 10 g/mL
(ethyl acetate extract).” In other in vitro experiments, several
individual kavalactones were tested for their effects on the
activities of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6, as well
as CYP3A4. Desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and
methysticin produced a concentration-dependent inhibition of
one or more of the CYP isoforms at concentrations of <10 timol/
L, considered as ‘potent’ inhibition (e.g. ICso values for
desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and methysticin for
CYP2C19 were 0.51, 0.43 and 0.93 jmol/L, respectively, and for
dihydromethysticin and methysticin for CYP3A4 under certain
assay conditions were 2.49 and 1.49 mol/L, respectively). In
several cases, this degree of inhibition was greater than that shown
by positive controls which are known to produce clinically
significant drug interactions. Similar results have been reported
for an ethanolic kava root extract and the individual kavalactones
desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and yangonin: in two in
vitro models, both the extract and the individual kavalactones
inhibited CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4
with ICs values of around 10 mol/L.“

Differences in CYP enzyme inhibition have been described for
commercial preparations (acetone, methanol and ethanol extracts)
and traditional aqueous extracts, with commercial preparations
having a greater inhibitory effect than traditional preparations on
CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19."''? Desmethoxyyan-
gonin and dihydromethysticin induced the expression of CYP3A23
by approximately seven-fold in an in vitro system; other
experimental results suggested that the inductive effect of these
kavalactones is additively or synergistically enhanced by the
presence of other kavalactones."'?) Other in vitro experiments
have demonstrated that kava root extract and the individual
kavalactones kavain, dihydrokavain, methysticin, dihydromethys-

Kava

ticin and desmethoxyyangonin inhibit the efflux transporter P-
glycoprotein. (13)

The clinical relevance of these findings is not known, although
the potential for kava extracts to interact with concurrently
administered drugs metabolised mainly by the CYP enzymes
mentioned above should be considered.

There are conflicting results from in vitro studies regarding the
effects of the kavalactone (+)-kavain on cyclooxygenase activ-
ity.“ One study reported that (+)-kavain inhibited human
platelet aggregation in vitro (see In vitro and animal studies,
Other activities], although the clinical relevance of this, if any is
not known. At present, there is insufficient evidence to warn
against the concurrent use of kava preparations and antiplatelet
agents. The kavalactones kavain, methysticin, yangonin and
desmethoxyyangonin did not inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase in
vitro when applied to the system at concentrations of 1, 10 and
100 pmol/L.“

Alcohol The effects of concurrent use of kava extract and alcohol
have undergone some investigation. In a randomised, double-
blind, controlled trial, 20 healthy participants received kava
extract (WS-1490; Laitan) 300 mg daily (equivalent to 210 mg
kavalactones), or placebo, for eight days.) Alcohol was

ingested on days one, four and eight in quantities sufficient to
achieve a blood alcohol concentration of 50 mg%; participants
underwent a series of tests designed to assess psychomotor
performance before and after alcohol consumption. The results
indicated that there was no difference in performance between
the kava and placebo groups, apart from one test (concentra-
tion) in which the kava group was reported to be superior to
the placebo group.''!”

A small study involving 40 healthy participants found that
the concurrent ingestion of a kava beverage (350 mL of aqueous
extract of Fijian kava) and alcohol 0.75 g/kg led to a greater
reduction in cognitive performance, as assessed by a series of
tests, compared with that observed with ingestion of alcohol
alone; ingestion of kava alone did not affect cognitive
performance."''9)

Studies in mice given ethanol (3.5 and 4 g/kg, intraperitone-
ally) and kava resin 200 or 300 mg/kg orally have demonstrated
a prolongation of hypnotic effects.”

Pregnancy and lactation There is a lack of information on the
use of kava preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Given the lack of data, kava should be avoided during these
periods.

Brazil: Ansiopax; Calmonex; Farmakava; Kavakan; Kavalac;
Kavasedon; Laitan; Natuzilium. Czech Republic: Antares;
Kavasedon; Leikan. Venezuela: Kavasedon.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
USA: Calming Aid.

References

1 Singh YN, Blumenthal M. Kava an overview. Herbalgram 1997; 39:
33-55.

----- PAGE 411 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Kava

Alton J. Kava-kava (Piper methysticum G. Forster) in contemporary
medical research [translation of reference 3]. Eur J Herb Med 1997; 3:
17-23.

Hansel R. Kava-kava (Piper methysticum G. Forster) in der modernen
Arzneimittelforschung. Z Phytother 1996; 17: 180-195.

The Medicines for Human Use (Kava-Kava) (Prohibition) Order 2002
(S12002/3170). London: The Stationery Office, 2003.

Dharmaratne HRW et al. Kavalactones from Piper methysticum, and
their C NMR spectroscopic analyses. Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 429-
433.

Parmar VS et al. Phytochemistry of the genus Piper. Phytochemistry
1997; 46: 597-673.

Singh YN. Kava: an overview. J] Ethnopharmacol 1992; 37: 13-45.
Shao Y et al. Reversed-phase high-performance liquid
chromatographic method for quantitative analysis of the six major
kavalactones in Piper methysticum. ] Chromatogr A 1998; 825: 1-8.
Wu D et al. Cyclooxygenase enzyme inhibitory compounds with
antioxidant activities from Piper methysticum (kava kava) roots.
Phytomed 2002; 9: 41-47.

Bone K. Kava — a safe treatment for anxiety. Br ] Phytother 1993/4; 3:
147-153.

Jaggy H, Achenbach H. Cepharadione A from Piper methysticum.
Planta Med 1992; 58: 111.

Achenbach H, Karl W. Uber die isolierung von zwei neuen
pyrrolididen aus Rauschpfeffer (Piper methysticum Forst.). Chem Ber
1970; 103: 2535-2540.

Cheng D et al. Identification by methane chemical ionization gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry of the products obtained by steam
distillation and aqueous acid extraction of commercial Piper
methysticum. Biomed Environ Mass Spectrom 1988; 17: 371-376.
Wu D et al. Novel compounds from Piper methysticum Forst (Kava
Kava) roots and their effect on cyclooxygenase enzyme. J Agric Food
Chem 2002; 50: 701-705.

Dragull K e¢ al. Piperidine alkaloids from Piper methysticum.
Phytochemistry 2003; 63: 193-198.

Cawte J. Psychoactive substances of the South seas: betel, kava and
pituri. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1985; 19: 83-87.

Keledjian J et al. Uptake into mouse brain of four compounds present
in the psychoactive beverage kava. J Pharm Sci 1988; 77: 1003-1006.
Smith KK e¢ al. Anxiolytic effects of kava extract and kavalactones in
the chick social separation-stress paradigm. Psychopharmacology
2001; 155: 86-90.

Feltenstein MW et al. Anxiolytic properties of Piper methysticum
extract samples and fractions in the chick social-separation-stress
procedure. Phytother Res 2003; 17: 210-216.

Capasso A, Calignano A. Synergism between the sedative action of
kava extract and D,L-kawain. Acta Ther 1988; 14: 249-256.

Capasso A, Pinto A. Experimental investigations of the synergistic-
sedative effect of passiflora and kava. Acta Ther 1995; 21: 127-139.
Duffield PH et al. Effect of aqueous and lipid-soluble extracts of kava
on the conditioned avoidance response in rats. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
1989; 301: 81-90.

Holm E et al. Untersuchungen zum Wirkungsprofil von D,L-kavain.
Zerebrale Angriffsorte und Schlaf-Wach-Rhythmus im
Tierexperiment. Arzneim Forsch 1991; 41: 673-683.

Davies LP et al. Kava pyrones and resin: studies on GABA, GABA,
and benzodiazepine binding sites in rodent brain. Pharmacol Toxicol
1992; 71: 120-126.

Grunze H, Walden J. Kawain limits excitation in CA 1 pyramidal
neurons of rats by modulating ionic currents and attenuating
excitatory synaptic transmission [letter]. Hum Psychopharm Clin Exp
1999; 14: 63-66.

Jussofie A et al. Kavapyrone enriched extract from Piper metlysticum
as modulator of the GABA binding site in different regions of rat
brain. Psychopharmacology 1994; 116: 469-474.

Boonen G, Haberlein H. Influence of genuine kavapyrone enantiomers
on the GABA, binding site. Planta Med 1998; 64: 504-506.
Uebelhack R et al. Inhibition of platelet MAO-B by kava pyrone-
enriched extract from Piper methysticum Forster (kava-kava).
Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31: 187-192.

Seitz U et al. [3H]-Monoamine uptake inhibition properties of kava
pyrones [letter]. Planta Med 1997; 63: 548-549.

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

Walden J et al. Actions of kavain and dihydromethysticin on
ipsapirone-induced field potential changes in the hippocampus. Hum
Psychopharmacol 1997; 12: 265-270.

Boonen G et al. In vivo effects of the kavapyrones (+)-
dihydromethysticin and (+/—)-kavain on dopamine, 3,4-
dihyroxyphenylacetic acid, serotonin and 5-hydrozyindoleacetic acid
levels in striatal and cortical brain regions. Planta Med 1998; 64: 507—
510.

Baum SS et al. Effect of kava extract and individual kavapyrones on
neurotransmitter levels in the nucleus accumbens of rats. Prog Neuro-
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiat 1998; 22: 1105-1120.

Duffield PH, Jamieson D. Development of tolerance to kava in mice.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1991; 18: 571-578.

Gleitz J et al. Anticonvulsive action of (+/—)-kavain estimated from
its properties on stimulated synaptosomes and Na* channel receptor
sites. Eur ] Pharmacol 1996; 315: 89-97.

Magura El et al. Kava extract ingredients, (+)-methysticin and (+/—)-
kavain inhibit voltage-operated Na“-channels in rat CA1
hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 1997; 81: 345-351.

Gleitz J et al. Kavain inhibits non-stereospecifically veratridine-
activated Na‘ channels [letter]. Planta Med 1996; 62: 580-581.
Schirrmacher K et al. Effects of (+/—)-kavain on voltage-activated
inward currents of dorsal root ganglion cells from neonatal rats. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 1999; 9: 171-176.

Gleitz J et al. (+/—)-Kavain inhibits veratridine-activated voltage-
dependent Na*-channels in synaptosomes prepared from rat cerebral
cortex. Neuropharmacology 1995; 34; 1133-1138.

Gleitz J et al. (+/—)-Kavain inhibits the veratridine- and KCl-induced
increase in intracellular Ca*+ and glutamate-release of rat
cerebrocortical synaptosomes. Neuropharmacology 1996; 35: 179-
186.

Ferger B et al. In vivo microdialysis study of (+/—)-kavain on
veratridine-induced glutamate release. Eur J Pharmacol 1998; 347:
211-214.

Gleitz J et al. The protective action of tetrodotoxin and (+/—)-kavain
on anaerobic glycolysis, ATP content and intracellular Na* and Ca?*
of anoxic brain vesicles. Neuropharmacology 1996; 35: 1743-1752.
Schmidt N, Ferger B. Neuroprotective effects of (+/—)-kavain in the
MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease. Synapse 2001; 40: 47-54.
Backhauss C, Krieglstein J. Extract of kava (Piper methysticum) and
its methysticin constituents protect brain tissue against ischemic
damage in rodents. Eur J Pharmacol 1992; 215: 265-269.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. The antinociceptive actions of kava
components in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990; 17: 495-508.
Briiggemann F, Meyer HJ. Die analgetische Wirkung der Kawa-
Inhaltsstoffe Dihydrokawain und Dihydromethysticin. Arzneimittel-
Forschung 1963; 13: 407-409.

Singh YN. Effects of kava on neuromuscular transmission and muscle
contractility. J Ethnopharmacol 1983; 7: 267-276.

Seitz U et al. Relaxation of evoked contractile activity of isolated
guinea-pig ileum by (+/—)-kavain. Planta Med 1997; 63: 303-306.
Martin HB et al. Kavain inhibits murine airway smooth muscle
contraction. Planta Med 2000; 66: 601-606.

Gleitz J et al. Antithrombotic action of the kava pyrone (+)-kavain
prepared from Piper methysticum on human platelets. Planta Med
1997; 63: 27-30.

Hashimoto T e¢ al. Isolation and synthesis of TNF-z release inhibitors
from Fijian kawa (Piper methysticum). Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 309—
317.

Blaszcyk T et al. Kawa-kawa als antimykotikum. Pharmazie 1997; 21:
32-34.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Kava extract versus placebo for treating anxiety
(Cochrane review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
2003, Issue 1. Art. No. :CD003383.

Warnecke G. [Psychosomatische Dysfunktionen im weiblichen
Klimakterium]. Fortschr Med 191 109: 119-122.

Volz H-P, Kieser M. Kava-kava extract WS 1490 versus placebo in
anxiety disorders — a randomized, placebo-controlled 25-week
outpatient trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30: 1-5.

Witte $ et al. Meta-analysis of the efficacy of the acetonic kava-kava
extract WS"'1490 in patients with non-psychotic anxiety disorders.
Phytotherapy Res 2005; 19: 183-188.

----- PAGE 412 -----
56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

Lehrl S. Clinical efficacy of kava extract WS 1490 in sleep disturbances
associated with anxiety disorders. Results of a multicenter,
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. J Affect
Disord 2004; 78(2): 101-110.

Jacobs BP et al. An internet-based randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of kava and valerian for anxiety and insomnia. Medicine 2005; 84
(4): 197-207.

Cagnacci A et al. Kava-kava administration reduces anxiety in
perimenopausal women. Maturitas 2003; 44: 103-109.

Woelk H et al. Behandlung von Angst-Patienten. Doppelblindstudie:
Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490 versus Benzodiazepine. Z Allg Med
1993; 69: 271-277.

Boerner RJ et al. Kava-kava extract LI 150 is as effective as opipramol
and buspirone in generalised anxiety disorder — an 8-week
randomized, double-blind, multi-centre clinical trial in 129 out-
patients. Phytomedicine 2003; 10(Suppl IV): 38-49.

De Leo Vet al. Valutazione dell'associazione di estratto di kava-kava e
terapia ormonale sostitutiva nel trattamento d'ansia in
postmenopausa. Minerva Ginecol 2000; 52: 263-267.

Cropley M et al. Effect of kava and valerian on human physiological
and psychological responses to mental stress assessed under
laboratory conditions. Phytother Res 2002; 16: 23-27.

Miller HJ, Heuberger L. Anxiolytische Potenz von D,L-kavain.
Ergebnisse einer plazebokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Miinch
Med Wschr 1989; 131: 656-659.

Lindenberg D, Pitule-Schédel H. D,L-kavain im Vergleich zu
Oxazepam bei Angstzustanden. Doppelblindstudie zur klinischen
Wirksamkeit. Fortschr Med 1990; 108: 31-34.

Moller H-J et al. Kavain als Hilfe beim Benzodiazepin-Entzug. Miinch
Med Wschr 1992; 134: 587-590.

Thompson R et al. Enhanced cognitive performance and cheerful
mood by standardized extracts of Piper methysticum (kava-kava).
Human Psychopharmacol 2004; 19(4): 243-250.

Boerner RJ, Klement $. Attenuation of neuroleptic-induced
extrapyramidal side-effects by kava special extract WS 1490. Wiener
Med Wochenschrift 2004; 154: 21-22.

Duffield AM et al. Identification of some human urinary metabolites
of the intoxicating beverage kava. J Chromatogr 1989; 475: 273-281.
Stevinson C et al. A systematic review of the safety of kava extract in
the treatment of anxiety. Drug Safety 2002; 25: 251-261.

Neto JT. Eficacia e tolerabilidade do extrato de kava-kava WS 1490 em
estados de ansiedade. Estudo multicéntrico brasileiro. Rev Bras Med
1999; 56: 280-284.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 20 January, 2006).

Medicines Control Agency. Consultation MLX 286: Proposals to
prohibit the herbal ingredient kava-kava (Piper methysticum) in
unlicensed medicines. Medicines Control Agency, 19 July 2002.
Anon. Kava-kava. The Medicines for Human Use (Kava-kava)
(Prohibition) Order 2002. Herbal Safety News, Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (http://www.mhra.gov.uk,
accessed 26 January, 2006).

Adverse Drug Reactions On-line Information Tracking (ADROIT)
system. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency,
London, UK.

Committee on Safety of Medicines' Expert Working Group (Kava).
Report of the CSM's expert working group on the safety of kava.
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, 2006.
Available at http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed 25 September, 2006).
Schulze J et al. Toxicity of kava pyrones, drug safety and precautions —
a case study. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 68-73.

Stickel F et al. Hepatitis induced by kava (Piper methysticum
rhizoma). ] Hepatol 2003; 39: 62-67.

Gow PJ et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aust 2003; 178: 442-443.

Russmann § e¢ al. Hepatic injury due to traditional aqueous extracts
of kava root in New Caledonia. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2003; 15:
1033-1036.

Clough AR et al. Liver function test abnormalities in users of aqueous
kava extracts. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2003; 41(6): 821-829.

Norton SA, Ruze P. Kava dermopathy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994; 31:
89-97.

Kava

82 Ruze P. Kava-induced dermopathy: a niacin deficiency? Lancet 1990;
335: 1442-1445,

83 Mathews JD et al. Effects of the heavy usage of kava on physical
health: summary of a pilot survey in an Aboriginal community. Med J
Aust 1988; 148: 548-555.

84 Levine R, Taylor WB. Take tea and see [letter]. Arch Dermatol 1988;
122: 856.

85  Siiss R, Lehmann P. Hamatogenes Kontaktekzem durch pflanzliche
Medikamente am Beispiel des Kavawurzelextraktes. Hautarzt 1996;
47: 459-461.

86 Jappe U et al. Sebotropic drug reaction resulting from kava-kava
extract therapy: a new entity? J Am Acad Dermatol 1998; 38: 104-106.

87 Schmidt P, Boehncke W-H. Delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to
kava-kava extract. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42: 363.

88 Schelosky L et al. Kava and dopamine antagonism. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 58: 639-640.

89 Spillane PK et al. Neurological manifestations of kava intoxication.
Med J Aust 1997; 167: 172-173.

90 Chanwai LG. Kava toxicity. Emerg Med 2000; 12: 142-145.

91 Cairney S et al. Saccade and cognitive impairment associated with
kava intoxication. Human Psychopharmacol 2003; 18(7): 525-533.

92 Miinte TF et al. Effects of oxazepam and an extract of kava roots
(Piper methysticum) on event-related potentials in a word recognition
task. Neuropsychobiology 1993; 27: 46-53.

93 Gessner B, Cnota P. Untersuchung der Vigilanz nach Applikation von
Kava-kava-extrakt, diazepam oder Plazebo. Z Phytother 1994; 15: 30-
37.

94 Schulz H et al. The quantitative EEG as a screening instrument to
identify sedative effects of single doses of plant extracts in comparison
with diazepam. Phytomedicine 1998: 449-458.

95. Saletu B et al. EEG-Brain mapping, psychometric and
psychophysiological studies on central effects of kavain — a kava plant
derivative. Hum Psychopharmacol 1989; 4: 169-190.

96 Guro-Razuman § et al. Dermatomyositis-like illness following kava-
kava ingestion. J Clin Rheumatol 1999; 6: 342-345.

97 Donadio Vet al. Myoglobinuria after ingestion of extracts of guarana,
Ginkgo biloba and kava. Neurol Sci 2000; 21: 124.

98 Garner LF, Klinger JD. Some visual effects caused by the beverage
kava. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 307-311.

99 Logan JL, Ahmed J. Critical hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis due
to Sjégren's syndrome: association with the purported immune
stimulant echinacea. Clin Rheumatol 2003; 22: 158-159.

100 Clough AR et al. Case-control study of the association between kava
use and ischaemic heart disease in eastern Arnhem Land (Northern
Territory) Australia. J Epidemiol Community Health 2004; 58: 140-
141.

101 Clough AR et al. Case-control study of the association between kava
use and pneumonia in eastern Arnhem and Aboriginal communities
(Northern Territory, Australia). Epidemiol Infect 2003; 131(1): 627—
635.

102 Nerurkar PV et al. In vitro toxicity of kava alkaloid, pipermethystine,
in HepG2 cells compared to kavalactones. Toxicolog Sci 2004; 79:
106-111.

103 Singh YN, Devkota AK. Aqueous kava extracts do not affect liver
function tests in rats. Planta Med 2003; 69: 496-499.

104 Zou L et al. Effects of kava (kava-kava, 'Awa, Yaqona, Piper
methysticum) on c-DNA-expressed cytochrome P450 enzymes and
cryopreserved hepatocytes. Phytomedicine 2004; 11(4): 285-294.

105 Zou L et al. Kava does not display metabolic toxicity in a
homogeneous cellular assay. Planta Med 2004; 70(4): 289-292.

106 Almeida JC, Grimsley EW. Coma from the health food store:
interaction between kava and alprazolam. [letter]. Ann Intern Med
1996; 125: 940-941.

107 Herberg K-W. Alltagssicherheit unter Kava-Kava Extrakt,
Bromazepam und deren Kombination. Z Allg Med 1996; 72: 973-977.

108 Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

109 Unger M et al. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 by extracts and
kavalactones of Piper methysticum (kava-kava). Planta Med 2002; 68:
1055-1058.

----- PAGE 413 -----
Kava

110 Zou L et al. Effects of herbal components on cDNA-expressed
cytochrome P450 enzyme catalytic activity. Life Sci 2002; 71: 1579-
1589.

111 Cote CS et al. Composition and biological activity of traditional and
commercial kava extracts. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 2004; 322(1):
147-152.

112 Ma Y et al. Desmethoxyyangonin and dihydromethysticin are two
major pharmacological kavalactones with marked activity on the
induction of CYP3A23. Drug Metab Disp 2004; 32(11): 1317-1324.

113 Weiss J et al. Extracts and kavalactones of Piper methysticum G.
Forst. (kava-kava) inhibit P-glycoprotein in vitro. Drug Metab Disp
2005; 33(11): 1580-1583.

114 Anke J et al. Kavalactones fail to inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase in
vitro. Phytomedicine 2006; 13(3): 192-195.

115 Herberg KW. Zum Einfluss von Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490 in
Kombination mit Ethylalkohol auf sicherheitsrelevante
Leisungsparameter. Blutalkohol 1993; 30: 96-105.

116 Foo H, Lemon J. Acute effects of kava, alone or in combination
with alcohol, on subjective measures of impairment and intoxication
and on cognitive performance. Drug Alcohol Rev 1997; 16: 147—
15S.

117 Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. Positive interaction of ethanol and kava
resin in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990; 17: 509-514.

----- PAGE 414 -----
= Lady’s Slipper

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Virtually no phytochemical or pharmacological data are
available for lady’s slipper to justify its use as a herbal remedy.
In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Cypripedium parviflorum var. pubescens (Willd.) O.W. Knight
(Orchidaceae)

Synonym(s)

American Valerian, Cypripedium, Cypripedium calceolus var.
pubescens (Willd.) Correll, Cypripedium pubescens Willd., Nerve
Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19830”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Cypripedium) '°*”

Constituents

Little chemical information has been documented. Lady's slipper
is stated to contain glycosides, resin, tannic and gallic acids
(usually associated with hydrolysable tannins), tannins and a
volatile oil.

Several quinones have been reported including cypripedin,
stated to belong to a group of rare non-terpenoid phenanthra-

quinones and not previously isolated from natural sources.

Food Use

Lady's slipper is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Lady's slipper is stated to po: edative, mild hypnotic,
antispasmodic and thymoleptic properties. Traditionally, it has

Benzonaphthoquinone
°

OCH,
CHs0 CI
Ce:

OH
cypripedin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lady’s slipper.

Figure 2 Lady’s slipper (Cypripedium parviflorum var. pubescens).

been used for insomnia, hysteria, emotional tension, anxiety
states, and specifically for anxiety states with insomnia.'C7 °°
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as an infusion three times daily.'‘C”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Figure 3 Lady’s slipper — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 415 -----
Lady’s Slipper

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lady's
slipper and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are

required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for lady's slipper
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

It has been stated that the roots may cause psychedelic reactions
and large doses may result in giddiness, restlessness, headache,
(S22) | ady's slipper is
stated to be allergenic and contact dermatitis has been
©) The sensitising property of lady's slipper has
been attributed to the quinone constituents.

mental excitement and visual hallucinations.

documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Lady's slipper may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive
individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lady's slipper to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of lady's slipper has not
been established. In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicological information the use of lady's
slipper during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Reference

1 Schmalle H, Hausen BM. A new sensitizing quinone from lady slipper
(Cypripedium calceolus). Naturwissenschaften 1979; 66: 527-528.

----- PAGE 416 -----
5 Lemon Verbena

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on lemon verbena. Some of
the traditional uses may be attributable to the volatile oil, for
which many components have been identified, and to the
flavone constituents. In the UK, lemon verbena is mainly used
as an ingredient of herbal teas.

Species (Family)
Aloysia triphylla (L'Her.) Britton (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)

Aloysia citriodora (Cav.) Ort., Lippia citriodora (Ort.) HBK,
Verbena citriodora Cav., Verbena triphylla L'Her.

Part(s) Used

Flowering top, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
G85)

Martindale 35th edition‘

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Lemon verbena is not included in the GSL.‘C*”?

Constituents

Flavonoids Flavones including apigenin, chrysoeriol, cirsimar-
itin, diosmetin, eupafolin, eupatorin, hispidulin, luteolin and
derivatives, pectolinarigenin and salvigenin.?

Volatile oils Terpene components include borneol, cineol, citral,
citronellal, cymol, eugenol, geraniol, limonene, linalool, B-pinene,
nerol, and terpineol (monoterpenes), and «-caryophyllene, B-
caryophyllene, myrcenene, pyrollic acid and isovalerianic acid
(sesquiterpenes).’

Monoterpenes

om
borneol we
S
cineole limonene
OH
S ‘OH PEG
te Te
linalool geraniol citral

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lemon verbena.

Figure 2 Lemon verbena (Aloysia triphylla).

Food Use

Previously, lemon verbena has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe) for human consumption in alcoholic
beverages. Lemon verbena is also used in herbal teas.'°*”

Herbal Use

Lemon verbena is reputed to possess antispasmodic, antipyretic,
sedative and stomachic properties. It has been used for the
treatment of asthma, cold, fever, flatulence, colic, diarrhoea and
indigestion, (3% 57 Go

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older pharmaceutical reference texts are given
below.

Figure 3. Lemon verbena - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 417 -----
Lemon Verbena

Decoction 45 mL taken several times daily.(C*?

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lemon
verbena and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for lemon verbena and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Terpene-rich volatile oils are generally
regarded as irritant and may cause kidney irritation during
excretion.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with existing renal disease should avoid excessive
doses of lemon verbena in view of the possible irritant nature of
the volatile oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lemon verbena to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of pharmacological
and toxicity data, and the potential irritant nature of the volatile
oil, excessive doses of lemon verbena are best avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

Spain: Agua del Carmen.

References

1. Skaltsa H, Shammas G. Flavonoids from Lippia citriodora. Planta
Med 1988; 54: 465.

2 Montes M et al. Sur la composition de l'essence d'Aloysia triphylla
(Cedron). Planta Med 1973; 23: 119-124.

----- PAGE 418 -----
5 Liferoot

pharmacological studies were found to substantiate the
traditional uses. The Senecio genus is characterised by
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents and the
hepatotoxicity of this class of compounds is well recognised
(see Comfrey). In view of this, liferoot is not suitable for use as
a herbal medicine.

Species (Family)

Senecio aureus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Golden Ragwort, Golden Senecio, Heart-leaved Groundsel,
Squaw Weed

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Martindale 35th edition‘

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Liferoot is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G19.

Limited information is documented regarding the constituents
of liferoot, although it is well recognised that Senecio species
contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
senecionine.'"?)

The volatile oil composition of various Senecio species (but not
Senecio aureus) has been investigated.)

Floridanine, florosenine, otosenine,

Food Use

Liferoot is not used as a food.

Alkaloids

senecionine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of liferoot.

Herbal Use

Liferoot is stated to possess uterine tonic, diuretic and mild
expectorant properties. Traditionally, it has been used in the
treatment of functional amenorrhoea, menopausal neurosis and
leucorrhoea (as a douche).'67 6%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
However, current advice is that liferoot is not suitable for use as a
herbal medicine and should not be ingested.

Herb 1-4¢ as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 14mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Figure 2 Liferoot (Senecio aureus).

Figure 3 Liferoot — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 419 -----
Liferoot

Pharmacological Actions

No documented studies were located.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Liferoot contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids. The toxicity, primarily
hepatic, of this class of compounds is well recognised in both
animals and humans‘@"”) (see Comfrey).

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents,
liferoot should not be ingested.‘°!”)

Pregnancy and lactation
liferoot is contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation."

In view of the toxic constituents,
G49)

Furthermore, liferoot is traditionally reputed to be an abortifa-
cient, emmenagogue, and_ uterine tonic..67°) In animals,
placental transfer and secretion into breast milk“ has been
documented for unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

References

1 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

2 Roder E et al. Pyrrolizidinalkaloide aus Senecio aureus. Planta Med
1983; 49: 57-59.

3. Dooren B et al. Composition of essential oils of some Senecio species.
Planta Med 1981; 42: 385-389.

4 Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986: 1-393.

----- PAGE 420 -----
Lime Flower

scientific information was located to justify the reputed herbal
uses of lime flower, although some correlation can be made
with the known pharmacological activities of the reported
constituents. In view of the lack of toxicological data excessive
use of lime flower and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Tilia cordata Mill. (Tiliaceae)

tTilia platyphyllos Scop.

$Tilia x vulgaris Hayne, a hybrid of the above (Tiliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Lime Tree, Linden Tree

*T. officinarum Crantz, T. officinarum Crantz subsp. officinarum
pro parte, T. ulmifolia Scop., T. parvifolia Ehrh. ex Hoffm., Small-
leaved Lime

+T. officinarum Crantz, T. officinarum Crantz subsp. officinarum
pro parte, Large-leaved Lime

$T. x europaea auct. non L., Lime

Part(s) Used

Flowerheads

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007*?

Complete German Commission E (Linden) ‘©
Martindale 35th edition'‘*”

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Flavonoids

OH

tiliroside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lime flower.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Acids Caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid and p-coumaric acid.

Amino acids Alanine, cysteine, cystine, isoleucine, leucine,
phenylalanine and serine.

Carbohydrates Mucilage polysaccharides (3%). Five fractions
identified yielding arabinose, galactose, rhamnose, with lesser
amounts of glucose, mannose, and xylose; galacturonic and
glucuronic acids; gum.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, quercetin, myricetin and their glyco-
sides.

Volatile oil Many components including alkanes, phenolic
alcohols and esters, and terpenes including citral, citronellal,
citronellol, eugenol, limonene, nerol, o&-pinene and_terpineol
(monoterpenes), and farnesol (sesquiterpene).

Other constituents Saponin (unspecified), tannin (condensed)
and tocopherol (phytosterol).

Food Use

Lime flower is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that lime
flower can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“©'® Previously, lime flower has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘@%

Herbal Use

Lime flower is stated to possess sedative, antispasmodic,
diaphoretic, diuretic and mild astringent properties. Traditionally
it has been used for migraine, hysteria, arteriosclerotic hyperten-
sion, feverish colds, and specifically for raised arterial pressure

associated with arteriosclerosis and nervous tension.'C> % O76

G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and/or pharmaceutical reference
texts are given below.

Flowerhead 2-4 ¢ by infusion.
Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).
Tincture 1-2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro, lime flower has been reported to exhibit antispasmodic
activity followed by a spasmogenic effect on rat duodenum.” The
actions were inhibited by atropine and papaverine, and reinforced

----- PAGE 421 -----
Lime Flower

by acetylcholine. The diaphoretic and antispasmodic properties
claimed for lime flower have been attributed to p-coumaric acid
and the flavonoids.'@?” °° In addition, a number of actions have
been associated with volatile oils including diuretic, sedative and
antispasmodic effects, which may also account for some of the
reputed uses of lime flower.) Volatile oils are not thought to
possess any true diuretic activity, but to act as a result of certain
terpenoid components having an irritant action on the kidneys
during renal excretion.

Lime flower has been documented to possess a restricted range
of antifungal activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lime
flower and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for lime flower and further investigation of these aspects is
required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Previously it has been advised that lime flower should be avoided
by individuals with an existing cardiac disorder;'C?* 0
however, the scientific basis for this statement, if any, is not
known.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lime flower to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of lime flower has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicological data, use of lime
flower during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Vigilia. Israel: Jungborn. Italy: Alkagin; Lenicalm; Sedofit;
Tussol. Portugal: Alkagin; Alkagin; Alkagin. Spain: Agua del
Carmen; Jaquesor; Mesatil; Natusor Gripotul; Natusor
Jaquesan; Natusor Sinulan; Natusor Somnisedan. Switzerland:
Tisane contre les refroidissements; Tisane pour nourissons et
enfants. UK: Menopause Relief; Tranquil; Wellwoman.

References

1 Kram G, Franz G. Structural investigations on the water soluble
polysaccharides of lime tree flowers (Tilia cordata L.). Pharmazie
1985; 40: SOL.

2 Lanza JP, Steinmetz M. Actions comparees des exraits aqueux de
graines de Tilia platyphylla et de Tilia vulgaris sur l'intestin isolé de
rat. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 185.

3 Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.

4 Svendsen AB, Scheffer JJC. Essential Oils and Aromatic Plants.
Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Essential Oils.
Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1984; 225-226.

5 Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological, Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

6 Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. I Study of 41 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Fr 1984; B: 553-559

----- PAGE 422 -----
Liquorice

locumented pharmacological data althoug
evidence of antispasmodic activity was found.
Carbenoxolone, an ester derivative of a triterpenoid
constituent in liquorice, is well known for its use in ulcer
therapy. Much has been written concerning the steroid-type
adverse effects associated with liquorice ingestion. Liquorice
ingestion should therefore be avoided by individuals with an
existing cardiovascular disorder and moderate consumption
should be observed by other individuals.

Species (Family)
Glycyrrhiza glabra L. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Gan Cao (root/rhizome), Glycyrrhiza glabra L. var. glabra, G.
glabra L. subsp. glandulifera (Waldst. & Kit.) Ponert, Licorice

Part(s) Used

Root, stolon

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition\*”

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24‘C80)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Coumarins Glycyrin, heniarin, liqcoumarin, umbelliferone, GU-
7 (3-arylcoumarin derivative).\?

Flavonoids Flavonols and isoflavones including formononetin,
glabrin, glabrol, glabrone, glyzarin, glycyrol, glabridin and
derivatives, kumatakenin, licoflavonol, licoisoflavones A and B,
licoisoflavanone, licoricone, liquiritin and derivatives, phaseolli-
nisoflavan;” chalcones_ including isoliquiritigenin, licuraside,
echinatin, licochalcones A and B, neo-licuroside.)

Terpenoids Glycyrrhizin glycoside (1-24%) also known as
glycyrrhizic or glycyrrhizinic acid yielding glycyrrhetinic (or

glycyrrhetic) acid and glucuronic acid following hydrolysis;

glycyrrhetol, glabrolide, licoric acid, liquiritic acid and B-amyrin.

Volatile oils 0.047%." More than 80 components identified
including anethole, benzaldehyde, butyrolactone, cumic alcohol,
eugenol, fenchone, furfuryl alcohol, hexanol, indole, linalool, y-
nonalactone, oestragole, propionic acid, o-terpineol and thu-
jone

Other constituents Amino acids, amines, gums, lignin, starch,
sterols (f-sitosterol, stigmasterol), sugars and wax.

Other plant parts Components documented for the leaves of G.
glabra include flavonoids (kaempferol and derivatives, isoquerce-
tin, quercetin and derivatives, phytoalexins), coumarins (bergap-
ten, xanthotoxin), phytoestrogen, B-sitosterol and saponaretin."?

Food Use

Liquorice is widely used in foods as a flavouring agent. Liquorice
root is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that liquorice
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“'® Previously, liquorice has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C*

Herbal Use

Liquorice is stated to possess expectorant, demulcent, antispas-
modic, anti-inflammatory and laxative properties. Traditionally, it
is also reported to affect the adrenal glands. It has been used for
bronchial catarrh, bronchitis, chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer, colic
and primary adrenocortical insufficiency.(C C° * 61% Ge)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Powdered root 1-4 as a decoction three times daily.C%°”

Liquorice Extract (BPC 1973) 0.6-2.0g.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological actions of liquorice have been reviewed.” *)

In vitro and animal studies

Much has been documented regarding the steroid-type actions of
liquorice (see Side-effects, Toxicity). Both glycyrrhizin and
glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) have been reported to bind to
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors with moderate
affinity, and to oestrogen receptors, sex hormone-binding globulin
and corticosteroid-binding globulin with very weak affinity.°-!? It
has been suggested that glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic acid may
influence endogenous steroid activity via a receptor mechanism,
with displacement of corticosteroids or other endogenous
steroids.”

----- PAGE 423 -----
Liquorice

Triterpenoids

COOH
HO ce)
HO 3
COOH

glycyrrhizinic acid

Flavonoids

OH
H
i NN
R

°
R
glabrol H
3-—hydroxyglabrol OH

\soflavonoids

hispaglabridin A

Chalcones
HO. OH
Ce
°

Selected constituents of liquorice.

; OR

isoliquiritigenin
isoliquiritin

Figure 1

The anti-oestrogenic action documented for glycyrrhizin at
relatively high concentrations has been associated with a blocking
effect that would be caused by glycyrrhizin binding at oestrogen
receptors.) However, oestrogenic activity has also been docu-
mented for liquorice and attributed to the isoflavone constitu-
® Liquorice exhibits an alternative action on oestrogen
metabolism, causing inhibition if oestrogen concentrations are
high and potentiation when concentrations are low.

The relatively low affinity of glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic
acid for binding to mineralocorticoid receptors, together with the
fact that liquorice does not exert its mineralocorticoid activity in
adrenalectomised animals, indicates that a direct action at

ents.

HO.

°
R
liquiritigenin H
liquiritin glucose

licoisoflavone A

R
H

glucose

mineralocorticoid receptors is not the predominant mode of
action.) It has been suggested that glycyrrhizin and glycyr-
thetinic acid may exert their mineralocorticoid effect via an
inhibition of 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11B-OHSD).”)
11B-OHSD is a microsomal enzyme complex found predomi-
nantly in the liver and kidneys which catalyses the conversion of
cortisol (potent mineralocortoid activity) to the inactive cortisone.
Deficiency of 11B-OHSD results in increased concentrations of
urinary free cortisol and cortisol metabolites. Glycyrrhetinic acid
has been shown to inhibit renal 11B-OHSD in rats." It has also
been proposed that glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic acid may
displace cortisol from binding to transcortin."?

----- PAGE 424 -----
Figure 2 Liquorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra).

Antiplatelet activity in vitro has been documented for a 3-
arylcoumarin derivative, GU-7, isolated from liquorice." GU-7
was thought to inhibit platelet aggregation by increasing
intraplatelet cyclic AMP concentration.

Isoliquiritigenin has been reported to inhibit aldose reductase,
the first enzyme in the polyol pathway which reduces glucose to
sorbitol." Isoliquiritigenin was subsequently found to inhibit
sorbitol accumulation in human red blood cells in vitro, and in red
blood cells, the sciatic nerve and the lens of diabetic rats
administered isoliquirigenin intragastrically."'* ') Many diabetic
complications, such as cataracts, peripheral neuropathy, retino-
pathy and nephropathy have been associated with the polyol

pathway and have shown improvement with inhibitors of aldose
(14, 15)

reductase.

Significant anti-inflammatory action is exhibited by glycyr-
rhetinic acid against UV erythema." 180-Glycyrrhetinic acid has
exhibited stronger anti-inflammatory action compared to its
stereoisomer 18-glycyrrhetinic acid.” Chalcones isolated from
G. inflata Bat. have been reported to inhibit leukotriene
production and increase cyclic AMP concentrations in human
polymorphonuclear neutrophils in vitro."'®) Glycyrrhetinic acid
derivatives, but not glycyrrhetinic acid, have exhibited inhibitory
effects on writhing and vascular permeability tests and on type IV
allergy in mice.” The dihemiphthalate derivatives were especially
active with respect to the two former activities and have previously
been found to inhibit lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase activities,
and to prevent formation of gastric ulcer.‘'”

Glycyrrhetinic acid is known to inhibit Epstein-Barr virus
activation by tumour promotors.2”

Antimicrobial activity versus Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobac-
terium smegmatis and Candida albicans has been documented for
liquorice and attributed to isoflavonoid constituents (glabridin,
glabrol and their derivatives).”’ Antiviral activity has been
described for glycyrrhetinic acid, which interacts with virus
structures producing different effects according to the viral stage
affected.°"” Activity was observed against vaccinia, herpes

Liquorice

simplex 1, Newcastle dise: and vesicular stomatitis virus
with no activity demonstrated towards poliovirus 1.°”

In vitro hepatoprotective activity against CCly-induced toxicity
has been reported to be greater for glycyrrhetinic acid compared
to glycyrrhizin.~? Glycyrrhetinic acid is thought to act by
inhibition of the cytochrome P450 system required for the
metabolism of CCl, to the highly reactive radical CCl.”
Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch is used to treat hepatitis B in China,
with a success rate reported to be greater than 70%.° Other
activities documented for G. uralensis are anti-inflammatory and
anti-allergic, treatment of jaundice, inhibition of fibrosis of the
liver, corticosteroid-like immunosuppressing effect and a detox-
ifying effect.?>

Screening of several plant extracts for antifertility activity
reported liquorice to be ineffective following oral administration
to rats in days 1-7 of pregnancy.”

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetic profile of glycyrrhizin
in rats has been found to be similar to that observed in
humans.°° Glycyrrhizin is primarily (80%) excreted into the
bile from the liver against a concentration gradient.?> This
process is saturable and can therefore affect the excretion rate of
glycyrrhizin. In addition, enterohepatic recycling occurs with
reabsorption of bile-excreted glycyrrhizin from the intestinal

tract.2>

Clinical studies

Carbenoxolone, an ester derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid, has been
used in the treatment of gastric and oesophageal ulcers. It is
thought to exhibit a mucosal-protecting effect by beneficially
interfering with gastric prostanoid synthesis, and increasing
mucus production and mucosal blood flow.°”

Liquorice is thought to exert its mineralocorticoid effect by
inhibition of the enzyme 11B-OHSD, which catalyses the
conversion of cortisol to the inactive cortisone (see Pharmacolo-
gical Actions, In vitro and animal studies). Administration of
liquorice to healthy volunteers has resulted in a disturbance of
cortisol metabolism and a significant rise in urinary free cortisol,
despite there being no change in plasma concentrations. These
changes are consistent with this hypothesis, being indicative of
11B-OHSD deficiency.” Liquorice has also been found to
suppress both plasma renin activity and aldosterone secre-
tion.°7°?)

Subjects consuming 100-200 g liquorice/day have been reported
to achieve plasma glycyrrhetinic acid concentrations of 80-480 ng/
mL.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Apart from confectionery, liquorice can also be ingested from
infusions and by chewing tobaccos. Excessive or prolonged
liquorice ingestion has resulted in symptoms typical of primary
hyperaldosteronism, namely hypertension, sodium, chloride and
water retention, hypokalaemia and weight gain, but also in low

levels of plasma renin activity, aldosterone and antidiuretic
(13, 27, 30)

hormone.

Raised concentrations of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP),
which is secreted in response to atrial stretch and has vasodilating,
natriuretic and diuretic properties, have also been observed in
healthy subjects following the ingestion of liquorice.» Indivi-
duals consuming 10-45 g liquorice/day have exhibited raised blood
pressure, together with a block of the aldosterone/renin axis and
electrocardiogram changes, which resolved one month after

----- PAGE 425 -----
4 Liquorice

withdrawal of liquorice." Individuals consuming vastly differing
amounts of liquorice have exhibited similar side-effect symptoms,
indicating that the mineralocorticoid effect of liquorice is not dose
dependent and is a saturable process.°”

Hypokalaemic myopathy has also been associated with
liquorice ingestion.°
lysis has been documented in a male patient following the
ingestion of an alcohol-free beverage containing only small
amounts of glycyrrhetinic acid (0.35 g/day).” The patient had
known liver cirrhosis due to alcohol consumption and it was
suggested that cirrhotic patients may be more susceptible to the
mineralocorticoid side-effects of liquorice.“” In one case,° the
myoglobinaemia led to glomerulopathy and tubulopathy but with
no clinical evidence of acute renal failure (ARF). The latter was
attributed to the volume expansion also caused by the liquorice
ingestion.

Rhabdomyolysis without myoglobinuria has been described.”
In addition, severe congestive heart failure and pulmonary oedema
have been reported in a previously healthy man who had ingested
700 g liquorice over eight days.°° Liquorice extract given orally
has been reported to have a similar but longer lasting action to
intravenous deoxycortone and it has been noted that sodium

chloride and water retention do not have to be accompanied by
(38)

236) Severe hypokalaemia with rhabdomyo-

clinical oedema. Amenorrhoea has been associated with
liquorice ingestion (anti-oestrogenic action), with the menstrual
cycle re-appearing following the withdrawal of liquorice.°”

It has been noted that symptoms of hyperaldosteronism often
resolve quickly, within a few days to two weeks, following the
withdrawal of liquorice, even in individuals who have ingested the
substance for many years.”

A case has been described where a patient presented with
symptoms related to hyperglycaemia and myopathy secondary to
liquorice-induced hypokalaemia. An inverse relationship was
observed between the concentrations of fasting serum glucose
and serum potassium.” Interestingly, animal studies have
indicated that liquorice may reduce diabetic complications

associated with intracellular accumulation of sorbitol.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Numerous instances have been documented where liquorice
ingestion has resulted in symptoms of primary hyperaldosteron-
ism, such as water and sodium retention and hypokalaemia.
Liquorice should therefore be avoided completely by individuals
with an existing cardiovascular-related disorder, and ingested in
moderation by other individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of liquorice to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Excessive or prolonged use
of liquorice may lead to hypokalaemia and this, therefore, may
potentiate the action of cardiac glycosides and interact with
antiarrhythmic drugs or with drugs that induce reversion to sinus
rhythm (e.g. quinidine), concomitant use of liquorice with other
drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide or loop diuretics,
adrenocorticosteroids and stimulant laxatives) may aggravate
electrolyte imbalance. There is limited evidence from preclinical
studies that constituents of liquorice have oestrogenic and anti-
oestrogenic effects, depending on dose.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the documented
pharmacological and toxicological effects, liquorice should not
be used during pregnancy and lactation.

Preparations
Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Brazil: Brefus. Czech Republic: Gallentee. France: Depiderm;
Trio D.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: No-Tos Adultos; No-Tos Adultos; No-Tos Infantil;
No-Tos Infantil; Urinefrol. Australia: Asa Tones; Betaine
Digestive Aid; Broncafect; Feminine Herbal Complex; Gingo
A; Glycoplex; Glycyrrhiza Complex; Herbal Cold & Flu
Relief; Herbal Digestive Formula; Herbal PMS Formula;
Hydrastis Complex; Neo-Cleanse; Potassium Iodide and
Stramonium Compound; Senega and Ammonia; Verbascum
Complex. Austria: Gastripan; Heumann's Bronchialtee; Krau-
ter Hustensaft; Laxalpin; Midro Tee; Neoplex; Nesthakchen;
Sigman-Haustropfen. Brazil: Fontolax; Frutalax; Laxarine;
Laxtam; Peitoral Angico Pelotense; Sene Composta; Tamaril;
Tamarine; Tamarix; Tussucalman. Canada: Bentasil Licorice
with Echinacea; Bronchozone; Damiana-Sarsaparilla Formula;
Herbal Nerve; Milk Thistle Extract Formula. Chile: Naturlax;
Neostrata; Pectoral Pasteur. Czech Republic: Biotussil; Blasen-
und Nierentee; Bronchialtee N; Cajova Smes pri Nachlazeni;
Cajova Smes pri Redukcni Diete; Detska Cajova Smes; Detsky
Caj s Hermankem; Diabetan; Erkaltungstee; Ipecarin; Magen-
und Darmtee N; Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Projimava;
Pruduskova; Pulmoran; Reduktan; Schlaf-Nerventee N; Species
Pectorales Planta; Stoffwechseltee N; Tormentan; Zaludecni
Cajova Smes. France: Mediflor Tisane Contre la Constipation
Passagere No 7; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5; Mediflor
Tisane No 4 Diuretique. Germany: Gastritol; Heumann
Bronchialtee Solubifix T; Heumann Magentee Solu-Vetan;
Heweberberol-Tee; Iberogast; Muc-Sabona; Renob Blasen- und
Nierentee; Salmiak; Ulcu-Pasc. Hong Kong: Mist Expect Stim;
Vida Brown Mixture. India: Arowash; Diovol Forte DGL;
Disogel; N-T-Tus. Israel: Gingisan; Gingisan; Lido Tea;
Midro-Tea. Italy: Cadifen; Cadimint; Dicalmir; Influ-Zinc
Gola; Lassatina; Midro; Proctopure; Rabro N; Sciroppo Berta;
Tamarine; Tussol. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus; Total Man.
Monaco: Blackoids du Docteur Meur. Norway: Solvipect
comp; Solvipect. New Zealand: Bonningtons Irish Moss.
Portugal: Midro. Russia: Doktor Mom (Aoxtop Mom); Doktor
Mom Herbal Cough Lozenges (Aoxrop Mom Pacrureapneie
Tlacrmaxn Or Kantas); Linkus (Avmac); Original Grosser
Bittner Balsam (Opurmmapneiii Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa);
Prostanorm ([Ipocranopm). South Africa: Borsdruppels;
Chamberlains Cough Remedy Regular; Puma Cough Balsam.
Singapore: Phytoestrin. Spain: Bronpul; Laxomax; Malvaliz;
Natusor Astringel; Natusor Gastrolen; Natusor Low Blood
Pressure; Pastillas Pectoral Kely; Regamint. Switzerland: DAM
Antacidum; DemoPectol; DemoTussil; Gem; Iberogast; Ker-
nosan Elixir; Lapidar 10; Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives;
Makaphyt Sirop; Pastilles bronchiques S$ nouvelle formule;
Sirop pectoral contre la toux $; Sirop $ contre la toux et la
bronchite; Strath Gouttes pour l'estomac; Tisane laxative;
Tisane pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale pour les
enfants. Thailand: Brown Mixture; Meloids; Ulgastrin. UK:
Allens Pine & Honey; Asthma & Catarrh Relief; Chesty
Cough Relief; Covonia Mentholated; Culpeper Detox Tea;
Honey & Molasses; Jamaican Sarsaparilla; Lane's Sage and
Garlic Catarrh Remedy; Lightning Cough Remedy; Napiers
Echinacea Tea; Nigroids; Potters Sugar Free Cough Pastilles;

----- PAGE 426 -----
Cough & Sore Throat Relief; Vegetable Cough Remover;
Vocalzone.

References

1

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

Tawata M et al. Anti-platelet action of GU-7, a 3-arylcoumarin
derivative, purified from Glycyrrhizae radix. Planta Med 1990; 56:
259-263.

Mitscher LA et al. Antimicrobial agents from higher plants.
Antimicrobial isoflavanoids and related substances from Glycyrrhiza
glabra L. var. typica. ] Nat Prod 1980; 43: 259-269.

Miething H, Speicher-Brinker A. Neolicuroside — A new chalcone
glycoside from the roots of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Arch Pharm
(Weinheim) 1989; 322: 141-143.

Takino Y et al. Quantitative determination of glycyrrhizic acid in
liquorice roots and extracts by TLC-densitometry. Planta Med 1979;
36: 74-78.

Kameoka H, Nakai K. Components of essential oil from the root of
Glycyrrhiza glabra. Nippon Nogeikagaku Kaishi [J] Ag Chem Soc
Japan} 1987; 61: 1119-1121.

Jimenez J et al. Flavonoids of Helianthemum cinereum. Fitoterapia
1989; 60: 189.

Chandler RF. Licorice, more than just a flavour. Can Pharm J 1985;
118: 421-424.

Pizzorno JE, Murray AT. Glycyrrhiza glabra. A Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Seattle, WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985
(looseleaf).

Tamaya MD et al. Possible mechanism of steroid action of the plant
herb extracts glycyrrhizin, glycyrrhetinic acid, and paconiflorin:
Inhibition by plant herb extracts of steroid protein binding in the
rabbit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986; 155: 1134-1139.

Armanini D et al. Binding of agonists and antagonists to
mineralocorticoid receptors in human peripheral mononuclear
leucocytes. J Hypertens 1985; 3 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $157-159.
Armanini D et al. Affinity of liquorice derivatives for
mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptors. Clin Endocrinol 1983;
19: 609-612.

Stewart PM et al. Mineralocorticoid activity of liquorice: 11-beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency comes of age. Lancet 1987;
ii: 821-824.

Forslund T et al. Effects of licorice on plasma atrial natriuretic peptide
in healthy volunteers. J Intern Med 1989; 225: 95-99.

Aida K et al. Isoliquiritigenin: A new aldose reductase inhibitor from
Glycyrrhizae radix. Planta Med 1990; 56: 254-258.

Yun-ping Z, Jia-qing Z. Oral baicalin and liquid extract of licorice
reduce sorbitol levels in red blood cell of diabetic rats. Chin Med J
1989; 102: 203-206.

Fujita H et al. Antiinflammatory effect of glycyrrhizinic acid. Effects
of glycyrrhizinic acid against carrageenin-induced edema, UV-
erythema and skin reaction sensitised with DCNB. Pharmacometrics
1980; 19: 481-484.

Amagaya S et al. Separation and quantitative analysis of 18a-
glycyrrhetinic acid and 18f-glycyrrhetinic acid in Glycyrrhizae radix
by gas-liquid chromatography. ] Chromatogr 1985; 320: 430-434.

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Liquorice

Kimura Y et al. Effects of chalcones isolated from licorice roots on
leukotriene biosynthesis in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
Phytother Res 1988; 2: 140-145.

Inque H et al. Pharmacological activities of glycerrhetinic acid
derivatives: Analgesic and anti-type IV allergic effects. Chem Pharm
Bull 1987; 35: 3888-3893.

Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleandolic acid on
skin tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate.
Cancer Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

Pompei R et al. Antiviral activity of glycyrrhizic acid. Experientia
1980; 36: 304.

Kiso Y et al. Mechanism of antihepatotoxic activity of glycyrrhizin, I:
Effect on free radical generation and lipid peroxidation. Planta Med
1984; 50: 298-302.

Chang HM et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985.

Sharma BB et al. Antifertility screening of plants. Part I. Effect of ten

indigenous plants on early pregnancy in albino rats. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1983; 21: 183-187.

Ichikawa T et al. Biliary excretion and enterohepatic cycling of
glycyrrhizin in rats. J Pharm Sci 1986; 75: 672-675.

Guslandi M. Ulcer-healing drugs and endogenous prostaglandins. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1985; 23: 398-402.

Conn J et al. Licorice-induced pseudoaldosteronism. Hypertension,
hypokalaemia, aldosteronopenia and suppressed plasma renin activity.
JAMA 1968; 205: 492-496.

Epstein MT et al. Effect of eating liquorice on the renin-angiotensin
aldosterone axis in normal subjects. BMJ 1977; 1: 488-490.
Mantero EF. Exogenous mineralocorticoid-like disorders. Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1981; 10: 465-478.

Chamberlain TJ. Licorice poisoning, pseudoaldosteronism, heart
failure. JAMA 1970; 213: 1343.

Corrocher R et al. Pseudoprimary hyperaldosteronism due to
liquorice intoxication. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 1983; 5: 467-470.
Piette AM et al. Hypokaliémie majeure avec rhabdomyolase
secondaire a l'ingestion de pastis non alcoolisé. Ann Med Interne
(Paris) 1984; 135: 296-298.

Cibelli G et al. Hypokalemic myopathy associated with liquorice
ingestion. Ital J] Neurol Sci 1984; 5: 463-466.

Heidermann HT, Kreuzfelder E. Hypokalemic rhabdomyolysis with
myoglobinuria due to licorice ingestion and diuretic treatment. Klin
Wochenschr 1983; 61: 303-305.

Ruggeri CS e¢ al. L. Carnetina cloruro e KCI nel trattamento di un
caso di rabdomiolisi atraumatica senza mioglobinuria da ingestione di
liquerizia. Minn Med 1985; 76: 725-728.

Bannister B et al. Cardiac arrest due to liquorice induced
hypokalaemia. BMJ 1977; 2: 738-739.

Maresca MC et al. Low blood potassium and rhabdomyolosis.
Description of three cases with different aetiologies. Minerva Med
1988; 79: 79-81.

Molhuysen JA. A liquorice extract with deoxycortone-like action.
Lancet 1950; ii: 381-386.

Jamil A et al. Hyperglycaemia related to licorice-induced
hypokalaemia. J Kwt Med Assoc 1986; 20: 69-71.

----- PAGE 427 -----
- Lobelia

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The principal constituent of lobelia is lobeline, an alkaloid
with similar pharmacological properties to those of nicotine.
Lobelia has previously been used in herbal preparations for
the treatment of asthma and bronchitis, and in anti-smoking
preparations aimed to lessen nicotine withdrawal symptoms.
However, in view of its potent alkaloid constituents, excessive
use of lobelia and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Lobelia inflata L. (Campanulaceae)

Synonym(s)

Indian Tobacco

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids

lobeline

gs
- \

lobelanine

lobelanidine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lobelia.

Figure 2 Lobelia (Lobelia inflata).

Alkaloids  Piperidine-type. 0.48%. Lobeline (major); others
include lobelanine, lobelanidine, norlobelanine, lelobanidine,
norlelobanidine, norlobelanidine and lobinine.

Other constituents Bitter glycoside (lobelacrin), chelidonic acid,
fats, gum, resin and volatile oil.

Food Use

Lobelia is not generally used as a food.

Herbal Use

Lobelia is stated to possess respiratory stimulant, antasthmatic,
antispasmodic, expectorant, and emetic properties. Traditionally,
it has been used for bronchitic asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
specifically for spasmodic asthma with secondary bronchitis. It
has also been used topically for myositis and rheumatic

nodules. 'G% 97 S% Ge)

Figure 3 Lobelia — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 428 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 0.2-0.6g as an infusion or decoction three times
daily.“C%

Liquid extract 0.2-0.6mL (1:1 in 50% alcohol) three times
daily,“C%

Simple Tincture of Lobelia (BPC 1949) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Tincture Lobelia Acid 1-4mL (1:10 in dilute acetic acid) three
times daily.“C%

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of lobelia can be attributed to the
alkaloid constituents, principally lobeline. Lobeline has peripheral
and central effects similar to those of nicotine, but is less potent.
Hence, lobeline initially causes CNS stimulation followed by
respiratory depression. Lobeline is also reported to possess
expectorant properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lobelia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Lobelia

Side-effects, Toxicity

Side-effects of lobeline and lobelia are similar to those of nicotine
and include nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, coughing, tremors
and dizziness. Symptoms of overdosage are reported to include
profuse diaphoresis, tachycardia, convulsions, hypothermia,
hypotension and coma, and may be fatal.'*

Contra-indications, Warnings

The pharmacological actions of lobeline are similar to those of
nicotine.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lobelia to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. The pharmacological activity of
lobeline is similar to that of nicotine.

Pregnancy and lactation Lobelia should not be used during
pregnancy or lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Catarrh Tablets.

----- PAGE 429 -----
Marshmallow

. D
of clinical studies investigating the effects of marshmallow.
Although no toxicity data were located, the chemistry of
marshmallow and its use in foods indicate that there should
not be any reason for concern regarding safety.

Species (Family)
Althaea officinalis L. (Malvaceae)

Synonym(s)

Althaea, A. taurinensis DC., A. Rragujevacensis Panc.

Polysaccharides

Part(s) Used

Leaf, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'6

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission EC)

ESCOP 200307

Martindale 35th edition'©*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'@”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

f-o-gal

3
1

B-p-glyc A

4 1
= p-o-gal

a-p-gal A

4 1
= a-i-rha + a-p-galA

gal = galactose, rha = rhamnose, glyc A = glucuronic acid

gal A = galacturonic acid

R!
; Ol
HO. O. Re

Flavonoids

OH O
RR?
hypolaetin OH OH
isoscutellarein OH H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of marshmallow.

----- PAGE 430 -----
Polysaccharides Mucilage polysaccharides (S—10%), consisting

. . T
of galacturono-rhamnans, arabinans, glucans, arabinogalactans.'”
G52)

Flavonoids Hypolaetin 8-glucoside, isoscutellarein 4’-methy-
lether-8-glucoside-2/’-sulfate.”)

Phenolic acids Caffeic, p-coumaric, ferulic, p-hydroxybenzoic
and syringic.

Other constituents Asparagine 2%, calcium oxalate, coumarins
(scopoletin), pectin, starch and tannin.

Food Use

Marshmallow is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that marshmallow can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“'® Previously in the USA,
marshmallow has been approved for use in foods.‘°*?

Herbal Use

Marshmallow is stated to possess demulcent, expectorant,
emollient, diuretic, antilithic and vulnerary properties.'°? C+ °°
G8, G43, G52, G54, G64) Ty aditionally, it has been used internally for
the treatment of respiratory catarrh and cough, peptic ulceration,
inflammation of the mouth and pharynx, enteritis, cystitis,
urethritis and urinary calculus, and topically for abscesses, boils
and varicose and thrombotic ulcers. The German Commission E
approved use of root and leaf for irritation of oral and pharyngeal
mucosa and associated dry cough and root for mild inflammation
of gastric mucosa.(“*) Marshmallow root is used in combination
with anise fruit, eucalyptus oil, liquorice and with anise fruit,
liquorice and primrose root and with anise fruit and primrose root
for catarrh of the upper respiratory tract and resulting dry
cough.'©»

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 2-5 g as an infusion three times daily;'C%° 5 g.'C®

Leaf, liquid extract 2—SmL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.“C%

Figure 2. Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis).

Marshmallow

Figure 3. Marshmallow — dried drug substance (root).

Ointment 5% Powdered althaea leaf in usual ointment base three
times daily.“ °)

Dried root 2-5g by cold extraction three times daily;“°%°?

6g.)
Root, liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S”

Syrup of Althaea (BPC 1949) 2-10 mL three times daily.'®°?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus
vulgaris and Staphylococcus aureus has been documented for
marshmallow.”

The mucilage has demonstrated considerable hypoglycaemic
activity in non-diabetic mice.

Inhibition (17%) of mucociliary transport in ciliated epithelium
isolated from frog oesophagus was observed with 200 nL of cold
macerate of marshmallow root (6.4 g/140 mL).‘°

Marshmallow root extract is reported to stimulate phagocy-
tosis, and to release oxygen radicals and leukotrienes from human
neutrophils.(C” In addition, release of cytokines, interleukin 6
and tumour necrosis factor from monocytes occurs, demonstrat-
ing potential anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects.
In mice, intraperitoneal administration of isolated polysaccharide
(10mg/kg) resulted in activity of macrophages in a carbon
clearance test, and was indicative of non-specific immunomodu-
lation.'©°) A lack of anti-inflammatory activity has been observed
for marshmallow in the carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema
test.) The anti-inflammatory effect of an ointment containing
0.05% dexamethasone was enhanced by addition of aqueous
extract of marshmallow (20%) as assessed in a rabbit ear irritancy
test using UV irradiation or furfuryl alcohol.'“”

A total extract of root and isolated polysaccharide (100 and
50 mg/kg, respectively) have been tested for their antitussive
activity in unanaesthetised cats." The polysaccharide gave a
statistically significant decrease in the number of cough efforts
from laryngopharyngeal and tracheobronchial areas. The root
extract was less effective than the isolated polysaccharide.

A polysaccharide enriched extract showed moderate concentra-
tion-dependent adhesive properties in porcine buccal membranes
ex vivo.”

----- PAGE 431 -----
Marshmallow

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
marshmallow and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for marshmallow, and further investigation of these
aspects is required where therapeutic dosages are greater than the
quantities ingested in foods.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of marshmallow to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Marshmallow may delay
the absorption of other medicines taken simultaneously.'©”” There
is limited evidence from preclinical studies that marshmallow has
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of marshmallow during pregnancy or lactation. However,
amounts ingested should not exceed those used in foods.

Kamfeine. Brazil: Asmatiron; Broncofenil; Bronquidex; Bron-
toss; Expectobron; Expectol; Iodeto de Potassio; Iodeto de

Mixture; Modern Herbals Cold & Catarrh; Modern Herbals
Cold & Congestion; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Potter's Catarrh
Pastilles; Sinotar; Vegetable Cough Remover. USA: Laci Le
Beau Super Dieter's Tea.

References

1 Blaschek W, Franz G. A convenient method for the quantitative
determination of mucilage polysaccharides in Althaeae radix. Planta
Med 1986; 52 (Suppl. Suppl.): 537.

2 Gudej J. Flavonoids, phenolic acids and coumarins from the roots of
Althaea officinalis. Planta Med 1991, 57: 284-285.

3 Recio MC et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed in
the Spanish Mediterranean area Part II. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 77-80.

4 Tomodo M et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of twenty plant mucilages
and three modified products. Planta Med 1987; 53: 8-12.

5 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

6 Nosalova G et al. Antitussive wirkung des extraktes und der
polysaccharide aus eibisch (Althaea officinalis L., var. robusta).
Pharmazie 1992; 47: 224-226.

7 Schmidgall J et al. Evidence for bioadhesive effects of polysaccharides
and polysaccharide-containing herbs in an ex vivo bioadhesion assay
on buccal membranes. Planta Med 2000; 66: 48-53.

----- PAGE 432 -----
= Mate

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Maté is characterised by the xanthine constituents, which also
represent the active principles. The herbal uses of maté can be
attributed to the pharmacological actions of caffeine, which
are well documented. However, there is a lack of clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of preparations of
mate. Side-effects and warnings associated with other
xanthine-containing beverages, such as tea and coffee, are
applicable to maté.

Species (Family)

Ilex paraguariensis St. Hil. (Aquifoliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Tlex, Jesuit's Brazil Tea, Paraguay Tea, St Bartholomew's Tea,
Yerba Maté

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”?
Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids Xanthine-type. Caffeine 0.2-2.0%, theobromine 0.1—
0.2%, theophylline 0.05%.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, quercetin, and their glycosides, includ-
ing rutin.

Tannins 4-16%.

Terpenoids Ursolic acid (major), B-amyrin, ilexoside A, ilexoside
B methyl ester.”

Other constituents Choline and trigonellin (amines), amino
acids," riboflavin (vitamin B3), pyridoxine (vitamin Bg), niacin,
pantothenic acid, vitamin C and resins.

Other \lex species Triterpenoid saponins termed ilexsaponins By,
By, and B; have been isolated from Ilex pubescens Hook. &
Arn.)

A cyanogenetic glucoside has been isolated from Ilex aquifo-
lium.

Purines
fe) 2
f R! R?
RL
N | y caffeine CH3 = CH
aA theobromine H CH3
fe) N | theophylline CH3 H
CH, CHs

Triterpenes

OH ilexoside A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of maté.

Food Use

Mat is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that maté can be

added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation
(G16)

of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.
Maté is commonly consumed as a beverage. It is stated to be less
astringent than tea.'“*) Previously, maté has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'¢%

Herbal Use

Maté is stated to pc CNS-stimulant, thymoleptic, diuretic,
antirheumatic and mild analgesic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for psychogenic headache and fatigue, nervous

depression, rheumatic pains, and specifically for headache
associated with fatigue.(C* 676% GO)

Figure 2  Maté (Ilex paraguariensis).

----- PAGE 433 -----
Figure 3 Maté - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily©%°?

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(CoO

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vivo hypotensive activity in rats has been reported for an
aqueous extract of Ilex pubescens (commonly referred to as
maodong qing or MDQ) It was concluded that intravenous
administration of MDQ releases histamine.)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of maté and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

The xanthine constituents, in particular caffeine, are the active
principles in maté. The pharmacological actions of caffeine are
well documented and include stimulation of the CNS, respiration
and skeletal muscle, in addition to cardiac stimulation, coronary
dilation, smooth muscle relaxation and diuresis.(“*! Reduction of
appetite has been documented for maté.'”

In China, MDQ is used parenterally for the treatment of
cardiovascular diseases (hypotensive action).

Side-effects, Toxi

ity

Side-effects generally associated with xanthine-containing bev-
erages include sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor, palpitations and
withdrawal headache.

Veno-occlusive disease of the liver in a young woman has been
attributed to the consumption of large quantities of maté over a
number of years.'“* The association between consumption of
maté infusions and oesophageal cancer has been investigated in
Uruguay, where oesophageal cancer constitutes a major public
health problem.'°” Heavy consumption was reported to elevate
the relative risk of oesophageal cancer by 6.5 and 34.6 in men and
women, respectively.

The fatal dose of caffeine in humans is stated to be 10 g.(@*”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Warnings generally associated with caffeine are applicable, such as
restricted intake by individuals with hypertension or a cardiac
disorder.

Drug interactions None documented for maté. However, the
potential for preparations of maté to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Warnings
generally associated with caffeine are applicable.

Pregnancy and lactation It is generally recommended that
caffeine consumption should be restricted during pregnancy,
although conflicting results have been documented concerning the
association between birth defects and caffeine consumption. In
view of this, excessive consumption of maté during pregnancy
should be avoided. Caffeine is excreted in breast milk, but at
concentrations too low to represent a hazard to breastfed
infants.‘* As with all xanthine-containing beverages, excessive
consumption of maté by breastfeeding mothers should be avoided.

References

1 Ohem N, Holzl J. Some new investigations on Ilex paraguariensis —
Flavonoids and triterpenes. Planta Med 1988; 54: 576.

2 Inada A. Two new triterpenoid glycosides from the leaves of Ilex
chinensis. Chem Pharm Bull 1987; 37: 884-885.

3 Hidaka K et al. New triterpene saponins from Ilex pubescens. Chem
Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 524-529.

4 Willems M. Quantification and distribution of a novel cyanogenic
glycoside in Ilex aquifolium. Planta Med 1989; 55: 114.

5 Yang ML, Pang PKT. The vascular effects of Ilex pubescens. Planta
Med 1986; 52: 262-265.

6 Morton JE The potential carcinogenicity of herbal tea. Environ
Carcino Rev. ] Environ Sci Health 1986; C4: 203-223.

7 Vassallo A et al. Esophageal cancer in Uruguay: a case control study. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1985; 75: 1005-1009.

----- PAGE 434 -----
- Meadowsweet

tannins. Documented scientific evidence from preclinical
studies supports some of the antiseptic, antirheumatic and
astringent traditional uses. However, there is a lack of clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of meadowsweet.
No documented toxicity data were located for meadowsweet
and, in view of this, excessive use of meadowsweet and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Dropwort, Filipendula, Queen of the Meadow

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Flavonols, flavones, flavanones and chalcone deriva-
tives (e.g. hyperoside” and spireoside,” kaempferol glucoside”)
and avicularin.’

Salicylates Main components of the volatile oil including
salicylaldehyde (major, up to 70%), gaultherin, isosalicin, methyl
salicylate, monotropitin, salicin, salicylic acid and spirein. °°)

Tannins 1% (alcoholic extract), 12.5% (aqueous extract).

Hydrolysable type; leaf extracts have also yielded catechols,\?
compounds normally associated with condensed tannins.

Volatile oils Many phenolic components including salicylates
(see above), benzyl alcohol, benzaldehyde, ethyl benzoate,
heliotropin, phenylacetate, vanillin.)

Other constituents Coumarin (trace), mucilage, carbohydrates
and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).

Food Use

Meadowsweet is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that meadowsweet can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“!® Previously, meadowsweet
has been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Meadowsweet is stated to possess stomachic, mild urinary
antiseptic, antirheumatic, astringent and antacid properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for atonic dyspepsia with heartburn
and hyperacidity, acute catarrhal cystitis, rheumatic muscle and
joint pains, diarrhoea in children, and_ specifically for the
prophylaxis and treatment of peptic ulcer.'C? 9% 67 G8 6?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 4-6g as an infusion three times daily\C%

Liquid extract 1.5-6.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'CS”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Lowering of motor activity and rectal temperature, myorelaxation
and potentiation of narcotic action have been documented for
meadowsweet.") In addition, flower extracts have been reported to

Salicylates
CHO COOH CH20H
CY OH OH O-glucose
salicylaidehyde salicylic acid salicin
R
; _-O-primeverosyl
R
spiraein CHO
monotropitin COOCH3
HO
primeverosyl
\
HO CHp
HO °
HO. Oo
HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of meadowsweet.

----- PAGE 435 -----
Meadowsweet

Figure 2 Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria).

prolong life expectancy of mice, lower vascular permeability and
prevent the development of stomach ulcers in rats and mice.‘ !®
') However, meadowsweet has also been reported to potentiate
the ulcerogenic properties of histamine in the guinea-pig." The
anti-ulcer action documented for meadowsweet is associated with
the aqueous extract and greatest activity has been observed with
the flowers.”'' Meadowsweet has been reported to increase
bronchial tone in the cat”) and to potentiate the bronchospastic
properties of histamine in the guinea-pig.’ In vitro, meadows-
weet has been reported to increase intestinal tone in the guinea-
pig and uterine tone in the rabbit.”

Bacteriostatic activity against Staphylococcus aureus, Staphy-
lococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Proteus vulgaris and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been documented for flower
extracts.(?)

Tannins are generally considered to possess astringent proper-
ties and have been reported as constituents of meadowsweet.
Meadowsweet is stated to promote uric acid excretion.'“”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
meadowsweet and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for meadowsweet and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Figure 3 Meadowsweet - dried drug substance (herb).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Salicylate constituents have been documented and therefore the
usual precautions recommended for salicylates are relevant for
meadowsweet (see Willow). Meadowsweet is stated to be used for
the treatment of diarrhoea in children, but in view of the salicylate
constituents, this is not advisable.

Bronchospastic activity has been documented in preclinical
studies and, therefore, it is prudent to advise that meadowsweet
should be used with caution by asthmatics.

Aqueous extracts have been reported to contain high tannin
concentrations and excessive consumption should therefore be
avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of meadowsweet to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro utero-activity has been
documented for meadowsweet. In view of the salicylate constitu-
ents and the lack of toxicity data, the use of meadowsweet during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Czech Republic: Antirevmaticky Caj. France: Mediflor Tisane
Antirhumatismale No 2; Mediflor Tisane No 4 Diuretique;
Polypirine. Italy: Pik Gel. Spain: Dolosul; Natusor Harpago-
sinol; Natusor Renal. Switzerland: Urinex. UK: Acidosis;
Acidosis; Indigestion Mixture; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Roberts
Acidosis Tablets. USA: Amerigel.

References

1 Genic AY, Ladnaya LY. Phytochemical study of Filipendula ulmaria
Maxim. and Filipendula hexapetala Gilib. of flora of the Lvov region.
Farm Zh (Kiev) 1980; 1: 50-52.

2 Novikova NN. Use of Filipendula ulmaria in medicine. Tr Perm Farm
Inst 1969; 267-270.

3. Scheer T, Wicht! M. Zum Vorkommen von Kampferol-4'-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside in Filipendula ulmaria und Allium cepa. Planta Med
1987 53: 573-574.

4 Syuzeva ZB, Novikova NN. Flavonoid composition of Filipendula
ulmaria queen-of-the meadow. Nauch Tr Perm Farm Inst 1973; 5: 2-
26.

5 Barnaulov OD et al. Chemical composition and primary evaluation of
the properties of preparations from Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim
flowers. Rastit Resur 1977; 13: 661-669.

6 Saifullina NA, Kozhina IS. Composition of essential oils from flowers
of Filipendula ulmaria, E denudata, and EF. stepposa. Rastit Resur
1975; 11: 542-544.

7 Thieme H. Isolierung eines neuen phenolischen glykosids aus den
bliiten von Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim. Pharmazie 1966; 21: 123.

8 Valle MG et al. Das atherische 61 aus Filipendula ulmaria. Planta Med
1988; 54: 181-182.

9 Barnaulov OD et al. Preliminary evaluation of the spasmolytic
properties of some natural compounds and galenic preparations.
Rastit Resur 1978; 14: 573-579.

10 Barnaulov OD, Denisenko PP. Antiulcerogenic action of the decoction
from flowers of Filipendula ulmaria (L.). Pharmakol-Toxicol
(Moscow) 1980; 43: 700-705.

11 Yanutsh AY et al. A study of the antiulcerative action of the extracts
from the supernatant part and roots of Filipendula ulmaria. Farm Zh
(Kiev) 1982; 37: 53-56.

12. Catanicin-Hintz | et al. Action of some plant extracts on the bacteria
involved in urinary infections. Clujul-Med 1983; 56: 381-384.

----- PAGE 436 -----
- Melissa

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Randomised clinical trials have suggested that topical lemon
balm extract may have some effects on healing cutaneous
lesions resulting from HSV-1 virus infection, although further
rigorous studies are required to determine whether there is
any effect on recurrence of infection. There is some evidence
from randomised controlled trials of combination
preparations containing lemon balm leaf extract to support
the efficacy of such products in individuals with minor sleep
disorders, there has been little investigation of the effects of
lemon balm extract alone on sleep quality. Further studies are
required to determine the effects of preparations of lemon
balm leaf extract in individuals with sleep disorders.
Supporting evidence for the use of lemon balm for
gastrointestinal complaints is limited to in vitro work and
requires clinical investigation.

Small-scale, short-term studies indicate that oral
combination preparations containing lemon balm extract and
topical preparations of lemon balm extract are well tolerated.
However, there is a lack of research investigating the safety of
long-term administration of lemon balm. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, oral administration of lemon balm during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Melissa officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Balm, Faucibarba officinalis (L.) Dulac, Honeyplant, Lemon

Balm, Mutelia officinalis (L.) Gren. ex Mutel, Sweet Balm,
Thymus melissa Krause

Part(s) Used

Dried leaves and flowering tops

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007 (Lemon Balm)@**)

Complete German Commission E (Lemon Balm)?
ESCOP 2003'¢7°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Volatile oil —0.06-0.375% vim.'"° Contains at least 70
components,” including: monoterpenes >60%. Mainly alde-
hydes, including citronellal, geranial, neral; also citronellol,

(G2

Monoterpenes

S . UCH20H

CHO CHO

geraniol

a

A-caryophyllene

neral citronellal

Sesquiterpenes

germacrene D

Figure 1 Selected constituents of melissa.

geraniol, nerol, B-ocimene.”» Sesquiterpenes >35%. B-Caryo-
phyllene, germacrene D.

Flavonoids 0.5%. Including glycosides of luteolin (e.g. luteolin
3/-O-B-p-glucuronide), quercetin, apigenin and kaempferol.

Polyphenols Protocatechuic acid, hydroxycinnamic acid deriva-
tives,”) caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, rosmarinic acid,” 2-(3/,4!-
dihydroxyphenyl)-1,3-benzodioxole-5-aldehyde.

Food Use

Lemon balm is used to give fragrance to wine, tea and beer.
Lemon balm (herb, flowers, flower tips) is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This
category indicates that lemon balm can be added to foodstuffs in
small quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle
(as yet unspecified) in the final product.'©!® Previously, lemon
balm has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe) C6

Herbal Use

Lemon balm has been used traditionally for its sedative,
spasmolytic and antibacterial properties.(°™ It is also stated to
be a carminative, diaphoretic and a febrifuge,“¢™
used for headaches, gastrointestinal disorders, nervousness and
rheumatism.” Current interest is focused on its use as a sedative,
and topically in herpes simplex labialis as a result of infection
with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). The German
Commission E monographs state that lemon balm can be used
for nervous sleeping disorders and functional gastrointestinal

complaints.'°?

) and has been

----- PAGE 437 -----
426, Melissa

Figure 2 Melissa (Melissa officinalis).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1.5—4.5 g as an infusion in 150 mL water several times
daily'C®

Topical application Cream containing 1% of a lyophilised
aqueous extract of dried leaves of Melissa officinalis (70: 1) two to
four times daily.(@°?)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antiviral activity Aqueous extracts of Melissa officinalis have
been reported to inhibit the development of several viruses.’
8.652) The virucidal effect of several aqueous extracts of M.
officinalis against HSV-1 has been demonstrated in a rabbit
kidney cell line.” However, the extracts appeared to have no
activity against experimental HSV-1 infection in the eyes of
rabbits.”

Anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) activity has
been reported for an aqueous extract of M. officinalis in in vitro
studies using MT-4 cells; the EDsy (50% effective dose for
inhibition of HIV-1-induced cytopathogenicity) was found to be
16 pg/mL." Furthermore, the aqueous extract demonstrated
potent inhibitory activity (EDs) = 62,g/mL) against HIV-1
replication (KK-1 strain, freshly isolated from a patient with
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). In other in vitro
studies, an aqueous extract of M. officinalis inhibited giant cell
formation in co-cultures of MOLT-4 cells with and without HIV-1
infection, and showed inhibitory activity against HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase (EDs9 = 1.6 g/mL).

Aqueous extracts of M. officinalis have been reported to inhibit
protein biosynthesis in a cell-free system from rat liver cells, and it
has been suggested that this effect may be due to caffeic acid and a
component isolated from the glycoside fraction of the extract.)

The latter component appears to block the binding of the
elongation factor EF-2 to ribosomes, thus terminating peptide
elongation.”

Antimicrobial activity Antimicrobial activity of essential oil
extracted from M. officinalis by steam distillation, determined
using a micro-atmospheric technique, has been reported against
the yeasts Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and
against Pseudomonas putida, Staphylococcus aureus, Micrococcus
luteus, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Proteus vulgaris, Shigella
sonnei and Escherichia coli.”

Other activity In studies in mice, a hydroalcoholic extract of M.
officinalis leaves administered intraperitoneally _ significantly
reduced behavioural activity in two tests, compared with control,
suggesting that the extract has sedative effects." In both tests,
the effect was maximum at 25mg/kg. The same _ extract
demonstrated peripheral analgesic activity by reducing acetic
acid-induced writhing and stretching in mice when administered
intraperitoneally at doses of 25-1600 mg/kg 30 minutes after
intraperitoneal administration of 1.2% acetic acid solution."
However, no analgesic effects were observed on heat-induced pain
(hotplate test) which suggests a lack of central analgesic activity.
In other tests, low doses (3 and 6mg/kg) of a hydroalcoholic
extract of M. officinalis leaves administered intraperitoneally
induced sleep in mice given an infrahypnotic dose of pentobarbi-
tal."') By contrast, in the same battery of tests, essential oil
obtained from M. officinalis by distillation did not demonstrate
sedative or sleep-inducing effects."

A 30% alcoholic extract of M. officinalis demonstrated an
antispasmodic effect on rat duodenum in vitro.‘

Aqueous methanolic extracts of the aerial parts of M.
officinalis demonstrated inhibition of lipid peroxidation in vitro
in both enzyme-dependent and enzyme-independent systems.\!)
The same tests carried out on the main known phenolic
components of M. officinalis revealed that rosmarinic acid,
caffeic acid, luteolin and luteolin-7-O-glucoside were more potent
inhibitors of enzyme-dependent lipid peroxidation than enzyme-
independent lipid peroxidation.

Clinical studies

Antiviral effects The effects of a topical preparation of a
standardised aqueous extract of M. officinalis leaves (drug/
extract 70:1) have been investigated in herpes simplex virus
(HSV) infection. In an open, multicentre study, 115 patients with

Figure 3 Melissa — dried drug substance (leaf and flowering tops).

----- PAGE 438 -----
HSV infection of the skin or transitional mucosa applied lemon
balm leaf extract five times daily for a maximum of 14 days;
complete healing of lesions was achieved after eight days of
treatment in 96% of participants."®'” Subsequently, a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 116
patients with HSV infection of the skin or transitional mucosa
reported statistically significant differences between the treat-
ment (applied locally two to four times daily over 5—10 days) and
placebo groups for some (including redness, physician's assess-
ment, patient's assessment), but not all, outcome measures (e.g.
extent of scabbing, vesication, pain). Another randomised,
double-blind trial that involved 66 patients with an acute episode
of recurrent (at least four episodes per year) herpes simplex
labialis compared verum cream (applied on the affected area four
times daily over five days) with placebo."® There was a
significant difference in the primary outcome measure —
symptom score after two days’ treatment — between the two
groups (p = 0.042). However, further investigation is required to
determine if time to recurrence is prolonged.

Sedative effects The acute sedative effects of several plant
extracts, including a preparation of M. officinalis leaves, were
explored in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study involving 12 healthy volunteers.) M. officinalis
extract 1200mg was administered orally as a single dose about
two hours before administration of caffeine 100mg. Melissa
extract was one of the extracts tested that showed least effects on
increasing tiredness (i.e. it was no different from placebo) as
measured using a visual analogue scale score for alertness.

Several other studies have investigated the sedative effects of
combination preparations containing extracts of lemon balm and
valerian (Valeriana officinalis). A randomised, double-blind trial
involving healthy volunteers who received Songha Night (V.
officinalis root extract 120mg and M. officinalis leaf extract
80mg) three tablets daily taken as one dose 30 minutes before
bedtime for 30 days (7 = 66), or placebo (7 = 32), found that the
proportion of participants reporting an improvement in sleep
quality was significantly greater for the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (33.3% versus 9.4%, respec-
tively; p = 0.04).°° However, analysis of visual analogue scale
scores revealed only a slight but statistically non-significant
improvement in sleep quality in both groups over the treatment
period. Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
patients with insomnia who received Euvegal forte (valerian
extract 160mg and lemon balm extract 80 mg) two tablets daily
for two weeks reported significant improvements in sleep quality
in recipients of the herbal preparation, compared with placebo
recipients.*” A placebo-controlled study involving 'poor sleepers!
who received Euvegal forte reported significant improvements in
sleep efficiency and in sleep stages three and four in the treatment
group, compared with placebo recipients.”

Other studies have investigated the sedative effects of
combination preparations of extracts of lemon balm, valerian
and hops (Humulus lupulus). In an open, uncontrolled, multi-
centre study, 225 individuals who were experiencing nervous
agitation and/or difficulties falling asleep and achieving unin-
terrupted sleep were treated for two weeks with a combination
preparation containing extracts of valerian root, hop grains and
lemon balm leaves.*” Significant improvements in the severity and
frequency of symptoms were reported, compared with the
pretreatment period. Difficulties falling asleep, difficulties sleep-
ing through the night, and nervous agitation were improved in
89%, 80% and 82% of participants, respectively.

Melissa

Side-effects, Toxicity

Small-scale, short-term (two weeks' duration) studies investigating
the sedative effects of oral combination preparations containing
lemon balm extract indicate that these preparations are well-
tolerated and do not appear to induce a ‘hangover effect’. In an
open, uncontrolled, multicentre study, 225 individuals who were
experiencing nervous agitation and/or difficulties falling asleep
and achieving uninterrupted sleep were treated for two weeks with
a combination preparation containing extracts of valerian root,
hop grains and lemon balm leaves.*) The tolerability of the
preparation was rated as 'good' or 'very good! by 97% of physicians
and 96% of patients. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving healthy volunteers who received Songha
Night (V. officinalis root 120mg and M. officinalis leaf extract
80 mg) three tablets daily for 30 days (n = 66), or placebo (1 = 32),
the proportion of volunteers reporting adverse events was similar
in both groups (around 28%).°° Sleep disturbances and tiredness
were the most common adverse events reported during the study.
(Note: the study was designed to assess the effects of the
preparation on sleep quality.) No severe adverse events were
reported. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving 48 adults assessed the adverse effects of two weeks!
treatment with a combination preparation (valerian root extract
95mg, hops extract 15mg and lemon balm leaf extract 85 mg)
taken alone or with alcohol." Compared with placebo, the herbal
combination preparation did not have adverse effects on
performance (e.g. concentration, vigilance). Furthermore, co-
administration of the combination preparation with alcohol did
not have potentiating effects on performance parameters." No
serious adverse events were observed during the study.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a
topical preparation containing 1% dried extract of M. officinalis
leaves (drug/extract 70:1) involving 116 patients with HSV
infection of the skin or transitional mucosa reported that there
were no statistically significant differences between the treatment
and placebo groups with regard to the frequency of adverse
effects.” Adverse events reported were minor (irritation, burning
sensation); there were no reports of allergic contact reactions.
However, skin sensitisation may occur with melissa.(@°*

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of melissa to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data,

oral administration of lemon balm during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided. Topical use of lemon balm during pregnancy
and lactation is unlikely to be problematic.

roprietary single-ingredient preparations

Austria: Lomaherpan. Belgium: Dormiplant. Chile: Citromel.
Czech Republic: Lakinal; Medovka Lekarska; Medunkovy,
Medunkova. Germany: Gastrovegetalin; Lomaherpan; Me-
Sabona; Sedinfant. Russia: Novo-Passit (Hoso-Iaccut). Swit-
zerland: Valverde Boutons de fievre creme.

----- PAGE 439 -----
Melissa

Regium; Solucion Schoum. Switzerland: Arterosan Plus;
Baldriparan; Cardiaforce; Carmol; Dormiplant; Dragees pour
la detente nerveuse; Gastrosan; Hyperiforce comp; Iberogast;
Relaxane; Relaxo; Songha Night; Soporin; Tisane calmante
pour les enfants; Tisane favorisant l'allaitement; Tisane pour
l'estomac; Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation; Tisane pour le
sommeil et les nerfs; Tisane pour nourissons et enfants;
Valverde Detente dragees; Valviska. UK: Boots Alternatives
Sleep Well; Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets; Melissa Comp.;
Napiers Echinacea Tea; Valerina Day Time; Valerina Day-
Time; Valerina Night-Time; Valerina Night-Time.

References

1. Tittel G e¢ al. Uber die chemische Zusammensetzung von
Melissendlen. Planta Med 1982; 46: 91-98.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

21

24

Carnat AP et al. The aromatic and polyphenolic composition of lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis L. subsp. officinalis) tea. Pharm Acta Helv
1998; 72: 301-305.

Sarer E, K6kdil G. Constituents of the essential oil from Melissa
officinalis. Planta Med 1991; 57: 89-90.

Heitz A et al. Luteolin 3/-glucuronide, the major flavonoid from
Melissa officinalis subsp. officinalis. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 201-202.
Tagashira M, Ohtake Y. A new antioxidative 1,3-benzodioxole from
Melissa officinalis. Planta Med 1998; 64: 555-558.

Kucera LS, Herrmann ECJr. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint
family (Labiatae). I Tannin of Melissa officinalis. Proc Soc Exp Biol
Med 1967; 124: 865-869.

Herrmann ECJr, Kucera LS. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint
family (Labiatae). II Nontannin polyphenol of Melissa officinalis.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1967; 124: 869-874.

May G, Willuhn G. Antivirale Wirkung wassriger Pflanzenextrakte in
Gewebekulturen. Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1-7.

Dimitrova Z et al. Antiherpes effect of Melissa officinalis L. extracts.
Acta Microbiol Bulg 1993; 29: 65-72.

Yamasaki K e¢ al. Anti-HIV-1 activity of herbs in Labiatae. Biol Pharm
Bull 1998; 21: 829-833.

Chlabicz J, Galasinski W. The components of Melissa officinalis L.
that influence protein biosynthesis in-vitro. J Pharm Pharmacol 1986;
38: 791-794.

Larrondo JV et al. Antimicrobial activity of essences from labiates.
Microbios 1995; 82: 171-2.

Soulimani R et al. Neurotropic action of the hydroalcoholic extract of
Melissa officinalis in the mouse. Planta Med 1991; 57: 105-109.
Soulimani R et al. Recherche de I'activitébiologique de Melissa
officinalis L. sur le systéme nerveux central de la souris in vivo et le
duodenum de rat in vitro. Plantes Méd Phytothér 1993; 26: 77-85.
Hohmann J et al. Protective effects of the aerial parts of Salvia
officinalis, Melissa officinalis and Lavandula angustifolia and their
constituents against enzyme-dependent and enzyme-independent lipid
peroxidation. Planta Med 1999; 65: 576-578.

Wolbling RH, Milbradt R. Klinik und Therapie des Herpes simplex.
Therapiewoche 1984; 34: 1193-1200.

Wolbling RH, Leonhardt K. Local therapy of herpes simplex with
dried extract from Melissa officinalis. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 25-31.
Koytchev R et al. Balm mint extract (Lo-701) for topical treatment of
recurring Herpes labialis. Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 225-230.

Schulz H et al. The quantitative EEG as a screening instrument to
identify sedative effects of single doses of plant extracts in comparison
with diazepam. Phytomedicine 1998, 5: 449-458.

Cerny A, Schmid K. Tolerability and efficacy of valerian/lemon balm
in healthy volunteers (a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study). Fitoterapia 1999; 70: 221-228.

Dressing H et al. Verbesserung der Schlafqualitat mit einem
hochdosierten Baldrian-Melisse-Praparat. Eine plazebokontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1996; 3: 123-130.
Dressing H et al. Baldrian-Melisse-Kombinationen versus
Benzodiazepin. Bei Schlafstérungen gleichwertig? Therapiewoche
1992; 42: 726-736.

Orth-Wagner S et al. Phytosedativum gegen Schlafstarungen. Z
Phytother 1995; 16: 147-156.

Herberg K-W. Nebenwirkungen pflanzlicher Beruhigungsmittel. Z
Allgemeinmed 1996; 72: 234-240.

----- PAGE 440 -----
Milk Thistle

Teas prepared from milk thistle fruits or herb are not
commonly used as only a small proportion of silymarin gets
into the aqueous extract such that pharmacologically active
doses are not attained. For this reason, in Germany teas are
recommended only as supportive treatment in functional gall
bladder disorders and not for antihepatotoxic effects.(¢? In
Germany, milk thistle fruit (3-5 g) as an infusion three or four
times daily is also indicated for mild digestive disorders.”

There are some toxicity and safety data for milk thistle
which, together with data on the adverse effects reported in
clinical trials, provide good evidence for the safety of milk
thistle when used at recommended doses in the short term.
However, further data on the long-term safety of milk thistle
use are required.

Species (Family)

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Lady's Thistle, Mariana lactea Hill, Marian Thistle, Mediterra-
nean Milk Thistle, St Mary's Thistle.

Part(s) Used

Fruits (often referred to as 'seeds'), herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1996”)
BP 200708

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'‘“*»

Ph Eur 20078”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Milk thistle is not included in the GSL.“@*”)

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Fruit

Flavolignans 1.5-3% silymarin, a mixture containing approxi-
mately 50% silibinin (=  silybin, silybinin), silichristin and
silidianin, as well as  silimonin, isosilichristin, isosilibinin,
silandrin, silhermin, neosilihermins A and B, 2,3-dehydrosilibinin
and tri- to pentamers of silibinin (silybinomers).

Flavonoids Quercetin, taxifolin and dehydrokaempferol.”
Lipids 20-30%. Linoleic acid, oleic acid and palmitic acid.
Sterols Cholesterol, campesterol and stigmasterol.

Other constituents Mucilages, sugars (arabinose, rhamnose,
xylose, glucose), amines and saponins.)

Leaves
Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin and kaempferol and their glyco-
sides.”

Other constituents
triterpene acetate.”
Silymarin is not found in the leaves.

B-Sitosterol and its glucoside, and a

Food Use

Milk thistle is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, milk thistle fruits have been used for disorders of the
liver, spleen and gall bladder such as jaundice and gall bladder
colic. Milk thistle has also been used for nursing mothers for
stimulating milk production, as a bitter tonic, for haemorrhoids,
for dyspeptic complaints and as a demulcent in catarrah and
(G2, G32, G34, G35, G50, G64) 7

pleurisy. It is stated to possess hepatopro-
tective, antioxidant and choleretic properties."

Current interest is focused on the hepatoprotective activity of
milk thistle and its use in the prophylaxis and treatment of liver
damage and disease.

The leaves have also been used for the treatment of liver, spleen
and gall bladder disorders and as an antimalarial, emmenagogue
and for uterine complaints. Milk thistle leaf preparations are
available today, although most research has been conducted with
preparations of the fruit since the leaf does not contain the
pharmacologically active component silymarin.

----- PAGE 441 -----
Milk Thistle

Flavanolignans
0.
HO fe) CX
: fe)
‘OH

OH O

silybin (silybinin)

gxCH2OH

OCH;

OH

OH O
silandrin

OH O

silydianin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of milk thistle.
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Fruit Crude drug 12-15 g daily in divided doses (equivalent to
silymarin 200-400 mg daily).'@?

Herb Approximately 1.5 g of finely chopped material as a tea, two
or three cups daily.

The doses of silymarin used in clinical trials have ranged from
280-800 mg/day (equivalent to milk thistle extract 400-1140 mg/
day standardised to contain 70% silibinin).© For hepatic
disorders, doses of up to 140 mg (equivalent to 60 mg silibinin)
two or three times daily have been suggested.“©*)

In Germany, the recommended regimen for treatment of
Amanita phalloides poisoning with a standardised silymarin
preparation (Legalon) is a total dose of silibinin (as the disodium
dihemisuccinate) (20 mg/kg body weight) over 24 hours, divided
into four intravenous infusions each given over a 2-hour
period.(C S59)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for milk
thistle fruit, including hepatoprotective, antioxidant, anti-inflam-
matory, antifibrotic and antitumour properties, as well as
inhibition of lipid peroxidation, stimulation of protein biosynth-

Flavonoids

OH O
taxifolin (2,3-dihydroquercetin)

esis and acceleration of liver regeneration. Silymarin (an isomer
mixture comprising mainly silibinin, silichristin and silidianin) is
the pharmacologically active component of milk thistle fruit;
silibinin is the main component of silymarin. There is an extensive
literature on the pharmacological effects of silymarin and
silibinin, particularly with regard to their hepatoprotective
activity which provides supporting evidence for the clinical uses.
The pharmacology and clinical efficacy of milk thistle have been
reviewed.'' 5°55) The following represents a summary of
selected publications on this subject.

There is a lack of research investigating the pharmacological
effects of preparations of milk thistle leaf.(C% 3"

In vitro and animal studies

Antioxidant activity Silymarin and _ silibinin (silybin) are
antioxidants that react with free radicals (e.g. reactive oxygen
species) transforming them into more stable and less reactive
compounds.'’* Silymarin and silybin have been reported to
inihibit lipid peroxidation induced by iron-linked systems in rat
liver microsomes"”® and protect against phenylhydrazine-induced
lipid peroxidation in rat erythrocytes.) Furthermore, in rats,
intraperitoneal silymarin has been shown to increase total
glutathione in the liver, intestine and stomach and to improve
the reduced glutathione to oxidised glutathione ratio.” Silymarin
has been shown to inhibit copper-induced oxidation of human

----- PAGE 442 -----
Figure 2. Milk thistle (Silybum marianum).

low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in vitro in a concentration-
dependent manner. Silybin appears to be the constituent of
silymarin responsible for the LDL antioxidant effect. In contrast,
silichristin and silydianin appeared to act as pro-oxidants, but
without significantly reducing the total LDL antioxidant capacity
of silymarin.

Free radicals are recognised as having an important role in
several pathological processes, including inflammation, necrosis,
fibrosis, atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis and ageing and in the
hepatotoxic mechanisms of various substances. The antioxidant
activity of silymarin is thought to contibute to its hepatoprotective
properties." 9)

Hepatoprotective properties In vitro studies using isolated
hepatocytes have documented the protective activity of silymarin
and several of its components against cell damage induced by
various cytotoxic substances."

In vivo studies in rats and mice have demonstrated the
hepatoprotective activity of silymarin and silybin in acute liver
toxicity induced by various toxic agents with different mechan-
isms of action, including carbon tetrachloride, galactosamine,
thioacetamide, ethanol, paracetamol (acetaminophen), thallium,
phalloidin and o&-amanitin (the main toxic constituents of the
mushroom A. phalloides)." Experimental studies in chronic liver
toxicity induced by repeated administration of carbon tetrachlor-
ide, heavy metals, thioacetamide and several drugs, including
azathioprine and indometacin, have also demonstrated that
administration of silymarin and silybin protects against
damage." Other studies have reported protective effects of
silymarin against liver injury induced by ischaemia’ and gamma
irradiation.''?)

Studies in rabbits fed a high-fat diet for 12 weeks have shown
that histopathological alterations were least advanced in animals
which also received a silymarin—phospholipid complex." In rats,
silymarin inhibited the development of diet-induced hypercholes-
terolaemia.*) The hypocholesterolaemic effects of silymarin may
be due to the effects of silymarin on lipoprotein metabolism."

Milk Thistle

The effects of silymarin on biliary bile salt secretion have been
seen in studies in rats.” Intraperitoneal silymarin (25, 50, 100
and 150 mg/kg/day) for five days induced a dose-dependent
increase in bile flow and bile salt secretion. Stimulation of bile
salt secretion was mainly accounted for by an increase in the
biliary secretion of the hepatoprotective bile salts B-muricholate
and ursodeoxycholate.

Nephroprotective properties Silibinin injected into rats prior to
administration of cisplatin afforded protection of glomerular and
proximal tubular function.""*!” Silibinin does not affect the
cytotoxic activity of cisplatin.” Intraperitoneal silibinin (5 mg/
kg) administered to rats 30 minutes before ciclosporin decreased
ciclosporin-induced lipid peroxidation but produced no protective
effect on the glomerular filtration rate.°”

Anticancer activity Silybin at concentrations of 0.1-20 jtmol/L
inhibited the growth of drug-resistant ovarian cancer cells and
doxorubicin-resistant breast cancer cells in vitro.?! Furthermore,
silybin in the range of 0.1-1.0,1mol/L potentiated the effect of
cisplatin and doxorubicin in experimental tumour cell lines. When
applied to the skin of SENCAR mice, silymarin gave protection
against the effects of the tumour promoters 12-O-tetradecanoyl-
phorbol (TPA) and okaidic acid (OA).°” Topical application of
silymarin prior to that of TPA and OA completely inhibited
induction of tumour necrosis factor « (TNFa) mRNA expression
in the epidermis. Substantial protection from photocarcinogenesis
in mice treated with phorbol ester or 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)
anthracene has been demonstrated.**?) The antitumour effect is
primarily at stage 1 tumour promotion and silymarin acts by
inhibiting cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and interleukin 1 (IL-
1a).° Such effects may involve inhibition of promoter-induced
oedema, hyperplasia, the proliferation index and oxidant state.)
Treatment of serum-starved human prostate carcinoma DU145
cells with silymarin resulted in significant inhibition of transform-
ing growth factor « (TGFa)-mediated activation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor erbB1.°° There was also a decrease in
tyrosine phosphorylation of an immediate downstream target, the
adapter protein SHC, together with a decrease in binding to
erbB1. In the silymarin-treated cell lines there was a significant
induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) Cip1/
p21 and Kip/p27 concomitant with a significant decrease in CDK4
expression, but no changes in the levels of CDK2 and CDK6 and
their associated cyclins E and D1, respectively. Additional
experiments showed that there was a significant inhibition of
constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of both erbB1 and SHC, but

Figure 3. Milk thistle - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 443 -----
Milk Thistle

no changes in their protein levels. The results indicated that
silymarin may exert a strong anticarcinogenic effect against
prostate cancer and that this effect is likely to involve impairment
of the erbB1-SHC-mediated signalling pathway, induction of
CDKIs and resultant G, arrest.?

There was a significant inhibition of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) ERK activity at lower doses in epidermal A431
cells treated with silymarin, whereas higher doses activated
MAPK/JNK1.°”) Silymarin exerted a strong anticarcinogenic
effect against human breast carcinoma cells MDA-MB468 with G,
arrest in cell cycle progression and also induction in protein
expression of the CDKI Cip/p21.°°

The cancer chemoprevention and anticarcinogenic effects of
silymarin have been shown to be due to its major constituent
silibinin.°” Silibinin decreases prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in
hormone-refractory human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells and
inhibits cell growth via G, arrest.°

Silibinin was fed orally to SENCAR mice and its tissue
distribution investigated.” Free silibinin mainly accumulated in
the liver, although it was also distributed in other organs.
Increases in  glutathione-S-transferase and quinone reductase
activities in the liver, lung, stomach, skin and small bowel were
the bioavailability of and
phase II enzyme induction of silibinin in different tissues where
silymarin has been shown to be a strong cancer chemopreventive
agent.

observed. The results demonstrate

Anti-inflammatory activity  Silymarin administered orally
reduced foot-pad abscesses in a dose-dependent manner in the
carrageenan rat-paw oedema test (EDso = 62.4 mg/kg). In the
xylene-induced inflammation test, topically applied silymarin was
comparable with indometacin.°” Silymarin given intraperitone-
ally to mice resulted in inhibition of leukocyte accumulation in
inflammatory exudates and reduced the neutrophil count.‘
Activation of NF-«B induced by TNE, phorbol ester, okaidic acid
and ceramide was blocked by silymarin in a dose-dependent
manner.» Silymarin also inhibited TNF-induced activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase.°?)
The inhibition of activation of NF-«B and the kinases may provide
part of the molecular ba: nflammatory and
anticarcinogenic effects of  silymarin. Silymarin potently
suppressed both NF-kB-DNA binding activity and its dependent
gene expression induced by okaidic acid in the hepatoma cell line
Hep G2.°* In addition, silymarin inhibits COX-2 and IL-1a.°”

for the anti
(33)

Gastric ulcer protective effects Oral administration of silymarin
to rats prevented gastric ulceration induced by cold-restraint
stress.°° Gastric secretion volume and acidity were not affected,
but histamine concentration was significantly decreased. It was
suggested that the anti-ulcerogenic effect of silymarin may be
related to inhibition of enzymic peroxidation by the lipoxygenase
pathway.°) The protective effect of silymarin on gastric injury
induced in rats by ischaemia—reperfusion and its effects on
mucosal myeloperoxidase has been compared with that of
allopurinol.° The mean ulcer indexes (4.75, 4.50 and 3.63 ui,
respectively) of rats treated with 25, 50 and 100 mg/kg silymarin
were significantly lower than in control rats, although allopurinol
was considerably more potent (2.3 ui; 100 mg/kg).°

Other effects Silymarin has been shown to prevent alloxan-
induced diabetes mellitus in rats, possibly due to its antioxidant
activity and increases in plasma and pancreatic glutathione
concentrations.°”)

It has been reported that Silybum marianum and silymarin
beneficially affect skin elasticity A  phospholipid-silymarin
complex (Silymarin—Phytosome) evaluated for its topical effects
against croton oil dermatitis in mice and UV-induced erythema in
humans showed reduction of oedema and inhibition of myeloper-
oxidase activity."® A standardised extract of S. marianum
significantly inhibited porcine elastase in vitro.°” An 80%
ethanol extract of S. marianum aerial parts showed activity
against Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus
haemolyticus, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Salmonella typhi.“

Clinical studies

Clinical trials with milk thistle preparations have focused on their
use in alcoholic liver disease, cirrhosis and acute viral and chronic
hepatitis. However, several trials have included patients with liver
disease of different aetiology, e.g. alcoholic and non-alcoholic
cirrhosis. There is also interest in the use of silymarin in toxin-
and drug-induced hepatitis, for example following ingestion of the
death cap mushroom A. phalloides.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
trial involving 200 alcoholic patients with histologically or
laparoscopically proven liver cirrhosis investigated the effects of
administration of silymarin (150mg) three times daily.“ The
results indicated that silymarin had no effect on survival and the
clinical course in these patients: 125 patients (silymarin 7 = 57 and
placebo n = 68) completed the two-year study period, during
which 29 died (n 15 and 14 for silymarin and placebo,
respectively; no statistically significant difference).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
patients with alcoholic (7 = 91) or non-alcoholic (n = 79)
cirrhosis received silymarin (140 mg) three times daily or placebo
for two years.) The four-year survival rate was significantly
higher in silymarin-treated patients than in placebo recipients
(58% versus 39%, respectively, p = 0.036). Subgroup analysis
indicated that the effect of silymarin on mortality was more
pronounced in those patients with alcoholic cirrhosis.

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
carried out over four years reported a significantly higher survival
treated with silymarin

rate in patients with alcoholic cirrhosi
(420 mg) daily compared with placebo recipients, although the
effect in patients with non-alcoholic cirrhosis was less marked.“
Other controlled trials have also investigated the effects of
silymarin in patients with alcohol-related liver damage. S:
these,“ but not all,“° reported statistically significant
benefits with silymarin, e.g. on serum transaminases, compared
with placebo." In a randomised controlled trial, 60 patients with
diabetes caused by alcoholic liver cirrhosis received silymarin
(600 mg/day) or no silymarin treatment for six months.) At the
end of the study period, the mean values for fasting blood glucose,
daily blood glucose, daily glycosuria, glycosylated haemoglobin,
daily insulin requirement, malondialdehyde and glucagon-stimu-
lated C peptide were significantly lower in silymarin-treated
patients than in those who did not receive silymarin treatment.
A pilot study involving 20 patients with chronic active hepatitis
randomised to receive a silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex
preparation (IdB1016; Silipide) (240 mg) twice daily or placebo for
seven days reported significant reductions in the mean serum
concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), y-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) and
total bilirubin in silybin complex-treated patients compared with

values in placebo recipients.® The same preparation has been

everal of

----- PAGE 444 -----
reported to reduce serum concentrations of liver enzymes (AST
and ALT) in 65 patients with chronic persistent hepatitis in a
randomised placebo-controlled trial.“

A Cochrane systematic review of trials assessing milk thistle
preparations for the treatment of alcoholic and/or hepatitis B or C
virus induced liver disease included 13 randomised trials involving
a total of 915 patients.” The methodological quality of included
trials was considered to be low: only 23% reported an adequate
method for concealment of treatment allocation and only 46%
were adequately double-blinded. When all trials were considered,
mortality due to liver disease was found to be significantly reduced
in the milk thistle group compared with controls (relative risk
(95% confidence interval) 0.50 (0.29 to 0.88)), but not when data
from only high-quality trials were assessed (0.57 (0.28 to 1.19)).
There were no statistically significant differences for milk thistle,
compared with placebo or no treatment controls, with respect to

all-cause mortality, complications of liver disease and_ liver
))

histology.

The hepatoprotective effects of silymarin in 222 de novo
tacrine-treated patients with mild to moderate dementia of the
Alzheimer type were investigated in a randomised, double-blind
(for silymarin), placebo-controlled, multicentre, 12-week trial.”
Patients received tacrine plus silymarin (420 mg/day) (7 = 110) or
tacrine plus placebo (m = 112); silymarin (and placebo) were
initiated one week before tacrine (40 mg/day for six weeks then
80 mg/day for six weeks). An intention-to-treat analysis indicated
that there was no difference in serum ALT concentrations between
the two groups, but that silymarin-treated patients experienced
significantly fewer gastrointestinal and cholinergic side-effects
without any impact on cognitive status than did placebo
recipients.)

The effects of silymarin in preventing psychotropic drug-
induced hepatic damage have been investigated in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.°?) Sixty women aged 40-
60 years who had been taking phenothiazines or butyrophenones
for at least five years and who had AST and ALT activity twice
normal values were randomised to continued treatment with
psychotropic agents or suspension of treatment and to silymarin
(800 mg/day) or placebo for 90 days. The findings indicated that
treatment with silymarin reduced the lipoperoxidative hepatic
damage associated with prolonged administration of butyrophe-
nones and phenothiazines and that the protec
greater when treatment with these psychotropic agents was
suspended for three months.”

There have been numerous case reports, many of which report
favourable outcomes, on the therapeutic use of silymarin and
silibinin, usually given in combination with standard treatment, in
poisoning caused by ingestion of the death cap mushroom A.
phalloides, although there are no controlled trials in this
(1,52°55,655) Silibinin is usually given intravenously and
case reports have indicated that early administration appears to be
important.° ”)

ve effect was

indication.

Pharmacokinetics Studies of the pharmacokinetics of silymarin
and its components and of a_ silibinin-phosphatidylcholine
complex preparation (IdB 1016; Silipide) in both healthy
volunteers and patients with cirrhosis and those who have
undergone cholecystectomy have been 1, G50, G55)
Approximately 20-50% of silymarin is absorbed following oral
administration and approximately 80% of the dose, whether
administered orally or intravenously, is excreted in the bile.°*
Studies in healthy volunteers have reported an elimination half-life
of approximately six hours following administration of single

reviewed. '

Milk Thistle

dos

silibinin.

of silymarin corresponding to approximately 240mg
°.6°) Other studies have compared the pharmacokinetics
of different silymarin preparations and shown statistically
significant differences in bioavailability.

The bioavailability of a silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex
preparation (IdB 1016) has been shown to be several times greater
than that of silymarin in single-dose studies involving healthy

volunteers) and patients with hepatic cirrhosis.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for milk thistle are limited and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

No adverse events were noted in a pharmacokinetic study
involving healthy male volunteers following single oral doses of
silymarin corresponding to up to 254 mg silibinin.
linical trials involving patients with liver disorders of various
origin and who received oral silymarin at doses of up to 600-

800 mg/day for up to six months have reported that no adverse
42, 47, 52)

effects were observed.

Data from drug monitoring studies involving more than 3500
patients, including one study involving 2637 patients with various
types of chronic liver disease treated with silymarin (Legalon)
(560 mg/day) for eight weeks, have indicated that the frequency of
adverse effects with silymarin is approximately 1%. Adverse
effects are mainly transient, non-serious, gastrointestinal com-
plaints.4° 9 Tt is stated that silymarin may occasionally
produce a mild laxative effect.'©?)

A case report from Australia described a reaction associated
with a preparation of milk thistle. The symptoms included
episodes of severe sweating, abdominal cramping, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea and weakness and these were verified by
rechallenge.® Another report described a case of anaphylactic
shock in a 54-year-old man with immediate-type allergy to kiwi
fruit.” He experienced facial oedema, swelling of the oral
mucosa, bronchospasm, respiratory distress and decreased blood
pressure after taking a preparation of milk thistle; a skin-prick
test of an extract of milk thistle fruit elicited an immediate-type
reaction.

Preclinical data

The acute toxicity of oral and intravenous silymarin and silibinin
has been investigated in various animal species (mice, rats, rabbits
and dogs). Oral silymarin administered to mice and dogs at
doses of 20 and 1 g/kg, respectively, did not cause adverse effects or
mortality. Long-term oral administration of silymarin (100 mg/kg/
day) to rats for 16 or 22 weeks did not reveal any adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the lack of long-term safety data,
excessive use of milk thistle should be avoided (except where its
use may help to prevent toxicity caused by other substances).

Milk thistle is contra-indicated for individuals with hypersen-
sitivity to species of Asteraceae.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of milk thistle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

----- PAGE 445 -----
Milk Thistle

Skottova N et al. Activities of silymarin and its flavolignans upon low
density lipoprotein oxidizability in vitro. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 535—
537.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data, use 10
of milk thistle preparations during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Thistle Plus. Austria: Hepabene; Rutiviscal; Wechseltee
Severin. Canada: Milk Thistle Extract Formula; Milk Thistle.
Czech Republic: Alvisan Neo; Hepabene; Hypotonicka;
Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Ungolen. France: Mediflor
Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany: Antihypertoni-
cum §; Bilisan Duo; Cholhepan N; Cholosom-Tee; Gallexier;
Heumann Verdauungstee Solu-Lipar; Iberogast; Ilja Rogoff.
Hungary: Hepabene. Italy: Epagest; Venoplus. Portugal:
Cholagutt. Russia: Hepabene (Mena6ene); Herbion Drops for
the Heart (fep6uon Cepaeuupre Karan). Singapore: Hepatofalk
Planta. Switzerland: Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile;
Iberogast; Tisane hepatique et biliaire. USA: Liver Formula.

References

1 Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Silybum marianum (Carduus marianus).
Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 3-42.

2 Awang D. Milk thistle. Can Pharm J 1993; 403-404, 422.

3 Pepping J. Milk thistle: Silybum marianum. Am J Health-Syst Pharm
1999; 56: 1195-1197.

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

Valenzuela A, Garrido A. Biochemical basis of the pharmacological
action of the flavonoid silymarin and its structural isomer silibinin.
Biol Res 1994; 27: 105-112.

Wu CG et al. Protective effect of silymarin on rat liver injury induced
by ischaemia. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Mol Pathol 1993; 64: 259—
263.

Kropacova K et al. Protective and therapeutic effect of silymarin on
the development of latent liver damage. Radiat Biol Radioecol 1998;
38: 411-415.

Drozdzik M et al. Effect of silymarinphospholipid complex on the
liver in rabbits maintained on a high-fat diet. Phytother Res 1996; 10:
406-409.

Krecman V et al. Silymarin inhibits the development of diet-induced
hypercholesterolemia in rats. Planta Med 1998; 64: 138-142.
Skottova N, Krecman V. Silymarin a potential hypocholesterolaemic
drug. Physiol Res 1998; 47: 1-7.

Crocenzi FA et al. Effect of silymarin on biliary bile salt secretion in
the rat. Biochem Pharmacol 2000; 59: 1015-1022.

Gaedeke J et al. Cisplatin nephrotoxicity and protection by silibinin.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11: 55-62.

Bokemeyer C et al. Silibinin protects against cisplatin-induced
nephrotoxicity without compromising cisplatin or ifosfamide anti-
tumour activity. Br J Cancer 1996; 74: 2036-2041.

Zima T et al. The effect of silibinin on experimental cyclosporine
nephrotoxicity. Renal Failure 1998; 20: 471-479.

Scambia G et al. Antiproliferative effects of silybin on gynaecological
malignancies: synergism with cisplatin and doxorubicin. Eur J Cancer
1996; 32A: 877-882.

Zi X et al. Novel cancer chemopreventative effects of a flavonoid
constituent silymarin: inhibition of mRNA expression of an
endogenous tumour promoter TNFalpha. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1997; 239: 334-339.

Katiyar SK et al. Protective effects of silymarin against
photocarcinogenesis in a mouse skin model. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;
89: 556-566.

Zhao J et al. Significant inhibition by the flavonoid antioxidant
silymarin against 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate caused
modulation of anti oxidant and inflammatory enzymes and
cyclooxygenase 2 and interleukin-1 alpha expression in SENCAR
mouse epidermis: implications in the prevention of stage | tumour
promotion. Mol Carcinogen 1999; 26: 321-333.

Lahiri-Chatterjee M et al. A flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, affords
exceptionally high protection against tumour promotion in the
SENCAR mouse skin tumorigenic model. Cancer Res 1999; 59: 622—
632.

Zi X et al. A flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, inhibits activation of
erbB1 signaling and induces cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, G;
arrest and anticarcinogenic effects in human prostate carcinoma
DU145 cells. Cancer Res 1998; 58: 1920-1929.

Zi X, Agarwal R. Modulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation and cell cycle regulators by the potent skin cancer
preventative agent silymarin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;
263: 528-536.

4 Leng-Peschlow E. Properties and medical use of flavolignans 28 Zi X et al. Anticarcinogenic effect of a flavonoid antioxidant,
(silymarin) from Silybum marianum. Phytother Res 1996; 10: $25-26. silymarin, in human breast cancer cells MDA-MB468: induction of G;
5 Pascual C et al. Effect of silymarin and silybinin on oxygen radicals. arrest through an increase in Cip1/p21 concomitant with a decrease in
Drug Dev Res 1993; 29: 73-77. kinase activity of cyclin-dependent kinases and associated cyclins. Clin
6 Mira L et al. Scavenging of reactive oxygen species by silibinin Cancer Res 1998; 4: 1055-1064. 7
dihemisuccinate. Biochem Pharmacol 1994; 48: 753-759. 29 Bhatia N et al. Inhibition of human carcinoma cell growth and DNA
7 Bindoli A et al. Inhibitory action of silymarin of lipid peroxide synthesis by silibinin, an active constituent of milk thistle: comparison
formation in rat liver mitochondria and microsomes. Biochem with silymarin. Cancer Lett 1999; 147: 784. : .
Ph 11977; 26: 2405-240 30 Zi X et al. Silibinin decreases prostate-specific antigen with cell
jarmacol 1977; 26: 05: 9. . oa. growth inhibition via G, arrest, leading to differentiation of prostate
8 Valenzuela Act al. Antioxidant Propertics of the flavonoids silybin carcinoma cells: implications for prostate cancer intervention. Proc
and (+)-cyanidanol-3: comparison with butylated hydroxyanisole and Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96: 7490-7495.
butylated hydroxytoluene. Planta Med 1986; 19: 438-440. 31 Zhao J, Agarwal R. Tissue distribution of silibinin, the major active

9 Valenzuela A et al. Selectivity of silymarin on the increase of the
glutathione content in different tissues of the rat. Planta Med 1989;
55: 420-422.

constituent of silymarin, in mice and its association with enhancement
of phase II enzymes: implications in cancer chemoprevention.
Carcinogenesis 1999; 20: 2101-2108.

----- PAGE 446 -----
32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

De La Puerta R et al. Effect of silymarin on different acute
inflammation models and in leukocyte migration. J Pharm Pharmacol
1996; 48: 968-970.

Manna SK et al. Silymarin suppresses TNF-induced activation of NF-
kappaB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and apoptosis. J Immunol 1999; 163:
6800-6809.

Saliou C et al. Selective inhibition of NF-kappaB activation by the
flavonoid hepatoprotector silymarin in HepG2. FEBS Lett 1998; 440:
8-12.

De La Lastra C e¢ al. Gastric antiulcer activity of silymarin, a
lipoxygenase inhibitor, on rats. ] Pharm Pharmacol 1992; 44: 929-931.
De La Lastra C et al. Gastroprotection induced by silymarin, the
hepatoprotective principle of Silybum marianum in ischaemia—
reperfusion mucosal injury: role of neutrophils. Planta Med 1995; 61:
116-119.

Soto CP et al. Prevention of alloxan-induced diabetes mellitus in the
rat by silymarin. Comp Biochem Physiol 1998; 119C: 125-129.
Bombardelli E et al. Ageing skin: protective effect of silymarin—
Phytosome’ . Fitoterapia 1991; 62: 115-122.

Benaiges A et al. Study of the refirming effect of a plant complex. Int J
Cosmet Sci 1998; 20: 223-233.

Izzo AA et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
antibacterial activity. Phytother Res 1995; 9: 281-286.

Pares A et al. Effects of silymarin in alcoholic patients with cirrhosis
of the liver: results of a controlled, double-blind, randomized and
multicenter trial. J Hepatol 1998; 28: 615-621.

Ferenci P et al. Randomized controlled trial of silymarin treatment in
patients with cirrhosis of the liver. ] Hepatol 1989; 9: 105-113.
Benda L et al. The influence of therapy with silymarin on the survival
rate of patients with liver cirrhosis. Wien Klin Wschr 1980; 92: 678—
683.

Salmi H, Sarna S. Effect of silymarin on the chemical, functional and
morphological alterations of the liver. Scand ] Gastroenterol 1982; 17:
517-521.

Feher J et al. Hepatoprotective activity of silymarin Legalon’ therapy
in patients with chronic alcoholic liver disease. Orv Hetil 1989; 130:
2723-2727.

Trinchet JC et al. Traitement de I'hépatite alcoolique par la
silymarine. Une étude comparative en double insu chez 116 malades.
Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1989; 13: 120-124.

Velussi M et al. Silymarin reduces hyperinsulinaemia,
malondialdehyde levels, and daily insulin need in cirrhotic diabetic
patients. Curr Ther Res 1993; 53: 533-545.

Buzzelli G et al. A pilot study on the liver protective effect of silybin—
phosphatidylcholine complex (IdB1016) in chronic active hepatitis. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1993; 31: 456-460.

Marcelli R et al. Cited by Morazzoni P et al. Silybum marianum
(Carduus marianus). Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 3-42. Eur Bull Drug Res
1992; 1: 131-135.

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

Milk Thistle

Rambaldi A et al. Milk thistle for alcoholic and/or hepatitis B or C
virus liver diseases (review). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 2005, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003620.

Allain H et al. Aminotransferase levels and silymarin in de novo
tacrine-treated patients with Alzheimer's disease. Dementia Geriat
Cogn Disord 1999; 10: 181-185.

Palasciano G et al. The effect of silymarin on plasma levels of malon-
dialdehyde in patients receiving long-term treatment with
psychotropic drugs. Curr Ther Res 1994; 55: 537-545.

Klein AS et al. Amanita poisoning: treatment and the role of liver
transplantation. Am J Med 1989; 86: 187-193.

Floersheim GL et al. Die Klinische Knollenblatterpilzverg; Frung:
prognostische faktoren und therapeutische massnahmen. Schweiz Med
Wochenschr 1982; 112: 1164-1177.

Carducci R et al. Silibinin and acute poisoning with Amanita
phalloides. Minerva Anestesiol 1996; 62: 187-193.

Hruby K et al. Pharmacotherapy of Amanita phalloides poisoning
using silybin. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1983; 95: 225-231.

Hruby K et al. Chemotherapy of Amanita phalloides poisoning with
intravenous silibinin. Hum Toxicol 1983; 2: 183-190.

Mennicke WH. Zur biologischen Verfiigbarkeit und
Verstoffwechselung von Silybin. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1975; 115: 1205—
1206.

Lorenz D et al. Pharmacokinetic studies with silymarin in human
serum and bile. Meth Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1984; 6: 655-661.
Weyhenmeyer R et al. Study on the dose-linearity of the
pharmacokinetics of silibinin diastereomers using a new stereospecific
assay. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1992; 30: 134-138.

Cho J-Y et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of two formulations
containing silymarin: Legalon 140™ cap and Silymarin™, J Korean
Soc Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998; 6: 119-127.

Schulz H-U et al. Untersuchungen zum Freisetzungsverhalten und zur
Bioaquivalenz von Silymarin—Praparaten. Arzneimittelforschung 1995;
4S: 61-64.

Barzaghi N et al. Pharmacokinetic studies on 1dB 1016, a silybin—
phosphatidylcholine complex, in healthy human volunteers. Eur J
Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1990; 15: 333-338.

Orlando R et al. Silybin kinetics in patients with liver cirrhos'
comparative study of silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex and
silymarin. Med Sci Res 1990; 18: 861-863.

Albrecht M, Fredrick H. Therapy of toxic liver pathologies with
Legalon. Z Klin Med 1992; 47: 87-92.

Anon. An adverse reaction of the herbal medication milk thistle

na

(Silybum marianum). Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee.
Med J Aust 1999; 170: 218-219.

Geier J et al. Anaphylactic shock due to an extract of Silybum
marianum in a patient with immediate-type allergy to kiwi fruit.
Allergologie 1990; 13: 387-388.

----- PAGE 447 -----
Mistletoe

ations, or their isola omponents, are effe e
the treatment of cancer or as adjunctive treatments in cancer.
Further research using rigorous clinical trial methodology to
test the effects of well-characterised mistletoe extracts is
warranted.

Reviews of clinical trials which have provided an assessment
of the safety of mistletoe, generally have reported mistletoe
preparations to be well tolerated. The most frequently
reported adverse events in trials using lectin-standardised
mistletoe preparations are local reactions, such as urticaria
and/or erythema at the injection site, which usually resolve
within 48 hours.

The toxic nature of the mistletoe constituents (e.g. lectins,
viscotoxins) indicates that mistletoe is unsuitable for self-
medication. Mistletoe berries are poisonous and, in the UK,
sale/supply is restricted to pharmacies only and by or under
the supervision of a pharmacist.

Species (Family)

Viscum album L. (Loranthaceae)

Synonym(s)

Viscum

Part(s) Used
Leaf, fruit (berry), twig

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHMA 2003
BHP 1996”)

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Mistletoe is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2 and General Reference G2.

Acids Fatty acids (Cy)—Cy2), 80% oleic and palmitic, myrisitic;>)

phenolic acids, e.g. caffeic, p-coumaric, gentisic, p-hydroxyben-
zoic, p-hydroxyphenylacetic, protocatechuic, vanillic;'>* anisic,
quinic and shikimic.°**

Alkaloids It has been suggested that alkaloids can be passed on
from hosts to parasitic plants such as mistletoe (e.g. nicotine
alkaloids have been isolated from mistletoe growing on Solana-
ceae shrubs).

Amines Acetylcholine, choline, B-phenylethylamine, histamine,
propionylcholine and tyramine.

Flavonoids Chalcones, e.g. 2'-hydroxy-4', 6’-dimethoxy-chal-
cone-4-O-glucoside, 2'-hydroxy-3, 4’, 6’-trimethoxychalcone-4-O-
glucoside, 2'-hydroxy-4' ,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O-(apiosyl-
12)-glucoside.‘"”

Flavanones, e.g. (2R)-5,7-dimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside,
(28)-3', 5, 7-trimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside, homoeriodictyol
(4/,5,7-trihydroxy-5’-methoxyflavanone.'"”)

Flavones, e.g. quercetin, isorhamnetin, sakuranetin, rhamnazin
(3,4’,5-trihydroxy-3’,7-dimethoxyflavone; quercetin 3',7-dimethyl
ether) and its glycoside rhamnazin-3,4'-di-O-glucoside and other
quercetin methyl ethers.“"”

Lectins Lectins are heterodimeric glycoproteins (mol. wt between
55kDa and 63kDa),'” which belong to a group of type 2
ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) and are structurally similar
to ricin. They are composed of two distinct subunits, one B-
subunit (B-chain, the galactose-binding site; 34kDa) and one
toxophoric A-subunit (A-chain, the cytotoxic-binding site, RNA-
N-glycosidase; 29kDa). The structure of the B-chain of mistletoe
lectins is based on 264 amino acids. Seven cysteine residues and
three N-linked carbohydrate chains are included. Mistletoe lectins
(V, album agglutinin-1, viscumin (mol. wt 60000)) are galactoside-
specific plant lectins (63 kDa). Three different mistletoe lectins
have been isolated: ML-1 (main component; broad range of
affinity for o/B-linked galactopyranosyl residues), ML-2 (affinity
for D-galactose and N-acetyl-p-galactosamine) and ML-3 (affinity
for N-acetyl-p-galactosamine). The chitin-binding lectin (chitin-
binding-agglutinin, visalb-CBA or visalb-CBL), which is distinct

----- PAGE 448 -----
from ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3, is a homodimer lectin with two
identical subunits (10.8kDa). Its amino acid composition is
similar to that of other chitin-binding hololectins.'” Reported
yields of ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3 from leaves and stems are 3-
170 mg/100g dry weight, 0.1-35mg/100g dry weight, and 0-
67 mg/100g dry weight, respectively.”

ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3 have been isolated from Iscador Qu
Special and Iscador M Special. Iscador P contains almost no
mistletoe lectins (R Dierdorf, personal communication, Septem-
ber 2003).

Terpenoids An acyclic monoterpene glucoside, 2,6-dimethylocta-
2,7-diene-1,6-diol-6-O-[6’-B-p-apiofuranosy]]-B-p-glucopyrano-
side, has been isolated from leaves and stems.) Phytosterols,
including B-sitosterol, stigmasterol and glycosides, together with
pentacyclic triterpenes B-amyrin and its acetate, betulinic acid,
oleandrin and oleanolic acid are present.” '°

Viscotoxins Viscotoxins (mol. wt 5 kDa) have been isolated from
leaf homogenates. Viscotoxins are amphipathic, strongly basic
polypeptides that are highly enriched with cysteine residues; they
belong to the family of a- and B-thionins." Viscotoxins consist of
46 amino acid residues with three disulphide bonds, which

Flavonoids
Chalcones Rr!

Rr! R
2’-hydroxy-4’ ,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O-glucoside H gic
2’-hydroxy-3,4’,6’-trimethoxychalcone-4-O-glucoside OCH; gic
2’-hydroxy-4’,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O- H — ap-gic

(apiosyl 1 2)-glucose

Flavanones

rR! R2 R? Rt

5,7-dimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside OCH; OCH; gic H
3’,5,7-trimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside OCH3 OCHgs gic OC
homoeriodictyol OH OH OH OC

Flavones

Ri
quercetin OH OH
isorhamnetin OH OCH3
rhamnazin OCH3 OCH3

gic = glucosyl, ap = apiosyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of mistletoe.

Mistletoe

stabilise the conformation of the molecule. Several different
viscotoxins have been isolated, the main ones being viscotoxins

A2, A3 and B.

Other constituents Lignans Syringaresinol 4,4’-O-diglucoside
(eleutheroside E).‘”

Phenylpropanoids Syringenin-4’-O-glucoside (syringin), syrin-
genin-4/-O-apiosyl-1—+2-glucoside (syringoside).'

Polyalcohols 1-p-1-O-Methyl-muco-inositol (a derivative of O-
methyl-inositol),(©?) mannitol, pinitol, quebrachitol and viscu-
mitol.

Polysaccharides Mainly a methylester of 1+4a-galacturonic acid
in the leaves and rhamnogalacturans in the berries. Pectin (mol.
wt 42kDa), arabinogalactan (mol. wt 110kDa) are present in
leaves, and a rhamnogalacturan (mol. wt 700kDa) is found in
the berries. The berries contain acidic (mol. wt 1340 kDa) and

(mol. wt 30kDa) polysaccharides. The acidic poly-

saccharides interact with ML-1. Simple sugars and tannins are

also present.“

neutral

Terpenoids

HO 36

CH2OH
2,6-dimethylocta-2,7-diene-1 ,6-diol-6-O-(6-O-B-p-
apiofuranosyl)-f-o-glucopyranoside

Lignans

syringaresinol-4,4’-O-diglucoside
(eleutheroside E)

Phenylpropanoids

CHgO. CH20H
HO

OCH
syringenin

Figure 2 Selected constituents of mistletoe.

----- PAGE 449 -----
Mistletoe

Food Use

Mistletoe is not generally used as a food. The branches and
berries of mistletoe are listed by the Council of Europe as natural
sources of food flavouring (category N3).'©'% This category
indicates that mistletoe may be added to foodstuffs in the
traditionally accepted manner, although there is insufficient
information available for an adequate assessment of potential
toxicity.

Herbal Use

Mistletoe is stated to possess hypotensive, cardiac-depressant and
sedative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for high blood
pressure, arteriosclerosis, nervous tachycardia, hypertensive head-
ache, chorea and hysteria.'? 67 9% S°)

Modern use of mistletoe preparations is focused on use as a
treatment and as an adjuvant treatment in cancer. Clinical studies
of mistletoe preparations have assessed mistletoe preparations as a
treatment, or as an adjunctive treatment, in patients with different
types of cancers. A small number of other clinical trials have been
conducted involving patients with chronic hepatitis C infection,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and respiratory
infections. (see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies).

Figure 3 Mistletoe (Viscum album).

~\ ‘
Figure 4 Mistletoe — dried drug substance (twig).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

Dried leaves 2-6 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture 0.5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Infusion 40-120 mL (1:20 in cold water) daily.©”

Soft extract 0.3-0.6mL (1:8 infusion or tincture) three times
daily.'C”

The administration of mistletoe preparations as adjunctive
treatments in cancer is mostly by subcutaneous injection, and the
manufacturer's recommendations for the specific mistletoe pre-
parations should be followed. Dosages used in clinical trials
assessing different mistletoe preparations, therefore, vary widely
and are often complex; dosage regimens also vary depending on
the type of cancer being treated. Trials involving ML-1
standardised mistletoe preparations usually describe the dose of
mistletoe extract in terms of the equivalent amount of ML-1. For
example, in a trial involving patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma, an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract
(Eurixor) equivalent to ML-1 Ing/kg body weight twice weekly
was given by subcutaneous injection over a 60-week period in
treatment cycles of 12 weeks followed by a break in treatment after
every four weeks."

Pharmacological Actions

There is a vast scientific literature relating to the biochemical and
pharmacological effects of mistletoe and its constituents,
particularly the lectin and viscotoxin constituents, which are
believed to be the active principles.) There is also a substantial
literature on clinical investigations with mistletoe extracts and
purified components, and at least one scientific meeting focused
solely on research into mistletoe in cancer therapy.

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical research has focused on investigating the cytotoxic and
immunomodulatory activities of mistletoe and its constituents,
although other effects, such as agglutinating and hypotensive
properties have also been documented. These activities have been
summarised in several comprehensive reviews.'”!?'*'®) A brief
summary of some of the scientific literature on the properties of
mistletoe and its constituents is given below. Evaluation,
interpretation and comparison of preclinical studies is not
straightforward as studies have investigated the effects of different
types of mistletoe extracts and commercial products, some of
which are not characterised or their composition is not adequately
described in reports of studies; a number of other studies have
used purified mistletoe lectins and/or viscotoxins.

Cytotoxic and anticancer activities The lectin and, to a lesser
extent, viscotoxin constituents of mistletoe are the main cytotoxic
components.) Cytotoxic activity in vitro has been documented
for mistletoe extracts and for purified mistletoe lectins and
viscotoxins. In one study, aqueous extracts (ABNOBAviscum) of
mistletoe sourced from two host trees and purified mistletoe
lectins II and III inhibited cell growth for several tumour cell lines,
including murine B cell hybridomas, P815 (murine mastocytoma),
EL-4 (murine thymoma), MOLT-4 (human T cell acute lympho-

----- PAGE 450 -----
blastic leukaemia) and U937 (human _ histiocytoma). For
example, the mistletoe extract sourced from apple trees at a
dilution of 1:10 (corresponding to aqueous extract 0.15 mg/mL)
resulted in 98% inhibition of the growth of the MOLT-4 tumour
cell line. The effects of another mistletoe extract (Isorel M), also
obtained from mistletoe grown on apple trees, on normal and
tumour cell growth were compared with those of its low and high
molecular weight components and mistletoe lectins in vitro using
melanoma B16 cell cultures. At the highest concentration tested
(2g/mL), all preparations significantly inhibited [*H]thymidine
incorporation into melanoma cells, compared with control.?”
However, separately, the low and high molecular weight
components achieved less inhibition than the total mistletoe
extract, suggesting that the constituents of both fractions are
needed for optimal activity.

In another in vitro study, mistletoe lectin I and purified
viscotoxins (ratio of viscotoxins A2: A3:B was 1:1.6:0.6) showed
cytotoxic activity against MOLT-4 cells as well as Yoshida
sarcoma cells and K562 human myeloid cells in a concentration-
dependent manner.?" Mistletoe lectins I, II and III showed

cytotoxic activity against sensitive and resistant human colon
(22)

cancer cell lines in a concentration-dependent manner in vitro.
The mechanism of growth arrest demonstrated with mistletoe
extracts in in vitro studies using human and murine tumour cell
ines was shown to be due to the induction by mistletoe
constituents of programmed cell death (apoptosis). Induction
of apoptosis by mistletoe extracts (various Iscador preparations)
has also been demonstrated in endothelial cells.? The apoptosis-
inducing properties and hence cytotoxicity of V. album extracts
depend on the content of active compounds, mainly the mistletoe
ectins, the content of which in turn is dependent on factors such
as the host tree and the manufacturing process.?*? Further-
more, other compounds present in mistletoe extract may modulate
the cytotoxic activity.
It has recently been reported following in vitro studies in

hepatocarcinoma cells that mistletoe lectin II from Korean
mistletoe induces apoptosis by inhibiting telomerase, an enzyme
that maintains protein—nucleic acid complexes (telomeres) at the
ends of chromosomes.” This effect appeared to be mediated via
a pathway independent of p53.

Antitumour activity in animal models has been demonstrated
for several different commercial preparations of mistletoe extract,
and for mistletoe lectins. In one study, mice bearing a hind-limb
melanoma B16F10 tumour were given a single dose (100 mg/kg
body weight, intraperitoneally) of a mistletoe extract (Isorel M)
obtained from mistletoe growing on apple trees. Compared with a
control group (which received a saline injection), mice treated

with mistletoe showed a statistically significant reduction in

tumour volume measured two days after mistletoe administra-
tion.°” Inhibition of tumour growth was documented for an
aqueous mistletoe extract (Lektinol, containing mistletoe lectins
405 g/mL), administered intraperitoneally or subcutaneously at
doses equivalent to mistletoe lectins 30 and 300 ng/mL/kg per day
for up to four weeks, in mice with Renca (renal cell carcinoma),
C8 colon 38 carcinoma and F9 testicular carcinoma, when
compared with control.'*) No such inhibitory effect was observed
in mice with Lewis lung carcinoma and B16 melanoma under the
same conditions.

Anticarcinogenic activities have been described for a bacterially
fermented mistletoe extract (Iscador M; mistletoe grown on apple
trees).”?) Methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma formation was
inhibited in mice treated with Iscador M (1.66 mg twice weekly for
15 weeks, intraperitoneally), compared with a control group. In

Mistletoe

separate experiments, mistletoe was reported to markedly inhibit
the development of lung metastases when co-administered with
metastatic B16F10 melanoma cells through the lateral tail vein;?”
however, the results from this experiment were not subjected to
statistical testing. Antimetastatic activity has also been documen-
ted for other commercial mistletoe preparations (e.g. Lektinol,
Helixor) standardised for mistletoe lectin content in other in vivo
studies (mice).°°>”

Immunomodulatory activity Certain types of immune cells,
such as natural killer (NK) cells, can lyse tumour cells; this can
occur with or without activation by cytokines.” Extracts of
mistletoe have been shown to enhance the cytolytic activity of NK
cells in studies using human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
and a human cancer cell line (K562 leukaemia).°*) Several other
studies have described the enhancing effects of mistletoe extracts
and their isolated components on natural killer activity of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro and in vivo.”

Components of mistletoe have also been reported to induce the

proliferation of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
0,

vitro.’ In one study, of six mistletoe extracts tested, an extract
(Iscador P) derived from mistletoe grown on pine trees induced the
strongest proliferative response on peripheral blood mononuclear
cells from non-treated individuals.” This extract is almost devoid
of lectins, suggesting that a non-lectin-associated antigen from
this extract is responsible for the observed effects.

Stimulation of cytokine release (e.g. interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-2,
IL-6, IL-12, tumour necrosis factor «% (TNFa)) by mistletoe
extracts or mistletoe lectins has been demonstrated in various
experimental studies in vitro."2°*?

Immunostimulant activity in mice, demonstrated for example
by an increase in the phagocytic activity of peritoneal macro-
phages, has been documente
mistletoe extrac
In vivo immunostimulant activity in mice (humoral and cellular),
demonstrated by an enhancement of delayed hypersensitivity and
antibody formation to sheep red blood cells, has been documented
for the crude plant juice, Iscador and for a polysaccharide fraction
isolated from the berries.°*) Activity was attributed to stimulation
of the monophagocytic system and to induction of inflammation.
The results indicated that the immunostimulant property of
mistletoe is not solely attributable to the polysaccharides found in
the berries (plant juice also active) or to the lactobacilli content of
the fermented plant juice (crude extract also active). Non-specific
immunological effects with mistletoe extracts are reported to be
dependent on the frequency and quantity of the applied extract.°”)

for mistletoe lectin 1 and for

s standardised for mistletoe lectin 1 content.‘?)

Agglutinating activity Agglutinating activity that is preferential
towards tumour cells over erythrocytes has been exhibited by
Iscador and by a lectin fraction.“°) The lectins have been shown
to bind to a number of cells including erythrocytes (non-specific
to blood type),*** lymphocytes, leukocytes, macrophages,
glycoproteins and plasma proteins.“ *» Binding has been found
to be stereospecific towards units containing a D-galactose
molecule,“”** although p-galactose units with unmodified
hydroxyl groups at C2, C3; and Cy, inhibit erythrocyte agglutina-
tion.“” Tyrosine residues are also thought to be involved in the
agglutination process. Plasma proteins compete for the lectin
receptor site and, therefore, decre: the agglutination of
erythrocytes and tumour cells.“* Unlike many other sugars,
lactose units have also been found to inhibit erythrocyte
agg! utination.“”

Mistletoe lectins have been reported to prevent viscotoxin- and
allergen-stimulated histamine release from human leukocytes.”

----- PAGE 451 -----
Mistletoe

Hypotensive effect The hypotensive effect documented for
mistletoe has been attributed to various biologically active
constituents such as acetylcholine, histamine, gamma aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), tyramine and flavones.'©*" The exact nature of
the hypotensive effect of mistletoe seems unclear: it has been
reported that activity is mainly due to an inhibitory action on the
excitability of the vasomotor centre in the medulla oblongata.”
However, it has also been stated that the hypotensive action of
mistletoe is mainly of a reflex character, exerting a normalising
effect on both hypertensive and hypotensive states. The effect
of different mistletoe plant parts and host plant on the
hypotensive activity has been studied with highest activity
reported for mistletoe leaves parasitising on willow.°”

Antimicrobial activity Extracts of the V. album subspecies
album, abietis, austriacum and pallasiana have been tested for
activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37A in vitro. Ether
extracts of the V. album subspecies album, abietis and austriacum
and petroleum ether extracts of the subspecies abietis and
austriacum were active against M. tuberculosis (minimum
inhibitory concentration, MIC: 200pg/mL for each).°! From
these results, it is not possible to determine whether polar or non-
polar compounds are responsible for the observed antimycobac-
terial activity.

Clinical studies

Numerous clinical studies of mistletoe preparations have been
carried out, mostly in the area of oncology, although few used
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trial methodology and
meet today's good clinical practice standards for the conduct of
clinical trials. Collectively, the results of these studies are difficult
to interpret as they involved patients with different types of
cancer, who were or were not receiving different types of
conventional cancer treatment (surgery, radiotherapy and/or
cancer chemotherapy), and investigated the effects of different
mistletoe preparations which vary markedly in their qualitative
and quantitative composition. Hence, results regarding efficacy
(and safety) need to be considered for each individual
product.

Nevertheless, several narrative reviews and systematic reviews
of clinical trials of mistletoe preparations involving patients with
cancer have been published. In short, there is insuffi
from well-designed clinical trials that mistletoe preparations, or
their isolated components, are effective in the treatment of cancer
or as adjunctive treatments in cancer. Although a small number of
reasonably well-designed trials have reported statistically sig-
nificant results for mistletoe, compared with controls, at present,
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of any specific
mistletoe preparation in the treatment of any specific type of
cancer. Further research using rigorous clinical trial methodology
to test the effects of well-characterised mistletoe extracts is
warranted. A summary of the clinical trial evidence relating to
mistletoe preparations is given below.

ent evidence

Pharmacokinetics There is a lack of clinical pharmacokinetic
data for the constituents of mistletoe preparations.

Therapeutic effects Cancer A systematic review of prospective,
controlled clinical trials of mistletoe preparations in the
treatment of cancers included 23 studies, of which 16 involved
random allocation to treatment, two involved quasi-randomi-
sation and the remaining five were non-randomised studies;
three of the studies were nested within an epidemiological
cohort study.” In total, the trials involved over 3500 patients

with different types of cancer (and at different stages),
including breast (1 = 4 studies), lung (4), colorectal (3),
melanoma (2), stomach, kidney, bladder, glioma, and head and
neck (1 each); several trials studied more than one cancer type.
Most trials tested the anthroposophical mistletoe preparations
Iscador and Helixor (7 = 14 and 3, respectively), whereas in six
the intervention was Eurixor. In most trials, the mistletoe
intervention was administered in addition to conventional
treatment (cancer chemotherapy, radiotherapy, corticosteroids
and/or surgery) and compared with conventional treatment
alone; other trials involved a no-treatment control group, or
compared the mistletoe preparation directly with conventional
treatment. Only two studies included a placebo control group,
and blinding of the intervention was not undertaken in any of
the trials (reliable blinding is hard to achieve as parenteral
administration of mistletoe can cause local skin reactions at
the injection site).°?) An assessment of the methodological
quality of the included clinical trials revealed that many of the
studies had methodological limitations to their design and/or
analysis and that most did not meet contemporary standards in
these respects.

The results of this group of clinical trials need to be
considered critically because of the poor methodological
quality of the studies. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the
studies precluded a quantitative assessment of effect size.” Of
the 23 trials, 12 recorded statistically significant results in
favour of the mistletoe intervention, compared with control, in
at least one clinically relevant outcome measure (e.g. mean/
median survival time, five-/six-year survival rate). Of the five
trials that incorporated a quality-of-life outcome measure,
three reported statistically significant results in favour of
mistletoe, compared with control, one reported no effect and
one result was omitted from the original publication of the
study. Three other trials reported statistically significant results
for mistletoe, compared with control, in reducing the
frequency of adverse effects of concomitantly administered
conventional cancer treatments. In summary, although several
trials reported positive results for certain mistletoe prepara-
tions, the data are inconclusive because of the studies!
methodological limitations, and further research using well-
designed and properly conducted trials is necessary.”
Another systematic review of prosp
trials of mistletoe preparations involving patients with cancer
employed stricter inclusion/exclusion criteria: only randomised
trials were considered. The review included 10 studies, eight of

e

ive controlled clinica

which were included in the systematic review”) described
above; the other two studies were available only as a conference
abstract and unpublished data from a manufacturer of a
mistletoe preparation, which prevented their thorough critical
analysis.°°) Of the eight trials for which a full ass
methodological quality was possible, the best five scored 3
points from a maximum of 5; as with the previous review,") a
quantitative analysis of data from the included studies was not
possible because of the heterogeneity of the trials. From this
review, it was concluded that the evidence does not provide
strong support for the efficacy of mistletoe preparations as a
treatment for cancer, or as supportive therapy in cancer.)

The two reviews®>*

ssment of

») described above have superseded a
previous systematic review” of controlled clinical trials of
mistletoe preparations in cancer, although there is little
difference in the respective conclusions of the more recent
and older reviews. The earlier review included 11 controlled
trials, only one of which was judged to be of high

----- PAGE 452 -----
methodological quality, although even this did not involve
masking (blinding) of the intervention. This trial was the only
study included in the review that did not show a beneficial
effect on outcome for a mistletoe preparation. The review
concluded that mistletoe extracts could not be recommended in
the treatment of patients with cancer, except in the setting of
clinical trials.

One other review (which does not fully describe the methods
used so must be described as non-systematic) included only
those trials which had evaluated the effects of well-charac-
terised mistletoe extracts standardised for their content of
mistletoe lectins I, I and III]. The conclusions of the review
concur with those of systematic reviews in that mistletoe
preparations do not have an established place in oncology and
that further rigorous clinical trials are necessary.°°) This
review did not involve a formal assessment of the methodo-
logical quality of included studies, but did highlight that two
trials"'°® only were conducted using contemporary rigorous
clinical trial methodology and in accordance with the
principles of good clinical practice. These two studies were
included in the two recent systematic reviews?*?) described
above, but at the time, data from one study were available
only in promotional literature produced by a manufacturer of a
mistletoe preparation.

One of these stud:
ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) involving 477
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Participants were stratified into two groups — surgery only,

or surgery followed by radiotherapy groups — and randomised
(11)

was a randomised controlled trial of an

to receive additional treatment with the mistletoe extract.
The dosage regimen for mistletoe extract was equivalent to
ML-1 Ing/kg body weight twice weekly by subcutaneous
injection over a 60-week period in treatment cycles of 12 weeks
followed by a break in treatment after every four weeks.
Mistletoe treatment was commenced 1-4 days before surgery
in 72% of participants; the remainder (for whom early
administration was not possible) first received mistletoe shortly
after undergoing surgery.

In total, 200 (42%) of the 477 participants experienced a
relapse during the follow-up period (median four years for
surviving participants); there was no statistically significant
difference between the mistletoe and control groups in
incidence of relapse and in the development of metastases
and second primary tumours.” In an_ intention-to-treat
analysis, there was no statistically significant difference
between the two groups in disease-free survival, the primary
efficacy parameter (adjusted hazard ratio, 95% confidence
interval (CI): 0.959, 0.725-1.268). There were also no
statistically significant differenc
control groups in secondary outcome measures (immune
parameters, quality-of-life score) assessed at different time
points throughout the study. The conclusion of the study was
that the ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract tested (Eurixor) is

not effective as an adjuvant treatment for patients with head
(1)

s between the treatment and

and neck cancer.

The second of these studies (now published as an abstract so
full details are still not available) was a randomised, double-
blind, multicentre trial involving 272 patients with breast
cancer who had undergone surgery and were receiving
treatment with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluor-
ouracil. In addition, they received one of three doses of
mistletoe extract (Lektinol) equivalent to 5, 15 or 35ng ML-1,
or placebo, twice weekly by subcutaneous injection for 15

Mistletoe

weeks. This was the first study to incorporate double-blinding
into the study design, although it is not clear from the
published information how this was achieved and whether or
not a check on the success of blinding was carried out.
Participants who received the intermediate dose of mistletoe
extract had statistically significant improvements in quality-of-
life scores, compared with those in the placebo group; this
result was not observed with the lower and higher doses of
mistletoe extract.

This result is difficult to interpret from a dose-response
perspective. However, the assumption that the optimal dose of
a herbal medicine is the highest tolerated dose has been
challenged previously, particularly since some herbal medi-
cines, including mistletoe, appear to act at least in part through
immunostimulatory or immunomodulatory mechanisms.°”
This view is borne out by the results of the present study®”
since the apparently effective dose of mistletoe extract
(equivalent to ML-1 15 ng, twice weekly) was not the highest
dose tested (mistletoe extract equivalent to ML-1 35 ng, twice
weekly). Furthermore, the effective dose was much lower than
that administered in a previous study‘'”) (equivalent to ML-1
Ing/kg body weight, albeit of a different ML-1 standardised
mistletoe extract) which found no effect for mistletoe extract,
compared with control, on quality of life. The hypothesis that
high doses of mistletoe extract adversely affect quality of life
requires testing.

The results of another prospective randomised controlled
trial, which have now been published in more detail since
(52,53) Were conducted, have echoed previous
findings that mistletoe extract (in this case, Iscador M) is not
effective as an adjuvant treatment in cancer. Patients involved
in this study had either high-risk stage II (thickness > 3 mm) or
stage III (regional lymph node metastases) melanoma without
distant metastases.“ The study, carried out by the German

systematic reviews

Cancer Society (DKG), at present is published only as a joint
report with another randomised controlled trial set up by the
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) to assess the value of low doses of the recombinant
interferons (rIFNs) rIFN-o2B8 and rIFN-y; the DKG study
contributed patients randomised to the rIFNs and control
groups. With respect to mistletoe, the report provides analysis
only for the Iscador M group versus the control group, and not
for Iscador M versus rIFNs.

The DKG study randomised 407 patients to receive Iscador
M in escalating doses as recommended (n = 102), rIFN-x2B
1 MU subcutaneously every other day (1 = 101), rIFN-y 0.2 mg
subcutaneously every other day (7 = 102), or control (m = 102),
for one year, or until tumour progression. The Iscador M
regimen was as follows: escalating doses from 0.01 to 1.0 mg/
mL (volume administered not stated) every other day over two
weeks, resumed after three treatment-free days for 14 doses of
20 mg/mL every other day, followed by seven treatment-free
days, and repeated over one year (or until tumour progres-
sion).*)

In an intention-to-treat analysis, there was no statistically
significant difference between the mistletoe group and the
control group with respect to the primary end-point of the
study, the disease-free interval, and duration of survival
(estimated hazard ratio (95% Cl): 1.32 (0.93-1.87), p = 0.12
and 1.21 (0.84-1.75), p = 0.31 for disease-free interval and
survival, respectively). Thus, adjuvant treatment with Iscador
M in patients with melanoma did not lead to a more favourable
outcome, when compared with control.* The findings raised

----- PAGE 453 -----
Mistletoe

the hypothesis that mistletoe treatment potentially may have an
adverse effect in patients with melanoma by stimulating
melanoma cell proliferation.

Another prospective, randomised, controlled, multicentre
trial, conducted in China, compared the effects of a mistletoe
preparation (Helixor A) with those of a polysaccharide
biological response modifier (Lentinan; 4 mg by intramuscular
injection, daily) on quality of life in 233 patients with breast (1
= 68), ovarian (n = 71) and non-small-cell lung cancer (1 = 94)
who also received conventional cancer chemotherapy.”
Participants randomised to the mistletoe group received
escalating doses, administered three times weekly by sub-
cutaneous injection and starting with 1 mg up to a maximum
of 200 mg (although it is not stated in a report of the study, this
probably refers to the amount of mistletoe extract, rather than
the mistletoe lectin content). The duration of treatment for
standard and adjuvant therapy was not stated in a report of the
trial.

A statistically significant improvement in the Karnofsky
Performance Index (which measures physical condition) was
reported for the mistletoe group, compared with the placebo
group (proportion of participants reporting an improvement:
50.4% and 32.4% for Helixor A and Lentinan, respectively; p
= 0.002). However, it is not known to what extent the lack
of blinding of treatment allocation could have influenced the
results and, in view of this and other methodological
limitations (e.g. no sample size calculation), the results of
this trial cannot be considered conclusive.

A new instrument has been developed to measure specifi-
cally the quality of life of patients with cancer treated with
mistletoe preparations in the clinical trial setting.‘

Effects on immunological parameters Immunomodulatory

effects do not necessarily translate into clinical efficacy, and
the influence of some immune parameters, for example,
interleukin-1 and -6, may be to stimulate the growth of certain
types of tumour cells.’ Other factors, such as res
changes in immune parameters, can occur in advanced stages in
some types of cancer, thus the responses of different tumour
types towards immunomodulatory effects need to be consid-
ered separately.

Many studies involving patients with cancer have investi-
gated the effects of mistletoe preparations on immune
parameters, such as lymphocytes, natural killer cells and
cytokines. Most, but not all, of these studies describe effects
for different mistletoe preparations. The results of several
studies have been summarised in a non-systematic, yet
comprehensive, review of clinical trials of well-characterised,
lectin-standardised mistletoe extracts in patients with different
types of cancer.

The two most methodologically rigorous randomise
controlled trials (see Therapeutic effects, Cancer), which
assessed the effects of mistletoe extracts on immune para-
meters (as well as on clinical outcome measures), reporte:
conflicting results. In a randomised controlled trial involving
477 patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma who
received an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) in

istance to

addition to conventional treatment, there were no statistically

significant differences between the treatment and contro!
groups in blood concentrations of the following lymphocyte
subsets when assessed at different time points throughout the
study: CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD19+, CD16+53+3+,
CD16+534+3, CD25+ and CD3+DR."! In contrast, a

randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial involving 272
patients with breast cancer who received mistletoe extract
(Lektinol) equivalent to 5, 15 or 35ng ML-1, or placebo, in
addition to conventional treatment found a. statistically
significant increase in blood concentrations of CD4+ cells in
the mistletoe group, compared with the placebo group.

Other studies discussed in the review had methodological
flaws and their results cannot be considered definitive. In one
of these studies — a randomised, controlled trial involving 35
patients with malignant stage III/IV glioma — statistically
significant increases in peripheral blood CD3+, CD4+ and
CD8-+ cell counts were observed after three months' treatment
with mistletoe extract (Eurixor) equivalent to Ing/kg body
weight twice weekly, compared with values for the control
group.” Another trial, in which 47 patients with advanced
breast cancer were randomised to receive mistletoe extract
(Eurixor) equivalent to 0.5 or 1 ng/kg body weight twice weekly
by subcutaneous injection for eight weeks followed by a four-
week break, for at least two cycles, reported increases in
plasma B-endorphin concentrations and enhanced activity of
natural killer cells and T-lymphocytes, compared with
pretreatment values.” This trial supported the findings of
an earlier similar study,'° which also reported increased in
vitro release of cytokines (IL-2, IFN-y and TNFa) by
mononuclear cells from patients with breast cancer treated
with mistletoe extract (Eurixor).

Other preliminary studies have described the production of
anti-ML-1 antibodies in patients with cancer who were treated
(6) The antibodies produced were
typically of the immunoglobulin G type, although in some
instances, antibodies of the immunoglobulin E and other types
were produced. There is some evidence that the antibody
ponse differs depending on the type of mistletoe preparation
administered (i.e. the profile of antigens within the extract).
In association with this work, in vitro studies showed that anti-
ML-1 antibodies neutralised the cytotoxic effect of mistletoe

with mistletoe extracts.

re

lectins on peripheral blood mononuclear cells,(°"% and
tumour cell lines.)

In a small (7 = 14), uncontrolled study, an increase in the
incorporation of [*H]thymidine into the DNA of unstimulated
lymphocytes, as a marker for DNA repair, was observed in
patients with breast cancer who received mistletoe extract
(Iscador M; single intravenous infusion then, after two days,
subcutaneous injections daily for seven days).°” The effect was
greatest on days 7-9 of treatment when values were 2.7 times
igher than pretreatment values. This finding raised several
ypotheses which require further testing.

Mistletoe preparations have also been documented to induce
immunological responses in healthy volunteers. In a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 48
ealthy volunteers, Iscador Q (in increasing doses twice weekly
y subcutaneous injection, over 12 weeks), but not Iscador P
(in increasing doses twice weekly by subcutaneous injection
over 12 weeks), induced eosinophilia after five weeks' treatment
which persisted until the end of treatment (week 12), when
compared with placebo. At the end of the study, anti-ML-1
antibodies were detected in all 16 volunteers in the Iscador Q
group, but in less than half those exposed to Iscador P, whereas
anti-viscotoxin A2 immunoglobulin G antibodies were found
in all mistletoe-exposed participants.” In a preliminary study
involving healthy volunteers who received Iscador Q_ by
subcutaneous injection, significant increases in the microcircu-
lation were observed, both local to the injection site and in

----- PAGE 454 -----
other target tissues investigated (e.g. gingival, rectal). Increased
transmigration of white blood cells was also noted both locally
and in other target tissues, a phenomenon which is believed to
be important in the immunological response.

In other studies, T-lymphocytes were obtained from blood
samples from patients with cancer who had received sub-
cutaneous injections three times weekly of aqueous mistletoe
extracts prepared from mistletoe grown on apple and pine trees
to examine their response to subsequent incubation with the
3.79 Proliferation of T-lymphocytes
from mistletoe-treated patients occurred, but was not observed
for T-lymphocytes obtained from untreated control subjects.
Further investigation revealed that the responding cells were
the CD44 T-cell subset.” A small uncontrolled study
s in the release of cytokines, such as TNFa
and IL-6, measured in the supernatants of cultured peripheral
blood mononuclear cells obtained from patients with breast
cancer who were treated with mistletoe extract (ABNOBA-
Viscum, 0.2mg fresh plant material/30kg body weight by
subcutaneous injection twice weekly for 16 weeks).

mistletoe extracts in vitro.

described increa:

Other conditions Clinical investigation of the effects of mistletoe
preparations in conditions other than cancer is limited. Several
preliminary investigations in patients with chronic hepatitis C
infection,” respiratory infections”°”” and HIV infection”
have been undertaken. Some of these studies have reported
improvements in clinical outcomes and immunological para-
meters in mistletoe recipients, compared with pretreatment
values or with placebo or other control group values. However,
due to the methodological limitations of these studies, the
results are inconclusive.

Side-effects, To.

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for mistletoe are limited and
further investigation of these aspects is required. Many clinical
trials have not provided an assessment of safety or have reported
little information on safety aspects, and there is a paucity of well-
designed postmarketing surveillance studies of mistletoe prepara-
tions.

The UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency's (MHRA) national spontaneous reporting scheme for
suspected adverse drug reactions has received a total of four
reports of suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs) associated
with Iscador preparations up to 2004.” These reports described
12 suspected ADRs, including hepatitis and abnormal liver
function (two reports), myalgia, dizziness, wheezing, cough,
hoarseness, abdominal pain, pyrexia, urticaria (one report) and
a suspected interaction (one report).”” The MHRA has received
one further suspected ADR report of arteritis associated with a
multi-ingredient product containing mistletoe (no further details
available at the time of writing). Causality in these cases has not
been established.

Reviews of clinical trials which have provided an assessment of
the safety of mistletoe, generally have reported mistletoe
preparations to be well tolerated.°*°°) The most frequently
reported adverse events in trials using ML-standardised mistletoe
preparations were local reactions, such as urticaria and/or
erythema, at the injection site which usually resolved within 48
©) The frequency of occurrence of such reactions in
patients with cancer who received mistletoe preparations by
injection has been described as being up to 48%.°*

hours.

Mistletoe

This information, however, comes mostly from small-scale
clinical trials involving patients with different types of cancer who
were also receiving various different conventiona
(surgery, radiotherapy and/or cancer chemotherapeutic agents) in
addition to mistletoe preparations. Furthermore, studies have
assessed the effects of different types of mistletoe preparations,
which vary both qualitatively and quantitatively in their
composition, administered according to different dosage regi-
mens. Against this background, the safety of each individual
mistletoe preparation needs to be considered.

In a randomised controlled trial involving 477 patients with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma receiving conventional
treatment, an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) was
administered in doses equivalent to ML-1 1ng/kg body weight
twice weekly by subcutaneous injection over a 60-week period in
treatment cycles of 12 weeks followed by a break in treatment after
every four weeks; the control group did not receive any additional
treatment.” In total, 43% of mistletoe recipients developed local
and/or systemic adverse events at the onset of mistletoe treatment,
although this fell to around 8% by week 32 or later of treatment.
The most common local reactions occurring at the onset of
treatment were rubor, prurigo and indurations (hard spots);
vesiculation was observed in 1-3% of mistletoe recipients over the
treatment period. Other reactions (melalgia, fever, sleeplessness,
tiredness, cold or heat sensations and sneezing) occurred in 14%
of the mistletoe group. In total, around 18% of mistletoe
recipients refused further injections during the study (after a
median of 12 weeks) because of adverse events believed to be

treatments

induced by mistletoe.”

In a randomised controlled trial involving 407 patients with
melanoma who received mistletoe extract (Iscador M in escalating
as recommended), rIFN-«2f, rIFN-y, or control, for one
year or until tumour progression, study withdrawals due to
anorexia, malaise, depressive moods, fever and inflammation at
the injection site occurred in 4.9%, 4.6% and 7.8% of the
mistletoe-, rIFN-0.2B- and rIFN-y recipients, respectively. Apart
from the statement that no organ toxicity was observed during the
study, no further information on safety aspects was provided.
Several small, non-randomised, controlled studies have assessed
the tolerability of mistletoe preparations in immunocompromised
HIV-positive and healthy individuals. In two studies in which
participants received mistletoe extracts (Iscador Qu FrF or Iscador
Qu Special) by subcutaneous injection twice weekly in increasing
loses for up to 68 weeks, erythema at the injection site occurred in
all but one participant.°°*”

Other adverse events rated to be possibly or probably associated
with mistletoe extract (Iscador Qu FrF) were headache, fatigue,
fever and inflammation; diarrhoea and nausea occurred in small
numbers of participants, but were not thought to be
with mistletoe treatment.°°*” Significant increases in serum urea
nitrogen and creatinine concentrations were observed for HIV-
positive participants after mistletoe treatment, compared with
baseline values (statistical comparisons with the control group
were not undertaken), but concentrations remained within the

los

sociated

normal range; no other statistically significant changes in
biochemical parameters, including liver function test values,
were seen.

Aspects of the local skin reaction that occurs following
subcutaneous injection of mistletoe extracts (Iscador QFrF or
Qu Special) have been described following studies involving
healthy volunteers.°”*» The reaction appears to involve a
subepidermal lymphomonocytic infiltrate, induced by mistletoe
extract, at the injection site.

----- PAGE 455 -----
Mistletoe

Hepatitis has been documented in a woman who had ingested a
herbal preparation containing kelp, motherwort, scullcap and
mistletoe.“ Mistletoe was assumed by the authors of the report
to be the causal factor since it was the only ingredient of the
remedy known to contain toxic constituents (although these had
not previously been linked with hepatotoxicity). No other
instances of hepatotoxicity have been associated with mistletoe
ingestion and, since the case report was published, hepatitis has
been documented with scullcap (see Scullcap).

V. album should not be confused with American mistletoe
(Phoradendron leucarpum, P. serotinum, P. flavescens). The safety
of American mistletoe has been reviewed.'(7"8**?)

Anaphylactic reactions There are isolated reports of anaphy-
lactic reactions occurring in individuals who have received
parenteral treatment with mistletoe extracts. One report described
three such cases involving patients who were already undergoing
treatment with mistletoe, but did not provide full details of the
mistletoe preparations administered, the reactions and outcomes,
and did not undertake a causality assessment.** One case
involved a non-atopic, 44-year-old man who was admitted to an
intensive care unit with hypotension, urticaria and loss of
consciousness which had developed within five minutes of an
injection of V. album L. (Quercus) 10mg (route of inje
specified). The man was treated with intravenous fluids and
corticosteroids. A similar case involved a 70-year-old non-atopic
woman after receiving her 25th dose (0.1 mg) of mistletoe extract;
one month later, she displayed a positive result (which included
generalised pruritus, pharyngeal oedema and malaise) following
an intradermal challenge with V. album at one-tenth dilution.
The third case involved a 42-year-old man with multiple
who received a maintenance dose of V. album (Quercus) 10 mg and
who immediately developed pruritus, oedema, asthma and
hypotension.

tion not

leros

Ss

Preclinical data

Data from an in vitro study involving human melanoma cell lines
indicate that clinically relevant low concentrations of mistletoe
lectin may stimulate tumour cell proliferation.” In contrast,
other in vitro experiments did not demonstrate that an aqueous
mistletoe extract (containing galactosid
265 g/mL) stimulated tumour cell proliferation.

Toxicity in animals has been documented for mistletoe lectins

-specific mistletoe lectin
(90)

and viscotoxins. Intravenous administration of viscotoxin to cats
(35 g/kg) resulted in a negative inotropic effect on cardiac muscle,
reflex bradycardia and hypotension.” Viscotoxins A3 and B have
also caused muscle contracture and progressive depolarisation in
isolated smooth, skeletal and cardiac muscle preparations (rabbit,
frog).°?) The mode of action was thought to involve the
displacement of calcium from cell membrane-bound sites. The
viscotoxins precipitate histamine release from human leukocytes
in an irritant manner without destroying the cells. Viscotoxin is
toxic on parenteral administration and an LDso value (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) has been estimated as 0.7 mg/kg.°

Mistletoe lectins inhibit protein synthesis in both cells and cell-
free systems.°” In common with other known toxic lectins (e.g.
ricin), mistletoe lectins bind to plasma proteins, are specific
towards p-galactose, possess some cytotoxic activity and have
caused macroscopic lesions in rats (e.g. ascites, congested
intestine, pancreatic haemorrhages).°*) An LDso (mice) value for
mistletoe lectin fraction is reported as 80 g/kg compared with
3 pg/kg for ricin.°”

Documented LDso values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) are
greater than 2.25mg for the polysaccharide fraction from the
berries, 32 mg for the crude plant juice, and 276 mg for Iscador.°*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Mistletoe is contra-indicated in cases of known allergy to
mistletoe preparations, acute inflammatory conditions and high
fever, and chronic progressive conditions, such as tuberculosis.'°°?
Increases in body temperature can occur following mistletoe
injection.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
activities of mistletoe, whether or not there is potential for
clinically important interactions between mistletoe and other
medicines with similar or opposing effects, such as existing
cardiac, immunosuppressant, hypo/hypertensive, antidepressant
and anticoagulant/coagulant therapies, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The use of mistletoe is contra-
indicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding in view of the toxic
constituents.

References

1 Pfiiller U. Chemical constituents of European mistletoe (Viscum
album L.) isolation and characterisation of the main relevant
ingredients: lectins, viscotoxins, oligo-/polysaccharides, flavonoids,
alkaloids. In: Biissing A, ed. Mistletoe. The Genus Viscum.
Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Press, 2000: 101-122.

2 Fukunaga T et al. Studies on the constituents of the European
mistletoe, Viscum album L. Chem Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 3292-3297.

3. Krzaczek T. Pharmacobotanical studies of the subspecies Viscum
album L. \V. Ann Univ Mariae Curie-Sklodowska, Sect D 1977; 32:
281-291.

4 Becker H, Exner J. Comparative studies of flavonoids and
phenylearboxylic acids of mistletoes from different host trees. Z
Pflanzenphysiol 1980; 97: 417-428.

S Khwaja TA et al. Recent studies on the anticancer activities of
mistletoe (Viscum album) and its alkaloids. Oncology 1986; 43: 42-50.

6 Graziano MN et al. Isolation of tyramine from five Argentine species
of Loranthaceae. Lloydia 1967; 30: 242-244.

7 Khwaja TA et al. Isolation of biologically active alkaloids from
Korean mistletoe Viscum album, coloratum. Experientia 1980; 36:
599-600.

8 Stein GM, Berg PA. Non-lectin component in a fermented extract

induces proliferation of
lymphocytes from healthy and allergic individuals in vitro. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol 1994; 47: 33-38.

9 Deliorman D et al. A new acyclic monoterpene glucoside from Viscum

album ssp album. Fitoterapia 2002; 72: $101.

10 Krzaczek T. Pharmacobotanical studies of the subspecies Viscum
album L. Ill. Terpenes and sterols. Ann Univ Mariae Curie-
Sklodowska, Sect D 1977; 32: 125-134.

11 Steuer-Vogt MK e¢ al. The effect of an adjuvant mistletoe treatment
programme in resected head and neck cancer patients: a randomised
controlled clinical trial. Eur J Cancer 2001; 37: 23-31.

12 Mengs U et al. Mistletoe extracts standardized to mistletoe lectins in
oncology: review on current status of preclinical research. Anticancer
Res 2002; 22: 1399-1408.

13 Die Mistel in der Tumortherapie. Grundlagenforschung und klinik.

from Viscum album L. grown on pin

In: Proceedings of the 3rd Mistletoe Symposium, Nonnweiler-
Otzenhausen, Germany, 2003. Nonnweiler-Otzenhausen:
Europaisches Bildungszentrum Otzenhausen, 2003.

14 Mansky PJ. Mistletoe and cancer: controversies and perspectives.
Semin Oncol 2002; 29: 589-594.

15 Gabius H-J et al. From ill-defined extracts to the immunomodulatory
lectin: will there be a reason for oncological application of mistletoe?
Planta Med 1994; 60: 2-7.

----- PAGE 456 -----
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Bocci V. Mistletoe (Viscum album) lectins as cytokine inducers and
immunoadjuvant in tumor therapy. A review. ] Biol Reg Homeostatic
Agents 1993; 7: 1-6.

Schink M. Mistletoe therapy for human cancer: the role of the natural
killer cells. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $47-S51.
Biissing A. Biological and pharmacological properties of Viscum
album L. From tissue flask to man. In: Biissing A, ed. Mistletoe. The
Genus Viscum. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Press, 2000: 128-182.
Janssen O et al. In vitro effects of mistletoe extracts and mistletoe
lectins. Cytotoxicity towards tumor cells due to the induction of
programmed cell death (apoptosis). Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1993;
43: 1221-1227.

Zarkovié N et al. Comparison of the effects of high and low
concentrations of the separated Viscum album L. lectins and of the
plain mistletoe plant preparation (Isorel) on the growth of normal and
tumor cells in vitro. Periodicum Biologorum 1995; 97: 61-67.

Urech K et al. Comparative study on the cytotoxic effect of viscotoxin
and mistletoe lectin on tumour cells in culture. Phytother Res 1995; 9:
49-55.

Valentiner U et al. The cytotoxic effect of mistletoe lectins I, II and III
on sensitive and multidrug resistant human colon cancer cell lines in
vitro. Toxicology 2002; 171: 187-199.

Van Huyen J-PD et al. Induction of apoptosis of endothelial cells by
Viscum album: a role for anti-tumoral properties of mistletoe lectins.
Mol Med 2002; 8: 600-606.

Biissing A et al. Differences in the apoptosis-inducing properties of
Viscum album L. extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): S9-S14.

Biissing A, Schietzel M. Apoptosis-inducing properties of Viscum
album L. extracts from different host trees correlate with their content
of toxic mistletoe lectins. Anticancer Res 1999; 19: 23-28.

Li S-S. Mistletoe lectins: telomerase inhibitors in alternative cancer
therapy. Drug Discovery Today 2002; 7: 896-897.

Zarkovié N et al. The Viscum album preparation Isorel inhibits the
growth of melanoma B16F10 by influencing the tumour-host
relationship. Anticancer Drugs 1997; Suppl. Suppl.1: $17-S22.
Burger AM et al. Anticancer activity of an aqueous mistletoe extract
(AME) in syngeneic murine tumor models. Anticancer Res 2001; 21:
1965-1968.

Kuttan G e¢ al. Anticarcinogenic and antimetastatic activity of
Iscador. Anticancer Drugs 1997; Suppl. Suppl.1: $15-S16.

Weber K et al. Effects of a standardized mistletoe preparation on
metastatic B16 melanoma colonization in murine lungs. Arzneim
Forsch/Drug Res 1998; 48: 497-502.

Braun JM et al. Standardized mistletoe extract augments immune
response and down-regulates local and metastatic tumor growth in
murine models. Anticancer Res 2002; 22: 4187-4190.

Braun JM et al. Application of standardized mistletoe extracts
augment immune response and down regulates metastatic organ
colonization in murine models. Cancer Lett 2001; 170: 25-31.
Mueller EA e¢ al. Biochemical characterization of a component in
extracts of Viscum album enhancing human NK cytotoxicity.
Immunopharmacology 1989; 17: 11-18.

Hostanska K et al. A plant lectin derived from Viscum album induces
cytokine gene expression and protein production in cultures of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Nat Immun 1995; 14: 295-304.
Braun JM et al. Cytokine release of whole blood from adult female
donors challenged with mistletoe lectin-1 standardised mistletoe
extract and E. coli endotoxin or phytohaemagglutinin (PHA).
Anticancer Res 2003; 23: 1349-1352.

Ribéreau-Gayon G et al. Modulation of cytotoxicity and enhancement
of cytokine release by Viscum album L. extracts or mistletoe lectins.
Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $3-S8.

Joller PW et al. Stimulation of cytokine production via a special
standardized mistletoe preparation in an in vitro human skin bioassay.
Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1996; 46: 649-653.

Bloksma N ef¢ al. Stimulation of humoral and cellular immunity by
Viscum preparations. Planta Med 1982; 46: 221-227.

Coeugniet EG, Elek E. Immunomodulation with Viscum album and
Echinacea purpurea extracts. Onkologie 1987; 10: 27-33.

Luther P, Mehnert WH. Zum serologischen Verhalten einiger
handelsiiblicher Praparate aus Viscum album L., insbesondere des

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

5S

56

57

59

60

61

62

64

Mistletoe

Iscador, in bezug aug menschliche Blutzellen und Aszites-Tumorzellen
von Mausen. Acta Biol Med Ger 1974; 33: 351-357.

Luther P et al. Isolation and characterization of mistletoe extracts. II.
Action of agglutinating and cytotoxic fractions on mouse ascites
tumor cells. Acta Biol Med Ger 1977; 36: 119-125.

Luther P et al. Reaktionen einiger antikérperahnlicher Substanzen aus
Insekten (Protektine) und Pflanzen (Lektine) mit Aszites-Tumorzellen.
Acta Biol Med Ger 1973; 31: K11-K18.

Ziska P et al. The lectin from Viscum album L. purification by
biospecific affinity chromatography. Experientia 1978; 34: 123-124.
Franz H et al. Isolation and properties of three lectins from mistletoe
(Viscum album L.). Biochem J 1981; 195: 481-484.

Luther P e¢ al. The lectin from Viscum album L. — isolation,
characterization, properties and structure. Int J Biochem 1980; 11:
429-435.

Ziska P et al. Chemical modification studies on the D-
galactopyranosyl binding lectin from the mistletoe Viscum album L.
Acta Biol Med Ger 1979; 38: 1361-1363.

Ziska P, Franz H. Studies on the interaction of the mistletoe lectin I
with carbohydrates. Experientia 1981; 37: 219.

Franz H e¢ al. Isolation and characterization of mistletoe extracts. I.
Affinity chromatography of mistletoe crude extract on insolubilized
plasma proteins. Acta Biol Med Ger 1976; 36: 113-117.

Luther P et al. Allergy and lectins: interaction between IgE-mediated
histamine release and glycoproteins from Viscum album L. (mistletoe).
Acta Biol Med Ger 1978; 37: 1623-1628.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.
Deliorman D e¢ al. Evaluation of antimycobacterial activity of Viscum
album subspecies. Pharmaceutical Biol 2001; 39: 381-383.

Kienle GS et al. Mistletoe in cancer. A systematic review on controlled
clinical trials. Eur J Med Res 2003; 8: 109-119.

Ernst E et al. Mistletoe for cancer? A systematic review of randomised
clinical trials. Int J Cancer 2003; 107: 262-267.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Mistletoe treatment for cancer. Review of
controlled trials in humans. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 255-260.
Stauder H, Kreuser E-D. Mistletoe extracts standardised in terms of
mistletoe lectins (ML 1) in oncology: current state of clinical research.
Onkologie 2002; 25: 374-380.

Wetzel D, Schafer M. Results of a randomised placebo-controlled
multicentre study with PS76A2 (standardised mistletoe preparation) in
patients with breast cancer receiving adjuvant chemotherapy
[abstract]. Phytomedicine 2000; II(Suppl): 34.

Vickers A. Botanical medicines for the treatment of cancer: rationale,
overview of current data, and methodological considerations for phase
I and II trials. Cancer Invest 2002; 29: 1069-1979.

Kleeberg UR et al. for the EORTC Melanoma Group in cooperation
with the German Cancer Society (DKG). Final results of the EORTC
18871/DKG 80-1 randomised phase III trial: rIFN-«2B versus rIFN-y
versus Iscador M" versus observation after surgery in melanoma
patients with either high-risk primary (thickness > 3 mm) or regional
lymph node metastasis. Eur J Cancer 2004; 40: 390-402.

Piao BK e¢ al. Impact of complementary mistletoe extract treatment
on quality of life in breast, ovarian and non-small cell lung cancer
patients. A prospective randomized controlled clinical trial.
Anticancer Res 2004; 24: 303-310.

Kirchberger I et al. Development and validation of an instrument to
measure the effects of a mistletoe preparation on quality of life of
cancer patients: the Life Quality Lection-53 (LQL-53) Questionnaire.
Qual Life Res 2004; 13: 463-479.

Lenartz D et al. Immunoprotective activity of the galactoside-specific
lectin from mistletoe after destructive therapy in glioma patients.
Anticancer Res 1996; 16: 3799-3802.

Heiny B-M et al. Correlation of immune cell activities and B-
endorphin release in breast carcinoma patients treated with
galactoside-specific lectin standardized mistletoe extract. Anticancer
Res 1998; 18: 583-586.

Heiny B-M, Beuth J. Mistletoe extract standardized for the
galactoside-specific lectin (ML-1) induces f-endorphin release and
immunopotentiation in breast cancer patients. Anticancer Res 1994;
14: 1339-1342.

Stettin A et al. Anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies are produced in
patients during therapy with an aqueous mistletoe extract derived

----- PAGE 457 -----
65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

Mistletoe

from Viscum album L. and neutralize lectin-induced cytotoxicity in
vitro. Klin Wochenschr 1990; 68: 896-900.

Stein GM et al. Induction of anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies in
relation to different mistletoe extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8
(Suppl. Suppl.1): $57-S59.

Stein GM et al. Modulation of the cellular and humoral immune
responses of tumor patients by mistletoe therapy. Eur ] Med Res 1998;
3: 194-202.

Stein GM et al. Recognition of different antigens of mistletoe extracts
by anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies. Cancer Lett 1999; 135: 165-170.
Tonevitsky AG et al. Hybridoma cells producing antibodies against A-
chain of mistletoe lectin are resistant to this toxin. Immunol Lett 1995;
46: 5-8.

Kovacs E et al. Improvement of DNA repair in lymphocytes of breast
cancer patients treated with Viscum album extract (Iscador). Eur ]
Cancer 1991; 27: 1672-1676.

Huber R et al. Effects of a lectin- and a viscotoxin-rich mistletoe
preparation on clinical and hematologic parameters: a placebo-
controlled evaluation in healthy subjects. J Altern Comp Med 2002; 8:
857-866.

Klein R et al. In vivo-induction of antibodies to mistletoe lectin-1 and
viscotoxin by exposure to aqueous mistletoe extracts: a randomised
double-blinded placebo-controlled phase I study in healthy
individuals. Eur J Med Res 2002; 7: 155-163.

Klopp R et al. Changes in immunological characteristics of white
blood cells after administration of standardized mistletoe extract. In
Vivo 2001; 15: 447-458.

Fischer S et al. Oligoclonal in vitro response of CD4 T cells to vesicles
of mistletoe extracts in mistletoe-treated cancer patients. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 1997; 44: 150-156.

Fischer S et al. Stimulation of the specific immune system by mistletoe
extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $33-$37.
Huber R et al. Effects of a mistletoe preparations with defined lectin
content on chronic hepatitis C: an individually controlled cohort
study. Eur J Med Res 2001; 6: 399-405.

Chernyshov VP e¢ al. Immunomodulatory actions of Viscum album
(Iscador) in children with recurrent respiratory disease as a result of
the Chernobyl nuclear accident. Comp Ther Med 1997; 5: 141-146.
Chernyshov VP e¢ al. Immunomodulatory and clinical effects of
Viscum album (Iscador M and Iscador P) in children with recurrent
respiratory infections as a result of the Chernobyl] nuclear accident.
Am J Therapeut 2000; 7: 195-203.

Stoss M, Gorter RW. No evidence of IFN-y increase in the serum of
HIV-positive and healthy subjects after subcutaneous injection of a

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

non-fermented Viscum album L. extract. Nat Immun 1998; 16: 157—
164.

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Adverse Drug
Reactions On-line Information Tracking (ADROIT) database
(accessed 26 July 2004).

Van Wely M et al. Toxicity of a standardized mistletoe extract in
immunocompromised and healthy individuals. Am ] Therapeut 1999;
6: 37-43.

Gorter RW et al. Tolerability of an extract of European mistletoe
among immunocompromised and healthy individuals. Altern Ther
1999; 5: 37-48.

Gorter RW et al. Subcutaneous infiltrates induced by injection of
mistletoe extracts (Iscador). Am ] Therapeut 1998; 5: 181-187.

Stoss M et al. Decrease of activated lympocytes four and nine hours
after a subcutaneous injection of a Viscum album L. extract in healthy
volunteers. Nat Immun 1998; 16: 185-197.

Harvey J, Colin-Jones DG. Mistletoe hepatitis. BMJ 1981; 282: 186-
187.

Hall AH et al. Ass
1320-1323.

Spiller HA et al. Retrospective study of mistletoe ingestion. Clin
Toxicol 1996; 34: 405-408.

Krenzelok EP et al. American mistletoe exposures. Am J Emerg Med
1997; 15: 516-520.

Hutt N et al. Anaphylactic reactions after therapeutic injection of
mistletoe (Viscum album L.). Allergol Immunol 2001; 29: 201-203.
Gabius H-J et al. Evidence for stimulation of tumor proliferation in
cell lines and histotypic cultures by clinically relevant low doses of the
galactoside-binding mistletoe lectin, a component of proprietary
extracts. Cancer Invest 2001; 19: 114-126.

Burger AM et al. No evidence of stimulation of human tumor cell
proliferation by a standardized aqueous mistletoe extract in vitro.
Anticancer Res 2003; 23: 3801-3806.

Rosell S, Samuelsson G. Effect of mistletoe viscotoxin and phoratoxin
on blood circulation. Toxicon 1966; 4: 107-110.

Andersson K-E, Joéhannsson M. Effects of viscotoxin on rabbit heart
and aorta, and on frog skeletal muscle. Eur J Pharmacol 1973; 23:
223-231.

Samuelsson G. Screening of plants of the family Loranthaceae for
toxic proteins. Acta Pharm Suec 1966; 3: 353-362.

Stirpe F et al. Inhibition of protein synthesis by a toxic lectin from
Viscum album L. (mistletoe). Biochem J 1980; 190: 843-845.

ssing mistletoe toxicity. Ann Emerg Med 1986; 15:

----- PAGE 458 -----
Motherwort

n

reported for motherwort (L. cardiaca), although the clinical
relevance of this is not clear. There is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of motherwort, and any
symptoms of cardiac disorder are not suitable for self-
diagnosis and treatment with a herbal remedy. In view of the
lack of toxicity data, excessive use of motherwort and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Leonurus cardiaca L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Leonurus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids 0.35%. Stachydrine (a pyrrolidine-type alkaloid),
betonicine and turicin (stereoisomers of 4-hydroxystachydrine),
leonurine 0.0068% (a guanidine derivative), leonuridin, leonur-
inine. The presence of leonurine in L. cardiaca has been disputed,
although it has been documented for other Leonurus species.

Flavonoids Glycosides of apigenin, kaempferol, and quercetin
(e.g. hyperoside, kaempferol-3-p-glucoside, genkwanin, quinque-
loside, quercitrin and rutin).2°>)

Iridoids Ajugol, ajugoside, galiridoside, leonuride and three or
four more unidentified glycosides.

Tannins —2-8%. Type not specified. Pseudotannins (e.g.
pyrogallol, catechins).

Terpenoids Volatile oil 0.05%, resin, wax, ursolic acid, leocardin
(a labdane diterpene)) as an epimeric mixture, and a diterpene
lactone similar to marrubiin.” Cardiac glycosides (bufadienolide/
bufanolide type) have been documented although their presence in
motherwort has not been confirmed.

Other constituents Citric acid, malic acid, oleic acid, bitter
principles,” carbohydrates 2.89%, choline and a_ phenolic
glycoside (caffeic acid 4-rutinoside).

A Cad-specific lectin has been isolated from the seeds.”

Food Use

Motherwort is not used in foods. Previously, motherwort has been
listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a Herb of
Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Motherwort is stated to possess sedative and antispasmodic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cardiac debility,
simple tachycardia, effort syndrome, amenorrhoea, and _specifi-
cally for cardiac symptoms associated with neurosis.(6% 07 #6

Alkaloids
{= Geom
OH NOTH
cH’ ‘CH, cHs” ‘CH,

stachydrine betonicine

CH;O

°

u _/NH2
HO C-O(CHaW N= CK
CH;

leonurine
Iridoids

genkwanin

leocardin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of motherwort.

----- PAGE 459 -----
Motherwort

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(CoO

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The uterotonic principle in motherwort is unclear, although
leonurine is reported to be the utero-active constituent in various
Leonurus species. In addition, oxytocic activity documented for L.
cardiaca has been attributed to another alkaloid constituent,
stachydrine.'©" Uterotonic activity has been reported for
leonurine in various in vitro preparations including human
myometrial strips and isolated rat uterus." '?

In vitro cardioactivity has been documented for motherwort.
An alcoholic extract was found to have a direct inhibitory effect
on myocardial cells: antagonistic action towards calcium chloride
(provided that the extract was administered before calcium
chloride), and towards both «- and B-adrenoceptor stimulation
was observed. No significant effect on the cardiac activity of the
isolated guinea-pig heart was noted for caffeic acid 4-rutinoside.®

Ursolic acid has been reported to possess antiviral, tumour-
inhibitory and cytotoxic activities." Ursolic acid was found to
inhibit the Epstein-Barr virus in vitro and to inhibit tumour
production by 12-O-tetradeconoyl phorbol (TPA) in mouse skin,
with activity comparable to that of retinoic acid, a known tumour-
promoter inhibitor.” In vitro cytotoxicity was documented in
lymphocytic leukaemia (P-388, L-1210), human lung carcinoma
(A-549), KB cells, human colon (HCT-8) and mammary tumour
(MCE-7)."1)

(12)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
motherwort and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for motherwort
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

It has been stated that the leaves of motherwort may cause
contact dermatitis and that the lemon-scented oil may result in
photosensitisation.“°*

Preclinical data

No documented toxicity studies were located. Cytotoxic activities
have been reported for ursolic acid (see Pharmacological Actions,
In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sensitive individuals may experience an allergic reaction.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of motherwort to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Motherwort is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.'“?” In view of the lack of toxicity data and the
documented in vitro uterotonic activity,“©*” the use of mother-

wort during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Biocarde. Germany: Biovital Aktiv; Biovital Classic; Mutellon;
Oxacant-sedativ. Hungary: Biovital; Biovital. Switzerland:
Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation. UK: Fenneherb
Prementaid; Menopause Relief; Modern Herbals Stress; Period
Pain Relief; Prementaid; Quiet Life; Roberts Alchemilla
Compound Tablets; SuNerven; Wellwoman.

References

1 Gulubov AZ. Structure of alkaloids from Leonurus cardiaca. Nauch
Tr Vissh Predagog Inst Plovdiv Mat Fiz Khim Biol 1970; 8: 129-132.

2. Scott JH et al. Components of Leonurus cardiaca. Sci Pharm 1973; 41:
149-155.

3. Kartnig T et al. Flavonoid-O-glycosides from the herbs of Leonurus
cardiaca. ] Nat Prod 1985; 48: 494-507.

4 Buzogany K, Cucu V. Comparative study between the species of
Leonurus quinquelobatus. Part Il Iridoids. Clujul Med 1983; 56: 385—
388.

5 Malakov P et al. The structure of leocardin, two epimers of a
diterpenoid from Leonurus cardiaca. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 2341-
2343.

6 Brieskorn CH, Hofmann R. Labiatenbitterstoffe: Ein clerodanderivat
aus Leonurus cardiaca L. Tetrahedron Lett 1979; 27: 2511-2512.

7 Brieskorn CH, Broschek W. Bitter principles and furanoid compounds
of L. cardiaca. Pharm Acta Helv 1972; 47: 123-132.

8 Tschesche R et al. Caffeic acid 4-rutinoside from Leonurus cardiaca.
Phytochemistry 1980; 19: 2783.

9 Bird GWG, Wingham J. Anti-Cad lectin from the seeds of Leonurus
cardiaca. Clin Lab Haematol 1979; 1: 57-59.

10 Yeung HW et al. The structure and biological effect of leonurine — a
uterotonic principle from the Chineses drug, I-mu Ts'ao. Planta Med
1977; 31: 51-S6.

11 Kong YC et al. Isolation of the uterotonic principle from Leonorus
artemisia, the Chinese motherwort. Am J Chin Med 1976; 4: 373-382.

12 Yanxing X. The inhibitory effect of motherwort extract on pulsating
myocardial cells in vitro. | Trad Chin Med 1983; 3: 185-188.

13. Kuo-Hsiung L et al. The cytotoxic principles of Prunella vulgaris,
Psychotria serpens, and Hyptis capitata: Ursolic acid and related
derivatives. Planta Med 1988; 54: 308.

14 Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleanolic acid on skin
tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Cancer
Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

----- PAGE 460 -----
oe - altho ‘do ai
studies were located. Lipid-lowering properties via a stimulant
action on the thyroid gland have been documented for C.
mukul both in animals and, to a limited extent, in humans.
However, robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of myrrh is lacking. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of myrrh and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Commiphora myrrha (Nees) Engl. (Burseraceae)

Synonym(s)

African Myrrh, Arabian Myrrh, Balsamodendron Myrrha,
Balsamodendron myrrha (Nees), Bitter Myrrh, Commiphora,
Commiphora molmol (Engl.) Engl., C. coriacea Engl., C.
cuspidata Chiov., C. habessinica (O. Berg) Engl. var. grossedentata
Chiov., C. myrrha (Nees) Engl. var. molmol Engl., C. playfairii
(Oliv.) Engl. var. benadirensis Chiov., C. rivae Engl., Diddin,
Didin, Male Myrrh, Malmal, Mohmol, Molmol, Murr, Myrrh,
Somali Myrrh, Yemen Myrrh

Part(s) Used

Oleo-gum-resin

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2006'¢”°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

Carbohydrates Up to 60% gum yielding arabinose, galactose,
xylose, and 4-O-methylglucuronic acid following hydrolysis.

Resins Up to 40% (average 20%) consisting of a-, B- and y-
commiphoric acids, commiphorinic acid, &- and B-heerabomyr-
rhols, heeraboresene and commiferin.

Steroids Campesterol, cholesterol and B-sitosterol.

Terpenoids x-Amyrin. Furanosesquiterpenes, including furaneu-
desma-1,3-diene (major), furaneudesma-1,4-diene-6-one, lindes-
trine, curzerenone, furanodiene, 2-methoxyfuranodiene and 4,5-
dihydrofuranodiene-6-one.("

Volatile oils 1.5-17%. Main constituents are furanosesquiter-
penes. Dipentene, cadinene, heerabolene, limonene, pinene,
eugenol, m-cresol, cinnamaldehyde, cuminaldehyde, cumic alco-
hol and others.

Food Use

Myrrh is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that myrrh
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'@! Previously, in the USA, myrrh has been permitted for
use in alcoholic beverages.'°°

Herbal Use

Myrrh is stated to possess antimicrobial, astringent, carminative,
expectorant, anticatarrhal, antiseptic and vulnerary properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for aphthous ulcers, pharyngitis,
respiratory catarrh, common cold, furunculosis, wounds and
abrasions, and specifically for mouth ulcers, gingivitis and
pharyngitis.'C» + 9° G# C#. G52, G4 The German Commission E
approved topical use for mild inflammation of the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa.)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older pharmaceutical reference texts are given
below.

Myrrh Tincture (BPC 1973) 2.5-5.0mL; in a glass of water
several times daily as a gargle or a mouthwash. For skin, undiluted
or diluted.'(@>”)

Tincture Myrrh Co (Thompsons) (1 part Capsicum Tincture
BPC 1973 to 4 parts Myrrh Tincture BPC 1973) 1.0— 2.5 mL.

Sesquiterpenes
° CHO. fe]
/ iy,
Oo
4, 5-dihydrofurano 2-methoxy- lindestrene
-dien-6-one furanodiene
H

curzerenone elemol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of myrrh.

----- PAGE 461 -----
Myrrh

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity Anti-inflammatory (carrageenan-
induced inflammation and cotton pellet granuloma)” and
antipyretic activities in mice) have been documented for C.
molmol.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity in both normal
and diabetic rats has been reported for a myrrh extract.“>*
Together with an aloe gum extract, myrrh was found to be an
active component of a multi-plant extract that exhibited
antidiabetic activity. The mode of action was thought to involve
a decrease in gluconeogenesis and an increase in peripheral
utilisation of glucose in diabetic rats.

Myrrh is stated to have astringent properties on mucous
membranes‘“*) and to have antimicrobial activities in vitro.”

Anti-inflammatory activity Anti-inflammatory activities have
been reported for an Indian plant, Commiphora mukul,
commonly known as guggulipid. Anti-inflammatory activity was
described for a crystalline steroidal fraction of guggulipid in both
acute (carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema test) and chronic
(adjuvant arthritis) models of inflammation.

Lipid-lowering effects A ketosteroid has been identified as the
active hypocholesterolaemic principle in guggulipid.” In some
animal species, thyroid suppression is required as well as
cholesterol administration in order to achieve experimental
hypercholesterolaemia. Results of studies in chicks administered
a thyroid suppressant and cholesterol indicated that guggulipid
prevents endogenous hypercholesterolaemia via stimulation of the
thyroid gland.‘ When fed to rabbits, guggulipid has been found
to reverse the decrease in catecholamine concentrations and
dopamine-B-decarboxylase activity that are associated with
hyperlipidaemia.”

Stimulation of phagocytosis Stimulation of phagocytosis has
been documented in mice innoculated with Escherichia coli and
given with extracts of myrrh by intraperitoneal injecton.'©”

Cytoprotective activity An aqueous suspension of myrrh
administered to rats at oral doses of 250-1000mg/kg gave
significant and dose-dependent protection to gastric mucosa
against various ulcerogenic agents.‘

Analgesic activity In mice, powdered myrrh (1 mg/kg, orally)
had significant analgesic activity in the hotplate test.” Isolated
furanoeudesma-1,3-dione (50 mg/kg, orally) was significantly
more effective than control (p < 0.01) in the mouse writhing

test, and the effective dose was reversed by naloxone (1 mg/
kg).(652)

Anti-tumour and cytotoxic activities In mice with Ehrlich solid
tumours, an aqueous suspension of myrrh (250 or 500 mg/kg,
orally) produced significant decreases in tumour weight (p < 0.05)
after 25 days.‘©°”) Aqueous suspension of myrrh increased survival
time in mice with Ehrlich ascite tumours.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of myrrh
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
Guggulipid has been reported to lower the concentration of
total serum lipids, serum cholesterol, serum triglycerides, serum
phospholipids and B-lipoproteins in 20 patients.” This effect was

reported to be comparable to that of two other known lipid-
lowering drugs also used in the study.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for myrrh and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

No reported side-effects were located for C. molmol or C.
abyssinica. Hiccup,” diarrhoea,” restlessness and apprehen-
sion,®’ were documented as side-effects for guggulipid when
administered to 20 patients.’ Myrrh has been reported to be non-
irritating, non-sensitising and non-phototoxic to human and
animal skins.‘@*?

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of myrrh to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that myrrh has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation in view of the lack of safety

information, use of myrrh during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

ter. Denmark: Dolodent. Germany: Ad-Muc; Mint-Lysoform;
Myrrhinil-Intest; Repha-Os. Hong Kong: Ad-Muc. Italy:
Gengivario. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
waApupiit Boapnroii Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Hel-
montskruie; Lewensessens. Spain: Buco Regis. Switzerland:
Pommade au Baume; Sanogencive. UK: Golden Seal Indiges-
tion Tablets; Herbal Indigestion Naturtabs; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Indigestion and Flatulence; Napiers Digestion
Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Vocalzone; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. Venezuela: One Drop Spray.

References

1 Brieskorn CH, Noble P. Constituents of the essential oil of myrrh. II:
Sesquiterpenes and furanosesquiterpenes. Planta Med 1982; 44: 87-90.

2. Tariq M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Commiphora molmol.
Agents Actions 1986; 17: 381-382.

3 Mohsin A et al. Analgesic, antipyretic activity and phytochemical
screening of some plants used in traditional Arab system of medicine.
Fitoterapia 1989; 60: 174-177.

4 Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.

5S Al-Awadi FM et al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

----- PAGE 462 -----
6 Arora RB et al. Anti-inflammatory studies on a crystalline steroid
isolated from Commiphora mukul. Indian J] Med Res 1972; 60: 929—
931.

7 Tripathi SN et al. Effect of a keto-steroid of Commifora mukul L. on
hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia induced by neomercazole
and cholesterol mixture in chicks. Indian J Exp Biol 1975; 13: 15—
18.

Myrrh

Srivastava M et al. Effect of hypocholesterolemic agents of plant
origin on catecholamine biosynthesis in normal and cholesterol fed
rabbits. J Biosci 1984; 6: 277-282.

Malhotra SC, Ahuja MMS. Comparative hypolipidaemic effectiveness
of gum guggulu (Commiphora mukul) fraction 'A', ethyl-p-
chlorophenoxyisobutyrate and Ciba-13437-Su. Indian J Med Res
1971; 59: 1621-1632.

----- PAGE 463 -----
Nettle

and for the effects of nettle in relief of symptoms of allergic
rhinitis. Clinical evidence exists to support the efficacy of root
extracts in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
However, further well-designed clinical trials of nettle
involving large numbers of patients are required to establish
the benefits. Irritant properties have been documented for
nettle, and excessive use and use during pregnancy and

lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Urtica dioica L. (Urticaceae)

Synonym(s)

Stinging Nettle, Urtica

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E@?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G52.

Acids Carbonic, caffeic, caffeoylmalic, chlorogenic, formic,
silicic, citric, fumaric, glyceric, malic, oxalic, phosphoric, quinic,
succinic, threonic and threono-1,4-lactone.')

Amines
N : i NH HO. :
4 NH2
N N
H H
histamine serotonin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of nettle.

Amines Acetylcholine, betaine, choline, lecithin, histamine,
serotonin” and a glycoprotein.”

Flavonoids Flavonol glycosides (e.g. isorhamnetin, kaempferol,
quercetin).

Inorganics Up to 20% minerals, including calcium, potassium
and silicon.

Lignans Several lignans, including (—)-secoisolariciresinol.

Other constituents Choline acetyltransferase, scopoletin,” B-
sitosterol and tannin

Other plant parts The rhizome contains lectin (Urtica dioica
agglutinin) composed of six isolectins,°”) coumarin (scopoletin),
triterpenes (B-sitosterol, its glucoside, and six stearyl deriva-
tives),**) two phenylpropane derivatives, and six lignans."

Food Use

Nettle (herbs and leaves) is listed by the Council of Europe as a
natural source of food flavouring (category 1) (see Appendix
3).(6 Nettle is used in soups and herbal teas. Previously, in the
USA, nettle has been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration
(FDA) as a Herb of Undefined Safety.“°

Herbal Use

Nettle is stated to possess antihaemorrhagic and hypoglycaemic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for uterine haemor-
rhage, cutaneous eruption, infantile and psychogenic eczema,
epistaxis, melaena and specifically for nervous eczema.'°> + O°
CB G32, G43, G50, G52, G54, G64) The German Commission E approved
internal use of nettle leaf as supportive therapy for rheumatic
ailments and as irrigation therapy for inflammatory disease of the
lower urinary tract and prevention of kidney gravel; internal and
external use for rheumatic ailments.'“*) The root is approved for
difficulty in urination from benign prostatic hyperplasia.(©?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4 as an infusion three times daily;'C%°” 8-12. g
daily;‘> fresh juice 10-15 mL three times daily.(@°?

Liquid extract 3-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The pharmacological properties of nettle have been reviewed.‘

652,658 Information from these reviews and other sources is
summarised below.

Anti-inflammatory activity An aqueous ethanol extract and
isolated caffeoylmalic acid partially inhibited the biosynthesis of

----- PAGE 464 -----
Figure 2. Nettle (Urtica dioica).

arachidonic acid in vitro.(©>”

Nettle extract (0.1mg/mL) and
isolated acid (1mg/mL) inhibited 5-lipoxygenase-derived bio-
synthesis of leukotriene By by 20.8% and 68.2%, respectively,
and inhibited synthesis of cyclooxygenase-derived prostaglandins
(ICso 92pg/mL and 38 tg/mL, respectively). The same extract
significantly reduced tumour-necrosis-factor-% (TNF) and inter-
leukin 18 (IL-1B) concentrations after lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-
stimulated secretion of these proinflammatory cytokines in human
blood.‘ An aqueous ethanol extract (0.25 mg/mL) inhibited
platelet-activating factor (PAF)-induced exocytosis of elasta’
from human neutrophils by 93%, but failed to inhibit biosynthesis
of prostaglandins from ['*C]arachidonic acid.“

In vitro addition of a commercial preparation of nettle leaf
(IDS-23) to whole human blood resulted in an inhibition of LPS-
stimulated TNFa and IL-18 secretion, correlating with drug
ingestion. The same preparation inhibited phytohaemogglutinin-
stimulated production of T helper cell 1 (Th1)-specific inter-
leukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon-y (IFNy) in culture in a dose-
dependent manner up to 50% and 74%, respectively.” By
contrast, T helper cell 2 (Th2)-specific interleukin-4 (IL-4)
production was stimulated. The results suggested that the nettle
leaf extract acts by mediating a switch in T helper cell-derived
cytokine patterns and may inhibit the inflammatory cascade in
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.) The
transcription
inflammatory diseases and is responsible for the enhanced

factor NF-kB is elevated in several chronic

expression of some proinflammatory gene products. A nettle
leaf extract (IDS 23) potently inhibited NF-«B activation in a
number of cells, including human T cells, macrophages, epithelial

) Tr was

cells and mouse L929 fibrosarcoma cells in vitro.'
proposed that part of the anti-inflammatory effects of nettle may

be due to its inhibitory effect on NF-«B activity.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia activity Several lignans and their
metabolites reduce binding activity of human sex hormone-
binding globulin (SHBG) in vitro. Lignans from nettle are
competitive inhibitors of the interaction between SHBG and Sa-

dihydrotestosterone.(©" An aqueous extract of nettle root led to

Nettle

a concentration-dependent (0.6-10 mg/mL) inhibition of SHBG
interaction with its receptor on human prostatic membranes. A
20% methanol extract of root inhibited binding capacity of SHBG
after preincubation in human serum.‘

Subfractions of an aqueous methanol extract of nettle root
inhibited cellular proliferation in benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) tissue. A root extract had a specific and concentration-
dependent inhibition of human leukocyte elastase (HLE) activity
in vitro. (HLE is an important marker in clinically silent
genitourinary tract infection and inflammation.) Root extracts
inhibited alternative and classic complementary pathways and
significantly inhibited prostate growth in mice with induced BPH
(by 51%, compared with control; p < 0.003).'%

Other activities CNS-depressant activity has been documented
for nettle. It has been shown to produce a reduction in
mice,'!*'* inhibition of drug-
induced convulsions, and a lowering of body temperature in
3) Nettle has been reporte
pressure of mice,‘ whereas in cats it has produced a marked
hypotensive effect and bradycardia." Atropine was reported to
have no effect on these latter actions and a mode of action via &-
adrenoceptors was suggested.'!)

Nettle is stated to contain both hypoglycaemic and hypergly-
caemic principles." The hypoglycaemic component has been
termed 'urticin' and nettle has been reported to lower the blood
sugar concentration in hyperglycaemic rabbits."

spontaneous activity in rats an

rats. to have no effect on the blood

An 80% ethanolic and an aqueous extract of nettle adminis-
tered to mice at a dose of 25 mg/kg orally prior to glucose load,
led to hypoglycaemia effects.”
effects

No diuretic or ion excretion
were observed in rats after oral administration of an
aqueous extract of nettle (1g/kg)."'4'® Dried nettle had a
potassium ion to sodium ion ratio of 63:1, whereas an aqueous
decoction had a corresponding ratio of 448 : 1." It was suggested
that the high potassium ion concentration in aqueous decoctions
may contribute to their diuretic activity.

Utero-activity has been documented for nettle in pregnant and
non-pregnant mice; betaine and serotonin were stated to be the
active constituen
of antifertility activity following oral administration to mice
(250 mg/kg).?? Analgesic activity in mice has been documen-
ted." Administration of an aqueous extract (1200 mg/kg) to mice
showed resistance to stimulation in the hotplate test at 55°C with
a 190% increase in reaction time.’ Conversely, no analgesic

2 :
) A nettle extract was reported to be devoid

activity was noted in the hotplate test on rats given an ethanolic

Figure 3 Nettle - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 465 -----
Nettle

extract, but the same extract did reduce the writhing response to
phenylquinone after oral (1 g/kg) and intraperitoneal (500 mg/kg)
treatment.)

The isolectins isolated from the rhizome are reported to cause
non-specific agglutination of erythrocytes, to induce the synthesis
of interferon by human lymphocytes,” and have carbohydrate-
binding properties.”

An extract of nettle at a concentration of 1.2 mg/mL has been
reported to be active against L-1210 leukaemic cells in mice.”

Clinical studies

Diuretic effect In an open, uncontrolled study, 32 patients with
myocardial or chronic venous insufficiency were treated with
15mL of nettle juice three times daily for two weeks.© A
significant increase in daily volume of urine was observed
throughout the study, the volume by day two being 9.2% (p <
0.0005) higher than the baseline value in patients with myocardial
insufficiency and 23.9% higher than the baseline value (p <
0.0005) in those with chronic venous insufficiency. It has been
proposed that the diuretic activity of aqueous extracts of nettle
may be attributed to the high potassium content.'” The reputed
diuretic effects of nettle require further investigation.

Arthritis and rheumatism An open, uncontrolled multicentre
study involving 152 patients with various, mainly degenerative,
rheumatic conditions reported that 70% of participants experi-
enced symptom relief by the end of the three-week treatment
period.'S°?) In an open, randomised pilot study involving 37
patients with acute arthritis, diclofenac 50 mg plus stewed nettle
herb 50g was compared with diclofenac 200 mg.* Assessment
was based on the decrease in elevated acute phase C-reactive
protein serum concentrations, and clinical signs of acute arthritis.
Clinical improvement was observed in both groups to a similar
extent. On the basis of the findings, it was suggested that nettle
herb administration may enhance the effectiveness of diclofenac in
rheumatic conditions. However, this requires further investiga-
tion.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 27 patients with
osteoarthritis pain at the base of the thumb and index finger,
received stinging nettle leaf (applied for 30 seconds daily for one
week to the painful area) or white dead nettle (Lamium album) as
placebo, followed by a five-week wash-out period before crossing
to the other arm of the study.** The results indicated that
reductions in visual analogue scale scores for pain and in a health
assessment questionnaire score for disability were significantly
better for the stinging nettle group, compared with the placebo
group (p = 0.026 and p = 0.0027 for pain and disability,
respectively).

Benign prostatic hyperplasia A small number of clinical studies
has assessed the effectiveness of nettle preparations in the
treatment of symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).

Several uncontrolled trials have reported improvements in
urological symptoms, compared with baseline values, following
administration of nettle root extract (5:1) 600-1200 mg daily for
three weeks to 20 months.(@ Large observational studies
involving patients with BPH who received nettle root extract for
two to three months have reported improvements in various
symptoms, such as urinary frequency, urinary flow and noctur-
“5 These studies provide justification for further, rigorous
investigation of the effects of nettle in BPH.

A placebo-controlled trial involving 79 patients with BPH
ssed the effects of nettle root extract 600 mg daily for six to

ia."

ass

eight weeks. Compared with placebo, nettle root extract
administration resulted in greater improvements in urinary flow
‘650 Another placebo-
controlled trial of nettle root extract 600 mg daily for nine weeks
in men with BPH (7 = 50) reported a significant decrease in SHBG
concentrations and significant improvement in micturition volume
and maximum urinary flow.'5

and urine volume and residual volume.

Rhinitis A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
sed the effects of a freeze-dried preparation of nettle herb in
individuals with allergic rhinitis.*° Participants received nettle
herb 600 mg, or placebo, at the onset of symptoms over a one-
week period. A ment was based on daily symptom diaries and
global responses recorded at follow-up visits after one week of
therapy. Nettle herb was rated more highly than placebo in the
global assessment, but was rated less highly on the basis of data
from the symptom diaries. It was concluded that there should be
further investigation with a larger sample size and involving a
longer treatment period.

as:

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for nettle and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Postmarketing surveillance studies involving a total of almost
2000 patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated for three weeks
with nettle leaf extract (IDS-23) administered as an adjuvant to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or as mono-
therapy, have reported that the extract was well-tolerated.2%?”

Consumption of nettle tea has caused gastric irritation, a
burning sensation of the skin, oedema and oliguria.'“*” The
leaves are extremely irritant in view of their acetylcholine- and
histamine-containing glandular hairs.

Preclinical data

An LDspo in mice following intraperitoneal administration of nettle
has been reported as 3.625 g/kg." The LDso for intravenous
infusion of nettle leaf in mice has been documented as 1.92 g/kg,
and the LDso for chronic administration in rats has been stated as
1.31 g/kg.“ An ethanolic extract of nettle (plant part unspeci-
fied) showed low toxicity in rats and mice after oral and
intraperitoneal administration at doses equivalent to 2 g/kg.\'*

Contra-indications, Warnings

Gastrointestinal irritation has been documented following con-
sumption of nettle tea.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of nettle to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that nettle preparations have hypoglycaemic,
hypotensive and CNS depressant effects.

Pregnancy and lactation Nettle is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ Utero-activity
has been documented in animal studies. In view of this and other
documented pharmacological activities, the use of nettle during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

----- PAGE 466 -----
plant. Malaysia: Cleansa Plus. Mexico: Prosgutt. Russia:
Herbion Urtica (fep6uon Vpruxa). South Africa: Combu-
doron; Enzian Anaemodoron Drops; Menodoron. Spain:
Natusor Artilane. Switzerland: Combudoron; Prostagutt-F;
Prostatonin; The a l'avoine sauvage de Vollmer; Tisane
Diuretique; Tisane pour les problemes de prostate. UK:
Culpeper Detox Tea; Napiers Echinacea Tea; Summertime
Tea Blend. USA: Prostate Health.

References

1 Bakke ILF e¢ al Water-soluble acids from Urtica dioica L. Medd Nor
Farm Selsk 1978; 40: 181-188.

2 Adamski R, Bieganska J. Studies on substances present in Urtica
dioica L. leaves Il. Analysis for protein amino acids and nitrogen
containing non-protein amino acids. Herba Pol 1984; 30: 17-26.

3 Andersen $, Wold JK. Water-soluble glycoprotein from Urtica dioica
leaves. Phytochemistry 1978; 17: 1875-1877.

4 Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Flavonolglykoside aus Urtica dioica. Planta
Med 1987; 53: 432-434.

5 Barlow RB, Dixon ROD. Choline aceytltransferase in the nettle Urtica
dioica L. Biochem J 1973; 132: 15-18.

6 Shibuya N et al. Carbohydrates binding properties of the stinging
nettle (Urtica dioica) rhizome lectin. Arch Biochem Biophys 1986; 249:
215-224.

7 Damme EJM et al. The Urtica dioica agglutinin is a complex mixture
of isolectins. Plant Physiol 1988; 86: 598-601.

8 Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Scopoletin, 3-B-sitosterin und 3-B-D-glucosid

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

Nettle

aus Brennesselwurzel (Urticae radix). Dtsch Apothek Zeitung 1986;
126: 81-83.

Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Sterols and steryl glycosides from Urtica
dioica. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 881-885.

Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Phenylpropane und lignane aus der wurzel
von Urtica dioica L. Dtsch Apothek Zeitung 1986; 126: 1559-1563.
Klingelhoefer $ et al. Antirheumatic effect of IDS 23, a stinging nettle
leaf extract, on in vivo expression of T helper cytokines. J Rheumatol
1999; 26: 2517-2522.

Riehemann K e¢ al. Plant extracts from stinging nettle (Urtica dioica),
an antirheumatic remedy, inhibit the proinflammatory transcription
factor NF-KB. FEBS Lett 1999; 442: 89-94.

Broncano J et al. Estudio de diferentes preparados de Urtica dioica L
sobre SNC. An R Acad Farm 1987; 53: 284-291.

Lasheras B e¢ al. Etude pharmacologique préliminaire de Prunus
spinosa L. Amelanchier ovalis medikus Juniperus communis L. et
Urtica dioica L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1986; 20: 219-226.

Broncano FJ et al. Etude de I'effet sur le centre cardiovasculaire de
quelques préparations de l'Urtica dioica L. Planta Med 1983; 17: 222-
229.

Oliver-Bever B, Zahland GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic activity.
QJ Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

Neef H et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of selected European plants.
Phytother Res 1995; 9: 45-48.

Tita B et al. Urtica dioica L.: Pharmacological effect of ethanol
extract. Pharmacol Res 1993; 27: 21-22.

Szentmihalyi K et al. Potassium-sodium ratio for the characterization
of medicinal plants extracts with diuretic activity. Phytother Res 1998;
12: 163-166.

Broncano FJ et al. Estudio de efecto sobre musculatura lisa uterina de
distintos preparados de las hojas de Urtica dioica L. An R Acad Farm
1987; 53: 69-76.

Sharma BB et al. Antifertility screening of plants. Part I. Effect of ten
indigenous plants on early pregnancy in albino rats. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1983; 21: 183-187.

Ilarionova M et al. Cytotoxic effect on leukemic cells of the essential
oils from rosemary, wild geranium and nettle and concret of royal
bulgarian rose. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1915.

Chrubasik S et al. Evidence for antirheumatic effectiveness of herba
Urtica dioicae in acute arthritis: a pilot study. Phytomedicine 1997; 4:
105-108.

Randall C et al. Randomized controlled trial of nettle sting for
treatment of base-of-thumb pain. J R Soc Med 2000; 93: 305-309.
Mittman P. Randomized, double-blind study of freeze-dried Urtica
dioica in the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Planta Med 1990; 56: 44-47.
Sommer R-G, Sinner B. Kennen sie den neuen zytokinanatagonisten?
Therapiewoche 1996; 1: 44-49.

Ramm §S, Hansen C. Brennesselblatter-extrakt bei arthrose und
rheumatoider arthritis-Multizentrische anwendungsbeobachtung mit
rheuma-hek. Therapiewoche 1996; 28: 1575-1578.

----- PAGE 467 -----
Parsley

apiole, myristicin and furanocoumarin constituents. Most of
the reported uses of parsley are probably due to the volatile
oil; no documented information was located regarding
antirheumatic and antimicrobial properties. There is a lack of
clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of parsley.
Parsley should not be consumed in doses that greatly exceed
the amounts used in foods, as excessive ingestion may result
in apiole and myristicin toxicity.

Species (Family)

Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Hill (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)
Apium petroselinum L., Carum petroselinum (L.) Benth.,

Petroselinum sativum Hoffm., P. peregrinum (L.) Lag., P. hortense
auct., P. vulgare Lag.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, root, seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996?)

Complete German Commission EC)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Glycosides of apigenin, luteolin (e.g. apiin, luteolin-
7-apiosyl-glucoside, apigenin-7-glucoside (leaf only), luteolin-7-
diglucoside (leaf only)).

Furanocoumarins Bergapten and oxypeucedanin as major
constituents (up to 0.02% and 0.01% respectively); also 8-
methoxypsoralen, imperatorin, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin,
psoralen, xanthotoxin (up to 0.003%).

Volatile oils 2-7% in seed, 0.05% in leaf. The seed contains
apiole, myristicin, tetramethoxyallylbenzene, various terpene
aldehydes, ketones, and alcohols. The leaf contains myristicin
(up to 85%), apiole, 1,3,8-p-menthatriene, 1-methyl-4-isoprope-
nylbenzene, methyl disulfide, monoterpenes (e.g. ¢- and B-pinene,
B-myrcene, B-ocimene, B-phellandrene, p-terpinene, o&-terpineol),
sesquiterpenes (e.g. &-copaene, carotol, caryophyllene).

Other constituents Fixed oil, oleo-resin, proteins, carbohydrates,
and vitamins (especially vitamins A and C).
A detailed vitamin and mineral analysis is given elsewhere. ‘¢?”)

Food Use

Parsley is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that parsley can
be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“! Parsley is commonly used in foods. Previously,
pars ey has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe).

Herbal Use

Parsley is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, diuretic,
emmenagogue, expectorant, antirheumatic and antimicrobial
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for flatulent dyspepsia,
colic, cystitis, dysuria, bronchitic cough in the elderly, dysmenor-
thoea, functional amenorrhoea, myalgia and_ specifically for
flatulent dyspepsia with intestinal colic.'C* 6% 67% Ge?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Leaf/root 2-4¢ as an infusion.

Seed 1-2¢.

Dried root 24g or by infusion three times dailyC%°?

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Parsley extract (0.25-1.0 mL/kg, by intravenous injection) has been
reported to lower the blood pressure of cats by more than 40%,”
and to decrease both respiratory movements and blood pressure in
anaesthetised dogs. Parsley exhibits a tonic effect on both
intestinal and uterine muscle.” This uterine effect has been
attributed to the apiole content,*” but has also been observed
with apiole-free aqueous extracts.) An aqueous extract of parsley
has been documented to contain an antithiamine substance which
was unaffected by cooking or contact with gastric juice.
Mpyristicin and apiole are both effective insecticides.

Parsley seed oil has been reported to stimulate hepatic
regeneration in a rat model.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of parsley
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Myristicin is the hallucinogenic principle present in nutmeg
seed. It has been hypothesised that myristicin is converted in the
body to amfetamine, to which it is structurally related.

----- PAGE 468 -----
Phenylpropanoids

Parsley 457,

o-\ o-"\ OCH3
CHO. o CHO. © CHO OCH,
‘OCH; ‘OCH;
apiole myristicin allyltetra-
methoxybenzene
Furanocoumarins
R'
J s 1
° o~ So ° 07 Sa
Re R' R oxypeucedanin
psoralen H H
bergapten OCH; H
8-methoxypsoralen H OCH3
imperatorin H isopentenyl
isopimpinellin OCH; OCH3

Figure 1

Selected constituents of parsley.

¥ 2

Figure 3. Parsley — dried drug substance (root).

Myristicin has a structural similarity with sympathomimetic
amines and it is thought that it may compete for monoamine
oxidase enzymes, thereby exhibiting a monoamine oxidase
inhibitor (MAOI)-like action. However, this requires confirma-
tion. Parsley oil has been included in the diet of pregnant women
and is reported to increase diuresis, and plasma protein and
plasma calcium concentrations.)

The diuretic effect associated with the consumption of parsley
may be attributable to the pharmacological activities of myristicin
(sympathomimetic action) and apiole (irritant effect).

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for parsley and
further investigation of these aspects is required. The suggestion
that myristicin, a constituent of parsley, has MAOI-like activity
requires confirmation.

Chronic and excessive consumption of fresh parsley (170 g daily
for 30 years) has been associated with generalised itching and
pigmentation of the lower legs in a 70-year-old woman. The
symptoms were attributed to excessive ingestion of parsley in the
presence of chronic liver disease. The aetiology of the chronic
hepatitis was unknown, but considered possibly related to the
chronic exposure to the psoralen constituents in parsley. Apiole
and myristicin are also documented to be hepatotoxic.

The ingestion of approximately 10g apiole has been reported to
cause acute haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia purpura,
nephrosis and hepatic dysfunction. However, ingestion of 10g of
apiole would require a dose of more than 200g parsley. The
amount of apiole ingested as a result of normal dietary
consumption of parsley is not hazardous. Myristicin has been
documented to cause giddiness, deafness, hypotension, decrease in
pulse rate, and paralysis, followed by fatty degeneration of the
liver and kidney.'©?”) In addition, myristicin is known to possess
hallucinogenic properties. However, when compared to nutmeg,
parsley contains a relatively low concentration of myristicin (less

----- PAGE 469 -----
Parsley

than 0.05% in parsley leaf, about 0.4-0.89% in nutmeg); parsley
seed is potentially hazardous in view of its higher volatile oil
content (about 2-7%) which contains apiole and myristicin.

Parsley contains phototoxic furanocoumarins (see Celery).
However, photodermatitis resulting from the oral ingestion of
parsley is thought to be unlikely. The ingestion of 50g parsley
provides negligible amounts of bergapten (0.5-0.8¢).” The
concentration of oxypeucedanin provided was not mentioned.
However, a photoactive reaction from topical contact with parsley
is possible.

Apiole is an irritant component of the volatile oil and may
cause irritation of the kidneys during excretion.

Parsley seed oil has been reported to stimulate hepatic
regeneration. Myristicin and apiole are documented to have a
similar chemical structure and acute toxicity to safrole, which is
known to be carcinogenic and hepatotoxic (see Sassafras). The
carcinogenic potential of apiole and myristicin has not been
evaluated.

LDs9 (mice, intravenous injection) values for apiole and
myristicin have been documented as 50mg/kg and 200 mg/kg
body weight, respectively.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Parsley should not be ingested in excessive amounts in view of the
documented toxicities of apiole and myristicin. Parsley may cause
a photoactive reaction, especially following external contact, and
may aggravate existing renal disease.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of parsley to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Parsley is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.‘©7) Utero-activity has been documented in
humans and animals,“ and parsley is stated to be contra-

indicated during pregnancy.'©*”® Myristicin has been reported
to cross the placenta and can lead to foetal tachycardia." In view
of this, parsley should not be taken during pregnancy and
lactation in doses that greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

agus-P; nephro-loges. Malaysia: Total Man. Russia: Herbion
Urological Drops ((ep6uon Ypoaornueckue Kanan). UK:
Athera; Fre-bre; Héfels One-A-Day Garlic with Parsley; Mixed
Vegetable Tablets; Modern Herbals Menopause. USA: Natural
Herbal Water Tablets; PMS Control.

References

1 Chaudhary SK et al. Oxypeucedanin, a major furocoumarin in
parsley, Petroselinum crispum. Planta Med 1986; 52: 462-464.

2. Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

3 Opdyke DLJ. Parsley seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 897-898.

4 Buchanan RL. Toxicity of spices containing methylenedioxybenzene
derivatives: A review. J Food Safety 1978; 1: 275-293.

5 Gershbein LL. Regeneration of rat liver in the presence of essential oils
and their components. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1977; 15: 171-181.

6 Cootes P. Clinical curio: liver disease and parsley. BMJ 1982; 285:
1719.

7 Zaynoun S et al. The bergapten content of garden parsley and its
significance in causing cutaneous photosensitization. Clin Exp
Dermatol 1985; 10: 328-331.

8 Lavy G. Nutmeg intoxication in pregnancy. J Reprod Med 1987; 32:
63-64.

----- PAGE 470 -----
a Parsley Piert

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Little chemical information is available on parsley piert. No
scientific evidence was found to justify the herbal uses. There
is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
parsley piert. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use
of parsley piert and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Aphanes arvensis L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Alchemilla arvensis Scop., Aphanes

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G7.

Limited information is available. Parsley piert is stated to
contain an astringent principle.'°%

Food Use

Parsley piert is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Parsley piert is stated to possess diuretic and demulcent proper-
ties, and to dissolve urinary deposits. Traditionally, it has been

used for kidney and bladder calculi, dysuria, strangury, oedema of

renal and hepatic origin, and specifically for renal calculus.'(C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2—4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-10 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of parsley
piert and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for parsley piert and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of parsley piert to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of phytochemical,

pharmacological, and toxicity information, the use of parsley
piert during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Figure 1 Parsley piert (Aphanes arvensis).

Figure 2 Parsley piert — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 471 -----
Parsley Piert

----- PAGE 472 -----
Passionflower

been described for preparations of P. incarnata following pre-
clinical studies, providing supporting evidence for some of the
traditional uses. However, well-designed clinical trials of P.
incarnata preparations are lacking and further studies are
required to determine their clinical efficacy and effectiveness.
The few clinical trials available generally have investigated the
effects of proprietary products containing P. incarnata, in
some cases in combination with other herbal ingredients, in
patients with anxiety disorders. Further investigation of the
efficacy and effectiveness of P. incarnata preparations is
required.

Trials of monopreparations of P. incarnata have involved
relatively small numbers of participants (less than 70 per trial)
and been of short duration (up to four weeks). Information on
the safety and toxicity of P. incarnata preparations is limited
and, in view of this, excessive use (higher than recommended
dosages and/or for long periods of time) and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Passiflora incarnata L. (Passifloraceae)

Synonym(s)

Apricot Vine, Grenadille, Maypop, Passiflora, Passion Vine

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®

BHMA 20036

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2003079
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL'°*?
Constituents
Alkaloids Indole alkaloids of the B-carboline type, including

harman, harmol, harmine, harmalol and harmaline. The
alkaloids are minor constituents and may be present in ppm or

even not detectable in some samples of plant material. The yields
of harman and harmine in the aerial parts of greenhouse grown
plants have been reported as 0.012% and 0.007%, respectively,
while the yields in field grown plants were 0.005% and not
detectable, respectively."

Flavonoids Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 1.5%
expressed as vitexin.(“*"°*) Aglycones apigenin, chrysin (5,7-
hydroxyflavone), luteolin, quercetin and kaempferol. C-glycosides
of apigenin (e.g. vitexin, isovitexin, schaftoside, isoschaftoside)
and of luteolin (e.g. orientin, iso-orientin) and_ related

Flavonoid C-glycosides

Rt
vitexin H OH gic H
isovitexin gic OH H H
orientin H OH gic OH
isoorientin gic OH H OH
schaftoside gic OH ara H
isoschaftoside ara OH gic H
swertisin gic OCH; H H
vicenin-2 gic OH gic 4H
lucenin-2 gic OH gic OH
isovitexin-2”
-O-glucoside soph OH H H
isoorientin-2”
-O-glucoside soph OH H OH

ara = a-1—arabinopyranosy!
gle = B-o-glucopyranosy! 12
soph = sophorosyl (sophorose = glucose ————* glucose)

Alkaloids

S
N NH
R n~ 47 R n~ 7
H H
Hg HH
R R

harman =H harmalol OH
harmol OH harmaline OCH3
harmine OCH3
Cyanogenic glucosides y—Benzopyrans
O. CH3
NC, | |
ms “OH
GleO OH
H (o}
gynocardin maltol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of passionflower.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Passionflower

flavonoids. There is considerable variation, qualitatively and
quantitatively; in the flavonoid composition depending on the
source of plant material.°°° The four major C-glycosidic
flavonoids have been identified as schaftoside, isoschaftoside,
isovitexin-2”-O-glucopyranoside and iso-orientin-2”-O-glucopyr-
anoside on the basis of mass spectral and ['*C] NMR data.”

Other constituents Cyanogenic glycoside gynocardin,'*” y-

benzopyrones maltol and ethylmaltol,"® polyacetylene  passi-
col," essential oil (hexanol, benzylalcohol, linalool, 2-phenyl-
ethyl alcohol, 2-hydroxybenzoic acid methyl ester, carvone
(major), transanethole, eugenol, isoeugenol, B-ionone, o-berga-
molol, phytol),” amino acids, fatty acids (e.g. linoleic, linolenic,
myristic, palmitic, oleic acids), formic and butyric acids, sterols
(e.g. stigmasterol, sitosterol), sugars (e.g. raffinose, sucrose,
glucose, fructose).

Other plant parts Coumarins (scopoletin and umbelliferone) are
found in the root.

Other Passiflora species

Passiflora edulis Sims, source of edible passionflower fruit,
contains numerous glycosides including flavonoids (e.g. luteolin-
6-C-chinovoside, luteolin-6-C-fucoside),' cyanogenic glycosides
(e.g. passibiflorin, epipassibiflorin, passicapsin, passicoriacin,
epipassicoriacin, cyanogenic-B-rutinoside, epitetraphyllin  B,
amygdalin, prunasin,”*'®) triterpenoid glycosides (e.g.passiflorine)
and salicylate glycosides. Also present are the -carboline
alkaloids harman, harmine, harmaline and harmalol,‘'” phenols,
carotenes and y-lacton

Cyanogenic glycosides are present in species of Passifloraceae
including species of Passiflora.‘'?) When the genus was reviewed in
2002 for the presence of cyanogenic glycosides, only 33 species
(7%) of some 460 species had been investigated chemically for
these constituents. Four structurally different types of glycosides
have been identified and their occurrence related to the subgeneric
classification of this large genus. In a subsequent review of the
chemical constituents of Passiflora, it was claimed that only 46 of
the 500 species of the genus had been investigated chemically.»
Flavonoids and cyanogenic glycosides are present in many of the
species. Low concentrations (ppm) of harman-type alkaloids were
detected in 53 of 104 samples, representing 91 species of Passiflora
analysed by HPLC. The highest concentration detected of total
alkaloids in any species was 6.35 ppm."

Quality of plant material and commercial products

Flavonoids The presence of complex mixtures and varying
composition of flavonoids, both qualitatively and quantitatively;
in P. incarnata herb and its preparations has led to a number of
analytical investigations.“*® The C-glycosides are readily sepa-
rated by HPLC and the major ones characterised by MS,” MS-
(8C]-NMR,” and MS-2D-NMR."'®) HPLC separation of C-
glycosides provides a ‘fingerprint’ for the C-glycosides and
analyses of 14 different commercial samples of P. incarnata
revealed considerable qualitative and quantitative differences. '”
Vitexin and orientin were absent from some samples but detected
in others at concentrations of 0.05-0.25%. Swertisin was the
major C-glycoside in two samples whilst it was absent in others,
isovitexin was the major compound in five samples, isovitexin-2”’-
O-glucoside was the major compound in four samples with
schaftoside and isoschaftoside being major in the three other
samples. Interpretation of HPLC analytical results was simplified

by acid hydrolysis resulting in the loss of O-glycosides but not C-
glycosyl flavonoids. HPLC was used to compare the flavonoid
content of six different species of Passiflora grown under identical
conditions.°” The highest concentration of isovitexin was found
in P. incarnata leaves. Accelerated solvent extraction and HPLC
analysis were used to investigate the presence of schaftoside,
isoschaftoside, orientin, iso-orientin, vitexin and isovitexin in 115
samples of Passiflora species obtained from the Americas, Europe
and Australia.*") There was a wide diversity in the number and
concentration of the flavonoid C-glycosides. The methodology
was claimed to be suitable for the analysis of phytochemical
preparations containing P. incarnata.

High performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC) and
densitometry have been used for the quantitative determination of
total flavonoids and of orientin and iso-orientin in the leaves of
four species of Passiflora.°”) The results were compared with those
of HPLC-UV analyses. Although HPTLC proved to be a reliable
and fast method for 'fingerprinting' P. incarnata, HPLC proved to
be more useful for quantitative determination of the flavonoids.
These methods were used to examine 11 commercial samples of
Passiflora leaf.

Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) has been used for the
separation and resolution of 14 flavonoid glycosides from P.
incarnata.”» The technique was applied to 18 different commer-
cial samples and demonstrated the great variability in qualitative
composition. Four C-glycoside flavonoid patterns of P. incarnata
were defined: high isovitexin content; high swertisin content; high
isovitexin-2”-O-glucoside content; four flavonoids present, namely
isovitexin, isoschaftoside, schaftoside and iso-orientin. CZE has
also been used to separate and quantify 13 flavonoids from 10
different commercial samples of P. incarnata herb.? There were
differences in the amount of individual flavonoids present and the
total flavonoid content was 0.37-3.75%.

HPLC analysis of 12 liquid and 14 solid pharmaceutical
preparations of P. incarnata revealed that the flavonoid content
ranged from 0.31-5.81mg/g and 2.56—2.68 mg/100 mg extract,
respectively. HPLC-DAD and HPLC-MS have been applied to
study the stability of flavonoids in tinctures of P. incarnata.*°) The
shelf-life of a 60% v/v tincture was determined as being six
months.

Alkaloids Reversed phase HPLC was used to screen 17 different
samples of P. incarnata herb for the presence of alkaloids.) Only
one sample yielded a possible harman content of approximately
0.1 ppm. A sample of Japanese P. incarnata herb was quantified by
reversed-phase HPLC for the presence of harmol, harman and
harmine. The amounts present were determined as being 410, 126
and 30.8ng/g dry weight, respectively? HPLC analysis of nine
different samples of P. incarnata herb available in Australia
resulted in a range of concentrations for harman (not detected to
0.112 g/g) and harmine (not detected to 0.271 g/g); harmol was
not detected.°” Reversed phase HPLC with photodiode array
detection was used to determine the harman alkaloid content of
104 samples (91 species) of Passiflora."® One sample of P.
incarnata contained harmalol, harmol, harman, harmaline and
harmine (0.05, 0.09, 0.11, 0.20 and 0.23 ppm, respectively).

Food Use

Passionflower is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that passionflower can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally
accepted manner, but that there is insufficient information

----- PAGE 474 -----
available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.C!®

Previously in the USA, passionflower has been permitted for use in

food.'C%

Herbal Use

Passionflower is stated to possess sedative, hypnotic, antispasmo-
dic and anodyne properties.'° Traditionally, it has been used for
neuralgia, generalised seizures, hysteria, nervous tachycardia,
spasmodic asthma, and specifically for insomnia.'°” The German
Commission E approved internal use for nervous restlessness.)
Passionflower is used in combination with valerian root and
lemon balm for conditions of unrest, difficulty in falling asleep
due to nervousness.“©?) Passionflower is used extensively in
homeopathy.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

For restlessness and resulting irritability and insomnia, and
nervous tension 0.5-1g of dried plant equivalent three times
daily;'“*) 4-8 g herb daily.“C»

Modern standard herbal reference texts recommend the
following dosages for oral administration (adults).

For tenseness, restlessness and irritability with difficulty falling
asleep: 0.5—2 g of drug three to four times daily; 2.5 g of drug as an
infusion three to four times daily; 1-4mL of tincture (1:8) three
to four times daily.‘©”

There has been insufficient clinical investigation of P. incarnata
preparations to describe dosages typically used in clinical trials.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical studies have focused on investigating the anxiolytic and
sedative properties of preparations of Passiflora incarnata,
although other activities, such as anticonvulsant, anti-inflamma-
tory, anti-addictive and aphrodisiac effects, have also been
explored."'?) There are conflicting reports on which of the
constituents of P. incarnata are responsible for the documented
pharmacological effects; the alkaloids and flavonoids are con-
sidered to be important for activity, although the alkaloids are not
detected in some samples of P incarnata material. A tri-

Figure 2  Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata).

Passionflower

substituted benzoflavone moiety has been associated with various
activities.)

A mechanism of action for P. incarnata has not clearly been
established." In radioligand receptor binding studies, extracts of
P. incarnata aerial parts (containing 3% or 9% flavonoids) at
concentrations of 10-1000 g/mL did not interact with benzodia-
zepine, dopaminergic and histaminergic binding sites.°*) Two
flavonoid constituents of P. incarnata, isovitexin-2"-O-glucoside
and iso-orientin-2"-O-glucoside, at concentrations up to 30 mol/
L also failed to inhibit the interaction of ligands with the
benzodiazepine receptor binding site. In vitro experiments
utilising rat CNS receptors have shown that a multi-herb product
(containing hydroalcoholic extracts of P incarnata stalks and
leaves and Valeriana officinalis roots, aqueous extracts of
Crataegus oxyacantha flowers and Ballota foetida, and dried
seed powder of Paullinia cupana and Cola nitida) as well as P.
incarnata extract alone, inhibited the binding of ligands to
central, but not peripheral, benzodiazepine receptors (ICs 37.1
and 601.4u1g/mL for the multi-herb extract and P incarnata
extract, respectively).°”) The multi-herb extract and P. incarnata
extract also inhibited the binding of ligands to alpha-2
adrenoceptors, but had no such effect on binding of ligands to
serotonergic 5-HT, and S-HT, and dopaminergic DA; and DA;
receptors.

Anxiolytic activity Several studies have explored the anxiolytic
properties of P. incarnata preparations in experimental models. In
a battery of experiments in mice, a hydroalcoholic extract (10%
w/v) of the fresh aerial parts of P. incarnata collected in Italy was
administered intraperitoneally at doses ranging from 3 to 800 mg/
kg (doses expressed in terms of dry plant material) body weight 30
minutes before tests.°°” Compared with controls, animals treated
with P incarnata extract displayed increased activity in the
staircase test (at doses of 400 and 800 mg/kg body weight) and
increased time spent in the light compartment in the light/dark
avoidance test (at a dose of 400 mg/kg body weight). These results
were indicative of anxiolytic, rather than sedative effects.
Mixtures comprising different quantities of maltol plus different
quantities of indole alkaloids or flavonoids found in P. incarnata,
also administered intraperitoneally, had no effect on behavioural
activity in the staircase test, suggesting that these compounds are
not responsible for activity.°”

Anxiolytic activity has also been documented for P. incarnata
following studies using the elevated plus-maze model, an
experimental test used to observe anxiolytic behaviour; less

Figure 3. Passionflower — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 475 -----
Passionflower

anxious animals spend more time in the 'open' arms of the plus
maze. In mice, a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata was significantly more effective than control in
increasing the amount of time animals spent in the open arms
of the model (p < 0.001) when administered orally at doses
ranging from 75 to 200mg/kg body weight. By contrast, a
methanol extract of the aerial parts of P. edulis, a related species
with which P. incarnata has been confused, was virtually devoid of
activity in this test.°”

Subsequent work using different extracts of carefully separated
plant parts of P. incarnata found that methanol extracts of the
respective plant parts showed the greatest anxiolytic activity in
mice in an experiment involving the elevated plus-maze model.)
It was concluded that methanol extracts of the leaves/petioles and
the stems/tendrils achieved greater anxiolytic activity than did
extracts of the flowers/buds, the whole plant and the roots,
although statistical tests for intergroup differences were not
carried out. Selection of the entire aerial parts excluding the
flowers may be the optimum approach to achieving a maximal
anxiolytic effect.°?) Further investigations, utilising bioactivity-
guided fractionation and chromatographic techniques, indicated
that a subfraction of a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata showed the greatest anxiolytic activity in mice in the
elevated plus-maze model. Anxiolytic activity of this subfraction
at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight orally was comparable to that
of diazepam 2mg/kg body weight orally.°* The subfraction
comprised f-sitosterol and a compound reported to be a
benzoflavone derivative.

In a study involving mice, animals received ethanol 2 g/kg twice
daily orally and a benzoflavone fraction (obtained from a
methanol extract of the aerial parts of P incarnata) 10, 20 or
50 mg/kg orally, or control, twice daily for six days. The
anxiogenic profile of the animals was assessed on day seven after
treatment with alcohol with or without the benzoflavone fraction
had ceased. Compared with control, treated animals showed
reductions in hyperanxiety due to alcohol cessation, as assessed by
mean duration of time spent in the open arms of the elevated plus-
maze model (p < 0.001).

Chrysin, a flavonoid found in P. incarnata, has been reported to
have anxiolytic activity following a series of experiments carried
out in rats. Compared with control, chrysin 1 mg/kg administered
intraperitoneally significantly increased the length of time spent in
the light compartment in the light/dark test of anxiety (p < 0.05).
The anxiolytic effect of chrysin was inhibited by pre-treatment of
animals with the benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil
(3 mg/kg, intraperitoneally).°”

Sedative activity Sedative effects for preparations of P. incarnata
have also been documented following several studie:

An aqueous extract (10% w/v) of the fresh aerial parts of P.
incarnata collected in Italy exhibited sedative effects in three tests
when administered at doses of 400 and 800 mg/kg body weight.”
Treatment with flumazenil (a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist)
10mg/kg body weight before administration of P incarnata
aqueous extract 400 mg/kg body weight did not influence the
sedative activity observed in the staircase test. A methanol extract
of the leaves of P. incarnata administered at doses of 100, 200, 300
and 400 mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally to mice one hour
before intraperitoneal administration of pentobarbital sodium 25
mg/kg body weight significantly prolonged the pentobarbital-
induced sleeping time (time elapsed between loss and recovery of
the righting reflex), compared with control (p < 0.05 for all
doses).°® A similar result was obtained with a multifraction dry

extract of the whole aerial parts (leaves, stems and flowers) of P.
incarnata administered orally at a dose of 60mg/kg body
weight.°”

An aqueous ethanolic extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts
administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 160 mg/kg body weight
to rats prolonged sleeping time induced by pentobarbital (50-
4000 mg/kg) and reduced spontaneous locomotor activity.°* In
mice, a 70% ethanol extract of P. incarnata herb (1000 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) administered 10 minutes prior to sodium
pentobarbitol (40 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) resulted in a signifi-
cant prolongation (40%) of sleeping time,” although a p value
was not provided. When given by gastric tube one hour prior to
amfetamine (5 mg/kg, subcutaneous), the same extract at a dose of
500mg/kg body weight caused a significant reduction in
hypermotility.

CNS sedation, prolongation of hexobarbitone-induced sleeping
time (at high doses) and a reduction in spontaneous motor activity
have been documented for maltol and ethylmaltol
” Subsequent research documenting similar activities
in mice was unable to attribute the observed activities to either

flavonoid or alkaloid components present in the extract tested.)
However, maltol is reportedly an artefact and not a relevant
constituent.)

There are conflicting reports on the role of the flavonoid chrysin
(5,7-dihydroxyflavone) in the sedative effects of P. incarnata
preparations. In the pentobarbital-induced sleeping test in mice,
there was a significant prolongation in sleeping time in chrysin-
treated animals, compared with controls (p value not stated)
although the dose required to achieve this effect (30 mg/kg) was
higher than that reported to be found in extracts of P.
incarnata. In a study in rats, chrysin (50 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally) did not have any significant effect on the
pentobarbital-induced sleeping time (time elapsed between loss
and return of righting reflex.°° Chrysin and another flavonoid
found in P. incarnata, apigenin, displayed sedative activity as
determined by reductions in locomotor behaviour when admini:
tered intraperitoneally to rats at doses of 25-100 mg/kg body
weight. This activity was not influenced by prior administration
of the benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil (3 mg/kg
intraperitoneally).°>

An aqueous ethanolic extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts
administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 160 mg/kg body weight
to rats raised the threshold to nociceptive stimuli in tail flick and
hotplate tests.°* A methanol extract of the leaves of P. incarnata
administered at doses of 100, 200, 300 and 400 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally to mice one hour before intraperitoneal admin-
istration of acetic acid (0.6% v/v) 10mL/kg body weight
significantly reduced the number of writhings in treated animals,
compared with controls (p < 0.05 for all doses).°%

Anticonvulsant activity A methanol extract of the leaves of P.
incarnata administered at doses of 100, 200, 300 and 400 mg/kg
body weight intraperitoneally to mice one hour before intraper-
itoneal administration of the convulsant agent pentylenetetrazole
50 mg/kg body weight significantly delayed the onset of convul-
sions and increased survival time in treated animals, compared
with controls (p < 0.05 for all doses).°°
obtained with a multi-fraction dry extract of the whole aerial
parts (leaves, stems and flowers) of P incarnata administered
orally at a dose of 60 mg/kg body weight (p < 0.01 for treated
animals versus controls).°”

Anticonvulsant activity (at high doses) has been documented
for maltol and ethyl maltol in mice.“!°*”

” A similar result was

----- PAGE 476 -----
Anti-addictive activities Reports from several preclinical studies
have documented that the tri-substituted benzoflavone moiety

found in P. incarnata reverses tolerance and dependence to several
substances,» including the cannabinoid delta-9 tetrahydrocan-
nabinol (THC), diazepam, ethanol,° morphine“® and
nicotine.“” These studies have typically involved oral adminis-
tration to mice of the benzoflavone moiety at a dose of 10 or 20
mg/kg body weight (10-100 mg/kg in the case of morphine)
concomitantly with the addictive substance (THC and morphine:
10 mg/kg body weight orally twice daily; diazepam 20 mg/kg body
weight orally; nicotine 2 mg/kg body weight subcutaneously four
times daily; ethanol 2 g/kg body weight orally twice daily) for up
to 21 days.

Aphrodisiac activity A methanol extract of P. incarnata leaves
administered to male mice at oral doses of 75, 100 and 150 mg/kg
body weight significantly increased the number of mounts on non-
oestrus female mice, compared with control.“ The greatest
mounting activity was seen during the assessment period covering
105 to 120 minutes post administration, and for mice given the
100 mg/kg body weight dose, compared with control (mean
(standard deviation) number of mounts: 15.67 (1.21) and 1.0
(1.09), respectively; p <0.001). The extract tested was reported to
contain P. incarnata flavonoids and glycosides, but was free of
alkaloids. In another preclinical study, in which a benzoflavone
moiety isolated from a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata was administered orally to male rats at a dose of 10 mg/
kg body weight, a significant increase in mounting behaviour was
observed in the treated group, compared with the control group at
each of three assessment periods (p < 0.05 versus control).
Sperm count was also significantly higher in treated rats,
compared with rats in the control group, as was the proportion
of female rats (with whom male rats were given the opportunity to
mate) who became pregnant (6/15 versus 14/15 for control and
treated rats, respectively; p value not reported). Further controlled
experiments have described restoration of THC-induced decline in
sexual function in male rats given THC and the benzoflavone
moiety concurrently,
induced changes in parameters of sexual function
reported in male rats treated with the benzoflavone moiety,
compared with control.°)

Prevention of ethanol- and_nicotine-

as also been

Other activities A methanol extract of the leaves of P. incarnata
significantly reduced the extent of carrageenan-induced paw
oedema in mice when administered intraperitoneally one hour
before injection into paws of carrageenan 0.1mL.°° Anti-
inflammatory activity was greatest in animals treated with P
incarnata extract 400mg/kg body weight (p < 0.05 versus
control). An ethanolic extract of P incarnata flowering and
fruiting tops administered orally to rats one hour prior to
injection of carrageenan into rat paws at doses of 75-500 mg/kg
body weight reduced oedema in a dose-dependent manner, with
significant reductions in oedema in treated rats, compared with
control rats, observed with doses of 125mg/kg and above.©”)
Significant effects in other experimental models of inflammation,
including dextran-induced pleurisy and cotton pellet-induced
granuloma, were also documented for the P. incarnata extract.
Antitussive activity has been documented for a methanol
extract of P. incarnata leaves. In mice, P. incarnata leaf extract
administered orally at doses of 100 or 200mg/kg body weight
significantly reduced sulphur dioxide induced cough (39.4% and
65% reduction in frequency of cough for the lower and higher
doses, respectively, compared with control; p < 0.01). In an
experimental model of asthma, a methanol extract of P. incarnata

Passionflower

leaves administered orally to guinea pigs at doses of 50, 100 and
200 mg/kg body weight significantly reduced acetylcholine
induced bronchospasm at the two highest doses, compared with
control (p < 0.05).

An ethanol extract of P. incarnata (whole plant) significantly
inhibited phorbol-ester-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early antigen
(EBV-EA) activation in vitro. This assay is used to identify
potential cancer chemopreventive substances. An ethanol extract
of P. incarnata aerial parts had no calcium antagonist activity in in
vitro experiments involving inhibition of aortic contractions
induced by potassium ion depolarisation.%° Passicol exhibits
antimicrobial activity towards a wide variety of moulds, yeasts
“) Group A haemolytic streptococci are more
susceptible than are Staphylococcus aureus, with Candida
albicans of intermediate susceptibility."

and_ bacteria.

Pharmacokinetics Hard gelatin capsules containing different
preparations of 'Passiflora' (likely P incarnata) material have
different dissolution profiles in vitro.°”) Dissolution profiles for
capsules containing 100 mg freeze-dried extract of P. incarnata or
164.8 mg of a commercial dried purified extract of P. incarnata
(Passoflo2-LMF) showed that the release of flavonoids from both
preparations was almost 100% after ten minutes, whereas
flavonoid release from capsules containing 410.6 mg P. incarnata
powder was only around 50% after the same amount of time.

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics No information relating to the clinical
pharmacokinetics of P. incarnata preparations was found.

Therapeutics Clinical investigation of P. incarnata preparations
is limited. The few clinical trials available generally have
investigated the effects of proprietary products containing P.
incarnata, in some cases in combination with other herbal

ingredients, in patients with anxiety disorders. Further investiga-
tion of the efficacy and effectiveness of P. incarnata preparations is
required.

In a randomised, double-blind study, 36 patients with general-
ised anxiety disorder received P. incarnata extract (Passipay; Iran)
45 drops daily (no further details of preparation provided), or
oxazepam 30mg daily, for four weeks. At the end of the study,
participants in both groups showed significant reductions in
anxiety scores (assessed using the Hamilton Anxiety Rating
Scale), compared with baseline values (p < 0.001 for both), and
there were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups.°*) However, this was a small study, a sample size
calculation does not appear to have been carried out, and it is
possible that the study was not large enough to detect a difference
between the two treatments. In addition, the study did not include
a placebo arm, so it is also possible that the effects in both groups
could be explained as a placebo response.

Another randomised, double-blind trial compared the effects of

P. incarnata extract 20 drops three times daily (no further details
of preparation provided) plus clonidine 0.8 mg daily (maximum
dose) with clonidine alone on the opiate withdrawal syndrome in
65 men addicted to opiates. At the end of the two-week study,
participants in both groups experienced significant reductions in
total symptom scores (both physical and mental symptoms),
compared with baseline values (p < 0.05) for both.°” The
reduction in total score in the P. incarnata plus clonidine was
greater than that observed with clonidine alone (p = 0.011). This
study also has methodological limitations, including an apparent
lack of a sample size calculation.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Passionflower

Two further studies have explored the effects of a combination
herbal preparation (Euphytose) containing dry extracts of P.
incarnata (40mg), Valeriana officinalis (S0 mg), Crataegus oxya-
cantha (10mg) and Ballota foetida (10 mg) as well as powdered
Paullinia cupana (15 mg) and Cola nitida (15 mg) (plant part(s) for
each not stated). In a randomised, double-blind, multi-centre
study in a general practice setting, 182 patients diagnosed with
adjustment disorder with anxious mood received Euphytose two
tablets three times daily, or placebo, for 28 days. At the end of
the study, the mean Hamilton anxiety scale score (the primary
outcome variable) was reported to be significantly lower for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group, although the
p value given for this was <0.05. A significantly greater
proportion of participants in the treatment group was classified
as 'responders' (participants with Hamilton anxiety scale score <
10 at the end of the study: 42.9% and 25.3% for the treatment and
placebo groups, respectively; p = 0.012)."% Although this was a
reasonably good-sized study, a formal sample size calculation was
not reported. Other methodological limitations are that details of
the method of randomisation were not provided, there was no
description of the formulation of the placebo preparation, a check
for the success of blinding does not appear to have been carried
out, and although the two groups were reported to be similar at
baseline, baseline data on age, sex and other characteris
not provided in a report of the study.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
healthy volunteers assessed the psychometric effects of Euphytose.
Sixty participants received the herbal preparation, or placebo,
twice daily for 14 days and underwent a battery of psychometric
tests, including the number-symbol pair test, the reaction choice
test and the flicker-fusion test. There were no_ statistically
significant differences between the treatment and placebo groups
on a: ments on days three, seven and 14 of the

A protocol for a Cochrane systematic review of studies
assessing the effectiveness of 'passiflora’ or 'passionflower' in the
treatment of any generalised anxiety disorder has been pub-
lished. The protocol does not state that the review will be
limited to preparations of P. incarnata, yet it is important to
consider phytochemical differences between species (and between
different manufacturers’ products) which could result in different
clinical outcomes.

‘s were

study, (6?)

Side-effects, Toxicity

Cyanogenic glycosides have been documented for related Passiflora
species.

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of P.
incarnata_ preparations. No  post-marketing  surveillance-type
studies were identified, and there is only a small number of
clinical trials of P. incarnata.

In a randomised, double-blind study in which 36 patients with
generalised anxiety disorder received P. incarnata extract (Passi-
pay; Iran) 45 drops daily (no further details of preparation
provided), or oxazepam 30mg daily, for four weeks, no
statistically significant differences in the overall frequency of
adverse effects was observed between the two groups (p =
0.831).°% Impairment of job performance occurred more
frequently in the oxazepam group, although this only just reached
statistical significance (p = 0.049). There were no statistically
significant differences in the frequencies of other adverse effects

sed, such as dizziness, drowsiness and confusion (p > 0.1 for
all). A report of another randomised, double-blind trial involving
the same preparation of P. incarnata’” did not provide adverse
event data.

In a randomised, double-blind, multi-centre study in a general
practice setting, 182 patients diagnosed with adjustment disorder
with anxious mood received Euphytose (a combination herbal
preparation containing P. incarnata dry extract as well as five
other herbal ingredients) two tablets three times daily, or placebo,
for 28 days.©° Four adve events (dry mouth, headache,
constipation, drowsiness) judged probably related to treatment
occurred in the Euphytose group, and eight occurred in the
placebo group.

Several case reports describe suspected adverse reactions
associated with the ingestion of preparations of P. incarnata. In
Australia, a 34-year-old woman developed severe
vomiting within 24 to 48 hours of first taking three tablets of a
herbal preparation, Sedacalm (containing P. incarnata 500 mg per
tablet; no further details of preparation provided). The woman
also developed a prolonged QT, interval and experienced episodes
of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, and was admitted to
hospital for cardiac monitoring and treatment wit
fluids.» She stopped taking the herbal preparation after two
days, and within one week all symptoms had resolved. A sample
of the product had a similar chromatographic profile to that of a
sample from another batch of the same product and to a sample
of P. incarnata, and digoxin and digitoxin were not detected.'°?
No further details of this analysis were provided.

Another report describes a 77-year-old man with rheumatoid
arthritis who was a participant in a clinical trial of a gel
containing a NSAID for treatment of wrist synovitis.” The man
had already been taking diclofenac and cyclopenthiazide for five
years and, over the previous three weeks, had taken two tablets of
a herbal preparation (Naturest) containing 'passionflower' extract
on alternate nights for insomnia. After six applications of the gel,
the man developed a pruritic erythematous rash on areas of his
chest, and continued to develop blisters, papules and purpura on
several areas of his body despite ceasing use of the gel; this clinical
picture was suggestive of a hypersensitivity vasculitis.“ Subse-
quently, it was revealed that the man had been randomised to the
placebo gel group, thus removing suspicion from the gel product
as the causative agent. In addition, because of the temporal
relationship between use of the herbal product and the onset of
the reaction, the herbal product was suspected as being associated
with the reaction. However, causality in this case has not been
established.

Two further cases describe hepatotoxic reactions ass
with the use of herbal combination preparations containing P.
incarnata,©* © although in both cases, P. incarnata was not the
main suspected herbal ingredient. One case involved a 43-year-
old woman who developed jaundice, nausea and vomiting,
hepatitis and markedly raised liver function test values in
association with use of a product reported to contain passion-
flower as well as seven other herbal ingredients, including
skulleap, black cohosh and valerian." The duration of
administration of the herbal product, and the time to onset of
symptoms were not known. A second case describes a 56-year-old
woman who developed acute hepatic failure and who died.‘
The woman had taken a preparation labelled as containing kava
(Piper methysticum), P. incarnata and Scutellaria lateriflora,
although analysis of the product failed to identify S. lateriflora as
an ingredient but did reveal an unidentified compound (no
further details provided).

as:

nausea and

intravenous

ciated

----- PAGE 478 -----
The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. At the end of July 2005,
the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 16
reports, describing a total of 39 adverse reactions, for products
reported to contain P. incarnata only as the active ingredient (see
Table 1). This number includes at least one of the case
reports described in details above. Reports originated from
seven different countries, although most reports (1 = 8) came
from the UK. In 11 of the 16 reports, P. incarnata was the sole
suspected drug, and in four of these cases, the patient concerned
was taking other medicines. The database contains at least four
further reports describing a total of 11 adverse reactions
associated with herbal combination products containing P.
incarnata in addition to other herbal ingredients.

Preclinical data

Preclinical toxicity for P. incarnata preparations are also limited.
In mice, the acute toxicity threshold of an aqueous ethanolic
extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts administered intraper-
itoneally was greater than 900mg/kg body weight.°* Also in
mice, a dose of 250mg/kg body weight of a hydrochloric acid
soluble fraction of P incarnata extract caused decreases in
spontaneous activity, respiratory rate and heart rate." The

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 16) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Passiflora
incarnata preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of July 2005°®

*Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information include this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

Passionflower

same fraction at a dose of 1000 mg/kg body weight caused tremor-
like symptoms and death. LDs9 values for maltol and ethylmaltol
in mice after subcutaneous administration were 820 and 910 mg/kg
body weight, respectively.”

In rats, a benzoflavone moiety isolated from a methanol extract
of the aerial parts of P. incarnata, administered orally to male rats
at a dose of 10mg/kg body weight, was associated with a
significantly higher sperm count in treated rats, compared with
rats in the control group.” The proportion of female rats (with
whom male rats were given the opportunity to mate) who became
pregnant was also significantly higher in treated rats, compared
with rats in the control group (6/15 versus 14/15 for control and
treated rats, respectively; p value not reported).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented, although it is possible that use of doses (see
Dosage) of passionflower higher than those recommended may
cause sedation to a greater extent than intended. In view of the
lack of safety data, use of P. incarnata extracts at dosages higher
than those recommended and/or for longer periods should be
avoided.

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for P.
incarnata. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
and used concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation No clinical data regarding the use of
passionflower during pregnancy or lactation were identified. A
hydroalcoholic extract of P. incarnata aerial parts (400-1600 1g/
mL) was reported to potentiate the rhythmic spasms induced by
potassium chloride (10 mmol/L) when added to isolated rat uterus
suspended in Tyrode's solution. The highest concentration of P
incarnata extract also increased spontaneous contractions, and
reduced the response of the tissue to acetylcholine, when
compared with control (p < 0.05).

In view of the lack of information on the use of P. incarnata
during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided during
these periods.

us; Proesten; ; Relaxaplex; Valerian Plus Her'
Plus Formula 12. Austria: Nervenruh; Passedan; Passelyt;
Sedogelat; Wechseltee St Severin. Belgium: Sedinal; Seneuval.
Brazil: A Saude da Mulher; Benzomel; Bronquiogem; Calman;

----- PAGE 479 -----
Passionflower

antirhumatismales; Dragees pour la detente nerveuse; Dragees
pour le coeur et les nerfs; Phytomed Cardio; Relaxane; Relaxo;
Soporin; Strath Gouttes pour le coeur; Strath Gouttes pour le
nerfs et contre l'insomnie; Tisane antirhumatismale; Tisane
calmante pour les enfants; Valverde Coeur; Valverde Detente
dragees. UK: Anased; Avena Sativa Comp; Bio-Strath Valerian
Formula; Daily Tension & Strain Relief; Fenneherb Sweet-
dreams; Gerard House Serenity; Herbal Pain Relief; HRI
Night; Kalms Sleep; Modern Herbals Stress; Nighttime Herb;
Nodoff; Nytol Herbal; PMT Formula; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite;
Quiet Tyme; Relax B+; Sleepezy; Slumber; Sominex Herbal;
SuNerven. USA: Calming Aid. Venezuela: Cratex; Equaliv;
Eufytose; Lupassin; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Passiflorum; Ren-
detil.

References

1 Rehwald A e¢ al. Trace analysis of harman alkaloids in Passiflora
incarnata by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography.
Phytochem Anal 1995; 6: 96-100.

2 Lohdefink J, Kating H. Zur Frage des Vorkommens von
Harmanalkaloiden in Passiflora-Arten. Planta Med 1974; 25: 101-104.

3 Lutomski J, Nourcka B. Simple carboline alkaloids. VI. Comparative
chemical evaluation of alkaloid fractions from different sources.
Herba Polon 1968; 14: 235-238.

4 Schmidt PC, Ortega GG. Passionsblumenkraut. Bestimmung des
Gesamtflavonoidgehaltes von Passiflorae herba. Deutsche Apotheker
Zeitung 1993; 47(25): 17-26.

5 Schilcher H. Zur Kenntnis der Flavon-C-Glykoside in Passiflora
incarnata L. Z Naturforsch 1968; 23b: 1393.

6 Meier B. Passiflorae herba — pharmazeutische Qualitat. Z Phytother
1995; 16: 90-99.

7 QM Liet al. Mass spectral characterisation of C-glycosidic flavonoids
isolated from a medicinal plant (Passiflora incarnata). ] Chromatog
1991; 562: 435-446.

8 Spencer KC, Seigler DS. Gynocardin from Passiflora. Planta Med
1984; 50: 356-357.

9 Jaroszewski JW et al. Cyanohydrin glycosides of Passiflora:
distribution pattern, a saturated cyclopentane derivative from P.
guatemalensis, and formation of pseudocyanogenic o-hydroxyamides
as isolation artefacts. Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 501-511.

10 Aoyagi N et al. Studies on Passiflora incarnata dry extract. 1. Isolation
of maltol and pharmacological action of maltol and ethyl maltol.
Chem Pharm Bull 1974; 22: 1008-1013.

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

Nicholls JM et al. Passicol, an antibacterial and antifungal agent
produced by Passiflora plant species: qualitative and quantitative range
of activity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1973; 3: 110-117.
Buchbauer G, Jirovetz L. Volatile constituents of the essential oil of
Passiflora incarnata. ] Essent Oil Res 1992; 4: 329-334.

Dhawan K et al. Passiflora: a review update. J Ethnopharmacol 2004;
94: 1-23.

Lutomski J et al. Pharmacochemical investigation of the raw materials
from Passiflora genus. Planta Med 1975; 27: 112-121.

Olafsdottir ES et al. Cyanohydrin glycosides of Passifloraceae.
Phytochemistry 1989; 28(1): 127-132.

Abourashed EA et al. High-speed extraction and HPLC fingerprinting
of medicinal plants — II. Application of harman alkaloids of genus
Passiflora. Pharmaceutical Biol 2003; 41(2): 100-106.

Raffaelli A et al. Mass spectrometric characterization of flavonoids in
extracts from Passiflora incarnata. ] Chromatog A 1997; 777: 223-231.
Chimichi S et al. Isolation and characterization of an unknown
flavonoid in dry extracts from Passiflora incarnata. Nat Prod Letts
1998; 11: 225-232.

Rehwald A et al. Qualitative and quantitative reversed-phase high-
performance liquid chromatography of flavonoids in Passiflora
incarnata L. Pharm Acta Helv 1994; 69: 153-158.

Menghini A e¢ al. Flavonoid contents in Passiflora spp. Pharmacol Res
1993; 27 (Suppl. Suppl.1): 13-14.

Abourashed EA et al. High-speed extraction and HPLC fingerprinting
of medicinal plants — I. Application to Passiflora flavonoids.
Pharmaceut Biol 2002; 40(2): 81-91.

Pereira CAM et al. A HPTLC densitometric determination of
flavonoids from Passiflora alata, P. edulis, P. incarnata and P. caerulea
and comparison with HPLC method. Phytochemical Anal 2004; 15:
241-248.

Voirin B et al. Separation of flavone C-glycosides and qualitative
analysis of Passiflora incarnata L. by capillary zone electrophoresis.
Phytochemical Anal 2000; 11: 90-98.

Marchart E et al. Quantification of the flavonoid glycosides in
Passiflora incarnata by capillary electrophoresis. Planta Med 2003; 69:
452-456.

Bilia AR et al. Stability of the constituents of calendula, milk thistle
and passionflower tinctures by LC-DAD and LC-MS. J] Pharm Biomed
Anal 2002; 30: 613-624.

Tsuchiya H et al. Beta-carboline alkaloids in crude drugs. Chem
Pharm Bull 1999; 47(3): 440-443.

Grice ID et al. Identification and simultaneous analysis of harmane,
harmine, harmol, isovitexin, and vitexin in Passiflora incarnata
extracts with a novel HPLC method. J Lig Chrom Rel Technol 2001;
24(16): 2513-2523.

Burkard W et al. Receptor binding studies in the CNS with extracts of
Passiflora incarnata. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 1997; 7: 25-26.

Valli M et al. Euphytose"’, an association of plant extracts with
anxiolytic activity: investigation of its mechanism of action by an in
vitro binding study. Phytotherapy Res 1991; 5: 241-244.

Soulimani R et al. Behavioural effects of Passiflora incarnata L. and
its indole alkaloid and flavonoid derivatives and maltol in the mouse. J
Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 11-20.

Dhawan K et al. Comparative biological activity study on Passiflora
incarnata and P. edulis. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 698-702.

Dhawan K et al. Anxiolytic activity of aerial and underground parts of
Passiflora incarnata. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 922-926.

Dhawan K et al. Anti-anxiety studies on extracts of Passiflora
incarnata Linneaus. ] Ethnopharmacol 2001; 78: 165-170.

Dhawan K et al. Suppression of alcohol-cessation-oriented hyper-
anxiety by the benzoflavone moiety of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in
mice. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 81: 239-244.

Zanoli P et al. Behavioral characterisation of the flavonoids apigenin
and chrysin. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: $117-S123.

Dhawan K et al. Evaluation of central nervous system effects of
Passiflora incarnata in experimental animals. Pharm Biol 2003; 41(2):
87-91.

Speroni E et al. Sedative effects of crude extract of Passiflora incarnata
after oral administration. Phytotherapy Res 1996; 10: $92-S94.
Speroni E, Minghetti A. Neuropharmacological activity of extracts
from Passiflora incarnata. Planta Med 1988; 54: 488-491.

----- PAGE 480 -----
39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

Capasso A, Pinto A. Experimental investigations of the synergistic-
sedative effect of passiflora and kava. Acta Ther 1995; 21: 127-140.
Kimura R et al. Central depressant effects of maltol analogs in mice.
Chem Pharm Bull 1980; 28: 2570-2579.

Meier B. Passiflora incarnata L.-Passionsblume-Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 1995; 16: 115-126.

Speroni E et al. Role of chrysin in the sedative effects of Passiflora
incarnata L. Phytotherapy Res 1996; 10: S98-S100.

Dhawan K. Drug/substance reversal effects of a novel tri-substituted
benzoflavone moiety (BZF) isolated from Passiflora incarnata Linn.—
a brief perspective. Addiction Biology 2003; 8: 379-386.

Dhawan K et al. Reversal of cannabinoids (A°-THC) by the
benzoflavone moiety from methanol extract of Passiflora incarnata
Linneaus in mice: a possible therapy for cannabinoid addiction. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 875-881.

Dhawan K et al. Attenuation of benzodiazepine dependence in mice by
a tri-substituted benzoflavone moiety of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus:
a non-habit forming anxiolytic. | Pharm Pharmaceut Sci 2003; 6(2):
215-222.

Dhawan K et al. Reversal of morphine tolerance and dependence by
Passiflora incarnata — a traditional medicine to combat morphine
addiction. Pharmaceutical Biology 2002; 40(8): 576-580.

Dhawan K et al. Nicotine reversal effects of the benzoflavone moiety
from Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in mice. Addiction Biology 2002; 7:
435-441.

Dhawan K et al. Aphrodisiac activity of methanol extract of leaves of
Passiflora incarnata Linn. in mice. Phytotherapy Research 2003; 17:
401-403.

Dhawan K et al. Beneficial effects of chrysin and benzoflavone on
virility in 2-year-old male rats. J Med Food 2002; 5(1): 43-48.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Restoration of chronic- A’-THC-induced
decline in sexuality in male rats by a novel benzoflavone moiety from
Passiflora incarnata Linn. Br J Pharmacol 2003; 138: 117-120.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Prevention of chronic alcohol and nicotine-
induced azospermia, sterility and decreased libido, by a novel tri-
substituted benzoflavone moiety from Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in
healthy male rats. Life Sciences 2002; 71: 3059-3069.

Borrelli F et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Passiflora incarnata L. in
rats. Phytotherapy Research 1996; 10 (Suppl. Suppl.): $104-S106.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Antitussive activity of the methanol extract of
Passiflora incarnata leaves. Fitoterapia 2002; 73: 397-399.

Dhawan K e¢ al. Antiasthmatic activity of the methanol extract of
leaves of Passiflora incarnata. Phytotherapy Research 2003; 17: 821—
822.12916087

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

Passionflower

Kapadia GJ et al. Inhibitory effect of herbal remedies on 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early
antigen activation. Pharmacol Res 2002; 45(3): 213-220.

Rauwald HW et al. Screening of nine vasoactive medicinal plants for
their possible calcium antagonistic activity. Strategy of selection and
isolation for the active principles of Olea europaea and Peucedanum
ostruthium. Phytotherapy Research 1994; 8: 135-140.

Taglioli V et al. Evaluation of the dissolution behaviour of some
commercial herbal drugs and their preparations. Pharmazie 2001; 56:
868-870.

Akhondzadeh § et al. Passionflower in the treatment of generalized
anxiety: a pilot double-blind randomized controlled trial with
oxazepam. | Clin Pharm Ther 2001; 26: 363-367.

Akhondzadeh S et al. Passionflower in the treatment of opiates
withdrawal: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. J Clin Pharm
Ther 2001; 26: 369-373.

Bourin M e¢ al. A combination of plant extracts in the treatment of
outpatients with adjustment disorder with anxious mood: controlled
study versus placebo. Fundament Clin Pharmacol 1997; 11: 127-132.
Bourin M. Etude des effets d'Euphytose™ sur les performances
psychométriques du volontaire sain. Psychologie Medicale 1994; 26
(14): 1471-1478.

Miyasaka LS et al. Passiflora for anxiety disorder (protocol). The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2003, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD004518.

Fisher AA et al. Toxicity of Passiflora incarnata L. Clin Toxicol 2000;
38(1): 63-66.

Smith GW et al. Vasculitis associated with herbal preparation
containing Passiflora extract. Br J Rheumatol 1993; 32(1): 87-88.
Whiting PW et al. Black cohosh and other herbal remedies associated
with acute hepatitis. Med J Aus 2002; 177: 432-435.

Gow PJ et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aus 2003; 178: 442-443.

Thomsen M et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aus 2004; 180: 198-199.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 25 July, 2005)

Sadraei H et al. Effects of Zataria multiflora and Carum carvi
essential oils and hydroalcoholic extracts of Passiflora incarnata,
Berberis integerrima and Crocus sativus on rat isolated uterus
contractions. Int J Aromather 2003; 13(2/3): 121-127.

----- PAGE 481 -----
7 Pennyroyal

Interest in pennyroyal has focused on the toxicity associated
with the volatile oil. No documented reports of the
pharmacological actions exhibited by the herb were located.
In view of its potential toxicity, pennyroyal oil is not suitable
for internal or external use.

Species (Family)
*Mentha pulegium L. (Labiatae/Lamiceae)
+Hedeoma pulegioides (L.) Pers.

Synonym(s)

*Pulegium vulgare Mill., P. parviflorum (Req.) Samp. pro parte
+Melissa pulegioides L., Squaw Mint

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Pennyroyal is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G48 and G58.

Volatile oils 1-2%. Pulegone is the principal component (60—
90%); others include menthone, iso-menthone, 3-octanol, piper-
itenone and trans-iso-pulegone.

Food Use

Pennyroyal is not commonly used in foods. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N3).9'9 This category indicates that there is insufficient
information available for an adequate assessment of toxicity
(but see Side-effects, Toxicity). Previously, in the USA, pennyroyal
has been permitted for use in foods.'°°

Herbal Use

Pennyroyal is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic,
diaphoretic and emmenagogue properties, and has been used
topically as a refrigerant, antiseptic and insect repellent.
Traditionally, it has been used for flatulent dyspepsia, intestinal
colic, common cold, delayed menstruation, and topically for
cutaneous eruptions, formication and gout.'©”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Pennyroyal oil is not suitable for internal or external use.

Herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
pennyroyal.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

The toxicity of pennyroyal oil is well recognised and human
fatalities following its ingestion as an abortifacient have been
reported.“ Symptoms reported following ingestion of the oil
include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy
and agitation, pyrexia, raised blood pressure and pulse rate, and
generalised urticarial rash. Generally, doses required for an
abortifacient effect are also toxic and fatalities have involved
both nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity.°~ Doses of one ounce
and 30mL"*) have proved fatal, whereas individuals have
recovered following unsuccessful abortion attempts involving the
ingestion of 7.5 mL oil.°) The mechanism of hepatotoxicity for
pennyroyal is not known.” A direct hepatoxic action has been
suggested for the ketone component, pulegone.” Alternatively,
metabolic conversion of pulegone to a reactive intermediate, a
furan or epoxide, has been proposed.”

Preclinical data

Acute LDso values for pennyroyal oil are documented as 0.4 g/kg
(oral, rats) and 4.2 g/kg (dermal, rabbits). The oil is non- or
moderately irritating, non-sensitising and non-phototoxic.?
Acute LDs9 values documented for pulegone, the principal oil
component, are, not suprisingly, similar to those for the oil: 0.47 g/
kg (oral, rats), 3.09 g/kg (dermal, rabbits). Steroid (pregneno-
lone-16a-carbonitrile) treatment has reduced hepatotoxicity

Monoterpenes
° fe} fe} fe}
“™
(-)-pulegone (-)-menthone (+)-isomenthone piperitenone
Figure 1 Selected constituents of pennyroyal.

----- PAGE 482 -----
observed in female rats fed pulegone, whereas triamcinolone has
Toxicity of pulegone is unaffected by partial
hepatectomy or ligation of the common bile duct, while partial
nephrectomy intensified toxicity.”

increased it.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Pennyroyal oil is irritant and instances of hepatotoxicity and
nephrotoxicity have been documented following its ingestion.
Both the internal and external use of pennyroyal oil are contra-
indicated.‘

Pregnancy and lactation Pennyroyal is contra-indicated in
pregnancy.'°”’ Traditionally, it has been employed as an abortifa-

Pennyroyal

cient; fatalities have resulted from the doses of oil required to
exert an abortifacient effect.

References

1 Vallance WB. Pennyroyal poisoning. A fatal case. Lancet 1955; ii: 850-
851.

2. Sullivan JB et al. Pennyroyal oil poisoning and hepatotoxicity. JAMA
1979; 242: 2873.

3. Gunby P. Plant known for centuries still causes problems today. JAMA
1979; 241: 2246-2247.

4 Opdyke DLJ. Pennyroyal oil european. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
949-950.

5 Opdyke DLJ. Fragrance raw materials monographs: d-pulegone. Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16: 867-868.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Pilewort

investigations. There is a lack of clinical research assessing the
efficacy and safety of pilewort. In view of the toxic and irritant
properties stated for protoanemonin, the excessive use of
pilewort and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Ranunculus ficaria L. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Ficaria, Ficaria ranunculoides Roth, EF. degenii Hervier, EF
nudicaulis A. Kern., E verna Huds., FE vulgaris A. St.-Hil., Lesser
Celandine, Ranunculus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Simple lactones

CH,OH
HO ¢ =
HO. O-CHo'y
HO H O° °O
ranunculin
Triterpenes

hederagenin
oleanolic acid = CH3

CH2OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pilewort.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40 and G42.

Lactones
anemonin).

Anemonin (dimer), protoanemonin (precursor to

Triterpenoids Glycosides based on the sapogenins hederagenin
and oleanolic acid, with arabinose, glucose and rhamnose, as
sugar moieties.“

Other constituents Tannin and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).

Food Use

Pilewort is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pilewort is stated to possess astringent and demulcent properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for haemorrhoids, and specifically
for internal or prolapsed piles with or without haemorrhage, by
topical application as an ointment or a suppository.'C” °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below. Another source
states that pilewort is not suitable for internal use.'*”

Dried herb 2-5 g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pilewort Ointment (BPC 1934) 30% fresh herb in benzoinated
lard.

°
a
Lx ;
CH, “OY ~O \X [eo]
protoanemonin anemonin

----- PAGE 484 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Local antihaemorrhoidal activity has been documented for the
saponin constituents.) Antibacterial and antifungal properties
have been documented for both anemonin and protoanemonin,

although anemonin is reported to exhibit much weaker activi-
ty. (G33, G48)

The reported presence of tannin constituents‘*” supports the

reputed astringent activity of pilewort, although no pharmacolo-
gical studies were located.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pilewort
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pilewort and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

The sap of pilewort is stated to be irritant.(@*!
is stated to be an acrid skin irritant, although it is readily
converted into the inactive dimer anemonin.‘©*?
is stated to have a marked ability to combine with sulfhydryl (-SH)
groups and it is thought that the toxic subdermal properties of

) Protoanemonin

” Protoanemonin

Figure 2 Pilewort (Ranunculus ficaria).

Pilewort awn

Figure 3 Pilewort — dried drug substance (herb).

protoanemonin may depend on the inactivation of enzymes

containing -SH groups.'**) An LDso value (mice, intraperitoneal

injection) for anemonin has been reported as 150 mg/kg body
«1. (G48)

weight.

Contra-indications, Warnings

: . . (G49)
Pilewort is not recommended for internal consumption.”

Topical use of pilewort may cause irritant skin reactions.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of pilewort has not been
established. In view of this, the use of pilewort during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Confortel. Czech Republic: Avenoc. France: Apai-
sance; Hemorrogel. UK: Piletabs; Roberts Anti-Irritant Oint-
ment.

Reference

1 Texier O ef al. A triterpenoid saponin from Ficaria ranunculoides
tubers. Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2903-2905.

----- PAGE 485 -----
7 Plantain

reputed antihaemorrhagic properties may be attributable to
the tannin constituents. In addition, bronchospastic activity
has been documented in preclinical and preliminary clinical
studies. The toxicity of plantain is reported to be low, but
excessive ingestion should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Plantago major L. (Plantaginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Plantain, General Plantain, Greater Plantain, Plantago
asiatica auct. eur. pro parte, non L.

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E@)
Martindale 35th edition'“*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Plantain is not included in the GSL."

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40, G51 and Gé2.

Acids Benzoic acid, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, cinnamic acid,
p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, fumaric acid, gentisic acid, p-
hydroxybenzoic acid, neochlorogenic acid, salicylic acid, syringic

Iridoids
OH OH,
Ss S
0 fo)
H
HOCH, O-glucose = HOCH> O-glucose
aucubin catalpol
Alkaloids
OHC.

boschniakine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of plantain.

acid, ursolic acid, vanillic acid; oleanolic acid and ascorbic
acid.

Alkaloids Trace (unspecified) °°” boschniakine and the methyl
ester of boschniakinic acid

Amino acids pi-a-Alanine, asparagine, L-histidine, DL-lysine, DL-
leucine, serine and tryptophan.

Carbohydrates
stachyose, d-xylose, sorbitol, tyrosol, mucilage and gum.”

L-Fructose, D-glucose, planteose, saccharose,
)

Flavonoids Apigenin, baicalein, scutellarein, baicalin, homo-
plantaginin, nepitrin, luteolin, hispidulin and plantagoside.*"”

Iridoids Aucubin, aucubin derivatives, plantarenaloside, aucubo-
side and melitoside.©'"”)

Tannins 4%. Unspecified.

Other constituents Choline, allantoin, invertin and emulsin
(enzymes), fat 10-20%, resin, saponins, steroids" and thiogluco-
side.

Food Use

Plantain leaf is not used in foods. A related species, Plantago
lanceolata L., is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that P. lanceolata can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active constituent (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.''® Previously, plantain has
been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Plantain is stated to possess diuretic and antihaemorrhagic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis with
haematuria, and specifically for haemorrhoids with bleeding
and irritation. (6% 67 G4 CG)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

An aqueous extract has been reported to possess bronchodilatory
activity in guinea-pigs. It was more effective against acetylcholine-
induced contraction, than towards constriction induced by
histamine or serotonin. The bronchodilatory activity of
plantain in guinea-pigs has been reported to be less active and
of shorter duration compared to salbutamol or atropine."

----- PAGE 486 -----
Hypotensive activity in normotensive, anaesthetised dogs has
been documented; 125mg/kg extract was found to decrease
arterial blood pressure by 20-40 mmHg."

An aqueous extract, reported to contain flavonoids, saponins,
steroids and alkaloids, was shown to possess anti-inflammatory
activity in the rat using various models of inflammation, and a
strengthening of capillary vessels has also been documented.?)
However, an extract was found to exhibit minimal (11%)
inhibition of carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema." Leaf
extracts in hexane have shown potent wound-healing activity in
rabbits; the effect was primarily attributed to Cys—C39 alcohols
present in the extract.’ Both the anti-inflammatory and wound-
healing activities of plantain have been attributed to the high
content of chlorogenic and neochlorogenic acids.”

Aucubin and a haemolytic saponin fraction have exhibited
antibiotic activity towards Micrococcus flavus and Staphylococcus
aureus (aucubin only). Antibacterial activity towards Bacillus
subtilis has been documented for the fresh plant juice, which was
also found to lack activity towards Gram-positive organisms and

A negative response to cytotoxic, antitumour and
(20)

fungi.”
antiviral activity was also reported for the plant juice.
A mild laxative action has been reported in mice administered
iridoid glycosides, including aucubin.? Plantain seed is some-
times used as a substitute for ispaghula (a bul laxative).(C*
Plantain has been documented to lower concentrations of total
plasma lipids, cholesterol, B-lipoproteins and triglycerides in
rabbits with experimental atherosclerosis.°” Plantain has been
reported to be useful in lowering plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions.°?)
A tonus-raising effect on isolated guinea-pig and rabbit uterus
tissue has been documented for an aqueous extract.°
Aucubin has been stated to be the active principle responsible
for a hepatoprotective effect documented for plantain.°°)

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of plantain is limited and
rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Figure 2 Plantain (Plantago major).

Plantain

Figure 3. Plantain - dried drug substance (leaf).

Plantain has been reported to be effective in the treatment of
chronic bronchitis of a spastic or non-spastic nature."'47%7”) A
pronounced improvement in both subjective and objective
symptoms of the common cold following treatment with plantain
has also been reported.°® Plantain, in combination with
agrimony, German chamomile, peppermint and St. John's wort,
has been documented to provide pain relief in patients with
chronic gastroduodenitis.°” Following treatment, previously
diagnosed erosions and haemorrhagic mucous changes were
stated to have disappeared. However, the methodological limita-
tions of these studies preclude definitive conclusions.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for plantain and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Allergic contact dermatitis to plantain has been reporte
The green parts of the plant are thought to yield a mustard oil-
type of thioglucoside, which releases an irritant principle
(isothiocyanate) upon enzymatic hydrolysis.'(“* The seed may
also cause sensitisation and dermatitis.

(6s)

Preclinical data

Plantain is reported to be of low toxicity with LDs9 values in the
rat documented as 1 g/kg (intraperitoneal injection) and greater
than 4¢/kg (by mouth).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Plantain may cause a contact allergic reaction; it induces the
formation of IgE antibodies, which may cross-react to psyllium.°”
Excessive doses may exert a laxative effect and a hypotensive
effect.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of plantain to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro uterotonic activity has been
documented for plantain. In view of this, and the lack of
information on safety, use of plantain should be avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

----- PAGE 487 -----
Plantain

France: Ephydrol. Portugal: Erpecalm. Switzerland: Kernosan
Elixir; Pastilles pectorales Demo N; Pectoral N; Tisane
pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale pour les enfants.
UK: Napiers Breathe Easy Tea.

References

1 Andrzejewska-Golec E, Swiatek K. Chemotaxonomic studies on the
genus Plantago II. Analysis of phenolic acid fraction. Herba Pol 1986;
32: 19-31.

2 Maksyutina NP. Hydroxycinnamic acids of Plantago major and Pl.
lanceolata. Khim Prirodn Soedin 1971; 7: 795.

3. Smolenski SJ et al. Alkaloid screening. IV. Lloydia 1974; 37: 30-61.

4 Pailer M, Haschke-Hofmeister E. Inhaltsstoffe aus Plantago major.
Planta Med 1969; 17: 139-145.

5 Popov S et al. Cyclopentanoid monoterpenes from Plantago species.
Izv Khim 1981; 14: 175-180.

6 Maksyutin GV. Amino acids in Plantago (plantain) major leaves and
Matricaria recutita inflorescences. Rastit Resur 1972; 8: 110-112.

7 Tomoda M et al. Plant mucilages. XXIX. Isolation and
characterization of a mucous polysaccharide, plantago-mucilage A,
from the seeds of Plantago major var. asiatica. Chem Pharm Bull 1981;
29: 2877-2884.

8 Lebedev-Kosov VI. Flavonoids of Plantago major. Khim Prirodn
Soedin 1976; 12: 730.

9 Lebedev-Kosov VI et al. Flavonoids of Plantago major. Khim Prirodn
Soedin 1977; 13: 223.

10 Endo Tet al. The glycosides of Plantago major var. japonica Nakai. A
new flavone glycoside, plantagoside. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 1000-
1004.

11 Oshio H, Inouye H. Two new iridoid glucosides of Plantago asiatica.
Planta Med 1982; 44: 204-206.

12 Andrzejewska-Golec E, Swiatek K. Chemotaxonomic studies on the
genus Plantago I. Analysis of the iridoid fraction. Herba Pol 1984 30:
9-16.

13. Lambev I et al. Study of the anti-inflammatory and capillary

14

1s

16

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

restorative activity of a dispersed substance from Plantago major L.
Probl Vatr Med 1981; 9: 162-169.

Koichev A et al. Pharmacologic-clinical study of a preparation from
Plantago major. Probl Pneumol Ftiziatr 1983; 11: 68-74.

Marcov M et al. Pharmacologic study of the influence of the disperse
substance extracted from Plantago major on bronchial smooth
muscles. Probl Vatr Med 1980; 8: 132-139.

Kyi KK et al. Hypotensive property of Plantago major Linn. J Life Sci
1971; 4: 167-171.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987: 1: 28-31.

Mironov VA e¢ al. Physiologically active alcohols of Plantago major.
Khim-Farm Zh 1983; 17: 1321-1325.

Tarle D. Antibiotic effect of aucubin, saponins and extract of plantain
leaf — herba or folium Plantaginis lanceolata. Farm Glas 1981; 37:
351-354.

Lin Y-C et al. Search for biologically active substances in Taiwan
medicinal plants I. Screening for anti-tumor and anti-microbial
substances. Chin ] Microbiol 1972; 5: 76-78.

Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

Maksyutina NP et al. Chemical composition and hypocholesterolemic
action of some drugs from Plantago major leaves. Part I. Polyphenolic
compounds. Farm Zh (Kiev) 1978; 4: 56-61.

Ikram M. Medicinal plants as hypocholesterolemic agents. | Pak Med
Assoc 1980; 30: 278-279.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Chang I-M, Yun (Choi) HS. Plants with liver-protective activities:
pharmacology and toxicology of aucubin. In: Chang HM et al., eds.
Advances in Chinese Medical Material Research. Singapore: World
Scientific, 1985: 269.

Koichev A. Complex evaluation of the therapeutic effect of a
preparation from Plantago major in chronic bronchitis. Probl Vatr
Med 1983; 11: 61-69.

Matev M et al. Clinical trial of Plantago major preparation in the
treatment of chronic bronchitis. Vatr Boles 1982; 21: 133-137.
Koichev A. Study on the therapeutic effect of different doses from the
preparation Plantago major in cold. Prob Vatr Med 1982; 10: 117-124.
Chakarski I e¢ al. Clinical study of a herb combination consisting of
Agrimonia eupatoria, Hipericum perforatum, Plantago major,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria chamomila for the treatment of patients
with gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10: 78-84.

Rosenberg S et al. Serum IgE antibodies to psyllium in individuals
allergic to psyllium and English plantain. Ann Allergy 1982; 48: 294—
298.

----- PAGE 488 -----
J Pleurisy Root

phytochemical studies on pleurisy root and related Asclepias
species have identified many cardiac glycoside constituents.
No scientific evidence was found to justify the herbal uses.
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of pleurisy root. In view of the potential toxicity of
pleurisy root, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Asclepias tuberosa L. (Asclepiadaceae)
Synonym(s)

Asclepias, Butterfly Weed

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'©”
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?
Constituents

Little chemical information is available for pleurisy root. Cardiac
glycosides of the cardenolide type (e.g. afroside, asclepin, calactin,
calotropin, gomphoside, syriogenin, syrioside, _ uscharidin,
uscharin and uzarigenin) have been documented for many
Asclepias species," including A. tuberosa.°) Concentrations
of cardiac glycosides are reported to vary between Asclepias
species and individual plant parts, in descending order of
latex, stem, leaf and root.

No other data regarding constituents of the root were located.

Other plant parts Constituents documented for the herb include
flavonols (e.g. kaempferol and quercetin) and flavonol glycosides
(e.g. rutin and isorhamnetin), amino acids, caffeic acid,
chlorogenic acid, choline, carbohydrates (e.g. glucose, fructose
and sucrose), f-sitosterol, triterpenes (e.g. a-amyrin and f-
amyrin, lupeol, friedelin, viburnitol), volatile oil and resin.” 0**)

Food Use

Pleurisy root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pleurisy root is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant,

antispasmodic and carminative properties. It has been used for

bronchitis, pneumonitis, influenza, and specifically for pleuri-
gy. G7 G2, Got)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Steroids

Hy. Fon onc

Lok.

asclepin

OCOCH
calotropin OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pleurisy root.

Dried root 14g as an infusion three times daily.‘©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Tincture 1-5 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Low doses of extracts of Asclepias species including A. tuberosa
have been documented to cause uterine contractions (in vivo) and
to exhibit oestrogenic effects, 16%
blood pressure or respiration (in vivo), or on the isolated heart
(frog, turtle).

Various activities have been reported for related Asclepias

” No effect was observed on

species. A positive inotropic action (in vivo and in vitro) has been

Figure 2 Pleurisy root (Asclepias tuberosa).

----- PAGE 489 -----
Pleurisy Root

Figure 3 Pleurisy root — dried drug substance (root).

reported for asclepin (Asclepias curassavica), which was found to
be more potent, longer acting and with a wider safety margin when
compared with other cardiac glycosides (including digoxin).''!?)
Asclepin was also reported to exhibit a more powerful activity
towards weak cardiac muscle.) Plant extracts of A. curassavica,
Asclepias engelmanniana and Asclepias glaucescens have exhibited
a stimulatory effect on the mammalian CNS, causing an increase in
serotonin and noradrenaline concentrations.‘ Antitumour/cyto-
toxic activities have been documented for A. albicans and were
attributed to various cardenolide constituents.'

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pleurisy
root and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

e-effects, To

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pleurisy root
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Pleurisy root and other Asclepias species have been documented
to cause dermatitis; the milky latex is reported to be irritant.'°*)
Large doses may cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.'C” °”)

Preclinical data

Various Asclepias species, including A. tuberosa, are known to be
toxic to livestock, with cardenolides implicated as the toxic
constituents.) Toxic effects on the lungs, gastrointestinal tract,
kidneys, brain and spinal cord have been observed in rats and
rabbits following intravenous administration of an alcoholic
extract.)

Toxicity studies involving related Asclepias species have also
been documented. The cardenolide fraction of Asclepias eriocarpa
is reported to contain toxic principles. The whole plant, plant
extracts, an isolated and purified cardenolide (labriformin) and
digoxin were all found to show qualitatively similar signs of
toxicity and gross pathology in sheep and guinea-pigs." LDso
values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) for cardenolides obtained
from A. curassavica and A. eriocarpa were all estimated at less
than 5SO0mg/kg body weight. Asclepin (A. curassavica) was
reported to be safe following a three-month toxicity study in
rats, using doses of 0.8, 8 and 20 mg/kg (route unspecified).
Asclepin has also been documented to have a wider margin of
safety than digoxin!'") (see In vitro and animal studies).

Studies in cats have reported asclepin to be less cumulative
SB
compared to digoxin."

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pleurisy root to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Cardiac glycosides (see
Constituents) have been documented as constituents of pleurisy
root.

Pregnancy and lactation Uterotonic activity (in vivo) has been
reported for pleurisy root.’ In view of this and the potential

toxicity of pleurisy root, it should be avoided during pregnancy or
lactation.

Australia: Broncafect; Verbascum Complex. UK: Antibron;
Chest Mixture; Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture;
Vegetable Cough Remover.

References

1 Seiber JN et al. New cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) from Asclepias
species. Proceedings of the Australia/USA Poisonous Plants
Symposium. Plant Toxicol 1985: 427-437.

2 Radford DJ et al. Naturally occurring cardiac glycosides. Med J Aust
1986; 144: P540-544.

3. Jolad SD et al. Cardenolides and a lignan from Asclepias subulata.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 2581-2590.

4 Seiber JN et al. Cardenolides in the latex and leaves of seven Asclepias
species and Calotropis procera. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 2343-2348.

5 Conway GA, Slocumb JC. Plants used as abortifacients and
emmenagogues by Spanish New Mexicans. ] Ethnopharmacol 1979; 1:
241-261.

6 Duffey SS, Scudder GGE. Cardiac glycosides in North American
Asclepiadaceae, a basis for unpalatability in brightly coloured
Hemiptera and Coleoptera. J Insect Physiol 1972; 18: 63-78.

7 Nelson CJ et al. Seasonal and intraplant variation of cardenolide
content in the California milkweed Asclepias eriocarpa and
implications for plant defense. J Chem Ecol 1981; 7: 981-1010.

8 Pagani E Plant constituents of Asclepias tuberosa (Asclepiadaceae).
Boll Chim Farm 1975; 114: 450-456.

9 Costello CH, Butler CL. The estrogenic and uterine-stimulating
activity of Asclepias tuberosa. ] Am Pharm Assoc Sci Educ 1949; 39:
233-237.

10 Hassan WE, Reed HL. Studies on species of Asclepias VI. Toxicology,
pathology and pharmacology. J Am Pharm Assoc Sci Educ 1952; 41:
298-300.

11 Patnaik GK, Dhawan BN. Pharmacological investigations on asclepin
—a new cardenolide from Asclepius curassavica. Part 1. Cardiotonic
activity and acute toxicity. Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1095-1099.

12 Patnaik GK, Koehler E. Comparative studies on the inotropic and
toxic effects of asclepin, g-strophanthin, digoxin and digitoxin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1368-1372.

13. Dhawan BN, Patnaik GK. Investigation on some new cardioactive
glycosides. Indian Drugs 1985; 22: 285-290.

14 Del Pilar Alvarez Pellitero M. Pharmacological action of medicinal
plants in the nervous system. An Inst Farmacol Espan 1971; 20: 299-387.

15 Koike K et al. Potential anticancer agents. V. Cardiac glycosides of
Asclepias albicans (Asclepiadaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1980; 28: 401-
405.

16 Benson JM et al. Comparative toxicology of cardiac glycosides from
the milkweed Asclepias eriocarpa. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1977; 41:
131-132.

----- PAGE 490 -----
- Pokeroot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is limited chemical information available for pokeroot.
Apart from its traditional use as a herbal remedy, pokeroot is
also known to possess molluscicidal properties. Anti-
inflammatory activity documented in animal studies supports
the traditional use of pokeroot in rheumatism. However, there
is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
pokeroot. Pokeroot is recognised as a toxic plant. The effects
of pokeroot intoxication arise from the ingestion of any or all
plant parts, liquid preparations of plant extracts such as herbal
teas, or through skin contact with the plant. The main toxic
agents are the pokeweed mitogen (lectins) and the glycoside
saponins. The toxic properties of these two classes of
compounds, mitogenic and irritant respectively, are well
recognised. In view of this, excessive use of pokeroot and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Phytolacca americana L. (Phytolaccaceae)

Synonym(s)
Phytolacca dodecandra L., Pocan, Pokeberry, Pokeweed, Red Plant

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL ©)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G48 and G64.

Alkaloids Betalain-type. Betanidine, betanine, isobetanine,
isobetanidine, isoprebetanine, phytolaccine and prebetanine.

Lectins Pokeweed mitogen (PWM) consisting of five glyco-
proteins Pa! to Pa.

Saponins Triterpenes — phytolaccosides A-1, D2, and 0,0)
aglycones include phytolaccagenin, jaligonic acid, phytolaccagenic
acid, aesculentic acid,'°**® acinosolic acid methyl ester;*)
monodesmosidic and bidesmosidic compounds with oleanolic
acid and phytolaccagenic acids as aglycone in P. dodecandra.”?

Other constituents Isoamericanin A (neo-lignan),\PAP (poke-
weed antiviral protein), a-spinasterol,”, histamine and gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Betalain alkaloids

H
Hooc™ N~ ~COOH
R
betanidin H
betanin glucose

Triterpenes

phytolaccoside B
Figure 1 Selected constituents of pokeroot.

Food Use

Pokeroot is not commonly used in foods. Previously, in the USA,
the Herb Trade Association has recommended that pokeroot
should not be sold as a herbal beverage or food.''”

Herbal Use

Pokeroot is stated to possess antirheumatic, anticatarrhal, mild
anodyne, emetic, purgative, parasiticidal and fungicidal proper-
ties. Traditionally, it has been used for rheumatism, respiratory
catarrh, tonsillitis, laryngitis, adenitis, mumps, skin infections

Figure 2 Pokeroot (Phytolacca americana).

----- PAGE 491 -----
Pokeroot

Figure 3 Pokeroot — dried drug substance (root).

(e.g. scabies, tinea, sycosis, acne), mammary abscesses and
mastitis.'C7 0

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 0.06-0.3 g as an decoction three times daily,'©”

Liquid extract 0.1-0.5mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for saponin
fractions isolated from P. americana.”’'”) Activity comparable to
or greater than that of cortisone acetate was observed in the
carageenan rat paw oedema test when the extract was adminis-
tered by intraperitoneal injection. The major aglycone, phytolac-
cagenin, was reported to exhibit greater activity than glycyrrhetic
acid and oleanolic acid, which are both known to be effective in
acute inflammation. Oral administration required a_ six-fold
increase in dose for comparable activity.) Potency of the saponin
extract was reduced to one-eighth of that of cortisone when tested
against chronic inflammation (granuloma pouch method)."?) The
EDso for saponin and phytolaccagenin fractions against carragee-
nan-induced oedema in the rat (intraperitoneal injection) has been
determined as 15.1 and 26 mg/kg respectively.”

Isoamericanin A (a neo-lignan) isolated from the seeds of P.
americana has been reported to increase prostaglandin I, (PGI,)
production from the rat aorta by up to about 150% at a
concentration of 10° and to elicit a moderate inductive effect on
the in vivo release of PGh."”

Hypotensive properties have been described for a pokeroot
extract with the activity attributed to histamine and GABA."!”

A diuretic effect has been described in rats administered
pokeroot extract orally at a dose of 500 mg/kg."'*) The effect was
reported to be significantly greater than that observed in the
saline-treated group of rats, but less than in the furosemide-
treated (150 mg/kg) group.

In vitro contraction of the guinea-pig ileum has been described
for pokeroot extracts." Activity was attributed to a single active
constituent that proved to be heat resistant.

The properties of pokeweed antiviral protein have been
reviewed."

Molluscicidal activity against schistosomiasis-transmitting
snails and spermicidal activity have been documented for saponin
components obtained from the fruits of the related species, P.
dodecandra."'®'”) An enzyme located in the seeds has been
found to be necessary for molluscicidal activity of P. dodecan-
dra.) Crushing the seeds to release the enzyme is critical for
activity. The enzyme is inactivated by heat or alcohol and a cold
water extraction of the finely ground fruits was found to provide
the greatest molluscicidal activity. The saponin-containing extract
of P. dodecandra is commonly referred to as 'Endod'.'") Fruits of P.
americana also possess molluscicidal properties.“°?

Abortifacient activity in mice has been exhibited by a related
species P. acinosa Roxb. with activity strongest in the seed and
weakest in the leaf. Activity in the various extracts was destroyed
by heat and pepsin suggesting a protein to be the active
principle.°

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Haematological aberrations have been observed in human
peripheral blood following oral ingestion of the berries or
exposure of broken skin/conjunctival membrane to the berry
juice.?'*}) Analysis of peripheral blood revealed plasmacytoid
cells, dividing cells and mature plasmacytes. Eosinophilia was also
noted. The mitogenic principles in pokeroot, lectins, are reported
to be a mixture of agglutinating and non-agglutinating glycopro-
teins affecting both T cell and B cell lymphocytes.” Pokeroot leaf
extracts have been reported to be agglutinating, but lacking in
mitogenic activity?»

A 43-year-old woman suffered the following symptoms 30
minutes after drinking a cup of herbal tea prepared from half a
teaspoon of powdered pokeroot: nausea, vomiting, cramping,
generalised abdominal pain followed by profound watery
diarrhoea, weakness, haematemesis and bloody diarrhoea,
hypotension and tachycardia.°® Chewing the root for the relief
of a sore throat and cough has resulted in severe abdominal
cramps, protracted vomiting and profuse watery diarrhoea.°”
Additional symptoms of poisoning that have been documented for
pokeroot include difficulty with breathing, spasms, severe
convulsions and death.?*

The clinical symptoms of pokeroot poisoning have been
reviewed.”

All parts of the pokeroot plant are considered as potentially
toxic, with the root generally recognised as the most toxic part.°”
Toxicity is reported to increase with plant maturity although the
young green berries are more toxic compared to the more mature
red fruits.°”

Preclinical data

High doses of saponin extracts have produced thymolytic effects
in rats.)

LDso values for the saponin fraction (intraperitoneal injection)
have been determined as 181 mg/kg in mice and 208 mg/kg in
rats.) In contrast, no deaths were observed in rats administered
phytolaccagenin intraperitoneal injection up to a dose of 2g/
kg." Oral doses of saponin up to 1.5 g/kg did not produce any
mortalities in treated rats.'”)

----- PAGE 492 -----
The mutagenic potential of P. americana and P. dodecandra fruit
extracts has been tested using Salmonella typhimurium strain
TM677.""”) No activity was found for any of the extracts tested.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fresh pokeroot is poisonous and the dried root emetic and
cathartic.©”’ The toxic effects documented following the
ingestion of pokeroot make it unsuitable for internal ingestion.
In addition, external contact with the berry juice should be
avoided: systemic symptoms of toxicity have occurred following
exposure of broken skin and conjunctival membranes to the juice.

In 1979, the American Herb Trade Association declared that
pokeroot should no longer be sold as a herbal beverage or food."
It further recommended that all packages containing pokeroot
carry an appropriate warning regarding the potential toxicity of
pokeroot when taken internally. In the UK, manufacturers of
licensed medicinal products are permitted to include pokeroot
provided that the dose is restricted and that suitable evidence is
given to demonstrate the absence of the toxic protein constituents.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pokeroot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Pokeroot is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and is documented to exhibit uterine stimulant
activity in animals.‘@ In view of this and the documented toxic
effects, pokeroot should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Catarrh Tablets; Psorasolv.

References

1 Woo WS et al. Triterpenoid saponins from the roots of Phytolacca
americana. Planta Med 1978; 34: 87-92.

2 Woo WS et al. Constituents of Phytolacca species. (I) Anti-
inflammatory saponins. Korean ] Pharmacog 1976; 7: 47-50.

3 Kang SK, Woo WS. Two new saponins from Phytolacca americana.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 338-340.

4 Kang S, Woo WS. Triterpenes from the berries of Phytolacca
americana. ] Nat Prod 1980; 43: 510-513.

5 Woo WS et al. Constituents of Phytolacca species (II). Comparative
examination on constituents of the roots of Phytolacca americana, P.
esculenta and P. insularis. Korean ] Pharmacog 1975; 7: 51-54.

10

1

12

13

14

15
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

Pokeroot

Woo WS, Kang SS. The structure of Phytolaccoside G. Pharm Soc
Korea 1977; 21: 159-162.

Dorsaz A-C, Hostettmann K. Further saponins from Phytolacca
dodecandra \'Herit. Helv Chim Acta 1986; 69: 2038-2047.

Hasegawa T et al. Structure of isoamericanin A, a prostaglandin 1,
inducer, isolated from the seeds of Phytolacca americana L. Chem Lett
1987; 2: 329-332.

Ready MP et al. Extracellular localization of pokeweed antiviral
protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986; 83: 5033-5056.

Funayama S, Hikino H. Hypotensive principles of Phytolacca roots. J
Nat Prod 1979; 42: 672-674.

Tyler VE et al. Poke root. In: Pharmacognosy, 8th edn. Philadelphia:
Lea and Febiger, 1981: 493-494.

Woo WS, Shin KH. Antiinflammatory action of Phytolacca saponin. J
Pharm Soc Korea 1976; 20: 149-155.

Anokbonggo WW. Diuretic effect of an extract from the roots of
Phytolacca dodecandra \'Herit in the rat. Biochem Biol 1975; 11: 275—
277.

Anokbonggo WW. Extraction of pharmacologically active
constituents of the roots of Phytolacca dodecandra. Planta Med 1975;
28: 69-75.

Irvin JD. Pokeweed antiviral protein. Pharmac Ther 1983; 21: 371-387.
Adewunmi CO, Marzuis VO. Comparative evaluation of the
molluscicidal properties of aridan (Tetrapleura tetrapleura) laplapa
pupa (Jatropha gossypyfolia) endod (Phytolacca dodecandra) and
bayluscide. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 325-328.

Dorsaz A-C, Hostettmann K. Further saponins from Phytolacca
dodecandra: their molluscicidal and spermicidal properties. Planta
Med 1986; 52: 557-558.

Parkhurst RM et al. The molluscicidal activity of Phytolacca
dodecandra. |. Location of the activating esterase. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1989; 158: 436-439.

Pezzuto JM et al. Evaluation of the mutagenic potential of endod
(Phytolacca dodecandra), a molluscicide of potential value for the
control of schistosomiasis. Toxicol Lett 1984; 22: 15-20.

Yeung HW et al. Abortifacient activity in leaves, roots and seeds of
Phytolacca acinosa. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 21: 31-35.

Barker BE et al. Haematological effects of pokeweed. Lancet 1967; i:
437.

Barker BE et al. Peripheral blood plasmacytosis following systemic
exposure to Phytolacca americana (pokeweed). Pediatrics 1966; 38:
490-493.

Barker BE et al. Mitogenic activity in Phytolacca americana
(pokeweed). Lancet 1965; i: 170.

McPherson A. Pokeweed and other lymphocyte mitogens. In:
Kinghorn AD, ed. Toxic Plants. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1979: 84-102.

Downing HJ et al. Plant agglutinins and mitosis. Nature 1968; 217:
655.

Lewis WH, Smith PR. Pokeroot herbal tea poisoning. JAMA 1979;
242: 2759-2760.

Roberge R et al. The root of evil — poke weed intoxication. Ann Emerg
Med 1986; 15: 470-473.

Hardin JW, Arena JM. Human Poisoning from Native and Cultivated
Plants, 2nd edn. Durham: Duke University Press, 1974: 69-73.

----- PAGE 493 -----
= Poplar

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of poplar is characterised by the phenolic
glycoside components, which support some of the reputed
herbal uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of poplar. The usual
precautions associated with other salicylate-containing drugs
are applicable to poplar. In view of the lack of information,
the use of poplar during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Populus tremuloides Michx. (Salicaceae)

Synonym(s)
Aspen, Populus Alba, Quaking Aspen, White Poplar

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)
Complete German Commission E‘~?)
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL(@?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G39 and G40.

Glycosides Salicin (about 2.4%), salicortin, salireposide and
various benzoate derivatives including populin (salicin-6-benzo-
ate), tremuloidin (salicin-2-benzoate) and tremulacin (salicortin-2-
benzoate).

Other constituents Tannins (unspecified), triterpenes including
a-amyrin and B-amyrin, carbohydrates including glucose, fructose
and various trisaccharides, fats, waxes.

Salicylates H
0.
° fe)
CH20H
‘OR O-glucose
R
salicin glucose salicortin
populin 6-O-benzoyiglucose

Figure 1

Selected constituents of poplar.

Food Use

Poplar is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that poplar
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'@'!® Previously, in the USA, poplar has been permitted
for use in foods.'(“%”

Herbal Use

Poplar is stated to possess antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory,
antiseptic, astringent, anodyne and cholagogue properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for muscular and arthrodial
rheumatism, cystitis, diarrhoea, anorexia with stomach or liver

disorders, common cold, and specifically for rheumatoid arthri-
G6, G7, G64)

tis.
The buds of Populus tremula (European white poplar, aspen)
and Populus nigra (black poplar) are used, reputedly as
expectorant and circulatory stimulant remedies, for upper
respiratory tract infections and rheumatic conditions.'°*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-4g as a decoction three times daily,C% ©)

Liquid extract
daily. (G6,G7)

1-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Figure 2 Poplar (Populus tremuloides).

----- PAGE 494 -----
Figure 3. Poplar — dried drug substance (bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for poplar. See Willow for the pharmacological
actions associated with salicylates.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of poplar
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The
pharmacological actions of salicylates in humans are well
documented and are applicable to poplar. Salicin is a prodrug
that is metabolised to saligenin in the gastrointestinal tract and to
salicylic acid following absorption.

Poplar

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for poplar and further investigation of these aspects
is required. See Willow for side-effects and toxicity associated with
salicylates.

Contra-indications, Warnings

See Willow for contra-indications and warnings associated with
salicylates.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of poplar to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. The concurrent administration of
poplar with other salicylate-containing medicines should be
avoided. Drug interactions listed for salicylates are also applicable
to poplar and include oral anticoagulants, methotrexate, meto-
clopramide, phenytoin, probenecid, spironolactone and valproate
(see Willow for more information on drug interactions with
salicylates).

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of poplar taken during
pregnancy has not been established (see Willow for contra-
indications and warnings regarding the use of salicylates during
pregnancy and lactation). Use of poplar during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

ngredient preparations

Proprietary mu
UK: Tabritis Tablets.

----- PAGE 495 -----
ash should be consulted. There is limited scientific evidence
from preclinical studies to support the traditional herbal uses.
Also, there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the
efficacy and safety of northern prickly ash. In view of the
pharmacologically active constituents and potential toxicity
associated with the alkaloids, excessive use of northern prickly
ash and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Zanthoxylum americana Mill. (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Toothache Bark, Toothache-tree, Xanthoxylum, Zanthoxylum

Part(s) Used
Bark, berry

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'°” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Northern prickly ash is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Lauriflorine and nitidine (major
constituents), candicine, chelerythrine, magnoflorine and tembe-
tarine.

Coumarins Xanthyletin, xanthoxyletin, alloxanthoxyletin and 8-
(3,3-dimethylallyl)alloxanthoxyletin.

Other constituents Resins, tannins and acrid volatile oil.

Other plant parts Two furoquinoline alkaloids (y-fagarine and
skimmianine) have been isolated from the leaves.

Food Use

Prickly ash is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
prickly ash can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, but that there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(©!® Previously, in the

Prickly Ash, Northern

Alkaloids

°
' >
FR R! R?

chelerythrine H
nitidine OCH; H

xe
CH,O 7” *CHs

CH3O.
aCHs

C) e

N,,
HO , "CHs
HO. H

CH30

magnoflorine

Coumarins

ol LIL
aie xe: 07 So

CHg
xanthyletin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of northern prickly ash.

USA, prickly ash has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).‘C%)

Herbal Use

Prickly ash is stated to possess circulatory stimulant, diaphoretic,
antirheumatic, carminative and sialagogue properties. Tradition-
ally, it has been used for cramps, intermittent claudication,
Raynaud's syndrome, chronic rheumatic conditions, and specifi-
cally for peripheral circulatory insufficiency associated with
rheumatic symptoms. The berries are stated to be therapeutically
Sin oi . (G6, G7, G64)
more active in circulatory disorders.

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily,“C% ©?

Bark, liquid extract 1-3mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily\C°%

Bark, tincture
daily.'C%°”

2-SmL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Dried berry 0.5-1.5 g.0°°”
Berry, liquid extract 0.5-1.5 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol).(©°°?

----- PAGE 496 -----
Figure 2 Northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americana).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for northern prickly ash. See Prickly Ash,
Southern for activities of alkaloid constituents (e.g. chelerythrine
and nitidine).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of northern
prickly ash and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.
Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for northern
prickly ash and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Prickly Ash, Northern

Figure 3 Northern prickly ash — dried drug substance (bark).

The alkaloid constituents are potentially toxic (see Prickly Ash,
Southern).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of northern prickly ash to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Coumarin
constituents detected so far in northern prickly ash do not possess
the minimum structural requirements'°*? for anticoagulant
activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of northern prickly ash has
not been established. In view of the pharmacologically active
constituents the use of northern prickly ash during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Tabritis Tablets.

----- PAGE 497 -----
described for individual constituents. Few data have been
documented that support the herbal uses. Further, there is a
lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety
of southern prickly ash. Limited toxicity data are available;
some benzophenanthridine alkaloids are associated with
cytotoxicity. In view of this, excessive use of prickly ash and
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.
Northern prickly ash has been used for similar herbal uses but
has a different chemical composition compared to the
Southern species (see Prickly Ash, Northern).

Species (Family)

Zanthoxylum clava-herculis L. (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hercules-club, Toothache Bark, Xanthoxylum, Zanthoxylum

Part(s) Used
Bark, berry

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Chelerythrine and magnoflorine
(major constituents), candicine, lauriflorine, nitidine, N-acetyla-
nonaine™ and tembetarine.

Amides Cinnamamide, herculin and neoherculin.

Lignans (—)-Asarinin, (—)-sesamin, y,y-dimethylallyl ether of
(—)-pluviatilol.?

Other constituents Resins, tannins and an acrid volatile oil
(about 3.3%).

Food Use

Southern prickly ash is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that prickly ash can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally
accepted manner, but that there is insufficient information
available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(@!®

Prickly Ash, Southern

Herbal Use

Southern prickly ash is stated to possess circulatory stimulant,
diaphoretic, antirheumatic, carminative and sialogogue proper-
ties. Traditionally, it has been used for cramps, intermittent
claudication, Raynaud's syndrome, chronic rheumatic conditions,
and specifically for peripheral circulatory insufficiency associated
with rheumatic symptoms. The berries are stated to be
therapeutically more active in circulatory disorders.'°% 7” SC

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily,“C% ©?

Bark, liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%S”

Bark, tincture
daily.'C%°”

2-SmL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Dried berry 0.5-1.5 g.0°°”
Berry, liquid extract 0.5-1.5 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol).(©°°?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Southern prickly ash has been reported to act as a reversible
neuromuscular blocking agent. Activity was associated with a
neutral fraction of the bark that was thought to act primarily by
blockade of endplate receptors.”

Various activities have been documented for the benzophenan-
thridine alkaloids (e.g. chelerythrine, nitidine) present in southern
prickly ash. Hypotensive properties in mice have been documented
for nitidine chloride, a single dose of 2 mg/kg body weight lowered
the blood pressure by 20% within 90 minutes and persisted for six
hours. Nitidine was also found to antagonise the effects of
angiotensin-induced hypertension.) Antileukaemic activity has
been documented for nitidine, although preclinical toxicity
prevented further investigations.“**)

Anti-inflammatory activity in rats has been documented for
chelerythrine (10 mg/kg by mouth) comparable to that achieved
with indometacin (5 mg/kg by mouth). Chelerythrine has also
been reported to potentiate the analgesic effect of morphine,
prolong barbiturate-induced sleep, and cause temporary hyperten-
sion followed by hypotension in cats, mice and rabbits.”

Significant antimicrobial activity towards Gram-positive bac-
teria and Candida albicans has been documented for chelerythr-
ine, although conflicting activities have been reported regarding
Gram-negative bacteria. Chelerythrine has been shown to
interact with Na*K* ATPase and to inhibit hepatic t-alanine
and L-aspartate aminotransferases in the rat, while nitidine has
been reported to inhibit tRNA methyltransferase and catechol-O-
methyltransferase.)

The lignan component, asarinin, has been reported to possess
antitubercular activity.(C*? Neoherculin is reported to possess
insecticidal and sialogogic properties.”

----- PAGE 498 -----
Prickly Ash, Southern 487

Alkaloids

CH30 HO “CH
2
R’ R! Re HO.
chelerythrine H OCH;
nitidine OCH; 4H CH30
magnoflorine
Amides
CH3
cno—{_) concn ocen(_)
fe)
herclavin
HL
N

OSS SESE
°

neoherculin
(echinacein)

Lignans

(-)-asarinin Le}

Figure 1 Selected constituents of southern prickly ash.

Figure 2 Southern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum clava-herculis).

Figure 3 Southern prickly ash — dried drug substance (berry).

Side-effects, Toxicity Preclinical data

Ingestion of southern prickly ash by cattle, chicken and fish has
proved lethal. This was attributed to the neuromuscular blocking
No toxicity documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety properties of the bark.”
and toxicity data for southern prickly ash and further investiga- major ichthyotoxic principle in an extract of southern prickly
tion of these aspects is required. ash bark.

Clinical data

Neoherculin is reported to be the

----- PAGE 499 -----
Prickly Ash, Southern

The acute and chronic toxicity of chelerythrine in mice is
reported to be low.) LDso values were stated as 18.5 mg/kg body
weight (intravenous injection) and 95 mg/kg (subcutaneous
injection). Oral administration of 10mg/kg for three days
followed by 5 mg/kg for seven days produced no adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. The alkaloid constituents in southern prickly
ash are potentially toxic.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of southern prickly ash to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Chelerythrine
has been reported to interact with Na*K* ATPase. However the
clinical relevance of this with respect to prickly ash is unknown.
Hypotensive and sedative activities have been documented in
animals. Both chelerythrine and nitidine have been reported to
inhibit various hepatic enzymes (see Pharmacological Actions, In
vitro and animal studies).

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of southern prickly ash has
not been established. In view of this and the pharmacologically
active compounds, the use of southern prickly ash during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Rao KV, Davies R. The ichthyotoxic principles of Zanthoxylum clava-
herculis. ] Nat Prod 1986; 49: 340-342.

2 Bowen JM, Cole RJ. Neuromuscular blocking properties of southern
prickly ash toxin. Fedn Proc 1981; 40: 696.

3 Addae-Mensah | e¢ al. Structure and anti-hypertensive properties of
nitidine chloride from Fagara species. Planta Med 1986; 52 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 58.

4 Krane BD et al. The benzophenanthridine alkaloids. J Nat Prod 1984;
47: 143.

5 Simanek V. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids. In: Brossi A, ed. The
Alkaloids, vol 26. New York: Academic Press, 1985: 185-240.

6 Lenfield J et al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary
benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

7 Preininger V. In: Manske RHE, ed. The Alkaloids, vol 15. New York:
Academic Press, 1975: 242.

----- PAGE 500 -----
Pulsatilla

and safety of pulsatilla. The fresh plant is known to be irritant;
it contains a toxic principle (protoanemonin) and should not
be ingested. The dried plant material is not considered to be
toxic, but allergic reactions have been documented. In view
of this and the lack of safety information, the use of pulsatilla
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Pulsatilla vulgaris Mill. (Ranunculaceae)
tPulsatilla pratensis (L.) Mill.
$Pulsatilla patens (L.) Mill.

Synonym(s)

*Anemone pulsatilla L., Pulsatilla ucrainica (Ugr.) E.D. Wissjul,
Pasque Flower

tAnemone pratensis L., Pulsatilla nigricans Stérck, Small Pasque
Flower

Anemone patens (L.) Mill.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)

Simple lactones

CH20H

HO

O° = =
oe for ‘es S
HO a 0 OQ CHa oO (e)

ranunculin

Triterpenes

hederagenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pulsatilla.

Martindale 35th edition\*

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Flavonoids Delphinidin and pelargonidin glycosides.
Saponins Hederagenin (as the aglycone).

Volatile oils Ranunculin (a glycoside); enzymatic hydrolysis
yields the unstable lactone protoanemonin which readily dimerises
to anemonin.

Other constituents
galactose, glucose,
sitosterol.

Carbohydrates (e.g. arabinose, fructose,
rhamnose), triterpenes (e.g. B-amyrin) and B-

Food Use

Pulsatilla is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pulsatilla is stated to possess sedative, analgesic, antispasmodic
and bactericidal properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
dysmenorrhoea, orchitis, ovaralgia, epididymitis, tension head-
ache, hyperactive states, insomnia, boils, skin eruptions associated
with bacterial infection, asthma and pulmonary disease, earache,
and specifically for painful conditions of the male or female
reproductive system.(CC7S%S* Pulsatilla is widely used in
homeopathic preparations as well as in herbal medicine.

protoanemonin anemonin

----- PAGE 501 -----
Pulsatilla

x bs - ia

Figure 3 Pulsatilla — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 0.12-0.3g as an infusion or decoction three times
daily.'C°?

Liquid extract 0.12-0.3mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S”

Tincture 0.31.0 mL (1:10 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'C®
G7)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Utero-activity (stimulant and depressant) has been documented
for pulsatilla.('? © In vivo sedative and antipyretic properties in
rodents have been documented for anemonin and protoanemo-
nin.)

Cytotoxicity (KB tumour system) has been reported for

« (G22)
anemonin.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pulsatilla
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pulsatilla and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Fresh pulsatilla is poisonous because of the toxic volatile oil
component, protoanemonin. Protoanemonin rapidly degrades to
the non-toxic anemonin. Inhalation of vapour from the volatile oil
may cause irritation of the nasal mucosa and conjunctiva.‘@*))
Allergic reactions to pulsatilla have been documented and patch
tests ae produced vesicular reactions with hyperpigmenta-
tion.*”

Preclinical data

Cytotoxicity has been documented for anemonin (see Pharmaco-
logical Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fresh pulsatilla is poisonous and should not be ingested. External
contact with the fresh plant should be avoided. The toxic
principle, protoanemonin, rapidly degrades to the non-toxic
anemonin during drying of the plant material. Individuals may
experience an allergic reaction to pulsatilla, especially those with
an existing hypersensitivity.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pulsatilla to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that certain constituents of pulsatilla (e.g.
anemonin) have sedative activity. The clinical relevance of this is
not known.

Pregnancy and lactation Pulsatilla is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.'©??) Utero-activity has been documented for
pulsatilla (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal
studies). In view of this, the use of pulsatilla during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

“Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Cirflo; Calmo; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4
Women's Formula; Proflo; Women's Formula Herbal Formula
3. Brazil: Eviprostat. Czech Republic: Cicaderma. France:
Hepatoum; Histo-Fluine P. Germany: Eviprostat N. Japan:
Eviprostat. South Africa: Cough Elixir. Singapore: Eviprostat.
UK: <Anased; Calmanite Tablets; Fenneherb Prementaid;
Menopause Relief; Napiers Back Ache Tea; Napiers Monthly
Calm Tea; Nytol Herbal; Period Pain Relief; Prementaid;
Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets. USA: Eye Support
Formula.

References

1 Pilcher JM et al. The action of the so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

2. Pilcher JM et al. The action of 'female remedies' on intact uteri of
animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 18: 97-99.

3 Martin ML e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of lactones isolated from
Pulsatilla alpina subsp. apiifolia. ] Ethnopharmacol 1988; 24: 185—
191.

----- PAGE 502 -----
Quassia

However, there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing
the efficacy and safety of quassia. In view of the documented
cytotoxic activities and limited toxicological data, quassia
should not be taken in amounts greatly exceeding those used
in foods. The use of quassia during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Picrasma excelsa (Sw.) Planch. (Simaroubaceae)
tQuassia amara L.

Synonym(s)

Bitterwood, Picrasma

*Aeschrion excelsa (Sw.) Kuntze, Jamaican Quassia, Quassia
excelsa Sw., Simarouba excelsa (Sw.) DC.

}Surinam Quassia

Part(s) Used

Stem wood

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'C%
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition‘

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids Indole-type. Canthin-6-one, 5-methoxycanthin-6-one,
4-methoxy-5-hydroxycanthin-6-one, N-methoxy-1-vinyl-B-carbo-
line.“

Terpenoids Isoquassin (picrasmin) in P. excelsa, quassin 0.2%,
quassinol, quassimarin,” 18-hydroxyquassin, neoquassin, a
dihydronorneoquassin™ and simalikalactone D in Q. amara.
Coumarins Scopoletin."?

Other constituents B-Sitosterol, B-sitostenone; thiamine 1.8%
(in P. excelsa).

Food Use

Quassia is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that

Nortriterpenes

similikilactone D

Alkaloids

SS
n7 28
o2\Z

canthin-6-one

Coumarins

HO fe) [e}
scopoletin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of quassia.
quassia can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, although
the concentration of quassin must not exceed 5 mg/kg; a
concentration of 50mg/kg is permitted in alcoholic beverages
and 10 mg/kg in pastilles and lozenges.'“'® Previously, quassia has

been regarded by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as
GRAS (Generally Regarded As Safe).

Herbal Use

Quassia is stated to possess bitter, orexigenic, sialogogue, gastric
stimulant and anthelmintic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for anorexia, dyspepsia, nematode infestation (by oral or
rectal administration), pediculosis (by topical application), and

specifically for atonic dyspepsia with loss of appetite.'C*°%°”
G8, Go4)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

----- PAGE 503 -----
Quassia

Figure 2 Quassia (Picrasma excelsa).

Dried wood 0.3-0.6g by cold infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Concentrated Quassia Infusion (BPC 1959) 2-4mL. Quassia
Infusion is prepared by diluting one volume of Concentrated
Quassia Infusion to eight volumes with water.

Tincture of Quassia (BP 1948) 2-4mL.
Enema 150 mL per rectum (infusion with cold water, 1 in 20) on

three successive mornings together with 16 g magnesium sulfate by
mouth.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The f-carboline alkaloids have exhibited positive inotropic
activity in vitro." Canthin-6-one is reported to possess anti-
bacterial and antifungal activity. Cytotoxic and amoebicidal
activities (assessed against guinea-pig keratinocyte and Enta-
moeba histolytica test systems, respectively) have been documen-
ted for canthin-6-one and quassin (P. excelsa).°) However, later
studies have disputed any amoebicidal action. Quassin is reported
to be inactive against P388 leukaemia and 9KB test systems.
Significant antitumour activity in mice against the P388 lymphatic
leukaemia and in vitro against human carcinoma of the
nasopharynx (KB) has been documented.” Quassimarin and
simalikalactone were both isolated from the active extract.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of quassia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

The effective treatment of 454 patients with headlice has been
documented for quassia tincture. Quassia has been used as an
enema to expel threadworms.'°*

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for quassia and further investigation of these aspects is required.

No side-effects have been reported in 454 patients who used
quassia tincture as a scalp lotion to treat headlice. Large doses
of quassia may irritate the stomach and cause vomiting.(“®

Figure 3 Quassia — dried drug substance (stem wood).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Large doses of quassia are emetic.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of quassia to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that certain constituents of quassia have
cardiac effects, however, the clinical relevance of this is not clear.
Coumarin constituents detected so far in quassia do not possess
the minimum structural requirements for anticoagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the reported cytotoxic and
emetic activities, the use of quassia during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Cuassicum; Uze Active; Yalu. France: Quintonine.
Italy: Dekar 2. South Africa: Essens Amara of Groen Amara;
Versterkdruppels. Switzerland: Stomacine. UK: Sanderson's
Throat Specific.

References

1 Wagner H et al. New constituents of Picrasma excelsa, |. Planta Med
1979; 36: 113-118.

2 Wagner H, Nestler T. N-Methoxy-1-vinyl-f-carbolin, ein neues
Alkaloid aus Picrasma excelsa (Swartz) Planchon. Tetrahedron Lett
1978; 31: 2777-2778.

3 Kupchan SM, Streelman DR. Quassimarin, a new antileukemic
quassinoid from Quassia amara. J] Org Chem 1976; 41: 3481-3482.

4 Grandolini G e¢ al. A new neoquassin derivative from Quassia amara.
Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 3085-3087.

5 Harris A, Phillipson JD. Cytotoxic and amoebicidal compounds from
Picrasma excelsa (Jamaican Quassia). | Pharm Pharmacol 1982; 34:
43P.

6 Jensen O et al. Pediculosis capitis treated with quassia tincture. Acta
Dermat Venereol (Stockholm) 1978; 58: 557-559.

----- PAGE 504 -----
a Queen’s Delight

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The Euphorbiaceae plant family is characterised by the
diterpene esters. These compounds, known as phorbol,
ingenane or daphnane esters depending on their skeleton
type, have been investigated as constituents of genera such as
Euphorbia and Croton, and some of them have been found to
be co-carcinogenic and highly irritant to mucous
membranes.©?) No scientific evidence was found to justify
the reputed herbal uses. In view of the lack of data on
pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety, and the potential
toxicity of queen’s delight, the appropriateness of medicinal
use of queen’s delight should be considered; and excessive
use, at least, and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)
Stillingia sylvatica L. (Euphorbiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Ditrysinia sylvatica (L.) Raf., Excoecaria sylvatica (L.) Baill.,
Queen's Root, Sapium sylvaticum (L.) Torr., Stillingia, Stillingia
sylvatica var. genuina Mill. Arg, Yaw Root

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19960”?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

Terpenoids Gnidilatin, a daphnane diterpene.'” Eight com-
pounds, termed stillingia factors $,-Sg, have been isolated and
identified as daphnane-type and tigliane-type esters carrying
saturated, polyunsaturated or hydroxylated fatty acids.)

Other constituents Volatile oil 3-4%, fixed oil, acrid resin
(sylvacrol), resinic acid, stillingine (a glycoside) and tannin.

Other plant parts Hydrocyanic acid (leaf and stem).”

Food Use

Queen's delight is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Queen's delight is stated to possess sialogogue, expectorant,
diaphoretic, dermatological, astringent, antispasmodic and, in

Diterpenes

H OH CH20H
gnidilatin

yet

daphnane skeleton tigliane skeleton

Figure 1 Selected constituents of queen’s delight.

large doses, cathartic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitis, laryngitis, laryngismus stridulus, cutaneous eruptions,
haemorrhoids, constipation and specifically for exudative skin
eruption with irritation and lymphatic involvement, and laryn-
gismus stridulus.©70™

Figure 2 Queen’s delight (Stillingia sylvatica).

----- PAGE 505 -----
Queen’s Delight

Figure 3 Queen’s delight - dried drug substance (root).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 1-2 as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 0.5—2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”)

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of queen's
delight and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for queen's
delight and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Overdose of queen's delight is reported to cause vertigo,
burning sensation of the mouth, throat and gastrointestinal tract,
diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, dysuria, aches and pains, pruritus
and skin eruptions, cough, depression, fatigue and_perspira-
tion.'°) The diterpene esters are toxic irritant principles known
to cause swelling and inflammation of the skin and mucous
membranes.» ©)

Preclinical data

The leaves and stem are documented to be toxic to sheep because
of the hydrocyanic acid content.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the irritant nature of the diterpene esters, queen's
delight may cause irritation to the mucous membranes. In view of
the lack of data on pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety,
and the potential toxicity of queen's delight, whether or not
queen's delight is appropriate for medicinal use should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the irritant and potentially
toxic constituents, the use of queen's delight during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Dictionary of Natural Products. Chapman & Hall, 1982-2005.

2 Adolf W, Hecker E. New irritant diterpene-esters from roots of
Stillingia sylvatica L. (Euphorbiaceae). Tetrahedron Lett 1980; 21:
2887-2890.

3 Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis MPF. Medical Botany. New York: Wiley
Interscience, 1977.

----- PAGE 506 -----
Raspberry

leaf preparations, including when taken during pregnancy.
view of this, raspberry leaf should not be taken during
pregnancy unless under medical supervision. Raspberry leaf
preparations should be avoided during breastfeeding. Use of
raspberry leaf preparations at doses higher than those
recommended and/or for excessive periods should be
avoided until further information is available on their safety
with long-term use. In view of the documented
pharmacological actions of raspberry leaf preparations, the
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)
Rubus idaeus L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)
Rubus

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)
Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

Flavonoids Total flavonoid content in dried leaves 0.46-1.05%\”
and up to 5%.” Derivatives of kaempferol and quercetin,”
including quercetin-3-O-B-p-glucoside,"? quercetin- and kaemp-
ferol-3-O-B-p-galactosides, _ kaempferol-3-O-f-L-arabinopyrano-

side and
(tiliroside).

kaempferol-3-O-B-p-(6'-p-coumaroy])-glucoside

Polyphenols Gallo- and ellagi-tannins 2.06-6.89%'" and up to
10%.

Other constituents Volatile components, e.g. E-2-hexenal and Z-
3-hexenol, glycosides of Cy3-norisoprenoids, vitamin C.'¢”

Other parts of the plant Berries contain anthocyanins,
hydrolysable tannins, sanquin H6, a dimeric ellagitannin,
lambertianin (a tetrameric ellagitannin), triterpenoids a- and B-
amyrin, stigmasterol, campesterol, cycloartenol, cholesterol,
and raspberry ketone.”

Related species Mono-, sesqui-, di- and tri-terpenoids are
present in several species, and five labdane-type diterpenes have
been isolated from R. suavissimus.

Food Use

Both the leaf and fruit are listed by the Council of Europe as
natural sources of food flavouring (categories N2 and N1,
respectively). Category N2 allows the addition of the leaf to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product. Category
N1 indicates that no restrictions apply to the fruit.'©'% Raspberry
fruit is commonly used in foods.

Herbal Use

Raspberry is stated to possess astringent and partus praeparator
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for diarrhoea,
pregnancy, stomatitis, tonsillitis (as a mouthwash), conjunctivitis

Flavonoids

HO.

R! Re
quercetin H OH
quercetin-3-O-f-D-galactoside gal OH
kaempferol H H
kaempferol-3-O-f-D-galactoside gal H
kaempferol-3-O-f-L-arabinoside ara H

gal = galactoside, ara = arabinoside

Phenylpropanoids
le)
HO

4-(4-hydroxyphenyl)butan-2-one
(raspberry ketone — in the berries)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of raspberry.

----- PAGE 507 -----
Raspberry

Figure 2 Raspberry (Rubus idaeus).

(as an eye lotion), and specifically to facilitate parturition.'6?°”

Se) Modern interest is focused on the use of raspberry leaf to
stimulate and facilitate labour and to shorten its duration.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 4-8 g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 4-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.“©”

Pharmacological Actions

There is only a limited amount of basic and clinical research
exploring the effects of raspberry leaf preparations.

In vitro and animal studies

A conference abstract published in the older literature describes
utero-activity for a raspberry leaf infusion (1g dried leaves infused
with 15 ml of saline for 10 minutes at 95°C, then filtered) when
applied to rat and human uterine tissue. The extract had little or
no effect on the uterine strips from non-pregnant rats, but
inhibited contractions of those from pregnant rats."”) Similarly, the
extract had no effect on strips from non-pregnant human uteri,
but initiated contractions in strips from human uteri obtained at
10-16 weeks of pregnancy. The intrinsic rhythm of the uterine
tissue in which a pharmacological effect was observed (pregnant
rat and human uteri) was reported to become more regular, with
contractions, in most cases, less frequent. No data are provided
in a report of these experiments, and no statistical analyses appear
to have been carried out; replication of this work is necessary in
order to confirm or refute the findings.

A methanol extract of fresh, dried R. idaeus leaves relaxed

transmurally stimulated guinea-pig ileum in vitro, whereas no
response was seen with exposure of the system to extracts
prepared with less polar solvents (n-hexane and ethyl acetate).(!”
Subsequent methanol extraction and bioassay-guided fractiona-
tion revealed activity associated with fractions eluted with
trichloromethane/methanol (95:5) and trichloromethane/metha-
nol (50:50). The two most active fractions relaxed transmurally
stimulated guinea-pig ileum in a concentration-dependent man-
ner.

Aqueous extracts of raspberry leaves have been reported to
contain a number of active constituents, including a smooth

muscle stimulant, an anticholinesterase, and an antispasmodic
that antagonised the stimulant actions of the two previous
fractions. The smooth muscle stimulant fraction was more potent
towards uterine muscle."

Flavonoids isolated from 70% ethanol extracts of the leaves
from four varieties of raspberry (species not stated) collected in
Russia have antioxidant activity in vitro, as assessed in a system
involving measurement of the rate of oxygen absorption during
initiated oxidation of isopropylbenzene.”

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for extracts of the
leaves of a related species, Rubus fructicosus L., in both non-
diabetic and diabetic (glucose-induced and alloxan-induced)
rabbits") The reduction in blood glucose concentrations,
compared with controls, was greatest in glucose-induced diabetic
rabbits. In addition, blood insulin concentrations increased
significantly, compared with baseline values, following adminis-
tration of an ethyl ether extract of R. fructicosus leaf to
hyperglycaemic rabbits."”’ However, confirmation of these find-
ings using more robust experimental methods is required. In vitro
antiviral activity documented for raspberry fruit extract has been
attributed to the phenolic constituents, in particular to tannic
acid.)

Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

The effects of a raspberry leaf preparation on labour, birth and
the post-partum period were investigated in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 240 low-risk,
nulliparous women. Participants received tablets containing 1.2 ¢
raspberry leaf extract, one tablet twice daily, taken from 32 weeks!
gestation until the onset of labour (regular contractions)‘

In total, 192 women (n = 96 per group) completed the study;
the 48 withdrawals were evenly distributed across the two groups.
There were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups with respect to the length of gestation (p = 0.51),
likelihood of medical augmentation of labour (p = 0.91), need for
pethidine (meperidine) (p value not stated), need for artificial
rupture of membranes (p = 0.35), time spent in first, third (p value
not stated) and second stages of labour (p = 0.28), proportion of
normal vaginal births (62.4% and 50.6% for the raspberry leaf
and placebo groups, respectively; p = 0.19) and emergency
caesaerean section rate (p value not stated). There were also no
statistically significant differences between the two groups with
respect to safety outcomes in labour, including blood loss >
600 mL (p = 0.86), neonatal birth weight (p = 0.46), Apgar score

Figure 3 Raspberry — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 508 -----
at five minutes (p = 0.11) and occurrence of meconium-stained
fluid (p value not stated). However, a higher proportion of
women in the raspberry leaf group developed pre-eclampsia (4.2%
and 2.1% in the raspberry and placebo groups, respectively), and a
higher proportion of babies admitted to special care units was
born to mothers from the raspberry leaf group than to those from
the placebo group (p values not stated). Several of the above
parameters showed a tendency (although not statistically
significant at p < 0.05) for more favourable outcomes in the
raspberry leaf group and, on this basis, further research
investigating other dosage regimens may be worth while.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is only a limited amount of information on the safety and
toxicity of raspberry leaf preparations and further investigation of
these aspects is required. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial, 240 low-risk, nulliparous women received tablets
containing 1.2g raspberry leaf extract, one tablet twice daily,
taken from 32 weeks’ gestation until the onset of labour (regular
contractions); 192 women, 96 in each group completed the
study"? A higher number of adverse events was reported by
raspberry leaf recipients than by placebo recipients (31 and 24, for
the raspberry leaf and placebo groups, respectively, corresponding
to 32.3% and 25.0% of women in each group, respectively),
although no statistical analysis for this comparison was reported.
No congenital abnormalities were reported for either group. Also,
there were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups with respect to several safety outcomes in labour (see
Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies). This study provides
only very limited information on the safety of raspberry leaf when
taken during pregnancy (weeks 32 to labour onset) as clinical
trials are designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

As excessive ingestion of tannins is not recommended, raspberry
leaf tea should not be used for prolonged periods.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the pharma-
cological actions described for raspberry leaf, the potential for
preparations of raspberry leaf to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Preparations of raspberry leaf have
been used traditionally during labour to help ease parturition.
However, there is limited and conflicting scientific evidence that
raspberry leaf has effects on uterine contractions. A preliminary
report published in the older literature describes inhibition of
contractions of tissue obtained from the uteri of pregnant rats and
initiation of contractions in uterine strips obtained from pregnant

Raspberry

women at 10-16 weeks of pregnancy following application of a
raspberry leaf infusion in vitro. These findings require confirma-
tion. Furthermore, a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial found no statistically significant differences in labour
outcomes for raspberry leaf extract 1.2 g twice daily taken from 32
weeks' gestation to labour onset, when compared with placebo.
Hence, at present, as there is a lack of evidence to support the
efficacy of preparations of raspberry leaf during late pregnancy to
assist parturition, and in view of the lack of safety data,
preparations of raspberry leaf should not be used during
pregnancy and labour. If raspberry leaf is taken during these
periods, this should only be under medical supervision.

There is a lack of information on the use of raspberry leaf
during breastfeeding. Until information is available, raspberry leaf
preparations should be avoided during breastfeeding.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

France: IgeE. UK: Fenneherb Monthly. USA: Women's
Menopause Formula.

References

1 Gudej J, Tomezyk M. Determination of flavonoids, tannins and ellagic
acid in leaves from Rubus L. species. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 1114-
1119.

2. Nikitina VS et al. Flavonoids from raspberry and blackberry leaves
and their antioxidant activities. Pharm Chem J 2000; 34: 596-598.

3 Khabibullaeva LA, Khalmatov KK. Phytochemical study of raspberry
leaves. Mater Yubileinoi Resp Nauchn Konf Farm Posvyashch 1972;
Sept: 101-102.

4 Gudej J. Kaempferol and quercetin glycosides from Rubus idaeus L.
leaves. Acta Polon Pharm 2003; 60: 313-316.

5 Cygan F-C. Die Himbeere — Rubus idaeus L. Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 1995; 16: 366-374.

6 Puupponen-Pimia R et al. Bioactive berry compounds — novel tools
against human pathogens. App! Microbiol Biotech 2005; 67: 8-18.

7 Morimoto C et al. Anti-obese action of raspberry ketone. Life Sci
2005; 77: 194-204.

8 Patel AV et al. Therapeutic constituents and actions of Rubus species.
Curr Med Chem 2004; 11: 1501-1512.

9 Bamford DS et al. Raspberry leaf tea: a new aspect to an old problem.
Br J] Pharmacol 1970; 40: 161-162.

10 Rojas-Vera J et al. Relaxant activity of raspberry (Rubus idaeus) leaf
extract in guinea-pig ileum in vitro. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 665-
668.

11. Beckett AH e¢ al. The active constituents of raspberry leaves. A
preliminary investigation. J Pharm Pharmacol 1954; 6: 785-796.

12 Alonso R et al. A preliminary study of hypoglycaemic activity of
Rubus fruticosus. Planta Med 1980; 40 (Suppl. Suppl.): 102-106.

13. Konowalchuk JK, Speirs JI. Antiviral activity of fruit extracts. | Food
Sci 1976; 41: 1013-1017.

14 Simpson M et al. Raspberry leaf in pregnancy: its safety and efficacy
in labor. J Midwifery Women's Health 2001; 46(2): 51-59.

----- PAGE 509 -----
= Red Clover

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of red clover is well documented. Limited
information is available on the pharmacological properties
and no documented scientific evidence was found to justify
the herbal uses. Robust clinical research assessing the efficacy
and safety of red clover is limited. Reported oestrogenic side-
effects in grazing animals have been attributed to the
isoflavone constituents. Few toxicity data are available for red
clover. In view of this and the isoflavone and coumarin
components, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Trifolium pratense L. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Cow Clover, Meadow Clover, Purple Clover, Trefoil, Trifolium
borysthenicum Gruner, T. bracteatum Schousb., T. lenkoranicum
(Grossh.) Rosk., T. pratense L. var. lenkoranicum Grossh., T.
ukrainicum Opp.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Carbohydrates Arabinose, glucose, glucuronic acid, rhamnose,
xylose (following hydrolysis of saponin glycosides); polysacchar-
ide (a galactoglucomannan).

Coumarins Coumarin, medicagol.

Isoflavonoids

HO.

R R
formononetin CH3 biochaninA CH3
daidzein H genistein H
Figure 1 Selected constituents of red clover.

Isoflavonoids Biochanin A, daidzein, formononetin, genistein,
pratensin, trifoside, calycosine galactoside) and pectolinarin.

Flavonoids
glycosides.”

Isorhamnetin, kaempferol, quercetin, and their

Saponins Soyasapogenols B—F (C
(see above) yielded by acid hydrolys

F artefacts) and carbohydrates
. (3)

Other constituents Coumaric acid, phaseolic acid, salicylic acid,
trans- and cis-clovamide (L-dopa conjugated with trans- and cis-
caffeic acids), resin, volatile oil (containing furfural), fats,
vitamins and minerals. Cyanogenetic glycosides have been
documented for a related species, Trifolium repens.)

Food Use

Red clover is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category
be added to foodstuffs in small quantiti
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“!® Previously, red clover has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'°

indicates that it can

s, with a possible

Herbal Use

Red clover is stated to act as a dermatological agent, and to

possess mildly antispasmodic and expectorant properties. Tannins

are known to possess astringent properties. Traditionally red

clover has been used for chronic skin dise: whooping cough,
1 specifically for ec coriag)¢, (Go G7 G8, G64)

and specifically for eczema and psoriasis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried flowerhead 4g as an infusion three times daily.C%°

Liquid extract 1.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily'C%°?
Tincture 1-2mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C® o)

Figure 2 Red clover (Trifolium pratense).

----- PAGE 510 -----
Figure 3 Red clover — dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Biochanin A, formononetin and genistein (isoflavones) are known
to possess oestrogenic properties. The saponin constituents are
reported to lack any haemolytic or fungistatic activity.) A
possible chemoprotective effect has been documented for biocha-
nin A, which has been reported to inhibit carcinogenic activity in

cell culture.

Clinical studies

A systematic review of randomised clinical trials assessing the
efficacy of products containing T. pratense isoflavones in reducing
the frequency of hot flushes in menopausal women identified 17
articles of which five were suitable for inclusion into a meta-
analysis.” The five studies assessed the effects of T. pratense
isoflavones administered in doses ranging from 40-82 mg daily.
Meta-analysis of data from these trials indicated that the
frequency of hot flushes was lower for red clover, compared
with placebo (weighted mean difference (95% confidence inter-
val): —1.5 (—2.94 to 0.03); p = 0.05). The clinical relevance, if any,
of this finding is unclear. Another systematic review, which
assessed the efficacy of phytoestrogens for treatment of meno-
pausal symptoms, also included five trials that examined the
effects of red clover extracts on frequency of hot flushes for red
clover preparations, compared with control groups (weighted
mean difference (95% confidence interval): —0.60 (—1.71 to
0.51).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data
There is a lack of clinical and toxicity data for red clover and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Urticarial reactions have been documented.‘@*”)

Red Clover

Preclinical data

Infertility and growth disorders have been reported in grazing
animals.‘“>» These effects have been attributed to the oestrogenic
isoflavone constituents, in particular to formononetin.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the oestrogenic constituents, excessive ingestion should
be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of red clover to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is evidence that
constituents of red clover have oestrogenic effects and the
possibility that this could interfere with the activity of hormonal
therapies taken concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the oestrogenic components
the use of red clover during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Australia: Promensil; Trinovin. Brazil: Climadil. UK: Meno-
flavon.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover; Bioglan Soy Power
Plus; Lifechange Menopause Formula; Trifolium Complex.
Canada: Natural HRT. Malaysia: Cleansa Plus. USA: Women's
Menopause Formula.

References

1 Saxena VK, Jain AK. A new isoflavone glycoside from Trifolium
pratense. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 262-263.

2 Jain AK, Saxena VK. Isolation and characterisation of 3-
methoxyquercetin 7-O-B-b-glucopyranoside from Trifolium pratense.
Natl Acad Sci Lett 9: 379-380.

3 Olesek WA, Jurzysta M. Isolation, chemical characterization and
biological activity of red clover (Trifolium pratense L.) root saponins.
Acta Soc Bot Pol 1986; 55: 247-252.

4 Opdyke DLJ. Furfural. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16: 759-764.

5 Kelly RW et al. Formononetin content of 'Grasslands Pawera’ red
clover and its oestrogenic activity to sheep. NZ J Exp Agric 1979; 7:
131-134.

6 Cassady JM et al. Use of a mammalian cell culture benzo(a)pyrene
metabolism assay for the detection of potential anticarcinogens from
natural products: inhibition of metabolism by biochanin A, an
isoflavone from Trifolium pratense L. Cancer Res 1988; 48: 6257-6261.

7 Coon JT, et al. Trifolium pratense isoflavones in the treatment of
menopausal hot flushes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Phytomedicine 2007; 14(2-3): 158-159.

8 Krebs EE, et al. Phytoestrogens for treatment of menopausal
symptoms: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2004; 104(4): 824-836.

----- PAGE 511 -----
Rhodiola

- ,
are limited to a small number of single-dose or short-term
trials (lasting less than three weeks) involving small numbers
of healthy volunteers.

In view of the lack of safety and toxicity data, excessive use
(higher than recommended dosages and/or for long periods
of time) of R. rosea should be avoided.

Pharmacists and other healthcare professionals should be
aware that herbal products containing rhodiola are readily
available over the internet and from retail outlets; such
products are often promoted as being beneficial in
supporting mental and physical performance, emotional
balance, cardiovascular health, resistance to infection, male
sexual function and in increasing ability to cope with stressful
situations. There are no licensed rhodiola products available in
the UK, so the quality of commercially available products is
not assured.

Species (Family)

Rhodiola rosea L. (Crassulaceae)

Synonym(s)

Arctic root, Golden root, Hong Jing Tian, Rhodiola, Rodiola,
Rose root, Sedum rosea (L.) Scop., Sedum roseum Scop.

Rhodiola rosea and several other Rhodiola species are used as
local medicines in China."

Part(s) Used

Rhizome and root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

None

Legal category (Licensed Products)

Rhodiola is not on the GSL. There are no licensed products
containing rhodiola available in the UK.

Constituents

Flavonoids Herbacetin, gossypetin, kaempferol and their glyco-
sides rhodionin, rhodionidin, rhodiolgin, rhodiolgidin, rhodalin,
thodalidin, rhodiosin and kaempferol-7-O-a-L-rhamnopyrano-
side.”

Phenylethanoids Hydroxyphenylethy] tyrosol (p-tyrosol) and its
glycoside salidroside (rhodioloside; p-hydroxyphenylethyl-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside).

Phenylpropanoids Rosin (cinnamyl-O-f-p-glucopyranoside),
rosarin (cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-L-arabinofuranosyl)-O-B-p-glucopyra-
noside), rosavin (cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-L-arabinopyranosyl)-O-B-b-
glucopyranoside), sachaliside 1 (4-hydroxy-cinnamyl-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside), vimalin (4-methoxy-cinnamyl-O-B-p-glucopyr-
anoside), cinnamyl-(6'-O-B-xylopyranosyl)-O-B-glucopyranoside,
4-methoxy-cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-arabinopyranosyl)-O-B-glucopyra-
noside™ and cinnamyl alcohol.”

Volatile oils 0.05% (1% has been documented for Russian
material) of dry weight of crude rhizome, containing mono-
terpene hydrocarbons, monoterpene alcohols and straight-chain
aliphatic alcohols as major components; major compounds
(>3%) include geraniol, 1,4-p-menthadien-7-ol, limonene, a-
pinene (monoterpenes), and decanol and dodecanol (aliphatic
alcohols). The monoterpenes rosiridol™ and rosiridin are also
present.

Other constituents Picein ((4-O-B-p-glucopyranosyl)-acetophe-
none), benzyl-O-B-p-glucopyranoside,“” sterols (B-sitosterol,
daucosterol),” tannins,” gallic acid and its esters.

Quality
As with other herbal medicines, there can be qualitative and
quantitative variation in the profile of constituents present in
crude rhodiola material and in marketed products. Content of
salidroside and tyrosol in samples of R. rosea root obtained from
different outlets in the Yanbian area of China has been reported to
vary up to ten-fold (range: 1.3-11.1 and 0.3-2.2mg/g_ for
salidroside and tyrosol, respectively).

Standardisation of commercial extracts of R. rosea may be for
content of 'salidrosides' and 'rosavins', although the precise
composition of these groups may not always be stated. For
example, one commercial product available in the UK is described
as containing 3% 'rosavins', 1% 'salidrosides' and 24% poly-
phenols per 100mg capsule of rhodiola. Several other rhodiola
products are stated to contain 1% 'salidrozid' and 40%
polyphenols. The quality of these products is not assured as
they are not licensed products.

----- PAGE 512 -----
Phenylethanoids R

tyrosol H

R-O HO
‘dros HO
OL salidroside es 5.
OH HO

Phenylpropanoids

R'O. R
me : oI
HO. —

HO
R! R?
rosin H H
HO.
it HO.
rosarin Ax.) H
rs
OH
. °
Tee wn i
HO
sachaliside H OH
4-methoxy-cinnamyl-O- H OCH;

-p-glucopyranoside
cinnamyl-(6’-O-p-

HO x
xylopyranosyl)-O-6- WON H

p-glucopyranoside HO

4-methoxy-cinnamyl- oH
(6’-O-a-arabinosyl)
O-f-p-glucopyranoside

OCH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

An extract of R. rosea (SHR-S5) tested in clinical trials was
standardised for salidroside content (170mg or 185mg"?
extract provided approximately 4.5 mg salidroside).' ')

Analysis of 19 samples of dried rhizome from 10 Rhodiola
species other than R. rosea, obtained in the east of Qinghai
province in China, found that all species contained salidroside,
although only five species had a content greater than 0.3%."?)
Five species also contained lotaustralin, a cyanoglucoside which is
toxic to humans following oral administration.

Food Use

Rhodiola root and rhizome are not used in foods, although the
aerial parts of R. rosea are used as a food ingredient.”

Herbal Use

Rhodiola has a long history of use as a medicinal plant in several
traditional systems. It is reported to have been used as a 'brain
tonic’, to treat headache and lung disorders,''” and to eliminate
fatigue and improve work capacity.''?) It is also stated to have
stimulant properties, and to prevent stress."

Modern interest in rhodiola is focused on its adaptogenic
properties. (Adaptogens increase an organism's resistance to
physical, chemical and biological stressors, and have a normal-
ising influence on bodily systems.)

Rhodiola

Other glycosides

HO. R B
HO ° wer picein COCH3
HO o
HO benzyl-O-f-p- H

glucopyranoside

Flavonoids

OH
OH
O.

herbacetin H
gossypetin OH

R! R2 R?
rhodalin H xylose H
rhodionin xylose H H
rhodalidin H xylose glucose
thodiosin glucose'*rhamnose H H
thodionidin rhamnose glucose H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

Monoterpenes

HO.
~ OH SS OR
geraniol R
rosiridol H
rosiridin Glucose
S
limonene a-pinene

Figure 3 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

----- PAGE 513 -----
Rhodiola

Figure 4 Rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea).

Dosage

Authoritative guidance on dosages of R. rosea preparations for
adults and children hitherto is lacking. Given the intended uses of
R. rosea, it is not suitable for use in children.

In clinical trials involving young adults, dosages used have
ranged from R. rosea root extract (SHR-5) 50mg twice daily
(salidroside content not stated)" to 170mg daily (equivalent to
approximately 4.5 mg salidroside) for two weeks. In another
study investigating the effects of R. rosea on fatigue and stress,
participants took a single dose of two or three capsules (total
daily doses of 370mg and 555mg R. rosea extract, respec-
tively).

Other dosages have been suggested, although data supporting
these regimens are not available. For example, for long-term use as
an adaptogen (up to four months) daily doses of R. rosea extract
standardised for 1% rosavin of 360-600 mg (equivalent to 3.6—
6 mg rosavin daily), initiated several weeks before an anticipated
period of increased stress and continued for its duration, have
been stated." For use as an adaptogen in acute stressful
situations, such as taking an examination, a dose three times
that suggested for longer term administration, taken as a single
dose (i.e. 1080-1800 mg R. rosea extract standardised for 1%
rosavin, equivalent to 10.8-18 mg rosavin), has been advised.)

Pharmacological Actions

A substantial body of research investigating the pharmacological
and clinical properties of R. rosea has been undertaken, although
much of this work has been published in the Russian scientific
literature, making it difficult to access. The following represents a
summary of some of this literature, together with that published
in English. Where papers published in Russian or Ukrainian are
cited, information has been taken from the English abstract and/
or previous authoritative reviews only, thus the data and methods
have not been scrutinised here. The information is included here
to guide the interested reader to the original literature, and should
not be taken as confirmation of the effects described.

Several activities, including various adaptogenic effects, as well
as anti-arrhythmic, cardioprotective, antimutagenic and antitu-
mour properties, have been described for R. rosea following
preclinical and/or clinical studies. Several of these more specific
activities are often considered as part of the overall profile of
adaptogenic activity of R. rosea. The precise chemical constituents
responsible for the documented pharmacological activities of R.
rosea root and rhizome are not fully understood, although tyrosol
and salidroside (rhodioloside) and the cinnamyl (phenylpropa-
noid) glycoside constituents (rosin, rosavin, rosarin) (see Con-
stituents) are believed to be important for certain activities. '®

In vitro and animal studies

Adaptogenic effects Several adaptogenic properties have been
described for R. rosea extracts following preclinical studies.

The effects of R. rosea extract on erythropoiesis and
granulocytopoiesis following paradoxical sleep deprivation (which
leads to behavioural disorders and changes in haematopoiesis, for
example, suppression of bone marrow erythropoiesis and activa-
tion of granulocytopoiesis) have been explored in experiments in
(718) Th one study, mice were given R. rosea extract (no
further details given) 1 ml/kg once daily by gastric lavage for five
days before sleep deprivation.” Measurement of peripheral
blood reticulocytes over days 1-7 following treatment indicated
that R. rosea, compared with control, stimulated erythropoiesis
during the early stage (days 1-3) but inhibited accumulation of
erythroid cells in the bone marrow during days 4-7. In contrast, in
a similar experiment using the same dosage regimen, administra-
tion of R. rosea before sleep deprivation did not modulate
granulocytopoiesis as demonstrated by bone marrow content of
neutrophilic granulocytes.''*)

A protective effect against various stress conditions was shown
for an aqueous extract of R. rosea (SHR-5; containing rosavin
3.6%, salidroside 1.6% and p-tyrosol <0.1%) when applied to
preparations of three-day-old larvae of the freshwater snail
Lymnaea stagnalis before they were exposed to stressors.”
Preincubation of larvae with increasing concentrations of R. rosea
extract (ranging from 4.05 to 40.5 jtg/mL) for 20 hours resulted in
a concentration-dependent protective effect against exposure to
lethal heat shock (43°C for 4 minutes) for concentrations above
4.05 g/mL. A protective effect of R. rosea was also demonstrated
against other stressors (menadione, copper and cadmium)
although the effect was less marked than against lethal heat
shock. Further investigations, involving incubation of larvae with

mice.

Figure 5 Rhodiola - dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 514 -----
R. rosea extract at a concentration of 40.5 g/mL for 20 hours,
ruled out induction of the synthesis of heat shock proteins by R.
rosea extract as a possible mechanism of action for its protective
effect against stressors.''”

Cognitive effects The effects of a 40% ethanol extract of R. rosea
root on learning and memory were investigated in rats in a battery
of tests, including those involving passive avoidance and active
avoidance with negative or positive reinforcement.» The results
of these studies were conflicting. A single oral dose of R. rosea
root extract of 0.1mL given 30 minutes before maze training
significantly facilitated learning and improved memory at 24
hours after administration (p < 0.01 compared with control),
whereas doses of 0.02 and 1mL had no demonstrable effect. In
other tests using the staircase method (which trains animals to
retrieve food from the top stair), oral administration of R. rosea
extract 0.1mL daily for 10 days before training resulted in a
significantly greater proportion of trained rats, compared with
control (92.3% versus 61.5%, respectively; p < 0.05). However, in
other tests (including passive avoidance and active avoidance with
negative reinforcement methods), this dosage regimen of R. rosea
root extract had no significant effects on learning and memory.»
Oral administration of a 40% ethanol extract of R. rosea rhizome
0.1mL daily for 10 days before training also had no effect on
electroconvulsive shock-impaired learning and memory in rats.2”

The CNS depressant effects of a 50% ethanol extract (said to be
of Sedum rosea; plant part not stated) at doses of 10, 30 and
100 mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally were investigated in
mice." Animals were given a single dose of sodium pentobarbital
(SOmg/kg body weight, intraperitoneally) 30 minutes after S.
rosea, and the narcosis time (time between loss and recovery of the
righting reflex; the righting reflex is any one of the neuromuscular
responses that restore the body to its upright position when it has
been displaced) was measured by a blinded observer. It was
reported that S. rosea extract potentiated the effects of
pentobarbital, since the time to recovery of the righting reflex
was significantly longer for treated mice than for controls.
However, this finding is questionable since numerical data and a
precise p-value were not reported (the p-value was given as p <

0.05).

Antitumour activities Antitumour and antimetastatic effects
have been reported for an extract of R. rosea (no further details
given) following in vivo experiments. In one study, mice
transplanted with Ehrlich adenocarcinoma were treated with R.
rosea extract 0.5 mL/kg body weight orally daily from day 4 post-
transplantation until day 13 or 15 post-transplantation when the
animals were sacrificed.” It was reported that tumour growth
was significantly inhibited in treated mice, compared with
controls. However, the findings of this study are questionable
since the p-value given for this finding was p = 0.05, and the
number of animals involved in the experiment was not stated. A
similar experiment involved rats transplanted with metastasising
Pliss lymphosarcoma and treated with R. rosea extract according
to the same regimen. In this study, the extent of metastasis in
treated rats was reported to be 50% that in control animals (p <
0.01) and the mass of metastases was significantly less than that in
control animals (mean (standard deviation): 142.5 (23.0) and
203.3 (27.0), for treated and control groups, respectively; p <
0.05).°?) However, again, the sample size for this study was not
stated.

In another in vivo study, an extract of R. rosea root was tested
for its effects on the haematotoxicity of cyclophosphamide in mice
transplanted with Ehrlich ascites tumour and Lewis lung

Rhodiola

carcinoma. After transplantation, mice were treated with
cyclophosphamide (100 mg/kg body weight), R. rosea root extract
(0.5 mL/kg orally on days 2-8 following transplantation), or both
23) Cyclophosphamide, but not R. rosea extract,
reduced the numbers of leukocytes and myelokaryocytes to 40-
50%, compared with control (p < 0.05); when the two substances
were given in combination, the numbers of leukocytes ani
myelokaryocytes were reported to increase by 30% and 16-18%,
respectively, although only the change in the former parameter
was reported to be statistically significant (p < 0.05). R. rosea
extract was also reported to have no effect on the colony-forming
activity of myelokaryocytes, whereas cyclophosphamide inhibite:
the proliferation of these cells. In mice given a combination of the
two substances, no inhibition of colony-forming activity was
observed; this was stated to be statistically significant, compare
treated with cyclophosphamide alone,
although no p-value was given.)

substances."

with values for mic

Antimutagenic activities Antimutagenic activity has been
described for extracts of R. rosea. Ethanol extracts (20% an
40%) of R. rosea were reported to counteract gene mutations
induced by various chemical mutagens in the Ames test
(Salmonella typhimurium).°* In another in vitro experiment, R.
rosea extract (no further details given) was reported to reduce the
yield of bone
in vivo (mice) by cyclophosphamide. It is postulated in abstracts
of the Russian and Ukrainian literature that R. rosea acts as an
antimutagen by increasing the efficiency of intracellular DNA
repair mechanisms.”°) Since this information is taken from
abstracts, confirmation is required.

marrow cells with chromosome aberrations induce:

Cardiovascular activities Inotropic, anti-arrhythmic and other
cardioprotective activities have been described in abstracts of
papers published in Russian for R. rosea extracts. R. rosea extract
(no further details given), administered orally, was reported to
have an anti-arrhythmic effect in epinephrine (adrenaline)-induced
arrhythmia in rat heart,?® and to prevent the reperfusion-induced
decrease in contraction amplitude in isolated perfused rat
heart.”
administered by intravenous infusion, the authors postulated that
the observed cardioprotective effects of R. rosea extract may be
related to stimulation of the endogenous opioid system. This
information is taken only from abstracts, so confirmation is
required.

Since both these effects were reversed by naloxone

Clinical studies
Mental performance Several clinical trials, with reports
published in the English scientific literature, have investigated
the effects of preparations containing a dry extract of R. rosea
rhizome (SHR-5; Swedish Herbal Institute) on  stres
fatigue and on mental work capacity.
In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group trial, 40 healthy male Indian medical students took tablets
containing R. rosea dry extract 50mg, orally twice daily, or
placebo, for 20 days during an examination period." At the end
of the study, statistically significant improvements in self-assessed
mental fatigue, self-assessed general well-being and in one of the
psychomotor tests (accuracy of movement versus speed in a maze
test) were reported for the treated group, compared with the
placebo group (p < 0.01, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively). Statistically
non-significant differences were reported in several other tests,
including another psychomotor test (tapping test) and two mental
capacity tests. The findings of the study are limited since no

-induced

----- PAGE 515 -----
Rhodiola

predefined primary outcome measure was stated, the sample size
was small, and the method of randomisation of participants was
not adequately described. It was stated in a report of the study
that students who received R. rosea extract achieved a higher
average mark in the examinations than did placebo recipients
(3.47 and 3.20, respectively) and that this indicated the 'usefulness'
of R. rosea. However, this is a post-hoc outcome measure and
was not subjected to statistical testing, therefore the conclusion is
not necessarily valid.

A similar study, using a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover design, assessed the effects of R. rosea dry
extract 170mg (containing approximately 4.5 mg_ salidroside)
daily for 14 days on mental performance among 56 healthy
Armenian physicians aged 24-35 years undertaking night duty."
Participants underwent a battery of tests before and after the 14-
day treatment period, at the end of the 14-day wash-out period
and after crossing over to the other study arm for 14 days. It was
reported that participants who received R. rosea during the first
14-day period experienced statistically significant improvements in
tests for fatigue, compared with placebo recipients, but that there
was no difference between the two groups at the end of th
crossover period." The investigators use this as evidence of the
beneficial effects of R. rosea extract, but this analysis and,
therefore, the conclusion is flawed since it takes no account of the

eo

second treatment period. Crossover studies are used as a means of
increasing the sta al power of a study without increasing the
sample size, so ignoring the second treatment period in effect
halves the sample size of the study.

As the two studies described above had used doses of R. rosea
that were considered to be low, a subsequent randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study assessed the effects
of two different doses of R. rosea extract on capacity for mental
work against a background of fatigue. In this study, 121 healthy
male cadets aged 19-21 years received two (7 = 41) or three (n =
20) capsules containing R. rosea extract (SHR-5, 185 mg contains
4.5mg_ salidroside); equivalent to a total of 370mg (9mg
salidroside) and 555 mg extract (13.5 mg salidroside), respectively,
or placebo (m = 40), as a single dose; a further 20 participants
were allocated to a no-treatment control group.''") Participants
underwent a battery of tests at 5pm before undertaking nig!
duties, and took their allocated study medication at 4am the next
morning, 1 hour before as
time.

Participants who received higher dose R. rosea
performed significantly better than did placebo recipients in all
five measures of capacity for mental work in the test battery
(scanning for pre-assigned symbols, number of errors in this test,
recall of digit sequences, arrangement of numbers in a grid and
number of errors in this test; p < 0.05 in each test). Statistically
significant improvements with lower dose R. rosea extract,
compared with placebo, were observed in only two of the five
tests (p < 0.01 for each). Both doses of R. rosea extract, compared
with placebo, were reported to achieve significantly better scores
on an Antifatigue Index (mean (standard deviation): 1.04 (0.29),
1.02 (0.21) and 0.90 (0.32) for lower and higher dose R. rosea
extract and placebo, respectively; p < 0.0001 for dose of R. rosea
extract versus placebo)"

This study, however, has several methodological flaws. For
example, a formal sample size calculation was not carried out, the
study had no predefined primary outcome measure, and in the
analysis, no adjustment appears to have been made for multiple
statistical tests. Further, although the study was said to include
random allocation to treatment, the randomisation proc

3

ssment in the test battery a second

extract

5 as

described in a report of the study is inadequate and, additionally,
the no-treatment control group was not randomly allocated at all
but simply comprised the last 20 cadets to be enrolled into the
study.

Other conditions In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cros
over study designed to assess the effects of R. rosea on hypoxia
and oxidative stress, 15 healthy volunteers aged 20-33 years
received capsules each containing R. rosea 447mg (no further
details given), four daily for seven days, or placebo, before
undergoing hypoxic exposure (to simulate conditions at an
elevation of 4600 m).*) (The study also assessed the effects of a
supplement claimed to contain dissolved oxygen, although these
results are not reported here.) Fourteen participants completed the
study. There were no statistically significant differences between
R. rosea and placebo recipients in any of the outcome measures,
including arterial capillary blood oxygen (concentration — PcO.),
blood oxyhaemoglobin saturation as assessed using a pulse
oximeter on an index finger, and serum lipid peroxide and urine
malondialdehyde concentrations (as markers of
stress).°*) However, given the small sample size for this study,
further investigation into the effects of R. rosea preparations in
hypoxia is warranted.

Preliminary studies conducted in China and involving men
living and working at high altitude have compared the effects of a
multiherbal product containing the related species Rhodiola
kirilowii (Regel) Maxim. with those of acetazolamide.??*”

oxidative

Side-effects, Toxicity
Cl

There is a lack of reliable, accessible information relating to the
safety and toxicity of preparations of R. rosea. Data from clinical
trials of R. rosea are extremely limited, and no postmarketing
surveillance or other pharmacoepidemiological studies have been
identified.

Clinical trials involving small numbers of healthy young (<35
years) volunteers who received R. rosea extract (SHR-5) 100mg
for 20 days," or 170mg for 14 days" (see Pharmacological
Actions, Clinical studies for further details), have reported that no
adverse effects or events were observed during the studies.!®
Another study in which healthy young (19-21 years) volunteers
received R. rosea extract (SHR-5) 370mg (containing 9mg
salidroside) or 555 mg (containing 13.5 mg salidroside) as a single
dose also reported that no adverse effects or events were
observed."

‘al data

Preclinical data

In vitro experiments have investigated the effects of incubation of
three-day-old larvae of the freshwater snail Lymnaea stagnalis
with different concentrations of an aqueous extract of R. rosea
(SHR-5; containing rosavin 3.6%, salidroside 1.6% and p-tyrosol
<0.1%) for 24 hours. At a concentration of R. rosea extract of
1.35mg/mL, all larvae were killed; at 405 pg/mL, around 80%
were killed.” With a longer period of exposure (up to four days),
R. rosea extract 81.21g/mL did not induce death of exposed
larvae, but their development appeared to be retarded: specimens
hatched later and were smaller than control specimens, yet no
deformations or other abnormalities were observed. Exposure of
larvae to R. rosea 40.5pg/mL for up to four days was not
associated with any slowing down of growth or development.

----- PAGE 516 -----
Abstracts of papers published in Russian or Ukrainian have
described antimutagenic activity for R. rosea extracts, although
confirmation of these data is required. Antimutagenic activity has
been reported for ethanol extracts (20% and 40%) of R. rosea in
the Ames test (Salmonella typhimurium).° A reduction in the
yield of bone marrow cells with chromosome aberrations induced
in vivo (mice) by cyclophosphamide has also been described for an
extract of R. rosea.)

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the lack of safety data, use of R.
rosea extracts at dosages higher than those recommended (see
Dosage) and/or for longer periods should be avoided.

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for R.
rosea. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of R. rosea has not been
established. In view of the lack of information on the use of R.
rosea during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided
during these periods.

References

1 Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive constituents of Chinese natural
medicines. Il. Rhodiolae radix. (1). Chemical structures and
antiallergic activity of rhodiocyanosides A and B from the
underground part of Rhodiola quadrifida (Pall.) Fisch et Mey.
(Crassulaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1996; 44: 2086-2091.

2 Tolonen A. Analysis of secondary metabolites in plant and cell culture
tissue of Hypericum perforatum L. and Rhodiola rosea L. Oulu,
Finland: University of Oulu, 2003; (PhD thesis). Available at http://
herkules.oulu.fi/isbn9514271610/index.html?lang=en (accessed 16 July
2004).

3 Ssaratikov SA et al. [Rhodioloside, a new glycoside from Rhodiola
rosea and its pharmacological properties]. Pharmazie 1968; 23: 392—
395 [German].

4 Tolonen A et al. Phenylpropanoid glycosides from Rhodiola rosea.
Chem Pharm Bull 2003; 51: 467-470.

5 Rohloff J. Volatiles from rhizomes of Rhodiola rosea L.
Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 955-661.

6 Ganzera M et al. Analysis of the marker compounds of Rhodiola
rosea L. (golden root) by reversed phase high performance liquid
chromatography. Chem Pharm Bull 2001; 49: 465-467.

7 Nekratova NA et al. [Changes of quantitative contents of salidroside
and tannins in underground organs of Rhodiola rosea L. in its natural
habitats in Altai]. Rastit Resur 1992; 28: 40-48 [Russian].

8 Dubichev AG et al. [HPLC study of the composition of Rhodiola
rosea rhizomes]. Khim Prir Soedin 1991; 2: 188-193 [Russian].

9 Linh PT et al. Quantitiative determination of salidroside and tyrosol
from the underground part of Rhodiola rosea by high performance
liquid chromatography. Arch Pharm Res 2000; 23: 349-352.

10 Darbinyan Vet al. Rhodiola rosea in stress induced fatigue — a double
blind cross-over study of a standardized extract SHR-5 with a repeated
low-dose regimen on the mental performance of healthy physicians
during night duty. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 365-371.

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Rhodiola

Shetsov VA et al. A randomized trial of two different doses of a SHR-S
Rhodiola rosea extract versus placebo and control of capacity for
mental work. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 95-105.

Kang S, Wang J. [Comparative study of the constituents from 10
rhodiola plants]. Zhong Yao Cai 1997; 20: 616-618 [Chinese].
Petkov VD et al. Effects of alcohol aqueous extract from Rhodiola
rosea L. roots on learning and memory: Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg
1986; 12: 3-15.

Spasov AA et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study of the
stimulating and adaptogenic effect of Rhodiola rosea SHR-S extract
on the fatigue of students caused by stress during an examination
period with a repeated low-dose regimen. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 85—
89.

Anon. Rhodiola rosea. Altern Med Rev 2002; 7: 421-423.

Sokolov § et al. [Studies of neurotropic activity of new compounds
isolated from Rhodiola rosea L.]. Khim Farm Zh 1985; 19: 1367-1371
[Russian].

Provalova NV et al. Mechanisms underling the effects of adaptogens
on erythropoiesis during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol
Med 2002; 133: 428-432.

Provalova NV et al. Effects of adaptogens on granulocytopoiesis
during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol Med 2002;
264.

Boon-Niermeijer EK et al. Phyto-adaptogens protect against
environmental stress-induced death of embryos from the freshwater
snail Lymnaea stagnalis. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 389-399.

Lazarova MB et al. Effects of meclofenoxate and extr. Rhodiolae
roseae L. on electroconvulsive shock-impaired learning and memory
in rats. Meth Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1986; 8: 547-552.

Ahumada F et al. Effect of certain adaptogenic plant extracts on drug-
induced narcosis in female and male mice. Phytother Res 1991; 5: 29-
31.

Udintsev SN, Shakhov VP. The role of humoral factors of regenerating
liver in the development of experimental tumors and the effect of
Rhodiola rosea extract on this process. Neoplasma 1991; 38: 323-331.
Udintsev SN, Schakhov VP. Decrease of cyclophosphamide
haematotoxicity by Rhodiola rosea root extract in mice with Ehrlich
and Lewis transplantable tumours. Eur J] Cancer 1991; 27: 1182.
Duhan OM et al. [The antimutagenic activity of biomass extracts
from the cultured cells of medicinal plants in the Ames test]. Tsitol
Genet 1999; 33: 19-25.

Salikhova RA et al. [Effect of Rhodiola rosea on the yield of mutation
alterations and DNA repair in bone marrow cells]. Patol Fiziol Eksp
Ter 1997; 4: 22-22 [Russian].

Maimeskulova LA et al. [The participation of the mu-, delta- and
kappa-opioid receptors in the realization of the anti-arrhythmia effect
of Rhodiola rosea). Eksp Klin Farmakol 1997; 60: 38-39.

Lishmanoyv IuB e¢ al. [Contribution of the opioid
of inotropic effects of Rhodiola rosea extracts in ischemic and
reperfusion heart damage in vitro]. Eksp Klin Farmakol 1997; 60: 34—
36.

Wing SL et al. Lack of effect of rhodiola or oxygenated water
supplementation on hypoxemia and oxidative stress. Wilderness
Environ Med 2003; 14: 9-16.

Ha Z et al. [The effect of rhodiola and acetazolamide on the sleep
architecture and blood oxygen saturation in men living at high
altitude]. Chin J Tuberc Respir Dis 2002; 25: 527-530 [Chinese].
Ma Y et al. [Effect of rhodiola and acetazolamide in improving
hypoxia at high altitude]. Chin Ment Health J 2001; 15: 117-118
[Chinese].

261-

stem to realization

----- PAGE 517 -----
Rhubarb

preparations, the use of non-standardised products should
avoided because their pharmacological effect will be variable
and unpredictable. See Senna for information on side-effects,
toxicity, contra-indications and warnings, including drug
interactions and use in pregnancy and lactation, for
anthraquinone-containing preparations.

Species (Family)

*Rheum officinale Baill.

+R. palmatum L. (Polygonaceae)
Synonym(s)

*Yao Yong Da Huang
+R. potaninii Losinsk., R. ginlingense Y.K. Yang et al., R.
tanguticum (maxim. ex Regel) Maxim., Zhang Ye Da Huang

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003”
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007°°8

WHO volume 1 1999'°%”

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G59.

Hydroxyanthracenes Primarily anthraquinone O-glycosides
(anthraglycosides) of aloe-emodin, emodin, chrysophanol and
physcion; dianthrone glycosides of rhein (sennosides A and B) and
their oxalates; heterodianthrones including palmidin A (aloe-
emodin, emodin), palmidin B (aloe-emodin, chrysophanol),
palmidin C (chrysophanol, emodin), sennidin C (rhein, aloe-
emodin), rheidin B (rhein, chrysophanol), and reidin C (rhein,
physcion); free anthraquinones mainly aloe-emodin, chrysopha-
nol, emodin, physcion and rhein.

Tannins Hydrolysable and condensed including glucogallin, free
gallic acid, (—)-epicatechin gallate and catechin.

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, fatty acids, rutin, resins,

BHC 1992'°° starch (about 16%), stilbene glycosides, carbohydrates, volatile oil
BHP 19960”) (trace) with more than 100 components.
-Anthraquinone aglycones,
OH O- OH
R' Re
thein COOH H
aloe-emodin CH20H H
Re 1 chrysophanol CH3 H
R emodin CH, OH
fe} physcion CH3 OCH3
Dianthrone aglycones
OH O OH Homodianthrones R' R? Re Rt
aloe-emodin dianthrone CH2,0H H CH2Z0H H
chrysophanol dianthrone = CH3 H CH3 H
emodin dianthrone CH3 OH CH3 OH
physcion dianthrone CH3 OCH; CH3 OCH;
R Rr! sennidin A,B COOH H COOH H
Rt Re
Heterodianthrones
palmidin A CHs OH CH20H H
palmidin B CH3 H CH2,0H H
OH O OH palmidin C CH3 H CH3 OH
palmidin D CHs H CH3 OCHs
theidin A CH3 OH COOH H
theidin B CHs H COOH H
theidin C CH3 OCH; COOH 4H
sennidin C,D CH,0H H COOH H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rhubarb.

----- PAGE 518 -----
Oe cue
Figure 2. Rhubarb (Rheum officinale).

Food Use

Rhubarb is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that it can
be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
produet.“'® Rhubarb stems are commonly eaten as a food.
Previously, rhubarb has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘6°

Herbal Use

Rhubarb has been used traditionally both as a laxative and an
antidiarrhoeal agent.'©? 0% Ge)

Dosage

Rhizome/root 0.2-1.0g.

Pharmacological Actions

The laxative action of anthraquinone derivatives is well recognised
(see Senna). Rhubarb also contains tannins, which exert an
astringent action. At low doses, rhubarb is stated to act as an
antidiarrhoeal because of the tannin components, whereas at
higher doses it exerts a cathartic action.“©”)

Figure 3. Rhubarb — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Rhubarb

Side-effects, Toxicity

See Senna for side-effects and toxicity associated with anthraqui-
none-containing drugs. Rhubarb leaves are toxic because of the
oxalic acid content and should not be ingested. A case of
anaphylaxis following rhubarb ingestion has been documented.‘“>

Contra-indications, Warnings

See Senna for contra-indications and warnings associated with
anthraquinone-containing drugs.‘©?? The astringent effect of
rhubarb may exacerbate, rather than relieve, symptoms of
constipation.” It has been stated that rhubarb should be avoided
by individuals suffering from arthritis, kidney disease or urinary
problems.'¢”)

Drug interactions See Senna for information on drug interac-
tions associated with anthraquinone-containing drugs.

Pregnancy and lactation It is stated that rhubarb should be
avoided during pregnancy.‘
and warnings regarding the use of stimulant laxatives during
pregnancy and lactation.

C*®) See Senna for contra-indications

Ar, na: O € opic; Parodium; alvex
Australia: Betaine Digestive Aid; Neo-Cleanse; Pyralvex; SM-
33 Adult Formula. Austria: Eucarbon; Eucarbon Herbal;
Novocholin; Pyralvex; Sabatif; Silberne. Belgium: Pyralvex.
Brazil: Bilifel; Bisuisan; Boldopeptan; Eparema; Regulador
Xavier N-2. Canada: Herbal Laxative; Herbalax. Czech
Republic: Cynarosan; Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss
Schweden Krauter; Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Species Chola-
gogae Planta; Zlucnikova Cajova Smes. France: Parodium;
Pyralvex; Resource Rhubagil. Germany: Abdomilon. Greece:
Pyralvex. Hong Kong: Hepatofalk; Pyralvex. Hungary: Bolus
Laxans. Ireland: Pyralvex. Israel: Davilla; Encypalmed; Eucar-
bon; Novicarbon. Italy: Amaro Medicinale; Caramelle alle
Erbe Digestive; Colax; Critichol; Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex;
Eparema-Levul; Eparema; Eucarbon; Eupatol; Lactolas; Las-
satina; Lassativi Vetegali; Magisbile; Mepalax; Neoform;
Puntualax; Pyralvex; Stimolfit. Netherlands: Pyralvex. Portu-
gal: Pyralvex. Russia: Parodium ([apoanym). South Africa:
Helmontskruie; Lewensessens; Moultons Herbal Extract;
Pyralvex; Wonderkroonessens. Singapore: Pyralvex. Spain:
Crislaxo; Laxante Bescansa Aloico; Menabil Complex; Pyr-
alvex; Solucion Schoum. Switzerland: Padma-Lax; Padmed
Laxan; Pyralvex; Schweden-Mixtur H nouvelle formulation.
Thailand: Pyralvex. UK: Acidosis; Digestive; Fam-Lax Senna;
Fam-Lax; Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; Herbal Laxative
Tablets; HRI Golden Seal Digestive; Indian Brandee; Jacksons
Herbal Laxative; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Pegina; Pyralvex;
Rhuaka; Stomach Mixture; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief.
Venezuela: Orafilm; Pinvex; Pyralvex.

Reference

1 Rohrback JA. Some uses of rhubarb in veterinary medicine. Herbalist
1983; 1: 239-241.

----- PAGE 519 -----
Rosemary

against endotoxin shock and adult respiratory distress
syndrome. However, these effects and other activities
documented for rosemary and/or its constituents following
preclinical studies require confirmation in robust clinical
studies. Rosemary should not be used by epileptic patients, or
used during pregnancy and lactation, in doses greatly
exceeding amounts used in food.

Species (Family)

Rosmarinus officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Rosmarinus laxiflorus Noé ex Lange

Part(s) Used

Leaf, twig

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 20078

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E”
ESCOP 20030”

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G41, G52 and G58.

Flavonoids Include diosmetin, diosmin, genkwanin and deriva-
tives, luteolin and derivatives, hispidulin, nepetin, nepitrin and
apigenin.

Phenols — Caffeic, chlorogenic, labiatic, neochlorogenic and
rosmarinic acids.

Volatile oi! 1-25%. Components vary according to chemotype.
Composed mainly of monoterpene hydrocarbons including «- and
B-pinenes, camphene and limonene, together with 1,8-cineole,
borneol, camphor (20-50% of the oil), linalool, verbinol,
terpineol, 3-octanone and isobornyl acetate.

Flavonoids

R°O.
R' R? R°
genkwanin H OH CHa
luteolin OH OH H

diosmetin OH OCH; H

Phenylpropanoids

fe)
HO. OH
HO’ HOOC ‘OH

rosmarinic acid

Monoterpenes
fe)
R
1,8-cineole borneol H camphor
bornyl-acetate COCH;
Diterpenes

camosol rosmanol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rosemary.

Terpenoids Carnosol, carnosolic acid, rosmanol (diterpenes);
oleanolic and ursolic acids (triterpenes).

Food Use

Rosemary herb and oil are commonly used as flavouring agents in
foods. Rosemary is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of
natural food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that rosemary can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with
a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in
the final product.“ Previously, rosemary has been listed as
GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C°

Herbal Use

Rosemary is stated to act as a carminative, spasmolytic,
thymoleptic, sedative, diuretic and antimicrobial.'©” Topically,
rubefacient, mild analgesic and parasiticide properties are
documented.'©” Traditionally rosemary is indicated for flatulent
dyspepsia, headache, and topically for myalgia, sciatica, and
intercostal neuralgia. The German Commission E approved

----- PAGE 520 -----
Figure 2 Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis).

internal use for dyspeptic complaints and external use as
supporting therapy for rheumatic diseases and circulatory
problems.'?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf/twig 2-4 ¢ as an infusion three times daily;©” 4-6 g
daily; external use 50g for one bath.'©?)

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity Antibacterial and antifungal activities in
vitro have been reported for rosemary oil. APS) Rosemary
herb is an effective antimicrobial agent against Staphylococcus
aureus in meat and against a wide range of bacteria in laboratory
media." Antimicrobial activity has been documented for the oil
towards moulds, and Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria"
including S. aureus, S. albus, Vibrio cholerae, Escherichia coli and
corynebacteria.?) Carnosol and ursolic acid have inhibited a range
of food spoilage microbes (S. aureus, E. coli, Lactobacillus brevis,
Pseudomonas fluorescens, Rhodotorula glutinis and Kluyvero-
myces bulgaricus). Activity was comparable to that of known
antioxidants — butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated
hydroxytoluene (BHT) — and correlated with the respective

antioxidant properties of the two compounds (carnosol > ursolic
acid).

Antiviral activity A dried 95% ethanol extract of rosemary (2-
100 ,tg/mL) inhibited in vitro formation of herpes simplex virus
type 2 plaques from 2-100% in a concentration-dependent
manner. Carnosolic acid had activity against human immunode-
ficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease (ICsq value 0.08 pg/mL)
when assayed against HIV-1 replication (ICo9 value 0.32 pg/
mL).“*°) Carnosolic acid was cytotoxic to lymphocytes with a
TCo9 on H9 lymphocytes of 0.36 ttg/mL.

Antitumour activity An extract of rosemary (precipitate from
aqueous phase of 70% alcohol extract) inhibited KB cells by 87%
when applied at a concentration of 50 pg/mL.'° The volatile oil
(1.2-300 g/mL) was reported to be toxic to L-1210 leukaemia

Rosemary

cells.° Topical administration of a methanol extract five minutes
prior to application of carcinogens to the dorsal surface of CD-1
mice reduced the irritation and promotion of tumours. Applica-
tion of rosemary extract (1.2 mg and 3.6 mg) prior to [*H]-benzo
(a)pyrene reduced the formation of metabolite-DNA adducts by
30% and 54%, respectively.” In rats, dietary supplementation
with 1% rosemary extract for 21 weeks reduced the development
of dimethylbenz(a)anthracene mammary carcinoma in the treated
group, compared with the control group (40% versus 75%,
respectively).

Antispasmodic and anticonvulsant activities Rosemary oil,
1,8-cineole, and bornyl acetate have exerted a spasmolytic action
in both smooth muscle (guinea-pig ileum) and cardiac muscle
(guinea-pig atria) preparations, with the latter more sensitive.” In
smooth muscle this spasmolytic effect has been attributed to
antagonism of acetylcholine,'!”) with borneol considered the most
active component of the oil." The spasmolytic action of
rosemary oil is preceded by a contractile action, which is
attributed to the pinene components." o-Pinenes and B-pinenes
have exhibited a spasmogenic activity towards smooth muscle,
with no effect on cardiac muscle.”

Spasmolytic action in vivo (guinea-pigs) has been demonstrated
by rosemary oil (administered intravenously) via a relaxant action
on Oddi's sphincter contracted by morphine. Activity increased
with incremental doses of oil until an optimum dose was reached
(25 mg/kg) at which the unblocking effect was immediate.”
Further increases in dose reintroduced a delayed response time."
Smooth muscle-stimulant and analgesic actions have been
documented for a rosmaricine derivative.“C*)

The volatile oil of rosemary inhibited contractions of rabbit
tracheal smooth muscle induced by acetylcholine, and inhibited
contraction of guinea-pig tracheal smooth muscle induced by
histamine."?) The oil also inhibited contractions in both
preparations induced by high potassium concentrations. Contrac-
tions of rabbit and guinea-pig tracheal smooth muscle induced by
acetylcholine and histamine, respectively, were inhibited by
rosemary oil in calcium ion-free solution. It was suggested that
the oil has calcium antagonist activity.) A 30% ethanol extract
of rosemary produced a spasmolytic effect on guinea-pig ileum, as
demonstrated by measuring the increase in the EDs9 of acetylcho-
line (4.9 pg/L after addition of 2.5 mL extract and 25.1 g/L after
addition of 10mL extract).(“°? An increase in the EDso for

histamine from 8.1 ,1g/L to 44.6 j1g/L, respectively, was noted for
the same doses of extract.

Figure 3 Rosemary — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 521 -----
Rosemary

Noradrenaline (norephinephrine)- and potassium ion-induced
contractions of rabbit aortic rings were significantly reduced by
rosemary oil 0.48mg/mL and 0.64mg/mL, respectively. It was

proposed that action was by a direct vascular smooth muscle
effect.)

Anti-inflammatory activity Complement activation and sub-
sequent triggering of the arachidonic acid cascade are thought to
play an important role in the early phase of shock. An intact
complement system is required for the formation of vasoactive
prostanoids (prostacyclin, thromboxane Aj), arterial hypotension
and thrombocytopenia." The effect of rosmarinic acid on
endotoxin-induced haemodynamic and haematological changes
has been studied in a rabbit model of circulatory shock.‘ ')
Rosmarinic acid (20 mg/kg, intravenous) was found to suppress
the endotoxin-induced activation of complement, formation of
prostacyclin, hypotension, thrombocytopenia, and the release of
thromboxane Ap." Unlike non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), the mode of action by which rosmarinic acid
suppresses prostaglandin formation does not involve interference
with cyclooxygenase activity or prostacyclin synthetase.'')
Activity has been attributed to inhibition of complement factor
C3 conversion to activated complement components, which
mediate the inflammatory process." Rosmarinic acid has
inhibited carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema, and_ passive
cutaneous anaphylaxis, also in rats (IDs) 1 mg/kg, intravenously;
10 mg/kg, intramuscularly).

Topical application of rosmarinic acid (5%) to rhesus monkeys
reduced gingival plaque indices when compared with placebo.'¢”)
A methanol extract of herb (3.6mg) applied topically to CD-1
mice twice daily for four days inhibited skin inflammation and
hyperplasia caused by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA).‘C A similar extract inhibited both TPA- and arachidonic
acid-induced inflammation as well as TPA-induced hyperplasia.”

Anti-hepatotoxic activity A lyophilised aqueous extract of
rosemary significantly reduced hepatotoxicity of t-butylperoxide
to rat hepatocytes in vitro, significantly decreasing malonaldehyde
formation, release of lactic acid dehydrogenase and aspartate
aminotransferase.) Pretreatment of rats with an aqueous extract
(1 mg of lyophilisate equivalent to 7 mg young shoots) 30 minutes
prior to exposure to carbon tetrachloride, resulted in a 72%
decrease in plasma glutamic-pyruvic transaminase. Rosemary
extract supplementation in the diet of rats enhanced the activity of
GSH-transferase and NAD(P)H-quinone reductase.“°

Cholagogic activity A lyophilised ethanolic extract (1mg) of
young shoots at doses of 0.1, 1.0 and 2.0 g/kg was injected into the
jugular vein of common bile duct-cannulated Sprague-Dawley
rats infused with sodium taurocholate.® A significant, rapid
increase in bile flow (114%) was achieved with maximum effect in
30 minutes. The extract of young shoots was significantly more
active in stimulating bile flow than a similar extract of whole
plant. A rapid increase in bile secretion was observed (138% in 40
minutes) in cannulated guinea-pigs given an aqueous—ethanol
extract (15%).'6

Antioxidant activity Several extracts and constituents of
rosemary have been shown to have antioxidant activity.“@” An
antioxidant action, demonstrated by inhibition of chemilumines-
cence and hydrogen peroxide generation from human granulo-
cytes, has been reported for rosmarinic acid.“

Lipophilic and hydrophobic fractions of rosemary showed
activity which was attributed to the diterpenes carnosol,
carnosolic acid and rosmanol inhibiting superoxide anion

production in the xanthine/xanthine oxidase system.''?) These
diterpenes at concentrations of 3-30,1mol/L also completely
inhibit mitochondrial and microsomal lipid peroxidation induced
by NADPH or NADPH oxidation. '”

The complement-inhibiting and antioxidant properties of
rosmarinic acid are not thought to adversely affect the
chemotaxic, phagocytic and enzymatic properties of polymorp!
nuclear leukocytes.

)-

Other activities A hyperglycaemic effect was observed in glucose-
loaded rats treated with a solution of rosemary oil (925 mg/kg,
intramuscular).?” In rabbits with alloxan-induced diabetes given
rosemary oil (25 mg/kg, intramuscular) six hours after fasting,
plasma glucose concentrations increased by 17% six hours later.

Pretreatment with rosmarinic acid (20mg/kg and 10 mg/kg,
intravenously) has been reported to inhibit the development of
adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in a rabbit model.”
This action can be attributed to both the antioxidant and
anticomplement activities of rosmarinic acid.2”

The ability to reduce capillary permeability has been described

for diosmin.'“*” Activity reportedly exceeds that exhibited by
(G41)

rutin.

An increase in locomotor activity has been observed in mice
following either inhalation or oral administration of rosemary
oil.” The increase in activity paralleled a dose-related increase in
the serum 1,8-cineole concentration. Biphasic elimination of 1,8-
cineole from the blood was observed (ty. = 6 minutes, ty. = 45
minutes).°”

In rats, antigonadotrophic activity has been documented for
oxidation products of rosmarinic acid administered intramuscu-
larly?) Activity was determined by suppression of pregnant
mares’ serum-induced increase in ovarian and uterine weights.
Concentrations of 10°’ mol/L of the flavonoids nepitrin and
nepetin inhibited aldose-reductase activity in homogenised rat eye
lenses by 31% .'6”)

Cc

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
rosemary and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

‘al studies

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for rosemary and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Rosemary oil is stated to be non-irritating and non-sensitising
when applied to human skin,(@°* but moderately irritating when
applied undiluted to rabbit skin." Bath preparations, cosmetics
and toiletries containing rosemary oil may cause erythema and
dermatitis in hypersensitive individuals.“°” Photosensitivity has
been associated with the oil.(@?

Preclinical data

Rosmarinic acid exhibits low toxicity (an LDso in mice is stated as
561 mg/kg for intravenous administration) and is rapidly elimi-
nated from the circulation (t1/. = 9 minutes following intravenous
administration)."“® Transient cardiovascular actions become
pronounced at intravenous doses exceeding 50mg/kg." Acute
LDso values quoted include 5 mL/kg (rat, oral) and >10 mL/kg
(rabbit, dermal).

----- PAGE 522 -----
Diosmin is reportedly less toxic than rutin.(“*” No mortality

was seen in Wistar rats and Swiss mice given single intraperitoneal
doses of 2 g/kg of aqueous alcoholic rosemary extract (15%). (C52)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Topical preparations containing rosemary oil should be used with
caution by hypersensitive individuals. Rosemary oil contains 20—
50% camphor; orally, camphor readily causes epileptiform
convulsions if taken in sufficient quantity.‘

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of rosemary to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that rosemary oil has hyperglycaemic
activity. The clinical relevance of this, if any, is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation Rosemary is reputed to be an
abortifacient'“*” and to affect the menstrual cycle (emmenago-

gue).'°*® In view of this, rosemary should not be ingested during
pregnancy and lactation in amounts greatly exceeding those
normally encountered in foods.

7; Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique
No 5; Romarene; Romarinex. Germany: Canephron; Melis-
sengeist. Russia: Canephron N (Kanecppon H). Spain:
Linimento Naion; Mesatil; Natusor Hepavesical; Natusor
Low Blood Pressure; Natusor Sinulan; Resolutivo Regium.
Switzerland: Phytomed Cardio. UK: Supa-Tonic Tablets; Wood
Sap Ointment.

References

1 Collin MA, Charles HP. Antimicrobial activity of carnosol and ursolic
acid: two anti-oxidant constituents of Rosmarinus officinalis L. Food
Microbiol 1987; 4: 311-315.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

Rosemary

Panizzi L et al. Composition and antimicrobial properties of essential
oils of four Mediterranean Lamiaceae. J Ethnopharmacol 1993; 39:
167-170.

Opdyke DLJ. Rosemary oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 977-978.
Pari8 A et al. Inhibitory effect of carnosolic acid on HIV-1 protease in
cell-free assays. J Nat Prod 1993; 56: 1426-1430.

Pukl M et al. Inhibitory effect of carnosolic acid on HIV-1 protease.
Planta Med 1992; 58: A632.

Ilarionova M et al. Cytotoxic effect on leukemic cells of the essential
oils from rosemary, wild geranium and nettle and concret of royal
bulgarian rose. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1915.

Huang M-T et al. Inhibition of skin tumorigenesis by rosemary and its
constituents carnosol and ursolic acid. Cancer Res 1994; 54: 701-708.
Singletary K. Inhibition of DMBA-induced mammary tumorigenesis
by rosemary extract. FASEB J 1991; 5: 5A927.

Hof $, Ammon HPT. Negative inotropic action of rosemary oil, 1,8-
cineole, and bornyl acetate. Planta Med 1989; 55: 106-107.

Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.
Giachetti D et al. Pharmacological activity of essential oils on Oddi's
sphincter. Planta Med 1988; 389-392.

Agel MB. Relaxant effect of the volatile oil of Rosmarinus officinalis
on tracheal smooth muscle. J Ethnopharmacol 1991; 33: 57-62.
Agel MB. A vascular smooth muscle relaxant effect of Rosmarinus
officinalis. Int ] Pharmacog 1992; 30: 281-288.

Bult H et al. Modification of endotoxin-induced haemodynamic and
haematological changes in the rabbit by methylprednisolone, F(ab’)2
fragments and rosmarinic acid. Br J Pharmacol 1985; 84: 317-327.
Rampart M et al. Complement-dependent stimulation of prostacyclin
biosynthesis: inhibition by rosmarinic acid. Biochem Pharmacol 1986;
35: 1397-1400.

Parnham MJ, Kesselring K. Rosmarinic acid. Drugs Future 1985; 10:
756-757.

Joyeux M et al. Screening of antiradical, antilipoperoxidant and
hepatoprotective effects of nine plants extracts used in Caribbean folk
medicine. Phytother Res 1995; 9: 228-230.

Hoefler C et al. Comparative choleretic and hepatoprotective
properties of young sprouts and total plant extracts of Rosmarinus
officinalis in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 19: 133-143.

Haraguchi H e¢ al. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation and superoxide
generation by diterpenoids from Rosmarinus officinalis. Planta Med
1995; 61: 333-336.

Nuytinck JKS e¢ al. Inhibition of experimentally induced
microvascular injury by rosmarinic acid. Agents Actions 1985; 17:
373-374.

Al-Hader AA et al. Hyperglycemic and insulin release inhibitory
effects of Rosmarinus officinalis. ] Ethnopharmacol 1994; 43: 217-
221.

Kovar KA et al. Blood levels of 1,8-cineole and locomotor activity of
mice after inhalation and oral administration of rosemary oil. Planta
Med 1987; 315-318.

Gumbinger HG et al. Formation of compounds with antigonadotropic
activity from inactive phenolic precursors. Contraception 1981; 23:
661-665.

----- PAGE 523 -----
Sage

oil contains high concentrations of thujone, a toxic ketone,
and should not be ingested. Sage is commonly used as a
culinary herb and presents no hazard when ingested in
amounts normally encountered in foods. However, extracts of
the herb should be used with caution and should not be
ingested in large amounts or over prolonged periods.

Sage should not be used during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

*Salvia officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)
S. lavandulifolia Vahl

Synonym(s)

*Dalmatian Sage, Garden Sage, True Sage

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission E@?)

ESCOP 2003079)

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2, G52, G58 and G62.

Acids Phenolic — caffeic, chlorogenic, ellagic, ferulic, gallic and
rosmarinic.”

Flavonoids 5-Methoxysalvigenin.

Terpenes Monoterpene glycosides. Diterpenes, abietanes includ-
ing carnosic acid and derivatives, e.g. carnasol. Triterpenes,
oleanolic acid and derivatives.

Tannins 3-8%. Hydrolysable and condensed.”

Volatile oil 1-2.8%. Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 1.0%
cut herb.'C#"°*) Major components are a- and B-thujones (35—
50%, mainly «). Others include 1,8-cineole, borneol, camphor,
caryophyllene, linalyl acetate and various terpenes.»

Phenylpropanoids
fe)
HO. OH
are ee
HO’ HOOC ‘OH

rosmarinic acid

Monoterpenes

H,, CH
6050 ay °
H
fo)

a-thujone 1,8-cineole camphor
((-)-thujone)

Diterpenes

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sage.

It has been noted that commercial sage may be substituted with
Salvia triloba.” In contrast to S. officinalis, the principal volatile
oil component of S. triloba is 1,8-cineole, with a-thujone only
accounting for 1-5%.") Compared with S. officinalis, the volatile
oil yield of various Salvia species is lower, with lower total ketone
content and higher total alcohol content.'®

Food Use

Sage is commonly used as a culinary herb. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2).S' This category indicates that sage can be added to
foodstuffs providing the concentration of thujones («% and )
present in the final product does not exceed 0.5 mg/kg, with the
exceptions of alcoholic beverages (10 mg/kg), bitters (35 mg/kg),
food containing sage (25mg/kg) and sage stuffing (250 mg/
kg).'“' Previously, sage has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘°®

Herbal Use

Sage is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, antiseptic,
astringent and antihidrotic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used to treat flatulent dyspepsia, pharyngitis, uvulitis, stomatitis,
gingivitis, glossitis (internally or as a_ gargle/mouthwash),
hyperhidrosis, and galactorrhoea.'C* C4 97: G3 G43, G52, G54, God)
The herbals of Gerard, Culpeper and Hill credit sage with the
ability to enhance memory.” The German Commission E
approved internal use for dyspeptic symptoms and _ excessive

----- PAGE 524 -----
P PaaS
Figure 2 Sage (Salvia officinalis).

perspiration, and external use for inflammation of mucous
membranes of mouth and throat.'°?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Leaf 1-4 as an infusion three times daily;'C” 4-6 g daily. (©

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily©”

Gargles, rinses 2.5 9/100 mL water.'°

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypotensive activity in anaesthetised cats, CNS-depressant action
(prolonged barbiturate sleep) in anaesthetised mice, and an
antispasmodic action in vitro (guinea-pig ileum) have been
reported for a sage extract and for the essential oil.”

Antispasmodic activity Inhibition of contractions induced by
acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin and barium chloride by 60-
80% has been noted for a total sage extract, with lesser activity
exhibited by a total flavonoid extract."® An initial spasmogenic
action exhibited by low doses of sage oil has been attributed to the
pinene content.”) Antispasmodic activity in vivo (guinea-pigs) has
been reported for sage oil administered intravenously, which
released contraction of Oddi's sphincter induced by intravenous
morphine.)

Anticholinesterase activity Early herbals claim that sage
enhances the memory.” The anticholinesterase activity of several
Salvia species and their constituents have been investigated in the
search for new drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. The
inhibition of anticholinesterase in vitro by an ethanolic extract of
S. officinalis (2.5 mg/mL) was 68%, and by oils of S. officinalis and
S. lavandulifolia (0.1 pg/mL) was 52% and 63%, respectively.
The ICso value of S. lavandulifolia oil is reportedly 0.03 g/mL."

Sage

The monoterpenes 1,8-cineole and o-pinene from the oil have been
identified as the inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase with ICso values
of 0.67 and 0.63 mmol/L, respectively." Rats given S. lavandu-
lifolia oil (20pL or SOwL for five days) were sacrificed, and
acetylcholinesterase activity assessed for striatum, cortex and
hippocampus of brain left hemisphere.'’” At the lower dose, there
was a decrease in acetylcholinesterase activity in the striatum, but
not in the hippocampus or cortex of treated rats. At the higher
dose, there was a decrease in striatal acetylcholinesterase activity.
It was concluded that the oil inhibited acetylcholinesterase in
selective areas of the brain.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity in vivo (rabbits)
has been reported for §. lavandulifolia."?) and for mixed
phytotherapy preparations containing various Salvia species,
including S. officinalis." Activity in normoglycaemic, hypogly-
caemic and in alloxan-diabetic rabbits was observed, although no
change in insulin concentrations was noted.'!*)

Antimicrobial and antiviral activity Antimicrobial activity of
the volatile oil has been attributed to the thujone content.”
Antimicrobial activity in vitro was noted against Escherichia coli,
Shigella sonnei, Salmonella species, Klebsiella ozanae (Gram-
negative), Bacillus subtilis (Gram-positive), and against various
fungi (Candida albicans, C. krusei, C. pseudotropicalis, Toru-
lopsis glabrata, Cryptococcus neoformans)."'>) No activity was
observed versus Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microencapsulation
of sage oil into gelatin-acacia capsules introduced a lagtime with
respect to antibacterial activity and inhibited antifungal activity.”
Diterpene constituents of S. officinalis are reported to be active
against vesicular stomatitis virus.“

Other activities An aqueous ethanolic extract of sage (50%)
strongly inhibited collagenolytic activity of Porphyromonas
gingivitis. In addition to anticholinesterase activity, other
biological activities have relevance in the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease. In this context, S. lavandulifolia and its individual
constituents have been assessed for antioxidant, anti-inflamma-
tory and oestrogenic activities.” An ethanolic extract of dried
herb (5 mg/mL) and the monoterpenes a and B-pinene and 1,8-
cineole (0.1 mol/L) inhibited bovine brain liposome peroxidate
activity. Anti-inflammatory activity was demonstrated by weak
inhibition of thromboxane B, and leukotriene By synthesis, and
possible oestrogenic activity of sage oil (0.01 mg/mL) and geraniol
(0.1-2 mmol/L), demonstrated by induction of B-galactosidase in
yeast cells.

----- PAGE 525 -----
Sage

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of sage is limited and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Excessive sweat induced by pilocarpine was inhibited by a
dialysate of an aqueous extract of fresh sage.'“” In an open
study, 40 patients were given dried aqueous extract of sage
(440 mg, equivalent to 2.6 g herbs) and 40 were given infusion of
sage (4.5g herb daily). Reduction of sweat (less than 50%) was
achieved in both groups of patients with idiopathic hyperhidrio-
sis”) It should be noted, however, that this study did not
include a control group and, therefore, the observed effects cannot
be attributed to sage with any certainty.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving
20 healthy volunteers compared the effects of 50 tL, 100 pL and
150 pL of S. lavandulifolia oil and sunflower oil."'?) Cognitive
assessment indicated improvements in both immediate and
delayed word recall scores, coupled with decrements in accuracy
and speed of attention, with sage oil SOL. At this dose, self-
related alertness at 2.5 hours and calmness at four hours and six
hours were reported to be reduced.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for sage and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

A case of human poisoning has been documented following
ingestion of sage oil for acne." Convulsant activity in humans
(and animals) has been documented for sage oil." '®)

Sage oil is reported to be a moderate skin irritant”
recommended for use in aromatherapy.‘

and is not

Preclinical data

In rats, the subclinical, clinical and lethal doses for convulsant
action of sage oil are estimated as 0.3, 0.5, and 3.2 g/kg."'” This
toxicity has been attributed to the ketone terpenoids in the volatile
oil, namely camphor and thujone. Acute LD so values for sage oil
are documented as 2.6 g/kg in rats for oral administration and 5 g/
kg in rabbits for intradermal administration.” S. officinalis has
no mutagenic or DNA-damaging activity in either the Ames test

or Bacillus rec-assay.'°)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sage oil is toxic (due to the thujone content) and should not be
ingested. S. lavandulifolia oil has a much lower content of thujone
than does S. officinalis oil."?) In view of the toxicity of the
essential oil, sage extracts should be used with caution and not
ingested in large amounts.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of sage to interact with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects,
should be considered. There is limited evidence from preclinical
studies that sage has hypoglycaemic activity. Sage oil has a high
content of thujones, which are convulsants.

Pregnancy and lactation Sage is contra-indicated during
pregnancy. Traditionally, it is reputed to be an abortifacient and
to affect the menstrual cycle.(“*” The volatile oil contains a high
proportion of a- and f-thujones, which are known to be
abortifacient and emmenagogic. Sage should not be used during
lactation.

matosan; Tormentan. France: Bolcitol; Gonaxine; Saugella;
Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt. Germany: Amara-Tropfen;
Melissengeist; Parodontal. Israel: Baby Paste + Chamomile;
Kamilotract. Italy: Donalg; Saugella Attiva; Saugella Dermo-
latte; Saugella Fitothym; Saugella Salviettine; Saugella Solido
ph 3.5. South Africa: Amara; Dynexan. Spain: Diabesor;
Menstrunat; Natusor Farinol; Natusor Low Blood Pressure.
Switzerland: Strath Gouttes pour les muqueuses; Tisane
pectorale et antitussive; Wala Echinacea. Venezuela: One
Drop Spray. UK: Lane's Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy;
Menopace Plus; Napiers Echinacea Tea.

References

1 Tucker AO et al. Botanical aspects of commercial sage. Econ Bot 1980;
34: 16-19.

2. Petri G et al. Tannins and other polyphenolic compounds in the genus
Salvia. Planta Med 1988: 54: 575.

3 Murko D et al. Tannins of Salvia officinalis and their changes during
storage. Planta Med 1974; 25: 295-300.

4 Jalsenjak V et al. Microcapsules of sage oil: Essential oils content and
antimicrobial activity. Pharmazie 1987; 42: 419-420.

5 Giachetti D et al. Pharmacological activity of essential oils on Oddi's
sphincter. Planta Med 1988: 54: 389-392.

6 Ivanic R, Savin K. A comparative analysis of essential oils from several
wild species of Salvia. Planta Med 1976; 30: 25-31.

7 Perry EK et al. Medicinal plants and Alzheimer's disease: integrating
ethnobotanical and contemporary scientific evidence. J Alt
Complement Med 1998; 4: 419-428.

8 Todorov S et al. Experimental pharmacological study of three species
from genus Salvia. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg 1984; 10: 13-20.

9 Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.

10 Perry N et al. European herbs with cholinergic activities: potential in
dementia therapy. Int J Geriat Psychiat 1996; 11: 1063-1069.

11. Perry NSL et al. In-vitro inhibition of human erythrocyte
acetylcholinesterase by Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil and
constituent terpenes. J Pharm Pharmacol 2000; 52: 895-902.

12 Houghton PJ. Personal communication.

13. Jimenez J et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of Salvia lavandulifolia. Planta
Med 1986: 52: 260-262.

14 Cabo J et al. Accion hipoglucemiante de preparados fitoterapicos que
contienen especies del genero salvia. Ars Pharmac 1985; 26: 239-249.

15. Recio MC et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed in
the Spanish Mediterranean area. Part II. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 77.

16 Centini F et al. A case of sage oil poisoning. Zacchia 1987; 60: 263—
174.

17. Millet Y. Experimental study of the toxic convulsant properties of
commercial preparations of essences of sage and hyssop.
Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 1980; 49: 102P.

18 Millet Y et al. Toxicity of some essential plant oils — clinical and
experimental study. Clin Toxicol 1981; 18: 1485-1498.

19 Opdyke DLJ. Sage oil Dalmatian. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
987-988.

----- PAGE 526 -----
Sarsaparilla

Species (Family)
TS. purhampuy Ruiz

Synonym(s)

*Smilax ornata Hook

loses may be irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa ani Part(s) Used
should, therefore, be avoided. Part(s) Used
There are no known problems with the use of sarsaparilla Rhizome, root

during pregnancy and lactation but, as a precaution, amounts
ingested should not exceed those usually found in foods.

Triterpenes

R' R?
HO! sarsasapogenin CH3; 4H
smilagenin H CH3

sarsaparilloside HO Ne

parillin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sarsaparilla.

*Smilax regelii Killip & C.V. Morton (Smilacaceae)

+S. febrifuga Kunth, S. febrifuga var. aequatoris A. DC

----- PAGE 527 -----
Sarsaparilla

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 1996'°”’ :
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Saponins About 2%. Sarsasapogenin (parigenin), smilagenin,
diosgenin, tigogenin, asperagenin, laxogenin from various spe-
cies," sarsasaponin (parillin), smilasaponin (smilacin) and
sarsaparilloside.

Other constituents Caffeoylshikimic acid, ferulic acid, shikimic
acid, kaempferol, quercetin, phytosterols (e.g. f-sitosterol,
stigmasterol, pollinastanol), resin, starch, volatile oil (trace) and
cetyl alcohol.

Food Use

Sarsaparilla is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that the
use of sarsaparilla as a flavouring agent is recognised but that
there is insufficient information available to further classify it into
categories N1, N2 or N3.'C'® Sarsaparilla has been used as a
vehicle and flavouring agent for medicaments,‘“*> and is widely
employed in the manufacture of non-alcoholic beverages.'(°”
Previously, sarsaparilla has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Sarsaparilla is stated to possess antirheumatic, antiseptic and
antipruritic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for psoriasis

Figure 2 Sarsaparilla (Smilax regelii).

Figure 3 Sarsaparilla — dried drug substance (root).

and other cutaneous conditions, chronic rheumatism, rheumatoid
arthritis, as an adjunct to other treatments for leprosy, and
specifically for psoriasis.'C% C7 Go

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 1-4g as a decoction three times daily.(©®

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory” and hepatoprotective” effects have been
described following studies in rats.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
sarsaparilla and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.
The following observations and uses require assessment in well-
designed clinical studies.

Improvement of appetite and digestion’
diuretic*® action have been reported. Limited clinical data
utilising extracts indicate improvement in psoriasis; the extract
has also been used as an adjuvant for the treatment of leprosy.”

as well as a

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for sarsaparilla. However, there is a lack of
clinical safety and toxicity data for sarsaparilla and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Large doses of saponins
are reported to cause gastrointestinal irritation resulting in
diarrhoea and vomiting. Although haemolytic activity has been
documented for the saponins,'°°” they are not harmful when
taken by mouth and are only highly toxic if injected into the
bloodstream.'©”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for sarsaparilla. In view of the possible irritant
nature of the saponin constituents, excessive ingestion should be
avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of sarsaparilla to interact with other medicines

----- PAGE 528 -----
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of sarsaparilla during pregnancy and lactation. However,
in view of the possible irritant nature of the saponin components,
excessive ingestion (amounts greater than those found in foods)
should be avoided.

Reumalex; HRI Clear Complexion; Jamaican Sarsaparilla;
Napiers Skin Tablets; Skin Eruptions Mixture.

1

2

Sarsaparilla

References

Sharma SC e¢ al. Uber Saponine von Smilax parvifolia Wall.
Pharmazie 1980; 35: 646.

Ageel AM et al. Experimental studies on antirheumatic crude drugs
used in Saudi traditional medicine. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1989; 15: 369—
372.

Rafatullah $ et al. Hepatoprotective and safety evaluation studies on
sarsaparilla. Int J Pharmacog 1991; 29: 296-301.

Harnischfeger G, Stolze H. Smilax species — Sarsaparille. In: Bewahrte
Pflanzendrogen in Wissenschaft und Medizin. Bad Homburg/
Melsungen: Notamed Verlag., 1983: 216-225.

Hobbs C. Sarsaparilla — a literature review. Herbalgram 1988; 17: 1,
10-15.

Thermon FM. The treatment of psoriasis with a sarsaparilla
compound. N Engl J Med 1942; 227: 128-133.

Rollier R. Treatment of lepromatous leprosy by a combination of DDS
and sarsaparilla (Smilax ornata). Int J Leprosy 1959; 27: 328-340.

----- PAGE 529 -----
Sassafras

,
component of sassafras volatile oil. Consequently, the use of
safrole is no longer permitted in foods and sassafras is not
permitted as an ingredient in licensed medicinal products.

Antiseptic and diuretic properties claimed for sassafras are
probably attributable to the volatile oil, although no
documented studies were found supporting the
antirheumatic claims. Sassafras should not be used as a herbal
remedy, either internally or externally.

Species (Family)

Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees (Lauraceae)

Synonym(s)

Ague Tree, Cinnamon Wood, Saloop, Sassafras sassfras (L.)
Karst., S. albidum var. molle (Raf.) Fern., Saxifrax

Part(s) Used

Inner root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Sassafras is not permitted for use in medicinal products.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids soquinoline-type about 0.02%. Boldine, isoboldine,
norboldine, cinnamolaurine, norcinnamolaurine and reticuline.

Volatile oils = 5-9%. Safrole as major component (80-90%),
others include anethole, apiole, asarone, camphor, caryophyllene,
coniferaldehyde, copaene, elemicin, eugenol, 5-methoxyeugenol,
menthone, myristicin, &-pinene, %- and f-phellandrene, piper-
onylacrolein and thujone.

Other constituents Gum, mucilage, lignans (sesamin, des-
methoxyaschantin), resin, sitosterol, starch, tannins and wax.

Food Use

Sassafras oil was formerly used as flavouring agent in beverages
including root beer.'©°*) However, in the 1960s safrole, the major
component of the volatile oil, was reported to be carcinogen-
ic.©®) The use of safrole in foods is now banned, and its use in

Phenylpropanoids
seed
fe}

safrole

Alkaloids

R'O.
C) N—CH.
CH30"
OH
R! R?

boldine H CH3
isoboldine CH; H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sassafras.

toilet preparations controlled.'©** Previously, in the USA, safrole-
free sassafras extract, leaf and leaf extract have been approved for
food use. In 1976, the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)
banned interstate marketing of sassafras for sassafras tea.'¢?”)

Herbal Use

Sassafras is stated to possess carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic,
dermatologic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has

been used for cutaneous eruptions, gout and rheumatic pains.‘©*

G7, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
However, sassafras is no longer recommended for internal or
external use.

Bark 2—4g as an infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

Studies have concentrated on investigating the toxicity associated
with the bark. However, aqueous and alcoholic extracts have been
reported to elicit ataxia, hypersensitivity to touch, CNS depres-
sion and hypothermia in mice." Both inhibition and induction of
hepatic microsomal enzymes have been documented for
safrole."* Enzyme-inducing activity was found to be a transient
phenomenon, with activity falling after the onset of hepatic
toxicity (see Side-effects, Toxicity). Safrole is reported to induce
both cytochrome P488 and P450 activities. Sassafras oil has been
used as a topical antiseptic, pediculicide and carminative.”

----- PAGE 530 -----
Figure 2 Sassafras (Sassafras albidum).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

The toxicity of sassafras is attributable to the volatile oil, and in
particular to the safrole content. It is estimated that a few drops
of sassafras oil are sufficient to kill a toddler and as little as one
teaspoonful has proved fatal in an adult.©) Symptoms of
poisoning are described as vomiting, stupor and collapse. High
doses may cause spasm followed by paralysis.(©°* Large amounts
of the oil are reported to be psychoactive with the hallucinogenic
effects lasting for several days.°?”) One of the components of the
oil is myristicin, the hallucinogenic principle in nutmeg. Sassafras
has traditionally been used as an ingredient of beverages. To put
the potential toxicity of sassafras into perspective, the following
estimation has been made.” Extrapolation of results from animal
toxicity studies indicate that 0.66 mg/kg may prove hazardous in
humans.” By comparison, a cup of sassafras tea, prepared from a
2.5g teabag, may provide up to 200mg safrole, representing
approximately 3 mg/kg.”

Figure 3

Sassafras — dried drug substance (inner root bark).

Sassafras

Preclinical data

Safrole, the principal component of the volatile oil, was first
recognised to be a hepatocarcinogen in the 1960s‘ and many
animal studies have been documented concerning this toxicity.”
Both benign and malignant tumours have developed in laboratory
animals, depending on the dose of safrole administered.”

Both human and animal studies have shown that safrole gives
rise to a large number of metabolites.® A sulfate ester (formed via
a hydroxylated metabolite) has been established as the ultimate
carcinogen for safrole with tumour incidence paralleling the rate
of conversion to the ester.’ Induction of cytochrome P450 activity
has been associated with mutagenic and carcinogenic activity of
the inducing agent." The inducing effect of safrole on certain
metabolising enzymes is thought to play a role in the carcinogenic
activity of safrole. The liver has a high level of cytochrome P450
activity and is therefore susceptible to induction.

Acute oral LDso values for safrole have been reported as 1.95 g/
kg (rats) and 2.35 g/kg (mice).°’ Major symptoms of toxicity are
stated as ataxia, depression, diarrhoea, followed by death within
four hours to seven days." Rats fed safrole in their diet at
concentrations of 0.25, 0.5 and 1.0% exhibited reduction in
growth, stomach and testicular atrophy, liver necrosis, biliary
proliferation and primary hepatomas.“ Animals have also
developed tumours when fed safrole-free extracts.'°~”

Conflicting results have been reported from studies investigat-
ing the mutagenicity of safrole, using the Ames test and DNA
repair test.” !) Purity of the safrole, test system employed, type
of metabolic activation mix, and toxicity of the test system have
been suggested as reasons for the observed variations.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sassafras should not be used internally or externally. Safrole, the
major component in the volatile oil of sassafras, is hepatotoxic
and even safrole-free extracts of sassafras have been reported to
produce tumours in animals. Sassafras essential oil is contra-
indicated in internal and external use.'©°* Sassafras has been
reported to inhibit and induce microsomal enzymes.

Pregnancy and lactation Sassafras is contra-indicated during
pregnancy and lactation. The oil is reported to be abortifacient.”)

References

1 Segelman AB et al. Sassafras and herb tea. Potential health hazards.
JAMA 1976; 238: 477.

2 Opdyke DLJ. Safrole. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 983-986.

3. Jaffe H et al. In vivo inhibition of mouse liver microsomal
hydroxylating systems by methylenedioxypheny] insecticidal synergists
and related compounds. Life Sci 1968; 7: 1051-1062.

4 International Agency for Research on Cancer. [ARC Monographs on
the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man. Some
Naturally Occurring Substances, vol 10. Geneva: WHO, 1976.

5 Craig JO. Poisoning by the volatile oils in childhood. Arch Dis Child
1953; 28: 475-483.

6 Homburger F, Boger E. The carcinogenicity of essential oils, flavors,
and spices: A review. Cancer Res 1968; 28: 2372-2374.

7 Opdyke DLJ. Sassafras oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1982; 20: 825-826.

8 Ioannides C et al. Safrole: its metabolism, carcinogenicity and
interactions with cytochrome P-450. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1981; 19:
657-666.

9 Bock KW, Schirmer G. Species differences of glucuronidation and
sulfation in relation to hepatocarcinogenesis. Arch Toxicol 1987; 10
(Suppl. Suppl.): 125-135.

----- PAGE 531 -----
10

1

Sassafras

Iwasaki K et al. Induction of cytochrome P-448 activity as exemplified
by the O-deethylation of ethoxyresorufin. Effects of dose, sex, tissue
and animal species. Biochem Pharmacol 1986; 35: 3879-3884.
Jenner PM et al. Food flavourings and compounds of related structure.
I. Acute oral toxicity. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1964; 2: 327-343.

12

13

Sekizawa J, Shibamoto T. Genotoxicity of safrole-related chemicals in
microbial test systems. Mutat Res 1982; 101: 127-140.

Swanson AB et al. The mutagenicities of safrole, estragole, eugenol,
trans-anethole, and some of their known or possible metabolites for
Salmonella typhimurium mutants. Mutat Res 1979; 60: 143-153.

----- PAGE 532 -----
Saw Palmetto

pharmacological actions of saw palmetto preparations, thi
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Studies have assessed the
effects of combination preparations containing saw palmetto,
as well as different manufacturers’ products (which vary
qualitatively and quantitatively in their phytochemical
composition); at least eight studies involved one particular
saw palmetto product. These points should be taken into
account when considering the evidence to support the
efficacy and safety of individual products. PC-SPES, a
combination preparation containing saw palmetto fruit
extract and seven other herbal ingredients, has been found to
be adulterated with diethylstilbestrol, indometacin
(indomethacin), warfarin and ethinylestradiol.

Species (Family)

Serenoa repens (W. Bart.) Small (Arecaceae/Palmae)

Synonym(s)

Sabal, Sabal serrulata (Michx.) Schult. f., Serenoa, Serenoa
serrulata (Michx.) Hook. f. ex B.D. Jacks

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)

BHMA 2003'°°°

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 193401

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GsL©)

Constituents

Carbohydrates Invert sugar 28.2%, mannitol, high molecular
weight polysaccharides (e.g. MW 100000) with galactose,
arabinose and uronic acid"? identified as main sugar components
for one.

Fixed oils 26.7%. Many free fatty acids and their glycerides.
Monoacylglycerides (1-monolaurin, 1-monomyristicin).”’ Oleic
acid (unsaturated) and capric acid, caproic acid, caprylic acid,
lauric acid, myristic acid, palmitic acid and _ stearic acid
(saturated).

Steroids
compounds.

B-Sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol and other
G-S)

Other constituents Flavonoids (e.g. rutin, isoquercitrin,
kaempferol),’ pigment (carotene), resin, tannin and volatile oil
1.5%.

Most commercial preparations of saw palmetto contain
lipophilic extracts.‘

Fatty acids

Teveen

myristoleic acid

Carbohydrates
H. OHH OH

— CH,OH

H OHH OH
mannitol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of saw palmetto.

----- PAGE 533 -----
Saw Palmetto

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of saw palmetto crude
plant material and commercial preparations of saw palmetto fruit.
Analysis of 14 saw palmetto products marketed in Europe and the
USA for content of specific groups of constituents using liquid
and gas chromatography revealed substantial variations in the
concentrations of constituents present in different products. Free
fatty acid content ranged from 40.7% (in one product which
contained 50% olive oil) to 80.7%, content of methyl and ethyl
esters ranged from 1.5% (in one product which contained 50%
olive oil) to 16.7%, long-chain esters from 0.7% to 1.4% and
glycerides from 6.8% to 52.2% (in one product which contained
50% olive oil). Although it is clear that there are variations
between products, data from this analytical study are difficult to
interpret as values for actual content of the respective constituents
were not reported.

Food Use

Saw palmetto is not used in foods. Previously, saw palmetto has
been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.'C*”

Herbal Use

Saw palmetto is stated to possess diuretic, urinary antiseptic,
endocrinological and anabolic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for chronic or subacute cystitis, catarrh of the
genitourinary tract, testicular atrophy, sex hormone disorders
and specifically for prostatic enlargement.'(07 °C Modern
interest in saw palmetto is focused on its use in the treatment of
symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).

for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried fruit 0.5-1.0g as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Extract 320mg lipophilic ingredients extracted with lipophilic
solvents (hexane or ethanol 90% v/y).‘C?

Clinical trials have assessed the effects of lipophilic extracts
(containing lipids and sterols) of saw palmetto usually at a dosage
of 160 mg twice daily.

Figure 2 Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens).

Figure 3. Saw palmetto — dried drug substance (fruit).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for saw
palmetto in vitro and in vivo (animals). Several of these
properties, such as inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity, inhibition
of androgen binding and spasmolytic activity, are thought to
explain, at least in part, the effects of saw palmetto in BPH.
However, the clinical significance of the in vitro inhibition of 5-c.-
reductase activity by saw palmetto has not been clearly established
(see Clinical studies).

5-o-Reductase is the enzyme that catalyses the conversion of
testosterone to 5-c-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in androgen target
, including the prostate. DHT is more potent than
testosterone, and is thought to be implicated in the development
of BPH. There is evidence that 5-o-reductase activity is higher in
cells obtained from BPH tissue than from normal prostate tissue.

A lipidic (liposterolic) extract of saw palmetto was found to
inhibit 5-o-reductase-mediated conversion of testosterone to

tissu

dihydrotestosterone, and 3-ketosteroid reductase-mediated con-
version of dihydrotestosterone to an androgen derivative.’ Other
in vitro studies have shown that an ethanolic extract of saw
palmetto (IDS-89) inhibited 5-a-reductase activity in the epithe-
lium and stroma of human BPH tissue in a concentration-
dependent manner.” The ICs was around 2.2 mg/mL. This study
also demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of IDS-89 was mainly
due to the fatty acid constituents of a saponifiable subfraction of
the extract, as non-saponifiable and hydrophilic subfractions
showed little or no inhibition of 5-a-reductase activity. Inhibition
of 5-c-reductase by a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto has also
been documented in porcine prostatic microsomes.”

There are at least two isoenzymes of 5-a-reductase (S-o-
reductase types I and II), and several studies have documented that
a liposterolic extract (Permixon) of saw palmetto inhibits both
isoenzymes in prostate epithelial cells! and fibroblast cells."
Several other studies have documented inhibition of 5-a-reductase
activity by liposterolic extracts of saw palmetto in vitro.
Permixon was reported to inhibit 5-o-reductase activity without
affecting the secretion of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) by
epithelial cells, suggesting that use of saw palmetto extract should
not interfere with PSA measurements for prostate-cancer screen-
ing.)

Anti-androgenic activity has been documented for a hexane
liposterolic extract (Permixon) of saw palmetto. In vitro studies in
rat prostate tissue and human foreskin fibroblasts indicated that

----- PAGE 534 -----
this extract competitively inhibited the binding of dihydrotestos-
terone to cytosolic and nuclear androgen receptor sites."'""'” By
contrast, an alcoholic extract of saw palmetto appeared to be
without androgen receptor-binding activity.'?)

Liposterolic extracts of saw palmetto have also been investi-
gated in animal models of BPH. A liposterolic extract (Permixon)
of saw palmetto 50 mg/kg body weight administered for 30 days to
castrated rats with estradiol/testosterone-induced prostate enlar-
gement resulted in significant reductions in the wet weight of the
dorsal region of the prostate, compared with control." Another
study in rats compared the effects of a liposterolic extract of saw
palmetto with those of the 5-c-reductase inhibitor finasteride in
rat prostate hyperplasia induced by hyperprolactinaemia.> It
was reported that the liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
inhibited rat prostate hyperplasia in the lateral lobe induced by
hyperprolactinaemia, and that finasteride did not antagonise the
action of prolactin. By contrast, a study in dogs with BPH
reported a lack of effect for saw palmetto extract on prostatic
weight, prostatic volume, prostatic histologic scores, prostatic
ultrasonographs and serum testosterone concentrations." In the
study, 20 dogs with BPH, determined by raised prostatic volume
and prostatic volume per kilogram body weight, received saw
palmetto extract (type of extract not specified) 1500 mg daily in
meatballs (2 = 8), 300mg daily in meatballs (1 = 6) or
unmedicated meatballs (1 = 6), for 91 days. Dogs included in
this study did not have clinical signs of BPH (i.e. decreased urinary
flow and residual urine volume) that often occur in human males
with BPH. Dogs did not appear to be randomly assigned to
treatment, and the mean prostatic volume in the control group
was higher than that in the active treatment groups before
treatment, although it was stated that this was not statistically
significant. Assessments and data analysis were carried out by
blinded investigators.

Spasmolytic activity and effects on the micturition reflex have
also been documented for saw palmetto extract, although the
contribution of these effects to effects in men with BPH is unclear.

In anaesthetised, saline-infused rats, mean micturition interval,
micturition volume and bladder capacity were significantly
increased, and maximum micturition pressure was significantly
decreased, compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), in
animals that received intraduodenal administration of saw
palmetto extract (Permixon) at a dose of 60 mg/kg body weight,
but not 6 mg/kg body weight.” In anaesthetised rats infused with
0.1% acetic acid, mean micturition interval, micturition volume
and bladder capacity were significantly increased, compared with
baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), in animals that received
intraduodenal administration of saw palmetto extract (Permixon)
at a dose of 12 or 20mg/kg body weight. However, p values for
statistical tests comparing saw palmetto-treated rats with vehicle-
treated rats (control group) are not reported for these sets of
experiments. In rats given saw palmetto extract 6mg/kg body
weight orally for 14 days, total mean micturition volume was
increased significantly, compared with baseline values, for days 9
to 14 (p < 0.05); however, a comparison with a parallel control
group was not reported. Further experiments using rat bladder
and prostate tissues showed that saw palmetto extract (10 to
300 t1g/mL) competitively inhibited the binding of [N-methyl-*H]-
scopolamine methyl chloride (ICso 46 g/mL in bladder tissue)
and [SH]-prazosin (ICsy 183pg/mL in prostate tissue) in a
concentration-dependent manner.”

An ethanolic lipidic extract was reported to produce a
concentration-dependent relaxation of rat uterus tonic contrac-
tion induced by vanadate (ECsq 11.41 p1g/mL)."® Further

Saw Palmetto

investigation suggested that a mechanism for the observed effect
could be interference with intracellular calcium mobilisation,
possibly mediated via cyclic AMP. Other in vitro studies
demonstrated that a lipophilic ethanolic extract of saw palmetto
0.3-0.75 mg/mL reduced norepinephrine (noradrenaline)-induced
contractions in rat deferential duct. Further study indicated that
the relaxant effect of saw palmetto extract results from either o-

adrenoceptor blockade or from calcium-blocking activity.'”

Cytotoxic and related activities In a study using human
prostate tissue, a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon)
30 pg/mL significantly inhibited basic fibroblast growth factor-
induced proliferation of human prostate cell cultures, compare
th control, although the extract did not affect basal prostate cel
proliferation.°? An unsaponified fraction of the extract also
markedly inhibited basic fibroblast growth factor-induced cel
proliferation, but had only a minimal effect on basal cel
proliferation. In a study using stromal and epithelial tissue from
normal prostate and from patients with BPH, cell numbers ani
proliferative indices were found to be higher in BPH tissue than in
tissue from normal prostates.” In tissue from patients with BPH
who had been treated with a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
(Permixon), there was significant induction of apoptosis ani
inhibition of cell proliferation, compared with tissue from patients
with BPH who had not received saw palmetto extract. In another
in vitro study, incubation with Permixon 10 jtg/mL also increase:
the apoptotic index for prostate epithelial cells by 35%."

Other in vitro studies have explored the effects of saw palmetto
extract and its constituents on human prostatic cancer cells ani
other tumour cell lines. An extract of saw palmetto fruit, prepare
by supercritical fluid extraction with carbon dioxide, induced cel
death in LNCaP cells (a hormonal therapy-resistant prostatic
cancer cell line) in a concentration-dependent manner.?” This
confirms the findings of previous studies demonstrating the effect
of a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) on the
mortality rate of LNCaP cells: increased mortality was observe
with saw palmetto extract 50{1g/mL, compared with control.?)
Further investigation identified myristoleic acid as a component
of saw palmetto extract that caused cell death. The ECso for both
the extract and myristoleic acid was around 100 pg/mL.)
Following incubation of LNCaP cells with saw palmetto extract
130 pg/mL or myristoleic acid 100}1g/mL, the proportions of
apoptotic and necrotic cells were 16.5% and 46.8%, respectively,
for the extract, and 8.8% and 81.8%, respectively, for myristoleic
acid. An extract of saw palmetto obtained by supercritical
extraction with carbon dioxide inhibited the invasion of PC-3 cells
(derived from human adenocarcinoma of the prostate) into
Matrigel in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner at
concentrations in the range 1-10 g/mL?” However, LNCaP
cells and SKRC-1 cells (derived from human renal carcinoma)
were unaffected by the extract. The extract was also shown to
inhibit the activity of urokinase-type plasminogen activator, a
protease enzyme that is necessary for tumour-cell invasion into
basement membranes. The monoacylglycerides 1-monolaurin and
1-monomyristicin isolated from saw palmetto demonstrated in
vitro activity against renal (A-498) and pancreatic (PACA-2)
human tumour cells (ECso for 1-monolaurin: 3.77 g/mL and
2.33 g/mL, respectively; ECs9 for 1-monomyristicin: 3.58 g/mL
and 1.87 g/mL, respectively).”’ However, only borderline cyto-
toxicity was observed against PC-3 cells (ECso for 1-monomyr-
isticin: 8.84 g/mL).

PC-SPES, a combination preparation containing saw palmetto
fruit extract and seven other herbal ingredients, has cytotoxic and

w

----- PAGE 535 -----
Saw Palmetto

pro-apoptotic activity in vitro in prostate carcinoma cells,? and
in drug-sensitive (H69) and drug-resistant (H69V) human small-
cell lung carcinoma cells.°° Batches of PC-SPES have, however,
been found to be adulterated with diethylstilbestrol, indometacin
and/or warfarin, and cytotoxic activity in prostate carcinoma cells
has been attributed to these contaminants.** In contrast, in
experiments involving H69 and H69V cells, the cytotoxic activity
of the contaminants was insufficient to account for the
cytotoxicity of PC-SPES.°° Adding contaminants to a. ‘less’
contaminated batch of PC-SPES did not alter the cytotoxic
activity of the herbal preparation in H69 and H69V cells. None of
the contaminants displayed apoptotic activity at concentrations
found as contaminants and higher, whereas both contaminated
and ‘less contaminated’ batches of PC-SPES exhibited pro-
apoptotic activity in these small-cell lung carcinoma cell lines.”

Other activities In vivo oestrogenic activity in the rat has also
been documented for an alcoholic extract.” Activity was
attributed to the high content of f-sitosterol, a known oestrogenic
agent, present in saw palmetto.

In vivo anti-oedema activity in the rat has been documented for
a hexane extract of saw palmetto, acting by inhibition of
histamine-induced increase in capillary permeability.?*
doses of an aqueous extract were effective in carrageenan-induced
paw oedema and pellet tests in the rat, although the extract was
not found to influence the proliferative stage of inflammation.'"”
The observed anti-inflammatory activity was attributed to a high
molecular weight polysaccharide (approximately 100000). Poly-
saccharides possessing immunostimulating activity have also been
documented for saw palmetto and were stated to contain a high
content of glucuronic acid."
An extract (SG-291) prepared from saw palmetto fruits by
supercritical fluid extraction with carbon dioxide was reported to
inhibit both cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase in vitro (ICso
28.1 pg/mL and 18.0pg/mL, respectively).°° Further study
indicated that the component(s) of saw palmetto extract that
inhibits these enzymes must be within the acidic lipophilic
fraction. Subsequent studies have documented that a liposterolic
extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) significantly inhibited the
production of S-lipoxygenase metabolites, including leukotriene

Low

B,, by human polymorphonuclear neutrophils at concentrations
of saw palmetto extract of 5 pg/mL and above.°”

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics Some data on the pharmacokinetics of saw
palmetto extracts in healthy male volunteers (1 = 12) come from
an open, randomised, single-dose bioequivalence study of a 320-
mg capsule of a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto compared
with two capsules of saw palmetto extract 160 mg as the reference
preparation.)
reported to be almost identical for both preparations. The
maximum concentration (Cy,ax) for saw palmetto extract 320-mg
capsule and 2 x 160-mg capsules was 2.54-2.61 g/mL and 2.57—
2.67 g/mL, respectively, and time to Cyrax (Tmax) Was 1.58 and 1.5
hours for the 320-mg capsule and 2 x 160-mg capsules,
respectively. Another study explored the bioavailability and
pharmacokinetic profile of a rectal formulation of saw palmetto
extract 640 mg in healthy male volunteers (7 = 12).°°) The mean
maximum plasma concentration of the second component of saw
palmetto was almost 2.6 tg/mL at around three hours after drug
administration.

The plasma concentration-time curves were

Pharmacodynamics The inhibitory effects of saw palmetto
extract on 5-a-reductase activity documented in vitro (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies) have been
confirmed in some studies in humans, and refuted by others.

In one study, 25 men with symptomatic, established BPH were
randomised to receive either a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
(Permixon) 320 mg/day for three months (7 = 10), or no treatment
(n = 15).°% At the end of the treatment period, analysis of
samples of BPH tissue, obtained by suprapubic prostatectomy,
showed that dihydrotestosterone concentrations were significantly
reduced and that testosterone concentrations were significantly
higher in the treatment group, compared with the control group (p
< 0.001 for both). A significant reduction in concentrations of
epidermal growth factor in total BPH tissue was also observed in
the treatment group, compared with the control group (p < 0.01).
The reported biochemical effects were most evident in BPH tissue
from the periurethral region.

In another study, biopsy specimens of the prostate were taken
from 44 men with symptomatic BPH participating in a
randomised, placebo-controlled trial of a herbal combination
preparation containing saw palmetto lipoidal extract 106mg
together with nettle root extract, pumpkin seed oil, lemon
bioflavonoid extract and vitamin A.°°*°
statistically significant differences in median tissue dihydrotestos-
terone and testosterone concentrations between the treatment and
placebo groups at baseline. At the end of the study, mean tissue
dihydrotestosterone concentrations decreased significantly in the
treatment group, compared with baseline values (p = 0.005),
whereas there was no significant change in dihydrotestosterone
concentrations in the placebo group. However, in a separate
analysis, it was reported that the median change in tissue
dihydrotestosterone concentrations for the treatment group
(1.38 ng/g) did not differ significantly from the corresponding
change in the placebo group (0.87 ng/g). The findings of this study
should be interpreted cautiously as it is possible there are other
explanations for the observed effect.

Another randomised, double-blind trial involving 18 men with
BPH compared saw palmetto extract (IDS-89; Strogen) 640 mg
three times daily (i.e. six times the normal dose) for three months
with placebo.°” This high dose of saw palmetto extract achieved
only a moderate decrease in 5-o-reductase activity.

An open, randomised, placebo-controlled study involving 32
healthy male volunteers compared the effects of a liposterolic
extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) 80mg twice daily for seven
days with those of finasteride Smg daily for seven days on
inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity.°* Serum dihydrotestosterone
concentrations were reported to decrease significantly with
finasteride, compared with baseline values, but no significant
changes were ob:
Thus, this study did not support a mechanism of action for saw
palmetto in BPH by inhibition of 5-a-reductase activity.

In addition, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, four-way,
crossover study in which 12 healthy male volunteers received three
different saw palmetto extract preparations (Prostagutt uno,
Prostess uno, Talso uno; 320 mg daily for eight days each,
separated by wash-out phases of at least two weeks), none of the
study medications showed signs of o-adrenoceptor subtype
occupancy as determined by a radioreceptor assay.°””

Effects of saw palmetto fruit extract on certain cytokines have
also been described. In an open, randomised, multicentre study, 30
men with BPH received a liposterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon) 160 mg twice daily for three months before undergoing
surgery, or to no treatment for three weeks before undergoing

There were no

srved for the saw palmetto and placebo groups.

----- PAGE 536 -----
surgery.)

treatment period, prostatic tissue concentrations of the cytokines
TNF-« and interleukin-1B were significantly lower in Permixon
recipients, compared with participants in the no-treatment control
group (p = 0.012 and 0.004, respectively). No significant
differences were observed, however, in concentrations of IL-6,
TGF (transforming growth factor) or EGF (epidermal growth
factor).

The effects of a combination preparation containing 106 mg of
a lipoidal extract of saw palmetto, as well as nettle root extract,
pumpkin seed oil, lemon bioflavonoid extract and vitamin A, were
assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 40 men with symptomatic BPH." At the end of the six-
month study, 23/60 and 25/60 nuclear morphometric descriptors
(NMDs) for nuclei of 200 randomly selected epithelial cells were
altered, compared with baseline characteristics, in prostatic ti
from men in the treatment group and placebo groups, respectively.
A statistically significant multivariate change from baseline in
NMDs was apparent for the treatment group but not the placebo
group. These preliminary data may reflect effects such as
alterations in gene expression, but this and the contribution of
the saw palmetto extract, require testing in further studies.“

It was stated that at the end of the three-month

ue

Therapeutic effects Numerous clinical studies have investigated
the effects of saw palmetto extracts in men with BPH.

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 randomised
controlled clinical trials (18 of which were double-blind) of saw
palmetto extracts involving a total of 3139 men with BPH.“ This
work is an update of a previous Cochrane systematic review.»
The updated review included 12 studies which compared saw
palmetto extracts alone with placebo, four comparing saw
palmetto extracts in combination with other herbals with placebo,
two comparing saw palmetto extracts alone with an active
control, one comparing saw palmetto extracts in combination
with other herbals with an active control, one comparing saw
palmetto extract with another herb and with placebo, and one
comparing oral saw palmetto extract with a rectal formulation of
saw palmetto extract. The mean duration of the included studies
was 13 weeks (range 448 weeks).

Compared with placebo, saw palmetto extracts were associated
with a decrease in urinary symptom scores (weighted mean
difference (WMD), 95% confidence interval (CI): —1.41, —2.52 to
—0.30; one trial), nocturia (WMD, 95% Cl: —0.76, —1.21 to
—0.32; ten trials) and residual volume (WMD, 95% CI: —22.95,
—42.33 to —3.56; six trials), and improvements in peak urine flow
(WMD, 95% CI: 1.86, 0.60 to 3.12; nine trials), mean urine flow
(WMD, 95% CI: 2.23, 1.18 to 3.27; four trials) and physician and
self-rating of urinary symptoms (weighted risk ratio, 95% CI:
1.72, 1.11 to 2.66; three trials and 1.76, 1.21 to 2.54; six trials,
respectively).“” Saw palmetto extracts had no effect, however, on
prostate size.

Compared with finasteride, saw palmetto extracts (mono- and
combination preparations) achieved similar improvements in
urinary symptom scores, frequency of nocturia, peak urine flow,
mean urine flow and residual volume, but not prostate size.

The conclusions of the review were that there is evidence that
preparations containing saw palmetto improve urinary symptoms
and flow measures in men with BPH and that improvement is
similar to that achieved with finasteride. However, the review

included trials which assessed the effects of preparations contain-
ing saw palmetto alone and in combination with other herbal
ingredients, as well as saw palmetto preparations produced by
different manufacturers, which vary qualitatively and quantita-

Saw Palmetto

tively in their phytochemical composition (although at least eight
studies involved one particular saw palmetto product). The results
of the trials discussed above cannot necessarily be transferred to
other saw palmetto products unless they are pharmaceutically and
bioequivalent.

Another systematic review and meta-analysis included only
trials involving a particular saw palmetto extract (Permixon) in

men with BPH. The review included 14 randomised controlled
(42)

ie:

trials (several of which were included in the Cochrane review
described above), of which nine were placebo-controlled, four
compared Permixon with standard drugs (finasteride, tamsulosin,
prazosin, alfuzosin) and one compared two doses of Permixon;
the remaining three were open, uncontrolled studies. The meta-
analysis found similar results to that of the Cochrane review:
compared with placebo, Permixon resulted in a_ significant
improvement in peak flow rate and a reduction in nocturia, and
a five-point reduction in International Prostate Symptom Scale
(IPSS) score.“ Data from an unpublished study included in the
meta-analysis have recently been published.4"*

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
100 men with BPH published since the Cochrane review found no
statistically significant effects for a carbon dioxide extract of S.
repens 320 mg daily on symptoms of BPH as assessed using IPSS
scores, peak urinary flow rate and the International Index of
Erectile Function questionnaire.) A sample size calculation was
used in determining the size of the study, so it seems unlikely that
the trial did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference between groups. This finding is in contrast to findings
from previous studies, and warrants further investigation,
particularly with respect to the phytochemical composition of
the extract relative to that of other preparations for which
significant effects on symptoms of BPH have been described.
Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial not
included in the Cochrane review assessed the effects of a

combination preparation containing saw palmetto complex
(standardised for 40-50% free fatty acids and f-sitosterol 43%),
cernitin (a pollen mixture comprising rye, timothy and corn) and
vitamin E two 'pills' daily (equivalent to total daily doses of saw
palmetto and f-sitosterol 286mg, cernitin 378mg, vitamin E
1001U and f-sitosterol) for 90 days in 144 men with symptoms of
BPH. At the end of the study, statistically significant differences
were reported for the treatment group, compared with placebo, in
nocturia, urinary frequency and total American Urological
Association symptom score."

Several other clinical studies of saw palmetto extracts in BPH
have been conducted although these di
criteria for the Cochrane review.

In a study involving 75 men with mild/moderate BPH according
to their International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), participants
received a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) 160 mg
twice daily for nine weeks (n = 57). A control group (1 = 18)
did not receive any medical treatment for BPH, and there was no
random allocation to treatment, although it was stated that
baseline parameters were comparable between the two groups. It
was reported that, at the end of the study, IPSS and quality-of-life
scores, compared with baseline values, significantly improved in
Permixon-treated men (p < 0.001). There were no significant
differences in these parameters, compared with baseline values,
for the control group.

Two randomised studies involving men with symptomatic BPH
have compared the effects of different regimens of saw palmetto
(05) A multi-centre, randomised, single-blind trial
involving 132 men with BPH compared the effects of saw palmetto

not meet the inclusion

extract.

----- PAGE 537 -----
Saw Palmetto

extract (Prostaserene) 320 mg once daily with 160 mg twice daily
for one year.°° Another study compared a liposterolic extract of
saw palmetto (Permixon) 320 mg daily with 160 mg twice daily for
three months in 100 men with symptomatic BPH.°! For each
regimen, both studies reported significant improvements in the
mean IPSS, maximum and mean urinary flow rates and residual
urine volume, at the end of the studies, compared with baseline
values. However, as these studies did not include a placebo-control
group, the possibility that the observed effects are placebo effects
cannot be excluded.

Several open, uncontrolled studies of saw palmetto extracts
(alone or in combination with other herbs), several of which were
drug-monitoring studies which also assessed effectiveness, have
reported improvements in symptoms of BPH at the end of
treatment, compared with baseline values.°? ©
these studies were usually 160 mg two or three times daily for up
to three years. These studies are discussed in more detail later (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

A small number of studies have explored the effects of saw
palmetto extracts in disorders other than BPH. In a single-blind,
controlled trial, 64 men with USA National Institutues of Health
category III prostatitis (chronic pelvic pain syndrome) were
randomised to receive saw palmetto extract 325mg daily (not
further specified), or finasteride 5 mg daily, for one year.” At the
end of the study, the proportion of participants with a statistically
significant improvement in Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index
score was higher for finasteride, compared with placebo (65%
versus 24%; p < 0.02).

The effects of a softgel capsule preparation containing saw
palmetto extract 200mg (standardised for 85-95% liposterolic
content) and f-sitosterol 50mg in the treatment of androgenetic
alopecia (which affe men and women) were assessed in a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot trial.* In the
study, 26 men aged 23 to 64 years with mild-to-moderate
androgenetic alopecia received one softgel capsule, or placebo,
twice daily for up to 21 weeks (precise duration of treatment not
stated). Overall, 19 men completed the study and, for these,
investigator-assessed hair growth was deemed to be improved in a
greater proportion of those who received the active treatment,
compared with those who received placebo (60% versus 11%),
although no statistical tests were undertaken. With respect to
participants’ self- ment of their hair condition, none of the
active treatment recipients thought their condition had deterio-
rated, compared with 33% of placebo recipients. The hypothesis
that saw palmetto extract (with P-sitosterol) is beneficial in
androgenetic alopecia requires testing in well-designed rando-
mised controlled trials.

Saw palmetto is one of the eight herbal ingredients contained in
a commercial preparation known as PC-SPES; the other herbal
ingredients were stated as being chrysanthemum, isatis, licorice,
Ganoderma lucidum, Panax pseudoginseng, Rabdosia rubescens
and Scutellaria (scullcap). The combination preparation has been
investigated for oestrogenic activity, and for its potential effects in
the treatment of hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. In a

” Doses assessed in

randomised, controlled, crossover trial, 90 men with androgen-
independent prostate cancer received three capsules of PC-SPES
three times daily, or diethylstilbestrol 3 mg once daily. Participants
crossed to the other arm of the study on reaching clinical or
prostate-specific antigen progression. The median times to
progression for PC-SPES and diethylstilboestrol were 5.5 and 2.9
months, respectively.6° However, the study was terminated
prematurely because PC-SPES was withdrawn from the market
after being found to be contaminated with diethylstilbesterol and

radiol. Other contaminants, including warfarin and
25, 26)

ethinyles
indometacin have also been reported.’

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 randomised
controlled clinical trials (18 of which were double-blind) of saw
palmetto extracts involving a total of 3139 men with BPH (see
Clinical studies, Therapeutic effects). Of these,12_ studies
compared saw palmetto extracts alone with placebo; the mean
duration of all included studies was 13 weeks (range 448 weeks).
The review found that the frequency and type of adverse events
reported for saw palmetto extracts were similar to those reported
for placebo. There were no statistically significant differences
between participant withdrawal rates for saw palmetto, placebo
and finasteride (8.9, 7.1 and 9.0%, respectively; p = 0.17 for saw
palmetto versus placebo and p = 1.0 for saw palmetto versus
finasteride), and in the frequency of gastrointestinal adverse events
(1.3, 0.9, 1.5%, respectively; p > 0.5 for saw palmetto versus
finasteride). Impotence was reported more frequently by finaster-
ide recipients than by saw palmetto recipients, or placebo
recipients (4.9, 1.1 and 0.7%, respectively; p < 0.001 for saw
palmetto versus finasteride and p= 0.58 for saw palmetto versus
placebo). Clinical trials, however, are designed primarily to
assess efficacy, not safety, and have the statistical power only to
detect common acute adverse effects.

Several post-marketing surveillance type studies involving over
4000 men with BPH have assessed the safety and tolerability of
different saw palmetto extracts taken at recommended doses and
have also found preparations to be well-tolerated. Studies
conducted to date have, however, assessed the effects of several
different preparations of saw palmetto extract; these are likely to
vary qualitatively and quantitatively in their pharmaceutical
quality, and the implications of this for safety of specific products
should be considered. Some studies have monitored the effects of
longer term treatment (one to three years) with saw palmetto
preparations, but further well-designed post-marketing surveil-
lance studies are necessary to assess the safety of use of saw
palmetto fruit extracts in men with BPH for even longer periods.
To date, almost all clinical studies of saw palmetto fruit products
have involved men only, so there is a lack of information on the
safety of saw palmetto fruit preparations when used by women
(for example, for androgenetic alopecia and other conditions such
as acne).

In a drug-monitoring study involving 1334 men with BPH, the
tolerability of saw palmetto extract 160mg twice daily for 12
weeks was reported to be 'good' or ‘excellent’ by more than 95% of
participants.°”) This is similar to a finding from a three-year
prospective, uncontrolled study involving 435 men with BPH, in
which the tolerability of saw palmetto extract (IDS-89) 160mg
twice daily was classified as 'good' or ‘very good' by both
physicians and patients for 98% of participants.” A total of 46
adverse events was reported in 34 patients. Of these, 30% were
gastrointestinal disturbances. The withdrawal rate from the study
was 1.8%, mostly because of digestive disturbances (7 = 3) and
tumours (1 = 3). Non-serious adverse effects (4.95-6.63%),
mainly minor gastrointestinal effects, such as gastralgia, nausea,
diarrhoea, constipation and anorexia, as well as vertigo, headache,
dry mouth and pruritus, were reported in an open study involving
413 men with BPH who received saw palmetto extract 160mg
twice daily for three months.°*) An observational study involving

----- PAGE 538 -----
2080 patients with BPH who received a combination of saw
palmetto extract (WS-1473) and nettle root extract (WS-1031)
reported that the tolerability of the preparation was classified by
physicians to be 'good' or 'very good' for the majority of
participants. Mild adverse effects were reported in 15 patients
(0.72%).

Studies assessing the equivalence of two different regimens of
saw palmetto extract (320 mg once daily and 160 mg twice daily)
report that adverse events occurred with a similar frequency in
both groups."
unlikely to be related to treatment with saw palmetto extract.

In a small obervational study involving 155 men with BPH who
received a lipidosterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon)
160 mg twice daily for two years, 10 adverse events (including four
cardiovascular events; not further specified), none of which were
considered to be related to saw palmetto, were reported by nine
participants (5.8%).° However, the study did not involve
sufficient numbers of participants to have the statistical power
to detect rare adverse effects.

’ Most events were deemed to be unrelated or

An isolated report describes a 53-year-old white man with a
meningioma who experienced a bleeding episode during resection
of the tumour.‘ The man lost around two litres of blood before
the haemorrhage was stopped using standard treatments.
Laboratory values for prothrombin time and activated partial
thromboplastin time were reported to be within normal ranges,
although the bleeding time when measured after surgery was
found to be 21 minutes (normal range reported to be 2-10
minutes). The bleeding normalised over the next five days. The
patient stated that he had not taken non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents before undergoing surgery, but said he had
been taking saw palmetto for BPH. The authors of the report
stated that the prolonged bleeding time was 'probably' due to
cyclooxygenase inhibition caused by saw palmetto and affecting
platelets. However, this case relies on the patient's self-report of
saw palmetto use, no details of the saw palmetto product
implicated were provided in a report of the case, and no analysis
of the product was undertaken. Causality has not been
established.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 187 reports,
describing a total of 313 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain S. repens only as the active ingredient (see Table 1).
This number may include the case reports described above.
Reports originated from several different countries.

Toxicity Incubation of high concentrations of saw palmetto
extract (Permixon) 9.0 mg/mL for 48 hours inhibited sperm
motility, compared with control.“ Cytotoxic activity has been
described for saw palmetto fruit extracts and certain individual
constituents in vitro (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and
animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None specified. BPH, the main intended use for saw palmetto, is
not suitable for self-treatment.

Drug interactions In view of the reported anti-androgen and
oestrogenic activities, the possibility that saw palmetto extracts
could affect concurrent hormonal therapy, including the oral

Saw Palmetto

contraceptive pill and hormone replacement therapy, should be
considered. Drug interaction studies involving small numbers of
healthy volunteers who received saw palmetto extracts have
indicated that 14 or 28 days’ oral administration of saw palmetto
extract 320mg daily (equivalent to 396mg non-esterified fatty
acids and 6.3mg -sitosterol daily, or 277mg non-esterified
fatty acids daily) did not influence the activity of the
cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2D6, and CYP 3A4,°°°° and
also CYP1A2 and CYP2E1.°°

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 187) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Serenoa
repens preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of 2005°**»)

Application site disorders 1

Body as a whole — general disorders. Including asthenia (5) 22

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension (4) 6

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including 19
dizziness (3); headache (4); paraesthesia (3)

Endocrine disorders. Including gynaecomastia (9) 10

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal pain 76
(11); diarrhoea (9); dyspepsia (18); eructation (3);
flatulence (4); nausea (11); vomiting (8)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including atrial fibrillation 15
(3); tachycardia (3)

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatitis, 15
cholestatic (4)
Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including alkaline 9

phosphatase increased (3); weight decrease (3)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders.

Myoendopericardial and valve disorders

2
1
Neoplasm 1
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 8

Psychiatric disorders. Including confusion (3); impotence 33
(11); libido decreased (8)

Red blood cell disorders. 4

Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including testis 7
disorder (3)

Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (4) 7

Skin and appendages disorders. Including eczema (3); 37
pruritus (6); rash (3); rash, erythematous (3); rash,
psoriaform (5); urticaria (5)

Special senses other, disorders. 2

Urinary system disorders. Including urinary retention (4) 18

Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. 3

White cell and res disorders. Including granulocytopenia (3) 6

Other reactions described using terms not included in database 11

Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 313

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 539 -----
Saw Palmetto

Habib FK, Wyllie MG. Not all brands are created equal: a comparison
of selected components of different brands of Serenoa repens extract.
Prostate Canc Prostatic Dis 2004; 7: 195-200.

7 Weisser H et al. Effects of the Sabal serrulata extract IDS 89 and its
subfractions on 5-a-reductase activity in human benign prostatic

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of saw palmetto has not 6
been established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the
documented hormonal activity, the use of saw palmetto during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Keracnyl; Keracnyl; Sabal. Germany: Cefasabal; Granu Fi
Prosta; Nephroselect M; Prostagutt forte. Hong Kong: Phyto-
Ease; Prostease; Urgenin. Israel: Urgenin. Italy: Biothymus M.
Urto; Prostaplant. Malaysia: Total Man. Mexico: Prosgutt.
Portugal: Efluvium Anti-caspa; Efluvium Anti-seborreico;
Spasmo-Urgenin. Singapore: Palmetto Plus. Spain: Neo
Urgenin; Spasmo-Urgenin; Urgenin. Switzerland: Granu Fink
Prosta; Prosta-Caps Chassot N; Prostagutt-K Thailand:
Spasmo-Urgenin. UK: Antiglan; Daily Fatigue Relief; Damiana
and Kola Tablets; Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto; Prostaid;
Regina Royal Concorde; Roberts Black Willow Compound
Tablets; Strength; Strength Tablets; Supa-Tonic Tablets. USA:
ProstatExcell; Prostate Health.

References

1 Wagner H, Flachsbarth H. A new antiphlogistic principle from Sabal
serrulata, |. Planta Med 1981; 41: 244-251.

2 Shimada H e¢ al. Biologically active acylglycerides from the berries of
saw palmetto (Serenoa repens). J Nat Prod 1997; 60: 417-418.

3. Schépflin G et al. B-Sitosterin als méglicher Wirkstoff der
Sabalfriichte. Planta Med 1966; 14: 402-407.

4 Hansel R et al. Eine Diinnschichtchromatographische Untersuchung
der Sabalfriichte. Planta Med 1964; 12: 169-172.

5S Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Serenoa repens (Bartram) J.K. Small.
Fitoterapia 1997; 68: 99-113.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

27

28

29

30

hyperplasia. Prostate 1996; 28: 300-306.
Palin M-F et al. Inhibitory effects of Serenoa repens on the kinetic of
pig prostatic microsomal Sa-reductase activity. Endocrine 1998; 9: 65—
69.

Bayne CW et al. Serenoa repens (Permixon’): a So-reductase types |
and II inhibitor — new evidence in a coculture model of BPH. Prostate
1999; 40: 232-241.

Bayne CW et al. The selectivity and specificity of the actions of the
lipido-sterolic extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’) on the prostate.
J Urol 2000; 164: 876-881.

Carilla E et al. Binding of permixon, a new treatment for prostatic
benign hyperplasia, to the cytosolic androgen receptor in the rat
prostate. ] Steroid Biochem 1984; 20: 521-523.

Sultan C et al. Inhibition of androgen metabolism and binding by a
liposterolic extract of 'Serenoa repens B' in human foreskin fibroblasts.
J Steroid Biochem 1984; 20: 515-519.

Diiker E-M et al. Inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity by extracts from
Sabal serrulata. Planta Med 1989; 55: 587.

Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of Serenoa repens extract (Permixon’)
on estradiol/testosterone-induced experimental prostate enlargement
in the rat. Pharmacol Res 1996; 34: 171-179.

Van Coppenolle F e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of the lipidosterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon ) on rat prostate hyperplasia
induced by hyperprolactinaemia: comparison with finasteride.
Prostate 2000; 43: 49-58.

Barsanti JA et al. Effects of an extract of Serenoa repens on dogs with
hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 880-885.
Oki T et al. Effects of saw palmetto extract on micturition reflex of
rats and its autonomic receptor binding activity. J Urol 2005; 173:
1395-1399.

Gutiérrez M et al. Spasmolytic activity of a lipidic extract from Sabal
serrulata fruits: further study of the mechanisms underlying this
activity. Planta Med 1996; 62: 507-511.

Odenthal KP. Phytotherapy of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
with Cucurbita, Hypoxis, Pygeum, Urtica and Sabal serrulata
(Serenoa repens). Phytother Res 1996; 10: $141-$143.
Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa
repens (Permixon’) and its major components on basic fibroblast
growth factor-induced proliferation of cultures of human prostate
biopsies. Eur Urol 1998; 33: 340-347.

Vachero F et al. Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of cell
proliferation by the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens (LSEr,
Permixon’) in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate 2000; 45: 259-
266.

Iguchi K et al. Myristoleic acid, a cytotoxic component in the extract
from Serenoa repens, induces apoptosis and necrosis in human
prostatic LNCaP cells. Prostate 2001; 47: 59-65.

Ravenna L et al. Effects of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon’) on human prostatic cell lines. Prostate 1996; 29: 219-230.
Ishii K et al. Extract from Serenoa repens suppresses the invasion
activity of human urological cancer cells by inhibiting urokinase-type
plasminogen activator. Biol Pharm Bull 2001; 24: 188-190.

Sovak M et al. Herbal composition PC-SPES for management of
prostate cancer: identification of active principles. J Nat Canc Inst
2002; 94: 1275-1281.

Sadava D, Winesburg J. Contaminants of PC-SPES are not responsible
for cytotoxicity in human small-cell lung carcinomas. Cancer Lett
2005; 220(2): 171-175.

Elghamry MI, Hansel R. Activity and isolated phytoestrogen of shrub
palmetto fruits (Serenoa repens Small), a new estrogenic plant.
Experientia 1969; 25: 828-829.

Stenger A et al. Pharmacology and biochemistry of hexane extract of
Serenoa repens. Gazz Med Fr 1982; 89: 2041-2048.

‘Wagner H et al. A new antiphlogistic principle from Sabal serrulata Il.
Planta Med 1981, 41: 252-258.

Breu W et al. Antiphlogistic activity of an extract from Sabal serrulata
fruits prepared by supercritical carbon dioxide: in vitro inhibition of

----- PAGE 540 -----
31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase metabolism.
Arzneimittelforschung 1992; 42: 547-551.

Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidic lipidosterolic extract of
Serenoa repens (Permixon’) on the ionophore A23187-stimulated
production of leukotriene By (LTB4) from human polymorphonuclear
neutrophils. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1997; 57: 299-
304,

De Bernardi di Valserra M et al. Serenoa repens capsules: a
bioequivalence study. Acta Toxicol Ther 1994; 15: 21-39.

De Bernardi di Valserra M, Tripodi AS. Rectal bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers of Serenoa repens new
formulation. Arch Med Intern 1994; 46: 77-86.

Di Silverio F et al. Effects of long-term treatment with Serenoa repens
(Permixon") on the concentrations and regional distribution of
androgens and epidermal growth factor in benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Prostate 1998; 37: 77-83.

Marks LS e¢ al. Tissue effects of saw palmetto and finasteride: use of
biopsy cores for in situ quantification of prostatic androgens. Urology
2001; 57: 999-1005.

Marks LS et al. Effects of a saw palmetto herbal blend in men with
symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol 2000; 163: 1451—
1456.

Weisser H et al. Enzyme activities in tissue of human benign prostatic
hyperplasia after three months’ treatment with the Sabal serrulata
extract IDS 89 (Strogen’) or placebo. Eur Urol 1997; 31: 97-101.
Strauch G et al. Comparison of finasteride (Proscar’) and Serenoa
repens (Permixon’ ) in the inhibition of 5-alpha-reductase in healthy
male volunteers. Eur Urol 1994; 26: 247-252.

Goepel M et al. Do saw palmetto extracts block human o&)-
adrenoceptor subtypes in vivo? Prostate 2001; 46: 226-232.

Vela Navarrete R et al. BPH and inflammation: pharmacological
effects of Permixon on histological and molecular inflammatory
markers. Results of a double-blind pilot clinical assay. European Urol
2003; 44: 549-555.

Veltri RW et al. Saw palmetto alters nuclear measurements reflecting
DNA content in men symptomatic BPH: evidence for a possible
molecular mechanism. Urology 2002; 60: 617-622.

Wilt T et al. Serenoa repens for benign prostatic hyperplasia (review).
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2002, Issue 3. Art.
No.: CD001423.

Wilt TJ et al. Serenoa repens for treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia. In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford: Update
Software.

Boyle P et al. Updated meta-analysis of clinical trials of Serenoa repens
extract in the treatment of symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia.
BJU International 2004; 93: 751-756.

Debruyne F et al. Comparison of a phytotherapeutic agent (Permixon)
with an a-blocker (tamsulosin) in the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia: a 1-year randomized international study. European Urol
2002; 41: 497-507.

Debruyne F et al. Evaluation of the clinical benefit of Permixon and
tamsulosin in severe BPH patients —- PERMAL study subset analysis.
European Urol 2004; 45: 773-780.

Willetts KE et al. Serenoa repens extract for benign prostate
hyperplasia: a randomized controlled trial. BJU International 2003;
92: 267-270.

Preuss HG e¢ al. Randomized trial of a combination of natural
products (cernitin, saw palmetto, B-sitosterol, vitamin E) on

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Saw Palmetto

symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Int Urol Nephrol
2001; 33: 217-225.

Al-Shukri SH et al. Early urodynamic effects of the lipido-sterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’) in patients with lower urinary
tract symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate Cancer
Prostatic Dis 2000; 3: 195-199.

Braeckman J et al. Efficacy and safety of the extract of Serenoa repens
in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: therapeutic
equivalence between twice and once daily dosage forms. Phytother Res
1997; 11: 558-563.

Stepanov VN et al. Efficacy and tolerability of the lipidosterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’ ) in benign prostatic hyperplasia:
a double-blind comparison of two dosage regimens. Adv Ther 1999;
16: 231-241.

Gerber GS e¢ al. Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) in men with lower
urinary tract symptoms: effects on urodynamic parameters and
voiding symptoms. Urology 1998; 51: 1003-1007.

Braeckman J et al. Efficacy and safety of the extract of Serenoa repens
in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: an open multicentre
study. Eur J Clin Res 1997; 9: 47-57.

Bach D, Ebeling L. Long-term drug treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia — results of a prospective 3-year multicenter study using
Sabal extract IDS 89. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 105-111.

Vahlensieck W et al. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie — Behandlung mit
Sabalfrucht-Extrakt. Fort schritte Ther 1993; 18: 4548.

Schneider H-J et al. Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie.
Fortschritte Ther 1995; 3: 37-40.

Kaplan SA et al. A prospective, 1-year trial using saw palmetto versus

finasteride in the treatment of category III prostatitis/chronic pelvic
pain syndrome. J Urol 2004; 171: 284-288.

Prager N et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
to determine the effectiveness of botanically derived inhibitors of 5-a-
reductase in the treatment of androgenetic alopecia. J] Alt Comp Med
2002; 8: 143-152.

DiPaola RS et al. Clinical and biological activity of an estrogenic
herbal combination (PC-SPES) in prostate cancer. N Engl ] Med 1998;
339: 785-791.

Oh WK et al. Prospective, multicenter, randomized phase II trial of the
herbal supplement, PC-SPES, and diethylstilboestrol in patients with
androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22(18):
3705-3712.

Pytel YA et al. Long-term clinical and biologic effects of the
lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens in patients with symptomatic
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Adv Ther 2002; 19: 297-306.

Cheema P et al. Intraoperative haemorrhage associated with the use of
saw palmetto herb: a case report and review of literature. J Int Med
2001; 250: 167-169.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 6 January, 2006).

Ondrizek RR et al. Inhibition of human sperm motility by specific
herbs used in alternative medicine. J Assist Reprod Genet 1999; 16:
87-91.

Markowitz JS et al. Multiple doses of saw palmetto (Serenoa repens)
did not alter cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in normal
volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2003; 74: 536-542.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo assessment of botanical supplementation of
human cytochrome P450 phenotypes: Citrus aurantium, Echinacea
purpurea, milk thistle and saw palmetto. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 428-440.

----- PAGE 541 -----
Scullcap

species. Hepatitis has been associated with germander
(Teucrium chamaedrys). Hepatotoxicity has resulted in
humans taking commercially available remedies in the UK
which are stated to contain scullcap. In view of the possibility
of contamination, and the lack of pharmacological
information, it would seem advisable to avoid ingestion of
scullcap.

Species (Family)

*Scutellaria lateriflora L.
+S. baicalensis Georgi (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

*Helmet Flower, Hoodwort, Quaker Bonnet, Scutellaria, Skullcap
+S. lanceolaria Miq., S. macrantha Fisch., Huang Qin

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996)
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G20 and G60.

Limited information has been documented regarding the
constituents of S. lateriflora and S. baicalensis.

Flavonoids Apigenin, hispidulin, luteolin, scutellarein, scutel-
larin (bitter glycoside).

Iridoids Catalpol.

Volatile oils Limonene, terpineol (monoterpenes); d-cadinene,
caryophyllene, ¢rans-B-farnesene, B-humulene (sesquiterpenes).

Other constituents Lignin, resin and tannin. S. baicalensis is
reported to contain baicalein, baicalin, chrysin, oroxylin A,
skullcapflavone II and wogonin.~

Other Scutellaria species The related species S. galericulata is
stated to contain apigenin, baicalein, baicalin, apigenin-7-gluco-
side and galeroside (baicalein-B-1-rhamnofuranoside).?

Food Use

Scullcap is not used in foods. Previously, scullcap has been listed
by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a Herb of
Undefined Safety.”

Herbal Use

Scullcap is stated to possess anticonvulsant and sedative proper-
ties. °% Traditionally, it has been used for epilepsy, chorea,
hysteria, nervous tension states, and specifically for grand mal
epilepsy.” In Chinese herbal medicine, the roots of S. baicalensis
Georgi have been used traditionally as a remedy for inflammation,
suppurative dermatitis, allergic diseases, hyperlipidaemia and
atherosclerosis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.‘©”

Flavonoids

Iridoids

=H
HOCH, O-glucose

scutellarein
(6-hydroxyapigenin)

catalpol

Monoterpenes

.

H HY:
S “MN

limonene OH — (+)-a-terpineol

Sesquiterpenes
8

HC an H Finny CH2
CHg=:
CHs
#-caryophyllene

Selected constituents of scullcap.

B-cadinene

Figure 1

----- PAGE 542 -----
Figure 2. Scullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora).

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘©”?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Many investigations have been undertaken to study the pharma-
cological actions of S. baicalensis root. Documented actions have
primarily been attributed to the various flavonoid constituents and
include: in vitro inhibition of mast cell histamine release
comparable to disodium cromoglicate for some flavonoids; in
vitro cytotoxicity of scullcap flavone II; in vivo and in vitro
inhibition of lipid peroxidation;* in vitro inhibition of
lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase pathways; hypocholesterolae-
mic activity in rats." This in vivo effect has been linked to in
vitro actions documented for various flavonoids, including
prevention of ethanol-induced hyperlipidaemia," catechola-
mine-induced lipolysis"! and lipogenesis in adipose  tis-
sue;""' there is no pronounced effect on blood pressure in
cats and rabbits."'” In addition, the latter study found no CNS-
depressant and no antispasmodic activity. However, it did find
marked antibacterial activity against various Gram-positive
bacteria (e.g. Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Sarcina lutea
and Staphylococcus aureus).""»

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of scullcap
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Clinical investigation of scutellarin, a constituent of S.
lateriflora, involving 634 cases of cerebral thrombosis, cerebral
embolism, and paralysis caused by stroke has been undertaken.
An overall effective rate of more than 88% was reported following
intramuscular, intravenous or oral administration. However,
information from case series provides only a low level of clinical
evidence and the observed effects cannot be attributed definitively
to scutellarin.

Scullcap

Figure 3. Scullcap — dried drug substance (herb).

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for scullcap and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Symptoms caused by overdosage of scullcap tincture include
giddiness, stupor, confusion and_ seizures.'©? Hepatotoxic
reactions have been reported after ingestion of preparations
stated to contain scullcap;"> °°
cap herb by Teucrium species is recognised and several cases of
hepatitis have been associated with germander (Teucrium
chamaedrys).""

) however, adulteration of scull-

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the possible hepatotoxicity
associated with scullcap preparations adulterated with germander,
its use is best avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of scullcap to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Scullcap is stated to have been used
traditionally to eliminate a mother's afterbirth and to promote
menstruation.'©” Limited information is known regarding the
pharmacological activity and toxicity of scullcap. In view of this
and concerns over hepatotoxicity of adulterated preparations,
scullcap should not be taken during pregnancy and lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Albizia Complex; Andrographis Compound;
Calmo; Euphrasia Compound; Feminine Herbal Complex;
Goodnight Formula; Nevaton; Pacifenity; Passiflora Complex;
Passionflower Plus; Relaxaplex; Valerian. Canada: Herbal
Nerve. UK: Fenneherb Newrelax; Herbal Indigestion Natur-
tabs; HRI Calm Life; Inflamol; Napiers Tension Tablets;
Newrelax; Nodoff; Quiet Days; Quiet Tyme; Scullcap &
Gentian Tablets; Sleepezy; St Johns wort Compound; Stress-
less; Vegetable Cough Remover; Wellwoman.

----- PAGE 543 -----
1

Scullcap

References

Kubo M et al. Scutellariae radix. X. Inhibitory effects of various
flavonoids on histamine release from rat peritoneal mast cells in vitro.
Chem Pharm Bull 1984; 32: 5051-5054.

Tomimori T et al. Studies on the constituents of Scutellarian species.
Yakugaku Zasshi 1985; 105: 148-15.
Tomimori T et al. Studies on the constituents of Scutellaria species.
VI. On the flavonoid constituents of the root of Scutellaria baicalensis
Georgi (5). Quantitative analysis of flavonoids in Scutellaria roots by
high-performance liquid chromatography. Yakugaku Zasshi 1985; 105:
148-155.

Popova TP et al. Chemical composition and medicinal properties of
Scutellaria galericulata. Farm Zh (Kiev) 1972; 27: 58-61.

Ryn SH et al. The cytotoxic principle of Scutellariae radix against
11210 cell. Planta Med 1985; 51: 355.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix; 1X. New component
inhibiting lipid peroxidation in rat liver. Planta Med 1984; 50: 290-
295.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. IV. Effects on lipid
peroxidation in rat liver. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 2610-2617.
Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. V1. Effects of flavanone
compounds on lipid peroxidation in rat liver. Chem Pharm Bull 1982;
30: 1792-1795.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. XIII. Effects of various
flavonoids on arachidonate metabolism in leukocytes. Planta Med
1985; 51: 132-136.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. Ill. Effects on lipid
metabolism in serum, liver and fat cells of rats. Chem Pharm Bull
1981; 29: 2308-2312.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. V. Effects on ethanol-
induced hyperlipidemia and lipolysis in isolated fat cells. Chem Pharm
Bull 1982; 30: 219-222.

Kurnakov BA. Pharmacology of skullcap. Farmakol i Toksikol 1957;
20: 79-80.

Kubo M et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. Part I: The antibacterial
substance. Planta Med 1981; 43: 194-201.

Peigen X, Keji C. Recent advances in clinical studies of Chinese
medicinal herbs. 1. Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system.
Phytother Res 1987; 1: 53-57.

Perharic L et al. Toxicological problems resulting from exposure to
traditional remedies and food supplements. Drug Safety 1994; 11: 284—
294.

Larrey D et al. Hepatitis after germander (Teucrium chamaedrys)
administration: another instance of herbal medicine toxicity. Am Coll
Physicians 1992; 117: 129-132.

----- PAGE 544 -----
available. The activity of the saponins in animals supports the
herbal use for bronchitis. In view of the lack of toxicity data
and uncertainty regarding the risk associated with chronic
ingestion of haemolytic saponins, excessive use of senega,
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Polygala senega L. (Polygalaceae) and other closely related
Polygala species cultivated in western Canada and Japan.

Synonym(s)
Northern Senega (Canada), Polygala, Polygala senega var.

latifolia, Rattlesnake Root, Senega Root, Senega Snakeroot, Snake
Root

Part(s) Used

Root, rootstock

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0?)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2003079
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

G85)

Saponins

HO

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

See Reference 1 and General References G2, G6, G20, G52, G59
and G62.

Acids Salicylic acid and its methyl ester 0.1-0.2%; hydroxycin-
namic acids (e.g. caffeic acid, ferulic acid, sinapic acid) free or
esterified with saponins.”

Carbohydrates Arabinose, fructose, glucose, melibiose, raffi-
nose, saccharose, stachyose, sucrose; 1,5-anhydro-p-glucitol and
other p-glucitol derivatives;>” trisaccharides; mucilage, pectin. A
series of oligosaccharide esters, senegoses A—O, containing acetic,
benzoic, trans- and cis-ferulic acid moieties linked to glucose and
fructose. Five acylated sucrose glycosides, tenuifolisides A-E,
have been isolated from P. tenuifolia.”*® The esterifying acids are
3,4,5-trimethoxycinnamic, p-hydroxybenzoic, sinapic and ferulic.

Terpenoids A complex mixture of bidesmosidic triterpene
saponins (6-10%) based on the aglycone presenegin. The total
saponin mixture may be referred to as senegin. The saponins of P.
senega var. latifolia are 3-glucosides of presenegin with tetra-,
penta- or hexa-glucosyl groups linked at C-28 and including 4’’-
methoxycinnamoyl or 3”,4’’-dimethoxycinnamoylfucosyl resulting
in E- and Z-cinnamoyl isomers of each saponin.” Senegins -
IV were the first saponins to be characterised and were E-
“21) P tenuifolia contains similar saponins named
onjisaponins A-G."* 19)

isomers.

Xanthones A number of xanthones have been isolated from P.
tenuifolia including 4-C-[B-p-apiofuranosyl-(1—+6)-B-p-glucopyr-
anosyl]-1,3,6-trihydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone.

CH,OH
°
HO

CH,O

fe)
OH
H

senegrin R' =R? =H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of senega.

----- PAGE 545 -----
Senega

Figure 2 Senega (Polygala senega).

Other constituents Fat, resin, sterols and valeric acid ester.

Other Polygala species Polygala paniculata contains coumarins
(aurapten, murrangatin, phebalosin and 7-methoxy-8-(1,4-di-
hydroxy-3-methyl-2-butenyl) coumarin,''® pyranocoumarin).”
Polygala chamaebuxus (European species) contains hydroxycin-
namic acid esters involving acetic, ferulic and sinapic acids as the
ester moieties, saponins, tenuifolin (prosapogenin), rutin (flavo-
noid glycoside), coniferin and syringen (phenolic glycosides).

Other European species (e.g. Polygala alpestris, Polygala
comosa, Polygala vayredae) contain complex mixtures of bi-
desmosidic saponins, tenuifolin (prosapogenin), hydroxycinnimic
acid esters similar to those reported for P. chamaebuxus.\'®
Polygala triphylla contains B-ring oxygen-free trioxygenated- and
glucosyloxy-xanthones."”) Polygala polygama contains podophyl-
lotoxin and demethylpodophyllotoxin (lignans).2

Food Use

Senega is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that senega
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.(@!®

Herbal Use

Senega is stated to possess expectorant, diaphoretic, sialogogue
and emetic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitic asthma, chronic bronchitis, as a gargle for pharyngitis,
and specifically for chronic bronchitis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried root 0.5-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”
Senega Liquid Extract (BPC 1968) 0.3-1.0mL.

Senega Tincture (BPC 1968) 2.5-5.0mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Mucosal secretion Polygalic acid and senegin are stated to be
irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa, and to cause a reflex
secretion of mucus in the bronchioles.’ °% “4° A fluid extract
of senega increased respiratory tract fluid secretion in guinea-pig,
cat and dog, but not in rabbit.'°

CNS-depressant activity CNS-depressant properties in mice
(e.g. reduction in spontaneous activity, inhibition of amfetamine
stimulation, potentiation of barbiturate-induced sleeping time,
and decrease in rectal temperature) have been documented for
Polygala microphylla.*” Similar properties have been reported for
Polygala tenuifolia and have been attributed to the saponin
constituents. A methanolic extract of P. tenuifolia, various
fractions and pure onjisaponins B, F and G prolonged hexobarbi-
tal sleeping time in mice.‘°*” Onjisaponin F produced sleep times
in mice of 33 and 35 minutes for doses of 5 and 20 mg/kg,
respectively, compared with 24 minutes for control and 42 minutes
for chlorpromazine hydrochloride (2 mg/kg).

Inhibition of alcohol absorption E,Z-senegin II and E,Z-
senagasaponins a and b from P. senega var. latifolia have potent
inhibitory effects on alcohol absorption in rats. E,Z-senegasapo-
nins a or b (100 mg/kg) administered orally to rats 1 hour after
20% aqueous ethanol (5mL/kg, orally) reduced blood alcohol
concentrations after 1 hour from 0.5mg/mL to 0.02 mg/mL.”
Under similar test conditions, E,Z-senegin II administration led to
a blood ethanol concentration of 0.09 mg/mL.

Hypoglycaemic activity Senegin II and E,Z-senegasaponins a
and b have significant hypoglycaemic effects in rodents.” Senegin
II (2.5 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) reduced blood glucose concentra-
tions in normal mice from 220 mg/dL to 131 mg/dL 4 hours after
administration and also significantly lowered blood glucose
concentrations in KK-Ay mice from 434mg/dL to 142 mg/dL
under similar test conditions (p < 0.001, compared with control,
for both studies). In glucose tolerance tests in rats, administration
of E,Z-senegasaponins a and b (100mg/kg, orally) resulted in
glucose concentrations of 107-123mg/mL after 30 minutes
compared with 156 mg/mL in control animals (p < 0.01).

Hypolipidaemic activity Seven hours after administration of an
n-butanol fraction of a methanolic extract of P. senega var. latifolia
containing senegin II (5mg/kg, intraperitoneally), the mean

Figure 3. Senega — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 546 -----
(standard deviation) blood triglyceride concentration was 65 (9)
mg/100 mL, compared with 152 (17) mg/mL in control animals (p
< 0.05).°) The blood triglyceride concentration in cholesterol-fed
mice was also significantly reduced (p < 0.05) under the similar
test conditions. Pure senegin II at a dose of 5mg/kg was also
reported to lower blood triglyceride concentrations in mice.?)

Other activities Guinea-pig serum taken two hours after
administration of lyophilised aqueous extract of P. tenuifolia
(600 mg, intraperitoneally) inhibited the growth of herpes simplex
virus type 1 (HSV-1) in Vero cells.'©°”) An unspecified senegin
from P. senega produced a 34% inhibition of influenza virus (A2/
Japan 305) at a concentration of 12.5 pg/mL.(° An ethanolic
extract of P. senega has been reported to inhibit growth of a range
of fungi.'(C”

Polygala erioptera and P. paniculata have exhibited molluscici-
dal activity, and P paniculata is reported to possess antifungal
activity.” A butanol extract of P. tanuifolia containing onjisapo-
nins (100 pg/mL) inhibited cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) diesterase by 73%.‘ Isolated onjisaponins E, F and
G inhibited cAMP phosphodiasterase, with ICso values of 3.1, 2.9,
and 3.7 x 10° mol/L, respectively, being similar in action to
papaverine. A total saponin concentration of P. senega var. latifolia
increased rat plasma concentrations of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), corticosterone and glucose 30 minutes after
intraperitoneal administration (25 mg/kg). Single doses of a dried
methanol (50%) extract of P. senega var. latifolia and P. tanuifolia
administered orally (2g/kg) to rats produced 62% and 100%
inhibition, respectively, of congestive oedema.‘°*”) Under the same
conditions, furosemide 100 mg/kg produced 100% inhibition of
congestive oedema.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of senega
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The
following observations and uses require assessment in well-
designed clinical studies.

A fluid extract of senega root was reported to reduce the
viscosity of sputum in patients with bronchiectasis.“©°”) A French
patent has stated that a triterpenic acid extracted from senega
possesses anti-inflammatory activity and is effective against graft
rejection, eczema, psoriasis and multiple sclerosis.°* These
reports provide only a low level of clinical evidence and the
observed effects cannot be attributed definitively to senega or its
constituents.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for senega and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Saponins are generally regarded as irritant to the gastrointest-
inal mucosa, and irritant properties have been documented for
senega and other Polygala species.‘C°)) Large doses of senega are
reported to cause vomiting and purging.'°°”’

The haemolytic index (HI) of senega saponins is stated to be
between 2500 and 4500.‘“) Haemolytic saponins are toxic to
mammals when administered intravenously, but have a low
toxicity when given orally because they do not cross the
gastrointestinal mucosa.?) Contact with damaged mucosal areas
may cause a problem. Toxicity associated with chronic exposure of
the gastrointestinal mucosa to haemolytic saponins has not been
established. It has been stated that the suitability of saponins for
nutritional and pharmacological use requires further investiga-

Senega

tion: free saponins in the gastrointestinal tract may interact with
the mucosal cells, causing a transient increase in the permeability
of the small intestine to intraluminal solutes and inhibiting active
nutrient absorption.**) This action may consequently facilitate
the entry of antigens and biologically active food peptides into the
blood circulation, with adverse systemic effects.'°°) Aqueous and
methanol extracts of P. senega and P. tenuifolia were negative in
the rec-assay with Bacillus subtilis and in the reversion assay with
Ames strains TA98 and TA 100 of Salmonella typhimurium.° A
mixture of senegins given to rats (i.p.) gave an LDso value of 3 mg/
kg and inhibited the growth of Walker carcinoma in rats with an
EDso value of 1.5 mg/kg.'C”

Cytotoxic lignans have been documented as constituents of a
related species, P. polygama."”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Senega may exacerbate existing gastrointestinal inflammation and
excessive doses may cause vomiting. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that constituents of senega have
ypoglycaemic activity. The clinical relevance of this is not clear
although, until further information is available, senega should not
be used by patients with diabetes.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
reparations of senega to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
reclinical studies that certain constituents of senega have
ypoglycaemic activity. The clinical relevance of this, if any, is
not clear; however, until further information is available, it is
recommended that senega should not be used by patients receiving
ypoglycaemic agents.

Pregnancy and lactation Limited information is available on
the chemistry, pharmacology and toxicity of senega. In view of
this, and the potential irritant properties of senega, its use during
regnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Codion. Hong Kong: Coci-Fedra; Cocillana Christo; Cocillana
Compound; Cocillana Compound; Mefedra-N; Mist Expect
Stim. Portugal: Stodal. Russia: Neo-Codion Babies (Heo-
Koavon Aan Maaaennes). South Africa: Borstol Cough
Remedy. Spain: Broncovital; Pastillas Pectoral Kely; Pulmofasa.
Sweden: Cocillana-Etyfin. Switzerland: Hederix; Makaphyt
Gouttes antitussives; Makaphyt Sirop; Pectocalmine; Pectoral
N; Phol-Tux. UK: Antibron; Chest Mixture; Chesty Cough
Relief; Tickly Cough & Sore Throat Relief. Venezuela:
Acetoben.

References

1 Briggs CJ. Senega Snakeroot — A traditional Canadian herbal
medicine. Can Pharm J 1988; 121: 199-201.

----- PAGE 547 -----
10

1

12

Senega

Hamburger M, Hostettmann K. Hydroxycinnamic acid esters from
Polygala chamaebuxus. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 1793-1797.
Takiura K et al. Studies on oligosaccharides. XIII. Oligosaccharides in
Polygala senega and structures of glycosyl-1,5-anhydro-p-glucitols.
Yakugaku Zasshi 1974; 94: 998-1003.

Takiura K et al. Studies on oligosaccharides XVI. New trisaccharides
found in Senega radix. Yakugaku Zasshi 1975; 95: 166-169.

Saitoh H et al. Senegoses A-E, oligosaccharide multi-esters from
Polygala senega var. latifolia Torr. et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1993; 41:
1127-1131.

Saitoh H et al. Senegoses F-I, oligosaccharide multi-esters from the
roots of Polygala senega var. latifolia Torr. et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull
1993; 41: 2125-2128.

Ikeya Y et al. Four new phenolic glycosides from Polygala tenuifolia.
Chem Pharm Bull 1991; 39: 2600-2605.

Ikeya Y et al. Xanthone C-glycoside and acylated sugar from Polygala
tenuifolia. Chem Pharm Bull 1994; 42: 2305-2308.

Yoshikawa M et al. E-Senegasaponins a and b, Z-senegasaponins a
and b, Z-senegins II and III, new type inhibitors of ethanol absorption
in rats from senegae radix, the roots of Polygala senega L. var latifolia
Torrey et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 350-352.

Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive saponins and glycosides. I. Senegae
radix. (1): E-senegasaponins a and b and Z-senegasaponins a and b,
their inhibitory effect on alcohol absorption and hypoglycemic
activity. Chem Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 2115-2122.
Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive saponins and glyc
radix. (2): Chemical structures, hypoglycemic activity, and ethanol
absorption-inhibitory effect of E-senegasaponin c, Z-senegasaponins
c, and Z-senegins II, Ill, and IV. Chem Pharm Bull 1996; 44: 1305—
1313.

Tsukitani Y et al. Studies on the constituents of Senegae radix. II. The
structure of senegin-II, a saponin from Polygala senega Linne var.
latifolia ‘Torry et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1973; 21: 791-799.

ides, II. Senegae

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Tsukitani Y, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of Senegae radix III.
The structures of senegin-III and -IV, saponins from Polygala senega
Linne var. latifolia Torry et Gray. Chem Bull Pharm 1973; 21: 1564—
1574.

Sakuma S, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygala
tenuifolia Willdenow. I. Isolation of saponins and the structures of
onjisaponins g and f. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 2431-2441.
Sakuma S$, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygala
tenuifolia Willdenow. II. On the structures of onjisaponins a, b and e.
Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 810-821.

Hamburger M et al. Coumarins from Polygala paniculata. Planta Med
1985; 51: 215-217.

Hamburger M e¢ al. A new pyranocoumarin diester from Polygala
paniculata L. Helv Chim Acta 1984; 67: 1729-1733.

Hamburger M, Hostettmann K. Glycosidic constituents of some
European Polygala species. J Nat Prod 1986; May-June: 557.

Ghosal S$ et al. 1,2,3-Trioxygenated glucosyloxy xanthones.
Phytochemistry 1981; 20: 489-492.

Hokanson GC. Podophyllotoxin and 4-demethylpodophyllotoxin
from Polygala polygama (Polygalaceae). Lloydia 1978; 41: 497-498.
Carretero ME et al. Etudes pharmacodynamiques préliminaires de
Polygala microphylla (L.), sur le systéme nerveux central. Plant Méd
Phytothér 1986; 20: 148-154.

Kako M et al. Effect of senegin-II on blood glucose in normal and
NIDDM mice. Biol Pharm Bull 1995; 18 (Suppl. Suppl.8): 1159-1161.
Masuda H e¢ al. Intraperitoneal administration of senegae radix
extract and its main component, senegin-II, affects lipid metabolism
in normal and hyperlipidemic mice. Biol Pharm Bull 1996; 19: 315—
317.

Tubery P. Antiinflammatory triterpenic alcohol acids. Fr Demande
Patent 2,202,683.

Johnson IT et al. Influence of saponins on gut permeability and active
nutrient transport in vitro. J Nutr 1986; 116: 2270-2277.

----- PAGE 548 -----
Senna

However, the use of non-standardised hydroxyanthracene-
containing preparations should be avoided since their

pharmacological effect will be variable and unpredictable.
The sennoside content of many licensed senna products is
standardised and generally calculated as sennoside B. The use
of senna during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Senna alexandrina Mill. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Alexandrian Senna, Cassia acutifolia Delile, C. angustifolia M.
Vahl, C. alexandrina (Garsault) Thell., C. senna L., Indian Senna,
Khartoum Senna, Senna acutifolia (Delile) Batka, S. alexandrina
Garsault, S. angustifolia (Vahl) Batka, Tinnevelly Senna

Part(s) Used
Fruit (pod), leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)

EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph’
ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2,G6, G7, G20 and G32.

Hydroxyanthracenes Pharmacopoeial standards not less than
2.5% for leaf and 2.2% for C. angustifolia fruit.“C8O™
Dianthrone glycosides (1.5-3% leaf; 2-5% fruit), primarily
sennosides A and B (rhein dianthrones) with sennosides C and
D (rhein aloe-emodin heterodianthrones), aloe-emodin dia-
nthrone. Sennosides A and B yield sennidin A and B respectively.
Free anthraquinones including aloe-emodin, chrysophanol and
rhein with their glycosides.

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides (about 2.5%)" including
mucilage (arabinose, galactose, galacturonic acid, rhamnose)
and a galactomannan (galactose, mannose); free sugars (e.g.
fructose, glucose, pinitol, sucrose).

Flavonoids Flavonols, including isorhamnetin and kaempferol.
Glycosides 6-Hydroxymusizin and tinnevellin glycosides.

Other constituents Chrysophanic acid, salicylic acid, saponin,
resin, volatile oil (trace).

Food Use

Senna is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring. Previously, senna has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Senna is stated to possess cathartic properties (leaf greater than
fruit) and has been used traditionally for constipation.(C? C+ O°
CB, G32, G43, G52, G54, G5 G64) The German Commission E approved
use for constipation.'“* Senna is also used in combination with
ispaghula for constipation.'°? The EMEA Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted community herbal
monographs for senna leaf and senna fruit with indications for
short-term use in cases of occasional constipation.)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried pods 3-6 pods (Alexandrian) or 4-12 pods (Tinnevelly)
steeped in 150mL warm water for 6-12 hours;'C%°” 0.6-0.2 g
(equivalent to 20-30 mg hydroxyanthracene glycosides calculated
as sennosides B).‘@>”)

Hydroxyanthracene glycosides
glucose-O fe} OH

RB 10 R 10
* LH lH
R2 R 10° s 10°
Raa ya

dextro-rotation optically inactive

glucose-O oO OH

R! Re Isomeric form
sennosideA COOH COOH (+), trans
sennosideB COOH COOH meso, cis
sennosideC COOH CH,OH (+), trans
sennoside D COOH CH2OH meso, cis

Figure 1 Selected constituents of senna.

----- PAGE 549 -----
Senna

Dried leaflets 0.5-2.0g°°°° (equivalent to 20-30 mg hydro-
xyanthracene glycosides calculated as sennoside B).'@”

Leaf, liquid extract 0.5-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).'C°°?
Senna Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 0.5-2.0 mL.

Herbal drug preparations Equivalent to 15-30mg_hydroxy-

anthracene derivatives (calculated as sennoside B) to be taken at
i ed)

night.

Pharmacological Actions

The cathartic action of hydroxyanthracene-containing drugs
well recognised and such preparations have been used as laxatives
for many years. However, there is still some uncertainty as to the
exact mode of action of the hydroxyanthracenes. It is thought that
hydroxyanthracene glycosides are absorbed from the gastrointest-
inal tract, the aglycones liberated during metabolism and excreted
into the colon resulting in stimulation and an increase in
peristalsis. However, it has also been suggested that the purgative
action of senna is due to the action of intestinal bacteria. Using
human intestinal flora, it was found that sennoside A is reduced to
8-glucosyl rheinanthrone, hydrolysed to rheinanthrone and
oxidised to sennidin A. The active principle causing peristaltic

movements of the large intestine was thought to be rhein-
(4)

anthrone.

In vitro and animal studies

Sennosides A and B, and their natural metabolites sennidins A and
B, have been reported to act specifically on the large intestine in
the rat with the acceleration of colonic transport the major
component of their laxative effect.) Sennosides A and B have also

been reported to induce fluid secretion exclusively in the colon,
following oral administration of the glycosides to rats.

It has been suggested that the laxative action of the sennosides
involves prostaglandins. Indometacin has been found to partly
inhibit the action of sennosides A and B, although a bolus
injection of prostaglandins into the caecal lumen was stated
neither to influence transit time nor to induce diarrhoea.”
Pretreatment of mice with indometacin and a prostaglandin E
(PGE) antagonist has been documented to prevent diarrhoea
caused by intracaecal administration of rhein, which stimulates
the production of PGE-like material specifically in the colon.”
Indometacin was found to depress the large intestinal propulsive
activity of rhein, but did not suppress PGE -induced diarrhoea.
The authors suggest that the action of rhein is mediated by
prostaglandin biosynthesis and release.”

Antihepatotoxic activity has been documented for naphtho-a-
pyrone and naphtho-y-pyrone glycosides, and for the hydroxyan-
thracene glyco s Cassia tora.”
Greatest activity was documented for the naphtho-y-pyrone
glycosides.

Significant inhibitory activity in mice against leukaemia P388
Gal)

sides isolated from a related speci

has been documented for aloe-emodin.

Clinical studies

In a randomised, controlled trial, 91 patients with terminal cancer
received senna 12 mg daily, or lactulose, for 27 days. At the end
of the study, no differences were found between the two groups in
defecation-free intervals, or in days with defecation. The general
health of each group was also reported to be similar.

A randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre,
controlled, crossover study involving 77 hospitalised elderly

patients with a history of chronic constipation compared the
effects of a senna—fibre combination (senna 12.4%, ispaghula
54.2%, 10 mL daily) and lactulose (15 mL twice daily) for two 14-
day periods with a three- to five-day wash-out period.”
Assessments included stool frequency and consistency, ease of
evacuation, adverse effects and costs of treatment. The senna—
fibre combination was reported to be significantly more effective
than lactulose.

Commercial preparations containing senna and ispaghula have
been reported to be equally effective for the treatment of
constipation in small clinical studies involving elderly hospitalised
patients and/or residents in nursing homes.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Senna may cause mild abdominal discomfort such as colic or
cramps. Prolonged use or overdosage can result in diarrhoea with
excessive loss of potassium, albuminuria and haematuria.‘©>
Potassium deficiency may lead to disorders of the heart and
muscular weakness especially with concurrent use of cardiac
glycosides, diuretics or corticosteroids. An atonic non-functioning
colon may also develop.'“**) Excessive use and abuse of senna has

been associated with finger clubbing and with the development of
(12)

cachexia and reduced serum globulin concentrations.

Preclinical data

Sennosides A and B are reported to be most potent with respect to
laxative action, but to be the least toxic compared with other
hydroxyanthracene fractions in senna. Similarly, fractions with a
low laxative activity (e.g. rhein-8-glucoside) are reported to have
the highest acute toxicity’) LDs9 values in mice following
intravenous injection of sennosides A and B and of rhein-8-
glycoside are reported to be 4.1 g/kg and 400 g/kg, respectively.?)
The acute oral toxicity of all senna fractions in mice has been
reported to be greater than 5¢g/kg, although all of the animals
were stated to have died by the following week. The toxicity of
total senna extracts is greater than that of the individual
sennosides and it has been proposed that the laxative and toxic
components of senna could be separated.”

In vitro carcinogenicity testing has reported certain anthraqui-
nones, including aloe-emodin, to be active in more than one strain
of Salmonella typhimurium.” Aglycones were documented to
exhibit genotoxic activity in a mammalian cell assay.‘

Sensitising properties have been documented for emodin (see
Aloes).(@>

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information." There are no new, systematic
preclinical tests for senna leaf or preparations thereof. Most data
refer to extracts of senna fruit containing 1.4-3.5% of
hydroxyanthacenes, corresponding to 0.9-2.35% of potential
thein, 0.05—0.15% potential aloe-emodin and 0.001—-0.006% of
potential emodin, or to isolated active constituents, e.g. rhein or
sennosides A and B. The acute toxicity of senna fruit and specified
extracts thereof, as well as of sennosides in rats and mice was low
after oral treatment. As a result of investigations with parenteral
application in mice, extracts are supposed to possess a higher
toxicity than purified glucosides, possibly due to the content of
aglycones.

Sennosides displayed no specific toxicity when tested at doses
up to 500 g/kg in dogs for four weeks and up to 100 g/kg in rats for
six months. Data for herbal drug preparations are not available.

----- PAGE 550 -----
There was no evidence of any embryolethal, teratogenic or
fetotoxic actions in rats or rabbits after oral treatment with
sennosides. Furthermore, there was no effect on the postnatal
development of young rats, on rearing behaviour of dams or on
male and female fertility in rats. Data on herbal drug preparations
are not available.

An extract and aloe-emodin were mutagenic in in vitro tests;
sennosides A and B and rhein gave negative results. In vivo
examinations of a defined extract of senna pods were negative. A
specified senna extract given orally for two years was not
carcinogenic in male or female rats. The extract investigated
contained approximately 40.8% of hydroxyanthracenes from
which 35% were sennosides, corresponding to about 25.2% of
potential rhein, 2.3% of potential aloe-emodin and 0.007% of
potential emodin, and 142 ppm free aloe-emodin and 9 ppm free
emodin.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is recommended that senna should not be given to patients with
intestinal obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory colon
diseases (e.g. Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis), appendicitis, with
undiagnosed abdominal symptoms; severe dehydration states with
water and electrolyte depletion. Prolonged use should be
avoided! G20 G45, G52)

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information.

As with all laxatives, senna should not be given when any
undiagnosed acute or persistent abdominal symptoms are present.
If laxatives are needed every day the cause of the constipation
should be investigated. Long-term use of laxatives should be
avoided. Use for more than two weeks requires medical super-
vision. Chronic use may cause pigmentation of the colon
(pseudomelanosis coli) which is harmless and reversible after
drug discontinuation.

Abuse, with diarrhoea and consequent fluid and electrolyte
losses, may cause dependence, with possible need for increased
dosages, disturbance of water and electrolyte (mainly hypokalae-
mia) balance, atonic colon with impaired function. Intake of
anthranoid containing laxatives exceeding short-term use may
result in an aggravation of constipation.

Hypokalaemia can result in cardiac and neuromuscular
dysfunction, especially if cardiac glycosides, diuretics or cortico-
steroids are also taken. Chronic use may result in albuminuria and
haematuria.

In chronic constipation, stimulant laxatives are not an
acceptable alternative to a changed diet.

Interaction with other medicaments and other forms of
interaction Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term use of
senna) may potentiate the action of cardiac glycosides and
interacts with antiarrhythmic drugs, with drugs which induce
reversion to sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomitant use with
other drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide diuretics, adreno
corticosteroids and liquorice root) may enhance electrolyte
imbalance. Abdominal spasms and pain may occur, in particular
in patients with irritable colon.”

Anthraquinones cause discoloration of the urine which may
interfere with diagnostic tests.'“*)

Pregnancy and lactation Non-standardised hydoxyanthracene
containing laxative preparations should not be taken during
pregnancy or lactation since their pharmacological action is

Senna

unpredictable. Although hydroxyanthracene derivatives may be
excreted in the breast milk, following normal dosage their
concentration is usually insufficient to affect the nursing
infant.'C*)

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information.”

Pregnancy Not recommended during pregnancy. There are no
reports of undesirable or damaging effects during pregnancy
and on the fetus when used at the recommended dosage
schedule. However, experimental data concerning a genotoxic
risk of several anthranoids (e.g. emodine and physcione) and
senna are not counterbalanced by sufficient studies to
eliminate a possible risk.

Lactation Breastfeeding is mot recommended as there are
insufficient data on the excretion of metabolites in breast
milk. Excretion of active principles in breast milk has not been
investigated. However, small amounts of active metabolites
(e.g. rhein) from other anthranoids are known to be excreted in
breast milk. A laxative effect in breastfed babies has not been
reported.

a; Agarol witl
Lax; Fletchers Castoria; Maximum Relief Ex-Lax; Senna-Gen;
Senokot; Senokotxtra; X-Prep.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Agiolax; Cirulaxia; Gelax; Kronolax; LX-30;
Rapilax Fibras. Australia: Agiolax; Neo-Cleanse; Peritone;
Prolax; Soflax. Austria: Abfuhrtee St Severin; Agiolax;
Carilax; Entschlackender Abfuhrtee EF-EM-ES; Eucarbon;
Eucarbon Herbal; Frugelletten; Laxalpin; Laxolind; Mag
Kottas Krauterexpress Abfuhrtee; Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee;
Menodoron; Midro Tee; Neda Fruchtewurfel; Planta Lax;
Sabatif; The Chambard-Tee. Belgium: Agiolax; Tux. Brazil:

----- PAGE 551 -----
Senna

Constipation Tablets; Dual-Lax
Normal Strength; Fam-Lax Senna; Fibre Plus; Jacksons
Herbal Laxative; Kas-Bah; Laxative Tablets; Lion Cleansing
Herbs; Lustys Herbalene; Manevac; Modern Herbals Laxa-
tive; Modern Herbals Menopause; Natural Herb Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Pripsen; Rhuaka; Sciargo; Skin Cleansing;
Tabritis. USA: Laci Le Beau Super Dieter's Tea; Perdiem;
Senokot-S; X-Prep Bowel Evacuant Kit-1. Venezuela: Agiolax;
Fibralax.

1

10

1

12

13

14

References

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPC). Community Herbal Monograph on Cassia senna L., fructus
and Cassia angustifolia Vahl, fructus. London, 7 September 2006. Doc
Ref. EMEA/HMPC/5187 1/2006; European Medicines Agency.
Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). Community
Herbal Monograph on Cassia senna L. and Cassia angustifolia Vahl,
folium. London, 7 September 2006. Doc Ref. EMEA/HMPC/5 1869/2006.
Miller BM et al. Isolation and structural investigation of a
polysaccharide from Cassia angusti folia leaves. Planta Med 1989; 55:
99.

Alam N, Gupta PC. Structure of a water-soluble polysaccharide from
the seeds of Cassia angustifolia. Planta Med 1986; 52: 308-310.
Kobashi K et al. Metabolism of sennosides by human intestinal
bacteria. Planta Med 1980; 40: 225-236.

Leng-Peschlow E. Acceleration of large intestine transit time in rats by
sennosides and related compounds. J Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 369—
373.

Leng-Peschlow E. Dual effect orally administered sennosides on large
intestine transit and fluid absorption in the rat. J Pharm Pharmacol
1986; 38: 606-610.

Yagi T et al. Involvement of prostaglandin E-like material in the
purgative action of rhein anthrone, the intraluminal active metabolite
of sennosides A and B in mice. J Pharm Pharmacol 1988; 40: 27-30.
Wong SM e¢ al. Isolation and structural elucidation of new
antihepatotoxic naphtho-gamma-pyrone glycosides, naphtho-a-
pyrone glycoside and anthraquinone glycosides from the seeds of
Cassia tora. Planta Med 1989; 55: 112.

Agra Y et al. Efficacy of senna versus lactulose in terminal cancer
patients treated with opioids. J Pain Symptom Management 1998; 15:
1-7.

Passmore AP et al. Chronic constipation in long stay elderly patients: a
comparison of lactulose and a senna-fibre combination. BM] 1993;
307: 769-771.

Petticrew M et al. Epidemiology of constipation in the general adult
population. Health Technol Assess 1997; 1: 1-S2.

Senna Lawrence Review of Natural Products. Levittown,
Pennsylvania: Pharmaceutical Information Associates Ltd, 1989.
Hietala P e¢ al. Laxative potency and acute toxicity of some
anthraquinone derivatives, senna extracts and fractions of senna
extracts. Pharmacol Toxicol 1987; 61: 153-156.

Westendorf J et al. Possible carcinogenicity of anthraquinone-
containing medical plants. Planta Med 1988; 54: 562.

----- PAGE 552 -----
a Shepherd’s Purse

The chemistry of shepherd’s purse is well documented.
Several actions affecting the circulatory system have been
observed in animal studies, although these actions do not
relate to the traditional herbal uses. There is a lack of robust
clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
shepherd’s purse. Limited toxicity data are available. In view
of this together with the demonstrated pharmacological
activity of the herb, excessive use of shepherd’s purse and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik (Brassicaceae/Cruciferae)
Synonym(s)

Capsella

Part(s) Used

Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”?
Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G7.

Amines Acetylcholine, choline, amino acids 2.33% (major
component proline), histamine, tyramine and unidentified crystal-
line alkaloids.”

Flavonoids Quercetin, diosmetin, luteolin, hesperetin and their
glycosides (e.g. rutin, diosmin, hesperidin).”

Volatile oils 0.02%. Camphor (major); at least 74 components
identified.”

Other constituents Carotenoids, fumaric acid, sinigrin (mustard
oil glucoside), ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and vitamin K.45.62)
Food Use

Shepherd's purse is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Shepherd's purse is stated to possess antihaemorrhagic and
urinary antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
menorrhagia, haematemesis, haematuria, diarrhoea and acute
catarrhal cystitis,(C% 070

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-4¢ as an infusion three times daily'©”

Liquid extract 14 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Figure 1

Monoterpenes

fe}
camphor
Glucosinolates
it
o—$—0?
CH2OH N 6
° * =
HO Oo — CHe— CH=CH,
HO. s
HO
sinigrin

Selected constituents of shepherd’s purse.

Figure 3. Shepherd’s purse — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 553 -----
Shepherd’s Purse

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A variety of actions has been documented for an ethanolic extract
of shepherd's purse in various animal models.'°? Anti-inflam-
matory activity has been exhibited versus carrageenan-induced
and dextran-induced rat paw oedema.” A reduction in capillary
permeability in the guinea-pig, induced by histamine and
serotonin, has also been observed,” and flavonoid components
isolated from shepherd's purse have been reported to reduce blood
vessel permeability in mice. Anti-ulcer activity has been
documented in rats following intraperitoneal injection. The
extract did not affect gastric secretion, but accelerated recovery
from stress-induced ulcers.” A hypotensive effect observed in
cats, dogs, rabbits and rats, following intravenous injection, was
inhibited by a B-adrenoceptor blocker but not by atropine, thus
dismissing earlier reports that this action was attributable to
cholinergic compounds present in shepherd's purse.”

Diuresis has been reported in mice, following oral or intraper-
itoneal administration of shepherd's purse. The mode of action was
stated to involve an increase in the glomerular filtration rate.

Documented cardiac actions include increased coronary blood
flow in dogs following intra-arterial administration, and a slight
inhibitory effect on ouabain-induced ventricular fibrillation in the
rat following intraperitoneal injection, together with a negative
chronotropic effect.) Studies on the isolated heart have reported
negative chronotropic and inotropic actions in the guinea-pig and
rabbit and coronary vasodilatation.)

A CNS-depressant action in mice has been demonstrated
(potentiation of barbiturate-induced sleeping time).

Weak antibacterial activity, mainly towards Gram-positive
organisms, has been reported.”

Antineoplastic activity in rats has been documented for fumaric
acid, which prevented the development of hepatic neoplasms when
co-administered with the carcinogen 3-MeDAB."))

Shepherd's purse seeds are stated to possess rubefacient and
vesicant properties because of their isothiocyanate-yielding
components.“0*))

In vitro studies have documented stimulatory action in various
smooth muscle tissue
in the guinea-pig were reported to be unaffected by atropine and
diphenhydramine, but were inhibited by papaverine.” Induced
utero-activity in the rat, equivalent to the effect of oxytocin 0.1 i.u.,
was unaffected by atropine, but inhibited by competitive inhibitors
of oxytocin. Two unidentified alkaloid components of shepherd's
purse have also been stated to elicit a physiological activity on the
uterus.) Induced tracheal contractions in the guinea-pig were
unaffected by adrenaline, which did inhibit acetylcholine-induced
contractions.” These studies concluded that the active substance

(s) in shepherd's purse responsible for the observed actions on
(8,9)

Induced contractions of the small intestine

smooth muscle were neither acetylcholine nor histamine.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
shepherd's purse and rigorous randomised clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity
Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for shepherd's
purse and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Preclinical data

Shepherd's purse extracts have been reported to exhibit low
toxicity in mice. LDso values reported are 1.5 g/kg body weight
(mice, intraperitoneal injection) and 31.5 g/kg (mice, subcuta-
neous injection). Signs of toxicity were described as sedation,
enlargement of pupils, paralysis of hind limbs, difficulty in
respiration, and death by respiratory paralysis.) Following
hydrolysis, the constituent sinigrin yields allyl isothiocyanate
which is an extremely powerful irritant and produces blisters on
the skin.'C*) Isothiocyanates have been implicated in endemic
goitre (hypothyroidism with thyroid enlargement) and have been
reported to produce goitre in experimental animals.‘C*

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of shepherd's purse to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that shepherd's purse and/or certain
isolated constituents have hypotensive, diuretic and cardiac
activities and effects on thyroid fuction.

Pregnancy and lactation Shepherd's purse is reputed to act as
an abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle, and tyramine is
©3°) Th view of this, the
reported oxytocin-like activity and the general lack of safety data,
the use of shepherd's purse during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Proprietary mul
UK: Fenneherb Cystaid.

documented as a utero-active constituent.‘

ingredient preparations

References

1 Kuroda K, Kaku T. Pharmacological and chemical studies on the
alcohol extract of Capsella bursa-pastoris. Life Sci 1969; 8: 151-155.

2. Jurisson S. Flavonoid substances of Capsella bursa pastoris.
Farmatsiya (Moscow) 1973; 22: 34-35.

3 Miyazawa M et al. The constituents of the essential oils from Capsella
bursa-pastoris Medik. Yakugaku Zasshi 1979; 99: 1041-1043.

4 Park RJ. The occurrence of mustard oil glucosides in Lepidium
hyssopifolium, L. bonariense, and Capsella bursa pastoris. Aust ]
Chem 1967; 20: 2799-2801.

5. Jurisson S. Vitamin content of shepherd's purse. Farmatsiya (Moscow)
1976; 25: 66-67.

6 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Studies on Capsella bursa pastoris. 1. General
pharmacology of ethanol extract of the herb. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
Ther 1969; 178: 382-391.

7 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Studies on capsella bursa pastoris. II. Diuretic,
anti-inflammatory and anti-ulcer action of ethanol extracts of the
herb. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1969; 178: 392-399.

8 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Physiologically active substance in Capsella
bursa-pastoris. Nature 1968; 220: 707-708.

9 Juri
pastori:

Determination of active substances of Capsella bursa

Tartu Riiliku Ulikooli Toim 1971; 270: 71-79.

10 Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.

11 Kuroda K. Neoplasm inhibitor from Capsella bursa pastoris. Japan
Kokai 1977; 41: 207.

son

----- PAGE 554 -----
J Skunk Cabbage

cabbage (even though citings as early as 1817 reporte:
irritant properties). No documented evidence was found to
justify the herbal uses. In view of the lack of data, the
appropriateness of medicinal use of skunk cabbage should be
considered. In view of the documented irritant properties,
excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Skunk cabbage
should not be used during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The
potential for skunk cabbage preparations to interact with
other medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)
Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Salisb. ex W. Barton (Araceae)

Synonym(s)

Dracontium foetidum L., Skunkweed

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

Reported constituents include starch, gum-sugar, fixed and
volatile oils, resin, tannin, an acrid principle and iron.(622 Ge)

Other plant parts Large amounts of alkaloids (unspecified),
phenolic compounds and glycosides have been isolated from all
plant parts of skunk cabbage.” The leaves are reported to contain
hydroxytryptamine.““*”) The flower contains the anthocyanins
cyanidin-3-monoglucoside, cyanidin-3-rutinoside and peonidin-3-
rutinoside.”)

Food Use

Skunk cabbage is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Skunk cabbage is stated to possess expectorant, antispasmodic
and mild sedative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma and specifically for bronchi-
tic asthma.'67 6%

Figure 1 Skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus).

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Powdered rhizome/root 0.5—1.0g in honey or as an infusion or
decoction three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C” eG

Figure 2 Skunk cabbage - dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 555 -----
Skunk Cabbage

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for the rhizome/root. There is a preliminary
report of bacteriostatic activity for ethanol extracts of skunk
cabbage (plant parts not specified), although data on minimum
inhibitory concentrations were not provided. The leaf extract has
haemolytic properties,“ although the scientific basis for this
statement is not clear.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of skunk
cabbage and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Tox'

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for skunk
cabbage and further investigation of these aspects is required.
The root is reported to be bitter and acrid, with a disagreeable
odour. Severe itching and inflammation of the skin has been
documented.'“* No published toxicity studies were located.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that the fresh plant can cause blistering.“ In

view of the acrid principle thought to be present in both the dried
and fresh root,‘ skunk cabbage should be used with caution.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of skunk cabbage and _ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for skunk cabbage
preparations to interact with other medicines used concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Skunk cabbage is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle” although the scientific basis for this statement
is not clear. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacolo-
gical, and toxicological information, and the irritant properties,
the use of skunk cabbage during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

UK: Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture; Vegetable
Cough Remover.

References

1 Konyukhov VP et al. Dynamics of the accumulation of biologically
active agents in Lysichitum camtsochatcense and Symplocarpus
foetidus. Uch Zap Khabarovsk Gos Pedagog Inst 1970; 26: 59-62.

2 Chang N et al. Anthocyanins in Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Nutt.
(Araceae). Bot J Linn Soc 1970; 63: 95-96.

----- PAGE 556 -----
Slippery Elm

e lack of information, the appropriateness of medicinal use
of slippery elm should be considered. Excessive use, at least,
should be avoided. Slippery elm should not be used during
pregnancy and breastfeeding. The potential for slippery elm
preparations to interact with other medicines should be
considered. The supply of whole bark is controlled by
regulations.

Species (Family)
Ulmus rubra Muhl. (Ulmaceae)

Synonym(s)
Ulmus fulva Mich.

Part(s) Used

Bark (inner)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL.‘” Whole (unpowdered) slippery elm is controlled by
regulations.”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G59.

Carbohydrates = Mucilage (major constituent) consisting of
hexoses, pentoses, methylpentoses, at least two polyuronides,
and yielding on hydrolysis galactose, glucose and fructose (trace),
galacturonic acid, L-rhamnose and p-galactose.”)

Other constituents Tannins 3.0-6.5% (type unspecified),
phytosterols (f-sitosterol, citrostadienol, dolichol), sesquiter-
penes, calcium oxalate and cholesterol.

Food Use

Slippery elm is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that

there is insufficient information available to make an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.'C'?

Herbal Use

Slippery elm is stated to possess demulcent, emollient, nutrient
and antitussive properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
inflammation or ulceration of the stomach or duodenum,
convalescence, colitis, diarrhoea and locally for abcesses, boils
and ulcers (as a poultice).“6% 97% Go)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Powdered bark 4-16mL (1:8 as a decoction) three times
daily.'C&S”

Powdered bark 4g in 500mL boiling water as a nutritional
supplement three times daily.C%°”

Coarse powdered bark With boiling water as a poultice.“

Liquid extract 5mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.“©*
G7

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

There is a lack of information on the pharmacological properties
of slippery elm. Mucilages are known to have demulcent and
emollient properties. Mucilage is the principal constituent of
slippery elm. Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of slippery
elm and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Figure 1 Slippery elm — dried drug substance (powdered bark).

----- PAGE 557 -----
Slippery Elm

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical and
preclinical safety and toxicity data for slippery elm and further
investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of slippery elm and _ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for slippery elm prepara-
tions to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Whole bark has been used to procure
abortions. In view of this and the lack of information on the
pharmacological properties of slippery elm, it should not be used
during pregnancy and breastfeeding.

Soap; Slippery Elm Stomach Tablets; Wood Sap Ointment.
USA: Laci Le Beau Throat Care.

References

1 The Medicines (Retail Sale or Supply of Herbal Medicines) Order
1977, SI 2130.

2 Tamayo C et al. The chemistry and biological activity of herbs used in
Flor-Essence™ herbal tonic and Essiac™. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14:
1-14.

----- PAGE 558 -----
Squill

attributed to the cardioactive components and squill has been
used as an expectorant for many years. However, in view of
the documented cardioactive and emetic properties of the
aglycones, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided. Red squill is primarily used as a
rodenticide.

Species (Family)

Drimia maritima (L.) Stearn (Asparagaceae)

Synonym(s)

Scilla, Sea Onion, Urginea, Urginea maritima (L.) Baker, Urginea
scilla Steinh., White Squill

Part(s) Used

Bulb (red and white varieties)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
See References 1 and 2 and General References G6 and Gé2.

Cardiac glycosides Scillaren A and proscillaridin A (major
constituents); others include glucoscillaren A, scillaridin A,
scillicyanoside, scilliglaucoside, scilliphaeoside, _ scillicoeloside,
scillazuroside and scillicryptoside. Scillaren B represents a mixture
of the squill glycosides.

Flavonoids Apigenin, dihydroquercetin, isovitexin, iso-orientin,
luteolin, orientin, quercetin, taxifolin and vitexin.

Other constituents Stigmasterol, tannin, volatile and fixed oils.

Food Use

The Food Additives and Contaminants Committee (FACC)
recommended that squill be prohibited as a food flavouring,.‘“*”
Herbal Use

Squill is stated to possess expectorant, cathartic, emetic,
cardioactive and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for chronic bronchitis, asthma with bronchitis, whooping

cough, and specifically for chronic bronchitis with scanty
sputum, 6567 68.66

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried bulb 60-200 mg as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Squill Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 0.06-0.2 mL.
Squill Tincture (BPC 1973) 0.3-2.0 mL.
Squill Vinegar (BPC 1973) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

The aglycone components of the cardiac glycoside constituents
possess digitalis-like cardiotonic properties.'“* However, the
squill aglycones are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract and are less potent than digitalis cardiac glycosides.‘
Expectorant, emetic and diuretic properties have been docu-
mented for white squill.*” Squill is reported to induce vomiting
by both a central action and local gastric irritation.” Subemetic
or near-emetic doses of squill appear to exhibit an expectorant

effect, causing an increase in the flow of gastric secretions.'"”

Cardiac glycosides
R°0

R! R2 R?
scillarenin H H H
proscillaridin A H H rha
scillaren A H H gle-rha
glucoscillaren A H H_— gle-gle-rha
scilliphaeoside OH H tha
glucoscilliphaeoside OH H gic-rha
12-epi-scilliphaeoside H OH tha

glc = glucosyl, rha = rhamnosyl

O-glucosyl

scilliglaucoside H
scillicyanoside © OCOCH3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of squill.

----- PAGE 559 -----
Figure 2 Squill (Drimia maritima).

Antiseborrhoeic properties have been documented for methanol
extracts of red squill which have been employed as hair tonics for
the treatment of chronic seborrhoea and dandruff.(C*”

Squill extracts have been reported to exhibit peripheral
vasodilatation and bradycardia in anaesthetised rabbits.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Excessive use of squill is potentially toxic because of the
cardiotonic constituents. However, squill is also a gastric irritant
and large doses will stimulate a vomiting reflex.

Preclinical data

Red squill is toxic to rats and is mainly used as a rodenticide,
causing death by a centrally induced convulsant action.) A
squill soft mass (crude extract) has been stated to be toxic in

Figure 3 Squill — dried drug substance (bulb).

guinea-pigs at a dose of 270 mg/kg body weight. A fatal dose for
Indian squill (Urginea indica Kunth.) is documented as 36 mg/kg.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Squill may cause gastric irritation and should be avoided by
individuals with a cardiac disorder. In view of the cardiotonic
constituents, precautions applied to digoxin therapy should be
considered for squill.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of squill to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Squill contains cardiac glycosides,
and interactions listed for digoxin should be considered for squill.

Pregnancy and lactation Squill is reputed to be an abortifacient
and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ In addition, cardioactive
and gastrointestinal irritant properties have been documented.
The use of squill during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

References

1 Court WE. Squill — energetic diuretic. Pharm J 1985; 235: 194-197.
2 Anon. Squill: Lawrence Review of Natural Products. Levittown,
Pennsylvania: Pharmaceutical Information Associates Ltd, 1989.

----- PAGE 560 -----
= St John’s Wort

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemical composition of St John’s wort has been well
studied. Documented pharmacological activities provide
supporting evidence for several of the traditional uses stated
for St John’s wort. Many pharmacological activities appear to
be attributable to hypericin, hyperforin and/or the flavonoid
constituents; hypericin is also reported to be responsible for
the photosensitive reactions that have been documented for
St John’s wort. With regard to the antidepressant effects of St
John’s wort, hyperforin rather than hypericin, as originally
thought, has emerged as one of the major constituents
responsible for antidepressant activity. However, further
research is required in order to determine which other
constituents contribute to the antidepressant effect.

There are now over forty clinical trials of H. perforatum
preparations involving patients with different types of
depression, although a rigorous systematic review and meta-
analysis found that overall the evidence is inconsistent and
complex. H. perforatum preparations and standard
antidepressant agents appear to show similar effects, whereas
H. perforatum preparations have only small benefits over
placebo in patients with major depression; in older studies in
patients with mild-to-moderate depression, H. perforatum
preparations appear to be of more benefit than placebo. A
previous systematic review/meta-analysis, for which inclusion
criteria for trials were slightly less strict, found evidence from
randomised, controlled trials that St John’s wort preparations
were more efficacious than placebo in the treatment of mild-
to-moderately severe depression.

An important point is that there is heterogeneity not only
among the trials and their results, but also among the different
manufacturers’ products tested. Products are not necessarily
equally effective, and the results of the analyses above should
not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum preparations,
which may differ considerably in their pharmaceutical quality.
These comments also imply that the need for dose adjustment
should be considered for patients changing from one St John’s
wort product to another.

Clinical safety data from randomised controlled trials,
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of trials, and post-
marketing surveillance and other observational studies,
indicate that certain St John’s wort extracts are well-tolerated
when taken at recommended doses for shorter periods of time
(around eight weeks). Certain St John’s wort preparations do
appear to have a more favourable safety profile, at least with
short-term use, than standard antidepressants, particularly
older antidepressant agents, a factor that may be important in
patients continuing to take medication. Data from the small
number of longer-term (one year) studies support the
tolerability of certain St John’s wort extracts, although further
investigation of long-term use is warranted. Adverse events/
effects reported are generally mild and most commonly
gastrointestinal symptoms. These observations, however, are
based on data collected in the settings of formal randomised
or observational studies, and usually where H. perforatum

has been prescribed under the supervision of a physician. The
safety of St John’s wort products taken as self-treatment
without supervision by a healthcare professional requires
further study.

The risk of photosensitive reactions following oral ingestion
of St John’s wort preparations appears to be low, since serum
and skin concentrations of hypericin (the photosensitising
constituent) after oral administration of recommended doses
are below 100 ng/mL, although caution is advised as it is
possible that there may be unusual absorption of hypericin in
some individuals and in fair-skinned individuals and after
extended periods of solar irradiation, there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin.
Likewise, the phototoxic potential of topical application of H.
perforatum preparations appears to be low, although caution is
necessary, particularly as hypericin may penetrate more highly
through broken or lesional skin, and there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin in
fair-skinned individuals and after extended periods of solar
irradiation.

There are important pharmacokinetic interactions between
St John’s wort preparations and certain other medicines,
leading to a loss of or reduction in the therapeutic effect of
those medicines, and potential for important
pharmacodynamic interactions, which could lead to
enhancement or antagonism of pharmacological effects,
depending on the activities of the co-administered medicines.
Drugs that may be affected by pharmacokinetic interactions
include certain anticonvulsants, ciclosporin, digoxin, indinavir
(and other HIV protease inhibitors), oral contraceptives,
theophylline and warfarin, and by pharmacodynamic
interactions, triptans and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors. Advice is that patients taking these medicines
should stop taking St John’s wort preparations, generally after
seeking professional advice, as dose adjustment may be
necessary.

There is evidence that pharmacokinetic interactions arise
through induction, by constituents of St John’s wort
preparations, of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug-
metabolising enzyme CYP3A4 (and possibly certain other CYP
enzymes), and through effects on P-glycoprotein (a transport
protein). As CYP3A4 is involved in the metabolism of many
drugs, and as P-glycoprotein is involved widely in drug
transport, it is possible that St John’s wort preparations interact
with other medicines in addition to those already identified.

In view of the lack of toxicity data, St John’s wort
preparations should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Pharmacists and other healthcare professionals should be
mindful that patients at all levels of health care may self-treat
with herbal and other non-prescription medicines, and that
use is not necessarily disclosed to healthcare professionals. St
John’s wort products may be used in addition to, or instead of,
standard antidepressants and other conventional medicines.
The prevalence of concurrent use of St John’s wort products

----- PAGE 561 -----
St John’s Wort

among certain subgroups of patients with depression: a cross-
sectional survey involving members of a depression self-help
group reported that over 50% were using St John’s wort and
that, among these individuals, the concurrent use of St John’s
wort and conventional antidepressants was 29% (see Side-
effects, Toxicity, Clinical data).

Species (Family)

Hypericum perforatum L. (Guttiferae/Clusiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hypericum, Hypericum veronense Schrank, H. noeanum Boiss.,
Millepertuis

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia'@”

BHMA 2003'0°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E'°”
ESCOP 2003 ‘°°

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24'68°

WHO volume 2 (2002)‘°””

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (for external use only)'@”

Constituents
See also References 1 and 2 and General References G1 and G2.

Anthraquinone derivatives (naphthodianthrones) Hypericin,
pseudohypericin and isohypericin; protohypericin and protopseu-
dohypericin (biosynthetic precursors of hypericin and pseudohy-
pericin, respectively) are present in fresh
Cyclopseudohypericin is also stated to be present. The hypericin
content (approximately 0.1-0.15%) includes both hypericin and
pseudohypericin) and is sometimes referred to as 'total
hypericins'.

material.

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin), flavones (e.g.
luteolin) and glycosides (e.g. hyperoside, isoquercitrin, quercitrin,
rutin), biflavonoids including biapigenin (a flavone) and amento-
flavone (a biapigenin derivative)** and catechins (flavonoids
often associated with condensed tannins).'°” The concentrations
of rutin, hyperoside and isoquercitrin have been reported as 1.6,
0.9 and 0.3%, respectively.”

Prenylated phloroglucinols Hyperforin (2.0-4.5%) and adhy-
perforin (0.2-1.9%),(7 1G)

Tannins 8-9%. Type not specified. Proanthocyanidins (con-
densed type) have been reported.'©?

Other phenols  Caffeic, chlorogenic, p-coumaric, ferulic, p-
hydroxybenzoic and vanillic acids.

Volatile oils 0.05—0.9%. Major component (not less than 30%) is
methyl-2-octane (saturated hydrocarbon); others include 1-non-
ane and traces of methyl-2-decane and n-undecane (saturated
hydrocarbons),"!? o- and B-pinene, a-terpineol, geraniol, and
traces of myrcene and limonene (monoterpenes), caryophyllene
and humulene (sesquiterpenes).17!»

Other constituents Acids (isovalerianic, nicotinic, myristic,
palmitic, stearic), carotenoids, choline, nicotinamide, pectin, B-
sitosterol, straight-chain saturated hydrocarbons (Cy, C39)‘'"
and alcohols (Co4, C26, Crg).(1P

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, St John's
wort herb consists of the whole or cut dried flowering tops of H.
perforatum, harvested during flowering time, and contains not less
than 0.08% of total hypericins, expressed as hypericin, calculated
with reference to the dried drug.@*"°* Detailed descriptions of
H. perforatum herb for use in botanical, microscopic and
macroscopic identification have been published, along with
qualitative and quantitative methods for the assessment of H.
perforatum herb raw material.'C?

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial St
John's wort preparations. In the USA, analysis of 21 St John's wort
products (18 of which claimed to contain only standardised
extracts and three of which were combinations of extracts and
crude plant material) found that seven products did not meet at
least one of the quality criteria assessed: four products had a
hypericin content ranging from 77% to 85% of that stated on
their labels or, if not stated on the label, of the minimum
acceptable concentration permitted in the analysis; one of the two
products claiming to contain hyperforin contained only 21.7% of
the stated amount; five products contained cadmium exceeding
acceptable concentrations in the analysis, and two of these
products contained more than twice the permitted concentration
of cadmium.) Overall, five of the 18 products labelled with
hypericin and/or hyperforin concentrations, and five of the seven
products labelled as being produced from ‘aerial parts’, failed the
analysis. Another analytical study which investigated eight St
John's wort products marketed in the USA found that their
hyperforin content varied from 0.01-1.89%, and that only two
products contained more than one percent hyperforin, the
minimum concentration suggested to be required for antidepres-
sant effects. Similarly, hypericin content varied from 0.03—
0.29% and, for several products, the actual content ranged from
57-130% of that stated on the label.

Analysis (using a liquid chromatographic method with
fluorescent detection) of 54 commercially available St John's
wort products purchased in the USA and Canada found that only
two of the products had a total naphthodianthrone concentration
(hypericin and pseudohypericin) within 10% of that stated on the
label.” Overall, total naphthodianthrone content for tablets and
capsules, respectively, ranged from 0-108.6% and from 31.3-
80.2% of the amount stated on the label. The naphthodianthrone
content of products formulated as tinctures ranged from 0-
118.6 pg/mL.

Isolated hyperforin is susceptible to oxidation, although the
hyperforin content of dried herb and preparations containing
extracts of H. perforatum appears to be more stable.“
Degradation products for hyperforin include deoxyfurohyperforin
A,") furohyperforin, furoadhyperforin and furohyperforin A and
other oxygenated hyperforin analogues.°"7”

----- PAGE 562 -----
A fast high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC)
method with photodiode array detection has been developed for
the determination of six of the naphthodianthrone (including
hypericin) and phloroglucinol (including hyperforin) compounds
in H. perforatum extracts.°?) The method allows quantitative
determination of concentrations as low as 2 ttg/mL and 0.5 jtg/mL
for hyperforin and hypericin, respectively, while detection limits
for these compounds were 0.1 and 0.02 g/mL, respectively.

Variation in St John's wort products is not limited to product
composition, but as with other herbal medicinal products also
applies to the dissolution profiles of products which might be
considered to be pharmaceutically equivalent. In vitro dissolution
tests using biorelevant conditions (i.e. simulated gastric fluid and
similar substances as the dissolution media) were used to
determine the dissolution profiles of five St John's wort products
purchased in Germany. All products were ethanol or methanol
extracts of St John's wort, formulated as tablets or capsules and
contained 300-612mg extract per unit dosage form.°* In
simulated gastric fluid without pepsin, and under conditions
simulating the fasted state in the proximal small intestine,
dissolution of hyperforin was 'not detected' and 'poor', respec-
tively. Dissolution of hyperforin improved under conditions
simulating postprandial conditions in the proximal small intestine
for some products (e.g. 90% release within two hours), but was
relatively poor for other products (e.g. <50% release within two
hours). Dissolution of hypericins into simulated gastric fluid was
also not detected; results for dissolution of hypericins into other
media were either not available or were deemed to be unreliable.
Dissolution of the flavonoid compounds tested (rutin, hyperoside,
isoquercitrin and quercitrin) was good into all media tested,
although there were variations between products in the release of
rutin.) These results indicate that these St John's wort products
cannot be considered interchangeable; the implication being that
the need for dose adjustment should be considered for patients
changing from one St John's wort product to another.

Food Use

St John's wort is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural

source of food flavouring (herb: category 5).'¢!”
Herbal Use
St John's wort is stated to pc sedative and astringent

properties. It has been used for excitability, neuralgia, fibrositis,
sciatica, wounds, menopausal neurosis, anxiety and depression
(G3,67,G32) ¢+ John's wort also has a long
history of traditional use in topical preparations for wound
healing.'C''S” St John's wort is used extensively in homeopathic
preparations as well as in herbal products. Modern interest is
focused on its use as an antidepressant.

and as a nerve tonic.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in

‘S6G” are the same for several

standard herbal reference texts
traditional uses; examples are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”
Doses of St John's wort extracts used in clinical trials involving
patients with mild to moderate depression generally range from

St John’s Wort

Flavonoids

HO.
CHOH
OH O HO by
hyperoside
Dianthrones
OH O OH
HO : ‘CH;
HO. : R
R
OH O OH hypericin CH3

pseudohypericin CH2OH

Prenylated phloroglucinols

hyperforin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of St John’s wort.
240-1800 mg daily (equivalent to varying concentrations of
hypericin and hyperforin, depending on the extract), typically

for four to six weeks.?”

Pharmacological Actions

The major active constituents are considered to be hyperforin (a
prenylated phloroglucinol) and hypericin (a naphthodianthrone),
although other biologically active constituents, e.g. flavonoids and
tannins, are also present.? Several pharmacological activities,
including antidepressant, anticancer, antiviral and antibacterial
effects, have been documented for extracts of St John's wort and/
or its constituents following preclinical studies. Clinical studies
mainly have described antidepressant effects for St John's wort
preparations.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics In vivo (rats), the bioavailability of hypericin
following oral administration was increased by co-administration
of procyanidin B2, isolated from H. perforatum, or hyperoside.?”

Antidepressant activity The precise mechanism of action for the
antidepressant effect of St John's wort is unclear. Initially,
attention was focused on hypericin as the constituent of St John's
wort believed to be responsible for the herb's antidepressant
effects. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase (MAO) type A and B in

----- PAGE 563 -----
552 St John’s Wort

Figure 2 St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
rat brain mitochondria in vitro was described for hypericin.?”
However, other studies have demonstrated only weak or no MAO
inhibition.°°

In vitro receptor binding and enzyme inhibition assays carried
out using hypericum extract demonstrated significant receptor
affinity for adenosine, GABA,, GABAg, benzodiazepine and
MAO types A and B, although, with the exception of GABA, and
GABAg, the concentrations of hypericum required were unlikely
to be attained after oral administration in humans." Other
biochemical studies have reported that the hypericum extract LI
160 is only a weak inhibitor of MAO-A and MAO-B activity, but
that it inhibits the synaptosomal uptake of serotonin (5-
ydroxytryptamine or 5-HT), dopamine and noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) with approximately equal affinity and also leads
to a downregulation of B-receptors and an upregulation of 5-HT
receptors in the rat frontal cortex.°” The effects of fluoxetine and
ypericin- and flavonoid-standardised hypericum extracts (LI 160,
0.3% hypericin and 6% flavonoids and Ph-50, 0.3% hypericin and
50% flavonoids) on the concentrations of neurotransmitters in
brain regions were studied in rats." All three preparations
induced a significant increase in 5-HT concentrations in the rat
cortex, both LI 160 and Ph-50 caused increas
(norepinephrine) and dopamine in the rat diencephalon and Ph-50
also induced an increase in the noradrenaline (norepinephrine)

content in the brainstem, areas that are implicated in depres-
(33)

s in noradrenaline

sion.

Other in vitro experiments using peripheral blood mononuclear
cells have shown that an alcoholic extract of H. perforatum
containing 0.25mg/mL_ hypericin downregulated mitogen-
mediated tryptophan degradation in a concentration-dependent
manner. Tryptophan is a precursor for biosynthesis of 5-HT.

Hyperforin has now emerged as being one of the major active
constituents of importance in antidepressant activity. Hyper-
forin has been shown to be an uptake inhibitor of 5-HT,
dopamine, noradrenaline (norepinephrine), GABA and t-gluta-
mate in synaptosomal preparations” and to inhibit 5-HT uptake
in rat peritoneal cells in a dos
also described discrepancies between observed and theoretical

dependent manner.” Studies have

ICso values, indicating that hyperforin is not the only component
of hypericum extract that is responsible for the observed
effects.°7°® Adhyperforin, another phloroglucinol constituent
of H. perforatum, also inhibits the uptake of dopamine, serotonin
and norepinephrine in vitro, and its possible involvement in the
antidepressant activity of St John's wort requires further
investigation.”

Figure 3 St John’s wort - dried drug substance (herb).

In vitro screening of the activities of hypericin, pseudohyper-
icin, hyperforin and
perforatum using 42 biogenic amine receptors and transporters
(available as part of the National Institute of Mental Health
Psychoactive Drug Screening Program of the USA) showed that
compounds significantly inhibited ligand binding at the following
receptors in particular: amentoflavone — serotonin (5-HTjp, 5-
HT>¢), dopamine-D3, opiate (delta), benzodiazepine; hypericin
and pseudohypericin — dopamine-D3, dopamine-D,, B-adrenergic;
hyperforin — dopamine-D,, dopamine-D,."") Hyperforin was less
active than the other constituents tested on all receptors screened.

several flavonoid constituents of H.

Screening revealed some interactions at G-protein coupled
receptors that were previously unreported (e.g. hypericin and B-
adrenergic activity).

The effects of hyperforin on interleukin-6 (IL-6) release in
different experimental models have been explored as a possi
alternative mechanism for antidepressant effects, since St John's
been shown to inhibit substance-P mediated effi

wort h:
(substance P has been implicated in the aetiology of depre:
sion).“ Hyperforin inhibited both substance-P- and lipopoly-
saccharide-induced IL-6 release in human astrocytoma cells (ICso
= 1.6 and 1.9,mol/L, respectively), although concentrations
required to achieve this were around one order of magnitude
higher than those found in the plasma of patients treated with H.
perforatum extracts.”

Other findings indicate that flavonoids, as well as hyperforin
and hypericin, are at least some of the constituents of H.
perforatum responsible for its antidepressant activity.)

In vivo (mice and rats) experiments which assessed the effects of
a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum (containing hypericin
0.15% and hyperforin 3.2%) and the same extract with hypericin
and hyperforin removed in turn, showed that all extracts,
including the extract devoid of both hypericin and hyperforin

(but containing 12% flavonoids), retained activity in behavioural
(43)

models.
It has been reported that the mode of action of hyperforin in
erotonin uptake inhibition seems to be associated with the
levation of free intracellular sodium ion concentrations and
at this may be secondary to activation of the Na‘/H* exchange
sa result of a decrease in intracellular pH.“® Further in vitro
‘xperiments using two cell systems (human platelets and rat
haeochromocytoma cells) have shown that hyperforin increases
oth intracellular sodium ion and calcium ion concentrations, and
at this is mediated through activation by hyperforin of non-
selective cation channels.”

oe

epg

ru

ao

----- PAGE 564 -----
Hyperforin was shown to inhibit 5-HT reuptake in washed
platelets but not in fresh platelet-rich plasma, suggesting that
plasma-protein binding could be a limiting factor for 5-HT uptake
inhibition in vivo.“*

A commercial extract of St John's wort has exhibited
psychotropic and antidepressant activities in mice.)
hyperforin and hypericum extracts also demonstrated antidepres-
sant activity in a despair behaviour test in rats.”

In other experimental models of depression, including acute
ape deficit induced by stressors,
hypericum extract was shown to protect rats from the con-
sequences of unavoidable stress. In studies using the rat forced
swimming test, an experimental model of depression, hypericum
extracts induced a significant reduction in immobility.°!
Flavonoid fractions and flavonoids isolated from th
have also been reported to have antidepressant activity in the
forced swimming test in rats.”

Pure

and chronic forms of es

fractions

Cytotoxic and anticancer activities The findings of a
substantial body of preclinical research have documented anti-
cancer activites for H. perforatum preparations and _ their
constituents. A methanolic extract of H. perforatum (containing
hypericin 0.3% and hyperforin 3.8%) administered intraperito-
neally (15 mg/kg body weight) ten days before implantation of PC-
3 human Caucasian prostate adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice
significantly reduced tumour growth and the number of regional
lymph node metastases (p < 0.01 for both).°°?
at a concentration of 1.41 mg/mL also significantly inhibited the
proliferation of PC-3 cells in vitro (ICs = 0.42 mg/mL). Ethanolic
extracts of H. perforatum from fresh and dried plant material
(drug to extract ratio 1.3-1.5:1) inhibited the proliferation of
human malignant cells (e.g. leakamia cell lines K562 and U937) in
a concentration-dependent manner.’ The extracts also induced
apoptosis of glioblastoma LN229 cells. The observed effects were
potentiated by light activation. In a similar series of experiments
using extracts of H. perforatum containing 0.3% hypericins but
differing concentrations of hyperforin (0.21%, 2.21% or 3.25% w/
w) and flavonoids (5.3% or 10% w/w), antiproliferative activity of
the different extracts varied (Glso values: 248.3 to 621.3 g/mL and
378.2 to 911.7 ttg/mL for K562 and U937 cell lines, respectively),
indicating that the flavonoid constituents, as well as hypericin and
hyperforin, contribute to the observed effects. The possibility
that constituents other than hypericin have cytotoxic and/or
antiproliferative activity is supported by further in vitro work
which showed that a methanolic extract of H. perforatum
flowering parts inhibited growth of K562 cells and induced
apoptosis to a greater extent than did hypericin alone. In mic
injected with murine and human cancer cell lines, seven days’
pretreatment with hyperforin (as the stable dicyclohexylammo-
nium salt) intraperitoneally reduced several markers of cancer
infiltration and metastasis.”
tions of MT-450 rat mammary carcinoma cells, treatment with
hyperforin (100L of 2mmol/L solution subcutaneously at the
tumour site once daily) for two weeks starting 15 days after
tumour injection inhibited tumour growth to a similar extent as
did paclitaxel given according to the same dosage regimen.°*
There is evidence that the mechanism by which hyperforin induces
apoptosis involves the activation of caspases (inactive proen-
zymes) .©8 59)

Numerous preclinical studies have established that hypericin is
a photocytotoxic agent. Hypericin photosensitisation has been
"and in

several in vivo experimental models of cancer. The

) The same extract

&”) Tn rats given subcutaneous injec-

documented for various cancer cell lines in vitro!

St John’s Wort

photocytotoxic effects of hypericin towards human leukaemic
HL-60 cells can be potientiated in vitro by co-incubation with
acetazolamide and quercetin.” Phototoxicity and induction of
apoptosis also occur with pseudohypericin in vitro. Hypericin
photo-induced apoptosis may involve the tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, activation of cas-
pases, such as caspase-8,°'”” and inhibition of proteasome
function (which is involved in caspase activation)."”

Further in vitro studies have added a layer of complexity to the
above findings. Hypericin can induce apoptos S5
depending on the intracellular hypericin concentration and/or the
light-activating dose.) Furthermore, exposure of U937 cells to
hypericin and sub-lethal doses of light irradiation induced
subsequent photoresistance with light doses which normally
induced apoptosis.”

In an in vitro system involving the human cytochrome P450
enzyme CYP1A1, three commercially available H. perforatum
extracts as well as several constituents of H. perforatum extracts
(with the exception of rutin) inhibited the CYP1A1-catalysed
epoxidation of (+)-trans-7,8-dihydro-7,8-dihydroxy-benzo(a) pyr-
ene, the reaction which leads to formation of the carcinogenic
product diolepoxide 2.”

In vitro cytotoxicity against human colon carcinoma cells (CO
115) has been described for hyperforin-related constituents

isolated from Hypericum calycinum and Hypericum revolu-
(76)
Mm.

or necrce

tui

Antimicrobial activity Extracts of H. perforatum aerial parts
have antibacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria, parti-
cularly Bacillus subtilis and B. cereus, but not Gram-negative
bacteria and yeasts, according to the findings of a series of in vitro
assays.”

A leaf extract of H. perforatum has been documented as
enhancing the immunity of mice towards Staphylococcus aureus
and Bordetella pertussis."® Hyperforin has antibacterial activity
against S. aureus,”
positive bacteria, including Streptococcus pyogenes and Coryne-
bacterium diphtheriae.” However, the antibacterial effects of
hyperforin are only observed at high concentrations.°°* Other
experiments have shown that S. aureus is able to acquire resis
to hyperforin, but that this does not occur with hyperforin
concentrations similar to those found in patients treated with H.
perforatum extracts for depression.“ Hyperforin did not exhibit
any growth inhibitory effect against Gram-negative bacteria, such
as Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa or against Candida albicans.” Other antibacterial
constituents (imanine and novoimanine) have been isolated from
St John's wort.6* 5"

Several other species of Hypericum have been shown to have
antimicrobial activity.“ In disc-diffusion assays, 33 of 34
chloroform extracts of Hypericum species (not including H.
perforatum) showed substantial activity against a clinical isolate
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.®

) multi-drug resistant S. aureus and Gram-

tance

Antiviral activity Flavonoid and catechin-containing fractions
have exhibited antiviral activity, inhibiting the influenza virus by
83-100%.*” Hypericin and pseudohypericin have been reported
to inhibit several encapsulated viruses in vitro, including herpes
mplex types 1 and 2,*5° 9) and human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).°!° Hypericin has also
been reported to inactivate murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) and
Sindbis virus.°") The antiviral activity of hypericin appears to
involve a photoactivation process.°*°" An extract of a St John's
wort product (5-50 pL/mL; no further details provided) and pure

varicella-zoster virus

----- PAGE 565 -----
St John’s Wort

hypericin (S—20tmol/L) inhibited UV-induced HIV gene expres-
sion in HeLa cells in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas
hypericin without UV-induced HIV gene activation had no effect
on HIV gene expression.)

Other effects In vitro studies using a hamster vas deferens
smooth muscle cell line demonstrated that hyperforin induces the
release of calcium ions from mitochondrial or other sources
followed by activation of cellular metabolism. It is not known
whether this activity contributes to the antidepressant effects of
hyperforin.

Oral administration of a single dose of St John's wort (100, 200,
400, 600 or 800 mg/kg) to two strains of alcohol-preferring rats
significantly reduced alcohol intake in both strains.°”) In another
study in experimental alcoholism, acute intraperitoneal adminis-
tration of St John's wort (10-40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (1-10 mg/kg)
and imipramine (3-30 mg/kg) reduced alcohol intake in a dose-
dependent manner in a 12-hour, limited access, two-bottle choice
(ethanol/water) procedure." In alcohol-preferring mice, the dose
(Smg/kg administered orally by gavage) of a hyperforin-rich
carbon-dioxide extract of H. perforatum required to reduce the
intake of 10% ethanol to a statistically significant extent was 125-
fold lower than that required with a crude methanolic extract
(625 mg/kg) with negligible hyperforin content administered by
the same route.” In mice, oral administration of a Hypericum
perforatum extract (Ph-50) attenuated nicotine withdrawal
symptoms.” Depression, alcoholism and smoking are thought

to have some neurochemical similarities, such as low brain
(100, 101)

serotonin concentrations.

An extract of St John's wort was found to suppress
inflammation and leukocyte infiltration induced by carrageenan
and prostaglandin E; (PGE,) in mice.” In vitro, hypericin has
been shown to inhibit tumour necrosis factor-induced activation
of the transcription factor NF-«B,"°» specific growth factor-
regulated protein kinases?! and the release of arachidonic
acid and leukotriene By." In a rabbit model of proliferative
vitreoretinopathy (PVR), intravitreal injection of hypericin 0.1 mL
(10 or 100 pmol/L, but not 1 pmol/L) inhibited the progression of
PVR when compared with severity in control eyes five days after
hypericin administration." It was suggested that, as protein
kinase C is important in the cellular reactions occurring in PVR,
modulation of protein kinase C by hypericin may be a factor in
this system. Hypericin and pseudohypericin have been reported to
inhibit 12-lipoxygenase activity; the products of lipoxygenase-
catalysed reactions, include leukotrienes.” Hyperforin has also
been shown to inhibit the activity of enzymes involved in
inflammatory pathways: in vitro, hyperforin inhibited 5-lipox-
ygenase and cyclooxygenase 1, but not cyclooxygenase 2."

Antioxidant properties have been reported for H. perforatum
following in vitro experiments. St John's wort products (Nature's
Plus and Movana, respectively) obtained in the USA and labelled
as being hypericin- (0.3-0.5%) and hyperforin-standardised
(minimum 3%) attenuated superoxide production in an inverse
concentration-dependent manner in a cell-free system and in an
experimental model using human vascular tissue."! Hyperforin
isolated from H. perforatum reduced radical formation by
polymorphonuclear cells from healthy human donors after
stimulation with N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (ICso
= 1.8 pmol/L)."'"?) However, in other systems, hyperforin did not
exhibit any free-radical scavenging activity against 2,2-diphenyl-1-
picrylhydrazyl and was inactive in an enzymatic assay based on
oxygen radical production by horseradish peroxidase in the
presence of hydrogen peroxide.

Imanine was reported to reduce blood pressure and increase the
frequency and depth of breathing following intravenous admin-
istration (50 mg/kg) to rabbits.“ A study of the vasoconstrictor
action of water-soluble imanine and imanine on the isolated
rabbit ear indicated that their hypotensive action was not due to a
3) When perfused through the
isolated frog heart, both water-soluble imanine and imanine were
found to cause cardiac systolic arrest at a dilution of 1 x 10°.)
Proanthocyanidin-containing fractions isolated from St John's
wort have been reported to inhibit contractions of the isolated
guinea-pig heart induced by histamine, PGF, and potassium
chloride.)

A tonus-raising effect on isolated guinea-pig and rabbit uteri
has been documented for a crude aqueous extract.' Of the
group of plants investigated, St John's wort was reported to
exhibit the weakest uterotonic activity.

A dried methanol extract of St John's wort (no further details
provided) protected human neuroblastoma cells against hydrogen
peroxide induced apoptosis in vitro.''!>

Analgesic activity in mice has been reported for a total
flavonoid fraction of H. perforatum;'''® the active principle was
stated to be of the quercetin type.

Tannins isolated from St John's wort are stated to have mild
astringent activity.!!” The anthraquinone derivatives documented
for St John's wort do not possess any purgative action.'C°

direct effect on the vasculature.

Cc

Clinical trials with extracts of St John's wort have focused mainly
on its effects in patients with depression, although there have been
several studies exploring its use in other conditions, including
asonal affective disorder, chronic fatigue and premenstrual
syndrome."'!®)

‘al studies

Pharmacodynamics Initially, hypericin was thought to be
responsible for the antidepressant activity of St John's wort,
although, more recently, experimental®®*” and clinical evi-
dence!” has emerged to indicate that hyperforin is one of the
major constituents required for antidepressant activity.

The precise of St John's wort's
antidepressant effect remains unclear (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study involving 16 healthy volunteers who received St John's wort
extract (Neuroplant) 300 mg three times daily for seven days, St
John's wort extract did not influence plasma norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) concentrations, but significantly increased plasma
dihydroxyphenylacetic acid concentrations (the main metabolite
of dopamine), compared with placebo (p = 0.013).{2

Studies in humans have reported conflicting results with res
to the effects of St John's wort extracts on endocrinological
parameters. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
in 12 healthy male volunteers investigated the effects of a single
dose of St John's wort extract (LI 160) (2700mg, 9 x 300-mg
tablets standardised to 0.3% hypericin) on plasma concentrations
of growth hormone, prolactin and cortisol.‘ A. significant
increase in plasma growth hormone concentration and a
significant decrease in plasma prolactin concentration were
observed following St John's wort administration relative to
placebo administration. Plasma cortisol concentrations were
unchanged. These findings suggest that this dose of St John's
wort extract may increase aspects of brain dopamine function in
humans, although further studies are required to confirm this,
assess dose-response relationships and determine whether there is

mechanism of action

----- PAGE 566 -----
evidence for effects on dopaminergic systems in patients with

depression treated with St John's wort.'*") Another study, which

used a randomised, three-way, crossover design, investigated the

s of a single dose of St John's wort extract (LI 160S) (600 or

300 mg) or placebo on hormone concentrations in 12 healthy male

volunteers.‘'??) Compared with placebo, St John's wort extract

(600 mg) increased cortisol secretion between 30 and 90 minutes

after dosing, indicating an influence of St John's wort on certain

CNS neurotransmitters. There was no difference between the

three groups with regard to adrenocorticotrophic hormone

(ACTH), growth hormone and prolactin secretion.”

By contrast, in a randomised, single-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study involving 12 healthy male volunteers, mean serum
ACTH concentrations, but not cortisol, growth hormone and
prolactin concentrations, were significantly increased following
oral administration of a St John's wort extract (WS-5570) at doses
of 600, 900 and 1200 mg/day on four different days (p < 0.05
versus placebo). However, there were no significant differenc
ACTH concentrations between groups when a statistical adjust-
ment (Bonferroni correction) was made for post-hoc tests.'!?*)
Differences in the findings of this study, compared with previous
work, may be due to differences between doses, products tested
and their bioavailabilities.“'??

Therapeutic effects Depression There are now over forty clinical
trials of H. perforatum preparations involving patients with
different types of depression, and many of these trials have
been included in systematic reviews.

A Cochrane systematic review included 37 randomised,

double-blind, controlled clinical trials of monopreparations of

H. perforatum involving a total of 4925 patients with

depressive disorders.?? Of these, 26 trials were placebo-

controlled, 14 compared H. perforatum preparations with
standard antidepressants (imipramine 50 to 150 mg daily, four
trials; fluoxetine 20 to 40 mg daily, four trials;

150 mg daily, three trials; amitriptyline 30 or 75 mg daily, two

trials; maprotiline 75 mg daily, one trial) and three of these

studies"?*?9 also included a placebo control group. Trials
involved a variety of H. perforatum preparations administered
at doses of 240 to 1800 mg extract daily. The treatment period
was typically four to six weeks (29 trials) although adminis-
tration periods ranged from four to 12 weeks overall. The most
frequently investigated product was LI-160 (Lichtwer Pharma,

Germany). Overall, 24 trials involved only patients with major

depression. In most trials (7 = 35), the Hamilton Rating Scale

for Depression (HAMD) was the instrument used to assess
outcomes, and the methodological quality of the majority of

effec

in

ertraline 75 to

the included studies was considered to be ‘reasonable to

good'.29

Of the 26 trials (involving 3320 participants) comparing H.
perforatum preparations with placebo, 23 provided data which
were eligible for meta-analysis. For these studies, the results
indicated that H. perforatum preparations were more effective
than placebo (response rate ratio (RRR), 95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.55, 1.42-1.70), although when the anal
limited to larger (i.e. more precise) trials in patients with major
depression only, the results showed a small benefit for H.
perforatum over placebo (RRR, 95% Cl: 1.15, 1.02-1.129).°
Similarly, meta-analysis of data from the 23 placebo-controlled
trials which used HAMD scores to a indicated
that H. perforatum preparations were more effective than
placebo (weighted mean difference (WMD), 95% Cl: —3.25,
—3.74 to —2.77), but when the analysis was restricted to the 12

was

outcome:

St John’s Wort

such trials involving only patients with major depression, the
effect was less marked (WMD, 95% CI: —2.48, —3.06 to
~1.89).

Meta-analysis of data from the 14 trials (involving 2283
participants) comparing H. perforatum with standard anti-
depressant agents indicated that H. perforatum preparations
had similar effects to those of standard antidepressants (RRR,
95% CI: 1.01, 0.93 to 1.10 and WMD, 95% CI: —0.06, —0.64
to 0.51 for trials providing response rate data (13 trials) and
HAMD scores (11 trials), respectively).°” Results were similar
for sub-analysis of the trials comparing H. perforatum
preparations with older antidepressants and comparisons
with newer antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors).

The conclusions drawn from this work were that the
evidence is inconsistent and complex. H. perforatum prepara-
tions and standard antidepressant agents appear to show
similar effects, whereas H. perforatum preparations have only
small benefits over placebo in patients with major depression;
in older studies in patients with mild-to-moderate depression,
H. perforatum preparations appear to be of more benefit than
placebo.) An important point is that there is heterogeneity
not only among the trials and their results, but also among the
different manufacturers! products tested. Products are not
necessarily equally effective, and the results of the analyses
above should not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum
preparations, which may differ considerably in their pharma-
ceutical quality (see Quality of plant material and commercial
products).

One of the trials included in the systematic review was a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study comparing an extract of H. perforatum (LI-160,
standardised for hypericin 0.12-0.28%) 900 mg daily with the
SSRI sertraline (which is authorised for the treatment of
ion) at a dose of 50 mg daily in 340 patients with major
essive disorder. The trial was funded by the National
Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine and the
National Institute of Mental Health, USA, and was designed to
assess whether or not H. perforatum extract was superior to
placebo after 8 weeks’ treatment.''? However, at the end of
the study, there were no statistically significant differences in
(changes in HAMD scores
and response rate) not only between H. perforatum extract and
placebo, but also between sertraline and placebo. Thus, this
trial was criticised for lacking the sensitivity at least to detect
the effectiveness of a treatment known to be effective (i.e.
sertraline).

A further issue which arose subsequently relates to
adherence to treatment among participants randomised to
the H. perforatum group. Analysis of blood samples available
for 97 of the 113 H. perforatum recipients revealed that 80
(82%) had detectable concentrations of hyperforin in at least
one sample, whereas 17 (17%) had no detectable hyperforin in
any of their samples.''””) The sensitivity threshold of the assay
was hyperforin 10ng/mL. Furthermore, of 104 of the 116
participants randomised to placebo for whom blood samples
were available, 18 (17%) had detectable concentrations of
hyperforin in at least one sample. By contrast, sertraline and/or
N-desmethylsertraline were detected in at least one sample for
all sertraline recipients for whom blood samples were available
(91 of 111). Reanalysis of the efficacy data using only data from
participants with plasma hyperforin concentrations consistent

the two primary outcome measure:

----- PAGE 567 -----
St John’s Wort

with their treatment allocation did not change the initial
findings."?”

A randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial comparing the
effects of a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum herb (WS-
5570, drug to extract ratio 3-7: 1, standardised for hyperforin
3-6% and hypericin 0.12-0.28%; Schwabe Pharmaceuticals)
with those of paroxetine in the acute treatment of moderate to
severe depression has been published since the revised
Cochrane review was completed. In the study, after a placebo
run-in phase, 251 participants with acute major depre:
received H. perforatum extract 300mg three times daily
(increased to 1800 mg daily in non-responders), or paroxetine
20mg daily (40mg daily for non-responders), for six
8) At the end of the study, the H. perforatum extract
was reported to be at least as effective as paroxetine in reducing
symptoms of moderate to severe depression (mean (standard
deviation) reduction in HAMD scores from baseline values:
14.4 (8.8) and 11.4 (8.6) for H. perforatum and paroxetine,
respectively).

The review described above

on

weeks.'

) was an update of a previous

Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of 27 rando-
mised controlled trials of H. perforatum preparations in
depressive disorders."? The updated review had stricter and
tighter inclusion and exclusion criteria for trials — only trials
which explicitly stated that the method of treatment allocation
was random and which used a double-blind design were
included, and trials investigating H. perforatum for prevention
of depression, those using combination preparations contain-
ing H. perforatum, comparing H. perforatum with drugs not
explicitly recommended as antidepressant agents, measuring
only physiological parameters and those with a treatment
period of less than four weeks were excluded.?” Thus, the
previous Cochrane review included seven trials which were
excluded from the updated review.

The results of the earlier meta-analysis showed that H.
perforatum preparations were significantly superior to placebo
in the short-term treatment of mild to moderately severe
depressive disorders (rate ratio 2.47 and 95% confidence
interval (95% Cl) 1.69-3.61). and as effective as conventional
antidepressant agents (single preparations, rate ratio 1.01 and
95% CI 0.87-1.16), although for several reasons — for example,
the use of low doses of conventional antidepressants and the
trials involving small numbers of patients — this evidence was
considered inadequate for establishing whether H. perforatum
preparations were as effective as conventional antidepressant
drugs.” Further studies comparing St John's wort prepara-
tions with standard antidepressant agents in well-defined
patient groups and over longer periods were considered
n ary,(!29)

Another earlier meta-analysis employed tighter inclusion
criteria for trials in an effort to increase the validity of the
analysis." It included only randomised, blinded, controlled
trials of St John's wort as a single preparation, which involved
patients with depressive disorders as defined by the standard
criteria ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems), DSM-IIIR (Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual) or DSM-IV and which used the
Hamilton Depression (HAMD) Scale for measuring clinical
outcomes. Six such trials involving 651 patients with mainly
mild to moderately severe depressive disorders were included;
two trials were placebo controlled and four compared St John's
wort with standard antidepressants. The studies lasted for 4-6
weeks and the doses of St John's wort extract ranged from 200

to 900 mg daily; the range for total hypericin administered was
0.75-2.7 mg daily.

This meta-analysis showed that the response rate for St
John's wort was significantly greater than that for placebo
(73.2% versus 37.9%, respectively, relative risk 1.48 and 95%
CI 1.03-1.92) and similar to that observed with tricyclic
antidepressants (64% versus 6.4% for St John's wort and
tricyclic antidepressants, respectively, relative risk 1.11 and
95% CI 0.92-1.29)."3 Despite the stringent inclusion criteria
for trials in this meta-analysis, it was concluded that further
studies are required in order to address methodological

problems before it can be concluded that St John's wort is an
(130)

effective antidepressant.

A systematic review of large-scale observational studies of
H. perforatum extracts in patients with depressive disorders is
also available. The review included 16 non-randomised studies
(involving a total of 34804 patients) each involving at least 100
participants with depressive disorders who were treated with
H. perforatum preparations for at least four weeks.“'*” Fifteen
of the studies reported physician-assessed response rates, and
these ranged from 65% to 100% for short-term studies (four to
around six weeks' treatment; 13 studies) and were 60% and
69% for the two long-term studies (52 weeks’ treatment).
Patient-assessed response rates ranged from 63% to 98% (ten
studies). These results suggest that the H. perforatum extracts
ed are effective for mild and moderately severe depre:
disorders, although this conclusion cannot be definitive since
the studies did not include random allocation to treatment and
many had other methodological limitations.''*") Furthermore,
the studies included in the review assessed the effects of 12
different H. perforatum products, with some differences in
how they were standardised, administered at doses ranging
from 360 to 1200 mg extract daily. Thus, the results cannot be
extrapolated directly to other H. perforatum preparations with
a different phytochemical profile.

One of the studies included in the review assessed the effects

as.

ive

of an H. perforatum preparation in children aged under 12
years with symptoms of depression and_psychovegetative
disturbances. This study reported the highest physician- and
patients-assessed response rates (100% and 98%, respec-
tively).
the effects of H. perforatum preparations in children and
adolescents, although the efficacy of such preparations in these
patient groups requires testing in randomised controlled trials.

In a dose-ranging trial involving 348 patients with mild to
moderate depression according to ICD-10 criteria, patients
were randomised to receive St John's wort extract three times
daily equivalent to either 1 mg (7 = 119), 0.33 mg (m = 115) or
0.17 mg (n = 114) hypericin for six weeks." At the end of the
treatment period, there was a significant reduction in HAMD
scores compared with baseline values. The response rates
(according to recognised criteria) were 68%, 65% and 62% for
1, 0.33 and 0.17mg hypericin, respectively; the differences
between groups were not statistically significant. Thus, the
study showed that there was no dose-dependent effect of
hypericin in St John's wort extracts.

) Other open, uncontrolled studies» have explored

Smoking cessation A preliminary, uncontrolled study has

ass

sed the effects of a methanol (80%) extract of H.
perforatum herb (LI-160, standardised for hypericin 900 ug
and a minimum of 2% hyperforin; drug to extract ratio 3-6 : 1)
as an aid to motivational/behavioural support in adult smokers
who wish to stop smoking. The rationale for inve:

----- PAGE 568 -----
perforatum in this indication is that there is an association
between smoking and depression: nicotine may act as an
antidepressant in some smokers, and depress
precipitated by nicotine withdrawal, i.e. smoking cessation.
In the study, point prevalence and continuous abstinence rates
were both 18% at 3 months, and 0% at 12 months (intention-
to-treat analysis); these rates compare poorly with response
rates in placebo groups in controlled clinical studies of other
smoking ces (135)

sation interventions.

Seasonal affective disorder The effects of St John's wort extracts

have been investigated in studies involving subjects with
seasonal affective disorder (SAD),"°% '%” although as yet there
have not been any trials that have included a placebo control
group. Twenty individuals with SAD were randomised to
receive St John's wort (LI 160) (300mg) three times daily
(equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin) with or without bright light
therapy." After four weeks, there were significant reductions
in HAMD scores in both groups compared with baseline values
and there were no statistically significant differences between
groups. Another study evaluated data from individuals with
mild to moderate SAD who had used St John's wort (300 mg)
three times daily (equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin) with (1 =
133) or without light therapy (” = 168) for eight weeks.''*”
The study was not randomised and involved data collection by
postal questionnaires. Data from 301 returned questionnaires
were suitable for analysis. Significant reductions in the mean
SAD scores were observed in both groups compared with
baseline values; the differences in the SAD scores between
groups were statistically non-significant.

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity has been reported for

hypericin against human immunodeficiency _ virus
(HIV)."3*'99) Several uncontrolled studies in HIV-positive
patients who received St John's wort extract have reported
immunologic and clinical benefits, including increases in CD4
cell counts in some patients.“4°'* In a phase I, dose-
escalating study, 30 HIV-positive patients with CD4 cell counts
<350 cells/mm’ received intravenous synthetic hypericin twice
weekly (0.25 or 0.5mg/kg body weight), three times weekly
(0.25 mg/kg) or oral hypericin daily (0.5 mg/kg). Sixteen
patients discontinued treatment early because of toxic effects,
and phototoxicity in several other patients prevented comple-
tion of dose escalation. Antiretroviral activity as assessed by
significant changes in HIV p24 antigen level, HIV titre, HIV
RNA copie:

In contrast, in a phase-I dose-escalation study involving 19
patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection who received
hypericin administered orally at doses of 0.05 and 0.10 mg/kg
daily for eight weeks, there was no evidence of antiviral activity
as determined by median changes in HCV RNA concentrations
in plasma.''*)

and CD4 cell counts was not observed.

Other studies The potential for the use of St John's wort in 20

individuals presenting with fatigue*® and in 19 women with
self-reported premenstrual syndrome''*”) has also been
explored in uncontrolled pilot studies. Significant improve-
ments in perceived fatigue and in symptoms of depression and
anxiety were seen after six weeks' treatment with St John's
wort (equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin daily) compared with
baseline values‘! and in overall premenstrual syndrome
scores after treatment with St John's wort (equivalent to 0.9 mg
hypericin daily) for two menstrual cycles.) Thus, there is

St John’s Wort

scope for conducting randomised controlled trials of St John's
wort in these conditions.''** '*)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled _ trial
assessed the effects of an 80% methanol extract of St John's
wort (LI-160; containing 300 mg extract, drug to extract ratio
4-7:1) in 175 patients with somatoform disorders (usually
characterised by chronic multiple physical symptoms not
explained by underlying organic pathology). Participants
received St John's wort extract 300mg twice daily (n = 87),
or placebo (m = 88), for six weeks. At the end of the study,
according to an intention-to-treat analysis, St John's wort
recipients, compared with placebo recipients, showed statisti-
cally significant improvements on the six individual variables
comprising the primary efficacy analysis and in the combined
score (p < 0.0001 for all comparisons).

Another randomised, double-blind, parallel-group trial
investigated the effects of LI-160 300mg extract twice daily
to a maximum of 1800 mg extract
daily at the physician's discretion), or placebo, for 12 weeks in
41 individuals with social phobia (social anxiety disorder). At
the end of the study, there was no statistically significant
difference between the two groups in Liebowitz Social Anxiety
Scale scores, the primary outcome measure (p = 0.79).(1*”)

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 179
women with menopause-related psychovegetative symptoms
received a combination preparation of St John's wort and black
cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) or placebo for six weeks.
The results indicated that the combination product had a
significantly greater effect on the symptoms than did placebo.

A randomised, double-blind, phase I study involving 55
healthy volunteers who received St John's wort (900 mg) daily
(containing 0.5% hyperforin), St John's wort (900mg) daily
(containing 5.0% hyperforin) or placebo for eight days
investigated the effects on quantitative electroencephalogram
as an indicator of drug-induced pharmacological action.”
Reproducible central pharmacodynamic effects were apparent
in both groups of St John's wort recipients compared with
placebo recipients. The effects were greater in subjects who
received extract containing 5.0% hyperforin than in those who
received extract containing 0.5% hyperforin.

Placebo-controlled, crossover studies investigating the effects
of St John's wort (0.9 and 1.8 mg) on the sleep polysomnogram
of healthy subjects reported that both doses of St John's wort
significantly increased rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
latency compared with placebo, but had no effect on REM
sleep duration or other parameters of sleep architecture.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 23 overweight but otherwise healthy adults, subjects
who received treatment with St John's wort (900mg) daily,
Citrus aurantium extract (975 mg) daily and caffeine (528 mg)
daily lost significantly more body weight than did subjects in
the placebo and no-treatment control groups.5)

A placebo-controlled, crossover study in 19 healthy volun-
teers who received St John's wort for 15 days either alone or in
combination with ethanol (to achieve a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.05%) reported that there were no

differences between the two groups in sense of well-being or
152)

(increased in increments

adverse events.‘

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, six-week
trial involving 72 long-distance runners and triathletes reported
significant improvements in endurance capacity in subjects who
received vitamin E with St John's wort compared with subjects

who received vitamin E alone or placebo.''”*)

----- PAGE 569 -----
St John’s Wort

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 21 patients
with symmetrical mild to atopic dermatitis,
participants used a topical preparation of H. perforatum
(cream containing 5% of a carbon-dioxide extract; drug to
extract ratio 20-25: 1, containing total 9.9% hyperforins) with
a final hyperforin content of 1.5%, or placebo, twice daily for
Treatment was randomly allocated to be
applied to the left or right side of the body. At the end of the
study, the H. perforatum preparation was found to be superior
to placebo with respect to the primary outcome measure
(clinical intensity of skin lesions; p < 0.022 for H. perforatum
versus placebo).

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial involving 54
diabetic and non-diabetic patients with polyneuropathy, the
analgesic effects of an H. perforatum preparation (Calmigen,
Sanopharm; each tablet containing hypericin 900 pig, no further
details of preparation provided) one tablet three times daily
were compared with those of placebo." The rationale for
investigating the effects of H. perforatum on pain was centred

moderate

four weeks."

doses, respectively. Peak plasma

concentrations were seen with

hypericin after 2.0-2.6 hours and with pseudohypericin after 0.4—
0.6 hours. The elimination half-life of hypericin was between 24.8

and 26.5 hours. Repeated doses

daily resulted in steady-state concentrations after four days.'

Oral administration of the St
(300 mg, equivalent to 14.8 mg hy,

of LI 160 (300mg) three times
160)

John's wort extract WS 5572
perforin) resulted in peak plasma

concentrations of 150ng/mL being reached 3.5 hours after

administration.) The

Following repeated doses of
estimated steady-state plasma
100 ng/mL.

oral administration of a single

elimination

half-life 9 hours.
300mg three times daily, the
hyperforin concentrations were

was

In open trials involving 18 healthy male volunteers, following

tablet of a dry extract of H.

perforatum (STW-3, containing 612mg extract equivalent to

ypericin 600g, pseudohyperic

parameters for hypericin,
respectively, were: maximum p!

in 1200ug, hyperforin 13.5 mg,

flavonoids 73.2 mg; drug to extract ratio S—8: 1), pharmacokinetic
pseudohypericin

and _hyperforin,
lasma concentration, 3.14, 8.5

around evidence that the antidepressant effect of H. perfor-
atum preparations is due to effects on monoaminergic systems,
and that effects on such systems may be the mechanism of
action of agents such as tricyclic antidepressants currently used
in painful polyneuropathy. In the study, patients! daily ratings
of pain using numeric rating scales were used as the primary
outcome measure. At the end of the treatment period, there
were no statistically significant differences in total pain score
between the H. perforatum and placebo groups (14 and 15,
respectively; p = 0.05), in individual pain rating scales (p = 0.09
to 0.33), or in participants’ evaluations of pain relief (p =
0.07).

In a double-blind, controlled, crossover study, 12 healthy
volunteers aged 18 to 54 years received tablets containing an
extract of H. perforatum (Hyperiforte, each tablet contained

an

peal

83.5 ng/mL; time to maximum concentration, 8.1, 3.0 and 4.4

ours; elimination half-life, 23.8, 25.4 and 19.6 hours.\!© The
flavonoid compounds quercetin and isorhamnetin showed two

's of maximum plasma concentration, separated by about four

jours (quercetin: 47.7 ng/mL by 1.2 hours and 43.8 ng/mL by 5.5
ours; isorhamnetin: 7.6 ng/mL by 1.5 hours and 9.0 ng/mL by 6.4
ours). The elimination half-life for these constituents was 4.2

and 4.5 hours for quercetin

and isorhamnetin, respectively.

Pharmacokinetic parameters following multiple dosing (STW-3
once daily for 14 days) were similar.'

62)

In an open, randomised, two-way, crossover study involving 12

ealthy voluntee:

s, the bioavailability of hyperforin after a single

ora
dry
fori

administration of a softgel capsule containing H. perforatum
extract 300mg (containing 0.3% hypericin and 5% hyper-
n) was found to be superior to that following a single oral

300 mg extract standardised for

yperforin 3-5 % and hypericin

0.3%). Participants received placebo, and three and six tablets

of the extract as a single

ose in a random order and

undertook a battery of memory tests before and after each

administration. The results in

icated that the H. perforatum

extract did not have nootropic effects, although as a sample
size calculation does not appear to have been carried out, it is

possible that the study did not
to detect any differences.

A preliminary study found tl
from H. perforatum and Cai
surface

area of wounds in

ave adequate statistical power

hat a mixture of oils extracted
lendula arvensis reduced the
women who had undergone

Caesarean section during chi

dbirth, when compared with

control (wheatgerm oil). However, the study did not involve
random allocation to treatment and was not blinded, so the
findings cannot be attributed definitively to the intervention.

The use of intravesical instillation of hypericin as a
photosensitiser in human bladders together with blue light
irradiation and fluorescence detection has been described as a
diagnostic tool for the detection of bladder carcinoma. The
technique had 98.5% specificity in detecting carcinoma in situ
and dysplasia, and had a sensitivity of 93%.)

Pharmacokinetics Detailed pharmacokinetic studies have been
carried out with the hypericin-standardised St John's wort extract
LI 160 and with certain other H. perforatum extracts.'’°!
Administration of single oral doses of LI 160 (300, 900 and
1800 mg) to healthy male volunteers resulted in peak plasma
hypericin concentrations of 1.5, 7.5 and 14.2 ng/mL for the three

administration of a hard gelatin capsule containing the same

extract."'©) The mean (standard

deviation) peak plasma hyper-

forin concentrations were 168.4 (57.8) and 84.3 (33.5) ng/mL

following administration of t

e softgel and hard gelatin capsules,

respectively, although a p value was not reported. Hypericin,

however, was not detectable in a

most half of the participants for

each dosage form. In nine male patients with superficial transition

cell carcinoma of the bladder,

intravesical instillation to the

bladder of 40 mL of a 8 mol/L hypericin solution for 2 to 3 hours

followed by photodynamic diagn

osis of bladder tumours, plasma

concentrations of hypericin in samples taken one hour after the

end of the instillation were belo

1.164)

w the detection limit (<6 nmol/

A method for the simultaneous determination of hypericin and
hyperforin in human plasma using liquid chromatography and
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) has been developed and
validated." Using the method, the limits of quantification for

hypericin and hyperforin were

0.05ng/mL and 0.035 ng/mL,

respectively. These low limits may allow detection of ingestion

of hypericin and hyperforin
discontinuation of treatment.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Data relating to the frequency and type

associated with treatment with St John's wort extracts are

available from randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews

for up to several days after

of adverse effects

----- PAGE 570 -----
and meta-analyses of such trials, and from  post-marketing
surveillance and other observational studies. Collectively, the
data indicate that certain St John's wort extracts are well-tolerated
when taken at recommended doses for shorter periods of time
(around eight weeks).34'° Data from the small number of
longer-term (one year) studies support the tolerability of certain St
John's wort extracts, although further investigation of long-term
use is warranted. Adverse events/effects reported are generally
mild and most commonly gastrointestinal symptoms. These
observations, however, are based on data collected in the settings
of formal randomised or observational studies, usually where H.
perforatum has been prescribed under the supervision of a
physician, not taken as self-treatment.

A small number of studies has explored the effects of self-
treatment with St John's wort products. In a cro: tional study
involving 452 members of a depression self-help group (response
rate = 17%), 63 of the 452 respondents (28%) reported adverse
effects, including psychological symptoms, allergic reactions and
visual disturbances, that they believed to be related to use of St
John's wort." The safety of St John's wort products taken as
self-treatment without supervision by a healthcare professional
requires further study.

A Cochrane systematic review included 37 randomised, double-
blind, controlled clinical trials of monopreparations of H.
perforatum and involving a total of 4925 patients with depressive
disorders (see Therapeutic effects, Depression).?* Of the 26
placebo-controlled trials included in the review, data for analysis
of the number of participants withdrawing for any reason were
available from 19 trials, for withdrawing due to adverse effects
from nine trials and for numbers of patients reporting adverse
effects from 16 trials. Compared with placebo recipients, slightly
fewer H. perforatum recipients withdrew from trials for any
reason (odds ratio, 95% Cl: 0.82, 0.64-1.06), withdrew due to
adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.61, 0.28-1.31), and reported
adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.79, 0.61-1.03). Compared
with SSRIs, H. perforatum extracts were associated with a slightly
lower probability of withdrawing from the study due to advers
effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.60, 0.31-1.15; data from six trials)
and reporting of adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.75, 0.52-
1.08; data from five trials), whereas overall withdrawal rates were
similar (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.95, 0.65-1.40; data from six
trials).°? Compared with older antidepressant agents, H.
perforatum extracts were associated with a lower probability of
withdrawing for any reason (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.65, 0.46-0.92;
data from seven trials), withdrawing due to adverse effects (odds
ratio, 95% Cl: 0.25, 0.14-0.45; data from six trials) and of
reporting adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.39, 0.31-0.50;
data from seven trials). It is important to consider that there is
qualitative and quantitative variation in the composition of
different manufacturers’ products and the results of the analyses
above should not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum
preparations.

The review described above
inclusion and

» Was an update, with tighter

previous Cochrane
systematic review of 27 randomised controlled trials of H.
perforatum preparations in depressive disorders.” The previous
review reported that, in the trials comparing St John's wort with
standard antidepressants, the proportions of patients reporting
side-effects were 26.3% and 44.7%, respectively (rate ratio 0.57
and 95% CI 0.4-0.69)."??) Another meta-analysis which employed
tight inclusion criteria reported that tricyclic antidepressants were
associated with a higher proportion of side-effects than were St

exclusion criteria, of a

St John’s Wort

John's wort preparations (47% versus 26.4%, respectively, relative
risk 1.72 and 95% CI 1.30-2.14).8

A randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial comparing the
effects of a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum herb (WS-
5570, drug to extract ratio 3-7: 1, standardised for hyperforin 3-
6% and hypericin 0.12-0.28%; Schwabe Pharmaceuticals) with
those of paroxetine in the acute treatment of moderate to severe
depression has been published since the revised Cochrane
review) was completed. In the study, 251 participants with
acute major depression received H. perforatum extract 300mg
three times daily (increased to 1800 mg daily in non-responders),
or paroxetine 20 mg daily (40 mg daily for non-responders), for six
weeks.'®) During the study, 55% of H. perforatum recipients
reported a total of 172 adverse events and 76% of paroxetine
recipients reported a total of 269 adverse events, representing
incidences of 0.035 and 0.060 adverse events per day of exposure
for H. perforatum and paroxetine, respectively. Gastrointestinal
adverse events were the most common adverse events reported for
both groups. Data were not provided on numbers and types of
adverse events considered to be related to treatment.

A systematic review of large-scale observational studies of H.
perforatum extracts in patients with depressive disorders also
provides data on adverse events. The review included 16 non-
randomised studies (involving a total of 34804 patients) each
involving at least 100 participants with depressive disorders who
were treated with H. perforatum preparations for at least four
weeks (see Therapeutic effects, Depression)."'*") Overall, 13
studies reported data on proportions of participants withdrawing
due to adverse events; these ranged from 0% to 2.8% in short-
term studies and from 3.4% to 5.7% in longer-term (one year)
stud: tudies reported data on proportions of partici-
pants with adverse events (range 049.3%) and 12 (not the same
12 studies) reported data on proportions of participants with side-
effects (range 0-5.9%). These data, however, should be inter-
preted cautiously as most of the studies did not describe
adequately how these data were collected, clear definitions for
the terms adverse events and adverse effects were not always
provided, and as no serious adverse events were reported among
the 30000 patients, this raises questions about the methods used
to collect data." The most frequently reported adverse events or
side-effects were gastrointestinal symptoms, followed by increased
sensitivity to light and other skin reactions.

Twelve

Photosensitivity Sensitivity to sunlight following the ingestion of
hypericum or hypericin, the photosensitising agent in H.
perforatum,"°* S is known as hypericism.

Several studies have explored the photosensitising potential of
hypericin-containing H. perforatum extract following oral admin-
istration. In a double-blind, crossover, single-dose study involving
13 healthy volunteers who received placebo or St John's wort
extract (LI 160) (900, 1800 and 3600 mg containing 0, 2.81, 5.62
and 11.25mg total hypericin, respectively), no evidence of
photosensitivity was observed with or without St John's wort
following skin irradiation with both UV-A and UV-B light 4 hours
after dosing.” In a multiple-dose study in which 50 volunteers
received St John's wort (LI 160) (600mg) three times daily
(equivalent to 5.6 mg total hypericin daily) for 15 days, a moderate
increase in UV-A sensitivity was ob
used were higher than those recommended therapeutically. In
another single-dose study, administration of St John's wort (LI
160) (1800 mg, equivalent to 5.4 mg total hypericin) to 12 healthy
volunteers resulted in a mean serum total hypericin concentration
of 43 ng/mL and a mean skin blister fluid concentration of 5.3 ng/

served.) However, the doses

----- PAGE 571 -----
St John’s Wort

mL." After administration of St John's wort (300mg) three
times daily for seven days in order to achieve steady-state
concentrations, the mean serum total hypericin concentration was
12.5ng/mL and the mean skin blister fluid concentration was
2.8ng/mL; these concentrations are below those estimated to be
phototoxic.'”” Further randomised, controlled, single- (six or 12
tablets of LI-160, equivalent to 5.4 and 10.8mg_hypericins,
respectively; n = 48) and multiple-dose studies (three tablets of LI-
160 daily, equivalent to 2.7 mg hypericins daily, for seven da
24) found no statistically significant differenc
erythema threshold doses (of light irradiation), erythema index
and pigmentation index between treated and untreated skin areas
(p > 0.05 for each).(171 17)

Collectively, the evidence indicates that the threshold for
phototoxicity of hypericin is between 100 and 1000ng/mL.\'7)
Since serum and skin concentrations of hypericin after oral
loses are below 100ng/mL,
photosensitivity seems unlikely. However, caution is advised as it is
possible that there may be unusual absorption of hypericin in
some individuals and, particularly in fair-skinned individuals and
after extended periods of solar irradiation, there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin.‘'”?

A study reported that HIV-positive patients treated with oral
hypericin (0.05 mg/kg) for 28 days developed mild symptoms of
photosensitivity on exposure to sunlight and that two patients
developed intolerable symptoms of photosensitivity when the dose
was increased to 0.16mg/kg."') In a dose-escalating study
involving 30 HIV-infected patients treated with oral (0.5 mg/kg
daily) or intravenous hypericin (starting dosage 0.25 mg/kg twice
or three times weekly), 16 patients discontinued treatment before
completing eight weeks of therapy because of moderate or severe
phototoxicity; severe cutaneous phototoxicity was observed in 11
out of 23 evaluable patients.''*”
laboratory adverse events were infrequent: elevation of alkaline
phosphatas.
than five times normal values was noted in two and three patients,
respectively.

The effects of topical application of H. perforatum extract on
skin sensitivity have also been investigated. In a randomised
controlled trial, 16 healthy volunteers with no history of skin
disease or photosensitivity were treated with H. perforatum oil
(containing hypericin 110pg/mL) or H. perforatum ointment
(containing an alcoholic H. perforatum extract with a final
hypericin concentration of 301g/mL). The oil or ointment was
applied to a two centimetre test area on one forearm of
participants for 24 hours. Controls were an untreated test area
of the same forearm, and the untreated other forearm. After
removal of the oil or ointment, both forearms of participants
received increasing doses of solar simulated irradiation (24, 48, 96
and 144 J/cm). No phototoxic reactions were observed in any of
the participants, and there was no change in the minimal
erythema dose in either the oil or the ointment group,”
although data to support the latter statement were not shown.
There was a significant increase in the erythema index following
treatment with H. perforatum oil (which contained the higher
concentration of hypericin) but not after H. perforatum ointment
(p < 0.01 and p > 0.05, respectively, compared wit
untreated skin), although this may not be clinically relevant since
the minimal erythema dose did not change. The phototoxic
potential of topical application of the H. perforatum preparations
tested appears to be low, although caution is necessary,
particularly as hypericin may penetrate more highly through
broken or lesional skin, and there may be increased susceptibility

5

in minimum

administration of recommended

Other serious clinical or

> and hepatic aminotransferase concentrations to more

values for

to the photosensitising properties of hypericin in fair-skinned
individuals and after extended periods of solar irradiation.’

A case report describes a 45-year-old woman who developed
blisters on two occasions at the treatment site following laser
therapy to her legs for multiple solar keratoses.” It was stated
that the patient revealed that she was taking St John's wort,
although a sample of the product was not obtained and, therefore,
no analysis was undertaken. The blisters resolved and, after
stopping treatment with St John's wort, the patient underwent a
further session of laser treatment without experiencing adverse
effects.

Delayed hypersensitivity or photodermatitis has been docu-
mented for St John's wort following the ingestion of a herbal tea

made from the leaves.”

(177, 178) (179, 180)

Psychiatric effects Cases of mania ) and hypomania
ave been reported in individuals taking St John's wort
preparations. Two cases of mania were reported in patients with
bipolar depression who began self-treatment with standardised St
John's wort extract (900mg) daily"”® and one in a patient
experiencing a moderate depressive episode who was taking both
sertraline and St John's wort (dosage not known).''”) A case of
ypomania was reported in a woman with panic disorder and
unipolar major depression who had_ discontinue
treatment one week before starting St John's wort tincture.
Two cases of hypomania were reported in individuals with no
istory of bipolar disorder.''*”
electroconvulsive therapy and who had previously taken various
antidepressant drugs, including venlafaxine, fluvoxamine, moclo-
bemide and nortriptyline, experienced a hypomanic episode six
weeks after starting St John's wort (dosage not stated). A man
with symptoms of post-traumatic stress s diagnosed
with an acute manic episode after three months of self-treatment
with St John's wort (dosage not stated).

The cases described above, along with five other cases of mania,
one of hypomania, two of schizophrenia, two of delirium and one
of acute anxiety, were included in a review of psychotic events
associated with administration of St John's wort products. Across
the 17 cases, the onset of symptoms ranged from two days to six
months after initiation of St John's wort treatment."'*! The
dosage of St John's wort taken was stated in only
cases; this was within recommended dosages except in one case
where an excessively high dose was reported to have been taken
(18 g; no further details provided). All these reports stated that the
symptoms had resolved after stopping treatment with St John's
wort, although in one case the patient improved but initially
remained agitated des ation of St John's wort."'®” None of
the cases involved rechallenge with St John's wort. Typically, these
cases have involved self-treatment with St John's wort products,
rely on self-report of St John's wort use, have not obtained blood
samples for analysis of constituents of H. perforatum and/or their
metabolites and have not obtained samples of the product for
analysis. Also, in most cases, there were other pharmacological
factors and/or underlying illnesses that could have been respon-
sible for or contributed to the observed events.

sertraline
(179)

A man who had received

disorder wa:

ix of these

ite c

Other effects A case of subacute toxic neuropathy possibly
related to the use of St John's wort and subsequent exposure to
sunlight has been reported."'*” A woman developed stinging pains
in areas exposed to the sun (face and hands) four weeks after
starting treatment with St John's wort (500 mg/day, extract and
hypericin content not stated); the report did not state whether the
woman was using any other products. Her symptoms improved

----- PAGE 572 -----
three weeks after stopping St John's wort and disappeared over the
next two months.

There en reports of sensory nerve hypersensitivity
occurring in individuals who have taken St John's wort prepara-
tions (tablets or tinctures).(!*?

There is an isolated report of confusion, disorientation and
hypertensive crisis (blood pressure 210/140 mmHg) in a 41-year-
old man seven days after he began taking a St John's wort product
for work-related str It was reported that the man had
consumed aged cheese and red wine before onset of the delirium,
which is suggestive of hypertension associated with the use of a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor.“ However, although previous in
vitro experiments have indicated that H. perforatum extracts had
monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity, this has not been
confirmed in subsequent in vitro studies (see Pharmcological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies), and consensus is that St
John's wort is not a monoamine oxidase inhibitor."''® In addition,
no analysis of blood samples or of the St John's product appears
to have been undertaken, thus alternative explanations for the

ave bi

event cannot be ruled out.

St John's wort extract (BNO-1385, containing 255-285 mg
extract equivalent to hypericin 900 tg) 255 to 285 mg three times
daily taken for 14 days had no significant effect on heart rate
variability, cognitive performance and parameters of autonomic
function (vasoconstrictory response of cutaneous blood flow and
skin conductance response following a single deep inspiration)
according to the results of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, three-arm, crossover trial involving 12 healthy male
volunteers. (Decrease in heart rate variability is an effect observed
with chronic administration of tricyclic antidepressant agents,
although the implications of this for morbidity and mortality in
patients with depression are not yet understood.) '®9 In
contrast, amitriptyline 25mg daily significantly decreased heart
rate variability and significantly influenced the parameters of
autonomic function. The effects of another St John's wort herb
extract (Hyperiforte, 300 mg extract containing hypericin 990 pg,
pseudohypericin 526g and hyperforin 9-151g) 900mg or
1800mg as a single dose on cognitive and psychomotor
performance were compared with those of amitriptyline 25 mg
in a randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 13
healthy volunteers. Recipients of H. perforatum extract, compared
with placebo, experienced a dose-dependent impairment in one of
the eight tests (digit symbol substitution test), whereas amitripty-
line recipients showed statistically significant impairments in
performance in seven of the eight tests.”

In a case-control study, 37 patients with raised serum thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) (7-20 U/mL)
matched for age and sex to 37 individuals with normal TSH
concentrations (1-3 tU/mL) selected from the same set of patient
records, were interviewed regarding their exposure to St John's
wort products and other prescription and non-prescription
medicines. Four participants with raised TSH concentrations
and two with normal TSH concentrations reported that they had
taken St John's wort products within six months of the TSH test
(odds ratio, 95% CI for raised TSH concentrations associated
with self-reported exposure to St John's wort during the specified
time period: 2.12, 0.36 to 12.36; p > 0.05)."'*® The small sample
size may mean that the study lacked the statistical power to detect
an association between St John's wort exposure and raised TSH
concentrations. Other methodological issues include the possibi-
lity of confounding by indication, since individuals with
hypothyroidism may experience symptoms of depression and,

concentrations

St John’s Wort

88) Further

therefore, be more likely to take St John's wort.
research to assess the possibility of effects of H. perforatum on
thyroid function may be warranted.

There are two isolated reports of sexual dysfunction, including
decreased libido and erectile dysfunction, associated with use of St
John's wort products. In one man, previous symptoms of sexual
dysfunction, possibly related to use of a conventional antidepres-
sant agent which had resolved on stopping treatment, reappeared
one week after initiation of treatment with St John's wort.‘*?)
Another report describes a man who experienced decreased libido
whilst taking St John's wort for nine months.'!”

Preclinical data

The consumption of large quantities of St John's wort by grazing
animals has been associated with the development of photo-
sensitivity???) Mice given 0.2-0.5mg of the herb were
found to develop severe photodynamic effects.'°?” Studies using
cell cultures of human keratinocytes incubated with hypericin or
St John's wort extract and exposed to UV-A resulted in a
reduction in the LCs (lethal concentration) with hypericin, but
only a mild reduction with hypericum."”” From these findings it
as been estimated that at least 30 times the therapeutic dose
ary to produce phototoxic effects in humans.”

It has been shown in in vitro experiments using a human
eratinocyte cell line and quercitrin-free and quercitrin-containing
extracts of H. perforatum that quercitrin reduces the photo-
toxicity of H. perforatum extracts."

Experimental evidence has suggested that a solution of
ypericin can react with visible and UV light to produce free
radical species and that this may lead to damage of proteins in the
ens of the eye.’ Up to October 2005, there were no
spontaneous reports of cataract formation in individuals who
ave taken St John's wort."

A hydromethanolic extract of St John's wort flowering tops
(containing 0.3% hypericin) at concentrations of 1-300 h1g/mL
reduced experimentally induced contractions in rat vas deferens
smooth muscle in a concentration-dependent manner.'!?° The St
John's wort extract and hyperforin also produced a concentration-
dependent inhibition of phenylephrine-induced contractions in
human vas deferens in vitro; mean (standard error of mean) ICso
values for the extract and hyperforin were 13.9 (2.0) and 0.45
(0.04) ptg/mL, respectively.

A number of experimental studies has investigated the
genotoxic potential and mutagenic activity of St John's wort

in vitro and in vivo. In vivo studies and most in vitro
provided negative results, indicating a lack of mutagenic
potential with defined St John's wort extracts.'(©” Mutagenic
activity observed in an in vitro Ames test was attributed to the
presence of quercetin, although other studies have found no
mutagenic potential with a St John's wort extract and it has been
stated that there is no valid evidence for the carcinogenicity of
quercetin in humans.‘¢?°°?)

Dietary administration of St John's wort to rats was found to
have no effect on various hepatic drug-metabolising enzymes (e.g.
aminopyrine, N-demethylase, glutathione S-transferase and epox-
ide hydrolase) or on copper concentrations in the liver (see
Contra-indications, Warnings, Drug interactions). No major
effects were observed on hepatic iron or zinc concentrations and
no significant tissue lesions were found in four rats fed St John's
wort in their daily diet for 119 days (10% for first 12 days and 5%
thereafter because of unpalatability).!!"?

would be nec

----- PAGE 573 -----
St John’s Wort

Cytotoxic constituents related to hyperforin have been isolated
from two related Hypericum species (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with sensitivity towards St John's wort may experience
allergic reactions. The use of St John's wort is not advised in
known cases of photosensitivity and, in view of the potential of
hypericin as a photosensitising agent, therapeutic UV treatment
should be avoided whilst using St John's wort.'C?)

It has previously been suggested that excessive doses of St
John's wort may potentiate monoamine oxidase inhibitor
therapy."’® However, as monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity
has not been reported in vivo with St John's wort, this warning is
no longer considered necessary. In addition, avoidance of food-
stuffs, such as those containing tyramine (e.g. cheese, wine, meat
and yeast extracts) and medicines containing sympathomimetic
agents (e.g. cough/cold remedies), which interact with MAOIs, is
not considered necessary.

Drug interactions There are important pharmacokinetic
interactions and potential for important pharmacodynamic
interactions between St John's wort preparations and certain
other medicines.(1'® 1992)

Evidence for pharmacokinetic interactions between St John's
wort preparations and certain other medicines, leading to a loss of
or reduction in the therapeutic effect of those medicines, includes
spontaneous reports"? and published case reports.2°° ©”) Drugs
that may be affected include certain anticonvulsants, ciclosporin,
digoxin, indinavir (and other HIV protease inhibitors, and HIV
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors), oral contracep-
tives, theophylline and warfarin. A report involving four cases
describes reduced plasma methadone trough concentrations in

addicts who received St John's wort extract 900 mg daily before
(201)

methadone maintenance treatment.

There have also been reports of increased serotonergic effects (i.
e. pharmacodynamic interactions) in patients taking St John's
wort products concurrently with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (e.g. sertraline, paroxetine).°°*7°? There are isolated
reports of hypotension during general anaesthesia?” and delayed
emergence following general anaesthesia.”°°) In both cases,
patients had been taking St John's wort before receiving several
anaesthetic agents, including fentanyl and propofol. It has been
suggested that treatment with St John's wort preparations should
be stopped at least five days before undergoing elective surgery.2°

In the year 2000, the UK Committee on Safety of Medicines
(CSM) issued advice to pharmacists, doctors, other healthcare
professionals and patients on the use of St John's wort products
with certain other medicines.°°”?% The CSM's advice for
healthcare professionals regarding patients taking St John's wort
and other medicines concurrently can be summarised as follows.

Warfarin, ciclosporin, digoxin, theophylline and anticonvul-
sants (carbamazepine, phenobarbital and phenytoin)
There is a risk of reduced therapeutic effect, e.g. risk of
transplant rejection, seizures and loss of asthma control.
Advice is to check plasma drug concentrations (with warfarin,
the patient's International Normalised Ratio should be
checked) and to stop St John's wort therapy. In addition,
dose adjustment may be necessary.

HIV protease inhibitors (indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir and
saquinavir) and HIV non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (efavirenz and nevirapine) There is a risk of
reduced blood concentrations with possible loss of HIV
suppression. Advice is to measure HIV RNA viral load and
to stop St John's wort.

Oral contraceptives There is a risk of reduced blood concentra-
tions, breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancy.
Advice is to stop St John's wort.

Triptans (sumatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan and zolmitrip-
tan) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (citalo-
pram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline)
There is a risk of increased serotonergic effects with the
possibility of an increased risk of adverse reactions. Advice is to
stop St John's wort.

Patients already taking any of the above drugs should be
advised not to start taking St John's wort and users of other
medicines should be advised to seek professional advice before
using St John's wort. Topical medicines and non-psychotropic
medicines that are excreted renally are not likely to interact
with St John's wort. In addition, topical or homeopathic
preparations of St John's wort are not likely to interact wit!

pr

ribed medicines.
There is further evidence from prospective pharmacokinetic
studies involving patients who have received St John's wort
preparations and other medicines concurrently that there ari
interactions which result in altered pharmacokinetics, includ-
ing reduced plasma concentrations, of amitriptyline,?”
ciclosporin, 71°?! tacrolimus,!”) and irinotecan.?! These
studies have typically been open-label studies (although two
involved a randomised, crossover design) involving small
numbers of patients undergoing treatment with the respective
conventional medicines and who were also treated with single
and/or multiple doses (600 to 900 mg extract daily for around
two weeks) of St John's wort preparations. In one randomised,
crossover study, 10 patients who had undergone renal
transplants were treated concurrently with ciclosporin and St
John's wort extract with a low or high hyperforin content.
Patients experienced altered ciclosporin pharmacokinetics and
required ciclosporin dose increases only whilst taking the
extract with the high content of hyperforin.?!)

Studies with different designs (and varying methodological
quality)?! and involving healthy volunteers have provided
supporting evidence of pharmacokinetic interactions between St
John's wort preparations and digoxin,?!» imatinib," 7"”)
contraceptives,*!**!”) phenprocoumon,”
simvastatin, °”” tacrolimus,” verapamil?” and warfarin.
These and other studies provide evidence indicating that St
John's wort preparations induce the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
drug-metabolising enzyme CYP3A4,72%?°2) well as
affecting P-glycoprotein (a transport protein).2°°> As with
other medicines, whether or not clinically important drug
interactions occur with St John's wort preparations depends on
several factors, including the dosage regimen, route of admin-
istration and pharmaceutical quality of St John's wort prepara-
tions and co-administered medicines. As CYP3A4 is involved in
the metabolism of at least half of all medicinal agents, and as P-
glycoprotein is involved in the transport of many drugs, it is
possible that St John's wort preparations interact with other
medicines in addition to those listed above.'*””

é

) oral

quazepam,
(225)

----- PAGE 574 -----
There is also evidence from studies involving healthy
volunteers, albeit less extensive, that St John's wort prepara-
tions induce CYP2C19.°”) Effects on certain other CYP drug
metabolising enzymes are less clear: one study reported no
effect on CYP2C9 activity???) whereas another study found
that a St John's wort extract did induce CYP2C9 as determined
by effects on the pharmacokinetics of S-warfarin;??>
ing results have also been reported for CYP1A2 with respect to
5) or a lack of induction” by St John's wort

) conflict-

induction
preparations.

In contrast, similar studies have reported a lack of
pharmacokinetic interaction between St John's wort prepara-
tions and carbamazepine,”**) pravastatin,” and theophyl-
line,'3 and several others have reported a lack of significant
effects on CYP isoenzymes,” **” although the numbers of
volunteers may have been too small and the duration of St
John's wort administration too short to exclude definitively an

236, 237, . :
. ) There is evidence from several studies

inductive effect.
involving healthy volunteers that St John's wort preparations
do not influence CYP2D6 activity to an extent likely to be
clinically relevant. 2°78 2% 238)

Randomised, placebo-controlled studies involving healthy
volunteers who received an ethanol extract of St John's wort
with a low hyperforin content (Esbericum capsules containing
60 mg extract, drug to extract ratio 3.5—6.0:1, equivalent to
0.25mg total hypericins and 0.88mg_hyperforin) 240mg
extract daily found no statistically significant effects on the
pharmacokinetics of drugs used as substrates for CYP3A4,
CYP1A2 and CYP2C9. It is not clear whether the lack of effect
is due to the preparation having a low hyperforin content, or to
>) The suggestion
that the occurrence of CYP enzyme induction, or the extent of
induction, may vary depending on the particular St John's wort
preparation is a valid one, since the profile of constituents,
including those influencing CYP enzyme activity, varies
qualitatively and quantitatively between products (see Quality
of plant material and commercial products).

A further randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study involving healthy volunteers (7 = 33) explored the effects
of the CYP enzyme inhibitor cimetidine and the CYP enzyme
inducer carbamazepine on the pharmacokinetics of certain
ituents of St John's wort extracts. Participants received St
John's wort extract (LI-160) 300mg three times daily for 11
days, followed by a further seven days' administration together
with cimetidine 1000 mg daily in divided doses, carbamazepine
400mg each night, or placebo. No statistically significant
differences in the plasma concentration versus time curves from
hours 0 to 24 (AUCo24) were observed between groups;
statistically significant intragroup differences in the AUCp24
were observed for hypericin during cimetidine administration
and for pseudohypericin during carbamazepine administration,
although these effects are unlikely to be of clinical rele-
vance.)

A number of in vitro and animal studies have also explored
the effects of St John's wort preparations on CYP drug
metabolising enzymes. In vitro studies have reported induction
of the CYP enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 by St John's wort
extracts,7°°3 and of CYP2C9 by hyperforin.*4"?” Results
from in vivo (mice) experiments indicate that hyperforin is
important for induction of CYP3A in the liver.
experiments have shown that hyperforin induction of CYP2C9
is mediated by the pregnane X nuclear receptor." Induction
of P-glycoprotein by St John's wort extract? and hyper-

the low dose of extract used in the studi

cons

” In vitro

St John’s Wort

forin?*)

has been reported following in vitro experiments
using LS180 intestinal carcinoma cells, whereas there are
conflicting results on the induction of P-glycoprotein by
hypericin. 749)

A number of in vitro experiments have described inhibition
of the CYP enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 by St John's wort
(246,247) and inhibition of P-glycoprotein by hypericin
and hyperforin.°**) A series of in vitro experiments explored
the effects of hypericin on human DNA topoisomerase II
activity. Hypericin appeared to interact with DNA in a manner
which precluded topoisomerase II DNA binding activity and
antagonised the formation of topoisomerase IlI-covalent
cleavage complexes mediated by the topoisomerase II poisons
etoposide and amsacrine. The effects of hypericin and St John's
wort extracts on topoisomerase II cancer chemotherapy require
further investigation.°*”)

Certain groups of users may have little knowledge of safety
aspects, such as drug interactions, related to use of St John's

wort products, and may be particularly vulnerable to certain
250-253)

extracts,

e

adverse effects.‘

Pregnancy and lactation Information on the use of H.
perforatum preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding is
summarised below. In view of the lack of toxicity data, St John's
wort preparations should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Clinical data In a prospective, cohort study, 33 breastfeeding

women who had made enquiries about the safety of St John's
wort during breastfeeding to a teratogen/toxicology advice
service (and who took St John's wort products) were compared
with 33 age- and parity-matched controls and 101 disease-
matched controls (who had enquired about the safety of St
John's wort products but who did not take any). Three of the
women in the first group had initiated St John's wort treatment
during pregnancy (stage not stated), and the mean (standard
deviation) of infant exposure to St John's wort through
breastfeeding was 2.1 (3.5) months.”>” There were no
statistically significant differences in maternal or infant
demographics, and in women's reasons for enquiring about
use of St John's wort, although significantly more women who
took St John's wort were using conventional antidepressants,
compared with women who inquired about St John's wort but
who did not use it (42.4% versus 17.8%; p < 0.01). No
maternal adverse events were reported in any of the women and
there were no statistically significant differences in the
proportions of women reporting decreased milk volume
(12.1%, 6.9% and 6.1% for St John's wort consumers,
disease-matched controls, and age-/parity-matched controls,
respectively; p = 0.58).°° Five infants born to St John's wort
consumers experienced colic, drowsiness or lethargy, compared
with one report in each of the other two groups, although two
of the former five infants were also exposed to conventional
antidepressant agents during breastfeeding.

The study described above provides only limited information
on the safety of St John's wort products during breastfeeding
(and, to a even lesser extent, pregnancy) as it involved only
small numbers of women so had the statistical power to detect
only very common, acute adverse events. In addition, a report
of the study did not provide any details of the St John's wort
products consumed by the participants. It is likely that several,
perhaps many, different St John's wort products were involved,
all of which are likely to differ in their pharmaceutical quality
and, therefore, in their potential effects on the infant.

S

----- PAGE 575 -----
St John’s Wort

There is a report of a 38-year-old woman who started taking
St John's wort (900 mg/day) at her 24th week of pregnancy,
taking the last dose 24 hours before delivery.** The pregnancy
was unremarkable except for late onset of thrombocytopenia.
Another report described a 43-year-old woman who discon-
tinued fluoxetine and methylphenidate upon becoming preg-
nant and started taking St John's wort (900 mg/day). The
report does not state the outcome of the pregnancy,?*>
although it is assumed that had adverse events occurred, they
would have been stated.

Another case report describes a 33-year-old woman who
presented with post-natal depression at a German psychiatric
service and who had been taking an extract of H. perforatum
(Jarsin) 300mg three times daily from five months  post-
partum. Analysis of breast milk samples indicated that
hyperforin is excreted into breast milk at concentrations below
the lower limit of quantification (0.50 ng/mL).°° No adverse
effects were observed in the infant or the mother, however,
further investigation of the pharmacokinetics of constituents
of H. perforatum extract in breast milk and in mothers’ and
infants' plasma is required.

Preclinical data In a randomised experiment, 40 adult female mice

were given food bars containing 'hypericum herb' (no further
details of plant material provided) at a dose of 180 mg/kg body
weight daily, or placebo, for two weeks before conception and
throughout the gestation period. At the end of the study, there
were no statistically significant differences between the
‘hypericum' and placebo groups in duration of gestation,
number of live pups per litter, body length and head
circumference measurements, dam-—pup interactions, physical
maturation milestones and reproductive capabilities of off-
spring.?*” The only exceptions to this were that male offspring
in the hypericum-exposed group weighed significantly less than
those in the placebo group at birth (p < 0.02), but this difference
was not statistically significant by day three after birth, and
male offspring in the hypericum-exposed group experienced a
temporary delay in appearance of the upper incisors. Since
multiple statistical tests were carried out, this number of
statistically significant results at a level of p < 0.05 is likely. In
similar experiments, 18 adult female rats were given a methanol
extract of St John's wort (containing 0.3% total hypericins) 100
or 1000 mg/kg, or placebo, by gavage for two weeks before
mating, throughout the gestation period and/or for three weeks
during breastfeeding. Histological alterations in the livers and
kidneys of rat pups exposed to St John's wort extract
throughout gestation and/or during breastfeeding; lesions
were more severe in the offspring of rats treated with the
higher dose and in offspring exposed to St John's wort extract
during both the gestation period and breastfeeding.” Slight in
vitro uterotonic activity has been reported for St John's wort
(see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

pound; Mefedra-N; Mist Expect Stim. Italy: Hiperogyn;
Mithen. Mexico: Nordimenty. Portugal: Cicaderma. Russia:
Prostanorm ([Ipocranopm). South Africa: Cocillana Co;
Contra-Coff; Linctus Tussi Infans. Spain: Natusor Gastrolen;
Natusor Somnisedan. Switzerland: Gel a la consoude; Huile de
millepertuis A. Vogel (huile de St. Jean); Hyperiforce comp;
The a I'avoine sauvage de Vollmer. UK: Allens Chesty Cough;
Balm of Gilead; Buttercup Syrup; Chest Mixture; Covonia
Mentholated; Galloway's Cough Syrup; Honey & Molasses;
Modern Herbals Cough Mixture; Potters Children's Cough
Pastilles; Potters Gees Linctus; Sanderson's Throat Specific;
Sanderson's Throat Specific; St Johnswort Compound. Vene-
zuela: Biomicovo.

References

1 Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Hypericum perforatum. Fitoterapia
1995; 66: 43-68.

2 Hélzl J, Petersen M. Chemical constituents of Hypericum spp. In
Ernst E (ed), Hypericum. The genus Hypericum. London, New York:
Taylor and Francis, 2003.

3 Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. Quantitative determination of
biologically active constituents in medicinal plant crude extracts by
thin-layer chromatography-densitometry. | Chromatogr 1983; 281:
263-271.

4 Berghéfer R, Hélzl J. Biflavonoids in Hypericum perforatum, part 1.
Isolation of 13,1I8-biapigenin. Planta Med 1987; 53: 216-217.

----- PAGE 576 -----
9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Berghéfer R, Hdlz! J. Isolation of 13/,118-biapigenin (amentoflavone)
from Hypericum perforatum. Planta Med 1989; 55: 91.

Ollivier B e¢ al. Separation et identification des acides phenols par
chromatographie liquide haute performance et spectroscopie ultra-
violette. Application a la pariétaire (Parietaria officinalis L.) et au
millepertuis (Hypericum perforatum L.). J] Pharm Belg 1985; 40: 173—
177.

Hoelzl J, Ostrowski E. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.).
HPLC analysis of the main components and their variability in a
population. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1987; 127: 1227-1230.

Dorossiev I. Determination of flavonoids in Hypericum perforatum.
Pharmazie 1985; 40: 585-586.

Brondz | et al. The relative stereochemistry of hyperforin — an
antibiotic from Hypericum perforatum L. Tetrahedron Lett 1982; 23:
1299-1300.

Ayuga C, Rebuelta M. A comparative study of phenolic acids of
Hypericum caprifolium Boiss and Hypericum perforatum L. An Real
Acad Farm 1986; 52: 723-728.

Brondz | et al. n-Alkanes of Hypericum perforatum: a revision.
Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 295-296.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — Il. Identification de constituants de diverses huiles
essentielles d'Hypericum. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 115-131.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — IV. Repartition des sesquiterpenes, des alcools
monoterpeniques et des aldehydes satures dans les huiles essentielles
d'Hypericum. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 377-378.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — V. Identification de quelques constituants non volatils
d'Hypericum perforatum L. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 379.
ConsumerLab. Product Review: St John's wort. (accessed 28 August
2003).

De Los Reyes GC, Koda RT. Determining hyperforin and hypericin
content in eight brands of St John's wort. Am J Health-Syst Pharm
2002; 59: 545-547.

Draves AH, Walker SE. Analysis of the hypericin and pseudohypericin
content of commercially available St John's wort preparations. Can J
Clin Pharmacol 2003; 10(3): 114-118.

Orth HCJ et al. Isolation, purity analysis and stability of hyperforin as
a standard material from Hypericum perforatum L. ] Pharm
Pharmacol 1999; 51: 193-200.

Vaja V et al. Further degradation product of hyperforin from
Hypericum perforatum (St. John's wort). Fitoterapia 2003; 74: 439-
444,

Verotta L et al. Furohyperforin, a prenylated phloroglucinol from St
John's wort (Hypericum perforatum). ] Nat Prod 1999; 62: 770-772.
Verotta L et al. Hyperforin analogues from St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum). J Nat Prod 2000; 63: 412-415.

Tolonen A et al. Fast high-performance liquid chromatographic
analysis of naphthodianthrones and phloroglucinols from Hypericum
perforatum extracts. Phytochemical Anal 2003; 14: 306-309.

Westerhoff K et al. Biorelevant dissolution testing of St John's wort
products. | Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 1615-1621.

Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression. The Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 2005, Issue 3. Art. No. :CD000448.pub2.

Nahrstedt A, Butterweck V. Biologically active and other chemical
constituents of the herb of Hypericum perforatum L.
Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 129-134.

Butterweck V et al. Plasma levels of hypericin in presence of
procyanidin B2 and hyperoside: a pharmacokinetic study in rats.
Planta Med 2003; 6: 189-192.

Suzuki O e¢ al. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase by hypericin. Planta
Med 1984; 50: 272-274.

Bladt S$, Wagner H. Inhibition of MAO by fractions and constituents
of Hypericum extract. ] Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7: $57-59.
Demisch L et al. Identification of MAO-type-A inhibitors in

Hypericum perforatum L. (Hyperforat). Pharmacopsychiatry 1989;
22: 194.

Thiede HM, Walper A. Inhibition of MAO and COMT by

Hypericum extracts and hypericin. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7:
S54-56.

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

St John’s Wort

Cott JM. In vitro receptor binding and enzyme inhibition by
Hypericum perforatum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 108-112.

Miiller WE et al. Effects of hypericum extract (LI 160) in biochemical
models of antidepressant activity. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30
(Suppl. Suppl.): 102-107.

Calapai G et al. Effects of Hypericum perforatum on levels of 5-
hydroxytryptamine, noradrenaline and dopamine in the cortex,
diencephalon and brainstem of the rat. J Pharm Pharmacol 1999; 51:
723-728.

Winkler C et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) counteracts
cytokine-induced tryptophan catabolism in vitro. Biol Chem 2004;
385: 1197-1202.

Zanoli P. Role of hyperforin in the pharmacological activities of St
John's wort. CNS Drug Rev 2004; 10: 203-218.

Chatterjee SS et al. Hyperforin as a possible antidepressant
component of hypericum extracts. Life Sci 1998; 63: 499-510.
Chatterjee SS et al. Antidepressant activity of Hypericum perforatum
and hyperforin: the neglected possibility. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31
(Suppl. Suppl.): 7-15.

Gobbi M et al. Hypericum perforatum L. extract does not inhibit 5-
HT transporter in rat brain cortex. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch
Pharmacol 1999; 360: 262-269.

Jensen AG et al. Adhyperforin as a contributor to the effect of
Hypericum perforatum L. in biochemical models of antidepressant
activity. Life Sci 2001; 68: 1593-1605.

Butterweck V et al. In vitro receptor screening of pure constituents of
St John's wort reveals novel interactions with a number of GPCRs.
Psychopharmacology 2002; 162: 193-202.

Fiebich BL e¢ al. Inhibition of substance P-induced cytokine synthesis
by St John's wort extracts. Pharmacopsychiatry 2001; 34 (Suppl.
Suppl. 1): $26-S28.

Gobbi M et al. In vitro effects of the dicyclohexylammonium salt of
hyperforin on interleukin-6 release in different experimental models.
Planta Med 2004; 70: 680-682.

Butterweck V et al. Step by step removal of hyperforin and hypericin:
activity profile of different Hypericum preparations in behavioral
models. Life Sci 2003; 73: 627-639.

Butterweck V. Mechanism of action of St John's wort in depression:
what is known?. CNS Drugs 2003; 17: 539-562.

Singer A et al. Hyperforin, a major antidepressant constituent of St.
John's wort, inhibits serotonin uptake by elevating free intracellular
Nat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999; 290: 1363-1368.

Singer A et al. Hyperforin alters free intracellular H* and Na*
concentration in human platelets (abstract). Paper presented at the
Biocenter Symposium on Drug Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's
Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and its Constituents., February
2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

Treiber K et al. Hyperforin activates nonselective cation channels
(NSCCs). Br J Pharmacol 2005; 145: 75-83.

Uebelhack R, Franke L. In vitro effects of hypericum extract and
hyperforin on SHT uptake and efflux in human blood platelets
(abstract). Paper presented at the Biocenter Symposium on Drug
Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)
and its Constituents, February 2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

Okpanyi SN, Weischer ML. Animal experiments on the psychotropic
action of a Hypericum extract. Arzneimittelforschung 1987; 37: 10-13.
Gambarana C et al. Efficacy of an Hypericum perforatum (St John'
wort) extract in preventing and reverting a condition of escape deficit
in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 1999; 21: 247-257.

De Vry J et al. Comparison of hypericum extracts with imipramine
and fluoxetine in animal models of depression and alcoholism. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 1999; 9: 461-468.

Butterweck V et al. Flavonoids from Hypericum perforatum show
antidepressant activity in the forced swimming test. Planta Med 2000;
66: 3-6.

Martarelli D et al. Hypericum perforatum methanolic extract inhibits
growth of human prostatic carcinoma cell line orthotopically
implanted in nude mice. Cancer Lett 2004; 210: 27-33.

Hostanska K et al. Aqueous ethanolic extract of St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) induces growth inhibition and apoptosis
in human malignant cells in vitro. Pharmazie 2002; 57: 323-331.

----- PAGE 577 -----
SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

St John’s Wort

Hostanska K et al. Comparison of the growth-inhibitory effect of
Hypericum perforatum L. extracts, differing in the concentration of
phloroglucinols and flavonoids, on leukaemia cells. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2003; 55: 973-980.

Roscetti G et al. Cytotoxic activity of Hypericum perforatum L. on
K562 erythroleukemic cells: differential effects between methanolic
extract and hypericin. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 66-72.

Dona M et al. Hyperforin inhibits cancer invasion and metastasis.
Cancer Res 2004; 64: 6225-6232.

Schempp CM et al. Inhibition of tumour cell growth by hyperforin, a
novel anticancer drug from St John's wort that acts by induction of
apoptosis. Oncogene 2002; 21: 1242-1250.

Hostanska K et al. Hyperforin a constituent of St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) extract induces apoptosis by triggering
activation of caspases and with hypericin synergistically exerts
cytotoxicity towards human malignant cell lines. Eur J Pharm
Biopharmaceut 2003; 56: 121-132.

Colasanti A et al. Hypericin photosensitization of tumor and
metastatic cell lines of human prostate. J Photochem Photobiol B
Biology 2000; 54: 103-107.

Liu CD et al. Hypericin and photodynamic therapy decreases human
pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo. J Surg Res 2000; 93: 137-143.
Delaey E et al. Photocytotoxicity of hypericin in normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. J Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2000; 56: 19-24.
H6pfner M et al. Hypericin activated by an incoherent light source has
photodynamic effects on esophageal cancer cells. Int J Colorectal Dis
2003; 18: 239-247.

Kamuhabwa AR et al. Photodynamic activity of hypericin in human
urinary bladder carcinoma cells. Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 2579-2584.
Carvarga I et al. Photodynamic therapy of murine fibrosarcoma with
topical and systemic administration of hypericin. Phytomedicine 2001;
8: 325-330.

Solar P et al. Effect of azetazolamide on hypericin photocytotoxicity.
Planta Med 2002; 68: 658-660.

MiroSéay A et al. The effect of quercetin on light-induced cytotoxicity
of hypericin. Physiol Res 2001; 50: 635-637.

Schempp CM et al. Phototoxic and apoptosis-inducing capacity of
pseudohypericin. Planta Med 2002; 68: 171-173.

Schempp CM et al. Hypericin photo-induced apoptosis involves the
tumor necrosis factor apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and
activation of caspase-8. FEBS Lett 2001; 493: 26-30.

Ali SM et al. Hypericin and hypocrellin induced apoptosis in human
mucosal carcinoma cells. J Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2001; 65:
59-73.

Pajonk F et al. Hypericin — an inhibitor of proteasome function.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2005; 55: 439-446.

Kamuhabwa AR et al. Cellular photodestruction induced by hypericin
in AY-27 rat bladder carcinoma cells. Photochem Photobiol 2001; 74:
126-132.

Paba V et al. Photo-activation of hypericin with low doses of light
promotes apparent photo-resistance in human histiocytic lymphoma
U937 cells. | Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2001; 60: 87-96.
Varriale L et al. Molecular aspects of photodynamic therapy: low
energy pre-sensitization of hypericin-loaded human endometrial
carcinoma cells enhances photo-tolerance, alters gene expression and
affects the cell cycle. FEBS Lett 2002; 512: 287-290.

Schwarz D et al. St John's wort extracts and some of their constituents
potently inhibit ultimate carcinogen formation from benzo(a)pyrene-
7,8-didhyrodiol by human CYP1A1. Cancer Res 2003; 63: 8062-8068.
Decosterd LA et al. Isolation of new cytotoxic constituents from
Hypericum revolutum and Hypericum calycinum by liquid-liquid
chromatography. Planta Med 1988; 54: 560.

Avato P et al. Extracts from St John's wort and their antimicrobial
activity. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 230-232.

Zakharova NS et al. Action of plant extracts on the natural immunity
indices of animals. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol 1986; 4: 71—
7S.

Schempp C et al. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort, against multiresistant Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-positive
bacteria. Lancet 1999; : 2129.

Voss A, Verweij PE. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort. Lancet 1999; 354: 777.

81 Fiebich B et al. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort. Lancet 1999; 354: 777.

82. Hiibner AT et al. Treatment with Hypericum perforatum L. does not
trigger decreased resistance in Staphylococcus aureus against
antibiotics and hyperforin. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 206-208.

83 Negrash AK et al. Comparative study of chemotherapeutic and
pharmacological properties of antimicrobial preparations from
common St John's wort. Fitontsidy Mater Soveshch 1969; 198-200.

84 Sakar MK et al. Antimicrobial activities of some Hypericum species
growing in Turkey. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 49-52.

85 Dall'Agnol R e¢ al. Antimicrobial activity of some Hypericum species.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 511-516.

86 Gibbons $ et al. The genus Hypericum — a valuable resource of anti-
Staphylococcal leads. Fitoterapia 2002; 73: 300-304.

87 Mishenkova EL e¢ al. Antiviral properties of St John's wort and
preparations produced from it. Tr S'ezda Mikrobiol Ukr 1975; 222-
223.

88 Weber ND et al. The antiviral agent hypericin has in vitro activity
against HSV-1 through non-specific association with viral and cellular
membranes. Antiviral Chem Chemother 1994; 5: 83-90.

89 Wood S et al. Antiviral activity of naturally occurring anthraquinones
and anthraquinone derivatives. Planta Med 1990; 56: 651-652.

90 Jia YR et al. In vitro study on the effects of hypericin and lysine
hydrochloride against herpes virus. Chin J Clin Rehab 2004; 8(5): 966—
967.

91 Lavie G et al. Studies of the mechanisms of the antiretroviral agents
hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86:
5963-5967.

92 Lopez-Bazzocchi | et al. Antiviral activity of the photoactive plant
pigment hypericin. Photochem Photobiol 1991; 54: 95-98.

93 Meruelo D et al. Therapeutic agents with dramatic antiretroviral
activity and little toxicity at effective doses: aromatic polycyclic diones
hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988; 85:
5230-5234.

94 Hudson JB et al. Antiviral activities of hypericin. Antiviral Res 1991;
1S: 101-112.

95 Taher MM et al. Mood-enhancing antidepressant St John's wort
inhibits the activation of human immunodeficiency virus gene
expression by ultraviolet light. Life 2002; 54: 357-364.

96 Koch E, Chatterjee SS. Hyperforin stimulates intracellular calcium
mobilisation and enhances extracellular acidification in DDT1-MF2
smooth muscle cells (abstract). Paper presented at the Biocenter
Symposium on Drug Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's Wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) and its Constituents. February 2000,
Frankfurt, Germany.

97 Rezvani AH et al. Attenuation of alcohol intake by extract of
Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort) in two different strains of
alcohol-preferring rats. Alcohol Alcoholism 1999; 34: 699-705.

98 Wright CW et al. Correlation of hyperforin content of Hypericum
perforatum (St John's wort) extracts with their effects on alcohol
drinking in C57BL/6J mice: a preliminary study. J Psychopharmacol
2003; 17: 403-408.

99 Catania MA et al. Hypericum perforatum attenuates nicotine
withdrawal signs in mice. Psychopharmacology 2003; 169(2): 186-189.

100 Ballenger JC et al. Alcohol and central serotonin metabolism in man.
Arch Gen Psych Scand 1979; 57: 224-227. Cited by Rezvani AH et al.
Alcohol Alcoholism 1999, 3 99-705.

101 Hughes JR et al. Antidepressants for smoking c
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2004,
CD000031.

102 Shipochliev T e¢ al. Anti-inflammatory action of a group of plant
extracts. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 87-94.

103 Bork PS et al. Hypericin as a non-oxidant inhibitor of NF-«B. Planta
Med 1999; 65: 297-300.

104 Takahashi | et al. Hypericin and pseudohypericin specifically inhibit
protein kinase C: possible relation to their antiretroviral activity.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1989; 165: 1207-1212.

105 Agostinis P et al. Photosensitized inhibition of growth factor regulated
protein kinases by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1615—
1622.

106 De Witte P et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase activity by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacol 1993; 46:
1929-1936.

tion. The
sue 4. Art. No.:

----- PAGE 578 -----
107 Panossian AG et al. Immunosuppressive effects of hypericin on
stimulated human leucocytes: inhibition of the arachidonic acid
release, leukotriene By and interleukin-1 production and activation of
nitric oxide formation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 19-28.

108 Tahara Y et al. The antidepressant hypericin inhibits progression of
experimental proliferative vitreoretinopathy. Curr Eye Res 1999; 19:
323-329.

109 Bezakova L et al. Effect of dianthrones and their precursors from
Hypericum perforatum L. on lipoxygenase activity. Pharmazie 1999;
54: 711.

110 Albert D et al. Hyperforin is a dual inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-1 and
5-lipoxygenase. Biochemical Pharmacol 2002; 64: 1767-1775.

111 Hunt EJ et al. Effect of St John's wort on free radical production. Life
Sci 2001; 69: 181-190.

112 Heilmann J e¢ al. Studies on the antioxidative activity of
phloroglucinol derivatives isolated from Hypericum species. Planta
Med 2003; 69: 202-206.

113 Melzer R et al. Proanthocyanidins from Hypericum perforatum:
effects on isolated pig coronary arteries. Planta Med 1988; 54: 572—
573.

114 Shiplochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

115 Jang M-H et al. Protective effect of Hypericum perforatum Linn (St
John's wort) against hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis on human
neuroblastoma cells. Neuroscience Lett 2002; 329: 177-180.

116 Vasilchenko EA et al. Analgesic action of flavonoids of Rhododendron
luteum Sweet, Hypericum perforatum L., Lespedeza bicolor Turcz.
and L. hedysaroides (Pall.) Kitag. Rastit Resur 1986; 22: 12-21.

117 Grujic-Vasic J et al. The examining of isolated tannins and their
astringent effect. Planta Med 1986; 52 (Suppl. Suppl.): 67-68.

118 Barnes J et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.): a review of
its chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2001; 53: 583-600.

119 Laakman G et al. St John's wort in mild to moderate depression: the
relevance of hyperforin for the clinical efficacy. Pharmacopsychiatry
1998; 31 (Suppl. Suppl.): 54-59.

120 Schroeder C et al. Influence of St John's wort on catecholamine
turnover and cardiovascular regulation in humans. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2004; 76: 480-489.

121 Franklin M et al. Neuroendocrine evidence for dopaminergic actions
of hypericum extract (LI 160) in healthy volunteers. Biol Psychiatr
1999; 46: 581-584.

122 Laakman G et al. Effects of hypericum extract on adenohypophysial
hormone secretion and catechol amine metabolism (abstract). Paper
presented at the Biocenter Symposium on Drug Therapy.
Pharmacology of St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and its
Constituents. February 2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

123 Schiile C et al. Endocrinological effects of high-dose Hypericum
perforatum extract WS 5570 in healthy subjects. Neuropsychobiology
2004; 49: 58-63.

124 Anon. Johanniskraut VS. SSRI — neue Erkentnnisse zur Wirksamkeit
und Vertraglichkeit. Nervenheilkunde 2000; 19: 92-93.

125 Philipp M et al. Hypericum extract versus imipramine or placebo in
patients with moderate depression: randomized multicentre study of
treatment for 8 weeks. BMJ 1999; 319: 1534-1539.

126 Hypericum Depression Trial Study Group. Effect of Hypericum
perforatum (St John's wort) in major depressive disorder. A
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002; 287: 1807-1814.

127 Vitiello B et al. Hyperforin plasma level as a marker of treatment
adherence in the National Institutes of Health Hypericum depression
trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2005, 25(3): 243-249.

128 Szegedi A et al. Acute treatment of moderate to severe depression with
hypericum extract WS 5570 (St John's wort): randomised controlled
double blind non-inferiority trial versus paroxetine. BMJ 2005; 330:
503.

129 Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression — an overview and meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ 1996; 313: 253-258.

130 Kim HL et al. St John's wort for depression. A meta-analysis of well-
defined clinical trials. J Nerv Ment Dis 1999; 187: 532-539.

131 Linde K, Kniippel L. Large-scale observational studies of hypericum
extracts in patients with depressive disorders — a systematic review.
Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 148-157.15693723

St John’s Wort

132 Hiibner WD, Kirste T. Experience with St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum) in children under 12 years with symptoms of depression
and psychovegetative disturbances. Phytotherapy Res 2001; 15: 367—
370.

133 Findling RL et al. An open-label pilot study of St John's wort in
juvenile depression. J] Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42:
908-914.

134 Lenoir S et al. No dose-dependent effect of hypericin in hypericum
extracts for depression. Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 141-146.

135 Barnes J et al. A pilot, randomised, open, uncontrolled clinical study
of two dosages of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) herb
extract as an aid to motivational/behavioural support in smoking
cessation. Planta Med 2006; 72(4): 378-382.

136 Kasper S. Treatment of seasonal affective disorder (SAD) with
hypericum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 89-
93.

137 Wheatley D. Hypericum in seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Curr
Med Res Opin 1999; 15: 33-37.

138 Hypericin — a plant extract with anti-HIV activity. Scrip 1989; 1415:
29.

139 Anon. Hypericin HIV trial in Thailand. Scrip 1995; 2019: 25.

140 Cooper WC, James J. An observational study of the safety and
efficacy of hypericin in HIV-positive subjects (abstract). Int Conf.
AIDS 1990; 6: 369.

141 Steinbeck-Klose A, Wernet P. Successful long-term treatment over 40
months of HIV-patients with intravenous hypericin (abstract). Int
Conf AIDS 1993; 9: 470.

142 Gulick RM et al. Phase I studies of hypericin, the active compound in
St John's wort, as an antiretroviral agent in HIV-infected adults. Ann
Intern Med 1999; 130: 510-514.

143 Jacobson JM et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety and antiviral effects of
hypericin, a derivative of St John's wort plant, in patients with chronic
hepatitis C virus infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001; 45:
517-524.

144 Stevinson C et al. Hypericum for fatigue — a pilot study.
Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 443-447.

145 Stevinson C, Ernst E. A pilot study of Hypericum perforatum for the
treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 2000; 107:
870-876.

146 Miiller T et al. Treatment of somatoform disorders with St John's
wort: a randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled trial.
Psychosomatic Med 2004; 66: 538-547.

147 Kobak KA et al. St John's wort versus placebo in social phobia.
Results from a placebo-controlled pilot study. J Clin Psychopharmacol
2005; 25(1): 51-58.

148 Boblitz N e¢ al. Benefit of a fixed drug combination containing St
John's wort and black cohosh for climacteric patients — results of a
randomised clinical trial (abstract). FACT 2000; 5: 85.

149 Schellenberg R et al. Pharmacodynamic effects of two different
hypericum extracts in healthy volunteers measured by quantitative
EEG. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31 (Suppl. Suppl.): 44-53.

150 Sharpley AL et al. Antidepressant-like effect of Hypericum perforatum
(St John's wort) on the sleep polysomnogram. Psychopharmacology
1998; 139: 286-287.

151 Colker CM et al. Effects of Citrus aurantium extract, caffeine, and St
John's wort on body fat loss, lipid levels, and mood states in
overweight healthy adults. Curr Ther Res 1999; 60: 145-153.

152 Friede M et al. Alltagssicherheit eines pflanzlichen Antidepressivums
aus Johanniskraut. Fortschritte Med 1998; 116: 131-135.

153 Hottenrot K et al. The influence of vitamin E and extract from
hypericum on the endurance capacity of competitors. A placebo-
controlled double-blind study with long-distance runners and
triathletes. Dtsche Zeitschrift Sportmed 1997; 48: 22-27.

154 Schempp CM et al. Topical treatment of atopic dermatitis with St
John's wort cream — a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind
half-side comparison. Phytomedicine 2003; 10 (Suppl. Suppl. IV): 31—
37.

155 Sindrup SH et al. St John's wort has no effect on pain in
polyneuropathy. Pain 2000; 91: 361-365.

156 Ellis KA et al. An investigation into the acute nootropic effects of
Hypericum perforatum L. (St John's wort) in healthy human
volunteers. Behav Pharmacol 2001; 12: 173-182.

----- PAGE 579 -----
St John’s Wort

157 Lavagna SM et al. Efficacy of Hypericum and Calendula oils in the
epithelial reconstruction of surgical wounds in childbirth with
caesarean section. I] Farmaco 2001; 56: 451-453.

158 D'Hallewin MA et al. Fluorescence detection of flat bladder
carcinoma in situ after intravesical instillation of hypericin. J Urol
2000; 164: 349-351.

159 D'Hallewin MA et al. Hypericin-based fluorescence diagnosis of
bladder carcinoma. BJU Int 2002; 89: 760-763

160 Staffeldt B et al. Pharmacokinetics of hypericin and pseudohypericin
after oral intake of the Hypericum perforatum extract LI 160 in
healthy volunteers. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7: $47-53.

161 Biber A e¢ al. Oral bioavailability of hyperforin from hypericum
extracts in rats and human volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31
(Suppl. Suppl.1): 36-43.

162 Schulz HU et al. Investigation of the bioavailability of hypericin,
pseudohypericin, hyperforin and the flavonoids quercetin and
isorhamnetin following single and multiple oral dosing of a hypericum
extract containing tablet. Arzneim Forsch 2005; 55(1): 15-22.

163 Agrosi M et al. Oral bioavailability of active principles from herbal
products in humans. A study on Hypericum perforatum extracts using
the soft gelatin capsule technology. Phytomedicine 2000; 7(6): 455-462.

164 Kamuhabwa AR et al. Determination of hypericin in human plasma
by high-performance liquid chromatography after intravesical
administration in patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder. Eur J Pharmaceut Biopharmaceut 2005; 59: 469-474.

165 Riedel KD e¢ al. Simultaneous determination of hypericin and
hyperforin in human plasma with liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry. J Chromatog B 2004; 813: 27-33.

166 Ernst E et al. Adverse effects profile of the herbal antidepressant St
John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.). Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1998;
54: 589-594.

167 Dyson R et al. The reported use and effectiveness of Hypericum (St
John's wort) on affective symptoms in a depression self-help group.
Primary Care Psych 2002; 8: 99-102.

168 Duran N, Song P-S. Hypericin and its photodynamic action.
Photochem Photobiol 1986; 43: 677-680.

169 Brockmédller J et al. Hypericin and pseudohypericin: pharmacokinetics
and effects on photosensitivity in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 94-101.

170 Schempp C et al. Hypericin levels in human serum and interstitial skin
blister fluid after oral single-dose and steady-state administration of
Hypericum perforatum extract (St John's wort). Skin Pharmacol Appl
Skin Physiol 1999; 12: 299-304.

171 Schempp CM et al. Effect of oral administration of Hypericum
perforatum extract (St. John's wort) on skin erythema and
pigmentation induced by UVB, UVA, visible light and solar simulated
radiation. Phytother Res 2003; 17: 141-146.

172 Schempp CM et al. Single-dose and steady-state administration of
Hypericum perforatum extract (St John's wort) does not influence skin
sensitivity to UV radiation, visible light, and solar-simulated
radiation. Arch Dermatol 2001; 337: 512.

173 Pitisuttithum P et al. Int Conf AIDS 1996; 11: 285. Cited by G50

174 Schempp CM et al. Effect of topical application of Hypericum
perforatum extract (St John's wort) on skin sensitivity to solar
simulated radiation. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2000;
16: 125-128.

175 Cotterill JA et al. Severe phototoxic reaction to laser treatment in a
patient taking St John's wort. J Cosmetic Laser Ther 2001; 3: 159-160.

176 Benner MH, Lee HJ. Med Lett 1979; 21: 29-30.

177 Barbenel DM et al. Mania in a patient receiving testosterone
replacement post-orchidectomy taking St John's wort and sertraline. J
Psychopharmacol 2000; 14: 84-86.

178 Nierenberg AA et al. Mania associated with St John's wort. Biol
Psychiatr 1999; 46: 1707-1708.

179 Schneck C. St John's wort and hypomania. J Clin Psychiatr 1998; 59:
689.

180 O'Breasil AM, Argouarch $. Hypomania and St John's wort. Can J
Psychiatr 1998; 43: 746-747.

181 Stevinson C, Ernst E. Can St John's wort trigger psychoses? Int J Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 42(9): 473-480.

182 Bove GM. Acute neuropathy after exposure to sun in a patient treated
with St John's wort. Lancet 1998; 352: 1121-1122.

183 Baillie N. Hypericum — four hypersensitivity reactions. Modern
Phytother 1997; 3: 24-26.

184 Patel S et al. Hypertensive crisis associated with St John's wort. Am J
Med 2002; 112: 507-508.

185 Siepmann M et al. The effects of St John's wort extract on heart rate
variability, cognitive function and quantitative EEG: a comparison
with amitriptyline and placebo in healthy men. Br J Clin Pharmacol
2002; 54: 277-282.

186 Siepmann M et al. The effects of St John's wort extract and
amitriptyline on autonomic responses of blood vessels and sweat
glands in healthy volunteers. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2004; 24(1): 79-
82.

187 Timoshanko A e¢ al. A preliminary investigation on the acute
pharmacodynamic effects of hypericin on cognitive and psychomotor
performance. Behav Pharmacol 2001; 12: 635-640.

188 Ferko N, Levine MAH. Evaluation of the association between St
John's wort and elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21(12): 1574-1578.

189 Assalian P. Sildenafil for St John-wort induced sexual dysfunction. J
Sex Marital Ther 2000; 26: 357-358.

190 Bhopal JS. St John's wort-induced sexual dysfunction. Can J
Psychiatry 2001; 46: 456-457.

191 Giese AC. Hypericism. Photochem Photobiol 1980; 5: 229-255.

192 Siegers C et al. Zur Frage der Phototoxizitat von Hypericum.
Nervenheilkunde 1993; 12: 320-322.

193 Wilhelm K-P et al. Role of flavonoids in controlling the phototoxicity
of Hypericum perforatum extracts. Phytomedicine 2001; 8(4): 306-
309.

194 Johnston N. Sun trap. New Sci 1999; 24 July: 24.

195 Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 24 October, 2005).

196 Capasso R et al. Effects of the antidepressant St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum) on rat and human vas deferens contractility. J
Urol 2005; 173: 2194-2197.

197 Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

198 Newall CA et al. Herbal Medicines. A Guide for Health-care
Professionals, 1st edn. London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

199 Henderson L et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum): drug
interactions and clinical outcomes. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002; 54: 349—
356.

200 Mannel M. Drug interactions with St John's wort. Drug Saf 2004; 27
(11): 773-797.

201 Eich-Hochli D et al. Methadone maintenance treatment and St John's
wort — a case report. Pharmacopsychiatry 2003; 36: 35-37.

202 Gordon JB. SSRIs and St John's wort: possible toxicity? Am Family
Phys 1998; 57: 950-953.

203 Lantz MS et al. St John's wort and antidepressant drug interactions in
the elderly. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1999; 12: 7-10.

204 Irefin S, Sprung J. A possible case of cardiovascular collapse during
anaesthesia: long-term use of St John's wort. J Clin Anaesthesiol 2000;
12: 498-499.

205 Crowe S, McKeating K. Delayed emergence and St John's wort.
Anaesthesiology 2002; 96: 1025-1027.

206 Ang-Lee MK et al. Herbal medicines and peri-operative care. JAMA
2001; 286: 208-216.

207 Breckenridge A. Herbal Safety News: Important interactions between
St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) preparations and prescribed
medicines. http://www.mhra.gov.uk

208 Anon. CSM advice on St John's wort. Pharm J 2000; 264: 358.

209 Johne A et al. Decreased plasma levels of amitriptyline and its
metabolites on comedication with an extract from St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum). J Clin Psychopharmacol 2002; 22(1): 46-54.

210 Bauer $ et al. Alterations in cyclosporin A pharmacokinetics and
metabolism during treatment with St John's wort in renal transplant
patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2003; 55: 203-211.

211 Mai I et al. Hyperforin content determines the magnitude of the St
John's wort-cyclosporin drug interaction. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 330-340.

----- PAGE 580 -----
212 Mai I et al. Impact of St John's wort treatment on the
pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and mycophenolic acid in renal
transplant patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2003; 18: 819-822.

213 Mathijssen RHJ e¢ al. Effects of St John's wort on irinotecan
metabolism. J Nat Cancer Inst 2002; 94(16): 1247-1249.

214 Mills E et al. Interaction of St John's wort with conventional drugs:
systematic review of clinical trials. BMJ 2004; 329: 27-30.

215 Johne A et al. Pharmacokinetic interaction of digoxin with an herbal
extract from St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum). Clin Pharmacol
Ther 1999; 66: 338-345.

216 Smith P et al. The influence of St John's wort on the pharmacokinetics
and protein binding of imatinib mesylate. Pharmacotherapy 2004; 24
(11): 1508-1514.

217 Frye RF et al. Effect of St John's wort on imatinib mesylate
pharmacokinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 76: 323-329.

218 Pfrunder A e¢ al. Interaction of St John's wort with low-dose oral
contraceptive therapy: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 2003; 56: 683-690.

219 Hall SD et al. The interaction between St John's wort and an oral
contraceptive. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2003; 74: 525-535.

220 Maurer A et al. Interaction of St John's wort extract with
phenprocoumon (abstract). Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1999; 55: A22.

221 Kawaguchi A e¢ al. Drug interaction between St John's wort and
quazepam. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 58: 403-410.

222 Sugimoto K-I et al. Different effects of St John's wort on the
pharmacokinetics of simvastatin and pravastatin. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2001; 70: 518-524.

223 Hebert MF et al. Effects of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) on
tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol
2004; 44: 89-94,

224 Tannergren C et al. St John's wort decreases the bioavailability of R-
and S-verapamil through induction of the first-pass metabolism. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 298-309.

225 Jiang X et al. Effect of St John's wort and ginseng on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy
subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57: 592-599.

226 Kerb R et al. Urinary 6-beta-hydroxycortisol excretion rate is affected
by treatment with hypericum extract. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1992; 52:
607.

227 Roby CA et al. St John's wort impact on CYP3A4 activity. Poster no.
129 presented at the 39th Annual Meeting of the New Clinical Drug
Evaluation Unit Program, June 1999, Florida.

228 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of St John's wort on drug metabolism by
induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme. JAMA 2003; 290: 1500-
1504.

229 Wang Z et al. The effects of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
on human cytochrome P450 activity. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2001; 70:
317-326.

230 Hennessy M et al. St John's wort increases expression of P-
glycoprotein: implications for drug interactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol
2002; 53: 75-82.

231 Zhou S e¢ al. Pharmacokinetic interactions of drugs with St John's
wort. J Pscychopharmacol 2004; 18: 262-276.

232 Wang L-S et al. St John's wort induces both cytochrome P450 3A4-
catalyzed sulfoxidation and 2C19-dependent hydroxylation of
omeprazole. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 191-197.

233 Burstein AH et al. Lack of effect of St John's wort on carbamazepine
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2000;
68: 605-612.

234 Morimoto T e¢ al. Effect of St John's wort on the pharmacokinetics of
theophylline in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 44: 95-101.

235 Ereshefsky B et al. Determination of St John's wort differential
metabolism at CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, using dextromethorphan probe
methodology. Poster no. 130 presented at the 39th Annual Meeting of
the New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit Program, June 1999, Florida.

236 Gewertz N et al. Determination of the differential effects of St John's
wort on the CYP1A2 and NAT2 metabolic pathways using caffeine

St John’s Wort

probe methodology. Poster no. 131 presented at the 39th Annual
Meeting of the New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit Program, June
1999, Florida.

237 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
on cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in healthy volunteers. Life
Sci 2000; 66(9): 133-139.

238 Wenk M et al. Effect of St John's wort on the activities of CYP1A2,
CYP3A4,CYP2D6, N-acetyltransferase 2, and xanthine oxidase in
healthy males and females. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57: 495-499.

239 Arold G et al. No relevant interaction with alprazolam, caffeine,
tolbutamide, and digoxin by treatment with a low-hyperforin St John's
wort extract. Planta Med 2005; 71: 331-337.

240 Johne A et al. Impact of cytochrome P-450 inhibition by cimetidine
and induction by carbamazepine on the kinetics of hypericin and
pseudohypericin in healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 60:
617-622.

241 Komoroski BJ e¢ al. Induction and inhibition of cytochromes P450 by
the St John's wort constituent hyperforin in human hepatocyte
cultures. Drug Metab Disposition 2004; 32: 512-518.

242 Chen Y et al. Induction of human CYP2C9 by rifampicin, hyperforin,
and phenobarbital is mediated by the pregnane X receptor. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2004; 308: 495-501.

243 Cantoni L et al. Hyperforin contributes to the hepatic CYP3A-
inducing effect of Hypericum perforatum extract in the mouse.
Toxicol Sci 2003; 75: 25-30.

244 Perloff MD e¢ al. Saint John's wort: an in vitro analysis of P-
glycoprotein induction due to extended exposure. Br J Pharmacol
2001; 134: 1601-1608.

245 Tian R et al. Functional induction and de-induction of P-glycoprotein
by St John's wort and its ingredients in a human colon
adenocarcinoma cell line. Drug Metab Disposition 2005; 33: 547-554.

246 Budzinski JW et al. An in vitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450
3A4 inhibition by selected commercial herbal extracts and tinctures.
Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 273-282.

247 Strandell J et al. An approach to the in vitro evaluation of potential
for cytochrome P450 enzyme inhibition from herbals and other
natural remedies. Phytomedicine 2004; 11: 98-104.

248 Wang E et al. Quantitative characterization of direct P-glycoprotein
inhibition by St John's wort constituents hypericin and hyperforin. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56: 123-128.

249 Peebles KA et al. Catalytic inhibition of human DNA topoisomerase
Ila by hypericin, a naphthodianthrone from St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum). Biochemical Pharmacol 2001; 62: 1059-
1070.

250 Martin-Facklam M et al. Undeclared exposure to St John's wort in
hospitalised patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 58: 437-441.

251 Redvers A et al. How many patients self-medicate with St John's wort?
Psychiatric Bull 2001; 25: 254-256.

252 Beckman SE et al. Consumer use of St John's wort: a survey on
effectiveness, safety and tolerability. Pharmacotherapy 2000; 20: 568—
S74,

253 Hindmarch M, Oakeshott P. Interactions of the oral contraceptive pill
with antibiotics and St John's wort: knowledge of female college
students. Family Prac 2002; 19(6): 708.

254 Lee A et al. The safety of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
during breastfeeding. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 966-968.

255 Grush LR et al. St John's wort during pregnancy. JAMA 1998; 280(18):
1566.

256 Klier CM et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) — is it safe
during breastfeeding? Pharmacopsychiatry 2002; 35: 29-30.

257 Rayburn WE et al. Effect of prenatally administered hypericum (St
John's wort) on growth and physical maturation of mouse offspring.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001; 184: 191-195.

258 Gregoretti B et al. Toxicity of Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort)
administered during pregnancy and lactation in rats. Toxicol Applied
Pharmacol 2004; 200: 201-205.

----- PAGE 581 -----
Stone Root

, ,
appropriateness of medicinal use of stone root should be
considered. Excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Stone
root should not be used during pregnancy and lactation. The
potential for stone root preparations to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)

Collinsonia canadensis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Collinsonia punctata Ell., C. canadensis var. punctata (Ell.) Gray,
Heal-All, Knob Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

a

Terpenoids Pentacyclic triterpene caulophyllogenin,'” saponin

glycosides.
Other constituents An unidentified alkaloid, mucilage, resin,
tannins, essential oil.

Other parts of the plant Leaves and stems contain flavonoids
2,5-dihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxyflavanone, baicalein-6,7-dimethyl
ether, norwogenin-7,8-dimethyl ether and tetrochrysin (S-
hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone).”

Food Use

Stone root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Stone root is stated to possess antilithic, litholytic, mild
diaphoretic and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has been

used for renal calculus, lithuria, and specifically for urinary
G7, G64)

calculus."

Flavonoids (in leaves and stems)

OH
CH,O. 0. 1@)

CH3O

OH O

OH O

2,5-dihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxyflavanone

norwogenin-7,8-dimethyl ether tetrochrysin
(5-hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone)

Triterpenes

HO

HO.

caulophyllogenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of stone root.

Figure 2 Stone root (Collinsonia canadensis).

----- PAGE 582 -----
Figure 3 Stone root — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and older pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried root 14g as a decoction three times daily.'©”
Liquid extract 14 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture of Collinsonia 2-8 mL.‘0!

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Stone Root

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical and
preclinical safety and toxicity data for stone root and further
investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of stone root and_ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for stone root prepara-
tions to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of stone root has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicological information, the use of stone root during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Piletabs.

References

1 Buckingham J, ed. Dictionary of Natural Products on CD-ROM. Boca
Raton: CRC Press, 2005.

2. Stevens JF et al. A novel 2-hydroxyflavanone from Collinsonia
canadensis. ] Nat Prod 1999; 62: 392-394.

----- PAGE 583 -----
a lack of robu al research assessing the efficacy and
safety of tansy. Tansy yields an extremely toxic volatile oil,
which should not be used internally or externally.“¢>® In view
of this, the use of tansy as a herbal medicine is not justified
even though documented studies have supported the
traditional uses of the herb as a choleretic and anthelmintic
agent. Tansy is contra-indicated in pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Tanacetum vulgare L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Chrysanthemum audiberti (DC.) P. Fourn., C. tanacetum Karsch
non Vis., C. vulgare (L.) Bernh. non (Lam.) Gaterau, Pyrethrum
vulgare (L.) Boiss. Tanacetum audibertii (Req.) DC., Tanacetum

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'@®

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Tansy is not included in the GSL.'*”

Constituents

Steroids {-Sitosterol (major), campesterol, cholesterol, stigmas-
terol and taraxasterol.'”

Terpenoids %-Amyrin (major), B-amyrin, sesquiterpene lactones
including arbusculin-A, tanacetin, germacrene D, crispolide;*>>
tanacetols A and B.°

Volatile oils 0.12-0.18%. Major components as B-thujone (up to
95%) and camphor, others include &-pinene, borneol, 1,8-cineole,
umbellone and sabinene. At least ten different chemotypes have
been identified in which camphor was the most frequently
occurring main component and thujone second.”

Other constituents Gum, mucilage, resin and tannins.

Food Use

Tansy is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that tansy
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although there is insufficient information for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity. In addition, the Council of
Europe recommends that the concentration of thujones present in
food products is restricted to 0.5 mg/kg."©'9 Tansy oil is

Monoterpenes

Oo fe)

camphor
6-thujone

Sesquiterpene lactones

sr

HO

arbusculin A

Triterpenes

a-amyrin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of tansy.

prohibited from use as a food flavouring by the Food Additives
and Contaminants Committee (FACC) in view of the thujone
content.'*

Herbal Use

Tansy is stated to possess anthelmintic, carminative and
antispasmodic properties and to act as a stimulant to abdominal
viscera. Traditionally, it has been used for nematode infestation,
topically for scabies (as a decoction) and pruritus ani (as an
ointment), and specifically for roundworm or threadworm
infestation in children.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro antispasmodic activity on rabbit intestine, and in vivo
choleretic activity in the dog have been documented for tansy

----- PAGE 584 -----
Figure 2 Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare).

extracts. It was suggested that the choleretic action might be
attributable to caffeic acid, a known bile stimulant that is present
in tansy.) Anthelmintic activity in dogs has been described for
tansy oil, an ether extract of the oil, and for B-thujone."% Daily
intragastric doses of a tansy extract given to rabbits have been
found to reduce serum lipid concentrations and inhibit further
development of hypercholesterolaemia. In addition, it was noted
that recovery of blood sugar concentrations was inhibited in
animals given twice daily doses. In vitro antifungal activity in 15
pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi has been reported.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of tansy
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Aqueous infusions and alcoholic extracts have been reported to
be clinically effective bile stimulants in patients with liver and gall
bladder disorders. The treatment alleviated pain and increased
appetite and digestion.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

. . . F G58) ¢
Tansy oil contains the toxic ketone B-thujone.(©°* Symptoms of
tansy oil poisoning are attributable to the thujone content and
include rapid and weak pulse, severe gastritis, violent spasms and

‘S22) Documented fatalities have mainly been asso-

convulsions.
ciated with ingestion of the oil, although fatal cases of poisoning
have occurred with infusions and powders.” The ratio of toxic
to therapeutic dose has been reported as 2.5: 1 and it was noted
that all tansy preparations should be administered with castor
oil. Tansy yields potentially allergenic sesquiterpene lactones
which have been implicated in the aetiology of contact dermatitis.

Instances of contact dermatitis to tansy have been documented.
G51)

Preclinical data

An oral LDso value for tansy oil is stated as 1.15 g/kg body
weight.”

Figure 3 Tansy — dried drug substance (herb).

In vitro and in vivo antitumour activity has been documented
for tansy.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Tansy oil is toxic and should not be used internally or
externally. Fatalities have been reported following ingestion
of infusions and extracts. Tansy contains allergenic sesquiterpene
lactones and may cause an allergic reaction.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of tansy to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that tansy has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation ‘Tansy is contra-indicated in
pregnancy and lactation. Tansy is reputed to affect the menstrual

cycle and utero-activity has been documented in animal studies.
The volatile oil contains B-thujone, a known hepatotoxin.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Calmo.

References

1 Chandler RF et al. Herbal remedies of the Maritime Indians: Sterols
and triterpenes of Tanacetum vulgare L. (Tansy). Lipids 1982; 17:
102-106.

2 Chandra A et al. Germacranolides and an alkyl glucoside from
Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1463-1465.

3 Appendino G. Crispolide, an unusual hydroperoxysesquiterpene
lactone from Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 1099-1102.

4 Holopainen M et al. A study on tansy chemotypes. Planta Med 1987;
53: 284-287.

5  Appendino G et al. Tanacetols A and B, non-volatile uiterpene
alcohols, from Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 509-512.

6 Opdyke DLJ. Tansy oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1976; 14: 869-871.

7 Hardin JW, Arena JM, eds. Human Poisoning from Native and
Cultivated Plants, 2nd edn. North Carolina: Duke University, 1974:
150-153.

----- PAGE 585 -----
; Thyme

standardised thyme extracts based on the phenolic volatile
components may not be appropriate because antispasmodic
actions previously attributed to these compounds may be
attributable to other constituents. Thyme should not be
ingested during pregnancy and lactation in quantities greater
than those found in foods.

Species (Family)

*Thymus vulgaris L.
+Thymus zygis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Thyme, French Thyme, Garden Thyme, Rubbed Thyme
*Thymus ilerdensis Gonz. Frag. ex Costa., T. webbianus Rouy, T:
valentinus Rouy., T. aestivus Reut. ex Willk., T. welwitschii Boiss.

subsp ilerdensis (Gonz. Frag. ex Costa) Nyman
+T. sabulicola Coss., T. sylvestris Hoffman & Link

Monoterpenes
OH |
thymol carvacrol
Flavonoids
OH
Cc) ‘OCH;
CH3O0°
OH O
cirsileneol
OH
H
HO °. OC}
Oo ”
OH O
eriodictyol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of thyme.

Part(s) Used

Flowering top, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007°08°

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition’@*”

Ph Eur 20078

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G22, G52 and G58.

Volatile oils 0.8-2.6%. Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
1.2%.'C8 S89) Phenols as major components (20-80%) primarily
thymol and carvacrol; others include p-cymene and y-terpinene
(monoterpenes), linalool, %-terpineol, and thujan-4-ol (alcohols);
biphenyl compounds of monoterpene origin.” A detailed
analysis of the volatile oil components is given elsewhere.'°?”

Flavonoids
eriodictyol.

Cirsilineol, 8-methoxycirsilineol, thymonin and

thymonin

----- PAGE 586 -----
Other constituents Caffeic acid, oleanolic acid, ursolic acid,
rosmarinic acid, resins, saponins and tannins.

Food Use

Thyme is commonly used as a culinary herb, and thyme oil is used
in food flavouring. Previously, thyme has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'@%

Herbal Use

Thyme is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, anti-
tussive, expectorant, secretomotor, bactericidal, anthelmintic and
astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for dyspepsia,
chronic gastritis, asthma, diarrhoea in children, enuresis in
children, laryngitis, tonsillitis (as a gargle), and specifically for
pertussis and bronchitis.'C? C4 97 G32 G8; 650, G52,C6), The Ger-
man Commission E approved internal use for treating symptoms
of bronchitis, whooping cough and catarrh of the upper
respiratory tract.©?) Thyme is used in various combinations
with anise oil, eucalyptus oil, fennel oil, fennel fruit, Iceland moss,
lime flower, liquorice root, marshmallow root, primrose root and
star anise fruit for catarrh and diseases of the upper respiratory
tract."

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily;©? 1-
2g, (C3652

Liquid Extract of Thyme (BPC 1949) 0.64.0 mL.
Elixir of Thyme (BPC 1949) 4-8 mL.

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily,“” four

drops.(6?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antitussive, expectorant and antispasmodic actions are considered
to be the major pharmacological properties of thyme,” and have
been associated with the volatile oils (e.g. thymol, carvacrol) and
flavonoid constituents. Thyme oil has produced hypotensive and

Figure 2. Thyme (Thymus vulgaris).

LON + ah

Figure 3_ Thyme - dried drug substance (leaf).

respiratory stimulant effects in rabbits following oral or
intramuscular administration, and in cats following intravenous
injection;“*” an increase in rhythmic heart contraction was also
observed in rabbits.‘*?

In vitro antispasmodic activity of thyme and related Thymus
species has been associated with the phenolic components of the
volatile oil and with the flavonoid constituents; their mode of
action is thought to involve calcium-channel blockage.'’* The
flavonoids thymonin, circilineol and 8-methoxycircilineol have
potent spasmolytic activity in guineapig trachea preparations in
vitro.)

Analgesic and antipyretic properties in mice have been reporte:
for a thyme extract.)

Thymol possesses anthelmintic (especially hookworms), anti-
bacterial and antifungal properties.“ Thymol and thyme oi
have antibacterial activity against certain organisms and thymol,
carvacrol and thyme oil have antifungal activity against a range of
organisms.‘

Thyme oil inhibits prostaglandin synthesis; rosmarinic acid has
anti-inflammatory activity, inhibiting complement in rats an
some of the functions of polymorphonucleocytes.'** Rosmarinic
acid reduced oedema produced by cobra venom factor in rats, ani
inhibited passive cutaneous anaphylaxis and impairment of in
vivo activation of mouse macrophages by heat killed Corynebac-

terium parvum.'° Activity may relate to complement inactiva-
« (GSO)
tion.

Clinical studies

Generally, well-designed clinical studies assessing the effects of
thyme are lacking. A randomised, double-blind, controlled trial
involving 60 patients with productive cough compared syrup of
thyme and bromhexine over a five-day period. Both groups were
similar in self-reported symptom relief.“

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for thyme and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Thyme oil is a dermal and mucous membrane irritan
Toxic symptoms documented for thymol include nausea, vomit-
ing, gastric pain, headache, dizziness, convulsions, coma, and
cardiac and respiratory arrest.'°??) Thymol is present in some
toothpaste preparations, and has been reported to cause cheilitis

(O58)

T

----- PAGE 587 -----
T

Thyme

and glossitis. Hyperaemia and severe inflammation have been
described for thyme oil used in bath preparations.'°”

Preclinical data

A concentrated extract of thyme decreased locomotor activity and
caused a slight slowing down of respiration in mice following oral
administration of doses of 0.5-3.0 g/kg, equivalent to 4.3-26.0g
dried plant material.“ In rats, oral LDso values stated for
thyme oil include 2.84 g/kg'C and 4.7 g/kg in rats, and >5 g/kg
following dermal administration. In mice, oral administration
of a concentrated ethanol extract of herb in subacute toxicity tests
resulted in increased weights of liver and testes. Also in mice, a
dose of 0.9 g daily for three months resulted in mortality rates of
30% and 10% in males and females, respectively. Thyme oil had
no mutagenic or DNA-damaging activity in either the Ames test
or Bacillus subtilis rec-assay.'°™

Contra-indications, Warnings

Thyme oil is toxic and should be used with considerable caution.
It should not be taken internally and only applied externally if
diluted in a suitable carrier oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of thyme to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of thyme during pregnancy and lactation, provided that
doses do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.
Traditionally, thyme is reputed to affect the menstrual cycle and,
therefore, large amounts should not be ingested.

Husten (Bpouxunym Macraaxu or Kamas); Tussamag (Tycca-
mar). Switzerland: Thymusin N.

Africa: Cough Elixir. Spain: Natusor Asmaten; Natusor
Farinol; Natusor Gripotul; Natusor Infenol; Natusor Renal;
Natusor Sinulan; Pilka; Wobenzimal; Wobenzimal. Switzer-
land: DemoPectol; DemoPectol; Makaphyt Gouttes antitus-
sives; Makaphyt Sirop; Nican; Pectoral N; Strath Gouttes
contre la toux; Tisane pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale
pour les enfants. Thailand: Solvopret; Solvopret TP. UK: Herb
and Honey Cough Elixir. Venezuela: Codebromil; Mixagel.

References

1 Van Den Broucke CO. The therapeutic value of Thymus species.
Fitoterapia 1983; 4: 171-174.

2 Van Den Broucke CO, Lernli JA. Pharmacological and chemical
investigation of thyme liquid extracts. Planta Med 1981, 41: 129-135.

3 Cruz T et al. The spasmolytic activity of the essential oil of Thymus
baeticus Boiss in rats. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 106-108.

4 Blazquez MA et al. Effects of Thymus species extracts on rat
duodenum isolated smooth muscle contraction. Phytother Res 1989; 3:
41-42.

5 Mohsin A et al. Analgesic, antipyretic activity and phytochemical
screening of some plants used in traditional Arab system of medicine.
Fitoterapia 1989; 60: 174.

6 Opdyke DLJ. Thyme oil, red. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 1003—
1004.

----- PAGE 588 -----
- Uva-Ursi

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of uva-ursi is well documented with
hydroquinone derivatives, especially arbutin, identified as the
major active constituents. Documented pharmacological
actions justify the herbal use of uva-ursi as a urinary antiseptic.
However, clinical information is lacking and further studies are
required to determine the true usefulness of uva-ursi in the
treatment of urinary tract infections. Although hydroquinone
has been reported to be toxic in large amounts,
concentrations provided by the ingestion of therapeutic doses
of uva-ursi are not thought to represent a risk to human
health. Excessive use of uva-ursi and use during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. (Ericaceae)

Synonym(s)

Bearberry

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C”
ESCOP 2003'¢7°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'G3?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. myricetin, quercetin) and_ their
glycosides including hyperin, isoquercitrin, myricitrin and querci-
trin.

Iridoids Asperuloside (disputed), monotropein.

Quinones Total content at least 6%, mainly arbutin (S—15%) and
methyl-arbutin (glycosides), with lesser amounts of piceoside” (a
glycoside), free hydroquinone and free p-methoxyphenol.”)
Tannins 6-7% (range 640%). Hydrolysable-type (e.g. corilagin
pyranoside); ellagic and gallic acids (usually associated with
hydrolysable tannins).

Quinones OR

CH,OH_ SS
HO

HO
R
arbutin H
methylarbutin CH3
piceoside COCH;

Figure 1 Selected constituents of uva-ursi.

Terpenoids  «-Amyrin, g-amyrin acetate, B-amyrin, lupeol,
uvaol, ursolic acid, and a mixture of mono- and di-ketonic o-

amyrin derivatives.

Other constituents Acids (malic, quinic), allantoin, resin (e.g.
ursone), volatile oil (trace) and wax.

Other plant parts The root is reported to contain unedoside
(iridoid glucoside).

Food Use

Uva-ursi is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Uva-ursi is stated to possess diuretic, urinary antiseptic, and
astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis,
urethritis, dysuria, pyelitis, lithuria, and specifically for acute
catarrhal cystitis with dysuria and highly acidic urine.“©?°%°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Figure 2. Uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi).

----- PAGE 589 -----
Uva-Ursi

Figure 3 Uva-ursi — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dried leaves 1.54.0 g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 1.5-4.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S?

Concentrated Infusion of Bearberry (BPC 1934) 2-4mL.
Fresh Infusion of Bearberry (BPC 1934) 15-30 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Uva-ursi has exhibited antimicrobial activity towards a variety of
organisms including Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis,
Escherichia coli, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Shigella sonnei and
Shigella flexneri.” The antimicrobial activity of arbutin towards
bacteria implicated in producing urinary tract infections, has been
found to be directly dependent on the B-glucosidase activity of the
infective organism. Highest enzymatic activity was shown by
Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Streptococcus genera, and lowest by
Escherichia coli.® The minimum inhibitory concentration for
arbutin is reported to be 0.4-0.8% depending on the micro-
organism. Aqueous and methanolic extracts have demonstrated
molluscicidal activity against Biomphalaria glabrata, at a

concentration of 50 ppm.

tannin constituents (con

° The activity was attributed to the
lensed and hydrolysable).

Of 915 patients treated for six weeks, success was reported in
about 70%. The design of this study, however, does not allow the
observed effects to be attributed to uva-ursi.

The antiseptic and diuretic properties claimed for uva-ursi can
be attributed to the hydroquinone derivatives, especially arbutin.
The latter is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract virtually
unchanged and during renal excretion is hydrolysed to yield the
active principle, hydroquinone, which exerts an antiseptic and
astringent action on the urinary mucous membranes.''*!*) The
crude extract is reported to be more effective than isolated arbutin
as an astringent and antiseptic."“** This may be due to the other
hydroquinone derivatives, in addition to arbutin, that are present
in the crude extract and which will also yield hydroquinone.
Furthermore, it has been stated that the presence of gallic acid in
the crude extract may prevent B-glucosidase cleavage of arbutin in
the gastrointestinal tract before absorption, thereby increasing the
amount of hydroquinone released during renal excretion.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for uva-ursi and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hydroquinone is reported to be toxic if ingested in large
quantities: 1g (equivalent to 6-20g plant material) has caused
tinnitus, nausea and vomiting, sense of suffocation, shortness of
breath, cyanosis, convulsions, delirium and collapse.'°**) A dose
of Sg (equivalent to 30-100g of plant material) has proved
fatal.'“*® In view of the high tannin content, prolonged use of
uva-ursi may cause chronic liver impairment.'“*”

Preclinical data

Cytotoxic activity has been documented for hydroquinone (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Uva-ursi herb can sometimes be adulterated with box leaves
(Buxus sempervirens), which contain toxic steroidal alkaloids.
However, no cases of poisoning as a result of such adulteration
have been reported.'‘“*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Uva-ursi requires an alkaline urine for it to be effective as a

Anti-inflammatory activity (rat paw oedema tests) has been

urinary antiseptic; an al

aline reaction is needed to yield

documented for uva-ursi

against a variety of chemical inducers

such as carrageenan, histamine and prostaglandins.

Uva-ursi failed to exhibit any in vitro uterotonic action when
tested on rabbit and guinea-pig uteri."

Hydroquinone has been reported to show a concentration-
dependent cytotoxic activity on cultured rat hepatoma cells (HTC
line); arbutin was not found to inhibit growth of the HTC cells.'”)
It was stated that hydroquinone appeared to have greater
cytotoxic activity towards rat hepatoma cells than agents like
azauridin or colchicine, but less than valtrate from valerian
(Valeriana officinalis). The cytoxicity of hydroquinone has also
been tested on L1210, CA-755 and S-180 tumour systems.”

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of uva-ursi is limited and
rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

A herbal preparation, whose ingredients included uva-ursi,
hops and peppermint, has been used to treat patients suffering
from compulsive strangury, enuresis and painful micturition.

hydroquinone from the inactive esters such as arbutin.'“ Patients
have been advised to avoid eating highly acidic foods, such as
acidic fruits and their juices. The presence of hydroquinone
may impart a greenish-brown colour to the urine, which darkens
following exposure to air due to oxidation of hydroquinone.

Excessive use of uva-ursi should be avoided in view of the high
tannin content and potential toxicity of hydroquinone.

Prolonged use of uva-ursi to treat a urinary tract infection is
not advisable. Patients in whom symptoms persist for longer than
48 hours should consult their doctor.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of uva-ursi to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Large doses of uva-ursi are reported to
be oxytocic,““*” although in vitro studies have reported a lack of
utero-activity. In view of the potential toxicity of hydroquinone, the
use of uva-ursi during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

----- PAGE 590 -----
Backache; Buchu Backache Compound Tablets; Cascade; De
Witt's K & B Pills; Diuretabs; Fenneherb Cystaid; Fenneherb
Prementaid; HealthAid Boldo-Plus; HRI Water Balance; Kas-
Bah; Modern Herbals Water Retention; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea;
Prementaid; Sciargo; Sciatica Tablets; Tabritis; Tabritis
Tablets; Uvacin; Watershed. USA: CitriMax Plus.

1

2

10

cay

12

13

14

15

Uva-Ursi

References

Jahodar L et al. Investigation of iridoid substances in Arctostaphylos
uva-ursi. Pharmazie 1978; 33: 536-537.

Karikas GA et al. Isolation of piceoside from Arctostaphylos uva-ursi.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 307-308.

Jahodar L, Leifertova I. The evaluation of p-methoxyphenol in the
leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. Pharmazie 1979; 34: 188-189.
Droliac A. Triterpenes of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Spreng. Plant Méd
Phytothér 1980; 14: 155-158.

Malterud KE. The non-polar components of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
leaves. Medd Nor Farm Selsk 1980; 42: 15-20.

Jahodar L et al. Unedoside in Arctostaphylos uva-ursi roots.
Pharmazie 1981; 36: 294-296.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Jahodar L eg al. Antimicrobial action of arbutin and the extract from
the leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi in vitro. Ceskoslov Farm 1985;
34: 174-178.

Schaufelberger D, Hostettmann K. On the molluscicidal activity of
tannin containing plants. Planta Med 1983; 48: 105-107.

Shipochliev T, Fournadjiev G. Spectrum of the antiinflammatory effect
of Arctostaphylos uva ursi and Achillea millefolium, L. Probl Vutr
Med 1984; 12: 99-107.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Assaf MH eft al. Preliminary study of the phenolic glycosides from
Origanum majorana; quantitative estimation of arbutin; cytotoxic
activity of hydroquinone. Planta Med 1987; 53: 343-345.

Lenau H et al. Wirksamkeit und Vertraglichkeit von Cysto Fink bei
Patienten mit Reizblase und/oder Harninkontinenz. Therapiewoche
1984; 34: 6054-6059.

Frohne D. Untersuchungen zur Frage der Harndesinfizierenden
Wirkungen von Barentraubenblatt-Extrakten. Planta Med 1970; 18:
23-25.

Natural drugs with glycosides. In: Stahl E, ed. Drug Analysis in
Chromatography and Microscopy. Ann Arbor: Ann Arbor Scientific
Publishers, 1973: 97.

----- PAGE 591 -----
Valerian

recommended. Excessive consumption of alcohol whils'
receiving treatment with valerian root preparations should
avoided. Patients should seek medical advice if symptoms
worsen beyond two weeks’ continuous treatment with
valerian. Patients with known sensitivity to valerian should not
use valerian root preparations. The potential for preparations
of valerian to interfere with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar (such as
barbiturates and other sedatives) or opposing effects, should
be considered.

There are isolated reports of adverse effects, mainly
hepatotoxic reactions, associated with the use of single-
ingredient and combination valerian-containing products.
However, causal relationships for these reports could not be
established as other factors could have been responsible for
the observed effects.

Species (Family)

Valeriana officinalis L. (Valerianaceae)

Synonym(s)

All-Heal, Belgian Valerian, Common Valerian, Fragrant Valerian,
Garden Valerian

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘? ©”

BHC 1992'0°

BHP 1996”)

BHMA 20030°°

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission EC?)
EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph'°*”
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'**

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24‘80)

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'@”)

Constituents
See also References 1-5.

Alkaloids Pyridine type. Actinidine, chatinine, skyanthine,
valerianine and valerine.

Iridoids (valepotriates) Valtrates (e.g. valtrate, valtrate iso-
valeroxyhydrin, acevaltrate, valechlorine), didrovaltrates (e.g.
didrovaltrate, homodidrovaltrate, deoxydidrovaltrate, homode-
oxydidrovaltrate, isovaleroxyhydroxydidrovaltrate) and isoval-
trates (e.g. isovaltrate, 7-epideacetylisovaltrate). Valtrate and
didrovaltrate are documented as the major components. Valer-
osidate (iridoid glucoside). The valepotriates are unstable and
decompose on storage or processing; the main degradation
products are baldrinal and homobaldrinal. The baldrinals may
react further and are unlikely to be present in finished products.

Steroids .-sitosterol, clionasterol 3-B-O-glucoside and a mixture
of 6'-O-acyl-B-p-glucosyl clionasterols where the acyl moieties are
hexadecanoyl (major), 8E,11E-octadecadienoyl and 14-methyl-
pentadecanoyl.”

Volatile oils 0.5-2%. Numerous identified components include
monoterpenes (e.g. &- and B-pinene, camphene, borneol, eugenol,
isoeugenol) present mainly as esters, sesquiterpenes (e.g. B-
bisabolene, caryophyllene, valeranone, ledol, pacifigorgiol, patch-
ouli alcohol, valerianol, valerenol and a series of valereny] esters,

valerenal, valerenic acid with acetoxy and hydroxy derivatives).
11)

Other constituents Amino acids (e.g. arginine, y-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), glutamine, tyrosine),""'” caffeic and chlorogenic
acids (polyphenolic), methyl 2-pyrrolketone, choline, tannins
(type unspecified), gum and resin.

----- PAGE 592 -----
Monoterpenes

OCOCH;

bornyl acetate

Valerian ‘ser

Iridoids
CH,OR? R! R2 R?
valtrate isovaleryl isovaleryl acetyl
isovaltrate isovaleryl acetyl isovaleryl
acevaltrate _isovaleryl © f-acetoxyvaleryl —_ acetyl
R' R? RS RY
didrovaltrate isovaleryl acetyl isovaleryl H
isovaleryloxy- isovalery! acetyl —2-(isovaleryl OH
R?0' hydroxydidro- -oxy)-isovaleryl
valtrate
(isovalery! = (CH3)2 CH = CH2CO-)
Sesquiterpenes
CH;OCOCH; RP
S
S0'
CHO
baldrinal
R! RI R2
valerenal CHO H
valerenic acid COOH H
acetoxyvalerenic acid COOH OCOCH3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of valerian.

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, valerian
consists of the dried underground parts of V. officinalis L.,
including the rhizome surrounded by the roots and stolons.'@8"
S84) Tr contains not less than 5 mL/kg of essential oil for the whole
drug and not less than 3 mL/kg for the cut drug, both calculated
with reference to the dried drug, and not less than 0.17% of
sesquiterpenic acids expressed as valerenic acid, calculated with
reference to the dried drug.'©*” As with other plants, there can be
variation in the content of active compounds (e.g. valerenic acid
derivatives and valepotriates) found in valerian rhizomes and
roots.) Detailed descriptions of V. officinalis root for use in
botanical, microscopic and macroscopic identification have been
published, along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the
assessment of V. officinalis root raw material.‘¢?

Food Use

Valerian is not generally used as a food. Valerian is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (root:
category 5) (see Appendix 3, Table 1).'S Previously, valerian has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Valerian is stated to possess sedative, mild anodyne, hypnotic,
antispasmodic, carminative and hypotensive properties. Tradi-

tionally, it has been used for hysterical states, excitability,
insomnia, hypochondriasis, migraine, cramp, intestinal colic,
rheumatic pains, dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for conditions
presenting nervous excitability.'C> S% 97 C% SSS) Modern inter-
est in valerian is focused on its use as a sedative and hypnotic.
A Community Herbal Monograph adopted by the European
Medicines Agency's Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
states the following therapeutic indications for valerian root:

Figure 2 Valerian (Valeriana officinalis).

----- PAGE 593 -----
Valerian

10M 12 13: 15 16
Figure 3. Valerian - dried drug substance (rhizome).

traditional use, for support of mental relaxation and to aid
natural sleep; well-established use, for the relief of mild nervous
tension and difficulty in falling asleep.C*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 1-3 g as an infusion or decoction up to three
times daily.”

Tincture = 3-SmL (1:5; 70% ethanol) up to three times
daily;‘C° 1-3 mL, once to several times daily.'C?

Extracts Amount equivalent to 2-3 g drug, once to several times
daily;'C? 2-6 mL of 1:2 liquid extract daily.“

Doses given in older texts vary. For example: Valerian Liquid
Extract (BPC 1963) 0.3-1.0 mL; Simple Tincture of Valerian (BPC
1949) 4-8mL; Concentrated Valerian Infusion (BPC 1963) 2-
4mL.

Clinical trials inves

igating the effects of valerian root extracts
on sleep parameters have used varying dosages, for example,
valerian extract 400 mg/day (drug to extract ratio of 3:1)" and
1215 mg/day (drug to extract ratio of 5 to 6:1).

Pharmacological Actions

Sedative and hypnotic properties have been described for certain
valerian rhizome/root preparations following preclinical and
clinical studies. However, the available scientific evidence is
strong; also it remains unclear precisely which of the constituents
of valerian are responsible for the observed sedative and hypnotic
properties. Attention had focused on the volatile oil, and then
the valepotriates and their degradation products, as the consti-
tuents responsible. However, it appeared that the effects of the
volatile oil could not account for the whole action of the drug, and
the valepotriates, which degrade rapidly, are unlikely to be present
in finished products in significant concentrations. Current
thinking is that the overall effect of valerian is due to several
different groups of constituents and their varying mechanisms of
action. Therefore, the activity of different valerian preparations
will depend on their content and concentrations of several types of
One mechanism of action is likely to involve
increased concentrations of the inhibitory transmitter GABA in
the brain. Increased concentrations of GABA are associated with a

constituent.

decrease in CNS activity and this action may, therefore, be
involved in the reported sedative activity.

In vitro and animal studies

Sedative properties have been documented for valerian and have
been attributed to both the volatile oil and valepotriate
(1617) Screening of the volatile oil components for
sedative activity concluded valerenal and valerenic acid to be the
most active compounds, causing ataxia in mice at a dose of 50 mg/
kg by intraperitoneal injection.“ Further studies in mice
described valerenic acid as a general CNS depressant similar to
pentobarbitone, requiring high doses (100 mg/kg by intraperito-
neal injection) for activity."® A dose of 400 mg/kg resulted in
muscle spasms, convulsions and death.''*) Valerenic acid was also
reported to prolong pentobarbitone-induced sleep in mice,
resulting in a hangover effect. Biochemical studies have docu-
mented that valerenic acid inhibits the enzyme system responsible
for the central catabolism of GABA." An aqueous extract of
roots and rhizomes of V. officinalis (standardised to 55mg
valerenic acids per 100g extract) inhibited the uptake and
stimulated the release of radiolabelled GABA in_ isolated
synaptosomes from rat brain cortex.?”*" Further work suggested
that this aqueous extract of valerian induces the release of GABA
by reversal of the GABA carrier, and that the mechanism is Na*
dependent and Ca** independent.” The extract contained a high
concentration of GABA (about 5 mmol/L) which was shown to be
sufficient to induce the release of radiolabelled GABA by this type
of mechanism.?” Aqueous and hydroalcoholic (ethanol) extracts
of valerian root displaced radiolabelled muscimol binding to
synaptic membranes (a measure of the influence of drugs on
GABAg receptors). However, valerenic acid (0.1 mmol/L) did not
displace radiolabelled muscimol in this model.°*) Other in vitro
studies using rat brain tissue have shown that hydroalcoholic and
aqueous total extracts of V. officinalis root, and an aqueous
fraction derived from the hydroalcoholic extract, show affinity for
GABA, receptors, although far lower than that of the neuro-
transmitter  itself.°" However, a lipophilic fraction of the
hydroalcoholic extract, hydroxyvalerenic acid and dihydrovaltrate
did not show any affinity for the GABA, receptor in this model.

The effects of valerian extracts on benzodiazepine binding to
rat cortical membranes have also been explored. Very low
concentrations of ethanolic extract of V. officinalis had no effect
on radiolabelled flunitrazepam binding in this model, although
concentrations of 107-'° to 10°-*mg/mL increased radiolabelled
flunitrazepam binding with an ECso of 4.13 x 107 !° mg/mL.)
However, flunitrazepam binding was inhibited at higher concen-
trations (0.5-7.0 mg/mL) of valerian extract (ICs9 4.82 x 10°! mg/
mL). In other investigations, valerian extract potentiated radi-
olabelled GABA release from rat hippocampal slices, and
inhibited synaptosomal GABA uptake, confirming the effects of
valerian extract on GABA, receptors.?°

Radiolabelled ligand binding studies have also shown that
constituents of dichloromethane and petroleum ether extracts of
valerian have strong binding affinities for S-HT;, receptors but
only weak binding affinities for 5-HTs, receptors.°% At
concentrations of S50 ,tg/mL, the petroleum ether and dichlor-
omethane extracts inhibited binding of radiolabelled lysergic acid
diethylamide to 5-HT;, receptors by 86% and 51%, respectively.
Generation of an ICso curve for the petroleum ether extract
produced a biphasic curve. Valerenic acid, a constituent of both
extracts, had an ICso of 17.2 mol/L. In other radiolabelled ligand
binding experiments, a 45% methanol extract of valerian root

fractions.

----- PAGE 594 -----
(drug to extract ratio 4-6: 1; containing valerenic acids 0.388%,
and no valepotriates) had an ICso value of 450 pg/mL at
melatonin-1 (ML) receptors obtained from chicken brain, whereas
a 45% methanol extract of hops' cones (containing flavonoids
0.479%, calculated as rutin) had an ICso value of 71 ttg/mL at
these receptors. A preparation (ZE-91019) containing both
extracts had an ICso value of 97 pg/mL, suggesting a synergistic
action between the two extracts at ML1 receptors.”

CNS-depressant activities in mice following intraperitoneal
injection have been documented for the valepotriates and for their
degradation products, although activity was found to be greatly
reduced following oral administration.°*) A study explored the
effects of a mixture of valepotriates on the behaviour of diazepam-
withdrawn male Wistar rats in the elevated plus-maze test (a
measure of the anxiolytic or anxiogenic properties of drugs).°”)
Rats were given diazepam (up to 5 mg/kg for 28 days) then vehicle
only for three days to induce a withdrawal syndrome. Rats given
diazepam or a mixture of valepotriates (stated to contain
dihydrovaltrate 80%, valtrate 15% and acevaltrate 5%) adminis-
tered intraperitoneally (12 mg/kg) spent a significantly greater
proportion of time in the ‘open’ arms of the maze than did those
in the control group.

Another specific valepotriate fraction, Vpto, has been docu-
mented to exhibit tranquillising, central myorelaxant, anti-
convulsant, coronary-artery dilating and anti-arrhythmic actions
in mice, rabbits, and cats.°°°” The fraction was reported to
prevent arrhythmias induced by Pituitrin vasopressin and barium
chloride, and to exhibit moderate positive inotropic and negative
chronotropic effects.

Antispasmodic activity on intact and isolated guinea-pig ileum
(32)

has been documented for isovaltrate, valtrate and valeranone.
This activity was attributed to a direct action on the smooth
muscle receptors rather than ganglion receptors. Valerian oil has
been reported to exhibit antispasmodic activity on isolated
guinea-pig uterine muscle,°) but proved inactive when tested in
vivo.

In-vitro inactivation of complement activation has been
reported for the valepotriates.°

In-vitro cytotoxicity (inhibition of DNA and protein synthesis,
and potent alkylating activity) has been documented for the
valepotriates, with valtrate stated to be the most toxic
compound. Valepotriates (valtrate and didrovaltrate) isolated
from the related species Valeriana wallichii, and baldrinal (a
degradation product of valtrate) have been tested for their
cytotoxic activity in vitro using cultured rat hepatoma cells.
Valtrate was the most active compound in this system, leading to a
100% mortality of hepatoma cells after 24 hours! incubation at a
concentration of 33pg/mL.°” More detailed studies using the
same system showed that didrovaltrate demonstrated cytotoxic
activity when incubated at concentrations higher than 8 jtg/mL of
culture (1.5 x 10° mol/L) and led to 100% cellular mortality
with 24 hours of incubation at a concentration of 66 g/mL. The
cytotoxic effect of didrovaltrate was irreversible within two hours
of incubation with hepatoma cells. In mice, administration of
intraperitoneal didrovaltrate led to a regression of Krebs II ascitic
tumours, compared with control.°” A subsequent in vivo study,
in which valtrate was administered to mice (by intraperitoneal
injection and by mouth), did not report any toxic effects on
haematopoietic precursor cells when compared with control
groups.°*) The valepotriates are known to be unstable compounds
in both acidic and alkaline media and it has been suggested that
their in vivo toxicity is limited due to poor absorption and/or
© Baldrinal and homobaldrinal, decomposition

distribution.

Valerian

products of valtrate and isovaltrate respectively, have exhibited
direct mutagenic activity against various Salmonella strains in

vitro.)

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of valerian preparations and their constituent
compounds. The pharmacokinetic:
explored in a single-dose study involving six healthy adults who
received a 70% ethanol extract of valerian root (LI-156,
Sedonium, Lichtwer Pharma; drug to extract ratio 5:1) 600mg
in the morning. For five participants, maximum serum concentra-
tions of valerenic acid occurred between one and two hours after
valerian administration and ranged from 0.9 to 2.3ng/mL;
valerenic acid concentrations were measurable for at least five

of valerenic acid were

hours after valerian administration.” For one subject, maximum
concentrations occurred at both one and five hours after valerian
administration. The mean (standard deviation (SD)) elimination
half-life (¢1/2) for valerenic acid was 1.1 (0.6) hours and the mean
(SD) area under the plasma concentration time curve was 4.80
(2.96) ttg/mL/hour. Further investigation of the pharmacokinetics
of valerian is required, including those of different manufacturers!
preparations and their constituents.

Sleep disorders, hypnotic activity Numerous studies have
explored the effects of valerian preparations on subjective (e.g.
participants’ self-assessment of sleep quality) and/or objective (e.g.
sleep structure, such as duration of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep or slow-wave sleep) sleep parameters. Collectively, the
findings of these studies are difficult to interpret, as different
studie: sed different valerian preparations and different
dosages, and some have involved healthy volunteers whereas
others have involved patients with diagnosed sleep disorders. In
addition, other studies have used different subjective and/or

have as

objective outcome measures, and some have been conducted in
sleep laboratories, whereas others have assessed participants
receiving valerian whilst sleeping at home. Overall, several, but
not all, studies have documented a hypnotic effect for valerian
preparations with regard to subjective measures of sleep quality,
and some have documented effects on objective measures of sleep
structure. There is a view that investigating subjective measures of
sleep quality may be the most appropriate or relevant form of
assessment.” Several trials, including the most recent studies,
particularly those involving individuals with sleep disorders rather
than healthy volunteers, are summarised below.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study involving 16 patients with previously established psycho-
physiological insomnia according to International Clas
of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) criteria and confirmed by polysomno-
graphy assessed the effects of single-dose and longer-term
administration of valerian root extract on objective parameters
of sleep structure and subjective parameters of sleep quality.”
Participants received a 70% ethanol extract of valerian root (LI-
156; drug to extract ratio 5:1) 600mg, or placebo, one hour
before bedtime for 14 days, followed by a wash-out period of 13
days before crossing over to the other arm of the study. There were
no statistically significant effects on objective and subjective
parameters of sleep following single-dose valerian administration.
Similarly, after long-term treatment, there were no statistically
significant differences between groups in sleep efficiency (ratio of
time spent asleep to time spent in bed). There was a statistically
significant difference with valerian on parameters of slow-wave

sification

----- PAGE 595 -----
Valerian

sleep, compared with baseline valu
placebo. However, it is not clear if this difference was significantly
different for valerian, compared with placebo, as no p-value was
given.

The effects of repeated doses of the same valerian root extract
(LI-156) were assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group trial involving 121 patients with
insomnia not due to organic causes.” Participants received
valerian extract 600 mg, or placebo, one hour before bedtime for
28 days. At the end of the study, clinical global impression scores
were significantly higher for the valerian group than for the
placebo group.

A crossover study a: ing the same valerian root extract (LI-
156) involved 16 individuals aged 50 to 64 years with mild sleep
complaints (e.g. difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, early
morning awakenings) who received a single 300 mg or 600 mg dose
of the extract, or placebo, at 10 pm on one occasion, with a 6-day
wash-out period before crossing over to each of the other arms of
the study.” Participants underwent a battery of tests designed to
assess objective and subjective measures of sleep at 7.05 am on the
morning after each treatment intervention. There were no
statistically significant differences between the three groups for
any of the outcome variables measured (p > 0.05).

In a randomised, double-blind, pilot study, 14 older women who
were poor sleepers received valerian aqueous extract (Valdispert
forte; drug to extract ratio S—6: 1), or placebo (n = 6), for eight
consecutive days." Valerian 405mg was administered one hour
before sleep for one night in the laboratory, then taken three times
daily for the following seven days. Valerian recipients showed an
increase in slow-wave sleep, compared with baseline values.
However, valerian had no effect on sleep onset time, rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep or on self-rated sleep quality, when
compared with placebo. In another randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study involving older participants, 78 hospital-
ised patients with various chronic conditions in addition to
difficulty sleeping received an aqueous valerian root extract
(Baldrian Dispert) 270 mg daily, or placebo, for 14 days.” At the
end of the study, sleep latency and sleep duration were
significantly improved in the valerian group, compared with the
placebo group (p < 0.001 for both).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
128 volunteers explored the effects of an aqueous extract of
valerian root (400mg) and a proprietary preparation of valerian
and hops (Hova) on subjective measures of sleep quality. Each
participant took each of the three preparations at night for three
non-consecutive nights." On the basis of participants’ self-
assessment, valerian significantly reduced sleep latency (time to
onset of sleep) and improved sleep quality, compared with placebo
(p < 0.05). Subgroup analysis suggested that the effects of valerian
were most marked among participants who di
as 'poor' or ‘irregular’ sleepers." It was reported that the
valerian—hops preparation did not significantly affect sleep latency
or sleep quality, compared with placebo, only that the valerian—
hops preparation administration was associated with an increase
in the number of reports of 'feeling more sleepy than usual the
next morning’ (i.e. a 'hangover' effect). The authors were unable to
explain this discrepancy in the results for the two preparations

In a subsequent study, eight individuals wit!
each received aqueous valerian root extract 450mg, 900mg or

placebo, in a random-order experimental design over almost three
(46)

scribed themselves

mild insomnia

weeks.“ The time to the first period of five consecutive minutes
sured using wrist-worn activity meters,

was used as an objective measure of sleep latency. For this

without movement, me

parameter, valerian 450 mg significantly reduced the mean sleep
latency, compared with placebo, although there was no further
reduction in sleep latency with valerian 900mg. Subjective
assessments indicated that participants were more likely to
experience a ‘hangover’ effect with valerian 900 mg.“

The effects of a valerian root/rhizome extract (tablets contain-
ing 225 mg extract equivalent to 1000 mg crude drug, standardised
for total valerenic acids 2.94 mg, valerenal 0.46 mg and valtrates
1.23 mg; Mediherb, Australia) two tablets at night half an hour
before going to bed on self-assessed sleep parameters were
assessed in a series of randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, 'n-of-1' crossover trials involving 24 patients with
chronic insomnia diagnosed by a general practitioner. The trials
were conducted in a general practice setting and involved three
pairs of one-week treatments with valerian extract and placebo (i.
e. each n-of-1 trial lasted for six weeks).
found that participants did not show any response to valerian for
any of the outcome measures either individually or when
individual results were pooled. N-of-1 trials have recognised
limitations, including some which can increase the possibility of
false negative results, although these were taken into considera-
tion during the analysis of these data. Investigation of dosage
regimens involving higher doses of this extract administered for
longer periods may be warranted.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial con-
ducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least 40
points on the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scale and who
reported having sleeping problems on at least two occasions
received two capsules containing valerian extract (each containing
valerenic acids 3.2 mg; no further details of preparation provided)
one hour before bedtime, capsules containing kava extract (each
containing total kavalactones 100mg) one three times daily, or
placebo, for 28 days.*) At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between valerian and placebo
with respect to the primary outcome measure changes from
baseline in Insomnia Severity Index scores. The study also assessed
effects on anxiety (see Anxiety, depression and other conditions).

The effects of preparations of valerian root extract have been
compared with those of certain benzodiazepines. In a randomised,
double-blind trial, 75 individuals with non-organic and non-
psychiatric insomnia received valerian root extract (drug to extract
ratio 5: 1) 600 mg or oxazepam 10 mg; both treatments were taken
30 minutes before going to bed for 28 days.) At the end of the
treatment period, sleep quality had improved significantly (p <
0.001) in both groups, compared with baseline values, and there
was no statistically significant difference between the two groups
(p= 0.70). The effects of a combination valerian preparation were
compared with those of bromazepam in a three-week, random-
ised, double-blind trial involving patients with ‘environmental!
sleep disorders (temporary dyscoimesis and dysphylaxia) accord-
ing to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM)-IV criteria.°°
The combination preparation, containing valerian 200mg and
hops extract 45.5mg, was reported to be equivalent to
bromazepam 3mg with regard to sleep quality. These findings
require confirmation in rigorous studies designed specifically to
test for equivalence.

Several of the studies summarised above'

) Statistical analyses

14, 15, 43, 45, 46)
° ” were

included in a systematic review of nine randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of monopreparations of valerian.°" All
trials included in the review had different designs and assessed the
effects of different valerian preparations administered according
to different dosage regimens, so the validity of considering their
results collectively is questionnable. The review concluded that the

----- PAGE 596 -----
evidence for valerian as a treatment for insomnia is inconclusive
and that there is a need for further rigorous trials.

Several other studies have assessed the effects of valerian extract
in combination with other herb extracts, such as hops (Humulus
lupulus) and/or melissa (Melissa officinalis), on measures of
sleep. 5°

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group trial, 184 adults with mild insomnia received two tablets of
a valerian—hops preparation (each tablet containing 187 mg of a
45% methanol extract of valerian, drug to extract ratio 5-8: 1,
and 42mg of a 45% methanol extract of hops, drug to extract
ratio 7-10: 1; 2 = 59), or placebo (n = 65), each night for 28 days;
a third study arm received diphenhydramine 50 mg each night for
14 days followed by placebo for 14 days (n = 60).°”) At the end of
the study, there was no statistically significant difference in sleep
latency between the valerian—hops group and the placebo group (p
= 0.08). There were no statistically significant differen
groups with respect to the sleep continuity variables, as measured
by polysomnography, nor in the duration of sleep stages 3 and 4,
and REM sleep. The physical component, but not the mental
component, of the quality-of-life measure used was significantly
improved in the valerian—hops group, compared with the placebo
group after 28 days (p = 0.028).

A randomised, double-blind trial involving healthy volunteers

who received Songha Night (V. officinalis root extract 120 mg and
M. officinalis leaf extract 80 mg) three tablets daily taken as one
dose 30 minutes before bedtime for 30 days (1 = 66), or placebo (
= 32), found that the proportion of participants reporting an
improvement in sleep quality was significantly greater for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (33.3% versus
9.4%, respectively; p = 0.04).° However, analysi
analogue scale scores revealed only a slight, but statistically non-
significant, improvement in sleep quality in both groups over the
treatment period. Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving patients with insomnia who received Euvegal forte
tablets (containing valerian extract 160 mg and lemon balm extract
80 mg) two daily for two weeks reported significant improvements
in sleep quality in recipients of the herbal preparation, compared
with placebo recipients.°°) A placebo-controlled study involving
‘poor sleepers’ who received Euvegal forte reported significant
improvements in sleep efficiency and in sleep stages 3 and 4 in the
treatment group, compared with placebo recipients.
In a single-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving
12 healthy volunteers, two different single doses of a combination
preparation (ZE-91019) containing extracts of valerian and hops
(valerian 500mg, hops 120mg; valerian 1500mg, hops 360 mg)
ssed for their effects on EEG recordings.” Some slight
on the quantitative EEG were documented following
administration of the higher dose valerian—hops combination,
suggesting effects on the central nervous system. The same
preparation (two or six tablets as a single dose; m = 16), in addition
to caffeine 200 mg, was administered to healthy volunteers in a
controlled (caffeine 200 mg plus placebo; 1 = 16) study which aimed
to determine the pharmacodynamics of co-administration of the
two preparations by measuring EEG responses.) EEG recordings
at one hour after administration indicated that the lower dose of the
valerian—hops preparation reduced caffeine-induced arousal and
the higher dose inhibited the caffeine-induced arousal. It was stated
that this indicates that the valerian—hops combination preparation
8) although which
constituents are responsible for this effect is not known.

The effects of a related species, V. edulis, on sleep parameters
sed in a preliminary randomised, double-blind, placebo-

between

of visual

were assi

effec

acts via a central adenosine mechanism,

were as:

Valerian

controlled, crossover trial involving five male children (7 to 14
years) with intellectual deficits (intelligence quotient < 70).
Participants received tablets containing V. edulis dried crushed
root 500 mg (containing 5.52 mg valtrate/isovaltrate, didrovaltrate
and acevaltrate were absent; Mediherb, Australia), or placebo
(which contained 25 mg dried V. edulis root to achieve blinding for
odour), at a dose of 20mg/kg body weight administered each
night at least one hour before bedtime for two weeks following a
two-week run-in period. Participants underwent a one-week
wash-out period before crossing over to the other arm of the study.
Time awake, total sleep time and sleep quality all improved in the
valerian group, compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each),
whereas only sleep quality improved in the placebo group,
compared with baseline values (p = 0.04). However, as no
statistical analyses appear to have been conducted to examine any
differences between the valerian and placebo groups, the’
findings raise the hypothesis that dried V. edulis root has effects
on certain sleep parameters and this requires testing in well-
designed clinical trials involving adequate numbers of partici-
pants. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, a
preparation of constituents (Valmane, comprising didrovaltrate
80%, valtrate 15% and acevaltrate 5%; Whitehall Pharmaceu-
ticals) obtained from the root of V. wallichii, another related
species, was assessed for its effects on sleep parameters in 19
individuals who had undergone withdrawal from benzodiaze-
pines. Participants received the valerian preparation at a dose
of 100mg, or placebo, three times daily starting two days after
completing benzodiazepine withdrawal and continuing for 15
days. At the end of the study, wake time after sleep onset was
significantly reduced in the valerian group compared with the
placebo group, whereas sleep latency was significantly improved in
the placebo group, compared with the valerian group (p < 0.05 for
both). The study has methodological limitations, including the
small sample size, and these apparently conflicting findings
require further investigation in well-designed clinical trials
involving adequate numbers of participants.

e

Anxiety, depression and other conditions The effects of a
preparation containing a mixture of valepotriate compounds
(stated to contain dihydrovaltrate 80%, valtrate 15%, acevaltrate
5%) were assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group trial involving 36 patients with general-
ised anxiety disorder diagnosed according to DSM-III-R (Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) criteria.'°”
Participants received capsules containing the valepotriate mixture
50 mg, diazepam 2.5 mg, or placebo, for four weeks according to a
flexible dosing regimen (one to three capsules of the active
treatments) depending on the participants! response. At the end of
the study, there were no statistically significant differences
between the three groups for the primary outcome variable
mean total Hamilton Anxiety scale scores (p > 0.05) and for
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scores. As a sample size
calculation was not carried out, and as the study involved only a
small sample, it is possible that the trial did not have sufficient
statistical power to detect differences (if they exist) between the
three groups.

In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
conducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least
40 points on the STAI scale and who reported having sleeping
problems on at least two occasions received two capsules
containing valerian extract (each containing valerenic acids
3.2mg; no further details of preparation provided) one hour
before bedtime, capsules containing kava extract (each containing

----- PAGE 597 -----
Valerian

total kavalactones 100 mg) one three times daily, or placebo, for 28
days." At the end of the study, there were no statistically
significant differences
to the primary outcome measure changes from baseline in STAI
anxiety scores. The study also assessed effects on insomnia (see
Sleep disorders, hypnotic activity).

The effects of valerian have also been ass
in laboratory-based studies involving healthy volunteers. In a
randomised controlled trial, 36 participants received valerian root
extract (LI-156) 1200mg (m = 18) or kava root extract (LI-150)
120 mg daily for seven days; a third group of participants acted as
a no-treatment control group.” Participants! heart rate and
blood pressure measurements were taken before, during and after
a mental stress test at baseline and seven days later following
treatment. The results suggested that increases in systolic blood
pressure in response to mental stress were lower in the valerian
group, compared with those in the control group. These results,
however, can only be considered preliminary as the control group
did not receive placebo. Further investigation using a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial design is required.

The effects of another valerian extract at a dose of 100 mg (no
further details of preparation given), with or without propranolol
20 mg, on activation and performance under experimental social
stress conditions were assessed in a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study involving 48 healthy volunteers.'°?
Valerian was reported to have no statistically significant effect
on physiological activation and to lead to less intensive subjective
feelings of somatic arousal, compared with control.

Several studies have assessed the effects of combinations of
valerian and other herbal ingredients in patients with anxiety or
depression. In a randomised, double-blind study involving 100
patients with anxiety, a combination of valerian and St John's
wort was significantly more effective than diazepam according to
a physician's rating scale and a patient's self-rating scale. In a
randomised, double-blind trial involving 162 patients with
dysthymic disorders, the effects of a valerian and St John's wort
combination preparation (Sedariston) were compared with those
of amitriptyline 75-150 mg.'° Another randomised, double-blind
trial, involving 100 patients with mild-to-moderate depression
compared Sedariston with desipramine 100-150 mg. Pooling
the results of these two studies indicated there were 88 (68%)
treatment responders in the Sedariston group and 66 (50%) in the
group that received standard antidepressants.” This difference
was not statistically significant. As valerian root is not known for
antidepressant effects, it is likely that any antidepressant activity
observed in the studies described above is attributable to St John's
wort.

between valerian and placebo with respect

ssed on mental stress

Several studies have sed the effects of valerian, or herbal
combination products containing valerian, on performance the
morning after treatment (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of valerian
preparations from clinical trials. Clinical trials have the statistical
power to detect only common, acute adverse effects and post-
marketing surveillance-type studies are required to establish the
safety of valerian preparations, particularly with long-term use.
Few controlled clinical trials of valerian preparations have
provided detailed information on safety. Where adverse event data
were provided, randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving

healthy volunteers or patients with diagnosed insomnia reported
that adverse events with valerian were mild and transient, and that
the types and frequency of adverse events reported for valerian
were similar to those for placebo.“46479° One study involving
small numbers of patients reported a lower frequency of adverse
events with valerian than with placebo; the authors did not
suggest an explanation for this.?) Studies comparing valerian
preparations with benzodiazepines have reported that valerian
root extract (LI-156) 600 mg daily for 14 days or 28 days”) had
a more favourable adverse effect profile than flunitrazepam 1 mg
daily for 14 days and oxazepam 10mg daily for 28 days,”
respectively.

There is an isolated report of cardiac complications and
delirium associated with valerian root extract withdrawal in a 58-
year-old man with a history of coronary artery disease,
hypertension and congestive heart failure.” The man had been
taking valerian root extract (S30mg to 2g, five times daily),
multiple other medications and had undergone surgery, therefore a
causal link with valerian could not be made. There have been

isolated reports of hepatotoxic reactions following the use of
combination products containing valerian, although these pro-
ducts contained other herbal ingredients which could also be
implicated." @!*S?" Several other reports document hepatotoxic
reactions with single-ingredient valerian products, although it is
possible that these were idiosyncratic reactions.” There is a lack
of data on the safety of the long-term use of valerian.

Cases of individuals who had taken overdoses of valerian or
valerian-containing products have been documented. One case
involved an 18-year-old female who ingested 40-50 capsules of
powdered valerian root 470mg, approximately 20 times thera-
peutic doses.” The patient presented three hours after ingestion
with fatigue, crampy abdominal pain, chest tightness, tremor and
lightheadedness
screen tested positive for tetrahydrocannabinol. The patient was
treated with activated charcoal, and symptoms resolved within 24
hours. Several cases (1 = 47) have been documented of overdose

Liver function test values were normal; a urine

with a combination valerian-containing product ('Sleep-Qik';
valerian dry extract 75mg, hyoscine hydrobromide 0.25 mg,
cyproheptadine hydrochloride 2mg).'”* Individuals had
ingested tablets equivalent to 0.5—-12¢g valerian extract. Liver
function tests were carried out for most patients and yielded
results within normal ranges.

Effects on cognitive and psychomotor performance

Studies assessing the effects of valerian preparations on measures
of performance report conflicting results: some suggest that there
is slight impairment for a few hours following ingestion of single
doses of valerian, whereas other studies report no effects on
performance following administration. As these studies have
assessed the effects of different preparations of valerian, the
conflicting results may simply relate to differences in the chemical
composition of the products tested. Further research is needed to
establish whether or not specific valerian preparations impair
performance following ingestion. In contrast, the few studies
investigating the potential for impaired performance the morning
following treatment (i.e. "hangover" effects) with valerian prepara-
tions have found that such impairment does not occur, at least
with the preparations and dosages tested. Several of the studies
examining these aspects are summarised below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, nine healthy participants each received a 70% ethanol
extract of valerian root (containing valerenic acid 0.25%; drug to

----- PAGE 598 -----
extract ratio 4:1) 500mg, 1000 mg, and triazolam 0.25 mg, as a
single dose with a one-week wash-out period between treatments.
There were no statistically significant differences in the outcomes
of cognitive and psychomotor tests performed before and two,
four and eight hours after each treatment dose between the
valerian and placebo groups.” A similar finding was obtained in
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
involving ten healthy participants who underwent assessments of
mood and psychomotor performance before and after receiving a
valerian root extract (LI-156) at doses of 600, 1200 and 1800 mg,
and diazepam 10mg, with a one-week wash-out period between
treatments. Compared with placebo, valerian had no statistically
significant effects on mood or on cognitive and psychomotor
performance.”

The two studies described above involved younger (aged |
than 30 years) participants. Another randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study involved 14 healthy older
participants (mean age 71.6 years, range 65—89 years) who received
valerian 400mg and 800mg (Jamieson, Canada; subsequently
reported to contain valerenic acid, 1-acetoxyvalerenic acid and 1-
hydroxyvalerenic acid 0.63%), temazepam 15 mg and 30mg, and
diphenhydramine 50mg and 75mg, with a three-day wash-out
period between treatments. No statistically significant differences
on measures of psychomotor performance or sedation were found
for valerian, compared with placebo.”

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 102 healthy

volunteers, the effects of single-dose valerian extract (LI-156)
600mg on reaction time, alertness and concentration were
compared with those of flunitrazepam 1 mg and placebo.® The
treatment was administered in the evening and psychometric tests
were carried out the next morning. After a one-week wash-out
period, 91 volunteers continued with the second phase of the
study, which comprised 14 days' administration of valerian extract
600 mg or placebo. Single-dose valerian extract administration did
not impair reaction time, concentration or coordination. A
‘hangover' effect was reported by 59% of flunitrazepam recipients,
compared with 32% and 30% of placebo and valerian recipients,
respectively (p < 0.05 for flunitrazepam versus valerian). At the
end of the 14-day study, there was no statistically significant
difference (p = 0.45) between valerian extract and placebo on
mean reaction time (a measure of performance).
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
80 volunteers compared the 'hangover' effects of tablets containing
valerian and hops, a syrup containing valerian only, and
flunitrazepam 1mg, all given as a single dose.”* Performance
the morning after treatment, measured both objectively and
subjectively, was impaired only in the flunitrazepam group.”®) Side
effects occurred more frequently in the flunitrazepam group
(50%), compared with the valerian and placebo groups (10%). In
a further placebo-controlled study involving 36 volunteers who
received valerian—hops tablets, valerian syrup, or placebo, and who
underwent a battery of cognitive psychomotor tests 1-2 hours
after drug administration, there was a slight, but statistically
significant, impairment in vigilance with valerian syrup and
impairment in the processing of complex information with
valerian-hops tablets, compared with placebo.®

S

Preclinical data

Toxicological studies documented in the older literature have
reported an LDso of 3.3 mg/kg for an ethanolic extract of valerian
administered intraperitoneally in rats, and that daily doses of 400-
600 mg/kg, administered intraperitoneally for 45 days, did not lead

Valerian

to any changes in weight, blood or urine measurements, compared
) Literature cited in a review of the safety of
valerian describes LDso values of 64 mg/kg for valtrate, 125 mg/kg
for didrovaltrate and 150mg/kg for acevaltrate in mice after
intraperitoneal injection.'©? Another study in mice reported that
valerenic acid 150mg/kg, given by intraperitoneal injection,
caused muscle spasms and that 400 mg/kg caused heavy convul-
8) The latter dose was lethal to six of seven mice.

F 1
with controls.‘

sion:

In vitro cytotoxicity and mutagenicity have been documented
for the valepotriates. The clinical significance of this is unclear,
since the valepotriates are known to be highly unstable and,
therefore, probably degrade when taken orally. Only traces of
valepotriates or their degradation products (in part, baldrinals)
are likely to be found in finished products.'(“*”

In toxicological studies in rats, there were no changes in bile
value and liver enzyme activity in animals treated with a valerian
preparation (Indena, Italy; no further details provided) as a single
dose (0.31 to 18.6 g/kg) or 3.1 g/kg for 28 days. In vitro, incubation
of human hepatoma cells with the same valerian preparation at a
concentration of 20 mg/mL led to increased cell death, compared
with values for control.’ No such effect was seen for the valerian
preparation at a concentration of 2mg/mL, when compared with
control.

A study in rats involved the administration of valepotriates (6,
12 and 24 mg/kg administered orally) during pregnancy up to the
19th day when animals were sacrificed.“° There were no

differences between valepotriate-treated rats and control rats as
determined by fetotoxicity and external examination studies,
although the two highest doses of valepotriates were associated
with an increase in retarded ossification evident on internal
examination.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Intake of valerian preparations immediately (up to two hours)
before driving or operating machinery is not recommended.(C*”
The effect of valerian preparations may be enhanced by
consumption of alcohol, so excessive consumption of alcohol
whilst receiving treatment with valerian root preparations should
be avoided.'©*” Patients should seek medical advice if symptoms
worsen beyond two weeks' continuous treatment with valer-

(G80

ian.‘C® Patients with known sensitivity to valerian should not use

valerian root preparations.“

Drug interactions Only limited data on the potential for
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions with other
medicines administered concurrently are available for valerian root
preparations. In view of the documented pharmacological actions
of valerian the potential for preparations of valerian to interfere
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those
with similar or opposing effects, should be considered. In
particular, co-medication with barbiturates and other sedatives
is not recommended because of the potential for excessive
sedation, ‘C8

In an open-label, fixed-treatment, crossover study, 12 healthy
volunteers received two tablets containing 500mg of a 70%
ethanol extract of valerian root (containing total valerenic acids
5.51 mg per tablet) each night for two weeks.®” The probe drugs
dextromethorphan 30 mg and alprazolam 2 mg were administered
before and after valerian exposure to assess the effects of valerian
on CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activity, respectively. There were no
statistically significant differences in dextromethorphan pharma-
cokinetics after valerian exposure, compared with baseline values.

----- PAGE 599 -----
588, Valerian

The maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam was sig-
nificantly increased following valerian exposure, compared with
baseline values (p < 0.05) although there were no statistically
significant differences in other pharmacokinetic parameters
measured. Another study involved healthy volunteers who received
valerian root extract (subsequently found to contain quantities of
valerenic acid only at the limits of detection (10ng/mL)) 125 mg
three times daily for 28 days.” No. statistically significant
changes in phenotypic ratios for CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and
CYP3A4/5 were observed for valerian, although the valerian
product tested may not be representative of other valerian
preparations and their effects on CYP enzymes.” In in-vitro
experiments, aqueous, ethanol and acetonitrile extracts of
commercial monopreparations and combination preparations of
valerian root inhibited cytochrome P450 3A4 activity and P-
glycoprotein transport, as determined by an ATPase assay.°”

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of valerian during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established and, therefore,
its use should be avoided.“°*

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Nervisatis. Australia: Herbal Sleep Formula.
Belgium: Dormiplant; Relaxine; Valerial. Brazil: Noctaval;
Recalm; Sonoripan; Valeriane; Valerimed; Valerin; Valerix;
Valezen; Valmane. Canada: Nytol Natural Source; Sleep-Eze V
Natural; Unisom Natural Source. Chile: Sominex. Czech
Republic: Koren Kozliku Lekarskeho; Valdispert. Finland:
Valrian. Germany: Baldorm; Baldriparan Stark; Baldrivit;
Baldurat; Cefaluna; Dolestan; Euvegal Balance; Luvased
mono; Recvalysat; Sedonium; Sporal mono; Valdispert. Israel:
Relaxine; Valeton. Italy: Ticalma. Mexico: Neolaikan. Nether-
lands: Dormiplant; Valdispert. Portugal: Valdispert. Russia:
Novo-Passit (Hoso-Ilaccur). South Africa: Calmettes. Spain:
Ansiokey; Coenrelax; Valdispert; Valeriana Orto; Valsedan.
Sweden: Baldrian-Dispert; Neurol; Valerecen. Switzerland:
Baldriparan pour la nuit; Natu-Seda; ReDormin; Sedasol eco
natura; Sedonium; Valdispert. UK: Phytorelax; Sedonium.
Venezuela: Floral Pas.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Armonil; Dioxicolagol; Nervocalm; SDN 200;
Sedante Dia; Serenil; Sigmasedan; Valeriana Oligoplex.
Australia: Calmo; Coleus Complex; Dan Shen Compound;
Executive B; Extralife Sleep-Care; Goodnight Formula; Humu-
lus Compound; Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 2 Valerian;
Macro Anti-Stress; Multi-Vitamin Day & Night; Natural Dee
Sleep; Pacifenity; Passiflora Complex; Passionflower Plus;
Prosed-X; Relaxaplex; Valerian Plus Herbal Plus Formula 12;
Valerian. Austria: Baldracin; Baldrian AMA; Eryval; Euvekan;
Hova; Nervenruh; Nerventee St Severin; Sedadom; Sedogelat;
Songha; Species nervinae; Thymoval; Valin Baldrian; Wechsel-
tee St Severin. Belgium: Natudor; Seneuval; Songha. Brazil:
Passicalm; Sominex; Sonhare. Canada: Herbal Nerve; Herbal
Relax; Herbal Sleep Aid; Herbal Sleep Well. Chile: Armonyl;
Recalm; Valupass. Czech Republic: Baldracin; Bio-Strath;
Contraspan; Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schweden-
bitter; Euvekan; Hertz- und Kreislauftee,; Nervova Cajova
Smes; Novo-Passit; Persen; Sanason; Schlaf-Nerventee N;

Songha Night; Species Nervinae Planta; Valofyt Neo; Visinal.
France: Biocarde; Euphytose; Mediflor Tisane Calmante
Troubles du Sommeil No 14; Mediflor Tisane Circulation du
Sang No 12; Neuroflorine; Passinevryl; Spasmine; Sympa-
neurol; Tranquital. Germany: Ardeysedon; Avedorm duo;
Baldrian-Dispert Nacht; Baldriparan N Stark; Biosedon;
Boxocalm; Cefasedativ; Dormarist; Dormeasan; Dormo-Sern;
Dormoverlan; Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Nerven- und
Beruhigungstee; Dreierlei; Euvegal Entspannungs- und Eins-
chlaftropfen; Gutnacht; Gutnacht; Heumann Beruhigungstee
Tenerval; Hingfong-Essenz Hofmanns; Hyperesa; Klosterfrau
Beruhigungs Forte; Kytta-Sedativum; Leukona-Beruhigungs-
bad; Luvased; Moradorm S$; Mutellon; Nervendragees; Ner-
venkapseln; | Nervoregin forte; | Neurapas; — Nitrangin
compositum; Oxacant-sedativ; Pascosedon; Phytonoctu; Plan-
tival novo; Pronervon Phyto; Schlaf- und Nerventee; Schwe-
dentrunk Elixier; Sedacur; Sedariston Konzentrat; Sedariston
plus; Sedaselect D; Selon; Sensinerv forte; Tornix; Valdispert
comp; Valeriana comp novum; Valeriana mild; Valverde
Baldrian Hopfen bei Einschlafstorungen und zur Beruhigung;
Vivinox Day. Hungary: Euvekan; Hova. India: Well-Beeing.
Israel: Calmanervin; Calmanervin; Nerven-Dragees; Passiflora
Compound; Passiflora; Songha Night. Italy: Anevrasi; Bio-
calm; Dormiplant; Fitosonno; Florelax; Glicero-Valerovit;
Noctis; Parvisedil; Reve; Sedatol; Sedopuer FE Mexico:
Nervinetas; Plantival. Portugal: Neurocardol; Songha; Vale-
sono. Russia: Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aonmeasrepy, Buraao-
touuk); Herbion Drops for the Heart (fep6uon Cepaecuunie
Kaman); Persen (Iepcen); Sanason (Canacon). South Africa:
Avena Sativa Comp; Biral; Entressdruppels HM; Helmont-
skruie; Krampdruppels; Restin, Stuidruppels; Wonderkroones-
sens. Spain: Natusor Somnisedan; Nervikan; Relana; Sedasor;
Sedonat; Valdispert Complex. Switzerland: Baldriparan; Dor-
measan; Dormiplant; Dragees pour la detente nerveuse;
Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs; Dragees pour le sommeil;
Dragees sedatives Dr Welti; Hova; Nervinetten; ReDormin;
Relaxane; Relaxo; Songha Night; Soporin; Strath Gouttes pour
le nerfs et contre l'insomnie; Tisane calmante pour les enfants;
Tisane pour le sommeil et les nerfs; Valverde Coeur; Valverde
Detente dragees; Valverde Sommeil; Valviska; Zeller Sommeil.
UK: Avena Sativa Comp; Bio-Strath Valerian Formula; Boots
Alternatives Sleep Well; Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets;
Calmanite Tablets; Constipation Tablets; Daily Tension &
Strain Relief; Digestive; Fenneherb Newrelax; Fenneherb
Prementaid; Gerard House Serenity; Gerard House Somnus;
Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; Herbal Indigestion Natur-
tabs; Herbal Pain Relief; HRI Calm Life; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; HRI Night; Indigestion and Flatulence; Kalms Sleep;
Kalms; Laxative Tablets; Menopause Relief; Modern Herbals
Stress; Napiers Digestion Tablets; Napiers Sleep Tablets;
Napiers Tension Tablets; Natrasleep; Natural Herb Tablets;
Nerfood Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Newrelax;
Nighttime Herb; Nodoff; Period Pain Relief; PMT Formula;
Prementaid; Quiet Days; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Quiet Tyme;
Relax B+; Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets; Scullcap &
Gentian Tablets; Sominex Herbal; Stressless; SuNerven; Sure-
Lax (Herbal); Unwind Herbal Nytol; Valerina Day Time;
Valerina Day-Time; Valerina Night-Time; Valerina Night-
Time; Vegetable Cough Remover; Wellwoman; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Calming Aid; Stress Complex;
StressEez. Venezuela: Cratex; Equaliv; Eufytose; Lupassin;
Nervinetas; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Rendetil.

----- PAGE 600 -----
1

9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

References

Upton R, ed. American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium. Valerian root. Valeriana officinalis. Analytical, Quality
Control, and Therapeutic Monograph. Santa Cruz: American Herbal
Pharmacopoeia, 1999.

Houghton PJ. The biological activity of valerian and related plants. J
Ethnopharmacol 1988; 22: 121-142.

Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Valeriana officinalis: traditional use and
recent evaluation of activity. Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 99-112.

Houghton PJ. The scientific basis for the reputed activity of valerian. ]
Pharm Pharmacol 1999; 51: 505-512.

Houghton PJ, ed. Valerian. The genus Valeriana. Amsterdam:
Harwood Academic Publishers, 1997.

Inouye H et al. [The absolute configuration of valerosidate and of
didovaltrate]. Tetrahedron Lett 1974; 30: 2317-2325 [German].
Pullela SV e¢ al. New acylated clionasterol glycosides from Valeriana
officinalis. Planta Med 2005; 71(10): 960-961.

Bos R et al. Isolation and identification of valerenane sesquiterpenoids
from Valeriana officinalis. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 133-135.

Bos R et al. Isolation of the sesquiterpene alcohol (—)-pacifigorgiol
from Valeriana officinalis. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 1234-1235.

Stoll A et al. New investigations on Valerian. Schweiz Apotheker-
Zeitung 1957; 15-120.

Hendricks H et al. Eugenyl isovalerate and isoeugeny] isovalerate in
the essential oil of Valerian root. Phytochemistry 1977; 16: 1853-1854.
Lapke C et al. Free amino acids in commercial preparations of
Valeriana officinalis L. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 1997; 4: 172-174.
Gao XQ, Bjérk L. Valerenic acid derivatives and valepotriates among
individuals, varieties and species of Valeriana. Fitoterapia 2000; 71:
19-24,

Leathwood PD et al. Aqueous extract of valerian root improves sleep
quality in man. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1982; 17: 65-71.

Schulz H e¢ al. The effect of valerian extract on sleep polygraphy in
poor sleepers: a pilot study. Pharmacopsychiatry 1994; 27: 147-151.
Hendricks H et al. Pharmacological screening of valerenal and some
other components of essential oil of Valeriana officinalis. Planta Med
1981; 42: 62-68.

Wagner H et al. Comparative studies on the sedative action of
Valeriana extracts, valepotriates and their degradation products.
Planta Med 1980; 39: 358-365.

Hendriks H e¢ al. Central nervous depressant activity of valerenic acid
in the mouse. Planta Med 1985; 51: 28-31.

Riedel E et al. Inhibition of y-aminobutyric acid catabolism by
valerenic acid derivatives. Planta Med 1982; 48: 219-220.

Santos MS et al. The amount of GABA present in aqueous extracts of
valerian is sufficient to account for [7H]GABA release in
synaptosomes. Planta Med 1994; 60: 475-476.

Santos MS et al. Synaptosomal GABA release as influenced by valerian
root extract — involvement of the GABA carrier. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn 1994; 327: 220-231.

Santos MS et al. An aqueous extract of valerian influences the
transport of GABA in synaptosomes. Planta Med 1994; 60: 278-279.
Cavadas C et al. In vitro study on the interaction of Valeriana
officinalis L. extracts and their amino acids on GABAg receptor in rat
brain. Arzneimittelforschung/Drug Res 1995; 45: 753-755.

Mennini T e¢ al. In vitro study on the interaction of extracts and pure
compounds from Valeriana officinalis roots with GABA,
benzodiazepine and barbiturate receptors in the brain. Fitoterapia
1993; 64: 291-300.

Ortiz JG et al. Effects of Valeriana officinalis extracts on [*H]
flunitrazepam binding, synaptosomal [*H]GABA uptake, and
hippocampal [H]GABA release. Neurochem Res 1999; 24: 1373—
1378.

Dietz BM et al. Valerian extract and valerenic acid are partial agonists
of the S-HTs, receptor in vitro. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005; 138(2):
191-197.

Abourashed EA et al. In vitro binding experiments with a valerian,
hops and their fixed combination extract (Ze91019) to selected central
nervous system receptors. Phytomedicine 2004; 11: 633-638.

Veith J et al. The influence of some degradation products of
valepotriates on the motor activity of light-dark synchronized mice.
Planta Med 1986; 52: 179-183.

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

Valerian

Andreatini R, Leite JR. Effect of valepotriates on the behavior of rats
in the elevated plus-maze during diazepam withdrawal. Eur J
Pharmacol 1994; 260: 233-235.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

Petkov V, Manolav P. To the pharmacology of iridoids. Paper
presented at the 2nd Congress of the Bulgarian Society for
Physiological Sciences, Sofia, October 31-November 3, 1974.
Hazelhoff B et al. Antispasmodic effects of Valeriana compounds: an
in vivo and in vitro study on the guinea-pig ileum. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn 1982; 257: 274-287.

Pilcher JD et al. The action of so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.
Pilcher JD, Mauer RT. The action of female remedies on the intact
uteri of animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 97-99.

Van Meer JH. Plantaardige stoffen met een effect op het
complementsysteem. Pharm Weekbl 1984; 119: 836-942.

Bounthanh C et al. The action of valepotriates on the synthesis of
DNA and proteins of cultured hepatoma cells. Planta Med 1983; 49:
138-142.

Bounthanh C et al. Valepotriates, a new class of cytotoxic and
antitumour agents. Planta Med 1981; 41: 21-28.

Braun R et al. Influence of valtrate/isovaltrate on the hematopoiesis
and metabolic liver activity in mice in vivo. Planta Med 1984; 50: 1-4.
Hude W et al. Bacterial mutagenicity of the tranquillizing constituents
of Valerianaceae roots. Mutat Res 1986; 169: 23-27.

Anderson GD et al. Pharmacokinetics of valerenic acid after
administration of valerian in healthy subjects. Phytotherapy Research
2005; 19(9): 801-803.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F. Quantifying the effects of mild sedatives.
J Psychiatr Res 1983; 17: 115-122.

Donath F e¢ al. Critical evaluation of the effect of valerian extract on
sleep structure and sleep quality. Pharmacopsychiatry 2000; 33: 47-53.
Vorbach EU et al. Therapie von Insomnien. Wirksamkeit und
Vertraglichkeit eines Baldrianpraparats. Psychopharmakotherapie
1996; 3: 109-115.

Diaper A, Hindmarch I. A double-blind, placebo-controlled
investigation of the effects of two doses of a valerian preparation on
the sleep, cognitive and psychomotor function of sleep-disturbed older
adults. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 831-836.

Kamm-Kohl AV et al. Moderne Baldriantherapie gegen nervose
Stérungen im Senium. Med Welt 1984; 35: 1450-1454.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F. Aqueous extract of valerian reduces
latency to fall asleep in man. Planta Med 1985; 51: 144-148.
Coxeter PD et al. Valerian does not appear to reduce symptoms for
patients with chronic insomnia in general practice using a series of
randomised n-of-1 trials. Complement Ther Med 2003; 11(4): 215—
222.

Jacobs BP et al. An internet-based randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of kava and valerian for anxiety and insomnia. Medicine 2005; 84
(4): 197-207.

Dorn M. [Baldrian versus oxazepam: efficacy and tolerability in non-
organic and non-psychiatric insomniacs. A randomised, double-blind,
clinical, comparative study]. Forsch Komplement Klass Naturheilkd
2000; 7: 79-84.

Schmitz M, Jackel M. [Comparative study investigating the quality of
life in patients with environmental sleep disorders (temporary
dyscoimesis and dysphylaxia) under therapy with a hop-valerian
preparation and a benzodiazepine preparation.] Wiener Med
Wochenschrift 1998; 148: 291-298 [German].

Stevinson C, Ernst E. Valerian for insomnia: a systematic review of
randomized clinical trials. Sleep Med 2000; 1: 91-99.

Morin CM et al. Valerian-hops combination and diphenhydramine for
treating insomnia: a randomised placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Sleep 2005; 28(11): 1465-1471.

Muller-Limmroth W, Ehrenstein W. Untersuchungen tiber die Wirkung
von Seda-Kneipp auf den Schlaf schlafgéstorter Menschen. Med Klin
1977; 72: 1119-1125.

Cerny A, Schmid K. Tolerability and efficacy of valerian/lemon balm
in healthy volunteers (a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study). Fitoterapia 1999; 70: 221-228.

----- PAGE 601 -----
SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

Valerian

Dressing H et al. Verbesserung der Schlafqualitat mit einem
hochdosierten Baldrian-Melisse-Praparat. Eine plazebokontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1996; 3: 123-130.
Dressing H et al. Baldrian-Melisse-Kombinationen versus
Benzodiazepin. Bei Schlafstérungen gleichwertig? Therapiewoche
1992; 42: 726-736.

Vonderheid-Guth B et al. Pharmacodynamic effects
hops extract combination (ZE-91019) on the quantitative-
topographical EEG in healthy volunteers. Eur J Med Res 2000; 5: 139-
144.

Schellenberg R et al. The fixed combination of valerian and hops
(Ze91019) acts via a central adenosine mechanism. Planta Med 2004;
70(7): 594-597.

Francis AJP, Dempster RJW. Effect of valerian, Valeriana edulis, on
sleep difficulties in children with intellectual deficits: randomised trial.
Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 273-279.

Poyares DR et al. Can valerian improve the sleep of insomniacs after
benzodiazepine withdrawal? Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psych
2002; 26: 539-545.

Andreatini R et al. Effect of valepotriates (valerian extract) in
generalized anxiety disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled pilot
study. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 650-654.

Cropley M et al. Effect of kava and valerian on human physiological
and psychological responses to mental stress assessed under
laboratory conditions. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 23-27.

Kohnen R, Oswald W-D. The effects of valerian, propranolol, and
their combination on activation, performance, and mood of healthy
volunteers under social stress conditions. Pharmacopsychiatry 1988;
21: 447-448.

Panijel M. Die behandlung mittelschwerer angstzustande.
Therapiewoche 1985; 41: 4659-4668.

Kneibel R, Burchard JM. Zur Therapie depressiver Verstimmungen in
der Praxis. Z Allgemeinmed 1988; 64: 689-696.

Steger W. Depressive Verstimmungen. Z Allgemeinmed 1985; 61: 914—
918.

Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression — an overview and meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ 1996; 313: 253-258.
Kuhlmann J e¢ al. The influence of valerian treatment on 'reaction
time, alertness and concentration’ in volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry
1999; 32: 235-241.

f valerian and

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

81

82

83

Garges HP et al. Cardiac complications and delirium associated with
valerian root withdrawal. JAMA 1998; 280: 1566-1567.

MacGregor FB et al. Hepatotoxicity of herbal medicines. BMJ 1989;
299: 1156-1157.

Shaw D et al. Traditional remedies and food supplements. A five-year
toxicological study (1991-1995). Drug Safety 1997; 17: 342-356.
Willey LB et al. Valerian overdose: a case report. Vet Human Toxicol
1995; 37: 364-365.

Chan TYK et al. Poisoning due to an over-the-counter hypnotic,
Sleep-Qik (hyoscine, cyproheptadine, valerian). Postgrad Med J 1995;
71: 227-228.

Chan TYK. An assessment of the delayed effects associated with
valerian overdose. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998; 36: 569.

Hallam KT et al. Comparative cognitive and psychomotor effects of
single doses of Valeriana officinalis and triazolam in healthy
volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2003; 18: 619-625.
Gutierrez S et al. Assessing subjective and psychomotor effects of the
herbal medication valerian in healthy volunteers. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 2004; 78: 57-64.

Glass JR et al. Acute pharmacological effects of temazepam,
diphenhydramine, and valerian in healthy elderly subjects. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 2003; 23: 260-268.

Gerhard U et al. [Effects of two plant-based sleep remedies on
vigilance]. Schweiz Runsch Med Prax 1996; 85: 473-481 [German].
Vo LT et al. Investigation of the effects of peppermint oil and valerian
on rat liver and cultured human liver cells. Clin Exp Pharmacol
Physiol 2003; 30: 799-804.

Tufik S et al. Effects of a prolonged administration of valepotriates in
rats on the mothers and their offspring. J Ethnopharmacol 1994; 41:
39-44.

Donovan JL et al. Multiple night-time doses of valerian (Valeriana
officinalis) had minimal effects on CYP3A4 activity and no effect on
CYP2D6 activity in healthy volunteers. Drug Metab Disp 2004; 32
(12): 1333-1336.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

Lefebvre T et al. In vitro activity of commercial valerian extracts
against human cytochrome P450 3A4. J Pharm Pharmaceut Sci 2004; 7
(2): 265-273.

----- PAGE 602 -----
- Vervain

Limited chemical, pharmacological and toxicity data are
available for vervain. Documented scientific information does
not justifiy the herbal uses. In view of the lack of data on
pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety, the
appropriateness of medicinal use of vervain should be
considered. Excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Vervain
should not be used during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The
potential for vervain preparations to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)

Verbena officinalis L. (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)

Verbena

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Glycosides Iridoid glycosides: hastatoside, verbenalin (verbanalo-
side), verbenin (aucubin). Phenylpropanoid glycosides: acteoside
2

: : I,
(verbascoside) and eukovoside.'

Volatile oils Monoterpene components include citral, geraniol,
limonene and verbenone.

Other constituents Adenosibe, alkaloid (unspecified), bitters,
carbohydrates (stachyose, mucilage), B-carotene, invertin (sucrose
hydrolytic enzymes), saponin and tannic acid.

Food Use

Vervain is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
vervain can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'©!® Previously, vervain was listed by the United
States of America Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Iridoids
° 7 COOCH3 a» COOCH;
as SS
° °
O-glucose O-glucose
hastoside verbenalin

(cornin, verbenaloside)
Phenylpropanoids

HO.

ion OH
HO" is 70 on met
HO OH

HO
verbascoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of vervain.
Herbal Use

Vervain is stated to possi
mild diaphoretic and, reputedly, galactogogue propertie

s sedative, thymoleptic, antispasmodic,
Tradi-

tionally, it has been used for depression, melancholia, hysteria,
generalised seizures, cholecystalgia, jaundice, early stages of fever,

and specifically for depression and debility of convalescence after
(G2, G7, G64)

fevers, especially influenza.

Figure 2. Vervain (Verbena officinalis).

----- PAGE 603 -----
Vervain

Figure 3 Vervain — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4¢ as an infusion three times daily.”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.“©”

Tincture 5-10 mL (1:1 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Chloroform, methanol and petroleum ether extracts of the aerial
parts of vervain have anti-inflammatory activity in vivo as
determined using the carrageenan-induced paw oedema model.
The chloroform extract was found to exhibit the greatest activity.
Vervain is stated to have several properties, including galacto-
gogue activity and luteinising activity, although the scientific
basis for these statements is not clear.

Verbenalin has been reported to exhibit uterine stimulant
activity.“ A slight laxative action in mice has been documented
for iridoid glycosides.

A total aqueous extract of the aerial parts of the related species
Vervain hastata was found to have sedative properties in
experiments involving male rats.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of vervain
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for vervain and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Preclinical data

It is stated that, in frogs, small doses of verbenalin stimulate the
uterus and that high doses paralyse the CNS, following stupor and
convulsions,‘°~ although the scientific basis for these statements

is not known.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of vervain and their pharmaco-
logical activities, the potential for preparations of vervain to
interact with other medicines taken concurrently should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Vervain is reputed to act as an
abortifacient and oxytocic agent"?
documented (see In vitro and animal studies). In view of this,
vervain should not be taken during pregnancy.

Vervain is stated to act as a galactogogue," although the
scientific basis for this statement is not known. In view of the lack
of information on the safety of vervain during breastfeeding, use
should be avoided during this period.

) with in vivo utero-activity

Australia: Avena Complex; Calmo; Nevaton. Austria: Sinupret.
Czech Republic: Sinupret; Stomatosan. France: Calmophytum;
Vigilia. Germany: Sinupret. Hong Kong: Sinupret. Hungary:
Sinupret. Italy: Neoderma 47. Russia: Sinupret (Cusynper).
Singapore: Sinupret. Switzerland: Sinupret; Tisane pour
nourissons et enfants. Thailand: Sinupret. UK: Athera;
Fenneherb Prementaid; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Modern
Herbals Menopause; Modern Herbals Stress; Napiers Sleep
Tablets; Newrelax; Period Pain Relief; Prementaid; Roberts
Alchemilla Compound Tablets; Scullcap & Gentian Tablets;
Stressless; SuNerven.

References

1 Lahloub MF et al. Phenylpropanoid and iridoid glycosides from the
Egyptian Verbena officinalis. Planta Med 1986; 52: 47.

2 Andary C et al. Structures of verbascoside and orobanchoside, caffeic
acid sugar esters from Orobanche rapum-genistae. Phytochemistry
1982; 21: 1123-1127.

3 Deepak M, Handa SS. Antiinflammatory activity and chemical
composition of extracts of Verbena officinalis. Phytotherapy Res 2000;
14(6): 463-465.

4 Oliver-Bever BEP. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

5 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

6 Akanmu HA et al.. Hypnotic effects of total aqueous extracts of
Vervain hastata. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2002; 56(3): 309-310.

----- PAGE 604 -----
Wild Carrot

is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of wild carrot. The principal traditional use of wild
carrot is as a diuretic. This activity has not been documented
in animal studies, but the seed oil of wild carrot does contain
terpinen-4-ol, the diuretic principle documented for juniper.
Toxicity data only refer to the oil and indicate low toxicity. In
view of the limited information on safety, excessive use of
wild carrot and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Daucus carota L. subsp. carota (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Daucus, Daucus carota L. subsp. maximus auct. lusit. non (Desf.)
Ball, D. communis Rouy & E.G. Camus proles communis, Queen
Anne's Lace

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Documented constituents refer to the fruit or seeds obtained
from the dried fruit unless otherwise stated.

Flavonoids Flavones (e.g. apigenin, chrysin, luteolin), flavonols
(e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and various glycosides.”

Furanocoumarin 8-Methoxypsoralen and 5-methoxypsoralen
(0.01-0.02 g/g fresh weight) in fresh plant. Concentrations
increased in the diseased plant.”

Volatile oils 0.66-1.65%." Many components identified; relative
composition varies between different cultivars.) Various compo-
nents include o-pinene, f-pinene, geraniol, geranyl acetate,
limonene, &-terpinen, p-terpinen, o-terpineol, terpinen-4-ol, p-

Sesquiterpenes

<=

daucol B-caryophyllene
Coumarins
5
CO
o NS ~o7 So
psoralen

Figure 1 Selected constituents of wild carrot.

decanolactone (monoterpenes); B-bisabolene, B-elemene, caryo-
phyllene, caryophyllene oxide, carotol, daucol (sesquiterpenes);
asarone (phenylpropanoid derivative).

Other constituents Choline,” daucine (alkaloid), a tertiary base
(uncharacterised),” fatty acids (butyric, palmitic), coumarin,
xylitol (polyol).

Food Use

Wild carrot should not be confused with the common cultivated
carrot, D. carota L. subsp. sativus (Hoffm.) Arcang., which has
the familiar fleshy orange-red edible root. Wild carrot has an
inedible tough whitish root.'“*? Wild carrot is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring
(categories N1, N3). Category N1 indicates that for the roots
there are no restrictions on use, whereas category N3 indicates
that there is insufficient information available for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.'“!®

Herbal Use

Wild carrot is stated to possess diuretic, antilithic, and
carminative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for urinary
calculus, lithuria, cystitis, gout, and specifically for urinary gravel

or calculus,“6% 67 08 Go)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4g as an infusion three times daily\C%

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

----- PAGE 605 -----
Wild Carrot

Figure 2 Wild carrot (Daucus carota).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Significant antifertility activity (60%) in rats has been reported for
wild carrot. In contrast, insignificant antifertility activity was
observed in pregnant rats fed oral doses of up to 4.5 g/kg body
weight from day 1 to day 10 of pregnancy.” Aqueous, alcoholic
and petrol extracts were reported to exhibit 20%, 40% and 10%
activities respectively, Weak oestrogenic activity'*** and inhibi-
tion of implantation” d
extracts.) Oestrogenic activity, demonstrated by the inhibition
of ovarian hypertrophy in hemicastrated rats, has been attributed
to the known constituent coumarin (a weak phytooestrogen).!”

Central effects similar to those of barbiturates have been

have been documented for

documented for the seed oil obtained from D. carota L. var. sativa
DC.) The oil was reported to elicit CNS hypnotic effects in the
rat, hypotension in the dog™ leading to respiratory depression at
higher doses, anticonvulsant activity in the frog, in vitro smooth
muscle relaxant activity reducing acetylcholine-induced contrac-
tions (ileum/uterus, rabbit/rat), antagonism of acetylcholine in
isolated frog skeletal muscle, direct depressant effect on cardiac
muscle in the dog.“!” In vitro cardiotonic activity” and
vasodilation of coronary vessels of the isolated cat heart have
been reported.'!”) Papaverine-like antispasmodic activity has been
documented for a tertiary base isolated from wild carrot seeds.
Activity of approximately one-tenth that of papaverine was noted
in a number of isolated preparations: ileum, uterus, blood vessels
and trachea.) Cholinergic-type actions have also been reported
for wild carrot with in vitro spasmodic actions noted in both
smooth and skeletal muscle.’ This cholinergic activity has been
attributed to choline.''?) The identity of a second quaternary base
isolated was not established.

Terpinen-4-ol is a documented component of the seed oil. This
constituent is considered to be the diuretic principle in juniper (see
Juniper).

Increased resistance to carbon tetrachloride-induced hepato-
toxicity has been reported in rats fed wild carrot.‘

Limited antifungal activity has been documented, with activity
exhibited against only one (Botrytis cinerea) out of nine fungi
tested."

Agglutination of Streptococcus mutans cells has been described
for wild carrot. The agglutinin, found to be heat and trypsin
stable but sensitive to dextranose, was thought to be a dextran."

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research as ng the effects of wild
carrot and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are

required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for wild carrot
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

The oil is reported to be generally non-irritating and non-
sensitising.''” However, hypersensitivity reactions, occupational
dermatitis and positive patch tests have been reported for wild
GS) Wild carrot is reported to have a slight photo-
sensitising effect.” Furanocoumarins are known photosensitisers.

carrot.

Preclinical data

The oil is reported to be of low toxicity. Acute LD so values in mice
(oral) and guinea-pigs (dermal) are reported to exceed 5 g/kg."

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fruit extracts may cause sensitivity reactions similar to those seen
with celery.)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of wild carrot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that wild carrot seed extracts have
oestrogenic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of wild carrot has not been
established. In view of this, the use of wild carrot during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Hepatalgina; Hepatalgina; Metiogen; Palatrobil.
Chile: Natur-Zin; Natursel-C. Italy: Evamilk. Malaysia:
Eyebright Plus. UK: Sciargo; Watershed.

References

1 El-Moghazi AM et al. Flavonoids of Daucus carota. Planta Med 1980;
40: 382-385

2 Ceska O et al. Furocoumarins in the cultivated carrot, Daucus carota.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 81-83.

3. Benecke R et al. Vergleichende Untersuchungen tiber den Gehalt an
atherischem Ol] und dessen Zusammensetzung in den Friichten
verschiedener Sorten von Daucus carota L. ssp. sativus (Hoffm.)
Arcang. Pharmazie 1987; 42: 256-259.

4 Gambhir SS e¢ al. Studies on Daucus carota, Linn. Part 1.
Pharmacological studies with the water-soluble fraction of the
alcoholic extract of the seeds: a preliminary report. Indian ] Med Res
1966; 54: 178-187.

----- PAGE 606 -----
10

cel

Gambhir SS et al. Antispasmodic activity of the tertiary base of
Daucus carota, Linn. seeds. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 1979; 23: 225—
228.

Prakash AO. Biological evaluation of some medicinal plant extracts
for contraceptive efficacy. Contracept Deliv Syst 1984; 5: 9.

Lal R et al. Antifertility effect of Daucus carota seeds in female albino
rats. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 243-246.

Kant A et al. The estrogenic efficacy of carrot (Daucus carota) seeds. ]
Adv Zool 1986; 7: 36-41.

Sharma MM et al. Estrogenic and pregnancy interceptory effects of
carrot Daucus carota seeds. Indian J Exp Biol 1976; 14: 506-508.
Kaliwal BB, Rao MA. Inhibition of ovarian compensatory
hypertrophy by carrot seed (Daucus carota) extract or estradiol-176 in
hemicastrated albino rats. Indian J Exp Biol 1981; 19: 1058-1060.
Bhargava AK et al. Pharmacological investigation of the essential oil

12
13

14

15

16

17

Wild Carrot

of Daucus carota Linn. var. sativa DC. Indian J Pharm 1967; 29: 127—
129.

Carrot seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1976; 14: 705-706.

Gambhir SS et al. Studies on Daucus carota, Linn. Part II.
Cholingergic activity of the quaternary base isolated from water-
soluble fraction of alcoholic extracts of seeds. Indian ] Med Res 1966;
54: 1053-1056.

Handa SS. Natural products and plants as liver protecting drugs.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 307-351.

Guérin J-C, Réveillére H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. II Study of 40 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Fr 1985; 43: 77-81.

Ramstorp M et al. Isolation and partial characterization of a
substance from carrots, Daucus carota, with ability to agglutinate
cells of Streptococcus mutans. Caries Res 1982; 16: 423-427.
Opdyke DLJ. Carrot seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 14: 705.

----- PAGE 607 -----
- Wild Lettuce

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of wild lettuce is well documented, although it
is not clear which constituents represent the active
components. Early reports of hyoscyamine as a constituent
have not been substantiated by subsequent study. No
published information was found to support the traditional
herbal uses of wild lettuce, although a sedative action in toads
has been reported for a related species L. sativa. In view of the
potential allergenicity of wild lettuce and the lack of toxicity
data, excessive use and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Related Lactuca species include Lactuca sativa (Garden
Lettuce), Lactuca serriola L. (Prickly Lettuce), L. quescina L.
subsp. quercina and Lactuca canadensis (Wild Lettuce of
America).

Species (Family)

Lactuca virosa L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Bitter Lettuce, Great Lettuce, Lettuce Opium

Part(s) Used

Leaf, latex

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

All parts of the plant contain a milky, white latex (sap) which,
when collected and dried, forms the drug known as lactucar-
ium, (9)

Acids Citric, malic and oxalic (up to 1%) acids; cichoric acid
(phenolic).

Alkaloids — Hyoscyamine, later disputed.**°**) N-methyl-f-
phenethylamine, also disputed.”

Coumarins Aesculin, cichoriin.”

Flavonoids Flavones (e.g. apigenin, luteolin), flavonols (e.g.
quercetin) and their glycosides.”

Terpenoids Bitter principles including the sesquiterpene lactones
lactucin and lactupicrin (lactucopicrin); B-amyrin, germanicol,
and lactucone (lactucerin). Lactucone is a mixture of a- and f-
lactucerol acetates, B-lactucerol being identical to taraxasterol.

Sesquiterpene lactones

fe}
-sitOR
HO
o RB
t
lactucopicrin —-C— on \- OH
lactucin H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of wild lettuce.

Other constituents Mannitol, proteins, resins and sugars.

Food Use

Wild lettuce is not used in foods, although the related species L.
sativa is commonly used as a salad ingredient.

Herbal Use

Wild lettuce is stated to possess mild sedative, anodyne and
hypnotic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for insomnia,
restlessness and excitability in children, pertussis, irritable cough,
priapism, dysmenorrhoea, nymphomania, muscular or articular

pains, and specifically for irritable cough and insomnia.(C% ©” C*
Ga2, Goa)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried leaves 0.5-3.0g as an infusion three times daily.'(©®

Figure 2 Wild lettuce (Lactuca virosa).

----- PAGE 608 -----
Figure 3 Wild lettuce - dried drug substance (herb).

Liquid extract 0.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6%

Lactucarium (dried latex extract) (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.0g three
times daily.

Soft extract (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.0g three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Lactucarium has been noted to induce mydriasis.©® This effect
may be attributable to hyoscyamine, although the dried sap is
reportedly devoid of this alkaloid.

An alcoholic extract of a related species, L. sativa, has exhibited
a sedative effect in toads, causing a reduction in motor activity
and behaviour.) Higher doses resulted in flaccid paralysis. In
addition, an antispasmodic action on isolated smooth and striated
muscle, and in vitro negative chronotropic and inotropic effects on
normal and stressed (tachycardic) hearts were observed. The
antispasmodic action was noted to be antagonised by calcium.

Lactucin, lactupicrin and hyoscyamine have all been proposed
as the sedative components in wild lettuce. However in the above
study,” the active component was uncharacterised and acted
mainly peripherally, not readily crossing the blood-brain barrier.
The suggested mode of action was via interference with basic
excitatory processes common to neural and muscular functions,
and not via a neuromuscular block.

Low amounts (nanograms) of morphine have been detected in
Lactuca species, although the concentrations involved are
considered too low to exert any obvious pharmacological

effect.(C
Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of wild
lettuce and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxi

Clinical data

No side-effects documented for L. virosa. However, there is a lack
of clinical safety and toxicity data for wild lettuce and further
investigation of these aspects is required.Wild lettuce contains

Wild Lettuce

sesquiterpene lactones which are potentially allergenic.“©’”)

Occupational dermatitis has been documented for L. sativa
together with an urticarial eruption after ingestion of the leaves.‘
©°S) The milky sap of L. sativa is reported to be irritant.‘

Preclinical data

Consumption of large amounts of L. scariola has caused
poisoning in cattle, which developed pulmonary emphysema,
severe dyspnoea, and weakness.” Only the immature plants were
reported to be toxic.

L. sativa has been reported to produce only negative responses
when tested for mutagenicity using the Ames test (Salmonella
typhimurium TA98, TA100).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Overdosage may produce poisoning” involving — stupor,
depressed respiration, coma and even death. Wild lettuce may
cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals, in particular
those with an existing sensitivity to other members of the
Asteraceae/Compositae family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of wild lettuce to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of wild lettuce has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the possibility
of allergic reactions, use of wild lettuce during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Canada: Sirop Cocillana Codeine. Russia: Speman Forte
(Cnemax ®opre). South Africa: Choats Extract of Lettuce
Cough Mixture. UK: Anased; Antibron; Calmanite Tablets;
Gerard House Somnus; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Napiers Sleep
Tablets; Nytol Herbal; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Slumber;
Unwind Herbal Nytol. Venezuela: Cerylana.

References

1 Rees $, Harborne JB. Flavonoids and other phenolics of Cichorium
and related members of the Lactuceae (Compositae). Bot J Linn Soc
1984; 89: 313-319.

2 Huang Z-J et al. Studies on herbal remedies I: Analysis of herbal
smoking preparations alleged to contain lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.)
and other natural products. J Pharm Sci 1982; 71: 270-271.

3 Gonzalex-Lima F et al. Depressant pharmacological effects of a
component isolated from lettuce, Lactuca sativa. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1986; 24: 154-166.

4 Krook G. Occupational dermatitis from Lactuca sativa (lettuce) and
Cichorium (endive). Contact Dermatitis 1977; 3: 27-36.

5 Rinkel HJ, Balyeat RM. Occupational dermatitis due to lettuce.
JAMA 1932; 98: 137-138.

6 Zeller W et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants 6.
Guinea pig sensitization experiments with ornamental plants and
weeds using different methods. Arch Dermatol Res 1985; 277: 28-35.

7 Anon. Poisindex CD-ROM 1995; 85. Denver: Micromedex.

8 White RD e¢ al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 26-31.

----- PAGE 609 -----
taken with other salicylate-containing drugs are applicable.
Products containing willow should preferably be standardised
on their salicin content, in view of the considerable variation
in salicylate concentrations between different Salix species.
The use of willow during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Several Salix species are used including S. alba L., S. fragilis L., S.
pentandra L., S. purpurea L. (Salicaceae)

Synonym(s)

Salix

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia'*”)

BHC 1992'°®

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E@?)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G1, G2, G6 and G52.

Glycosides (phenolic) Various phenolic glycosides including
salicin, salicortin, tremulacin, salireposide, picein and triandrin.“?
Acetylated salicin, salicortin, salireposide, and esters of salicylic
acid and salicyl alcohol may also occur.

Salicylates (calculated as salicin) Vary between species, e.g.
0.5% in S. alba, 1-10% in S. fragilis, 3-9% in S. purpurea.”

Flavonoids  Flavanones, eriodictoyl-7-glucoside; naringenin-5S-
glucoside; chalcone; isosalipurposide; catechin.'2 S

Tannins Condensed.

Other constituents Catechins.

There is reported to be no difference between the phenolic
glycoside pattern of the bark and leaf. The latter is also reported
to contain flavonoids, catechins and condensed tannins.»

Food Use

Willow is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Willow is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic,
antipyretic, antihidrotic, analgesic, antiseptic and astringent
properties. Traditionally it has been used for muscular and
arthrodial rheumatism with inflammation and pain, influenza,
respiratory catarrh, gouty arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and
specifically for rheumatoid arthritis and other systemic connective
tissue disorders characterised by inflammatory changes. The
German Commission E approved internal use for diseases
accompanied by fever, rheumatic ailments and headaches.'*

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dry bark

corresponding to 60-120 mg total salicin daily.

1-3g as a decoction three times daily'C%°”

(G3)

Liquid extract
daily(Co%

1-3mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacological actions documented for salicylates include anti-
inflammatory, antipyretic, hyperglycaemic/hypoglycaemic and

Salicylates
CH,OH

OH
oO. 0.
CH,OR

R
salicin H
fragilin CH3CO
populin benzoyl
fe)

OH

salicortin H
2’-O-acetylsalicortin CH3;CO
tremulacin benzoyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of willow.

----- PAGE 610 -----
Figure 2 Willow (Salix spp.).

uricosuric/antiuricosuric activities, and increased blood-clotting
time and plasma albumin binding.'©* Anti-inflammatory activity
for salicin and tremulacin (isolated from Populus spp.) has been
assessed in the hen's egg choriollantoic test.-%” The results
indicate that the activity may be due to the metabolites of these
compounds. Salicin is probably the most active anti-inflamma-
tory compound in willow; it is metabolised to salicylic acid. The
enzymatic degradation of salicin, salicortin and tremulacin by B-
glucosidase and by esterase has been investigated.

Tannins are known to have astringent properties.

Clinical studies

Robust clinical research assessing the effects of willow is limited
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Willow bark extract (equivalent to 240mg salicin/day) was
compared with placebo in a two-week, randomised, double-blind
trial involving 78 patients with osteoarthritis.” A difference in
pain dimension in the treated group, compared with placebo, just
reached statistical significance (p = 0.047).

The pharmacological actions of salicylates in humans are well
documented, and are applicable to willow. Salicin is a prodrug
which is metabolised to saligenin in the gastrointestinal tract and
to salicylic acid after absorption.”

Side-effects, To.

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for willow are limited and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Minor adverse effects
including stomachache, nausea, dizziness, sweating and rash have
been reported for willow.(C”

Side-effects and signs of toxicity normally associated with
salicylates, such as gastric and renal irritation, hypersensitivity,
blood in the stools, tinnitus, nausea and vomiting, may occur.
Salicin is documented to cause skin rashes.(C

Willow

|
tele I3 S 1 1 78 79

Figure 3 Willow — dried drug substance (bark).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Precautions associated with salicylate therapy are also applicable
to willow. Therefore individuals with known hypersensitivity to
aspirin, asthma, active peptic ulceration, diabetes, gout, haemo-
philia, hypoprothrombinaemia, kidney or liver disease should be
aware of the possible risks associated with the ingestion of
willow.

Drug interactions Drug interactions listed for salicylates are also
applicable to willow and include oral anticoagulants, methotrex-
ate, metoclopramide, phenytoin, probenecid, spironolactone and
valproate. Concurrent administration of willow with other
salicylate-containing products, such as aspirin, should be avoided.
Irritant effects of salicylates on the gastrointestinal tract may be
enhanced by alcohol, and barbiturates an
been documented to enhance salicylate toxicity as well as masking
the symptoms of overdosage.““*?

oral sedatives have

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of willow during pregnancy
and lactation has not been established. Conflicting reports have
been documented concerning the safety of aspirin taken during
pregnancy. Salicylates excreted in breast milk have been reported
to cause macular rashes in breastfed babies.'(“*” In view of this
information, the use of willow during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Brazil: Zortrix. Germany: Assalix; Assplant; Rheumakaps;
Rheumatab Salicis. Switzerland: Assalix.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Arthritic Pain Herbal Formula 1; Bioglan Arthri
Plus; Extralife Migrai-Care; Extralife PMS-Care; Guaiacum
Complex; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid; Prost-1.
Austria: Digestodoron. Brazil: Calman; Calmiplan; Floriny;
Pasalix; Passi Catha; Passiflorine. Czech Republic: Antirevma-
ticky Caj; Erkaltungstee; Valofyt Neo. France: Arkophytum;
Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany:
Digestodoron; Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum. Italy: Biothy-
mus DS; Biothymus DS; Bodyguard; Donalg; Influ-Zinc;
Nevril; Passiflorine. Malaysia: Celery Plus. Mexico: Ifupasil.
Portugal: Neurocardol. South Africa: Digestodoron. Spain:

----- PAGE 611 -----
Willow

Relief; Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets; St Johnswort
Compound. Venezuela: Passiflorum.

References

1

Meier B e¢ al. Identifikation und Bestimmung von je acht
Phenolglykosiden in Salix purpurea und Salix daphnoides mit
moderner HPLC. Pharm Acta Helv 1985; 60: 269-274.

Meier B et al. Pharmaceutical aspects of the use of willows in herbal
remedies. Planta Med 1988: 54: 559-560.

Karl C et al. Flavonoide aus Salix alba, die Struktur des terniflorins

und eines Weiteren Acylflavonoides. Phytochemistry 1976; 15: 1084—
1085.

Albrecht M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of flavonol glycosides
and salicin derivatives from the leaves of Populus tremuloides. Planta
Med 1990; 56: 660.

Meier B, Liebi M. Salicinhaltige pflanzliche Arzneimittel-
Uberlegungen zu wirksamkeit und unbedenklichkeit. Z Phytother
1990; 11: 50-58.

Julkunen-Tiitto R, Meier B. The enzymatic decomposition of salicin
and its derivatives obtained from salicaceae species. J Nat Prod 1992;
SS: 1204-1212.

Schmid B et al. Efficacy and tolerability of a standardized willow bark
extract in patients with osteoarthritis: randomized placebo-
controlled, double blind clinical trial. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 344—
350.

Baker S, Thomas PS. Herbal medicine precipitating massive
haemolysis. Lancet 1987; i: 1039-1040.

----- PAGE 612 -----
- Witch Hazel

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Witch hazel is characterised by its tannin constituents and
astringent properties. The documented herbal uses are
related to these astringent properties. There is limited
evidence from clinical studies to indicate that witch hazel
used topically is effective in the treatment of haemorrhoids,
but its use in the treatment of eczema and dermatitis is more
controversial. There are no known problems associated with
the use of topical preparations of witch hazel during
pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Hamamelis virginiana L. (Hamamelidaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hamamelis, Virginian Witch Hazel, Witchazel

Part(s) Used
Bark, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C”
ESCOP 2003'°7?
Martindale 35th edition'@
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2 and G52.

Flavonoids (leaf) Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and their
glycosides including astragalin, quercitrin, afzelin and myricitrin.

Tannins, catechins Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
3% (868) Hamamelitannin (hydrolysable), lesser amounts of
condensed tannins (bark). (+)-catechin, (+)-gallocatechin, (—)-
epicatechingallate, (—)-epigallocatechingallate, proanthocyanidin
oligomers of cyanidin and delphinidin type.

Volatile oils About 0.5%. Hexen-2-ol, hexenol, o- and B-ionones,
eugenol, safrole and sesquiterpenes.

Other constituents Fixed oil (about 0.6%), resin (hamamelin,
hamamamelitannin), wax, saponins, choline, free gallic acid and
free hamamelose.

Sugars
CH,OH
HO sO
OH
HO OH

hamamelose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of witch hazel.

Food Use

Witch hazel is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that

there is insufficient information available for an adequate
(G16)

assessment of potential toxicity.

Herbal Use

Witch hazel is stated to possess astringent, antihaemorrhagic and
anti-inflammatory properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
diarrhoea, mucous colitis, haemorrhoids, haematemesis, haemop-
tysis, and externally for external haemorrhoids, bruises and
localised inflamed swellings. The German Commission E

approved use for minor skin injuries, local inflammation of skin
(G3)

and mucous membranes, haemorrhoids and varicose veins.

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in older and contemporary
standard herbal and pharmaceutical reference texts are given

Figure 2. Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana).

----- PAGE 613 -----
Figure 3 Witch hazel — dried drug substance (bark).

below. While doses for oral administration are given in older
literature, modern use of witch hazel is by topical application.

Dried leaves 2 as an infusion three times daily.'C®

Hamamelis Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 2-4mL (1:1 in 45%

alcohol) three times daily.'‘C®
Hamamelis Water (BPC 1973) for local application, undiluted or
1:3 dilution for external use.'°?)

Decoction 5-10 g in 250 mL water for compresses.'©*

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Witch hazel is known to possess astringent and haemostatic
properties, which have been attributed to the tannin constituents.
Vasoconstriction was reduced in the hindquarters of rabbits when
arteries were perfused with aqueous or ethanolic extracts of witch
hazel leaf. A 70% ethanolic extract of leaf (1:5, 200 mg/kg,
administered orally) significantly inhibited the chronic phase of
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema over a period of 19 days,
compared with control (p < 0.05). An aqueous ethanolic extract
of witch hazel bark yielded a fraction rich in polymeric
proanthocyanins after ultracentrifugation.?) This fraction was
significantly active against herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). It
also showed radical scavenging properties, inhibited B-glucosidase
and human leukocyte elastase activity, and was active in the croton
oil ear oedema test in mice. In other studies, 3-O-galloyl-
epicatechin-(4B,8)-catechin, a catechin oligomer and hamameli-
tannin isolated from witch hazel bark had ICso values of 6.6, 8.8
and 1.0,mol/L, respectively, for inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase.
The oligomer was active in the microsomal lyso-PAF:acetyl-CoA-
acetyltransferase inhibition assay, with an ICso value of 9.4 tmol/
L, whereas hamamelitannin was inactive.

Clinical studies

Robust clinical research assessing the effects of witch hazel is
limited and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. A
double-blind, controlled trial involving 90 patients with haemor-
thoids compared the effects of witch hazel bark salve with those
of other salves. Witch hazel was reported to be superior in relief of
symptoms. ‘°°

In a study involving 30 volunteers who received topical
applications of a hydroglycolic extract of witch hazel leaf, skin

temperature was significantly reduced, compared with baseline
values. This was interpreted as a possible vasoconstrictor effect of
witch hazel.‘ The effects of an after-sun lotion containing 10%
hamamelis distillate were assessed in 30 healthy volunteers using a
modified UV-B erythema test for inflammation. It was reported
that erythema suppression ranged from 20% at seven hours to
27% at 48 hours.

In a two-week, randomised, double-blind trial, 72 patients with
moderately severe eczema were treated with either a hamamelis
distillate cream (5.35g distillate with 0.64g ketone/100g),
hydrocortisone cream 0.5%, or drug-free cream. All three
treatments significantly reduced itching, erythema and scaling
after one week. Hydrocortisone cream was more effective than
hamamelis cream.

Several clinical studies of witch hazel in the treatment of eczema
have been reviewed.'©™ A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of witch hazel salve (25% water distillate from leaf) involving 80
patients with toxic and degenerative eczema and 31 patients with
endogenous eczema found that atopic dermatitis responded to the
treatment to a greater extent than to placebo, but that there was
no significant effect on primary irritant contact dermatitis. An
uncontrolled study involving 22 patients with atopic eczema who
were treated with witch hazel (4g leaf provided 25 mL distillate/
100g salve) applied to affected arms over a three-week period
reported improvements in symptoms, compared with baseline
‘G5 Uncontrolled studies provide preliminary data only
and the observed effects cannot be attributed definitively to witch
hazel. An uncontrolled study involving 37 patients treated with a
witch hazel leaf cream twice daily for two weeks reported
improvements in eczema and neurodermatitis.

values.

Side-effects, Toxicity

The volatile oil contains safrole, a known carcinogen (see
Sassafras), but in amounts too small to cause concern. Stomach
irritation may occur in susceptible patients after oral treatment.
Four of 1032 patients tested reacted to an ointment containing
25% witch hazel extract, but two of these patients were sensitive

to wool fat in the ointment base.'©”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for witch hazel. In view of the tannin
constituents, excessive ingestion of witch hazel is not recom-
mended.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of information on
the safety of witch hazel preparations administered orally, their
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided. There are
no known problems associated with topical use of witch hazel
during pregnancy and lactation.

“Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Australia: Optrex Original; Witch Doctor. Austria: Hametum.
Canada: Optrex. Chile: Sperti Preparacion H Clear Gel.
France: Optrex. Germany: Hamasana; Hametum; Posterine;
Venoplant top. Italy: Acqua Virginiana; Derminiol; Optrex.
Malaysia: Optrex. Mexico: Tia Puppy. New Zealand: Optrex.
Singapore: Optrex. Spain: Derminiol; Hametol; Hemo Dermi-
niol; Optrex. Switzerland: Mavena Anal-Gen; Optrex. Thai-

----- PAGE 614 -----
Luminique; Nevril; Proctopure; Sacnel; Salviette H; Steril Zeta;
Varicogel; Venactive; Venoplus. Mexico: Almodin; Prespir;
Supranettes Naturalag. New Zealand: Lacto Calamine; Optrex

Witch Hazel

References

Zeylstra H. Hamamelis virginiana. Br J Phytother 1998; 5: 23-28.
Duwiejua M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Polygonum bistorta,
Guaiacum officinale and Hamamelis virginiana in rats. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1994; 46: 286-290.

Erdelmeier CAJ e¢ al. Antiviral and antiphlogistic activities of
Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 1996, 62: 241-245.

Hartisch C et al. Dual inhibitory activities of tannins from Hamamelis
virginiana and related polyphenols on S-lipoxygenase and lyso-PAF:
acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase. Planta Med 1997; 63: 106-110.
Hughes-Formella BJ et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of hamamelis
lotion in a UVB erythema test. Dermatology 1998; 196: 316-322.
Korting HC et al. Comparative efficacy of hamamelis distillate and
hydrocortisone cream in atopic eczema. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1995;
48: 461-465.

----- PAGE 615 -----
Yarrow

efficacy and safety of yarrow is limited. Yarrow is considered
to be relatively non-toxic although allergic reactions in
susceptible individuals have been documented. The volatile
oil is contra-indicated in pregnancy and in view of the lack of
safety information, use of yarrow should be avoided during
lactation.©>®)

Species (Family)

Achillea millefolium L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Milfoil, Millefolium

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission EO
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Acids Amino acids (e.g. alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid
histidine, leucine, lysine, proline, valine),'"? fatty acids (e.g.
rr rrr a ~ y (3,4) ar

> > > 5 >
linoleic, myristic, oleic, palmitic, stearic) and others including
ascorbic acid,” caffeic acid, folic acid, salicylic acid and
succinic acid."?

Alkaloids/bases Betonicine and stachydrine (pyrrolidine),
trigonelline (pyridine) ,“"” betaine and choline  (bases).'”
Uncharacterised alkaloids include achiceine, achilleine® (possible
synonym for L-betonicine), which is stated to yield achilletine'” on
alkaline hydrolysis, and moscatine/moschatine,” stated to be an

ill-defined glucoalkaloid.

(1,7)

Flavonoids Predominantly flavone glycosides apigenin- and
luteolin-7-glycosides,°) with lesser quantities of artemetin,
casticin, 5-hydroxy-3,6,7,4-tetramethoxyflavone and isorhamne-
tin. Rutin (a flavonol glycoside).

0)

Tannins Condensed and hydrolysable, !® with glucose as the

carbohydrate component of the latter”)

Volatile oils Numerous identified components include borneol,
bornyl acetate (trace), camphor, 1,8-cineole, eucalyptol, limonene,
sabinene, terpinen-4-ol, terpineol and a-thujone (monoterpenes),
caryophyllene (a sesquiterpene), achillicin, achillin, millefin and
millefolide (sesquiterpene lactones), azulene and chamazulene
(sesquiterpene lactone- derived) and isoartemisia ketone. The
relative composition of the components varies greatly between
Achillea species, especially the azulene content. Azulene has been
reported as the major component.''? However, true yarrow (A.
millefolium) is thought to be hexaploid and azulene-free, whereas
closely related species, such as Achillea lanulosa Nutt. and
Achillea collina Becker, are tetraploid and contain up to 50%
azulene in their volatile oil. '%! It is possible that the tetraploid

Monoterpenes
OH

|

camphor

linalool

Sesquiterpenes

achillicin

chamazulene fe)

+t OCOCHg

ay

CH;CO.0

svnatt

millefin

leukodin O

Acetylenes
CH3-(C=C)3-CH=CH— CH-CH -CH=CHp pontica epoxide

CH3-(C=C)3-CH==CHCO.CH, matricaria ester

Alkaloids e
Coo
HO, ° ° ZA
coo coo |
Oy Oo Xuy >
Ny, Ni, NO
cHY ‘CHs cHY ‘CHs GH,
betonicine stachydrine trigonelline

Figure 1 Selected constituents of yarrow.

----- PAGE 616 -----
species may be supplied for A. millefolium. The azulenes are not
present in the fresh herb: they are formed as artefacts during
steam distillation of the oil, from unstable precursors called
proazulenes (e.g. achillin and achillicin), via equally unstable

azulene-carboxylic acid intermediates.”

Other constituents Unknown cyanogenetic compound," sugars
including arabinose, galactose, dextrose, dulcitol, glucose,

oe : 1,2)
inositol, maltose, mannitol and sucrose.¢~

Food Use

Yarrow is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (herb, flowers, essential oil and other prepara-
tions: category 4, with limits on camphor, eucalyptol and thujone)
(see Appendix 3).‘C'” Previously, in the USA, yarrow was only

approved for use in alcoholic beverages, and the finished product
G41)

had to be thujone free."

Herbal Use

Yarrow i

tated to possess diaphoretic, antipyretic, hypotensive,
astringent, diuretic and urinary antiseptic properties. Tradition-
ally, it has been used for bruises, swellings, strains, fevers,
common cold, essential hypertension, amenorrhoea, dysentery,
diarrhoea, and specifically for thrombotic conditions with

hypertension, including cerebral and coronary thromboses.(C* °°
G7, G8, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.C°%°?

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily. (G6, G7)

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Figure 2. Yarrow (Achillea millefolium).

Yarrow 605,

Figure 3 Yarrow - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

Some activities documented for yarrow are associated with the
azulene constituents, although it is now thought that azulene is
absent from true yarrow (see Constituents). It is possible that
some of the documented pharmacological studies have used

Achillea species other than A. millefolium.?

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for an aqueous
extract of yarrow using mouse" and rat" paw oedema models,
5) and various inflammatory
including histamine, carrageenan and prostaglan-
din. In mouse studies, the active fraction was reported as a series
of protein-carbohydrate complexes. Topical anti-inflammatory
activity in rabbits has also been documented for the aqueous
extract." In general, anti-inflammatory properties are associated
with azulenes (see Chamomile, German). Anti-inflammatory
activity has been described for the azulene components docu-

mented for the volatile oil of yarrow.)

with inflammation induced by yeast

substances,

A diuretic effect was also noted in mice administered an
aqueous extract of yarrow," but only at a dose more than double
that required for an anti-inflammatory effect.) Terpinen-4-ol,
the diuretic principle in juniper, has been reported as a component
of yarrow volatile oil.

CNS-depressant activity has been documented for the volatile
oil: a dose of 300 mg/kg decreased the spontaneous activity of
mice and lowered the body temperature of rats. In addition, 300-
600 mg/kg doses inhibited pentetrazole-induced convulsions and
prolonged sleep induced by a barbiturate preparation.”

Moderate antibacterial activity has been documented for an
erb against Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Escherichia coli,
Shigella sonnei and Shigella flexneri.) Antimicrobial properties
have been documented for the sesquiterpene lactone fraction.

Achilleine 0.5 g/kg by intravenous injection has been noted to
decrease the blood clotting time in rabbits by 32%. The
haemostatic action persis
toxic effects.

Antispasmodic activity on the isolated rabbit intestine has been
documented for a flavonoid-containing fraction of yarrow.)
Antispasmodic activity is generally associated with azulene
constituents (see Chamomile, German).

Antipyretic and hypotensive actions have been reported for the
basic fraction (alkaloid/base);‘“"" the sesquiterpene lactone

ethanolic extract of the

ed for 45 minutes with no observable

----- PAGE 617 -----
Yarrow

fraction is stated to possess cytotoxic activities,’ although no
further details were located. Tannins are known to possess
astringent activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yarrow
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Allergic reactions to yarrow (e.g. dermatitis) have been documen-
ted, and positive patch tests have been produced in individuals
sensitised to other plants.°°°* An instance of yarrow tea
causing a generalised eruption in a sensitised individual was
reported in 1929. The allergenic properties of some sesquiterpene
lactones are well documented, although none of those present in
yarrow are recognised sensitisers.'“° Yarrow has been suspected
of being a photosensitiser, although extracts have been reported to
lack phototoxicity and to be devoid of psoralens, compounds with
known photosensitising properties.‘

Preclinical data

Yarrow is considered to be of low toxicity. In mice LDso values
have been reported of up to 3.65 g/kg (by mouth), 3.1 g/kg (by
intraperitoneal injection), and greater than or equal to 1 g/kg (by
subcutaneous injection). ” In rats, an LDso (subcutaneous
injection) has been recorded as 16.86 g/kg, with corresponding
LD and LD 49 values reported as 12 and 20 g/kg, respectively."
By comparison, an ED); for anti-inflammatory activity has been
estimated as about 0.43 g/kg."

The known toxic principle thujone has been documented as a
minor component of yarrow volatile oil, although concentrations
present are probably too low to represent a risk to human
health.

A single report of animal poisoning has been documented for
yarrow in which a calf died following the ingestion of a single
plant. No additional reports of animal toxicity were located.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Yarrow may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/ Compositae.'”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yarrow to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that achilleine, a constituent of yarrow,
has anticoagulant activity, although the clinical relevance of this, if
any is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation Yarrow should not be taken during
pregnancy. It is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle,“ and the volatile oil contains trace amounts
(0.3%) of the abortifacient principle thujone. In view of the lack
of safety information use of yarrow should be avoided during
lactation.

Lozione Same Urto; Pik Gel. Portugal: Cicaderma; Fade
Cream. Russia: Liv 52 (Aus 52); Liv 52 (Aus 52); Original
Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapupii Boapmoti Baan3sam
Burrnepa); Tonsilgon N (Tousmaron H). South Africa: Amara;
Clairo; Menodoron. Spain: Jaquesor; Menstrunat; Natusor
Circusil; Natusor Gastrolen; Natusor Jaquesan. Switzerland:
Gastrosan; Kernosan Heidelberger Poudre; Pommade au
Baume; Tisane hepatique et biliaire; Tisane pour l'estomac.
UK: Catarrh-eeze; Drops of Life Tablets; Rheumatic Pain
Remedy; Rutin Compound Tablets; Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets;
Wellwoman.

References

1 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. 1.
Preparation of the total extracts and composition of the part of the
alcoholic extracts soluble in alcohol and water. God Vissh
Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 195-222.

2 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. Ul.
Composition of the parts soluble in water and insoluble in alcohol.
God Vissh Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 223-241.

3 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. Il.
Composition of the acidic, water-insoluble part of the alcoholic
extract. God Vissh Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 61-72.

4 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. V.
Composition and structure of the components of neutral fraction
insoluble in the aqueous part of the alcoholic extract. God Vissh
Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 73-101.

5S Chandler RF et al. Ethnobotany and phytochemistry of yarrow,
Achillea millefolium, Compositae. Economic Bot 1982; 36: 203-223.

6 Falk AJ et al. Isolation and identification of three new flavones from
Achillea millefolium L. ] Pharm Sci 1975; 64: 1838-1842.

7 Zirvi KA, Ikram M. Alkaloids of some of the plants of the
Compositae. Pakistan J Sci Ind Res 1975; 18: 93-101.

8 Miller FM, Chow LM. Alkaloids of Achillea millefolium L. 1.
Isolation and characterization of Achilleine. | Am Chem Soc 1954; 76:
1353-1354.

9 Hoerhammer L. Flavone concentration of medical plants with regard
to their spasmolytic action. Congr Sci Farm Conf Commun 21st Pisa
1961; 578-588.

10 Falk AJ et al. The constituents of the essential oil from Achillea
millefolium L. Lloydia 1974; 37: 598-602.

11 Haggag MY et al. Thin layer and gas-chromatographic studies on the
essential oil from Achillea millefolium. Planta Med 1975; 27: 361-366.

12. Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

13. Seigler DS. Plants of the Northeastern United States that produce
cyanogenic compounds. Economic Bot 1976; 30: 395-407.

----- PAGE 618 -----
14

15

16

Chandler F. Vindication of maritime Indian herbal remedies. J
Ethnopharmacol 1983; 9: 323-327.

Goldberg AS et al. Isolation of anti-inflammatory principles from
Achillea millefolium (Compositae). ] Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 938-941.
Shipochliev T, Fournadjiev G. Spectrum of the antiinflammatory effect
of Arctostaphylos uva ursi and Achilea millefolium, L. Probl Vutr Med
1984; 12: 99-107.

17

18

19

Yarrow

Kudrzycka-Bieloszabska FW, Glowniak K. Pharmacodynamic
properties of oleam chamomillae and oleum millefolii. Diss Pharm
Pharmacol 1966; 18: 449-454.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Mathias CGT et al. Plant dermatitis — patch test results (1975-78).
Note on Juniperus extract. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5: 336.

----- PAGE 619 -----
- Yellow Dock

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical, pharmacological, and toxicity information
is available for yellow dock. Documented anthraquinone
constituents justify the reputed purgative action. However,
there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy
and safety of yellow dock. Although the purgative effect of
yellow dock is reputed to be gentle, the use of unstandardised
anthraquinone-containing preparations should be avoided
since their pharmacological effect is unpredictable and may
cause abdominal cramp and diarrhoea. The use of yellow
dock should be avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Rumex crispus L. (Polygonaceae)

Synonym(s)

Curled Dock, Rumex odontocarpus 1. Sandor

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL)
Constituents

Anthraquinones
physcion (aglycones).

24%. Chrysophanol, emodin, nepodin,
(1-3)
Tannins Catechol 5% (condensed-type).

Other plants parts The plant constituents documented include
oxalic acid, oxalates, chrysophanic acid, emodin, tannin, and a

complex volatile oil (more than 60 components identified).

Anthraquinones

OH O OH
el ,
°
R! R?
chrysophanol H  CHg
aloe-emodin H  CH20H
emodin OH CH3
physcion OCH; CH3

Figure 1

Selected constituents of yellow dock.

Food Use

Yellow dock is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Yellow dock is stated to possess gentle purgative and cholagogue
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for chronic skin disease,

obstructive jaundice, constipation, and specifically for psoriasis
(G7, G64)

with constipation.

Figure 2 Yellow dock (Rumex crispus).

Figure 3 Yellow dock — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 620 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried root 24g as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for the root. Slight antibacterial activity has
been reported for herb extracts, which exhibited activity towards
both Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobacterium
smegmatis) and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli, Shigella sonnei,
Shigella flexneri) organisms.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yellow
dock and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

No side-effects documented. However, there is a lack of clinical
safety and toxicity data for yellow dock and further investigation
of these aspects is required.. In view of the documented
anthraquinone constituents, side-effects generally associated
with laxatives are also applicable to yellow dock. Overuse may
cause abdominal cramps and diarrhoea, and prolonged use may
lead to intestinal atrophy and hypokalaemia.

Preclinical data

Dermatitis has been reported in livestock following the ingestion
of plant material in large quantities.(©*” Oxalic acid is known to
be a toxic plant acid that forms insoluble calcium salts which

Yellow Dock

cause a disturbance in calcium concentrations and hence affect the
: (G33)
blood coagulation mechanism. ‘“??)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Warnings generally associated with stimulant laxatives are also
applicable to yellow dock (see Senna). Therefore, yellow dock
should not be taken when there is existing intestinal obstruction,
and excessive use should be avoided (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yellow dock to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Drug interactions listed
for other stimulant laxatives are applicable to yellow dock (see
Senna).

Pregnancy and lactation In general, unstandardised stimulant
laxatives are not recommended for use during pregnancy. The use
of yellow dock should therefore be avoided in favour of a
standardised preparation that is recommended for the treatment
of constipation during pregnancy. The use of yellow dock by
breastfeeding women should also be avoided, since it has been
documented that anthraquinones can be secreted into the breast
milk (see Senna).

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Colax; Colax; Dermaco; Herbal Cleanse; Trifolium
Complex. Canada: Herborex. UK: Skin Eruptions Mixture.

References

1. de Siqueira NCS et al. Hydroxyanthraquinones in Rumex crispus L.
(of southern Rio Grande). Rev Cent Cienc Biomed 1977; 5: 69-74.

2 Midiwo JO, Rukunga GM. Distribution of anthraquinone pigments in
Rumex species of Kenya. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 1390-1391.

3. Fairbairn JW, El-Muhtadi FJ. Chemotaxonomy of anthraquinones in
Rumex. Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 263-268.

4 Miyazawa M, Kameoka H. Constituents of essential oil from Rumex
crispus. Yakugaku Zasshi 1983; 32: 45-47.

----- PAGE 621 -----
Yucca

a , Such as pain and ess, and reduce
pressure and serum triglyceride and cholesterol
concentrations. However, robust clinical research assessing
the efficacy and safety of yucca is lacking. The traditional use
of yucca as a foodstuff would indicate it to be of low toxicity.
However there is a lack of information on the safety of
medicinal use of yucca. In view of this excessive use of yucca
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Various Yucca species (Asparagaceae) including
*Yucca schidigera Roezl ex Ortgies

+Yucca brevifolia Engelm.

Yucca glauca Nutt.

Synonym(s)

*Mohave Yucca, Yucca mohavensis Sarg.
tJoshua Tree, Yucca arborescens Trel.

Part(s) Used
Whole plant

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Yucca is not listed in the GSL.

Constituents

Terpenoids Various saponins have been isolated from different
Yucca species, including tigogenin and chlerogenin,”) sarsasapo-
genin, markogenin, higogenin, neo-tigogenin, neo-gitogenin,

hecogenin, gloriogenin, and diosgenin (trace)” and smilagenin.

Food Use

The yucca plant has been used traditionally as a major foodstuff
by Indian tribes. Previously, in the USA, both Y. schidigera and Y.
brevifolia have been approved for food use.'“*?

Herbal Use

Yucca has been used for the treatment of arthritis, diabetes and
stomach disorders. Concentrated plant juice has been used
topically to soothe painful joints.

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Yucca saponin extract, from Y. schidigera, is reported to exhibit
approximately half the haemolytic activity of commercial soap
bark saponin.

Antitumour activity against B16 melanoma has been documen-
ted for a polysaccharide-containing extract of Y. glauca.°) The
extract was found to be inactive towards L1210 or P388
leukaemias.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yucca
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

A saponin-containing yucca extract has been reported to reduce
symptoms of swelling, pain and stiffness in approximately 75 of
150 arthritic patients given the extract in a double-blind study.
The onset of a positive response was found to vary from days to
weeks or months. A saponin-containing yucca extract has also
been documented to reduce blood pressure, abnormal triglyceride,
and high cholesterol concentrations in a double-blind study
involving 212 arthritic and hypertensive patients.’ Optimum
results were obtained in conjunction with diet and exercise. Yucca
extracts have also been reported to provide relief from headaches
and to improve circulation and gastrointestinal function."*»

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for yucca and further investigation of these aspects is required.

sarsasapogenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of yucca.

----- PAGE 622 -----
A saponin-containing yucca extract was given to more than 700
arthritic patients with no signs of toxicity documented. The
yucca saponins are regarded to be a safe food supplement since
they are not thought to be absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract, thereby reducing the dangers of systemic haemolytic
activity.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yucca to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of information on
the constituents, pharmacology and toxicology of yucca, its use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Yucca

Australia: Prost-1. Brazil: Bronquiogem.

References

1 Dewidar AM, El-Munajjed D. The steroid sapogenin constituents of
Agave americana, A. variegata and Yucca gloriosa. Planta Med 1970;
19: 87-91.

2. Stohs SJ et al. Steroidal sapogenins of Yucca glauca seeds. Lloydia
1973; 36: 443.

3 Ali MS e¢ al. Isolation of antitumor polysaccharide fractions from
Yucca glauca Nutt. (Liliaceae). Growth 1978; 42: 213-223.

4 Bingham R e¢ al. Yucca plant saponin in the management of arthritis.
J Appl Nutr 1975; 27: 45-51.

5S Bingham R et al. Yucca plant saponin in the treatment of hypertension
and hypercholesterolemia. J App! Nutr 1978; 30: 127-136.

----- PAGE 623 -----
Appendix 1

Until the emergence of reports of important interactions between
St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and certain conven-
tional drugs (see St John's Wort), very few interactions involving
herbal products had been reported in the medical literature.
Furthermore, there has been very little experimental and clinical
research in this area.

The following list of potential drug—herb interactions has been
compiled on the basis of known herbal constituents and their
reported pharmacological actions. It should be emphasised that
many drug interactions are harmless and many of those that are

Table 1 Potential drug—herb interactions
Drug/therapeutic category affected
Gastrointestinal system

Antacids, ulcer-healing drugs

Antidiarrhoeal drugs

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients irritant to gastrointestinal
tract. See Appendix 2, Table 12

Herbal ingredients with laxative activity.

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions

potentially harmful occur only in a small proportion of patients
and may then vary in severity from patient to patient. Healthcare
professionals should be alert to undeclared use of herbal
medicines as a possible cause of unexplained toxicity or lack of
effect of conventional medicines.

Suspected drug-herb interactions involving licensed or unli-
censed herbal products should be reported to the regulatory
authorities, as for any other suspected adverse reaction to herbal
or 'conventional' medicines.

Possible effects

Exacerbation of symptoms. Risk of
systemic side-effects

Antagonism

See Appendix 2, Table 1

Laxatives

Herbal ingredients with laxative activity.

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

See Appendix 2, Table 1

Cardiovascular system

Cardiac glycosides
2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients containing

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2,

Table 1
St John’s wort

Diuretics

Herbal ingredients containing

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
digoxin

Potentiation; increased risk of

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2, hypokalaemia

Table 1

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients containing

Anti-arrhythmic activity

Potentiation; increased risk of
hypokalaemia

Difficulty in controlling diuresis;
hypotension

Interference with existing therapy;

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2, increased risk of hypokalaemia

Table 1

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Interference/antagonism with existing

2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.

therapy

Antagonism if hypokalaemia occurs

See Appendix 2, Table 3

Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
2, Table 2

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Potential antagonism

table continues

----- PAGE 624 -----
Table 1 continued

Drug/therapeutic category affected

Antihypertensive therapy

Lipid-lowering drugs

Nitrates and calcium-channel blockers

Sympathomimetics

Anticoagulants

Respiratory system

Terfenadine

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions os

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients with significant amine
content or sympathomimetic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with mineralocorticoid
activity See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with significant amine
content or sympathomimetic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with hypolipidaemic
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 6

Cardioactive ingredients. See Appendix 2,
Table 2

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with significant
sympathomimetic amine content.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with coagulant/
anticoagulant activity. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients containing coumarins with
anticoagulant activity. See Appendix 2, Table
16

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
concentrations. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Cranberry juice
Garlic

Ginkgo

Horse-chestnut

St John’s wort

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients that are potentially
allergenic. See Appendix 2, Table 11

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix
2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Possible effects

Potential risk of severe hypertension

Antagonism
Antagonism
Potentiation

Antagonism

Risk of potentiation/ interference with
existing therapy

Additive effect
Interference with therapy
Antagonism

Reduced sublingual absorption of glyceryl
trinitrate

Potentiation; increased risk of
hypertension

Increased risk of hypertension
Antagonism
Risk of antagonism or potentiation

Risk of potentiation

Risk of potentiation

Raised INR reported in patients receiving
warfarin

Raised INR reported in patients receiving
warfarin

Antiplatelet activity; increased risk of
bleeding, particularly in patients receiving
warfarin and other anticoagulant or
antiplatelet agents

Plasma protein binding

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
warfarin

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
theophylline

Risk of allergic reaction

May increase arrhythmogenic potential of
terfenadine

Electrolyte imbalance may increase
arrhythmogenic potential of terfenadine

----- PAGE 625 -----
4 Appendix 1

Table 1 continued
Drug/therapeutic category affected

Allergic disorders

Central nervous system

Hypnotics and anxiolytics

Antipsychotics

Antidepressants

Drugs used in nausea and vertigo

Analgesics

Antiepileptics

Drugs for parkinsonism

Infections

Antifungal drugs

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients claimed to have sedative
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients claimed to have sedative
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Evening primrose

Herbal ingredients containing
sympathomimetic amines. See Appendix 2,
Table 15

Ginseng (Panax)

Herbal ingredients containing tryptophan
White horehound
Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.

See Appendix 2, Table 7
St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with corticosteroid activity.

See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

Borage
Evening primrose oil
Sage

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with significant folic acid
content

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with cholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Possible effects

Potentiation of drowsiness associated with
antihistamines

Potentiation

Potentiation of lithium therapy; increased
risk of toxicity; diuretics reported to
reduce lithium clearance

Risk of interference with therapy;
anticholinergic drug reported to reduce
plasma phenothiazine concentrations

Potential risk of seizures

Risk of hypertensive crisis with
monoamine-oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)

Suspected phenelzine interaction

Risk of CNS excitation and confusional
states with MAOIs

5-Hydroxytryptamine antagonism, in vitro,
in vivo

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Risk of increased serotonergic effects in
patients taking selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Antagonism

Increased risk of toxicity with anti-
inflammatory analgesics

Possible reduction in plasma-aspirin
concentrations

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Risk of increased serotonergic effects, with
possibility of increased risk of side-effects

May potentiate sedative side-effects

May increase risk of seizure
May increase risk of seizure
May increase risk of seizure

Transient potentiation of phenytoin
therapy may occur

Plasma phenytoin concentration may be
reduced

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
anticonvulsants (carbamazepine,
phenobarbitone, phenytoin)

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

Antagonism

Risk of reduced absorption of
ketoconazole

----- PAGE 626 -----
Table 1 continued

Drug/therapeutic category affected

HIV protease inhibitorsHIV non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors

Endocrine system

Antidiabetics

Drugs for hypo- and hyperthyroidism

Corticosteroids

Sex hormones

Obstetrics and gynaecology

Oral contraceptives

Malignant disease and immunosuppression
Irinotecan

Methotrexate

Drugs affecting immune response

Musculoskeletal and joint diseases
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Probenecid

Eye

Acetazolamide

Skin

Anaesthetics

General anaesthetics
Competitive muscle relaxants

Depolarising muscle relaxants

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions ois.

Herbal ingredients interacting

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with hypo- or
hyperglycaemic activity. See Appendix 2,
Table 8

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with significant iodine
content.

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with corticosteroid activity.

See Appendix 2 Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hormonal activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hormonal activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 9

St John’s wort

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with immunomodulatory
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 10

St John’s wort

Alfalfa

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with potential allergenic
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 11

Herbal ingredients with phototoxic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 11

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Cardioactive herbal ingredients.
See Appendix 2, Table 2

Possible effects

Risk of reduced blood concentrations of
anti-HIV drugs, with possible loss of HIV
suppression

Potentiation/antagonism of activity

Antagonism

Interference with therapy

Risk of increased potassium loss
Increased risk of side-effects, e.g. water

and sodium retention

Possible interaction with existing therapy

Possible interaction with existing therapy;
may reduce effectiveness of oral
contraceptive

Risk of reduced blood concentrations of
oral contraceptives, breakthrough
bleeding and unintended pregnancy

Risk of altered irinotecan pharmacokinetics

Increased risk of toxicity
Potentiation or antagonism

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
ciclosporin

Antagonism; contra-indicated

Risk of inhibition of probenecid

Increased risk of toxicity
Allergic reaction; exacerbation of existing
symptoms

Phototoxic reaction; exacerbation of
existing symptoms

Potentiation of hypotensive effect
Risk of potentiation if hypokalaemia occurs

Risk of arrhythmias

----- PAGE 627 -----
Appendix 2
Pharmacological Activities and
Constituents of Herbal Ingredients

Table 1 Laxatives

Drug

Aloes

Cascara

Frangula
Horehound, White
Ispaghula

Plantain

Rhubarb

Senna

Yellow Dock

Comment

Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Large doses
Bulk laxative
Bulk laxative
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents

Hydroxyanthracene constituents

Table 2 Cardioactive agents

Drug

Broom
Butterbur

Calamus
Cereus

Cola
Coltsfoot
Devil’s Claw
Fenugreek

Figwort

Fumitory
Ginger
Ginseng, Panax
Golden Seal

Hawthorn

Horehound, White
Lime Flower

Maté

Mistletoe

Motherwort

Comment

Alkaloid constituents: cardiac depressant
activity

S-petasin: negative chronotropic activity
in vivo, negative inotropic activity ex vivo

Anti-arrhythmic activity

Tyramine: cardiotonic amine

Caffeine

Cardiac calcium-channel blocking activity
Activity in vivo

Activity in vitro

Cardioactive glycoside constituents,
activity in vitro

Alkaloid constituent: cardioactive
Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Berberine: cardioactive alkaloid

Tyramine: cardiotonic amine; activity in
vivo

Activity in vivo

Activity reputed with excessive ingestion
Caffeine

Viscotoxin, negative inotropic effect in vivo

Cardiac glycoside constituents; activity in
vitro

table continues

Table 2 continued

Drug

Pleurisy Root

Prickly Ash, Northern
Prickly Ash, Southern
Quassia

Rhodiola

Shepherd’s Purse
Squill
Wild Carrot

Table 3 Diuretics
Drug
Agrimony
Artichoke
Boldo
Broom
Buchu
Burdock
Celery
Corn Silk
Couchgrass
Dandelion
Elder
Guaiacum
Java Tea
Juniper
Nettle
Pokeroot
Shepherd’s Purse
Squill
Uva-Ursi

Yarrow

Comment

Cardenolides, active in vitro and in vivo
Interaction with Na*K* ATPase
Interaction with Na*K* ATPase
Activity in vitro

Inotropic, anti-arrhythmic and other
cardiac effects ex vivo, confirmation
required

Activity in vitro
Cardiac glycoside constituents

Depressant activity in vivo

Comment
Activity in vivo
Reputed action
Reputed action, oil
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Activity in vivo
Activity in vivo
Activity in vivo
Reputed action

Activity in vivo

Reputed action; terpinen-4-ol
Activity in humans.

Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Reputed action

Activity in vivo

----- PAGE 628 -----
Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 7

Table 4 Hypotensives and hypertensives

Drug

Hypotensive
Agrimony
Asafoetida
Avens

Butterbur

Calamus

Cat’s Claw

Corn Silk
Cowslip

Devil’s Claw
Elecampane
Fenugreek

Fucus

Fumitory

Garlic

Ginger

Ginseng, Panax
Golden Seal
Hawthorn
Horehound, White
Horse-chestnut
Horseradish

Java Tea

Juniper

Mistletoe

Nettle

Parsley

Plantain
Pokeroot

Prickly Ash, Northern
Prickly Ash, Southern
Sage

Shepherd's Purse
Squill

St John’s Wort
Thyme

Vervain

Wild Carrot
Yarrow
Hypertensive
Bayberry

Broom

Capsicum

Cohosh, Blue

Comment

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypotensive, in vivo; S-petasin, iso-5-
petasin

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, then hypertensive in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, human and in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive, human and in vivo
Hypotensive, alkaloid effect
Hypotensive, in vivo
Vasodilator (volatile oil)
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive

Vasodilator, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypertensive, myricitrin mineralocorticoid
side-effect

Hypertensive, alkaloid effect

Hypertensive, increased catecholamine
secretion

Hypertensive, alkaloid effect

table continues

Table 4 continued
Drug
Cola
Coltsfoot
Ephedra
Ginger
Ginseng, Panax

Liquorice

Maté

Vervain

Comment

Hypertensive, caffeine

Hypertensive, pressor activity 2

Hypertensive, human and in vivo
Hypertensive
Hypertensive, human and in vivo

Hypertensive, mineralocorticoid side-
effect

Hypertensive, caffeine

Hypertensive

Table 5 Anticoagulants and coagulants

Drug

Anticoagulants

Bilberry

Cat’s Claw
Clove
Feverfew
Fucus

Garlic

Ginger
Ginkgo
Ginseng, Panax

Horseradish

Liquorice
Meadowsweet
Poplar

Willow
Coagulants
Golden Seal
Mistletoe

Yarrow

Comment

Inhibits platelet aggregation, human, in
vivo, in vitro

Inhibits platelet aggregation, in vitro
Eugenol inhibitor of platelet activity
Inhibits platelet aggregation
Anticoagulant action

Inhibits platelet aggregation, humans in
vivo

Inhibition of platelet activity
Inhibition of platelet activity
Reduction of blood coagulation

Peroxidase stimulates synthesis of
arachidonic acid metabolites

Inhibition of platelet activity
Salicylate constituents
Salicylate constituents

Salicylate constituents

Heparin antagonist
Lectins, agglutinating activity

Coagulant, in vivo

Table 6 Hypolipidaemic and hyperlipidaemic agents

Drug

Comment

Hypocholesterolaemic

Alfalfa
Artichoke
Bilberry
Capsicum
Cohosh, Black
Fenugreek

Garlic

Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
table continues

----- PAGE 629 -----
8 Appendix 2

Table 6 continued
Drug
Ginger
Ispaghula
Milk thistle
Myrrh
Plantain
Scullcap
Senega

Tansy

Hydrocotyle

Table 7 Sedatives
Drug

Calamus

Celery

Centaury
Chamomile, German
Couchgrass
Elecampane

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus;
Ginseng, Panax

Golden Seal

Hawthorn

Hops
Hydrocotyle
Jamaica Dogwood
Kava

Nettle
Passionflower
Sage

Scullcap

Senega
Shepherd’s Purse
Valerian

Wild Carrot
Wild Lettuce

Comment

Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypolipidaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypolipidaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypercholesterolaemic

Hypercholesterolaemic, in vivo

Comment

Potentiates barbiturate sleeping time
In vivo

Reputed action

Human

In vivo

In vivo

CNS depressant and stimulant

In vivo

CNS depressant; potentiates barbiturate
sleeping time

In vivo

In vivo

In vivo

Conflicting results in vivo
CNS depression, in vivo
In vivo

In vivo

Reputed action

CNS depressant, in vivo
Potentiates barbiturate sleeping time
Human, in vivo

In vivo

In vivo, related species

Table 8 Hypoglycaemics and hyperglycaemics

Drug
Hypoglycaemic
Agrimony
Alfalfa

Aloes/Aloe vera

Comment

Hypoglycaemic, in vivo
Manganese, human
In vivo

table continues

Table 8 continued
Drug

Burdock
Celery

Corn Silk
Damiana
Dandelion
Devil’s Claw
Elecampane
Eucalyptus
Fenugreek
Garlic
Ginger

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus

Ginseng, Panax
Ispaghula

Java Tea
Juniper
Marshmallow
Myrrh

Nettle

Sage

Senega

Tansy
Hyperglycaemic
Elecampane
Ginseng, Panax
Hydrocotyl

Rosemary

Comment

In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
Human
Human, in vivo,
In vivo

In vivo

Human
Human
In vivo
In vivo
Human, in vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo

In vivo

In vivo
Human, in vivo
Human

In vivo

Table 9 Hormonally active agents

Drug

Agnus Castus
Alfalfa
Aniseed
Bayberry
Butterbur

Cohosh, Black

Fucus
Ginkgo

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus;
Ginseng, Panax

Horseradish

Comment

Oestrogenic, in vitro; conflicting results
Oestrogenic, in vivo

Oestrogenic, in vivo

Mineralocorticoid, in vivo

S-petasin, inhibition of testosterone
release, in vivo, in vitro

Oestrogenic, in vivo, in vitro; conflicting
results

Hyper-/hypothyroidism reported
Oestrogenic, in vitro

Oestrogenic, in vivo, in vitro

May depress thyroid activity; conflicting
results

table continues

----- PAGE 630 -----
Table 9 continued
Drug

Liquorice

Motherwort
Pleurisy Root
Red Clover

Saw Palmetto
Vervain

Wild Carrot

Table 10
Drug
Alfalfa

Boneset

Calendula

Cat’s Claw
Celandine, Greater
Chamomile, German
Drosera

Echinacea

Ephedra

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus

Mistletoe

Saw Palmetto

Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 619

Comment

Mineralocorticoid activity, human;
oestrogenic in vivo, in vitro

Oxytocic, in vitro; conflicting results
Oestrogenic, in vivo; conflicting results
Oestrogenic in vivo; conflicting results

Oestrogenic and anti-androgenic in vivo;
human use in prostate cancer

Inhibition of gonadotrophic activity;
conflicting results

Oestrogenic, in vivo

Immunomodulating agents

Comments

In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro

In vitro, in vivo, conflicting results in
humans

Inhibits complement pathway, in vitro

Human in vivo, in vitro

Human, in vivo, in vitro

In vivo

Table 11 Allergenic and photosensitising agents

Drug

Agnus Castus

Angelica
Aniseed

Apricot
Arnica
Artichoke
Asafoetida
Boneset

Calendula
Cassia

Celery
Chamomile, German

Chamomile, Roman

Comment

Allergic effects reported

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity,
contact allergy

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity,
contact allergy

Contact allergy, kernels

Contact allergy

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Irritant gum, contact allergy
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Individuals sensitive to plants from the
Compositae/Asteraceae families

Allergic reactions, mainly contact
dermatitis

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

table continues

Table 11 continued
Drug
Cinnamon
Corn Silk
Cowslip
Dandelion

Echinacea

Elecampane
Feverfew
Fucus

Garlic

Ginger
Ginkgo

Gravel Root
Guaiacum
Holy Thistle
Hops
Hydrangea
Hydrocotyle
Ispaghula
Juniper
Kava

Lady’s Slipper
Mistletoe

Motherwort
Parsley
Pilewort
Plantain
Pleurisy Root
Pulsatilla
Rosemary

St John’s Wort
Tansy

Wild Carrot

Yarrow

Table 12 Irritants

Drug
Alfalfa
Arnica
Asafoetida
Blue Flag
Bogbean
Boldo

Comment

Contact allergy

Allergic reactions 2
Allergic reactions

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Individuals sensitive to plants from the
Compositae/Asteraceae families

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
lodine may aggravate/trigger acne

Sulfur-containing compounds, allergic
reaction

Dermatitis in sensitive individuals

Fruit pulp and seeds: severe allergic
reactions

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Irritant resin

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Contact allergy

Contact allergy

Photosensitivity

Rare cases of allergy

Contact allergy

Cases of allergic skin reactions
Contact allergy

Injection site reactions, rare cases of
anaphylactic reactions

Dermatitis, photosensitisation
Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity
Contact allergy, protanemonin
Contact allergy

Contact allergy

Contact allergy, protoanemonin
Dermatitis, photosensitisation
Photodermatitis, hypericin
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Comment

Canavanine in seeds

Irritant to mucous membranes
Irritant gum

Irritant gum and oil

Irritant to Gl tract

Irritant oil

table continues

----- PAGE 631 -----
620 Appendix 2

Table 12 continued
Drug
Buchu

Capsicum

Cassia

Celandine, Greater
Cinnamon
Cohosh, Blue

Cowslip
Drosera
Eucalyptus
False Unicorn
Figwort
Garlic
Ground Ivy
Guaiacum

Horse-chestnut

Horseradish
Hydrangea
Jamaica Dogwood
Juniper

Lemon Verbena
Lime Flower
Mistletoe
Nettle

Parsley
Pennyroyal
Pilewort
Pleurisy Root
Pokeroot
Pulsatilla
Queen’s Delight
Sage
Sarsaparilla
Senega

Skunk Cabbage
Squill

Thyme

Willow

Witch Hazel

Comment

Irritant oil

Capsaicinoids, mucosal irritants
Irritant to mucous membranes; oil
Irritant juice

Irritant to mucous membranes; oil

Irritant to mucous membranes;
spasmogenic in vitro

Irritant saponins

Plumbagin

Irritant oil

Large doses may cause vomiting
Purgative effect

Raw clove

Irritant oil

Avoid if inflammatory condition

Saponin constituents, contra-indicated in
existing renal disease

Irritant oil

May cause gastro-enteritis, hydrangin
Irritant to humans

Irritant oil

Irritant oil

Irritant to kidney, oil

Injection site reactions

Tea irritant to stomach

Irritant oil

Toxic and irritant oil

Irritant sap

Gastrointestinal irritant

Irritant saponins

Irritant to mucous membranes
Diterpene constituents

Irritant oil

Saponins

Saponins

Inflammatory and blistering to skin
Saponins

Irritant oil

Salicylates

Irritant to stomach

Table 13 Anti-inflammatory agents

Aloe Vera, Angelica, Arnica, Bilberry, Bloodroot, Blue Flag, Boldo,
Boneset, Borage, Buchu, Butterbur, Calendula, Cassia, Cat’s Claw,
Celandine (Greater), Centaury, Chamomile (German),
Chamomile (Roman), Cohosh (Black), Coltsfoot, Comfrey,
Cowslip, Dandelion, Devil’s Claw, Echinacea, Elder, Ephedra,
Evening Primrose, Feverfew, Figwort, Gentian, Ginger, Ground
Ivy, Horse-chestnut, Hydrocotyle, Java tea, Juniper, Liquorice, Milk
Thistle, Myrrh, Nettle, Passionflower, Plantain, Pokeroot, Prickly
Ash (Southern), Rosemary, Sarsaparilla, Shepherd's Purse, St
John’s wort, Uva-Ursi, Willow, Yarrow, Yucca

Table 14 Antispasmodics

Angelica, Aniseed, Asafoetida, Butterbur, Calendula, Capsicum,
Cassia, Celandine (Greater), Celery, Chamomile (German),
Cinnamon, Clove, Cohosh (Blue), Cowslip, Devil’s claw,
Elecampane, Euphorbia, Hops, Jamaica Dogwood, Lime Flower,
Raspberry, Chamomile (Roman), Rosemary, Sage, Scullcap,
Tansy, Thyme, Valerian

Table 15 Herbal ingredients containing amines or alkaloids, or with
sympathomimetic action

Drug Comment

Agnus Castus Dopamine agonist (labdane diterpenes),

in vitro
Alfalfa Alkaloids
Aniseed Anethole, sympathomimetic
Arnica Betaines, choline
Bloodroot Alkaloids
Bogbean Alkaloids
Boldo Alkaloids
Borage Alkaloids
Broom Alkaloids, amines
Butterbur Alkaloids
Calamus Amines
Capsicum Sympathomimetic
Cat’s Claw Alkaloids
Celandine, Greater Alkaloids
Centaury Alkaloids
Cereus Tyramine
Cohosh, Black Alkaloids
Cohosh, Blue Alkaloids
Cola Alkaloids
Coltsfoot Alkaloids
Comfrey Alkaloids
Corn Silk Amines
Ephedra Alkaloids
Eyebright Alkaloids
Fenugreek Choline, trigonelline
Fumitory Alkaloids
Gentian Alkaloids
Ginkgo Seed: alkaloids; leaf: MAOI activity

table continues

----- PAGE 632 -----
Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 621

Table 15 continued

Drug Comment

Ginseng, Panax MAOI potentiation, suspected phenelzine
interaction

Golden Seal Alkaloids

Gravel Root Alkaloids

Hawthorn Tyramine

Horehound, White Alkaloids

Hydrocotyle Alkaloids

Ispaghula Alkaloids

Jamaica Dogwood Alkaloids

Kava Alkaloids; possible dopamine antagonist
effects

Liferoot Alkaloids

Lobelia Alkaloids

Maté Alkaloids, amines

Mistletoe Amines, alkaloids (possible)

Motherwort Alkaloids

Nettle Choline

Parsley Myristicin, sympathomimetic

Passionflower Alkaloids (traces or absent)

Plantain Alkaloids

Pleurisy Root Sympathomimetic

Pokeroot Betalains

Prickly Ash, Northern Alkaloids
Prickly Ash, Southern Alkaloids

Quassia Alkaloids

Sassafras Alkaloids

Shepherd's Purse Choline, tyramine

Skunk Cabbage Alkaloids

Stone Root Alkaloids

Valerian Alkaloids

Vervain Sympathomimetic

Yarrow Betonicine, stachydrine, betaine

Table 16 Herbal ingredients containing coumarins

Alfalfa, Angelica, Aniseed, Arnica, Asafoetida, Bogbean, Boldo,
Buchu, Capsicum, Cassia, Celery, Chamomile (German),
Chamomile (Roman), Dandelion, Fenugreek, Ginseng
(Eleutherococcus), Horse-chestnut, Horseradish, Java tea,
Liquorice, Meadowsweet, Nettle, Parsley, Prickly Ash (Northern),
Quassia, Wild Carrot, Wild Lettuce

Coumarin constituents detected so far in these herbal ingredients do not
possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent and
a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©®” for anticoagulant activity.

Table 17 Herbal ingredients containing flavonoids

Agnus Castus, Agrimony, Angelica, Aniseed, Apricot, Arnica,
Artichoke, Bayberry, Bilberry, Bogbean, Boldo, Boneset, Broom,
Buchu, Burdock, Burnet, Butterbur, Calendula, Celandine
(Greater), Celery, Cereus, Chamomile (German), Chamomile
(Roman), Chaparral, Clivers, Cohosh (Black), Coltsfoot, Corn Silk,
Couchgrass, Cowslip, Damiana, Dandelion, Devil’s Claw, Drosera,
Elder, Ephedra, Eucalyptus, Euphorbia, Eyebright, Fenugreek,
Feverfew, Figwort, Frangula, Fumitory, Ginkgo, Gravel Root,
Ground Ivy, Hawthorn, Hops, Horehound (Black), Horehound
(White), Horse-chestnut, Hydrangea, Hydrocotyle, Java Tea,
Juniper, Kava, Lemon Verbena, Lime Flower, Liquorice,
Marshmallow, Maté, Meadowsweet, Melissa, Milk thistle,
Mistletoe, Motherwort, Nettle, Parsley, Passionflower, Plantain,
Pulsatilla, Raspberry, Red Clover, Rhodiola, Rhubarb, Rosemary,
Sage, Sarsaparilla, Saw Palmetto, Scullcap, Senna, Shepherd’s
Purse, Squill, St John’s Wort, Stone Root, Thyme, Uva-Ursi, Wild
Carrot, Wild Lettuce, Willow, Witch Hazel, Yarrow

Table 18 Herbal ingredients containing iridoids

Agnus Castus, Bilberry, Bogbean, Centaury, Clivers, Devil’s Claw,
Eyebright, Figwort, Gentian, Ispaghula, Motherwort, Plantain,
Scullcap, Uva-Ursi, Valerian, Vervain

Table 19 Herbal ingredients containing saponins

Alfalfa, Aloe Vera, Bogbean, Burnet, Calendula, Chaparral,
Cohosh (Blue), Corn Silk, Cowslip, False Unicorn, Fenugreek,
Ginseng (Eleutherococcus), Ginseng (Panax), Hawthorn,
Horehound (White), Horse-chestnut, Hydrangea, Hydrocotyle,
Jamaica Dogwood, Lime Flower, Milk Thistle, Mistletoe, Pokeroot,
Pulsatilla, Red Clover, Sarsaparilla, Senega, Senna, Stone Root,
Thyme, Vervain, Witch Hazel, Yucca

Table 20 Herbal ingredients containing tannins

Agrimony, Apricot, Arnica, Artichoke, Avens, Bayberry, Bilberry,
Blue Flag, Boldo, Borage, Burnet, Butterbur, Calamus, Cascara,
Cassia, Chamomile (German), Cinnamon, Clivers, Cola, Coltsfoot,
Comfrey, Corn Silk, Cowslip, Damiana, Drosera, Elder, Ephedra,
Eucalyptus, Eyebright, Feverfew, Frangula, Gentian, Ground lvy,
Hawthorn, Holy Thistle, Hops, Horse-chestnut, Ispaghula, Juniper,
Lady’s Slipper, Lime Flower, Marshmallow, Meadowsweet,
Motherwort, Nettle, Pilewort, Plantain, Poplar, Prickly Ash
(Northern), Prickly Ash (Southern), Queen’s Delight, Raspberry,
Rhubarb, Sage, Sassafras, Saw Palmetto, Scullcap, Slippery Elm,
Squill, St. John’s Wort, Stone Root, Tansy, Thyme, Uva-Ursi,
Valerian, Vervain, Willow, Witch Hazel, Yarrow, Yellow Dock

Table 21 Herbal ingredients containing essential oils

Agnus Castus, Agrimony, Angelica, Aniseed, Arnica, Artichoke,
Asafoetida, Avens, Blue Flag, Boldo, Boneset, Buchu, Burdock,
Burnet, Butterbur, Calamus, Calendula, Capsicum, Cassia, Celery,
Chamomile (German), Chamomile (Roman), Chaparral,
Cinnamon, Clove, Coltsfoot, Couchgrass, Damiana, Elder,
Elecampane, Ephedra, Eucalyptus, Eyebright, Feverfew, Garlic,
Gentian, Ginger, Ginseng (Eleutherococcus), Ginseng (Panax),
Golden Seal, Ground Ivy, Holy Thistle, Hops, Horehound (Black),
Horseradish, Hydrocotyle, Java Tea, Juniper, Lemon Verbena,
Lime Flower, Liquorice, Lobelia, Meadowsweet, Melissa,
Motherwort, Myrrh, Parsley, Pennyroyal, Prickly Ash (Northern),
Queen’s Delight, Red Clover, Rhodiola, Rosemary, Sage, Sassafras,
Saw Palmetto, Senna (trace), Skunk Cabbage, Squill, St John’s
Wort, Stone Root, Tansy, Thyme, Uva-Ursi, Valerian, Vervain, Wild
Carrot, Witch Hazel, Yarrow

----- PAGE 633 -----
Table 1

Appendix 3
Council of Europe — Categories for
Natural Sources of Flavourings

Council of Europe. categories for natural sources of flavourings (Report No. 1. Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2000)

Category Natural source of flavouring

1

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in
Europe for which it is considered that there should be no restrictions on use.Flavouring preparations, which are not themselves
consumed as food but which are derived from plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof,
normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe. These preparations, on the basis of the information available, are not
considered a risk to health in the quantities used.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, not normally
consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe.These source materials and preparations, on the basis of the information
available, are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the quantities used.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in
Europe which contain defined ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ requiring limits on use levels.Flavouring
preparations, which are not themselves consumed as food but which are derived from plants, animals and other organisms, and
parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe which contain defined ‘active
principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ requiring limits on use levels.

These source materials and preparations are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the quantities used provided that the
limits set for the ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, not normally
consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe which contain defined ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’
requiring limits on use levels. These source materials and preparations are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the
quantities used provided that the limits set for the ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, for which
additional toxicological and/or chemical information is required.These could temporarily be acceptable provided that any limits
set for the ‘active principles’ or the ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, which are
considered to be unfit for human consumption in any amount.

Reproduced with permission of Council of Europe.

----- PAGE 634 -----
Appendix 4

Preparations Directory

Introduction

Appendix 4 contains an alphabetical listing of selected
preparations from over 35 countries. Information on products
believed to be currently available was gathered from standard
compendia and specific supplier literature and websites. The
inclusion of a supplier or product is not intended as an
endorsement of that supplier or its products; similarly, the
omission of a supplier or product is not intended to reflect
adversely on that supplier or product. Preparations are
arranged in two sections. The first section lists preparations
that have a single herbal ingredient which is included in
Herbal Medicines. The second section lists preparations that
contain multiple ingredients. Only those herbal ingredients
included as monographs in Herbal Medicines are shown. It
should be noted that these preparations may contain other
ingredients, possibly not just herbal ingredients, that are not
shown in this listing. Preparations are listed by proprietary
name (product name), supplier, country, herbal ingredient(s).
Preparations without a proprietary name that are identified by
a supplier by the herbal ingredient name (e.g. angelica) are
indicated with a e symbol. Contact details for the supplier are
shown in Appendix 5.

Single-ingredient preparations

TA)

aar gamma N aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
aar vir aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

ABC Beiersdorf GmbH, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Abfuhrtee N Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna
(p. 537)

Abnobaviscum Abnoba Heilmittel GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Abolibe Sidefarma SA, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Acorus Zeppenfeldt Pharma GmbH, Germany, Couchgrass (p. 193)

Acqua Virginiana Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Adprex Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

A-E-R Birchwood Laboratories Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Aescorin Forte Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Aesculaforce Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

AesculaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Aescusan Jenapharm GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Aescuven Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Agarol Extra Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Agarol with Sennosides Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)
Agiobulk Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiocur Madaus GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374) Meda Oy, Finland, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Madaus AG, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Trinity Trading Co. Ltd, Hong

and Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374) Neo-Farmacéutica,
Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Agiofibe Knoll Australia, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiofibra Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma S.A. de C.
V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiofibras Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.1.C.F., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Agiofibre Madaus S.r.1., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiogel Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiolax mite Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Agnofem Madaus GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnolyt Madaus AG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Max Zeller Sohne AG,
Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agno-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnucaston Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Bionorica AG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Agnus
Castus (p. 36) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnucaston (Arnyxacron) Bionorica AG, Russia, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Agnufemil Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Agnukliman Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Agnumens Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

e Agnus Castus (p. 36)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

 Agrimony (p. 42)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Ajomast Monserrat y Eclair S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Ajuta Hermes Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Akipic Laboratoires Asepta, Monaco, Aloes (p. 50), Calendula (p. 121)
Alcachofa Plus Tecnonat S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Alcodin Alcon Italia S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Alepa Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

© Alfalfa (p. 45)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Alho Rogoff Crefar, Lda, Portugal, Garlic (p. 279)
Alliocaps Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)
Allya Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Aloe Vera (p. 48)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature’s Bounty

Alrinte Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Rosemary (p. 508)

Alz CuraMED Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Amenicil Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Anastil Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

© Angelica (p. 53)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Animic Vinas, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
© Aniseed (p. 57)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Ansiokey Inkeysa, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)
Ansiopax Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Antares Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389)

----- PAGE 635 -----
Appendix 4

Anxium Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Aperisan Dentinox Gesellschaft fur Pharmazeutische Praparate Lenk & Schuppan,
Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Apihepar Madaus GmbH, Viatris Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Aplause Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Ardey-aktiv Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ardeycholan Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Ardeycordal mono Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ardeyhepan Emonta Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Ardeypharm
GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Aristo Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Aristoforat Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Arkocapsulas Hiperico Arkochim Esparia, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Arnican Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Arnigel Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnikaderm Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnikatinktur Chemische Fabrik Dr. Hetterich GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Arnica
(p. 64)

Arsen Arlex de México, S.A.deC.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)

Arthrodynat N Ziethen, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Arthrosenex AR Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Arthrosetten H Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Arthrotabs Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Artichoke (p. 67)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Asendra Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Aspecton Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Assalix Bionorica AG, Germany, Willow (p. 598) Biomed AG, Switzerland, Willow
(p. 598)

Assplant Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Willow (p. 598)
Aubeline Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Avala Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Azuprostat Sabal Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Azuprostat Urtica Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

CB)

Baldorm Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian-Dispert Solvay Pharma AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan pour la nuit Whitehall-Robins AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)
Baldriparan Stark Whitehall-Much GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Baldrivit Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldurat G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co., Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Balsamo Nordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica
(p. 64)

Basticrat Bastian-Werk GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Bazoton Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Bekunis Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Dexxon, Israel, Senna
(p. 537) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537) Merz Pharma
(Schweiz) AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Bekunis Herbal Tea Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Senna
(p. 537)

Bekunis Instant Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)
roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Bekunis Plantaardig roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Bekunis Senna roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Bekunis-Krautertee N roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Beltrax Uno Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
beni-cur Sabona GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Benylin Energy Boosting Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Bericard Provita Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)

© Bilberry (p. 79)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins
Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Biloban Cipan, Companhia Industrial Produtora de Antibioticos SA, Portugal,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bilobene Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276)
Merckle GmbH, Germany, Fumitory (p. 276) ratiopharm Hungaria Kft, Hungary,
Fumitory (p. 276)

Bilobil (Buvodua) KRKA d.d., Russia, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Bilogink Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Binko Hexal do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bio Star Ferrer Farma, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bio-Dermis Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Biofem Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
BioGinkgo Pharmanex Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bioglan Liver-Vite Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Bioglan Pro-Guard Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioglan Stress-Relax Bioglan Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Biolid Rovi, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Biorevit Gel Laboratorio DNR Farma SRL, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Biotuss W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Black-Draught Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Senna (p. 537)
Blancaler Galderma Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Yarrow (p. 604)
Blastoestimulina Almirall Prodesfarma S.A., Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

© Blue Flag (p. 87)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

e Boldo (p. 91)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Bomarthros Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Boneset (p. 94)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Borage (p. 96)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers
USA: Sundown

Born Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Brefus Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)

Bronchicum Husten (Bponxuxym Macruaxn or Kamas) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia,
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Husten-Pastillen Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchicum Pastillen Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchipret Bionorica AG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Bukosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Rhubarb (p. 506)

e Burdock (p. 102)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Butt-Out Paradise Promotions Ltd, Canada, Marshmallow (p. 418)

@

Caj z Hlohu Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Caj z Kvetu Bezu Cerneho Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237)
Caj z Listu Senny Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

Caj ze Salveje Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Calendolon Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)

Calendula (p. 121)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Calendulene Laboratoires Théa, France, Calendula (p. 121)

Calendumed Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Calendula (p. 121)
Calmettes Solvay Pharma (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Calmonex Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Capistan Pierre Fabre Medicament sro, Czech Republic, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Capsamol Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)
Capson Pharmatrix, Div. de Therabel Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Cardiocalm Pharmastra, Usines Chimiques et Pharmaceutiques de Strasbourg,
France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Cardiplant Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Hawthorn
(p. 346) Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

----- PAGE 636 -----
Carito mono MaxMedic Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Carvicum Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204)

e Cascara (p. 128)
USA: Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Castufemin Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

© Cat’s Claw (p. 132)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide
Health Corp. Ltd

Cefacynar Cefak KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cefakliman mono Cefak KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Vicis Pharma Kft,
Hungary, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Cefalektin Cefak KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cefaluna Cefak KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Cefanorm Cefak KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Vicis Pharma Kft, Hungary,
Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Cefasept Cefak KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Cefasliymarin Cefak KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cefatec Cefak KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Celery (p. 146)
UK: Biocare Ltd

Celulase Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Celulase Plus Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cenat Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Centabel Laboratorios Silesia SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

 Centaury (p. 149)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Centellase Aventis Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Polymedic Trading
Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centella-Vit Fontovit Laboratérios Ltda, Brazil, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Centica Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cerebokan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ceremin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Cesradyston Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Chofitol Laboratorios Millet-Franklin S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)
Cholagogum Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Cholax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Senna (p. 537)

Chophytol Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)
Laboratoires Rosa-Phytopharma, France, Artichoke (p. 67) Laboratoire Golaz SA,
Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Chophytol (Xocurox) FIC Medical, Russia, Artichoke (p. 67)
Chronocard N Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Cicloplant Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

Cimifemine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Cimipax Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Cimisan APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

e Cinnamon (p. 162)
UK: Healthy Direct

Cinnamon Extract Natrol, USA, Cinnamon (p. 162)

Ciruela Fibra Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Ciruelax Comp /vax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Ciruelax TE Ivax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Citranacea Nutravite, Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Citromel Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Melissa (p. 425)

Clarvix Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Clibium Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Clifemin Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Climadil Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Red Clover (p. 498)
Climavita Permamed AG, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Coenrelax A.S.A.C. Pharma, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;

Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Colofiber Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Preparations Directory

Colonorm Mundipharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Concentrin ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Contre-Coups de I’Abbe Perdrigeon Laboratoires Pionneau, France, Aloes
(p. 50)

Cordapur Novo APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Coriosta Vitaltonikum N Dr Niedermaier GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Corocrat biomo Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

 Couchgrass (p. 193)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Craegium Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cran Max Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cranberry (p. 197)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct; Holland
and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Crataegan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Crataegisan Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Crataegitan Amino AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataegutt Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346) Dr
Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346) AS! Budapest Kft,
Hungary, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataegysat F Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cratae-Loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataepas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Cratenox Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cuassicum Prevent 2 en 1 Nucleopharm SRL, Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)
Cynacur Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynalip duo Sabona GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarex Lab. Roux-Ocefa S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarix Montavit GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarix N Sabona GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cystinol Akut Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

[D)

e Damiana (p. 201)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Dandelion (p. 204)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Darlin Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Darmol Dr A & L Schmidgall, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Iromedica AG, Switzerland,
Senna (p. 537)

Dekatin Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Demodon Neo Vifor SA, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Demonatur Ginkgo Vifor SA, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Depiderm Laboratoires Dermatologiques Uriage, France, Liquorice (p. 411)
Deprim Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Deprim (Acnpum) Lek, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Depuran Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537) Aspen
Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Depuratif des Alpes Laboratoires Sodia, France, Frangula (p. 270)

Derminiol Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Laboratorios DHU
Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermum Laboratoires du Dermophil Indien, France, St John's Wort (p. 549)

e Devil’s Claw (p. 207)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Dexol Laboratorios SMB Farma SA, Chile, Borage (p. 96)

Difrarel Sigma-Tau Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Bilberry (p. 79) Tecnifar, SA,
Portugal, Bilberry (p. 79)

Digitalysat Scilla-Digitaloid Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Dinaton Asta Medica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Dismegyn Gynea Laboratorios, Spain, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Diurevit Mono Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381)

----- PAGE 637 -----
Appendix 4

Doc FIT Pharma GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)

Dolestan Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Dolo-Arthrodynat Ziethen, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Dolo-Arthrosetten H Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Dolorub Capsico Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Capsicum (p. 125)

Doloteffin Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Dormiplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) VSM
Geneesmiddelen BV, Netherlands, Valerian (p. 580)

Dosaflex Shire Pharmaceuticals, USA, Senna (p. 537)

Dr Theiss Ringelblumen Salbe Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Calendula
(p. 121)

Duiwelsdrekdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida
(p. 72)

Duogink Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
durasilymarin Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
dysto-lux Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

CE)

Ebamin Ebewe Pharma (ASIA) Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Echan Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echifit Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echiherb Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217) Natrol, USA,
Echinacea (p. 217)

© Echinacea (p. 217)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Echinacin Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium,
Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus AG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217) Apivita SA, Greece,
Echinacea (p. 217) Naturprodukt Kft, Hungary, Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus, Spain,
Echinacea (p. 217) Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinaforce Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217) Bioforce
GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217) Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)
Bioforce UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

EchinaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinapur Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echinatur Dr. E. Ritsert GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Edual Laboratorios Recalcine SA, Chile, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Ekian Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Spain, Echinacea (p. 217)

Elagen Eladon Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleu Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleu-Kokk Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Ginseng,

Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleutheroforce Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Eleutherokokk Arko Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Eleutherosan Alpa sro, Czech Republic, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Elixir frangulae compositum G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270)
Emotival Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Emoton Tentan AG, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Enax Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)

Enelbin-Salbe Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Enziagil Magenplus Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Gentian (p. 290)
Episcorit Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Epitaloe Mediwhite Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Equilibra Darrow Laboratorios $.A., Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Equinacea Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)
Equitam Eurofarma Laboratdrios Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Esbericard novo Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Esbericum Europharm, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Esberitox mono Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Escar T Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Essaven Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Estimul Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica (p. 64)
EuMunil Madaus S.r./., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)

Eurixor Richter Pharma, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) biosyn Arzneimittel GmbH,
Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Euromucil Laboratorios Saval SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Euvegal Balance Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Evana Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

e Evening Primrose (p. 251)

UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct; Worldwide Health
Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Eviprostat-S Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Ex-Lax Novartis Consumer Health, UK, Senna (p. 537) Novartis Consumer Health
Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Experience Awareness Corp., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Exprep Mundipharma Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537)

@

Falquilax Falqui Prodotti Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)
Farmakava Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Faros Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346) Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Felis Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Femi Sabona GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Femicine Vifor SA, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Femicur N Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Femikliman uno Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Femilla N Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Feminon A Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Feminon C Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Femiplante Farmasierra S.A., Spain, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Femisana gyn Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Femisana mens Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

 Fenugreek (p. 260)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Fenugrene Laboratoires Legras, France, Fenugreek (p. 260)

 Feverfew (p. 263)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and
Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Fiberall Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Fibrasol Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Fibrelief Manx Pharma Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibrolax Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibromucil Productos Farmaceuticos Collins 5.4. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Fiotan Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Fitokey Ginkgo /Inkeysa, Spain, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Fitokey Harpagophytum /nkeysa, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Flebostasin Sankyo Pharma Italia S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Fletchers Castoria Mentholatum Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Flexal Brennessel Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
flexi-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Floral Pas Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Florilax Floris, Israel, Senna (p. 537)

Florsalmin Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Flosa Merckle GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Flosine Bittermedizin Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Ford Fibre Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fuca Melisana SA, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 638 -----
Fuca N Melisana AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Fybogel Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt
Benckiser, Ireland, Ispaghula (p. 374) Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Reckitt Benckiser (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt Benckiser plc,
UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

@

Gal Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Gallentee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121),
Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Yarrow (p. 604)

Garlic (p. 279)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Garlimega The Cantassium Company, UK, Garlic (p. 279)
GarliPure Natrol, USA, Garlic (p. 279)
Garlix Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279)

Gastrovegetalin Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Gelobronchial G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co., Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Gentian (p. 290)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Geriaforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gerimax Ginseng (Tepumaxc 7Kenpmenn) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia, Ginseng, Panax

Gerimax Tonique Merck Lipha Santé, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Gibilon Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginbiloba Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincare Y.S.P. Industries (M) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincoben Ipsen Portugal, SA, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gincolin Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincuran Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginemaxim Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Ginger (p. 293)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Gingiloba 1 A Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingium Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299) Hexal Hungaria
Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingivitol N Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Golden Seal (p. 337)
Gingobeta betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gingohexal Hexal Pharma GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingol F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingopret Bionorica AG, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingosol Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkapran Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkgo (p. 299)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Natrol; Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Ginkgold AS/ Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoba Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkobil Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkodilat Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkofarma Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoftal Davi Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkogink Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkogreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkokan Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkolab Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkolin Weston Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoplus Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkopur W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Preparations Directory

Ginkosen Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkovital Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginsana Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer
Ingelheim Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim
SA/NV, Belgium, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e
Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd,
Canada, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim, Division Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd,
Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim, Lda, Portugal, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325) Diethelm Singapore Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) GPL
Ginsana Products Lugano SA, Tochterunternehmen der Pharmaton SA,
Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim (Thai) Ltd, Thailand,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Ginsana (Iuncana) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH, Russia, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

e Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Ginsex Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ginsroy Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
GNC Herbal Laxative General Nutrition Canada, Canada, Senna (p. 537)

Golden Seal (p. 337)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty

Grafic Retard Microsules y Bernabo S.A., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Grains de Vals Nouvelle formule F. Uhimann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Senna
(p. 537)

Gravel Root (p. 340)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Gravol Natural Source Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Ginger (p. 293)

Ground lvy (p. 342)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Gyncobem Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gyndelta Laboratoires CCD, France, Cranberry (p. 197)
Gynocastus Fritz Zilly GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

cH)

Hamasana Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Hamburg Tea Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)
Hametol Dr W Schwabe, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hametum Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Dr
Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany,
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Harpadol Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagocid Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagofito Orto Normon S.A., Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Harpagoforte Asmedic Dyckerhoff Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Devil's Claw
(p. 207)

HarpagoMega Astrid Twardy GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagosan Neopharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Hawthorn (p. 346)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and
Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Hebucol Will-Pharma SA, Belgium, Artichoke (p. 67)
Hegrimarin Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Helarium Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Bionorica AG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549) ASI Budapest Kft, Hungary, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Helarium (Teaapuym) Bionorica AG, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Helixor Germania Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Helixor
Heilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Hemo Derminiol Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
HepaBesch S$ Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 639 -----
Appendix 4

Hepagallin N Homéopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfluger GmbH, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepa-Loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Hepanephrol Laboratoires Zambon France, France, Artichoke (p. 67)
Hepar SL Sertuirner Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepar-Pasc Pascoe Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepar-POS Croma-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67) Ursapharm
Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Heparstad Stada GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepa-S Vifor SA, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepatos Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Heplant W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Herbaccion Bioenergizante /nstituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C., Argentina,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Herbaccion Venotonico Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Herbal Eye Care Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)
Herbal Headache Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Feverfew (p. 263)
Herbal Liver Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Herbal Premens SwissHealth, UK, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Herbal Sleep Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Valerian (p. 580)
Herbal Stress Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Hevert-Aktivon Mono Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Heverto Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Hevertogyn Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Hewechol Artischockendragees Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hewepsychon uno Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Heweven Phyto Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Hipax Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperex Eurofarma Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hipericin Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hiperico Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Naytsal, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hiperifarma Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperikan Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperil Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperinat Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hipersac Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hloh-List S Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Hoevenol Carl Hoernecke GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Hops (p. 354)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Horehound, Black (p. 358)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Hormolax Laboratorios Hormona S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)

e Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett
USA: Sundown

Hox Alpha Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Hustagil Thymian-Hustensaft Dentinox Gesellschaft fur Pharmazeutische
Prdparate Lenk & Schuppan, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Hustagil Thymiantropfen Dentinox Gesellschaft fuir Pharmazeutische Prdparate
Lenk & Schuppan, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Husties Eu Rho OTC Pharma GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Hydrocil Instant Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Hyneurin Korhispana, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hypercircin Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Hyperforat Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hypericaps Duopharm GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperico Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiforce Bio-Garten GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Bioforce AG,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiforte Blackmores Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperigreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

HyperiMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperimerck Merck dura GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549) Schwabe Pharma AG,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperprost Uno Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Hyperpur Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperval Sidroga AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyzum N Merckle GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)

IL HWA allcura Naturheilmittel GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Ilja Rogoff Forte Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Garlic
(p. 279)

Immunal Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immunal (Haaynaa) Lek, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immunorm (Hsimynopm) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Imunnal Herbarium Laboratdrio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)
Imunocel Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)

Imunogreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Inmune Booster Solara Farmaceutica SA de CV, Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)
Inspirol P Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)
Iperisan Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Iscador Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Weleda AG, Switzerland, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Isephca S$ /so-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Isogel GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals (India) Ltd, India, Ispaghula (p. 374)
GlaxoSmithKline, New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Isoginkgo Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Isorel Novipharm GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Ispagel LPC Medical (UK) Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

oO

Jarsin F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Laboratorios Biosintetica
Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549) Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549) Vifor SA, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Jinda F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Riemser Arzneimittel AG,
Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Johanicum Apomedica GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Johni Interpharm GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Jo-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Jucurba Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Capsicum (p. 125), Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Jungborn Taro Pharmaceutical International, Israel, Senna (p. 537)

e Juniper (p. 386)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

@

Kalter Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Kava (p. 389)
UK: Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Natrol

Kavakan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Kavalac Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Kavasedon Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Horna Business Service, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389) Laboratorios Cofasa S.A.,
Venezuela, Kava (p. 389)

Kaveri Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Kiadon Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299) Merck Quimica
Chilena Ltda, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299) Merck S.A., Venezuela, Ginkgo (p. 299)

KintaVital Sanofi-Aventis (Schweiz) AG, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 640 -----
Kira F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Lichtwer Pharma, Canada, St
John's Wort (p. 549) Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549) Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Kirsan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Klimadynon Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Bionorica AG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd,
Hong Kong, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) MBD Marketing (5S) Pte Ltd, Singapore, Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Klimadynon (Kaumaannon) Bionorica AG, Russia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Klosterfrau Nervenruh Dragees Melisana AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354)

Kneipp Pflanzen-Dragees Weissdorn Kneipp-Werke, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Kolob Unipharm de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Konstitutin CytoChemia AG, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Konsyl GlaxoSmithKline S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharmateam
Marketing, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374) Konsyl Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Konsyl-D Konsyl Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Kontryhelova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Parsley Piert (p. 459)
Koprivovy Caj, Koprivova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)
Koren Kozliku Lekarskeho Leros sro, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580)
Koren Puskvorce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Calamus (p. 118)

Koro-Nyhadin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Korseng Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Krauterlax Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Kvet Bazy Ciernej Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237)
Kvet Lipy Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409)

Kwai F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Garlic (p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma, Canada, Garlic
(p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Garlic (p. 279) Solvay Pharma S.p.A., Italy,
Garlic (p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Garlic (p. 279) Grupo Farma S.A.,
Venezuela, Garlic (p. 279)

Kyolic Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279) JDH
Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Garlic (p. 279) Quest Vitamins Ltd, UK, Garlic
(p. 279)

Kytta Pommade /romedica AG, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Cor Merck KGaA, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Kytta-Plasma f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Salbe f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)

@

Laci Echinacea with Hint of Mint Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)
Lagenbach Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)

Lagosa Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Laif Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Laitan Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Lakinal Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)

Laxabene Alter, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxal Gulf Pharmaceutical Industries, Julphar, United Arab Emirates, Senna (p. 537)
Laxamucil Orion-yhtymd Oyj, Finland, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxans Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxante Bescansa Normal Bescansa, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Olan Puerto Galiano, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Salud Boots Healthcare, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxikal Forte Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Senna (p. 537)
Laxiplant Soft Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Laxiruela Ciruela Fibra Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)
Laxolen Laboratorios Basi, Portugal, Cascara (p. 128)

Laxucil Novopharm Ltd, Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Legalon Madaus GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus Pharma SA,
Belgium, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Laboratoires Madaus, France, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus AG, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429) Naturprodukt Kft, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus S.r.l.,
Italy, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Legapas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Cascara (p. 128)

Preparations Directory

Leikan Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389)
Lektinol Madaus AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Libeprosta Pharma Fabre Hellas S.A., Greece, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Libertin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Lipei Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Lipovy Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409)
Liquidepur Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537)

e Liquorice (p. 411)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

List Medvedice Lecive Leros sro, Czech Republic, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

List Salveje Lekarske Leros sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

List Senny Leros sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

List Vachty Trojliste Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bogbean (p. 89)

Litonate Laboratorios Biotech C.A., Venezuela, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Lomacard Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lomaherpan Madaus GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425) Lomapharm, Rudolf
Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Lomahypericum Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Losapan Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Lostamucil Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Lubovnik Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Lucilium Ecosol AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Lunare /nterpharm GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Lunelax Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374) AstraZeneca Sverige
AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Lutene Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Luvased mono Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Lymphozil Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

@

Macro Garlic Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Division of Wyeth Australia P/L, Australia,
Garlic (p. 279)

Madecassol Bayer Austria GmbH, Austria, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Roche SA/NV,
Belgium, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Bayer SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Laboratoires
Roche Nicholas, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) A. Nikolakopoulos & Co. O.E, Greece,
Hydrocotyle (p. 371) CNW (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Confar,
Lda, Portugal, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A.,
Venezuela, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Makatussin Saft Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Makatussin Saft Drosera Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Drosera
(p. 215)

Makatussin Tropfen Drosera Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Drosera (p. 215)

Mariendistel Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany,
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Marshmallow (p. 418)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Matai Engelhard Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Mavena Anal-Gen Psorimed AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Maxifem Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Maximum Relief Ex-Lax Novartis Consumer Health Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

e Meadowsweet (p. 423)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Medovka Lekarska Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Medunkovy, Medunkova Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Medvedice Leciva as, Czech Republic, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Melissa (p. 425)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Melrosum Hustensirup Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Memfit Boehringer Ingelheim SA/NV, Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memokit Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Mencirax Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Menofem Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

----- PAGE 641 -----
Appendix 4

Menoflavon Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Red Clover (p. 498)

Menoliv Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Mensana Darrow Laboratorios S.A., Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Mensifem Boehringer Ingelheim, Chile, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Me-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Mesickovy Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121)

Metamucil Procter & Gamble Interamericanos Inc., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Procter & Gamble Australia P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble
Austria GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble do Brasil S.A., Brazil,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble Inc., Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374) Laboratorios
Recalcine SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374) Wick Pharma Zweigniederlassung der
Procter & Gamble GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharmacia Asia Ltd, Hong
Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter € Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Netherlands, Ispaghula

(p. 374) Procter & Gamble NPD, Inc., New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter
Gamble, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Pfizer (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble, USA,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

jidro Wolfs SA, Belgium, Senna (p. 537) Midro Vertrieb AG, Switzerland, Senna
37)

lidro Abfuhr Midro Lorrach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Midro Tee Midro Lorrach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

e Milk Thistle (p. 429)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Milperinol Dolisos SA, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549)
lis Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Bilberry (p. 79)
Mirfusot Merckle GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Mirtilene Forte Societd Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Mirtilene Forte (Mupruacue ®opre) Schering-Plough Central East AG, Russia,
Bilberry (p. 79)

Mistel Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Mistel-Krautertabletten Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co
KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Misteltropfen Bio-Didt-Berlin GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Misteltropfen Hofmanns Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Modern Herbals Sleep Aid G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Passionflower
(p. 461)

e Motherwort (p. 447)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Motional Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Motiven Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Movana Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mucilag Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucilar Spirig Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucilax Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucilin Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ispaghula (p. 374) Berlin
Pharmaceutical Industry Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucillium Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucinum Confar, Lda, Portugal, Cascara (p. 128)

Mucivital Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharma Guri,
Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucofalk Lab. Cevallos Salud S.R.L., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Dr. Falk
Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd,
Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374) JDH Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Tramedico BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374) Dr. Falk Pharma Portugal
Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374) JDH Pharmaceutical Division, Singapore,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

@ Myrrh (p. 449)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Myrtaven Institut Biochimique SA, Switzerland, Bilberry (p. 79)

®

Nadem Ivax Argentina SA, Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Nat Cubetu Benediktu Leros sro, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Nat Jmeli Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Nat Rebricku Leros sro, Czech Republic, Yarrow (p. 604)

Nat Repiku Lekarskeho Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)

Nat Salveje Lekarske Leros sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Nat Trezalky Leros sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nat Zemezluce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Centaury (p. 149)

Natracalm Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Natucor Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Natu-fem Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Natu-Hepa Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67) Vita Health
Care AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Natulax Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Cascara (p. 128)

Natu-lind Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Natu-prosta Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Naturest G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Naturlax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Senna (p. 537) Great Eastern Healthcare
Ltd, Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Naturreiner Kneipp-Werke, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Natu-Seda Vita Health Care AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)

Natuzilium Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Neda Fruchtewurfel Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Negrustin (Herpycruu) Hexal AG, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neolaikan Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Valerian (p. 580)
Nephronorm med APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Nervaxon Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nervei Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Nervisatis Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Valerian (p. 580)

Neurol Abigo Medical AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)

Neuroplant Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neurosporal Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muller,
Apotheker, GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neurovegetalin Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neutrogena Drying Neutrogena Corp., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Nimopect Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Noctaval Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Nodoff Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Nokatar Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Noricaven Bionorica AG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Normurol CuraMED Pharma GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Novo-Mucilax Novopharm Ltd, Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Novo-Passit (Hoso-Iaccrr) Ivax AC, Russia, Elder (p. 237), Hawthorn (p. 346),
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Nylax with Senna Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Nytol Natural Source GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, Canada, Valerian
(p. 580)

©

Oddibil Gerot-Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276) Aventis Pharma
Ltda, Brazil, Fumitory (p. 276) Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France,
Fumitory (p. 276)

Oprane Vifor SA, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Optrex Schering-Plough Healthcare Products Canada Inc., Canada, Witch Hazel
(p. 601) Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare S.
p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Trading (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Witch
Hazel (p. 601) The Boots Company (Far East) Pte Ltd, Singapore, Witch Hazel

(p. 601) Boots Healthcare, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare
(Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Olic (Thailand) Ltd,
Thai-land, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex Original Boots Healthcare Australia P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Orgaplasma Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Orthangin novo Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn

(p. 346)

Orthosiphonblatter Indischer Nierentee FidesLine Biologische Heilmittel Heel
GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

----- PAGE 642 -----
Oxacant-mono Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

CP)

Parche Leon Fortificante Beiersdorf SA, Chile, Capsicum (p. 125)
Pargo Bio-Didt-Berlin GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Parsley Piert (p. 459)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Pascomucil Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Pascotox forte-Injektopas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdaparate GmbH, Germany,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Pascotox mono Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)
Passelyt Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflora Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany,
Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflorin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Passionflower (p. 461)
Perika VSM Belgium, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Perikan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Peristaltine Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Cascara (p. 128)
Permicaps Laboratorios Bago S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Permixon Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Germania
Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires Pierre Fabre,
France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Medibrands, Israel, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre
Italia S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Farma de Mexico S.A. de C.V.,
Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Médicament Portugal, Lda, Portugal,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Iberica, Spain, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Robapharm
SA, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) B/C Trading Co Ltd, Thailand, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521) Laboratorio Leti S.A.V., Venezuela, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Permixon (IMepamxcon) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Pertussin medphano Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Petadolex Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Butterbur (p. 107)
Petaforce V Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Butterbur (p. 107)

Pharmadose teinture d’arnica Laboratoires Gilbert, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Phlebostasin Altana Pharma Ltd, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Phytocalm Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Phytocold Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Phytohepar Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Phytohustil Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Phytorelax Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Valerian (p. 580)

 Pilewort (p. 472)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Plantaben Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma Ltda,
Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374) EciFarma SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma S.A.
de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374) Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Planten Whitehall Italia S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Plantivenol Dr W Schwabe, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Planturol Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

e Pleurisy Root (p. 477)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Plissamur Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Plod Jalovce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Juniper (p. 386)

 Pokeroot (p. 479)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Pollivita Permamed AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107)
Posterine Dr Kade Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Prazen Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prefemine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus
Castus (p. 36)

PreMens Phytotec Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Max Zeller Schne
AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Preparation H Clear Gel Wyeth Laboratories, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

e Prickly Ash, Northern (p. 484)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Primadrill Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Probeks Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Procalm Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Preparations Directory

Procalmil Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prodiem Plain Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Proginkgo Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Prol Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Promensil Novogen Laboratories P/L, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)
Pro-Sabona Uno Sabona GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Proserem Arkofarm S.r.1., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prosta Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prosta Urgenin Uno Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostafort Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostaforton Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prostagalen Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostagutt mono Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostagutt uno Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostaherb N Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prostakan AS/ Budapest Kft, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostakan Mono Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostalium Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
ProstaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostamed Urtica Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostamol Uno Berlin-Chemie Menarini Group, Czech Republic, Saw Palmetto
(p. 921) Berlin-Chemie Képviselet, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostamol Uno (Ipocramoa Yuo) Berlin-Pharma ZAO Moscow, Russia, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostaplant Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostasan Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostaserene Therabel Pharma SA, Belgium, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostata Stada GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostatal Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prosta-Truw Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prosta-Urgenin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus Pharma
SA, Belgium, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus AG, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prosta-Urgenine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostawern Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prosteren Cornelli Consulting Sas, Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostess TAD Pharma GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostex Productos Medix S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostiva Aneid, Lda, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Protat Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Corn Silk (p. 191)
Provenen HWS-OTC-Service GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Prunasine Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Psychotonin Madaus GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Steigerwald
Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Psylia Techni-Pharma, Monaco, Ispaghula (p. 374)

© Pulsatilla (p. 489)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Pursennid Novartis Finland Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537) Novartis Sverige AB,
Sweden, Senna (p. 537)

@

e Quassia (p. 491)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Quetzal A.S.A.C. Pharma, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Quiens Marco Antonetto S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Raigin Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ramend Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Raspberry (p. 495)
UK: Holland and Barrett

----- PAGE 643 -----
Appendix 4

Rebrickovy Caj, Rebrickova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Yarrow (p. 604)
Recalm Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Recvalysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Red Clover (p. 498)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Holland and Barrett

Red Kooga Peter Black Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

ReDormin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Valerian
(p. 580)

Regripax Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)
Regucol Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Regulacor-POS Ursapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Regulan Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Regulatum Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Regulax Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Regulax N Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Reguloid Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Relaxine Laboratoires Pharmaceutiques Trenker SA, Belgium, Valerian (p. 580)
Trima, Israel, Valerian (p. 580)

Remifemin Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black

(p. 168) Phytotec Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Bionax Singapore
Pte Ltd, Singapore, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Farmasierra S.A., Spain, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168) Diethelm & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Remiprostan uno Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Remotiv Torrex Pharma GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Phytotec Hungdria
Kft, Hungary, St John's Wort (p. 549) Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V.,
Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549) Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Remotive Sigma Tau S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Renopen Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Repha Orphon Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Repik Lekarsky Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)

Repikovy Caj, Repikova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)
Resistan mono Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Resplant W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

ReBalance Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Rheogen Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Rheuferm Phyto Wiedemann Pharma GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Rheuma-Hek Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Rheumakaps Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Willow (p. 598)
Rheuma-Sern Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Rheuma-Stada Stada GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Rheumatab Salicis Schuck GmbH, Germany, Willow (p. 598)

Rhodiola (p. 500)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Rilaprost Laboratori Guidotti S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Rivoltan Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Rokan Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299) W. Spitzner,
Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

e Rosemary (p. 508)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Rutying Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

CS)

Saba Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabacur uno Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabal uno Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabalin Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Lichtwer Pharma UK,

Sabalvit Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Sabal Duopharm GmbH, Stada GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
SabCaps Vifor SA, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabonal Uno Sabona GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Saforelle Avanderm Mexico, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Burdock (p. 102) Biosaude
Produtos Farmaceuticos SA, Portugal, Burdock (p. 102)

Sage (p. 512)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Salbei Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Sage
(p. 512)

Salus Mistel-Tropfen Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG,
Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Salvejova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Salvysat Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Sage (p. 512) Johannes Burger
Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Sanjin Royal Jelly Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Sanopinwern Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Sanvita Immun Sanamed GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217)
Sapec Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Sarai Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

 Sarsaparilla (p. 515)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Saugella Dermoliquido Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

e Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Scottopect Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

 Scullcap (p. 530)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Sedante Noche La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet., Argentina,
Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedasol eco natura Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)
Sedinfant Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Sedonium Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580) Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Valerian (p. 580) Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Valerian (p. 580)

Sedovegan Dr. August Wolff Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Senan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)
Senicor Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

e Senna (p. 537)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Senna-Gen /vax Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)
Sennalax Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)
Sennaprep Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Sennapur Pharmia Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537)

Sennatab Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)

Sennocol Viatris BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Sennove Lusky Leros sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Sennovy List Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

Senokot Purdue Pharma, Canada, Senna (p. 537) Viatris, France, Senna (p. 537)
Reckitt Benckiser Hong Kong Ltd, Hong Kong, Senna (p. 537) mundipharma AS,
Norway, Senna (p. 537) Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd, Singapore, Senna (p. 537) Reckitt
Benckiser plc, UK, Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Senokotxtra The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Sensivision au plantain Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb, France, Plantain
(p. 474)

Sereprostat Robapharm Espana, Spain, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Serpens Lisapharma S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Seven Seas Cranberry Forte Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Cranberry (p. 197)

Silegon Biogal-Teva Pharma Rt, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silibene Merckle GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silicur Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silimarin Benedetti S.p.A., Italy, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silimarit Bionorica AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Siliver Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia $/A, Brazil, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Silmar Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Siludane Laboratorios Dermatologicos Darier S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Silvaysan Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Silyhexal Hexal Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 644 -----
Silymarin Phytosome Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Sinei Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Sita Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Skin Clear Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)
Sklerovenol N Febena Pharma GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Sleep-Eze V Natural Medtech Lab, Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

© Slippery Elm (p. 545)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Snore Calm British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association Ltd, UK, Eyebright (p. 256)
Soflax Cipla-Medpro (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Sogoon Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Devil's Claw
(p. 207)

Solaguttae Emonta Pharma GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Solarcaine Aloe Vera Balmar, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Solcosplen C Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Soledum Hustensaft Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Soledum Hustentropfen Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Solevita Permamed AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sominex Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Valerian (p. 580)

Sonoripan Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Spagulax Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spagulax Mucilage Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spalda Sabal Leo Pharma A/S, Denmark, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Spartiol Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Broom (p. 98)

Spasmosedine Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sperti Preparacion H Clear Gel Wyeth Consumer Healthcare, Chile, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Sporal mono Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muiller,
Apotheker, GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

St John’s Wort (p. 550)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Natrol; Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Steicorton Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Steiprostat Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Stenocrat mono Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Sthenorex Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT, France, Fenugreek (p. 260)

Strogen Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Strogen Uno Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Strongus franconpharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Strotan Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Styptysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Sure-Lax Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Sweatosan N Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)
Syllact MedPointe Healthcare Inc, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Symfona Medichemie AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Syxal Syxyl GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

oO

Takata Madariaga, Spain, Senna (p. 537)
Talso Sanofi-Synthelabo GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Tanacain Ipsen EpE, Greece, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tanacet Ashbury Biologicals Inc., Canada, Feverfew (p. 263) Herbal Laboratories
Ltd, UK, Feverfew (p. 263)

Tanaceto Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Feverfew (p. 263)
Tanakan Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299) Ipsen NV,
Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299) Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos, Brazil,
Ginkgo (p. 299) Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299) IDS (Hong Kong)
Ltd Healthcare Division, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299) Europharm Trade Kft,
Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo
(p. 299) Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd, Singapore,
Ginkgo (p. 299) Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Laboratorio Leti S.A.V., Venezuela, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tanakan (Tanaka) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Preparations Directory

Tanakan Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Tanakene Ipsen Pharma, Spain, Ginkgo (p. 299) F. Uhlmann-Eyraud SA,
Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tavonin VSM Belgium, Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299) VSM Geneesmiddelen BV,
Netherlands, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebofortan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299) ASI
Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebokan Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Ginkgo
(p. 299) Vianex S.A., Greece, Ginkgo (p. 299) Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebonin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299) Altana Pharma
Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299) Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Ginkgo
(p. 299) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de
CV., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tegens Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Teltonal Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Tenag Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Tenliv Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Feverfew (p. 263)

Tensiane Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Tesalin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Butterbur
(p. 107)

Tetesept Erkaltungs tetesept Pharma GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Teufelskralle&xref details= ratiopharm GmbH, Stada GmbH, Germany, Devil's
Claw (p. 207)

Texx Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Thankgod Panacea Biotec Ltd, India, Euphorbia (p. 249)
Thermo Burger Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)

© Thyme (p. 574)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Thymi Syrup Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Thyme (p. 574)
Thymipin N Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymiverlan Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH &
Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymusin N G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Thyme (p. 574)

Tia Puppy Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Ticalma Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Valerian (p. 580)
Tisana Kelemata Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)

Tisane laxative H nouvelle formulation Hadnseler AG, Switzerland, Senna
(p. 537)

Tisasen ICN Czech Republic as, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Tonizin betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Tramisal Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Transilane Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra, France,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

Transix Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Traumaplant F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Comfrey (p. 188) Horna Business Service,
Czech Republic, Comfrey (p. 188) Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH,
Germany, Comfrey (p. 188) Laboratorios Cofasa S.A., Venezuela, Comfrey (p. 188)

Travacalm Natural Hamilton Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293)
Travel Sickness The Cantassium Company, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Trezalka v Nalevovych Sacchich Leros sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Trezalkova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Trezalkovy Caj Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Triativ Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Triffadiane Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Trinovin Novogen Laboratories P/L, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)
Trio D Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Liquorice (p. 411)
Triple Blend Echinacea Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Turineurin Schering sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549) Jenapharm
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Tussamag Hustensaft N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussamag Hustentropfen N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussamag (Tyccamar) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Thyme (p. 574)

----- PAGE 645 -----
Appendix 4

Tussiflorin Thymian Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Thyme (p. 574)

CU)

Unisom Natural Source Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

Uricleanse Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Cranberry (p. 197)
Urogutt Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Uro-POS Croma-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452) Ursapharm Arzneimittel
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Urtivit Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
utk TAD Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Uvalysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

e Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Uvavid Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

@

Valdispert Solvay Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay
Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma BV, Netherlands,
Valerian (p. 580) Solvayfarma, Lda, Portugal, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma,
Spain, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerecen Abigo Medical AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerial Zambon SA, Belgium, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerian (p. 580)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Valeriana Orto Normon S.A., Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriane Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerimed Cimed Industria de Medicamentos Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerin Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerix Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valeton Rekah Ltd, Israel, Valerian (p. 580)

Valezen Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valmane Solvay Farma Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valrian Oy Leiras Finland AB, Finland, Valerian (p. 580)

Valsedan Cederroth, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Artischocke Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Valverde Boutons de fievre creme Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425)

Valverde Monchspfeffer bei Menstruationsbeschwerden Novartis Consumer
Health GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Valverde Prostate capsules Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)
Varicid Lacer, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Varilise Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Varison Grunenthal Lda, Grunenthal Lda, Portugal, Bilberry (p. 79)
Vasactife Ferring Portuguesa, Lda, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vasodil Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Venafort Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venalot novo Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Venastat Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Boehringer
Ingelheim, Chile, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma
Magyarorszdgi Kereskedelmi Képviselet, Hungary, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Boehringer Ingelheim Promeco, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venavit N UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Dragees ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Fluid ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Tabletten Stada GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venentabs ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Tropfen N Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venitan Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Veno-biomo biomo Pharma GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venodura Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venoplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Dr Willmar Schwabe
GmbH & Co., Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venoplant top Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Venopyronum Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venosin Fujisawa GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venostasin Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Fujisawa GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Ariston Industrias Quimicas e
Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Altana Pharma Ltd, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Veraskin Laboratoires Mazal Pharmaceutique, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

e Vervain (p. 591)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Vibtil Therabel Pharma SA, Belgium, Lime Flower (p. 409) SERP, Monaco, Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Viru-Salvysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)
Viscysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Vi-Siblin Pfizer ApS Danmark, Denmark, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pfizer Oy, Finland,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374) Recip AB,
Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Vitacor UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Vitalium Farma Lepori, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Vitenon Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Vitex Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Volcolon Pfizer BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Vulcase Teofarma, Italy, Aloes (p. 50)

@

Wiedimmun Wiedemann Pharma GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Wild Lettuce (p. 596)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Witch Doctor C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601) E.C. De
Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Witch Sunsore E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

@

X-Prep Mundipharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Purdue Pharma, Canada,
Senna (p. 537) Mundipharma GmbH, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537) Lavipharm
Group, Greece, Senna (p. 537) Viatris S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537) Ferring S.A. de C.
V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537) mundipharma AS, Norway, Senna (p. 537) Viatris
Farmacéutica SA, Portugal, Senna (p. $37) Mundipharma Medical Co, Switzerland,
Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

@

Yakona Tentan AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Zihlava Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)
Zinaxin Vita Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Zintona Herbalist & Doc Gesundheitsgesellschaft mbH, Germany, Ginger (p. 293)
Chrisana GmbH, Switzerland, Ginger (p. 293)

Zortrix Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Willow (p. 598)

Multiple-ingredient preparations

©

A Saude da Mulher EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461)
Abanta Laboratorios Columbia de Argentina SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Abdomilon Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Calamus (p. 118), Frangula (p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Abdomilon N Caesaro Med GmbH, Austria, Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118),
Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425) Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425)
Abfuhr-Heilkrautertee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Frangula (p. 270), Juniper (p. 386), Nettle (p. 452), Senna (p. 537)
Abfuhrtee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Absorbine Arthritis WF Young Inc., Canada, Capsicum (p. 125)
Acetoben Productos Ronava C.A., Venezuela, Senega (p. 533)

----- PAGE 646 -----
Acidosis Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Meadowsweet
(p. 423), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Acne Oral Spray Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Burdock (p. 102)

Acnetrol Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Calendula (p. 121),
Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512)

Ac-Sal /sdin Chile Ltda, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Acti Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Fumitory (p. 276)
Actimind Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Activex 40 Plus Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Acuaderm Laboritorios Felipe Bajer S.A.I.C., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Adiantine Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Adios DDD Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)

Ad-Muc Merz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449) Weston
Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Myrrh (p. 449)

Adult Citrex Multivitamin + Ginseng + Omega 3 Pharmaniaga Marketing
Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Aescusan Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Aforinol Rekah Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

After Burn Tender Corporation, Czech Republic, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aftil Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Cinnamon (p. 162)

Agiolax Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Knoll Australia, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus GmbH,
Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Meda Oy, Finland, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Laboratoires Madaus,
France, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus AG, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374),
Senna (p. 537) Trinity Trading Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus S.r.
L, Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Byk Nederland BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula

(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Meda A/S, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Neo-
Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Madaus Pty
Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula

(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Meda AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Max
Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Zuoz
Pharma S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Agua del Carmen Fardi, Spain, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Lemon
Verbena (p. 405), Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425)

Ajo 1000 + C Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Ajolip Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Akildia Laboratoires Asepta, Monaco, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Alasenn Pharma Schworer GmbH, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Albizia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Feverfew (p. 263), Scullcap (p. 530)
Alcafelol Luper Indvistria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Alcaflor Luper Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Alkagin Istituto Ganassini S.p.A. di Ricerche Biochimiche, Italy, Calendula (p. 121),
Lime Flower (p. 409) Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula (p. 121),
Lime Flower (p. 409)

Allens Chesty Cough Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Allens Dry Tickly Cough Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125)
Allens Pine & Honey Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)
Allercept Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Nettle (p. 452)

AllerClear Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)
Allium Plus Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Garlic

(p. 279), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Almodin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Aloe Grande Gordon Laboratories, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloe Vera Plus GNLD International P/L, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloebel Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloelax Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Aloes (p. 50)

Alofedina Coll Farma, Spain, Aloes (p. 50)

Althaea Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Marshmallow

(p. 418), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Alvear con Ginseng Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Preparations Directory

Alvisan Neo Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Amara Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Centaury (p. 149), Dandelion
(p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Juniper (p. 386), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amara-Pascoe Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon
(p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Amara-Tropfen Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Juniper (p. 386), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amaro Medicinale Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Amerigel Amerx Health Care Corp., USA, Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Amersan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Agrimony (p. 42), Bilberry
(p. 79), Yarrow (p. 604) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Agrimony (p. 42), Bilberry (p. 79), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amphodyn Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
anabol-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Anaemodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Nettle (p. 452)

Anased Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374),
Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Anastim con RTH Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Andrographis Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Andrographis Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217),
Sculleap (p. 530)

Anevrasi Donini S.r.1., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Angioton GD Tecnologie Interdisciplinari Farmaceutiche S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Angocin Anti-Infekt N Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany,
Horseradish (p. 367)

Antiacneicos Ac-Sal Isdin Lda, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Antibron Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Euphorbia (p. 249),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Senega (p. 533), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Antiestrias Isdin Lda, Portugal, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Antifect Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Antiglan Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hydrangea (p. 369), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Antihypertonicum S$ Schuck GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Antioxidant Forte Tablets Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Antirevmaticky Caj Leros sro, Czech Republic, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Willow (p. 598)

Antitis Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Antitos Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)
Antomiopic Novartis Farmaceutica, Spain, Bilberry (p. 79)

Anusol Pfizer P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Apaisance Laboratoires Liérac, France, Lime Flower (p. 409), Pilewort (p. 472)
Apergan Farmaceutici G.B. Panzera S.r.I., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Aphloine P Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Aphtagone Trima, Israel, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Api Baby Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Appetiser Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290)
Aptha-X C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd, Israel, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aqua Ban Herbal G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers
(p. 164), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Aqualette Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204) Lichtwer Pharma UK,

Aqualibra Medice, Arzneimittel Putter GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381)

Arbum Laboratoires Jaldes, France, Burdock (p. 102)

Arceligasol Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Coltsfoot (p. 185)
Arctuvan Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Ardeysedon Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Argeal Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Arheumacare Health Perception Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)
Aristaloe Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Arkophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow
(p. 598)

----- PAGE 647 -----
Appendix 4

Armonil Ivax Argentina SA, Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Armonyl Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Arnicadol Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnicet Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Arnicon Pan Quimica Farmaceutica, Spain, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnidol Horna Business Service, Czech Republic, Arnica (p. 64)

Arowash Zydus Cadila Group, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Arterase Laboratoires Clément-Thékan, France, Garlic (p. 279), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Arterosan Plus Doetsch Grether AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn
(p. 346), Melissa (p. 425)

Arthriforte Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Arthritic Pain Herbal Formula 1 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146),
Devil's Claw (p. 207), Juniper (p. 386), Willow (p. 598)

Artin Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Aloes (p. 50), Frangula (p. 270)
Artrex MD Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginger (p. 293)

Asa Tones Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Drosera (p. 215), Euphorbia
(p. 249), Hawthorn (p. 346), Liquorice (p. 411)

Asic Cesam, Lda, Portugal, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Asmatiron /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Asparagus-P Plantina Biologische Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Parsley (p. 456)

Asthma & Catarrh Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Asthmatee EF-EM-ES FF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Aniseed (p. 57),
Arnica (p. 64)

Astragalus Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Astrijesan Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA, Chile, Myrrh (p. 449)

Athera G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Parsley (p. 456), Senna
(p. 537), Vervain (p. 591)

Avedorm duo Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Avena Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Rosemary (p. 508), Vervain (p. 591)

Avena Sativa Comp Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580) Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Avenoc Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Pilewort (p. 472)
Avensyl Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Aviril H Leciva as, Czech Republic, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

CB)

B-100 Complex Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)
Baby Paste + Chamomile Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Sage (p. 512)
Babygella Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Calendula (p. 121)

Backache Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Dandelion (p. 204), Gravel Root (p. 340), Hydrangea (p. 369), Juniper
(p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Backache Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459),
Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Bacopa Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Bagohepat Laboratorios Bago S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Baldracin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Hops
(p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian AMA F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian-Dispert Nacht Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan Whitehall-Robins AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan N Stark Whitehall-Much GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Balm of Gilead Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418), St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Balsamo Analgesico Sanitas Upsifarma, Lda, Portugal, Capsicum (p. 125)

Balsamo Branco Laboratorio Catarinense S.A., Brazil, Aniseed (p. 57), Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Balsoclase Compositum UCB Pharma BV, Netherlands, Thyme (p. 574)
Banoftal Alcon Cusi, Spain, Calendula (p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bebimix Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Bekunis Complex Diafarm, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Bentasil Licorice with Echinacea Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Liquorice (p. 411)
Bentasil Licorice with Echina-cea Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Benylin First Defense Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Benzomel Casa Granado Lab. Farmacias e Drogarias S.A., Brazil, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Berberis Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)
Berggeist Kur- und Stadtapotheke, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)

Betaine Digestive Aid GNLD International P/L, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Bicholate Sabex Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128)
Bilaxil Bayer SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Bilberry Plus Eye Health Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Bilbery 40mg Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
Bilidren Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Bilifel Neckerman Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Bilifuge Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Java Tea (p. 381)

Biliosan Compuesto Lab. Hexa-Medinova S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91)

Bilisan Duo Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Biocalm Lizofarm S.r.l., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Biocarde Laboratoires Lehning, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

BioCyst CytoChemia AG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Bioglan 3B Beer Belly Buster Bioglan Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Bioglan Arthri Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)
Bioglan Bioage Peripheral Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Bioglan Cirflo Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla (p. 489),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bioglan Cranbiotic Super Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Bioglan Ginger-Vite Forte Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293)

Bioglan Ginsynergy Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bioglan Joint Mobility Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Damiana (p. 201), Red
Clover (p. 498), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Bioglan Psylli-Mucil Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

Bioglan Pygno-Vite Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)
Bioglan Soy Power Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)

Bioglan The Blue One Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Damiana
(p. 201)

Bioglan Vision-Eze Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bioglan Zellulean with Escin Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Biolactine Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Biomicovo Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula
(p. 121), St John's Wort (p. 549), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Biophase Shampoo Ecofarm Group Srl, Italy, Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166)
bioplant-Kamillenfluid Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Calendula (p. 121)

Biosedon Sabona GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Bio-Strath Bio-Strath AG, Czech Republic, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Artichoke (p. 67), Holy
Thistle (p. 352)

Bio-Strath Valerian Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Bio-Strath Willow Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Cowslip (p. 195), Willow
(p. 598)

Biotene with Calcium Laclede Inc., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

----- PAGE 648 -----
Biothymus DS Biochimici PSN S.p.A., Italy, Nettle (p. 452), Willow (p. 598)
Biothymus M Urto Biochimici PSN S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioton Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Biotussil Biomedica sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian
(p. 290), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Biovital Roche (Magyarorszdg) Kft, Hungary, Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort
(p. 447)

Biovital Roche (Magyarorszdg) Kft, Hungary, Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Aktiv Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Classic Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Ginseng Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Biral Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Bisuisan DM Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Black Cohosh Natrol, USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Blackoids du Docteur Meur SERP, Monaco, Liquorice (p. 411)

Blahungstee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Aniseed
(p. 57), Calendula (p. 121), Cinnamon (p. 162), Melissa (p. 425)

Blasen- und Nierentee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Liquorice (p. 411), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Blastoestimulina Almirall Prodesfarma S.A., Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Bodi Kleen Geritrex Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Bodyguard Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C., Italy, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Echinacea (p. 217), Willow (p. 598)

Bolcitol Laboratoires Gabriel Lesourd, France, Boldo (p. 91), Fumitory (p. 276),
Sage (p. 512)

Boldex Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)
Boldina Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Boldocynara Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204)

Boldopeptan Laboratorio Neo Quimica Comercio e Industria Ltda, Brazil, Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Boljuprima Laboratorios Prima Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91)

Bolus Laxans EGIS Pharmaceuticals, Hungary, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Bomacorin Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Bonningtons Irish Moss GlaxoSmithKline, New Zealand, Liquorice (p. 411)
Boots Alternatives Easy Digest Alliance Boots plc, UK, Artichoke (p. 67)
Boots Alternatives Laxative Alliance Boots plc, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Boots Alternatives Premenstrual Alliance Boots plc, UK, Evening Primrose
(p. 251)

Boots Alternatives Sharp Mind Alliance Boots plc, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Boots Alternatives Sleep Well Alliance Boots plc, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets Alliance Boots plc, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Borage Oil Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)
Borsdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Liquorice (p. 411)

Borstol Cough Remedy Group Laboratories SA (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu
(p. 100), Senega (p. 533)

Boswellia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Ginger (p. 293)

Boswellia Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Ginger
(p. 293), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Botanica Hayfever Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd, New Zealand, Melissa
(p. 425)

Boxocalm Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Brady’s-Magentropfen Brady C. KG, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Cinnamon (p. 162),
Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449)

Bromidrastina /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Golden Seal
(p. 337), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bromocod N G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Broncafect Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice
(p. 411), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchial £-Z-EM Canada Inc., Canada, Senega (p. 533)

Bronchialtee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Cowslip
(p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Preparations Directory

Bronchicum Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574) Aventis Pharma, Netherlands, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Elixir Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchicum Elixir $ Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Husten (Bpornxuxym Cupon or Kamas) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia,
Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Hustensirup Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Pflanzlicher Hustenstiller Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic,
Drosera (p. 215)

Bronchicum Sekret-Loser Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Tropfen Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchicum (Bponxuxym) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchipret Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574) Bionorica
AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchithym Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchostop Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchozone DC Labs Ltd, Canada, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

Bronco Asmol Herbes Universelles, Canada, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Broncofenil Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Broncol Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginger (p. 293)

Broncosedina F.A.M.A. Istituto Chimico Biologico S.r.l., Italy, Juniper (p. 386),
Thyme (p. 574)

Broncovital Puerto Galiano, Spain, Drosera (p. 215), Senega (p. 533)

Bronpul Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Bronquidex Farmalab Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Bronquiogem Prodotti Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower
(p. 461), Yucca (p. 610)

Brontoss Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Brown Mixture British Dispensary, Thailand, Liquorice (p. 411)

Brunavera Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula
(p. 121)

Brust- und Hustentee Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Brust- und Hustentee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Elecampane (p. 240), Thyme (p. 574)

Buchu Backache Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd,
UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Buco Regis Reig Jofre, Spain, Myrrh (p. 449)

Bulgarolax Laboratorios Chile SA, Chile, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Bupleurum Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Bupleurum Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Burgerstein TopVital Antistress AG, Gesellschaft fur Gesundheitsschutz,
Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bushi Laboratorios Andromaco S.A.1.C.I., Argentina, Calendula (p. 121)
Buttercup Syrup Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Cadifen Ca.Di.Group S.r.I., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)
Cadimint Ca.Di.Group S.r.., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Cajova Smes pri Nachlazeni Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Lime
Flower (p. 409), Liquorice (p. 411)

Cajova Smes pri Redukcni Diete Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice
(p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cal Alkyline Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Slippery Elm
(p. 545)

Cal 520 Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Alfalfa (p. 45)
Calcium with Magnesium Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

Calendula Concreta Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Calendula (p. 121)
Calendula Nappy Change Cream Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)
Califig Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 649 -----
Appendix 4

Calman Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Calmanervin Meditec/Sam-On Ltd, Israel, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Calmanite Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Calmapax Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Calmatol Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA, Chile, Lime Flower (p. 409)

Calmazin /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Calming Aid Sundown, USA, Kava (p. 389), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Calmiphase Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Calmiplan Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Calmo Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Milk Thistle
(p. 429), Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Scullcap (p. 530), Tansy (p. 572),
Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Calmophytum Laboratoires Holistica International, France, Lime Flower (p. 409),
Vervain (p. 591)

Camolyn Laboratorios L.O. Oftalmi C.A., Venezuela, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Canephron Bionorica AG, Germany, Centaury (p. 149), Rosemary (p. 508)

Canephron N (Kanedpou H) Bionorica AG, Russia, Centaury (p. 149), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Canephron novo Bionorica AG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Canol Laboratoires Jolly-jatel, France, Artichoke (p. 67)

Capill Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Capill Venogel Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.1., Italy, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Capso Euroderm-RDC S.p.A., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Capsules-vital Biomed AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Caramelle alle Erbe Digestive Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Caramelos Agua del Carmen Fardi, Spain, Melissa (p. 425)
Cardiaforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425)
Cardioace Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Cardiodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Cowslip (p. 195)

Cardio-Longoral Artesan Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Cassella-med GmbH & Co.
KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Carilax Mag. Dr. Till Strallhofer, Austria, Senna (p. 537)
Carmicide Indoco Remedies Ltd, India, Cinnamon (p. 162), Ginger (p. 293)
Carmol Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425)

Carmol Magen-Galle-Darm Omegin Dr Schmidgall GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204)

Cascade G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Cascara Sagrada Bouzen Bouzen S.A.C,.I.F.A.F., Argentina, Cascara (p. 128)
Cascara-Salax Ferring Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cascara (p. 128)

Castanha de India Composta Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda,
Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Catarrh Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Boneset
(p. 94), Burdock (p. 102), Capsicum (p. 125)

Catarrh Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217),
Lobelia (p. 416), Pokeroot (p. 479)

Catarrh-eeze Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Elecampane (p. 240), Yarrow (p. 604)

Catiz Plus Merck Quimica Argentina S.A.1.C., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Cats Claw Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Cayenne Plus Nutravite, Canada, Ginger (p. 293)

Cefadrin Cefak KG, Germany, Ephedra (p. 243), Thyme (p. 574)

Cefasabal Cefak KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Cefasedativ Cefak KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Cefawell Cefak KG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula (p. 121)

Celery Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Burdock (p. 102), Celery
(p. 146), Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)

Celltech Gold Laboratorios Recalcine SA, Chile, Borage (p. 96), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Celu-Atlas Atlas Farmaceutica, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Celulase Con Neomicina Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cemalyt Saros Laboratorios, Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centella Complex Peter Italia sas, Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Centella Queen Complex Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Centella Queen Reductora Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Centellase de Centella Queen Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centellase Gel Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centeril H Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Cervusen Australian Medic-Care Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Cerylana Laboratorios Intra S.A., Venezuela, Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Chamberlains Cough Remedy Regular Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Liquorice (p. 411)

Chap Stick Whitehall, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Chase Coldsorex Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc., Canada, Myrrh (p. 449)

Chase Kolik GripeWater Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc., Canada, Ginger
(p. 293)

Chest Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy
Root (p. 477), Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Chesty Cough Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

China-Eisenwein Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Chlorophyl liquid Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Chlorophyllin Salbe Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Choats Extract of Lettuce Cough Mixture Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Chofabol Allen Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Chofranina De Mayo Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke
(p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Cholagol Ivax-CR a s Kozvetlen Kereskedelmi Képviselet, Hungary, Frangula
(p. 270) Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Frangula (p. 270)

Cholagutt Korangi S.A., Portugal, Calamus (p. 118), Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cholasyn II Rolmex International Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)
Cholhepan N Schuck GmbH, Germany, Aloes (p. 50), Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Chol-Kugeletten Neu Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Cholosom SL Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204)

Cholosom-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion
(p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Cicaderma Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121), Pulsatilla (p. 489), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604) Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Calendula (p. 121), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cicapost Isdin Chile Ltda, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Cimicifuga Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Cional Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512)

Circanetten Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil,
Senna (p. 537) Sriprasit Dispensary R O P, Thailand, Senna (p. 537)

Circulan Adroka AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)
Ciruelax Jalea [vax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Cirulaxia Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Cito-Guakalin Stada GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Citos Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Drosera (p. 215)
CitriMax Plus Natrol, USA, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Citrimax Plus with ChromeMate Natrol, USA, Cascara (p. 128)

Citro-C Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Echinacea (p. 217)

Clairo Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aniseed (p. 57), Centaury (p. 149),
Clove (p. 166), Senna (p. 537), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cleansa Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Burdock (p. 102), Nettle
(p. 452), Passionflower (p. 461), Red Clover (p. 498), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Cleansing Herbs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Senna (p. 537)
Clearasil Double Clear Procter & Gamble, USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Clevosan Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

----- PAGE 650 -----
Climaxol Laboratoires Lehning, France, Golden Seal (p. 337), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Climil Complex Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Climil-80 Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Clogar Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Coci-Fedra MPL, Marching Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Senega (p. 533), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana Christo Christo Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249),
Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana Co Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Cocillana Compound Synco (HK) Ltd, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549) Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd, Hong Kong,
Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549) Vida Laboratories Ltd,
Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana-Etyfin Ellem Lakemedel AB, Sweden, Senega (p. 533)

Codebromil Laboratorios Vincenti C.A., Venezuela, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme
(p. 574)

Codelum Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Colachofra EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Coladren Cooperativa Farmaceutica Soc. (CoFa Farmaceutici), Italy, Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128)

Colax Mediherb P/L, Australia, Cascara (p. 128), Dandelion (p. 204), Yellow Dock
(p. 608) Mediherb P/L, Officina Farmaceutica Fiorentina S.r.l. Istituto Biochimico,
Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Cold and Flu Relief Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Cold Sore Lotion DC Labs Ltd, Canada, Myrrh (p. 449)

Coleus Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian (p. 580)
Colimax Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Thyme (p. 574)

Colimil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Melissa (p. 425)

Collypan Vifor SA, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Colosan plus Vifor SA, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270)

Combudoron Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle
(p. 452) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)
Weleda AG, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)

Comfrey Plus Concept for Pharmacy Ltd, Israel, Comfrey (p. 188)

Composto Anticelulitico Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil,
Ginkgo (p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Composto Emagrecedor Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Cascara (p. 128), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Passionflower (p. 461)

Compound Laxative Syrup of Figs Alliance Boots plc, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Concentrated Milk of Magnesia-Cascara Roxane Laboratories Inc., a
Subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim, USA, Cascara (p. 128)

Confetti Lassativi CM Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537)

Confortel Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas, Argentina, Pilewort (p. 472)
Constipation Nobel Pharm Enrg, Canada, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Constipation Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50),
Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Contra-Coff Universal Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Contraspan Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580)
Control Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé, Canada, Cascara (p. 128)

Controlacne Pharmalab, Division de Stonglass SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Calendula (p. 121)

Contusin Lacer, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Convallocor-SL Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Convastabil Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cosylan Pfizer AS, Norway, Cascara (p. 128)

Cough Elixir Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aniseed (p. 57), Drosera
(p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Thyme (p. 574)

Cough Relief Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Nettle (p. 452), Thyme (p. 574)

Cough-eeze Perrigo, UK, Elecampane (p. 240)
Covonia Mentholated Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411), St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Cran Support Natrol, USA, Cat's Claw (p. 132), Corn Silk (p. 191), Cranberry
(p. 197)

Preparations Directory

CranAssure Nature Made, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)
Cranberry Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cranberry Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577) Mediherb P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Cran-C Holista Health Corp, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cratex Corporacion de Salud C.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Creme Rap Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Arnica (p. 64), Broom (p. 98), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Cremor cap: comp Pharmachemie BV, Netherlands, Capsicum (p. 125)
Cremor Capsici compositus ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)

Crislaxo Quimifar, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Aniseed (p. 57), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Critichol Aziende Chimiche Riunite Angelini Francesco S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Cuassicum Nucleopharm SRL, Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

Culpeper After Dinner Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, German
(p. 152)

Culpeper DeTox Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice
(p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

Cuscutine Geymonat S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)

Cycloven Forte N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Cynarix comp Montavit GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynaro Bilina Nutridiver SL, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Cynarzym N Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91)

Cystinol Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

[D)

Daily Fatigue Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Daily Tension & Strain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dam Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.., Italy, Cinnamon (p. 162), Damiana
(p. 201)

DAM Antacidum Corifel SA, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411)

Damiana and Kola Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Damiana-Sarsaparilla Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Dan Shen Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian
(p. 580)

Dandelion Complex Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Burdock (p. 102), Capsicum (p. 125), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293)

Davilla Rekah Ltd, Israel, Cinnamon (p. 162), Rhubarb (p. 506)
De Witt’s K & B Pills E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

De Witts New Pills C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

De Witts Pills Regional Health Ltd, New Zealand, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Decon Ovuli /P Farma Sas, Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Dekar 2 Pentamedical S.r.1., Italy, Quassia (p. 491)

Dellova Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Java Tea (p. 381)

Demo Elixir pectoral N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Demonatur Capsules contre les refroidissements Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Demonatur Dragees pour les reins et la vessie Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217), Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile Vifor SA, Switzerland, Artichoke
(p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

DemoPectol Vifor SA, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme
(p. 574)

DemoPectol Vifor SA, Switzerland, Thyme (p. 574)
DemotTussil Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)
Demoven N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

----- PAGE 651 -----
Appendix 4

Dentinox Altana Pharma GmbH, Austria, Myrrh (p. 449)
Dentosan Carie & Alito Pfizer Italiana S.r.l., Italy, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Depuratif Parnel Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Burdock (p. 102), Fumitory
(p. 276)

Depurativo Richelet Vitafarma, Spain, Gentian (p. 290)

Depuratum Laboratoires Lehning, France, Fumitory (p. 276), Juniper (p. 386),
Rosemary (p. 508), Thyme (p. 574)

Derma Care Fischer Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermaco Mediherb P/L, Australia, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Sarsaparilla
(p. 515), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

Dermaglos Plus Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Dermaloe Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Derm’attive 10 Sidone Induistria e Comercio Ltda., Brazil, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Derm/’attive Solaire Sidone Industria e Comercio Ltda., Brazil, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Dermilia Flebozin Depofarma S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Echinacea (p. 217),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermitina Donini S.r.1., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermocica Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Dermol Laboratorio Simdes Ltda, Brazil, Arnica (p. 64)
Dermoprolyn Infosint S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Dermtex HC with Aloe Pfeiffer Company, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Dermvien Hautel S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Desitin Creamy Pfizer Pte Ltd, Singapore, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Detska Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Detsky Caj s Hermankem Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Hops (p. 354),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Devils Claw Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Devil's
Claw (p. 207)

Diabesor Soria Natural, Spain, Burdock (p. 102), Sage (p. 512)

Diabetan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion
(p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Diabeticka Cajova Smes-Megadiabetin Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic,
Bilberry (p. 79), Dandelion (p. 204), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Diacure Laboratoires Lehning, France, Bilberry (p. 79), Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204)

Diaparene Corn Starch Personal Care Group Inc., USA, Aloes (p. 50)
Dicalmir Dicofarm S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Difrarel Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Bilberry (p. 79) Sigma-Tau
Ethifarma B.V., Netherlands, Bilberry (p. 79)

Difrarel E Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Bilberry (p. 79) Ubepharm,
Hungary, Bilberry (p. 79)

Digelax Balverda Srl, Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Digest Mediherb P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Echinacea (p. 217), Gentian
(p. 290), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Digestaid Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290) Healthy Direct,
UK, Gentian (p. 290)

Digestar Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas, Brazil, Gentian (p. 290)

Digestive Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal (p. 337), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Digestive Aid Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Digestodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Willow (p. 598) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Willow (p. 598) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Willow (p. 598)

Digestovital Puerto Galiano, Spain, Aniseed (p. 57)

Digestron Lopes Produtos Farmaceuticos S.A., Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Dilaescol Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Dioptec Laboratoires Dergam, France, Calendula (p. 121)
Diovol Forte DGL Wallace Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Dioxicolagol Lab. Fabra S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Valerian (p. 580)

Dis-Cinil Complex A. Menarini Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.r.l., Italy, Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Disogel Concept Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Diu Venostasin Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Diuretabs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459),
Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Diurette Cederroth, Spain, Dandelion (p. 204)
Diurinat Soria Natural, Spain, Corn Silk (p. 191), Couchgrass (p. 193)

Doans Backache Pills Mentholatum South Africa (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu
(p. 100)

Docrub Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu (p. 100)

Doktor Mom Herbal Cough Lozenges (Aoxrop Mom Pacrureapunie MacruaKkn
Or Kamas) Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Russia, Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice
(p. 411)

Doktor Mom (Aoxrop Mom) Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Russia, Aloes
(p. 50), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411)

Dolo-cyl Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Dolodent OBA Pharma ApS, Denmark, Myrrh (p. 449)
Dolokey Inkeysa, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125)

Dolosul Soria Natural, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Willow
(p. 598)

Domuderm Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Donalg Dynacren Laboratorio Farmaceutico del Dott. A. Francioni e di M. Gerosa
S.rL, Italy, Ginger (p. 293), Sage (p. 512), Willow (p. 598)

Dong Quai Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Doppelherz Ginseng Aktiv (Aomeasrepr, 7Kenpmien Axru) Queisser Pharma
GmbH. & Co., Russia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Doppelherz Melissa (Aommeasrepry Meancca) Queisser Pharma GmbH.& Co.,
Russia, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aonmeasrepy Buraxoronux) Queisser Pharma GmbH. &
Co., Russia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormarist Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormeasan Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Bioforce
AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461)

Dormiplant Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Schwabe
Pharma AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormo-Sern Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Dormoverlan Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH &
Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dorofen Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Doulax Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Blasen- und Nierentee Dr Scheffler
Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Nerven- und Beruhigungstee Dr
Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower

(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dr Scurr’s Zinopin Healthy Direct, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Dr Theiss Beinwell Salbe Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Comfrey (p. 188)
Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Myrrh (p. 449),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Dr Theiss Schweden Krauter Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Cinnamon (p. 162), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)
Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum Beethoven-Pharma Dr Wiemann GmbH,
Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)

Dragees antirhumatismales Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Dragees aux figues avec du sene Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Senna (p. 537)

Dragees Fuca Laboratoires Fuca, France, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270)

Dragees pour la detente nerveuse Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

----- PAGE 652 -----
Dragees pour le sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees pour le sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees S pour les reins et la vessie Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Dragees sedatives Dr Welti Dr Heinz Welti AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees Vegetales Rex Laboratoires Lehning, France, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270)

Drainactil Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Boldo (p. 91)

Draverex Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.
(p. 270)

Dreierlei Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Drenocol Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91)

Drops of Life Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Yarrow
(p. 604)

Drosana Resiston avec vitamine C Vifor SA, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Drosithym-N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Dual-Lax Extra Strong G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Senna (p. 537)

Dual-Lax Normal Strength G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50),
Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Ductoveran Lab. Ducto Ind. Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91)

Duolaxan Pharmacia Italia S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Dynamisan Novartis Argentina S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Dynexan Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512) Adcock
Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512)
Dystolise Laboratoires Motima, France, Angelica (p. 53), Melissa (p. 425)

Dyzco Mediherb P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh, Blue (p. 180),
Ginger (p. 293)

., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula

CE)

Echinaboost Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Fumitory (p. 276)
Echinacea 4000 Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea ACE + Zinc Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echinacea Golden Seal Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Goldenseal Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Echinacea (p. 217), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Echinacea Lozenge Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Plus Zuellig Pharma Sdn Bhd, Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Eciclean EciFarma SA, Chile, Sage (p. 512)

Ecnagel Valuge S.A., Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eczema Relief Mediherb P/L, Australia, Calendula (p. 121), Myrrh (p. 449)
Efcamon (cpxamon) Nizhpharm OAO, Russia, Capsicum (p. 125)
Efluvium Anti-caspa Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Efluvium Anti-seborreico Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Ehrlich Balsamo Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Capsicum
(p. 125)

Eicebaer Merck GmbH, Austria, Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Ekseme Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Ektrofil Farmaceutici Ecobi s.a.s., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Elixir Bonjean Laboratoires Dexo, France, Aniseed (p. 57), Melissa (p. 425)

Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Corn Silk
(p. 191), Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Elixir de Inhame Laboratorios Goulart S.A., Brazil, Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Elixir de Marinheiro Laboratorio Phos-Kola Ltda, Brazil, Sarsaparilla (p. 515)
Elixir de Passiflora Laboratorio Sinterapico Industrial e Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil,
Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Elixir Grez Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud, France, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290)

Preparations Directory

Elixir Spark Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Elovera Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Elovera-SPF Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Emagrevit Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Passionflower (p. 461), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Embrocacion Gras Quimifar, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125)
—Em-medical Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Thyme (p. 574)

Emmenoiasi Ferlito Farmaceutici, Divisione Palmares S.p.A., Italy, Couchgrass
(p. 193), Hops (p. 354), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Melissa (p. 425)

Emulax AstraZeneca Sverige AB, Sweden, Cascara (p. 128)
Encypalmed Trima, Israel, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Energy Plus Nutravite, Canada, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Energy Support Sundown, USA, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Energysor Soria Natural, Spain, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
(p. 315), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Entertainer’s Secret KL/ Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Entressdruppels HM Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida
(p. 72), Valerian (p. 580)

Entschlackender Abfuhrtee EF-EM-ES EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Elder (p. 237), Senna (p. 537)

Enzian Anaemodoron Drops Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Gentian
(p. 290), Nettle (p. 452)

Epagest Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Eparema Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506) Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.1., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Eparema-Levul Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.1., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

EP&C Essence Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bayberry (p. 77), Elder (p. 237)

Ephepect-Pastillen N Bolder Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Ephydrol Laboratoires CS Dermatologie, France, Plantain (p. 474)
Epilobin Leros sro, Czech Republic, Buchu (p. 100), Calendula (p. 121)

Equaliv Meyer Productos Terapéuticos S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Equisil N Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Erkaltungstee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574), Willow (p. 598)

Erpecalm Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Melissa (p. 425), Plantain (p. 474)
Eryange Laboratoires Klorane, France, Calendula (p. 121)

Eryval Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Centaury (p. 149), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Esberitop Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Esberitox Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Esberitox N Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Escar T-Neomicina Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Escotussin G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Esculeol P Quimica Medical Arg. S.. L, Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Espol (Scroa) Nizhpharm OAO, Russia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Essens Amara of Groen Amara Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Quassia (p. 491)

Estomafitino Jofadel Ind. Farmacéutica S.A., Brazil, Gentian (p. 290), Senna
(p. 537)

Estri-Atlas Atlas Farmaceutica, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Estrocare Pharmanex Inc., USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Eucarbon F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537) Tetra Pharm, Israel, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. $37) Giuliani
S.p.A,, Italy, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Eucarbon Herbal F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Austria,
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Euceta avec camomille et arnica Novartis Consumer Health Schweiz AG,
Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Eufytose Productos Roche S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Eugastrin Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Calamus (p. 118),
Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549)

----- PAGE 653 -----
Appendix 4

Euka Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Eulatin NN Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Eulux Mediwhite Sri, Italy, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Eupatol Donini S.r.., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Euphorbia Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Euphorbia (p. 249), Passionflower
(p. 461), Thyme (p. 574)

Euphrasia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Echinacea
(p. 217), Eyebright (p. 256), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Euphrasia Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Eyebright
(p. 256), Sculleap (p. 530)

Euphytose Laboratoires Roche Nicholas, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Euproctol N Sanopharm AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eurocolor Post Solar Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Calendula (p. 121)

Europrotec Post Solar Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera
(p. 48), Calendula (p. 121)

Euvegal Entspannungs- und Einschlaftropfen Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH &
Co., Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Euvekan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Evacrine Laboratoires Motima, France, Ginger (p. 293)
Evamilk Laboratori Gambar S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Evarose Laboratoires Bailly SPEAB, France, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Evening Primrose Oil Natrol, USA, Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Eviprostat Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Indtistria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil,
Pulsatilla (p. 489) Nippon Shinyaku Co. Ltd, Japan, Pulsatilla (p. 489) Wellchem
Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd, Singapore, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Eviprostat N Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH, Germany, Pulsatilla
(p. 489)

Exail Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)
Excess Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Executive B Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Ex-Lax Gentle Strength Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Senna
(p. 537)

Expectal-Tropfen Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Expectobron Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Expectol Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Expectomel Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Senega
(p. 533)

Expectosan Hierbas y Miel Laboratorios Excelentia S.A., Argentina, Cowslip
(p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Expectysat N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Extralife Arthri-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Feverfew (p. 263), Ginger (p. 293)

Extralife Extra-Brite Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Extralife Eye-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Extralife Flow-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Extralife Fluid-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Dandelion

(p. 204), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Extralife Leg-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Extralife Liva-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Extralife Meno-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Extralife Migrai-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Feverfew

(p. 263), Willow (p. 598)

Extralife PMS-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Willow (p. 598)

Extralife Sleep-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290),
Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Extralife Uri-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100),
Cranberry (p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Eye Dew Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eye Health Herbal Plus Formula 4 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Eyebright
(p. 256), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Eye Support Formula Natrol, USA, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Eyebright
(p. 256)

Eyebright Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Eyebright (p. 256), Wild
Carrot (p. 593)

@

Fade Cream Cosmofarma, Lda (Laboratorios Cosmos), Portugal, Yarrow (p. 604)
Fadiamone Laboratoires CS Dermatologie, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Fagorutin Rosskastanien-Balsam N GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Famel Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)
Fam-Lax Typharm Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Fam-Lax Senna Typharm Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Fave di Fuca Roche S.p.A., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270)

Feminine Herbal Complex GNLD International P/L, Australia, Agnus Castus
(p. 36), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512), Sculleap
(p. 530), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Fenneherb Cystaid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Shepherd's Purse (p. 541), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Fenneherb Monthly Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Raspberry (p. 495)

Fenneherb Newrelax Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Fenneherb Prementaid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Motherwort (p. 447),
Pulsatilla (p. 489), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Fenneherb Slim Aid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Fenneherb Sweetdreams Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)
Fen-y-Tos Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Drosera (p. 215)
Ferroplex-frangula ERA Medical ApS, Denmark, Frangula (p. 270)

Fiberfull Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibralax Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537)

Fibre Dophilus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibre Plus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Fibrolax Complex Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Figatil Laboratorio Catarinense S.A., Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Figen ERA Medical ApS, Amternes Laegemiddelregistreringskontor |/S, Denmark,
Senna (p. 537)

Filigel Laboratoires Codifra, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fishogar Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Fitacnol Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Burdock (p. 102), Nettle (p. 452)
Fitolax Instituto de Medicamentos e Alergia IMA Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)

Fitosonno Pharbenia S.r.1., Societa del Gruppo Bayer, Italy, Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Fitotos Laboratorio Koni-Cofarm SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Flatulence Gastulence Greater Pharma Ltd Part, Thailand, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Capsicum (p. 125), Cascara (p. 128), Ginger (p. 293)

Flavion Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.1., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Flavo-C Primal Chemical Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Flavons Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Boneset (p. 94), Echinacea (p. 217),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Flebior Therasophia, France, Bilberry (p. 79)
Flebitol Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Flebolider Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Arnica (p. 64), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Flexi-muv Zydus Cadila Group, India, Capsicum (p. 125), Celery (p. 146)

Floradix Multipretten N Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co
KG, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Yarrow (p. 604)

Florelax Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A., Italy, Angelica (p. 53), Valerian (p. 580)

----- PAGE 654 -----
Floriny Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

Florlax Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Senna
(p. 537)

Fluid Loss Vitaplex Products, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Celery (p. 146), Dandelion
(p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Fluido Spineda, Pérez y Hnos. Y Cia SRL, Argentina, Arnica (p. 64)

Fluon Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Fon Wan Ginsenergy Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Fontlax Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)

Fontolax Fontovit Laboratdrios Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)

For Peripheral Circulation Herbal Plus Formula 5 Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Fortacet /nterdelta SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Forticrin Farmaceutici G.B. Panzera S.r.l., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Yarrow (p. 604)

Fosfarsile Forte Fitobucaneve S.r./., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Four-Ton Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Fovysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Fray Romano Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Fre-bre Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Parsley (p. 456)

Frugelletten Herbert Bregenzer, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Frutalax Hexal do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Fruttasan Graf Fruttasan AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Fybogel Mebeverine Reckitt Benckiser, Ireland, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt
Benckiser plc, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fytokliman Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Parsley Piert (p. 459), St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Galium Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Calendula (p. 121), Clivers (p. 164),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Gallemolan forte Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion
(p. 204)

Gallen- und Lebertee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Agrimony (p. 42), Dandelion (p. 204), Yarrow (p. 604)

Gallesyn Mr J W Wenig GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270)

Gallexier Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67), Bogbean (p. 89), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger
(p. 293), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Galloway’s Cough Syrup Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Gameral Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Cascara (p. 128)
Garcinol Max Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Garlic Allium Complex GNLD International P/L, Australia, Garlic (p. 279),
Rosemary (p. 508)

Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Fenugreek (p. 260), Garlic (p. 279), Horseradish (p. 367), Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Garlic, Horseradish, A & C Capsules Vitaplex Products, Australia, Horseradish
(p. 367)

GarLife Nature Made, USA, Garlic (p. 279)
Gartech Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)
Gastripan Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gastritol Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Holy Thistle (p. 352),
Liquorice (p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Gastrosan Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Angelica (p. 53), Centaury (p. 149), Dandelion
(p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Gastrosecur Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290),
Ginger (p. 293)

Gastrotuss DMG Italia S.r.1., Italy, Marshmallow (p. 418)
GB 100 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)
GB Tablets Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102)

Gel a la consoude Phytomed AG, Switzerland, Calendula (p. 121), Comfrey
(p. 188), Echinacea (p. 217), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Gelax Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Gelconordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Aloe Vera
(p. 48)

Preparations Directory

Gelovis Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Capsicum (p. 125), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Gem /Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gengivario Giovanni Ogna & Figli S.p.A., Italy, Myrrh (p. 449)
Genolaxante Craveri S.A.1.C., Argentina, Aloes (p. 50)

Gentaplex Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gentlees Delamac Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Genurat Soria Natural, Spain, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Gerard House Reumalex Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Guaiacum
(p. 344), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Willow (p. 598)

Gerard House Serenity Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Gerard House Skin Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102)

Gerard House Somnus Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580), Wild
Lettuce (p. 596)

Gerard House Water Relief Tablets Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Ground Ivy (p. 342)

Geri Gisand AG, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Geri-Lav Free Geritrex Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Gerimax Plus Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Gerin EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ginal Cent Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Gincosan Boehringer Ingelheim, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Gingisan Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gingo A Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Hawthorn (p. 346), Liquorice (p. 411)

Ginkan Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Ginkgo Biloba Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ginkgo Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ginkgo Plus Herbal Plus Formula 10 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginger
(p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkgo-PS Usana, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoba Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Ginkoba Active Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkoftal Tubilux Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkor Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Fort Beaufour Ipsen International, Czech Republic, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299) IDS (Hong Kong) Ltd Healthcare
Division, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299) Europharm Trade Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo

(p. 299) Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Fort (Munxop opr) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Ginkor Fort Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Gel (Mumkop ean) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Ginkoret Tubilux Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginoxil Ecoschiuma Euroderm-RDC S.p.A., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Ginsana Ton Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Ginseng-Complex Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Gin-Vita Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Glicero-Valerovit Teofarma, Italy, Valerian (p. 580)

Glycoplex Vitaplex Products, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411)
Glycyrrhiza Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Golatux Laboratorio di Chimica Medica dell’ Antipiol S.n.c., Italy, Echinacea

(p. 217)

Gold Bond Medicated Triple Action Relief Chattem Consumer Products, USA,
Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets Richard Lane’s, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden
Seal (p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

----- PAGE 655 -----
Appendix 4

Gonaxine Laboratoires Motima, France, Alfalfa (p. 45), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Sage
(p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Goodnight Formula Vitaplex Products, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461), Sculleap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Goodypops Health Imports Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Gotas Digestivas Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91),
Gentian (p. 290)

Gotas Nican Laboratorios Prima Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461) Laboratorios
Andromaco SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Gothaplast Rheumamed AC Gothaplast Verbandpflasterfabrik GmbH,
Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum (p. 125)

Gouttes contre la toux Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Grains de Vals Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270) Laboratoires Nogues, France, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. $37)

Grani di Vals Geymonat S.p.A., Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)

Granocol Schering P/L, Australia, Frangula (p. 270) Schering (NZ) Ltd, New
Zealand, Frangula (p. 270)

Granu Fink Prosta GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) GlaxoSmithKline, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Gripaleta Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)

Grippetee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Elder (p. 237), Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Guaiacum Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Feverfew (p. 263), Guaiacum (p. 344), Willow (p. 598)

Gutnacht Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Gynastan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Parsley Piert (p. 459)
Gynosoja Laboratoires Codifra, France, Alfalfa (p. 45)

cH)

Hactos Hubert A.C. Thomas & Co., UK, Capsicum (p. 125)
Haemocortin G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Haemolan G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hansaplast Herbal Heat Plaster Beiersdorf UK Ltd, UK, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum
(p. 125)

Happy’tizer Zydus Cadila Group, India, Fenugreek (p. 260), Ginger (p. 293)
Harntee STADA Stada GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Harntee-Steiner Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Java
Tea (p. 381)

Harzer Hustenloser Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Hawaiian Tropic Cool Aloe with I.C.E. Tanning Research Labs Inc., USA, Aloe
Vera (p. 48)

Hay Fever & Sinus Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder
(p. 237), Garlic (p. 279)

Hayfever & Sinus Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder
(p. 237), Garlic (p. 279)

HDG Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

HealthAid Boldo-Plus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Clivers (p. 164),
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Healthy Eyes Sundown, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Heart Health Sundown, USA, Garlic (p. 279), Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn (p. 346)
Hebert Caramelos Fed. Arg. de Coop. Farm., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)

HEC Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Bausch &
Lomb Swiss AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hecrosine B12 Ortoquimica Ind. Quimico Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Hederix Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Elecampane (p. 240), Senega (p. 533)
Heemex G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Heilsalbe Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Calendula (p. 121)

Helmontskruie Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50), Gentian
(p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Hemocane Key Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemodotti Prodotti Laboratdrio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemofissural Farmoquimica Baldacci, SA, Portugal, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemolax B L Hua & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Cascara (p. 128)

Hemoral Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Yarrow (p. 604)
Hemorid For Women Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Hemorid Pharmamagist Kft, Wagner Pharmafax Kft, Hungary, Yarrow (p. 604)

Hemorrogel Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Calendula (p. 121), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Pilewort (p. 472)

Hemorroidex Medic Industrial Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hepabene Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276),
Milk Thistle (p. 429) Ratiopharm CZ sro, Czech Republic, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk
Thistle (p. 429) ratiopharm Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepabene (Iena6ene) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepabil Instituto Sanitas SA, Chile, Boldo (p. 91)
Hepaclem Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Hepacur Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Heparfelien G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Buchu (p. 100), Dandelion (p. 204), Juniper (p. 386)

Heparin Comp Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363) ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Heparin-Gel Pharma Funcke, Czech Republic, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Hepatalgina Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Wild
Carrot (p. 593)

Hepatodirectol Instituto Sanitas Arg. SACIPQ y M., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Hepatofalk Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Hepatofalk Planta /DH Pharmaceutical Division, Singapore, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Hepatoregius Farmoterapica Dovalle Induistria Quimica Farmacéutica Ltda,
Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Hepatos Teofarma, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)
Hepatos B12 Teofarma, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)
Hepatoum Laboratoires Hépatoum, France, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Hepax Laboratoires Tradiphar, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Hepedren Laboratorios Parggon S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91)

Herb and Honey Cough Elixir Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Aniseed (p. 57), Elder
(p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418), Thyme (p. 574)

Herbaccion Celfin Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C., Argentina, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Herbaccion Ginseng Y Magnesio /nstituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C.,
Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Herbaccion Memory Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Herbal Anxiety Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461)
Herbal Arthritis Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Herbal Capillary Care Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Herbal Cleanse Vitaplex Products, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Dandelion (p. 204), Echinacea (p. 217), Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal
(p. 337), Ispaghula (p. 374), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Slippery Elm
(p. 545), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

Herbal Cold & Flu Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic
(p. 279), Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Cold Relief Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Ephedra (p. 243)

Herbal Digestive Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Diuretic Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Buchu (p. 100), Celery
(p. 146), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Herbal Diuretic Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Herbal Energy Sundown, USA, Ginger (p. 293)

Herbal Indigestion Naturtabs The Cantassium Company, UK, Myrrh (p. 449),
Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Laxative Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 656 -----
Herbal Laxative Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Aloe Vera
(p. 48), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Herbal Nerve Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Gentian (p. 290), Liquorice
(p. 411), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Pain Relief The Cantassium Company, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Herbal PMS Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168), Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Relax Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Sleep Aid Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Sleep Well Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Hops (p. 354), Lime
Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Throat Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Parsley (p. 456), Slippery Elm
(p. 545), Thyme (p. 574)

Herbalax Santé Naturelle (AG) Ltée, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Herbelix G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Herbesan Laboratoires Pfizer, France, Aniseed (p. 57), Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna
(p. 537)

Herbheal Ointment Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Mep6uon Kanan 7Keaueronnie) KRKA d.d.,
Russia, Agrimony (p. 42), Artichoke (p. 67)

Herbion Drops for the Heart (Iep6uon Cepacanie Kanan) KRKA d.d., Russia,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbion Drops for the Stomach (Iep6uon 7Keayaounmie Karan) KRKA d.d.,
Russia, Centaury (p. 149), Gentian (p. 290)

Herbion Urological Drops (I'ep6u0H Vpoaornueckue Kanan) KRKA d.d., Russia,
Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Herbion Urtica (Mep6u0on Vprixa) KRKA d.d., Russia, Nettle (p. 452)

Herborex Rolmex International Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Yellow Dock
(p. 608)

Herbulax Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Hertz- und Kreislauftee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508), Valerian
(p. 580), Yarrow (p. 604)

Heumann Beruhigungstee Tenerval Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Heumann Bronchialtee Solubifix T Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Heumann Magentee Solu-Vetan Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)

Heumann Verdauungstee Solu-Lipar Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH &
Co., Germany, Boldo (p. 91), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Heumann’s Bronchialtee Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hevert-Blasen-Nieren-Tee N Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Java Tea (p. 381)

Heweberberol-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381), Liquorice (p. 411)

Hewenephron duo Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Himcolin (Xum«xoanm) Transatlantic International, Russia, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Himelan Soria Natural, Spain, Angelica (p. 53), Melissa (p. 425)

Hingfong-Essenz Hofmanns Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Valerian (p. 580)

Hiperogyn Madaus S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hipoglos Cremoso Industria Farmacéutica Andromaco, S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Histo-Fluine P Laboratoires Richard, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla
(p. 489), Senna (p. 537), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Honey & Molasses G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Liquorice (p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK,
Elecampane (p. 240), Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Skunk Cabbage
(p. 543)

Horseradish Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Fenugreek (p. 260), Garlic
(p. 279), Horseradish (p. 367), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hot Flashex Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152), Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Preparations Directory

Hova Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Sager
Pharma Kft, Hungary, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Gebro Pharma SA,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Calm Life Jessup Marketing, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374), Sculleap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Clear Complexion Jessup Marketing, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Burdock (p. 102),
Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

HRI Golden Seal Digestive Jessup Marketing, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal
(p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Night Jessup Marketing, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580), Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

HRI Water Balance Jessup Marketing, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Dandelion (p. 204),
Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Huile de millepertuis A. Vogel (huile de St. Jean) Bioforce AG, Switzerland, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Humulus Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Hydracur Léro, France, Dandelion (p. 204)

Hydrastis Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Golden Seal (p. 337), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hyperesa Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian
(p. 580)

Hyperiforce comp Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Hypotonicka Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

H6fels Echinacea and Rosehip Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)
Hofels One-A-Day Cardiomax Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)
H6fels One-A-Day Garlic Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

H6fels One-A-Day Garlic with Parsley Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279),
Parsley (p. 456)

H6fels One-A-Day Ginge Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

H6fels One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and Garlic Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic
(p. 279), Ginger (p. 293)

Iberogast Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429) Hdnseler AG, Switzerland,
Angelica (p. 53), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Ideolaxyl Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Aloes (p. 50), Senna (p. 537)
Ifuchol Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Ifupasil Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

IgeE Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques, France, Raspberry (p. 495)

Ilja Rogoff Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279),
Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Imegul Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Cascara (p. 128), Ispaghula (p. 374)
Immumil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217), Thyme (p. 574)
Immune Insurance Healthy Direct, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immune Support Sundown, USA, Echinacea (p. 217), Golden Seal (p. 337)
Imugins Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Imuvit Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325) Sriprasit Dispensary R O P, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Inconturina OTW-Naturarzneimittel Regneri GmbH & Co KG, Germany, Clove
(p. 166)

Indian Brandee OTC Concepts, UK, Capsicum (p. 125) Potter’s (Herbal Supplies)
Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Indigestion and Flatulence The Cantassium Company, UK, Myrrh (p. 449),
Valerian (p. 580)

Indigestion Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290),
Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Indigestion Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginger (p. 293)
Infant Calm Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461)

Infant Tonic Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Inflamase Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Inflamol Healthy Direct, UK, Scullcap (p. 530)

Influ-Zinc Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217), Willow (p. 598)
Influ-Zinc Gola Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)

----- PAGE 657 -----
Appendix 4

Inotyol Brady C. KG, Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Perrigo Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Intim /CIM International S.r.1., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Intradermi Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Intrait de Marron d’Inde P Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

lodeto de Potassio Sedar Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow
(p. 418)

lodeto dePotassio Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
lol Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

lolin Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Ipasin Vifor SA, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Ipecarin Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411)

Iridil Montefarmaco S.p.A., Italy, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

lrontona Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Isalax Fibras Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

I-Sight Healthy Direct, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ixana Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)

oO

Jacksons Herbal Laxative Anglian Pharma Plc, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Jamaican Sarsaparilla Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Jaquesor Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Willow
(p. 598), Yarrow (p. 604)

Jarabe de Manzanas Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Jarabe Manceau Alcor, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Jecopeptol Alpharma France, France, Boldo (p. 91)

Jengimiel Jengimiel C.A., Venezuela, Ginger (p. 293)

Joint & Muscle Relief Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Arnica
(p. 64), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Jouvence de I’Abbe Soury Laboratoires Chefaro-Ardeval, France, Calamus
(p. 118), Ispaghula (p. 374), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Jukunda Melissen-Krautergeist N /ukunda Naturarzneimittel Dr Ludwig
Schmitt GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Jungborn Taro Pharmaceutical International, Israel, Aniseed (p. 57), Lime Flower
(p. 409), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Jurubileno /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)

@

Kalms G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Kalms Sleep G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Kamfeine Wolfs SA, Belgium, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Kamillan Plus Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Yarrow (p. 604)
Kamilotract Tamar Marketing, Israel, Sage (p. 512)

Kanormal German Remedies Ltd, India, Frangula (p. 270)

Kas-Bah Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Katapekt Vitabalans Oy, Finland, Thyme (p. 574)

Kavatrol Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152)

Keli-med Permamed AG, Switzerland, Garlic (p. 279)

Kelual DS Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Keppur Drossapharm SA, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)

Keracnyl Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Keracnyl eau nettoyante Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Kernosan Elixir E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitaten, Switzerland,
Aniseed (p. 57), Calamus (p. 118), Cowslip (p. 195), Horseradish (p. 367), Liquorice
(p. 411), Plantain (p. 474)

Kernosan Heidelberger Poudre E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische
Krauterspezialitdten, Switzerland, Aniseed (p. 57), Juniper (p. 386), Yarrow (p. 604)

Kilkof Bell, Sons & Co. (Druggists), UK, Capsicum (p. 125)

Kinder Em-eukal Hustensaft Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

KLB6 Fruit Diet Natural Life S.A., Argentina, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Klorane Shampooing Antipelliculaire Laboratoires Klorane, France, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Klosterfrau Beruhigungs Forte Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau
Vertriebsgesellschaft mbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Klosterfrau Melisana Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau Vertriebsgesellschaft
mbH, Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Elecampane
(p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Melissa (p. 425)

Korodin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Krampdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Krauter Hustensaft Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Kronolax Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Kruidvat Spierbalsem Pharmethica BV, Netherlands, Capsicum (p. 125)
KW Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Kyolic 101 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 102 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 103 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)

( )

( )

Kyolic 104 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 106 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kytta Baume /romedica AG, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Balsam f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)

Kytta-Sedativum Merck KGaA, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

@

Laci Le Beau Super Dieter’s Tea Natrol, USA, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna
(p. 537)

Laci Le Beau Throat Care Natrol, USA, Slippery Elm (p. 545)
Laci Supplement Power Time Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Laci Throat Care Soothing Citrus Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Lacto Calamine CSL (NZ) Ltd, New Zealand, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Schering-
Plough Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Lactolas /nfosint S.p.A., Italy, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lane’s Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy Richard Lane’s, UK, Garlic (p. 279),
Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Lapidar 10 Krauterpfarrer Kunzle AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Lassatina Kedrion S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Cascara (p. 128), Liquorice (p. 411),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lassativi Vetegali&xref details= Giovanni Ogna & Figli S.p.A., Zeta
Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Lavandula Oligoplex Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Calendula (p. 121),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Laxacaps Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Laxaco Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Laxalpin F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Elder (p. 237), Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Bescansa Aloico Bescansa, Spain, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Laxante Sanatorium Santiveri, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Aniseed (p. 57), Senna (p. 537)

Laxarine Farmion Laboratorio Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Laxative Nobel Pharm Enrg, Canada, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Laxative Comp Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Aloes (p. 50)

Laxative Tablets Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Laxolind Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)
Laxomax Soria Natural, Spain, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Laxtam Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Lefkaflam Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64)

Lenicalm Laboratoires Dolisos Italia S.r.l., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower
(p. 409)

Lenirose Novogaleno S.r.l., Italy, Calendula (p. 121)
Lepisor Soria Natural, Spain, Java Tea (p. 381)

----- PAGE 658 -----
Leukona-Beruhigungsbad Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Leukona-Wundsalbe Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Lewensessens Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50), Gentian
(p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Lexat Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Bloodroot (p. 84), Boldo
(p. 91)

Lice Blaster Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Zealand, Echinacea (p. 217)
Lidersoft Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Lido Tea Trima, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (j 7)

Life Drops Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Elder (p. 237)

Lifechange Circulation Aid Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lifechange Menopause Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Red Clover
(p. 498)

Lifechange Mens Complex with Saw Palmetto Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Lifechange Multi Plus Antioxidant Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Celery (p. 146), Devil's Claw (p. 207), Juniper (p. 386), Willow (p. 598)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women’s Formula Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh,
Blue (p. 180), Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 6 For Peripheral Circulation Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 7 Liver Tonic Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 2 Valerian Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 5 Eye Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Eyebright (p. 256), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 8 Echinacea Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 11 Ginkgo Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Lightning Cough Remedy Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)

Linctus Tussi Infans Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Lindofluid N Lindopharm GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Melissa (p. 425)
Linimento Naion Puerto Galiano, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125), Rosemary (p. 508)

Linkus (Ausxac) Herbion Pakistan PVT Ltd, Russia, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Linoforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)
LinoMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Lion Cleansing Herbs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Senna
(p. 537)

Lipidavit Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Lipograsil Uriach, Spain, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Li id Elderberry with Ester-C Natrol, USA, Elder (p. 237)

Lisian Laboratorio lodo Suma Ltda, Brazil, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Lisotox Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)

Liv 52 (Ans 52) Transatlantic International, Russia, Yarrow (p. 604)

Liver Formula Natrol, USA, Ginger (p. 293), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Liver Formula Herbal Blend Natrol, USA, Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion (p. 204)

Liver Tonic Herbal Formula 6 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Livstim Mediherb P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Livton Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Llantusil Soria Natural, Spain, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Logicin Natural Lozenges Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Lomal Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Drosera (p. 215),
Thyme (p. 574)

Lorasil Feminine Hygeine Medispec (M) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Preparations Directory

Lotio Pruni Comp cum Cupro Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica
(p. 64), Burdock (p. 102), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Lozione Same Urto Savoma Medicinali S.p.A., Italy, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Yarrow
(p. 604)

Lupassin Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Lustys Herbalene G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Frangula
(p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Luuf-Hustentee Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Luvased Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
LX-30 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lycia Luminique Artsana S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

@

Macro Anti-Stress Whitehall Laboratories Australia P/L, Australia, Valerian
(p. 580)

Madecassol C Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Madecassol N Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Madecassol Neomicina Productos Roche Ltda, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Madecassol NeomycineHydrocortisone Laboratoires Roche Nicholas, France,
Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Mag Kottas Krauterexpress Abfuhrtee Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn,
Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn, Austria, Frangula
(p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Magen- und Darmtee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Cinnamon (p. 162), Liquorice (p. 411)

Magentee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Magisbile Magis Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mailen Investi Farma S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Majocarmin-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57)

Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Drosera
(p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Makaphyt Sirop Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Makatussin Tropfen Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Makatussin Tropfen forte Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Drosera (p. 215)

Malvaliz Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Malvatricin Natural Laboratorio Daudt Oliveira Ltda, Brazil, Calendula (p. 121),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Malvatricin Natural Organic Laboratorio Daudt Oliveira Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea
(p. 217), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Malveol Laboratoires Magistra SA, Switzerland, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Manevac Galen Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Manolio Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Manzan Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Maraslavin (Mapacaasun) Sopharma AO, Russia, Clove (p. 166), Ginger (p. 293),
Thyme (p. 574)

Mariazeller Apotheke zur Gnadenmutter, Austria, Bogbean (p. 89), Centaury
(p. 149), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Juniper (p. 386), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Massage Balm with Calendula Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)

Matikomp Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula
(p. 121)

Mavena Proctal-Gen Psorimed AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Maximum Strength Flexall 454 Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Aloe Vera
(p. 48)

Medalginan Laboratorio Medinfar, SA, Portugal, Capsicum (p. 125)

Mediflor no 11 Draineur Renal et Digestif Merck Lipha Santé, France, Boldo
(p. 91)

Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No 2 Merck Lipha Santé, France,

Couchgrass (p. 193), Frangula (p. 270), Juniper (p. 386), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

----- PAGE 659 -----
Appendix 4

Mediflor Tisane Calmante Troubles du Sommeil No 14 Merck Lipha Santé,
France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12 Merck Lipha Santé, France,
Frangula (p. 270), Hawthorn (p. 346), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Melissa (p. 425), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Mediflor Tisane Contre la Constipation Passagere No 7 Merck Lipha Santé,
France, Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Senna (p. 537)

Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3 Merck Lipha Santé, France, Angelica (p. 53),
Aniseed (p. 57), Elecampane (p. 240), Rosemary (p. 508)

Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5 Merck Lipha Santé, France, Boldo (p. 91),
Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Senna (p. 537)

Mediflor Tisane No 4 Diuretique Merck Lipha Santé, France, Couchgrass
(p. 193), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Medilaxan Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Medinat Esten Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Medinat PMT-Eze Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Mefedra-N Medipharma Ltd, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Melaton Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Melipass Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Melissa (p. 425)

Melissa Comp. Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove
(p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Melissengeist Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512),
Thyme (p. 574) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Meloids Olic (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Capsicum (p. 125), Cinnamon (p. 162),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Memoactive Euroderm S.r.l., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memorandum Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memovisus Pharmacia Italia S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Menabil Complex Menarini, Spain, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Menodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Nettle (p. 452), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Nettle (p. 452), Senna
(p. 537), Yarrow (p. 604)

Menopace Plus Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Sage (p. 512)

Menopause Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Lime Flower (p. 409), Motherwort
(p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580) Walgreens Finest Natural, USA,
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Menopause Support Sundown, USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Menstrunat Soria Natural, Spain, Calendula (p. 121), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Mental Clarity Sundown, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Mentania Laboratorios Saval SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Mento-O-Cap Rekah Ltd, Israel, Capsicum (p. 125)
Mentopin Brady C. KG, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Mepalax Istituto Biologico Chemioterapico SpA, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mermelax Lab. Argenfarma S.R.L., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Me-Sabona plus Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Mesatil Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary
(p. 508), Willow (p. 598)

Metiogen Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

lalgan Qualicare AG, Switzerland, Capsicum (p. 125)

Midro Laboratori Italiani Vaillant S.r.1., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Crefar, Lda, Portugal, Clove (p. 166), Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Midro Tee Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Midro-Tea ProMedico Ltd, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Mielocol Herbes Universelles, Canada, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Milk Thistle Nutravite, Canada, Artichoke (p. 67), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Milk Thistle Extract Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Mint-Lysoform Lysoform Dr. Hans Rosemann GmbH, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

Mirfulan Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Merckle GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Mirorroidin Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Miroton Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mirtilene Societd Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)
Mirtilus Llorens, Spain, Bilberry (p. 79)

Mirtilux Mediwhite Srl, Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Mist Expect Stim Vida Laboratories Ltd, Hong Kong, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Mithen Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mixagel Productos Naturissima de Venezuela, Venezuela, Thyme (p. 574)

Mixed Vegetable Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Celery (p. 146), Horseradish
(p. 367), Parsley (p. 456)

MM Expectorante Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modane Cooperation Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Senna (p. 537)

Modern Herbals Cold & Catarrh G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Echinacea
(p. 217), Elder (p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modern Herbals Cold & Congestion G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modern Herbals Cough Mixture G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Modern Herbals Laxative G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Senna (p. 537)

Modern Herbals Menopause G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Clivers
(p. 164), Parsley (p. 456), Senna (p. 537), Vervain (p. 591)

Modern Herbals Pile G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Slippery Elm (p. 545), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Bogbean
(p. 89), Celery (p. 146), Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Modern Herbals Stress G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Modern Herbals Water Retention G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock
(p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Montana Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Cinnamon (p. 162),
Dandelion (p. 204), Hops (p. 354)

Montana N Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Mon-tana Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Gentian (p. 290)

Moradorm S$ Apotheker Walter Bouhon GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Moragen Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Moultons Herbal Extract Pharmaceutical Enterprises (Pty) Ltd, South Africa,
Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mr Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd, New Zealand, Borage (p. 96), Melissa
(p. 425)

MSM with Glucosamine Creme Natrol, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Arnica (p. 64),
Capsicum (p. 125), Chamomile, German (p. 152), Comfrey (p. 188)

Mucilar Avena Spirig Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucinum Sabex Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Mucinum a |’Extrait de Cascara Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du
groupe Innothéra, France, Anisced (p. 57), Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537)

Mucinum Cascara Wing Wai Trading Co., Hong Kong, Aniseed (p. 57), Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Muc-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)
Multilim RG Atlantic Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Multi-Mam Compressas Farmalight, Lda, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Multi-Vitamin Day & Night Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Muscle Rub Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum
(p. 125)

Mutellon Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Motherwort (p. 447), Valerian (p. 580)
My Defense Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

My Favorite Multiple Natrol, USA, Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn (p. 346)
My Favorite Multiple Energizer Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)

My Favorite Multiple Iron-Free Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)

----- PAGE 660 -----
My Favorite Multiple Original Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
My Favorite Multiple Prime Multi Vitamin Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
My Favorite Multiple Take One Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Bilberry (p. 79)

My Favorite Multiple Take One Iron-Free Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Bilberry
(p. 79)

Myrrhinil-Intest Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

LN]

Nadem Forte /vax Argentina SA, Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Napiers Back Ache Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Pulsatilla (p. 489)
Napiers Backache Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Celery (p. 146)

Napiers Breathe Easy Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Plantain
(p. 474)

Napiers Cold Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Napiers Digestion Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh
(p. 449), Valerian (p. 580)

Napiers Echinacea Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Calendula (p. 121), Echinacea
(p. 217), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Napiers Monthly Calm Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, German
(p. 152), Ginger (p. 293), Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Napiers Skin Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Burdock
(p. 102), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Napiers Sleep Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580),
Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Napiers Slimming Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Napiers Tension Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Napiers Uva Ursi Tea Natrol, UK, Corn Silk (p. 191) Culpeper and Napiers, UK,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Marshmallow (p. 418), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Nappy Rash Relief Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Calendula
(p. 121), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nasal-Ease Hi-Tech Pharmacal, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula (p. 121)
Natrasleep Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Natravene Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Natrol Complete Balance for Menopause AM/PM Formula Natrol, USA,
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Natudor Dolisos SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409), Valerian
(p. 580) Laboratoires Plantes et Médecines, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Natural Deep Sleep Naturopathica, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Natural Herb Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Natural Herbal Water Tablets Sundown, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Couchgrass
(p. 193), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley (p. 456)

Natural HRT Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Burdock
(p. 102), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Red Clover (p. 498)

Nature Complex Reduct-Te Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Boldo (p. 91), Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Nature’s Garden Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo
(p. 299)
Naturident Memsep sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter Naturland Czech Republic sro, Czech
Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Bogbean (p. 89), Centaury (p. 149), Clove (p. 166),
Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Naturlax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Natursel-C Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Wild Carrot (p. 593)
Natur-Zin Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Natusor Aerofane Soria Natural, Spain, Melissa (p. 425)

Natusor Artilane Soria Natural, Spain, Nettle (p. 452)

Natusor Asmaten Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Thyme (p. 574)
Natusor Astringel Soria Natural, Spain, Agrimony (p. 42), Liquorice (p. 411)

Natusor Broncopul Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Natusor Circusil Soria Natural, Spain, Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Farinol Soria Natural, Spain, Agrimony (p. 42), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Preparations Directory

Natusor Gastrolen Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow
(p. 418), St John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Gripotul Soria Natural, Spain, Elder (p. 237), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Harpagosinol Soria Natural, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Meadowsweet
(p. 423), Willow (p. 598)

Natusor Hepavesical Soria Natural, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149),
Fumitory (p. 276), Rosemary (p. 508)

Natusor High Blood Pressure Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Natusor Infenol Soria Natural, Spain, Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Jaquesan Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425),
Willow (p. 598), Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Low Blood Pressure Soria Natural, Spain, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
(p. 315), Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512)

Natusor Malvasen Soria Natural, Spain, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna (p. 537)
Natusor Renal Soria Natural, Spain, Meadowsweet (p. 423), Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Sinulan Soria Natural, Spain, Elder (p. 237), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Rosemary (p. 508), Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Somnisedan Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower
(p. 409), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Neda Fruchtewurfel Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Negacne Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Coltsfoot (p. 185)
Nenegloss Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Neo Baby Gripe Mixture Alinter Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Neo Gripe Mixture Alinter Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Neo Urgenin Madaus, Spain, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Neo-Atropan Laboratorios Quim-Far C.A., Venezuela, Aniseed (p. 57)

Neo-Cleanse GNLD International P/L, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45), Aniseed (p. 57),
Liquorice (p. 411), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Neo-Codion Laboratoires Bouchara-Recordati, France, Senega (p. 533)

Neo-Codion Babies (Heo-Koauon Aas Maaaennes) FIC Medical, Russia, Senega
(p. 533)

Neoderma 47 Neovita S.a.s. di G. Pirotta & C., Italy, Vervain (p. 591)
Neoform Pietrasanta Pharma S.r.l., Italy, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Neo-Healar Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Malaysia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Neompyrt Plus Baif International Products, New York S.n.c., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Neoplex Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411)
Neoplus Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.l., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Neostrata Lab Medstyle SA, Chile, Liquorice (p. 411)

nephro-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Parsley (p. 456)

Nephronorm med Mauermann-Arzneimittel, Franz Mauermann oHG, Germany,
Calendula (p. 121), Java Tea (p. 381)

Nephrosal Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)

Nephroselect M Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH, Germany, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Nephrubin-N Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Nerex Farmanova AFM S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Nerfood Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Valerian (p. 580)

Nervatona Plus Braver Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, False Unicorn (p. 258),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Passionflower (p. 461)

Nervendragees ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nerven-Dragees ProMedico Ltd, Israel, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervenkapseln ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervenruh Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nerventee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Hops (p. 354), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervikan Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervinetas Comercial GFC SA de CV, Mexico, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Grunenthal Venezolana C.A., Venezuela, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Nervinetten Zellaforte Vertriebsanstalt, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nervinfant N RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461)

----- PAGE 661 -----
Appendix 4

Nervocalm Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervoregin forte Homdopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfluger GmbH, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nervova Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nesfare Madaus, Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Nesthakchen Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Neurapas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Passionflower
(p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Neurocardol Confar, Lda, Portugal, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Neuroflorine Laboratoires Fuca, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Neuropax SERP, Monaco, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Nevaton Mediherb P/L, Australia, Damiana (p. 201), Scullcap (p. 530), St John's
Wort (p. 549), Vervain (p. 591)

Nevril Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Willow (p. 598), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

New Patecs A Hong Kong Medical Supplies Ltd, Hong Kong, Arnica (p. 64)

Newrelax Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Nican F. Uhlmann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Nico Hepatocyn Uriach, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128)

Nicoprive Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Nighttime Herb Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nigroids Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)

Ninfagin Ricerca, Produzione e Commercializzazione di Prodotti Farmaceutici e
Cosmetici Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Nitrangin compositum Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian
(p. 580)

Noctis Bouty SpA, Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nocvalene Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Noditran Naturland, Hungary, Yarrow (p. 604)

Nodoff Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

No-Gras Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Nontusyl Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Lime Flower
(p. 409), Marshmallow (p. 418), Melissa (p. 425), Thyme (p. 574)

Nordimenty Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Melissa
(p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Normacol Schering Mexicana S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Frangula (p. 270)
Normacol Forte Norgine de Esparia, Spain, Frangula (p. 270)

Normacol Plus Norgine P/L, Australia, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine SA, Belgium,
Frangula (p. 270) Treasure Mountain Development Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Frangula
(p. 270) United Drug, Ireland, Frangula (p. 270) Angelini, Portugal, Frangula (p. 270)
Grafton Pharmasia Pte Ltd, Singapore, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd, UK, Frangula (p. 270) CSL
(NZ) Ltd, Zuellig Pharma, New Zealand, Frangula (p. 270)

Normoprost Plus Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Nostress Laboratoires Robert Schwartz, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hops
(p. 354)

No-Tos Adultos Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

No-Tos Infantil Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

Notosil Grunenthal Chilena Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Novarrutina Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Novicarbon C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd, Israel, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Novocholin Adler-Apotheke, Austria, Agrimony (p. 42), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Novo-Passit Ivax-CR as, lvax-CR as, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort

(p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Noxivid Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

N-T-Tus Zydus Cadila Group, India, Liquorice (p. 411)
Nucolox Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Nytol Herbal GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

©

Obeflorine Laboratoires Lehning, France, Couchgrass (p. 193)

Oculosan Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Ocusense Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)

Oddispasmol Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory
(p. 276)

Odisor Soria Natural, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149), Fumitory (p. 276)
Odontal G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166)

Odontobiotic Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula
(p. 121)

Odor Eze Novartis New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Odourless Garlic Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279), Parsley (p. 456)
Vitaplex Products, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Ojosbel Dermofarm, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Oleum Rhinale Nasal Oil Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Calendula
(p. 121)

Olocynan Makros Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)
Omega Dr A & L Schmidgall, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Omega-3 Complex Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)

Omega-3 Glucosamine Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)

One Drop Spray Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Myrrh
(p. 449), Sage (p. 512)

Onguent aux herbes Keller UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64),
Calendula (p. 121)

Onopordon Comp B Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Cowslip (p. 195)
Onrectal Herbes Universelles, Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Ophtalmine Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Opobyl Spedrog Caillon S.A.l.y C., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91) Laboratoires Bailly
SPEAB, France, Aloes (p. 50), Boldo (p. 91) Uriach, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Boldo (p. 91)

Opo-Veinogene Alpharma France, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Opplin TNP Health Care Co. Ltd, Thailand, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Optimina Plus Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Optrex Boots Healthcare Australia P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex compresses Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland,
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex Red Eyes Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

OptrexRed-Eye Relief Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Orafilm Laboratorios Rowe-Fleming C.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Oralsone Topic Laboratorios Gramon, Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506)
OraMagicRx MPM Medical Inc., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurnnaapuniii Boanmofi Baansam Burrnepa)
Herbs Trading GmbH, Russia, Aloes (p. 50), Angelica (p. 53), Aniseed (p. 57),
Bogbean (p. 89), Calamus (p. 118), Centaury (p. 149), Clove (p. 166), Elecampane
(p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Liquorice (p. 411),
Myrrh (p. 449), Yarrow (p. 604)

Original Herb Cough Drops Ricola, Canada, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574), Yarrow (p. 604)

Original Schwedenbitter Riviera Handelsgesellschaft.m.b.h., Austria, Angelica
(p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449)

Ortisan Cabassi & Giuriati S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)
Osmogel Alphrema S.r.1., Italy, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Ottovis Laboratorio Fitolife S.r.1., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Out-of-Sorts Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537)

Ovumix Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Oxacant-sedativ Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Motherwort (p. 447), Valerian (p. 580)

CP)

30 Plus Ranbaxy (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 662 -----
Pacifenity Vitaplex Products, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580)

Padma-Lax Padma AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Padmed Laxan Padma AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Elecampane (p. 240), Frangula (p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Palatrobil Monserrat y Eclair $.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Wild Carrot
(p. 593)

Palmetto Plus Usana, Singapore, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Paltomiel Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Aniseed (p. 57)

Paltomiel Plus Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Echinacea (p. 217),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Panax Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45), Fenugreek (p. 260),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Pansoral Teething (Mancopaa Mepssie 3y6s1) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Panxeol Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Passionflower (p. 461)

Paracodin Abbott GmbH, Austria, Marshmallow (p. 418), Thyme (p. 574)
Paradenton Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Myrrh (p. 449), Sage (p. 512)
Parapsyllium Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Paratonico Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda, Brazil, Aloes (p. 50),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Myrrh (p. 449)

Parche Negro Belladona Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Capsicum
(p. 125)

Parodium Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Parodium (TMapoauym) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Parodontal Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Parodontax GlaxoSmithKline Pharma, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh (p. 449)
GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh (p. 449)

Parodontax Fluor GlaxoSmithKline S.A., Argentina, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh
(p. 449), Sage (p. 512)

Parogencyl prevention gencives Sanofi Synthelabo OTC, France, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Parvisedil Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.I., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasalix Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Pascosedon Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasidor CAFAR (Compania Anonima Farmaceutica), Venezuela, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasifluidina Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasinordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passacanthine Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passaneuro Bunker Induistria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Passedan Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passelyt Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passi Catha Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Passicalm Laboratorios Gemballa Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Passiflora Tamar Marketing, Israel, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflora Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflora Composta Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflora Compound Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflorine Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598) Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Hawthorn

Preparations Directory

(p. 346) Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Passionflower (p. 461) Teofarma, Italy,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598) Chiesi Esparia, Spain,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflorum Zuoz Pharma S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Passilex Luper Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passin Georg Simons GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passinevryl Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Passionflower Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Pastillas Pectoral Kely Boots Healthcare, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

Pastilles bronchiques $ nouvelle formule Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Drosera
(p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Pastilles Monleon Laboratoires Toulade, France, Drosera (p. 215), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Pastilles pectorales Demo N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Plantain
(p. 474)

Pazbronquial Cinfa, Spain, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)
PC 30 V Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

PC Regulax Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Ispaghula (p. 374), Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Pectal Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Senega (p. 533)
Pectobron Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)
Pectocalmine Vifor SA, Switzerland, Senega (p. 533)

Pectoral N Mepha Pharma AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Plantain (p. 474),
Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Pectoral Pasteur Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice
(p. 411)

Pedicrem Laboratorios Prieto S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Peerless Composition Essence Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bayberry
(p. 77)

Pegina Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Calamus (p. 118), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Peitoral Angico Pelotense Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Peking Ginseng Royal Jelly N Peking Royal Jelly Deutschland BOELL
HandelsKontor, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Penaten Johnson & Johnson/Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals of Canada,
Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Pentol Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Pepsitase B L Hua & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Gentian (p. 290)
Peptochol Laboratorios Grossman S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Boldo (p. 91)

Percutane Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Arnica (p. 64), Burdock (p. 102)

Perdiem Novartis Consumer Health Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Period Pain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, False Unicorn (p. 258), Motherwort
(p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Peritone Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Ginger (p. 293),
Senna (p. 537)

Perivar [psen Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Perospir Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Elder (p. 237),
Nettle (p. 452), Thyme (p. 574), Yarrow (p. 604)

Persen Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Persen (Tepcen) Lek, Russia, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Perskindol Cool Arnica Vifor SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Petites Pilules Carters Laboratoires Fumouze, France, Aloes (p. 50)

Phlebosedol Laboratoires Lehning, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Phol-Tux /nterdelta SA, Switzerland, Senega (p. 533)
Photoderm Flush Bioderma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Phyto Corrective Gel Dispolab Farmaceutica SA, Chile, Thyme (p. 574)

Phytobronchin Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Phyto-Ease Great Liaison Ltd, Hong Kong, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Phytoestrin Usana, Singapore, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Phyto-Laxia Phytopharma SA, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 663 -----
Appendix 4

Phytolaxin Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Frangula (p. 270), Senna
(p. 537)

Phytomed Cardio Phytomed AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Rosemary (p. 508)

Phytomelis Laboratoires Lehning, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Phytonoctu Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pi-Fedrin Laboratorios Flupal C.A., Venezuela, Drosera (p. 215)

Pik Gel Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Yarrow (p. 604)

Pildoras Zeninas Puerto Galiano, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Pileabs G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

Piletabs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Agrimony (p. 42), Cascara (p. 128),
Pilewort (p. 472), Stone Root (p. 570)

Pilka Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574) Novartis Ltd,
Israel, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574) Ferrer Farma, Spain, Drosera (p. 215),
Thyme (p. 574)

Pilka F Novartis Consumer Health, Lda, Portugal, Drosera (p. 215)
Pilka Forte Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Pilulas De Witt’s Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128),
Juniper (p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Pilulas Ross GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Capsicum (p. 125)

Pinvex Laboratorios Cofasa S.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Piodermina Farmachimici S.r.l., Italy, Thyme (p. 574)

Planta Lax Hoeveler Mag. & Co. GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Plantax Farmion Laboratorio Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Plantiodine Plus Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45)

Plantival Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Plantival novo Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Pleumolysin /vax-CR as, lvax-CR as, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)
PMS Control Natrol, USA, Evening Primrose (p. 251), Parsley (p. 456)
PMS Support Vitaplex Products, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Ginger (p. 293)

PMT Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Agnus Castus
(p. 36), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Ginger (p. 293)

PMT Formula Vitalia Health Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Pneumopan Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Pneumopect Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Poliseng Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Polypirine Laboratoires Lehning, France, Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Pommade au Baume Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland,
Guaiacum (p. 344), Myrrh (p. 449), Yarrow (p. 604)

Postopyl Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Potassium lodide and Stramonium Compound J. McGloin P/L, Australia,
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Potter’s Catarrh Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Potters Children’s Cough Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Potters Gees Linctus Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Potters Sugar Free Cough Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Liquorice
(p. 411)

PR21 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prementaid Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Pulsatilla
(p. 489), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Preparation H Cooling Gel Whitehall-Robins Inc., Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Prespir Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Prinachol Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91)

sen Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Prisoventril Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128)

ProAktiv Boehringer Ingelheim Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Probigol Omeofarma S.r.I., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)

ProBrain Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Procold Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Euphorbia (p. 249), Garlic (p. 279), Horseradish
(p. 367)

Proctoplex Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Proctopure Dermofarma Italia S.r.1., Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Liquorice (p. 411), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Proctosan Kley Hertz SA, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Proctosor Soria Natural, Spain, Golden Seal (p. 337), Senna (p. 537)

Prodiem Plus Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Proesten Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Garlic (p. 279),
Passionflower (p. 461), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Profelan M & A Pharmachem Ltd, UK, Arnica (p. 64)

Proflo Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Profluid Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley
Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Projimava Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Prolax Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)

Pronervon Phyto Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Prophthal Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Prosed-X Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Prosgutt Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Nettle (p. 452), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prost-1 Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598), Yucca
(p. 610)

Prosta-Caps Chassot N Doetsch Grether AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217),
Java Tea (p. 381), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostagutt Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostagutt forte Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostagutt-F Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostaid Healthy Direct, UK, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostakan Forte Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostanorm (Tpocrasopm) Farm Vilar ZAO, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217), Liquorice
(p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prostaplant Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostate Ease Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostate Health Sundown, USA, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
ProstatExcell Natrol, USA, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostatonin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452) Boehringer Ingelheim sro,
Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452) Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostease Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521) Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd, Hong Kong, Cranberry (p. 197), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostem Plus Laboratorios Baldacci S.A., Brazil, Nettle (p. 452)
ProstGard Holista Health Corp, Canada, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Protecor Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Protemp Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Juniper (p. 386), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Protol Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279)

Proyeast Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Chaparral (p. 159), Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic
(p. 279)

Pruduskova Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Pruina Faes Farma, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Prunacolon Nycomed BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Prunasine Nycomed BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Psor-Asist Sunspot Products P/L, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Psorasolv Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Pokeroot (p. 479)
Pulmagol Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)
Pulmofasa Generfarma, Spain, Senega (p. 533)

Pulmoforte Laboratorios Osorio de Moraes Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

----- PAGE 664 -----
Pulmoran Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Pulmotin Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Pulsalux Novartis Farma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Puma Cough Balsam Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Liquorice
(p. 411)

Puntualax Pharbenia S.r.1., Societa del Gruppo Bayer, Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Puraloe Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Pykno Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)

Pyralvex Laboratorio Dr. Lazar & Cia. S.A., Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine
P/L, Australia, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Pharma GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Norgine SA, Belgium, Rhubarb (p. 506) Laboratoires Norgine Pharma, France,
Rhubarb (p. 506) Faran Laboratories S.A., Greece, Rhubarb (p. 506) Treasure
Mountain Development Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Rhubarb (p. 506) United Drug,
Ireland, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Italia S.r.1., Italy, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine BV,
Netherlands, Rhubarb (p. 506) Angelini, Portugal, Rhubarb (p. 506) Grafton
Pharmasia Pte Ltd, Singapore, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine (Pty) Ltd, South Africa,
Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine AG, Switzerland, Rhubarb (p. 506) Zuellig Pharma Ltd,
Thailand, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506) Gervasi Farmacia, Norgine de
Esparia, Spain, Rhubarb (p. 506)

@

Quelodin F Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F., Argentina, Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Quiet Days The Cantassium Company, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580)

Quiet Life G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Motherwort (p. 447),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Quiet Nite The Cantassium Company, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Quiet Tyme The Cantassium Company, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Quinisedine Laboratoires Sodia, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Quintonine Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290), Quassia (p. 491)

@

Rabro N Teofarma, Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)
Radicura Laboratorio Walker S.R.L., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91)

Ramend Krauter Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Senna
(p. 537)

Ramistos Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Rapilax Fibras Merck Quimica Argentina S.A..C., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374),
Senna (p. 537)

Recalm Sanofi Aventis, Chile, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Rectovasol Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Red Kooga Co-Q-10 and Ginseng Peter Black Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

ReDormin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Redseng Polivit Korhispana, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Reducing (Slimming) Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Reduc-Te Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Boldo (p. 91), Lime Flower (p. 409)
Redudiet Laboratorio A.M. Farma Activ, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Reduktan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Refrane P Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Refrane Plus Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Regamint Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411)

Regina Royal Concorde Regina Health Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Regulador Xavier N-2 Laboratorio Hepacholan S.A., Brazil, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Rekiv Rekah Ltd, Israel, Calamus (p. 118), Frangula (p. 270)
Relana Cederroth, Spain, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Relax B+ Vitalia Health Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Preparations Directory

Relaxane Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Butterbur
(p. 107), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Relaxaplex Vitaplex Products, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Relaxo UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Remifemin plus Europharm, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St John's Wort
(p. 549) Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Rendetil Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Valerian (p. 580)

Renob Blasen- und Nierentee Dr R. Pfleger Chemische Fabrik GmbH, Germany,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Liquorice (p. 411)

Renusor Soria Natural, Spain, Corn Silk (p. 191), Couchgrass (p. 193)
Rendetil Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Passionflower (p. 461)
Repha-Os Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

Resolutivo Regium Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Spain, Boldo (p. 91),
Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508)

Resource Rhubagil Laboratoires Novartis Nutrition, France, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Restin Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Retinovit /ndustria Terapeutica Splendore - Oftalmoterapica ALFA, Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Retterspitz Ausserlich Retterspitz GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Retterspitz Quick Retterspitz GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Reudol Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica (p. 64)

Reve Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.A., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Revitan Ranbaxy Unichem Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Revitonil Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Aniseed (p. 57), Clove (p. 166), Echinacea
(p. 217), Liquorice (p. 411)

Rheuma Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Arnica (p. 64)

Rheumatic Pain The Cantassium Company, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Celery (p. 146),
Dandelion (p. 204), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Rheumatic Pain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Capsicum
(p. 125), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Rheumatic Pain Remedy Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89),
Burdock (p. 102), Guaiacum (p. 344), Yarrow (p. 604)

Rheumatic Pain Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Bogbean
(p. 89), Celery (p. 146)

Rhinodoron Laboratoires Weleda, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Rhuaka OTC Concepts, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Rhus Opodeldoc Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Rosemary (p. 508),
Thyme (p. 574)

Rhus-Rheuma-Gel N Deutsche Homoopathie-Union, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)
Ribovir Plants, Laboratorio della Dott.ssa Luisa Coletta, Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)
Rilastil Dermo Solar Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Rob-Bron Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Horehound,
White (p. 361), Liquorice (p. 411)

Roberts Acidosis Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries)
Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Roberts Anti-Irritant Ointment Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Pilewort (p. 472)

Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries)
Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Corn Silk (p. 191), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521), Willow (p. 598)

Roidhemo Pan Quimica Farmaceutica, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Romarene Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Dandelion (p. 204), Rosemary (p. 508)
Romarinex Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Rosemary (p. 508)

Rooilavental Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Roteroblong Maagtabletten /mgroma BV, Netherlands, Frangula (p. 270)
Ruscimel Soria Natural, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Rutin Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Yarrow (p. 604)

Rutiviscal Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Garlic (p. 279), Hawthorn (p. 346),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 665 -----
Appendix 4

CS)

Sabal Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Sabatif Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Sacnel Teofarma, Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sadeltan F Hautel S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Sagittaproct Sagitta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Salhumin Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Salmiak Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)

Salus Herz-Schutz-Kapseln Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH &
Co KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Salutaris Lab. Incaico SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Salviette H Whitehall Italia S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sambucus Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder (p. 237),
Euphorbia (p. 249), Eyebright (p. 256), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Sanaderm Febena Pharma GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Sanason Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Sanason (Canacon) Lek, Russia, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sanderson’s Throat Specific Sandersons (Chemists) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Quassia (p. 491), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sanicut Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Calendula (p. 121)

Sanogencive Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Horseradish (p. 367), Myrrh
(p. 449)

Saugella Laboratoires Rottapharm, France, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Attiva Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Dermolatte Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Fitothym Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Poligyn 7 Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Thyme (p. 574)

Saugella Salviettine Rottapharm S.r.I., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Solido ph 3.5 Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Uomo Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Clove (p. 166)

Schlaf- und Nerventee Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Schlaf-Nerventee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Hops
(p. 354), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Schoum Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT, France, Fumitory (p. 276), Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Schweden-Mixtur H nouvelle formulation Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Aloes
(p. 50), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Schwedentrunk Elixier Pharmazeutische Fabrik Infirmarius-Rovit GmbH,
Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290), Valerian (p. 580)

Sciargo Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Sciatica Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89),
Celery (p. 146), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Sciroppo Berta Berta S.r.l., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)

Sclerovis H Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Borage (p. 96), Echinacea (p. 217),
Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Scottopect Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Scullcap & Gentian Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

SCV 300 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

SDN 200 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Sebium AKN Dispolab Farmaceutica SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Sebulex Lab. Panalab S.A. Argentina, Argentina, Capsicum (p. 125)

Sedacur Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedadom Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedalin Laboratorio Dinafarma Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Sedante Dia La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet., Argentina, Lime Flower
(p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedariston Konzentrat Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft,
Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedariston plus Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany,
Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedaselect D Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedasor Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Sedatif Tiber Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Sedatol £G Laboratori EuroGenerici S.p.A., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Ispaghula (p. 374), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedinal Melisana SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedofit Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedogelat Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedonat Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Sedopal Laboratoires Lehning, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sedopuer F Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.I., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedotus Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Sedovent Pharma Schworer GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290), Yarrow (p. 604)

Selon Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Senagar Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Senega (p. 533)
Senalsor Soria Natural, Spain, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna (p. 537)

Sene Composta /nfabra Induistria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Senega and Ammonia /. McGloin P/L, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega
(p. 533)

Seneuval Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Senna Prompt Konsy! Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Senna-S Tanta Pharmaceuticals Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Senokot con Fibra Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Senokot-S Purdue Pharma, Canada, Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co.,
USA, Senna (p. 537)

Sensinerv forte Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580)

Se-Power The Cantassium Company, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Eyebright (p. 256)
Septacord Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muiller, Apotheker,
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sequals G Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Rosemary (p. 508)

Serenil Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Serenoa Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Saw Palmetto

(p. 521)

Serenus Biolab Sanus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Seven Seas Evening Primrose Oil and Starflower Oil Seven Seas Ltd, UK,
Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Seven Seas Ginseng Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Sigmafem Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Sage (p. 512)

Sigmafen Free Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Sage (p. 512)
Sigman-Haustropfen Sigmapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co KG, Austria,
Gentian (p. 290), Liquorice (p. 411)

Sigmasedan Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian

(p. 580)

Silberne Brady C. KG, Austria, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Silybum Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Sinotar G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder (p. 237),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Sinuforton Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co., Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Sinupret Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech
Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Bionorica AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain

----- PAGE 666 -----
(p. 591) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder
(p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Cowslip
(p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) MBD Marketing (S) Pte
Ltd, Singapore, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)
Biomed AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain
(p. 591) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian
(p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Sinupret (Cunynper) Bionorica AG, Russia, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Sinus and Hay Fever Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Sirop Cocillana Codeine Laboratoire Atlas, Canada, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Sirop pectoral contre la toux S Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Sirop S contre la toux et la bronchite Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Cowslip
(p. 195), Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Skin Cleansing The Cantassium Company, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Fumitory (p. 276), Senna (p. 537)

Skin Eruptions Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87),
Buchu (p. 100), Burdock (p. 102), Cascara (p. 128), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Yellow Dock
(p. 608)

Skin Hair Nails Natrol, USA, Burdock (p. 102)

Skin Healing Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Calendula (p. 121),
St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sleepezy Healthy Direct, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530)

Slippery Elm Skin Soap Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Slippery Elm Stomach Tablets Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Slippery Elm
(p. 545)

Slumber Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374), Passionflower
(p. 461), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

SM-33 Adult Formula Bayer Australia Ltd (Pharmaceutical Business Group),
Australia, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Snella Vag Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Sofderm Cipla Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Soflax Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)
Solarcaine Aloe Extra Burn Relief Schering-Plough Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solarcaine Aloe Vera Gel Laboratorio Schering-Plough, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solenil Post Solar Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solubitrat Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Java Tea (p. 381)

Solucion Schoum Expanscience, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Fumitory (p. 276), Golden
Seal (p. 337), Ispaghula (p. 374), Melissa (p. 425), Rhubarb (p. 506), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Solution Stago Diluee Pharma Développement, France, Boldo (p. 91)
Soluzione Schoum Aventis Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Fumitory (p. 276), Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Solvipect Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Liquorice (p. 411)

Solvipect comp Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Liquorice (p. 411)

Solvobil Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128) Recordati Industria Chimica e Farmaceutica S.p.a.,
Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)

Solvopret Bionorica AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian

(p. 290) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Thyme (p. 574)

Solvopret TP Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)
Sominex EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sominex Herbal Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Songha F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Boehringer
Ingelheim SA/NV, Belgium, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Boehringer Ingelheim,
Lda, Portugal, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Songha Night Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Pharmashalom Ltd, Israel, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Sonhare Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Melissa

(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Soporin Herbamed AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Soy Forte with Black Cohosh Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Preparations Directory

Spagulax au Citrate de Potassium Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Spagulax au Sorbitol Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spagymun Spagyros AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Spagyrom Spagyros AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Spasmine Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian (p. 580)

Spasmo-Urgenin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto

(p. 521) Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Madaus, Spain, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd,
Thailand, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Species Cholagogae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42),
Elecampane (p. 240), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Species Diureticae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Parsley (p. 456)

Species nervinae F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Species Nervinae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Species Pectorales Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Species Urologicae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Nettle
(p. 452), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Yarrow (p. 604)

Speman Forte (Cneman ®opre) Transatlantic International, Russia, Wild Lettuce
(p. 596)

Spiritus Contra Tussim Drops Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Angelica
(p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Sportino Akut Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Arnica
(p. 64)

Sportupac M Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

St Bonifatius-Tee Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Boldo (p. 91), Juniper
(p. 386), Lime Flower (p. 409)

St Johns wort Compound Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Scullcap (p. 530)

St Johnswort Compound Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168), St John's Wort (p. 549), Willow (p. 598)

St Mary’s Thistle Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Steril Zeta Zeta Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stibium Comp Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stimolfit Body Spring S.r.1., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Stodal Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Drosera (p. 215), Senega (p. 533) Prisfar, SA,
Portugal, Senega (p. 533)

Stoffwechseltee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Liquorice
(p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

Stomach Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Stomachysat N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Yarrow (p. 604)
Stomacine Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Quassia (p. 491)

Stomaran Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Angelica (p. 53), Calamus
(p. 118), Centaury (p. 149), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Stomargil Laboratoires Motima, France, Bilberry (p. 79)

Stomatosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Clove (p. 166), Comfrey (p. 188),
Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574), Vervain (p. 591), Yarrow (p. 604)

Stop-Itch Plus Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd,
Singapore, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stoptussin-Fito (Cromryccun-dpuro) Ivax AC, Russia, Thyme (p. 574)

Strath Gouttes contre la toux Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Strath Gouttes pour le coeur Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Strath Gouttes pour le foie et la bile Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Strath Gouttes pour le nerfs et contre l’insomnie Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Strath Gouttes pour les muqueuses Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Sage (p. 512)
Strath Gouttes pour les reins et la vessie Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland,
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Strath Gouttes pour les veines Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Strath Gouttes pour I’estomac Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Gentian (p. 290),
Liquorice (p. 411)

----- PAGE 667 -----
Appendix 4

Strath Gouttes Rhumatisme Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Willow (p. 598)

Strength Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Strength Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Strepsils Echinacea Defence Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Stress Complex Natrol, USA, Valerian (p. 580)
StressEez Nature Made, USA, Valerian (p. 580)

Stressless DDD Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain
(p. 591)

Stuidruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Valerian (p. 580)

Stullmaton Pharma Stulln GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Centaury (p. 149),
Melissa (p. 425)

Succus Cineraria Mari

a Walker Pharmacal, USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sulgan 99 Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Sulgan 99 Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Summertime Tea Blend Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, Roman (p. 156),
Elder (p. 237), Eyebright (p. 256), Liquorice (p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

SuNerven G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Supa-Tonic Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Damiana
(p. 201), Rosemary (p. 508), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Supositorio Hamamelis Composto Laboratorio Simoes Ltda, Brazil, Horse-
chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Supradyn Vital 50+ Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Supranettes Alcon Pharmaceutical C.A., Venezuela, Calendula (p. 121), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Supranettes Naturalag Alcon Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Calendula
(p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Supravital Liferpal MD, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Garlic (p. 279)

Sure-Lax (Herbal) Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Holy Thistle (p. 352),
Valerian (p. 580)

Swarm J. Pickles & Sons, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Swiss Herb Cough Drops Ricola, Canada, Burnet (p. 105), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Parsley Piert (p. 459), Thyme (p. 574)

$X-22 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Echinacea (p. 217)

Sympaneurol Sanofi-Aventis, France, Hawthorn (p. 346
Valerian (p. 580)

Sympathy Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra, France,
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sympavagol Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

oO

Tabritis Potter's (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Elder
(p. 237), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tabritis Tablets Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Elder (p. 237), Poplar (p. 482), Prickly Ash, Northern (p. 484), Uva-Ursi (p. 577),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Talowin Costec S.R.L. Esp. Dermatocosmeéticas, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Tamaril Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Tamarine Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna
(p. 537) Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, GlaxoSmithKline, Chile, Senna

(p. 537) Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Senna (p. 537) Whitehall Italia S.p.
A, Italy, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Tamarix Hebron S.A. Indtistria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senna (p. 537)

Tampositorien mit Belladonna Provita Pharma GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Tandpyndruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Capsicum (p. 125)
Tea Tree & Witch Hazel Cream G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Tealine Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Java Tea (p. 381)

Tendro Tentan AG, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

), Passionflower (p. 461),

Tensiben Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Tereonsit Hautel S.A., Argentina, Sage (p. 512)
Thalgo Tonic Lab Thalgo Nutrition, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

The a l’avoine sauvage de Vollmer Dr Duinner SA, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452),
St John's Wort (p. 549)

The Chambard-Tee Brady C. KG, Austria, Calendula (p. 121), Marshmallow
(p. 418), Melissa (p. 425), Senna (p. 537)

The Salvat Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Thermocream Laboratoires Belges Pharmacobel SA, Belgium, Capsicum (p. 125)
Throat Discs GlaxoSmithKline, USA, Capsicum (p. 125)
Thymomel /vax-CR as, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymoval EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574), Valerian (p. 580)

Thyreogutt Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Motherwort (p. 447)

Tickly Cough & Sore Throat Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

Tisana Kelemata Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Couchgrass (p. 193),
Melissa (p. 425), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Senna (p. 537)

Tisane antirhumatismale Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

Tisane calmante pour les enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Tisane contre les refroidissements Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Elder (p. 237),
Lime Flower (p. 409)

Tisane Diuretique Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)

Tisane favorisant I’allaitement Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Aniseed (p. 57),
Melissa (p. 425)

Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt Laboratoires Michel Iderne, France, Agrimony
(p. 42), Bogbean (p. 89), Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149), Couchgrass (p. 193), Sage
(p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane hepatique et biliaire Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane laxative Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Tisane pectorale et antitussive Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Plantain (p. 474), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Tisane pectorale pour les enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418), Plantain (p. 474), Thyme (p. 574)

Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Motherwort (p. 447)

Tisane pour le sommeil et les nerfs Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Tisane pour les problemes de prostate Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Ginger (p. 293), Nettle (p. 452)

Tisane pour les reins et la vessie Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Java Tea (p. 381),
Juniper (p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Tisane pour l’estomac Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Calamus (p. 118), Centaury
(p. 149), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane pour nourissons et enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Lime Flower
(p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Vervain (p. 591)

Tisane Provencale No 1 F. Uhimann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Marshmallow
(p. 418), Senna (p. 537)

Ton Was Chiesi Espana, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Tonactil Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Tonimax Soria Natural, Spain, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Tonsilgon Bionorica AG, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Tonsilgon N (Tousuaron H) Bionorica AG, Russia, Dandelion (p. 204),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Yarrow (p. 604)

Topaceta G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Tormentan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Burnet (p. 105), Liquorice
(p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Tornix Steierl Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Total Magnesiano con Ginseng Lab. Temis Lostalo S.A., Argentina, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Total Magnesiano con Vitaminas y Minerales Lab. Temis Lostald S.A.,
Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 668 -----
Tranquil Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Total Man Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Damiana (p. 201), Echinacea
(p. 217), Garlic (p. 279), Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Liquorice (p. 411), Parsley (p. 456), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Tranquil Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409)

Tranquital Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian
(p. 580)

Trauma-cyl Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Trauma-Salbe warmend Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Traumed Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Arnica (p. 64), Ginkgo
(p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Travelaide Yauyip P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Slippery Elm (p. 545)
Traveleeze Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Triallin Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Garlic (p. 279), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Trifolium Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion
(p. 204), Red Clover (p. 498), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

TriMune Nature Made, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Tucks Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada Inc., Canada, Witch
Hazel (p. 601) Pfizer Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Tummy Ease Zydus Cadila Group, India, Asafoetida (p. 72), Ginger (p. 293)
Turulington Tincture Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50)

Tuscalman F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Elder (p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418) Desma
Healthcare BV, Switzerland, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Tussamag Montavit GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussidoron Laboratoires Weleda, France, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Tussiflorin Hustensaft Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195)

Tussiflorin Hustentropfen Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195)

Tussilen Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Drosera (p. 215)

Tussimont Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Senega (p. 533), Thyme
(p. 574)

TUSSinfant N RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Tussol Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Tussucalman /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)
Tux Pfizer SA, Belgium, Senega (p. 533), Senna (p. 537)
Tyroseng Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

CU)

Ulcu-Pasc Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)
Ulgastrin Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Liquorice (p. 411)

Ultimate Antioxidant Formula Natrol, USA, Artichoke (p. 67), Bilberry (p. 79),
Calendula (p. 121)

Ultra Quercitin Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Nettle (p. 452)

Ultracal Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Ultravisin Farmigea Industria Chimico Farmaceutica S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)
Ungolen Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Dandelion (p. 204),
Holy Thistle (p. 352), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Unguentum lymphaticum PGM Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH & Co.
Munchen, Germany, Calendula (p. 121)

Unwind Herbal Nytol GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Urapro Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Golden Seal (p. 337), Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Urcyston Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Elder (p. 237), Thyme
(p. 574), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urelium Neu £uropharm, Austria, Dandelion (p. 204)

Urgenin Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Trinity
Trading Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Salomon,

Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus, Spain,
Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Preparations Directory

Urinase Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Echinacea (p. 217),
Golden Seal (p. 337), Saw Palmetto (p. 521), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urinefrol Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Urinex E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitdten, Switzerland, Buchu
(p. 100), Calamus (p. 118), Calendula (p. 121), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Urisor Soria Natural, Spain, Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urologicka Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Parsley (p. 456), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Uromil Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Uropurat F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uvacin Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577) Medic Herb
UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204)

Uva-Ursi Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uva-Ursi Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Parsley
(p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uze Active Dist. Ofar S.A., Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

@

Vagicural Plus Lab. Raymos S.A.I.C., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Vagisil Combe Inc., USA, Aloes (p. 50)

Vagostabyl Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Melissa (p. 425)

Vagostesyl Laboratorio Gross S.A., Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461)

Valdispert comp Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valdispert Complex Solvay Pharma, Spain, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valerian Vitaplex Products, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Motherwort (p. 447),
Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Valerian Plus Herbal Plus Formula 12 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriana comp novum Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian
(p. 580)

Valeriana mild Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriana Oligoplex Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Valerina Day Time Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Valerina Day-Time Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Valerina Night-Time Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Valesono Laboratorio J. Neves, Lda, Portugal, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valin Baldrian Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Valerian (p. 580)

Valofyt Neo Leros sro, Czech Republic, Angelica (p. 53), Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops
(p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Valupass Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Baldrian Hopfen bei Einschlafstorungen und zur Beruhigung
Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Coeur Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Constipation dragees Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107),
Senna (p. 537)

Valverde Constipation sirop Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Valverde Detente dragees Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Sommeil Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Valviska Tentan AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Varicell Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Senna
(p. 537)

Varicofit Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Varicogel Alfa Wassermann S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Varicose Ointment Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

----- PAGE 669 -----
Appendix 4

Varicylum-S Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Varisedan Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Varizol Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Varizol Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Vasobrain Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Vasobrain Plus Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Vasopt Bausch & Lomb Oftal SpA, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vegetable Cough Remover Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum
(p. 125), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Scullcap (p. 530), Skunk Cabbage
(p. 543), Valerian (p. 580)

Vegetex G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Celery (p. 146),
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Veinophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Veinostase Merck Lipha Santé, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Veinotonyl Merck Lipha Santé, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venactive Euroderm S.r.l., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venen Krauter NT Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG,
Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venengel ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Salbe N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venocur Triplex Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos, Brazil, Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Venofit Arkochim Espana, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venoful Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venoplus Also S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Ventre Livre Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128)

ventri-loges N Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Calamus (p. 118), Gentian
(p. 290)

Veracolate Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Cascara (p. 128) Pfizer
(Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Cascara (p. 128)

Verbascum Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411), Pleurisy Root
(p. 477)

Versterkdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Gentian (p. 290),
Quassia (p. 491)

Vertiginkgo Midax Italia S.r.1., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vethoine Wolfs SA, Belgium, Cascara (p. 128)

Viadent Colgate Palmolive Canada, Canada, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Vicks Baby Balsam Procter & Gamble Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Vida Brown Mixture Vida Laboratories Ltd, Hong Kong, Liquorice (p. 411)
Vifortol Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Vig Key Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Vigilia Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques, France, Lime Flower (p. 409), Vervain
(p. 591)

Vigortonic Arkochim Espana, Spain, Cinnamon (p. 162), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Virgilocard Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)
jin S Recip AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Visinal Stada Pharma International os, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Visionom Unido Quimica Farmacéutica Nacional S.A., Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Vitace Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Echinacea (p. 217)

Vital Eyes Novartis Consumer Health, UK, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
VitAmour Healthy Direct, UK, Damiana (p. 201)

Vitanox Mediherb P/L, Australia, Rosemary (p. 508)

Vitatona Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Vitegin Capsules Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Vivinox Day Dr Gerhard Mann, Chem.-pharm. Fabrik GmbH, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

VNS 45 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Vocalzone Kestrel Healthcare Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411), Myrrh (p. 449)

Vollmers praparierter gruner N Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf.
GmbH & Co KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Vulnopur Devergé Medicina e Medicalizzazione S.r.l., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

@

Wala Echinacea Wala Schweiz GmbH, Switzerland, Calendula (p. 121), Echinacea
(p. 217), Sage (p. 512)

Wala Pulmonium suc contre la toux Wala Schweiz GmbH, Switzerland,
Butterbur (p. 107)

Waldheim Abfuhrdragees forte Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG, Austria, Aloes
(p. 50)

Waldheim Abfuhrdragees mild Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG, Austria, Aloes
(p. 50), Frangula (p. 270)

Wampole Bronchial Cough Syrup Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Bloodroot
(p. 84), Senega (p. 533)

Water Naturtabs Larkhall Laboratories, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Ground Ivy (p. 342)

Water Pill Natrol, USA, Buchu (p. 100), Juniper (p. 386)

Watershed Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Juniper (p. 386), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Wecesin Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula (p. 121),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Wechseltee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Passionflower (p. 461),
St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Weight Loss Aid Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)

Weleda Hamorrhoidalzapfchen Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Well-Beeing Panacea Biotec Ltd, India, Ginger (p. 293), Valerian (p. 580)
Wellman Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Wellwoman Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Lime Flower (p. 409), Motherwort
(p. 447), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Yarrow (p. 604)

Winar Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Wind & Dyspepsia Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger
(p. 293), Golden Seal (p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Wobenzimal Vitafarma, Spain, Thyme (p. 574)

Women’s Formula Herbal Formula 3 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Agnus
Castus (p. 36), Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh, Blue (p. 180),
Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Women’s Menopause Formula Natrol, USA, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168), Damiana (p. 201), Raspberry (p. 495), Red Clover (p. 498)

Wonderkroonessens Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50),
Elecampane (p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian
(p. 580)

Wood Sap Ointment Richard Lane’s, UK, Rosemary (p. 508), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

@

Xarope de Macas Rainetas Sociedade Farmacéutica Gestafarma, Lda, Portugal,
Senna (p. 537)

Xarope lodo-Suma Laboratorio lodo Suma Ltda, Brazil, Gentian (p. 290)
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant Kit-1 The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

@

Yalu Lab. Lacefa S.A.I.C.A., Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

Yerba Diet Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Ymea Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354)
Yuyo Lab. Incaico SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Cascara (p. 128)

@

Zaludecni Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Zeller Sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Zeniac Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Burdock (p. 102)
Zeniac LP Laboratoires d‘Evolution Dermatologique, France, Burdock (p. 102)
Zero Flush Niacin 400mg Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)

----- PAGE 670 -----
Preparations Directory

Zinaxin Plus Diethelm & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginger (p. 293) JDH Pharmaceutical Zlucnikova Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42),
Sdn Bhd, Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginger (p. 293) Rhubarb (p. 506)

Zinc Zenith Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45) Zotrim Sigma Chemical Co. Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201)
Zinopin Pynogin GmbH, Gee Lawson Distribution Centre, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

----- PAGE 671 -----
Appendix 5

Suppliers Directory

LA)

1A Pharma GmbH Keltenring 1 + 3, 82041 Oberhaching, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 61388250 Fax: +49 (0) 89 613882525

Email: medwiss@ lapharma.de Web: www.lapharma.de

A. Menarini Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.r.I. Via Sette Santi 3, 50131
Florence, Italy.

Tel: +39 055 56801

Web: www.menarini.com

A. Nikolakopoulos & Co. O.E 115 Galatsiou Ave, 111 46 Athens, Greece.
Tel: +30 1 2918671 Fax: +30 1 2922581

aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG Alleestr. 11, 42853 Remscheid, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2191 923013 Fax: +49 (0) 2191 923028

Email: info@aar.de Web: www.aarde

Abbott GmbH Perfektastrasse 86, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 891220 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8912244

Web: www.abbott.com

Abbott GmbH & Co. KG Max-Planck-Ring 2, 65205 Wiesbaden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6122 580 Fax: +49 (0) 6122 581244

Web: www.abbott.de

Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Av. Coyoacan 1622, Benito
Juarez del Valle, 03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57264600 Fax: +52 55 57264601

Web: www.abbott.com

Abbott Laboratories Ltd 20/F AIA Tower, 183 Electric Rd, North Point, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 25668711
Web: www.abbott.com
Abbott South Africa (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 7208, Weltevredenpark, Johannesburg
1715, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 8582000
Web: www.abbott.com
Abigo Medical AB , 436 32 Askim, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 31 7484950 Fax: +46 (0) 31 683951

Email: pharma@abi Web: www.abigo.com

Abnoba Heilmittel GmbH Hohenzollernstr. 16, 75177 Pforzheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7231 316478 Fax: +49 (0) 7231 358714

Email: info@abnoba.de Web: www.abnoba.de

Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH , Czech Republic.

A.C.P. S.C Rue Georges Moreau 174, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 3848711 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3847711
Email: direx@direx.be

Fax: +39 055 582771

Fax: +852 28072917

Fax: +27 (0) 11 8582070

Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd Adcock Ingram Park, 17 Harrison Ave,
Bryanston 2021, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 7099300
Web: www.adcock.co.za

Adler-Apotheke Wahringer Strasse 149, A-1180 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 4793320 Fax: +43 (0) 1 470978430

Adroka AG Postfach, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4863600 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4863636

Email: info@adroka.ch Web: www.adroka.ch

AFOM Medical S.p.A. Via S Cristoforo 97, 20090 Trezzano S/Naviglio (MI),
Italy.

Tel: +39 02 48463151 Fax: +39 02 48401787

Alcon Cusi Camil Fabra 58, El Masnou, 08320 El Masnou Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4977000 Fax: +34 93 4977010

Web: www.alconlabs.com

Alcon Italia S.p.A. Viale Giulio Richard 1/B, 20143 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 818031 Fax: +39 02 8910550
Web: www.alconlabs.com

Fax: +27 (0) 11 7099332

Alcon Laboratorios Argentina S.A. Estados Unidos 5335, 1667 Tortuguitas,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 3327 443400
Web: wwwaalconlabs.com
Alcon Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V. Adolfo Prieto 1644, Benito Juarez del Valle,
03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 52001100

Web: wwwaalconlabs.com

Fax: +54 (0) 3327 443557

Fax: +52 55 55245264

Alcon Pharmaceutical C.A. Av. Diego Cisneros, Edificio Siemens, Torre Sur,
Mezzanina, Los Ruices, Caracas 1070, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 Fax: +58 (0) 212

Web: wwwaalconlabs.com

Alcor P Del Prado 14 1 C, 28014 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 4204032 Fax: +34 91 3694788

Alfa Wassermann S.p.A. Contrada Sant’Emidio, 65020 Alanno (PE), Italy.

Tel: +39 085 85711 Fax: +39 085 8541625

Alinter Ltd New Abbey Court, 51-53 Stert St, Abingdon, OX14 3HB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1235 538700 Fax: +44 (0) 1235 538800

Email: info@alinter.co.uk Web: wwwaalinter.co.uk

allcura Naturheilmittel GmbH Reichendaker 7, 97877 Wertheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9342 96110 Fax: +49 (0) 9342 961196

Email: info@allcura.de Web: wwwaallcura.de

Allen Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V. Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional No. 4728,
Gustavo A Madero, Tlacamaca, 07380 Mexico D.F, Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55678027 Fax: +52 55 55678027

Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd Freshwinds, Pentraeth, Isle of Anglesey, LL75 8YF,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1248 450604

Email: info@allenshealthcare.co.uk
Allergan Produtos Farmacéuticos Ltda Av. Cardoso de Melo 1955 13 andar,
4548005 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Alliance Boots plc 4th Floor, 361 Oxford Street, Sedley Place, London, WIC 2JL,
UK.

Web: wwwaallianceboots.com

Allmedica Arzneimittel GmbH Schillerstr. 4, 37269 Eschwege, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5651 60356 Fax: +49 (0) 5651 70888

Almirall Prodesfarma S.A. Rda Gral Mitre 151, 08022 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 2913000 Fax: +34 93 2913180

Web: www.almirall.es

Alpa sro , Velke Mezirici, Czech Republic.

Alpharma France 40 rue Lecuyer, 93300 Aubervilliers, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 48110820 Fax: +33 (0) 1 48339662

Web: www.alpharma.fr

Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG Elisabeth-Selbert-Str. 1, 40764 Langenfeld,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2173 16740 Fax: +49 (0) 2173 1674205

Email: info.de@alpharma.de Web: www.alpharma.de

Alphrema S.r.I. Via 4 Novembre 92, 20021 Bollate (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 23506945 Fax: +39 (0) 238306418

Alsitan GmbH & Co. KG Am Buhl 16-18, 86926 Greifenberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8192 93010 Fax: +49 (0) $192 7827

Web: wwwalsitan.com

Also S.p.A. Viale Monte Rosa 96, 20149 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 485631 Fax: +39 02 4984727

Altana Madaus Pty Ltd 7st Floor, Uplands 12, The Woodlands, ZA-2080
Woodmead, Sandton, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 9042914

Web: wwwaltana.com

Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH Moltkestr. 4, 78467 Constance, Germany.
Email: customerservice@altanapharma.de

Web: www.altanapharma.de

Fax: +44 (0) 1248 450822
Web: www.allenshealthcare.co.uk

Fax: +27 (0) 11 3152125

----- PAGE 672 -----
Altana Pharma GmbH Ketzergasse 2000, A-1235 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 866530 Fax: +43 (0) 1 86653430

Altana Pharma Ltd Bachstrasse 10, 8280 Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 6771333 Fax: +41 (0) 71 6771334

Email: mail@altanapharma.ch

Altana Pharma Ltda Rua do Estilo Barroco 721, Santo Amaro, 04709-011 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 51884400
Web: www.altana.com
Altana Pharma SA Tronador 4890, 1430 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V. Av Primero de Mayo No. 130, Col. San Andres
Atoto, 53519 Naucalpan de Juarez., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53879330 Fax: +52 55 53590108

Web: www.altana.com

Alter Mateo Inurria 30, 28036 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3592000 Fax: +34 91 3501165

Email: informacion@alter.es Web: wwwaalter.es

Amerx Health Care Corp. 1150 Cleveland St, Suite 410, Clearwater, Fl 33755,
USA.

Amino AG Althofstrasse 12, 5432 Neuenhof, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 56 4061264 Fax: +41 (0) 56 4061764

Email: info@amino.ch

Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1. C.so della Vittoria 12/b, 28100 Novara (NO),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0321 499199
Web: www.amnol.net

Fax: +55 (0) 11 51834361

Fax: +39 0321 499202

Amternes Laegemiddelregistreringskontor I/S Amstrddsforeningen,
Dampfaergevej 22 (postboks 2593), 2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark.
Tel: +45 35298151 Fax: +45 35298333

Email: alis@arf.dk

Andrae GmbH Marinonigasse 2-6, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 29215590 Fax: +43 (0) 1 2921559

Aneid, Lda Rua José Florindo, Quinta da Pedra, Bloco B, R/C A, 2750-401
Cascais, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4849620
Email: info@aneid.pt

Angelini Rua Jodo Chagas 53, Piso 3, 1495-072 Alges, Portugal.
Tel: +351 214 148300 Fax: +351 214 142981
Anglian Pharma Plc P.O. Box 161, Hitchin, SG4 7WE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1438 743070 Fax: +44 (0) 1438 743080
Web: www.anglianpharma.com

Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd 3 Jin 19/1, 46300 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79567677 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79552007

Antistress AG, Gesellschaft fur Gesundheitsschutz Fluhstrasse 30, 8640
Rapperswil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2201212 Fax: +41 (0) 55 2201213

Email: services@antistress.ch Web: www.antistress.ch

Al SA 3 Koletti St, 144 52 Metamorfosi Attikis, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 2856350 Fax: +30 210 2843580

Web: www.apivita.
Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH Kyffhauserstr. 27, 01309 Dresden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 351 33633 Fax: +49 (0) 351 3363440

Email: apo@apogepha.de Web: www.apogepha.de

Apomedica GmbH Roseggerkai 3, A-8011 Graz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 316 823533 Fax: +43 (0) 316 82353352

Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH Niederhart 100, A-6253 Hart, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5288 64885 Fax: +43 (0) 5288 64885-5

Apotheke zur Gnadenmutter Hauptplatz 4, A-8630 Mariazell, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 3882 2102 Fax: +43 (0) 3882 210222

Apotheker Walter Bouhon GmbH & Co. KG Walter-Bouhan-Str 4, 90427
Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 936700
Email: info@freioel.de
APS Pharma GmbH Angelsrieder Feld 22, 82234 Wessling, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8153 90810 Fax: +49 (0) 8153 908130

Ardeypharm GmbH Loerfeldstr. 20, 58313 Herdecke, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2330 977677 Fax: +49 (0) 2330 977697

Email: office@ardeypharm.de Web: www.ardeypharm.de

Ariston Industrias Quimicas e Farm. Ltda Rua Adherbal Stresser 84, 05566-
000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37838000

Fax: +351 21 4849629
Web: wwwaneid.pt

om

Fax: +49 (0) 911 3071780
Web: www.freioel.de

Suppliers Directory

Arko Pharma GmbH Bajurwarenring 12, 82041 Oberhaching, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6281710 Fax: +49 (0) 89 62817177

Email: info@arkopharma.de Web: www.arkopharma.com

Arkochim Espafia Meneses 2, 28045 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 5271512 Fax: +34 91 5279991

Email: marketing@arkochim.es Web: www.arkochim.es

Arkofarm S.r.1. Via Limone Piemonte 13/D, 18039 Ventimiglia (IM), Italy.

Tel: +39 0184 236611 Fax: +39 0184 230900

Web: www.arkopharma-italia.com

Arkopharma UK Ltd 6 Redlands Centre, Redlands, Coulsden, CRS 2HT, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8763 1414 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8763 2124

Email: info@arkopharma.co.uk Web: www.arkopharma.com

Arlex de México, S.A.deC.V. Puerto Acapulco No.35, Col. Piloto, Deleg. Alvaro
Obregon, 01290 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56435099 Fax: +52 55 56435099

Artesan Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Wendlandstr. 1, 29439 Luchow, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5841 9390 Fax: +49 (0) 5841 939200

Email: artesan@t-online.de Web: wwwaartesan.de

Artsana S.p.A. Via Saldarini Catelli 1, 22070 Grandate (CO), Italy.

Tel: +39 031 382111 Fax: +39 031 382400

Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH Cestmirova 1, 140 00 Prague 4,
Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 6913971
Email: asi@login.cz
A.S.A.C. Pharma Sagitario 14, 03006 Alicante, Spain.

Tel: +34 96 5286700 Fax: +34 96 5286434

Email: asac@asac.net Web: www.asac.net

Ashbury Biologicals Inc. 349 Wildcat Rd, Toronto, M3) 253, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 6670555 Fax: +1 416 6612108

Email: ashbury@dalton.com Web: www.ashburybio.com

ASI Budapest Kft Ulldi u 91/b I/7, 1091 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2150672

Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd P. O. Box 1587, Gallo Manor 2052, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 2396100 Fax: +27 (0) 11 2396111

Web: www.aspenpharmacare.co.za

Asta Medica Ltda Rua Santo Antonio 184 19 degrees andar, 01314-900 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: (0) 11 32436800
Email: cac@astamedica.com.br
AstraZeneca GmbH , 22876 Wedel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4103 7080 Fax: +49 (0) 4103 7083293

Email: azinfo@astrazeneca.com Web: www.astrazeneca.de

AstraZeneca Sverige AB Storgatan 42, 151 85 Sodertdlje, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 8 55326000 Fax: +46 (0) 8 55328920

Web: www.astrazeneca.se

Astrid Twardy GmbH Liebigstr. 18, 65439 Florsheim/Main, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6145 5930 Fax: +49 (0) 6145 593210

Email: info@twardy.de Web: www.twardy.de

Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Fonte Mecia 2050, 13270000 Valinhos, Brazil.
Tel: (0) 19 38498600
Web: www.ativus.com.br
Atlantic Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd 2038 Sukhumvit Rd, Bangkok 10250,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 311 O111

Email: atlantic@mozart.inet.co.th
Atlas Farmaceutica /V Gonzalez 2456, 1417 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Australian Medic-Care Co. Ltd Suite 2810, Metroplaza Tower 2, 223 Hing Fong
Rd, Kwai Fong, Kwai Chung, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24804822 Fax: +852 24804866
Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH Richard-Strauss-Strasse 13, A-1232 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61626440 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616264418

Avanderm Mexico, S.A. de C.V. Patricio Saenz 1582, Del Valle, 3100 Mexico D.
F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55249250 Fax: +52 55 55341456

Aventis Pharma Bijenviucht 30, 3871 JJ Hoevelaken, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 33 2533911 Fax: +31 (0) 33 2535017

Web: www.aventis.nl

Aventis Pharma Ltda Avenida Marginal do Rio Pinheiros 5200, 05693-000 Sao
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37596000
Web: www.aventispharma.com.br

Fax: +420 (0) 2 6913541

Fax: +55 (0) 11 31072291
Web: www:astamedica.com.br

Email: ativus@ativus.com.br

Fax: +66 2 331 5697
Web: wwwaatlanticlab.com

Fax: +55 (0) 11 2476640

----- PAGE 673 -----
Appendix 5

Aventis Pharma (Pty) Ltd Private Bag X207, Midrand 1683, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 2563700 Fax: +27 (0) 11 2563722
Web: ww

Aventis Pharma S.A. de C.V. Ay. Universidad No. 1738, Col. Coyoacan, 04000
Mexico D.F., Mexico.

.sanofi-aventis.com

Fax: +52 55 54804113

Tel: +39 (0) 2937661

Fax: +39 (0) 293766046
Web:

Aventis Pharma sro Novodvorskd 994, 142 21 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 44043355 Fax: +420 (0) 2 44044110
Web: www.aventis.com

Awareness Corp. 210-9087B-198th Street, Langley, VIM 3B1, Canada.

Aziende Chimiche Riunite Angelini Francesco S.p.A. Viale Amelia 70, 00100
Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 780531

CB)

B L Hua & Co. Ltd 2 Somdej Chaopraya Rd, Klongsan, Bangkok 10600,
Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 437 0154 Fax: +66 2 437 S655

Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co. Am Krebsenbach 5-7, 83670
Bad Heilbrunn, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8046 91990

Email: info@bad-heilbrunner.de

Baif International Products, New York S.n.c. Via XX Setembre 20/68, 16121
Genoa, Italy.
Tel: +39 010 566251 Fax: +39 010 566252

Balmar P.O. Box 41-014, St Lukes, Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 8151020 Fax: +64 (0) 9 8151036
Web: www.balmar.co.nz

Balverda Srl Via Robert Kock 1.2, 20152 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 248381 Fax: +39 (0) 248382734

Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Antunes Maciel 86, Sdo Cristovao,
20940-010 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25898973

Web:

Bastian-Werk GmbH August-Exter-Str. 4, 81245 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 820930 Fax: +49 (0) 89 8209359
Email: bastian@bastian-werk.de Web: www.bastian-werk.de

Bausch & Lomb Oftal SpA Corso Italia 141, 95127 Catania (CT), Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 957221322 Fax: +39 (0) 957223856

Bausch & Lomb Swiss AG Sumpfstrasse 3, 6312 Steinhausen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 7471060 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7471069

Bayer Argentina S.A. Ricardo Gutierrez 3652, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires,

Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627000
Web: www.bayer.com.ar

eww.aventispharma.it

Fax: +39 06 78053291

Fax: +49 (0) 8046 919999
Web: www:bad-heilbrunner.de

Fax: +55 (0) 21 25891364
yww:barrene.com.br

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627100

Bayer Australia Ltd (Pharmaceutical Business Group) P.O. Box 903, Pymble,
NSW 2073, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 93916000
Web: www.bayer.com

Bayer Austria GmbH Am Heumarkt 10, Postfach 10, 1037 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1711460 Fax: +43 (0) 1 711462788
Web: www.bayer.at

Fax: +61 (0) 2 93916061

Bayer SA Carlos Fernandez 260, San Joaquin, Santiago, Chile.

Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma Postfach, Grubenstrasse 6, 8045 Zurich,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 1 4658111
Web: www.bayer.ch

Fax: +41 (0) 1 4620754

Beaufour Ipsen International U platenice 10, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 57324660 Fax: +420 (0) 2 57324660
Email: bii@tnet.cz

Beaufour Ipsen International SNC Mosenka Park Tower, Taganskaya ul. 19,
109004 Moscow, Russia.
5 2585400

Tel: +7 0 Fax: +7 095 2585401

Beaufour Ipsen Pharma 24 rue Erlanger, 75781 Paris cdx 16, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 44961313 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44961199
Web: www.beaufour-ipsen.com

Beethoven-Pharma Dr Wiemann GmbH Steinthalstr. 1, 90455 Nurnberg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 911 880044 Fax: +49 (0) 911 880255

Beiersdorf GmbH Laxenburger Strasse 151, A-1101 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 614000 Fax: +43 (0) 1 61400391

Email: contact@vienna.beiersdorf.com — Web: www.beiersdorf.com
Beiersdorf SA Lo Espejo 501, Maipu, Santiago, Chile.

Beiersdorf UK Ltd 2010 Solihull Parkway, Birmingham Business Park,
Birmingham, B37 7YS, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 121 3298800
Web: www.beiersdorf.com
Bell, Sons & Co. (Druggists) P.O. Box 62, Tanhouse Lane, Widnes, WA8 OSA,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 151 422 1200 Fax: +44 (0) 151 420 1211

Email: brianlunt@bells-healthcare.com = Web: www.bells-healthcare.com
Benedetti S.p.A. Vicolo de’ Bacchettoni 3, 51100 Pistoia (PT), Italy.

Tel: +39 0573 536496 Fax: +39 0573 534673

Email: ledisar@tin.it

Berlin Pharmaceutical Industry Co. Ltd 359 New Rd, Bangkok 10100,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 223 1011 Fax: +66 2 225 4260

Email: berlinin@lox1.loxinfo.co.th Web: www.berlinpharm.com
Berlin-Chemie Képviselet Vdci ut 113, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3296808 Fax: +36 3409352

Berlin-Chemie Menarini Group Komarkovd 27, 148 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 71913199
Email: office@berlin-chemie.cz
Berlin-Pharma ZAO Moscow ul. Kashirskoe 22-3, Str. 3, 115201 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 4928709

Email: info@berlin-pharma.ru
Berta S.r.l. Via Andrea Doria 7, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 6694750 Fax: +39 02 6693828

Bescansa PI. Inds. Tambre-via Pasteur 8, Santiago de Compostela, 15890 La
Coruna, Spain.

Tel: +34 981 958002

Email: labbescansa@telefonica.net
betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH Kobelweg 95, 86156 Augsburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 821 748810 Fax: +49 (0) 821 74881420

Email: info@betapharm.de Web: www.betapharm.de

Biocare Ltd Lakeside, 180 Lifford Lane, Kings Norton, Birmingham, B30 3NU, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 121 433 8725 Fax: +44 (0) 121 433 8705

Email: sales@biocare.co.uk Web: www.biocare.co.uk

Biochimici PSN S.p.A. Via Viadagola 30, 40050 Quarto Inferiore (BO), Italy.
Tel: +39 051 767015 Fax: +39 051 767154

Email: psn@biochimici it

Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH Otto-von-Guericke-Allee 1, 39179 Barleben,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8024 9080
Email: medwiss@biocur.de
Bioderma 75 cours Albert-Thomas, 69447 Lyon cdx 03, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 472114800 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78538254

Web: www.bioderma.com

Bio-Diat-Berlin GmbH Selerweg 43-45, 12169 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 795201112 Fax: +49 (0) 30 7967233

Email: info@bio-diaet-berlin.de Web: www. bio-diaet-berlin.de
Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV Industria Hulera 97 Fracc. Indust., 45130
Zapopan Norte Zapopan, Mexico.

Bioforce AG Postfach 76, 9325 Roggwil/TG, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 4546161 Fax: +41 (0) 71 4546162

Email: info@bioforce.ch Web: www.bioforce.ch

Bioforce GmbH Bruhlstr. 15, 78465 Constance, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7533 93010 Fax: +49 (0) 7533 930130

Email: bioforce@bioforce.de Web: www.bioforce.de

Bioforce UK Ltd 2 Brewster Place, Irvine, KA11 5DD, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1294 277344 Fax: +44 (0) 1294 277922

Email: enquires@bioforce.co.uk Web: www.bioforce.co.uk

Biogal-Teva Pharma Rt Robert Karoly krt 66, 1134 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2886400 Fax: +36 2886410

Bio-Garten GmbH Triesterstrasse 14/1, A-2351 Wiener Neudorf, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 2236 865901 Fax: +43 (0) 2236 86590122

Fax: +44 (0) 121 329 8801

Fax: +420 (0) 27929742

Fax: +7 095 7975958
Web: www.berlin-chemie.ru

Fax: +34 981 552745

Fax: +49 (0) 8024 9081290
Web: www:biocur.de

----- PAGE 674 -----
Bioglan Ltd 8/10 Yalgar Rd, Yalgar Business Park, Kirrawee, NSW 2232,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95451165
Web: www.bioglan.com.au

Fax: +61 (0) 2 95451067

Biolab Sanus Farmacéutica Ltda Av. dos Bandeirantes 5386, Planalto Paulista,
04071-900 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 55862000

Web: www.biolabfarma.com.br
Biomed AG Uberlandstrasse 199, Postfach, 8600 Dubendorf 1, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 44 8021616 Fax: +41 (0) 44 8021600

Email: biomed@biomed.ch Web: www.biomed.ch

Biomedica sro , Prague, Czech Republic.

biomo Pharma GmbH Lendersbergstrasse 86, 53721 Siegburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2241 385081 Fax: +49 (0) 2241 387007

Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG Heidsieker Heide 144, 33739
Bielefeld, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5206 704433
Email: info@bional.de
Bionax Singapore Pte Ltd 99 Bukit Timah Rd, Alfa Centre 03-06, S 229835,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6333 3432 Fax: +65 6339 7875

Email: bionax@pacific.net.sg

Bionax (Thailand) Ltd 10 Fl, Unit A, Lake Rajada Office Complex, 193/35 New
Rachadapisek Rd, Kwaeng Klongtoey, Khet Klongtoey, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 661 9208 Fax: +66 2 264 0316

Bionorica AG Kerschensteinerstr. 11-15, 92318 Neumarkt/Opf, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9181 23190 Fax: +49 (0) 9181 231265

Email: info@bionorica.de Web: www.bionorica.de

Bionorica AG Udaltsova 52, 119607 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 5029019 Fax: +7 095 7341200

Email: bionorica@co.ru Web: www:bionorica.de
Bio-Pharmaceuticals Sdn Bhd C-5-8, Block C, Centre Point Business Park, 5 Jin
26/53, Seksyen 26, 400000 Shah Alam, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 51011450 Fax: +60 (0) 3 51912025

Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH Bahnhofstr. 5, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 939845 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 939846

Bioprogress S.p.A. Via Aurelia 58, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 39383101 Fax: +39 06 39382134

Biosatde Produtos Farmaceuticos SA Rua Ramalho Ortigdo 454, 1070-228
Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 3191280

Bio-Strath AG , Czech Republic.

Bio-Strath AG Muhlebachstrasse 25, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 1258151 Fax: +41 (0) 1 2624326

biosyn Arzneimittel GmbH Schorndorfer Str. 32, 70734 Fellbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 711 5753200 Fax: +49 (0) 711 5753299

Email: info@biosyn.de Web: www.biosyn.de

Biovital Pty Ltd 24/10 Yalgar Road, Kirrawee, NSW 2232, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95451899 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95451992

Birchwood Laboratories Inc. 7900 Fuller Rd, Eden Prairie, MN 53344-2195,
USA.

Tel: +1 952 937 7943

Email: medical@birchlabs.com
Bittermedizin Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH Taku-Fort-Str. 20, 81827
Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 4306841

Email: info@bittermedizin.com
BJC Trading Co Ltd 99 Soi Rubia, Sukhumvit 42 Rd, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 367 1274 Fax: +66 2 381 4551

Email: bjcpharma@berlijucker.co.th Web: www.bje.co.th

Blackmores Ltd P.O. Box 258, Balgowlah, NSW 2093, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 99510111 Fax: +61 (0) 2 99491954

Web: www.blackmores.com.au

Body Spring S.r.1. Via Parco della Rimembranza 27, 00041 Albano Laziale (RM),
Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 718091 Fax: +39 (0) 71809440

Boehringer Ingelheim Carlos Fernandez 260, San Joaquin, Santiago, Chile.
Boehringer Ingelheim Prat d ela Riba S/N, Sector Turo de Can Matas, Sant
Cugat del Valles, 08190 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4045100 Fax: +34 93 4045580

Email: webmaster@boehringer-ingelheim.es

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.es

Fax: +55 (0) 11 55840376

Fax: +49 (0) 5206 704443
Web: www:bional.de

Fax: +351 21 3191289

Fax: +1 952 937 7979
Web: www.birchlabs.com

Fax: +49 (0) 89 4304043
Web: www:bittermedizin.com

Suppliers Directory

Boehringer Ingelheim Austria GmbH Dr Boehringer-Gasse 5-11, A-1121
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 801050

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.at

Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd 5780 South Service Rd, Burlington, L7L
5H4, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 6390333

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.ca

ion Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd P.O. Box 3031,

Fax: +43 (0) 1 8040823

Fax: +1 905 6393769

Boehringer Ingelheim, Di
47620 Subang Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 80246088

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 80249088

Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e Farm. Ltda Av. Maria Coelho Aguair
215, Bl. F. 3 degrees andar, 05805-000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37412181 Fax: +55 (0) 11 37411678

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com.br

Boehringer Ingelheim France 37-9 rue Boissiére, 75116 Paris, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 44346565 Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.fr

Boehringer Ingelheim Italia S.p.A. Via Lorenzini 8, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 53551 Fax: +39 02 5355222
Web: www:boehringer-ingelheim.it

Boehringer Ingelheim, Lda Av. Antonio Augusto de Aguiar 104, 1069-029
Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 3135300

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +351 21 3135303

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH Moscow Office, Donskaya ul. 39/9, Str.
1, 119049 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 4117801

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Binger Str. 173, 55216
Ingelheim, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 1805 779090 Fax: +49 (0) 6132 729999

Email: webmaster. bipd@boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.de

Fax: +7 095 4117802

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma Magyarorszagi Kereskedelmi Képviselet
Dobsinai u 19, 1124 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 2247120 Fax: +36 2247121

Boehringer Ingelheim Promeco, S.A. de C.V. Calle del Maiz No. 49, Col.
Xaltocan, Deleg. Xochimilco, 16090 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56298300 Fax: +52 55 56765866

Email: webmaster@mex.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com.mx

Boehringer Ingelheim S.A. Av. del Libertador 7208, 1429 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47048600

Web: www.bai.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47048630

Boehringer Ingelheim SA/NV Ave Ariane 16, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7733311 Fax: +32 (0) 2 7733300

Email: external@bru.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.be

Boehringer Ingelheim sro Lublariskd 21, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 21983111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21983222

Email: info@boehringer-ingelheim.cz. Web: www:boehringer-ingelheim.cz
Boehringer Ingelheim (Thai) Ltd 12 Fl, Charn Issara Tower Il, 2922/207-208
New Petchburi Rd, Bangkapi, Huay Kwang, Bangkok 10310, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 308 8500 Fax: +66 2 308 2117

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Boiron CZ sro Vikovd 40, 130 00 Prague 3, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 22722350 Fax: +420 (0) 2 22721139

Email: office@boiron.cz

Bolder Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Koblenzer Str. 65, 50968 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 376520 Fax: +49 (0) 221 3765225

Email: info@bolder.de Web: www.bolder.de

Boots Healthcare Doctor Zamenhof 36 Dup 2, 28027 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 7433930 Fax: +34 91 3249527

Email: info@bhi.com Web: www.bootshealthcare.es

Boots Healthcare Australia P/L Locked Bag 2067, North Ryde, NSW 1670,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98706000
Web: www.skinexpert.net

Fax: +61 (0) 2 98706100

5

----- PAGE 675 -----
Appendix 5

Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd P.O. Box 27-341, Wellington 1, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 4 4733859
Web: www.skinexpert.net
Boots Healthcare (SA) (Pty) Ltd 20 Zulberg Close, Building A, Entrance 2,
Johannesburg 2198, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 6165544

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Boots Healthcare S.p.A. Via Tarantelli 13/15, 22076 Mozzate (CO), Italy.
Tel: +39 0331 838111 Fax: +39 0331 821450

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal Untermuli 11, 6300 Zug,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 7632575
Web: www.skinexpert.net
Boots Trading (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Level 4, Wisma Samudra, 1 JIn Kontraktor
U1/14, Hicom-Glenmarie Industrial Park, 40150 Shah Alam, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 55695418 Fax: +60 (0) 3 55695452

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Bouty SpA V.le Casiraghi 471, 20099 Sesto S Giovanni (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 262891 Fax: +39 02 26221305

Bouzen S.A.C,.1.F.A.F. Calle 36 No. 165/67, 1900 La Plata, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 4839908
Bracco S.p.A. Via E. Folli 50, 20134 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 21771 Fax: +39 02 26410678
Web: www.bracco.com

Brady C. KG Horlgasse 5, A-1092 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 3106960

Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas Avenida Miguel Stefano 2278,
04301-002 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Brauer Natural Medicine P/L P.O. Box 234, Tanunda, SA 5352, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 8 85632932 Fax: +61 (0) 8 85633398

Email: admin@brauer.com.au Web: www.brauer.com.au

Bristol-Myers Squibb 3 rue Joseph-Monier, 92506 Rueill-Malmaison cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 58836000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 58836001

Email: infomed@bms.com Web: www.bms.com

British Dispensary 272 Moo 1 Soi Pattanasuk, Teparak Rd, Samutprakarn
10270, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2755 7300 Fax: +66 (0) 2755 7315

Email: customerservice@britishdispensary.com

British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association Ltd 2nd Floor Suite, 52 Albert Rd
North, Reigate, RH2 9EL, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1737 245638

Email: info@britishsnoring.co.uk
Bucca Juan Alvarez Mendizabal 43, 28008 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 5473463 Fax: +34 91 5473463

Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Anibal dos Anjos Carvalho 212,
04810-050 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 56660266 Fax: +55 (0) 11 56660739

Byk Nederland BV Weerenweg 29, 1161 AG Zwanenburg, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 20 4079400 Fax: +31 (0) 20 4976117

@

Cabassi & Giuriati S.p.A. Via Uruguay 20/22, Z.1. Padua, 35127 Padua, Italy.
Tel: +39 049 8705870 Fax: +39 049 8700783

Email: giuriati@tin.it Web: www.cabassi-giuriati.it
Ca.Di.Group S.r.1. Via Pieve Tesino 75, 00124 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 52363403 Fax: +39 06 52363401

Email: cadigroup@cadigroup.it Web: www.cadigroup.it

Caesaro Med GmbH Raidenstrasse 46, A-4060 Leonding, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 732 677164 Fax: +43 (0) 732 6771649

CAFAR (Compania Anonima Farmaceutica) Avenida M. Perez Pisanti, Sector
Industrial Los 3 puentes, Urb. El Tambor Los Teques, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3231811 Fax: +58 (0) 212 3231974

Email: cafar2000@cantv.net Web: www.cafar.com.ve

Capo Sole S.r.l. Via Edison 60, 20019 Settimo Milanese (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 33512309 Fax: +39 02 33500602

Carl Hoernecke GmbH Halberstadter Chaussee 22, 39116 Magdeburg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 391 635460
Email: info@hoernecke.com

Fax: +64 (0) 4 4722706

Fax: +27 (0) 11 6160710

Fax: +41 (0) 41 7632576

Web: www.bouzensa.com.ar

Fax: +44 (0) 1737 248744
Web: wwwbritishsnoring.co.uk

Fax: +49 (0) 391 6354627
Web: www:hoernecke.com

Carter Horner Inc. 6600 Kitimat Rd, Mississauga, LSN 1L9, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 8266200 Fax: +1 905 8260389

Casa Granado Lab. Farmacias e Drogarias S.A. Travessa do Comércio 17,
20010-080 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 2031212

Web: www.granado.com.br
Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG Gereonsmuhlengasse 1, 50670 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 120157
Email: cmed@cassella-med.de

Fax: +55 (0) 21 2215589

Fax: +49 (0) 221 124495

Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Anténio Lopes 17,
06600-000 Jandira, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 47075155 Fax: +55 (0) 11 47075144

C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L P.O. Box 716, Braeside, VIC 3195, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3. 95802755 Fax: +61 (0) 3 95802899

Email: cbfleet@hyperlink.net.au Web: www.ozpages.comcbfleet

C.B. Fleet Co. Inc. 4615 Murray Pl., P.O. Box 11349, Lynchburg, VA 24506,
USA.

Tel: +1 804 528 4000
Web: www.cbfleet.com
Cedar Health Ltd Pepper Rd, Bramhall Moor Lane, Hazel Grove, Stockport, SK7
SBW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 161 483 1235
Email: customerservices

Fax: +1 804 847 4219

Fax: +44 (0) 161 456 4321
darhealth.co.uk

Web: www.cedarhealth.co.uk

Cederroth C/Jose Bardasano Baos 9, Edificio Gorbea 3, 28016 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 3836171 Fax: +34 91 3836197

Email: info@cederroth.es Web: www.cederroth.com

Cefak KG Ostbahnhofstr. 15, 87437 Kempten, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 831 574010 Fax: +49 (0) 831 5740148

Email: cefak@cefak.com Web: www.cefak.com

Cesam, Lda Rua de Ceuta 4, Piso, 2795-056 Linda-a-Velha, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4142880 Fax: +351 21 4199496

Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Braunmattstr. 20, 76532 Baden-Baden,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7221 95400
Email: cesra@cesra.de

Ceutical Trading Co. Ltd Rm 24, 12/F, Goldfield Industrial Ctr, 1 Sui Wo Rd, Fo
Tan, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 26065262 Fax: +852 26917214

Chattem Consumer Products 1715 West 38th St, Chattanooga, TN 37409,
USA.

Tel: +1 615 821 4571
Chauvin ankerpharm GmbH Brunsbutteler Damm 165-173, 13581 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 33093300

Email: ankerpharm@bausch.com
Chefaro UK Ltd 7 Tower Close, St Peters Industrial Park, Huntingdon, PE29 7DH,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1480 421800
Email: enquiries@chefaro.co.uk
Chemische Fabrik Dr. Hetterich GmbH & Co. KG Gebhardtstr. 5, 90762
Furth/Bayern, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 97706
Web: www.hetterich.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7221 54026
Web: www:cesra.de

Web: www.chattem.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 33093350

Fax: +44 (0) 1480 434861
Web: wwwchefaro.com

Fax: +49 (0) 911 9770755

Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Géppingen Carl Miiller, Apotheker,
GmbH & Co. KG Bahnhofstr. 33-35 & 40, 73033 Goppingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7161 6760 Fax: +49 (0) 7161 676298

Email: info@mueller-goeppingen.de Web: www.mueller-goeppingen.de
Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH Bahnhofstr 1a, 17498 Mesekenhagen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 38351 53690
Web: www.cheplapharm.de
Chiesi Espafia Berlin 38-48, 7 planta, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4948000 Fax: +34 93 4948030
Email: chiesi@chiesi.es Web: www.chiesigroup.com

Fax: +49 (0) 38351536925

Chrisana GmbH Ruggenstrasse 31, 8903 Birmensdorf, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 17370069 Fax: +41 (0) 1 7370061
Web: www.chrisana.ch

Christo Pharmaceuticals Ltd Blk A-D, 14/F, Stage 2, Superluck Industrial Ctr, 57
Sha Tsui Rd, Tsuen Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24140146 Fax: +852 24935666

----- PAGE 676 -----
Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda Av. das Industrias 3651, 33040-130
Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 31 36414100
Web: www.cifarma.com.br

Email: cifarma@uai.com.br

Cimed Industria de Medicamentos Ltda Rua Engenheiro Prudente 119,
01550-000 Sdo Paulo Vila Monumento, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 69159090

Cinfa Olaz-Chipi 10, Poligono Areta, Huarte-Pamplona, 31620 Navarra, Spain.
Tel: +34 948 335005 Fax: +34 948 330367
Email: cinfa@cinfa.com Web: www.cinfa.com

Web: www.cimed.ind.br

Cipan, Companhia Industrial Produtora de Antibioticos SA Vala do
Carregado, Apartado 60, 2600-733 Castanheira do Ribatejo, Portugal.

Tel: +351 263 856800 Fax: +351 263 855020

Web: www.cipan.pt

Cipla Ltd Mumbai Central, Mumbai 400 008, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 23082891 Fax: +91 (0) 22 23070013

Web: www.cipla.com

Cipla-Medpro (Pty) Ltd Rosen Heights, Rosen Park, Bellville 7530, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 9140520 Fax: +27 (0) 21 9140247

Email: medical@ciplamedpro.co.za Web: www.ciplamedpro.co.za

CNW (Hong Kong) Ltd Rm 606, 6/F, Fo Tan Industrial Ctr, 26-28 Au Pui Wan
St, Fo Tan, Shatin, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 23882933

Email: cnw@cnw-hk.com
Colgate Palmolive Canada 99 Vanderhoof Ave, Toronto, M4G 2H6, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 4216000 Web: www.colgate.com

Coll Farma Napoles 166, 08013 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2314505

Combe Inc. 1701 Westchester Ave, White Plains, NY 10604, USA.

Tel: +1 914 694 5454 Fax: +1 800 431 2610

Email: combe@combe.com Web: www.combe.com

Comercial GFC SA de CV Blvd Juan A de Torres 220, 37360 Leon Gto Vibar,
Mexico.

Fax: +852 27712138
Web: www.cnwhk.com

Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica Rua Figueira de Melo 301, 20941-001 Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 30823535

Web: www.cif-farmaceutica.com.br
Concept for Pharmacy Ltd P.O. Box 2105, Kfar Sava 44643, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 7667890 Fax: +972 (0) 9 7667899

Email: info@concept-rx.co.il Web: www.concept-rx.co.il

Concept Pharmaceuticals Ltd 167 C.S.T. Rd, Santacruz (E), Mumbai 400 098,
India.

Confar, Lda Rua Sebastido e Silva 25, Zona Industrial de Massama, 2745-838
Queluz, Portugal.
Tel: +351 214 371009
Email: med@confar.pt

Fax: +55 (0) 21 30823527

Fax: +351 214 387489

Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise , 77020 Melun cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 64872000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 64872087

Cooperativa Farmaceutica Soc. (CoFa Farmaceutici) Via Passione 8, 20122
Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 784141 Fax: +39 02 781308

Coradol-Pharma GmbH Ludwig-Erhard-Str. 10, 50129 Bergheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2238 940251 Fax: +49 (0) 2238 940258
Email: info@coradol.de Web: www.coradol.de

Corifel SA Via Clemente Maraini 9, 6907 Lugano 7, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 9239657 Fax: +41 (0) 91 9210807

Cornelli Consulting Sas Corso Indipendenza 1, 20129 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 2714904 Fax: +39 (0) 2714904
Email: info@cornelliconsulting.it Web: www.cornelliconsulting.it

Corporacion de Salud C.A. Av. J. M. Vargas, Edif. Artico Piso 1 Oficina 15B, Sta.
Fe Norte Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9795945 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9795945
Cosmofarma, Lda (Laboratérios Cosmos) Rua Arco do Carvalhdo 14, 1070
Lisbon, Portugal.

Costec S.R.L. Esp. Dermatocosméticas Av. Corrientes 1296 Piso 7 Dto.76,
1043 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43818729 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43818729

Craveri S.A.I.C. Arengreen 830, 1405 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 51670555 Fax: +54 (0) 11 51670505
Web: www.craveri.com.ar

Suppliers Directory

Crefar, Lda Rua da Madalena 171, 1149-032 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8824690 Fax: +351 21 8862546
Email: mail@crefar.pt

Croma-Pharma GmbH /ndustriezeile 6, A-2100 Leobendorf, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 2262 684680 Fax: +43 (0) 2262 6846815

Crookes Healthcare Ltd D6 Building, Nottingham, NG90 6BH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 115 968 8922 Fax: +44 (0) 115 968 8923
Email: medicalinfo@crookes.co.uk Web: www.crookes.co.uk

CSL (NZ) Ltd P.O. Box 62590, Central Park, Auckland 6, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 5798105 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5798106
Web: www.

ct-Arzneimittel GmbH Lengeder Str. 42A, 13407 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 4090080 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40900821

Email: office@ct-berlin.de Web: wwwact-berlin.de

C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd 4 Haharosh St, P.O.Box 10, Hod-Hasharon
45240, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 7626333
Web: www.cts.co.il

I.com.au

ct

Fax: +972 (0) 9 7626300

Culpeper and Napiers Bourton Industrial Park, , Bourton-On-The-Water, GL54
2HQ, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1451 812 341 Fax: +44 (0) 1451 812 349

Email: wholesale@culpeperandnapier.co.uk

CuraMED Pharma GmbH Pforzheimer Str. 5, 76227 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 402089 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005530

CytoChemia AG Im Burgerstock 7, 79241 Ihringen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7668 99220 Fax: +49 (0) 7668 992233

Email: info@cytochemia.de Web: www.cytochemia.de

[D)

Darrow Laboratérios S.A. Rua Marques de Olinda 69, 22251-040 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25538150 Fax: +55 (0) 21 25532551

Davi Farmacéutica, Lda Estrada da Barrosa, Elospark, Arm. 8, Algueirdo, 2725-
193 Mem Martins, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9229720 Fax: +351 21 9229729

DC Labs Ltd 795 Pharmacy Ave, Toronto, MIL 3K2, Canada.

DDD Ltd 94 Rickmansworth Rd, Watford, WD1 7/JJ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 229251 Fax: +44 (0) 1923 220728
Email: info@dddltd.co.uk Web: www.dddgroup.co.uk

De Mayo Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda Rua Bardo de Petropolis
109, 20251-061 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 22931409

Defuen S.A. Av. Dorrego 331, 1414 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 48551249 Fax: +54 (0) 11 48562895

Delamac Pharmaceuticals P/L Suite 1/14 Hill Street, Spring Hill, Qld 4000,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 7 38321432

Email: delamac@healthnut.com.au

Fax: +61 (0) 7 38326623

Dentinox Gesellschaft fiir Pharmazeutische Praparate Lenk & Schuppan
Nunsdorfer Ring 19, 12277 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 7200340 Fax: +49 (0) 30 7211038

Email: dentinox@dentinox.de Web: www.dentinox.de

Depofarma S.r.I. Via Guindazzi 44/54, 80040 Pollena Trocchia (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 081 5305468 Fax: +39 081 5302124
Email: info@dermilia.it

Dermofarm Can Sant Joan, Rubi, 08191 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 6026026 Fax: +34 93 6026036
Email: email@dermofarm.com Web: www.dermofarm.com

Dermofarma Italia S.r.l. Via Beata Francesca 10, 83100 Avellino, Italy.
Tel: +39 0825 30263 Fax: +39 0825 30263

Dermoteca, SA Estrada Nacional 117, 2720 Alfragide, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4718322 Fax: +351 21 4718381

Desma Healthcare BV Corso San Gottardo 32, 6830 Chiasso, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 6831506 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6831509

Deutsche Homéopathie-Union Ottostr. 24, 76227 Karlsruhe, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 721 409301 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4093263
Web: www.dhu.de

Devergé Medicina e Medicalizzazione S.r.l. C.so Casale 206, 10132 Turin,
Italy.

Tel: +39 O11 8993844 Fax: +39 011 8995514

----- PAGE 677 -----
Appendix 5

Dexxon P.O. Box 50, Hadera 38100, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 6 6364000 Fax: +972 (0) 6 6364004

Email: info@dexcel.com Web: www.dexxon.co.il

Diafarm Avda Arraona 119-123, Barbera del Valles, 08210 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 7192120 Fax: +34 93 7192104

Email: info@diafarm.es Web: www.diafarm.es

Dicofarm S.p.A. Via Vitorchiano 151, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3322891 Fax: +39 06 3332172

Email: dicofarm@dicofarm.it Web: www.dicofarm.it

Diethelm & Co. Ltd Pharmaceutical Division, 280 New Rd, Bangkok 10100,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 221 1121
Email: ditco@loxinfo.co.th
Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd 74 JIn Universiti, 46700 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 79660288 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79576649

Web: www.
Diethelm Singapore Pte Ltd 34 Boon Leat Terrace, $ 119866, Singapore.
Tel: +65 6471 0888 Web: www.diethelm.com.sg

Dispolab Farmaceutica SA Santa Victoria 213, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.
Dist. Ofar S.A. Salom 651, 1277 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43018687

DM Inddstria Farmacéutica Ltda Av. Piracema 155, 06460-030 Barueri, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 41952122 Fax: +55 (0) 11 41914855

DMG Italia S.r.1. Via Campello sul Clitunno 34, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 78359715 Fax: +39 06 78359719

Email: info@dmgit.com

Doetsch Grether AG , 4002 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2873411 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2873413

Web: www.doetschgrether.ch

Dolisos SA Rue Carli 5, 1140 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 2406770 Fax: +32 (0) 2 2406771

Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG Otto-von-Guericke-Str. 1, 53757 St. Augustin/Bonn,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2241 3170 Fax: +49 (0) 2241 317390

Donini S.r.1. Via Ecce Homo 18, 37054 Nogara (VR), Italy.

Tel: +39 0442 88922 Fax: +39 0442 50537

Dorwest Herbs Ltd Shipton Gorge, Bridport, DT6 4LP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1308 987272 Fax: +44 (0) 1308 987929

Email: info@dorwest.co.uk Web: www.dorwest.co.uk

Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd P.O. Box 7004, Baulkham Hills
Business Centre, Baulkham Hills, NSW 2153, Australia.

Tel: +61 1800 678 302 Fax: +61 (0) 2 88182122

Web: www.douglas.com.au

Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd P.O. Box 45-027, Auckland, New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 8350660 Fax: +64 (0) 9 8350665

Web: www.douglas.co.nz

DP-Medica SA, Pharmazeutische Produkte Case postale 238, Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 26 4929370 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4929371

Dr A & L Schmidgall Wolfganggasse 45-7, A-1121 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 81158 Fax: +43 (0) 1 811587

Dr A & M Kropf Promenade, 3780 Gstaad, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 33 7488626 Fax: +41 (0) 33 7488620

Email: apotheke.kropf@gstaad.ch

Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik Dr. Atzinger Str. 5, 94036 Passau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 851 955210 Fax: +49 (0) 851 9552155

Dr. August Wolff Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. Sudbrackstr. 56, 33611 Bielefeld,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 521 880805

Email: info@wolff-arzneimittel.de
Dr AW Gubler Petersgraben 5, 4051 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2612026 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2616513
Dr. C. Soldan GmbH Herderstr. 5-9, 90427 Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 327801 Fax: +49 (0) 911 3278159
Web: www.soldan.com

Fax: +66 2 224 8475
Web: www.diethelmpharma-thailand.com

iethelmkeller.com

Fax: +49 (0) 521 8808334
Web: www.wolff-arzneimittel.de

Dr Dinner SA Artherstrassec 60, 6405 Immensee, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 8544600 Fax: +41 (0) 41 8544603

Dr. E. Ritsert GmbH & Co. KG Klausenweg 12, 69412 Eberbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6271 92210 Fax: +49 (0) 6271 922155

Email: info@ritsert.de Web: wwwaritsert.de

Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH Leinenweberstr. 5, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 761 15140 Fax: +49 (0) 761 1514321
Email: zentrale@drfalkpharma.de Web: www.drfalkpharma.de

Dr. Falk Pharma Portugal Lda Av. José Gomes Ferreira 11, Edificio Atlas Il - 3
Piso, Sala 33, Miraflores, 1495-139 Algés, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4126170 Fax: +351 21 4126179

Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel Hohenburger Str. 39, 92289 Ursensollen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9628 91368
Email: info@eberth.de

Dr Gerhard Mann, Chem.-pharm. Fabrik GmbH Brunsbutteler Damm 165-
73, 13581 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 330930
Email: dmp@bausch.com

Dr Grandel GmbH Pfladergasse 7-13, 86150 Augsburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 821 32020 Fax: +49 (0) 821 3202229
Web: www.grandel.de

Dr Grossmann AG, Pharmaca Hardstrasse 25, Postfach 914, 4127 Birsfelden/
Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3775000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3775050

Email: administration@grossmannpharma.com

Web: www.grossmannpharma.com

Fax: +49 (0) 9628 91399
Web: www:eberth.de

Fax: +49 (0) 30 33093350
Web: www:mannpharma.de

Dr Gustav Klein Steinenfeld 3, 77736 Zell am Harmersbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7835 63550 Fax: +49 (0) 7835 634685

Email: info@klien-phytopharma.de Web: www.klein-phytopharma.de
Dr Heinz Welti AG Althofstrasse 12, 5432 Neuenhof, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 56 4062994 Fax: +41 (0) 56 4061764

Email: info@drwelti.ch

Dr. Hobein & Co. Nachf. GmbH Arzneimittel Grenzstr. 2, 53340
Meckenheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2225 $8940
Email: info@eubos.de
Dr Kade Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH Rigistr. 2, 12277 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 720820 Fax: +49 (0) 30 72082200

Email: info@kade.de Web: www.kade.de

Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH Gastgebgasse 5-13, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8691604 Fax: +43 (0) 1 869160418

Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH Schutzenstr. 5, 21423 Winsen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4171 7070 Fax: +49 (0) 4171 707100

Email: info@loges.com Web: wwwloges.com

Dr med G Knobel AG Bahnhofstrasse 9, 8730 Uznach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2804020

Dr Niedermaier GmbH Taufkirchner Str. 59, 85662 Hohenbrunn bei Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6607970

Email: info@niedermaier-pharma.de
Dr. Ottolenghi & C. S.r.I. Via Cuneo 5, 10028 Trofarello (TO), Italy.

Tel: +39 011 6481028 Fax: +39 011 6497132

Email: info@ottolenghi.it Web: www.ottolenghi.it

Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co. Richard-Strauss-Strasse 13, A-1232
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61626440 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616264418

Dr R. Pfleger Chemische Fabrik GmbH , 96045 Bamberg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 951 60430 Fax: +49 (0) 951 604329

Email: info@dr-pfleger.de Web: www.dr-pfleger.de

Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG Senefelderstr. 44, 51469 Bergisch
Gladbach, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2202 1050 Fax: +49 (0) 2202 105344

Dr W Schwabe Pol Ind Francoli, Parcela 3, Nave 2, 43006 Tarragona, Spain.
Tel: +34 977 550542 Fax: +34 977 550848

Web: www.schwabepharma.com

Fax: +49 (0) 2225 889466
Web: www:eubos.de

Fax: +49 (0) 89 66079750
Web: www:niedermaier-pharma.de

Dr. Werner Janssen Nachf. Chem.-pharm. Produkte GmbH Grenzstr. 2,
53340 Meckenheim, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2225 $8940 Fax: +49 (0) 2225 889466

Dr Wild & Co. AG Lange Gasse 4, 4002 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2799000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2799009

Email: info@wild-pharma.com Web: www.wild-pharma.com

Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co. Willmar-Schwabe-Str. 4, 76227 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 40050
Web: www:schwabe.de

Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005500

----- PAGE 678 -----
Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH Marktplatz 5, 31840
Hessisch Oldendorf, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5152 94240

Web: www.dreluso.de

Drossapharm SA Postfach 2660, 4002 Basle, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 7021000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7021005
Email: info@drossapharm.ch Web: www.drossapharm.ch

Fax: +49 (0) 5152 3408

Duopharm GmbH Grassingerstr. 9, 83043 Bad Aibling, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8061 931400 Fax: +49 (0) 8061 931425
Email: info@duopharm.de Web: www.duopharm.de

Dyckerhoff Pharma GmbH & Co. Robert-Perthel-Str. 49, 50739 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 9574370

Web: www.dyckerhoff-pharma.de

Fax: +49 (0) 221 95743745

Dynacren Laboratorio Farmaceutico del Dott. A. Francioni e di M. Gerosa
S.r.1. Via P Nenni 12, Loc Malpensa, 28053 Castelletto Ticino (NO), Italy.

Tel: +39 0331 924205 Fax: +39 0331 913415

Email: dynacren@dyneren.it Web: www.dynacren.it

CE)

E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitaten Hauptstrasse 23, 8867
Niederumen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 6102727

Email: kern.pharma@bluewin.ch

Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 927, Castle Hill, NSW 1765, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98999099 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98996564

Eastern Pharmaceuticals Ltd Coomb House, St. Johns Rd, Isleworth, TW7 6NA,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8569 8174 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8569 8175

Email: sales@eastern-pharmaceuticals.co.uk

Web: www.eastern-pharmaceuticals.co.uk

Ebewe Pharma (ASIA) Ltd 8/F Eastwood Ctr, 5 A Kung Ngam Village Rd,
Shaukeiwan, Hong Kong.
Email: asia@ebewe.com.hk

E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd Tudor Rd, Manor Park, Runcorn, WA7 1SZ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1928 579029 Fax: +44 (0) 1928 579712
Email: info@ecdewitt.com Web: www.ecdewitt.co.uk

Fax: +41 (0) 55 6102508

EciFarma SA Carmen Covarrubias 271, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Ecofarm Group Srl Via F Vezzani 99/r, 16159 Genoa Rivarolo, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 107261682 Fax: +39 (0) 107268296
Email: ecofarmgroup@tin.it

Ecosol AG Hinterbergstrasse 24, 6330 Cham, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 7483080 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7483081
Email: contact@ecosol.ch Web: www.ecosol.ch

Edmond Pharma S.r.I. Via dei Giovi 131, 20037 Paderno Dugnano (MI), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 9100111 Fax: +39 02 91001351

EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co. Scheidlstrasse 28, A-1180 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 4792142 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4700746

EG Laboratori EuroGenerici S.p.A. Via Domenico Scarlatti 31, 20124 Milan,
Italy.
Tel: +39 02 8310371 Fax: +39 02 83103776

EGIS Pharmaceuticals Hungaria krt 179-187, 1146 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 4692222 Fax: +36 3839257

Eladon Ltd P.O. Box 111, Bangor, LLS7 1ZB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1248 370059 Fax: +44 (0) 1248 364208
Web: www.elagen.com

Elhoim S.R.L. Independencia 2809 Piso 6 Dto. A, 1225 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 48151105

Ellem Lakemedel AB Svdrdvdgen 13, 182 12 Danderyd, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 54496030 Fax: +46 (0) 8 54496049
Email: info@ellem.nu Web: www.ellem.nu

Elvetium S.A. Catulo Castillo 2437, 1261 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43081474 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49415980

Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd Phileo Damansara II, Lot 3A03, Block B, No 15, JIn
16/11, Off JIn Damansara, 46350 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79560658 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79552260

Email: info@emergingp.com Web: www.emergingp.com

Emonta Pharma GmbH Weidelstrasse 21, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 6892035 Fax: +43 (0) 1 6892037

Suppliers Directory

EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia SP 101, Km 08, 13186-481 Hortolandia,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 38879800 Fax: +55 (0) 19 38879824

Email: departamentomedico@ems.com.br

Web: www.ems.com.br

Engelhard Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Herzbergstr. 3, 61138
Niederdorfelden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6101 539300
Email: info@engelhard-am.de
ERA Medical ApS Storeholm 25, 2670 Greve, Denmark.

Tel: +45 46151677 Fax: +45 43600301

Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd 29 High St, Crediton, EX17 3AP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1363 633000 Fax: +44 (0) 1363 636063

Web: www.ejackson.co.uk

Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A. Via C. Menotti 1/A, 20129 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 7491345 Fax: +39 02 715734

Esp. Medicinales Northia S.A.C.I.F.1.A. Madero 135, 1408 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46440911 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46427975

esparma GmbH Lange Gohren 3, 39171 Osterweddingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 39205 420 Fax: +49 (0) 39205 42240

Email: info@esparma.de Web: www.esparma.de
Esplanade-Apotheke Esplanade 18, A-4820 Bad Ischl, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 6132 23427 Fax: +43 (0) 6132 2342716

Eu Rho OTC Pharma GmbH Kamen Karree 32-34, 59174 Kamen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2307 2020 Fax: +49 (0) 2307 202155

Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L. Emilio Mitre 1790/94, 1424 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49213310 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49248090

Euroderm S.r.l. V.le Italia 147, 19126 La Spezia, Italy.

Tel: +39 0187 777276 Fax: +39 0187 778424

Web: www.euroderm.net

Euroderm-RDC S.p.A. P.le Aquileia 8, 20144 Milan (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 335728 Fax: +39 02 33572818

Eurofarma Laboratorios Ltda Rua Bardo do Triunfo 1440, 04602-005 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50908600

Email: euroatende@eurofarma.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 6101 539315
Web: www:engelhard-am.de

Fax: +55 (0) 11 50908742
Web: www.eurofarmalaboratorio.com.br
Europharm Jochen-Rindt-Strasse 23, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61684250 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616842510

Europharm Trade Kft Kovirdzsa ut 5, 1163 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 4024204 Fax: +36 4024205

Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Agostinho
Teixeira de Lima 344, 04826-230 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 59284199
Expanscience Pol. Ind. Los Olivos, Adaptacidn 33, Getafe, 28906 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 6011070 Fax: +34 91 6011076

Email: infomustela@expanscience.es Web: www.mustela.com

E-Z-EM Canada Inc. 17 065 L-H Lafontaine, Anjou, H1) 2Z4, Canada.

Tel: +1 514 3535820 Fax: +1 514 3533450

Email: info@ezemcanada.com Web: www.ezemeanada.com

CF)

F. Joh. Kwizda Fffingergasse 21, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 48855 Fax: +43 (0) 1 48855320

F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH Goldeggassee 5, A-1040
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 50503410 Fax: +43 (0) 1 505034131

F, Uhlmann-Eyraud SA 28 chemin du Grand-Puits, 1217 Meyrin 2/Geneva,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 9893100 Fax: +41 (0) 22 9893105

Faes Farma Alpedrete 24, 28045 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 4680800 Fax: +34 91 4685934

Web: www.faes.es

Falqui Prodotti Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Fabio Filzi 8, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 67078288 Fax: +39 02 6694509

F.A.M.A. Istituto Chimico Biologico S.r.1. Via A. Sauli 21, 20127 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 2846802 Fax: +39 02 26824535

Faran Laboratories S.A. Achaias & Troizinias, 145 64 N. Kifisia, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 6269200 Fax: +30 210 8071688

Email: faran@faran.gr Web: www.faran.gr

Web: www.eversil.com.br

----- PAGE 679 -----
Appendix 5

Fardi Grassot 16, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2073751 Fax: +34 93 4570717

Email: lab@fardi.es Web: www.fardi.es

Farm Vilar ZAO Grina ul. 7, 117216 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7121081 Fax: +7 095 7121072

Web: www.farmvilar.ru

Farma Lepori Osi 7-9, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2534500 Fax: +34 93 3940900

Email: farmalepori@finaf92.¢s Web: wwwfarmalepori.com
Farmaceutici Ecobi s.a.s. Via E. Bazzano 26, 16019 Ronco Scrivia (GE), Italy.
Tel: +39 010 935280 Fax: +39 010 9350679

Email: ecobi@aleph.it

G.B. Panzera S.r.l. Via de Sanctis 71, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 89502462 Fax: +39 02 89502459

Farmachimici S.r.1. Via Mercanti 36, 84121 Salerno, Italy.

Tel: +39 089 252389 Fax: +39 081 5552728

Email: info@farmachimici.it Web: www.farmachimici.it

Farmalab Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda Av. BrigADEIRO Faria
Lima 1811, 12 degrees andar, 01451-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 30970012 Fax: +55 (0) 11 30952357

Email: cientifico@farmalabchiesi.com.br Web: www.farmalabchiesi.com.br
Farmalight, Lda Rua Padre Américo 18, Escritorio 1, 1600-548 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7122240 Fax: +351 21 7122245

Email: farmalight@farmalight.pt Web: www.farmalight.pt

Farmanova AFM S.r.|. Via Flaminia 287 Sc. A. int.10, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3210307 Fax: +39 06 3212996

Email: farmanova@tiscali.it Web: www.farmanova.org

Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. Pforzheimer Str. 5, 76227 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 40050 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005500

Farmasierra S.A. Ctra de Irun Km 26.2, San Sebastian de Los Reyes, 28100
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 6570659

Email: farmasierra@farmasierra.com
Farmasur Pol Store C/H 28-A, 41008 Seville, Spain.

Farmigea Industria Chimico Farmaceutica S.p.A. Via G. Oliva n. 8, 56121
Ospedaletto-Pisa, Italy.
Tel: +39 050 31211
Email: info@farmigea.it
Farmila-Thea Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via E. Fermi 50, 20019 Settimo Milanese
(Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 335501 Fax: +39 02 3285160

Web: www.farmila.it

Fax: +34 91 6539805
Web: www.farmasierra.com

Fax: +39 050 3121.
Web: www-farmigea.it

Farmion Laboratério Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda Avenida Celso dos
Santos 579, 04658-240 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55620742 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55620742

Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA Av. Grecia 2208, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Farmoquimica Baldacci, SA Rua Duarte Galvdo 44, 1549-005 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7783031 Fax: +351 21 7785457

Farmoterapica Dovalle Industria Quimica Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia SC
438 Km 3, 88701970 Tubarao, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 48 6280337

Febena Pharma GmbH Oskar-Jager-Str. 115, 50825 Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 9544770 Fax: +49 (0) 221 9544775

Email: info@febena.de Web: www.febena.de

Fed. Arg. de Coop. Farm. Av. Pte. Peron 2742, 1754 San Justo, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 44825522 Fax: +54 (0) 11 44825549

Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L P.O. Box 74, Oakleigh South, VIC 3167,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 3 95627711
Web: www.fgb.com.au
Ferlito Farmaceutici, Divisione Palmares S.p.A. Via E Ramarini 31-33, 00016
Monterotondo Scalo (RM), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 9060327

Email: ferlitoromaced@kosmos.it
Ferrer Farma Edifici L’illa, Diagonal 549. 5a planta, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 6003700 Fax: +34 93 4907078

Email: ferrerfarma@ferrergrupo.com Web: wwwferrergrupo.com

Ferring Arzneimittel GmbH Wienerbergstrasse 11, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 60808 Fax: +43 (0) 1 6080880

Web: www.ferring.com

Fax: +61 (0) 3 95627291

Fax: +39 06 9060932
Web: www.ferlitofarmaceutici.it

Ferring Portuguesa, Lda Rua Professor Henrique de Barros, Edificio Sagres, 8 -
Sala A, 2685-338 Prior Velho, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 9405190

Web: www.ferring.com

Ferring S.A. de C.V. Av. Nemesio Diez Riega Mza. 2 Lote 15, Col. Parque
Industrial Cerrillo Il, 52000 Lerma, Mexico.

Tel: +52 728 2825636 Fax: +52 728 2825635

Web: www.ferring.com

Fher,
Italy.
Tel: +39 055 86501 Fax: +39 055 8650222

FIC Medical Krasnopresnenskaya nab. 12, Gostinitsa International-2, Of. 742,
123610 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 2582006
Email: fmv@aha.ru
FidesLine Biologische Heilmittel Heel GmbH Dr.-Reckeweg-Str. 2-4, 76532
Baden-Baden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7221 501200
Web: www.fides.de

Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Ponte della Fabbrica 3/A, 35031 Abano Terme
(Padua), Italy.

Tel: +39 049 8232111 Fax: +39 049 810653

Fischer Pharmaceuticals Ltd P.O. Box 39071, Tel Aviv 61390, Israel.

Tel: +972 3 6772081 Fax: +972 3 6776959

Email: info@dr-fischer.com Web: www.dr-fischer.com

FIT Pharma GmbH Humboldstr. 4, 32756 Detmold, Germany.

Email: info@docsalbe.de Web: www.docsalbe.de

Fitobucaneve S.r.I. Via Galvani 25/27, 20018 Sedriano (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 90111001 Fax: +39 02 90111003

Flordis Pty Ltd Level 2, 3 Carlingford Rd, Epping, NSW 2121, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98694111 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98694155

Email: flordis@flordis.com.au Web: www.flordis.com.au

Floris , Misgav 20179, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 9991333 Fax: +972 (0) 4 9991336

Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda Rua Antdnio das Chagas 862, 04714-001 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 51829655

Email: fontovit@fontovit.com.br
Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas Rivadavia 5747 Piso 5 Dto.A, 1406 Cdad.,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 44319702 Fax: +54 (0) 11 44319702
franconpharm Arzneimittel GmbH Alexandrinenstr. 1, 96450 Coburg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9561 20615 Fax: +49 (0) 9561 20617

Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) LtdFrank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries
Ltd) Dean Street, , Bristol, BS2 8FR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 117 942 8704 Fax: +44 (0) 117 944 1297

Email: info@robertsherbalmedicines.co.uk

Web: www.robertsherbalmedicines.co.uk

Fritz Zilly GmbH Eckbergstr. 18, 76534 Baden-Baden, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7221 73734 Fax: +49 (0) 7221 73733

Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH Berg-am-Laim-Str. 129, 81673 Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 454401

Email: info@fujisawa-deutschland.de
Fujisawa GmbH Linzerstrasse 221/E0.2, A-1140 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 87726680 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8771636
Web: wwwfujisawa.at

@

G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co. Kieler Str. 11, 25551 Hohenlockstedt, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 4826 590 Fax: +49 (0) 4826 59109

Web: www.pohl-boskamp.de

G. Streuli & Co. AG , 8730 Uznach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2859292 Fax: +41 (0) 55 2859290
Galactopharm Hans Sanders Sudstr. 10, 49751 Sogel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5952 9250 Fax: +49 (0) 5952 9251

Email: infos@galactopharm.de Web: www.galactopharm.de
Galderma Mexico S.A. de C.V. Jose Maria Ibarraran No. 20, Col. San Jose
Insurgentes, 03900 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55934355 Fax: +52 55 55933420

Web: www-galderma.com.mx

Fax: +351 21 9405199

ione della Boehringer Ingelheim Casella Postale, 50100 Florence,

Fax: +7 095 2582007
Web: www.aha.ru

Fax: +49 (0) 7221 501160

Fax: +55 (0) 11 51829604
Web: www.fontovit.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 89 45441329
Web: www.fujisawa-deutschland.de

----- PAGE 680 -----
Galen Ltd Seagoe Industrial Estate, Craigavon, BT63 SUA, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 28 3833 4974 Fax: +44 (0) 28 3835 0206

Email: galen@galen.co.uk Web: wwwgalenple.com

GD Tecnologie Interdisciplinari Farmaceutiche S.r.l. Via Augusto Gaudenzi
29, 00163 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 66418170
Web: www.gditalia.biz
Gebro Pharma GmbH , A-6391 Fieberbrunn, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 5354 53000 Fax: +43 (0) 5354 53500710

Email: pharma@gebro.com Web: www.gebro.com

Gebro Pharma SA Postfach 397, 4410 Liestal, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 9268833 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9268844

Email: info@gebro.ch Web: www.gebro.com

Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV Circuito Centro Civico 27, 53100 Naucalpan
de Juarez Ciudad Satel, Mexico.

General Nutrition Canada 6299 Airport Td, Ste 201, Mississauga, L4V 1N3,
Canada.

Fax: +39 06 66415358

Generfarma Los Centelles 7, 46006 Valencia, Spain.
Tel: +34 96 3742212 Fax: +34 96 3951982

Georg Simons GmbH Bunsenstr. 1, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried, Germany.
Tel: £49 (0) 89 8991620 Fax: +49 (0) 89 8575742
Email: simons@merz.de Web: www.simons.de

Geritrex Corp. 144 Kingsbridge Rd East, Mt Vernon, NY 10550, USA.

Tel: +1 914 668 4003 Fax: +1 914 668 4047

Email: info@geritrex.com Web: wwwageritrex.com

German Remedies Ltd Shivsagar Estate ‘A’, Dr Annie Besant Rd, Worli, Mumbai
400 018, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4935528 Fax: +91 (0) 22 4950327

Web: www.germanremedies.com

Germania Pharmazeutika GmbH Schuselkagasse 8, A-1150 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 9823399 Fax: +43 (0) 1 982339924
Gerot-Pharmazeutika GmbH Arnethgasse 3, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48535050 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4857773
Gervasi Farmacia C/Juan XXIII 15-19, 08950 Brcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4809911
Geymonat S.p.A. Via S. Anna 2, 03012 Anagni (FR), Italy.
Tel: +39 0775 768081 Fax: +39 0775 768082
Giovanardi Farmaceutici S.n.c. del Dr Benito Giovanardi e Figli Via Sapeto
28, 16131 Genoa, Italy.
Tel: +39 010 381651
Email: info@giovanardi.net
i S.p.A. Via Figini 41, 20053 Muggio (MI), Italy.
Fax: +39 039 2782958
Web: www.ogna.it

Fax: +39 010 393248
Web: www.giovanardi.net
Giovanni Ogna & Fi:
Tel: +39 039 2782954
Email: ogna@ogna.it
Gisand AG Schlaflistrasse 14, 3013 Berne, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3323113

Giuliani S.p.A. Via Palagi 2, 20129 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 20541 Fax: +39 02 2054297

GlaxoSmithKline Av. Andres Bello 2687, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
GlaxoSmithKline Private Bag 10-6600, Downtown, Aukland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3672900 Fax: +64 (0) 9 3672910

Web: www.gsk.co.nz

GlaxoSmithKline Talstrasse 3-5, 3053 Munchenbuchsee, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 8622111 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8622200

Web: www.glaxosmithkline.ch

GlaxoSmithKline 5 Moore Drive, P.O. Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA.

Tel: +1 215 751 4000
GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda Estrada dos Bandeirantes 8464, 22783-110 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 21 24446000
Web: www.gsk.com.br
GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare 2030 Bristol Circle, Oakville, L6H 5V2,
Canada.

Tel: +1 905 8292030
Web: wwwegsk.ca
GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare 980 Great West Rd, Brentford, TW8
9BD, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8047 5000
Web: www.gsk.com

Web: www.gsk.com

Fax: +55 21 24446001

Fax: +1 905 8296064

Fax: +44 (0) 20 8990 4328

Suppliers Directory

GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co. KG Bussmatten 1,
77815 Buhl, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7223 760

Web: www.gsk-consumer.de
GlaxoSmithKline Mexico S.A. de C.V. Calz. Mexico-Xochimilco No. 4900,
Deleg. Tlalpan San Lorenzo Huipulco, 14370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 4838300 Fax: +52 55 54838629

Web: www.gsk.com.mx

GlaxoSmithKline Pharma Albert-Schweitzer-Gasse 6, A-1140 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 970750 Fax: +43 (0) 1 97075198
Web: www.gsk.com

GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals (India) Ltd Dr Annie Besant Rd, Mumbai
400 025, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4933871
Web: www.gsk.com

GlaxoSmithKline S.A. Carlos Casares 3690, 1644 Victoria, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47258900
Web: www.gsk.com

Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd 801-813, 8th Floor, Mahalaxmi Chambers, 22
Bhulabhai Desai Rd, Mumbai 400 026, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4964893 Fax: +91 (0) 22 4932648

Web: www.glenmarkpharma.com

GNLD International P/L P.O. Box 419, Beenleigh, Qld 4207, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 7 38053499 Fax: +61 (0) 7 38052728
Web: www.gnld.com.au

Gordon Laboratories 6801 Ludlow St, Upper Darby, PA 19082-2408, USA.
Tel: +1 610 734 2011 Fax: +1 800 347 5678

Web: www.gordonlabs.com

Gothaplast Verbandpflasterfabrik GmbH Postfach: 100132, 99851 Gotha/
Thuringen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 3621 30650 Fax: +49 (0) 3621 306530

Email: gothaplast@aol.com Web: www.gothaplast.de

GPL Ginsana Products Lugano SA, Tochterunternehmen der Pharmaton
SA Postfach, 6903 Lugano, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 6103111 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6103211

Web: www.pharmaton-sa.ch

G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd Sisson Rd, Gloucester, GL1 3QB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1452 524012 Fax: +44 (0) 1452 507930
Web: www.laneshealth.com

Graf Fruttasan AG Untere Etzmatten 16, 4467 Rothenfluh/BL, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 9959595 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9959590
Email: info@fruttasan.ch Web: www.fruttasan.ch

Grafton Pharmasia Pte Ltd 66 Tannery Lane, 01-05A Sindo Building, S 347805,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6841 3606

Web: www.grafton.com.sg

Great Eastern Healthcare Ltd 9/F, Blk A Kerry BCI Godown, 3 Kin Chuen St,
Kwai Chung, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 24818832

Email: gehl@gehl.com.hk

Great Liaison Ltd Unit 705, Fibres & Fabrics Industrial Ctr, 7 Shing Yip St, Kwun
Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: 4-852 28516662 Fax: +852 28505314

Greater Pharma Ltd Part 46, 46/1-2 Soi Charansanitwongs 40, Bangyikhan,
Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 433 0256

Email: greater@mozart.inet.co.th

Fax: +49 (0) 7223 764000

Fax: +91 (0) 22 4935358

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47460244

Fax: +65 6841 7526

Fax: +852 26101483

Fax: +66 2 433 0076

Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda Quadra 2-A Modulos 32/35
DAIA, 75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 62 3106400 Fax: +55 (0) 62 3106401

Email: greenpharma@greenpharma.com.br

Web: www.greenpharma.com.br

Group Laboratories SA (Pty) Ltd 27 Wrench Rd, Isando, South Africa.
Grunenthal Chilena Ltda Av. Providencia 727, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Griinenthal Lda Rua Alfredo da Silva no 16, 2610-016 Amadora, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4726300 Fax: +351 21 4710910

Web: www.grunenthal.com

Griinenthal Venezolana C.A. Av. 1, Torre Centro Profesional Los Samanes Piso
6, Urb. Los Samanes, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9498511 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9450201

Email: info@grunenthal.com.ve Web: www.grunenthal.com.ve

----- PAGE 681 -----
Appendix 5

Grupo Farma S.A. Av. Principal, Los Ruices, Edif. Farma, Urb. Los Ruices, Caracas
1071, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2026200
Web: www.grupofarma.com
Gulf Pharmaceutical Industries, Julphar P.O. Box 997, Ras Al Khaimah, United
Arab Emirates.

Tel: +971 7 2461461
Web: wwwjulphar.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2377456

Fax: +971 7 2462462

Gynea Laboratorios Avda Cataluna 127 B, 08184 Palau-Solita i Plegamans,
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 8639560
Email: gynea@gynea.com

cH)

Hamilton Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 7, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 8 82232957 Fax: +61 (0) 8 82321480
Email: enquire@hamiltonlabs.com.au Web: www.hamiltonlabs.com.au

Fax: +34 93 8646853
Web: www.gynea.com

Hanseler AG Industriestrasse 35, 9100 Herisau, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 71 3535858 Fax: +41 (0) 71 3535800
Web: www.haenseler.ch

Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH Am Harras 15, 81373 Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 7473670
Email: mail@harraspharma.de
Hautel S.A. Warnes 829 Dto. A, 1414 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 48556753

Health Imports Ltd Binbrook Mill, Young Street, Bradford, BD8 9RE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1274 488511

Health Perception Ltd Lakeside Business Park, Swan Lane, Sandhurst, GU47
9DN, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1252 861454 Fax: +44 (0) 1252 861455
Email: queries@health-perception.co.uk Web: www:health-perception.co.uk

Fax: +49 (0) 89 74736719
Web: www:harraspharma.de

Healthy Direct Unit C, Empress Park, 179 Empress Road, Southampton, SO14
OJX, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 800 107 5757

Email: customercare@healthydirect.co.uk

Fax: +44 (0) 800 O11 1132

Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica Rua Ribeiro de Brito 573, 6
andar, 51021-310 Recife, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 81 34649294

Email: hebron@hebron.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 81 34649268
Web: www:hebron.com.br

Helago-Pharma GmbH Rheinallee 11, 53173 Bonn, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 228 956940 Fax: +49 (0) 228 956949

Email: helago@t-online.de Web: wwwhelago.de

Helixor Heilmittel GmbH & Co. Fischermuhle 1, 72348 Rosenfeld, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7428 9350 Fax: +49 (0) 7428 935102

Email: mail@helixor.de Web: www.helixor.de

Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Liebigstr. 1-2, 65439 Florsheim am
Main, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6145 5080

Email: medwiss@hennig-am.de
Herbal Concepts Ltd 2 Park St., Woburn, MK17 9PG, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1525 292345 Fax: +44 (0) 1525 292346

Email: contactus@herbal-concepts.co.uk Web: www.herbal-concepts.co.uk

Herbal Laboratories Ltd Malew House, 21 Malew St., Castletown, IM9 1AD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1624 827885 Fax: +44 (0) 1624 824623

Web:
Herbalist & Doc Gesundheitsgesellschaft mbH Waldseeweg 6, 13467 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 40008100
Email: info@herbalist-doc.com
Herbamed AG Untere Au, 9055 Buhler, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 7918050 Fax: +41 (0) 71 7933720

Email: herbamed@access.ch Web: www.herbamed.ch

Herbarium Laboratério Botanico Ltda Rua Maua 838, 80030-200 Curitiba,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 41 2545450 Fax: +55 (0) 41 2546511

Email: decex@herbarium.net Web: www.herbarium.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 6145 508140
Web: www:hennig-am.de

ywwherballaboratories.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 40008500
Web: www:herbalist-doc.com

Herbert Bregenzer Am Damm 20, A-6820 Frastanz, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5522 51127 Fax: +43 (0) 5522 5112721

Herbes Universelles 7, 70e Ave O, Blainville, J7C 1R7, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 4357514

Herbion Pakistan PVT Ltd Miklukho-Maklaya ul. 8, str. 3, 117198 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7812073
Web: wwwherbion.com
Herbs Trading GmbH Novinskii boulevard, d.3, str. 1, 121099 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 7979660 Fax: +7 095 7979661

Web: www bittner.ru

Hermes Arzneimittel GmbH Georg-Kalb-Str. 5-8, 82049 Grosshesselohe/
Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 791020

Web: www.hermes-arzneimittel.de
Herron Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 95, Brisbane Market, QLD 4106,
Australia.

Fax: +61 (0) 7 38483650
Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG /n der Weiherwiese 1, 55569 Nussbaum,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6751 9100
Email: info@hevert.de
Hexal AG 3, ul. Kulneva, 121170 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 787-85-88 Fax: +7 095 787-85-92
Email: hexal@hexal.ru Web: www.hexal.ru

Fax: +7 095 7814569

Fax: +49 (0) 89 79102280

Web: www.herron.com.au

Fax: +49 (0) 6751 910150
Web: www:hevert.de

Hexal Argentina S.A. Paseo Colyn 221 Piso 7, 1063 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43342080 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43342084

Web: www.hexal.com.ar

Hexal do Brasil Ltda Av. Itaborai 1425, 04135-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 11 55917600 Fax: 11 55946485

Email: hexal.brasil@hexal.com.br Web: www.hexal.com.br

Hexal Hungaria Kft Timdr u 20, 1034 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 4302890 Fax: +36 4302899

Hexal Pharma GmbH Wilhelminenstrasse 91/II F, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 4869622 Fax: +43 (0) 1 486962233

Web: www.hexal.at

Higaté Medical Argentina Av. Eva Peron 3052, 1650 San Marten Villa Libertad,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45126841

Hilary's Distribution Ltd 145 Idema Rd, Markham, L3R 1A9, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 4755446 Fax: +1 905 4750377

Hind Wing Co. Ltd Unit No 11038, 11/F, Block B, Seaview Estate, 2-8 Watson
Rd, North Point, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25410909

Email: hindwing@netvigator.com
Hi-Tech Pharmacal 369 Bayview Ave, Amityville, NY 11701, USA.

Tel: +1 631 789 8228 Web: www.hitechpharm.com
Hoeveler Mag. & Co. GmbH Mosham 40, A-4943 Geinberg, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 7723 42305 Fax: +43 (0) 7723 4230515
Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG Lindenstr. 11, 07426 Konigsee,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 36738 42762 Fax: +49 (0) 36738 42798

Email: hofmannundsommer@t-online.de Web: www.hofmannundsommer.de
Holista Health Corp PO Box 57525, Coquitlam, V3K SY9, Canada.

Tel: +1 604 4223500 Fax: +1 888 6684252

Web: www.holistahealth.com

Fax: +852 28540695

Holland and Barrett Samuel Ryder House, Townsend Drive, Attleborough Fields,
Nuneaton, CV11 6XW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 870 606 6606

Email: healthinformation@hollandandbarrett.com

Web: www.hollandandbarrett.com

HomGopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfliiger GmbH Bielefelder Str. 17, 33378
Rheda-Wiedenbruck, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5242 92820
Email: info@pflueger.de

Fax: +49 (0) 5242 55932
Web: www:pflueger.de

Hong Kong Medical Supplies Ltd 7/F China Aerospace Centre, 143 Hoi Bun Rd,
Kwun Tong, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 28063112

Email: info@hkmedsup.com.hk

Horna Business Service Narcisovd 2/850, 106 00 Prague 10, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 72654588

Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG Alfred-Nobel-Str. 10, 40789 Monheim,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2173 483100

Email: information@hoyer-madaus.de

Fax: +852 28873425

Fax: +49 (0) 2173 483198
Web: www:hoyer-madaus.de

----- PAGE 682 -----
HPC Harras Pharma Curarina Worbstrasse 221, 3073 Gumligen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 31 9513313 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9516465

Hubert A.C. Thomas & Co. Burry Port, SA16 OTB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1554 835512

HWS-OTC-Service GmbH Steindorf 65, A-5570 Mauterndorf, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 6472 20076 Fax: +43 (0) 6472 2007641

Ibefar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda Rua Franca Pinto 1357, 04016-035
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55718855 Fax: +55 (0) 11 5571 2343

ICIM International S.r.l. Via Peloritana 28, 20024 Garbagnate Milanese (Ml),
Italy.

Tel: +39 02 9947931 Fax: +39 02 99479340

ICN Czech Republic as Truhldrskd 13-15, 110 00 Prague 1, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 21434111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21434214

Email: info@icnpharm.cz Web: www.ienpharm.cz

IDS (Hong Kong) Ltd Healthcare Division 14/F Lifung Ctr, 2 On Ping St, Siu
Lek Yuen, Shatin, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 26355555

Web: www.idsmarketing.com
Imgroma BV Aldebert van Scharnlaan 170 A-2, 6224 JX Maastricht,
Netherlands.

Indoco Remedies Ltd Indoco House, 166 CST Rd, Santacruz (East), Mumbai
400 098, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 6541851
Web: www:indoco.com

Fax: +852 26375818

Fax: +91 (0) 22 6523976

Industria Farmacéutica Andrémaco, S.A. de C.V. Andromaco No. 104, Col.
Ampliacién Granada, Deleg. Miguel Hidalgo, 11520 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55457285 Fax: +52 55 55450727

Web: www.andromaco.com.mx

Industria Terapeutica Splendore - Oftalmoterapica ALFA Via F.Ili Bandiera
26, 80026 Casoria (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 081 5846060

Email: alfaintes@alfaintes.it

Fax: +39 081 5842526

Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda Av. das Americas 8.445
Conj.803, 22793-080 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24876305 Fax: +55 (0) 21 24876309

Web: www.infabra.com.br

Infosint S.p.A. C. Dir. Colleoni, Pal. Pegaso 2, 20041 Agrate Brianza (Ml), Italy.
Tel: +39 039 6892207 Fax: +39 039 6892246

Email: infosint@tiscalinet.it

Inkeysa Juan XXIII 15, Esplugas de Llobregat, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4809911 Fax: +34 93 3726551
Email: inkeysa@inkeysa.es Web: www:inkeysa.es

Institut Biochimique SA Via del Piano, 6915 Pambio-Noranco, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 9857776 Fax: +41 (0) 91 9857686
Email: info@ibsa.ch Web: www.ibsa.ch

Instituto de Medicamentos e Alergia IMA Ltda Rua Araujo Leitao 193,
20715-310 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25010248 Fax: +55 (0) 21 22181651

Instituto Sanitas Arg. SACIPQ y M. Saladillo 2452, 1440 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46873663 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46874065

Instituto Sanitas SA Avda Americo Vespucio 1260, Quilicura, Santiago, Chile.
Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C. Av. Larrazabal 1848, 1440 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46838888 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46838888

Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda Rua Engenheiro Guilherme Cristiano Frendez
827, 03477-000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 67245311 Fax: +55 (0) 11 67246480

Interdelta SA Case postale 791, 1701 Fribourg, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4665126 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4667400

Interpharm GmbH Fffingergasse 21, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48855 Fax: +43 (0) 1 48855320

Intersan GmbH EFinsteinstr. 30, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 1840 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 18439

Investi Farma S.A. Lisandro de la Torre 2160, 1440 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43342080 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43342080

IP Farma Sas Via Vigna 6, 80078 Pozzuoli (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 815269226 Fax: +39 (0) 815269899

Suppliers Directory

Ipsen EpE 63 AG. Dimitriou St., 174 56 Alimos, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 9843324 Fax: +30 210 9887911

Web: www.ipsen.com

Ipsen NV Guldensporenpark 87, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 9 2439600 Fax: +32 (0) 9 2204473

Web: www.ipsen.com

Ipsen Pharma Ctra Laurea Miro 395, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, 08980 Barcelona,
Spain.

Tel: +34 93 6858100
Web: www.ipsen.com
Ipsen Pharma GmbH EFinsteinstr. 30, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 18480 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 18439

Email: info@ipsen-pharma.de Web: www.ipsen-pharma.de

Ipsen Portugal, SA Rua General Ferreira Martins, Alameda Ferndo Lopes 16-11,
Miraflores, 1495-136 Algés, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4123550

Web: www.beaufour-ipsen.com
Iromedica AG Haggenstrasse 45, 9014 St Gallen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 2741800 Fax: +41 (0) 71 2741801

Email: info@iromedica.ch Web: www.iromedica.ch

Isdin Chile Ltda Carmencita 25 Of. 82, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.

Isdin Lda Rua da Ilha dos Amores, Lote 4.08.01,X, Parque das Na¢oes - Zona
Norte, Santa Maria dos Olivais, 1990-118 Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 8950084 Fax: +351 21 8950101

Iso-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Bunsenstr. 6-10, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 10603 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 106169

Email: info@iso-arznei.de Web: www:iso-arznei.de

Istituto Biologico Chemioterapico SpA Via Crescentino 25, 10154 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 112440011 Fax: +39 (0) 112485341

Email: info@abcfarmaceutici.it Web: www.abcfarmaceutici.it

Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.A. Via Vincenzo Monti 6, 20123 Milan,

Italy.
Tel: +39 02 909313250 Fax: +39 02 909313211

Web: www.omeoimo.it

Fax: +34 93 6851011

Fax: +351 21 4123551

Email: imo@omeoimo.it
Istituto Ganassini S.p.A. di Ricerche Biochimiche Via Gaggia 16, 20139
Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 5357041

Email: istituto@ganassini.it
Ivax AC Dmitrovskii per. 9, Business-Centre Stoleshniki, et. 5, 103031 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2349713
Web: www.ivax.com

Ivax Argentina SA J/ Castelli 6701, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Ivax Pharmaceuticals Inc. 4400 Biscayne Blvd, Miami, FL 33137, USA.

Tel: +1 305 575 6000 Web: www.ivaxpharmaceuticals.com
Ivax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V. Calz de Hueso 859, Ex-Hacienda
Coapa, 14100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 5990000

Web: www.ivax.com

Ivax-CR a s Kézvetlen Kereskedelmi Képviselet Berlini ut 47-49, 1045
Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3993343 Fax: +36 3993494

Ivax-CR as Pod Habrovou 3, 152 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51007111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51007110

Web: www.ivax.cz

Oo

J. McGloin P/L P.O. Box 294, Kings Grove, NSW 2208, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95023777 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95022054

J. Pickles & Sons Beech House, 62 High St, Knaresborough, HGS OEA, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1423 867314 Fax: +44 (0) 1423 869177

Email: enquiries@jpickleshealthcare.com Web: www.jpickleshealthcare.com
Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd 15/F China Trade Ctr, 122-124 Wai Yip St,
Kwun Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 28271616 Fax: +852 25072829

Email: Jacobson@jacobsonmedical.com.hk

Jamieson Laboratories 4025 Rhodes Drive, Windsor, N8W 5B5, Canada.

Tel: +1 519 9748482 Fax: +1 519 9744742

JDH Pharmaceutical Division 279 Jalan Ahmad Ibrahim, 03-01, S 639938,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6566 1188

Email: jdhpharm@sg_lfdis.com

Fax: +39 02 534106
Web: www:ganassini.it

Fax: +7 095 2349711

Fax: +52 55 6170038

Fax: +65 6861 7307

----- PAGE 683 -----
Appendix 5

JDH Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd Lifung Centre, Lot 6, Persiaran Perusahaan
Seksyen 23, Kawasan Perusahaan Shah Alam, 40300 Shah Alam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 55417748 Fax: +60 (0) 3 55421486

Jenapharm GmbH & Co. KG Otto-Schott-Str. 15, 07745 Jena, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 3641 645 Fax: +49 (0) 3641 646085
Email: jenapharm@jenapharm.de Web: www.jenapharm.de

Jengimiel C.A. Calle Capitolio, Edificio Indelca, piso 3, local E, Boleita Sur,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2354715

Email: informacion@jengimiel.com
Jessup Marketing 27 Old Gloucester St, London, WCIN 3XX, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1932 854825 Fax: +44 (0) 1923 850519

Email: mail@jessup.co.uk Web: www.jessup.co.uk

Jofadel Ind. Farmacéutica S.A. Av. Jose da Frota Vasconcelos 100, 37062-500
Varginha, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 35 2141522
Web: www.jofadel.com.br
Johannes Biirger Ysatfabrik GmbH Herzog-Julius-Str. 83, 38667 Bad
Harzburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5322 4444
Email: info@ysat.de

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2388302
Web: www:jengimiel.com

Fax: +55 (0) 35 2142380

Fax: +49 (0) 5322 780229

Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products Co. 199 Grandview Rd, Skillman, NJ
08558-9418, USA.
Tel: +1 732 524 0400

Johnson & Johnson/Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals of Canada 890
Woodlawn Rd W, Guelph, N1K 1AS, Canada.

Tel: +1 519 8266300 Fax: +1 519 8266202

Web: www.jnjgateway.com

Jukunda Naturarzneimittel Dr Ludwig Schmitt GmbH & Co. KG Hofmarkstr.
35, 82152 Planegg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 8993450
Email: info@jukunda.de

@

Kameliya NPP OOO Gostinichnyi prospekt d. 6, korp. 2, 127106 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2219202
Web: www.kamelia.ru

Web: www.jnj.com

Fax: +49 (0) 89 89934520
Web: www.jukunda.de

Email: kamelia@astelit.ru

Kedrion S.p.A. Localita ai Conti Barga, 55020 Castelvecchio Pascoli (LU), Italy.
Tel: +39 0583 19691 Fax: +39 0583 766121

Kelemata S.p.A. Via S Quintino 28, 10121 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 011 5160411 Fax: +39 O11 9976512

Kemiprogress S.r.l. Via Aurelia 58, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 39383101 Fax: +39 06 39383131

Kestrel Healthcare Ltd Ashfield House, Resolution Rd, Ashby de la Zouch, LE65
THW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1530 562301
Email: kestrel @ventiv.co.uk

Key Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 121, Concord West, NSW 2138, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 97363811 Fax: +61 (0) 2 97363316

Email: orc@keypharm.com.au Web: www:keypharm.com.au

Kley Hertz SA Rua Comendador Azevedo 224, 90220-150 Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 51 33468488 Fax: +55 (0) 51 33468488

Web: www.grupohertz.com

KLI Corp. 1119 Third Ave SW, Carmel, IN 46032, USA.

Tel: +1 317 846 7452 Fax: +1 317 846 1676
Email: info@entertainers-secret.com Web: wwwentertainers-secret.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1530 562430

Kneipp (Schweiz) GmbH Schwarzackerstrasse 2, 8304 Wallisellen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 1 8833860 Fax: +41 (0) 1 8833864
Email: info@kneipp-schweiz.ch Web: www.kneipp-schweiz.ch

Kneipp-Werke , 97064 Wurzburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 931 80020 Fax: +49 (0) 931 8002104
Email: info@kneipp.de Web: www.kneip.de

Knoll Australia 15 Orion Road, Lane Cove, NSW 2066, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 94279900

Knoll Lusitana, Lda Rua Alfredo da Silva 3 C/D, 1300-040 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3616350 Fax: +351 21 3616378

Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos Estrada dos Bandeirantes 2400,
27710-104 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24442525 Fax: +55 (0) 11 24442517

Konsyl Pharmaceuticals 8050 Industrial Park Rd, Easton, MD 21601, USA.
Tel: +1 410 822 5192 Fax: +1 410 820 7032
Email: sales@konsyl.com Web: www.konsyl.com

Korangi S.A. Parque Empresarial Primovel Edificio A1, r/c Albarraque, 2635-595
Rio de Mouro, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9251901 Fax: +351 21 9251905

Korhispana PS/ Can Politic 17 3, Hospitalet de Llobregat, 08907 Barcelona,
Spain.

Tel: +34 93 3358167

Web: wwwkorhispana.com
Kotra Pharma (M) Sdn Bhd No. 7 Jin TTC 12, Cheng Industrial Estate, 75250
Melaka, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 6 3362222

Web: www.kotrapharma.com

Fax: +34 93 3351822

Fax: +60 (0) 6 3366122

Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn Bavernmarkt 24, A-1014 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 531210

Krauterpfarrer Kunzle AG , 6573 Magadino, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 7430340 Fax: +41 (0) 91 7434034

Krewel Meuselbach GmbH Krewelstr. 2, 53783 Eitorf, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2243 870 Fax: +49 (0) 2243 87175

Email: medzin@krewel-meuselbach.de | Web: www.krewel-meuselbach.de

Krewel Meuselbach GmbH Nam. gen. Kutlvasra 6, 140 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 41404181
KRKA d.d. ul. 2-ya Zvenigorodskaya, d. 13, Str. 41, et. 5, 125009 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7396600
Email: info@krka.ra
Kur- und Stadtapotheke Oberer Stadtplatz 5, A-6060 Hall in Tirol, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5223 57216 Fax: +43 (0) 5223 43316

@

La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet. Calle 49 3752, 1653 Villa
Ballester, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47674297 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47644891

Lab. Argenfarma S.R.L. LLavallol 2649, 1417 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45029504 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45029504

Lab. Baliarda S.A. Alberti 1283, 1247 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43081450 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43080281

Web: www.baliarda.com.ar

Lab. Cevallos Salud S$.R.L. Zapiola 2836/40, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45433335 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45440637

Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA Av. Luis Maria Campos 585, 1426 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47711734 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47754380

Lab. Ducto Ind. Farm. Ltda Rua VPR 3 Quadra 2-A, Modulos 20/21 DAIA,
75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 62 3105700
Email: ducto@ducto.com.br

Lab E J Gezzi SRL 14 de Julio 855 OB Dto. 2, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Lab. Fabra S.R.L. Carlos Villate 5271, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47567293 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47564153

Lab. Ferro Av. Mate de Luna 4333, 4000 S.M. de Tucuman, Tucuman,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 381 4350214 Fax: +54 (0) 381 4355281

Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A. Escalada 133, 1407 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46829376 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46829314

Web: www.fortbenton.com.ar

Lab. Garden House S.A. Estomba 1058/60, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 4: Fax: +54 (0) 11 45547749

Lab. Hexa-Medinova S.A. Helguera 254/58, 1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46116845 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46133013

Lab. Incaico SA Montiel 156, 1408 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46413632 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46417310

Lab. Lacefa S.A.I.C.A. Ladines 2263/7, 1419 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45740444 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45713103

Lab. Lafage S.R.L. J. E. Uriburu 61, 1027 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49539168 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49538076

Lab Medstyle SA Monsenor Felix Cabrea 42 Of. 1, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Email: krewel@vol.cz

Fax: +7 095 7396601
Web: wwwkrka.ru

Fax: +55 (0) 62 3105757
Web: www.ducto.com.br

----- PAGE 684 -----
Lab. Natufarma Av. Cordoba 1745, 3080 Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 3496 420153 Fax: +54 (0) 3496 420153

Web: www.natufarma.com.ar

Lab. Panalab S.A. Argentina Av. Del Libertador 6250 Piso 2, 1428 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47885717

Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L. Valentin Torra 5450, 3100 Pque.Ind.G. Belgrano,
Entre Rios, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 343 4262104

Lab. Primula S.A. Andonaegui 1141, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45230031

Lab. Raymos S.A.1.C. Vuelta de Obligado 2775, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47812552 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47882625

Web: www.raymos.com

Lab. Roux-Ocefa S.A. Montevideo 79/81, 1019 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43830067 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43814661

Lab. Serch S.R.L. Av. Arturo Illia 668, 1706 Haedo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46588456 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46586876

Lab. Temis Lostalé S.A. Zepita 3178, 1285 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 63441300 Fax: +54 (0) 11 63441390

Web: www.temislostalo.com.ar

Lab Thalgo Nutrition Domaine des Chdtaigniers, 83520 Roquebrune-sur-
Argens, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 94197373
Web: www.thalgo.com

Laboratoire Atlas 900 Blvd des Sciences, Suite 200, St-Leonard, H1H 1H1,
Canada.

Tel: +1 514 2547188 Fax: +1 514 2543006

Laboratoire Golaz SA Case postale 1067, 1701 Fribourg-Moncor, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4076111 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4011485

Laboratoire RTA SA chemin du Signal 18, 1071 Chexbres, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 21 9643430 Fax: +41 (0) 21 9643431

Email: rta.jlv@bluewin.ch

Fax: +33 (0) 4 94816012

Laboratoires Aérocid 248 bis, rue Gabriel-Peri, 94230 Cachan, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 41986700 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45479445

Laboratoires Arkopharma B.P. 28, 06511 Carros cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 93291128 Fax: +33 (0) 4 93291162
Web: www.arkopharma.com

Laboratoires Asepta 17 bd Prince-Héréditaire-Albert, MC 98000, Monaco.
Tel: +377 92057551 Fax: +377 92052484
Web: www.asepta.com

Laboratoires Bailly SPEAB 60 rue Pierre-Charron, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44951495 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44951490
Laboratoires Belges Pharmacobel SA Ave de Scheut 46-50, 1070 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 5243966 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5216071

Laboratoires Besins International 13 rue Perier, 92120 Montrouge, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 47353510 Fax: +33 (0) 1 47353891
Laboratoires Bio2 99 bvd des Belges, 69006 Lyon, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 472740785 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78523890

Email: info@bio2labo.com Web: www.bio2labo.com
Laboratoires Biocom 44 bd Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.
Laboratoires Bouchara-Recordati 68 rue Marjolin, 92302 Levallois-Perret,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45191000

Laboratoires CCD 60 rue Pierre-Charron, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44951495 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44951490

Web: www.ccd-lab.com

Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb 416 rue Samuel-Morse, B.P. 1174,
34009 Montpellier cdx 1, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 67123030

Web: www.bausch.com

Fax: +33 (0) 4 67123031

Laboratoires Chefaro-Ardeval 2-4 rue de Chaintron, 92542 Montrouge cdx,
France.

Laboratoires Clément-Thékan 2-4 rue Chaintron, B.P. 850, 92542 Montrouge
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55481800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 55481801

Laboratoires Clément-Thionville 6 rue Joffre, B.P. 60028, 57101 Thionville
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 82827673 Fax: +33 (0) 3 82827677

Suppliers Directory

Laboratoires Codifra 18 av. Dutarte, 78150 de Chesney, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 39238920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 39439659

Laboratoires CS Dermatologie 35 rue d’Artois, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53761111 Fax: +33 (0) 1 53761212

Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique 7 rue d’Aguesseau, 75008 Paris,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44560007 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44560008

Laboratoires DB Pharma 1 bis, rue du Cdt-Riviére, 94210 La Varenne-St-Hilaire,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 48832514 Fax: +33 (0) 1 48832757

Laboratoires Dergam 6 rue Saint-Nicolas, 75012 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 43437911 Fax: +33 (0) 1 43437911

Email: dergam@wnandoo.fr

Laboratoires Dermatologiques Uriage 98 av de la Republique, 92400
Courbevoie, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 55701900
Laboratoires Dexo 179 bureaux de la Colline, 92213 Saint-Cloud cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 41121700 Fax: +33 (0) 1 41121701

Laboratoires Dolisos 45 place Abel Gance, 92100 Boulogne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 62477700
Laboratoires Dolisos Italia S.r.l. Via Pontina Vecchia km 34,200, 00040 Ardea
(Rome), Italy.

Tel: +39 06 91602810
Email: dolisos@dolisos.it
Laboratoires du Dermophil Indien B.P. 9, 61600 La Ferte-Mace, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 33306550 Fax: +33 (0) 2 33380632

Laboratoires Fournier SA 153 rue de Buzenval, 92380 Garches, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47108800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 47108801

Web: www.groupe-fournier.com

Laboratoires Fuca 7 bis, rue de Plaisance, 94732 Nogent-sur-Marne cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 43247070

Laboratoires Fumouze Le Malesherbes, 110-114 rue Victor-Hugo, 92303
Levallois-Perret cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 49684100

Laboratoires Gabriel Lesourd 6 rue Ste-Isaure, 75018 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46064108

Laboratoires Gilbert av. du Général-de-Gaulle, B.P.115, 14204 Heérouville-
Saint-Clair cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 2 31471515
Web: www.groupebatteur.fr
Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline 100 rte de Versailles, 78163 Marly-le-Roi cdx,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 39178000
Web: wwwgsk.fr
Laboratoires Hépatoum 8B.P. 5, 03270 Saint-Yorre, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 70588400

Laboratoires Holistica International 465 chemin des Jalassiéres, 13510
Equilles, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 42951717
Web: www.holistica.fr

Web: www:labo-uriage.com

Web: www.dolisos.fr

Fax: +39 06 91821345
Web: www.dolisos.it

Fax: +33 (0) 2 31439500

Fax: +33 (0) 1 39171758

Fax: +33 (0) 4 42951718

Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra 7-9 av
Francois-Vincent-Raspail, B.P. 32, 94111 Arcueil cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46152920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45464015

Email: innotech@innotechinternational.fr

Web: www.innotechinternational.fr

Laboratoires IPRAD 42-52 rue de I’Aqueduc, 75010 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 40051188

Laboratoires Jaldes 10 ac de Poussan, B.P. 30, 34770 Gigean cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 67789898 Fax: +33 (0) 4 67781087
Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel 28 av. Carnot, 78100 Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 34510083

Laboratoires Klorane Les Cauquillous, B.P. 100, 81506 Lavaur cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 5 63588800 Fax: +33 (0) 5 63588672
Laboratoires Legras 114 Bis, rue Michel-Ange, 75016 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47047852

Laboratoires Lehning 1-3 rue du Petit-Marais, 57640 Sainte-Barbe, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 3 87767224 Web: www.lehning.com

Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum 68/88 rue Ampere, 93330 Neuilly-sur-
Marne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 49442929
Web: www.mediolanum-farma.com

Fax: +33 (0) 1 49442914

----- PAGE 685 -----
Appendix 5

Laboratoires Liérac 35 av Franklin-Roosevelt, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53939906 Fax: +33 (0) 1 53939901

Laboratoires Madaus 55 bis, quai de Grenelle, Immeuble Mercure Ill, 75015
Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 56771900 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56771919

Laboratoires Magistra SA 28 Chemin du Grand-Puits, Case postale 122, 1217
Meyrin 2/Geneva, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7825542 Fax: +41 (0) 22 7850443

Laboratoires Mazal Pharmaceutique 117 rue Rontgen, B.P. 1309, 29000
Quimper cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 98535455

Laboratoires Médix 18 rue Saint-Mathieu, 78550 Houdan, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 30881600 Fax: +33 (0) 1 30881380

Laboratoires Michel Iderne Parc d’activités Rosenmeer, 67560 Rosheim,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88480055

Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud Parc Euromedecine Il, rue de la Valsiére, 34099
Montpellier cdx 5, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 67041106

Laboratoires Motima 19 rue de Passy, 75016 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 42249873 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45203814

Email: motima@club-internet.fr

Laboratoires Nogués 43 rue de Neuilly, 92000 Nanterre, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47241501

Laboratoires Norgine Pharma 23 av. de Neuilly, 75116 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44174888 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44174896

Email: norgine.pharma.france@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Laboratoires Novartis Nutrition B.P. 29, 31250 Revel, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 62187283 Fax: +33 (0) 5 62187284

Web: www.novartisnutrition.com

Laboratoires Pfizer 23-25 av. du Dr-Lannelongue, 75668 Paris cdx 14, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 58073000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 58073440

Web: www.pfizer.com

Laboratoires Pharmaceutiques Trenker SA Ave Dolez 480-482, 1180 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 3740253
Email: info@trenker.be
Laboratoires Pharmafarm 73 av de la Porte d’Italie, 75648 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46461920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 46461922

Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT 2-4 rue Chaintron, B.P. 850, 92542
Montrouge cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55481800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 55481801

Laboratoires Phytomedica Z/ Les Milles, B.P. 5000, Parc d’activités de Pichaury,
13791 Aix-en-Provence cdx 3, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 42245624

Email: info@phytomedica.com
Laboratoires Phytoprevent 75 av. de Segur, 75007 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53868600 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56582152
Laboratoires Pierre Fabre 45 place Abel-Gance, 92100 Boulogne, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 5 63714500 Fax: +33 (0) 5 63725066

Web: ww
Laboratoires Pionneau , 33870 Vayres, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 57748501

Laboratoires Plan SA Chemin de la Verseuse 1, Case postale 208, 1219 Aire-
Geneva, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7961585
Email: pharma@plansa.com
Laboratoires Plantes et Médecines Le Payrat, 46000 Cahors, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 63516800 Fax: +33 (0) 5

Laboratoires Richard rue du Progrés, ZI des Reys de Saulce, 26270 Saulce-sur-
Rhone, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 75631720 Fax: +33 (0) 475632007

Laboratoires Robert Schwartz Parc d‘Innovation, Illkirck, 67400 Strasbourg,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88673232 Fax: +33 (0) 3 88661129

Laboratoires Roche Nicholas 33 Rue de I|Industrie, 74240 Gaillard, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 50877070 Fax: +33 (0) 4 50877077

Web: www.roche.com

Laboratoires Rosa-Phytopharma 68 rue Jean-jaques-Rousseau, 75001 Paris,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45080242

Fax: +32 (0) 2 3746881
Web: wwwtrenker.be

Fax: +33 (0) 4 42245628
Web: www:phytomedica-labo.com

ierre-fabre.com

Fax: +41 (0) 22 7961586

Laboratoires Rottapharm 83-85 bd Vincent-Auriol, 75013 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 56619461 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56619462

Web: www.rotta.com

Laboratoires Sodia av. Robert Schuman, 51100 Reims, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 26790000 Fax: +33 (0) 3 26790009

Email: sodia@wanadoo.fr

Laboratoires Théa 12 rue Louis-Bleriot, 63016 Clermont-Ferrand cdx 2, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 473981436 Fax: +33 (0) 4 73981438

Web: www.laboratoires-thea.fr

Laboratoires Theratech 6 rue Dubais, 27000 Evreux, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 32311714

Laboratoires Toulade av. du Docteur-Aubry, 76280 Criquetot-L’Esneval, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 2 35287874 Fax: +33 (0) 2 35287872

Laboratoires Tradiphar 176 rue de I’Arbrisseau, 59000 Lille, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 20971370 Fax: +33 (0) 3 20970970

Email: contact@tradiphar.com Web: www.tradiphar.com

Laboratoires Weleda 9 rue Eugene-Jung, 68330 Huningue, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 89696800 Fax: +33 (0) 3 89696899

Web: www.weleda.com

Laboratoires Zambon France 13 rue René-Jaques, 92138 Issy-les-Moulineaux,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 58044141
Web: www.zambongroup.com

Fax: +33 (0) 1 58044100

Laboratori Gambar S.r.1. Via Bolognola 45, 00138 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 8804548 Fax: +39 06 8804537

Laboratori Guidotti S.p.A. Via Livornese 897, 56010 Pisa La Vettola (PI), Italy.
Tel: +39 050 971011 Fax: +39 050 9710306
Web: wwwilabguidotti.it

Laboratori Italiani Vaillant S.r.1. Via Cavalieri V. Veneto 241, 21040 Cislago
(VA), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 96382620 Fax: +39 02 96380208

Laboratorio A.M. Farma Activ Italia 743, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 341 4255580

Laboratério Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A Rua Nova York 245, 04560-
908 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50496200 Fax:
Web: www.farmasa.com.br

5S

(0) 11 50496266

Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica Calle 10 con 5 Edif. Walpirema, Piso 1, La
Urbina, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2410545 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2427662

Email: btq@biotecnoquimica.com Web: www.biotecnoquimica.com
Laboratério Catarinense S.A. Rua Doutor Jodo Colin 1053, 89204-001
Joinville, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 47 4519036
Email: sac@labeat.com.br
Laboratério Daudt Oliveira Ltda Rua Simoes da Mota 57, 21540-100 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24502878
Email: odontis@odontis.com.br
Laboratorio di Chimica Medica dell’ Antipiol S.n.c. Via S. Benigno 26, 10154
Turin, Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 11 201141 Fax: +39 (0) 11 2428028

Laboratério Dinafarma Ltda Avenida Major Alvim 155, 12942550 Atibaia,
Brazil.

Fax: +55 (0) 11 44131814

Laboratorio DNR Farma SRL Hipolito Vieytes 147, 1603 Villa Martelli, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Laboratorio Dr. Lazar & Cia. S.A. Av. Velez Sarsfield 5855, 1605 Carapachay,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47620181
Web: www.lazar.com.ar
Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.1.F.yA. Sanabria 2353 Piso 1, 1417 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43794300

Web: www.laboratorioelea.com.ar
Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda Av. Lib. Bdo. O’higgins 1671, Santiago,
Chile.

Laboratorio Farmaceutico Master SA Av. /rarrazaval 2821, Torre A, Of. 1001,
Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda Rua Saldanha Marinho 161, 3055020 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Fax: +55 (0) 47 4519090
Web: wwwilabcat.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 21 3901772
Web: www:odontis.com.br

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47620181

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43794333

----- PAGE 686 -----
Laboratorio Fitolife $.r.1. Via Domiziana km 55, 80072 Arco Felice Pozzuoli
(NA), Italy.

Tel: +39 081 8042385
Email: info@fitolife.it
Laboratério Gross S.A. Rua Padre Ildefonso Penalba 389, 20775-020 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 25973112
Email: gross@gross.com.br
Laboratério Hepacholan S.A. Av. Manoel Monteiro de Araujo 1051, Vila
Jaguara, 05113-020 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 36214122 Fax: +55 (0) 11 36219595

Laboratério lodo Suma Ltda Rua Maximiliano Fraga 35, 36880-000 Muriae,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 32 7223155

Laboratério J. Neves, Lda Parque Industrial do Seixal, 2840-069 Paio Pires,
Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 2134800

Email: evazlabjneves@mail.eunet.pt

Laboratorio Koni-Cofarm SA Crescente Errazuriz 2077, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Fax: +39 081 8042838
Web: www.fitolife.it

Fax: +55 (0) 21 25973112
Web: www.gross.com.br

Fax: +351 21 2134899

Laboratorio Leti $.A.V. 2a Av., Parcela 3, Manzana | Edif. Leti, Guarenas,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3622424
Email: myanez@leti.com.ve

Fax: +58 (0) 212 3624545
Web: www.leti.com.ve

Laboratorio Medinfar, SA Rua Manuel Ribeiro da Pavia 1 - 1, Venda Nova,
2700-547 Amadora, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4748228

Web: www.medinfar.pt

Fax: +351 21 4751736

Laboratério Neo Quimica Comércio e Industria Ltda Rua VPR 1 Quadra 2-A,
Modulo 4 DAIA, 75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 62 3102500 Fax: +55 (0) 62 3161022

Web: www.neoquimica.com.br

Laboratério Phos-Kola Ltda Rua das Laranjeiras 984, 49010-000 Aracaju,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 79 2119798

Laboratorio Prater SA Av. P Aguirre Cerda 5291, Cerrillos, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorio Schering-Plough Burgos 80, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratério Sedabel Ltda Rodovia Washington Luiz 1308 Km 4.5, 25085-000
Duque de Caxias, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 26713636
Web: www.sedabel.com.br
Laboratorio Sim6es Ltda Rua Pereira de Almeida 102, 20260-100 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 501055: Fax: +55 (0) 21 5027000

Laboratério Sinterapico Industrial e Farmacéutico Ltda Rua Olegario Cunha
Lobo 25, 12940-000 Atibaia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 44110333 Fax: +55 (0) 11 44133313

Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.l. Via Domenico Veneziano 13, 50143
Florence, Italy.

Tel: +39 055 714724
Email: labtermr@tin.it
Laboratério Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda VP 7-D Modulo 11 Quadra 13, 75133-600
Anapolis, Brazil.

Email: trade@teuto.com.br
Laboratorio Walker S.R.L. E. Zeballos 249, 2000 Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 341 4492945
Laboratorio Wunderpharm S.R.L. Remedios 5322, 1440 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46356078 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46352891
Laboratorio Ximena Polanco Dresden 4640, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Andromaco SA Av. Quilin 5273, Penalolen, Santiago, Chile.

Email: sedabel@sedabel.com.br

Fax: +39 055 708371
Web: www.mr-online.it

Web: www.teutointernational.com

Web: www.laboratoriowalker.com.ar

Laboratorios Andrémaco S.A.1.C.I. Ingeniero Huergo 1145, 1107 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43076000
Web: www.andromaco.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43620725

Laboratorios Bagé S.A. Bernardo de Irigoyen 248, 1072 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43442000
Web: www.bago,com.ar
Laboratérios Baldacci $.A. Rua Pedro de Toledo 520, 04039-001 Sdo Paulo,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50854444

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43442086

Suppliers Directory

Laboratorios Basi R.do do Padrdo 98, 3000-312 Coimbra, Portugal.
Tel: +351 239 827021 Fax: +351 239 492845
Email: basi@basi.com.pt

Laboratorios Beta S.A. Av. San Juan 2266, 1232 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 59216200 Fax: +54 (0) 11 59216299
Web: www.betalab.com.ar

Laboratérios Biosintetica Ltda Av das Nacdes Unidas 22.428, Predio 30,
04795-916 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55466822 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55466812

Email: biosintetica@biosintetica.com.br_ Web: www.biosintetica.com.br

Laboratorios Biotech C.A. Calle del Arenal Edif. Biotech, Urb. La Trinidad,

Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9035400 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9035690 5
Web: www.biotech.com.ve

Laboratorios Chile SA Av. Marathon 1315, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Cofasa $.A. Urbanizacion Industrial Lebrun, Edificio Cofasa, 4to.
Piso, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 2566344
Email: info@laboratoriocofasa.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2568464
Web: www:laboratoriocofasa.com

Laboratorios Columbia de Argentina SA Cervantes 2950, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Laboratorios Dermatologicos Darier S.A. de C.V. Av. Insurgentes sur 3579
Torre 3, Piso 8, M Hidalgo La Joya Olimpica, 14020 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53505555 Fax: +52 55 53505538

Email: atencionaclientes@darier.com.mx Web: www.darier.com.mx

Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A. Pol Ind Francolm Parcela 3, Nave 1-2, Apartado
de Correos 1082, 43006 Tarragona, Spain.

Tel: +34 977 550542 Fax: +34 977 550848

Email: marketing@dhu.es Web: www.dhu.es

Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L. Pont Reixat 5, Saint Just Desvern, 08960
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4733000 Fax: +34 93 4332092

Email: aquilea@aquilea.com Web: www.aquilea.com

Laboratorios Elmor S.A. Av. Eugenio Mendoza, Centro Letonia, Piso 16, La
Castellana, Apartado Postal 80444, Caracas 1062, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2638233 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2672910

Email: servicioalcliente@elmor.com.ve | Web: www.laboratorioselmor.com.ve

Laboratorios Excelentia S.A. Santo Domingo 4088, 1437 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 49119114 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49119114

Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V. Bufalo No. 27, Col. del Valle, 03100 Mexico
D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 55247451 Fax: +52 55 55246789

Laboratorios Flupal C.A. Parcelamiento Industrial La Fe Parcel a Nro. B23,
Macarao, Caracas 1000 A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 4319360 Fax: +58 (0) 212 4335482

Laboratérios Gemballa Ltda Avenida Sete de Setembro 50, 89160-000 Rio do
Sul, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 47 5318040 Fax: +55 (0) 47 5318002

Laboratérios Goulart S.A. Rua Aguape 56, Parada de Lucas, 21010-080 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 24851960

Laboratorios Gramén /ntendente Amaro Avalos 4208, 1605 Munro, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627600

Web: www.gramon.com.ar
Laboratorios Grisi Hermanos, S.A. de C.V. Calle Amores No. 1746, Col. del

Valle, Deleg. Benito Juarez, 03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56299902 Fax: +52 55 55341003

Web: www.grisi.com.mx

Laboratorios Grossman S.A. de C.V. Blvd Manuel Avila Camacho 40, P.20 T.Es,
Miguel Hidalgo Lomas de Chapulte, 11000 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Laboratorios Hochstetter SA Dardignac 6, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Hormona S.A. de C.V. Blvd. M. Avila Camacho No.470, Col. San
Andres Atoto, 53500 Naucalpan de Juarez, Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 55762511 Fax: +52 55 55765467

Laboratorios Ifusa S.A. Francisco Lorenzana 20, Col. San Rafael, Deleg.
Cuauhtemoc, 06470 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 57051410 Fax: +52 55 55353961

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627605

----- PAGE 687 -----
Appendix 5

Laboratérios Inibsa, SA Sintra Business Park, Zona Industrial da Abrunheira,
Edificio 1 - 2, 2710-089 Sintra, Portugal.

Tel: +351 219 112730 Fax: +351 219 112023

Email: inibsa@inibsa.pt Web: www.inibsa.com

Laboratorios Intra S.A. Av. Principal 50-75, Barrio Los Estanques Maracaibo,
Zulia, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 61 348826 Fax: +58 (0) 61 343357

Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda Rua Assahy 45, Rudge Ramos, 09633-010
Sdo Bernardo do Campo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 43624660

Web: wwwlabklinger.com.br
Laboratorios L.O. Oftalmi C.A. Edificio Santo Domingo, Calle 6, Zona Industrial
La Urbina, Apto 66285, Caracas 1061-A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2424747 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2427446
Web: www.oftalmi.com

Email: marketing@labklinger.com.br

Laboratorios Maver SA Emilio Vaisse 574, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Millet-Franklin S.A. Thames 121 Piso 1 of. 2, 1609 Boulogne,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47665848
Web: www.milletfranklin.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47664774

Laboratérios Osorio de Moraes Ltda Avenida Cardeal Eugenio Pacelli 2281,
32210-001 Contagem, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 31 33610844 Fax: +55 (0) 31 33618045

Laboratorios Parggon S.A. de C.V. Av. Vallarta 7000, Zapopan San Juan de
Ocotan, 45019 Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36820388

Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda Ignacio Serrano 568, Concepcidn, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorios Phoenix $.A.1.C.F. Humahuaca 4065, 1192 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43794200
Web: www.phoenix.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43794244

Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A. Cipreses a Hoyo 109-11, Pso.1 Edif.
El Viejo, Urb. Sta. Rosalia Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 5423384 Fax: +58 (0) 212 5423548

Laboratorios Prieto S.A. Maza 1869/73, 1240 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49210365 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49210419
Laboratérios Prima Ltda Rua Juparana 62, 20510-040 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25723855 Fax: +55 (0) 21 25713198

Email: sac@primalab.com.br Web: www.laboratoriosprima.com.br

Laboratorios Quim-Far C.A. Chacaito-Quinta Nueva Segovia, Urb. Bello Monte
Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 9512679 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9513246

Laboratorios Recalcine SA San Eugenio 567, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Rider SA Placer 1348, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Rowe-Fleming C.A. Av.La Habana con calle Quito Edif. Vizcaya,
Los Caobos Entrada B Pent House, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 7932080 Fax: +58 (0) 212 7933404

Laboratorios Saval SA Avenida Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva 4600,
Santiago, Chile.
Email: lab@saval.cl
Laboratorios Sidus S.A. Av. del Libertador 742, 1638 Vicente Lopez, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47966800
Web: www:sidus.com.ar

Web: www.saval.cl

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47966860

Laboratorios Sigma Chaco 667, 5000 Cordoba Capital, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 351 4224716

Laboratorios Silesia SA Av. Chile Espana 325, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios SMB Farma SA Av. Bulnes 377, Dpto 305, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorios Vincenti C.A. Urb. Industrial Santa Cruz, Calle Roma, Edif., Centro
Proa, Piso 2 Guarenas, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3632455 Fax: +58 (0) 212

Email: info@vincentilab.com Web: vincentilab.com

Laboritorios Felipe Bajer S.A.1.C. Alfredo R. Bufano 1265, 1416 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45827920
Lacer Sardenya 350, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4465300 Fax: +34 93 3479009
Web: wwwlacer.es

Laclede Inc. 2030 East University Drive, Rancho Dominguez, CA 90220, USA.

Web: www.laclede.com

Web: www:bajer.com.ar

Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L. Jorge Newbery 1829, 1426 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47727599
Web: wwwlagoslab.com.ar
Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Gramsci 4, 20014 Nerviano (Milan),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0331 587354

Email: info@lampugnanifarmaceutici.it
Larkhall Laboratories Forest Road, Charlbury, Chipping Norton, OX7 3HH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1608 811539 Fax: +44 (0) 1608 811834

Lavipharm Group Agias Marinas St, 190 02 Peania Attica, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 6691106 Fax: +30 210 6691208

Email: comm@lavipharm.gr Web: wwwlavipharm.ge

Leciva as U Kabelorny 130, 10237 Prague 10, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 67241111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 72702402

Email: leciva@leciva.cz Web: wwwleciva.cz

Lek Starokonyushennyi per. 10/10 str. 1, 119002 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2588484 Fax: +7 095 2588485

Lek Pharma sro Jeseniovd 30, 130 00 Prague 3, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 21421611 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21421629

Email: lekpharma@lek-cz.cz

Leo Pharma A/S Industriparken 55, 2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Tel: +45 44923800 Fax: +45 44943040.

Web: www.leo-pharma.com

Léro 65 bd du Mal-de-Lattre-de-Tassigny, 92150 Suresnes, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 40991433 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45062764

Leros sro U Narodni galerie 460, 156 15 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 57898111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 57922200

Email: leros@leros.cz Web: wwwleros.cz

Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques B.P. 6054, 34030 Montpellier cdx 01,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 67070071

Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé 3564 Griffith St, St-Laurent, H4C 1A7, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 7377343 Fax: +1 514 7376878

Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co. /ndustriestrasse 26, 56218
Mulheim-Karlich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 261 809030

Web: wwwilichtenstein-pharma.de
Lichtwer Pharma 145 Idema Road, Markham, Ontario, L3R 1A9, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 475 5446 Fax: +1 905 475 0377

Web: wwwilichtwer.de

Lichtwer Pharma AG Wallenroder Str. 8-10, 13435 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 403700 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40370103

Email: info@lichtwer.de Web: www.lichtwer.de

Lichtwer Pharma UK Regency House, Mere Park, Dedmere Rd, Marlow, SL7 1F],
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 487780
Web: wwwilichtwer.co.uk
Liferpal MD, S.A. de C.V. Refineria No. 1266, Col. Alamo Industrial, 44490
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36661228 Fax: +52 33 36661073

Lindopharm GmbH Neustr. 82, 40721 Hilden, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2103 2065 Fax: +49 (0) 2103 206600

Web: www.lindopharm.de

Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc. 89417 Atlanta Ave., Huntington Beach, CA 92648,
USA.

Email: mail@liptis.com
Lisapharma S.p.A. Via Licinio 11, 22036 Erba (Como), Italy.

Tel: +39 031 641257 Fax: +39 031 644182

Email: lisapharma@lisapharma.it

Lizofarm S.r.l. Via S. Gottardo 37, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 3900277 Fax: +39 039 389671

Llorens Ciudad de Balaguer 7-11, 08022 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2125312 Fax: +34 93 4174741

Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG Langes Feld 5, 31860 Emmerthal,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5155 63200
Email: service@lomapharm.de
Lopes Produtos Farmaceuticos S.A. Rodovia BR 491, Km 5, Caixa Postal:62,
37002-970 Varginha, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 35 32221233

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47747587

Fax: +39 0331 585588

Fax: +49 (0) 261 8090321

Fax: +44 (0) 1628 487781

Web: wwweliptis.com

Fax: +49 (0) 5155 63210
Web: www:lomapharm.de

----- PAGE 688 -----
LPC Medical (UK) Ltd 30 Chaul End Lane, Luton, LU4 8EZ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1582 560393 Fax: +44 (0) 1582 560395
Email: info@lpepharma.com Web: www.lpcpharma.com

Luper Inddstria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Doutor Clementino 608, 03059-030
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 2917344
Email: luper@luper.com.br

Lysoform Dr. Hans Rosemann GmbH Kaiser-Wilhelm-Str. 133, 12247 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 779920
Email: kontakt@lysoform.de

@

M & A Pharmachem Ltd Allenby Laboratories, Wigan Rd, Westhoughton,
Bolton, BL6 2LA, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1942 816184

Email: buy@mapharmachem.co.uk

Fax: +55 (0) 11 66930498
Web: www:luper.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 30 77992219
Web: wwwilysoform.de

Fax: +44 (0) 1924 813937
Web: www:mapharmachem.co.uk

Madariaga Electronica, 7, Poligono Urtinsa II, Alcorcon, 28923 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 6437500 Fax: +34 91 6433990

Madaus FOC 68-82, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 2988200 Fax: +34 93 2231652
Email: info@madaus.es Web: www.madaus.es

Madaus AG Colonia-Allee 15, 51067 Cologne, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 221 89980 Fax: +49 (0) 221 8998701
Email: info@madaus.de Web: www.madaus.de

Madaus GmbH Lienfeldergasse 91-93, A-1171 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48016000 Fax: +43 (0) 1 480160025

Madaus Pharma SA Rue des Trois Arbres 16, 1180 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 3704777 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3704774
Email: madaus.pharma@skynet.be Web: www.masaus.com

Madaus S.r.l. Rivera Francia 3/A, 35127 Padua, Italy.
Tel: +39 0496989211 Fax: +39 0496989204
Email: info@madaus.it

Mag. Dr. Till Strallhofer St-Veit-Gasse 56, A-1130 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 8770699 Fax: +43 (0) 1 877069916

Magis Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Cacciamali 34-36-38, Zona Ind. (Loc. Noce),
25125 Brescia, Italy.
Tel: +39 030 349761 Fax: +39 030 349352

Makros Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Riachuelo 410, 20230-013 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 22325851

Manx Pharma Ltd Manx House, Spectrum Business Estate, Bircholt Rd,
Maidstone, ME15 9YP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1622 766389
Web: www.manxhealthcare.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1622 761435

Marco Antonetto S.p.A. Via Arsenale 29, 10121 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 011 5613031 Fax: +39 011 5628190

Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH Doerenkampgasse 11, A-1105
Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 6882161 Fax: +43 (0) 1 688216127

Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau Vertriebsgesellschaft mbH , 50606
Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 16520
Web: www:klosterfrau.de

Fax: +49 (0) 221 1652430

Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Gibraltar 165, 04755-070 Sdo Paulo,
Brazil.

5 (0) 11 56429888
sac@marjan.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 11 56416009
Web: www:marjan.com.br

Marvecs Services Srl Via Paracelso 26, 20041 Agrate Brianza, Italy.
Tel: +39 039684641 Fax: +39 039664300

Mauermann-Arzneimittel, Franz Mauermann oHG Heinrich-Knote-Str. 2,
82343 Pocking, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8157 1002

Email: info@mauermann-arznei.de

Fax: +49 (0) $157 4208

Mavena AG Birkenweg 1-8, 3123 Belp, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 31 8185588 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8185590

Mavena GmbH Haubachstrasse 33, 10585 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 3450693 Fax: +49 (0) 30 34506950
Web: www.mavena.com

Suppliers Directory

Max Zeller S6hne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel Seeblickstrasse 4, Postfach 29,
8590 Romanshorn, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 71 4660500
Email: zeller@zellerag.ch

MaxMedic Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Amalienstr. 71, 80799 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 2889060 Fax: +49 (0) 89 28890620

Email: info@maxmedic.de Web: www.maxmedic.de

Mayne Pharma P/L Level 6, 390 St Kilda Road, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3 98680700 Web: www.maynegroup.com

Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika Melissenweg 15, A-4021 Linz, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 732 76590 Fax: +43 (0) 732 7659100

MBD Marketing (S) Pte Ltd 371 Beach Rd, 03-30 KeyPoint, S 199597,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6391 5915

Email: mbdmktg@singnet.com.sg

MD Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd 896 Dunearn Rd, 04-03 Sime Darby Centre, S
589472, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6460 2753

Email: md777@singnet.com.sg

Meda AB Box 906, 170 09 Solna, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 6301900 Fax: +46 (0) 8 6301950
Email: info@meda.se Web: www.meda.se

Fax: +41 (0) 71 4635007
Web: wwwzellerag.ch

Fax: +65 6392 3929

Fax: +65 6469 8979

Meda A/S Bjerkas Industriomrade, 3470 Slemmestad, Norway.
Tel: +47 31294500 Fax: +47 31294545
Web: www.meda.se

Meda Oy Lemminkdisenkatu 32, 20520 Turku, Finland.
Tel: +358 (0) 2 2849900 Fax: +358 (0) 2 2849929
Web: www.meda.fi

Medibrands P.O. Box 531, Yokneam 20692, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 4 9590131 Fax: +972 (0) 4 9590028

Medic Herb UK Ltd PO Box 2835, Brewery Courtyard, Draymans Lane, Marlow,
SL7 2XG, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 400 608 Fax: +44 (0) 1628 891 701

Email: customercare@medicherb.co.uk | Web: www.medicherb.co.uk

Medic Industrial Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Conselheiro Mayrink 362, 20960-140
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 22414436

Medice, Arzneimittel Putter GmbH & Co. KG Kuhloweg 37, 58638 Iserlohn,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2371 9370
Email: info@medice.de
Medichemie AG Bruhlstrasse 50, 4107 Ettingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7262200 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7262205

Mediherb P/L P.O. Box 713, Warwick, QLD 4370, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 7 46610700 Fax: +61 (0) 7 46610788

Web: www.mediherb.com.au

Medika Lizenz Pharmaz. Praparate Am Alten Weg 20, 82041 Oberhaching,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6131786 Fax: +49 (0) 89 2606384

Medipharma Homburg GmbH Michelinstr. 10, 66424 Homburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6841 709246 Fax: +49 (0) 6841 709265

Medipharma Ltd, Hong Kong Unit 2409, Tsuen Wan Industrial Ctr, 220-248
Texaco Rd, Tsuen Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24089171 Fax: +852 24076092

Medispec (M) Sdn Bhd No 55 & 57 Lorong Sempadan 2, Off Boundary Rd,
11400 Ayer Itam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 4 827 3450
Web: www.medispec.com.my
Meditec/Sam-On Ltd P.O. Box 1224, Bat-Yam 59602, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5511925 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5526453
Web: www.meditec.co.il

Fax: +49 (0) 2371 937329
Web: www.medice.de

Fax: +60 (0) 4 827 3453

Medi-Test Imm Azur, 4 rue Rene-Razel, 91400 Saclay, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 69411000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 69412241
Web: www.medi-test.fr

Mediwhite Srl Via del Forte Bravetta 98, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Medopharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Grunwalderstr. 22, 79098
Freiburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7633 909500
Email: info@medopharm.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7633 909505
Web: www:medopharm.de

----- PAGE 689 -----
Appendix 5

medphano Arzneimittel GmbH Maienbergstr. 10, 15562 Rudersdorf,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 33638 7490
Email: info@medphano.de
MedPointe Healthcare Inc 265 Davidson Ave , Suite 300 , Somerset , NJ
08873-4120 , USA.
Tel: +1 732 564 2200
Medtech Lab 120 Harry Walker Parkway N, New Market, L3Y 7B2, Canada.
Megafyt-R sro , Vrané nad Vitavou, Czech Republic.

Melisana AG Ankerstrasse 53, Postfach, 8026 Zurich, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 44 2454350 Fax: +41 (0) 44 2454355
Melisana SA Ave du Four d Briques 1, 1140 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7261565 Fax: +32 (0) 2 7262970
Email: webmaster@melisana.be Web: www.melisana.be
Memsep sro Strakonickd 1134/13, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 57321621

Menarini Alfonso XII 587, Badalona, 08918 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4628800 Fax: +34 93 4628820

Email: info@menarini.es Web: www.menarini.es

Mentholatum Inc. 707 Sterling Dr., Orchard Park, NY 14127, USA.

Tel: +1 716 677 2500 Web: www.mentholatum.com
Mentholatum South Africa (Pty) Ltd 80 Bonza Bay Rd, Beacon Bay 5241,
South Africa.

Web: www.mentholatum.com

Mepha Pharma AG Postfach 445, 4147 Aesch/BL, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7054343 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7054385

Email: contact@mepha.ch Web: www.mepha.ch

Merck & Co. 7 Merck Dr, White House Station, NJ 08889-1000, USA.

Tel: +1 908 423 1000 Web: www.merck.com

Merck dura GmbH Postfach: 100635, 64206 Darmstadt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 723400 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 723409

Email: merck-dura@merck.de Web: www.merck-dura.de

Merck GmbH Zimbagasse 5, A-1147 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 57600 Fax: +43 (0) 1 5773370

Email: merck-wien@merck.at Web: www.merck.at

Merck KGaA Frankfurter Str. 250, 64271 Darmstadt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 720 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 723250

Email: medizinpartner@merck.de Web: www.medizinpartner.de

Merck Lipha Santé 37 rue St-Romain, 69008 Lyon, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 72782525 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78753905

Web: www.mercksante.fr

Merck Quimica Argentina $.A.1.C. Panamericana Plaza Tronador 4890 Piso 5,
1430 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45468100
Web: www.merck.com.ar
Merck Quimica Chilena Ltda Francisco de Paula Taforo 1981, Nunoa,
Santiago, Chile.

Merck S.A. Hans Neumann Ed.Corimon p3, Los Cortijos de Lou., Caracas,
Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2351379
Web: www.merck.com
Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas Estrada dos Bandeirantes 1099, 22710-571
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24442000
Email: farma@merck.com.br
Merckle GmbH Graf-Arco-Str. 3, 89079 Ulm, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 731 4027426 Fax: +49 (0) 731 4024141

Email: service@merckle.de Web: www.merckle.de

Merz Pharma (Schweiz) AG Postfach, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4863600 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4863636

Email: info@merz.ch Web: www.merz.ch

Merz Pharmaceuticals GmbH Eckenheimer Landstr. 100, 60318 Frankfurt
(Main), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 69 15031

Email: arzneimittelservice@merz.de
Metochem-Pharma GmbH Jochen-Rindt-Strasse 23, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 61684250 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616842510

Meyer Productos Terapéuticos S.A. Urb. Ind. Boleita Norte Calle E, Edif. Meyer,
Aptdo. 70008, Caracas 1071-A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2382633 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2341918

Email: general@meyer.com.ve Web: www.meyer.com.ve

Fax: +49 (0) 33638 74977
Web: www.medphano.de

Web: www.medpointeine.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 45468199

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2377632

Fax: +55 (0) 21 24452263
Web: www:merck.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 69 5962150
Web: www.merz.de

Microsules y Bernabo S.A. Terrada 2346, 1416 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45013278 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45016426
Web: www.microsulesybernabo.com.ar

Midax Italia S.r.1. Via Piave 5, 35010 San Pietro in Gu (PD), Italy.
Tel: +39 049 9455636 Fax: +39 049 9459434
Midro Lorrach GmbH Barenfelser Str. 7, 79539 Lorrach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7621 46415 Fax: +49 (0) 7621 87664
Email: mail@midro.de Web: www.midro.de

Midro Vertrieb AG Uferstrasse 90, 4019 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3027036 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3020750
Web: www.midro.com

Milte Italia S.p.A. Via Tadino 29/A, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 29517803 Fax: +39 02 29517938
Web: www.milte.it

Monserrat y Eclair S.A. Virrey Cevallos 1625/7, 1135 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43044524

Montavit GmbH Salzbergstrasse 96, A-6060 Absam, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 5223 57926 Fax: +43 (0) 5223 5792611

Web: www.montavit.com

Montefarmaco S.p.A. Via G. Galilei 7, 20016 Pero (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 39171 Fax: +39 02 33911205

Email: info@montefarmaco.com Web: www.montefarmaco.com

MPL, Marching Pharmaceutical Ltd Units 2,4,8-12, 9/F Block B Vigor Ind Bldg,
14-20 Cheung Tat Rd, Tsing Yi, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24326993 Fax: +852 24323522

Email: info@marching.com.hk Web: www.marching.com.hk

MPM Medical Inc. 2301 Crown Ct, Irving, TX 75038, USA.

Web: www.mommedicalinc.com

Mr J W Wenig GmbH Van der Nullgasse 22, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 604149018

Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda RS 407 Km 30 No. 1009,

96700-000 Sdo Jeronimo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 51 32304006 Fax:
Web: www:multilab.com.br

55 (0) 51 32304007

mundipharma AS Postboks 218, 1326 Lysaker, Norway.

Tel: +47 67518900 Fax: +47 67518901

Web: www.mundipharma.com

Mundipharma GmbH Apollogasse 16-18, A-1072 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 52325050 Fax: +43 (0) 1 523250544

Web: www.mundipharma.co.uk

Mundipharma GmbH Turisticka 36, 621 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 5 775062 Email: mundipharma@iol.cz
Mundipharma GmbH Mundipharma Str. 2, 65549 Limburg (Lahn), Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6431 7010 Fax: +49 (0) 6431 74272

Email: mundipharma@mundipharma.de Web: www.mundipharma.de
Mundipharma Medical Co St Alban-Rheinweg 74, 4020 Basle, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 2051111 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2051187

Email: info@mundipharma.ch Web: www.mundipharma.ch
Mundipharma Oy Rajatorpantie 41 B, 01640 Vantaa, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 85202065 Fax: +358 (0) 9 85202062

Web: www.mundipharma.com

®

NAM Neukénigsférder Arzneimittel GmbH Moorbeker Strasse 35, 26197
Grossenkneten, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 4435 5067
Email: info@nam.de
Natrol 21471 Prairie Street, , Chatsworth, CA 91311, USA.

Tel: +1 818 739 6000 Email: customer-service@natrol.com
Web: www.natrol.com

Fax: +49 (0) 4435 6166
Web: www:nam.de

Natural Life S.A. Tucuman 3516, 1189 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 41279300 Fax: +54 (0) 11 41279317
Nature Made PO Box 9606, , Mission Hills, CA 91346-9606, USA.
Tel: +1 800 276 2878
Nature’s Bounty 90 Orville Drive, , Bohemia, NY 11716, USA.

Tel: +1 800 433 2990 Email: info@naturesbounty.com
Web: www.naturesbounty.com

Web: www.naturemade.com

Nature’s Resources , , USA.
Nature Made

Naturland Csillagvirdg u 8, 1106 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 4312040

----- PAGE 690 -----
Naturland Czech Republic sro Kartouzskd 4/200, 15 000 Prague 5, Czech
Republic.

Naturopathica P.O. Box 7096, Sydney, NSW 2001, Australia.

Fax: +61 (0) 2 92790464 Web: www.naturopathica.com.au
Naturpharma SA Sd route des Jeunes, Case postale 8, 1211 Geneva 26,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 3004740 Fax: +41 (0) 22 3001396

Naturprodukt Kft DEPO Pf: 8, 2046 Tordkbdlint, Hungary.
Tel: +36 23 336331 Fax: +36 23 336333

Naturwaren OHG , Czech Republic.

Naytsal C/ Molino 2, Meco, 28880 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8876055 Fax: +34 91 8876054

Email: natysal@pasanet.es Web: www.natysal.com

Neckerman Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua das Perobeiras 157, 05879-470
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 58732890 Fax: +55 (0) 11 58734788

Neo Dermos S.R.L. Francisco Bilbao 1927, 1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46320717 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46335670
Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda Avenida D Jodo Il, 1990-090 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7812300 Fax: +351 21 7812390

Email: neofarmaceutica@mail.telepac.pt Web: www.neo-farmaceutica.pt

Neopharm Ltd 8 Hashiloach St, P.O. Box 7063, Petach Tikva 49170, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 3 9373737 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9373770

Email: hana.c@neopharmisrael.com Web: www.neopharmisrael.com
Neopharma GmbH & Co. KG Kirchstr. 10, 83229 Aschau i. Chiemgau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8052 306

Email: neopharma@t-online.de

Neovita S.a.s. di G. Pirotta & C. Via Solferino 4, 21040 Uboldo (VA), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 96780394 Fax: +39 02 96780394

Email: neogiul@tin.it

Neutrogena Corp. 5760 W 96th St, Los Angeles, CA 90045-5595, USA.
Tel: +1 310 647 1150 Web: www.neutrogena.com

Nippon Shinyaku Co. Ltd 14 Nishinosho-Monguchi-cho, Kisshoin, Minami-ku,
Kyoto 601-8550, Japan.

Tel: +81 (0) 75 3211111 Fax: +81 (0) 75 3210678

Nizhpharm OAO 7 Salganskaya ul., GSP-459, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod,
Russia.

Tel: +7 8312 788000
Email: med@nizhpharm.ra

Nobel Pharm Enrg 2615 pl. Chasse, Montreal, H1Y 2C3, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 5223187

Norgine AG Neue Bahnhofstrasse 160, 4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 4610868 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4610875
Email: norgine.switzerland@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine BV Hogehilweg 7, 1101 CA Amsterdam Zuid-Oost, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 20 5670900 Fax: +31 (0) 20 5670999

Email: norgine.netherlands@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine de Espafia Maudes, 517 8 Pl., 28003 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3956350 Fax: +34 91 3956396

Email: norgine.spain@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine GmbH /m Schwarzenborn 4, 35041 Marburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6421 98520 Fax: +49 (0) 6421 985230

Email: info@norgine.de Web: www.norgine.de

Norgine Italia S.r.1. Via Prina 15, 20154 Milan (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 33614476 Fax: +39 02 315625

Email: norgine.italy@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine Pharma GmbH Haidestrasse 4, A-1110 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8178120 Fax: +43 (0) 1 7436370

Email: norgine.pharma.austria@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd Chaplin House, Moorhall Rd, Harefield, Uxbridge,
UB9 6NS, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1895 826600
Email: norgine.uk@norgine.com
Norgine P/L 3/14 Rodborough Road, Frenchs Forest, NSW 2086, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 99727500 Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 781247, Gauteng, Sandton 2146, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 8835630 Fax: +27 (0) 11 7831712

Email: norgine.south.africa@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Fax: +49 (0) 8052 5429

Fax: +7 8312 307213
Web: www:nizhpharm.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1895 825865
Web: www:norgine.com

Suppliers Directory

Norgine SA Haasrode Research Park, Romeinsestraat 10, 3001 Heverlee,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 16 392710 Fax: +32 (0) 16 392720

Email: norgine_info@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Normon S.A. Ronda de Valdecarrizo 6, Tres Cantos, 28760 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8065240 Fax: +34 91 8065256

Web: www.normon.com

Novag Infancia S.A. de C.V. Claz. de Tlalpan No. 3417, Col. Sta. Ursula Coapa-
Coyoacan, 04650 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56664120 Fax: +52 55 56067076

Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda Rodovia SP101 (Campinas a
Monte Mor) Km 08, 13186-481 Hortolandia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 8871209 Fax: +55 (0) 19 8872242

Novartis Argentina S.A. Ramallo 1851, 1429 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47037000 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47037251

Web: www.ar.novartis.com

Novartis Consumer Health Wimblehurst Rd, Horsham, RH12 4AB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1403 210211 Fax: +44 (0) 1403 323939

Web: www.novartis.co.uk

Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc. 2233 Argentia Rd, Suite 205,
Mississauga, LSN 2X7, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 8124100

Web: www.ca.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health GmbH Zielstattstr. 40, 81379 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 78770 Fax: +49 (0) 89 7877444

Email: munich_de@ch.novartis.com Web: www.novartis-consumerhealth.de
Novartis Consumer Health Inc. 200 Kimball Drive, Parsippany, NJ 07054-
0622, USA.

Tel: +1 973 503 8000
Web: www.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health, Lda Av Poeta Mistral 2-2, 1069-172 Lisbon,
Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 7811010

Web: www.consumer-health.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health Schweiz AG Monbijoustrasse 118, 3001 Berne,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3776111

Web: www.novartis-consumer-health.ch
Novartis Farma S.p.A. Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21040 Origgio (VA), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 96541 Fax: +39 02 96542910

Web: www.novartis.it

Novartis Farmaceutica Gran Via Corts Catalanes 764, 08013 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 3064200 Fax: +34 93 3064290

Web: ww
Novartis Finland Oy Metsdnneidonkuja 10, 02130 Espoo, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 61332211 Fax: +358 (0) 9 61332200

Web: www.novartis.fi

Novartis (Hellas) A.E.B.E. 120 chim. Ethnikis Odou Athinon-Lamias, 144 51
Metamorfosi, Greece.
Tel: +30 210 2811712
Web: www.novartis.gr
Novartis Ltd Hasivim 23, Petach Tikva, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9201111 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9229230

Web: www.novartis.com

Novartis New Zealand Ltd Private Bag 19-999, Avondale, Auckland, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 8283149
Web: www.novartis.com

Fax: +1 905 8214058

Fax: +1 973 503 8400

Fax: +351 21 7811011

Fax: +41 (0) 31 3776100

es.novartis.com

Fax: +30 210 2812014

Fax: +64 (0) 9 8286565

Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG Monbijoustrasse 118, Postfach, 3001 Berne,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3775111
Web: www.novartis.ch
Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp. One Health Plaza, East Hanover, NJ 07936-
1080, USA.

Tel: +1 862 778 8300

Web: www.pharma.us.novartis.com
Novartis Santé Familiale SA 14 bd Richelieu, B.P. 440, 92845 Rueil-Malmaison
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55478000

Novartis South Africa (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 92, ZA-Kempton Park, Isando 1600,
South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 9299111
Web: www.novartis.com

Fax: +41 (0) 31 3775211

Fax: +1 973 781 8265

Fax: +27 (0) 11 9292544

----- PAGE 691 -----
Appendix 5

Novartis Sverige AB Box 1150, 183 11 Tdby, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 7323200 Fax: +46 (0) 8 7.
Email: info.se@pharma.novartis.com Web: www.novartis.s
Novipharm GmbH Klagenfurter Strasse 164, A-9210 Portschach, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 4272 2751 Fax: +43 (0) 4272 3119

Novogaleno S.r.1. Largo Sermoneta 24, 80123 Naples, Italy.

Tel: +39 081 7613117 Fax: +39 081 7613117

Email: novogaleno@hotmail.com

Novogen Laboratories P/L 140 Wicks Rd, North Ryde, NSW 2113, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98780088 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98780055

Web: www.novogen.com

Novopharm Ltd 30 Novopharm Court, Toronto, M1B 2K9, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 2918888 Fax: +1 416 2911874

Web: www.novopharm.com

Nucleopharm SRL Av. Remedios 5341/49, 1440 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Numark Laboratories Inc. 164 North Field Ave, Edison, NJ 08818, USA.

Tel: +1 732 417 1870 Web: www.numarklabs.com

Nutravite 1470 Leathead Rd, Unit 2, Kelowna, V1X 7/6, Canada.

Tel: +1 250 7120600 Fax: +1 250 7120617

Web: www.nutravite.com

Nutridiver SL C/del Pont Reixat 5, 08960 Sant Just Desvern, Barcelona, Spain.
Nycomed Austria GmbH St Peter-Strasse 25, A-4020 Linz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 732 69190 Fax: +43 (0) 732 655568

Nycomed BV Nikkelstraat 5, 4823 AE Breda, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 76 5481600 Fax: +31 (0) 76 5412197

Web: www.nycomed.nl

Nycomed Christiaens Chris Juliam, Gentsesteenweg 615, 1080 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 4640611
Web: www.nycomed.be
Nycomed Pharma AS Hagalokkv. 13, Postboks 205, 1372 Asker, Norway.
Tel: +47 67763030 Fax: +47 67763040

Web: www.nycomed.no

(0)

OBA Pharma ApS Kronprinsessegade 26 A (postboks 117), 1004 Copenhagen K,
Denmark.

Tel: +45 33326647 Fax: +45 33126647

Officina Farmaceutica Fiorentina S.r.|. Istituto Biochimico Quart. Varignano
12-14, 55049 Viareggio (Lucca), Italy.
Tel: +39 0584 392353

Email: info@off-biolabs.it

Olic (Thailand) Ltd 280 New Rd, Bangkok 10100, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2220 9000 Fax: +66 (0) 2220 9009

Email: info@olic-thailand.com Web: www.olic-thailand.com
Omegin Dr Schmidgall GmbH & Co. KG Industriepark 210, 78244
Gottmadingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7731 98250
Omeofarma S.r.|. Via di Morena 12/a, 00043 Ciampino (Rome), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 7903101 Fax: +39 06 79031208

Email: omeofarmaciampino@tiscalinet.it

Orient Europharm Pte Ltd 7 Sophia Rd, 04-12 Peace Centre, $ 228149,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6339 8820

Email: orienteuro@pacific.net.sg
Orion-yhtyma Oyj Kalkkipellontie 2, 02601 Espoo, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 10 4291 Fax: +358 (0) 10 4293939

Email: etunimi.sukunimi@orionpharma.com

Web: www.orionpharma.com

Ortoquimica Ind. Quimico Farmacéutica Ltda Av. Magalhdes de Castro 800,
05502-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 38135052

OTC Concepts , UK.
OTW-Naturarzneimittel Regneri GmbH & Co KG Carl-Zeiss-Str. 4, 76275

Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 5100 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 510100

Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd 46, 46/2 Soi Charansanitwongs 40,
Charansanwitwongs Rd, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 433 0061 Fax: +66 2 883 1842

Oy Leiras Finland AB PL 1406, 00101 Helsinki, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 20 7465000 Fax: +358 (0) 20 7465090
Email: etunimi.sukunimi@leirasfinland.fi Web: www.leiras.fi

Fax: +32 (0) 2 4640699

Fax: +39 0584 388374

Web: www.omegin.de

Fax: +65 6339 5272

[P)

Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd 229/1 South Sathorn Rd, Bangkok
10120, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 211 5142
Email: phc@phe.co.th
Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd P.O. Box 11-183, Ellerslie, Auckland, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 5792792 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5797072

Padma AG Wiesenstrasse 5, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 43 3434444 Fax: +41 (0) 43 3434443

Email: mail@padma.ch Web: www.padma.com

Pan Quimica Farmaceutica Rufino Gonzalez 50, 28037 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3756230 Fax: +34 91 3047881

Panacea Biotec Ltd B-1 Extn. A-27,, Mohan Co-op. Industrial Estate, Mathura
Rd, New Delhi 110 044, India.
Tel: +91 (0) 11 26945270

Web: www.panacea-biotec.com

Paradise Promotions Ltd 13 George St, Novar, POA 1R0, Canada.

Parsenn-Produkte AG, Abt. Pharmazeutik Klus, 7240 Kublis, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 81 3003333 Fax: +41 (0) $1 3003339

Pascoe Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH Schiffenberger Weg 55, 35394
Giessen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 641 79600
Email: webmaster@pascoe.de
Peking Royal Jelly Deutschland BOELL HandelsKontor Am Kirchberg 3,
86666 Burgheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8432 94010
Email: info@boell-peking.de
Pentamedical S.r.I. Via G. Mazzini 1, 20021 Bollate (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 38302445 Fax: +39 02 38302790

Permamed AG Ringstrasse 29, Postfach 360, 4106 Therwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7252020 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7252040

Email: permamed@permamed.ch Web: www.permamed.ch

Perrigo Wrafton Laboratories Ltd., Wrafton, Braunton, EX33 2DL, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1271 815815 Fax: +44 (0) 1271 818997

Web: www.wrafton.com

Perrigo Ltd 29 Lehi Street, Bnei Brak 51200, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5773700 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5773500

Web: www.perrigo.com

Personal Care Group Inc. 225 Summit Ave, Montvale, NJ 07645-1574, USA.
Tel: +1 201 573 5633

Peter Black Healthcare Ltd William Nadin Way, Swadlincote, DE11 OBB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1283 228300 Fax: +44 (0) 1283 228328

Email: info.pbh@peterblack.co.uk Web: www.peterblack.co.uk

Peter Italia sas Via Tommaso Silvestri 22, 00135 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3380459 Fax: +39 06 30601489

Email: peteritalia@linet.it Web: www.medicinaestetica.it

Pfeiffer Company 65-71 University Ave, P.O. Box 4447, Atlanta, GA 30302,
USA.

Tel: +1 404 614 0255 Web: www:pfeifferpharmaceuticals.com
Pfizer ApS Danmark Lautrupvang 8, 2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Tel: +45 44201100 Fax: +45 44201101

Web: wwwepfizer.dk

Pfizer AS Postboks 3, 1324 Lysaker, Norway.

Tel: +47 67526100 Fax: +47 67526196

Web: www.pfizer.no

Pfizer BV Roer 266, 2908 AA Capelle a/d ljssel, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 10 4064200 Fax: +31 (0) 10 4064299

Web: wwwpfizer.com

Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada Inc. 2200 Eglinton
Ave E, Toronto, MIL 2N3, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 2882200

Web: wwwepfizer.ca

Pfizer GmbH Pfizerstr. 1, 76139 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 61019000 Fax: +49 (0) 721 62039000
Email: info@pfizer.de Web: wwwpfizer.de
Pfizer Inc. 235 East 42nd St, New York, NY 10017-5755, USA.
Tel: +1 212 733 2323 Web: www.pfizer.com
Pfizer Italiana S.r.1. Via Valbondione 113, 00188 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 331821 Fax: +39 06 33626019
Web: wwwopfizer.it

Fax: +66 2 212 5323
Web: www:phe.co.th

Fax: +91 (0) 11 26974600

Fax: +49 (0) 641 7960119
Web: www:pascoe.de

Fax: +49 (0) 8432 940126
Web: www:boell-peking.de

Fax: +1 416 2882588

----- PAGE 692 -----
Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 2271, Cape Town 8000, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 4063224 Fax: +27 (0) 21 4063459
Web: wwwpfizer.co.za

Pfizer Ltd Walton Oaks, Dorking Rd, Tadworth, KT20 7NS, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1304 616161 Fax: +44 (0) 1304 656221
Web: wwwpfizer.co.uk

Pfizer Oy PL 36, 00331 Helsinki, Finland.
Tel: +358 (0) 9 430040 Fax: +358 (0) 9 43004400
Web: wwwpfizer.fi

Pfizer P/L P.O. Box 57, West Ryde, NSW 2114, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98503333 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98581347
Web: www:pfizer.com.au

Pfizer Pte Ltd 152 Beach Rd, 29-00 Gateway East, S$ 189721, Singapore.
Tel: +-65 6311 3688 Fax: +65 6311 3698
Web: www.pfizer-singapore.com

Pfizer SA Boulevard de la Plaine 17, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 5546211 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5546660
Web: wwwpfizer.com

Pfizer SA Scharenmoosstrasse 99, 8052 Zurich, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 43 4957111 Fax: +41 (0) 43 4957280
Web: www.pfizer.ch

Pfizer (Thailand) Ltd 36-38 Fl, 42 Fl, United Center Building, 323 Silom Rd,
Kwang Silom, Khet Bangrak, Bangkok 10500, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2665 4666 Fax: +66 (0) 2635 5471

Web: www.pfizer.co.th

PGM Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH & Co. Miinchen Fiirstenstr 6,
80333 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 284633

Email: info@pgm-muenchen.de

Pharbenia S.r.I., Societa del Gruppo Bayer V‘le Certosa 130, 20156 Milan,
Italy.
Tel: +39 02 39781 Fax: +39 02 39782109

Pharma Développement 40 rue des Bergers, 75015 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45752200

Pharma Fabre Hellas S.A. 85 Lavriou Ave , , 190 02 Paiania , Greenland.
Tel: +30 210 6683000 Fax: +30 210 6683250

Pharma Funcke , Czech Republic.

Pharma Guri P.O. Box 15164, Rishon Le Zion 75105, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 8 9205888 Fax: +972 (0) 8 9205999
Email: pharma_g@inter.net.il Web: www.pharmaguri.co.il

Fax: +49 (0) 89 2809703
Web: www:pgm-muenchen.de

Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.l. Via Vittor Pisani 93, 70033
Corato (BA), Italy.

Tel: +39 080 3593060

Email: info@pharmaitalia.com

Fax: +39 080 3580238
Web: www:pharmaitalia.com

Pharma Liebermann GmbH Hauptstr. 27, 89423 Gundelfingen/Do., Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9073 958930 Fax: +49 (0) 9073 9589355
Email: info@pharma-liebermann.de Web: www.pharma-liebermann.de

Pharma Schworer GmbH Goethestr. 29, 69257 Wiesenbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6223 4347 Fax: +49 (0) 6223 47438
Email: info@pharma-schwoerer.de Web: www.pharma-schwoerer.de

Pharma Selz GmbH Leininger Ring 65a, 67278 Bockenheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6359 943610 Fax: +49 (0) 6359 943636
Web: www.pharmaselz.de

Pharma Stulln GmbH Werksstr. 3, 92551 Stulln, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9435 30080 Fax: +49 (0) 9435 300899
Email: info@pharmastulln.de Web: www.pharmastulln.de

Pharma Wernigerode GmbH Dornbergsweg 35, 38855 Wernigerode/Harz,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 3943 5540

Email: info@pharmawernigerode.de

Fax: +49 (0) 3943 554183
Web: www.pharmawernigerode.de

Pharmaceutical Enterprises (Pty) Ltd Howards Drive, Pinelands, Howard Place
7405, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 5311341 Fax: +27 (0) 21 5312692

Pharmachemie BV Swensweg 5, 2031 GA Haarlem, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 23 5147147 Fax: +31 (0) 23 5312879
Web: www.pharmachemie.com

Pharmachoice (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 291, Fourways 2055, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 4653647 Fax: +27 (0) 11 4653696
Email: info@pharmachoice.co.za Web: www.pharmachoice.co.za

Suppliers Directory

Pharmacia Asia Ltd 16/F Stanhope House, 738 Kings Rd, North Point, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 28119711

Web: www.pharmacia.com
Pharmacia GmbH Am Wolfsmantel 46, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9131 620 Fax: +49 (0) 9131 621202

Web: www.pharmacia.de

Pharmacia Italia S.p.A. Via Robert Koch 1.2, 20152 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 48381 Fax: +39 02 48382734

Web: www.pharmaciaitalia.it

Pharmacia Singapore Pte Ltd 707 Thomson Rd, 31-04/05 United Square, S
307591, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6354 9828

Web: www.pharmacia.com
Pharmacie du Collége, Dr Cl & A Behringer rue du Lac 42, 1400 Yverdons-les-
Bains, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 24 4252107 Fax: +41 (0) 24 4258910

Pharmadass Ltd HealthAid House, Marlborough Hill, Harrow, HA1 1UD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8426 3400 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8426 3434

Email: sales@pharmadass.com Web: www.pharmadass.com

Pharmalab, Di ion de Stonglass SA Av. Santa Fe 3312, Piso 7 C, 1425
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Fax: +852 25790599

Fax: +65 6354 9501

Pharmamagist Kft Patakhegyi ut 83-85, 1028 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3975174 Fax: +36 3975175

Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 494, Bergvlei 2012, South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 4456000 Fax: +27 (0) 11 4456089

Email: healthcare@pharma.co.za Web: www.pharma.co.za

Pharmanex Inc. 74 West Center, Provo, UT 84601, USA.

Tel: +1 801 345 9800 Fax: +1 801 345 2850

Email: productsupport@pharmanex.com Web: www.pharmanex.com
Pharmaniaga Marketing Sdn Bhd P.O. Box 2030, Pusat Business Bukit Raja,
40800 Shah Alam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 33429999

Web: www.pharmaniaga.com.my
Pharmascience Inc. 6111 Royalmount Ave, Suite 100, Montreal, H4T 2T4,
Canada.

Tel: +1 514 3401114

Web: www.pharmascience.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 33417777

Fax: +1 514 3427764

Pharmasette di Paolo Donati e C. S.a.s. Via Lusitania 15/A, 00183 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 58232820 Fax: +39 06 58232820

Pharmashalom Ltd 27 Hamelaha St, Park Afek, Rosh Ha‘ayin, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9031424 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9031358

Pharmastra, Usines Chimiques et Pharmaceutiques de Strasbourg 40 rue
du Canal, 67460 Souffelweyersheim, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88200212 Fax: +33 (0) 3 88339347

Email: info@pharmastra.com Web: www.pharmastra.com

Pharmateam Marketing P.O. Box 405, Jerusalem, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 2 5712140 Fax: +972 (0) 2 5712235

Email: ptm@pharmateam-mktg.co.il Web: www.pharmateam.co.il
Pharmaton SA , 6934 Bioggio, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 6103111 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6103211

Pharmatrix, Div. de Therabel Pharma S.A. Arenales 259, 1704 Ramos Mejia,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46561816
Web: www.pharmatrix.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 46583557

Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH Siemensstr. 4, 25421 Pinneberg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4101 73800
Email: evco@pharmaevers.de
Pharmazeutische Fabrik Infirmarius-Rovit GmbH Eislinger Str. 66, 73084
Salach, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7162 930800

Email: info@infirmarius-rovit.de
Pharmethica BV Ronde Tocht 11, 1507 CC Zaandam, Netherlands.
Pharmia Oy Kalliotie 2, 04360 Tuusula, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 8254030 Fax: +358 (0) 9 8709715
Email: info@pharmia.fi Web: www.pharmia.fi

Fax: +49 (0) 4101 73889
Web: www:pharmaevers.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7162 9308091
Web: www.infirmarius-rovit.de

Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer Montanastrasse 7, A-8112 Gratwein,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 3124 51368
Email: pharmonta@sime.at

Fax: +43 (0) 3124 5136821
Web: www:pharmonta.com

----- PAGE 693 -----
Appendix 5

Phytomed AG Tschamerie 25, 3415 Hasle/Burgdorf, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 34 4602211 Fax: +41 (0) 34 4614163
Email: info@phytomed.ch

Phytomedicine P/L P.O. Box 1995, Dee Why, NSW 2099, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 99391380 Fax: +61 (0) 2 99391333
Email: cust.serv@phytomedicine.com.au Web: www.phytomedicine.com.au

Phytopharma SA Chemin des Golettes 4a, 1666 Grandvillard, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 9281549 Fax: +41 (0) 26 9282149
Email: phytopharma@bluewin.ch Web: www.phytopharma.ch

Phytotec Hungaria Kft Lotz Kdroly u 3, 1026 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 3920385 Fax: +36 3980192

Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A. Marcelo T de Alvear 684, piso 7, 1058 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43189600
Web: www.pierre-fabre.com.ar

Pierre Fabre Farma de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Blvd Manuel Avila Camacho 191,
Piso 4 In, Polanco Los Morales, 11510 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 21223700 Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Iberica Ramon Trias Fargas 7-11, Edifico Marina Village, 08005
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4833000
Email: info@pierre-fabre.es

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43189626

Fax: +34 93 4833059

Web: www.pierre-fabre.es

Pierre Fabre Italia S.p.A. Via G.G. Winckelmann 1, 20146 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 477941 Fax: +39 02 425589

Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Medicament Usacheva ul. 33, 119048 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 7452650 Fax: +7 095 7452654
Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Médicament Portugal, Lda Rua Rodrigo da Fonseca 178 - 2 Esq,
1099-067 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3815320

Web: www.pierre-fabre.com
Pierre Fabre Medicament sro Radimovd 36, 160 00 Prague 6, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 20516778 Fax: +420 (0) 2 20517415

Email: all@pfm.cz

Pietrasanta Pharma S.r.I. Loc. S. Rocchino, 55054 Massarosa (LU), Italy.

Tel: +39 0584 49855 Fax: +39 0584 45190

Email: pietrasantapharma@interbusiness.it

Web: www.pietrasantapharma.it

Fax: +351 21 3860370

Plantina Biologische Arzneimittel AG Jochbergweg 1, 82418 Murnau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8841 48880
Email: info@plantina.de

Fax: +49 (0) 8841 488820
Web: www.plantina.de

Plants, Laboratorio della Dott.ssa Luisa Coletta Viaria C, Zona Industriale,
98040 Giammoro (ME), Italy.

Tel: +39 090 9387033 Fax: +39 090 9387237

Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd 7150 Kampong Ampat, 06-07 KA Centre,
S 368324, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6283 6826

Email: polymed@starhub.net.sg

Fax: +65 6382 4948

Polypharm GmbH Bad Nauheimer Str. 4, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6151 601980 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 6019820

Email: email@polypharm.de

Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A. Edificio Ponce & Benzo, 2da. Avenida, Urb.
Santa Eduvigis, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 2863822

Email: info@ponce-benzo.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2833389

Web: www.ponce-benzo.com

Potter’s Herbal Medicines 7 Botanic Court, Martland Park, Wigan, WNS 0JZ,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1942 219 960

Email: info@pottersherbals.co.uk

Fax: +44 (0) 1942 219 966
Web: www.pottersherbals.co.uk
Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd Unit 5b, Chipchase Court, Seaham Grange
Industrial Estate, Seaham, SR7 OPP, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 191 5236578

Email: info@herbal-direct.com
Presselin-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Heinkelstr. 8a, 76461 Muggensturm,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7222 96930

Email: webmaster@presselin.de

Fax: +44 (0) 191 5236059
Web: www:herbal-direct.com

Fax: +49 (0) 7222 969325

Web: www.presselin.de

Primal Chemical Co. Ltd Flat A, 7/F, Hoi Bun Industrial Bldg, 6 Wing Yip St,
Kwun Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 23433212 Fax: +852 27978595

Prisfar, SA Rua Antero de Quentel 629, 4200-068 Porto, Portugal.

Tel: +351 22 5573600 Fax: +351 22 5504207

Web: www.prisfar.pt

Procter & Gamble / or 2, Procter & Gamble Plaza, Cincinnati, OH 45201, USA.
Tel: +1 513 983 1100 Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble AG 47 rue de Saint-Georges, 1213 Petit-Lancy 1,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7096111
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Australia P/L Locked Bag 75, Parramatta, NSW 2124,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 96854400
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Austria GmbH Guglgasse 7-9, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 58857400 Fax: +43 (0) 1 588575400

Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Loma Florida 32, Lomas de
Vistahermosa, Del. Cuajimalpa, 05100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57242000 Fax: +52 55 57242331

Web: www.pg.com.mx

Procter & Gamble do Brasil S.A. Av. Maria Coelho Aguiar 251, Bloco E- Andares
4./5, Jd Sdo Luiz, 05805-000 Paulo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 37480264 Fax:
Web: www.procter.com.br

Procter & Gamble (Health & Beauty Care) Ltd The Heights, Brooklands,
Weybridge, KT13 OXP, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 896000
Email: ukmisc.im@pg.com
Procter & Gamble Inc. P.O. Box 355, Station A, Toronto, MSW 1CS5, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 7304711 Fax: +1 416 7306049

Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble Interamericanos Inc. Suipacha 664 Piso 2, 1008 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43230600
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble NPD, Inc. 7th Floor, Acer Building, 10-12 Scotia Place,
Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3561800
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals Watermanweg 100, 3067 GG Rotterdam,
Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 10 2863100
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd Rusham Park Technical Centre,
Whitehall Lane, Egham, TW20 9NW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1784 474900 Fax: +44 (0) 1784 495253

Email: ukmisc.im@pg.com Web: www.uk.pg.com

Procter & Gamble Srl Viale C Pavese 385, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 50971 Fax: +39 06 SO11881

Web: www.pg.com

Procter Gamble Av. del Partenon 16-18, Campo de las Naciones, 28042
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 7222100
Web: www.pg.com
Prodotti Laboratério Farmacéutico Ltda Avenida Jodo Dias 1084, Santo
Amaro, 04724-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55419344 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55228718

Productos Farmaceuticos Collins S.A. de C.V. Cipres No. 1677, Col. del
Fresno, 44900 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 38115171 Fax: +52 33 3811Si71

Web: www.collins.com.mx

Productos Gache S.A. Calle La Industria, Ed. Lemar P.B., Urb. Palo Verde,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2510964 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2512662

Productos Maver S.A. de C.V. Av. Oleoducto No. 2804, Fracc. Industrial El
Alamo, 44490 Tlaquepaque, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36661873 Fax: +52 33 36662773

Productos Medix S.A. de C.V. Calz. del Hueso No. 39, Col. Ejido Santa Ursula
Coapa, Deleg. Coyoacan, 04910 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55992800 Fax: +52 55 56795652

Productos Naturissima de Venezuela Calle del Arenal Edif. Biotech, Urb. La
Trinidad, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 9035400

Fax: +41 (0) 22 7096855

Fax: +61 (0) 2 96854777

5 (0) 11 37480244

Fax: +44 (0) 1923 896200
Web: wwwuk.pg.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43230781

Fax: +64 (0) 9 3561818

Fax: +31 (0) 10 2863131

Fax: +34 91 7222411

Fax: +58 (0) 212 9035690

----- PAGE 694 -----
Productos Roche Ltda Av. Quilin 3750, Macul, Santiago, Chile.
Productos Roche S.A. Edificio Roche, Av. Diego Cisneros/Los Ruices, Caracas
1062, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2734611
Web: www:roche.com.ve

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2398191

Productos Ronava C.A. Final calle Mara, Edif.Ronava Zona Ind. El Marqué,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2396413
Email: ventas@ronava.com.ve
Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda Praia de Botafogo 440, 25 andar,
22250-040 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25390608

Email: milletroux@milletroux.com.br
ProMedico Ltd 4 Baltimor St, Petach Tikva 49510, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9265965 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9248548

Web: www.promedico.co.il

Protina Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH Adalperostr. 90, 85737
Ismaning, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 9965530
Email: info@protina.de
Provita Pharma GmbH Seidengasse 33-35, A-1070 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 14709631 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4796463

Psorimed AG Postfach, 5401 Baden, Switzerland.

Puerto Galiano Calle ’S’, 4, Parque Europolis, Las Rozas, 28230 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 7105047 Fax: +34 91 6371989

Email: okal@puertogaliano.com Web: www.puertogaliano.com

Purdue Pharma 575 Granite Court, Pickering, LIW 3W8, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 4206400 Fax: +1 905 4200385

Pynogin GmbH, Gee Lawson Distribution Centre Unit 15 South Nottingham
& Wilford Industrial Estate, Wilford, Nottingham, NG11 7EP, UK.

@
Qualicare AG Florenz-Strasse 7, 4142 Muinchenstein, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3330085 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3330086

Email: mail@qualicare.ch Web: www.qualicare.ch

Qualiphar SA Rijksweg 9, 2880 Bornem, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 8891721 Fax: +32 (0) 3 8896913

Web: www.qualiphar.be

Queisser Pharma GmbH.& Co. Lyusinovskaya ul. 36, Of. 73, 113093 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 3635051
Email: office@queisser.ru
Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co. Schleswiger Str. 74, 24941 Flensburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 461 99960 Fax: +49 (0) 461 9996110

Email: lorenzen@queisser.de Web: www.queisser.de

Quest Vitamins Ltd 8 Venture Way, Aston Science Park, Birmingham, B7 4AP,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 121 359 0056
Email: info@questvitamins.co.uk
Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F. O’Connor 550/5, 1707 V. Sarmiento, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46583051 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46587290

Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda Rua Jaime Perdigao 431-435,
21920-240 Ilha do Governador, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 3934266 Fax: +55 (0) 21 3931343

Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V. Paseo Lomas Atlas No. 292,
Col. Lomas del Valle, 45120 Zapopan, Jal., Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36423030 Fax: +52 33 36428833

Web: www.nordin.com.mx

Quimica Knoll de Mexico S.A. de C.V. La Candelaria No.186, Col. Atlantida,
Deleg. Coyoacan, 04370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55493740 Fax: +52 55 56898256

Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I. Int. Amaro Avalos 4208, 1605 Munro, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627600 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627664

Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V. Av. Insurgentes sur 619 Desp 602, Benito
Juarez Napoles, 3810 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53402230

Quimifar Comadran 37, Pol Ind Can Salvatella, Barbera del Valles, 08210
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 7297900
Email: info@quimifares

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2397186
Web: www.ronava.com.ve

Fax: +55 (0) 21 22861076
Web: www.milletroux.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 89 963446
Web: www:protina.de

Fax: +7 095 3635057
Web: www.queisser.ru

Fax: +44 (0) 121 359 0313
Web: www.questvitamins.co.uk

Fax: +34 93 7297901
Web: www:quimifar.es

Suppliers Directory

Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda Rua Sdo Januario 712, Tubalina, 38400-410
Uberlandia, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 34 32383111

@

Ranbaxy (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Box #8, Wisma Selangor Dredging, Sth Floor,

South Block, 142-A Jalan Ampang, 50450 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 21614181 Fax: +60 (0) 3 21627589

Web: www.ranbaxy.com

Ranbaxy Unichem Co. Ltd 3 Fl, Rm 374-8, Phayathai Building, 31 Phayathai

Rd, Rajathevi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 246 3300 Fax: +66 2 246 4727

Email: saleserv@ranbaxy.co.th Web: www.ranbaxy.com 5
Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH Albert-Schweitzer-Gasse 3, A-1140

Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 97007
Web: www.ratiopharm.at
Ratiopharm CZ sro Belehradskd 54, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51021122 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51021123

Email: ratiopharm@ratiopharm.cz

ratiopharm GmbH Graf-Arco-Str. 3, 89079 Ulm/Donautal, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 731 40202 Fax: +49 (0) 731 4027329

Email: info@ratiopharm.de Web: www.ratiopharm.de

Ratiopharm Group Vspolny per. 19/20, str. 2, 123001 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2321247 Fax: +7 095 2321369

Email: moscow@ranbaxy.ru Web: www.ranbaxy.com

ratiopharm Hungaria Kft Uzsoki u 36/a, 1145 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2732730 Fax: +36 2732731

Recip AB Brdnningevdgen 12, 120 54 Arsta, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 8 6025200 Fax: +46 (0) 8 818703

Email: info@recip.se Web: www.recip.se

Reckitt Benckiser Pharmapark, Chapelizod, Dublin 20, Ireland.

Tel: +353 (0) 1 630 5420 Fax: +353 (0) 1 630 5430

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Reckitt Benckiser Hong Kong Ltd 1203-5 Allied Kajima Bldg, 138 Gloucester
Rd, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 25980328
Web: www.reckitt.com
Reckitt Benckiser (Overseas) Ltd Unit No 1101, Level 11, Uptown 2, 2 JIn SS
21-37, Damansara Uptown, 47400 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 77253042 Fax: +60 (0) 3 77253008

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals P.O. Box 138, West Ryde, NSW 2114,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 93254000

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 164, Isando 1600,
South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 8711611

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser plc Dansom House, Hull, HU8 7DS, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1482 326151 Fax: +44 (0) 1482 582526

Email: miu@reckittbenckiser.com Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser SA/NV Allée de Ia Recherche 20, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 5261811 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5200230

Email: reckitt@skynet.be Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser (Thailand) Ltd 9 Fl, Vanissa Building, 29 Soi Chidlom,
Ploenchit Rd, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 252 3149 Fax: +66 2 252 3195

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Fax: +43 (0) 1 9700766

Fax: +852 25980808

Fax: +61 (0) 2 93254018

Fax: +27 (0) 11 8711831

Recordati Industria Chimica e Farmaceutica S.p.a. Via Civitali 1, 20148
Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 487871 Fax: +39 02 40073747

Regina Health Ltd NLA Tower, 12-16 Addiscombe Rd, Croydon, CRO OXT, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8410 2550 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8686 0807

Email: regina@netcom.uk.co.uk Web: www.reginahealthcare.com
Regional Health Ltd P.O. Box 101-104, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland,
New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 9686688
Email: info@regional.co.nz
Reig Jofre Gran Capitan 10, Sant Joan Despi, 08970 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4806715 Fax: +34 93 4806721

Web: www.teigjofre.com

Fax: +64 (0) 9 9686689
Web: www.regional.co.nz

----- PAGE 695 -----
Appendix 5

Rekah Ltd P.O. Bos 25, Azor 58190, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5581233 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5565919
Email: info@rekah.co.il Web: www.rekah.co.il
Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel Alt-Godshorn 87, 30855
Langenhagen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 511 786100
Email: info@repha.de
Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Diagonal 20 de Noviembre No.
264, Col. Obrera, Deleg. Cuauhtemoc, 06800 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55783570 Fax: +52 55 55783090

Web: www.remexa.com

Retterspitz GmbH Laufer Str. 17-19, 90571 Schwaig, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 911 507000 Fax: +49 (0) 911 5070045

Web: www.retterspitz.de

Fax: +49 (0) S11 7861099
Web: www:repha.de

Ricerca, Produzione e Commercializzazione di Prodotti Farmaceutici e
Cosmetici Srl Via Grottole 80/B, 81020 Castel Morrone (CE), Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 823399187 Fax: +39 (0) 823399870

Richard Lane’s 47 Mayflower Street, , Plymouth, PL1 1QL, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1752 665 175 Fax: +44 (0) 1752 255 212

Email: herbals@richardlanes.co.uk Web: www.richardlanes.co.uk
Richter Pharma Feldgasse 19, A-4600 Wels, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 7242 4900 Fax: +43 (0) 7242 49015

Ricola , Canada.

Ridupharm Emil Frey-Strasse 99, 4142 Munchenstein, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 4114385 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4139757

Riemser Arzneimittel AG An der Wiek 7, 17493 Greifswald/Insel Riems,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 38351 760
Email: info@riemser.de
Riviera Handelsgesellschaft.m.b.h. Penzingerstrasse 54, A-1140 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8943366 Fax: +43 (0) 1 894336622

Robapharm Espafia Ramon Trias Fargas 7-11, Edificio Marina Village, 08005
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4833000 Fax: +34 93 4833059

Robapharm SA Gewerbestrasse 18, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4878888 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4878899

Email: info@robapharm.ch Web: www.robapharm.ch

Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik Alleenstr. 22-6, 73730 Esslingen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 711 366016
Email: robugen@robugen.de
Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH Valterweg 24-5, 65817
Eppstein-Bremthal, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6198 3000

Email: rch.deutschland-gmbh@roche.com

Fax: +49 (0) 38351 308
Web: www.riemser.de

Fax: +49 (0) 711 367450
Web: www.robugen.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6198 30035

Web: www.roche.de

Roche (Magyarorszag) Kft Edison u 1, 2040 Budaors, Hungary.

Tel: +36 23 446800 Fax: +36 23 446860

Roche SA/NV Rue Dante 75, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 5258211 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5258201

Email: brussels.internet@roche.com Web: www.roche.be

Roche S.p.A. Viale G.B. Stucchi 10, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 2471 Fax: +39 039 2474328

Web: www.roche.com

Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH Kolner Str. 48, 51149 Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2203 91200 Fax: +49 (0) 2203 9120300

Web: www.rodisma.de

roha Arzneimittel GmbH Rockwinkeler Heerstr. 100, 28355 Bremen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 421 25790 Fax: +49 (0) 421 2579280

Web: www.roha-bremen.de

Rolmex International Inc. 1351 rue Gay-Lussac, Boucherville, /4B7K1, Canada.
Rottapharm S.r.l. Via Valosa di Sopra 9, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 73901 Fax: +39 039 7390446

Web: www.rotta.com

Rovi Julian Camarillo 35, 28037 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3756230 Fax: +34 91 3047881

Email: rovi@rovi.es Web: www.rovi.es

Roxane Laboratories Inc., a Subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim P.O. Box
16532, Columbus, OH 43216, USA.

Tel: +1 614 276 4000
Web: www.roxane.com

Fax: +1 614 279 5517

RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH Bruder-Grimm-Str. 121, 36396 Steinau an der
Strasse, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6663 96040
Email: hallo@rubiepharm.de
Rye Pharmaceuticals Unit 1, Block F, 25-7 Paul St North, North Ryde, NSW
2113, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98573830

Email: rye@ryepharmaceuticals.com

cS)

Sabex Inc. 145 Jules-Leger St, Boucherville, J4B 7K8, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 5960000 Fax: +1 514 5960003
Sabona GmbH Gutenbergstr. 1, 83052 Bruckmuhl, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8062 904837 Fax: +49 (0) $062 904827
Email: sabona@t-online.de Web: www.sabona.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6663 960432
Web: www:rubiepharm.de

Fax: +61 (0) 2 98573831
Web: www:ryepharmaceuticals.com

Sager Pharma Kft Pdlya u 9, 1012 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2146559 Fax: +36 2146561

Sagitta Arzneimittel GmbH Fruhlingstr. 7, Postfach: 1262, 83618 Feldkirchen-
Westerham, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8063 97010 Fax: +49 (0) $063 970111

Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd P.O. Box 8077, Kiryat Nordau, Netanya, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 9 8927878 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8854766

Salus France B.P. 104 Principal, 83403 Hyéres cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 94126060 Fax: +33 (0) 4 94574724

Email: salus.france@wanadoo.fr

Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG Bahnhofstr. 24,
83052 Bruckmuhl/Mangfall (Obb.), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8062 9010 Fax: +49 (0) $062 901352

Email: info@salus.de Web: www.salus.de

Salutas Pharma GmbH Otto-von-Guericke-Allee 1, 39179 Barleben, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 39203 710 Fax: +49 (0) 39203 71777

Sanamed GmbH Rudolf Waisenhorngasse 32, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8886338 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8898395

Sandersons (Chemists) Ltd 37 Oakwood Rise, Heaton, Bolton, BL1 SEE, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1204 841285

Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH Carl-Zeiss-Ring 3, 85737 Ismaning, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 244040 Fax: +49 (0) 89 24404100

Email: info@sandoz.de Web: www.sandoz.de

Sanidom Handels-GmbH Sundlweg 2, A-8045 Graz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 316 694944 Fax: +43 (0) 316 6949444

Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C. Strada dei Tadini 5, 10131 Turin, Italy.

Tel: +39 011 6603246

Sankyo Pharma Italia S.p.A. Via Reno 5, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 852551 Fax: +39 06 85255235
Email: sankyo@sankyo-pharma.it Web: www:sankyo-pharma.com

Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG Boltzmanngasse 9a-11, A-1091 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 31914560
Email: office@sanochemia.at

Fax: +43 (0) 1 319145644
Web: www:sanochemia.at

Sanofi Aventis Coyancura 2283 Piso 13, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Sanofi Synthelabo OTC 9 rue du President-Allende, 94258 Gentilly cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 8 25088352 Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Sanofi-Aventis 174 av de France, 75013 Paris, France.
Tel: +33 1 53774000 Fax: +33 1 53779157
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.fr

Sanofi-Aventis Ulansky Pereulok 4, 101000 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 9265703 Fax: +7 095 9265710
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.com

Sanofi-Aventis (Schweiz) AG 17 rue de Veyrot, 1217 Meyrin 1/GE, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 22 9890147 Fax: +41 (0) 22 7839255
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.ch

Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Km 37.5 Autopista Mexico-Qro,
54730 Cuautitlan Izcali, Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 50623300 Fax: +52 55 50627514

Email: contacto@sanofi-synthelabo.com.mx

Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com.mx

Sanofi-Synthelabo GmbH Potsdamer Str. 8, 10785 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 25752000 Fax: +49 (0) 30 25752001

Email: info.deutschland@de.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.de

----- PAGE 696 -----
Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A. Via GB Piranesi 38, 20137 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 73941 Fax: +39 02 76110389
Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Sanol GmbH Alfred-Nobel-Str. 10, 40789 Monheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2173 485857 Fax: +49 (0) 2173 485851
Web: www.sanol.de

Sanopharm AG Via dei Ciossi 8, 6648 Minusio, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 7446862 Fax: +41 (0) 91 7446863
Email: sanopharm@econophone.ch

Sanova Pharma GmbH Postfach 3, A-1110 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 801040 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8042904
Santé Naturelle (AG) Ltée 369 Charles Péguy, La Prairie, J5R 3E8, Canada.
Tel: +1 450 6597723 Fax: +1 450 6599791
Web: www.santenaturelle.ca

Santiveri Encuny 8, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2986800 Fax: +34 93 2986819

Email: informacion@santiveri.es Web: www.santiveri.es
Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG Hasseler Steinweg 9-12, 27318 Hoya,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4251 93520

Email: sanum-kehlbeck@t-online.de
Saros Laboratorios FOC 68, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2988200 Fax: +34 93 2231652

Savoma Medicinali S.p.A. Via Baganza 2/A, 43100 Parma, Italy.

Tel: +39 0521 963890 Fax: +39 0521 968408

Email: savoma@tin.it

Schaper & Brimmer GmbH & Co. KG Bahnhofstr. 35, 38259 Salzgitter
(Ringelheim), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5341 3070

Email: info@schaper-bruemmer.de
Schering Mexicana S.A. de C.V. Calz. Mexico Xochimilco No. 5019, Tlalpan
San Lorenzo Huipulco, 14370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56277000 Fax: +52 55 56717053

Email: info@scheringmexicana.com Web: www.schering.com.mx

Schering (NZ) Ltd P.O. Box 101-691, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10,
New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 4152850
Web: www.schering.com
Schering P/L 27-31 Doody Street, Alexandria, NSW 2015, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 93178666 Fax: +61 (0) 2 93172138

Web: www.schering.com

Schering sro Safarikovd 17, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 71730661 Fax: +420 (0) 2 71730657

Email: schering@mbox.vol.cz

Schering-Plough Central East AG Usacheva ul. 33, str.1, 119048 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 9167100

Web: www.schering-plough.ru
Schering-Plough Corp. Galloping Hill Rd, Kenilworth, NJ 07033-0530, USA.
Tel: +1 908 298 4000 Web: www.schering-plough.com
Schering-Plough Healthcare Products Canada Inc. 6400 Northam Drive,
Mississauga, L4V 1]1, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 6736242

Web: www.schering-plough.com
Schering-Plough Ltd Schering-Plough House, Shire Park, Welwyn Garden City,
AL7 1TW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1707 363636
Email: medinfo@spcorp.com
Schering-Plough S.A. de C.V. Av. 16 de Septiembre No. 301, Col. Xaltocan,
Deleg. Xochimilco, 16090 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57284444 Fax: +52 55 56530926

Web: www.schering-plough.com

Schéning Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH & Co. KG Porschestr. 22-24,
12107 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 7007760

Email: schoeningberlin@aol.com
Schuck GmbH /ndustriestr. 11, 90571 Schwaig b. Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 500185 Fax: +49 (0) 911 508802

Email: info@schuck-arzneimittel.de Web: www.schuck-arzneimittel.de
Schiilke & Mayr GmbH Zieglergasse 8/3, A-1070 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 5232501 Fax: +43 (0) 1 523903579
Web: www:schuelke-mayr.com

Fax: +49 (0) 4251 935290
Web: www:sanum.com

Fax: +49 (0) 5341 307124
Web: www:schaper-bruemmer.de

Fax: +64 (0) 9 4156497

Fax: +7 095 9167094

Fax: +1 905 6710686

Fax: +44 (0) 1707 363763

Web: www:schering-plough.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 7417003
Web: www.schoeningberlin.de

Suppliers Directory

Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd 73 Soi Latphrao 91, Latphrao Rd, Wangthonglaeng,
Bangkok 10310, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 542 1791

Email: schumit@kse.th.com
Schwabe Pharma AG Friistrasse 2, Postfach, 6403 Kussnacht a.R., Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 8541960 Fax: +41 (0) 41 8541861

Email: info@schwabepharma.ch Web: www.schwabepharma.com
Schwabe S.A.C.1. Tte. Gral. Peron 1666, 1037 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43727772 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43826267
Schwarzwalder Natur-Heilmittel Marktplatz 4, 93183 Kallmunz, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9473 457 Fax: +49 (0) 9473 8769

Seber Portuguesa Farmacéutica, SA Rua Norberto de Oliveira 1-5, 2620-111 5

Fax: +66 2 542 0325

Povoa de St Adrido, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9381500 Fax: +351 21 9374237

Email: medicamentos@seber-farmaceutica.pt

Sedar Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia BR 101 Sul Km 18, Distr. Ind. dos
Prazeres, 50950-000 Recife, Brazil.

Self-Care Products Ltd 30 Sycamore Rd, Amersham, HP6 SDR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1494 722741

Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l. Via Vicenza 67, 36015 Schio (Vicenza), Italy.
Tel: +39 0445 670088 Fax: +39 0445 673537

Email: info@sellafarmaceutici.it Web: www.sellafarmaceutici.it

SERP le Triton, 5 rue du Gabian, MC 98000, Monaco.

Tel: +377 97778705 Fax: +377 92167827

Email: serp@monaco377.com

Sertiirner Arzneimittel GmbH Wallenroder Str. 8-10, 13435 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 4037070 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40370103

Email: info@sertuerner.de Web: www.sertuerner.de

Serumwerk Bernburg AG Hallesche Landstr. 105 b, 06406 Bernburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 3471 8600 Fax: +49 (0) 3471 860130

Email: swb-ag@t-online.de Web: www.serum-werk.de

Seven Seas Ltd Hedon Rd, Marfleet, Hull, HU9 SNJ, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1482 375234 Fax: +44 (0) 1482 374345

Email: info@seven-seas.Itd.uk Web: www.seven-seas.Itd.uk

Shaklee Canada Inc. 952 Century Dr, Burlington, L7L 5P2, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 681 1422
Shire Pharmaceuticals 725 Chesterbrook Blvd, Wayne, PA 19087-5637, USA.
Tel: +1 484 595 8800 Fax: +1 484 595 8900

Email: medinfo@us.shire.com Web: www.shire.com

Sidefarma SA Rua da Guine 26, 2689-514 Prior Velho, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9426100 Fax: +351 21 9416205

Sidone Industria e Comércio Ltda. Rua Sdo Francisco Xavier 930, 38412-080
Uberlandia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 34 32175352

Sidroga AG Postfach, 4800 Zofingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 62 7461777 Fax: +41 (0) 62 7461707

Email: administration@sidroga.com Web: wwwsidroga.com

Sigma Chemical Co. Ltd 7 Colonial Way, North Watford Industrial Estate, North
Watford, WD2 4P}, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 444999
Email: info@sigpharm.co.uk
Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L 96 Merrindale Drive, Croydon, VIC 3136, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3 98392800 Fax: +61 (0) 3 98392801

Web: www.sigmaco.com.au

Web: www.shaklee.ca

Fax: +44 (0) 1923 444998
Web: www:sigpharm.co.uk

Sigma Tau Espana Poligono Azque, Apt. do 1144, Alcald de Henares, 28815
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8883600
Email: sigmatau@nauta.es
Sigma Tau S.p.A. Via Pontina Km. 30,400, 00040 Pomezia (Rome), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 91391 Fax: +39 06 91393980

Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Sigmapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co KG Leystrasse 129, A-1204 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 3300671

Email: sigmapharm@sigmapharm.at
Sigma-Tau Arzneimittel GmbH Shadowstr. 44, 40212 Dusseldorf, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 211 3694993 Fax: +49 (0) 211 161527

Email: sigmatau@cww.de Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Sigma-Tau Ethifarma B.V. Postbus 10072, 9400 CB Assen, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 592 333000 Fax: +31 (0) 592 333009

Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Fax: +34 91 8883616
Web: www:sigma-tau.com

Fax: +43 (0) 1 330067138
Web: www:sigmapharm.at

----- PAGE 697 -----
Appendix 5

Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd 896
Dunearn Rd, 04-03 Sime Darby Centre, S 589472, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6469 8877 Fax: +65 6468 4928

Email: simemktg@singnet.com.sg,

Skills in Farmacia S.r.1. Piazza Buonarroti 32, 20145 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 4675111 Fax: +39 02 46751160

Email: info@skillsfarmacia.it Web: www.skillsfarmacia.it
Slovakofarma sro Machovd 18, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 96530102 Fax: +420 (0) 2 96530112

Email: info@slofa.sk

Sociedade Farmacéutica Gestafarma, Lda Rua Dr. Alvaro de Castro 65-7,
1600-058 Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 7961158

Societa Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A. Via Ercole Patti 36, 95025
Lavinao-Aci S. Antonio (CY), Italy.

Tel: +39 095 7922111 Fax: +39 095 7893435

Solara Farmaceutica SA de CV Av Paseo de las Palmas 330 PB, 11000 Lomas de
Chapultepec, Mexico.

Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH Hans-Bockler-Allee 20, 30173 Hannover, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 511 8572400 Fax: +49 (0) 511 8573120

Email: solvay.arzneimittel@solvaycom — Web: www-solvay-arzneimittel.de
Solvay Farma Ltda Rua Sergipe 120, 1243000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Solvay Pharma Avda Diagonal 507-509, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4954500 Fax: +34 93 4052492

Email: atencli.pharma@solvay.com Web: www.solvaypharma.es

Solvay Pharma & Cie S.N.C. Blue Planet Building, Ave Bourgemestre E.
Demunter 3, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 4222711

Email: pharma.be@solvay.com
Solvay Pharma AB Sisjo Kullegata 8, 421 32 Vdstra Frolunda, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 31 689030 Fax: +46 (0) 31 689040

Email: info@solvay-pharma.se Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com
Solvay Pharma AG Untermattweg 8, 3027 Bern, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 9969600 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9969699

Email: solvay-bern@solvaycom Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com
Solvay Pharma BV C / Van Houtenlaan 36, 1381 CP Weesp, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 294 479000 Fax: +31 (0) 294 432189

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma GmbH Donaustrasse 106, A-3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 2243 25620 Fax: +43 (0) 2243 2562040

Web: www.solvaypharma.at

Solvay Pharma (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 5278, halfway House 1685, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 3139803 Fax: +27 (0) 11 3139804

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma S.p.A. Via della Liberta 30, 10095 Grugliasco (TO), Italy.
Tel: +39 011 4027911 Fax: +39 O11 783955

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma sro Bieblovd 19, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51562156 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51561588

Email: solvay@solvay-pharma.cz

Solvayfarma, Lda Av. Marechal Gomes da Costa 33, 1800-255 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8315800 Fax: +351 21 8315860

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Sopharma AO Taganskaya ul. 19, et. 10, 109147 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7995511

Soria Natural Pol Ind La Sacea 1, Garray, 42162 Soria, Spain.

Tel: +34 975 252046 Fax: +34 975 252267

Email: soria@sorianatural.es Web: www.sorianatural.es

Spagyros AG Tannackerstrasse 7, 3073 Gumlingen, Switzerland.

Fax: +32 (0) 2 4222799
Web: www:solvaypharmaceuticals.com

vw

Tel: +41 (0) 31 9595580 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9595581
Specialita Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.l. C.so Cavour 70, 27035 Mede (Pavia),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0384 820416 Fax: +39 0384 822133

Email: sit@sit-farmaceutici.com

Spedrog Caillon S.A.ly C. Alte. Feo. J. Segui 2106, 1416 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45820411 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45852929

Spineda, Pérez y Hnos. Y Cia SRL Zado 3735, 1431 Villa Urquiza, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45722902 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45730529

Spirig Pharma AG Postfach 111, 4622 Egerkingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 62 3878787 Fax: +41 (0) 62 3878799

Sriprasit Dispensary R O P 617 Charoen Rath Rd, Klongsarn, Bangkok 10600,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 437 0343
Email: sipasit@tcc.or.th
Stada GmbH Stadastr. 2-18, 61118 Bad Vilbel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6101 6030 Fax: +49 (0) 6101 603259
Email: info@stada.de Web: www.stada.de

Fax: +66 2 438 8060

Stada Pharma International os Hnevkovskd 58, 148 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Stanley Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Division of Vita Health Products Ltd 150
Beghin Ave, Winnipeg, R2] 3W2, Canada.

Tel: +1 204 6618386 Fax: +1 204 6638386

Steierl Pharma GmbH Muhlfelder Str. 48, 82211 Herrsching, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8152 93220 Fax: +49 (0) $152 932244

Email: info@steierl.de Web: wwwsteierl.de

Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH Havelstr. 5, 64295 Darmstadt,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 33050
Web: www.steigerwald.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6151 3305410

Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft Ostpreussendamm 72/74,
12207 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 710940

Email: info@steinerarznei-berlin.de
Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc. 407-220 Duncan Mill Rd, Don Mills, M3B
3)5, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 4430636
Web: www.nutribar.com
Strathmann AG & Co. Sellhopsweg 1, 22459 Hamburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 40 559050 Fax: +49 (0) 40 5509253
Email: info@strathmann.de Web: www.strathmann.de

Fax: +49 (0) 30 7125012
Web: wwwisteinerarznei-berlin.de

Fax: +1 416 4438504

Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete /poly u 5/f, 1133 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3202865 Fax: +36 3202867

Sundown 6111 Broken Sound Parkway NW, , Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA.

Tel: +1 561 241 9400 Email: info@sundownnutrition.com

Web: www.sundownnutrition.com

Sunspot Products P/L Level 3, Suite 303, 20 Bungan St, Mona Vale, NSW 2103,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 99797333

Email: enquires@sunspot.com.au
Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V. Calle 3 No. 13 Local 4, Fracc. Industrial
Alce Blanco, Naucalpan de Juarez, 53370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53594180 Fax: +52 55 53594181

Web: www.smn.com.mx

Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd 2nd Fl, Bik E, No 10, Jin Bersatu 13/4, 46200
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 79573873
Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd 35 Leek Cres, Richmond Hill, L4B 4C2, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 8869500 Fax: +1 905 8865434

Web: www.swissherbal.com

SwissHealth , UK.

Synco (HK) Ltd Bik D, 3/F, Sun View Industrial Bldg, 3 On Yip St, Chaiwan, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 25560157
Email: info@synco.com.hk

Fax: +61 (0) 2 99978647
Web: www:sunspot.com.au

Email: enquiries@vitahealth.com.my

Fax: +852 28972582
Web: www:synco-pharma.com

Syxyl GmbH & Co. KG Gereonsmuhlengasse 5, 50670 Cologne, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 221 1652630 Fax: +49 (0) 221 1652631

oO

TAD Pharma GmbH Heinz-Lohmann-Str. 5, 27472 Cuxhaven, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4721 6060 Fax: +49 (0) 4721 606333

Email: info@tad.de Web: www.tad.de

Tamar Marketing , Rishon-Lezion 75652, Israel.

Tanning Research Labs Inc. P.O. Box 265111, Daytone Beach, FL 32126-5111,
USA.

Tel: +1 386 677 9559
Web: wwwhtropic.com
Tanta Pharmaceuticals Inc. 1009 Burns St East, Whitby, LIN 6A6, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 4308440 Fax: +1 905 4308449

Taro Pharmaceutical International 74 Hakitor St, P.O. Box 10347, Haifa Bay
26110, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 8475700

Fax: +1 386 677 9595

Web: www.taro.co.il

----- PAGE 698 -----
Techni-Pharma 7 rue de I‘Industrie, B.P. 717, MC 98014, Monaco.

Tel: +377 92057510 Fax: +377 92057710

Teclapharm GmbH Heilgenthalar Str. 4, 21335 Luneburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4131 404100 Fax: +49 (0) 4131 43380

Web: www.teclapharm.de

Tecnifar, SA Rua Tierno Galvan, Torre 3, 12 Piso, 1099-036 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 0330700 Fax: +351 21 0330709

Tecnonat S.A. 24 de Noviembre 368, 1170 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49322600 Web: www.tecnonat.com

Tender Corporation , Czech Republic.

Tentan AG Brunnliweg 16, 4433 Ramlinsburg, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 9313874 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9313876

Email: info@tentan.ch Web: www.tentan.ch

Teofarma Via F.lli Cervi 5, 27100 Valle Salimbene (PV), Italy.

Tel: +39 0382 422008 Fax: +39 0382 525845

Web: www.teofarma.it

Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH Lindenbergstr. 5, 79199 Kirchzarten, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7661 90320 Fax: +49 (0) 7661 903279

Email: info@terra-bio.de Web: www.terra-bio.de

tetesept Pharma GmbH Marschnerstr. 10, 60318 Frankfurt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 69 15031 Fax: +49 (0) 69 5962150

Email: merzpr@merz.de Web: www.merz.de

Tetra Pharm 7 Azrieli Center, Round Bldg, 24 floor, Tel Aviv 67021, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 6911688 Fax: +972 (0) 3 6911686

Email: info@sebocalm.co.il Web: www.sebocalm.co.il

Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd P.O. Box 8077, Kiryat Nordau, Netanya, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 9 8639777 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8653764

Web: www.tevapharm.com

The Boots Company (Far East) Pte Ltd 180-B Bencoolen St, 09-03 The
Bencoolen, S 189648, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6332 9230 Fax: +65 6837 0285

The Cantassium Company Larkhill Farm, Putney, UK.

The Purdue Frederick Co. One Stamford Forum, 201 Tresser Blvd, Stamford, CT
06901-3431, USA.
Tel: +1 203 588 8000
Web: www.pharma.com
Therabel Pharma SA Rue Egide Van Ophem 108, 1180 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 3704611 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3704690
Web: www:therabel.com

Fax: +1 203 588 8850

Therasophia 630 route des Dolines, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 93755955 Fax: +33 (0) 4 93755716

Email: infos@therasophia.com Web: www.therasophia.com
Thornton & Ross Ltd Linthwaite Laboratories, Huddersfield, HD7 5QH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1484 842217 Fax: +44 (0) 1484 847301

Email: mail@thorntonross.com Web: www.thorntonross.com

Thuna Herbal Remedies Ltd 298 Danforth Ave, Toronto, M4K 1N6, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 4653511

Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd Pacific Highway, Gallen’s Road, Ballina,
NSW 2478, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 66867273

Web: www.thursdayplantation.com.au
Tilman SA/NV Zoning Industriel 15, 5377 Baillonville, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 84 320360 Fax: +32 (0) 84 320375

Email: export@tilman.be Web: www.tilman.be

TNP Health Care Co. Ltd 94/7 Soi Yimprakrob, Ngamwongwan Rd, Nonthaburi
11000, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2951 8008

Email: thainakorn@thainakorn.com
Torrex Pharma GmbH Lange Gasse 76/12, A-1080 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 4073919 Fax: +43 (0) 1 40739194
Tramedico BV Postbus 192, 1380 AD Weesp, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 294 461122 Fax: +31 (0) 294 461170
Web: www:tramedico.nl

Fax: +61 (0) 2 66867458

Fax: +66 (0) 2589 2729
Web: www:thainakorn.com

Transatlantic International Ulof Palme ul. 1, Section 5, 119590 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7753938

Email: office@transatlantic.ru

Fax: +7 095 5141054

Web: www.transatlantic.ru

Treasure Mountain Development Co. Ltd 19/F Chit Lee Commercial Bldg, 30-
36 Shaukeiwan Rd, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25677983

Email: tmdcl@netvigator.com

Fax: +852 25672600
Web: www.tmdel.com.hk

Suppliers Directory

Trima , Kibbutz Ma‘abarot 40230, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 8982862 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8982879

Email: info@trima.co.il Web: www.trima.co.il

Trinity Trading Co. Ltd Unit 7A-B, 39/F Cable TV Tower, 9 Hoi Shing Rd, Tsuen
Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 23856044 Fax: +852 27701508

Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH Ziethenstr. 8, 33330 Gutersloh, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5241 300740 Fax: +49 (0) 5241 3007415

Email: info@truw.de Web: www.truw.de

Tubilux Pharma S.p.A. Via Costarica 20/22, 00040 Pomezia (RM), Italy.

Tel: +39 06 911831 Fax: +39 06 91183410

Email: tubilux@tubilux.it

Typharm Ltd 14D Wendover Rd, Rackheath Industrial Estate, Norwich, NR13
6LH, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1603 735200 Fax: +44 (0) 1603 735217

Email: customerservices@typharm.com Web: www:typharm.com

CU)

UB Interpharm SA 36 av Cardinal-Mermillod, 1227 Carouge/GE, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 22 3001734 Fax: +41 (0) 22 3003679

Ubepharm Bodor u 8 1/6, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 3597113

UCB Pharma BV Druivenstraat 5, 4816 KB Breda, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 76 5879222 Fax: +31 (0) 76 5875264
Web: www.ucbpharma.com

Uniao Quimica Farmacéutica Nacional S.A. Avenida dos Bandeirantes 5386,
04071-900 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55862000 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55859755

Email: faleconosco@uniaoquimica.com.br

Web: www.uniaoquimica.com.br

Uniderm Farmaceutici S.r.l. P.le F. il Macedone 140, 00124 Casalpalocco (RM),
Italy.

Tel: +39 06 50930618
Email: uniderm@uniderm.it
Union Medical (Thailand) Co. Ltd 513/199-200 Jaransanitwong Rd, Soi 37
Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 412 1915

Email: ume@unionmedical.co.th

Unipharm de Mexico SA de CV Tamarindos XV-A Lote 10 y 11, 91697
Veracruz C Ind. Bruno Pagliai, Mexico.

Fax: +39 06 50930587
Web: www.uniderm.it

Fax: +66 2 412 5927
Web: www.unionmedical.co.th

Uni-Pharma Kleon Tsetis, Pharmaceutical Laboratories $.A. 14th km
National Rd 1, 145 64 Kifissia, Greece.
Tel: +30 210 8072512

Email: unipharma@uni-pharma.gr

Fax: +30 210 8078907
Web: www:uni-pharma.gr

Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories Sadovaya-Kudrinskaya ul. 3, 123242
Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2547579
Email: unique@relline.ru

United Drug United Drug House, Belgard Rd, Tallaght, Dublin 24, Ireland.
Tel: +353 (0) 1459 8877 Fax: +353 (0) 1 459 6893
Email: info@united-drug.ie Web: www.united-drug.ie

Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd Eastern Ctr, G/F & 1/F, Unit 1-5, 1065 King’s
Rd, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 25628131 Fax: +852 25657913

Universal Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd 7 Browning St, Jeppe, Johannesburg,
South Africa.

Upsifarma, Lda S. Domingos d Lapa 8, Letra H, 1200-835 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3953644 Fax: +351 21 3954765

Uriach Avdaa. Cami Real 51-57, Pol. Industrial Riera de Caldes, Palau-Solita i
Plegamans, 08184 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 3471511

Email: corp@uriach.com
Ursapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Industriestr., 66129 Saarbrucken,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6805 92920
Email: info@ursapharm.de

Fax: +7 095 2548382

Fax: +34 93 8646606
Web: www.uriach.com

Fax: +49 (0) 6805 929288
Web: www.ursapharm.de
Usana , Singapore.

Usana Hong Kong Ltd Unit 2504-06, 25/F, World Trade Centre, 280 Gloucester
Rd, Causeway Bay, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 21621818 Fax: +852 21621228

----- PAGE 699 -----
Appendix 5

@

Valuge S.A. Cuyo 2870, 1640 Martinez, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 48363636

Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH & Co. KG
Hauptstr. 98, 82327 Tutzing, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8158 2570

Email: info@verla.de

Vianex S.A. Tatoiou Str., 18th Km Lamia National Rd, 146 10 Nea Erythrea,
Greece.

Tel: +30 210 8009111
Email: mailbox@vianex.gr

Fax: +49 (0) 8158 257250
Web: www.verla.de

Fax: +30 210 8071573

Web: wwwvianex.gr

Viatris Av J.F. Kennedy, 33701 Meérignac cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 56553535 Fax: +33 (0) 5 56341328

Email: info@viatris.fr Web: www.viatris.fr

Viatris BV Verriin Stuartweg 60, 1112 AX Diemen, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 20 5198300 Fax: +31 (0) 20 6906435

Email: info@viatris.nl Web: www.viatris.nl

Viatris Farmacéutica SA Rua do Centro Cultural 13, 1749-066 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8420300 Fax: +351 21 8492042

Email: info@viatris.pt Web: www.viatris.pt

Viatris Pharma GmbH Liesinger Flur-Gasse 2C, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 863900 Fax: +43 (0) 1 863903161

Email: info@viatris.at Web: www.viatris.at

Viatris S.p.A. Viale Brenta 18, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 700671 Fax: +39 02 716574

Email: info@viatris.it Web: www.viatris.com

Vicis Pharma Kft Kapds u 11-15, Buda Business Center, 1027 Budapest,
Hungary.

Tel: +36 4579921

Vida Laboratories Ltd Unit 919 Vanta Industrial Ctr, 21 Tai Lin Pai Rd, Kwai
Chung, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24236333

Email: mail-box@vidalab.com
Vifor SA Route de Moncor 10, 1752 Villars-sur-Gldne, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4076111 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4011485
Email: info@vifor.ch Web: www.vifor.ch

Fax: +852 24236232
Web: www.vidalab.com

Vifias Provenza 386, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2070512 Fax: +34 93 2071932

Vita Health Care AG , 3177 Laupen, Switzerland.

Vita Healthcare Ltd Palladium House, 1-4 Argyll St, London, W1V 2LD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 73289797 Fax: +44 (0) 20 73288555

Email: addresse@vitahealthcare.com

Vitabalans Oy Varastokatu 8, 13500 Hdmeenlinna, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 3 615600 Fax: +358 (0) 3 6183902

Email: etunimi.sukunimi@yitabalans.fi_ Web: www.vitabalans.fi

Vitabiotics Ltd 7 Apsley Way, , London, NW2 7HE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8955 2600 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8955 2601

Web: www.vitabiotics.com

Vitafarma C/Florida 29, Hernani, 20120 Guipuzcoa, Spain.

Tel: +34 943 335273 Fax: +34 943 335269

Email: d.comercial@vitafarma.es Web: www.vitafarma.es

Vitalia Health Ltd P.O. Box 2492, Marlow, SL7 2WW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 898366 Fax: +44 (0) 1628 898367

Email: information@vitalia-health.co.uk Web: www.vitalia-health.co.uk
Vitamed Ltd P.O. Box 114, Binyamina 30550, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 6189000 Fax: +972 (0) 4 6189029

Email: ricki@vitamed.co.il

Vitaplex Products P.O. Box 270, Gymea, NSW 2227, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95452633 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95452642

Viternat Laboratérios Ltda Av Dr Luis Arrobas Martins 759, 04781-001 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 56862661

VSM Belgium Prins Boudewijniaan 17 unit 7, 2550 Kontich, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 4508166 Fax: +32 (0) 3 4583624

Email: info@vsm.be Web: www.vsm.nl

VSM Geneesmiddelen BV Postbus 9321, 1800 GH Alkmaar, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 72 5661122 Fax: +31 (0) 72 5623883
Web: www.vsm.nl

@

W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH Bunsenstr. 6-10, 76275 Ettlingen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 10601
Web: wwwspitzner.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7243 106333

Wagner Pharmafax Kft Gyogyszer Business Center, Kassai u 56-58/b, 1041
Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3804596 Fax: +36 3708633

Wala Schweiz GmbH Waaghausgasse 3, 3011 Berne, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 8493901 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8493902

Walgreens Finest Natural 200 Wilmot Road, , Deerfield, IL 60015, USA.

Tel: +1 847 914 2500 Web: www.walgreens.com

Walker Pharmacal 4200 Laclede Ave, St Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Tel: +1 314 533 9600

Wallace Pharmaceuticals Ltd 7101/2 Floral Deck Plaza, Off Central MIDC Rd,
Andheri (East), Mumbai 400 093, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 8390681 Fax: +91 (0) 22 8390733

Web: www.wallacepharma.net

Wampole Brands Inc. 5950 Cote-de-Liesse, Montreal, H4T 1E2, Canada.
Tel: +1 866 2219267

Wassen Italia S.r.1. Via Canova 25, 20145 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 3191061 Fax: +39 02 33100935

Email: wassen@wassen.it Web: www.wassen.it

Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc. 371 Bonnie Circle, Corona, CA 91720, USA.
Tel: +1 951 493 5300 Fax: +1 951 493 5842

Web: www.watsonpharm.com

Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG Herrschinger Str. 33, 82266 Inning/
Ammersee, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8143 9270

Email: service@weber-weber.de
Weleda AG Stollenrain 11, 4144 Arlesheim, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7052121 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7052310

Email: info@weleda.ch Web: www.weleda.ch

Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe Mohlerstr. 3-5, 73525 Schwabisch Gmund,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7171 9190
Email: med-wiss@weleda.de
Weleda GmbH & Co. KG Hosenedelgasse 27, A-1220 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 2566060 Fax: +43 (0) 1 2594204

Web: www.weleda.at

Weleda (UK) Ltd Heanor Rd, Ilkeston, DE7 8DR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 115 944 8200 Fax: +44 (0) 115 944 8210

Email: info@weleda.co.uk Web: www.weleda.co.uk

Wellchem Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd 221 Henderson Rd, 04-15 Henderson
Building, S 159557, Singapore.
Tel: +65 6276 6533

Email: wellchem@singnet.com.sg
Weston Pharmaceutical Ltd Unit 26, 8/F Tower A, Southmark, 11 Yip Hing St,
Wong Chuk Hang, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25528122

Email: westonph@netvigator.com
WF Young Inc. 1225 rue Volta, Boucherville, 4B 7M7, Canada.

Tel: +1 450 6416496 Fax: +1 450 6419347

Whitehall P.O. Box 12736, Penrose, Auckland, New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 5253807 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5257971

Whitehall Italia S.p.A. Via Puccini 3, 20121 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 8069181 Fax: +39 02 80691871

Whitehall Laboratories Australia P/L Private Mailbag 1, Punchbowl, NSW
2196, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95341000 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95333980
Whitehall-Much GmbH Regina-Protmann-Str. 16, 48159 Munster, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 251 92718 Fax: +49 (0) 251 92713099

Email: wh-medwiss@wyeth.com Web: www.whitehall-much.de
Whitehall-Robins AG Grafenauweg 10, 6301 Zug 7, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 7290250 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7290255
Whitehall-Robins Inc. 5975 Whittle Rd, Mississauga, L4Z 3M6, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 5077000 Fax: +1 905 SO77111

Wick Pharma Zweigniederlassung der Procter & Gamble GmbH Sulzbacher
Str. 40, 65824 Schwalbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6196 8901

Web: www.wickpharma.de

Fax: +49 (0) $143 7084
Web: www.weber-weber.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7171 919362
Web: www.weleda.de

Fax: +65 6276 5672
Web: www.wellchem.com

Fax: +852 25526799

Fax: +49 (0) 6196 894929

----- PAGE 700 -----
Wiedemann Pharma GmbH Pilotyweg 14, 82541 Munsing, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8177 93140 Fax: +49 (0) 8177 931414

Email: mail@wiedemann-pharma.de Web: www.wiedemann-pharma.de
Wierhom Pharma S.A. Arismendi 2441, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45234815

Will-Pharma SA Rue du Manil 80, 1301 Wavre, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 10 243838 Fax: +32 (0) 10 243377

Email: willpharma@willpharma.com Web: wwwawillpharma.com

Wing Wai Trading Co. Unit E, 2/F Freder Ctr, 3 Mok Cheong St, Kowloon, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 23346228 Fax: +852 23344665

Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co. Rhondorfer Str. 80, 53604 Bad Honnef, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2224 7740 Fax: +49 (0) 2224 774170

Email: kontakt@woelm.com Web: www.woelm.com

Wolfs SA Industriepark West 68, 9100 Sint-Niklaas, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 7806390 Fax: +32 (0) 3 7806391

Email: info@wolfsnvbe

Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd Freepost, Alderney, Guernsey, Channel Islands,
GY1 555, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 800 952 9952
Email: info@wwhonline.com
Wérwag Pharma GmbH & Co Pod Zameckem 1372, 500 12 Hradec Krdlové,
Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 49 5267157
Email: woerwag@traveller.cz
Wé6rwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Calwer Str. 7, 71034 Boblingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7031 62040 Fax: +49 (0) 7031 620431

Email: info@woerwagpharma.de Web: www.woerwagpharma.de

Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Del Inca 4446, Of. 201, Las Condes, Santiago,
Chile.

Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Inc. 5 Giralda Farms, Madison, NJ 07940, USA.
Tel: +1 973 660 5500 Fax: +1 973 660 7111

Web: www.wyeth.com

Wyeth Laboratories Huntercombe Lane South, Taplow, Maidenhead, SL6 OPH,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 604377
Web: www.wyeth.co.uk
Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Division of Wyeth Australia P/L Locked Bag 5002,
Baulkham Hills BC, NSW 2153, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 88508200 Fax: +61 (0) 2 90230000

Web: www.wyeth.com.au

Wyeth-Lederle Pharma GmbH Storchengasse 1, A-1150 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1.891140 Fax: +43 (0) 1 89114399

Web: www.wyeth.at

ty)

Yauyip P/L Suite 503 Cliveden, 4 Bridge Street, NSW 2000, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 92474160

Y.S.P. Industries (M) Sdn Bhd 78 Jin Wan Kadir, Taman Tun Dr Ismail, 60000
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 77276390
Web: www.ysp.com.my

Fax: +44 (0) 1481 824 878
Web: www.wwhonline.com

Fax: +420 (0)

Fax: +44 (0) 1628 666368

Fax: +60 (0) 3 77276701

Suppliers Directory

Yung Shin Pharmaceutical (S) Pte Ltd 8 Kaki Bukit Rd 2, 02-26 Ruby
Warehouse Complex, S 417841, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6741 2466 Fax: +65 6747 6009

Email: yspsin@singnet.com.sg Web: www.ysp.com.tw

@

Zambon Group SpA Glazovskii per. 7, of. 17, 119002 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 9333830 Fax: +7 095 9333831

Email: zambin@zambon.ru Web: www.zambon.ru

Zambon SA Ave Bourgemestre E. Demunter 1 boite 9, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7719936 Fax: +32 (0) 27718570

Web: www.zambongroup.com

Zellaforte Vertriebsanstalt Austrasse 52, FL-9490 Vaduz, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 75 2322617

Zeppenfeldt Pharma GmbH Weiler Str. 19-21, 79540 Lorrach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7621 919290 Fax: +49 (0) 7621 9192930

Email: mail@zeppenfeldt.de Web: www.zeppenfeldt.de

Zeta Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Galvani 10, 36066 Sandrigo (VI), Italy.

Tel: +39 0444 461911 Fax: +39 0444 658351

Email: info@zetafarm.it

Ziethen Tengstr. 26, 80798 Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 2714759 Fax: +49 (0) 89 339558

Zuellig Pharma 376-318 Richmond Road, Grey Lynn, Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3610403 Fax: +64 (0) 9 3610445

Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Ltd 8-9 Ploenchit Center, 2 Sukhumvit Rd, Kwang Klongtoey,
Khet Klongtoey, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 656 9800 Fax: +66 2 656 9801

Email: info@zuelligpharma.co.th Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd 19 Loyang Way, 08-20, S 508724, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6546 8188 Fax: +65 6546 8288

Email: enquiry@zuelligpharma.com Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Sdn Bhd Level 3A, No 10, JIn Bersatu 13/4, 46200 Petaling
Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79856688

Web: www.zuelligpharma.com
Zuoz Pharma S.A. Esquina Puente Restaurador a Rio, Av. Oeste 20, Santa Teresa,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 4818833 Fa:
Email: clientes@zuoz.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 79551388

+58 (0) 212 4846401
Web: www.zuozpharma.com.ve

Zurita Laboratério Farmacéutico Ltda Rua Domingos Graziano 104, 13600-
000 Araras, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 5411611
Email: zurita@zurita.com.br
Zydus Cadila Group Zydus Tower, Satellite Cross Roads, Ahmedabad 380 015,
India.

Tel: +91 (0) 79 6868100
Web: www.cadila-zydus.com
Zyfas Medical Co 102E Pasir Panjang Rd, 02-10/11 Citilink Warehouse Complex,
S 118529, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6275 7757

Email: zyfas@singnet.com.sg

Fax: +55 (0) 19 5412052
Web: www.zurita.com.br

Fax: +91 (0) 79 6862366

Fax: +65 6275 2287

----- PAGE 701 -----
yp 7 Index

Page numbers in bold refer to monographs.

13-hydroxyballonigrinolide, 358

LA)

abdominal cramps, 51, 52
abdominal pains, 51, 271
abietanes, 30, 31
abortifacient activity

aloes, 52

aniseed, 59

chamomile, Roman, 157

cohosh, blue, 181

feverfew, 266

garlic, 286

ginger, 297

horehound, white, 362

hydrocotyle, 373

juniper, 387

liferoot, 408

nettle, 454

pennyroyal, 470

pokeroot, 480

shepherd's purse, 542

squill, 548

vervain, 592

yarrow, 606
abscess treatment, 545
acacetin rhamnoside, 268
Acanthopanax senticosus, 315
acetic acid, 102, 169
acetovanillochromene, 382
7-a-acetoxymarrubiin, 358
acetylcholine, 452, 541

antagonist, 92

inhibited release, 38
acetylenes, 153, 604
acetylenic amide, 218
Achillea collina, 604
Achillea lanulosa, 604
Achillea millefolium, 604
achillicin, 604
acid constituents

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67

blue flag, 87

bogbean, 89

borage, 96

burdock, 102

centaury, 149

clivers, 164

coltsfoot, 185

cranberry, 197

dandelion, 204, 205

eyebright, 256

figwort, 268

fumitory, 276

Jamaica dogwood, 379

juniper, 386

lime flower, 409

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

sage, 512

senega, 533

acidic urine, 199, 577

acne, 274

Aconitum spp., 8

Acoraceae, 118

Acorus calamus, 118

Actaea monogyna, 168

Actaea racemosa, 168

actein, 168, 170

acteoside, 208

adaptogenic properties, 318, 501, 502

adrenal cortical activity, 126

adrenocorticosteroids, 52
senna and, 539

adulteration, 8, 10

adverse effects

examples, see Introduction, Table 1
potential, see Introduction, Table 2

Aeromonas, 283
Aeschrion excelsa, 491
aescin, 363, 365
aesculentic acid, 479
aesculetin, 363, 367
aesculin, 363, 367
Aesculus, 363
Aesculus hippocastanum, 363
African Myrrh, 449
afterbirth elimination, 531
Agathosma betulina, 100
agglutinating activity
mistletoe, 439
Agni Casti, 36
Agnus Castus, 36
agnuside, 36, 37
Agrimonia, 42
Agrimonia eupatoria, 42, 43
agrimoniin, 31, 43
Agrimony, 42
agropyrene, 193
Agropyron, 193
Agropyron repens, 193
Ague Tree, 518
Ajo, 279
ajoene, 279, 280
ajugol, 447
ajugoside, 447
akuammigine, 133
alanine, 268, 371, 409, 474
Alant, 240
alant camphor, 240
alantolactone, 240
albumen, 77
Alchemilla arvensis, 459
alcoholic liver disease, 432
alcoholism, 253
alcohols, 294
absorption inhibition, 534
metabolism, 51
aldehydes, 102, 247, 256, 294, 425
Alder Buckthorn, 270
Alexandrian Senna, 537
Alfalfa, 45
alfalfa top saponins (ATS), 47
alginic acid, 273, 274
aliphatic alcohols, 390

alkaloid-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
alkaloids, 29, 218
kava, 390
alkamides, 218, 219, 220, 221
alkanes, 149, 164, 249, 409
alkenes, 218
allantoin, 188, 191
allergenic herbal ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
i
allergic reactions
kava, 397
allergic rhinitis, 108, 112, 243
All-Heal, 580
Alliaceae, 279
allicin, 279, 280, 281, 283, 284
alliin, 279, 280, 281
allinase, 279, 280
Allium, 279
Allium sativum, 279
alloxanthoxyletin, 484
allyl isothiocyanate, 542
S-allyl-L-cysteine, 281
allylpropyl disulfide, 279
allyltetramethoxybenzene, 457
Aloe africana, 48
Aloe barbadensis, 48, 50
Aloe ferox, 50
Aloe gel, 48
Aloe Vera, 48
Aloe vera, 48, 50
aloe-emodin, 506, 608
aloenins, 51
Aloes, 50
aloesins, 50, 51
aloinosides, 50, 51
aloins, 50, 51
alopecia
treatment, 526
Aloysia citriodora, 405
Aloysia triphylla, 405
Altamisa, 263
Althaea, 418
Althaea kragujevacensis, 418
Althaea officinalis, 418
Althaea taurinensis, 418
Alzheimer's disease, 253, 303, 513
amarogentin, 290
amenorrhoea, 180, 258, 414
treatment, 407
amentoflavone, 299, 300, 386
American Elder, 237
American Ginseng, 325
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), 2
American Valerian, 403
amides, 486
kava, 390
amine-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
amino acid constituents
alfalfa, 45
arnica, 64
broom, 98
chamomile, German, 152
chaparral, 159

----- PAGE 702 -----
eyebright, 256
fenugreek, 260
figwort, 268
ginkgo, 299
ground ivy, 342
hydrocotyle, 371
lime flower, 409
plantain, 474
yarrow, 604
amoebicidals, 160, 492
amygdalin, 29, 61, 62
amyrin(s), 30, 31, 237, 249, 411, 482, 489, 572, 596
anacardic acid, 303
anaemia treatment, 238
anaesthetics, 49, 163
anagyrine, 180
analgesic activity, 139, 172, 189, 209, 450, 575, 599
kava, 393
analphylactic reactions, 377
anaphylactic reactions, 147, 154, 157, 444
andrenocorticosteroids
cascara and, 129
Anemone patens, 489
Anemone pratensis, 489
Anemone pulsatilla, 489
anemonin, 472, 473, 489, 490
anethole, 58, 411, 518
angelic acid esters, 156
Angelica, 53
Angelica archangelica, 53
Angelica sinensis, 54, 55
Angelicae Radix, 53
angelicin, 53
angiogenic activity, 122
anisaldehyde, 57
Anise, 57
Aniseed, 57
Anisi Fructus, 57
Anisum, 57
Anisum officinarum, 57
Anisum vulgare, 57
anodyne, 167
anorexia, 119, 149, 156, 162, 183, 261, 291
anorexia nervosa, 54, 103
anthelmintic agents, 92, 162, 240, 572, 573
anthemic acid, 154, 156
Anthemis nobilis, 156
anthocyanins, 31, 32, 79, 80, 197, 495, 543
anthracene glycosides, 128
anthranoid glycoside content, 50
anthranoids, 50
genotoxicity, 539
anthraquinone glycosides, 271
anthraquinones, 128, 164, 270, 506, 537, 550, 608
anti-allergic properties, 110, 153, 157
anti-androgenic activity, 522
anti-arthritics, 49
anti-asthmatic properties, 300
anti-atherogenic effects, 280
anti-atherosclerotic effects, 80, 281, 284, 295
antibacterial ingredients
aloe vera, 49
angelica, 54
bilberry, 81
bogbean, 90
burdock, 103
calendula, 122
chamomile, German, 153
cohosh, black, 173
coltsfoot, 186
cranberry, 197
damiana, 202

echinacea, 219, 222

elecampane, 240

ephedra, 244

eucalyptus, 248

euphorbia, 250

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318

holy thistle, 352

hops, 355

horehound, black, 359

quassia, 492

sculleap, 531

shepherd's purse, 542

thyme, 575

yarrow, 605

yellow dock, 609
antibiotic activity, 475
anticarcinogenic activity

bilberry, 80

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 139, 142

cranberry, 198

garlic, 282, 285

ginger, 294, 295

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 319

Jamaica dogwood, 380

milk thistle, 432

mistletoe, 438, 440

rhodiola, 503
anticatarrhal effects, 237, 256
anticholinesterase activity, 513
anticoagulant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 5
anticoagulant therapy

garlic and, 286

ginkgo and, 311

ginseng, eleutherococcus and, 322

ginseng, panax, and, 333
anticonvulsant effect, 58, 119, 338, 463, 464, 594.

kava, 392
antidepressant(s), 183, 303, 555

St John's wort, 551
antidepressants

sexual dysfunction and, 307
antidiarrhoeals, 75, 130, 162, 183, 376, 507
anti-emetic activity, 87, 130, 156, 166, 294
antifertility, 180, 387, 594
antifungal activity

angelica, 54

aniseed, 58

calamus, 119

celandine, greater, 141

cinnamon, 163

cranberry, 198

echinacea, 222

garlic, 283

gentian, 291

kava, 393

quassia, 492

thyme, 575

wild carrot, 594
antihaemorrhagics, 75, 98, 105, 121, 188
antihaemorrhoidal properties, 105, 473
antihepatotoxic effects, 283

rosemary, 510
antihistaminic properties, 167, 338
anti-HIV-1 activity, 426
antihypertensive effects, 280, 282, 285, 383
antihypertensives, interaction with

butterbur, 116

hawthorn, 350
anti-infective agents, 219
anti-inflammatory activity, 110, 140, 153, 172, 209,

222

Index

anti-inflammatory ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 13

antileukaemic activity, 486
antimalarials, 429
antimicrobial activity

agnus castus, 38

aniseed, 58

arnica, 65

bloodroot, 85

burdock, 103

cassia, 130

celandine, greater, 141

chamomile, German, 153

chaparral, 160

cinnamon, 162

drosera, 215

ephedra, 244

feverfew, 265

garlic, 280, 283, 285

ginger, 294, 295

golden seal, 338

guaiacum, 345

holy thistle, 353

Java tea, 383

liquorice, 413

marshmallow, 419

melissa, 426

mistletoe, 440

passionflower, 465

prickly ash, Southern, 486

rosemary, 509

sage, 513

St John's wort, 553

uva-ursi, 578
antimutagenic effects, 132, 133, 150, 503
antinociceptive properties, 264
anti-oedema effects, 363, 524
anti-oestrogenic activity, 172, 412
antioxidant activity

artichoke, 69

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 141

echinacea, 222

garlic, 281, 285

ginger, 294, 295

ginkgo, 301, 302

horehound, black, 359

milk thistle, 430

rosemary, 510
antiplatelet activity, 147, 295, 297, 413
antiplatelet agents

bilberry and, 82

garlic and, 286

ginkgo and, 311
antipsychotic activity, 392
antipsychotics

ginseng, eleutherococcus and, 322
antipyretics, 77, 490, 575, 598, 605
antirheumatic properties, 132, 147, 169, 180, 273
antiseborrhoeic properties, 548
antiseptics

bilberry, 80

bloodroot, 84

boldo, 91

buchu, 100

calendula, 122

capsicum, 126

celery, 147

chamomile, German, 153

cinnamon, 163

cinnamon oil, 162
clove oil, 167

----- PAGE 703 -----
Index

antiseptics (cont.)

eucalyptus, 247

uva-ursi, 578
antiserotonergic activity, 294
antispasmodic activity, 108, 110, 137, 139, 153, 509
antispasmodic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table

14

antithrombotic activity, 280, 281, 285, 294
antitoxic activity, 318
antitumourigenic activity

agrimony, 43

aloes, 51

aniseed, 58

arnica, 65

burdock, 103

cassia, 131

cat's claw, 132, 133

chamomile, Roman, 157

dandelion, 206

echinacea, 222, 224, 232

euphorbia, 250

garlic, 282

ginseng, panax, 329, 330

mistletoe, 439

motherwort, 448

myrrh, 450

rhodiola, 503

rosemary, 509

yucca, 610
antitussive properties, 169, 185, 215, 300, 465, 575
anti-ulcerogenic activity, 131, 153, 294, 424
antiviral activity

calendula, 122, 123

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 141

chamomile, German, 153

cinnamon, 163

echinacea, 219, 221, 230

elder, 238

eucalyptus, 248

fucus, 274

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318

ginseng, panax, 329

ground ivy, 343

horse-chestnut, 364

melissa, 426

motherwort, 448

rosemary, 509

sage, 513

St John's wort, 553, 557
anxiety, 184, 195, 245, 355, 403, 422, 551

treatment, 202, 349, 585
anxiolytic effects, 295, 463, 465
anxiolytics, 392, 393
aperient properties, 94
Aphanes, 459
Aphanes arvensis, 459
aphrodisiac activity

passionflower, 465
Apiaceae, 53, 57, 146, 371, 456, 593
apigenin, 31, 32

agrimony, 42

celery, 146

chamomile, German, 152, 153

chamomile, Roman, 156

cowslip, 195

fenugreek, 261

hawthorn, 346

horehound, white, 361

juniper, 386

lemon verbena, 405

melissa, 425

motherwort, 447

passionflower, 461, 464

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

sculleap, 530

squill, 547

wild carrot, 593

wild lettuce, 596
apigenin glycosides, 447, 456
apigravin, 146
Apii Fructus, 146
apiin, 146, 152, 156
apiole, 12, 456, 457, 458, 518
Apium graveolens, 146
Apium petroselinum, 456
appendicitis, 52, 129, 271, 539

grumbling, 42
appetite

increase, 516, 573

loss, 92, 205, 209, 291, 491

suppressant, 244
Apricot, 61
Apricot Vine, 461
Aquifoliaceae, 421
Arabian Myrrh, 449
arabinans, 419
arabinogalactan, 218, 221
arabinogalactans, 419
arabinose

aloe vera, 48

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

cowslip, 195

ispaghula, 374

lime flower, 409

myrrh, 449

pilewort, 472

red clover, 498

senega, 533
arabinoxylan, 374
Araceae, 543
arachidonic acid, 48
Aralia quinquifolia, 325
Araliaceae, 315, 325
arbutin, 201, 577
archangelenone, 53
Archangelica officinalis, 53
archangelicin, 53, 54
archengelenone, 53
Arctic root, 500
arctigenin, 102, 352
arctiin, 102
arctiopicrin, 102, 103
Arctium lappa, 102
Arctium majus, 102
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, S77
Arecaceae, 521
arginine, 45, 159, 260
Aristolochia spp., 8
aristolochic acids, 12
Armeniaca vulgaris, 61
Armoracia lapathifolia, 367
Armoracia rusticana, 367
Arnica, 64
Arnica chamissonis ssp. foliosa, 64
Arnica montana, 64
Arnicae Flos, 64
arnicin, 64
arterial pressure, raised, 409
arterial vasomotion enhancement, 80, 81
arteriosclerosis, 347

treatment, 409

arthritis
alfalfa, 46
arnica, 65
capsicum, 126
cat's claw, 132
celery, 147
chaparral, 159
devil's claw, 210
yucca, 610
arthritis treatment, 208, 273, 454
arthrosis, painful, 208
Artichoke, 67
asacoumarins, 72
Asafetida, 72
Asafoetida, 72
Asant, 72
B-asarone, 12
asarone, 518
Asarum europaeum, 119
ascaridole, 91
Asclepiadaceae, 477
Asclepias, 477
Asclepias albicans, 478
Asclepias curassavica, 478
Asclepias engelmanniana, 478
Asclepias eriocarpa, 478
Asclepias glaucescens, 478
Asclepias tuberosa, 477
asclepin, 477, 478
Ascophyllum, 273
Ascophyllum nodosum, 274
ascorbate, 146
ascorbic acid, see vitamin C
ash values, 10
Asian Ginseng, 325
asiatic acid, 373
Asiatic Pennywort, 371
asiaticentoic acid, 371
asiaticoside, 371
Asparagaceae, 547, 610
asparagic acid, 342
asparagine, 45, 419, 474
aspartine, 159
Aspen, 482
Aspergillus parasiticus, 283
Aspergillus spp., 283
asperuloside, 164, 165, 577
aspirin
willow and, 599
aspirin hypersensitivity, 599
Asteraceae
arnica, 64
artichoke, 67
boneset, 94
butterbur, 107
calendula, 121
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
coltsfoot, 185
dandelion, 204
echinacea, 217
elecampane, 240
feverfew, 263
gravel root, 340
holy thistle, 352
hypersensitivity to, 154, 157, 266
liferoot, 407
milk thistle, 429
tansy, 572
wild lettuce, 596
yarrow, 604
asthenia, 89

----- PAGE 704 -----
asthma, 84, 154, 185, 249, 252, 307, 599
adult bronchial, 49
psychogenic, 54
spasmodic, 416
treatment, 113, 215, 405, 543

astragalin, 354, 363, 601

astringents
agrimony, 42
avens, 76
bayberry, 77
bilberry, 80
burnet, 105
cassia, 130
cinnamon bark, 162
clivers, 164
comfrey, 188
eyebright, 256
ground ivy, 342
juniper, 387
raspberry, 495
St John's wort, 554
witch hazel, 602

atherosclerosis, 46, 383, 530

atony, 183, 271, 539

atopic eczema, see eczema, atopic

aucubin, 36, 37, 256, 268, 374, 474, 475, 591

aucubinine B, 209

Avens, 75

azulene, 240

CB)

Baccae Juniperi, 386
Bacillus anthracis, 277
Bacillus leprae, 372
Bacillus pumilus, 147
Bacillus spp., 283
Bacillus subtilis

aloes, 51

arnica, 65

burdock, 103

celery, 147

chaparral, 160

cohosh, black, 173

eucalyptus, 248

garlic, 283

holy thistle, 353

milk thistle, 432

plantain, 475

sage, 513

sculleap, 531

uva-ursi, 578

yarrow, 605
back pain, low, treatment, 208, 211
bacterial skin diseases, 153
bactericidal activity, 46, 65, 163, 277
bacteriostatic properties, 147, 424, 544
Bai Guo, 299
baicalein-6,7-dimethylether, 570
baldrinals, 580
ballonigrin, 358
Ballota, 358
Ballota foetida, 358
Ballota nigra, 358
ballotenol, 358
ballotinone, 358
Balm, 425
Balsamodendron Myrrha, 449
Balsamodendron myrrha, 449
baptifoline, 180
Bardanae Radix, 102

Bari, 389
barium antagonist, 92
Barosma betulina, 100
Batavia Cassia, 162
Batavia Cinnamon, 162
Bayberry, 77
Bearberry, 577
Bee plant, 96
Beebread, 96
behavioural activity, 301
Belgian Valerian, 580
Benedict's Herb, 75
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 452, 454
benzaldehyde, 162, 166, 411, 423
benzochromenes, 382
benzoic acid, 474
benzophenanthridines, 12, 137, 276
y-benzopyrones, 462
benzyl alcohol, 423
berberastine, 337
Berberidaceae, 180
berberine, 337, 338
bergapten, 53, 57, 456, 457
betaine, 64, 183, 452, 453
betalains, 479
betanidine, 479
betanine, 479
betonicine, 29, 361, 447, 604
beverages
alcoholic, 50, 64, 68, 149, 240, 605
non-alcoholic, 149
bicuculline methochloride, 392
Bilberry, 79
bile duct occlusion, 206
bile flow disturbance, 205, 277
biliary system dysfunction, 142, 144
bilobalide, 299, 300, 302
bilobetin, 299
biochanin A, 45, 498, 499
Biomphalaria glabrata, 578
birth facilitation, 58
bisabolene, 294
bisflavonols, 243
bitter acids, 354
bitter aromatics, 54, 149
bitter complexes, 205
bitter glucoside, 94
bitter index, 90
Bitter Lettuce, 596
Bitter Myrrh, 449
bitter principles, 42, 64, 98, 118, 354, 596
bitter properties, 89
Bitter Root, 290
bitters, 290
Bitterwood, 491
Bitterwort, 290
Black Cohosh, 168
Black Elder, 237
Black Horehound, 358
Black Sampson, 217
Black Snakeroot, 168
Black Tang, 273
Bladderwrack, 273
Blatterdock, 107
Blazing Star, 258
bleeding
enhanced risk, 310, 311
Blessed Thistle, 352
Blond Psyllium, 374
blood pressure
high, see hypertension
increase, 181, 245

Index

low, see hypotension

reduction, 75, 440, 554
Bloodroot, 84
Blue Cohosh, 180
Blue Flag, 87
blueberry, 79
Bockshornsame, 260
Bog rhubarb, 107
Bogbean, 89
bogberry, 79
Bogshorns, 107
boils, treatment, 219, 545
Boldi Folium, 91
boldine, 29, 91, 92, 518
Boldo, 91
Boldus, 91
Boneset, 94
Borage, 96
Boraginaceae, 96, 188
Borago officinalis, 96
Bordetella pertussis, 186, 553
borneol, 405, 508, 512
bornyl acetate, 581
boschniakine, 374, 474
boschniakinic acid, 374, 474
Botrytis cinerea, 65, 594
bowel cramps, 159
brahminoside, 371, 372
brahmoside, 371, 372
Brassicaceae, 541
Brauneria pallida, 217
breast cancer, 177
breastfeeding, 19
bromazepam, 399
bronchial asthma, see asthma

bronchial catarrh, 58
chronic, 342
bronchiectasis, 535
bronchitis, 575
acute, 94
chronic, 475, 534, 547
secondary, 416
treatment, 215, 243
angelica, 54
aniseed, 58
asafoetida, 72
bloodroot, 84
coltsfoot, 185
horehound, white, 361
thyme, 575
bronchodilation, 474
bronchospasm, prevention, 215
Broom, 98
Brucella abortus, 353
Brucella bronchoseptica, 353
bruises, 64
Buchu, 100
Buckbean, 89
Burdock, 102
burn treatment, 48, 80, 123
Burnet, 105
Burrage, 96
Burseraceae, 449
Butterbur, 107
Butterdock, 107
Butterfly Dock, 107
Butterfly Weed, 477
butyric acid, 169
Buxus sempervirens, 578

----- PAGE 705 -----
Index

@

Cactaceae, 151
cactine, 151
Cactus grandiflorus, 151
$-cadine, 201
cadinene, 386, 530
caffeic acid, 30, 67

celandine, greater, 136, 137, 139

clivers, 164

cohosh, black, 172

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 204

eucalyptus, 247

eyebright, 256, 257

figwort, 268

fumitory, 276

lime flower, 409

marshmallow, 419

melissa, 425

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

sage, 512

St John's wort, 550
caffeic acid derivatives, 218, 219, 367
caffeine, 29, 183, 184, 421, 422
caffeoylmalic acid, 358, 452
caffeoyltartaric acid, 185
calamene, 201
Calamus, 118
calcium, 130, 162, 452
Calendula, 121
Calendula officinalis, 121
calenduladiol, 121
calendulin, 121
calendulosides, 121
calotropin, 477
cAMP, 65
Campanulaceae, 416
campesterol, 30, 31, 45, 121, 166, 249, 429, 449, 572
camphene, 386, 508, 580
camphor, 31, 386, 508, 512, 518, 541, 572, 604
canadine, 337
canavanine, 45, 47
cancer treatment, 62, 159, 526
Candida albicans, 163, 283, 383, 413, 426, 486, 513
Candida krusei, 513
Candida pseudotropicalis, 513
Candida spp., 46, 85, 283
Candleberry Bark, 77
canin, 263
Cannabaceae, 354
Cao Ma Huang, 243
Capdockin, 107
Caprifoliaceae, 237
capsaicin, 125, 126
capsaicinoids, 125
Capsella, 541
Capsella bursa-pastoris, 541
Capsicum, 125
Capsicum spp., 125
Carbenia benedicta, 352
Carbenia Benedicta, 352
carbohydrate constituents

alfalfa, 45

aloe vera, 48

aniseed, 57

arnica, 64

burdock, 102

clove, 166

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

couchgrass, 193

cowslip, 195

cranberry, 197

damiana, 201

devil's claw, 207

elecampane, 240

fucus, 273

ginger, 293

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315, 316

hydrangea, 369

lime flower, 409

myrrh, 449

plantain, 474

pulsatilla, 489

red clover, 498

saw palmetto, 521

senega, 533

senna, 537

slippery elm, 545
carbonic acid, 452
carboxystrictosidine, 133
carcinogenesis, protection against, 302
carcinogenic properties

aloes, 51

bayberry, 78

bloodroot, 85

comfrey, 190

euphorbia, 250

gravel root, 341

liferoot, 408

sassafras, 519

senna, 538
cardiac disorders, 151, 447, 548

arrhythmias, 99

therapy, 348
cardiac glycosides, 30, 477, 547
cardioactive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 2
cardiotonic activity, 46, 99, 297, 338, 347, 547
cardiotoxic ingredients, 181
cardiovascular activity, 108, 301, 319, 328, 348, 503
cardiovascular diseases, 19, 422
cardiovascular-related disorders, 414
Carduus Benedictus, 352
carminatives

angelica, 54

aniseed, 58

asafoetida, 72

calamus, 118

capsicum, 126

cassia, 130

chamomile, German, 153

chamomile, Roman, 156

cinnamon, 162

clove, 166

juniper, 386
carnasol, 512
carnosic acid, 30
carnosolic acid, 509
carotene, 89, 188, 521
carotenoids, 64, 98, 121, 125, 137
Carum petroselinum, 456
carvacrol, 31, 193, 574
carvone, 31, 193, 462
caryophyllene, 67, 166
B-caryophyllene, 358
caryophyllene, 371, 382, 386, 405, 425, 518, 530,

580

B-caryophyllene, 593
Caryophyllus aromaticus, 166
Cascara, 128

Cascara Sagrada, 128
cascarosides, 29, 30, 128
Cassia, 130
Cassia acutifolia, 537
Cassia alexandrina, 537
Cassia angustifolia, 537
Cassia Bark, 130
Cassia Lignea, 130
Cassia senna, 537
casticin, 36, 37
catalpol, 474, 530
catarrh, 58, 249
bronchial, see bronchial catarrh
nasal, 153
nasopharyngeal, see nasopharyngeal catarrh
upper respiratory tract, 419, 575
catarrhal cystitis, acute, 100, 541, 577
catechins, 31, 61, 79, 183, 601
catecholamines, 58
catechols, 423, 608
cathartic activity, 84, 98, 538
Cat's Claw, 132
caulophylline, 180
caulophyllogenin, 570
Caulophyllum, 180
Caulophyllum robustum, 180
Caulophyllum thalictroides, 180
caulosaponin, 180, 181
cauloside D, 180
Cayenne, 125
celandine
common, 136
garden, 136
greater, 136
lesser, 136
celerin, 146
Celery, 146
Celery Fruit, 146
Celery Seed, 146
cell death, 69, 523
cell necrosis, 59
cell proliferation, 59
cell-proliferant, 188
cellulose, 183
centapicrin, 149
Centaurium erythraea, 149
Centaurium minus, 149
Centaurium umbellatum, 149
Centaury, 149
Centella, 371
Centella asiatica, 371
centelloside, 371
central nervous system
activity, 58, 99, 131
hypnotic effects, 594
central nervous system depressants
hawthorn, 348
hydrocotyle, 372
nettle, 453
sassafras, 518
sculleap, 531
senega, 534
valerian, 582
central nervous system stimulants.
cola, 183, 184
ephedra, 244
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318
lobelia, 417
maté, 421
cerebral embolism, 531
cerebral thrombosis, 531, 605
Cereus, 151

----- PAGE 706 -----
Cereus grandiflorus, 151
Ceylon Cinnamon, 162
chalcone derivatives, 423
chalcones, 31, 32, 354, 390, 411, 412, 436, 437
chamaelirin, 258
Chamaelirium carolianum, 258
Chamaelirium luteum, 258
Chamaemelum nobile, 156
Chamaesyce hirta, 249
chamazulene, 152, 153, 156, 604
Chamomile

German, 152

Roman, 156
Chamomilla recutita, 152
Chaparral, 159
Chaste tree, 36
Chasteberry, 36
cheilitis, 167
chelerythrine, 84, 138, 143, 484, 485, 486, 487
chelidonic acid, 136, 137
Chelidonium majus, 136
chilblains, 126
Chilli Pepper, 125
Chinese Cinnamon, 130
Chinese Ginseng, 325
Chlamydia aureus, 338
Chlamydia trachomatis, 338
chlorogenic acid

angelica, 53

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67, 69

burdock, 102

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 204

fumitory, 276

lime flower, 409

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

St John's wort, 550
chlorogenic acids, 219, 237
cholagogic activity, 510
cholecystitis, 205
choleretic activity, 139
choleretics, 92
cholesterol, 46, 48, 61, 70, 121, 429, 449, 572

biosynthesis inhibition, 68, 252

high concentrations, 46

intestinal absorption decreased, 46
cholesterol-lowering effects, 46, 281, 284

see also lipid-lowering effects
choline

arnica, 64

celery, 146

chamomile, German, 152

chamomile, Roman, 156

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

euphorbia, 249

eyebright, 256

fenugreek, 260

nettle, 452

shepherd's purse, 541
cholinergic activity, 375
chorea, 169
chromones, 50, 51
chromosome damage, 73
chronic fatigue syndrome, 319, 321
chrysaloin, 128
Chrysanthemum audiberti, 572
Chrysanthemum parthenium, 263
Chrysanthemum tanacetum, 572

Chrysanthemum vulgare, 572
chrysin, 464
chrysophanol, 506, 608
chrysophanol glycosides, 270
chrysoplenol, 36, 37
cichoric acid, 218, 219
Cimicifuga, 168
Cimicifuga daburica, 173
Cimicifuga foetida, 173
Cimicifuga heracleifolia, 173
Cimicifuga racemosa, 168
Cimicifuga simplex, 173
cimicifugic acids, 169, 172
ifugoside, 168, 170
cimicifugosides, 173
cimigenol, 170
cimiracemosides, 168, 170
cineole, 31, 91, 156, 201, 405

see eucalyptol
1,8-cineole, 508, 512
cinnamaldehyde, 130, 162, 163, 449

toxicity, 163
cinnamamide, 486
cinnamic acid, 50, 162, 268, 474
Cinnamomum aromaticum, 130
Cinnamomum burmanii, 162
Cinnamomum cassia, 130
Cinnamomum japonicum, 162
Cinnamomum loureirii, 162
Cinnamomum obtusifolium, 162
Cinnamomum pseudomelastoma, 130
Cinnamomum verum, 162
Cinnamomum zeylanicum, 162
Cinnamon, 162
cinnamon oil, 162, 163
Cinnamon Wood, 518
cinnamylideneacetone, 390
cinnzeylanin, 162
cinnzeylanol, 162
circulatory stimulants, 77
cirrhosis, 338, 432
cirsilineol, 574
cirsimaritin, 405
citral, 405
citric acid, 164, 197, 596
Citrobacter, 283
citronellal, 425
citrullol, 180
Cleavers, 164
Clivers, 164
Clove, 166

bud oil, 166

leaf oil, 166

stem oil, 166
Clusiaceae, 550
enicin, 352, 353
Cnicus, 352
Cnicus benedictus, 352
coagulant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 5
Cochlearia armoracia, 367
cognitive deficiency, 300, 303
cognitive enhancement, 304, 503
cognitive performance

kava, 397
Cohosh

black, 168

blue, 180
Cola, 183
Cola acuminata, 183
Cola nitida, 183
Cola Seed, 183
colchicine, 29

Index

Colewort, 75
colic

flatulent, see flatulent colic

intestinal, see intestinal colic
colitis, 129, 188, 545
Collinsonia canadensis, 570
Collinsonia punctata, 570
Collisonia canadensis, 570
colon inflammatory disease, 51, 271
Coltsfoot, 185, 16
coma, 62
Comfrey, 188, 16
Commiphora, 449
Commiphora coriacea, 449
Commiphora cuspidata, 449
Commiphora habessinica, 449
Commiphora molmol, 449
Commiphora mukul, 449, 450
Commiphora myrrha, 449
Commiphora playfairii, 449
Commiphora rivae, 449
commiphoric acids, 449
Common Boneset, 94
Common Centaury, 149
common cold, 130, 159, 470

treatment, 219, 223, 224, 225, 226, 243, 405
Common Evening Primrose, 251
Common Figwort, 268
Common Fumitory, 276
Common Hoarhound, 361
Common Juniper, 386
Common Plantain, 474
Common Thyme, 574
Common Valerian, 580
Compositae

arnica, 64

artichoke, 67

boneset, 94

butterbur, 107

chamomile, German, 152

chamomile, Roman, 156

coltsfoot, 185

dandelion, 204

echinacea, 217

elecampane, 240

feverfew, 263

gravel root, 340

holy thistle, 352

hypersensitivity to, 154, 157, 266

liferoot, 407

milk thistle, 429

tansy, 572

wild lettuce, 596

yarrow, 604
Coneflower, 217
coniferaldehyde, 518
conjunctivitis, 122

treatment, 256
constipation, 70, 87, 91, 92, 128, 270, 526, 608

chronic, 374, 376, 538

occasional, 537

treatment, 537
contact dermatitis

aniseed, 59

asafoetida, 73

boneset, 95

celandine, greater, 143

chaparral, 160

clove, 167

corn silk, 192

elecampane, 241

hops, 356

----- PAGE 707 -----
Index

contact dermatitis (cont.)
horehound, white, 362
hydrangea, 370
plantain, 475
pleurisy root, 478
contaminants of herbal ingredients, 10
contraceptives, 132
convulsion-inducing ingredients, 62, 202, S11, 514
a-copaene, 201
copaene, 518
coptisine, 84
Corn Silk, 191
coronary dilation, 184
coronary heart disease, 253
coronary thrombosis, 245, 605
corticosteroid-like activity, 327
corynebacteria, 509
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 147, 338, 553
Corynebacterium insidosum, 65
corynoxeine, 133
cosmetics, 61
cosmoriin, 342
costonulide, 263
Couchgrass, 193
coughs, 96
dry, 419
treatment, 243
coumaric acid, 30, 409, 419, 474, 498, 550
coumarin containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 16
coumarins, 29
coumestrol, 45
counter-irritants, 64
Cow Clover, 498
Cowslip, 195
COX-1 and COX-2 inhibition, 222
cramp, 480
Cranberry, 197
Crassulaceae, 500
Crataegus laevigata, 346
Crataegus monogyna, 346
Crataegus oxyacantha, 346
Crataegus oxyacanthoides, 346
Crataegus pinnatifidia, 348
Creosote bush, 159
Crohn's disease, 52, 129, 271, 539
croton oil dermatitis, 432
Cruciferae, 541
Cryptococcus neoformans, 283, 513
cryptoxanthin, 191, 192
cuminaldehyde, 162
Cupressaceae, 386
Curled Dock, 608
curzerenone, 449
cutaneous affection, 371
cutaneous eruptions, 87, 103, 518
cutaneous porphyria, 43
cyanide, 61
cyanide glycosides, 29
cyanide poisoning, 62
acute, 62
antidotes, 62
chronic, 62
cyanidin, 79
cyanogenetic glycosides, 13, 61, 193, 201
cyanogenic glycosides, 461, 462
cyanosis, 43
cyclic mastalgia, 251, 253
p-cymene, 91, 193, 201, 386, 574
Cynara scolymus, 67
cynarin, 68, 218, 219
cynaropicrin, 67

cynaroside, 342
cypripedin, 403
Cypripedium, 403
Cypripedium calceolus, 403
Cypripedium parviflorum, 403
Cypripedium pubescens, 403
cysteines, 281
cystine, 45, 159, 409
cystitis, 42, 91, 100, 103, 193, 369
cytisine, 168, 169
Cytisus scoparius, 98
cytochrome P450 inhibition, 233, 399
cytokine production, 221
cytoprotective activity, 450
cytostatic effects, 383
cytotoxic constituents, 216

agnus castus, 38

agrimony, 43

aniseed, 59

arnica, 65

boneset, 95

calendula, 123

cat's claw, 133

cinnamon, 163

drosera, 216

ephedra, 244

ginkgo, 302

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 319

ginseng, panax, 329

hydroquinone, 578

mistletoe, 438, 440

motherwort, 448

quassia, 492

saw palmetto, 523

St John's wort, 553

valerian, 583

[D)

daidzein, 45, 498
Dalmation Sage, 512
damaradienol, 240, 241
Damiana, 201
damianin, 201
Dandelion, 204
daphnanes, 30, 31
daucol, 593
Daucus, 593
Daucus carota, 593, 594
Daucus carota subsp. sativus, 593
Daucus communis, 593
dehydration, 271, 539
dehydrogingerdione, 294
dehydroguaiaretic acid, 344
dehydrokaempferol, 429
dementia, 253, 303
demulcents, 185, 188
dental hygiene, 85
depression, 96, 183, 303, 551, 555, 585, 591

kava contra-indication, 398
dermatitis

angelica, 55

aniseed, 59

arnica, 65

celandine, greater, 143

croton oil, 432

feverfew, 265

garlic, 286

hydrocotyle, 372

wild carrot, 594

wild lettuce, 597

yarrow, 606

dermatitis (conditions)
contact, see contact dermatitis
phototoxic, see phototoxic dermatitis
dermatology, 602
dermatomyositis, 397
dermatophytes, 85
desmethoxyyangonin, 391
Devil's Claw, 207
Devil's Dung, 72
Devil's Shrub, 315
Devil's-bit, 258
diabetes mellitus
alfalfa, 46
bilberry, 80
cranberry, 199
ephedra, 245
Java tea, 382
liquorice, 413
protection against, 432
willow, 599
yucca, 610
diabetic neuropathy, 253
diallyl disulfide, 279
diallyl trisulfide, 279
dianthrones, 506
diaphoretics, 54, 77, 94, 96, 118, 126, 237
diarrhoea, 51, 405, S41
acute, 338
herbal remedies causing/treating
agrimony, 42
aloes, 50, 51
bilberry, 80
bogbean, 90
broom, 99
cassia, 130
elder, 238
in children, 424
ispaghula, 374, 375
saw palmetto, 526
slippery elm, 545
nervous, 153
Diddin, 449
Didin, 449
didrovaltrate, 580, 581, 583
digestive disorders, 291
Digitalis lanata, 8
digoxin
squill and, 548
dihydroalantolactone, 240
dihydroanthracenes, 270
dihydrocorynantheine, 132, 133
dihydrofoliamenthin, 89
dihydrokavain, 391
dihydromethysticin, 392
dimeric flavones, 299
diosgenin, 261
diosmetin, 100, 268, 405, 508, 541
diosmetin-7-rutinoside, see diosmin
diosmin, 100, 268, 508
diosphenol, 100
Diplococcus pneumoniae, 338
disulfides, 72
diterpene acids, 386
diterpene lactone, 447
diterpenes, 30, 31, 36, 64, 94, 208, 299, 361, 382,
512,
Ditrysinia sylvatica, 493
diuresis, 184, 542
stimulation, 205
diuretic effects, 137, 238, 382, 454
diuretic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 3
dizziness, 62

----- PAGE 708 -----
docetaxel Eleutherococcus senticosus, 315
cohosh, black, and, 177 eleutherosides, 315, 316
Dogs Grass, 193 ellagitannins, 31
dopamine receptor Elymus repens, 193
antagonists, 116 Elytrigia repens, 193
dopamine receptors, 38 emetics, 46, 77, 84, 98, 157
antagonists, 40, 58 emmenagogues, 46, 169, 180, 408
dopamine release, enhancement, 80 emodin, 506, 608
doxorubicin emodin glycosides, 270
cohosh, black, and, 177 endometriosis, 253
Dracontium foetidium, 543 Entamoeba histolytica, 160, 283, 372, 492
Drimia maritima, 547 Enterobacter spp., 578
Dropwort, 423 Enterococcus, 383
Drosera, 215 Enterococcus faecalis, 199
Drosera rotundifolia, 215 enteropathy, 352
Droseraceae, 215 enzymes, 279
drowsiness, 62 Ephedra, 243
drug metabolism, inhibition, 55 Ephedra equisetina, 243
drug—herb interactions, 21 Ephedra gerardiana, 243
see also Appendix 1 Ephedra intermedia, 243
duodenal motility, activation, 126 Ephedra mahuang, 243
duodenal ulcers, 188, 212, 213, 291, 545 Ephedra major, 243
dysentry, 132, 183 Ephedra nebrodensis, 243
dyskinesia, 397 Ephedra scoparia, 243
dysmenorrhoea, 156, 169, 180 Ephedra shennungiana, 243
chronic primary, 81 Ephedra sinica, 243
dyspepsia Ephedraceae, 243
atonic, 337, 352, 491 , ephedradines, 243
flatulent, see flatulent dyspepsia ephedrannin A, 244

non-ulcer, 68 ephedrans, 243

dyspepsia, and herbal remedies ephedrine, 29, 243, 244, 245

aniseed, 58
artichoke, 69, 70
calamus, 118
centaury, 149
chamomile, Roman, 156
cinnamon, 162
dandelion, 205
devil's claw, 209
fenugreek, 261
gentian, 290, 291
juniper, 386
dyspeptic complaints, 54, 58, 509
dysuria, 164, 577

toxicity, 245
ephedroxane, 243

Epidermaphyton, 283

epigallocatechin, 195
epilepsy, 97, 343, 530

temporal lobe, 254
epinine, 98

eriodictyol, 574
e erythbigenin, 379

erythema nodosum, 231
Erythina piscipula, 379

echimidine, 188

Echinacea, 217 Erythraea centaurium, 149
Echinacea angustifolia, 217, 220 erythrolysis, 181
Echinacea intermedia, 217 Escherichia coli
Echinacea pallida, 217, 220 bilberry, 81
Echinacea purpurea, 217, 220 burdock, 103
echinacin, 218 cinnamon, 163
echinacoside, 218, 219, 222, 233 cohosh, black, 173
echinatine, 340 cranberry, 198, 199
eczema, 48, 103, 122, 498, 535 damiana, 202
atopic, 251, 253 garlic, 283
chronic, 277 golden seal, 338
nervous, 452 holy thistle, 353
treatment, 137, 268 java tea, 383
efficacy of herbal medicines, 23 meadowsweet, 424
elastase inhibition, 80 melissa, 426
Elder, 237 milk thistle, 432
Elecampane, 240 rosemary, 509
electrolyte depletion, 539 sage, 513
elemene, 382 scullcap, 531
elemicin, 518 uva-ursi, 578
elemol, 449 yarrow, 605
eleutherans, 315 yellow dock, 609
Eleuthero, 315 aescin, 363

Eleutherococcus Ginseng, 315 B-escin, 363

pharmacological properties, 245

epicatechin, 33, 79, 195

Epidermaphyton floccosum, 198
Epidermaphyton spp., 65

Epstein-Barr virus, inhibition, 413, 448
Ericaceae, 79, 197, 577

Index

essential oils, 382
see also Appendix 2, Table 21
esters
kava, 390
estragole, 12, 57
eucalyptol, 247, 604
eucalyptrin, 247
Eucalyptus, 247, 248
Eucalyptus globulus, 247
Eucalyptus maidenii, 247
eucalyptus oil, 248
eudesmane, 30, 31
eudesmanolides, 263
eudesmolides, 30, 31
eufoliatin, 94
eufoliatorin, 94
Eugenia aromatica, 166
Eugenia caryophyllata, 166
Eugenia caryophyllus, 166
eugenol, 75, 162, 166, 167, 405, 409, 411, 449, 462,
580, 580
eugenol acetate, 167
eukovoside, 256
euparin, 340
eupatorin, 94, 382, 405
eupatoriopicrin, 95
Eupatorium cannabinum, 95
Eupatorium chapmanii, 94
Eupatorium perfoliatum, 94
Eupatorium purpureum, 340
Eupatorium trifoliatum, 340
euperfolide, 94
euperfolin, 94
euperfolitin, 94
Euphorbia, 249
Euphorbia capitata, 249
Euphorbia hirta, 249
Euphorbiaceae, 493
euphrasia, 256
Eupbrasia officinalis, 256
Euphrasia rostkoviana, 256
euphroside, 256
European Cranberry, 197
European Elder, 237
European Medicines Agency, 4
European Medicines Evaluation Agency (EMEA),
5,5
European Pharmacopoeia (Ph Eur), 10
European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy
(ESCOP), 5
Evening Primrose, 251
excessive perspiration, 512
Excoecaria sylvatica, 493
exhaustion, 183
expectorant effect
angelica, 54
aniseed, 58
asafoetida, 72
bloodroot, 84
borage, 96
coltsfoot, 185
eucalyptus, 247
ginkgo, 300
horehound, white, 362
lobeline, 417
squill, 547
thyme, 575
extrapyramidal symptoms, 399
exudative skin eruptions, 493
eye abnormalities, 127
eye inflammation, 87
Eyebright, 256

----- PAGE 709 -----
Index

@

Fabaceae, 45
False Cinnamon, 130
False Unicorn, 258
Farfara, 185
farnesene, 371
farnesiferols, 72
fatigue, 557
chronic, 319, 321
postviral syndrome, 252, 253
fatty acids
mistletoe, 436
fatty acids, in
agnus castus, 36
arnica, 64
borage, 96
celery, 146
centaury, 149
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
elder, 237
ginger, 293
yarrow, 604
Faucibarba officinalis, 425
febrifuge, 247
Fenugreek, 260
fenugreekine, 261
ferujol, 73
Ferula assafoetida, 72
Ferula communis, 72, 73
Ferula foetida, 72
Ferula jaeschkeana, 73
ferulenol, 72
ferulic acid, 30, 72, 185, 247, 256, 268, 419, 474,
512
feruloylhistamine, 244
fetal tachycardia, 458
fever, 108, 591, 598
treatment, 96, 405
Feverfew, 263
hypersensitive reaction, 16
Fevertree, 247
Feverwort, 94
fibrinolytic activity, 280, 281, 285, 296
Ficaria, 472
Ficaria degenii, 472
Ficaria nudicaulis, 472
Ficaria ranunculoides, 472
Ficaria verna, 472
Ficaria vulgaris, 472
Figwort, 268
Filipendula, 423
Filipendula ulmaria, 423
Fish Poison Bark, 379
fixed oils, 191, 193, 251, 521
Flapperdock, 107
flatulence, 54, 70, 92, 377, 386
treatment, 405
flatulent colic, 58, 72, 130, 166, 352
intestinal, 294
flatulent dyspepsia, 54, 130, 153, 156, 456, 470, 512
flavanones, 31, 32, 423, 436, 437
flavolignans, 429, 430
flavone derivatives, 346
flavone glycosides, 57, 261, 342, 604
flavones, 31, 32, 105, 159, 405, 423, 436, 437, 550,
596, 596
flavonoflavonol, 243
flavonoid containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 17
flavonoid glycosides, 301, 409

flavonoids, 29, 31, 32, 218
kava, 390
flavonol derivatives, 577
flavonol glycosides, 103, 159, 185, 299, 300, 342,
452, 452, 601
flavonols, in, 31, 32
aniseed, 57
arnica, 64
boldo, 91
boneset, 94
coltsfoot, 185
elder, 237
ginkgo, 299
hawthorn, 346
liquorice, 411
meadowsweet, 423
St John's wort, 550
uva-ursi, 577
wild carrot, 593
wild lettuce, 596
witch hazel, 601
floridanine, 407
florosenine, 407
foenugraecin, 261
Folia Bucco, 100
folic acid, 89
food flavouring categories, definition, see Appendix
3
food use, see individual herbal ingredients
foreign organic matter, 11, 270
formic acid, 169, 452
formononetin, 45, 168, 169, 171, 411, 498, 499
Fossil Tree, 299
Fragrant Valerian, 580
Frangula, 270
Frangula alnus, 270
Frangula nigra, 270
Frangula purshiana, 128
frangulins A and B, 270
frangulosides, 270
fraxetin glucoside, 363
fraxin, 363
French Thyme, 574
fructose, 185, 188, 193, 197, 207, 474, 533
Fucaceae, 273
fucoidan, 273
Fucus, 273
Fucus spp., 273
Fucus vesiculosus, 273
fukiic acid, 169, 379
fukinolic acid, 169, 171, 172, 173
Fumaria officinalis, 276
Fumariaceae, 276
fumaric acid, 276, 452, 474, 541
Fumitory, 276
fungicidal activity, 387
fungitoxic activity, 46
furaneudesma-1,3-diene, 449
furanocoumarins, 13, 53, 57, 456, 457, 593
furanosesquiterpenes, 108, 109, 449
furfural, 87
furoguaiacin, 344
furoguaiaoxidin, 344
furunculosis, 219
Fusarium oxysporum, 383

CG)

GABA activity, 392

galactose, 48, 185, 207, 315, 316, 409, 449
galacturonic acid, 195, 545
galacturono-rhamnans, 419

Galium, 164
Galium aparine, 164
gallic acid, 30, 94, 164, 185, 247, 256, 403, 506, 512,
S77
gallocatechin, 31, 354, 386
gallotannins, 31
gallstones, 91, 213
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 58, 479, 480,
582,
concentration, 58
gamolenic acid, 48, 96, 251, 252
Gan Cao, 411
Gan Jiang, 293
Garden Angelica, 53
Garden Burnet, 105
Garden Sage, 512
Garden Thyme, 574
Garden Valerian, 580
Garlic, 279
gastralgia, 526
gastric mucosa, inflammation, 419
gastric ulcers, 188, 212, 213, 291, 413
protection against, 432
gastric upset, 338, 454, 492, 599
gastritis, 261
severe, 573
treatment, 215
gastroduodenitis, chronic, 43, 475
gastroenteritis, 65
gastrointestinal irritation
agnus castus, 40.
aloes, 51
frangula, 271
garlic, 286
ground ivy, 343
horse-chestnut, 365
kava, 395
rhubarb, 507
senega, 535
senna, 538
St John's wort, 559
yellow dock, 609
gastrointestinal tract, 81, 90, 101, 181, 244
antiseptic properties, 387
disorders, 137, 142, 253, 425, 433
function, 610
hypermotility, 189
inflammation, 535
motility, 294, 296, 377
protection from damage, 111
geijerone, 386
gein, 75
General Plantain, 474
genistein, 45, 498, 499
genisteine, 98
Geniévre, 386
genkwanin, 447, 508
genotoxic effects, 341, 408, 519
gentialutine, 290
gentiamarin, 290
Gentian, 290
Gentiana, 290
Gentiana lutea, 290
Gentiana pannonica, 291
Gentiana punctata, 291
Gentiana purpurea, 291
Gentianaceae, 149
gentianidine, 89
gentianin, 89, 291
gentianine, 29, 260, 290, 291
gentianose, 290
gentiopicrin, 149, 290

----- PAGE 710 -----
gentiopicroside, 149, 290
gentisein, 291
gentisic acid, 247
gentisin, 290, 291
Geotrichum canadidum, 46
geraniol, 405, 500, 501
germacranolide, 31
germacranolides, 30, 263
germacrene, 30, 31, 358, 371
German Chamomile, 152
Geum, 75
Geum urbanum, 75
Giardia intestinalis, 283
Giardia lamblia, 338
Ginger, 293
gingerol, 294
gingivitis, 64, 449, 512
ginkgetin, 299
Ginkgo, 299
Ginkgo biloba, 299
Ginkgoaceae, 299
ginkgolides, 30, 299, 300, 302
Ginseng
Eleutherococcus, 315
excessive ingestion, 16
Panax, 325
ginsenosides, 325, 326, 327
glabridin, 413
glabrol, 412, 413
glaucoma, 245
Glechoma hederacea, 342
glechomin, 342
Globe artichoke, 67
glucans, 419
glucomannan, 48
gluconasturtin, 367
glucose
coltsfoot, 185
comfrey, 188
couchgrass, 193
cowslip, 195
devil's claw, 207
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315
plantain, 474
red clover, 498
senega, 533
glucosides, 183
glucosinolates, 29, 367

glucuronic acid, 188, 195, 386, 411, 498

glutamic acid, 159, 342
glycans, 328
glyceryl-t-palmitate, 169
glycine, 159, 256
glycosides, 29, 30
agrimony, 42
aloes, 50
apricot, 61
eyebright, 256
Jamaica dogwood, 379
lady's slipper, 403
passionflower, 461, 462
pilewort, 472
poplar, 482
thodiola, 500, 501
senna, 537
St John's wort, 550
vervain, 591
glycyrin, 411
glycyrol, 411
glycyrrhetic acid, 411

glycyrrhetinic acid, 411, 412, 413

Glycyrrhiza glabra, 411

Glycyrrhiza uralensis, 413
glycyrrhizic acid, 411
glycyrrhizin, 411, 412, 413
glycyrrhizin glycoside, 411
glycyrrhizinic acid, 411, 412
gnidilatin, 493
Gold-bloom, 121
Golden ragwort, 407
Golden root, 500
Golden Seal, 337
Golden Senecio, 407
gonorrhoea, 132
gonzalitosin, 201
Goosegrass, 164
gossypetin, 195, 500, SOL
Gotu Kola, 371

gout, 518

graft rejection, 535
Gramineae, 191, 193
Grapple Plant, 207
Gravel Root, 340

Great Lettuce, 596
Greater Burdock, 102
Greater Burnet, 105
Greater Celandine, 136
Greater Plantain, 474
Grenadille, 461
grosheimin, 67

Ground Ivy, 342

growth depression, 119
grumbling appendicitis, 42
Guaiac, 344

guaiacin, 344

guaiacol, 344

Guaiacum, 344
Guaiacum officinale, 344
Guaiacum sanctum, 344
guaiane, 30, 31
guaianolides, 30, 31, 263
guaiaretic acid, 344
guaiazulene, 344

guaiol, 344

Guajacum, 344
Guayacar, 344
guggulipid, 450

Gum Asafetida, 72

gum fraction, 72

Gum Tree, 247

Guru Nut, 183
Guttiferae, 550
gynocardin, 461, 462

CH)

haematemesis, 188, 541
haematological aberrations, 480
haemolytic properties, 46
haemorheological activity, 301
haemorrhage, 310, 311
haemorrhagic gastritis, 51

haemorrhoids, 80, 374, 376, 474, 601, 602

see also piles
Hafnia, 283
hallucinations, 404
Hamamelidaceae, 601
Hamamelis, 601
Hamamelis virginiana, 601
hamamelitannin, 601
hamamelose, 601
harmaline, 461, 462
harmalol, 461, 462
harman, 29, 461, 462

Index

harmine, 461, 462
harmol, 461
harpagide, 208, 209, 268, 269
harpagogenin, 209
Harpagophytum, 207
Harpagophytum burchelii, 207
Harpagophytum procumbens, 207
harpagoside, 208, 209, 268
Hartogia betulina, 100
hastatoside, 591
Hawthorn, 346
hayfever, treatment, 243
headaches, 62, 598
fatigue associated, 421
nervous tension, 355
Heal-All, 570
hearing loss, 306
heart disease, 245
Heart-leaved Groundsel, 407
heavy metals, 9
Hedeoma pulegioides, 470
Hedera senticosa, 315
hederagenin, 45, 180, 472, 489
heerabomyrrhols, 449
helenalin, 64, 65
helenin, 240
Helenium microcephalum, 240
Helicobacter pylori, 283, 285
Helmet Flower, 530
Helonias, 258
Helonias dioica, 258
Helonias lutea, 258
helonin, 258
heniarin, 152, 411
hepatic cirrhosis, 55
hepatic disease, see liver disease
hepatic tumours, 186
hepatitis, 457
acute, 160, 432
chronic, 55, 432, 443
hepatoprotective activity, 67, 68, 69, 92, 328, 429,
516, 516
hepatoregeneration, 67, 69
see also liver, regeneration
hepatotoxic constituents, in
boneset, 95
borage, 97
buchu, 101
butterbur, 114, 116
celandine, greater, 142, 143
cohosh, black, 175
coltsfoot, 186
comfrey, 189, 190
gravel root, 341
liferoot, 408
pennyroyal, 470
scullcap, 531
hepatotoxicity
kava, 394, 395
Herb Bennet, 75
herbacetin, 500, 501
herbal ecstasy, 243
Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee (HMAC),
5
herbal teas, 153, 156, 186, 337, 405, 452
in pregnancy, 19
herclavin, 487
Hercules-club, 486
herculin, 486
herpes simplex labialis, 425
herpes simplex virus type 1, 221, 387, 425, 426, 602
growth inhibition, 535

----- PAGE 711 -----
Index

herpes simplex virus type 2, 230
Hippocastanaceae, 363
hirsuteine, 132, 133
hirsutine, 132, 133
histamine, 452, 479, 480, 541
inhibition of release, 51, 157
potentiation of release, 249
histidine, 45, 260, 474
HIV infection, 443
HIV-1 protease activity, 43, 509
Hoarhound, 361
Hogweed, 98
Holy Thistle, 352
homeopathy, 64, 463, 489
Honeyplant, 425
Hong Jing Tian, 500
Hoodwort, 530
hookworm treatment, 240
Hops, 354
hordenine, 151
Horehound, 361
black, 358
white, 361
hormonally active ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 9
Horse-chestnut, 363
Horseheal, 240
Horseradish, 367
Huang Qin, 530
huckleberry, 79
humulene, 354, 382, 530
humulone, 354
Humulus, 354
Humulus lupulus, 354, 427, 585
Hungarian Chamomile, 152
Hydrangea, 369
Hydrangea arborescens, 369
hydrangenol, 369
hydrangin, 369
hydrastine, 337, 338
Hydrastis canadensis, 337
Hydrocotyle, 371
Hydrocotyle asiatica, 371
Hydrocotyle lurida, 371
hydrocotylegenins, 371
hydrocotylin, 371
hydrocyanic acid, 61, 493
hydroplumbagin glucoside, 215
hydroquinone, 578
hydroxyanthracenes, 29, 506, 537, 538
hydroxybenzoic acid, 30, 185, 419
hydroxycinnamic acids, 533
derivatives, 136, 139, 425
esters, 169, 171
hydroxycostunolide, 263
hydroxyisonobilin, 157
hydroxykynurenic acid, 299, 300
hydroxyparthenolide, 263
5-hydroxytryptamine, see serotonin
hydroxyursolic acid, 342
hyoscine, 29
hyoscyamine, 596
hyperactivity, children, 254
hyperaldosteronism, 413, 414
hypercholesterolaemia, 573
hyperforin, 551, 552, 553, 554
hyperglycaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
8

hypericin, 550, 551, 553, 554
hypericism, 559

Hypericum, 550

Hypericum noeanum, 550

Hypericum perforatum, 550
Hypericum veronense, 550
hyperin, 89, 577
hyperlipidaemia, 530
prevention, 531
see also lipid-lowering effects
hyperlipidaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
6

hyperoside, 79, 151, 237, 247, 347, 423, 447, 551
hyperprolactinaemia, 36
hypertension, 99, 282, 291, 322, 338, 382
hypertensive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 4
hypertensives, interaction with

butterbur, 116
hyperthyroidism, 274, 275
hypnotic ingredients, 581
hypocholesterolaemic activity, 46, 68, 261, 376
hypoglycaemic activity, 328, 330, 377, 383, 450, 534
hypoglycaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 8
hypokalaemia, 414, 539
hypokalaemic myopathy, 414
hypolaetin, 419
hypolipidaemic activity, 534
hypolipidaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table

6

hypotension, 440, 456

hypotensive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 4
hypothyroidism, 368

hypouraemic activity, 153

ichthynone, 379, 380
Ichthyomethia communis, 379
Ichthyomethia piscipula, 379
Tlex, 421
Ilex aquifolium, 421
Ilex paraguariensis, 421
Hex pubescens, 421, 422
ilexosides, 421
imanine, 554
imidazoles, 29
immunomodulation, 140, 219, 220, 223, 252, 282,
439, 439, 442
immunomodulatory ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 10
immunosuppressant effects, 215
immunosuppressant therapy, 232
imperatorin, 55, 456, 457
incontinence, urinary, 42
Indian Pennywort, 371
Indian Plantago, 374
Indian Senna, 537
Indian Tobacco, 416
Indian Water Navelwort, 371
indicaine, 374
in nine, 374
indigestion, 355
treatment, 405
indoles, 29, 461, 463, 491
inflammation, 598
eyes, 87
joints, 367
skin, see skin inflammation
tissues, 367
inflammatory reactions, 43
influenza treatment, 94, 591
inorganics, 452
inositol, 156, 193, 249
insect bites, 64
insecticides, 38, 58
insomnia, 245, 379, 403, 463, 464, 581, 583, 596
see also sleep disorders

insulin secretion, 43, 286

intercostal myalgia, 169

interleukin-1 stimulation, 132

interleukin-6 stimulation, 132

intermedine, 96

intermidine, 188

intermittent claudication, 300, 306

intestinal amoebiasis, 249

intestinal colic, 162, 456, 470
flatulent, 294

intestinal obstruction, 52, 129, 271, 539, 609

intestinal spasms, 181

intoxicants, 391

Intoxicating Pepper, 389

Inula, 240

inula camphor, 240

Inula helenium, 240

Inula racemosa, 240

inulin, 64, 94, 102, 185, 240, 241

iodine, 273

iridin, 87

iridoid containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,

Table 18

iridoids, 36, 149, 164

Iris caroliniana, 87

Iris versicolor, 87

Iris virginica, 87

iriversical, 87

irritability, 195

irritable bladder, 202

irritable bowel syndrome, 70, 73, 374

irritable cough, 596

irritant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 12

irritants, powerful, allyl isothiocyanate, 542

isoalantolactone, 240

isoboldine, 91, 518

isobutylamides, 217, 218, 220

isocorynoxeine, 133

isoflavones, 411, 412

isoflavonoids, 45, 379, 498

isoginkgetin, 299

isoimperatorin, 53

isoleucine, 45, 159, 268, 409

isoliquiritigenin, 413

isomenthone, 470

isomitraphylline, 132, 133

isoorientin, 461

isopimpinellin, 457

isopteropodine, 132, 133

isoquassin, 491

isoquercitrin, 146, 237, 386, 521, 577

isoquinolines, 29, 84, 91, 180, 276, 337, 484, 486,

S18

isorhamnetin, 300, 452, 498
mistletoe, 437

isorhynchophylline, 132, 133

isoschaftoside, 461

isoscutellarin, 419

isosilichristin, 429

isothiocyanate, 367

isotussilagine, 218, 232

isovaltrates, 580, 581

isovitexin, 461

Ispaghul, 374

Ispaghula, 374

Ispagol, 374

itching, 544

jaligonic acid, 479
Jamaica Dogwood, 379

----- PAGE 712 -----
Jamaican Quassia, 491
jamiacin, 379

Java Tea, 381

Jesuit's Brazil Tea, 421

Ji Xue Cao, 371

Joe-Pye Weed, 340

joint inflammation, 367
Joshua Tree, 610
junionone, 386

Juniper, 386

Juniperus communis, 386

@

kaempferitrin, 151
kaempferol, 31, 32
bogbean, 89
clove, 166
coltsfoot, 185
drosera, 215
elder, 237
ginkgo, 300
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
hydrangea, 369
kaempferol, 363
lime flower, 409
maté, 421
motherwort, 447
nettle, 452
passionflower, 461
raspberry, 495
red clover, 498
thodiola, 500, 501
saw palmetto, 521
wild carrot, 593
witch hazel, 601
kaurenes, 30, 31
Kava, 389
kava dermopathy, 389
kavain, 391, 392
Kava-kava, 389

kavalactones, 389, 390, 391, 392, 394

kavapyrones, 389
Kawa, 389
Kawa-kawa, 389
kawalactones, 389
Kelp, 273
Kelpware, 273
keratinisation, 372
ketones, 247, 256, 456
Kew Tree, 299
Key, 389
Khartoum Senna, 537
kidney
damage, 55
gravel, 452
irritants, 343, 406
kidney disease, 599
treatment, 192
see also renal disease
King's Cureall, 251
Klebsiella ozanae, 513
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 283, 432
Klebsiella spp., 283, 338, 578
Kluyveromyces bulgaricus, 509
Knob Root, 570
Kola Nut, 183
Koniak, 389
Korean Ginseng, 325
Ku Xing Ren, 61
Kumis Kucing, 381
Kydney Root, 340

@

L-652,469, 186
labdanes, 30, 31
Labiatae, 342, 358, 361, 381, 425, 447, 470, 508,
530, 530, 570, 574

labriformin, 478
lactation, see Introduction, Table 3
lactic acid, 96
Lactobacillus brevis, 509
Lactuca canadensis, 596
Lactuca quescina, 596
Lactuca sativa, 596
Lactuca serriola, 596
Lactuca spp., 596
Lactuca virosa, 596
lactucarium, 596, 597
lactucin, 596
lactupicrin, 596
Lady's Slipper, 403
Lady's Thistle, 429
laetrile, 62
Lamiaceae, 381, 425, 447, 508, 512, 530, 570, 574
Lamiceae, 470
Laminaria, 273
laminarin, 273
Lamium album, 454
Large Cranberry, 197
Large-leaved Lime, 409
Larrea divaricata, 159
Larrea mexicana, 159
Larrea tridentata, 159
larreantin, 159
larvicidals, 163
laryngismus stridulus, 493
laryngitis, 84, 185, 479
Lauraceae, 130, 162, 518
lauric acid, 45, 87, 102, 293
lauriflorine, 484
laxative effect

celandine, greater, 137

elder, 238

ispaghula, 376
laxative ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 1
laxative preparation, 48
learning, 301
lectins, 12, 436, 438, 479
Leguminosae, 45, 260, 379, 411, 498, 537
Leishmania donovani, 338
Lemon Balm, 425
Lemon Verbena, 405
lens opacity, 81
leocardin, 447
Leontice thalictroides, 180
Leontodon taraxacum, 204
leonuride, 447
leonuridin, 447
leonurine, 447, 448
leonurinine, 447
Leonurus, 447
Leonurus cardiaca, 447
Leonurus heterophyllus, 447
Leonurus japonicus, 447
Leonurus sibirious, 447
Leopard's Bane, 64
leprosy, 516
leprous ulcers, 371
Lesser Celandine, 472
Lettuce Opium, 596
Leucanthemum parthenium, 263
leucine, 45, 159, 237, 256, 268, 409, 474
leucocyanidin, 249

Index

leucopenia, drug-induced, 238
leukodin, 604
leukotriene inhibition, 264
libido increase, 58, 307
licoflavonol, 411
licoric acid, 411
Licorice, 411
Life-giving Vine of Peru, 132
Liferoot, 407
lignans, 29, 102, 103, 159, 344, 352, 437, 452, 486
Lignum Vitae, 344
Liliaceae, 279
Lime, 409
Lime Flower, 409
Lime Tree, 409
limonene, 100, 146, 243, 386, 405, 409, 500, 501,
530, 530
linalool, 31, 91, 405, 462, 604
Linden Tree, 409
lindestrine, 449
linoleic acid, 128, 204, 237, 251, 252, 293, 429
linolenic acid, 204, 237, 251
Lion's Tooth, 204
ipid peroxidation inhibition, 80
lipid-lowering effects, 281, 284, 450
see also cholesterol-lowering effects
lipid(s), 48, 57, 128, 166, 293, 429
lipolytic activity, 46
Lippia citriodora, 405
liqcoumarin, 411
liquirigenin, 412
liquiritic acid, 411
liquiritin, 412
Liquorice, 411, 221
excessive ingestion, 16, 52
lisetin, 379
Listeria monocytogenes, 65
lithospermic acid, 188, 352
liver

cirrhosis, 55
dysfunction, 87
regeneration, 58, 157, 456
symptoms involving, 337
tumours, 186
liver damage, 51, 55, 69, 114, 177
treatment, 429
liver disease, 143, 175, 599
alcoholic, 432
treatment, 137, 429
see also hepatic disease
lobelacrin, 416
Lobelia, 416
Lobelia inflata, 416
lobeline, 29, 416, 417
local microcirculation, increased, 49
loganin, 89
loperamide
ispaghula and, 377
Lucerne, 45
lumbago, 126
lupanine, 98
lupulone, 354
Lupulus, 354
luteolin, 31, 32
luteolin glycosides, 425, 456
luteolin-7-lactate, 358
luteolins, constituents in
agnus castus, 36
agrimony, 42
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
cowslip, 195

----- PAGE 713 -----
Index

luteolins, constituents in (cont.)
dandelion, 204
fenugreek, 261
ground ivy, 342
hawthorn, 346
horehound, white, 361
lemon verbena, 405
melissa, 425
passionflower, 461, 462
rosemary, 508
shepherd's purse, 541
squill, 547
wild lettuce, 596
lyaloside, 133
lycopsamine, 96, 188
lymph node enlargement, 164
lymphadenitis, 164, 261
lymphocyte resistance to apoptosis, 221
lysine, 45, 260, 268, 474
lysozymes, 43

@

Macrocystis, 273
macrophage function
enhancement, 221
Macropiper latifolium, 389
Macropiper methysticum, 389
Macrotys Actaea, 168
madasiatic acid, 373
madecassic acid, 373
madecassoside, 371, 372
magnoflorine, 180, 484, 486, 487
Maidenhair Tree, 299
Maize, 191
Male Myrrh, 449
malic acid, 45, 96, 185, 197, 379, 452, 596
malignant duodenal tumours, 119
malignant melanoma, 160
Malmal, 449
malonic acid, 45
maltol, 461, 462, 463, 464
Malvaceae, 418
mandelonitrile, 61, 62
mania
St John's wort, side-effect, 560
mannitol, 521
mannose, 188
maodongqing, 422
MAOI therapy, 262
St John's wort and, 562
MAOL-like action, 457
maokonine, 244
Marian Thistle, 429
Mariana lactea, 429
Marigold, 121
marrubenol, 361
marrubiin, 361, 362, 447
marrubin acid, 362
Marrubium, 361
Marrubium vulgare, 361
Marsh Trefoil, 89
Marshmallow, 418
Marybud, 121
mastalgia, 38
noncyclic, see noncyclic mastalgia
mastitis, 153
mastodynia, 37
matricaria, 604
Matricaria Flowers, 152
Matricaria recutita, 152
matricin, 152, 153

matricine, 30

Maté, 421

Maypop, 461

maysin, 191

Meadow Clover, 498
Meadowsweet, 423
Medicago, 45

Medicago afganica, 45
Medicago grandiflora, 45
Medicago ladak, 45
Medicago mesopotanica, 45
Medicago orientalis, 45
Medicago polia, 45
Medicago praesativa, 45
Medicago sativa, 45
Medicago sogdiana, 45
medicagol, 45
medicarpin, 45

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory

Agency (MHRA), 6
Mediterranean Milk Thistle, 429
melancholy, 183
melanoma, malignant, 160
Melanthiaceae, 258
Melissa, 425
Melissa officinalis, 425, 585
Melissa pulegioides, 470
memory, 301
menopausal neurosis, 551
treatment, 407
menopausal symptoms, 173, 499
menstrual cycle
herbal remedies affecting
calendula, 123
chamomile, German, 155
gentian, 291
horehound, black, 360
horehound, white, 362
hydrocotyle, 373
motherwort, 448
nettle, 454
parsley, 458
pokeroot, 481
irregularities, 37
menstruation
profuse, 98
promotion, 58, 108
suppression, 50
mental depression, 147
Mentha pulegium, 470
menthiafolin, 89
menthol, 31, 193
menthone, 31, 100, 193, 470, 518
Menyanthaceae, 89
Menyanthes, 89
Menyanthes trifoliata, 89
metabolites
primary, 29
secondary, 29
methaemoglobinaemia, 73
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), 283
methionine, 45
5-methoxyeugenol, 518
methoxyphenylacetone, 57
methoxypsoralen, 456, 593
methyl acetate, 167
methyl chavicol, 57
2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, 354, 355
methylarbutin, 577
2-methylbuten-3-en—2-ol, 354
N-methylcytisine, 168, 169, 180, 181

methylephedrine, 243

methyleugenol, 12, 130, 162, 166

methylpseudoephedrine, 243

methylpyridoxine, 311

methylripariochromene A, 382, 383

methylsalicylaldehyde, 130

1-methyltetralin, 50

microbial contamination, 11

Micrococcus flavus, 475

Micrococcus glutamious, 248

Micrococcus luteus, 426

Micrococcus roseus, 65

Microsporum, 198, 283

Microsporum infections, 215

migraine, 183, 263, 264, 265
prevention, 108, 113, 263
treatment, 263

Milfoil, 604

Milk Thistle, 429

millefin, 604

Millefolium, 604

Millepertuis, 550

mineralocorticoids, 77

minerals, 46, 204

miscarriage, threatened, 258

Mistletoe, 436, 16

mitogenic substances, 480

mitraphylline, 132, 133

Mohave Yucca, 610

Mohmol, 449

molluscicidal activity, 480

Molmol, 449

Monimiaceae, 91

Monk's Pepper, 36

monoamine oxidase inhibition, 119, 392, 551

monosaccharides, 48

monoterpene glycosides, 512

monoterpene hydrocarbons, 294

monoterpenes, 30, 31, 36, 72, 193, 241, 247, 354,

386, 386, 425, 437, 456, 500, SOL
monoterpenoids, 149
monotropein, 164, 165, 577
Moraceae, 354
Mossberry, 197
Motherwort, 447
motion sickness, see travel sickness
motor impairment, 58, 423
Mountain Hydrangea, 369
Mountain Tobacco, 64
mouth ulcers, 449
movement disorders, 397
mucilage polysaccharides, 409, 419
mucilages, in

borage, 96

buchu, 100

burdock, 102

calamus, 118

cassia, 130

cinnamon, 162

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

elecampane, 240

ispaghula, 374, 375

marshmallow, 419

milk thistle, 429

plantain, 474

sassafras, 518

slippery elm, 545
mucopolysaccharides, 374
mucosal secretion, 534
mucous colitis, 42
multi-infarct dementia, 303

----- PAGE 714 -----
multiple sclerosis, 252, 253, 535

mumps, 479

Murr, 449

muscle ache, 65

muscle relaxants, 393

muscular rheumatism, 89, 169

muscular weakness, 183

mustard oedema, 49

mutagenic activity, 134, 190, 291, 539

Mutelia officinalis, 425

Mycobacterium avium, 54

Mycobacterium phlei, 65

Mycobacterium smegmatis, 103, 173, 413, 426, 578,
609, 609

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 51, 283, 372

myoglobinuria, 397, 398

myopathy, 397, 398

myrcene, 31, 386

Myrica, 77

Myrica cerifera, 77

Myricaceae, 77

myricadiol, 77

myricetin, 31, 32, 215, 409, 577

myricitrin, 77, 577, 601

myristic acid, 45, 293

myristicin, 456, 457, 458, 518

myristoleic acid, 521

Myrrh, 449

Myrtaceae, 166, 247

Myrtilus niger, 79

Myrtocyan, 80

myxoedema, 273

LN]

naphthodianthrones, 550
naphthoquinones, 215
nasal congestion, treatment, 243
nasopharyngeal catarrh, 94

chronic, 42
Nasturtium armoracia, 367
nausea, 40

aloes, 52

aniseed, 59

apricot, 62

blue flag, 87

bogbean, 90

broom, 99

chamomile, Roman, 156

cinnamon, 162

elder, 238

eucalyptus, 248

false unicorn, 259

ginger, 296

lobelia, 417

pokeroot, 480

saw palmetto, 526
nausea, prevention, 294, 296
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 338
Neisseria meningitidis, 338
neochlorogenic acid, 61
neoherculin, 486, 487
neopancreatinum, 46
neoquassin, 491
neosilihermins, 429
Nepeta glechoma, 342
Nepeta hederacea, 342
nephritis, 51
nephroprotective properties, 431
nephrotoxic ingredients, 365, 470
Nerve Root, 403

nervous conditions
treatment, 391, 392
nervous eczema, 452
nervous excitability, 581
nervous system, 81
nervous tension, 379
treatment, 409
Nettle, 452
neuralgia, 126, 379, 551
neurological adverse effects, 397
neurological effects, 59
neurosedative activity
horehound, black, 359
neurosis, 447
neurotransmitters, 328
nicotinamide complex, 42
nicotinic acid, 261, 352
nicotinic-like action, 181
Night Blooming Cereus, 151
night vision improvement, 81
nitidine, 484, 486, 487
nobilin, 156, 157
noncyclic mastalgia, 251, 253
noradrenaline decrease, 119
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), 159
toxicity, 160
norephedrine, 243
norisoguaiacin, 159
norpseudoephedrine, 243
Northern Prickly Ash, 484
Northern Senega, 533
nortracheloside, 352
norwogenin-7,8-dimethylether, 570
NSAIDs
passionflower and, 466
numbness, 380

©

obesity, treatment, 273
Oenothera biennis, 251
oesophageal
ulcers, 413
a-oestradiol, 61
oestrogenic activity
alfalfa, 46
aniseed, 58, 59
cohosh, black, 171, 177
ginkgo, 303
hops, 355
pleurisy root, 477
red clover, 499
saw palmetto, 524
wild carrot, 594
oestrone, 61
oils, 96
oleanoic acid, 30, 31
oleanolic acid, 166, 237, 326, 342, 345, 352, 472,
512
oleic acid, 251, 429
oleo-gum resin, 72, 449
oleo-resin, 294, 354
Onagra biennis, 251
Onagraceae, 251
ophthalmic activity, 80
oral hygiene, 85
oral mucosa
inflammation, 449, 513
irritants, 419
oral rinses, 85
oral toxicity, 134
Orchidaceae, 403

Index

orexigenic properties, 103, 162
organic acids, 84

Oriental Ginseng, 325
orientin, 261, 461, 547
Ormenis nobilis, 156
orthochromene A, 382
Orthosiphon aristatus, 381
Orthosiphon spicatus, 381
Orthosiphon stamineus, 381
osteoarthritis, 211, 294, 296, 599
osthenol, 146

osthol, 53

otosenine, 407

oxalic acid, 45, 452, 596
oxindole alkaloids, 132
Oxycoccus macrocarpus, 197
Oxycoccus palustris, 197
oxypeucedanin, 456
oxysparteine, 98

oxytocic properties, 181, 262
Oyo, 389

cP)

Padang-Cassia, 162
paedatric uses, 19
PAF, 302, 307
pagoside, 208
Paigle, 195
Pale Psyllium, 374
Palmae, 521
palmidin, 506
palmidin C, 270
palmitic acid, 382
agrimony, 42
alfalfa, 45
angelica, 53
blue flag, 87
bogbean, 89
burdock, 102
calamus, 118
cohosh, black, 169
dandelion, 204
elder, 237
evening primrose, 251
ginger, 293
milk thistle, 429
palmitic acid ester, 121
Palo Santo, 344
palpitations, 62, 184
Panang Cinnamon, 162
Panax americanus, 325
Panax cuneatus, 325
Panax Ginseng, 325
Panax ginseng, 325
Panax notoginseng, 325
Panax pseudoginseng, 325
Panax quinquefolius, 325
Panax schin-seng, 325
Panax spp., 325
Panax versus, 325
panaxosides, 325, 327
panaxynol, 328
panaxytriol, 329
pancytopenia, 47
Papaveraceae, 84, 136
Papoose root, 180
Paprika, 125
paraffin, 185
Paraguay Tea, 421
paralysis, 62
stroke induced, 531

----- PAGE 715 -----
Index

parasiticides, 58
parillin, 516
Parsley, 456
excessive ingestion, 16
phototoxic reaction, 16
Parsley Piert, 459
parthenolide, 263, 264
parturition, 496
raspberry leaf and, 496
Pasque Flower, 489
Passiflora, 461
Passiflora edulis, 462
Passiflora incarnata, 461
Passifloraceae, 461, 462
Passion Vine, 461
Passionflower, 461
patuletin-3-rutinoside, 218
Peagle, 195
pectins, 79, 102, 193
Pedaliaceae, 207
pediculosis, 58
pelvic congestion, 51
Penicillium digitatum, 383
Penicillium notatum, 387
Penicillium spp., 160
Pennyroyal, 470
pentacyclic triterpenes, 159
peptic discomfort, 291
peptic ulcers, 46, 48, 189, 599
prophylaxis, 423

see also duodenal ulcers; gastric ulcers

treatment, 215, 423

hawthorn, 348

hydrocotyle, 372

kava, 391, 394

liquorice, 413

milk thistle, 433

passionflower, 465

saw palmetto, 524

St John's wort, 558

valerian, 583
pharyngitis, 449
phellandrene, 53, 518
phenelzine

ginseng, panax, and, 333
phenethyl glycosides, 256
phenolic acids, 30

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67

bilberry, 79

centaury, 149

chamomile, Roman, 156

euphorbia, 249

marshmallow, 419

sage, 512

wild lettuce, 596
phenolic alcohols, 409
phenolic esters, 409
phenolic glycosides, 201, 598
phenolics, 30, 159, 197, 423

phenols, 130, 162, 195, 367, 508, 574

phenyl pyrones, 50

phenylalanine, 45, 159, 268, 409

phenylethylamine, 346

Pilewort, 472
Pillbearing Spurge, 249
pilocarpine, 29
Pimpinella anisum, 57

pinene(s), 31, 36, 201, 386, 405, 409, 500, 501, 508,

518, 518, 580
Piper methysticum, 389
Piper sanctum, 391
Piper wichmanni, 391
Piper wichmannii, 389
Piperaceae, 389
piperidines, 29, 416
piperitenone, 470
piperitone, 31
pipermethystine, 390
piperonylacrolein, 518
piscerythrone, 379
Piscidia erythina, 379
Piscidia inebrians, 379
Piscidia piscipula, 379
Piscidia toxicaria, 379
piscidic acid, 169, 379
piscidin, 379
piscidone, 379
Plantaginaceae, 374, 474
Plantago asiatica, 474
Plantago lanceolata, 474
Plantago major, 474
Plantago ovata, 374
plantagonine, 374
Plantain, 474
Plasmodium falciparum, 173

perfumery products, 61 phenylethylisothiocyanate, 367 platelet aggregation, 81, 133, 296
perimenopausal symptoms, 169, 173 phenylpropanes, 29 inhibition, 252, 264, 281, 294, 393
peri-operative use, 20 phenylpropanoids, 72, 75, 118, 130, 168, 169, 208, platelet-activating factor (PAF), 186
peripheral blood 219, 219, 315, 316, 358, 437 antagonism, 302, 307
mononuclear cells, 221 phosphoric acid, 180, 452 platyphylline, 189
peripheral blood flow photodermatitis, 55, 560 pleurisy, 54, 477
insufficiency, 484, 486 photosensitisation, 373 Pleurisy Root, 477
peripheral occlusive disease, 306 St John's wort, 553, 559, 562 plumbagin, 215
peripheral vascular disease, 54 photosensitive allergic reaction, 55, 59, 147 Pocan, 479
peroxidases, 43, 67, 279 phototoxic dermatitis, 448, 458 Podophyllum hexandrum, 8
pertussis, 58, 72, 185, 575 phototoxic effects, 55, 186, 372, 594 poisoning
pesticides, 11 phthalides, 53, 54, 146 animal, 606
Petasites hybridus, 107 physcion, 506, 608 human
Petasites officinalis, 107 phytohaemagglutinin, 237 apricot, 62
Petasites ovatus, 107 Phytolacca acinosa, 480 arnica, 65
Petasites sabaudus, 107 Phytolacca americana, 479 broom, 99
Petasites vulgaris, 107 Phytolacca dodecandra, 479 chaparral, 160
Petroselinum crispun, 456 Phytolaccaceae, 479 cohosh, blue, 181
Petroselinum hortense, 456 phytolaccagenic acid, 479 comfrey, 189
Petroselinum peregrinum, 456 phytolaccagenin, 479, 480 elder, 238
Petroselinum sativum, 456 phytosterols, 188, 409 eucalyptus, 248
Petroselinum vulgare, 456 agrimony, 42 golden seal, 338
Peumus boldus, 91 arnica, 64 pokeroot, 480, 481
phagocytosis, 43, 49 artichoke, 67 pulsatilla, 490
stimulation, 450 burdock, 103 sage, 514
pharmacodynamics chamomile, Roman, 156 sassafras, 519
devil's claw, 210 cohosh, blue, 180 tansy, 573
garlic, 284 coltsfoot, 185 Pokeberry, 479
saw palmetto, 524 comfrey, 188 Pokeroot, 479, 13, 16
St John's wort, 554 holy thistle, 352 Pokeweed, 479
pharmacokinetics phytotherapy, 4 pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), 479

butterbur, 110, 112 picein, 500, S01
celandine, greater, 138 piceoside, 577

pokeweed mitogen (PWM), 479
polyacetylenes, 102, 217, 218, 222, 241, 352, 353

cohosh, black, 173
devil's claw, 210
echinacea, 223
ephedra, 244
garlic, 281, 284
ginkgo, 303
ginseng, panax, 327

Picrasma, 491
Picrasma excelsa, 491
picrasmin, 491
piles
internal, 137, 472
prolapsed, 472
see also haemorrhoids

polyenes, 102, 218, 220, 352
Polygala, 533

Polygala alpestris, 534
Polygala chamaebuxus, 534
Polygala comosa, 534
Polygala erioptera, 535
Polygala microphylla, 534

----- PAGE 716 -----
Polygala paniculata, 535
Polygala polygama, 534
Polygala senega, 533
Polygala spp., 533
Polygala tenuifolia, 533
Polygala triphylla, 534
Polygala vayredae, 534
Polygalaceae, 533
polygalic acid, 534
Polygonaceae, 506, 608
polyhydroxylated triterpenes, 132
polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration, 49
polyphenols, 36, 79, 132, 134, 425
polysaccharides, 437
aloe vera, 48
arnica, 64
boneset, 94
burdock, 102
calendula, 121
chamomile, German, 152
echinacea, 217, 218, 221
fucus, 273
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315
marshmallow, 419
senna, 537
pomolic acid, 105
pontica, 604
Poplar, 482
populin, 482
Populus Alba, 482
Populus nigra, 482
Populus spp., 599
Populus tremula, 482
Populus tremuloides, 482
Porphyromonas gingivitis, 513
positive inotropic activity, 151
postmastectomy lymphoedema, 123
postmenopausal symptoms, 169, 173
postviral fatigue, 252, 253
Pot Marigold, 121
potassium, 204, 452
potassium ion inhibition, 80
Poterium officinale, 105
pratensin, 498
pregnancy
see Introduction, Table 3
preleosibirin, 358
premarrubiin, 361
premenstrual syndrome, 38, 252, 253, 557
prenylated terpenoids, 550, S51
Prickly Ash
northern, 484
southern, 486
Prickly Comfrey, 188
primin, 195
Primula, 195
primula acid, 195
Primula officinalis, 195
Primula veris, 195
primulaveroside, 195
primulic acid, 195
primveroside, 195
proanthocyanidins, 31, 61, 195, 197, 198, 299, 386,
550
procumbid, 268
procumbide, 208
procyanidins, 134, 347
prolactin secretion
inhibition of, by agnus castus, 38
proline, 342, 541
prophylactic activity, 348
proscillaridin A, 547

prostaglandin thromboxane, inhibition, 264
prostatic hyperplasia, 522, 525
benign, see benign prostatic hyperplasia
prostatitis, 100
proteins, 125, 183, 260
Proteus, 283
Proteus hauseri, 186
Proteus mirabilis, 202, 283, 383, 432
Proteus spp., 353
Proteus vulgaris, 65, 186, 419, 424, 426
protoanemonin, 472, 473, 489, 490
protoberberines, 137, 276
protocatechuic acid, 30, 247
protopanaxadiol, 325, 326
protopanaxatriol, 325, 326
protopines, 137, 276, 277
Providencia, 283
Prunus armeniaca, 61
Prunus tiliifolia, 61
pruritus
treatment, 268
pseudoephedrine, 243, 244, 245
pseudoguaianolides, 30, 31
pseudohypericin, 551
pseudomelanosis coli, 539
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160, 186, 202, 283, 338,
383, 383, 419, 424, 432
Pseudomonas fluorescens, 509
Pseudomonas putida, 426
Pseudomonas solancearum, 147
pseudotannins, 195, 447
psoralen, 456, 457, 593
psoriasis, 48, 103, 164, 252, 372, 498, 516, 535
treatment, 268, 608
psychogenic asthma, 54
psychological symptoms, 173, 559
pteropodine, 132, 133
Pulegium parviflorum, 470
Pulegium vulgare, 470
pulegone, 100, 470
pulmonary infection, 367
pulmonary oedema, 59
Pulsatilla, 489
Pulsatilla nigricans, 489
Pulsatilla patens, 489
Pulsatilla pratensis, 489
Pulsatilla ucrainica, 489
Pulsatilla vulgaris, 489
purgative ingredients, 538, 608
Purple Boneset, 340
Purple Clover, 498
Purple Medick, 45
Pyrethrum parthenium, 263
Pyrethrum vulgare, 572
pyridines, 29, 45, 149, 260, 290, 580, 604
pyrocatechols, 188
2-pyrones, 389
pyrophosphates, 30
pyrrolic esters, 189
pyrrolidines, 29, 45, 361, 604
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 12, 108, 109, 186, 189, 190,
407, 407
pyrrolizidines, 29, 185, 188, 218, 232
toxicity, 189

@

Quackgrass, 193
Quaker Bonnet, 530
Quaker Comfrey, 188
Quaking Aspen, 482
quality assurance, 11

Index

Quassia, 491
Quassia amara, 491
Quassia excelsa, 491
quassin, 491
Queen Anne's Lace, 593
Queen of the Meadow, 423
Queen's Delight, 493
Queen's Root, 493
quercetagetin, 37
quercetin, 31, 32
bilberry, 79
bogbean, 89
buchu, 100
chamomile, Roman, 156
coltsfoot, 185
drosera, 215
elder, 237
euphorbia, 249
eyebright, 256
fenugreek, 261
ginkgo, 300
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
horse-chestnut, 363
hydrangea, 369
juniper, 386
lime flower, 409
maté, 421
milk thistle, 429
motherwort, 447
nettle, 452
red clover, 498
shepherd's purse, 541
squill, 547
uva-ursi, 577
wild carrot, 593
wild lettuce, 596
witch hazel, 601
quercetin glycosides, 31, 32, 237, 276
quercetin-3,7-diglucoside, 100
quercitin
mistletoe, 437
passionflower, 461
raspberry, 495
quercitrin, 31, 32, 42, 79, 247, 249, 256, 354, 447,
601, 601
quinic acid, 45, 197, 452
quinidine
cascara and, 129
quinine, 29
quinolines, 29
quinolizidines, 29, 168, 169, 180
quinones, 195, 215, 403, 577
quinovic acid glycosides, 132, 134

@

radiation burns, 48

Ragwort, Golden, 407
ramentaceone, 215

ramentone, 215

Ranunculaceae, 168, 337, 472, 489
ranunculin, 472, 489
Ranunculus, 472

Ranunculus ficaria, 136, 472
rapid eye movement (REM), 557
Raspberry, 495

raspberry ketone, 495
Rattlesnake Root, 533

Red Clover, 498

Red Ginseng, 325, 326

----- PAGE 717 -----
Index

Red Indian Paint, 84
red pigment, 183
Red Plant, 479
Red Root, 84
refrigerants, 162
regulatory controls on herbal medicines, 4
United Kingdom, 5, 6
World-wide, 7, 10
Ren Shen, 325
renal calculi, 340
renal disease, 253, 343, 388
renal failure, acute, 134
renal irritation, 101, 599
renal tubular acidosis, 231
reporting of adverse reactions, 22
reproductive capacity, 319
reproductive system pain, male/female, 489
resins
asafoetida, 72
avens, 75
bayberry, 77
bloodroot, 84
boldo, 91
boneset, 94
broom, 98
buchu, 100
burdock, 103
calamus, 118
capsicum, 128
cassia, 130
cereus, 151
chaparral, 159
cinnamon, 162
cohosh, blue, 180
dandelion, 205
elecampane, 240
eucalyptus, 247
euphorbia, 249
guaiacum, 344
motherwort, 447
myrrh, 449
respiratory allergy, 356
respiratory catarrh, 54, 479
respiratory depression, 417
respiratory stimulation, 184
respiratory tract
fluid increase, 58

rheumatism, treatment, 454
bilberry, 80
bogbean, 89
boldo, 91
burdock, 103
capsicum, 126
cat's claw, 132
celery, 147
chaparral, 159
pokeroot, 479
rheumatoid arthritis
aloe vera, 49
bogbean, 89
celery, 147
cohosh, black, 169
devil's claw, 210
evening primrose, 253
feverfew, 265
ginger, 294
guaiacum, 345
poplar, 482
willow, 598
rhinitis, allergic, 454
Rhizopus nigricans, 383
thodalidin, 500, 501
thodalin, 500, S01
Rhodiola, 500
Rhodiola rosea, 500
rhodiolgidin, 500
thodiolgin, 500
rhodionidin, 500, S01
rhodionin, 500, 501
rhodiosin, 500, 501
Rhodotorula, 283
Rhodotorula glutinis, 46, 509
Rhubarb, 506
thynchophylline, 132, 133
Robinia alata, 379
Rockweed, 273
Rodiola, 500
Roman Chamomile, 156
Rosaceae, 42, 75, 105, 346, 423, 459, 495
rosarin, 500, 501
rosavin, 500, S01
Rose root, 500
Rosemary, 508
rosin, 500, SOL

Rutaceae, 100, 484, 486

rutin, 29, 30, 31, 32
buchu, 100
cereus, 151
chamomile, Roman, 156
elder, 237
eucalyptus, 247
fumitory, 276
ground ivy, 342
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
horse-chestnut, 363
maté, 421
motherwort, 447
saw palmetto, 521

CS)

Sabal, 521

Sabal serrulata, 521

sabinene, 386

Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 426
Saccharomyces pastorianus, 383
sachaliside, 500, 501

safety of herbal ingredients, 11
safrole, 12, 162, 518

Sage, 512

Saigon Cassia, 162

Saigon Cinnamon, 162

salads, 96, 188, 205
Salicaceae, 482, 598

salicin, 423, 482, 599
salicortin, 482

salicylaldehyde, 130, 423
salicylates, 423, 598

salicylic acid, 42, 87, 89, 164, 169, 423, 533

salidroside, 500, S01
saligenin, 483, 599
Salishuria adiantifolia, 299
Salisburia biloba, 299
Salix, 598

Salix alba, 598

Salix fragilis, 598

Salix pentandra, 598

Salix purpurea, 598
Salmonella, 160, 283, 513, 583
Salmonella paratyphi, 338

infections, 219, 220, 223, 224, 225, 443, 482
restlessness, 195, 245, 355

rosiridin, 500, S01

Salmonella typhi, 147, 283, 322, 338
rosiridol, 500, 501

Salmonella typhimurium, 51, 65, 66, 103, 123, 432,

nervous, 463
reticuline, 91
Rhamnaceae, 128, 270
rhamnazin

mistletoe, 437
rhamnetin, 166
Rhamni Purshianae Cortex, 128
rhamnose, 188, 195, 409, 498
Rhamnus, 128
Rhamnus frangula, 270
Rhamnus purshiana, 128
rheidin, 506
thein, 506
Rheum officinale, 506
Rheum palmatum, 506
Rheum potaninii, 506
Rheum qinlingense, 506
Rheum tanguticum, 506
rheumatic ailments, 598
rheumatic diseases, 54, 371, 484, 486

treatment, 208, 482
rheumatic pains, 180, 518
rheumatic therapy, 452

rosmaricine, 509

rosmarinic acid, 188, 189, 425, 508, 510, 512

Rosmarinus laxiflorus, 508
Rosmarinus officinalis, 508
rossoliside, 215

rotenoids, 379

rotenone, 379, 380
rotundifarine, 30
rotundifuran, 36, 37
Round-leaved Sundew, 215
roundworm treatment, 240, 572
Rubbed Thyme, 574
Rubiaceae, 132, 164
rubichloric acid, 164
Rubus, 495

Rubus idaeus, 495
Rudbeckia hispida, 217
Rudbeckia pallida, 217
Rudbeckia purpurea, 217
Rudbeckia serotina, 217
Rumex crispus, 608
Rumex odontocarpus, 608
Russian Comfrey, 188

597, 597
Saloop, 518
Salvia lavandulifolia, 512
Salvia officinalis, 512
Sambucus, 237
Sambucus canadensis, 237
Sambucus formosana, 238
Sambucus nigra, 237
sambunigrin, 237
San Qi, 325
Sanchi Ginseng, 325
Sanguinaria, 84
Sanguinaria australis, 84
Sanguinaria canadensis, 84
Sanguinaria dilleniana, 84
sanguinarine, 84, 85, 138, 143
Sanguisorba, 105
Sanguisorba officinalis, 105
Sanguisorba polygama, 105
Sanguisorbin, 105
Sapium sylvaticum, 493
sapogenins, 325
Saponaria officinalis, 238

----- PAGE 718 -----
saponin glycosides, 371

saponin-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 19

saponins, 13, 30, 121, 137

Sarcina lutea, 531

Sarcinia lutea, 65

sarothamine, 98

Sarothaninus scoparius, 98

sarracine, 189

Sarsaparilla, 515

sarsaparilloside, 516

sarsasapogenin, 516

sarsasaponin, 516

sarsaspogenin, 610

Sassafras, 518, 16

Sassafras albidum, 518

Sassafras sassfras, 518

Saveéntaro, 132

Saw Palmetto, 521

Saxifragaceae, 369

Saxifrax, 518

scabies, 58

Scabwort, 240

scalds, treatment, 123

Scented Mayweed, 152

schaftoside, 461

schizophrenia, 253

sciatica, 169, 551

Scilla, 547

scillaren A and B, 547

scillicyanoside, 547

scilliglaucoside, 547

scoparin, 98

Scoparius, 98

scopoletin, 57, 64, 89, 156, 164, 367, 419, 452, 462,
491

scopoletin glucoside, 363

scopoletin-7-glucoside, see scopolin

scopolin, 29, 30, 363

Scrophularia, 268

Scrophularia nodosa, 268

Scrophulariaceae, 256, 268

Scullcap, 530, 16

scutellarein, 530

Scutellaria, 530

Scutellaria baicalensis, 530

Scutellaria lanceolaria, 530

Scutellaria lateriflora, 530

Scutellaria macrantha, 530

scutellarin, 530

Sea Onion, 547

seasonal affective disorder, 557

Seawrack, 273

secretolytic affect, 58

sedative activity, 153, 427

sedative ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 7

Sedum rosea, 500

Sedum roseum, 500

seizures, 59

Selenicereus grandiflorus, 151

Senecio aureus, 407

senecionine, 185, 186, 407

Senega, 533

Senega Root, 533

Senega Snakeroot, 533

senegin, 533

senegrin, 533

senkirkine, 185, 186

Senna, 537

Senna acutifolia, 537

Senna alexandrina, 537

Senna angustifolia, 537

sennidin, 506, 537
sennosides, 537, 538
septicaemia, 219
Serenoa, 521
Serenoa repens, 521
Serenoa serrulata, 521
serine, 371, 409, 474
serotonin, 452, 453, 543, 552
decrease, 119
sesquiterpene bisabolol compounds, 152, 153
sesquiterpene lactones, 30, 31, 64, 94, 108, 109, 205,
241, 241, 263, 265, 572, 596
sesquiterpene(s), 30, 31
artichoke, 67
asafoetida, 72
boneset, 94
burdock, 102
butterbur, 107, 109
calamus, 118
celery, 146
chamomile, German, 152, 153
dandelion, 205
eucalyptus, 247
ginger, 294
ginkgo, 299
holy thistle, 352
hops, 354
juniper, 386
melissa, 425
parsley, 456
valerian, 581
Seven Barks, 369
sexual dysfunction
antidepressant-related, 307, S61
sexual function
increased, 465
sexual inadequacy related depression, 327
Shan Ling Ma Huang, 243
shengmanol, 168, 170
Shepherd's Purse, 541
Shigella dysenteriae, 147, 338
Shigella flexneri, 103, 173, 578, 605, 609
Shigella sonnei, 103, 173, 426, 513, 578, 605,
609
shikimic acid, 29
shogaol, 294
Short Buchu, 100
Siberian Ginseng, 315
silandrin, 429, 430
silhermin, 429
silibinin, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433
silichristin, 430
silicic acid, 42, 188, 195, 452
silicon, 452
silidianin, 429, 430
silimonin, 429
silybin, 429, 430, 431
Silybum marianum, 429, 432
silychristin, 430
silymarin, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433
Simarouba excelsa, 491
Simaroubaceae, 491
similikilactone, 491
sinensetin, 382, 383
sinigrin, 29, 367, 541, 542
sinusitis, treatment, 243
sitosterols, 30, 31, 166, 240, 249, 521, 572
Sjégren's syndrome, 253
skin inflammation, 544, 601
skin reactions
butterbur, 113
chamomile, German, 154

Index

kava, 396
Skullcap, 530
Skunk Cabbage, 543
sleep disorders, 355, 425, 464, 581, 583

see also insomnia
sleep disturbance, 427
sleep induction, 391, 392
sleeplessness, 184, 422
Slippery Elm, 545
Small Pasque Flower, 489
Smallage, 146
Small-leaved Lime, 409
Smilacaceae, 515
smilacin, 516
smilagenin, 516
Smilax febrifuga, 515
Smilax ornata, 515
Smilax purhampuy, 515
Smilax regelii, 515
smoking cessation

St John's wort, 556
Smooth Hydrangea, 369
smooth muscle

contraction, 250, 283

relaxation, 184, 240, 244, 283

stimulation, 181, 542
Snake Root, 533
Snakeroot, 94
Snakeweed, 249
sodium retention, 78
Solanaceae, 125
Somali Myrrh, 449
somatic symptoms, 173
sore throat, acute, 42
soups, 96, 188, 205, 452
Southern Bayberry, 77
Southern Prickly Ash, 486
Southern Wax Myrtle, 77
soyasapogenin, 45
sparteine, 29, 98, 99
Spartium scoparium, 98
spasmolytic activity, 84, 118, 119, 522, 523
speciophylline, 132, 133
sperm, and echinacea, 232
spices, 57, 125, 162, 294
a-spinasterol, 89
spirobenzoquinolines, 276
Spogel, 374
sprains, 64
sputum

scanty, 547

viscosity, 535
Squaw Mint, 470
Squaw root, 180
Squaw Weed, 407
Squill, 547
St Bartholomew's Tea, 421
St John's Wort, 549

drug interactions, 21

valerian, combination, 586
St Mary's Thistle, 429
stachydrine, 447, 604
stachyose, 207, 474
Staphylococcus albus, 147, 509
Staphylococcus aureus

agrimony, 43

arnica, 65

bilberry, 81

burdock, 103

celery, 147

chaparral, 160

cohosh, black, 173

----- PAGE 719 -----
Index

Staphylococcus aureus (cont.)
coltsfoot, 186
damiana, 202
garlic, 283
holy thistle, 353
java tea, 383
liquorice, 413
marshmallow, 419
meadowsweet, 424
melissa, 426
methicillin-resistant (MRSA), 283
milk thistle, 432
plantain, 475
rosemary, 509
sculleap, 531
St John's wort, 553
uva-ursi, 578
yarrow, 605
yellow dock, 609
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 424
Staphylococcus spp., 283, 338
starch, 77, 84, 118, 180, 201, 293
Starflower oil, 96, 97
Starwort, 258
stearic acid, 42, 87, 102, 251, 293
stenosis, 271, 539
Sterculia acuminata, 183
Sterculiaceae, 183
steroidal activity, 319, 411
steroidal sapogenins, 261
steroids, 45, 132, 342, 344, 352, 449, 521, 572
kava, 390
sterols, 94, 240, 249, 429
Stigma Maydis, 191
stigmasterols, 30, 31, 166, 188, 240, 249, 429,
572
Stillingia, 493
stillingia factors, 493
Stillingia sylvatica, 493
stimulants, 126, 180
Stinging Nettle, 452
stomach cramps, 54
stomach pains, severe, 181
stomatitis, 167, 512
Stone Root, 570
Streptococcus faecalis, 147, 283, 353
Streptococcus haemolyticus, 432
Streptococcus mutans, 383, 594
Streptococcus pyogenes, 147, 553
Streptococcus spp., 160, 338, 578
stress resistance, 317, 327
stroke
acute ischaemic, 307
substitution/adulteration, 8
sugars, 94, 98, 102, 118, 130, 162, 183, 249
Sundew, 215
Surinam Quassia, 491
swallow wort, 136
Sweet Balm, 425
Sweet False Chamomile, 152
Sweet Flag, 118
sweroside, 89, 149
swertiamarin, 149
swertiamarine, 290
swertisin, 461
symlandine, 188
sympathomimetic ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
symphytine, 29, 188
Symphytum asperum, 188
Symphytum officinale, 188
Symphytum Radix, 188

Symphytum uplandicum, 188

Symplocarpus foetidus, 543

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 47, 134
SLE-like syndrome, 46

Syzygium aromaticum, 166

Syzygium cuminii, 167

oO

T. x europaea, 409
Tabasco Pepper, 125
tachycardia, 245
tamoxifen

cohosh, black, and, 177
Tanacetum, 572
Tanacetum audibertii, 572
Tanacetum parthenium, 263
Tanacetum vulgare, 572
tannic acid, 94, 185, 403
tannin-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,

Table 20

tannins, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36
Tansy, 572
taraxacoside, 204
Taraxacum, 204
Taraxacum officinale, 204
Taraxacum palustre, 204
taraxerol, 77, 249
taraxerone, 77
tartaric acid, 185, 379
Tasmanian Bluegum, 247
taxanes, 30, 31
taxifolin, 429, 430, 547
tendonitis, 208
terpene aldehydes, 456
terpene lactones, 301
terpenes, 30, 159, 279, 405, 409, 512
terpenoids, constituents of

arnica, 64

bayberry, 77

boneset, 94

calendula, 121

cohosh, black, 168, 170

dandelion, 205

elecampane, 240

ephedra, 243

euphorbia, 249

feverfew, 263

ginkgo, 299

ginseng, panax, 325

ground ivy, 342

guaiacum, 345

hops, 354

horehound, white, 361

hydrocotyle, 371

liquorice, 411

motherwort, 447

myrrh, 449

quassia, 491

queen's delight, 493

rosemary, 508

senega, 533

tansy, 572

uva-ursi, 577

wild lettuce, 596

yucca, 610
terpinen-4-ol, 243, 386, 387, 593, 594, 604
terpinene, 386, 574
terpineol, 31, 243, 405, 409, 530
tetrahydroalstonine, 133
tetramethoxyflavones, 382, 383
tetramethylscutellarein, 382, 383

tetraphyllin B, 201
tetrochrysin, 570
Tetterwort, 84
Teucrium spp., 16, 531
theobromine, 183, 184, 421
theophylline, 421
thiamine, 42
thiazide diuretics, 52
cascara and, 129
senna and, 539
thioacrolein, 280
thiophenes, 102
Thoroughwort, 94
threadworm treatment, 240, 572
threonine, 45, 268
throat irritation, 88
thrombotic conditions, 605
thujone(s), 31, 512, 518, 572, 604
Thyme, 574
thymol, 201, 574
thymoleptic properties, 183
thymonin, 574
Thymus aestivus, 574
Thymus ilerdensis, 574
Thymus melissa, 425
Thymus sabulicola, 574
Thymus sylvestris, 574
Thymus valentinus, 574
Thymus vulgaris, 574
Thymus webbianus, 574
Thymus welwitschii, 574
Thymus zygis, 574
thyroid disease, 245
Tienchi Ginseng, 325
tiglianes, 30, 31
tiglic acid esters, 156
tigogenin, 610
Tilia x vulgaris, 409
Tilia cordata, 409
Tilia officinarum, 409
Tilia parvifolia, 409
Tilia platyphyllos, 409
Tilia ulmifolia, 409
Tiliaceae, 409
tiliroside, 409
Tinnevelly Senna, 537
tinnitus, 169, 306, 578
vascular origin, 300
tissue inflammation, 367
tonsilitis, 479
toothache, 166
Toothache Bark, 484, 486
Toothache-tree, 484
toothpastes, 85
Torulopsis glabrata, 513
Torulopsis spp., 46, 283
Touch-Me-Not, 315
toxic constituents, 12
toxic elements, 9
toxic metals, 11
tracheitis, 58
trachelogenin, 352
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), 54
trans-anethole, 57, 59, 193, 462
travel sickness, 153, 294
Trefoil, 498
tremors, 184, 422
tremulacin, 599
Treponema pallidum, 338
Trichomonas, 85
Trichomonas vaginalis, 338
Trichophyton, 283

----- PAGE 720 -----
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 65, 383
Trichosporon, 283
tricin, 193
trifolioside, 89
Trifolium borysthenicum, 498
Trifolium bracteatum, 498
Trifolium lenkoranicum, 498
Trifolium pratense, 498
Trifolium repens, 498
Trifolium ukrainicum, 498
trifoside, 498
trigalloyl glucose, 33
Trigonella foenum-graecum, 260
Trigonella upendrae, 45
trigonelline, 260, 261, 604
trimethylamine, 64
triterpene glycosides, 180
triterpene hydrocarbons, 152
triterpenes, 31
triterpenes, in, 30

agrimony, 42

boneset, 94

cat's claw, 134

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 205

elder, 237

elecampane, 241

euphorbia, 249

ginkgo, 299

hydrocotyle, 371

pokeroot, 479

pulsatilla, 489

sage, 512

stone root, 570
triterpenoids, 123, 149, 315, 317, 352, 472
Triticum, 193
Triticum repens, 193
tropanes, 29
True Cinnamon, 162
True Sage, 512
tryptophan, 45, 159, 260, 299, 474
Tu Mu Xiang, 240
tuberculosis, 159
tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 221, 232, 393
tumour-promoting activity, 163
turicin, 447
Turnera apbrodisiaca, 201
Turnera diffusa, 201
Turneraceae, 201
tussilagine, 185, 186
Tussilago farfara, 185
tussilagone, 185, 186
Twitch, 193
Twitchgrass, 193
tyramine, 151
tyrosine, 159, 268, 342
tyrosol, 500, 501

CU)

ulcerative colitis, 52, 105, 271, 539
Ulmaceae, 545

Ulmus fulva, 545

Ulmus rubra, 545

Umbelliferae, 53, 57, 146, 371, 456, 593
umbelliferone, 57, 64, 152, 153, 164, 369, 411, 462
umbelliprenine, 57

Umbrella Plant, 107

Uncaria guianensis, 132

Uncaria tomentosa, 132

uncarine F, 132, 133

United Kingdom regulatory controls, 5, 6
licensed products, 6
licensing-exempt remedies, 6

Urginea, 547

Urginea indica, 547, 548

Urginea maritima, 547

Urginea scilla, 547, 548

urinary antiseptic, 541, 577, 605

urinary calculi, 369, 593

urinary gravel, 593

urinary incontinence, 42

urinary porphyrins, 43

urinary system inflammation
acute, 191
chronic, 191

urinary tract infection, 193, 197, 452
prevention, 198
treatment, 199

urinary tract pain, 108

uronic acid, 185

ursolic acid, 30, 31, 237, 342, 421, 447, 474

Urtica, 452

Urtica dioica, 452

Urticaceae, 452

urticin, 453

uterine atony, 180

uterine colic, 169

uterine contraction, 54, 99

uterine depressants, 490

uterine relaxation, 54

uterine stimulants, 103, 126, 490

uterotonic activity
herbal remedies affecting

angelica, 54
calendula, 122
cohosh, blue, 180
comfrey, 189
liferoot, 407
motherwort, 448
in pregnancy, 19
Uva-Ursi, 577
Unia de gato, 132

@

Vaccinium macrocarpon, 197
Vaccinium myrtillus, 79
Vaccinium oxycoccus, 197
valepotriates, 580, 581, 582
valerenic acid, 582

Valerian, 580

Valeriana officinalis, 427, 578, 580
Valeriana wallichi, 583
Valerianaceae, 580

valerianine, 580

valerine, 371, 580

valine, 45, 159, 237, 256, 268, 342
valtrates, 580, 581

vanillic acid, 30

varicose veins, 122, 601

vascular disorders, 81
vasodilatory properties, 252, 362
venereal disease, 159

venous insufficiency, chronic, 306, 363, 364
venous tone, 363

venous ulcers, 306

ventricular tachycardia, 269
Veratrum luteum, 258
verbascoside, 219, 591

Verbena, 591

Verbena citriodora, 405

Verbena officinalis, 591

Index

Verbena triphylla, 405
Verbenaceae, 405, 591
verbenalin, 591
verbenin, 591
vertigo, 99, 300, 526
Vervain, 591
vesicular calculi, 340
Vibrio, 283
Vibrio cholerae, 147, 283, 338, 509
vimalin, 500
vinyldithiines, 279, 280
viral infections, 253
Virginian Witch Hazel, 601
viscotoxins, 12, 437, 438
Viscum, 436
Viscum album, 436
visual disorders, 307
visual disturbances, 398
vitality, 317
vitamin A, 125, 205
vitamin C, 42, 79, 105, 125, 215, 386, 423, 474, 495,
604, 604
vitamin K, 42, 541
vitamin(s), 42, 45, 46, 166
Vitex agnus-castus, 36
vitexilactone, 36, 37
vitexin, 98, 261, 461, 547
glycosides, 346, 347
vitexlactam, 36, 37
volatile oils
in pregnancy, 19
vomiting
aloes contra-indication, 52
herbal remedies causing/side-effect
aniseed, 59
apricot, 62
blue flag, 87
bogbean, 90
elder, 238
false unicorn, 258
lobelia, 417
pokeroot, 480
squill, 548
herbal remedies preventing, 296
ginger, 294, 296
herbal remedies treating,
chamomile, Roman, 156
horehound, black, 358
pregnancy, 156, 258
vulgarol, 361
vulnerary properties, 188

W)

Wacholderbeeren, 386
Waghi, 389

water retention, 78

Wati, 389

Wax Myrtle Bark, 77
waxes, 94, 98, 149, 247, 447
West Indian Dogwood, 379
whipworm treatment, 240
White Ginseng, 325, 326
White Horehound, 361
White Poplar, 482

White Squill, 547
whooping cough, 169, 361, 575
whortleberry, 79

Wild Carrot, 593

Wild Celery, 146

Wild Chamomile, 152

Wild Hydrangea, 369

----- PAGE 721 -----
Index

Wild Lettuce, 596
Wild Pepper, 315
Willow, 598
Witch Hazel, 601
Wolf's Bane, 64
Wood Avens, 75
Wood Spider, 207

Working Group on Herbal Medicinal Products

(HMPWG), 4

World Health Organization (WHO), 7

World-wide regulatory controls
authenticity of ingredients, 10, 7
efficacy, 7
quality control, 8
regulated products, 10

reproducibility of ingredients, 10

safety, 7
unregulated products, 8

World Health Organization (WHO), 7
wound healing, 48, 80, 154, 189, 222

@

xanthines, 29, 183, 184, 421, 422
xanthohumol, 354
xanthones, 149, 290, 291, 533

xanthorhamnin, 249

Xanthorhiza simplicissima, 337
Xanthorrhoaceae, 48
Xanthorrhoeaceae, 50
xanthotoxin, 53

xanthoxyletin, 484

Xanthoxylum, 484, 486
xanthyletin, 484

xyloglucan, 218

xylose, 48, 188, 195, 374, 449, 498

LY)

yamogenin, 261
yangonin, 391, 392

Yao Yong Da Huang, 506
Yarrow, 604

Yaw Root, 493

Yellow Dock, 608

Yellow Gentian, 290
Yellow Root, 337

Yellow Starwort, 240
Yemen Myrrh, 449

Yerba Maté, 421

Yin Xing, 299

Yin Xing Ye, 299

Yucca, 610
Yucca arborescens, 610
Yucca brevifolia, 610
Yucca glauca, 610
Yucca mohavensis, 610
Yucca schidigera, 610

@

Zanthoxylum, 484, 486
Zanthoxylum americana, 484
Zanthoxylum clava-herculis, 486
Zea, 191

Zea mays, 191

Zhang Ye Da Huang, 506
Zhong Ma Huang, 243
Zimbro, 386

zingerone, 294

Zingiber, 293

Zingiber officinale, 293
Zingiberaceae, 293
zingiberene, 294

ziyu glycosides, 105
Zygophyllaceae, 159, 344


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Common_Medicinal_Plants_their_uses.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
COMMON MEDICINAL PLANTS

AND THEIR USE

AYUSHMAN BHARAT
AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres

aeria Faa

MINISTRY OF AYUSH

Government of India

----- PAGE 2 -----


----- PAGE 3 -----
COMMON MEDICINAL PLANTS

AND THEIR USE

AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres

wera ad

MINISTRY OF AYUSH

Government of India

----- PAGE 4 -----
© Ministry of AYUSH,
Government of India,
New Delhi, 2020

Disclaimer: All possible efforts have been made to ensure the correctness
of the contents. However, the Ministry of AYUSH shall not be accountable
for any inadvertent error in the contents. Corrective measures shall be
taken up once such errors are brought to notice.

Publisher : Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, New Delhi
http://ayush.gov.in/

Printed at: Chauhan Art Press
Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005

----- PAGE 5 -----
1. Background 01
2. General Instructions 02
3. Amalaki Phyllanthus emblica L. 05
4. Ashvagandha Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal | 07
5. Bala Sida cordifolia L. 09
6. Brahmi Bacopa monnieri (L.) Pennel 11
7. Guduchi Tinospora cordifolia

(Thunb.) Miers 13
8. Haridra Curcuma longa L. 15
9. Kumari Aloe barbadensis Mill 17
10. | Mandukparni Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. 19
11. | Nimba Azadiracta india A. Juss. 21
12. | Nirgundi Vitex negundo L. 23
13. | Punarnava Boerhavia diffusa L. 25
14. | Shatavari Asparagus racemosus Willd. 27
15. | Shigru Moringa oleifera Lam. 29
16. | Shunthi Zinziber officinale Roscoe. 32
17. | Tulasi Ocimum tenuiflorum L. 34
18. | Vasa Justicia adhatoda L. 36

L 19. | Acknowledgement 39 J

----- PAGE 6 -----


----- PAGE 7 -----
Background

Growing plants around the house has multi- dimensional
benefits as they have enormous potential in the prevention and
treatment of various ailments. Apart from this, plants provide
basic nutritional requirement in the form of food ingredients.
Plants also keep the environment clean by improving the air
quality. Growing plants helps in preserving indigenous
knowledge, culture and if taken up on a large scale, can also
empower women, take care of livestock and poultry activities.

Indiscriminate collection from natural habitat has adversely
affected availability of plants. Adulteration is common in the
herbal material procured from market and their identification
needs expertise and scientific tools. Therefore, cultivation of
some essential and easy to grow plants in the house hold is
always beneficial for the conservation of plants and appropriate
use.

So as to empower the community with the basic knowledge
of medicinal plants, this booklet has been prepared focusing on
16 useful plants which can be easily grown in the gardens, parks
orevenin the pots. The booklet covers the general description of
the plants, their medicinal uses and method of cultivation.

Home Remedies

Home remedy is a simple medication prepared at home by
using herbs available in the region or other ingredients available
in the house like spices. Use of home remedies is prevalent in
every parts of the country as they are also cost effective.

----- PAGE 8 -----
General Instruction

The home remedies are generally safe but may give rise to side
effects if not used properly. Therefore the following instructions
should be read carefully, under stood and followed by the user.

* Home remedies are meant for prevention of diseases and
management of simple and minor illnesses like common cold,
cough, loss of appetite, indigestion and to aid recovery from
illnesses etc.

¢ Sometimes, the home remedies are also useful in chronic
problems suchas osteoarthritis.

* Home remedies cannot replace a standard treatment and can be
used as add on only. The attending physician should be always
informed about the home remedy used by the patient.

* Home remedies should not be used in major diseases such as
cancer, serious or life threatening conditions as a main course of
treatment.

* Avoid any internal medication when a person is unconscious,
not even through the nose. It may enter airway and can cause
sudden death.

* These home remedies should not be given to the child below 1
year of age, unless advised by a qualified AYUSH physician.

* The medicines mentioned in this booklet are generally
considered safe; however, in case of any discomfort it should be
stopped immediately and reported to a qualified physician.

* Use of right ingredient will give the desired result and therefore

ensure proper identification of herb.

¢ The plants from footpath, burial grounds, dump-yards, drain-
sides, industrial belt & other polluted area should be avoided.

* The plant should be properly washed and dried in shade if
required.

----- PAGE 9 -----
It should be stored in airtight container and freshness shold be
ensured before use.

Utmost care should be given to old, sick persons, children,
pregnant women while administrating these simple home
remedies.

Do not cause damage to the whole plant and encourage
replacement while plucking it.

Collection of plant materials should be done in proper season to
ensure maturity and minimal damage to plant.

Encourage the use of weeds (like touch me not) and plant wastes
(pomegranate fruit coat, rose petals).

The dose mentioned in the booklet is for adult, while advising
for children it must be 2 or %4 of this adult dose.

The dosage may be adjusted with little alterations according
need.

General Measurements
5gm = 1Teaspoon full
5ml = 1Teaspoon full

General Dosage
Fresh juice- ¥2 to 2 tea spoons
Decoction- ¥2to 1 cup
Hotand cold infusion- ¥2to 1 cup
Powder-1to3 gm
Paste-1-3 gm

Oils are generally recommended for external use as home
remedy.

----- PAGE 10 -----
Frequency of these simple medications is generally 2 to 3 times a
day, may be more frequently in cough, vomiting, dyspnoea,
diarrhea etc.

The duration may be as required or advised by the physician or
till the symptoms subside.

In case of combined use/ add on, a minimum gap of 30 minutes
should be kept to avoid drug interaction.

The home remedies may be taken along with water, milk, butter
milk, honey, ghee, rock salt as desired or as advised.

Juice should be prepared by crushing with stones/pestle or
grinding in mixture with little water if required and the juice
should be strained through a clean cloth/ strainer.

Decoction should be prepared by boiling crushed/coarsely
powdered drug in water.

Paste should be prepared by crushing/ grinding the drug very
finely with desired liquid if required.

It is advisable to take only one or two home remedies mentioned
in the booklet at a time.

The person should be immediately referred to a medical facility
if the condition is serious like acute pain, high fever, respiratory
distress, unconscious, uncontrolled bleeding, tumors, ulcers,
chronic cough, unexplained weight loss etc. and in case of
suspected major ailment.

----- PAGE 11 -----
1. Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica L.)

> Local name : Amla (Hindi)
Indian Gooseberry (English)

> Habitat: All over India
> Part used: Fruit

> General description

Amla is a medium sized deciduous ~
plant. It grows to a height of 8 -18 meters. It has a crooked trunk and
spreading branches. Its flower is yellow-greenish in color. The fruit
is spherical pale yellow with six vertical furrows. It has gray bark
and reddish wood. Its leaves are feathery, linear-oblong in shape
and have peculiar smell. Its wood is hard in texture. It wraps and
splits when exposed to the sun or in excessive heat.

> Uses

1. Enhancing immunity: The fruit is useful in the form of juice,
powder, food recipe or as part of formulation in enhancing
immunity against diseases.

2. Urinary problems: 10 to 20 ml of fresh juice of Amalaki with
jaggery is beneficial in burning micturition.
3. Reproductive problems: Fresh juice of Amalaki or powder is

useful in menorrhagia and leucorrhoea.

4. Diabetes / Prediabetes: Powder of Amalaki and turmeric (2-
4gm each in equal quantity) with water will be an effective
rernedy.

5. Anemia: Juice of Amalaki is beneficial.

6. Acid peptic disorder: Amalaki powder (2gm-3gm) with warm
water will help in hyperacidity.

----- PAGE 12 -----
Constipations: 5 to 10 gm of Amalaki powder taken with warm
water during bedtime is useful in relieving constipation.

Cosmetics: Amla boiled with any oil is used traditionally for the
treatment of dandruff and hair loss.

Food recipes

Amla murabba: Boiled Amla pieces are soaked in sugar or
jaggery syrup and flavored with cardamom. This easy recipe is
suitable for everyday use to boost immunity and to manage
health issues mentioned above. This preparation is not
recommended for diabetics due to presence of sugar jaggery.

Amla chutney: Amla along with fennel seeds, chillies salt and
other spices as per the choice are grounded in coconut.

Amla pickle: Boil the Amla with salt and water till it becomes
tender, drain the water. Heat some oil and add mustard seeds,
asafoetida and chilli powder. Mix well and add Ami. Stir till
mixed well and excess water gets fully evaporated.

Precautions

Intake in excessive quantity may result in loose motion.
Mode of propagation

Itis propagated by seeds as well as by stem cuttings.

When the stem divisions are used as the planting material, the
selected division should have 3-4 nodes. 100% sprouting will be
seen in7-10 days. Planting may be done in the month of June.

Or

Collect the fresh seeds during February-March. Sow them on
nursery beds or directly in the fields. 60% of germination would
be obtained within 10 days.

Ayurvedic formulations

Chyawanprash, Triphala Churna, Amalaki Churna.

----- PAGE 13 -----
2. Ashwagandha
(Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal)

Local name: Asgandh (Hindi)
Indian Ginseng, Winter Cherry
(English)

Habitat: All over India

Part used : Whole plant,
mainly root

General description

Ashwagandha is native to drier parts of India. It is a perennial
herb that is short, tender, growing 35-75 cm tall. Velvet-hairy
branches extend radially from a central stem. Leaves are dull
green, elliptic, usually up to 10-12 cm long. The flowers are
small, green and bell-shaped. Orange fruits in persistent papery
sepals follow the small greenish flowers.

Uses
Fatigue: Ashwagandha powder (2gm-6gm) with milk or ghee is
useful in general weakness.

Insomnia: Ashwagandha powder (2gm-3gm) with sugar/
milk/ cow's ghee is useful in sleeplessness anxiety & depression.

Neurological/ degenerative problems: Ashwagandha powder
(2gm-6gm) boiled with milk is useful in neurological problems
and degenerative arthritis.

Food recipes

Ashwagandha tea: Mix 12 cup milk, % cup water and 1 teaspoon
Ashwagandha powder together and boil. Add the cardamom
and honey and drink it twice ina day. Milk can be added in place

of water.

----- PAGE 14 -----
> Precautions
Over dose can cause diarrhoea, stomach upset and vomiting.
> Mode of propagation

Ashwagandha is propagated by division, cuttings or seed. It
prefers dry stony soil with sun to partial shade. Seed is the best
way to propagate Ashwagandha. It can be grown from seeds in
the early spring or from greenwood cuttings in the later spring.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Ashwagandha Powder, Ashwagandharistha.

----- PAGE 15 -----
3. Bala (Sida cordifolia L.)

Local name: Khareeti (Hindi)

Habitat : Throughout the tropical
and sub-tropical plains of India

Part used: Whole plant,
especially root

General description Le

-e
Bala is an erect perennial plant that reaches 50 to 200 cm tall. The
stems are yellow-green, hairy, long, and slender. The yellow-
green leaves are oblong-ovate, covered with hairs, and 3.5 to 7.5
cm (1.4 to 3.0 in) long and 2.5 to 6 cm (0.98 to 2.36 in) wide. The
flowers are dark yellow, sometimes with a darker orange center,
witha hairy 5-lobed calyx and 5-lobed corolla.

Uses

Neurological / degenerative problems: Decoction of Bala (whole
plant) for internal use and oil for local application are
recommended. Oil can be prepared by boiling the Bala paste in
sesame oil. Use of this oil is indicated for massage, internal use
and for therapeutic enema also.

Leucorrhea: Root powder (2gm-3gm) with milk is useful.
Precautions

Dizziness, restlessness, irritability, insomnia, headache, lack of
appetite, nausea, vomiting, flushing, tingling, difficulty in
urinating and pounding heartbeat may happen if taken in access
quantity.

Use of Bala with other stimulants such as caffeine is
contraindicated. This might increase the chance of having side

effects.

----- PAGE 16 -----
Mode of propagation

The plant is propagated through seeds and root suckers. It
prefers clay damp soils under shade conditions.

Collect the mature seeds from well-grown plants. Dry them and
soak in water for 24 hours. Sow the seeds in raised beds during
rainy season since water logging would be injurious to the
seedling. In other seasons you could sow the seeds in sunken
beds. In 6-7 days, 80-90% germination is obtained.

For vegetative propagation, plant the root suckers in small pits,
cover with loose soil and allow for sprouting. Transplant the
seedlings when they have at least 4 leaves.

Ayurvedic formulations

Balarishtha, Dashamularistha, Bala Taila.

----- PAGE 17 -----
4. Brahmi
(Bacopa monnieri (L.) Pennel)

Local name : Brahmi (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India,
particularly in marshy land

Part used: Whole plant

General description

Brahmiisa perennial, creeping herb
widely grown in wetlands and
muddy shores. The leaves of this plant are succulent and
relatively thick and are arranged oppositely on the stem. Small
flowers are borne in leaf axils. Flowers are blue, purple, or white,
8-10 mm, obscurely 2-lipped. Seeds are yellow-brown, ellipsoid,
truncate at one end, longitudinally channeled. Flowering occurs
during May-October.

Uses

Memory enhancer - 8 to 10 crushed fresh leaves or 3 gm powder
of Brahmi in water taken with sugar and milk improves learning
skills and memory.

Mental fatigue - Juice of Brahmi leaves 1-2 spoons with ghee and
honey taken twice daily controls mental stress and anxiety.

High blood pressure - One spoon of Brahmi juice taken twice
daily helps in lowering high blood pressure.

Epilepsy - 20 ml Brahmi juice with milk or boiled with cow's
ghee, taken twice daily is beneficial in epilepsy (as add on to
regular medication).

----- PAGE 18 -----
Food recipes

Brahmi chutney: Heat the oil, add black gram, bengal gram, red
chillies, curry leaves and asafetida. Fry them till the grams turn
golden brown in color. Transfer roasted and cooled masala to a
blender/ mixer. Add salt, tamarind, grated coconut and Brahmi
leaves, grind to a smooth consistency by adding water.

Precautions: Consult the physician for long term use or in case of
specific health problems.

Mode of propagation

It is propagated mainly by stem cuttings but sometimes it can
also be propagated by seeds.

For vegetative propagation, cut the whole plant into small units
with 4-6 nodes each.

Dip the cuttings in cow dung slurry to ensure better rooting.

Plant these stem cuttings directly in the field. Use marshy open
fields for the cultivation of the plant.

It grows faster in the high temperature (33- 42 Degree Celsius)
and humidity (65 -80%). It prefers wet spots. It is grown in the
pots in the house garden. It requires water from time to time as
its roots are shallow.

Ayurvedic formulations

Brahmi Rasayana, Brahmyadi Ghrita.

----- PAGE 19 -----
5. Guduchi
(Tinospora cordifolia (Thunb.) Miers)

> Local name: Giloy (Hindi)
> Habitat: All over India
> Partused:Stemand leaves

> General description

It is a large, deciduous, extensively-
spreading, climbing shrub with
several elongated twining branches. Leaves are simple, heart

shaped with long petioles. Fruits aggregate in clusters of one to
three and are orange in color.

> Uses

1. Fever -Decoction (30ml) of Guduchi stem is useful in all types of
fever including prevention and treatment of dengue, malaria,
chikungunya flue like symptoms.

2. Enhances immunity - Decoction of stem (40ml) taken every day
alongwith the standard treatment is good in immune deficiency
conditions like AIDS, tuberculosis and even cancer. The
decoction is used for prevention of seasonal infections.

3. Diabetes- The stem of Tinospora cordifolia is widely used in the
therapy of diabetes for regulating blood glucose.

4. Joint pain- Single or synergistic formulations of Tinospora
cordifolia with ginger has been used in treatment of all types of
arthritis including the sequel of viral fever.

> Precautions

Over dose may cause palpitation and discomfort in the chest.

----- PAGE 20 -----
Intake should be immediately stopped and should consult a
physician immediately.

Mode of propagation

The plant is propagated either through seeds or through cuttings
but the best way is through cuttings. Plant is raised through stem
cuttings having nodes/seeds sown directly in ground or ina pot
of adequate size. Plant requires support to grow, which can be
provided by raising rope, stick etc. The Climber needs watering
once in 2-3 days. Thereafter, occasional watering as per the
requirement will help the plant to survive in adverse conditions.

Ayurvedic formulations

Amritarista, Guduchyadi Kwatha.

----- PAGE 21 -----
6. Haridra (Curcuma longa L.)

Local name : Haldi (Hindi),
Turmeric (English)

Habitat : Cultivated all over India

Parts used: Rhizome
(underground stem)

General description : Haridra is a |

herb, it reaches up to 1 m tall.
Highly branched, yellow to orange,
cylindrical, aromatic rhizomes are found. The leaves are
alternate and arranged in two rows. They are divided into leaf
sheath, petiole, and leaf blade. The petiole is 50 to 115 cm long.
The simple leaf blades are usually 76 to 115 cm long and rarely
up to 230 cm. They have a width of 38 to 45cm and are oblong to
elliptical, narrowing at the tip.

Uses

Multiple benefits: hepato-protective, blood-purifier,
antioxidant, antiallergic, and reduces high cholesterol.

Diabetes /Prediabetes : Powder of Amalaki and Haridra (2-4gm
each in equal quantity) with water.

Seasonal allergy / Influenza : 2 to 3 gm of powder with warm
milk twiceaday.

Skin diseases and wounds : Powder mixed with water or oil for
external application on affected area alongwith 2 to 3 gm of
powder for internal use.

Food recipe

Turmeric is used daily in cooking asa spice.

----- PAGE 22 -----
Pieces of fresh rhizome may be added in the vegetables and
pickle.

Pieces of fresh rhizome ground with coconut, chillies, tamarind,
salt and jaggery makes a healthy and tasty recipe. The same may
be boiled alongwith water to eat with rice or millet. Jaggery and
lemon may be added according to the need.

Precaution

Turmeric is hot in nature and excessive use may be avoided
during summer. If burning of feet, palm and urine is noticed, the
intake should be restricted.

If taken together with other medicines in diabetes, the blood
sugar may drop drastically.

Mode of propagation
The plant is propagated through seeds and cuttings.

Collect fresh seeds, sow them directly in raised beds, pots or
polybags. May-June is the favorable season for sowing. In 7-8
days the seeds germinate. They show 70-90% germination.

Vegetatively the plant can be propagated through cuttings.
Separate the tillers arising from the base of a matured plant and
plant them individually as mentioned above.

Ayurvedic formulation

Haridra Khanda.

----- PAGE 23 -----
7. Kumari (Aloe barbadensis Mill.)

> Local name : Aloe Vera (English),
Ghritkumari (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India \
Part used : Gel inside the leaves

General description: Aloe Veraisa
stem less or very short-stemmed
plant growing to 60-100 cm tall,
spreading by offsets. The leaves are
thick and fleshy, green to grey-green, with some varieties

showing white flecks on their upper and lower stem surfaces.
The margin of the leaf is serrated and has small white teeth. The
flowers are produced in summer ona spike up to 90 cm tall, each
flower being pendulous, with a yellow tubular corolla 2-3 cm
long.

> Uses

1 Burns and wounds: Due to its soothing, moisturizing, and
cooling properties, Aloe vera gel is used externally to treat
burns. Gel, mixed with turmeric powder and coconut oil aids
early healing of wounds and ulcers including anal fissure and
skin problems.

2 Digestive problem: 2 to 3 spoons of Aloe gel mixed with a glass
of water should be taken in all types of digestive and liver
problems.

3 Adjuvant therapy: Aloe vera gel may be taken with antibiotics,
NSAIDs (Non-steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs) and
chemotherapy to eliminate drug induced gastritis and other
adverse effects.

4 Multiple uses: Useful in various diseases such as diabetes,

----- PAGE 24 -----
arthritis, eye disease, spleen and liver complaints.
Precautions

Contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plant. It may cause
redness, burning, stinging sensation and rarely generalized
dermatitis in sensitive individuals.

Oral intake of Aloe vera is not be recommended during
pregnancy as it may cause stimulation of uterine contractions.

It may sometime causes gastrointestinal distress in the infant if
given to breastfeeding mothers.

Mode of propagation

Methods of propagation are sexual (with seeds), vegetative (by
pups obtained from the plants themselves or by the micro-
propagation method).

Itis grown successfully in marginal to sub marginal soils having
low fertility. It is observed that its growth was faster under
medium fertile heavier soil such as black cotton soils of central
India.

It is cultivated in pots out door or indoor, kept on sunny
window.

Ayurvedic formulations

Kumari Asava, Rajahaparvartani Vati, Aloe Vera Juice, Pulp,
Cream.

----- PAGE 25 -----
8. Mandukparni
(Centella asiatica (L.) Urb.)

Local name : Mandukaparni, }
Brahmi, Manduki

Habitat : Native to India, found in
tropical America, Africa, West :
Pakistan, China, Japan and the
Pacific

Part used : Whole plant

General description : Perennial herb, with long slender
horizontal stolons, characterised by long internodes. Leaves are
green, fan-shaped or round-reniform, 1-4 cm by 1-7 cm with a
crenate or dentate margin. Flowers are umbels with white or
light purple-to-pink petals and bear small oval fruit.

Uses

Mandukaparni is considered as brain tonic used for improving
memory and overcoming mental stress, fatigue. 5 to 10 ml fresh
juice or powder is given with milk in sleeplessness, anxiety,
cognitive problems, headache or neurological problems.

It is useful in neurological problems such as convulsions along
with standard therapy.

Food recipes

Mandukaparni chutney when ground with coconut, green
chilly, tamarind and coconut.

Juice of leaves or whole plant can be used in lemon sharbat,
herbal tea.

----- PAGE 26 -----
> Precautions
Excessive use every day may lead to giddiness or headache.
> Mode of propagation

Stolon cuttings with minimum of one node are planted
horizontally at a distance of 30 cm x 30 cm. Watering should be
done just after transplantation and subsequently at an interval of
2 to 3 days. To begin with weeding is done at an interval of 15-20
days thereafter, it is done as and when required. Similarly it can
be grown in the pots.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Saraswataristha, Brahma Rasayana.

----- PAGE 27 -----
9. Nimba (Azadiracta india A. Juss.)

Local name : Neem (Hindi)

Habitat : Nimba is found in
abundance in tropical and
semitropical regions like India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Nepal

Part used: Leaf, fruit, bark, seed oil

General description:

Neem is an attractive broad-leaved, evergreen tree which can
grow up to 30m tall and 2.5m in girth. Its trunk is usually straight
and 30-80 cm in diameter. Its spreading branches form a
rounded crown of deep-green leaves and honey-scented flowers
as muchas 20m across.

> Uses:

1. Dental plaque/ gingivitis: Gargling with warm decoction of
Neem leaves twice daily and brushing with twigs of Neem.

2. Skin diseases: Intake of powder of Neem leaves and
application of Neem oil.

3. Upset stomach: Decoction of Neem leaves helps in abdominal
pain and worm infestation.

4. Insect repellent: Applying Neem oil to the skin to protec against
mosquitoes.

5. Other important uses: Used to as antifungal agent, anti-
parasitic, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, neuro-protective,
and liver protective, used in jaundice.

> Foodrecipe

Neem flower chutney along with raw mango and green chilly

----- PAGE 28 -----
or

tender leaves fried in oil alongwith red chilly, asafoetida and
ajwain seeds and ground with tamarind, salt and jaggery makes
very healthy and savoury chutney.

Precautions

It can cause nausea, vomiting in some persons due to its bitter
taste.

Some studies also indicated adverse effects of excess doses on
sperm count, so may not be used in males planning for family.

Should not be used in access during pregnancy and lactation and
inchildren.

Mode of propagation

Neem is frequently self-sown in gardens and the areas under
mature trees which are quickly colonized by a carpet of
seedlings. It has the ability to establish itself under the protection
of thorny bushes and to survive in dry poor soils, provided it is
not subjected to frost. Although the main reproduction is by
seed, root suckering does occur, for example when the roots are
damaged.

The simplest way to propagate Neem trees is by seed, but root
shoot and root cuttings may also be used.

Ayurvedic formulations

Mahanarayan Oil, Nimba Churna, Neem Oil, Tiktaka Ghrita.

----- PAGE 29 -----
VV V WV

10. Nirgundi (Vitex negundo L.)

Local name : Samhalu (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used: Leaves, bark
General description

It is a shrub up to 5 meters tall or
sometimes a small, slender tree
with thin, gray bark. The bark is
reddish brown and has compound leaves in the form of a spread

hand with five leaflets, or sometimes three. Flowers are bluish-
purple, small and are in bunches In central India, flowering
occurs between June and December and fruiting from
September to February. The fruit is a succulent drupe, black
when ripe, 5-6 mm in diameter. Seeds are 5-6 mm in diameter.

Uses

Backache : 20 to 30 ml of decoction of Nirgundi leaves twice a
day is beneficial for lower back ache. 5 to 10 ml of Erandtaila
(castor oil) may be added to decoction, especially when there is
constipation and bloating of abdomen. The oil made up of
Nirgundi leaves should be applied externally.

Joint pain: 20 to 30 ml decoction of Nirgundi roots (3 to 5 gm) or
Nirgundi leaf powder in a dose of one 3-5 gm twice a day are
beneficial in osteoarthritis. Oil prepared from leaves is applied
or heated leaves are pressed and tied for joint pains and sprains.

Headache: Grind Nirgundi leaves with water and apply warm
paste on the forehead.

Wound: Washing with decoction or juice of leaves and
application of oil made from Nirgundi leaves aids healing of

----- PAGE 30 -----
woundsand chronic ulcers.
Precautions

Internal use may be best avoided in pregnant women and
alongwith hormonal pills. Nirgundi should be taken under
medical supervision in case of heart problems.

Mode of propagation

The mature seeds sown in nursery beds normally germinate
within 2-3 weeks. Four- to six-month-old seedlings are used for
transplanting in the field. It can be reproduced readily from
shoot cuttings. Nirgundi roots are strong, deep and produce root
suckers which can also be utilized as planting material.

Ayurvedic formulations

Dashamularishta, Sarasvatarishta, Mahayogaraja Guggulu,
Anu Taila.

----- PAGE 31 -----
11. Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa L.)

Local name : Gadarpunna (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Whole plant, roots

VV V WV

General description : It is a herb
grown as weed in waste lands
throughout the year but dries
during the summer. Leaves are

small with whitish colour on the
lower surface and green on upper
surface. Stems are purplish or pale green depending on the
variety. It bears small reddish pink flowers and fruits in winter.

> Uses

This plant is useful in all types of swellings, urinary problems,
anemia, liver disorders, heart diseases and piles. It can be used in
the form of fresh juice, decoction, powder or added in the food
preparations.

1. Dysuria: 50 to 100 ml of decoction made from 5 to 10 gm of arial
portion of the plant administered twice daily is useful in urinary
tract infection and burning or discomfort during urination.
Intake of plenty of fluids also advisable in this case.

2. Anaemia: 50to 100 ml decoction of whole plant is given thrice
daily in anaemia.

3. Jaundice: 50to 100 ml decoction of whole plant is given thrice
daily in liver problems.

4. Swelling: The warm paste of punarnava plant mixed with oil
applied externally twice daily on affected areas will be useful in
reducing swellings. Intake of the decoction of whole plant (50 to

100 ml) is also useful.

----- PAGE 32 -----
Joint pain: Intake of 2 to 5 gm of dry ginger with 50to 100 ml
decoction of Punarnava reduces swelling and pain in the joints.

Food recipes

Saute the tender leaves in little quantity of oil or ghee or butter
along with green chilies and grind with coconut to make chatni.
Cumin seeds, ginger, onion, garlic or asafetida can be used as per
the taste of the individual. Lemon juice, tamarind or curd may be
added.

Leaves can be used as a vegetable in dal or sambar.
Itcan be used in paratha as any other leafy vegetable.

Chopped leaves can be added in the dosa along with tomato and
onion.

Leaves and stem may be sauted and seasoned with chopped
onion, garlic, chilli and salt as a food item. It can also be mixed
with sprouts.

Precautions
Intake in excessive quantity may have mild purgative effect.
Mode of propagation

It grows widely in waste lands and does not require any special
care. The plant is propagated through seeds and cuttings.

Collect fresh seeds, sow them directly in raised beds, pots or
polybags. May-June is the favorable season for sowing. In 7-8
days the seeds germinate. They show 70-90% germination.

Vegetatively the plant can be propagated through cuttings.
Separate the tillers arising from the base of a matured plant and
plant them individually as mentioned above.

Ayurvedic formulations

Punarnavadi Mandura, Punarnavasava, Punarnavasthaka
Kwatha.

----- PAGE 33 -----
VV Vv WV

12. Shatavari
(Asparagus racemosus Willd.)

Local name: Shatavar (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Tuberous root

General description , K

The plant is a perennial, prickly es A %,
climber of 1-2 meters, found wildly

throughout India and also
cultivated for medicinal & ornamental purpose. Shatavari has
with shiny green leaves like pine needles, branches that are
thorny and pale. In July, it produces minute, white flowers on
short, spiky stems, and in September it fruits, producing
blackish-purple, globular berries. It has multiple tuberous roots
that measure up to one metre in length, tapering at both ends.

Uses

Shatavari is a good immunity booster. It is used to promote
fertility and have a range of health benefits, particularly for the
female reproductive system.

To increase breast milk: 3-5 gm of root powder or 2 spoons of
Shatavari root juice taken with 1 glass of milk twice daily
enhances milk in lactating mothers.

As a tonic: Shatavari root powder 1 to 3 gm is taken with milk
twice daily to overcome fatigue. It is useful in age related
problems suchas bone and neuro degeneration.

Hyper acidity and peptic ulcer: Intake of 2-4 spoon of juice of
Shatavari root or 1 to 3 gm of powder daily will be helpful to
reduce hyperacidity and peptic ulcers.

----- PAGE 34 -----
Reproductive health: 1 to 3 gm of Shatavari powder one to two
times a day is useful to prevent menopausal symptoms and
osteoporosis. The powder is recommended in non-specific
infertility.

Precautions

Shatavari is safe to be used within recommended quantity in a
normal person.

Sensitivity may cause allergic reactions in some people such as
skin rashes or breathing difficulty on intake of large dose. In case
of any medical problem or other medications, please follow the
advice of a qualified doctor.

Mode of propagation:

The seeds are used for propagation in the nurseries however
vegetative method is more suitable to grow in house hold. The
vegetative propagation is by division of rhizomatous disc
present at the base of the aerial stem. The rhizomatous disc
develops several vegetative buds around the aerial shoots. The
disc is divided in sucha way that each piece possess at least two
buds along with 2-3 tuberous roots. These pieces are planted
conversing the buds with 1 cm of soil followed by watering. The
sprouting commences in 8-10 days after plantation.

Ayurvedic formulations

Shatavari Ghrita, Shatavari Kalpa, Shatavari Churna.

----- PAGE 35 -----
13. Shigru (Moringa oleifera Lam.)

Local name: Sahijan (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Leaves, bark, fruit,
flower, seed

General description : Shigru, also
known as moringa, drumstick tree, |
grows to a height between 20-40

feet. Its stem is brittle having fragile branches of whitish-grey
bark. It has solitary compound leaf with a row of leaflets
arranged along each side of a common rachis. Leaflets are egg
shaped with the broader end at the base (ovate). Flowers are
yellowish-white in color and have a fragrant odour. The fruits
are long and size can vary between 8-18 inches. They bear dark
brown or white globular seeds. The seeds have three whitish
papery wings.

Uses

Anemia: 10 to 20 ml juice or use of leaves or pods Moringa in the
form of vegetable.

Asthma: Consumption of about 100 ml of decoction of a fistful of
drum stick leaves is beneficial in bronchitis and asthma.

Swellings & wound: application of warm paste made up of bark
and leaves of moringa is useful in relieving pain and swelling in
joints and abscesses. Its paste is also helpful in wound healing.

Heart disease: This has cholesterol lowering action and
stabilizes blood pressure. Therefore, use of leaves, flowers and
pods in any form is good for heart.

----- PAGE 36 -----
Other uses: Moringa is helpful in various eye problems and
improving vision. It is used in amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea
and asa tonic to improve the immunity against diseases.

Food recipes

Drum sticks pods & leaves are popularly added in sambar, daal
and vegetables.

It can be used in paratha as any other leafy vegetable. Chopped
leaves can be added in the dosa along with tomato and onion.

Tender drum stick pods or leaves may be sauted and seasoned
with chopped onion, garlic, chilli and salt.

The leaves can be used in zunka, a recipe popular in Maharashtra
and it's neighbouring parts of Karnataka. Heat oil/ ghee in a
utensil and add mustard seeds, asafetida, onions, curry leaves,
drum stick leaves and other spices of your choice. Add gram
flour, salt, turmeric powder and red chilli powder and mix well.
Add water, little by little as per desired consistency and mix
well. Cook on medium heat for four to five minutes while
continuously stirring. This can be used with rice, roti, dosa etc.

Precautions

There are no contra- indications for the use of any part of
moringa, however excessive intake may lead to increase in body
heat and Pitta in some people. Intake may be avoided during
heavy menstrual bleeding.

Mode of propagation

It grows best in direct sunlight. Moringa can be propagated from
seed or cuttings. Direct seeding is possible because the
germination rate is high. Soak the seeds in water overnight and
crack the shells before planting. Remove shells and plant kernels
only. Moringa seeds can be germinated year-round in well-
draining soil.

----- PAGE 37 -----
e

For vegetative propagation, use hard wood and not green wood.
Cuttings should be 45cm to 1.5m long and 10cm thick. Cuttings
can be planted directly or in sacks. Plant one-third of the length
in the ground and do not over water if the soil is too heavy or
wet, the roots may rot.

Ayurvedic formulations

Shigru Guggulu.

----- PAGE 38 -----
14. Shunthi
(Zinziber officinale Roscoe.)

Local name : Adrak (fresh ginger)
sonth (dry ginger) - Hindi

Habitat: All over India \
Part used : Root (nn
General description ——

Ginger is a flowering plant whose
rhizome is widely used as a spice and a
folk medicine. It is a herbaceous
perennial plant which grows pseudo
stems (false stems made of the rolled
bases of leaves) about one meter tall bearing narrow leaf blades.
The inflorescences bear pale yellow with purple flowers and
arise directly from the rhizome on separate shoots.

Uses

Rheumatoid arthritis: Decoction of Shunthi is useful in
rheumatoid arthritis when taken alongwith 10 to 20 ml of castor
oil.

Indigestion: Paste of Adarak with jaggery in equal quantity
helps in indigestion in warm water.

Cough: Shunthi (dry ginger) powder with honey is beneficial in
cough.

Joint pain : Shunthi churna 2 gm with ghee two times ina day.
Food recipes

Fresh turmeric-ginger pickle: Combine sliced ginger and
turmeric 4 cup each, 2 tsp lemon juice, chilli powder and 1 tsp
salt in in a deep bowl. Mix well and serve immediately or store
refrigerated for 1 week.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Ginger tea: Boil the water along with grated ginger. Add tea
leaves and sugar to the boiling water and then let the tea leaves
steep in the water for about 3-5 minutes. Add hot milk, mix well,
strain and serve immediately.

Ginger and lemon drink: Add 2 tsp ginger juice, 1 tsp lemon
juice and % tsp sugar syrup to a glass of water, stir and serve
immediately.

Ginger chutney: Fresh ginger ground with coconut, chillies and
tamarind make a healthy and tasty recipe.

Precautions

Intake in excessive quantity may result in heartburn and
stomach upset.

Mode of propagation

Ginger is always propagated by portions of the rhizomes,
known as seed rhizomes. Carefully preserved seed rhizomes are
cut into small pieces of 2.5 - 5 cm length weighing 20-25 gm, each
having one or two good buds.

The seed rhizomes are treated planted at a spacing of 20-25 cm
along the rows and 20-25 cm between the rows.

Ayurvedic formulations

Ardrak Paka, Nagaradi Kwatha, Trikatu Churna.

----- PAGE 40 -----
15. Tulasi (Ocimum tenuiflorum L.)

> Local Name : Holy basil (English),
Tulsi (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India
Part used: Leaves
General description

Tulasi is a heavy branched sub-
shrub having hair all over the parts.
It attains the height of about 75 - 90 cm. It has round oval shaped
leaves which are up to 5 cm long. The leaves are 2-4 cm in length.

Its flowers are purple - creamish in colour. Tulasi with the green
leaves is called the Shri Tulasi and one with the reddish leaves is
called the Krishna Tulasi. Seeds are yellow to reddish in colour.
Leaves of Tulasi contains essential oils and therefore have
peculiar fragrance.

> Uses

. Worms: Juice of Tulasi leaves (10-20ml) is beneficial for
deworming.

Wound or any skin disease: Local application of juice or paste of
Tulasi leaves is good.

Cough: Juice of Tulasi leaves (5-10ml) mixed with honey is good
for cough.

Urticaria: Intake and local application of Tulasi juice is useful in
urticaria.

> Foodrecipes

Tulasi tea: Boil Tulasi leaves in water, strain, add lemon juice
and Tulasi tea is ready to sip.

----- PAGE 41 -----
Tulasi juice: The fresh leaves of Tulasi can be consumed as a
juice. This tasty and refreshing method of using Tulasi is
profoundly rejuvenating for the immune system. Traditionally,
the juice is mixed with honey to resolve cold, fever, and
respiratory issues.

Precautions

Eating fresh leaves is not advisable as it causes damage to tooth
enamel. Excessive intake of Tulsi might cause nausea, heartburn
and diarrhoea.

Mode of propagation

This is propagated through seeds. For propagating through
seeds, they are to be sown in the nursery beds. The nursery
should be located preferably in partial shade with adequate
irrigation facilities.

As the seeds are minute, the required quantity of seeds are mixed
with sand in the ratio of 1:4 and sown innursery bed, 2 months in
advance of the onset of monsoon. They germinate in 8-12 days
and seedlings are ready for transplanting in about 6 weeks' time
at 4-5 leaf stage.

Ayurvedic formulations

Tulsi Arka.

----- PAGE 42 -----
VV V WV

16. Vasa (Justicia adhatoda L.)

Local name: Adusa (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India
Part used: Leaves

General description

Vasa is a shrub with lance-shaped
leaves 10 to 15 centimeters in
length. They are oppositely
arranged, smooth-edged, and
borne on short petioles. The trunk
has many long opposite ascending
branches, where the bark is yellowish in color. Flowers are
usually white and the inflorescence shows large, dense, axillary

spikes. Fruits are pubescent, and are with club-shaped capsules.
Uses
Cough: Decoction of 5-10 Vasa leaves is beneficial in cough.

Hemorrhagic disorders: Juice of Vasa leaves (5-15 ml) with
honey is useful in hemorrhagic epistaxis and hemoptysis.

Scanty menstruation: Decoction or juice of Vasa leaves is
beneficial.

Precautions: Intake in excessive quantity may result in
diarrhoea, vomiting and excessive menstrual bleeding.

Mode of propagation

Stem cuttings of 15-20 cm long with 3-4 nodes are ideal for
planting done in March-April.

----- PAGE 43 -----
* Tender stem cuttings are planted in poly bags /pots filled with
farm yard manure, top soil and sand in the ratio 1:1:1.

* Cuttings will root readily and will be ready to transplant to main
field after two months.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Vasavleha, Vasarishta.

----- PAGE 44 -----


----- PAGE 45 -----
Acknowledgement

Guidance

.

.

Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary , Ministry of AYUSH
Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary , Ministry of AYUSH

Prof. Tanuja Nesari, Director, All India Institute of Ayurveda, New
Delhi

Prof. Mita Kotecha, HoD, Department of Dravyaguna, National
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur

Editing

.

Dr A. Raghu, Joint Adviser, (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Sulochana Bhat, Nodal Officer (Ayushman Bharat), Ministry of
AYUSH

Dr Rajeshwari Singh, OSD (Tech.), Ministry of AYUSH

Contributors

Dr Amit Bhatt, Research Officer, (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH
Dr Dushyant Kishore, National Medicinal Plants Board

Dr Kandarp Desai, Senior Consultant, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Balu Mote, Domain Expert, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Sameer Deshmukh, Domain Expert, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Kavita Tyagi, National Medicinal Plants Board

Photo Courtesy

DrS. K. Lale, Research Officer, (Ayurveda), CCRAS

----- PAGE 46 -----


----- PAGE 47 -----


----- PAGE 48 -----



==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Dravyaguna Part2 Hegde .txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
NCISM |
2023 ) 2nd
Edition

e
dé. )
J

A Text Book of :

| Dravyaguna
'Vijnana

National Commission for Indian System of
Medicine (NCISM)

Dr. Prakash L. Hegde, MD (Ayu.), Ph.D. (Ayu.) j
Dr. Harini A., M.D. (Ayu. 7’

----- PAGE 2 -----
A Text Book of
Dravyaguna Vijnana

(According to the New Syllabus of National Commission for Indian
System of Medicine (NCISM)

nial ieeeettee ee eat anes einen aaa idememeamemmanat tamed eee cc aaadamandiins inte teaenaah taeda iene tesonae

. By
Dr. Prakash L. Hegde, MD (Ayu.), Ph.D. (Ayu.)
Dr. Harini A., M.D. (Ayu.)

Chaukhambha Publications
New Delhi

----- PAGE 3 -----
oN aun fF WN

WN NY NY NY NY NN NN NY |S BS So So oa ao ao ao ao an cg
CoO MON DUN KR WY S| CO DOD WAN AWN BR WH HH OO?

HES.
ara ia.
TAT.

aX.
TALIA.
afa.
af.

. aa.
. OT.
aa,

. WAY,
. a.

. offi.
. aR.
a5

. 0T.
ie

. WS.

. aaa,
. waa.
a

. USAW.
Ltt

. ta.
ta.
RCAC A
Laz.

. Ws.

bbl b bd dbl ddb dd bblidlliddlliividdd

Abbreviation

Oy FeA SAMA
OF Tet PRIA

WR HT FA

----- PAGE 4 -----
31.
32.
33.
34,
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Jlblllddidd

Dravyaguna Vijnana

MAM FA TT
WHA TIT UVS

WMH Bea WAT Ws
TUR sO Fea YA
waly Gar sey Tea YA
Bat SM TA

ae Patera
Gad UE IMA

Gat art
Yadavaji Trikamaji Acarya

----- PAGE 5 -----
Content

Particulars

1.

21
2:2
2.3

v2.4
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13

Bheshajavacharaniya

(Criteria have to be considered for selection of drugs in vyadhis).

Dravya (Drug) N ama-Guna-Karma Jnana
1. Useful parts withRasapanchaka,

2. Karma, Agryakarma, Dosha karma, Rogaghnata,

3. Amayikaprayoga: Therapeutic utility in Vyadhi (Disease)
pertaining to various Srotas, Vyadhiavastha (Stage),
Kalpana (dosage form), Matra (Dose), Anupana (Vehicle),

Marga (Route of administration),

Sevanakala (Time of administration), Kalavadhi
(Duration) and Pathya-apathya (Do’s and Don’ ts)
4. Active phyto-constituents, Research updates and Vishishta Yoga

(Important formulation).

5. Botanical name, Family, Main synonyms and Vernacular names.

Page No.
01

6. Identification- External morphological features such as habit, root, stem,

leaf, inflorescence, flower, fruit and seed.
7. Varieties , Grahyagrhyatwa , Adulterants, Substitutes &

toxic effects (wherever applicable) of
Agnimantha (Clerodendrum phlomidis)
Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum)
Ajamoda (Apium graveolens)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera)
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula)
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna)
Ashoka (Saraca asoca)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Asthishrunkhala (Cissus quadrangularis)
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)
Bakuchi (Psoralea corylifolia)
Bala (Sida cordifolia)

13
21
29
33
42
50
58
65
72
80
84
91
98

----- PAGE 6 -----
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.22
v2.23
— 2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
- 2.31
2.32
2.33
= 2.34
"2.35
2.36
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.40
2.41
2.42
2.43
2.44
2.45
2.46

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Beejaka (Pferocarpus marsupium)
Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium)
Bharangi (Clerodendrum serratum)
Bhrungaraja (Eclipta alba)
Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus amarus)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)

Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri)

Bruhati (Solanum indicum)
Chakramarda (Cassia tora)
Chandana (Santalum album)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
Dadima (Punica granatum)
Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum)
Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa)
Dhanvayasa (Fagonia critica)

Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)

Eranda (Ricinus communis)
Gambhari (Gmelina arborea)
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)

Hingu (Ferula narthex)

Jambu (Syzygium cumini)

Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis)
Jatamansi (Nardostachys grandiflora)
Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans)
Jeeraka (Cuminum cyminum)
Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus)
Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata)
Kampillaka (Mallotus philippensis)
Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata)

105
112
121
127
134
139
147
154
161
166
181
188
195
203
210
215
222
232
239
247
256
268
277
291
298
306
310
317
324
337
344
349
355

----- PAGE 7 -----
2.47
2.48
2.49
2.50
2.51
2.52
2:53
2.54
2.55
2.56
2.57
2.58
2.59
2.60
2.61
2.62
2.63
2.64
2.65
2.66
2.67
2.68
2.69
2.70
2.71
2.72
2.73
2.74
2.15
2.76
2.17
2.78
2.79
2.80

Content

Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Kapikachhu (Mucuna pruriens)
Karkatshrungi (Pistacia integerrima)
Katuki (Picrorhiza kurroa)

Khadira (Acacia catechu)

Kulatha (Dolichos biflorus)

Kumari (Aloe vera)

Kumkuma (Crocus sativus)

Kutaja (Holarrhena pubescens)
Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica)
Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista)
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa)
Madanphala (Catunaregum spinosa)
Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica)
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia)
Maricha (Piper nigrum)
Meshashrungi (Gymnema sylvestre)
Methika (Trigonella fonum-graecum)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Nagkeshara (Mesua ferrea)

Nimba (Azadirachta indica)
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo)

Palasha (Butea monosperma)
Pashanabheda (Bergenia ciliata)
Patha (Cissampelos pareira)

Pippali (Piper longum)

Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)

Rasona (Allium sativum)

Sairayaka (Barleria prionitis)
Sarapagandha (Rawvolfia serpentina)
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
Shallaki (Boswellia serrata)

XV

362
369
376
382
389
397
402
409
417
427
432
437
443
449
457
464
471
479
484
489
497
503
S11
518
526
$32
538
547
555
563
572
578
584
592

----- PAGE 8 -----
Xvi Dravyaguna Vijnana

2.81 Shalmali(Mocharasa) (Bombax ceiba) 598
2.82 Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) 607
2.83 Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) 614
2.84 Shigru (Moringa oleifera) 622
2.85 Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) 631
2.86 Talisapatra (Abies webbiana) 641
2.87 Trivrut (Operculina turpethum) 647
2.88 Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) 655
2.89 Twak (Cinnamomum aromaticum) 662
2.90 Usheera (Vetiveria zizanioides) 669
2.91 Vacha (Acorus calamus) 675
2.92 Varuna (Crataeva magna) 682
2.93 Vasa (Justicia adhatoda) 688
2.94 Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) 695
2.95 Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) 702
2.96 Vidanga (Embelia ribes) 709
2.97 Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 716

Appendix I 723

Appendx II 731

Question Papers 737

Index (Botanical Names) 763

----- PAGE 9 -----
Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of
Treatment)
—_e eee snsesntsssesesessnnasenetensnesunsanoenmmnesennenen,

Points

* Rogi Pariksha (Examination of the patient)

¢ Dosha Pariksha (Determination of Doshas)

¢ Deha Desha Pariksha (Determination of seats of diseases)

+ Aushadha Pariksha (Determination of the drug)

e Kala Aushadha Sambandha (Relationship of time and treatments)

e Bhaishajya Sevana Kala (Time of administration)

e Dosha Nirharana Kala (Time for elimination of doshas)
Introduction:

Treating a disease involves several key points and when applied properly will bring
the best result. All these key areas are very well explained in the chapter
Bheshajavacharaneeya Adhyaya of Ashtanga Sangraha Sutra Sthana, Chapter 23. For a
successful physician the knowledge regarding the different useful points which are ex-
Plained in this chapter is becomes must. The Chapter includes several important pre req-
uisites to carry out treatment like Rogi Pariksha (Examination of Patient), Dosha Pariksha
(Assessment of Dosha), Deha Pariksha (Determination of disease), Aushadha Pariksha
(Evaluation of drug / medicine), Bhaishyajya Sevana Kala (time of administration of

medicine) etc. which are very much required. Before selecting particular drug / medicinal
plant knowledge regarding Bheshajavacharana is essential.

Rogi Pariksha (Examination of the patient)~ _|1al/ 4 Creat fhtory-)

AUTH, Ula aaeaargt Ueteta | waferaet Set wrt: dat wale ar

Reiger St , Pr? f . sifted creer re ere
arahe creat eatientatratite | ueretta & a at Partastonserettat ae: |
aes daensh aga: vat tra: | cea: anther agar fea, crate
eRe at wes vies Af | cave aafevenieet yaSest Wor at
AT SSIMT TA: elem Fae: | cere | Baers
FIR AAAs Stare rTP eM AT ATTA: | ATA STOTT AT

----- PAGE 10 -----
- Dravyaguna Vijnana

aiitrataray a testy Tadtareatayishrrtter ark aM ITT |
Acted WIT 1 (37.4.Y, 23/2)

Rogil Par pecs oe is very amnpOREE to plan the treatment so, Berane starting of the treat-

e In which region is he born? Where as he been brought up? Where has he
developed the disease? Which are the type of food, activities, strength, mental]
attitude, accustomed things, the likes, prevalent diseases, the suitable and
unsuitable things of the people living in that region? Knowing this beforehand
will facilitate determination of the specific causes for the increase of the
Doshas. Though the dosha may be one, there are many causes for its increase.
Carefully noting the qualities and functions of each, the physician has to
determine the dosha involved. For example, has Vata undergone inctease by
indulgence in bad food or bad activities? Whether it is due to indulgence i in
foods which are dry, light, or cold or by overexertion, suppression of the urges
of the body, fear or grief? _

Prescribing the opposite kind of treatment after determining all these facts, will
certainly leads to quick success. Sweet, Sour and salt tastes have their opposites
in pungent, bitter and astringent tastes tespectively.

Dosha Pariksha (Determination of Doshas)

It is to be ascertained that in what manner the person has indulged in the causes of
the diseases, whether by mild, moderate or profound measure (quantity, degree). Even
though the cause may be one only, by its different variations (quality, quantity) it pro-
duces changes in the different facets (parts) of the doshas which in turn make the disease
to become either mild or severe.

In diseases which have many doshas and in drugs which have many tastes, the
physician should carefully consider the special effects of the each of the doshas and of
each of the tastes and plan out the appropriate mode of treatment of the disease.

ayaa WAaaMaTavaraT aT
anftranattad sti Prec | wierd fe ete: cate carreras teste at
SR Hater | caver Caraga Net Perera: TeHfeeter: ul (31.F.F, 23/3)

But this need not apply in all cases.

In conditions caused by the combination of things of dissimilar qualities, that is caused

----- PAGE 11 -----
_Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment)

pc rmeparie of different things each one supporting or antagonizing the other and
a ei which are being influenced by other factors, it is possible to relay on the
Special effect of the whole (Dosha, Diséase or Drug) than of each part of it. Thus, in such

eo the treatment should be planned, taking in to consideration the effect of the

Deha Desha Pariksha (Determination of seats of diseases):

Further it is to be decided, in which place (part) of the body the disease is localized.
The doshas which have increased may not produce the diseases in their own seats but
may do so in other places such as the head etc. and so may become difficult to treat.
Hence the treatment has to be planned as is found appropriate to the seat of the disease.

Aushadha Pariksha (Determination of the drug)

Waves | acarsadteeres sarge at ates: Rerercit ar 1 ara fe
deerdemnfracdt enirentrraentet safer u (ara. % 23/4)

Teta dieses at 1 aarsttaen-
WRAAMUT TATE aeaay: | deh gy enkracreranh aye
art enftraftaes siteraraeta 1 wtkaentrarh wtaestrenieacear |
aftaacrattert terrae (a8. F 23/5)

Selecting suitable and genuine drug is very much necessary to have best therapeutic
effects, hence Aushadha Pariksha (Assessment or determination of drug/medicine) be-
comes inevitable. :

To which drug and to what dose of it, are the disease and the patient suitable? Deter-
mination of the drug, its potency, dose etc., should be appropriate to the dosha, the strength
of the disease and the diseased (person). Whether the urgent use of powerful purificatory
drugs (or treatments) having the properties of Agni (Teja Bhuta) and Vayu bhuta is needed
or use of the drugs possessing mild properties in greater doses will be necessary, treatment
such as branding with the fire, use of alkalies and surgical instruments, are more harmful,
to patients who have poor mental stamina and physical strength. Palliative drugs (or treat-
ment) also if stronger than the strength of the disease will produce opposite diseases quickly,
after mitigating the earlier ones, in the body which has become weak by the effect of
disease. Those (drugs and treatment) which are stronger than the body will cause exhaus-
tion, fainting, toxicity, delusion and decrease of strength; those which are more powerful
than the digestive capacity will produce exhaustion and poor digestion. ;

af a | afrgetstraet gdet gdagutagttirneetraadtscartarcad-
gnisareamentatadt: uneedt at anfiaeta aacantaey 1 fe greater

----- PAGE 12 -----
4 Dravyaguna Vijnana

dean nang annealed atnarieanet 1

aemakaaygaeren: Wet: FPA: UTA | aets fefegraur forge: | Tar

aoate areangisrraemed at tasmfatacant ya wa sage carey, 1
(Ha. Y 23/6)

Persons who are stout, very emaciated, weak, which have their body part not having
well knit muscles, blood and bones; of poor digestive ability, take very little food, who are
habituated to unhealthy unaccustomed foods; whose body is impoverished of essences of
the tissues, will be incapable of withstanding the disease itself. Then how can they with-
stand the effect of such strong drugs (or treatment) Hence, such weak patient are to be
treated specially with drugs which do not cause discomfort, which are mild, pleasant,
successively hard (increasingly strong) and which do not cause debility.

This should be so, especially for women because they are unsteady, tender and of
weak heart (mind), tender in body and dependent on others (men);it should be still more
so especially for children. _

Likewise, drugs (or ee which are very mild and of very little quantity (dosha)
will do not any good for severe diseases and for strong persons; on the other hand, they
will aggravate the disease by exciting the doshas.

eA ce a
santcaeret ova «offer: 1 at wa wa aete eos

Perea eS (3a. FY 23/7)

Though a drug is found suitable, still it should be examined to determine its taste,
potency, taste after digestion, qualities nature of the substance (mass), actions, special
effects, place of growth, season of collection, method of preservation, correct mode of
using, prohibited mode of use, methods of processing, combinations (or admixtures),
procedure of use, dosage, the type of patient for whom it is meant, the time (season) of
use, the dosha which it expels out or mitigates inside etc. if there happens to be another
drug of similar properties, then both are to be compared and the best of them should be
used.

Very subtle are the variations in different stages of the doshas, drugs, dushya (tissues

----- PAGE 13 -----
Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 5

and wastes) regions, time, strength, digestive activity, food, tastes, accustoms, mental
makeup, constitution, age etc., which if not considered deeply will lead to death of the
patient. If taken up for careful consideration, these will create confusion even in the mind
of a very intelligent physician. What to say then one of poor intellect?

Hence the physician should study the scriptures, engage himself in practical work
constantly and transform his intellect for gaining mastery.

There are some diseases which stand out as exceptions to the general line of treat-
ment prescribed in the texts. In such cases, the intelligent physician should himself be the
judge to determine the strength or weakness of the doshas without seeking help from
elsewhere.

Kala Aushadha Sambandha (Relationship of time and treatments)

aves NSH AAAS 1A aToTagentfedeargquanan wo fear: were
a | vittteratoentafie: are: 1 aa vidteueddftesitaatrarsa aremuit
weoacraal | tiaatareateg, ureitge: prefer fracad | ay Aremraraey
amd vfafatafatarmstramrar 1 meron & wepidrradctargecand,
qaratrncrar: wreireerany | ferattarhearay ul (31.4. J 23/8)

Kala (time) also confers suitability of the drugs. It was described that time is of two
kinds viz., First — such as Kshana, Lava, Muhurta etc. Second — stages of the patient (or
disease). Time (seasons) is of three characters — cold, hot and rainy. Between cold (Shishira)
and hot (Grishma) seasons and in between rainy (Varsha) and Cold (Hemanta) seasons,
there are two ordinary seasons (temperate) Viz., Vasanta and Sharat respectively. The
ordinary (temperate) season found in between Grishma and Varsha which is the first
commencement of rain is known as Pravrat.

The ideal time for administration of therapies like emesis and purgation is the day
time of the ordinary (temperate) seasons; whereas the daytime of other seasons are unsuit-
able because of the risk of inadequate or excessive bouts. Similarly, the ordinary seasons
are ideal even for the administration of other drugs (or treatments) to the body, because of
mild degrees of cold, heat and rain during these seasons and so are easy and harmless.
Opposite will be the condition in other seasons.

wad | ortker armrattagara | dguteatt waaetreasat seed Uradataada Ta
Teg: wRefarmgerieenrateraaaa  yHaaalufeaaaa-
AATagae WAT water (AF. FT 23/9)

----- PAGE 14 -----
6 Dravyaguna Vijnana

During cold season, the body being a victim of severe cold and cold breeze the
doshas become stable (immobile, stagnated) and heavy (greatly increased). Purificatory
drugs (or therapies) administered during this period, though generally of hot potency, get
vanquished by the profound cold, becomes inefficient in action, give only inadequate
bouts and make the body susceptible to many diseases of Vata origin.

Similarly, during rainy season also, similar is the result (the drugs become weak and
produce only inadequate bouts) because in this season the sky is full of thick clouds
which obstruct the hot rays of the sun reaching the earth, the earth becomes full of slush
by lashing rain and flowing water, the bodies of men get water logged, lose the efficiency
of digestive activity and become weak by the effect of season.

Waa | AVaATATATA TA aT wort Hata eiwet Hererary TT —
Aredtaee Saree tl (37.4. J 23/10)

The condition of the entire vegetation will be poor in potency because of the net-
work of roots of trees will have been submerged in water due to rain falling in torrents
from the clouds, the stem and branches will become full with tender leaves and buds,
making the trees appear to have become young. Because of this tenderness and the effect
of slush of the soil they will undergo sourness during digestion; the water will have be-
come contaminated with the cadavers, tissues, urine and excreta of birds, animals, reptiles
etc., the wind will be very cold due to presence of water vapour, snow and mist; the heat
of the earth becomes reduce, the vegetation not attaining maturity with potency, they will
only cause burning sensation during digestion in the human body. Because of these rea-
sons, the drugs which are collected even at the commencement (of the rainy season) will
be unsuitable for health (and produce inadequate bouts only) due to preponderance of
water and wind full of water vapour.

aa | fast yarerate qasrenhraragen temrargararaer arrearreers | welt

FOOT ST AAT | RATATAT LT STATO TAT Aare TTT START:

laratre ¢ abrruiceradad quieaidrdarecenrran franc yaraure aera
afeatsrearerd tt (31.4. J 23/11)

During Grishma (Summer) due to the effect of withdrawal (of moisture by the sun)

----- PAGE 15 -----
_Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 7

the body under the influence of hot and dry wind will have severe perspiration and the
doshas will be very loose (fluid moving freely) and in very little quantity. Purificatory
drugs though not hot in potency will acquire the properties of heat and penctrating deep
inside, Cause excessive bouts (of emesis and purgation); the body will suffer from compli-
cations like thirst, giddiness and exhaustion,

So, itis ideal to administer emesis and other purificatory therapies during appropriate
seasons only, if there is no emergency discase. In case of an emergency conditions
purificatory treatment should be done by creating conditions opposite of the seasons arti-
ficially and administering drugs which have been made suitable with appropriate process-
ing, combination, dosage, mode of use and other procedures.

Bhaishajya Sevana Kala (Time of administration)

MKAAY GT Het: Ale Wat: | Taser arse AM
AeaTeAetet careteet attra: waft | PA HTSMNST AO, TTT | ST WATE
FETS UAHA TH ATS EHS: MM MATT PGT (a. 23/12)

In the context of the conditions or the stages of the patient (or the disease), time
means the different parts, viz., a certain time whether appropriate for administration of
medicine, or not, whether a particular time either suitable or unsuitable for a particular
drug etc. drugs administered either at premature time or elapsed time not yield the desired
results.

The times of administration of medicines are eleven in number such as without food,
before meals, after meals, mixed with food during its preparation itself, in between meals
(of afternoon and night), at the commencement and end of the meals, often (frequently)
irrespective of meals, mixed or along with morsel, in between such morsels and at night.

1. Abhakta
Tanith Amdetdee feterefedtei 1 ctxenfeepryreratar:
Wedoaqagata | gateq watfearareenter fect arferetrent safe 1
(A.4. Y 23/13)

Abhakta (without food) is administration of the drug separately without giving any
food to the patient. The action of the drug in that case will be very powerful. So, persons
who are strong, drugs should be given in the morning after the increased Kapha has
moved out of the stomach; in case of others it should be before food (of the morning or
breakfast) as the person will not suffer from fatigue by the consumption of food.

2. Pragbhakta
Rath AM Fea, | eM oe aay: HAT THATS AAT A earhtry,

----- PAGE 16 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

gerrare asftencorref er aren i (31.4. F 23/14)

Pragbhakia is administration of the drug just prior to the meal, It useful in the treat-
ment of diseases caused by Apana Varta, in diseases of lower extremities for strengthening
the body and for making the body thin.

3. Madhyabhakta
Teh Tet THT ae BAe frat | pteery a eareery thrhg a
(AA. FJ 23/15)
Madhyabhakta is administration of drug in the middle ofthe. meal_and useful in

diseases caused by Samana Vata, in diseases of alimentary tract and in diseases of Pittaja
origin.

4. Adhobhakta
SUNT WAHT | TT aaa UIA UA: Maa ys
mrret a aed aady etry a years wychenronedast Ni (3.8. | 23/16)

Adhobhakta is administration of drug after the meal, diseases due to Vyanavata and
should be after the morning meal and in diseases due to Udana vata it should be after the
evening meal. This method is useful for strengthening the upper part of the body and to
cure the diseases of Kapha and cause stoutness of the body.

5. Sabhakta
Rag ST ATG Ut (AA-Z,23/17)

Sabhakta is taking the food prepared by mixing the drug or mixing the drug to
prepared food and eating immediately. It is indicated for children, persons of tender con-
stitution, those who hate medicines, in loss of appetite and in diseases affecting the whole
body.

6. Antarabhakta

aT Ue Yate uh sitet were Aoaqagerd 1 afeever sfot qa
ae war Ubreateare | area areararay i (31.8. J 23/18)

Antarabhakta is administration of medicines first at midday after the digestion of the

forenoon meal (breakfast) and once again in the afternoon after the digestion of the mid-
day meal. Likewise in case of the night also. This method is indicated for those who have
strong digestion and in disorders caused by Vyanavata.

LY

----- PAGE 17 -----
Bheshajavacharanceyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 9

7, Samudga

HUTA MEAT TY ST VT 1 (31.4. FY 23/19)

Samudga is the use of the medicine twice- once just before meals and immediately
after meals. Food should be easily digestible and little in quantity, drugs should be having
digestive property and be in the form of confection, powder etc. this method is indicated
in hiccough, tremors, convulsions and when the doshas are localized at both upper and
lower parts of the body.

& Muhurmuhu

Weed Fr: Grath aaah at | remarernraheenqawtay faatatiry a fercnreg 11

(AA. F 23/20)

Muhurmuhu is the use of medicine, frequently with or without food. This method is
useful in diseases like dyspnoea, cough, hiccough, thirst, vomiting and diseases caused
by poisons.

9, Sagrasa, 10. Grasantara and 11, Nishi:

POS Ae DTH | OTA ae rea a eat were MrT resterseeay | TAT
ward quideacanfematadedt arstteronts aogier | ore EArt sat ArT
weary Pree Ul (31... F 23/21)

e Sagrasa is taking medicine only once with first morsel of food.

* Grasantara is taking medicine after every meal. Both these are indicated in
disorders of Pranavata. Medicines which are in the form of powder, confection
pill etc., and having the property of kindling digestion and those which are
aphrodisiacs are to be used along with one morsel. Drugs which are used in
diseases of heart, drugs to produce vomiting and those useful for inhalation of
smoke, they can be administered after every morsel.

e Nisha administration of drugs at night (bed time, before sleep) is ideal for the
treatment of diseases of parts of the body above the shoulders.

ware are afta: dtasftargrsief afr: arava fest ast 1 weg
asgemereemfedtantreananret sftararratte | sreatfer art votes: i (34.4. F 23/22)

The use of medicine during the first of this time (empty stomach) should be avoided
for those who are thirsty, who have just drunk cold water, which have indigestion, who
are hungry and who is very emaciated, very strong and hot potency medicine, having
strong smell and large quantity should be avoided.

----- PAGE 18 -----
10 Dravyaguna Vijnana

trarel wliste ceaareeeny at: Het Prey Uae aye PATENT MN
(4.4. FY 23/23)
The disease is to be examined first and next the drug; and then after, the physician
should treat the disease with full knowledge.

Paristt qaeatixetarnte tga (ee arffae ae: ve: gett gare: 0
Tearagqastianrd, warren | tegrratt aria yet eredtaraey
(AM. FY 23/24-25)
Though the diseases gets cured they may reappear again due to residue of the doshas
remaining inside the body and getting excited even by trivial causes, just like the fire
which flares up from a small spark. Hence doshas should be cleared out with harmless
methods and effective recipes.
AAT TAT Tes SOTTATTAY | aera eT: react HATA:
(AM. FT 23/26)
A drug which is good for health may become disagreeable due to continuous use or
lack of pleasantness; hence such things should be made acceptable by subjecting in to
various processes.
Waaatqaqrgittent whaler | parasite at Rae eave: were:
(31-4. Y 23/27)
Nourishment, valour, desire, strength and enjoyment of happiness all are dependent
upon the feeling of comfort in the mind; then the relief of the diseases follows.
Beara aT SPA: ATG Teal AeA ferret, |
(A.4. | 23/28)
Desire towards a thing develops during the course of the disease due to fondness,
decrease of the doshas or peculiar effect of the disease; physician who is well versed in
the knowledge of the good, should make appropriate alterations and make it suitable for
consumption.

Dosha Nirharana Kala (Time for elimination of doshas)

vittrorautfifrdt sarsracrentte 1 ATL MM yom wag ll
Ween wmeeaag a aq | aemity fate Parra |
virtroratat ydtert were | wate feat ured fore 3 wai
TSA TOTES Hearst wast | atest wre a Rrarerated: UyTrseahe g
artafersratcendere 1 (31.8. FY 23/29-32)

----- PAGE 19 -----
Bheshajavacharanecyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 1]

The doshas — Kapha Vata and Pitta - which have undergone increase in cold, hot
and rainy seasons respectively should be expelled out of the body either during the three
ordinary months — the Chaitra, Shravana, and Kartika or during the three ordinary Months
of Pravrat, Sharat and Vasanta Rutu respectively with the prescribed procedure. Having
created conditions opposite of the cold, hot and rainy seasons artificially treatments should
be done in appropriate time, without skipping the sequences of time.

If no relief is found within seven days another alternate treatment should be started
and that only after the effect of the earlier treatment has disappeared. Mixing of two kinds
of treatment is not good. Even it slight improvement has been obtained by any one treat-
ment, the same should be continued with suitable modifications to obtain better improve-
ment.

Quast yudeaewncaesst Yt: | Wert agyyt agaes: wether

satarisafed: aan aaa: | seated uftet: waraqwasra, i

(AA. FY 23/33-34)

The drug to be administered to the king, should be pleasant, small in quantity, with
no deleterious effects, pure, scientifically prepared, possessing many good qualities and
found efficacious many times. The physician should not engage himself in any other
work, should obtain the consent of his friends for his treatment; the drug having been
tasted by the royal routine earlier and also by himself and then administered to the king.

shat we at terest ete faery | aviszonit cadena |
driagiad ware, cater | teens wert are sitet aera |
VATA SISTA AT Ul (3.8. F 23/35-36)

That drug which is grown in the same land in which a person lives will be ideal for

that person. Those drugs which possess properties similar to the properties of the land in
which a person is born should be used for those living in a different land.

The drug, which by nature, is potent, fortified further by soaking it in the fresh juices
of others, made easily digestible, endowed with pleasant taste, smell etc. administered at
proper time, in the mild dose and with steady mind is sure to become nectar.

Exercise: Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)
1. Chapter Bheshajavacharaneeyamadhyayam is included in - Sthana of Ashtanga
Sangraha
a. Chiktsa Sthana b. Sutrasthana c. Sharirasthana d. Nidanasthana
Ans: b. Sutrasthana

----- PAGE 20 -----
12 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Chapter number of Bheshajavacharaneeya Adhyaya included in Sutrasthana of
Ashtanga Sangraha
a. 25" Chapter b. 27° Chapter c. 23 Chapter _—d.: 15"" Chapter
Ans: c. 234 Chapter

3. Kasmin Deshe jata refers to
a. Aushadha Pariksha b. Deha Desha Pariksha
c. Bhaishajya Kala d. Rogi Pariksha
Ans: d. Rogi Pariksha

4, Number of Bhaishajya Sevana Kala acc to Ashtanga Sangraha
a. 10 b. 11 c. 5 d. 8
Ans: b. L1

5. Abhakta refers to
a. With food b. After food
c. Without food d. In between food
Ans: c. Without food

6. Suitable Bhaishajya Sevana Kala for Pittaja Vyadhi
a. Madhya Bhakta b. Pragbhakta = c. Muhurmuhu d. Nishi
Ans; a. Madhyabhakta

7. Antarabhakta is suitable for Vyadhis related to
a. Prana Vata b. Apana Vata c. Udana Vata d.Vyana Vata
Ans: d. Vyana Vata

8. Aushadha Sevana Kala indicated in Jatrurdhva Vikara

a. Nishi b. Grasantara _—c. Sagrasa d. Pragbhakta
Ans: a. Nishi

RR AE

— |

----- PAGE 21 -----
Chapter

Agnimantha

Useful Part : Mula (Root)
Rasadi Panchaka : Rasa Pancaka

Katu, Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura

Karma (Actions)
Shothaghna, Agnivardhaka, Vibandhahara & Jwarahara

Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Anthelmintic & Anti inflammatory (Aqueous extract of leaves)
Dosha Karma (Actions on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka, Kaphahara because of Katu, Tikta, Kashaya rasa, Ushna
virya and Katu vipaka, Vata Shamaka because of its Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwayathu, Pandu, Agnimandya, Vibandha, Jwara, Arshas and Adhmana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administraion)

1. Vasameha (Lipuria]

aerate Riera at (a Fa. 11/9)

Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) kashaya is very effective in Vasameha.

2. Arshas (Haemorrhoids)

aftaaag Brats Waa ST | era Vo Ma TSA

(af. 14/45)

The decoction prepared from the leaves of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia), Shigru
(Moringa oleifera) and Ashmantaka (Ficus rumphii) is used for Avagaha (Tub bath) in
Hemorrhoids.

3. Granthi visarpa (Erysipelas pustulosum)
agraaatied pate afer were tafe. 21/125)

----- PAGE 22 -----
14 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from the leaves of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) and Vamsha is
applied in Granthi visarpa (Glandular erysipelas).

4, Urusthambha (Disease related to thigh)
attra a weirs Sara | Worst aftdatazeetent Pract i
(afa. 27/57)

Kwatha prepared from Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) and Karanja (Pongamia
pinnata) is sprinkled and paste of these two drugs is applied externally.

5, Shitapitta (Urticaria)
aftr yi fie after after | sfafiritedator, woreda Aree
(4.4. 51/7)

The Chuurna of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) is taken with ghee cures Shitapitta,
Udarda and Kotha within seven days.

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha - 50to 100 ml
Swarasa - 10to20ml
Churna - lto3gm

Important phytoconstituents

Root - Premnine (Alkaloid), Ganiarine, Ganikarine, B-sitosteroal, Ceryl alcohol,
Triterpenes, Clerodin, Polyphenols, Clerodendrin A, Essential oil.

Stem bark - Betulin, ?-sitosteroal, Aphelandrine, D-mannitol.
Leaves - Essential oil, Palmitic acid, g-sitosterol.
Research Corner

1. The plant has been found to possess hypoglycemic activity. (Pande M.C.,
Journal of natural integrated Med Ass, 1978, 20 (8), 295. The methanolic
extract of C. phlomidis Linn. (MECP) leaves shows most of the
pharmacological activities characteristic of minor tranquilizers. (Murugesan T.,
Saravanana K.S., Lakshmi S., Ramaya G. and Thenmozhi K., Evaluation of
psychopharmacological effects of Clerodendrum phlomidis Linn. Extract (J)
Phtomedicine, 2001, 8 (6), 472).

2. Methanolic extract of leaves of C. Phlomidis Linn (MECP) showed significant
inhibitory activity against castor oil induced diarrhoea and PGE2 induced
enteropooling in rats. The extract also showed a significant reduction in
gastrointestinal motility in charcoal meal test in rats. (Rani S., Ahamed N.,

----- PAGE 23 -----
3. The tre

a _ Agnimantha 15

Rajaram S, and Saluj

aR., Thenmozhi S., Murugesan T., J. Ethano-pharmacol.,
1999, 68, 315),

‘tment with petroleum ether, chloroforms and methanolic fractions of
alcoholic extract of Clerodendrum phlomidis at a dose of 500-mg/kg b.w,p.o.
significantly prevented CCl4 induced elevation of liver enzymes. The results
indicated that the methanolic fraction was most active among the three fractions
(Amita verma et al/Int.J.Pharm Tech Res. 2009, | (4) pp 1028-1031).

. Petroleum ether, Ethyl acetate and Methanolic extracts of Clerodendrum

phlomidis aerial parts at the doses of 100 and 200 mg/kg was evaluated for the

Analgesic activity using the hot plate and acetic acid induced abdominal

constrictions in mice. The study showed that the Methanolic and Ethyl acetate

extracts of Clerodendrum phlomidis at dose 200 mg/kg exhibited significant
analgesic activity. (R. Vijayamritharaj, S. Vincent and N. Senthilkumar.,

Analgesic activity of clerodendrum Phlomidis linn. (Aerial parts), International

Journal of Research in Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, Vol. 2 (1),

2011 pp 120-123),

. The methanolic extract of the roots of Clerodendrum phlomidis (Verbenaceae)
showed significant in-vitro anti-oxidation activity in the anti radical, superoxide
scavenging, anti lipid peroxidation, hydroxyl radical scavenging and nitric
Oxide scavenging, assays, (Gokani, R.H., et al, Evaluation of antioxidants
activity (in vitro) of Clerodendrum phlomidis, linn. f. suppl. Root, Journal of
Herbal Medicine and Toxicology 5 (1), 2011 pp 47-53).

- The anti inflammatory activity of the crude ethanolic extract of Clerodendrum
phlomidis was studied using the carrageenan and cotton pellet induced
inflammatory models. The antiarthritic activity was studied using Freund's’s
complete adjuvant induced rat model. Clerodendrum phlomidis displays
considerable potency in anti inflammatory action and has prominent antiarthritic
effect on adjuvant induced arthritis. (Babu NP, Pandukumar P, lgnacimuthu S.,
Lysosomal membrane stabilization and anti-inflammatory activity of
Clerodendrum phlomidis L.f., a traditional medicinal plant. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2011. Jun 1;135(3):779-85. Equb 2011 Apr 16).

. The leaf extract of C. Phlomidis, when subjected to TLC, showed the presence

of adrenaline. Mohan Maruga Raja MK, Patel RS, Mishra SH, identification

and quantification of adrenaline from the leaves of Clerodendrum phlomidis
using thin-layer chromatography, Journal of Chinese Integrative Medicine,

9(1), 2011.

----- PAGE 24 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

important formulations

Name Indications

iE Dashamularishta Aruchi, Shula, Shwasa

Ze Dashamula kwatha Jwara, Kasa, Shwasa
Kushtha, Prameha, Shotha

4. Narayana taila Vatavyadhi, Prakupitavata
Indukanta ghrata Vatavyadhi, Kshaya
[6 Pratiama Brahmarasayana | Ayurvardhak
ee

(A Agurvadya Taila hitajwara
fF 8k Baladi lepa isarpa

Botanical name

1. Clerodendron phlomides, Linn of Suppl.

2. Clerodendron multiflorum O. Kitze.
Kleros=Chance, Dendron = tree (Gk)
Pholomides = Resembling phlomis (Jerusalem sage)

3. Premna integrifolia Linn.
Premna = Premnon (Greek) = a stump, low stature of the species
Integri = entire or whole
Folia = leaves

Family - Lamiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Basonym of Drug

okt wetter dtaacarey_ |

When two dried sticks of Agnimantha plant rubbed each other will produce fire and
when administered internally stimulates digestive fire.

Main synonyms

Based on Habitat
1. freer —> wot aae vat wars ar

Agnimantha grows gregariously.

2. areet => wal vat!
Agnimantha grows gregariously on river banks.

----- PAGE 25 -----
Agnimantha 17

Morphology

3. hy: > Weteha yore |
Inflorescence of Agnimantha resembles the kite.

4. asafirat > warha |

Inflorescence resembles the kite.

Properties and actions
5. War > wartm
Agnimantha cures many diseases.

6 Tet => Wr Tara
Agnimantha overcomes diseases.
Other
7. aime > afinteadsyarftretor |
The Agnimantha stick catches fire similar to dry cowdung.
8. anitte > afer wasrar: |

Agnimantha can be used as a source of fuel like dried
cowdung.

9. wenlft — Acolloquial name

Regional names
Hin
Kannada i

Malayalam

Shothahara varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Anuvasanopaga varga

Viratarvadi Gana, Varunadi Gana, Brahat Panchamula

Guduchyadi varga 23-24

Habitat

The piant is found all over India. Grows abundantly in Karnataka, Maharashtra and
through out drier parts.

----- PAGE 26 -----
18 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Premna integrifolia Linn.

External Morphology : Premna integrefolia Linn.

A large shrub or a small tree reaching 9 mtrs in height.

Bark - Yellowish, lenticellate, Trunk and large branches
sometimes spinous.

Leaves - 5-9 cm long and 3-6 cm wide, broadly elliptic,
obtuse, very shortly acuminate, glabrous, entire or upper part
dentate, base rounded or sub acute, with 4-5 pairs of main
nerves, petioles 1 cm long.

Inflorescence - Terminal, Pubescent, Paniculate corym-
bose cyme.

Flower - Small greenish yellow, with disagreeable
odour.

Fruits - Pear shaped, small 4 mm long.

Clerodendron phlomides Linn

A large bush or small tree, reaching 9 mtrs high with
more or less pubescent branches.

Leaves - Ovate or subrhomboid, coarsely crenate, den-
tate or sub entire, glabrous above more or less puberulous
beneath. Base truncate, or subcordate, simple or opposite.

Inflorescence - Dichotomous axillary cyme, arranged to form a rounded terminal
panicle.
Flower - White or pinkish.
Fruit - Drupe, obovoid, black when ripe.
Varieties
Dhanvantari Nighantu. — 1. Agnimantha (Tarkari)
2. Nadeyi
. 3. Kshudragnimantha (Aranika)
Kaiyyadeva Nighantu’ -— > 1. Agnimantha
2. Tarkari
Raja Nighantu . — = 1. Agnimantha-Premna integrifolia Linn.

2. Kshudragnimantha-Clerodendron phlomides.
Linn.

Clerodendron. phlomides
Linn.

----- PAGE 27 -----
Agnimantha 19

Grahya Laxana (Features of useful Part: Mula (Root)
Diagnostic characters

Premna latifolia Clerodendron multiflorum

Shape: Cylindrical, knarled roots or it’s | Shape: Pieces of cylindrical, some what
longitudinally split pieces. twisted, gradually tapering roots, upto 3 cm
in diameter.
Surface: Surface rough, longitudinally | Surface: Surface is longitudinally fissured,
wrinkled, yellowish brown in clour with | yellowish brown in colour; transversely cut
small round root scars. Debarked portion shows a creamish yellow. Surface
surface is silky yellow and longitudinally | enclosed by an easily separating thin bark,
striated. Surface of transversely cut root | well- defined annual rings and a central pith
shows a closely adhering thin bark, of dark brown colour. Size: The bark occur
followed by a narrow cortical region, a | small flat or slightly curved and friable pieces
large woody portion with prominent of 1.5 to2 mm thickness. These have a brown
concentric rings and small central pith. _| exfoliating inner surface.

Odour: Mild and pleasant Odour: Slightly pungent

Taste: Astringent Taste: Bitter

Substitutes
Premna mucronata is substitute for Agnimantha (API-I-Vol. 3).
Classical references
Synonyms
air wer: wearedtauff aftertaste seat enh areet arora
(A. TAS a-23)
Properties, Actions & Indications
aftara: gargqghiten: amaded | Wag qengatermegant wetshre:
(aa. Wseafe at 24)
ceaaltt meet ferent cates Premrngheret | vite verofrreraferarartsr feared
(a.fA. gee aT 110)
aeahet agent fever qau wepeftrer | cfteifoor axe are Mey UTTgAT: |
sTfererat TUTeTaTSRTaTaT TTT Ul (GFF. sitahey PF 25-28)

----- PAGE 28 -----
20 Dravyaguna Vijnana

aired wa fren: Hare: Neg | Shafer: were stadt seca:
(BLP. etree aT 29)

waht agson a fereasreracaaer | vayctentraransistreareeArt ATT 1
aires da gen atetrenfeg | certain ater erate
(aia. samixrt 23-25)
STATE Ba Hee: Vil WAN | ata eT Woah Se: TAT: AIST:
(B.A. etttenfe af 30)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Agnimanthaa is
a. Patra b. Kanda c. Mulatwak = d. Phala
Ans: c. Mula twak
2. Pradhana Rasa of Agnimantha

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Katu
3. Pradhana Karma of Agnimantha
a. Brahmana __b. Bhedana c. Balya d. Shothaghna

Ans: d. Shothaghna

4. Agnimantha Kashaya is effective in
a. Vasameha _b. Haridrameha c. Shukrameha_ d. Sikatameha
Ans: a. Vasameha

5. Premnine an alkaloid is present in
a. Ahiphena _b.. Arka c. Agnimantha d. Bhallataka
Ans: c. Agnimantha

6. Vaijayantika is a synonym of
a. Amalaki b. Agnimantha c. Arka d. Ashwagandha
Ans: b. Agnimantha

7. Premna integrifolia is the botanical name of
a. Haridra b. Panasa c. Ashoka d. Brahat Agnimantha
Ans: d. Brahat Agnimantha

8. Substitute for Agnimantha
a, Premna mucronata b. Plumbago zeylanica
c. Withania somnifera d. Aegle marmelos
Ans: a. Premna mucronata

----- PAGE 29 -----
*~ “Chapter

Ahiphena

Parts used — Kshira (Latex) & Beeja (Seed)

Rasadi Panchaka

ee ee | | |

Karma (Actions)

Niryasa (Latex) : Grahi, Madaka, Ruchikara, Agnivardhaka, Stambhaka,
Vedanasthapaka, Nidrajanaka.

Phalatwak (Fruit bark) : Grahi, Mohakara, Ruchya, Agnivardhaka
Bija (Seed) : Balya, Vrashya

Pharmacological Actions

Analgesic, Hypnotic, Sedative, Narcotic, Respiratory depressant, and Depresses
cough reflex, Emetic (but in large doses suppresses vomiting centre).

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha) : Niryasa is Kaphahara because of its Ushna
virya. Bija is Pittahara because of its Shita virya.

Rogaghnata (Indications)
Niryasa (Latex): Shula (Pain), Atisara (Diarrhoea) and Agnimandya (Loss of appe-
tite)
Bija (Seed): Daurbalya (General debility), Klaibya (Impotency)
Amayika payoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Daruna (Dandruff)
Sar Grae Sst werarg qreut HAT (MA. 3/11/19)

Paste prepared from Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) seeds and milk if applied over
scalp will destroy dandruff.

----- PAGE 30 -----
22 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

walter wee wae: fenced: aa stat Mak YR THER TTT

(4.4. 6/3)

Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) mixed with bark of Kupilu (Strychnos nuxvomica)
and honey if given checks all kinds of Atisara (Diarrhoea).

Matra (Dose)
Aphim (Latex) - 30to 125 mg
Churna (Powder) - 1to2gm
Bija (Seed) - 2to5fgm
Phytoconstituents

Alkaloids of Opium are divided into two groups Viz., Phenantherene group and
Benzyl isoquindine group.

Phenanthrene séries - Benzyl isoquinoline group

Morphine 521%
Codeine 03.4%
Thebaine 03%

Opium also contains Meconin or pianin, organic acids like Neopine, Porphyroxine
and Meconidine.

Research Corner

1. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separations using a
monolithic column with acidic potassium permanganate and tris (2,2'-
bipyridyl)ruthenium (II) chemiluminescence detection in a rapid and highly
sensitive method to monitor the process of extracting opiate alkaloids from
Papaver somniferum. Due to the high flow rates allowed with the monolithic
column and the inherent selectivity of the chemiluminescence reactions, the
four predominant alkaloids-morphine, codeine, oripavine and thebaine-were
determined in less than 2 min. (Costin JW, Lewis SW, Purcell SD, Waddell
LR, Francis PS, Barnett NW. Rapid determination of Papaver somniferum
alkaloids in process streams using monolithic column high Acta. 2007 Jul
30;597(1):19-23. Epub 2007 Jun 27).

2. Solid-phase microextraction (SPME) with DVB/Carboxen/PDMS Stable-Flex
fiber was applied to the study of volatile compounds of several seed oil samples
from Papaver somniferum L. (Papaveraceae). 1-Pentanol (3.3-4-9%), 1-

----- PAGE 31 -----
Ahiphena 23

hexanal (10.9-30.9%), 1-hexanol (5.3-337%), 2-pentylfuran (7.2-10.0%), and
caproic acid (2.9-11.5%) could be identified as the main volatile compounds in
all examined poppy seed oil samples. (Krist S, Stuebiger G, Unterweger H,
Bandion F, Buchbauer G. Analysis of volatile compounds and triglycerides of
seed oils extracted from different poppy varieties (Papaver somniferum L.). J
Agric Food Chem. 2005 Oct 19;53(21):83 10-6).

3. Papaver somniferum allergy is mediated by an IgE mediated mechanism and
not by a pharmacological or toxic effect of the alkaloids or polyphenols.
(Moneo I, Alday E, Ramos C, Curiel G. Occupational asthma caused by
Papaver somniferum. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 1993 Jul-Aug; 21
(4):145-8).

4. Oripavine was isolated from the dried capsules of a variety of Papaver
somniferum cultivated in Tasmania. (Nielsen B, Roe J, Brochmann-Hanseen E.
Oripavine-a new opium alkaloid. Planta Med. 1983. Aug; 48(8):205-6).

5. The stenciling of alkaloid biosynthetic genes using VIGS confirms the
physiological function of enzymes previously characterized in vitro, provides
insight into the biochemical regulation of morphine biosynthesis, and
demonstrates the immense potential for metabolic engineering in opium poppy.
(Wijekoon CP, Facchini Pj. Systematic knockdown of morphine pathway
enzymes in opium poppy using virus-induced gene silencing. Plant J. 2012.
Mar; 69(6):1052-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04855.x.Epub 2011 Dec

28.)
Important formulations
SI-No. Formulations Indications

Agnikumara Rasa

a

Botanical Name
Papaver somniferum Linn.
Papaver - Member of Papaveraceae family.
Somniferum - Produce sleep.

----- PAGE 32 -----
24 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Family
Papaveraceae
Classification
Bhavaprakasha Nighantu - Haritakyadi Varga 236-238
are ther Mette Aewrporcang, | arereTeT ate AT Cat Meta TAMA
(FA.)

Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) latex is very strong like venom of Cobra.

Synonyms
Kshira (Latex)

o hth > wHftrat ha a SITUA

Latex is as strong as venom of Snake.

e Atha — Kshira (Latex) is as strong as Snake venom.

e 3th — A source for opium.

« TGamcieftt > Injury done to fruit yeilds latex.
Bija (seed)

¢ Ger att > Seeds are very small

e Wan age — Small seeds
Regie Name:
leas
Habitat

In India it is cultivated in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar.

Morphology
Habit. - An annual herb with latex.
Reet - Tap root, branched.
Stem- Erect, herbaceous, green, cylindrical, hairy with latex

----- PAGE 33 -----
Ahiphena 25

Leaf - Simple, alternate, sessile, sheathing base,
exstipulate, lobed, unicostate, reticulately, veined.

Inflorescence - Solitary, terminal Cymose

Flower - Pedicellate, actinomorphic, bisexual,
complete, hypogynous, large, showy, red or white
coloured.

Fruit - Small, white or black
Varieties

I. According to the Colour of flowers [Ra.Ni.

& Ni. Ratnakara)

1. Shweta — White flower
2. Pita — Yellow flower Papaver somniferum Linn.
3. Krishna — Black flower
4. Chitra — Multi coloured
IL Acc to Action
1. Jarana — Digests food
2. Marana — Fatal
3. Dharana — Maitains health
4. Sarana — Evacuates wastes

Ii. Different Species
1. Papaver glabrum Bios — Cultivated in Turkey, Egypt and Iran.

2 Papaver album DC — Cultivated in India & Yugoslavia
3. Papaver nigrum DC — Cultivated in Southern Europe
4. Papaver setigerum DC — Wild in Southern Europe
Different preparations
1. Raw opium (the inspissated juice): It is the dried latex obtained by the

incision from the unripe fruit capsules of Papaver somniferum, dried or partly
dried or partly dried by heat or spontaneous evaporation and worked into some
what irregularly shaped masses or moulded into masses of more uniform size
and shape.

2. Poppy seeds: Seeds are collected from the poppy capsules. The seeds are very
small, about 1 to 1.5 mm in diameter.

----- PAGE 34 -----
26 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Poppy straw: Dricd opium poppies are referred as ‘‘Poppy straw’’
Adverse effects and remedial measures
Signs and symptoms of acute poisoning
There are three stages:
1. Stage of Excitement: Sense of well being
(i) Freedom from anxiety
(ii) Restlessness
(iii) Hallucination
(iv) Flushing of face
(v) Increased action of heart
(vi) In children it may present with convulsions
2. Stage of Stupor: Depressive action starts
(i) Headache
(ii) Heaviness of the body
(iii) Fatigue
(iv) Giddiness
(v) Drowsiness and intense desire to sleep
(vi) Pupils contracted and pinpointed.
(vii) Face and lips slightly cyanosed
(viii) Pulse and respiration is normal
3. Stage of Coma:
(i) No response to talking and shaking.
(ii) Later, no response to deep pain.
(iii) Relaxed muscles, reflexes are lost.
(iv) All secretions except that of skin are depressed.
(v) Pupils contracted and insensitive to light.
(vi) Feeble pulse, slow.
(vii) Low blood pressure
Treatment
1. Gastric lavage with Potassium Permanganate (KMn04)
2. Endotracheal clearance

----- PAGE 35 -----
Ahiphena 27

3. Hot bags and blankets should be used to maintain the body heat.

4, Administering the antidote - Nalorphene hydro bromide in the dose of 5 mg IV
should be given.

Fatal dose
Crude opium - lto2g
Tinctureopium - 3to4ml
Morphine - 60 tol80 mg (Injectable)
Codiene200 - 400mg
Heroin - 20to30mg
Fatal period
45 minutes to 12 hrs.
Ahiphena is contraindicated in
Bala (Young)
Vraddha (Aged)

Madhumeha (Diabetic)
Visuchika (Patients suffering from Visuchika with cold limbs)
Shlaishmika kasa (Cough because of Kapha dosha).
Vrakka shotha (Inflammation of Kidney).
Purification: [Rasa Tarangini-24/242]
Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) is subjected to trituration with Ardraka swarasa
for 21 times.
Classical References
Synonyms
Valkala - frate: Gateret: Grate TTA: |
Ksira - Searnciaht arpeanateray |
Bija - Fae Gein a Greate arte 1 ay, etree at-236
Gunakarma
mie fark Has adhd HHA, | MGA wile BaaHaststtay, |
alee vireo wes severed araftrrery | AAT Gace acne Ura AT It
aastienttt acaritr genftr qyettr a seat aa ater srratet VAIN UI
(Aa. Sitaaieart 236-240)
gent aeasy attra: VAM aA: | arma Hat att ret Agra:

----- PAGE 36 -----
to

Dravyaguna Vijnana

SRS ihe oy yeeros aah (PLT aH 106-108)
Pvt anit ent apeereor | Pret g ORE ATTY IT ce

Cia sPraret eet gre: wes ui (BLA. magene a 198-199)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Ahiphena

a. Root b. Latex & Seed cc. Stem d. Leaf
Ans: b. Latex & Seed
2. Madaka Karma is attributed to of Ahiphena

a. Rasa b. Guna c. Vipaka d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhaya

3. Ahiphena Bija is
a. Balya b. Shulahara c. Agnidipaka d. Pranahara
Ans: a. Balya

4. Morphine an alkaloid derived from
a. Vatsanabha b. Ahiphena c. Jayapala d. Arka
Ans: b. Ahiphena

5. Morphine is best
a. Antihypertensive b. Antidiabetic c. Analgesic d. Antiepileptic
Ans: c. Analgesic

6. Botanical name of Ahiphena
a. Argemona Mexicana b. Withania somnifera
c. Uraria picta d. Papaver somnifera
Ans: d. Papaver somnifera

7. English name for Ahiphena
a. Cannabis b. Castor c. Opium d. Henbane
Ans: c. Opium

8. Which variety of Ahiphena maintains health
a. Jarana b. Marana c. Dharana d. Sarana
Ans: c. Dharana

9. Ardraka swarasa is used to purify
a. Shala b. Ahiphena c. Lashuna d. Bhallataka
Ans: b. Ahiphena

26 2K ek

----- PAGE 37 -----
Ajamoda = | 0K)
pearre wha \ervoud

Useful part - Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Dipana, Ruchikara, Shulahara, Hridya, Vrishya, Balya, Krimighna, Chardighna,
Hikkanigrahana, Bastirujahara.
Pharmacological (Actions)

Carminative, Stimulant, Expectorant, Emmenagogue, Cardiotonic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata hara Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha hara due to its Ushna
virya, Katu vipaka & Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Indications)

Agnimandya, Aruchi, Shula, Chardi, Hridroga, Krimi, Hikka and Bastiruja.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Sashula Atisara (Diarrhoea with pain)

wat gas ay a fraeoenfge: 1 franmeneaguyercaitiag

(]3. 40/79)

In Sashula Atisara (Diarrhoea with pain) the milk mixed with ghee, honey, sugar,
powder of Ajamoda (Carum roxburghianum), Katvanga (Ailanthes excelsa) and Madhuka
(Glycyrrhiza glabra) is administered.

2. Vataja vikara (Disorders of Vata) and Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice)

aareRrenreat ar Rragarst warfeteany (YS. 53/11)
Combination of Devadaru (Cedrus deodara), Agnika (Carum roxburghianum) and

honey is very useful in Vata vyadhi (Disorders of Vata) and Swarabheda (Hoarseness of
voice).

----- PAGE 38 -----
30 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Chemical constituents
Fruits contain Anthoxanthins, Graveobioside A and B, Lutrolin, Myristic acid, d-
linconene and Bergapten. ‘

Research corner

Study done to evaluate the chemical composition and antimicrobial activity of
Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Study shown presence of thymol, r-terpinene and O-
cymene were the major components of Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Thymol is an
antimicrobial agent. Mahaboubi M & Kazempour N. Chemical composition and antimi-
crobial activity of Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Iran J. Microbiol 2011 Dec; 3(4):194-
200.
Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Ajamodadi kwatha Chaturthika jwara

Ajamodadi churna Atisara, Shula
Hingwashtaka churna Agnimandya, Vatavyadhi

Latin Name
Carum roxburghianum Benth. or Apium graveolens Linn.

Carum - roots and seeds are edible, roxburghianum in memory of Dr. William
roxburgh a botanist.

Family — Apiaceae
Kula — Shatapushpa kula

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Dipaniya varga, Shulaprashamana varga
Pippalyadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyidi varga 77-79

Basonym of Drug

aret Aeahet, AA MVTMATOTaeL; BTSTET Aled TASTE Stet AT

Fruit of Ajamoda (Carum roxburghianum Benth) has got strong odour which may
cause intoxication to goat if consumed. Fruit has got similar aroma like that of goat.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Ajamoda 31

Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Gvar-wivad sft i aerPerrarcrarment |
Fruit of Ajamoda has got similar odour to donkey.
2. cere: -arftretot |
Ajamoda increases appetite.
3, SoPeret-sa: West Stet |
Ajamoda has got very strong Aroma.
Vernacular Names

Malayalam Aayamodakam
2
Habitat

Ajamoda grows all over India but commonly cultivated in Maharashtra state.

Morphology

Habit - An annual herb. Grows up to 1 mtr in
height

Leaves - Lower leaves are broad; where as upper
leaves are linear-lanceolate.

Inflorescence - Umbel inflorescence.

Flowers - White or greenish white and very small.

Fruit - Very small, Cremocarp 2 mm long.
Grahya- agrahya (Genuine characteristics):

Fruits of Ajamoda are ovoid or globular shaped,
yellow or grayish yellow in colour and up to 2 mm long.
The surface is studded with blunt simple hair. Fruit con-
sists of two mericarps, each having five ridges and fif-
teen vittae. Has got characteristic odour.

w
F/EIE
5 if]
=} +) oe
= 2.
o. ~
boo]

z
S
i

Carum roxburghianum Benth

----- PAGE 40 -----
32 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references

Synonyms

SHAT VATA ST TAY hee | TAT HATH re HCA TATA
(ata. eterna aT-7 7 )
Properties and Actions
aatet eee dost aaa | sot rarest eer Gear aetentt wT:
Fare Hlteoftttaan aftrast eeu (ar. eirenfe at-7 8-79)
sTatler a yerett fara acne | eaeereareherdha He are i
(a.Fr. mrargeaie 7-9 6 )
aTaalar efter Hearent ferarfedt | dtast avert war arate aTaretee |
aftr sagfteat wer gear Rare | saRrTekrateererakteaHay
(fr. ates af-1 201-1203)
AAAS ESM SAT HHA SharHd, | AAMT HARTATATTA IT UI
(aA. freeanfe aT-1 10)
ANT Aa Aa: Tartare Wh: | TAaTafereareg ae: WATS AT
(BA. eergeate af-1 3 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Ajamoda
a. Mula b. Phala c. Bija d. Patra
Ans: b. Phala
. Pradhana Karma of Ajamoda
a. Bhedana b. Rchana c. Dipana d. Vrashya
Ans: c. Dipana
. Apium graveolens is the botanical name of
a. Jiraka b. Krishna Jiraka c. Dhanyaka d. Ajamoda
Ans: d. Ajamoda
4. Kharashwa is the synonym of
a. Ashwagandhab. Sarpagandha c. Ajamoda d. Jiraka
Ans: c. Ajamoda
. Ajamoda is
a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

ay

NO

Ww

Nn

dR RR

----- PAGE 41 -----
Chapter *

Amalaki

Parts used ~ Phala (Fruit)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Rasayana, Pramehaghna, Jwaraghna, Vrashya, Dahahara, Chardighna,
Shophaghna, Ruchya, Medohara, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Keshya, Chakshushya,
Kushthaghna.

Agrya Karma antegng
AMAT SALAAM | (F.-Y. 25/40)

Aamalaki (Emblica officinalis Gaerten.) is best Vayasthaapana (Rejuvenative).

Pharmacological actions

Immunomodulator, Antioxidant, Antiulcerogenic, Anticarcinogenic,
Antihypercholesterolaemic, Pancreatoprotective, Antimicrobial.

Doshakarma : Tridoshahara
— Vataharahecause of Amla Rasa
— Pittaharabecause of Shita virya and Madhura vipaka
— _Kaphara-because of Ruksha guna and Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

As a Rasayana, Prameha, Jwara, Raktapitta, Panduroga, Kamala, Shukra
dourbalya, Daha, Chardi, Bhagna, Shopha, Kesha vikara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

él ehtat fraxearmrcratHerany | (=F. 6/26)

----- PAGE 42 -----
34 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fresh Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) juice mixed with Haridra (Curcuma longa)
taken every day will cheek the Prameha (Diabetes).

2. Jwara (Fever)

TOAST at Ft WE TTT | (a. 3/230)

Juice extracted from Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) fruit fried with ghee is very use-
ful in Jwara.

3. Pandu (Anaemia)

eTeitaet at AEATSateraMe, | (GS. 44/27)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna (powder) mixed with honey is effective in
Pandu roga (Anaemia).

4, Kamala (Jaundice)

ITSM AT Baleaetent Ta: 1 (aA. 16/114)

Juice of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and grapes may be used in Kamala (Jaun-
dice).

5, Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder)

en aaa aT |

fated waaite weperaeyerehery | Ta: Werte ot Terie festa:

(a.fa. 4/57-58)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna mixed with more quantity of Madhu (Honey)
and Sharkara (Sugar) given as a Virechaka (Purgative) is very useful in Raktapitta.

6, Hikka (Hiccough)

frroreftreyereat at tat exeftenftreeratt: 0 (a.F. 17/135)

Juice of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Kapitha (Feronia elphantum) mixed with
Pippali (Piper longum) churna and Madhu (Honey) controls Hikka (Hiccough).

7, Kasa (Cough)

got firaamcrnen arte efitor vat wat feast | (3.2.fa. 3/78)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna boiled with milk and taken with ghee is very
useful in Kasa (Cough).

8, Vatarakta (Gouti Arthritis)

aimee ERAT HATS AY AAT aaa | (GAB. 5/10)

Kashaya (Decoction) of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Haridra (Curcuma longa)
are very useful in Vatarakta.

----- PAGE 43 -----
Amalaki 35

Matra (Dose)
Phalachurna — 3tol0g
Kashaya — 30to 100 ml
Swarasa — 10to20ml

Important phytoconstituents

Fruit -Ellagic acid, Amlaic acid, Phyllantine, Phyllantidine, Zeatin, Zeatin nucle-
otide, Zeatin riboside, Benzenoid, Chebulic acid, Chebulinic acid, Chebulagic acid, Gal-
lic acid, Ethyl galate, {-glucogatin, Digallic acid, Emblicol, Phyllemblic acid, Ascorbic
acid, Triterpene, Lupiol, Phyllemblin, Flavonoid, Kaempheral, Rutin, g-Sitosterol, Tan-
nin (28%), Carbohydrates, Protein, Fat, Calcium.

Bark — Tannin (10-20%)
Leaves — Tannin — 22%
Rich source of Vit. C-— 600 mg/100 g.

Research Corner

1. Adil MD, Kaiser P, Satti NK, Zargar AM, Vishwakarma RA, Tasdug SA,
Effect of Emblica officinalis (fruit) against UVB-induced photo-aging in
human skin fibroblasts. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Oct 28; 132 (1) : 109--14.
Equp 2010 Aug 3. Fruit of Emblica officinalis effectively inhibits UVB-
induced photo-aging in human skin fibroblast via its strong ROS scavenging
ability.

2. Gopa B, Bhatt J, Hemavathi KG, A comparative clinical study of
hypolipidemic efficacy of Amla (Emblica officinalis) with 3-hydroxy-
3methylgutaryl-coenzyme-A reductase inhibitor simvastatin. Indian J
Pharmacol. 2012 Mar; 44(2):238-42. Amla produced significant hypolipidemic
effect along with a reduction in blood pressure. Addition of Amla to the
currently available hypolipidemic therapy would offer significant protection
against atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, with reduction in the dose
and adverse effects of the hypolipidemic agents.

3. Shivananjappa MM, Joshi MK, influence of Emblica officinalis aqueous
extract on growth and antioxidant defence system of human hepatoma cell line
(Hep G2]. Pharm Biol. 2012 Apr; 50(4):497-505. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

4. Dhingra D, Joshi P, Gupta A, Chhillar R, Possible Involvement of
Monoaminergic Neurotransmission in Antidepressant-like activity of Emblica
officinalis Fruits in Mice. CNS Neurosci Their. 2012 May; 18(5):419-25.

----- PAGE 44 -----
36 Dravyaguna Vijnana

doi:10.1111/).1755-5949.2011.00256.x. Epub 2011 Jun7. Thus, aqueous
extract of E. officinalis showed antidepressant-like activity probably by
inhibiting MAO-A and GABA; and also due to its antioxidant activity.

5. Patel SS, Goyal RK, Prevention of diabetes-induced myocardial dysfunction in
rats using the juice of the Emblica officinalis fruit. Exp Clin Cardiol. 2011 Fall;
16 (3):87-91.

6. Kumar A, Tantry BA, Rahiman S, Gupta U, Comparative study of
antimicrobial activity and phytochemical analysis of methanolic and aqueous
extracts of the fruit of Emblica officinalis against pathogenic bacteria J Tradit
Chin Med. 2011. Sep;31(3):246-50. Aqueous infusion extract of amla
exhibited potent antimicrobial activity against E. cloacae followed by E. coli.
Preliminary phytochemical analysis of E. officinalis aqueous extracts (infusions
and decoctions) only showed presence of tannins, saponins, flavonoids,
terpenoids and phenols. MIC of aqueous extract of E. officinalis was most
active against K. pneumoniae. Whereas minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) of methanol extract of E. officinalis shows maximum activity against E.
coli. Emblica officinalis definitely possesses potent antimicrobial.

Important formulations
SENo.
i

Formulations. Indications

Bhrangamalakadi taila Keshavikara, Netra roga
Triphala kwatha
Triphala ghrata

Jwara, Kasa

Timira, Netraroga
Pandu, Kamala, Hradroga

oo) Sui

Dhatryarishta

Botanical Names
Emblica officinalis Gareth
Phyllanthus emblica, Linn
Emblica — from Sanskrit — Amlika (Sour)
officinalis — available in the market.

Family : Phyllanthaceae (See appendix-I for key features).

----- PAGE 45 -----
Amalaki 37

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka

Kushthaghna varga, Kasahara varga,
Virechanopaga varga, Jwarahara varga,
Vayasthapana varga.

Parushakadi gana, Amalakyadi gana, Triphala
Bhavaprakasha Nighantu | Haritakyadi varga 38-41
Basonym of Drug
STATS emTearfer TAT HET EMT area ST Wa STA ST VAI, SAAT
MAAAN EM Aah earaval- aah Ie Pea SA AMMA TA ATTA TAT TTEAT

Amalaka (Emblica officinalis), which protects the body by subsiding the aggravated
doshas or the fruit is mainly sour to taste.

Synonyms
Habitat
1. ga Vet Var |

Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) commonly cultivated in Tamilnadu and Andhra
Pradesh.

Morphology
2. TAHT — Ft HTM: |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) fruit is globose.
3. le — HicraRart weet |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) fruit weighs 6 g.
4. freer — frst dread wet area sem:, fret aged emmen str Was
Fruiting season in Pushya masa (Nov-Dec.) or the fruits are auspicious.
5. ae — a Ae free |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) purifies the body.
6. TIAHT BAA TA HTT:
Fruit is rejuvenating as Amrita (Elixir).

7. sya — ayeag Yornkuft, areca, FT thera WaT stenret eT: Baas |

----- PAGE 46 -----
“uUINTOO [BNW J1OYs B UO ¢ SOT}
-uY “9sINgo ‘“Su0]g0 ‘9g sjedas ‘sjaotpad sapua|s WOYs UO ‘sNOJOWINN —SAIMO]y BJeYA]
“sjoTouRIg SULWaq Jeo] ay) UO so[tosey Are][IXe Ur ‘MOT[OA YSTUISID — amo],
‘gnoe Ayoury ‘ayeAo sopndys
‘sonra ajeuutd Jo souvseodde oy Suravy ‘osnygo ‘reour] A[Mouzeu ‘snoiqes ‘users 14ST]
‘sjaTqouRIG ot] BuoTe 39s ATASOjO ‘oprm WU €-¢'Z ‘SUT WO €T-| ‘o[Issasqng —Seava']
“snonploep UajJo ‘BUOT Wd QZ-OT ‘uoosaqnd AjouTy JO snoigeys sjoTyouelg
“sooueig Surpeaids pue YUNT psyoord YIM 9aI) pozis SPP Jo [Tus snonprsap VY
ASojoqdr0y] [EUIIIXA
“ATPIEM 2] Qe [LEAR JO payBATI[NO STII BIPUT INO YSNoIy |, 2 Feyquyy

TpurH
Atioq aS003 ueIpuy ysysuq

SOME TeMICUII A
“pad DILYS sossassod yn (sypuroyfo vIIquiq) DyDJDULy
| ith Pippa — htnpya*€ 1
‘Telorjouag skemye (s1puioyfo vo1.quiq) byDjDUy
| yiteiniiedts — hela} *Z 1
“nyoyq vaynys saoidun (syoursiffo voyquiq) byvjDUY
| bbusit — Ira * 1 1
‘AWAIBUOT So}OWOId (syoUIIIffo DIN Quiq) DYDjDIUy
| ‘pikabire 1b2) phite Rhb - lbihb *O |
‘Qa
yseoig) p{unjg se sontadosd reyruns sey pur (ansst) ney soyoword saint yin]
| ‘Webspinth [B2bh biajbeb? ‘pupinnibinilts nARe bills — Yells 6
‘[NJosn Ar9A AT[VULOIPOUl st Muy Jo son oy,
| bdo|bdoth ‘Dah {plln — hwdothipin *g

(UXT) Olay se Suneuoanfos (sypujayfo vay qui) DyV]OULY

vueuli, vundeAavig 8¢

----- PAGE 47 -----
Amalaki 39

Female flowers — Few, subsessile, ovary 3-celled.

Fruit — 1-1.5 cm diameter, fleshy, globose, with 6 ob-
scure vertical furrows, pale yellow of three 2-seeded crusta-
ceous cocci.

Seed — 6, 3-gonous.
Varieties
Raja Nighantu - Amalaka
Kshudamalaka
1. Vanya — Small & hard |
2. Gramya — Big, Soft & Fleshy Emblica afficinalis
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Charavteristics) Gach

Dried fruit is globular, subhexagonal, upto 1.5 cm in diameter, with a wrinkled sur-
face of yellowish brown or greyish black colour. The fruit breaks easily, exposing a
section of dried pulp and nut which contains triangular seeds of yellowish brown colour.

Fresh fruit is globular, fleshy, obscurely six lobed and measures 2 to 3 cm in diam-
eter. The surface is smooth and pale or yellowish green in colour. The fruits contain a
juicy pulp enclosing an obtusely obovate, Triangular, 3 celled nut, containing two seeds
ineach cell.

Classical references
Synonyms
SITET weed Prey | aeitact shasta aargdHet FIAT |
Brarmernareandt echt freer menswean ul (as. eiteRMe a3 8)
Properties
Bicat wt eitect faq faster: 1 weftramdeet We get TARA tl
Bhat are Tanerearheaed Aree Seat: HH SAH Aa MATAR TST, |
ae ter eee ote wate are et wee Safer aeararatt Fafesre,
(aa.etiaeate FI-3 9-41)
ware Hefernnet tag Ue ea | at Praleeg Get watet ST TATA Il
Sheard dercreanfead aeyesicat: | atheerenarearatcnet emeakararatste,
(afr. qgeate wt)
amet warns nat Prt wy lt ceftaaite vitwet a TARA

----- PAGE 48 -----
40 Dravyaguna Vijnana
sranfiaan-emreeyrayangat «=| ae: «et THN
(af. smear 158-159)
age at watdlemen yet ar | ween vet frorarnwftre |
TASH YAR: TaTgeraeel terete | Bet aed TATA Het waAs HANTS AT
aE wdaleet Termite | (a. sitefrerf. 238-240)
Biaat wi attect fg favtea: 1 ctf vftaater firretewet we |

areata tenftrs: was aT araarad | viteht uftager wet aa: werent uu
(fi. ff. ateenfeert 9-10)

Variety
Kshudramalaka or Kashtha Dhatri
Waele With wseltact aa | aa Wath ates A
(aft. street 60-161)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Pradhana Rasa of Amalaki
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Katu d. Tikta
Ans: b. Amla
Number of Rasa in Amalaki
a.3 b. 1 c. 5 d. 2
Ans: ¢. 5
. Nishamalaki is best in
a. Prameha b. Agnimandya c. Parinama shula d. Jwara
Ans: a. Prameha
4. Amalaki is rich with
a. VitB b. Vit D c. Vit K d. Vit C
Ans: d. Vit C
5. Agrya Karma of Amalaki
a. Sanjnasthapana b. Prajasthapana c. Vedanasthapana d. Vayasthapana

Ans: d. Vayasthapana

—y

ad

Ww

----- PAGE 49 -----
Amalaki 41

6. Indian Goose berry is the common name for

a. Haritaki b. Amalaki c. Vibhitaki d. Brahati
Ans: b. Amalaki
7. Botanical name of Amalaki
a. Emblica officinalis b. Zingiber officinalis
c. Phyllanthus urinaria d. Terminalia chebula

Ans: a. Emblica officinalis

ah ok a a

----- PAGE 50 -----
Apamarga

ii

Useful Part — Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi Panchaka

[Vivaka
Vina |

Karma ( Actions)
Agnidipaka, Saraka, Pachaka, Vamaka, Chedana.
Agrya Karma

WeTRTET PATA | (FY, 25/40)

Pratyakpushpa (Achyranthes aspera Linn.) is best for Shirovirechana Karma.

Phala
Madhura
Ruksha

Madhura

[Usina Sit

Panchanga

Pharmacological actions
Anti-hypertensive, Antidiabetic, Abortifaecient, Diuretic, Antileprotic, Purgative,
Spasmolytic, Hypoglycaemic and Antifungal.
Action on Dosha
Panchanga (Whole plant) — Kaphavatahara - because of its Ushna virya.
Phala (Fruit) — Vatakara— because of the Shita Virya.
Rogaghnata [Therapeutic indications]

Agnimandya Adhmana Chardi Hradruja Arsha — Kanduu
Udarashula Udara Apachi Dadru

Apamarga bija is indicated in Bhasmaka roga.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)

sroTaTeH aT Ug eee MAE: (A 6/13)

Repeated administration of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) mula (root) grinded
with Kshaudra (Honey) and given with Tandulodaka (Tice-water) is very useful in Arshas.

----- PAGE 51 -----
Apamarga 43

2. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
staant atarat aenerrgeranttor | chat center aret apee ArT Aya:
(WA. 2/5/19)
In bleeding piles, seeds of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) are taken with rice-
water.
3. Visuchika (Diarrhoea)

wertraaranhyet ware fergferaany | (41... 6/110)

Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) mula (root) Kalka taken with water is efficacious
in Visuchika.
4. Nadivrana (Sinus)

meant way Va Hate way frarearcery | (ZA. 17/25)

Oil prepared out of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) phala is applied along with
Cow’s urine in Nadivrana.

5. Atyagni (Bhasmaka)

get arearart ates: aT | (FZ. 2/33)

In excessive hunger, gruel prepared out of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) bija
(seeds), milk and Godha rasa (Inguana meat Juice) is effective.

6. Shastrakshata (Wound)

aan dita wateas THA aT | Melaaty Tee g Wart URafaste

(A.%. 44/52)

Paste of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) leaves is applied over accidental wound
to check bleeding.

Matra (Dose)
Kshara -— 0.5 to2g
Swarasa - 10to20ml
Mulachurna — 3to6g
Bijachurna —- 3g
Important phytoconstituents

Whole plant— Achyranthine (Alkaloid)
Root—Ecdysone, Ecdysterone, Oleanolic acid
Seeds— Saponin A, B, C, D, Hentriacontane

----- PAGE 52 -----
44

- Aqueous extract of Achyranthes aspera

= Dravyaguna Vijnana

Research Corner
J.

5 aspera showed excellent wound.
Begum SA, Pathak DC, Sarma
ling efficacy and antioxidant
s. Pharm Biol. 2012. Apr

The methanol leaf extract of Achyanthe
healing activities. (Barua CC., Talukdar A,
DK, Borah RS, Gupta A. In vivo wound-hea
activity of Achyranthes aspera in experimental burn

6. [Epub ahead of rint]).
Ark (500 and 1000 mg/kg body wt.) had

nd reduced renal injury. (Aggarwal A,
e and curative effects of
lly induced nephrolithiasis,

an ability to maintain renal functioning a! :
Singla Sk, Gandhi M, Tandon C. Preventiv
Achyranthes aspera Linn. extract in experimenta
Indian J. Exp. Biol. 2012 Mar; 50 (3):201-8).

- Anxiolytic activity of methanol extract of Achyaranthes aspera Linn

(Amaranthaceae) is confirmed & attributed to its phyto-constituents viz.
Alkaloid, steroid and triterpenses. (Barua CC, Talukdar A, Begum SA, Borah
P, Lahkar M. Anxiolytic activity of methanol leaf extract of Achyranthes
aspera Linn in mice using experimental models of anxiety. Indian J.
Pharmacol. 2012 Jan; 44(1):63-7).

. 58-kDa protein isolated from Achyranthes aspera root possesses spermatotoxic

effects comparable to gossypol. (Anuja MN, Nithya RN, Rajamanickam C,
Madambath I. Spermatotoxicity of a protein isolated from the root of
Achyranthes aspera : a comparative study with gossypol. Contraception. 2010
Oct; 82(4):385-90. Epub 2010 Jun 17).

. The acetone, chloroform, ethyl acetate, hexane and methanol leaf extracts of

Achyranthes aspera studied for larval mortality and the highest larval mortality
was found in the ethyl acetate extract of A. aspera. (Bagavan A, Rahuman AA,
Kamaraj C, Geetha K. Larvicidal activity of saponin from Achyranthes aspera
against Aedes aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera : Culicidae).
Parasitol Res. 2008 Jun; 103(1):223-9).

. The phytochemical tests revealed the presence of sterols, flavanoids, tannins

and carbohydrates. (Krishnaveni A, Thaakur SR. Pharmacognostical and
preliminary phytochemical studies of Achyranthes aspera linn. Anc Sci Life.
2006 Jul; 26(1-2):1-5).

. The ethanol extract of the root of Achyranthes aspera was screened for

antifertility activity in proven fertile female albino rats at 200 mg/kg body
weight and given orally on days 1-7 of pregnancy. The ethanol extract
exhibited 83.3% antiimplantation activity when given orally at 200 mg/kg body

----- PAGE 53 -----
Apamarga 45

weight. (Vasudeva N, Sharma SK. Post-coital antifertility activity of
Achyranthes aspera Linn. Root. J Ethnopharmacol, 2006 Sep. 19;107(2):179-
81. Epub 2006 Mar 22).

Important formulations

SIL.No. Formulation Indications

Apamarga kshra Arshas
Apamarga taila Krimija Shirashula

Apamargadi varti Yonigata Raktasrava, Yonivyapat

Mahapanchagavya Ghrata Apasmara, Unmada, Shotha
Apamarga kalka Asragdhara

Botanical Name

1.
sl

Achyranthes aspera Linn.

Achyranthes — Akanthes — Thorn.

aspera — Refering to the spinuouns bracts of inflorescence.
Family— Amarantheaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Apamarga Kula

Classification of Dravya
Krimighna Varga, Vamanopaga Varga, Shirovirechanopaga Varga

Sushruta

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi Varga 219-223

Basonym of Drug
TaUSTS Set |
The plant which removes all vitiated doshas from the body and purifies the body.
Main synonyms
Morphology
1. Gat — aueferar ureast gost |

Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) inflorescence has spinous bracteols and pointed
perianth, hence prickly to touch.

----- PAGE 54 -----
2. SMEG ~ yrefeayeTUNTE TAT |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) has spinuous bracteo
3. gslet — arvefrceret ate Er | |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) is difficult to hold as the inflorescence is
spinuous,

4. Rraft - Pret gorse |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) plant bears terminal spike inflorescence.
S. WereRyE -yrahes areitqearft eaves |
Plant has deflexed flowers.
Actions and properties
6. Ant: anstafe ary eta |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) cleanses all the channels.
7. ARAET:- AR TA MASE, Bite: ATC WIAA |
Whole plant is predominantly alkaline.
8. Wath: ag ga ferrer:, aterar Hitarfer feahet THT |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) is antipoisonous or cures many diseases.
9. MaH:-aagent: sarant aogerat Prafaterenare |

Causes sneezing, the seeds possess Sirovirecaka property.

Js and pointed perianth.

Regional Names

Prickly chaff flower

Habitat
The plant grows abundantly in waste places of tropical and temperate regions.

External Morphology
Habit- Wild perennial herb grows 30-90 cm in height.

Root-— Branched tap root.

----- PAGE 55 -----
Apamarga 47

Stem-— Acrial erect, angular, branched, hairy, green,
herbaceous but woody below, nodes and internodes are
prominent on stem and is violet or pink at nodes.

Leaf- Petiolate, opposite, simple, obovate or
semiorbicular with a suddenly pointed apex; hairy, reticu-
late venation.

Inflorescence— A spike with reflexed flowers ar-
ranged on long peduncle.

Flower-— Bracteate, bracteolate, bracteoles have
spinous tips, complete, actinomorphic, bisexual, hypogy-
nous, pentamerous, tertracyclic, small, green and spinescent.

Achyranthes aspera Linn.

Perianth- Tepals 5, polyphyllous, valvate, persistent,
ovate to oblong, green, membranous and chaffy. Androecium-Stamens 10, 5 fertile sta-
mens alternating with 5 sterile.

Gynoecium- Bicapellary syncarpous and ovary is superior.
Fruit— An indehiscent achene enclosed within persistent perianth and bracteole.t
Seed— Endospermic.

Varieties
Bha. Ni 1. Shweta — Achyranthes aspera
Dha. Ni } 2. Rakta — Achyranthes rubrofusco
Ra. Ni
Kai.Ni-— 1. Apamarga
2. Vashira

3. Ramatha (Toyapamarga)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Dry herb, consisting of pieces of quadrangular, striated stems, 4 to 7 mm in diameter,
orbicular, obovate, hairy leaves, having an attenuated base and short petiole and pieces of
long slender spikes bearing prickly flowers or fruits which are sharply deflexed against
the rachis. The colour of fleshy dried material is greyish which changes to pale brown
during storage and will have faintly aromatic odour and bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
staranteg Pratt eergreat were: | achet gale: anit fenftredt Gat
(Ma EMeaA-2 19)

----- PAGE 56 -----
48 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Raktapamarga

THEA a sae aantatste a 1 werepualf cyraulf aaferar aAfahtroretT

(Maeas-2 27 )

Properties and actions
Apamarga

srarant: weeftent daa: Rerereh: the: | Ure tergotdanntetsPreance: 1

Prefer ggarenist: avg yettauaett: 0 (aa ygefert-220)

aTaranteg ferenten: Heat HATTA: | ave: HUGSUTEA TrheaMeaied Hel

(aA SAeat-2 54)

atarant: wearnedtemtent ctor: Ae: | Urea aTawet areata shreaTs: |

Pref yetereitenrgagrret: ut (a.F.sirsftrert-1 033-1034)
Raktapamarga

sTaTanifseut arafaerht arneaten: | eat: geersta: caret ureters: 1

( iiaaTgeafeart- 222 )

Apamarga phala (Fruit)

STOTT thet Fag TH Urs TT ae | feet atact Gat Teel Ware Il

(aageeat-2 23)

Apamarga bija (Seed)

ararart ators asert wer arlfor reaver feet Perera Te ETAT

(BLP rrgsaieat-1 7 9 )

Ramatha [Jalapamarga]
WHS: HEH: VHA: 1 (35.F.straheaT-1 038)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Ueseful Part of Apamarga
a. Patra b. Panchanga c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: Panchanga

2. Apamarga Phala has which Vipaka
a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

----- PAGE 57 -----
Apamarga

. Agrya Karma of Apamarga

a. Vamana b. Virechana c. Pramehahara_ d. Shirovirechana
Ans: Shiro Virechana

. Apamarga Bija is indicated in

a. Atyagni b. Kushtha c. Madhumeha_— d. Shiroroga
Ans: a. Atyagni

. Achyranthine an alkaloid found in

a. Chitraka b. Apamarga c. Shunthi d. Aragwadha
Ans: b. Apamarga

. Apamarga Kshara is indicated in

a. Visha Roga_ b. Arshas c. Yakratvikara d. Pandu
Ans: b. Arshas

. Botanical name of Apamarga is

a. Cinnamomum zeylanica b. Plumbago rosea
c. Achyranthes aspera d. Piper longum
Ans: c. Achyranthes aspera

. Kharamanjari is a synonym of

a. Chitraka b. Swarnakshiri c. Ativisha d. Apamarga
Ans: d. Apamarga

seo KR Re

49

----- PAGE 58 -----
Chapter

Aragwadha

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Karnikara (Variety)

Aragwadha phala Aragwadha puspa
majja (Pulp) (Flower)

Rasa Madhura- Tikta (Ra. Ni) |Madhura, Kashaya, | Madhura Tikta (Ra.
Tikta Ni)

Guru, Snigdha fa ako 2 Laghu Sara

Vipaka Madhura Madhura MadhuraKatu (Ra.
Ni)
Shita, - Ushna (Dha.Ni) Shita,-Ushna(Ra. Ni)

Karma (Actions)

Phala (Fruit) - Sramsana, Shulahara, Ruchya, Koshtha Shuddhikara, 17rKrimighna,
Pramehaghna, Jwaraghna, Kushtaghna

Patra (Leaf) - Meda vishoshaka, Virechaka.

Pushpa (Flower) - Grahi

Aragwadha phala majja is best Sramsaka.

Particulars

Agrya Karma
agent We fertaarry | (FF, 25/40)
Chaturangula (Cassia fistula Linn.) induce mild purgation.
Pharmacological actions
e Purgative
« Febrifuge
Dosha karma
Vatapitta Shamaka and Pitta kapha samshodhaka.
e Vata Shamaka because of Madhura rasa, Snigdha guna and Madhura vipaka.
e Pitta Shamaka because of Madhura rasa and Shita virya.
+ Pitta kapha, Samshodhaka because of its Sramsana property.

----- PAGE 59 -----
Aragwadha 5]

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Phala (Fruit) - Jwara, Hradroga, Raktapitta, Udavarta, Kushtha Krimi Prameha,
Mutrakrachra, Gulma, Udara, Vrana.

Patra (Leaf) - Medoroga
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Prameha (Diabetes insipidus)

eka Afet wergaerHarey | (ahs. 1179)

Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) kashaya is best for Haridra meha.

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

unit fireat arg a UU cre: | Te ATT
PSrAeaae IEG Ul (TY, 3/17)

Triturate leaves of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) and Kakamachi (Solanum nigrum)
with buttermilk. The paste thus obtained is applied over skin lesions (the part should be
anointed prior to this application).

3. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)
TTT Uae syeathrencdad: | AMAT AL: Hale, Beat AeHTS AT TU
(a1.5.F8. 26/52)

Leaves of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) are fried with mustard oil. These leaves are
chewed after evening meal.

4. Visarpa (Erysipelas)
ATA VAN Set STOTT SH eT Hale aM: Aagitsér ae
Weal: Wa Wad Sar: TaeaTarya: Ut (aA. 21/89-92)

Paste of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) leaves and Shleshmataka bark is mixed with
ghee and applied in all types of Visarpa (Erysipelas).

Matra (Dose)

Bija churna (Powder) -— 3to6og.
Mula twak kwatha - 10tolS5ml
Pushpa swarasa —- 5tol0ml

Phala majja (Fruit pulp)

10 to 20 g

Important phytoconstituents
Pod pulp - Anthraquinone, sucrose, lignoceric acid, amino acids.

----- PAGE 60 -----
$2 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Root bark - Anthraquinone derivates, sennoside A&B, Fistucacidin, g-sitosterol,
Volatile oil.

Stem bark and Leaves - Rhein glycoside.

Research Corner

1. Cassia fistula stem bark was used for the preparation of aqueous extract and
synthesis of god nanoparticles to evaluate the hypoglycemic effects and found
that gold nanoparticles have promising antidiabetic properties. (Daisy P,
Saipriya K. Biochemical analysis of Cassia fistula aqueous extract and
phytochemically sythesized gold nanoparticles as hypoglycemic treatment for
diabetes mellitus. Int. J. Nanomedicine. 2012;7:1189-202. Epub 2012 Mar 7).

2. Antibacterial and antifungal potentials of hydroalcohol extracts of leaves of
Cassia fistula Linn found very effective. (Bhalodia NR, Shukla VJ.
Antibacterial and antifungal activities from leaf extracts of Cassia fistula L. :
An ethnomedicinal plant. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Apr; 2 (2):104-9).

3. Bioactivity-guided fractionation of n-hexane phase from MeoH extract of the
seeds of Cassia fistula L. (Leguminosae) yielded two bioactive substances
against Cladosporium cladosporioides and C. sphaerospermum. (Sartorelli P,
Lago JH, Cunha RL, Kitamura RO, Young MC. A new minor dimmeric ester
from seeds of Cassia fistula L. (Leguminosae). Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(1):36-
41. doi:10.1080/1478619.2010.5321128. Epub 2011 Jul 15).

4. Methanolic extract of seeds of Cassia fistula did not produce any significant
toxic effect in mice. (Jothy SL, Zakaria Z, Chen Y, Lau YL, Latha LY,
Sasidharan S. Acute oral toxicity of methanolic seed extract of Cassia fistula
in mice. Molecules. 2011. Jun 23;16(6):5268-82).

5. Cassia fistula fruit pulp and seed extract possessed anticandidal activity.
(Irshad, Shreaz S$, Manzoor N, Khan LA, Rizvi MM. Anticandidal activity of
Cassia fistula and its effect on ergosterol biosynthesis. Pharm Biol. 2011 Jul;
49(7):727-33. Epub 2011 May 18).

6. Crude hydro-alcoholic extract of Cassia fistula (golden shower tree) fruit to
protect the kidney against bromobenzene-induced toxicity was confirmed by
the histological examination of the kidneys. (Kalantari H, Jalali M, Jalali A,
Salimi A, Alhalvachi, F, Varga B, Juhasz B, Jakab A, Kemeny-Beke A,
Gesztelyi R, Tosaki A, Zsuga J. Protective effect of Cassia fistula fruit extract
on bromobenzene-induced nephrotoxicity in mice. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2011
Oct; 30(10:1710-5. Epub 2011 Jan 19).

7. Hepatoprotective an antioxidant activities of ethanolic leaf extract (ELE) of

----- PAGE 61 -----
Aragwadha 53

Cassia fistula Linn. against diethylynitrosamine induced liver injury in ethanol
pretreated rats was found very effective. (Pradeep K, Raj Mohan CV,
Gobianand K, Karthikeyan S. Protective effect of Cassia fistula Linn. on
dicthylinitrosamine induced hepatocellular damage and oxidative stress in
ethanol pretreated rats. Biol Res. 2010;43(1):113-25. Epub 2010 May 7).

Formulations

SLNo Formulation Indications

Aragwadha Ghrata
Shula, Kamala, Raktapitta
Kushtha, Sarvanga Shotha

Botanical Name
Cassia fistula Linn.

Cassia — Kasia (Greek), derived from a Hebrew word, which os a name of plant.
fistula — Tube (Refering to the cylindrical pod)
Family— Fabaceae (See appendix-II for family features).
Classification of the Dravya

Charaka Kushthaghna, Kandughna Varga
Aragwadhadi gana, Shyamadi gana

B.P.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 148-150

Basonym of Drug

A MAAS Gat AST |

Aragwadha completely cures ailments.
Main synonyms
Morphology

1. PAATAT-Hat MAT ATT FOTIA |

When flowering, the tree looks adorned with garlands.

----- PAGE 62 -----
54 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. WYRM aaelsyea: yAroeT wer: ETP wets seca:
Aragwadha fruit has depression at every 4 inch distance.
3. detwe:-ded wet afbacet |
Aragwadha fruits are long.
4, UAGR:-TAUT WaT, YHA: VATA |
Aragwadha tree is regarded as king of tree oving to its beauty.
5. FaUig-tauiqurbaretty GouVET |
Aragwadha flowers are golden yellow coloured.
6. Wae:- Wave Were HH: |
Aragwadha tree is liked by people as it is beautiful.
Properties and actions
7. STASI-3Ht SheT
Aragwadha relieves Ama
8. Wad-saahe Pacatet ACH |
Expels mala (faeces) from the body.
9. antafita-smbeaye: ra: Hees |
Pods are therapeutically very useful.
10. HPSIer-HS Faucher |
Aragwadha cures skin diseases.
11, SATHTh:-SaTATTh: |
Aragwadha relieves from fever.
12. earrara:-sarelis aha |
Aragwadha is useful in many diseases.
13. WPOTE:-¥t EATON UTS |
Aragwadha corrects the digestive process.
14, BHUTTO: aUpA TATU BUTT VITTS |

Aragwadha flowers were used as ear ornaments.

----- PAGE 63 -----
Aragwadha 55

Regional Names

Hindi Amaltas
Kannada Kakke kayi

Malyalam
Mini

Habitat
Grows all over India and as it is a beautiful plant, it is cultivated in gardens.

External Morphology

Habit — A medium sized perennial tree.

Stem — Erect, branched, cylindrical, woody, solid,
bark greenish grey in colour.

Leaf — Alternate, petiolate, compound, paripinnate,
with pulvinus base, leaf lets 4-8 pairs, stalked, ovate,
wavy, acute, glabrous, entire, venation of the leaflets | “
unicostate, reticulate.

Inflorescence — Long axillary pendulous racemes.

Flower — Pedicellate, with long pedicels, bracte-
ate, bisexual, complete, zygomorphic, yellow, hypogy-
nous and pentamerous.

Calyx-5 speals, slightly petaloid, polysepalous, odd ed
sepal anterior, imbricate aestivation. Cassia fistula Linn.

Corolla-5 petals, polypetalous, yellow, posterior a
petal is the small and innermost in the bud; petals unequally inserted on the thalamus.

Androecium-10 stamens, polyandrous and all with anthers, but very unequal in length.

Gynoecium-Monocarpellary, ovary superior, unilocular, with marginal placentation,
ovules many, short style, stigma is terminal and hairy.t

Fruit - A legume which is very long (1-2 feet) and cylindrical (nearly one inch in
diameter).

Seeds — Flat, albuminous, embedded in soft pulp.

Varieites ;
Dhanvantari Nighantu & Raja Nighantu : 1. Aragwadha 2. Karnikara

----- PAGE 64 -----
56 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

The fruit is a straight or slightly curved, cylindrical pod of chocolate brown colour,
with a short woody stalk and a blunt end which is suddenly contracted into a point. It
measures 40 to 70 cm in length and upto 2.5 cm in diameter. Internally the pod is divided into
anumber of cellular compartments by then woody transverse dissepiments. These compart-
ments contain flat, oval seeds of reddish brown colour and a soft black greasy pulp.

Commercially available material consists of seeds and walls of cells, having deposits
of black pulp. Pieces of the rind are also commonly mixed with the mixture.
Classical references
Synonyms
ATA MAG: MTA YCA: | Aa carrera: Herat: Faster: |
waftteart detect: carurig: eauteeOT: 1 (aT. etretet-1 48 )
Action and properties
area ye: wag: vitae: Washes: | vearestrftrrearctaradyyerse |
Aen Gat wet Holtiranmey | wt Gg Aad Tet aleyigat wy
(a. eRaemfert-1 49-150)
area wa ferent your: pltepergd | anlar Weert: eayeahreratsry tt
(a. fgenfeat-21 6)
amet aftr weet yeter: 1 gedit saryedtarae: 1
Veteradgstian HeMAITG Ul (HP.stsat 944-945)
aera
Waa aaa faye | feta wad wet wear what uu
(S.P.ststtert 945-946)
TAY HYA-
wes Rit wag Hort is ferneny | (3. P.sierert 945-946)
BTA THT
ene Sat wet He frame | wat T Wad wet aleyeant Ws
(d.P.atsftret 947)
ATA et HaN- AAT Targurentshred Rares Prete |
(d.P.siehtert 948)
sreaeishange: eta: Yee: | vag Bele ae ATTA: I
(ar.FF.)

----- PAGE 65 -----
Aragwadha Si

wyraet agittewntan (4.9. 25/40)
waaay | Tass ust gga:
art ae at aft gat aaa 1 det ygrafrenferasgege:

(AH. 8/4-5)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful Part of Aragwadha
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Bija d. Phalamajja
Ans: d. Phalamajja
2. Vipaka of Aragwadha Phala Majja
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Aragwadha
a. Bhedana b. Anulomana c. Sramsana d. Rechana
Ans: c. Sramsana
4. Agrya Karma of Aragwadha as per Charaka
a. Mradu Virechana b. Tikshna Virechana
c. Sukha Virechana d. Stambhana
Ans: a. Mradu Virechana
5. Rajavraksha Kashaya is indicated in
a. Udaka Meha b. Haridra Meha_ ic. Vasa Meha dd. Sikata Meha
Ans: b. Haridra Meha
6. Botanical Name of Aragwadha
a. Cassia tora b. Withania somnifera
c. Cassia fistula d. Eclipta alba
Ans: c. Cassia fistula
7. Kratamala is a synonym of
a. Ashwagandhab. Ashoka c. Ashoka d. Aragwadha
Ans: d. Aragwadha
8. Raja Vriksha is a synonym of
a. Arjuna b. Aragwadha c. Japa d. Amalaki
Ans: b. Aragwadha
9. Habit of Aragwadha is
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper
Ans: c. Tree
2K KKK

----- PAGE 66 -----
Arjuna

Useful part- Twak (Bark)

Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)
Hradya (Prabhavajanya karma), Vranahara, Artighna, Bhagna sandhanakara,

Raktapittahara.

Pharmacological actions

Cardiotonic, Antidysenteric, Diuretic, Antihypertensive.
Action on Dosha

Kapha Pitta Shamaka : Kaphahara because of Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka,
Pittahara because of Kashaya rasa and Shita virya.

Actions on Dhatu — Medohara, Asthisandhanaka

Rogaghnata [Therapeutic indications]
Hrdroga, Medoroga, Pameha, Trsna, Arti, Bhagna, Uraksata, Ksaya, Raktapiita.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Hradroga (Cardiac diseases)
dersnysterrest ut meas ashe
frafe waits @ wate france: Gor: Perens FT 26)
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) and Godhuma (Triticum sativum) are mixed together
and cooked with oil, ghee, jaggery and milk. This is beneficial in Cardiac disorders.
2. Shukrameha (Spermaturia)

Wapatest apy wear Hort a (aaa. 11/44)

The decoction of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) is very useful in Shukrameha.

----- PAGE 67 -----
Arjuna 59
ee i‘

3. Twak roga (Skin diseases)
SS APT, ar HET ar aig era: aaerftat an serarecan Tet

- HBS. 32/16)

Application of Kalka

and honey is useful in Vang eines eae nia ee ie Re

4. Bhagna (Fracture)
yet gt dese ytartrerent: 1 Oa: Ceara ete eter

(a.5.Fa. 48/29)
Powder of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna), Laksha (Coccus lacca) and Guggulu
(Commiphora mukul) mixed with ghe

: : € and taken internally, which promotes union in
fracture. During this treatment patient should be on milk diet.
Matra [Dose]

Kwatha [Decoction]

— 60to100 ml
Churna [Powder] — 3to6g.
Kshirapaka [Decoction with milk] — 20to30ml

Important phytoconstituents

Hydrolysable tannis (15%), Triterpenoid saponin, Arjunolic acid, g-sitosterol, El-
lagic acid, Arjunic acid, Arjunine, Arjunetinc, Calcium, Aluminium and Magnesium.
Research Corner

1. Methanol, ethanol, acetone, aqueous (hot and cold) extracts from the leaves and
bark of Terminalia arjuna were tested for their antimicrobial activity and found
to be useful to treat the bacterial ear pathogens especially S. aureus. (Aneja KR,
Sharma C, Joshi R. Antimicrobial activity of Terminalia arjuna Wight & Arm.
: an ethnomedicinal plant against pathogens causing ear infection. Braz J.
Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Feb; 78(1):68-74).

2. Methanol extract of Terminalia arjuna leaf (META) exhibited remarkable
antitumour activity against Ehrlich ascites carcionoma (EAC) in Swiss albino
mice (Biswas M, Bhattacharya S, Ghos AK, Kumar RB, Bera S, Gupta M,
Haldar PK, Antitumour activity of Terminalia arjuna leaf against Ehrlich
ascites carcinoma in mice. Nat Prod’Res. 2011 Oct 24. [Equb ahead of print).

3. Diethyl ether, ethyl acetate and ethanol fractions of Terminalia arjuna bark
exerted hypolipidemic and antioxidative effects at two different doses leves of
175 and 350 mg/kg body weight in. Poloxamer (PX)-407 induced

----- PAGE 68 -----
60

Dravyaguna Vijnana

hyperlipidemic albino Wistar rats. (Subramaniam S, Ramachandran S,
Uthrapathi S, Gnamanickam VR, Dubey GP, Antihyperlipidemic and
antioxidant potential of different fractions of Terminalia arjuna Roxb. bark
against PX-407 induced hfyperlipidemia, Indian J Exp Biol. 2011 Apr; 49
(4):282-8).f

. Aqueous extract of Terminalia arjuna [TA (AqE)]-induced cardiotonic action

via enhancing SR function, a unique action minimizing the occurrence of
arrhythmias, makes TA (AqE) a promising and relatively safe cardiotonic
beneficial to the healthy heart and the treatment for chronic heart disease.
(Oberoi L, Akiyama T, Lee KH, Liu SJ. The aqueous extract, not organic
extracts, of Terminalia arjuna bark exerts cardiotonic effect on adult ventricular
myocytes. Phytomedicine. 2011. Feb 15; 18(4):259-65).

. Methanolic Extract of Terminalia arjuna leaf demonstrated remarkable

antihyperglycemic activity in STZ (streptozotocin)-induced diabetic: rats.
(Biswas M, Kar B, Bhattacharya S, Kumar RB, Ghosh AK, Haldar PK.
Antithyperglycemic activity and antioxidant role of Terminalia arjuna leaf in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Pharm Biol. 2011. Apr;49(4):335-40.
Equb 2011 Feb 1).

. Terminalia arjuna bark powder (400 mg/kg, po) significantly reduced

formalin-indued paw oedema, showed anti-inflammatory potential against some
phlogistic agents along with some immunomodulatory activity and
antinococeptive action. (Halder S, Bharal N, Mediratta PK, fKaur I, Sharma
KK. Anti-inflammatory, immuno-modulatory and antinociceptive activity of
Terminalia arjuna Roxb bark powder in mice and rats.Indian J Exp Biol. 2009
Jul; 47(7):577-83).

. Arjunic acid, a strong antioxidant and a free radical scavenger, more potent

than ascorbic acid, in microsomes lipid peroxidation, DPPH, hydrogen
peroxide induced RBCs hemolysis, and (DCFH (2)-DA) assay (p<0.05). (Sun
FY, Chen XP, Wang JH, Qin HL, Yang SR, DU GH. Arjunic acid, a strong
free radical scavenger from Terminalia arjrruna. Am J Chin Med. 2008;
36(1):197-207).

Formulations

SI.No.
Arjuna Ghrata Sarva Hradroga
Zr Arjuna twak churna Hradroga

Formulation Indications

----- PAGE 69 -----
Arjuna 6]

Arjunadi siddha kshira

Parthadyarishta Hradroga, Puppusa roga

Arjunadi taila Prameha

Kakubhadi vati Yakshma, Kasa
Sarivadi vati Karna roga, Hradroga
Kakubhadi churna Hradroga, Raktapitta

Botanaical Name
Terminalia arjuna Wight and Avn.
Terminalia — Disposition of leaves of some species towards the end of branchlets.
arjuna — Derived from Sanskrit word ‘Arujna’.
Family — Combretaceae
Kula — Haritaki kula

Classification of Dravya

Caraka Udardaprashamana varga
Nyagrodhadi gana, Salasaradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni | Vatadi varga 26-27
Basonym of Drug

srtater yreertet Ferry, |

Arjuna gives strength to heart, hence useful in cardiac disorders.

Synonyms
Habitat
Commonly grows on river banks.
Morphology
2. Ydet:- DAA |
Arjuna bark is white in colour.
3. Paae:- Aa aT |
Bark is white in colour.

4. edur:- warorstter: |

----- PAGE 70 -----
62 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Arjuna is a large tree with spreading branches.
S. Tepper: TET |
Arjuna flowers are sweet scented.
A large tree covers large area.
Actions and properties
7. FRB WAT HATA gar: |
Tree which is a very potent medicine.
8. SaRTA:- CAM HATA Ta: Heit aT |
Tree with strong action.
9. drae:- vader |
A potent tree.
10. Barrah-aart faforscrstene: |
Arjuna is very useful for Cardiac problems.
11, VARA ATTA: |
Arjuna relieves Shwasa

Regional Names

—

Habitat

Arjuna is found as naturally growing plant in the dense forests through out India.
Arjuna can be successfully raised by sowing seeds.

External Morphology
A large tree with a huge buttressed trunk and horizontally spreading branches.

Bark — Smooth, Gray, flaking off in large flat pieces. Sap wood is reddish white and.
heart wood is brown.

Leaves — Sub-opposite, 10-15 cm long, 4-7 cm wide, oblong or elliptic oblong,

----- PAGE 71 -----
Arjuna 63

obtuse or subacute, pale dull green above, pale brown
beneath. Shallowly crenate, serrate in the upper part.
Base rounded or cordate, often unequal sided, main
nerves arcuate, 10-15 Pairs, reticulate venation. Peti-
ole is 0.5 to 1 cm long, with | or usually 2 prominent
glands at the top immediately below the leaves.f

Inflorescence - Short axillary spikes or termi-
nal panicles.

Flowers — Sessile, bracteoles linear, shorter than
flowers.

Fruit — Drupe, 2.5-5 cm in diameter, ovoid or %
obovoid-oblong, fibrous, woody, glabrous, dark Terminalia arjuna Wight
brown with 5 hard projecting wings. and Avn

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Flat or slightly curved, stratified pieces of stem bark or varying sizes.and 5 to 10 mm
thickness. External surface pink or flesh coloured with a mealy coating.

Inner surface is reddish brown finely striated, peeling out in thin flakes.

Fracture -— Fibrous
Odour — None
Taste — Astringent
Adulteration
e Terminalia alata e Terminalia tomentosa

Classical references

Synonyms
apse adtesiar aitie: | sagdiaes die sat: wa: Il
(Aa. aereart-2 6)
Properties
wpU: vitro zea: aeaaraaarated, | AaeaOMy et Gee: SeealtrST
(aa. aerfert-27)
PUY HATA: HHA AVA: \ ftrasargurftedt areamrereanras:
(a.Aarenfeert-1 05)

anprger: vidt wad frranauid, | Aettereesorag wertarar Il
(d.A.siteftert-s 20)

----- PAGE 72 -----
64 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ape aerator: amet aurea: | ftrersmrgeritfedt areerraentas:
(a.Praatea-1 1 8)
arta: safer) Aelteroreafie | stant art aha cenftet waar, 1
(fa. etirrnfert-1 26 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Hradya Karma of Arjuna is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: ¢, Prabhava
. Useful part of Arjuna is
a. Mula b. Twak c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: b. Twak
3. Rasa of Arjuna Twak
a, Amla b. Katu c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: d. Kashaya
4. Arjuna and Chandana Kashaya is indicated in
a. Shukra Meha b. KshaudraMeha c.Udakameha  d. Vasa Meha
Ans: a. Shukrameha
5. Matra of Arjuna Kshirapaka
a.10to20ml__b. 20 to 30 ml c5to10ml d. 80 to 100 ml
Ans: b. 20 to 30 ml
6. Arjuna Kshirapaka is best indicated in
a. Agnimandya_b. Raktapitta c. Jwara d. Hradroga
Ans: d. Hradroga

nN

7. Botanical name of Arjuna
a. Terminalia chebula b. Terminalia bellirica
c. Terminalia arjuna d. Terminalia alata
Ans: c. Terminalia arjuna
8. Dhavala a Synonym of Arjuna is given to its
a. Kanda Twak b. Mula c. Pushpa d, Phala
Ans: a. Kanda Twak

----- PAGE 73 -----
Chapter

Ashoka

Useful parts — T\wak (Bark), Beeja (Seed) & Pushpa (Flowers)

Rasadi Pancaka

Kashaya, Tikta

Karma (Actions)
Grahi, Varnya, Trishnahara, Daha Shamaka, Krimighna, Vranaropaka, Hradya,
Sandhaniya, Vishaghna, Stambhaka.

Phamacological Actions
Astringent, Uterine sedative
Dosha karma [Actions on Dosha]
Kaphapitta Shmaka
Kapha Shamaka because of Kashaya, Tikta Rasa and Katu vipaka.
Pitta Shamaka because of Shita virya and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Pradara, Yonivyapat, Trishna, Daha, Krimi, Vrana, Visharoga, Shosha, Apachi,
Arshas, Vaivarnya, Gulma, Udarashula, Adhmana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Diseases of Vata)
favaanfakrartaramadeen: (yf. 4/27
Ashoka ghrata is indicated in Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata) by Acharya
Sushruta.
2. Pradara (Metrorrhagia)
AeHacHe Fas Geet Yoon | erat fray Mae A PATA, Ut

(3.71. 63/5)

----- PAGE 74 -----
66 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ashoka twak kwatha (Decoction of bark) cold milk in morning will check severe
bleeding per Vagina.

3. Ashmari (Urinary calculus)
wert Gafadt athst yarereryetteny ui (a3. 33/12)

Ashoka bija churna (Seed powder) with water relieves Mutraghata (Retention of
urine) and Ashmari (Urinary calculus).

Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) - 40to80ml
2. Bija churna (Seed powder) -— lto3g

3. Pushpa churna (Flower powder) — 1to3g

Phytoconstituents

Bark - Contains -Tannin (6%), Catechol, Epicatechin, Catechin, Hematoxylin,
Ketosterol and Saponin.

Pods—Contain-Catechol, Epicatechol, Leucocyanidin

Seeds — Have oleic, Linoleic, Palmitic and Stearic acids.

Flowers — Contain-g-sitosterol, Quercetins, Gallic acids, Palmitic, Stearic, Oleic
and Linoleic acids.

Wood contains Quercetin.

Research corner

1. Saraca asoca methanol extract was capable of ameliorating the conditions of
arthritis in adjuvant induced arthritic rats. Saravanan S, Babu NP, Pandikumar
P, lgnacimuthu S. Therapeutic effect of Saraca asoca (Roxb.) Wilde on
lysosomal enzymes and collagen metabolism in adjuvant induced arthritis.
Inflammophar-macology. 2011 Dec; 19(6):317-25. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

2. Flavonoids of Saraca asoca shown chemopopreventive activity on 2-stage skin
carcinogenesis. Cibin TR, Devi DG, Abraham A. Chemoprevention of Two
stages Skin Cancer in Vivo by Saraca asoca. Inter Cancer Ther. 2011 Jul 19.

Ww

. The phytochemical analysis of the promising methanolic extract of the seed
extract was postive for carbohydrates, saponins, terpenoids, tannins, and
proteins. Bioassay-guided fractionation of effective extracts may result in
identification ofa useful molecule for the control of mosquito vectors. Mathew
N, Anitha MG, Bala TS, Sivakumar SM, Narmadha R, Kalyanasundaram M.
Larvicidal activity of Saraca indica, Nyctanthes arbor-tristis, and Clitoria

----- PAGE 75 -----
Ashoka 67

ternatea extracts against three mosquiot vector species. Parasitol Res. 2009 Apr;
104(5):1017-25. Epub 2008 Nov 28.

4, Extracts of Saraca asoca contain antibacterial agents. Shahid M, Shahzad A,
Malik A, Anis M. Antibacterial activity of aerial parts as well as in vitro raised
calli of the medicianal plant Saraca asoca (Roxb.) de Wilde. Can J Microbiol.
2007 Jan; 53 (1):75-81.

5. The antimicrobial potential of seventy-seven extracts from twenty-four plants
was screened aganist eight bacteria and four pathogenic fungi, using
microbroth dilution assay. Water extracts of Acacia nilotica, Justicia zelanica,
Lantana camara and Saraca asoca exhibited good activity against ‘all the
bacteria tested. Dabur R, Gupta A, Mandal TK, Singh DD, Bajpal V, Gurav
AM, Lavekar GS. Antimicrobial activity of some Indian medicinal plants. Afr
J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2007 Feb 16;4(3):313-8.

6. The commonly used adulterant is the bark of Polyalthia longifolia which shows
some similarity with that of Asoka. Studies were conducted at Aromatic and
Medicinal Plants Research station, Odakkali (Kerala Agricultural University)
during 2001-2002 to evolve methods for differentiating the original drug from
the adulterant species by anatomical biochemical and chromatographic
techniques. Mathew S, Mathew G, Joy PP, Skari BP, Joseph TS.
Differentiation of Saraca asoca crude drug from its adulterant, Anc Sci Life.
2005 Apr; 24(4):174-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulations Indications
1
2D.

Botanical Name

Ashokarishta Asragdhara, Raktapitta
Ashoka ghrata Pradara, Yonishula, Katishula
Ashoka kashaya Swarasada

Madhukadyavaleha _, | Pradara, Raktatisara, Raktarsha
Mahamarichadya Taila

Saraca indica Linn.

Saraca asoca Roxb, De Wilde

Saraca -Named after Dr. Sarasin who was French physician.
indica -Native of India.

----- PAGE 76 -----
68 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Family
Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Classification of Dravya

Vedanasthapana varga
Rodhradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ | Pushpavarga 47-48

Basonym of Drug
AMAIA, VieHATETAT sere:

Ashoka relives pain and patients get relief from many health problems.

Synonyms
Morphology
1, TRIG Y TATA |
Flowers of Ashoka are aromatic.
2. ATAUSATA- ATA: UECTAT TT |
Tender leaves of Ashoka are coppery red coloured.
3. frosyey- festa: AIA: FATS ST |
Inflorescence (Corymb) is globose.
4, AT: Aat Teed Yea |
Plant flowers in Vasanta Ritu (Spring).
5. BAST: TaOPT ETT ITT
Ashoka flowers are golden coloured.
Properties and Actions
6. etfra:- shut fra: etry feacart |
Women like this plant or Ashoka is useful in striroga.
7. lah GS Heals saat, serene: |
Ashoka generates happiness.

Regional Names

English

----- PAGE 77 -----
Ashoka 69

Malayalam

Habitat - Commonly grows in forest region of Western Peninsula, Central and
Eastern Himalaya and West Bengal. Plant grows very well near the streams or river banks.
It is cultivated in gardens throughout India for its handsome flowers.

Morphology — A tree grows 6-9 mtrs high,
branches are glabrous.

Leaves — 15-20 cm long, compound, rachis gla-
brous, corky at the base, petioles very short, stipules
are intrapetiolar, completely united.

Leaflets — 4-6 pairs, 10-20 cm long and 4-7 cm
wide, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, glabrous,
base rounded or cuneate, slightly oblique, petiolules
4-6 mm long, stout, wrinkled.

Inflorescence — Axillary corymb.

Flowers— Numerous, fragrant, 7.5-10 cm across, u
peduncles stout, pedicels 8-13 mm long, red, glabrous, Saraca indica Linn.
bracts ovate, subacute, bracteoles 2, appearing like a
calyx, 4 mm long, calyx passing from yellow to orange and finally red; tube 1.3-2 cm
long, cylindrical, solid at the base; segments 4, oblong or obovate-oblong, 1 cm long.
Stamens 7 or 8 ovary is pubescent.

Fruit — Pod, black, 10-25 cm long, 4.5-5 cm wide, linear oblong, tapering to both
ends, compressed, and glabrous.

Seeds — 4-8, ellipsoid-oblong, 3-8 cm long, slightly compressed.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Bark: Curved, channelled or sometimes quilled pieces, 5 to 12 mm in thickness.
Outer surface is rough, greyish brown in colour, covered with warty protuberances and
enclosing circular to transversely elongated lenticels. The inner surface of the bark is
smooth reddish brown in colour and finely mottled with black dots. Transversely cut
surface shows long, radially elongated but irregularly running medullary rays. It is tough
to break and becomes fibrous. Bark doesn't possess any characteristic odour.

----- PAGE 78 -----
70

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Adulterant & Substitutes
Polyalthia longifolia is very commonly used as Ashoka, but it is an adulterant. Shala

(Shorea roubusta) is common substitute,
Classical references

Synonyms

awirat ays ayerennaeda: | age: fresqersr weet zeeTaT 11

Actions and properties

aie: EUS IE AS ATR aoreeitqerarcaftrene frat

(AIT. WIErt 47)

(A17. Tart 48)

args vtamaret: goitetea vehi | art arate ada: |
arent wet er: Varta: green: (a. sreenfert 147-148)
aTetet Baer: Ravet quel ot Harr: | etoroeitqerereanhtatts ferarefer 1

(df. sitet 1503)

aria: Rrrt ca: fracresarge: | Yeayetareaa-ae: fafa:

(aA. archatat 57)

agit Rernegqar: viet avaf frame: vette vert a atPrearaeg sree

—

NS

a. Mula Twak _ b. Kanda Twak c. Patra
Ans: b. Kanda Twak

. Pradhana Rasa of Ashoka

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Kashaya
Ans: c. Kashaya

. Main indication of Ashoka is

a. Striroga b. Ajirna c. visha Vikara
Ans: a. Striroga

(B.A. eteeeneteart 174)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Important useful part of Ashoka

d. Phala

d. Amla

d. Sthaulya

----- PAGE 79 -----
Ashoka i
- Main indication of Ashokarishta
a. Agnimandya_p, Pradara
Ans: b. Pradara

- Botanical Name of Ashoka

a. Aconitum ferox

c. Boerhavia diffusa

Ans: d. Saraca asoca

c. Sthaulya d. Vibandha

b. Achyranthes aspera
d. Saraca asoca

. Tamrapallava is a synonym of

a. Maricha b. Manjishta
Ans: c. Ashoka

. Substitute of Ashoka

a. Kashtadaru _b. Shala
Ans: b. Shala

. Adulteration of Ashoka

a. Shorea robusta

c. Polyalthia longifolia

Ans: c. Polyalthia longifolia

c. Ashoka d. Haridra

c. Vidarikanda d. Yashtimadhu

b. Aconitum heterophyllum
d. Withania somnifera

----- PAGE 80 -----
Ashwagandha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Action of Dosha: Kaphavatahara

Kaphahara - Because of Ushna virya & Tikta, Kashaya rasa.
Vatahara - Because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.

Karma (Action)

Balya Rasayana Shukrala
Kantivardhaka Kasahara Nadibalya
Shwitraghni Kandughna Krimighna
Shwasahara Vishaghna Vraanahara
Shophahara

Pharmacological actions
e Sedative e Hypnotic e Antiseptic
e Antimitotic e Antitumour

Rogaghnata: (Therapeutic Indications)
Kshaya Vatavyadhi Klaivya Shwitra Shotha Visha
Vranaa_ Kasa Shopha Kandu Krimi Shwasa

Amyika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. As a Rasayana (Rejuvenator)
Cats aren TeaeIseart Bast TAT TSEPSAT aT |
wares ofS agat faert atereT PAT TMT Ta: | a.Z.S. 39/158

Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) taken with milk or ghee or oil or warm water
for fifteen days will act as Rasayana and increases the weight.

----- PAGE 81 -----
Ashwagandha 13

2. Shosha (Emaciation)
ager aftege frerest ura: free aise wets (8.3. 41/42)

Ghrata prepared from Ashwagandha to be taken every day morning or the milk

processed with Ashwagandha taken with sugar helps to relieve Shosha.
3. Shwasa (Dyspnoea)

anrarearsnreran ferret atts aftfar (af. 17/117)
The Kshara (Alkali) of Ashwagandha taken with honey and ghee is beneficial in
Shwasa.
4. Nidranasha (Insomnia)
aut weer: Ferrer wefgerss ater efter | farcenter tehR Pare fafa ar
(4.4. Seratarfe 13)
Ashwagandha churna mixed with sugar and ghee is very useful in Nidranasha (In-
somnia).
5. Garbhadharanartha (For conception)
SATIVA: Urea AT Wa: | a ETATSAeT Ucar wat eect TAT
(a1.9.Fa. 70/26)
Ghrata prepared from Ashwagandha kwatha (decoction) and milk should be con-
sumed by the woman at the right time (Ritusnata) to help in conception.
Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3 to 5 g

Phytoconstituents

Root — Somniferine, Somniferinine, Withanine, Nicotine, Withaniol [Steroidal lac-
tone], Withasomnine [Pyrazole alkaloid], Tropine, Withanolide [Steroidal lactones],
Analygrine, Anaferine (Alkalirid), Starch, g-sitosterol.

Seed — Withanolide, Withaferin A

Research corner
1. Neha Sehgal, Alok Gupta, et.al., Withania somnifera reverses Alzheimer’s
disease pathology by enhancing low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
in liver, proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of United States of
America, (Published on-line before print January 30, 2012, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1073/pnas. 1112209109)

A 30-d course or oral administration of a semipurified extract of the root of

----- PAGE 82 -----
74

bo

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Withania somnifera consisting predominantly of withanolides and withanosides
reversed behavioral deficits, plaque pathology, accumulation of g-amyloid
peptides (Ab) and oligomers in the brains of middle-aged and old APP/PS1
Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice. It was similarly effective in reversing
behavioral deficits and plaque load in APPSwlnd mice (line j20). The
remarkable therapeutic cffect of W. Somnifera mediated through up-regulation
of liver LRP indicates that targeting the periphery offers a unique mechanism
of Ab clearance and reverse the behavioral deficits and pathology seen in
Alzheimer's disease models.

. Kaurav BP, Wanjari MM, Chandekar A, Chauhan NS, Upmanyu N, Influence

of Withania somnifera on obsessive compulsive disorder in mice, Asian Pac J
Trop Med. 2012 May; 5(5):380-4.

W. Somnifera extract was found effective in treating obsessive compulsive
disorder. Administration of aqueous extracts W. Somnifera (AEWS) and
methanolic extracts MEWS (50 mg/kg) successively decreassed the marble
burying behaviour activity without affecting motor activity.

. Hosny Mansour H, Farouk Hafez H. Protective effect of Withania somnifera

against radiation-induced hepatotoxicty in rats. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2012
Jun; 80:14-9. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

WS could be developed as a potential preventive drug for ionizing irradiation
induced hepatotoxicity disorder via enhancing the antioxidant activity and
induction of HO-1.

Konar A, Shah N, Singh R, Saxena N, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Thakur MK.
Protective role of Ashwagandha leaf extract and its component withanone on
scopolamine-induced changes in the brain and brain-derived cells. Plos One.
2011;6(11):e27265. Epub 2011 Nov11.

Our study suggested that besides cholinergic blockade, scopolamine-induced
memory loss may be associated with oxidative stress and alcoholic extract of
Ashwagandha leaf, and withanone may serve as potential preventive and
therapeutic agents for ne-urodegenerative disorders.

Shah J, Goyal R., Investigation of neuropsychopharma-cological effects of a
polyherbal formulation on the learning and memory process in rats. J Young
Pharm. 2011 Apr;3(2):119-24.

The poly herbal formulation containing Ashwagandha produced significant
improvement in passive avoidance acquisition and memory retrieval in rats.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Ashwagandha 715

Formulations

SI.No Name Indications

Ashwagandhadya Ghrata
Ashwagandhadi Kwatha
Ashwagandhadyarishta Murcha, Apasmara

4. Ashwagandha Rasayana
Vatavyadhi, Karshya, Raktapitta
Ashwagandhadi Lepa Vrana Shotha
Pandu, Kshaya, Arshas

Karshya, Durbala

Vataroga, Angadaha

| 6
yt
P
| 0.

Ashwagandhadi Churna
Ashwagandhadi Lehya

Balashwagandhadi Taila
Vajikarana Ghrata
Botanical Name

Withania somnifera (L) Dunal.
Withania - Withan [Scientist name]

10. As a Vrishya

somnifera - produces sleep
Family — Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for Key features)
Kula — Kantaakari
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Balya, Brahmaniya
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bha.Pra.Ni Guduchyadi Varga 189-190
Basonym of Drug
AMAA WANS: ATMS TAT WHT SATE: ( ATAENT: ) AAT: HAA AT |

Ashwagandha root has the smell of horse and also improves sexual potency of the
person who consumes it.

Synonyms
Morphology
1, Wert garorearaerca4ry |

Leaves too have the smell of horse.

----- PAGE 84 -----
76 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. aTeHull. areata waTOTEM: |
Ashwagandha leaves resemble pig’s ears.

3. AMHA- AMAT WAH: Tea BMA: Ha: TTA: |
The root smells like horse or on consuming it imparts sexual power like a
horse.

Actions and properties

4, Aearenten:- samarigater ater: aritfer Geaereat geet |
Ashwagandha promotes sexual power better than horse.

5. HRRI-HAd TEMA Yow alerawes |
Ashwagandha increases and retains Shukra

6, carroftuft-arreates WA TATA: |
Ashwagandha gives good look to the person who consumes it.

7. GAaI-UAt calle Ymaelnrare |
Which increases the potency and quality of Shukra (Sperm) there by increasing
the chances of progeny.

8. Aeal-aet carer aeraeitieae: |
It imparts strength.
9, Avatett-Arect aretferaare ele |
Ashwagandha useful in Vata disorders.
10. Ga-gquad-Yaelstt asia F
Ashwagandha increases sexual potency.
Others
11. Faleel-AY ATAT WTA |
Synonyms of horse may be attributed to Ashwagandha.

‘Regional Names

----- PAGE 85 -----
Ashwagandha 77

Habitat — Found throughout the dry parts of In-
dia, in waste places, on bunds in areas of upper ge-
netic plain, West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Gujarat,
Konkan, Deccan and Karnataka. It grows in semitropi-
cal areas receiving 500-750 mm rain fall. Crop requires
relatively dry season during its growing period.
External Morphology

Habit — A much branched wild peremial herb.

Root -— Tap-root branched.

Stem — Acrial, erect, cylindrical, branched, her-
baceous above, woody below, densely covered with
fine stellate hairs.

Leaf -—Cauline and ramal, alternate or in unequal
pairs, ovate, ovate-oblong, or ovate lanceolate, entire,
acute or obtuse, tapering to the base; petiolate, petiole | Withania somnifera(L) Dunal

thick and long; reticulate unicostate ventation, covered
with glandular branched hair.

Inflorescence — Sub-sessile, axillary umbellate, 5- flowered cyme.

Flower — Greenish yellow, subsessile, pedicellates, complete, bisexual, pentamer-
ous, actinomorphic and hypogynous.

Calyx —5 Sepals, gamosepalous, campanulate (bell shaped), tomentose.

Corolla —5-Petals, short, campanulate, greenish yellow in colour.

Androecium — Stamens 5, free

Gynoecium — Bicarpellary, syncarpous, superior, bilocular and axile placentation.

Fruit — Small berry, globose, yellow or red when ripe.

Seed — Endospermic.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root—Cylindrical, straight or slightly tortuous, mostly unbranched roots, 5 to 8 mm
in diameter, occurring whole or in pieces of varying length; upper portion of the roots are
more often topped with stem bases. Outer surface fawn coloured or light brown, finely
wrinkled longitudinally : a transversely cut portion of the root shows a creamish starchy
surface with a thin, closely adhering bark, followed by a narrow cortex and a large woody
portion cortex and a large woody portion surrounded by a prominent cambium ring of
brownish colour.

----- PAGE 86 -----
78 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fracture — Short and powdery
Odour -— Slightly pungent
Taste — Bitter and acrid

Difference between root of Cultivated and Wild Variety

Cultivated Ashwagandha Wild Ashwagandha

e Diameter of root is 0.5-0.8 mm Diameter of root is 1 cm or more (thicker)
e Cylindrical and straight Curved or vary in sahpe

e Ext. surface-light brown finely Ext. surface-reddish brown, easily
wrinkled longitudinally seperable bark (3 mm thick)

Substitution
Ashwagandha is a substitute for
e Kakoli (Lillium polyphyllum)
e Kshirakakoli (Fritillaria roylei)

Classical references

Synonyms
Tarn afrarnearen gare | amenuff ar acer penert u
(AT.AMeaT-6 7 )
Actions and properties
RITA SHASATTA AMAA TST Ta fereaT HATA SHAH
(aTTSaMe GT 190)
atenren carne fereat atdtareraer | fersaar atery ett carfeet atet aeTTAT
(afi. yeeatert 263)
Tarren wera fercat ET Tare | eerae aT ele HATA TAIT,
virmavsherataa aitraraercaaary ul (Fy. sisfrat 1045-1046)
AAT HET CATT HT A AST | ACA ATTRA Sheet TAA,
(aA. wraveefe at 112)

AAS ATM TAY HATO Tara aretakt aera tt (B.A rages et 110)

----- PAGE 87 -----
-_

to

ON

~

Ashwagandha

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Prayojya Anga of Ashwagandha

a, Phala b. Patra c. Mula d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Mula

. Vipaka of Ashwagandha

a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Madhura

. Pradhana Karma of Ashwagandha

a. Stambhaka __ b. dipana c. Shodhana d. Vrashya
Ans: d. Wrashya

. Analkaloid Somniferine is present in

a. Ashwagandha _b. Chitraka c. Punarnava d. Vatsanabha

Ans: a. Ashwagandha

. Ashwagandhadi Lehya is indicated in

a. Sthaulya b. Medoroga c. Karshya d. Kushta
Ans: c. Karshya

. Botanical Name of Ashwagandha

a. Rauwolfia serpentina b. Cassia fistula
c. Withania somnifera d. Papaver somnifera

Ans: c. Withania somnifera

. Balya and Brahmana Karma is attributed to

a. Kapikacchu b. Ashwagandha — c. Amalaki d. Haritaki
Ans: b. Ashwagandha

. Varaha Karni is a synonym of

a. Patha b. Ashoka c. Ashwagandha d. Arjuna
Ans: c. Ashwagandha

. Ashwagandha is a

a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

79

----- PAGE 88 -----
2.10

Asthishrunkhala
a
Useful part - Kanda (Stem)
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Action) .

Bhagna Sandhanakara, Arshoghna, Krimighna, Netrarogahara, Pachana, Vrishyg
Balya.

Pharmacological Actions

Union promoting, Laxative Anthelmintic, Carminative, Digestive, Stomachic,
Haemostatic, Aphrodisiac and Opthalmic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata kapha hara, Vatahara because of Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura
rasa. Kaphahara because of Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Asthibhagana, Vatavyadhi, Krimi, Arshas, Agnimandya, Netraroga, Klaibya and
Dourbalya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Bhagna (Fracture)

wedaReadan cent ep | ashe a rag efter Ara: 1

(J.T. 46/8)

In case of Bhagna (Fracture) one should take milk processed with Asthisamhara
(Cissus quadrangularis), ghee, lac, wheat and Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna).

2. Putra labhartha (To achieve conception)
SSAC Gea det Aeneen FePITL | aegeTaT ae: firs aerate yareniferet 1
(a9. 13/10)

----- PAGE 89 -----
Asthishrunkhala 81

To achieve conception, lady after having seasonal bath should consume juice and
paste of Vajra vallari (Cissus quadrangularis) mixed with Oil. ‘
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Chemical constituents
Stem contains two tetracyclic triterpenoids, g-sitosterol, f-amyrin and g-amyrone.

Research corner .
A study is conducted to evaluate the beneficial effects of Cissus quadrangularis
stem extract on antoxidant or oxidant status in Diabetes mellitus. The ethyl acetate frac-
tion of Cissus quadrangularis is rich in quercitin and this indicates that it is good supple-
ment for the attenuation of diabetic complications. Lakshmi R.K. Divya BT & Mini S.
‘*Cissus quadrangularis extract attenuates hyperglycaemia mediated oxidative stress in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats.’” Redox Rep. 2014 Sep : 19 (5) : 214-20.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Asthisamharadi Churna Asthibhagna, Sandhimukta
Asthisamhara Taila Bhagna, Vatavyadhi
Lakshadi Guggulu Asthibhagna 5 ee

Botanical Name

SI.No.

Cissus quadrangularis Linn.
Cissus — A name for Ivy (a creeper)
quadrangularis — Stem is four angled
Family — Vitaceae
Kula - Draksha kula
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not included in Gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Guduchyadi Varga
Basonym of Drug
Tea See SATS WTAE

Stem of Asthishrunkhala (Cissus quardrangularis Linn.) appears like chain of bones.

----- PAGE 90 -----
82 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Morphology
1, DAT -HTUS TT: |
Stem of Asthishrunkhala is having nodular stem.
2. ag:fae:-aere: feet: BUSSE |
Asthishrunkhala has got quadrangular stem.
Properties and Actions
3. site dertt-stiter wet Percale ater
Asthishrunkhala is one of the best drugs for the fracture of bones and it promotes
union of bones.
Regional Names
Habitat
Asthishrunkhala commonly grows in South India.

Morphology

A tendril climber with stout fleshy jointed quadrangu-
Jar stems. Tendrils are simple, long, slender and leaf opposed.
In addition to the normal roots, some aerial roots arising from
the jointed nodes grow downwards and strike the soil.

Leaves - Simple, broadly reniform, entire or toothed,
rounded, truncate or cuneate at the base.

Cissus quadrangularis
Linn.

Flower - Small, greenish in shortly peduncled cymes.
Petals are 4, hooded at the apex.

Fruits - Ovoid or globose, red berries with ellipsoid seeds.
Classical references

Synonyms

aPanratudent asrgtarskearreen | (as. Wee TH 226)

----- PAGE 91 -----
Asthishrunkhala 83

Properties and Actions
atiterderan: went arascrershtermg | sor: ae: Biltretargatret starter esr,
wer: Fargetyser: ureta: ferret: BTA: uu (aT. BBeaMRe a-2 26-227)
asacet wr tan Higher 1 dhoeqen fra a tarst Gear Teryay
afte wararrt arerserorett Te: (HF. sitet af-1594-1595)
aifterssgterer cto aretseroret ae | areata wreat caterer a
(fi. FA. froremf& at-5 8)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful Part of Asthishrinkhala
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Partra d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Kanda

2. Pradhana Karma of Asthishrinkhala is
a. Kushthaghna b. Pramehahara c. Bhagna Sandhanakara_ _—_ d. Dipana
Ans: c. Bhagna Sandhanakara

3. Asthisamhara Taila is indicated in
a. Bhagna b. Agnimandya c. Kushtha d. Prameha
Ans: a. Bhagna

4. Botanical Name of Asthishrinkhala
a. Vitis vinifera b. Saraca asoca
c. Cissus quadrangularis d. Bauhinia variegata
Ans: c. Cissus quadrangularis

5. Chatusira is a synonym of
a. Madanaphala b. Nagakesara c. Asthishrinkhala d. Ashoka
Ans: c. Asthishrinkhala

6. Habit of Asthishrinkhala is
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Climber
Ans: d. Climber

----- PAGE 92 -----
Useful part — Kanda (Tuberous roots)
Rasadi Pancaka

Laghu, Ruksha

rc

i
[Vishahara |

Karma (Actions)
Dipana, Pachana, Kasahara, Jwarahara, Krimighna,
Agrya Karma

arferrat dtasfterarerteraimnearrd arrears | (AY, 25/40)

Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum Wall.) is Appetizer, Digesta
pacify all three doshas.
Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Aphrodisiac & Tonic
Desha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha pitta Shamaka
Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Vishaghna, Chardighna.

nt, Astringent and

PittaShamaka because of Tikta rasa
Rogaghmuata (Therapeutic Indications)

Atisara, Agnimandya, Ajirna, Jwara, Kasa, Chardi, Krimi, Balaroga, Visaroga.
Aumayiha Paayoge (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

qreera SPARTA HATTA ASOT ETL \(S.@.3. 2/58)

Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum) kanda churna (Powder of tuberous roots) ad-
ministered with Madhu (Honey) is very beneficial in Kasa (Cough).

----- PAGE 93 -----
Ativisha 85

2. Amatisara (Diarrhoea with undigested food)
SEL UTfererat Vat Ay are MATT | (AY, 2/22)

The peya (Liquid gruel) processed with Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Nagara
(Zingiber officinale) and sours is very beneficial in Amatisara.

3. Grahani (Spruce)
aMTfreranetaarea: Parerraraa: | (AAT. 15/98)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Shunthi
(Zingiber officinale) and Musta (Cyperus routndus) is very useful in digesting Ama (Un-
digested food) in Grahani roga.

Matra (Dose)
Mula churna (Root powder) — 1-3 gm
Phytoconstituents

Root tuber and root contains-Atisine, Atidine, Atodine, Benzylheteratisine,
Doterpene, Heteratisine, Hestisine, Heterophylline, Heterophyllcene, Aconitic. acid, Tan-
nic acid, g-sitosterol, g-carotene, Isoatisine etc.Ativisa

Research corner

1. Two new diterpenoid alkaloids, heterophyllinine-A (1) and heterophyllinine-B
(2), along with two known alkaloids dihydroatisine (3):and ‘lycoctonine (4)
were isolated from the roots of Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. Nisar M,
Ahmad M, Wadood N, Lodhi MA, Saheen F, Choudhary M1. New diterpenoid
alkaloids from Aconitum heterophyllum Wall : Selective butyrylcholinestrase
inhibitors. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2009 Feb; 24(1):47-51.

2. Two new aconitine-type norditerpenoid alkaloids 6-dehydroacetylsepaconitine
(1) and 13- hydroxyl-appaconitine. (2) along with three known norditerpenoid
alkaloids lycoctonine, delphatine and lappaconitine were isolated from the roots
ofthe Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. These compounds have exhbited
significant antibacterial activity. Anmad M, Ahmad W, Ahmad M, Zeeshan M,
Obaidullah, Shaheen F. Norditerpenoid alkaloids from the roots of Aconitum
heterophyluum Wall with antibacterial activity. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem.
2008 Denc; 23(6):1018-22.

3. The immunobiological activity was investigated of certain medicinal plants
widely used in the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine for treatment of
chronic infections and immunological disorders. The effect of an ethanolic
extract of each drug was studied on delayed type hypersensitivity, humoral

----- PAGE 94 -----
86 Dravyaguna Vijnana

sabi tmeenefninnemneernaciadenspemmaongmaesnceponns inna ioe eceoneeemacilinaitesgeesiniainn eraiasimmandpoatinademencas
responses to sheep red blood cells, skin allograft rejection, and phagocytic
activity of the reticuloendothelial system in mice. Aconitum heterophyllum
appeared to stimulate phagocytic function while inhibiting the humoral
component of the immune system. Atal CK, Sharma ML, Kaul A, Khajuria A.
Immunomodulating agents of plant origin. I: Preliminary screening. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 1986 Nov; 18(2):133-41.

4. In the absence of a desired first choice medicinal herb, classical Ayurveda
recommends use of a functionally similar substitute. Post 16th century
Ayurvedic texts and lexicons give specific examples of possible substitutes.
Here we report a preliminary study of one such Ayurvedic substitution pair:
Musta (Cyperus rotunds L., Cyperaceae), a common weed, for the rare
Himalayan species, Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. ex Royle;
Ranunculaceae). Observations indicate that Ayurveda may attach more
importance to pharmacological properties of raw drugs than to their botanical
classification. Venkatasubramanian P, Kumar SK, Nair VS. Cyperus rotundus,
a substitute for Aconitum heterophyllum: Studies on the Ayurvedic concept of
Abhava Pratinidhi Dravya (Drug substitution). J Ayurveda integr Med. 2010
Jan; 1(1):33-9.

Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo.

Indications

Formulations

Ativishadi Churna
Mahatiktaka Ghrata Pittaja kushtha
Pushyanuga churna Arsha, Atisara
Prameha
6 5

Madhukadi Ghrat
Botanical Name

Aconitum heterophyllum wall.
Aconitum - Aconite
heterophyllum - with dissimilar leaves
Family
Rananculaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula

Vatsanabha

----- PAGE 95 -----
Ativisha

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Lekhaniya, Arshoghna Varga
Sushruta Pippalyadi gana, Vachadi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr. Haritakyadi varga 213-214
Basonym of Drug
ferrafecnrt |
Ativisha overpowers Visha.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. cargeihet :- aye war
The plant grows in Kashmir.
2. Wat :- ARa TAT |

Plant grows in Madra Desha.

Morphology
3. YRAaa- YA: HalSSM: |
Root tubers are white in colour.
4. STgt- TET sea, |
Root tubers are horn shaped.
Properties and actions
5. Rraacca-firearwey |
Ativisa is efficacious in Pittaja roga
6. PUACAN- BMY TN: GIR |
Root tubers are quickly infested.
7. siferarcedt-arfereant areratet
Ativisa is very useful in Atisara.

8. Preatasaq-arentty ATTET |

Ativisa is very beneficial in pediatric disorders.
9. ferat-aerhe caratter erat steven fart eft |
Ativisa spreads through out the body or is useful as an antidote.

10. QNATaST-SHATTAT I

Ativisa cures Shopha.

87

----- PAGE 96 -----
88 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Regional Names

Indian Atees
Habitat

Ativisha is a drug of Himalayan origin. It is commonly found in the sub alpine and
alpine zones of the Himalaya from Indus to Kumaon at a height ranging about 6000-
15000 ft.

Morphology

Habit — Herbaceous perennial plant grows 1 to 1.5
mrs.

Root — Both taproot and adventitious roots are
present. Adventitious roots are swollen to form tubers.

Stem — Aerial as well as underground, aerial stem is
erect, hairy & branched.

Leaves — Cauline and ramal, simple, petiolate, leaf
base sheathing.

Inflorescence — Raceme with an end flower.

Flowers — Bisexual, polyse-palous, polypetalous,
with numerous stamens, bi to pentacarpellary syncarpous,
superior ovary.

Fruit —Etaerio of follicles

Varieties :
Based on colour of root tubers: esdanidae oa yom
Madanapala Nighantu
1. Rakta — Red tubers
2.Shweta — White tubers
3. Krishna -— Black tubers
4. Pita — Yellow tubers

----- PAGE 97 -----
Ativisha 89

Botanically three varieties of Afivisha are observed:

1, Aconitum heterophyllum

2. Aconitum palmatum

3. Aconitum kashmiricum
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Tuberous roots are obconical or ovoid, sometimes occurring as a pair of mother and
daughter tubers. The daughter tuber is bigger in size being 2 to 6 cm Jong and upto 1 cm
broad in the middle. It ends in a thin tap like extremity which is sometimes divided. The
surface is smooth, slightly curved and has a yellowish grey colour. The mother tuber is
small, shriveled up to 3 cm long and 0.5 cm thick and has a dark grey colour. The roots
are often crowned with scaly leaf buds.

Adverse effects

Ativisha belongs to the genus of poisonous species, shows the effect of poisoning
when used without proper care. At extreme over doses shows mild to moderate poisoning
like constipation, dry mouth, brady cardia but not fatal. 5-6 gm in a single dose without
purification may produce these toxicological effects.

Antidote — Goghrata (Cow’s ghee) or Godugdha (Cow’s milk) orally.
Shodhana (Purification)
Ativisha tuberous roots are cut into small pieces and kept in Gomaya kwatha (Liquid
cow dung) for 3 hours and then dried in Sunlight.
Classical references
Synonyms
ferarcaferferar ferar sret wfaferarseun | yertenear SAT ASAT FUTACAAT UI
(aa. Slaerafert 213)

Properties & Actions
faa arom weft uret dettett | arafirnirantarrarcatrpay
(aa. etreenfert 214)
aoomstataer feat aratrisatcel | arardtararedt ferrsatdternert
(aft. Teaert 11)
faarator crafter dt oret seat, | eaftiraricranraferrenreratrpatry Ut
(Fr. sieftat 1120-1121)

----- PAGE 98 -----
90 Dravyaguna Vijnana
memmstatren free patra | aranitararreth frreataterrert i
(wr. frorenfe af 135)

atfaferet mettre atom dtorarett | ara PTY STATA ASNT I
(B.A. mage ef 176)

Varieties
Pafrersferferar Har Yar HOT Taser | Taehtes ferareay Prfeigra yor aT ArT
(air. rocane af 136)

Purification
aerat teas Taefakerat aa: Etat wetewea asa at Areva:
(afr. froavafe et 137)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Ativisha
a. Tuberous roots b. Fruit c. Seed d. Flower

re

Ans: a. Tuberous roots
2. Atisine is present in

a. Gunja b. chitraka c. Ativisha d. Sarpagandha
Ans: c. Ativisha
3. Botanical name of Ativisha
a. Aconitum ferox b. Aconitum chasmanthum
c. Aconitum heterophyllum d. Glycyrrhiza glabra

Ans: c. Aconitum heterophyllum
4. Madri is a synonym of

a. Kumkuma b. Ativisha c.Apamarga d. Katuki
Ans: b. Ativisha

5. Shishubhaishajya is a synonym of
a. Lodhra b. Shunthi c. Vatsanabha_ d. Ativisha
Ans: d. Ativisha

6. Types of Ativisha as per Madanapala Nighantu
a.5 b. 4 c.6 d3

Ans: b. 4

----- PAGE 99 -----
Bakuchi

Useful part — Beeja (Seed)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Bija — Shwitraghna, Rasayana, Ruchya, Hradya, Shwasahara, Kushthaghna,
Mehahara, Krimighna, Medhya, Dipana, Kandughna.

Phala — Kushthaghna, Keshya, Twachya, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Shothahara.

Dosha karma : Kaphapittahara
Kaphahara because of Katuvipaka and Tikta Rasa.
Pittahara because of Tikta Madhura Rasa and Shita virya.
Phala — Kaphavatahara
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Bija -— Shwitra, Kushtha, Meha, Jwara, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Visha, Kandu.
Phala — Kushtha, Kesha vikara, Twak roga, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Shotha, Pandu.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwitra (Leucoderma)
qaAMsaMpreat aetkaeranar: (aL yeterat fers Past weary Toy
(RA. 2.2/137)

Kwatha (Decoction) preparerd from Avalguja (Psoralea corylifolia), Dhatri
(Phyllanthus emblica) and Khadira sara (Heart wood of Acacia catechu) will cure Shwitra
(Vitiligo). Patient should be on condusive diet.

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
arnt got yar waranty | sashes et Hes Hareresy
(ar.a.Fa. 54/53)

----- PAGE 100 -----
92 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Udwartana (Rubbing dried powder) of powder prepared from Somaraji (Psoralea
corylifolia) and Shringavera (Zingiber officinale) will cure any severe skin disorders.

3. Warkeent (Enteritis)
qadererssiat yretrareyas ar | aftr afer ages ATT IN

(a.fa. 19/33)

Shaka (Leaves) of Avalguja (Psoralea corylifolia) is processed with Dadhi (Curd)
and Dadima (Punica granatum) consumed with Shalyadi laghu Anna (Rice) by adding
ample Sneha (Ghee), will check Pravahika (Enteritis).

Matra (Dose)

Churna (Powder) — | to 3 gm (Internally)
Sufficient quantity (externally)

Phytoconstituents .

Fruits and seeds have essential oil (0.05%), resin (8.9%), brown fixed oil (10%),
raffenose compounds, coumarin compounds, psoralen, isopsoralidin, psoralidin, corylifolin,
bavachromanol, psoralenol.

Research corner

1. Antifungal activity of petroleum ether extract of Psoralea corylifolia L. seed,
tested against Fusarium sp. namely, Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium
moniliforme, and Fusarium graminearum, was evaluated by agar well diffusion
assay and showed potent antifungal activity with a minimum inhibitory
concentration of 1 mg/mL against Fusarium sp. Srinivasan S, Sarada DV.
Antifungal activity of Phenyl Derivative of Pyranocoumarin from Psoralea
corylifolia L. Seeds by inhibition of Acetylation Activity of Trichothecene 3-
O-Acetyltransferase (Tri 101). J. Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:310850.
Equb 2012 Jun 21.

2. The seeds of Psoralea corylifolia L., an important medicinal herb in Indian
Pharmacopeia has shown anti-oxidant modulation in response to gamma
radiation induced oxidative stress. Jan. S, Parween T, Siddiqi TO,
Mahmooduzzafar. Antioxidant modulation in response to gamma radiation
induced oxidative stress in developing seedlings of Psoralea corylifolia L. J.
Environ Radioact. 2012. Jun 20:113C:142-149.

3. Psoralen and isopsoralen constituents of Psoralea corylifolia L. contribute to its
anticancer effect. Wang Y, Hong C, Zhou C, Xu D, Qu HB. Screening
Antitumour Compounds Psoralen and Isopsoralen from Psoralea corylifolia L.

----- PAGE 101 -----
Bakuchi 93

Seeds. Evid Based Complement Alternate Med. 2011;2011:363052. Equb
2011 Mar 10.

4. The antidepressant-like effects of psoralidin isolated from the seeds of Psoralea
corylifolia were investigated in the forced swimming test (FST) in ICR strain
of male mice. Results suggested that psoralidin possessed potent antidepressant-
like properties that were mediated via the monoamine ‘.curotransmitter and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis systems. Yi LT, Li YC, Pan Y, Li
JM, Xu Q, Mo SF, Qiao CF, Jiang FX, Xu, HX, LU, XB, Kong LD, Kung
HF. Antidepressant-like effects of psoralidin isolated from the seeds of
Psoralea Corylifolia in the forced swimming test in mice. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Feb 15;32(2):510-9. Epub 2007
Oct 16.

5. A new biologically active flavonol glycoside (1) mp 264-265 degrees C,
C32H38020, (M)+742 (EIMS) has been isolated from the methanol-soluble
fraction of the defatted seeds of Psoralea corylifolia (Linn). which showed
antimicrobial activity against various bacteria and fungi. Yadava RN, Verma
V. A new biologically active flavonol glycoside from Psoralea corylifolia
(Linn.). J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2005 Aug; 7(4):671-S.

6. Psoralidin, Bakuchicin, Psoralin and Angelicin, isolated from the seeds of
Psoralea corylifolia, showed significant antibacterial activities against a number
of Gram (+) and Gram (-) bacteria. Khatune NA, Islam ME, Haque ME,
Khondkar P, Rahman MM. Antibacterial compounds from the seeds of
Psoralea corylifolia. Fitoterapia. 2004 Mar; 75(2):228-30.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No.

Indications
Shwitra, Kandu
Kushtha, Twakroga
Kushtha
Shwitra

Kushtha
Shwetakushtha

Psoralea — plants with rough surface due to glandular dots or warts.

Name
Somaraji Taila
Nila Ghrata

Vidangadi Churna

Somaraji Ghrata
Shashilekha Vati

| ae Panchanana Taila
Botanical Name
Psoralea corylifolia Linn.

----- PAGE 102 -----
94 Dravyaguna Vijnana

corylifolia — From Greek word korus which means helmet, calcine covering of the
nut.

Family : Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Haritakyadi varga 206-209
Basonym of Drug
ATR: PEAS Mot KAT WHET UTATT, |
Bakuchi is a reputed drug for its use in Shwitra.
Synonyms
Morphology
‘lis gatttea - water woe: |
Bakuchi possess beautiful leaves.
2. wIeeet caret Frater eaele, Horeca: |
Bakuchi fruits are black.
3, POTAAT- HH HAAEM: |
Bakuchi fruits are black in colour.

4. Ufernent-alet giifer meTTeT: |
Fruits have characteristic offensive odour.
5. ifieral-aaa TEIseary |
Bakuchi seeds have white streaks.
Properties and Actions
6. -HS Erith
Bakuci is efficacious in Kustha
8. Paaedt-Past efter
Bakuchi cures Switra
9. Tery:-Aet Past Arter gery carte
Bakuchi destroys Switra (Vitiligo).
10, HARYM- sae aryl TRY wT TTTTAT |

Bakuchi imparts colour and lustre to a person suffering from Switra.

----- PAGE 103 -----
Bakuchi 95

Regional Names

Big [Poa sn Pap eaan]
(a cr
Bavachya, Babchi
Habitat

Grows in Uttar Pradesh and Assam, fairly common in Bihar, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Deccan, Konkan, and Karnataka, Commonly grows in plain areas and it is cultivated
also.

Morphology

Habit — An erect annual herb grows 60-180 cm
in height. Trunk is straight and gland dolted. Branches
are strong and elastic.

Leaves — Alternate, simple, covered with numer-
ous black dots. 3 to 8 cm long and 2.5 to 5 cm broad.
Round or heart shaped, scallop toothed with mucr-
onate apex. 5 main nerves springing from the base
and 4-6 pairs of lateral nerves springing higher up of
the leaf. Petiole is 1-2.5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary 10-30 flowered race-
mose.

Flowers — Bluish purple in colour, long peduncle
and short pedicels. Calyx 3-4 mm long, gamosepalos.
Corolla twice as long as calyx, standard petal is or-
bicular 6 mm long, clawed, wing petal is oblong and
keel petal is obtuse.

Psoralea corylifolia Linn.

Androecium contains 10 stamens.

Gynocecium has monocarpellary ovary with long style and a minute terminal stigma.

Fruit — A small blackish, glabrous, ovoid or kidney shaped, compresed, closely
pitted one seeded indehiscent legume. Pods are 5 mm long.

Seeds — Smooth, small, adhering to pericap, some what ovate with an agreeable
aroma.

----- PAGE 104 -----
96 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruit is one seeded, indehiscent pod, measuring up to 5 mm in length and 3.5 mm in
breadth. These are ovoid, oblong, somewhat compressed or flattened. The surface of the
pericarp which closely adheres to the seed is glabrous, closely pitted, having a dark chocolate
to almost black pitted, having a dark chocolate to almost black colour. The entire pod, in
most cases, is found to be enclosed within a membranous persistent calyx which is adher-
ent to the fruit. The seed is also black and contains two starchless cotyledons. Odfrour is
faint, which turns pungent on chewing, having acrid, bitter taste and is nauseating.
Adverse effects

Oral administration has resulted in nausea, vomiting, malaise, loose motion and head
ache. Oil has a specific irritant action on the skin and mucous membrane.

On applying on leucoderma, the skin become reddish and occasionally blisters may
occur.
Classical references
Synonyms
TAM StH eres gutter | wihrerarHeTHe atar yfercacttier aT
aracett arent geet a wanttar u (ars. etrafest 206-207)

Properties and actions

atepelt weitere Hearet Tart | recreear wear MT vera UI

wal SM ses Aesarphy u acne frat HeHurtetet we |

aye eras TT (ALT. elMest 207-209)

araett vitcen ferret yer perigee, | tareategeer a ofatenteaedstt 1
(afi. Texafert 164)

arpelt gan fercar eure fear ory: | cto eye GAT Sea GET Tara

fase a tea cafe | att geahtrarremtesateet:

tect cay wae itraragiarrare ged | (s.FA. sitet 706-708)

ageh agra pipeaame | erdtaferangtreg weet a AT
(aft. wareete at 65)

ape dhrst eifesaret utah: 1 frre st fect fast cae satoTTafe

(RAR. Magee TT 166)

----- PAGE 105 -----
ro"

Bakuchi

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Bakuchi

a. Mehahara b. Shwitraghna c. Vrishya
Ans: b. Shwitraghna

. Indications of Somaraji Taila

a. Shwitra b. Prameha c. Agnimandya
Ans: a. Shwitra

. Botanical name of Bakuchi

a. Boerhavia diffusa b. Vitex negundo
c. Piper longum d. Psoralea corylifolia
Ans: d. Psoralea corylifolia

. Shashilekha is a synonym of

a. Ativisha b. Ashwagandha __c. Bakuchi
Ans: c. Bakuchi

. Malayu is a synonym of

a. Kapikacchu b. Bakuchi c. Agnimantha
Nagakeshara
Ans: b. Bakuchi
. Bakuchi is
a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper

Ans: a. Herb

d. Anulomana

d. Raktapitta

d. Shirisha

d. Shrub

----- PAGE 106 -----
Bala

Useful part: Mula (Root)
Rasadi Panchaka

Ra.
Snigdha, Guru
Karma (Actions)

Balya, Kantikara, Grahi, Vrashya, Ojo vardhaka, Ayu vardhaka, Stambhana (Bala
phala), Brahmana, Shothahara, Rasayana, Hradya.

Agrya Karma

AT MMM SHACTATAS TUM | (F.Y. 25/40)

Balaa (Sida cordifolia Linn.) is Astringent, energy promoter and pacify Vata.
Pharmacological activities

Aphrodisiac, Diuretic, Deflatulant, Analgesic, Antiinflammatory, Tonic, Emollient,
Cardio tonic.
Dosha karma (Action on Doshas)

Vatapitta Shamaka-Vatahara because of Madhura rasa, Snigdha guna and Madhura
vipaka.

Pittahara because of Shita Virya, Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Karshya, Dourbalya, Kshaya, Raktapitta, Vatarakta, Mutratisara,
Mutrakrachra.

Balaphala — Adhmana, Jwara
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic Administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Bala taila 4.fa.— 28/148-56, Ufa. 5/19

Bala taild is commonly used in all kinds of Vatavyadhi.

----- PAGE 107 -----
Bala 99

Bahu Shosha (Atrophy of Arms) = Decoction of Bala mula (Root) with Saindhava
favana (Rock salt) is very useful in Bahu Shosha (Atrophy of arms).

2. Vatarakta (Gout)
BRAT VATS TST | (aA. 29/119-120, Ha Fe. 22/45-46)
aeraet at ufttenrame aftr wT 1 (yA. 5/12)
Bala taila (Oil) is used for bath, enema and for diet in case of Vatarakta.
3. Madatyayaja Trashna (Thirst caused by alcoholism)
gad ale aret seret Sar are ear vRACwat at Hocarats eran ge
(a.fa. 24/165)
In Madatyayaja trashna (Thirst caused by alcoholism) water processed with Bala
should be given to drink.
4, Shlipada (Filariasis)
afftor prerecare fate ag ATE | Halt seftrarsrgquares watt yeas
CAR ILCEDD)
One, who takes milk processed with two types of Bala (Bala and Atibala) in the
morning, will be relieved from Asadhya Shlipada (Chronic and severe filariasis).
Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
2. Chuurna (Powder) - 3to6g
3. Swarasa (Liquid extract) - 10to20ml

Phytoconstituents

Seed contains: Ephedrine, Fatty oil, Steroids, Phytosterol, Resin, Resin acids, Mu-
cin, Potassium nitrate.

Root contains: Ephedrine, Hypaphorine, Vasiscinone, Vasicine, Vasiscinol, Cho-
line, Betaine.

Research corner
1. Ethanol extract (EE), Chloroform (CF) and methanol (MF) fractions obtained
from Sida cordifolia are subjected to antinociceptive activity and these
demonstrate a pronounced antinociceptive activity on orofacial nociception.
Bonjardim LR, Silva AM, Oliveira MG, Guimaraes AG, Antoniolli AR,
Santana MF, Serafini MR, Santos RC, Araujo AA, Estevam CS, Santos MR,

----- PAGE 108 -----
Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo Name Indications

Bala Taila Vata Vikara, Bhagna
:

tN

a

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Lyra A, Carvalho R, Quintans-Junior LJ, Azevedo EG, Botelho MA. Sida
cordifolia leaf extract reduces the orofacial nociceptive response in mice.
Phytother Res. 2011 Aug; 25(8):1236-41. doi:10.1002/ptr.3550. Epub 2011
Jun 14.

. This study aimed at assessing the effects of ethanolic extract of Sida cordifolia

root on quinolinic acid (QUIN) induced neurotoxicity and to compare its effect
with the standard drug deprenyl in rat brain. Swathy SS, Panicker S, Nithya
RS, Anuja MM, Rejitha S, Indira M. Antiperoxidative and antiinflammatory
effect of Sida cordifolia Linn. on quinolinic acid induced neurotoxicity.
Neurochem Res. 2010 Sep; 35(9):1361-7. Epub 2010 May 25.

. Ethanol extracts of roots of Sida cordifolia was evaluated for antistress,

adaptogenic activity using cold restraint stress and swim endurance in mice.
Mice pretreated with extract of Sida cordifolia showed significant improvement
in the swim duration and reduced the elevated WBC, blood glucose and plasma
cortisone. Sumanth M, Mustafa SS. Antistress, Adoptogenic Activity of Sida
cordifolia Roots in Mice. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2009. May; 71 (3):323-4.

. The anti-pyretic and anti-ulcerogenic properties of methanolic extract of Sida

cordifolia aerial parts (MESC) were investigated in rats.

The analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities of a new alkaloid, 1,2,3,9-
tetrahydropyrrolo (2,1-b) quinazolin-3-ylamine (compound 1) isolated from
Sida cordifolia Linn. were investigated in animal models. The alkaloid also
produced significant increase in the tail flick latency in radiant heat tail-flick
method. In Carrageenan induced rat paw edema the compound 1 produced
16.93 and 24.43% inhibition of paw edema at the doses of 25 and 50 mg/kg
body weight respectively at the third hour of study. Sutradha RK, Rahman
AM, Ahmad M, Bachar SC, Saha A, Roy TG. Anti-inflammatory and
analgesic alkaloid from Sida cordifolia linn. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2007 Jul;
20(3):185-8.

Sida cordifolia extracts of the aerial and root parts showed good analgesic,
antiinflammatory and hypoglycaemic activities. Kanth VR, Diwan PV.
Analgesic, antiflammatory and hypoglycaemic activities of Sida cordifolia.
Phytother Res. 1999 Feb; 13(1):75-7.

Kshirabala Taila

----- PAGE 109 -----
Bala 10]

Vatarakta, pte

Baladi Kashaya

Baladya Ghrata
Balashwagandhalakshadi Taila

Botanical Name: Sida Cordifolia Linn.

Pittaja taja kasa
Rajayakshma, Kasa

Jwara, Unmada, Vatavikara

Sida — (Greek) old name for water lily used by Theophratus.
cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves.

Family — Malvaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Karpasa

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Brahmaniya Varga, Balya Varga, Prajasthapana Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi Varga 142-146
Basonym of Drug
aela aerate at, Wushth set aeladiered: , carat gerarexr |
Bala improves strength.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. ATeaTeeHT-aret aorerether TATA ET
Herb grows in fields and waste places.
Morphology
2. Gratar-war vem aaa, |
Stem of Bala is rough like Yastika
Tet Fore: |
Flowers are yellow.
4. Aeat-areae award BART
Bala stem is having strong fibres.
5. yitrarent-yftcrentet Teac ster

Fruits of Bala ripen in winter season.

----- PAGE 110 -----
102 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. wgtadt-wantedt dtarreat: |
Bala seeds resemble cereals.
7. HeArea-vaaaharmararavarelest Ga |

Seeds of Bala resemble like that of Cereals.

Properties and Actions
8. TATSU-WYTATITAT |
Bala itself is strong and imparts strength.
9. faer-fasreor serfer aerate
Bala is promoting strength.

Regional Names

Mac

Habitat —Bala is distributed throughout the hotter parts of India and fairly common
in various provinces in states like Uttarpradesh, West
Bengal, Karnataka, Andhrapradesh, Tamilnadu and
Kerala. It is acommon weed grows in waste places.

Morphology
Habit — Wild undershrub

Stem — Herbaceous, aerial, erect, cylindrical,
branched, solid and green.

Leaf - Cauline and ramal, alternate, stipulate,
cordate, serrate, acute, pubescent, unciostate reticu-
late reined.

Inflorescence — Solitary, axillary or terminal and
few flowered cymes.
Flower —- Bracteate, pedicellate, complete,

actionomorphic, bisexual, pentamerous, hypogynous,
yellow coloured, 5 sepals, gamosepalous, petals are Sida cordifolia Linn

----- PAGE 111 -----
Bala 103

5, polypetalous, twisted, yellow. Stamens are indefinite, monadelphous; gynoecium is
multicarpellary, syncarpous, multi locular due to false septa.

Fruit —Schizocarp., 6-8 mm in diameter.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Identification: Pieces of cylindrical, gradually tapering roots upto 2 cm in diameter.
branching at lower parts only. The outer surface is rough, longitudinally wrinkled or
shrivelled and earthy brown in colour. The thicker root pieces bear transversely elongated
lenticels. Thinner pieces representing lower part of root bear lot of root-scars and rem-
nants of rootlets. A transversely cut portion of the root whose closely adhering bark which
is up to 1 mm thick; a well marked cambium ring, a woody region characterised by
radiating medullary rays in between concentric ring and a central pith. On breaking be-
comes short woody fieces, has characteristic pungent odour, mucilaginous on chewing.

Adverse effects

Bala is known as Indian-ephedra because it contains 0.8-1.2% of Ephedrine. The
continuous use of products with Ephedrine which is an alkaloid can bear a series of risk to
health. Intake of Bala, by not being aware of presence of ephedrine, or by ignoring its
contra-indications, or a prolonged use, specially combined with other stimulants, can be
harmful. For the reasons many states of United States have prohibited the use of the
ephedrine in the dietary compliments and not to advise in home made preparations. If
used it may cause Hypertension, Headache, Tremors, Insomnia, and Tacchycardia etc.

Remedial Measures: Avoid a prolonged usage of products containing ‘Ephedrine’
Synonyms
went areaiferent aaa Aa areaterentshe St 1 (aT. Yeeeah 142)
Properties and actions
aereged vit wet aerenritHe | feared maf weftreattrares ATTA MN
(ae. Weert 144)
(a5. TSeaeat 145)
aot fearert ear rarectver aeat Bratage | traf at eta acts aefaeatt
(af. yseaeert 271)
aereged Reret wet Taare: | vitet ote erecitsitteng: aaferotelay tt
aha arameanttrarercresreararcderary | (HAY. sitet tf 1056-1057)

----- PAGE 112 -----
104

Dravyaguna Vijnana

aeraet Targa Hard wet Ta fet Ate ET ees chat ENT
frarrenrrraaerfirerencrrentere 1 (3.F. ater af 1058-1059)
aersfafirra wet ftrartaraert | werdiver gi-aaiesntedt
(aA. Weeriert 95)
aeawAgRe wag vires rere | aed get gens arafrreraey
(RP. erqenfe TT 106)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Rasa of Bala Mula
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Sangrahika Balya Vata hara is the Agrya Karma is attributed to
a. Ashwagandha b. Brahmi c. Bala d. Amalaki
Ans: c. Bala
3. Pradhana Karma of Bala is
a. Balya b. Grahi c. Dipana d. Sangrahi
Ans: a. Balya

—

4. Ephedrine is present in

a. Ashoka b. Nirgundi c. Ativisha d. Bala
Ans: d. Bala

5. Balaguduchyadi Taila is indicated in
a. Amavata b. Vatarakta c. Jwara d. Shwitra

Ans: b. Vatarakta
6. Bhadraudani is a synonym of

a. Arjuna b. Ardraka c. Bala d
Ashwagandha
Ans: c. Bala
7. Botanical Name of Bala is
a. Sida veronaecifolia b. Sida cordifolia
c. Soda rhombifolia d. Abutilon indicum

Ans: b. Sida cordifolia

----- PAGE 113 -----
Chapter

Bijaka /Asana

Useful part - Sara (Heart wood).
Rasadi Panchaka

Rasa [Rashad
Ruksha, Laghu

Karma (Action)

Sara (Heart wood) — Pramehahara, Twachya, Keshya, Krimighna, Visarpahara,
Kushthaghna, Medohara, Rasayana, Galadoshahara, Stambhana, Rakta Shodhaka.

Pushpa (Flower) — Keshya, Pachana
Pharmacological Actions

Astringent, Anthelmintic, Blood purifier
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka - Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu Vipaka and
Kashaya rasa.

Pitta Shamaka because of Kashaya rasa. Vatahara (Ra.Ni).- because of Ushna
virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Prameha, Kushtha, Visarpa, Shwitra, Krimi, Keshavikara, Raktapitta, Medoroga,
Galaroga.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

ATA WT: HSA: | ATV SATA: HHA: I

(S.4, 38/9)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Salasaradya gana including Bijaka is very use-

ful in Meha (Diabetes). It is also useful in Kushtha (Skin disease) & Pandu
(Anemia).

----- PAGE 114 -----
106 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

aT Matfer ark Ba: Tfereitsrenr | (yfa. 6/19)

Sushruta advocates usage of Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) and Khadira (Acacia
chateau) in different forms.
3. Raktapitta (Bleeding disorders)

AAT AH TATA IT: Were fakerra at | (aFa. 4/14)

Kshira (Alkali) prepared from Asana (Pterrocarpus marsupium) and Madhuka
(Madhuca indica) is very useful in Ratkapitta (Bleeding disorders).
4. Shwitra (Vititigo)

Wha Glogs ders cease | erasers get aay Praga

(a¢.fa. 20/8)

Intake of Markava (Eclipta alba) fried in oil kept in iron vessel followed by milk

processed with Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) will cure Shwitra (Vitiligo).

5. Drishtibalartha (To improve eyesight)

fretemardet Teraatseated Pee: | sreraars frat antler Baler TAT

(3.8.3. 13/46)

The oil prepared from Tila (Sesamum indicum), Aksha taila (Terminalia belerica),
Bhrangaraja swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana kwatha (Decoction of Pterocarpus
marsupium) in an iron vessel used as Nasya (Snuff) will improve vision.

Matra (Dose)

Kwatha (Decoction) — 40-80 ml

Churna (Powder) — 3-5 g

Phytoconstituents — Kino heart wood contains 70-80% of Kinotannic acid, Kino-
red, K-pyrocatechin (Catechol), resin and gallic acid.

Research corner

1. To fractionate the antidiabetic constituents (s) of the aqueous extract of
Pterocarpus marsupium, heartwood: (PME), the antidiabetic constituents of
Pterocarpus marsupium demonstrate that a high molecular weight constituents
(s) of Pterocarpus marsupium has patent insulinotrophic and insulin-like
properties. Mohankumar SK, O'Shea T, McFarlane JR. Insulinotrophic and
Insulin-like effects of a high molecular weight aqueous extract of Pterocarpus
marsupium Roxb. heartwood. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012 May 7;141 (1): 72-9.
Epub 2012 Feb 10.

----- PAGE 115 -----
Bijaka /Asana 107

he

. Study is designed to investigate the effect of of aqueous extract of Prerocarpus
marsupium Roxb, on elevated inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-i by in type 2 diabetic rats. Modulation of cytokine TNF-f by the
Rasayana drug Prerocarpus marsupium is telated with its potential anti-diabetic
activity. Halagappa K, Girish HN, Srinivasan BP. The study of aqueous extract
of Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. on cytokine TNF-{ in type 2 diabetic rats.
Indian J. Pharmacol. 2010 Dec; 42(6):392-6.

3. Methanolic extract. of Plerocarpus marsupium Roxb (P. marsupium)
administered to both non-diabetic and alloxan induced diabetic adult female
Wistar rats a dosage of 500mg/kg body weight, and its effect was checked on
serum and tissue lipids together with corticosterone, estrogen and progesterone
profile. Singh PK, Baxi D, Banerjee, $, Ramachandran AV. Therapy with
methanolic extract of Pferocarpus marsupium Roxb and Ocimum sanctum
Linn reverses dyslipidemia and oxidative stress in alloxan induced type I
diabetic rat model. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2012 Jul; 64(5):441-8. Epub 2010 Nov
23.

4, The present study was aimed at extensively evaluating the antioxidant
properties of an anti-diabetic plant extract of stem bark of Pterocarpus
marsupium using various in vitro radical scavenging assays as well as by using
liver slice cultures as a model system. Results demonstrate that the whole
aqueous extract showed high antioxidant activity in all different assays used
and also protected mitochondria against oxidative damage. Mohammadi M,
Khole S, Devasagayam TP, Ghaskadbi SS. Pterocarpus marsupium extract
reveals strong in vitro antioxidant activity. Drug Discover Ther. 2009 Aug;
3(4):151-61.

5. The present study was undertaken to evaluate cardiotonic activity of aqueous
extract of heartwood of Pterocarpus marsupium. Compared to digoxin, a drug
with narrow therapeutic window, Pterocarpus marsupium showed wide
therapeutic window. Mohire NC, Salunkhe VR, Bhise SB, Yadav AV.
Cardiotonic activity of aqueous extract of heartwood of Pterocarpus
marsupium. Indian J Exp Biol. 2007 Jun; 45(6):532-7.

Yoga (Formulation)

SI.No. Name

Asana kashaya
Asana Bilvadi Taila

Bijaka Sararishta

Indications

Sthoulya
Shiroroga, Karnaroga

----- PAGE 116 -----
108 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Asanadi Yoga Dushtha vrana
Pandu, Prameha

Botanical Name — Pierocarpus marsupium Linn.

pterocarpus - Ptero-with wings, carpus-fruit
marsupium - bears pouch in flowers (Purse like).
Family — Fabaceae
Kula - Aparajita kula

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Udardaprashamana Varga
Sushruta Salasaradi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Vatadi varga 28-29

Basonym of Drug
ates areater ferafer were TAI, sted Reratela wrens a AAA, |

Bijaka is very much beneficial in Prameha roga and fruits are spread over large area
as itis a large tree.

disens tet disreta Wrerar |
Seed appears prominent in a fruit.
Synonyms
Habitat
Bijaka commonly grows in Shura sena pradesha (Western Uttar Pradesh).
Morphology
2. tat: Wet HSA |
Trunk of Bijaka is very large.
3. Wereast:—Wer gat: Tale: |
Bijaka is big tree like that of Sarja (Vateria indica).
Bijaka blossoms in Pushya masa (Late winter).
5. Btieer- goat Bread |

Flowers are aromatic.

----- PAGE 117 -----
Bijaka /Asana 109

6, Crrare thereat: aise
Heart wood of Bijaka is yellow in colour,

7, regres: —threrare: virereryy: |
Heart wood is yellow in colour and resembles heart wood of Sala (Shorea ro-
busta),

Properties and Actions

8. yd: Hye: |

Bijaka is Karshyakara (emaciating)

Regional Names

Indian Kino tree
Vijayasar
Honnemara
Habitat

Plant is distributed throughout India. It is commonly seen in Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Orissa, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.

B

Morphology

Habit — Moderate to tall sized deciduous tree
grows 30 mtrs in height and 2.5 mtrs in girth with
straight clear hole.

Heart wood — Golden brown or reddish brown
coloured with darker streaks, strong, tough and mod-
erately heavy.

Leaves — Compound, imparipinnate, leaflets 5-
7, coriaceous, oblong to obtuse glabrous on both
surfaces.

Inflorescence — Terminal panicle.

Flower- Pale yellow, petals are 1-1.5 cm long.

Pterocarpus marsupium Linn.

Fruit — Pod, 2.5-5cm in diameter, nearly cir-
cular, glabrous, with wings, seed is small.

----- PAGE 118 -----
110 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Heart wood pieces will be rectangular or square shaped, 2 to 3 cm thick. Surface is
yellowish red with golden hue, marked with dark streaks and parallely running striation
which represent annual rings. The drug also occurs as curved shavings of brownish red
colour. Very difficult to break and it is brittle. Has phenolic characteristic odour. Taste is

astringent followed by bitter after taste.
Classical references

Synonyms

asta: dhrans Hager gent | aepenger: free: Ustensret: TAA:
(ary. aereat 28)

Properties and Actions
disre: gedhatias teqe arity aha sctoretircts crea: caval Tare: 1
(Ae. aetert 29)

aiste: CHa arate: (a. sranfeert 115)

ofits: Hee: Alo: HAs: Sahel laa: heaters: Hhrataday:

aha pegehiatatar wares: | rater a orttn ferares weer et

(Syarhh ateratatfir pores weprftr a ) farce arerttarhs arent startet FE
(fa. atefterf 811-815)

STA: HSS ferent aaa | AHL MATA THATS: UI
(ay. sasteat 133)

TEA FAT: ited Gar: foraHTTE: | eet AeHErahraned TAR: |
(BAY. etree aT 128)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Bijaka is
a. Mula b. Sara c. Pushpa d. Fruit
Ans: b. Sara

2. Pradhana Rasa of Bijaka
a. Katu b. Amla c. Tikta d. Kashaya

Ans: d. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Bijaka

----- PAGE 119 -----
Bijaka /Asana 111

sec a ab a a ce

a. Jwaraghna b. Pramehahara c. Dipana d. Shwasahara
Ans: b. Pramehahara

4. Ayaskriti is indicated in
a. Prameha b. Agnimanadya c. Shwasa d. Atisara
Ans: a. Prameha

5. Botanical name of Bijaka or Asana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Aconitum ferox
c. Pterocarpus marsupium d. Elettaria cardamomum
Ans: c. Pterocarpus marsupium

6. Mahasarja is a synonym of
a. Arjuna b. Sarja c. Tuvaraka d. Bijaka
Ans: d. Sarja

7. Habit of Bijaka
a. Shrub b. Tree c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 120 -----
Chapter

Bhallataka

Useful parts — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi pancaka

Vipaka

Karma (Action)
Bhallataka phala— Pachana, Chedana, Bhedana, Medhya, Dipana, Vranahara,
Kushthahara, Arsoghna, Jwarahara, Krimighna, Sukrala, Grahi and Balya.

Bhallataka majja — Vrishya, Bramhana, Dahashamaka, Tarpaka, Dipana.
Bhallatakasthi— Pachaka, Medhya, Dipaka, Krimighna.

Agrya Karma
MecaaHtsee:y | (31.2.3. 40)

Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is best in Arshas (Piles).

~

Pharmacological Action

Anti cancerous Antiallergic Anti inflammatory
Antibacterial Analgesic Anti arthritic
Cardiac depressant Hypotensive

Dosha Karma
Kapha Vata Shamaka - Kapha hara beacause of Ushna virya and Katu rasa.
- Vatahara because of Ushna virya, Madhura Vipaka and Snigdha guna
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Bhallataka phala — Arshas, Kushtha, Grahani, Gulma, Shopha, Anaha, Jwara,
Krimi, Agnimandya, Shwitra, Krimi, Vrana.

Bhallataka majja — Karshya, Klaivya, Daha, Aruchi.
Bhallatakasthi — Kushtha, Arshas, Grahani, Gulma, Shopha, Anaha, Jwara, Krimi.

----- PAGE 121 -----
Bhallataka 113

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)

Woody AY Wawro | (af. 14/70)
Butter milk processed with Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is very useful in
Arshas (Piles).
2. Apaci (Scrofula)
atartecarfit gear weer: we | orp dfieacetet were
(WH. 3.11/98)

The paste prepared by burning the combination of Sarsapa, Arishtha patra (Leaves
of Azadirachta indica) and Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) mixed with goat’s urine
and applied over Apaci.

3. Romashtanartha (To remove unwanted hair)
det wera watat ada wo wees afta, dame
(a.fa. 1/107)
The combination of Taila (Oil) of Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) and Snuhi
Kshira (Latex of Euphorbia nerifolia) is a very good remedy for removing unwanted
hair.
4. Krimi (Worm infestation)
ferarecat det Uy edt et asta | (37.2.F8. 20/32)
In case of Krimi (Worms) one has to take Bhallataka taila internally or as a Basti
(Enema).
5. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
Tee: AaHct: Ural: Breit amber Teh a (aA. 7/82)

Person has to take the ghee processed with Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium),
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia
belerica) and Nimba (Azadirachta indica). This is very beneficial in curing all the skin
diseases.

Matra (Dose)
Taila : 10-20 drops
Kshirapaka _: 30m.
Phytoconstituents

Nuts contain — Bhilawanol, Bioflavanoids A, B and C., Anacardiac acid.

----- PAGE 122 -----
114

Seeds contai i ‘
1in— Bhilawanol :
j 4 Bt ne, Bioflavonoids, Bp;
Anacardol, Semecarpol. Nut shell contains! Bioflavaone, » Bhil
Tetrahydroa-mentoflavone, and Tetrahydrorobust
Research corner

Li;

i)

Dravyaguna Vijnana _

and Anacordoside, Anacardic acid, cardoy,

tho
aw: ’
aflavone. Ang),

wo 1 a a .
The objective of the study was [0 determine the antic NCEFOUS effica,
jective oO ‘ . us anacardium (SA) ny ot
Ayurvedic preparation made of Semecarp™ Uts, f;
yurvedic preparation mé he stud demonstrated the eff; Ve
groups of rats were used for the study. The stucy ICac
act for the treatment of hepatocey

Semecarpus anacardium nut milk extr Lule,
carcinoma cither alone or along with chemotherapy. Joseph JP1, Raval S

Sadariya KA, Jhala M, Kumar P. Anti cancerous efficacy of Ayurvedic milk
extract of Semecarpus anacardium nuts on hepatocellular carcinoma in Wists
rats. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2013 Aug 12; 10(5):299-304
To evaluate the hypolipidemic effect of Semecarpus anacardium Linn nut milk
extract (SA) in high cholesterol fed hyperlipidemic rat model. SA demonstrate
remarkable hypolipidemic activity in high cholesterol fed hypercholesterolemic
rats. The potential anthihyperlipidemic action 1s plausibly due to its underlyin
antioxidant role. vinayagam KS1, Khan HB, Keerthiga G, Palanivelu §,
Panchanatham S. Hypolipidemic effect of Semecarpus anacardium in hj
cholesterol fed hypercholesterolemic rats. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Dec 3,
Semecarpus anacardium Linn. nut milk extract (SA) was evaluated for jts
antidiabetic role in type 2 diabetic rats. Type 2 diabetes was induced in rats by
feeding high-fat diet for 2 weeks followed by single intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin 35 mg/kg body weight. Diabetic rats were treated with SA orally
at a dosage of 200 mg/kg body weight daily for 30 days. The potential
antihyperglycemic action of SA is plausibly due to tis underlying antioxidant
role. Khan HB1, Vinayagam KS, Renny CM, Palanivelu S, Panchanadham S.
Potential antidiabetic effect of the Semecarpus anacardium in a type 2 diabetic
rat model. Inflammopharmacology. 2013 Feb; 21 (1):47-53. doi: 10.1007/
s10787-012-0136-6. Epub 2012 May 4.

- The wound healing promoting property of stem bark methanol extract of

Semecarpus anacardium was evaluated at three different dosages by excision,
incision and dead space wound models using Wistar albino rats. Methanol
extract at 100 mg kg (-1) exhibited significant wound healing activity but was
lesser than standard; whereas, in animals treated with 50 and 75 mg kg(-!)
showed moderate activity. Lingaraju GM1, Krishna V, Joy Hoskeri 1
Pradeepa K, Venkatesh, Babu PS. Wound healing promoting activity of stem

----- PAGE 123 -----
Bhallataka 115

bark extract of Semecarpus anacardium using rats, Nat. Prod Res. 2012;
26(24):2344-7. doi: 10,1080/14786419.2012,656108. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

toga (Formulations)
SI.No

Indications
Graathi

Name
Bhallataka Churna
Bhallatakadya Taila
Bhallataka Ghrata

Nadivrana, Apachi
Grahani, Gulma, Pandu

Kankayana Vati
Bhallatakavaleha

I

z

3

4.

Bhallatakadi Kwatha Urustambha

Botanical Name

Semecarpus anacardium Linn.

Semecarpus - Simeion-marking, carpus-carpos (Greek) which means nut [Black
juice of the nut is used for marking or tracing designs upon cloth].

Anacardium - Heart like.
Family — Anacardiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Amra kula
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Dipaniya Varga, Kushthaghna Varga, Mutra Sangrahaniya Varga
Sushruta Nyagrodhadi Gana, Mustadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi Varga 228-232

Basonym of Drug

Tet Fara, TATA |

Bhallataka is very sharp like that of spear.
Synonyms
Morphology

1. aPagdt- ataxic pa vittaritset |

Bhallataka fruits are attached to the orange coloured fleshy cup.

----- PAGE 124 -----
116 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. enqeffer:-erqftarettarrer |

Bhallataka fruits are obliquely ovoid.
3. Were: -det Ase |

Bhallataka fruit has oily contents.

Properties and actions
4. Aratk-areatyrr: |
Bhallataka passifies Vata.
5, aiftren:-atrar aera |
Bhallataka causes burns and increase temperature.
6, SRA: aTEdTt HAT
Bhallataka fruit causes blisters.
7. Weett-aeet ga cent tase |
The Rasa (Juice) of Bhallataka is very corrosive.
8. Ver:-Rrreagarcthre
Bhallataka alleviates Arbuda (Cancerous growth).
9. Wren: Taree caret rter
Bhallataka juice cause redness to the skin.
10. yitmpd-Vitth caeter eae het
Bhallataka juice induce swelling if comes in contact with skin.
11. araer:-atetary gat: |
Bhallataka is very sharp and potent plant.
= Names

es aa |
Habitat— Bhallataka is found in abundant in Bihar, Westbengal, Orissa, Assam,
Karnataka and fairly common in hotter parts of India.

----- PAGE 125 -----
Bhallataka 117

Morphology

Bhallataka is a medium sized tree grows up to
30-50 ft. in height.

Bark — Gray in colour and exudes an irritant se-
cretions on incising.

Leaves-— Simple, 30-60 cm long, 12-30 cm broad,
obovate to oblong, glabrous above, ashy gray or buff
and pubescent beneath and developed on the tip of the |£7,”
branch and deciduous. ;

Inflorescence — Compound panicle.

Flowers-— Small, greenish yellow, dioecious, with
long flower stalk, petals are 5-6, stamens 5-6, ovary is
rudimentary in male flowers and superior in case of | Semecarpus anacardium Linn.
female flowers.

Fruit— Drupaceous nut, 2-3 cm long, heart shaped, green when raw and turn to
black on ripening. Fruits are attached to fleshy orange coloured receptacle, which is ed-
ible.

Seeds - Pendulous.

Fruit contains black, oily and highly vesicant juice which is used traditionally for
marking the cloths.

Varieties — Sushruta and Nighantu Ratnakara:

1.Bhallataka 2. Nadi Bhallataka

Botanically other species are:

1. Semecarpus albecens 2. Semecarpus travancoria
3. Semecarpus anrienlata 4. Semecarpus heterophylla
5. Semecarpus kurzi 6. Semecarpus pubescens
7. Semecarpus obscura 8. Semecarpus parviflora

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruit is heart shaped, obliquely ovoid, drupaceous nut, with a fleshy pear-shaped
receptacle. It is up to 2.5 cm long and 2 cm broad. Surface is black or brownish black,
glossy, sometimes shrivelled. Internally the nut contains a viscous oily liquid of black
colour.

Adverse effects
In higher doses Bhallataka will cause

----- PAGE 126 -----
118 Dravyaguna Vijnana

e Blisters on tongue and throat e Increased thirst and sweat

e Heart burn e Gastro-intestinal tract irritation
e Oliguria ¢ Skin eruptions and burning

e Swelling e Renal failure

Remedial measures
1. If consumed then gastric lavage should be done.
. In case of dehydration-I V fluid administration.
. Antacid therapy
. Jiraka (Cumin seed) and Saindhava lavana (Rock salt) to be given.

nn & WwW bh

. Coriander leaves paste is applied.
6. Butter with Tila kalka (Paste of Sesamum) or Haridra (Turmeric) application.

Antidote
1. Coconut oil will be good antidote.

2. Application of Meghanada Rasa (Juice of Amaranthus tricolour) with-
Navanita (Butter).

Fatal Dose — More than 10 gm.
Fatal Period — 12-24 hrs.

Shodhana (Purification)

1. Fruit of Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is cut into pieces by crushing
and kept it in Ishtika churna (Brick powder) or rubbed with brick powder.
Then it is washed clearly with hot water. This purifies Bhallataka.

2. Swedana is done with Narikela ambu (Coconut water) is Dolayantra.
Classical references
Synonyms
aves Bry vinecrisenisttre: alain sect cages sims,
(a3. etrrnfert 228)

Properties and Actions
Tet arent aha amarante | Hewiinecthyeaiermesatpety Ul
aaa aT ger seu avafirrat | GaTeERt tag fret year,
(aa. ethene at 229-231)

----- PAGE 127 -----
Bhallataka 119

TATA ATATT TUT:
oa gersenfasatenra sitar ui (as. ehercrnfeert 232)
TEMA: BHT AIT: HHA: | Tearefaeeltart set aH A, I
(aft, aaeat 129)
Sete TAA: HATA AYUASA | Met Utes che: firmwares trey: I
yet sat set wefirr fererny i areata et far Heures wy
mare ured fearet cfteniteat Sfe Nea | Hext atrgent eft aaa AVTTaTy, |!
SS Teut YouylEMepi | AST AE Get seelt araftrcta
(fA. sitsftreart 496-500)
Teeth: eae: Bea: Hea, | UHATATTATS- ASAT:
STERN Wat ATTA EE at arc ATH AAT ATE TATE TAT TAT TSA |
wart ot fexteatesrt frarcen adutt arabernentctrarrtt PrateT TASTAT I
(aft. sTeTfeat 69)
gestg aamay fata wert ghsy, amet viftraghetstiragy ait
faatreatt 1 (R.A. iaeenest 53)
Grahya Bhallataka (Genuine Bhallataka)
aectaafr waar franca ahr g | Paste fe arta ores fags
(L.4. 24/473)

Bhallataka matra (Dose)
Teent: WAT Terres day | Meta Waele: serenreretera
(Ld. 24/473)
Bhallataka Shodhana Prayojana (Dose)
Wea TT: wacasth ufsate i tht aeot ATt Aarfaereory
wit weeny dia ce earany | ge frat at dread yaa su
SHURA Uaet UIA RaT | Meat at: MaMa Ae
(U1. 24/474-476)
Bhallataka Shodhana

sBergut wath wet weoraanteey | Wgcteated etenft ara: 0

----- PAGE 128 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

Aa: Wat Was atterdafractd: | seat tera TT Aeon Bhar u

(U9. 24/477-478)

eA: Theis AtRenemaare: | heer sherent Ger YA ATA TTA,

_

(Ud. 24/475)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Bhallataka

a. Bija b. Phala c. Twak d. Mula
Ans: b. Phala

. Vipaka of Bhallataka

a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Lavana
Ans: c. Madhura

. Agrya Karma of Bhallataka

a. Arshas __ b. Kushta c.Jwara d. Raktapitta
Ans: a. Arshas

. Anacardic acid is present in

a. Arka b. Karanja _—_c. Kanchanarad. Bhallataka
Ans: d. Bhallataka

. Kankayana Vati is indicated in

a. Kushta b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Grahani
Ans: b. Arshas

. Botanical name of Bhallataka

a. Pongamia pinnata b. Piper nigrum
c. Semecarpus anacardium d. Zingiber officinalis
Ans: c. Semecarpus anacardium

. Dhanurbija is the synonym of

a. Bhallataka b. Maricha c.Dadima _d. Guggulu
Ans: a. Bhallataka

. Bhallataka shodhana is done with

a. Shunthi Rasa b. Ishtika Churna c. Taila d. Ghrata
Ans: b. Ishtika Churna

----- PAGE 129 -----
Bharangi

Useful part — Mula (Root).
Rasadi panchaka

Katu, Tikta, Kashaya
Ruksha, Laghu

Karma (Action)
Shwasahara, Kasahara, Pachana, Dipana, Shothahara, Jwaraghna, Krimighna,
Dahahara, Vranahara, Ruchikara, Arshoghna.
Action on Dosha
Kapha vata Shamaka, Kaphara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu,
Tikta, Kashaya rasa. Vatahara because of its Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Shwasa, Kasa, Pinasa, Aruchi, Agnimandya, Gulma, Shotha, Jwara, Rajayakshma,
Vrana, Krimi, Jwara, Raktagulma, Arshas.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwasa (Bronchial asthma)
ugar: meh aRaaetar | dghrrarentangatont agar Frey
(a.fa. 17/110)
Paste prepared from Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) and Nagara (Zingiber officinale)
or Marica (Piper nigrum) and Yavakshara is taken with Kwatha of Pitadru (Berberis

aristata), Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica), Asphota (Hemidesmus indicus) and Murva
(Marsedinia tenacissima) is much beneficial in Shwasa (Bronchial asthma).

feranq-aret ar aftteprargary | (33. 51/39)

Paste of Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) prepared with ghee and honey should be given
for licking in case of Shwasa (Asthma).

2. Arshas (Piles)

Te Wa Tgulentaaaramctey Say Aas HET: 1 (GFT. 6/13)

----- PAGE 130 -----
122 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Butter milk processed with Bharangi (Rotheca serrata), Asphota, Yava (Hordeum
vulgare), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) is to be given
for drinking in case of Arshas (Piles).

3. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)
agi a wert feetsaaen: | (%.3. 47/36)

Decoction prepared from Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) is used to take bath. This will
cure Madatyaya (Alcoholism).

Matra (Dose)
Mula Churna (Root powder) : 3 to 6 gm

Phytoconstituents
Root bark — Contains-D-mannitol, B-Sitosterol, Glucose, Stigmasterol, Traces of
saponins, serratagenic acid, oleanolic acid, queretaroic acid.

Leaves — a-spinasterol, Catechin, Luteolin, Apigenin, Baicalein, Scutellarein, Caf-
feic acid, Ferulic acid, Arabinose & glucuronic acid, Plantarenaloside and euphroside.

Research corner

1. A new compound, serratin, was isolated from the essential oil of Clerodendron

serratum alongwith lupeol. The structure of the compound has been elucidated
on the basis of chemical analysis and spectroscopic methods including IR, MS,
and NMR techniques. Ravikumar R, Lakshmanan AJ, Ravi S. Chemical
constituents from Clerodendron serratum. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2008 Jul-
Aug; 10(7-8):659-62.

2. The ethanol extract of Clerodendron serratum roots and ursolic acid isolated
from it were evaluated for hepatoprotective activity against carbon tetrachloride
induced toxicity in male Wistar strain rats. The results when compared with the
standard drug silymarin, revealed that the hepatoprotective activity of the
constituents ursolic acid is significant as similar to the standard drug. Vidya
SM, Krishna V, Manunatha BK, Mankani KL, Ahmed M, Singh SD.
Evaluation of hepatoprotective activity of Clerodendrum serratum L. Indian J
Exp Biol. 2007 Jun; 45(6):538-42.

. The alcoholic extract (50, 100 and 200 mg/kg, p.o.) of Clerodendron serratum
roots produced a significant antinociceptive, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
activities in animal models. Narayanan N, Thirugnana-sambantham P,
Viswanathan S, Vijayasekaran, V, Sukumar E, Antinociceptive, anti-
inflammatory and antipyretic effects of ethanol extract of Clerodendron

wW

----- PAGE 131 -----
Bharangi 123

serratum roots in experimental animals. J Ethnopharmacol. 1999 Jun; 65 (3):
237-41.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Bharangyadi churna Shula, Angamarda

Bharangyadi kwatha Kapha jwara

Bharangyadi lehya Shwasa

Bharangyadi sura Unmada
Vidangadi churna Mandagni
Botanical Name

Rotheca serrata (Linn.), Steane & Mabb.
Rotheca — Small teak from Malayalam origin

serratum — Based on saw toothed margins of the leaves.
Family— Lamiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Classical categorization (Gana)
Charaka — Purisha Sangarahaniya Varga
Sushruta Pippalyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi Varga 182-183

Basonym of Drug

oat sft argt | yeritere 1 ( Prat.) vate er oetfseerenre, gfe aT 1 aT
ames 1 (31.4)

Bharangi destroys all the diseases. It possesses the potency of Sun.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. GRTH-Gh: TTT: |
Leaves of Bharangi are rough.
2. Wl-WaMnet GST: |

Flowers are red like that of lotus.

3. AFNaeh-sg_rieraectt sez sit sigTracet |

----- PAGE 132 -----
124 Dravyaguna Vijnana

When blossoms appears like Angara (Red hot coal).
Properties and Actions
4, Wreratt-aferrcart Treat ste
Bharangi is very auspicious plant.
5. Wreratdent-areroren aE she | ATEVITHATIS ATL |
Bharangi is an auspicious plant having the stem like that of Yasft.

Regional Names

Habitat— Bharangi grows in many parts of India like Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu,
West Bengal, Bihar and Himalayan region.

Morphology

Habit — Shrub grows upto 7 ft. in height.

Stem — Bluntly quadrangular, young parts gla-
brous.

Leaves— Opposite, big, upto 28 cm long but usu-
ally 12-15 cm in length, 5.5-6 cm wide, oblong or
elliptic, acute, coarsely and sharply serrate, glabrous,
petioles are very stout, 6 mm long.

Inflorescence— Panicle, 15-20 cm long.

Flowers— Numerous, showy has a pair of acute
bracts at each branching, pedicels twisted, flowers
are bluish to dark purple in colour.

; Clerodendron serratum (Linn).
Fruit — Drupe, 6 mm long, somewhat succulent, ile Cinp)

broadly obovoid, normally four lobed.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Roots are hard, cylindrical, gradually tapering, 2 to 5 cm in diameter, split longitudi-
nally into half. External surface is rough, dark brown in colour, with scattered patches of
small beady warts and circular scars. The centrally split pieces show a creamish yellow,

----- PAGE 133 -----
Bharangi 125

longitudinally striated woody surface with a well marked pith. The bark is upto 2 mm
thick and is always accompanied with substantial portion of woody part of the root. Root
is difficult to break and becomes fibrous. Root does not have any particular odour.

Adulterants
1. Stem part of Clerodendron serratuin
2. Root of Clerodendrum indicum
3. Bark of Picrasma quasiodes
Classical references

Synonyms
agt eat War Gosh arelvratwet | aelvagacch a UIT sera I
(41.5. Te=aeart 143)

Properties and Actions

anff var peter Sector ore ory: | eto get YorerHqayeae Fay I

Vila H SMT a SATA HAL UI (ALT. Site HT 182-183)

TST AL ae ferear SOT APH HUTT EAST ae seat Stat STM

(afi. qeeufe aT 68)

aster Haravent dost ure og: | cea BAT TATA HATTA, I

iirarahaeura senrut ferret i (o.F.sitetirert 1135-1136)

ag g wefan meat | warped a cesar Prarktatt
(ain. frereanfert 151)

UST vaHeMTeTaT adler ort, araver Hatt aN ATA HES |

ard direnarite warete: Y tei at set aha a eeerARaet WET araatt
(B.A. marge at 126)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Bharangi
a. Twak b. Mula c. Phala d. Patra

Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Karma of Bharangi is

a. Dipana b. Stambhana c. Shwasahara__ d. Vrashya

Ans: c. Shwasahara

----- PAGE 134 -----
126 Dravyaguna Vijnana

eee

3. Bharangyadi Lehya is indicated in
a. Agnimandya _ b. Ajirna c. Anidra d. Shwasa
Ans: d. Shwasa

4, Botanical name of Bharangi is
a. Rotheca serrata b. Symplocos serrata
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Andrographis paniculata
Ans: a. Rotheca serrata

5. Brahmana Yashtika is the synonym of
a. Manjishta b. Bharangi c. Parpata d. Gambhari
Ans: b. Bharangi

6. Habit of Bharangi is
a. Tree b. Creeper c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: d. Shrub

----- PAGE 135 -----
Chapter
Bhringaraja

Useful parts — Panchanga (Leaves, stem, fio

Wer, roots & fruits)
Rasadi Panchaka

li
thi

Karma (Actions) — Keshya, Twachya,
Shothahara, Pandunut, Dantya, Rasayana,

Pharmacological activities: Hepatoprotective, Antiviral, Antibacterial, Purgative
Hypotensive, Analgesic, Antileprotic, wound healing.

Action on Dosha — Kapha Vata hara,
Katu vipaka and Katu, Tikta Rasas, Vataha
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications]

Kesha vikara like Palitya & Khali
Shotha, Amadosha, Pandu, Dantarog

Krimighna, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Balya, Netrya.

Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya,
ra because of Ushna virya.

tya, Kushtha, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Shotha, Kasa,
a, Netravikara, Shirorti, Hradroga, Visha.

Amayika— Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1 Palitya (Hair fall)

archer Taree, etre faneet ee WENT 1 a: wed Hed dortaes ufeaTae II
(af. 26/267)

The oil prepared from Markava (Eclipta alba), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and
milk is used as Nasya (Inhalation). This reduces Palita (Premature graying of hair).

2 Shwitra (Vitiligo)

Who Bled Te te cheesy | Sistas es Gre wag frases uN

(3.a.Fa. 20/08)

Bhringaraja (Eclipta alba) is fried in iron pan with oil given to eat then milk pro-

cessed with Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) given to drink. This therapy is very much
beneficial in Shwitra (vitiligo).

----- PAGE 136 -----
128 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Drashti prasadanartha (To improve vision)
fretemardet yeeaistarea Pree: | srereraratercet anttfer eater eT, 11
(3.2.5 13/46)

Taila (Oil) of Tila (Sesamum indicum), Aksha (Terminalia belerica) is processed
with Bhringa Swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana Kwatha (Decoction of
Pterocarpus Marsupium) in iron vessel. This oil is used for Nasya (Snuff).

4. Suryavarta (Head ache)
TRTsenttatgent scherftea: gated Peay tere ware
(M.5.F4. 62/50)

Bhringaraja Rasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) mixed with equal quantity of Chaga kshira
(Goat’s milk) kept in sunlight should be used as Nasya (Instillation), will be a very good
remedy for Suryavarta.

Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) : 5tol0ml
Churna (Powder) : 3 to 6g
Phytoconstituents

Leaves — B-terthienyl-methanol, stigmasterol, B-amyrin, Desmethyl wedelolactone
glucoside Amino acids—cystine, glutamic acid, phenylalanine, tyrosine and methionine.

Whole plant — Phytosterol-A, «-amyrin, Wedelolactone, Triterpenic acid, desmethyl
wedelolactone, fatty acids like-palmetic, stearic, oleic and linoleic acids, nicotine.

Root — Hentriacontanol, 14-heptaosanol, stigmasterol.

Research corner

1 The anti-diabetic effect of the ethanolic extract of Eclipta alba (EEA) on
hyperglycaemia and diabetic nephropathy was investigated in streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats. The results suggest that EEA possesses antidiabetic effect
associated with alpha-glucosidase and aldose reductase inhibition. Jaiswal N,
Bhatia V, Srivastava SP, Srivastava AK, Tamrakar AK, Antidiabetic effect of
Eclipta alba associated with the inhibition of alpha-glucoside and
aldosereductase. Nat Prod Res. 2012 Feb 21.

2 Study was designed to explore antiproliferative activity of Eclipta alba on liver
and other related cancer. The data establish the existence of anti-proliferative,
DNA damaging and anti-metastasis properties in EAE which is yet unexplored
and hold high therapeutic impact. Chaudhary H, Dhuna V, Singh J, Kamboj

----- PAGE 137 -----
Bhringaraja 129

SS, Seshadri S. Evaluation of hydro-alcoholic extract of Eclipta alba for its
anticancer potential: an in vitro study. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Jun
22;136(2):363-7-6. Epub 2011 May 6.

3. The present study investigated the ability of 100 and 200mg/kg of aqueous
extract of Eclipia alba to circumvent aggression. Eclipta alba significantly
minimized dominance (p<0.05) which is correlated to the level of aggression
particularly with 200 mg/kg in the water competition test. A tangible behavioral
submission was observed with 100 and 200mg/kg and of Eclipta alba in the
foot shock induced test. Lobo OJ, Banji D, Annamalai AR, Manavalan R.
Evaluation of anti aggressive activity of Eclipta alba in experimental animals.
Pak J. Pharm Sci. 2008 Apr; 21(2):195-9.

4. The combined effect of dried Eclipta alba leaf powder (3 g/day) in
encapsulated form on blood pressure, diuresis, and lipid profile of 60 mildly
hypertension male subjects in the age group of 40-55 years was studied. In
conclusion, it would appear that E. alba is diuretic, hypotensive, and
hypocholesteroliemic and helps in the alleviating oxidative stress-induced
complications in hypertensions. Rangineni V, Sharada D, Saxena D. Diuretic,
hypotensive and hypocholesterolemic effects of Eclipta alba in mild
hypertensions subjects: a pilot study. J Med Food. 2007 Mar; 10(1):143-8.

5. The anti-inflammatory effect of the plant of Eclipa alba (Family-Asteraceae)
was evaluated using carrageenin, mediators such as histamine and serotonin
induced paw oedema, and cotton pellet induced granuloma tests for their effect
on acute and chronic phase inflammation models in rats. The results indicate
the potent anti-inflammatory effect and therapeutic efficacy of Eclipta alba
extract on animal models, which is compared with Indomethacin. Kumar SS,
Sivakumar T, Chandrasekar MJ, Suresh B. Evaluation of Anti-inflammatory
Activity of Eclipta alba in rats. Anc Sci Life. 2005 Jan;24(3):112-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Indiéations

Khalitya, Palitya

Name
;

Brahanmanjishthadi Kwatha Sarvakushtha
Panchanimba Churna Kushtha

HAL Nn

----- PAGE 138 -----
130 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name- Eclipta alba, Hask.
Eclipta — Derived from ekleipo which means to be deficient.
alba — White
Family— Asteraceae (See Appendix-II for Key features)
Kula- Bhringaraja
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi Varga 239-241

Basonym of Drug
WF sa UAT |
The flowers of Bhringaraja shine like honey bees.
Synonyms
Habitat
1 FART RL Tatahet See
Plant attracts honey bees.
2 SIRT TPH CTT |
Bhringaraja plant attracts honey bees.
3 AYRATA-HYT: Wated BIT Shyacared Bea |
Bhingaraja has very good effect on hair. If used, hair will become very beautiful.
4 CYRS- hy Wa: vaca she |
Bhringaraja nourishes hair and gives natural black colour.
5 Wrcha:—arcate cayrpttercet ferret |

Bhringaraja prevents premature graying of hair.

Regina] Names

Kannada
Malayalam

Bhangra
Garuga
Kayyunni
Maka

----- PAGE 139 -----
Bhringaraja 131

Habitat

Bhringaraja is found throughout India ascending
to 6000 ft altitude from sea level especially nearby
Marshy places as a weed. Commonly seen in South
Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamilnadu and grows abundantly in Uttar Pradesh,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal ete.f

Morphology
Habit — Annual herb.
Root- Branched, tap root

Stem- Herbaceous, aerial, erect, cylindrical,
branched, solid, glabrous, hairy.

Leaf —Ramal and cauline, simple, opposite, decussate, sub-sessile, exstipulate, el-
liptical, acute, reticulate venation.

Inflorenscence — Capitulum: ray florests (periph-
eral flowers) are ligulate, and disc florets (Central flow-
ers) are tubular; involucre of bracts present.ftt

Ray floret — Bracteate, sessile, incomplete, zy-
gomorphic, unisexual, pistillate, tetramerous, epigy-
nous, cyclic, and peripheral in position. Sepals are 4,
white, petals are 4. Androecium is absent or highly
reduced. Ovary is inferior. Gynoecium is bicarpellary
syncarpous, Disc florets are sessile, complete, actino-
morphic, bisexual, tetramerous, white, central in po-
sition, sepals are 4, reduced to pappus Petals are 4,
gamopetalous, tubular stamens are 4, Gynoecium is
bicarpellary syncarpous, inferior ovary and unilocu-
lar.

wet

pS he

b 2
Wedelia calendulacea Less

Fruit—Cypsela

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Dried whole herb with flowers and fruits; stems, cylindrical up to 4 mm thick, red-
dish brown in colour; leaves, long lanceolate, narrowed at both ends, having a rough
surface of dark green colour which is covered with white apressed hair; flower heads are
in pairs, axillary or terminal, with white ray florets and yellow or black disc (when ripe).
It has mild odour and bitter taste.

----- PAGE 140 -----
132 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
HTMUTAY WRT rebel age Tren eT | OTT: Shorea AT: AAA:
(an.5. Tee PF. 239)
Properties and Actions
YR: HeHetemt Ballon: seaeaye, | Hy: Barna WATS TA
aah THA aA: He Aafrisheigea (a9. WE ah. 240-241)
TRA MATAR Bear Ter I | HAVA EAU TATA: 1
(af, artrofeat)
arch: aaganfterent gaitenitsfeatrats felt, | arcmerrett eae: Aye TATA: |
ha arrairare He warrarogen: ui (4.4. staftrat 1575-1576)
ARUN VYSTAR: Ses: | ATCA Aatett Tara:
(aa. wareefert 147)
argue: weft Staten awmerccgd, | ava: Mage eat TATA:
(B.A. magenta TF 145)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Pradhana Karma of Bhringaraja
a. Kanthya b. Swarya c. Keshya d. Jwaraghna
Ans: c. Keshya
2. The drug used for Khalitya and palitya

a. Ativisha b. Bhringaraja _—_c. Bhallataka d. Ahiphena
Ans: b. Bhringaraja

3. Bhringaraja swarasa Nasya is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Jwara c. Kasa d. Palitya

Ans: d. Palitya
4, Bhringaraja Taila is indicated in
a. Shwasa b. Shula c. Khalitya d. Shotha

Ans: c. Khalitya

----- PAGE 141 -----
Bhringaraja 133
Se ree

5. Botanical Name of Bhringaraja
a. Eclipta alba b. Boerhavia diffusa

c. Glycyrrhiza glabra d. Vitex negundo
Ans; a. Eclipta alba
6. Markava is a synonym of

a. Mandukaparni_ b. Ashwattha c. Lodhra d. Bhringaraja
Ans: d. Bhringaraja
7. Habit of Bhringaraja
a. Tree b. Herb c. Climber d. shrub
Ans: b. Herb

----- PAGE 142 -----
Bhumyamalaki

Useful part - Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi panchaka

Shita

Karma (Action)

Kasahara, Kandughna, Dahahara, Rochaka, Kushthaghna, Shwasahara,
Trishnahara, Shothahara, Mehahara and Mutrarogahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Demulcent, Hepatoprotective, Antifungal, Anticancer, Antiviral and
Hypoglycaemic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka. Pittahara due to Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta
Kashaya Madhura Rasa. Kaphara because of Tikta kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Kamala, Pandu, Shotha, Prameha, Mutra vikara, Kushtha, Kandu,
Trishna and Daha.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes insipidus)
gerard frrenut aftarrs fete: | sreaeary MLA, AEP AUT ATT:
(ALY. 287)

In case of Prameha (Diabetes insipidus) one should take combination of 20 g of
Bhumyamataki (Phyllanthus urinaria) and 20 Maricha (Piper nigrum).

2. Pradara (Metrorrhagia)
qearmernget fe dit aogerarhtor | erat sae art Vth Tere Te, UN
(aid. 74/9)

----- PAGE 143 -----
Bhumyamalaki 135

Powder of root of Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus urinaria) is taken with rice water
cures Pradara (Metrorrhagia) very quickly.
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice)—10 to 20 ml

Churna (Powder)-3 to 5g

Chemical constituents

Bitter substance and Alkaloids total plant contains phylJanthin, hypophyllanthin,
niphyllin, phyllnirium, phyllantheol and phylleteralin.

Research corner

A study done to assess hepatoprotective and antioxidant activities of 11 phyllanthus
species like P. amarus, P. urinaria, P. debilis, P. tenellus, P. virgatus, P. maderaspatensis,
P. reticulates, P. polyphyllus, P. emblica, P. indofischer and P. acidus. The methanol
extracts of P. polyphyllus, P. emblica and P. indofischeri showed high levels of
hepactoprective activity. Srirama R et all. “Hepatoprotective activity of Indian Phyllanthus.
Pharm Biol. 2012. Aug 50 (8):948-53.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

Chyavanaprasha Medhyartha, Karshya ~

Botanical Name
Phyllanthes urinaria Linn.
Phyllanthes — Phyllus-leaved anthus

Urinaria —Diuretic
Family—Phyllanthaceae

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kasahara varga Shwasahara varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Guduchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug

apfer atrovent Str |

----- PAGE 144 -----
136 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruits of Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus urinaria Linn.) resemble the fruit of Amalaki
(Phyllanthes emblica) but the plant is very small,
Synonyms
Morphology

1. aaa & aga srrerctat TT

Bhumyamalaki is a very small tender herb.

2. TEIA-Aga: Wale AAT |

Bhumyamalaki has many small leaves.
3, AYHAU-Aga: Heh AAT |
Bhumyamalaki yields many fruits.
Properties and Actions
4, HAST SA Ae AEM: |
Bhumyamalaki purifies the body.

5. Brave Prana

Bhumyamalaki is a very potent medicine and regarded as one of the best.

Vernacular Names.

Habitat
Bhumyamalaki grows in waste place through-

out India.

Morphology
An annual herb grows 30 to 60 cm in height.

Stem - Erect and branched.
Leaf - Simple, Closely placed, distichously im-

Phyllanthes urinaria Linn.
bricate, sessile or nearly so, 6 to 13 mm long and 2 to “i aie eu

----- PAGE 145 -----
Bhumyamalaki 137

omm wide, oblong or linear-oblong, stipules are peltate,
Mower - Solitary, axillary, subsessile, minute and yellowish in colour.
ruit - Capsule, 3 mm in diameter, globose. Seeds are trigonus, transversely fur-
rowed and 1.5 mm long.
Classical references
Synonyms
aparrerenant wheat frat araeratfe ae agua agen agatatsaterst = 1
(a3. Tee Th 277)

Properties and Actions
yerat antahirat waren wep fear Provan Arak ahs aTATTRT I
(AI. Tee wT 278)
aera wepe freer ate: ror erat | feet elt ret eeareferasyt 1
(af. deat FT 86)

arrerent fear fereat ara HERE ay: | eet oneginaanpS frac |

TATA TTTSTERREATAAT TATA, |

qerat g aeararen ftrate feast | ror Peete SEAT
(a.fa. siete FF 93)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Bhumyamalaki
a. Only Root b. Only fruit c. Only Flower d. Whole Plant
Ans: d. Whole Plant
. Pradhana Rasa of Bhumyamalaki
a, Madhura b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Katu
Ans: b. Tikta
3. Vipaka of Bhumyamalaki
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: a. Madhura
4, Bhumyamalaki Kashaya is mainly indicated in
a. Atisara b. Vibandha c. Kasa d. Ajirna

Ans: c. Kasa

—

i)

----- PAGE 146 -----
138

a. Cedrus deodara

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Botanical name of Bhumyamalaki

b. Phyllanthes urinaria

c. Phyllanthes emblica d. salmalia malabarica

Ans; b. Phyllanthes urinaria

a. Talisapatra

. Tamalaki is the synonym of

b. Amalaki c. Bhumyamalaki d. Nagakeshara

Ans: c. Bhumyamalaki

b. Compound
Ans: b Simple

. Bhumyamalaki is a
a. Shrub b. tree c. Creeper d. herb
Ans: d. herb

. Botanically Leaf of Bhumyamalaki is

b. Simple c. Pinnately compound d. Palmate

----- PAGE 147 -----
Bilva

Useful parts— Mula (Root), Phala (Apakwa)-Unripened fruit & Patra (leaves)

Rasadi Pancaka

Apakwa phala Pakwa phala Mula

(Unripened fruit) (Ripened fruit) (Root)

Karma (Actions)
Mula (Root) — Shothahara, Chardighna, Shuulahara
Patra (Leaf) — Sangrahi, Pramehaghna, Shothahara
Kasisa (Stem) — Kasahara, Hradya, Ruchya, Agnivardhaka
Apakwa phala (Unripen fruit) — Dipana, Pachana, Grahi, Hradya.
Pakwaphala (Ripen fruit) - Vidahi Vishtambhi, Durjara, Agnisadaka.
Pushpa (Flowers) —Atisarahara, Trishnahara, Chardighna.

Agrya Karma
fared aineendtefterare mya | (AY, 25/40)
Bilva (Aegle marmrlos Corr.) is Astringent, Appetizer and Pacify Vaata Kapha
Dosha.
Pharmacological Activities
Unripen fruit — Astringent, Digestive, Stomachic, Constipative.
Pulp — Stimulant, Antipyretic
Ripen fruit — Cooling, alterative, laxative
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Kaphahara because of Kashaya, Tikta rasa, Ushna virya and
Katu vipaka.

Vatahara because of Ushna Virya

----- PAGE 148 -----
140 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Rogaghnata — Therapeutic indications
Mula (Root) — Shotha, Shula, Chardi
Patra (Leaf) — Prameha, Shotha
Kanda (Stem) — Kasa, Aruchi, Agnimandya
Apakwaphala (Unripen fruit) — Atisara, Agnimandya
Pushpa (Flowers) — Atisara, Trishna, Chardi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration):
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
eau aegat Ucar ash tear afer | Sree aT aretercanht Peat AAMT
(afa. 19/113)
If one takes Bala bilva (Unripen fruit of Aegle marmelos), he will be relieved
from Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktatisara (Diarrhoea mixed with blood)
Fa Wad Bale settee Metra | aaltactet wera ferenrany Ra aa
(G3. 40/119)
Combination of Bala bilva phala (Unripen fruit of Aegle marmelos), Jaggery,
honey and oil if administered, it checks diarrhoea with blood.
3. Chardi (Vomitting)
fara arn Pzaret eareate fara rerenny | fated AUR cheat sare wraferent Wet:
(ara.Ft 6/112)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Bilva (Aegle marmelos) and Nagara (Zingiber
officinale) is very useful in Chardi (Vomiting). If added with Kaitarya it
becomes more potent.

4. Arshas (Piles)
fara araisae ash eervenet aise A aT GaN tf THATS I

(a.fa. 14/47)

Patient suffering from Arshas (Piles) should sit in a tub containing warm
decoction of Bilva (Aegle marmelos).

5. Balaroga (Diseases of children)

rot averted: | (BE. 1/40)

Unripen fruit of Bilva (Aegle marmelos), Ela (Elattaria cardamom), Sugar and
Laja (Parched paddy) are mixed together and advised in Bala (Children) to
improve Agni (Appetite).

----- PAGE 149 -----
Bilva 14]

6, Medoroga (Obesity)

fares: velare: argent reer ae | ere Tre Bree Trae atxor eA: 1
(WH, 2/2/117)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Brahat pancamiila like Bilva (Aegle marmelos),
Agnimantha (Clerodendron phlomides), Shyonaka (Oroxylum indicum),
Kashmari (Gmelina arboroea) and Patala (Stereospermum suaveolens) is
taken with honey reduces weight.

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) -lto2g
Patra swarasa (Leaf juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents

Root and Root bark contains — Marmelosin, marmelide, tannic acid, marmin,
skimmianine (alkaloid), Haplopine (alkaloid), Marmelin, Skimmin, Marmesin, Fatty ac-
ids, essential oil.

Leaves contain — o and B- phellandrene, Rutin, marmesinin.

Unripen fruit — Has-Marmeline (Alkaloid), Aegeline (Alkaloid).

Ripen fruit — Contains-Xanthotoxol, B-Sitosterol.

Heart wood — Contains Dictamine.

Research corner

1 To evaluate ethanolic extract of leaves of Aegle marmelos in an experimental
animal model of chronic fatigue syndrome for potential therapeutic benefit. The
results are suggestive of potential protective effect of A. marmelos against
experimentally induced CFS. Lalremruta V, Prasanna GS. Evaluation of
protective effect of Aegle marmelous Corr. In an animal model of chronic
fatigue syndrome. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2012 May; 44(3):351-6.

2 Antioxidative role of Aegle marmelos in aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
ulceration in albino rat was evaluated using essential biochemical parameters.
Pretreatment with Aegle marmelous fruit pulp extract for 14 consecutive days
showed the reverse effects of aspirin suggesting gastro-duodenal protective and
anti-ulcerogenic properties of Aegle marmelos through its antioxidants
mechanism. Das SK, Roy C. The protective role of Aegle marmelos on aspirin-
induced gastro-duodenal ulceration in albino rat model: a possible involvement
of antioxidants. Saudi J. Gastroenterol. 2012 May-Jun; 18(3):188-94.

3 To evaluate antiproliferative and anxtioxidant activity of Aegle marmelos
leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites (DLA)-bearing mice. The

----- PAGE 150 -----
142 Dravyaguna Vijnana
hydroalcoholic extract of Aegle marmelos exhibits strong antitumour and
antioxidant activities in DLA-bearing mice. Chockalingam V, Kadali SS,
Gnanasambantham P. Antiproliferative and antioxidant activity of Aegle
marmelos (Linn.) leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascities transplanted activity
of Aegle marmelos (Linn.) leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites transplanted
mice. Indian J Pharmacol. 2012. Mar; 44(2):225-9.

4 Study done to examine the antidiabetic potential of Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr.
(Rutaceae) bark in a diabetic rat model. These findings suggest that Aegle
marmelos bark extract has the therapeutic potential in STZ-induced
hyperglycemia; hence it can be used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
Gandhi GR, Ignacimuthu S, Paulraj MG. Hypoglycemic and ?-cells
regenerative effects of Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. bark extract in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 May;
50(5):1667-74. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

5 Study done to evaluate the immunomodulatory potential of methanol extract of
Aegle marmelos in an experimental animal model of cellular and humoral
immunity. Low dose of methanol extract of Aegle marmelos was more
effective for augmenting cellular immunity, whereas, high dose was more
inclined towards humoral immunity. Govinda HV, Asdaq SM.
Immunomodulatroy Potential of Methanol Extract of Aegle marmelos in
Animals. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2011 Mar; 73(2):235-40.

6 To evaluate and compare the anti-inflammatory activity of the aqueous root
bark extract of Aegle marmelous (Bilwa) in experimental acute and chronic
inflammatory animal models. Bilwa showed significant anti-inflammatory
agent. Benni JM, Jayanthi MK. Suresha RN. Evaluation of the anti-
inflammatory activity of Aegle marmelos (Bilwa) root. Indian J Pharmacol.
2011 Jul;43(4):393-7.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No:

Name of formulations Indications |

Bilvadi kwatha Jwaratisara, Shotha
Bilvadi ghrata Grahani roga, Agnimandya

----- PAGE 151 -----
Bilva

Botanical Name = Acgle marmelos Corr.
Aegle —goat-One of the hesperides daughters of the evening golden apple.
marmelos — Portuguese word meaning acid pear shaped fruit.
Family — Rutaceac (See Appendix-II for key features]
Kula - Jambira
Gana Vargikarana (Classification)

Charaka — Shothahara varga, Arshoghana varga, Asthapanopaga varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta — Varunadi gana, Ambashthadi gana, Brahatpancamula

Bh.Pr.Ni = Guduchyadi varga 13

Basonym of Drug
Bilva is very useful drug in dysentery.
Synonyms
Habitat
1 Srepe:—vrotshtr rarer |
Bilva tree grows in hilly region also.
Morphology
2 Oaet:—o aa are |
Stem of Bilva is nodular.
3 qleHl-Huee: wae |
Bilva is a thorny tree.
4 Pras:-sitftt wearers |
Leaves of Bilva are trifoliate.
5 WRU: —Teya tt WATT |
Leaves of Bilva are aromatic.
6 Ternftca:-ged witer Fey: |
Fruit resembles large Kapittha fruit.
7 Hehe: Te HTT |

Fruit is large in size.

143

----- PAGE 152 -----
144 Dravyaguna Vijnana

8 sftret:—sfterrmergeh werret, see, thr Gat HAT |
Fruit of Bilva is having aroma.
9 Parnet:-TarHetet fees rare, |

Bilva bears fruits always.

Properties and actions
10 Wettat-Wai aya attrat ars eteecatt |
Bilva purifies Koshtha like that of Haritaki, especially in animals.
11 ATA ret, Tater, atreToT sere:
Bilva alleviates all types of Mala dosa.
12 Alara: arrears aac |
Bilva is very good carminative.
13. wnfteca:—gregs Tet Ta
Bilva cures money diseases.
14 CEPR: set WAST TST |

Aroma of Bilva is pleasant.

Habitat
Commonly found throughout India especially in temple yard.

Morphology

Habit— A deciduous, armed tree of 8-15 mtr
high.

Root — Tap root, branched,.

Stem — Erect, branched, woody, cylindrical,
solid, with axillary straight single or paired spines.

Leaf —Palmately compound, trifoliate, petiolate,
alternate, gland-dotted, leaflets are elliptic, lanceolate
or oblong, acute, entire, glabrous, net-veined, laterals
sessile, terminal one stalked.

Inflorescence —Cymose, axillary panicle.

Flowers- Pedicellate, bisexual, actinomorphic, Ve. we
complete, hypogynous, pentamerous, sweet scented, Aegle marmelos Corr.
5 petals white in colour.

----- PAGE 153 -----
Bilva 145

Fruit - Berry with wooden rind, ovoid, sweet pulp having many orange seeds,

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root Curved or channeled pieces of root bark of varying sizes, 3-5 mm in thick-
ness. Outer surface is grayish white or carthy brown in colour, prominently warty in the
case of older roots. The younger root shows few warts but a large number of lenticels
which appear as short vertical slits, Surface skin is fairly tough and layered, but feels off in
small irregular pieces on rupturing. Inner surface is fibrous, having greenish brown colour.

Classical references
Synonyms
fava: enfteca vieatareae sftmerratir 1 (1. yeeafe at. 13)

Properties and Actions
oftrcreqahircat dt waitsfaftrerant | arascrrett aoa TROT Ue:
(a3. Teeae TH. 13)
wefan fet aaamey | frerdea Weed wet We ll
faranfe Pawererant SoeeafrTsTA Ul (LP Teeate TT. 106-107)
sfacteqaritant oat warship | orayctoreretet Ut Gas araksrg,
Wer aeeaiqeayered wT HY: | wAcAaTgeTed arfeutt farcarafyrear
wus raat eet Searkrerety | fret Heart fer aay,
Rarei dtent ory ole wet atrtaraer | vad fears fester wepTaTs TE
Bet wferent Uiee AMTaTafeareray | (af. staff. 19-24)
facaeq TER ga: Hara: fray Te: | Harfsaned wheres: WE
wea vad fast neat weet Ue | wefrmnaratent dae a fretefa
(a. stemfe FT. 190-192)
faraeryat are ryt wasTd | decor whet eel vlwet oN
aed mars tarhach nfs a Aer | aaa Vat wat ye faster ashy
(B.A. eiteenfe af. 19-20)

----- PAGE 154 -----
146

Ww

Nn

~“

ge

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

a. Pakwa Phala
Ans: b. Apakwa

a. Kashaya
Ans: a. Kashaya

a. Shita
Ans: c. Ushna

. Bilva Mula is

a. Jwarahara

b. Apakwa

b. Madhura

. Bilva Mula has which Virya

b. Snigdha

b. Kushthahara

Ans: d. Shothahara

a. Agnimandya
Ans: b. Atisara

a. Arshas
Ans: c. Ajirna

. Apakwa Bilva Phala is
a. Grahi b. Rechana
Ans: a. Grahi

. Apakwa Bilva Phala is best in

b. Atisara

. Bilvadi Gutika is indicated in

b. Jwara

. When fruit of Bilva to be used it should be

c. Atipakwa

c. Amla

c. Ushna

c. Vishahara

c. Amavardhaka

c. Shotha

c. Ajima

Aegle marmelos is the botanical name of

a. Chandana
Ans: d. Bilva

b. Maricha

Mahakapittha is a synonym of

a. Tuvaraka
Ans: b. Bilva

b. Bilva

c. Kalamegha

c. Kapittha

d. Pakwa majja

. Apakwa Phala of Bilva has which Rasa as its Pradhana Rasa

d. Lavana

d. guru

d. Shothahara

d. Kushthaghna

d. Raktapitta

d. Kasa

d. Bilva

d. Vidarikanda

----- PAGE 155 -----
Brahmi

Useful parts — Panchanga (Whole plant),
Rasadi Panchaka
Pig [Shit
Prabhove | Medlya

Karma (Actions)
Medhya, Ayushyakara, Rasayana, Swarya, Smrati Vardhaka, Kushthaghna,

Pandujit, Mehahara, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Hradya, Kandughna,
Shwasahara, Kasahara.

Tikta, Kashaya,

Madhura

Agrya Karma

eet atet | (3.2.3. 40)

Brahmi (Bacopa monneri) is best in loss of memory.
Pharmacological Actions

Nervine tonic, Diuretic, Anti-infammatory, Anticonvulsent, Immenagogue, Blood
purifier, Rejuvinative, Cardiotonic and Memory enhancer.

Dosha Karma (Actions on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka - Vata hara because of Madhura vipaka, Pittahara hebnins of
Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura Rasa, Madhura vipaka and Shita virya. Kaphahara because of
Tikta kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Unmada, Apasmara, Kushtha, Kandu, Pandu, Shotha, Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa,
Jwara, Swarbheda, Aruchi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Apasmara (Epilepsy)
aeite carps egyehtta a | WOT A MATT Ul (FFT 10/25)

----- PAGE 156 -----
148 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Purana ghrata (Old ghee) processed with Brahmi rasa (Juice of Bacopa
monneri),Vacha (Acorus calamus), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa) and Shankha pushpi
(Convolulus pluricaulis) will cure Unmada (Insanity), Alakshmi (Inauspiciousness),
Apasmara (Epilepsy) and Papa (Sinful conditions).

2. Unmada (Insanity)
velporesmeareeNn Waa: | TATA SET: Vat HS Aya: 1
(W.a. 2/1-18)

Juice prepared seperately from Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri), Kushmandi phala,
Shadgrantha (Acorus calamus), Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaculis) mixed with
Kushtha churna (Powder of Saussurea lappa) and honey relieves insanity.

3. Medhadi Janana (To promote intellect)
raat: 5 T aetaisitaenieet: | gesat saan yeat fasten Ae TAL
arr terregfercarecetan et TATSPUTRTUANT It (37.8.3. 1/27)

Drugs like Brahmi (Centella asiatica), Aindri (Bacopa monnieri) and Jivaka are
tied around Hasta (Palm), Griva (Neck) and Murdhna (Head) helps in over all develop-
ment of child including intellect. For this purpose Vacha (Acorus calamus) is best.
Matra (Dose)

e Swarasa (Juice) —10-20 ml

e Churna (Powder) -5-10 gm

e Kwatha (Decoction) —50-100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Whole plant contains — D-Mannitol, Saponin, Betulic acid, B- Sitosteroal, Stig-
masterol, Stigmastanol, Bacoside A, Bacoside B (Saponins), Monnierin, Hersaponin,
Nicotine, Bacogenin-A Betulinic acid, Mannitol.

Leaves — Brahmine and herpestine (Alkaloids)

Research corner

1 The study is conducted to evaluate the neuroprotective potential of Bacopa
monnieri (BM), and Indian traditional medicinal plant effective against
cognitive impairment, in colchicine-induced Dementia. The results suggest
therapeutic potential of Bacopa monnieri in the treatment of AD associated
cognitive decline. Saini N, Singh D, Sandhir R. Neuroprotective Effects of
Bacopa monnieri in Experimental Model of Dementia. Neurochem Res. 2012
Sep; 37(9):1928-37. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Brahmi 149

2 Study done to test the hypothesis that BM Extract (BME) could offset
neurotoxicity induced oxidative dysfunctions in developing brain in a rotenone
(ROT) mouse model. It is suggested that Bacopa monnieri may be effectively
exploited as a prophylactic/therapeutic adjuvant for neurodegenerative
disorders involving oxidative stress. Shinomol GK, Mythri RB, Srinivas
Bharath MM, Muralidhara. Bacopa monnieri extract offsets rotenone-induced
cytotoxicity in dopaminergic cells and oxidative impairments in mic brain, Cell
Mol Nurobiol/ 2012 Apr; 32(3):455-65. doi:10.1007/s10571-011-9776-0.
Epub 2011 Dec 10.

3 An n-butanol extract of the plant (nBt-ext BM) was analysed and found to
contain Bacoside A (Bacoside A3, Bacopaside II and Bacopasaponin C), The
effects of the BM extract were then studied on morphine-induced hyperactivity
as well as dopamine and serotonin turnover in the stratum since these
parameters have a role in opioid sensitivity and dependence. These findings
suggest that nBT-ext BM has an antidopaminergic/serotonergic effect and may
have potential beneficial effects in the treatment of morphine dependence. Rauf
K, Subhan F, Sewell RD. A Bacoside containing Bacopa monnieri extract
reduces both morphine hyperactivity plus the elevated striatal dopamine and
serotonin turnover. Phytother Res. 2012 May; 26(5):758-63. doi:10.1002/
ptr.3631. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

4 Study is done on Anthihyperglycemic activity, in vivo antioxidant potential,
effect on hemoglobin glyco-sylation, estimation of liver glycogen content, and
in vitro peripheral glucose utilization of bacosine, a triterpene isolated from
ethyl acetate fraction (EAF) of the ethylenic extract of Bacopa monnieri. Study
suggested that bacosine might have insulin-like activity and_ its
antihyperglycemic effect might be due to an increase in peripheral glucose
consumption as well as protection against oxidative damage in alloxanized
diabetes. Ghosh T, Maity TK, Singh J. Antihyperglycemic activity of bacosine,
a triterpene from Bacopa monnieri, in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. Planta
Med. 2011 May; 77(8):804-8. Epub 2010.Dec 10.

5 In this study, the neuroprotective properties of Bacopa monnieri against
rotenone induced oxidative damage and neurotoxicity is studied. Flies (Oregon
K strain, adult males) exposed to a standardized Bacopa monnieri powder for
7 days in the diet exhibited significant diminution in the levels of endogenous
oxidative markers viz., malondialdehyde, hydroperoxide and protein carbonyl
content. Hosamani R, Muralidhara. Neuroprotective efficacy of Bacopa
monnieri against rotenone induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity in

----- PAGE 158 -----
Drosophila melanogaster. Neurotoxicology. 2009 Nov; 30(6):977-85, Epub

2009 Sep 8.
Yoga (Formulations)
SINo. Name

Brahmi Ghrata
Kumara Kalyanaka Ghrata

Saraswatarishta
Brahmi Vati

Smrati Sagara Rasa

| 6 | Brahmi Arka
Manasa Mitra Vataka Unmada, Apasmara
ages | Brahmi Draksadi Kwatha Unmada, Apasmara

Botanical Name— Bacopa monneri, Herpestis moniera H.B.K.

Indications

Apasmara
Pandu, Shosha

Horpesties - Creeping, moniera - Moni-Necklace
Family— Plantaginaceae

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Caraka Balya Varga, Prajasthapana Varga, Sanjnasthapana Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga

Bh.Pr.Ni Guducyadi Varga 279-281
Basonym of Drug

gam: st ate |

Brahmi plant is related to intellectuality and it is memory enhancer.

Habitat
Ts Freracht-aet AAMT Aeeht aT AT SEAT: |

Brahmi grows abundantly near water resources.

Morphology
>. Heearaft-reratta ORT: |

Flowers of Brahmi resemble eyes of fish.

Properties and Actions

3. Rreneitftrent-fercer afer caterer |

----- PAGE 159 -----
Brahmi 151

Brahmi is bitter type of Lonika.
4, aaeat-aate freer |

Brahmi is very good rejuvinator.
5, Wraceh-arera acta |

Brahmi filled with good qualities.
Regional Names

Habitat

Brahmi is found through out India growing naturally in the planes as well as in hills
up to 1200 mtr attitude particularly in the areas having more moisture. It is very common
in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttarpradesh, Bihar etc.

Morphology

Habit — Succulent, spreading, prostrate or
creeping glabrous annual herb. Branches are nu-
merous, upright and having adventitious roots at
almost every node. Stem is green with internodes
of varying length.

Leaves — Simple, opposite, decussate, almost
sessile, spathulate or obovate-oblong shape, entire
and fleshy. Leaves are obscurely veined and dot-
ted with minute spots 0.5-2 cm long and 0.5 cm
wide.

Flowers— Axillary, solitary on long slender
pedicels of varying lengths usually longer than the
leaves. Flowers are whitish or pale bluish in colour.
Petals are twice as long as the sepals. Stamens are 4. Ovary is bicarpellary syncarpous,
two chambered with many ovules in each cell on swollen placenta.

wy
Bacopa monnieri

Fruits — Capsule, ovoid, small, 2-celled, 2-valved and glabrous.
Seeds— Oblong, minute and many.

----- PAGE 160 -----
152 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fresh herbs consists of quadangular, succlent, creeping stems, upto 8 mm thick,
bearing fleshy leaves occuring in whorls at nodes; the leaves are decussate, spathulate,
oblong, obovate and upto 2.5 cm in length; the stems bear clusters of white thin wiry roots
on the underside; flowers are solitary, axillary and have a pink perianth.

The dried material is yellowish in colour with majority of leaves detached. It has
mild odour and bitter in taste.

Controversy

Number of plants has been described in Ayurveda as Medhya (Brain tonic). Brahmi
and Mandukaparni are two popular names in this category. The controversy on Brahmi
and Manukaparni is never ending.

In Ayurvedic classical texts like Charaka samhita, Sushruta Samhita and Ashtanga
Hradaya, Brahmi and Mandukaparni have been described as two different plants. For
examples Caraka enumerated Aindri and Mandukaparni together in the Prajasthapana
varga which may be considered as Bacopa Monnieri and Centella asiatica respectively.
The controversy may be because of synonyms and similar properties.

But these two plants may be distinguished easily.

Distinguishing features

SLNo..” Criteria Brahimi Mandukaparni

—_ Botanical Name Cae asiatica

Family Scrophulariaceae
Type of Plant | Prostrate succulent herb

Prostrate herb and rooting at

the meas
Simple, Opposite decus-

ees ee fleshy and entire brous and crenats ipo
Flower White or Pinkish i ee
He — Capsule and Many seded

Classical references

ie. a

Synonyms
arett mattag w Macc ara | aUgeTUll aregart canst fecat etaet 1
(A. Teeate GT. 279)

Properties and Actions

aratt ferret ferenr reeeat St PTET | HUTA HET TATG UTS STEM TATA Ul

----- PAGE 161 -----
Brahmi 153

ep ree

erat tafemeT HEUTE Areva | Revie agagaateett

arelt gitar (ara. Teas aH. 280-281)
RATAN TRT eHaTET RET aT: | ear gare ATTA EMEA TATA I
mferefteret et HeavEsat we | vilereler fermarrraateraaTUsAT:
(SF. atteftrert, 722-723)
oral fet saver a fereet stare, | ahs wat a ert a Freatarges att
=_ Tata weitqsran | areft ferencetemt eM ET ara Ut

(afr. viet +f. 66-67)
oralt er ae frat cater a yitten 1 caret

(B.A. serene at. 19)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Brahmi

a. Panchanga b. Patra c. Mula d. Pushpa
Ans: a. Panchanga
. Medhya Karma of Brahmi is attributed to
a. Shita Virya b. Madhura Vipaka c. Laghu guna d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Pradhana Rasa of Brahmi
a. Kashaya b. Katu c. Tikta d. Madhura
Ans: b.Tikta
4, Puranaghrita with Brahmi is useful in
a. Apasmara b. Kampavata c. Ardita d. Pakshaghata
Ans: a. Apasmara
5. Brahmi Vati is indicated in
a. Kushta b. Atisara cc. Manasika Roga — d. Arshas
Ans: c. Manasika roga
6. Botanical Name of Brahmi
a. Centella asiatica b. Herpestis moneira
c. Citrullus colocynthis d. Papaver somnifera
Ans: b. Herpestis moneira
7. Matsyakshi is a synonym of
a. Ashwagandha b. Kalamegha  c. Brahmi d. Ashoka
Ans: c. Brahmi

—

nN

----- PAGE 162 -----
Brahati

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Phala (Fruit) & Patra (leaves).
Rasadi Panchaka

Karina (Actions)

Kasahara, Hradya, Pachana, Ruchikara, Kushthaghna, Shwasahara, Kanthya,
Shulahara, Agnivardhaka, Chardighna.

Sarpatanu (Variety) — Kasahara, Shwasahara

Shweta Brahati — Ruchya, Netrya

Pharmacological Actions — Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Cardiac tonic, Antipyretic,
Analgesic, Expectorant.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosa)

Kaphavata Shamaka - Kapha hara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu
Tikta rasa.

Vatahara because of Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) - Shwasa, Kasa, Swarabheda, Hradroga,
Agnimandya, Asya vairasya, Arochaka, Kushtha, Jwara, Shula, Chardi.

Sarpatanu (Variety) — Shwasa, Kasa & Jwara.
Shwetabrahati — Aruchi and Netraroga.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1 Grahani (Sprue)
wa Maen sae aah Gaditera: | (MM. 2/5/28)

Butter milk processed with Brahati (Solanum indicum) Mula (Root) will be benefi-
cial in Grahani (Sprue).

2. Indralupta (Alopecia areata)

saa oar wear geeites: | (MMA. 3/11/2718)

----- PAGE 163 -----
si zat 155

Fruit juice of Brahati (Solany

scalp in case of Indralupta (Aopen, ieee scam
3. Balaroga (Diseases of Children)

ct crate: err i ory thar fraratateercet wareers rea I
(3.23. 2/58)

m) & Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)

anchakola (Pippali, Pippalimula, Chavya, Chitraka &
who vomit the breast milk.

4, Krimi karna (Maggots in ear)
aratgefres fem: wniaee war a (Ys. 21/52)

. Dhuma (Fumigation) of Vartaki (Solanum indicum) is very beneficial in case of
Krimi karna (Maggots in ear) as like that of Sarshapa sneha (Oil of mustard).

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 80 ml

teen

Fruit juice of Brahati (Solanum indicu
mixed with honey, ghee and P,
Shunthi) and given to the child

Churna (Powder) - lto2g
Phytoconstituents

Roots & Stem — Contains Solasonine (Glycoalkaloid), Solanine, solasodine,
diesgenin, f - sitosterol, lanosterol & solamargine.

Fruits — Solasonine, solanine, diosgenin, maltase, fatty acids like lauric, palmitic,
stearic, arachidic, oleic and linoleic acids, carpesterol.

_ Leaves — Solasoniné, solanine, diosgenin, B-sistosterol, lanosterol, solamargine &
solasodine.

Research corner

1 A new characteristic steroidal glycoside of the 23S, 26R-hydroxylated
spirostanol-type named indioside F was isolated from the fruit of Solanum
indicum, along with indioside A and protodioscin. El-Aasr M, Miyashita H,
Ikeda T, Lee JH, Yoshimitsu H, Nohara T, Murakami K. A new spirostanol
glycoside from fruits of Solanum indicum L. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009
Jul; 57 (7):747-8.

2 Solavetivone (1), Cytotoxic to OVCAR-3 cells with an IC (50) value of 0.1
mM, has been isolated from Solanum indicum. Syu WJ, Don MJ, Lee GH, Sun
CM. Cytotoxic and novel compounds from Solanum indicum. J Nat Prod.
2001 Sep; 64(9):1232-3.

----- PAGE 164 -----
156 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Beta-Sitosterol (S]-0), beta-sitosterol glucoside (S]-1), dioscin (SI-2), methyl
protoprosapogenin A of dioscin (SI-3), methyl protyodioscin (SI-4) and
protodioscin (SI-5) were isolated and characterized from the whole plant of
Solanum indicum L. (Solanaceae) showed cytotoxicity on seven cancer cel]
lines. Chiang HC, Tseng TH, Wang CJ, Chen CF, Kan WS. Experimental
antitumor agents from Solanum indicum L. Anticancer Res. 1991 Sep-Oct;
11(5):1911-7.

4. The ethanol extract of roots, fruits and roots of Solanum indicum and
Saccharum munja respectively and water soluble resin of commiphora myrrha
were studied for anti-inflationary activity were found in former two plants will
slight anti inflammatory activity was observed in latter plant. Singh RK, Joshi
VK, Gambhir SS. Anti-inflammatory activity of some traditional medicinal
plants. Anc Sci Life. 1998 Oct; 18(2):160-4.

5. A standardized extract of the fruits of Solanum distichum has previously been
shown to possess anti-hypertension activity in rats (ED50 about 1 mg/kg).
Earlier acute toxicity studies had shown that single doses up to 2g/kg orally or
intraperitoneally failed to show any signs of morbidity. To study its potential
long-term toxicity, rats of either sex were fed rurally 1g/kg of the extract daily
over a period of 4 weeks to 6 months the present findings point to the wide
safety margin of the extract, Abdel Aziz UW, Fawzy N, Ismail Al, El-Askary H.
Toxicological studies on a standardized extract of Solanum indicum ssp.
distichum. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Apr; 49(4):903-9. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Brahatyadi kwatha Sannipata Jwara, Shwasa

Laghupancamula kwatha Vatapittaja jwara
Dashamularishta Shwasa, Kasa, Vatavyadhi
4 Dashamuladya ghrata Vatavyadhi

Botanical Name
Solanum indicum Linn.

Solanum — Name of a German Botanist

indicum — Native of India

Family— Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Kantakari

----- PAGE 165 -----
Brahati

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka — Kanthya Varga, Shothahara Varga, Hikkanigrahana Varga,
Angamardaprashamana Varga

Sushruta Brahatyadi Gana, Laghupanchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga 36-37

Basonym of Drug

gett | ae Tat | vested, Tea FT
In comparison to Kantakari, Brahati plant is big.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, atatat-adasaat gfe
Brihati is a common plant available in all regions.

Morphology
2. Uhraet-dtranntft mehr srt |
Fruits of Brihati are yellow.
3, MUeal-HUSH: AASET |
Plant bears thorns.
Properties and Actions
4. fdt-fee sa renter eh |
Brihati is very efficacious in Kasa (Cough).
5. Wedt-weret gsaesat ster aed |
Brhati is very useful in many diseases hence respected by all.
Botanical Name
Solanum indicum Linn.
Solanum - Name of a German Botani~*
indicum - Native of India
Family- Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula- Kantakari

Yemacular Names

157

----- PAGE 166 -----
138 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Malayalam Cheruchunda

Habitat

Brahati is found throughout tropical India,
grows in waste places, along roadsides and in the
places where it gets good sunshine.

Morphology

Habit — Armed shrub

Stem — Herbaceous, branched, green, prickly;
prickles scattered.

Leaves — Simple, appear opposite (from adna-
tion); those of the same node unequal, sinuate,
sparsely stellate-pubescent above; densely so below;
prickles absent on leaves; exstipulate.

Solanum indicum Linn.

Inflorescence —Extra-axillary corymbose cyme.
Flower — Ebracteates, bisexual, ebracteolate, obliquely, zygomorphic, hypogynous.
Calyx — Cupular, lobes pubescent, lobes enlarged in fruit.
Corolla: Petals Stellate— pubescent, acute, white, sub-rotate, plicate.
Androecium — Stamens 5.
Gynoecium — Superior ovary, bilocular.
Fruit- Berry, green, globose, pulpy.
Seeds — Circular, smooth.
Varieties
Ra.Ni- 1. Brahati 2. Sarpatanu
3. Shwetabrahati
Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Pieces of stout, tortuous roots upto 4 cm in diameter, sometimes divaricately branched,
with long cylindrical rootlets. External surface is rough, earthy brown in colour, with
small round warty protuberances. Root bark separates easily from the root, exposing a
longitudinally striated surface of yellowish white colour. A transversely cut portion shows
a thin bark, followed by a cortical layer enclosing a broad mealy woody portion and a

----- PAGE 167 -----
Brahati 159

a a nent ret tin ne a —

central pith surrounded by a prominent ring. The dried root is difficult to break and be-
comes short pieces. It has slightly pungent odour and bitter to taste.

Different species
1, Solanum indicum 2. Solanum torvum
Substitutes
1. Solanum torvum Swartz
2. Solanum incanum Linn.
Classical references
Synonyms
aratent qarverat rect sect ett | eget utter feet weTst Goettott u
(41.5. Teenie FH. 36)
Properties and Actions
sect met ger urett Hared | HeferrassereaTeMe aa
TOT PSA ATH AAA | (AT. WSEAS TH. 36-37)
fifter erat srayersenme 1 oftestrrairemeia arr
(afi. Weeafe aT. 94)
gect Harta Ato aaa | dott orett ger mnfeult sarHsye |
TATRA ARTA eTRy TS, (s.AR. stsfRrerf. 50-51)
gedt wefan aahisaetat | athrearmarcedt smestrrert i

(afr. wareerfe FT 25)
wag (Variety)
erfercat gedit freer BEAN ST AAT | rT KeaaeTeay amet Were sega U
(afr. wereere aT 27)

aged
fasar acaedt art scrafeeret | wear aeahlt ARMATAaTTaT UI
(afi. wareetia TT 29)
gedt wefan marceatt wat 1 fect areit wear ger afendtost
TAT HT TAT BA Yet ATT ST MATT (BLA. Sites af 37-38)

----- PAGE 168 -----
160 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Brahati in combination of Laghu Panchamula
a. Patra b. Mula c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula
2. Solanum indicum is the botanical name of
a. Kantakari b. Katuki c. Brahati d. Kakamachi
Ans: c. Brahati
3. Vartaki is a synonym of

a. Brahati b. Vatada c. Devadaru d. Bala
Ans: a. Brahati

4, Brahati is
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: b. Shrub
. As per Raja Nighantu Sarpatanu is a variety of
a. Sarpagandha __b. Swarna kshiri_c. Brahati d. Agnimantha

Ans: ¢c. Brahati

Nn

6. Brahati is one among
a. Brahat Panchamula b. Trana Panchamula
c. Kantaka Panchamula d. Laghu Panchamula

Ans: d. Laghu Panchamula

7. Dhuma of Vartaki (Brahati) is indicated in
a. Kasa b. Krimi Karna ___c. Shwasa d. Jwara
Ans: b. Krimi Karna

----- PAGE 169 -----
Chapter

Chakramarda

Parts used - Bija (Seeds)
Rasadi panchaka

D.N., B.P.Ni.

al 0
Laghu Ruksha
Katu

Laghu Ruksha s

Madhura
Shita

Vipaka
Vina | Using
Karma (Actions)

Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Dadrughna, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Hridya, Jwaraghna,
Medohara, Vranaropaka.

Pharmacological Actions

Laxative, Antibacterial, Antimicrobial Hepatoprotective, Antiinflammatory, Antitu-
mor, Antioxidant, Antihelminthic.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka,, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa. ,
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Dadru, Kushtha, Kandu, Twak vikara, Krimi, Shwasa, Jwara, Medoroga and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease)

TST: Vase Fa fast ws YS Sages eee SP u

(afa. 7/161)

Combination of Edagaja (Cassia tora), Vidanga (Embelia ribes), Haridra (Cur-
cuma longa), Daruharidra (Berberis aristata), root of Raja vraksha (Cassia fistula),
Pippali (Piper longum), Pakala (Saussurea lappa) is used for bath and drink in Kushtha.

2. Shiroroga (Head disease)
Me Y Woatelsterenieend: | (3.2.5. 24/10)

----- PAGE 170 -----
162 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Prapunnata (Cassia tora) seeds are pounded with sour substances and then applied
over scalp will relieve many head related diseases.

Matra (Dose)

Bija Churna (Seed powder) - 1 to3g
Patra Swarasa (Leaf juice) - 5to10ml

Chemical constituents

Seeds yield fatty oil consisting of Oleic, Lenolic, Palmitic and Lignoceric acids and
Sitosterol. ;

Research corner

A study done to investigate the effects of soluble fibres of Cassia tora seeds on lipid
metabolism. Male sprague dawly rats were fed one of three experimental diets, a normal
diet a high cholesterol diet or a high cholesterol diet with 5% soluble fibres of Cassia tora
seeds for 5 weeks. Serum concentration of total cholesterol in rats fed soluble fibres of
Cassia tora was 27% lower compared to that of the control group. The results indicate
that it enchances fecal lipid excretion and may cause a reduction in serum and hepatic
lipid concentration in rats. Cho IJ, Lee C & Ha T%. “Hypolipidemic effect of soluble
fiber isolated from seeds of Cassia tora Linn. in rats fed a high cholesterol diet.” J. Agric
food Chem 2007 Feb 21:55(4):1592-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Edagajadi lepa Sidhmakushtha

Botanical Name

Cassia tora Linn.

Casia - Cognate of Kasian in Bible
tora — Srilankan name of the plant
Family — Fabaceae

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization) .

Shaka varga
Urdhwabhagahara

----- PAGE 171 -----
Chakramarda 163

Basonym of Drug
aah as Teeth; ae TAMAS Weare aT |
Chakramarda (Cassia tora Linn.) is a very eficacious drug in ring worm infestation
and skin diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, Unt aes WAS ATTA: |
Chakramarda grows gregariously.
Morphology
2. Resitar-Aeer Aafia TAA |
The leaves of Chakramarda resemble with eyes of sheep.
3. qatar Stes |
Seeds of Chakramarda are hard.
Properties and Actions
4, Cga-ag extifer |
Chakramarda cures Dadru.
5. Urarenta-ureat waiter
Chakramarda is useful in Pama Kushtha.

Vernacular Names

English

Habitat

Chakramarda grows through out India. Grows wild
on roadsides and field margins in the midlands and moun-
tains.
Morphology
Annual shrubby weed, 30 to 90 cm in height. Leaves Cassia tora Linn.

----- PAGE 172 -----
164 Dravyaguna Vijnana

are alternate, pinnate, with 3 pairs of obovate leaflets.

Inflorescence - Axillary raceme and shorter than leaf.

Flower - Yellow, | to 3 in number.

Fruit - Pods, slender, very long, curved seeds, many, dark-brown and shining.
Classical references
Synonyms

aennd: Wgarel eget Racer: | wae: Elles Wat Yate Feary 1

(aot. Sirens FF 210)

Properties and Actions
UenAel Ty: tale Ga: frre: | get fea: SHE Hs agartetc
egal dene we Hg ag frente, | Torres wg FIAT I
(A15. SttteMe a-21 1-212)
EAS: HEMT: TAL WIHT ATATUTATE: | AAHVSR: Hiecatpartent Act:
(afr. axdrife af-s )
Water fant wait ear: kag: Veety: u
fasst ge faoqa: gate french at | wposrararetererarpay Ul
WATS Wiles Ff HHS | fravenrqut set SgUATet TS
aanet Hees At BAe He Hater | Saravgyenaguanaay TAT Ul
(& fr. attefet af-7 00-703)
aad: meet AetarcaHeae: | AUHVSfrarlaguraaataye tl
(aA. aereenfe ai-2 00)
sander sist oy Hugeg rarer u (B.A. mages TH-167)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Chakramarda

a. Mula b. Pushpa c. Patra d. Bija
Ans: d. Bija

2. Pradhana Karma of Chakramarda
a. Kasahara b. Kushtaghna cc. Shwasahara_— d. Dipana

Ans: b. Kushtaghna

----- PAGE 173 -----
Chakramarda 165
a eee

3, Chakramarda is indicated in
a. Dadru b. Agnimandya —c. Jwara d. Shwasa
Ans: a. Dadru

4. Main ingredient of Edagajadi Lepa is
a. Kantakari b. Bijaka c. Chakramarda_ d. Manjishta
Ans: c. Chakramarda

5. Botanical name of Chakramarda
a. Cassia fistula b. Cassia tora
c. Cassia occidentalis d. Cassi alata

Ans: b. Cassia tora

6. Pamaghati is a synonym of
a. Aragwadha ob. Kalamegha ce. Chakramarda_d. Pushkaramula
Ans: c. Chakramarda

7. Chakramarda is a
a. Shrubby weed b. Tree c. Creeper d. Climber
Ans: a. Shrubby weed

RRR KK

----- PAGE 174 -----
Shweta Chandana

Useful part - Saara (Heart wood).
Rasadi Panchaka

Ruksha, Laghu
Karma (Action) — Ahladakara, Shramahara, Trashnahara, Raktaprasadaka,

Vrishya, Dahahara, Krimighna, Twakdosha hara, Saumanasya janana, Hradya,
Kushthaghna, Jwaraghna, Angamarda prashamana.

Shrikhanda Chandana Karma — Trishnahara, Jwarahara, Krimighna, Vrashya,
Kantivardhaka.

Vetta Chandana Karma - Dahahara, Jwarahara, Chardighna, Trashnahara,
Kushthaghna, Kasahara. ,

Sukadi Chandana Karma — Dahahara, Sugandhaprada.
Shabara Chandana Karma — Shramahara, Visphotahara, Trashnahara.

Pita Chandana Karma — Kushthahara, Kanduhara, Dadrughna, Krmighna,
Kantivardhaka.

Barbara Chandana ~ Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Rakta-doshahara.
Hari Candana — Shramahara, Tapahara
Agrya Karma

weed Gierraetrataoraaaray | (FG, 25/40)

Chandana (Samtalum album) application will remove bad odour, relieve burning
sensation and acts as coolant.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka - PittaShamaka because of Shita virya and Tikta, Madhura
rasa.

Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

----- PAGE 175 -----
Shweta Chandana 167
ee ae

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Chandana — Daha, Trashna, R i ; imi
: ’ , Raktapitta, i , Krimi,
Varna vikara, Jwara and Vidaroga. SEN EEEE scot Manatee REED

Shrikhanda Chandana ~ Raktapitta, Trashna, Krimi and Varna Vikara.

Vetta chandana — Daha, Jwara, Chardi, Trashna, Kushtha, Kasa.
Sukadi Chandana - Daha, Dourgandhya

Shabara Chandana - Shrama, Trashna, Visphota

Pita Chandana - Kushtha, Kandu, Dadru, Krimi

Barbara Chandana ~ Kushtha, Kandu, Vrana and Raktadosha.

Hari Chandana — Shrama & Jwara.
Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Antiviral, Antigonorrhoeal, Antifungal, Antioxidant, Blood purifier,
Intellect promoting, cooling, Diuretic, Analegesic, Antipyretic and Haemostatic.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktatisara (Diarrhoea with blood)

Via MUTANS VI AUSATAT | STRTUNT WAAAY CERT Ea Ul
(afa. 19/86)

In Raktatisara (Blood mixed diarrhoea), Candana curna (Powder of Santalum al-
bum), Sugar and honey are mixed to Tandulodaka (Rice water) and taken internally.

2. Raktarshas (Haemorrhoids)
Heaatrse: TAM: area: TSS ET Aa PATTI
(afa. 14/185)

Candana (Santalum album) Kashaya or Rasa (Extract) is mixed with Shunthi is
very useful remedy for Raktarshas (Bleeding piles).

3. Pittajwara (Fever)

frasarat at reaarftenaret sree | (GPa. 5/8)

Candanadi kwatha mixed with sugar and honey should be administered. ,
4. Shukra meha (Diabetes)

Uae wprerarHares at | (Ge. 11/9)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) and Candana (Santalum al-
bum) is very much beneficial.

----- PAGE 176 -----
168 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Chardi (Vomiting)

erat waaran aeast at 1 (af. 20/32)

In case of Chardi (Vomiting) Candana curna (Powder of Santalum album) taken
with Dhatri rasa (Juice of Emblica officinalis) is useful.

Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) — 50 to100 ml
2. Churna (Powder) —- 3to6g
3. Taila (Oil) — 5to 10 drops

Phytoconstituents— Sandal wood oil contains about 95% of two isomeric sesquiter-
pene alcohols, o-santalol, B-santalol, santene, santenone, teresantol, santalone and

santalene.

Research corner

1 The chemical composition of volatile compounds from pericarp oils of Indian
sandalwood, Santalum album L., isolated by Hydrodistillation and solvent
extraction, were analyzed by GC and GC-MS. A total of 66 volatile
components were detected. The most prominent compounds were palmitic and
oleic acids, representing about 40-70% of the total oil. Zhang XH, da Silva JA,
Jia YX, Zhao JT, Ma GH. Chemical composition of volatile oils from the
pericarps of Indian Sandalwood (Santalum album ) by different extraction
methods. Nat Prod Commun. 2012 Jan; 7(1):93-6.

2 This study investigated the antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect of
long-term oral administration of the Santalum album pet ether fraction in
streptozotoccin induced diabetic rats. Santalum album pet ether fraction has
potential antihyperlipidemic activity that can help in overcoming insulin
resistance. Kulkarni CR, Joglekar MM, Patil SB, Arvidekar AU.
Antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect of Santalum album in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Pharm Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):360-5. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

3 The antimicrobial activity of aqueous extract leaf and stem of Santalum album
was performed against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and
Pseudomonas. Leaf extract showed significantly higher inhibition when
compared to stem extract. Kumar MG, Jeyraaj IA, Jeyaraaj R, Loganathan P.
Antimicrobial activity of aqueous extract of leaf and stem extract of Santalum
album. Anc Sci Life. 2006 Jan; 25(3-4):6-9.

4 Six new sesquiterpenes, (Z)-2beta-hydroxy-14-hydro-beta-santalol (1), (Z)-

----- PAGE 177 -----
Shweta Chandana 169

2alphahydroxy-albumol (2), 2R-(Z)-campherene-2, 13-diol (3), (Z)-campheren-
2beta, 13-diol (4), (Z)-7-hydroxynuciferol (5), and (Z)-1beta-hydroxy-2-
hydrolanceol (6), together with five known compounds, (Z)-alpha-santalol (7),
(Z)-beta-santalol (8), (Z)-lanceol (9), alpha-santaldiol (10) and beta-santaldiol
(11) were isolated from Santalum album, by using bioassay-guided
fractionation for Helicobacter pylori and compounds 7 and 8 have strong anti-
H. pylori activities. Ochi T, Shibata H, Higuti T, Kodama KH, Kusumi T,
Takaishi Y. Anti-Helicobacter pylori compounds from Santalum album. J Nat
Prod. 2005 Jun; 68 (6):819-24.

Sandalwood oil, the essential oil of Snatalum album L., was tested for in vitro
antiviral activity against Herpes simplex viruses-1 and -2. It was found that the
replication of these viruses was inhibited in the presence of the oil. Benenicia,
F, Courreges MC. Antiviral activity of Sandalwood oil against herpes simplex
viruses-1 and -2. Phytomedicine. 1999 May; 6 (2):119-23.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.

Nn

Name

Chandanadi Taila

Indications

Daha, Jwara

Chandanasava Mutrakricchra, Shukrameha

2
5

Chandanabalalakshadi taila Jwara, Kasa, Kshaya
Chandnadi Churna Prameha, Jirna jwara

Botanical Name

Santalum album Linn.
Santalum — Derived from Greek word Santalon, which signifies its aroma.
album — White
Family —Santalaceae
Kula — Chandana
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Dahaprashamana Varga, Angamarda prashamana Varga, Trashna
nigrahana Varga, Varnya Varga, Kandughna Varga & Vishaghna
Varga

----- PAGE 178 -----
170 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Salasaradi gana, Patoladi gana, Sarivadi gana, Priyangwadi gana,
Guduchyadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ Karpuradi Varga 11-13

Basonym of Drug
araht arereater sft |
areata sere SAL PP Aa Vihrercarest |
Chandana gives pleasure because of its aroma and cooling effect.
Prat aay gfe |
Shweta Chandana is white coloured.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. AATA-ATTTAT BAT: |
Chandana plant grows in Malaya (Region covers Western Ghats spreading in
Karnataka and Kerala states).
Morphology
2. freautery-freraa coir |
Leaves of Shweta Chandana resemble leaves of Tila (Sesamum plant).
3. WRT: UNS |
Heartwood of Shweta Chandana has good aroma.
Properties and Actions
4. Perereq-sitt cast def a |
Shweta Chandana has Shita Virya and it is cold to touch.
5, CRO lt:-AARNATATSIAHTL |
Shweta chandana has cooling effect like that of moon rays, so it is pleasing.
6. Uget:-vaT oft: yiraTSeT |
Imparts beauty to the person who uses Shweta chandana.
7, TRATA-TFATOT WaT ASA |
Shweta chandana is regarded as best among aromatic substances.

Others
8. fraven-firar gata WvSsr7e |

Pieces of heart wood of Shweta chandana are valuable.

----- PAGE 179 -----
Shweta Chandana 171

Habitat— Chandana is commonly found in for-
ests of Karnataka & Tamil nadu. Weather of South-
ern Karnataka is very much conducive to cultivate
Sandal wood.

Morphology
Habit — Small ever green glabrous tree.

Branches — Slender and drooping.

Sapwood — White and odourless.

Heartwood — Yellowish brown in colour and
strongly scented.

Leaves-— 4-6 cm long and 2-3 cm wide, elliptic-
lanceolate, subacute, glabrous, entire, thin, base acute,
petioles are 1-1.3 cm long and slender.

Santalum album Linn.

Inflorescence — Terminal and axillary paniculate cyme.

Flowers — Brownish purple in colour, inodourous. Perianth is companulate, sta-
mens are 4.

Fruit — Drupe
Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni. 1 Shweta Chandana — Santalum album linn

2 Rakta Chandana — Pterocarpus santalinns Linn.
3 Pita Chandana (Kaleyaka) — Jateorhiza palmata or Coscinium

fenestratum Colebr.
Kuchandana (Patranga)— Caesalpinia sappan.
Chandana — Santalum album Linn.
Raktacandana — Pterocarpus santalinus Linn.
Kucandana —Caesalpinia sappan
Kaliyaka — Coscinium fenestratum Colebr. °
Barbarika
Chandana — Santalum album Linn.
Rakta Candana — Pterocarpus santalinus Linn.
Pita Candana — Coscinium fenestratum Colebr.
Kairata Candana
Barbara Candana
Hari Candana

Dh.Ni.

Ka.Ni.

NUORWNRKNARWNK LH

----- PAGE 180 -----
172 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Based on Colour - 1. Rakta 2. Pita 3. Pandura

Based on Habitat - 1. Malayaja — Uttama
2. Yavana — Madhyama
3. Barbara/Pancala-Adhama
Ra.Ni- 1 Shrikhanda-Santalum album
2 Shabara
3 Pita chandana — Santalum fonum
4 Patranga-— Caesalpinia sappan
5 Rakta chandana — Pterocarpus santalinus

6 Barbara
7 Harigandha
Shreshtha Chandana Lakshana (Qualities of best variety Chandana):
e Swade Tikta — Taste is Bitter
e Kashe Pitam — Yellow on rubbing
e Chede Raktam — Red on cutting
e Tanau Sitam — Body is white
e Granthi Kotara Samyukta — with knots and hollow space

Market sample consist cylindrical or longitudinally split pieces of heartwood, stripped
of much of the sapwood; pieces will be 20 cm long and 4 to 8 cm in diameter. The
heartwood is homogenous, rather hard and ponderous, pale reddish with darker reddish
brown and bright yellow concentric zones. Heart wood is having characteristic odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
sravg wet 3 att asattetcraftte: 1 wera werersaetea TREAT A: |
(ara. afore et. 11)
Properties and Actions
wert vtact wat frrmaretet wy | saetrafeaycter qonftraraaeye Ul
(ars. afafe af. 13)
stravé vftrct wag fark frafrarerr | tapered aereterenay |
frarafragecentret ye wenn | we wferaeyt weet Prise ae
(aft. aamfert 2-3)
agate vith aad forfire fa (dF. sitter 1256)

----- PAGE 181 -----
Shweta Chandana 173

aradodtenfe eon cenit wieterer aida first oo sramt:-yfr
wet we vit a att Hata a sad cals Ae wer qea |
orate wire free vier Utne | atalfesst firret yates a ary |
HR Yea T Uso Tea yet WAT

Shit Oat Wa Get wag fet ye | qomaerettrredt aenvirafragy. |
watt fed fark weet oy 1 avd aerated areqemfeanye

(4.FA. araferrt 1262-1267)
sfrarsersnyor
shavs Hefernvtitenyat tare ners ag ferwaaatt saat ger ara |
Get AEARATTS MAG Sher Tay Shoat frat Geran I
(A. aeart 8)
aga YT

aerated sftact ceftragrmd serve |
oidaeatt pedtinicnrencnyat

to ferment
(aA. aeate FT 12)

gals Uat WT
gases fark geste cegd, | Viet Hrd ures yeh AI cea UI
(af. aafert 13)
VARGA TT (AUT UT )
cua wevhacrs verorbreret sraftrcrentt |
frentcamniftaearas gaa aateateanhst
(a. aaa aT 15)
Utter TUT
Utes vitact fark qeycrentroney, | nughraiaregattecatdée UU
(wR. wea a7)
wet tact firm aftrret wy THM Blanka |
(BA. Sone wi 63)
we

wrest frfeet franre teh Ohta UST | seHTAA Vet Tey Ut TAT |

Wg want vieh weraftnfaeme: ui (a.f. sitet ef 1278-1269)

sravd grat dit wag THe | aet efter Get Wa BENT UN
(a. aera at 1)

----- PAGE 182 -----
174

Dravyaguna Vijnana

SAA See TUT ,
are free He cet BS teh eh fee | oPoRe dah at HeTeAt I

—

(ara. Before af. 12)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Shweta chanadana

a. Root Bark b. Fruit c. Leaf d. Heartwood
Ans: d. Heartwood

. Primary Taste of Shweta Chandana

a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Madhura
Ans: b. Tikta

. Agryakarma of Shweta Chandana

a. Dipana b. Stambhana c. Durgandhahara d. Mutrala
Ans: c. Durgandhara

. Combination of shweta chandana and Kakubha is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Shukrameha_ cc. Vasa Meha_— d. Sikata Meha
Ans: b. Shukrameha

. 6- Santalol is present in

a. Chandana b. Shunthi c. Arjuna d, Madanaphala
Ans: a. Chandana

. Botanical Name of Shweta chandana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Mesua ferrea
c. Asteracantha longifolia d. Santalum album

Ans: d. Santalum album

. Malayaja is a synonym of
a. Bala b. Shweta chandana
c. Bilva d. Bharangi

Ans: b. Shweta Chandana

. Shweta Chandana is a
a. Creeper b. Tree c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

eK a

----- PAGE 183 -----
Rakta Chandana

Useful parts - Saara (Heart wood)
Rasadi panchaka

na

Tikta Madhura

Ra
Vipaka [Kaw
[Vina | Shita |

Kar iia (Actions) — Tr ishnahara, Varnya, Netrya, Vrashya, Jwarahara, Vrana
Ropaka, Vishahara, Ahladakara, Dahahara, Chardihara.

Pharmacological Activities — Cooling, Tonic, Mild astringent, Antiinflammatory.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Kaphapitta Shamaka, Kapha Shamaka owing
to Katu vipaka and Tikta Rasa.

Pittahara because of Shita virya and Tikta Madhura Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications) - Trishna, Raktapitta, Jwara, Vrana,
Visharoga, Daha, Kasa, Krimi, Chardi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Bhagna (Fracture)
areata aRrst wech Tee | waelttaedtast enfeits a det
(aa. 3/7)
Combination of Manjishtha curna (Powder of Rubia cordifolia), Madhuka

(Glycyrrhiza glabra), Rakta candana (Pterocarpus santalinus) and Shali (Rice flour)
mixed with Shatadhouta ghrita (Ghee washed hundred times) and applied.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)
ative: fener at qatet a weet Tar |
suited Seraccsrars rar Pret feat a fect a eM: Ul (GS. 50/17)

Rakta candana (Ptrocarpus santalinus) triturated with breast milk and used for Nashya
(Instillation).

----- PAGE 184 -----
176 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Vyanga (Depigmentation)
Tae ARet aetataga: | ae: WEST cage: YaatiAay:
(4.8.3 32/17)
External application of paste prepared by Rakta chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus),
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa), Priyangu (Calicarpa
macrophylla), buds of Vata (Ficus benghalensis) & Masura (Ervum lens) will cure Vyanga
(Depigmentation) and gives good lustre to the face.
Matra (Dose)
Kanda sara churna (Powder of heart wood) - 2 to 5 g.

Taila (Oil) —5 to 25 drops
Kashaya (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Heart wood — Contains santalin, Santalic acid, Santalic pterocarpin, detoxy santalin
& Kino tannic acid.
Leaves — Contain -amyria, stigmasterol, erythrodial and betulin.

Research corner

1 One new phenanthrenedione, pterolinus K (1), and one chalcone, pterolinus L
(2) were isolated from the heartwood extract of Pterocarpus santalinus. Wu
SF, Hwang TL, Chen SL, Wu CC, Ohkoshi:'E, Lee KH, Chang FR, Wu YC.
Bioactive components from the heartwood of Pterocarpus santalinus. Bioorg
Med Chem Lett. 2011 Sep 15;21(18):5630-2. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

2 Five new benzofurans, pterolinuses A-E (1-5), six new neoflavonoids,
pterolinuses F-J (8-13), and five known compounds (6,7,14-16) were isolated
from an extract of Pterocarpus santalinus heartwood. Six compounds (1, 2, 4,
6, 7 and 15) showed significant inhibition in at least one anti-inflammatory
assay. Wu SF, Chang FR, Wang SY, Hwang TL, Lee CL, Chen SL, Wu CC,
Wu YC. Anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic neoflavonoids and benzofurans from
Pterocarpus santalinus. J Nat Prod. 2011 May 27:74 (5):989-96. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

3 The larvicidal potentials of the seed oils of Pterocarpus santalinus was
investigated in the laboratory against larvae of Aedes aegypti. The results
therefore suggest that the seed oil of Pterocarpus santalinus could be
incorporated as botanical insecticides against mosquito vectors with high safety
to non-target organisms. Adeleke MA, Popoola SA, Agbaje WB, Adewale B,

----- PAGE 185 -----
Rakta Chandana 177

Adeoye MD, Jimoh WA. Larvicidal efficacy of seeds oils of Pterocarpus
santalinus and tropical Manihot species against Aedes aegypti and effects on
aquatic fauna. Tanzan J Health Res. 2009 Oct; 11(4):250-2.

4 Study was designed to investigate the effect of bark of Pterocarpus santalinus,
an ethnomedicinal plant, on blood glucose, Plasma insulin, Serum lipids and
the activities of hepatic glucose metabolizing enzymes in streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats. Biological testing of the active fraction demonstrated a
significant antidiabetic activity by reducing the elevated blood glucose levels
and glycosylated hemoglobin, improving hyperlipidemia and restoring the
insulin levels in treated experimental induced diabetic rats, Further elucidation
of mechanism of action showed improvement in the hepatic carbohydrate
metabolizing enzymes after the treatment. Kondeti VK, Badri KR, Maddirala
DR, Thur SK, Fatima SS, Kasetti RB, Rao CA. Effect of Pterocarpus
santalinus bark, on blood glucose, serum lipids, plasma insulin and hepatic
carbohydrate metabolic enzymes in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Food
Chem Toxicol. 2010 May; 48(5):1281-7. Epub 2010 Feb 21.

5 A new isoflavone together with liquiritigenin and isoliquiritigenin has been
isolated from the heartwood of Pterocarpus santalinus. Krishnaveni KS, Rao
JV. An isoflavone from Pterocarpus santalinus. Phytochemistry. 2000 Mar;
53(5):605-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name

Indications

Chandanadi Churna Raktapitta, Atisara
Chandana kwatha Raktarshas, Raktapitta :

1
Chandanadya varti Timira

Chandanasava Mutra dosha, Shukradosha

Chandanadi ep

Pterocarpus santalinus Linn. Pterocarpus -Ptero-winged carpus-fruit. santalinus -
Sandal wood.

Family — Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).

Botanical Name

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Patoladi Gana, Sarivadi Gana, Priyangvadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Karpuradi Varga 16-17

----- PAGE 186 -----
178 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Teal wat Be BAT
Rakta Chandana is considered as red vareity of Sandal wood.

Morphology
1. THATNA-TrHatal A SEAT: |

Heart wood of Raktachandana is of red colour.
2. TRRTS=TeHAUTT HT TST TT |
The heart wood is red in colour.
3, WaTeT HA- WATT VSN Celtel AAT: |
Fruits of Rakta Chandana resemble like that of Pravala.

Properties and Actions
4, %JRaAeeAA-Properties are little inferior when compared to Shweta candana.

Regional Names

indi Rakta chandan

Rakta chandana

Chan chandanam

Rakta chandana

Kannada
Malayalam
Marathi

Zi
5
iS

Habitat

Red sandal grows naturally in South Indian
states like, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and
Andhrapradesh upto an elevation of 3000 ft. atti-
tude. Owing to its high commercial value it is culti-
vated in these states.

Morphology

Habit — Small tree grows upto 25 ft. in height.
Heart wood is dark purple in colour and is very
hard.

Leaves —- Compound with 3-5 leaflets, broadly
elliptic, obtuse, 4-7.5 cm long, Pale beneath and
clothed with fine adpressed hairs.

----- PAGE 187 -----
Rakta Chandana 179

Inflorescence — Few flowered axillary or terminal raceme.
Fruit — Pod, 4 cm in diameter, oblique, gradually narrowed into a short stalk.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Sample have tough, rectangular pieces of heartwood, upto 18 cm long and 3 to 5 cm
in diameter, surface is dark reddish brown in colour, polished with longitudinal striations.

The transversely cut portion shows prominent black veins. The wood is quite heavy,
sinking in water. It doesn’t have any particular odour, having astringent and bitter odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
THe Tals Axa | faeraut Tat Aaletact HAT
(ans. ayute at. 16)
Properties and actions
th vit qerrerofigomsaticed, | fre tated get seraufearey,
(aia. afate at. 17)
THISARENE ated faengftcery 1 Tealkeet eft fread gare,
(af. aaa. 5)
urivftact wat firmed glad wy | amptafragerer gon frarearegd,
aR. atsftert. 1257
THeracdta viteret frre Alert ERs SATA, |
Taha HaAes wbasrqarirgerey (aA. seers. 22)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Rakta Chandana
a. Bark b. Heartwood c. Fruit d. Leaf
Ans: b. Heartwood
2. Chandanadi Lepa is indicated in
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Vyanga d. Ajirna
Ans: c. Vyanga
3. Botanical Name of Rakta chandana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Mesua ferrea
c. Asteracantha longifolia d. Santalum album

Ans: a. Pterocarpus santalinus

_

----- PAGE 188 -----
180

Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Pravalaphala is a synonym of

ws

a. Dhataki bh. Haridra ¢. Jambu
Ans: d. Rakta Chandana

. Red Sandal wood is

a. Creeper b. Tree c. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

. Raktasara is a synonym of
a. Jyotishmati b. Kumari c, Bijaka

Ans: d, Rakta Chandana

. Pradhana Karma of Rakta Chandana

a, Swarya b. Mutrala c, Varnya
Ans: c. Varnya

d, Rakta Chandana

d. Shrub

d. Rakta Chandana

d. Kanthya

----- PAGE 189 -----
Chitraka

Useful parts — Mula (Root) and Mula twak (root bark).
Rasadi Panchaka

Katu (Tikta acc to Kai. Ni

Karma (Action)

Chitraka — Dipana, Pachana, Kushthaghna, Arshoghna, Shothahara, Krimighna,
Kasahara, Grahi, Rochaka, Kandughna.

Rakta Chitraka — Ruchya, Kushthaghna & Rasayana.
Agrya Karma

Farner deta urertenqanttaret erererromy | (A.A, 25/40)

Root of Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica Linn.) is Appetizer, Digestant and relieves
inflammation, Piles and colicky pain.
Pharmocological Actions

Appetiser, Digestant, Irritant

Action on Dosha -— Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya,
Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu rasa and Katu vipaka.

Ka.di.Ni —Tridosha Shamaka

Kaphara because of Katu rasa & Katu vipaka, Pittahara because of Tikta rasa,
Vatahara because of Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Chitraka: Agnimandya, Ajirna, Grahani, Kushtha, Shotha, Krimi, Kasa, Arshas,
Pandu, Udara, Kandu. ,

Rakta Chitraka: Aruchi and Kushtha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)
raet forenqeres firsar qest ware ais aT afer cet STTATfRt Fra

(a.Fa. 14/76)

----- PAGE 190 -----
182 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from Citrakamula twak (Root bark) of Plumbago zeylanica) is ap-
plied to the vessels (Mudjar) then curd or butermilk is prepared in the jar usage of this curd
or butter milk relieves piles.

Panne fare ar eee wera, | (a. 14/78)

Application of paste of Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica) and Nagara (Zingiber
officinale) mixed with sour gruel on haemorrhoids will relieve the problem.
2 Shwitra (Vitiligo)

(a.fa. 9/39)

In a jar, Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica), Vyosha (Piper longum, Piper nigrum and
Zingiber officinale), Cow’s urine, honey & ghee is mixed and kept for 15 days. The
patient suffering from Shwitra (Vitiligo) has to take internally.
3. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

Titra ait ar cenet stat PaO UTS Te | Ue Verse: serquritre: Freres
aT Yaar Tt Beat: VAP. 9/45

Finely powdered Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica) is taken with urine in case of
Kushtha (Skin diseases).

4, Atisara (Diarrhoea)

Ut AeYAat cigar ash Uicat aber | (af. 19/113)

Regular usage of Citraka (Plumbago zeylanica) with butter milke prevents diar-
rhoea and it is a good remedy as well.

Matra (Dose):
Mula twak churna (Root bark powder) - 0.5 to 1 g

Phytoconstituents — Yielded plumbagin (A naphthoquinone derivative)
isozeylinone, chitranone, zeylinone, elliptinone, droserone, T-sitosterol, vanillic acid,
plumbagic acid, steroidal glycoside, catechol, tannin, plumbazeylanone and naphthalenone.

Research corner
1. To assess the effect of plumbagin-free alcohol extract (PFAE) or Plumbago
zeylanica Linn. (Plumbaginaceae) P. zeylanica) root, on female reproductive
system and fertility of adult female wistar rats. All findings suggest that the
antifertility activity of extract could possibly be through the changes in the
implantation site, altered hormonal levels, prolonged estrous cycle and

----- PAGE 191 -----
two

iss)

Chitraka 183
antiestrogenic activity. Hence, the extract possesses reversible antifertility
activity without adverse toxicity in female rats. Sandeep G, Dheeraj A, Sharma
NK, Jhade D, Bharti A. Effect of plumagin free alcohol extract of Plumbago

zeylanica Linn. root on reproductive system of female Wistar rats. Asian Pac
J Trop Med. 2011 Dec; 4 (12):978-84,

. The study was aimed at isolating, separating and evaluating the antimicrobial

properties of compounds such as neioisoshinanolone and 1-epineo-
isoshinaolone from the roots of Plumbago zeylanica. The root extract of
Plumbago zeylanica possesses good antimicrobial activity, which suggests its
therapeutics use in the Ayurvedic system of medicine to cure skin diseases.
Jetty A, Subhakar C, Rajagopal D, Jetty M, Subra-manyam M, Marthanda
Murthy M. Antimicrobial activities of neo- and 1-epineo-isoshinaolones from
Plumbago zeylinica roots, Pharm Biol. 2010 Sep; 48(9):1007-11.

. Three Plumbago spp have been tested for mosquito larvicidal activity. The

crude extracts exhibiting the highest larvicidal activity against Anopheles
gambiae were hexane (LC 50=6.4 microg/mL) and chloroform (LC50=6.7
microg/mL) extracts from Plubago zeylanica Linn, chloroform (LC50=6.7 ug/
mL) extract from Plumbago stenophylla Bull and ethyl acetate (LC50=4.1
microg/mL) extract from Plumbago dawei Rolfe. Maniafu BM, Wilber L,
Ndiege IO, Wanjala CC, Akenga TA. Larvicidal activity of extracts from three
Plumbago spp against Anopheles gambiae. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2009.
Sep; 104(6):813-7.

. Plumbago zeylanica was tested for its possible in vivo protective effect against

cyclophosphamide-induced genotoxicity and oxidative stress in Swiss albino
mice. Study shown Plumbago zeylanica were effective in exerting a protective
effect against cyclophosphamide-induced gentoxicity and oxidative stress.
Sivakumar V, Niranjali Devaraj S. Protective effect of Plumbago zeylancia
against cyclophosphamide-induced genotoxicity and oxidative stress in Swiss
albino mice. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2006; 29(3):279-88.

. Plumbagin (5-hydroxy-2-methyl-1,4naphogquinone) isolated from Plumbago

zeylanica Linn, when administered orally, at a dosage of 4 mg/kg body weight
induces tumour recession in 3-methyl-4-dimethyl aminoaxzobemzene
(3MeDAB) induced hepatoma in Wistar male rats. Plumbagin administration
increased the gluconeogenic enzyme levels in the treated animals. Parimala R,
Sachadanadam P. Effect of Plumbagin on some glucose metabolising enzymes
studied in rats in experimental hepatoma. Mol Cell Biochem. 1993 Aug
11;125(1):59-63.

----- PAGE 192 -----
184 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Yoga (Formulations)

Name of formulation Indications

oe aS Chitrakadi Gutika Grahani, Agnimandya
2 Chitrakadya Ghrata Arsha, Shotha

SI.No.

4 Chitrakadi Kwatha Vatakaphaja Atisara

Botanical Name
Plumbago zeylanica Linn. Plumbum - lead, Plumbago-which cures lead palsy.

zeylanica — of Ceylon

Family—Plumbaginaceae

Kula — Chitraka
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Dipaniya varga, Trptighna varga, Shulaprashamana varga,
Bhedaniya varga, Arshoghna varga, Lekhaniya varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana, Mustadi gana, Amalakyadi gana, Mushkakadi
gana, Varunadi gana, Aragwadhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 70-71

Basonym of Drug
fore: farreaa:, dag See: fat carahrat Brahe agent yeuratarren: fe |
Citraka is very potent that it tears of unwanted growth. It is sharp like a spotted
Leopard.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. aiftren:-athrgea: som: wast ate a ate BASH |
Citraka has Ushna virya and it is hot to touch. If comes in contact cause
burning sensation and induce swelling.
2. HUN:-e: TH Uh a |
Citraka has Katu rasa (Pungent taste) and undergoes Katu vipaka.
3, Weay-arater aterttet |
Citraka digests Anna (Food).

----- PAGE 193 -----
Chitraka 185

4. Gtram:-arhrdtas: |
Citraka increases Appetite.
5, SAeaTaT-athrearen:, THEM steractewrsy |
Citraka has burning qualities like that of Agni (Fire) hence; different synonyms
of Agni are also synonyms with Citraka.
6, aaret:- feng: dae Vee: |
Citraka can tear apart unwanted tissue growths.

Regional Names

Habitat— Chitraka grows very commonly in South
Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu &
Andhrapradesh and also in West Bengal, Uttarpradesh.
Attractive plant hence commonly cultivated in gardens.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial herb

Stem — 1.5-4 ft. long, somewhat woody, spread-
ing, terete, striate and glabrous.

Leaves— Thin, 4-7 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, ovate,
subacute, entire, glabrous, glaucous beneath, reticulately
veined, shortly and abruptly attenuated into a short peti- | Plumbago zeylanica Linn
ole, petiole is very narrow, amplexicaul at the base and
there often dilated into stipule like auricles.

Inflorescence — Elongated spikes.

Flowers ~ Arranged in glandular rachis, white in colour, corollatube is 2-2.5 cm
long.

Fruit — Capsule, oblong, pointed, pericarp is thin below and hardened above.
Varieties— 1.Shweta -  Plumbago zeylanica

----- PAGE 194 -----
186 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Rakta -- Plumbago rosea
3. Nila -

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Charecteristics):

Root material consists of cylindrical pieces of various lengths 2-12 mm in diameter.
The external surface is longitudinally striated or shrivelled, reddish brown in colour, hay-
ing warty projections at some places. The bark gets easily separated, exposing an inner
woody portion of pinkish white colour. A transversely cut portion of the root shows a
smooth surface of pinkish white colour with upto 2 mm thick bark, followed by a narrow
cortex and a radiating woody centre. The bark occurs as small curved or quilled, easily
friable pieces of various length, upto 2 mm in thickness. Internal surface of the bark is
rough or slightly fibrous and rusty brown in colour. On breaking it becomes short pieces.
If comes in contact with tongue it causes burning sensation.

Adverse effects — Chitraka is having strong properties; it has to be used cautiously.
It may cause burning sensation.

Purification — Chitraka mula (Root) which is the useful part has to be purified with
lime water.

Classical references
Synonyms

PaaS ST Urest earerea TTT: | (ALT. Aaeenfeart 70)

Properties and Actions
fae: mage: Ue abana oy: lato Teuht Sssitenst: Hitrearage |
AAPA Mietatrer: serorherra | (AH. eaeenert 70-71)
faretshiret: Uren wee: agar | aritensitecttercarg fear:
(a.Pr. mages et)
fast doar: we: Ure TA org: | attra ore watt ctafert treat wae
Teuftenarrayipseraity | waeercae sath eter ferme fre: |
atrorant art wera Breteaistirdtes: | tear ory as araftrafearerr tl
($.P.aieftet 1179-1181)
faaaishrean: ure we: wRHaE: | arteusiineuitaitrrgiearer: 1
(aA. frrenieert 45)
Tataaa-
Waa wear: HEA Taf: | wa Freameat wie Aes Tare: 1
(a.FF. frorente aT-47)

----- PAGE 195 -----
Chitraka ° 187

eewonn trek ferafer eget eure:
Savage wearer Sark ae aheen: | fers ehrafer werreraret ae MeVs ae,
fim fest ate aPeerteperent Sek: wet Tyee (A.A. Preenfe art 12)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Chitraka
a. Phala b. Bija c. Mula d. Kanda
Ans: c. Mula
. Pradhana Karma of chitraka
a, Jwaraghna b. Dipana Pachana_ c. Mutrala d. Kanthya
Ans: b. Dipana Pachana
3. Agrya Karma of Chitraka
a. Arshoghna b. Jwaraghna c. Balya d. Varnya
Ans: a. Arshoghna
4. Chitraka Samskarita Takra is advised in
a. Ajima b. Raktapitta c. Kasa d. Arshas
Ans: d. Arshas
5. A chemical constituent Pumbagin is present in
a. Kutaja b. Chitraka c. Bakuchi d. Dhanyaka
Ans: b. Chitraka
6. Chitrakadi Gutika specifically indicated in
a. Grahani b. Atisara c. Kasa d. Shwasa
Ans: a. Grahani
7. Botanical name of Chitraka
a. Myristica fragrans b. Mallotus philippinensis
c. Plumbago zeylanica d. Cyperus rotundus
Ans: c. Plumbago zeylanica
8. Habit of Chitraka is
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Herb
9. Types of Chitraka
a. 2 b. 5 c. 4 d. 3
Ans: d. 3 e

—

No

----- PAGE 196 -----
Chapter

Dadima

Useful parts — Phala twak (Rind), Kanda twak, Mula twak (Stem & Root bark) &
Pushpa (Flowers).
Rasadi Panchaka
Madhura Dadima (Sweet variety)

Madhura, Kashaya, Amla

Amla Dadima (Sour variety)

Karma — Madhura Ddima ~ Dahahara, Jwarahara, Tarpana Shukrala, Medhya,
Balya, Hradya

Madhuramla Dadima phala — Dipana, Ruchya

Amla Dadima phala — Ruchya, Dipana

Dadima phala twak ~ Grahi

Pharmacological Actions ~ Astringent, Anthelmintic, stomachic & cooling.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Madhura Dadima — Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka
and Madhura rasa. Pitta Shamaka due to Madhura Vipaka & Madhura Kashaya Rasa,
Kapha Shamaka due to Laghu Guna.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Madhura Dadima phala —Trishna, Daha, Jwara, Mukha dourgandhya.

Madhuramla Dadima phala — Agnimandya, Aruchi

Amla Dadima phala — Hradroga

----- PAGE 197 -----
Dadima 189

Dadima phala twak — Atisara
Dadima mula twak = Krimi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
yeahs foe, quad afedtmem | amet aeyeigen: wattage:
(IA, 2/1/31)
Ripen fruit of Dadima (Punica granatum) should be cooked in closed heating. The
juice extracted from fruit cures all types of Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
Ta asageroranier: weet at | aedients weerrerneg
(3.4.F4. 2/47)
Juice extracted from Dadima (Punica granatum) is mixed with juice of Amra
(Mangifera indica) leaves or Waa (Cynodon dactylon) or any drug having Shita virya
(Cold potency) should be used internally and as an external application.
3. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
TU Saet Ta CAPR | (aA. 14/185)
Decoction prepared from Dadima phala twak (Fruit rind) is very useful in Raktarsas
(Bleeding piles).
4. Trishna (Thirst)
wetasanars werefsrareta | Heh remade vite AAA I
(a1.5.F. 1/321)

The paste prepared from sugar and Dadima (Punica granatum) or Draksha (Vitis
vinifera) and Dadima (Punica granatum) is kept in mouth will reduce dryness and taste-
lessness associated with Trishna (Thirst).

5. Vyanga (Pigmentetion)

aromafitur arsarfsarae | (31.4.3. 37/24)

Fresh rind of Dadima (Punica granatum) has to be triturated with Aja kshira (Goat
milk) then applied gives good complexion.
Matra (Dose)

1. Phala rasa (Juice) —20 to 50 ml

2. Phala twak kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 80 ml

----- PAGE 198 -----
190 Dravyaguna Vijnana

meneame eens eens ssceeneensatniaiatitesaa,

Phytoconstituents

Fruit contains - Glucose, fructose, maltose, starch, oxalic acid, carotene, thiamine,
riboflavin, nicotinic acid, Vitamin C, pectin, amino acids, citric acid, tannin, punicic acid.

Research index

1. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of pomegranate (Punica
granatum) in inhibiting and rerversing the nephrotoxicity of carbon
tetrachloride, a potent oxidative stress inducer which induces cellular kidney
damage. Study suggested that pomegranate juice was able to elevate the
antioxidant defense system, clean up free radicals, lessen oxidative damages
and protect the kidney against carbon tetrachloride-induced toxicity, thus
having a potential potective effect. Abdel Moneim AE, El-Khadagy MF. The
potential effects of pomegranate (Punica granatum) juice on carbon
tetrachloride-induced nephrotoxicity in rats. J physiol Biochem. 2012 Nov 7.

2. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the protective effect of
pomegranate peel extract (PPE) on azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon
tumors in rats as an in vivo expertimental model. The resuits suggest thaat PPE
can partially inhibit the development of colonic premalignant lesions in an
AOM-induced colorectal carcinogenesis model, by abrogating oxidative stress
and improving the redox status of colonic cells. Waly ML, Ali A, Guizani N,
Al Rawahi AS, Farooq SA, Rahman MS. Pomegranate (Punica granatum)
peel Extract Efficacy as a Dietary Antioxidant against Azoxymethane-Induced
Colon Cancer in Rat. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(8):4051-5.

3. Two new ellagitannins containing a rare 3-oxo-1,3,3a, 8b-tetrahydrofuor[3,4-
b]benzofuran moiety, namely punicatannins A (1) and B (2), were isolated
from pomegranate (Punica granatum) flowers. Punicatannin A showed potent
inhibition of ?-glucosidase and lipogenic gene expression. Org Lett. 2012 Oct
19;14(20):5358-61. doi:10.1021/01302548c.

4. Present study was aimed to isolate and evaluate the antidiabetic activity of
phytoconstituents from fruit rinds of Punica granatum. These findings suggest
that MEPG and VAD possess significant antidiabetic activity in both in vitro
and in vivo models. Jain V, Viswanatha GL, Manohar, D, Shivaprasad HN.
Isolation of Antidiabetic Principle from Fruit Rinds of Punica granatum. Evid
Based complement alternat Med. 2012;2012:147202. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

5. This study aimed at evaluating the anti-inflammatory properties of a
pomegranate fruit husk (PomH) polyphenolic extract, rich in punicalagin, using
Caco-2 cells, an in vitro mode] of human intestinal epithelium. Data suggest

----- PAGE 199 -----
Dadima 191

that pomegranate husk could be an intersting natural source contributing to
prevent intestinal chronic inflammation. Hollebeeck S, Winand J, Herent MF,
During A, Leclercq J, Larondelle Y, Schneider YJ. Anti-inflammatory effects
of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) husk ellagitannins in Caco-2 cells, an in
vitro model of human intestine. Food Funct. 2012 Aug; 3(8):875-85. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo. Name Indications

Dadimashtaka churna Grahani, Atisara

Dadimadya ghrata Prameha, Ashmari
Dadimadya taila Grahani, Prameha
Dadimadi churna Aruchi, Agnimandya

Botanical Name - Punica granatum Linn.
Punica - Pertaining to Carthage-Cartheginian apple

granatum - Filled with seeds.
Family - Lythraceae
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Hradya varga, Chardinigrahana Varga, Shramahara Varga
Sushruta Parushakadi gana
B.Pr.N. Amradi phalavarga 101-104
Basonym of Drug
area fereretet Tarareereh ate
When Dadima fruit is cut open juice spills over.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Gateltet:- ote eettt ST
Dadima seeds resemble teeth.
2. aftteita:-attit: waa: tified at, tae street l
The seeds are like quartz or ruby.

3. Cereitst:-taui disreree |

----- PAGE 200 -----
192 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Dadima seeds are red in colour.
4, witerqeran:- cif Teneref gore |
Dadima flowers are red in colour.
5. GAA: - Tet Heme |
Fruits are round shaped.
6. APH: -ArHelsd HTT |
Dadima fruit is coverd by leathery rind.
7. TATeTH:-THGTH: |
Fruit is juicy.
Properties and Actions
8. TASRTA-AEATS TE |
Fruit of Dadima has sweet and sour taste.
9. Wetct-fectee: |
Dadima is conducive to health.

10. arten:-unter eater Wea

Dadima is very useful in so many diseases.

Regional Names

Enlih

Habitat

Pomegranate plant is cultivated all over India.
Morphology

Habit — A large deciduous shrub or small tree.

Bark - Smooth, grey and thin, often armed with
small axillary or terminal thorns.

Leaves - Opposite, 2.5-6 cm long, oblong-lan-
ceolate, oblong-elliptic or oblong-oblanceolate, gla-
brous, entire, shining above, bright green beneath. Base Pinica granatum Linn.
narrowed into a very short petiole.

----- PAGE 201 -----
ate iniibaias

Dadima 193

aan | pontary, sometimes 2 to 4 together, 4-5 cm long, petals are 5 to 7 in
number, : co oured, with Numerous stamens, inferior ovary, many celled and cells ar-
ranged in 2 concentric circles,

Fr ee 4to7 comin diameter tipped with the calyx-limb, rind is coriaceous,
wood ays the interior septate with the membranous walls of the carpels, each carpel con-
taining numerous seeds, angular from mutual pressure,

Seeds — With a watery outer coat containing pink juice and a horny inner coat.
Varieties

Bha Ni — 3 Varieties : 1, Swadu, 2. Swadvamla, 3. Amla

Dha.Ni-—1. Madhura, 2. Amla
Commercial Varieties

1. Poona 2. Dholka

3. Muscat
4. Kabul 5. Alandi 6. Bedana
7. Kandahari 8.Papershell 9, Spanish Ruby 10. Vellodu

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteirtics)

Fruit rind — Irregularly broken, more or less curved pieces of dry rind of the fruit,
upto 3 mm in thickness. The outer surface is some what leathery and polished, brick red
or tan brown in colour. Some of the pieces carry a crown of toothed, tubular calyx. Inner
surface is more or less yellowish or light brown in colour, showing a honey-comb struc-

ture with depressions left by the seed. It is brittle and breaking with a short corky fracture,
without particular odour and having strong astringent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
SSa: catenl Sarat SSAA: | (A. T.sTae Herat. 101)

Varieties
Aeaet Pifeaet tag Cae Hare | (ALT. STEMS Herat. 101)
fefeet reer fae wet acta eT 1 (oP rageae aT. 62)

Properties and Actions ;
mura oe fart tereeraey | tareteidtast wet feoRaterrat oe
Beery rasa STRATA, UI (ATT. HEAT. 102-104)
feretront arfert wet ancattrer ferrari (e.Fa. ereargeieat. 62)

Tet g Pretest coreet arafirad | rgeafirent unet tie wagers ti

----- PAGE 202 -----
194

Dravyaguna Vijnana

attest treat wet chat arferftrereny, | Ret aoorer Tevet ator aamarafer,
aelfftraert fiat aurarget ory 1 fxfeet ag fared meyer fate = i
artet @ faferet art waret ferergaran | kag PratrrecresaTER TTT TA I
ware afer ay aan | ftreeraregon arene HAAS, |

(fa. ateftrert. 307-311)

SUES ETAT HUA CHRTTATINT |

mie dose creer vittet set ofan u (aA. sinfeat 75)

afer wei vad aE qaubaay | dale ator aed GomatesaaeNy, |!
wHeTeTR-Gorenferes Urevat gat Ter | ye Bg Praag WAST Il

(fr.. eaeafert 236-237)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Amla Dadima
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Katu d. Kashaya
Ans; b. Amla
2. Dadimashtaka Churna is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Shotha d. Kasa

Ans: a. Atisara
3. Botanical name of Dadima
a. Curcuma longa b. Cynodon dactylon
c. Punica granatum d. Centella asiatica
Ans: c. Punica granatum
4. Dantabija is a synonym of
a. Bhringaraja b. Bhallataka c. Gambhari d. Dadima
Ans: d. Dadima
5. Valkaphala is a synonym of

a. Nimba b. Dadima c. Kapikacchu dd. Haritaki
Ans: b. Dadima

6. Habit of Dadima plant
a. Creeper b. Climber c. Large shrub d. Herb

Ans: c. Large shrub
7. Types of Dadima as per Bhavaprakasha
a. 4 b. 5 c. 6 d. 3

Ans: d.3

----- PAGE 203 -----
Dhanyaka

Useful Parts - Phalg (Fruit),

Rasadipanchaka

Particulars Ardra Dhanyaka Shushka Dhanyaka Dhanyaka Shaka

Rasa sng katu, Tikta Madhura, Kashya &
‘ashaya Madhura
a

Karma (Actions)

Shushka Dhanyaka - Dipana, Pachana, Mutrala, Jwaraghna, Rochaka, Grahi,
Trahara, Dahahara, Chardighna, Shwasahara, Krimighna, Hradya.

Ardra Dhanyaka - Dourgandhyahara, Hradya, Dipana, Pachana, Mutrala,
Rochaka, Trashnahara & Dahahara.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Ruchya, Dipana, Mutrala & Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions
Fruits - Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic, Refrigerant, Tonic & Diruretic.
Leaves - Pungent & Aromatic.

Dosha-karma (Action on Dosha)

Sushka Dhanyaka - Tridoshahara, Vatahara due to Ushna virya & Madhura
vipaka, Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka, Kaphahara due to Ushna virya.

Ardra Dhanyaka - Mainly Pittashamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura,
Tikta, Kashaya Rasa.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Kaphavatahara, Kaphahara due to Ushna virya, Vatahara
because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shushka Dhanyaka - Agnimandya, Mutrakrachra, Jwara, Aruchi, Trishna, Daha,
Atisara, Chardi, Shwasa and Krimi.

----- PAGE 204 -----
196 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ardra Dhanyaka » Mukha dourgandhya, Agnimandya, Aruci, Mutrakracchra,
Trashna and Daha.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Aruchi, Agnimandya & Jwara
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Trashna (Thirst)
(a.5.Fa. 18/23)

Drinking decoction of Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) mixed with Sugar in the
morning will alleviate Trashna (Thirst), Daha (Burning sensation) and acts as Sroto
Shodhaka (Clears the channels).

2. Daha (Burning sensation)
Udit ante Wrath werkt Gary | stale ervey Weare AAT I
(ALS.FA. 1/356)

Dhanyaka hima (Cold infusion) taken with sugar in the early morning will alleviate
even severe burning sensation immediately.
3. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

arent yet art Torrareret racy | (a7.5.Fa. 2/14)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) is very useful
in Atisara (Diarrhoea), Trashna (Thirst) and Daha (Burning sensation).

4. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)
STAT: FATT: UTA AAAS | WU STH WTA TAT
(3.4. 2/2/65)
Decoction of Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) and Nagara (Zingiber officinale) is

prepared and mixed with Erandamula kwatha (Decoction of root of Ricinus communis)
will overcome all kinds of Vataja disorders and Amavata (Rhumatiod arthiritis).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5¢g
Hima (Cold infusion) - 40 to 80 ml
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml
Phanta (Hot infusion) - 30 to 50 ml

Kwatha (Decoction) - 50-100 ml
Phytoconstituents - Coriander yields volatile oil (0.3 to 1%), fixed oil (13%) &
Proteins (20%).

----- PAGE 205 -----
Volatile oil contains Coriandrol, Co
Geraniol and Pinene. Also yield Tannin

Vit-A.

; Dhanyaka 197

randryl acetate and small quantities of L-borneol,
& Malic acid Coriander leaves are rich source of

Research Corner

1.

tw

Ww

The present study investigated the antioxidant

activity of Coriandrum sativum
on TAA-induced hepatotoxicity in the ma

—_ ie le rats. Phenolic content and
antioxidant activity were evaluated in the coriander leaves and seeds, Treatment
with coriander leaves and seeds helps in improving the adverse effect of TAA-
induced hepatotoxicity; also the histological study confirms this finding.
Moustafa AH, Ali EM, Moselhy SS, Tousson E, El-Said KS. Effect of

coriander on thioacetamide-induced hepatotoxicity in rats. Toxicol Ind Health.
2012 Oct 5.

. The aims of this study were to test the antifungal activity, toxicity and chemical

composition of essential oil from C. sativum L. fruits. C. sativum essential oil
is active in vitro against M. canis and Candida spp. demonstrating good
antifungal activity. Soares BV, Morasis SM, dos Santos Fontenelle RO,
Queiroz VA, Vila-Nova NS, Pereira CM, Brito ES, Neto MA, Brito EH,
Cavalcante CS, Castelo-Branco DS, Rocha MF. Antifungal activity, toxicity
and chemical composition of the essential oil of Coriandrum sativum L fruits.
Molecules. 2012 Jul 11, 17(7) 843948. doi: 10. 3390/molecules 47078439.

. To establish its utility in Diabetes mellitus, the present study evaluated the

antidiabetic and antioxidant effects of CS in alloxan-induced diabetic rats.
These results indicate that the extracts could protect liver function and exhibited
hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic, and antioxidant efficacies in the diabetic rats.
These results support the use of this plant extract to manage Diabetes mellitus.
Sreelatha S, JInbavalli R. Antioxidant, antihyperglycemic, and
antihyperlipidemic effects of Coriandrum sativum leaf and stem in alloxan-
induced diabetic rats, J Food Sci. 2012 Jul; 77(7):T119-23. doi: 10. 1111/
j.1750-3841.2012.02755.x. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

. The study aim was to investigate potential hypoglycemic (and hypolipidemic)

activity of CS-extract after a single oral dose and after daily dosing for 30 days
(sub-chronic study) in normal and obese-hyperglycemic-hyperlipidemic (OHH)
Meriones shawi rats, The present study validates the traditional use of coriander
in diabetes. Aissaoui A, Zizi S, Israili ZH, Lyoussi B. Hypoglycemic and
hypohodemic effect of Coriandrum sativurn L. in Meriones shawi rats. J
Ethno-pharmacol, 2011 Sep 1;137(1):652-61. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

----- PAGE 206 -----
198 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. The antioxidant and free-radical-scavenging property of seeds in Vitro was
studied and also investigated whether the administration of seeds curtails
oxidative stress in the kidney of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. These
results show that C. sativum seeds not only possess antihyperglycemic
properties but antioxidative properties also. Increased dietary intake of
coriander seeds decrease the oxidative bur-den in Diabetes mellitus. Deepa B,
Anuradha CY, Antioxidant potential of Coriandrum sativum L seed extract,
Indian J Exp Biol. 2011 Jan;49(1)30-8.

Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo. Name Indications

Dhanyakadi Hima Raktapitta, Jwara, Daha
Dhanyakadi Kwatha

Agnimandya, Amadosha
Dhanya Nagaradi Kwaha Agnimandya, Shula
Dhanya Shunthi Shula, Atisara

Dhanya Panchaka Vibandha, Shula

Botanical Name
Coriandrum sativum Linn.
Coriandrum—Corys=Helmet, andrum-anthers
sativum - Cultivated
Family — Apiaceae
Kula — Shatapushpa Kula
Classification of Dravya
Charaka — Trishna nigrahana Varga, Shitaprashamana Varga
Sushruta Guduchyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi Varga
Basonym of Drug
UAT Cacia |
Dhanyaka is a plant having seeds like cereals.
Synonyms
Morphology
1 Ganaa:- wears WATT |

Leaves of Dhanyaka are small.

----- PAGE 207 -----
Dhanyaka 199

Dhanyaka is a very small green plant looks like dancing when wind blows.
3, DAMUAM-SAANYMAL AH MT |

Dhanyaka has umbel inflorescence.
4, BA-DATANGMYT AT |

Dhanyaka is having umbel inflorescence.

Fruits of Dhanyaka resemble Tumburu.
6. Traatst:- eta STAT |

Dhanyaka seeds resemble cereals.

Properties and Actions
7. faqaan-ferd Garren Sareea
Dhanyaka is used to treat many diseases.
8. ARUTAT-AgUY WSTATHNARAY NST |
Dhanyaka is one of the best spices kept in the kitchen.
9. WTHaANa:-Vleh WH: |
Stem and leaves are used for food preparations
10. aqent-eftard gfe
Fruit powder is added to the drinks.
11, GERTAM-Fel WANSET: |
Dhanyaka has agreeable odour.

Regional Names

Kothimbir

Habitat
Coriander is cultivated throughout India and it is sold in the market. India is the
largest producer of coriander.

----- PAGE 208 -----
200 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - annual herb.

Root - Tap root, branched.

Stem - Herbaceous, erect, cylindrical, fistular, ribbed,
branched, glaucous with swollen nodes and aromatic.

Leaves - Cauline, alternate, exstipulate, petiolate,
sheathing leafy base, glaucous, decompound, very much
dissected when matured, leaflets are 2-3 lobed, linear lan-
ceolate, entire, acute apex, unicostate reticulate venation.

Coriandrum sativum Linn.

Inflorescence - Compound umbel, primary umbel
with an involucre of bracts at the base, the secondary umbels also with a similar involved

of bracteoles.

Flowers - The outer flowers of the umbel are with large and unequal petals. The
central ones are smaller with equal petiols. Flowers are bracteate, pedicillate, complete,
bisexual, pentamerous, epigynous. Outer flowers zygomorphic, central ones are actino-
morphic, purplish white in colour. Sepals are 5, gamosepalous and calyx tube adnate to
the ovary wall. Petals are 5, polypetalous with imbricate aestivation. Androecium con-
tains 5 stamens, polyandrous, alternating with the petals with long filaments. Gynoecium
is bicarpellary syncarpous, with inferior ovary axile plancentation without style.

Fruit - Cremocarp, oblong, ridged. Fruit breaks up into 2 Mericarps, one seed in
each mericarp, Vittae is present in the pericarp.

Seed - Endospermic
Varieties

Source — 1. Gramya (Cultivated) 2. Vanya (Wild)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruits are oval or sub-globular fruit of greenish yellow or straw colour, up to 5 mm in
diameter. It consists of two semi-circular mericarps united by their margins. The apex of
the fruit has a stylopod. External surface is covered with longitudinally running primary
and secondary ridges. The former are wavy and inconspicuous while the latter are straight
and prominent on the whole, the fruit gives a ribbed appearance. Fruits have spicy odour
and pungent taste.

----- PAGE 209 -----
Dhanyaka 201

Classical references
Synonyms
Oras IA IAT Maas Ae | Hat dyer war Hepa fers
(ara. whtrrafe aT 86)
Properties and Actions
wared treaeh fe eargurent Pretega | Trereatharranvtphrayd |
HR T Agu targ fergrarfeaagTTy Ul (A7.T. Sirens TF 87-88)
At PEP AS: Haley SATA AT YER VET Urs aren Taare
ah HGS wlewarcetgyy fea | carats wet deqareay
(aft. mageneat: 64-65)
TR MTS: Aa HEent pay wget: |
Yew MT: Year Pe Lag Uren HATA HEAT TY: II
STEM FAT ferret TET Seat Hraraer |
surdtat aefercent stot ore aearq, I
PUNa ea AAA asa |
vented oy Se wet arare Warent Tea II
(&..ateftrt 1195-1197)
arate Tet vit pared fear | See Tereoldarment a ata I
(afr. free FT 37)
ore dad me watet crevotdge | Pretagradt weet wet Poteet tt
(R.A. ergenie at 21)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Dhanyaka

a. Mula b. Kanda c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala

2. Vipaka of Dhanyaka
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla

Ans: b. Madhura

----- PAGE 210 -----
202

Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Dhanyaka kwatha with Sharkara is indicated in

a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Vibandha
Ans: d. Trishna

. Dhanya Panchaka is indicated

a. Vibandha b. Atisara c. Kushtha
Ans: a. Vibandha

. Coriandrum sativum is the botanical name of

a. Karkata shringi b. Dhanyaka c. Prishniparni
Ans: b. Dhanyaka

. Kunati is the synonym of

a. Rohitaka b. Pippali * _c. Dhanyaka
Ans: c. Dhanyaka

. Shakayogya is a synonym of

a. Dhanyaka b. Vidarai c. Eranda
Ans: a. dhanyaka

. Habit of Dhanyaka plant

a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub
Ans: d. Herb

ae ok oR RK

d. Trishna

d, Vaivarnya

d. Ushira

d. Kiratatikta

d. Punarnava

d. Herb

----- PAGE 211 -----
Dhataki

Useful part — Pushpa (Flowers)

Rasadi panchaka

Vipaka [Ram
Shita, (Ushna acc to. Dh.Ni)

Karma (action) — Trashnahara, Stambhaka, Vishaghna, Krimighna, Visarpahara,
Garbha sthapaka, Madakara, Vranahara, Sandhaniya, Mutravirajaniya.

Pharmacological actions— Astringent, Tonic, Stimulant, Haemostatic and wound
healer.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Kashaya Rasa, Kapha
hara because of Kashaya Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) - Atisara, Trashna, Krimi, Visarpa,
Raktatisara, Raktarshas, Raktapitta, Vishavikara, Pravahika and Vrana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
j. Balatisara (Diarrhoea in children)

Paral arent TATA: | (SLES. 1/40)

Combination of Dhataki pushpa (Flowers of Woodfordia fruticosa), Sugar and Laja
(Parched paddy) are mixed and administered to child, will check Atisara (Diarrhoea).

2. Pravahika (Dysentery)
aaat aatt ust aftercare | Wettetart aeat frst warfeariea: 1
(aa.Fe. 1/120)

Juice of Dhataki pushpa (Flower of Woodfoordia fruticosa), Badari patra (Leaves
of Zizyphus jujuba), Kapittha (Feronia elephentanum) mixed with Lodhra curna
(Powder of Symplocos racemosa), honey and butter milk will cure Pravahika (Dysen-

tery),

----- PAGE 212 -----
204 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

wert artaitat aera stared AHA | eH Herat POGAeATC A
(af. 7/95)

The paste prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) Dhataki (Woodfordia
fruticosa), Vatsaka bija (Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica), Karanja bija (Seeds of
Pongamia pinnata) and Malati is efficacious as an ointment in Kustha (Skin disease).

4, Pittabhisyanda (Conjunctivitis due to Pitta)
sot Hatagref Tat at HATA eMttent MSTA, Ul (G3. 10/9)

Ciirna (Powder) of Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) and Candana (Santalum album)
mixed with Stanya (breast milk) is applied as Afijana (Collyrium) in case of Pittabhisyanda
(Conjunctivitis due to pitta).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Flowers are containing becogenin, gallic acid and ellagic acid, B-sitoserol, tannins,
sugar (glucose), ursolic acid, kaempferol, lawsone, octacosanaol & mesoinositol.

Leaves have ellagic acid, myricetin, quercetin, lupeaol, B-sitoserol, betulin, ursolic
acid, betulinic acid, oleanolic acid, tannins.

Stem afford octacosanol, B-sitoserol, tannins, and flavonoids.
Gum has D-galactose, L-arabinose and L-rhamnose

Research index

1 The ethanolic extract of W. fruticosa flowers (250 and 500 mg/kg) significantly
reduced fasting blood glucose level and increased insulin level after 21 days
treatment in streptozotocin diabetic rats. The results suggest that W. fruticosa
possess potential anthiyperglycemic effect by regulating glucose homeostasis
and antioxidant efficacy in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Verma N,
Amresh G, Sahu PK, Rao ChV, Singh AP, Antihyperglycemic activity of
Woodfordia fruticosa (Kurz) flowers extracts in glucose metabolism and lipid
preroxidation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 2012
May; 50(5):351-8.

2 To evaluate the protective effect of Woodfordia fruticosa Kurz flowers against
experimentally induced liver toxicity in rats. This study demonstrated the
hepatoprotective activity of WFM and thus scientifically support the use of this

----- PAGE 213 -----
Dhataki 205

plant in traditional medicine for the treatment of liver disorders. Baravalia Y,
Vaghasiya, Y, Chanda, S. Hepatoprotective effect of Woodfordia fruticosa
Kurz flowers on diclofenac sodium induced liver toxicity in rats. Asian Pac J
Trop Med. 2011 May; 4(5):342-6. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

3 To investigate the effect of ethanol extract of W. fruticosa flowers on non-
specific immune responses in mice. The result described here indicates the
immunostimulatory activity of ethanol extract of W. fruticosa flowers by
stimulating non-specific immune responses, macrophages and bone marrow
cells. Shah AS, Juvekar AR In vitro and in vivo immunostimulatory activity of
Woodfordia fruticosa flowers on non-specific immunity. Pharm Biol. 2010
Sep; 48(9):1066-72.

4 The aim of present study was to validate hepatoprotective activity of flowers
of Woodfordia fruticosa Kurz. Present study showed that the aqueous extract
of Woodfordia fruticosa significantly restores physiological integrity of
hepatocytes. WF4 did not show any sign of toxicity up to oral dose of 2g/kg
in mice. Chandan BK, Saxena AK, Shukla S, Sharma N, Gupta DK, Singh,
K, Suri, J, Bhadauria M, Qazi GN. Hepatoprotective activity of Woodfordia
fruticosa Kurz flowers against carbon tetrachloride induced hepatotoxicity. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Sep. 26;119(2):218-24. Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications
1

9 Dhatakyadi Churna Jwaratisara (Bala)
Dhatakyadi Taila Sutika Vikara

Botanical name
Woodfordia floribunda Salisb., Woodfordia fruticosa kurz.
Woodfordia - After the name of J. Woodford a botanist.
floribunda — Flowers appear in clusters.
Family —Lythraceae (See Appendix II for key features)
Kula — Madayantika

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Sandhaniya varga, Mutravirajaniya varga, Purishasangrahaniya
varga

----- PAGE 214 -----
206 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta — Ambashtadi gana, Priyangvadi gana
B.P.Ni Haritakyadi varga 186-187
Basonym of Drug
aemnfer aiferernt efrarrier ceearfir yeuruttter ater center exter oretearcy RECT
Flowers of Dhataki are very attractive and it is also used as medicines.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Urdefter-ardeamegt TTT |
Dhataki commonly grows in hilly region.
2. Gfran-ageeatreTeaaeT |
Dhataki grows abundantly and one plant yield good quantity of flowers:

Morphology
3. aTgyett-eng: Tas, ago yorreerea: |
Flowers of Dhataki are red in colour like that of Red ochre.
4. abeqen-abesareta THAT fT FoaTTTT: |
The flowers are red in colour like that of flame.
5. TOT TOTTI: |
Dhataki flowers occur in bunches.
6. Agyteran-aght Gear: |
Dhataki plant will have many flowers.
Properties and Actions :
Dhataki flowers are used to prepare Alcoholic preparetions.
8. Meranfeet-wet aratag etter: |
Dhataki flowers are having property of generating alcohol.
9. ~ helt wet epee FEAT: |

Dhataki flowers are used in Alcoholic formulations.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Dhataki 207

Regional Names

indi [Dwi

Habitat
Dhataki plant is common in hilly regions of India.

Morphology

Habit —A straggling leafy shrub grows upto 10 ft.
in height.

Branches — Long, spreading.

Bark— Smooth, ashy brown, peeling off in fibres.

Young shoots — Are terete, often clothed with fine
white pubescence. =

Leaves — 5 to 9 cm long and 1 to 3 cm wide, op- Woodfordia flocbunda
posite or subopposite, sometimes in whorls of 3, sessile, Salisb.

ovate lanceolate, acute, softly velvety above, base is
rounded or cordate. Main nerves are 6 to 12 pairs, arcuate, prominent beneath.

Inflorescence — 2 to 15 flowered cymes.

Flowers — Having short glandular and pubescent pedicel, sepals are striate covered
with glandular dots. Petals are slightly longer than sepals and bright red in colour. Petals
are tubular and narrowly linear.

Fruit — Capsule, 1 cm long, irregularly dehiscent.
Seeds — Seeds are cuneate-obovoid, brown and smooth.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample of Dhataki contains dried flowers of scarlet or bright red colour,
measuring 12 mm to 15 mm in length and occurring in fascicled bunches. The flower is
trimorphic, short pedicellate with a long tubular calyx, which is upto 2 mm broad the
calyx is slightly contracted above the middle and has an oblique mouth having six small
trinagular teeth. The stamens are much exerted beyond the mouth of the tube. It has
characteristic odour and has slightly bitter and astringent taste.

----- PAGE 216 -----
208 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms

erent egqyedt a aragaht at pant | after aggedt a atesaren a UT AAT
(any. eterna TT. 185)

Properties and Actions
tet eat vila AeA ey: | Toorsetharettreerrenferrephertererc ere, 1
(an. afew. 186)
Uden meal a Rafat | strane mere Hires
(afi. Tene TH. 90)
eran vitten ect sare HeeeTy: | Tofrrerctterdferarctare ages, 1
wat wag faust a crear dhgiceny | React det weaken
Rat BUS AT AY MATT: HHT ANT USA. sieht ah. 1072-1074)
aeat wage a Napier i warttenstracet fretrorrert u
(wR. frorene af. 125)
viet ware ETT Raat waft | faa
eal we: Tamaeiwanren amaat eed: ll
(BAY. rage Pt. 77)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Dhataki
a. Bija b. Patra c. Pushpa d. Mula —
Ans: c. Pushpa
2. Pradhana Rasa of Dhataki Pushpa
a. Katu b. Kashaya c.Tikta d. Amla
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Plant having property to generate natural alcohol
a. Ajamoda b. Ashwagandha c. Patala d. Dhataki
Ans: d. Dhataki

4. Botanical name of Dhataki
a. Terminalia chebula b. Emblica officinalis
c. Woodfordia floribunda d. Tinospora cordifolia
Ans: c. Woodfordia floribunda

----- PAGE 217 -----
Dhataki

5. Madahetu is a synonym of

a. Jambu b. Dhataki c. Bakuchi
Ans: b. Dhataki

. Sidhu Pushpi is a synonym of

a. Dhataki b. Shigru c. Parpataka
Ans: a. Dhataki

. Fire flame bush is a common name of

a. Palasha b. Daruharidra _—_c. Dhataki
Ans: c. Dhataki

. Dhatakyadi Churna is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Prameha c. Jwaratisara
Ans: c. Jwaratisara

209

d. Shyonaka

d. Aragwadha

d. Sariva

d. Vaivarnya

----- PAGE 218 -----
Dhanvayasa

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant).
Rasadipanchaka

Rasa [Reshaya Tk, Mahara, Rat

Karma (Actions)

Trishnahara, Kushthaghna, Visarpanashaka, Jwaraghna, Dahanashaka,
Chardighna, Madajit, Bhramajit, Vataraktanashaka.

Pharmacological Actions
Antipyretic, Anti-inflammatory, Analgesic, Antimicrobial, Antiviral, CNS stimu-
lant and Anticancerous.
Agrya Karma:
BeeTaT PTT | (FY, 25/40)
Duralabha (Fagonia cretica Linn.) pacifies Pitta and Shleshma.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Pitta Shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka. Pitta Shamaka because of
Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Kasshaya, Tikta, Madhura Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Kushtha, Visarpa, Jwara, Trishna, Daha, Chardi, Raktapitta, Vatarakta, Mada and
Bhrama.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
mara gaat a Tierepae | etter welts Wet ange MG Ut (aa. 4/68)
In case of Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage) roots of Yavasa.

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3to6g

----- PAGE 219 -----
Dhanvayasa 211

Kwatha(Decoction) = 50 to 100 ml
Chemical Constituents

Acrial part of the plant have Chinovic acid, Harmine, Alanine, Arginine, Glycine,
Lysine, Genin A & B, Fagonin, Oleanolic acid and Campesterol.
Research corner

To evaluate antioxidant and radical scavenging activities of organic extracts from
fruit, roots and aerial parts of Fagonia critica a research work was carried out. The study
revealed the potent antioxidant potential of Fagonia cretica and its prospective efficacy
against various reactive oxygen species mediated diseases. Iqbal P, Anmed D & Asghar
MN. A comparative invitro antioxidant potential profile of extracts from different parts of
Fagonia cretica. Asian Pac. J. Trop Med. 2014 Sep.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Duralabha Kwatha

Sudarshana Churna Jvara, Yakrutvriddhi
3 Haritakyadi Kwatha Mutrakrichra, Vibandha

Botanical Name
Fagonia cretica Linn.

Fagonia — for Monisignor Fagon (1638-1718), Physician to Louis XIV of France.
cretica — Inhabiting Chalky soils
Family —Zygophyllaceae
Kula — Gokshura
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Trisha Nigrahana, Arshoghna varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduuchyadi varga
Basonym of Drug
SA: ART: WHAM ATAATACAT |

Dhanvayasa (Fagonia cretica Linn) grows commonly in dry lands.

----- PAGE 220 -----
212 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1. WAR: WRCH Ta: |
Dhavanyasa grows in dry regions.

2. WM TeMTaN ABTA TEET |

Dhanvayasa is very common in Gandhara Desha (Afghanistan).

Morphology
3, START Ste: freA |
Dhanvayasa spreads extensively on the ground.
4. aayeht-atraat Foe |
Root of Dhanvayasa is coppery in colour.
5. GUAMT-S2r TA Grattan ave tenrarea |
Dhanvayasa has thorns, so difficult to hold.
6. AUel-Welqusran, Hvetercar |
Dhanvayasa is a difficult plant to hold because of thorns.
Properties and Actions
7 BUAT-KAS HAATATT |
Dhanvayasa has astringent taste.

Vernacular Names

Marathi Dhamasa

Habitat
Dhanvayasa mainly grows in dry regions of North-Western India, Rajasthan and

Andhra Pradesh.

Morphology
Habit - Small erect under shrub, spinuous. Branches are slender and glabrous.

----- PAGE 221 -----
Dhanvayasa 243

Leaves - Opposite, | to 3 foliate. Petioles are variable in
length up to 3. cm long, 2 pairs of thorny stipules sometimes |
cm long. Leaflets are linear, acute, and sessile or with very short
petiolules.

Flowers - Small, light pink in colour.

Fruit - Glandular, pubescent, rounded at the base and py-
ramidal towards the apex. Seeds are ovoid, acute and smooth
with flattened surface.

Varieties
Raja Nighantu — Two varieties: 1. Duralabha,

2. Kshudraduralabha
. Fagonia cretica Linn.
Classical references
Synonyms
UA AAA SAAT AAA: PATS: | FUAA SUT AAAAM A Wee 11
THI HEHUSTAT HATA Se eTNT | (AL. TSA TT 211-212)

Properties and Actions
Oa: Fale: Urea: Vile AA: aHAAS at frargaHs ATARTT |
sonfrrdararesasaat: Aa: i AarererTelegear GAA SMTA Ul
(a9. TSM at 212-214)
gues eargetter ferent creer | frrasarqeahtenteteet

(afi. THM FT 20)
eraarat fear: Herat WERT TE: I

at Ref fraraeeateeyar | frais arareargerenrcaticary, ul
(SR. aiteft af 985-986)

Sree Helter BOT ameter TAT | TERT aaa Sa ET WAS TT

(aft, aera TT S55)
Kshudraduralabha
Sree fetter a ear TaTHS Faq! MTA a one yyfegentitar
(aA. wraveerfe aT ss)

arege afar Mare wet vitae oy | TeTosareotedtatsres Tq
(R.A. margenfe + 182)

----- PAGE 222 -----
214

—

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Dhanvayasa

a, Mula b. Panchanga c. Pushpa d. Bija
Ans: b. Panchanga

. Vipaka of Dhanvayasa

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: a. Madhura

. Specific indication of Dhanvayasa

a. Kushtha b. Prameha c. Bhrama d. arshas
Ans: c. Bhrama

. Botanical name of Dhanvayasa

a. Acorus calamus b. Andrographis paniculata
c. Crocus sativus d. Fagonia cretica
Ans: d. Fagonia cretica

. Duralabha is a synonym of

a. Saireyaka b. Gokshura c. Dhanvayasa d. Hingu
Ans: c. Dhanvayasa oS

. Tamramuli is a synonym of

a. Yashtimadhu b. Dhanvayasa_ c. Varuna d. Ashoka
Ans: b. Dhanvayasa

. Habit of Dhanvayasa plant

a. Under shrub __ b. Small tree c. Large tree d. Creeper
Ans: a. Under shrub

. Types of Dhanvayasa as per Raja Nighantu

a. 3 b. 5 c. 4 d. 2
Ans: d. 2

----- PAGE 223 -----
Eladwaya

SS erersnenstnesssnnssasenanennneeennsan.
Useful parts — Phala (Fruits) and Beeja (Seeds).

Rasadi Panchaka

Sukshmaila Sthulaila

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Sukshmaila — Pitta Vatahara, Pittahara due to Shita virya & Vatahara due to
Madhura vipaka. ,
Sthulaila — Vata Kaphahara, Vatahara due to Ushna virya & Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Karma (Actions)

Sukshmaila - Shwasahara, Kasahara, Arshoghna, Mutrakrechraghna, Rochana,
Dipana, Hradya, Mukhashodhaka.

Sthulaila — Shwasahara, Kandughna, Trishnahara, Hrallasanashaka, Kasahara,
Vishaghna, Rochaka, Chardighna.
Pharmacological Actions

Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic and Diuretic.

Rogaghnala (Therapeutic indications)
Sukshmaila — Shwasa, Kasa, Mutrakracchra, Aruchi, Mukhadourgandhya, Daha,

Trishna.
Sthulaila — Shwasa, Kasa, Kandu, Hrallasa, Chardi, Aruchi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mutraghata (Retention of urine) and Mutrakracchra (Dysuria)

unfmerata gaitet ot fratat: (3. 58/41)

Amalaki Rasa (Juice of Emblica officinalis) and Ela churna (powder of Elettaria

----- PAGE 224 -----
216 Dravyaguna Vijnana

cardamomum) will relieve Mutraghata (Retention of Urine) and Mutrakracchra (Dys-
uria),

2. Timira (Progressive Cataract)

ae ee Baretereal gure | yorigrras aftrae wftrecremeIeTy, II

The powder of Ela (Elettaria cardamomum) is immersed in Basta mutra (Goat's
urine) for 3 days and used as Anjana (Collyrium) is efficacious in Timira (Progressive
cataract), Krinu (Helminthiasis) and Pilla.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 0.5 to 1g

Phytoconstituents

Cardamom seeds contain volatile oil (2 to 8%). Volatite oil contains cineole, Terpiny]
acetate, Terpineol, Borneol, Terpinene, camphene, P-cymene, Geraneol. Seeds also con-
tain fixed oil (10%), starch and proteins.

Research index

1. The chemopreventive potential of cardamom was evaluated on
7,12dimethylbenz [ajanthracene-initiated and croton oil-promoted mouse skin
papillomagenesis. These findings indicate the potential of cardamom as a
chemopreventive agent against two-stage skin cancer. Qiblawi S, Al-Hazimi A,
Al-Mogbel M, Hossain A, Bagchi D. Chemopreventive effects of cardamom
(Elettaria cardamomum L) on chemically induced skin carcinogenesis in Swiss
albino mice. J Med Food. 2012 Jun: 15(6):576-80. Epub 2C 12 Mar 9.

2. Elettaria cardamomum (L.) Maton. (Small cardamom) fruit powder was
evaluated for its antihypertensive potential and its effect on some of the
cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with stage 1 hypertension. The present
study demonstrates that small cardamom effectively reduces blood pressure,
enhances fibrinolysis and improves antioxidant status, without significantly
altering blood lipids and fibrinogen levels in stage 1 hypertensive individuals.
Verma SK, Jain V Katewa SS. Blood pressure lowering, fibrinolysis
enhancing and antioxidant activities of cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum).
Indian J Biochern Biophys. 2009 Dec,46(6.):503-6

3. Petroleum ether soluble (PS) of Elettaria cardamomum was tried for its
efficacy in gastro protective activity. The PS extract at doses > or=12.5mg/kg
proved to be more active than ranitidine at 50mg/kg. Jamal A, Javed K, Aslam
M, Jafri MA. Gastroprotective effect of cardamom, Elettaria cardamomum

----- PAGE 225 -----
Eladwaya 217

2005 Nov 17.

4. The inhibitory activity of cardamom extract was studied on human platelets.
The aqueous extracted of cardamom may have component (s), which protect
platelets from aggregation and lipid peroxidation, Suneetha VVJ,
Krishnakantha TP. Cardamom extract as inhibitor of human platelet
aggregation. Phytother Res. 2005 May 19(5):437-40.

5. A comparative study of the anti-inflammatory activity of the oil e’dracted from
commercial Elettaria cardamomum seeds, in doses of 175 and 280 microliters/
kg and indomethacin in a dose of 30 mg/kg against acute carrageenan-induced
planter oedema in male albino rats was performed. In addition the
antispasmodic activity was determined on a rabbit intestine preparation using
acetylcholine as agonist, the results proving that cardamom oil exerts its
antispasmodic action through muscarinic receptor blockage. alZuhair H, el-
Sayeh B, Ameen HA, al-Shoora H, Pharmacological studies of cardamom oil
in animals. Pharmacol Res, 1996 Jul-Aug;34(1-2):79-82.

Yoga (Formulation)

SI.No.
1

Indications
Eladi gutika Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka

Ashmari, Mutrakracchra

Eladi Churna Mutrakracchra

=z

Name

Eladyarishta Visarpa, Masurika
Eladya ghrata Rajayakshma, Bhagandara
Eladya modaka Madatyaya, Madyavikara

Botanical Name — Elettaria cardamomum. Maton Elettaria = Elacetar-derived from
Malayalam cardamomum - Kardamon-amomon cress = Pungent.

Family — Zingiberaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula — Haridra.
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Shwasahara varga, Angamarda prashamana varga, Vishaghna Varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Pippalyadi gana
B.P.Ni. — Karpuradi varga 60-63

----- PAGE 226 -----
218 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Ela is a stimulant.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, TAB aaleRee STAT |
Ela grows in South India.

2. xifeSt-xfersest ST |
Ela is cultivated in South Indian states.
Morphology
3, Prget-We: Yet Stet: |
Ela fruit is triangular shaped and has three surfaces.
4, Prepfe:-Prearat ge: ater start Hlergacare, |
Seeds are enclosed by leathery layer appears like a pouch.
5. aget-aete ata |
Ela fruit has many seeds.
6. wfe:-qeae sf, qetteret: |
Ela seeds are very small.
7. suphyert-sopste |
Fruits are contracted.
Properties and actions
8. AQTRN-Aget TANS |
Ela has strong and pleasant odour.
9. Gear-are earrate erate |
Ela alleviated pricking pain.
Regional names

Eli
Hindi Chhoti Elachi

----- PAGE 227 -----
Eladwaya 219

Malayalam Ellakaya

Habitat

Ela is cultivated in many parts of South Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamilnadu.

Morphology

Elettaria cardamomum — Plant with woody root
stock, branching.

Stem — 5 to 8 ft high. Clothed below with spongy
sheaths.

Leaves — Leaves are subsessile, 30 to 60 cm long
and 7.5 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate.

Inflorescence — Panicles, 30-60 cm long. Bracts are
linear-oblong, Persistent, 3.8-5 cm long. Calyx is 1.3 cm
long. Lip of corolla is white, streaked with violet.

Fruit — Capsule, subglobose or oblong, about 1.3
cm in diameter, marked with many fine vertical ribs.

Seeds — Small and black.

Amomum subulatum Roxb.- Leafy stem, 3-4 ft.
long.

Leaves — Leaves are 30 to 60 cm long, 7.5 to 10cm
wide, oblong, lanceolate, green, glabrous on both surfaces.

Elettaria cardamomum Maton

Inflorescence — Spike, shortly peduncled, 5-7.5 cm
long, globose, very dense. Bracts are red-brown, obtuse,
outer 2.5 cm, ovate, with a horny cusp, inner shorter. Calyx
and corolla tube 2.5 cm long, segments subobtuse, shorter
than the tube, upper cuspidate. Lip obovate-cuneate, emar-
ginate, yellowish white, rather longer than the corolla- Ammomum subulatum
segments. Filament is very short. Roxb.

----- PAGE 228 -----
220 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit — Capsule, 2.5 cm in diameter, globose, red-brown, densely echinate.

Varieties
B.P.Ni., Dh.Ni. & Ka.Ni. -Two varieties- 1. Sukshmaila 2. Sthulaila

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruits are three sided trilocular capsule, ovoid or oblong in shape with rounded base
and slightly pointed beak, upto 1.5 cm long and 6 mm broad. Surface is finely striated
longitudinally, pale buff to light green in colour. Seeds are many, irregularly angular,
transversely rugose, reddish brown in colour, closely packed in each of the three cells.
Fruits have camphoraceous and pungent odour, has acrid and sweet taste leaving a cold
sensation on chewing.

Amomum subulatuin— Fruits are large, coarsely striated, dark brown in colour, mea-
suring about 2 to 3 cm in length and upto 1.5 cm in width. Fruit is trilocular capsule,
anterio-posteriorly flattened, having a number of irregular, dentate-undulate wings which
extend from the apex downwards, for two third of its length. Internally the capsule con-
tains several seeds held together by a viscious pulp of dark brown colour. Odour is very
strong and camphoraceous. Has pungent and slightly sweet taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Sukshmaila

Genres gen ant sfast ae: 1 (ars. afureart. 63)
Sthulaita

Te Wet a agen yedter Bryetsft a 1 axe Geter GT axa a Frese:
(ana. ayueeat. 60-61)

Properties and Actions
Sukshmaila
Ue FeAl HHMAHAM GAPS | TF Hee shar creat ataett Far
(aa. atuert. 63)
getter qarpeget areeraae feat | gator vittem wargeen treat
(af. mage at. 45)
gate Gaps: arrHeHHE | Teg wget ta creat attatt aT
(afr. attsft af. 1341)
wen g acer vier gare: Fastest | eatery at ges a WAT UI
(BF. eiaenfert. 93)

Brahadela-
TSM HHT Wes TH UTHeTy: | waloor vero ys aTATaTSTRT |

----- PAGE 229 -----
Eladwaya 221

wrorafrraanes Prigrattrarage 1 (aT. Te ah. 61-62)
Tetfercat a reat CareHHATAeaATOTL | aT H A ehet TTT TITETAY
(afr. wearqente af. 47)
axe Hea TA fra Heerg: | waite wert srrcHHarra aE |
aha gerade mug Priawarererat: 1 (a.fA. sitafirert. 1343-1344)
werent Bayt Raaq cafe arena 1 (A.A. etraene at. 94)
Ela Samanya Guna

(aA. froreanfe at. 87)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Ela
a. Pushpa b. Mula c. Phala & Bija_ d. Patra
Ans: c. Phala & Bija

2. Vipaka of Sukshma Ela
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura

3. Eladi gutika is indicated in
a. Raktapitta b. Shotha c. Shwasa d. Arshas
Ans: c. Shwasa

4. Eladi Churna specifically indicated in
a. Mutrakricchra _b. Shiroroga c. Netra Roga _ d. Hradroga
Ans: a. Mutrakrichra

5. Botanical name of Sukshma Ela
a. Eclipta alba b. Elettaria cardamomum
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Ammomum subulatum
Ans: b. Elettaria cardamomum

6. Botanical name of Brahat ela
a. Ammomum subulatum b. Elettaria cardamomum
c. Boswelia serrta d. Cuminum cyminum
Ans; a. Ammomum subulatum

7. Dravidi is a synonym of

—

a. Guggulu b. Shalmali c. Agaru d. Ela
Ans: d. Ela

8. Triputa is a synonym of
a. Dadima b. Ela c. Nirgundi d. Kataka

Ans: b. Ela r)

----- PAGE 230 -----
Chapter

Eranda

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Beeja (Seed) & Patra (Leaf).
Rasadi Panchaka

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shmaka - Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka, Pittahara
because of Madhura vipaka, Kaphahara due to its Ushna virya.

Karma (Actions)

Eranda mula - Vrashya, Shulahara, Shothahara, Shirapida hara, Jwarahara,
Anahahara, Kasanashaka, Kushthaghna.

Eranda Beeja—Bhedana, Shulahara, Dipana, Arshoghna, Udarapaha, Krimighna,
Mutrakracchrahara. ,

Eranda patra — Krimighna, Mutradoshahara, Bastishulahara.

Pharmacological Actions—Purgative, Stimulant.

Agrya Karma
WS Het FI AAT | (.Y, 25/40)

Root of Eranda (Ricinus communis Linn.) best Aphrodisiac and pacifies Vata.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Erandamutla — Shula, Katishula, Basti Shula, Amavata, Gradhrasi, Pakshaghata,
Shotha, Shirashula, Jwara, Gulma, Anaha and Kushtha.

Eranda beeja —- Malabaddhata, Agnimandya, Arshas, Udara, Mutrakracchra.
Erandapatra — Krimi, Mutradosha, Bastishula.
Erandapushpa — Mutradosha
Indications of different varieties of Eranda
Rakta Eranda — Shwasa, Kasa, Kampa, Arshas, Pandu.

----- PAGE 231 -----
Eranda 223

Shweta Eranda — Arti, Jwara, Kasa.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)

amare wither: | wa wae Peay mecha ii

(5a. 26/50)
Eranda taila (Oil of Ricinus communis) alone will cure dreadful disease Amavata
(Rheumatoid arthritis) like how lion kills big animal like elephant.
2. Parshwashula (Pain in flanks)
Were fret Wetseyfired wed | Aeeaalt Aras: UEKI UI
(3H. 2/2/101)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from 80 g of Eranda mula (Root of Ricinus commu-
nis) and 8 times of water. Then it is administered with Yavakshara will alleviates
Parshwashula (Pain in flanks).
3. Vibandha (Constiption)
oars g fateart | (aF, 13/12)
Wusde Benes fe a ate uit wetirat az fet fafteat u
(1.4.3/4/20)
In the context of Udara Roga (Ascites), Acharya Caraka has considered Eranda
taila (Oil of Ricinus communis) is best.
Eranda taila (Ricinus communis) oil mixed with double the quantity of Triphala
kwatha or milk will induce purgation immediately.
4. Shula (Abdominal pain)
famrssine earaticn wet frag | egalaeteiaet wal: Beary
(ALS.FA. 30/57)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Shunthi (Zingiber officinale), Eranda mula (Root
of Ricinus communis) mixed with Hingu (Ferula narthex) and Sauvarcala lavana will
relieve Shula (Colic) immediately.
5. Arshas (Piles)

aruierafirarat witerants Brie 14/44)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from leaves of Vrisha (Adhatoda vasica), Arka

----- PAGE 232 -----
224

Dravyaguna Vijnana

(Calotropis procera), Eranda (Ricinus communis) and Bilva (Aegle marmelos) is benefi-
cial in Arshas (Piles).

Matra (Dosage)
1. Mula kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
2. Mula kalka (Paste) -3to6g
3. Patra kalka (Paste) - 10 to 20 ml
4. Taila (Oil)
5. Bija churna (Powder) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Seeds contain fixed oil (45 to 52%), proteids 20%, Starch, Mucilage, Albumin, Ri-

cin, Uric acid, hydrocyanic acid. Seed hull contains a bitter substance, some resin, pig-
ments, Recinine (alkaloid). ‘Ricin’ is a toxic substance.

Root and Root bark contains inorganic materials like potassium, sodium, magne-

sium, chloride, nitrate, iron, aluminium, manganese and calcium.

Leaves contain lysine, leucine, isoleucine, valine, threonine tyrosine, histidine, cys-

tine, tartaric acid, B - sitosterol, ricinine, gallic acid, and rutin.

Research Corner

1 Ricin toxin A chain (RTA) is the cytotoxic component of the dimeric protein,

ricin, one of the most potent and deadly plant toxins extracted from the seeds
of Ricinus communis. RTA has been investigated as a potential candidate for
cancer chemotherapy, in the form of immunotoxins, and as a method for
depleting macrophages in vivo. These data suggest that i.v. administration of
RTA resulted in organ injuries that were associated with inflammation and OS.
Alipour M, Pucaj K, Smith MG, Suntres ZE, Toxicity of ricin toxin A chain
in rats Drug Chem Toxicol. 2012 Sep 5.

2 The present study evaluated the in vitro antioxidant and antibacterial activities

of various extracts of aerial parts of Periploca aphylla and Ricinus communis.
The present study provides evidence that Periploca aphylla and Ricinus
communis prove to be potent natural antioxidants and could replace synthetic
antioxidants. Iqbal J, Zaib S, Farooq U, Khan A, Bibi 1, Suleman S.
Antioxidant, Antimicrobial, and Free Radical Scavenging Potential of Aerial
Parts of Periploca apkiyNa and Ricinus communis. ISRN Pharmacol.
2012Z,2012:563267. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

3 The aim of the present study was to appraise the antimicrobial activity of

Ricinus communis L. essential oil against different pathogenic microorganisms

----- PAGE 233 -----
Eranda 225

and the cytotoxic activity against HeLa cell lines. The present study showed the
potential antimicrobial and anticarcinogenic properties of the essential oil of
Ricinus communis L., indicating the possibilities of its potential use in the
formula of natural remedies for the topical treatment of infections. Zarai Z,
Chobba 113, Mansour RB, Bakir A, Gharsallah N, Kadri A. Essential oil of
the leaves of Ricinus communis L.“Jn vitro cytotoxicity and antimicrobial
properties. Upids Health Dis, 2012 Aug 13:11:102. doi: 10.1186/1476-51 1X-
1 1-102.

4. The study was carried out to ascertain the antibacterial properties inherent in
fermented seed extracts of Ricinus communis. The active antimicrobial
ingredients in fermented R. communis seeds should be identified while its
medicinal value to humans properly investigated. Jombo GT, Enenebeaku MN.
Antibacterial profile of fermented seed extracts of Ricinus communis: findings
from a preliminary analysis. Niger J Physiol Sci, 2008 Jun-Dec;23(12)55-9.

5. The antidiabetic activity of 50% ethanolic extract of roots of Ricinus communis
(RCRE) along with its bioassay-guided purification was evaluated. Thus R.
communis seems to have a promising value for the development of a potent
phytomedicine for diabetes. Shokeen P, Anand P, Murali YK, Tandon V.
Antidiabetic activity of 50% ethanolic extract of Ricinus communis and its
purified fractions. Food Chem Toxicol, 2008 Nov;46(1 1)3458-66. Epub 2008
Aug 28.

Yoga (Formulation)

Name Indication

Botanical Name~ Ricinus communis Linn. Ricinus-little tick (Seeds resemble little
ticks) communis -common.

Family — Euphorbiaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula — Eranda kula.
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Bhedaniya varga, Swedopaga varga, Angamarda-prashamana varga

----- PAGE 234 -----
226 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Vidarigandhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 60-66
Basonym of Drug
ar warardtcerter farafer srererceater arg htrter Tey TTS STAT
Eranda is very efficacious drug in Vata vyadhi.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, aetarr-argy ale |
Eranda plant grows very fast.
2. FAAIA:- Tae WATE |
Leaves of Eranda are facing upwards.
3, Tada: reads Tet Fa WATT |

Eranda leaves are palmately lobed and resembling the palm
Gandharva.

4. Targe:-wergterag ferrch Ue |
Leaves of Eranda are palmately lobed.
5, Bhaute:- Fe TARE |
Leaves of Eranda are large.
Leaves of Eranda have got long petiole.
7. AAVS:- IT Hass a TOA |
The flowers when blossomed plant appears very attractive.
8. wsan:-Rreaate tang aSatgats sare: |
When wind blows the inflorescence of Eranda appears like dancing.
9, CUAGS:- ATA Fo Fa YTS |
Inflorescence of Eranda is raceme and that resemble tiger’s tail.
10. faadta:-Fatrd ater |
Eranda has mottled seeds.

Properties and Actions

11. arenht:- arafreanroratt: waatyren seat:

of

----- PAGE 235 -----
Eranda 227

Eranda is regarded as the best drug in Vata vyadhi.

12. YR: YSTATE: |

Eranda relieves pain.

Regional Names

Habitat

Eranda plant is cultivated through out India and
also grows wild.

Morphology
Habit — A tall glabrous annual shrub.

Stem — Erect, herbaceous above and woody be-
low, cylindrical branched, solid.

Leaf — Alternate, broad, palmately lobed and
veined, lobes usually 7-8, simple, serrate, acute, gland-

dotted, green or reddish, petiolate with multicostate
reticulate venation.

Ricinus communis. Linn.

Inflorescence — A terminal raceme.

Flower — Monoecious, aptetalous, female flowers hypogynous, bracteate, pedicel-
late and incomplete, male towards the lower portion of the inflorescence and female to-
wards the upper portion. Male flowers have 5 stamens and female flowers have tricarpellary
syncarpous gynoecium with superior ovary.

Fruit — Globose oblong explosively dehiscent, 3-seeded capsule, 1-2 cm long,
septicidally dehiscent or splitting into 3 two valved cocci. The fruit when young will be
green, turns to ash colour on drying. The fruit usually covered with short or long fleshy
prickles.

Seed — Carunculate, oblong, 1 to 1.5 cm long with smooth mottled surface and hard
crustaceous testa. Endosperm is oily.

----- PAGE 236 -----
228 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni —1. Shukla Eranda — 2, Rakta Eranda
Ra.Ni - 1. Shweta Eranda 2. Rakta Eranda 3. Sthula Eranda

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root of Eranda will be tough and cylindrical 1.5 to 3.5 cm in diameter. Outer sur-
face consists of closely adhering bark which is slightly wrinkled longitudinally and grey-
ish brown in colour. Transversely cut surface shows a creamish yellow surface with radi-
ating medullary rays, enclosed within a concentric ring of cambium. On breaking thin
root become short pieces while thick roots become fibrous. Roots are having resionous
odour and slightly acid taste.

Seed — Seeds are oval shaped, some what laterally compressed, upto 1.5 cm in
length and 4 to 7 mm in thickness. Surface of the testa is smooth and glossy, brownish
grey in colour, more often mottled with dark brown or black. There is a prominent caruncle
at one extremity of the seed from which the raphe runs along the ventral surface to the
other extremity. The caruncle terminates in a raised Chalaza. The testa is hard and en-
closed a white oily endosperm. Seeds have disagreeable odour.

Toxicology

Entire plant is strong and containing toxalbumin ricin (a water soluble glycoprotein)
and a powerful allergin. Seeds also have yellow coloured purgative oil. Toxalbumin is a
toxic protein, which resembles a bacterial toxin in action and causes agglutination of red
cells with some hemolysis. Ricin blocks the protein synthesis through the inhibition of
RNA polymerase. Ricin has a special binding protein that allows it to gain access to the
endoplasmic reticulum in gastrointestinal mucosal cells causing severe diarrhoea.

Note — Unbroken seeds are non-poisonous when swallowed or cooked.
Fatal dose — 5 to 10 crushed seeds.
Fatal period — 2 to several days.

Treatment
¢ Gastric lavage with plain water.
e Demulcents to prevent intestinal mucosal irritation.
e Turpentine hot water fomentation.
In case of severe haemolysis and severe anemia
¢ Blood transfusion
e Haemotenics orally

----- PAGE 237 -----
Eranda 229

e Oral steroid administration
e Symptomatic treatment
Classical references
Synonyms
Shukla eranda -
Yaa WS aravahyat werdgera: | verge alert cheiguet ase: |
arattererrsntt waaay Pree i (as. Tene TF. 60-61)
Rakta eranda -
THIS BIH: MASSA VARIA | AAS aR yoaATag: 1
(19. Teele FT. 61-62)
Properties and Actions
Wsyt RM WS faa | Ueteadtatte foredteter SAT
RAMTHSMEHASSASA | St aed Hpi
Tape uit fram weatoory | ararinect yeu ahageret we
cna aibeta afte wert faerafr | mosmeaet youn,
aarcigetet mech dot we | deere a fereddt arayetateae:
(A. TERA aI. 62-66)
Ws fie: reser: | seradeite yoraterenstgkssd,
Teatemerat franteviftrearset | Het tag a Bat eT Ale ara Se, UI
Ws Ge tag first seers (a. Yseale a. 287-289)
WUSt wet Get Toot arteters: | Halter: I
Traidanendakares | Aesmadayeithy yet i
Erandapatra -

Wet aed anata | tafe qaett weet
Tet a afttget a ahs wafiet var | anarceiientt gareTSTeTay II
Erandapuspa -

wey act wafer 1 qaeteet get wraftrarratoory
Erandaphala -

sna Toren, | apaegeugtet mea dhetaey Ul
agaist a fread araverottarae: ut (af. atefirerf. 115-121)

----- PAGE 238 -----
230 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Raktaeranda -
THUR: HUTT: HHT TA | ATA TTT EAT:
(aM. araferrt, 123)

Shwetaecranda -

dws: wage sor: sft | ee eel Tae HCHTAENT Tare: I

Raktaeranda -

Thus: wage: aarnftug-wbaaacars aH TPT
(af. meneneart. 58)

Sthulaeranda -

Bens quer: weet iearay | (w.A. merenert. 59)
musa ated dist Serta | Test Meet wees Yost AAT UN
Qt NAN ANT AAS, AA TACHA SASET II
(B.A. marqenieat. 71-72)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Eranda
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Vrashya and Vata hara is the Agrya Karma of
a. Eranda Mula _ b. Guduchi c. Kantakari d. Pippali
Ans: a. Eranda mula
3. Eranda Bija is
a. Stambhana b. Kushthaghna c. Varnya d. Bhedana
Ans: d. Bhedana
4, As per Bhava Mishra Eranda taila alone can cure
a. Jwara b. Amavata c. Kushtha d. Sandhi shotha
Ans; b. Amavata
5. Eranda Phala payasa is specifically indicated in
a, Gridhrasi b. Atisara c. Nidrahani d. Ajirna
Ans: a. Gridhrasi

----- PAGE 239 -----
Branda 23)

nnn UE UU UaIINE NSIS SII EIEENNERIERERERERESRREERERRERneneneEEnend

6. Gandharva hasta is a synonym of
a. Kutaja b. Sarpagandha —_c. Eranda d. Arjuna
Ans: c. Eranda

7. Chitra bija is a synonym of
a. Vidanga b. Eranda c. Manjishta d. Brahati
Ans: b. Eranda

8. Panchangula is a synonym of
a. Tila b. Shveta Chandana_ c. Eranda_ dd. Aragwadha
Ans: c. Eranda

----- PAGE 240 -----
Chapter

Gambhari

Useful parts = Mula twak (Root bark).
Rasadi paneaka

Mula (Root) Phala (Kruit)

| Rasa Tikta Kashaya Madhura Madhura, Amla
Laghu, Ruksha Guru, Snigdha

Karma (Actions)
Mula - Shothahara, Dipana, Pachana, Bhedana, Shoshahara, Trashnahara,
Amahara, Shulahara, Arshoghna, Vishaghna, Dahashamaka, Jwarahara, Shramahara,

Raktapittahara.
Phala - Brahmana, Vrashya, Keshya, Rasayana, Trashnahara, Dahashamaka,
Hradya, Medhya.
Pushpa = Sangrahi, Raktapittahara.
Pharmacological Actions
Stomachic, Refrigerant, Demulcent, Laxative
Dosha karma (Actions of Desha)

Tridosha Shamaka - Vata Shamaka because of Madhura Rasa & Ushna virya,
Pittahara due to Tikta kashaya Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka. Kaphashamaka

due to its Ushna virya.
Phala (Fruit) is Vatapitta Shamaka because of Madhura Rasa & Madhura Vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Mula = Shotha, Agnimandya, Vibandha, Arshas, Trishna, Daha, Shula, Jwara,

Shrama, Raktapitta, Vishavikara.
Phala = Karshya, Dourbalya, Klaivya, Trishna, Daha.

Pushpa Raktapitta

----- PAGE 241 -----
Gambhari 233

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1, Atisara (Diarrhoea)
mrereteaeramt at fenhereret: Ayre: (aA. 19/74)
The Yusha (Soup) prepared from Kashmarya phala (Fruits of Ginelina arborea),
mixed with sugar and little sour substance will check Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder)
wlfeenra yori arrears wreae: | ata feelers aearare Tenfrrye
(a.f¥. 4/39)

Flowers of Kovidara (Bauhinia purpurea) Kashmarya (Gmelina arborea) and
Shalmali (Bombax malabaricum) if used as vegetable will check Raktapitta (Bleeding
disorders).

3. Vatarakta (Gout)

SIVA ARAMT sheet aT 1 (GA. 5/12)
Paste prepared from Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and wheat flour is applied.
4, Anguliveshta (Whit low)
wea: AeA: UA: ArT: URAREA: | argferedea: Tat YAY WeTaee
(ALS. 61/77)
In case of Anguli Veshta (Whit low), one should wrap seven tender leaves of
Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea).
5. Panduroga (Anaemia)
arene ator areratgferregay | xrearetet ar wtect cet fret aT gS
(af. 5/12)

160 gm. fruits of Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea) or Draksha (Vitis vinifera) are
dipped in 40 ml warm decoction of Danti (Baliospermum montanum), when fruits be-
come soft, they are removed and squeezed to get juice. This juice is useful in Panu roga
(Anemia).

Matra (Dosage)

1. Mula Kwatha (Decoction) -—50 to 100 ml

2. Mula Churna (Powder) -—3to6g

3. Phala Rasa (Juice) —10 to 20 ml

----- PAGE 242 -----
234 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Phytoconstituents

Root yielded Gmelinol, B-sitosterol, Sesquiterpene, cerylalcohol, yellow viscid oil,
resin, trace of benzoic acid and ash free from manganese.

Leaves have luteolin, apigenin, quercetin, hentria contonal and f-sitosterol.

Heartwood afforded n-octacosanol, gmelinol, arboreal, isoarboreol, gmelanone, p-
sitosterol, gmelinol, paulownin, gummadiol, palmitic, oleic and linoleic acids, Glucose,
Xylose, Mannose, Arabinose, Galactose & rhamnose.

Research index

1. The present study investigated the effects of Gmelina arborea hexane leaves
extract on markers of oxidative stress and its vaso relaxant effects on isolated
rat aorta, in order to postulate possible mechanisms involved in the
antihypertensive properties of the plant. The results indicate that Gemelina
arborea hexane extract possesses bioactive compounds with antioxidant and
vasorelaxant properties. Wansi SL, Nyadjeu, P, Nguelefack TB, Fodouop SF,
Donatien AA, Kamanyi A. In vivo Antioxidant and Vasodilating Activities Of
Gmelina arborea (Verbenaceae) Leaves Hexane Extract. J. Complement
Integer Med. 2012 Oct 5:9(1). pii:/j/jcim.2012.9.issue1/1553-3840. 1623/1553-
3840.1623. xml. doi: 10.1515/1553-3840.1623.

2. The present study was designed to evaluate acute and repeated dose toxicity of
the methanol extract (ME) of the Gmelina arborea stem bark. ME of G.
arborea was found safe in acute and repeated dose toxicity studies when tested
in mice and rats. Kulkarni YA, Veeranjaneyulu A. Toxicological Evaluation of
the Methanol Extract of Gmelina arborea Roxb. Bark in Mice and Rats.
Toxicol Int. 2012 May; 19(2):125-31.

3. Phytochemical screening of stem bark and leaves of Gemelina arborea; sand
effect of aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Gemelina arborea stembark on
hepatic and renal insufficiency in rats was assessed in this study. Thus Gmelina
arborea extracts may have ameliorating effect on hepatic and renal
insufficiency caused by paracetamol and cipsplatin respectively, and any
inherent toxicity may be reduced or eliminated through adequate heat treatment.
Anthony OE, Mbuh AF, Emmanuel MP. Phytochemical screening, and
assessment of ameliorating effect of aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Gmelina
arborea on drug induced hepatic. and renal insufficiency in rats. Pak J. Pharm
SCi. 2012 Apr; 25(2):457-61.

4. The immunomodulatory effects of roots of Gmelina arborea Linn. were
investigated. The drug is found to be a potential immunostimulant. Shukla SH,

----- PAGE 243 -----
Gambhari 235

Saluja AK, Pandya SS. Modulating effect of Gmelina arborea Linn. On
immunosuppressed albino rats. Pharmacognosy Res. 2010 Nov; 2(6):359-63.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. ‘Name Indications

Botanical Name — Gmelina arborea Linn. Gmelina - Name of a scientist, arborea—
Tree like.

Family — Lamiaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Shothahara varga, Virechanopaga varga, Dahaprashamana varga
Sushruta Sarivadi gana, Bruhat panchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 14-18

Basonym of Drug
at weft fersretier
Gambhari is one of the fast growing trees.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. save -eareeeweety STATA
Gambhari commonly grows in Kashmir region.
Morphology
2. SIVA -cHTeTe WenTaTet Ste
Gambhari is very beautiful tree.
3. aguUff -srarfor wort: |
Leaves of Gambhari are beautiful.
4. sftauff-sftaPa wntsret: |

Gambhari has beautiful leaves.

----- PAGE 244 -----
236 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. TYME ~RTATHT |
Bark of Gambhari is very thick.
6. HOTA - THOU PTT: |
Leaf has got blackish petiole.
7. Wtatfguft cere: dhacare, |
Bark is yellowish in colour.
8. AHA -Helat HYATAM: |
Gambhari has very long inflorescence.
9. Qe - Mt Hee: |
Gambhari fruit is beautiful and wholesome.
10, Haw -HewHeTAg Here: |
The fruit of Gambhari resembles fruit of Katphala.
Properties and Actions
11, alae -araart 1
Gambhari alleviates Vata.
12. éhr-featfa aed aetafer a ek Taare

Gambhari has got rejuvenating qualities.
Regional Names

Habitat
Gambhari plant grows in hilly regions of South India and Himalayan regions.

Morphology ;
Habit — Moderate sized unarmed deciduous tree grows up to 50 ft. in height.

Bark — Grayish yellow, corky. Branch lets and young parts clothed with fine white
mealy pubescence.

Leaves — 10 to 20 cm long, 7.5 to 15 cm wide, broadly ovate, acuminate, entire,

----- PAGE 245 -----
Gambhari 237

glabrous above when mature, stellately fulvous tomen-
tose beneath, base is cordate, or sometimes truncate
and shortly cuneate. Petioles 5-7.5 cm long, cylindric,
puberulous glandular at the top.

Inflorescence — Densely fulyous-hairy panicle
reaching 30 cm long.

Flowers — Calyx is 5 mm long, broadly campaiiu-
Jate, densely fulvous-hairy, Petals are brownish yel- | #
low, densely hairy outside, up to 4 cm long, 5 lobed, 2 | #iGeeht
lipped upper lip rather more than 1 cm long, deeply | Wags
divided into 2 oblong, obtuse lobes, lower lip nearly
2.5 cm long, 3-lobed, middle lobe projecting forward,
ovate, subobtuse, wit irregularly crenulate margin.

Gmelina arborea, Roxb.

Fruit — Drupe, 2 to 2.5 cm long, ovoid or pyriform, smooth, orange-yellow when ripe.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characeteristics)

Market sample of root bark contains pieces of dry, corky root of various sizes, 2 mm
to 4 mm thickness. Outer surface is brownish yellow in colour, lenticillate, somewhat
warty with shallow longitudinal fissures. The bark more often exfoliates into scurfy flakes.
Inner surface is leathery, whitish in colour. On crushing, root bark becomes short pieces.
Root bark has faintly aromatic odour and sweet mucilaginous with bitter after taste.
Substitute

e For root Gmelina asatica linn.

e Fruit is a substitute for Draksha (Vitis vinifera)

Classical references

Synonyms
Tet agault a sttoulf, wezatoten | creat carga er carer: ctreteaatt
POG AYTA Aerpyrenrsee TU (AT. WeeMe TT. 14-15)

Properties and actions
careentt gat ferear erator wee We: Uetost ureht Rear fet wera It
SATS SHIM MTATATE STAT
acne Geut gel We chy ware | aaiirage wataqafaaseqd |
warguras Rt fart gamit ayaa, | eereeTearaceaftrrerterary I

(1.5. WSeane TT. 15-18)

----- PAGE 246 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

att edt rest ew centri hesreneffemrgemPrarat,

(afr, qeenfe af. 15)

attaoff aepaferent etafer qert ye: | chet arett tea Het wrergtrafere, 11
aeronrayenetfrraesarae | Tee Ayt vit free done aracry, I
ware wet Ure firarergraagy, | arcarfireret vem: whet feret fet Ze
Agua Fa Harare TAIT | Set YoRet chyet ext qaferrerze 1
SeMarrarTaeferrecmaterary | (a.F1. sitafererf 30-34)

aiyatt aeatfecer yoo aay” | fretaferrcrentsargemearatsrd.

(af. saat at 38)

aaa CHa eas Trea, | (AY, 25/35)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from the plant Gambhari
a. Kanda b. Pushpa c. Mulatwak and Phala d. Patra
Ans: c. Mula Twak and Phala
2. Pradhana Karma of Gambhari Mula
a. Shwasahara __b. Shothahara c. Dipana d. Jwarahara
Ans: b. Shothahara

_

3. Paste prepared from Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) and wheat flour is applied in
a. Vatarakta b. Kushtha c. Atisara d. Arshas
Ans: a. Vatarakta
4. Kashmaryadi shita Kashaya is specifically indicated in
a. Jwara b. Pittaja trishna cc. Kasa d. Swarabheda
Ans: b. Pittaja trishna
5. Botanical source of Gambhari
a. Tecoma undulata b. Picrorrhiza kurroa
c. Inula racemosa d. Gmelina arboroea
Ans: d. Gmelina arboroea
6. Shriparni is a synonym of
a. Ela b. Rasna c. Gambhari d. Kamala
Ans: c. Gambhari
7. Habit of Gambhari plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 247 -----
Gokshura

Useful parts— Mula (Root) and Phala (Fruits)
Rasadi panchaka

Phala Mula

Karma (Actions)

Shothahara, Mutrala, Bastishodhaka, Balya, Dipana, Vrashya, Ashmarihara,
Pramehahara, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Arshoghna, Hradya.

Note — Even though both types of Gokshura are having similar properties Brahat
Gokshura (bigger variety-pedalium murex) is said to be more potent (Raja nighantu).
Agrya karma

Metal PAH eH TTI | (FY, 25/40)

Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris Linn.) useful in Dysuria and pacify Vata.

Pharmacological Actions — Diuretic, Tonic, Aphrodisiac, Demulcent.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) — Mutrakracchra, Ashmari, Shotha,
Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa, Hradroga, Arshas, Shukra dourbalya.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

TridoshaShamaka (Mula) - Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka and Ushna virya,
Pitta shamaka because of Madhura rasa and Madhura vipaka, Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya.

Phala is Vatapitta Shmaka

Vatahara due to Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka. Pittahara due to Madhura
vipaka and Shita virya.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Mutrakriechra (Dysuria)
ween avccertteat ey MoMA | (FA, 2/22)

----- PAGE 248 -----
240 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gruel prepared from Shwadamshtra (Tribulus terrestris) and Kantakari (Solanum
xanthocarpum) is taken with jaggery relieves Mutrakricchra (Dysuria).

ayertarraarer: ferarerftrenetege: | argreet orepeaprttr ter tram erritcore 1
(WA. 2/2/109)
Kwatha (Decoction) of total plant of Goksura (Tribulus terrestris) is mixed with
sugar and honcy is given to drink. It alleviates Mutrakricchra (Dysuria).

2. Ashmari (Calculus)
Raveara dha aot wrayer | arferefttor aerermyatitet wor
(q.Fa. 7/19)
Curna (Powder) of Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris) mixed with honey and Aviksira
(Goat's milk) is given to drink for 7 days will break Ashmari (Calculus).
3. Keshavardhanartha (To promote hair growth)
maktergenit get a agafft 1 Brewed aa aya co
(W.F. 3/11/22)
Flowers of Goksura (Tribulus terrestris) and Tila (Sesamum indicum) are mixed

with equal quanity of honey and ghee, and then applied on scalp. This therapy promotes
hair-growth.

4. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis) & Katishula (Lumbago)
guetta sare: wre: wrahtafra: | aaa afeeet ore wa UI
(4.4. 25/9)
Kwatha (Decoction) of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Gokshura (Tribulus
terrestris) if taken in morning times regularly acts as digestant there by relieves Amavata
(Rhumatoid arthritis), Katishula (Lumbago) and Ruk (Pain).
Matra (Dosage)
Phala churna (Powder) —3 to6g
Kwatha (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml

Phytoconstitutents

Total plant contains Diosgenin, Gitogenin, Chlorogenic, Harmane, Harmine,
Kaemperal, Quercitin, Rutin, Steroidal glycosides (Trillin, diosgenin-D, gracillin, dioscin,
protodioscin), Saponin C & G, astragaline.

Fruits yielded flavonoid components like Kaempferol, Steroid sapogenins,
neotigogenin and hecogenin.

----- PAGE 249 -----
Gokshura 241

Roots afforded campesterol, (}-sitosterol and stigmasterol.

Research index

ls

ty

The present study is aimed at examining the antilithiatic potency of the protein
biomolecules of Tribulus terrestris, a plant which is a common constituent of
herbal marketed preparations to treat urolithiasis. Findings suggest that this
purified protein biomolecule from Tribulus terrestris could open new vista in
medical management of urolithiasis. Aggarwal A, Tandon S, Singla SK,
Tandon C. A novel antilithiatic protein from Tribulus terrestris having
cytoprotective potency. Protein Pept Lett. 2012 Aug; 19 (8) : 812-9.

. To Study the effect of acute and repeated dose administration of lyophilized

aqueous extract of the dried fruits of Tribulus terrestrisSLAET) on sexual
function in sexually sluggish male albino rats. Findings of the present study
validate the traditional use of 7. terrestris as a sexual enhancer in the
management of sexual dysfunction in males. Singh S, Nair V, Gupta YK.
Evaluation of the aphrodisiac activity of Tribulus terrestris Linn in sexually
sluggish male albino rats. J Pharmacol Pharmacother. 2012 Jan;3(1):43-7,

. The effect of oral exposure of Acetaminophen (500 mg/kg) in Oreochromis

mossambicus at 24-h duration was evaluated. The Tribulus terrestris fruit
extract (250 mg/kg) showed a remarkable hepatoprotective activity against
acetaminophen induced hepatotoxicity. Kavitha P, Ramesh R, Bupesh G,
Stalin A, Subramanian P. Hepato protective activity of Tribulus terrestris
extract against acetaminophen-induced toxicity in a freshwater fish
(Oreochromis mossambicus). In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2011. Dec;
47(10):698-706.

. Investigate the possible effects of Tribulus terrestris (TT) on endocrine

sensitive organs in intact and castrated male rats as well as in a postmenopausal
rat model using ovariectomized females. Tribulus terrestris was not able to
stimulate endocrine sensitive tissue such as the prostate, seminal vesicle, uterus
and vagina in Wistar rats, indicating lack of androgenic and estrogenic activity
in vivo. Martino-Andrade AJ, Morais RN, Spercoski KM, Rossi SC, Vechi
MF, Golin M, Lombardi NF, Greca CS, Dalsenter PR. Effects of Tribulus
terrestris on endocrine sensitive organs in male and female Wistar rats, J
Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Jan 8; 1 27(1)165-70. Epub 2009 Sep 23.

. Acetone extracts of leaves and seeds from the Tribulus terrestris

(Zygophyllaceae) were tested against mature and immature different mosquito
vectors under laboratory condition. It is confirmed from the LC5O values that

----- PAGE 250 -----
242 Dravyaguna Vijnana

the seed acetone extract of 7. terrestris is more effective compared to leaf
extracts. Singh SP, Raghavendra K, Singh RK, Mohanty SS, Dash AP,
Evaluation of Tribulus terrestris Linn (Zygophyllaceae) acetone extract for
larvicidal and repellence activity against mosquito vectors. J Commun Dis.
2008 Dec:40(4):255-61.

Yoga (Formulations)

Naine Indications
Gokshuradyavaleha Ashmari, Mutrakracchra
Gokshurabija churna Ashmari

Gokshura kwatha Mutraghata
Gokshuradi modaka Vajikaranartha
Shwadmshtradya ghrata Hradroga, Shula
Shwadamshtradi lepa Mutrakracchra

Botanical Name -— Tribulus terrestris Linn. Tribulus - having three sides, terrestris-
of the ground.

Family — Zygophyllaceae

Kula — Gokshura
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Mutra virechaniya varga, Shothahara varga, Krimighna varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta _ Vidarigandhadi gana, Viratarvadi gana, Laghu panchamula,
Kantakapanchamula

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 44-46

Basonym of Drug
Gokshura fruits injure the grazing cattle.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, SAYRE: At Aa: YETTA |
Goksura grows wild.
Morphology
2. ATZA:-ATA: Ya: |

----- PAGE 251 -----
sokshura 243

i nen illinois id clean tiglacee

Herbaceous plant with leaves resembling leaves of Canaka (Bengal gram).
3. Wepven:-Tat Hee: |
Fruits of Goksura have spines which pricks grazing cattle.
4. QteH:- Ar ga dtevrnveacang |
Goksura fruit bears sharp spines.
5, PAM - YA eda chan Hewat |
Fruit of Goksura has sharp spines resembling canines of dog.
6. PHS :- TA: HVSHT: HIST |
Goksura fruit bears three spines.
7. HUetHe:- Huctad HAA |
Goksura fruits have spines.
Properties and Actions
8. sarierc:- gata wetset |
Goksura has the similar odour to /ksu (Sugarcane).
9. Usama - Uct aie Hate eater Hucteacanrd |
The fruit of Goksura injures flesh because of its sharp spines.
10. TIGHUSH:- TeTHVeHATT |
Goksura has sweet taste.
11. eenve:-Huefeerastt wea: |

Even though fruit has spines the fruit is commonly used as medicines.

Regional Names

Tribulus terrestris Pedalium murex

Habitat
Gokshura grows commonly in sandy soil throughout India. Brahat gokshura is com-
mon in South India.

----- PAGE 252 -----
244 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pedalium murex (Pedaliaceae)

Habit — Glabrous annual herb.

Leaves — Opposite, petioled, irregularly toothed
or almost lobed.

Inforescence — Solitary axillary with two glands
at the base.

Flowers — Yellow coloured with small calyx, four
stamens are present.

Fruit —Indchiscent, hard, capsule, ovoid or pyra-
midal with four patent spines arising from the base.

Tribulus terrestris Linn. (Zygophyllaceae)

Habit — Prostrate herb. Stem — Slender, branched,
weak and creeping. ;

Leaf — Compound, sub-opposite, even-pinnate,
stipulate, leaflets in 4 or 5 pairs, pairs unequal, leaflets
oblong.

Flower — Actinomorphic, bisexual, pentamerous,
hypogynous and bright yellow, sepals are 5 and free.
Petals are 5, free and obovate. Androecium contains
two whorls of stamens 5 in each which are inserted at
the base of a disc. Stamens subtended by glandular
scales. Gynoecium is 2-5 carpellary, axile placentation
lobed ovary with simple style. Tribulus terrestris Linn.

Fruit — Schizocarp with 5 spinous cocci, each contain one seed, Schizocarp is 5
angled, cocci is woody, each with a pair of unequal spines.

Seed — Obliquely pendulous. One or more seed in each coccus.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample of Goksura root contains slender, tortuous, gradually tapering roots,
12 to 20cm long and upto 1 cm in diameter at the thickest part, external surface is yellow-
ish brown in colour, slightly wrinkled longitudinally with prominent root scars, the crown
of the root, more often, and bears a number of horizontally spreading proteins of stem.

----- PAGE 253 -----
Gokshura 45

Transverscly cut portion of the root shows a yellowish surface, surrounded by a loosely
adhering bark, followed by a cortical zone of light colour and a central woody portion
showing distinct concentric rings. On breaking root becomes short pieces and powdery.
Has faint agreeable odour and swectish astringent taste.

Fruit — Fruits are five ribbed or lobed, more or less spherical with flattened apex and
dome-shaped base, upto 1 cm in diameter. Each of the lobes of the fruit is studded with
four sharp and rigid spines. Surface of the fruit is hard, villous and greenish yellow in
colour. The fruit contains several small seeds in a number of transversely separated com-
partments. Fruit has faint agreeable odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
Tigre: arent earbreanve: Calgaes: | Wenveat Mayet GST Feaee
USM VERT ST TMT CMaaeraar i (AMA TCAMe Th 44-45)
Properties and actions
Tat: vite: wrgdepattrster: 1 weet deat qea: yfecereatter: |
wearer Pesearrarage Ul (ASEM Th 45-46)
(aft. yeeate at 103)
Tat wet get deat aegBed | vttet aftrarcet ctesatraar |
CATA H ASLAM: (HAM. stale af 69-70)
erage weateat Bsitacit aermeh cit wept at seit |
ereanrattetreawet aad at Feqyvirat: i
(aft. wareefe TT 43)
MAA F Yet gM araaraey, | aenet vilaet Mg Aes FS PACH II
(BAr. eeireenfe TT 45)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from the plant Gokshura
. Patra b. Mula & Phala c. Sara d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula & Phala

2. Pradhana Karma of Gokshura
a. Varnya b. Nidrakara c. Mutrala d. Medhya

Ans: c. Mutrala

po

----- PAGE 254 -----
. Mutrakrichra Anila haranam is the Agrya Karma refers to

Dravyaguna Vijnana

a, Gmbhari b. Chitraka c. Dhanvayasa d. Gokshura
Ans: d. Gokshura

. Gruel prepared from Shwadamshtra (Tribulus terrestris) and Kantakari

(Solanum xanthocarpum) is taken with jaggery
a, Atisara b. Mutrakracchra_c. Arshas d. Shotha

Ans: b. Mutrakracchra

. Gokshuradi Modaka is best

a, Rasayana b. Vajikara Shothahara d. Kasahara
Ans: b. Vajikara

. Botanical source of Laghu Gokshura

a. Acorus calamus b. Cyperus rotundus
c. Tribulus terrestris d. Commiphora mukul
Ans: c. Tribulus terrestris

. Botanical source of Brahat Gokshura

a. Bergenia ligulata b. Dioscorea bulbifera
c. Tribulus terrestris d. Pedalium murex

Ans: d. Pedalium murex

. Shwadamshtra and Trikantaka are synonyms of

a. Gokshura b. Agaru c. Kantakari d. Khadira
Ans: a. Gokshura

----- PAGE 255 -----
Chapter

Guduchi

Useful part - Kaanda (Stem).

Rasadi panchaka

Tikta kashaya
Guru, Snigdha

Karma (Actions)

Jwarahara, Rasayana, Sangrahi, Dipana, Amahara, Trashnahara, Dahahara,
Pramehaghna, Kasahara, Kusnthaghna, Balya, Krmighna, Chardighna, Arshoghna,
Medhya, Hradya, Chakshushya, Vayasthapana.

Kanda Guduchi — Jwarahara, Vishaghni, Bhutagni, Valipalitanashini
Agrya Karma
STAT Aion arrearage oN TM AT AIM | (F.-Y, 25/40)

Amruta (Tinospora cordifolia Miers.) is Astringent, Pacify Vata, Appetizer, Pacify
Kapha, Pacify Rakta and useful in Vibandha.

Pharmaclogical (Actions)
Antipyretic, Alterative, Diuretic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.
Pittahara due to Madhura vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Indications)

Jwara, Vatarakta, Prameha, Kushtha, Agnimandya, Trishna, Daha, Kasa, Krimi,
Chardi, Arshas, Netravikara, Hradroga.

Note — Guduchi is one of the best Medhya dravya mentioned by Charaka.
Amayika-Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Jwara (Fever)

TH vittenarst at Tee: ata Ft (YS. 39/170)

----- PAGE 256 -----
248 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Decoction prepared from Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) when it is cooled to be
administered.

2. Vataja Jwara (Fever because of Vata)

ararat HaeaTY Maret arswATA: | (31.4.F4. 1/70)

In case of fever originated from Véita, Juice of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) is very
useful.

3. Vatarakta (Gout)

qekagemat vet marta at 1 fet ayeerttat amg,

(a. fa. 29/121)

The Taila (oil) processed with Guduci kwatha (Decoction) and milk will alleviate
Vata rakta (Gout).

4, Amlapitta (Hyper acidity)

froitpertraceterast aitsitad tirararacy |

arent abet carerttrt aererfereteTayS WITT (ATH. FA. 10/16)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from leaves of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) Nimba
(Azadirachta indica) and Patola (Tricosanthes dioica) is taken with honey cures severe
Amlapitta (Hyper acidity).

5. Prameha (Diabetes)

TET Th SCAM A TATA TR AT | (3.3. FA. 12/6)

Juice of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) taken with honey cures all types of Prameha.
6. Trsna (Thirst)

MTA ASMA Aa TM Sled | (AP. 22/45)

Syurp prepared from Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) is beneficial in all kinds of Trsna
(Thirst).

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction)  -—50to 100 ml

Churna (Powder) -lto3g
Satva -0.5 to2g
Phytoconstituents

Total plant contains tinosporide, cordifolide, unosporin, tinosporon, tinosporic acid,
cordifol, heptacosanol B-sitosterol and tinosporidine.

----- PAGE 257 -----
Guduchi JA9

Leaves yielded octacosanol, J-sitosterol, heptacosanol and cardifolone, magnoflorine
& tembetarine.

Research index

1. To evaluate the effect of aqueous extract of stem of Tinospora cordifolia (TC)
on hyperalgesia in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats and invitro aldose
reductase inhibition. Tinospora cordifolia prevents the hyperalgesia in
experimental diabetic neuropathy. It has an aldose reductase inhibitory activity
in-vitro which may contribute to the beneficial effects. Nadig PD, Revankar
RR, Dethe SM, Narayanswamy SB, Aliyar MA. Effect of Tinospora cordifolia
on experimental diabetic neuropathy. Indian J Pharmacol. 2012 Sep; 44(Q580-
3. dok 10.4103/0253-7613.10038CO

2. The aim of the study was to isolate and characterise the immunomodulatory
active compounds of Tinospora cordifolia. Chromatographic purification of
these fraction led to the isolation of a mixture of two compounds 2, 3 isolated
for the first time from natural source and five known compounds 1, 4-7 which
were characterized as 11-hydroxyrmus takone (2 N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (3),
N-formylannonain (1), cordifolioside A (4), magnoflorine (5), tinocordiside (6),
syringin (7) by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry
(MS) and comparing the spectral data with reported one. Cordifolioside A and
syringin have been reported to possess immunomodulatory activity. Other five
compounds showed significant enhancement in phagocytic activity and
increase in nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species generation at concentration
0.1-2.5 ?g/ml, Sharma U, Bala M, Kumar N, Singh B, Munshi RK, Bhalerao
S. Immunomodulatory active compounds from Tinospora cordifolia. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 14;141 (3) 918-26. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

3. Immunomodulatory activity of Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) was tried. The
confirmation of an immunomodulatory protein in guduchi stem showing
lymphoproliferative and macro phage-activating properties reinforces the
rationale of the use of guduchi preparations in several Ayurvedic medicines for
immunomodulation. Aranha 1, Clement F, Venkatesh YP. Immunostimulatory
properties of the major protein from the stem of the Ayurvedic medicinal herb,
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia). J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jan 31;139(2) 366-
72. Epub 2011 Nov 20.

4. This study assess the antioxidant capacity of Tinospora cordifolia stem
methanol extract in daily oral administration of 500 mg/kg of body weight for
40 days in alloxan induced diabetic rats. After treatment of methanol Tinospora

----- PAGE 258 -----
250 Dravyaguna Vijnana

cordifolia stem extract brings back to normal (P<0.01) in the erythrocytes
membrane and liver cell enzymes activities. Sivakumar V, Rajan MS,
Antioxidant Effect of Tinospora cordifolia Extract in Alloxaninduced Diabetic
Rats. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2010 Nov;72(6):795-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo.

Name Indications

Guduchyadi kwatha
Guduchi ghrata Vatarakta, Kushtha

a

Guduchyadi Modaka Prameha, Raktapitta

0. Kaishora Guggulu Vatarakta, Kushtha

Botanical name — Tinospora cordifolia, Miers.

Tinospora - Plant stitches like a bow with the curved seeds.
cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves and cordate base.
Family — Menispermaceae.
Kula -— Guduchi
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Traptighna varga, Stanyashodhana varga, Dahaprashamana varga,
snehopaga varga, Trashnanigrahana varga, Sandhaniya varga,
Vayasthapana varga

Sushruta Guduchyadi gana, Patoladi gana, Aragwadhadi gana, Kakolyadi gana,
Vallipancha mula

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 6-10

Basonym of Drug

Tyefer verter Teer ste |

Guduchi protect from diseases.

----- PAGE 259 -----
Guduchi 251

Synonyms
Habitat
1, HUSA - HVSTERANSM: |
Guduci can be propagated with stem.
2. ayaarert - a fae aatset: |
If planted, Guduci never dic.
3. fosmet ~ fora wet ga: trae
When cut Guduci grows again.
Morphology
4. Husett - Huseranr at |
Guduci ascends a supporting plant in a circular way.
5, WuSet -quserartr aelarT |
Guduci climbs up the supporting plant in a circular manner.
6. TeAcHT -WsaTAHNT, FART A |
The stem of Guduci resembles a rope.
7. waft - HTSesS TAT eT She |
When cut transversely the stem shows circular structure.
8. Ayu - weyaRMa Hs ToT: |
When crushed, leaves give viscid juice like that of honey.
9. WRT - AAT Basta AM: |
The seed is semi lunar shaped.
Properties and Actions

10. Sat - saydag Worearftatt = |
Guduci is very useful drug and possess the qualities like that of nectar.
11. Taree - tartare |
Guduci has rejuvenating quality.
12. Gard - sfteradife varercare |
Guduci protects the life because of its Rasayana (Rejuvenating) property.
13. Gee - aera age fear, areata: |

Guduci promotes longivity.

----- PAGE 260 -----
252 Dravyaguna Vijnana

14, Tact - sat fares, |

Guduci is very efficacious drug in fever,
15. fagrear - fered were: |

Guduci protects by removing toxins.
16. Qt - SATaMT |

Guduci_ gives strength like that of Soma.
17. arate - acta |

Leaves of Guduci is liked by Calves.

Regional Names

Habit

Guduchi grows throughout India and commonly
cultivated owing to excessive demand.

Morphology

A large glabrous climber with succulent, corky
and grooved stems. Branches sending down slender
pendulous fleshy roots, terete, striate, with tubercled,
pale, sometimes shining or glaucous bark.

Leaves - Membranous, 5-10 cm long, roundish
or sub deltoid, cordate with a broad sinus and large
basal lobes, obtuse or more or less cuspidate, 7-9
nerved, reticulately veined with microscopic glisten-
ing glands beneath; petiole is 2.5 cm to 7 cm long.

Tinospora cordifolia Meirs

Inflorescence - Laxed Raceme, 5 cm long, elongating and often longer than the
leaves, axillary, terminal or from the old wood.

Flowers
Male flowers — Clustered in the axils of small subulate bracts. Sepals are 6 in num-

----- PAGE 261 -----
Guduchi 253

ber. Outer three are small, ovate-oblong, acute and inner three are larger, membranous,
broadly elliptical, concave, 3-4 mm, yellow in colour. Petals are 6 in number, equal about
2 mm long, broadly spathulate, cach loosely embracing a stamen when young. Female
flowers usually solitary, similar to male, but sepals are green, margins not reflexed
staminodes short and linear. Carpels | to 3 widely seperated on the short fleshy gyno-
phore, dorsally convex, ventrally flat or nearly so,

Fruit — Red on ripening, size of a large pea.

Seeds — Broadly ellipsoid with a slender dorsal ridge and a ventral depression, slightly
muricate.

Varieties (D.N.)
1. Padmaguduchi

2. Kanda guduchi (Tinospora sinensis)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characetristics):

Market sample consists transversely cut pieces of dry, cylindrical, soft wooded stem,
5 mm to 2.5 cm in diameter. Outer surface is grayish brown to almost black in colour,
longitudinally wrinkled and warty and covered with raised lenticels the bark peels of in
then papery flakes. Transversely cut surface of the stem shows a soft pale yellow or dirty
white surface with marked wedge shaped structure brought about by radiating medullary
rays. On breaking stem is fibrous stem is not having any particular odour but has very
bitter taste.

Species

1. Tinospora crispa 2. Tinospora sinensis

3. Tinospora malabarica 4. Tinospora tomentosa
Classical references
Synonyms

Tget ayouff enaqasyracet | frat foavet foataat aeerett w u
fart afar att araect a Hose | cencterftren efter fagrean Tt TAT

asErM aaa a Aust Sakray. PATH 6-9)

Properties and Actions
Tse ween ferent Margurenr Tare | dase aerate creat Aras
AAMC SH UGA | ATCT B ATTA aT UI
Wagar: Pepearaa gy | (AL. TeAMerT 8-10)

----- PAGE 262 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

nn

TSVATAwAvEr dear ferent Hot wer i eegeMIgarrapoeretaaratsrd_ 1
Tee amare feria 1 creer auger

(afr. Temafert 5-7)
wraygett-
are Use a mewn afore | freed sere acetates
(aft. Weemert g)

get wer wre Hare eet TY: | ferret Hote ger accion ares
augepieotagareanvga: | SRMaMeMegeMea Tae
fratwet tag vet aa dud wy aaa: wat Beane

(FA. aitafeert 9-17)
FA Yoel qeourdteat frat Hara TATA T
er qoarakteHaMAASaTy AAT = I
ardigat Teet a ager afar | fared sanyredt actor 1
(af. yeeafert 17-18)

geht g we fercer Bot ae Tare | sat AS area araeeh WETAT I
Rrencarstt tareraarsclerasaratstrary | caret We U8 aeatlet Fs aha Mt
(B.A. rocane at 18-19)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Main useful part of Guduchi
a. Root b. Stem c. Fruit d. Flower
Ans: b. Stem
2. Pradhana Rasa of Guduchi
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Tikta d. Katu
Ans; c. Tikta
3. Vipaka of Guduchi
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: a. Madhura
4, Shrita Shita Kashaya of Guduchi is indiacted in
a. Kasa b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Jwara

Ans: d. Jwara

_

----- PAGE 263 -----
ames

Guduchi 255
nr ndtasiniasi sets sigaansasatmansscsiiosonoene

. The Taila (oil) processed with Guduchi kwatha (Decoction) and milk will

alleviate
a. Granthi b. Vatarakta

c. Netraroga d. Shwasa
Ans: b. Vatarakta

. Tinosporide a chemical constituent is present in

a. Ativisha b.Shatavari
Ans: d. Guduchi

c. Brahmi d, Guduchi

. Amratarishta is indicated in

a. Shwasa b. Sarvajwara c. Vaivarnya d. Kasa
Ans: b. Sarvajwara

. Botanical name of Guduchi

a. Haridra b. Guggulu c. Guduchi d, Varuna
Ans: c. Guduchi

. Chakralakshanika and Chandrahasa are the synonyms of

a. Gokshura b. Katuki c. Karpura d. Guduchi
Ans: d. Guduchi

----- PAGE 264 -----
Chapter

Guggulu

Useful parts — Niryasa (Gum resin)
Rasadi panchaka

Tikta Katu Madhura Kashaya

Tikshna, Sara, Sukshma, Snigdha, Laghu, Vishada

Karma (Actions)

Medohara, Amavatahara, Pramehahara, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Vrashya, Swarya,
Rasayana, Dipana, Balya, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Shophahara, Arshoghna, Krmihara,
Varnya, Brahmana.

Nava Guggulu Karma (Actions of fresh Guggulu)

Brahmana, Vrashya

Properties and Actions of Nava & Purana Guggulu

Nava Guggulu. (Fresh) Purana Guggulu (Old)

Varna (Colour) Bright yellow (Kanchana)

or Dark brown (Pakwa
jambu phala)

Gandha (odour) | Sugandha (Pleasant) Durgandha (Offensive)
Guna (Qualities) | Snigdha (Unctuous) Picchila Shushka

Karma (Actions) | Brahmana (Vrashya)

Note— Guggulu older than 5 yrs is considered as Purana Guggulu.

Yellowish brown (Tyakta
Prakrati varna)

Properties and actions of different types of Guggulu

1. Gandharaja (Kana) Guggulu — Katu Rasa, Ushna virya, Shulahara, Rasayana,
Vatahara.

2. Bhinya guggulu — Tikta katu Rasa, Ushna virya, Vatahara, Medhya.
Agrya Karma
Harry WATT: (3.ZS. 40)

----- PAGE 265 -----
Guggulu 257

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) is best in diseases of Vata and Meda dhatu (Obe-
sity).
Doshakarma (Action of Dasha)

TridoshaShamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Pittahara due to Tikta
madhurakashaya rasa and Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tiktakatu

kashaya rasa.
Note — Because of Madhura rasa vatahara, Kasaya rasa pittahara & Tikta rasa
kaphara.
Rogaghnata (Indications)
Medo roga, Amavata, Prameha, Bhagna, Vrana, Kushtha, Shopha, Arsha, Krmi &
Vatavyadhi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)
TAM waar wed | vera wgaisered weer Weyer
(AFA. 28/241)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) taken with milk is very useful as a Rasayana in all
kinds of Vatavyadhi.
2. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)
rat vitor weet eet Prteray| (He Fe. 21/47)
Regular usage of Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) with cow’s urine is beneficial in
Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis).
3. Shotha (Oedema)
Wye ar eT, etterent ar 1 (37.8. Fa. 19/3)

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) or Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) mixed with urine
to be administered in case of Shotha (Oedema)

4. Vatarakta (Gout)

fremarg water payers 1 (aFa. 29/159)
Regular usage of Guggulu (Commiphora mukul), Shilajatu (Bitumen) and honey
will cure Vatarakta (Gout).

5. Urustambha

Wrat yayet ster ui (ga. 5/35)

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) with cow’s urine is a best remedy for Usrutambha.

----- PAGE 266 -----
258 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Sthoulya (Obesity)

THT UT: TTT NT: 1 rem warrar arfrrerat fer: 1

(H.Z.Y. 14/23)

Rasanjana, Mahat panchamula (Bilva - Aegle marmelos, Agnimantha -
Clerodendron phlomides, Shyonaka - Oroxylum indicum, Patala - Sterospermum
suaveolens & Gambhari - Gmelina arborea), Guggulu (Commiphora mukul), Shilajatu
(Bitumen) & Agnimantha rasa (Juice of Premna intergrifolia) taken regularly is benefi-
cial in Sthoulya (Obesity).
Matra (Dosage)

Niryasa (Gumresin) - 0.5 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Gum resin of Guggulu contains steroidal constituents like Z-guggulusterone, E-
Guggulusterone, Guggulusterols I, II, II, IV & V, Diterpene alcohol, Myrecene,
Dimyrcene, Polymyrcene, Myricyl alocohol, B-sitosterol, 15 amino acids like Cystine,
Histidine, Lysine, Arginine, Aspartic acid, Serine, Gultamic acid, Threonine, Alanine,
Proline, Tyrosine, Tryptophan, Valine, Leucine and Isoleucine.

Research index

1. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the effect of ethanol extract of
Commiphora mukul gum resin (CMEE) on blood glucose, plasma insulin, lipid
profiles, reduced glutathione, lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation and
enzymatic antioxidants like superoxide dismutase, catalase, giutathiane
reductase, glutathiane peroxidase, glutathione-S-transferase in fructoseinduced
type-2 diabetic rats. CMEE has the ability to improve insulin sensitivity and
delay the development of insulin resistance, aggravate antioxidant status in
diabetic rats and may be used as an adjuvant therapy for patients with insulin
resistance. Ramesh B, Saralakumari D. Antihypergiycemic, hypolipidemic and
antioxidant activities of ethanafic extract of Commiphora mukul gum resin in
fructose-fed male 1 Nistar rats. J Physiol Biachem. 2012 May 13.

2. Present study was undertaken to evaluate cardio-protective potential: of
COmmiphora mukul against isoprenaline-induced myocardial necrosis in rats. It
is concluded that Commiphora mukul may be a potential preventive and
therapeutic agent against the oxidative stress associated ischemic heart disease
owing to antioxidant and antiperoxidative activity. Ojha S, Bhatia J, Arora S,
Golechha M, Kumari S, Arya DS. Card ioprotective effects of Commiphora
mukul against isaprenaline induced cardiotaxicity: a biochemical and histo-
pathologicaf evaluation. J Environ Biol. 2011 Nov; 32(6):731-8.

----- PAGE 267 -----
Guggulu 259

3. Oleo gum resin extracted by incision of the bark is a very complex mixture of
gum, minerals, essential oils, terpenes, sterols, ferrulates, flavananes and
sterones. Its active constituents, the Z- and E-guggulsterones, have been
demonstrated to exhibit their biological activities by binding to nuclear
receptors and modulating the expression of proteins involved in carcinogenic
activities. Shah R, Gulati V, Palombo EA. Pharmacological properties of
gugguisterones, the major active components of gum guggul. Phytother Res.
2012 Nov;26(11):1594-605. doi: 10.1002Iptr.4647. Epub 2012 Mar 3.

4. High fat diet induced diabetic rodent models resembling type 11 diabetic
conditions in human population were used to assess the anti-diabetic and
hypolipidemic activity of guggulsterone (isolated fram COmmiphora mukul
resin). The results presented here suggest that the gugqulsterone has both
hypoglycemic and hypofipidemic effect which can help to cure type i! diabetes.
Sharma B, Sa4unke R, Srivastava S, Majumder C, Roy P. Effects of
guggulsterone isolated from Commiphora mukul in high fat diet induced
diabetic rats. Food Chem Taxicol. 2009 4ct;47(10):2631-9. Epub 2009 Jul 25.

5. In the present study effects of the combination of XN + C’,S an 3T3-L1
adipacyte apoptasis and adipagenesis were investigated. Combination of XN
and G5 is more patent in exerting anti-obesity effects than additive effects of
the individual compounds. Rayafam S, Yang JY, Deila-Fera MA, Park HJ,
Ambati S, Baibe CA. Anti-obesity effects of xanthohumoi plus guggulsterone
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J Med Food. 2009 Aug;12(4):846-53.

Yoga (Formulations)

SINo.: Name Indications

Gokshuradi Guggulu Prameha, Mitrakracchra
Kanchanara Guggulu Gandamala, Arbuda
Kaishora Guggulu Vatarakta, Pramehapidaka

Trayodashanga Guggulu Gradhrasi, Katigraha
Mahayoggaraja Guggulu Vatavyadhi, Kushtha

Shotha, Arsha, Bhagandara

----- PAGE 268 -----
260 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name - Commiphora mukul Hook ex. Stocks. Balsamodendron mukul,
Hook.
Commiphora — phore=bearer, mukul - Arabic name

Family— Burseraceae.
Kula — Guggulu
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Sanjnasthapana varga
Sushruta Eladi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 32-45
Basonym of Drug
TS oaenfster Tarathe
Guggulu protects the body by curing many diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Gt:- Great aaa |
Guggulu mainly grows in dry mountain regions.
2. WBdvea - HSA WTAAA: |
Guggulu plant grows in dry regions.
Morphology
3. Bae - wpaceratentata: |
Gum-resin exudes from the cavities.
4. GPNLATHY - PATS LATTA BTA: |
Gum-resin of Guggulu exudes from pot shaped cavities.
5. alte: ~ HUST: |
Guggulu exudes gum-resin from its cavities.
6. AAMT A:- ASTAAAL TTA HMTAT: |
Gum-resin of Guggulu has reddish black colour like that of Buffalo’s eye.
7. wurbrate: - Hore Prabaset |
Gum-resin of Guggulu has particles.
8. aerate: pret: HT Praarses |

----- PAGE 269 -----
Guggulu 261

Gum-resin of Guggulu is blackish in colour.
Properties and Actions
9. Wt: - frafey ste:

Guggulu is regarded as best among Nirydsa (Gum-resin).

10. Wage: - vet Att wale feaha, wleagferad: |
Guggulu reduces obesity.

11, Taller - tari gether, reef got wee: |
Guggulu is very good antimicrobial hence used for fumigation.

12, Saye agra aware: |

Guggulu is also used in incense sticks to worship.

Regional Names

English Indian bedellium

Habitat

Guggulu plant commonly grows in dry and arid
regions and it is cultivated extensively because of huge
demand. Found in arid and rocky tracks of Rajasthan,
Deccan, Bellary & Mysore.

Morphology

Shrubby, 4 to 6 ft. high. Young parts glandular-
pubescent; branches knotty and crooked, divaricate, usu-
ally ending in a sharp spine.

Leaves — 1 to 3 foliate, leaflets sub sessile, the ter-
minal leaf let is large, 2 cm long and 1 cm wide, rhom-
boid or ovate shaped, serrate, toothed in upper part,
smooth, shining, the lateral leaflets when present less
than half the size of the terminal ones.

. . . Commiphora mukul
Flowers — Seen in fascicles of 2-3 with very short Hook ex stocks

----- PAGE 270 -----
262 Dravyaguna Vijnana

pedicels. Calyx is companulate, glandular and hairy. Petals are brownish red, broadly
linear, nearly thrice the length of the calyx, reflexed at the apex. Stamens are 8 to 10 in
number, alternately long and short, half the length of the petals. Ovary is oblong-ovoid,

Fruit - Drupe, when ripe becomes red; 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid, epicarp is 4-
valved.
Seeds — Small, Nuts, Ovoid, Splitting into two.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 5 types
1. Mahishaksha - Black in colour
2. Mahanila - Blue in colour
3. Kumuda - White in colour
4, Padma - Brown in colour
5. Hiranyaksha - Yellow in colour
Bh.Pr.Ni — 2 types
1. Nava Guggulu
2. Purana Guggulu
R.Ni. - 1. Gandharaja Guggulu | Kana Guggulu
2. Bhumija Guggulu

Commercial varieties
1. IGrade — Consists of translucent Guggulu free from bark and sand.
2. JiGrade — Dull coloured Guggulu mixed with bark and sand.
3. JGrade - Mostinferior quality, Collected from ground and mixed with

lot of extraneous matters.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of Market Sample)

Market sample of gum resin is translucent vermicular or stalactitic tears of varying
sizes, reddish yellow or brown in colour, more often occurring in resinous lumps which
turn darker in colour on long storage. On breaking become pieces with a rough waxy
surface having a moist unctuous appearance. Having balsamic aromatic odour with bitter

taste.
Toxicology
LD50 of Essential oil —- 750 mg/kg I.P. Sometimes there might be burning in stom-
ach, itching and urticarial rashes on skin after its use.
Treatment— Stop using for two days.
Saffron is an antidote

----- PAGE 271 -----
263

Guggulu Shodhana

Physical impurities like sand, stone, leaf ctc. are first removed from crude drug,
crushed into small pieces, Then taken in a pottali and boiled in liquids and one among
Gomutra (Cow’s urine), Triphala Kwatha, Vasapatra swarasa, Vasa patra Kashaya,
Nirgundi patra swarasa or Godugdha (Milk). Swedana (Boiling) is carried out till all
pass into the fluid through cloth. The residue left in the Pottali is to be discarded. The fluid
is filtered and boiled till it forms a mass. This mass is dried under sun and pounded with a
pestle in a stone mortar, adding a little quantity of ghee till it becomes waxy.
Prashasta Guggulu (Qualities of Genunine Guggulu)

1. Atapaiste vitiyanti becomes liquified when exposed to Sunlight.

2. Kshiptagnou jwalanti-Burns well when put on fire.

3. Should be Snigdha, Mradu (Soft), Picchila, Sugandha (Good smell), Pitabha

(Yellowish tinged).
4. Mrat Sikata rahita (Devoid of mud and sand).

Atimatra prayoga (Excessive usage) of Guggulu
Without precaution if Guggulu used in excess it may lead to-

e Klaviya (Impotency) e Asya Shosha (Dryness in mouth)
e Timira (Progressive cataract) e Karshya (Lean)
e Moha (Giddiness) e Atisara (Diarrhoea)

Contraindications during Guggulu usage
1 Amla & Tikshna —Sour and strong foods.
2 Ajirna - Food that causes indigestion.
3 Vyavaya, Shrama, Atapa - Avoid excessive sex, Strenous exercise and walking
in hot Sunlight.
4 Madya - Alcoholic preparations
5 Rosha - Psychological upsets like anger.

Adulteration .
Main adultrants of Guggulu available in Market were the gums of olants such as—
e Albizia lebbeck e Acacia senegal
e Acacia arabica e Boswellia serrata
e Morninga oleifera

Note — Guggulu is listed among endangered plants.

----- PAGE 272 -----
264 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Collections

Schizogonous ducts in the bark become enlarged by braking down of the surround-
ings cells to form large lysigenous cavities in which a granular oleo-gum-resin collects,
When the bark is wounded, the secretion exudes and changes in the air from a yellowish-
white fluid to a reddish brown hard mass. The greater part of the gum resin exudes spon-
taneously through natural fissures.

Tapping

The best tapping period for gum resin has been recognised from the middle of De-
cember to the end of February. The plants of 7 yrs age group are suitable for tapping the
gum resin. The contractors are to use solution prepared in sulphuric acid for complete
extraction of gum-resin.

The incision of 0.8 to 1.5 cm deep is made on the main trunk and thick branches after
dipping the knife in the solution of the angle of 600 the yellow fragrant liquid starts
coming out just after incision for hours depending upon the plant. The liquid solidifies in
the due course of time and the same is collected after a day or two. This collected gum
resin is sold in the market as Guggulu. Since the plant is an important source of Guggulu
gum over the past few years this species has been extensively tapped in rajasthan and
Gujarat and the trees were noticed to be progressively drying.

Classical references
Synonyms
Wyqeayas weg: Hire: Ue: | Pritepacts setter ufsarar: aes: |
(1.5. Bee TT 32)
Types, characters & their utility
afearant Werte: gaye: war seafe | feror: warat Fat WAYe: Tar wa:
ygrmaatesy ufearer sft wie: | weriicreg faga: TaATTaAcTAMT: I
HAS: PSA: Aer Mafra haw: STATS SATA: Tar fer
ste ne wh fo | gart ys: Wat aware wt
fasta agent aaa: unentfia: | parferaieeratsr wa: aafargurafr
(aa. Hue GT 34-37)
Properties and Actions
Ie feterattent cftaton: fret: Ae: | HAT: HES: UT He Balt MY: UE: Ul
MTIAHS FA: Yer: Tae Tare: ates: foes sea: HATTA:
Adhiteen amis acteenaredry | freamPasiharsitwsaetrehtear |

----- PAGE 273 -----
- Guggulu 265
myaheeadterd waracaree firerer 1 frencara anf yyy: aelaraer i
(a1.5. Hate at 38-41)

TAP TT TOOTS Toa : 1
Bal Foot ger: Yeates: | eer: HBT: Te: 11
et Ta: wie: BaPekeg fafa: | ypent gierasa eremamspferater: 1
Gere: og faaat yryepeietaSta: (ary. Hae Pf 42-44)
Contraindications during Guggulu usage
aTet dtenrasituigg Sarars srraraay | wet Te astern Tore yeaa: I
(a1.5. ayate Ti 45)
Tay: fase: wien: efter: Heraary laud: eral org: Gent wat artacraphag
(aff. aeate BT 117)
waurafagter: Raven: Faratet: Geet: | wet Garctatet wel TT: AAT: |
aad Perens: HATA: FATS: TAA, | AAS alt Wer Herts es
aihsrat Hye: Vall ANT atch: VA: | Aeareorag att HaTAcared ra I
fragranced yng: wadlaet | Hom: vittrars a veratirs a fist:
arated car Fat TT: VT Tar | PTE HUTA: Heh: He: Il
Ureaeal oy: Wer: Staten: acetates: Hoare GET: AeA TA:
wR eat seu farrrcots | Aehteen aaa VrSsATTTSH:
frsaractartnrnttarsasatrpaiy 1 (A. sitet 1412-1420)
PRs:
(dF. attain 1420-1421)
ING: wefernter: panacea, | Hftardtancteyinyitet Tara: 1
(a. wae af 105)
BITS: Heo: BATA: | YENCAA AUAET TA:
(aA. aaa &T 107)
gira Tyg:
mnTyfratach: HELO: HUA, | SAT TEA He: TAT: eT Ul
(aA, aaafert 109)

----- PAGE 274 -----
206 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tnpehernancar safer: arcrareepe, | arreates rosaren wonfeg a we
Qualities of Genuine Guggulu
arreattrest Perched farmrarralh serertrenht 1 (25.Fr. sitaftrert 1412)

Adverse effects of excessive usage of Guggulu

arrearage aod fetes rary | Rrearenvivafeficnre aera
(fir.fa. etree TF 80)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Guggulu
a. Kanda b. Niryasa c. Mula d, Phala
Ans: b. Niryasa
2. Pradhana Karma of Guggulu
a. Medohara b. Jwarahara c. Arshoghna d. Medhya
Ans: a. Medohara
3. Pradhana Karma of Purana Guggulu
a. Dipana b. Bhedana c. Lekhana d. Sramsana
Ans: c. Lekhana
4. Medo anila hara is the Agrya Karma attributed to
a. Kalamegha b. Bala c. Jiraka d. Guggulu
Ans: d. Guggulu
5. Gokshuradi Guggulu is specifically indicated
a. Jwara b. Vatarakta c. Mutrakracchra d. Galaganda

—

Ans: c. Mutra kracchra

6. Kanchanara Guggulu specifically indicated in
a. Galaganda b. Vatarakta c. Jwara d. Mutrakracchra
Ans: a. Galaganda

7. Kaishora Guggulu is specifically indicated in
a. Jwara b. Vatarakta c. Mutrakracchra d. Galaganda
Ans: b. Vatarakta

8. Triphala Guggulu is specifically indicated
a. Bhagandara _—b. Mutrakracchra c. Galaganda d. Vatarakta
Ans: a. Bhagandara

----- PAGE 275 -----
Guggulu 267

9. Laksha Guggulu is specifically indicated in

13.

14.

15.

a. Mutrakracchra_ b. Vatarakta
Ans: c. Asthibhagna

a. Vatarakta b. Amavata
Ans: b. Amavata

. Botanical name of Gugulu

a. Cedrus deodara
c. Glycyrrhiza glabra
Ans: d. Commiphora mukul

. Mahishaksha is a synonym of

a. Hingu b. Guggulu
Ans: b. Guggulu

Pura is a synonym of

a. Shankhapushpi b. Kumkuma
Ans: c. Guggulu

Habit of Guggulu is

a. Tree b. Herb
Ans: d. Shrub

c. Asthibhagna d. Bhagandara

. Simhanada Guggulu is specifically indicated

c. Bhagandara — d.. Arshas

b. Embelia ribes
d. Commiphora mukul

c. Vasa d. Shallaki

c. Guggulu d. Kiratatikta

c. Creeper d. Shrub

Types of Guggulu as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 4 b. 5
Ans: b. 5

c. 6 d. 7

----- PAGE 276 -----
Haridra

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)

Varnya, Twachya, Pramehahara, Shothahara, Vranahara, Kandughna, Vishaghna,
Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Shitapittahara.

Amragandhi Haridra
Kandughna
Vana Haridra
Kushthaghna & Vataraktanashaka.
Phamacological Actions
Hepatoprotective, Antiallergic, Immunostimulant, Anticancer, Antitumor,
Antihyperlipidimic, Antioxidant and Antimicrobial.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pittaharais due to Tikta rasa and Kapha nashaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta katu rasa.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
j. Prameha (Diabetes)
ath gramaar oftat frag weATeTatHeAAMT | (AFH. 6/26)

Powder of Haridra (Curcuma longa) is taken with honey or Haridra (Curcuma
longa) and Amalaki (Phyllanthes emblica) mixed in equal quantity and administered will
be beneficial in Prameha (Diabetes).

2. Dadru Kushtha (Ring worm infestation)
wet ystgret aor fies: | ated scfiug eta aga fasted: u
(ars.fa. 45/14)

----- PAGE 277 -----
Haridra 269

Rajani (Curcuma longa) powder is taken with Cow’s urine and Jaggery cures
Dadrukushtha (Ring worm infestation) and even Shlipada (Filariasis).

3. Vatarakta (Gout)
ehtargass aaret wear wepeipery | fete ar Bremerrereret areca apcaTher II
(.9.f4. 29/79)

Kwatha of Haridra (Curcuma longa) and Amrta (Tinospora cordifolia) is taken
with honey in case of Kapha dominant Vatarakta.

4. Kaphaja Trishna (Thirst due to Kapha dosha)

wet frag ta at fetes attache | (3.8. 14/5)

In case of Kaphaja trishna (Thirst) one has to take water processed with Rajani
(Curcuma longa) mixed with honey and sugar.

5. Panduroga (Anaemia)

fata eftat Breenaat ar i aftteysar | (8.3.44/17)

Haridra (Curcuma longa) Churna (Powder) is mixed with Triphala (Amalaki,
Haritaki & Vibhitaki) added with ghee and honey cures Panduroga (Anaemia).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 2to4g

Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml

Kashaya (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Rhizome of Curcuma longa contains 5% volatile oil, Resin, abundant zingeberaceous
starch grains and yellow colouring substances known as curcuminoids. Chief component
of curcuminoids is known as curcumin (50-60%).

Volatile oil contains mono and sesquiterpenes such as and 1i-pinene, -phellandrene,
camphor, camphene, zingiberene and curcumenes.

Research index
1. This study reports the induction of cellular senescence of human colon cancer
cells HCT1 16 upon curcumin treatment. Study demonstrated a new antitumor
activity of curcumin leading to cancer cell senescence and revealed the
presence of a functional link between senescence and autophagy in curcumin-
treated cells. Mosieniak G, Adamowicz M, Alster 0, Jaskowiak H,
Szczepankiewicz AA, Wilczynski GM, Ciechomska IA, Sikora E. Curcumin

----- PAGE 278 -----
270

Dravyaguna Vijnana

induces permanent growth arrest of human colon cancer cells: link between
senescence and autophagy. Mech Ageing Dev. 2012 Jun; 133(6):444-55, doi:
10,1016/j.mad, 2012.05,004. Epub 2012 May 18,

2 To explore the therapcutic potential of turmeric for epilepsy further, we
analyzed its anticonvulsant activity in a larval zebrafish seizure assay.
Researchers presented the first report of the anticonvulsant properties of
bisabolene sesquiterpenoids and provide evidence which warrants further
investigation toward the mechanistic understanding of their neuromodulatory
activity. Orellana-Paucar AM et all. Anticonvulsant activity of bisabolene
sesquiterpenoids of Curcuma longa in zebrafish and mouse seizure models.
Epilepsy Behav. 2012 May;24(1):14-22. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

3 In the present study, curcumin was observed to contain a high level of
polyphenols and strong antioxidant activity. Then, the antihyperglycemic effect
of curcumin was examined for various signaling pathways using C(2)C(12)
mouse myoblast cells. Results indicate that curcumin can promote AMPK
activation and glucose uptake with increased insulin sensitivity in muscle cells
as a potential anti-diabetic therapeutic agent. Kang C, Kim E. Synergistic effect
of curcumin and insulin on muscle cell glucose metabolism, Food Chem
Toxicol. 2010 Aug-Sep;48(8-9)2366-73. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

4 In the present study, reseacrhers investigated the effects of chronic
unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) and curcumin on behaviours and
serotonergic receptor-cou pled AC-cAMP signal pathway in rats. These results
suggested that the potent antidepressant property of curcumin might be
attributed to its improvement of AC-cAMP pathway as well as CREB via
suppressing central 5-HT(1A/1B/7) receptors in the CUMS rats. Li YC, Wang
FM, Pan Y, Qiang LQ, Cheng G, Zhang WY, Kong LD. Antidepressant-like
effects of curcumin on serotonergic receptor-coupled AC-cAMP pathway in
chronic unpredictable mild stress of rats. Prog Neuropsycho-pharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2009 Apr 30;33(3)A35-49. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

5 The purpose of the present study was to investigate the preventive effects of
curcumin against acute pancreatitis (AP) induced by caerulein in Mouse and to
elucidate possible mechanism of curcurmin action. Curcurmin significantly
decreased the pancreas injury and reversed the elevation of serum amylase,
ALT and AST activities. Yu VVG, Xu G, Ren GJ, Xu X, Yuan HQ, Qi XL,
Tian KL. Preventive action of curcumin in experimental acute pancreatitis in
mouse. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov; 134(5):717-24.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Haridra 271

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Haridra khanda Shitapitta, Kandu

Haridradi kwatha Kaphajwara

Haridra churna Shwasa

Haridradi lepa Arshas

Haridradi varti Timira, Naktandya

Haridradya ghrata Kamala, Panduu

Botanial Name — Curcuma longa Linn.
Curcuma - Arabic name-Kurkum, longa - long.
Family— Zingiberaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula - Haridra
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka — Kushthaghna varga, Vishaghna varga, Lekhaniya varga
Sushruta _Haridradi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi varga 196-197
Basonym of Drug
Haridra is yellow coloured.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Utar-teauterar, that gear a |
Rhizome of Haridra is yellow and even flowers are also yellow coloured.
2. wat-cautant |
Haridra rhizome is yellow like that of gold.
3. fremen-femerticatearattetaect |
Turmeric is also known by names like Nisa, Rajani etc. owing to its yellow
coloured rhizome.

Properties and Actions

4. spftreat - gfrtart |

Haridra is efficacious anthelmintic drug.

----- PAGE 280 -----
272 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Peet - wikeatt fervtitor were |
Haridra is very potent antidiabetic drug.
6. orator - ae: det auitsem: |
Haridra is having attractive bright yellow colour.
7. Tart - taraft cenit centers ward: |
Haridra imparts colour to the cloth hence used for colouring.
8. aut ferenftrtt - aot fererrerate wargarcttfr
Haridra is one of the popular cosmetic.
9. ferorestt - Feoreercftter |
Haridra is effective antidote for poison.
10. 4 faentet - egareut fercrrererter srrererettfer |
aridra gives good look to the shops where it is sold.
11, Stftraftren-athtrairer eftort fire, searchers Wettsercare, |

Haridra is a best cosmetic substance liked by ladies.

Regional Names

Hindi Haldi

Habitat
Turmeric is cultivated extensively all over India
as acommerical crop.

Morphology
A tall herb root stock large, ovoid, with sessile,
cylindric tubers orange-coloured inside.

Leaves — Very large, in tufts up to 1.2 meter or
longer, including the petiole which is about as long
as the blade, oblong lanceolate, tapering to the base.

Inflorescence — Spike, 10-15 cm long, peduncle

Curcuma longa Linn.

----- PAGE 281 -----
Haridra 273

15 em or more, concealed by the sheating pertiole. Flowering bracts pale green, bracts of
coma tinged with pink.

Flowers — Pale yellow as long as bracts, Corolla tube has funnel shaped upper half
which is pinkish white.

Types
Bh.Pr.Ni. ~ 1, Haridra 2. Amraharidra 3, Vanaharidra 4, Daruharidra

Dathana = |. Pinda haridra 2. Daruharidra

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Rhizome of occurs in two forms: long turmeric consisting of lateral branches of the
rhizome and round turmeric which is the primary rhizome. The long turmeric is cylindri-
cal in shape, upto 7 cm long and 1.5 em broad and have a yellowish brown external
surface with small round root scars. The round turmeric is ovate, oblong or conical in
shape, 4 to 8 cm in length and 2 to 3 cm in diameter. Transversely cut portion of both the
forms shows a waxy surface of deep orange colour, having a central cylinder twice as
broad as the cortex. Ithas characteristic aromatic odour and bitter taste.

Curing of Haridra (Turmeric)

Fresh turmeric is cured for obtaining dry turmeric, The fingers are separated from
mother rhizomes. Mother rhizomes are usually kept as seed material. Curing involves
boiling of fresh rhizomes in water and drying in the sun. In traditional method of curing,
the cleaned rhizomes are boiled in water just enough to immerse them. Boiling is stopped
when froth comes out.

Shodhana-Samskara (Purification and Processing)

Ina vessel Bijapiira rasa and Kanji is taken and 10 g of lime is added then rhizomes
of Haridra (Curcuma longa) is immersed. Vessel is kept on fire and heated in a low flame
till the liquid gets dried. Then in a dolayantra Tila taila (Sesam oil) 150 ml and Gandhodaka
is filled and Swedana is done. Everyday oil should be changed. By this Haridra becomes
bright yellow and gets purified.

Drying

The cooked fingers are dried in the Sun by spreading them in 5-7 cm thick layers on
Bamboo mats or drying floor. A thinner layer is not desirable, as the colour of the dried
product may be adversely affected. During night time, the rhizomes should be heaped or
covered with material which provides aeration. It may take 10-15 days for the rhizomes to
become completely dry. Artificial drying, using cross-flow hot air at a maximum tempera-
ture of 600C also gives a satisfactory product. In the case of sliced turmeric, artificial

----- PAGE 282 -----
‘74 Dravyaguna Vijnana

drying has clear advantages in giving brighter colored product than sun drying which
tends to under go surface bleaching. The yield of the dry product varies from 10-30%
depending upon the variety and the location where the crop is grown and white fumes
appear giving out a typical odour. The boiling should last for 40-60 minutes when the
rhizomes turn soft. The stage at which boiling is stopped largely influences the colour and
aroma of the final product. Over cooking spoils the colour of the final product while
under-cooking renders the dried product brittle.

Scientific method

The cleaned fingers (Approximately 50 kg) are taken in a perforated through of 0.9
m x 0.5 m x 0.4 m size made of GI or MS sheet with extended paralled handle. The
perforated trough containing the finger is then immersed in a pan; 100 liters of water is
poured into the trough so as to immerse the turmeric fingers. The whole mass is boiled till
the fingers become soft. The cooked fingers are taken out of the pan by lifting the trough
and draining the water into the pan.

Polishing

Dried turmeric has a poor appearance and a rough dull outer surface with scales and
root bits. The appearance is improved by smoothening and polishing the outer surface by
manual or mechanical rubbing.

Manual polishing consists of rubbing the dried turmeric fingers on a hard surface.
The improved method is by using a hand operated barrel or drum mounted on a central
axis, the sides of which are made of expanded metal mesh. When the drum filled with
turmeric is rotated, polishing is effected by abrasion of the surface against the mesh as
well as by mutual rubbing against each other as they roll inside the drum. Turmeric is also
polished in power operated drums. The yield of polished turmeric from the raw material
varies from 15-25%.

Classical references
Synonyms

afta aaraat tat Proms swe arate | aaftrett geret arfirferar esteem 1
(a5. Rites TT 196)

Properties and Actions

aftar meen ferent waitor Haftrge | aval waraleterst MATT SATTTTNT
(ara. eae eT 197)

----- PAGE 283 -----
Haridra 275

areas after:

arene ear ar ar gitar areren wer 1 fireearepe ferent actanrgferifordt 1
(ony, wtterrate at 199)

anette:

BRUGES: PSATATT ATTA: 1 (AT. wlkraenfe at 200)

ght wad feat Sato faateqd | HusHeaorata eeautfeenfestt 1

fastert after traraterartrt | (ef. Weert 55-56)

fren frat Hear avator arate | cogaroredttecarare ferrets.

(b.F. arafeert 1115)

aft agra awareHsad | teaver eta eeavtferenfet
(aA. frorerafert 199)
aaratordtal etestattrst carat Verarateterrerrary | (A.A. mergeafeat 170)
HIRE
atatehtaracat ear fared Waeet eae, | STAT HEAT UF eR: FeraATAAT AeT
(B.A. margeneat 170)
attr ge
TAA Uergu Waa UBecieh | ya: Eade aeeded waa |
TRIM Yee Ves Tet we fated: (AL. aTTenfPafeaca 447)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Haridra
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Patra d. Phala
Ans: b. Kanda
2. Pradhana Karma of Haridra
a. Jwaraghna b. Kasahara c. Varnya d. Atisaraghna
Ans: c. Varnya
3. Combination of Nisha and Amalaki is indicated in
a. Kasa b. Kushtha c. Shotha d., Prameha
Ans: d. Prameha

—

----- PAGE 284 -----
276

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Haridra Khanda is specifically indicated in

a. Shitapitta b. Netra roga c. Jwara d. Atisara
Ans: a, shitapitta

. Botanical name of Haridra

a, Curcuma zedoria b. Curcuma longa
c. Andrographis paniculata d. Piper longum
Ans: b. Curcuma longa

. Hattavilasini and Vyoshati priya are the synonyms of

a. Kumkuma b. Manjishta c. Haridra d. Lodhra
Ans: c. Haridra

. Habit of Haridra

a. Shrub b. Creeper c. Tree d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

. Types of Haridra as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 4 c. 5 d. 7
Ans: b. 4

----- PAGE 285 -----
Haritaki

Useful part — Phaia (Fruits),
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Rasayana, Medhya, Caksushya, Brhmana, Anulomana, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Pramehahara, Arsoghna, Kushthagna, Shothahara, Krimighna, Vibandhahara,
Trishnanigraha, Chardighna, Kandughna, Hradya, Shulahara, Lekhana, Dipana,
Pachana, Vayasthapaka, Smritiprada, Jwarahara, Vranahara.

Agrya Karma

Bttaent Wea | (FF. 25/40)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula Linn.) is highly conducive.

Pharmacological Actions

Antimicrobial, Antifungal, Antibacterial, Antistress, Antispasmodic, Hypotensive,
Hypolipidemic, Anthelmintic, Purgative, Cytoprotective, Cardiotonic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka, Pitta
Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka owing to

Ushna virya and Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Indications)
Vibandha, Shwasa, Kasa, Prameha, Arshas, Kushttha, Netraroga, Shotha, Krimi,

Chardi, Shula, Agnimandya & as a Rasayana.

1. Parinama sila (Duodenal ulcer)

Myst Padget warade ar etterenty | (H1..FE. 30/51)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery and sugar relieves Parinama shula.

----- PAGE 286 -----
278 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Vatavyadhi (Disorder of Viita)

wvat pfrererer eat yprayet firteterery, | (31.aFa. 21/41)

Regular usage of Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) with cow’s urine cures Vatavyadhi.
(Disorders of Vara).

3. Atisweda (Excessive sweating)
etaat g after meyadier: | war ert wei Betas II
(ar.y.Fa. 39/75)

Paste of Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) is anointed on the body, then taken bath, will
check Atishweda (Excessive perspiration).

4. Vibandha (Constipation)

TSA at TSA aT avatar: | (aA. 12/27)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery relieves Vibaddha varca (Consti-
pation).
5. Chardi (Vomiting)

foray aes ars | (af. 20/21)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) powder taken with honey will check Chardi (Vomit-
ing).
6. Arshas (Piles)
Treghrat cere AST at attranhy | elrant agar Braet at watsrag
(a.Fa. 14/67)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) is kept in Cow’s urine then mixed with jaggery if
taken cures Arshas (Piles).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 1g (Rasayanartha)

Churna (Powder) — 6g (Shodhanartha)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 30to50ml
Phytoconstituents

Chebulic myrobalan is an important source for Tannin. It contains upto 32% of
Tannin (Hydrolysable) and on hydrolysis yield chebulic acid and d-galloyl glucose. Other
constituents include chebulagic acid, chebulinic acid, gallic acid, sorbitol, ethyl gallate,
punicalagin terflavin A, Terchebin.

----- PAGE 287 -----
Research Index

|

w

3

4

5

a Haritaki 279
mae

a a

Chebulic acid was Selected, as tannj
antidiabetic, renoprotective ‘tte )
inhibitor, Objective: The study c
ischemia reperfusion induced bio

ns from Terminalia chebula are used as
xidant, hypotensive and a-glucosidase
valuated the effect of chebulic acid on

+ rags chemical alteration in diabetic rats. The
statistical dat : ion in diabetic
. data indicated that chebulic acid at both doses (25 and 50 mg/kg)

improves bi ics .

a at N eee, alterations caused by renal ischemia in diabetic rats.

Einelnint ‘ in cave Chebulic acid attenuates ischemia reperfusion induced
cal alteration in diabetic rats, Pharm Biol. 2012 Sep 10.

~ present study has evaluated the healin g effects of extract of dried fruit pulp
e Terminalia chebula (TCE) on acetic acid (AA)-induced colitis in rats. TCE
indicated the Presence of active Principles with proven antioxidants, anti-
inflammatory, immunomodulatory, and free radical scavenging and healing
properties. Thus, TCE seemed to be safe and effective in healing experimental
colitis. Gautam MK, Goel S, Ghatule RR, Singh A, Nath G, Goel RK.
Curative effect of Terminalia chebula extract on acetic acid-induced

experimental colitis: role of antioxidants, free radicals and acute inflammatory
marker. Inflammo-pharmacology. 2012 Sep 7.

In the present study, we firstly compared rat intestinal a-glucosidase inhibitory
activity by different ethanol-aqueous extractions from the dried fruits of
Terminalia chebula Retz. The results presented here suggest that chebulagic
acid from T. chebula can be used to control blood glucose and manage type
2 diabetes, although clinical trials are needed. Huang YN, Zhao DD, Gao B,
Zhong K, Zhu RX, Zhang Y, Xie WJ, Jia LR, Gao H. Anti-Hyperglycemic
Effect of Chebulagic Acid from the Fruits of Terminalia chebula Retz. Int J
Mal Sci. 2012;13(5):6320-33. Epub 2012 May 22.

Terminalia chebula fruit extracts were prepared sequentially with hexane, ethyl
acetate, methanol and methanol-water (70:30) and tested for their ?-glucosidase
inhibitory and antioxidant potential. The results indicated the ‘possibility of
using the extract as a nutraceutical health supplement in the management of
type 2 diabetes. Sasidharan I, Sundaresan A, Nisha VM, Kirishna MS, Raghu
KG, Jayamurthy P. Inhibitory effect of Terminalia chebula Retz. fruit extracts
on digestive enzyme related to diabetes and oxidative stress. J Enzyme inhib
Med Chem. 2012 Aug;27(4):578-86. Epub 2012 Apr. 18.

The objective of this study is to explore the optimal extraction and purification
technology (OEPT) of tannins, while studying the use of this drug in the
treatment of a cutaneous wound of rat as well as its antibacterial effects. The
results suggest that tannin extracts from dried immature fruits of Terminalia

----- PAGE 288 -----
280 Dravyaguna Vijnana

chebula Fructus Retz, can promote cutaneous wound healing in rats, probably
resulting from a powerful anti-bacterial and angiogenic activity of the extracts.
Li K, Diao Y, Zhang H, Wang S, Zhang Z, Yu B, Huang S, Yang H. Tannin
extracts from immature fruits of Terminalia chebula Fructus Retz. promote
cutaneous wound healing in rats. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2011 Oct
7;11:86.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Haritakyadi kwatha Vibandha, Mutrakracchra
Haritaki khanda AshtavidhaShula, Amlapitta

SI.No.

;

; ;

[6 Vator Gugguli
;
ra
Ls]

Chitraka Haritaki Gulma, Udavarta
Agastya Harta
Habitat

Haritaki tree is found all over India especially in forests of North India, Central
provinces and South India.
Bhavamishra has given habitat for individual varieties of Haritaki.

Arochaka, Udararoga

Name/Type | Distribution

Vijaya Vindhya mountain
Chetaki Himalayan region
Sindhu region

1 Tv

----- PAGE 289 -----
Haritaki

Morphology

Moderate to large sized deciduous tree, attaining height
upto 90 ft, youngest leaves, branchlets and leaf buds have
soft, shining, generally rust coloured hairs.

Leaves — 7 to 20 cm long and 4 to 8 cm wide, gla-
brous or nearly so when mature, not clustered, distant, al-
ternate or subopposite, elliptic-oblong, acute, rounded or
cordate at base, penninerved, secondary nerves 6-8 pairs,
arching, prominent, petioles are 2 to 5 cm long, pubescent
usually with two glands near the top.

Inflorescence — Spikes sometimes simple, usually in
short panicles, terminal and in the axils of the uppermost
leaves.

Flowers — All hermaphrodite, 4 mm, across, sessile, dull white or yellow with an
offensive smell. Bracts are exceeding the flowers, subulate or lanceolate, hairy, conspicu-
ous, among the buds but soon deciduous. Calyx is campanulate, 3 mm long, flat at the
base expanding a little towards the mouth, glabrous outside, hairy within.

Fruit - Pendulous drupe, 2-4 cm long, ellipsoid or obovoid from a broad base,
glabrous, more or less 5-ribbed, when dry becomes yellowish green.

Seed — Oblong, bony, very thick and obscurely angled.

Bark — Bark is 6 mm thick, dark brown with many generally shallow vertical cracks.

Wood — Wood is very hard, brownish grey, with a greenish or yellowish tinge, with
an irregular small dark purple heartwood, close grained.

Botanical Name — Terminalia chebula Retz.

Terminalia —Proceeding from the extremity at the end.

chebula — Distorted form of the world Kabul.

Family— Combretaceae.

Kula - Haritaki
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Kasaharavarga, Virechanopaga varga, Arshoghna varga,
Vayasthapana varga, Kushthaghna varga, Jwarahara varga,
Prajasthapana varga, Hikkanigrahana varga

Sushruta Amalakyadi gana, Mushkakadi gana, Vachadi gana, Parushakadi
gana, Mustadi gana, Triphala

Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 6-35

Terminalia chebula Retz.

----- PAGE 290 -----
282

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
wafer were, center gate sorely weragren aaatsitarectter
Haritaki evacuates Mala (Impurity) and cures the diseases.
BRET AY HAM, BALeTT Rae: | ee Tel Tis ce: Ger Beret

Haritaki is very auspicious drug which cures all the diseases.

Synonyms
Habitat

‘lly

drach - erate aguerarat ATT |

Haritaki is commonly growing in Himalaya.

Properties and Actions

2

11.

AMAT - TAS cael VaATSM: Tareas SarPeraferreren care |

Consuming Haritaki rejuvenates the body and wards off fear for diseases.

_ SAAT - ata Herero, Tareas refer wheres |

Haritaki has rejuvenation quality and protects from old age disorders.

. sate - aterat

Haritaki is efficacious drug and never fails in showing action for the purpose
it is used.

_ HTM - AAT Yet Wat at: F AAT HAAN: , YET WHATS |

Vyatha means pain, Haritaki relieves pain.

. area - ae: weahtaseran, auifarcratt | art arava tarrercitter,

aeaearetcre: |

Haritaki promotes health and postpones old age.

. Beteat - cererter Fert watererchtter |

Haritaki sharpens the mind.

. Sart - taxt gow arate, careerentcae, | STEER TATERT |

Haritaki brings back normalcy and promotes strength.

, teat - ofa: atten Rar, weatsater at, Aa: aerate:

Haritaki is very much conducive to the channels and never harm mind and
body.

_yRAt ~ yet ged ali

Haritaki is cleansing the body.

Tat - ear Veet; carers aftorey emer Teeter at |

----- PAGE 291 -----
Haritaki 283

13.

16.

Haritaki has healing power and nourishes the tissues because of its
rejuvenating qualitics.

. aan - aaa Rar aaeareticash: |

Haritaki promotes longevity.
fersrar - fargteor yetrederat srefer Tomer

Haritaki over comes the diseases from its root.

. UT - USAT TAT BET: |

Haritaki has five rasa (Tastes).

. Seat - atferrere |

Haritaki is best and auspicious drug.

Brat - Hea |

Haritaki always does well to the person who consumes it.

Regional Names

SI-No.

Harad

Alalekayi

Bheda/Type. --Lakshana (Characters) Prayoga (Utility)

Chebulic myrobalan

Alabu vratta(oval) Sarva roga (all diseases)
Vratta(Round) Vranaropaka (Wound healing

Mamsala (bulky) Shodhanartha (for purification

Pancharekha (Five lines Akshiroga (Eye diseases)
Swarnavarna (Yellow Sarvarogahara (Useful in all dis
coloured) eases)

Trirekha (Three lines over} Churnartha (For preparaing
it) powder)

Asthimati Sukshma (Small__| Pralepanartha (for external ap
but with large seed) plication)

----- PAGE 292 -----
284 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note :— Chetaki is again of two types Shukla and Krashna, Shukla is six Angula
long and Krashna is of one Angula long.

Kaiyyadeva Nighantu: 3 types
1. Niraja 2. Vanaja 3. Parvatiya

Bh.Pr.Ni-— 1. Vijaya - Victorious
2. Rohini - Regenerating and healing
3. Putana - Scantifying
4, Amruta - Nector like
5. Abhaya - Conferring (Fearlessness from diseases)
6. Jivanti - Life giving
7. Chetaki - Animating, stimuiating

Market varieties—

1. Small — Stone less

2. Yellow — Having stones but immature

3. Big — Fully matured

Various species—

1. Terminalia citrina 2. Terminalia angustifolia

3. Terminalia gangetica 4. Terminalia tomentosa

Pancharasa Sthana (Sites of 5 tastes)

1 Madhura Majja Fruit pulp

2 Amla Snayu Fibrous part

3 Tikta Vranta Base of fruit

4 Katu Twaca Outer skin

5 Kashaya Asthi Seed

Prashasta Haritaki (Qualities of Best Haritaki)

1. Nava (New)

2. Snigdha (Unctuous)

3. Ghana (Hard)

4. Vratta (Round)

5. Gurvi (With weight)

6. Ambasi nimejjasa (Sinks in water)

Ae)

. Dwikarsha (Weighing 22 gm) — Double the weight of Vibhitaki.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):
Two types of fruits are available in the trade. Large sized fruit and small sized fruit.

----- PAGE 293 -----
Haritaki 285

Large sized fruits consisting of semi-mature fruits which are upto 8 cm long and 2.5
cm in diameter at the thickest part. These are oblong, ovoid or club shaped, with a longi-
tudinally wrinkled surface of greenish yellow or golden brown colour, having five ribs
running from apex to the base. The fruit contains a single stony seed or light yellow
colour.

The small sized variety of young immature fruits are upto 2.5 cm long and 8 mm
broad at the thickest part, Ovoid or often dorsally compressed with a longitudinally wrinkled
surface and dark brown to black colour. It doesn’t have any odour and has astringent
taste.

Ritu Haritaki

To achieve Rasayana karma one has to consume Haritaki with different Anupana

(Vehicle) in different Ritu (Season). This is a unique concept in Ayurveda.

Ritu (Season) Anupana (Vehicle)
Varsha (Rainy season) Saindhava lavana (Rock salt)
Shunt Ginge

Shisira (Late winter) Kana (Long pepper)
Madhu (Honey)

Dosha Haratwa Anupana
Kaphahara Saindhava lavana (Rock salt)
Vatahara Ghrata (Ghee)

Haritaki Bhakshananarha (Contraindications)

1. Adhwatikhinna — Tired of walking

2. Balavarjita — Weak

3. Ruksha — One, who has dryness in his/her body
4. Krasha — Lean

5.Langhnakarshita - Tired of observing fasting

6. Pittadhikya — Excessive aggravation of Pitta

7. Garbhavati — Pregnant

----- PAGE 294 -----
286 Dravyaguna Vijnana

8. Vimukta raktata ~ One who underwent blood letting.

Haritaki Prayoga Bhedena Phalabheda
1. Charvita — Chewed and swallowed increases Agni.

. Peshita (Powder) — When triturated acts as Malashodhaka (Purifies faeces).

. Swinna — When boiled acts as Sangrahi (Astringent).

. Bhrishta — When fried acts as Tridosha Shamaka (Counters Triodosha).

. Sahabhojana - When taken with food, it Unmilini buddhi, Bala, Indriyanam
(Improves intellect, Strength and functions of sense organs) Nirmulini, Pitta
kaphanilan. (Passifies Tridosha), Visramsini mutra, Shakranmalanam
(Evacuates faeces and acts as diuretic).

6. Pashchat bhojana — Annapanakratandoshan vatapitta, Kaphodbhavan Harati

(Alleviates the diseases occured because of improper food and also alleviates
Triodosha).

ne Ww Ye

Classical references

Synonyms
UAT UAT HALT YAS AT | Saar ale cheat sere fear
aera faster aft sfaeht Ceuta au (ay. erate wt 6-7)

Types, Origin and Characters

fasrar Oat Ser year aes aT | Ser erat Vela Te: ATTA:

feet fase arate KArearat TAT

ferret care Taft Pera stat fears

TOTALS HAT ST TAT BS TTR hterchtfer ater Prafeeer wet WAT FA:

AAUTTA PISA THT AT Aah Sy TASHA HAA AAAS TAT

URE Ghat sash cautahott | rear erent gar ara:
(a3. Siaeae FT 8-10)

Utility of Seven types of Haritaki
fase uditty tut aontot | wet yaar ater wereisget feat U
aifaittsaat gre stat aattrert, | eotsh ehtaat gre Taga Wasa
Sreteat fafa TAT POT eT ATA: STATA YS HOM ARTA STAT
RACKATEHTAM cial Vea | ibaa PASAT Ua Aeakesar
arairerearaquaded af am: 1 fed mearmed ugqufapie: i

----- PAGE 295 -----
He ari aki 287

Sire ye ret arathaths aft: Laetigite teg erento r
TAT THAN GMAT eae | Stat wea great feet qeaherrect i
(ain. aflrarate at 11-18)

Properties and Actions
Siva TSMIseaIT Gat TEL | Realtor dot tear wargurent Tart
aya cesT Gault arqeifiet 1 areemreawtert: qyeviaterse

wet rat | wurarrens frat aera i
aqht: frensteret argef Pratseat | sated mh: areal sears ea: I
ata ate Fares ertterperaetan (ars. Areas FF 19-26)
HUTA T eer ferret Teyana | shet TTAT Tea rears fereahStar
aretararasragaret ft weer | ah BAHASA AAS AAT UI
woe cet weet Heat Vasa Ter | AepEAUTeofeeiaraest ea, |
aragemt get APs were 1 dadorratigrnt aha aticet

(oF. Weeaeat 203-206)

war frau Waray Gakiener | TgUHcagen wate seat wy:
datos uret tear aererzarost UAT

eae eae a eat inet cee eee oe

wmareraecared fret ght Aietent | esa ETAT AMAT: TAA:

USHA: PHAM TAT: | TAS MATRA ATTAIN TS: Ul
(fr. asf at 222-229)

iret waar Bram | eters wet free doar

fire arr eeett ar 1 aghoenet gait

amiteraaadaregat Aa | eft vers uegs dead ara
(B.A. aaeeneat 3-5)

----- PAGE 296 -----
288 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sites of 5 tastes

Weare ASAT Cag: ATT orate: | PrafereneaeHSLLATAT TH:
(ais. aternfect 27)

Qualities of best Haritaki
warhtaren wat gary freer a arse 1 Pras ware wt afresh WoT
aararaed aders fratar 1 gira: wert get TeeETEAM I
(a3. sterate aT 28-29)
Properties of Haritaki in different forms
after aaah after werent | Rar danfeoht wear yer wire fraterye.
sahtert ghgactrant Pritt fray |
fret qatar etitent SI AEM II
TAMAS AAS, eich ara ArHeaaR arfetar

wate ats ea fet eat Berke | gat ara TreyStPaar
(a3. Rite at 30-33)

Ritu Haritaki
Reparhuguetnmeys: HAT | aatfesrsra wivet TareRTOT TTT
(15. Brae TT 34)
Contraindications

sreatfahtaat aeratsitar Bart: Ht cyt HAMA |
firatttrent stadt at art ferret ease A Gree Ut (ATT. Shirai at 3 5)
Unsuitable Haritaki
WRTET caTereant Weiss feria: | Het a erat Prat askirg etry
(df. siete +234)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Haritaki
a. Patra b. Mula c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala

2. Rasa which is absent in Haritaki
a. Madhura b. Lavana c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Lavana

----- PAGE 297 -----
10.

11.

12.

Haritaki
. Pradhana rasa of Haritaki
a. Lavana b. Madhura c. Katu
Ans: d. Kashaya
. Haritaki is best
a. Visha vardhaka b. Rasayana c. Vrashya

Ans: b. Rasayana

. Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery relieves

a. Vibaddha varcha b. Jwara c. Kasa
Ans: a. Vibaddha Varcha

. Agastya Haritaki is indicated

a. Atisara b. Kushtha c. Bhagna
Ans: d. Shwasa

. Vijaya variety of Haritaki is growing in

289

d, Kashaya

d. Vishahara

d. Shotha

d. Shwasa

a. Himalaya region b. Vindhya region c. Champa regiond. Sindhu

region
Ans: b. Vindhya region

. Botanical Name of Haritaki

a. Terminalia belerica b. Terminalia arjuna
c. Terminalia chebula_ d. Curcuma longa
Ans: c. Terminalia chebula

. Pathya is the synonym of

a. Amalaki b. Vibhitaki c. Arjuna
Ans: d. Haritaki

Abhaya is the synonym of

a. Vibhitaki b. Haritaki c. Amalaki
Ans: b. Haritaki

Types of Haritaki as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 5 b. 6 c.7

Ans: ¢.7

Variety of Haritaki having Mamsala (bulky) lakshana
a. A. Putana b. Amrata c. Abhaya

Ans: b. Amrata

d. Haritaki

d. Arjuna

d. 4

d. Chetaki

----- PAGE 298 -----
290 Dravyaguna Vijnana

13. In Varsha rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a, Sharkara b. Pippali c. Saindhava lavana d. Shunthi
Ans: ¢c. Saindhaya Layana

14. In Sharad Rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a. Pippali b. Saindhavalavana c. Guda d, Sharkara
Ans: d. Sharkara

15. In Hemanta Rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Guda c. Sharkara d. Pippali
Ans: a. Shunthi

16. In Shishira Rutu Haritaki is to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Pippali c. Saindhava Lavana d. Guda
Ans: b. Pippali

17. In Vasanta Rutu the Haritaki to be taken with
a. Guda b. Shunthi c. Pippali d. Madhu
Ans: d. Madhu

18. In Grishma Rutu the Haritaki is to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Guda c. Madhu d. Pippali
Ans : b. Guda

19. Swinna Haritaki is
a. Agni Dipaka b. Mala shodhka c. Sangrahi d. Tridosha hara
Ans: c. Sangrahi

20. Charvita Haritaki is

a. Mala shodhaka b. Agni dipaka c. Tridosha hara d. Sangrahi
Ans: b. Agni Dipaka

----- PAGE 299 -----
v

Hingu

Useful part - Niryasa (Exudate)

Rasa panchaka

Laghu, Tikshna

Vipaka Katu

Karma (Actions)
Pachana, Ruchya, Krimighna, Shulahara, Hradya, Dipana, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Chakshushya.

Agrya Karma

feghratarsettardtttargetraranth errr | (5.9, 25/40)
Hingu (Ferula narthex Boiss.) is Chedana, Dipana (Appetizer), Anulomana (Car-
minative) and pacify Vata and Kapha dosha

Pharmacological actions

Carminative, Nurvine stimulant, Antimicrobial, Antiepileptic, Anthelmintic, Con-
traceptive, Diaphoretic.
Doshakarma (Action on dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of its Ushna virya and Kaphahara because
of Katu Tikta Rasa and Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Agnimandya, Shula, Gulma, Udara, Anaha, Krimi, Hidroga, Kasa, Shwasa,
Vibandha, Netra roga, Karna Shula.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)

aad Haetet card Beh Terenas: | ARUN MATA TH Ara AeTMATETT

(Aq. 24/49)

If patient fell unconscious after the consumption of alcohol then Sauvarcala salt

----- PAGE 300 -----
292 Dravyaguna Vijnana

should be mixed with Hingu (Ferula narthex) & Marica (Piper nigrum) given with wine
and sour gruel till the patient regains consciousness.

2. Unmada (Insanity)

fee egret er enter et ere ras, Pet rere re TT ATA:
(a.Fa. 9/57)

Ghee processed with Hingu niryasa (Latex of Ferula narthex), Leaves of Hingu
(Ferula narthex), Kayastha (Elettaria cardamomum) and Vayastha (Bacopa monneiri)
may be used. Other wise Ghee processed with Vayastha (Bacopa monneiri), Hingu (Ferula
narthex) and Coraka (Angelica glauca) is also very useful.

3. Karna shkula (Bar ache)
fesrarte deny | (af. 26/213)

Hingu is the important ingredient of Hifigvadi taila which is used in Karn shula (Ear
ache).

Matra (Dosage)
Churha_ - 125 to 500 mg
Phytocenstituents:
Asafoetida contains resin (40 to 65%), gum (20 to 25%) and volatile oil (4 to 20%).

Resin mainly contains asaresinotanol. Where as oil contains butyl propanyl disulphide,
disulphides, trisulphides, pinene and terpenes.

Research corner

1. The properties of essential oils obtained from Ferula asafOetida oleo-gumresins
(OGRs) collected in three collections times in 15 june (OGR1), 30 June
(OGR2) and 15 July (OGR3) 2011 was investigated. Essential oil from OGR1
was constituted high levels of (E)-1-properny] sec-butyl disulfide (23.9%) and
10-epi-y-eudesmol (15.1%). Essential oil from OGR2 was constituted high
levels of (Z)-1-propenyl sec-butyl disulfide (27.7%). Kavoosi G, Rowshan V.
Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of essential oil
obtained from Ferula asafoetida oleo-gum-resin: Effect of collection time-
“ Food Chem. 2013 Jun 15;138(4):2180-7. doi:10.1016/j.food chem. 2012.11.

131. Epub 2012 Dec 29.

2. The study aimed to evaluate the activity of asafoetida against the in vitro

growth of Blastocystis sp. Asafoetida as powder-form (Ap) and oil-form (Ao)
extracts at concentrations of 2, 4, 8, 16, and 20 mg/ml and 5, 10, 25, 40 and

----- PAGE 301 -----
Hingu 293
50 mg/ml, respectively were incubated with isolates of Blastocystis sp, subtype
3 for 24, 72 and 144 h and compared to the reference antiprotozoan drug
metronidazole at concentrations of 10, 100 and 500 ?g/ml, These findings
demonstrate the potential of phytomedicine asafoctida as a potent natural
alternative for treatment of Blastocystis sp. infection. El Deeb HK, Al
Khadrawy FM, Abd El-Hameid AK. Inhibitory effect of Ferula asafoetida L.
(Umbellifers) on Blastocystis sp. subtype 3 growth in vitro. Parasitol Res. 2012
Spe; 111 (3):1213-21. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-2955-1. Epub 2012 May 15.

. Memory loss is universal and is the first symptom to manifest in majority of the
patients suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. This study is designed to
investigate the effect of Ferula asafoetida linn. (F. foetida) extract on learning
and memory in rats. Memory enhancing potential of F. foetida can be attributed
to acetylcholinesterase inhibiting and antioxidant properties. Hence, dietary
usage of F. foetida is beneficial and can also be employed as an adjuvant to
existing anti-dementia therapies. Vijayalakshmi, Adiga S, Bhat P, Chaturvedi
A, Bairy KL, Kamath S. Evaluation of the effect of Ferula asafoetida Linn.
gum extract on learning and memory in Wistar rats. Indian J. Pharmacol]. 2012
Jan; 44(1):82-7. doi.: 10.4103/0253-7613.91873.

4, The Ferula genus (Umbelliferae) is a rich source of gum-resin and is much
utilized in folklore medicine. This study is designed to examine antioxidant and
antihaemolytic activities of Ferula foetida regel flower, stem and leaf extracts.
This study showed remarkable antioxidant and antiahemolytic activities in
Feruia foetida. Biological effects may be attributed to the presence of phenols
and flavonoids in the extract. It is very promising for further biochemical
experiments. Nabavi SM, Ebrahimzadeh MA, Nabavi SF, Eslami B, Dehpour
AA. Antioxidant and antihaemolytic activities of Ferula foetida regel
(Umbelliferae). Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2011 Feb; 15(2):157-64.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No.

1
3
ar

uw

Indications

Agnimandya, Gulma
Udara roga, Gulma

Formulation

Hingvashtaka churna

Hingutriguna taila

Ayaskriti Prameha, Pandu
Chitrakadi vati Agnimandya

Hingvadya taila Yoni Shula, Krachrartava

cr aa 7 a rT!
Hingvadi gutika Vata Shula

----- PAGE 302 -----
294 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Ferula foetida Linn.
Ferula — Giant funnel
foetida - With foul smell
Family- Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Shatapushpa kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Shwasahara, Dipaniya, Sanjnasthapana, Krimighna
Sushruta —_ Pippalyadi gana, Ushakadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi Varga 100-101

Basonym of Drug
fog Ralfa vftet create ara, aed a ean, feet and at Ug Teale Bier aT
Hingu which will be perceived quickly by nose because of its penetrating quality, it
gets increased by itself and alleviates Kapha dosha and cold.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. TAH - TAH Sgt TTT |
Available in Bahlika desa (Punjab province of Pakistan).
Morphology
2. Wqw - wat wrgvater qaret TRAM eet Ag Agee a |
Hifgu is a resinous exudate from the plant.
Properties
3. STITT - SATA AT AT |
Hifgu has very strong odour.
4, WA - Hingu kills worms.
5. Wyte - Hingu destroys worms.
6. Weaater - Hingu has got very strong odour that it cannot be covered by any

means.

Regional names

English Asafoetida, Devil’s dung

----- PAGE 303 -----
Hingu 295

Marathi |: SE
Habitat

Hingu is cultivated in Afghanistan and Iran. In India it is growing in Punjab and
Kashmir.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial herb
Root — Fusiform
Stem — 5 to 8 ft. tall.

Leaves — Pubescent when young, lower leaves are 30
to 60 cm long, ovate shaped. Cauline sheaths are large, from
which inflorescence comes out. Secondary & tertiary pin-
nate are decurrent, entire or very irregularly crenate-serrate.

Inflorescence — Terminal compound umbel.

Fruit — 8x5 mm, having vittae, reddish-brown in colour.

Varieties
As such there is no variety mentioned for Hingu, but
depending on the material sold in the market it is of two kinds. Berula narthex
1. White 2. Black
Different species used for Hingu along with ferula foetida.
1. Ferula jaeschkeana 2. Ferula thomsoni
3. Ferula galbaniflua 4, Ferula sumul
5. Ferula suaveolens 6. Ferula persica

7. Ferula alliaceae

Grahya Laxana (Charecteristics of market sample):

The mass will be gummy or waxy; will have differnt sizes and shapes. Surface is
smooth, dull opaque or vitreous, ranging from light brown to chocolate in colour, when
we break it becomes pieces exposing a waxy surface with numerous cavities, more often
filled with glossy resinous material, thin pieces are translucent. It has got strong aromatic
odour, tastes pungent and bitter.

----- PAGE 304 -----
296 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Adulterants
Usually pebbels, mud; leaves and gum acacia are the things used as an adulterant.

Collection

The collection is done by laying bare the root stock to a depth of 4 to 5 cm of those
plants which have not reached their flowering stage. Then it is cut off as a slice from the
top of the root stock, from which at once a milky juice starts exuding, which is not col-
lected. The root then is covered over by a domed structue called ‘Khora’ formed of twigs
and covered with clay, leaving an opening towards the north, thus protecting the exposed
root from the rays of the sun. After six weeks, a thick gummy, reddish substance appeares
in more or less irregular lumps upon the exposed surface of the root, which is scaraped off
with a piece of iron hoop or removed along with a slice of root and at once placed in a
leather bed, the tanned skin of goat.

Classical references
Synonyms
TERA AIH sredteh fog MAST | (ALT. eirenfe TT 100)
Properties and actions
fegut wet wed dest arareregd | yerieiteresties fir
(ara. attaeafe + 107)
fegut wes eet wt arraat ety 1 eft Yer TARE UI
(oF. marqente at 37)
gut Rraned oor a chery | ag area
uret Hitastrartaraentese ui (a.F. state ef 1210-1211)
we fg mem a phtrardnnraey | erareeA ered AYR TAT Ut
(afr. frre FT. 74)
arget fig week Pract amartgd | cet Wome Yet MATA I
(B.A. etteenfe eT 151)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful Part of Hingu is
a. Mula b. Niryasa c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: b. Niryasa

----- PAGE 305 -----
bo

1s)

wm

Hingu 297

. Chedana, Dipana (Appetizer), Anulomana (Carminative) and pacify Vata and

Kapha dosha is the Agrya Karma refers to
a. Chitraka b. Bhallataka c. Pippali d. Hingu
Ans: d. Hingu

. Hingwashtaka Churna is indicated in

a, Agnimandya b. Atisara c. Shotha d. Arshas
Ans: a. Agnimandya

Hingwadya Taila is specifically indicated in

a. Shiroroga b. Yoni shula c. Arshas d. Kushtha
Ans: b. Yoni shula

. Botanical Name of Hingu

a. Ficus lacor b. Azadirachta indica

c. Convolvulus pluricaulis d. Ferula narthex

Ans: d. Ferula narthex

Sahasravedhi is a synonym of

a. Nagakeshara b. Hingu c. Jiraka d. Jatiphala
Ans: b. Hingu

. Bahlika is the synonym of

a. Kumkuma b. Ativisha c. Hingu d. Lodhra
Ans: c. Hingu

. Habit of the Hingu is

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

----- PAGE 306 -----
Chapter |

Jambu

Useful parts - Beeja (Seed), Phala (Fruit), Twak (Bark) and Patra (leaf).

Rasadi panchaka

Shita (Mahajambu is Ushna)

Karma (Action) - Sangrahi, Rochana, Kanthya, Vishtambhi, Lekhana, Daha
Shamaka, Shramahara, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Mehahara.
~ Mahajambu - Swarya, Shramahara, Atisaraghni, Shwasahara, Kasahara.
Kakajambu - Dahahara, Shramahara, Atisaraghni, Balya.
Bhumijambu - Hradya, Sangrahi, Balya.
Twak (Bark) — Sangrahi

Agrya Karma

Waa AAT | (AY. 25/40)

Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) increase Vata Dosha.

Pharmacological actives — Antidiarrhoeal, Antidiabetic, Antiinflammatory, Anti-
viral & Antipyretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to
Kashaya Rasa & Shita virya and Kapha Shamaka due to Kashaya Rasa & Katu vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Prameha, Atisara, Aruchi, Sthoulya, Daha, Shrama, Krimi and Shwasa.
Mahamabu - Swarabheda, Atisara, Shrama, Shwasa and Kasa.
Kakajambu — Daha, Shrama, Atisara & Dourbalya.
Bhumijambu - Atisara, Dourbalya & Hridroga
Jambu twak (Bark) —Atisara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
fracdiaaerd a mraanfadvea, | sgraact fiear fernqrata aru

(Gs. 45/23)

----- PAGE 307 -----
Jambu 299

nen

In case of instrinsic haemorrhage cold infusion prepared from Jambu (Syzygium
cumini), Amra (Mangifera indica) and Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) is very useful or
Udumbara (Ficus glomerata) Phala rasa (Fruti juice) is administered.

2. Chardi (Vomitting)

Wea: Urctast Hares Prete Belt wepeige ar 1 (af. 20123)

Decoction of tender leaves of Jambu (Syzygium cumini) and Amra (Mangifera in-
dica) is prepared. Once it is cooled add little honey and given for drink.

3. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
weaned facas Walt warm | terauss oreradtanr frand i
(a.fa. 81127)

Decoction prepared from Jambu seed of (Syzygium cumini), Amra bija (Seed Ker-
nel of Mangifera indica), Pulp of Bilva (Aegle marmelos), Kapittha (Feronium elephantum)
and Nagara (Zingiber officinale). This decoction is administered with liquid gruel.

4. Vrina Ropanartha (Wound healing)

BPN AMVAATIAAT HelHet: | ATA ATVAS VEThet rea AT: 1

(afa. 25/113)

Fine powder is prepared from barks of Kakubha (Terminalia arjuna), Udumbara
(Ficus glomerata), Ashwattha (Ficus religiosa), Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa), Jambu
(Eugenia jambolana) and Katphala (Myrica nagi). This powder is used for dusting over
wound. It improves healing of wound.

5. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus)

Various researches conducted have proved that it is very useful in Mahumeha (Dia-
betes mellitus). Fine powder prepared from seeds of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) | tsp to
be taken every day morning. Decoction prepared from bark is also very useful in
Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus).

Matra (Dosage)

Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml
Churna (Powder) -— 3to6gm
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark yielded friedelin, Kaempferol, Quercitin, -sitosterol, B-D-glucoside,
betullinic acid, gallo tannin, ellagi tannin, eugenin, epifriedelanol, Fruits yielded
delphinidin-3-gentiobioside and malvidin-3-laminaribioside.

----- PAGE 308 -----
300

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Leaves contain glycine, alanine, leucine and tyrosine. Flowers yielded Myricetin.3_

L-arabinoside and dehydromyricetin.

acol,

Seeds contain indoleacetic acid, gallic aci
heptacosane, n-nonacosane, n-triacontane, cra

d, oxalic acid, citric acid, glycollic acid, n.
tegolic acid, ellagic acid, corilagin, guaj.

resorcinol dimethyl ether, caffeic acid and ferulic acid.

Research corner

od

bod

t to evaluate the possible in vitro antibacterja|
bolana seeds against multidrug-resistant
human bacterial pathogens. The result provides justification for the use of £,

jambolana folk lore medicine to treat various infectious diseases and may

contribute to the development of novel antimicrobial agents for the treatment of
t bacterial pathogens. Bag A,

infection caused by these drug resistan
Bhattacharyya SK, Pal NK, Chattopadhyay RR. In vitro antibacterial potential
mbolana seed extracts against multidurg-resistant human bacterial

of Eugenia ja :
pathogens. Microbiol Res. 2012 Jun 20:167(6):352-7, doi; 10.1016/j. micres.

2012.02.005. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Crude extracts of leaves and bark of E. jambolana were tested for antiviral
activity against highly pathogenic avain influenza virus (H5N1) by CPE
reduction assay in three different layouts to elucidate virucidal, post-exposure
and preexposure antiviral activity of the extracts. The significant virucidal
activity of leaves and bark of E. jambolan merits further investigation as it may
provide alternative antiviral agent for managing avaina influenza infections in
poultry farms and potential avian-human transmission, Sood R, Swarup D,
Bhatia S, Kulkarni DD, Dey S, Saini M, Dubey SC. Antiviral activity of curde
extracts of Eugenia jambolana Lam. against highly pathogenic avian influenza
(H5N1) Virus. Indian J Exp Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):179-86.

To evaluate the antihyperlipidaemic effects of Eugenia jambolana fruit pulp in
diet induced hyperlipidemic rats and to compare them with Simvastatin. In male
albino rats ethanolic extract of Eugenia jambolana fruit pulp was as effective
as simvastatin in lowering serum total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein
cholesterol and triglycerides and increasing high density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Bilal R, Zakaria M, Usman A, Aftab S, Zia A. Antihyperli-pidaemic effects of
Eugenia jambolana fruit in diet induced hyperlipidemia rats. J. Pak Med
Assoc. 2011 May; 61(5):433-7.

1. The present study was carried ou
potential of extracts of Eugenia jam

. To estimate the hepatoprotective effects of the methanolic seed extract of

Eugenia jambolana Lam. (Myrtaceae), in Wistar albino rats treated with carbon

----- PAGE 309 -----
Jambu 301

tetrachloride (CCl4), The study suggests preventive action of Eugenia
jambolana Lam. in carbon tetrachloride induced liver toxicity. Hepatic cell
regeneration process was dose dependent. Sisodia SS, Bhatnagar M.
Hepatoprotective activity of Eugenia jambolana Lam. in carbon tetrachloride
treated rats. Iidian J. Pharmacol, 2009. Feb; 41(1):23-7. doi: 10.4103/0253-
7613.48888.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications

SILNo.
Madhumeha, Daha
Asragdhara, Shwetapradara
Botanical Name - Eugenia jambolana. Lam
Eugenia — after the name of the prince Eugene of Savoy, Patron of Botany.

jambolana — Derived from Sanskrit word Jambu.
Family — Myrtaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Lavanga kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Mutrasangrahaniya Varga, Purisha virajaniya varga, Cardinigrahana
varga

Sushruta Nyagrodhadi gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Amradi phala varga 69

WAS HAT: |
Fruit of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) is edible.
Synonyms
Moershelecy
1. TERT - Wa HRS: |
Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) plant has very big and strong trunk.
2. dtergreedr - Ateraryect: TATTTT: |

----- PAGE 310 -----
302 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Jambu leaves of Jambu are bluish in colour.
3. Ahraar - Brera |
Jambu leaves have aroma.
4. Wentfectt - teafedt ster: aafenret waetrearAare, |
Fruiting season of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) is Varsa ritu (Rainy season).
5. Tetnen - ether searHriht HeraeM: |
Jambu fruit is relatively big.
6. Atermett - Aerts tetra: |
Fruit of Jambu is bluish purple in colour.
7. HERS - WRATH: |
Jambu fruit is juicy.
Properties
8. ets: HOARE: TAT |
Jambu fruit is regarded as one of the best fruits.
Note - The fruit of Jambu is advised in Prameha.

Regional Names

Hind

Habitat

Jambu grows throughout India. It is also cultivated
in gardens as it yields fruits and gives good shade.

Morphology

Habit — An evergreen tree
Root - Tap root, branched.

Stem — Erect, woody, branched, thick, solid, cylin-
drical with grey bark. j

Leaf — Simple, opposite, stalked, ovate or ovate lan- Eugenia jambolana. Lan

----- PAGE 311 -----
Jambu 303

ceolate, 10-12 cm long and 3-4 cm wide, entire margin, acute tip, long pointed, petiolate,
exstipulate with unicostate reticulate venation, gland dotted.
Inflorescence — Panicle inflorescence

Flower — White, small, crowded on inflorescence, sepals are 4 in number, petals are
4-5, numerous stamens, much longer than sepals, 2 Carpels, syncarpous, inferior ovary,
bilocular axile placentation.

Fruit - Berry, succulent, globose or oblong, dark purple in colour.
Seed — Single, endospersmic.

Varieties
B.P.Ni— 1. Raja Jambu 2. Kshudra jambu
Ra.Ni.— 1. Jambu 2. Mahajambu

3. Kakajambu 4. Bhumijambu

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics market sample):

Dried fruit is ovoid or club shaped 2 to 2.5 cm long and upto 1.3 cm in diameter,
having a black or dark brown shrivelled skin enclosing the seed. The seed is ovoid, upto
2 cm long, with a brownish papery shell which encloses a dark brown kernel. It has not
got any characteristic odour and has astringent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms

TeTa-
wernt aera vet Ustad | det aefraat a verergefy GyAT
(AI. SEMfe Hea 69)
AAMaA- YA: TRA Aleeht Mera (ATT. see Herat 70)
Properties and Actions
Tasregae targ fergftsr ye Tay | (AT sae Herat 69)
weg: Banfeaht war aaftrrrararatste, 1 (A. sEMAe Heat 70)
Was Aas US aS HLA, | A HVS HTT ATA HAT RATTAN
(af. senfeet 78)
faster cred arafterasentne Yar |
meaayt fared qefeefter trey | vitar firracar crest wersrgeT
(af. ateftert 349-350)

----- PAGE 312 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

agrarrarcancnenre ferent a fereftsrtt water trerrorertt =

(afr, arerfeent 25)
Testry-
TENTS AAA set | freed aft asa caters I
feert fent yrafa a vite fearge | sardtantt afta waar wT
(aia. arafeet 27)
rH
BTSMG: HIATT Urs F AT Ye: | Tefen dtetyfeacwar
(w.ft. arafert 29)

afreng-
arse: HUTA et HET yer | EM Sees Veet ety fewer:

(w.F. srafert 31)
WHITH F HATA KATA aTfsaht yey | ARTA ET TEU ot Hey,
(Bait. atrenfert 234)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vatajanana is the Agrya Karma attributed to
a. Hingu b. Jambu c. Nimba d. Jayapala
Ans: b. Jambu
2. Main indication of Jambu is
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Prameha d. Kasa
Ans: c. Prameha
3. Jambvasava is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Kasa c. Shotha d. Madhumeha
Ans: d. Madhumeha
4. Jambvadi Taila is indicated in
a. Upadamsha b. Kushtha c. Kasa d. Prameha
Ans: a. Upadamsha
5. Botanical name of Jambu
a. Sida cordifolia b. Tecoma undulata

c.Eugeniajambolana __d. Pluchea lanceolata
Ans: c. Eugenia jambolana

----- PAGE 313 -----
Jambu 305

—_—

6. Nilanjana cchada is a synonym of
a. Dhanyaka b. Nimba c. Bhallataka d. Jambu
Ans: d, Jambu
7. Phalendra and Nilaphala are the synonyms of
a, Draksha b. Puga c. Jambu d. Kushmanda

Ans: c. Jambu
8. Habit of the Jambu Plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

9. Types of Jambu as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a.2 b. 3 c.4 d. 5
Ans: a, 2

----- PAGE 314 -----
Japa

Useful parts - Pushpa (Flowers) and Patra (Leaves)
Rasadipanchaka

Ras [Rash Mara
Karma (Actions)

Keshya, Sangrahaka, Hridya, Shonitasthapana, Garbhanirodhaka,
Mutrasangrahaniya.
Pharmacological (Actions)

Antifertility, Antiinflammatory, Analgesic, Spasmolytic, Hypotensive, Antipyretic,
Antispasmodic, Antiviral, Antifungal and Antibacterial.
Dosha karma (Action on Desha)

Pittakapha Shamaka. Pittahara due to Shita virya and Kashaya madhura Rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Rasa

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Khalitya, Palitya, Indralupta, Shiroroga, Hridroga, Raktapitta, Raktapradara,
Prameha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Palitya (Premature greying of hairs)
Peace: STG: Berea | ulate a ovate agTEAate ATT Ut
(4.41. 57/91)

Paste of Lohamala (Iron slag), fruit of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and flowers of
Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis) has to be applied over scalp everyday and then take bath;
this therapy is beneficial in Palitya (Premature greying of hairs).

2. Rajorodha (Amenorrhoea)
Penfees VOTE ze watferorcteery | doers a Ferree aPren raade TAT, Ul
(aa. 62/22)

----- PAGE 315 -----
Japa 307

In case of Rajorodha (Amenorrhoca) one should consume the paste prepared from
flowers of Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis), leaves of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus)
and Kanji (Sour gruel).

Matra (Dose)

Churna (Powder) - 5 to 10 g

Chemical Constituents - Taraxeryl acetate, Beta-sistosterol, Campestrol, Stigmas-
terol, Flavonoids, Flavonoid glycosides, Hibiscetin, Alkanes, Cyanin and Cyanidine glu-
cosides are present in leaves stems and flowers.

Research Corner

Antioxidant and Antibacterial potential of different solvent extracts of Hibiscus rosa-
sinensis was evaluated. The antioxidant activity was assessed by estimation of total fla-
vonoids contents, total phenolic contents, DPPH free radical scavenging activity and per-
centage inhibition of linoleic acid oxidation capacity. Agar disc diffusion method was
used to assess antibacterial potential of crude extract of H. rosa-sinensis. Antibacterial
study against three human pathogens such as staphalococcus Sp., Bacillus Sp. and Escheria
coli showed growth inhibitory effect in the range of 12.75 + 1.17 to 16.75+ 2.10 mm.
Khan ZA eral. “Antioxidant and Antibacterial activities of Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.
flower extracts. Pak. J. Pharm Sci 2014 May:27(3).

Yoga (Formulations)

Madhukadyavaleha Pradara, Yonishula
Patrangasava Pradara, Jwara, Pandu

Botanical Name

Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.

Hibiscus — Virgil’s name for the Marsh mallow.

rosa-sinensis-rosa - reddish or pink, Sinensis of the native China.
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Pushpa varga

Basonym of Drug

wate sf wor | safe eth Hele Mary, TUT |

----- PAGE 316 -----
308 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis L.) is having very attractive flowers.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. aigyst - am gaa saftr isch eaters | ots gore |
Flowers of Japa contain a sticky substance.
2. Target - Usually flowers of Japa are red coloured.
3. frazat - Japa will have flowers always.

Vernacular Names

Dasavala

Malayalam Chembarathi

Habitat

Japa is a native plant of China, but it is grown as an
ornamental plant throughout India.

Morphology

Habit- Perennial shrub, grows upto 8 ft.

Root - Tap root and branched.

Stem - Erect, woody, branched, solid, cylindrical, her-
baceous above and woody below.

Leaves - Simple, alternate, large, broad, palmately

veined, petiolate, stipulate, ovate shaped, serrate margin | Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.
and acute tip.

Inflorescence - Solitary terminal or axillary cyme.

Flower - Showy, scarlet red coloured, complete flower.

Fruit - Capsule, mostly abortive. Seeds are endospermic, glabrous and hairy.
Classical references |
Synonyms =

attgged sor are Brarear arseurt feet | (MET. TT aH: 58)

----- PAGE 317 -----
Japa 309

Properties and Actions
wor Garfeott daar Braear armarethere, | (AF. THT aH: 58)
Brean vitor fercat feraftrrencaraer tt
wa g Hee weaned, | freotdarg wert qahrerst are
(aft. achat at: 122)
waged g daret hee wsiPrarony u (B.A. eiaaenfe ah: 220)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Pradhana Rasa of Japa Pushpa
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: c. Kashaya
2. Pradhana Karma of Japa
a. Varnya b. Keshya c. Swarya d. Kanthya
Ans: b. Keshya
3. Botanical name of Japa
a. Myristica fragrans _c. Punica granatum
c. Rosa centifolia d. Hibiscus rosa-sinensis
Ans: d. Hibiscus rosa-sinensis
4. Aundra Pushpa is a synonym of
a. Japa b. Champaka c. Jati d. Kamala
Ans: a. Japa
5. Trisandhya is a synonym of

a. Mallika b. Taruni c. Japa d. Puga
Ans: c. Japa

6. Habit of Japa Plant is
a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb

Ans: b. Shrub

----- PAGE 318 -----
Jatamamsi

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Medhya, Dahahara, Kushthahara, Visarpanut, Vishaghna, Twachya,
Kantiprasadaka, Balya, Bhutaghni, Nidrajanaka.

Gandhamamsi - Raktapittahara, Varnya, Vishaghni, Bhutaghni, Jwarahara.

Akashamamsi — Shophahara, Vranahara, Varnya
Pharmacological actions

Astringent, Coolant, Antiseptic, Analgesic, Digestive, Carminative, Liver stimulant,
Vermifuge, Nervine tonic, Intellect promoter, Sedative, Antipyretic and Aphrodisiac,
Diruretic and Emmenagogue.

Doshakarma (Actions on Dosha) - Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara because of its
Snigdha guna. Pitta Shamaka due to its Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura Rasa and Shita virya.

Kapha shamaka due to its Tikta, Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Manasa vikara, Kushtha, Daha, Twak vikara, Vishavikara, Visarpa and Nidranasha.
Gandhamamsi — Vaivarnya, Raktapitta, Jwara and Vishavikara.
Akashamamsi - Vaivarnya, Shopha and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
Tih afte cant tart ere Ger WETayA: | A first ae: UTI: HS AT CTT:
(a.fa. 7/87)

Paste prepared from Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Maricha (Piper nigrum),

----- PAGE 319 -----
Jatamamsi 3)1

Lavana (Salt), Rajani (Curcuma longa), Tagara (Valeriana wallichi), Sudha (Euphorbia
nerifolia), Soot, Urine, Bile and Alkali of Palasha (Butea monosperma) is efficacious in
Kushtha.

2. Kasa (Cough)
wear forerret wees Are ete: feral | eet aeaTy a aft qetrent ays frets.
(a.fa. 18/69)
One should smoke the wick prepared from realgar, Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra),
Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Musta (Cyperus rotundus). Ingudi (Balanites
roxburghi) then should drink warm milk added with jaggery.

3. Keshavardhanartha (To promote hair growth)
niet qs’ from: Hom: atta tergerery_ | altar afetert Ser aes we It
(F.2.5. 24/41)
The paste prepared Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa)
Krishna tila (Sesamum indicum), Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus), Nilotpala, milk and honey
if applied over scalp will promote hair growth.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder)  -—3to6g

Taila (Oil) —Required quantity
Phytoconstituents

Rhizome has essential oil which contains Jatamansic acid, aristolene, calarene,
jatamansin, oroselol, orselone, dihydrojatamansin, angelic acid, jatamansinol, seselin,
jatamansinone, «-pinene, B-pinene, B-eudesmol, elmol, B-sitosterol, jatamansinol,
jatamansin and angelicin.

Research corner Co

1. Study investigated the potential of NV. Jatamansi extract (NJE) in protecting

against chronic stress-induced impairments in spatial learning and memory. The

study has shown significant results in improving memory. Karkada G, Shenoy

KB, Halahalli H, Karanth KS. Nardostachys jatamansi extract prevents

chronic restraint stress-induced learning and memory deficits in a radial arm

maze task. J. Nat. Sci Biol Med. 2012 Jul; 3 (2):125-32. doi:10.4103/0976-
9668.1011879.

2. The aim of this study was to examine the inhibitory effects of NJ on ACP, C57

black/6 mice received ethanol injections intraperitoneally for 3 weeks against a

----- PAGE 320 -----
312 Dravyaguna Vijnana

background of cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis. In conclusion, the results
suggest that NJ attenuated ACP through the inhibition of PSC activation. Bae
GS, Park KC, Koo BS, Choi SB, Jo Ij, Choi CM, Song HJ, Park SJ. The
inhibitory effects of Nardostachys jatamansi on alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.
BMB Rep. 2012 Jul; 45(7):402-7.

In the present study, the anti-stress effect of hydroethanolic extract (70%) of N.
jatamansi (NJE) was evaluated in reference to its antioxidant property. The
findings suggest that the NJE possesses significant anti-stress activity, which
may be due to its antioxidant activity. Lyle N, Bhattacharyya D, Sur TK,
Munshi S, Paul S, Chatterjee S, Gomes A. Stress modulating antioxidant effect
of Nardostachys jatamansi. Indian J. Biochem Biophys. 2009 Feb; 46(1):93-
8.

4. The present study was undertaken to assess the potential of N. Jatamansi as a
memory enhancer. The 200 mg/kg dose of N. Jatamansi ethanolic extract
significantly improved learning and memory in young mice and also reversed
the amnesisa induced by diazepam (1 mg/kg, i.p.) and scopolamine (0.4 mg/kg,
i.p.) Joshi H, Parle M. Nardostachys jatamansi improves learning and memory
in mice. J. Med Food. 2006 Spring; 9 (1):113-8.

5. Ethanol extract of the roots of Nardostachys jatamansi DC. (Valerianaceae)
was studied for its anticonvulsant activity and neurotoxicity, alone and in
combination with phenytoin in rats. The results demonstrated a significant
increase in the seizure threshold by Nardostachys jatamansi root extract against
maximal electroshock seizure (MES) model as indicated by a decrease in the
extension/flexion (E/F) ration. Rao VS, Rao A, Karanth KS. Anticonvulsant
and neurotoxicity profile of Nardostachys jatamansi in rats. J Ethnopharmacol.
2005. Dec 1;102(3):351-6. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

w

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Formulation Indications

: Mahapaishachika ghrata Unmada, Apasmara

Botanical Name — Nardostachys jatamansi Dc.

Nart — Valerius, Stachys - spiked

----- PAGE 321 -----
Jatamamsi 313

Jatamansi = Derived from sanskrit word Jatamansi
Family - Caprifoliaccae
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Sanjnasthapana varga, Kandughna varga, Shukrajanana varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Anjanadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 89
Basonym of Drug
Wergre viet |
Jatamamsi has matted hair.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. fenerfertt-fenerctarget wre eamegt TAT |
Jatamamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi) grows in mountains of Himalaya.
2. qaRadt-aercan dearest aararen aaRata sae |
Jatamamsi commonly found in high altitudes of Himéalaya, it is having matted
hair like that of a sage.
Morphology
3. Wheen-serenhutt |
Jatamamsi has matted hairs.
4, Yrster- yet Mery |
Jatamamsi has fibres in rhizome which appears like matted hair.
5. HOA-HMA TETITHT |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi is black in colour.
6. ferit-qeract |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi is black in colour.
7. etteen-viterteifahera |

Fibres on rhizome are neatly arranged like a matted hair.
Properties and Actions
8. aret-are feaediie, aaa |

Reduces fat becaue of Lekhana karma (Emaciating action).

----- PAGE 322 -----
314 Dravyaguna Vijnana
9, Uegar- Tet Ate cater feretter |
Reduces Mamsa (Fat stored in flesh).
10. AeaA- Baer: |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi has agreeable odour.
11. Brat -areda Prarrate t

Induces good sleep.

Regional Names

Habitat
Jatamamsi grows at great elevations upto 17,000 ft.
on the Alpine Himalayas.

Morphology

Habit — An erect perennial herb grows 10 to 60 cm
high with long, stout and woody root stock covered with
fibres from the petioles of withered leaves.

Stem - Radical leaves measuring 15 to 20x2.5 cm, | Nardostachys jatamansi DC

longitudinally nerved, glabrous or slightly pubescent, nar-
rowed into the petiole. Cauline leaves are one or two pairs, 2.5 to 7.5 cm long, sessile,
oblong or subovate.

Inflorescence — Usually 1, 3 and 5 flowered, dense cyme.

Flower — Rosy, pale pink or blue coloured, pubescent. .

Fruit ~ 4 mm long, indehiscent, covered with ascending minute transparent hairs,
crowned by the ovate, acute, after dentate calyx teeth.
Varieties

Ra. Ni- 1. Jatamamsi 2. Gandhamansi 3. Akashamansi

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)
Rhizome will be stout, woody frequently arched, 2.5 to 8 cm long and upto 1 cm

----- PAGE 323 -----
Jatamamsi 315

thick and having dark grey colour. Rhizome densely covered with silky reddish brown
fibres, which are matted to form a network. A transversely cut portion shows a reddish
brown surface and a prominent cambium ring surrounding a porous wood. On breaking
rhizome becomes short piece and exposes reddish brown uneven surface. Rhizome will
have very strong odour and bitter taste.
Substitutes

1. Root of Cymbopogon schoenanthus spreng

2. Nynphoids macrospermum L.
Aduterants

1 Selinium vaginatum clarke

2. Selinium tenuifolium wall ex.
Classical references
Synonyms

weraiet yaster wieer a attest 1 (ars. ahute at 89)
Properties and Actions
Tish fercar Berar a Bean serfersrervay | eatat fear Preteracrectad pea tl
(a. atate at 89)
Tit tag HoT arenas AT | reared TeTTM THM GHATS
(aft. wee TT 44)

niet arg fear fercer gant aerenrhetat | Grete fare chard atest HET U
(&.P. stat ef 1364-1365)

werarett-

ain weratet aor aeviire | Hes YraTeeH fret Heep
(aft. aaa aT 95)

Treraret-

Teme fren vitat amavorrance | teelieter aval fareyrsanrtet Ul
(aft. safe aT 97)

arenrgraret-

argaret fear yite-aorrdhectaet | oarrésrarenfe erftuft auterttett 1
(aA. ane FT 99)

----- PAGE 324 -----
316

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tih tear g fara ereqen aufero | thacmet Pome qeertatt u
(BLP. wagers af 37)

—

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Jatamansi is

c. Carum carvi d. Cedrus deodara

Ans: b. Nardostachys jatamansi

a. Haritaki b. Bilva
Ans: c. Jatamansi

a. Root b. Rhizome c. Leaf
Ans: b. Rhizome

. Pradhana Rasa of Jatamansi
a, Madhura b. Kashaya c. Tikta
Ans: c. Tikta

. Pradhana Karma of Jatamansi
a. Jwarahara b. Kasahara c. Shwasahara
Ans: d. Nidrajanaka

. Jatamansi mainly indicated in
a. Netra Roga b. Karna Roga c. Prameha
vikara
Ans: d. Manasika vikara

. Achemical Jatamansic acid is present in
a. Vatsanabha b. Jatamansi c. Chitraka
Ans: b. Jatamansi

. Mamsyadi Lepa specifically indicated in
a. Kushtha b. Jwara c. Arshas
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Mahapaishachika Ghrata is indicated in
a. Grahani b. Gulma c. Kushtha
Ans: d. Unmada

. Botanical name of Jatamansi
a. Centella asiatica b. Nardostachys jatamansi

. Bhutajata and Tapaswini are the synonyms of

c. Jatamansi

d. Fruit

d. Amla

d. Nidrajnaka

d. Manasika

d. Bhallataka

d. Shotha

d. Unmada

d. Katuki

----- PAGE 325 -----
Jatiphala

Useful part - Beeja (Seed) and Jatipatri (Ari).

Rasadi panchaka

Katu Tikta Kashaya

Karma (Action)
Jatiphala (Fruit /Seed) — Grahi, Dipana, Rochana, Swarya, Dourgandhyahara,
Krimighna, Kasahara, Shwasahara, Mehaghna, Vrashya and Hradya.

Jatipatri (Arils) — Ruchikara, Varshya, Kasahara, Chardighna, Shwasahara,
Trrashna nigraha, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Dourgandhyahara & Vrashya.

Pharmacological Actions
Nutmeg —- Aphrodisiac, Stomachic, Stimulant, Analgesic, Appetizer, Digestant,
Carminative, Astringent & Anthelmintic.

Aril (Mace) — Stomachic, Digestive, Carminative and Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Jatiphala —Atisara, Klaibya, Agnimandya, Aruchi, Vaiswarya, Mukhadourgandhya,
Krimi, Kasa, Chardi, Shwasa, Shosha, Pinasa, Hrdruja, Prameha, Kantharoga.

Jatipatri /Kosha — Aruchi, Vaivarnya, Klaibya, Chardi, Shwasa, Trishna, Krimi,
Visha roga, Mukhadourgandhya, Hradroga.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

mar wretteaet fear areit cee Wer | alarertrart arercatranhtary
(2. aa 30)

----- PAGE 326 -----
318

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is applied over the umbilicus

will definitely check the dangerous diarrhoea.

2. Vyanga (Freckles)

wiewerear caeg eta sags ftferenry | (aT. aFa. 61/42)

The Aril of Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is triturated with water then applied over

face. It relieves Vyanga.

3. Vipadika (Cracks in foot)

firser sietact core farreta franz (4.4. FS 118)

Paste prepared from Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) cures Vipadika (Cracks in foot).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (powder) — 250mg to lg
Taila (Oil) — 7to 15 drops

Phytoconstituents

Nutmeg has volatile oil which contains myristicin, myristic acid, d-pinene, d-cam-

phene, &-pinene, dipentene, P-cymene, geraniol, safrole, eugenol & iesoeugenol.

Aril contains dehy droisoeugenol, lycopene, safrol, trimyristin and guiacin.

Research corner

1. To investigate the anti-angiogenic activity and antioxidant properties of

Myristica fragrans (M. fragrans) (nutmeg). The antiangiogenic activity of
nutmeg oil showed significant antiangiogenic activity with IC (50) of 77.64 g/
mL comparing to mengkudu oil which exhibits IC (50) of 109.30 g/mL. Piaru
SP, Mahmud R, Abdul Majid AM, Mahmoud Nassar ZD. Antioxidant and
antiangiogenic activities of the essential oil of Myristica fragrans and Morinda
citrifolia. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Apr; 5(4):294-8. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645 (12)60042-X.

. This study determined the potential anticancer efficacy of the leaf extract of

Myristica fragrans (Houtt.) Phytochemical compounds, possessing antioxidant
activity, may be responsible for the observed effects, suggesting a necessary
characteristic of a promising anticancer agent. Akinboro A, Mohamed KB,
Asmawi MZ, Othman AS, Ying TH, Maidin SM. Mutagenic and
antimutagenic assessment of methanol leaf extract of Myristica fragrans
(Houtt.) using in vitro and in vivo genetic assays. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2012
Oct; 35(4):412-22. doi. 10.3109/01480545. 2011. 638300. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

----- PAGE 327 -----
Jatiphala 319

3. In this study, freeze-dried water extract from the leaves of Myristica fragrans
(Houtt.) was tested for mutagenic and antimutagenic potential using the allium
cepa assay. The obtained results suggest mitode pressive and antimutagenic
potential of water extract of the leaves of M. fragrans as desirable properties of
a promising anticancer agent. Akinboro A, Mohamed KB, Asmawi MZ,
Sulaiman SF, Sofiman OA. Antioxidants in aqueous extract of Myristic
fragrans (Houtt.) suppress mitosis and cyclophosphamideinduced
chromosomal aberrations in Allium cepa L. cells. J. Zhejiag Univ Sci B. 2011
Noy; 12(11):915-22 doi: 10. 1631/jzus. B 1000315.

4. In this study, the anti-inflammatory effect of myristicin on double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA)-stimulated macrophages was examined. In conclusion,
myristicin has anti-inflammatory properties related with its inhibition of NO,
Cytokines, chemokinesis and growth factors in dsRNA-stimulated
macrophages via the calcium pathway. Lee JY, Park W. Antiinflammatory
effect of myristicin on RAW 264.7 Macrophages stimulated with polyinosinic-
polycytidylic acid. Molecules 2011: 16(8):7132-42.

. The present investigation was undertaken to evaluate the antibacterial activity
of constituents of M. fragrans seeds. All the constituents isolated from nutmeg
exhibited good antibacterial activity. Narasimhan B, Dhake AS. Antibacterial
principles from Myristica fragrans seeds. J.Med. Food. 2006 Fall; 9(3):395-9.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Nn

Formulation Indications

Atisara, Grahani

Jatiphaladi taila Dantashula, Mukhavedana
Botanical Name - Myristica fragrans Houtt

Myristica — Sweet scented drug belongs to Myristicaceae family.
fragrans — Aromatic
Family — Myristicaceae
Kula - Jatiphala kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

----- PAGE 328 -----
320 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 54-56
Basonym of Drug
TaTet Chet BATT Tet | F.TT.
Jatiphala has got shell-like fruit.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Wateftentet:~ seit cateriter wrethiter ara, |
Fruit is shell like and it is covered by arils.
2. Ye-vedifer ye: Ye seaes |
The fruit is in the form of a shell, as it is coverd by hard cover.
Properties and Actions
3. Wretettaet:- ATM: He, Weta, Hera vite emrerett fet ATT
The fruit of Jatiphala has got sweet aroma which resembles Jati (Jasmine).
4, Hevivs:- Hat efawErar |
As like Pippali (Piper longum) Jatiphala is also used after consuming alcohol.
Regional Names

Habitat
Nutmeg tree grows in South Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala and Tamilnadu.
The plant grows upto the height of 500 mtrs from the sea level.

Morphology
Habit — Tree with slender branches.

Leaves — Coriaceous, 8 to 9 cm long & 2 to 3 cm wide, elliptic-oblong or lanceolate,

----- PAGE 329 -----
Jatiphala

acuminate. Nerves are pale yellow brown, paler with red-
brown beneath, 8 pairs of nerves which are slender. Peti-
ole is 0.5 to 1 cm long.

Male - Racemes 2.5 to 5 cm long

Flowers - 6 mm long, ellipsoid. Male flowers are
seen in lax slender supra-axillary racemes, Bracteole
scale under the glabrate perianth. Anthers are 9-12 in
number.

Fruit — Ovoid, Subglobose or Pyriform, 4-5 cm long
in diameter.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market
sample) Myristica fragrans Houtt

Kernels are ovoid or broadly oval, 2 to 3 cm long

and 1.5 to 2 cm broad. Surface is light brown or greyish brown in colour, showing a
network of shallow, reticulate grooves and marked with numerous small dark brown
lines. The tip of the radicle is indicated by a slight circular elevation which is connected
by a broad shallow groove with chalaza which has the form of a slight shallow depression
at the opposite end. The inside of the kernel consists of fawn coloured endosperm cov-
ered by a thin reddish brown perisperm. The perisperm penetrates the endosperm by
numerous inflodings giving a characteristic ruminate appearance to the broken surface. It
has got strong aromatic characteristic odour and has got pungent and slight bitter taste.

Fleshy, foliaceous mantle or arillus of seed occuring as entire piece or in the form of
coarsely reticulate flattened bands. The entire piece is cup shaped divided into strap shaped,
terminally disected lobes, upto 4 cm in length, 2.5 to 3 cm in breadth and about | mm in
thickness. These are transluscent and brittle have a dully yellowish red in colour. Has got
strong aromatic odour.

Substitutes—1.Myristicabeddomei —_2.. Myristica attenuata

Adulterants — 1. Myristica malabarica 2. Myristica argentea
Classical references
Synonyms

reitaet arttentet arereitorctfrcate (as. ature at 54)
Properties and Actions

Uidthet Ta fore dtenttet treat ry | heck det ole tah seterPremaa

----- PAGE 330 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pefa qaaret wedhizaporn: | aftrera aftraragiedtragge:
(ay. ature af 54-55)
~ardtastt-
wardtreres tap witrat wreftusht frerat: | aireftastt org: tare: Heer oferaaipe |
mare aftigara gan perfec uu (asa + 56-57)
widiee-
widtact aureitat we avert  arenfreant teed ory Get at cto
(aff. aaafe at 34)
wardtasit-
widtast aoa ear Beet ee | cecebieaegvat: ferred arent
(af. dane FT 33)
widtea-
widtrct we ferris cteuttort treet ory | mech dost wet wae serene
(HFA. staf af 1327)
wareitastt-
adios wefan oem feracter, | acne afta gem epfeferarag:
(&.fr. staf af 1330)
ardicaet-
wide Horatat ae averted, | arakranatset oy set at doa
(aft. aeafe aT 78)
afestt-
wifes aefkrat eer: aoe | aeererensrst creer
(at. arame GT 76)
waidtast aefern fest arma | afer det one get eatery,
Haantafacts onfosttr meat | wert geet g qedhieeet
- (B.A. traf aT 82-83)

----- PAGE 331 -----
—

WN

wn

Jatiphala 323

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Jatiphala

a. Shothahara —_—b. Kushthaghna c. Grahi d. Shodhana
Ans: c. Grahi

. Jatipatri in Jatiphala refers to

a. Stem b. Aril c. Root d. Seed
Ans: b. Aril

. Main indication of Jatiphala

a. Agnimandya __b. Arshas c. Gulma d. Atisara

Ans: d. Atisara
The Aril of Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is triturated with water then applied
over face will be beneficial in

a. Kushtha b. Vyanga c. Shotha d. Yauvana Pidaka
Ans: b. Vyanga

Jatiphaladi Vati is indicated in

a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Jwara d. Anidra

Ans: a. Atisara

Botanical name of Jatiphala

a. Oroxylum indicum b. Myristica fragrans
c. Vetiveria zizanoides d. Mucuna pruriens

Ans: b. Myristica fragrans

. Malatiphala is the synonym of

a. Madanaphala _b. Jatiphala c. Aragwadha_ d. Shigru
Ans: b. Jatiphala

. Habit of Jatiphala Plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Climber

Ans: a. Tree

----- PAGE 332 -----
Shweta Jiraka

rrr en
Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Katu (Madhura-Dh.Ni.)

Rusa Laghu
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Sangrahi, Medhya, Garbhashaya shodhaka, Jwaraghna, Pachana
Vrashya, Balya, Ruchya, Chakshushya, Chardini-grahana, Hradya, Krimighna,

Vishaghna, Vranahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Appetizer, Digestant, Carminative, Astringent, Anthelmintic, Analgesic, Blood pu-
rifier, Diuretic, Aphrodisiac, Galactogogue, Antipyretic, Antispasmodic, Antibacterial,
Antifungal, Larvicidal, Antiseptic, Antiinflammatory.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha shmaka, Vata shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
owing to its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Agnimandya, Ajirna, Atisara, Vishamajwara, Chardi, Amlapitta, Aruchi, Krimi,
Netra roga, Adhmana, Gulma, Hradroga, Garbhashaya vikara and Udara Shula.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Jwara (Fever)

AAS: ATS He... 1 (3.8. Fa. 2/93)

Paste prepared from Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) with jaggery is v
case of Jwara (Fever).
2. Amlapitta (Hyper acidity)

Remensarstt eemrtes amet Peart | areafirere feet Hara SA,

(az. 52/51)

ery effective in

----- PAGE 333 -----
Shweta Jiraka 325

First, the paste is prepared from Ajaji (Cuminum cyminum) & Dhanyaka (Coriandrum
sativum) then it is added to 1 prastha (640 gm) of ghee and cooked. It is administered
internally and it is very useful in Amlapitta (Hyper acidity). It is also effective in diseases
of Kapha & Pitta dosas. Aruci (Anorexia) and Manddnila (Reduced appetite).

3. Chardi (Vomitting)
dada a yreht after a i gets aya oe: severed: 1
(JAI. 15/18)

Sauvarchala salt, Ajaji (Cuminum cyminum), sugar & Maricha (Piper nigrum) are
mixed with honey, if taken stops vomitting.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) 3 to 6 g.

Phytoconstituents

Fruits contain 2.5-4% volatile oil, 10% fixed oil and proteins. Volatile oil mainly
consists of 30-50% cuminaldehyde, small quantities of o-pinene, B-pinene, phellandrene,
cuminic alcohol, hydrated cuminaldehyde and hydrocuminine.

Research corner

1. In the present study, the effect of intra peritoneal (ip) administration of different
doses of cumin fruit essential oil (FEO)’on the acquisition of morphine induced
conditioned place preference (GPP) in L-arginine-treated mice was
investigated. Study suggested that some components of the Cuminum cyminum
L. seed attenuate the excessive effect of L-arginine on morphine-induced CPP
through the NOS inhibitory mechanism. Kermani M, Azizi P, Haghparast A.
The role of nitric oxide in the effects of cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.) fruit
essential oil on the acquisition of morphine-induced conditioned place
preference in adult male mice. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Jan 12.

2. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the contraceptive efficacy of
Cuminum cyminum (Jeera) seeds in male albino rats. The present study shows
that C. cyminum treatment resulted in the inhibtion of spermatogenesis and
fertility without producing apparent toxic effects. Gupta RS, Saxena P, Gupta
R, Kachhawa JB. Evaluation of reversible contraceptive activities of Cuminum
cyminum in male albino rats. Contraception. 2011 Jul; 84(1):98-107. doi:
10.1016/j. contraception. 2010.10.013. Epub 2011 Feb 16.

3. To investigate effects of various concentrations of the essential oil of Cuminum
cyminum L. seed alone and in combination with nisin on survival of vegetative

----- PAGE 334 -----
326 Dravyaguna Vijnana

forms of Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis in a food model (commercial
barley soup) and their ultra structure. The essential oil of C. cyminum L. seed
showed the most bactericidal effects on B. cereus at 8 OC. Ultrastructure studies
of vegetative cells confirmed the synergistic destructive effects of the essential
oil and nisin on membrane and cell wall of the bacteria. Pajohi MR, Tajik H,
Farshid AA, Hadian M. Synergistic antibacterial activity of the essential oil of
Cuminum cyminum L. seed and nisin in a food model. J Appl Microbial. 2011
Jan 12. doi: 10.1111/j. 1365-2672.2011.04946.x.

4. The essential oil of fruits of Cuminum cyminum L. (Apiaceae), from India, was
analyzed by GC and GC-MS, and its antifungal activity was tested on
dermatophytes and phytopathogens, fungi, yeasts and some new Aspergilli.
Antifungal testing showed that Cuminum cyminum is active in general on all
fungi but in particular on the dermatophytes, where Trichophyton rubrum was
the most inhibited fungus also at the lowest dose of 5 microL. Less senstive to
treatment were the phytopathogens. Pharm Biol. 2010 Jul; 48(7):834-8. doi:
10.3109/13880200903283715. Antifungal activity of essential oil form furits of
Indian Cuminum cyminum. Romagnoli C, Andreotti E, Maietti S, Mahendra R,
Mares D.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.
1

Formulation Indications

Jiraka ghrata Agnidagdha vrana
Trak modaka

=<
a

Botanical Name — Cuminum cyminum Linn. Cuminum - derived from Greek means
very useful for cooking.

Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorisation)
Charaka Shulaprashamana varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 81-85

----- PAGE 335 -----
Shweta Jiraka 327

Basonym of Drug

frre até oRorrafe, sar aatertt |

Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum Linn.) is very good digestive.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, STITT SATTS TT |

Jiraka is cultivated in Northern part of India.
Morphology

2. defeq-dtarenc |
Fruit of Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) is long.
3. Cars -chet srsarsee
Fruit is yellowish in colour
Properties and Actions
4. de:- coach |
Jiraka stimulates appetite.
5. sateit-aret aginst wreercttier
Jiraka improves appetite.
6. BRUT THAT
Jiraka is very good digestant.
7. wary-oharRy |
Jiraka improves the taste.
8. Aemm-Aered Rar
Jiraka improves memory.

Regional Names

Hind

----- PAGE 336 -----
328 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Cultivated throughout India, but cultivated more
in Rajasthan and Punjab states. It is mostly cultivated
as cold season crop.

Morphology

Habit - A slender annual plant.

Leaves — Thrice or thrice 3- partite, ultimate seg-
ments are filiform.

Inflorescence — Compound umbel, rays are few,
has several bracts and bracteoles. Bracts are linear and
rigid. Petals are white in colur, often unequal.

Fruit — Cylindrical with narrow tip. Primary
ridges are filiform, distinct and secondary ridges usu-
ally hispidulous. Vittae is large. Solitary under each secondary ridge. Carpophore is 2-
partite or bifid.

Seed —Convex-concave, dorsally compressed.

Cuminum cyminum

Varieties
B.P.Ni—3 types— 1. Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum)
2. Krishna jiraka (Carum carvi)
3. Kalajaji (Nigella sativa)
Dh.Ni— 4 types— 1. Jiraka
2. Shuklajiraka
3. Krishnajiraka
4. Brihatpali
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruits are elongated, greenish or grayish brown in colour, measuring 4 to 6 mm in
length and up to 2.5 mm in width. The fruit is a cremocarp, consisting of two mericarps
which remains united together when dry. Each mericarp has five primary ridges which
run from base to apex. Alternating with these are secondary ridges which are flat and
conspicuous. It has got characteristic odour and pungent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Sitar Sussisft aun wareretshives: | (ars. Kicenfeet 81)

----- PAGE 337 -----
Shweta Jiraka 329

Properties and Actions :
wared Ure Ge aed Bet HUTTE | Mayet TaTEMTT er eeerae Be, II
(ars. etirernfeet 84-85)
aierstt fear wear wettest | aftrett feroeatt a aeers semrrafyertt
(afr. magenta +t 69)
aeearett ( sft farsa: )
aa SR: wg vilett aOTET GATT: 1 (ah. eagenfe at 72)

(&.F. staff 1188)
tikerstt feet wear etyr chet | pret aga a aeperenrs arr
(aA. frente af 59)
BATT Sie TUT
sft: eet: Ure atten ahedtean: | sftutsatet Seat AVTTEATA ASAT:
(aL. frreanfeat 66)
sitter: memetton: fret: BHATT, | tT: UTA Beat Taher fergtters:
(AY. wagenfeart 6)

----- PAGE 338 -----
Krishna Jiraka

Useful parts - Phala (Fruits)

Rasadi panchaka

Ruksha, Laghu
Vipaka
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Pachana, Sangrahi, Medhya, Garbhashaya Shodhaka, Jwaraghna,
Vrashya, Balya, Ruchya, Chakshushya, Chardighna, Hradya.

Pharmacological Actions ;

Appetizer, Digestant, Antiflatulent, Constipative, Antiinflammatory, Cardiotonic,
Antispasmodic, Larvicidal, Antiseptic, Galactogogue, Stomachic, Diuretic, Febrifuge.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakaphahara - Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Kaphahara because of its
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Agnimandya, Ajirna, Jwara gulma, Adhmana, Atisara, Chardi, Netraroga, Jwara,
Garbhashaya vikruti, Krmi, Vrana.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

areraatt ¢ est reset aT (aT. F. 1/753)

Intake of Kalajaji (Carum carvi) with jaggery is very useful in Vishama jwara (Ma-
larial fever).

2. Aruchi (Anorexia)
ardtaftarsnst sera asary alate Ys: ats wake
(afa. 26/212)

Mixture of Karavi (Carum carvi), Maricha (Piper nigrum), Ajaji (Cuminum

----- PAGE 339 -----
ee Krishna Jiraka 331
eyminum), Draksha (Vitis vinifera
granatum) mixed with §
Aruchi (Anorexia),

aie ), Vrakshamla (Garcinia indica) and Dadima (Punica
auvarcala salt, Jaggery and honey is very useful in all kinds of

Maira (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) = 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Fruit contains 2.5 to 8% volatile oil, 10%

; fixed oil, 15% proteins and resin. Volatile
contains 45 to 65% of carvone limonene, dihy it

drocarone and traces of carvacol.
Research corner

—

. The purpose of the present study was to assess the effect of aqueous extract of
Carum carvi seeds in diet induced hyperlipidemia in rats. Carum carvi aqueous
seeds extract decrease lipid levels in diet induced hyperlipidemic rats. Saghir
MR, Sadiq S, Nayak S, Tahir MU. Hypolipidemic effect of aqueous extract of

Carum carvi (black Zeera) seeds in diet induced hyperlipidemic rats. Pak J
Pharm Sci. 2012 Apr; 25(2):333-7.

i)

. To evaluate the effect of oral administration of caraway (Carum carvi) on the
blood glucose level, lipid profile, and the weight of diabetic rats. Caraway has
both antihyperglycemic and hypolipidemic activity in diabetic rats. Haidari F,
Seyed-Sadjadi N, Taha-jalali M, Mohammed-Shahi M. The effect of oral
administration of Carum carvi on weight, serum glucose and lipid profile in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Saudi Med J. 2011 Jul; 32(7):695-700.

3. The present study investigates the direct effects of Carum carvi L. (Apiaceae)
ethanol extract on dispersed intestinal smooth muscle cells (SMC) of guinea
pigs. The data obtained indicate a dose-dependent inhibition of the contraction
induced by Ach. This response may explain, in part, the beneficiaP effect of
caraway in relieving gastrointestinal symptoms associated with dyspepsia. Al-
Essa MK, Carum carvi on dispersed intestinal smooth muscle cells of the
genua pig. Pharm Biol. 2010 Jan; 48(1):76-80. doi:10.3109/138802009030-
46161.

4. Essential oil of Carum carvi L. fruits analyzed by gas chromatographymass
spectrometry and assayed for its in vitro and in vivo antioxidant activity and
hepatoprotective effect against carbon tetrachloride (CCI (4) damage. Caraway
essential oil strongly inhibited LP in both systems of induction, the essential oil
of caraway appeared promising for safe use in folk medicine and the
pharmaceutical and food industries. Samojlik 1, Lakic N, Mimica-Dukic N,

----- PAGE 340 -----
ww
Ww
tw

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Dakovic-Svajcer K, Bozin B. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective potential of
essential oils of coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.) and caraway (Carum carvi
L.) (Apiaceae). J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Aug 11:58(15):8848-53.doi:10.
1021/jf101645n.

5. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the diuretic potential of aqueous
extracts of Carum carvi fruit (Caraway). From the pattern of exception of
water, sodium and potassium, it may be deduced that there are atleast two types
of active principals present in these extracts, one having a furosemide-like
activity and the other a thiazide-like activity. Lahlou S, Tahraoui A, Israili Z,
Lyoussi B. Diuretic activity of the aqueous extracts of Carum carvi and
Tanacetum vulgare in normal rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2007 Apr 4;
110(3):458-63. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulations Indications

1. Lavngadi churna Kasa, Agnimandya
2: Lavana bhaskara churna Agnimandya, Shula
33

sig Sal Ajaji Gudayoga Vishamajwara, Agnimandya
Hingwashtaka churna
Yogaraja guggulu

Botanical Name — Carum carvi Linn.

Agnimandya, Shula

Amavata, Udararoga

Carum — Caria— Where it was discovered, roots as well as seeds are edible.
carvi — Caraway (Karawia name in Arab).
Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni  Haritakyadi varga 81-85

Basonym of Drug

poranit sina |

Fruit is like Jiraka but black in colour.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Krishna Jiraka 333

Basonym of Drug
Porat shew, |
Fruit is like Jiraka but black in colour.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, carpdtcatices-angeiizaet star sftrent |
Krishna jiraka (Carum carvi) grows in Kashmir state.
Morphology
2. calfe-Horreat: |
Fruits are black in colour
Properties and Actions
3. TBAT ATA |
Fruit of Krishna jiraka has got very strong odour.
4. GIRL TASS |
Krishna jiraka has got very agreeable odour.
5, SRNRTE-SaNe Vitra Pree
It expels the air and induces clear eructation.
6. wem-wtaaett |
Krishna jiraka increases taste.
7. WTA ATA

Itis very good digestive as like Jiraka.

Regional Names

English

indi
Malayayam Shema jeerakam
Habitat
Krishna jiraka is extensively cultivated in Kashmir and Gadhwal.

Morphology
Habit — Biennial but occasionally forming a perennial stock.

----- PAGE 342 -----
334 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Stem — Erect, branched, 35 to 50 cm tall.

Leaves — Has long sheathing foot stalk, pinnate, with
several pairs of segments which are sessile, but once or
twice pinnate with short linear lobes. In a leaf of 6 or 8 cm
long, the lowest or next to the lowest segments are 0.75
cm (7.5 mm), the others diminishing gradually to the top.
Upper leaves are smaller and less divided.

Inflorescence — Umbel having 8 to 10 rays, either
without involucres or with one or two small linear bracts.
Fruit — Caraway seeds are 5 mm long, linear-ob-
long and usually curved, with prominent ribs.
Varieties Carum carvi Linn.
B.Pr.Ni -1. Jiraka 2. Krishna jiraka
3. Upakunchika
Dh.Ni - 1. Jiraka 2. Shukla jiraka 3. Krishna jiraka 4. Vanya jiraka

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruits are oblong, laterally compressed and slightly curved, up to 5 mm long, 1 mm
broad, tapering towards both ends. The mericarp is yellowish brown in colour and shows
five equal sides with five narrow ridges which are very distinct, endosperm is brown and
somewhat oily. It has got characteristic odour and pungent taste.

Substitute : 1. Fruit of Bunium persicum Boiss
Adulterant : 1. Cuminum cyminum Linn
Classical references
Synonyms
POS: GIST Tae: (ALT. Aire 8 2)
Properties and Actions
wate Ure Get ae wet HATE, | ST aE CoA ET,
(a3. ethrrafe at 84-85)
TUT HHO St aay Prat | wearschuisaet a aayea oifsatt TAT Ut
(afr. magenta at 71)

----- PAGE 343 -----
Krishna Jiraka 335

sires ehrentent wat ureter ery | wet Hate meget waterer feretrerry
ftract dod text get arena, | Eafeer ore wfdqearenraferantard, 11
(& fr. sirafirert 1188)

TROT ESOT a aRUAMAhet | wes ots a mae Death wT 1
(afr. frorenfaart 62)

gece
geclert Heo AACA, | SOTA Sttont Sed Stott wT
(uF. frorenfert 64)
secret ( areft aftr )-
saat: He: Vila are TTT: (TA. frreenteert 65 )
Sara Site YUT:-
fice: agen: Ue Bhtren apedtoan: | storiseet Gea ATA:
(aA. freenfert 66)
HOST: BUT: LATTA SAAT: STA: SANT MATT MST: Tat Ff OPS:
(B.Pargenert 7 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Jiraka
a. Mula b. Phala c. Kanda d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Phala

2. Pradhana Karma of Jiraka
a. Rasayana b. Vajikara c. Dipana d. Shothahara

_

Ans: c. Dipana
3. Paste prepared from Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) with jaggery is very effective
in case of
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Arshas d. Shotha
Ans: a. Jwara
4. Jirakadyarishta is specifically indicated in
a. Amlapitta b. Sutika vikara c. Kushta d. Raktapitta
Ans: b. Sutika Vikara

----- PAGE 344 -----
336 Dravyaguna Vijnana
ae

5. Botanical name of Shweta Jiraka
a. Cuminum cyminum b. Nigella sativa
c. Carum carvi d, Carum roxburghianum
Ans: a. Cuminum cyminum
6. Botanical name of Krishna Jiraka
a. Nigella sativa b. Carum copti
c. Cuminum cyminum d. Carum carvi
Ans: d. Carum carvi
7. Udgara shodhana is a synonym of
a. Chitraka b. Maricha c. Haritaki d. Krishna Jiraka
Ans: d. Krishna Jiraka
8. Types of jiraka acc to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 2 b. 3 c.4 d.6
Ans: b. 3

----- PAGE 345 -----
Chapter

Jyotishmati

Useful part - Beeja (Seed),

Rasadi panchaka

Katu Tikta
Tikshna, Sara, Snigdha

Karma (Action)
Medhya, Buddhi vardhaka, Smritivardhaka, Vamaka, Varnya, Vranahara, Dipana,
Swedajanana, Uttejaka, Nadi balya.

Pharmacological Actions

Intellect promoter, Appetizer, Stimulant, Rubefacient, Emollient, Emetic & Diges-
tive.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because
of its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu vipaka
and Katu tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Manasika vikara, Vrana, Visarpa, Pandu, Vaivarnya, Agnimandya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Sidhma (White spotted leprosy)
TH atatet Wetea: Uae | fragt weatftrarat Serre, eA
(3.¢.fa. 19/75)

The oil of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) is processed with water mixed with
Apamarga kshara (Alkali of Achyranthes aspera) and decanted for 7 times. Massaging
this oil on skin lesions will cure Sidhma (White spotted leprosy).

2. Udara (Ascitis)

weitkereatact det ar afitur cafstentegterst fret (GA. 14/10)

Internal usage of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) oil which is mixed to milk and

----- PAGE 346 -----
338 Dravyaguna Vijnana

then Swarjika alkali, and Hingu (Ferula narthex) added will cure Udara (Ascitis).

Matra (Dosage)
Taila (Oil) - 5-15 drops
Churna (Powder) -1-2g
Phytoconstituents

Seeds contain 62% oil which is thick reddish yellow in colour. It also contains bitter
resinous principle, Tannin, Celapangine, Celapanine, Celastin, Celestrol, Paniculatine,
Malakanguniol, Malkangunin, -amyrin and 1-sitosterol.

Research corner

1. The objective of the present study was to evaluate hypolipidemic effect of
methanolic extract of Celastrus paniculatus in experimentally induced
hypercholesterolemic rats. Histological studies showed less cholesterol deposits
in the aorta of animals fed with seed extract of C. Paniculatus, compared to the
induced hypercholesterolemic animals not given C. Paniculatus supplement.
Patil RH, Prakash K, Maheshwari VL. Hypolipidemic. Effect of Celastrus
paniculatus in experimentally induced Hypercholesterolemic Wistar Rats.
Indian J Clin Biochem. 2010 Oct; 25(4):405-10. doi: 10. 1007/s 12291-010-
0050-x. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

2. The effect of Celastrus paniculatus Willd. (Celeastraceae) seed aqueous extract
on learning and memory was studied using elevated plus maze and passive
avoidance test (sodium nitrite induced amnesia rodent model). The study
reveals that the aqueous extract of Celastrus paniculatus seed has dose-
dependent cholinergic activity, thereby improving memory performance.
Bhanumathy M, Harish MS, Shivaprasad HN, Sushma G. Nootropic activity
of Celastrus paniculatus seed. Pharm Biol. 2010 Mar; 48(3):324-7. doi:
10.3109/13880200903 127391.

3. To investigate the mode of the relaxing action of a methanolic extract prepared
from the seeds of Celastrus paniculatus (CPE, 0.001-10 microg/mL) in the rat
ileum and to try to confirm on human tissues the intestinal pharmacological
activity of the extract. It is concluded that (i) CPE exerted a powerful myogenic
and L-type Ca(2+)-dependent relaxing effect in the isolated rat ileum and that
(ii) the human ileum is sensitive to the inhibitory effect of CPE. If confirmed
in vivo, our data could explain the traditional use of this herb in the treatment
of intestinal spasma. Borrelli, F, Borbone N, Capassoa R, Monesanao D, De
Marino S, Aviello G, Aprea G, Masone S, Izzo AA. Potent relaxation effect

----- PAGE 347 -----
Jyotishmati 339

of Celeastrus paniculatus extract’ in the rate and human ileum. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Apr. 21;122(3):434-8. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2009.02.003.
Epub 2009 Feb 11.

4 Biochemical, histochemical and histological studies of the effects on an oily
extractive from the seeds of Celastrus paniculatus were done on the testes and
liver of adult rats. These results indicate that Celastrus paniculatus oil may
have useful antifertility effects and that the degenerative changes seen in the
liver are reversal with time. Bidwai PP, Wangoo D, Bhullar N.
Antispermatogenic action of Celastrus paniculatus seed extract in the rat with
reversible changes in the liver. J Ethnopharmacol. 1990 Mar; 28(3):293-303.

Yoga (Formulations)

SIL.No. Formulation Indications

Jyotishmati taila Manasika vikara, Medhya karmartha

Botanical Name — Celastrus paniculatus. Willd.

Celastrus — Privet, a bushy ever green shrub.

paniculata — Having panicle inflorescence.

Family— Celastraceae

Kula —Jyotishmati kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Shirovirechanopaga Varga

Sushruta Arkadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi Varga 171-172
Basonym of Drug

where yur ts HSM: , After aererarer, Sarhe: Tact ser at
a aa|

Stem of Jyotishmati is having white shining dots (Lenticels), it improves intellect
and having hot potency.

Synonyms
Morphology
1. Hat-aectheatt |

Jyotishmati is a climber.

----- PAGE 348 -----
340 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. URTaAIa-UNTaT aa Te TTA: |
Root of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) resembles legs of pigeon.
3. WHecre- per Aaa TET: |
Stem bark has shining white dots over its surface.
4, qauterferent-eearguatrarcn eat |
Jyotishmati has yellow coloured flowers.
5. QeNHeT-ATHT |
Fruits are small in size.
6. HHS HreHlTSad HT |

Fruits of Jyotishmati resemble eggs of crow.

Properties and'actions
7. Cedten-dteeut ere: |
The oil prepared from Jyotishmati will be having yellow colour.
8. Reat-Aere feat |
Jyotishmati improves intellect.
9. wrauT-eatfer fear Teme
Jyotishmati alleviates many diseases.
10. Gaara STM: Whereas aT |
Miscellaneous
11, WUT -IUATey: WUT, ST Sea STANT |
Seeds and oil of Jyotishmati sold in the market.

Regional Names

Habitat
Jyotishmati grows throughout India, especially in hilly areas.

----- PAGE 349 -----
Jyotishmati 341

Morphology

Habit — A large deciduous climber.

Stem — 18 Mtrs high and maximum 23 cm in diam-
eter. Twigs fairly smooth, reddish brown, densely cov-
ered with small elongate whitish lenticels.

Bark — Pale brown, rough with shallow cracks, ex-
foliating in small soft scales. Blaze is 0.75-1 cm in thick-
ness, not fibrous, pink finely streaked with red or reddish
brown. The juice turning blue on the blade of a knife.

Leaves — 6 to 10 cm long, 4 to 8 cm wide, broadly
elliptic ovate or obovate, abruptly short-acuminate, crenate-
serrate, rather coriaceous, glabrous, lateral nerves are arch-
ing. Petiole is 8-15 mm long.

Inflorescence — Long panicle of 5-20 cm long.

Flowers — 4 cm in diameter and green coloured.

Fruit - Capsule, 1 cm in diameter, depressed globose, 3-lobed, bright yellow on
ripening 3-6 seeds.

Seeds — Completely enclosed in an orange-red aril.

Celastrus paniculetus

Different sources/synonyms

1. Celastrus montana 2. Celastrus multiflora 3. Celastrus nutans
4. Celeastrus senegalensis 5. Celastrus spinoses

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruit of Celastrus paniculatus contains 3 to 6 seeds enclosed in a complete arillus of
deep orange. Seeds are triquetrous, reddish brown in colour, slightly arched with acute
ends. The testa is hard; enclosing a white kernel which releases oil when put some pres-
sure. It has got aromatic odour.

Adulterants
1 Seeds of Cardiospermum helicacabum Linn.

2. Fruits of Duranta species
Classical references

Synonyms

weitere earmeet waters ether A Correct MTT aT eT SAT
(ara. eaeenfeert 171)

----- PAGE 350 -----
342 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions
waren we fterea aa eer | seq anette areafererta|y
(a. Srerafeat 172 af. Teresi 259)
wafrorct ¢ @faren ferearen seer AT | Haar ara ear Ateterferaat|4r 1
serarfrerent Sat aureterd uregan: 1 (A. sitet 716-717)
waferort ferravar a war faRscncatrancaaer = |
weve dearer teat wars yori cer feta
(af. Terme GF 45)
wart Heftrce denier amarater | dost art ferment qfegareat
att aay unage werent | aenfsaeiaredss Gerd mega: i
waren wareq aR tetenrear carter Hea a era: WaT |
sar wey ft wit wdamene fa arian
(BLP. freate at 72-74)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Jyothishmati

a. Mula b. Biya c. Kanda d. Patra
Ans: b. Bija
2. Pradhana Karma of Jyothishmati
a. Medhya b. Jwaraghna c. Kandughna _—_d.Shothahara
Ans: a. Medhya
3. Celestrol a chemical constituent present in
a. Devadaru b. Vidarikanda cc. Jyothishmati = d. Manjishtha

Ans: c. Jyothishmati
4. Jyothishmati taila is indicated in
a. Jwara b. Vaivarnya c. Netraroga d. Manasika Vikara
Ans: d. Manasika Vikara
5. Botanical name of Jyothishmati
a. Curcuma longa b. Cedrus deodara
c. Operculina turpethum. d. Celastrus paniculatus
Ans: d. Celastrus paniculatus

----- PAGE 351 -----
i

Jyotishmati

6. Paravata Padi is the synonym of

a. Tulasi b. Aragwadha _ c. Jyothishmati
Ans: c. Jyothishmati

. Sphutatwacha is the synonym of

a. Vidanga b. Jyothishmati c. Yashtimadhu
Ans: b. Jyothishmati

. Habit of Jyothishmati
a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub

Ans: d. Climber

d. Guduchi

d. Aparajita

d. Climber

343

----- PAGE 352 -----
Po Chanter

Kalamegha
Useful part — Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi panchaka
Laghu, Ruksha, Tikshna

Karma (Action)

Dipana, Swedajanaka, Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Yakrudrogahara, Kushthaghna,
Raktashodhaka, Balavardhaka, Shothahara, Vishaghna.
Pharmacological (Action)

Febrifuge, Anthelmintic, Hepatoprotective, Stomachic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka be-
cause of Ushna Virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Jwara, Agnimandya, Yakrut vikara, Kamala, Kustha, Krimi, Shotha, Vishavikara.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Vishamajwara (Malaria)~ One part of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata)
churna and one part of Maricha and 1 g of this churna is given internally in
case of Vishamajwara (Malaria).

2. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus) — Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from whole
plant of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata) is given internally 60 to 100 ml
for a day in case of Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus).

3. Yakrudvikara (Liver disorders) — Kwatha (Decoction) of Kalamegha
(Andrographis paniculata) is given orally in case of all kinds of Yakrudvikara
(Liver disorders).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - lto3g

----- PAGE 353 -----
swarasa (Juice) - S5tol0ml }
Kwatha (Decoction) — 20to40 mI
phytocostituents

Total plant contains bitter substances; the bitter substances in the leaves are identi-

fied as ‘Andrographolid’, and ‘Kalameghin’. The ash obtained from the plant had sodium
chloride and potassium salts.

Research corner

[

ae

w

4,

The current investigation was aimed to determine the hepatocurative role of
silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) synthesized rapidly using Andrographis
paniculata. Low dose (25 mg/kg BW) was effective in revival of all biological
parameters to near normal in all intoxicated groups indicating the curing effects
on CCI (4) induced liver injury. Suriyakalaa U, Antony JJ, Suganya S, Siva D,
Sukirtha R, Kamalakkannan S, Pichiah PB, Achiraman S. Hepatocurative
activity of biosynthesized silver nanopaticles fabricated using Andrographis
paniculata. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2013 Feb 1:102:189-94, doi
10.1016/j. colsufb. 2012.06.039. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

The aim of the present work was to analyze the anti-diabetic potential of
chloroform fraction of ethanol extract of Andrographis paniculata (AP) and
diabetes laden gene expression alteration. Antidiabetic screening fraction of AP
at molecular level revealed significant antidiabetic activity. Chaurasia A,
Kharya MD, Sharma B, Roy P. Glucose metabolism and diabetogenic gene
expression analysis of chloroform fraction of Andrographis paniculata (Nees)
whole herb in diabetic albino mice. J. Complement Integr Med. 2012 Aug
10:9:Article 21.doi: 10.1515/1553-3840.1632.

. This study was designed to evaluate and compare the inhibitory property of

extracts of Andrographis paniculata leaves [Methanolic (AP1), hydroalcoholic
(AP2), Successive water (AP3)] and non-leaves [Methanolic (AP4),
hydroalcoholic (AP5), successive water (AP6)] towards inflammatory
mediators. Results revealed that AP1 and AP4 exhibited inhibitory effect on all
the inflammatory mediators excluding PGE2 and TNF-alpha. Chandrasekara
CV, Murali B, Deepak M, Agarwal A. In vitro comparative evaluation of non-
leaves and leaves extracts of Andrographis paniculata on modulation of
inflammatory mediators. Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem. 2012
Sep; 11(2):191-7.

Andrographolide, a diterpene lactone of the Andrographis paniculata, displays

----- PAGE 354 -----
346 Dravyaguna Vijnana

anti-HIV activity in vitro, A series of andrographolide derivatives have been
synthesized and evaluated for their anti-HIV activity in a cell-free virus
infectivity assay using TZM-bl cells. The results suggest that androgrpholide
derivatives may be promising candidates for prevention of HIV infection.
Uttekar MM, Das T, Pawar RS, Bhandari B, Menon V, Nutan, Gupta SK,
Bhat SV. Anti-HIV activity of semisynthetic derivatives of andrographolide
and computational study of HIV-1 gp 120 protein binding. Eur J. Med Chem.
2012 Oct; 56:368-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech. 2012.07.030. Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Kalamegha churna Jaundice, Liver disorder

Botanical Name — Andrographis paniculata, Nees, Andrographis - denoting male,
paniculata — having an inflorescence known as panicle.

Family — Acanthaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Vasa
Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Not mentioned in Varga
Basonym of Drug
Opfrreat- fer reat, Fret Ta fereHca Tat AINA |
Kalamegha is considered as smaller variety of Nimba as it has got similar properties.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Welferrh- Whole plant is very bitter to taste.
2. aafert- The seeds are barley shaped which is also very bitter.

Regional Names

=

----- PAGE 355 -----
Kalamegha 347

Malayalam
Habitat
Kalamegha plant grows throughout India, especially in plains of central India,
Andhrapradesh, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Kerala.
Morphology
Habit — Erect, wild, annual sub shrub.
Stem — Branched, herbaceous, cylindrical, solid, green, branch lets 4-gonous.

Leaves — Simple, opposite decussate, linear-obvate, exstipulate, their, delicate, sub
sessile, unicostate reticulate venation, leaf apex is acute.

Inflorescence — Panicle inflorescence, Panicle branches are zigzag.

Flowers — Complete, bisexual, zygomorphic, white in colour & lower mid lobes are
crested with purple lines gives pink tinge, petals are 5, stamens are 2 in number and
exerted. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous, superior ovary and axile placentation.

Fruit — Capsule, basally beaked, oblong, compressed, minutely hairy the funicle of
seeds forms a hook-like projection.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Dry, whole plant of grayish green colour consisting of straight quadrangular stems,
which are up to 5 mm thick, lanceolate, leaves, up to 8 cm long and 1 to 2.5 cm broad,
small flowers or linear oblong and flattened capsules, 1.5 to 2.5 cm long, borne on termi-
nal and axillary panicles. The roots are fibrous and divaricately branched. It has got no
characteristic odour and tastes very bitter.

Kalamegha (Andrographis praniculata) is used as substitute for Kiratatikta (Swertia
chirata).

Classical references

Synonyms
area rast aarenncacteTan | (A.A. rargeniert 135)

Properties and Actions
Glereat creator: srafraferrert: | ata: Feat Hat VET: APATITE:
apart Hal HE vat areal voreaa ui (HA. Wagaest 136)

----- PAGE 356 -----
348 Dravyaguna Vijnana
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Kalamegha
a. Mula b. Panchanga _ c. fruit d. Seed
Ans: b. Panchanga

2. Kwatha (Decoction) of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata) is given orally
in case of
a. Shwasa b. Jwara c. Yakrudvikara d. Vibandha
Ans: ce. Yakrudvikara

3. Andrographolid is present in
a. Katuki b. Jiraka c. Dhanyaka d. Kalamegha
Ans: d. Kalamegha

4. Botanical name of Kalamegha
a. Andrographis paniculata b. Celastrus paniculata
c. Berberis aristata d. Piper longum
Ans: a. Andrographis paniculata

5. Yava tikta is the synonym
a. Kutaja b. Kalamegha c. Yava d. Aragwadha
Ans: b. Kalamegha

6. Habit of Kalamegha plant
a. Herb b. Sub shrub c. Tree d. Tree
Ans: b. Sub shrub

7. Kalamegha is a substitute for

a. Parpataka b. Nimba c. Kiratatikta d. Akarakarabha
Ans: c. Kratatikta

----- PAGE 357 -----
Kampillaka

Useful part - Phala raja (Dried glands covering mature fruits).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Phalaraja - Rechana, Krimighna, Mehahara, Vishaghna, Ashmarighna, Vranahara,
Shaka - Grahi and Dipana

Pharmacological Actions
Cathartic, Anthelmintic, Lithotriptic, Purgative.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka & Pitta saraka.

Vatashamaka because of Ushna virya, Kapha Shamaka due to its Ushna virya,
Katu Rasa and Katu vipaka. Pittasaraka as it has got Virecana karma.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Krimi, Ashmari, Prameha, Gulma, Adhmana, Udara, Vibandha and Vrana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimi (Worms)
aftaeet wut catel Ss we afer | ureery arity patra: Ul
(a.5.Fa. 7/22)

6 gm of powders of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) taken with jaggery will
expell all the Krimi (Worms).

2. Vrana (Wound)
— Set cahtueetaet aT | (AFA. 25/93)

Oil processed with Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) if applied, will improve
healing of Vrana (Wound).

----- PAGE 358 -----
350 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Rakta guima (Haemetometra)

yrarirertrenrezut yreberenfarenntearere, | feraetterrgy afer Here AT

(aa.fa. 25/93)

Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) powder mixed with sugar and honey allevi-
ates Rakta gulma.

Matra (Dosage)
Phala raja churna- 2 to 3 g (for adults)
(Powder of fruit) 1 to 2g (for children)

Phytoconstituents
Heart wood yielded lupeol, lupeol acetate, sitosterol and berginin.

Bark consist acetylaleceritolic acid, o-amyrin, sitosterol and sitosterol glucoside.
Seeds yielded bergenin, corotoxigenin-L-rhamnoside and coroglaucigenin-L-rham-
noside.

Research corner

1 A new lignan dimer, bilariciresional (1), was isolated from the leaves of
Mallotus philippensis, along with platanoside (2), isovitexin (3),
dihydromyricetin (4), bergenin (5), 4-O-galloylbergenin (6), and pachysandiol
A (7). Mai NT, Cuong NX, Thao NP, Nam NH, Khoi NH, Minh CV, Heyden
YV, Thuan NT, Tuyen NV, Quetin-Leclercq J, Kiem PV. A new lignan dimer
from Mallotus philippines. Nat Prod Common. 2010 Mar, 5(3):423-6.

2 Bioassay-directed fractionation of the organic extract against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis was a new compound, 8-cinnamoyl-5,7-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-
6-geranylchromene (1) for which the name malloto-philippen F is suggested.
Hong Q, Minter, DE, Franzblau SG, Arfan M, Amin H, Reinecke MG. Anti-
tuberculosis compounds from Mallotus philippinensis. Nat Prod Common.
2010 Feb; 5(2):211-7.

3 In the quest for potent anti-Helicobacter pylori agents, scholars found 70%
EtOh extract of Mallotus philippinensis (LAM.) MUELL. (MPM) with strong
bactericidal activity at the concentration of 15.6-31.2 mg/L against eight H.
pylori strains. Further fractionation and purification of 70% EtOh extract of
MPM led to the isolation of 5 compounds, namely 5,7-dihydroxy-8-methyl-6-
prenylflavanone (1), 3'-prenylrubranine (2), red compound (3), isorottlerin (4),
and rottlerin (5) which were elucidated on the basis of nuclear magnetic
resonance and mass spectroscopy. Zaidi SF, Yoshida I, Butt F, Yusuf MA,

----- PAGE 359 -----
Kampillaka 351

Usmanghani K, Kadowaki M, Sugiyama T. Potent bactericidal constituents
from Mallotus philippinensis against clarithromycin and metronidazole resistant
strains of Japanese and Pakistani Helicobacter pylori. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009
Apr;32(4):631-6.

4, Four known friedelane-type triterpenoids, friedelin (1), 3-hydroxy-D:A-
friedoolean-3-en-2-one (2), beta-hydroxy-D:A- friedooleanan-3-one (3), and 3
alpha-hydroxy-D:A-friedooleanan-2-one (4), and two known lupane-type
triterpenoids, lupeol (5) and betulin (6), were isolated from the stem bark of
Mallotus phillippensis. Tanaka R, Nakata T, Yamaguchi C, Wada S, Yamada
T, Tokuda H. Potential anti-tumor-promoting activity of 3alpha-hydroxy-D:A-
friedooleanan-2-one from the stem bark of Mallotus philippensis. Planta Med.
2008 Mar; 74(4):413-6. doi:10.1055/s-2008- 1034347.

5. The present study was designed to investigate the adverse effects of indigenous
Kamala seed etheral extract on various reproductive parameters of female rats.
Taken together, these data indicate the Kamala reduced serum FSH and LH
levels probably by affecting hypothalamic /pitutary axis in treated animals.
Thus, reduced levels of FSH and LH and estradiol might have affected the
follicular development, quality and number of ovulated eggs, corpora lutea
formation, oestrous cycle, establishment and maintenance of pregnancy in
treated rats. Thakur SC, Thakur SS, Chaube SK, Singh SP. An etheral extract
of Kamala (Mallotus philippinensis (Moll.Arg) Lam) seed induce adverse
effects on reproductive parameters of female rats. Reprod Toxicol. 2005. May-
Jun; 20(1):149-56.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Formulation Indications

Botanical Name — Mallotus philippinensis Muell Arg.
Mallotus — Like the shape of Melon
philippinensis — Native of Philippines
Family — Euphorbiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Eranda

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka  Notmentioned in Varga

----- PAGE 360 -----
352

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta — Shyamadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.— Haritakyadi varga 147

Basonym of Drug

maha ABM SIT AAT. |

The plant is abundantly available at Kampilla Desha.

Synonyms

Morphology

is

2

3s

Tea THATS TTT |

Fruits of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) will be covered by red dust.
Hh :- TRAM: VATA |

Powder is rough to touch as it is covered by hairs.
THeuie:- tant gut weaker

Fruits are covered by red coloured powders.

Properties and Actions

4.

10.

aa Ural atrereata frearedeare |
Kampillaka Raja (Powder) has got attractive red colour and also cures many
diseases.

. Welaa:- Terragen |

Powder of Kampillaka if mixed with water may be used as colouring agents
for clothes.

. Tare:-tarafa ard, aterar tarenfirdt aetater

Kampillaka imparts colour to the clothes and also increases Raftjaka pitta.

. THITAA-TeHfeeant eae

Kampillaka alleviates diseases related to Rakta dhatu.

. tere:-trerata efargeneata, pirrredcard |

Kampillaka improves taste as it kills worms which may be a cause for anorexia.

. tar:- terete act aftrafed Preareater |

Kampillaka is very good purgative and expels the worms.
aUeTET:- wut Merate, Hea |

Kampillaka cleanses the wound by killing microorganism.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Kampillaka 353

Regional Names

Indian Kamala, Rottlera

Habitat

Kampillaka plant grows throughout India and commonly seen in South Indian states
like Karnataka, Kerala and Tamilnadu.

Morphology
Habit — Small much branched tree. Branch lets,
young leaves and inflorescence are rusty pubescent.

Leaves — Alternative, simple, variable, 8 to 15
cm long, 3 to 7.5 cm in width, ovate or ovate-lan-
ceolate, entire or slightly toothed, acuminate tip, gla-
brous above, pubescent and with numerous orbicular
red glands beneath, reticulately veined, base rounded
or acute, strongly 3-nerved at the base and with 4-7
pairs of nerves above the basal ones. Petioles are 2.5
to 5 cm long, cylindrical, fulvous-pubescent, with 2 Mallotus philippinensis
small sessile glands one on each side of the summit. Muell.Arg

Inflorescence — Male inflorescence is long ter-
minal spike where as female inflorescence is short spike.

Flowers — Dioecious, small. Male flowers clustered, sessile or very shortly pedicel-
late, sepals are 4 and have numerous stamens. Female flowers: sepals are 3 or 4 in num-
ber, thicker when compare to male flowers ovary has red glands, 3-celled.

Fruit — Capsule, 8-13 mm in diameter, 3-lobed, Loculicidally 3-valved, covered
with a bright red powder consisting of minute stellate hairs and fine grains of a red resin-
ous substance.

Seeds — 4 mm in diameter, sub globose, black.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Reddish powder containing numerous brick red, spherical glands and stellate thick
walled hair. The powder is resinous.

----- PAGE 362 -----
354 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
mittee: aeherarat Teargey Vrertiste at (a1.9. elerrnte af 147)

Properties and Actions

ahaa: aafrareatiegetarar | aa teh corse AerareferaryAsa. |
(a3. etrrafert 147)

aaftareray Patel Care HSMN HUMANA: | etter Blaferargrs:
(aft. aaa at 125 >

aaftaeet deat tet eer: amerahr | wonpeHerreneraerrsarger
aeare vitact fer areret ane chery ui (S.A. staf af 949-950)

aftaedt: TRYST: HEBIN ter: | WySIt wee: PART awry a7

(BLA. etree TI 6s)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kampillaka is
a. Mula b. Phalaraja c. Bija d. Patra

Ans: b. Phalaraja
2. Pradhana Karma of Kampillaka
a. Rechana b. Stambhana c. Atisaraghna d. Keshya
Ans: a. Rechana
3. 6 gm of powders of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) taken with jaggery

will expel
a. Mala b. Dosha c. Krimi d. Sweda
Ans: c. Krimi
4. Botanical name of Kampillaka ;
a. Operculina turpethum b. Tinospora cordifolia
c. Withania somnifera d. Mallotus philippinensis

Ans: d. Mallotus philippinensis

5. Patodaka is a synonym of
a. Kampillaka b. Arjuna c. Mandukaparni d. Haridra
Ans: a. Kampillaka

6. Raktachurnaka is a synonym
a. Padmaka b. Kamala c. Kampillaka d. Guggulu
Ans: c. Kampillaka

7. Habit of Kampillaka plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Tree

Ans: d. Tree

----- PAGE 363 -----
Chapter

Kanchanara

Useful part — Kaanda Twak (Stem bark)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Kanchanara twak— Grahi, Krimighna, Kushthaghna, Gandamalahara, Vranahara,

Kasahara.
Kovidara twak —Gandamalahara, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Dipana.

Kanchanara pushpa — Sangrahi, Rochaka, Pradara nashaka, Kasahara.
Kovidara pushpa —Pradaranashaka, Raktapittahara

Pharmacological Actions
Astringent, Anthelminitc, Haemostatic, Antiinflammatory.

Doshakarma (Action om Dosha)
Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pittahara due to Shita virya and Kashaya Rasa and Kaphahara

because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Twak — Gandamala, Krimi, Kushtha, Kasa, Vranavikara, Atisara, Apachi.
Pushpa — Pradara, Raktapitta, Kasa, Shwasa

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Gandamala (Goitre))
PISA: FMA: YOST TOT ATA |
MOBO ssscsissieseisssdeudassooncan N(R. 2/2/126)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is prepared and Shunthi

----- PAGE 364 -----
356 Dravyaguna Vijnana

(Zingiber officinale) powder is added, and then administered. It is very efficacious in
Gandamala (Goitre).

2. Masurika (Pox) a

SSAA: ATTA SOT HOt (HLTA. 60/49)

Incase of Masurika (Pox) the decoction prepared from bark of Kanchanara (Bauhinia
variegata) added with Swarna makshika (Copper pyrite) powder is beneficial.

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 40 to 80 ml

Churna (Powder) —- 3to6g

Pushpa rasa(Juice) - 10to20 ml
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark yielded hentriacontane, octacosanol, -Sitosterol and stigmasterol. Stem
contains lupeol & aminoacids. Seeds consist myricetol glycosides flowers have
hentriacontane, octacosanol, B-Sitosterol & stigma sterol.

Research corner

1 Study to investigate the role of aqueous (BVA) and ethanol (BVE) extracts of
Bauhinia variegata against milk-induced leukocytosis and eosinophilia in
albino mice. The results of the study revealed that pretreatment with both the
extracts caused significant reduction in the total leukocyte and eosinophil
counts in animals in dose-dependent manner, Mali RG, Dhake AS. Evaluation
of effects of Bahuhina vareigata stem bark extracts against milk-induced
eosinophilia in mice. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Apr; 2(2):132-4.
doi:10.4103/2231-4040.82949.

2 The nephroprotective activity of the ethanolic extract of Bauhinia variegata
(Linn.) whole stem against cisplatin-induced nephropathy was investigated by
an in vivo method in rats. The ethanol extract of B. variegata at 400 mg/kg
(b.w.) exhibit significant and comparable nephroprotective potential to that of
the standard polyherbal drug cystone. Pani SR, Mishra S, Sahoo S, Panda PK.
Nephroprotctive effect of Bauhinia vareigata (Linn). whole stem extract
agatinst cisplatin-induced nephropathy in rats. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2011. Apr;
43(2):200-2. doi: 10.4103/0253-7673.77370.

To evaluate the ethanolic and aqueous extracts of Bauhinia variegata Linn. for
in vitro antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic activity. From the results, it is
evident that alcoholic and aqueous extracts of B. variegata Linn. can

Ww

----- PAGE 365 -----
Kanchanara 357

effectively decrease plasma cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL, and VLDL and
increase plasma HDL levels. In addition, the alcoholic and aqueous extracts
have shown significant antioxidant activity. By the virtue of its antioxidant
activity, B. variegata Linn. may show antihyperlipidemic activity. Rajani GP,
Ashok P. In vitro antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic activities of Bauhinia
variegata Linn. Indian J. Pharmacal. 2009. Oct; 41(5):227-32. doi:10.4103/
0253-7613.58513.

4 To evaluate the anticarcinogenicity and antimutagenicity of Kachanar extract a
skin carncinogenesis and melanoma tumour model in Swiss albino mice.
Results suggest that Kachanar extract exerts anticarcinogenic and
antimutagenic activity. Agarawal RC, Pandey S. Evaluation of
anticarcinogenic and antimutagenic potential of Bauhinia variegata extract in
Swiss albino mice. Asian Pac J. Cancer preve 2009;10(5):913-6.

5 The present work was carried out to assess the potential of Bauhinia variegata
bark as hepatoprotective agent. The hepatoprotective activity was investigated
in carbon tetrachloride (CC1(4)) intoxicated Spraguedawely rats. The extract
exhibited significant hepatroptective activity. Bodakhe SH, Ram A.
Hepatoprotective properties of Bauhinia variegata bark extract. Yakugaku
Zashi. 2007 Sep;127(9):1503-7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

3

Kanchanara varuna_ kwatha
Kanchanaradi kwatha

Botanical Name — Bauhinia variegata Linn.

Bauhinia — In memory of the two famous French Botanist brothers of the 16th cen-
tury Johna and Casper Bauhin.

Variegata — Variegated with patches of different colours.

Family — Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Vamanopaga Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi Varga 101-104

----- PAGE 366 -----
358 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
wret aeaut seater yet: |

The flower of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is golden yellow in colour.Synonyms

Morphology
1, QUT := AAA PTA: | BT AT UT |
Leaf of Kancanara is emarginated.
2. aaa-aatsearcdifer aaa: |
Kancanara has smooth and beautiful bark.
3. AME aTTaTt Yat Tear ECAH |
The flower of Kancanara is coppery red coloured.
4, Warrenl-waet seer Herel TET: |
Flowers contain very few stamens.
Properties and Actions
5. WuSrh-ws: TerTSArerear Wea athe: seer |
Kancanara is very useful in Galaganda and Gandamala.
Regional Names
Mountain Ebony, Camel’s foot
Habitat

Kanchanara is very common throughout India. As it grows very fast and gives
shade, commonly planted by the road sides. Kanchanara plant bears very beautiful flow-
ers hence cultivated in gardens.

Morphology
Habit — Shrub or small tree
Stem— Woody, aerial, erect, branched, solid, cylindrical & rough.

Leaf — Alternate, simple, stipulate, cordate, entire, emarginate, long, wide, divergent
minutely hairy, unicostate reticulate veined.

----- PAGE 367 -----
Kanchanara 359

Inflorescence — Panicle cyme

Flower - Complete, bisexual, zygomorphic, pink
colourd with prominent red veins, 5 petals and 5 sepals,
stamens are 5 in number, monocarpellary gynoecium.

Ip
\
A\

iy

fl

Fruit - Legume or Pod, 15 to 30 cm long and con-
taining several seeds,

Varieties
Kai. Ni & Pri. Ni—Two types :
1, Kanchanara, 2. Kovidara

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample) | Bauhinia variegata Linn.

Stem bark is moderately hard, curved, 4 to 8 mm in
thickness. External surface is rough, grayish brown in colour, transversely fissured or
cracked with small elliptic warts of darker colour. Inner surface is reddish brown and
lamellated with portion of bark coming out in thin strips. A transversely cut portion of
bark shows a narrow cork followed by conspicuous tangential stands of fibers. On break-
ing outer side breaks but fibrous within and has got characteristic faint odour with astrin-
gent state.

Classical references
Synonyms
ISA: HBAS AWS: vtorgers: | alana Altes: Here FIAT: Ul
Suseht aM: ere | (A. WEEMe TH 101-102)
Properties and Actions
arsant fort ot gar: scrafiege | ahtrepsqesit Weare aUTTE:
mifrentstt Care: Us AY BTL | wel Sale firrreanraaaNAgT I
(LF. Tees FT 103-104)
aeer: weg dart wUNITT: | USAT Yeset MTA: FEAT I
(a.Pageae at 195)
@AnN-
Tat HBA Ha: Tat: USE VT YH t Has wa as WS ale Tey
wal praert araftrarea werraer i (&.F.siete af 936)

----- PAGE 368 -----
360 Dravyaguna Vijnana

aatferan-
aarferaret feet ret arava: arenftrerf sae | TSA TRUM HOT oH A AAT

(4 faire TH 934)
alfa: mara: wary wast wortawr: 1 dhe: aeRererett Popes rags
(uP af 25)
aISAR-
TSA: HATA: TATeStat Tet AoE: t acaftrree wVSarenate rags: |
(BP etaent at 196)
walfarane-

AN HSA VA At PASAT: | Aa: Gat Teas yet a Farasz
(B.A. atteafe aT 200)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Kanchanara
a. Kanda Twak b. Mula c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: a. Kanda Twak
2. Gandamalahara action of Kanchanara is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka b. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Kanchanara pushpa has important Karma as
a. Rechana b. Bhedana cc. Sangrahi d. Dipana
Ans c. Sangrahi
4. Kwatha (Decoction) of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is prepared and
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) powder is added, and then administered is
beneficial in
a. Jwara b. Gandamala_ c. Ajima d. Prameha
Ans: b. Gandamala
5. Kanchanara Guggulu is indicated in
a. Vatarakta b. Amavata c. Bhagandhara d. Gandamala
Ans: d. Gandamala
. Botanical name of Kanchanara is
a. Terminalia belerica b. Bauhinia variegata
c. Boerhavia diffusa d. Rauwolfia serpentina
Ans: b. Bauhinia variegata

—

lon

----- PAGE 369 -----
361
Kanchanara

7, Yugmapatra is a synonym of

a. Irimeda b. Babbula
Ans: c. Kanchanara

g. Gandari is a synonym of
a. Kanchanara b. Bhallataka
Ans: a. Kanchanara

c. Kanchanara_ d. Arishtaka

c. Haridra d. Manjishta

----- PAGE 370 -----
Chapter

Kantakari

Useful Parts — Mula (Root) and Panchanga (whole plant).
Rasadi pancaka

Laghu ruksha
Karma (Action)

Mula (Root) — Kanthya, Kasahara, Shwasahara, Jwaraghna, Dipana, Pachana,
Krimighna, Hridya, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Rochana, Pramehahara.

Phala (Fruit) - Shukra rechaka, Bhedana, Dipana, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Cakshushya, Balya.
Agrya Karma

care Prfefterenr 1 (31.2.3. 40)

Nidigdhika (Solanum xanthocarpum) is best for Kasa (Cough).

Pharmacological Actions

Antiinflammatory, Antibacterial, Analgesic, Stimulant, Appetizer, Carminative,
Cardio-stimulant, Expectorant, Demulcent, Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta katu Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Mula (Root) — Shotha, Shwasa, Kasa, Jwara, Kantharoga, Agnimandya, Ajirna,
Krimi, Hridroga, Kushtha, Aruchi, Pinasa, Parshwa Shula.

Phala (Fruit) — Kasa, Krimi, Agnimandya, Jwara.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction) - 50to 100ml

Churna (Powder) - lto2g

----- PAGE 371 -----
Kantakari 363

Tn
ph ytoconstituents

Whole plant yield an alkaloid call
coumarins, scopolin, scopoletin, esculin an
‘ Jkaloid solanocarpine, solanine-s, solasodi
§-solamargine.

and

ed solasonine. Roots, leaves and fruits yield
d esculetin. Fruits yield carpesteral, gluco-
ne, solamargine, stigma sterol, campesterol

Seeds contain solanocarpine and essential amino acids.

Research corner

1.

Y

Present study reports the phytochemical analysis as well as free radical
scavenging and antioxidant activities of Solanum xanthocarpum root extracts.
The study demonstrated appreciable protective efficacy in S. Xanthocarpum
root extracts against free radical damage. Kumar S, Sharma UK, Sharma AK,
Pandey AK. Protective efficacy of Solanum xanthocarpum root extracts against
free radical damage : phytochemical analysis and antioxidant effect. Cell Mol
Biol (Noisy-legrand). 2012 Dec 22358(1):174-81.

This study was designed to evaluate the effects of Solanum xanthocarpum fruit
extract in ethylene-glycol-induced urolithiasis in the male Wistar rats. The result
indicates the antiurolithiatic activity of S.xanthocarpum mediated possibly by
CaOX crystal inhibition, diuretic, antioxidant and this study rationalized its
medicinal use in urolithiasis. Patel P, Patel M, Saralai M, Gandhi T.
Antiurolothiatic Effects of Solanum xanthocarpum Fruit Extract on Ethylene-
Glycol-induced Nephrolithiasis in Rats. J. Young Pharm. 2012 Jul; 4(3):164-
70. doi:10.4103/0975-1483. 100022.

. To evaluate nephroprotective potential of Solanum xanthocarpum (S.

xanthocarpum) fruit extract (SXE) against gentamicin (GM) induced
nephrotoxicity and renal dysfunction. The findings powerfully supports that S.
xantocarpum fruit extract acts in the kidney as a potent scavenger of free
radicals to prevent the toxic effects of GM both in the biochemical and
histopathological parameters and thus validates its ethnomedicinal use. Hussain
T, Gupta RK, Sweety K, Eswaran, B, Vijayakumar M, Rao CV.
Nephroprotective activity of Solanum xanthocarpum fruit extract against
gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity and renal dysfunction in experimental
rodents. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Sep; 5(9):686-91. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645(12)60107-2.

. The present work objective are to investigate indigenous plants used in wound

healing in India, we hereby reported our findings related to wound healing
activities of plant Solanum xanthocarpum Scharad and Wendl (Solanaceae)

----- PAGE 372 -----
una Vijnana acini
—tnaeanaee el studies. The result revealed that th,

from some in vitro and in vivo Me ling potency and appear to justify ;

ethanol extract has remarkable wou ‘a ound healing in India and in
sadieg .¢ , sarpul Cr

traditional use of Solanum xanthocd') sitional healers. Dewangan H, Bash

ae . f trac ; f
a scientific support to the treatment 0 tow anti ie.
ntific support » perential wound healing activity of the ethanol,

M, Jaiswal V, Verma VK, Potenta

shard £ endl leaves Pak J Pharma g,;
extract of Solanum xanthocarpum schard and w Sci

2012 Jan; 25(1):189-94,

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

Kantakari kwatha

i ghrata

Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa
Arochaka, Udara

Dashamula kwatha Shwasa, Ivara

Dashamula ghrata

Kantakaryavaleha

Botanical Name — Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad & Wendl.
Solanum — Night shade

xanthocarpum — Xantho-yellow, carpum-fruit.

Family- Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Kantakari kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)

Charaka Kasahara varga, Kanthya varga, Hikkanigrahana varga, Shothahara
varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Angamarda prashamana varga

Sushruta —_ Brihatyadi gana, Varunadi gana, Laghupancha mula
Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 38-43

Basonym of Drug
mpucenttratel |

Plant is thorny.
Synonyms

Habitat
1. Uien-waarrer arcane |

----- PAGE 373 -----
Kantakari 365

The plant is seen everywhere.
2. Hell-Her VAS Var |
Plant is gregarious in nature.
Morphology
3. fafafterar-fafeere aeie 1
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum) grows very quickly.
4, oeatt-aract wate ste |
Katakari spreads on the ground very quickly.
5. wvetett-Huccnt: Uae: |
Kantakari plant has thorns all over.
6. FSAI CAST, Hula |
Kantakari is difficult to touch as it is studded with thorns.
7. JAH ASOT HAM: |
Fruits of Kantakari are small.
8. Featmett-fearitt werent: |
Fuits of Kantakari are having variegated appearance.
Properties and Actions
9. Caesarea Settler
Kantakari is very good remedy for cough.
10. xrauft-sersrrant sree |
Kantakari liquifies the Shleshma (Sputum).
11. careht-corfirecttfer, ararfertt were, carted Tarat TT |

Kantakari cures many diseases especially Nasal disorders and it gives strong
voice like that of tiger.
Regional Names

Kateli

----- PAGE 374 -----
366 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Commonly grows through out India especially
in west and east coasts.

Morphology

Habit — A prickly, Prostrate, Perennial herb
with compressed yellow straight spines all over the | &
plant surface.

Stem — Erect, solid, branched, dark green and
glabrous.

Leaves —Exstipulate, petiolate, alternate, simple
reticulate unicostate venation. Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad

Inflorescence —Extra-axillary shortly peduncled & Wendl
cyme sometimes flower is solitary.

Flowers —Complete, actinomorphic, bisexual, bluish purple or violet coloured with
5 sepals and 5 petals. Stamens are 5 and free. Gynoecium is bicarpellary. Syncarpous
with bilocular ovary, axile placentation.

Fruit —Berry with endospermic seeds.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 1. Shwetapushpa Kantakari
2. Nilapushpa kantakari

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Root will be long, gradually tapering sometimes twisted but sparingly branched, 4 to
12 mm in diameter. External surface creamish brown, long itudinally striated or ribbed
with their wiry rootlests coming out from lower parts. Transversely cut portion shows a
creamish white, mealy surface with a prominent cambium ring. On breaking it becomes
short pieces. Roots have bitter taste and not having any characteristic odour. Pieces of
whole plant, consisting highly spinescent stems, leaves, flowers and berries stems cylin-
drical, hollow, upto 6 mm in diameter, covered with straight compressed spines of shining
yellow colour, not exceeding 1 cm in length, lobes of leaves bearing spines the upper
surface of leaf is glabrous, greyish green, frequently mottled with white spots, flowers
campanulate, pink or violet in colour, upto 20 mm across when fresh, Berries spehrical
upto 1.5 mm in diameter, variegated with green and white when immature and deep
yellow when ripe. Odour is disagreeable and tastes bitter.

----- PAGE 375 -----
Kantakari 367

Classical references
Synonyms
BUSH F Feat AAT caret Pafetterer | vere Huet arat geet ear
(a5. Teefeat 38)
gayest Hcant-
aa Qa ae Ta saghra | wag aa ast eager fier
(a9. Teast 39)
Properties and Actions

wHUcant aT fara Heart cost oe: | atte Urata ATA Tat |
Prete dnd uehticratecrrars ui (a3. Wwerkat 40-41)
wlcat taciga-
Wat: Wet He WS Urs A Heh Aa | YoweT tas et fer frePHeeTy
PaewneenUgarde: Hrsg i (AT. Teast 42)
HAT HUcATt-
aac frat ara festare Hea | (ATT. TEeTeTT 43)
aucant Hehe Aa aaa | steht VATA AST
aucentge fireh ararracncnratind, | afraren: tact aa weft STITT |
BUSHSHMAT HHATTRTA Ut (TA. Tee Ft 96-97)
wUcant Heft Batre Net oa: | chet ret PML SHAT TaRTEreA: Ul
eararaararonda Hera, | Ta: wast fare Te Heh Heh TH |
Set Wer eet fark franftreeety | Se screed SUSAR Ul
(.fr. steht aT 5456)
mucant Tc ,
Prfefterar Hucarat: wet Areat aa | Hal AT USAT TATAT I
PTT MYA TA ATTA: LAAT: FASTA: HET: TESTI:
(fA. steht 60-61)
Fawcett wat-
gaat OSes Re arereerstaftrani |
(& fA. ataftrert 62)

----- PAGE 376 -----
368

Dravyaguna Vijnana

ftigteret:- ffteact airrerararemrararary ate STO, | (45.FA. sitaftrert 63)

aueart eum a chet arnrahir | wfervarattarrett apart serfs
(a.F. wearereat 32)

Vaaveawkt-
PaHvearhtanr Sar HOM Hea Te | raze ot Har Wheat Taran TAA I

(uff. werarfeat 36)

meant Heft dato pment, | Berna SAT AAA, TALE, II
(RPI. eireneat 41 )

—_

Ww

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Kantakari

a. Mula & Panchanga _ b. Pushpa c. Patra
Ans: a. Mula & Panchanga

. Agrya Karma of Kantakari

a. Dipana b. Kushthaghna cc. Krimighna
Ans: d. Kasahara

. Kantakari Ghrata is specifically indicated

a. Prameha b. Medoroga c. Kasa
Ans: c. Kasa

. Kantakaryavaleha is indicated in

a. Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa b. Jwara, Rakta pitta
c. Ajirna, Atisara d. Prameha, Kushtha
Ans: a. Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa

. Botanical name of Kantakari

a. Solanum indicum b. Solanum torvum
b. Solanum xanthocarpum d. Solanum nigrum
Ans: c. Solanum xanthocarpum

. Nidigdhika is a synonym of

a. Bharangi b. Kantakari c. Shyonaka
Ans: b. Kantakari

. Habit of Kantakari

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper
Ans: d. Prickly herb

. Types of Kantakari as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 2 c.4
Ans: b.2

d. Phala

d. Kasahara

d. Jwara

d. Patala

d. Prickly herb

d.7

----- PAGE 377 -----
Chapter

Kapikacchu

Useful part — Beeja (Seed)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa [Madhura Tika |

Karma (Action)

Vrshya, Brahmana, Balya, Vrananashaka.
Dadhipushpi (Kapikacchu vishesha)

Ranjana
Pharmacologocial Actions

Aphrodisiac, Anthelmintic, Nervine tonic, Astringent, Diuretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and
Madhura Rasa. Pittahara due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa and Kaphara be-
cause of Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Klaibya, Dourbalya, Dushtavrana, Krisha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vajikarana (As an aphrodisiac)
efruaaieg Mea: We | MA AAA Gleeta: Waste Pray Wa:
(afa. 26/33)

Powder of Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita) is mixed with Godhuma (Wheat), and
then processed with milk. Ghee is added to it and consumed. Then one should take milk,
will act as an aphrodisiac.

Tata: THereut Mere | MTT ae: tear Tera a atet AST
(afa. 26/33)

----- PAGE 378 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

a AIT
A re enn cm

men,

Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita) & Iksuraka (Ast
and taken with Dharoshna paya (Milch-warm mi

eracantha longifolia) mixed with Su
i sver have deficj Bar
Ik) with never have de iciency of,

2. Vatavyadhi-Apabahuka (Paralysis of brachial plexus)

a TATE RATAT PHATT 1 TAM AAS AMAA BG? (A. 22/26)

In case of Apabahuka (Paralysis of brachial plexus) one of the Vatavyadhi one has

to take juice of seeds of Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita). It gives more strength.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) -3to6g

Phytoconstituents

Seeds afforded alkaloids like mucuadine mucuadinine, mucuadininine & prurienidine,

Italso contains L-dopa, glutarthione, lecithin, gallic acid, amino acids like histidine, lysine,
tyrosine and valine.

Serotonin is present in trichomes of pods.

Research corner

1. A comparative study on the production of 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-

DOPA) was carried out in cell cultures of Two Mucuna species by elicitor
treatment and precursor feeding. The efficacy of L-DOPA production was
found to be higher for suspension cultures of M. Pruriens compared to M.
prurita in all treatments. Raghavendra S, Kumar V, Ramesh CK, Khan MH.
Enhanced production of L-DOPA in cell cultures of Mucuna pruriens L. and
Mucuna prurita H. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(9):792-801. doi:10.1080/14786419.
2011.553721. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

. To explore the antidiabetic properties of Mucuna pruriens (M. purines), The

study clearly supports the traditional use of M. pruriens for the treatment of
antidiabetic drug. Majekodunmi SO, Oyagbemi A A, Umukoro S, Odeku OA.
Evaluation of the antidiabetic properties of Mucuna pruriens seed extract.
Asian Pac J. Trop Med. 2011 Aug; 4(8):632-6. doi: 10.1016/S 1995-7645
(11)601611-2.

- To assess the anticataleptic and antiepileptic activity of leaves of Mucuna

pruriens in albino rats. M. Pruriens extract has the potential to be an
anticataleptic and antiepileptic drug. Dopamine and 5-HT may have a role in
such activity. Champatisingh D, Sahu PK, Pal A, Nanda GS. Anticataleptic
and antiepileptic activity of ethanolic extract of leaves of Mucuna pruriens: A

----- PAGE 379 -----
Kapikacchu 371

study on role of dopaminergic system in epilepsy in albino rats. Indian J.
Pharmacol. 2011 Apr; 43(2):197-9, doi: 10.4103/0253-7613,77368.

4, Objective of the present study was to analyze the efficacy of M. pruriens on
male sexual behaviour and sperm parameters in long-term hyperglycemic male
rats. The present work reveals the potential efficacy of ethanolic seed extract
of M. pruriens to improve male sexual behavior with androgenic and
antidiabetic effects on the STZ-induced diabetic male rats. Suresh S, Prakash
S. Effect of Mucuna pruriens (Linn). on sexual behaviour and sperm
parameters in streptozotocin-induced diabetic male rat. J. Sex Med. 2012 Dec;
9(12):3066-78. doi: 10.1111/j. 1743-6109.2010.01831.x. Epub 2010 Apr 26.

5. The present investigation was undertaken to assess the role of Mucuna pruriens
in infertile men who were under psychological stress. On the basis of results
of the present study, it may be concluded that M. pruriens not only reactivates
the anti-oxidant defense system of infertile men but it also helps in the
management of stress and improves semen quality. Shukla KK, Mahdi, AA,
Ahmad MK, Jaiswar SP, Shankwar SN, Tiwari SC. Mucuna pruriens reduces
stress and improves the quality of Semen in infertile Men. Evid Based
Complement Alterant Med. 2010 Mar; 7(1):134-44. doi:10. 1093/ecam/nem
171. Epub 2007 Dec 18.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Gokshuradi modaka Vajikaranartha
Brahat Shatavari modaka Dourbalya, Alparetas
Vrashyartha, Viryastambhanartha

Botanical Name — Mucuna pruriens Bak.
Mucuna — Name in Brazillian language

pruriens — Prurita-producing itching
Family — Fabaceae

Gana vargikarana (Classical catergorization)
Charaka Balya varga, Purisha Virajaniya Varga
Sushruta Vidarigandha gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga 129-131

----- PAGE 380 -----
372 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
adit Sega |
Hairs on the fruit of Kapikacchu cause itching to the monkey.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, Sayan at Sra RTA WANT TT I
The creeper Kapikacchu grows in forest and fruit has hairs like that of Monkey.
2. Wasranft-mradt aracard |

Kapikacchu plant grows mainly in rainy season.

Morphology

3. wpftrnen-afttarag Watt weeTAM: |
Kapikacchu fruits are having firm hairs on their surface.

4. yyenttreatt-yreneent fort orem: |
Kapikacchu fruits are having stiff hairs.

5. iigef-mdkeengerte: tora a frat
Kapikacchu fruit resemble the shape like that of tail of monkey and also has
compact hairs.

6. Whet-Acheag VAT |
Kapikacchu fruit is studded with stiff hairs like that of monkey.

7. AUT - STATA Ra TS TATA TAA:
Fruits have dense hairs which induce intense itching gives protection to the
plant.

8. geftrer-Teercare Tele S:kTeAT |
Very difficult to pluck the fruit as it is covered by stiff hairs which cause severe
itching.
9. WAVS- HUSA WHE ats |
Seeds of Kapikacchu resemble testicles.
Properties and Actions
10. geraten-gearftr starr: |

Seeds of Kapikacchu are potent aphrodisiac.

----- PAGE 381 -----
Kapikacchu 373

11, HST AreT aetet Preacher |
Kapikacchu seeds are strong aphrodisiacs and also stimulate the mind.

12. HUQT-HIS The athe |

When dried hairs of matured fruits come in contact with skin it causes intense

itching.

Regional Names

Hindi
Kannada
Malayalam
Marathi Kuhili
Habitat

Kapikacchu grows all over India, but very
common in tropical regions.

Morphology
Habit — An annual twiner

Branches — Slender, More or less hairy at
first, at length glabrescent.

Leaves — Trifoliate, compound, petiole is 6-
11 cm long; stipules are lanceolate, 5 mm long.
Leaf lets are membranous, 7.5 to 12.5 cm long
and 5 to 7.5 cm wide, terminal leaflets is slightly
smaller, all leaflets are subacute, mucronate, pu- Mucuna pruriens Bak.
bescent above, densely clothed with silvery gray
hairs beneath.

Inflorescence — 6-30 flowered raceme, 15-30 cm long.

Flowers — Solitary or 2 to 3 together along a slender silky rachis. Pedicels are 3 to 6
mm long hairy, bracts 1.2 cm long and lanceolate, calyx 1 cm long, silky and with a few
irritant bristles outside, tube is campanulate. Petals are 2.5 to 4.cm long and purple coloured.
Keel is slightly incurved, Papillonaceous petals.

Fruit — Pod, 5 to 7.5 cm long and 1 cm wide turgid, with a longitudinal rib running
the length of each valve, falcately curved on both ends, some what like letter “S’, densely

----- PAGE 382 -----
374 Dravyaguna Vijnana

clothed with persistent irritant bristles which are at first pale brown, afterwards steel gray.
Have 5-6 seeds.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Seeds are kidney shaped, upto 1.5 cm Jong and 0.5 to 1 cm broad. Seed coat is hard,
glossy with brown colour and mottled with black. Hilum is conspicuous with funicular
growth. The embryo consists of two hard dusky brown cotyledons. It has not got any
odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
BRIA FM Wreat FT Aehet | BAST HURT HAST gee wreath
aigett seafratt a dar wire efter: 1 (91.5. Weert 129-130)

Properties and Actions

ahtracqyyt ger wer dau qe: | ra adet sea aah

Watst aragrast ard araftent oe | (aT. Zea 130-131)

cahtreneg: TH eargharer earshrengea | gen trareeat a Geant

(af. Terafeat 248)
erat (aitracgiasrs )
watrren yet watt oar 1 sortat cergen areaest ara,
(afi. Weert 150)

wafthared: tare fercet araftrrncarettere | vitret Seot Get Ages Tat: HET IN
waftrerenct get vit warerd ye | waftenreret geau feeiery tt
(& fi. sitsftrert 608-609)
wftraeg: TATA FEM araaaaEd | vara a fap wort
(afr. qeeafeat 53)
atrecsist gear ae det we: 1 freer ated sear adist fewgqsad
gulstr ager weedu aaa | ahem yh es wei HTT |
Ot Werate areata Yacht Tore Fe arto (A.A. Premeafert 49-50)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kapikacchu
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Bija d. Patra
Ans: c. Bija

----- PAGE 383 -----
Kapikacchu 375
a occ cme resem ete innate aii

. Vipaka of Kapikacchu
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Kapikacchu
a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Vajikara d. Medhya
Ans: c. Vajikara
4. Mucadinine a chemical constituent present in
a. Durva b. Kapikacchu c. Guggulu d. Madanaphala
Ans: b. Kapikacchu
. Vanari Vatika is indicated in
a. Dhwaja Bhanga b. Atisara c. Netraroga d. Krimi
Ans: a. Dhwajabhanga
6. Botanical name of Kapikacchu
a. Clerodendron phlomidis b. Gmelina arboroea
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Mucuna pruriens
Ans: d. Mucuna pruriens
7. Markati and atmagupta are the synonyms of
a. Langali b. Kapikacchu
c. Shalaparni d. Prishniparni
Ans: b. Kapikacchu
8. Habit of Kapikacchu plant
a. Twiner b. Creeper c. Herb d. Tree
Ans: a. Twiner

to

nm

FORE RR

----- PAGE 384 -----
2.49 EE

Karkata Shringi
Pe asia aaa een

Useful part -— Keeta Kosha (Galls)

Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta

Laghu, Ruksha, Guru (Ra.Ni & Pr.Ni)

Vipaka [Ram
[Ushna

Karma (Action)
Shwasahara, Kasahara, Hikkanigrahana, Rochaka, Chardighna, Atisarajit.

Ajashringi

Shophahara, Trashnanigrahana, Shwasahara, Hradya, Vishaghna, Kasaghna,
Kushthaghna, Artinut, Chakshushya.
Pharmacological Action

Astringent, Tonic, Expectorant, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action of Desha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Kasshaya tikta Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Karkatashringi— Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Aruchi, Trishna, Chardi. Rajayakshma,
Atisara.

Ajashringi— Shopha, Trishna, Chardi, Chakshu vikara, Shwasa, Hradroga, Visha,
Kushtha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwasa (Asthma) & Hikka (Hiccough)

fig mhergn a aan: aratetecnrany | (a.fa. 17/101)

The gruel prepared with Karkata shringi (Pistacia integerrima) is useful in Shwasa
(Asthma) & Hikka (Hiccough).

----- PAGE 385 -----
Karkata Shringi 377

2. Kasa (Cough)
fran, Haeoretes Bare erst ares 1 (aA. 15/50)

Powder prepared from Karkata Shringi (Pistacia integerrima) licked with Taila
(Commonly with sesam oil).

3. Kapha chardi (Vomiting)
en RATA HASH TST oe MEA MEAT Pera, Telefe ay |
, (a.fa. 20/38)

Karkatashringi (Pistacia integerrima) Churna mixed with Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Churna then administered with honey checks vomiting caused by the vitiation of
Kaphadosha.

4, Vajikarana (As an aphrodisiac)
epetegen: a: aeanieie weer fret | raracaatsarett w arty gars 1
(AAS. 50/44)
Kalka prepared from milk and Karkata Shringa (Pistacia integerrima) is beneficial
as an aphrodisiac. But the person should be on diet like cereals mixed with sugar, ghee
and milk.
Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) -lto3g

Phytoconstituents

Galls contain tannin, resin, essential oil, pistacienoic acid A & pistacin oil acid B,
tirucallid, B-sitosterol and masticadienoic acid.

Essential oil contains 0-pinene, camphene, o--terpineol, caprylic acid.

Fruit yielded crystalline compounds named pistacin and pistacinin.

Research corner

1. This study was planned to evaluate the possible analgesic and antiinflammatory
effects of Pistacia integerrima extracts. These results demonstrate the Pitacia
integerrima extracts have antinociceptive and analgesic effects and not
apparent acute toxicity on oral administration. Anmad NS, Waheed A, Farman,
M, Qayyum A. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects of Pistacia
integerrima extracts in mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010 May 27;129(2):250-3.
doi>10.1016/j.jep.2010.03.017. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

2. Pistacides A and B (1-2), two new flavonoid glycosides, have been isolated

----- PAGE 386 -----
78 Dravyaguna Vijnana
from the methanolic extract of the aerial parts of Pistacia integerrima, along
with 2'-hydroxytisooriention (3), echioidinin 2'-O-beta-D-(6"-O-acety])
glucopyranoside (4), chrysoeriol (5) and diandraflavone A (6), reported for the
first time from this species. Their structures were elucidated by spectroscopic
analysis including 2D NMR, FAB-MS, and acidic hydrolysis. Ullah Z,
Mehmood R, Imran M, Malikb A, Afzal RA. Flavonoid constituents of
Pistacia integerrima, Nat Prod Commun. 2012 Aug;7(8):1011-4.

. Deregulated expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) on’ vascular
endothelium aggravates the inflammatory condition in various chronic diseases.
In this work, it is aimed to identify the active constituent from leaf gall of
Pistacia integerrima Linn. using CAMs expression assay in activity guided
purification, followed by determining the molecular mechanism of action.
Results suggest that EG could be useful as a lead molecules for developing
therapeutic agent for various inflammatory diseases. Mehla K, Balwani S,
Kulshreshtha A, Nandi D,Jaisankar P, Ghosh B. Ethyl gallate isolated from
Pistacia integerrima Linn. inhibits cell adhesion molecules by blocking AP-1
transcription factor. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Oct 11;137(3):1345-52.
doi:10.1016/j.jep. 2011.07.068. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

4. The present study was designed to investigate the whole plant of Pistacia
integerrima stewart in order to examine the pharmacological basis of the use
of the plant in folk medicine for the treatment of infectious disease and disorder.
Pistagremic acid showed significant leishmanicidal activity (IC (50):6.710.09
2M) against Leishmania major (DESTO) promastigotes in comparison to
standard compound amphotericin B (IC(50):0.210.06 ?M). Uddin G. Rauf A,
Arfan M, Waliullah, Khan, I, Ali M, Taimur M, ur-Rehman I, Samiullah.
Pistagremic acid a new leishmanicidal triterpene isolated from Pistacia
integerrima Stewart. J. Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2012 Oct; 27(5):646-8. doi:
10.3109/14756366.201 1.604853. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Yoga (Formulations)

w

SL No. Name Indications

Shrangyadi Churna Hikka, Shwasa
2. sri? Guta
Botanical Name — Pistacia integerrima stewart. Rhus succedenea Linn.

Balachaturbhadra Churna

Rhus — Name of the plant used by Theopharatus.

----- PAGE 387 -----
Karkata Shringi 379

een UnEEIIEII nN REIERRERERREEEERRERREEREEREEnennneneenemnennennaa

succedenea — Used as a substitute.
Family — Anacardiaccae
Kula - Amra kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Hikkanigrahana varga, Kasahara varga
Sushruta Kakolyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 178-179
Basonym of Drug
Hehe FIX TH ARM: AT |
Karkata Shringi gall resemble projections of Karkata (Crab).
Synonyms
Morphology
1. BIPM -saATITKaT TET sear ste
The galls of Karkatashringi (Pistacia integerrima) resembles horn of goat.
2. GAI-Ah TAM sit AMA HAGA |
The galls of Karkatashringi are curved.
3. fesrftret- Galls resemble a horn.
4. qeikfaann-gHeik ga fawrat TEM: AT |
The galls of Karkatashringi resemble the shape of crab horn.
Properties and Actions
5. Tyt- STOTT ASA |

Karkatashringi cures many diseases like Kasa, Shwasa, Balaroga etc.

Kakada singi

Kakada singi

The plant grows in Himalayan slopes, hills of Punjab and Uttarapradesh.

----- PAGE 388 -----
380 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology
Habit — Tree, glabrous in nature

Leaves - Imparipinnate, 15-20 cm long, with
fine pubescence along petioles and nerves when
young. Leaflets are opposite or nearly so; 4-5 pairs of | JW
leaflets are present in one leaf. Petiolulate is short, lan-
ceolate from oblique base, entire margin, with 10-18
arcuate lateral nerves joined by reticulate veins.

Inflorescence — Panicle, Male inflorescence is
short, compact and pubescent. Female inflorescence |’
is long.

Flowers — Male flowers have 5,6 or 7 stamens
with large anthers. Sepals are shorter than stamens.
Female flowers have 4 linear sepals, deciduous.

Fruit — Drupe, Somewhat broader than long 6

: Pistacia integerrima. Stewart
mm broad, rugose, glabrous, grey when ripe.

Varieiteis/species
1. Pistacia lentiscus 2. Pistacia veralin

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Galls are curved or horn shaped, hollow, upto 15 cm long and 3 cm broad. Outer
surface is rough, Pinkish purple or dark brown in colour, having a fimbriated appearance.
The inner surface is reddish brown in colour, bearing deposits of dust-like particles, which
represent dried insects and their excrementitious matter. On breaking become uneven
short pieces, having a characteristic odour and astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
ore acess a carpets Prarie | aye a UT aacherea a aATAT
(ay. Shaenfest 178)

Properties and Actions
STS HUTA PATON HATTA] | ATR SHA aHISHRAAA SLU
(ay. eireest 179)
fret aborts a Tested | areata aageneehtstea
(af. Teeeat 84)

----- PAGE 389 -----
Karkata Shringi

ararret ( sagt fergre )

arareret feet tary: Mego aaftserer, | ragear sare ware ferrenratet pase,
(afr. Teenfert 86)

ore FereRT HUTAOMT HUA TATA, | arAagcarerrecnraheenarateraretstag I
(ef. sirafeert 1133)

fereat HahesTet G Tees Prenaren | fear seafarers
(afr. frorenfeert 157)
sre ararar Fre ACHATTATAT | Sat ATA ret are wal feerargy werd I
(fi.Pr. street 147)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Karkata Shringi
a. Root b. Fruit c. Gall d. Exudates
Ans: c. Gall

tN

. Pradhana Karma of Kapikacchu
a. Madhumehahara b. Shothahara c. Kasahara d. Visarpahara
Ans: c. Kasahara

. The gruel prepared with Karkata shringi (Pistacia integerrima) is useful in
a. Shwasa b. Arshas c. Karnaroga d. Hradroga
Ans: a. Shwasa

4. Shringyadi Churna is indicated in

Lo

a. Kushtha b. Hikka c. Vyanga d. Mutrakricchra
Ans: b. Hikka

5. Balachaturbhadra Churna is indicated in
a. Graharoga b. Twak roga c. Balatisara d. Agnimandya

Ans: c. Balatisara
6. Botanical name of Karkatashringi
a. Semecarpus anacardium b. Swertia chirata
c. Plumbago zeylanica d. Pistacia integerrima
Ans: d. Pistacia integerrima
7. Kuliravishana is the synonym of
a. Rasna b. Meshashringi _c. Karkata shringi d. Jatamansi
Ans: c. Karkata shringi
8. Vakra is the synonym of
a. Agnimanda c. Karkata shringi c.Nirgundi d. Bala

Ans: c. Karkata shringi e

----- PAGE 390 -----
0

Katuki

Useful part -— Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Bhedana, Dipana, Hradya, Jwaraghna, Pramehahara, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Dahahara, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Vishamajwaraghna, Arshoghna.

Pharmacological Action
Liver stimulant, Cholagogue, Purgative, Anthelmintic, Expectorant.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) -Kapha pittashamaka

Pitta shamaka due to Shita virya and Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka because of
Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogahnata (Therapeutic indication)

Kamala, Yakrut vikara, Vibandha, Hridroga, Agnimandya, Jwara, Vishamajawara,
Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa, Daha, Kushtha, Krimi, Arshas, Raktavikara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pittaja Kushtha (Skin diseases due to Pitta)

aie eager ares a men 1 aise at wader wear et
meat Ul (afa. 7/132)

The Lepa (Application) of Priyangu (Callicarpa macrophylla), Katuki (Picrorhiza
kurroa), Renuka (Vitex negundo seeds), Indrayava (Fruit of Holarrhena antidysenterica),
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Sevya (Vetiveria zizanoides) and Candana (Santalum
album) is beneficial in Pittaja kushtha (Skin diseases caused by Pitta dosha).

2. Stanya Shuddhi (To Purify breast milk)
UAT KAA Vigattsreny aA. 30/261

----- PAGE 391 -----
Katuki 383

Decoction prepared from Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) is useful in purifying breast
milk.
3. Hridroga (Heart disease)

wedinganees free aftrersrar | anata. 6/44

In Pittaja Hridroga (Heart disease caused by Pitta dosha) the Kalka prepared from
Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) & Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) is taken with Sugar-water.

Matra (Dosage)
Virechanartha (to induce purgation) - 3 to 6g

Phytoconstituents

Irridoid bitter substances, picroside I, Picroside II, Kutkoside; Kutkin, Picrorhizin
are present in Rhizome.

Roots contain Kutkin, Kurrin, Vanillic acid, Kutkiol, Kutkisterol, D-Mannitol,
Picroside I, Picroside II and a glucoside called Kutkoside.

Research corner

1. This study attempts to determine the in vivo pharmacokinetic profile of
picrosides I and II in rats after oral administration of three different preparations
namely, kutkin (a mixture of picrosides I and II) P. kurroa extract and
Picrolaxz capsule (marketed formulation). Upadhyay D, Dash RP,
Anandjiwala S, Nivasarkar M. Comparative pharmacokinetic profiles of
picrosides I and II from kutkin, Picrorhiza kurroa extract and its formulation
in rats. Fitoterapia. 2013 Mar; 85:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j. fitote. 2013.01.004.
Epub 2013 Jan 18.

2. The antioxidant and anti-neoplastic activities of methanolic and aqueous
extracts of P. kurroa rhizome were investigated in the present study. The study
concludes that P. kurroa possess diverse therapeutic potentials which might be
useful in development of drugs or their precursors. Rajkumar V, Guha G,
Kumar RA. Antioxidant and anti-neoplastic activities of Picrorhiza kurroa
extracts. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Feb;49(2):363-9. doi:10.1016/
j-fet.2010.11.009. Epub 2010 Nov 21.

3. The present study was undertaken to investigate the effect of standardized
aqueous extract of Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth. on diabetes. The
findings provide in vivo evidence that standardized extrat of Picrorhiza kurroa
possess significant antidiabetic activity in streptozotocinnicotinamide induced
type-2 diabetes mellitus in rats. Husain GM, Singh PN, Kumar V. Antidiabetic

----- PAGE 392 -----
aot Dravyaguna Vijnana
‘act of Picrorhiza kurroa in rat model of NIDDyy

activity of standardized extr
activity of standardi : 3(3):88-92.

Drug Discov Ther. 2009 Jut a .
4. The effect of P. kurroa treatment on the antiproliferative response and, hepatic

antioxidant enzymes of rats administered with 2-acetylaminofluorene (2-4 ap

was studied in Wistar rats. There was an increase in the levels of transaminasg
nt also enhanced ornithine decarboxylase

3 as -AAF treatme . ‘ ‘
enzymes and EE, & dine incorporation into hepatic DNA.

activity and [3H] thymi
(ODC) activity and [3H] kurroa extract (250 and 500 mg/kg body

Pretreatment of rats orally with P. ce a :
weight) resulted in significant decreases in lipid peroxidation, transaminase

enzymes, LDH, hepatic ODC activity, and DNA synthesis (p<0.001). Rahman
S, Sultana S. Protective effects of Picorrhiza kurroa extract against 2.
acetylaminofluorene-induced hepatotoxicity in Wistar rats. J. Environ Patho]

Toxicol Oncol. 2007;26(3):195-205.
Yoga (Formulations)

SL.No.

Indications |

Kushtha, Yakratvikara
Kaphapitta jwara

Formulation

Arogyavardhini gutika

Katukadi kashaya Kaphapittajwara

Katukamaladi kashaya Malashodhanartha

Botanical Name — Picrorrhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.

Picrorrhiza - Palmented root
Family — Scrophulariaceae (see Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Katuki kula

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka _Bhedaniya varga, Lekhaniya varga, Stanya shodhana varga,
Prajasthapana varga, Balya varga, Sanjnasthapana Varga

Sushruta Patoladi gana, Pippalyadi Gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 151-152
Basonym of Drug
wetter atte fired aetercttter |
Katuki helps in releasing bile (Choleretic).

----- PAGE 393 -----
Katuki 385

Synonyms
Habitat
1, BTUSHT-HTTAT VAT |
Katuki (Picrorhiza kurroa) plant may be grown by stem cuttings.
Morphology
2. ARAMA PTAA PTT: |
Rhizome of Katuki resembles fish scales.
3, CISA: HVS: |
When cut the stem appears like wheel.
4. FOMte-HOT: WeIISEM: |

On breaking the rhizome, it becomes black powder.

Properties and Actions

5. farat-faTntet |
Katuki has very bitter taste.

6. wmeal-stealg: \
Katuki has unpalatable taste.

7. Aeaftran-tare Haft a Aeahirag, |
Katuki has bitter taste like that of fish bile and even the action is also similar
to bile of fish.

8. aTAet-art efter |
Katuki mitigates Ama.
9. Meth-teaks Gasiaats wk Aare THM ete; Ve: TA, TATETA
ape fercntott = |
Katuki purifies blood, improves functions of liver, acts as regenerative.
10. weuieht-aesret Uectt &

Katuki has regenerative action.
Regional Names

Engh

----- PAGE 394 -----
386 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Malayalam Kadukrohini

Marathi Kalikutki

Habitat
Katuki grows in Himalayan regions from Kashmir to Sikkim at the height of 7,000
to 14,000 ft.

Morphology

Habit - Creeping herb, this spreads by stolons. A
whorl of radical leaves arises from rhizome tip.

Root — Primary root grow maximum upto 38 cm
in length, but usually 6-10 inches long. Many adventi-
tious roots arise from the rhizome.

Shoot — Stem is represented by stolon and under
ground rhizome which bear leaves and flowering scape.

Leaves — Leaves are 5-10 cm long, oval in shape
with a sharp apex, flat and serrate.

Inflorescence — Indeterminate spike forming more
or less a triangular head.

Flower — Flowers are white or pale purple, bi-
sexual and having convex thalamus.

Picrorrhiza kurroa
Royle ex Benth

Fruit — Capsule, 1-15 cm long and oval shaped.

Seed — Extremely small sized 1 mm long and 1 mm wide. Embryo is enclosed in the
large bladdery loose hyaline reticulate taste.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Rhizome is straight or slightly arched cylindrical, upto 12 cm long and 4 to 10 mm in
diameter. Outer surface is grey or creamish brown in colour, bearing impressions of round
root scars and numerous scales. Rhizome terminates in a scaly leaf, bed or stem. A trans-
versely cut portion of the rhizome shows a smooth dark brown surface with large creamish
vascular bundles arranged in a prominent broken ring. On breaking becomes short pieces
and black powders spreads around, having a faint odour which is disagreeable. Taste is
very bitter.

Adulterant — Root of Lagotis glauca Gaertn.

----- PAGE 395 -----
Katuki 387

Classical references

Synonyms

meat g Heer fireat Porter Hee | arvilenl MITE TATAT Wee
Teeattrar arvseer Vigo Heahsatt: 1 (a.. elrernfeert 151)

Properties and Actions

edt g Hee Us feet war fear org: | Ate dot ger aaftrrsaraad |

WiesTaaScasaaye ti (as. Fant 152)

aacat ftrafafren we: vilarerarefert | aorreantarenry eet Pera sa TT 1

(afr. Te=aeat 38)

cecal Uitte farat weureRran wy: | edt ctoth war aeafirrseTTeT I

Waeare arant: ae HeHA HAT (S.A. stehrerf 1123-1124)

macanrsterme tree sitattrira Statirt | TANT ATT TA ET A AT I
(a.P. frerenieat 132)

agar 7 we frat dite tat aT | wafietet ate at fete

wR watery Hs aitre aa | seat aera frat g weer

(B.A. wagenteat 157-158)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Katuki is
a. Root b. Rhizome c. Fruit d. Flower

Ans: b. Rhizome
2. Pradhana Karma of Katuki as per Sharangadhara Samhita
a. Rechana b. Anulomana c. Bhedana d. Sramsana

Ans: c. Bhedana
3. Picroside and Kutkoside are present in
a. Pushkaramula b. Ushira c. Ahiphena d. Katuki
Ans: d. Katuki
4. Main ingredient of Arogyavardhini Vati is
a. Trivrat b. Katuki c. Haritaki d. Amalaki

Ans: b. Katuki

----- PAGE 396 -----
388 Drayyaguna Vijnana

5, Botanical name of Katuki is
a, Trachyspermum ammi b, Syzigium aromaticum
¢, Picrorrhiza kurron d, Piper longum
Ans: e. Picrorrhiza kurroa
6. Matsya Shakala is the synonym of
a. Trivrut b, Avartaki c, Aragwadha — d, Katuki
Ans: d. Katuki
7. Chakrangi and Krishna Bheda are the synonyms of
a. Katuki b. Guduchi c.Saptachakra sd. Chandana
Ans: a. Katuki
Habit of Katuki plant is
a. Tree b. Climber c. Creeping herb d. Shrub
Ans: c. Creeping herb
9, Pradhana Rasa of Katuki
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Tikta

2

----- PAGE 397 -----
Khadira
jseful part - Sara (Heartwood)

U
Tikta Kashaya

Laghu, Ruksha

=
vine

Prabhava

Karma (Action)
Khadira — Kushthaghna, Dantya, Kandughna, Kasaghna, Ruchya, Medohara,
Krmighna, Pramehahara, Jwaraghna, Shothahara, Shwitrahara, Pachana.

Shwetakhadira — Varnya, Mukha-rogahara, Vranaropaka
somavalka - Raktadoshahara, Kushthaghna, Kandughna
Raktakhadira — Jwaraghna, Bhutaghna

Agrya Karma:
Get HSA | (AY, 25/40)
Khadira (Acacia catechu Willd.) is best for skin diseases.
Pharmacological Actions
Astringent, Cooling, Digestant, Haemostatic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Tikta Kashaya Rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Kushtha, Dantaroga, Kandu, Kasa, Aruchi, Medoroga, Prameha, Jwara, Shwitra,
Ajirna and Krimi.
Shwetakhadira — Vaivarnya, Mukharoga, Vrana
Somavalka — Raktadosha, Kushtha and Kandu
Raktakhadira — Jwara

----- PAGE 398 -----
390 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

Uahtiarameney a UferenaTeay | (FFA. 9/5)
The patient suffering from Kushtha (Skin disease) should use Khadira (Acacia cat-
echu) for drinking, bathing etc. It destroys Kushtha.

2. Shwitra (Vitiligo)
Tarn Heer Aorut wate Tee | Ulettan Hath Ulett aT A
(afi. 71/166)

Khadira (Acacia catechu) decoction is very. useful for Shwitra (Vitiligo).

3. Kasa (Cough)

fret, fea at aferaterreg hr: | (afar. 18/64)
The powder of heart wood of Khadira (Acacia catechu) is mixed with wine or curd
water.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 60 ml

Phytoconstituents
10% of acacatechin, quercitin, gum quercitrin.

Research corner

1. The chemopreventive potential of (+)-catechin-rich extract of Acacia catechu
(L-f.) Willd. Heart wood (AQCE) was evaluated against human breast
adenocarcinoma cell line (MCF-7) and 7, 12-dimethylbenz [a] anthracene
(DMBA)-induced mammary carcinoma in Balb/c mice. The present data
strongly suggest that anticancer potentiality of (+)-catechin-rich AQCE may be
attributable to its ability to positively modulate tumour markers as well as the
antioxidant system that could decompose the peroxides and thereby, offer a
protection against lipid peroxidation and linked to the expression of
transcription factors during DMBA-induced mammary carcinoma. Monga J,
Chauhan CS, Sharma M. Humab Breast Adenocarcinoma Cytotoxicity and
Modulation of 7,12-dimethylbenz [a] anthracene-Induced Mammary
Carcinoma in Balb/c Mice by Acacia catechu (L.f.) Wild Heartwood. Integer
Cancer Ther. 2012 Nov 9.

2. Anti-inflammatory properties of both baicalin and catechins have been widely
reported. However, the reports of analgesic effects of baicalin and catechins are

----- PAGE 399 -----
Khadira 391

limited. Three commonly used pain-related animal models were employed to
evaluate the analgesic activity of UP 446, a standardized bioflavonoid
composition of baicalin and catechins. The findings suggest that the
standardized anti-inflammatory bioflavonoid composition, UP446, could also
be employed to inhibit nociception. Yimam M, Brownell L, Hodges M, Jia Q.
Analgesic effects of a standardized bioflavonoid composition from Scutellaria
baicalensis and Acacia catechu. J Diet Suppl. 2012 Sep;9(3):155-65.
doi: 10.3109/19390211.-2012.708713. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

3. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxicity of A. catechu
heartwood extracts in a human epithelial carcinoma cell line (A431) and
antitumor activity against DMBA/TPA induced squamous cell carcinoma in
Balb/c mice. The results suggest that AQCE may exert its chemopreventive
activity by acting as an antioxidant. Monga J, Chauhan CS, Sharma M. Human
epithelial carcinoma cytotoxicity and inhibition of DMBA/TPA induced
squamous cell carcinoma in Balb/e mice by Acacia catechu heartwood. J.
Pharm Pharmacol. 2011. Nov; 63(11):1470-82. doi:10.1111/j.2042-
7158.2011.-01354.x. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

4. Two new phenolic compounds, 5-hydroxy-2-[2-(4-hydroyphenyl) axety]]-3-
methoxylbenzoic acid (1) and (2S,3S)-3,7,8.3',4'-pentahdroxyflavane (2), were
obtained from the aqueous extract of Acacia catechu, along with four known
compounds identified as rhamnetin (3), 4-hydroxyphenyl ethanol (4),
3,3',5,5',7-pentahydroxy-flavane (5), and fisetinidol (6). Their structures were
determined on the basis of spectroscopic analysis. Free radical-scavenging
activities of the new compounds were evaluated. Li XC, Liu C, Yang LX,
Chen RY. Phenolic compounds from the aqueous extract of Acacia catechu.
J. Asian Nat Prod Res. 2011 Sep; 13(9):826-30. doi: 10.1080/10286020.2011.
597384.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications
ib Khadirarishta
35 Khadirakwatha Bhagandara

Botanical Name — Acacia catechu Willd.

Acacia — Tree yielding gum

----- PAGE 400 -----
392 Dravyaguna Vijnana

catechu — Kachu (Kannada word)
Family — Fabaceac (see Appendix-II for key features)

Gana _ vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Kushthaghna varga, Udarda prashamana varga, Mutrasangrahaniya
varga
Sushruta Salasaradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Vatadi varga 30-33

Basonym of Drug
wafer feat festa feat a terse
By alleviating diseases it brings stability.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, HUCH-HUCHT: AA |
Khadira (Acacia catechu) has thorns over its trunk and branches.
2. ABMCA:- ACA; VSM: HUSH AT |
Khadira is thorny tree having money thorns.
3, PrargTee:- FAM aeT: VIG: HVSHT BIT |
Spines are curved in Khadira.
4. ANZA: ANAL Tar: |
Khadira has heartwood which is medicinally used.
5. THAR:-ThaTt: ARIST |
The heartwood of Khadira has red colour.
6. ATCA: - aA |
Khadira leaves are small in size.
Properties and Actions .
Khadira is regarded as best Kushtaghna dravya (Useful in skin diseases).
8. SAMA: SAMA WAHT |

Khadira twigs are made brush and used for brushing the. teeth.

----- PAGE 401 -----
Khadira 393

9. TARNTTA- TERETE: |

Khadira is very useful in diseases of throat.

Others
10. Teat-meast areadt, Tat Waar |
Khadira is regarded as sacred and used in sacrifices.
11, Ufqe-agt WASTAT: |

Khadira is used to perform rituals.
Regional Names

Hind
Khaya

Habitat
Khadira tree is growing throughout forests of India, but very common in dry regions
of North Karnataka.

Morphology

Habit — Moderate sized tree grows up to
AO ft. in height.

Bark — Dark coloured, rough, young,
shoots dark brown or purple, glabrous.

Leaves— Compound, Bipinnate, 10-15
cm long, main rachis, pubescent, with glands
between many of the pairs of pinnae and a large
conspicuous gland at or near the middle or the
petiole, stipular spines short, hooked, arises
from a broad triangular base. Pinnae have 10-
30 pairs, 4-5 cm long, nearly sessile, and their
rachises pubescent. Leaflets are 30-50 pairs, 0.5
cm wide, linear, subacute, sessile, often ciliate.

Inflorescence — 5-10 cm long axillary
spikes.

Acacia catechu. Wild

----- PAGE 402 -----
at Dravyaguna Vijnana
Flowers — Pale yellow coloured, sessile with corolla longer than calyx,
Fruit — Pod, 5-7.5 cm long and 1-15 cm wide, flat, thin, brown, shining, with

triangular beak at the apex and narrowed at the base. Seeds are 3 to 10 in number.

Manufacture of Catechu

The red heart wood obtained by felling the tree and separating the bark and sq
wood, is cut into chips mechanically and put into extractors. The steam is passed through
the drug for maximum extraction. The extract is concentrated under vacuum and js Cooled
by refrigeration. It is then centrifuged to isolate the cake of Kattha. The cake is moulded

in desired sizes and dried in proper condition.

Chemical tests
1. Catechu gives pink or red colour with Vanillin and Hydrochloric acid because
of the presence of Catehin.

2. Lime water when added to aqueous extract of black catechu gives brown
colour which tuns to red precipitate on standing for some time.

Classical references

Synonyms

Get were weet ae: | Hust ae age ala: 11
(AF. aeteat 30)

Properties and Actions
atett vitaet ora: augrerefamup | firm: Ha Aater: afte SAT I
Roaytrerattrerg penn ete ul (a9. aeieart 31-32)
Sratere nat fargrat aval qatar |
(a1. dere vt 33 df. aitaftrart 825)

Tater: Tae ferent fem: frremread | HErrenrenvsfrafreraer: yA: I

(afr. yeeafeat 25)
arrears (afer fasts )
ace aferftrrs: vita: free: | tadwata augqsfiargr: |
(af. yeeafeert 27)
ater: vftriirm: ware arate | oat aha at iraseATT Ul
VETACAA SATAN AHA: (A. sitet 823-824)

----- PAGE 403 -----
Khadira

395

vaiceyy ee fre: ofteer fererarenee: | ret: 1 arperererrtenagnetien "
(uPA. mrerente af 23)

aTAT:~
aay wiearktats: Hart: Hee: | wHVele YPeET: MATA: II
(afr. mrerenfert 25)
Th UaTlet:-
HEM Th Glet: HUTA Wola: | saat ae AUST: |
(aft. mrerenfert 27)
wateregarhern fer: firernarag: | WHAT Hee Sra AeAatet: VEU
(B.A. etirernfeert 130)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Khadira
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Saara d. Patra
Ans: c. Saara
2. Kushthaghna Karma of Khadira is attributed to
a, Rasa b. Virya c. Vipaka d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Agrya Karma of Khadira
a. Kandughna b. Kushthaghna cc. Jwarghna d. Kasahara

Ans: b. Kushthaghna

. Khadirarishtha is indicated in

a. Kushtha b Prameha c. Arshas
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Khadiradi Gutika is specifically indicated in

a. Atisara b. Mukharoga c. Jwara
Ans: b. Mukharoga

. Botanical name of Khadira

a. Areca catechu b. Cassia fistula
c. Acaia catechu d. Cassia occidentalis
Ans: c. Acacia catechu

d. Nidranasha

d. Sandhivata

----- PAGE 404 -----
LO

Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Gayathri is a synonym of

a. Devadary b. Shala ¢, Sariva
Ans: d, Khadita

. Balaptara is a synonym of

a. Agastya b. Karamarda c. Khadira
Ans: «. Khadira

. Habit of Khadira

a. Shrub b. Tree c. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

2K RK

d, Khadira

d. Atagwadha

d. Climber

----- PAGE 405 -----
Kulattha

Part used - Bija (Sced)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa Rashaya ]
Karma (Actions)

Ashmarihara, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Lekhana, Mutrala, Swedajanana, Medohara,
Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Bhedana, Arshoghna, Shulahara, Vranaropaka and
Chakshusya.

Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Hypotensive, Anti-spasmodic, Abortifacient, Haemoglutinating,
Hypolipidaemic, Antistress, Hypoglycaemic and Hypocholesterolemic.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Ashmari, Shwasa, Kasa, Medoroga, Jwara, Mutrakricchra krimi, Aruchi, Arshas,
Shuula and Vrana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisweda (Excessive sweating)

aaah yEHera wold vreatits qatar 1 (ga. 1/186)

Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to reduce
the Atisweda (Excessive sweating).

Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to reduce
the Atisweda (Excessive sweating).

2. Kasa (Cough) & Shwasa (Asthma)

HAMAArh a UH FL UTA test HI farses a yews
(a.Fa. 18/129)

----- PAGE 406 -----
398 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ghee cooked with decoction prepared from Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus), Pippali
(Piper longum), and Root of Pippali, Chavya (Piper chaba), Chitraka (Plumbago
zeylanica) and Shringavera (Zingiber officinale) is very useful in case of Kasa (Cough),
Shwasa (Asthma) and Hikka (Hiccough), oe

Matra (Dose)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - 3to5 gm

Chemical Constituents - Seeds contain strepogenin, g-sitosterol, Genistein, Ure-
ase, Kievitone, Phaseollidein, Coumesterol, Psoralidin, D-glucose, D-galactose, L-
thamnose, D-arabinose and aspartic acid.

Research corner

To evaluate the preventive effect of hydro-alcoholic extract of Dolichos biflorus
seeds (DBE) in ethylene glycol induced nephrolithiasis. Ethylene glycol caused a signifi-
cant increase in calcium, oxalate, phosphate, and total protein in urine as well as in kidney
whereas decrease in calcium, sodium, and magnesium in serum was observed (p< 0.001).
Ethylene glycol also caused a significant increase in lipid peroxidation and concurrent
decrease in activities of antioxidant enzymes in kidney (p < 0.001). However, the seed
extract of D. biflorus caused significant restoration of all these parameters (p < 0.001).
Histopathological and histochemical studies also showed the reduced calcifications in
kidney of seed extract treated rats. These results indicated that seeds of D. biflorus have
significant prophylactic effect in preventing the nephrolithiasis, which might be due to the
antioxidant activity of the active compounds of the plant. Saha S1, Verma RJ. Anti
nephrolithiatic and antio-xidative efficacy of Dolichos biflorus seeds in a lithiasic rat model.
Pharm Biol. 2015 Jan;53(1):16-30. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2014.909501. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

Kulatthadya Ghrita Ashmari, Mutrakricchra
z Kulattha Gude
3, Kulattha yusha Shula, Vatadosha

Pashanabhedadi ghrita Ashmari, Vatavyadhi

Latin Name
Dolichos biflorus Linn.
Dolichos— Old Greek name for a bear.

----- PAGE 407 -----
Kulattha 399

biflorus— Bi=two, florus-flowers, having two flowers
Family - Fabaceae

Gama Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Swedopaga varga
Sushruta Vatasamshamana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Dhanya varga

Basonym of Drug

Het Yea Ae festa gfe

Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus Linn) Plant spreads on the ground.
Synonyms

Morphology
1. dadts:- agant dare |

Seeds of Kulattha are having copper colour.
2. qnetiedent- The creeper spreads on the ground.

Properties and actions
3. weu- Kulattha has got Lekhana karma so it reduces the weight.
4. Uet- Kulattha is beneficial for eyes.

Vernacular Names

inc [ea

Habitat
Kulattha is cultivated through out India.

Morphology
Habit - Annual, branches are suberect or twining, stipules oblong.

Leaves - Compound, leaflets are 2.5 to 5 cm long, broadly lanceolate or oblong and
entire.

----- PAGE 408 -----
400 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Flowers - Papilionaccous, | to 3 flowers are seen in the
axis of leaves, yellow in colour, petals are | to 2 cm long, Keel
is narrow and obtuse shorter than the standard,

Fruit - Pod, about 5 cm long, compressed, recurved with
persistant style, seeds are 5 to 6 in number in one fruit, reni-
form shaped, grey or reddish brown in colour.

Varieties
Based on cultivation: two types as per Bhavamishra
1. Gramya (Cultivated)
2. Vanya (Wild)
Ra. Ni- ‘Two types

Dolichos biflorus Linn.

1. Tamrabija
2. Shweta bija

Classical references
Synonyms
Hea HAN HAA AGT BIT | (AH. TTHt: 60)
Properties and Actions
Seed: ee: Wes HATA: freemen | referer Aafen: arerenrercncarhrery,
gha Resvatigncrerter war | aaa Halse feahret: AT
(715. arta: 6)
So: peated: was: wefdure HwATEdeA: |
gaat yer yes dea: deeaeed ll
arrendtsera ater feerrarace: witfttr freee |
ate Fae fagtedt aarpereyr Ad: I
(af. gana a: 94-95)
aera werartten ferarasren ferearfea: | frattor Hey war HUTA THT:
Tea wba vitae Reale Heer RHA Se areal aaa Ul
(SF. aeret: 76-77)
wetteaen Hea Pe: Yo | raat aE ATTA
(a. were at: 72)

SOT: eM Tae: sUTatstet Percent arAaTEdeA: |

----- PAGE 409 -----
_

to

Wn

Kulattha — 401

* apieitgietingear titer: dire | areeat i
(fr. Ft. Preeenfe af: 72)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Kulattha

a, Bija b. Mula c. Pushpa d. Patra
Ans: a. Bija

. Pradhana Rasa of Kulattha

a. Tikta b. Madhura c, Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: c. Kashaya

. Main action of Kulattha

a. Dipana b. Grahi c. Kasahara d. Ashmarihara

Ans: d. Ashmarihara

. Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to

reduce
a. Kushtha b. Atimutra c. Atisweda d. Atipurisha

Ans: c. Atisweda

. Botanical name of Kulattha

a. Dolichos biflorus ___b. Dendropthe falcate
c. Criticum sativum d. Oryza sativa
Ans: a. Dolichos biflorus

. Tamrabija is a synonym of

a. Masha b. Kulattha c. Mudga d. Atasi
Ans: b. Kulattha

. Kulatthadya Ghrata is indicated in

a. Kasa b. Atisara c. Krimi d. Ashmari
Ans: d. Ashmari

KKK

----- PAGE 410 -----
Chapter

Useful part - Patra (Leaves)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)

Bhedana, Rasayana, Netrya, Brahmana, Balya, Vrashya, Vishahara, Jwarahara,

Kushthaghna, Krimighna.
Pharmacological Actions

Anti-inflammatory, Coolant, Laxative, Diuretic & Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Snigdha guna, Pitta Shamaka because of
Shita virya and Tikta Madhura rasa and Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and
Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yakrutvikara, Kamala, Vibandha, Rajorodha, Krichrartava, Mutrakrichra, Pandu,
Jwara, Netraroga, Arshas, Gulma, Shotha, vishavikara, Agnidagdha visphota, Twakvikara,
Kushtha, Krimi.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kamala (Jaundice)

aretha eared Tea Sen Bet Mer: 1 (TAR. 8/44)

The juice extracted from Kumari (Aloe vera) is used as Nasya (Snuff) for Kamala
(Jaundice).

2. Pleeha vraddhi (Spleenomegaly)

Prmgutga: aaa: wetteroeftar: 0 (et. 2/1/15)

----- PAGE 411 -----
Kumari 403

Juice of Kumari (Aloe vera) mixed with Haridra (Curcuma longa) taken internally
will relieve Plecha vraddhi (Splenomegaly) and this therapy is also useful in Apachi
(Scrofula).

3. Vrana (Wound)
apardtee afte sites Seek flag | a aear Uremer Brera Fear I

(UF. 25/18)

Kalka (Paste) prepared from Kumari rasa (Juice of Aloe vera) and Jiraka (Cuminum
cyminum) if applied will relieve burning sensation and inflammation.

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Leafjuice) -10to20 ml

Phytoconstitutents

Anthraquinone glycosides, aloin-barbaloin, isobarbaloin, i-barbaloin, aloe-emodin,
resin, aloetic acid, homonataloin, aloesone, chrysophanic acid, chrysamminic acid
galactouronic acid choline salicylate, mucopolysaccharides, glucosamine, and hexuronic
acid.

Research corner

1. Aloe vera (A.V.) is a tropical plant with anti-inflammatory and
immunostimulant effects, which could be of benefit in a diversity of wound
healing conditions. The aim of this study is to evaluate topically administered
A.V. gel on oral cavity minor aphthous healing. It seems likely that A.V. 2%
oral gel is not only effective in decreasing the recurrent aphthous stomatitis
patient’s pain score and wound size but also decreases the aphthous wound
healing period. Babaee N, Zabihi E, Mohseni S, Moghadamnia AA.
Evaluation of the therapeutic effects of Aloe vera gel on minor recurrent
aphthous stomatitis. Dent Res J (isfahan). 2012 Jul; 9(4):381-5.

2. The aim of the present study was to investigate the anti-obesity effects of Aloe
vera gel administration in male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats with diet-induced
obesity (DIO). SD rats at 7 wk of age were fed either a standard diet (10 kcal%
fat) (Std D) or high-fat (60 kcal% fat) diet (HFD) during the experimental
period. The results suggest that intake of Aloe vera gel reduced body fat
accumulation, in part, by stimulation of energy expenditure. Aloe vera gel
might be benefical for the prevention and improvement of diet-induced obesity.
Misawa E, Tanaka M, Nabeshima K, Nomaguchi K, Yamada M, Todia T,
Iwatsuki K. Administration of dried Aloe vera gel powder reduced body fat

----- PAGE 412 -----
104 Dravyaguna Vijnana
mass in diet-induced obestity (DIO) rats. J. Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo).
2012;58(3); 195-201.

3. The present study was performed to explore the effect of aqueous extract of
Aloe vera on behavioural parameters of pain, thus, the findings suggest that A,
vera exerts its effect by a peripheral mechanism of action rather than central.
Rathor N, Mehta AK, Sharma AK, Mediratta PK, Sharma KK. Acute effect
of Aloe vera gel extract on experimental models of pain. Inflammation. 2012
Dec; 35(6):1900-3. doi: 10.1007/s 10753-012-95 12-z.

4. To investigate the anti-oxidative and anti-fibrotic effects of Aloe vera in patients
with liver fibrosis. Oral supplementation with AHM could be helpful in
alleviating the fibrosis and inflammation of hepatic fibrosis patietns. Hegazy
SK, El-Bedewy M, Yagi A. Antifibrotic effect of Alove vera in viral infection-
induced hepatic periportal fibrosis. World J. Gastroenterol. 2012 May 7;18
(17): 2026-34. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i17.2026.

5. The anti-inflammatory activity of Aloe vera was investigated through MMP
inhibition studies. The effect of Aloe vera on MMP-9 inhibition was tested on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The inhibition of MMP-9
production in the cells was detected by gelatin zymography and was confirmed
by RT-PCR. Vijayalakshmi D, Dhandapani R, Jayaveni S, Jithendra PS, Rose
C, Mandal AB. In vitro anti inflammatory activity of Aloe vera by down
regulation of MMP-9 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2012 May 7;141(1):542-6. doi:10.1016/j.jep. 2012.02.040.
Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No: Formulation Indications

Botanical Name — Aloe vera Tourn. ex. Linn.
Aloe — Alloeh—A name from Arabic
vera — Native of India.

Family — Asphodelaceae

----- PAGE 413 -----
Kumari 40S

Gana vargikarana (Classical cagegorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 229-230
Basonym of Drug
Saat mise wae wert vite | arftearsrarg ae |
The plant which can survive with little quantity of water and it has cooling effect.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. PyeeeN-Lyet Tet AEA AT |
Kumari (Aloe vera) has very big and thick leaves.
2. Gaprdl-eergenr Hartt ser get alert Uler PraaeTes SMterahteayrey |
Leaves of Kumari have juice which resembles ghee.
3. fageraar-farget agala Sea: |
On cutting the leaves it secretes more juices.
Properties
4. SeAa- sales Seas AT Tartare: Seer

Kumari possesses rejuvenative qualities and it is also very useful in disorders
of teenage girls.

5. TeHA-Te HM Fa, AAS YA THART Ske |

The plant has got very good medicinal properties and useful in disorders of
teen, so liked by all the people.

Regional Name

Habitat

Kumari plant is cultivated throughout India as a commercial plant.

----- PAGE 414 -----
406 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - Perennial dwarf fleshy leaved plant.

Stem — Short and thick, somewhat divided.

Leaves — Sessile, crowded, lanceolate, erect-spreading, concave, spiny toothed at
the margin.

Scape longer than the leaves, scaly, branched,
racemes long & dense.

Flowers — Pendulous, yellow or orange
coloured, Perianth-segments united into a cylindric
or campanulate straight or slightly curved tube. Sta-
mens are as long as perianth.

Fruit —Locculicidal.
Varieties Varieties
Commercially there are four varieties.
1. Curacao aloes
2. Cape aloes
3. Socotrina aloes
4. Zanzibar aloes
Chemical tests

1. Freshly prepared bromine solution is added to a small quantity of the filtrate pre-
pared by 1 g of aloe powder boiled with 10 ml water and filtered with help of Kieselguhr.
The test gives a pale yellow precipitate of tetrabromalin.

Adulterants
Black catechu, Pieces of iron and stones.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features)

Juice obtained from pulp of leaves when dried becomes solid mass of irregular shape
and different sizes, dark chocolate to black in colour surface is hard, opaque with slightly
vitreous appearance. On breaking become pieces exposing a glossy somewhat sticky
surface. Thin pieces are translucent and brownish in colour. It has got nauseating odour
and bitter taste.

Aloe vera Tourn.ex.Linn

The fresh juice which is obtained by crushing the white pulp of green succulent
leaves. It is a sticky liquid of golden yellow colour having nauseating odour and metallic
taste.

----- PAGE 415 -----
Kumari 407

Classical references
Synonyms :
HPA TERA ST He Taparitane | (HI. eM 229)
Properties and Actions
want Vert often farce Asa Tart i eR seuht sea Gear areferr wpe, 11
Tenepegigaastet ea | meaftreufrantefirrmrermar
(aM. Teaeat 229-230)
apart efter frat wep Vest ea Terete eHashes Hse BU
Tranter] fraracarmrary, | aaeer ferrantett aca gen Ta
aratrrahtet HANt HT Te u (HA. staff 1639-1640)
Jean fear frat weer aearcet | firrenrafewarst Heel ot caret
(afr. werieat 49)
ward wep force eT vite Tar | yerette aaa heg Ties Perea I
sat a eT ava Haratea Haare | (ALA. Mayenfe at 154-155)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kumari
a. Mula b. Bija c. Patra d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Patra
. Pradhana Rasa of Kumari
a. Kashaya b. Tikta c. Madhura d. Katu

Ans: b. Tikta
3. The juice extracted from Kumari (Aloe vera) is used as Nasya (Snuff) for
a. Kamala b. Shotha c. Kushtha d. Arshas

i)

Ans: a. Kamala
4. Rajapravartini Vati is indicated in
a. Yoniroga b. Rajorodha c. Shiroroga d. Nidranasha
Ans: b. Rajorodha
5. Botanical name of Kumari
a. Mesua ferrea b. Asparagus racemosus

c. Curcuma zedoria d. Aloe vera
Ans: d. Aloe vera

----- PAGE 416 -----
cs Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Sthula dala is a synonym of
a. Bhaya b. Kutaja
Ans: ec. Kumari

7. Kanya and Graha Kanya are the synonyms of :
a, Haridra b. Lodhra c. Manjishta d. Kumari

Ans: d. Kumari

RK

----- PAGE 417 -----
Kumkuma Keshara

Useful part - Keshara (Dried stigma)

Rasadi panchaka

Snigdha Laghu

Karma (Action)

Varnya, Vranahara, Vamihara, Jantughna, Kantikara, Drishtivardhaka, Vishahara,
Hikka nigrahana, Kasahara, Rujahara, Dourgandhyhara, Kushthaghna.

Trana kumkuma

Shophahara, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Amadoshaghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Antispasmodic, Emmanagogue, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakaphahara, Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Snigdha guna. Kaphahara
because of its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Vyanga, Shiroruja, Krimi, Chardi, Vrana, Drishtidosha, Vishavikara, Hikka, Kasa,
Kushtha and Twak vikara, Mutraghata.
Trana kumkuma

Shopha, Kandu, Pama, Kushtha and Amadosha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mutraghata (Retention of Urine)

Prot Heprend aT Aye ATT | Ut WraceTaT YAAATYAMT, |!

(43. 58/31)

10 g of Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) is kept in honey water over night. This if it is
taken then it relieves retention of urine immediately.

----- PAGE 418 -----
410 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Shiroroga (Headache)

wea Ue frmg Tay | (31.2.5 24/7)
Nasya (Snuff) with ghee processed with Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) and Sugar will
relieve headache caused by Pitta dosha and Rakta.

3, Mutrodavarta (Obstruction and retention of urine)

FRAT ances HAT PEAT A | vsvsssvn are fretgiscrauttqary, 1
(9.9.3 55/25)
Decoction prepared from Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) added with little salt relieves
the retention of urine.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 125 to 500 mg

Phytoconstituents
Saffron contains red colouring matter known as crocin, crocetin, bitter principle called
picrocrocin, traces of volatile oil, non-reducing substances, hydrocarbon.

Research corner

1. The aim of the present study was to investigate the antithyperglycemic and
protective potential of crocin, a pharmacologically active constituent of Crocus
sativus L., in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. In conclusion, findings
suggest that crocin has the hypoglycemic and antioxidative properties in
streptozotocin-induced diabetes and it may be useful in the management of
diabetic patients. Rajaei Z, Hadjzadeh MA, Nemati H, Hosseini M, Ahmadi M,
Shafiee S. Antihyperglycemic and antioxidant activity of crocin in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. J Med Food. 2013 Mar; 16(3):206-10.
doi:10.1089/jmf. 2012.2407. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

2. In this study, they aimed to investigate the effects of crocinon MMP-1, MMP-
3 and MMP-13 expression in rabbit chondrocytes induced by interleukin-1a
(IL-1o) and in an experimental rabbit model induced by anterior cruciate
ligament transection. Findings suggest that the antiinflammatory activity of
crocin may be of potential value in the prevention and treatment of
osteoarthritis. Ding Q, Zhong H, Qi Y, Cheng Y, Li W, Yan S, Wang X. Anti-
arthritic effects of crocin in interleukin-1?-treated articular chondrocytes and
cartilage in a rabbit osteoarthritic model. Inflamm Res. 2013 Jan; 62(1):17-25.
doi: 10.1007/s 00011-012-0546-3. Epub 2012 Aug 18.

3. In this study, the effects of saffron (Crocus sativus) stigma aqueous extract and

----- PAGE 419 -----
Kumkuma_ Keshara 411
two active constituents, crocin and safranal, were investigated on blood
pressure of normotensive and  desoxycorticosterone — acetate-induced
hypertensive rats, Safranal is more important than crocin for lowering down
blood pressure of rats. Imenshahidi M, Hosseinzadeh H, Javadpour Y.
Hypotensive effect of aqueous saffron extract (Crocus sativus L.) and its
constituents, safranal and crocin, in normotensive and hypertensive rats
Phytother Res. 2010 Jul; 24(7):990-4, doi:10.11002/ptr. 3044.

4. The aim of this study was to investigate the agntidepressant properties of
stigmas and corms of Crocus sativus L. The aqueous ethanol extract of C.
sativus corms was fractionated on the basis of polarity. The results suggest that
the low polarity parts of C. sativus corms should be considered as a new plant
material for curing depression, which merit further studies regarding anti
depressive-like activitics of chemical compounds isolated from the two
fractions and mechanism of action. Wang Y, Han T, Zhu Y, Zheng CJ, Ming
QL, Rahman K, Qin LP. Antidepressant properties of bioactive fractions from
the extract of Crocus sativus L. J Nat Med. 2010 Jan; 64 (1):24-30. doi:
10.1007/s 11418-009-0360-6. Epub 2009 Sep 29.

5. In this study, the anxiolytic and hypnotic effects of saffron aqueous extract and
its constituents crocin and safranal, were studied in mice. The results showed
that saffron aqueous extract and safranal have anxiolytic and hypnotic effects.
Hosseinzadeh H, Noraei NB. Anxiolytic and hypnotic effect of Crocus sativus
aqueous extract and its constituents, crocin and safranal, in mice. Phytother
Res. 2009 Jun; 23(6):768-74. doi:10.1002/ptr. 2597.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Kumkumadya taila Vyanga, Nilika
Kumkumadi Ghrata Mukhadushika, Sidhma

Botanical Name — Crocus sativus Linn.
Crocus - Name adopted from Theophrastus, sativus - Cultivated.
Family — Iridaceae
Kula — Keshara kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Shonithasthapana varga
Sushruta Eladigana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpradi varga 74-78

----- PAGE 420 -----
412

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

Vee: FLAT |

Kumkuma is very sacred and all worship.

Synonyms
Habitat

1.

2.

maIeey-HyAt Tey |

Kumkuma grows in Kashmir region.
ATSHT-TTRTHAN STTAATA |

Kumkuma found in Bahlika desha (Punjab province of Pakistan).

Morphology

Se

4.

sTfrraq- art: raat HIST |

Keshara resembles fire-flame.

PHNGAAT-HYAGAaASAT |

Keshara (Stigma) which is a useful part and obtained from the flowers.

Properties and Actions

5.

11.

TRA-THATT |

Kumkuma is red in colour.

. Uaeng-ditant sate

Kumkuma imparts yellow colour if mixed with water.

. auedy-aurter fear

Kumkuma imparts colour.

. Se Hyaranty |

Kumkuma imparts yellow colour like that of Kusumbha (Carthamus
tinctorius).

. tty cteurh er |

Kumkuma has very potent odour.

. RE-ea TR |

Kumkuma has got strong odour.
arq-rat area ster |

Kumkuma is liked by everybody because of its bright and attractive colour.

----- PAGE 421 -----
Kumkuma Keshara 413

Regional Name

Hindi | Kesar ——d

Habitat
Kumkuma is a native plant of Asia and it is cul-
tivated in Kashmir state of India.

Morphology

Habit - Herb

Stem — Underground corm covered by few scale
leaves buds present in the axils of scale leaves, scape
arises from corm. Aerial stem is erect, simple, bear-
ing one flower at the tip.

Leaves — Dorsiventral, grooved on the back,
radical, basal, linear or sword shaped, flat, equidis-
tant, parallel-multicostate veined.

Inflorescence — Simple, solitary and terminal.

Flower — Actinomorphic, bisexual, lilac or deep Crocus sativus. Linn

purple in colour with 3+3 tepals froms a long tube,
Stamens are 3 in number, free, inserted on the throat of the tube. Gynoecium is tricarpellary

syncarpous, Ovary is inferior with axile placentation.
Fruit — Small locucidal capsule.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 3 types
1. Kashmira - Best quality
2. Bahlika - Medium quality
3. Parasika - Inferior quality

Ra.Ni-— 1. Kumkuma, 2.Trana kumkuma
Market samples — 1. Mograa, 2. Laccha

----- PAGE 422 -----
414 Dravyaguna Vinana

Properties
1. Kashmira - Sukshmakesharayukta on stigma) Raktavarna (Red in colour)
) i i Lotus).
Padmagandhi (Aroma like that of . |
2. Bahlika - Shukla (White) or Pita varna (Yellow) Ketaki gandha (Aroma like

Pandanus) Sukshma kesara (Small stigma). -
3. Parasika —- Madhugandha (Honey like odour), Jshatpandura varna (Whitish

in colour) Sthulakeshara (Bigget stigma).

Adulterants

Carthamus tinctorius Florets
Chemical tests

1. Add a drop of Sulphuric acid to dry stigma, it turns blue, gradually changing to
purple and finally purplish red.

2. Saffrons imparts yellowish orange brown colour to water.

Collection

The plants are raised from corms planted during July or August. The flowering takes
about one year. Flowers are collected in early morning in November and December,
Stigma and Upper style portions are detached manually and the drug is dried by artificial
heat and stored in dry place.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features):

Dried stigma of Mogra variety is of deep red colour with the style cut and removed
beyond the length of 10 mm. The upper extremity of each stigma spreads out to form a flat
lamina having a dentate margin. It has got very strong characteristic odour and having
slightly bitter taste.

Dried stigma of Laccha variety is having long, tubular gradually tapering style of
yellowish colour, up to 2.5 cm in length. It has got strong characteristic odour and has
bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms :

(as. afatert 74)
Properties and Actions

(a1.3. afufeat 78)

----- PAGE 423 -----
Kumkuma_ Keshara 415

BRET Hed fremyet yeroretteforet | wurgheforcrerferarge, arvana,
(afr. aeanfaert 12)

HEN Hed ferek ave aurea, 1 afer arse frernrforer aftr
(fa. airaftrert 1302)

MC EC a
(af, aaaeart 41)
TPH OMT HOt Here | HUgherararparrarret aTeht ATA.
(uF. aenfeart 43)

Srarae 1 (ALA. eeargenearf 3 9 )
Varieties and their characterstics
ares at get agai aa | qencenach warner agra,
Bet unde aarerher adie, 1 garage aut aaah wy
(ary. Buieett 75-77)
aidt Woh Trager | areity a werd ware agTay
ara rated mea aaaha fF 1 sagt wi Wa wR a
Seat WT PEAT, Ut (S.A. sitefefeart 1303-1306)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kumkuma
a. Stem b. Dried stigma ___c. Root d. Rhizome
Ans: b. Dried stigma
2. Pradhana Karma of Kumkuma kesara
a. Balya b. Medhya c. Varnya d. Dipana
Ans: c. Varnya
3. Dose of Kumkuma Churna
a. 500mg to 1 g b. 1 to2g
c.3 to6g d. 125 to 500mg

Ans: d. 125 to 500 mg

----- PAGE 424 -----
416 Dravyaguna Vijnana
ce a

4. Kumkumadya Taila is indicated in
a. Vyanga b. Kushtha c. Visarpa d. Vipadika
Ans: a. Vyanga
5. Botanical name of Kumkuma
a. Centella asiatica b. Crocos sativus
c. Curcuma longa d. Hedychium spicatum
Ans: b. Crocos sativus
6. Kusumodbhava is a synonym of
a. Patala b. Aragwadha c. Kumkuma d. Apamarga
Ans: c. Kumkuma
7. Habit of Kumkuma plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

8. Types of Kumkuma as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 c. 5 d. 6
Ans: a. 3

9. Adulterant of Kumkuma
a. Tila b. Kusumbha c. Yashtimadhu d. Vacha

Ans: b. Kusumbha

ERK

----- PAGE 425 -----
Kutaja

Useful part Kanda Twak (Stem bark) & Beeja (Seed)

rasadi pancaka

Pushpa (Flower

Karma (Action)

Twak (Bark) — Stambhaka, Arshoghna, Dipana, ‘TOSS FR Kushtaghna,
Krimighna, Amapachaka.

Bija (Seed) — Vamaka, Jwaraghna, Atisarahara, Kushthaghna, Shulahara, Dipana,
Pachana.

Pushpa (Flowers) — Atisarahara, Dipana, Kushthaghna.
Agrya Karma:

HERAH VOUT THATS | (AF. 25/40)

Bark of Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall.) pacify Kapha, Pitta & Rakta,
astringent and dries up.

Pharmacological Actions
Bark — Stomachic, Astringent, Antidysenteric, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic.
Seed — Astringent, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic, Antidysenteric, Emetic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Twak (Bark) and Pushpa (Flower) — Pittakapha Shamaka. Pitta Shamaka due to
Shitavirya and Tikta Kashaya rasa, Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta
Kashaya rasa.

Indrayava (Kutaja bija) — Tridosha Shamaka (Ra.Ni.) Vatahara because of Ushna
Virya, Pitta Shamaka due to Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu
vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

----- PAGE 426 -----
418 Dravyaguna Vijnana
—____
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Twak (Bark) —Atisara, Pravahika, Arshas,
Krimi, Twak vikara.
Bija (Seed) ~ Atisara, Jwaratisara, Rakt
Raktapitta, Jwara.
Pushpa (Flower) — Atisara, Kushtha, Krimi.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
(FF 19775)
In case of blood mixed diarrhoea one should consume ghee cooked with Indrayay,
(Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica) and barley. Then one should take liquid grue,

2. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)

pescetde: wan: renee: | (aR. 14/185)

Decoction prepared from Kutaja twak (Bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica) and
Nagara (Zingiber officinale) checks the bleeding piles.
3. Vrana (Wound)

ereittehgpest: Hare AUT: 11 (AY. 25/87)

Decoction prepared from Karavira (Nerium indicum), Arka (Calotropis procera)
and Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica) if used for washin g the wound it promotes heal-
ing.

Raktapitta, Kushtha, Amadoshg, Tri

arshas, Visarpa, Kushtha, Vataraky, Shu
> ONY

Matra (Dosage)
Twak kwatha (Decoction of Bark) -— 30to50ml
Bija churna (Seed powder) - 500 mg to 1.5¢
Phytoconstituents

Akaloids like conessine (Kurchicine), Norconessine, Isoconessine, Dioxyconessine,
Conessimine, Holarrhimine, Holarrhidine.

Research corner

1. The present study shows evaluation of anti-malarial effects of two plants
commonly used against malaria in the Garhwal region of north-west Himalay®,
in order to discover the herbal-based medicine. The present investigation

----- PAGE 427 -----
Kutaja 419
reflects the use of these traditi

taditional medicinal i ari
plants may work as potenti poker einer eee samen

lal source in the development of variety of herbal

canescens, plants tradition
rest Himalaya, Malar J. 2011 Feb 2;10:20. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-10-

2. The alkaloids from the ethanolic extrac

: t of H. antidysenterica seeds were
evaluated for their antibacterial acti

vity against clinical isolates of
C) in vitro, and their antidiarrheal
induced diarrhoea in rats, in vivo. The results suggest
usefulness of alkaloids of H. antidysentrica seeds as antibacterial and
andtidiarrhoeal agents. Kavitha D, Shilpa PN, Devaraj SN. Antibacterial and

antidiarrhoeal effects of alkaloids of Holarrhena antidysenterica WALL.
Indian J Exp Biol. 2004 Jun; 42(6):589-94.

3. The aim of the present work to isolate and identify new AChE inhibitors from
Holarrhena antidysenterica. The results suggest that these alkaloids could be
potential candidates for further development of new drugs against AD. Yang
ZD, Duan DZ, Xue WW, Yao XJ, LI S. Steroidal alkaloids from Holarrehna
antidysentrica as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and the investigation for
structure-activity relationships. Life Sci. 2012 Jun14;90(23-24):929-33. doi:
10.1016/).lfs.2012.-04.017. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

4. This study was carried out to provide pharmacological basis for medicinal of
Holarrhena antidysenterica in gastrointestinal disorders. These results indicate
that the gut stimulant and relaxant activities of Holarrhena antidysenterica are
mediated possibly through activation of hitamine receptors and Ca(++) channel
blockade, respectively and this study provides sound mechanistic background
for its usefulness in gut motility disorders such as constipation, colic, and
possibly diarrhoea. Gilani AH, Khan A, Khan AU, Bashir S, Rehman NU,
Mandukhail SU. Pharmacological basis for the medicinal use of Holarrhena
antidysenterica in gut motility disorders. Pharm Biol. 2010 Nov; 48(11):1240-
6. doi: 10.3106/13880201003727960. Epub 2010 Sep 7.

5. A new steroidal alkaloid, named antidysentricine, has been isolated from the
seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica and characterized as 3  beta-
dimethylaminocon-5-enin-18-one (1). Kumar A, Ali M. A new steroidal
alkaloid from the seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica. Fitoterapia. 2000. Apr;
71(2):101-4.

----- PAGE 428 -----
420 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No Formulation Indications

Kutajadyarishta Atisara, Grahani
Kutajavaleha Atisara, Grahani

Kutaja Rasakriya Raktatisara
Kutajadya ghrata Raktarshas
Kutajashtaka Atisara, Arshas

Kalpa of Vatsaka mentioned in Kalpasthana 5th chapter of Caraka. Totally 18
yogas are explained.

Rutajadi kashaya Atisara, Amaja Shula

SI No Kalpa Number of Yoga

With Jala 3 yogas
With Krashara 1 yoga
Botanical Name — Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall.

Holarrhena - Holos-whole, Arrhen-male-whole male-entire anther.

antidysenterica - Useful in dysentery.

Family — Apocynaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Kutaja

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

oni

Charaka — Arshoghna varga, Kandughna varga, Stanyashodhana varga,
Asthapanopaga varga

Sushruta Aragwadhadi gana, Pippalyadi gana, Haridradi gana, Brihatyadi
gana, Lakshadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 116-118, Haritakyaadi Varga 156
Basonym of Drug
He at wae area get, He frtys art ser

Kutaja tree grows in forest and in rainy season.

----- PAGE 429 -----
; Kutaja 421
esther eee -
Synonyms

Habitat
1. aalferg:-cHfereest aa: |
Kutaja grows commonly in Kalinga region.
2, ATH: ASN Te: |
Found in Vatsa desa.
3. Faget artery aeaaay age area |
Commonly found in Mahendraparvata KSetra.
4, Uae aee WAS Sa: wt gar: |
Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenteria) plant grows gregariously.
Morphology
5. GAh:-Beaga: |
Kutaja is a small tree.
6. WURIEA:-UU sy gat: |
The bark of Kutaja is pale white in colour.
7. Waava:-yrafr geeAT |
Kutaja plant blossoms just prior to rainy season.
8. fiRafecar-fity afecrareaeaagUEe: |

Kutaja is tree grows in mountains and flowers are white like that of Mallika
(Jasmine).

9. WfeereRTgEr:— APTA Fa YATE I
Flowers are bright white like that of Jasuune.
10. AEMTeT:-WTIGeIT: I
Flowers are aromatic.
11. Ganea-aarandterated emer | tanh fe sara’ sf ara ute
Seeds of Kutaja fruit are barley-shaped.

Properties and Actions
12. Pordt-ttea carerarchtter
Kutaja stops diarrhoea.

13. arferen-fereey HB: |

----- PAGE 430 -----
422 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Kutaja is one of the best drug among Tikta dravya (Drugs having bitter taste).

Regional Names
a

Habitat

Kutaja tree grows through out India, more com-
mon in forests.

Morphology
Holarrhena antidysenterica

A shrub or small tree, glabrous or pubescent. The
bark is pale in colour.

Leaves — Leaves are opposite, 10 to 20 cm long
and 5 to 11 cm wide, broadly ovate to elliptic, obtuse
or obtusely acuminate tip, glabrous or more or less pu-
bescent, base usually obtuse. Main nerves are 10-14
pairs, conspicuous, very short petiole, 3 mm long and
sometimes leaves are sessile.

Inflorescence — Corymbose cyme, 7 to 15 cm
in diameter, pedicels are slender.

Flowers — Aromatic, creamish white in colour,
corolla is tubular and 8 to 13 mm long.

Fruit —Follicles, 20 to 40 cm long, 6 to 8 mm in
diameter, cylindric, diverging, often dotted with white
spots.

Seeds—8 mm long, linear-oblong, tipped with a
spreading deciduous coma of brown hairs 2 to 2.5 cm
long.

Wrightia tomentosa R.Br.

----- PAGE 431 -----
Kutaja 423

Wrightia tinctoria
Habit — Deciduous tree grows upto 45 ft. in height.

Bark — 8 to 10 mm ‘thick, grey, smooth, outer layer is thin and inner layer is thick,
brittle, creamy, blaze is greenish-yellow, latex is milky white.

Leaves — Simple, opposite, distichous, exstipulate, petiole is 2 to 5 mm Jong, stout,
glabrous. Lamina is 3.5 to 11 cm long and 2 to 4 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate or elliptic-
ovate, base is acute, apex is acuminate, entire margin, glaucous beneath, lateral nerves 5
to 10 pairs, reticulate venation.

Inflorescence — Terminal cyme

Flower — Bisexual, white, scented, pedicel is 1.5 mm long, stamens are 5, carpels
are 2 and free.

Fruit — 2 follicular mericarps, 15 to 45 cm long, slender, smooth, green, cylindric
and cohering at the tip.

Seed —- 1.5 cm long, black and commate at one end.
Varieites
Charaka -— 1. Pumkutaja— Holarrhena antidysenterica
2. Strikataja - Wrightia tinctoria
Modern classification — White and Black variety.

Particular/ Variety White Black
Dark black
White on drying Black on drying

Flowers White, small, Slightly Strongly scented
fragrant
Pods Arranged in pairs but Grow in pairs joined at origin

partly seperate

Charaka in Kalpasthana 5th chapter mentioned two types of Kutaja viz. Pumkutaja
and Strikutaja.

Pumkutaja Strikutaja
Fruit Big Small

Flower White Blackish or Pinkish
Leaf Glaucous -
Pedicel - Small

----- PAGE 432 -----
A424 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features)

The bark will be flat, slightly curved or arched and upto 5 mm thick, outer surface is
buff to reddish brown in colour, rough and warty, with patches of beady protruberances.
Inner surface is rough and scaly, reddish brown on sides and whitish in the center. On
breaking becomes short pieces or granules, has got faint agreable odour and bitter taste.

Seeds are long, lanceolate upto 1.25 cm long and 3 to 4 mm wide at its thickest point.
External surface is yellowish brown in colourk, finely striated lingitudinally. Seeds when
ripe, carry a teft of brown hair at the top. Seeds have not got any odour and tastes very
bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
HET: Hes: Hlet arent Prelaferrenr | aarlers: Mee wa AfSeTHTTST SATE |
Sa Baca: Wheat Gar: UU STEA: (A. Wee TF 116-117)
Properties and Actions
Hes: HH wat cereal fer: | sreifshrearcrTEraaT Ms APSTT I
(TN. Tete TT 118)
wen: waht: Bera warfare: | petdtar frmeqenhr feared, u
(afi. ragomie at 14)
Hew: Vaeit wer: aret das: HY: | Hafiraradepeaarayi stead
(S.A. aie af 894-895)
west: Herr: Hoenn | outset rp:
(afr. saarfe aT 54)
peaegqaktan: waftasten: | dort dea: prea: aftrerecarrarers: 1
srrarteae Ceara: SecA |
peaet ( passin )-
gaat Prateet doe we vitae serdtencnilaitdtadaega 0
atest Teantererarearerserorgeery | (AT. Shree at 158-159)
vena: Hehrmemaawrets deat: i Taenitant a sake yeratterar
(afr. magenfe at 16)
YealerHarerearsreteraery ul (HA. atefrert 896-897)

----- PAGE 433 -----
Kutaja

425

BRAT He fterent vite separrercenftrenew | arerkeraeTT ht AAAI I
(aft. waatfe at s7)

Agu ere aetst aera 1 (BLA. atime at 62)
yeuge
aeget vite fare Hered wey che | ateet aeaftrarrerpardtan sqft

(& fa. siafs af 395-896)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Main useful Part of Kutaja

a. Mula b. Kanda Twak & Bija

c. Patra d. Niryasa

Ans: b. Kanda Twak & Bija

. Rasa of Kutaja Kanda Twak

a. Tikta Kashaya b. Tikta Madhura c. Katu Tikta
Ans: a. Tikta Kashaya

. Pradhana Karma of Kutaja Twak

a. Bhedana b. Rechana c. Anulomana
Ans: d. Stambhana

. Bija of Kutaja is called

a, Yava b. Indrayava c. Godhuma
Ans: b. Indrayava

d. Tikta Amla

d. Stambhana

d. Madhulika

. Decoction prepared from Kutaja twak (Bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica)

and Nagara (Zingiber officinale) checks

a. Raktarshas b. Raktapitta

c. Raktatisara d. Rakta shtivana

Ans: a. Raktarshas

. Kurchisine — an important alkaloid present in

a. Langali b. Kupilu c. Kutaja
Ans: c. Kutaja

. Kutajavaleha is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Atisara c. Amlapitta
Ans: b. Atisara

d. Bhallataka

d. Arshas

----- PAGE 434 -----
426

Dravyaguna Vijnana

8. Total Vamana Yoga mentioned for Vatsaka

10.

Lt,

13.

14.

15.

a. 60 b. 133 c. 24
Ans: d. 18
. Botanical name of Kutaja

a. Pterocarpus marsupium
c. Oroxylum indicum
Ans: b. Holarrhena antidyenterica

Vatsaka is a synonym of
a. Pippali b. Kumkuma c. Haridra
Ans: d. Kutaja
Girimallika is a synonym of
a. Agastya b. Kutaja c. Jati
Ans: b. Kutaja
. Botanical name of Shweta Kutaja
a. Uraria picta b. Holarrhena antidysenterica
c. Wrigthia tinctoria d. Rubia cordifolia
Ans: c. Wrigthia tinctoria
Varieties of Kutaja as per Charaka
a. 2 b. 3 c.4
Ans: a. 2
Habit of Kutaja Plant
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Small tree

Ans: c. Small tree

Main action of Indrayava is

a. Bhedana b. Rechana c. Anulomana
Ans: d. Vamaka

KK

b. Holarrhena antidyenterica
d. Randia dumetorum

d. Kutaja

d. Champaka

d. 5

d. Climber

d. Vamaka

----- PAGE 435 -----
Chapter

Lajjalu

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant) and Mula (Root)

Rasadi pancaka

Tikta Kashaya
Laghu, Ruksha
Karma (Actions)

Atisarahara, Raktapittaghna, Yoniroganashaka, Shophahara, Dahanashaka,
Shwasahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Sandhaniya and Raktastambhaka.

Pharmacological Actions

Antiviral, Spasmogenic, Diuretic, Constipating, Febrifuge, Wound healing, Hyper-
glycemic and Antifertility.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta shamaka because of Shita virya and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yoniroga, Atisara, Raktapitta, Shopha, Daha, Kushtha, Vrana, Bhagna and
Bhagandara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Urustambha

aay mene fared Heat Ge AT fret ut (=F 27/29)

Combination of Samanga (Mimosa pudica), Shalmali (Salmalia malabrica) and
Bilva (Aegle marmelos) if taken with honey is beneficial in Urustambha.

2. Antravruddhi (Scrotal enlargement)
mane were fre wera: vata: | qos atPrers arereeferaaeat: 1
(aa. arafs 46)

Paste prepared from root of Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica) and excreta of eagle is applied
externally in case of Antravruddhi (Scrotal enlargement).

----- PAGE 436 -----
428 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dose)
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml
Kashaya (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml

Chemical Constituents - Leaves contain Leucoanthocya-nidin, Stigmasterol, Fla-
vone glycosides and an alkaloid Mimosine. Whole plant contains Turgorins, g-sitosterol
& Tannin.

Research corner

1. Mimosa pudica Linn was tested for diuretic activity using the lipschitz test. The
ethanolic and aqoues extract of Mimosa pudica Linn. was studied at two dose level 100
and 200 mg kg (-1) b.wt. Furosemide (20 mg kg (-1) b.wt.) was used as standard drug in
a 0.9% saline solution. Urine volumes were measured for all the groups up to 5 h. The
ethanolic extract of Mimosa pudica linn was exhibited significant diuretic activity at doses
of 100 and 200 mg kg (-1) b.wt. by increasing total urine volume and ion concentration of
Na+ k+ and ClI-. Baghel Al, Rathore DS2, Gupta V3. Evaluation of diuretic activity of
different extracts of Mimosa pudica Linn. Pak J Biol Sci. 2013 Oct 15; 16(20) : 1223-5.

2. The anti-mumps virus activity of Mimosa pudica was evaluated. Suspected mumps
cases were collected to isolate a standard mumps virus by systematic laboratory testing
which included IgM antibody assays, virus isolation, RT-PCR and phylogenetic analysis.
The virus was quantified by TCIDSO assay and anti-mumps virus property was evaluated
by CPE reduction assay and cytotoxicity of the extract was measured by MTT assay and
phytochemical analysis was done by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy. The RT-
PCR and phylogenetic tree analysis of the SH gene sequence of the clinical isolate showed
it to be mumps virus genotype C. 150 pg/ml concentration of M. pudica completely inhib-
ited mumps virus and the drug was found to be non-toxic up to 2 mg/ml. M. pudica was
thus found to be a potent inhibitor of MuV. Malayan J1, Selvaraj B1, Warrier Al,
Shanmugam S2, Mathayan M1, Menon T1. Anti-mumps virus activity by extracts of
Mimosa pudica, a unique Indian medicinal plant. Indian J Virol. 2013 Sep; 24(2):166-73.
doi: 10.1007/s13337-013-0143-2. Epub 2013 Aug 10.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI-No. — Name Indications

fl. [Samangadi Kashaya
Kutajavaleha Grahani, Raktatisara
3. [

Samangadirbilvadi kwatha Pravahika, Atisara
4 Pushyanuga churna Yonidosha, Raktapradara

----- PAGE 437 -----
Lajjalu 429

Latin Name
Mimosa pudica Linn.
Mimosa—Mimos = Mimic, sensitivity of the leaves
pudica—hides itself when touched.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Babbula kula.
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Sandhaniya varga, Purisha Sangarahaniya varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana, Ambashthadi gana
Bh. Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug
wasticntfarrarecrssgttett |
Leaves of Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica Linn.) are sensitive so on touching they close.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Werentftent-stefter West STAT |
Lajjalu grows commonly in moist places.
Morphology
2. TlexHl-GRAET TAT |
Leaves resemble like that of Khadira (Acacia catechu).
3. wettast-yeT Sa UAT: |
Lajjalu leaves resemble to the leaves of Shami (Prosopis spicigera).
4, Waele: Haiteregtten AAT |
Lajjalu leaves will be folded on touch giving an impression that the plant is
saluting.

Regional Names

English Touch me not plant

----- PAGE 438 -----
430 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Lajjalu grows in waste lands of tropical regions in India.
Morphology
Habit - Diffuse under shrub, 45 to 90 cm high.

Stem & Branches - Sparingly prickly and clothes with long weak bristles from
bulbous bases.

Leaves - Compound, Sensitive, Petioles 2.5 to 5 cm long, leaf is 5 to 7.5 cm long,
leaf lets are 12 to 20 pairs, 6 to 8 mm long and 4 mm wide, sessile, linear-oblong.

Flowers - Pink in colour, seen in globose heads, 8 mm in diameter.
Fruits - Pods, 1 to 2 cm long, 3 to 4 mm wide, flat, slightly recurved, consisting 3 to
5 one seeded joints.
Varieties
Two types— 1. Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica)
2. Viparita Lajjalu (Biophytum sensitivum)
Classical references
Synonyms
PRT: Creates VAs Were | THATS AAA ATT aetaacaTeer Ut
(M3. Trae aH: 272)
Properties and Actions
wae: Bitten ferear eearean eacaftra hare | Tenftrrrareae ay Pee
(a9. e=ate at: 273)
Teardt we: viet frantaratrt | vingesraagnganreyd Ul
(aft. arate et 98)
sneer fear feat ware anf | aerate tafe a arerag
(fa. steitt af 1082-1083)

Teardt ee: sitet ftrantar ast i wines sAaTe AHS HHATT, |
(afr. wee aT 106)

----- PAGE 439 -----
Lajjalu 43]

Viparita Lajjalu
ASAT ATT HESOIT HLHTAT AL | TAY Praca Seat AMT:
(afr. tere at 108)
ASAT Feat vita erat anaftrahtad, | cateratant was ferred
(B.Fa. mrergente at 79)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Main indication of Lajjalu
a. Kasa b. Gulma c. Yoniroga d. Anidra
Ans: c. Yoniroga

. Combination of Samanga (Mimosa pudica), Shalmali (Salmalia malabrica)
and Bilva (Aegle marmelos) if taken with honey is beneficial in

a. Urustambha b. Vatarakta c. Amavata d. Galaganda
Ans: a. Urustambha
3. Botanical name of Lajjalu
a. Albizzia lebbec b. Acacia catechu
c. Acacia arabica d. Mimiosa pudica
Ans: d. Mimosa pudica
4. Namaskari is the synonym of
a. Shatavari b. Lajjalu c. Irimeda d. Gokshura
Ans: b. Lajjalu
5. Khadiraka is a synonym of
a. Palasha b. Babbula c. Lajjalu d. Agastya
Ans: c. Lajjalu
6. Samangadi Kashaya is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Arshas c. Vaivarnya d. Prameha

No

Ans: a. Atisara

Fok

----- PAGE 440 -----
Lata Karanja

eect CE
Part used - Bija (Seed), Mula (Root), and Patra (Leaf).

Rasadi pancaka

Rasa
Guna

Karma (Actions)
Vishamajwaraghna, Krimighna, Shothahara, Rakta Shodhaka, Kushthaghna,

Pramehaghna and Shulahara.

Pharmacological Actions
Anthelmintic, Styptic, Antipyretic, Antiviral, Antifungal, Anti-inflammatory, Anti-

malarial and Antimicrobial.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)
Vata kapha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Vishamajwara, Krimi, Shotha, Kushtha, Prameha and Udarashula.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1.Vishamajwara (Malarial fever)

Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) are powdered and administered with equal
quantity of Maricha (Piper nigrum) Churna (Powder) in case of Vishamajwara (Malarial
fever).

2. Youvanapidaka (Pimples)

Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) is grounded with Godugdha (Cow milk)

and applied in case of Youvanapidaka (Pimples).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 1 to 3 gm
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

----- PAGE 441 -----
Lata Karanja 433

Chemical Constituents - Seeds contain Cacsalpin (Bitter substance), Phytosterinin,
Bonducin, Saponin, Fatty oil, Starch, Amino acids, Sucrose and Glucose, Seed kernel
contains Caesalpin, Homoisoflavone bonducellin and fatty acids.

Research corner

A study was carried out to evaluate the ameliorating effect of Caesalpinia crista
Linn. (CCME) extract on iron-overload-induced liver injury. Iron overload was induced
by intraperitoneal administration of iron dextran into mice. CCME attenuated the percent-
age increase in liver iron and serum ferritin levels when compared to control group. CCME
also showed a dose-dependent inhibition of lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and
liver fibrosis. The serum enzyme markers were found to be less, whereas enhanced levels
of liver antioxidant enzymes were detected in CCME-treated group. In presence of CCME,
the reductive release of ferritin iron was increased significantly. Furthermore, CCME
exhibited DPPH radical scavenging and protection against Fe(2+)-mediated oxidative
DNA damage. The current study confirmed the hepatoprotective effect of CCME against
the model hepatotoxicant iron overload and the activity is likely related to its potent anti-
oxidant and iron-chelating property. Sarkar R’, Hazra B, Mandal N. Hepatoprotective
Potential of Caesalpinia crista against Iron-Overload-Induced Liver Toxicity in Mice.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med.2012; 2012:896341. doi: 10.1155/2012/896341.
Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

| Latakaranja Bija Taila Kushtha

Latin Name
Caesalpinia crista Linn.
Caesalpinia — In memory of Andrea Caesalpine, Tuscan botanist.
crista- Cock’s comb.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Putikaranja
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not included in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga

----- PAGE 442 -----
434 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

ya Met Heras Hens encafer gfe |

Lata karanja (Caesalpinia crista) is considered as creeper having similar fruits to
Karanja.

Synonyms

Morphology -
1. GAT: HATE HAT Fa ATT AA She
Seeds of Latakaranja resemble the eyes of Kubera.
2. BUCH HUA- HUST: Ue |
Fruits of Latakaranja bear sharp projections.
3. Uferen:-yfet Wet STEM: |
Plant has got foetid smell.
4. Utena: afte Ghar: gear Hee ge |

Latakaranja is a variety of Karanja with bad odour.

Vernacular Names

Habitat:
Latakaranja grows throughout India.

Morphology

Habit - Large straggling thorny shrub.

Branches - Armed with hooks and straight hard yel-
low prickles.

Leaves - Compound, 30 to 60 cm long, petioles are
prickly, at the base of leaf there is a pair of stipule reduced to
pinnae, prinnae are 6 to 8 pairs, 5 to 7.5 cm long. Leaflets | Caesalpinia cirsta Linn.
are 6 to 9 pairs, 2 to 3.8 cm long, | to 2 cm wide, elliptic-

----- PAGE 443 -----
Lata Karanja 435

oblong, glabrous above, more or less puberulous beneath, short petiolutes.

Inflorescence - Long peduncled terminal or supra axillary raceme.
Fruit - Pods, shortly stalked, oblong, 5 to 7 cm long, 45 cm wide, densely armed
with wiry prickles. Seeds are 1 to 2 in one fruit, lead coloured | to 3 cm long.

Varieties

Classical references

Synonyms

Se: Hucat aecttnra sft Here u (fA. ethreenfe at: 209)
Properties and Actions

are: Scaeien dtatet attetred, | aetarahyernefanreahranrag:

(a3. Teeafe TH: 120)

vary Sette ferngat wera: | ferreneg eae aHege aor I

—_

NO

(fr. attereenfe at: 211)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Main action of Latakaranja

a. Kasahara b. Krimighna
c. Vishamajwaraghna d. Varnya
Ans: c. Vishama jwaraghna

. Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) are powdered and administered with

equal quantity of Maricha (Piper nigrum) Churna (Powder) in case of
a. Shwasa b. Atisara c. Shotha d. Vishamajwara

Ans: d. Vishamajwara

. Latakaranja Bija Taila is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Ajirna c. Anidra d. Atisara
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Botanical name of Latakaranja

a. Cassia fistula b. Pongamia pinnata
c. Caesalpinia crista  d. Holoptelia integrifolia
Ans: c. Caesalpinia crista

----- PAGE 444 -----
436 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Kuberaksha is the synonym of
a. Kokilaksha b. Latakaranja c.Matsyakshi  d. Lodhra
Ans: b. Latakaranja
6. Fever nut is the common English name of
a. Latakaranja b. Vasa c. Bhallataka d. Kalamegha
Ans: a. Latakaranja
7. Habit of the Latakaranja plant
a. Large Tree b. Herb
c. Climbing shrub d. Small tree
Ans: c. Climbing shrub

FRR ERR

----- PAGE 445 -----
Lavanga

Useful part — Pushpa Kalika (Flower bud).
Rasadi pancaka

Katu Tikta

[Guna Laghu Snigdha, Tikshna
ipaka | Ratu
oz | Sie

Karma (Action)
Kasahara, Shwasahara, Dipana, Pachana, Netrya, Ruchya, Trishnahara,
Chardighna, Shulanashaka, Hikkanigrahana, Vishaghna, Vrishya, Swarya, Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Dental analgesic, Carminative, Stimulant, Aromatic, Antispetic, Appetizer, Diges-
tive, Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphapitta Shaamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Kasa, Shwasa, Hikka, Mukhadourgandhya, Danta Shula, Chardi, Trishna,
Agnimandya, Aruchi, Swarabheda, Jwara.
1. Mukhavaishadyartha (To cleans mouth)
TATU See HRT PRAT 1 TATA cssssssseenee mage wet TU
(A.¥. 5/76)

To cleanse mouth one can keep flower buds of Lavanga (Syzigium aromaticum) in
mouth. It also acts as mouth freshner and improves taste sensation.

2. Vatarti Shamanartha (Pain due to Vata)
oe: wort frat eareertrarat AMT (3H. 12/6)

Paste prepared from Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum) with water is applied over the
of pain. It relieves pain.

Site

----- PAGE 446 -----
438 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Pipasa (Thirst)
RrorereTTA A Ta RING WTA (ZA. 6/62)

Cloves added to a glass of water if taken will relieve Pipasa (Thirst) and Utklesha
(Nausea).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 250mg tol g
Taila (Oil) — 4to 6 drops

Phytoconstituents

Clove contains 15 to 20% volatile oil, 10 to 13% tannin (Gallotanic acid), resin,
chromone, eugenin.

Volatile oil of clove contains eugenol (70-90%), eugenol acetate, caryophyllenes,
esters, ketones and alcohols.

Research corner

1. Molecular mechanism of eugenol-induced apoptosis in melanoma, skin tumors,
osteosarcoma, leukemia, gastric and mast cells has been well documented. This
review article will highlight the antiproliferative activity and molecular
mechanism of the eugenol induced apoptosis the cancer cells and animal
models. Jaganathan SK, Supriyanto E. Antiproliferative and molecular
mechanism of eugenol-induced apoptosis in cancer cells. Molecules. 2012 May
25;17(6):6290-304. doi: 10.3390/molecules 17066290.

. The plant Syzigium aromaticum (SYZ), commonly known as clove has since
been employed locally to treat constipation. Attempt to complement the effort
of other researches called fort its selection for laboratory investigation, in order
to determine its possible effect on intestinal propulsion in rodents as well as its
suspected gastrointestinal protective properties. The findings explain the
folkloric uses of SYZ as an antiulcer and a purgative agent as well as its
possible mechanism of action. Agbaje EO. Gastrointestinal effects of Syzigium
aromaticum (L) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae) in animal models. Nig Q J Hosp
Med, 2008 Jul-Sep; 18(3):137-41.

3. The essential oil extracted from the dried flower buds of clove, Eugenia

caryophyllata L. Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae), is used as a topical application to

relieve pain and to promote healing and also finds use in the fragrance and
flavoring industries. This short review addresses the chemical composition and
biological effects of clove essential oil, and includes new results from GC/MS

No

----- PAGE 447 -----
Lavanga 439
analysis and a study of its antimicrobial activity against a large number of multi-
resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated from dialysis biomaterial. Chaieb
K, Hajlaoui H, Zmantar T, Kahla-Nakbi AB, Rouabhia M, Mahdouani K,
Bakhrouf A. The chemical compostion and biological activity of clove essential
oil, Eugenia caryophyllata (Syzigium aromaticum L. Myrtaceae): a short
review. Phytother Res. 2007 Jun; 21(6):501-6.

4. The effects of long-term administration of boiled aqueous extract of Syzigium
aromaticum (SYZ), commonly known as clove (which has been locally
employed for treating gastrointestinal tract diseases and also used as food
spices), on some biochemical indices, such as body weight, liver functions and
blood parameters were studied in adult albino rats of both sexes. The present
work has revealed the toxicity of sub chronic administration of SYZ, which
suggests that its prolonged usage must be avoided. Agbaje EO, Adeneye AA,
Daramola AO. Biochemical and toxicological studies of aqueous extract of
Syzigium aromaticum (L.) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae) in rodents. Afr J Tradit
Complement Altern Med. 2009 May 7:6(3):241-54.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Formulation Indications ‘

Botanical Name — Syzgium aromaticum Merr.Perry
Syzygium — Conjuction-Caryohpyllus

aromaticum - Scented
Family —- Myrtaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Lavanga

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 58-59

----- PAGE 448 -----
440 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Maer festhet Sats SAAT
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticunt) will expell the Kapha.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, WATS: VSATAT TM SET |
The flowers of Lavanga resemble the flowers of Candana (Santalum album).
2. TaGyA-Tart PY, aT PING ea ga TASMeay | Fal ea Ares PIAA ster
ARTA |
The flowers are used to worship gods and it is considered to be the best flower
among the flowers.

3. Deuter - Cures grahani roga.

4, sftaat - Lavanga is auspicious

5. sftaat - Flowers are beautiful
Habitat

Lavanga plant requires 150 to 300 cm rainfall,

rich loamy with high humus soil, so it is cultivated
in Kerala, Coastal districts of Karnataka and Coorg.

An ever green small tree reaching a height of

20 to 30 ft. Branches are many and horizontal gives
a pyramid shape.

Cy

yy

pA

INH
ge § fig

iy

a=
Vy

Stem is hard with pale yellowish or grey bark | Syzgium aromaticum Merr.
and has smooth surface. Perry

----- PAGE 449 -----
Lavanga 441

Leaves - Simple, opposite, obovate, petiolate, acute, 7.5 to 12 cm long and 2.5 to
3.5 cm wide, leathery, gland dotted.

Inflorescence — Axillary cymose inflorescence

Flowers — White, complete, bisexual, Corolla with four petals and it is free. Flower
bud is clustered at terminal branches, greenish to pink and highly aromatic, Dried cloves
are nail shaped, reddish brown in colour, | to 2 cm long, rough to touch, cylindrical base,
crowned with plum ball like unopened corolla. Surmounted by four toothed calyx.

Fruit — Fleshy, dark pink, drupes, 2.5 cm long and 1 cm thick.

Seeds — Oblong, soft and grooved on one side.

Adulterants
Mother cloves, Blown cloves, Clove stalks, exhausted cloves.

Chemical test
Transverse section of the clove is treated with strong potassium hydroxide solution,
the needle shaped crystals of potassium eugenate is observed.

Collection

The plant starts bearing after 7 to 8 years and a satisfactory yield per hectare of the
drug is achieved only after 15 to 20 years of growth. Cloves are hand picked or collected
by beating with bamboos. Cloves are to be collected when the cloves start changing their
colour from green to slightly pink. The cloves are dried in the sun and freed from foreign

material and graded.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Flower bud is reddish brown in colour and upto 1.7 cm long. It has got a slightly
flattened stalk (Hypanthium) and a head composed of four calyx teeth and a globular
portion in the centre, consisting of stiff leathery petals and numerous incurred stamens
surrounding the style. Clove has got strong spicy odour, aromatic and tastes pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms :
wag capa skis sftrgrey (ars. afae at 538)
Properties and Actions
aont wfé cansenrt yerary ferrerete, | sere areata Rercnres art arma Yay
(ay. afae aT 58-59)

----- PAGE 450 -----
442

Dravyaguna Vijnana

(af. same TT 40)

cpenftrres decnrerarerentferadt rary tl (HF. sireferert 1334)

(af. aeamfe at 83)

wR are aa ae aa agwfey t pevaraftars a anf wera ul
(B.fr. ettteate aT 80-87)

me

wo

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Lavanga

a. Fruit b. Flower bud c. Root
Ans: b. Flower bud

. Virya of Lavanga Pushpakalika

a. Ushna b. Ruksha c. Shita
Ans: c. Shita

. Pradhana Karma of Lavanga

a. Kasahara b. Medhya c. Vajikara
Ans: a. Kasahara

Lavangadi Vati is specifically indicated in

a. Jwara b. Anidra c. Arshas
Ans: d. Grahani

. Botanicl name of Lavanga

a. Egenia jambolana __b. Syzigium aromaticum
c. Albizia lebbeck d. Syzigium cumini
Ans: b. Syzigium aromaticum

. Devakusuma is the synonym of

a. Patala b. Jati c. Lavanga
Ans: c. Lavanga

. Grahanimihira & Sreesanjna are the synonyms of

a. Chitraka b. Lavanga c. Dadima
Ans: b. Lavanga

. Habit of Lavanga Plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Herb
Ans: a. Tree

d. Exudate

d. Laghu

d. Stambhana

d. Grahani

d. Mallika

d. Pippali

d. Creeper

----- PAGE 451 -----
Lodhra

Useful part — Kaanda Twak (Stem bark)
Rasadi panchaka

Twak (Bark) Pushpa (Flower)
Kashaya
Karma (Action)

Shitagrahi, Chakshushya, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Trashnanigrahana, Vishaghna.

ii

Pharmacological Actions
Haemostatic, Coagulant, Astringent, Antiinflammatory.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Pittakapha Shamaka — Pitta Shamaka due to its Kashaya rasa and Shita virya.
Kapha shamaka because of its Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Raktapradara, Shwetapradara, Raktapitta, Raktatisara, Shotha, Netrabhishyanda,
Jwara, Trishna, Aruchi, Vishavikara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mukhadushika (Acne)

qughtni ¢ ctagakervat ar wear | (31.9.5 37/5)

Application of the paste prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) and Tuvarika
(Alum) will reduce Mukhadushika (Acne).

2. Pandura pradara (Leurorrhoea)
alereraenaret eters ae fra (AAR. 30/118)

ee Paste of Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) is taken with decoction of Nyagrodha
5 enghalensis) relieves leucorrhoea.

----- PAGE 452 -----
44

Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Pravahika (Dysentary)

Bilateral eet fraa-werftenrfser: ui (aT..F. 2/120)

Intake of curd mixed with Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) will check dysentery.

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - lto2g
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark has triterpenoid saponin, g-sitosterol, Leaves contain flavonol glycoside

rhamnetin, arabinogalactar and phlorizin.

Research corner

1. The present study aims to evaluate the hepatoprotective activity of ethanol

extract of Symplocos racemosa (EESR) bark on carbon tetrachloride (CC14)-
induced hepatic damage in rats. It was therefore concluded that EESR bark is
an effective hepatoprotective agent in CC14-induced hepatic damage, and has
potential clinical applications for treatment of liver diseases. Wakchaure D, Jain
D, Singhai AK, Somani R. Hepatoprotective activity of Symplocos racemosa
bark on carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic damage in rats. J Ayurveda
Integer Med. 2011 Jul; 2(3):137-43. doi: 10.4103/0975-9476.85552.

. In this study in vivo effect of aqueous extracts of Symplocos racemosa Roxb.

(Fam. Symplocaceae) on serum FSH and LH levels in immature female
Sprague-Dawley rats under basal conditions are reported. Bhutani KK, Jadhav
AN, Kalia V. Effect of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. on gonadotropin release in
immature female rats and ovarian histology. J Ethnopharmacol. 2004 Sep;
94(1):197-200.

. One new phenolic glycoside named benzoylsalireposide (1) along with one

known phenolic glycoside named salireposide (2) have been isolated from
Symplocos racemosa. Four other known compounds i.e. beta-amyrin (3),
oleonolic acid (4), beta-sitosterol (5) and beta-sitosteroal glycoside (6) were
also isolated from this plant. Anmad VU, Abbasi MA, Hussain H, Akhtar MN,
Farooq U, Fatima N, Choudhary MI. Phenolic glycosides from Symplocos
racemosa: natural inhibitors of phosphodiesterase I. Phytochemistry. 2003
May; 63(2):217-20.

. The phytochemical investigation of the n-butanol soluble fraction of the bark

of stem of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. yielded two new phenolic glycosides of

----- PAGE 453 -----
Lodhra 445

salirepin series, symplocuronic acid (1) and sympocemoside (2), while salirepin
(3) was isolated for the first time from this plant. Ahmad VU, Rashid MA,
Abbasi MA, Rasool N, Zubair M. New salirepin derivatives from Symplocos
racemosa. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2007 Apr-Aug; 9 (3-5):209-15.

5. Phytochemical investigation of Symplocos racemosa resulted in the isolation of
a new ethyl substituted glycoside, 1-ethyl brachiose-3'-acetate (1) along with
four known compounds ketochaulmoogric acid (2), nonaeicosanol (3),
triaconty] palmitate (4) and methyl triacontanoate (5). Abbasi MA, Ahmad VU,
Zubair M, Nawaz SA, Lodhi MA, Farooq U, Choudhary MI. Lipoxygenase
inhibiting ethyl substituted glycoside from Symplocos racemosa. Nat Prod Res.
2005 Jul; 19(5):509-15.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications

Pushyanuga churna Atisara, Yonidosha
Garbhashaya vikara, Grahani

Lodhrotpaladi kashaya
Pravahika, Atisara

Latin Name — Symplocos racemosa Roxb.

SI.No.

Symplocos —Connection-Stamens united at the base, having an inflorescence with a
long undivided axis.

racemosa — In form of a cluster of grapes
Family — Symplocaceae (Styraceae)
Kula - Lodhra kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Sandhaniya varga, Purishasangrahaniya varga, Shonithasthapana
varga

Sushruta Lodhradi gana, Nyagrodhadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 215-216
Basonym of Drug

teams | eRe area

Lodhra plant has property of stoping bleeding.

----- PAGE 454 -----
446 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
1. fava-feerfa ferate stearate farea: |
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) produces smoothness to the organs of the body.
2. RAH-MAls Meals HATTA she |
Lodhra has got strong astringent taste like that of Kramuka (Areca catechu).
Lodhra cures many diseases.
4, Ufgnrer-ugisearedife wsl-aiget F
Bark is beautiful and has got high medicinal values.
5. asada ay Yet |
When used, it cleanses the body.
Regional Names

Habitat

Lodhra tree commonly grows in plains of Eastern and Northern India. Also seen in
parts of Kerala and Karnataka.

Morphology

A small evergreen tree with stems up to 20 ft. in
hight and 15 cm in diameter

Bark — Dark grey, rough blaze 7-13 mm thick
shortly fibrous, pale yellow in colour and finely
mottled with pale orange brown.

Leaves — Leaves are 9 to 18 cm long and 3 to5
cm wide, alternate, elliptic-oblong or elliptic lan-
ceolate, apex acute obtusely acuminate or obtuse,
serrulate obscurely crenate or rarely entire, base acute
cuneate, coriaceous, glabrous above and pubescent

Symplocos racemosa. Roxb

----- PAGE 455 -----
Lodhra 447

beneath when young but ultimately glabrous or with scattered spreading hairs mainly on
the mid rub, glossy on both surfaces, dark green above. When it dries lateral nerves are
indistinct, 5 to 9 pairs. Petiole is | to 2 cm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary pubescent racemes.

Flowers — 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter white fading yellow. Petals seen in 2 series sta-
mens usually numerous and ovary is inferior, 3 celled.

Fruit - Drupe, | to 1.3 cm long, oblong, glabrous, purplish black, crowned with
persistent calyx.

Seeds — Oblong, cotyledons much shorter than the radicle.

Varieties Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni-—1.Lodhra_ 2. Pattika lodhra

Dha.Ni-1.Lodhra 2. Kramuka
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Stem bark is curved, channelled or arched and upto 1 cm thick. Outer surface is
reddish brown in colour, corky and friable with deep transverse and longitudinal cracks.
The corky covering breaks away frequently, excising a rusty brown granular surface.
Internally, the bark is whitish or light brown in colour and closely wrinkled longitudi-
nally. On breaking outer surface becomes short piece but internally fibrous. Odour is
characteristic and agreeable, having astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
ceaeatertesr erent Tretereta | farther: wfsearetea: HY: CITA: |
Sotasit gees: vet crergaret: i (aT.F. etree TT 215)
Properties and Actions
iret oral erg: vitetsrazeT: Hef OTA, | HATA Te TTA ATE MT ET,
(aa. Strne et 216)
wie vita: aarersy eft gerratrereny | erafeecteas: vicar wert Det HITE:
(ef. arate at 156)
aye ( citer fergre )-
Tiere operat Care Vitek arerentnea aT | rages ferrets arate:
(af. aafe TT 158)

----- PAGE 456 -----
448

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ver: SUAS: Hatta: at: | fer: warren parraratagestany

fears Hat gat wet fee | afer Hea Ur dare weft
(bP. state af 1126-1127)

eet Hares Bae vit arcatHrarge | aaa fares faster acentterm:
(a. frorenfe +f 212)

itat ante argent teaftrashereay 1 PRA ARCA OUTS FRIST AHMET
(B.A. atrenfe at 143)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Lodhra
a. Kanda twak b. Mula twak c. Patra d. Niryasa
Ans: a. Kanda twak
. Pradhana Rasa of Lodhra twak
a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Katu d. Madhura
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Lodhra
a. Dipana b. Rechana c. Stambhana d. Anulomana

a"

i)

Ans: c. Stambhana
4. Lodhrasava is indicated in
a. Garbhashaya Vikara b. Ajirna c. Shotha d. Arshas
Ans: a. Garbhashaya Vikara
5. Botanical name of Lodhra
a. Symplocos racemosa b. Cretaeva nurvala
c. Andrographis paniculata d. Zingiber officinalis
Ans: a. Symplocos racemosa
6. Tilva is the synonym of
a. Puga b. Lodhra c. Khadira d. Kalamegha
Ans: b. Lodhra
7. Habit of Lodhra plant
a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree
. Types of Lodhra as per Bhava Prakash Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 c. 2 d. 6

Ans: c. 2

oo

----- PAGE 457 -----
Madanaphala

Part used — Phala (Fruit) & Beeja (Seed)

Tikta, Madhura, Katu & Kashaya
Laghu, Ruksha

Katu
Usha
Vamaka

Karma (Action)
Madana - Vamaka, Lekhana, Vidradhihara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Jwarahara,
Shophahara.

Varaha — Chardana, Pakwashaya Shodhaka, Amashaya shodhaka.

Agrya Karma
Tetaet TARA ATATATaTAL t (F.Z. 25/40)

Madanaphala (Randia dumetorum) suitable for Vamana Karma (Emesis),
Asthaapana (Enema with decoction) & Anuvaasana (Enema with Oil).

Pharmacological Actions

Emetic, Diaphoretic, Antispasmodic, Antiflammatory, Antibacterial, Antifungal,
Antiviral.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka (Ra.Ni.) & Pittanissaraka.

Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya & Kapha Shamaka because of its Ushna
"rya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Pitta saraka ~ Expells Pittadosha also.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

= gig Shwasa, Jwara, Shotha, Anaha, Gulma, Pratishyaya, Vidradhi, Vrana

any diseases where Vamana karma is indicated.
Varaha - Vraha Vamanartha

----- PAGE 458 -----
450 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note - Madanaphaia is considered as best drug to induce emesis.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration) ,
1. Vamanartha (To induce emesis)
SAAR EAH NSTI, STATITAACATT_|
BMA MAATA STATE Weryaaret FAM (A.A. 1/13-14)
Madana (Randia dumetorum) is the best drug for inducing emesis, as itis very safe

to use for emesis, because it does not cause any complications.

2. Jwara (Fever)
Hex ftracfifirat pfestieert ar qrequmgay ta east aCe
(afa. 3/228)

Madana (Randia dumetorum) mixed with Pippali (Piper longum) or Indrayava
(Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica) or Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) if administered
with hot water will induce vomiting there by alleviate fever.

3. Parshva Shula (Pain in flanks)

aipeastereatet Wea: caifereniad: | (4.8.31 11)

Madana kalka (Paste of Randia dumetorum) prepared from sour gruel if applied
over naval will relieve all kinds of pain including pain in flanks.

Matra (Dosage)

Chikitsarta - 500 mg to 2 g
Vamanartha (to induce vomiting) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Fruits yielded saponins, ursosaponin, essential oil, 6 saponins named as dumetoronin
A,B,C, D, E&F, randialic acid-A & Randialic acid-B, Pulp contains citric acid, tartaric
acid, tannis, pectin and mucilage.

Research corner
1. Randia dumetorum (RD) fruits in different form have been
ethnopharmacologically reported to possess antiasthmatic property. Therefore,
present study was undertaken to evaluate two different extracts of RD i.e., ethyl
acetate (RD-EA) and methanol (RD-ME) for bronchorelaxant, anti-
inflammatory, mast cell stabilizing and antioxidant effect along with safety
margin, according to OECD guidelines for toxicity. RD extracts also exhibited
antioxidant activity in DPPH, reducing power and metal chelation method,

----- PAGE 459 -----
Madanaphala 451

Ww

along with safe margin for oral administration as observed in acute toxicity
evaluation. Ghante MH, Bhusari KP, Duragkar NJ, Jain NS, Warokar AS.
Bronchorelaxant, mast cell stabilizing, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
activity of Randia dumetorum (Retz.) Lamk. extracts. Acta Pol Pharm. 2012
May-Jun; 69 (3):465-74.

. The present study was conducted to evaluate the protective effect of methanolic

fruit extract of Randia dumetorum (L.) on alcohol-induced liver damage in rats.
Histology of the liver section of the animals treated with R. dumetorum
improved the hepatotoxicity caused by alcohol. Hence the study concluded that
R. dumetroum has potential hepatoprotective activity. Noorani AA, Kale MK.
Pretreatment of Albino Rats with Methanolic Fruit Extract of Randia
Dumetorum (L.) Protects against Alcohol induced liver Damage. Korean J.
Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Apr; 16(2):125-30. doi; 10.4196/kjpp. 2012.
16.2.125. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

. Two new triterpene-saponins, 3-O-[O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-(1——4)-O-

beta-D-glucopyranosyl- (1...3)-(beta-D-glucuronopyranosyl)] oleanolic acid
(1), 3-O-[O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-(1....6)-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl- (1.....3)-
(beta-D-glucuronopyranosyl)] oleanolic acid (2) together with five known
saponins (3-7) were isolated from the methanolic extract of the fruits of Randia
dumetorum (Retz) Lam. (Rubiaceae). Dubois MA, Benze S, Wagner H. New
biologically active triterpene-saponins from Randia dumetorum. Planta Med.
1990 Oct; 56(5):451-5.

. Extracts of Randia dumetorum Lamk (SD) could inhibit pregnancy in 50-60%

of rats. Prakash AO, Saxena V, Shukla S, Tewari RK, Mathur S, Gupta A,
Sharma S, Mathur R. Anti-implantation activity of some indigenous plants in
rats. Acta Eur Fertil. 1985 Nov-Dec; 16(6):441-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo: Formulation Indications

Madanadi lepa Shula

Kalpa - Charakacharya has mentioned 133 Yogas of Madanaphala for Vamana
karma in Kalpasthana \st chapter named Madanaphala kalpadhyaya.

----- PAGE 460 -----
452 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Kshira & Ghrata yoga

Phanita yoga
Churna yoga

Nasya yoga
Varti yoga
Leha yoga
Modaka yoga
tkarika yoga
haskuli yoga
Pupa yoga

Shadava yoga

Botanical Name — Randia dumetorum Lamk.
Randia —In memory of Issac Rand, Botanist from London.
dumetorum — of throny bushes, of hedges.
Family — Rubiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Manjishtha kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Asthapanopaga varga, Anuvasanopaga varga
Sushruta  Aragwadhadi gana, Mushkakadi gana
Bha.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 160-161

Basonym of Drug
Treerter tered teres STAT

Madana produces horripulation and discomfort.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, Rea: YRS Wreat BTA |

Madana (Randia spinosa) commonly grows in dry region.

Morphology
2. @rele:-at geata carafe, avefencarc |

----- PAGE 461 -----
Madanaphala ~ 453

When touched without notice it injures the hand because of its thorns.
3. faaqura:-faarrh gerne |
Madana flowers are toxic in nature.
4, frodtaa: fivstant wet dts |
Fruits and seeds of Madana are round.
5, WeTHeT:- MTT HCTATL |
Madana fruits are round in shape.
6. ARMA: AA HTT |
Madana fruits have streaks on its surface.
7. Wa WRTRT HOTT HOTTA WANT:
Madana fruits are best used as medicines.
Properties and Actions
8. Wet: Meat Saat Hewat |
Madana has a property to eliminate Kapha.
9. OTA: arrahea, TT WHAT |
Madana is best Vamaka dravya.
10. ferratgrt-fert arerercttfer
Madana phala alleviates poison from the body.
11. afergttert:-attrrt: carcercitter, after aariftr wepeacare |
Madana is very useful drug for Basti karma.
12. Ug: TeTa Kare ster
Everybody praise the fruit of Madana as best and safe Vamaka dravya.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 462 -----
4n4 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Madanaphaia plant grows throughout out India but
very common in hilly regions.

Morphology
A large shrub or small tree armed with strong straight
nearly opposite decussate spines | to 3 cm long, coming
off from above the branchlets.
Branches are horizontal, rigid, many of the lateral
ones suppressed and very short.

Leaves — Opposite but looks like fascicled on the
suppressed branches, 3 to 5 cm long and 2 to 3 cm wide,
obovate, obtuse, wrinkled, shining above, base is cuneate,
main nerves are 6-10 pairs, petiole very small and | mm
to 3 mm long, densely pubescent.

Inflorescence — Solitary and terminal or axillary or} Randia dumetorum Lamk.
leaf opposed cymes.

Flowers — White or yellowish, stamens are five and ovary is two celled.

Fruits — Berry, globose, ovoid or ellipsoid, two celled, many seeded.

Seeds — Often immersed in pulp & angled.
Varieties

Ka. Dev. Ni.— 1. Madanaphala_ 2. Pinditaka

Ra. Ni.—1.Madana_ 2. Varaha

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruits are globular or ovate, 2 to 4 cm in diameter, crowned with the rim of the calyx,
which appears like a disc. Surface is minutely or roughly wrinkled and longitudinally
ribbed, reddish brown in colour. The fruit is two celled and contains numerous oblong,
translucent and shining seeds attached to a yellowish grey gelatinous pulp. It has got

characteristic disagreeable odour.

Classical references

Synonyms : ,
neavoda: frvdt we: frodicareter | eareret wares: werent fryers:
(arr, weiraarfe a 160)

----- PAGE 463 -----
Madanaphala 455

Properties and Actions :
Tent went date cheat og: | aaa: wives:
Ba: PSHAMASM ATA: (AH. rene Th 161)
Wea: wehrmetar wit ave: | setorsufwarayeny fagety a
virmetarael aett at Ve wreae u (af. yee af 166)
Heat Hehtteal dato Cat ry: wait org: wiewares varfaaer Heer |
TRnyiTeAedvEs AAAI: uN (sb.Fy. steht af 901-902)
frogtta (Het Ae)
frudta: yftact: tare: Hae: saenftreter i (H.. sttaf aT 905)
Aca:
Wet: wef: Hae: | wracteesfa ant MT Wee I
(aft. merene at 68)

ae (Heataet Fe )

att a vet set aekrmnbadt 1 odet emedht cearereTeTey
(aft. merene at 70)

Aether

acact Seared ag wets: un (R.A. etre af 63)
SAA FAT Hee Head, sAaTfercaregy (aA. 1/13)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Madanaphala

a. Twak b. Mula c. Madanapippali d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Madanapippali

2. Vamaka Karma of Madanaphala is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Prabhava c.Vipaka d. Virya
Ans: b. Prabhava

3. Madanadi Lepa is beneficial in

a. Shula b. Kushtha c. Vyanga d. Vatarakta

Ans: a. Shula

—y

----- PAGE 464 -----
456 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4. Total number of Vamana yogas mentioned for Madanaphala
a, 60 b. 24 c. 109 d. 133
Ans: d. 133
5. Botanical name of Madanaphala
a. Randia dumetorum _ b. Operculina turpethum
c. Croton tiglium d. Strychnos nux-vomica
Ans: a. Randia dumetorum
6. Vishapushpaka is the synonym of
a. Jati b. Madanaphala__c. Shankhapushpi d. Champaka
Ans: b. Madanaphala
7. Raatha & Karahata are the synonyms of
a. Hingu b. Lodhra c. Madanaphala_ d. Manjishtha
Ans: c. Madanaphala
8. Types of Madanaphala as per Raja Nighantu
a. 2 b. 4 c. 5 d. 6
Ans: a. 2

sea

----- PAGE 465 -----
Chapter

Mandukaparni

\

Useful part — Patra (Leaf) or Panchanga (whole herb).

Karma (Action)

Medhya, Rasayana, Swarya, Smritivardhaka, Kushthaghna, Pandujit, Mehaghna,
Kasahara, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Hridya, Ayushyakara, Kandughna,
Ruchikara, Shwasahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Memory enhancer, Anti-inflammatory, CNS depressant, Sedative, Hypotensive and
Hepatoprotective.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka, Pittahara because of Shita

virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Kashaya Madhura rasa. Kaphahara because of Tikta
Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Smritidourbalya, Unmada, Apasmara, Swarabheda, Hriddourbalya, Kushtha,
Kandu, Pandu, Prameha, Kasa, Vishavikara, Shotha, Jwara, Aruchi and Shwasa.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Medhya (Intellect promoter)
mugemmtate serra seat yet ANAT Mea: |
Garter aaret Faget MATT HT EATVAT TATA AEM: Ut (37.8.3. 39/165)

Regular usage of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica) fried with ghee for a month
promotes intellect.

----- PAGE 466 -----
458 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kasa (Cough) and Shosha (Wasting)
augHaval: Heatse ae fratrerer a 1 (aefa. 3/119)

Combination of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), Yashthi (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and Vishwoushadha (Zingiber officinale) taken 5 gm first and gradually increased up to
40 g ina month, relieves Kasa (Cough) and Shosha (Wasting).

3. Vagvikara (Disorders of voice)
reat area | vier gett tar Vea arat fey
(A0.5.Fa. 1/659)

To get the clear voice one has to take Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), Malura
mula root of (Aegle marmolos), Amaya (Saussurea lappa), Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus
pluricaulis) mixed with honey.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) -3to5¢g
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Phytoconstituents

Asiaticoside, Brahmoside, Brahminoside, Hydrocotylin, Thankuniside, Thankunic
acid, Madegascaric acid, Brahmic acid, Centelloside, Centic acid, Centellic acid and
Centoic acid.

Research corner

1. To evaluate the specific effect of Centella asiatica (CA), vitamins, glycolic acid
and their mixture preparations to stimulate collagen and fibronectin synthesis in
cultured human fibroblast cells. The results showed that CA, glycolic acid,
vitamins A, E and C significantly stimulate collagen and fibronectin synthesis
in the fibroblast. Hashim P. The effect of Centella asiatica, vitamins, glycolic
acid and their mixtures preparations in stimulating collagen and fibronectin
synthesis in cultured human skin fibroblast. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2014 Mar,
27(2):233-7.

2. The accumulation of amyloid-(3 (AR) is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease and
is known to result in neurotoxicity both in vivo and in vitro. Study
demonstrated that treatment with the water extract of Centella asiatica (CAW)
improves learning and memory deficits in Tg2576 mice, an animal model of
AR accumulation. Each compound not only mitigated A (B-induced cell death,
but was able to attenuate A(B-induced alterations in tau expression and

----- PAGE 467 -----
Mandukaparni 459

phosphorylation in both cell lines, as seen with CAW. Gray NE’, Morre J2,
Kelley J2, Maier CS2, Stevens JF3, Quinn JF4, Soumyanath A’.
Caffeoylquinic Acids in Centella asiatica Protect against Amyloid-R Toxicity.
J Alzheimers Dis. 2014 Jan 21.

3. The present study was undertaken to assess analgesic and anti-inflammatory
properties of Centella asiatica leaf extracts. Study demonstrated that Centella
asiatica bears significant analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities in those
models. Saha S’, Guria T2, Singha T2, Maity TKz. Evaluation of Analgesic
and Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Chloroform and Methanol Extracts of
Centella asiatica Linn. ISRN Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 21;2013: 789613. doi:
10.1155/2013/789613. Collection 2013.

4. This study was to investigate the effects of Asiaticoside (AS) on memory
impairment and inflammatory cytokines expression induced by transient
cerebral ischemia and repertusion in mice, as well as the potential signaling
pathway. The results suggested that AS showed the neuroprotective effect
against transient cerebral ischemia and reperfusion in mice, and this effect
might be associated with the anti-inflammation effect of AS via inhibiting over
activation of p38 MAPK pathway. Chen S’, Yin ZJ’, Jiang C2, Ma ZQ’, Fu
Q3, Qu R4, Ma SP5. Asiaticoside attenuates memory impairment induced by
transient cerebral ischemia-reperfusion in mice through anti-inflammatory
mechanism. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2014 Mar 12;122C:7-15. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2014.03.004.

5. The study was conducted to determine the antioxidant properties of two well
known memory enhancer medicinal plants Baccopa monnieri and Centella
asiatica. The study that regular use of Baccopa monnieri as a supplement could
be more helpful compared to Centella asiatica in treatment of neurological
disorders caused by free radical damage. Meena H’, Pandey HK, Pandey P,
Arya MC, Ahmed Z. Evaluation of antioxidant activity of two important
memories enhancing medicinal plants Baccopa monnieri and Centella asiatica.
Indian J Pharmacol. 2012 Jan;44(1):114-7. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.91880.

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

L

----- PAGE 468 -----
460 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Centella asiatica Linn.
Centella —- Many
asiatica — of Asia
Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Vayasthapana Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga
Bha.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 279-281

Basonym of Drug
Huge sa gular | USeHrale TOT | Bel AV EH FaleATat TUT
Leaves of Mandukaparni(Centella asiatica Linn.) resemble frog in its shape and it is
a runner.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, Wogal-nigenttra teste ste |
Mandukaparni has got runner and growth pattern resemble how frog jumps.
Properties and Actions
2. aetaeht-aedt after: |
Mandukaparni is one among best medicinal plants.

3. feear-fefer star AAT OTT

Mandukaparni is appreciated by all owing to its extraordinary qualities.
4. feortan-feet taqed ast aeM: |

Mandukaparni is having best qualities hence it is given great importance.
5. varedt-caer arferer oft SararseaT: |

Mandukaparni is believed to be an abode of goddess Laxmi.
6. Wreadt—-

Mandukaparni imparts good knowledge by enhancing memory.

----- PAGE 469 -----
Mandukaparni 461

Regional Names

Habitat

Mandukaparni is a common weed found through-
out India and especially grows in moist regions.

Morphology
Habit — Annual prostate herb.
Root — Tap root, branched.

Stem -— Prostate, herbaceous, weak, fistular, green,
stolons are present, rooting at nodes.

Leaf — Simple, arising in groups from nodes, or-
bicular or reniform, crenate, lobed, glabrous, shining,
petiolar, long petioled, stipulate, unicostate reticulate
veined.

Inflorescence — Racemose, simple umbels, 3 to 6
flowers in each group. Centella asiatica Linn.

Flowers — Pedicellate, bracteate, actinomorphic, bisexual, epigynous, complete, regu-
lar, pedicels and bracts are small, sepals are 5 in number, gamosepalous, petals are 5,
polypetalous. Androecium has 5 stamens polyandrous, alternate to petals. Gynocium has
2 carpels, with inferior ovary.

Fruit — Cremocarp, laterally compressed, cremocarp breaks into 2 mericarps, one
seed in each mericarp.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Sample of Centella asiatica consisting of reniform or orbicular leaves, up to 3.5 cm
long and 2 cm broad with crenate or lobulate margins and broadly cordate base. Upper
surface glabrous, greenish brown, lower surface grayish green, palmately veined. The
leaves are borne on long wiry petioles. Has got strong odour and tastes bitter.

The fresh herb consists of long slender slightly succulent, creeping stems with long

----- PAGE 470 -----
462 Dravyaguna Vijnana

internodes and bearing rosettes of long stalked, frequently cupped leaves, crowded at
nodes underside of which gives out fibrous roots.

Classical references

Synonyms :
Hugenuult wrogat rast feear weteeht 1 (ay. Teens HT 279)
Properties and Actions :
arealt Fear ferear HEAT ST MAST | HATA AAT FATS UTEAT SSE TATA
waat wyfmer qeagtersaratrd | fragitesaet agave aft ui
(WF. Teas TT 280-281)
aiferasret Heal TAT Hee | UTA wT taal Taree fea
(aft. axcrafe at 8s)
areht vite eer fercet HATA AT AT: | AeA Laer LATS UTEHT RETTEM TATA
airegiral seat HSHVESA Ac | vilHraferewaeaHratera Wg: N
(HFA. staf af 722-723)
wet nvgnauf were afaet aaaq guile
weraet cafe |= wafarrer—efterftregegqantt
Wat Ferg cle uRett wt aad enter
(B.A. margene at 178)
atelt fear nearer a freer arrears, | afd wat a tet at peaterqerestt u
(aft. Terie af 66)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Mandukaparni
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Medhya Karma of Mandukaparni is attributed to its
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava ,

----- PAGE 471 -----
Nn

nN

foe)

Mandukaparni 463

. Regular usage of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica) fried with ghee for a month

is beneficial for

a. Medha karma b. Swedana Karma c. Dipana d. Stambhana
Ans: a. Medha Karma

A chemical called Asiaticoside is present in

a. Bhallataka b. Brahati c. Kantakari d. Mandukaparni
Ans: d. Mandukaparni

. Sarasvatarishta is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Shotha c. Manasika vikara_ d. Prameha
Ans: c. Manasika Vikara

Botanical name of Mandukaparni

a. Bacopa monneri b. Centella asiatica

c. Convolvulus pluricaulis d. Evolvulus alsinoides

Ans: b. Centella asiatica

Saraswati is the synonym of

a. Mandukaparni b. Jyotishmati c. Kushmanda_ d, Vacha
Ans: a. Mandukaparni

. Habit of Mandukaparni plant
a. Tree b. Shrub c. creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

2h KK

----- PAGE 472 -----
Chapter

Manjishta

Useful part — Mula (Root)

Kashaya, Tikta, Madhura
Guru, Ruksha
;
Karma (Action)

Varnya, Raktashodhaka, Swarya, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Netrya, Kushthaghna,
Pramehahara, Vranahara, Yonirogahara, Arshoghna, Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Blood purifier, Astringent, Diuretic, Emmanogogue, Anthelmintic, Haemostatic,
Uterine stimulant, Antidiabetic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka because of its Kashaya, Tikta and Madhura
rasa. Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna Virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Kushtha, Twak roga, Visarpa, Vaivarnya, Vishavikara, Yoniroga, Shotha, Karnaruja,
Netraroga, Raktatisara, Prameha, Vrana, Arshas, Jwara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vyanga (Freckle)

adrsur ar feet wafer | (31.3.3. 37/24)

Manyishtha (Rubia cordifolia) root has to be triturated with honey to prepare a paste.
This paste of applied over the Vyanga, it brings back the normal colour of the skin.

2. Prameha (Diabetes)

uasmtedt afar art aay | (yf. 11/9)

The decoction prepared from Manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia) and Candana (Santalum
album) is very useful in Manjishta meha a type of Pittaja prameha.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Manjishta 465

3. Bhagna (Fracture)

aretaarel TARE TERT Ul (F.41. 46/3)

The paste prepared from Manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia) and Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) triturated with sour gruel if applied will heal the fracture.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction) -— 60to 100ml
Churna (Powder) - lto3g

Phytoconstituents
Root consists manjishtin, purpurin, xanthopurpurin, pseudopurpurin, rubifolic acid,
rubianin, ruberythric acid, -sitosterol, B-scopoletol and fatty acids.

Research corner

1. An immunoassay system was established for the estimation of the quantity of
an antitumor cyclohexapeptide, deoxybouvardin (RA-V) from Bouvardia
ternifolia (Cav.) Schlecht, Rubia cordifolia L., and R. akane Nakai
(Rubiaceae). Two clones were isolated, one producing MAb IgG (1) and the
other MAb IgG(2b), both having a K light chain. Hasuda T, Hitosuyanagi Y,
Takeya K. Monoclonal antibodies from Rubia cordifolia against antitumor
cyclohexapeptide deoxybouvardin and their use in immunoassay. Hybridoma
(Larchmt). 2012 Feb; 31(1):20-4. doi:10.1089/hyb. 2011.0084.

2. This study was undertaken to investigate the possible effect of hydroalcoholic
root extract of Rubia cordifolia against indomethacin-induced enterocolitis in
rats. The present data suggests protective effect of Rubia cordifolia in
indomethacin-induced enterocolitis and may be beneficial in patients with
inflammatory bowel diseases. Pawar AT, Anap RM, Ghodasara JV, Kuchekar
BS. Protective Effect of Hydroalcoholic Root Extract of Rubia cordifolia in
Indomethacin-Induced Enterocolitis in Rats. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011 Mar; 73
(2):250-3.

3. The ameliorative effect of the Rubia cordifolia methanol extract on N-
nitrosodiethylamine-induced experimental hepatocellular carcinogenesis in rats.
The findings demonstrated that Rubia cordifolia can be a source of potent
antioxidants for treatment of diseases such as cancer. Shilpa PN,
Venkatabalasubramanian §, Devaraj SN. Ameliorative effect of methanol
extract of Rubia cordifolia in N-nitrosodeithylamine-induced hepatocellular
carcinoma. Pharm Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):376-83. doi: 10.3109/
13880209.2011.608073. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

----- PAGE 474 -----
466 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4. The neuroprotective potential and in vivo antioxidant status of extract of roots
and rhizomes of Rubia cordifolia L (MERC) in reserpine-induced orofacial
dyskinesia was studied. It is concluded that oxidative stress might play an
important role in reserpine-induced abnormal oral movements and MERC
significantly protected animals against reserpine-induced orofacial dyskinesia
and has great potential in treatment of neuroleptic induced orofacial dyskinesia.
Patil RA, Kasture SB. Protective effect of Rubia cordifolia on reserpine-
induced orofacial dyskinesia. Nat Prod Res. 2012: 26(22):2159-61. doi:
10.1080/14786419.2011.635341. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

5. To evaluate the in vivo antioxidant activity of the ethanolic extract of the roots
of Rubia cordifolia (RC) and to study its influence on lead nitrate-induced
immunosuppression is due to oxidative stress and RC can prevent the same by
virtue of its in vivo antioxidant property. Lodi S, Sharma V, Kanasal L. The
protective effect of Rubia cordifolia against lead nitrate-induced immune
response impairment and kidney oxidative damage. Indian J Pharmacal. 2011
jul; 43(4):441-4. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.83118.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Formulation Indications

re Mahamanjishthadi kashaya
;

Manisa ep

Botanical Name — Rubia cordifolia Linn.
Rubia - red, redness alluding to the dye obtained from it.

cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves
Family — Rubiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Manjishta
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Varnya varga, Vishaghna varga, Jwarahara varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana
Bh.Pi.Ni Haritakyadi varga 188-191

Basonym of Drug

Traht vitera aot oritt earch, Tengiterancae, |

----- PAGE 475 -----
Manjishta 467

Manjishta imparts normal colour to the skin as it purifies blood.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. fraan-fraate wate |
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia) spreads on the ground.
2. Aeraceht-aert Aa WIA ACTEM: |
Manjishta is a climber spreads on the ground.
3. quet-aoster wate |
Manjishta creeper spreads extensively on the land.
4. Pargh-frgte meme weechihe
Manjishta expands very quickly and covers larger area.
5. WASH MAaAaSHet WERET
Manjishta spreads extensively on the ground.
Morphology
6. area feent-aret Prater ered, Wen ale Yet Horraas state |
When completely dried the root becomes black.
7. BIAM-HOTATT, PATA Tet |
On drying root of Manjishta becomes black.
8. AAA arrerat Hore: srelypes Ala Yet aaah sar |
When half dried the root becomes copper coloured.
9. TRIST-TeHAg HVS TATE: |
Fresh root of Manjishta will be red and even stem also red in colour.
10. ASiMl-TrHIAAVST |
Stem is reddish in colour.
11. TRB RT-Te TVS: |
Stem of Manjishta will be red in colour.
12. fasaeff-feontr aera Reranfer corte: |
Leaves are arranged in equal distance and in a circle.
Properties and Actions

13. Tatert-aet teat, Tata Waa: |

----- PAGE 476 -----
468 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Manjishta imparts colour to cloth hence used as dyeing agent.

14, Taret-tardiat engqararanret, ereedrarct |
Manjishta may be used as rejuvenating agent.
15. Todas welthirate weg weacifer, afer franca: |

Manjishta may be used for glandular growths as a medicine.

Regional Names

Habitat

Manjishta is growing throughout India, most com-
monly seen in Hilly areas.

Morphology

Perennial, herbaceous, climber, roots are very
long, cylindrical with a thin red bark.

Stem-— Often many yards long, rough, grooved,
becoming, slightly woody at the base, bark is white,
branches are scandent by means of numerous
divaricate or deflexed branch lets and petioles, qua-
drangular, sometimes prickly on the angles, glabrous
and shining.

Leaves — 4 leaves in one whorl, 4 to 9 cm long
and 1.5 to 3.5 cm wide. Usually two leaves in whorl Rubia cordifolia Linn.
are larger when compared to other two leaves, ovate,
acute, base rounded or slightly cordate, 5 nerved, all starts from base. Petioles are triangu-
Jar with many recurved sharp prickles on the edges and exstipulate.

Inflorescence - Terminal panicle cymes with trichomatous branches.

Flowers — Small pedicels are articulated with the calyx, petals are greenish and
divided nearly to the base.

Fruits — Globose, 4 to 6 mm in diameter, smooth, shining, purplish black when ripe.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Manjishta 469

Varieites

Ra.Ni.-— 1. Chola 2. Yojani 3.Crounci — 4. Simhali

Market samples—1. Nepali 2.Afghani 3. Eshani 4. Hindustani
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root is hard, woody and cylindrical. Root will be upto to 1 cm in diameter. Outer
surface is smooth, faintly striated longitudinally, rusty brown in colour. Transversely cut
pieces show a closely adhering bark, followed by a reddish brown tissue full of minute
pores and hollow centre. On breaking it becomes very short pieces. It has got bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms :
aRast fener first art creattent (avgenaulf sesh sost aterracate it
THATSUT Ge Tea gt Terateent | sushrat at Tht war cee
(aa. Seema aT 188-190)

Properties and Actions

TST HET ferret HITT Laat | PHS erascraiteraraernutag |
THe Heras Ut (AT. eirMe FE 190-191)

TRAST WT Tae SVT Yea | wastes

(af. Tents wt 18)
aRaSt qae fear eaafon wep ye: | Uae aagiferetet
Pradtegaritaurcmitrarntid | wr tag oe fret het araftrafire

(Fy. aiteftrert 1426-1427)

ARST AYN Tale were yee 1 que warsctar fawarraeRT
(w.F. frorenfe af 194)

fran gannasq «= fefact et tert

aya
etritaftratter caneg wfetear eh: 1 ereraft cee teh aret ert fereretarer
(BLA. froreente at 76-77)

Types of Manjishtha

aes atertt ast Recht a agfeien afer ete at witcer free STAT It
(af. froreanfe aT 195)

----- PAGE 478 -----
470 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Manjishta
a. Kanda b. Mula c. Patra d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Manjishta
a, Tikta b. Katu c. Madhura d. Kashaya

Ans: d. Kashaya
3. Main action of Manjishta
a. Stambhana b. Medhya c. Raktashodhaka d. Shulahara
Ans: c. Raktashodhaka
4, Manjishtadi Lepa is specifically indicated in
a. Shotha b. Vidradhi c. Shirashula d. Vyanga
Ans: a. Shotha
. Botanical name of Manjishta
a. Sida cordifolia b. Rubia cordifolia
c. Tinospora cordifolia d. Vitex negundo
Ans: b. Rubia cordifolia
. Yojanavalli is a synonym of
a. Jyothishmathi b. Kushmanda c. Manjishta d. Nagavalli
Ans: c. Manjishta
7. Tamra mula & Chitraparni are the synonyms of
a. Vidanga b. Eranda c. Jyothishmati d. Manjishta
Ans: d. Manjishta
. Habit of Manjishta plant
a. Tree b. Climber c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: b. Climber

w,y

lon

o

oR

----- PAGE 479 -----
Chapter

Maricha

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka
Shushka (dry) Ardra (Fresh)

Katu

aan aa

Karma (Action)

Maricha - Dipana, Shwasahara, Krimighna, Shulahara, Rochana, Hradrogahara,
Chedana, Avrsya.

Shwetamaricha — Vishaghna, Avrashya, Rasayana, Netrarogahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic, Appetizers, Vermifuge.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

KaphaVata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka be-
cause of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Agnimandya, Shula, Krimi, Kasa, Shwasa, Hradroga, Vatavyadhi, Mutrakrachra.
Shwetamaricha

Netraroga, Visharoga.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pravahika (Dysentery)

fovea: frat: Gert watt afteratrar ar | Rerceprerrgerenrste areracary Wanieer 1

(3t.3.Fa. 9/40)

Fine powder of Pippali (Piper longum) and Maricha (Piper nigrum) if taken will
check even chronic dysentery immediately.

----- PAGE 480 -----
472 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Grahani (Spure)
aan a: frafiret gu ute dey | faretecieited mevtt aes agate
(W.4. 2/6/53)

The powder prepared from Maricha (Piper nigrum), Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
and Sauvarcala lavana (Sochal salt) if taken with butter milk will cure Grahani dosha.

3. Kasa (Cough)

fram akarepat ar weet attaereey t (a.Fa. 18/180)
Intake of fine powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) mixed with ghee, honey and sugar
will cure all kinds of cough.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 500 mg to 1 g

Phytoconstituents

Pepper contains an alkaloid (5 to 9%), volatile oil (1 to 2.5%), pungent resin, (6.0%),
piperidine, starch.

Volatine oil contains l-phellandrene & caryophyllene.

Research corner

1. Piperine, the chief alkaloid present in Piper nigrum (black pepper), has a wide
array of uses in alternative and complementary therapies. The effect of piperine
on blood glucose level was studied in alloxan-induced diabetic mice in acute
and subacute study models. Subacute administration of piperine has statistically
significant antihyperglycemic activity while acutely it raises blood glucose at
high doses. Atal S, Agrawal RP, Vyas S, Phadnis P, Rai N. Evaluation of the
effect of piperine per se on blood glucose level in alloxan-induced diabetic
mice. Acta Pol Pharm. 2012 Sep-Oct; 69 (5):965-9.

2. Piperine (CAS no:94-62-2), an alkaloid obtained (CYP isozymes) responsible
for biotransformation of drugs. By inhibiting the metabolism of drugs, piperine
improves the bioavailability of drugs. In-the present study piperine (10 mg./kg)
significantly increased the dose-dependent anti-hyperglycemic activity of
nateglinide (CAS no: 105816-04-4) as evaluated by glucose challenged and
alloxan-induced diabetic models, when it was administered with nateglinide.
Sama V, Nadipelli M, Yenumula P, Bommineni MR, Mullangi R. Effect of
piperine on antihyperglycemic activity and pharmacokinetic profile of
nateglinide. Arzneimittelforschung. 2012 Aug;62 (8):384-8. doi: 10.1055/s-
0032-1314849. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

----- PAGE 481 -----
Maricha 473
3. To investigate the effect of piperine, a major pungent alkaloid present mouse
4Tl mammary carcinoma in vitro and in vivo, and clucidate the underlying
mechanisms. The results demonstrated that piperine is an effective antitumor
compound in vitro and in vivo, and has the potential to be developed as a new
anticancer drug. Lai LH, Fu QH, Liu Y, Jiang K, Guo QM, Chen QY, Yan
B, Wang QQ, Shen JG. Piperine suppresses tumor growth and metastatis in
vitro and in vivo in a 4 T1 murine breast cancer model. Acta Pharmacol Sin.
2012 Apr; 33(4):523-30. doi: 10.1038/aps. 2011.209. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

4. The insecticidal activity of Piper nigrum fruit-derived piperidine alkaloid
(piperine) and N-is obutlyamide alkaloids (pellitories, genuineness, pipercide
and retrofractamide A) against female adults of Culex pipiens pallens and
Aedes aegypti was examined. Park IK. Insecticidal activity of isobutlylamides
derived from Piper nigrum against adult of two mosquito species, Culex
pipiens pallens and Aedes aegypti. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(22):2129-31.
doi:10.1080/14786419.2011.-628178. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

5. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of black pepper fruit hot
water extract (BPE) on rat ileum contractility and the mechanisms (s) of its
action. The extract was prepared by adding black pepper powder to boiling
distilled water followed by evaporated the solvent. Naseri MK, Yahyavi H.
Antispasmodic effect of Piper nigrum fruit hot water extract on rat ileum. PaK
J Biol Sci. 2008 Jun 1:11(11):1492-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SINo- Formulation Indications |

,

Botanical Name - Piper nigrum Linn.

Piper - Derived from Sanskrit word pippali or called Peperi in Greek.
nigrum — Black in colour

Family — Piperaceae

Kula — Pippali kula

----- PAGE 482 -----
474

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka __Dipaniya varga, ShulapraSamana varga, Krimighna varga,

Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta _ Pippalyadi gana, Trayushana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 59-61

Basonym of Drug
frat aeaatsaate, et sera: |

Maricha is efficacious anthelmintic drug.

Synonyms

Morphology

1.

Aoorany-aocrtea Wadler eet: Aeehthet aad |

Maricha (Piper nigrum) plant is a climber.

. aeeltaq-accrat TAH |

Maricha is obtained from a climber.

. FARA -TaIAN HAA |

Maricha fruits are round in shape.

. Prtqraq-vittart gare |

Maricha fruits have a minute cup on the top.

. POA FUTTTA |

Maricha fruits are black in colour.

Properties and Actions

6.

HANF-HAle Als Battsy TAA

Maricha causes burning sensation and pain.

. Atearq-cfreorgory |

Maricha is having sharp qualities.

, BAS BATT |

Maricha causes dryness.

. HESH-HTA fears S|

Maricha has pungent taste.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Maricha 475

10. akey-were ahetgrny |
Maricha has a very strong potency.
Others
11, wleeay-alerHare araeaater aT |
Maricha is commonly stored in ports to export.
12. oduarayq-adore eae |
Maricha is stored in ports as an item to export to different countries.
13. AaAsA-TaAat ss ay |
Maricha is having a great demand by the foreigners.
14, USAMA Hea WATT MATA seer |
Maricha is commonly used spice and stored in kitchen.
Regional Names

3

Habitat

Maricha is indigenous to Western coast of India,
now it is grown all over South India because of its
high commercial value.
Morphology

Stout glabrous climber.

Stem —Terete, sparingly rooting, much thick-
ened at the nodes.

Leaves —Coriaceous, 10-18 cm long and 5-12
cm wide, broadly ovate, heart shaped, glabrous, 5 to
9 nerved, suprabasal nerves are usually alternate, base,

usually rounded, more or less oblique petioles 1 to 2.5
cm long.

Piper nigrum Linn.

----- PAGE 484 -----
476 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Inflorescence - Spikes of variable length (5 to 15 cm).

Flowers — Dioecious or sometimes polygamous, bracts of the female spikes more or
less adnate to the rachis, forming a short hemispheric cup beneath the ovary, stamens are
two in number.

Fruit — Globose, 6 mm in diameter, when young green in colour turn to red when
fully ripe. On drying fruits will have wrinkles and on removing outer layer of fruit will
have white with vertical lines.

Varieties
Dha.Ni & Ra. Ni- 1. Maricha 2. Shweta maricha

Adulterants
Vidanga
Substitutes
1. Piper longum 2. Piper attenuatum 3. Piper brachystachyum

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruits are dry, globose shaped, 3.5 to 6 mm in diameter. The surface is coarse, deeply
and reticulately wrinkled, having a brown or brownish black colour. The fruit bears re-
mains of a sessile stigma at the apex. The pericarp is closely adherent to the seed. It has
got strong spicy odour and pungent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Ute aectet Porat eet wT | (ALT. irae TF 59)
Properties and Actions
Aas Wat Ure ATT Mech Te | fahren yor scrorates arate
(ana. eiteate FT 60-61)
afte aehrntat trapeestererny | art Pana seq PATA I
(afr. mAs FT 86)
arg att aia cargorenatirreny | aes mech fafa cies Te
Ue aot wa Uh Heh oY etary | ages thet devi wat ary
aii arageret fe giregferceny, ul (3.F. staf at 1162-1164)

----- PAGE 485 -----
Maricha ATT
afte aight oq scram | wlicahtetrers oferemrcnt t
(uf. frorenfe af 32)
Ata Fort Haft sary sare Arter: | pheniteat amaresent dost oe
(Pr.fr. Prevent at 4)
Seater. Ago aferwat wt alee Ate ferry, 1 (aA. wagons at 87)
weet deat fret yee | strqet efetrret ee wa carat

(afr. froreate at 34)
daaenT eaura Pras Sars | geet gq Prater: dfs Aaretrg
(fF. froreanfe a s)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Maricha
a. Patra b. Mula c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala
2. Pradhana Karma of Maricha
a. Grahi b. medhya c. Trishna hara_ d. Dipana
Ans: d. Dipana

3. Fine powder of Pippali (Piper longum) and Maricha (Piper nigrum) if taken
will check
a. Prameha b Raktapitta c. Pravahika d. Shwasa
Ans: c. Pravahika

4. Intake of fine powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) mixed with ghee, honey and
sugar will cure

a. Shotha b. Kasa c. Sthoulya d.Sandhivata
Ans: b. Kasa

5. Marichadya Taila is mainly indicated in
a. Shwasa b. Atisara c. Daha d. Kushtha
Ans: Kushtha

6. Botanical name of Maricha
a. Piper nigrum b. Piper longum
c. Piper cubeba d. Solanum nigrum

Ans: a. Piper nigrum

----- PAGE 486 -----
478 Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Dharmapattanam is the synonym of
a. Pippali b. Shunthi c. Maricha d. Bakuchi
Ans: c. Maricha

8. Habit of Maricha plant
a. Climber b. Herb c. Tree d. Shrub
Ans: a. Climber

ERK

----- PAGE 487 -----
Chapter

Meshashringi

Part used - Patra (Leaf) and Mula (Root).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Mehaghna, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Vranahara, AkshiShulahara, Kushthaghna,
Dipana, Sramsana, Krimighna, and Vishaghna.

Pharmacological Actions
Antidiabetic, Hypoglycemic, Antiviral, Antimicrobial, Antiatherosclerotic and Spas-
molytic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha Vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya. Kaphahara due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Prameha, Shwasakasa, Kushtha, Akshishula, Agnimandya, Krimi, Akshiroga and
Vishavikara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus)

Kesha Churna (Powder) of dried leaves of Meshashringi (Gymnema sylvestrae) is
given in Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus) which always checks the blood Sugar level.
2. Sandhi Shotha (Inflammation of Joints)

Leaf paste of Mesha Shringi (Gymnema sylvestrae) is applied over the joints. It is a
very good remedy in case of Sandhi Shotha (Inflammation of joints).

Matra (Dose)
Patra Churna (Leaf powder) - 3 to 6 gm

----- PAGE 488 -----
480 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Mula Kwatha (Root decoction) - 50 to 100 ml

Chemical constituents - Leaf contains Gymnamine (Alkaloid), Alananine, Valine,
Adenine, Betaine, Hentriacontane and Nonacosane.

Research corner

The anti obesity effect of water soluble fraction of Gymnema sylvestre extract (120
mg/kg, p.o. for 21 days) in HFD fed rats was evaluated by the measurement of body
weight gain, food intake, hemodynamic changes (systolic, diastolic, mean blood pressure
and heart rate), serum lipid profiles (triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-
cholesterol), leptin, insulin, glucose, apolipoproteins Al and B, lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and antioxidant enzymes such as reduced glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxi-
dase (GPx), glutathione reductase (GR), glutathione-S transferase (GST), superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) levels in liver tissues. Organs and visceral fat pad
weight were measured. Histopathological studies were also carried out. Water soluble
fraction of G.sylvestre ethanolic extract and rimonabant significantly reduced serum lip-
ids, leptin, insulin, glucose, apolipoprotein B and LDH levels while it significantly in-
creased the HDL-cholesterol, apolipoprotein Al and antioxidant enzymes levels in liver
tissue as compared to the HFD fed rats. Histopathological studies of tissues showed no
pathological changes. The results of this study show that water soluble fraction of G.
sylvestre extract possess antiobesity effect. Kumar V1, Bhandari U2, Tripathi CD3,
Khanna G4. Anti-obesity effect of Gymnema sylvestre extract on high fat diet-induced
obesity in Wistar rats. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2013 Dec;63 (12):625-32. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-
1349852. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.

Name Indications |

Madhumehantaka Churna Madhumeha
Nyagrodhadi Churna Madhumehaja vrana

Maha Vishagarbha Taila Vatavikara, Gridhrasi
MeshashringiTaila | Kushtha
Latin Name

Gymnema sylvestre R.Br. in Mem.

Gymnema-—Gymnos=naked
sylvestre— Sylva wood land
Family - Asclepiadaceae
Kula - Arka kula

----- PAGE 489 -----
Meshashringi 481

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduuchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug
AUTH Fa Hels ATT |
Fruits of Mesasrifigi (Gymnema sylvestre R.Br) resembles like that of horns of goat.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. HAIG saa Fa YR Heh ATE |
Meshashringi fruits resemble the horns of a goat.
2. Reraroft- were asaya FATT: |
Meshashringi fruits are appearing similar to the horns of goat.
Properties and Actions
3. wef meee ae sored Tee |
If one eats the leaves of Meshashringi he can not taste sweet taste for some-
time.

Vernacular Names

English Periploca of the woods

Gurmar
Sanna gere, Madhunashini

a ae |

'

'

Habitat
Meshashringi is found through out India especially in dry forests.

Morphology
Habit - Large woody much-branched climber running over the tops of high trees.
Stem - Young stems are pubescent.

----- PAGE 490 -----
482 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Leaves - Opposite, simple, 3 to 5 cm long and |
to 3 cm wide, ovate, elliptic, acute or shortly acumi-
nate, more or less pubescent on both the sides. Petiole
is 1 cm long.

Flowers - Seen in sessile cymes. Yellow, tube is
companulate.

Fruits - Follicles 6 to 7.5 cm long, 1 cm wide,
lanceolate, attenuated into a beak. Seeds are 1 cm long,
narrowly ovoid-oblong, flat with a thin broad mar-
ginal wing and brown in colour.

Substitutes
1. Gymnema hirsutum

2. Gymnema montanum

Classical references Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.

Synonyms
Teasygt frarat earteacerrstsset | (ALF. Teeaert: 253)
Properties and Actions
Tes ST TS force ae ATTRA, | WAT Ute He: ferrarorserorfeargyer yc, I
Reagted fxh petenamy | det eet crater aunfeared
(a5. Feenfeat: 253-255)
oofsent get ferent cefirraareet | fréfer fafirearccraaunferrsty
Tate fh aeteen | det ced da aficatador i
(df. siteftert: 738-739)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Meshashringi
a. Patra b. Phala c. Pushpa d. Niryasa
Ans: a. Patra
2. Pradhana Rasa of Meshashringi
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Tikta d. Amla
Ans: c. Tikta

----- PAGE 491 -----
Meshashringi

. Pradhana Karma of Meshashringi

a. Shwasahara b. Kasahara
Ans: d. Mehaghna

. Main indication of Meshashringi

a. Atisara b. Trishna
Ans: c. Madhumeha

. Gymnamine is an alkaloid present in

a. Karkatashringi b. Meshashringi
Ans: b. Meshashringi

. Botanical name of Meshashringi

a. Andrographis paniculata

c. Gymnema sylvestre

Ans: c. Gymnema sylvestre

. Madhunashini is the synonym of

a. Shalmali b. Meshashringi
Ans: b. Meshashringi

. Habit of Meshashringi plant

a. Herb b. Tree

Ans: d. Climber

ARK KK

c. Jwaraghna

c. Madhumeha

c. Durva

483

d. Mehaghna

d. Vibandha

d. Ahiphena

b. Pistacia integerrima

d. Aquillaria agallocha

c. Ativisha

c. Shrub

d. Manjishtha

d. Climber

----- PAGE 492 -----
Methika

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant) and Bija (Seed).
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)

Jwaraghna, Ruchikara, Dipana, Nadibalya, Balya, Shulahara, Vrushya. :
Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Fungitoxic, Insecticidal, Antibiotic, Antineoplastic, Antiinflamma-
tory, Antipyretic, Analgesic and Hypocholesterolemic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha shamaka, Vata shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kaphas shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Jwara, Aruchi, Agnimandya, Nadidourbalya, Dourbalya, Shula and
Sukradourbalya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Tftrent SaaS caret serra | Meee Ed Beh agaist VAT Ut

aoqut wftt Fret Prete cea | staff yermenrt ureeret wfeareny

(a.a.f. 1/98-99)

Powder of Chaturbija-Methika (Trigonella foenum graecum), Chandrashura
(Lepidium sativum), Kalajaji (Nigella sativa) and Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi) if taken
will destroy all the Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata). This is also useful in Ajirna (Indiges-

tion), Shula (Abdominal pain), Adhmana (Flatulance), Parshva Shula (Pain in flanks)
and Kativyatha (Low backache).

----- PAGE 493 -----
Methika 485

Matra (Dose)
Bija Churna (Seed powder) - 1 to 3 gm

Chemical constituents - Whole plant contains §-Carotene, Choline, Essentrial amino
acids, Diosgenin Tigogenin, B-sistosterol, Kaempferol, Quercetin and Saponins, Graecunin
A, B,C, D, E, F& G.

Seeds contain Vitexin, Isovitexin, Vitamins, Carbohydrates, Proteins, Fatty acids,
Fenugrin B and Cholesterol.

Research Corner

This study is done to evaluate the antihyperglycemic and antioxidative potential of
seed powder of Trigonella foenum-graecum L in alloxan (55 mg/kg) induced diabetic
rats. The results obtained showed that extensive oxidative stress is generated in tissues of
diabetic rats as evidenced by increased production of hydrogen peroxide, increased accu-
mulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) and 4-hydroxynonanal (4HNE) and decreased ac-
tivities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and catalase (CAT)
in tissues of diabetic rats. It was observed that the transcription of genes of SOD, GPx,
and CAT was also significantly decreased when compared with control. Treatment of
Trigonella for 15 days to diabetic rats showed hypoglycemic effect and improved the
altered levels of H202, MDA, and 4HNE, the activities of SOD, GPx, and CAT as well
as transcription of these genes in the liver and the brain of diabetic rats. Sharma S1,
Mishra V1, Jayant SK1, Srivastava N2. Effect of Trigonella foenum graecum L on the
Activities of Antioxidant Enzyme and Their Expression in Tissues of Alloxan-Induced
Diabetic Rats. J Evid Based Complementary Altern Med. 2015 Jul; 20(3):203-11. doi:
10.1177/2156587215573664. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name Indications

Chaturbija Churna Shula, Vataroga
Pramehamihira Taila

Latin Name
Trigonella foenum-graecum Linn.
Trigonella-Tries=three, Gona-angle, little triangle, foenum-graecum-hay or large.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Aparajita kula

----- PAGE 494 -----
486 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga

Basonym of Drug

Rafe atta arrears |

Methika (Trigonella foenumgraecum Linn) is very useful in Vatakaphaja Jwara.
Synonyms
Morphology

1. Utasitar-ttarhs atari area: |

Seeds of Methika are yellow in colour.

Properties and Actions
2. atert-aterafa wert sf |
Methika increases appetite.
3. dtat- Methika acts as Dipana.

Vernacular Names

Habitat
Methika is cultivated throughout India.

Morphology
Habit - Nearly smooth erect annual.
Stipules - Not toothed.

Leaves - Compound, leaflets are 2 to 2.5 cm long,
oblanceolate-oblong, toothed. Trigonella
foenumgraecum Linn.

Flowers - Axillary, sessile.

----- PAGE 495 -----
Methika 487

Fruits - Pods, 5 to 7.5 cm long, with a long persistent beak, often falcate, 10 to 20
seeded.
Varieties
Ra.Ni.- Twotypes: 1. Gramya (Cultivated)
2. Vanya (Wild)
Classical references
Synonyms
Afra At det chet agahran | at ageion a watferteren aati
aert afxar ven Fragen a arat | rent agautf a utes green 1
(a1.5. etree: 93-94)

Properties and Actions
After araert screed Sar | at: ASTM ata ATF UP STAT N
(ALI. Weert: 95)
Afar aceon a waftramantedt 1 ont afta aay i
(afr. gaonfeat: 100)
Afra seemtt a taftramentoct 1 anteremet afta atcerdtostt
(dF. attsftrert: 70)

Arar Hee aT Tafentaot | anternent ditt atari
(afr. frorenie FT 69)
sor sfteretirenrarsttre caret fear Sta, Saat Prt ae ctrahratdateat Tate
KATE SRAUSTA BfeaeAT FEM ATMA, EN Arete fereoeten fara eT eoH ALA
(B.A. wrergeaie at: 22)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Methika is one among
a. Trijataka b. Chaturbija c. Chaturjataka d. Trikatu
Ans: b. Chaturbija
2. Chaturbija Churna is indicated in
a. Shula & Vataroga b. Pinasa
c. Kasa d. Atisara

Ans: a. Shula & Vataroga

----- PAGE 496 -----
488 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ee
3. Botanical name of Methika
a. Hemidesmus indicus b. Glycyrrhiza glabra
c. Trigonella foenum-greacum d. Amomum subulatum
Ans: c. Trigonella foenum-greacum
4, Peetabija is the synonym of
a. Jiraka b. Chakramarda cc. Lanka d. Methika
Ans: d. Methika
5. Habit of Methika plant
a. Shrub b. Herb c. Under shrub. d. Tree
Ans: b. Herb

RRA ARR

----- PAGE 497 -----
Musta

Useful part - Kanda (Tuber)

Rasadi panchaka

Tikta, Kashaya, Katu
Laghu, Ruksha

Vipaka Katu

Karma (Action)

Shitagrahi, Jwaraghna, Trashnahara, Rochaka, Krimighna, Atisaraghna, Pachaka,
Dipana.

Nagaramusta
Jwaraghna, Atisaraghna, Rochaka, Daha Shamaka, Trishna nigrahana,
Shramahara.

Agrya Karma

aad cinigendtefaurettarry | (FF, 25/40)

Musta (Cyperus rotundus Linn.) is Astringent, Appetizer and Digestant.
Pharmacological Actions
Appetizer, Digestant, Astringent, Anthelmintic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)
Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya, Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Atisara, Jwara, Aruchi, Daha, Trishna, Krimi.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
Het waaretes at Uet BEATA | (YS. 40/72)

Decoction of Musta (Cyperus rotundus) root is prepared then taken with honey will
check all kinds of diarrhoea.

----- PAGE 498 -----
490 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Jwara (Fever)
gern wie ah yuan septs ot | Uret vile a......... TT
(a.@.fa 1/45)

Administration of decoction or cold infusion prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
and Parpata (Fumaria parviflora) is beneficial in fever.

3. Halimaka (Chronic obstructive jaundice)
wiftt ores Got yet yor wee | aferer career fished eethrHy
(mPa. 8/45)
Ayasa curna (Iron powder) mixed with Musta curna (Cyperus rotundus) taken with
Kashaya (Decoction) of Khadira (Acacia catechu) will relieve from Halimaka.
4, Vatarakta (Gout)
watt | Warf aT TTT I
(aa.fa. 29/78)

Continuous usage of decoction prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus), Amalaki
(Emblica officinalis) and Nisa (Curcuma longa) taken with honey will cure Vatarakta
assocaited with Kapha dosa.

5. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)
wet Wet: at ait cere craferarasy | Uae a atts wetonth wereret
(a.fa. 24/167)

Decoction prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is very useful in all kinds of
Madatyaya (Alcoholism).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) - lto3g
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Tubers yielded cyperene, c-selinine, cypernone, keto-alcohols, B-rotunol, a-rotunol,
essential oil which contains pinene, cineol, linolenic, linolic, oleic, myristic acid, steoric
acid and glycerol.

----- PAGE 499 -----
Musta 49]

Research corner

—

. The present study explored the analgesic, anti-inflammatory and genotoxic

activities of extracts from the aerial parts of C. rotundus. The antioxidant
capacity and the modulation of splenocyte functions by these exacts were also
investigated in mice. The phytochemical analysis was carried out using
standard methods. It appears that C. rotundus extracts contain potent
components such as flavonoids that may potentially be useful for modulating
the immune cell functions, provoking analgesic, antiinflammatory and
antioxidant effects. Soumaya KJ, Dhekra M, Fadwa C, Zied G, llef L, Kamel
G, Leila CG. Pharmacological, antioxidant, genotoxic studies and modulation
or rat splenocyte functions by Cyperus routundus extracts. BMC Complement
Altern Med. 2013 Feb 6;13:28, doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-28.

. A new iridoid glycoside, rotunduside (1), along with four known iridoid

glycosides, 10-O-p-hydroxy-benzoyltheviridoside (2), 10-O-
vanilloyltheviridosise (3), 6"-O-(trans-p-coumaroyl)-procumbide (4) and
loganic acid (5), was isolated from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. Zhou
Z, Yin W, Zhang H, Feng Z, Xia J. A new iridoid glycoside and potential
MRB inhibitory activity of isolated compounds from the rhizomes of Cyperus
rotundus L. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Jan. 28.

. Two novel compounds, 1i-methoxy-3i-hydroxy-4i- (3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-1,

2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalin (1) and 11,3i-dihydroxy-4i-(3',4'-dihydroxypheny])-
1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalin (2), were isolated along with six known
compounds 3-8 from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus. Zhou Z, Yin W. Two
novel phenolic compounds from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L.
Molecules. 2012 Oct 25;17(11):12636-41. doi: 10.3390/molecules 171112636.

. An extract of the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. afforded two new

sesquiterpenoids (2 and 3) with rearranged secoeudesmane and germacrane
skeletons, and a new 9,10-seco-cycloartane triterpenoid (9), as well as seven
previously reported terpenoids, including a monoterpenoid (1), five
sesquiterpenoids (4-8) with guaiane, patchoulane, and eudesmane skeletons,
and a 3,4-seco-dammarane nortriterpenoid (10). Yang JL, Shi YP. Structurally
diverse terpenoids from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. Planta Med. 2012
Jan; 78(1):59-64. doi:10.1055/s-0031-1280216. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

. To study the antidiarrhoeal activity of the decoction of Cyperus rotundus Linn.

tubers using representative assays of diarrheal pathogenesis and understand its
mechanism of action. Antibacterial, antigiardial and antirotaviral activities were
studied. Effect on adherence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) and

----- PAGE 500 -----
492 Dravyaguna Vijnana

invasion of enteroinvasive E. coli (EJEC) and Shigella flexneri to HEp-2 cells
was evaluated as a measure of effect on colonization. The decoction of C.
rotundus does not have marked antimicrobial activity and exerts its
antidiarrheal action by mechanisms other than direct killing of the pathogen.
Daswani PG, Brijesh, S, Tetali P, Birdi TJ. Studies on the activity of Cyperus
rotundus Linn. tubers against infectious diarrhea Indian J Pharmacol. 2011
May; 43(3):340-4. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.81502.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications:

Mustakad vata

Mustakarishta Grahani, Ajirna

Mustakadi leha Kshaya, Kasa

Mustadi churna Amapachaka, Kaphajashula

Botanical Name — Cyperus rotundus Linn.
Cyperus — Derived from Greek word kuperos, rotundus - means round.

Family — Cyperaceae
Kula — Musta

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Truptighna varga, Trushnanigrahana varga, Lekhaniya varga,
Kandughna varga, Stanyashodhana varga

Sushruta Mustadi gana, Vachadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 92-94

Basonym of Drug

Wet Herat Braet gee

Musta is a plant grows gregariously with clustered tubers.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, Weteh-wraretcattwery war |

Musta is commonly growing near to water resources, so it is very common on
the banks of river Ganga.

----- PAGE 501 -----
Musta

493

2. HBaA-HVOy HerTayferg ara se |

Musta (Cyperus rotundus) grows in marshy land.

3. Wea:-yrhat Wa: |

Musta is common in north eastern region of India.

4. aReamay-sile: oa: atte searfe Nears |

Musta grows near water resources hence the synonyms related to water is also

synonyms of Musta.
Morphology
5. Ofee-TeTT |
Musta tubers are nodular
Properties and Actions
6. Qaer:- MATT: |
Musta has an agreeable odour.
Others
7. PALSeT-sAlSrat aATRTOTTAET AT |
Musta is liked by pigs.
— Names

Musta grows like a weed in waste fields with water resources.

Morphology
Habit — Rhizomatous perennial herb.

Stem — Caespitose or solitary, sparsely tufted, rigid trigonums, solid and septate.
Leaves —Basal, lower ones often scale like, sometimes reduced to sheaths, several,

flat, nerves, prominent, scabrous.

----- PAGE 502 -----
494 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Inflorescence — Spike with spikelets, spikelets
2-8, spicate, narrow-oblong, pale or purple, 10 to 20
flowered, rachilla is present, winged, glumes closely
imbricating.

Flower — Small, bisexual subtended by glumes,
upper ones are male flowers. Perianth is bristles or
scales, stamens are 3, red-crusted, ovary is superior,
unilocular.

Fruit — Nut, oblong and trigonums.
Varieties
Ra.Ni. — 1. Musta — Cyperus rotundus
2. Nagaramusta - Cyperus scariosus

Purification of Musta

Rhizome of Musta to be cut into two pieces and
immersed in an earthen pot filled with Kanji (Sour
gruel) for three days. On 4th day it is take out and Cyperus rotundus. Linn
washed with water. Then Swedana (Fomentation) is
done with Pancapallava kwatha (Decoction of 5 tender leaves) in a Dolayantra and
dried in sunlight. Then it is boiled with water mixed with jaggery, dried, again triturated
with goat’s urine and Shigru twak kwatha (Decoction of bark of Moringa oleifera). Lastly
it should be kept with Jasmine flowers for sometimes.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Tubers of Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is hard, ovoid and sometimes elongated, with a
wiry stolon attached to the tips, up to 5 cm long and 1 cm in diameter at the thickest part.
Surface is dark brown or black in colour with a number of annular ridges densely clothed
with root hair. A transversely cut portion shows a mealy flesh coloured surface, differen-
tiated into an outer cortex and a central core region with a number of dot like structures
representing vascular bundles. It is very difficult to break and if broken also then becomes
very small piece, Has got strong aromatic odour and bitter in taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Weth a feat get firg arfterrreny | pefrasr terdiso: mlscreeh:
UGA TM ST AM APSA: AT. HLS TE 92-93)

----- PAGE 503 -----
Musta 495

Properties and Actions
yet welts ants fare des crea | Hart waftireagesatefa Aya, |
am tenn gant wet Lert qPhe: gir at arg
(aa. afate at 93-94)
Wet fare wareansfahrore sctereraferd. | frerseraftrarcett qorephrfernyertt
(afi. Weare at 41)
Wen fare fea mnie det wrest Ge | Hare Heft Tesateha aah
(& fA. siete at 1358-1359)
wae Haren a ferret eter a Ure fica eet a Het Tegectt 7 AT A
(afr. frereanfe FF 140)
APRA
fever ANGE he: HITT a vittew HHI!
frasaufrarretat = eM Tea LU
(afr. froreanie af 143)
aed fara me fe derarrarey | wat cleswerart Teves WA
(B.A. wagEest 43)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Musta .
a. Phala b. Pushpa c. Kanda (Tuber) d. Patra
Ans: c. Kanda (Tuber)
2. Musta is a best example for
a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Shothahara _— d.. Shitagrahi
Ans: d. Shitagrahi
3. As per Vagbhata Agrya karma of Musta is
a. Jwaraghna b. Shwasahara c. Samshodhana d. Kushthaghna
Ans: a. Jwaraghna

4. Administration of decoction or cold infusion prepared from Musta (Cyperus
rotundus) and Parpata (Fumaria parviflora) is beneficial in

a. Prameha b. Jwara c. Pinasa d. Shiroroga
Ans: b. Jwara

----- PAGE 504 -----
496

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Mustakarishta is specifically indicated in

a. Grahani b. Amlapitta c. Kasa d. Trishna
Ans: a. Grahani

. Botanical name of Musta

a. Calotropis procera __b. Randia dumetorum
c. Bacopa monneri d. Cyperus rotundus
Ans: d. Cyperus rotundus

. Krodeshta is the synonym of

a. Kakamachi b. Kakanasa c. Musta d. Ashwagandha
Ans: c. Musta

. Habit of Musta plant
a. Tree b. climber c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: c. Herb

RR RK

----- PAGE 505 -----
Chapter ~

Nagakeshara

Useful part - Keshara (Stamens)
Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta

R
Karma (Actions)

Pachana, Jwaraghna, Kandughna, Trishnahara, Dourgandhyahara, Kushthaghna,
Hrillasanashaka, Shophahara, Chardighna, Swedapaha and Vishaghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Astringent, Stomachic, Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Appetizer, Antiemetic,

Tonic, Digestant, Haemostatic, Cardiotonic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Kashaya and Tikta rasa.
Kaphahara due to its Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Ajirna, Jwara, Kandu, Twakroga, Atisweda, Chardi, Hrallasa, Dourgandhya,
Kushtha, Visarpa, Visharoga, Bastiruja, Vatarakta, Trishna, Adhoga raktapitta and
Raktarshas.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
semernsnessesnsssns OP RATATASTERATEAATEATEL, Uo sessssssenssevnsees sierra TathT 0
(a-Fa. 14/210)

Regular usage of combination of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferra), butter and sugar will
cure bleeding piles.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)

aig feat anorenet a free TAT | (8.3. 50/23)

----- PAGE 506 -----
498

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Intake of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) mixed with sugar, honey, sugarcane juice

and Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) will relieve from Hikka (Hiccough)

3. Raktatisara (Blood mixed diarrhoea)

ARTA Bot THATS TSU WA (aS. ara 119)

Usage of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) powder will check blood mixed diarrhoea.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 0.5 to 2 g

Phytoconstituents

Flower bud contains mesuol, mammeisin, mammeigin, and mesuagin.

Stamens afforded two biflavanones designated as mesuaferrone-A & mesuaferrone-

B, also have mesuanic acid, o-amyrine, B-amyrine and B-sitosterol.

Research corner

1. In the present study, antibacterial efficacy of leaf and fruit extracts on the

growth and morphology of Staphylococcus aureus is evaluated. Both extracts
display good antibacterial activity against S. aureus with a minimum inhibition
concentration of 0.0.48 mg/mL. Both extracts are bacteriostatic at a minimum
bacteriostatic concentration of 0.39 mg/mL. Aruldass CA, Marimuthu MM,
Ramanathan S, Mansor SM, Murugaiyah V. Effects of Mesua ferrea leaf and
fruit extracts on growth and morphology of Staphylococcus aureus. Microsc
Microanal. 2013 Feb;19(1):254-60. doi: 10.1017/S14319276120-13785. Epub
2013 Jan 18.

. In present investigation, activity of Mesua ferrea and its evaluation in the

formaldehyde and complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis in rats
is reported. The results indicate that Mesua ferrea protects rats against
formaldehyde and CFA induced arthritis. The body weight chances and
hematological perturbations induced by CFA were maintained. The overall
results indicated that Mesua ferrea exerts a potent protective effect against
formaldehyde and adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats. Jalalpure SS, Mandavkar
YD, Khalure PR, Shinde GS, Shelar PA, Shah AS. Antiarthritic activity of
various extracts of Mesua ferrea Linn. seed. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Dec
8:138(3):700-41.doi: 10.1016/j.jep.-2011.09.042. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

3. The present study was performed to evaluate immunomodulatory activity of

mesuol isolated from M. ferrea seed oil in experimental animals. The study
indicated immunomodulatory activity of mesuol. Chahar MK, Sanjaya Kumar

----- PAGE 507 -----
Nagakeshara 499

DS, Lokesh T, Manohara KP. In-vivo antioxidant and immunomodulatory
activity of mesuol isolated from Mesua ferrea L. seed oil. Int
Immunopharmacol. 2012. Aug; 13(4):386-91, doi:10. 1016/j.intimp.
2012.05.006. Epub 2012 May 24.

4, The antibacterial efficacy of the methanol extract of whole flowers of Mesua
ferrea Linn. was studied against various strains of bacteria. The extract at 200
microg/g body weight dosage, could significantly reduce the viable count of the
strain Sulmonella typhimurium ATCC 6539 in liver, spleen and heart blood of
the extract treated challenged mice. Mazumder R, Dastidar SG, Basu SP,
Mazumder A, Singh SK. Antibacterial potentiality of Mesua ferrea Linn.
flowers. Phytother Res. 2004 Oct; 18(10):824-6.

. The cured native oil and purified seed oil of Mesua ferrea were studied for their
effect on isolated rat ileum by taking standard spasmodic and antispasmodic
drugs. The cured oil of seed showed significant antispasmodic activity but
purified oil was devoid of any antispasmodic activity of the cured and purified
oil of Mesua ferrea seed. Anc Sci Life. 1999 Jul; 19 (1-2):74-5.

WN

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Bhaskara lavana Agnimandya, Shula

Chandanadi Taila Daha, Raktapitta
Eladi Churna Aruchi, Chardi
: Haridrakhanda Shitapitta, Kandu

: Pippalyadyasava Grahani, Gulma
Mahakushta, Panduroga

Botanical Name — Mesua ferrea Linn.

Mesua — After the name of the two Arab scientists.
ferrea—Rust coloured

Family - Calothyllaceae

Kula — Nagakeshara

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Sushruta Eladigana, Priyangvadi gana, Anjanadi gana
Bh. Pr.Ni. Karpuradi varga

----- PAGE 508 -----
Nagakeshara is liked by elephants.

Mrophology

1. APTASG:- APTA AUT ATTN POAT AT |
Petals of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) resembles hood of Cobra.

2. ISAS: wauaraele: Utter |
Stamens of Nagakeshara is yellow in colour.

3. BT: ATONE TATE: |
Stamens have yellow colour like that of Champaka (Michelia champaca)
flower.

4, SAQUA-TAVAUT: YOY BRA |
Nagakeshara has yellow coloured stamens.
5. Hea: -HTAN Hee |
Fruits of Nagakeshara are pitcher shaped.
Properties and Actions
6. CAV WOTET: AYN UTES |

Stamens of Nagakeshara are very useful as a medicine.
Others
7. fya:-eferat fre: |
Nagakeshara is liked by elephants.

Regional Names

----- PAGE 509 -----
Nagakeshara 501

Habitat
Grows commonly In Western Ghats, Eastern
Ghats, Bengal and Assam up to the height of 5,000 ft

altitude. As It Is very attractive tree with scented flow-
ers itis also grown in gardens.

Morphology

Habit = Medium sized glabrous tree. Trunk is
straight.

Bark = Smooth, ash-coloured, young branches
are twiggy and slender.

Leaves = Simple, opposite, 7.5 to 12.5 cm long
2.5 to4.cm in width. oblong-lanceolate, acute tip, red
when young, afterwards shining above, glaucous and pruinose beneath, nerves are incon-
spicuous. Petiole is 6 to 8 mm long.

Mesua ferrea. Linn

Flowers = Solitary or in pairs, subsessile, fragrant, 2.5 to 7.5 cm in diameter, buds
are subglobose, sepals are 4 in number and petals are 4 in number and bright white in
colour, stamens are numerous and golden yellow.

Fruit = Ovoid shaped with a conical point, surrounded by the enlarged sepals, 2.5 to
5cm in diameter. Pericarp is tough and sémi-woody.

Seeds = 1 to 4 angular, smooth and brown coloured.
Substitutes
1. Raktanagakeshara — Mammea suriga flower, buds Ochrocarpus longifolius
2. Krishnanagakeshara — Cinnamomum tamala
3. Malabar nagakeshara — Dillenia pentagyna
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Stamens when dried becomes golden brown in colour. The stamens are upto 5 mm
long and very thin that is less than 1 mm on thickness and tapering at both the ends.
Stamens have copper coloured filaments and some what thick elongated anther lobes. If
the market sample mixed with broken pieces of petals then it will be creamish white in
colour. It has got pleasant odour and on keeping in mouth becomes mucilaginous.

Classical references
Synonyms
AMTgEt Harare wet eA | VATU TARACoEceMa ATA, |

----- PAGE 510 -----
502

Dravyaguna Vijnana

dhiaaarschad anaftrs frame i (as. afufe at 70-71)

anrerenedrent wy fers eared, | aerate HUGE VTA, 1
(afr. magenta af 49)

aMTgES Haratat evi cearaarery | wet firernaeateygs auger hr |

qroededhing as qerferaraey i (am.A. sitar at 1346-1347)

APTA Aether wy frre araraed | afttarmaet ow Huasittesraer, Ul
(afr. fraeate at 178)

SIA APTS HUTA TY: Wat aTagaher fiers Fast wat AA 1

aa watt g tnrsife gf sat 1 carat fogs a artaere gerd

(f.Fi. eitene at 98-99)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Nagakeshara
a. Root b. Stem c. Fruit d. Stamens
Ans: d. Stamens
. Pradhana Rasa of Nagakeshara
a. Madhura b. Kashaya c. Tikta d. Lavana
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Nagakeshara as per Sharangadhara Samhita

_

i)

a. Grahi b. Kasahara c. Pachana d. Vajikara
Ans: c. Pachana %

4. Botanical name of Nagakeshaea
a. Mesua ferrea b. Crocos sativus

c. Nelumbo nucifera __ d. Aistolochia bracteata
Ans: a. Mesua ferrea
5. Habit of Nagakeshara plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Tree

6. Mammea suriga is the substitute for
a. Punnaga b. Pippali c. Nagakeshara d. Surapunnaga

Ans: c. Nagakeshara

7. Mesuol a chemical constituent present in
a. Jatiphala b. Maricha c. Dhanvayasa d. Nagakeshara
Ans: d. Nagakeshara

----- PAGE 511 -----
Chapter

Nimba

Useful part - Patra (Leaf), Twak (Bark), Bija (Seed), Phala (Fruit), Pushpa (Flow-
ers) and Niryasa (Resin).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Patra (Leaf)

Krimighna, Netrya, Vishaghna, Kushthagna, Ruchikara, Vranaghna, Kasahara and
Shwasahara.
Twak (Bark)

Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Shramahara, Trishnahara, Jwaraghna, Chardighna,
Kandughna, Pramehahara, Ruchikara, Shothahara and Rakta Shodhaka.

Phala (Fruit)
Kushthaghna, Arshoghna, Krimighna, Bhedana, Mehahara and Gulmanashaka.

Pushpa (Flower)
Krimighna, Vishaghna
Bija (Seed)
Krimighna and Kushthaghna
Pharmacological Actions
Leaves — Insect repellent, Blood purifier, Antidiabetic
Seed — Antiviral
Bark — Antiviral and Antibacterial
Flower — Insecticidal
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shitavirya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya rasa.

----- PAGE 512 -----
504 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Rogaghuata (Therapeutic indications)

Patra (Leaf) — Kushtha, Krimi, Netra roga, Aruchi, Kasa, Shwasa, Visharoga and
Vrana

Twak (Bark) — Kushtha, Krimi, Kandu, Prameha, Aruchi, Raktadushti, Trishna,
Shrama, Chardi and Shotha.

Phala (Fruit) — Kushtha, Arshas, Krimi, Prameha and Gulma.

Brija (Seed) — Krimi and Kushtha

Pushpa (Flower) — Krimi and Visha roga
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease-Psoriasis)

woe oeanagay Tag SraY wot Pra hres AM Ue wees It

(a.Fa. 7/157)
Affected part of skin of wounded and eaten by maggots, is cleaned and Nimba

(Azadirachta indica) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) powder is mixed with cow’s urine and
applied. Then the same combination may be used internally also.

2. Surameha (Acetonuria)

Bast Pre wera | (gfe. 11/9)

Decoction of Nimba (Azardirachta indica) is used internally in case of Surameha.
3. Twagroga (Skin diseases)

Pramcraret: caeent fa SeaTaT Aad, | (37.9.5. 37/6)

Paste prepared from Nimba (Azadirachta indica) and Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) is
applied in skin diseases.
4. Arumshika (Head boils)

araftent et Teh Aaahera aR | (GFA. 20/27)

In case of Arumshika (Head boils), First, blood letting should be done then decoc-
tion of Nimba (Azadirachta indica) is sprinkled over the head boils.

Matra (Desxge);
Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml
Kalka (Paste) - 10to20g

Kashaya (Decoction) -— 50 to 100ml
Churna (Powder) — 2to4g

----- PAGE 513 -----
Nimba 505

Taila (Oil) - Sto 10 drops
Phytoconstituents

Leaves contain Nimbin, Nimbinene, Nimbandiol, Nimbolide, Quercitin, g-sitosterol,
Azadirone, Azadiradione and Azadirachtin. Bark has Nimbin, Nimbinin, Nimbidin,
Margolone and Margolonone. Seeds contain Nimbin, Nimbidin, Azadirachtin, Chloro-
genic acid, Salanin and 4-Epinimbin. Flowers possess Nimbosterol, Myricitin and
Kaempferol.

Fruits yielded gedunin, Azadiradione, Azadirone and Deacety] Azadirachtinol.

Research corner

1. Experimental cerebral malaria was induced in mice by infection with
Plasmodium berghei ANKA. Infected mice were administered with
Azadirachta indica ethanolic extract as doses of 300, 500, or 1000 mg./kg
intraperitoneally (i.p.) in experimental groups, or with the anti-malarial drugs
chloroquine (12 mg/kg, i.p.) or artemether (1.6 mg/kg, i.p.), in the positive
control groups. Azardiachta indica ethanolic extract mitigated neuro
inflammation, decreased the severity of brain oedema, and protected pyramidal
neurons from apoptosis, particularly at the highest dose used, comparable to
chloroquine and artemether. The findings suggest that Azadirachta indica
ethanolic extract has protective effects on neuronal populations in the
inflammed central nervous system, and justify at least in part of it is used in
African and Asian folk medicine and practices. Bedri S$, Khalil EA, Khalid SA,
Alzohairy MA, Mohieldein A, Aldebasi YH, Seke Etet PF, Farahna M.
Azadirachta indica ethanolic extract protects neurons from apoptosis and
mitigates brain swelling in experimental cerebral malaria. Malar J. 2013 Aug,
29312(1):298.

2. This study analysed the antimicrobial effect of five irrigants formulated from
different parts of the tree Azardiachta indica (Neem) and compared with 2.5% ‘
sodium hypochlorite and 0.2% chlorohydrins gluconate through an agar
diffusion test. A clinical isolate of Candida albicans was inoculated on
Seaboard Dextrose Agar and Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 291212) on sheep
blood Agar. Two neem irrigants displayed antimicrobial properties. Dutta A,
Kundabala M. Antimicrobial efficacy of endodontic irrigants from Azadirachta
indica: An in viro study. Acta adonitol scand. 2013 May 3.

Ww

. The aqueous extract of A. indica leaf and bark has been evaluated for its effect
on antioxidant status of alloxan diabetic rats and compared with insulin
treatment. The oral effective dose of A. Indica leaf (500 mg/kg body weight)

----- PAGE 514 -----
506 Dravyaguna Vijnana

and A. indica bark (100 mg/kg body weight) were given once daily for 21 days
to separate groups of diabetic rats. Diabetic rats showed high blood glucose
(P<0.01), increased level of malonialdehyde (P<0.05) and a significant
decrease in the activity of antioxidant enzymes. Shailey S, Basir SF.
Strengthening of antioxidant defence by Azadirachata indica in alloxandiabetic
rat tissues. J Ayurveda Integr Med. 2012 Jul; 3(3):130-5. doi : 10.4103/0975-
9476.100174.

4. The present study aims at evaluating the activity of two polysaccharides (P1
and P2) isolated from the leaves of Azadirachta indica and their chemical
sulfated derivatives (P1S and P2S) against poliovirus type 1 (PV-1). The
cytotoxicity of the compounds was analyzed by MTT and the antiviral effect
was determined by plaque reduction assay in different protocols. The
polysaccharides did not show any cytotoxic effects on HEP-2 cells at the
highest tested concentration (200 Ig/ml) and exhibited significant antiviral
activity with inhibitory concentrations (IC5O) of 80 Ig/ml, 37.5 Ig/ml, 77.5 Ig/
ml, and 12.1 [g/ml for P1, P1S, P2 and P2S, respectively and the selectivity
indexes (SI) ranged from 18 to 131.9. Faccin-Galhardi LC, Yamamoto KA,
Ray S, Ray B, Carvalho Linhares RE, Nozawa C. The in vitro antiviral
property of Azadirachta indica polysaccharides for poliovirus. J
Ehtnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 26:142(1):86-90.

Yoga (Important formulations)
SI.No.

Name of Yoga Indications

Pk | Nimbad churns
4. J

Panchanimba churna Sarvakushtha, Visarpa
Tiktaka ghrata Kushtha, Visarpa
f 6 Panchatikta ghrata guggulu

Botanical Name —- Azadirachta indica Juss.

Kushtha, Prameha

Azadirachta — Persian name meaning best tree

indica — Native of India

Family — Meliaceae (Refer appendix-II for family features)
Kula — Nimba kula

----- PAGE 515 -----
Nimba 507

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kandughna varga
Sushruta Aragvadhadi gana, Guduchyadi gana, Lakshadi gana
Bh.Pr. Ni. Guduchyadi varga 93-96

Basonym of Drug

Prafe ate wareatite, crearghracttte aac |

Nimba (Azadirachta indica) is very useful drug, which maintains health.
Synonyms
Mrophology

1. fegtrata:-ftg ya rates |

The exudate from Nimba resembles Hingu Niryasa (Gum of Ferula narthex).

Properties and Actions
2. afte:- + Reg, TAT H STA: |
Nimba cures many diseases, does well always if used.
3. oplter-griy ata ster |
Nimba is very efficacious in helminthiasis.
4. Praaa-Prereote wate wearer
Nimba alleviates many diseases.
5. Unftag-uftt: x: HeATUTAT: |
If used, Nimba always does well.
6. frqd:-fre as ucerter arererchitter |
Nimba is very efficacious drug when it comes to skin diseases.
Vs Olanan:- arferteren: fereaxeary ATI: |
Nimba is one of the best among drugs having bitter taste.
8. Aaa: AT HST TEAL
Bark of Nimba is very useful.

Regional Name

----- PAGE 516 -----
508 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Nimba (Neem) tree grows all over India. It is
commonly planted as avenue trees.
Morphology
Habit = A large tree
Root = Tap root and branched
Stem = Woody, bran-ched solid, erect and cy-
lindrical.
Leaf = Compound, alternate, imparipinnate,

exstipulate, pinnae are lanceolate, oblique, serrate,
acuminate with unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence = Axillary panicle

Flower = Actinomorphic, bisexual, complete, bracteate, pedicellate, hypogynous,
sepals are 5 and gamosepalous, petals are 5, polypetalous and white in colour, stamens
are 10, Gynoecium : Tricarpellary, syncarpous, superior ovary.

Fruit = Drupaceous with one seed.

Azadirachta indica (Nimba) Juss

Varieties
1. Nimba — Azadirachta indica
2. Mahanimba — Melia azadirachta
3. Parvata Nimba (Aralu) -—  Ailanthes excelsa
4. Akasha Nimba —  Malingtonia horensis

Note~ Nimba can be considered as Kalpa vruksa as every parts of itis very useful.
Caraka opines that one who uses parts of Nimba to take bath, in food and for preparing
bed to sleep for a year will never suffer from skin diseases.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Leaf —Pinnately branched leaves with ovate lanceolate, subfalcate and bluntly ser-
rate leaflets having an acute apex, measuring upto 5 cm in length and 1.5 cm in breadth.
The leaves are upto 50 cm long clustered at the end of the branches, which also bear
bunches of lilac flowers in terminal panicles. Leaflets when fresh are bright green but turn
greyish on drying. Has got disagreeable odor. Taste is very bitter.

Bark ~ Bark is Channelled or quilled pieces of tough and fibrous bark ranging from

3 mm to 10 mm in thickness. Outer surface is greyish brown to black in colour, rough,
scaly, irregularly fissured, especially in the bark obtained from older stems. Inner surface

----- PAGE 517 -----
Nimba 509

is creamish in colour, conspicuously laminated and coarsely fibrous. Transversely cut
portion shows a smooth, minutely chequred surface. On breaking becomes fibrous, has
got bitter and astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Pra: eafergrdsr fares fermen: | afte: uiftans fighrats sere ii
(a5. Temas FT 93)
Properties and Actions
fra: ict wyatt agarentshrarmgd | ter srdearerenteterphiape |
aUirreopseciategd (AF. Wee TT 94)
Fra UA (Leaf)
Rraud tad At aftr Prema | aac MeN WaranHsyd, |
(a3. Tee TT 95)
freer eT (Fruit)
franc ta faith ure g meter | ere ret eet yourst: HiAeTa
(ALT. Yerate TT 96)
Pratt: vic ag: seraratiregg | penrgareted crarenttegtttera:
quad Ureereayitte aut west faeittad 1 (af. TEAMe TT 29-30)

da wart Peace surety fagtea: | gretent Peace area
atten § ater eid Fetes | wept Pragarsy patra,
aide BOT MAL Tarra | thet fees TS UI es Tet TT
ath Wored TAA, at eet Te foreaers |
Pradiona asst a aftrpstagtert: 1 (a.f. sitsftr af 879-885)

wage: waate vtaterenen: aaquephrarryig ae |

aeratugg erated fastrct eqaterareentetare, tt (aA, sHETe TT 10)

----- PAGE 518 -----
510

Dravyaguna Vijnana

fra: vial wafer: aaftrrerae: | Eopfhrears Aeet Tages:
aur frare freer Temes Teitafer: 1 (A.A. eeierafe aT 180-181)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Pradhana Karma attributed to Nimba
a. Kushthaghna b. Dipana c. Pachana d. Medhya
Ans: a. Kushthaghna
. Main action of Nimba Bija
a. Shothahara b. Krimighna c. Rasayana d. Grahi
Ans: b. Krimighna
3. Decoction of Nimba (Azardirachta indica) is used internally in case of

—

Nw

a. Sikata Meha b. Haridra Meha_ c. udaka Meha_ d. Sura Meha

Ans: d. Sura Meha
4. Nimbandiol a chemical constituent present in
a. Shallaki b. Shala c. Nimba d. haridra
Ans: c. Nimba
5. Botanical name of Nimba
a. Melia azadirach b. Azadirachta indica
c. Ailanthes excels d. Malingtonia horensis
Ans: b. Azadirachta indica
6. Hingu niryasa is a synonym of
a. Nimba b. Hingu c. Shala d. Sarala
Ans: a. Nimba
7. Pichunarda and Arshta are the synonyms of

a. Katuki b. Paribhadra c. Nimba d. Kalamegha
Ans: c. Nimba

8. Habit of Nimba plant is
a. Creeper b. Tree c. Undershrub — d. Herb

Ans: b. Tree

SRB R RE

----- PAGE 519 -----
Chapter

Nirgundi

Parts used - Mula (Root), Patra (Leaf).
Rasadi Panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Shweta nirgundi - Keshya, Netrya, Shulahara, Shothahara, Krimighna.
Kushthaghna, Jwaraghna, Kandughna, Kasahara, Medhya.
Nila nirgundi - Kasahara, Shophahara, Pradaranashaka, Adhmanahara.
Shephali — Sandhivatahara, Gudavatahara.
Nirgundi patra (Leaf) - Krimighna
Nirgundi pushpa (Flower) - Krimighna, Gulmanashaka, Pleehaghna,
Kushthaghna, Kandughna and Shophahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Leaf -— Antiparasitic, Vermifuge, Anodyne and Alterative

Root — Tonic, Febrifuge, Expectorant, Diuretic

Fruit - Emmanogogue :
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Katu Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shwetanirgundi — Shula, Shotha, Krimi, Vatavyadhi, Kushtha, Kandu, Kasa,
Keshavikara.

Nila Nirgundi — Kasa, Shopha, Pradara, Adhmana
Shephali - Sandhivata, Guda vata
Nirgundi patra (Leaf) - Krimi, Gulma, Kushtha, Kandu and Shopha.

----- PAGE 520 -----
512 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Prfdt qe yurg ad tert eed  aPerara: afeara: aerate greater

(LL. 21/164)

One Karsha (12 g) powder of root of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is taken with oil. It
is very useful in case of Sandhivata (Osteo arthritis), Kativata (Lumbago) and Kampavata
(Trembling).
2. Kasa (Cough)

Fafftsusrard a uacatt: ate ferret ary | (Gs. 52/30)

Ghee processed with juice extracted from leaves of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is
efficacious in Kasa (Cough) originated from Kapha dosha.
3, Apasmara (Epilepsy)

Pafoctaereh sree aoe, ferqeae ul (LL. 21/57)

Powder of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) root if taken internally, very useful in case of
Epilepsy.

Matra (Dosage)
Mula churna (Root powder) - l1to3g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10to20ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 40to50ml
Phytoconstituents

Bark yielded Vanillic acid, Luetolin, B-sitoslerol, Seed oil contains vanillin, amino
acids like glycine, alanine, valine and leucine, o-pinene, camphene, caryophyllene.

Research corner

1. To evaluate the possible antifilarial effect of ethyl acetate extract of Vitex
negundo (Verbenaceae) leaves against Setaria cervi filarial parasite in vitro. In
vitro screening was done by the method of motility inhibition and MTT
reduction assay with concentration of 0.03 to 1.00 mg/mL for 2 to 24 h
incubation periods respectively, for possible antifilarial effect by comparing
with control. The present study recorded significant antifilarial effect of Vitex
negundo plant extract and contributed toward the development of database for
novel drug candidates for lymphatic filariasis. Sahare KN, Singh V. Antifilarial
activity of ethyl acetate extract of Vitex negundo leaves in vitro. Asian Pac J.
Trop Med. 2013 Sep;6(9):689-92. doi:10.1016/S 1995-7645(13)60119-4.

2. The hepatoprotective activity of ethanolic extract from the leaves of Vitex

----- PAGE 521 -----
Nimba +13
negundo (VN) was conducted against thioacetamide (TAA) induced hepatic
injury in Spurge Dawley rats. Rats were administered with VN extract at two
different doses, 100 mg/kg and 300 mg/kg body weight. After 12 weeks, the
rats administered with VN should a significantly lower liver to body weight
ration. Their abnormal levels of biochemical parameters and_ liver
malondialdehyde were restored closer to the normal levels and were
comparable to the levels in animals treated with the standard drug, SY. Kadir
FA, Kassim NM, Abdulla MA, Yehye WA. Hepatoprotective Role of
Ethanolic Extract of Vitex negundo in Thioacetamide-Induced Liver Fibrosis in
Male Rats. Evid Based Complement Alternate Med. 2013;2013:739850.
doi:10.1155/2013/739850. Epub 2013 May 19.

3. Two new glycosides, 2-methyl pyromeconic acid 3-0-i-d-glucopyranoside-6'-
(O-4”-hydroxybenzoate) (1), 6'-O-p-hydroxybenzoly-gardoside (2) and four
known iridoid glycosides (3-6) were isolated from the whole plant of Vitex
negundo. Huang J, Wang GC, Wang CH, Huang XJ, Ye WC. Two new
glycosides from Vitex negundo. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Jan 29.

4. Chemical investigations of the seed extract afforded a new labdane diterpenoid,
named negundol (1a+1b), as an inseparable mixture of two diastereoisomers in
a 5:4 ratio. Zheng CJ, Lan XP, Wang Y, Huang BK, Han T, Zhang QY, Qin
LP. A new labdane diterpene from Vitex negundo. Pharm Biol. 2012
Jun;50(6):687-90. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2011.597410. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

5. This study was carried out to investigate its cough-relieving potential. The
antitussive effect of the butanolic extract of V. negundo (Vn) on sulphur
dioxide (SO(2))-induced cough was examined in mice. In toxicity tests, no
signs of neural impairment and acute behavioral toxicity were observed at
antitussive doses and extract has been well tolerated at higher doses. The results
indicate that V. negundo exhibits antitussive effect and it was found devoid of
toxicity. Haq RU, Shah AU, Khan AU, Ullah Z, Khan HU, Khan RA, Malik
A. Antitussive and toxicological evaluation of Vitex negundo. Nat Prod Res.
2012;26(5):484-8. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2010. 534472. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo. (Name of Yoga Indications

----- PAGE 522 -----
514 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name = Vitex negundo Linn.
Vitex — Chaste tree
negundo — From the word Nirgundi
Family —Lamiaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Nirgundi
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Vishaghna varga, Krimighna varga
Sushruta Surasadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 113-115

Basonym of Drug
Prenrer arrefty usater greet carter
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) cures many diseases and protects the body.
Synonyms
Mrophology
1. QURTRT- IAT TSM: |
Leaves and other parts of Nirgundi has Aromatic odour.
2. aal-yy sete wetter
The Aroma of Nirgundi spreads all around.
Properties and Actions
3. SAGTA-MAAAS EAT: AAT, FHT YA FRGTT |
The juice extracted from leaves of Nirgundi is an efficacious medicine.

Nirgundi alleviates evil spirits.
5. Ufterae:- vit wet, TeTATT |

The plant is having Ushna virya, hence it can alleviate Shitatva.

Regional Name

English Five leaved chaste tree
Hindi Nirgandi, Mewri

----- PAGE 523 -----
Nimba 515

Habitat

Nirgundi grows all over India. As it is an attrac-
tive shrub, it is cultivated in gardens.

Morphology

Habit — Shrub grows upto 12 ft. in height

Root — Branched, cylindrical

Stem — Pinnately compound, digitately 3 to 5
foliate, leaflets are oblanceolate, grey-pubescent be-
low.

Inflorescence — Dichasial cyme

Flower — Bracteate, pentamerous, bisexual, zy-
gomorphic and complete, sepals are 5, shortly 5-
toothed, petals are 5, upper lip two to bed, much shorter
than the lower, purple to violet in colour stamens are
5 in number. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous
superior ovary.

Vitex negundo Linn. (Nirgundi)

Fruit — Small, globose, drupe, seeds are ovate oblong shaped with a straight em-
bryo.

Ra.Ni. — 3 types

1. Sinduvara 2. Nila Nirgundi 3. Shephali

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Roots are stout cylindrical 2 to 7 cm in diameter. External surface is greyish brown
colour, longitudinally wrinkled with occasional warty proturberences and circular root
scars. Transversely cut surface shows a light brown surface with dark coloured concen-
tric rings and a thin closely adhering bark. On braking becomes fibrous and it is difficult
to break. Has got slight aromatic odour and bitter in taste.

Leaf — Leaf is 3 to 5 foliate, leaflets are shortly petiolate, narrow lancelolate, acute or
acuminate, 5 to 12 cm long and 1.5 cm to 4 cm broad. The upper surface is sub-glabrous,
black in colour, lower surface greyish white. Has got pleasant aromatic odour and has
bitter taste.

----- PAGE 524 -----
516 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
firgar: dager: fiega: fiegare: i frerqedt g Prlust srarctt qaer a aT
(aa. Teena FF 113)
Properties and Actions
fiega: wate: Horr: Heat oy: lahat Fate tet Bera EAT
pitgarehascterserattents tae ui (aa. THM TF 114)
fegar cet Weqarasteret TE (AT. YSeaTe aT 115)

saferfost—

Frfoct mefirntom pitpsresaet | arson wierearectsta
(af. Teens at 74)

fergar

: weft: srRaTaaae: | HecHveteyaa: 2
(afr. seareerfe at 152)

atePrtst-

maemrteaatost fereet wa at arabe | serotonin waceartenatt
(aA. werent FT 154)

wrnttet—

Safe Helena BAT AAAI | Magara Yearaearryd tt
(WA. wareefe GT 156)

Frfost gan fer dear vitro erg: | reqeer dros hye searhretferaraet

SIA | wnaslufeeHaa agar |

Sronferer cat: weer feraftrs frase 1 (aA. steht et 127-1297

Prost wa-

sobre wy cette Pricer aftrenter wa (af. sitet at 130)

Frfvet gor

Prydt get ferntont ahrarcanrey | yeretiereta: Hs HVS with wa HE UU
(SF. ateft af 130)

firgansd fark we dot gaftger | araycrrat yormtaasaniy ete

----- PAGE 525 -----
Nimba 517

amare faster uaeare seat ui (A. ethane FF 203-204)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from Nirgundi
a. Stem b. Root & Leaf cc. Fruit '  d. Latex
Ans: b. Root & Leaf
2. Pradhana Karma of Nirgundi Patra
a. Shulahara b. Krimighna c. Jwaraghna d. Rasayana
Ans: b. Krimighna
. Nirgundi Ghrata is specifically indicated in
a. Rajayakshma b. Nidranasha c. Sthoulya d. Daha
Ans: a. Rajayakshma
. Nirgundyerandadi Kashaya is indicated in
a. Pitta Vyadhi b. Kapha Vyadhi c. Vata Vyadhi d. Jwara
Ans: c. Vata Vyadhi
5. Botanical name of Nirgundi
a. Aconitum heterophyllum b. Ficus glomerata
c. Azadirachta indica d. Vitex negundo
Ans: d. Vitex negundo
. Indrasurasa is a synonym of
a. Nimba b. Nirgundi c. Brahmi d. Varuna
Ans: b. Nirgundi
7. Habit of Nirgundi Plant
a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper

Ans: c. Shrub

—

LS)

=

ON

8. Types of Nirgundi as per Raja Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 eS d. 6
Ans: a. 3

Fo

----- PAGE 526 -----
Palasha

a
Useful part — Bija (Seed)

Rasadi panchaka

Biya (Seed) Pushpa (Flower)

Karma (Actions)

Bija (Seed) — Krimighna, Dipana, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Sangrahi, Arshoghna,
Vrishya.

Pushpa (Flower) — Tririshnahara, Dahanashaka, Kushthaghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Seeds — Anthelmintic, Laxative

Leaves & Flowers — Tonic, Aphrodisiac and Diuretic
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Bija (Seed) —Vatakapha Shamaka

Vatashamaka due to Ushna virya and Snigdha guna, Kapha Shamaka because of
its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya Katu rasa.

Pushpa (Flower) —Pitta Shamaka

Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya, Madhura rasa and Vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Bija (Seed) — Krimi, Agnimandya, Bhagna, Arshas

Pushpa (Flower) — Trishna, Daha and Kushtha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimiroga (Worms)

Wee Stst CR Teck AT MTYAMAAT | (Ys. 54/25)

----- PAGE 527 -----
Palasha 519

Paste or Juice of Palasha (Butea monosperma) seed if taken with rice water, is very
useful in Krimi (Worms).

frrargtsanceh at aah afta | (a09.Fa. 7/21)
Paste prepared from seeds of Palasha (Butea monosperma) should be taken with
butter milk in case of Worm infestation.

2. Daha (Burning sensation) in Jwara (fever)
Wea aaat at Praerygaena: | serfs: Weratset FAL eA TAT
(41.5.F8. 1/360)
Paste prepared from tender leaves Palasha (Butea monosperma) and Nimba
(Azadirachta indica) or Badara (Zizyphus jujuba) with sour gruel, if applied reduces
Daha (Burning sensation) in fever.

3. Paittika Shula (Colic)
Tete arat att first Te AyTTT | (GS. 42/107)

In colic one should take soup prepared from Palasha (Butea monosperma) or
Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) with sugar.

Matra (Dosage)

Bija churna (Seed powder) -1to8&g

Kwatha (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml

Patra swarasa (Leaf juice) -—10to20ml

Phytoconstituents ~ Seeds contain Palasonin, Aleuritic acid and stable oil (18%).
Flowers yielded five flavonoid glucosides like butrin, Isobutrin, Coreospsin, Isocoreopsin,
Sulphurein and two new compounds called Monospermoside and Isomono-spermoside.
Root bark afforded B-sitosterol, Leucoantho-cyandin, Tannic acid and Gallic acid (50%).

Research corner

1. To study the efficacy of ethanolic extract of B. monosperma bark in cafeteria
and atherogenic diet fed rats and monosodium glutamate (MSG) obese rats,
different doses (200, 400 and 800 mg/kg) of ethanolic extract of B.
monosperma bark showed dose dependent decreases in body weight. Dixit P,
Prakash T, Karki R, Kotresha D. Anti-obese activity of Butea monosperma
(Lam) bark extract in experimentally induced obese rats. Indian J. Exp Biol.
2012 Jul;50(7):476-83.

2. The antihyperglycemic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidative properties of
hydroethanolic extract of Butea monosperma bark were investigated in
alloxan-induced diabetic mice. The daily treatment of diabetic animals with

----- PAGE 528 -----
520 Dravyaguna Vijnana
crude extract of B. monosperma bark (300 mg kg (-1) for 45 days significantly
lowered blood glucose level and elevated hepatic glycogen content, bringing
the values close to those observed in normal control and gliberncalmidetreateg
diabetetic mice. Furthermore, the level of various lipid profile parameters wa.
also reversed towards normal. Sharma N, Garg V. Anithyperglycemic ang
antioxidant effect of hydroethanolic extract of Butea monosperma bark jn
diabetic mice. Indian J. Biochem Biophys. 2012 Feb; 49(1):55-62.

Aqueous extract of flowers of Butea monosperma (Fabaceae) was evaluated at
different dose levels (200. 400, 800 mg/kg, p.o) for its protective efficacy
against CCl (4) (1.5 ml/kg i.p.) induced acute liver injury. Therapy of B.
monosperma showed its protective effect on biochemical and histopathological
alterations at all the three doses in dose dependent manner. Sharma N, Shukla
S., Hepatoprotective potential of aqueous extract of Butea monosperma against
CCI (4) induced damage in rats. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2011 Nov; 63(7-8):671-
6. doi: 10.1016/j.etp. 2010.05.009. Epub 2010 Jun 18.

4. Phytochemical investigation from the stem bark of Butea monosperma, led to
the isolation and identification of three new compounds named buteaspermin A
(1), Buteaspermin B (2) and buteaspermanol (3), along with 19 known
compounds. Maurya R, Yadav DK, Sing G, Bhargavan B, Narayana Murthy
PS, Sahai M, Singh MM. Osteogenic activity of constituents from Butea
monosperma. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 1;19(3):610-3. doi: 10.1016/
j-bmcl.2008. 12.064. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

5. One new dihydrochalcone, Dihydromonospermoside (7), was isolated from the
flowers of Butea monosperma together with three known chalcones, butein (2),
monospermoside (4) and isoliquiritigenin (8), one flavone, 7,3',4-
trihydroxyflavone (6), four flavanones,

(-)-butrin (1a), (-)-butrin (3a), (+)-isomonospermoside (5b) and (-)-liquiritgenin (94);
and three isofavones, formononetion (10), afromosin (11) and formononetin-7-O-beta-D-
glucopyranoside (12). Chokchaisiri R, Suaisomn C, Sriphota S, Chindaduang A; Chuprajob
T, Suksamrarn A. Bioactive flavonoids of the flowers of Butea monosperma. Chem Pharm
Bull (Tokyo). 2009 Apr;57(4):428-32.

>

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No, Name of Yoga Indi¢ations

Palasha bijadi churna bias tins"

----- PAGE 529 -----
Palasha 521

Krimimudgara rasa Krimi,
Krimihara rasa Krimi
Krimighna rasa Krimi

4.
P 6 Rnigi vara | rin

8. Paribhadrakavaleha Krimi, Shula

Agnimandya

Botanical Name — Butea monosperma Lan-Kutze
Butea — Named after John Earl of Bute, Patron of Botany
mono — One, sperma - seed
Family — Fabaceae
Kula — Aparajita kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Rodhradi gana, Mushkakadi gana, Ambashthadi gana, Nyagrodhadi
gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 49-53

Basonym of Drug

WORT TATA I

The leaves of Palasa (Butea monosperma) is very auspicious and the plant bears
characteristic leaves.

Synonyms

Mrophology
1. AAWES:- aA WEA STASI
Palasha grows in forest.
Morphology
2. fraa:-sfiftrasraroere anf |
A leaf bears three leaflets.
3. TRUUT:-Tes ToT |

Palasha leaves have rough surface.

----- PAGE 530 -----
522 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, THYWH:-TeHler YouITE |
Flower of Palasha are red in colour.
5. GRY: Aah FIA |
Palasha flowers are curved.
6. RYH: YRIVS ATT HAT |
The flower of Palasha resemble beak of a parrot.
7. dtreg- cht Meqare |
The seeds of Palasha have more oil content.
Properties and Actions
8. ATAS:-AKINy HB: |
Palasha is regarded as best among plants yielding alkali.
9. aaftrer:~artey Bat Sh |
Seeds of Palasha are very useful in Krimi (Helminthiasis).
10. Qldet:- ATT Bt: IITA: |
The drug Palasha passifies Vata.
Others
11. Bftet:- aAy WEA ater HB:
Palasha is one of the best among the plants which are used for rituals.
12. Otften:- Ga WERT: |
Palasha is commonly used for performing religious rites.
13. WeAga:- Tet gar: Shem AeENy WaSTaL |

The plant is commonly used in rituals.

Regional Name

----- PAGE 531 -----
Palasha 523

Habitat
Palasha plant grows all over India. It is also cultivated as its leaves are commonly
used.

Morphology

Habit — An erect tree grows upto 50 ft. height.
Trunk is crooked.

Branches — Irregular, bark is rough, ash-coloured,
young parts are tomentose.

Leaves — Compound, trifoliate, petioles are 10
to 15 cm long, stipules are linear-lanceolate. Leaves
deciduous, leaf lets are coriaceous, the terminal leaflet
is 10-20 cm long, and 10-15 broad, broadly obovate,
from a cuneate base, lateral leaflets are smaller, 10 to
15cm long and 7.5 to 10 cm wide, obliquely rounded u
at the base, glabrous above. Petiolules are 6 mm long | Butea Monosperma Lan-Kutza.
and stout. (Palaga)

Inflorescence — Raceme, 15 cm long.

Flower — Long pedicel, calyx densely velvety outside, dark olive green. Petals are
orange or salmon coloured, 4 to 5 cm long standard petal is 25 cm broad, keel is semi
circular, beaked and veined.

Fruit — Pods, stalked, 12 to 20 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, thickened at the sutures.

Varieties
Ra. Ni — 4 types acc to colour of flowers
1. Rakta palasha 2. Pita palasha 3. Shweta palasha 4. Nila palasha

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Seeds are flat Kidney shaped, 3 to 3.5 cm long, 2 to 2.5 cm broad and upto 2 mm
thick. Surface is leathery, glossy veined and wrinkled with a deep reddish brown colour.
The seed has a conspicuous hilum which is situated near the middle of its concave edge.
Seed does not have any odour.

Classical references

Synonyms

Tete: faye: Wot arat THOT: | asET aaa warger: AER:
(aa. dare aT 49)

----- PAGE 532 -----
524 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions
TET Ca TUT: AAO HOTT CHA | TTS STMT: BHT SUT,
ware: Heftareh: are Jerre i (A. FVTte Ft 50)
Wetet Yer
aeqe tag Ure Y whe feat HoT | ate Mafia Heats ale wetter
TSSTS WAH AAT PSST WT (ALT. Fave TT 51-52)
UST wHet-
Tact Het Aerst: frat warmer | fears Heh Wet HS Yewar Wy uu
(ay. aefe af 53)
anae: afters dart tor: ae: wile yor Tevet aratscror Fae: |
fagnentt pat grb wey a ad dist g ae Rrerqut pt gerard
(af. ste +f 149-150)
Teeth: Rae det: we: LAG We Tat Wag sea
Teoh TRYST, AL YOR Tag ferranyl | Teeenatireapsadl HAT TU
aU Hoch Ue Atetet UMS vitrery | Gat fears Hea eet aaa
saytarctenat: HA yr | yee vert gy Pitarmet wu
(afr. staf af 833-836)
TATE HUTT: SPAT: | Aalst UATE he B_ra ATTA, |
Tee Ys rs Bugera | (a. adhert 37-38)
ware OF one get Aes Piet a ast wet were (BA. eae ah 156)
Varieties
(w.A. adios af 38-39)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Main useful part of Palasha

a. Mula b. Bija c. Kanda d. Niryasa
Ans: b. Bija

2. Pradhana Karma of Palasha Bija
a. Dipana b. Rechana c. Krimighna d. Medhya

Ans: c. Krimighna

----- PAGE 533 -----
3. Paste or Juice of Palasha (Butea monosperma) seed if taken with rice water,
is very useful in
a. Atisara b. Krimi c. Vibandha d. Arshas
Ans: b. Krimi

4. Palashabijadi Churna is indicated in
a. Krimi b. Klaibya c. Kasa d. Shula
Ans: a. Krimi

5. Botanical name of Palasha
a. Vitex negundo b. Butea monosperma
c. Saraca asoca d. Glycyrrhiza glabra
Ans: b. Butea monosperma

6. Kimshuka is a synonym of
a. Shalmali b. Vidari c. Palasha d. Shirisha
Ans: c. Palasha

7. Kshara Shreshtha is a synonym of

a. Palasha b. Snuhi c. Chincha d, Arka
Ans: a. Palasha

8. Samidvara is a synonym of
a. Ashwattha b. Arjuna c. Arka d. Palasha

Ans: d. Palasha

RRR KK

----- PAGE 534 -----
Pashana Bheda

Useful part — Kanda (Rhizome) / Mula (Root)

Rasadi panchaka
Kashaya Tikta (Madhura-Ra.Ni.)

Karma (Action)

Ashmaribhedana, Bastishodhaka, Arshoghna, Pramehahara, Shulahara,
Vranahara, Yoniroga nashaka, Mutrala, Pliharogahara, Dahahara and Hridrogahara.

Pharmaclogical Actions
Diuretic, Antiinflammatory, Haemostatic, Cardiotonic and Antitoxic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Snigdhaguna and Pitta Shamaka be-
cause of Kashaya Tikta and Shita virya, Kaphahara because of Kashaya tikta rasa and
Katu vipaka.

Rogaghanta (Therapeutic indications)

Ashmari, Mutrakrichra, Arshas, Prameha, Shula, Yoniroga, Pliharoga, Daha,

Hridroga and Vrana

Amayika Prayoga (Thereapeutic administration)
1. Ashmari (Calculus), & Mutrakrichra (Dysuria)
Aeateatgaydatedtrar | aft usar aa free aft: waar tt
(4.3. 57/47)
Milk boiled with Nala (Arundo donax) Ashmabheda (Bergenia ligulata), Darbha
(Desmostachya bipinnata), Ikshu (Saccharum officinarum), seeds of Trapusha (Cucumis

sativus), and Ervaruka (Cucums utilissimus) then it has to be taken with ghee. This is
efficacious in Ashmari (Calculus) and Mutra krichra (Dysuria).

----- PAGE 535 -----
Pashana Bheda 527

Matra (Dose)
Mula/Kanda churna (Powder of rhizome) -lto3g

Phytochemistry — Roots and Rhizomes contains a C-glycoside called Bergenin, B-
sitosterol, gallic acid, gallic acid, tannic acid, bergenin, amino acids-isoleucine, leucine,
methionine, phenylalanine and threonine.

Research corner

1. To rationalize the Bergenia ligulata use in kidney stones and explain the
underlying mechanisms. The crude aqueous-methanolic extract of Bergenia
ligulata rhizome (BLR) was studied using in vitro and in vivo methods. BLR
inhibited calcium oxalate (CaC(2)O(4)) crystal aggregation as well as crystal
formation in the metastable solutions and exhibited antioxidant effect against
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazy] free radical and lipid peroxidation in the in vitro.
The antiurolithic activity in Bergenia ligulata mediated possibly through
CaC(2)O(4) crystal inhibitions diuretic, hyper mageneseuric and antioxidant
effects. Bashir S, Gilani AH. Antiurolithic effect of Bergenia ligulata rhizome:
an explanation of the underlying mechanisms. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Feb
25:122(1):106-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2008.12.004. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

2. Inhibitory compound of alpha-glucosidase activity (+)-afzelechin (1), was
isolated from rhizomes of Bergenia ligulata. The structure was identified by IR,
EI-MS, (1) H and (13) C NMR spectroscopy. The ID (50) (50% inhibtion
dose) value of compound 1 was 0.13 mM. To investigate the structure-activity
relationship, (+)-afzelechin tetra acetate (2), (+)-5,7,4'-trimethoxyaf-zelechin
(3), (+)-tetramethoxyafzelechin (4), and (+)-3-acetyl-5,7,4'-trimethoxya-
fezelechin (5) as the derivatives of compound 1 were evaluated as well. Saijyo
J, Suzuki Y, Okuno Y, Yamaki H, Suzuki T, Miyazawa M. Alpha-glucosidase
inhibitor from Bergenia ligulata. J Olea Sci. 2008;57(8):431-5.

3. The action of the putatively litholytic medicinal plants Tribulus terrestris and
Bergenia ligulata on the growth of CHPD crystals was studied. The effects of
artificial reference urine (ARU) and human urine (HU), along with the plant
extracts, are also reported. Attempts were made to understand the role of these
inhibitors on urinary crystal formation. HU, ARU, extracts of B. ligulata and
T. terrestris exhibit appreciable amounts of inhibition, but B. ligulata and T.
terrestris with ARU and HU do not show inhibition at all. Joshi VS, Parekh
BB, Joshi MJ, Vaidya AD. Inhibition of the growth of urinary calcium
hydrogen phosphate dihydrate crystals with aqueous extracts of Tribulus

terrestris and Bergenia ligulata. Urol Res. 2005 May; 33(2):80-6. Epub 2005
Mar 25,

----- PAGE 536 -----
528 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Methanol water extract from rhizomes of Bergenia ligulata, a plant used in
Nepalese ethnomedicine, inhibited in vitro the replication of influenza virus in
a dose dependent manner and did not show virucidal activity at effective
concentration. Pretreatment of cells with B. ligulata extract was shown to be
most effective to prevent cell destruction. The extract inhibited viral RNA
synthesis and reduced viral peptide synthesis at 10 microg/ml. The virus
inhibitory effect is related to the presence of condensed tannins in the extract.
Rajbhandari M, Wegner U, Schopke T, Lindequist U, Mentel R. Inhibitory
effect of Bergenia ligulata on influenza virus A. Pharmazie. 2003
Apr;58(4):268-71.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name of Yoga Indications

Pashanabhedad kwath

Pashanabhedadi ghrita Vataja Ashmari
Gokshuradyavaleha Ashmari, Mutrakrichra
Pashanabheda kashaya Mutravarodha

Botanical Name — Bergenia ligulata Wall.
Bergenia — After the name of K.A. Von Bergen a German botanist.
ligulata —Strap like
Family — Saxifragaceae
Kula — Pashanabheda
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Mutra virechaniya
Sushruta Viratarvadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 184-185
Basonym of Drug
Urarat areTrtt Farrer |
The plant Pashanabheda (Berginia ligulata) breaks the stone and sprouts. It is the
best among drugs which are useful in Ashmari (Calculi).

Synonyms
1. TVAVSA-sIVH Weare Pca Brae ster | stg sree rere 1
Pashanabheda break open the ground and sprout.

----- PAGE 537 -----
Pashana Bheda §29

Regional Name

Habitat
Pashanabheda grows in Hemalayan region |

about 6,000 ft. altitude.

Morphology

Habit — Pashanabheda is much branched pe- |:
rennial herb grows 60 to 180 cm in height.

Root — Red in colour and 2 to 5 cm thick
Stem — Short thick, fleshy and procumbent.

Leaves —Ovate, 12 to 25 cm in diameter, sessile,
rounded at the apex, fringed with short hairs.

Bergenia ligulata wall.
(Pasanabheda)

Flowers — White, Pink or purple in colour and
flowering occurs in April and May. Flowers are 3 cm
in diameter forming a cymose panicle.

Fruit — Drupes, orange or red in colour.
Substitutes

1. Aerva lanata Juss — Whole herb

2. Didymocarpus pedicellatus R.Br — Root

3. Coleus amboinicus Benth — Root

4. Bergenia ciliata — Root

5. Bergenia stracheyi — Root
Controversy

Pashanaabheda is one of the most controversial drugs in Ayurveda. Different spe-
cies are used as Pashanaheda in various parts of India.

----- PAGE 538 -----
530 Dravyaguna Vijnana

SI.No. Species Region

South India (AP & Karnataka)

Rotula aquatica Lour Karnataka

Bryophyllum calicynum Salisb | Bengal

Ocimum basilicum a eer

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Transversely cut pieces of dried rhizome will be up to 6 cm long and 1 to 2 cm in
diameter. External surface is reddish brown in colour, wrinkled or irregularly shrivelled,
bearing leaf scales in the upper part and root scars below. A transversely cut portion
shows 2 to 3 mm thick bark, followed by a light coloured cambium ring and a woody
portion which surrounds a central pith. Breaking is difficult and on breaking exposes a
light brick red surface. Has characteristic faint odour, tastes bitter and astringent.

Classical references

Synonyms
UTeTaTaecn sere PRAT | (aT. elias FT 184)

Properties and Actions

ayaa Batra: Haat Aa Mera: | Neat sha SIM HOSA: I

SPaaraaeer wettest ST (aa. eitaeMe HT 184-185)

araatal fenttarn: veut, | eaereteqeraret atteyfernt: We
(aft. Teeate Gf 154)

aryaiat fener: Haat ates vier: | Yack afer StareiyeT PITA Tyw: |

areret water wttegret aoa 0 (4.Fa. sitet af 1145-1146)

ureroraat wapfercat Bef: | de eqerpege: viltetsrerfet:

(at. Weert 40)

sR framers act wentar 1 sree a arena aa: urerorsteen:

----- PAGE 539 -----
Pashana Bheda 531

marmste =o sft  oienaftegarmt «= weet axfereciifecryeraue: |
itt Pare TST: areearatiertantant states:

—_

w

~—

oo

(B.f. warqenfe at 85-86)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Pashanabheda

a. Mula b. Bija c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: a. Mula

. Ashmarighna Karma of Pashanabheda is attributed to

a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: c. Prabhava

. Important pharmacological action attributed to Pashanabheda

a. Analgesic b. Hepatoprotective c. Antidiuretic  d. Diuretic
Ans: d. Diuretic

. Main indication of Pashanabheda

a. Jwara b. Ashmari c. Atisara d. Prameha
Ans: b. Ashmari

. Pashanabhedadi Kwatha is indicated in

a. Mutrakricchra - b. Shotha c. Grahani d. Kasa
Ans: a. Mutrakricchra

. Botanical name of Pashanabheda

a. Premna integrifolia b. Plumbago zeylanica
c. Bergenia ligulata d. Asparagus racemosus
Ans: c. Bergenia ligulata

. Ashmabhedana is asynonym of

a. Pippali b. Shigru c. Punarnava d. Pashanabheda
Ans: d. Pashanabheda

. Habit of Pashanabheda plant

a. Tree b. Herb c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Herb

. South Indian substitute for Pashanabheda is

a. Gorakshaganja b. Varuna c. Punarnava d. Apamarga
Ans: a. Gorakshaganja

FoR

----- PAGE 540 -----
Chapter

Patha

Part used - Mula (Root).

Rasadi panchaka

Laghu Tikshna
Karma (Actions)

Jwaratisara, Stanyashodhana, Shulahara, Chardighna, Atisarajit, Kushthaghna,
Kandughna, Daha Shamaka, Vishaghna, Krimighna, Gulmanashaka, Vranahara,
Vrishya, Hridrogahara and Bhagna sandhanakara.

Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Muscle relaxant, Antibacterial, CNS depressant, Fungitoxic and
Antitumour activity.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Jwara, Stanyadushti, Bhagna, Shula, Chardi, Atisara, Kushtha, Kandu, Vishavikara,
Krimi, Daha, Gulma, Hridroga and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

manratet wreisyeaoray | afer. 11/5

In case of Lavana meha decoction of Patha (Cissampelos periera) and Aguru
(Aquillaria agallocha) is much beneficial.

2, Atisara (Diarrhoea)

wet fast a Meet ter aera | atta caer are SAY TANT:
(aa. fa. 2/42)

----- PAGE 541 -----
Patha 533

In case of burning sensation in Atisara (Diarrhoea) Patha (Cissamelos periera) is
triturated with curd and given internally.

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - | to 3 g

Chemical constituents - Root contains alkaloids like Hayatine & Hyatinine,
Hayatidine. Also contains quercitol, sterol and saponins.

Leaves contain Cycleanine, 1-bebeerine, Hyatidin, Hyatinin, Hayatin and d-quercitol.

Research corner

1. Study done to evaluate antiurolithic activity of alcoholic extract of roots of
Cissampelos pareira (AERGP) in chemicals induced urolithiasis in albino rats.
The rats treated with alcoholic extract of roots of C. pareira at 03 different
doses significantly (p< 0.05) reduced urinary calcium, uric acid and increased
urinary magnesium levels, reduced serum calcium, creatinine and increased
serum magnesium. Rats treated with 200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg doses revealed
less tissue damage and the cytology of the nephrotic tissue was almost similar
to normal control Group I rats. Results showed that alcoholic extract of roots
of C. pareira has exhibited a significant antiurolithic effect against urolithiasis
in experimental rats. Sayana SB1, Khanwelkar CC2, Nimmagadda VR3,
Chavan VR4, Bh R5, S NK6. Evalution of antiurolithic activity of alcoholic
extract of roots of Cissampelos pareira in albino rats. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014
Jul; 8 (7) : HCO1-4. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2014/9604.4528.

2. A study done to evaluate Cissampelos pareira (C. pareira) for in vitro
cytotoxicity and in vivo antitumor activity against Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites
(DLA) cells in Swiss mice. Methanol Extract of Cissampelos pariera (MECP)
showed a potent cytotoxic activity, with an IC50 value of 95.5 pg/ml and a
significant (P < 0.001) decrease in packed cell volume, viable cell count, and
an increased lifespan (54 and 72%). The hematological and serum biochemical
profiles were restored to normal levels in MECP-treated mice. The MECP-
treated group significantly (P < 0.001) decreased SOD, lipid peroxidation, and
CAT to normal. This study demonstrated that C. pariera exhibited significant
in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activities and that it was reasonably imputable
to its increasing endogenous mechanism of antioxidant property. Thavamani
BS1, Mathew M2, Dhanabal SP3. Anticancer activity of Cissampelos pareira
against dalton’s lymphoma ascites bearing mice. Pharmacogn Mag. 2014
Ju1;10(39):200-6. doi: 10.4103/0973 1296.137356.

----- PAGE 542 -----
“34 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. A study done to evaluate the preliminary phytochemicals of petroleum ether
and ethanolic extracts of Cyclea peltata and their diuretic activity. Preliminary
phytochemical screening reveals the presence of phytosterols and alkaloids as
major phytoconstituents in petroleum ether extract. The ethanolic extract
showed the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, diterpenes and saponins.
Pharmacological investigation revealed that ethanolic extract of C. peltata
leaves possessed significant diuretic activity in a given dose of 200 and 300
mg/kg body weight (Diuretic action 1.7 and 2.6, respectively). Whereas
petroleum ether extract has shown moderate diuresis at a dose of 300 mg/kg
body weight (Diuretic action 1.1). The present study justifies the use of C.
peltata in the Ayurvedic system of medicine as a diuretic drug. Hullatti KK1,
Gopikrishna UV, Kuppast IJ. Phytochemical investigation and diuretic activity
of Cyclea peltata leaf extracts. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Oct;2(4):241-
4. doi: 10.4103/223 1-4040.90880.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Pathadi Churna Atisara, Aruchi

Botanical Name

Cissampelos pareira Linn.

Cissampelos—Ciss means Ivy, Ameloc means vine, resembling Ivy in rambling habit
and vine.

pareira- Hairy
Family - Menispermaceae
Kula - Guduchi

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka _| Sandhaniya Varga, Jwarahara Varga, StanyaSodhana Varga

Sushruta | Aragwadhadi Gana, Ambashthadi Gana, Pippalyadi Gana, Patoladi
Gana, Brihatyadi Gana, Mustdi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi Varga

----- PAGE 543 -----
Patha §35

Basonym of Drug
Wreate aret sent aeletther, Weare KIA Ar Yorenrh carey, |
Patha (Cissampelos pareira Linn.) if used will strengthen the voice. Hence it is
always praised.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Wreftar-prfer wrest war:

Patha is seen in eastern part of India.

Morphology
2. afagafttar-a fag: Hut GaTeRISeT: |
Patha has got peltate leaves.
3. faferr-feretsferenr at feet: |
Leaves of Patha will have three or more prominent veins.
4. Wersten-Terstet dist wesc: |
Fruit of Patha will have one seed.
Properties and actions
5. aelettemeat-aeT ST FT ATTRT: |
Patha has got bitter taste and it is best among bitter drugs.
6. UrTetferent-ure Ter Vrererter Praca
Patha cure many diseases.
7. wag-araa ounda frst wate, aq ut wade a,
ALMGAMTAATT |
Patha will act as Stambhaka and also improves health of the person.
Habitat

Patha (Cissampelos pareira) is seen mainly in
Northern part of India and Rajapatha (Cyclea peltata) is
more common in South India.

Morphology
Habit - Climbing shrub.
Branches - Striate, pubescent. ;
Leaves - Peltate, 4 to 6 cm in diameter, cordate or | Cissampelos pareira Linn.

----- PAGE 544 -----
536 Dravyaguna Vijnana

truncate at the base. Petioles are long, 4 to 10 cm long,
pubescent, inserted 3 to 6 mm within the basal margin.

Flowers - Male flowers are pedicelled and seen in
axillary cymes.

Fruit - Drupe, subglobose, compressed, red on rip-
ening. Endocarp is transversely ridged.
Varieties

Ka. Ni- Twotypes : 1. Patha 2. Kuchelika

P.V. Sharma —Two types:

Cyclea peltata Linn.

1. Patha (Cissampelos pareira)

2. Raja Patha (Cyclea peltata)
Classical references
Synonyms
Wretstasistagant at ureter ureretferenr | Wenrstert Tat reat Ulfser attehHeae UI
(as. TSeafert: 191)
Properties and actions
Ueto agar dient ascent wy: | sha yeraatdgenttanegs: |
eS MAHA AI Ut (ALT. Yeeeah: 192)
uret farrateat gen feat penrgqd | wfdasrrsahre Pretagrt wer |
UlStstraneeret Heatrtseraen (ah. WSeaeat: 70-71)
uret g ager cleo eget fratear | at HErareoiaarerttareaest: |
Teraug aaa (S.A. steftreat: 678-679)
wort fret a vit amanda qe ed!
aaa uit cae vitae? wet qemfe frefateru

(af. siteftrert: 681)
Kucélika
qrateran ference targaren fear org: vanfeutt aren frrenrcnfrneyrt
(HA. steftert: 680)

urer ferent Yeo at arahtrarsaae | TT MMT Hearst aTerdanNeered,
(afr. froreanfe at: 121)

----- PAGE 545 -----
Patha 537

uraret FTA fercar meat Mary, | eet YoTsatofdperarega:

—

ge

(fr. Prorat af: 21)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Patha is

a. Patra b. Mula c. Kanda d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Mula

. Pradhana Rasa of Patha is

a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Katu d. Madhura
Ans: a. Tikta

. Main indication of Patha is

a. Kasa b. Kamala c. Jwaratisara d. Kushtha

Ans: c. Jwaratisara

. Decoction of Patha (Cissampelos periera) and Aguru (Aquillaria agallocha) is

much beneficial in
a. Udakameha b. Lavana Meha cc. Sikata Meha d. Shukra Meha

Ans: b. Lavana Meha

. Pathadi Churna is mainly indicated in

a. Atisara b. Kushtha c. Kandu d. Arshas
Ans: a. Atisara ,

. Botanical name of Patha

a. Boerhavia diffusa §_b. Desmodium gangeticum
c. Cissampelos pareira d. Centella asiatica
Ans: c. Cissampelos pareira

. Ekashtila and Ambashta are the synonyms of
a. Nagakeshara b. Guduchi c. Bhallataka d. Patha
Ans: d. Patha

Botanical source of Rajpatha

a. Cyclea peltata b. Bauhinia variegate
c. Adhatoda vasica d. Fumaria parviflora
Ans: a. Cyclea peltata

oe ie ok oR a8

----- PAGE 546 -----
Chapter

Pippali & Pippali Mula

Useful part — Phala (Fruit) & Mula (Root).
Rasadi panchaka

Tikshna Laghu Snigdha
Vi

Madura

Karma (Actions)

Dipana, Rasayana, Vrishya, Rechaka, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Jwarahara,
Kushthaghna, Pramehahara, Arshoghna, Shulanashaka.

Pippalimula (Root) — Dipana, Pachana, Pliharogahara, Gulmaghna, Krimighna,
Shwasahara.

Gajapippali — Mala vishoshaka

Saimhali pippali - Dipana, Jantughna, Shulahara, Shwasahara and
Koshthashodhaka.

Vanadi pippali — Dipana, Ruchikara
Agrya Karma

froreiiqe doteoretrareysrrarery | (FY, 25/40)

Root of Pippali (Piper longum Linn.) is Appetizer, Digestant and Carminative.
Pharmacological Actions

Fruit — Appetizer, Digestant, Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Stimulant, Diuretic, Ver-
mifuge, Rubefacient.

Root — Stimulant
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Kaphahara due to Katurasa and Vata Shamaka because of
Madhura vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indiations)
Pippali— Agnimandya, Jwara, Shwasa, Kushtha, Prameha, Arshas and Udara Shula.

----- PAGE 547 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 539

Pippali mula — Agnimandya, Gulma, Krimi, Shwasa and Pliharoga.
Gajapippali - Agnimandya
Saimhali pippali - Agnimandya, Shula, Krimi and Shwasa.
Vanadi pippali — Agnimandya, Aruchi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shula (Colic)
ftroreft sygattes setorereh Arahat, (G.s. 42/110)

Combination of Pippali (Piper longum) and Shrangavera (Zingiber officinale) is the
best remedy for Udara Shula (Colic) caused by Kapha.

2. Chardi (Vomiting)

ate: alstrdttat arreft ar fers aat u(.s. 49/32)

Pippali (Piper longum) consumed with ghee, honey and sugar is very useful in
vomiting.
3. Kasa (Cough)

USHA: HUTA Or MAES | (AAP. 12/34)

Powder of Pippali (Pipper longum) and Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum) if taken
with honey alleviates Kasa (Cough).

4. Jwara (Fever)

agyataresren at frorean ar syct fret 1 (at.8.Fa. 2/41)

Decoction prepared by Pippali (Piper longum) with four times water if taken allevi-
ates Jwara (Fever).

Pippali mula (Root)
1. Krimi Roga (Worm infestation)

frag on frortyerrargar WaT | (YS. 54/32)

Decoction prepared by Pippali mula (Root of Piper longum) should be taken with
Goat’s urine. This is effective in Krimi roga (Worm infestation).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 5 to 10 g

Phytoconstituents — Fruit yielded Piperine, Piplartine, Pipernonaline,
Piperundecalidine, n-hexadecane, n-heptadecane, n-octadecane, n-nonadecane, n-eicosane,

----- PAGE 548 -----
540 Dravyaguna Vijnana

a.-thujene, Zingiberene, P-cymene and Terpinolene. Root yielded piperine, Piperlongumine
& Piperlonguminine.

Research corner

1. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the antihyperglycemic and
antihyperlipidemic effects of Piper longum root aqueous extract (PlrAge) in
streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats. During the short term study the
aqueous extract at a dosage of 200 mg/kg.b.w. was found to possess significant
antidiabetic activity after 6 h of the treatment. The administration of aqueous
extract at the same dose for 30 days in STZ induced diabetic rats resulted in
a significant decrease in FBG levels with the corrections of diabetic
dyslipidemia compared to untreated diabetic rats. Sheik Abdul Nabi 1, Ramesh
Babu Kasetti2, Swapna Sirasanagandlal, Thandaiah Krishna Tilak1, Malaka
Venkateshwarulau Jyothi Kumar 3 and Chippada Appa Raol* Antidiabetic
and antihyperlipidemic activity of Piper longum root aqueous extract in STZ
induced diabetic rats. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2013,
13:37.

2. Bioactivity guided fractionation concludes that Piperine is the only active
ingredients in various fractions of fruit extract evaluated for antibacterial
activity. Fraction having piperine has significant activity against multi drug
resistant strains of Mycobacterium spp. than other purified fractions of fruit
extract. The current finding encourages us to develop new alternative medicine
that includes piperine alone and/or in combination with other drugs to fight
against the drug residence among Mycobactrial strains. Chandan Singh,
Santosh Kumar Singh, Gopal Nath, N P Rai. Anti-mycobacterial activity of
Piper longum L, fruit extracts against multi drug resistant Mycobacterium Spp-
International Journal of Phytomedicine. Vol 3. No. 3 (2011).

. 28 compounds with high purity were obtained and their structures were
comprehensively charactrised by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry
(ESI-MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The results
demonstrate that the 2D NPLCxRPLC method with good orthogonality
(58.3%) was effective for the preparative separation and purification of amide
alkaloids from Piper longum L. Kuiyong Lia, Wenya zhu,a Qing, Fu,@
Yanxiong Ke,a Yu Jin*a and Xinmiao Liang*a Purification of amide alkaloids
from Piper longum L. using preparative two-dimensional normalphase liquid
chromatography x reversed-phase liquid chromatography Analyst.

Ww

----- PAGE 549 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 541

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Indications

Name of Yoga
Pippalyadyasava
Pippalighrata Kshayaja kasa

Pipal vt
Pippali khanda
Pippalipaka

Pippalyadya taila Arshas, Udarashula

Grahani, Gulma

Pippalyadya loha Hikka, Shwasa

Botanical Name — Piper longum Linn.

Piper —Pepri (Greek) or Pippal (Derived from Sanskrit names).

longum — Long
Family - Piperaceae
Kula - Pippali kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kasahara varga, Kanthya varga, Hikkanigrahana varga,

Asthapanopaga varga, Triptighna varga, Shirovirechanopaga varga,
Dipaniya varga, Shulaprashamana varga, Shitaprashamana varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 53-65

Basonym of Drug

frat urerate you yreter or after, emreterter
Pippali (Piper longum) increases depleted Dhatu (Tissues) and acts as Rasayana
(Rejuvenative).

Synonyms
Habitat
1. Arreft-wTery aT |

----- PAGE 550 -----
542 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pippali is abunduntly available in Magadha deéa.
2. degt-fresy var |
Pippali is very common in Videha deéa.
3, SARC HEAT SAT WaT ATTA |
Pippali grows near or along side of water streams.
Morphology
4, HOM-HMTHA, Teh Alt HEMT Tear, ATT HOTT eT |
Fruit of Pippali is red in colour on ripening but turns to black once it is dried.
5. BUT- HUTA |
Fruits of Pippali are small berries.
6. vlog - usta weraeT |
Pippali fruits are adhered to solid fleshy which resembles an elephant’s trunk.
Properties and Actions
7. BON-Tatet TH AAA HEAT |
Pippali has got pungent taste, if taken causes burning sensation in tongue.
8. CALC-HeraTET |
Pippali has got pungent taste, if taken causes burning sensation in tongue.
9. chenrcrgen dteuretagen Stsrerea: |

Seeds of Pippali are spicy.
10. CARATS MTT VAT TTT TCE
Pippali is very useful drug which cures many diseases.

Regional Name
Habitat
Pippali plant is cultivated in Bengal, Bihar, Assam and Tamilnadu.

----- PAGE 551 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 543

Morphology
Habit — Ascending or prostrate climber.
Root stock — Erect, thick, jointed branched.

Stem —Numerous, stout, 60 to 90 cm, cylindrical, thick-
ened above the nodes, finely pubescent.

Leaves — 6 to 9 cm long, lower leaves are broadly
ovate, very cordate with broad rounded lobes at base, up-
per-ones oblong oval, cordate at base, all subacute, entire,
glabrous, thin, bullate with reticulated venation sunk above
and dull beneath, petiole of lower leaves 5 to 7.5 cm where
as lower leaves are very short. Stipules are 1 cm long, mem-
branous, lanceolate.

Inflorescence — Spike, pedunculate. Male inflorescence is slender with narrow bracts.
Female inflorescence is 1 to 2.5 cm long, bracts are circular and flat.

Fruit — Small, ovoid and completely sunk in solid fleshy spike which is 2.5 to 4cm
long, and blackish green in colour.

ey y
SX

Piper longum (Pippali)

Varieties
Ra.Ni-4types 1. Pippali
2. Gajapippali
3. Simhali pippali
4. Vanadi pippali
Adulternants - Piper peepuloides Roxb.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Big variety Pippali has straight blunt spikes of grayish brown colour measuring 3 to
4 cm in length and up to 8 mm in diameter. The spike is composed of minute baccate fruits
closely packed around a common axis. The spikes are often supported by a short stalk.
Easily breaks, has got very strong and spicy odour, taste is pungent.

Short variety is less than 2 cm long and up to 5 mm in diameter, having a rough
beady surface with dark brown or greenish black colour. It has got strong and spicy
odour.

Root — Transversely cut pieces of root is 0.5 to 1 cm thick, sometimes branched in
Zigzag fashion. On breaking becomes short pieces or powdery. Odour is characteristic
and very strong and taste is pungent.

----- PAGE 552 -----
S44 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
Teoreft-
ftoreft arreft om Sedt ae HoT | Seer vio eater areas ATS CAT ti
aise: wets eg SITS (AT. Aiteae TT 53)
Propet Wer
Uirek Racha wens: (a. Kaas at 64)
Properties and Actions
frorctt dust qe eargure Tare | argo agent ferret arersetoHEtt TY:
frei tert ePa areata | Heute yours: wheeerararTary |
anat arayer Raver efttem wept ye: | rent ar g gent frente
fret negra Besant | srercrasarett ger aearsfratest 1
ahiststrard ow great weft 1 aranivietrarmeangepirrrgd
faqu: froasitqoig aster resi rat: (Ae. ives TT 54-58)
frorett yA-
amectaqrret pitraraararrey tl (as. Siete aT 64-65)
ftroreft mean earefeer feren Breer | Teter a Tart
(afr. magne at 74)
wou froretyst yeror UA | aiifeottent sha HaatewdttersHed,
(oF. magenie at 76)
ferorcarrat fer ett caret Rarer aeATaT | ESAT AE: PATS UTCRT ENO TA HE?
wmrada wear aT gen wart i diodt urett cer frac array Ul
Peta moneaeitectis seta | denier sara sere eres
Sreamarenrepate fret wha a Peroreh 1 attorney AAA Weare ATTA TAT
(af. atteft af 1166-1169)
ftrorett -
ftroreft sarer ger Rearetromt Hefercnent taht ARNT HTT SLOT aTATTRTN
(afr. frorenfa at 13)

----- PAGE 553 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 545

Tle He a war Heeger | aera areata erareratferahes st
(aA. froreanfe af 15)

dech ageom a aged det oe | aware edtatt wet araviertt 1
(a.FA. froreante af 18)

arte fort -

aattrorefter atent cteom wear a cost | Seat wergUTEN YF Year ASTON STAT
(a.P. froreate +f 20)

froretige -

went firorefiqge seterpfiterre t det arathret thet firrentary
(aft. fracas +f 23)

frre aeaceh SI HIN YF HUA We | Hct Yes HEH Yereatost UTA Il
amarrany arefeg a reat t ada yattor feat gq ward i
cect aftr Te erates HET Ae HettOoTT | MeTTaAT TATRA Halo fore
(BAA. faoreanfe aT 1-3)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful parts of Pippali

a. Stem b. Fruit & Root c. Exudate d. Flower

Ans: b. Fruit & Root
2. Vipaka of Pippali is

—

a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

3. Pradhana Karma of Pippali
a. Dipana b. Shothahara c. Arshoghna d. Virechaka
Ans: a. Dipana

4. Main indication of Pippali is
a. Arshas b. Shotha c.Agnimandya_ d. Ashmari

Ans: c. Agnimandya

----- PAGE 554 -----
546

Dravyaguna Vijnana

LL LLBRBDBDLLLLLLLLLLLLLL LLL LCCC,
Powder of Pippali (Pipper longum) and Kantakari (Solanum xanthocerpum), if

5.

taken with honey alleviates

a. Kasa b. Ajirna c. arshas
Ans: a. Kasa
. Pippalyadyasava is specifically indicated in
a. Amlapitta b. Udarashula c. Grahani
Ans: c. Grahani
. Botanical name of Pippali
a. Piper nigrum b. Piper lomgum
c. Piper cubeba d. Piper retrofractum
Ans: b. Piper lomgum
. Magadhi & Tikshna Tandula are the synonyms of
a. Maricha b. Nirgundi c. Vidanga
Ans: d. Pippali
. Habit of Pippali plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Climber

Ans: c. Climber

sR RR

d. Shotha

d. Jwara

d. Pippali

d. Shrub

----- PAGE 555 -----
Punarnava

[aoa eneneeeieeneeeinnniieniaiaaae”

Useful part - Mula (Root) or Panchanga (Whole plant)

Vipaka

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Rakta punarnava ~— Grahi, Shophanashaka, Pandughna

Shweta punarnava — Dipana, Shophahara, Pandughna, Bradnahara, Udara roga
hara, Kasahara, Hridroga shamaka, Shulahara, Vishahara.

Nila punarnava — Rasayana, Hridrogahara, Pandughna, Shwayathuhara,
Shwasahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Stomatic, Laxative, Expectorant, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Rakta punarnava — Pitta Kaphanashaka

Pittahara due to Shita virya and Tikta rasa and Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and
Tikta rasa.

Shweta punarnava — Vatakaphanashaka

Vatahara becaue of Ushna virya and Kaphanashaka due to Ushna virya, Katu
vipaka and Katu Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Rakta punarnava — Shopha and Pandu

Shweta punarnava - Shopha, Pandu, Bradna, Kasa, Udara, Hridroga, Shula and
Visha vikara.

Nila punarnava — Hridroga, Pandu, Shwayathu and Shwasa.

----- PAGE 556 -----
548 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shotha (OQedema)

TAAAMER RTT Wea eft: Tees ATA | (a.FA. 12/23)

Paste is prepared from Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa), Nagara (Zingiber officinale)
and Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is taken with 640 ml of milk in case of Shotha (Oedema).

2. Ashmari (Calculus)

autsy firegta ar 1 (9.f8. 7/26)

Milk cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) is very useful in Ashmari (Calcu-
lus).

3. Rakta Shthivana (Haemoptysis)

ut trata cenerfertugeechey | Teste free fires MaTTT ATA:
(a.fa. 11/2626)

Red variety of rice is cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) powder, sugar,
juice of Draksha (Vitis vinifera), milk and ghee should be taken internally in case of
Raktashthivana (Haemoptysis).

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) —10to 20 ml
Kwatha (Decoction) -40to 80 ml

Phytoconstituents — Punarnava contains Punarnavine an alkaloid, Punarnavoside,
g-sitosterol, Tetracosanoic, Hexacosanoic, Stearic acids, Hentriacontane, Ursolic acid,
Mysristic acid, Oxalic acid, Potassium nitrate and Asparagine.

Research corner

1. Punarnavine, a quinolizidine alkaloid isolated from Boerhvia diffusa is known
to possess analgesic, anti-inflammatory, hepato-protective, immunomodulatory
and anti-proliferative properties. Anti-angiogenic effects and mechanisms of
Punarnavine is examined in vitro and in vivo. Punarnavine (15mg/kgbw/d)
treatment showed dose-dependent decrease in the ascitic fluid volume by
60.94% and tumour volume by 86.40% in Ehrlich ascites model. Reduction in
peritoneal angiogenesis with punarnavine treatment suggests the anti-
angiogenic activity of punarnavine. Saraswati S, Alhaider AA, Agrawal SS.
Punarnavine, an alkaloid from Boerhaavia diffusa exhibits anti-angiogenic
activity via down regulation of VEGF in vitro and in vivo. Chem Biol Interact.
2013 Sep 20. pii: S0009-2797(13)00232-9. doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2013.09.007.

----- PAGE 557 -----
Punarnava 549

te

. Five new (2,3,5,7 and 9) and four known rotenoids (1,4,6 and 8) were isolated
from a methanol extract of Boerhaavia diffusa roots. The structures of the new
rotenoids were elucidated by spectroscopic data interpretation. The 70%
ethanol extract, a reotenoid-rich fraction, and all isolated rotenoids were
evaluated for their COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitory activities. Boeravinone B (6)
exhibited significant anti-inflammatory activity (56.6% at 50 mg./kg) when
evaluated in an in vivo carrageenan-induced rat paw model. Bairwa K, Singh
IN, Roy SK, Grover J, Srivastava A, Jachak SM. Rotenoids from Boerhaavia
diffusa as potential Anti-inflammatory Agents. J. Nat. Prod. 2013 Aug
23;76(8):1393-8. doi; 10.1021/np 300899w. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

The present study was designed to investigate the ameliorating effect of
aqueous extract of B. diffusa rotos (BDBDE extract was found to possess a
high total phenolic content and exhibited significant free radicals scavenging
activity. E) in hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury. The present
study reveals that antioxidant activity of BDE significantly protects against
hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury in urolithiasis. Pareta
hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury in urolithiasis. Pareta Sk,
Patra, KC, Mazumder PM, Sasmal D. Aqueous extract of Boerhaavia diffusa
root ameliorates ethylene glycol-induced hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and
renal injury in rat kidney. Pharm Biol. 2011 oxidative stress and renal injury
in rat kidney. Pharm Biol. 2011 Dec; 49(12):1224-33. doi: 10.3109/
13880209.2011.581671. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

4. The present study evaluates the efficacy of ethanolic extract of Boerhaavia
diffusa L (BD) administered orally at a dose of 500mg/kg body weight for a
period of 30 days to alloxanized diabetic rats and its efficacy compared with
the standard hypocalcaemic drug metformin. Administration of BD not only
maintained renal Na+-K+ ATPase activity but also significantly minimized
diabetic hypercalcaemia. Singh PK, Baxi D, Doshi A, Ramachandran AV.
Antihyperglycaemic and renoprotective effect of Boerhaavia diffusa L. in
experimental diabetic rats. J. Complement Integr Med. 2011 Jan; 8, doi:
10.2202/1553-3840.1533.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No

Ww

Indications

Name of Yoga

Punarnavadi kwatha Vidradhi
Punarnavadi guggulu Shotha, Pandu

----- PAGE 558 -----
550 Dravyaguna Vijnana
Punarnavashtaka kwatha
Punarnavadi taila Shotha, Pandu

Punarnavadi mandura
Punarnavasava

Punarnavadyarishta
Botanical Name — Boerhavia diffusa Linn.
Boerhavia — Name of a discoverer.
diffusa — Which spreads on ground
Family — Nyctaginaceae
Kula — Punarnava kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Kasahara varga, Vayasthapana varga, Swedopaga varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta Vidarigandhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 231-233

Basonym of Drug
addf qatar safe, iter pata aarchtfet
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) regenerates in rainy season and it regenerates the
body as well if it is used.
Synonyms
Habitat

1. aaty-aatat adat gastactiter |

Punarnava is a perennial plant gets regenerated during rainy season.

2. Wraarauft-wrgecnret gastater ster

Punarnava plant regenerates during rainy season.

3. adehg-ad add charata qererciter
Punarnava regenerates in Varsa ritu (Rainy season) hence it indicates the
season.

Morphology
4. AAT At EMT |

----- PAGE 559 -----
Punarnava 551

Punarnava root is white in colour.
S. feyrren:~ forget: yar are |
The Punarnava plant spreads on the ground.
6. THATST-Tth HUVSARM: |
The stem of Punarnava is reddish in colour.
7. WUseafrear-AvSet GAA TANT: |
Leaves of Punarnava are round in shape.
8. -Tth YAM: |
Flowers of Punarnava are red in colour
Properties and Actions
9. Merett-yitet eft
Punarnava reduces oedema.
10. Rraftan-Rrarea aearorrearetawrarchtter |

Punarnava plant always does well if-used.

Regional Name

Habitat
Punarnava grows commonly in waste places as
a weed throughout India.
Morphology
Habit — Annual herb

Stem — Prostrate or ascending glabrous stem
with distinct swollen nodes, stem is diffusely branched.
Leaves — Opposite, unequal, exstipulate, simple,
ovate with rounded or cordate base, margin is entire, Boerhavia diffusa Linn.
apex is obtuse, dorsal surface is green and lower sur- (Punarnava)
face is silvery white in colour.

----- PAGE 560 -----
552 Dravyaguna Vijnana

PA

Inflorescence — Flowers crowded in heads at the end of long slender stalks forming
terminal panicle.

Flowers — Bracteate, small, minute, red in colour, perianth lobes are 5, pink in colour,
gamophyllous, stamens are 2 to 3 in number, slightly exerted, Gynoecium is
Monocarpellary, Ovary is unilouclar, superior with single basal ovule.

Fruit — A clavate and 5-ribbed achene.
Varieties
Acc to Bh.Pr.Ni, Dh.Ni and Ka.De.Ni - 2 types
1. Shweta punarnava (Trianthema portulacastrum)
2. Rakta punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Acc to Raja Nighantu - 3 types
1. Shweta punarnava =. 2. Rakta punarnava 3. Nila punarnava

Substitue
Boerhavia repanda Willd.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Roots will be 30 cm or more long, 0.5 to 1.5 cm thick, stout, tapering, somewhat
knotty and twisted. Roots often crowned with stem bases. Outer surface is brown in
colour, finely striated longitudinally. Peeled off surface of the root will be creamish in
colour. A transversely cut portions of the root shows a thin bark, followed by a yellowish
white cortical region and a central woody portion. On breaking root becomes fibrous,
odour is characteristic and taste is slightly bitter. .

Classical references

Synonyms

meagan

Qatar sergen oat Hetatsrear | (AT. Wee FT 231)

Teyay-

Gatarsar ter teegea Rrenfeer 1 weet gaaatsyecticng: afaccre:
(A. WSeae GT 232)

Properties and Actions

gaqatar- :

we ama wegedt dot ar 1 vitae ceded |
(ae, Weare TT 231)

----- PAGE 561 -----
Punarnava 553

Tega

Gadarseur ferrar agate fear ey: | Arete afer seronfirercenferforst
(an. Tees at 233)

daqar-

gadar wager freer War HHT | Avie UT ATCHTAAreeTAA, |
(aft. Tene TH 265)

RHRr-

vet Gadar ferret afte wear 1 cameretaedt ureter
(aft. yee at 267)

grat

aatypiene ferent Hare aaeeat EAT | areroore arett Ba MAT Te HATTT
GEN SEM Walaa gay (a. stat at 753-754)
aloe ( Saqatat )-

waloeota fart fark fore Heh ory | Soret arate T
(fA. atsft af 756)

Hagaar-

Jat Garter atom freer seaferaraer | HIST UToSyiT eye
(afr. Were at 116)

THya-

THT farvar erftuft staat 1 ceyateterett ung firwafest u
(aA. Werfe aT 120)

sreagatan-

stern qatar ferret Bevo a Tare | EAT WG aay ATT ATT HTHTTRT
(aft, were at 122)

Get Ff wieetaeha UIy HTT: | LATTA, 5] Te BAT Ml
(BAY. erargsafe eT 153)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Important useful part of Punaranava
a. Stem b. Root c. Fruit d. Seed
Ans: b. Root

----- PAGE 562 -----
554 Dravyaguna Vijnana

SS
2. Pradhana Karma attributed to Punarnava
a. Jwaraghna b. Stambhana c. Shothaghna  d. Arshoghna
Ans: c. Shothaghna
3. Important Pharmacological action attributed to Punarnava
a. Diuretic b. Antidiuretic c. Antidiabetic d. Analgesic
Ans: a. Diuretic

4. As per Sushruta milk cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) is very
useful in

a. Atisara b. Ashmari c. Arshas d. Kasa
Ans: b. Ashmari
5. Punarnavine an alkaloid present in
a. Shigru b. Jambu c. Aragwadha — d. Punarnava
Ans: d. Punarnava
6. Botanical name of Punarnava
a. Bauhinia variegata __b. Allium sativum
c. Boerhavia diffusa  d. Boswellia serrata
Ans: c. Boerhavia diffusa
7. Varshabhu and Shothaghni are the synonyms of
a. Kakamachi b. Punarnava c. Lajjalu  d. Bhumyamalaki
Ans: b. Punarnava
8. Botanical name of Shweta Punarnava
a. Trianthema portulacastrum b. Boerhavia diffusa
c. Butea monosperma d. Achyranthes bidentata
Ans: a. Trianthema portulacastrum

ae 2k ak

----- PAGE 563 -----
Rasna

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Patra (Leaf) and Panchanga (whole plant)

Rasadi panchaka
Vipaka Katu
Karma (Actions)
Shophahara, Shwasahara, Vatashulahara, Kasahara, Jwarahara, Vishahara,
Sidhmahara, Pachaka.
Agrya Karma
TET STO | (FZ, 25/40)
Raasna (Pluchea lanceolata Oliver & H.) best for Vatvyadhi (Diseases of Vata).

Pharmacological Actions
Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Antibacterial
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Kaphahara due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Shopha, Shwasa, Kasa, Shula, Jwara, Sidhma, Agnimandya,
Vishavikara, Amavata.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatvyadhi (Disorders of Vata)
WEN Atte | (4.9, 25/40)

Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) Churna (Powder) or Kwatha (Decoction) is useful and
best in case of Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata).

2. Vatarakta (Gouty arthritis)

----- PAGE 564 -----
556 Dravyaguna Vijnana

seer wutyearonint = eitemennt | fern (4.41. 23/6)

In case of Vatarakta (Gout) the decoction prepared from Rasna (Plucheq lanceolar,
or Alpinia calcarata), Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) and Chaturangula (Cassig fisty la
is taken with Eranda (Ricinus communis) Taila (Oil).

3. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)
wat [eats gaara aeleeny | free watet art aa weafterssry
(3.71. 25/6)

Decoction prepared from Rasna (Alpinia calcarata). Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Eranda (Ricinus communis), Devadaru (Cedrus deodara) and Mahoushadha (Zingiber
officinale) is very effective in case of Amavata affecting joints, bones and bone marrow,

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 60 ml
Churna (Powder) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Pluchea lanceolata — Pluchine, Betain hydrochloride, Taraxasterol, i and g-sito-
sterol, flavone glycoside, Quercitin and isorhamnetin,

Alpinia calcarata ~ Green rhizomes contain 0.6% to 1.5 % of volatile oil. The oil
contains methyl cinnamate (48%), Cineole (25%) Camphor and Pinene. It also contains
resin, pungent galangol, alpinol, yellow crystalline substances known as galangin.

Research corner

1. To evaluate antimalarial and safety profile of Pluchea lanceolata : an in-vitro,
in-vivo for its ethno-pharmacological validation. Hexane extract and TxAc
showed promising antimalarial activity in-vitro and in-vivo condition. TxAC
attributed in inhibition of the pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as affroad to
significant increase in the blood glucose and haemoglobin level when
compared with vehicle treated infected mice. Mohanty S, Srivastaa P, Maurya
AK, Cheema HS, Shanker K, Dhawan S, Darokar MP, Bawankule DU.
Antimalarial and safety evaluation of Pluchea lanceolata (DC.) Oliv. & Hiern:
In-vitro and in-vivor study. J, Ethnophar-macola. 2013 Oct 7;149(3):797-802.
doi: 10,1016/j.jep. 2013.08.003. Epub 2013 Aug 14,

2. To investigate the immunosuppressive potential of Pluchea lanceolata 50%
ethanolic extract (PL) and its bioactive chloroform fraction (PLC). Oral
administration of PL at dosess of 50 to 800 mg/kg in mice, with sheep red
blood cells (SRBC) as an antigen, inhibited both humoral and cell-mediated

----- PAGE 565 -----
Rasna 557

immune responses, as evidenced by the production of the circulating antibody
titer and delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction results, respectively, and the
immune suppression was statistically significant (P<0.01) in Balb/C mice. The
findings reveal that P. Lanceolata causes immunosuppression by inhibiting
Th1 cytokines. Bhagwat DP, Kharya MD, Bani S, Kaul A, Kour K, Chauhan
PS, Suri KA, Satti NK. Immunosuppressive properties of Pluchea lanceolata
leaves. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2010 Feb; 42(1):21-6. doi: 10.4103/0253-
7613.62405.

3. Oral pre-treatment with Pluchea lanceolata extract at doses of 100 and 200 mg
kg-l for 7 consective days before CdC12 intoxication caused a significant
reduction in malanodialdehyde formation and xanthine oxidanse activity
(P<0.001). A significant restoration of the activity of antioxidant defence
system enzymes such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase (P<0.05), glutathione-
S-transferase and glutathione reductase (P<0.001) was observed. Jahangir T,
Khan TH, Prasad L, Sultana S. Pluchea lanceolata attenuates cadmium
chloride induced oxidative stress and gentoxicity in Swiss albino mice. J.
Pharm Pharmacol. 2005 Sep; 57(9):1199-204.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo:

Indications

Name of Yoga

Rasnadi kwatha Vataja jwara
tava, Shi

Rasnadashamula kwatha Arditavata, ShiraShula

Rasnadilepa Vatarakta
Rasna panchakam Amavata, Sandhigata Vata

Botanical Name — Pluchea lanceolata DC., Alpinia calcarata Roscoe

Alpinia — Alpini-Italian botanist

Family —Zingiberaceae — Alpinia calcarata
Rosacoe, Asteraceae- Pluchea lanceolata DC.
Kula - Haridra kula — Alpinia calcarata,

Bhringaraja kula — Pluchea lanceolata

----- PAGE 566 -----
558 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Anuvasanopaga varga, Vayasthapana varga
Sushruta Arkadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Hariakyadi varga 162-164

Basonym of Drug
TTT STA HUH ATA SAM UTA THT | AST AS area MATA TAT: Seer
Rasna plant is always praised owing to its Kapha vatahara properties. This is the
best drug for Shotha (Swelling) etc. diseases.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Terran ga AUTEM: |
Leaves of Rasna (Alpinia officinarum) resemble leaves of Cardamomum.
Properties and Actions
2. TEN-TH AY: BT TET |
The taste of Rasna is very pleasant.
3. Oem Tal-Aet Tal AEM: |
Plant has full of juices.
4. QV-Gy Wet GET AT |
The odour of Rasna is very pleasant.
5. QRal-Yy Tae: eer
The juice has good qualities.
6. Seret-srfereres werent aetareratatg ste sere |
Rasna is regarded as the best drug for Vataroga.
Other
7. Apelt-aqerrat Fa Praca, |
Rasna is liked by Mungoose.

Regional Name

English Lesser galanga
Hing [Rasen |

----- PAGE 567 -----
Rasna 559

Rasna, Chikkadumparasme

Habitat

Alpinia calcarata (South Indian Variety) grows very commonly in Karnataka, Kerala
and Andhrapradesh.

Pluchea lanceolata (North Indian Variety) grows in Punjab and states having
Gangetic plain.
Morphology
Pluchea lanceolata
Habit — An erect undershrub
Stem — Slender, terete, softly ashy pubescent
Branches — Slender, terete softly pubescent.

Leaves — Sessile, coriaceous, 2 to 7 cm long and
0.5 to 1 cm oblong or oblanceolate, obtuse, narrowed
at the base, finely ashy pubescent on both sides, entire
margin. Main nerves are prominent.

Inflorescence — Heads in compound corymb.

Involucre — Contracted at the mouth. Outer
bracts are 2 to 3 seriate, oblong, obtuse, pubescent usually tinged with purple the inner
most bracts are linear, subacute and few.

Fruit - Achene
Morphology
Alpinia calcarata
Habit — Root stock is perennial, not tuberous.
Stem — Stem is slender, 60 to 120 cm high,

Leaves ~ 15 to 30 cm long, 2.5 to 5 cm wide,
lanceolate, acuminate, green and glossy.

Inflorescence - Panicle, 7.5 to 10 cm long.

Flowers — Numerous, Calyx tube is funnel

shaped, 6 to 8 mm long, corolla segments 1-3 m long. (Rasna)
Lip is 2.5 to 4 cm long, ovate-oblong, sessile, yellow

----- PAGE 568 -----
560 Dravyaguna Vijnana

in colour, streaked with purple veins.

Fruit — Capsule, globose and red on ripening.
Varieites

Ra.Ni. — 3 types

1. Mula Rasna — Rauwolfia serpentina

2. Patra Rasna — Lochnera rosea

3. Trina Rasna — Vanda tessellata

Controversy — Rasna is one of the controversial drugs in Ayurveda. Various spe-
cies are used as Rasna.

Plant name Family |

Solanaceae

Rauwolfia serpentina Benth
: Lochnera rosea Reichb.
10. Enicostema littorale Blume

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Pluchea lanceolata —Rootis cylindrical, some what irregularly bent or twisted, root
is upto 21 cm long and 3 to 4cm in diameter. Outer surface is covered with a dark brown
thick bark having longitudinal striations and transverse cuts. The bark peels off at a num-
ber of places, exposing a fibrous, creamish tissue. On breaking becomes fibrous, has got
spicy odour and tastes bitter.

Alpinia calcarata

The rhizomes are reddish brown externally and light orange brown internally. Hav-
ing a characteristic odour, aromatic. Rhizomes are about 2 to 8 cm in length and 2 cm in
thickness. Rhizome is irregularly branched and marked with fine annulations. Rhizomes
are tough becomes fibrous on breaking.

----- PAGE 569 -----
Rasna 561

Classical references

Synonyms
WET FRAT TAT Yaar TAT TAT | Tealf ae great Bren ser aa
(arm. eerie FT 162)

Properties and Actions

Tessa fra ROT aaa | Maa ATT |

HATA AAT eraicrenreT ATE UA. SeTMe TAT 163-164)

Tet yes fereaen Rrrararet sarah, | vitae HM ITTeT UTA
(aft. Teme TT 261)

Tren free Joost arate | reba viewers core ferrsTs,

Renvtamannerartgyetentar = i (FF. atefrert 1043-10)

TEA TRA Pereat oO PTAA, | RATT STAT OTT AT
(afr. frorenfe FT 82)

TAT araerser ferrater sama | aU arerorfereersaTeT
(B.A. MTEMe TT 165)

Varieties
wen g Beer wheat yet wat Gor tar | HAT Actact AS TOT AT ALAAT I
(af. frorenfe FT 81)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Agrya Karma attributed to Rasna as per Charaka
a. Dipana b. Vatahara c. Pachana d. Shothahara
Ans: b. Vatahara
2. A chemical constituent Pluchine is present in

a. Rasona b. Rohitaka c. Rasna d. Nirgundi
Ans: c. Rasna

3. Rasna Saptaka Kwatha is indicated
a. Prishtha Shula b. Jwara c. Shotha d. Ajirna

Ans: a. Prishtha Shula

----- PAGE 570 -----
562

wm

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Botanical name of Rasna

a. Azadirachta indica _b. Ferula foetida
c. Crocus sativus d. Pluchea lanceolata
Ans: d. Pluchea lanceolata

. Elaparni is a synonym of

a. Ela b. Sudarshana c. Rasna
Ans: c. Rasna

. Shreyasi and Sugandha are the synonyms of

a. Rasona b. Palasha c. Ela
Ans: d. Rasna

. Botanical source of South Indian Rasna

a. Amomum subulatum b. Alpinia calcarata
c. Embelia ribes d, Allium sativum
Ans: b. Alpinia calcarata

. Types of Rasna as per Raja Nighantu

a. 4 b. 5 c. 3
Ans: c. 3

2h OK A KK

d. Palandu

d. Rasna

d. 7

----- PAGE 571 -----
Chapter

Rasona

Useful part — Mula (Bulb)

Rasadt pancaka

Katu Madhura Lavana Tikta Kashaya

Guna Tikshna Snigdha, Guru, Sara
ee

Ushiia

Notes — 5 tastes are present in different parts of the plant.

Madhura rasa Bija (Seed)

itr

Karma (Action)

Rasona — Brimhana, Vrishya, Pachana, Bhagnasandhanakara, Kanthya, Balya,
Varnya, Netrya, Rasayana, Hridroga hara, Jwaraghna, Shulaghna, Vibandha hara,
Ruchikara, Gulmaghna, Kasahara, Shophahara, Arshoghna, Kushthaghna, Jantughna,
Shwasahara, Medhya, Hikkanigrahana, Mehaghna, Switranashaka.

Mahakanda — Hridrogahara, Jirnajwarahara, Snulahara, Vibandhahara,
Gulmaghna, Ruchikara, Shophaghna, Arshoghna, Kushthghna, Dipana and Jantughna.

Shweta rasona — Atibalya, Vrishya, Medhya, Swarya, Varnya, Netrya,
Bhagnasandhanakara.

Rakta rasona — Jirna jwarahara, Hridroga nashaka, Shulaghna, Vibandhahara,
Ruchikara, Sophahara, Arshoghna, Kushthaghna and Jantughna.

Agrya Karma

TY: WAAL | (BL.ES. 40)
Lashuna (Allium sativum) is best in Vaata Vyadhi.

----- PAGE 572 -----
564 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pharmacological Actions

Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Expectorant, Stimulant, Disinfectant, Anthelmintic and
Rubefacient.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Regaghuata (Therapeutic indications)

Rasona—Karshya, Klaibya, Agnimandya, Bhagna, Dourbalya, Varnya, Netra roga,
Hridroga, Jwara, Kukshi Shula, Aruchi, Vibandha, Gulma, Kasa, Shwasa, Shopha,
Arshas, Kushtha, Jantuvikara, Hikka and Shwitra.

Mahakanda — Hridroga, Jirnajwara, Shula, Vibandha, Gulma, Aruchi, Shopha,
Arshas, Kushtha, Agnimandya and Jantuvikara.

Shweta rasona —Dourbalya, Klaibya, Swarabheda, Vaivarnya, Netra vikara and
Bhagna.

Rakta rasona—Jirna jwara, Hridroga, Shula, Vibandha, Aruchi, Shopha, Arshas,
Kushtha and Jantu.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatvyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

TEACH: TANT | (MI. 2/5/7)

The paste of Rasona (Allium sativum) is mixed with Tila taila (Oil of Sesamum
indicum) is very useful in all kinds of Vatavyadhi.
2. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)

vata fea Prfostecrerarerteer: Prete (.5.Fe. 26/39)

Decoction of Rasona (Allium sativum), Vishwa (Zingiber officinalis) and Nirgundi
(Vitex negundo) is efficacious in Amavata.
3. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

TST HAT WIT TATA | (*FH. 3/304)

Rasona (Allium sativum) mixed with oil should be taken internally before having
food.

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Kalka(Paste) -—2to5g

----- PAGE 573 -----
Rasona 565

Phytoconstituents

Garlic bulbs contain 29% of Carbohydrates, 56% of protiens (Albumin), 0.1% of
fat, Mucilage, 0.1% of volatile oil. It also contains phosphorus, iron and copper. Volatile
oil contains allyl propyl disulphide, diallyl disulphide, alliin and alliun.

Research corner

1. Garlic (Allium sativum) products tested against a major aquarium pathogen,
Gyrodactylus turnbulli, infecting the guppy (Poecilia reticulata). All garlic
products significatly reduced parasite mean survival time in vitro, from 13h to
<ih. In fully randomised trials, the number of parasites was also significantly
reduced on infected fish exposed to garlic from different sources. Schelkle B,
Snellgrove D, Cable J. In vitro and in vivo efficacy of garlic compounds
against Gyrodactylus turnbulli infecting the guppy (Poecilia reticulate). Vet
Parasitol. 2013 Sep 6. pii: S0304-4017(13)00490-1. doi: 10.1016/j
vetpar.2013.08.027.

2. This study was aimed to find out whether garlic preparation (Allium sativum L)
has ameliorative effects on gentamicin nephrotoxicity. Serum creatinine and
BUN levels were significantly high in the gentamicin group (Group 2) after the
experiment. However, the levels of these parameters in group 3 (co-treatment
with gentamicin and garlic) were significantly lower than those in group 2.
Garlic has regenerative potential after tubular injury induced by gentamicin in
animal models. Nasri H, Nematbakhsh M, Rafieian-Kopaei M. Ethanolic
Extract of Garlic for Attenutation of Gentamicin-induced Nephrotoxicity in
Wistar Rats. Iran J Kidney Dis. 2013 Sep; 7(5):376-82.

3. The present study evaluated the effects of garlic on blood pressure in patients
with essential hypertension. Patients (n=210) with stage 1 essential
hypertension were divided into 7 groups named as A, B, C, D, E, F and G.
Each group comprised of 30 patients. Each patient in group A, B, C, D and
E has received garlic tablets at the dose of 300/mg. 600/mg, 900/mg, 1200/mg
and 1500/mg in divided doses per day respectively for 24 weeks while group
F & group G were given tablet atenolol and placebo respectively. Blood
pressure readings were recorded at weeks 0, 12 and 24. Present study showed
significant decrease in both Systolic and Diastolic blood pressure in both dose
and duration dependent manner. In each garlic treated group, significant
reduction in SBP and DBP (pé&lt; 0.005) were observed when compared with
atenolol (p&lt;0.005) and placebo. Ashraf R, Khan RA, Ashraf I,Qureshi AA.
Effects of Allium sativum (Garlic) on systolic and diastolic blood pressure in

----- PAGE 574 -----
566 Dravyaguna Vijnana

patients with essential hypertension. Pak J. Pharm Sci. 2013 Sep;26(5):859-63.

4. The objective of this in vitro study was to assess the antibacterial effect of
different concentrations of garlic extract against human dental plaque
microbiota. All bacterial strains were inhibited by all test materials. The
inhibitions zones of the different concentrations of garlic extract were not
significantly different for S. mutans, S. sanguis, and S. Salivarious. For P,
aeruginosa and lactobacillus spp. the inhibition zones of 5%, 10% and 20%
concentrations were not significantly different from one another, but they were
significantly more than that of the 100% extract. Houshmand B, Mahjor F,
Dianat O. Antibacterial effect of different concentrations of garlic (Allium
sativum) extract on dental plaque bacteria. Indian J Dent Res. 2013 Jan-Feb;
24(1):71-5. doi; doi;10.4103/0970-9290.114957.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name of Yoga Indications

Lashunadya ghrita Arshas, Unmada
: Lashunadya taila Badhirya

Jwara, Vataroga
Gulma, Anaha

Lashuna kshira Udavarta, Gridhrasi

Botanical name — Allium sativum Linn.
Allium — Garlic
sativum — Cultivated
Family — Amaryllidaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Rasona kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 217-223

Basonym of Drug
Tear sft |
atrar weefeat Tees ate: |

----- PAGE 575 -----
Rasona 567

Rasona (Allium sativum) is named because it is deficient with one Rasa i.e. Amla
(Sour).
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. SRR: - Sredtent ws |
The odour of Rasona is very potent.
2. verde: oft adaft gfe sitererc |
Rasona alleviates cold because of its hot potency.
3. AYA SVGd caratfer gee eaatefaTre er
Rasona spreads all over the body because of its potency.
4. Yee ae eather |

Rasona alleviates evil spirits.

5. AWUA- Hevea sive, siteety Wea |

Rasona is very useful medicinces and used in many diseaes.

6. afte:- aReaep ATT |

Rasona, if it is used, will be beneficial.

Others :
7. TaAS:- TEATS: , ARAL |
Rasona is liked by foreigners.
8. eeer:- Wee fra: Gee: A WaT I
Liked by Mlecha as it is used to prepared dishes.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 576 -----
568 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Rasona (Garlic) is cultivated throughout India.

Morphology

Erect herb, usually grown as an annual from small
bulbs (Cloves), up to 150 cm tall. Real stem is very
short, formed at the base of the plant in the form of a
disk, with adventitous roots at the base, bulb is soli-
tary, depressed globose to ovoid, upto 7 cm in diam-
eter, whitish, composed of 7 to 15 sessile cloves, each
clove consisting of a protective sheath a single thick-
ened storage leaf sheath and a small central bud,
pseudo stem formed by sheathing bases of successive
leaves.

Leaves—4 to 10, distichously alternate, glabrous,
with tubular sheath, blade is linear oblong, upto 30
cm long and 2.5 cm wide, nearly flat, V-shaped in
cross-section, acute at apex, smooth or crenulate at margins.

Inflorescence — Spherical umbel upto 2.5 cm diameter, on a solid scape up to 150
cm long. Umbels composed of flower and bulbils, initially surrounded by a mebranous
spathe.

Allium sativum Linn (Rasona)

Flowers — Usually poorly developed or absent, pedicels are slender, upto 1.5 cm
long, tepals are 6 in number and 2 whorls, free, lanceolate, upto 3 mm long, greenish
white or pale pink, stamens are six usually rudimentary, ovary is superior.

Fruit —Js abortive and seedless.
Varieti

Dh.Ni. - 1. Rasona - Allium sativum Linn.

2. Mahakanda - Allium asacalonicum Linn.
Ra.Ni- 4 types
1. Rasona 2. Shweta rasona 3.Granjana 4, Rakta rasona

Hitahara (Conducive) during Lashuna Sevana

Madya (Alcohol), Mamsa (Meat) and Amla dravyas (Sour substances).
Ahita (Non conducive) during Lashuna sevana

Vyayama (Excercise), Atapa (Sunrays), Atinira (Excess water), Paya (Milk) and
Guda (Jaggery).

----- PAGE 577 -----
Rasona 569

Substitute

Allium ampeloprasma Linn.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Bulb is sub-globular, upto 6 cm in diameter, consisting of 8 to 20, ovoid, 3 to 4 sided
cloves which are attached to flattened circular woody axis, the axis has numerous thin
wiry roots on the underside; each clove is surrounded by papery scale leaves of white or
pinkish white colour. It has got very strong odour and tastes pungent.

Classical references

Synonyms

AUR WH: Sige veer | ake wrens saet tars: Il
(5. eerrahe at 217)
aya

AaSHet Sata HA GAT, | dal TetsuAg ferg: B Tatswag ye

(ara. eiaaate TT 218)
Tas Prefta-
wahtar weet Wares afta: | ceRaT sepa RETO ToTafahA:
(a5. Staats FT 219)
TRAM TYA-

acnatt yg: wy aaa: | at Hare ShegSt ATT Ha: TA:
aft g Far: viet taeaguraerr: u (ara. etree et 220)
Properties and Actions

Tat Seutt ger: eave: Urea: AE: TS Us ae genet weeAl Aa:
TEI Gears Je: rare sega: | aerate Renfeet Aart ares: Ul

wam whi ofieer fraenqerehrearasiar |

qin aeremergqeiko = areata I

AS. RTA FT 221-223

waa-

Tat sor: Hefaheos Rare To: Tagen stkeraea: |

gas teen autagedutederar: ydte: u
(af. arathrfe at 62)

----- PAGE 578 -----
570 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ARTS
wr ofthe | pfhtyrertarenqenrafagreaeirar |
Singermann eet Here:
(afi. axahofe at 63)
PAYA: HTH: UG WH feet TH: AE: | alate weet qeat eet Fer ara:
fran sertenitt autehgr erat, | EET Fee HATTA

Raararasatore qsderdttary | frergiqenestryyeryirary, Tare
(df. ata of 1219-1221)

wr ,
TASHA: CAL, TROT: HHATATT | STeReraHEReT VET TAT:
(aA. ara PT so)
ga Waa-
wast sor: Blakes Rare Te: Tages atferarcs: |
qs 8 aearantaguankerrenrat: «= -Oeitent: 1
(uP. qerafe at 51)
Wea-
Wt aac ATeTeafeght =a |
alle a fe get wana aah
(aA. aerate at 53)
Tata-
war sfvisear aftxget frerenqearefr sega t
ain getter aearmar ata were: ui
(aft. Ferme FF 54)

Brit Wines erdisepors tenn: | aagatcet: Rerrearct Get TAA:
areentirg yrery atearel feat car cat: rere aah: eioneg Pare
THAT Tereahir water area | HN HLA MEAP Tae ara Ta Ul
ut arentset uRexte yor fatter erat Wry atten gia Tart feerara:
(B.A. magene at 25-27)
agra ater fea-
ae aie comers eyerery, | (rT. era aT 225)

----- PAGE 579 -----
Rasona 57)

AYA feat sthea-
aramarad went wat qeq | tar gerteniear, Prana

—

i)

oo

(ars, etree at 225)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Rasona

a. Stem b. Bulb c. Leaf d. Flower
Ans: b. Bulb

. The taste which is absent in Rasona

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Lavana
Ans: c. Amla

. The paste of Rasona (Allium sativum) is mixed with Tila taila (Oil of Sesamum

indicum) is very useful in
a. Ajirna b. Vatavyadhi c. Kushtha d. Arshas

Ans: b. Vatavyadhi

_ Decoction of Rasona (Allium sativum), Vishwa (Zingiber officinalis) and

Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is efficacious in
a. Amavata b. Raktapitta c. Arshas d. Kushtha
Ans: a. Amavata

. Lashunadya Taila is specifically indicated in

a. Padashula b. Vaivarnya c. Anidra d. Badhirya
Ans: d. Badhirya

. Botanical name of Rasona

a. Allium cepa b. Allium sativum
c. Pluchea lanceolata dd. Aquillaria agallocha
Ans: b. Allium sativum

. Yavaneshta is a synonym of

a. Jiraka b. Dhanyaka c. Lashuna d. Pippali
Ans: c. Lashuna

. Habit of Rasona plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

RR

----- PAGE 580 -----
Chapter

Saireyaka

Useful parts — Panchanga (Whole herb) & Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Pita saireyaka — Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Vishaghna, Kesharanjaka, Shophahara,
Trishnahara, Dahahara, Dipana, Twakdoshanashaka.

Rakta saireyaka— Shophanashaka, Jwarahara, Shulaghna, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Varnya.

Nila saireyaka — Shulahara, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Vranahara, Sophanashaka,
Twakdoshahara.

Shweta saireyaka — Dantamayahara, Shulaghna, Shophanashaka, Kasahara,
Twakdoshahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Antiinflammatory, Expectorant, Analgesic, Antipyretic.

Doshakarma

Vata kapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Pita saireyaka— Kushtha, Kandu, Visha, Twakdosha, Shopha, Keshavikara, Dipana,
Trishna and Daha.

Rakta saireyaka — Shopha, Jwara, Shula, Kasa, Shwasa and Vaivarnya.
Nila saireyaka — Kushtha, Shula, Kandu, Shopha, Vrana and Twak vikara.
Shweta saireyaka — Danta roga, Shula, Shopha, Kasa and Twak dosha.

----- PAGE 581 -----
Saireyaka 573

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatarakta (Gout)
(a.¢fa. 22/33)

Roots of Saireyaka (Balrleria prionitis) and Jivanti (Leptadenia reticulata) is pounded
with Goat’s milk then mixed with ghee and applied as a paste.

2. afar fis (Rat poison)
Setar aot Vals TSH | (3.7.5. 38/30)

Root of Saireyaka (Barleria prionitis) is powdered and mixed with honey, then
given with Tandulodaka (Rice water).

3. Sidhma
AirgruearreReres tamtrage: | era Aetenctst: fiber eres UI
(4%. 50/31)

In case of Sidhma first one should apply paste of Bana (Barleria strigosa) on the
lession, followed by application of paste of seeds of Mulaka (Raphanus sativus).

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) -—50to 100ml
Swarasa (Juice) -10to 20 ml

Botanical name —Barleria prionitis Linn.

Barleria — named after Rev. J. Barrelier of Paris

prionitis — Saw like

Family — Acanthaceae (Refer Appendix-II for Key features)

Kula - Vasa kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Aragwadhadi Gana, Varunadi Gana, Veeratarvadi Gana, Kantaka

Panchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni Pushpa varga 51-53
Basonym of Drug

SR Yatra srecoreest ath west archer: |

----- PAGE 582 -----
574 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tat ets Bay Bey arrears UI
Saireyaka (Barleria prionitis Linn.) grows in temperate conditions. Its flowers shine
like sun,
Synonyms
Habitat
1. BR-TE Ale seer
Saireyaka grows in groups.
Morphology
2. Heaa-Hlera: Fag G: ed: areftt sea Fhe | TPTAAT CATT |
Saireyaka flowers have less quantity of nectar, so few honey bees will visit
flowers.

Properties and Actions

3, arel-aead arya Hartera Het S sa: ste |

Saireyaka is very useful drug in Kusta etc. diseases.

Others
4, BT: aoa Very ashes a art BAA: ste

Saireyaka flowers are beautiful hence described by many poets.

Regional Names

English Yellow Hedge Barleria, Porcupine flower

Habitat
Saireyaka grows in hilly areas of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Punjab.

Morphology
Habit - A wild prickly shrub
Root — Branched tap root

----- PAGE 583 -----
Saireyaka x15

Stem — Acrial, woody, erect, cylindrical, solid,
ridged and furrowed, branched, green and glabrous.

Leaf - Simple, opposite, decussate, petiolate,
stipulate, lanceolate, entire margin, acuminate apex,
venation is unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence - Terminal spike, dichasial cyme
in lower region.

Flower — Bracteate, barcteolate (Bracteoles are
six in number 2 larger and 4 smaller) sessile, bisexual,
zygomorphic, hypogynous, complete, sepals are 4 in
number, polysepalous, in two whorls of 2 each, pet-
als are 5 in number, gamopetalous, cranny yellow,
bilabiate having 4 petals in upper lip and one petal in lower lip. Stamens are 4 in number,
polyandrous, Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous, ovary is superior.

Barleria prionitis Linn (Saireyaka)

Fruit - A capsule with two chambers, dehiscing elastically by 2 values.
Seed — Non-endospermic with hooked jaculators.

Varieties
Ra.Ni & Bh. Pr. Ni. — 4 types

1. Aadtas - Barleria cristata Linn
2. tha ata - Barleria prionitis Linn
3. Wh aae - Barleria cristata Linn
4. ate ae - Barleria strigosa Willd
Ka.Dh. Ni. - 3 types

1. Waas - Barleria cristata Linn
2. tiaetas - Barleria prionitis Linn
3. ata das - Barleria strigosa Linn

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample consists of highly spinerscent, dry herb, consisting of branched, cy-
lindrical root; stem pieces of greyish brown colour having longitudinally arranged tiny
warts on the surface and ellipitc lanceolate, acuminate leaves, 3 to 4 cm long and upto 2
cm broad. It also contains dried flowers with dusty yellow petals and capsular fruits. The
leaves are clustered in whorls at nodes which also bear sharp straight interpetiolar spines
of white colour. Has got faint and disagreable odour. It tastes bitter.

----- PAGE 584 -----
576 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references

Synonyms

da Vas -

faa: gage: Wa: aeatar | were: Wee: a a firatt Heat

tha Sears - Hevecntsate......

Th RAG - WIRTH FT Ih: Ae: |

sta Rew - Ate avon getreret aret ereiretara: (ALF. Gat 51-52)
Properties and Actions

ea: Hears atnenvyg ferarag: | ferratont Heist: YR: ceeNSA:

(AL. Fret 53)

qrucat Rattan: Magnet | aerat Gets geass Prete waa Aa:
(af. TeeMe FT 269)

@tat ay: feraferator: Sees: | eval aera ERIS Ta
(af. atsft af 1050)
th Was-

SO BS: FLAY AAA HAT SAT | STATS TTA META TTT:
(aA. archaea 131)

Uta ataaH-

fafa: woreiren Rarcasy aan | Stas: MRIS THAT:
(aft. arte af 133)

diet Raa-

ardent cag ferent GHMATEd VIL | HIGHS VrEaaeaTT
(a. arctae af 135)
Xa as -
faftcer: aaeerftercat aaier yiiitetsr eter: |
ATAH HM Ha TaT feraTet warhtva:
(aft. are af 138)

Rasen: war Heer: set Tet: 1 (LA. Tae af 69)

----- PAGE 585 -----
_

bad

Nn

lon

~“

go

Saireyaka 577

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. As per Sushruta Saireyaka is included in

a. Trina Panchamula _b. Kantaka Panchamula
c. Laghu Panchamula_ d. Brahat Panchamula
Ans: b. Kantaka Panchamula

. Roots of Saireyaka (Balrleria prionitis) and Jivanti (Leptadenia reticulata) is

pounded with Goat’s milk then mixed with ghee and applied as a paste in
a. Vatarakta b. Sandhishula b. Kushta d. daha
Ans: a. Vatarakta

Botanical name of Saireyaka

a. Albizia lebbeck b. Berberis arstata

c. Barleria prionitis d. Hemidesmus indicus

Ans: c. Barleria prionitis

. Sahachara is a synonym of

a. Ativisha b. Saireyaka c. Dadima d. Bhringaraja
Ans: b. Saireyaka

. Dasi is a synonym of

a. Dhanvayasa b. Daruharidra c. Devadaru d. Saireyaka
Ans: d. Saireyaka

. Bana is a synonym of

a. Saireyaka b. Ushira c. Kantakari d. Jatamansi
Ans: a. Saireyaka

. Habit of Saireyaka is
a. Herb b. Prickly Shrub _c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: b. Prickly Shrub

Types of Saireyaka as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 5 b. 3 c. 4 d. 2
Ans: c. 4

ERK

----- PAGE 586 -----
Chapter

Sarpagandha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)

Nidrakara, Vedanasthapana, Vishaghna, Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Vranahara,
Unmadahara.
Gandhanakuli (Sarpakshi)

Krimighna, Vishaghna and Vrana ropaka.
Pharmacological Actions

Antihypertensive, Tranquillizer, Febrifuge, Bitter tonic and Sedative.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata kapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Raktabharadhikya, Nidranasha, Vedanayukta vikara, Visha vikara, Jwara, Krimi,
Vrana and Unmada.
Gandha Nakuli
Krimi, Vishavikara and Vrana
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktachapa (Hypertension)
Powder of Sarpagandha (Rauwolfia serpentina) to be given in the quantity of 125
mg to 1 g in case of Raktachapa (Hypertension).
2. Sarpa visha (Snake bite)

In Sarpa visha (Snake bite) 1 to 2 Tola (10 to 20 g) of powder of Sarpagandha
(Rauwolfia serpentina) is triturated with water and administered.

----- PAGE 587 -----
Sarpagandha 579

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) ~ 125 mg to 1 g

Phytoconstituents — About 30 indole alkaloids have been reported in drug and total
alkaloidal content of rauwolfia roots ranges from 0.7 to 3% depending upon the source.
The important alkaloid is reserpine. Apart from the alkaloids it also contains oleo-resin,
phytosterol, fatty acids, alcohol and sugars. The other alkaloids present in the drug are
ajmaline, Ajmalicine, Rauwolfinine, Reserpine, Yohimbine, Serpertine and serpentine.

Research corner

1.

S

Le)

4,

To evaluate the ant diarrheal property of methanol extract of the leaves of
Rauwolfia serpentina (R. Serpentina) in experimental diarrhoea induced by
castor oil in mice. All doses of the extract and the reference drug atropine
sulphate (3 mg./kg, i.p.) produced a dose-dependent reduction in intestinal
weight and fluid volume. The extracts also significantly reduced the intestinal
transit in charcoal meal test when compared to diphenoxylate Hel (5 mg/kg, p/
o/). Ezeigbo 1, Ezeja M, Madubuike K, Ifenkwe D, Ukweni la, Udeh N,
Akomas S. Antidiarrhoeal activity of leaf methanolic extract of Rauwolfia
serpentina. Asian Pac J. Trip Biomed. 2012 Jun; 2(6):430-2. doi: 10.1016/
$2221-1691 (12)60070-7.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the phytochemistry and the effect of
methanolic root extract (MREt) of Rauwolfia serpentina on alloxan-induced
diabetic Wister male mice. MREt found effective in improving the body
weights, glucose and insulin levels, insulin/glucose ratio, glycosylated and total
hemoglobin in test groups as compared to diabetic control. Azmi MB, Qureshi
SA. Methanolic Root Extract of Rauwolfia serpentina Benth improves the
Glycemic, Antiatherogenic and Cardioprotective indices in Alloxan-Induced
Diabetic Mice. Adv Pharmacal Sci. 2012; 2012:376429. doi: 10.1155/2012/
376429. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

. From the dried roots of Rauwolfia serpentina were isolated five new indole

alkaloids, N(b)-methylajmaline (1), N(b)-methylisoajmaline (2), 3-
hydroxysarpagine (3), Yohimbinic acid (4), Isorauhimbinic acid (5), A new
iridoid glucoside, 7-epiloganin (6), and a new sucrose derivative, 6'-0-(3,4,5-
trimethoxybenzoyl) glomeratose A (7), together with 20 known compounds.
Itoh A, Kumashiro T, Yamaguchi M, Nagakura N, Mizushina Y, Nishi T,
Tanahashi T. Indole alkaloids and other constituents of Rauwolfia serpentina.
J Nat Prod. 2005 Jun; 68(6):848-52.

Three new monoterpenoid indole alkaloids, 19(S),20(R)-dihydroperaksine (1),

----- PAGE 588 -----
580 Dravyaguna Vijnana

19(S),20(R)-dihydroperaksine-17-al (2), and 10-hydroxy-19(S),20(R)-dihydro-
peraksine (3), along with 16 known alkaloids 4-19 were isolated from hairy
root culture of Rauwolfia serpentina, and their structures were elucidated by 1D
and 2D NMR analyses. Sheludko Y, Gerasimenko J, Kolshorn H, Stockigt J.
New alkaloids of the sarpagine group from Rauwolfia serpentina hairy root
culture. J Nat Prod. 2002 Jul; 65 (7):1006-10.

5. The conventional experimental techniques showed that ajmaline derived from
Rauwolfia serpentina Benth. biomass grown in tissue culture was effective in
attesting canine ventricular arrhythmias induced by coronary occlusion,
strophanthin and epinephrine, displaying antiarrhythmic effects in aconitine
induced intoxication of rats and substantially elevating the threshold of
venticular fibrillations in cats. Kostin laV, Tsybusov AP, Minina SA,
Kuznetsova VA, Borodulina MV, Balashov VP. Antiarrhythmic activity of
ajmaline obtained from Rauwolfia serpentina biomass grown in tissue culture.
Kardiologiia. 1990 Aug:30(8):72-4.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No: Name of Yoga Indications

2.
Botanical Name — Rauwolfia serpentina Benth.
Rauwolfia — Leonard Rauwolf-Name of a physician at Augsberg (Bararia).
serpentina — Pertaining to serpents
Family — Apocynaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Kutaja
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 165-166
Basonym of Drug
wary wreereter area ster

Because of the strong odour of Sarpagandha (Rauwolfia serpentina) the snakes
won’t stay near the plant and it acts as antidote for snake venom.

----- PAGE 589 -----
Sarpagandha 581

Synonyms

Properties and Actions

1. TRATHell-Wey TH ATHelt | ATaelt Aeperst Reet Ate aT |

Sarpagandha has got similar odour to [wari (Aristolochia indica) and the
plant has got great potency to pacify cobra’s venom like that of Mon-
goose.

2. waar: aaa: mea rrant arerchiher
Sarpangandha is very useful drug in mental disorders.
3. fasndst-fad acacia |
Sarpagandha acts as an antidote to poison.

Regional Names

Habitat

Sarpagandha grows all over India, especially
in Bihar, West Bengal, Deccan states and Uttar
Pradesh.

Morphology

Habitat - Small erect shrub grows upto 90 cm
high.

Bark — Pale

Leaves — 3 Leaves in one whorl, 7.5 to 18 cm
long, 2.5 to 6 cm wide, lanceolate, acute or acumi-
nate, glabrous bright green above, pale beneath, base
is tapering, main nerves are 8 to 10 pairs, and petiole is 8 mm long.

Rouwolfia serpentina Benth Kurz

Inflorescence — Many flowered, irregular corymbose cyme.

Flower ~ White, 3 to 6 mm long, bright red, bracts beneath the pedicels triangular,
acute, Calyx is glabrous, bright red, Corolla 1 to 15 cm long, tube is slender.

----- PAGE 590 -----
582 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit - Drupes, Single, 6 mm in diameter, becomes purplish black when ripe.

Varieties
Dh. Ni -2 Types
1. Nakuli — Rauwolfia serpentina Benthex Kurz.
2. Gandhanakuli — Ophiorhiza mungos Linn.
Ra. Ni — 2 types
1. Nakuli 2. Mahasugandha
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Root is stout, cylindrical, somewhat crooked, up to 20 cm long and 1.8 cm in diam-
eter the external surface is rough, longitudinally fissured and yellowish brown in colour.
It bears occasional root scars. In older roots the bark becomes thick, corky and friable and
constitutes a substantial part of the root. Transversely cut surface shows a thick bark
enclosing a brownish tissue having prominent growth rings and medullary rays. On break-
ing root become short pieces and taste very bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
aTacht Get aren Wee | Heer ASTETalt watt ferrari
(aa. eireraie a. 165)
Properties and Actions
Areett get fret mento rasa | aPreeTarangeaaHitanrsy |
(a1. Riterae TT. 166)
ATeaeh mew earkrearste aRantian afters fers shat Hitrate erat
(aA. aedrae af. 92)
Tere (-aatat )-
aatatt meer freer aan a aire | abrarge aaifeterreht aorraatt 1
(af. archaea &t 94)

ape Hefterra Harare Prereate | aur adeperghrenregrerst WT, Mt
(Sf. aiteftrert 777)

aitrenstthream ar Pome | eet yematianent cradkory ul
(B.A. mageniert 164)

----- PAGE 591 -----
Sarpagandha 583
arepeftgaret ferris argu a retain | are feraftrecife Renfree fetter
(a.FA. Here TT 96)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Sarpagandha is

a. Kanda b. Mula c. Bija d. Phala
Ans: b. Mula
2. Pradhana Rasa of Sarpagandha
a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Madhura d. Katu
Ans: a. Tikta
3. Pradhana Karma of Sarpagandha
a. Balya b. Vrashya c. Nidrakara  d, Kushthaghna

Ans: c. Nidrakara
4. Important Pharmacological action of Sarpagandha
a. Diuretic b. Analgesic
c. Antidiabetic d. Antihypertensive
Ans: d. Antihypertensive
5. Main indication of Sarpagandha
a. Madhumeha b. Sthaulya c. Raktabharadhikya d. Kushtha
Ans: c. Raktabharadhikya
6. Reserpine is present in
a. Rasna b. Sarpagandha cc. Eranda = d. Ashwagandha
Ans: b. Sarpagandha
7. Botanical name of Sarpagandha
a. Withania somnifera b. Gymnema sylvestre
c. Rauwolfia serpentina d. Azadirachta indica
Ans: c. Rauwolfia serpentina
8. Chandramara and Gandha nakuli are the synonyms of
a. Sarpagandha b. Ikshu b. Dhamargava_ d. Kutaja
Ans: a. Sarpagandha

KAKEK

----- PAGE 592 -----
Karma (Actions)

Shukravardhaka, Ruchikara, Vishaghna, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Raktapradara
nashaka, Jwaraghna, Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Mehahara, Dourgandhyanashaka,
Trishnahara, Raktapittahara, Raktashodhaka, Balya, Sangrahi & Dipana.

Agrya Karma

SAAT AM SHH | (FY, 25/40)

Ananta (Hemidesmus indicus R. B.) is Astringent and useful in Raktapitta (Bleed-
ing disorder).
Pharmacological Actions

Alterative, Tonic, Demulcent, Diaphoretic and Diuretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Madhura vipaka. Pitta Shamaka because
of Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Madhura rasa. Kaphahara due to Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Raktavikara, Kushtha, Kandu, Shukradourbalya, Aruchi, Vishavikara, Shwasa,
Kasa, Jwara, Meha, Dourgandhya, Trishna, Daha, Raktapitta, Atisara and Agnimandya.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease)

(afa. 7/128)
Drugs like Vasa (Adhatoda vasica), Amalaki (Emblica oficinalis), Haritaki

----- PAGE 593 -----
Sariva 585

(Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia belerica), Brahati (Solanum indicum), Sevya
(Vetiveria zizaoides), Patola (Tricosanthes dioica) Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus) and
Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) are used for drinking, bathing and for application in combi-
nation or individually.

2. Visarpa (Erysipelas)
Terhraaeteart wetter | aRarreraeegetrat at ferarerr:
eae waa Sar: Rear Shadarerary Ut (aA. 21/54)

Decoction of Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Ushira
(Vetivera zizanoides) and Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is very useful in all kinds of Visarpa
(Erysipelas).

Matra (Dosage)

Phanta (Hotinfusion) — 50 to 100 ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Hemidesmus indicus— Roots contain essential oil which possess 2-hydroxy
benzaldehye, 4-methoxybenzaldehyde, sterols, saponin, resinic acid, tannins, B-sitosterol,
a. and B-amyrins, lupeol, tetracyclic triterpene alcohols, fatty acids, glycoside and ketone.
It also contains Coumarin (Principle which gives Aroma and taste) volatile oil, hemidesmine
and smilasperic acid.

Ichnocarpus frutescens — Apigenin, Luteolin, Glyco-flavones, Leucoanthocyanins,
Vanillic acid, Syringic acid and Sinapic acid.

Research corner

1. The present study was designed to investigate the protective effect of Hl
aqueous extract against bromoben-zene induced mitochondrial dysfunction in
rat kidneys. Prior administration of HI extract showed a significant protection
against bromobenzen induced changes in the kidney and this effect is attributed
to the antioxidant and free radical scavenging potential of the Hl. The
protection was much better with HI compared to vitamin E. Ramakrishna V,
Gopi S, Setty OH, Protective effect of Hemidesmus indicus L. R. Br. against
bromobenzene-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in rat kidney. Am J Chin
Med. 2012;40(3):560-80.

2. From the roots of Hemidesmus indicus, one new condensed phenylpropanoid
A-C, were isolated along with one known related compound, plocoside A.
Zhao Z, Matsunami K, Otsuka H, Negi N, Kumar A, Negi DS. A condenced

----- PAGE 594 -----
586 Dravyaguna Vijnana

phyenylpropanoid glucoside and pregnane saponins from the roots oj
Hemidesmus indicus. J Nat Med. 2013 Jan; 67(1):137-42. doi: 10.1007/;
11418-012-0659. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

3. To investigate the protective effects of hydroalcoholic and its fractions from
roots of Hemidesmus indicus on arthritis in vitro models of rodents,
Hydroalcoholic extract and its ethyl acetate fraction of Hemidesmus indicus
showed significantly higher anti-arthritic activity than chloroform and residual
fraction. Histopathological analysis demonstrate that both of hydroalchoholic
extract and its ethyl acetate fraction had comparable antiarthritic activity with
methotrexates. The present study suggests that Hemidesmus indicus has
protective activity against arthritis and the activity might be attributed to
protective activity against arthritis and the activity might be attributed to
presence of terpenoid in hydroalcoholic extract, as well as in ethyl acetate
fraction. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Feb; 5(2):1305. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645(12)60011-X. Anti-arthritis activity of roots of Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.
(Anantmul) in rats. Mehta A, Sethiya NK, Mehta C, Shah GB.

4. The genotoxic and antigenotoxic potential of the ethanolic extract of
Hemidesmus indicus roots were evaluated in culturaed human lymphocytes
using cisplatin as the po9stive mutagen. Hemidesmus indicus root extract
possesses sigfnificant genoprotective effet as the lower concentraions although
it is cytotoxic and probably genotoxic at higher doses. Ananthi R, Chandra N,
Santhiya ST, Ramesh A. Genotoxic and antigenotoxic effects of Hemidesmus
indicus R. Br. root extract in cultured lymphocytes. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010
Feb 3:127(2):558-60. doi: 10.1016/j. jep. 2009.10.034. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

5. Data indicate that treatment with H. Indicus extract offers protection against
free radical-mediated oxidative stress in plasma, erythrocytes, and liver of
animals with ethanol-induced liver injury. Saravanan N, Nalini N. Antioxidant
effect of Hemidesmus indicus on ethanol-induced hepatotoxicity in rats. J. Med
Food. 2007 Dec; 10(4):675-82.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

Sarivadi vati Karna vikara, Prameha
Sarivadi louha Pramehapidaka, Vatarakta

----- PAGE 595 -----
Sariva 587

Sarivadi kashaya Daha, Raktapitta
= Pinda taila Vataratka, Ruja

Botanical Name — Shweta sariva — Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.

Hemidesmus — Half bond, so named in allusion to the subconnate filaments at their
base-joint pods and connected stamens.

indicus — of India
Family — Apocynaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Arka Kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Jwarahara varga, Varnya varga, Dahaprashamana varga, Kanthya
varga, Stanyashodhana varga, Purisha sangrahaniya varga

Sushruta Sarivadi gana, Vidarigandhadi gana, Vallipancamula
Bh.Pr.Ni | Guduchyadi varga 236-238
Basonym of Drug
PUR: WARUTATETEAT: |
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus) is a twinner spreads on the ground.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. We Preat- WATT SHTET: |
Sariva is twinner
2. SAM-T SANS: TYTTATS |
Sariva spreads extenesively on the ground.
3. Qubengen-girenerreM: |
Root of Sariva has got good Aroma.
4. ydt-wrefe year |
Sariva blossom in Sharad ritu (autumn season)
5. Balet-entena ferdteia Terre: |

Fruits of Sariva are dehiscent in nature.

----- PAGE 596 -----
588 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions

6. MHA MATA Hale TAT |
The plant may be protected because of its useful medicinal properties.

7, Weay:- Wort aya weartatt |
Sariva plant may be preserved at houses owing to its best medicinal prop-
erties.

8. Teh sirereter terchther
Sariva protects the person who uses it.

9. Mraeeh-omt aech tormenta: |

Sariva is very useful medicine in many diseases.

Regional Names

Indian Sarsaparilla

Malayalam
Marat

Habitat
Sariva grows all over India, especially in Karnataka, Kerala, Bihar, West Bengal
and Maharashtra.
Morphology
Hemidesmus indicus R.BrMorphology

Habit — Perennial prostrate or twining shrub. Root
stock is woody.

Stem - Numerous, slender, terete, glabrous or
pubescent, striate, thickened at the Nodes.

Leaves ~ Simple, opposite, variable, elliptic-ob-
long to linear-lanceolate, 5 to 10 cm long, 0.8 to4.cm
broad, apiculate, glabrous, dark green, often varie-
gated with white above, pale and sometimes, silvery
white and pubescent beneath, reticulate venation, peti-
ole 3 to 4 mm long.

Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.
(Sweta sariva)

----- PAGE 597 -----
Sariva 589

Inflorescence —Subsessile cyme.

Flower — Pedicel short, clothed with numerous bracts, calyx 2.5 mm Jong, glabrous
outside, ovate, acute corolla 5 to 6 mm long, greenish outside, purple inside.

Fruit — Follicles, 10 to 15 cm by 6 mm, cylindric, tapering to a point at the apex,
straight or sometimes slightly curved, striate glabrous.

Seed-— 6 to 8 mm long, ovate-oblong, flattened, black coma is silvery white, 25 cm
long.

Morphology

Ichnocarpus frutescens

Habit — Large, much branched twining shrub.
Young branches are finely fulvous-tomentose.

Leaves — Simple, 4.5 to 7.5 cm long and 2 to 4
cm wide, elliptic-oblong, acute or acuminate, glabrous
above, slightly pubescent and pale beneath, base
rounded, main nerves 5 to 7 pairs, with finely reticu-
late venation. Petioles 3 to 6 mm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary and terminal rusty-pu-
bescent trichotomous pedunculate cymes.

(Krishna sarira)

Flowers — Greenish white, Numerous, Pedicels
3 to 4 mm long, Calyx fulvous-hairy, lobe ovate, Acute. Corolla tube 2.5 to 3 mm long,
with a narrow portion below.

Fruit — Follicles 1.0 to 1.5 cm long and 4 mm wide, straight or slightly curved,
slender and cylindric.

Seeds — 1 to 2 cm long, linear, black, not beaked.
Varities
Bh.Pr.Ni., Dh.Ni, & Ra.Ni—2 types
1. Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
2. Krishnasariva (Ichnocarpus frutiscens)
Substitutes
Hemidesmus indicus — Cryptolepsis buchanani RxS.
-  Ichnocarpus frutescens R-Br.
— Decalepis hamiltoni Wt. and Arn.

----- PAGE 598 -----
590 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)
Hemidesmus indicus — Root.

Root is woody, cylindrical, upto 30 cm long and 6 mm in diameter. The outer sur-
face is greyish purple or reddish brown in colour, longitudinally fissured and transversely
cracked. A transversely cut portion shows a narrow hollow strand in the center surrounded
by a yellowish cambium ring and mealy white cortical layer. On breaking it becomes a
short pieces when cut at the periphery, fibrous when cut at the centre. Has got agreeable
odour and tastes bitter.

Ichnocarpus frutescens — Root

Root is hard, cylindrical, straight or sometimes arched, upto 2.5 cm in diameter.
Outer surface in thin roots is purplish brown in colour, longitudinally wrinkled and occa-
sionally lenticillate. The thick roots have a dark brown prominently shrivelled surface.
Removal of bark exposes lamellated wood. Transversely cut surface of the root shows a
closely adhering thin bark, a well marked cortical zone, a cambium ring and a pith which
appears as a central hole. On breaking, root becomes short pieces, has bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Shweta sarira—
STAT MUAAT MAT THAT MM | LHLST FATT MATCH AS SERA A ASAT
(aL. Tee aT. 237)
Krishna sarira—
HOT F Mar vara wet Mayer AT 1 (AT. TSHAMS FT. 236)
Properties and Actions
mRagiet tare Rare yet Te | afmrastrararamtarery |
AAT SATA TAT 1 (AT. SEAMS TT. 238)
aka & g wet arama | geavgsat Aegis i
sort g deri award Poet vert crabtree AAT
(aft. Tgeate FT. 160-161)
aiftar wept freer gta genet feat 1 ydisnrdtanrreterateraraar |
atfirarereha SRAaTATAMANTL HA (3.FY. attafe aH. 995)

ara 3 g Bat wearer | Heavgeet egies
(a. aaa GT. 119)

----- PAGE 599 -----
Sariva
wRagrt weet | wig sere doe dot freer
ATG Fer Teh freer ser | Arar Hat |
Ged wiftrerant ta Aer A ema ut (AY. frereenfe ef, 32-33)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Sariva

—_

a. Bija b. Mula c. Phala d. kanda
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Sariva
a. Madhura b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Katu
Ans: b. Tikta

3. Agrya Karma of Sariva as per Charaka Samhita
a. Rakta Pitta Prashamana b. Vatashamana
c. Jwaraghna d. Buddhi vardhaka

Ans: a. Raktapitta Prashamana

4. Sarivadi Vati is indicated in
a. Mutrakricchra b. Ajirna c. Karna Roga_ d. Arshas
Ans: c. Karna Roga

5. Botanical name of Shweta Sariva
a. Psoralea corylifolia b. Woodfordia cordifolia
c. Swertia chirata d. Hemidesmus indicus
Ans: d. Hemidesmus indicus
6. Botanical name of Krishna Sariva
a. Hemidesmus indicus b. Ichnocarpus frutiscens
c. Pureria tuberosa d. Tecoma undulate
Ans: b. Ichnocarpus frutiscens
7. Ananta and Gopavadhu are the synonyms of
a. Tulasi b. Kapikacchu c. Sariva d. Dhataki

Ans: c. Sariva

8. Types of Sariva according to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 2 b. 3 c. 4 d. 5
Ans: a. 2

ARK

591

----- PAGE 600 -----
Chapter

Shallaki

TE I RE A TNA TS SEI PES UR AAT PS NS OPIS,

Useful part - Niryasa (Exudate)

Rasadi panchaka

Shallaki Kunduru
Rasa Kashaya Tikta Madhura Madhura Tikta
Guna Laghu Ruksha Tikshna, Snigdha
Virya

Karma (Actions)

Shallaki — Atisarahara, Raktapittahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Arshoghna,
Stambhaka.

Pushpa (Flowers) — Kushthaghna, Aruchinashaka

Kunduru (Exudate) - Twacya, Jwaraghna, Swedahara, Mukharogahara, Grahi,
Bhutagrahanashaka, Yoni rogahara, Shulahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Emmanogogue, Aromatic, Demulcent, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Kashaya Tikta, Madhura
rasa, Kaphahara because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shallaki - Atisara, Raktapitta, Kushtha and Vrana

Pushpa (Flowers) — Kushtha and Aruchi

Kunduru (Exudate) - Jwara, Atisara, Yoniroga, Atisweda, Bhutagraha, Mukharoga
and Sandhishula.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vrana (Wound)

vienat wrerettar aftrexita at a: atat aut wer abt aegarerenaTrEaT

(9.4. 25/28)

----- PAGE 601 -----
Shallaki 593

Powder of Shallaki (Boswellia serrata) fruit is applied over the Vrana (Wound) then
it is to be bandaged.

2. Shwasa (Asthma)

FeeHyeeTaaSs YRe: TareweT aT Tet we eafthee: eye: areal fers

(%3. 51/52)

Fumigation is done with Turushka Shallaki (Boswellia serrata), Guggulu
(Commiphora mukul) and Padmaka (Prunus cerasoides) and ghee.

Matra (Dosage)
Niryasa (Exudate) - 1 to 3 g

Research corner

1. A penetacyclic triterpendiol (TPD) from Boswellia serrata has significant
cytotoxic and apoptotic potential in a large number of human cancer cell lines.
To enhance its anticancer potential, it was successfully formulated into solid
lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) by the micro emulsion method with 75% drug
entrapment efficiency. Bhushan S, Kakkar V, Pal HC, Guru SK, Kumar A,
Mondhe DM, Sharma PR, Taneja SC, Kaur IP, Singh J, Saxena AK.
Enhanced anticancer potential of encapsulated solid lipid nanoparticles of TPD:
a novel triterpenediol from Boswellia serrata. Mol Pharm. 2013 Jan
7:10(1):225-35. doi:10.1021/mp 300385m. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

2. The resinous part of Boswellia serrata possesses monoterpenes, diterpenes,
triterpenes, tetracyclic triterpenic acids and four major pentacyclic triterpenic
acids i.e. ?-boswellic acid, acetyl-?-boswellic acid, 11-keto-?-boswellic acid
and acetyl-11-keto-?-boswellic acid, responsible for inhibition of pro-
inflammatory enzymes. Out of these four boswellic acids, acetyl-11-keto-?-
boswellic acid is the most potent inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase, an enzyme
responsible for inflammation. Siddiqui MZ. Boswellia serrata, a potential
antiinflammatory agent and overview. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011
May;73(3):255-61. doi: 10.4103/0250-474x.93507.

3. To evaluate the antioxidant effect of an extract of the plant Boswellia serrata
in an experimental model of acute ulcerative colitis induces by administration
of acetic acid (AA) in rats. The anal sphincter pressure in the groups treated
with B. serrata showed a significant increase compared to the colitis group
(P<0.0001). Histological analysis of treated animals showed less edema with
preservation of mucosal crypts. Lipid peroxidation showed a significant
decrease in the treated groups compared to the colitis group (P<0.001).

----- PAGE 602 -----
594

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Hartmann RM, Morgan Martins MI, Tieppo J, Fillmann HS, Marroni NP.
Effect of Boswellia serrata on antioxidant status in an experimental model of
colitis in rats induced by acetic acid. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Aug;57(8):2038-44;
doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2134-3. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

. This study was conducted to evaluate the antioxidative and antithrombotic

properties of stem bark gum resin extracts of Boswellia serrata (BS). Present
study demonstrated antioxidant and antithrombotic anticoagulant activities of
water and hydroalcoholic extracts of Boswellia serrata’s gum resin. Kokkiripati
PK, Bhakshu LM, Marri S, Padmasree K, Row AT, Raghavendra AS, Tetali
SD. Gum resin of Boswellia serrata has inhibited human monocytic (THP-1)
cell activation and platelet aggregation. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011, Sep
1;137(1):893-901. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2011.07.004. Epub 2011 Jul 8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNO: Name of Yora Indications

Botanical name — Boswellia serrata Roxb.

Boswellia — named after Dr. Boswell Edinburgh
serrata — saw toothed

Family — Burseraceae

Kula - Guggulu kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Purshavirajaniya varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Rodhradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 22-23 & Karpuradi Varga 50-51 (Kunduru)

Basonym of Drug

Betta deter afi, Aaa stated TATRA |

Leaves of Shallaki (Boswelia serrata) are liked by elephants.

Synonyms
Habitat

1. OeM-at VAT |

Grows wild.

----- PAGE 603 -----
Shallaki 595

Morphology
2. Hret-yaft Rratetet |
Shallaki releases exudates
3. att-quee: |
Exudates of Shallaki are aromatic.
4, Grae ges: Paar: Ba: ATA SEAT: |
Exudates of Shallaki have Aroma.
5, Wgaat-agaadite, wyretfercad: |
Shallaki releases profuse quantity of exudates.
6. aaaeh-staer wate areitsem: |
The exudate of Shallaki resembles urine of horse.
7. Sqeal-Hgelaratsed: |
The exudates of Shallaki are called Kunduru.
8. PAAR RTT HTT: |
Fruit of Shallaki is trigonus.
Properties and Actions
9. Wert-greatet GAA |
Shallaki pleases the mind because of its Aroma.
Others
10. WHAT Vat VTA |
The leaves of Shallaki are liked by elephants.
11. WARON-Aerdt Terra Weert |
Shallaki leaves are eaten by elephants.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 604 -----
596 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Shallaki grows in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and parts of South India.
Morphology

Habit — A deciduous middle sized tree.

Bark —Ash-coloured, peeling off in thin flakes, young
shoots and leaves pubescent.

Leaves — Compound, 20 to 40 cm long, leaflets are

‘ : Boswellia serrata Roxb.
at 5 1
opposite, 2.5 to 6 cm long, | to 3 cm wide, sessile, 8 to 15 (Shallaki)

pairs and an odd one. Variable in shape, ovate or ovate-
lanceolate, usually in equilateral and obtuse, crenate-ser-
rate, more or less pubescent, base in acute, rounded.

Inflorescence— Axillary raceme

Flowers — Calyx pubescent outside lobes broadly triangular-ovate, Petals are 5 mm
long, ovate, stamens are inserted at the base of and annular crenate disk.

Fruits — Drupe, Trigonums, Pyrepes heart-shaped, and Cotyledons are trifid.
Substitutes

Boswellia carteri

Boswellia frereana
Adulterants

Garuga pinnata Roxb.
Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Market sample will have hardened, opaque or translucent tears of greenish white,
golden yellow or light brown colour, occurring in various sizes. The shape ranges from
round and club shaped to typical stalactite. On breaking become short pieces exposing a
shining glossy surface. It has got turpentine like odour, tastes astringent.

Classical references
Synonyms
wieerent—
Weeteat TAHT A THT Gt TAT | HEMT Guat aa A ARAAT I
(aa, aerfe at. 22)
HSE PINT FHra: Paya: Fg graf i (ay. afafs af. 50)

----- PAGE 605 -----
Shallaki 597

Properties and Actions

viecrat qau vita frarserenftrartre, | tafe aorertt gfepeegditar i
(1.5. Ferfe at. 23)

Pyrigtrarctarcaca: wget | wte Tereihpeernarer
(a3. afore aT. 51)
Veerat KIA Haar sHergftar Ses warren teers ete reer wenragreh Aa
(af. wane Tt 123)

vecat gar yitat mau veda: 1 aeraftrveatran auf

Ae HHAATAHERTHAIAT | (HA. steht 863)
verat ferraaeyT Hara wneatt wet | PErerHmarangit aureterhtaryrat
(a.F. sree at 195)
errant Gat Bitar seafarers | ETE aT Tele AUTETS ST VTA |
eee: ahaa yar: 1 ahah feet gat a waerd
(B.A. ettaaenfe at 119-120)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful Part of Shallaki
a. Mula b. Patra c. Niryasa d. Phala
Ans: c. Niryasa

2. Niryasa of Shallaki is called
a. Kunduru b. Shriveshtaka c. Sarala d. Mocharasa
Ans: a. Kunduru

3. Surabhisrava is a synonym of
a. Guggulu b. Devadaru c. Shallaki d. Arjuna

Ans: c. Shallaki
4, Botanical name of Shallaki
a. Uraria picta b. Boswellia serrata
c. Myristicafragrans _ d. Inula racemosa
Ans: b. Boswellia serrata
5. Gajabhakshya and Maherana are the syncnyms of

a. Kutaja b. Kampillaka c. Chandana d. Shallaki
Ans: d, Shallaki

6. Habit of Shallaki plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Tree d. Shrub
Ans: c. Tree

RRR

----- PAGE 606 -----
Shalmali

cae CC CL LTT

Useful part — Niryasa (Exudate)
Rasadi panchaka

Shalmali Mocharasa

Me odes age
Laghu, Snigdha, Picchila
Vicia | Mada Bae
ving | Shia Cid

Karma (Actions)

Shalmali — Raktapittahara, Rasayana, Shukravardhaka, Brimhana & Vrishya.
Shalmali pushpa — Grahi
Shalmali kanda - Malasangrahaka, Dahanashaka, Santapanashaka.

Mocharasa — Grahi, Vrishya, Dahahara, Rasayana, Balya, Pushtivardhaka, Varnya

and Stambhana.
Kuta Shalmali -— Vishaghna, Gulmanashaka, Vibandhahara and Shulaghna.

Pharmacological Actions — Astringent, Styptic, Antin-flammatory, Diuretic, An-
thelmintic, Tonic, Demulcent, Aphrodisiac.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa. Pitta Shamaka due

to Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shalmali — Raktapitta, Dourbalya, Shukrakshaya, Karshya.
Shalmali pushpa — Atisara

Shalmali kanda — Atisara, Daha and Jwara
Mocharasa — Atisara, Raktatisara, Raktapitta, Dourbalya, Daha, Vaivarnya.
Kuta Shalmali — Gulma, Vibandha, Shula and Visha vikara.

----- PAGE 607 -----
Shalmali 599

4mayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pravahika (Gastro enteritis)
afta: mrenttgramt efit) garaa: | ea: vareut age ae: mrenfernet eT
(aa. 10/36)
Basti (Enema) of Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) leaf petioles or exudates boiled
with milk then mixed with ghee is very useful in case of diarrhoea with tenesmus.

2. Vyanga (Freckles)

maar wera firear deur, erenfernveenr | anferet sree wee, Warr
FSA UC FAT 57/38)

Powder prepared from sharp thorns of Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) triturated
with milk if applied over face, it removes Vyanga (Freekles) and face becomes smooth
and lustrous.

3. Gudagata Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)

fastadt frenedvadt cat eat rere Perey (Fa. 4/86)

Milk processed with Mocharasa (Exudate of Salmalia malabarica) is efficacious in
case of bleeding per rectum.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) of Bark -— 3to5g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10to20ml
Niryasa (Exudate) - l1to3g

Phytoconstituents — Root bark yielded napthaquinone, B-sitosterol, lupeol, and {-
D-glucoside.

Stem bark contains Lupeol and f-sitosterol.

Flowers yielded o-D-glucoside, B-sitosterol, hentriacontane, hentriacontanol, essential
oil, Kaempferol and quercitin.

Seeds contain n-hexacosanol, palmitic acid, gallic acid, tannic acid and ethy] gallate.

Research corner
1. The aim of the present study was to confirm its anti-inflammatory activity and
to search for the possible mechanism of action for methanol extract of Bombax
malabaricum leaves (MEBM). MEBM possesses anti-inflammatory activity,
mediated through inhibition of NO production. Hossain E, Sarkar D, Chatterjee

----- PAGE 608 -----
600

Dravyaguna Vijnana

M, Chakraborty S, Mandal SC, Gupta JK. Effect of methanol extract of
Bombax malabaricum leaves on nitric oxidae production during inflammation.
Acta Pol Pharm. 2013 Mar-Apr; 70(2):255-60.

. A new lignan bombasinoal A (1), together with three known compounds was

obtained from the ethanol (95%) extract of roots of Bombax ceiba L. Through
its being subjected to silica gel and Sephadex LH-20 chromatography. Wang
GK, Lin BB, Rao R, Zhu K, Qin XY, Xie GY, Qin MJ. A new lignan with
anti HBV activity from the roots of Bombax ceiba. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Aug;
27(15):1348-52. doi:10.1080/14786419.2012.740032. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

. Bio-efficacy of n-hexane fraction of sepal of Salmalia malabarica was

evaluated covering the biochemical sensors for the management of
hyperglycemic and hyperlipidemic effects. Evaluation of n-hexane fraction of
Salmalia malabarica (SMH) from hydro-metahanolic (2:3) extract at the dose
of 0.1 gm/kg body weight twice a day were investigated in normal and
streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats. Histologic studies of pancreas
showed a qualitative diminution in the area of the islet’s of Langerhans in
diabetic group which was recovered by said fraction. Phytochemical screening
of the fraction revealed the presence of flavonoids, terpenoids and steroids. De
D, Ali KM, Chatterjee K, Bera TK, Ghosh D. Antihyperglycemic and
antihyperli-pidemic effects of n-hexane fraction from the hydro-metahanolic
extract of sepals of Salmalia malabarica in streptoxzotocin-induced diabetic
rats. J. Complement Integr Med. 2012 Jun 21:9: Article 12. doi:10.1515/1553-
3840.1565.

. The present study was aimed to investigate the diuretic effects of aqueous and

crude ethanol extracts of Bombax ceiba L. fruits (family, Bombacaceae) using
acute model in rats. A single individual dose of aqueous and ethanol extract of
B. ceiba fruit (200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg, p.o. each), furesemide and
hydrochlorothiazide, (25 mg/kg, p.o., each) as reference diuretic drugs, were
administered orally to dehydrated rats. Study gave positive results. Jalalpure
SS, Gadge NB. Diuretic effects of young fruit extracts of Bombax ceiba L. In
rats. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011 May; 73(3):306-11. doi. 10.4103/0250-
474X.93525.

. The objective of this study was to evaluate anthelminitc activity of the methanol

extract of B. malabaricum leaves (MEBM). The study established the
anthelmintic activity of MEBM. Hossain E, Chandra G, Nandy AP, Mandal
SC, Gupta JK. Anthelmintic effect of a methanol extract of Bombax
malabaricum leaves on Paramphistomum explanatum. Periosteal Res. 2012

----- PAGE 609 -----
Shalmali 601

Mar; 110(3):1097-102.doi:10.1007/s00436-011-2594-y. Epub 2011 Aug 19.
Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

2

Yonidosha, Rajadosha

SILNo. Name of Yoga

— | Shalmali Ghrita

6.

Botanical Name — Salmalia malabarica De.
Salmalia — Derived from Sanskrit name Salmali.

Pushyanuga churna

malabarica — of Malabar
Family — Malvaceae
Basonym of Drug
Viera VAS Het TTA VAT
Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) bears beautiful red flowers and which stops Diar-
thoea.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Guuft-fersitfercart |
Shalmali plant lives for many years.
2. farsttferer-fer state |
Shalmali is a long lived tree.
3. ARGH: Haas AA MAY Be: , Area Stag eATET |
Shalmali is a tall and long-lived tree.
4, BUEHSA-TATHVCHA THT |
Shalmali trunk and branches are studded with prickles.
5, Brar-qate Praterete |
Shalmali releases juice which is called as Mocha.

6. THYMT-Teerber YOAV |

----- PAGE 610 -----
602 Dravyaguna Vij. *.a

Flowers of Shalmali are red in colour.
7. erpeal-paperarag Taal For: |
Flowers are red in colour like that of Rooster’s Comb.
8, FRHeT-Fet HetseM: |
Fruit has cotton like substance.
Properties and Actions
9. fafeacr-Rresiseet |
Juice released by Shalmali is slimy.
10, Weaft-acercttfer |
The juice of Shalmali is very slimy.
11. ageltd:-wepe wieTTteT |
Shalmali is very efficacious drug, especially in Diarrhoea.

Regional Names

Marathi Tambadi savaru

Gabavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Purishavirajaniya varga, Sandhaniya varga, Shonitasthapana
varga, Purisha sangrahaniya varga, Vedanasthapana varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 54-59
Habitat

Shalmali is found all over India, where as Kuta Shalmali is seen more in South
India.

Morphology

Bombax ceiba Linn / Salmalia malabarica De.Morphology:Bombax ceiba Linn/
Salmalia malabarica De.

----- PAGE 611 -----
Shalmali 603

Habit - A tall deciduous tree
Trunk ~ Straight and buttressed
Branches — Spreading

Bark — Grey covered with hard sharp conical
prickles.

Leaves - Compound, large, leaflets are 3 to 7
in number, entire, 7 to 18 cm long, glabrous,
penninerved, reticulately veined, lanceolate or oval,
acute at the base. Petioles are very long; 20 cm long,
glabrous, petiolules 1 to 2.5 cm long, stipules are
small, triangular and caducous. Bombax ceiba Linn.
(Shalmali)

Flowers — Numerous, appearing before the new
leaves, near the ends of the branches. Calyx is thick,
usually 3-lobed; lobes are rounded, densely silky within. Corolla is bright red, tomentose
on the outside. Petals are elliptic-oblong and re curved. Stamens more than 60, arranged
in 5 bundles of about 9 to 12 each, and an inner bundle of 15 of which the 5 inner most are
longest.

Fruits - Capsule, 10 to 12.5 cm long, ovoid, 5-
valved, lined within with white silky hairs.

Seeds — Seeds are 9 mm long numerous, ovoid,
packed in white cotton.
Morphology

Cieba pentandra Gaertn

Habit — A tall tree

Trunk — Prickly when young

Branches — Horizontal in whorls of 3.

Leaves — Compound, glabrous, petioles 10 to
15 cm long, leaflets 5 to 8 in number, lanceolate, 5 to
12.5 cm long, cuspidate, entire, glaucous beneath, Ceiba pentandra Gaertn.
petiolules are 2.5 mm long, stipules filiform. (Kuta Shalmali)

Flowers — Pedicels 2.5 to 5 cm long in clusters
of 2 to 8. Calyx 1 to 2 cm long, glabrous outside, hairy at the base within, 5-lobed, lobes
rounded or triangular. Flowers 4 to 5 cm in diameter, dirty white, appearing with the
young leaves at the ends of the branches. Ovary is conical, glabrous.

----- PAGE 612 -----
604

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit - Capsule, fusiform, blunt, lined with long white silky hairs.
Seeds - 6 mm long or more, pyriform, glabrous, black, enveloped in silky wool.

Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni — 2 types
1. Shalmali — Salmalia malabarica DC.

2. Kuta Shalmali — Ceiba pentandra

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consists round or irregularly shaped tears, up to 4 cm across. Outer

surface is opaque, brick red to reddish brown in colour, resembling shellac. Some of the
large sized tears are hollow. The tears swell to a large size on soaking in water. Has got
faint disagreeable odour. Taste is astringent and mucilaginous nature.

Classical references

Synonyms

wren vaste fifesen wuts a cyan eR areata a ert i
(415. Ferert. 54)

Mocarasa-

Prate: oer: freon irenicht aecantsf a i areraratareret araPrate gears
(ana. Ferfeart 56)

Kuta shalmali-

apiera: wreate: wireat teat: Hewrenter: Ul (AF. Feet 58)

Properties and Actions

wrench vitae carat TH OTe Tare | setorent frrarareaehatt tears, Ut

(a5. Feteat 55)
Mocarasa-
ararerat fear oret Rearett ger: Harrah: | verivarshranmtanattrreteteye tl
(AT. Fetert 57)
Kuta shalmali-

pementratern: wea: AHAIyd, | Aeon: wietowngefearay: |

eae Pera: BICTHATAG: 1 (ALT. FeTfeaT 59)

wiretieft vitcrer feerenr yenscroaterarh | perereraet Ot Yet Aaa Her Ul
(af. sinfert 118)

----- PAGE 613 -----
Shalmali 605

greater: vite caret a Urea Tare | severe seutt gem fever frat ares
WSs Targets wat fares at ye | Hart araet aly aaeaftrretfsr, WTA, 1
Prata: oftacr: feared ot ger: porte: | warfgentcitarmencnftrrearcregd, |!
(df. attafeert 911-973)
Mocarasa-
ARR HUT: HATS Tara aT
acraftcautctetyas sqaqetttagat met
(aA. meneame TT 13)
went mencthyet Rat get Tare, | vitae Eat aa gash Teva
frata: yreaet: arava geahreltare | para: eres: vitreadtaRrarerrge, It
ward wreaciget wet wert ae | wae APRRseuEt @ Weed I
(B.A. irene FT 158-160)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Shalmali
a. Mula b. Niryasa c. Patra d. bija
Ans: b. Niryasa

2. Important Guna present in Niryasa of Shalmali
a. Ruksha b. Vishada c. Picchila d. Sandra

Ans: c. Picchila

3. Pradhana Karma of Shalmali Niryasa
a. Dipana b. Pachana c. Bhedana d. Stambhana
Ans: d. Stambhana

4. Main indication of Shalmali Niryasa
a. Ajima b. Raktatisara c. Arshas d. Shotha
Ans: b. Raktatisara

5. Shalmali Kantaka is useful in
a. Yauvana Pidaka b. Kushtha c. Shotha d. Daha
Ans: a. Yauvana Pidaka

6. Picchabasti is mainly indicated in
a. Agnimandya b. Prameha c. Pravahika d. Mutrakricchra

Ans: c. Pravahika

----- PAGE 614 -----
606 Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Botanical name of Shalmali
a. Pinus roxburghi b. Salmalia malabaricum

c. Boswellia serrata d. Shorea robusta

Ans: b. Salmalia malabarica
8. Chirajivika and Kantakadhya are the synonyms of
a. Tejohwa b. Kantakari c. Salmali d. Shatavarj

Ans: c. Salmali

9. Habit of Shalmali plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper

Ans: a. Tree

28 oR aK oR

----- PAGE 615 -----
Shankhapushpi

Useful part — Panchanga (Whole herb)
Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Kashaya, Katu, Tikta
Guna Snigdha, Picchila, Guru, Sara
Vipaka Madhura

Prabhava

Karma (Action)
Shankhapushpi - Medhya, Vrishya, Rasayana, Smriti Vardhaka, Kantivardhaka,
Balya, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Kasahara, Swarya.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Shamaka due to Madhura Vipaka, Pittahara because of Shita virya, Madhura
vipaka and Kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka due to Kashaya Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Manasika Vikaras, Unmada, Apasmara, Dourbalya, Kushtha, Krimi, Vishavikara,
Kasa, Swarabheda.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Medhya Rasayana (Intellect promoter)

teat fagtant g mqGEe | (a.fa. 1/3/31)

Different preparations of Shankhapushpi, (Convolvulus pluricaculis) help in pro-
moting memory.

wgyatyay | (8.2.5. 39/47)
Ghee processed with juice of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) if used regu-
larly improves intellect.

2. Unmada (Insanity) and Apasmara (Epilepsy)
TA ATA PSM GTS ST | TTT FAAS ARTA TIT, Ut (FAA. 10/25)

Puranaghrita (Old ghee) processed with juice of Brahmi (Bacopa moneri), Powder

----- PAGE 616 -----
608 Dravyaguna Vijnana

of Vacha (Acorus calamus) & Kushtha (Saussurea lappa) and paste of Shankhapushp;
(Convolvulus pluricaulis) is efficacious in alleviating insanity and epilepsy.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5g
Swarasa (Juice) — 10to 20 ml

Phanta (Hot infusion) - 40 to 80 ml

Phytoconstituents — Shankhapushpi has Carbohydrate-D-Glucose, Maltose, Rham-
nose, Glacial acetic acid, Scopoletin, B-sitosterol, Tropane alkaloids, Kaemferol, Convoline,
Convolidine, Convolvine, Confoline, Convosine and tetratriacontanoic acid.

Research corner

1. Methanolic extract of whole plant of Convolvulus pluricaulis Choisy was
evaluated for antioxidant activity by using 1, 1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl
(DPPH) free radical scavenging model and anticonvulsant activity by using
maximal electroshock seizure model. Methanolic extract of C. pluricaulis was
evaluated for anticonvulsant activity at 250, 500 and 1000 mg/kg. Experimental
results have shown that at the dose of 500 and 1000 mg/kg, C. Pluricaulis
didn’t abolish the hind limb extension, but reduced the mean recovery time
from convulsion. Verma S, Sinha R, Kumar P, Amin F, Jain J, Tanwar S.
Study of Convolvulus pluricaulis for antioxidant and anticonvulsant activity.
Cent Nerve Syst Agents Med Chem. 2012 Mar; 12 (1):55-9.

2. Investigation done for neuroprotective effects of aqueous extract from
Convolvulus pluricaulis (CP) against aluminium chloride induced neurotoxicity
in rate cerebral cortex. Convolvulus pluricaulis possesses neuro protective
potential, thus validating its use in alleviating toxic effects of aluminium. Bihaqi
SW, Sharma M, Singh AP, Tiwari M, Neuroprotective role of Convolvulus
pluricaulis on aluminium induced neurotoxicity in rat brain. J Ethnopharmacol.
2009 Jul 30;124(3):409-15. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2009.05.038. Epub 2009 Jun 6.

. The chloroform fraction of the total ethanolic extract of Convolvulus pluricaulis
elicited a significant antidepressant-like effect in mice by interaction with the
adrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic systems. Dhingra D, Valecha R.
Evaluation of the antidepressant-like activity of Convolvulus pluricaulis choisy
in the mouse forced swim and tail suspension tests. Med Sci Monit. 2007 Jul;
13(7):BR 155-61.

4. The present study was conducted to evaluate the potential anti-ulcerogen'¢

effect of juice of fresh whole plants of C. pluricaulis (CPJ) against various

Ww

----- PAGE 617 -----
Shankhapushpi 609

experimental gastric ulcer models induced by ethanol, aspirin, 2 hr cold
restraint stress and 4 hr pyloric ligation in rats. The drug was given orally twice
daily for five days in the doses of 375 and 750 mg/kg body weight. CPJ
showed nati-ulcerogenic effect at both doses in all the experimental gastric
ulcer models and was comparable to the reference drug sucralfate (250 mg/kg).
Sairam K, Rao CV, Goel RK. Effect of Convolvulus pluricaulis Chois on
gastric ulceration and secretion in rats. Indian J. Exp Biol. 2001 Apr;39(4):350-
4.

5. Plants commonly used under the name Shankhpushpi are : Convolvulus
pluricaulis chois, Evolvulus alsinoides Linn., both from Convolvulaceae, and
Clitoria ternate Linn. (Leguminosae). To find out the true source of
shankhpushpi by evaluating and comparing memory-enhancing activity of the
three above mentioned plants. Anxiolytic, antidepressant and CNS-depressant
activity. Malik J, Karan M, Vasisht K. Nootropic, Anxiolytic and CNS-
depressant studies on different plant sources of Shankhpuspi. Pharm Biol. 2011
Dec; 49(12):1234-42. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2011.584539. Epub 2011 Aug
16.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

Shankhapushpi taila Balaroga, Medhavardhaka

: Manodosha, Medhavardhaka
, Medhavardhaka, Pushtivardhaka

; Aindri Rasayana Apasmara, Unmada

; Brahma rasayana Ayuvardhaka, Rasayana
Botanical Name — Convolvulus pluricaulis Chois

Convolvulus — Convolvo-to twine-twining

pluricaulis — Pluri-Many, Caulis-Stem (Having many stems)

Family —- Convolvulaceae (Ref. Appendix-II for key features)

Kula - Trivrit kula

Basonym of Drug
VETER YOM: Bert
Flowers of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) is bell shaped.

----- PAGE 618 -----
610 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1. sera afer ora xfer |
Shankhapushpi plant grows on ground.
Morphology
“es Us Fane: |
Shankhapushpi flowers are beautiful.
3. APTA HYM-ATct HA YAHAT |
Shankhapushpi flowers are beautiful and regarded as very auspicious.

Regional Names

Ganavargikarana (Classica) categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 269-270
Habitat

Convolvulus pluricaulis grows mainly in
Gujarat state.
Morphology

Habit — Perennial prostate herb.

Root - Tap root, branched

‘

A

ie
K
Y

)
ap

y
<
branched, cylindrical, solid, hairy and green. of CS A vy,
Leaf - Simple, alternate, sub-sessile, exstipu-
late, oblong or oblanceolate, entire, hairy, acute,
coriaceous with unicostate reticulate venation.

Zs
Stem — Prostrate, aerial, herbaceous, weak,

----- PAGE 619 -----
Shankhapushpi 611

Inflorescence — Dichasial cyme.

Flowers — Pedicellate, actinomorphic, regular, bisexual, complete, pentamerous,
hypogynous and light purple in colour. Sepals are 5, polysepalous, hairy and green. Pet-
als are 5, gamopetalous, infundibuliform. Andorecium contains 5 stamens, polyandrous
and epipetalous. Gynoecium is bicarpellary, syncarpous, superior ovary.

Fruit — A capsule.

Seed - Endospermic.

Substitutes
Evolvulus alsinoids Linn.
Camscora decussate Schult.

Controversies

Shankhapushpi is one among controversial drugs. Shankha means conch, Pushpi
mean flower. Different plants having conch shaped flowers are being used as
Shankhapushpi in different regions.

1. Convolvulus pluricaulis chois Convolvulaceae

2. Evolvlulus alsinoides Linn. Convolvulaceae

3. Canscora diffusa R.Br. Gentianaceae

4. Clitoria ternatea Linn Papilionaceae

5. Lavendula bipinnata Okze Lamiaceae

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consist dried whole herb with small woody, profusely branched root,
slender, terete, sparsely fulvous and pilose stems; linear, oblanceolate, hairy leaves, upto
3.5 cm long. 2 to 4 mm broad and small, white funeral shaped flowers occurring solitary
or in pairs in the axil of the alternately arranged leaves. The herb depicts dusty yellowish
green colour in dry condition. Has got mild phenolic odour, taste is slightly bitter and it is
mucilaginous.

Classical references

Synonyms
wget y mgr weer Haast a (aLs. aereat. 269)

Properties and Actions
wrgyett war Hear Fer ATA TEd, | Tat Harare Valarie AeTTAT |
ararrean yerht safenhr erm (ALT. TAs Tt 269-270)

----- PAGE 620 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

vifgeht ae ferentonn eprettrerererrert ere, | ferarereae Herat Btect Hea TATA I
(af. acdrafe af 102)

Vishnukranta-
fersupsareat cefterear arenerrerrerraet | (ef. aaa at 104)
wget ar wat weft caret | argu auftentiracry: caifrer Br, |
Serra ittqassrererrspetty (3.4. sttaftrert 1496-1497)
wget fear ferret Aerpe cacao | meyenfeatrett aefternfefeger
(aA. aeemhe wt 133)
ferensefter saate ert arahrtagat | tear oer at are TTA
vragedt an fra ae fofsen Ye: | Terie GearTaeAETRUHT
(RL. ergata at 116-117)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Shankhapushpi
a. Pushpa b. Panchanga c. Bija d. Niryasa
Ans: b. Panchanga
2. Prabhavajanya Karma of Shankhapushpi
a. Dipana b. Jwaraghna c. Medhya d. Varnya
Ans: c. Medhya
3. Best Medhya Rasayana as per Charaka
a. Yashtimadhu b. Mandukaparni
c. Guduchi d. Shankhapushpi
Ans: d. Shankhapushpi

4. Ghee processed with juice of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) if used
regularly will be beneficial in

a. Medhya b. Vajikara c. Balya d. Vrashya
Ans: a. Medhya
5. Botanical name of Shankhapushpi

—_

a. Evolvulus alsinoides b. Convolvulus pluricaulis
c. Clitorea ternatea d. Plumbago zeylanica
Ans; b. Convolvyulus pluricaulis

----- PAGE 621 -----
Shankhapushpi 613

6. Mangalya Kusuma is a synonym of

a. Champaka b. Mallika c. Shankhapushpi d. Amalaki
Ans: c. Shankhapushpi
. Habit of Shankhapushpi Plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

. Substitutes for Shankhapushpi
a. Clitorea ternatea b. Evolvulus alsinoides

c. Angelica glauca d. Aconitum heterophyllum
Ans: b. Evolvulus alsinoides

----- PAGE 622 -----
pam bs
F; e =| 283 |

<> Shatavari

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Madhura Tikta
Guru, Snigdha
Karma (Actions)

Shatavari — Rasayana, Medhya, Pushti vardhaka, Netrya, Atisarajit,
Shukravardhaka, Stanyavardhaka, Balya, Shothahara, Vrishya, Gulmanashaka.

MahaShatavari - Medhya, Hridya, Vrishya, Rasayana, Arshoghna,
Grahanyamayahara, Netrya, Bulya, Shukravardhaka, Stanyavardhaka and Shulahara.

Maha Shatavari Ankura — Vrishya, Hridya, Arshoghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Galactogogue, Tonic, Diuretic
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatapitta Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Pitta Shamaka due to Shita Virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Shatavari — Dourbalya, Stanyakshaya, Vata vikara, Grahani, Shotha, Gulma,
Shukradourbalya, Manasika vikara and as a Rasayana.

Maha Shatavari — Hridroga, as a Rasayana, to improve Medhya, Grahani,
Akshivikara, Shula, Dourbalya and Stanya kshaya.

Maha Shatavari Ankura - Arshas, Hridroga and Vajikaranartha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Stanya vardhanartha (Galactogogue)

vrarertt afteftreer tar erateraett | (att.7. 427)

Paste of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) prepared by triturating with milk, it has

----- PAGE 623 -----
Shatavari 615

oss tense SSS sss Snes

to be taken with one glass of milk which acts as Stanyavardhaka (Galactogogue).
2. Rasayana (Rejuvenative)
yraratt Feary | (31.8.3. 39/157)

Ghee prepared from paste and decoction of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) taken
with sugar acts as best Rasayana (Rejuvenative).

3. Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice)
free ATH at aul wepaggary | vara wort aergqerras arn
(4.3. 53/4)

Powder of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) if taken with honey and ghee is very
useful in Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) —3to6g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents — Roots contain shatavarin I to V sistosterol, Saponins A4, AS,
A6, A7 and A8, Sarsapogenin, Glycosides of quercetin, rutin, D-glucose, D-mannose
and Diasaccharide. Fruits yielded, Sistosterol, Stigmasterol, Sarsapogenin, Sitosterol-a-
D-glucoside, Stigmasterol-c.-D-glucoside.

Research corner

1. The present study was designed to evaluate the effect of standardized
methanolic extract of AR (MAR) on experimentally un-manipulated animals to
observe the per se effects on stress pathways. MAR showed a physiological
modulation of the stress pathways. Interestingly, in most brain regions the
change in monoaminergic systems was limited by a ceiling effect at a dose of
100 mg/kg. These observations could explain the traditional use of AR as an
adaptogen and a functional food. Asparagus racemosus modulates the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and brain monoaminergic systems in rats.
Krishnamurthy S, Garabadu D, Reddy NR. Nutr Neurosci. 2013 Nov;
16(6):255-61. doi: 10.1179/1476830513Y. 0000000053. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

2. The antioxidant activities of the crude hydro-alcoholic extract (CE) and its four
fractions viz. methanol (MF), ethyl acetate (EF), n-Butanol (BF), and
precipitated aqueous (PAF) of A. racemosus roots tested decreased in the order
of EF>MF>CE>BF>PAF when investigated by DPPH free radical scavenging
assay. Under iron induced lipid peroxidation almost similar results were
observed except that the activity was more in PAF than BF. Hepatoprotective

----- PAGE 624 -----
616

Dravyaguna Vijnana

activity of the extracts was also demonstrable in vivo by the inhibition of CCL4
induced formation of lipid peroxides in the liver of rats by pre treatment with
the extracts. Acharya NS, Bhangale JO, Shah SK, Pandya SS. Antioxidant and
hepatoprotective action of Asparagus racemosus Willd. root extracts. Indian J.
Exp Biol. 2012 Nov;50(11):795-801.

3. The anticancer activity of Shatavarins (Containing shatavarin IV) isolated from

the roots of Asparagus racemosus (Wild) was evaluated using in vitro and in
vivo experimental models. The result suggests that the shatavarins (containing
shatavarin IV) rich faction (AR-2B) exhibits significant anticancer activity in
both in vitro and in vivo experimental models. Mitra SK. Prakash NS,
Sundaram R. Shatavarins (Containing Shatavarin IV) with anticancer activity
from the roots of Asparagus racemosus. India J. Pharmacol.2012 Nov-Dec;
44(6):732-6. doi:10.4103/0253-7613.103273.

4. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of ethanolic extract of

Asparagus racemosus in urolithiasis in rats. The rats treated with ethanolic
extract of A. racemosus at doses 800 and 1600 mg/kg significantly (P<0.05)
reduced the serum concentration of calcium, phosphorus, urea, and creatinine.
Histopathology of the kidneys in Groups V and VI revealed less tissue damage
and were almost similar to Group I rats. Jagannath N, Chikkannasetty SS,
Govindadas D, Devasankaraiah G, Study of antiurolithiatic activity of
Asparagus racemosus on albino rats. India J. Pharmacol. 2012 Sep-Oct;
44(5):576-9. doi:10.41103/0253-7613.100378.

5. Ethanolic extract of the roots of A. racemosus improved the stress tolerance in

chemical writhing test and swimming endurance test at all the doses as
compared to stress control group. The result suggests antistress property of
Asparagus racemosus in different model of stress. Joshi T, Sah SP, Singh A.
Antistress activity of ethanolic extract of Asparagus racemosus Willd roots in
mice. Indian J Exp Biol. 2012 Jun; 50(6):419-24.

Yoga (Formulations)

| ape jag Shatavari taila
2 Shatavari Mandura

Name of Yoga Indications

;

Raktapitta, Daha

ol
.

Shatavari Modaka
Shatavaryadi kwatha

----- PAGE 625 -----
Shatavari 617

rdita, Manyastambha
j

Botanical Name — Asparagus racemosus Willd.

Asparagus — Derivated from-A = Intesive, Sparasso- in allusion to strong prickles.
racemosus — Having raceme inflorescence.
Family -— Asparagaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Basonym of Drug
VAS TAM, ATA- MIE HST |

Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) has numerous succulent tuberous roots and all
those roots are very best.

Synonyms
Morphology
1. WaTat- Vet WaT YTAET: |
Shatavari has numerous succulent roots.
2. SRYA-AEA: YaT: ral BT |
Shatavari has numerous tuberous roots.
3. Wratt-wyeterct |
Tuberous roots of Shatavari are succulent in nature.
4. adte:-4 ote: waa: Hvefeacare |
Shatavari has sharp spine.
5. ARVEH- ANGST: HVEHT STM: |
Spines in Shatavari are recurved.
6. Yenual-yearter wav: |
Cladodes of Shatavari are very thin.
7. wattrfrearautt - adfsregracy TATTETET: |
Cladodes resemble Snake’s tongue.
Properties and Actions

8. TAQTA-TaTg: TAISEN: |

----- PAGE 626 -----
618 Dravyaguna Vijnana

The taste of Shatavari is sweet.
9. at-airefing ser |
Shatavari is regarded as best among medicines.
10. ATTeUA-ART are: aT ara: Arena, atren feronperaferent, steer ae |

Shatavari is rich with water elements and it protects the body by nourishing the
tissues.

Regional Names

a

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Balya varga, Vayasthapana varga

Sushruta _ Vidarigandhadi gana, Kantakapanchamula

Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Guduchyadi varga 184-188
Habitat

Shatavari commonly grows all over India now days it is commonly cultivated ow-
ing to its commercial values.

Morphology

Habit — A tall climbing under shrub.

Stem — Aerial, erect, or weak, angular, green,
solid, whorl of one internodal leafy structure called
cladodes found at every node.

Root — Adventitious root, many be tuberous or
fasciculate type.

Leaves— Scale like, membranous and caducous.

Inflorescence — Fascicle, araceme of white flow-
ers.

Asparagus racemosus Will.
(Shatavari)

Flower — Pedicellate, bisexual, actinomorphic,
complete, regular, hypogynous, perianth members are

----- PAGE 627 -----
Shatavari 619

six, arranged in two whorls of 3 each. Stamens are 6, in two whorls of 3 each; gynoecium
is tricarpellary syncarpous, superior ovary and axile Placentation,

Fruit — Berry.
Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni & Ka.Ni. — 2 types

1. Shatavari— Asparagus racemosus, Willd.

2. Maha Shatavari — Asparagus sarmentosus, Willd.
Adulterant

Peeled root of Asparagus adscendens Roxb.
Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Root is peeled, dried, unbranched roots, 5 to 15 cm long and up to 1 cm broad at the
thickest part. These are slightly arched or almost straight, fusiform and somewhat translu-
cent. The tubers are generally deeply wrinkled longitudinally. The wrinkle appears as
flaps extending to the whole length of the roots. The surface is smooth, waxy, having
fawn or flesh colour. A transversely cut portions of the root shows a mealy white surface
with a yellowish central strand. The margin of the cut surface is wavy or sometimes star
shaped on breaking becomes short and uneven pieces, not having any characteristic odour,
tastes sweetish with a bitter after taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
waret agger hafta aft 1 arrenit waadt wredtat a dtedt u
Mahaégatavari-
TerraTat wiser waedaiican | weedtat Fast weve Helatt
(aS. Feeaie GT 184-185)
Properties and Actions
vrarertt we-ettar farce wat Tart | Aershrghe|n Rarer Asa year |
Qrarrattacn aaftrarsnatstd 0 (a5. Tene et 186-187)

Mahashatavari-

reread Feat Tet set Tat | eladtat Pexavitaeniaaaaar |
maga creel: aTaTTET Ul (AT. TSeMS TT 187-188)

----- PAGE 628 -----
620

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Shatavari-
vravant fear fareet wa wag: erarerferet | arate gear Tara BAT I

(oF. Wee TF 282)
Mahashatavari-

aeadtat teat gq ger gen tart | vitactat Prexavifrectaearrars,
aagiirataet crereteraae: | (aA. yeas af 283-284)
Shatavari-
vravent earfercat Carat Wel caret | Often yeaa eresHrghzaT
ayer areata Youtethare viteah ste, | (a. sitef Th 1063-1064)
Mahashatavari- .
Herat ger enfr aerypRat | Tevasifstetrett vfladtat caret 1
agi vga gat gataegt | Pefrarciiremeniqenaear,
(df. aiteft af 1066-1067)
wataedt fet ga agt frafiraat i amare fire was Ta
wearatest aot net firafregery | ved amare fore ster Tare |
SUTRA THAT WaT: SHAT: (TAY. Meee HT 122-123)
vielatigad vit firrh tag TARA | Unerent aed arate
veraaiss wet firageratt Ta: | wigena fife aw aeqyaary i
waren auetraste Gert Yonfrencaahrrad Fe: |
wetetratsaat a atte, 7 crenata corre mead
(B.A. frente FT 40-42)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Shatavari
a. Bija b. Mula c. Kanda d. patra
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Shatavari Mula
a. Katu b. Kashaya c. Madhura d. Amla

Ans; c. Madhura
. Important Karma attributed to Shatavari
a. Shodhana b. Bhedana c. Jwarghna’ d. Stanya janana

Ww

Ans: d. Stanya Janana

----- PAGE 629 -----
fon

~

~

Shatavari 621

. Ghee prepared from paste and decoction of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)

taken with sugar acts as
a. Rasayana b. Stambhaka c. Grahi d. Trishna hara
Ans: a. Rasayana

. Shatavari Guda is indicated in

a, Jwara b. Raktapitta c. Arshas d. Ardita
Ans: b. Raktapitta

. Shatavaryadi Churna is indicated

a. Trishna b. Jwara c. Shukra kshaya d. Atisara
Ans: c. Shukra kshaya

. Botanical name of Shatavari
a. Asparagus racemosus b. Boerhavia diffusa
c. Gmelina arborea d. Bacopa monneri

Ans: a. Asparagus racemosus

Vari and Narayani are the synonyms of

a. Haritaki b. Majishta c. Varuna d. Shatavari
Ans: d. Shtavari

. Types of Shatavari acc to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 4 c. 6 d.2
Ans: 4.2

RK

----- PAGE 630 -----
Shigru

(NRE SEY et SE ST ST
Useful parts ~ Twak (Bark), Phala (Fruit), Patra (Leaf) and Beeja (Seed).

Rasadi panchaka

Ruksha Tikshna Sara Laghu
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Rochana, Vidahakara, Sangrahi, Shukrala, Hridya, Chakshushya,
Shwayathuhara, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Vranahara, Medohara, Kushthaghna,
Shulahara, Shwasahara, Mukhajadyahara.

Shigru valkala (Bark) — Shulahara, Chakshusya, Bramhana, Medahara,
Krimihara, Ruchikara, Dipana, Pachana.

Shigru pushpa (Flowers) — Jantuhara, Chakshushya, Krimi
Shigruphala (Fruit) — Shulahara, Kushthahara, Shwasahara, Gulmaghna, Dipana.
Shigru bija (Seed) — Chaksushya, Vishaghna, Avrashya, Shirortinashaka.
Madhu Shigru — Dipana
Nila Shigru — Jantughna, Artinashaka, Shulaghna, Chakshushya and Rochana.
Shweta Shigru — Shophahara, Ruchya, Dipana, Mukhajadyahara
Rakta Shigru — Rasayana, Shophahara, Artihara.
Pharmacological Actions
Antioxidant, Antiinflammatory, Antispasmodic, Stimulant, Expectorant, Diuretic,
Emmanagogue.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shigru — Netraroga, Vishavikara, Shotha, Krimi, Kushtha, Medoroga, Shwasa,
Shula.

----- PAGE 631 -----
Shigru 623

Shigru valkala (Bark) — Shula ®
Shigru patra (Leaves) — Netraroga, Shula, Medohara, Krimi, Aruchi, Agnimandya.
Shigru pushpa (Flowers) — Netraroga and Krimi.
Shigru phala (Fruit) — Shula, Kushtha, Gulma, Agnimandya
Shigru bija (Seed) — Netraroga, Shirashula
Madhu Shigru — Agnimandya
Nila Shigru —Jantu vikara, Arti, Netraroga
Shweta Shigru — Shopha, Aruchi, Agnimandya.
Rakta Shigru — Shopha, Arti and as a Rasayana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Netraroga (Eye disorders)
araftrrenmatrartat saree terete etary |
vieta wate wate: Bryaecta Ta: WATT: U1 (3.ES. 16/9)

Intake of juice prepared from tender leaves of Shigru (Moringa oleifera) alleviates
many diseases of eye caused by vitiation of Vata, Pitta, Kapha and combination of all
three Doshas.

2. Shira Shula (Head ache)

(8.4. 3/40/21)
Nasya (Snuff therapy) with juice of leaves of Shigru (Moringa oleifera) mixed with
Jaggery is very effective in Head ache.
3. Krimi roga (Worm infestation)
waits: ofits: ta: fatter: Srp sare: 1 (4.8.-HFA. 22)
Decoction of Shigru (Moringo oleifera) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) is mixed with
honey and taken in case of Krimi (Worm infestation).

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 20to30ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 30to50ml

Phytoconstituents — Total plant contains amino acids like leucine, i-alanine, aspar-
tic acid, glutamic acid, glycine, valine, asparagine and glutamine and two amid along
with organics acids like citric, malic, malonic, fumaric and oxalic acids.

----- PAGE 632 -----
624 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pods and leaves contain Vitamin A, Nicotinic acid, Ascorbic acid, Essential amino
acids like arginine, histidine, lysine, leucine and isoleucine.

Root bark contains three alkaloids like moringine, moringinine and spirochine.

Flowers are having quercetin and Kaempferol. Exudates from stem consists Arabi-
nose, Galactose and Glucuronic acid.

Seeds showed presence of stigmasterol and a glycoside called moringyne.

Research corner

1. To evaluate and compare the antioxidant potential and anti-inflammatory actiity
of ethanolic extract of flowers of Moringa oleifera (M. oleifera). Phytochemical
analysis of extract showed flavonoids, cardiac glycosides etc. M. Oleifera
flowers were found to contain 19.31 mg/g of gallic acid equivalent of total
phenolics in dry extract but exhibited moderate antioxidant activity. The anti-
inflammatory activity of plant extract was significant and comparable with the
standard drug diclofenac sodium. Alhakmani F, Kumar S, Khan SA.
Estimation of total phenolic content, in-vitro antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activity of flowers of Moringa oleifera. Asian Pac J. Trop Biomed. 2013 Aug;
3 (8):623-7; discussion 626-7. doi:10.1016/S2221-1691 (13)60126-4.

2. To evaluate the antioxidant activity of aqueous extract of Moringa oleifea (M.
Oleifera) Young leaves by in vivo as well as in vitro assays. Significant
increase in activities of SOD, CAT, GST while, a decrease in LPO content
was observed. Whereas, total phenolic, Flavonoid and flavonao contents in the
extract were found to be 120 mg/g of GAE, 40.5 mg/g of QE and 12.12 mg/
g of QE, respectively. On the other hand, FRAP assay results of M. oleifera
leaves was (85.00- 5.00) M/g of extract powder. Jaiswal D, Rai PK, Mehta S,
Chatterji S, Shukla S, Rai DK, Sharma G, Sharma B, Khair S, Watal G. Role
of Moringa oleifera in regulation of diabetes-induced oxidative stress. Asian
Pac J Trop Med. 2013 Jun; 6(6):426-32. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(13)60068-
1.

3. 4-(alpha-L-Rhamnosyloxy) benzyl isothicocynate (1) and 4-(4'-O-acetyl-alpha-
L-rhamnosyloxy)-benzyl isothiocyanate (2) isolated from Moringa oleifera
seeds were screened for their antibacterial activities against Staphylococcus
aurous, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli,
Enterobacter aerogenous, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and for their antifungal activities against Candida albicans,
Trichophyton rubrum, and Epidermophyton floccosum using the disk diffusion
method. Isothiocyanates 1 and 2 were found active at the lowest inhibitory

----- PAGE 633 -----
Shigru 625

concentration of 1 mg/ml against all Gram-positive bacteria tested (S. aureus.
S. epidermidis, B. subtilis) and against the dermatophytic fungi E. floccosum
and T. rubrum. Padla EP, Solis LT, Levida RM, Shen CC, Ragasa CY.

Antimicrobial isothiocyanates from the seeds of Moringa oleifera Lam. Z
Naturforsch C. 2012 Nov-Dec; 67 (11-12):557-64.

. To investigate the potential of hydroethanolic extract of Moringa oleifera
(MOHE) against 7, 12-dimethylbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA)-induced toxicity
in male Swiss albino mice. Single oral administration of 15 mg/kg of DMBA
resulted in significant increases in Cyt P450 and Cyt b5 (P<0.01). The toxic
effect of DMBA was justified by the significant decreases in the activities of
GSH and GST in renal tissues (P<0.05). The levels of renal AST, ALT and
ALP and protein content which are indicate of renocellular damage were also
found decreased along with significant increae in total cholesterol content in
DMBA-treated mice (P<0.01). The DMBA-induced alterations inth tissues
were significantly reversed after pretreatment with 200 and 400 mg/kg of
MOHE orally for 14 d (P<0.01). Sharma V, Paliwal R, Janmeda P, Sharma S.
Renoprotective effects of Moringa oleifera pods in 7,12-dimethylbenz (a)
anthracene-exposed mice. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2012 Oct; 10(10):
1171-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

2. Shobhanjanadi lepa Apachi
Shwetakaraviradya taila Kushtha

Botanical Name — Moringa oleifera Linn.
Moringa — Derived from Malayalam name
oleifera— Oil bearing

Family — Moringaceae

Kula - Shigru kula

Basonym of Drug
foratfer ftewret fereerter |

Shigru (Moringa oleifera) having very potent qualities.

----- PAGE 634 -----
626 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Morphology
1, MeTS- wears, vite sere: |
Shigru plant is very beautiful.
2. AgAet- ARPT ATRL |
Shigru plant has many roots.
3. Atae:- Tate Fata ar
Shigru plant releases exudates.
4, FACS: TAT: WEA SHAT STAT |
Shigru plant will have dense foliage.
Properties and Actions
5. dteuge:- cteut yore |
Shigru root is very sharp in quality.
6. Ferennult-yerenete cents were |
Shigru leaves have strong qualities like that of Radish.
7. PONTT-Houi Ate Te AST |
Odour of Shigru is very strong like that of Black pepper.
8. fasftrer-agter exitte |
Shigru is very useful in abscess.
9. wefta-a aftat nagen: HeATeTH sere: |
Shigru is useful in intoxication.
10. @ftererren:-eftergres Ware: |
Shigru is used as green vegetable.
Others
11. Geeaht-eitfenent Gat |

Shigru is known as Murangi especially in Malayalam language and even the
later name Moringa oleifera is derived from this word.

Regional Names

English Drum stick, Horse radish tree

----- PAGE 635 -----
Shigru 627

Nugge Mara
Malaya

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Swedopaga varga, Krimighna varga, Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta — Varunadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Guduchyadi varga 105-110

Habitat
Shigru is cultivated through out India.

Morphology
Habit — Small or Middle sized tree.

Bark — Corky
Wood - Soft
Root -Young parts are tomentose

Leaves — Usually tripinnate, sometimes 45 cm
long, rhachis are slender, thickened and articulated at
the base, pinnae and pinnules are opposite, decidu-
ous, their rhachides are very slender, articulated and
with a gland at the articulations. Ultimate leaflets 12
to 20 mm long, and 6 to 10 mm wide, the lateral ellip-
tic, the terminal obovate and slightly, larger than the lat-
eral ones, nerves obscure, petiolules of lateral leaflets 1 to 2.5 mm, those of the terminal
are 3 to 6 mm long.

Moringa oleifera Lam.
(Shigru)

Inflorescence — Large puberculous panicles

Flowers — White in colour, calyx lobes are linear, lanceolate, reflexed, petals are
spathulate, veined, stamens five and are fertile. Ovary is oblong, villous and style is cylin-
dric.

Fruit - Pod, reaching upto 45 cm long and 9 ribbed.

Seeds — Three-angled and the angles are winged.
Varieties

Bh.Pr. Ni —2 types

1. Shigru— Moringa oleifera 2. Madhushigru — Moringa concanensis

----- PAGE 636 -----
628 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ra. Ni — 4 types

1. Shigru 2. Nila Shigru
3. Shweta Shigru 4. Rakta Shigru
Classical references
Synonyms

(1.5. Tee TT 105)
Properties and Actions
Py: HY: He: UT entrar wept ory: | dtost Treat wer: ameftaent facreHe
dort yet Ga: fier aT: | eer: Hare farsfraag iets
Faisush Rete Yor THSATTAT | Ie: MATT Var feraraEH KAT |
whtart fast ea sures: frat tHe (aT. WEeaie aT 105-108)
Madhu Shigru-
nergy: wrrequnt fergraretaat: Ue: (S03. Teens at 108)
Shigru Valkala (Bark) and Shigru patra (Leaf)-
RryseHcrann eas: Teta | (AT. TEHAMe TT 109)
Shigru bija (Seed)-
ages ryt atst dente ferearery | stare parted TACT PRT, u
(ata. Tees FT 110)
Pryce: weston: payin | rearferatatet faxtrcteqergsd tl
(af. arthaeat 38)
fog: we: Heures cevitet wept org: 1 stot Tet Bar: arreearcat feraeHe_ Ul
Ma Yao ea: Telia Hloa: | Mayes: Hae Bet seafarers
Aatsoeh frais Terrsau | Heyy: efter: vet cho: UE: |
art arated wast eargetirery | devigmad feet Fa: Bret Te
fy gat wy aofrret wey | weno yen wget pita
TAM YOGA: Yor | sctorct Hey | frag gteaet aH WATT Ut
wes wet wag Hat raf | yeTpsarara youet dhot wT |
sages rast atst ctenitent roars | aged Hated Aaa isha
(af. attsft af 944-951)

----- PAGE 637 -----
Shigru 629

Shigru-

Pras Hefermordtent arene: | yaaa wear drat worarrze_
(afr, Herta ef 27)

Nila Shigru-

viearerreftenteng: targum: fifeseretar | arqarenfelgpercasegeat tert: We:
(uPA, ernie aT 27)

Shigru-

Pras weferrntertent arcane: | EEE west Choa awraraz,
(afr. qeranfe vi 29)

Shweta Shigru-

dairy: weeten: wae: | TRAE wea sett FaTATT I
wir. yerane at 31

Rakta Shigru-

vetatedkat wy tare: | viteemmedhrht frescoes: |
(aw. qerafe at 33)

forg: vittreredtent: aeferrntoreteten: | dhoa: emer Crafter:

we et feserageiy | yet wes a aghst aaEMSTS Aad Ul
(fB.Pi. etree eT 201-202)
Shigru patra-
(a. Fea aT 131)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Shigru Patra is mainly indicated in,
a. Raktapitta b. Shotha c. Netra Roga_—_ d. Arshas
Ans: c. Netra Roga

2. Decoction of Shigru (Moringo oleifera) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) is mixed
with honey and taken in case of

a. Krimi b. Kushtha c. Visarpa d.Vyanga
Ans: a. Krimi

----- PAGE 638 -----
630 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3, Shigru Kwatha is specifically indicated in
a. Jalodara b. Plihodara
Ans:b, Plihodara

4. Shobhanjanadi Lepa is indicated in
a. Gandamala b. Medoroga
Ans: c. Apachi

5. Botanical name of Shigru
a. Operculina turpathum
c. Alpinia galangal
Ans: d. Moringa oleifera

6. Shobhanjana is a synonym of
a. Shigru b. Daruharidra
Ans: a. Shigru

7. Akshiva is a synonym of
a. Kokilaksha b. Ishvari
Ans; c. Shigru

8. Habit of Shigru Plant
a. Herb b. Tree
Ans: b. Tree

aeRO

c. Hridroga d, Shirashoola

c, Apachi d. Karshya

b. Terminalia chebula
d. Moringa oleifera

c. Nandyavarta d. Katuki

c. Shigru d. Maricha

c. Shrub d. Creeper

----- PAGE 639 -----
Shunthi

aoe eee deena eneemnneemmnemenemanmnennsnenemnenmemnnmemnanmneanaemmnneiadeeeinene
Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Particulars Ardraka Shunthi

Pha ee Kae
lL ee

Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)
Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka. Kaphahara beacause of
Ushna virya and Katu Rasa.

Karma (Actions)
Ardraka: Pachana Bhedana Rochana, Vrishya
Dipana Swarya Vibandhahara — Shulahara
Jihwa Shodhaka Kanthashodhaka
Shunthi Dipana Pachaka Vrishya Swarya
Kasahara Shwasahara — Shulahara Grahi
Ruchya Hradya Vibandhahara
Pharmacological actions
Externally-  Rubefaecient
Stimulant
Internally- Digestive
Gastro intestinal stimulant
Carminative
Stomachic
Sialagogue

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Ajirna, Agnimandya, Amavata, Chardi, Shula, Shwasa, Kasa, Hradroga, Shlipada,
Shotha, Arsha, Anaha, Udara, Vibandha.

----- PAGE 640 -----
632 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Agnimandya (Loss of appetite)
PAYA WAAAY | (37.8.3. 40/55)
MAA Varres aA TarOT | attract Tel Peregrenvs fereterry
(ara. elaeate FA. 51)

Consuming a piece of fresh ginger with a pinch of salt before having food is very
useful in increasing depleted digestive power.

2. Aruchi (Anorexia)
Hal T aPATTTTA: Me: Bey: Sar: | (ATTA. 1/851)
Keeping Luke warm ginger juice and rock salt in mouth is beneficial in Aruchi.
3. Arshas (Haemorrhoids)
HAY TeaAT Hearst: (TFT 6/16)
Kwatha of Ginger and Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is beneficial in Kaphaja Arshas.
4, Shitapitta (Urticaria)
(aa.fa. 55/11)
Consuming Ardraka (Zingiber officinale) swarasa with old Jaggery is useful in
Shitapitta (Urticaria) and Agnimandya (loss of appetite).
Shunthi
1. Agnimandya (Loss of appetite)
wtiaent tar Bust vara Ysa a Ares ar ar care aT
(aa.Fa. 6/34)

In Agnimandya (Loss of appetite), Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Haritaki
(Terminalia chebula) Churna in equal quantity has to be taken with jaggery or Saindhava
lavana (Rock salt).

2. Parinaima Shula (Duodenal ulcer)
Quat fens: Heh Gas Be asad | Ros TATA ATTA
(Ma. 2/5/18)

Paste of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale), Tila (Seasamum indicum) and Guda (Jaggery).
when consumed with milk is beneficial in Parinama shula and Amavata (Rheumatoid
arthritis).

----- PAGE 641 -----
Shunthi 633

3. Shotha (Oedema)

Teayst at gust Gastar Haranrqarny | (31.4.F4. 19/3)

Consuming equal quantity of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and jaggery with
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) Kashaya (Decoction) is beneficial in Shotha.
4. Shira Shula (Headache)

TSAR HHT AT eT YeTGA, tl (AFA. 62/33)

Nasya of Guda (Jaggery) and Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) Kalka (Paste) is benefi-
cial in Shira Shula (Headache).
5. Visuchika (Diarrhoea)

fararrn Peart eareate feng herent (9.FA. 6/112)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Bilva (Aegle
marmelos) is useful in Visuchika and Chardi (Vomitting).
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) — 3-10 ml

Churna (Powder) — 750 mg-1.5 g
Phytochemistry

Aromatic oil (1-4%), Starch (40-60%), Fat (10%), Fibre (5%), Camphene,
Phellandrene, Zingiberine, Cineol, Borneol, Gingerol, Gingerin (Oleo-resin).

Ginger oil contains— Monoterpene hydrocarbons serquiterpene hydrocarbons oxy-
genated mono and sesquiterpene pheny] propanoids.
Research corner

1. Saraswat M, Suryanarayana P. Reddy PY, Patil MA, Balakrishna N, Reddy
GB, Antiglycating potential of Zingiber officinalis and the delay of diabetic
cataract in rats. Mol Vis. 2010 Aug. 10;16:1525-37. PMID: 20806076.

The results indicated that ginger was effective against the development of
diabetic cataract in rats mainly through its antiglycating potential and to a lesser
extent by inhibition of the polyol pathway.

2. Carrasco FR, Schmidt G, Romero AL, Sartoretto JL, Caparroz-Assef SM,
Bersani-Amado CA, Cuman RK, Immunomodulatory activity of Zingiber
officinale Roscoe, and cell-mediated responses. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2009 Jul;
61(7):961-7. PMID:19589240. Ginger essential oil recorded the humoral
immune response in immunosuppressed mice.

----- PAGE 642 -----
634

Dravyaguna Vijnana

WwW

-

an

. Aimbire F, Penna SC, Rodrigues M, Rodrigues KC, Lopes-Martins RA, Sertie

JA., Effect of hydroalcoholic extract of Z. officinalis rhizomes on LPS-induced
rat airway hyperreactivity and lung inflammation. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids. 2007 Oct-Nov; 77(3-4):129-38. Epub 2007 Oct. 17.
PMID:17923400.

Ginger exerts an anti-inflammatory effect on lung attenuating RTHR and Cox
metabolites.

. Mansour MS, Ni YM, Roberts AL, Kelleman M, Roychoudhury A, St-Onge

MP, Ginger consumption enhances the thermic effect of food and promotes
feelings of satiety without affecting metabolic and hormonal parameters in
overweight men : A pilot study. Metabolism. 2012 Apr 24. [Equb ahead of
print] PMID: 22538118. The results, showing enhanced thermoge-nesis and
reduced feelings of hunger with ginger consumption, suggest a potential role of
ginger in weight management.

. Iranloye BO, Arikawe AP, Rotimi G, Sogbade AO, Anti-diabetic and anti-

oxidant effects of Zingiber officinale on alloxan-induced and insulin-resistant
diabetic male rats. Niger J Physiol Sci. 2011 Nov 23;26(1):89-96.
PMID:22314994, Dietary ginger has hypoglycaemic effect, enhances insulin
synthesis in male rats and had high antioxidant activity.

Saenghong N, Wattanathorn J, Muchimapura S, Tongun T, Piyavhatkul, N,
Banchonglikitkul C, Kajsongkram T, Zingiber officinale improves cognitive
function of the middle-Aged Healthy Women. Evid based complement
alternate. Med. 2012; 2012:383062. Epub 2011 Dec 22. PMID:22235230.
Ginger is a potential cognitive enhancer for middle-aged women.

Wu KL, Rayner CK, Chuah SK, Changchien CS, Lu SN, Chiu YC, Chiu
KW, Lee CM, Effects of ginger on gastric emptying and motility in healthy
humans. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 May; 20(5):436-40.
PMID:18403946. .

El-Ghorab AH, Nauman M, Anjum FM, Hussain S, Nadeem M, A
comparative study on chemical composition an antioxidant activity of ginger
(Zingiber officinale) and cumin (Cuminum cyminum). J Agric Food
Chem.2010 Jul 28;58(14):8231-7. PMID:20590154.

Ginger and cumin can be used as potential sources of natural antioxidants in
foods.

----- PAGE 643 -----
_Shunthi 635

een

vga (Formulations)

S].No. Name Indications
pe ase Shunthi kashaya Agnimandya, Kasa, Shula
5 al Nagaradi churna Grahani dosha, Arsha
x ns Nagaradi taila Mukha roga

/ Shunthi ghrata Grahani, Pandu, Jwara
is rs Shunthi khanda Amlapitta, Shula, Amavata
i Shunthi rasanadi kashaya Vataja swarabheda

Zingiber officinale Roscoe.
Zingiber — Derived from Shrungber

Officinale — Sold in shops or used as medicine
Family - Zingiberaceae (See appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Haridra kula
Basonym of Drug
quats afta ate aT SA, ster, Yost wr |
AGUAS, AAA, AAAS YHA Ye Weesy
Shunthi subsides Kapha and Vata dosha, dries away Kapha and Ama and itself is
dried product, hence the name Shunthi.
Synonyms
Availability
1. ARS ae preare, eaforsrATTUT BERT TT
Sunthi (Ginger) is available in shops.
Morphology
2. HATE WAY HATH SA GATHATAUT TATA |
Leaves spread out like Umbrella.
3. afteapreny- aeRO YORAM: |
Flowers are like Cobras hood.

Horn shaped rhizomes.

----- PAGE 644 -----
636 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Actions and properties
5. HEMAT: HgaUG ws ferent |
Sunthi is one of the best Katu Dravya.
6. SeHeq- Atery
Rhizome is very strong.
7. BITA- Tear |
Rhizome causes burning sensation.
8. ARTI. Heer Aa, UREA ATATT |
Sunthi is very efficacious drug because of its strong actions.
9. fiatur- fader erfst franaq aaa fea wt faq, Gersrarey
Yorantkteare |
Commonly used by public because of its quality and easy availability.
10. fesat-arrgy wfererfe erie temerfeter |
Quickly enters circulation because of its strong potency.

Regional Names

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Triptighna Varga, Arshoghna Varga, Dipaniya Varga,
Shulaprashamana Varga, Shitaprashamana Varga, Trishna
nigrahana Varga, Stanyashodhana Varga

Sushruta _ Pippalyadi gana, Trikatu

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 44-52
Habitat

Ginger is cultivated through out the sub-Himalayan tracts of Uttarpradesh, Deccan,
Karnataka, Kerala and Bihar. Run wild in some places of Western Ghats.

----- PAGE 645 -----
Shunthi 637

External morphology

Perennial herb with elongated leafy stems and
horizontal tuberous root stocks.

Rhizome — Stout and tuberous.

Stem — Erect, Leafy stem, 0.6 to 1.2 Mtr high.

Leaves — Narrow, distichous, subscssile on the
sheaths, linear-lanceolate,

1-2 cm wide and glabrous.

Inflorescence — Spike

Flowers — Greenish with a small dark purple or
purplish black.

Fruit — Dehiscent capsule and oblong.
Curing of Ginge

Ginger is marketed both in the peeled and in the unpeeled condition.

Zingiber officinale Roscoe

In scraped (peeled) the epidermal layer of the rhizome is scraped off with the help of
a sharpened bamboo-splinter and then washed in water and dried in the sunlight for 7-10
days.
Contraindications

Fresh ginger is contraindicated in Kushtha, Pandu, Mutrakrchra, Raktapitta, Vrana,
Jwara, Daha, Grishma and Sharad Ritu.

Market Sample:
Size —- Rhizomes of ginger are about 1.5x1.5 to 6.5 cm.

Shape — Rhizomes are laterally compressed, bearing short flat, ovate and oblique
branches on the upper side, with bud at the apex.

Colour —Externally, it is buff coloured. Transversely cut surface shows well marked
endodermis and stele.

Fracture — Short and fibrous.
Odour — Agreable and aromatic.
Taste — Agreable and pungent.
Classical references
Ardraka Synonyms
Teh THA TaTHS NS marsha | (ATT. eTEMMS TH. 49)

----- PAGE 646 -----
638 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties
atiitent Set yeh Atenitonr ost wet | see META HAA ATTEHTATTRT
ATO: fa: Yuouredsh weaTgHsRIeT:
WA Ver vest wade varony | athraedtast Gea fret Hue ferme
(ara.etirrate TT. 49-57)
anifictet tad Prarerenareyerhrd, | Hew Tet Get wel eanssdeh PIAA UI
(a.Fmagente TH. 84)
aera fered Yeast at Ye | ert Wert get gut aretha
warictet tad francs, | stat syarer Tah yerarartay
SS
arvernntraed fasteners | tert det unit vitedeat oe
ara aut aaa | want camer et abana ul
TA Terret freeravs faye | aravetnet wet dhot ore we
Praper a freee peer | (3. f.siteftert: 1155-1161)
memmteh et fork vilaet oy 1 dot eis vin-aHnvermaey, Ul

(af. fracafert: 29)
AH | A ish garages Aa TATA: |
aftrershr reat sarcary ateshipey tt
ager: alxgret arora | arararecitéea wlivart ertefe u
(B.A.frreanfeert: 7-8)

Contra-indications

porgara ges wafra att wet 1 qehrerenetta yf
(aa.etaaae aT 52)

Shunthi Synonyms

id Gian -y eee Tat eden | Seep are
(aT .etreene at 4.4)

Properties
godt wearmarcett orett wget oy: | Raretton wep Ure RET Pa GT,
aon waatafrarayeraracenan, | eat sefceyienet siretarareary ul
sme ype aaeraftentr a | ayer wet AY Uy YvSuaat eer

----- PAGE 647 -----
Shunthi 639

ferarr Set arg ar set arfgott sae 1 eiftafeterer Ae eee A Terre II
(aa etrrerate at 45-38)
ftaretto wear Yudt ger virmancaroehhy | afr artracare wg setoerst
(Fr. mrergenia af 83)
fet wrest get ward arremcaraer | Prefer yerestrettenet: seftacrery,
aTareaTaanreartgenraterreny | (af. sitet af 1151-1153)
yudiacon Rarer a arena | yeaa ae settrearttt
(af. froreafe af 26)

edie yet art oneed fret ag may ATEN

(R.A froreanfe aT 6)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Shunthi
a. Mula b. Patra c. Kanda d. Phala
Ans: c. Kanda
2. Vipaka of Shunthi
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Shunthi as per Sharangadhara
a. Madakari b. Lekhana c. Medhya d. Grahi
Ans: d. Grahi
4. Consuming a piece of fresh ginger with a pinch of salt before having food is

very useful in
a. Agnimandya b. Daha c. Trishna d. Raktapitta
Ans: a. Agnimandya

. Keeping Luke warm ginger juice and rock salt in mouth is beneficial in
a. Kushtha b. Amlapitta c. Aruchi d. Raktapitta
Ans: c. Aruchi

ws

----- PAGE 648 -----
640

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Nasya of Guda (Jaggery) and Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) Kalka (Paste) is

beneficial in
a. Netra roga b. Shirashula c. Udara shula_ d. Ajirna
Ans: b. Shirashula

. Shunthi Khanda is specifically indicated in

a. Amlapitta b. Shirashula c. Krimi d. Kasa
Ans: a. Amlapitta

. Botanical name of Shunthi

a. Alpinia galangal b. Pluchea lanceolata
c. Punica granatum d. Zingiber officinale
Ans: d. Zingiber officinale

. Vishvabheshaja is a synonym of

a. Lodhra b. Shunthi c. Ativisha d. Vatsanabha
Ans: b. Shunthi

de KK

----- PAGE 649 -----
Chapter

Talisapatra

Useful part - Patra (Leaf)
Rasadi panchaka

ose __| Kan ies Medhwre |
Via
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Madhura vipaka, Pitta Shamaka because
of Madhura vipaka. Kaphahara because of Katu Tikta rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Ruchikara, Dipana, Gulmaroganashaka, Mukharogahara,
Hridya, Krimighna, Hikkanigrahana, Chardinigrahana.
Pharmacological Actions

Antispasmodic, Emmenagogue, Antilithic, Antipyretic, Carminative, Expectorant,
Stomachic, Anticancer, Antifungel, Antibacterial, Antinflammatory.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Hridroga, Chardi, Aruchi, Mukharoga, Agnimandya and
Gulma.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

areftearget GaaaTes Beh Vet MATA: GA: SrA | (sa. 3/10/27)

Powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana) mixed with juice of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica)
leaves if taken it alleviates Kasa (Cough) caused by Kapha and Pitta. This combination is
very useful in all respiratory disorders.

2. Aruchi (Anorrexia)

Arete UE SAT: ARTA: ssseesesenenes SPAR: FM | (H.g.FA. 5/49)

Tablets prepared from powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana), Karpura (Cinnamom
camphora) and Sugarcandy promote taste.

----- PAGE 650 -----
642 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Taxinine, Taxine-A, Ephedrine, Betuloside, Taxagifin, B-Sitosterol, Hydrocyanic
acid, Tannin, Taxicatin, Taxyphyllin, and Ferredoxin are present in leaves.

Fruit contains Lycopene, B-Carotene, Rhodoxanthin and Zeaxanthin.

Research corner

1. The methanol extract of the dried leaves of Abies webbiana as evaluated for
antimicrobial activity. The methanol extract showed a broad spectrum of
antibacterial activity. Vishnoi SP, Ghosh AK, Debnath B, Samanta S, Gayen
S, Jha T. Antibacterial activity of Abies webbiana. Fitoterapia. 2007 Feb;
78(2):153-5. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

2. The methanol extract of A. Webbiana Lind] was evaluated for its effect on a
cough model induced by sulphur dioxide gas in mice. When administered
orally it exhibited significant antitussive activity compared with the control in
a dose dependent manner. Nayak SS, Ghosh AK, Srikanth, K, Debnath B, Jha
T. Antitussive activity of Abies webbiana Lindl. leaf extract against sulphur
dioxide-induced cough reflex in mice. Phytother Res. 2003 Sep; 17(8):930-2.

3. The leaves of A. Webbiana yielded methyl betuloside and betuloside. The
former had been isolated for the first item from a nasal source and the latter is
reoperated from the PANACEA family for the first time. Sarkar SK, Poddar
G, Mahato SB. Glucosides from Abies webbiana. Planta Med. 1987 Apr;
§3(2):219-20.

4. The present investigation was undertaken to evaluate the bronchodilating effect
and bronchial hyperreactivity of alcoholic extract to Taxus baccata Linn.
(AET) leaves in experimental animals. Treatment with AET (200 and 400 mg/
kg, p.o., for 7 days) showed significant protection against histamine and
acetylcholine aerosol induced bronchospasm in guinea pigs. Significant
decrease in the total leukocyte and differential leukocyte count in the BALF of
the egg albumin sensitized guinea pigs was observed by administration of AET
(200 and 400 mg/kg, p.o., for 15 days). AET dose dependently protected the
mast cell disruption induced by compound 48/80. These results suggest. that
AET not only has bronchodilating activity but also decreases bronchial
hyperreactivity by decreasing the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the airway
and inhibiting the release of histamine like mediators from the mast cell by

----- PAGE 651 -----
Talisapatra 643

stabilizing it Patel p, Patel K, Gandhi T. Evaluation of Effect of Taxus baccata
leaves Extract on Bronchoconstriction and Bronchial Hyperreactivity in
Experimental Animals. J Young Pharm. 2011 Jan; 3(1):41-7. doi: 10.4103/
0975-1483.76418.

5. Three lignan derivatives, (-)-taxiresinol (1), (-)-3’-demethylisolariciresinol-9'-
hydroxyisopropylether (2) and (-)-3-demethylisolariciresinol (3), Previously
isolated from the heart-wood to Taxus baccata L. (Taxaceae) were investigated
for cytotoxicity against the oncology Cell Line Panel (Breast, colon, ovary,
prostate, lung and a normal adult bovine aortic endothelial cell line) as well as
for antimicrobial activities. Erdemoglu N, Sener B,Choudhary Ml. Bioactivity
of Liganas from Taxus baccata. Z Naturforsch C. 2004 Jul-Aug; 59(7-8): 494-
8.

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

SI.No.
Botanical Name — Abies webbiana Lindle
Abies — A fur tree
webbiana — After the name of Mr P. Barkar Webb a naturalist.
Family — Pinaceae
Kula - Devadaru
Basonym of Drug
acta cerita t aertet i set: wae:

Talisapatra (Taxus buccata) is a plant growing on the high mountains.

Name of Yoga

Synonyms
Morphology
1. eettoa-enst ox eet UareT: |
Leaves of Talisapatra resemble like that of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis).
2. WAEN-WH BSA TEA: WATT: |
Talisapatra plant bears plenty of leaves.

----- PAGE 652 -----
o44 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Regional Names

Bir
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni — Karpuradi varga 114-115
Habitat

Talisapatra grows in Himalayan ranges.
Morphology

Abies Webbiana Lindl.Abies Webbiana Lindl

Habit — A small or medium sized evergreen tree.

Stem — Fluted

Branches — Horizontal, wide spreading, not
whorled

Leaves —2.5 to 4cm long, linear, flattened, dis-
tichous, acute, narrowed into a short petiole which is
decurrent along the twig, dark green and shining
above, pale yellowish brown or rusty red below.

Inflorescence — Male inflorescence is Catkin,
female is with solitary flower.

Flowers — Male flowers subglobose, 10 sta-
mens, with 5 to 9 pollen sacs.

Taxus baccata Linn.
(Talisa patra)

Female flowers resembling leaf buds, each con-
sisting of a few imbricate scales rounds a single erect
ovule, which is surrounded at the base by a membra-
nous cap shaped disk.

Fruit — In fruit the disk enlarges, becomes suc-
culent and bright red, about 7.5 mm long, and sur-

(Talisa patra)

----- PAGE 653 -----
Talisapatra 645

rounds the olive green seed of which only the tip is exposed.
Taxus baccata
Habit — A tree usually stunted.

Leaves — | to 2.5 cm long, spreading in all directions and densely covering the twigs
when viewed from above, more or less distichous when the twigs are seen from below.

Young shoots are clothed with short brown hairs.
Substitute

Rhododendron anthopogon D. Don

Abies pindrow Sparch

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):
Abies webbiana

Acicular leaves of leathery texture, 2.5 to 4 cm long and 3 to 4 mm broad, with a
prominent midrib, recurved margins and notched apex. The upper surface of the leaf is
rusty brown, while it is mealy white on under surface. The leaf breaks easily, has got
characteristic and agreeable odour. It tastes astringent.
Taxus baccata

Acicular, cuspidate leaves, 1.5 to 2.5 cm long 1 to 2 mm broad with a prominent
midrib and pointed apex. Upper surface is dark green, waxy, lower pale green in colour.
It tastes astringent and had turpentine like odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
aieieagth wage arses ATT (ATT. BETS TT 114)
Properties and Actions
aetet oy citer srerenrrearrearry | Prerereryeaar ena TATA
(a. afte vt 115)
(afi. wagenie aT 54)
acid frennge pitrarcencarrery | (S.A. stat at 1382)
aretrast fereatort met aemeraye | Hraeenreraaeeoted aed
(aA. frorenfa tT 184)

----- PAGE 654 -----
646 Dravyaguna Vijnana
areftaast dtevitent amardet AA aaret areswet agar Genftr greta
(B.fy. siaeenfe aT 102)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Talisapatra

a. Root b. Stem c. Leaf d. Fruit
Ans: c. Leaf

2. Vipaka of Talisapatra
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya

Ans: b. Madhura

3. Pradhana Karma of Talisapatra
a. Shwasahara b. Arshoghna c. Jwaraghna d. Trishnanigrahana
Ans: a. Shwasahara

4. Powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana) mixed with juice of Vasa (Adhatoda
vasica) leaves if taken it alleviates

a. Jwara b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Kasa
Ans: d. Kasa

5. Taxinine is present in
a. Devadaru b. Talisapatra c. Shunthi d. Haritaki

Ans: b. Talisapatra
6. Talisadya Churna is indicated in

a. Hridroga b. Vibandha c. Kasa d. Atisara
Ans: c. Kasa
7. Botanical name of Talisapatra
a. Abies webbiana b. Argemone mexicana
c. Sida cordifolia d. Cinnamomum tamala

Ans: a. Abbies webbiana

8. Dhatri Patra is a synonym of
a. Bhumyamalaki b. Jambu c. Agastya d. Talisapatra
Ans: d. Talisapatra

9. Rhododendron anthopogon is a substitute for
a. Rohitaka b. Talisapatra c. Nagakeshara d. Arjuna
Ans: b. Talisapatra

ROK RR OK

----- PAGE 655 -----
Chapter

Trivrit
TN,
Useful part: Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatahara (Bh. Pr.Ni) - because of Ushna virya. Kaphapittahara (Ka.Ni): Pittahara
because of Virechana karma and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and
Katu Tikta rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shweta trivrit — Rechana, Pittajwarahara, Shothahara, Udararogahara, Krimighna,

Pliharogahara, Pandurogahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Kandughna.

Shyama trivrit - Tikshna rechaka, Dahavardhaka, Murchakara, Bhramaprada,
Kantotkarshanakaraka.

Raka trivrit— Rechana, Malavishtambhaharaka
Agrya Karma

Fra Farraaryry | (FF, 25/40)

Trivrit (Operculina turpathum R.B.) is best for Virechana (Purgation).
Pharmacological Actions

Purgative, Antiinflammatory, Antibacteorial, Cathartic, Anthelminthic, Cardiac de-
pressant, Laxative, Antipyretic and Spasmodic.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shweta trivrit - Vibandha, Shotha, Jwara, Udara roga, Krimi, Pliha roga, Pandu,
Kushtha, Kandu and Vrana.

Shyama trivrit— As a Tikshna virechaka karma.

----- PAGE 656 -----
648 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note — It is considered as inferior variety.

Rakta trivrit — Vibandha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1, Arshas (Piles)

wader Rrgequl Brencreagay, eet yates ate treme Har II

(4.9, 25/40)

Powder of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum) is mixed with decoction prepared from
Triphala-Amalaki (Emblical officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) and Vibhitaki
(Terminalia belerica) given internally in case of Arshas (Piles).

2. Kamala (Jaundice)

aarrett freat arte Brera: wa: free | (af. 16/60)

Triphala (Kwatha (decoction) is mixed with powder of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum)
is efficacious in Kamala (Jaundice).

3. Jwara (Fever)

Pramerenracn: frasetorsamag: | (a.Fa. 3/209)
Trivrit (Operculima turpethum) powder taken with Sugar is useful in Jwara origi-
nated by Pitta and Kapha dosha.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 1 to 4 g

Phytoconstituents — Root contains a glycoside resin, which includes turpethin (5%),
ether insoluble glycoside, two ether soluble glycoside namely o:-turpethin (8%) B-turpethin
(0.5%). It also contains volatile oil, Coumarin, Scopoletin, Rhamnose, Vanillic acid,
Turpethinic acids C,D,E and Saponins.

Research corner
1. Ulcer preventive and ulcer protective activites of HAOP and MOP stem bark
extracts of Opercullina turpethum (100 mg/kg, b.w., orally) were evaluated
employing aspirint+pylorus ligation (APL) model in experimental rats. The
results suggested that both extracts (HAOP and MOP) possess enhanced ulcer
preventive and protective activities when compared with their standard drug
ranitidine. Lgnatius V, Narayanam M, Subramanian V, Periyasamy BM.
Antiulcer Activity of Indigenous Plant Operculina turpethum Linn. Evid based
Complement Alterant Med. 2013;2013:2722134. doi: 10.1155/2013/272134.

Epub 2013 Feb 11.

----- PAGE 657 -----
Trivrit 649

2. Three glycosidic acids, turpethic acids A-C, and two intact resin glycosides,
turpethosides A and B, all having a common pentasaccharide moiety and 12-
hydroxy fatty acid aglycones of different chain lengths, were obtained from the
aerial parts of Operculina turpethum. Ding W, Jiang ZH, Wu P, Xu L, Wei
X. Resin glycosides from the aerial parts of Opeculina turpethum.
Phytochemistry. 2012 Sep; 81:165-74. doi. 10.1016/j. phytochem. 2012.05.
010, Epub 2012 Jun 18.

3. Four new dammarane-type saponins, operculinosides A-D (1-4), were isolated
from the aerial parts of Operculina turpethum, of which 1 and 2 are the first
two dammarane-type triterpenoids having an oxymethyl group at C-24, Ding
W, Zeng F, Xu L, Chen Y, Wang Y, Wei X. Bioactive dammarance-type
saponins from Operculina turpethum. J. Nat Prod. 2011 Sep 23:74(9):1868-74.
doi. 10.1021/np 200274m. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

4. Antioxidant activity of methanolic extract of Operculina turpethum stems
(MEOT) on 7,12 dimethyllbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA) induced breast cancer
was investigated in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Changes in the levels of lipid
peroixidantion and antioxidants system was evaluated in addition to tumour
development. The result suggests that MEOT shows antioxidant activity and
play a protective role against DMBA induced breast cancer, Anbuselvam C,
Vijayavel K, Balasubramanian MP. Protective effect of Operculina turpethum
against DMBA induced breast cancer. Anbuselvam C, Vijayavel K,
Balasubramanian, MP. Protective effect of Operculina turpethum against 7,12-
dimethyl benz(a) anthracene induced oxidative stress with reference to breast
cancer in experimental rats. Chem Biol Interact. 2007 Jul 20;168(3):229-36.
Epub 2007 Apr 22.

5. In the present study it is examined that the therapeutic effects of OTE root
extract against NDMA-induced hepatotoxicity and clastogenicity in rats.
Results suggest that OTE has hepatoprotective and anti-clastogenic effects
against NDMA-induced hepatic fibrosis. Ahmad R, Ahmed S, Khan NU,
Hasnain AU. Operculina turpethum attenuates N-nitrosodimethylamine
induced toxic liver injury and clastogenicity in rats. Chem Biol Interact. 2009
Oct 7;181(2):145-53. doi:10.1016/j.cbi. 2009. 06.021. Epub 2009 Jul 7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yora Indications

Trivritadi ghrita Antravikara, Prameha

----- PAGE 658 -----
650 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Trivritadi modaka Agnimandya
Avipattikara churna

Amlapitta, Arshas
In Charaka Kalpasthana 7th Chapter totally 110 Virechana Yogas are mentioned:

Name of Yoga Number

Gomutra 18
Ksheeraadi ees
|
a Caaaeanees

Panaka

10 Rutu Anusara
11 Modaka
12

1 Tarpana
14

1

6

Botanical Name — Operculina turpethum Linn.

Operculina — Opening by a lid

turpethum — From English name

Family — Convolvulaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Trivrut kula

Basonym of Drug

Ae atone aa TN sft Frac Re: andar Brae, Pratorenvserel: 1

The stem of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum Linn.) is triangular.

----- PAGE 659 -----
Trivrit

Synonyms
Morphology
1. Prger-aa: Yer: fratoreargeM: |
Stem of Trivrit is triangular,
2. Bravdt-fAAr: arth: qosaa Hee seer
Trivrit has got triangular stem.
3, RTH TASTE: HLT TET |
Trivrit stem has got three angles.
4. wletaredt-alet got aed, srt: cHlerguiteard: |
Flowers of Trivrit are funnel shaped.
Properties and Actions
s. fyita:-Parate vite tara |
Trivrit is very useful drug in Oedema.
6. Yart-teacife |
Trivrit is regarded as one of the safest purgative.
7, WeT-aRate wet ole a Sra; Ge ara aT
Trivrit is regarded as safe purgative.
8. Matqyfe:-aeeqyadtsea: Ware gle
Trivrit is one of the useful drugs and utilized in many disorders.
Regional Names
English
Hindi Nisoth

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Bhedaniya varga, Asthapanopaga varga
Sushruta Shyamadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 193-196

Habitat
Trivrit is found throughout India, especially grows in plains.

651

----- PAGE 660 -----
652 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - Perennial twiner with milky juice.

Root - Long, slender, fleshy, much
branched..

Stem - Very long twining and twisted to-
gether, angled and winged, pubescent, tough and
becomes brown after sometimes.

Leaves — Simple, 5 to 10 cm long, 1 to7 cm
wide, ovate or oblong more or less pubescent or
both the sides. Petiole is 2 to 5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Few flowered cyme, pe-
duncle stout, 2 to 5 cm long.

Operculina turpethum Silva. M

Flower — Pedicels 0.5 to 2.5 cm long, stout,
pubescent, slightly thickened upwards. Outer se-
pals 2 cm long, inner sepals are smaller. Corolla is white, 4 to 5 cm long, subcompanulate.

Fruit — Capsule, 8 mm in diameter, globose, enclosed in enlarged brittle imbricate
sepals.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni—2 types: 1. Shweta trivrit 2. Shyama trivrit
Ra.Ni- 2 types: 1. Trivrit 2. Rakta trivrit

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Root is stout, cylindrical 1 to 3 cm diameter surface is reddish brown in colour,
having longitudinal furrows. Internally the root shows a thick bark and a central woody
portion which is twisted and gives a rope like or columnar appearance; transversely cut
portion shows an easily separating bark followed by a porous surface of dirty white colour
depicting distinct cortical and vascular zones. The cortex is loaded with a resin of pale
yellowish colour. On breaking becomes short at bark portion and fibrous in central woody
part. Does not have any odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
Shweta trivrit -
dara Bast ere frgen Bryetstr a water: wen Fryttear Tarte ea
(a. Weeae aT 193)

----- PAGE 661 -----
Trivrit 653

Shyama trivrit -

Prevoorsaerar a urferdt a yafirent | referer areft aaftrent arereftrear
(a3. Tene TH 195)

Properties and Actions

Shweta trivrit -

dat fare ereageomn wihed | war frrsaserafirrgiararce 1
(Ly. Weeate at 194)

Shyama trivrit -

vant Baad dagen diafetest 1 qeataeneutravctendurenkott 1
(a5. Female FT 196)

Paar aceon g Hitsatetarsard | vinaTTgarrectter eet Her aA
(afr. quate wt 237)

Shuktabhandi -

aaa TERT ato feratas Heat Pra | rafter wan Tbe
(afr. Wweae wt 239)

Trivrit -

fragam mefterat wareatat Perret | aera HTT ae aHeAf ITE Ut

wanteroteurgaurrertrert 0 (af. sitet at 10716-1017)

Shyama trivrit -

act daqungarn diem diafitadt | austenite yeotae Wavy
(fA. sitet af 1019)

Trivrit -

faafren wae o feattrscreterietard, | HeRTSATMT Ehet Wee a PTT Ut
(aA. foreenfe eT 167)

Rakta trivrit -
cet Prager agen tadt a at 1 Devitrerfrsrrerftot fecenitatt

(a.Fr. frorente TT 169)
don aataitety Gaar sacar ar rae | var Brea act UT Aten
saa yet Hater oat ui (A. frorenfe ef 37-38)

----- PAGE 662 -----
654

—

to

10.

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Trivrit

a. Phala b. Mula c. Keshara d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula

. Virechana Karma of Trivrit is attributed to

a, Rasa b. Guna c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: c. Prabhava

. Trivrit is regarded as

a. Tikshna Virechana b. Mradu Virechana
c. Vibandhakara d. Sukha Virechaka
Ans: d. Sukha Virechaka

. Triphala (Kwatha (decoction) is mixed with powder of Trivrit (Operculina

turpethun) is efficacious in
a. Kamala b. Ajirna c. Atisara d. Anidra

Ans: a. Kamala

. Avipattikara churna is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Amlapitta c. Atisara d. Raktapitta
Ans: b. Amlapitta

. Total number of Virechana Yogas of Trivrit mentioned in 7" Chapter of Kalpa

Sthana
a. 133 © b 18 c. 60 d. 110
Ans: d. 110

. Botanical name of Trivrit
a. Papaver somnifera b. Andrographis paniculata
c. Operculina turpethum d. Croton tiglium

Ans: c. Operculina turpethum

. Nishotha is a synonym of

a. Haritaki b. Trivrit c. Haridra d. Daruharidra
Ans: b. Trivrit

. Habit of Trvrit Plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Twiner d. Herb
Ans: c. Twiner

Varieties of Trivrit

a, Shyama and Aruna_ b, Nila and Shyama

c. Shyma and Krishna d. Shweta and Pingala

Ans: a. Shyama and Aruna

3 2 2 ak oR

----- PAGE 663 -----
a

Useful parts — Patra (Leaf)
adi panchaka

Ras

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Hi ikkanig rahana, Hridya, Dahakara, Dipana, Kushthaghna,
parshwaShulanashaka, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Chardighna, Dourgandhyahara,
Vishaghna and Jwarahara.

Pharmacological Activities

Antiasthmatic, Antirheumatic, Antistress, Antibacterial, Antifungal, Antiviral, Anti-
fertility, Abortifacient, Hypogly-caemic, Antispasmodic, Antifertility, Abortifacient,
Hypoglycaemic, Antispasmodic, Antipyretic, Antiulcer, Antiinflammatory, Anticancer
and Hypotensive.

Doshkarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara owing to
its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Parshwashula, Hridroga, Agnimandya, Kushtham, Krimi,
Mukhadourgandhya, Aruchi, Chardi, Jwara and Vishavikara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

ett cr epafat GET TATAT THE evs Praha frersaey ui (MG. 2/1/10)
Juice of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) taken with powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) is
Very useful in Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

2 Kasa (Cough)
Waly: aamenrerer: BeeeerTea | CIR. 18/117)

----- PAGE 664 -----
656 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Juice of black Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) if taken will honey alleviated Kasq (Cough
originated by Kapha dosha.
3. Shitapitta (Uriticaria)

Brareardatea creat weary tl (ALLY. 348)

Applications of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) juice is th best remedy for Shitapitta (y,.
ticaria).
Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Bija churna (Powder) — 1 to2 g
Phytoconstituents —- Leaves contain Cardinene, Camphere, Carvacro],
Caryophyllene, 1:8-Cineole, Decyladehyde, Eugenaol, Humelene, Limonene,
Methylchavicol, a and B-pinenes, Ascorbic acid, B-Carotene, Apigenin, Oreantin and
Ursolic acid.
Total plant has ascorbic acid, Carotene, Alkaloids, Glycosides, Saponins and Tan-
nin.
Seed contains sitosterol, Palmitic, Stearic, Oleic, Linoleic and Linolenic acids.
Research corner
1. In gastric epithelial tissue different derivatives of Ocimum sanctum had
antiulcer and anti-secretary characteristics and could heal gastric ulceration.
These beneficial properties of this medicinal plant fan mainly contribute to its
major biochemically active constituents like eugenol, carvacrol, rosolic and,
Anti-Inflammatory, Gastrointestinal and Hepatoprotective Effects of Ocimum
sanctum Linn: and Ancient Remedy with New application. Inflamm Allergy
Drug Targets. 2013 Nov 24. [Epub ahead of print].
2. In the present study, effect of different pharmacological doses (1.0, 0.1, 0.01
and 0.001 mg/mL) of O. sanctum crude extract were used to determine their
impact on life span, thermotolerance and ROS scavenging activities in C.
elegans. The results revealed that 1 mg/mL of O. sanctum extract significantly
extended the life span of C. elegans. Pandey R, Gupta S, Shukla V, Tandon
S, Shukla V. Antiaging, antistress and ROS scavenging activity of crude
extract of Ocimum sanctum (L.) in Caenorhabditis elegans (Maupas, 1900).
Indian J. Exp Biol. 2013 Jul;51(7):515-21.
3. The aim of this study was to study the anxiolytic effects of Ocimum sanctum
stress-induced anxiety. Ocimum sanctum possess significant anti stress activitY

----- PAGE 665 -----
Tulasi 657

but the magnitude and efficacy for relieving stress is less, when compare to
standard anxiolytic agent, i.c. Alprazolam, Bathala LR, Rao ChY, Manjunath
S, Vinuta S, Vemulapalli R. Efficacy of Ocimum sanctum for relieving stress:
a preclinical study. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2012 Nov 1:13(6):782-6.

4. An ameliorating effect of Ocimum sanctum on the toxic effect of meloxicam,
a new non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug was studied by evaluating
haemato-biogeochemical parameters, oxidative stress, grows and
histopathological changes in various orangs of Wistar rats. The Ocimum
sanctum could only counteract the toxic effect of meloxicam in liver and
gastrointestinal tract. Maharprabhu R, Bhandarkar AG, Jangir BL,
Rahangadale SP, Kurkure NV. Ameliorative effect of Ocimum sanctum on
meloxicam induced toxicity in wistar rats. Toxicol Int. 2011 jul; 18(2):130-6.
doi: 10.4103/097 1-6580.84265.

5. The antioxidant effects of Ocimum sanctum in experimental streptozocin-
induced diabetic rats was evaluated in this study. Administration of O. sanctum
to streptozocin-induced diabetic rats for 30 days significantly reduced the
plasma level of TBARS and improved the status of the antioxidant enzymes
catalase, SOD and glutathione peroxide in vital organs such as the liver and
kidney. Muralikrishnan G, Pillai SK, Shakeel F. Protective effects of Ocimum
sanctum on lipid protestation and antioxidant status in streptozocin-induced
diabetic rats. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(5):474-8. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2010.
531016. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Name of Yoga Indications

Surasadi kwatha
Vataguina
Botanical Name— Ocimum sanctum Linn.

Ocimum — Derived from a Greek word Okimon. Okimon in Greek means smell
sanctum — Holy, used for religious purpose.

Family — Lamiaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Tulasi kula

----- PAGE 666 -----
658 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

areata wits, aitafirg wheter:
Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) is regarded as the best drug.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, THRT-DTA TTA sar |
Tulasi is very common plant grown in all villages.
2. YRM- aaa |
Tulasi plant can be seen everywhere.
Morphology
3. Agratl-aet ARa SM: |

Tulasi has got many spikes.

4. Sageha:-sarat Fela: Tar |

The spikes of Tulasi resemble a trumpet.

Properties and Actions
5. yeet-qure: |
Tulasi leaves are having particular odour.
6. Weett-et Setter |

Tulasi is effective in painful conditions.

7. GOATS VASE: MTT TET Aa TTS TAS |

Juice extracted from Tulasi is very useful in many diseases.

8. atenrardt-arten: Prarkter wearer stare: yeaa: |

Tulasi brings back normalcy by alleviating many diseases.

Regional Names

English Holy basil

----- PAGE 667 -----
Tulasi 659

Malayalam Shiva Tulasi

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Shwasahara varga

Sushruta — Surasadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Pushpa varga 62-63

Habitat

Tulasi is found throughout India. Commonly
cultivated in front of the house and worshipped.
Morphology

Habit— A perennial herb with a typical aromatic
smell.

Stem — Erect, branched, quadrangular, slightly
woody, solid, branches covered with soft hairs.

Leaf — Simple, opposite, short petioled, exstipu-
late, ovate, serrate, acute, gland dotted and has} Ocimum sanctum Linn. (Tulasi)
unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence — Verticillaster

Flowers —Pedicellate, bracteate, bracts are small and caducous, bisexual, zygomor-
phic, complete, purple and hypogynous. Sepals are five, gamosepalous, bilabiate, peta-
loid, gland dotted with imbricate aestivation. Petals are five, gamosepalous and bilabiate.
Androecium contains four stamens, polyandrous and didynamous. Gynoecium is
bicarpellary synacarpous, ovary is bilocular in early stage but tetralocular in later stage.

Fruit — Schizocarps, carcerulus, four nut lets developed.
Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni —2 types : 1. Shweta tulasi 2. Krishna tulasi

Different varieties

SI.No: English Name Sanskrit Botanical Name
[i | Holybasl
Shurby basil Phaninjaka Ocimum gratissimum

----- PAGE 668 -----
660 Dravyaguna Vijnana

i ; 0
P 6 [Bush bast | arubaka [Ocimum minimum

Graliya laxana (Genie characteristics)

Leaves are elliptic oblong, entire or sub serrate leaves with round or sub cordate
base, up to 6 cm long and 2 to 3 cm broad, sometimes attached to tender branches. Upper
surface is downy, bright green in colour. Lower surface is lighter colour with prominent
pinnately reticulate veins with minute gland dots. Has got aromatic odour, taste is pungent
with cooling after taste.

Classical references
Synonyms

geet Gear ore Yer AEH | antaardt wht yao sageghr: 1
(AF. I at 62)

Properties and Actions
Gert agar force gato settee | det epee RATATAT, I
Yat Ho a Gere Preqea wafer ui (as. YT TT 63)
qeet agen a ean wake | phat Pextet where atedtett
(afi. arth at 46)
Gert qeafercer fantom agate wer ger ery: weet areftreny ae
Warmannare aaa | chiar deR Hoerrpeagyrgy Wary Il
(df. atsftert 1554-1556)
aor weft yee: seorarahe | qatar efahard Miche
sarearetenttrerttrsparcerttutt gat u (wf. acts Ft 150-151)
geet wean fer ator amarced | fren atett eareasay STATTATTRT
(R.A. magne wt 150)

----- PAGE 669 -----
—

Tulasi 661

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Tulasi

a. Arshghna b. Stambhana c. Shwasa hara_ d. Dipana
Ans: c. Shwasa hara

. Juice of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) taken with powder of Maricha (Piper

nigrum) is very useful in
a. Vishama Jwara b. Kushtha c. Krimi d. Ajirna
Ans: a. Vishama Jwara

. Applications of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) juice is th best remedy for

a. Vyanga b. Vaivarnya c. Sthoulya d. Shitapitta
Ans: d. Shitapitta ,

. Tulasiswarasadya Taila Nasya is beneficial in

a. Shiroroga b. Putinasa c. Vishwachi d. Ardita
Ans: b. Putinasa

. Botanical name of Tulasi

a. Ocimum basillicum b. Oroxylum indicum
c. Ocimum sanctum _— d. Leucas aspera
Ans: c. Ocimum sanctum

. Sulabha and Devadundubhi are the synonyms of

a. Apamarga b. Tulasi c. Ardraka d. Punarnava
Ans: b. Tulasi

. Apetarakshasi is a synonym of

a. Musta b. Vidanga c. Devadaru d. Tulasi
Ans: d. Tulasi

. Habit of Tulasi plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

. Types of Tulasi as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 3 b, 2 c. 4 d. 5
Ans: b. 2

Do 2 a

----- PAGE 670 -----
Twak

Useful part — Twak (Bark)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Dourgandhyahara, Balya, Trishnahara, Vishaghna, Mukharoga hara,

Bastishodhaka, Jantughna, Ruchya, Kandughna, Kanthashuddhikara, Dipana, Pachana,
Kasahara, Arshoghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Carminative, Antispasmodic, Aromatic, Stimulant, Haemostatic, Antiseptic, Sto-
machic, Germicide, Antiinflammatory, Antiarthritic, Antihyperglycemic and
Antihyperlipidemic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Ushna virya, Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Kasa, Shwasa, Pratishyaya, Pinasa, Chardi, Trishna, Agnimandya, Mukharoga,
Jantu vikara, Aruchi, Kandu, Arshas and Shirashula.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

catrenftorett aftiterche ayo: ware afttar: afer: attxatier areca:

Tara: rae alee HATTA: WN (31.g.FF 5/33-34)

Powder of Twak (Cinnamomum zeylanicum), Ela (Elattaria cardamomum), Pippali
(Piper longum), Kshira (Curcuma angustifolia) and Sugar mixed in successively double

quantity taken with honey and ghee in case of Kasa (Cough). It is also useful in Asthma,
Chest pain and to improve voice.

----- PAGE 671 -----
Twak 663

2. Paittika Shiroroga (Headache due to Pitta)
catrenftrorelt afthtercher fire: srerrer, | epfofer: srfézerr: etterftter erreretfgar:
waar: HraaaaTaaraeas BHATIA: WN (31. 5/33-34)
Paste of Twak (Cinnamomum zeylanicum), Patra (Cinna-momum tamala) and Sugar

should be mixed with rice water and used as a Avapida nasya (Snuff) it is efficacious in
headache originated by Pitta dosha.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) —- 0.5tolg

Taila (Oil) — 3to6drops

Phytoconstituents — Bark and leaf contains volatile oil, cinnamic acid, resin, tannin,
sugar, starch mucilage, phellandrene, pinne, linalol, caryophyllene and eugenol.

Research corner

1. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of the
polypheno fraction from Cinnamomum zeylanicum bark (CPP) in animal
models of inflammation and rheumatoid arthritis. Dose-response studies of CPP
(50, 100 and 200 mg/kg) used in a separate set of in vivo experiments were
conducted in acute (Carrageenan-induced rat paw edema), subacute (Cotton
pellet-induced granuloma) and sub-chronic (AIA, adjuvant-induced established
polyarthritis) models of inflammation in rats and the acetic acid-induced
writhing model of pain in mice. CPP demonstrated prominent action in animal
models of inflammation and arthritis and therefore can be considered as a
potential anti-rheumatic agent with disease-modifying action. Rathi B,
Bodhankar, S, Mohan V, Thakurdesai P. Ameliorative Effects of a
Polyphenolic Fraction of Cinnamomum zeylanicum L. Bark in Animal Models
of Inflammation and Arthritis. Sci Pharm. 2013 Jun; 81(2):567-89. doi:
10.3797/scipharm. 1301-16. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

2. This study aimed to investigate the likelihood of detrimental effects of carbon
tetrachloride (CCl (4). Yuce A, Turk G, Ceribasi S, Guvenc M, Ciftci M,
Sonmez M, Ozer Kaya S, Cay M, Aksakal M. Effectiveness of cinnamon
(Cinnamomum zeylanicum) bark oil in the prevention of carbon tetrachloride-
induced damages on the male reproductive system. Andrologia. 2013 Feb 15.
doi: 10.1111/and.12072.

3. The present work investigates the acute and chronic antihypertensive effects of
the methanol extract of Cinnamomum zeylanicum stem bark (MECZ) in L-
NAME-induced hypertensive rats. MECZ possesses antihypertensive and

----- PAGE 672 -----
664 Dravyaguna Vijnana

organ protective effects that may result from its ability to increase the
production of the endogenous NO and/or to regulate dyslipidemia. 7. Nyadjeu
P, Nguelefack-Mbuyo EP, Atsamo AD, Nguelefack TB, Dongmo AB,
Kamanyi A. Acute and chronic antihypertensive effects of Cinnamomum
zeylanicum stem bark methanol extract in L-NAME-induced hypertensive rats.
BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Jan 31;13:27. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-
13-2.

4. To investigate the effects of cinnamaldehyde (CA), an active and major
compound in cinnamon, on glucose metabolism and insulin reistance in
C57BLKS/J db/db miec. CA has antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic
actions in db/db mice and could be useful in the treatment of type-2 diabetes.
Li J, Liu T, Wang L, Guo X, Xu T, Wu L, Qin L, Sun W. Antihyperglycemic
and antihyperlipidemic actions in db/db mice and could be useful in the
treatment of type-2 diabetes. Li J, Liu T, Wang L, Guo X, Xu T, Wu L, Qin
L, Sun W. Antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic actions of
cinnamaldehyde in C57BLKS/J db/db mice. J Tradit Chin Med. 2012 Sep;
32(3):446-52.

5. The goal of this study is to investigate the in vivo and in vitro inhibitory effect
of necrosis factor (TNF)-i and its underlying intracellular mechanisms.
Treatment with CWE decreased LPS-induced TNF-i in serum. In vitro
inhibiton of TNF-{ gene by CWE may occur vita the modulation of IkB?
degradatin and JNK, p38, and ERK 1/2 activation. Our results also indicate
that the observed anti-inflammatory action of CWE may originate from the
presence of polyphenols. Hong JW, Yang GE, Kim YB, Eom SH, Lew JH,
Kang H. Anti-inflammatory activity of cinnamon water extract in vivo and in
vitro LPS-induced models. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Nov
28;12:237. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-12-237.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name of Yoga ~ | Indications

Talisadya churna Kasa, Shwasa

----- PAGE 673 -----
Twak 665

Botanical Name — Cinnamomum zeylanica Blume.

Cinnamomum — Derived from a Greek word. Kinno-mononon means bright colour,
brown mixed with yellow and red.

Family — Lauraceae

Kula - Karpura kula

Basonym of Drug
WHAT aH, eer HOTA Tarek
Bark of Cinnamomum zeylanicum plant is commonly used.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. aafreaqeat wragit arery |
Twak plant grows wild.
2. Seerq-Rgerast aT |
Twak plant is very common in Sri Lanka.
Morphology
3. adare-adageT Taare |
Leaves of Cinnamomum are leathery.
Properties and Actions
4. GTT-WIT TAS |
The bark is very useful.
5. Sem|enq-ctant Teer |
The bark is highly aromatic.
6. AE TYTT TAT |
The bark is having strong odour.
7. TSAR-TS FA MAGA A |
Bark is having sweet taste.
8. aen- faut dea |

Bark has got good Aroma.

. Favtery-ye viteractt qayitert wae |

ie}

----- PAGE 674 -----
666 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Cleanses the mouth hence used for cleaning the mouth.

Regional Names

Malayalam

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Eladi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 66-67
Habit

Twak plant is cultivated in Western and
Southern India.

Morphology
Habit — Moderate sized ever green tree.

Bark — Thick, smooth, pale coloured.
Twigs are often compressed, young parts gla-
brous except the buds which are finely silky.

Leaves — Opposite, or sub opposite, hard
and coriaceous, 7.5 to 20 cm long 4 to 7.5 cm
wide, ovate or ovate lanceolate, subacute, gla-
brous and shinning above, slightly paler be- . -
neath, base acute or rounded, main nerves 3 to Cinnamomum zeylanica Blume.
5 from the base or nearly so, strong, reticulate
venation, petioles 1 to 2.5 cm long, flattened above.

Inflorescence — Panicle, peduncles are long, often clustered, glabrous or pubescent.
Flowers — Numerous, pedicels are long. Perianth 5 to 6 mm long.

Fruit — 1 to 1.5 cm long, oblong or ovoid-oblong, minutely apiculate, dry or slightly
fleshy, dark purple, surrounded by the enlarged campanulate perianth which is 8 mm in
diameter.

----- PAGE 675 -----
Twak 667

Varieties

Classical texts have not mentioned varieties, but commercially three types are avail-
able in the market.

1. Chinese 2. Sinhali 3. Indian
Substitute

Cinnamomum tamala Nees and Ebem.
Market Sample

Market sample contains single, double or closely packed, compound quills of vary-
ing length up to 2.5 cm in diameter and 0.5 mm to 1 mm in thickness. Outer surface is
deep fawn or yellowish brown in colour with shining wavy lines running longitudinally
and occasional scars and holes. Inner surface is dark brown with faint straight striations.
On breaking become short pieces. Does have a characteristic pungent and mucilaginous
taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
TARAS Ff TSR SSAA Ae | (ALT. HYAMS TT 66)
Properties and Actions
sent ateften tart frrerahreaftrrat, | GAT: YReM AEM FSMATATET
(ais. adate at 67)
aig oy aeniteat marae | Hvsderest eed Steger Me UN
(af. magenfe at 51)
ireraferenusenraragarayened | (4.9. staftrert 1337-1338)
TIE hoch Miler Hay, | RTT Set Hua fegat A Ul
(aA. froenfert 172)
wae tara Heferratem fren ernated | tart wrest Sear Sra arsaraGe Mt
(RA. etree FT 90)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Twak
a. Mula b. Pushpa c. Bija d. Twak

Ans: d. Twak

----- PAGE 676 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

_ Main indication of Twak
a. Kushtha b. Amlapitta c. Kasa d. Atisara
Ans: c. Kasa

_ Cinnamic acid a chemical constituent present in
a. Arka b. Twak c. Apamarga d. Punarnava
Ans: b. Twak

. Botanical name of Twak

a. Cinnamomum zeylanica

c. Cinnamomum tamala

Ans: a. Cinnamomumzeylanica

_ Simhala and Chocham are the synonyms of
b. Maricha

b. cinnamomum camphora
d. Solanum nigrum

a. Pippali c. Kankola d. Twak

Ans: d. Twak
_ Charmanama and Gudatwak are the synonyms of

a. Arjuna b. Twak c. Lodhra d. Ashwattha
Ans: b. Twk

. Habit of Cinnamomum plant
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: c. Tree

eR

----- PAGE 677 -----
Chapter

Ushira

Useful part = Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

[Rose [Tea aura

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata pitta Shamaka vatahara due to Madhura vipaka. Pittashamaka because of
Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Madhura rasa.

Karima (Actions)

Trishnahara, Dahashamaka, Mutrala, Jwarghna, Chardinigrahana, Vishaghna,
Visarpahara, Vranaropaka, Mehahara, Swedahara, Dourgandhyanashaka, Pachana,
Kushthaghna, Rakadoshahara.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Trishna, Daha, Jwara, Chardi, Mutra krichra, Kushtha, Visarpa, Prameha,
Dourgandhya, Atisweda and Raktapitta.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Jwara (Fever)
qerndeayit aeteermt: | petted wet cere rarer SaTTTS
(aft 3/145)
Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) is one of the ingredients of Shadanga paniya and effi-
cacious remedy in case of Jwara (Fever).
2. Chardi (Vomiting)
Ret fra arate at wares aUgeeTagg tt (af 20/32)

In case of vomiting patient has to take Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) and Balaka
(Pavonia odorata) with rice water. It checks vomiting.

:

----- PAGE 678 -----
670 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5¢g
Phanta - 30 to 60 ml

Phytoconstituents — Root contains, Isobisabolene, Khusol, Husinol, Khusilal.
Isokhusimol, Khusimol, Khusimone, Vetiselinenol, Zizanol, Zizanene, Zizanoic acid,
epizizanoic acid, Acoradiene, -Vetivone, eregenol, Vanillin and B-Vetivones.

Research corner

1. To evaluate anticonvulsant activity of ethanol extract of V. zizanioides (EEVZ)
in experimental mice. Findings demonstrate that V. zizanioides shows
significant anticonvulsant activity in mice. Gupta R, Sharma KK, Afzal M,
Damanhouri ZA, Ali B, Kaur R, Kazmi I, Anwar F. Anticonvulsant activity
of ethanoil exacts of Vetiveria zizanioides roots in experimental mice. Phrm
Biol. 2013 Dec; 51(12):1521-4. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013. 799710. Epub
2013 jul 18.

2. Vetiveria zizanioides L. Nash (Family: Poaceae) root (Intact and spent) extracts
and fractions were evaluated for antimycobacterial activity against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H(37)Rv and H(37)Ra strains using radiometric
BACTEC 460 TB system. Results suggest that ethanolic extract and hexane
fraction exhibited potent antimycobacterial activity. Saikia D, Parveen S, Gupta
VK, Luqman S. Anti-tuberculosis activity of Indian grass KHUS (Vetiveria
zizanioides L. Nash). Complement Their Med. 2012 Dec; 20 (6):434-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ctim. 2012.07.010. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

3. In the present study, ferric reducing, free radical scavenging and antioxidant
activity of two genotypes namely KS1 and gulabi of V. zizanioides L. Nash
root were investigated using in vitro assays-the ferric reducing antioxidant
power (FRAP), 1,1-diphenyl-2-picylhydrazyl (DPPH), total phenolic content
(TPC), total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and reducing power (RP). The cv KS1
showed better antioxidant activity, compared to cv gulabi indicting the
possibility of exploring the presence of different phytoconstituents in the two
varieties. Luqgman S, Kumar R, Kaushik S, Srivastava S, Darokar MP,
Khanuja SP. Antioxidant potential of the root of Vetivera zizanioides were (L.)
Nash. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2009 Feb; 46(1):122-5.

4. The chemical components of the volatiles from Vetiveria zizanioides were
analyzed by SPME and GC-MS. In the roots, the main component was
valencne (30.36%), while in the shoots and leaves, they were 9-
octadecenamide (33.50%), 2,6,10,15,19,23 hexamethyl-2,6,10,14,18,22-

----- PAGE 679 -----
Ushira 67)

tetracosahexaene (27.46%), and 1,2-benzendicarboxylic acid, diisooctyl ester
(18.29%). The results showed that there were many terpenoids in theviolates.
In shoot volatiles, there existed 3 monoterpenes, 2 sequiterpenes and |
triterpene. Most of the volatiles in roots were sesquiterpenes. Huang J, Li H,
Yang J, Chen Y, Liu Y, Li N, Nie C. Chemical components of Vetiveria
zizanioides volatiles. Ying Yong Sheng Tai Xue Bao. 2004 Jan; 15 (1):170-2.

5. Study investigated the effects of volatile compounds emitted from the cut roots
of V. zizanioides (1.0 g, low-dose conditions; 30 g, high-dose conditions) on
individuals during a visual display terminal task. The findings indicate that
volatile compounds emitted from the roots of V. zizanioides under low-dose
conditions may have helped subjects to maintain performance in visual
discrimination tasks while maintaining high sympathetic nerve system activity,
Matsubara E, Shimizu K, Fukagawa M, Ishizi Y, Kakoi C, Hatayama T,
Nagano J, Okamoto T, Ohnuki K, Kondo R. Volatiles emitted from the roots
of Vetivera zizanioides suppress the decline in attention during a visual display
terminal task. Biomed Res. 2012;33(5):299-308.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI-No.

Name of Indications
Ushiradikwatha
Ushiradichura

Botanical Name — Vetiveria zizanoides Linn. Nash

Ushiradya taila

Vetiver — Derived from Tamil word which means root that is dug up.
zizanoides — Which means by the river side.

Family — Poaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Yava kula

Basonym of Drug

Bet FATS Tea: TEAS OHA Fe |

Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) is liked by many people because of its sweet scent and
taste.

----- PAGE 680 -----
672 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1, WAATAT-Het Tete get I
Ushira grows commonly near water resources.
Morphology
2. YOMAA- TOT FF ge
Ushira stem appears similar to lotus stem.
Properties and Actions
3, Aes Ae We carla ster
Ushira has got pleasant Aroma.
4, AMAA Wet AEM: AT |
Ushira is useful in many diseases, so no fear of any disease.
5. Beary aferg aires Serafegrencary seer |
Ushira is very useful in diseases like fever etc.
Regional Names

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Varnya varga, Stanyajanana varga, Chardinigrahana varga,
Angamardaprashamana varga, Dahaprashamana varga,
Shukrashodhana varga

Sushruta  Sarivadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 86-88

Habitat

Ushira is grown throughout India especially in plains of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and South Indian states.

----- PAGE 681 -----
Ushira 673

Morphology

Habit - A densely tufted perennial grass. Root
stock branching with spongy aromatic roots. Culms
stout, upto 5 ft high, usually sheated all along.

Leaf sheaths compressed, especially the lower
sheaths which are sharply keeled, fan-like, very
smooth and firm, ligules reduced to a scarious rim,
blades narrowly linear, acute, 30 to 90 cm long and
4 to 10 mm wide, erect, rigid, firm or somewhat
spongy, pale green, midrib slender, lateral nerves
close, six of more on each side, margin spinousely | Vetiveria zizanoides Linn-N.
rough. (Usira)

Inflorescence — Raceme, upto 5 cm long, very
slender, more or less rough, minutely and unequally cililate, pedicels similar.

Sessile spikelet linear-lanceolate to almost linear, acute 4 mm long, yellowish or
violet brown or purplish in colour. Involucral glumes are acute, coriaceous, 5 nerved.
Lower floral glume as long as the involucral glumes.

Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Roots are fibrous, wiry, up to 2 mm in diameter, longitudinally grooved, cream, grey
or light yellow to brown in colour. Has got very strong aromatic odour. Taste is slightly
bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
dione g yet Srgeht ares ad | Tes Hers Tarbes Praft
(a1.9. HYate Tt 86)
Properties and Actions
Tonsetractadae Prapaqwrgey i (AT. HYUe FT 87-88)
Suit vitcet fereh creaerPaet A Ad | arte VataUAETareh ea arta:
soit Medhizatieret Rarafermeany i (af. aaert 14)
qTorafarchiaa peppeattrarary it (Ft. siteftract 1369-1370)

----- PAGE 682 -----
674

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Ushira

a. Mula b. Twak c. Bija
Ans: a. Mula

. Vipaka of Ushira
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Tikta

Ans: b. Madhura

. Ushirasava is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Kushtha c. Raktapitta
Ans: c. Raktapitta

. Shadanga Paniya is specifically indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Raktapitta c. Kshavathu
Ans: d, Jwara

. Botanical name of Ushira

a. Vetiveria zizanoides b. Achyranthes aspera
c. Saussurea lappa d. Albizzia lebbeck
Ans: a. Vetiveria zizanoides

. Nalada and Sevya are the synonyms of

a. Jatamansi b. Musta c. Ushira

Ans: c. Ushira

. Habit of Ushira plant

a. Tree b. Tufted grass —_c. Creeper
Ans: b. Tufted grass

seo aR eK

seit vitret fark STATUTE | WaT ae Teafrt Wes ACY aa
qorrestateraty erarttrera werere 1 (A.A. wage at 40-41)

d. Patra

d. Amla

d. Hridroga

d. Jwara

d. Manjishtha

d. Twinner

----- PAGE 683 -----
Chapter

Vacha

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)

Rasadi pancaka

Laghu Tikshna

Karma (Actions)

Medhya, Lekhana, Vamaka, Dipana, Vibandhahara, Adhmanahara, Shulaghna,
Mutra vishodhaka, Jantughna, Kanthya, Pachana, Mukharogahara, Swaraprada,
Unmada rogahara, Apasmarahara, Jwaraghna, Atisaraghna, Bhutaghna.

Shweta vacha

Medhya, Vrishya, Krimighna, Dipana.
Pharmacological Actions

Vermifuge, Carminative, Tranguilizer, Sedative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya,
Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Unmada, Apasmara, Sthoulya, Murcha, Agnimandya. Ajirna, Arshas, Krimi,
Udarashula, Jwara, Adhmana, Vibandha, Mukharoga, Swarasada, Atisara and
Mutradosha.

Shweta vacha

Smritinasha, Klaibya, Krimi and Agnimandya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Apasmara (Epilepsy)

smnscnisisdeewied area aT wea | (AAA 10/64)

----- PAGE 684 -----
676 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Vacha (Acorus calamus) powder taken with honey is very useful in Apasmara (Epi-
lepsy).
2. Shotha (Oedema)

TAATT Hes WAT: MATA: | (FZ. 40/22)

Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Sarshapa (Brasica campestris) if applied
reduces Shotha (Oedema).

3. Suryavarta

aist erga garaged: | Atay aT AAT HE AYA: (GS. 26/33)

Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Magadhi (Piper longum) is mixed with honey,
then used as an Avapidana Nasya (Snuff). It will be useful in Suryavarta.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna_ — 0.5 to 1 g (Oushadhartha)

1 to 3 g (Vamanartha)

Phytoconstituents — Rhizome of Vacha contains 1.5 to 3.5% of volatile oil, Starch,
Resin (2.5%) and tanin (1.5%). Volatile oil contains asaraldehyde, Asarone and eugenol.
Other constituents include B-asarone, Calamenol, Calamene, Calamenone, Methyl eu-
genol, o-Pinene and camphene.

Research corner

1. The study aims to evaluate the anti-Candida efficacy of asaronaldehyde and its
three structural isomers, namely, 2,3,4-trimethoxybenzaldehyde, 3,4,5-
trimethoxy-benzaldehyde, and 2,4,6-trimethoxybenzaldehyde. Asaronaldehyde
and 2, 4, 6-trimethoxybenzaldehyde showed anti-Candida efficacy. Rajput SB,
Shinde RB, Routh MM, Karuppayil SM. Anti-Candida properties of
asronaldehyde of Acorous gramineous rhizome and three structural isomers.
Chin Med. 2013 Sep 8;8 (1):18. doi:10.1186/1749-8546-8-18.

2. Ten compounds were separated from A. calamus and identified as 1 beta, 4
beta, 7 alphatrihydroxyeude-smane (1), bullatantriol (2), teuclatriol (3), threo-1',
2'-dihydroxyasarone (4), erythro-1], 2'-dihydroxyasarone (5),(+)-de-4'-0-
methyleudesmin (6), (+)-de-4'-0-methylmagnolin (7), (+)-eudesmin (8), (+)-
eudesmin (8), (+)-magnolin (9) and beta-sitosterol (10), respectively. Qiao D,
Gan LS, Mo JX, Zhou CX. Chemical constituents of Acorus calamus.
Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;37(22):3430-3.

3. In the present study a comparative anticonvulsant activity of raw and Shodhita
(Classically processed) Vaca rhizomes were screened against Maximal Electro

----- PAGE 685 -----
Vacha 677
Shock (MES) seizure model to assess the effect of classical purificatory
procedure on pharmacological action of Vaca. The results obtained from the
present study clearly confirmed the anticonvulsant activity of raw Vaca and
subjecting to classical Shodhana procedure did not alter the efficacy of Vaca
rhizomes instead it enhanced the activity profile of the Vaca. Bhat SD, Ashok
BK, Acharya RN, Ravishankar B. Anticonvulsant activity of raw and
classically processed Vaca (Acorus calamus Linn.) rhizomes. Ayu. 2012 Jan;
33(1):119-22. doi. 10.4103/0974-8520.100328.

4. Present study focuses on the evaluation of saponin rich extract of Acorus
calamus (SREAC) in chronic constriction injury (CCI) of sciatic nerve induced
neuropathic pain and neuronal functional changes in rats. SRE-AC has shown
ameliorate effect in CCl-induced neuropathic pain which may be attributed to
its multiple actions including antioxidative, anti-inflammatory . and
neuroprotective actions. Muthuraman A, Singh N. Neuroprotective effect of
Saponin rich extract of Acorus calamus L. in rat model of chronic construction
injury (CCI) of sciatic nerve-induced neuropathic pain, J. Ethnopharmacol.
2012 Aug 1;142(3):723-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2012.05.049. Epub 2012 Jun
15.

. Eight new sesquiterpenes (1-8) and one new norsesquiterpene (9) named
calamusins A-l were isolated from the ethanol extract of AcOrus calamus
rhizomes. Hao ZY, Liang D, Luo H, Liu YF, Ni G, Zhang QJ, Li L, Si YK,
Sun H, Chen RY,Yu DQ. Bioactive sesquiterpenoids from the rhizomes of
Acorus calamus. J Nat Prod. 2012 Jun 22;75(6):1083-9. doi: 10.1021/np
300095c. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Nn

Indications

Vachadi churna Kaphaja Shula
Vachadi taila Apachi

;
> aa

Name of Yoga

Mahapaishachika ghrita Buddhivardhaka, Medhya
Manodosha, Smritihani

Botanical Name — Acorus calamus Linn.

Acorus — A= private, marked by the loss, kore-pupil of the eye (Useful in eye dis-
eases).

----- PAGE 686 -----
ons Dravyaguna Vijnana
—__

calamus — Derived from a Greek word meaning marshy, grows in marshy lang,
Family — Acoraceae

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Lekhaniya varga, Arshoghna varga, Triptighna varga, Asthapanopa Ba
varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Sanjnasthapana varga

Sushruta — Pippalyadi gana, Vachadi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni— Haritakyadi varga 102-103
Basonym of Drug
afte amruiferaata agp treat are vith aefereticael: |
The drug Vacha (Acorus calamus) is used to improve voice.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. STRUT-STRVTAUT Hay |
The rhizome of Vacha has reddish brown colour.
2. Tettht-nreffartte waft ease: |
Rhizome of Vacha has hairs over it resembling the hair of cow.
3, wraeft-Weytarae |
Vacha rhizome is hairy

4, WEAM- ASA VATA |
Vacha rhizome has hair
5. weatelet-wret at Wave: |
Vacha rhizome has numerous nodes.
6. Wenra-weltrent at Wa: Wears: Talfot eset: |
Rhizome of Vacha has more than six nodes on it.
Properties and Actions
7. sorren-saretigntt Wee: |
Rhizome of Vacha has very strong odour.
8. sar-dteum afte |
Vacha has got very strong qualities.

9, Hinrear-agee fear |

----- PAGE 687 -----
Vacha 679

The drug Vacha is regarded as an auspicious drug.
10. eaduft-qerechtte |
Vacha if used reduces the weight.
Regional Names
Kannada Baje

Malayalam Vayambhu

Habitat
Vacha is culitvated throughout India. It is also found wild in Himalayan region and
Sikkim.
Morphology
Habit — A perennial terrestrial herb of marshy
places.

Stem — Stout, creeping
Rhizome — Is aromatic.

Leaves — Two-ranked, distichous, sword shaped
(ensiform), erect, sharp pointed, closely sheathing each
other, midrib is stouts, striate parallel venation, and
leaves are glabrous, weakly differentiated into petiole
and blade.

Inflorescence —Spadix, scapes 3-angled, keeled
on the back, spathe is leaf-like long, green, narrow.

Acorus calamus Linn (Vaca)

Flower — Flower densely cover the entire spadix, bisexual, trimerous, compactly
arranged, actinomorphic, hypogynous, greenish yellow, bracts and bracteoles absent.
Perianth contains six tepals in two equal series, narrowly oblong, equalling the pistil with
vaulted tips. Androecium contains six stamens in two whorls of three each. Gynoecium is
tricarpellary, syncarpous; ovary is trilocular with few ovules.

Fruit —Turbinate, prismatic and top pyramidal.

Varieties
Ra.Ni- 2types: 1. Vacha - Acorus calamus, 2. Shweta vacha — Iris germanica

----- PAGE 688 -----
O80 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

The Rhizome is sub-cylindrical or compressed, upto 20 cm long and 1 to 1.5 crn
broad, having a light brown colour. The upper surface shows triangular leaf scars, while
lower surface bear small, raised circular root scars. The fracture is short, granular and
porous. The cut pieces are some what circular, mealy white in colour and upto 1 cm thick.
Has got strong and characteristic odour, taste is pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms
TANT Terran Tet rerafeier | aust a agen wfeeita a eT
(a. eireate FT 102)

aarrean wear ferate artabeae | Prenat yeret waa fers 1
TAA SINS Yost UAT. SeeMe TT 103)
ST HEPAT AAAS STUT | HVS HEAT ST Playa VMAM MAG I
wae FT Heh Balt Hee | dest Hares Hegel aT UT
eet VT Career HUST TST, 11 (eA. errgeate FT 7-8)
wer fara He: Ue HEVOATTTE | tat ara ear lat arepeNTET
Sepa wigan | yet fener weft
(fa. attefrert. 1216-1217)
SAT AAMT HOT ST HATTA, | ATA AH ASAT Mt
(aA. froreenfe of 52 )
Shweta vaca -
aera arated a dost a rer uw. frente at 54)
weft casegem ant abeakiat | aaa tear amarcteaeaay
are watare yoeaaarad | frat yaoerg aareot wera u
(B.A. margqenfe aT 46-47)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Vacha
a. Rhizome b. Fruit c. Leaf d. Flower
Ans: a. Rhizome

----- PAGE 689 -----
Vacha 681

. Medhya Karma of Vacha is attributed to
a. Virya b. Prabhava c. Rasa d, Vipaka
Ans: b. Prabhava
. Vacha (Acorus calamus) powder taken with honey is very useful in
a. Ajirna b. Atisara c. Apasmara d. Hridroga
Ans: c. Apasmara
. Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Magadhi (Piper longum) is mixed with
honey, then used as an Avapidana Nasya (Snuff) is beneficial in
a, Suryavarta b. Sandhivata c. Vatarakta d. Amavata
Ans: a. Suryavarta
. Vachadi Churna is specifically indicated in
a. Vataja Shula b. Pittaja Shula _—c. Kaphaja Shula d. Shirashula
Ans: c. Kaphaja Shula
. Botanical name of Vacha is
a. Abutilon indicum — b. Aconitum ferox
c. Abies webbiana d. Acorus calamus
Ans: d. Acorus calamus
. Golomi and Shadgrantha are the synonyms of
a. Durva b. Shatavari c. Vacha d. Kokilaksha
Ans: c. Vacha
. Habit of Vacha plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Creeper d. Shrub

Ans: b. Herb

KEKKK

----- PAGE 690 -----
Chapter

Varuna

Useful part — Kanda Twak (Stem bark)

Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta Madhura
Laghu Ruksha

Ushna
Ashmaribhedaka

Karma (Actions)
Mutrala, Agnidipana, Krimighna, Ashmaribhedana, Vidradhihara,
Raktadoshanashaka, Hridrogahara.

Varuna pushpa (Flowers)

Grahi
Pharmacological Activities

Lithotriptic, Spasmodic, Anti-inflammatory, Antipyretic, Antibacterial and Diuretic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara due to Ushna
virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya, Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Ashmari, Mutrakrichra, Basti Shula, Jwara, Krimi, Agnimandya, Vidradhi, Hridroga
and Rakta vikara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Ashmari (Urinay calculus)

FAT AQUA Tenens Cafeaa: | uta Parra Aer: Sea

(45 7/11)

Prepare decoction of Varuna (Crataeva nurvala) root bark, then add the paste of
Root bark. If it is taken it is efficacious in Ashmari (Urinary calculus).

----- PAGE 691 -----
Varuna 683

2. Gandamala (Goitre)
TOS Ta Farer: allAur aetna: | (VWF. 2/2/126)

In case of Gandamala (Goitre) decoction prepared from root bark of Varuna
(Crataeva nurvala) is taken with honey.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) -—50 to 100 ml
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents— Root bark contains Lauric acid, Stearic acid, Oleic acid, Li-
noleic acid, Rutin, Quercitin, Lupeol and Pentacyclic triterpene alcohol.

Stem bark has Friedelin, Betulinic acid, Diosgenin, Lupeol, Volatile components, P-
cymene, Limonene, Linalool, o and B-ionones. Leaf contains 1-stacydrine.

Research corner

1. The aim of this study was to investigate the antidiabetic activity of Crataeva
nurvala stem bark (Family: Capparidaceae) extracts in alloxan-induced diabetic
albino rats. C. nurvala pertroleum ether extract (CNPEE) and ethanolic extract
(CNEE) showed significant (P<0.001) anti diabetic activities. Sikarwar MS,
Patil MB. Antidiabetic activityof Crataeva nurvala stem bark extracts in
alloxan-induced diabetic rats. J. Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2010 Jan; 2(1):18-21.
doi: 10.4103/0975-7406.62700.

2. Chemical investigation of stem bark of Crataeva nurvala afforded 5,7-
dimethoxy-3-phenyl-1-ethyl-1, 4-dihydro-4-quinolone and a steroidal glycoside
with unprecedented pentacyclic ring system named crateamine (la) and
crataenoside (2) respectively. Sinha S, Mishra P, Amin H, Rah B, Nayak D,
Goswami A,Kumar N. Vishwakarma R, Ghosal S. A new cytotoxic quinolone
alkaloid and a pentacyclic steroidal glycoside from the stem bark of Crataeva
nurvala: study of anti-proliferative and apoptosis inducing property. Eur J. Med
Chem. 2013 Feb; 60:490-6. dol: 10.1016/j. ejmech. 2012.12.017. Epub 2012
Dec 17.

3. In this study, lupeol, a pentacyclic triterpene isolated from Crataeva nurvala
stem bark, and its ester, lupeol linoleate, were investigated for their possible
hypocholesterolaemic effect against cyclophosphamide-induced lipidaemic
instabilities. Treatment with lupeol linoleate was more effective than leupeol in
rendering protection to the cardiac tissue challenged by cyclophosphamide.
Sudharsan PT, Mythili Y, Sudhahar V, Varalakshmi P. Role of lupeol and its

----- PAGE 692 -----
684 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ester on cyclophosphamide-induced hyperlipidemic cardiomyopathy in rats
Pharm Pharmacal. 2005 Nov; 57 (11):1437-44.
Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name of Yoga Indications

Ashmari, Sharkara
Mutraghata, Mutra krichra
Ashmari, Mutrakrichra
Vataja Ashmari
Sharkara, Ashmark
Basonym of Drug

athe quitter after qercarc |

Leaves of Crataeva nurvala resemble those of Bilva (Aegle marmelos).

Synonyms
Morphology
1. BaRs:- Han: RATA |
Leaves of Varuna remain tender for many days.
Properties and Actions
2. ferraytten:—fereh: Pret see |
Leaves of Varuna are bitter in taste.
3. aemttet-anhy Baa |
Varuna destroys Ashmari (Urinary calculus).
4. Aqaa-featte dae at

Varuna is very potent drug in removing urinary calculus.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 693 -----
Varuna 685

Botanical Name — Crataeva nurvala Roxb.
Crataeva — Crativas- a Greek botanist.
nurvala — From Nir-Malayalam name for water.
Family — Capparidaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Varuna
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Varunadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 65-66
Habitat

Varuna is found through out India especially in
upper Gangetic plains, Bengal, Bihar; Orissa, Gujarat
and Konkan region. It is also cultivated in gardens as
it is very beautiful tree.

Morphology
Habit — Small tree with grey bark.
Root - Long, tap-root
Stem — Erect, woody, branched, cylindrical,
solid with horizontal wrinkles. Crataeva nurvala Roxb. (Varuna)
Leaf -— Compound, 3- foliate, alternate, decidu-
ous, petiole is 4 to 7.5 cm long, leaflets are 5 to 15 cm and 4 to 6 cm wide, ovate, lan-

ceolate or obovate, acute or acuminate, entire, glabrous on both the surfaces, reticulately
veined, lateral leaflets oblique at the base. Petiolules 6 to 9 mm long.

Inflorescence — Densely flowered terminal corymb.

Flowers — Greenish white, pedicels 2.5 to 4.5 cm long, stout, hypogynous, sepals
are four and polysepalous, petals are four and polypetalous, Androecium contains many
stamens. Gynoecium is bicarpellay syncarpous, superior ovary, unilocular.

Fruit - Berry and many seeded.

Seeds — Woody and non-endospermic
Adulterant

Stem bark of Aegle marmelos.

----- PAGE 694 -----
686 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Bark is channelled, flat or slightly curved pieces, outer surface is rough and scaly,
greyish black in colour, minutely fissured, bearing numerous small lenticels. Inner surface
is lemon yellow in colour, longitudinally striated. Transversely cut portion of bark shows
a porous surface with numerous dark yellow specks, representing vascular bundles. On
breaking it becomes short pieces, does not have any odour. Taste is slightly bitter.
Classical references

Synonyms
RU GUT: Ager: HANH: 1 (ALT. Ferart 65)
Properties and Actions
aan: firieit Adisctrgrearsrreary | Peta yorararerphrsieantstretat: |
Hea: HEH TY: Ul (ALT. area 65-66)
aeur: vittoria faxing | qa wa Hewes Tereleet: UE: UI
(aft. ame at 110)
arent eae: Haat TY: Reto: ferret vet chat: rRaTaTT_
Reta ators, | get firareeg ale wet ret At Te
aTemt Bet Urs aTetet crraftrahare | (S.A. sitefert 849-850)
AST: HEV Thaset: Ut: | vittaraer: ferret det fasts ara u
(a. sage at 137)
sem ae ua aera Prorttiar fea arent
uRaet gq yaestt wad feeaft arrarete: u
antares: aanathrann: | tt Pett pear feel
(B.A. settee at 163-164)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Varuna
a. Niryasa b. Kanda twak c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: b. Kanda twak
2. Ashmaribhedaka action of Varuna is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava

----- PAGE 695 -----
Varuna 687

. Pradhana Karma of Varuna is

a. Kushthaghna b. Jwaraghna c. Mutrala d. Nidrakata
Ans: c. Mutrala

. Decoction prepared from root bark of Varuna (Crataeva nurvala) is taken with
honey in case of

a. Ajima b. Atisara c. Arshas d. Gandamala
Ans: d. Gandamala

. Varunadi Kashaya is indicated in

a. Ashmari b. Jwara c. Kushtha d. Apasmara
Ans: a. Ashmari

. Setu Vriksha is a synonym of

a. Sarja b. Arjuna c. Varuna d. Aragwadha
Ans: c. Varuna

. Botanical name of Varuna

a. Cedrus deodara b. Creteava nurvala

c. Pureria tuberosa d. Argemone Mexicana

Ans: b. Creteava nurvala

. Habit of Varuna plant

a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: a. Tree

FERRER

----- PAGE 696 -----
Vasa

Useful part — Patra (Leaf)
Rasadi panchaka

[Rasa Tikta Kashaya
Ruksha Laghu
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Tikta Kahasya rasa.
Kaphahara because of Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Swarya, Hridya, Raktapittahara, Trishna Shamaka,
Artihara, Jwarghna, Chardighna, Mehahara, Kushthaghna, Ruchya, Kamalahara,
Varnya.

Agrya Karma

Basar | (3.7.3. 40)

Vrusha (Adhatoda vasica) is best in Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder).
Pharmacological Activities

Bronchodilator, Expectorant, Abortificient.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Raktapitta, Shwasa, Kasa, Swarabheda, Hridroga, Trishna, Jwara, Chardi,
Prameha, Kushtha, Aruchi, Kamala, Vaivarnya.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktapitta (Haemorrhage)
waMEayeh: Here ar sesh ar | Pe: We Weare Se eT TAT ENT
(a1.g.Fa. 2/24-25)

Juice or decoction prepared from leaves of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) if taken alone or
with honey or sugar checks haemorrhage immediately and it is regarded as best drug for
it.

----- PAGE 697 -----
SS 689

i Jwara (Fever)
) : Rretsctorsert after argpfirst eranrerer tl
ice of leaves of Vi (aA Fa. 1/92)
eas er a Ls (Adhatoda vasica) if taken with sugar and honey relieves
Jwara d € 8 rom Pitta and Kapha and this remedy is also useful in Raktapitta
(Intrinsic haemorthage) and Kamala (Jaundice),
3, Kasa (Cough)

arararal fea: care Crnftrerserry eT tt (eM. 2/4/7)

Cold infusion of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) is very useful in Kasa (Cough).

Matra (Dosage)

Swarasa (Juice) - 5toiSml
Churna (Powder) - lto3g
Kwatha(Decoction) —-— 20to40ml

ives such as vasicine,

Phytoconstituents — Leaves contain quinazoline derivat
Vasicolinone and

yasicinone, B-sitosterol, Kaempferol, 1-peganine, Aadhatodine,

Anisoline.

Research corner

1. The effectiveness of aqueous extracts of various medicinal plants in
detoxification of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) was tested in vitro by thin-layer
chromatography and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Among
the different plant extracts, the leaf extract of Vasaka (Adhatoda vasica Nees)
showed the maximum degradation of AFB1 (798%) after incubation for 24h at
370C. Vijayanandraj S, Brinda R, Kannan K, Adhithya R, Vinothini S, Senthil
K, Chinta RR, Paranidharan V, Velazhahan R. Detoxification of aflatoxin B1
by an aqueous extract from leaves of Adhatoda vasica Nees. Microbial Res.
2013 Aug 5. pii: $0944-5013(1300118-3. doi:10.1016/j.micres. 2013.07.008.
2. The purpose of this study was to characterize the most bioactive

phytochemicals viz., vasicine, vasicinone, vasicine acetate, 2-acetyl
benzylamine, vasicinolone present in the chloroform fraction having anti-
inflammatory and antimicrobial activities. The anti-inflammatory activity was
tested by using carrageenan and CFA-model induced paw oedema. The
observed results revealed that vasicine showed most potent anti-inflammaory
effects (59.51%) at the dose of 20.0 mg/kg at 6h after carrageenan inejection
and maximum inhibition rate was observed of vasicinone (63.94%) at the dose

----- PAGE 698 -----
690

-

Nn

Dravyaguna Vijnana

of 10.0 mg/kg at 4 days after CFA injection. Singh B, Sharma RA. Anti-
inflammatory and antimicrobial properties of pyrroloquinazoline alkaloids from
Adhatoda vasica Nees. Phytomedicine. 2013 Mar 15;20(5):441-5. doi:
10.1016/j.phymed. 2012.12.015. Epub 2013 Jan 26.

3. The larvicidal activities of methanolic fractions from Adhatoda vasica leaf

extracts were investigated against the bancroftian filariasis vector Culex
quinquefasciatus and dengue vector Aedes aegypti. The results indicated that
the mortality rates was high at 100, 150, 200 and 250 ppm of methanol extract
of fractions III with R (f) value 0.67 and methanol extract of fraction V with
R (f) value 0.64 of A. Vasica against all the larval instars of C.
quinquefasciatus and A. aegypti. Thaingaivel A, Chandrasekaran R, Revathi
K, Nisha S, Sathish-Narayanan S, Kirubakaran SA, Senthil-Nathan S.
Larvicidal efficacy of Adhatoda vasica (L.) Nees against the bancroftian
filariasis vector Culex quinquefasciatus Say and dengue vector Aedes aegypti
L. in in vitro condition. Parasitol Res. 2012 May; 110(5):1193-9. doi: 10.1007/
s 00436-011-2728-2. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

. Study demonstrated that both the compounds, vasicine acetate and 2-acetyl
benzylamine, could be evaluated further for developing a drug to control M.
tuberculosis. Ignacimuthu S$, Shanmugam N. Antimycobacterial activity of two
natural alkaloids, vasicine acetate and 2-acetyle benzylamine, isolated from
Indian shrub Adhatoda vasica Ness. leaves. J Biosci. 2010 Dec; 35(4):565-70.

. The present investigation was carried out to study the anti-ulcer activity of
Adhatoda vasica leaves using two ulcer models (1) Ethanol-induced, and (2)
Pylorus ligation plus aspirin-induced models. Results of the study suggest that
in addition to its classically established pharmacological activities, the plant also
has immense potential as an anti-ulcer agent of great therapeutic relevance.

. Shrivastava N, Srivastava A, Banerjee A, Nivasarkar M. Anti-ulcer activity of
Adhatoda vasica Nees. J Herb Pharmacother. 2006; 6(2):43-9.

Yoga (Formulations)

ili lly

Name of Yoga Indications

SI.No.

Vasaguduchyadi kashaya Raktapitta, Kamala
Vasakhanda Raktapitta, Shwasa
Rajayakshma, Kasa

----- PAGE 699 -----
Vasa 691

Botanical Name — Adhatoda vasica Nees.

Adhatoda — Derived from Malabar Name.

vasica — From the Sanskrit term Vasaka which means scented.
Family — Acanthaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Vasa kula.

Basonym of Drug

areata warrata oat ware, aed atreaTeahet aT |

Adhatoda vasica alleviates many diseaes there by restores the health.

Synonyms

Morphology
1, SURTET:- AAEM FA FAFA |

Zi.

Se

Flowers of Vasa are white in colour as like that of teeth of horse.
ftiera-fieer fearhaqgaagt Fars |
Flowers of Vasa are bilabiate which resemble wide opened mouth of a Lion.

Rifger-fiereracqeaatt ar |

‘Flowers of Vasa resemble mouth of a lion.

Properties and Actions

4.

MSSI-BLET Mesa Wary Water AT |

Vasa is very useful drug in many diseases.

. Teaftraaredt-teaftrt wareate sree

Vasa is regarded as a best drug in Raktapitta otilipagl disorders).

. frag-sraereltat were: |

Vasa cures many diseases, hence supports like a mother.
Trat-area fecrenthtont ror FeTTT

Vasa always does well like a mother.

aera fet He OMT MITA TAT, |

Flowers have sweet nectar in large quantity.
aael- sath Ste |

Vasa passifies Kapha dosha.

----- PAGE 700 -----
692 Dravyaguna Vijnana

10. HAAS: BAA: |

Vasa alleviates cough

Regional Names

Kannada
Marathi

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not Mentioned In Varga
Sushruta Not Mentioned In Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Guduchyadi varga 88-90

Habitat
Vasaka is indigenous to India, especially found in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa and

Kerala.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial under shrub.
Root — Tap-root, branched.

Stem — Herbaceous above, woody below,
branched, branches swelled at the nodes, solid, an-
gular, hairy, greenish-yellow.

Leaf — Simple, opposite, lanceolate, entire
acute, coriaceous with unicostate reticulate vena-
tion, small petiole.

Inflorescence — Racemose, A terminal spike.

Flower — Bracteate, bracteolate, zygomorphic,
bilabiate, bisexual, hypogynous, complete, pentam-
erous, whitish with pink streaks. Sepals are five,
gamosepalous, green and valvate aestivation. Petals are five bilipped, gamopetalous, pos-
terior lip with two lobes. Androecium contains two fertile stamens and two small
staminodes. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous and superior ovary.

Adhatoda vasica Nees (Vasa)

----- PAGE 701 -----
Vasa 693

Fruit — Capsule
Substitute
Adhatoda beddomi in Kerala.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Leaves are lanceolate, entire, tapering 12 to 20 cm long, 2.5 to 5 cm broad, having a
long petiole, upper surface glabrous, dark green in colour. The dry leaves are extremely
brittle, occuring in small pieces of brownish green colour. These are generally mixed with
twigs and flowering or fruiting spikes. Has got characterisitc disagreeable odour. Taste is
very bitter.

Classical references

Synonyms
arent atftent arar Rreenrat a fifeenr | great afte CArelSeasSoaH: |
seat geen: Riguutss a aya: | (AF. Fewest 83-89)

Properties and Actions

amat aprad: aafrarcasr: | firaegant ta: cwaeitadettad

grarsneeigasarame: | (AT. Wert 89-90)

atest fatter: fraser | cageafdpsett vargas: Ul

(afr. Waafert 23)

Rigen qerfarer ger waat fear ory: | ate TAT BL |

wgeroREgMada, Nl aeet adet yet gest safari

(& fA. 13-14)

aren fercat Hester cararett Teale, | HTH HAHCASATATT TATTRT
(w.F. wereee TT 49)

ara fereet oq: efter anfirafearrt | tatsaret avat areata

Tens are aaa HOTT TAS
arasvart fafeeny, faftrat went _ | fraraafa wget grit
area wemedgageagt adt afte frei amt |
(B.A. rargenfe FT 141-143)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Main useful part of Vasa

a. Whole plant b. Leaf c. flower d. Fruit

Ans: b. Leaf

----- PAGE 702 -----
694 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Pradhana Rasa of Vasa
a. Katu b. Kashaya c. Tikta d. Madhura
Ans: c. Tikta

3. Agrya karma of Vasa is
a. Raktapitta hara b. Stambhana c. Kushthaghna d. Dipana
Ans: a. Raktapitta hara

4, Cold infusion of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) is very useful in
a. Jwara b. Kasa c. Anidra d. Arshas
Ans: b. Kasa

5. Vaiscine a chemical constituent present in
a. Shunthi b. Punarnava c. Shala d. Vasa
Ans: d. Vasa

6. Vasarishta is mainly indicated in
a. Kasa Shwasa b. Jwara c. Vibandha 7. Shotha
Ans: a. Kasa Shwasa

7. Botanical name of Vasa is
a. Salacia reticulata b. Mesua ferrea
c. Adhatoda vassica _ d. Citrullus colocynthis
Ans: c. Adhatoda vassica

8. Vajidanta and Simhasya are the synonyms of
a. Ashwagandha b. Vasa c. Kshiravidara d.Shatavari
Ans: b. Vasa
9. Atarusha and Mata are the synonyms of

a. Vasa b. Kalamegha c. Haritaki d. Amalaki
Ans: a. Vasa

10. Habit of Vasa Plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Tree

Ans: c. shrub

28K A aR

----- PAGE 703 -----
Chapter

Vatsanabha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa LO” Se |

Guna Ruksha, Tikshna, na LG TE Se a Vikasi, Sukshma & Vyavayi

Karma (Actions)

Swedajanaka, Jwaraghna, Shothahara, Dipana, Vedanahara, Kasahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Febrifuge, Antidiarrhocal, Spasmogenic, Psychostimulant, Cardiac stimulant, Anal-
gesic, Diaphoretic, Anodyne, Irritant and Sedative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura
rasa. Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa and Kapha Shamaka due
to Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Jwara, Shotha, Agnimandya, Vedanayukta Vikara and Kasa
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Jirna jwara (Chronic fever)
Tere Vera Gees: | afftor at fet arm situisaret WA
(AAS. 48/2:

Powder prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa), Chandana (Santalum ¢
bum), Shadgrantha (Acorus calamus), Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is taken with Sug:
Ghee, Honey and Milk is best remedy for Jirna jwara (Chronic fever).

2. Rasayana (Rejuvenating)
Wears | (af. 1/3/25)

----- PAGE 704 -----
696 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is regarded as one of the Rasayana (Rejuventative)
drugs; hence it is one of the important ingredients of Aindra rasayana.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 30 to 62.5 mg

Phytoconstituents — Root contains Indaconitine, Chasmaconitine, Chasmanine,
Lycoctonine, Aconitine, Delphinine, Bikhacontine & Pseudaconitine.

Research corner

1. Ayurvedic method of detoxification of such products involves Shodhana.
Hence, in present paper it has been decided to replace Ayurvedic Shodhana
process by chemical purification method and to study the benefits and/or
drawbacks of the traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana process. Crude aconite root,
Ayurvedic Shodhana treated aconite root and chemical Shodhana treated
aconite root samples were evaluated for toxicity and changes by animal studies
and thin layer chromatography (TLC) respectively. The results of the toxicity
study suggest that the modified method of Shodhana is less efficient as
compared to the traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana process. TLC studies have
shown that pseudoaconitine and aconitine were converted into far less toxic
substances like vertroyl pseudoaconine and benzoylaconine respectively only
in traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana. Deore SL, Moon KV, Khadabadi SS,
Deokate UA, Baviskar BA. Evaluation of toxicity of ‘Vatsanabha’ (Aconitum
feerox, Ranuculaceae) Before and After Shodhana. J Young Pharm. 2013 Mar;
5(1):3-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jyp. 2013.01.001. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

2. Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox Wall.) is a very well-known ingredient of
Ayurvedic formulations and is prescribed as an antipyretic, analgesic,
antirheumatic, appetizer and digestive. The recommended dose of purified
Vatsanabha (A. ferox Wall.) root is 15 mg. A case of hypotension and
bradycardia due to aconite poisoning caused by overdosing of an Ayurvedic
medicine (Mahashankaha Vati), which was primarily managed by Ayurvedic
treatment. Panda AK, Debnath SK. Overdose effect of aconite containing
Ayurvedic Medicine (‘Mahashankha Vati’). Int J Ayurveda Res. 2010 jul;
1(3):183-6. doi. 10.4103/0974-7788.72493.

3. Simple and rapid stability-indicating HPLC method were developed for the
individual analysis of aconitine (ACN) and piperine (PIN) in Mahamrutynjaya
rasa, and herbal dosage form containing Aconitum ferox, Piper nigrum, and
Piper longum in combination. Separation of the ACN from its major and minor
degradation products was successfully achieved on a reverse-phase C18

----- PAGE 705 -----
Vatsanabha 697

column (250x4.6 mm id, 5 microm particle size), with isocratic elution using
a mixture of acetonitrile-KH2PO4 buffer (10 mM, pH 8+/-0.1; 50+50, v/v) at
flow rate of 0.7 mL/min with UV detection at 227 nm. PIN separation was
performed on a reversed-phase C18 column (250x4.6 mm id, 5 microm particle
size), with isocratic elution in acetonitrile-KH2P04 buffer (10mM, pH 7+/-
0.1;35+65, v/v) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with UV detention at 343 nm, Rai
P, Pathak A, Rajput SJ. Stability-indicating reverse-phase liquid
chromatographic methods for the determination of aconitine and piperine in a
polyherbal formulation. J AOAC Int. 2009 Jul-Aug; 92(4):1044-54,

Yoga (Formulations)

SIL.No. ‘Name of Yoga Indications

: Mratyunjaya rasa Jwara, Vatapittajwara
3 Shitajvara, Shula

Ananda bhairava rasa Sannipata jwara

Jwaramurari rasa Jirna jwara, Amavata

; Jwarankusha rasa Tridoshaja jwara

Basonym of Drug
area fafa arfiaert ste at |
The tuber of Aconitum ferox resembles the umbilicus of Calf.

Synonyms
Properties and Actions

1. fad-faas arr |
Vatsanabha is a poison and it spreads very quickly all over the body.

2. eas acted Wieetet Bee |
Consumption of Vatsanabha makes the individual unconcious.

3. TReTA-PRrefer sitearz
Vatsanabha kills the person.

Regional Names

English Monk’s hood, Indian aconite

----- PAGE 706 -----
698 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Aconitum ferox Wall.
Aconitum — Aconite-Monk’s hood
ferox—Ferocious, Terrible, Very poisonous
Family — Rananculaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Vatsanabha kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka  Notmentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Dhatwadi varga 192
Habitat

Vatsanabha is found in alpine and subalpine western Himalayan region at the height
of 6,000 to 10,000 ft. altitude.
Morphology

Habit — Herb

Roots — Biennial, paired, tuberous, daughter tube
is ovoid-oblong, to ellipsoid, 2.5 to 4 cm long, 1 to
1.5 cm thick, with few filiform root-fibres, dark brown
externally, mother tuber much shrunk and wrinkled
with more numerous root fibres.

Stem — Erect, 40 to 90 cm high, slender, cov-

ered with short spreading yellow hairs in the upper
part, glabrous below.

Leaves — Scattered, distant, petioles slender, 25 (Vatsanabha)
cm in lower leaves, upper leaves have short petioles.
Blade is orbicular-cordate to reform in outline with a rather wide sinus upto 8 cm deep, 11
cm high from the sinus to the tip, upto 20 cm across.

Inflorescence — Raceme, 10 to 25 cm long, rachis slender.

Flower — Slender pedicels, erect, sepals are blue, hairy, uppermost helmet shaped,
shortly beaked, lip deflexed, lanceolate, acute and entire. Carpels are five in number.

----- PAGE 707 -----
Vatsanabha 699

Fruit — Follicle, 1.5 to 2 cm long, 4 to 5 mm broad, almost glabrous.
Seeds — Obovoid to of pyramidal 2.5 to 3 mm long, winged along the rhaphe.

Visha laxana (Toxic signs and Symptoms)

As Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is a ferocious poison it causes several harmful
effects. In a few minutes after consuming any of the preparations of aconite, there will be
tingling sensation followed by numbness in the lips, mouth, tongue and pharynx, fol-
lowed by salivation, pain in the stomach and vomiting. Tingling and numbness extend
over the whole body. The person sweats profusely and there will be a sensation of im-
pending paralysis. The person feels giddiness, his vision and speech will be impaired,
limb becomes weak, unable to stand or walk. Twiching of muscles and convulsions may
occur. Pulse will be slow and become irregular. First breathing will be rapid but soon
becomes slow. Pupils alternately contract and dilate but remain fully dilated in the later
stages. Death ensures from ventricular fibrillation or respiratory paralysis.

Fatal dose — 1 gm (Root), 250 mg (Extract) 4 mg (Alkaloid)

Fatal period — 20 minutes to 24 hrs. Average is 6 hrs.

Treatment
e Patient should be kept warm.
e Gastric lavage with tannic acid or Postassium permanganate solution.
¢ Heart and respiration support with hypodermic injections.
e Artificial respiration and oxygen supply if necessary.
Purification
1. Mature tubers of Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) are cut into small pieces (To
size of Bengal gram) and put into a vessel made of mud or stone filled with
Gomutra (Cow’s urine). This vessel is kept under hot sun. Fresh Gomutra is
used every morning and process is repeated for 3 days. Later tubers are
removed, deskined and dried.

2. Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is cut into small pieces and placed in a Potali
formed out of cloth. This Potali containing Vatsanabha is immersed in a vessel

containing milk and boiled for 3 to 6 hours.
Antidote — Tankana (Borax)
Substitutes
Acointum laciniatum stapf.
Aconitum denorrhizum stapf.

----- PAGE 708 -----
700 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Aconitum falconeri
Aconitum spicatum stapf.

Aconitum violaceum jawab.

Market sample

Market sample consist abconical, abruptly tapering roots, more often paired as mother
and daughter tubers, 2 to 5 cm in length and 2.5 cm in diameter at the thickest part.
Surface dark brown in colour, transversely shrivelled, and densely covered with remanants
of rootlets or root scars arranged in an annular fashion. On breaking become short pieces,
exposing a mealy surface of yellowish brown in colour. Doesn’t possess any odour, taste
is slightly sweet followed by tingling sensation.

Classical references

Morphology
Regan wequt aaaraireta | sear a atghaderars: @ area:
(a3. aranfe GT 192)
Synonyms

aad ware aoa faery else et AU At wate WOE, UI
(uF. fracae aT 222)

Properties and Actions

ARSE: Aleut ATTA: | AS wRa TUTTE: PTAA: UI
(aA. fraeanfe at 223)

aanit wdguit arascerraae: | firrayterenft artaret walag:
mrad shagd ast Aaaae: | AAraTAl wat aa afar | SAA
(B.A. erergenie at 195-196)
Purification
1 maith Yur Most Acs WAN | Aa Ae TST: SALAH It
Oreo aes arte BET ATS Aa: | TTT AT Ae TITAS I
vee oe ft ahora g 1 aart a at at dlaenig fasaq ul
ud fant Hen rae: | Meter fare cast YgTaTe STAAL, |
(Ra. 24/19-22)

2. fae aire Heart Hen Ugrarmny | yore Ue afar BTA: I

----- PAGE 709 -----
—

Vatsanabha

701

amg ar ante ataterreta: | centres feet erat ferypaerer a Mera:

(Lt. 24/23-24)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Vatsanabha

a. Root b. Rhizome

Ans: a. Root
Vipaka of Vatsanabha is
a. Katu b. Madhura

Ans: b. Madhura

. Pradhana Karma of Vatsanabha

a. Shwasahara

Ans: d. Jwaraghna
Mratyunjaya Rasa is indicated in
b. Kushtha

b. Medhya

a. Kasa

Ans: c. Jwara
Botanical name of Vatsanabha
a. Aconitum heterophyllum

c. Acorus calamus

Ans: b. Aconitum ferox

. Habit of Vatsanabha Plant

a. Tree b. Creeper

Ans: c. Herb

. Antidote for Vatsanabha

a. Manashila b. Tankana

Ans: b. Tankana

Te RR AR

c. Leaf d. stem

c. Amla d. Lavana

c. Vajikara d. Jwaraghna
c. Jwara d. Anidra

b. Aconitum ferox
d. Areca catechu

c. Herb d. Shrub

c. Gandhaka d. Sarjakshara

----- PAGE 710 -----
Chapter

Vibhitaki

Useful part— Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi Panchaka

Karma (Actions) — Kasahara, Netrya, Keshya, Krimighna, Swarya, Chardighna,
Mukharogahara, Bhedana.

Majja — Madaka.

Pharmacological Actions — Astringent, Tonic, Expectorant

Doshakarma — Tridosha Shamaka (Mainly Kapha Shamaka) Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya and Kashaya rasa, Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka and Kasshaya
rasa, Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications) — Kasa, Netra roga, Kesha vikara, Krimi,
Swarabheda, Mukharoga, Shotha, Visarpa, Mutradosha and Ashmari.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic Administration)
1. Kasashwasa (Cough and Asthma)

aay arerenray sare ar fersiterenry | (3..F8. 3/173)

Vibhitaka (Terminalia bellerica) is used in different forms in case of Kasa (Cough)
and Shwasa (Asthma).
2. Shotha (Oedema)

Rasfirenrat Hemera: wety atentet: wee: (af. 12/71)

The Lepa (Application) of Phalamajja (Fruit pulp) of Vibhitaki (Terminalia belirica)
will relieve Daha (Burning sensation) and Arti (Pain) in all kinds of Shotha (Oedema).
3. Netra roga (Shukra)-Corneal opacity

fasftrenrterrsar at Walls: BSAA: (B.S. 12/13)
Anjana (Collyrium) of Vibhitakasthi majja (Seed pulp of Terminalia belirica) is
very beneficial in case of Shukra (Corneal opacity).

----- PAGE 711 -----
Vibhitaki 703

4. Drishti Balartha (To improve eyesight)
fretemante ypeRalseared Pref: 1 srerearaterrert antther geatet Tear II
(H.Z3. 13/46)
Nasya (Instillation) of combination of Tila taila (Sesamum oil), Akshataila (Oil of
Terminalia belirica), Bhringa swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana niryuha (De-
coction of Pterocarpus marsupium) cooked in iron vessel improves vision.
5. Granthi visarpa
fasta erat ast aerators Weed | (aA. 21/124)
Kalka (Paste) of Vibhataka twak (Bark of Terminalia belirica) is prepared, warm it
and applied.
6. Mutra dosha (Disorders of Urinary tract) and Ashmari (Calculus)

aeadies gar acta fidar: 1 ate fagead atari

(G3. 58/45)
Churna (Powder) of Aksha bija (Seeds of Terminalia belirica) is mixed with Sura

(Wine) to prepare a paste and taken orally. It cures all Mutra dosha (Disorders of Urinary
tract) and Ashmari (Calculus).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder)-1-2 g

Phytoconstituents

Fruit - Contains-Tannin (20-30%), gallic acid, ellagic acid, phyllemblin, ethyl gal-
late, gallocyl glucose, g - sitosterol, chebulagic acid, mannitol, glucose, galactose, fruc-
tose, rhamnose, bellericanin (Cardiac glycoside).

Kernel — Contains-Yellow fatty oil possessing fatty acid, like palmitic, oleic and
linoleic acids.

Seeds — Contain-Protein, Oxalic acid and non-edible oil.

Bark — Contains Tannin, Oxalic acids.

Research corner
1. The antiulcer activity of 70% methanolic extract of fruits of Terminalia belerica
Roxb. (Combretaceae) was evaluated using ethanol induced, aspirin induced,
cold stress restraint and pylorus ligated ulcer in rats. Results suggested that the
70% methanolic extract of Terminalia belerica increased resistance to
necrotizing agents, providing a direct protective effect on the gastric mucosa

----- PAGE 712 -----
704

-

Nn

Dravyaguna Vijnana

and exhibited antiulcer effect. Jawanjal H, Rajput MS, Agrawal P, Dange V
Pharmacological Evaluation of Fruits of Zerminalia belerica Roxb, for
Antiulcer Activity. J. Complement Integer Med. 2012 Jun 18:9(1), pity
jcim.2012.9.issue-1/1553-3840. 1556/1553-3840.1556.xml. doi:10.1515/1553.
3840.1556.

_ Effect of continuous administration of dried 757% methanolic extract of fruits of

Terminalia belerica (Combretaceae) suspended in water was studied in alloxan
induced hyperglycemia and antioxidant defense mechanism in rats. Results
suggested that T. belerica fruit extract possessed anti-diabetic and antioxidant
activity and these activities may be interrelated. Sabu MC, Kuttan R.
Antidiabetic and antioxidant activity of Terminalia belerica. Roxb. Indian J
Exp Biol. 2009 Apr; 47(4):270-5.

. Fruits of T. Belerica were extracted with petroleum ether, chloroform, acetone,

alcohol and water and efficacy of extracts against Salmonella typhi and
Salmonella typhimurium was evaluated. Pretreatment of mice with aqueuous
extract of T. belerica conferred protection against experimental Salmonellosis
and 100% survival of animals has been reported when challenged with lethal
doses of S. typhimurium. Madani A, Jain SK. Anti-Salmonella activity of
Terminalia belerica: in vitro and in vivo studies. Indian J Exp Biol. 2008 Dec;
46(12):817-215

Study done to evaluate the protective effect of Terminalia belerica fruit extract
and its active principle, gallic acid (3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid) at different
doses against carbon tetrachloride intoxication. It is concluded that 200mg/kg
dose of gallic acid was found to be most effective against carbon tetrachloride
induced liver and kidney damage. Jadon A, Bhadauria M, Shukla S. Protective
effect or Terminalia belerica Roxb. and Gallic acid against carbon tetrachloride

induced damage in albino rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2007. Jan 19:109(2):214°8:
Epub 2006 Aug 12. ,

. Hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis were induced experimentally in

rabbits by cholesterol feeding. The effect of an indigenous drug, T. beleric4,
was evaluated in these hypercholestrorlemic rabbits. 7. belerica reduced the
levels of lipids in hypercholesterolemic animals. There was also a significant
decrease in liver lipids and heart lipids (P<0,05) j ‘oials

‘ -05) in the drug-treated anima™
Shaila HP, Udupa AL, Udupa SL. Preventive actions of Terminalia belerica

in experimentally induced atherosclerosis, Int J. Cordial. 1995 Apr; 49(2):101-

----- PAGE 713 -----
Vibhitaki 705

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of ormulations Indications |

Vibhitaki Churn

Triphala Kashaya Jwara, Shula
Triphala Guggulu

Bhagandhara, Shotha
Triphaladi taila Shiroroga, Keshavikara

~~ [Tribhatad ghrita

Botanical Name

wn

Terminalia belerica, Roxb.
Terminalia - Terminus-end leaves are terminal in position.
belerica - Bely-which is an Arabic name.
Family — Combretaceae
Kula — Haritaki
Basonym of Drug
Vibhitaki removes fear about diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. faaara:-freagest ages Te: |
Vibhitaki grows commonly in Vindhya region.
Morphology
2. TAA: Bert Yfercarg, |
Vibhitaki blossoms in Vasanta Ritu (spring)
3. wadtaet:-HaTATUT THETA |
Fruits weigh about 1 Karsha (app. 10gm)
4, Aemet:-AerT eh et ST |
Kernel of Vibhitaki yield oil.
Properties and Actions
5, Stat:-arerter carcatter SrA earehtetatier; steer otarhiexet, AheReTATTRT: |

Vibhitaki is very useful for sense organs.

----- PAGE 714 -----
706 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. HUTT Sele |
Vibhitaki cures Kasa (Cough).

7. agatd:-yayaerHary |
Vibhitaki fruit is very potent.

8. faven:-fasraur Arata tare
Vibhitaki if used removes the diseases from the root.

Others

9. wHferga:-actda:, ae we Ba Hla wees: |
Regarded as auspicious plant as it is abode of Goddess Kali and in ancient
times it was used as dice.

10. YMANA:- Yet: THI, HfergAas waar er: fagrarctararara: |
Vibhitaki plant is an abode of Bhuta (Evil spirit).
Regional Names
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Virechanopaga, Jwarahara
Sushruta Mustadi, Triphala
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi Varga 35-37
Habitat
Vibhitaki is very common tree found in Indian
forests and plains.

Morphology
Habit — Large deciduous tree grows up to 60 ft.
height.

Leaves — Gathered at the extremities of the

branches, simple, alternate, coriaceous, 10-20 cm long, Terminalia et Roxb

----- PAGE 715 -----
Vibhitaki 707

7-15 cm wide, broadly elliptic or elliptic-obovate, rounded or rarely subacute, or shortly
acuminate, both surfaces are puberculous when young, margin is entire, base is narrowed,
main nerves are 6-8 pairs, spreading, prominent, midrib is prominent on both sides, peti-
ole is 2-10 cm long, without glands at the apex.

Inflorencence — Axillary slender spike.

Flowers— Greenish yellow, with an offensive odour, flowers in upper part of spikes
are male, which is shortly pedicelled and those in the lower part are hermaphrodite and
sessile.

Fruit—Drupe, 1 to 2.5 cm in diameter, ovoid, grey, suddenly narrowed into a short
stalk, velvety, obscurely S-angled when dried.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics);

Fruit is hard, ovoid or obovoid, more often pentagonal drupe, suddenly narrowed
into a short stalk or a scar of pedicel, up to 2.5 cm long and 2 cm broad. Surface is velvety,
covered with a close fulvous tomentum, having light amber colour. Fruits are dark brown
to black in colour and globular in shape. The fruit contains a hard stony seed with five
longitudinal ridges. The kernel is oily, having three prominent ridges. Fruit does not have
any characteristic odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
fasitanfattg: rea: aitnetreg U: | afegar yerareeter eAfererera: Ut
(aa. BireMeaT 35)
Properties and Actions

fasftaeh targus wort arate | corded fereast tet area I
wet Aafed tet afrdectaer | fasta desttemarett og: UI
wert Hepes afasashe ag: u (ay. eiaeasat 36-37)
fanfice: we: Ure creeeaetfrcet: | earenher aeahTet: Aaya hega: UT: I
(afr. yeast 210)
arat maremeyt ures frrerarren | sorte fereret cage ceaetsrg here,
age Yad wat TY BAT, | AAAS Wea: GUHATOMAITA: UI
(a. aiteftrert 243-244)
fasten: aeftath: aroretor: eames: erase: Ufereterar rare ME STE:
(a.fa. srenfert 232)

----- PAGE 716 -----
708

Dravyaguna Vijnana

fice we iW wae agreed aaa

_

(B.A. etiaeenfeart 14)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Vibhitaki
a. Mula b., Phala c. Patra d. Kanda
Ans: b. Phala

. Vipaka and Virya of Vibhitaki

a. Katu and Ushna b. Katu and Shita
c. Madhura and Ushna d. Madhura and Shita
Ans: c. Madhura and Ushna

. Pradhana Karma attributed to Vibhitaki is

a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Pachana d. Stambhana
Ans: b. Kasahara

. Anjana (Collyrium) of Vibhitakasthi majja (Seed pulp of Terminalia belirica)

is very beneficial in case of
a. Ajima b. Kushtha c. Visha Vikara d, Netra Roga

Ans: d. Netra Roga

. Main indication of Vibhitaki Churna is

a. Atisara b. Shotha c. Shwasa d. Ajima
Ans: c. Shwasa

. Botanical name of Vibhitaki is

a. Terminlia belerica _b. Terminalia chebula
c. Terminalia arjuna = d. Terminalia tomentosa
Ans: a. Terminalia belerica

. Karshaphala and Aksha are the synonyms of

a. Amalaki b. Haritaki c. Vibhitaki d. Pippali
Ans: c. Vibhitaki

. Kalidruma and Bhutavasa are the synonyms of

a. Arjuna b. Kutaja c. Haritaki d. Vibhitaki
Ans: d. Vibhitaki

. Habit of Vibhitaki plant is

a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 717 -----
Chapter

Vidanga

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi pancaka
[Rasa | Rat Rashaya
Laghu, Ruksha, Tikshna

Karma (Action)
Krimighna, Dipana, Shulahara, Adhmanahara, Vibandhahara, Vishaghna, Ruchya,
Medohara, Mehahara, Garbhanirodhaka, Varnya, Rasayana and Kushthaghna.

fers¢ faftrearany | (4.9, 25/40)

Vidanga (Embelia ribes Burm. F.) is best Anthelmintic.
Pharmacological Actions

Anthelmintic, Antifungal, Antioxidant, Protective, Anticonvulsant, Stimulant, Al-
ternative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kaphahara because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Krimi, Agnimandya, Ajirna, Udarashula, Adhmana, Vibandha, Aruchi, Medoroga,
Prameha, Vaivarnya and Kushtha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimi (Worm infestation)
UPTER fart WAY eos wee a 1 feats reg ferfyrert Feet Gre:
(af. 7/159)
How Khadira (Acacia catechu) is useful in Kushtha (Skin) diseases) likewise Vidanga

(Embelia ribes) should be used for food and drinks, for bath, for fumigation and for
application.

----- PAGE 718 -----
710 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
frssirmerponreul od arrirany | eft ape fealty Ae arta wae I
(far. 12/33)
Powder of Vidanga (Embelia ribes), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Haritaki
(Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia belerica) and Pippali (Piper longum) should
be taken with honey. It is useful in Kushtha (Skin disease), Krimi (Worm infestation),
Meha (Diabetes melitus) and Bhagandhara (Fistula in ano).

3. Rasayana (Rejuvenating)

fase Tee APT as thet BETTE |

SRAa Trae ct reve HT Gear Ut (B.S. 39/152)

One should take Vidanga (Embelica ribes) Powder with ghee and honey. It acts as
Rasayana (Rejuvenative).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) -lto2g
For Krimi roga 10 g of Churna in a single dose to be given.

Phytoconstituents — Fruits yielded Embelin, Quercitol, Taninn, an alkolied
Christembine, Iodoembolin, Bromoembelin, Embelic acid, Quercitol, Fatty ingredients,
Volatile oil, Vilangin.

Research corner

1. Antifungal activity of Embelia ribes was evaluated on eight different fungal
species by employing various concentrations of seed extract (0.5-2.0 mg). All
the concentrations of seed extract inhibited the fungal growth, whereas
maximum activity was observed at 2.0 mg concentration of seed extract. The
present study clearly demonstrated the antifungal properties of Embelia ribes.
Rani AS, Saritha K, Nagamani V, Sulakshana G. In vitro Evaluation of
Antifungal Activity of the Seed Extract of Embelia ribes. Indian J Pharm Sci.
2011 Mar;73(2):247-9.

2. The purpose of this study was to investigate the preventive effect of embelin
against hyperlipidemia and oxidative stress in HFD-induced obesity in rats. The
present study indicated the preventive effect of embelin in HFD-induced
obesity and its related complications. Embelin could be valuable in the
development of new drug therapies to prevent obesity, hyperlipidemia, and
oxidative stress. Chaudhari HS, Bhandari U, Khanna G. Preventive effect of
embelin from Embelia ribes on lipid metabolism and oxidative stress in high-

----- PAGE 719 -----
Vidanga 71
fat diet-induced obesity in rats. Planta Med, 2012 May;78(7):651-7. doi:
10.1055/s-0031-1298379. Epub 2012 Mar. 26

3. The present study was designed to investigate the protective effects of embelin
from Eribes on global ischemia/reperfusion-induced brain injury in rats.
Observations suggested that embelin is a neuroprotective agent and may prove
to be useful adjunct in the treatment of stroke. Thippeswamy BS, Nagakannan
P, Shivaharan BD, Mahendran S, Veerapur VP, Badami S. Protective effect of
embelin from Embelia ribes Burm. against transient global ischemia-induced
brain damage in rats. Neurotox Res. 2011 Nov; 20 (4):379-86. doi: 10. 1007/
s12640-011-9258-7. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

4. Anticonvulsant activity of embelin (2.5, 5 and 10mg/kg, i.p.) was studied. It
showed a significant inhibition of the seizures induced by electroshock and
pentylenetetrazole in a dose dependent manner and the activity was comparable
to phenytioin and diazepam. Significant decrease in locomotion revealing its
CNS depressant activity was observed. The findings suggest that embelin
possess anticonvulsant activity against both grand mal and petit mal epilepsy.
Mahendran S, Thippeswamy BS, Veerapur VP, Badami S. Anticonvulsant
activity of embelin isolated from Embelia ribes. Phytomedicine. 2011 Jan
15;18(2-3): 186-8. doi: 1016/j. phymed.2010.04.002. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

5. Forty days of orally feeding the aqueous E. ribes extract (100 and 200 mg/kg)
to streptozotocin (40 mg/kg, iv, single dose) induced diabetic rats produced
significant decrease in heart rate, systolic blood pressure, blood glucose, blood
glycosylated hemoglobin, serum lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase and
increase in blood glutathione levels as compared to pathogenic diabetic rats.
Bhandari U, Ansari MN. Antihyperglycaemic activity of aqueous extract of
Embelia ribes Burm in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Indian J Exp Biol.
2008 Aug; 46(8):607-13.

Yoga (Formulations)
SENo.

1

Name of Yoga Indications

Vidangarisht

----- PAGE 720 -----
712 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Embelia ribes Burn. F.

Embelia — Embe is from Simhali word which means sour.
ribes — Rubarb’s sour.

Family — Primulaceae

Basonym of Drug
fersta Brahe Hate
Vidanga (Embelia ribes) kills the worms.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Ratteq-fate wdatrat arat |
Vidanga grows commonly in hilly regions.
Morphology
2. Foay-anerareanhrdeetta ead ae |
Due to its delicate and flexible branches Vidanga looks like a creeper.
3. faaauge-feer: fatrranterngen: ast |
Seed of Vidanga has white spots on its surface.
4. FAATZA- PA FATEATAT BT |
Vidanga Seed is white spotted.
Properties and Actions
5. aTaret-ateqat |

Vidanga is very efficacious drug in case of worm infestations and it never fail
in this condition.

6. @itrer-Haty ata ste
Vidanga kills the worms.
7. WaPAM-sey arya seer
Vidanga is an efficacious drug in case of worm infestation.
Others
8. SRAT-ALATAN WAM AAEM |

Vidanga is commonly used in Kerala.

9. raft ytreatty treater wasert geet |

----- PAGE 721 -----
Vidanga 743

Vidanga is also used as veterinary medicine.

Regional Names

indi | Baberng

Kannada Vayu vidanga
Malayalam

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Krimighna varga, Triptighna varga, Kushthaghna varga,
Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta  Pippalyadi gana, Surasadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ Haritakyadi varga 111-112

Habitat
Vidanga is found in hilly parts of India.

Morphology
Habit — Large scandent shrub.

Branches — Long, slender, flexible, terete with
long internodes.

Bark — Studded with lenticules

Leaves —5 to 9 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide, ellip-
tic or elliptic lanceolate, coriaceous, shortly and ob-
tusely acuminate, entire, glabrous on both the sides,
shining above, paler and silvery beneath, whole sur-
face covered with scattered minute reddish sunken
gland. Base is rounded or acute, main nerves are
numerous. Petiole 0.5 to 1.5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Laxed terminal or axillary
panicled raceme. Branches are 7.5 to 10 cm long.

Embelia ribes Burn. F

Flowers— Numerous, small, greenish yellow
colored. Pedicels are 1.5 to 2 mm long. Glandular pubescent bracts are minute. Sepals
1.25 mm long, ciliate, petals are 5 in number, free, 4 mm long, stamens are 5, shorter than
the petals.

----- PAGE 722 -----
714 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit — Globose, 3 to 4 mm in diameter, smooth, succulent, black when ripe, like a
pepper corn when dried, tipped with the persistent style.
Different species

1. Embelia ribes Burm. f. 2. Embelia robusta C.B.Cl.
Substitute

Myrsine africana Linn.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics): Market sample contains globular fruits
dull red or brown colour, up to 4 mm in diameter, more often with a five partite persistent
calyx and a short stalk. The surface of the fruit is warty. The thin pericarp encloses a
single seed of red colour which is enveloped in a delicate membrane. It has got faint spicy
odour, tastes pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms
Oft ace freg: treated Sa: | Age Tat deere ferarvge:
(aetrerne TT 117)

Propertis and Actions

fas¢ ae center wet afgant Ty ysreminaineincaases u
(any. etree at 112)

Rat Hee Ules AY ATTSHTATIEH, | gUhach fear het freg Birra lt
(aA. mages ST 1 2 )

freg mech ures vet farentet ory | dtahet dat wed Hitartanraay, |

fasmremmyeraaatterentir a ut (aA. sitefirerf 1148-1149)

fares meee a eatery | ataarerete ua fat crater
(aA. frorenfe aT so)

dias amaraer vrerrens ferererge ul (PA. eitreenfe af 54-55)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)d. Seed
1. Useful part of Vidanga is
a. Mula b. Phala c. Patra d. Twak

Ans: b. Phala

----- PAGE 723 -----
Vidanga 715

mM

. Krimighna Karma of Vidanga is attributed to

a. Prabhava b. Rasa c. Guna d. Virya

Ans: a. Prabhaya

. Agrya Karma of Vidanga as per Charaka

a. Jwaraghna b. Kasaghna c.Krimighna —_d. Medhya
Ans: c. Krimighna

. One should take Vidanga (Embelica ribes) Powder with ghee and honey. It
acts as

a. Vajikara b. Rasayana c. Medhya d. Shwasahara
Ans: b. Rasayana

. Botanical name of Vidanga

a. Emblica officinalis  b. Embelia tsjerium-cottam

c. Phyllanthus amarus d. Embelia ribes

Ans: d. Embelia ribes

. Kirita and Vella are the synonyms of

a. Maricha b. Pippali c. Vidanga d. Nagavalli
Ans: c. Vidanga

. Chitra Tandula is a synonym of

a. Eranda b. vidanga c. Kapikacchu d. Manjishta
Ans: b. Vidanga

. Habit of Vidanga

a. Large Scandant shrubb. Herb c. Large Tree = d. Small Tree
Ans: a. Large Scandant shrub

. Substitute of Vidanga

a. Alpinia galanga b. Myrsine Africana

c. Carica papaya d. Vitex negundo

Ans: b. Myrsine Africana

TBR ORR

----- PAGE 724 -----
Chapter

Yashtimadhu

Useful part - Mula (Root) and Stolons.

Guru Snigdha
Karma (Action)
Yashtimadhu - Balya, Chakshushya, Varnya, Shukrala, Keshya, Swarya,
Vranahara, Shothahara, Vishaghna, Trishnahara, Ruchya, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Shirashuia hara, Kanthya.
Klitanaka - Trishnhara, Ruchya, Balya, Vrishya, Vranahara, Chakshushya,
Raktapittahara.

Agrya Karma
Tech AY wrErvaHvadea awitseaUAMANy | (FA. 25/40)

Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.) will improve Vision, acts as Aphrodisiac, good
for hair & throat, improves complexion and heals the wound.

Rasadi panchaka

Pharmacological Actions

Hepatoprotective, Antimicrobial, Antiviral, Spasmolytic, Antiulcer, Antimutagenic,
Antipyretic, Antioxidant, Antiinflammatory and Expectorant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata pitta shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura Rasa, Pitta
Shamaka due to Shita Virya, Mdhura Vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yashtimadhu - Dourbalya, Klaibya, Khalitya, Palitya, Shwaasa, Kasa, Swarabheda,
Vishavikara, Aruchi, Trishna, Daha, Vaivarnya and Sirashula.

Klitanaka - Trishna, Aruchi, Dourbalya, Klaibya, Raktapitta, Netra Vikara.

----- PAGE 725 -----
Yashtimadhu wal

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Shwasa (Hoarseness of Voice)

adfiared atch astray tl (Fs. 53/13)

Intake of ricemilk processed with Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and ghee is
very useful in Swarabheda.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)
Beas T AaMTaMsS forest at warty: | (YS. 50/16)

Avapidaka (pressed snuff) Nasya with mixture of Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and honey is good for Hikka (Hiccough).

3. Pandu (Anaemia)

feat a AAS Hart Yor as at AeATsateteMd, Ul (Ys. 7/28)
Powder or decoction of Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) if taken with honey is useful
in Pandu (Anaemia)

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - lto3¢

Phytoconstituents

Root contains glycyrrhizine, prenylated biaurone, licoagrone, liqcomarin, isoflavone,
glyzaglabrin, quercitin, kaempferol, stragaion, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenis, licuraside,
liquiritoside, liquoric acid, glabrotide, deoxoglabrolide, glycyrrhizic acid, liconicone,
blabridin, liqurazid, liquiritin, glabranine and glabrene

Research corner

1. Isoliquiritigenin (ISL), a chalcone and liquiritigenin (LTG), a flavonoid found
in licorice roots. ISL displays antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antitumor and
heatoprotective activities whereas LTG is an estrogenic compound, acts as an
agonist selective for the b-subtype of the oestrogen receptor. Both the phenolics
were isolated from the rhizomes of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Compunds 1, 4 and 10
were selected for in vivo antidiabetic ‘activity and found to be potential
candidates for treatment of diabetes. Gaur R, Yadav KS, Verma RK, Yadav
NP, Bhkuni RS. In vivo anti-diabetic activity of derivatives of isoliquiritigenin
and liquiritigenin. Phytomedicine. 2013 Nov. 18. pii : S0944-7113 (13)00424-
8.doi : 10.1016/j. phymed. 2013.10.015.

2. The present study was designed to investigate the beneficial effects of Gg root
extract on learning and memory in 1-month-old male Wistar albino rats. Four

----- PAGE 726 -----
18 Dravyaguna Vijnana

doses (75, 150, 225, and 300 mg/kg) of aqueous extract of root of Gg was
administered orally for six successive weeks. Results showed that all the doses
of aqueous root extract of Gg significantly enhanced the memory; however, in
the doses of 150 and 225 mg/kg, it showed a significant (p <0.01) enhancement
in learning and memory. Ghakravarthi KK, Avadhani R. Beneficial effect of
aqueous root extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra on learning and memory using
different behavioral models; An experimental study. J. Nat Sci Biol Med. 2013
Jul;4(2) : 420-5. doi : 10.4103/0976-9668. 117025.

3. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the anit-convulsant potential of
aqueous and ethanol extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra (AEGG and EEGG) and its
action on markers of oxidant stress in albino rats. The results demonstrate that
EEGG poses anti-convulsant potential and ameliorates ROS induced neuronal
damage in PTZ-induced seizure. Chowdhury B, Bhattamira SK, Das MC.
Anti-convulsant action and amelioration of oxidative stress by Glycyrrhiza
glabra root extract in pentylenetetrazole-induced seizure in albino rats. Inddian
J. Pharmacol. 2013 Jan-Feb; 45(1) : 40-3. doi : 10.4103/0253-7613.106433.

4. In this study, investigation done about the anti-obesity effect of glabridin and
glabridin rich supercritical fluid extract of licorice (LSC). Results suggest that
glabridin and glabridin-rich licorice exract would be effective anti-obesity
agents. Ahn J, Lee H, Jang J, Kim §, Ha T. Anti-obesity effects of glabridin-
rich supercritical carbon dioxide extract of licorice in high-fat-fed obese mice.
Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Jan; 51:439-45. doi : 10.1016/j-fict. 2012. 08.048.
Epub 2012 Sep 4.

5. The present work was to study the effect of licorice aqueous extract on
carbendazim-induced testicualr toxicity in albino rats. The present results, it is
concluded that licorice aqueous extract can imporove the testicualr toxicity of
acarbendazim and this effect may be attributed to antioxidant porperties of one
or more of its constituents. Sakr S, Shalaby SY. Carbendazim-induced
testicular damage and oxidative stress in albino rats: Ameliorative effect of
licorice aqueous extract. Toxicol Ind Health. 2012 Aug 17.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

I! eee, | Yashtimadhuvadi taila
SP Qieerrae | Yashtyadi kashaya
a | Yashtivasadi kashaya

Madhukadi Ghrita

----- PAGE 727 -----
Yashtimadhu

Botanical Name — Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.
Glycyrrhiza —Glykas-means sweet, rhiza-means root
glabra - Smooth and hairless
Family — Fabaceae
Basonym of Durg
ated Hye ght
Stem of Glycyrrhiza glabra is sweet.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Wey: Aey Fa ALTA: |
Yashtimadhu has got sweet taste.
2. alee - aettact wate sien setters cant Gerard |
Yashtimadhu cures male infertility.

Regional Name

Liquorice, sweetwood
Mulathee

Kannada Jestamadhu

Malayalam Tratimadhuram
Jashtimadhu

Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)

les}
a

z
iso

<

719

Charaka _ Jivaniya Varga, Sandhaniya Varga, Varnya Varga, Kanthya Varga,
Kandughna Varga, Chardinigrahana Varga, Snehopaga Varga,
Vamanopaga Varga, Asthapanopaga Varga, Mutravirajaniya Varga,

Shonita sthapana Varga, Angamarda prashamana varga
Sushruta Kakolyadi Gana, Sarivadi Gana, Anjanadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 145-146
Habitat

In India, Yashtimadhu is cultivated in Jammu Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi.

Morphology

Habit -Tall perennial plant grows 50 cm to 1 mtr in height.

----- PAGE 728 -----
720 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Stem - Erect

Leaves — Compound, leaflets are 4 to 7 pairs ob-
long to elliptical-lanceolate, acute or obtuse.

Inflorescence — Raceme, shorter than the leaves.

Flowers — | cm long, bluish or violet coloured.
Calyx are 2 lipped, upper teeth connate higher than the

lower ones. Standard petal is narrow, wings and keel
are acute. Stamens are diadelphous. Ovary many ovuled.

Fruit — Pod, oblong to linear, 1 to 3 cm long, flat-
tened, straightish, more or less densely echinate glan-
dular many seeded. Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.
Adulterants (Yastimadhu)

Roots of Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch and Abrus precatorius Linn. are often adulter-
ated with liquorice. Even stem pieces of Glycyrrhiza glabra is used as an adulterant.

Varieties
Dh. Ni. & Ra. Ni. - 2 types: 1. Yashtimadhu — 2. Klitanaka

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consists transversely cut pieces of dry clyindrical roots and stolons,
more often with a fibrous cut surface, 1 to 3 cm in diameter. External surface is shrunken,
rusty brown in colour, long tediously wrinkled with occasional small buds, circular root
scars and remnants of encircling leafy scales. Transversely cut surface shows a yellowish
brown fibrous structure depicting loose bark, followed by a well marked campus ring and
radiating vascular tissue. On breaking becomes fibrous, has got faint characteristic odour,
taste is sweet and mucilaginous.

Classical references
Synonyms
asiny cen adtaeyes aeftte aa | strech TY Aare weferar
(a3. etcaanfa af 145)
Properties and Actions
ast fear ye: tag ayEN seal Ofer Yen yar carat fraeaPAaT, |
auafrrcsfegorrentreraaen ul (a5. are +t 146)
mgerst wargrar efter fran 1 ger vivecen faster u
(af. yeeieet 139)

----- PAGE 729 -----
Yashtimadhu 721

Klitaka

afsergnet tag Toftrerentrfegery ui (a. Teaert 40)

nysh Hat get que wad fit ye 1 gard det ay arafier wore 0
Pears Tewrearagieaaa Be (a. atufireat 148)

Yashtimadhu

nyt afi fastarh a vittery | wager firreget viragomaurrey |
(a. froreafe at 145)

Klitanaka

acid vat wet art get aUTGET | vitact Ie aemeatirag UA I
(af. frorenfe aT 148)
ayaearré Yet Pair qed Wer, | aaa Preyer Aaa
(R.A. meargenie at 92)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Yashtimadhu
a. Stem b. Root and Stolon c. Fruit c. Seed
Ans: b. Root and Stolon

2. Pradhana Rasa of Yashtimadhu
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

3. Intake of rice milk processed with Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and ghee
is very useful
a. Jwara b. Swarabheda c. Ajima d. Kushtha
Ans: b. Swarabheda

4. Avapidaka (pressed snuff) Nasya with mixture of Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) and honey is good for
a. Kasa b. Pandu c. Hikka d. Ajirna
Ans: c. Hikka

5. Glycyrrhizine a chemical constituent present in
a. Vidari b. Manjishtha c. Vatsanabha d. Yashtimadhu

Ans: d. Yashtimadhu

----- PAGE 730 -----
722 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Yashtimadhuvadi Taila is specifically indicated in
a. Khalitya b. Vyanga c. Kushtha d. Udarashula
Ans: a. Khalitya
. Common English Name of Yashtimadhu
a. Nutmeg b. Marking Nut __c. Liquorice d. Flax seeds
Ans: c. Liquorice
8. Types of Yashtimadhu as per Dhanvantari Nighantu
a. Yashtimadhu & Klitanaka b. Yashtimadhu & Mahayashti
c. Yashtimadhu & Laghyashti d. Klitanaka & Maha Klitanaka
Ans: a. Yashtimadhu & Klitanaka

~

FoR


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Encyclopedia Of Herbal Medicine.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
SE
550 HER

Andrew Chevallier, FNIMH

BS and REMEDIES for COMMON AILMENTS
Pe

----- PAGE 2 -----


----- PAGE 3 -----
‘\ (
f MEDICINE 1

4

----- PAGE 4 -----
37S Se oe

----- PAGE 5 -----
a aa > “a?

Q ENCYCLOPEDIA OF
MEDICINE

7

Do
a

----- PAGE 6 -----
\ Penguin
DK] Random

House

THIRD EDITION

DK UK DK INDIA
Editor Toby Mann Senior Art Editor Elaine Hewson Project Editor Janashree Singha
Design Assistant Rehan Abdul Senior Art Editor Balwant Singh
US Consultant David Hoffman Editors Sugandh Juneja, Seetha Natesh
US Editor Michelle Melani Art Editors Sourabh Challariya, Jomin Johny
Senior Jackets Creative Nicola Powling Assistant Art Editor Juhi Sheth
Senior Pre-Production Producer Tony Phipps Picture Researchers Deepak Negi, Nishwan Rasool
Senior Producer Che Creasey Deputy Managing Editor Bushra Ahmed
Creative Technical Support Sonia Charbonnier Managing Art Editor Navidita Thapa
Managing Editors Lisa Dyer, Angela Wilkes Pre-production Manager Sunil Sharma
Managing Art Editor Marianne Markham DTP Designers Satish Chandra Gaur, Rajdeep Singh,
US Managing Editor Lori Cates Hand Anurag Trivedi

Art Director Maxine Pedliham
US Publisher Mike Sanders
Publishing Director Mary-Clare Jerram
FIRST EDITION
Project Editor Penny Warren Editors Valerie Horn, Christa Weil

Senior Editor Rosie Pearson Senior Art Editor Spencer Holbrook
Designers Robert Ford, Jeremy Butcher, Rachana Devidayal
Picture Researcher Jo Walton Illustrator Gillie Newman

Main Photographers Andy Crawford, Steve Gorton
Managing Editor Susannah Marriott Managing Art Editor Toni Kay
DTP Designer Karen Ruane Production Antony Heller

IMPORTANT NOTICE

Do not try self-diagnosis or attempt self-treatment for serious or long-term problems without first consulting
a qualified medical herbalist or medical practitioner as appropriate. Do not take any herb without first
checking the cautions in the relevant herb entry (see pp. 56-283) and the Essential Information on
pp. 298-299. Do not exceed any dosages recommended. Always consult a professional practitioner if
symptoms persist. If taking prescribed medicines, seek professional medical advice before using herbal
remedies. Take care to correctly identify plants and do not harvest restricted or banned species. So far as the
author is aware, the information given is correct and up to date as of July 2016. Practice, laws, and regulations
all change, and the reader should obtain up-to-date professional advice on any such issues. In addition, this
book contains general information on growing cannabis, which is a controlled substance in North America
and throughout much of the world. As the use and cultivation of cannabis and its derivative products can
carry heavy penalties, you should research your local laws before using the information in this book. The
author and the publisher expressly disclaim any liability, loss, or risk, personal or otherwise, which is incurred
as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of this book.

Third American Edition, 2016
First American Edition, 1996
This edition published in the United States in 2016 by
DK Publishing, 345 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014

Copyright © 1996, 2001, 2016 Dorling Kindersley Limited
Text copyright © 1996, 2001, 2016 Andrew Chevallier
DK, a Division of Penguin Random House LLC
16 17 181920 10987654321
001-285452-July/2016

All rights reserved.

Without limiting the rights under the copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
Published in Great Britain by Dorling Kindersley Limited.

A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 978-1 -4654-498 | -8

DK books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising,
or educational use. For details, contact: DK Publishing Special Markets, 345 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014
SpecialSales@dk.com

Printed and bound in China

A WORLD OF IDEAS:
SEE ALL THERE IS TO KNOW

www.dk.com

----- PAGE 7 -----
Q
\
‘
»

Contents

10

17
18
28
32

54

156
284
286
288
290
298

299
320

6 Introduction

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE
How Medicinal Plants Work

Active Constituents

Quality Control

Early Origins to the 19th Century
20th Century Onward

Herbal Traditions of the World

32 Europe

36 India and the Middle East

40 — China, Japan, and Southeast Asia
44 Africa

46 Australia and New Zealand

48 — North America

52. South America

KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS

A visual guide to 100 key herbs from around the world with
details of their habitat, constituents, actions, traditional

and current uses, and information on the latest research.

Also included are key preparations and practical self-help uses.

OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS

450 other herbs from different herbal traditions with descriptions
of their therapeutic properties and past and present uses.

HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE

Growing Medicinal Plants
Harvesting & Processing

Making Herbal Remedies

Using Herbal Remedies Safely
Remedies for Common Ailments
Consulting an Herbal Practitioner
321 Glossary

322 Bibliography

323 General Index

332 Index of Herbs by Ailment
336 Useful Addresses & Acknowledgments

----- PAGE 8 -----
Oo

iT

Introduction

In the twenty years since the first edition of this encyclopedia in 1996, herbal medicine

has gone through unprecedented change. Herbs, which have always been the principal form
of medicine in developing countries, have again become popular in the developed world,

as people strive to stay healthy in the face of chronic stress and pollution, and to treat illness
with medicines that work in concert with the body's defenses. A quiet revolution has been
taking place. Tens of millions of people now take herbs such as ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p. |00)

to help maintain mental and physical health, and increasingly people consult trained herbal
professionals and naturopaths for chronic or routine health problems. Increasingly too,

scientific evidence is accumulating to show that herbal medicines can provide treatment that
is as effective as conventional medicines but with few side effects. Sales of herbal medicines
continue to grow year after year—by over 50 percent in the U.S. since 2000—and several
mainstream pharmaceutical companies now manufacture and market herbal medicines.

Plant Medicines
The variety and sheer number of plants with therapeutic properties are quite astonishing.
Some 50,000 to 70,000 plant species, from lichens to towering trees, have been used at
one time or another for medicinal purposes. Today, Western herbal medicine still makes use
of hundreds of native European plants, as well as many hundreds of species from other
continents. In Ayurveda (traditional Indian medicine) about 2,000 plant species are
considered to have medicinal value, while the Chinese Pharmacopoeia lists over 5,700

traditional medicines, mostly of plant origin.

About 500 herbs are still employed within conventional medicine, although whole plants are
rarely used. In general, the herbs provide the starting material for the isolation or synthesis
of conventional drugs. Digoxin, for example, which is used for heart failure, was isolated
from common foxglove (Digitalis purpurea, p. 202), and the contraceptive pill was
synthesized from constituents found in wild yam (Dioscorea villosa, p. 91).

Ecological Factors
The increased use of medicinal herbs has important environmental implications. Growing
herbs as an organic crop offers new opportunities for farmers, and sometimes, especially
in developing countries, opportunities for whole communities. In northeastern Brazil,
for example, community-run herb gardens grow medicinal herbs that are sold to local hospitals.
Doctors at the hospital then prescribe these medicines for their patients.

The rise in popularity of herbal medicines, however, also directly threatens the survival
of some wild species. Demand for goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis, p. 105) has become so
great that it now fetches around $140 a pound (£170 a kilo). It was a common plant in the
woodlands of northern America two centuries ago, but is now an endangered species, with
its survival in the wild threatened by overcollection. This example is by no means unique,

and, sadly, many species are similarly threatened across the planet. The extinction of plant
species as a result of over-intensive collecting is nothing new. The herb silphion, a member
of the carrot family, was used extensively as a contraceptive by the women of ancient Rome.

----- PAGE 9 -----
Silphion proved difficult to cultivate and was gathered from the wild in such large quantities
that it became extinct during the 3rd century CE.

Today, if herbal medicine continues to grow at its present rate, it is imperative that
manufacturers, suppliers, practitioners, and the public use only produce that has been
cultivated or wildcrafted in an ecologically sensitive manner.

About This Book
In the past, books on herbal medicine have tended to focus either on the traditional and
folkloric use of plants or on their active constituents and pharmacology. The Encyclopedia

of Herbal Medicine, which features over 550 plants, aims to cover both aspects. It discusses

each plant's history, traditions, and folklore, and explains in simple terms what is known from

scientific research about its active constituents, actions, and potential new uses.
tt is easy when concentrating on the scientific aspect of herbal medicine to forget that
much, in some cases all, that we currently know about a particular plant results from its

raditional use. Moreover, even when a plant has been well researched, herbal medicines are
so complex and variable that what is currently known is rarely definitive, but rather a sound

pointer as to how it works. Sometimes the traditional use, insofar as it is based on the

experience of practitioners, provides an insight into how best to use an herb that is missing
from scientific knowledge alone. Herbal medicine is, after all, both a science and an art.

In choosing the plants profiled in the Encyclopedia, the aim has been to select herbs that are
commonly used in different parts of the world and are considered to have particular health
benefits. The index of key medicinal plants (pp. 54-155) contains many herbs that are
readily available in health stores and pharmacies, for example St. John’s wort (Hypericum
perforatum, p. 106). It also includes herbs that are more commonly known as foods, such as

lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82), but which, nonetheless, are valuable medicines. The index of other
medicinal plants (pp. 156-283) contains some less commonly known but important medicinal
herbs, such as andrographis (Andrographis paniculata, p. 167), a traditional Indian medicinal
plant that stimulates recovery from infection and supports normal liver function.

A global overview of the history of herbal medicine puts the development of different
herbal traditions from earliest origins to the present day into perspective. This is complemented

with features on herbal medicine in Europe, India, China, Africa, Australia, and the Americas,

providing a rounded picture of herbal medicine worldwide.

Herbal medicine is nothing if not practical in its approach, and the Encyclopedia has a
detailed self-help section with advice on preparing and using herbal medicines to treat
a range of common health problems.

if more people come to appreciate the immense richness of the world of herbal
medicine and are able to benefit from the curative properties of medicinal herbs, this

book will have achieved its aim.

Aidussss Chiat
wu

----- PAGE 10 -----


----- PAGE 11 -----
THE
DEVELOPMENT
OF HERBAL
MEDICINE

From the earliest times, herbs have been prized for their pain-relieving and
healing abilities, and today we still rely on the curative properties of plants
in about 75 percent of our medicines. Over the centuries, societies around
the world have developed their own traditions to make sense of medicinal
plants and their uses. Some of these traditions and medicinal practices may
seem strange and magical, others appear rational and sensible, but all are
attempts to overcome illness and suffering, and to enhance quality of life.

----- PAGE 12 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

How Medicinal Plants Work

Many of the thousands of plant species growing throughout the world have medicinal
uses, containing active constituents that have a direct action on the body. They are used
both in herbal and conventional medicine and offer benefits that pharmaceutical drugs
he body's efforts to regain good health.

often lack, helping to combat illness and support

There is no doubt that in extreme situations, the treatments
devised by modern medicine can offer an unparalleled
opportunity to relieve symptoms and save lives. A newspaper
article in 1993 described the terrible conditions in a hospital
in war-torn Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Deprived of conventional medical supplies and drugs, the
doctors were forced to use a well-known European herb,
valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148), as a painkiller for the
wounded and as an anesthetic. Valerian is an effective herbal
medicine for anxiety and nervous tension, but it is woefully
inadequate as an analgesic or anesthetic.
Orthodox pharmaceutical medicines sustain life and counter
infections in situations where other types of treatment
may have little to offer. Modern surgical techniques, such as
keyhole surgery and plastic surgery, and the whole range of
diagnostics and of life-support machinery now available, can
all be used to improve the chances of recovery from serious
illness or injury.

The Benefits of Herbal Medicine

Yet despite the dramatic advances and advantages of
conventional medicine, or biomedicine as it is also known,
it is clear that herbal medicine has much to offer. We tend
to forget that in all but the past 70 years or so, humans
have relied almost entirely on plants to treat all manner

of illnesses, from minor problems such as coughs and colds
to life-threatening diseases such as tuberculosis and malaria.

Opium poppy fields in Tasmania. Opium, derived from the seed capsules of the opium
Poppy, yields the narcotic alkaloids morphine and codeine, powerful painkillers that are
widely used in conventional medicine.

Today, herbal remedies are coming back into prominence
because the efficacy of conventional medicines such as
antibiotics, which once had near-universal effectiveness against
serious infections, is on the wane. Over the years, infectious
organisms have developed resistance to synthesized drugs,
and the herb sweet wormwood (Artemisia annua, p. 67) and
its active constituent artemisinin, for example, are now the
standard treatment for malaria in tropical areas where
the protozoa causing the infection no longer respond to
conventional treatment.
Herbal medicine often complements conventional
treatments, providing safe, well-tolerated remedies for chronic
illnesses. It is experiencing a dramatic renaissance in Western
countries, partly because no effective conventional treatment
as yet exists for many chronic illnesses, such as asthma,
arthritis, and irritable bowel syndrome. In addition, concern
over the side effects of biomedicine is encouraging people
0 look for more gentle forms of treatment. It is estimated
hat 10-20% of hospital patients in the West are there due
0 the side effects of conventional medical treatment.

Using Herbs Wisely

ost commonly used herbs are extremely safe to use.

But some plants can produce side effects and, like all
medicines, herbal remedies must be treated with respect.

t is essential to take or use certain plants only under the
guidance of a well-trained practitioner, to avoid adverse
consequences. Ma huang (Ephedra sinica, p. 95), for example,
can be extremely toxic at the wrong dosage, and comfrey
(Symphytum officinale, p. 138), a very popular herb in the
past, is thought to cause severe or even fatal liver damage

in rare circumstances. When an herbal medicine is used
correctly, however, the chances of developing a serious side
effect are remote.

Potent Plant Chemicals

The ability of an herbal medicine to affect body systems
depends on the chemical constituents that it contains.
Scientists first started extracting and isolating chemicals from
plants in the 18th century, and since that time we have
grown accustomed to looking at herbs and their effects in
terms of the active constituents they contain. This Encyclopedia
is no exception, providing details of all the main active
constituents of the medicinal herbs featured and explaining
their actions.

----- PAGE 13 -----
Ginkgo, one of the oldest known plant
species, improves the circulation of blood
to the head.

Research into isolated plant
constituents is of great
importance, for it has given rise
‘© many of the world’s most
useful drugs. Tubocurarine, the
most powerful muscle relaxant
in existence, is derived from
pareira (Chondrodendron
tomentosum, p. |89), and the
strongest painkiller of all,
morphine, comes from opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum,
p. 244). Many anesthetics
are also derived from plants—
for example cocaine comes
from coca (Erythroxylum
coca, p. 206).
Today, biomedicine still
relies on plants rather than
he laboratory for at least 25%
of its medicines, and many of

these are among the most effective of all conventional drugs.
It is hard to think of a world deprived of the antimalarial

properties of quinine (derived

from Cinchona spp., p. 80); or

rather than develop
taking a watch apa

ed in a laboratory. In the same way that
and identifying its key parts will not show

you how it works as a whole, dividing up a medicinal herb

into its constituent
in tts natural form. 1

sum of its parts, and scienti

hat the active cons

Plan
constituent chemical
Frequently, we simp!

in ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p.
produce the therapeutic effect of the remedy as a whole.
s contain hundreds, if not

parts cannot explain exactly how it works

he whole herb is worth more than the
fic research is increasingly showing
ituents of many herbs, for example those
00), interact in complex ways to

housands, of different
s that interact in complex ways.
y do not know in detail how a particular

herb works—even
established. The ph

how whole herbs work is

hough its medicinal benefit is well
armacological approach to understanding
ike working on a puzzle where only

some of the pieces have been provided. Furthermore,

although it is very useful to know that a plan
s, such informa’

active constituer
own. For example,
p. 126)
anthraquinones tha’
movement. This
large quantities o
constituents, notab

axative effect,
f the herb are used. At lower doses other

contains certain
ion can be misleading on its
Chinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum,

is a commonly used laxative, containing

irritate the gut wall and stimulate bowel
however, occurs only when

ly tannins, which dry and tighten up

the heart remedy digoxin (from Digitalis s
cough-relieving properties of ephedrine (
p. 95), which is present in many prescrip’
counter cold remedies. These and many
medicines are all derived from isolated p

pp., p. 202); or the
from Ephedra sinica,
ion and over-the-
other conventional
ant constituents.

mucous membranes in the gu
result, Chinese rhubarb works
ways depending on
high doses; to treat diarrhea at

This example reveals a cou
about herbal medicine. Firstly,

, have greater effect. As a
in two apparently opposite

he dosage: as a laxative at moderate to

a lower dose.
ple of fundamental truths
he experience of the herbal

Value of Whole Plants

Although it is important to understand

individual active constituents,

he actions of
ike bio-

herbal medicine, un

medicine, is ultimately about the use and actions of whole
plants—medicines that are literally god- or goddess-given,

Cultivation of medicinal plants in Cameroon. Scientific research indicates that
whole-plant preparations may often be gentler and more effective remedies
than isolated plant chemicals.

practitioner and of the patien
reliable guide to the medicinal e

Secondly, the value of a medicinal herb cannot

simply to a list of its active consti

Plants as Foods & Medicines

In general, the human body is m
treatment with herbal remedies t

medicines. We have evolved side-by-side with

hundreds of thousands of years,
and

physiology as a whole are geared to diges

often provide the most

ffect of individual herbs.
be reduced
uents.

uch better suited to

han with isolated chemical
plants over
ive system
ing and

and our diges

utilizing plant-based foods, which often have a medicinal

value as well as providing sustenance.
The dividing line between “foods” and “medicines” may

not always be clear. Are lemons,

papayas, onions, and oats

foods or medicines? The answer, very simply, is that they

are both. Lemon (Citrus limon, p.

82) improves resistance

to infection; papaya (Carica papaya, p. | 83) is taken in some

parts of the world to expel wor

ms; onion (Allium cepa,

p. 164) relieves bronchial infections; and oats (Avena sativa,
p. 175) support convalescence. Indeed, herbal medicine
comes into its own when the distinctions between foods

and medicines are removed.

MAYOM SLNV1Id TVNIOIGHWN MOH ©

----- PAGE 14 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

Though we might eat a bowl of oatmeal oblivious to the
medicinal benefits, it will, nonetheless, increase stamina, help
the nervous system to function correctly, provide a good
supply of B vitamins, and maintain regular bowel function.
A similar range of benefits is provided by many of the other
gentler-acting herbs listed in the Encyclopedia.

Herbal Treatments

The strategies that herbal practitioners adopt to prevent
illness or restore health in their patients are different in the
many and varied herbal traditions across the planet, but
he effects that herbal medicines have within the body to
improve health do not vary. There are many thousands
of medicinal plants in use throughout the world, with a
remendous range of actions and degrees of potency. Most
have a specific action on particular body systems and are
nown to be suitable for treating certain types of ailments.
See p. 13 for specific actions.

Digestion, Respiration, & Circulation

mproving the quality of the diet is often an essential starting
point in sustaining or regaining good health. The saying ‘You
are what you eat” is by and large true, though herbalists
prefer to qualify it, saying “You are what you absorb from
what you eat.’ Herbal medicines not only provide nutrients,
but when needed they also strengthen and support the
action of the digestive system, speeding up the rate of
processing food and improving the absorption of nutrients.
The body requires another kind of “nutrient” to
function—oxygen. The lungs and respiratory system can
be helped with herbs that relax the bronchial muscles and
stimulate respiration.
Once taken in by the body, nutrients and medicines are
carried to the body's estimated one hundred trillion cells.
The circulatory system has a remarkable ability to adapt
to an endlessly shifting pattern of demand. At rest, the flow
of blood is mainly toward the center of the body, while
when active, the muscles in the limbs make huge demands.
Herbal medicines work to encourage circulation in
particular ways. Some, for example, encourage blood to
flow to the surface of the body; others stimulate the heart
to pump more efficiently; while others relax the muscles of
the arteries, lowering blood pressure.

Clearing Toxicity & Soothing Skin

After circulation has carried nutrients to the cells, waste
matter must be removed. All too often in our polluted world,
high levels of toxicity in the body are an underlying cause of
ill health, and herbalists use a wide range of cleansing herbs
that improve the body's ability to remove toxins. Perhaps
the finest example of a detoxifying herb is burdock (Arctium
lappa, p. 65), which is used extensively in both Western and
Chinese medicine. Once herbs such as this reduce the toxic

“load,” the body is able to invest greater resources
in repairing and strengthening damaged tissue and
weakened organs.

The skin also plays an important role in good health.
Antiseptic plants fight infection, while vulnerary (wound-
healing) herbs such as comfrey (Symphytum officinale,

p. 138) encourage blood clotting and help speed the healing
of wounds.

Nervous, Endocrine, & Immune Systems

Good health depends on having a healthy, balanced nervous
system. In order to ensure long-term good health of the
nervous system, it is important to adapt well to life's daily
demands, to avoid excessive anxiety, worry, or depression,
and to get sufficient rest and exercise.
The latest research shows that the nervous system does
not work in isolation but is complemented by the endocrine
system, which controls the release of a whole symphony
of hormones, including the sex hormones, which control
fertility and often affect vitality and mood. The nervous
system is also intimately linked with the immune system,
which controls the ability to resist infection and to recover
from illness and injury.
This incredible complex of systerms—part electrical, part
chemical, part mechanical—must function harmoniously if
good health is to be maintained. In health, the body has a
seemingly infinite capacity, via its controlling systems, to adjust
and change to external pressures. This ability to adapt to the
external world while the body's internal workings remain
constant is known as homeostasis. Many herbs work with
the immune, nervous, and endocrine systems to help the
body adapt more effectively to stresses and strains of all kinds:
physical, mental, emotional, and even spiritual. They are
effective because they work in tune with the body's processes.
Some herbs are adaptogenic, meaning that they have an
ability to help people to adapt, either by supporting the
nervous system and easing nervous and emotional tension,
or by working directly with the body's own physiological
processes to maintain health. The prime example of an
adaptogenic herb is ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. 118), which
is an effective remedy at times of great mental or physical
stress, but in certain cases can also be taken when a relaxing
effect is required, for example to relieve headaches, or to
ensure a good night's sleep.

Complex Natural Medicines

As can be seen, an herb is not a “magic bullet” with a single
action, but a complex natural medicine composed of many
active constituents that work on different body systems. By
combining scientific research into active constituents with
clinical observation and traditional knowledge of the whole
plant, we can develop a rounded picture of each herb’s range
of medicinal uses.

----- PAGE 15 -----
Herbs & Body Systems

One of the most common ways of classifying medicinal plants is to identify their actions, for example whether they are
sedative, antiseptic, or diuretic, and the degree to which they affect different body systems. Herbs often have a pronounced
action on a particular body system, for example a plant that is strongly antiseptic in the digestive tract may be less so in the

respiratory tract. Examples of how herbs work on the body are given below.

Skin

Antiseptics, e.g. tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. 112),
disinfect the skin. Emollients, e.g., marshmallow
(Althea officinalis, p. 165), reduce itchiness, redness,
and soreness. Astringents, e.g., witch hazel
(Hamamelis virginiana, p. 102), tighten the skin.
Depuratives, e.g., burdock (Arctium lappa, p. 65),
encourage removal of waste products. Healing and
vulnerary herbs, e.g., comfrey (Symphytum officinale,
p. 138) and calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73), aid
the healing of cuts, wounds, and abrasions.

Calendula
(Calendula officinalis)

Immune system

Immune modulators, e.g, echinacea (Echinacea
spp. p. 92) and pau d’arco (Tabebuia spp.,

p. 139), encourage the immune system to
ward off infection.

* Echinacea
(Echinacea spp)

Respiratory system

Antiseptics and antibiotics, e.g. garlic (Allium
sativum, p. 59), help the lungs resist infection.
Expectorants, e.g., elecampane (Inula helenium,
p. 107), stimulate the coughing up of mucus.
Demulcents, e.g., coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara,

p. 278), soothe irritated membranes.
Spasmolytics, e.g., visnaga (Ammi visnaga, p. 62),
relax bronchial muscles.

Garlic
(Allium sativurn)

Endocrine glands
Adaptogens, e.g., ginseng (Panax ginseng,

p. 118), help the body adjust to external pressures
and stress. Hormonally active herbs, e.g., chaste tree
(Vitex agnus-castus, p. 151), stimulate production of
sex and other hormones. Emmenagogues, e.g.,
black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa, p. 79),
encourage or regulate menstruation.

Ginseng
(Panax ginseng)

Urinary system
Antiseptics, e.g., buchu (Barosma betulina, p. 71),
disinfect the urinary tubules. Astringents, e.g.,
horsetail (Equisetum arvense, p. 205), tighten and
protect the urinary tubules. Diuretics, e.g. cornsilk
(Zea mays, p. |54), stimulate the flow of urine. -

Cornsilk
(Zea mays)

Musculoskeletal system

p. 216), relieve joint and nerve pain. Anti-
inflammatories, e.g., white willow (Salix alba, p. 129),
reduce swelling and pain in joints. Antispasmodics, e.g.,
cinchona (Cinchona spp., p. 80), relax tense
and cramped muscles.

White Willow
(Salix alba)

Analgesics, e.g., yellow jasmine (Gelsemium empervirens,

Nervous system

Nervines, e.g, rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis, p. 128), support and strengthen
the nervous system. Relaxants, e.g., lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13), relax the
nervous system. Sedatives, e.g., mistletoe (Viscum
album, p. 283), reduce nervous activity. Stimulants,
e.g., kola nut (Cola acuminata, p. 192), increase
nervous activity. Tonics, e.g., oats (Avena sativa,

p. 175), improve nerve function and tone, and
help to restore the nervous system as a whole.

Rosemary
(Rosmarinus officinalis)
Circulation & heart
Cardiotonics, e.g., dan shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza,

p. 130), vary in action. Some slow heartbeat
rate, while others increase it. Some improve
the regularity and strength of the heart's
contractions. Circulatory stimulants, e.g., cayenne
(Capsicum frutescens, p. 74), improve the
circulation of blood to the extremities.
Diaphoretics, e.g., ju hua (Chrysanthemum x
morifolium, p. 78), encourage blood flow to
the surface of the body, promote sweating, and
lower blood pressure. Spasmolytics, e.g., cramp
bark (Viburnum opulus, p. |50), relax the muscles,
helping to lower blood pressure.

Cayenne
(Capsicum frutescens)

Digestive organs
Antiseptics, e.g., ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155), protect
against infection. Astringents, e.g. bistort (Polygonum
bistorta, p. 253), tighten up the inner lining of the intestines
and create a protective coating over them. Bitters, e.g.,
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium, p. 66),
stimulate secretion of digestive
juices by the stomach and
intestines. Carminatives, e.g.,
sweet flag (Acorus calamus,

p. 57), relieve gas and cramps.
Cholagogues, e.g, fringe tree
(Chionanthus virginicus,

p. 188), improve the flow of bile into

the intestines. Choleretics, e.g., artichoke (Cynara scolymus,
p. 199), stimulate secretion of bile by the liver. Demulcents,
e.g., psyllium (Plantago spp., p. |23), soothe the digestive
system and protect against acidity and irritation.
Hepatics, e.g., bupleurum (Bupleurum chinense,

p. 72), prevent liver damage. Laxatives,
e.g., senna (Cassia senna, p. 75),
stimulate bowel movements.
Stomachics, e.g., cardamom
(Eletteria cardamomum, p. 93),
protect and support
the stomach.

Sweet Flag
(Acorus calamus)

Senna
(Cassia senna)

WUOM SLNVTId TVNIDIGHN MOH ©

----- PAGE 16 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

Active Constituents

The medicinal effects of certain plants are well known. German chamomile, for example, has been
taken to soothe digestive problems for thousands of years, and aloe vera was known to Cleopatra as
a healing skin remedy, It is only relatively recently, however, that active constituents responsible for the
medicinal actions of plants have been isolated and observed. Knowing a little about the chemicals
contained in plants helps you to understand how they work within the body.

Phenols

Phenols are a very varied group
of plant constituents ranging from
salicylic acid, a molecule similar

to aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), to
complex sugar-containing phenolic
glycosides. Phenols are often anti-
inflammatory and antiseptic, and
are thought to be produced by
plants to protect against infection
and feeding by insects. Phenolic
acids, such as rosmarinic acid,

are strongly antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory, and can also have
antiviral properties. Wintergreen
(Gaultheria procumbens, p. 215)
and white willow (Salix alba, p. 129)
both contain salicylates. Many mint
family members contain phenols—
for example, the strongly antiseptic
thymol, found in thyme (Thymus
vulgaris, p. 143).

(Thymus vulgaris)

Volatile Oils

Volatile oils—which are extracted
from plants to produce
essential oils—are some

of the most important
medicinally active plant
constituents, and are

also used widely in
perfumery. They are
complex mixtures often of
00 or more compounds,
mostly made up of
monoterpenes—molecules
containing 10 carbon atoms.
Essential oils have many uses.

Tea tree oil (Melaleuca alternifolia,

p. | 12) is strongly antiseptic, while
sweet gale oil (Myrica gale, p. 238) is an
effective insect repellent. On distillation, some
essential oils contain compounds not found in

e volatile oil—chamazulene, found in German
chamomile (Chamomilla recutita, p. 77) essential
oil, is anti-inflammatory and antiallergenic.
Resins—sticky oily substances that seep from
plants, for example from the bark of Scots
pine (Pinus sylvestris, p. 249)—are often
linked with essential oils (oleoresins) and
gums (see Polysaccharides), though they
are nonvolatile.

a4

German Chamomile
(Chamomiilla recutita)

Flavonoids
Found widely throughout
the plant world, flavonoids
are polyphenolic
compounds that act

as pigments, imparting
color, often yellow or
white, to flowers and
fruits. They have a wide
range of actions and many
medicinal uses. They are
antioxidant and especially
useful in maintaining healthy
circulation. Some flavonoids also
have anti-inflammatory, antiviral, and
liver-protective activity. Flavonoids such as hesperidin and rutin,
found in many plants, notably buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum,
p. 210) and lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82), strengthen capillaries
and prevent leakage into surrounding tissues. Isoflavones,
found for example in red clover (Trifolium pratense,
p. 277), are estrogenic and valuable in treating
menopausal symptoms.

Lemon
(Gitrus limon)

Black Catechu
(Acacia catechu)

| Tannins
Tannins are produced to a greater or
lesser degree by all plants. The harsh,
astringent taste of tannin-laden bark
and leaves makes them unpalatable to
insects and grazing animals. Tannins are
polyphenolic compounds that contract and astringe tissues of the body by
binding with and precipitating proteins—hence their use to “tan” leather.
They also help to stop bleeding and to check infection. Tannin-containing
herbs are used to tighten up over-relaxed tissues—as in varicose veins—
to dry up excessive watery secretions—as in diarrhea—and to protect
damaged tissue—such as skin problems resulting from eczema or a burn.
Oak bark (Quercus robur, p. 260) and black catechu (Acacia catechu, p. 158)
are both high in tannins.

----- PAGE 17 -----
Proanthocyanins
Closely related to tannins and flavonoids,
these polyphenolic compounds are
pigments that give flowers and
fruits a blue, purple, or red hue.
They are powerfully antioxidant
and free-radical scavengers. They
rotect the circulation from damage,
specially the circulation in the
eart, hands, feet, and eyes.
lackberry (Rubus fruticosus,
. 264), red grapes (Vitis
inifera, p. 283), and
awthorn (Crataegus
xycantha, p. 87) all contain
ppreciable quantities of
ese proanthocyanins.

>ouv

ies}

ers.v

+»

Blackberry
(Rubus fruticosus)

Coumarins

Coumarins of different kinds are found
in many plant species and have widely
divergent actions. The coumarins in melilot
(Melilotus officinalis, p. 234) and horse
chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum, p. 58)
help to keep the blood thin, while
furanocoumarins such as bergapten,
found in celery (Apium graveolens, p. 64),
stimulate skin tanning, and khellin, found
in visnaga (Ammi visnaga, p. 62), is a
powerful smooth-muscle relaxant.

Celery
(Apium graveolens)

Saponins

The main active
constituents in many
key medicinal plants,
saponins gained their
name because, like soap,

they make a lather when

placed in water. Saponins occur in two
different forms—steroidal and triterpenoid.
The chemical structure of steroidal saponins
similar to that of many of the body's hormones, for example
estrogen and cortisol, and many plants containing them have a
marked hormonal activity. Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa, p. 91), from
which the contraceptive pill was first developed, contains steroidal
saponins. Triterpenoid saponins occur more commonly—for example
in licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101) and cowslip root (Primula veris,

p. 256)—but have less hormonal activity. They are often expectorant
and aid absorption of nutrients.

Licorice
(Glycyrrhiza
glabra)

a

Anthraquinones
Anthraquinones are the main active
constituents in herbs such as senna
(Cassia senna, p. 75) and Chinese rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum, p. 126), both of which
are taken to relieve constipation.
Anthraquinones have an irritant laxative
effect on the large intestine, causing
contractions of the intestinal walls
and stimulating a bowel
movement approximately |0
hours after being taken. They
also make the stool more liquid,
easing bowel movements.

*”

Chinese Rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum)

Cardiac Glycosides
Found in various medicinal plants, notably
in foxgloves (see common foxglove, Digitalis
purpurea, p. 202) and in lily of the valley
(Convallaria majalis, p. 194), cardiac glycosides
such as digitoxin, digoxin, and convallotoxin
have a strong, direct action on the heart,
supporting its strength and rate of
contraction when it is failing. Cardiac
glycosides are also significantly diuretic.
They help to stimulate urine production,
thus increasing the removal of fluid from
the tissues and circulatory system.

Common Foxglove
(Digitalis purpurea)

Cyanogenic glycosides
Though these glycosides are
based on cyanide, a very
potent poison, in small
doses they have a
helpful sedative and
relaxant effect

on the heart and
muscles. The bark
of wild cherry (Prunus
serotina, p. 257) and the
leaves of elder (Sambucus nigra,
p. 132) both contain cyanogenic
glycosides, which contribute to the plant's
ability to suppress and soothe irritant dry
coughs. Many fruit kernels contain high
levels of cyanogenic glycosides, for example
those of apricot (Prunus armeniaca, p. 257).

Elderflower
(Sambucus nigra)

SENENLILSNOO FAILOV ©

----- PAGE 18 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

Polysaccharides

Found in all plants, polysaccharides
are multiple units of sugar

molecules linked together. From

an herbal point of view, the most
important polysaccharides are the
“sticky” mucilages and gums, which
are commonly found in roots, bark,
leaves, and seeds. Both mucilage and
gum soak up large quantities of water,
producing a sticky, jelly-like mass that can be
used to soothe and protect irritated tissue, for
example, dry irritated skin and sore or inflamed mucous membranes
in the gut. Mucilaginous herbs, such as slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
and linseed or flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum, p. 109), are best prepared
by soaking (macerating) in plenty of cold water. Some polysaccharides
stimulate the immune system, for example acemannan, which is found
in the leaves of aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60).

Slippery Elm
(Ulmus rubra)

Glucosilinates

Found exclusively in species of

the mustard and cabbage family,
glucosilinates have an irritant effect
on the skin, causing inflammation
and blistering. Applied as poultices
to painful or aching joints,
they increase blood flow to
the affected area, helping to
remove the buildup of waste
products (a contributory factor in
many joint problems). On eating,
glucosilinates are broken down and
produce a strong, pungent taste.
Radish (Raphanus sativus, p. 261)
and watercress (Nasturtium officinale,
p. 239) are typical glucosilinate-
containing plants.

Radish
(Raphanus sativus)

Bitters
Bitters are a varied group of constituents
linked only by their pronounced bitter taste.
The bitterness itself stimulates secretions
by the salivary glands and digestive organs.
Such secretions can dramatically improve the
appetite and strengthen the overall function
of the digestive system. With the improved
digestion and absorption of nutrients that follow,
the body is nourished and strengthened. Many
herbs have bitter constituents, notably
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium, p. 66),
chiretta (Swertia chirata, p. 273), and hops
(Humulus lupulus, p. |04).

Wormwood
(Artemisia absinthium)

Alkaloids

Avery mixed group, alkaloids mostly
contain a nitrogen-bearing molecule
(-NH,) that makes them particularly
pharmacologically active. Some are
well-known drugs and have a
recognized medical use. Vincristine,
for example, derived from Madagascar
periwinkle (Vinca rosea, p. 282), is used
to treat some types of cancer.
Other alkaloids, such as
atropine, found in deadly
nightshade (Atropa belladonna,

p. 69), have a direct effect on the
body, reducing spasms, relieving pain,
and drying up bodily secretions.

Vitamins

Deadly Nightshade
(Atropa belladonna)

Though often overlooked, many
medicinal plants contain useful

levels of vitamins. Some are well
known for their vitamin content,

canina,

carota,

Dog Rose
(Rosa canina)

Minerals

Like vegetable foods, many medicinal
plants provide high levels of minerals.
Plants, especially organically grown

ones, draw minerals from the soil and
convert them into a form that is more
easily absorbed and used by the body.
Whether plants are eaten as a
vegetable, like cabbage (Brassica
oleracea, p. 180), or taken as a medicine,
like bladderwrack (Fucus vesiculosus,

p. 213), in many cases the mineral content
is a key factor in the plant's therapeutic
activity within the body. Dandelion leaf
(Taraxacum officinale, p. 141) is a potent
diuretic, balanced by its high potassium
content, while the high silica content of horsetail
(Equisetum arvense, p. 205) supports the repair
of connective tissue, making it useful in arthritis.

for example dog rose (Rosa
vitamin C, and carrot (Daucus

carotene (pro-vitamin A), but
many are less well recognized.
Watercress (Nasturtium

vitamins B,, B,, C, and E as well
as beta-carotene, while sea
buckthorn (Hippophae
rhamnoides, p. 220) can be
regarded as a vitamin and
mineral supplement in its

own right.

p. 263) has high levels of

p. 201) is rich in beta-

officinale, p. 239), for
example, contains
appreciable levels of

Dandelion
(Taraxacum officinale)

----- PAGE 19 -----
Quality control

Making the most of herbal medicine means ensuring that herbs and herbal products

used are of good quality—properly grown, well dried, correctly processed, and within
their sell-by date. Using poor-quality herbal produce is all too often a waste of money
since there is the strong possibility that you will receive little benefit from it. When |
comes to herbal medicine, quality is everything.

Quality is vital for herbal medicine. Without a guarantee that — control procedures. Usually this involves comparing the dried
the correct herb of the right quality is being used, it is hard to — herb material with listings in an herbal or national pharmacopeia
be confident that the medicine will prove effective. In fact, one (a standard reference work that gives the characteristics one
reason why the medical profession has generally preferred would expect to find when analyzing a specific herb). Quality

conventional medicines to herbal ones is the difficulty of control involves making routine checks to establish that the
guaranteeing quality in herbal remedies. Many herbal products herbal material is what it claims to be and that it meets a number
on the market are of high quality but some can be very poor. of minimum requirements. The material is inspected with the

A 2006 US. study of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa, p.79) naked eye, and assessed microscopically, to see if its botanical
found that only 7 out of | | over-the-counter products tested profile matches the standard. Other checks are made to see

contained what was stated on the label. Four contained a whether it contains appropriate levels of active constituents
cheaper Chinese species instead. The adulteration of herbal and to ensure that the material is free from contamination.
products, particularly in Chinese and Indian herbs sold in More sensitive quality-control methods, however, recognize
the West is, regrettably, not unusual. hat the quality of an herb does not depend simply on the
Herb quality may be affected not only by deliberate presence of one or two key active constituents. Increasingly,

adulteration, but by the use of wrongly identified or poor-quality — people in the world of herbal medicine are focusing on the
material. The herb may have been poorly harvested, dried, or ‘fingerprint’ of an herb—the unique chemical profile that
stored, or it may be old or decayed. It may even be that the represents the complex pattern of constituents found when
wrong herb was used. In each case, the lack of attention to good-quality dried herb material is analyzed by sensitive
quality results in a product with reduced medicinal value— scientific machinery. By monitoring the sample and comparing
or even none at all. it with this unique fingerprint, it is possible to make a much

To try to ensure that only good-quality products are made, broader assessment of quality than when using only one or
manufacturers of genuine herbal medicines use strict quality- two constituents as a standard.

cat |
Fi Buying Herbal Medicines

What should you look for when buying herbal medicines?
It is usually most convenient to buy capsules, tablets,
essential oils, pessaries, and perhaps tinctures, and to
make up your own infusions, decoctions, and syrups
(see p. 291 and p. 293).

* Buy from a reputable herb store, staffed by
people knowledgeable about herbal medicines.
* Only buy herbs online from established
herbal suppliers.
* Buy organic herbs and products where available.

* Good-quality aromatic herbs should have a distinct scent and taste.

* Check for signs of infestation due to poor drying techniques, or
adulteration. This can sometimes be recognized by the presence of
dried grass or other non-medicinal material in the jar.

* Herbs lose their color as they age. Look for bright material that has
been well dried and stored, and that is not too old. Calendula flowers
(Calendula officinalis, p. 73) that are a vivid yellow/orange color are likely
to make good medicine. If they have been sitting on a shelf for

18 months, they will probably look drab and pale.

Buying Herbal Products

Calendula
Buying Dried Herbs When buying products such as capsules, tablets, essential oils,
Dried herbs are generally available from herbal suppliers. Buying pessaries, and tinctures, always check the label on the jar or packet.
from shops is preferable to buying online because the herbs can be If it does not do the following, do not buy it:
examined before purchasing. However, it is possible some online a Name all constituents of the product
companies may supply fresher herbs due to higher turnover. To gain the = State the recommended daily dosage
best medicinal effect, good-quality produce is essential. Shop around = State the weight of each capsule or tablet, or volume of bottle
and bear in mind the following points before buying: a List the weight of each constituent of a capsule, tablet, etc.
* Herbs should not be stored in clear glass jars or in direct sunlight, a List the ratio of herb in the product (for example, |:3, meaning
as this causes oxidation, which affects their efficacy. | part herb to 3 parts liquid).

TOULNOD ALITVNO

----- PAGE 20 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

Early Origins to the

mysticism, and age-old oral traditions.

From the earliest times, medicinal plants have been crucial in
sustaining the health and the well-being of mankind. Flaxseed
(Linum usitatissimum, p. 109), for example, provided its
harvesters with a nutritious food oil, fuel, a cosmetic balm
for the skin, and fiber to make fabric. At the same time it
was used to treat conditions such as bronchitis, respiratory
congestion, boils, and a number of digestive problems. Given
he life-enhancing benefits that this and so many other plants
conferred, it is hardly surprising that most cultures believed
hem to have magical as well as medicinal abilities. It is
reasonable to assume that for tens of thousands of years
herbs were probably used as much for their ritual magical
powers as for their medicinal qualities. A 60,000-year-old
burial site excavated in Iraq, for instance, was found to

Mistletoe, which the Druids called “golden bough,” had a central place in their
shamanistic religious and healing ceremonies. The Druids had a well-developed
knowledge of medicinal plants.

nan age of medical specialization in which an expert in neurology will know little about
he latest developments in medicine for the ear, nose, and throat, it is difficult to imagine the
practices of an earlier time, when healing was holistic in nature and heavily reliant on magic,

I9th Century

contain eight different medicinal plants, including ephedra
(Ephedra sinica, p. 95). The inclusion of the plants in the
tomb suggests they had supernatural significance as well
as medicinal value.
In some cultures, plants were considered to have souls.
Even Aristotle, the 4th-century Bce Greek philosopher,
thought that plants had a “‘psyche,” albeit of a lesser order
than the human soul. In Hinduism, which dates back
to at least 1500 ace, many plants are sacred to specific
divinities. For example, the bael tree (Aegle marmelos,
p. 161) is said to shelter Shiva, the god of health, beneath
its branches.
In medieval Europe, the Doctrine of Signatures stated
there was a connection between how a plant looked—
God's “signature’’—and how it might be used medicinally.
For example, the mottled leaves of lungwort (Pulmonaria
officinalis, p. 259) were thought to resemble lung tissue,
and the plant is still used to treat ailments of the
respiratory tract.
Even in Western cultures, beliefs in plant spirits linger. Until
the first half of the 20th century, British farm workers would
not cut down elder trees (Sambucus nigra, p. 132) for fear of
arousing the anger of the Elder Mother, the spirit who lived
in and protected the tree.
nasimilar vein, native peoples of the Andes in South
America believe that the coca plant (Erythroxylum coca,
p. 206) is protected by Mama Coca, a spirit who must be
respected and placated if the leaves are to be harvested
and used.

Shamanistic Medicine

In many traditional societies today, the world is believed to
be shaped by good and evil spirits. In these societies, illness
is thought to stem from malignant forces or possession by
evil spirits. If a member of the tribe falls ill, the shaman (the
“medicine” man or woman) is expected to intercede with
he spirit world to bring about a cure. Shamans often enter
he spiritual realm with the aid of hallucinogenic plants or
fungi, such as ayahuasca (Banisteriopsis caapi, p. 176), taken
by Amazonian shamans, or fly agaric (Amanita muscaria),
aken by traditional healers of the Siberian steppes.

At the same time, the shaman provides medical treatment
for the physical needs of the patient—putting salves and
compresses on wounds, boiling up decoctions and barks
for internal treatment, stimulating sweating for fevers, and so

----- PAGE 21 -----
Shiva, the Hindu god who oversees health, is traditionally thought to live under the bael tree,
an important medicinal plant in India.

on. Such treatment is based on a wealth of acutely observed
plant lore and knowledge, handed down in an oral tradition
from generation to generation.

The Development of Medicinal Lore

It is generally recognized that our ancestors had a wide range
of medicinal plants at their disposal, and that they likewise
possessed a profound understanding of plants’ healing powers.
n fact, up until the 20th century, every village and rural
community had a wealth of herbal folklore. Tried and tested
ocal plants were picked for a range of common health
problems and taken as teas, applied as lotions, or even mixed
with lard and rubbed in as an ointment.
But what were the origins of this herbal expertise? There
are no definitive answers. Clearly, acute observation coupled
with trial and error has played a predominant role. Human
societies have had many thousands of years to observe the
effects—both good and bad—of eating a particular root,
leaf, or berry. Watching the behavior of animals after they
have eaten or rubbed against certain plants has also added
to medicinal lore. If one watches sheep or cattle, they almost

unerringly steer a path past poisonous plants such as ragwort

(Senecio jacobaea) or oleander (Nerium oleander). Over and
above such close observation, some people have speculated
that human beings, like grazing animals, have an instinct that
recognizes poisonous as opposed to medicinal plants.

Ancient Civilizations

As civilizations grew from 3000 BcE
onward in Egypt, the Middle East,
India, and China, so the use of
herbs became more sophisticated,
and the first written accounts of
medicinal plants were made. The
Egyptian Ebers papyrus of c. 1500
BCE is the earliest surviving
example. It lists dozens of
medicinal plants, their uses, and
related spells and incantations. The
herbs include myrrh (Commiphora molmol, p. 85), castor oil
(Ricinus communis, p. 262), and garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59).
In India, the Vedas, epic poems written c. 1500 BcE, also
contain rich material on the herbal lore of that time. The
Vedas were followed in about 400 sce by the Charaka Samhita,
written by the physician Charaka. This medical treatise
includes details of around 350 herbal medicines. Among
them are visnaga (Ammi visnaga, p. 62), an herb of Middle
Eastern origin that has recently proven effective in the
treatment of asthma, and gotu kola (Centella asiatica, p. 76),
which has long been used to treat leprosy.

Castor oil plant
has been used
medicinally for

) about 4000 years.

Medicine Breaks from its
Mystical Origins

By about 500 sce in developed
cultures, medicine began to separate
from the magical and spiritual
world. Hippocrates (460-377 Bce),
he Greek “father of medicine,’
considered illness to be a natural
rather than a supernatural
phenomenon, and he felt that
medicine should be given without
ritual ceremonies or magic.

In the earliest Chinese medical
ext, the Yellow Emperor's Classic of
Internal Medicine written in the Ist
century Bce, the emphasis on rational
medicine is equally clear: “In treating
illness, it is necessary to examine
the entire context, scrutinize the

The bump in the right cheek of this
Peruvian figurine may represent
coca, taken in that country to
increase endurance.

AUYNLNAO HL6T FHL OL SNIOINO ATUVE ©

----- PAGE 22 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

symptoms, observe the emotions and attitudes. If one
insists on the presence of ghosts and spirits one cannot
speak of therapeutics.”

Foundation of Major Herbal Traditions
300 BCE-600 CE

Trade between Europe, the Middle East, India, and Asia was
already well under way by the 2nd century Bce, and trade
routes became established for many medicinal and culinary
herbs. Cloves (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97), for example,
which are native to the Philippines and the Molucca Islands
near New Guinea, were imported into China in the 3rd
century Bce, and first arrived in Egypt around |76 ce. As the
centuries passed, the popularity of cloves grew, and by the
8th century ce, their strong aromatic flavor and powerfully
antiseptic and analgesic properties were familiar throughout
most of Europe.

As trade and interest in
herbal medicines and spices
flourished, various writers
tried to make systematic
records of plants with a
known medicinal action and
record their properties.

In China, the Divine
Husbandman's Classic
(Shen’nong Bencaojing),
written in the Ist century CE,
has 364 entries, of which 252
are herbal medicines, including
bupleurum (Bupleurum
chinense, p. 72), coltsfoot
(Tussilago farfara,
p. 278), and gan cao (Glycyrrhiza uralensis). This Daoist text
laid the foundations for the continuous developmen
and refinement of Chinese herbal medicine up to the
present day.

In Europe, a |st-century ce Greek physician named
Dioscorides wrote the first European herbal, De Materia
Medica. His intention was to produce an accurate and
authoritative work on herbal medicines, and in this he was
dramatically successful. Among the many plants mentioned
are juniper (Juniperus communis, p. 224), elm (Ulmus carpinifolia),
peony (Paeonia officinalis, p. 243), and burdock (Arctium lappa,
p. 65). The text, listing about 600 herbs in all, was to have
an astonishing influence on Western medicine, being the
principal reference used in Europe until the 17th century.

It was translated into languages as varied as Anglo-Saxon,
Persian, and Hebrew. In 512 ce, De Materia Medica became
the first herbal to feature pictures of the plants discussed.
Made for Juliana Arnicia, the daughter of the Roman emperor
Flavius Avicius Olybrius, it contained nearly 400 full-page
color illustrations.

Galen’s “four humors,” which he believed
made up the human constitution.

Frontispiece decoration for the first illustrated herbal, Dioscorides' De Materia
Medica, produced in Constantinople in 512 ce.

Galen (131-200 ce), physician to the Roman emperor
Marcus Aurelius, had an equally profound influence on the
development of herbal medicine. Galen drew inspiration
from Hippocrates and based his theories on the ‘theory

of the four humors” (see p. 32). His ideas shaped and, some
would say, distorted medical practice for the next |,400 years.

In India and in China, elaborate medical systems somewhat
resembling the theory of the four humors developed (see
pp. 36-38 and pp. 40-41 respectively) that have endured to
the present day.

Though European, Indian, and Chinese systems differ
widely, they all consider that imbalance within the constituent
elements of the body is the cause of illness, and that the aim
of the healer is to restore balance, often with the aid of
herbal remedies.

Folk Healing in the Middle Ages

The theories of Galenic, Ayurvedic (Indian), and Chinese
traditional medicine, however, would have meant practically
nothing to most of the world's population. As is still the case
today for some indigenous peoples who have little access
to conventional medicines, in the past most villages and
communities relied on the services of local “wise” men and
women for medical treatment. These healers were almost
certainly ignorant of the conventions of scholastic medicine,
yet through apprenticeship and practice in treating illness,
attending childbirth, and making use of locally growing herbs
as a natural pharmacy, they developed a high level of practical
medical knowledge.

----- PAGE 23 -----
We tend to underestimate the medical skills of apparently
undeveloped communities—particularly during the so-called
Dark Ages in medieval Europe—but it is evident that many
people had a surprisingly sophisticated understanding of plant
medicine. For example, recent excavations at an | |th-century

monastic hospital in Scotland revealed tha’

the monks were

using exotic herbs such as opium poppy (Papaver somniferum,

p. 244) and marijuana (Cannabis sativa, p.

anesthetics. Likewise, the herbalists in

South Wales, obviously knew of Hippocr:
6th century ce and used a wide variety o
hat have been handed down
tradition are filled with an engaging blend

The texts

82) as painkillers and
yddfai, a village in
ates’ writings in the

f medicinal plants.
from that herbal

of superstition and

wisdom. Two prescriptions from a | 3th-century manuscript
illustrate the point. The first recipe could have been written by
a modern, scientifically trained herbalist; the second, one must
presume, is pure fancy, and would not choose to try it out!

To Strengthen the Sight
Take Eyebright and Red Fennel, a handful of each, and half a handful
of Rue, distil, and wash your eye daily therewith.
To Destroy a Worm in the Tooth
Take the root of a cat's ear, bruise, and apply to the patient's tooth
for three nights, and it will kill the worm.

Islamic & Indian Medicine 500-1500 cE

Folk medicine was largely unaffected by sweeping forces of
history, but Western scholastic medicine suffered greatly with

the decline of the Roman Empire.

It was thanks to the flowering of Arabic culture in
500-1300 ce that the gains of the classical Greek and

Roman period were preserved and e
of Islamic culture along North Africa
Italy, Spain, and Portugal led to the fo!
medical schools, notably at Cordoba

laborated. The spread
and into present-day
unding of renowned
in Spain. The Arabs

were expert pharmacists, blending and mixing herbs to

improve their medicinal effect and th
contac
meant

herbal knowledge to draw on and de

s with both Indian and Chinese medical
hat they had a remarkable range of medical and

eir taste. Their
raditions

velop. Avicenna

(980-1037 ce), author of Canon of Medicine, was the
most famous physician of the day, but perhaps the most

unusual herbal connection was made

a century before

his time by Ibn Cordoba, an intrepid Arab seafarer, who

brought ginseng root (Panax ginseng,

p. | 18) from China

to Europe. This valuable tonic herb was to be regularly

imported into Europe from the 16th
Further east, in India, the 7th cent

university, especially a

the medical achievements of the time, with
hospitals, maternity

as the development of
planting of medicinal herb gardens.

century onward.
ury saw a golden age

of medicine. Thousands of students studied Ayurveda at
alanda. There, scholars recorded

advances such
homes, and the

Central & South American Cures

On the other side of

of Central and South America—May

of local medicinal plants. One accoun
local herbalists from what is now Bo
capital Cuzco in Peru because of the
capabilities, which reputedly included
on green banana skins.

At the same time, medicine and re
interwoven in these cul

he world, the ancient civilizations

‘a, Aztec, and Inca—

all had herbal traditions with a profound understanding

tells of Incas taking
ivia back to their
herbalists’ great
growing penicillin

igion were still closely

in Europe. One grue:

Fortunate

was not
other afflictions. Many
as alternative treatmen
sarsaparilla (Smilax spp., p. 270), a tonic
and cleansing herb that was used

ures, possibly even more so than
some account tells of Aztec sufferers

of skin diseases who sought to appease the god Xipe
Totec by wearing the flayed s

ly, a supernatural
he sole means

appeal to the gods
0 relieve this and
herbs were available
s, including

in treatments for a variety of skin
complaints including eczema
and psoriasis.

Galen and Hippocrates, two of the
preeminent physicians of the classical
era, debate in this imaginary scene
depicted in a fresco.

ins of sacrificial victims.

AYUNLINEO HL6ET HHL OL SNIOINO ATUVEA &

2\|

----- PAGE 24 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

22

Marco Polo’s voyage to China in the | 4th century opened the door for a flourishing
reciprocal trade in goods, including medicinal herbs, between East and West. Eventually,
exotic herbs like ginger, cinnamon, and cloves became widely used in European medicine
and cooking.

Rebirth of European Scholarship 1000-1400 cE
As European scholars slowly started to absorb the lessons
of Arabic medical learning in the early Middle Ages, classical
Greek, Roman, and Egyptian texts preserved in the libraries
of Constantinople (later Istanbul) filtered back to Europe,

and hospitals, medical schools, and universities were founded.

Perhaps the most interesting among them was the medical
school at Salerno on the west coast of Italy. It not only
allowed students from all fatths—Christian, Muslim, and
lewish—to study medicine, but it also allowed women to
rain as physicians. Trotula, a woman who wrote a book on
obstetrics, practiced and taught there in the | 2th century cE.
Herbs were, of course, central to the healing process. An
adage from the Salerno school on sage (Salvia officinalis,

p. 131) went as follows: Salvia salvatrix, natura conciliatrix
(sage, the savior; nature, the conciliator).

By the | 2th century, trade with Asia and Africa was
expanding and new herbs and spices were being regularly
imported into Europe. Hildegard of Bingen (1098-1179),
the famous German mystic and herbal authority, considered
galangal (Alpinia officinarum, p. 6|)}—used in Asia as a warming
and nourishing spice for the digestive system—to be the
“spice of life;’ given by God to provide health and to protect
against illness.

Asian Unification

Marco Polo's travels to China in the |4th century coincided
with the unification of the whole of Asia from the Yellow
Sea in China to the Black Sea in southeastern Europe by
Genghis Khan and his grandson Kublai Khan, whose capital
was in China, not far from Beijing. Neither the Chinese nor
Ayurvedic medical traditions were directly threatened by this
conquest. The Mongol rulers were strict in banning the use
of certain toxic plants such as aconite (Aconitum napellus,
p. 160), but their decree may have held an element of self-

preservation, given aconite's alternative use as an arrow
poison—one that could have been used against the ruling
powers. Moreover, the Mongol unification may have
encouraged greater communication between the two
medical disciplines.

In other parts of Asia, such as Vietnam and Japan, Chinese
culture and medicine exerted the primary influence.
While kampoh—the traditional herbal medicine of Japan—
is distinctive to that country, its roots stem from
Chinese practices.

Trade between Continents 1400-1700

Trade routes had slowly expanded during the Middle Ages,
bringing exotic new herbs in their wake. From the [5th
century onward, an explosion in trade led to a cornucopia
of new herbs becoming readily available in Europe. They
included plants such as ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155),
cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum, p. 93), nutmeg (Myristica
fragrans, p. | 15), turmeric (Curcuma longa, p. 90), cinnamon
(Cinnamomum spp., p. 81), and senna (Cassia senna, p. 75).

wep
; eee het
Ve
stall al .
[stew pspetenp romp
petoucent:, oe modgepplle
jee eg
pun peel qonin beongpopend
ea yada best open bee

geemnce papper pa
qege frpro ute hicknt 1
pbidypde hpadher-

tb prochumry phere peniy faylean

Bo yopre uqpeenpesghporene

copie frngohule qlege cohutpe teak
pondefpacoff dacopn fryph done

prrin seks poor spt - TTS aise
Sunoene ni por Saeop yee penPF
Forumith reoxtehe hy’ pr *
éonnelle dot aria eppecope ?
Ne rohepe pepe faye
peep DWE lege diene
germefin spac fuera} ya

Manuscript page from an Anglo-Saxon herbal of about | 050 ce, illustrating the aerial parts
and root system of a medicinal plant.

----- PAGE 25 -----
The trade in herbs was not entirely
one way. The European herb sage,
for example, came into use in China,
where it was considered to be a
valuable yin tonic.
The arrival of Columbus’ ships in
the Caribbean in 1492 was followed
by the rapid conquest and
colonization of central and
south America by the Spanish
and Portuguese. Along with
their booty of plundered
gold, the conquistadores
returned to the Old World
with previously unheard-of

medicinal plants. Many
Garlic is native to Asia but was readily of these herbs from the
adopted for its medicinal and culinary . .
qualities in the West. Americas had highly potent
medicinal actions, and they
soon became available in the apothecaries of the major

European cities. Plants such as lignum vitae (Guaiacum
officinale, p. 218) and cinchona (Cinchona spp., p. 80) with
strong medicinal actions were used with greater and lesser
degrees of success as treatments for fever, malaria, syphilis,
smallpox, and other serious illnesses.

For most rural communities, however, the only foreign
plants that were used medicinally were those that could also
be grown locally as foods. Garlic offers one of the earliest and
clearest examples. Originating in central Asia, over time it
was cultivated farther and farther west and was grown in
Egypt around 4500 sce. In Homer's 8th-century BCE epic
poem The Odyssey, the hero is saved from being changed
into a pig thanks to garlic. The herb was introduced into
Britain after the Roman conquest in the Ist century ce, and
by the time it reached the island its remarkable medicinal
powers were well understood. In later centuries, potatoes
(Solanum tuberosum, p. 271) and corn (Zea mays, p. |54),
both native to South America, would become common
foods. These plants have clear medicinal as well as
nutritional benefits. Potato juice is a valuable remedy for the
reatment of arthritis, while cornsilk makes an effective
decoction for urinary problems such as cystitis.

Health & Hygiene 1400-1700

Between the | 2th and | 8th centuries, the influx of exotic
medicinal plants added to an already large number of useful
European herbs. Conceivably, an overall improvement of
health in Europe might have resulted. After all, not only
were new medicinal plants available, but Europeans had the
opportunity to observe the different medical practices of
people in South America, China, Japan, and especially in India,
where trade was well established. But, in fact, the reverse was
the case. People living in Europe during this period probably

experienced some of the most unhealthy conditions the
world has ever seen. In contrast, Native Americans before
the arrival of Columbus lived longer, healthier lives than their
counterparts in Europe. This fact is unsurprising given the cities
of medieval Europe, with their open sewers, overcrowding,
and ignorance of simple hygiene.
Conditions such as these laid fertile ground for the spread
of plague-infested rats from the ports of the Mediterranean
throughout Western Europe. From the mid-|4th century
onward, plague killed millions, in some cases close to 50
percent of the population. No medical treatment—herbal
or mineral—was able to alter its fatal course. Epidemics
continued to decimate the cities of Europe and Asia well into
the | 8th century. An outbreak in India in 1994 reawakened the
terror inspired simply at the mention of the word “plague.”
Syphilis was another disease spread by seafarers. It was
reputedly brought back from the Caribbean to Naples by
Columbus’ crew in the |490s, spreading quickly throughout
Europe and to the rest of the world, reaching China in 1550.
European doctors had little success in combating diseases
as devastating as plague. The medicine they practiced was
based on the blind acceptance of Galen's humoral principles.
Perhaps if, as in Chinese and Indian medicine, European
medicine had continued to evolve, revising ancient medical
texts and reinterpreting them in the light of new discoveries,
it would have had greater success. As it was, European
physicians were at least as likely to kill their patients
with bloodletting and toxic minerals
in misbegotten attempts to balance
the humors as they were to cure.
Indeed, the increasingly
fashionable use of
mineral cures such
as mercury led to the
growth of chemical
formulations, culminating
in scientific medicine's
ultimate break away from
herbal practices.

The Influence
of Paracelsus

One of the key European figures

of the | 6th century was Paracelsus

(1493-1541), a larger-than-life

character who rejected the tired

repetition of Galen's theories in

favor of detailed observation in
medicine. ‘'l have not borrowed
from Hippocrates, Galen, or
anyone else,’ he wrote, “having
acquired my knowledge from
the best teacher, that is, by

17th-century doctor wearing a
costume designed to protect against
contamination by the plague.

AYNLINHO HL6ET FHL OL SNIDINO ATUVA ©

----- PAGE 26 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

24

The iconoclastic Paracelsus, an alchemist and chemist, was one of the greatest scientists

of the | 6th century, and advocated the use of minerals in healing, but only in tightly
controlled dosages.

experience and hard work.” And again, ‘“What a doctor
needs is not eloquence or knowledge of language and of
books, but profound knowledge of nature and her works.’
He also paid great attention to the exact dosage, saying that
“it depends only on the dose whether a poison is a poison
or not.’
As a result, Paracelsus was an influential force in the future
development of chemistry, conventional medicine, herbal

medicine, and homeopathy. Though he is

nown as the

“father of chemistry,’ he also explored alchemy, which

concerned itself with the transmutation of

gold, and the search for immortal life. Parac

interest in the Doctrine of Signatures—t!

base materials to
elsus also revived
he ancient theory

that held that a plant's appearance indicated the ailments
it would treat—and affirmed the value of locally grown
medicinal herbs over expensive imported specimens.

Culpeper & Printed Herbals

Paracelsus’ advocacy of local herbs was later fiercely espoused
by Nicholas Culpeper (1616-1654). The frontispiece to

his The English Physitian contains the memorable words:
“Containing a Compleat Method of Physick, whereby a Man

may preserve his Body in Health, or Cure himself, being
Sick, for three pence Charge, with such things only as grow
in England, they being most fit for English Bodies.”

Wounded during the English Civil War fighting for the
Commonwealth, Culpeper championed the needs of the
ordinary people who could afford neither the services of a
doctor nor the expensive imported herbs and formulations
that doctors generally prescribed. Drawing to some degree
on Dioscorides, Arabian physicians, and Paracelsus, Culpeper
developed a medical system that blended astrology and
sound personal experience of the therapeutic uses of local
plants. His herbal became an instant ‘bestseller’ and appeared
in many subsequent editions. The first herbal published in
orth America, in |700, was an edition of his herbal.

While the popularity of The English Physitian was notable,
other herbals also found a place in households. The
development of the printing press in the | 5th century brought
herbal medicine into homes on a wide scale. Texts such as
Dioscorides’ De Materia Medica were printed for the first
ime, and throughout Europe herbals were published and ran
hrough many editions.

Deadly Cures 1700-1900

By the end of the | 6th century, Paracelsus had become the
figurehead of the new chemical medicine. However, where
he had insisted upon caution in the use of metallic poisons—
mercury, antimony, and arsenic—the new medical thinkers
were not so inhibited. Larger and larger doses of the purgative
nown as calomel (mercurous chloride, Hg,Cl,) were given
0 those suffering from syphilis and many other diseases. The
reatment was very often worse than the illness, with some
patients dying and many more suffering from the long-term
consequences of mercury poisoning.
Hippocrates’ saying ‘Desperate cases need the most
desperate remedies’ was taken very literally, as is evident in
the incredible excess of purging and bleeding that developed
over the next three centuries in Europe and North America.
These practices reached a peak in the “heroic” medicine of
the early | 9th century. Its leading proponent, Dr. Benjamin
Rush (1745-1813), maintained that only bloodletting and
calomel were required in medical practice. His position was
obviously extreme, but it is clear that in this new climate herbal
medicines were becoming increasingly irrelevant.

The New Rationalism

Along with the new emphasis on chemical cures, modern
medicine came to look askance at the notion of the ‘‘vital
force.’ Up until the end of the | 6th century, nearly all medical
traditions had been based on the concept of working with
nature, with the body's healing capacities, which could be
supported and strengthened with appropriate medicinal
herbs. In traditional Chinese medicine, gi is the primal energy
that maintains life and health. In Ayurveda, it is prana, and

----- PAGE 27 -----
The symbol for “om” — provides a good example of “ignorant” folk medicine
Hiowofheln ey outstripping scientific understanding in therapeutic application:
practice of Ayurveda “During the bitter cold winter of 1535-6, the three ships
as a focus for meditation. of Jacques Cartier were frozen fast in the fathom-deep ice of
the St Lawrence River near the site of Montreal. Isolated by
four feet of snow, the company of | 10 men subsisted on
the fare stored in the holds of their ships. Soon scurvy was
so rampant among them that by mid-March, 25 men had
died and the others, ‘only three or foure excepted; were
so ill that hope for their recovery was abandoned. As the
crisis deepened Cartier had the good fortune to encounter
once again the local Indian chief, Domagaia, who had cured

in the Western
tradition, Hippocrates
writes about “vis
medicatrix naturae”
or the healing power of
nature, while modern Western

AUYNLNAO HL6T FHL OL SNIOINO ATUVE ©

himself of the same disease with ‘the juice and sappe of a
medical herbalists and homeopaths certain tree’ The Indian women gathered branches of the
use the term ‘Vital force.” magical tree, ‘boiling the bark and leaves for a decoction,
The importance of the vital force and placing the dregs upon the legs’ All those so treated
was diminished in the West by the rapidly recovered their health, and the Frenchmen

philosophy of René Descartes (1596-1650). This French marvelled at the curative skill of the natives.’

mathematician divided the world into body and mind, nature aturally, the Native Americans had not heard of vitamin C

and ideas. His philosophy ordained that the intangible vital deficiency, which causes scurvy, nor would they have been able

force that maintains life and governs good health was the to explain in rational terms why the treatment worked. Indeed,

province of religion rather than of the newly self-aware it was not until 1753 that James Lind (1716-1794), a British

“science’ of medicine. To the new medical establishment, naval surgeon, inspired partly by Cartier’s account, published

inching its way forward toward scientifically sound medical __A Treatise of the Scurvy, which showed conclusively that the

practices, “supernatural” concepts such as the vital force disease could be prevented by eating fresh greens, vegetables,

were a reminder of the ignorance and superstition that were and fruit, and was caused by their lack in the diet. James Lind’s

part and parcel of older healing practices. work is a marvellous example of what can be achieved by
Even before Descartes’ theories, the rational approach combining a systematic and scientific approach with traditional

0 scientific and medical exploration was beginning to reap herbal knowledge.

rewards. Slowly, medical understanding of bodily functions

was gaining ground. William Harvey (1578-1657) made a

detailed study of the heart and circulation, proving for the

first time that, contrary to Galenic thought, the heart
pumped blood around the body. Published in 1628,
his study is a classic example of the revolution in
medical science.

\

’

Since Harvey's time, science has had astounding \) N A
success in revealing how the body works on a iy \ y |
biochemical level and in distinguishing different i '

disease processes. However, by comparison it has
been altogether less successful in developing
effective medical treatments for the relief and a
cure of diseases. 3 .

The Gap in the Scientific Approach

In hindsight, it seems as if the new science
of medicine could only be born in separation
from the traditional arts of healing, with which it
had always been intertwined. As a result, even though
traditional medicine has generally lacked scientific explanation,
it has frequently been far ahead of medical science in the

. . . . : Mask hy Native Americ hi . Th h
way it has been applied therapeutically. In American Indian ask of a northwestern Native American shaman. The efficacy of techniques

used by native healers often surpassed that of conventional medical practices

Medicine (University of Oklahoma Press, 1970), Virgil Vogel of the time.

----- PAGE 28 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

26

Isolating Chemicals

The discovery of the medicinal value of foxglove (Digitalis
purpurea, p. 202) is another case where traditional herbal
knowledge led to a major advance in medicine. Dr. William
Withering (1741-1799), a conventionally trained
doctor with a long interest in medicinal plants,
started to investigate foxglove after encountering
a family recipe for curing dropsy (water
retention). He found that in some regions of
England, foxglove was traditionally used to
treat this condition, which is often one of
he indications of a failing heart. In 1785,
he published Account of the Foxglove,
documenting dozens of carefully
recorded case histories, and showing
how foxglove’s powerful (and
potentially dangerous) active
constituents, now known as cardiac
glycosides, made it a valuable plant
medicine for dropsy. Cardiac
glycosides remain in common
use to the present day. Yet
despite this clearcut example
of the possibilities inherent
in a marriage of herbal
medicine and scientific
method, conventional
medicine was to take
another path in the
|9th century.

—_

Laboratory versus
Nature

From the early 19th
century, the chemical
laboratory began to
regularly supplant Mother
Nature as the source
of medicines. In 1803,
narcotic alkaloids were
isolated from the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum,
p. 244). A year later, inulin was
extracted from elecampane
(Inula helenium, p. 107). In 1838,
salicylic acid, a chemical forerunner
of aspirin, was isolated from white
willow bark (Salix alba, p. 129), and
was first synthesized in the laboratory
in 1860. From this point on, herbal

In the 18th century, the physician William Withering
documented foxglove's ability to restore a failing heart.

Opium poppy, native to Asia, yields a resin that has long been smoked for its narcotic
effect. The main active constituent, morphine, was first isolated in the laboratory in
1803 and is used to relieve pain.

medicine and biomedicine were to take separate paths.
Aspirin, an entirely new chemical formulation, was

first developed in Germany in 1899. But this was still an
early step. For the time being, the influence of the
universities, medical schools, and laboratories of Europe
would remain limited, and herbal medicine would prevail
as the predominant form of treatment for most people
around the world.

New Frontiers, New Herbal Medicines

Wherever Europeans settled during the great migrations of
the 18th and |9th centuries—North America, South America,
southern Africa, or Australia—much of the European
medicine familiar from home was either unavailable or
prohibitively expensive. Settlers came to learn that native
peoples were a wellspring of information about the
medicinal virtues of indigenous plants. For example,
European settlers in southern Africa learned about the
diuretic properties of buchu (Barosma betulina, p. 71) from
native peoples; and Australian settlers came to understand
the remarkable antiseptic properties of tea tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia, p. | 12) from observing the medicinal practices of
the Aborigines. Mexican herbal medicine as it exists today is
a blend of Aztec, Mayan, and Spanish herbs and practices.

In North America, native herbalists were particularly
adept at healing external wounds and bites—being superior
in many respects to their European counterparts in this area
of medicine. This is not surprising, given the range of highly

----- PAGE 29 -----
effective medicinal plants Native Americans had
discovered—including well-known herbs such as echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92), goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis,

p. 105), and lobelia (Lobelia inflata, p. | 10).

European settlers learned much from observing native
practices. Over the course of the | 9th and early 20th centuries,
as pioneers moved west across the frontier territory, new
plants were constantly being added to the official record
of healing herbs. In addition to the three species mentioned
above, about |70 native plants were listed in The Pharmacopeia
of the United States.

Samuel Thomson & his Followers

Lobelia was one of the key herbs, along with cayenne
(Capsicum frutescens, p. 74), advocated by Samuel Thomson
(1769-1 843), an unorthodox herbal practitioner who believed
hat all illness resulted from cold. His simple approach was
entirely at odds with the conventional practices of his time
(see North America, p. 50). Thomson's methods were often
very effective and were well suited to the needs of people
iving in frontier territory. His system of medicine—in many
ways an early form of naturopathy, in which ill health is
reated with naturally grown food, sunlight, fresh air, and
natural medicines—became extraordinarily popular, with
millions of people across North America following his
methods. Thomson's success waned as other
more sophisticated herbal approaches were
developed—those of the Eclectics and
Physiomedicalists, for example—in the
fertile medical world of |9th-century
America, which also saw the birth
of osteopathy (a system of healing
based upon the manipulation
of bones) and chiropractic
(a similar system primarily
involving manipulation of
the spine).

Western Influences on
Asian Medicine

Across the world in
China, Thomson's
practices might have
been looked on with
a measure of surprise,
but they would have
been familiar. In Chinese
medicine, there has
always been a debate
as to what degree
illness arises from
cold, and to what
degree it arises from heat.

Ginseng has been used
as a tonic remedy in
Chinese medicine for
at least 5,000 years.

The Shanghanlun (On Cold-Induced Maladies), written in the 2nd
century ce, and revised and reinterpreted in commentaries
over the last |,800 years, recommends the herb cinnamon
(Cinnamomum spp., p. 81) as a principal remedy when the
patient “shivers with fever, breathes heavily, and feels
nauseous.” In the |4th century, Wang Lu distinguished
between cold-induced illness and febrile illness, and treated
them in different ways, and this distinction was elaborated in
greater and greater detail by different Chinese herbalists right
up to the 19th century.

During the early 19th century, the influence of Western
biomedicine was beginning to affect traditional practices in both
China and India. This was certainly beneficial in many respects.
The judicious incorporation of scientific principles and methods
into traditional herbal healing offers the possibility of greatly
refining the effectiveness of treatment.

But in India under British rule, Western medicine eventually
became the only alternative. Ayurveda was seen as inferior to
biomedicine (see India & the Middle East, p. 39). Western
practice was introduced not as a complement to traditional
medicine, but rather as a means to supplant it. According to
one authority, ‘before 1835 Western physicians and their
Indian counterparts exchanged knowledge; thereafter only
Western medicine was recognised as legitimate and the
Eastern systems were actively discouraged” (Robert
Svoboda, Ayurveda, Life, Health and Longevity, 1992).

In China, the influx of Western ideas was less traumatic.
Increasing numbers of Chinese medical students studied
Western medicine, but this did not stop the continuing
development of traditional herbal practice. By and large,
each tradition was recognized as having both advantages
and disadvantages.

Herbalism Outlawed 1850-1900

In Europe, conventional medicine was seeking to establish
a monopoly for its own type of practice. In 1858, the British
Parliament was asked to impose legislation banning the
practice of medicine by anyone who had not been trained in
a conventional medical school. Fortunately, this proposal was
rejected, but in countries such as France, Spain, and Italy, and
in some states of the U.S., it became illegal to practice herbal
medicine without an orthodox qualification. Herbalists were
forced to risk fines or imprisonment simply for providing
herbal medicine to patients who had sought their help.

In Britain, concerns such as these, combined with a desire
0 establish Western herbal medicine as an alternative to
conventional practices, particularly in the industrial cities
of the North of England, led to the formation in |864 of the
ational Institute of Medical Herbalists, the first professional
body of herbal practitioners in the world. Its history is an
example of how tenacious herbal practitioners have had
0 be simply to retain their right to give safe, gentle, and
effective herbal medicines to their patients.

AYNLINAO HL6ET HHL OL SNIODINO ATUVEA ©

27

----- PAGE 30 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

20th Century Onward

For most of us, modern medicine is exemplified by drugs such as antibiotics and
methods of diagnosis and treatment. However, many might be surprised to discover that,
for much of the last century, herbal medicines have been the primary form of treatment,

even in Western countries.

Even as late as the 1930s, around 90 percent of medicines
prescribed by doctors or sold over the counter were herbal
in origin. It is only during the last 70 years that laboratory-
produced medicines have become the norm. During the
First World War (1914-1918), for example, garlic (Allium
sativum, p. 59) and sphagnum moss (Sphagnum spp.) were
used by the ton in the battle trenches to dress wounds and

0 treat infections. Garlic is an excellent natural antibiotic,

and was the most effective antiseptic available at the time,
and sphagnum moss, gathered
from the moorlands, makes
a natural aseptic dressing.

Science & Medicine

The development of new
medicines in the laboratory—
either extracted from medicinal
plants or synthesized—stretches
back to the early | 9th century,
when chemists first isolated
constituents such as morphine,
from opium poppy (Papaver
somniferum, p. 244), and cocaine,
from coca (Erythroxylum coca, p. 206). From that time onward,
scientists made tremendous progress in understanding how
isolated chemicals affect the body, as well as how the body
works in health and disease. From the | 860s, scientists—most
notably Louis Pasteur (1822—1895)—began to identify the
microorganisms that were ultimately responsible for causing
infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis and malaria.

Naturally enough, the first aim of those engaged in medical
research was to seek out medicines that would act as “magic
bullets,” directly attacking the microorganisms concerned and
ridding the body of the threat. This eventually led to the
discovery, or, more accurately, the rediscovery of penicillin
by anumber of medical researchers, most notably Alexander
Fleming (1881—1955) in 1929. However, while 20th-century
scientists were the first to scientifically evaluate antibiotics as
medicines, they were not the first to employ them in healing.
Antibiotic molds had been grown and used to combat
infection in ancient Egypt, |4th-century Peru, and in recent
European folk medicine.

In the decades following the Second World War (1939—
1945), when antibiotics first came into use, it seemed as
though a new era had dawned in which infection could

Louis Pasteur was a pioneer in the
identification of bacteria.

highly technical

be conquered, and life-threatening diseases such as syphilis,
pneumonia, and tuberculosis would cease to be major causes
of death in the developed world. Modern medicine also
provided other highly effective drugs such as steroid anti-
inflammatories, and it seemed as if it was simply a question
of time until cures for most illnesses were found.

Ascendancy of Biomedicine

As Americans and Europeans became accustomed to
medication that led to an almost instant short-term
improvement in symptoms (if not in underlying health), herbal
medicines came to be seen by the public as outmoded and
ineffective. Increasingly, the practice of herbal medicine was
outlawed in North America and most of Europe, while the
wealthy in developing countries abandoned herbal medicine
in favor of the new treatments available.
This was in no small part due to the medical profession
itself, which saw herbal medicine as a throwback to the
superstitions of the past. From the late 19th century
onward, the aim of organizations such as the American
Medical Association and the British Medical Association had
been to monopolize conventional medical practice. Herbal
medicine thus neared extinction in many countries, especially
in the U.S. and Britain. In Britain, for example, from 1941 until
1968 it was illegal to practice herbal medicine without
medical qualifications.

The Tide Turns

Although there were spectacular
successes with modern
chemical medicines,
there were also horrific
disasters, most notably
the thalidomide
tragedy in 1962 in
Britain and Germany,
when 3,000 deformed
babies were born to
mothers who had taken
the drug for morning
sickness during pregnancy.
This event marked a
turning point in the
public's opinion of
chemical medicines.

An electron micrograph of the parasite
Plasmodium. Transmitted to man by infected
mosquitoes, it causes the disease malaria.

----- PAGE 31 -----
“Slash-and-burn” farming in the rainforest of Brazil results in the eradication of native
medicinal plants. Efforts are now under way to provide local farmers with alternative
means of profiting from the land.

People began to realize that a serious cost could accompany
he benefits of treatment with modern pharmaceutical
drugs. This, and the factors described below, have brought
about a sea change in public perceptions of the value of
herbal medicine.

The Chinese Example

Herbal medicine experienced a major gain in fortune in
1949 in China, when Mao Zedong and the Communis
Red Army gained control of the country.

Traditional Western medicine by that time was well
established in China, but most of the population had little
hope of access to modern hospitals, let alone to new drugs.
Out of necessity, traditional Chinese medicine—essentially
herbal medicine and acupuncture—once more began to
be used alongside Western conventional medicine. The
authorities aimed to provide the best of both worlds. Five
eaching hospitals for traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
were established, where it was taught on a scientific basis.
n addition, great efforts were made to improve the quality
of plant medicines.

Contrary to the trend in conventional Western medicine
hat makes the patient ever more dependent upon the
doctor and high-tech machinery, TCM, like other forms
of complementary medicine, stresses the patient's personal
responsibility for his or her own cure, encouraging a holistic
approach to treatment.
In the 1960s, China also established a system of “barefoot
doctors.” After a period of basic medical instruction that
blended herbal medicine, acupuncture, and Western practices,
these practitioners were sent out to provide health care
for the millions of rural Chinese too remote from cities
to benefit from the facilities available there. The barefoot
doctors in the late 1960s became a model for the World

needs of developing countries.

Western medicine can indeed work well in
he relationship is often quite complex. J. M.

Health Organization, which created a strategy of including
raditional herbal practitioners in planning for the health care

Western Medicine & Herbal Practices

Further to the initiative by the World Health Organization,
experience has shown that traditional (usually herbal) and

andem, although
anzen’s The Quest

for Therapy in Lower Zaire (University of California Press, 1978)
describes one such interaction in Africa:
“The people of Zaire recognize the advantages of
Western medicine and seek its surgery, drugs, and hospital
care, but contrary to what might have been expected, native
doctors, prophets, and traditional consultations among
kinsmen do not disappear with the adoption of Western
medicine. Rather a [working relationship] has developed
in which different forms of therapy play complementary rather
than competitive roles in the thoughts and lives of the people.”
The high cost of Western medical treatment is another
factor that has encouraged people and governments to
re-examine traditional healing. In China, Mexico, Cuba, Egypt,
Ghana, India, and Mongolia, to give but a few examples, herbal
medicines are being cultivated in greater quantities, and are
being used to some degree by conventional as well as
traditional practitioners.

Likewise, different types of treatment have evolved
to meet the variety of needs within a population. India offers
an extraordinary example of the kind of choices available
in types of medical care. Alongside physicians trained in
conventional Western medicine, there are medically trained
Ayurvedic practitioners, traditional Ayurvedic practitioners,
local healers, and homeopaths.

Changing Attitudes

Perhaps the most important factor behind the growing
interest in complementary medicine is the poor state of
health in Western societies. Conventional medicine has by
and large brought serious infectious diseases under control,
although there are worrying signs that infectious organisms
are becoming resistant to antibiotic treatment, largely as a
result of their indiscriminate use. Chronic illness, however,
seems to be on the increase. Probably around 50 percent
of people in Western countries daily take one or more
conventional medicines—for conditions as diverse as high
blood pressure, asthma, arthritis, and depression. Many
Western countries such as the U.S. and France spend
astronomical sums on health care, yet despite this massive
investment, much of the population remains demonstrably
unhealthy. Even the significant increase in life expectancy in
developed countries is starting to go into reverse, perhaps
a result of environmental pollutants and toxic accumulation
within the body.

GUVMNO AYNLNAO HLOS

----- PAGE 32 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE &

Over the years, changes in public awareness have led to a
renewed interest in herbal medicine. In fact, some herbal
preparations are now so commonly used that they are
accepted as a part of everyday life. One of many possible
examples is evening primrose oil, which is used by hundreds
of thousands of women in Britain to help relieve premenstrual
syndrome. It is extracted from the seeds of Oenothera biennis
(p. 241), a North American plant. Peppermint oil (Mentha x
piperita, p. | 14), prescribed for irritable bowel syndrome and
other gut problems, is another example, while senna (Cassia
senna, p. 75), a simple, effective treatment for short-term
constipation, is one of the most frequently used medicines
throughout the world.
The growing awareness of how our lives as human beings
are interwoven with the fate of our planet also reinforces the
value of herbal medicines. As long as care is taken to prevent
overharvesting, herbal medicine is ecologically in tune with
the environment.

Herbalism & Holism

The “germ theory of disease,” which holds that illness
springs from contact with an infectious organism, remains
the dominant view in mainstream medicine. Many people,
however, recognize that this is only part of the picture.
While illnesses such as cholera and typhoid are highly
infectious and are indeed likely to be caught by almost
anyone, many infectious diseases are not transmitted
automatically from one person to another. The question
arises, therefore, what weakness in the patient has allowed
the “seed” of infection to find fertile ground? Unlike much
conventional medical practice, which focuses on eradicating
the “bug” or abnormal condition, herbal medicine seeks to
treat the weakness that gave rise to ill health, and sets this
in the context of the patient's life as a whole. A complex
web of factors may lie behind the onset of illness. While
bodily signs and symptoms are the most obvious indicators,
dietary, emotional, and spiritual factors may be of
equal importance.
Our bodies contain over one hundred trillion cells, which
collectively must function in harmony if good health is to be
maintained. Used wisely, herbs work in tune with our bodies,
stimulating, supporting, or restraining different sets of cells in
their allotted tasks within the body, encouraging a return to
normal balanced function. Remedies aim to strengthen the
patient's own resistance, improve the vitality of weakened
tissue, and encourage the body's innate ability to return to
good health.
Of course, for people with severe acute illnesses, it may
be too late to use an herbal approach to treatment. In these
circumstances, strong-acting conventional medicines such
as heart drugs, antibiotics, and painkillers, as well as surgery,
can all be lifesavers. However, a health-care system that
is carefully attuned to the needs of the patient might well

Evening primrose is native to North America and has been used to treat a wide range

of conditions, including premenstrual syndrome, asthma, whooping cough, digestive
disorders, and eczema.

provide herbal remedies as a first line of treatment, with
conventional medicines held in reserve to be used only
when necessary.

Evidence in Support of Herbal Cures

any medical scientists still find it hard to accept that natural
medicines, with their complex chemical makeup and variable
constituents, can be as good as chemical cures in treating illness.
lowever, as more and more research reveals that herbal
medicines can be as effective as conventional medicines—and are
far safer—this thinking is beginning to change.
This is well illustrated by the change in attitude toward
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum, p. |06)—a European
plant commonly taken as an antidepressant. Extracts of the
herb are now scientifically recognized as having value in mild
© moderate depression. Since the | 980s, over 30 clinical
rials have found extracts of St. John’s wort to be as effective
as conventional antidepressants and to have far fewer side
effects. In 15 of these trials, the herbal extract produced
fewer side effects than the placebo (or inert ‘‘medicine’)
used as a comparison. Other investigations suggest that St.
lohn'’s wort may have a role in countering viral infections,
promoting wound healing, and helping withdrawal from
addiction, especially from alcohol.
As is so often the case, research has confirmed traditional
views. In the | 6th century, Paracelsus (see p. 23) had this
to say about the herb: ‘Nothing chases away disease like
strength. Therefore, we should seek medicines with power
and strength to overcome whatever illnesses they are used
against. From this it follows that God has given to Perforatum
[St. John’s wort] the strength to chase [away] the ghosts of
nature...and all downheartedness.”
As a result of scientific research, today's practitioners have
an important advantage—how the plant works in the body is

----- PAGE 33 -----
now better understood, so that it is possible to be precise
about dosages, aware of side effects, and confident in what
form the herb should be taken as a medicine.

All over the world research is now being directed into
plants with a traditional use as medicines, in the hope of
finding new treatments for all manner of health problems.
To give but two examples: the Indian gooseberry (Emblica
officinalis, p. 204) appears to protect the liver against cancer,
owers blood cholesterol levels, and may prove valuable
for acute pancreatitis; while thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. |43),
better known as a culinary herb, is a potent antioxidant that
may prevent the breakdown of essential fatty acids in the
brain and slow the aging process.

Medicinal Herbs & Big Business

The major pharmaceutical companies have realized that
rainforests, grasslands, and even along roads and fields are
sources of potentially invaluable medicines. As a result, the
industry has invested vast resources into screening the active
constituents of medicinal plants from all over the world.
The drug taxol, first extracted from the Pacific yew (Taxus
brevifolia), and one of the most effective treatments for
breast cancer, was developed in this way.
In this search through the plant world it is likely that
other remarkable medicines will be found, though far
fewer new drugs have been successfully developed via this
research than was originally anticipated. In fact, there is a key
problem to this approach, for it is geared to the production
of isolated plant chemicals which can then be synthesized
and patented. With a patent, a company can make a profit,
recouping the massive investment required to research
and develop new medicines. Herbs, however, are whole,
naturally occurring remedies. They cannot and should
not be patented. Even if the major
pharmaceutical companies were able
to find an herb such as St. John’s wort,
which proved to be more effective
and safer than conventional
medicines, they would prefer
to develop synthetic chemical
drugs rather than
plant medicines.

Herbal Synergy

One word more than
any other separates herbal
from conventional medicine:
synergy. When the whole plant
is used rather than extracted
constituents, the different

S

St. John’s wort’s traditional use as a remedy for
nervous exhaustion and depression has been
confirmed by clinical trials.

training since 2003.

producing a greater therapeutic
effect than the equivalent dosage
of isolated active constituents
that are generally preferred in
conventional medicine.
Increasingly, research shows
that herbs such as ephedra
(Ephedra sinica, p. 95), hawthorn
(Crataegus oxyacantha, p. 87),
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p. 100),
and lily of the valley (Convallaria
majalis, p. 194) have a greater-
than-expected medicinal benefit
thanks to the natural combination

The Moreton Bay chestnut is being
investigated for its anti-HIV activity.

of constituents within the whole
plant. In some cases, the medicinal value of the herb may be

due entirely to the combination of substances and cannot
be reproduced by one or two “active” constituents alone.

The Future of Herbal Medicine

The main issue for the future of herbal medicine is whether
medicinal plants, and the traditional knowledge that informs
their use, will be valued for what they are—an immense
resource of safe, economical, ecologically balanced
medicines—or whether they will be yet another area of life
to be exploited for short-term profit.
Another issue is convincing skeptics in the medical
world that herbal medicine is not just a poor substitute for
conventional medicine, but a valuable form of treatment in its
own right. In trials into the effect of certain Chinese herbs
on patients with eczema at London's Royal Free Hospital in
he early 1990s, conventional specialists were astonished
when the addition of one extra herb to a Chinese formula
containing |0 others resulted in a dramatic improvement in a
previously unresponsive patient. This story offers evidence of
he skill and art involved in herbal practice. In tailoring the
remedy to suit the individual needs of the patient and in
reating the underlying cause, major improvements were
made. This approach is a far cry from the standard medical
view of using a single drug to treat a single disease.
In India and China, there have been university courses in
herbal medicine for decades. In the West this process has
been slower, with undergraduate courses emerging only in
he last 20 years. There are now degree courses in herbal
medicine or naturopathy in several Western countries,
including Australia, the UK, and the U.S., while in Germany,
medical students have been required to study naturopathy
and phytotherapy (herbal medicine) as part of their medical

herbal approaches when considering what medical treatment
will suit them best.

parts interact, often, it is thought,

Such developments point toward a future
where patients might be able to choose between medical and

GUVMNO AYNLNAO HLOS

x

31

----- PAGE 34 -----
Valerian tincture

St. John’s wort
(Hypericum
perforatum, p. 106)
is an astringent and
antiviral herb, and

is widely used in
Europe as a remedy
for depression.

St. John’s wort
infused oil

Dried St. John’s wort

Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis, p. 148) isa
good herb for calming
nervous tension.

Goldenrod (Solidago
virgaurea, p. 271) is
an astringent herb
‘taken for sore throats,
congestion, and
problems of the
urinary tract.

Calendula (Calendula
officinalis, p. 73) is

an age-old remedy
for soothing
inflamed skin.

Fresh and dried
calendula petals

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL M

Europe

Despite regional variations, European herbal
practices largely arose from the common root
of the classical tradition. Today, herbalism is

EDICINE

a

increasingly popular in Europe, and in some countries it is
widely practiced by orthodox medical practitioners as well as

by qualified herbalists.

Each of the world’s major herbal traditions developed its

own framework

for making sense of illness. In Europe, the principal model for understanding

and explaining illness was the ‘theory of the four humors;
well into the | 7th century. It was laid down by Galen (|
physician to the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius. Gale

which persisted
31-201 ce),
n was born in

Pergamum, and part of his medical practice involved caring for the gladiators
of the city, which gave him the opportunity to learn about anatomy and the
remedies best suited to healing wounds. He wrote literally hundreds of
books and had a crucial influence on European medicine for over |,500
years. To this day, plant medicines are sometimes called Galenicals to

distinguish them from synthesized drugs.

The Theory of the Four Humors

Galen developed his ideas from the texts of Hippocrates (460-c. 377 Bce)
and Aristotle (384-322 Bce), who in turn had been influenced by Egyptian

and Indian ideas. Hippocrates, expanding on the early bel

ief that the world

was made up of the elements fire, air, earth, and water, classified herbs as

having hot, dry, cold, and moist properties. Aristotle develo}

predominate, giving rise to particular temperaments or c|
instance, excess choler produced a choleric-type person,

hat pneuma (spirit) was taken in with each breath, and

proper balance between the four humors and the four e'
the correct mix with the inspired pneuma.

Influence of Classical Herbalists

Two other classical writers strongly influenced t
herbal tradition. Dioscorides (40-90 ce), a Gre

ce) drew together writings from over

interesting herbs mentioned

ped and endorsed

he theory of the four humors. According to the theory, four principal
fluids—or humors—exist within the body: blood, choler (yellow bile),
melancholy (black bile), and phlegm. The “ideal” person bore all four
in equal proportion. However, in most people, one or more humors

haracters. For
who was likely

o be short-tempered, sallow, ambitious, and vengeful. Galen also believed

processed in

he body to form the “‘vital spirit.” Vitality and health depended upon the

lements and

he European
ek-born Roman

army surgeon, wrote the classical world’s most comprehensive
book on herbal medicines, De Materia Medica, based on
observations of nearly 600 plants. Pliny the Elder (23—79

400 authors in

his Natural History, recording, among other things,

herbal lore of the time. Much traditional European
knowledge of medicinal herbs comes from
Dioscorides and Pliny. One of the mos

by both is

----- PAGE 35 -----
EUROPE

Season Humor
Spring Blood
Part of the body Temperament
Heart Sanguine
FIRE
MOIST HOT
Season Winter Season Summer
Part of the body Part of the body
Brain Liver
Humor Humor
Phlegm WATER AIR Yellow bile
Temperament Temperament
Phlegmatic Choleric
COLD EARTH DRY
Season Humor
Spring Blood
Part of the body Temperament
Heart Sanguine

The ancient theory of the four humors holds that four fluids within the body—black bile, phlegm, yellow bile,
and blood—correspond to the four elements (earth, water, air, and fire), the four seasons, and other aspects
of the natural world. Until the | 7th century, physicians believed that an imbalance of the humoral system
caused mental and physical illness.

mandrake (Mandragora officinarum, see p. 232). With a forked root that
resembles the human shape, mandrake was credited with great magical
and healing powers. It was recommended by Dioscorides for many
ailments, including sleeplessness and inflammation of the eyes.

With the collapse of the Roman empire in the 5th century cE, the
debate about how illness arose and how it should be treated shifted to
he East. By the 9th century, Islamic physicians had translated much of Galen's
work into Arabic, and his ideas affected the development of Arabic medicine
into the Middle Ages, influencing Avicenna (980—| 037). Later in the
iddle Ages, Galen's writings were translated back into Latin from the
Arabic and, for 400 years, his ideas held sway and were diligently applied in
European medical practice. Even in the | 6th and | 7th centuries, students
in university medical schools were given an academic training in the
principles of the humoral system, as established by Galen. They learned
how to diagnose an imbalance of the humors, and the methods of
restoring equilibrium, primarily bloodletting and purging (see pp. 23-24).

Printing & Herbal Medicine

The invention of printing in the | 5th century changed the face of herbal
medicine in Europe. Before that time, European folk medicine had been
handed down from generation to generation. While some early herbals
were written in Anglo-Saxon, Icelandic, and Welsh, for example, for the
most part the tradition was orally based.

During the following centuries, herbals were published throughout
Europe in different languages, making standardized catalogs of herbs and
their applications accessible to the general public, not just to those who
understood Latin. As literacy rates rose, women in particular used the
advice in the herbals to treat their families.

Fresh hops

Dried hops

Hops (Humulus lupulus,
p. 104) are generally
sedative, but they

also stimulate

digestive function.

Feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium, p. 140) is
hailed as a breakthrough
treatment for migraine.

Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium, p. 56)
may have been used
by Achilles’ troops in
the Trojan war to
staunch bleeding.

Angelica (Angelica
archangelica, p. |68)
treats indigestion.

Chaste tree

(Vitex agnus-castus,

p. 151) relieves
menopausal problems.

Nettle (Urtica dioica,
p. 146) treats anemia.

Hyssop (Hyssopus
officinalis, p. 222)

was prescribed by
Hippocrates for pleurisy.

Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis, p. 128) is
traditionally taken to
improve the memory.

Cramp bark
(Viburnum opulus,
p. 150) relaxes
muscles.

Cramp bark
berries

33

----- PAGE 36 -----
Blackberry (Rubus
fruticosus, p. 264) is
a cleansing, diuretic
plant that was
recommended by
classical physicians.

Fresh rosemary

Marshmallow
(Althaea officinalis,
p. 165) is a soothing
remedy for gastritis
and irritable bowel
syndrome. The
ancient Greek
physician Pliny
extolled the plant
as a cure-all.

Marshmallow flowers.

Milk thistle
(Silybum marianum,
p. 137) protects the
liver from damage.

Milk thistle capsules

Elderflower

(Sambucus nigra,
p. 132) helps to
relieve hay fever.

Sage (Salvia officinalis,
p. 131) was

considered a cure-all
in medieval times.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

In some cases, the printed herbals were written by physicians, and largely
reflected the writings of classical authors such as Dioscorides. In other
instances they were based directly on first-hand experience—the English
herbals of John Gerard (1597) and Nicholas Culpeper (1652) being

good examples.

John Gerard's The Herball is clearly the work of a horticulturist, rather
than of an herbal practitioner, but is nonetheless a mine of information.
The book includes many plants that had been recently brought back to

Europe by explorers and traders.
Culpeper’s The English Physitian has been widely used as

a practical

reference book ever since its publication. It is a rich blend of personal
and practical experience, traditional European medicine, and astrological

thought. Each herb is assigned a “‘temperature,” a use within

the humoral

system, and a ruling planet and star sign. Like Dioscorides’ De Materia

Medica, it has the merit of being based on close observation
experience in the use of herbal medicines.

Foreign Herbs & Synthesized Drugs

and extensive

The growing use of foreign herbs in the |7th century prompted heated

debate about the relative value of indigenous European herbs, but for the
majority of the population this was irrelevant as the imported herbs were
well out of their price range. In the end, it created a rift in herbal medicine.

Poor and rural peoples used locally available herbs, while a’
dwellers and aristocrats purchased plants of foreign origin,
by university-trained physicians. By the beginning of the |8

ffluent city-
prescribed
h century,

approximately 70 percent of plant medicines stocked by European
apothecaries were imported. Over time, this city-based herbalism evolved

into conventional scientific medicine, which in turn rejected
and regarded plant medicines as inferior.

most European countries by the end of the 19th century—i
in many cases still remains) illegal to practice herbalism wit!

s herbal roots

Once conventional medicine established its monopoly of practice—in

became (and
hout medical

certification. In Greece, traditional herbalists, known as komboyannites, were
persecuted, and the word itself became an insult meaning “trickster”

or “quack.” In France and Italy, experienced traditional herbalists were
imprisoned for providing treatment to their patients. The renaissance in
herbal medicine that has occurred in the last 40 years offers hope that

official censure will change.

Modern Practitioners

The pattern of herbal medicine
across Europe today is remarkably
varied, but a common thread runs
through the different traditions and
practices. Most European herbalists
use orthodox methods of diagnosis,
looking for signs of infection and
inflammation, for example. However,
most also try to establish a broad,
holistic picture, placing the illness in
the context of the patient's life as a
whole. Herbalists then choose plant

restore physical imbalance with

Healers in medieval Europe frequently sought to

bloodletting, purges,

medicines and recommend suitable and preparations that caused vomiting.

----- PAGE 37 -----
EUROPE

dietary and lifestyle changes that will
allow the body's self-regenerating
powers—the modern equivalent of the
“vital spirit—to establish good health
once again. Recovery may take longer
than it would if treated with conventional
medicine, but relief is generally enduring
and free from side effects.

A patient with a stomach ulcer, for
example, may be treated with a variety
of herbs such as meadowsweet
(Filipendula ulmaria, p. 98), German
chamomile (Chamomilla recutita, p. 77),
marshmallow (Althaed officinalis, p. 165),
and deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna,
p. 69) to soothe inflammation, astringe,
and protect the inner lining of the stomach,
and reduce excess acid production. In
addition, herbal practitioners also address
poor dietary habits, bad posture, and stress—which are all conditions that
may have undermined the body's healing ability. Problems such as these
are reversed with herbs to relieve stress, a diet rich in non-acidic
vegetables and fruits, and exercise.

John Gerard’s 1597 Herball is one of the
classic texts on healing plants.

Popular Herbs

In European herbal medicine, native herbs are still highly popular. Alpine
plants such as arnica (Arnica montana, p. |72) and pulsatilla (Anemone
pulsatilla, p. 168) are much used in Swiss, German, Italian, and French herbal
medicine, while comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138) is particularly well
liked in Britain. There has also been a surge in demand for exotic herbs. The
Chinese ginkgo tree (Ginkgo biloba, p. 100), which improves circulation of
blood to the head and helps the memory, is now cultivated in vast plantations
in France, and has been a bestselling medicine in Germany for over 20 years.

European Traditions & the Future

Sales of over-the-counter herbal medicines in Europe have continued to
increase over the last two decades, though the reasons for this growth
vary widely.

It is possibly a reaction to the over-reliance on drug treatment in
conventional medicine. Sound advice on a healthy diet and lifestyle,
including food herbs, such as turmeric (Curcuma longa, p. 90), might well
prove more beneficial than conventionally prescribed drugs in helping
an aging population to stay healthy for longer.

Nevertheless, in several European countries herbal medicines are
routinely prescribed, offering doctors a choice of gentle-acting
treatments for chronic and more minor health problems. In Germany and
Poland, herbal medicines can be frontline treatments for digestive disorders
and chronic problems such as arthritis. This approach leaves conventional
drug treatments available for more acute or serious conditions.

In contrast, a barely reported trend is that more and more people are
growing medicinal plants. There seems to be a desire to rediscover the
magic of cultivating and harvesting plants, and involving them (as food and
medicine) in one's daily life.

Dried feverfew

Hawthorn (Crataegus
oxyacantha, p. 87)
has a marked tonic
effect on the heart.

Dried hawthorn
flowers and berries

Cowslip (Primula
veris, p. 256) isa
sedative plant that
helps calm what
herbalist John Gerard
called “the frensies:”

Thyme (Thymus
vulgaris, p. 143) is a
good antiseptic and

tonic herb. It is
particularly effective
as a treatment for
chest infections.

Common foxglove
(Digitalis purpurea,
p. 202) is the
source of digitalis,
a widely used
cardiac stimulant.

Heartsease (Viola
tricolor, p. 282)
gained its name
from its former

use in love potions.
It is an effective
expectorant, treating
coughs and colds.

Lavender (Lavandula
officinalis, p. 108)
yields an essential oil
that is a good first-aid
remedy for insect
bites and sunburn.

35

----- PAGE 38 -----
Myrtle (Myrtus
communis, p. 239)
is cultivated for its
oil, which is used
for bronchitis.

Castor oil plant
(Ricinus communis,

p. 262) is prescribed
in India for nervous
disorders.

Garlic pearls

Garlic capsules

Garlic cloves

Garlic (Allium
sativum, p. 59) is

4 a key herb in
Ayurvedic medicine,
highly regarded for
its detoxifying

\» properties.

Cloves (Eugenia
caryophyllata, p. 97)
help infections
ranging from scabies
to cholera.

Storax (Liquidambar
orientalis, p. 229)

is an important
ingredient in Western
cough mixtures.

Powdered garlic

| Licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra,
p. 101) grows
wild in India. It is
an indispensable
medicinal herb.

Dried licorice root

Powdered
licorice root

Fresh licorice

36

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

India and the
Middle East

In India and the neighboring regions, a variety of herbal traditions
continue to flourish. Ayurveda is the main system of healing in
India, but Unani Tibb, traditional Arabic medicine, and Siddha,
practised in Tamil areas of southern India and Sri Lanka, are also
major herbal traditions.

The name Ayurveda derives from two Indian words: ayur meaning
longevity, and veda meaning knowledge or science. Ayurveda is as much a
way of life as a system of medicine, and encompasses science, religion, and
philosophy. Its ultimate aim, drawing on its many different practices—yoga
and meditation, for example—is to promote self-realization and a
harmonious relationship with the world.

Early Origins

Ancient Indian culture developed around 5,000 years ago along the banks
of the Indus river in northern India. This is thought of as a time of great
spiritual enlightenment, with knowledge and wisdom being transmitted
orally from teacher to student over many generations, and eventually set
down in Sanskrit poetry known as the Vedas. These writings, dating from
approximately 1500 sce, distilled the prevailing historical, religious,
philosophical, and medical knowledge, and form the basis of Indian culture.
The most important of these texts are the Rig Veda and the Atharva Veda.
In about 400 sce, the first Ayurvedic medical school was founded by
Punarvasu Atreya. He and his pupils recorded medical knowledge in treatises
hat would in turn influence Charaka, the scholar who is thought to have
written the Charaka Samhita. This compendium of writings, in the form
hat it has come down to us, dates from around |00 ce and describes
341 plant medicines as well as medicines of animal and mineral origin. The
second major work was the Susruta Samhita, dating from around the same
ime; it displays detailed knowledge of surgery, especially plastic surgery,
and is still consulted today.

The Influence of Ayurveda

Other traditions of medicine share common roots with Ayurveda, and
Ayurveda has some claim to being the oldest surviving medical tradition

in the world. From the time of

the Buddha (563-483 sce) onward,
Ayurvedic medical ideas and
practices spread across Asia,
accompanying the spread of
Buddhism itself. Buddhism, and
Ayurvedic approaches to medicine,
strongly influenced the development
of Tibetan medicine, and these
ideas in turn combined fruitfully
with traditional Chinese medicine.
Ancient civilizations of East and

Cloves have been used medicinally for thousands of
years in India. The flower buds are dried in the open air.

----- PAGE 39 -----
INDIA AND THE MIDDLE EAST

West were linked to one another
by trade routes, campaigns, and
wars. In each case, this led to the 83 a fe & .
exchange of ideas, medicinal i . , N ,
plants, and medical practices, a j
including fertile connections
between Ayurveda, Siddha, and
raditional Chinese medicine

o the east, and ancient Greek
and Roman medicine to the west.
Later, from around 700 ce,
raditional Greek medicine, based
on Hippocratic ideas, developed
in the Arabic world as classical
Greek texts were translated

into Arabic. This tradition, mi

known as Unani Tibb :
The chakras are represented in this figure. India’s medical

oa . oy
(meaning onian medicine, system, Ayurveda, identifies seven energy centers, chakras,
referring to the island of lona sited along the spinal column from the head to the base of
where H ippocrates lived) the spine. If they are blocked, illness results.

at one time spanned from India to Spain, and is still the main form of
herbal medicine practiced by hakims in the Middle East.

The Five Elements

Ayurveda is a unique holistic system, based on the interaction of body,
mind, and spirit. In Ayurveda, the origin of all aspects of existence is pure
intellect or consciousness. Energy and matter are one. Energy is
manifested in five elements—ether, air, fire, water, and earth—which
ogether form the basis of all matter. In the body, ether is present in the
cavities of the mouth, abdomen, digestive tract, thorax, and lungs. Air

is manifested in the movements of the muscles, pulsations of the heart,
expansion and contraction of the lungs, and the workings of the digestive
ract and the nervous system. Fire is manifested in the digestive system,
metabolism, body temperature, vision, and intelligence. Water is present
in the digestive juices, salivary glands, mucous membranes, blood, and
cytoplasm. Earth exists in the nails, skin, and hair, as well as in the elements
hat hold the body together: bones, cartilage, muscles, and tendons.

The five elements manifest in the functioning of the five senses, and
hey are closely related to our ability to perceive and interact with the
environment in which we live. In Ayurveda, ether, air, fire, water and earth
correspond to hearing, touch, vision, taste, and smell respectively.

The Doshas & Health

The five elements combine to form three basic forces, known as the
tridoshas, which exist in everything in the universe, and influence all mental
and physical processes. From ether and air, the air principle vata is created;
fire and water yield the fire principle pitta; and earth and water produce
the water principle kapha. The principles correspond closely to the three
humors of Tibetan medicine and somewhat resemble Galen's theory of
the four humors (see p. 32).

According to Ayurveda, we are all born with a particular balance of
doshas. The proportions are largely determined by the balance of doshas
in our parents at the time of our conception. Our body type,

delayed menstruation.

37

Nutmeg & mace
(Myristica fragrans,

p. 115) are different
parts of the same
tree. In India, nutmeg
paste is applied to
eczema, and mace is a
warming herb for
stomach infections.

Nutmeg

Mace

Holy basil (Ocimum
tenuifolium, p. 116) is
often planted in
temple courtyards
in India. It is used in
Ayurvedic medicine
to protect the heart,
and recent research
shows that it lowers
blood pressure.

Fresh holy basil

Holy basil seeds

Balloon vine
(Cardiospermum
spp., p. 183) is used
in Indian herbal
medicine to bring on

Turmeric (Curcuma

longa, p. 90) isa
traditional Ayurvedic
remedy for jaundice.

----- PAGE 40 -----
Asafoetida (Ferula

assa-foetida, p. 210)
helps to strengthen
the gastrointestinal

tract. It is often taken

to treat indigestion.

Lemon (Citrus limon,
p. 82). Lemon helps

stave off colds by

improving resistance

to infection. It is
thought to be
native to India.

Dried lemon

Cardamom (Elettar'

ia

cardamomum, p. 93)

has been used in
India for thousands
of years as a
digestive remedy.

Fresh cardamom
leaves

Cardamom seed

Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum spp.,

p. 81) is a tonic herb

taken to stimulate
circulation.

Cinnamon sticks

Cinnamon powder

Ashwagandha

(Withania somnifera,

p. 152) has been
called “Indian
ginseng,” and,
much like ginseng,
it is used to restore
vitality and treat

nervous exhaustion.

Jequirity (Abrus
precatorius, p. 158).
The seeds have
been used in Asia
as a contraceptive
and abortifacient.

Soy (Glycine max,
p. 217) is a highly

nutritious bean that

has become a stap!
crop around the
world. The beans
benefit the
circulatory system.

Soybeans

Soybean pods

le

38

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

temperament, and susceptibility to illnesses are largely governed by the
predominant dosha. In this way we inherit our basic constitution, called
the prakruti, which remains unaltered throughout our lives.

The first requirement for health in Ayurveda is a proper balance of the
doshas. If the balance is upset, illness, ryadhi, results. The disruption may
be manifested in physical discomfort and pain, or in mental and emotional
suffering, including jealousy, anger, fear, and sorrow. While our balance of
doshas influences vulnerability to certain kinds of illness, the principles do
not work in a vacuum.

The effect our lifestyle has on our prakruti—vakruti—has a strong effect
on overall health, and it may easily disrupt dosha balance.

Illness may also result if the flow of energy, prana, around the body
is interrupted. The flow is relayed via the seven chakras (psychic energy
centers), which are situated at various points along the spinal column,
from the crown of the head to the tailbone. If the energy flowing between
these centers is blocked, the likelihood of ill health increases.

Visiting an Ayurvedic Practitioner

An Ayurvedic practitioner first carefully assesses prakruti and vakruti—
constitution and lifestyle. This involves taking a detailed case history and
carefully examining the body, paying attention to the build, the lines

in the face and hands, and skin and hair type—all of which point to
more profound aspects of the patient's condition. However, the main
foundations on which diagnosis rests are the appearance of the tongue,
and the pulse rate. In these respects, Ayurveda has much in common with
Chinese and Tibetan medicine, in which these two indicators are also
of the greatest importance. A very complex technique for taking the
patient's pulse has been developed by Ayurvedic practitioners, requiring
many years’ experience.

When a dosha imbalance has been diagnosed, medical treatment and
lifestyle advice are provided. The first step is eliminating toxins, and the
main cleansing and rejuvenation program, known as panchakarma,
includes therapeutic vomiting, purging, enemas, nasal administration of
medication, and purification of the blood.

Attributes of Remedies

Subsequent treatments fall into three main categories: medicines

from natural sources, dietary regimens, and behavioral modifications.
edicines, foods, and lifestyle activities are all classified according to their
effect on the three doshas. For instance, a health problem associated with
an excess of kapha, the water principle, is characterized by congestion,
excess weight, fluid retention, and lethargy. The practitioner would
prescribe the consumption of warm, dry, light foods, because the quality
of kapha is cool and damp. Avoidance of cold damp foods (such as
wheat, sugar, and milk products), which increase kapha, would also be
advised. Herbal remedies would include warming spices such as ginger
Zingiber officinale, p. 155) and cayenne (Capsicum frutescens, p. 74), as
well as bitters such as turmeric (Curcuma longa, p. 90).

The specific choice of herbal remedy depends on its “quality” or
‘energy,’ which Ayurveda determines according to twenty attributes
vimshati guna) such as hot, cold, wet, dry, heavy, or light. Ayurveda
also classifies remedies according to six tastes—sweet, sour, salty, bitter,
pungent, and astringent. Sweet, sour, and salty substances increase water

----- PAGE 41 -----
INDIA AND THE MIDDLE EAST

Ayurvedic market doctor. Practitioners prescribe herbal remedies on the basis of their attributes — “warm” and
“cool” are but two of them. The Ayurvedic practitioner's aim is to balance the patient's doshas, the principles that
regulate sickness and health.

(kapha) and decrease air (vata); bitter, pungent, and astringent remedies
increase air and decrease water; and sour, salty, and pungent herbs increase
fire (pitta).

Preparations & Treatments

n addition to plant extracts, Ayurvedic medicines include honey and dairy
produce, and sometimes minute doses of minerals such as salt are added.
Remedies take the form of pills, powders, balms, and infusions, and most
contain several different ingredients, all carefully balanced to individual
needs. Treatment might include washes and enemas or the application of
poultices as well as massage with warm herbal oil, burning incense, the use
of precious stones and metals, and ritual purification for imbalanced mind
and emotions. The chanting of mantras (incantations based on sacred
exts), breathing, and meditation exercises may be advised, due to the
power of sound and the effect of vibration and meditation on the body,
mind, and spirit.

Herbal Medicine in India Today

nthe 19th century, the British dismissed Ayurveda as mere superstition,
and in 1833 they closed all Ayurvedic schools and banned the practice.
Great centers of Indian learning thus fell apart, and Ayurvedic knowledge
retreated into villages and temples. At the turn of the century, however,
some Indian physicians and enlightened Englishmen began to reevaluate
Ayurveda, and by the time of India's independence in 1947 it had regained
its reputation as a valid medical system. Today, Ayurveda flourishes side by
side with Unani Tibb and Western conventional medicine and is actively
encouraged by the Indian government as an inexpensive alternative to
Western drugs. In recent years, Ayurveda has attracted increasing attention
from medical scientists in the West and in Japan, and the World Health
Organization has resolved to promote its practice in developing countries.

Ayurveda's value lies in the fact that it is not a medical science dealing
solely with treatment of disease. Instead, it offers practical guidelines that
apply to every facet of daily existence. It also seeks to reconcile health and
lifestyle with universal aspects of existence, and to enhance well-being
and promote longevity.

32

sf 1

Sweet flag (Acorus
calamus, p. 57). The
rhizome is taken

as a tonic and as

an aphrodisiac.

Fresh sweet flag

Dried sweet flag

Chiretta (Swertia
chirata, p. 273) is

a strongly bitter
herb used to treat
excess pitta (fire),
marked by fever and
liver problems.

Pomegranate (Punica
granatum, p. 259) is
used to make a
traditional Ayurvedic
remedy for dysentery.

Pomegranate flower

Pomegranate fruit

Tea (Camellia
sinensis, p. 181) is
astringent and tonic.

Ginger (Zingiber
officinale, p. 155)

is known as the
“universal medicine”
in Ayurveda. It is
particularly helpful
for relieving nausea
and indigestion.

Ginger root

Ginger powder

----- PAGE 42 -----
Magnolia (Magnolia
officinalis, p. 232)
relieves cramps and
indigestion.

Baical skullcap
(Scutellaria baicalensis,
p. 134) is given

for diarrhea.

Fu ling (Poria cocos) is

a fungus that is dried,
compressed, and cut

into cubes. It increases
energy levels.

Chou wu tong
(Clerodendrum
trichotomum, p. 191) is
a valuable herb for the
‘treatment of eczema.

Ginseng (Panax
ginseng, p. | 18) helps
the body cope with
stress and fatigue.

Ginseng decoction

Ginseng root

Schisandra
(Schisandra chinensis,
p. 133). The berries
are eaten for 100
days as a tonic.

Sang ye (Morus alba,
p. 237) alleviates the
symptoms of flu.

Codonopsis
(Codonopsis pilosula,
p. 83) restores the
appetite. In China, it is
often added to soups
and vegetable dishes.

Jing jie
(Schizonepeta
tenuifolia, p. 268)
is prescribed for
fevers and measles.

40

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

China, Japan, and

Southeast Asia

China's ancient herbal tradition has survived intact into the

2 Ist century, and in China it is now accorded

equal status with

Western conventional medicine. Today, many Chinese universities

teach and research herbal medicine, a factor of
in the reemergence of herbalism worldwide.

Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and

of |
recorded between 200 sce and 100 ce in

he herbal

observations of nature and a deep unders
subject to natural laws. It contains concepts that are

effect of nature upon health.

In TCM, living in harmony with these principles is
and
previous generations lived for a hundred years, and
rong that illness was cured by incantations alone.

a

developed separately from Chinese folk medicine. It arose from
the Yellow Emperor's Classic of
Internal Medicine (Huang Di Nei Jing). This text is based on detailed
anding of the way that all

longevity. According to the Yellow Emperor's Classic, members o

vitality, or gi, declined and people became “‘overactive...going agains

crucial importance

tradition that is part

ideas

ife is
fundamental to TCM,

including yin and yang; the five elements (wu xing); and the theory of the

he key to good health

had constitutions so
Only later, as human
the

joy of life,’ did herbal medicine, acupuncture, and ot!
become necessary.

Key Theories

five elements system was only accepted and fully incoi

On the streets of Hong Kong herbal pharmacists are a familiar sight. Prescripti
consultation with an herbalist, and the patient then obtains the appropriate herbs.

her branches of TCM

Unlike other herbal traditions that have a unified theory for making sense
of illness and disease (for example, the European theory of the four

humors), TCM has two quite different systems—the yin and yang theory
and the five elements. They developed quite separately in China, and the

rporated into Chinese

ions are formulated during a

----- PAGE 43 -----
CHINA, JAPAN, AND SOUTHEAST

DN

WOOD
Season Spring Climate Windy Emotion Anger
Taste Sour Herb Schisandra Action Astringent
Parts of the body Liver, Gallbladder, Eyes, Tendons

AR

ASIA

A

WATER FIRE
Season Winter Season Summer
Climate Cold Climate Hot
Emotion Fear Emotion Joy
Taste Salty Taste Bitter

Herb Chinese figwort
Action Drains fluids
Parts of the body
Kidneys, Bladder,
Bones, Ears, Hair

&

METAL
Season Autumn Climate Dry
Emotion Grief Taste Pungent Herb
Ginger Actions Stimulant, Warming
Parts of the body Lungs, Large
intestine, Nose, Skin

He

c.

EARTH

Herb Jujube Actions Toni

Herb Chinese rhubarb

Action Cooling

Parts of the body

art, Small intestine,

Tongue, Blood vessels

Season Late summer Climate Damp
Emotion Reflection Taste Sweet

ic, Restorative

Parts of the body Spleen, Stomach,
Mouth, Flesh

The ancient five elements theory is used by the Chinese when writing prescriptions. It associates herbs
with the natural world, including elements, seasons, and parts of the body. In the circular movement,

each element gives rise to the next (for example, winter gives rise to spring). The five-angl
is a controlling one, in which each element restrains another.

led movement

medicine during the Song dynasty (960-1279 ce). To this day, differences

be
diagnosis and treatment.

n Chinese thought, everything in the universe is compo:
yang—words that were first used to denote the dark and |

ween these theories are reflected in practitioners’ approaches to

sed of yin and
ight side of a

valley. Everything has yin and yang aspects, or complementary opposites—
such as day and night, up and down, wet and dry. Every yin or yang category

can itself also be subdivided—so that while the front of t
relative to the back, which is yang, the abdomen is yin relati
which is yang.

The five elements theory associates constituents of the
world—wood, fire, earth, metal, and water—with other
such as
the next
system

in a perpetual fashion (see diagram above). For t

he body is yin
ve to the chest,

natural
fundamentals

seasons, emotions, and parts of the body. Each element gives rise to

his reason, the

might be more accurately described as the five phases,

representing the process of continual movement in life. The five elements

have a central role in Chinese herbal medicine, especially in
tastes of herbs and parts of the body.

Diagnosis & Treatment

Ins

he grouping of

ead of looking for causes of illness, Chinese practitioners seek patterns

of disharmony, which are expressions of imbalance between yin and yang.
Particular attention is given to reading the pulse and tongue, both of which
are very important for an accurate diagnosis. Ill health results from a

deficiency or excess of either yin or yang. A cold, for exam

the result of a virus (though this clearly is a cause), but a sign that the body
wind-cold,” or

is not adapting to external factors such as “wind-heat;

ple, is not just

“summer-heat.” A high temperature denotes too much yang and shivering

4\

Fo ti

(Polygonum multiflorum,
p. 124), the oldest
Chinese tonic herb, is
used to prevent aging.

Dong quai

(Angelica sinensis,

p. 63) is taken by
millions of Chinese
women as a nourishing
blood tonic.

Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum, p. 61) is a
warming herb used for
abdominal pain.

Cinnamon (Cinnamomum
cassia, p. 81) isa
warming herb that

helps the circulation.

Notopterygium root
(Notopterygium incisium,
p. 240) is used in China

for colds, especially those
accompanied by aching
muscles and joints.

Ginkgo = |
tablets

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba,
p. 100) improves

the memory and the
circulation. Tablets,
made from the leaves,
are a bestselling herbal
remedy in Europe.

Ginkgo
seeds

Ginkgo
leaves

Su xian hua
(Jasminum officinale,
see J. grandiflorum,

p. 224) is an aromatic
herb used to treat
depression.

a

----- PAGE 44 -----
Goji berry (Lycium
chinense, p. 11 1) is
used in China as a
blood tonic.

Goji berries

Goji berry plant bark

Hong hua (Carthamus
tinctorius, p. 184).
Known as safflower in
the West, hong hua is
used in China to induce
menstruation and to
help heal wounds.

White peony
(Paeonia lactiflora,
p. 117) helps
menstrual complaints.
In China, women who
take the root regularly
are thought to
become as beautiful
as the flower itself.

Huo xiang (Agastache
rugosa, p. 161)

stimulates and warms
the digestive tract.

Ephedra (Ephedra
sinica, p. 95) contains
ephedrine, used in
Western medicine
‘to treat asthma.

Ephedra tincture

Dried Ephedra

Chinese rhubarb

(Rheum palmatum, p. 126)
is laxative in large doses
and constipating in

small ones.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

is the result of an excess of yin. The art of the Chinese herbal practitioner
is to restore harmony between yin and yang both within the patient's body

and between the patient and the world at large.

Chinese Herbs

Over the centuries, the number of medicinal herbs

has grown, and the

1977 Encyclopedia of Traditional Chinese Medicinal Substances has 5,757
entries, the majority of which are herbs. The Communist Revolution in

1949 helped swell the number of plan
had previously only been employed in

into the tradition.

As the herbal tradition developed wi

characteristics of herbs

s used in TCM, because herbs that
folk medicine were incorporated

hin TCM, the taste and other

became closely linked with their therapeutic uses.

The Divine Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing, Ist century ce) lists
252 herbal medicines specifying their tastes and “‘temperatures,’ and today,
Chinese herbalists still relate the taste and temperature of an herb directly

Many herbal preparations are available to Chinese
practitioners.

(0 its therapeutic use. Sweet-tasting
herbs such as ginseng (Panax ginseng,
p. | 18) are prescribed to tone,
harmonize, and moisten, while bitter-
asting herbs such as dan shen (Salvia
miltiorrhiza, p. 130) are employed

o drain and dry excess “dampness.”
Hot-tasting herbs are used for
reating ‘“‘cold” conditions and vice
versa. Together, an herb's taste and
emperature link it to specific types
of illness. For example, Baical skullcap
Scutellaria baicalensis, p. 134), which

is bitter-tasting and “cold,” is a drying, cooling herb for conditions such as

fever and irritability, brought on by

Taking Medicines
The Chinese tradition

of herbs that have proven effectiveness

illnesses. Many are avai

Four Things Soup,’ a
‘one the reproductive
p. 63), rehmannia (Reh

people every day in China and around
often take a formula as a starting point and then add other herbs to the
mixture. There are hundreds of formulas, one of the most famous being

patterns of excess heat.

formulas, which are set mixtures
as tonics or remedies for specific
able over the counter and are used by millions of
he world. Chinese herbalists

relies heavily on

onic given to regulate the menstrual cycle and
system. It consists of dong quai (Angelica sinensis,
mannia glutinosa, p. 125), chuang xiong (Ligusticum

wallachii), and white peony (Paeonia lactiflora, p. | 17).

Chinese herbal med

The Chinese Influe:

icine uses tinctures or alcoholic extracts of herbs,

but only infrequently. Generally, patients are given mixtures of roots and
bark to take as decoctions two or three

imes a day.

nce in Japan & Korea

Japan and Korea have been strongly influenced by Chinese medical

ideas and practices. Ka
origins back to the 5th

mpoh, traditional Japanese medicine, traces its
century ce, when Buddhist monks from Korea

introduced their healing arts, largely derived from Chinese medicine,
into Japan. In the following century, the Empress Suiko (592-628 ce)

----- PAGE 45 -----
CHINA, JAPAN, AND SOUTHEAST ASIA

sent envoys to China to study that country’s culture
and medicine. Direct Chinese influence on Japanese
medicine, which was practiced for the most
part by the monks, continued for |,000
years. In the | 6th century, Japan started
to assert its cultural identity, and kampoh
developed its own characteristic traits,
emphasizing the Japanese ideals of
simplicity and naturalness. However,
certain Chinese concepts, such as
yin and yang and ki (qi), continued

o have a central role.

In 1868, the Japanese embraced
Western conventional medicine.
Formal training in kampoh officially
ceased in 1885, but a few committed
practitioners passed their knowledge
on to younger generations, keeping
he tradition alive. In the last 40 years
he number of medical practitioners who use kampoh within their
practice has greatly increased. Many Japanese medical schools now
include training in kampoh as part of the curriculum.

Korean herbal medicine is very similar to mainstream Chinese herbal
medicine, and almost all the Chinese herbs are used in Korea. Ginseng
(Panax ginseng, p. | 18) has been cultivated in Korea for home use and
export since |300.

a
The tai chi symbol (in the center of the silk material)
illustrates the harmony of yin and yang. An imbalance
of these principles leads to illness.

Importance of Chinese Herbal Medicine

Since 1949 when the Communists gained control, the herbal tradition
has flourished in China (see p. 29) and today it is recognized as a valid
medical system, available to the Chinese on an equal footing with
conventional Western medicine. As is often the case elsewhere, herbs
seem to be used mainly for chronic conditions, while Western medicine
is more frequently employed for serious acute illness.

Chinese herbal medicine, however, is not just of significance in China
and the surrounding regions, but is practiced by trained practitioners in
every continent and, in some countries, now has official government
recognition. For example, there has been a traditional Chinese medicine
hospital in Paris since 1996, and in 2013 the French government agreed
© open three new traditional Chinese medicine hospital centers. Herbal
medicine is now taught in 34 Chinese universities. This development (and
he massive input of resources involved) has helped revitalize herbal
medicine around the world over the past 30 to 40 years.
The impact of these developments has not been confined solely
o those taking herbal medicines—whether in China or elsewhere.

n 2015 Dr. Tu Youyou, a researcher trained in traditional Chinese
medicine and conventional medicine, was awarded the Nobel Prize
for medicine for her lifelong study of sweet Annie (Artemisia annua,
p. 67) and its key active constituent artemisinin. From her base at the
Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Beijing, she proved that
he herb (and its active constituent) had unusually potent antimalarial
activity. Artemisinin has now become the standard treatment for
acute malaria.

43

Ju hua
(Chrysanthemum x.
morifolium, p. 78) is

popular as a relaxing
infusion. It also
improves vision.

Corydalis rhizome

Corydalis
(Corydalis yanhusuo,
p. 86) has a potent
painkilling action.

Corydalis tincture

Zhe bei mu (Fritillaria
thunbergii) is taken

in eastern China for
coughs and bronchitis.

Lycium aerial parts

Coptis (Coptis
chinensis, p. 195)

has been shown to
improve tuberculosis
in a clinical trial.

Fo ti

(Polygonum multiflorum,
p. 124) is thought

to concentrate qi

(vital spirit) in its

root, and is taken to
improve longevity.

Shan yao

(Dioscorea opposita)
is used in the “Pill of
Eight Ingredients,” a
traditional Chinese
remedy for diabetes.

Suan zhoa ren
(Ziziphus spinosa,
see Z. jujuba, p. 283)
is used in Chinese
medicine to “nourish
the heart and
cleanse the spirit.”

----- PAGE 46 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

Calumba (Jateorhiza '
palmata, p. 224) isa
bitter herb that is used

as a digestive remedy
and as a means to

improve the appetite. In Africa there is a greater variety of herbal traditions
than on any other continent. During the colonial
period, native herbal practices were largely suppressed, but today,

Buchu (Barosma betuina, in. a marked turnaround, practitioners of conventional medicine
p. 71) has a diuretic and

tonic effect within the often work closely with traditional healers.
urinary tract. It is infused
in oil to make perfume.

N

The therapeutic use of medicinal plants in Africa dates back to the

earliest times. Ancient Egyptian writings confirm that herbal medicines
have been valued in North Africa for millennia. The Ebers papyrus

Coffee (Coffea arabica, ran . .

p. 192). According to (c. 1500 sce), one of the oldest surviving medical texts, includes over

legend, an Islamic mullah age c oe _ . .
discovered the stimulating 870 prescriptions and formulas, 700 medicinal herbs: including gentian
effect of coffee by (Gentiana lutea, p. 99), aloe (Aloe vera, p. 60), and opium poppy

observing the frisky . ae .

behavior of wats who (Papaver somniferum, p. 244)—and covers conditions ranging from

had grazed on the beans chest complaints to crocodile bite. The medicinal arts put forward
Coffee is used medicinally

to treat headaches. in this and other Egyptian texts formed the intellectual foundation
of classical medical practice in Greece, Rome, and the Arabic world.

Trade & the Arabian Influence

Herbal medicines have been traded between the Middle East, India,
Visnaga (Ammi visnaga, and northeastern Africa for at least 3,000 years. Herbs widely used
0 Capone in the Middle East, such as myrrh (Commiphora molmol, p. 85), originally
text of c.1500 ace came from Somalia and the Horn of Africa. From the 5th century ce
as an herb that relieves . .
kidney stones. Visnaga ‘o the 13th century, Arab physicians were at the forefront of medical
seeds were used to advancement, and in the 8th century, the spread of Arabic culture across
northern Africa had an influence on North African medicine that lasts
Visnaga seeds 0 this day. In the mid-|3th century, the botanist Ibn El Beitar published
a Materia Medica that considerably increased the range of North African

plant medicines in common use.

Visnaga leaves
Ancient Beliefs & Indigenous Herbs

nthe more remote areas of Africa, nomadic peoples, such as the Berber

of Morocco and the Topnaar of Namibia, have herbal traditions that
Myrrh (Commiphora remain largely una' ected by changes in medicine in the world at large.
molmol, p. 85) exudes For these peoples, healing is linked to a magical world in which spirits
an astringent resin . . . ee soe
that is used to treat influence illness and death. In Berber culture, possession by a djinn (spirit)
sore throats, is a major cause of sickness, and herbs with “magical” properties are given
o restore health. If the patient fails to recover, their condition is likely to
fon claw be attributed to a curse or to the “evil eye.’
larpagophytum . .
procumbens, p. 103) The Topnaar formerly depended completely on their environment for
‘santhinflammator medicines, using the few medicinal plants that grow in such harsh and arid
and is now widely i a
used in the West. conditions. Although they are now heavily influenced by the Western way

of life and have lost much of their plant lore, they continue to employ many
indigenous plants medicinally. The stem of the seaweed Ecklonia maxima,
for example, is roasted, mixed with petroleum jelly, and rubbed into wounds
and burns, while Hoodia currori, a low-lying cactus, is stripped of its thorns and
Devil's claw outer skin and eaten raw to treat coughs and colds.
Ehizome Throughout Africa, thousands of different wild and locally grown
Fits daw medicinal plants are sold in the markets. Some are prescribed as medicines
chopped rhizome 44. for home use. Others, such as kanna (Membryanthemum spp.) and iboga

----- PAGE 47 -----
AFRICA

(Tabernanthe iboga), are chewed to combat fatigue, and are taken as

intoxicants in religious ceremonies. According to local accounts in the Kola nut (Cola

Congo and Gabon, iboga’s stimulant effect was discovered when observers Ceumnata p12) 5
“ : in we

saw wild boars and gorillas dig up and eat the roots, and subsequently central Africa to

become frenzied relieve headaches.

ele . Kola nut powder
Traditional & Conventional Care

Conventional Western medicine is well established
hroughout Africa, but in rural areas, far from
medical and hospital services, traditional medicine
remains the only form of health care available.
Even in urban areas conventional health care
services can be limited, and in this situation
raditional providers of care such as spiritualists,
herbalists, and midwives are the main
source of treatment available for
he majority of the population.
The World Health Organization
aims to achieve a level of health
care that will permit all people “= : ee Pellitory (Anacyclus
. . - pyrethrum, p. 166)
0 lead socially and economically has an acrid, irritant
productive lives. In an attempt to foot that suimulales
meet this, African countries have applied to the skin.
pioneered the training of traditional
medicine practitioners in simple
medical techniques and basic
hygiene procedures. In one center
in Mampong, Ghana, conventionally
rained medical staff work hand
in hand with traditional herbal This Nigerian divination bowl was used by traditional
practitioners, encouraging the healers in the diagnosis of illness via the interpretation
- Lo of magical signs.
safer use of herbal medicines and
researching them in detail. In nearby Kumasi, the university now offers a
BS degree in herbal medicine. This represents a remarkable change in
attitude. In the 19th and much of the 20th centuries, colonial governments
and Christian missionaries viewed traditional herbalists as witch doctors, Senna (Cassia senna, p. 75)

whose practices were best suppressed. contains artiraqinanes

the bowel to contract—

The Discovery of New Herbal Cures hence the plant's laxative
effect. The plant's first

Along with encouraging the safer use of herbal medicines, medical centers recorded medicinal use was
are researching their use in detail. The benefits of pygeum (Pygeum africanum, ean
p. 260) have been conclusively established. This tree is traditionally used in
central and southern Africa to treat urinary problems. Today, it is regularly
prescribed in conventional French and Italian medicine for prostate problems.

AD

Grains of paradise
(Aframomum melegueta)
are used as a condiment
in Africa and are taken
medicinally as a warming
remedy for nausea.

Senna decoction

Senna pods

Of the plants under investigation in Africa, Kigelia (Kigelia pinnata, p. Aloe vera (Aloe vera,

. . p. 60) contains two

225)—a sub-Saharan tree, and Sutherlandia (Sutherlandia frutescens)—a medicinal substances,

small South African shrub, are of particular interest. Kigelia has a marked ae with a markedly

ape . . . . . : . lifferent use. le Clear

ability to prevent and heal skin lesions, including psoriasis, while gel from the center of

Sutherlandia is an adaptogen with anticancer activity. eal ai Speen the

. _ : . : \ealing of wounds. Juice

The reevaluation of traditional herbal medicine in Africa may result in from the base of the leaf,

ye woe . known as “bitter aloes,”

the acceptance of additional plant-based medicines. Today, the opportunity has laxative properties

exists to combine the best of traditional practice with conventional medical

knowledge, for mutual gain. 45

----- PAGE 48 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

Opium

~~ Australia and
New Zealand

Regrettably, much of the herbal knowledge of the Australian
Opium poppy Aborigines was lost after the arrival of the Europeans. The

(Papaver somniferum,

p. 244) is cultivated predominant strains of Australian herbalism today derive from

commercially in

Australia tis used the West, China, and, increasingly, from other countries on the
extensively in both Pacific Rim.

conventional and

herbal medicine

as a sedative and . Lo

is avery potent The cradle of the oldest continuous culture on earth, Australia is also

painkile the home of an ancient herbal tradition. The Aborigines, believed to
have settled in Australia over 60,000 years ago, developed a sophisticated
empirical understanding of indigenous plants, many of which, such as
eucalyptus (Eucalpytus globulus, p. 96), are unique to Australia. While
much of this knowledge has vanished with its keepers, there is currently
a high level of interest in native herbal traditions.

Australian wattle
(Acacia decurrens, see

A. nilotica, p. 159) is Aboriginal Herbal Medicine
a strongly antiseptic

herb used to treat The Aborigines probably had a more robust health than the early European
conditions where . . . .
the skin or mucous settlers who displaced them. They had very different ideas of health, disease,
membranes need and illness, in which the influence of the spirit world played a major role. In
tightening or protecting. . . .

common with other hunter-gatherer societies, the Aborigines devoted
much time to ritual, which reinforced the sense of place and purpose in the
lives of each individual. They used healing plants and the laying on of hands
in a complex weave of culture and medicine.
The influx of Europeans in the | 8th century was disastrous for
Vervain (Verbena the Aborigines. They were exploited and driven off the land, and their
officinalis, p. 149) was population was decimated by killings and infectious Western diseases.
rought to Australia . . : : .
by early British Not only did the Europeans fail to discern any value in native customs,
setters isa tonic but much of the orally based herbal tradition was lost through death
ore nerves of the elders and the dispersal of tribal groupings.
an gestion. . . woe oe .

. evertheless, a little is known of Aboriginal medicine. Aromatic herbs,
such as eucalpytus, were crushed and inhaled to treat many common
illnesses, including respiratory diseases such as flu. Without metal technology,
water could not be boiled, but decoctions were made by heating water
with hot stones. These were drunk or applied externally. Skin eruptions,
such as boils and scabies, were common and were treated with acacia
Kava (Piper (Acacia spp., p. 158), while acute diarrhea was treated with eucalyptus or
methysticum p. 122) kino (Pterocarpus marsupium, p. 258). In Queensland, fever bark (Alstonia
lorms an important
part of ceremonial spp., p. 165) was used to treat fevers.

activities among the

peoples of Melanesia . .
and Polynesia, It is Indigenous & Foreign Herbs

taken for herbal . .
calming and urinary Over the past 200 years, many native Australian plants have become

Infections, ands used popular around the world. Research into fever bark resulted in the

rheumatic pain. discovery of the alkaloid reserpine, which markedly lowers blood pressure.
The substance is now prescribed by herbalists and conventional practi-
tioners alike. Eucalyptus and tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. 112) yield
essential oils that are employed worldwide as antiseptics. Other native

46 Australian plants are now used in Australian herbalism because of their

Kava root

----- PAGE 49 -----
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND

Red river gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis) has aromatic, astringent leaves. When it is taken internally,
generally to treat diarrhea, it turns the saliva red.

medicinal use elsewhere, for example gotu kola (Centella asiatica, p. 76) and
visnaga (Ammi visnaga, p. 62), which have a long history of medicinal use in
India and the Middle East. Early British settlers imported European medicinal
plants, such as vervain (Verbena officinalis, p. 149), hawthorn (Crataegus
oxycantha, p. 87), mullein (Verbascum thapsus, p. 281), and dandelion
(Taraxacum officinale, p. 141), which have now all become naturalized. Native
American plants have also found their way to Australia, including prickly
pear (Opuntia ficus-indica, p. 242) and Canadian fleabane (Conyza
canadensis, p. 194). As Australian herbalists generally follow the Anglo-
American herbal tradition, these plants are often employed in local practice.

Chinese Influence

Traditional Chinese medicine has substantially influenced herbalism in
Australia. Following the arrival of Chinese immigrants in the | 9th century,
herbal formulas gained a reputation for effectiveness, and Chinese medicine
maintained a small but loyal following in all the major cities. During the 1980s,
a renaissance in all branches of herbal medicine began, and today Australia
has three colleges of traditional Chinese medicine. In 2012, traditional
Chinese medicine became a nationally regulated form of medicine, with
practitioners required to register with the Chinese Medicine Board of
Australia. Naturopathy and Western herbal medicine are yet to achieve
this status.

The Future

With the passing of enlightened legislation—the Therapeutic Goods
Act—in 1989, herbal medicine became a dynamic growth industry in
Australia. This process is likely to continue as Australia and New Zealand
are due to harmonize their medicines legislation. Quality standards for
over-the-counter herbal medicines have been raised and many new herbal
products developed. There is increased commercial cultivation of medicinal
plants, notably tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. | 12), and university training
and herbal research has been expanded. In this environment, Australians are
becoming increasingly sophisticated in their use of natural medicines.

With its ancient culture, ties to Western herbalism, and location on the
Pacific Rim, Australia is host to many herbal traditions. The next 20 years
will doubtless see further exciting developments.

Gotu kola (Centella
asiatica, p. 76) is a
cleansing tonic for the
skin and digestion. It
also strengthens the
nervous system and
improves the memory.

Dried gotu kola

Fresh gotu
kola leaves

Gotu kola powder,

Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus, p. 96) leaves
were traditionally used
by Aborigines to treat
fevers and infections.
Eucalyptus is a warming
and stimulant herb. As
well as being strongly
antiseptic, it is effective
in relieving colds,
coughs, and sore
throats,

Dried eucalyptus leaves

Dried, crushed
eucalyptus leaves

47

----- PAGE 50 -----
Cornsilk (Zea mays,
p. 154) is a remedy
for problems affecting
the urinary system.

Slippery elm (Ulmus
rubra, p. 145), soothes
the mucous membranes.

Saw palmetto
(Serenoa repens,
p. 136) has an
antiseptic effect
within the
urinary tract.

Saw palmetto
tincture

Saw palmetto
dried fruit

Prickly ash bark

Gravel root
(Eupatorium
purpureum, p. 209)
is a traditional
Native American
remedy for urinary
tract problems.

Prickly ash
(Zanthoxylum
americanum, p. 153)
is a warming remedy
that is used to treat
poor circulation.

Prickly ash berries

Prickly ash leaves

48

THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

North America

Many an

America not only withstood the influx of European

cient herbal traditions in North and Central

settlers but helped to reinvigorate Western herbalism. In parts

of Central America herbal med

U.S. and

Stretchin

tamarind—were introduced
onward. Likewise, native American

cayenne,

balance’

and vitali

before H
he
plan
(written
uses of 2
p. 144), t

juliflora), used by

medicinal
pulegium,

approximately 65

tropical regions of Panama,
geographical regions and harbor an

This trade of species was an impor
Old and New Worlds’ herbal

Herbal Traditions in Central

erbal medicine is commonly prac
especially in Guatemala and

be the underlying cause of illness, and tl

medicines. T

Canada it is again enormously popular.

g from the Arctic wilds of Canada and Alaska to the

from

and sunflower—were int!

traditions.

America

’ between hot and cold elements within the body is though

Ys

exican herbal medicine is not a static tradition, but has evolved
from a shifting blend of Aztec, Mayan,

and Spanish influences. Long
ernando Cortez and his conquistadors came ashore in |5

ayan and Aztec cultures had a well-developed understanding of
he Badianus Manuscript, the first American herbal
by an Aztec, Martin de la Cruz, in 1552), lists the medicina

51 Mexican species. They incl
aken by

ude damiana (Turnera diffusa,

he Aztecs as an eye lotion. Both species are still u
ly, alongside European herbs such as pennyroyal (Mentha
p. 235) and thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143). It is thought t!
percent of the plants used today by traditional

Mexican

herbalists originated in Europe.

In other Central American countries efforts are being made to

encourage people to use herbal medicine as the
illness, Projects in

the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua, for examp

he healer’s art is to restore bal

icine is widely practiced, and in the

orth and Central America cover diverse
immense variety of medicinal plants.
ost of them are indigenous, but others—such as nutmeg, ginger, and

he Old World from the | 6th century
medicinal plants—such as corn, cocoa,
roduced to Europe, Asia, and Africa.
ant part of the interplay between the

iced in rural areas of Central America,
exico. In the Mexican tradition, loss of

to
lance

9,

he Maya as an aphrodisiac, and mesquite (Prosopis

sed

hat

first line of treatment for

e, are

teaching women how to use local herbs within their communities, while in

Cuba doctors routinely prescribe medicinal her
scarcity of conventional medicines.

Caribbean Herbal Medicine
Throughout the Caribbean, domestic herbal medicine remains popu

Some of

(Cymbopogon citratus, p. 198), which, as its name suggests, is used to
fevers, and kerala (Momordica charantia, p. 236), a creeping vine tha’

the widely used herbs include fever grass or lemon grass

bs to make up for the

ar

reat
is

prized as a ‘‘cure-all’’ on many of the islands. Kerala has been shown to
have an ability to lower blood-sugar levels and may help to slow down the

----- PAGE 51 -----
NORTH AMERICA

onset of diabetes, a relatively
common illness among Afro-
Caribbeans. The medical
and religious customs on
each Caribbean island vary,
but on many they reflect
the African traditions of
transported slaves, especially
of the Yoruba people
shipped from West Africa,
who carried on the practices
of their homelands. In some
of these traditions, herbs
are valued for their magical
power as well as for their
medicinal properties.
Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum,
p. 240) for example, is

used for divination in many
American cultures, including
in Santeria and Voodoo religious rituals, as are other herbs, including garlic
(Allium sativum, p. 59) and cayenne (Capsicum frutescens, p. 74).

A Native American medicine man performing a healing ritual
intended to drive out evil spirits, as depicted by the | 9th-century
artist George Catlin.

Shamanism

oving north, Native American herbal medicine in what is now the
United States was and is primarily shamanistic in nature, involving herbal
ore, ritual, and magic. Shamanistic societies from Siberia to the Amazon
believe that, in serious illness, the soul of the sick person has been taken
over by malign forces. The shaman’s role is to heal both the physical and
he spiritual dimension of the illness. The patient cannot be truly cured
until his or her soul has been freed from evil spirits. Shamanistic ceremonies
and rites to heal the sick person's spirit include dancing, chanting, drumming,
playing games, and the stirring of ashes or sprinkling of water. By taking
hallucinogens such as peyote (Lophophora williamsii, p. 230), the shaman is
able to reach out to the spirit world and heal both the individual and the
community as a whole.

Power of Herbs

nall Native American cultures from Canada to Chile, herbs are thought
o have spiritual energy, and many of them are invested with great magical
power. The Iroquois believe that cardinal lobelia (Lobelia cardinalis, see

L. inflata, p. 110) and morning glory (Ipomoea pandurata) have the ability
‘o heal or harm, and should be picked, stored, and used with great care.
orning glory is considered so powerful that even touching it could cause
harm. The Iroquois use the plant as a remedy for coughs, tuberculosis, and
other ailments, and also take it as a decoction with sunflower seeds
(Helianthus annuus) as a sacrament in spring and autumn rituals.
Tobacco, now considered an addictive drug, was a sacred shamanistic
herb for most Native American peoples. It was smoked in pipes and
‘thrown into fires as an offering, cast into the wind and water to abate
storms, scattered about a fish weir to improve the catch, and offered to
he air in thanksgiving for escape from danger,’ according to Virgil Vogel's
American Indian Medicine (1970).

Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa,
p. 91) contains steroidal
saponins that have

a hormonal effect. It was
used to produce early
versions of the birth-
control pill.

Wild yam chopped rhizome

Wild yam rhizome

Lobelia tablets

(Lobelia inflata, p. | 10)
help relax the small
muscles of the bronchial
tubes, easing asthma.

Goldenseal (Hydrastis
canadensis, p. 105)
was prized as a cure-all
in the 19th century.

Pokeweed
(Phytolacca americana,
p. 247) was used in
the 19th century

‘to induce vomiting.

Skullcap (Scutellaria
lateriflora, p. 135) is an
effective relaxant.

Cramp bark

(Viburnum opulus, p. 150)
is a sedative and muscle
relaxant, hence its
common name.

Pleurisy root
(Asclepias tuberosa,

p. 173) was a popular
Native American
remedy for fever.

49

----- PAGE 52 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

European Settlers

The first European settlers in North America, arriving in the early | 7th
century, tended to dismiss Native American medical practices as nothing
more than primitive savagery. The settlers relied largely on imported
herbal medicines, or on European plants hardy enough to grow in eastern

hs North America.
virginiana, p. 102) As time went by, however, the settlers’ increased contact with indigenous
poxceler for peoples in the frontier regions fostered a healthy respect for their healing
skills. Sometimes settlers adopted not just the plants but the harvesting and
Witch hazel leaf therapeutic methods as well. Joseph Doddridge, in Notes on the Settlement

and Indian Wars (1876), relates that butternut bark (Juglans cinerea, p. 224)
was peeled downward if it was to be used as a purgative (acting
“downward” by purging the bowels), and upward for use as an emetic
(acting “upward” by provoking vomiting).

The types of healing regimens practiced by Native Americans
eventually gained widespread popularity. Toward the end of the | 8th
century, Samuel Thomson (| 769-1843) developed a simple therapeutic
regimen based on Native American herbal practice. Thomson never
acknowledged the debt, but it is clearly evident—from the use of emetics,
Avocado leaf purgatives, and stimulants, to the central role of sweating and vapor baths
(based in part on Native American sweat lodges), to the deep knowledge
of American medicinal plants. Thomson considered that “‘all disease is
‘Avocado bark caused by cold” and his system worked well for those with a robust health
struck down by infection or injury. The two main herbs in his systemm—
cayenne, a stimulating herb, and lobelia, an emetic, relaxant, and
stimulant—act to raise body temperature and dilate the blood vessels.
‘Avocado (Persea Taking these plants helps to increase resistance to infection and speeds the

americana, p. 121 .
isan important ) healing of wounds.

medicinal plant

in Guatemala,

where all the parts
are used as remedies.

Witch hazel bark

Eclecticism & Its Influence

The fertile marriage between Native American and Western herba
medicine led to the establishment of more sophisticated herbal systems,
such as Eclecticism, founded by Dr. Wooster Beech (1 794—1 868) in the
830s. Beech studied both herbal and conventional medicine and tried

to combine the new scientific knowledge of
ce physiology and pathology with the best of the

Avocado fruit

herbal tradition. Beech rejected Thomson's
theories as being overly simplistic, and aimed
to use the lowest dosages possible to achieve
good results. His approach was so successful
that at Eclecticism's height in 1909, over
8,000 members were in practice, all
with recognized medical qualifications.
Another significant medical movement,
inspired by Thomson's regimen and
influenced by the Eclectics, was
Physiomedicalism. Using many
herbs, these practitioners sought

Slippery elm

(Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
is a Native American
remedy for boils
and wounds.

California poppy
(Eschscholzia californica,
p. 207) is a gentle,
effective sedative

that is often used

to encourage sleep.

Blue cohosh
(Caulophyllum
thalictroides,

p. 185) stimulates
the uterus.

Samuel Thomson, who inspired
the | 9th-century Physiomedicalists,
advocated Native American remedies.

----- PAGE 53 -----
NORTH AMERICA

‘o harmonize “the organic
issues with the vital force,’ with
he aim of restoring equilibrium
within the body. Believing the
stomach was the source of
disease, Physiomedicalists used
herbs that induced vomiting,
such as pokeweed (Phytolacca
americana, p. 247), to cleanse
he organ. Other herbs, such

as echinacea (Echinacea spp.,

Wild yam is found growing in Mexico. Its rhizome relaxes D. 92), now recognized as an
smooth muscle and it is used as an antispasmodic.

effective immune modulator,
and goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis, p. 105), a tonic and anti-inflammatory,
were then prescribed to aid recovery.

The second half of the 19th century was an extraordinary time for
American natural medicine. In addition to engendering osteopathy and
chiropractic at the turn of the century, it also reinvigorated herbal
medicine in Britain to such a degree that Physiomedicalism became an
Anglo-American herbal tradition. To this day, British herbalists still use
a far wider variety of North American medicinal herbs than do their
European counterparts.

North American Herbal Medicine Today

In the US., herbal medicine went into steep decline after 1907 because
of the government's decision to limit financial support for herbal medical
training at conventional medical schools. Since that time, herbal medicine
in both the U.S. and Canada has existed mostly on the fringes of
conventional health care. In some U.S. states, it is illegal to practice herbal
medicine without medical qualifications, but courses in herbalism are not
offered at medical schools.
With the passing of liberal legislation in 1994, use of herbal medicine
in the U.S. exploded and sales of St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. |06)—the most extreme example—are thought to have increased
by 3,900 percent between 1995 and 1997. Such growth could not be
sustained, and led to lower-quality herbal products being sold over the
counter. The American Botanical Council has been at the forefront of the
campaign to raise quality standards of herbal medicines, and many bona
fide herbal manufacturers have signed up to their Botanical Adulterants
program. At the same time, greater resources are being put into
researching herbal medicines, for example through the U.S. National Center
for Complementary and Integrative Health, which
has so far funded over |5 clinical trials into herbs
such as garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59) and saw
palmetto (Serenoa repens, p. 136).
Over the past 20 years, North Americans have
become increasingly savvy about herbal medicines
and their role in maintaining well-being and
reating ill health. Best-selling herbs include
urmeric (Curcumad longa, p. 90) and
elderberry (Sambucus nigra, p. 132), and
heir use fits well with the American
radition of self-reliance.

Turmeric

Damiana (Turnera
diffusa, p. 144)
eases depression.

Cayenne (Capsicum
frutescens, p. 74) is
a potent warming

herb that stimulates

circulation
and digestion.

Evening primrose
(Oenothera biennis,

p. 241) yields a
seed oil containing
essential fatty acids
‘that help maintain

healthy tissues.

Black cohosh
(Cimicifuga racemosa,
p. 79) was used by
Native Americans to
treat rheumatism.

Helonias

(Chamaelirium luteum,

p. 186) was chewed by
Native American women
to prevent miscarriage.

51

----- PAGE 54 -----
THE DEVELOPMENT OF HERBAL MEDICINE

South America

Herbal medicine is a part of the struggle for survival
Cinchona (Cinchona for the indigenous peoples of South America, as they
cari seek to protect their culture and natural habitats. As

s2 powerful the great rainforests disappear we are losing thousands of plant
antimalarial. ° . _.
species, some of which may have had great medicinal value.

Herbal medicine in South America conjures up images of shamanistic
rituals and a collection of thousands of as yet unclassified plants under
Nasturtium the thick canopy of the rainforest. But these are only two facets of the

ota) ca cna continent's herbal tradition—those of the Amazon and Orinoco regions.
Andean remedy for Distinctly different plants and practices are found in other areas, for

ds and chest - vy
infections tis example on the Bolivian Andes plateau, on the humid plains of Paraguay,
strongly antibiotic. and in cities such as Rio de Janeiro.

Wealth of Native Plants

Arro Ever since the Spanish conquest in the early | 6th century, European

wroot . . an

(Maranta writers have remarked on the huge variety of plant medicines used by

arundinacea, . . . .

p. 233) is used to native peoples. The most important of these was cinchona (Cinchona

\reat darren and spp., p. 80), a traditional Andean fever remedy, which the Spaniards first

to heal wounds discovered around | 630. Quinine, produced from this plant, became the
most effective treatment for malaria for nearly 300 years and is still widely
used as a tonic, bitter, and muscle relaxant. Other important plants
originating in South America include the potato (Solanum tuberosum,

p. 271), which was cultivated in over 60 different varieties by the Inca. Its
Lemon verbena

(Lippia citriodora, uses are wide-ranging, but it is particularly effective as a poultice for skin
208) has sedate conditions. Ipecac (Cephaelis ipecacuanha, p. |86)—now commonly found
as a calming infusion, in over-the-counter cough preparations—was taken by Brazilian native
Fresh lemon peoples to treat amebic dysentery. Maté (Ilex paraguariensis, p. 222), which
verbena leaves grows in southern regions of the continent, makes a stimulating beverage

that is prepared and drunk like tea. Maté has become so popular it is now
ried lemon cultivated in Spain and Por ‘ugal as well as in South America.
verbena leaves Since the 1950s, specialist ethnobotanists have lived within native
communities, particularly in the Amazon region, where most tribes have
a highly developed herbal lore. Their work has resulted in a wealth of
knowledge about Amazonian species. Pareira (Chondrodendron tomentosum,
Boldo p. 189), a climbing vine of the rainforest, for example, yields the poison
(Peumus curare used in hunting, and is taken medicinally to treat water
boldo, p. 246) . oe . .
isa liver tonic. retention, bruising, and insanity. Sadly, however, the herbal
medicine of many indigenous groups is now under threat as the
rainforests, and their culture, disappear.

Fresh boldo
leaves

Dried

Mind-altering Remedies
boldo leaves

Notorious in the West as the source of cocaine,
coca (Erythroxylum coca, p. 206) is an important
medicine in South America for nausea and
vomiting, toothache, and asthma. It is also
completely interwoven into the culture of
indigenous Amazonian and Andean peoples
and serves as a precise example of the unique

----- PAGE 55 -----
SOUTH AMERICA

Coca harvest in Bolivia. The leaves are picked when they begin to curl. They have been used as a stimulant for
centuries by the indigenous peoples of the Andes.

relationship that traditional peoples have with the plant world. Many
different myths confirm coca's sacred and ancient origins in South America,
and great ritual and significance is attached to the leaves, which, when mixed
with lime and chewed, reduce appetite and increase endurance.

Many hallucinogenic plants are used within South American shamanistic
societies, notably ayahuasca (Banisteriopsis caapi, p. | 76). This powerful
“medicine” enables the shaman (priest) to communicate with the spirit
world and cure the patient's ill health.

The European Influence

In more westernized areas of South America, herbal medicine is often

a blend of both Spanish and local traditions (as is also the case in Central
America, see p. 48). Large herb markets exist in some cities, such as La
Paz and Quito, which provide an astonishing variety of indigenous and
European herbs. In Ecuadorian markets, for example, anise (Pimpinella
anisum, p. 248), a digestive remedy for colic and cramps that originally came
from the Mediterranean, is sold alongside unusual native medicines such as
arquitecta (Culcitium reflexum), a diuretic and detoxifying herb traditionally
used to treat toxicity and infections, including syphilis.

Research & New Hopes

Research into native herbs has led to the use of certain plants in
conventional medicine. Brazilian investigation into pau d’arco (Tabebuia
impetiginosa, p. 139) indicates significant therapeutic potential for fungal
infections, inflammation of the cervix, HIV, and cancer. While pau d’arco's
effectiveness in treating cancer is controversial, it is currently prescribed
both by local doctors and in hospitals.
Research into herbal medicine is expanding, with hospital-based
studies taking place in centers such as Belem in northeastern Brazil
and Bogota in Colombia. Such studies are important for the world as
a whole. The locally based researchers, unlike most multinational drug
companies, are willing to develop medicines based on simple extracts,
which may ultimately prove more effective than the isolated constituents
often used in conventional drugs.

Pau d’arco (Tabebuia
spp., p. 139) is used as
an anticancer remedy.

It has long been

used by indigenous
Peruvian peoples

‘to lower fever and
reduce inflammation.

Pau d’arco tincture

Guarana (Paullinia
cupana, p. 245)
contains a natural
stimulant with
properties similar

to caffeine. Roasted
and ground guarana
seeds are now widely
used in the health
food industry.

Soap bark (Quillaja
saponaria, p. 260)
is a traditional
expectorant in
Peru and Chile.

Pineapple (Ananas
comosus, p. 167) is

rich in vitamin C, and
contains an enzyme
that aids digestion. The
Juice is employed as

a digestive tonic

and a diuretic.

53

----- PAGE 56 -----


----- PAGE 57 -----
be

KEY MEDICINAL
PLANTS

Of the estimated 500,000 plants on our planet, it is thought that around 10,000 are used
regularly for medicinal purposes. The index of Key Medicinal Plants features 100 of the
best-known medicinal plants in Latin name order. Many are commonly available and widely
used in different herbal traditions around the world, for example German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77) and ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155). Others, such as neem
(Azadirachta indica, p. 70), from Asia, are key herbs within their native region. A significant
proportion of these herbs have been well researched and most are excellent for home use.

PLANT NAMES

The Latin name given is the one by which the plant is most
generally known in medical herbalism. If the plant has a
Latin synonym, this is provided. The first part of the Latin
name designates the plant's genus (sub-family). The second
Part specifies the species name. In brackets after the Latin
name(s) comes the plant's family name, the broader class
to which the genus belongs. The plant's common name(s)
are beneath the family name. If more than one common
name is in popular use, they are listed in order of
importance. Where appropriate, the origins of common
names are given in brackets.

HABITAT & CULTIVATION

Gives information on where the plant is indigenous, its
current distribution, how it is cultivated and harvested,
and any preferred growing conditions.

RELATED SPECIES
Provides cross-references and information on related
species that are used medicinally or are well known.

KEY CONSTITUENTS & KEY ACTIONS

Lists the key active constituents and the key medicinal
actions of the plant on the body in order of importance
Note For more information on plant constituents and
their actions, see pp. 10-16.

RESEARCH

Provides details of scientific research conducted into
the plant, its constituents, and its extracts, including
results of any clinical trials. If appropriate, includes herbal
practitioners’ observations of the plant's known actions
and potential new medicinal uses for the herb.

TRADITIONAL & CURRENT USES

Reveals how the plant was used medicinally in the past
and how it is used today in different herbal traditions.

Examines differences between traditional and current

uses, and shows how scientific research is sometimes
confirming the validity of the traditional use and
sometimes uncovering completely new applications for
the herb. Note See Glossary p. 321 for unfamiliar terms.

PARTS USED
Illustrates the parts of the plant used medicinally.

KEY PREPARATIONS & THEIR USES

Features key preparations with details of how they are
taken or applied. Gives cautions about using the herb as a
medicine and about the plant in general. States if the plant,
its constituents, or its extracts are legally restricted.

Note: A self-help use is provided for many preparations.
Before attempting any self-help use, it is essential to read
the cautions and the information on pp. 290 & 298-299.

CAUTIONS

Gives cautions about using the herb medicinally and about
the plant in general. States if the plant, its constituents, or
its extracts are legally restricted.

@ Considered safe as a medicine but potentially harmful
if used inappropriately. Particular safety issues are listed.
Where a plant is listed as “Take only under professional
supervision,” it is not suitable for home use.

@ Known to be toxic or unsafe as a medicine. Do not self-
medicate with these plants. Some plants with this symbol
may be safely prescribed by experienced healthcare
practitioners within a very narrow dosage range. At a
higher dose, such plants will be poisonous.

SELF-HELP USES

Cross-refers to self-help treatments in Remedies for
Common Ailments. Note: Always read the cautions in Key
Preparations & Their Uses and the information on pp. 290
& 298-299 before using any herb.

le
¢
(
yi

----- PAGE 58 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

56

Achillea millefolium (Asteraceae)

Yarrow, Milfoil

Yarrow is a native European plant, with a long history
as a wound healer. In classical times, it was known as
herba militaris, being used to staunch war wounds. It has
long been taken as a strengthening bitter tonic, and all
kinds of bitter drinks have been made from it. Yarrow
helps recovery from colds and flu and is beneficial for
hay fever. It is also helpful for menstrual problems and

circulatory disorders.

Yarrow was once known as “nosebleed”

because its leaves were used to
staunch blood.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Europe and western Asia,
yarrow can be found growing wild
in temperate regions throughout the
world, in meadows and along
roadsides. The herb spreads via its
roots, and the aerial parts are picked
in summer when in flower.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil with variable
content (linalool, camphor,
sabinene, azulene)

= Sesquiterpene lactones

= Flavonoids

= Alkaloids (achilleine)

= Triterpenes

= Phytosterols

= Tannins

Key Actions

= Antispasmodic

= Astringent

= Bitter tonic

= Increases sweating

= Lowers blood pressure

m= Reduces fever

= Mild diuretic and urinary antiseptic

= Stops internal bleeding
= Promotes menstruation
= Anti-inflammatory

Research

Despite its many uses and similarity
to German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita, p. 77), yarrow has been
poorly researched. The herb and its
volatile oil have been shown to be
antiinflammatory; the azulenes are
also antiallergenic. The sesquiterpene
lactones are bitter and have
antitumor activity. Achilleine and the
flavonoids help arrest internal and
external bleeding; the flavonoids
may be responsible for yarrow's
antispasmodic action. Laboratory
studies indicate that yarrow dilates
blood vessels, thereby lowering
blood pressure. It works, in part,
like conventional medicines known as
ACE inhibitors, which are commonly
prescribed for high blood pressure.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Healing wounds Achilles
reputedly used yarrow to heal wounds,
hence its botanical name. It has been
used for this purpose for centuries, and
in Scotland a traditional wound
ointment was made from yarrow.

= Gynecological herb Yarrow
helps regulate the menstrual cycle,
reduces heavy menstrual bleeding,
and eases period pain.

= Other uses Combined with
other herbs, yarrow helps colds and
flu. Its bitter tonic properties make it
useful for weak digestion and colic.

It also helps hay fever, lowers high
blood pressure, improves venous
circulation, and tones varicose veins.

Self-help Uses
= Cleansing wounds, p. 304.
= Colds & flu, p. 311.

Yarrow

A creeping perennial,
growing to 3 ft (I m),
with white flower
heads and finely
divided leaves.

& Parts Used

Aerial parts contain
flavonoids, which are
thought to give yarrow its
antispasmodic properties.

‘
dy le
+S Flowers contain

ses, gx TL _ wolatile oi

‘a

Fresh aerial
parts

FASS

Dried aerial parts

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions May cause allergic reaction in rare cases. Use the essential
oil only under professional supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Peppermint

—— Elderflower

Remedy For colds, mix equal
parts of yarrow, peppermint,
and elderflower. Infuse | tsp
with % cup (150 ml) water
for 10 minutes (see p. 291).
Take 3 times a day.

Yarrow

Tincture (to make, p. 292). Essential oil extracted
For indigestion, take

20 drops 3 times a day.

from the flowers is
used by herbalists
to treat congestion.

> Poultice (to make, p. 295). Apply to grazes, cuts, and bruises.

= Digestive infections, p. 305.
= Fever, p. 311.
= Varicose veins, p. 302.

----- PAGE 59 -----
bitter taste.

Sweet flag is an aquatic plant, similar in
appearance to the iris. It has yellow flowers
in summer.

Habitat & Cultivation

Sweet flag, believed to originate from
India, now grows in many parts of the
world. It prefers wet soil and is found
in ditches, beside lakes and rivers, and

& Parts Used

Rhizomes have
an aromatic,
spicy fragrance

Rhizomes grow to about | 4 in (3 cm)
thick. They are harvested as needed.

Dried rhizome

Acorus calamus (Araceae)

Sweet Flag, Calamus, Bacc (Hindi)

Sweet flag has a long-standing reputation as a tonic

and stimulant. An important herb in Ayurvedic
medicine, it is also widely used in Europe and the U.S.
The rhizome is a valuable remedy for digestion,

and is a tonic for the nervous system. It stimulates the
appetite and soothes digestion, relieving gas and calming
indigestion and colic. Sweet flag has a strongly aromatic,

in marshy places. Propagation is carried
out in autumn or early spring by
dividing the clumps of rhizomes and
replanting them in shallow water. The
rhizomes are harvested as needed.

Related Species

A. gramineus (shi chang pu) is a
Chinese herb and a close relative
that is used medicinally for much
the same range of conditions as
A. calamus.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil—sesquiterpenes
(A. calamus var. americanus
only); asarone (except
A. calamus var. americanus)

= Saponins

= Bitter principle (acorin)

a Mucilage

Key Actions

= Carminative

= Relieves muscle spasm
= Antioxidant

= Anti-inflammatory

= Tonic

Research

= Beta-asarone Research attention
has focused on the constituent beta-
asarone in the volatile oil, which has
a carcinogenic action when isolated.
The American variety of sweet

flag (A. calamus var. americanus),
commonly available in Europe, does
not contain beta-asarone, and only
preparations made from this should
be used.

a Whole herb In India, sweet

flag powder has been taken for
thousands of years with no reports
of cancer arising from its use.

This suggests that use of the

whole herb may be safe, but

more research is needed.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Early uses Sweet flag has been
regarded as an aphrodisiac in India
and Egypt for at least 2,500 years.
In Europe, it was valued as a

Decoction is given to relieve
indigestion and gas and to

increase appetite.

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only under professional supervision. Do not
take for more than | month. Restricted in some countries.

Sweet flag

An herbaceous, aquatic
reedlike plant with tall,
sword-shaped leaves.

It grows to 3 ft (I m).

stimulant, bitter herb for the appetite
(if not for the appetites) and as

an aid to digestion. In North
America, the decoction was used for
fevers, stomach cramps, and colic; the
rhizome was chewed for toothache,
and powdered rhizome was inhaled
for congestion.

= Ayurvedic medicine Sweet
flag is an important herb in
Ayurvedic medicine, and is valued

as a “‘rejuvenator” for the brain and
nervous system, and as a remedy
for digestive disorders.

= Western herbalism In Western
herbal medicine, the herb is chiefly
used for digestive problems such

as bloating, gas, colic, and poor
digestive function. Sweet flag,
particularly A. calamus var.
americanus, which is the most
effective antispasmodic, relieves
spasm of the intestines. It helps
uncomfortable and distended
stomachs, and headaches associated
with weak digestion. Small amounts:
are thought to reduce stomach
acidity, while larger doses increase
deficient acid production—a good
example of how different doses

of the same herb can produce
different results.

Tincture is prescribed
by herbalists and doctors
for digestive ailments.

Powder is taken
as a tonic in
Ayurvedic medicine.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ady

----- PAGE 60 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Aesculus hippocastanum (Sapindaceae)

Horse Chestnut

Extracts of horse chestnut seed—the shiny brown
“conkers” collected by British children in autumn—have
a scientifically established ability to relieve the symptoms
of varicose veins, and promote their repair. Taken by
mouth, or applied as a lotion, horse chestnut will help
to tighten up the tissues and reduce the pain and
swelling of varicose veins. It is also useful in helping

to reduce fluid retention.

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antioxidant
= Reduces fluid retention

Research

= Clinical trials Numerous trials
have confirmed horse chestnut's value
as a medicine in venous problems
such as varicose veins, venous ulcers,
hemorrhoids, and frostbite. In one
London-based study, published in
1996, horsechestnut extract was
shown to be as effective in treating
varicose veins as compression
stockings. In Germany, horse chestnut
extracts and aescin are now routinely
used to treat varicose veins.

= Venous insufficiency A 2006
review of clinical trials by the
Cochrane Database assessed the use
of horse chestnut extract for chronic

Horse chestnut seeds are the main herbal
medicine for venous disorders.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to mountain woods from the
Balkans through western Asia to
the Himalayas, horse chestnut is now
cultivated as an ornamental and shade
tree in temperate regions around
the world, especially in northern and
western Europe. It is propagated
from seed in autumn or spring. Leaves
are harvested in summer, the bark
and seeds in autumn.

venous insufficiency—a condition
that includes leg swelling and spider
and varicose veins. The review con-
cluded that horse chestnut extract
was a safe and effective short-term
treatment for this problem.
Related Species

Do not use Ohio Buckeye (A. glabra)
as it is toxic if taken internally.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Circulatory system Although
horse chestnut has a beneficial
effect on the heart and arteries, it
is primarily a remedy for the veins.
tt helps improve the tone of the
vein walls, which when slack or
distended result in varicose veins,
piles, and similar problems. It also
reduces edema (fluid retention)
caused by fluid leaking from
distended veins, and increases the

Key Constituents

= Triterpenoid saponins, including
about 5% aescin, a complex
mixture of glycosides

= Polysaccharides (about 50%)

= Coumarins, including aesculin

= Flavonoids

= Tannins, including proanthocyanidins

u Fixed oil (2-3%)

Horse chestnut

A deciduous tree with
divided leaves, white
and pink flowers, and
spiny green fruit. It
grows to 80 ft (25 m).

& Parts Used

Leaves can be used to make a lotion
for varicose veins and hemorrhoids.

Fresh
leaves

Seeds are an excellent
remedy for varicose veins
and associated fluid retention.

Bark is much
more astringent
than the seeds.

Fresh seeds

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Cautions Best taken with professional advice. Horse chestnut can cause gastro-
intestinal upset at normal dosage (discontinue if symptoms develop) and is toxic at
excess dosage. Not suitable for children. Do not apply to broken or ulcerated skin.
May interact with blood-thinning drugs.

re A,
I DW

Tablets may have a higher aescin

content than other preparations. Lotion (to make, p. 296). Apply

twice daily to varicose veins.

“1 Capsules are convenient for long-term use.

chestnut is taken internally for leg
ulcers, varicose veins, piles, and
frostbite, and applied locally as a
lotion, gel, or ointment. A decoction
of the bark or leaf can be used as an

been used as a topical application
for rheumatism.

= Chest remedy Horse chestnut
makes a serviceable chest remedy and
in Turkey has been used to treat chest

Key Actions
= Venous tonic
= Astringent

permeability of the capillaries,
allowing excess fluid to drain back
into the circulatory system. Horse

astringent lotion for varicose veins.
= Rheumatism In France, an oil
extracted from the seeds has

complaints in horses. In the U.S. a
decoction of the leaves has been
considered useful for whooping cough.

----- PAGE 61 -----
Allium sativum (Liliaceae)

Garlic

Known for its pungent odor and taste, garlic is an

ideal herbal medicine, being completely safe for home
use and a powerful treatment for a host of health
problems. lt counters many infections, including those

of the nose, throat, and chest. It also reduces cholesterol,
helps circulatory disorders, such as high blood pressure,

and lowers blood-sugar levels, mal

addition in type 2 diabetes.

Garlic is widely cultivated commercially
for use in cooking.

Habitat & Cultivation
Originally from central Asia, garlic
is now grown worldwide. It is grown
by dividing the bulb and is harvested
late the following summer.

Related Species

Onion and ramsons (A. cepa and
A. ursinum, p. 164) are both
important medicinal herbs.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (alliin, alliinase, allicin)
= Scordinins

= Selenium

= Vitamins A, B, C, and E

Key Actions

= Antibiotic

= Expectorant

= Increases sweating

= Lowers blood pressure
= Reduces blood clotting
= Anti-diabetic

= Expels worms

Research
= Invaluable remedy Well over
1,000 research papers have been

ing it a useful dietary

published on the medicinal effects
of garlic. They show that it helps to
lower raised blood fat levels, including
cholesterol, to keep the blood thin
and protect against blood clots, to
lower raised blood pressure, to lower
raised blood-sugar levels, and to have
antibiotic activity.

= Unknown action While it is
understood that when the fresh
clove is crushed, alliin is broken down
by alliinase into allicin (which has
strong antiseptic activity), authorities
still disagree on precisely how

garlic achieves its medicinal effects.
Nevertheless, research indicates that
it is best to crush garlic cloves, and
then to wait 10 minutes before using
it in food or as medicine. This allows
sufficient time for allicin to form.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional remedy Garlic has
always been esteemed for its healing
powers, and before the development
of antibiotics tt was a treatment for all
manner of infections, from tuberculosis
to typhoid. It was also used to dress
wounds in World War |.

= Bronchial infections Garlic is
an excellent remedy for all types of
chest infections. It is good for colds,
flu, and ear infections, and it helps

to reduce mucus.

= Digestive tract Digestive
infections respond well to garlic.

The herb can also rid the body of
intestinal parasites.

= Circulatory remedy Garlic
prevents circulatory problems and
strokes by keeping the blood thin.

It lowers cholesterol levels and

blood pressure.

Garlic
A bulbous perennial
growing to |-3 ft
(30 cm-I m), with
pale pink or green-
white flowers.

& Parts Used

Garlic whole, chopped, or crushed, has
been used as a medicine and as a tonic
food for thousands of years.

ra

Cloves contain volatile
oil, which is antiseptic
and antibiotic

Cloves

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses _—-

@ Caution Consult a professional practitioner before giving garlic as a medicine to
children under | 2. Take on professional advice if taking blood-thinning medication.

vlehehe,

Pearls contain garlic oil. Take to
increase resistance to infections.

Chopped cloves Use
regularly in cooking to
help reduce cholesterol
levels and boost the
immune system.

Garlic syrup
(to make, p. 293).
For coughs, take
| tsp every 3 hours.

“> Capsules (to make, p. 292). For bronchitis, take 2 x 100 mg capsules 3 times a day.

© Tablets Take for high blood pressure and bronchitis.

= Other uses Garlic has been
used to treat diverse health problems,
from hay fever and asthma to an
enlarged prostate and osteoarthritis.
It is useful when taken alongside
conventional antibiotics to help
prevent side-effects such as diarrhea.
Strongly antifungal, garlic can be an
effective treatment in fungal skin
conditions, taken internally and
applied to the skin. It has anti-cancer
activity and helps to protect against
stomach and colon cancer.

Self-help Uses

= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Athlete's foot, p. 304.

= Colds & flu, p. 311.

= Cold sores, p. 304.

= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.
= Digestive infections, p. 305.

= Earache, p. 312.

= Fungal infections, p. 314.

= High blood pressure, p. 301.
= Old age tonic, p. 319.

= Tonsillitis, p. 311.

= Urinary infections, p. 314.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM ©

59

----- PAGE 62 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Aloe vera syn. A. barbadensis (Xanthorrhoeaceae)

Aloe Vera, Aloes

Native to Africa, aloe vera is commonly cultivated

as a potted plant and has two distinct types of medicinal
use. The clear gel contained in the leaf is a remarkably
effective healer of wounds and burns, speeding up

the rate of healing and reducing the risk of infection.
The yellow sap from the base of the leaf when dried

is known as “bitter aloes.” It is a strong laxative, useful

for short-term constipation.

Aloe vera has prickly, gray-green,
succulent leaves that yield effective
medicinal substances.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to eastern and southern Africa,
aloe vera grows wild in the tropics and
is cultivated extensively worldwide.
(Aloe vera plants grown as potted
plants have a low anthraquinone
content.) Aloe vera is propagated by
breaking off small rooted plantlets.
To collect the gel and bitter liquid,
the leaves are cut and drained.

Related Species

Cape aloes (A. ferox) is used in
herbal medicine as an irritant
laxative. Many other Aloe species
are also useful medicinally.

Key Constituents

= Anthraquinones (aloin,
aloe-emodin)

= Resins

= Tannins

= Polysaccharides

= Aloectin B

Key Actions
= Heals wounds
= Emollient

= Stimulates secretions of bile
= Laxative

Research

= Healing properties Extensive
research since the 1930s in the U.S.
and Russia has shown that the clear
gel has a dramatic ability to heal
wounds, ulcers, and burns, putting a
protective coat on the affected area
and speeding up the rate of healing.
This action is in part due to the
presence of aloectin B, which
stimulates the immune system.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Beauty treatment Aloe vera
has a long history as a skin lotion—
Cleopatra is said to have attributed
her beauty to it.

= Western remedy In the West,
aloe vera first became popular in
the 1950s when its ability to heal
burns, in particular radiation burns,
was discovered.

u First aid Aloe vera is an excellent
first aid remedy for burns, scrapes,
scalds, and sunburn. A leaf, broken
off, releases soothing gel, which may
be applied to the affected part.

= Skin conditions The gel is useful
for almost any skin condition that
needs soothing and astringing, and will
help varicose veins to some degree.
a Ulcers The protective and healing
effect of aloe vera also works
internally, and the gel can be used
for peptic ulcers and irritable

bowel syndrome.

= Laxative The bitter yellow liquid
in the leaves (bitter aloes) contains
anthraquinones, which are strongly
laxative. They cause the colon

Parts Used

Leaves exude a bitter

liquid, which is dried and
known as “‘bitter aloes.’ They
also contain a clear gel, which
is a soothing skin remedy.

Aloe vera

A perennial with
succulent leaves

2 ft (60 cm) long
and a spike of yellow
or orange flowers.

Leaves are broken
off and the clear
gel is applied to the
skin as a first aid
remedy for burns

Chopped leaves

fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Leaves

@ Cautions Do not use the bitter yellow juice from
the base of the leaves (bitter aloes) on the skin. Its

use is restricted in some countries. Do not take internally
during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Do not take

if suffering from hemorrhoids or kidney disease.

Bitter aloes are
used by herbalists
to treat constipation.

]

“
%
Juice is made commercially from
the gel. For peptic ulcers,
take 2'/ tbsp 3 times a day.

Leaves Break off a leaf and split open
to collect the gel. For burns and
eczema, apply liberally twice a day.

_-® Tincture made from bitter aloes (see p. 292). To stimulate the appetite,

take 3 drops with water before meals.

to contract, generally producing a
bowel movement 8—!2 hours after
consumption. At low doses, the bitter
properties of the herb stimulate
digestion. At higher doses, bitter aloes
are laxative and purgative.

Self-help Uses

= Minor burns & sunburn, p. 303.
= Stretch marks, p. 317.

a Warts, p. 304.

= Weeping skin, p. 303.

= Wounds, p. 304.

----- PAGE 63 -----
Galangal (Hindi), Gao Liang Jiang (Chi

Like other members of the ginger family, galangal
is warming and comforting to the digestion. It has a

Alpinia officinarum (Zingiberaceae)

nese)

pleasantly aromatic and mildly spicy taste, and is suitable

for all conditions where the central areas of the body
need greater warmth. It was introduced into Europe in
about the 9th century. The German mystic Hildegard
Bingen regarded it literally as the “‘spice of life,’ given

God to ward off ill-health.

Galangal is an important spice in Thai
cooking and is reportedly fed to Arabian
horses to “fire them up” in parts of Asia.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to grassland areas of southern
China, and Southeast Asia in general,
galangal is now cultivated as a spice
and as a medicine throughout much
of tropical Asia. It is propagated by
dividing and replanting the rhizomes in
spring, and it requires well-drained soil
and a shady position. The rhizomes are
harvested from 4- to 6-year-old plants
at the end of the growing season and
may be used fresh or dried.

Related Species

Greater galangal, also known as
Siamese ginger (A. galanga), though a
close relative of galangal, has a much
inferior taste and volatile oil content.
lt appears to have an antiulcer action.
Two other Alpinia species, cao dou
cou (A. katsumadai) and yi zhi ren

(A. oxyphylla), are used in a broadly
similar way to galangal in traditional
Chinese medicine.

Key Constituents
= Volatile oil (about 1%) containing
alpha-pinene, cineole, linalool

of
by

= Sesquiterpene lactones
(galangol, galangin)

= Diterpenes

m= Flavonoids

Key Actions

= Warming digestive tonic
= Carminative

= Anti-inflammatory

= Anti-emetic

= Antibacterial

= Antifungal

= Antitumor

Research

= Antibacterial Research indicates
that galangal has antibacterial activity,
notably against Staphylococcus aureus,
responsible for many ear, nose, and
throat infections.

= Antifungal Galangal has shown
pronounced activity against fungi

in laboratory research, especially
against Candida albicans.

= Osteoarthritis A 200! clinical
trial found that a concentrated extract
of ginger (Zingiber officinalis, p. 155)
and galangal was effective in relieving
osteoarthritis symptoms in the knee.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Chinese medicine In traditional
Chinese herbal medicine, galangal is
a warming herb used for abdominal
pain, vomiting, and hiccups, as well as
for diarrhea due to internal cold.
When used for hiccups, it is combined
with codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula,
p. 83) and fu ling (Poria cocos).

= Indian tradition In India

and southwestern Asia, galangal

is considered stomachic, anti-
inflammatory, expectorant, and

& Parts Used

Galangal
A perennial aromatic
plant growing to 6/4 ft

lipped flowers and
lance-shaped leaves.

Rhizome has a warming,

stimulating action and

is

useful for a wide range

of digestive problems.

Rhizomes have a
spicy flavour and are
used in cooking

Fresh rhizome

Dried rhizome

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Chopping root for a decoction
(to make, p. 291). For motion
sickness, slowly sip up to
¥% cup (150 ml).

e

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is suitable for
long-term use. To improve digestion,
take 20 drops diluted with 2 cup
(100 ml) hot water 3 times a day.

Powder For nausea, take
a 250 mg capsule (to make,
p. 292) twice a day.

a nervine tonic. It is used in the
treatment of hiccups, dyspepsia,
stomach pain, rheumatoid arthritis,
and intermittent fever.

= Western herbalism Galangal
was introduced into Europe by
Arabian physicians over |,000 years
ago. It is mainly used in the West
for gas, indigestion, vomiting, and
stomach pain. An infusion can be
used to alleviate mouth ulcers and
sore gums. Galangal has long been
recommended as a treatment for
seasickness, which is not surprising

given the well-established ability of
its relative, ginger (Zingiber officinale,
p. 155) to relieve motion sickness.

= Candidiasis Galangal can be used
with other antifungal herbs as part of a
regimen to treat intestinal candidiasis.
= Dosage At a moderate dosage,
galangal is a warming and gently
stimulating herb for a weakened
digestive system, but at a higher
dosage it can be an irritant.

Self-help Use

= Nausea & motion sickness, p. 306.

(2 m), with white, red-

SLNV1Id TVNIOIGHW AM

----- PAGE 64 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

q
ae

62

Ammi visnaga syn. Daucus visnaga (Apiaceae)

Visnaga, Khella

Visnaga, with its aromatic, bitter scent and flavor, has
greater medicinal than culinary value. It is an effective
muscle relaxant and has been used for many centuries
to alleviate the excruciating pain of kidney stones. Scientific
research has confirmed the validity of this traditional
use. Visnaga contains khellin, from which particularly
safe pharmaceutical drugs for the treatment of asthma
have been derived.

Research

= Strong antispasmodic
Research by a pharmacologist
working in Egypt in 1946 revealed
that visnaga (in particular its
constituents khellin and visnagin)
has a powerful antispasmodic action
on the smaller bronchial muscles,
the coronary arteries that supply
blood to the heart, and on the
urinary tubules. Visnaga’s ability

to relax the small bronchi lasts
for up to 6 hours, and the plant
has practically no side effects.

= Khellin Intal, an asthma drug

Visnaga is a member of the carrot family and
has the characteristic delicate, wispy leaves.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to North Africa, visnaga grows
wild in the Middle East and around
the Mediterranean. It is naturalized in
Australia and South America. Grown
from seed, visnaga is widely cultivated.
The tiny fruits containing the seeds are
picked in late summer before they
have fully ripened.

is derived chemically from khellin.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Kidney stones Visnaga is a
traditional Egyptian remedy for
kidney stones. It was mentioned
in the Ebers papyrus of Egypt
(c. 1500 sce) and is still used
there to relieve kidney stones.
By relaxing the muscles of the
ureter, visnaga reduces the pain
caused by the trapped stone
and helps ease the stone down
into the bladder.

= Asthma remedy Following
research into its antispasmodic
properties, visnaga is now given
for asthma, and is safe even for

Related Species

Bishop's weed (A. majus, p. 166)

is a close relative. This plant has

been used to treat asthma but is
mainly taken as a diuretic and to
treat psoriasis.

Key Constituents
= Furochromones including
khellin (1%) and visnagin

= Coumarins children to take. Although it does
= Flavonoids not always relieve acute asthma
= Volatile oil attacks, it does help to prevent

their recurrence.

= Other respiratory conditions
Visnaga is an effective remedy

for various respiratory problems,

= Phytosterols

Key Actions
= Antispasmodic
= Antiasthmatic
= Relaxant

including bronchitis, emphysema,
and whooping cough.

widely used in conventional medicine,

Visnaga

An erect annual
growing to 3 ft (1 m),
with leaves divided into
wisps and clusters of
small white flowers.

& Parts Used

Seeds from the fruit of the fresh plant are
collected in late summer and dried for use
in infusions and powders.

Fresh plant
in fruit

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only under professional supervision. Long-term use produces
symptoms such as nausea, headaches, and insomnia. Subject to legal restrictions
in some countries.

Infusion alleviates asthma,
bronchitis, and kidney stones.

Powder is prescribed by doctors and
medical herbalists to relieve angina.

= Circulatory herb By
relaxing the coronary arteries,
visnaga helps to improve blood
supply to the heart muscle and
thereby eases angina. Visnaga
does not, however, reduce
blood pressure.

= Dental hygiene In Andalusia

in Spain, the largest and best-quality
visnaga seeds were employed to clean
the teeth. The high value given to the
herb in general was reflected in the
saying: “Oro, plata, visnaga, o nada!”
(Gold, silver, visnaga, or nothing!).

----- PAGE 65 -----
Dong quai

A stout, erect
perennial growing to
6% ft (2 m), with large
bright green leaves
and hollow stems.

Angelica sinensis syn. A. polymorpha (Apiaceae)

Dong Quai, Chinese Angelica, Dang Gui (Chinese)

In China, dong quai is the main tonic herb for
conditions suffered by women. It is taken on a daily
basis by millions of women as an invigorating tonic,
helping to regulate menstruation and tonify the blood.
It also improves the circulation. Dong quai has a sweet,
pungent aroma that is very distinctive, and in China it in cooking. Rhizome is large

& Parts Used

Rhizome is valued for
its medicinal properties
and is often used

is often used in cooking, which is the best way to take

it as a blood tonic.

Dong quai has attractive clusters
of white flowers in summer.

Habitat & Cultivation
Dong quai is native to China

and Japan, where it is now cultivated.
The best rhizomes are in Gansu
province in China. Seed is sown

in spring and the rhizomes are

lifted in autumn.

Related Species

American angelica (A. atropurpurea)
has similar properties, though it is
less aromatic. European angelica

(A. archangelica, p. 168) is a warming
tonic herb for digestion and
circulation, but does not have the
same tonic action as dong quai.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (ligustilide,
sesquiterpenes, carvacrol)

= Coumarins

= Phytosterols

= Polyacetylenes

m= Ferulic acid

Key Actions

= Tonic

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antispasmodic

= Thins blood Sliced dried
= Promotes menstrual flow rhizome

Research

= Gynecology Research in
China from the 1970s has shown
that the herb helps to regulate
uterine contractions, which may
explain its benefit for period pain.
= Circulation The root can help
to normalize heart function and
has been shown to thin the blood.
It may therefore interact with
anticoagulant medicines.

Traditional &
Current Uses

and brownish on
the outside and
white inside

= Blood tonic Famous in China as Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

a tonic, dong quai is taken for

@ Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Should not be

“deficient blood” conditions, anemia, used for heavy menstrual bleeding, bleeding disorders, and diarrhea. May interact

and for the symptoms of anemia

due to blood loss—a pale complexion,
palpitations, and lowered vitality.

= Women’s health Dong quai
regulates the menstrual cycle, relieves
period pain and cramps, and

is an ideal tonic for women with heavy
menstruation who risk becoming
anemic. However, as it stimulates
menstrual bleeding, other tonic herbs
such as nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146)
are best taken during menstruation if
the flow is heavy. It is also a uterine
tonic, and helps infertility.
= Circulation Dong quai

is a “warming” herb, improving the
circulation to the abdomen and
to the hands and feet. It strengthens For period pain, take 4 tsp
the digestion and is also useful in the with water up to 4 times
treatment of abscesses and boils. a day.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).

Self-help Uses

= Aiding conception, p. 31 6. > Tablets Take as a general female tonic.

= Menstrual problems, p. 315.

with prescribed blood-thinning medication.

Tonic wine Make with dong quai and other tonic
or bitter herbs (see p. 293). To improve vitality,
drink a % cup (150 ml) daily.

Chopped rhizome
is commonly added
to soups in China.

Infusion For poor
circulation, infuse
| tsp with % cup
(150 ml) water
(see p. 291). Drink
¥—| 4 cups (150—
300 ml) a day.

‘se Decoction (to make, p. 291). For anemia, take %4 cup (150 ml) 2-3 times a day.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 66 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Apium graveolens (Apiaceae)

Celery

More familiar as a vegetable than as a medicine, celery
stems and seeds have long been taken for urinary,
rheumatic, and arthritic problems. Celery is a good
cleansing, diuretic herb, and the seeds are used specifically
for arthritic complaints where there is an accumulation

of waste products. The seeds also have a reputation as

a carminative with a mild tranquilizing effect. The stems
are less significant medicinally.

Celery is an important medicinal herb
as well as a vegetable.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Britain and other European
countries, celery is found growing
wild along the English and Welsh
coasts, and in marshlands. Widely
grown as a vegetable, cultivated
celery is less fragrant than the

wild variety. It is propagated from
seed in spring and harvested

from midsummer to autumn.

Related Species

Celeriac (A. graveolens var. rapaceum)
is a “turnip-rooted” variety of celery.
A medicinal food, it has some of the
same qualities as celery.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (1.5—3%) containing
limonene (60-70%), phthalides,
and beta-selinene

= Coumarins

= Furanocoumarins (bergapten)

= Flavonoids (apiin)

Key Actions
= Antirheumatic
= Carminative

= Antispasmodic

= Diuretic

= Lowers blood pressure
= Urinary antiseptic

= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Volatile oil Research in the 1970s
and 1980s showed that the volatile oil
has a calming effect on the central
nervous system.

= Other research A 1995 study in
India found the seeds to have marked
iver-protective activity. Extracts of
the seeds may also lower blood fat
levels. Iranian laboratory research
from 2013 found that celery seed
had a marked effect in lowering high
blood pressure.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Ancient herb Records show
that celery has been cultivated

for at least 3,000 years, notably in
pharaonic Egypt, and it was known
in China in the 5th century Bce.
Throughout history, celery has been
used as a food, and at various times
both the whole plant and the seeds
have been taken medicinally.

= Cleansing properties Today,
the seeds are used for treating
rheumatic conditions and gout.
They help the kidneys dispose of
urates and other waste products,
and work to reduce acidity in the
body as a whole. The seeds are
useful in arthritis, helping to
detoxify the body and improve

the circulation of blood to the
muscles and joints.

= Diuretic Celery seeds have

a mildly diuretic and significantly
antiseptic action. They are an

Celery

A biennial with a
ridged shiny stem,
glossy leaves, and small
flowers, growing to
about 20 in (50 cm).

& Parts Used

Stems are eaten as a nourishing
vegetable and made into juice.

Divided
toothed leaves
are aromatic

Seeds contain
volatile oil and
are the main part
used medicinally.

Fi Key Preparations

& Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take celery seed during pregnancy or

if suffering from kidney disease. Do not use seeds sold for
cultivation in medicinal preparations. Do not take the essential
oil internally except under professional supervision.

Remedy As a cleansing drink,
take % cup (150 ml) of
organic carrot and celery
juice a day.

Infusion of seeds (to
make, p. 291). For gout
and arthritis, take 74 cup
(150 ml) daily.

Tincture of seeds (to make, p. 292).
For rheumatism, take 30 drops 3 times a day.

<>» Powder of seeds. For arthritis, mix | tsp with food each day.

effective treatment for cystitis,
helping to disinfect the bladder and
urinary tubules.

= Nutritious drink Celery and
organic carrot juice make a nutritious,

beneficial for chest problems such
as asthma and bronchitis, and, in
combination with other herbs, can
help to reduce blood pressure.

cleansing drink that is good for many Self-help Uses
chronic illnesses. = Arthritis, p. 313.
= Other uses Celery seeds are = Gout, p. 313.

----- PAGE 67 -----
and chronic skin problems. The root and the seeds help
to cleanse the body of waste products, and the root is
thought to be particularly good at helping to eliminate
heavy metals.

US. Burdock is also cultivated in
Europe and China and is propagated
from seed in spring. The seeds are
harvested in summer and the whole
plant is unearthed in high summer.

Related Species

A. minus and A. tomentosum are
related species that are used in
a similar way to burdock.

Key Constituents

= Bitter glycosides (arctiopicrin)
= Flavonoids (arctiin)

= Tannins

Burdock in its first year produces a rosette
of large leaves.

Habitat & Cultivation m Polyacetylenes

& Parts Used

Leaves and fruit (containing seeds)
are harvested in late summer.

Dried root is
most used to aid
detoxification.

Fruit is covered
in hooked bracts

= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Antibiotic Studies in Germany
(1967) and Japan (1986) showed
that the polyacetylenes, especially
within the fresh root, have an
antibiotic effect.

= Other research Burdock has
antibacterial and antifungal properties,
and diuretic and hypoglycemic
(lowering blood-sugar levels) effects.
It also seems to have an anti-tumor
action. Recent studies suggest

the seeds are anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant, and hepatoprotective.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= History Burdock was a

traditional remedy for gout, fevers,
and kidney stones. In the |7th century,

¥
ape

Burdock

and measles, and the root helps the
body to eliminate waste products in
chronic skin and arthritic conditions.
a Skin problems Burdock's
diuretic, antibiotic, and mildly bitter
actions make it helpful for skin
disorders, especially where toxicity
is a key factor, such as in acne,
abscesses, local skin infections,
eczema, and psoriasis.

= Combination remedies

Arctium lappa (Asteraceae) x ve A biennial, with &
stems that grow to 5 ft RR

cos
RB d | . . . SAK" (1.5m), reddish-purple |
UPrAOCK, Niu Bang Zi (Chinese) ARS flower heads, and x
DIS hooked bracts. z
Burdock is one of the foremost detoxifying herbs in Key Actions = Cleansing herb Burdock is used 5
both Western and Chinese herbal medicine. It is used a Detoxifying in both Western and Chinese herbal
to treat conditions caused by an “overload” of toxins, = Mild diuretic medicine as a detoxifyingherb. The |
such as throat and other infections, boils and rashes, = Antibiotic seeds are used to remove toxins in >
= Antiseptic fevers and infections such as mumps ia
ac]
>
Z
4
nN

Burdock is rarely used on its own

in remedies. It is generally mixed with
herbs such as dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale, p. 141) or yellow dock
(Rumex crispus, p. 264). These help
the body to remove accumulated
waste products drawn out of tissues
by burdock's detoxifying action. Use
of burdock alone can cause a flare-up
of skin conditions such as eczema.

Native to Europe and Asia, burdock = Volatile oil Culpeper wrote, “The seedis much Self-help Uses
now grows in temperate regions = Inulin (up to 45%) commended to break the stone and = Acne & boils, p. 305.
throughout the world, including the = Lignans cause it to be expelled by urine.’ = Skin rashes, p. 303.

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Cautions Very rarely can cause contact dermatitis.

Remedy For pimples, make
a decoction (see p. 291) with
2 tsp burdock root and 5 tsp
dandelion root. Drink #4 cup
(150 ml) twice a day.

Dandelion

Tincture of root (to make, p. 292).
For arthritis and skin disorders,
take 20 drops diluted with water
2-3 times a day for up to 4 weeks.

Fresh leaves

Seeds have

cleansing «=» Decoction of root (to make, p. 291) is an alternative to tincture for \

and diuretic arthritis and skin disorders. Drink 7 tsp once a day for up to 4 weeks. pe
. \

properties. <> Infusion of seeds (to make, p. 291). Use as a wash for acne and boils. i

Seeds Dried leaves » Poultice of leaves (to make, p. 295). Apply to abscesses and boils.

----- PAGE 68 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

66

Artemisia absinthium (Asteraceae)

Wormwood

One of the truly bitter plants—absinthium means
“without sweetness’’—wormwood has a strong tonic
effect on the digestive system, especially on the stomach
and gallbladder. It is taken in small doses and sipped, the
intensely bitter taste playing an important part in its
therapeutic effect. In the past, wormwood was one of
the main flavorings of vermouth (whose name derives
from the German for wormwood).

Wormwood is strongly aromatic
and was used to flavor many
alcoholic drinks.

Habitat & Cultivation
Wormwood is a wayside plant, native to
Europe. It now grows wild in central
Asia and in eastern parts of the U.S. It is
also cultivated in temperate regions
worldwide. Wormwood is propagated
from seed in spring or by dividing the
roots in autumn. The aerial parts are
harvested in late summer.

Related Species

Artemisia species with a medicinal
use include A. abrotanum (p. 172);
A. annua (p. 67); A. anomala;

A. capillaris and A. cina (p. 172);

A. vulgaris and A. dracunculus (p. 173).

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil containing
sesquiterpene lactones (artabsin,
anabsinthin); thujone; azulenes

m= Flavonoids

= Polyphenols

= Lignans

Key Actions
= Aromatic bitter
= Stimulates secretion of bile

= Anti-inflammatory
= Eases stomach pain
a Mild antidepressant
= Antimicrobial

= Antiparasitic

Research

= Bitter herb Research into
wormwood, mostly during the 1970s,
has established that a range of

the constituents within the plant
contributes to its medicinal activity.
Many are very bitter, affecting the
bitter taste receptors on the tongue
which sets off a reflex action,
stimulating stomach and other
digestive secretions.

= Gut inflammation A German
clinical trial in 2007 found that
wormwood helped in treating
Crohn's disease (an inflammatory
bowel disorder). Wormwood
prevented the return of symptoms in
90% of those taking it, and reduced
required dosage of powerful steroid
drugs taken to control inflammation.
Patients also experienced lower
levels of depression.

= Other research Constituents
within wormwood, notably the
essential oil, are thought to have
wide-ranging therapeutic effects,
including neuroprotective,
antidepressant, antibacterial,
antifungal, and antimalarial activity.

Traditional &

Current Uses

a Absinthe Wormwood is the
source of absinthe, an addictive
drink favored in | 9th-century
France. Flavored with wormwood
essential oil, absinthe was toxic due
to its high level of thujone. This is

& Parts Used

Aerial parts
are used as
an insect
repellent

Fresh leaves

Wormwood

. A perennial reaching
3 ft (1 m), with gray-
green stems and
feathery leaves, both
covered in fine hairs.

Aerial parts contain
bitter substances and
have a wide range of
medicinal uses.

Fresh
aerial parts

Dried aerial parts

Fikey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only under professional supervision. Take only in small doses,
generally for no more than 4-5 weeks at a time. Do not take during pregnancy.

Infusion made from wormwood can be

taken in small doses to stimulate appetite.

a nerve stimulant that is safe at low
dosage but is toxic in excess.

= Digestive stimulant
Wormwood is an extremely useful
medicine for those with weak and
underactive digestion. It increases
stomach acid and bile production and
therefore improves digestion and the
absorption of nutrients, making it
helpful for many conditions, including
anemia. Wormwood also eases gas
and bloating and, if the tincture is
taken regularly, it slowly strengthens
digestion and helps the body return
to full vitality and wellness after a
prolonged illness.

Tincture is used to treat
chronic digestive infections.

= Worms Wormwood is commonly
used by herbalists and naturopaths
to treat parasitic infections of the gut,
such as worm infestation, amebic
dysentery, and Shigella infection.

= Traditional insect repellent
Wormwood is a good insecticide and
insect repellent.

= Other uses The anti-inflammatory
action of wormwood makes it useful
for infections, and it has occasionally
been given as an antidepressant.

Self-help Uses
= Anemia, p. 301.
= High fever, p. 311.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Artemisia annua (Asteraceae)

Sweet Annie, Qing Hao

Until the 1970s, sweet Annie was regarded as just another
Artemisia, though one used in traditional Chinese medicine
for treating malaria. After extensive research, sweet Annie
and its key constituent artemisinin were shown to have
powerful antimalarial activity and few side effects.
Artemisinin rapidly became the key treatment for severe
malaria worldwide, and is still the treatment of choice in

many acute cases of the illness.

Sweet Annie has bright green, saw-toothed
leaves. It is used widely around the world as
an effective antimalarial.

Habitat & Cultivation
Sweet Annie grows in grasslands and
in open areas in Vietnam, Japan, China,
Russia, and North America. It is
cultivated in eastern China. The herb
is propagated from seed in spring
or by dividing the rootstock in
autumn. It is harvested in summer
before flowering.

Related Species

The related A. apiacea is used
interchangeably with sweet Annie

in China and is employed as a
general tonic in Vietnam. Many
other Artemisia species are used
medicinally: A. abrotanum (p. 172);
A. absinthium (p. 66); A. capillaris and
A. cina (p. 172); A. dracunculus and A.
vulgaris (p. 173).

Key Constituents

= Artemisinin (sesquiterpene
lactone)

= Essential oil (abrotamine, beta-
bourbonene)

m= Flavonoids

= Polyphenols

Key Actions
a= Bitter

= Reduces fever
= Antimalarial

= Antiparasitic

= Anti-cancer

Research

= Chinese research Sweet Annie
was extensively researched in China
in the 1980s, and studies have
demonstrated that its key active
constituent is an effective antimalarial,
having a powerful action against the
malaria parasite Plasmodium, a
protozoan introduced into the body
by the mosquito.

= Artemisinin Clinical trials,
notably in Thailand, show that it can
provide vital treatment in the acute
stages of malaria, proving up to 90%
effective in countering the infection.
Artemisinin has a lesser role to play
in chronic malaria and prevention of
the disease.

= Anti-cancer potential
Laboratory studies suggest that
sweet Annie has marked anti-
cancer activity, promoting
programmed cell death and inhibiting
blood vessel growth. No clinical
trials have so far been undertaken,
but sweet Annie is claimed to be
useful particularly in breast cancer
and leukemia. Synthetic molecules
modelled on artemisinin are also

being researched as potential anti-
cancer drugs.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= History The first mention of
sweet Annie was in a Chinese text of
168 Bce. Traditionally, it was seen as

& Parts Used

Leaves contain
artemisinin, which
is a powerful
antimalarial.

Dried leaves

Sweet Annie
A perennial growing to
about 3 ft (1 m), with
green feathery leaves
covered in fine hairs.

Leaves are
harvested
in summer

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

Fresh leaves

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Only take sweet Annie under professional supervision.

Do not take during pregnancy.

Tincture is prescribed to prevent malaria.
It is also used to treat the illness itself.

Infusion is strongly bitter. Herbalists.
use it to treat headaches and fever.

«> Tablets containing artemisinin, which is extracted from the herb, are taken for

malaria throughout the tropics.

an herb that helped ‘to clear and
relieve summer heat.”

= Cooling properties Sweet
Annie has a cool, bitter taste and is
used for conditions brought

on by heat, especially with symptoms
such as fever, headaches, dizziness,
and a tight-chested sensation. It is
used to treat chronic fevers, night
fevers, and morning chills and is a
traditional remedy for nosebleeds
associated with heat.

= Antimalarial Sweet Annie has
been used to treat the fevers

and chills of malaria for thousands
of years, and artemisinin is now used
in many countries as an antimalarial.
Artemisinin reduces the risk of
developing malaria and aids a quick
recovery, though drug resistance to it
is now being seen. The whole plant
may also be used to treat malaria and
act as a preventative, though large
doses are required. 67

----- PAGE 70 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

68

Astragalus membranaceus (Fabaceae)

Astragalus, Milk Vetch, Huang Qi (Chinese)

Despite the fact that astragalus is one of the most
popular tonic herbs in China, it is not that well known
in the West. In China, the root, known as huang gi, has
been used for thousands of years. It has a sweet taste
and is a warming tonic particularly suited to young,
active people, increasing stamina and endurance, and
improving resistance to the cold. It is often combined
with other herbs as a blood tonic.

found that 5 ga day of astragalus root

Astragalus is a typical member of the pea
family and is closely related to liqorice.

Habitat & Cultivation
Astragalus is native to Mongolia
and northern and eastern China.
It is grown from seed in spring or
autumn and thrives in sandy, well-
drained soil, with plenty of sun.
The roots of 4-year-old plants are
harvested in autumn.

Key Constituents

= Triterpene saponins
(astragolosides)

= Isoflavonoids (formonentin)

= Polysaccharides

= Phytosterols

Key Actions

= Adaptogenic

= Immune stimulant
= Diuretic

= Vasodilator

a= Antiviral

Research

= Chinese investigations
Investigations in China indicate that
astragalus is diuretic and that it lowers
blood pressure and increases
endurance. A 2012 clinical trial

helped to stabilize kidney function in
Patients with chronic kidney disease,
delaying the need for dialysis.

= Western research Recent
American research has focused on
the ability of astragalus to restore
normal immune function in cancer
patients. Clinical evidence suggests
that, as with a number of other
herbs, cancer patients undergoing
chemotherapy or radiotherapy
recover faster and live longer if
given astragalus concurrently.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Tonic & endurance remedy
Astragalus is a classic energy
tonic, perhaps even superior to
ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. | 18)

for young people. In China, it is
believed to warm and tone the
wei gi (a protective energy that
circulates just beneath the skin),
helping the body to adapt to
external influences, especially to
the cold. Astragalus raises immune
resistance and manifestly improves
physical endurance.

= Control of fluids Though a
vasodilator (encouraging blood to
flow to the surface), astragalus is

used for excessive sweating, including

night sweats. It is also helpful in both
relieving fluid retention and reducing
thirstiness. It supports normal kidney
function and is thought to protect
the kidneys from damage.

= Immune stimulant Not an
herb for acute illness, astragalus is
nonetheless a very useful medicine
for viral infections such as the
common cold.

Astragalus
A perennial growing

* to 16 in (40 cm) with
hairy stems and leaves
divided into 12-18 pairs
of leaflets.

& Parts Used

Root is a traditional tonic remedy
in China, improving energy levels
and helping the body to resist cold.

Dried root

© Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take astragalus if suffering from skin disorders,
or during acute illness.

Decoction For anemia, make a decoction

(see p. 291) with 12 g root and 12 g Chinese
angelica. Take | cups (300 ml) daily.

angelica

Astragalus

Dry-fried root As a stimulant tonic,
each day fry 5-10 g root by itself

Q or with | tsp of honey and eat
with meals.
Remedy For cold and numbness, make
a decoction (see p. 291) with 20 g root
and 5 g cinnamon. Drink % cup (150 ml)
twice a day.
a

Cinnamon

_-®* Tincture (to make, p. 292). For night sweats, take | tsp with water
: |-2 times daily.

= Other uses Astragalus is used to
treat prolapsed organs, especially
the uterus, and it is beneficial for
uterine bleeding. Astragalus is often

used in combination with dong
quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63) in
order to act as a blood tonic for
treating anemia.

----- PAGE 71 -----
; ATROPA

Atropa belladonna (Solanaceae)

Deadly Nightshade, Belladonna

Although deadly nightshade conjures up images of
poison and death, like many plants it is an important
and beneficial remedy when used correctly. Some of
its constituents are employed in conventional medicine,
for example to dilate the pupils for eye examinations
and as an anesthetic. In herbal medicine, deadly
nightshade is mainly prescribed to relieve intestinal

colic and to treat peptic ulcers.

Deadly nightshade produces unmistakable
cherry-sized, glossy black berries
in autumn.

Habitat & Cultivation
Deadly nightshade is native to
Europe, western Asia, and northern
Africa, and is now cultivated
worldwide. It thrives in chalky soils,
in woods, and in open areas. The
leaves are harvested in summer, and
the root is collected from the first
year onward in autumn.

Related Species

Many of the Solanaceae family

are powerful medicines, including

eggplant (Solanum melongena,

p. 270), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum,
p. 240), and henbane (Hyoscyamus
niger, p. 220).

Key Constituents

= Tropane alkaloids (up to 0.6%),
including hyoscyamine and atropine

m= Flavonoids

= Coumarins

= Volatile bases (nicotine)

Key Actions
= Smooth muscle antispasmodic
= Narcotic

m Reduces sweating
m= Sedative

Research

= Tropane alkaloids, The action
of the tropane alkaloids is well
understood. They inhibit the
parasympathetic nervous system,
which controls involuntary bodily
activities. This reduces saliva; gastric,
intestinal, and bronchial secretions;
as well as the activity of the urinary
tubules, bladder, and intestines.
Tropane alkaloids also increase
heart rate and dilate the pupils.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Folklore Deadly nightshade was
believed to help witches fly. Its other
name ‘belladonna’ (beautiful woman)
is thought to refer to its use by Italian
women to dilate the pupils of their
eyes, making them more attractive.

= Relaxant Deadly nightshade

has been used in the same way
throughout history. It is prescribed
to relax distended organs, especially
the stomach and intestines, relieving
intestinal colic and pain. It helps
peptic ulcers by reducing gastric

acid production, and it relaxes
spasms of the urinary tubules.

= Parkinson’s disease The herb
can be used to treat the symptoms
of Parkinson's disease, reducing
tremors and rigidity, and improving
speech and mobility.

= Anesthetic muscle-relaxant
properties of deadly nightshade make
it useful in conventional medicine as
an anesthetic, particularly when
digestive or bronchial secretions
need to be kept to a minimum.

BELLADONNA

Deadly nightshade
A perennial with large
' leaves and black
berries, growing to

5 ft (1.5 m).

& Parts Used

Leaves are harvested in early summer.
They have a weaker action than the root,
and are more commonly used.

SLNV1Id TVNIDOIGHW AM

Dried leaves

Leaves, like the root,
have relaxant
properties.

Fresh leaves

Root is collected
in autumn.

Fresh root Dried root

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only if prescribed by a medical herbalist or doctor.
Deadly nightshade can be fatal if taken at the wrong dosage.

Tincture, made from the leaves or the root,

is a strong relaxant. It is prescribed by herbal |
practitioners to relieve colic and to treat \
Parkinson's disease.

----- PAGE 72 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

|

70

Neem, Margosa Ti

Azadirachta indica (Meliaceae)

ree

Neem is one of the most valued herbs in Indian and

Ayurvedic medicine. Extrac

s of the leaves are used to

treat conditions such as asthma, eczema, diabetes, and

rheumatism, while neem oi
lotion, to treat headlice, and

has been applied as a hair
to calm angry skin rashes.

Research indicates that neem may prove useful as an

insecticide and a contracep

ive. The tree itself is said

to purify the air and is widely planted in India.

Neem has so many medicinal uses that the
tree is considered a “natural pharmacy.”

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Iran, Pakistan, India, and
Sri Lanka, neem is found throughout
the subcontinent in forests and
woods, often being planted on
roads to provide shade. It is now
naturalized in other tropical regions,
including Malaysia, Indonesia,
Australia, and West Africa. It is
grown from seed. Leaves and seed
are harvested throughout the year.

Related Species

Melia azedarach, also an Indian plant,
is a very close relative with particular
value in treating intestinal worms. It is
often used as a substitute for neem.

Key Constituents
= Meliacins

= Liminoids

= Triterpenoid bitters

= Sterols

= Tannins

= Flavonoids

Key Actions
= Anti-inflammatory
= Lowers fever

= Antimicrobial

= Promotes wound healing
= Antiparasitic

= Antimalarial

Research

= Recent research This indicates
that neem oil is both anti-inflammatory
and antibacterial, and to some degree
reduces fever and lowers blood-
sugar levels.
= Insecticide Extensive research
shows that liminoid azadirachtins are
insecticidal and inhibit feeding and
growth—making neem an inexpensive
and ecologically sound insecticidal
agent. The azadirachtins are also linked
to the tree's antimalarial activity.

= Diabetes Research indicates that
neem leaf and oil act to stabilize blood-

sugar levels and may be helpful in
treating or delaying type 2 diabetes.

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Medicine chest Thought of in
India as almost a pharmacy in its own
right, all parts of the neem tree may
be used medicinally. The bark is bitter
and astringent and a decoction is used
for hemorrhoids. The leaves are taken
as an infusion for malaria, peptic ulcers,
and intestinal worms, and may be
applied locally as a juice, infusion, or
ointment to skin problems including
ulcers, wounds, boils, and eczema.
The juice of the leaves is also
applied to the eyes to treat night
blindness and conjunctivitis. The twigs
are used as a tooth cleanser, firming
up the gums and preventing

gum disease.

= Neem oil and sap Neem

oil, expressed from the seeds,

& Parts Used

Leaves can be infused and
applied as a lotion to many skin
rashes, including acne, eczema,
and psoriasis.

Twigs are

used as toothpicks
to improve oral
hygiene.

Seeds contain neem oil, which

can be expressed and used to treat

headlice in adults and children.

Neem

An evergreen tree,
growing to 52 ft (16 m),
with compound leaves
and white flowers.

b

Fresh seeds

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take during pregnancy, while breastfeeding, or during fertility
treatment. In children, use topically only. Long term high-dose treatment is not advisable.

Oil from the seeds is used to prevent and
treat infestations of headlice. Apply daily
to the scalp.

2)

Cream (to make, p. 296)
_ is used to treat many skin
disorders, including eczema.
Apply as required.

.® Tincture (to make, p. 292) is bitter and can be used to treat fevers.

~~» Infusion of the leaves (to make, p. 291) can be used for conjuctivitis.

ee Decoction of the bark (to make, p. 291) is strongly bitter and astringent.

is commonly used as a hair dressing
and is strongly antifungal and
antiviral, preventing scabies and
ringworm, among other things.

It can be made into a useful and

easily applied treatment for headlice.

The oil is also used to treat skin

conditions such as eczema,

psoriasis, and even leprosy, and as

a vehicle for other active ingredients.
Neem oil should be avoided when
attempting to conceive a child as

it can reduce fertility in both
women and men.

----- PAGE 73 -----
Barosma betulina syn. Agathosma betulina (Rutaceae)

Buchu

A traditional South African remedy, buchu is taken as a
stimulant, a diuretic, and to relieve digestive complaints.
In Western herbal medicine, it is valued as a urinary
antiseptic and diuretic, and is used specifically to treat
cystitis and other infections of the urinary tract. Buchu
has a strongly distinctive aroma and taste, reminiscent
of black currant but described by some as a mixture
between rosemary and peppermint.

Buchu

A bushy shrub growing
to 6% ft (2 m), with
stemless, slightly
leathery leaves dotted
with oil glands.

Parts Used

Leaves are harvested
in summer and used
in preparations for
urinary infections.

Leaves contain
volatile oil, which
= Stimulant is antiseptic

= Uterine stimulant

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional remedy Buchu is

a traditional remedy of the Khoisan
people of South Africa. It is used as
a general stimulant and a diuretic.
Strongly aromatic, it is taken as a
carminative, helping to relieve gas
and bloating.

= Early Western uses The herb
was first exported to Britain in

1790 and became an official medicine
in 1821, being listed in the British
Pharmacopoeia as an effective
remedy for “cystitis, urethritis,
nephritis, and catarrh of the bladder.’
= Modern urinary treatment
Broadly speaking, buchu is used today
in Western herbal medicine for the

Dried leaves

Buchu is grown commercially and used to
enhance the black-currant flavor of cassis.

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions During pregnancy take only on advice of your health care practitioner.
Habitat & Cultivation Potentially toxic at excessive dosage.
Buchu is native to South Africa,
where is it widely cultivated on
hillsides. It is also grown in parts
of South America. The herb is
grown from cuttings in late summer
and requires well-drained soil

and plenty of sun. The leaves

are harvested when the plant is

flowering or fruiting in summer.

same type of urinary complaints as
in the 19th century. It is commonly at
prescribed for urinary tract infections, Infusion (to make, p. 291).
often proving effective in curing acute For prostatitis, drink % cup
cystitis when combined with other (150 m) twice a day.
herbs such as cornsilk (Zea mays,

p. 154) and juniper (Juniperus
communis, p. 224). Taken regularly, it
can help to prevent recurrent attacks
of chronic cystitis or urethritis. It is
also taken for prostatitis and irritable
bladder, often in combination with
herbs such as uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For chronic urinary infections,
take 40 drops with water
3 times a day.

Related Species

Two closely related species,

B. crenulata and B. serratifolia,

are used in a similar way to buchu,
but contain less volatile oil and

. Cc les (t ke, p. 292).
are not so effective. apsules (to make, p. 292)

For cystitis, take a 500 mg
capsule twice daily.

Key Constituents
= Volatile oil (1.5-2.5%),

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adm ©

including pulegone, menthone,
diosphenol

= Sulphur compounds

= Flavonoids (diosmin, rutin)

a Mucilage

Key Actions
= Urinary antiseptic
= Diuretic

uva-ursi, p. |70) and cornsilk. The key
active constituent diosphenol has a
diuretic action, and may partly
account for the herb's antiseptic
effect on the urinary system.

= Gynecological uses Buchu
infusion or tincture is useful in
treatments for cystitis and urethritis,
especially when they are related to a

pre-existing Candida problem, such as

yeast infections. The infusion is generally

preferable to the tincture, particularly
when onset of infection is sudden. The
infusion is also used as a douche for
leukorrhea (white vaginal discharge),
and occasionally for yeast infections.
The herb is a uterine stimulant and

contains pulegone, which is also present

in large quantities in pennyroyal
(Mentha pulegium, p. 235). Pulegone
is an abortifacient and a powerful
emmenagogue (stimulates menstrual
flow). Buchu should not, therefore,
be taken during pregnancy.

Self-help Use

= Urinary infections, p. 314.

7\

----- PAGE 74 -----
4
| Bupleurum chinense syn. B. scorzoneraefolium (Apiaceae) eee en a rowing
Ha a 3 ft ( m) igh, with
. . “ sickle-shaped leaves
a Bu pleu CUM, Hare's Ear Root, Chai Hu (Chinese) and clusters of small
= yellow flowers.
First mentioned in texts from the Ist century BCE,
z bupleurum is one of China's “‘harmony’” herbs, balancing & Parts Used
2 different organs and energies within the body. It is used Root is harvested in spring and
YZ asa tonic, strengthening the action of the digestive tract, autumn, when it contains the
2 improving liver function, and helping to push blood to most nutrients. It is used to
= the surface of the body. Recent research in Japan has make a valuable liver tonic.
> endorsed traditional use, showing that bupleurum
wv protects the liver.
are potent medicines. They appear
to protect the liver from toxicity,
and strengthen liver function, even
in people with immune system
disorders. Following this discovery, Sliced dried
clinical trials during the 1980s in Japan root
showed that the root is effective in
the treatment of hepatitis and other
chronic liver problems. Saikosides
also have antitumor activity.
= Anti-inflammatory The
saikosides stimulate the body's
Bupleurum is commonly on sale in medicinal production of corticosteroids ,
herb shops in China. It is widely taken as as well as increasing their anti-
a liver tonic. inflammatory effect.
; . . Fi Key Preparations
Habitat & Cultivation Traditional & Their Uses
Bupleurum grows in China and is & Current Uses
cultivated throughout the central = Ancient Chinese remedy @ Cautions Do not exceed the dose. Can occasionally cause nausea or vomiting.
and eastern parts of that country. Bupleurum has been taken in China
It is also found in other parts of for over 2,000 years as a liver tonic. It Bupleurum
Asia and in Europe. Bupleurum is is traditionally believed to strengthen
propagated from seed in spring liver gi and to have a tonic action on Liquorice
or by root division in autumn and the spleen and stomach. In Chinese =
requires well-drained soil and plenty medicine, bupleurum is used to treat
of sun. The root is unearthed “disharmony’’ between the liver and
in spring and autumn. the spleen, a condition that manifests
itself in problems of the digestive
Key Constituents system such as abdominal pain, ‘
= Triterpenoid saponins—saikosides _ bloating, nausea, and indigestion.
(saikosaponins) = Liver problems In common -
= Flavonoids with milk thistle (Carduus marianus, Decoction (to make, -
= Polysaccharides p. 75) and members of the Glycyrrhiza oan ) To suimuats sweating Remedy To improve liver function, decoct
genus, for example licorice (G. glabra, % cup (150 ml) 3 times a day. 15 g bupleurum, 5 g licorice, and 3 cups
Key Actions p. 103), bupleurum is an excellent (750 ml) water (see p. 291). Take in 3 doses
= Protects liver remedy for a poorly functioning during a 24-hour period.
= Anti-inflammatory or compromised liver. Its anti-
= Tonic inflammatory action may contribute and either vomiting and abdominal now use extracts of bupleurum root
= Induces sweating to its overall use in the treatment pain, or dizziness and vertigo. to treat patients with liver problems.
of liver disease. = Modern Japanese remedy = Other uses Bupleurum is
Research = Fever In China, bupleurum is The traditional uses of bupleurum sometimes useful in the treatment
go = Saikosides Research in Japan from _taken to treat fevers, flu, and colds, and scientific research accord so well of hemorrhoids, and of prolapsed
the 1960s onward into the Bupleurum especially where accompanied by a that many Japanese doctors practic- tissue in the pelvis, such as a prolapse
72 | genus has revealed that the saikosides —_ bitter taste in the mouth, irritability, ing conventional Western medicine of the uterus.

----- PAGE 75 -----
Calendula officinalis (Asteraceae)

Calendula, Pot Marigold, English Marigold

Calendula is one of the most well known and versatile
herbs in Western herbal medicine. The bright orange
petals are an excellent remedy for inflamed and angry
skin, their antiseptic and healing properties helping to
prevent the spread of infection and speed up the rate
of repair. Calendula is also a cleansing and detoxifying

herb, and the infusion and tincture are used to

chronic infections.

Calendula’s colorful flowers were thought to
lift the spirits and encourage cheerfulness.

Habitat & Cultivation
Calendula, native to southern
Europe, is cultivated in temperate
regions around the world. Easily
propagated from seed, it flourishes in
almost all soils. The flowers are
harvested as they open in early
summer, and are dried in the shade.

Related Species

C. arvense, a wild species, seems to
have similar therapeutic properties
to calendula.

Key Constituents
= Triterpenes

= Resins

= Bitter glycosides

= Volatile oil

= Phytosterols

= Flavonoids

a Mucilage

= Carotenes

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory

= Relieves muscle spasms
= Astringent

= Prevents hemorrhaging

reat

= Heals wounds

= Antimicrobial

= Detoxifying

a Mildly estrogenic

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Therapeutic properties
Calendula is antiseptic. Some
constituents are antifungal (particularly
the resins), antibacterial, and antiviral,
and have shown significant activity
against Candida albicans. The herb also
astringes the capillaries, an action that
explains its effectiveness for cuts,
wounds, varicose veins, and various
inflammatory conditions.

a Skin remedy Calendula is above
all a remedy for the skin, providing
effective treatment for most minor
skin problems. It is used for cuts,
scrapes, and wounds; for red and
inflamed skin, including minor burns
and sunburn; for acne and many
rashes; and for fungal conditions such
as ringworm, athlete's foot, and thrush.
It is very helpful for diaper rash and
cradle cap, and soothes nipples that
are sore from breastfeeding.

= Digestive disorders Taken
internally, calendula infusion or
tincture helps inflammatory
problems of the digestive system
such as gastritis, peptic ulcers,
regional ileitis, and colitis.

= Detoxifying Calendula has long
been considered a detoxifying herb,
and helps treat the toxicity that
underlies many fevers and infections,
and systemic skin disorders, such as
eczema and acne. The herb is also
considered cleansing for the liver and
gallbladder and can be used to treat
problems affecting these organs.

& Parts Used

Flowers are harvested in
summer. Flower heads and
petals are removed for use in
a wide range of preparations.

Dried
petals

A
SJ

Dried flower
head

Fresh
flower heads

Bright orange
petals indicate
a high level of
active ingredients

: oF:
ty (= Calendula
\ he An annual growing
‘a to 2 ft (60 cm),
vl y i with vivid orange
W flower heads similar in

structure to daisies.

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution May cause allergic reaction in rare cases.

Infusion (to make, p. 291). For chronic
fungal infections, such as ringworm
or thrush, drink % cup (150 ml)

3 times a day.

2-3 times a day.

Cream is easy to make (see p. 296).
Apply to cuts and grazes.

Ointment (to make,
p. 295). For minor burns,
apply up to 3 times a day.

Infused oil (to make, p. 294). For inflamed dry skin, rub into the area

»* Tincture (to make, p. 292). For eczema, take 30 drops with water 3 times a day.

= Gynecological uses Calendula
has a mild estrogenic action and

is often used to help reduce pain
during menstruation and to regulate
menstrual bleeding. The infusion
makes an effective douche for
yeast infections.

Self-help Uses
= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Athlete's foot, p. 304.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Breast tenderness & sore
nipples, p. 315.

= Digestive infections, p. 305.

a Inflamed skin rashes, p. 303.

= Diaper rash, p. 318.

= Hives, p. 303.

= Varicose veins, p. 302.

= Wounds & bruises, p. 304.

SLNV1Id TVNIOIGHW AdM

——
~~

73

----- PAGE 76 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Capsicum annuum & C. frutescens (Solanaceae)

Cayenne, Cayenne Pepper, Chili

Originally from the tropical regions of the Americas,
cayenne was first introduced to Europe in the | 6th
century. In cooking, it is renowned for its hot, burning
taste, and it is not surprising to learn that, medicinally,
it is a powerful warming stimulant. It acts on the
circulation and digestion and is used to treat a wide
range of complaints from arthritis and chilblains to colic

~- Cayenne

A perennial, spiky
shrub growing to 3 ft
(| m), with scarlet-red
conical fruits filled with
white seeds.

£3 Parts Used

Fruit improves digestion
and circulation.

and diarrhea.

Cayenne is so popular in Mexico where it
originates that it is even used to flavor
ice cream.

Habitat & Cultivation
Cayenne is native to the tropical
Americas, and is now cultivated
throughout the tropics, especially
in Africa and India. It is grown from
seed in early spring and flourishes
in hot, moist conditions. The fruit
is harvested when ripe in summer
and is dried in the shade.

Related Species

Many closely related species and
varieties of C. frutescens exist, all
with different grades of pungency.
Paprika, or Hungarian pepper (one
of the mildest peppers), and the
large green and red peppers that
are eaten as vegetables are both
varieties of C. annuum and are
important medicinal foods.

Key Constituents

= Capsaicin (0.!—1.5%)

= Carotenoids

m= Flavonoids

a Volatile oil

= Steroidal saponins
(capsicidins—in seeds only)

Key Actions

= Stimulant

= Tonic

= Carminative

= Relieves muscle spasms

= Antiseptic

= Increases sweating

= Increases blood flow to the skin
= Analgesic

Research

= Capsaicin Extensive clinical
research shows that capsaicin, the
compound in cayenne mostly
responsible for its hot, pungent taste,
has strong, local analgesic activity in
certain types of nerve pain. Applied
to the skin, capsaicin desensitizes
nerve endings and acts as a counter-
irritant. It is standardly prescribed for
relief of neuralgic pain. It may also
provide effective pain relief in con-

ditions such as arthritis and headache.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Warming stimulant The herbs
heating qualities make it a valuable
remedy for poor circulation. It
improves blood flow to the hands
and feet and to the central organs.

= Antimicrobial In Mayan herbal
medicine, cayenne was used to
counter microbial infections—
different Capsicum species including
cayenne are now known to have
significant antimicrobial activity.
Adding cayenne to food reduces the
chances of developing gastric or
intestinal infection, and the herb is
frequently used by herbalists to treat
gastroenteritis and dysentery.

= External uses Applied locally

to the skin, cayenne is mildly

Fruit pods grow

Dried fruit

to 4 in (10 cm)

Fresh fruit

© Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Non-toxic at normal doses, although caution is required when
eating or handling cayenne. Can cause intense pain and burning,

and contact dermatitis.

Powder For sore throats, add a pinch to
5 tsp lemon juice. Dilute with hot water,
add honey, and use as a gargle.

we

Infused oil Add 100 g chopped
cayenne to 2 cups (500 ml) oil and
simmer (see p. 294). Gently massage
into rheumatic limbs.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For arthritis,
combine 20 drops with 2 cup (100 ml) willow:
bark tincture. Take | tsp with water twice a day.

> Tablets are convenient for long-term use. Take for poor circulation.

Ointment (to make, p. 295). Apply to chilblains (only if the skin is unbroken).

analgesic. It is also rubefacient,
increasing blood flow to the affected
part, and this helps to stimulate the
circulation in “cold” rheumatic and
arthritic conditions, aiding the
removal of waste products and
increasing the flow of nutrients to
the tissues. Cayenne may also be
applied to unbroken chilblains.

= Internal uses Cayenne is taken
to relieve gas and colic and to

stimulate the secretion of digestive
juices. It may be taken in frequent,
small doses for a weak or failing
heart. A pinch of cayenne is
excellent when used in gargles for
sore throats. Cayenne is also helpful
in relieving acute diarrhea.

Self-help Uses
= High fever, p. 311.
= Poor circulation, p. 302.

----- PAGE 77 -----
Senna

A small perennial
shrub growing to

3 ft (I m), witha
straight, woody stem
and yellow flowers.

Cassia senna syn. Senna alexandrina (Fabaceae)

Sen Na, Alexandrian Senna

Almost everyone will have taken a preparation containing
senna at some time in their lives. Senna is probably one
of the best known herbal medicines, not least because it
is still widely used in conventional medicine. It is a very
efficient laxative and is a particularly useful remedy for
the occasional bout of constipation. It has a slightly bitter,

& Parts Used

Leaves are stronger
in action than the
pods and are not

as commonly used.

nauseating taste, and is therefore generally mixed with

other herbs.

Senna shrubs have pairs of lance-
shaped leaflets arranged on either side
of a central stem.

Habitat & Cultivation
Senna is native to tropical Africa and
is now cultivated throughout that
continent. It is grown from seed in
spring or from cuttings in early summer
and requires plenty of sun. The leaves
may be picked before or while the plant
is in flower, and the pods are collected
when they are ripe in autumn.

Related Species

There are over 400 species of Cassia.
Tinnevelly senna (C. angustifolia) is
grown in the Indian subcontinent and
has the same therapeutic properties
as C. senna. In Ayurvedic medicine,

it is used for skin problems, jaundice,
bronchitis, and anemia, as well as for
constipation. Jue ming zi (C. obtusifolia)
is used in traditional Chinese medicine
for ‘‘liver fire’ patterns, constipation,
and atherosclerosis.

Key Constituents

= Anthraquinone glycosides
(sennosides)

= Naphthalene glycosides

= Mucilage

Dried leaves

= Flavonoids
= Volatile oil

Key Actions
= Stimulant

= Laxative

= Cathartic Fresh leaves
Research

= Sennosides Extensive research
during the last 50 years has led to
a clear understanding of senna's
action. The sennosides irritate the

Pods are milder in effect than
the leaves. They are made into
tablets and other preparations.

M6

Dried pods

lining of the large intestine, causing
the muscles to contract strongly,
resulting in a bowel movement about
10 hours after the dose is taken.

The sennosides also stop fluid being
absorbed from the large intestine,
helping to keep the stool soft.

|

Fresh pods

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Early records The herb was
first used medicinally by Arabian
physicians in the 9th century ce.

= Constipation Senna has always
been specifically used for constipation.
It is particularly appropriate when a
soft stool is required, for example in
cases of anal fissure. Senna is a good
short-term laxative but should not
be taken for more than |0 days as
this leads to weakening of the large
intestine muscles.

= Cathartic As a cathartic (very
strong laxative), senna can cause
cramping and colic, and is therefore
normally taken with aromatic,
carminative herbs that relax the
intestinal muscles.

@ Cautions Do not give to children under 12. Do not take for more than |0 days
at atime. Do not take if suffering from colitis. During pregnancy, take on advice
of your health care practitioner.

Tablets are the standard senna
preparation and are convenient.
Take for occasional constipation

=

Decoction For constipation,
steep 3-6 senna pods and | g
fresh ginger in 34 cup (150 ml)

freshly boiled water for

6-12 hours. Strain and drink.

Infusion For mild constipation,
infuse |—2 senna pods, | g fresh
ginger, and |-2 cloves in % cup
(150 ml) freshly boiled water for

Ginger 15 minutes. Strain and drink.

Self-help Use
= Constipation, p. 307.

.® Tincture is prescribed by herbalists to treat short-term constipation.

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 78 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Centella asiatica syn. Hydrocotyle asiatica (Apiaceae)

Gotu Kola (Hindi), Indian Pennywort

Gotu kola is an ancient Ayurvedic remedy that is now used
extensively in the West. It is a useful tonic and cleansing
herb for skin problems and digestive disorders. In India,

it is used to treat a variety of conditions, including leprosy,
but it is valued chiefly as a revitalizing herb that strengthens
nervous function and memory. It has a bittersweet, acrid
taste, and in India it is sometimes used in salads and as

a vegetable.

seed in spring. The aerial parts are
harvested throughout the year.

Related Species

Marsh pennywort (Hydrocotyle vulgaris)
is a related European species, but,
unlike gotu kola, has no known
therapeutic uses.

Key Constituents

= Triterpenoid saponins (asiaticoside,
brahmoside, thankuniside)

= Alkaloids (hydrocotyline)

a Bitter principles (vellarin)

Gotu kola is found growing wild
throughout India.

Habitat & Cultivation
Gotu kola is native to India and the
southern U.S. It also grows in tropical
and subtropical parts of Australia,

Key Actions
= Wound healer

southern Africa, and South America. = Tonic
It prefers marshy areas and = Anti-inflammatory
riverbanks. Though usually gathered = Sedative

wild, gotu kola can be cultivated from | m= Peripheral vasodilator

& Parts Used

Aerial parts have
valuable tonic and

cleansing properties. In India, fresh leaves are

eaten as a tonic herb in salads

Fresh
aerial parts

eX

Dried aerial parts

Research

= Wound healing Gotu kola has
an established ability to promote
wound healing and tissue repair,
making it useful as a cosmetic agent,
in skin disorders such as psoriasis,
and in arthritis. Asiaticoside, in
particular, has been shown to speed
up collagen formation and the laying
down of new blood vessels. This
healing effect extends to the blood
vessels, so that gotu kola extracts aid
venous repair, notably in chronic
venous insufficiency, a condition that
includes symptoms such as leg
swelling and varicose veins. Recent
US. research has investigated the
effectiveness of high-strength
extracts to help in diabetic neuropathy
(nerve pain due to poor circulation)
with signs of positive benefit.

= Brain function In the last 10
years, research has focused on gotu
kola's ability to relieve anxiety and
support healthy brain function.

A Thai clinical trial in 2008 found that
gotu kola extract improved attention,
working memory, alertness, and

mood in 28 healthy volunteers with
an average age of 65. Another small
study found that gotu kola eased
the symptoms of anxiety.

@ Cautions Can occasionally cause sensitivity to sunlight. Restricted
herb in some countries. May cause allergic reactions in rare cases.

Powder is an important Ayurvedic

remedy. Take |-2 g a day with
water as a general tonic.

-—

_-® Tincture (to make, p. 292). For poor memory and concentration,
take 40 drops with water 3 times a day.

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

| Infusion (to make, p. 291). For
rheumatism, take 7 tsp twice a day.

Gotu kola

A perennial, herbaceous
creeper, growing to 20
in (50 cm), with fan-
shaped leaves.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Wound healing Gotu kola's main
traditional use lies in treating wounds
and skin problems. In Ayurveda, it is
used specifically to promote healing in
skin ulcers and serious skin problems,
as well as to prevent scarring, The herb
may be applied directly to the skin, or
taken internally, where it appears to
promote tissue repair throughout the
body, It supports peripheral circulation
and can be taken to strengthen blood
vessels, e.g. varicose veins. Many
people swear by gotu kola’s ability to
prevent and relieve arthritis and
rheumatic problems.

= Tonic The herb has a longstanding
reputation in India and southern
Asia as a “‘rejuvenator,” aiding
concentration and memory,
particularly in the elderly. In Western
herbal medicine, it is understood to
be an adaptogen and can be taken
long-term to help support healthy
brain function, slow aging, and calm
anxiety. It is also thought to have a
tonic effect on digestion.

Self-help Uses
= Eczema, p. 300.
= Maintaining vitality, p. 319.

Paste made from powder.
Mix 2 tsp powder with 5 tsp
(25 ml) water and apply to
Patches of eczema.

----- PAGE 79 -----
Chamomilla recutita syn. Matricaria recutita (Asteraceae)

German Chamomile

German chamomile’s aromatic, slightly bitter taste,
reminiscent of apples, is familiar to herbal tea drinkers.
The herb’s varied medicinal uses, however, are not as
well known. It is an excellent herb for many digestive
disorders and for nervous tension and irritability.
Externally, it is used for sore skin and eczema. Roman
chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile, p. 187) is a close
relation, used in a similar way.

German chamomile is a useful herb to
cultivate for home use.

Habitat & Cultivation
German chamomile grows in much
of Europe and other temperate
regions. The seeds are sown in spring
or autumn and the flower heads are
picked in full bloom, in summer.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (proazulenes, farnesine,
alpha-bisabolol, spiroether)

= Flavonoids

a= Bitter glycosides (anthemic acid)

= Coumarins

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antiallergenic

= Antispasmodic

= Relaxant

= Carminative

Research

= Trials in Germany A cream
made from German chamomile
was tested in 1987 for its ability to
heal wounds. The results produced
were very positive. In 1993, another
trial using German chamomile and
four other herbs showed them

to be most effective at easing
infantile colic.

= Premenstrual syndrome

An Iranian clinical trial compared
chamomile with mefenamic acid for
relief of premenstrual syndrome
symptoms. Both were found effective
in relieving the physical symptoms

of premenstrual syndrome, but
chamomile proved better in

relieving emotional symptoms.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Digestive problems German
chamomile has been taken for
digestive problems since at least
the |st century ce. Gentle and
efficacious, it is very suitable for
children. The herb is valuable for
pain, indigestion, acidity, gastritis, gas,
bloating, and colic. It is also

used for hiatal hernia, peptic ulcer,
Crohn's disease, and irritable

bowel syndrome.

= Relaxation German chamomile,
which contains spiroether, a strong
antispasmodic, eases tense muscles
and period pain. It is known that
women in ancient Rome commonly
took chamomile to relieve menstrual
cramps. Chamomile flowers also
reduce irritability and promote
sleep—especially helpful for children.
a Irritation The herb is useful

for hay fever and asthma. On steam
distillation, the proazulenes produce
chamazulene, which is markedly
antiallergenic. Externally, it can be
applied to sore, itchy skin, sore
nipples, and eczema. It also relieves
eyestrain. A poultice can be applied
to sore breasts.

Self-help Uses
= Bites & stings, p. 303.

German chamomile
> Asweetly aromatic
annual growing to

2 ft (60 cm), with finely
cut leaves and white
flower heads.

& Parts Used

Flower heads may be used fresh
or dried. They should be picked on
the day they open, when the active
constituents are at their strongest.

%. Fresh flower
5

heads

Flower heads
contain volatile
oil, which has
antiallergenic
compounds

Dried
flower heads

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions The fresh plant can cause dermatitis. Do not take the essential oil
internally except under professional supervision. Take only on professional advice if
using blood-thinning medication. Do not use the oil externally during pregnancy.

Cream (to make,
p. 296). Rub on to
sore or itchy skin.

Essential oil For diaper rash,
combine 5 drops with | tbsp
carrier oil and apply.

Making infusion with flower heads
(see p. 291). For a good night's sleep,
drink 34 cup (150 ml) before bed.

Infusion To relax irritable and overtired children, infuse 4 tsp dried herb
in 2 cups (500 ml) water (see p. 291) and strain into a bath.
Ointment (to make, p. 295). Rub onto sore or inflamed skin.

_® Tincture (to make, p. 292). For irritable bowel syndrome, take | tsp diluted
with 14 cup (100 ml) water 3 times a day.

= Congestion & hay fever, p. 312.
= Colic, p. 318.

= Eczema, p. 300.

a Indigestion, p. 307.

= Insomnia, p. 309.

a Mild asthma, p. 301.

= Morning sickness, p. 317.
= Sore & tired eyes, p. 310.
= Sore nipples, p. 315.

= Stomach spasm, p. 305.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ad

----- PAGE 80 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Ju Hua (Chinese), Florists’ Chrysanthemum

Chrysanthemum x morifolium (Asteraceae)

Ju hua is known in the West as florists’ chrysanthemum
and is valued for its ornamental qualities. In China,
however, it is a popular medicinal herb and it is also
commonly drunk as a refreshing tisane. Ju hud is used
to improve vision and soothe sore eyes, to relieve
headaches, and to counter infections such as colds

and flu. Furthermore, research has demonstrated
that it is a valuable remedy for high blood pressure.

Ju hua flowers are colorful and have
been used medicinally in China since
the Ist century ce.

Habitat & Cultivation
Ju hua is native to China. Today, it is
mostly cultivated, and is propagated
from cuttings in spring or early
summer. The flower heads are

Parts Used

Flower heads are gathered in late
autumn. In China, they are steamed
before drying to reduce bitterness.

gathered in autumn when fully open.

They are usually dried in the sun,
which can take a long time.

Related Species

Wild chrysanthemum, ye hu hua

(C. indicum), has a similar use in
Chinese herbal medicine.

Many other closely related species
have an established therapeutic
value, for example tansy (Tanacetum
vulgare, p. 274) and feverfew

(T. parthenium, p. 140).

Key Constituents

= Alkaloids, including stachydrine
a Volatile oil

= Sesquiterpene lactones

= Flavonoids, including apigenin
= Betaine & choline

a Vitamin B,

Dried flowerheads

Key Actions

= Increases sweating

= Antiseptic

= Lowers blood pressure
= Cooling

m Reduces fever

Research

= Blood pressure A number of
Chinese and Japanese clinical trials
during the 1970s showed that ju hua
is most effective at lowering blood
pressure and relieving associated
symptoms such as headaches,
dizziness, and insomnia. In these
trials, ju hua was mixed with jin yin
hua (Lonicera spp., p. 229).

= Other research Ju hua has
proven to be helpful in the treatment
of angina, and to have an antibiotic
effect against a range of pathogens.
In laboratory studies, some of

the flavonoids were found to have
anti-HIV activity. Extracts of the
flowers reduce inflammation.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Long-standing remedy
Ju hua has been taken in China
as a medicine and as a beverage
for thousands of years. It was

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution May cause allergic reactions in rare cases.

Sf
/ \
/
4

Infusion of flower heads (p. 291).
For tension headaches, drink
% cup (150 ml) at hourly intervals.

|) Poultice of fresh leaves (to make, p. 295). For boils and pimples,

apply directly to the skin.

Poultice (to make, p. 295). For eyestrain,
steep flower heads in hot water for 10
minutes and place them on closed eyes.

Powdered leaves For acne, mix | tsp
with 2-3 tsp water and apply to pimples.

Ju hua

A perennial growing
to about 5 ft (1.5 m),
with flower heads.
composed of yellow
ray florets.

first categorized in the Divine
Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong
Bencaojing), written in the

Ist century CE.

= Eye problems In China, the
infused flower heads are popular

as a remedy for red, sore eyes,
especially after long periods of close
work, such as reading or working at a
computer. The warm flower heads
are placed on closed eyes and then
replaced when cool. Ju hua infusion is
taken in China as a remedy to
improve eyesight.

= Cooling & antiseptic Ju hua
infusion is used to reduce fever, to
counter infection, and to detoxify
the body. It relieves mild fevers

and tension headaches, soothes

a dry mouth or throat, and treats
bad breath.

a Skin complaints The fresh
leaves make an antiseptic poultice for
acne, pimples, boils, and sores.

= High blood pressure
Symptoms often associated with
high blood pressure, such as
dizziness, headaches, and tinnitus,
are treated with ju hua.

Self-help Use
= Sore & tired eyes, p. 310.

----- PAGE 81 -----
disagreeable odor.

Black cohosh was used by Native
Americans to treat gynecological problems
and complaints such as rheumatism and
headaches.

Habitat & Cultivation
Black cohosh is native to Canada
and eastern parts of the U.S.,
growing as far south as Florida.

It prefers shady positions in woods
and hedgerows. The herb is now
grown in Europe and can be found
in the wild, having self-seeded from
cultivated plants. It is propagated
from seed and the root is
harvested in autumn.

Related Species

A number of Cimicifuga species are
used in traditional Chinese medicine,
including sheng ma (C. dahurica)

and C. foetida. They are thought to
“clear heat” and relieve toxicity,

and are used to treat asthma,
headaches, and measles, among
other conditions.

Key Constituents

= Triterpene glycosides
(actein, cimicifugoside)

= Isoflavones (formononetin)

m lsoferulic acid

Cimicifuga racemosa syn. Actaea racemosa (Ranunculaceae)

Black Cohosh, Squaw Root

The root of black cohosh is a Native American remedy.

It has long been used for women’s complaints, especially
painful periods and problems associated with menopause
and was used by the Penobscot peoples for kidney
troubles. It also benefits rheumatic problems, including
rheumatoid arthritis, and nerve conditions such as tinnitus
(ringing in the ears). The root has a bitter, acrid taste and a

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Sedative

= Antirheumatic

= Estrogenic

= Expectorant

Research

= Menopause At least |0 clinical
trials have found that black cohosh
helps to relieve menopausal
symptoms. A 1995 German study
using black cohosh and St. John’s wort
found that the combination was 78%
effective in such cases.

= Estrogenic properties It seems
black cohosh does not

contain estrogen but has an
estrogenic action within the body
due to specific hormonal effects
within the brain. It is suggested that
black cohosh may slow or prevent
the development of osteoporosis,
and it has potential in treating
polycystic ovary syndrome.

= Safety concerns Research
strongly suggests that black cohosh

is a safe and valuable medicine.
Concerns have been raised that it
might cause liver damage or be
unsuitable for women at risk of
developing breast cancer. No effect
on liver function was found during
the clinical trials, and it is thought
that it has some preventative activity
against breast cancer.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Gynecological uses Black
cohosh has long been used by Native
Americans for women’s problems,
for which reason its folkname is
“squaw root.” It is used today for

& Parts Used

Root is unearthed
in autumn. Dried
root Is most
commonly used

in herbal medicine.

The active —_———~
constituents
are strongest
in mature roots

Dried root

25 Black cohosh
¥

eh An herbaceous
F <P" FY perennial growing to
: about 8 ft (2.5 m),
with creamy-white
flower spikes.

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

J

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For rheumatism, take 4 cup
(75 ml) twice a day.

@ Cautions Do not take in pregnancy or if breastfeeding. Larger doses can
cause stomach upsets and headache.

eal

Tincture (to make, p. 292). To relieve
period pain, add 40 drops to “2 cup
(100 ml) water and take 3 times a day.

Tablets are made from powdered herb. Take for menopausal symptoms,

such as mood swings and hot flashes.

period pain, menstrual problems
where estrogen levels are too
low, and for menopausal symptoms,
especially hot flashes.

= Inflammation Black cohosh is
useful for inflammatory arthritis,
especially when it is associated
with menopause, and it also finds
use as a remedy for

rheumatic problems, including
rheumatoid arthritis.

= Sedative properties Black
cohosh's sedative action makes it
valuable for treating many conditions,
including high blood pressure, tinnitus
(ringing in the ears), whooping cough,
and asthma.

Self-help Uses

= Arthritis, p. 313.

= Decreased estrogen &
progesterone levels, p. 316.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adm

----- PAGE 82 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Cinchona spp. (Rubiaceae)
Cinchona, Peruvian Bark

Cinchona is best known as the source of quinine,
which for centuries was the most widely taken
antimalarial remedy in the world. It was first
documented in Peru by a Jesuit missionary in | 633.
As well as being a remedy for malaria, the herb is
also used for fevers and digestive problems. Various
Cinchona species are used medicinally, including

C. calisaya, C. ledgeriana, and C. officinalis.

= Tonic

= Stimulates the appetite
= Antispasmodic

= Astringent

= Antibacterial

Research

= Pharmacology Cinchona has
been thoroughly researched and

its pharmacological actions are

well established.

= Quinine Quinine is both strongly
antimalarial and antibacterial. Like the
other alkaloids, it is antispasmodic.

= Bitter Cinchona contains bitter
constituents including alkaloids and
quinovin, which produce a reflex
stimulation of the digestion as a
whole, increasing stomach secretions.
= Quinidine Quinidine is a cardiac
depressant and is known to reduce
heart rate and improve irregularity

Cinchona bark has a bitter taste, and
it, or its constituent quinine, is used
to flavor tonic water.

Habitat & Cultivation

Native to mountainous tropical regions
of South America, especially Peru,
cinchona is now also grown in India,
Java, and parts of Africa and is cultivated
intensively in plantations. The trees are

propagated from cuttings in late spring, of heartbeat.
and the bark of the trunk, branches,
and root are removed from 6- to Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional remedy The
indigenous peoples of Peru have taken
cinchona for many centuries, and it
is still a well-used remedy for fevers,
digestive problems, and infections.
= Homeopathic proving

Samuel Hahnemann, the founder
of homeopathy, prepared the first
homeopathic medicine, or proving,
from cinchona in about 1790.

8-year-old trees, and then dried in the
sun. The annual production of cinchona
bark has been estimated at about
8,000 tons (8,200 tonnes) a year.

Key Constituents

= Alkaloids (up to 15%), mainly
quinoline alkaloids (quinine,
quinidine) and indole alkaloids
(cinchonamine)

a Bitter triterpenic glycosides

(quinovin) = Antimalarial Cinchona, and in
= Tannins particular quinine, were the principal
= Quinic acid remedies for malaria until the First
World War. From the 1960s,
Key Actions resistance of the malarial parasite
= Bitter to the synthetic drug chloroquine

m Reduces fever
= Antimalarial

led to quinine’s use once again in
preventing and treating malaria.

Parts Used

Cinchona

An evergreen tree
reaching 80 ft (25 m),
with reddish bark and
leaves that grow to
20 in (50 cm),

Bark of the trunk, branches, and root contains
alkaloids, especially quinine. The bark of the
trunk is most commonly used medicinally.

Dried bark

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Fresh bark

@ Cautions Take only under professional supervision.
Do not take during pregnancy. Excessive use causes
“cinchonism,’ which in extreme cases leads to coma
and death. Restricted in some countries.

Powder is used to treat malaria.

Decoction is a well-known
remedy for fevers. It is also
used as a gargle for sore throats.

Quinine is also used to treat other
acute feverish conditions.

= Digestive stimulant As a bitter
tonic, cinchona stimulates saliva,
digestive secretions, and appetite, and
improves weak digestive function.

= Gargle Cinchona is useful as a
gargle for sore, infected throats.

Tincture is strongly bitter
and is prescribed to
improve digestion.

= Muscle spasms The herb is
used in herbal medicine for cramps,
especially night cramps. It also
relieves arthritis.

= Indian remedy In India, cinchona
is used for various conditions,
including sciatica, dysentery, and
problems with kapha (see p. 38).

----- PAGE 83 -----
Cinnamomum spp. (Lauraceae)

Cinnamon, Dalcini (Hind

One of the world’s most important spices, cinnamon
is an ancient medicine, first mentioned in the Jewish
religious text, the Torah. The bark has a long history of
use in India and Southeast Asia, and is thought to have
arrived in Egypt around 2000 sce, reaching Europe
around 500 sce. Traditionally used to treat colds, flu,
and digestive problems, cinnamon is now commonly

taken to help stabilize blood-sugar levels.

Cinnamon is now widely cultivated as a spice
and a medicine, but, traditionally, only bark
from wild trees was used medicinally.

Habitat & Cultivation
Cinnamon (C. zeylanicum) is native
to India and Sri Lanka, growing

in tropical forests to an altitude of
1,600 ft (500 m). It is widely cultivated
throughout tropical regions, especially
in the Philippines and the Caribbean.
The tree is propagated from cuttings
and every second year, the young trees
are cut back to just above ground level.
The bark is stripped from the shoots
that emerge the following year, and
the inner layer is set out to dry in the
sun, forming the characteristic quills.

Related Species

Several species are used besides
“true” cinnamon (C. zeylanicum and
C. verum). Cassia (C. cassia), native to
China and Japan, is used as a yang tonic
(see p. 40) in Chinese herbal medicine.
Cassia is the most commonly used
species in commerce.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil up to 4%
(cinnamaldehyde 65-80%,
eugenol 5—10%)

= Phenolics (procyanidins)
= Coumarins (C. cassia)
a Mucilage

Key Actions

= Warming stimulant
= Carminative

= Antidiabetic

= Antimicrobial

= Antifungal

Research

= Metabolic syndrome Research
suggests the bark helps to prevent and
treat type 2 (late-onset) diabetes,
increasing cells’ ability to respond to
insulin and aiding the stabilization of
blood-sugar levels. It also helps to
reduce high blood pressure and may
slightly lower cholesterol, so it could be
key to treating metabolic syndrome.

= Other uses Similarities of the
phenolic procyanidins to grape seed
(Vitis vinifera, p. 283) and green tea
(Camellia sinensis, p. 181) indicates
cinnamon is strongly antioxidant
and aids healthy circulation. The
essential oil is sedative, analgesic,
and has marked antimicrobial and
antifungal activity. There are hints
that cinnamon helps brain health.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Ancient warming remedy
Cinnamon has always been used as

a warming herb for “cold” conditions,
often in combination with ginger
(Zingiber officinale, p. 155). The bark
stimulates circulation and blood flow
to the extremities. It has long been
used for flu symptoms, and makes an
excellent mouthwash for conditions
such as oral thrush.

i), Rou Gui (Chinese)

Parts Used

Inner bark is used
in preparations
and is distilled

Fi Key Preparations &

Cinnamon

An evergreen tree
growing to 26-59 ft
(8-18 m), with soft,
reddish-brown bark
and yellow flowers.

oil.

Twigs of closely
related C. cassia are
widely used in Chinese
medicine to relieve
“cold” conditions.

Their Uses

@ Cautions Occasionally causes allergic reaction; excessive doses may cause
low blood sugar; do not take essential oil internally.

5

Infusion (to make, p. 291).
For colds and flu, drink /2 cup
(100 ml) 2-3 times a day.

Essential oil For
wasp stings, dab
on oil as often
as required.

_-®* Tincture To make, infuse the herb in alcohol (see p. 292). For flatulence,

take 20 drops with water up to 4 times

a day.

“_» Powder take up to 3 tsp a day to support stable blood-sugar levels.

= Convalescence Cinnamon is a
gentle-acting herb that helps to
support both digestion and circulation.
It is used specifically in the treatment
of debility and in convalescence.

= Gynecological remedy

It can help relieve period cramps
and might have a normalizing effect
on menstrual bleeding—controlling
heavy bleeding but stimulating flow
where it is light. It is valuable in the
treatment of PCOS (polycystic
ovary syndrome) as it helps to
reduce insulin levels and stabilize
estrogen levels.

alnsulin resistance It has a
distinct role to play in promoting
better blood glucose levels and in

preventing insulin resistance—the
impaired uptake of sugar by cells that
is a warning sign of diabetes. One
suggestion, as part of a wider regimen
for diabetes and metabolic syndrome,
is to take 3 tsp of cinnamon powder a
day for 4 months.

= Gastrointestinal problems

It has always been used as a warming
and soothing remedy for digestion,
aiding in nausea, indigestion,

and flatulence, as well as colic and
diarrhea. Its antifungal activity means
that it can be of value in gut dysbiosis
(disordered gut bacteria).

Self-help Use
= Colds, p. 311.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ad

Is
#\
&

81

----- PAGE 84 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Lemon

Asmall, evergreen
tree growing to
about 23 ft (7 m),
with light green,
toothed leaves.

Citrus limon (Rutaceae)

Lemon

Lemon is one of the most important and versatile

natural medicines for home use. A familiar food as &3 Parts Used
well asa remedy, tt has a high vitamin Cc content that Fruit and peel improve revit comin twice
helps improve resistance to infection, making it valuable the circulation and increase as much vitamin C

for colds and flu. It is taken as a preventative for many resistance to infection. as oranges

conditions, including stomach infections, circulatory
problems, and arteriosclerosis (thickening of the
arterial walls).

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Valuable medicine Spanish
popular medicine ascribes so many
medicinal uses to lemon that whole
books have been written about it.

= Established properties Despite
its acid content, once digested, lemon
has an alkaline effect within the
body, making it useful in rheumatic
conditions where acidity is a
contributory factor. The volatile oil

is antiseptic and antibacterial. The
bioflavonoids are antioxidant and

Pith and peel contain
volatile oil and most of
the bioflavonoids.

Lemons were a remedy for scurvy (caused
by lack of vitamin C) long before vitamin C

was identified. strengthen the inner lining of blood Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses
vessels, especially veins and capillaries,

Habitat & Cultivation and help counter varicose veins and
Thought to be native to India, lemon easy bruising.
trees were first grown in Europe inthe = Preventative Lemon is a

Caution Do not take essential oil internally except under professional supervision.

2nd century cE and are now cultivated valuable preventative medicine.
in Mediterranean and subtropical Its antiseptic and cleansing actions
climates worldwide. Propagated from make it useful for those prone to
seed in spring, they prefer well-drained arteriosclerosis, and to infections
soil and plenty of sun. The fruit is and fevers (especially of the
harvested in winter when the vitamin stomach, liver, and intestines). \ Cinnamon
C content is at its highest. Its ability to strengthen blood
vessel walls helps prevent circulatory Remedy For colds, combine | tbsp lemon juice with

Key Constituents disorders and bleeding gums. 2 thsp hot water, a crushed garlic dove, and a
= Volatile oil (about 2.5% of Lemon is also useful as a general pinch of cinnamon. Drink up to 3 times a day.

the peel), limonene (up to tonic for many chronic illnesses.

70%), alpha-terpinene, alpha- Above all, it is a food that helps Essential oil Dilute 5 drops

pinene, beta-pinene, citral maintain general good health. with | tsp carrier oil. Dab
= Coumarins = Strengthening vein walls The Juice For sore throats, onto mouth ulcers.
= Bioflavonoids whole fruit, especially the pith, treats fe | tbsp Ferman juice
= Vitamins A, B,, B,, B,, and C arteriosclerosis, weak capillaries, and aan use a nave er

(40-50 mg per 100 g of fruit) varicose veins.
= Mucilage = Juice Lemon juice is good for

colds, flu, and chest infections. Externally, lemon juice can be a Arthritis, p. 313.

Key Actions It stimulates liver detoxification, applied directly to acne, athlete's m Bites & stings, p. 303.
= Antiseptic improves the appetite, and helps foot, chilblains, insect stings, = Chilblains, p. 302.
| Antirheumatic ease stomach acidity, ulcers, arthritis, ringworm, sunburn, and warts. = Colds & flu, p. 311.
= Antibacterial gout, and rheumatism. As a gargle, = Cold sores, p. 304.
= Antioxidant lemon juice is helpful for sore Self-help Uses = Sore throats, p. 311.

m Reduces fever throats, gingivitis, and mouth ulcers. = Acne & boils, p. 305. m= Weak digestion, p. 306.

----- PAGE 85 -----
Codonopsis pilosula (Campanulaceae)

Codonopsis, Dang Shen (Chinese)

Codonopsis has a central place in Chinese herbal
medicine as a gentle tonic that increases energy levels,
improves physical and mental well-being, and helps the
body adapt to stress. Codonopsis is an adaptogen similar in
action to ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. | 18) but with a milder
and shorter-lasting effect. It is given to those who find
ginseng too strong a tonic, and is used interchangeably
with ginseng in Chinese herbal formulas.

Codonopsis
A twining perennial

with oval leaves and

pendulous green
and purple flowers.

& Parts Used

Root is used in cooking or dried
for use in tinctures and decoctions.

growing to 5 ft (1.5m),

Codonopsis bears solitary bell-shaped
flowers with purple markings
in summer.

Habitat & Cultivation
Codonopsis is native to
northeastern China and grows
throughout much of the region,
especially in the Shanxi and Szechuan
provinces. It is propagated from seed
in spring or autumn. The root is
harvested in autumn once the aerial
parts have died down.

Key Constituents
m= Sterols

= Alkaloids

= Terpenes

= Polysaccharides

= Alkanes

Key Actions
= Adaptogen

= Tonic

= Anti-anemic

Research

= Blood remedy Laboratory
experiments have demonstrated that
codonopsis increases hemoglobin
and red blood cell levels, and lowers
blood pressure.

= Stamina Other research has
confirmed the ability of codonopsis
to help increase endurance to stress
and to maintain alertness.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Tonic herb In Chinese

herbal medicine, codonopsis

is considered to tone the qi

(vital force—see pp. 24-25), lungs,
and spleen. It improves vitality and
helps to balance metabolic function.
It is a gentle tonic remedy that helps
to revive the system as a whole.

= Primary uses Codonopsis is
taken in particular for tired limbs,
general fatigue, and for digestive
problems such as appetite loss,
vomiting, and diarrhea. It is thought
to nourish the yin (see pp. 40-41)

of the stomach without making it
too ‘wet,’ and at the same time to
tone the spleen without making it
too “dry.” It is beneficial in any chronic
illness where “‘spleen qi deficiency”

is a contributory factor.

= False fire Perhaps most
interestingly, codonopsis is given

as a tonic to people who are
stressed and have “false fire”
symptoms, including tense neck
muscles, headaches, irritability,

and high blood pressure. Such
symptoms can be aggravated by
stronger adaptogens such as ginseng
(Panax ginseng, p. 118), while
codonopsis is also more effective

in helping to reduce adrenaline
levels and associated stress.

= Breastfeeding tonic The herb is
taken regularly by nursing mothers in
China to increase milk production
and as a tonic to “build strong blood.”

bs

Dried root

Root has a
sweet taste

ra] Key Preparations

& Their Uses

As

Remedy Simmer 4 tsp codonopsis,
4 tsp astragalus, and 2 tsp lycium berries
with 3 cups (750 ml) water for
40 minutes. Drink regularly as a tonic.

Decoction (to make,
p. 291). For fatigue, drink
% cup (75 ml) twice a day.

= Respiratory problems
Codonopsis clears excessive
mucus from the lungs, and is
useful for respiratory problems
including shortness of breath
and asthma.

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is used
in the West, but not in Chinese
herbal medicine. As a tonic, take
4 tsp with water 3 times a day.

Self-help Uses

= Loss of appetite &
vomiting, p. 306.

m= Nervous exhaustion, muscle
tension, & headaches, p. 308.

= Stress or convalescence, p. 319.

SLNV1d TVNIOIGHW AGN”

----- PAGE 86 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Coleus forskohlii syn. Plectranthus barbatus (Lamiaceae)

Coleus

Native to India, coleus is used in Indian folk medicine
rather than within the Ayurvedic tradition, and is a
traditional digestive remedy. It shot to fame in Western
medical circles when one of its constituents, forskolin, was
first isolated in the 1970s. Research by an Indian/German
company showed that forskolin was a powerful medicine
for various conditions, including heart failure, glaucoma,

and bronchial asthma.

Coleus is strongly aromatic and the leaves
have a distinctive camphor-like scent.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to India, coleus grows on the
dry slopes of the Indian plains and in
the foothills of the Himalayas. It is
also found in subtropical or warm

f& Parts Used

Leaves have valuable
medicinal properties and
are also eaten in pickles.

Fresh leaves

temperate areas, including Nepal,
Sri Lanka, Myanmar (Burma), and
parts of eastern Africa. Coleus was
popular as an ornamental in the
19th century. Today it is cultivated
on a large scale in Gujarat, India, for
use in pickles—around 980 tons
(1,000 tonnes) are harvested each
year. The plant is propagated by
stem cuttings or root division in
spring or summer and flourishes in
well-drained soil in sun or partial
shade. Both root and leaves are
harvested in autumn.

Related Species

Six other species of Coleus have

been investigated but only C. forskohlii
contains forskolin. Indian borage

(C. amboinicus) is used traditionally

Root is unearthed in autumn
when the active constituents

are most concentrated.

Dried leaves

Dried root

within Ayurvedic and Unani Tibb
herbal medicine to help reduce
inflammation and is prescribed for
bronchitis and asthma.

Key Constituents
a Volatile oil
= Diterpenes (forskolin)

Key Actions

= Lowers blood pressure

= Antispasmodic

= Dilates the bronchioles
(small airways of the lungs)

= Dilates the blood vessels

= Heart tonic

Research

= Forskolin The active constituent
forskolin was first isolated in the
1970s. It has important therapeutic
benefits, which include lowering high
blood pressure, relaxing smooth
muscle, increasing the release of
hormones from the thyroid gland,
stimulating digestive secretions, and
reducing pressure within the eye.

a Whole herb Research into
coleus has focused on the action

of forskolin in isolation, and the herb
as a whole has not been researched.

—

Coleus
~ An aromatic perennial,
with tuberlike roots
and an erect stem,
reaching 2 ft (60 cm).
Traditional &
Current Uses
= Traditional uses Coleus is a
traditional herb in India for a wide
range of digestive problems. It is
given to relieve gas, bloating, and
abdominal discomfort.
= Circulatory remedy An
important heart and circulatory
tonic, coleus is used to treat
congestive heart failure and
poor coronary blood flow. It also
improves circulation of blood to
the brain.
= Respiratory problems Its
antispasmodic action makes coleus
valuable for respiratory complaints,
including asthma and bronchitis.
= Glaucoma Coleus is used
topically in treatments to relieve
glaucoma (excess pressure within
the eye, which, if untreated, can
result in loss of vision).
= Weight loss Recently, coleus has
been marketed as a weight-loss aid.
It is argued that because coleus
stimulates cellular metabolism, it will
help to promote weight loss. There is
no evidence to support this, though
it may be of use if weight gain is due
to poor thyroid function.

| Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take for circulatory problems or glaucoma
without professional advice.

©

Decoction of the root.

For bronchial asthma, make
a decoction with |5 g root

and 2 cups (500 ml) water

(see p. 291). Drink in small

doses over 2 days.

Infusion of the leaves
(to make, p. 291). To
relieve gas and bloating,
drink 34 cup (150 ml)
twice a day.

----- PAGE 87 -----
Myrrh

useful for skin problems.

Myrrh trees yield a thick, yellow resin
that has a distinct, aromatic odor.
It is used in mouthwashes.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to northeast Africa, especially
Somalia, myrrh is now also found in
Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia, India, Iran, and

& Parts Used

into yellow-red solid pieces.

ae

Dried gum resin

Gum resin oozes from fissures or
cuts in the bark of the tree and dries

&
“

Commiphora molmol syn. C. myrrha (Burseraceae)

Myrrh has been used in perfumes, incense, and
embalming, and, as a symbol of suffering, was one of
the three gifts offered to the infant Jesus by the Three
Wise Men. Myrrh is also one of the oldest known
medicines and was extensively used by the ancient
Egyptians. It is an excellent remedy for mouth and throat
problems, with a drying, slightly bitter taste, and it is also

Thailand. It grows in thickets and
likes well-drained soil and sun. Myrrh
is propagated from seed in spring
or from cuttings at the end of the
growing season. The resin is collected
from cut branches and is dried for use.

Related Species

A number of closely related
Commiphora species are used
interchangeably with myrrh.
See guggul (C. mukul, p. 193).

Key Constituents

m= Gum (30-60%), acidic
polysaccharides

= Resin (25-40%)

= Volatile oil (3—-8%), including
heerabolene, eugenol, and
many furanosesquiterpenes

Key Actions

= Antiseptic

= Astringent

= Antiparasitic

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antiulcer

= Wound healer

Research

= Antibiotic Egyptian research
confirms that myrrh is a key treatment
for certain parasitic infections, notably
liver flukes and schistosomiasis (both
common and serious waterborne
diseases). In one clinical study, myrrh
extract cleared all signs of liver fluke
infection within 6 days, with patients
remaining clear 3 months later.
Others have been similarly
successful. It is also being studied as
a gastric ulcer remedy and for anti-
cancer properties. The gum resin
has thyroid-stimulating activity.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Mouth & throat remedy Being
astringent and strongly antiseptic,
myrrh is a favored remedy for sore
throats, canker sores, and gingivitis
(gum disease). As myrrh is not soluble

|Ei Key Preparations & Their Uses

« Myrrh
A spiny, deciduous tree
growing to 16 ft (5 m),
with yellow-red flowers
and pointed fruit.

in water, tincture or essential oil is used
and diluted. The resulting mouthwash
or gargle is often swiftly effective
(though tastes very bitter). Myrrh's
key actions also make it valuable in
countering infection throughout the
digestive tract, while at the same time
it promotes healing in inflamed areas,
notably gastric ulcers.
= Ayurvedic remedy In Ayurvedic
medicine, myrrh is considered a tonic
and aphrodisiac and to cleanse the
blood. It has a reputation for improving
intellect. Myrrh is also taken for
irregular or painful menstruation.
= External uses Myrrh is an
underused treatment for skin
problems such as acne, boils, and
inflammatory conditions. The herb's
drying and slightly anesthetizing effect
has led to its use in Germany as a
treatment for pressure sores caused
by prosthetic limbs.

Self-help Uses

= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Mouth & tongue ulcers, p. 306.

= Canker sores & gum
problems, p. 306.

= Oral thrush, p. 314.

= Sore throats, p. 311.

@ Cautions Do not use in pregnancy. Do not take the essential oil internally.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For mouth ulcers, carefully
dab on a little every hour.

gently (see p. 297).

Powder Rub a little onto
sore gums 3 times daily.

Mouthwash Dilute | tsp
tincture (to make, p. 292)
with 4 cup (100 ml) water
and use as a mouthwash or
for sore throats.

Essential oil For congested
sinuses, dilute 3 drops in
| tsp carrier oil and massage

Capsules (to make, p. 292). For
bronchial congestion, take a
300 mg capsule twice a day.

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 88 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Corydalis is commonly prescribed
by the Chinese in formulations for
period pain.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Siberia, northern China, and
Japan, corydalis is commonly cultivated
in eastern and northeastern parts of
China. It is propagated from seed in
early spring or autumn, and the

£3 Parts Used

Corydalis yanhusuo (Papaveraceae)

Corydalis, Yan Hu Suo (Chinese)

Corydalis is an important Chinese remedy that has
been used at least since the 8th century to help
“invigorate the blood” and relieve almost any painful
condition. It is used particularly for menstrual cramps
and for chest and abdominal pain. Research in China
has confirmed the validity of corydalis’ traditional use,
revealing that it contains powerful alkaloids that are
responsible for its analgesic effect.

rhizome is harvested in late spring
and early summer when the aerial
parts have withered.

Related Species

C. cava, a related species from
southern Europe, has been shown
to provide relief from involuntary
tremors and ataxia (shaky movements).
C. gariana, native to the Himalayas, is
used in India as a detoxifying and tonic
herb for skin problems and genito-
urinary infections. Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis, p. 213), used to treat skin
problems, is also closely related.

Key Constituents

= Alkaloids (including corydalis L,
corydaline, tetrahydropalmatine
[THP], protopine)

= Protoberberine-type alkaloid
(leonticine)

Rhizome contains powerful alkaloids that research
shows help alleviate pain. It is unearthed in autumn

and dried and chopped.

Dried rhizome

Key Actions
= Analgesic

= Antispasmodic
m= Sedative

Research

= Analgesic properties Research
in China from the 1950s onward has
shown that corydalis has useful pain-
relieving properties. The powdered
rhizome has up to one-tenth of the
analgesic potency of morphine—an
alkaloid derived from the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum, p. 244).
Morphine is highly concentrated and
the strongest analgesic in medical
use. Although this research shows
corydalis to be much weaker in its
effect than morphine, it nonetheless
indicates the value of corydalis in
pain relief.

= Alkaloids The strongest analgesic
alkaloid in corydalis is corydaline.
Tetrahydropalmatine (THP), another
alkaloid, is analgesic and sedative and
has been shown to work, at least in
part, by blocking the dopamine
receptors in the central nervous
system. This constituent is also
known to stimulate secretion of the
adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH) by the anterior pituitary

gland, which controls aspects of stress.

FiKey Preparations

Corydalis

A small herbaceous
plant growing to

8 in (20 cm) with
narrow leaves and
pink flowers.

= Menstrual pain Several clinical
trials in China have shown corydalis
to be very effective in relieving
menstrual pain.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Pain relief Corydalis is specifically
taken to treat pain, and is used in
Chinese herbal medicine to relieve
pain resulting from almost any cause.
It is rarely taken on its own, being
combined with various other herbs
as appropriate.

= Period pain Corydalis is well
worth trying as a natural treatment
for period pain, and combines

well with cramp bark (Viburnum
opulus, p. 150).

= Abdominal conditions Many
types of abdominal pain, whether in
the lower abdomen as in appendicitis,
or in the upper abdomen as in peptic
ulcer, are treated with corydalis.

= Injuries In Chinese medical
theory, and in other herbal traditions,
pain is often thought to stem from
obstruction of normal blood flow.
As corydalis is thought to “invigorate
the blood,’ it is considered to be
especially useful as a treatment for

the pain that results from a
traumatic injury.

& Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Powder To ease pain,
take 2 g of powder
with food twice a day.

Decoction Make a decoction with 10 g
corydalis, 3 g cinnamon, and 2 cups
(500 ml) water (see p. 291). For period
pain, take 2 cup (100 ml) twice a day.

_-®* Tincture (to make, p. 292). For abdominal pain, take up to | tsp

with water twice a day.

----- PAGE 89 -----
Crataegus oxyacantha & C. monogyna (Rosaceae)

Hawthorn

Hawthorn is an extremely valuable medicinal herb. It was
known in the Middle Ages as a symbol of hope and taken
for many ailments. Today it is used mainly for heart and
circulatory disorders, in particular for angina. Western

herbalists consider it literally to be a ‘food for the heart,’
increasing blood flow to the heart muscles and restoring
normal heartbeat. Recent research has confirmed the

Hawthorn
A deciduous, thorny

berries, growing to
26 ft (8 m).

& Parts Used

Flowering tops contain
trimethylamine, which
stimulates circulation.
Fresh
flowering
tops

tree with small leaves,
white flowers, and red

validity of these uses.

Hawthorn has bright red berries in autumn.
They are used in remedies to treat a variety
of circulatory disorders.

Habitat & Cultivation
The hawthorn tree grows

along roadsides, and in thickets and
fields throughout the British Isles
and in all temperate regions of the
northern hemisphere. It can be
propagated from seed, but it
takes |8 months to germinate,

so the trees are usually cultivated
from cuttings. The flowering tops
are harvested in late spring and
the berries in late summer to
early autumn.

Key Constituents

= Polyphenols

= Proanthocyanins

= Bioflavonoids

= Triterpenoids

= Coumarins

= Amines (trimethylamine—
in flowers only)

Key Actions

= Cardiotonic

= Circulatory tonic

= Lowers blood pressure
= Antioxidant

Research

= Bioflavonoids Hawthorn has
been fairly well researched. Its main
medicinal benefit is due to its high
bioflavonoid and proanthocyanin
content. These constituents relax
and dilate the arteries, especially the
coronary arteries. This increases

the flow of blood to the heart
muscles and reduces the symptoms
of angina. Both the bioflavonoids and
the proanthocyanins are also strongly
antioxidant, helping to prevent or
reduce degeneration of the

blood vessels.

= Cardiac herb Several clinical
trials have explored hawthorn's ability
to lower blood pressure and support
heart function, with substantially
positive findings and strong evidence
of the herb's safety.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Historical uses Hawthorn was
traditionally used in Europe for
kidney and bladder stones, and as

a diuretic. The |6th- and | 8th-century
herbals of Gerard, Culpeper, and
K'Eogh all list these uses. Its current
use for circulatory and cardiac
problems stems from an Irish physician
who started using it successfully for
such conditions toward the end of
the | 9th century.

= Heart remedy Hawthorn is used
today to treat angina and coronary
artery disease. It specifically improves
heart function and is useful for mild
congestive heart failure and irregular
heartbeat. Like many herbs,
hawthorn works in tune with the
body's own physiological processes
and it takes time for change to occur.

Dried flowering tops

Berries help the heart
to function normally.

Oe *

Fresh berries

oes

Dried berries

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Interactions with prescribed medicines can occur. Seek advice from
an herbal or medical practitioner if taking prescribed medicines, especially for high

blood pressure and heart disorders.

Tincture of flowering tops or
berries is the most commonly
used preparation.

Decoction of flowering
tops is valuable for
circulatory disorders.

Tablets containing
powdered flowering
tops are convenient

for long-term use.

\ Infusion, made from the flowers or leaves, helps to restore

blood pressure levels to normal.

= Blood pressure Hawthorn is
best thought of as a remedy that
normalizes blood pressure. It clearly

works to lower high blood pressure,

but also appears to support blood
pressure levels where these tend
to be low.

= Poor memory Combined

with ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p. 100),
hawthorn is used to enhance poor
memory. It works by improving the
circulation of blood within the head,
thereby increasing the amount of
oxygen to the brain.

a

‘en
a

87

----- PAGE 90 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

q
ae

88

Crataeva nurvula (Capparidaceae)

Varuna, Barun (Hindi), T

hree-leaved Caper

The bark of the varuna tree is an important herb for

problems affecting the kidneys and

bladder, especially

kidney and bladder stones. In Ayurvedic medicine, it has
been used for around 3,000 years to treat these problems,
and, as is the case with so many herbs, recent scientific

research is confirming the appropriat
usage, demonstrating that it preven

kidney stones.

Varuna is frequently cultivated in the
vicinity of temples in central India
and Bangladesh.

Habitat & Cultivation
Varuna grows throughout India and is
often found along riverbanks. Grown
from seed in spring, the leaves are
harvested in spring and the bark is
collected throughout the year.

Key Constituents
= Triterpenes

= Saponins

= Flavonoids

= Sterols

= Alkaloids

= Glucosilinates

Key Actions

= Diuretic

a Inhibits the formation
of stones

Research

= Bladder & kidney stones
Clinical research in India from the
1980s onward indicates that varuna
increases bladder tone and inhibits
the formation of bladder stones. It
reduces the production within the
body of oxalates, substances that can

eness of its traditional
s the formation of

precipitate in the kidneys and bladder
to form stones. The herb also seems.
to reduce the rate at which stone-
forming constituents within the urine
are deposited in the kidneys.

= Urinary system Indian research
in the 1980s and 1990s points to
varuna being valuable in the
treatment of urinary tract infections
and bladder problems caused by an
enlarged prostate gland. In one clinical
trial, 85% of patients with chronic
urinary tract infections were
symptom-free after undergoing

4 weeks’ treatment with varuna.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Ancient urinary remedy Texts
dating back to the 8th century BCE
document varuna’s use in Ayurvedic
medicine for kidney and bladder
problems. From around | 100 ce,
varuna became the main Indian herbal
medicine for kidney stones.

= Other traditional uses
Traditionally, varuna bark is considered
useful in Ayurveda (see p. 36-39) for
weakened conditions of vata (air) and
kapha (earth), and is used to treat
many conditions, including asthma,
bronchitis, and skin diseases. The
bark is also used to treat fevers,
gastritis, and vomiting, as well as
snake bite. The fresh leaves, bruised
and mixed with vinegar, relieve sore
and inflamed joints.

= Kidney stones Today, varuna is
beginning to be used in the West, as
well as in India, in the prevention and
treatment of kidney stones. It is given
to people who are prone to develop
kidney stones, reducing the tendency
to stone formation. It is also prescribed

& Parts Used

Bark contains constituents
that inhibit the formation of
kidney stones.

tree growing to

33 ft (10 m), with
smooth bark and
pale yellow flowers.

Dried bark

Leaves are

harvested

in

spring and are
used in infusions.

Dried leaves

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Best taken under professional supervision.

Infusion of leaves
(to make, p. 291).
For painful joints,
apply as a lotion
3 times a day
(see p. 296).

Powdered bark is used in
Ayurveda. For urinary infections,
take 15 g with water daily.

Decoction of bark (to make, p. 291) is the most
common preparation. To prevent kidney stone
formation, take 34 cup (150 ml) once a day.

for people who already have small
stones. Varuna improves smooth
muscle tone and encourages the
removal of stones in the urine.

= Urinary tract remedy
Combined with antiseptic and
immune-stimulating herbs, varuna

is very useful for urinary tract
infections, including cystitis. It is

also sometimes effective for bladder
conditions involving poor muscle
tone, some cases of incontinence,
and urinary problems associated
with prostate enlargement.

----- PAGE 91 -----
Crocus sativa (lridaceae)

Saffron

Perhaps most familiar as an ingredient in the Spanish
dish paella, saffron is a prized herbal medicine that by
weight is more valuable than gold. The thin, deep-orange
filaments picked from the saffron flower have long-
standing traditional use as a remedy for lowered mood,
menstrual disorders, and as a sexual tonic. Current
research is endorsing some of these findings, and
saffron clearly offers significant health benefits.

Saffron’s golden-red threads may help
to support eyesight and prevent
macular degeneration.

Habitat & Cultivation
Saffron prefers a sunny, well-drained
site. It is cultivated in Iran, which
grows roughly 90% of world
production. The stigma are collected
in the autumn when the plant is in
flower. The flowers are first cut, the
stigma then being plucked from
within. The corms (bulbs) naturally
reproduce themselves—one corm
producing five after 3 years.

Related Species

Saffron should not be confused
with meadow saffron (Colchicum
autumnale, p. 193), an important
(but toxic) medicinal plant that is
only distantly related to saffron.

Key Constituents

= Crocins (carotenoid glucosides)
= Volatile oil (including safranal)

= Bitter substances

Key Actions
= Neuroprotective
= Antidepressant
= Antispasmodic

= Aphrodisiac
= Stomach tonic

Research

= Depression Several clinical
trials have found saffron to be
beneficial in depression. In 2005,
Iranian researchers found that
saffron was as effective as
fluoxetine (Prozac) for mild

to moderate depression. In a
different clinical trial, saffron was
shown to help relieve the symptoms
of sexual dysfunction (in both men
and women) that can sometimes
present themselves as a side effect
of taking fluoxetine.

= Eye health Research from a
combined Italian-Australian study
suggests that saffron has a useful
role to play in helping to support
eye health in the early stages of
macular degeneration. The study
found that retinal function
improved in those taking saffron.
Other research suggests that
saffron might prove useful in
treating glaucoma.

= Cognitive function

Saffron appears to have marked
neuroprotective activity (see
Depression and Eye health). Iranian
clinical research has examined
saffron's therapeutic potential in
people with moderate Alzheimer's
disease. Though still at a very early
stage, two small studies indicate
that saffron, and particularly the
crocins within it, acts on the brain
to improve memory and cognitive
function, including in those

with dementia.

= Adulteration Due to its high
cost, saffron is frequently adulterated.

& Parts Used

Stigma are the three deep
orange-red threads at the
center of the flower.

Stigma

™ Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Saffron

A perennial growing
to | ft (30 cm), saffron
has slender leaves and
multiple lilac to mauve
- flowers.

Flower head

@ Cautions Do not take as a medicine during pregnancy.

Excessive doses can be toxic.

Dried stigma For low mood, take
5 threads |—2 times a day.

> Capsules (to make, p. 292). For menstrual cramps, take a 300 mg capsule up to

five times a day.

For medicinal purposes, good-quality
material is essential.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional uses Avicenna,

a |0th-century physician famous for
his Canon of Medicine, described
saffron in detail, noting that it was
an “exhilarant and cardiac tonic’’ that
“strengthens eyesight,’ “reduces
appetite,’ and is “a stimulant of sexual
desire.’ A rereading of the Canon
paved the way for much of the
Iranian research over recent years.
The herbalist Christopher Catton,
following the English view of saffron

as a ‘cordial’ or heart tonic, wrote in
1862 that ‘Saffron hath power to
quicken the spirits, and the virtue
thereof pierceth by and by to the
heart, provoking laughter and
merriness.” It is said that rubbed into
the palm, saffron has an immediate
action on the heart.

= Chinese herbal medicine

In Chinese medicine, saffron is used
for depression and shock. It also has
long use as a remedy for menstrual
difficulties such as period cramps
and pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS).
Saffron is also used to treat skin
disorders, stomach weakness, and
to reduce appetite.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

89

----- PAGE 92 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Curcuma longa syn. C. domestica (Zingiberaceae)

Turmeric, Haldi (Hindi), Jiang Huang (Chinese)

Although best known for its bright yellow color

and spicy taste in Indian food, turmeric is increasingly
recognized as a medicinal food with almost unparalleled
health benefits. Its powerful anti-inflammatory action
makes turmeric a key remedy in many chronic health
problems, including allergies, arthritis, diabetes, and
psoriasis, where long-term inflammation is usually

a major underlying factor.

Turmeric is a valuable remedy for
arthritic and skin conditions.

Habitat & Cultivation
Turmeric is native to India and
southern Asia and is now cultivated
throughout the tropics. It is propagated
by cuttings from the root, and needs
well-drained soil and a humid climate.
The rhizome is unearthed in winter.

© Parts Used

Rhizome is carefully
unearthed and broken
into sections. It is boiled
or steamed before drying.

—e~

Dried rhizome

Key Constituents

= Curcumin

= Volatile oil (3—5%), including
zingiberen and turmerone

a Bitter principles

= Resin

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory

= Lowers cholesterol levels

= Antimicrobial

= Anti-platelet (blood-thinning)

Research

= New interest in turmeric
Despite its long-standing use in India
and China, the therapeutic actions of
turmeric were not researched until
recent decades when there was an
upsurge of interest in foods and
medicines that lower cholesterol
levels or have antioxidant properties

Fresh rhizome

Fresh rhizome is
bright orange inside

(neutralize harmful free radicals).
Research from the 1970s onward,
mostly in India, has tended to confirm
traditional uses of the root.

= Anti-inflammatory Research
has established that turmeric, and
curcumin in particular, blocks several
different inflammatory pathways,
countering inflammation throughout
the body. Turmeric is largely taken as
a supplement to prevent or treat
cancer, dementia, and many auto-
immune diseases. Black pepper

is traditionally taken with turmeric

to augment its efficacy. This effect

is now supported by research.

= Curcumin When applied to the
skin and exposed to sunlight, turmeric
is strongly antibacterial. Curcumin is
the constituent responsible for this
action. Curcumin is also more strongly
antioxidant than vitamin E.

= Cholesterol Chinese clinical trials
in 1987 indicate that turmeric lowers
cholesterol levels.

= Cancer Turmeric may be a
valuable preventative remedy for
those at risk of developing cancer,
but more research is needed.

= Other actions Research has
shown that turmeric has an anti-
coagulant action, keeping the blood
thin. It also increases bile production

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions If taking blood-thinning medication, or if gallstones are present,
take only on professional advice. Turmeric occasionally causes skin rashes.

3 times a day.

_-®* Tincture (to make, p. 292). For eczema, take | tsp diluted with

Y cup (100 ml) of water 3 times a day.

Decoction (to make,
p. 291). For gastritis,
take 5 cup (75 ml)

Powder is the most common preparation
in Ayurvedic medicine. For gastritis, take
| tsp with water 3 times a day.

Wy

Turmeric

A perennial reaching
3 ft (90 cm), with a
short stem, lance-
shaped leaves, and
a knobbly rhizome.

/

RS

Se
and flow, and has a protective action
on the stomach and liver.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional remedy Turmeric
improves the action of the liver and
is a traditional remedy for jaundice in
both Ayurvedic and Chinese herbal
medicine. It is also an ancient herb for
digestive problems such as gastritis
and acidity, helping to increase mucus
production and protect the stomach.
The herb also alleviates nausea.

= Arthritis & allergies Even though
turmeric does not relieve pain, its anti-
inflammatory action makes it useful
for arthritis and other inflammatory
conditions such as asthma and eczema.
= Circulatory disorders Due to
its anti-inflammatory, blood-thinning,
and cholesterol-lowering properties,
turmeric is now used to reduce the
risk of strokes and heart attacks.

= Skin conditions Applied to the
skin, turmeric is useful in treating

a number of conditions, including
psoriasis, and fungal infections such
as athlete's foot.

Self-help Uses
= Athlete's foot, p. 304.
= Nausea & motion sickness, p. 306.

Poultice using a paste made
with powder. For psoriasis,
mix | tsp with a little water
and apply 3 times a day.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Dioscorea villosa (Dioscoreaceae)

Wild Yam, Colic Root

Wild yam is the plant source of a steroid-like substance,
diosgenin, which was the starting point in the creation
of the first contraceptive pill. There is no suggestion
that the plant was used as a contraceptive in the past,
though it has traditionally been taken in Central America
to relieve menstrual, ovarian, and labor pains. The herb
is also valuable for digestive problems, arthritis, and

muscle cramps.

Wild yam can be found growing wild in
damp woodlands in North America.

Habitat & Cultivation
Wild yam is native to North and
Central America, and has now
become naturalized in tropical,
semitropical, and temperate climates
around the world. The plant is
propagated from seed in spring, or
from sections of tubers or by root
division in spring or autumn. It thrives
in sunny conditions and rich soil. The
root and tuber of wild yam are
harvested in autumn.

Related Species

Many yam species have a hormonal
action. Shan yao (Dioscorea opposita)
is an important tonic for the stomach
and digestion in traditional Chinese
medicine, and is taken for appetite
loss and wheezing.

Key Constituents

= Steroidal saponins
(mainly dioscin)

= Phytosterols
(beta-sitosterol)

= Alkaloids

= Tannins

= Starch

Key Actions

= Antispasmodic

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antirheumatic

= Increases sweating
= Diuretic

Research

= Synthesis of hormones
Diosgenin, a breakdown product of
dioscin, was first identified by Japanese
scientists in 1936. This discovery
paved the way for the synthesis of
progesterone (one of the main female
sex hormones) and of corticosteroid
hormones such as cortisone. Wild
yam does not contain estrogen or
progesterone, and wild yam “natural
progesterone” products are derived
from chemically processed diosgenin,
and have little or no relationship with
naturally occurring wild yam.

= Anti-cholesterol activity
Research indicates that diosgenin
reduces the absorption of cholesterol
from the gut and increases its
elimination from the body.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional uses Both the Maya
and the Aztec peoples used wild yam
medicinally—possibly to relieve pain.
The plant is also known as colic root
and rheumatism root in North
America, indicating its use by European
settlers for these conditions.

= Gynecological problems

A traditional remedy for painful
periods and ovarian pain, wild yam
has estrogen-modulating activity and
is used to treat menopausal symptoms.
= Arthritis & rheumatism

The herb’s combination of anti-

Parts Used

Root and tuber have valuable
antispasmodic properties. They
are used to treat colic and
menstrual cramps.

Y
* Wild yam

A deciduous perennial
vine, climbing to 20 ft
(6m) with heart-
shaped leaves and
tiny green flowers.

Fresh root
and tuber

Rhizome has muscle-
relaxant properties

Chopped dried
root and tuber

Dried root
and tuber

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For irritable bowel syndrome,
take 4 cup (75 ml) twice a day.

inflammatory and antispasmodic
actions makes it extremely useful

in treatments for arthritis and
rheumatism. It reduces inflammation
and pain, and relaxes stiff muscles

in the affected area.

= Muscle spasms & pain Wild
yam helps relieve cramps, muscle
tension, and colic.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For arthritis, take 4 tsp with
water twice a day.

= Digestive problems

The herb can be used as an
effective treatment for digestive
problems, including gallbladder
inflammation, irritable bowel
syndrome, and diverticulitis.

Self-help Use
= Period pain, p. 315.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 94 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

92

Echinacea spp. (Asteraceae)

Echi NaC€a, Purple Coneflower

A key medicinal herb, echinacea has a tonic action on
the body's immune system. Known by | 9th-century
Americans as Indian Snakeroot (due to its ability to treat
snake bites), the herb has a potent ability to counter
infection, especially viral and bacterial, and to aid the
clearance of toxins from the body. It is commonly taken
as a preventative and treatment for upper respiratory

infections such as colds, flu, and coughs.

Echinacea is a name derived from the Greek
word for hedgehog and was inspired by the
appearance of the flower’s central cone.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to central parts of the US.,
three species of echinacea are used
medicinally: E. angustifolia, E. purpurea,
and E. pallida. All are threatened in
the wild and only commercially
grown plants should be used.

E. purpurea is cultivated widely in the
USS. and Europe. Grown from seed
in spring or by root division in winter,
it thrives in rich, sandy soil. The leaves
and flowers are gathered during
flowering; the roots of 4-year-old
plants are lifted in autumn.

Key Constituents
(E. purpurea)
= Alkylamides
(mostly isobutylamides)
= Caffeic acid esters (mainly
echinacoside and cynarin)
= Polysaccharides

Key Actions

= Immune modulator
= Antimicrobial

= Anti-inflammatory
= Detoxifying

= Heals wounds
= Stimulates saliva

Research

= Immune system Clinical research
into echinacea has confirmed that it
increases the number of white blood
cells and their strength of action,
although its precise mode of

action on immune function is not well
understood. The polysaccharides
inhibit the ability of viruses to take
over cells, while the alkylamides are
antibacterial and antifungal. Research
supports the use of echinacea to
prevent colds and respiratory
infections resulting from air travel. Not
all clinical trials have found positive
effects, possibly because in some cases
too low a dose of echinacea was used.

Traditional &

Current uses

= Native American medicine The
Comanche used echinacea as

a remedy for toothache and sore
throats and the Sioux took it for rabies,
snake bite, and septic conditions.

= Western uses Echinacea is a key
remedy in Western herbal medicine,
and is used to treat many health
problems, notably viral and fungal
infections, and skin infections such as
acne and boils. It makes an excellent
gargle for throat infections, and is
typically prescribed by herbalists
wherever the immune system

is underperforming.

= Allergies The herb is a helpful
remedy for treating allergies such

as asthma.

Self-help Uses
= Acne & boils, p. 305.

Echinacea

A perennial growing
to 4 ft (1.2 m) with
upright stems and
pink to purple
daisy-like flowers.

& Parts Used

Flower of E. purpurea
is occasionally used
for infections.

Roots of all three
species have valuable
immune-stimulating
properties.

The best-quality
root leaves a 4 b 4 mm
tingling sensation ~

on the tongue .
8 Dried root

Fresh E. purpurea root

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Can cause allergic reactions in rare cases.

\

Tincture of root (to make,
p. 292). For chronic infections,
take /A tsp in water 3 times a day.

Decoction of root (to make,
p. 291). To treat throat infections,
gargle with 2/4 tbsp 3 times a day.

Capsules of powdered root
(to make, p. 292). For colds, take
a 500 mg capsule 3 times a day.

&— > Tablets Take as an immunostimulant for infections.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Chilblains, p. 302.

= Cold sores, p. 304.

= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.

= Earache, p. 312.

= Flu, sore throats & tonsillitis, p. 31 |.
= Canker sores, p. 306.

= Urinary & fungal infections, p. 314.

----- PAGE 95 -----
Elettaria cardamomum (Zingiberaceae)

Cardamom, Elaci (Hindi)

Cardamom is one of the oldest spices in the world
and was used extensively in ancient Egypt to make
perfumes. Its medicinal uses, however, are less well
known. Cardamom has been employed in Ayurvedic
medicine for thousands of years, and is an excellent
remedy for many digestive problems, helping to soothe
indigestion and gas. It has an aromatic and pungent taste
and combines well with other herbs.

Cardamom seed pods are harvested by
hand. Each pod contains up to 20 aromatic,
dark red-brown seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation
Cardamom is native to southern
India and Sri Lanka, where it grows
profusely in forests at 2,600—4,900 ft
(800-1 ,500 m) above sea level. It is
also widely cultivated in India, southern
Asia, Indonesia, and Guatemala.
Cardamom is propagated from

seed in autumn or by root division

in spring and summer, and needs a
shady position and rich and moist, but
well-drained soil. The seed pods are
harvested just before they start to open
in dry weather during the autumn
and are dried whole in the sun.

Key Constituents
= Volatile oil

= Alkaloids

= Flavonoids

= Saponins

= Sterols

Key Actions
= Digestive tonic
= Protects liver

= Mild stimulant
= Antispasmodic

Research

= Antispasmodic A 2009 Indian
clinical study found that cardamom
successfully lowered blood pressure
in 20 adults over a 3-month period.
Those taking part in the trial had “a
feeling of well-being without any
side-effects.’ The herb has a long-
established antispasmodic action.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Ancient herb Cardamom has
been highly valued both as a spice and
a medicine and was known in Greece
in the 4th century BCE.

= Digestive problems Throughout
history, cardamom has been used

for the relief of digestive problems,
especially indigestion, gas, cramping,
and irritable bowel syndrome. The
seed's pleasant taste means that
cardamom is often added to digestive
remedies to improve their flavor.

= Current Indian uses Cardamom
is used in India for many conditions,
including asthma, bronchitis, kidney
stones, anorexia, debility, and
weakened vata (see p. 37).

u Chinese remedy In China, the
herb is taken for urinary incontinence
and as a tonic.

= Bad breath Cardamom is an
effective treatment for bad breath,
and when taken with garlic helps to
reduce its smell.

= Aphrodisiac The herb contains
androgenic compounds and has a
long-standing reputation as a tonic and
aphrodisiac. A traditional Arabian
recipe blends cardamom with coffee.

Self-help Use
= Gas & bloating, p. 306.

Cardamom

A perennial growing
to 16 ft (5 m), with
mauve marked, white

lance-shaped leaves.

& Parts Used

Seeds are crushed for use in infusions
or have their volatile oil extracted.

Green seed pods
indicate that the
seeds are good quality

Seed pods

Opened seed pods

Crushed seeds
and seed pods

Fresh seed pods
on stem

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take the essential oil internally.

Tincture (to make, p. 292)
improves the appetite. For
poor appetite, combine
5 drops with 5 drops
gentian tincture and take
3 times a day.

Infusion (to make, p. 291)
is a pleasant drink. For
indigestion, drink 74 cup
(150 ml) after meals.

Essential oil For
digestive pain, dilute
10 drops with 4 tsp
carrier oil (see
p. 297). Gently rub
into the abdomen.

Crush cardamom seeds
using a mortar and pestle
just before you are about
to use them.

flowers and very long,

SINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 96 -----
Siberian ginseng

stress, including overwork and extreme cold or heat, and
the herb is taken to support performance during periods
of ongoing pressure or stress.

= Protects the immune system of physical training and stress on
the body.

= Exhaustion Siberian ginseng
can be highly beneficial in relieving

exhaustion and debilitated states

© | Eleutherococcus senticosus (Araliaceae) A deciduous, hardy
Es z 2 shrub, growing

. . . BO to 10 ft (3 m). It has
2 Siberian Ginseng, Eleuthero ; $ret ies
G con each stem.
® Siberian ginseng is a powerful tonic herb with an impressive = Triterpenoid saponins Traditional &
= range of health benefits. Unlike many plant medicines, m Glycans Current Uses
2 Siberian ginseng is generally more useful in maintaining Key Acti = Enhancing resilience Siberian
YZ good health than in treating ill health. Research shows that ey Actions ginseng is taken to improve mental
a . . . . = Adaptogenic resilience, such as in preparation for
=m extracts aid the body in coping with both physical and mental. tonic tests, and to reduce the impact
=
>
faa]
x

Research
= Russian studies There has been
much research into Siberian ginseng

Siberian ginseng can help those exposed
to toxic chemicals and radiation and was
given to people following the nuclear
disaster at Chernobyl in 1986.

Parts Used

Habitat & Cultivation
Siberian ginseng is native to eastern
Russia, China, Korea, and Japan. It
can be grown from seed, but it is a
difficult plant to germinate. The root
is lifted in autumn and dried.

Related Species

Wu jia pi (Acanthopanacis gracilistylus)
is a very close relative of Siberian
ginseng, used in Chinese herbal
medicine to treat “cold, damp”
conditions.

Key Constituents
m Eleutherosides, 0.6—-0.9%
= Polysaccharides

in Russia since the 1950s, although
the exact method by which it
stimulates stamina and resistance to
stress is not yet understood.

= Tonic herb Siberian ginseng
appears to have a general tonic
effect on the body, in particular

on the adrenal glands, helping

the body to withstand heat, cold,
infection, other physical stresses,
and radiation. It has even been given
to astronauts to counter the effects
of weightlessness.

= Stamina Athletes have
experienced as much as a 9%
improvement in stamina when
taking Siberian ginseng.

resu

term stress. It can also prove
helpful in treating chronic fatigue,
although in some cases it may be

iting from overwork or long-

over!

= Cancer treatment A valuable
remedy during conventional cancer
treatment, Siberian ginseng supports
vitality and healthy function when
taking chemotherapy, and may

redu

suggest that it helps to reduce the
harmful effects of radiation.

Self-help Uses
= Convalescence, p. 319.
= Stress, p. 308.

ly stimulating.

ce side effects. Russian studies

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Root is unearthed in autumn, dried whole, and
then chopped up for use in medicinal preparations.

@ Cautions Healthy young adults should not take for more than 6 weeks.
Can be taken long term on professional advice. Avoid caffeine when taking
Siberian ginseng. Side effects are rare, but more likely if the standard dose
is exceeded.

b Root has tonic
properties

Whole dried root

Fresh root

a general tonic.

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
Take 2 tbsp twice a day as

c

\— Tablets are a convenient way of taking Siberian ginseng.
Use before tests or other stressful events.

Capsules Make with powder

stress take | g of capsules daily.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
During busy periods, take /4 tsp
with water 3 times a day.

see p. 292) and for long-term

----- PAGE 97 -----
Ephedra sinica (Ephedraceae)
Ephed Fa, Ma Huang (Chinese)

Ephedra is a strongly stimulant, acrid-tasting herb that
has a central place in Chinese and other herbal traditions.
According to legend, the bodyguards of Genghis Khan,
threatened with beheading if they fell asleep on sentry
duty, used to take a tea containing ephedra to stay

alert. Today, ephedra is used in the West and in China
for problems ranging from chills and fevers to asthma

and hay fever.

Ma Huang was found in a Middle Eastern
neolithic grave, indicating that it may have
been used as a medicine 60,000 years ago.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to northern China and Inner
Mongolia, ephedra often grows in
desert areas. It is propagated from
seed in autumn or by root division
in autumn or spring and needs
well-drained soil. The stems

are gathered throughout the year
and dried.

Related Species
Other Ephedra species with similar
medicinal properties to ephedra
grow throughout the northern
hemisphere. In North America,
related species were used to treat
fevers and relieve kidney pain,
while in India, Ephedra species
were taken for asthma, hay fever,
and rheumatism.

Key Constituents

= Protoalkaloids (ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine)

= Tannins

= Saponin

= Flavone

a Volatile oil

Key Actions

= Increases sweating

= Dilates the bronchioles
(small airways in the lungs)

= Dries mucous membranes

= Diuretic

= Stimulant

= Raises blood pressure

Research

= Active constituents Most

of the active constituents mimic
the effect of adrenaline within the
body, increasing alertness. Ephedrine,
extracted originally from ephedra,
was first synthesized in 1927 and

is used as a decongestant and
antiasthmatic.

= Whole herb When used at

the correct dosage, the whole herb
has significant therapeutic effects—
including dilating the bronchial
airways—and a very low incidence
of side effects.

= Ephedra abuse ephedra

has been banned in the U.S. due
to frequent abuse of the herb, as
an amphetamine-type “high” and,
at excessive dosage, in weight-loss
regimens. At therapeutic dosage, and
with professional guidance, ephedra
rarely gives rise to side effects.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Historical uses Traditionally, Zen
monks used ephedra to promote
calm concentration during meditation.
= Chinese herb In China, ephedra
is popular for chills and fevers, coughs
and wheezing, and in combination
with rehmannia (Rehmannia glutinosa,
p. 125) it is given to treat kidney yin
deficiency (see pp. 40-41).

, Ephedra

An evergreen shrub
growing to 20 in

(50 cm), with long,
narrow sprawling
stems and tiny leaves.

& Parts Used

Stems are collected
throughout the year.
Ma Huang is best
known in medicine
for the ephedrine
that it contains.

Fresh stems

Dried stems

© Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only under professional supervision. Do not take if suffering from
angina, glaucoma, high blood pressure, enlarged prostate gland, or overactive
thyroid gland. Ephedra occasionally causes side effects, including headaches, tremors,
and insomnia. Restricted herb in some countries.

®

Decoction is prescribed
by herbalists for asthma.

Tincture is used in
treatments to alleviate
the aches and pains
of rheumatism.

Powder is used

by the Chinese

to treat kidney
energy deficiency.

and for the acute onset of colds
and flu. It also helps to raise blood
pressure, cool fevers, and to
alleviate rheumatism.

= Current Western uses
Ephedra is used principally in
current Western herbal medicine as
a treatment for asthma and hay fever,

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 98 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Eucalyptus globulus (Myrtaceae)
Eucalyptus, Blue Gum

Eucalyptus, a traditional Aboriginal remedy, is a powerful
antiseptic used all over the world for relieving coughs
and colds, sore throats, and other infections. It is warming
and stimulating, and for many people its scent conjures
up days spent in bed during childhood with eucalyptus

Eucalyptus

An evergreen tree
growing to 195 ft
(60 m), with a
blue-grey trunk
and green leaves.

& Parts Used

Leaves, which contain
antiseptic chemicals, are
either dried or used

and other oils smothered on the chest. Eucalpytus
is acommon ingredient in many over-the-counter

cold remedies.

Eucalyptus was first introduced to the
West from Australia in the | 9th century.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Australia, eucalyptus is
cultivated in plantations in tropical,
subtropical, and temperate areas
of the world. Planting can cause
ecological problems because the
trees absorb huge quantities of
water and prevent the growth of
native plants. This can be beneficial,
however, drying up marshy areas and
so reducing the risk of malaria. The
leaves are harvested as required and
are either dried or distilled for oil.

Related Species

Many other Eucalyptus species
contain valuable essential oils,
including E. smithii (p. 207).

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (cineole, up to 80%)
= Flavonoids

= Tannins

= Resin

Key Actions
= Antiseptic

= Analgesic

= Expectorant

for essential oil.

= Stimulates local blood flow
a= Insect repellent

Research

= Essential oil Extensive research
into eucalyptus essential oil during the
last 50 years has shown it to have a
marked antiseptic action and the
ability to dilate the bronchioles (small
airways) of the lungs. The action of the
essential oil as a whole is stronger than
that of its main constituent, cineole.

Fresh leaves
are distilled
to produce the
essential oil

ee. "e
Traditional & Dee eaves
Current Uses
a Infections Eucalyptus is a traditional
Aboriginal remedy for infections and
fevers. It is now used throughout the
world for these ailments.
= Antiseptic The herb is an
antiseptic and is very helpful for
colds, flu, and sore throats.
= Expectorant Eucalyptus is a
strong expectorant, suitable for
chest infections, including bronchitis
and pneumonia.
= Warming The diluted essential
oil, applied to the skin as a chest or
sinus rub, has a warming and slightly
anesthetic effect, helping to relieve
respiratory infections. The same
effect occurs when the infusion

Fresh leaves

ra] Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take essential oil internally except under professional
supervision. Do not give to small children or infants.

Lozenges, containing eucalyptus.
Take for sore throats.

444

Capsules, (to make, p. 292). For bronchitis,
take a 200 mg capsule 3 times a day.

or tincture is used as a gargle.

= Pain relief Diluted essential
oil applied to the affected area
can help relieve rheumatic joints
characterized by aching pains and
stiffness, as well as neuralgia and
some bacterial skin infections.

Inhalation For colds, add
10 drops essential oil to
boiling water (p. 297).

Essential oil (to use, p. 297). Use 5 drops diluted with 2 tsp carrier oil
as a chest or sinus rub.

Self-help Uses «Infusion (to make, p. 291). Drink | cup (150 ml) 3 times a day for bronchitis.

= Congestion, sinus problems,
& earache, p. 312.
= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.

_-® Tincture (to make, p. 292). For chest coughs, add 4 tsp tincture to
Ya cup (100 ml) water and take twice a day.

----- PAGE 99 -----
Eugenia caryophyllata syn. Syzgium aromaticum (Myrtaceae)

Clove

; EUGENIA CARYOPHYLLATA |

Cloves, the dried flower buds of the clove tree, are
best known as a spice, but are also highly valued as an
herbal medicine, particularly in India and Southeast
Asia. Native to the Molucca Islands, cloves were one
of the earliest spices to be traded and were imported
into Alexandria in 176 ce. The cloves contain the best
essential oil, but the stems and leaves of the tree can

also be distilled for their oil.

Cloves are pink when unripe, but later
turn brown when they are dried outside
in the sun.

Habitat & Cultivation
Originally from the Molucca Islands.
(Indonesia) and the southern
Philippines, cloves are now grown
extensively in Tanzania and
Madagascar, and to a lesser extent
in the West Indies and Brazil. The
tree is grown from seed in spring or
from semi-ripe cuttings in summer.
Twice a year, the unopened flower
buds are picked as they develop,
and then sun-dried.

Key Constituents
= Volatile oil containing eugenol
(up to 85%), acetyl eugenol,

methyl salicylate, pinene, vanillin
= Gum
= Tannins

Key Actions

= Antiseptic

= Carminative

= Stimulant

= Analgesic

= Prevents vomiting
= Antispasmodic

= Eliminates parasites

Research

= Volatile oil Argentinian research
in 1994 showed clove's volatile oil
to be strongly antibacterial. Eugenol
(a phenol) is the largest and most
important component of the volatile
oil. It is strongly anesthetic and
antiseptic, and therefore useful in
pain relief for toothache, and as

an antiseptic for many conditions.
= Acetyl eugenol Acety! eugenol,
another component of the volatile
oil, has been shown to be strongly
antispasmodic.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Ancient all-purpose remedy
Cloves have been used in Southeast
Asia for thousands of years and were
regarded as a panacea for almost all ills.
= Antiseptic The antiseptic property
of cloves makes them useful for
treating certain viral conditions. In
tropical Asia, they have often been
given to treat infections such as
malaria, cholera, and tuberculosis,
and parasites such as scabies.

= Antispasmodic Digestive
discomfort, such as gas, colic,

and abdominal bloating, can be
relieved with cloves. Their anti-
spasmodic property also eases
coughs and, applied topically,

relieves muscle spasms.

= Mind & body stimulant Cloves
are a stimulant, both to the mind
(improving memory) and to the
body as a whole, and have been
used as an aphrodisiac in India and

in the West. The herb has also

been used to prepare for childbirth.
It helps stimulate and strengthen
uterine muscle contractions in labor.

Clove tree
An evergreen,

growing to 49 ft
(15 m). The tree is
strongly aromatic.

& Parts Used

Flower buds are
picked unopened
and dried for use in
infusions or powders
and for oil extraction.

Fresh flower
buds

Leaves and
stems are
occasionally
used for oil
extraction

Dried flower
buds (cloves)

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions External use can cause dermatitis. Do not take essential oil internally
except under professional supervision.

a

Infusion For colic, infuse 2 cloves
in | cup (150 ml) of water (see
p. 291). Take 3 times daily.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For flatulence, take 20 drops
with water 3 times a day.

Essential oil For toothache, dab |—2 drops of oil
onto cotton wool and rub over the affected tooth.

= Additional uses Besides all their West. They are used regularly only

other uses, cloves can be used to in mouthwashes, and for their local
treat acne, skin ulcers, sores, and
styes. They also make a potent
mosquito and clothes moth repellent.
Oranges that had been studded with

cloves were used in the Moluccas as

anesthetic effect, for example in
relieving toothache.

Self-help Uses

= Acne & boils, p. 305.
insect repellents. a Fever, p. 311.
= Western herbalism Despite the
bewildering variety of their therapeutic

uses, cloves are underrated in the

= Fungal skin infections, p. 304.
= Neuralgia, p. 308.
= Toothache, p. 308.

pyramid-shaped tree

SLNV1Id TVNIDOIGHW AM

----- PAGE 100 -----
Filipendula ulmaria (Rosaceae)

Meadowsweet, Queen of the Meadow

In medieval times, meadowsweet was a favorite
strewing herb—Gerard wrote in his Herball (1597)
that ‘the smell thereof makes the heart merry and
joyful and delighteth the senses.’ Salicylic acid
isolated from the plant was first synthesized in
1860 and later used to develop aspirin. Nowadays,
meadowsweet is taken for gastric problems and
inflammatory conditions, such as arthritis.

Meadowsweet

A perennial reaching
5 ft (1.5 m), with
toothed leaves and
clusters of creamy,
scented flowers.

Flowering tops and leaves
contain salicylates that reduce
inflammation. They are harvested
in summer.

KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Fresh flowering
tops and leaves

Meadowsweet was called “meadwort”
in the Middle Ages, as it was used to
flavor mead.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Europe, meadowsweet
grows easily in damp places, preferring
ditches and the banks of streams and
rivers. It seeds itself freely, but can
also be propagated by root division
in autumn or spring. Leaves and
flowering tops are harvested in
summer when the flowers open.

Key Constituents

= Flavonol glycosides
(approximately 1%), mainly
glycosides of quercetin

= Phenolic glycosides (salicylates)

= Volatile oil (salicylaldehyde)

= Polyphenols (tannins)

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antirheumatic

= Astringent

= Diuretic

= Stimulates sweating

Research
= Salicylates The salicylates are
aspirin-type substances that help to

reduce inflammation and

relieve pain, for example in arthritic
conditions. However, they do not
have the blood-thinning properties
of aspirin.

= Protective combination
Unlike aspirin, which at high doses
causes gastric ulceration, the
combination of salicylates, tannins,
and other constituents acts to
protect the lining of the stomach
and intestines, while providing the
anti-inflammatory benefit of the
salicylates. Meadowsweet clearly
illustrates the fact that herbal
medicines cannot be understood
by considering their constituents

in isolation.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Acid indigestion The herb

is a key remedy for acid indigestion
and gastroesophageal reflux,

and can quickly help to improve
troubled digestions. Its mode of
action is not well understood,
though its anti-inflammatory action
is clearly important.

= Arthritis Meadowsweet is
commonly taken as a remedy for
rheumatic and arthritic problems
such as osteoarthritis, gout,
lumbago, and sciatica. It is a mild
diuretic and is thought to help the
kidneys to clear acid residues from
the body, thereby relieving joint
inflammation, which is often
associated with acidity.

= Digestive remedy
Meadowsweet is a safe remedy for
diarrhea, even in children, and is
used with other herbs for irritable
bowel syndrome.

Dried flowering tops
and leaves

Creamy white
flowers smell
of almonds

Fi Key Preparations

& Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take if allergic to aspirin.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For painful joints, soak a pad in 5 tsp

(25 ml) tincture and apply to the area.

y
as

Tablets Take for
rheumatic aches.

Infusion Make by adding freshly boiled water
to the herb (see p. 291). For indigestion, take

2 cup (100 ml) every 2 hours.

“ee Decoction (to make, p. 291). For diarrhea, take #4 cup (150 ml) 2-3 times a day.

» Powder For acidity, take 4 tsp mixed with a little water 3 times a day.

= Other uses Meadowsweet has
traditionally been taken in much the
same way as aspirin—to ease the
pain and discomfort of headache,
colds and flu, and toothache.

Self-help Uses

= Acidity with gastritis, p. 307.

= Arthritis associated with acid
indigestion or a peptic ulcer, p. 313.

= Heartburn, p. 317.

----- PAGE 101 -----
Gentiana lutea (Gentianaceae)

Gentian

Gentian is a powerful bitter, and the herb is an essential
ingredient of traditional aperitifs and bitters such as
Angostura bitters. The customary aperitif about half
an hour before a meal is more than a social nicety—
the bitter constituents stimulate gastric juices and
prime the stomach, enabling it to cope effectively with
a heavy meal. Medicinally, gentian strengthens a weak
or underactive digestive system.

Gentian is a tall, attractive plant and has
been cultivated in gardens at least since the
time of the | 6th-century herbalist Gerard.

Habitat & Cultivation

This largest member of the diverse
gentian family is native to the Alps and
other mountainous regions of central
and southern Europe from Spain to
the Balkans, flourishing at altitudes

of 2,300-7,900 ft (700-2,400 m).
The large root crowns can be split or
the plant grown from seed. Due to
overharvesting from the wild, this is
now a threatened species, so buy only
cultivated root. It needs a loamy soil
and a sheltered site. The root is dug
up in early autumn and dried.

Related Species

Many gentian species are bitter-tasting
plants and a number are used in herbal
medicine as a result, for example
Japanese gentian (G. scabra) and the
Chinese gin jiao (G. macrophylla).

Key Constituents

= Bitter principles
(gentiopicroside, amarogentin)

= Gentianose

= Inulin

m= Phenolic acids

Key Actions

m= Bitter

= Digestive stimulant
= Eases stomach pain

Research

= Amarogentin Although present
in much smaller quantities than
gentiopicroside, amarogentin is the
constituent largely responsible for
the bitterness of gentian. It is 3,000

times more bitter than gentiopicroside,
and, tasted at dilutions of |:50,000, it

is possibly the most bitter substance
on the planet.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Origin of the name Gentius,
king of Illyria in the 2nd century sce,
reputedly discovered the virtues of
the plant. The name gentian attests
to its use in classical times.

= Action of bitter principles
There are 4 main taste receptors
on the tongue: sweet, sour, salty,
and bitter. It has been shown that
the bitter principles in gentian
stimulate the bitter taste receptors
on the tongue, causing an increase

in the production of saliva and
gastric secretions. This in turn
stimulates the appetite and improves
the action of the digestive system
in general.

= Digestive stimulant By

stimulating the action of the stomach,

many symptoms associated with
weak digestion, such as gas,
indigestion, and poor appetite,
are relieved. Stomach and other
secretions are improved, which in
turn helps increase the absorption
of nutrients. The herb also acts as a

Parts Used

Root is harvested
in autumn for

use in remedies
to Improve
digestion.

Root contains
bitter principles

Fresh root

we

oe

i
Dried chopped root

g.
~
> &oo®

Gentian
An erect perennial

with star-shaped
yellow flowers and
* oval leaves.

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take if suffering from acid indigestion or a peptic ulcer.

ad

a

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For
poor appetite, take 2-5 drops
with water before meals.

stimulant on the gallbladder and liver,
encouraging them to function more
efficiently. Gentian is therefore useful
in almost any condition where the
digestive system needs to be toned
up. It is often taken as a digestive tonic
in old age.

= Nutrient absorption

By improving digestive function,
gentian increases the absorption of
nutrients across the gut wall. It aids
the absorption of a wide range of

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For anemia and weakened digestion,
take 5 tsp 3-5 times a day.

nutrients, including iron and vitamin
B,,, and is therefore useful for iron-
deficiency anemia (usually resulting
from blood loss). It is often added to
prescriptions for women with heavy
menstrual bleeding.

Self-help Uses

= Anemia, p. 301.

a Fever, p. 311.

= Weakened digestion, p. 319.
= Gas & bloating, p. 306.

growing to 4 ft (1.2m),

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adm

----- PAGE 102 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgoaceae)
Ginkgo, Maidenhair Tree, Bai Guo (Chinese)

Ginkgo is thought to be the oldest tree on the planet,
first growing about 190 million years ago. Though long
used as a medicine in its native China, its therapeutic
actions have only recently been researched. The leaves
(and their extract) are used to treat poor circulation and
to maintain a plentiful blood flow to the central nervous

system. Ginkgo is also valuable for asthma and other

allergic problems.

Ginkgo trees are widely cultivated for
their leaves, which are an excellent herbal
remedy for poor circulation and asthma.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to China, ginkgo trees are
grown in large-scale plantations in
China, France, and in South Carolina
in the U.S. They produce green

to yellow fan-shaped leaves with
radiating veins, and round fruits
about 3 cm (I in) across. Leaves
and fruit are harvested in autumn.

Key Constituents
m= Flavonoids
= Ginkgolides
= Bilobalides

Key Actions

= Circulatory tonic
= Anti-inflammatory
= Anti-asthmatic

= Anti-allergenic

= Antispasmodic

Research

= Clinical trials Extensive research
since the 1960s has established the
importance of ginkgo in improving
poor cerebral circulation and aiding
memory and concentration.

Several clinical trials have found that
gingko proved useful as a treatment
for dementia, including Alzheimer's
disease, although some studies have
found no positive benefit. Other
research indicates possible use in
conditions as varied as depression,
glaucoma, and poor peripheral
arterial blood flow.

= Anti-inflammatory action
Ginkgo’s ability to reduce
inflammation makes it valuable

in conditions where nerve tissue

is damaged by inflammation, for
example multiple sclerosis.

= Platelet activating factor
(PAF) Ginkgo inhibits PAF, a
substance released by a range

of blood cells that causes the

blood to become stickier and

more likely to produce clots.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Chinese herbal medicine
Ginkgo seeds are used to

relieve wheezing and to lessen
phlegm. They are also given to
treat vaginal discharge, a weak
bladder, and incontinence. The
leaves are traditionally used for
treating asthma.

= Western herbal medicine
Western interest in ginkgo has
concentrated on the remarkable
ability of the leaves to improve
the circulation, especially poor
circulation to the brain, and the
herb’ antiallergenic and anti-
inflammatory actions, which make
it a particularly useful herbal remedy
for the treatment of asthma. Ginkgo
is a bestselling herbal medicine in
France and Germany, where it is

Ginkgo

A deciduous tree with
cone or several main
trunks and spreading
branches. It grows to
100 ft (30 m).

& Parts Used

Leaves improve the circulation.
They are used to make tinctures,
tablets, and fluid extract.

Fresh leaf

The husk of the
ginkgo seed is
removed before use

vow

Seeds

Dried leaves

Seeds are prescribed by the
Chinese for urinary problems
and wheezing.

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not exceed the dose. May cause toxic reactions if taken to excess.
Take on professional advice if using blood-thinning medication. Restricted herb in
some countries.

Tincture of leaves (to make,
p. 292). For poor circulation, take
| tsp 2-3 times a day with water.

Tablets Take for poor
circulation and memory loss.

‘ee Decoction of the seeds is used by herbalists to treat wheezing

Fluid extract made from the fresh leaves is prescribed by medical herbalists
for asthma.

taken daily by millions of people from
middle age onward to maintain and
improve cerebral circulation and the
memory, and to reduce the possibility
of a stroke. It is also a valuable

nerve tissue and strengthen
the circulation.

Self-help Uses

a Failing memory, p. 319.

= High blood pressure &
arteriosclerosis, p. 301.

medicine to take after a stroke,
where it is thought to support

----- PAGE 103 -----
Glycyrrhiza glabra (Fabaceae)

Licorice

With a constituent—glycyrrhizic acid—that is 50 times

sweeter than sugar, it is not surprising that licorice is mainly

thought of as a candy. Yet it is also one of the most
valuable of all herbal medicines, a powerful anti-
inflammatory that is effective in conditions as varied
as arthritis and canker sores. It is among the most
used herbs in European medicine, and has been
taken medicinally for several thousand years.

Licorice has pealike flowers in summer.
It is cultivated commercially for its roots.

Habitat & Cultivation
Licorice grows wild in southeastern
Europe and southwestern Asia, but it
is now extensively cultivated. It is
propagated by dividing the roots in
autumn or spring. The root of
3-4-year-old plants is unearthed in
late autumn.

Related Species

Various Glycyrrhiza species are
used medicinally in a similar way
to licorice, for example the
Chinese gan cao (G. uralensis).

Key Constituents

= Triterpene saponins
(glycyrrhizin, up to 6%)

a Isoflavones (liquiritin,
isoliquiritin, formononetin)

= Polysaccharides

= Phytosterols

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Expectorant

= Demulcent

= Adrenal agent

= Mild laxative

Research

= Adrenal agent Research

shows that on being broken down
in the gut, glycyrrhizin has an anti-
inflammatory and antiarthritic
action similar to hydrocortisone and
other corticosteroid hormones. It
stimulates production of hormones
by the adrenal glands and reduces
the breakdown of steroids by the
iver and kidneys.

= Glycyrrhizin Research in Japan
in 1985 showed that glycyrrhizin was
effective in the treatment of chronic
epatitis and liver cirrhosis.

= Protective mucus Licorice as

a whole reduces stomach secretions
but produces a thick protective
mucus for the lining of the stomach,
making it a useful remedy in
inflammatory stomach conditions.

= Isoflavones The isoflavones are
known to be estrogenic. Licorice

is often used to treat menopausal
symptoms, including hot flashes.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional uses Licorice has
long been valued for its medicinal
uses. It was taken in ancient Greece
for asthma, chest problems, and
canker sores.

= Soothing herb Inflammatory
conditions of the digestive system
such as canker sores, gastritis,
peptic ulceration, and excessive
acid problems benefit from licorice's
demulcent and anti-inflammatory
properties, as do many chest
complaints, arthritis, inflamed
joints, and some skin problems.
Licorice is also soothing for
inflamed eyes.

Parts Used

Licorice

A woody-stemmed
perennial growing to
6% ft (2 m), with dark
leaves and cream to
mauve flowers.

Root is harvested in
utumn. It has valuable

properties.

al
anti-inflammatory
Fresh root
Dried root

An extensive system

of taproot, branch roots,
and runners can spread
to 3 ft (I m)

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Excessive doses can cause serious side effects, including high blood
pressure. Do not take large doses with high blood pressure. During pregnancy, or for

long-term use, take on professional advice

;
A

-.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For gastritis, add /4 tsp to 4 cup
(100 ml) water and take twice a day.

Dried juice stick
Chew for indigestion.

Powder
Gently rub onto
canker sores.

‘== Decoction For constipation, make a decoction (see p. 291) with
| part licorice and 3 parts dandelion root. Drink 4 cup (150 ml) twice a day.

Fluid extract is prescribed for peptic ulcers.

= Adrenal stimulation

Licorice stimulates the adrenal glands,
helping in Addison's disease, where
the adrenal glands cease to function
normally.

= Constipation Licorice is useful as
a gentle laxative.

Self-help Uses
= Constipation, p. 307.
= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.
= Loss of appetite
& vomiting, p. 306.
= Canker sores, p. 306.
= Oral thrush, p. 314.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ady

----- PAGE 104 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Hamamelis virginiana (Hamamelidaceae)

Witch Hazel

Witch hazel was a traditional remedy of many Native
North American peoples. They used poultices soaked
in a decoction of bark to treat tumors and inflammations,
especially of the eye, and took the herb internally for
hemorrhaging and heavy menstrual bleeding. European
settlers in the | 8th century soon came to value witch
hazel for its astringency, and its use spread to Europe

and beyond.

Witch hazel produces distinctive flowers in
winter followed by brown fruit capsules that,
when ripe, eject 2 seeds up to |3 ft (4 m)
away from the tree.

Habitat & Cultivation
Witch hazel is a woodland tree,
indigenous to Canada and eastern
parts of the U.S. Today it is
commonly cultivated in Europe.
The trees are grown from
hardwood cuttings or from seed,
both of which are planted in
autumn. The leaves are gathered
in summer and dried. The bark
is harvested during the autumn
and dried as quickly as possible in
the shade.

Related Species

European hazel (Corylus avellana) is
a similar herb. It is used occasionally
in European herbal medicine as an
astringent to treat diarrhea. The oil is
nutritious and can be used to treat
threadworms in children.

Key Constituents
= Tannins (8—-10%)

m= Flavonoids

a Bitter principle

a Volatile oil (leaves only)

Key Actions

= Astringent

= Anti-inflammatory

= Stops external and
internal bleeding

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Established properties Witch
hazel contains large quantities of
tannins. These have a drying,
astringent effect, causing the
tightening up of proteins in the skin
and across the surface of abrasions.
This creates a protective covering
that increases resistance to
inflammation and promotes healing
of broken skin. Witch hazel also
appears to help damaged blood
vessels beneath the skin. It is thought
that this effect may be due to the
flavonoids as well as to the tannins.
When witch hazel is distilled it retains
its astringency, suggesting that
astringent agents other than tannins
are present.

a Skin problems Witch hazel

isa very useful herb for inflamed
and tender skin conditions, such as
eczema. It is mainly used where the
skin has not been significantly broken
and helps to protect the affected
area and prevent infection.

= Damaged veins Witch hazel

is valuable for damaged facial veins,
varicose veins, and hemorrhoids,
and is an effective remedy for
bruises. Due to its astringent
properties, it helps to tighten
distended veins and restore their
normal structure.

= Other uses A lotion can be
applied to the skin for underlying
problems such as cysts or tumors.

Leaves and young twigs
are distilled to make
“witch hazel.”

Witch hazel

A small deciduous

. tree growing tol 6 ft
(5 m), with coarsely
toothed, broadly
oval leaves.

The leaves are odorless
but have a bitter,
aromatic taste

~ Bark is used

Fresh leaves

in tinctures
and ointments

%

Dried leaves

Fresh bark Dried bark

Fikey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution [f using internally, take only under professional supervision.

Tincture of bark (to make, p. 292),
Dilute | tbsp in 2 cup (100 ml) cold
water and sponge onto varicose veins.

2) Infusion of the leaves (to make, p.
veins and cysts.

Witch hazel also makes an effective
eyewash for inflammation of the
eyes. Less commonly, it is taken
internally to alleviate diarrhea,
helping to tighten up the mucous
membranes of the intestines, and
for bleeding of any kind.

—

Distilled witch hazel Dab onto insect
stings, sore skin, and broken veins.

Ointment of bark (to make,
p. 295). Apply to hemorrhoids
twice a day.

291). Use as a lotion (see p. 296) for broken

Self-help Uses

= Bruises, p. 304.

= Cleansing wounds, p. 304.
= Eczema, p. 300.

= Hemorrhoids, p. 302.

= Skin rashes, p. 303.

= Varicose veins, p. 302.

----- PAGE 105 -----
Devil's Claw

Harpagophytum procumbens (Pedaliaceae)

The colorful name of this African plant is derived
from the appearance of its tough, barbed fruit. The
medicinal properties of devil's claw were first discovered
by various southern African peoples, who used a
decoction of the tuber to treat digestive problems
and arthritis. The herb is now widely available in
pharmacies and health food stores in the West as

a remedy for arthritis and rheumatism.

Devil’s claw, found growing in the Transvaal,
has bright purple flowers in spring.

Habitat & Cultivation
Devil's claw is native to Namibia,
Botswana, and South Africa, where
it is a protected species due to over-
harvesting of wild plants. It thrives

in clay or sandy soils, preferring
roadsides and open areas, especially
places where natural vegetation
has been cleared. Propagated from
seed in spring, the young tubers
are unearthed in autumn and cut
into pieces about % in (2 cm) long.
Care is taken not to mix the tubers,
which contain the active constituents,
with the roots, as this can render
the herb ineffective.

Related Species

Two related species, both growing
in Africa, are used medicinally in
amore or less similar way to
devil's claw.

Key Constituents

a lridoid glycosides
(harpagoside)

= Sugars (stachyose)

= Phytosterols

m= Flavonoids

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Analgesic

= Digestive stimulant
= Antiarthritic

Research

= Anti-inflammatory French
research (1992) indicated that
devil's claw is anti-inflammatory,

but opinion is divided on its
effectiveness in practice.

= Pain relief There is some
evidence to confirm devil's claw's
use as an analgesic as it seems to
be effective in easing the symptoms
of joint pain.

= Bitter The strongly bitter action
of devil's claw stimulates and tones
the digestive system. Many arthritic
conditions are associated with poor
digestion and absorption of food,
and the stimulant effect of this

herb on the stomach and gallbladder
contributes to its overall therapeutic
value as an antiarthritic remedy.

Traditional &

Current Uses

a African traditional remedy
Devil's claw is used by various peoples
in southern Africa, including the
Khoisan and the Bantu. Traditionally
it has been used as a tonic, especially
for digestive problems; for arthritis
and rheumatism; to reduce fevers;
and as an ointment for sores,

ulcers, and boils.

= Western uses Current Western
use of devil's claw is broadly in line
with its traditional application. It is
commonly available over the counter
in tablet form for arthritic and
rheumatic conditions and can bring

Devil’s claw

A trailing perennial,
reaching 5 ft (1.5 m)
in length, with fleshy
lobed leaves and
barbed, woody fruit.

Parts Used

Tuber is harvested in autumn
and used in a variety of
antiarthritic preparations.

Chopped dried tuber

Sliced dried
tuber

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take if suffering from gallstones or peptic ulcer. Do not take
during pregnancy. May interact with anticoagulants.

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For rheumatism, simmer | tsp root
in cup (150 ml) water for 15 minutes.
Take in small doses over |—2 days.

Tablets Take for arthritis
and rheumatism.

Self-help Uses

= Arthritis & inflamed joints, p. 313.

= Back pain due to joint
inflammation, p. 313.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For arthritis associated with
poor digestion, take 30 drops
with water twice daily.

relief from pain arising from a range
of joint and muscular problems,
including gout, back pain, fibrositis,
and rheumatoid arthritis.

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 106 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

104

Hops

“endanger the people.’

Hops have been cultivated for brewing
beer since at least the | | th century.
The bines (stems) are trained up raised
wire runners.

& Parts Used

@
7

ried strobiles

Strobiles (female flowers) are leafy conelike
catkins. Ripe strobiles may be used fresh but are more
commonly dried for their sedative and bitter action.

Humulus lupulus (Cannabaceae)

The bitter taste of hops, which is well known to beer
drinkers, largely accounts for this herb’s ability to strengthen
and stimulate the digestion. Hops are also sedative and
make a valuable remedy for sleeplessness and excitability.
When the plant was first used to brew beer in England in
the | 6th century, it aroused great opposition: a petition

to Parliament described it as “‘a wicked weed” that would

Habitat & Cultivation
Indigenous to Europe and Asia,

hops flourish along roadsides and in
open areas. They are grown
commercially throughout northern
Europe and northern states of

the U.S. Flowers of the female plant
(strobiles) are picked in early autumn
and dried at a low temperature.

Related Species
Hops are related to marijuana
(Cannabis sativa, p. 181).

Key Constituents
= Bitter principles (lupulin containing
humulon, lupulon and valerianic acid)

Fresh strobiles

The strobiles SS
at the end of bines that

grow up to 13 ft (4m)

a

= Volatile oil (1% ), humulene
m= Flavonoids

= Polyphenolic tannins

= Estrogenic substances

Key Actions
= Sedative

= Soporific

= Antispasmodic
= Aromatic bitter

Research

= Bitter principles

The bitter principles as a whole
strongly stimulate the digestive
system, increasing the rate of
gastric and other secretions. A
number of constituents, such as
lupulin, are sedative, though it is not
yet entirely understood how they
work. Lupulon and humulon

are antiseptic.

= Other research The herb
relaxes smooth muscle and has
been shown to have an estrogenic
effect. Some isolated constituents
are thought to depress central
nervous activity.

a pillow to aid sleep.

fas

Sachet Make a sachet with
100 g dried herb. Put inside

Hops

A tall, climbing
perennial, growing

to 23 ft (7 m). Hop
plants are either male
or female.
Traditional &

Current Uses

= Historical uses Hops feature
only occasionally in early herbals,
and the health benefits ascribed

to them are similar to our
understanding today.

= Sedative The herb is used mostly
for its sedative effect. A sachet placed
inside a bed pillow releases an aroma
that calms the mind. Hops help to
reduce irritability and restlessness
and promote a sound night's sleep.

= Tension Blended with other
herbs, hops are good for stress,
anxiety, tension, and headaches,
though they should not be used

if depression is a factor. Their
antispasmodic action makes hops
useful for certain types of asthma
and for period pain.

= Aid to digestion Hops are
beneficial for the digestion, increasing
stomach secretions and relaxing
spasms and colic.

Self-help Uses

= Insomnia, p. 309.

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take if suffering from depression.

Infusion (to make, p. 291).
For insomnia, drink %4 cup
(150 ml) at night.

wd ew

Tablets usually contain other herbs.
‘Take for stress or sleeplessness.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For excessive
anxiety, take 20 drops diluted in a glass of
water 3 times a day. For digestive headaches,
take 10 drops with water up to 6 times a day.

> Capsules (to make, p. 292). To stimulate the appetite, take a
300 mg capsule 2 times a day before meals.

----- PAGE 107 -----
Goldenseal

Hydrastis canadensis (Ranunculaceae)

Goldenseal is a North American remedy, prized during
the | 9th century as a cure-all. The Cherokee and other
Native Americans used it, mixed with bear fat, as an insect
repellent, and they also made it into a lotion for wounds,
ulcers, and sore, inflamed eyes. It was given internally for
stomach and liver problems. Today it is employed as an
astringent, antibacterial remedy for the mucous

membranes of the body.

Goldenseal is an unusual looking plant with
a single, red inedible fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation
Goldenseal grows wild in moist
mountainous woodland areas of
North America and prefers soil
that is well covered with dead
leaves. Due to excessive harvesting
in the wild, instances of goldenseal
in its natural habitat have become
very rare. In 1997 it was listed as an
endangered species, and so only
cultivated produce should be used.
Goldenseal is propagated by root
division. Rhizomes from 3-year-old
plants are dug up in the autumn and
dried in the open air on cloth.

Key Constituents

= lsoquinoline alkaloids
(hydrastine, berberine,
canadine)

= Volatile oil

= Resin

Key Actions

= Bitter tonic

= Anti-inflammatory

= Antibacterial

= Uterine stimulant

= Stops internal bleeding

Research

= Alkaloids For an herb with
such a high medicinal reputation,
there has been very little research
into its pharmacology, but it is
known that goldenseal’s medicinal
actions are due largely to the
isoquinoline alkaloids.
= Hydrastine Research in
Canada in the late 1960s showed
that hydrastine constricts the blood
vessels and stimulates the autonomic
nervous system.
= Antibacterial Although this
herb’s mode of action and degree
of effectiveness is not fully known,
it has been found that the herb'’s
constituents collectively have a
stronger antibacterial activity than
berberine alone.

= Berberine Berberine is bitter,
antibacterial, and amebicidal.
Recent research has established
that it can be used to lower harmful
blood-fat levels and stabilize blood
glucose levels.

= Canadine Research shows that
this alkaloid stimulates the muscles
of the uterus.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Mucous membranes Most
authorities agree that goldenseal
is a potent remedy for disorders
affecting mucous membranes of
the body, notably of the eye, ear,
nose, and throat, the stomach and
intestines, and the vagina.

= Countering infection As

a dilute infusion, goldenseal can
be used as an eyewash, as a
mouthwash for infected gums,
and as an extremely effective

Parts Used

Rhizome contains alkaloids that
help to soothe and astringe the
mucous membranes.

Dried rhizome

Rhizome has a
characteristic golden
yellow color

Fresh rhizome

Goldenseal

A small herbaceous
perennial, with a thick
yellow root and an
erect stem growing
to | ft (30 cm).

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Toxic if taken to excess. Do not take if suffering from high blood pressure:
Do not take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Not suitable for children.

Capsules For gastritis,
take a 300 mg capsule
3 times a day.

r )

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For excess mucus, take 20 drops
with water 3 times a day.

Powder is used to make capsules (see p. 292).

= Decoction (to make, p. 291). For sore throats, gargle 2/4 tbsp 34 times a day.

“Infusion of powder (to make, p. 291). For yeast infections, apply % cup (150 ml).

wash or douche for vaginal yeast

and vaginal infections generally.

The infusion is also valued as a
remedy for psoriasis.

= Digestive problems Taken
internally, goldenseal increases
digestive secretions, astringes the
mucous membranes that line the gut,
and checks inflammation. It should
not be taken for extended periods
of time as it reduces the gut's capacity

to absorb certain nutrients, notably
B vitamins.

= Gynecological uses
Goldenseal helps to reduce heavy
menstrual bleeding and is used by
herbal practitioners and midwives
to help stop bleeding following

Goldenseal stimulates the uterus and
should not, therefore, be taken
during pregnancy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDOIGHW Adm ©

fe
childbirth (postpartum hemorrhage). Pi

a

105

----- PAGE 108 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Hypericum perforatum (Hypericaceae)

St. John’s Wort

St. John’s wort flowers at the summer solstice. In medieval
Europe it was considered to have the power to protect
against ill health and evil influences. Medicinally it was
thought to heal wounds and “all down-heartedness.” In the
|9th century the herb fell into disuse, but recent research
has brought it back into prominence as a key herb for
nervous exhaustion and depression. It is now one of the
most used herbal medicines in the world.

St. John’s wort was a folk remedy for insanity
in the Middle Ages.

Habitat & Cultivation

St. John's wort thrives in temperate
regions worldwide. It prefers a sunny
site and well-drained, chalky soil. It
can be grown from seed or by root
division in autumn. The flowering
tops are harvested in summer.

Related Species
A number of other Hypericum species
have a roughly similar medicinal action.

Key Constituents

= Phloroglucinols (hyperforin)
= Polycyclic diones (hypericin)
m= Flavonoids

Key Actions

= Antidepressant

= Anxiolytic

m= Antiviral

= Wound healer

= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Depression Clinical research
since the 1970s has established St.
John's wort as an effective treatment
for mild to moderate depression.

A review in 2009 also concluded
that the herb was helpful in treating
severe depression. Research shows.
that St. John’s wort works on
neurotransmitter levels (e.g. serotonin)
in several different ways.

a Viral infection St. John’s wort
extracts (particularly hypericin, the
red pigment found in the petals and
leaves) have strong antiviral activity,
notably against influenza, herpes, and
hepatitis B and C.

= Safety St. John's wort rarely
causes side effects itself, but

it does interact with certain
conventional medicines, mostly
increasing the rate at which they
are broken down by the liver.

This changes the amount of the
drug present in the bloodstream,
significantly reducing its
effectiveness. In rare situations,
this can be life threatening.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Nerve tonic The herb acts as a
restorative and neuroprotective,
helping to reverse long-term nervous
exhaustion and lowered mood. It
can prove useful in seasonal affective
disorder and chronic anxiety, and
improves sleep quality.

= Menopause The herb is
considered a specific for the lowered
mood that can accompany
menopause, often combined with
black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa,

p. 79) in such cases.

= Tissue healing The red infused
oil has potent wound-healing
properties and historically has been
used to heal knife and stab wounds.
Nowadays, St. John’s wort oil is more

# St. John’s wort
An erect perennial
growing to 32 in
(80 cm), with bright
yellow flowers in a
flat-topped cluster.

£3 Parts Used

Flowering tops are
picked when the
flowers have opened.

Bright yellow petals
have oil glands
containing hypericin

Fresh
flowering tops

Fresh flowers

Dried flowering tops

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Can cause sensitivity to sunlight. Due to possible interactions, seek
professional advice if taking a prescribed medicine, including blood thinners.
Restricted in some countries. Do not combine with other antidepressants.

Infused oil Make by
steeping the herb
in oil for 6 weeks
(see p. 294). Dab
onto minor wounds
and burns.

Cream (to make, p. 296). For
cramps or neuralgia, rub onto
the affected part.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For depression, take 4 tsp
with water 3 times a day.

‘“e! Infusion (to make, p. 291), Drink 2 cup (100 ml) daily as a digestive tonic.

commonly used to promote healing
after surgery and minor burns.

The oil can be particularly helpful

in relieving neuralgia—shingles,
sciatica, and toothache being
common applications.

= Back pain, p. 313.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Cold sores, chicken pox, &
shingles, p. 304.

= Depression & decreased vitality
due to menopause, p. 3! 6.

= Neuralgia, p. 308.

Self-help Uses m Stiff & aching joints, p. 313.
= Anxiety, depression & tension, = Tired & aching muscles,
p. 308. p.312.

----- PAGE 109 -----
Inula helenium (Asteraceae)

Elecampane

Prized by the Romans as a medicine and as a food,
this herb derives tts botanical name from Helen

of Troy, who, according to legend, was holding
elecampane in her hand when she set off with Paris
to live with him in Troy. The root of the plant has
long been seen as a gently warming and tonic herb,
and is particularly useful for chronic bronchitis and

other chest problems.

“Elecampane will the spirits sustain,”
is a medieval saying. It reflects the herb’s
tonic properties.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to southeastern Europe
and western Asia, elecampane
now grows in many temperate
regions, including parts of the U.S.
It is also cultivated. Propagated
from seed in spring or by root
division, it prefers moist, well-drained
ground. The root is unearthed in
autumn, cut up, and then dried at
a high temperature.

Related Species

Xuan fu hua (I. japonica) grows

in China and Japan. Other relatives
used medicinally include sunflower
(Helianthus annuus), common
fleabane (Pulicaria dysenterica), and
echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 94).

Key Constituents

= Inulin (up to 44%)

= Volatile oil (up to 4%),
containing alantol
and sesquiterpene lactones
(including alantolactone)

= Triterpene saponins

= Phytosterols

Key Actions

= Expectorant

= Soothes coughing
= Increases sweating
a Mildly bitter

= Eliminates worms
= Antibacterial

Research

= Inulin Inulin was first isolated
from elecampane in | 804 and
‘took its name from the herb. It
has mucilaginous qualities that
help soothe the bronchial linings.
= Antimicrobial Alantolactone
has been shown to have significant
activity against the tuberculosis
mycobacterium. Researchers in
Ireland found that the root had
potent effect against MRSA, an
antibiotic-resistant “superbug.”

= Whole herb As a whole, the
root has a stimulant, expectorant
effect, encouraging the coughing
up of mucus from the lungs. The
volatile oil is known to be partly
responsible for this and also for
the herb's antiseptic properties.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Chest infections Elecampane
has long been valued for its tonic,
strengthening effect on the
respiratory system and for its
ability to resolve chest infections.
Its warming effect on the lungs,
combined with its ability to gently
stimulate the clearing of mucus
from the chest, makes it safe for
young and old. It can be used in
almost all chest conditions, and

is very useful when the patient

is debilitated.

Parts Used

Root contains inulin, a
mucilaginous (jelly-like)
substance that soothes
and relieves coughing.

Dried root

Elecampane

A perennial growing
to 10 ft (3 m), with
golden yellow, daisy-
like flowers and large,
pointed leaves.

Sturdy
flowering
stem

NFS Gl i
A ANI
"Sa

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Can cause skin reactions. Do not take internally in pregnancy

or if breastfeeding.

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For irritable coughs, take 4 cup
(75 ml) 2-3 times a day.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For bronchitis,
mix 2/4 tbsp with 2/4 tbsp thyme tincture.
Take | tsp 3 times a day.

“er Syrup For coughs, make an infusion (see p. 291) and simmer until it has reduced

to half its volume, before adding the sugar or honey (to make, p. 293). Take |—2 tsp

every 2 hours.

= Chronic chest complaints
Elecampane's qualities have led to
its specific use for chronic bronchitis
and bronchial asthma. It is particularly
useful because it both soothes the
bronchial tube linings and is an
expectorant. In addition, the herb

is mildly bitter, helping recovery

by improving digestion and the
absorption of nutrients.

= Digestive problems
Elecampane has been taken
traditionally as a tonic herb for the

digestion. It stimulates the appetite
and relieves dyspepsia. It is a useful
remedy for the treatment of worms.
= Infection In the past, elecampane
was used in the treatment of
tuberculosis. It works well with
other antiseptic herbs and is given
for infections such as tonsillitis. Its
restorative, tonic action complements
its ability to counter infection.

Self-help Use
= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

—
~~

107

----- PAGE 110 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

108

Lavandula angustifolia syn. L. officinalis (Lamiaceae)

Lavender

Lavender is an important relaxing herb, but it is better
known for its sweet-scented aroma than for its medicinal
properties. It became popular as a medicine during the
late Middle Ages, and in 1620 it was one of the medicinal

herbs taken to the New World by the Pilgrims. It was
described by the herbalist John Parkinson (1640) as
being of “especiall good use for all griefes and paines

of the head and brain.”

Lavender is widely cultivated for perfume
and medicinal use.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to France and the western
Mediterranean, lavender is cultivated
worldwide for its volatile oil. It is
propagated from seed or cuttings
and needs a sunny position. The
flowers are picked in the morning
in high summer and are dried, or
distilled to produce essential oil.

Related Species

Spike lavender (L. spica) yields more
oil than L. officinalis, but of an inferior
quality. L. stoechas is used as an
antiseptic wash for wounds, ulcers,
and sores in Spain and Portugal.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (up to 3%)
containing over 40 constituents,
including linalyl acetate (30-60%),
cineole (10%), linalool,
nerol, borneol

= Flavonoids

Key Actions
= Antispasmodic
= Relieves anxiety
= Antidepressant

= Neuroprotective
= Antimicrobial

Research

= Lavender oil A 2014 cinical trial
found lavender oil taken internally
to be more effective than both a

placebo and a conventional tranquilizer

in relieving generalized anxiety. It also
showed antidepressant activity. Other
studies have found similar benefits
and tended to confirm relaxant,
antidepressant, and gently sedative
activity. The oil is thought to have low
toxicity and significant antibacterial
and antifungal activity.

= Flowers Lavender flowers and oil
have similar properties. Although

little research has been conducted,

it is likely the flowers have a
significantly greater carminative and
neuroprotective activity. Applied
externally, flower extracts are
insecticidal and rubefacient (irritant
and stimulating to the local circulation).

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Nervous system Lavender is well
known for its soothing and calming
effect and is combined with other
sedative herbs to relieve sleeplessness,
irritability, headaches, and migraine.

It also helps to alleviate depression.

= Digestion Like many herbs

with a significant volatile oil content,
lavender soothes indigestion and
colic, and relieves gas and bloating.

= Asthma Lavender's relaxing effect
makes it helpful for some types of
asthma, especially where excessive
nervousness is a feature.

= Essential oil The oil is an
invaluable first aid remedy. It is

& Parts Used

Flowers are
harvested toward
the end of flowering,
when the petals have
begun to fade.

Flowers contain
high levels of
volatile oil

Dried flowers

Lavender

A perennial shrub
growing to 3 ft (1 m),
with spikes of violet-
blue flowers extending
above the foliage.

Fresh
flowers

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take essential oil internally except under professional supervision.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For insomnia, take /4—| tsp
with water at night.

Massage oil For headaches, combine
20 drops with | tbsp carrier oil and
apply (see p. 297).

Q Essential oil Apply undiluted to insect stings.

© Infusion (to make, p. 291) is a calming remedy for digestive problems.
For indigestion, take 4 cup (75 ml) twice a day.

strongly antiseptic, helping to heal
burns, wounds, and sores. Rubbed
onto insect stings, it relieves pain and
inflammation, and can be used to treat
scabies and head lice. Massaging a few
drops on the temples eases headaches,
and five drops added to a bath at night
relieves muscle tension, tones the
nervous system, and encourages sleep.

Self-help Uses

= Back pain, p. 313.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Burns & sunburn, p. 309.

= Earache, p. 312.

m Headaches & migraine, p. 309.
= Insomnia, p. 309.

= Neuralgia, p. 308.

= Stiff & aching joints, p. 313.

----- PAGE 111 -----
Linum usitatissimum (Linaceae)

Flaxseed, Linseed

Flaxseed or linseed has been cultivated in the Middle
East for at least 7,000 years, and its seed and fiber

have been put to innumerable

uses—both medicinal

and industrial—throughout history. Flaxseed has been

shown to have very high levels

of polyunsaturated

essential fatty acids, making it valuable in maintaining

a healthy heart and circulation,
chronic inflammatory diseases.

Flaxseed is the best vegetable source
of omega-3 essential fatty acids.

Habitat & Cultivation
Originally native to temperate zones

in Europe and Asia, flaxseed is

now widely cultivated in temperate
regions, including Canada and the

US.,, Argentina, and northern Europe.
It is grown from seed in spring and
harvested when the seed is ripe in late
summer or early autumn.

Related Species

Purging flax (L. catharticum), native
to western Europe, is a purgative,
but no longer used.

Key Constituents

a Fixed oil (approximately 35%)
mostly alpha-linolenic acid
(omega-essential fatty acid)
Protein (about 26%)

Fiber (about 14%)

Mucilage (about 12%)

Sterols

Lignans

Key Actions
= Demulcent

= Emollient
a

Laxative

and in preventing

= Phytoestrogenic
= Cancer-fighting

Research

= Omega-3 oils Flaxseed is
unusual in that it has very high levels
of alpha-linolenic acid, an omega-3
polyunsaturated fatty acid, similar to
those most commonly found in fish
oils. Research indicates that omega-3
oils have significant anti-inflammatory
activity. They also help to protect the
heart and circulation, and to reduce
heart irregularities. The seed, rather
than the oil, helps to lower
cholesterol
= Cancer-fighting Ground flaxseed
appears to be specifically useful
against endometrial, breast, and
prostate cancer: it is rich in omega-3
oils, which are deficient in most
Western diets; in lignans, which are
phytoestrogenic and reduce the
impact of estradiol (a potentially
harmful type of estrogen); and in
mucilage and fiber, which prevent
reabsorption of unwanted estrogens
from the intestines. Flaxseed added
to the diet lowers PSA levels (used to
measure prostate cancer risk) and
thus is thought to protect against
prostate cancer.

levels.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Laxative Flaxseed has mostly
been used as a bulk laxative,
especially valuable in chronic
constipation. The seeds soak up
fluid in the gut, helping to make
the stool softer and encouraging
easier bowel movements. They
should be taken with about 5 times
their volume of water. With their

Flaxseed

A slender annual, to
3 ft (1 m) tall, with
narrow leaves, blue
flowers, and spherical
seed capsules.

Whole seeds gently
support elimination
and cleanse the colon.
Cracked or ground
seeds need to be used
for other medicinal
benefits. Golden
linseed varieties are
usually preferred.

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not use immature seeds, which may be toxic. Store cracked or
ground seed in a closed container and keep in the fridge.

Oil from the seed is convenient to use
but goes rancid easily. Take |—2 tsp
daily as a nutritional supplement.

Cracked or ground seed Take
|-2 tbsp daily with water to help

relieve menopausal symptoms. g c

«, Flour is mixed with water and used as a poultice, and used in baking as a
phytoestrogenic food during menopause.

significant mucilage content, the
seeds are also soothing and anti-
inflammatory, reducing irritation
and inflammation in the gut in

such conditions as colitis, irritable
bowel, and hemorrhoids.

= Respiratory & urinary
disorders The seeds, which need
to be split or ground up before being
swallowed, soothe the chest and,

to a lesser extent, the urinary tract.
They have proved helpful in chronic
or paroxysmal coughs, bronchitis, and
emphysema, and in urinary troubles
such as chronic cystitis.

= External uses A poultice of the
crushed seeds or of flaxseed flour is

applied to painful or tender boils and
carbuncles, softening the skin and
drawing out the purulent material.
A Portuguese recipe recommends
combining flaxseed oil with red
wine as an effective topical remedy
for wounds.

= Menopause Adding flaxseed

to the diet can support estrogen
balance at menopause and reduce
associated symptoms. Flax and other
seeds can be made into a
“menopause cake.”

Self-help Uses
= Constipation, p. 317.
= Menopause, p. 316.

SINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AX ©

----- PAGE 112 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Lobelia inflata (Campanulaceae)

Lobelia, Indian Tobacco

Lobelia is a powerful antispasmodic used for respiratory
and muscle disorders. In common with other Lobelia
species, it was a traditional Native American remedy
for many conditions. It was used as a “‘puke weed”’ to
induce vomiting, as a remedy for worms and venereal
disease, and as an expectorant. Lobelia was also smoked
as a substitute for tobacco, and was reputed to share

Lobelia

An annual growing

to 20 in (50 cm), with
lance-shaped leaves
and pale blue, pink-
tinged flowers.

Aerial parts have
important antispasmodic
properties and help relieve
respiratory complaints.

some of its magical qualities.

Lobelia’s pale blue flowers were believed to
have magical properties and were used
to ward off ghosts.

Habitat & Cultivation

An indigenous American plant,
lobelia is found in much of North
America, especially in eastern parts
of the U.S. It grows by roadsides and
in neglected areas, and prefers acid
soil. The aerial parts are harvested
in early autumn, when the seed
capsules are most numerous, and
are carefully dried.

Related Species

At least 4 other Lobelia species were
traditionally used by Native Americans.
One, great lobelia (L. siphilitica), as its
Latin name suggests, was credited

by Native Americans and European
settlers with the power to cure
syphilis. Chinese lobelia (ban bian
lian, L. chinensis) is used in Chinese
herbal medicine mainly as a diuretic
and for snake bite.

Key Constituents

a Piperidine alkaloids (6%)—
principally lobeline, but
many others present

= Carboxylic acids

Key Actions

= Respiratory stimulant
= Antispasmodic

= Expectorant

= Induces vomiting

= Increases sweating

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Native American remedy
Lobelia was a traditional Native

American remedy with a wide range

of applications. Its use was later
championed by the American
herbalist Samuel Thomson (1769—
1843), who made the herb the
mainstay of his therapeutic system
(see p. 27). He mainly used it to
induce vomiting.

= Therapeutic properties The

whole herb is strongly antispasmodic.

The constituent lobeline stimulates
the respiratory center within the
brain stem, producing stronger

and deeper breathing. Laboratory
investigations during the 1990s
suggest that lobeline has
antidepressant activity.

= Respiratory problems

A powerful antispasmodic and
respiratory stimulant, lobelia is
valuable for asthma, particularly
bronchial asthma, and chronic
bronchitis. The herb helps to relax
the muscles of the smaller bronchial
tubes, thereby opening the airways,
stimulating breathing, and promoting
the coughing up of phlegm. In the
Anglo-American herbal tradition,
lobelia has always been combined
with cayenne (Capsicum frutescens,
p. 74); the heating, stimulant action
helps to push blood into areas that
lobelia has relaxed.

NX
~
=

Dried aerial parts

Fresh
aerial parts

Fresh leaves

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Cautions Take only when prescribed by a medical herbalist
or doctor and do not eat the fresh plant. Excessive ingestion
is rare (vomiting normally occurs first) but can be fatal. Restricted

herb in some countries.

Nao / /

Infusion is prescribed
for bronchitis.

= External applications Some
constituents, especially lobeline,
break down rapidly in the body, and
lobelia is often most effective applied
externally. Its antispasmodic action
helps to relax muscles, particularly
smooth muscle, making it useful for
sprains, and back problems where
muscle tension is a key factor. In

Tincture is given
to relieve asthma.

Tablets containing lobelia in
combination with other herbs are
used to treat bronchial asthma.

combination with cayenne, lobelia has
been used as a chest and sinus rub.

= Tobacco addiction

The piperidine alkaloids, especially
lobeline, have similar chemical

effects to nicotine, found in tobacco
(Nicotiana tabacum, p. 240), and
lobelia is employed by herbalists

to help patients give up smoking.

----- PAGE 113 -----
Lycium chinense syn. L. barbarum (Solanaceae)

Go} Berry, Chinese Wolfberry

Goji berry is a major Chinese tonic herb, first
mentioned in the Divine Husbandman's Classic
(Shen'nong Bencaojing) written in the | st century CE.
‘Traditionally it is believed to promote long life—a
Chinese herbalist, said to have lived for 252 years,
ascribed his longevity to tonic herbs, including goji
berry. Today, both the berries and the root have a
wide range of medicinal uses.

Research

= Immune modulation
Research that has been carried out
over the past 30 years indicates goji
berry supports immune function, in
part countering the reduction of
white blood cell production resulting
from aging. It also appears to
prevent infection by preventing
bacteria and viruses from attaching
to cell membranes, particularly in
the liver. The polysaccharides have
cancer-fighting activity.

= Zeaxanthin This compound,
occurring in higher concentration

in goji berry than any other food,

is taken as a supplement to support
eyesight and the health of the retina.
It is thought to protect against age-
related macular degeneration.

= Tonic and neuroprotective

Goji berry produces berries that are
a blood tonic.

Habitat & Cultivation
Goji berry grows throughout much
of China and Tibet, and is cultivated
extensively across central and
northern China. It is grown from
seed in autumn. The root can be

Parts Used

Root is used in preparations
to relieve fevers.

U)

Dried root

Berries can be eaten

growing to 13 ft (4m),
with bright green
leaves and scarlet
berries.

Fresh
berries
on sprig

raw or dried, or used
in cooking, e.g. soups.

Dried
berries

fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Cautions Avoid during pregnancy It can interact
with some prescribed medicines: do not take with warfarin.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adm

unearthed at any time of the year,
but is most commonly harvested
in spring. The berries are picked in
late summer or early autumn.

Key Constituents
= Beta-sitosterol
Berries only:

= Polysaccharides

= Betaine

= Sterols

= Carotenoids—mostly zeaxanthin
a Vitamins B,, B,., and C
Root only:

= Cinnamic acid

a Psyllic acid

Key Actions

= Tonic

= Protects liver

= Neuroprotective

= Lowers blood pressure
= Anti-aging

Several clinical trials in China have
found that goji berry juice promotes
general well-being, reducing signs
of fatigue, weakness, depression,
and stress. In early-stage research,
goji berry has shown promise as a
neuroprotective agent, and seems
to act within the brain to prevent
some aspects of the degenerative
processes associated with
Alzheimer's disease.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Circulation |n China, goji berry
is taken as a blood tonic and to
improve the circulation. It is also
taken in order to help lower blood
pressure and treat a range of
symptoms that include dizziness
and tinnitus.

= Slowing aging The traditional
use of goji berry as a tonic of key

Decoction of the
root (to make,

p.291). For fevers, take
Ya cup (100 ml) daily

Tincture of the root
(to make, p. 292). For
coughs and wheezing,
take 4 tsp diluted with

Making a decoction with berries
Chop dried berries and simmer
(see p. 291). For poor eyesight,
take 2 cup (100 ml) daily.

water 3 times a day.

importance in the elderly is

gradually being endorsed by research.

Combined effects that protect
immune, liver, cardio-vascular, and
brain function from deterioration
suggest that goji berry has a place in

the diet of anyone seeking to keep
healthy in their later years. A small
handful of berries taken on a daily
basis (eaten raw or as part of a larger
dish) makes a useful contribution to
long term good health.

----- PAGE 114 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Melaleuca alternifolia (Myrtaceae)

Tea Tree

Tea tree, and in particular its essential oil, is one of the
most important natural antiseptics. Useful for stings,
burns, wounds, and skin infections of all kinds, the herb
merits a place in every medicine chest. Tea tree is native
to Australia and is a traditional remedy of the Aborigines.
Its therapeutic properties were first researched during
the 1920s, and it is now widely used in Europe and the

USS., as well as in Australia.

Tea tree provides one of the most effective
natural antiseptics.

Habitat & Cultivation

Tea tree is native to Australia,
flourishing in moist soils in northern
New South Wales and Queensland.
It is now cultivated extensively,
especially in New South Wales.

Tea tree is grown from cuttings

in summer. The leaves and small
branches are picked throughout
the year and distilled to produce
essential oil.

Related Species

Other Melaleuca species that provide
valuable essential oils include cajuput
(M. leucadendron, p. 233), broad-
leaved paperbark tree (M. viridiflora)
and M. linariifolia, the essential oil of
which is very similar to tea tree.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil containing terpinen-4-
ol (40%), gamma-terpinene (24%),
alpha-terpinene (10%), cineo (5%)
(percentages are variable).

Key Actions
= Antiseptic
= Antibacterial

= Antifungal
a= Antiviral
= Immune stimulant

Research

= Antiseptic properties Tea tree
essential oil was first researched in
1923 in Australia. Since the 1960s

it has been intensively investigated,
and its antiseptic properties are

well established. Clinical trials, mainly
in Australia, have shown that it is
effective at treating a broad range

of infectious conditions, especially
fungal and skin problems such as
vaginal yeast, acne, and warts.

= Active constituents One of
the most important constituents is
known to be terpinen-4-ol, which

is significantly antiseptic and well
tolerated by the skin. The oil also
contains cineol, which can irritate
the skin. The cineol content varies—
poor-quality oil has more than

10%; in some cases up to 65%.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional remedy Tea tree is
a traditional Aboriginal remedy. The
leaves are crushed and either inhaled
or used in infusions for coughs, colds,
and skin infections.

a Skin problems Tea tree can be
applied to skin infections such as
athlete's foot and ringworm, as well
as to corns, warts, acne, and boils,
infected burns, wounds, insect bites
and stings, and other skin conditions.
= Chronic infections Tea tree may
be taken internally as a treatment for
chronic, and some acute, infections,
notably cystitis, glandular fever, and
chronic fatigue syndrome.

Parts Used

Leaves have high levels of a
strongly antiseptic volatile oil
and are used in preparations for
skin problems and infections.

Dried leaves

fiKey Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take the
essential oil internally except
under professional supervision.

Cream Add 5 drops
essential oil to | tsp
base cream and apply
to pimples 3 times

a day.

i”

Infusion (to make, p. 291). For chronic
infections, infuse 4 tsp herb in 4 cup
(150 ml) of water. Take twice a day.

Tea tree

An evergreen reaching
23 ft (7 m), with
layers of papery bark,
pointed leaves, and
white flower spikes.

Leaves have a
strong aroma
when crushed

Fresh
leaves

Essential oil Add 3 drops
to 12 drops carrier oil and
dab onto athlete's foot.

_| Pessaries (to make, p. 297). For vaginal infections, insert one a day.

= Oral infections The herb is
effective in mouthwashes, countering
oral infection and gum disease, and

it can also be used as a gargle for

sore throats.

= Vaginal infections Tea tree is

an excellent remedy for vaginal
irritation and infection, including yeast

infections. It may be used as a pessary
or can be diluted in a carrier cream
and then applied.

Self-help Uses

= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Athlete's foot, p. 304.

= Vaginal yeast infection, p. 314.

----- PAGE 115 -----
Melissa officinalis (Lamiaceae)

Lemon Balm, Melissa

In writing that “Balm is sovereign for the brain,
strengthening the memory and powerfully chasing
away melancholy,’ John Evelyn (1620-1706) neatly
summarized lemon balm’s long tradition as a tonic
remedy that raises the spirits and comforts the heart.
‘Today, this sweet-smelling herb is still widely valued for
its calming properties, and new research shows that it
can help significantly in the treatment of cold sores.

Lemon balm’s botanical name, Melissa,
comes from the Greek for bee and refers to
the great attraction the plant holds for bees.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to southern Europe, western
Asia, and northern Africa, lemon
balm now grows throughout the
world, The plant is propagated from
seed or cuttings in spring. The aerial
parts are picked from early summer
onward and are best harvested

just before the flowers open, when
the concentration of volatile oil is

at its highest.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil up to 0.2% (citral,
caryophyllene oxide, linalool,
and citronellal)

m= Flavonoids

= Triterpenes

= Polyphenols

= Tannins

Key Actions

= Relaxant

= Antispasmodic

= Increases sweating
= Carminative

= Antiviral

= Nerve tonic

Research

= Volatile oil German research
has shown that the volatile oil, and in
particular citral and citronellal, calm
the central nervous system. The oil
is also strongly antispasmodic.
= Polyphenols Polyphenols are
antiviral. In particular, they combat the
herpes simplex virus, which produces
cold sores. In one research study, the
average healing time of cold sores was
halved to about 5 days and the time
between outbreaks doubled.
= Thyroid Lemon balm inhibits
thyroid function.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional uses This herb has
always been taken to lift the spirits.
Taken regularly, it was believed to
encourage longevity. Other traditional
uses include healing wounds, relieving
palpitations and relaxing the heart,
and treating toothache.

= Modern relaxing tonic Lemon
balm is a relaxing tonic for anxiety,
mild depression, restlessness, and
irritability. It reduces feelings of
nervousness and panic and will

often quiet a racing heart, being

a valuable remedy for palpitations
of a nervous origin. Lemon balm

is also useful when too much anxiety
is causing digestive problems such as
indigestion, acidity, nausea, bloating,
and colicky pains.

= Cold sores Lemon balm relieves
cold sores and reduces the chances
of further outbreaks.

= Hormonal herb Following the
discovery of its antithyroid effect, the
herb is given to people with an
overactive thyroid.

Lemon balm

A perennial growing
to 5 ft (1.5 m), with
tiny white flowers
and deeply veined,
toothed leaves.

Parts Used

Aerial parts are used in a variety
of preparations as a calming remedy.

Leaves produce
a lemon scent
when crushed

Fresh aerial
parts

Dried aerial parts

fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take the essential oil internally
except under professional supervision.

Essential oil For shingles, add 5 drops
to | tsp olive oil and massage the
painful area gently (see p. 297).

Infusion (to make, p. 291).
For nervous headaches, drink
% cup (150 ml) 3 times a day.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For
anxiety and mild depression, take
4 tsp with water 3 times a day.

= Lotion For cold sores, make an infusion (see p. 291) and apply
regularly (see p. 296).

“Si. Juice Apply as needed to cuts and scrapes.

~ Ointment (to make, p. 295). Apply to insect stings.

= Other uses Lemon balm is a = Cold sores, chicken pox,
& shingles, p. 304.

= Flu with muscle aches
& pains, p. 31 |.

= Nausea due to emotional

first-aid remedy for cuts and insect
stings and is good for fevers.

Self-help Uses

= Anxiety, depression,
& tension, p. 308.

problems, p. 306.
= Stomachache, p. 305.

SEINV1Id TVNIOIGHW AM ©

----- PAGE 116 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Mentha x piperita (Lamiaceae)

Peppermint

Peppermint's origin is a mystery, but it has been in
existence for a long timme—dried leaves were found
in Egyptian pyramids dating from around | 000 Bce.
It was highly valued by the Greeks and Romans, but
only became popular in Western Europe in the | 8th
century. Peppermint's chief therapeutic value lies in
its ability to relieve gas, flatulence, bloating, and colic,
though it has many other applications.

Peppermint is cultivated in many parts of
the world for its oil.

Habitat & Cultivation
Peppermint is grown commercially
and in gardens throughout Europe,
Asia, and North America. It is
propagated from seed in spring and
is harvested just before it flowers
in summer, in dry sunny weather.

Related Species
Peppermint is a hybrid of watermint
(M. aquatica) and spearmint

(M. spicata), which have similar, though

milder, therapeutic properties.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (up to 1.5%),
including menthol (35-55%),
menthone (10-40%)

= Flavonoids (luteolin,
menthoside)

m= Phenolic acids

= Triterpenes

Key Actions

= Antispasmodic

= Stimulates sweating
= Antimicrobial

= Analgesic

= Carminative

Research

= Volatile oil Research has shown
that the volatile oil is strongly
antibacterial. Menthol (a constituent
of the oil) is antiseptic, antifungal,
cooling, and anesthetic to the skin,
although it is also an irritant.
a Whole herb The whole plant
has an antispasmodic effect on the
digestive system. Clinical trials in
Denmark and the UK during the
1990s have confirmed its value
in the treatment of irritable
bowel syndrome.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Digestive problems
Peppermint is excellent for the
digestive system, increasing the
flow of digestive juices and bile
and relaxing the gut muscles. It
reduces nausea, colic, cramps, and
gas, and soothes an irritated bowel.
In soothing the lining and muscles
of the colon, it helps diarrhea and
relieves a spastic colon (often the
cause of constipation).

= Pain relief Applied to the

skin, peppermint relieves pain and
reduces sensitivity. It also relieves
headaches and migraines linked to
digestive weakness.

a Infection Diluted oil is used as an

inhalant and chest rub for respiratory

infections. The whole herb is
important for digestive infections.

Self-help Uses

= Digestive headaches, p. 309.

= Eczema, p. 300.

= Nausea with headache, p. 306.
= Neuralgia, p. 308.

= Gas & bloating, p. 306.

Peppermint
Astrongly aromatic,
square-stemmed
annual, growing to
32 in (80 cm) with
serrated leaves.

& Parts Used

Aerial parts are distilled
for their volatile oil and used
in a variety of preparations.

Dried aerial parts

Leaves have high
levels of volatile oil,
which has important
digestive properties

Fresh aerial parts

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not give peppermint to children
under 5. The essential oil is best taken internally
‘on the advice of a healthcare practitioner; it is not
suitable for children under 12.
infusion (see p. 296)

Apply to irritated skin.
Infusion (to make,
p. 291). To improve
digestion, drink % cup
(150 ml) after meals.

_ © Tincture mixed with other herbs, is prescribed mainly for digestive problems.

Lotion made with

Essential oil Dilute to

2% (see p. 297) and

dab onto temples to
ease headaches.

“+> Capsules are prescribed for irritable bowel syndrome.

----- PAGE 117 -----
Myristica fragrans (Myristicaceae) #8 An evergreen tree
baie growing to 39 ft

Nutmeg & Mace, Rou Dou Kou (Chinese) RO oo dcnesot

small yellow flowers.

Nutmeg and mace both come from the nutmeg tree

and have very similar medicinal properties. They

are infrequently used in the West because of their
toxicity at high dosages, but nonetheless are important
medicines, employed principally to stimulate
digestion and to treat infections of the digestive tract.
Nutmeg also has long been valued as an aphrodisiac
and as a remedy for eczema and rheumatism.

Nutmeg and mace are cultivated
commercially in the tropics.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to the Molucca Islands of
Indonesia, nutmeg trees are now
widely cultivated. They are propagated
from seed, sown when ripe. The

tree yields fruit after about 8 years,
and can continue to fruit for over
60 years. The fruit is picked when
ripe and the nutmeg and mace are
separated and dried.

Key Constituents

Nutmeg:

= Volatile oil (up to 15%),
including alpha-pinene,
beta-pinene, alpha-terpinene,
beta-terpinene, myristicin,
elincin, safrole

a Fixed oil (“nutmeg butter”),
myristine, butyrin

Mace:

= Volatile oil (similar to nutmeg
but with a higher concentration
of myristicin)

Key Actions
Nutmeg:

= Carminative

= Relieves muscle spasms

= Prevents vomiting
= Stimulant

Mace:

= Stimulant

= Carminative

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Digestive problems Nutmeg
essential oil has an anesthetic and
stimulating effect on the stomach
and intestines, increasing appetite
and reducing nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea. It is a helpful remedy for
many digestive problems, especially
gastroenteritis.

= Sleep aid Though nutmeg is

a stimulant, it has narcotic and
anticonvulsant properties and

can be successfully used at low

dose (a pinch of powder will do)

as a sleep aid for short- or long-term
sleep problems. Laboratory studies
also indicate that nutmeg has
antidepressant activity.

= Aphrodisiac |n India, nutmeg
has a long reputation as an
aphrodisiac. It is believed to
increase sexual stamina.

= External uses Ointments based
on the fixed oil (nutmeg butter) are
used to treat rheumatic conditions.
They have a counterirritant effect,
stimulating blood flow to the area.

In India, nutmeg is ground into a
paste and applied directly to areas
of eczema and ringworm.

= Safety Low medicinal doses and
culinary amounts of nutmeg and mace
are safe. In excess, however, the herbs
are strongly stimulant, hallucinogenic,
and toxic. The consumption of just
two whole nutmegs has been known
to cause death.

Parts Used

Aril (mace) surrounds
the seed casing. It is used in
cooking and as a medicine.

Fresh,
scarlet aril

Aril (mace)
turns yellow
as it dries

Woody seed
casing containing
kernel (nutmeg)

Fruit with
seed and aril

Dried seed and aril

Seed kernel (nutmeg)
is a stimulant remedy for
intestinal infections and
rheumatic conditions. In
China, nutmeg is known
as rou dou kou. Dried seed
kernel (nutmeg)

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Take the essential oil internally only under professional supervision.
Do not take more than 3 g of either herb a day. Do not use during pregnancy.

Grated nutmeg For
eczema, mix 2 tsp
with a little water
into a paste and apply.

Powdered mace is
prescribed to treat
gas and bloating

Infusion For gastroenteritis,

add a pinch of nutmeg
Essential oil of to 4 cup (150 m)) of
nutmeg is occasionally
used by herbalists to

treat vomiting.

—

Ointment made from fixed oil (nutmeg butter). For rheumatic conditions,
apply several times a day.

peppermint infusion (see
p. 291). Take 3 times a day.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AGM

----- PAGE 118 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Ocimum tenuiflorum syn. O. sanctum (Lamiaceae)

Holy Basil, Tulsi (Hindi)

Holy basil, like sweet (culinary) basil, comes from India,
where it is revered as the herb sacred to the goddess
Lakshmi, wife of Vishnu, the god who preserves life. Tulsi
means ‘‘matchless,’ and the herb has very important
medicinal properties—notably its ability to reduce blood-
sugar levels. In Indian herbal medicine, holy basil has a
wide range of uses, relieving fevers, bronchitis, asthma,
stress, and mouth ulcers.

m Reduces fever
= Adaptogenic
= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Diabetes Research into holy basil’s
ability to reduce blood-sugar levels,
and thus help diabetes, has been
going on for some decades. It has
now been established as a useful
medicine for some types of diabetes.
= Indian research Research in
India has shown that holy basil
helps lower blood pressure and has
antiinflammatory, pain-relieving, and
fever-reducing properties. Preliminary
research also indicates that the herb.
strengthens immune resistance,
protects against radiation, has
anticancer properties, and inhibits
sperm production.

Holy basil is so called because it is often
planted around temples and courtyards
in India.

Habitat & Cultivation
Holy basil is native to India and other
tropical regions of Asia. It is also
grown extensively in Central and
South America, mainly for its
medicinal properties. Holy basil can
be grown from seed and is often
cultivated as a potted plant. The
aerial parts are picked before the
flowers open, in early summer.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional use Holy basil

has always been considered to be

a tonic, invigorating herb, useful for
improving vitality.

= Ayurvedic remedy In Ayurvedic
medicine, holy basil is chiefly employed
for fevers. A classical Indian recipe

Related Species

The familiar culinary species,
sweet basil (O. basilicum, p. 241),
is a close relative.

& Parts Used

Aerial parts are tonic and
invigorating and have a wide
range of other properties.

Leaves are serrated and
covered in fine hairs

Dried aerial parts

Holy basil

An aromatic annual
growing to about
28 in (70 cm), with
small, purple-red or
white flowers.

Fresh aerial parts

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. Do not take if trying to conceive.

Juice For skin infections, apply / tbsp
to the affected part twice a day.

~

Decoction (to make, p. 291)
is used for fevers and as a tonic.
Take % cup (150 ml) daily as a
general tonic.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (1%) including
eugenol (70-80%)

= Flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin)

= Triterpene (ursolic acid)

= Polyphenols

= Saponins

Key Actions

= Antispasmodic

= Analgesic

= Lowers blood-sugar levels

mixes holy basil, black pepper (Piper
nigrum, p. 250), ginger (Zingiber
officinale, p. 155), and honey in a
remedy that prevents infection and
controls high fever.

= Heart & stress Holy basil

is thought to have an affinity with
the heart, protecting it from stress
and lowering blood pressure and
cholesterol levels. It has a reputation
for reducing stress and is regarded
as adaptogenic—helping the body to
adapt to new demands and stresses.

Powder For mouth ulcers, rub
powder gently into sore areas
several times a day.

= Other uses Juice is extracted and
applied to insect bites, ringworm,
and skin diseases. It is also used as
ear drops for ear infections. Juice or
powdered herb helps mouth ulcers

= Diabetic remedy The herb’s
ability to help stabilize blood-sugar
levels makes it useful in the treatment
of diabetes.

= Respiratory problems Holy

basil is valuable for respiratory to heal.
infections, especially colds, coughs,
bronchitis, and pleurisy. It also Self-help Use

treats asthma. = Bites & stings, p. 303.

----- PAGE 119 -----
Paeonia lactiflora syn. P. albiflora (Paeoniaceae)

White Peony, Chinese Peony, Bai Shao Yao (Chinese)

White peony’s history of medicinal use in China
stretches back for at least 1,500 years. It is known
most widely as one of the herbs used to make “Four
Things Soup,’ a female tonic, and it is also a remedy
for gynecological problems and for cramps, pain, and
dizziness. Traditionally, it is considered that women
who take the herb on a regular basis become as
radiant as the flower itself.

Research

= Paeoniflorin White peony

has significant anti-inflammatory

and antispasmodic properties, and
preclinical research indicates that

its traditional use for problems such
as rheumatoid arthritis is justified.
Paenoniflorin, the constituent most
responsible for these effects, is also
thought to lower blood pressure

and support blood flow to the heart.
= Polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS) White peony has a
hormone-balancing activity that helps
to reverse the symptoms of PCOS,
which include irregular menstruation
and infertility. In combination with
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101) it
has been shown to support regular
ovulation and to lower the raised
testosterone levels that typically
occur in PCOS.
= Supports cognition There is

White peony is cultivated for its root, which
is a hormonal tonic, and for its flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation
White peony is cultivated throughout
northeastern China and Inner
Mongolia. It is propagated from seed
in spring, or from root cuttings taken
in winter. The root of 4- or 5-year
old plants is harvested in spring

or autumn. accumulating evidence that white
peony supports mental function,
Related Species including spatial awareness and

P. suffructicosa, also commonly
used in East Asian herbal
medicine, and peony (P. officinalis,
p. 243), a European species,
have broadly similar properties
to white peony.

Key Constituents

= Monoterpenoid glycosides
(paeoniflorin, albiflorin)

m= Benzoic acid

= Pentagalloyl glucose

Key Actions

memory. Although no clinical
trials have yet been published,
white peony appears to
strong neuroprotective effect
within the brain.

ave a

= Cold sores Pentagalloyl glucose

may have an antiviral action against

the cold sore virus, herpes simplex.

Traditional &
Current Uses

= Four Things Soup White peony

is regarded primarily as a women's
herb. Together with rehmannia

“t. White peony

An upright perennial,
growing to 64 ft (2 m),
with large white
flowers and divided,
dark green leaves.

Parts Used

Root has important
tonic and pain-relieving
properties. It is boiled
and dried for use in a
wide range of
preparations.

Root has
antispasmodic
properties

Dried root

©) Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Dong quai

Decoction (to make, p. 291) helps relieve
period pain, heavy bleeding, and other
menstrual disorders. To relieve period
pain, take 4 cup (75 ml) 3 times a day.

Rehmannia

Four things soup (to make,
see p. 315). Drink % cup
(150 ml) daily as a general tonic.

White peony
Chuan xiong

the most widely used female tonic
in China.

= Gynecological remedy White
peony helps menstrual disorders,
including heavy bleeding and

(see pp. 40-41) and will help “blood
deficiency” states, as well as hot
flashes and night sweats.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AdM ©

Self-help Uses y\
= Heavy menstrual bleeding, p. 315.

= Hot flashes & night sweats, p. 316.

= Period pain, p. 315.

= Antispasmodic

= Anti-inflammatory

= Enhances cognition

= Lowers blood pressure

(Rehmannia glutinosa, p. 125), chuan
xiong (Ligusticum wallachii), and dong
quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63), it is an
ingredient in “Four Things Soup,”

bleeding between periods, and is
specifically used to treat period pain
and cramps. It is a blood and yin tonic

----- PAGE 120 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

118

Panax ginseng (Araliaceae)

Ginseng, Chinese Ginseng, Ren Shen (Chinese)

Ginseng is the most famous Chinese herb of all. It has
been prized for its remarkable therapeutic benefits for
about 7,000 years, and was so revered that wars were
fought for control of the forests in which it thrived. An
Arabian physician brought ginseng back to Europe in
the 9th century, yet its ability to improve stamina and
resistance to stress became common knowledge in
the West only from the | 8th century.

Research

= Adaptogen Ginseng has been
researched in detail over the last

50 years in China, Japan, Korea,
Russia, and many other countries.

Its remarkable adaptogenic quality
(helping the body adapt to stress,
fatigue and cold) has been confirmed.
Trials show that ginseng significantly
improves the body's capacity to cope
with hunger, extremes of temperature,
and mental and emotional stress.

= Hormonal support The
ginsenosides, which are similar

in structure to the body's own
hormones, can be adapted within the
body to tone up deficient hormonal
states. Clinical trials support the root's
traditional use by men, as they age,

Ginseng has always been valued as a tonic
in old age.

Habitat & Cultivation
Ginseng is native to northeastern
China, eastern Russia, and North
Korea, but is now extremely rare in

the wild. Ginseng cultivation requires
great skill. It is propagated from seed in
spring and requires rich, well-drained
soil. The plant takes at least 4 years to
mature. The root is then normally
harvested in autumn and washed

and steamed before being dried.

Related Species

San qi (P. notoginseng, p. 243),

P. pseudoginseng, and American
ginseng (P. quinquefolium, p. 243)
all have significant benefits.

Key Constituents

= Triterpenoid saponins (0.7—3%),
ginsenosides—at least 25 have
been identified

= Acetylenic compounds

m= Panaxans

= Sesquiterpenes

Key Actions
= Adaptogen
= Tonic

to maintain vitality and virility. There
is also evidence it helps with both
impotence and erectile dysfunction.
Research indicates that ginseng

is equally valuable for women and is
a useful medicine at menopause and
beyond, aiding hot flashes and
lowered mood, and improving
sexual arousal.

= Other research Ginseng
increases immune function and
resistance to infection and improves
liver function. Ginseng is a key herb
in maintaining health and quality of
life in those with cancer.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Chinese remedy In China,
ginseng is best known as a stimulant,
tonic herb for athletes and those
subject to physical stress, and as a
male aphrodisiac. It is also a tonic for
old age, and is traditionally taken by
people in northern and central China

Ginseng

A perennial growing
to 3 ft (1 m), with oval,
toothed leaves and a
cluster of small green-
yellow flowers.

& Parts Used

Root is harvested after 4 years,
when the active constituents are
most concentrated.

f root

In China, dried
root is chewed
to provide an
energy boost

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not exceed dose (can cause insomnia and high blood pressure). Take
‘on professional advice if using blood-thinning medication. Young healthy adults should not
take ginseng more than 6 weeks. Avoid caffeine while taking it. Do not take if pregnant.

Capsules For nervous

exhaustion, take a 500 mg

capsule once a day.

Soup is a common way of
taking ginseng in China. Add
| g dried root per portion
of vegetable soup. Take daily.

(<2) Tablets are a convenient way of taking ginseng. Take for short-term stressful

events, such as moving a household.

from late middle age onward, helping
them endure the long hard winters.
m= Western tonic |n the West,
ginseng is viewed not so much as a

medicine, but as a life-enhancing tonic.

It is useful for those coping with

stressful events, such as taking exams.

Self-help Uses

= Impotence & premature
ejaculation, p. 316.

= Maintaining vitality, p. 319.

= Poor sleep & nervous
exhaustion, p. 309.

= Short-term stress, p. 308.

----- PAGE 121 -----
Passionflower

A climbing vine
growing to 30 ft (9 m),
with 3-lobed leaves,
ornate flowers, and
egg-shaped fruit.

Passiflora incarnata (Passifloraceae)

Passionflower, Passiflora, Maypop

Passionflower's name comes from its beautiful flowers,
thought to represent Christ's crucifixion—5 stamens
for the 5 wounds, 3 styles for the 3 nails, and white
and purple-blue colors for purity and heaven. The herb
has valuable sedative and tranquilizing properties and
has a long use as a medicine in Central and North
American herbal traditions, being taken in Mexico for

& Parts Used

Aerial parts are picked as
needed for relaxing infusions.

insomnia, epilepsy, and hysteria.

Passionflower was used by the Algonquin
people of North America as an herbal
tranquilizer.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to the southern U.S.
(Virginia, Texas, and Tennessee)
and to Central and South America,
passionflower is now extensively
cultivated in Europe, notably in
Italy, as well as in North America.
It is propagated from seed in spring
and needs plenty of sun. The aerial
parts are gathered when the plant
is flowering or in fruit.

Related Species

There are approximately 400 Passiflora

species, some of which are popular
garden plants. A number have a

similar sedative action to passionflower.

P. quadrangularis has been found
to contain serotonin, one of the
main chemical messengers within
the brain.

Key Constituents

= Flavonoids (apigenin)

= Amino acids

= Cyanogenic glycosides
(gynocardin)

= Indole alkaloids (trace)

Key Actions
m= Sedative

= Antispasmodic
= Tranquilizing

Research

= Tranquilizing properties
Pharmacological research shows the
herb to have sedative, tranquilizing,
and sleep-inducing properties. A 2001
clinical trial found that passionflower

was as effective in relieving anxiety as

oxazepam, a conventional tranquilizer,
and had fewer reported side effects.
A clinical study in 2011 found

improvement in subjective sleep quality

in those taking passionflower.

= Indole alkaloids Research has
not yet conclusively established
that passionflower contains
indole alkaloids.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Insomnia Passionflower is best
known as a remedy for insomnia and

disturbed sleep patterns, and is useful

for short-term bouts of sleeplessness.
= Gentle sedative This herb

is widely acknowledged to be a
good medicine for anxiety, tension,
irritability, and insomnia. Its gentle
sedative properties produce a
soothing and relaxing effect, reducing
nervous activity and panic, and
making it a mild and non-addictive
herbal tranquilizer, comparable in
some ways to valerian (Valeriana
officinalis, p. 148). Occasionally, it is
prescribed for convulsions.

= Pain relief Passionflower has
valuable painkilling properties and

is given for toothache, period pain,
and headaches.

o é
Dried aerial
parts

Fresh
aerial parts

Fresh
flower

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Passionflower can cause drowsiness. Do not take high doses

in pregnancy.

®

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is a useful

sedative for an overactive mind.
Take | tsp with water daily.

= Tranquilizing effects Its ability
to reduce anxiety makes
passionflower valuable for many

nervous states, and it is used to treat

conditions as diverse as asthma,
palpitations, high blood pressure,
and muscle cramps. In each case,
its antispasmodic and tranquilizing

Infusion (to make, p. 291). For
occasional sleeplessness, drink up
to |/4 cups (300 ml) during the evening.

Tablets are a common over-the-counter
remedy for insomnia and stress.

properties are the key to its
usefulness, reducing the overactivity
responsible for the disorder.

Self-help Uses

= Insomnia, p. 309.

= Sleeplessness due to
backache, p. 313.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ad

----- PAGE 122 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

120

Pelargonium sidoides (Geraniaceae)

Pel argo nium , Umckaloabo

Known as umckaloabo (thought to mean “‘heavy cough”

in Zulu), pelargonium has been used for centuries by
traditional South African healers as a key remedy for
coughs and respiratory infections and for gastrointestinal
disorders. The herb came to the attention of Europeans in
the early 1900s after an Englishman named Charles Stevens
was cured of his tuberculosis by a Basuto traditional healer
who had given him large doses of pelargonium root.

Pelargonium

An evergreen herb growing to
10 in (25 cm), pelargonium
forms a rosette of long-stalked,
heart-shaped leaves with
striking purple-black flowers.

& Parts Used

Root is used for its strong
antimicrobial activity.

Pelargonium is a potent medicine for coughs,
colds, and sore throats.

Habitat and Cultivation
Pelargonium is still collected from
the wild in the eastern parts of South
Africa where it is native, though
demand for the root has led to
increased commercial cultivation.
The root is harvested at the end of
the growing season, sliced, and then
kiln dried. The plant is mostly
propagated from seed.

Related Species

Many other geranium species have
medicinal activity, including another
South African species, P. reniforme,
which is often used for the same
indications. The closely related
American cranesbill and herb robert
(Geranium maculatum and Geranium
robertianum, both p. 216) are strongly
astringent in action.

Key Constituents

= Polyphenols (including high levels
of proanthocyanidins)

= Coumarins

Key Actions
= Antibacterial

= Antiviral
= Immune enhancing
= Expectorant

Research

= Antimicrobial Pelargonium
extracts have been shown to have
strong activity against a wide range
of bacteria, notably those commonly
responsible for ear, nose, throat, and
chest infections. Extracts have also
been shown to act against herpes
viruses. The root exerts a tonic effect
on the immune system.

= Upper respiratory tract
problems German research over
the last 15-20 years has established
conclusively that pelargonium is a
safe and effective treatment for
problems affecting the upper
respiratory tract and chest. Clinical
trials have shown that it is an
effective treatment for acute and
chronic bronchitis, tonsillitis, sinusitis,
and the common cold, reducing

the intensity of symptoms and
speeding recovery.
= Children’s remedy Unusually,
several clinical trials have focused
on treating respiratory infections
in children, and the results of these
indicate that pelargonium is a very
safe and well-tolerated medicine
for children (from | year old) with
coughs, colds, sore throats, and
sinus problems.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Respiratory infections Now
commonly available in health stores
and pharmacies, pelargonium can
be considered a front-line home
treatment for upper respiratory

Root is sliced
and dried
before it is used

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

Cautions Give to children under | year of age only on professional advice.

Tincture (to make, p. 292) isa
valuable remedy for acute and
chronic bronchitis.

Tablets can be taken to
support and strengthen
immune function.

Fluid extract is best for children with upper respiratory tract infections.

problems and chest infections.

lt combines well with elderberry
extract, also easily found and very
safe for children.

= Traditional African remedy
Pelargonium has a much wider range
of uses in South Africa, where the
root has been used to treat not only

respiratory infections, including
tuberculosis, but conditions as diverse
as painful periods, liver disease,

and gastroenteritis.

Self-help Uses
= Colds & congestion in children,
p.318.

----- PAGE 123 -----
Persea americana (Lauraceae)

Avocado

Many parts of the avocado tree have a use in herbal
medicine. The leaves and bark are effective remedies for
digestive problems and coughs. As well as being extremely
nutritious, the fruit has a wide range of medicinal uses.
Native peoples of Guatemala, for example, use the pulp
to stimulate hair growth, the rind to expel worms, and the
seeds to treat diarrhea. The fruit pulp is used as a baby
food in West Africa.

= Relieve coughs

= Promote menstrual flow
Fruit pulp:

= Emollient

= Carminative

Rind:

= Eliminates worms

Research

= Cholesterol Research
shows that the fruit helps lower
cholesterol levels.

= Poisons Livestock that have

Avocado is very nutritious and makes an
excellent baby food.

grazed on avocado leaves, fruit, or
bark have been observed to suffer
less toxic effects from snake bite
and other poisons.

= Herpes simplex Laboratory
experiments have shown that
avocado leaf extracts strongly inhibit
the herpes simplex virus, responsible
for cold sores and genital herpes.

Habitat & Cultivation
Indigenous to Central America,
avocado is widely cultivated for its
fruit in tropical and subtropical areas,
including Israel, Spain, and South
Africa. It is propagated from seed. The
leaves are harvested as needed; the
unripe fruit is picked when fully grown.
Traditional &

Current Uses

= Leaves & bark Avocado

leaves and young bark stimulate
menstruation and can induce
abortion. The leaves are taken for
diarrhea, bloating, and gas and are
valuable for relieving coughs, for liver
obstructions, and for clearing high

Related Species
Other Persea species have similar fruits
to avocado and are used in a similar way.

Key Constituents

Leaves & bark:

= Volatile oil (methylchavicol,
alpha-pinene)

= Flavonoids uric acid levels, which cause gout.
= Tannins = Fruit The rind is used to expel
Fruit pulp: worms. The fruit pulp is considered

= Unsaturated fats

= Protein (about 25%)
= Sesquiterpenes

a Vitamins A, B,, and B,

to have aphrodisiac properties. Used
externally, it soothes the skin. It is
applied to suppurating wounds and
to the scalp to stimulate hair growth.
= Oil The expressed oil of the

Key Actions avocado seed nourishes the skin. It
Leaves & bark: softens rough, dry, or flaking skin and,
= Astringent massaged into the scalp, it improves

= Carminative hair growth.

Avocado

An evergreen tree,
growing to 65 ft

(20 m), with dark
green, leathery leaves
and white flowers.

5 Parts Used

Leaves are an astringent
remedy for diarrhea.

Fresh
leaves

Dried leaves

Rind has
the ability to
expel worms

Bark is stripped from the
tree for use in treating
diarrhea and dysentery.

Seed contains good-quality oil.

Fruit is nutritious and is
used to “draw” wounds.

©) Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution The leaves and bark should not be used during pregnancy.

Decoction of leaves or
bark (to make, p. 291). For
diarrhea, take 4 cup
(75 ml) 3 times daily.

Mashed pulp To help wounds
to heal, apply a little mashed
pulp 3 times a day.

Oil from the seed. For skin blemishes, rub
a little oil on the area daily 3 times a day.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ad

----- PAGE 124 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

122

Kava, Kava Kava

Piper methysticum (Piperaceae)

Kava has major ritual and cultural significance among
the peoples of the Pacific Islands, where it is as much a
part of daily social life as coffee is in the West. At
modest doses, kava is calming and tranquilizing.

At large doses, it leads to intoxication and euphoria,
though without a hangover the next day. It has a hot,
slightly aromatic and bitter taste and leaves the mouth

feeling slightly numb.

Kava has huge, tapering leaves, growing
to 10 in (25 cm) across. Its root is used
medicinally to relieve pain.

Habitat & Cultivation

Kava is an indigenous Polynesian vine
and grows throughout the Pacific
Islands as far east as Hawaii. It is
cultivated commercially in parts

of the U.S. and in Australia. Kava is
propagated from runners in late winter
or early spring and is usually grown on
frames. It needs well-drained, stony soil

& Parts Used

Root relieves pain and
counters urinary infections.

and a shady position. The root is
harvested at any time of year.

Related Species

The closely related P. sanctum is native
to Mexico. It is similar to kava in many
ways; for example, it also contains
kava lactones and is traditionally taken
as a stimulant. Other related species
include matico, betel, cubeb, and
pepper (P. angustifolia, P. betle,

P. cubeba and P. nigrum, pp. 249-250).

Key Constituents

= Resin containing kava
lactones, including kawain

a Piperidine alkaloid
(pipermethysticine)

Key Actions

= Tonic

m Reduces anxiety
= Urinary antiseptic
= Analgesic

= Induces sleep

Traditionally the root is
chewed and fermented
with saliva

Dried root

Research

m= German ban In 2002, German
regulators banned kava products
due to concerns that extracts were
toxic to the liver and had led to

20 deaths. Many other countries
followed Germany's example.

The ban was repealed by the
German authorities in 2015. Those
campaigning against it had long
maintained that the traditional use of
kava, especially water-based extracts
of kava, were inherently safe.
Australian regulators had adopted
this approach in 2003 by allowing the
sale of water-based extracts of kava.
A rigorous reexamination of the 20
fatal cases found that only two cases
could in any way be attributed to
the use of kava.

= Anxiety A 2003 review of kava
found that “compared with placebo,
kava extract is an effective
symptomatic treatment for anxiety.”
The authors commented that “few
adverse events were reported in the
reviewed trials.’ Kava is nonaddictive,
and clinical evidence suggests it is also
a safe and effective treatment for
anxiety linked with depression,

for insomnia, and for pain relief.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional aphrodisiac Kava
is valued in the South Sea Islands as a

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not exceed recommended dosage or take for more than
2 months at a time. Use water-based extracts. Do not take during pregnancy.
If there is a history of liver disease, take only on professional advice. Subject to

legal restrictions in many countries.

( Tablets containing a water-based extract can be taken for anxiety.

Kava

An evergreen shrub
climbing to 10 ft (3 m),
with fleshy stems and
heart-shaped leaves.

calming and stimulating intoxicant.

It produces a euphoric state when
taken in large quantities.

= Relaxing remedy Kava is a safe
and proven remedy for anxiety that
does not cause drowsiness or affect
the ability to operate machinery. It is
valuable for treating muscle tension
as well as emotional stress.

= Pain relief With its tonic,
strengthening, and mildly analgesic
properties, kava is a good remedy
for chronic pain, helping to reduce
sensitivity and to relax muscles that
are tensed in response to pain.

= Arthritic conditions The
analgesic and cleansing diuretic effect
of Kava often makes it a beneficial
herb for treating rheumatic and
arthritic problems such as gout. It
helps to bring relief from pain and
to remove waste products from the
affected joint.

= Antiseptic Kava is routinely used
by peoples of the South Pacific to
treat infection, especially where pain
is a key symptom. In New Guinea,

it is taken to soothe and treat sore
throats and to relieve toothache.

It makes a valuable urinary antiseptic
and will help in treating cystitis,
urethritis, urinary frequency, and
bladder irritability.

= External uses The herb makes
a useful analgesic mouthwash for
treating toothache and mouth ulcers.

Infusion (to make, p. 291)
To relieve anxiety and muscle
tension, drink 4 cup (75 ml) a day.

----- PAGE 125 -----
Psy liu M, Ispaghu

and P. indica—psyllium has

Psyllium is widely cultivated for its husks
and seeds, which are used as a remedy
for bowel problems.

Habitat & Cultivation
The three species that produce
Psyllium grow throughout southern
Europe, North Africa, and Asia,
especially in India, and are extensively
cultivated. They are propagated from
seed in spring and require plenty of
sun. The seeds are harvested when

& Parts Used

Seeds should be soaked in
water before they are used.

ripe in late summer and early autumn.

Plantago spp. (Plantaginaceae)

la (Hindi), Flea Seed

Produced by several Plantago species—P ovata, P. psyllium,

been used as a safe and

effective laxative for thousands of years in Europe,
North Africa, and Asia. Given their small size and brown
color, psyllium husks and seeds have been mistaken for
fleas, hence their folk name flea seed. Bland-tasting, they
swell when moistened, and have a jellylike consistency

in the mouth.

Related Species

Common plantain (P. major, p. 251)
is prescribed for diarrhea and
irritable bowel syndrome. Che gian zi
(P. asiatica) is used in China as a
diuretic, for diarrhea, and for

husk is given late in pregnancy to aid
normal presentation of the fetus
(head-down position in the uterus).

Key Constituents

= Mucilage (arabinoxylan)

a Fixed oil (2.5%)—mainly linoleic,
oleic, and palmitic fatty acids

m= Starch

Key Actions
= Demulcent

= Bulk laxative
= Antidiarrheal

Research
= Regulating bowel function
Clinical trials in the U.S., Germany,

Husks are generally powdered for
use in a variety of preparations.

Powdered husk

bronchial congestion. The powdered

and Scandinavia during the 1980s
have shown that psyllium has both a
laxative and an antidiarrheal action.

= Diabetes A 1998 clinical trial with
125 patients concluded that 5 g of
Psyllium taken 3 times a day helped to
lower blood-fat and -glucose levels in
people with type 2 diabetes.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Laxative Psyllium is prescribed
in conventional as well as herbal
medicine for constipation, especially
when the condition results from an
over-tensed or over-relaxed bowel.
Both husks and seeds contain high
levels of fiber (the mucilage) and
expand, becoming highly gelatinous.
when soaked in water. By maintaining
a high water content within the large
intestine, they increase the bulk of
the stool, easing its passage.

= Other bowel problems
Contrary to expectation, psyllium

is a useful remedy for diarrhea.

It is also an effective treatment

for many other bowel problems,
including irritable bowel syndrome,
ulcerative colitis, and Crohn's disease.
In India, psyllium is commonly used
to treat dysentery.

= Hemorrhoid relief Psyllium

is valuable for hemorrhoids, helping
to soften the stool and to reduce
irritation of the veins.

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not exceed the stated dose. Always take with plenty of water.

Cold maceration For constipation, soak
20 g of seeds in %4 cup (200 ml) water for

10 hours. Take the whole dose at night.

Psyllium

An annual, growing

to 16 in (40 cm) high,
with narrow leaves and
clusters of minute
white-brown flowers.

= Detoxifying herb The jellylike
mucilage produced when psyllium

is soaked in water has the ability to
absorb toxins within the large
intestine. Psyllium is commonly taken
to reduce autotoxicity (the toxins are
expelled from the body with the
husks and seeds in the feces).

= Digestive ailments The
soothing, protective effect imparted
by the mucilage-rich husks and

seeds benefits the whole gastro-
intestinal tract. Psyllium is taken for
stomach and duodenal ulcers, and
for acid indigestion.
a Urinary infections The
demulcent action of psyllium
extends to the urinary tract. In
India, an infusion of the seeds

(the only time this preparation

is used) is given for urethritis.

= External uses When psyllium
husks are soaked in an infusion of
calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73),
they make an effective poultice

for external use, drawing out
infection from boils, abscesses,

and whitlows (pus-filled swellings
on the fingertips).

Self-help Uses

= Chronic diarrhea & irritable
bowel syndrome, p. 307.

= Constipation, p. 317.

= Difficult passage of the stool
& hemorrhoids, p. 302.

Capsules of powdered husk (p. 292).
For hemorrhoids, take a 200 mg
capsule 3 times a day.

— Poultice For boils, mix 5 g of powdered husks with sufficient infusion of calendula
to make a thick paste. Apply (see p. 295) 3 times a day.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ady

----- PAGE 126 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Polygonum multiflorum (Polygonaceae)

FO TI, He Shou Wu (Chinese)

A Chinese tonic herb with a bittersweet taste, fo ti is
thought to concentrate gi (vital energy) in its root, so
that taking this herb gives vitality to the body. It

has always been considered a rejuvenating herb,
helping to prevent aging and encouraging longevity.
Traditionally, much folklore is attached to this herb,
and large, old roots are thought to have

remarkable powers.

Fo ti is one of the oldest Chinese tonic
herbs, It is used to help lower blood
cholesterol levels.

Habitat & Cultivation
Fo ti is native to central

and southern China, and is cultivated
throughout that region. It is
propagated from seed or by root
division in spring, or from cuttings
in summer. The plant requires
well-fertilized soil and plenty of
protection from winter weather.
The roots of 3- to 4-year-old fo ti
plants are unearthed and dried
during the autumn. Older, larger
roots are prized for their
therapeutic properties, but

are generally not available to
obtain commercially.

Related Species

Bistort (P. bistorta, p. 253), one of
the most strongly astringent of all
herbs, and knotgrass (P. aviculare,
p. 253) are used in European herbal
medicine. They do not have the
same tonic therapeutic properties
as P. multiflorum. In Chinese herbal
medicine, P. cuspidatum is used
to treat amenorrhea (absence
of periods).

Key Constituents

= Anthraquinone glycosides

a Stilbene glycoside

= Polyphenols

= Phospholipids, including lecithin

Key Actions

= Tonic

= Antioxidant

a Mild sedative

= Lowers cholesterol levels
= Neuroprotective

Research

= Cholesterol levels In animal
experiments in China, fo ti was
shown to significantly reduce raised
blood cholesterol levels. Also,

in a clinical trial, over 80% of patients
with high blood cholesterol who had
been taking decoctions of the root
showed an improvement.

= Blood-sugar levels Chinese
has revealed that fo ti
helps increase the levels of sugar

in the blood.

= Neuroprotective Preclinical
research points to fo ti having a
stabilizing effect on brain function,
and that it might—as traditional
use would suggest—prove valuable
in slowing aging processes within
the central nervous system.

researc!

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Popular tonic Although fo ti is
not the earliest tonic herb listed in
Chinese herbal medicine (it is first
mentioned in 713 ce), it has
become one of the most widely
used. It is taken regularly by
millions of people in the East

for its rejuvenating and toning

& Parts Used

Root is highly valued in Chinese
medicine for its tonic properties.
It is unearthed in the autumn.

Fo Ti

A perennial climber,
growing to 33 ft (10 m),
with red stems, light-
green leaves, and white
or pink flowers.

Dried root

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution Only the prepared root from Chinese herbal shops should be used.

Decoction (to make,
p. 291). As a general
tonic, take the decoction
over 2 days.

Tablets, known as
shou wu pian, are
taken in China for
their rejuvenating
Properties.

Tincture (to make, p. 292).

To reduce blood cholesterol

levels, take | tsp twice a day
with water.

«> Powder may be added to food for its tonic effect. Take 5 g a day.

properties, and to increase fertility
in both men and women.

= Liver & kidney remedy

In Chinese herbal medicine, fo ti’s
most important use is as a tonic

for the liver and kidneys. By
strengthening liver and kidney
function, it helps cleanse the blood,
enabling the qi to circulate freely
around the whole body.

= Nerve & blood tonic fo ti is
given in Chinese herbal medicine to
people with symptoms, such as
dizziness, weakness, numbness, and
blurred vision, that indicate inefficient
nerves and ‘blood deficiency.”

= Premature aging Fo ti is
prescribed in China for people
showing signs of premature aging.
This suggests it helps the body
function in a balanced, healthy way.
In particular, there is a lot of evidence
to support the root's use to aid
reversing hair loss and graying of
the hair.

= Malaria The herb is prescribed
in the treatment of chronic malaria,
when it is often combined with
ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. |20),
dong quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63),
as well as green tangerine peel
(Citrus reticulata).

----- PAGE 127 -----
Rehmannia

A perennial, reaching
|-2 ft (30-60 cm),
with large, sticky leaves
and purple flowers.

Rehmannia glutinosa (Scrophulariaceae)

Rehmannia, Di Huang (Chinese)

An important Chinese tonic herb, rehmannia has figured
extensively in many traditional herbal formulas and

has an ancient history: it was referred to by Ge Hong,
the 4th-century ce Chinese physician and alchemist.
Rehmannia is a “longevity” herb and has a marked tonic
action on the liver and kidneys. Research has confirmed
its traditional use, showing that it protects the liver and

& Parts Used

Root is unearthed in autumn. It has
a protective action on the liver.

Root is chewed
raw and has a

is useful for hepatitis.

Rehmannia’s appearance gave rise to its
Western folkname “Chinese foxglove.”

Habitat & Cultivation
Rehmannia grows wild on sunny
mountain slopes in northern and
northeastern parts of China,
especially in Henan province.
Rehmannia can be cultivated, in
which case it is propagated from
seed sown in autumn or spring.
The root is harvested in autumn,
after the plant has flowered.

Related Species
R. lutea is used in Chinese herbal
medicine as a diuretic.

Key Constituents
m lridoids

= Polysaccharides

= Phytosterols

= Phenethyl glycosides

Key Actions

= Tonic

= Anti-inflammatory

= Kidney tonic

= Lowers blood pressure
= Antidiabetic

m Reduces fever

= Antihemorrhagic

slightly bitter taste

Research

= Liver remedy Chinese research
has shown rehmannia to be a very
important liver-protective herb,
preventing poisoning and liver
damage. Clinical trials in China
have demonstrated that it can
be effective in treating hepatitis.
= Other research Chinese
research over the last 10 years
indicates that rehmannia has a
positive stabilizing effect on blood-
sugar regulation, and aids liver and
pancreatic function. Ongoing
preclinical research in China is
examining the herb's usefulness

in preventing osteoporosis.

Dried root Fresh root

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses
@ Caution Take only on professional advice during pregnancy.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Raw & prepared root In Chinese

herbal medicine, the root (di huang) é
is known as sheng di huang when

it is eaten raw and shu di huang
when it has been cooked in wine.
The former is the most commonly
taken remedy. Both are yin tonics

(see p. 40), but have different
therapeutic indications.

= Sheng di huang The raw root
“cools the blood,’ and is given to
help lower fever in acute and chronic

Rehmannia

Chinese
figwort
Shu di huang Simmer |5 g root

in 2 cups (500 ml) red wine for
20 minutes. For blood loss and

Remedy Decoct |5 g rehmannia and 10 g anemia, take / cup (100 ml) daily

Chinese figwort (see p. 291). For fevers,
take %4 cup (150 ml) 2-3 times daily.

= Chinese formulas The herb
is an ingredient of many famous
herbal formulas, most notably
“the pill of eight ingredients,’ which
contemporary Chinese herbalists
consider to “warm and invigorate
the yang of the loins.”

illnesses. Its cooling nature is
reflected in its use for problems such
as thirst and a red tongue that arise
from “heat patterns.’ Sheng di huang
is useful for treating people with
impaired liver function and is used
specifically to treat hepatitis and
other liver conditions.

= Shu di huang This preparation
is used specifically for blood loss

and “blood deficiency” states such
as irregular and heavy menstrual

bleeding. It is warming rather than
cooling, and is considered to be a
prime kidney tonic.

= Blood pressure Rehmannia is
used to treat high blood pressure.
Interestingly, while sheng di huang
appears to raise blood pressure,
shu di huang has the opposite effect.
= Longevity Rehmannia is a
traditional and valuable tonic for
old age. It is considered to help
prevent senility.

Self-help Uses

= Heavy menstrual bleeding, p. 315.

m Weakened liver & metabolism,
p.319.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM ©

----- PAGE 128 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Rheum palmatum (Polygonaceae)

Chinese Rhubarb, Da Huang (Chinese)

Chinese rhubarb has long been prized as the most
useful purge in herbal medicine, safe even for young
children due to its gentle action. It has been used in
China for over 2,000 years and is an extremely effective
treatment for many digestive problems. Paradoxically,
it is a laxative when taken in large doses but has a
constipating effect in small measures. The rhizome

has an astringent, unpleasant taste.

Chinese rhubarb grows best close to
water. In summer it produces clusters
of red flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to China and Tibet, where
the best-quality herb is still found,
Chinese rhubarb now also grows in
the West. It is found in the wild and
is widely cultivated. It is grown from
seed in spring or by root division

in spring or autumn and requires a
sunny position and well-drained soil.
The rhizomes of 6—|0-year-old plants
are dug up in the autumn after the
stem and leaves have turned yellow.

Related Species

R. tanguticum and R. officinale have
similar uses to R. palmatum. These
3 species are considered to be
superior in action to other rhubarbs.
The familiar, edible rhubarb is

R. rhaponticum.

Key Constituents

= Anthraquinones (about 3-5%),
rhein, aloe-emodin, emodin

= Flavonoids (catechin)

= Phenolic acids

= Tannins (5—10%)

= Calcium oxalate

Chinese rhubarb
A thick-rhizomed
perennial growing to
10 ft (3 m), with large
palm-shaped leaves
and small flowers.

& Parts Used

Rhizome contains anthraquinones, which are
laxative, and tannins, which are astringent.

Rhizome is a mild
appetite stimulant and
helps improve digestion

Key Actions

= Laxative

= Anti-inflammatory
= Astringent

= Stops bleeding

= Antibacterial

Research

= Anthraquinones & tannins
Chinese rhubarb's medicinal value
is largely due to the irritant, laxative,
and purgative properties of the
anthraquinones, and in large doses
the rhizome is strongly laxative.
A 2007 Chinese study concluded
that the anthraquinones in rhubarb.
“possess promising anticancer
properties and could have a broad

Dried rhizome

Fresh rhizome

fiKey Preparations & Their Uses

therapeutic potential.”

= Antibacterial properties
Decoctions of the root have been
shown to be effective against
Staphylococcus aureus, an infectious

@ Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Do not take during
menstruation or if prone to gout or kidney stones. Not suitable for children.

bacterium that causes mouth ulcers
and folliculitis (an acne-type infection
of the beard area). In laboratory
studies, rhubarb has been found
to have notable activity against \
Helicobacter pylori, a bacterium

that causes stomach ulcers.

Traditional &

Decoction (to make, p. 291). For

an occasional bout of constipation,

take 2 cup (100 ml) each evening.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). To
stimulate the appetite, take 20
drops with water twice a day.

(=> Tablets are one of the most convenient ways of taking the herb. Take for
occasional bouts of constipation.

Current Uses

= History Chinese rhubarb was

first mentioned in the | st-century CE
Chinese text The Divine Husbandman’s
Classic, and has been grown in the
West since 1732. It is one of the few
herbs still used today in conventional
as well as herbal medicine, and is listed
in the British Pharmacopoeia of 1988.

= Constipation Large doses of
Chinese rhubarb are combined with
carminative herbs and taken as a

= Other uses Chinese rhubarb
can be applied to burns, boils, and
carbuncles. The herb acts as a tonic
and mild appetite stimulant and
serves as a useful mouthwash for

laxative, helping to clear the colon
without causing excessive cramping.
This is useful for treating constipation
where the muscles of the large
intestine are weak.

= Diarrhea Small doses of the root — mouth ulcers.
are astringent, relieving irritation of
the inner lining of the gut, thus
reducing diarrhea.

Self-help Use
= Constipation, p. 307.

----- PAGE 129 -----
Rhodiola rosea (Crassulaceae)

Rhodiola, Golden Root

An Arctic plant that thrives in extreme environments,
rhodiola’s rose-colored roots have pronounced medicinal
activity, enhancing the ability of the body to deal with
stresses of all kinds. An adaptogen, similar to ginseng
(Panax ginseng, p. | 18), rhodiola also acts on the central
nervous system, supporting memory and concentration
under conditions of stress, and helping to relieve nervous
exhaustion and mild to moderate depression.

= Monoterpenes (including rosiridin)
= Triterpenes

Key Actions

= Adaptogen

= Antidepressant

= Aids mental performance
= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Adaptogen Rhodiola is an
unusual medicine—an adaptogen
that combines the ability to promote
physical and mental endurance with
antidepressant and anti-inflammatory
activity. Though large-scale clinical

Rhodiola root is most commonly taken to
improve mental and physical performance.

Habitat and Cultivation

Parts Used

Root helps to support physical
and mental endurance and to
counter the effects of stress.

Dried rhizome

Rhodiola

A fleshy perennial
growing to 16 in (40 cm)
in height with thick oblong
leaves and clusters of
yellow flowers.

©) Key Preparations & Their Uses

Cautions Can cause irritability and sleep disturbance. Not advisable in manic and

bipolar disorders.

Rhodiola is indigenous to
mountainous and Arctic regions of
the northern hemisphere, including
Canada, Scotland, Scandinavia, Russia,
and Alaska. Rhodiola is still mostly
collected from the wild, threatening
its long-term survival in some regions,

trials are lacking, research shows that
rhodiola root increases the capacity
to resist physical and mental fatigue.
= Clinical trials In a 2000
Armenian clinical trial, young healthy
hospital doctors working night shifts
were given a rhodiola extract. After

Decoction Take 2! tsp twice a day
to promote physical endurance.

though it is now cultivated in Canada,
Norway, and Finland.

2 weeks, those taking the extract
showed significantly fewer signs of
mental fatigue, including better levels
of concentration and short-term
memory, than those taking a placebo.
In a 2015 US. clinical trial, 57 adults
with moderate depression were
given rhodiola or sertraline, a
conventional antidepressant.

Both medicines proved effective,
but those taking rhodiola reported
fewer side effects.

Related Species

The central Asian R. quadrifida is used
in Mongolia to enhance strength and
vigor. R. crenulata and R. rosea are
used in Chinese medicine, though
across China many different species
of Rhodiola are used to alleviate
fatigue and protect against the cold.
Chinese research into R. crenulata
indicates that this species aids
endurance and has a protective
activity against radiation.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Key traditional uses |n Europe
and Asia, the central core of
rhodiola’s use in traditional medicine

Key Constituents

= Phenylpropanoids (rosavins—
occuring only in Rhodiola rosea)

= Salidroside

has always been its power to
increase endurance and work rate,

= Flavonoids and the capacity to cope with high

Tablets take as recommended by
supplier for lowered mood and vitality.

© Tincture (to make, p. 292). To support memory and concentration, take

Ya tsp 2-3 times a day.

altitude and winter cold. The roots
have also been taken to promote
longevity, ease depression, and treat
infection. Rhodiola is now most
commonly taken to improve mental
and physical performance and to
protect against the harmful effects of
ongoing stress.

= Russian medicine Rhodiola
became an official medicine in Russia
in 1969, being recommended for a wide
range of health problems, not only as
an adaptogen (see Research), but for
psychiatric and neurological problems,
such as depression and schizophrenia.

= Other uses Rhodiola is
traditionally considered to help
improve fertility in both men and
women. In Siberia, rhodiola roots
are given to marrying couples to
promote fertility and the health of
their future children. In Mongolia,
alongside its use as a tonic, rhodiola
is given for infections such as
bronchitis and pneumonia, and

is also used as a mouthwash for
bad breath.

Self-help Use
= Maintaining vitality, p. 319.

SLNV1Td TVNIDIGHW Adu

----- PAGE 130 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

128

Rosmarinus officinalis (Lamiaceae)

Rosemary

Rosemary is a well-known and greatly valued herb
that is native to southern Europe. It has been used
since antiquity to improve and strengthen the memory.
To this day it is burned in the homes of students in
Greece who are about to take exams. Rosemary has

a longstanding reputation as a tonic, invigorating herb,
imparting a zest for life that is to some degree reflected
in tts distinctive aromatic taste.

Research
= General circulation A 201 |
study published in Phytotherapy

anti-inflammatory and protective
effects on the inner lining of blood

supports the understanding that many
active compounds in rosemary
support a healthy circulation. A
small 2006 clinical trial in Germany
concluded (in line with traditional
usage) that rosemary raised blood
pressure in people suffering from
low blood pressure. All those taking
rosemary also reported feeling
better at the end of the trial.

= Other actions Japanese
laboratory research in 2003 found
that diterpenes within rosemary
(carnosic acid and carnosol) strongly
stimulated nerve growth factor,
suggesting that rosemary may
stimulate nerve repair. A 2015 review
in Cancer Letters stated that these
constituents also had “promising
results of anticancer activity.”

Rosemary was a symbol of fidelity between
lovers, on account of its ability to improve
the memory.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to the Mediterranean, rosemary
grows freely in much of southern
Europe and is cultivated throughout
the world. It is propagated from seed
or cuttings in spring and prefers a
warm, moderately dry climate and

a sheltered site. The branches are
gathered during the summer after
flowering and dried in the shade.

Key Constituents
= Volatile oil (1-2%) containing
borneol, camphene, camphor,

Traditional &
Current Uses

cineole = Circulatory stimulant
= Flavonoids (apigenin, diosmin) Rosemary has a central place in
= Tannins European herbal medicine as a

= Rosmarinic acid
= Diterpenes (including carnosic
acid and carnosol)

warming, tonic remedy that
stimulates blood flow throughout
the body, especially in those with
low blood pressure. It is thought to

Key Actions promote blood flow to the head,

= Tonic thus improving memory and

= Stimulant concentration. It may be taken to

= Astringent relieve migraine and headaches and
= Nervine encourages hair growth and health.

= Anti-inflammatory
= Antioxidant

= Poor circulation Thought to
raise low blood pressure, the herb

Research found that rosemary exerted

vessels in young adults. Such research

& Parts Used

Leaves are gathered in summer
and used in preparations or distilled

for their oil.

Dried leaves

Fresh leaves

FiKey Preparations

& Their Uses

Rosemary

A strongly aromatic
evergreen shrub
growing to 6% ft (2 m),
with narrow, dark
green, pinelike leaves.

Volatile oil is most
concentrated in
the leaves

@ Caution Do not take the essential oil internally except under a professional

Practitioner's supervision.

y.

Tincture (to make, p. 292)
is an excellent tonic. For
stress, take 40 drops twice
daily with water.

Essential oil To improve
concentration, burn
several drops in an oil
burner (to use, p. 297)

«Infusion (to make, p. 291). To relieve headaches, take 2/2 tsp every 3 hours.
The infusion, rubbed into the scalp, improves hair growth.

is valuable for fainting and weakness
associated with deficient circulation.
= Restorative Rosemary aids
recovery from long-term stress
and chronic illness. It is thought
to stimulate the adrenal glands
and is used specifically for debility,
especially when accompanied by
poor circulation and digestion.

a Uplifting herb Rosemary is
often prescribed for people who
are stressed and “failing to thrive:
Valued as an herb that raises the

spirits, it is useful for mild to
moderate depression.

= Other uses Applied as a lotion
or diluted essential oil, rosemary
eases aching, rheumatic muscles.
Add the infusion, or essential oil,
to bathwater for a reviving soak.

Self-help Uses

= Migraine, p. 309.

= Premenstrual syndrome, p. 315.
= Sore throats, p. 311.

= Tired & aching muscles, p. 312.

----- PAGE 131 -----
Salix alba (Salicaceae)

White Willow

Justly famous as the original source of salicylic acid
(the forerunner of aspirin), white willow and closely
related species have been used for thousands of years
in Europe, Africa, Asia, and North America to relieve
joint pain and manage fevers. Dioscorides, a Greek
physician in the Ist century CE, suggested taking “willow
leaves, mashed with a little pepper and drunk with wine”
to relieve lower back pain.

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory
= Analgesic

= Reduces fever

= Antirheumatic

= Astringent

Research

= Salicylic acid & aspirin Salicylic
acid, a strongly anti-inflammatory
and analgesic compound, was first
isolated from salicin in willow bark
in 1838. It was the forerunner of
aspirin, a chemical drug developed in
Germany during 1899. Salicylic acid
(and salicin) has many of the
properties of aspirin but causes

White willow is used in Britain to make
cricket bats. The bark has anti-inflammatory
properties.

Habitat & Cultivation

Native to much of Europe, white
willow is also found in North Africa
and Asia, thriving in damp areas, such
as on riverbanks. It is propagated
from semi-ripe cuttings in summer
or from hardwood cuttings in winter.
The trees are frequently pollarded
and bark is stripped from branches
of 2- to 5-year-old trees in spring.

Related Species

Many Salix species, for example
crack willow (5. fragilis), are used
interchangeably with white willow.
5. acmophylla is used on the Indian
subcontinent as a remedy for
fevers. In North American herbal
medicine, black willow (S. nigra)

is given as an anaphrodisiac
(sexual depressant).

Key Constituents
= Phenolic glycosides

(up to 11%)
= Salicin
= Flavonoids

= Polyphenols

notably fewer side effects. As such,
it is now being widely researched as
an alternative to aspirin-based anti-
inflammatory medicines such as
ibuprofen. Unlike aspirin, salicylic
acid does not thin the blood, and
any problems it might cause within
the digestive tract are likely to

be minor.

= Clinical trials Over the last 15
years, clinical trials have shown that
high-strength willow bark extract
offers an effective alternative to
mainstream anti-inflammatory
medicines, particularly in treating
conditions such as osteoarthritis and
lower back pain. In a 2008 clinical
trial published in Phytomedicine,
among people with arthritis of the
hip or knee, aged between 50 and
75, those taking willow bark extract,
after 6 weeks, were rated by
doctors as doing significantly better
than those taking standard aspirin-
based medication. Those taking
willow bark reported far fewer

side effects.

White willow

A deciduous tree
growing to 80 ft
(25 m), with green
tapering leaves, and
catkins in spring.

Parts Used

Bark is stripped from
young branches and used
fresh or dried.
Bark is dark

gray and deeply
fissured

Fresh bark
Dried bark

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Caution Avoid if allergic to aspirin. Do not
take during pregnancy or if breastfeeding.

Not suitable for young children. Rarely, may
cause gastrointestinal upset.

®

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For rheumatism, take 2 tsp

St John’s wort

Cramp bark

Remedy Make a decoction (see p. 291)
with 10 g each of white willow, St John's
wort, and cramp bark. For aching muscles,
drink % cup (150 ml) twice a day.

with water 3 times a day.

Tablets often also contain
other herbs. Take for arthritis.

= Decoction (to make, p. 291). For painful joints and aching rheumatic muscles,

take 4 cup (75 ml) 3 times a day.

Traditional &

Current Uses

a Joint remedy White willow is

an excellent remedy for arthritic and
rheumatic pain affecting the back,
and joints such as the knees and hips,
though large doses may be required,
such as a standardized tablet. In
combination with other herbs and
dietary changes, it relieves inflammation
and swelling, and improves mobility in
painful or creaky joints.

a Fevers & pain White willow

is taken to manage high fevers. It

may also be used to ease headaches

and head pain.

= Menopause A cooling herb that

reduces sweating, willow bark can be
helpful in controlling symptoms such
as hot flashes and night sweats.

Self-help Uses

= Arthritis & inflamed
joints, p. 313.

= Back pain due to joint
inflammation, p. 313.

= Hot flashes & night
sweats, p. 316.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adm

----- PAGE 132 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Salvia miltiorrhiza (Lamiaceae)

Dan Shen, Chinese Sage

Recent scientific research supports dan shen’s traditional

usage as a remedy for heart and circulatory problems such

as angina and palpitations. The Divine Husbandman's Classic
(Shen’nong Bencaojing), the earliest of all Chinese herbal
texts, listed dan shen as an herb that “invigorates the
blood,’ and it is still used as a circulatory remedy. In
particular, it is taken for period pain and other conditions
resulting from circulatory congestion.

Dan shen is an important circulatory
stimulant. It is sold in herbal markets
across China for use in medicinal formulas.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to China, dan shen is now
cultivated in northeastern China
and Inner Mongolia. It requires
moist, sandy soil and is propagated
by root division in spring. The root is
harvested from late autumn through
early spring.

Related Species

Sage (S. officinalis, p. 131) is closely
related, but is used for an entirely
different range of medical problems.
In Mexico, the related species

S. divinorum is used as a hallucinogen.

Key Constituents

= Diterpenes (tanshinones)
= Phenolic compounds

a Volatile oil

= Vitamin E

Key Actions

= Tonic to heart and circulation
= Anticoagulant

= Dilates the blood vessels

= Sedative

= Antibacterial

Research
= Tanshinones There has been
extensive research into dan shen in

China, and the tanshinones have been

shown to have a profound effect on
coronary circulation, reducing the
symptoms of angina and improving
heart function.

= Heart attack The whole herb
(rather than isolated constituents)
has been used in China to assist
patients who are recovering from
a heart attack, and it appears to
support heart function at this
critical time. Clinical trials in China,
however, have shown that dan shen
is most effective when taken as

a preventative, rather than as a
remedy after the heart attack

has taken place.

= Other research Many recent
clinical trials involving dan shen have
used Chinese herbal combinations,
rather than dan shen alone, so it is
hard to draw conclusions. However,
they do provide further evidence
of dan shen’s usefulness in cardio-
vascular problems such as high blood
pressure, angina, and heart disease.
Unusually, two clinical trials in China
(2012) found that injected extracts:
of dan shen were helpful in pre-
eclampsia, a serious condition during
pregnancy which involves fluid
retention and high blood pressure.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Circulatory stimulant Dan
shen has been esteemed by the
Chinese for thousands of years as a
circulatory stimulant. Like hawthorn
(Crataegus oxyacantha, p. 87), it is

a safe, effective remedy for many

Parts Used

Root is an ancient
Chinese remedy for
circulatory disorders.

Dan shen

FS A hardy perennial

“ growing to 32 in
(80 cm), with toothed
oval leaves and clusters
of purple flowers.

Dried root

Dried
chopped root

iKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions For serious circulatory or heart problems, take only under professional
supervision. The tincture may produce digestive and skin reactions. Avoid in pregnancy.

Tincture is used by herbalists
to treat angina and other
circulatory problems.

circulatory problems. It particularly
benefits coronary circulation,
opening up the arteries and improving
blood flow to the heart, and is
therefore helpful in treating coronary
heart disease. Though it does not
lower blood pressure, dan shen
relaxes the blood vessels and
improves circulation throughout
the body.

= Circulatory congestion Dan
shen is used traditionally to treat
conditions caused by blood

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For painful periods, take /4 cup
(75 ml) up to 3 times a day.

stagnation, primarily those affecting
the lower abdomen, such as absent
or painful periods and fibroids.

= Sedative The sedative action of
dan shen helps to calm the nerves,
and it is therefore helpful in treating
angina, a condition made worse by
anxiety and worry. Palpitations,
insomnia, and irritability also benefit
from dan shen's sedative properties.

Self-help Use
= Palpitations, p. 302.

----- PAGE 133 -----
Salvia officinalis (Lamiaceae)

Sage

Sage's botanical name is a clue to its medicinal importance:
Salvia comes from salvare, meaning ‘to cure” in Latin.

A medieval saying echoes this: ‘Why should a man die
while sage grows in his garden?” Today, sage is an excellent
remedy for sore throats, poor digestion, and irregular
periods, and it is also taken as a gently stimulating
tonic. It has a slightly warm, noticeably bitter, and

astringent taste.

Sage is known most commonly as a
culinary herb, but it is also of great
medicinal importance.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to the Mediterranean, sage

is cultivated all around the world,
thriving in sunny conditions. It is
grown from seed in spring and the
plants are replaced after 3 to 4 years.
The leaves are picked in summer.

Related Species

In all, there are about 500 species of
Salvia. Spanish sage (5. lavandulifolia) is
the most familiar culinary variety and
does not contain thujone. Two close
relatives of S. officinalis are dan shen
(S. miltiorrhiza, p. 130) and clary sage
(S. sclarea, p. 265).

Key Constituents

a Essential oil (1—2%)

= Diterpenes

= Triterpenes

= Phenolic compounds
including rosmarinic acid

= Tannins

Key Actions
= Antiseptic
= Astringent

= Clears mucus
= Nerve tonic
= Estrogenic

Research

= Nerve tonic Ongoing research
taking place in the UK provides
strong support for the traditional use
of sage to enhance memory. In the
most recent study (2008), healthy
volunteers averaging 73 years of age
showed a significant improvement in
memory processing and accuracy of
attention after taking a single dose of
sage extract. Interestingly, a moderate
dose, equivalent to 2.5 g of sage,
proved most effective, more so than
higher doses.

= Sore throat In a randomized trial
published during 2006, a sage throat
spray was found to relieve throat
pain in people who had acute
throat infection.

= Hormonal activity The herb's
longstanding use during menopause
has also been researched. In the
most recent study, undertaken in
Switzerland (2011), women with

at least 12 months of hot flashes
reported an average 64% decrease
in symptoms after 8 weeks of

taking sage.

= Lowering blood fat levels

A clinical trial published in 201 | in
Phytotherapy Research concluded
that “sage may be effective and safe
in the treatment of hyperlipidemia.”
All blood fat markers showed
improvement in those taking sage.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Sore throat Sage's combination
of antiseptic and astringent action

& Parts Used

Leaves have valuable
antiseptic and astringent
properties.

Purple sage,

S. officinalis
purpurascens, is
the preferred
medicinal variety

Dried leaves

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Sage

An evergreen
growing to 32 in

(80 cm), with square
stems and hairy grey-
green or purple leaves.

@ Cautions Do not take medicinal doses during pregnancy or while

breastfeeding, or if epileptic.

Infusion (to make,
p. 291). Use as a gargle
for sore throats up to

3 times a day.

makes it ideal as a gargle for sore
throats and throat infections. It can
equally be used for mouth ulcers
and sore gums.
= Hormonal remedy A valuable
remedy for irregular and scanty
periods, sage encourages better
blood flow at menstruation. The
herb is thought to reduce or prevent
sweating and can prove particularly
effective during menopause.
It also helps to reduce hot flashes
and night sweats and it has a
calming, relaxant aspect. Sage will
decrease breast-milk production,

Tincture (to make,

p. 292) is a digestive
tonic. Take 40 drops with

water twice a day.

Fresh sage leaves
are a useful first aid
remedy. Rub on stings
and bites.

and is traditionally taken by a mother
while weaning.

= Digestive tonic Sage has a long
traditional use as a digestive aid,
supporting stomach health and
promoting better digestion

and absorption.

Self-help Uses

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Diarrhea, p. 307.

= Hot flashes & night
sweats, p. 316.

= Mouth ulcers, p. 306.

= Sore throats, p. 311.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Adu ©

----- PAGE 134 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Sambucus nigra (Caprifoliaceae)

Elder

Elder has more folklore attached to it than almost
any other European plant, except perhaps mandrake
(Mandragora officinarum, p. 232). Chopping elder
branches was considered dangerous in rural England
as it was believed that the tree was inhabited by the
Elder Mother, and to avoid her wrath, woodcutters
would recite a placatory rhyme. Elder is a valuable
remedy for flu, colds, and chest conditions.

Elder was traditionally known as “Nature's
medicine chest.”

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Europe, elder thrives

in woods, hedges, and in open
areas. It is now found in most
temperate regions, and is often
cultivated. Elder is propagated from
cuttings in spring. The flowering
tops are harvested in late spring
and the berries are picked in early
autumn.

Key Constituents
Berries:

= Flavonoids

= Anthocyanins

= Lectins

= Vitamins A and C
Flowers:

= Flavonoids

= Anthocyanins

= Triterpenes

= Volatile oil (0.7%)
= Mucilage

= Tannins

Key Actions

= Antiviral

= Clears mucus

= Anti-inflammatory

= Diuretic
= Increases sweating

Research

= Elder berries Israeli research
from 1995 found 90% of people
that were given elderberry extract
recovered in 2-3 days, while 90%
of those taking the placebo took up
to 6 days. Further clinical trials have
supported these findings—a 2014
review concluded there was “good
scientific evidence” that elderberry
extract was an effective treatment
for influenza. Although the safety
profile of elderberry has not been
established, evidence indicates it is
a safe influenza remedy for adults
and children.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Coughs & colds The berries have
an established antiviral activity, helping
prevent and speed recovery from
upper respiratory infections, such

as colds and flu. Following traditional
usage, the flowers are taken to
stimulate sweating and relieve fever
by cooling the body. An elderflower
infusion makes a soothing remedy
when suffering from cold and flu.

= Congestion & allergies The
flowering tops tone the mucous linings
of the nose and throat (increasing
their resistance to infection) and are
prescribed for chronic congestion,
ear infections, and allergies. Infusions
with other herbs can reduce severity
of hay fever attacks if taken some
months before the season.

a Arthritis By encouraging
sweating and urine production,

elder flowering tops aid removal

Flowering tops
reduce fevers and help
coughs, colds, and flu.

reduce
inflammation

Elder

A deciduous tree
growing to 33 ft

(10 m), with oval
leaves, cream flowers,
and blue-black berries.

Fresh

flowering

Dried flowering tops

Berries are nutritious and
may be used as a mild laxative.

e
ee
+

Dried berries

vitamins A and C

tops

Berries contain

Fresh berries

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions None known. Do not consume unripe berries.

Infusion of flowering tops
(to make, p. 291). For colds, drink
¥s cup (150 ml) 3 times a day.

Cream made with
flowering tops (see
p. 296). Apply freely
to chapped skin.

Tincture of flowering tops
(to make, p. 292). For hay fever, take
| tsp with water 3—4 times a day.

“ee Decoction of berries (to make, p. 291). For rheumatic aches, take / cup

(100 ml) 3 times a day.

of waste products and are of value
in arthritic conditions.

= Other uses Flowers and berries
are mildly laxative and appear to help
lower blood pressure. The flowers
are thought to help control diabetes.
The berries appear to enhance
immune function.

Self-help Uses

= Allergic rhinitis, including hay
fever, p. 300.

= Colds, flu, & fevers, p. 311.

= Colds & congestion in children,
p.318.

= Earache due to chronic
congestion, p. 312.

----- PAGE 135 -----
Schisandra chinensis (Schisandraceae)

Schisandra, Wu Wei Zi (Chinese)

Schisandra ranks along with other Chinese tonic herbs
as an excellent tonic and restorative. It helps in stressful
times and increases zest for life. The berries tone the
kidneys and sexual organs, protect the liver, strengthen
nervous function, and cleanse the blood. The name wu
wei zi means ‘'5-flavored herb,’ since this herb reputedly
tastes of the 5 main elemental energies (see p. 40). It
has a sour, salty, and slightly warm taste.

Schisandra is one of China's most important
tonic herbs, widely taken as a sexual tonic.

Habitat & Cultivation
Schisandra is cultivated in north-
eastern China, especially in the
provinces of Jilin, Lianoning,
Heilongjiang, and Hebei. It is
propagated from seed in spring.
The fruit is harvested in autumn
when it is fully ripe.

Related Species

Though less therapeutically

active than schisandra, the berries
of the related nan wu wei zi

(S. sphenanthera) are commonly
used in Chinese medicine for the
treatment of acute coughs.

Key Constituents

= Lignans (schizandrin,
deoxyschizandrin, gomisin)

= Triterpeneso

a Volatile oil

= Vitamins C and E

Key Actions
= Nerve tonic

= Adaptogenic
= Protects liver

Research

= Aiding performance Healthy
adults given schisandra extract
showed a marked improvement

in both physical and mental stamina.
Russian sailors given schisandra had
an increased capacity to maintain and
endure normal working regimens,
and Russian factory workers were
reported to have decreased
sickness levels.

= Protecting the liver The lignans
have been shown to have pronounced
antihepatoxic (liver-protective) action.
Up to 30 different lignans have been
identified in schisandra, which all
contribute to this effect. One clinical
trial reported a 76% success rate in
treating patients with hepatitis, with
no side effects being noted.

= Nervous system Schisandra is
known to stimulate the nervous
system, increasing the speed of reflex
nervous responses and improving
mental clarity. The berries have a
mild antidepressant activity and

are thought to improve nervous
irritability and forgetfulness. In Russia,
schisandra has been used to treat
people with severe mental health
disorders including schizophrenia and
chronic alcoholism. Clinical studies

in 1967 found that those taking a
schisandra tincture became more
sociable and less emotionally tense.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Tonic Schisandra is a major tonic
herb and acts throughout the body,
strengthening and toning many
different organs.

= Sexual stimulant Probably best
known as a sexual tonic for both men

Parts Used

Fruit helps the body
to cope with stress.

Schisandra

An aromatic woody
vine reaching up to
26 ft (8 m), with pink
flowers and spikes of
red berries.

Berries are chewed
every day for 100 days
as a tonic in China

Dried fruit

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Large doses can cause heartburn. Can interact with some medicines.
Take only on professional advice, if taking prescribed medicines.

Decoction (to make, p. 291). For coughs and

shortness of breath, decoct 5 g crushed

berries with 4 cup (100 ml) of water.

Divide into 3 doses and drink during a
24-hour period.

and women, schisandra reputedly
increases the secretion of sexual
fluids and, in men, it also improves
sexual stamina.

= Liver treatment herb
Schisandra has proven benefits for
the liver and is used in the treatment
of hepatitis and poor liver function.

= Sedative Although a stimulant,
schisandra is used in Chinese medicine
to “quiet the spirit and calm the heart.’
It is given for insomnia and dream-
disturbed sleep and is a fine example
of how adaptogenic herbs often work
in apparently contradictory ways to
restore normal body function.

= Mental & emotional disorders
In Russia and China, schisandra berries
have traditionally been prescribed to
treat mental illnesses such as neuroses.
They are also given to improve
concentration and coordination

and are a traditional remedy for
forgetfulness and irritability.

= Respiratory infections The
herb is used in the treatment of

respiratory infections such as
chronic coughs, shortness of
breath, and wheezing.

= Balancing fluid levels
Schisandra is used to tone up

and strengthen kidney function
and to help the body balance
levels of fluid, making it helpful
for treating night sweats, thirst,
and urinary frequency.

= Skin rashes Recently, Chinese
herbalists have started to use
schisandra to treat urticaria (hives)
and other skin problems, including
eczema. It is usually given for
these conditions in the form

of a medicinal wine.

= Additional uses Schisandra

is used for a wide variety of
other physical disorders, including
diarrhea and dysentery, as well

as to help improve failing sight
and hearing.

Self-help Use

= Low sex drive, p. 316.

SLNV1Id TVNIODIGHW AdM

----- PAGE 136 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Scutellaria baicalensis syn. $. macrantha (Lamiaceae)

Baical Skullcap, Huang Quin

In 1973, 92 wooden tablets were discovered in a
2nd-century Ce tomb in northwestern China. Among
other herbs listed in prescriptions for decoctions,
tinctures, pills, and ointments was Baical skullcap. The
herb has had an established role in Chinese herbal
medicine at least from that time, and is one of the
main remedies for “hot and damp” conditions, such

as dysentery and diarrhea.

Baical skullcap is an important medicinal
plant in China and is also cultivated as
an ornamental.

Habitat & Cultivation
Baical skullcap is found in China,
Japan, Korea, Mongolia, and Russia.
It thrives on sunny, grassy slopes and
open areas between 330 ft (100 m)
and 5,900 ft (1,800 m) above sea
level. Baical skullcap is propagated

The roots of 3- to 4-year-old plants
are harvested in autumn or spring.

Related Species

ullcap (S. lateriflora, p. 135)

s a close relation. It is a Native
jorth American remedy for
anxiety and stress.

=o

Key Constituents

= Flavonoids (about 12%)—
baicalin, wogoniside

= Sterols

= Benzoic acid

Key Actions

m= Sedative

= Antiallergenic

= Antibacterial

= Anti-inflammatory

from seed sown in autumn or spring.

Research

= Flavonoids Baical skullcap has
been quite widely researched in
China, and it is clear that it has
marked anti-inflammatory, anti-
allergy, and antioxidant effects,
all 3 actions mostly being due to
the flavonoids.

= Clinical evidence Clinical studies

investigating different applications of
Baical skullcap show the herb has
promise in the treatment of
infections, including bronchitis,

and dysentery, high blood pressure,
chronic hepatitis, and allergic rhinitis
(hay fever). The root has anticancer
activity, with studies showing small-
scale positive results in patients with
lung and prostate cancer.

= Diabetes The herb may be useful
for problems arising from diabetes,
including cataracts.

= Weight-loss aid A South Korean
clinical trial in 2011 looked at the
effectiveness of a baical skullcap and
platycodon (Platycodon grandiflorum)
combination in treating obesity. After
2 months, the group taking the herbs
had lost significantly more weight than
the placebo group.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Cold & bitter herb In
traditional Chinese medicine,

Baical skullcap is “cold” and “bitter”
(see p. 42). It is prescribed in China
for hot and thirsty conditions such
as high fevers, coughs with thick
yellow phlegm, and gastrointestinal
infections that cause diarrhea,

such as dysentery. It is also given

to people suffering from painful
urinary conditions.

& Parts Used

Root is harvested
when the plant is
3-4 years old in
autumn or spring.

Root has anti-
inflammatory
properties

Dried root

Baical skullcap

A perennial growing
to |-4 ft (30-120 cm)
high, with lance-shaped
leaves and purplish-
blue flowers.

Fresh root

fiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Best taken under professional supervision.

Baical skullcap

Self-heal

Decoction (to make, p. 291).
For feverish chest colds, drink
4 cup (75 ml) 3 times a day.

Remedy For headaches,

decoct 15 g root with 10g
self-heal (see p. 291).
Drink 4 cup (75 ml)

3 times a day.

Tincture (to make, p. 292). For hay fever,
take 40 drops with water 3 times a day.

= Circulatory remedy Baical
skullcap is a valuable remedy for
circulation. In combination with other
herbs, it is used to treat high blood
pressure, arteriosclerosis, varicose
veins, and easy bruising.

= Other uses Applied to the
skin, Baical skullcap treats sores,
swelling, and boils. It is also given
for circulatory problems that arise
from diabetes.

= Allergic conditions The herb is
useful for treating allergic conditions
such as asthma, hay fever, eczema, and
hives. The flavonoids in particular
inhibit the inflammatory processes in
the body that lead to allergic reactions.

Self-help Uses

= Allergic rhinitis including hay
fever, p. 300.

= Wheezing, p. 301.

----- PAGE 137 -----
Scutellaria lateriflora (Lamiaceae)

Skullcap, Virginian Skullcap, Mad Dog

A Native American herb, skullcap was traditionally taken
for menstrual problems. It was also used in purification
ceremonies when menstrual taboos had been broken.
Skullcap became well known in |9th-century America
as a treatment for rabies, hence its folk name “mad dog.’
Today, it is mainly used as a tonic and sedative for the

nerves in times of stress. It has a bitter, slightly

astringent taste.

Skullcap is easy to recognize. It has pairs
of pink to blue flowers and distinctive
seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation

A native of North America, skullcap
still grows wild in much of the U.S.
and Canada. It thrives in damp
conditions, for example on
riverbanks, and needs plenty of
sun. Skullcap can be propagated
from seed or by root division in
spring. The aerial parts of 3- to
4-year-old plants are harvested

in summer, when in flower.

Related Species

There are around |00 species of
Scutellaria. In the past, European
skullcap (S. galericulata) and lesser
skullcap (S. minor) have been used
in a similar way to S. lateriflora, but
today they are considered to have
a less important therapeutic action.
Baical skullcap (5. baicalensis, p. 134)
is also closely related.

Key Constituents
= Flavonoids (scutellarin)
a Bitter iridoids (catalpol)
a Volatile oil

= Tannins

Key Actions
= Sedative

= Nervine tonic

= Antispasmodic
= Mild bitter

Research

= Anxiety remedy Little research
has been carried out on this species
of Scutellaria despite its long use in
North American and British herbal
medicine to ease anxiety and stress.
A small English study published in
2011 tested skullcap against placebo

in reducing anxiety in 43 “non-anxious”

people. Those taking skullcap showed
significantly better overall mood
levels at the end of the 2 weeks

of the study.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Native American cure The
Cherokee used skullcap to stimulate
menstruation, relieve breast pain, and
encourage expulsion of the placenta.
= 19th-century remedy The
Physiomedicalists (followers of a
|9th-century Anglo-American school
of herbal medicine) first discovered
skullcap’ use as a nervine. They
recognized that it has a “deeper”
action on the nervous system than.
many other herbs and used it for
hysteria, epilepsy, convulsions, and
rabies, as well as for serious mental
illnesses such as schizophrenia.

= Current uses Today, skullcap is
taken mainly as a nerve tonic and for
its restorative properties. It helps
support and nourish the nervous
system, and calms and relieves stress
and anxiety. Its antispasmodic action
makes it useful for conditions where

£3 Parts Used

Aerial parts are
harvested in summer
for use in a number of
calming preparations.

Dried aerial parts

Fresh aerial parts

Skullcap

~ A perennial growing
to 2 ft (60 cm), with
an erect, many-
branched stem and
pink to blue flowers.

Seed capsules,
when dry,
look like
skullcaps

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Best taken under professional supervision.

Infusion (to make,

p. 291). For short-term
relief of stress and
anxiety, take 2/4 tbsp

3 times a day.

Tincture (to make,
p. 292). For nervous

tension and headaches,
take 4 tsp with water

twice a day.

Capsules (to make,

p. 292). For nervous
exhaustion, take a 200 mg

capsule twice daily.

‘> Tablets, often containing other sedative herbs, are taken for insomnia.

stress and worry cause muscular
tension. Skullcap is often prescribed
on its own, or with other sedative
herbs, to treat insomnia, and it is also
given for period pain.

Self-help Uses

= Anxiety, depression, & tension,
p. 308.

a Migraine, p. 309.

= Panic attacks & headaches, p. 308.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 138 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

7
ae

136

Serenoa repens syn. Sabal serrulata (Palmaceae)

Saw Palmetto

Saw palmetto berries were eaten by Native North
Americans and animals. According to legend, on seeing the
animals grow “‘sleek and fat,’ European settlers tried

the berries and attributed medicinal properties to them.
The fruit pulp was used as a tonic from the | 9th century
onward, and today it is used to help in debility, for
urinary tract problems, and for reducing an enlarged
prostate gland.

= Diuretic
= Male tonic

Research

= Benign prostatic
hypertrophy (BPH) Extensive
clinical research, mostly in Europe,
has shown that a lipid or fat extract
of saw palmetto is effective in
reversing enlargement of the
prostate gland. In the process,

the extract reduces urinary retention
and eases urine flow. In many
European countries saw palmetto
extract is a standard treatment for
enlarged prostate. It is not clear
how extracts of the herb work.

Saw palmetto has dark purple to black
berries, growing in the center of the leaf fans.

Habitat & Cultivation

Saw palmetto is indigenous to North
America and can be found growing

in sand dunes along the Atlantic and
Caribbean coasts from South Carolina
to Texas. It is propagated from seed
in spring and needs well-drained soil
and plenty of sun. The berries are
harvested when ripe in autumn, then
dried, often with the seeds removed.

= Combination with nettle root
In the late 1990s two clinical trials
gave men with early stage BPH a
combination of saw palmetto and
nettle root. One trial compared the
herbs with placebo, the other with
finasteride, a standard conventional
treatment for BPH. Results for the
herb combination in both trials were

Related Species

The Maya of Central America used
the roots or leaves of S. japa, another
small palm, as a remedy for dysentery
and abdominal pain. The crushed
roots of S. adamsonii were used by
the Houma, who also lived in Central
America, as an eye lotion.

very good, with a clear improvement
in symptoms in respect to placebo,
and similar outcomes for those taking
the herbs or finasteride, but those
taking the herbs experienced fewer
side effects.

Traditional &

Current Uses

a Urinary remedy Saw palmetto
has been nicknamed the “plant
catheter.’ This is because it has the
ability to strengthen the neck of
the bladder, and to reduce an
enlarged prostate gland. It can be
equally useful in treating lower

Key Constituents

a Lipid (fat) content includes
phytosterols

m= Flavonoids

= Polysaccharides

Key Actions
= Anti-inflammatory
= Antispasmodic

urinary tract symptoms, such as pain,
frequency, and urgency in urination.

Saw palmetto

Asmall palm

— = growing to 20 ft

~ (6 m), with fans of
Tis yellow-green leaves

it “Sand ivory flowers.

f Parts Used

Berries have powerful diuretic
and tonic properties. They
are a traditional North
American remedy for

a wide range of problems.

Berries have
a vanilla,
nutty flavor

Fresh berries
Dried berries

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not use during pregnancy, while breastfeeding, if taking
hormonal drugs, or if you have a hormone-dependent cancer.

Licorice
Saw palmetto

Infusion (to make, p. 29!) isa
diuretic. For enlarged prostate,
take % cup (150 ml) daily.

Horsetail

Remedy Make an infusion
(see p. 291) with 2 tsp saw
palmetto, 2 tsp horsetail, | tsp licorice,
and % cup (200 ml) water. Take 4 cup
(100 ml) as a tonic twice a day.

Tincture (to make, p. 292)

can be taken as a long-term

tonic for debility. Take | tsp
with water daily.

It is a useful remedy in cystitis and
prostatitis (inflammation of the
prostate gland).

= Anabolic action Saw palmetto
is a tonic and is one of the few

weight gain. Fruit pulp or tincture is
given to those suffering from wasting
illnesses and for general debility and
failure to thrive.

Western remedies that is considered
to be anabolic—it strengthens and
builds body tissues and encourages

Self-help Use
= Impotence & premature
ejaculation, p. 316.

----- PAGE 139 -----
SILYeUM MARIANUM

Silybum marianum syn. Carduus marianus (Asteraceae)

Milk Thistle, Mary thistle y

Milk thistle

A spiny biennial,
growing to 5 ft

% (1.5m), with white-
“4 veined leaves and

Milk thistle has been used in Europe as a remedy for
depression and liver problems for hundreds, if not
thousands, of years. Recent research has confirmed
traditional herbal knowledge, proving that the herb has
a remarkable ability to protect the liver from damage
resulting from alcoholic and other types of poisoning.
Today, milk thistle is widely used in the West for the

& Parts Used

Flower heads are eaten as a tonic
food and can be used in remedies.

BF SS purple flower heads.

treatment of a range of liver conditions.

Milk thistle has distinctive white markings
on its leaves caused, according to tradition,
by the Virgin Mary's milk.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to the Mediterranean, milk
thistle grows throughout Europe and is
naturalized in California. It grows wild,
thriving in open areas, and is cultivated
as an ornamental plant. Milk thistle likes
a sunny position and self-seeds readily.
The flower heads are picked in full
bloom in early summer and the seeds:
are collected in late summer.

Related Species

Other closely related herbs, including
holy thistle (Cnicus benedictus,

p. 191) and globe artichoke (Cynara
scolymus, p. 199), protect the liver
from toxicity and exert a positive
restorative action on liver function.

Key Constituents
= Flavonlignans (1-4%)
(known collectively as “silymarin”)
= Bitter principles
= Polyacetylenes

Key Actions
a Liver protective
= Chemoprotective

= Anticancer
= Anti-allergenic
= Increases breast-milk production

Research

a Silymarin German research from
the 1970s onward has focused on
silymarin, a substance contained

in the seeds. This exerts a highly
protective effect on the liver,
maintaining its function and preventing
damage from compounds that are
normally highly toxic. It has been
shown that severe liver breakdown,
resulting from ingesting carbon

tetrachloride or death cap mushrooms,

can be prevented if silymarin is
taken immediately before, or within
48 hours. In Germany, silymarin has
been used successfully to treat
epatitis and liver cirrhosis.

= Other research In several clinical
trials, silymarin extracts protected
iver function in people taking
chemotherapy for cancer, including,
in one trial, children suffering from
leukemia. Research so far suggests
that silymarin extracts support
ealthy liver function during
chemotherapy and do not reduce
the effectiveness of chemotherapy
drugs. Laboratory research indicates
that silymarin, particularly silybin,
has significant anticancer properties.
In a 201 | clinical trial in Iran, patients
with allergic rhinitis experienced

significantly fewer symptoms when
taking a silymarin extract.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional uses Milk thistle
flower heads, boiled and eaten like
artichokes, were useful as a spring

Dried flower
head

Fresh flower
head

Spiny, thistle-
like leaves are
gray-green

Seeds contain silymarin,
which protects the liver.
They are the main part
used in remedies.

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions May cause allergic reactions in rare cases. Seek
guidance from your health care practitioner if planning to

take alongside chemotherapy.

Decoction of seeds (to
make, p. 291). For liver
infections, take
A cup (75 ml) a day.

Capsules of seeds (to make, p. 292).

For a hangover, take a 500 mg capsule.

Tincture of seeds may be
taken to help hay fever.

So Tablets are prescribed for long-term treatment of liver disorders.

tonic after the winter months when
people had been deprived of fresh
vegetables. They were also taken to
increase breast-milk production, and
were considered excellent for
melancholia (depression), which was
traditionally associated with the liver.
Gerard states in his Herball of 1597,
“My opinion is that this [milk thistle]
is the best remedy that grows against
all melancholy diseases.’

= Liver disorders Today, milk
thistle is the main remedy used
in Western herbal medicine to
protect the liver and its many
metabolic activities, and help
renew its cells. The herb is used
in the treatment of hepatitis and
jaundice, as well as in conditions
where the liver is under stress—
whether from infection or excess
alcohol, or from chemotherapy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 140 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Symphytum officinale (Boraginaceae)

Comfrey, Knitbone

Comfrey’s names testify to its traditional use in mending
broken bones. “Comfrey” is a corruption of con firma,
meaning the bone is “made firm,” Symphytum is derived
from the Greek for “‘to unite,’ and knitbone speaks for
itself. Comfrey is also a wound herb. K’Eogh in his Irish
Herbal (1735) wrote that it “heals all inward wounds

Comfrey

A perennial growing
to 3 ft (I m), with
thick leaves and bell-
like white to pink

or mauve flowers.

£3 Parts Used

Root is harvested in autumn when
the allantoin levels are highest.

and ruptures.” Today, tt is still highly regarded for its

healing properties.

Comfrey was known to the Greek physician
Dioscorides in the | st century ce, who wrote
about it in his Materia Medica.

Habitat & Cultivation

An indigenous European plant,
comfrey grows in all temperate
regions of the world, including
western Asia, North America, and
Australia. It thrives in moist, marshy
places. It can be grown from seed in
spring or by root division in autumn,
and the leaves and flowering tops
are harvested in summer. The root
is unearthed in autumn.

Key Constituents

= Allantoin (up to 4.7%)

= Mucilage (about 29%)

= Triterpenoids

m= Phenolic acids
(rosmarinic acid)

= Asparagine

= Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
(0.02-0.07%)

= Tannins

Key Actions

= Demulcent

= Astringent

= Anti-inflammatory

= Heals wounds and bones

Research

= Active constituents Allantoin
is a cell-proliferant that stimulates
the repair of damaged tissue. The
herb'’s anti-inflammatory activity

is partly due to the presence of
rosmarinic acid and phenolic acids.
= Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Research shows that, as isolated
substances, certain pyrrolizidine
alkaloids can be highly toxic to the
liver. It is still unclear whether they
are toxic in the context of the
whole plant, as they are only present
in minute amounts, often being
completely absent from samples

of dried aerial parts. The highest
concentration is in the root, which
should not be used internally. Skin
applications, as well as the aerial parts
of the plant, are considered safe.

= Clinical research In Germany
and elsewhere in Europe, comfrey
is widely used for sprains, bruises,
and sports injuries. Research, mostly
in Germany, endorses the traditional
knowledge of comfrey’s wound-
healing ability. In a 2007 study,
physicians rated the efficacy of a
comfrey leaf cream in healing
abrasions. The doctors rated its

effectiveness as good or very good

in 93% of cases, and complete healing

took 4 days with comfrey and 7 days
with placebo. Other studies indicate
comfrey's value in promoting tissue
repair and as an anti-inflammatory
in conditions such as sprained ankle,
osteoarthritis, and lower back pain.

Traditional &
Current Uses
a Injuries Comfrey’ ability to
promote the healing of bruises,

Fresh

aerial parts

Aerial parts are rich
in anti-inflammatory and
astringent substances.

Dried root

FiKey Preparations & Their Uses

OD 7
Dried
aerial parts

@ Cautions Do not use on dirty wounds as rapid healing can trap dirt or pus.
Take internally only under professional supervision. Restricted in some countries.
Do not take during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Chopping leaves
For boils, apply as a

Infused oil of leaves
(to make, p. 294)
Apply to sprains.

poultice (see p. 295).

Ointment of leaves
(to make, p. 295).
Apply to bruises.

_® Tincture of root (to make, p. 292). Apply undiluted to acne.

sprains, fractures, and broken bones
has been known for thousands of
years. It encourages ligaments and
bones to knit together firmly. A
comfrey compress applied immediately
to a sprained ankle can significantly
reduce the severity of the injury. The
combination of tannins and mucilage
helps to soothe bruises and grazes.

= Other uses Comfrey preparations
have many other uses and can be

applied to heal problems such as
insect bites, scars, skin inflammation,
acne, and mastitis.

Self-help Uses

= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Fractures, p. 312.

= Fungal skin infections, p. 304.
= Healing wounds, p. 304.

= Inflamed skin rashes, p. 303.
a Stiff & aching joints, p. 313.

----- PAGE 141 -----
including leukemia.

Pau d’arco is valued for its durable wood
and for its bark that has important:
therapeutic properties.

Habitat & Cultivation

An indigenous South American tree,
pau d’arco grows well in mountainous
terrains. In Peru and Argentina it is
found growing high up in the Andes.
Pau d’arco is also found in low-lying
areas (in Paraguay and Brazil), where
it is thought to have originated. Many
Tabebuia species are used in herbal

& Parts Used

Tabebuia spp. (Bignoniaceae)
Pau d’Arco (Portuguese), Lapacho (Spanish)

Bark from the pau d’arco tree has been valued

for centuries in traditional South American herbal
medicine for its remarkable health benefits. Today,

it is given as a remedy for inflammatory and infectious
problems, including conditions such as chronic fatigue
and candidiasis. It is also used for other conditions and
has a mixed reputation as a treatment for cancer,

medicine, so quality control of dried
bark can be difficult. T. avellanedae
is considered to be the most
therapeutically effective species,
while T. impetignosa is the species
that is most commonly available.
Pau d’arco is not normally
cultivated—the prized inner bark is
collected from trees growing in the
wild, throughout the year.

Key Constituents

= Napthaquinones (lapachol)
= Anthraquinones

= Coumarins

= Flavonoids

a lridoids

= Carnosol

Key Actions

= Antibacterial

= Antifungal

= Antiparasitic

= Immunostimulant
= Anti-inflammatory

Inner bark is prized for its immunostimulant properties.
It is used to treat many inflammatory conditions.

Bark has important
antibiotic properties

Dried inner bark

= Tonic
= Antitumor

Research

= Antibacterial and antifungal
activity A Colombian review (2013)
of research data on Tabebuia species,
much of which was undertaken

in South America, highlighted pau
d'arco’s strong, direct activity against
several key bacteria, notably
Staphylococcus aureus and
Helicobacter pylori, the latter being
the principal cause of stomach ulcers.
It also has broad-ranging activity
against many fungal agents, including
Candida albicans.

= Antitumor properties Pau
d'arco’s anticancer action has been
established in laboratory
experiments, with many of its
constituents suppressing the growth
of cancer cells. Research in Brazil in
the 1960s raised great hopes that
pau d’arco might prove to be a major
cancer treatment, but clinical
research has failed to produce
Positive results.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Early cure-all The Incas, the
Callawaya in Brazil, and other Native
South American peoples all prized
pau d’arco as a cure-all. They used

it to treat a variety of conditions,

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Caution If taking anticoagulant medication, take pau d’arco only on professional
advice. Do not take during pregnancy. Avoid if trying to conceive.

i
s
/

aS sat

Decoction (to make,

p. 291) is a traditional
preparation in South
America. For candidiasis,
drink % cup (150 ml)

3 times a day.

Ointment (to make, p. 295).
For wounds, apply freely.

Pau d’arco

An evergreen tree
(deciduous in cold
climates) reaching

100 ft (30 m), with
pink flowers.
including wounds, fever, dysentery,
and intestinal inflammation, as well as
certain types of cancer and snake bite.
a Infections Given the large
number of active constituents in

pau d’arco, it is not surprising that
this beneficial herb is used in South
America and by herbal practitioners
roughout the world. It is an
important, natural antibiotic for
bacterial and viral infections,
especially of the nose, mouth, and

t

d

oa

roat, and is considered helpful for
hronic conditions such as CFS
(chronic fatigue syndrome).

Pau d’arco is also used for fungal
conditions, including ringworm and
thrush, and is considered especially
useful for treating chronic candidiasis.
= Anti-inflammatory action
Pau d’arco reduces and relieves
inflammatory problems, especially
in the stomach and intestines. It

is used to treat a wide range of
other inflammatory conditions,
including cystitis, inflammation of
the cervix, and prostatitis.

= Cancer remedy Clinical
experience in Brazil, combined

ith its worldwide use by herbalists
as a cancer remedy, suggests that
pau d’arco may be beneficial in

the treatment of cancer, including
leukemia. However, more intensive
research is needed into its
therapeutic value.

wi

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is
suitable for long-term use.
For ces, take 40 drops with

water 3 times a day.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

139

----- PAGE 142 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Tanacetum parthenium (Asteraceae)

Feverfew

Feverfew’s main traditional use was as a woman's
herb. Nicholas Culpeper in The English Physitian
(1652) sings its praises as “‘a general strengthener of
[the] womb ... it cleanseth the womb, expelleth the
after-birth and doth the woman all the good she can
desire of an herb.” Feverfew is now used principally
as a treatment for migraine, but has also long been
thought of as an herb for arthritis and rheumatism.

Feverfew has daisylike flowers that bloom
all summer.

Habitat & Cultivation
Originally from southeastern
Europe, feverfew is now common.
throughout Europe, Australia, and
North America. It can be propagated
from seed or cuttings, and prefers
well-drained soil and sun. The leaves
are picked as required and the aerial
parts as a whole are harvested in
summer when the plant is in flower.

Related Species

Feverfew is a close relative of
tansy (Tanacetum vulgare, p. 274),
and the chrysanthemum and
chamomile species.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (alpha-pinene)

= Sesquiterpene lactones
(parthenolide)

= Sesquiterpenes (camphor)

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory

= Analgesic

m Reduces fever

= Antirheumatic

= Promotes menstrual flow

Research

= Migraine When, in 1973, the wife
of a Welsh doctor ended her 50-
year history of migraine with

a course of feverfew, a detailed
scientific investigation got underway.
In clinical trials in Britain during the
1980s the herb was shown to be an
effective remedy for migraine. Further
clinical trials across Europe, including
one in 2006 that combined feverfew
and willow bark (Salix alba, p. 129),
attest to feverfew's ability to treat
migraine. The trials indicate feverfew
may need to be taken long term (for
6 months or more) for full effect.

= Rheumatoid arthritis
Feverfew’s effectiveness in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis

is being investigated.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Fevers As its name implies,
feverfew may be used to lower
temperature and cool the body.

= Gynecological uses The herb
has been used since Roman times
to induce menstruation. It is also
given in childbirth to aid expulsion
of the placenta.

= Migraine & headaches |n small
quantities, feverfew is now used as a
preventative for migraine. It has to be
taken regularly, and at the first signs
of an attack. It is useful for migraine
associated with menstruation, and
for headaches.

= Arthritis remedy The herb
can help arthritic and rheumatic
pain, especially with other herbs.

Self-help Use

= Migraine prevention, p. 309.

Feverfew
An herbaceous
» perennial growing

numerous daisylike
flower heads.

Aerial parts
are harvested in
summer when the
plant is in flower.

The leaves contain
parthenolide, which
helps prevent migraine

aerial parts Fresh aerial parts

fiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Cautions Eating fresh leaves may cause mouth ulcers. Do not take feverfew
if taking warfarin or other blood-thinning drugs. Do not take during pregnancy.
Can cause allergic reactions in rare cases.

Se
=

\

Fresh leaves To prevent Tincture (to make, p. 292). For
long-term prevention of migraine,

take 10 drops a day.

migraine, eat 2-3 leaves
daily on a piece of bread.

“> Capsules (to make, p. 292). For symptomatic relief of headaches
take a 100 mg capsule daily.

) Tablets often contain other herbs. Take for headaches.

Sto 2 ft (60 cm), with

----- PAGE 143 -----
Taraxacum officinale (Asteraceae)

Dandelion

Known principally as a weed, dandelion has an astonishing
range of health benefits. In Western folk medicine, the
leaves, which can be eaten in salads, have long been used
as a diuretic. They were recommended in the works

of Arab physicians in the | 1th century, and in an herbal
written by the physicians of Myddfai in Wales in the
|3th century. The root, which has a shorter history

of medicinal use, is good for the liver.

Key Actions
= Diuretic

= Detoxifying

m= Bitter

Research

= Leaves Research published in
the journal Planta Medica, in 1974,
confirmed that dandelion leaves
are a powerful diuretic, though
their exact mode of action is not
understood. Many other small-scale
studies have confirmed this diuretic,

Dandelion’s name, which is a corruption of
the Latin dens leonis, meaning’lion’s teeth,”
derives from the appearance of its flowers.

or more accurately, aquaretic effect
of dandelion leaf. Aquaretic refers
to the fact that many herbal diuretics
Habitat & Cultivation
Dandelion grows wild in most parts:
of the world and is cultivated in

stimulate just the elimination of
water and potassium. As dandelion
leaf has very high levels of potassium,
it is thought that no net loss of this
mineral occurs on taking the leaf.

= Root A 2004 laboratory study
reported dandelion root had marked

Germany and France. It is propagated
from seed in spring. The young leaves
are picked in spring for tonic salads,
and later as a medicine. The root

of 2-year-old plants is unearthed anticancer activity. It significantly
in autumn. increased tumor necrosis factor and
apoptosis (programmed cell death).
Related Species

Pu gong ying (T. mongolicum) is used

in Chinese herbal medicine to “clear

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Diuretic Dandelion leaf is used
as a diuretic and treats high blood
pressure by reducing the volume
of fluid in the body.

= Detoxifying remedy Dandelion
root is a key detoxifying herb that
gently stimulates the liver and gall
bladder's capacity to clear waste
products from the body. This action
makes it valuable in the many health

heat” and relieve toxicity, especially
of the liver.

Key Constituents
= Sesquiterpene lactones
= Triterpenes

= Polysaccharides

Leaf only:

= Coumarins

= Carotenoids

a Minerals (especially potassium)
Root only:

m= Taraxacoside

m= Phenolic acids

conditions that involve chronic toxicity,
whether this toxicity is linked to
inflammation, infection, or dietary or
environmental factors. The root is

= Minerals (potassium, calcium) typically taken to treat constipation,

& Parts Used

Dandelion

A perennial growing
to 20 in (50 cm),
with ragged basal
leaves, hollow stalks,
and golden flowers.

Leaves are juiced, eaten raw in salads,
or dried for use in herbal preparations.

Dried leaves

Root is harvested after
2 years and is dried or roasted.

Fresh root

a 4 “
mo

Dried root

Leaves contain
high levels of
potassium

Fresh leaves

fl Key Preparations & Their Uses

Marigold petals Borage flowers

Tonic salad made with dandelion leaves.

Eat regularly for its cleansing benefits.

Tablets have a diuretic effect.
‘Take for fluid retention.

Tincture of root (to make, p. 292).
For eczema, take 4 tsp diluted with
A cup (100 ml) water 3 times a day.

‘we Decoction of root (p. 291). For acne, take 4 cup (75 ml) 3 times a day.

see Infusion of leaves (p. 291). For swollen ankles, take 2 cups (500 ml) daily.

Juice made from leaves. For fluid retention, take | tbsp 3 times a day.

skin problems, such as eczema, and
arthritic conditions, where improved
clearance of waste products can
reduce local inflammation.

= Other uses Dandelion root is a
good prebiotic, supporting the health
of the gut flora. It has traditionally
been used in the early stages of type 2
diabetes, stimulating insulin release

from the pancreas and supporting
stable blood-sugar levels.

Self-help Uses
= Acne & boils, p. 305.
= Constipation, p. 307.

= Detoxification for hangover, p. 309.

= Fluid retention, p. 315.
= Hives, p. 303.

SLNV1TId TVNIDIGHW AGM ©

Jp

As)

141

----- PAGE 144 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Terminalia arjuna (Combretaceae)
Arjun

The bark of the arjun tree has been used in Indian
herbal medicine for at least 3,000 years, and has
always been valued as a remedy for the heart. The
first person credited with prescribing arjun for heart
disease was Vagbhata, an Indian physician of the
7th century ce. Arjun is an example of an herb for
which the traditional use has been confirmed by
modern pharmacological research.

Arjun is a handsome evergreen tree. Its
bark is prescribed to help heart and
circulation problems.

Habitat & Cultivation
Arjun is found throughout most

of the Indian subcontinent, from
Sri Lanka to the foothills of the
Himalayas. It thrives in wet, marshy
areas and on riverbanks. The tree is
grown from seed and the bark

is cut in late winter.

Related Species

A number of other Terminalia species
are also used medicinally, notably
beleric myrobalan and chebulic
myrobalan (T. belerica and T. chebula,
p. 275). Both are close relatives of
arjun and are among the most used
herbal medicines in India.

Key Constituents
= Tannins

= Triterpenoid saponins
m= Flavonoids

= Phytosterols

Key Actions

= Cardiac tonic

= Lowers blood pressure

= Reduces cholesterol levels

Research

= Cardiac tonic Research has
been going on into arjun in India
since the 1930s. The results have
been highly conflicting, with some
studies indicating that it increases
heart rate and blood pressure, and
others suggesting the reverse. It
seems that the herb is best used
to treat conditions where the blood
supply to the heart is poor, for
example in ischemic heart disease
and angina. In a 2002 clinical trial

in India, 58 men with angina were
given arjun. Results were very
positive, with those taking arjun
experiencing a marked reduction
in angina symptoms and an increased
capacity to exercise.

= Cholesterol Indian research has
demonstrated that arjun reduces
blood cholesterol levels.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Traditional heart remedy

In Indian herbal medicine, arjun has
always been taken as a heart tonic.

It has a long history of treating heart
failure and edema (a condition in
which fluid accumulates in the ankles
and legs because the heart is not
pumping adequately).

= Ayurvedic medicine Ayurvedic
physicians use arjun to restore balance
when any of the 3 humors, kapha,
pitta, or vata (see p. 37), is present in
excess. As a decoction, the bark is
given to treat diarrhea and dysentery.
Powdered bark is part of a traditional
Ayurvedic treatment for asthma. Arjun
is also given in Ayurveda for bile duct
problems, as well as for poisoning and
scorpion stings.

Arjun
An evergreen tree
reaching 100 ft (30 m),
with pale yellow
flowers and cone-
shaped leaves.

£3 Parts Used

Bark has constituents that
lower blood pressure and
reduce cholesterol levels.

Dried
bark

Bark is used to treat
heart disease in India

Fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

@ Caution Take only under professional supervision.

e@ ,

Tincture is a valuable cardiac tonic.
Herbalists prescribe it to treat angina.

Decoction is used by herbalists to
treat poor circulation to the heart.

Powder is a traditional
Ayurvedic remedy,
prescribed for asthma.

= Modern heart remedy Arjun is
beneficial for angina and poor coronary
circulation. It is also of benefit if the
heart's rate and rhythm are abnormal.
By lowering blood cholesterol levels,

reducing blood pressure, and
supporting normal heart function,
arjun improves the health of the
circulation and reduces the risk of
developing a serious heart problem.

----- PAGE 145 -----
Thymus vulgaris (Lamiaceae)

Thyme, Garden Thyme

Thyme was praised by the herbalist Nicholas Culpeper
(1616-1654) as “a notable strengthener of the lungs,
as notable a one as grows; neither is there a better
remedy growing for that disease in children which they

Thyme

An aromatic shrub
growing to 16 in

(40 cm), with woody
stems, small leaves,
and pink flowers.

Parts Used

Aerial parts, harvested in summer,
contain antiseptic volatile oil.

commonly call chin-cough [whooping cough].’ Thyme is
an excellent antiseptic and tonic, and today it is still used
as a respiratory remedy, as well as being important for a

variety of other ailments.

Thyme’s pink flowers attract bees in
profusion and give a distinctive flavor
to the honey.

Habitat & Cultivation
Thyme is a cultivated variety of the
wild thyme (T. serpyllum, p. 276) of
southern Europe and is now grown
worldwide. It is raised from seed or
by root division in spring and prefers
light, chalky soils. The aerial parts are
harvested in summer.

Related Species

There are many Thymus species, each
with a different volatile oil content.
Wild thyme (T. serpyllum, p. 276) is
often used in the same way as thyme.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (mostly thymol
and carvacrol)

m= Flavonoids

m= Phenolic acids

Key Actions

= Antiseptic

= Tonic

= Relieves muscle spasms
= Expectorant

= Expels worms

= Antioxidant

Research
= Volatile oil Thymes volatile oil is
strongly antiseptic—the constituent
thymol, in particular, is a most
effective antifungal. The oil is also
expectorant and it expels worms.

= Anti-aging Research in the 1990s
in Scotland suggests that thyme and its
volatile oil have a markedly tonic
effect, supporting the body's normal
function and countering the effects
of aging. More recent research
indicates that thyme is strongly
antioxidant and may help maintain
higher levels of essential fatty acids
within the brain.

= Stomach ulcers Extracts of

the herb have shown strong
antibacterial activity against H. pylori,
a bacterium often associated with

stomach ulcers.

= Menstrual pain Many compounds
within thyme relieve muscle cramps.
A 2014 Iranian clinical trial compared
the ability of thyme and ibuprofen

to relieve period pains. The findings
showed both treatments to

be effective.

Traditional &

Current Uses

a Infections The antiseptic and
tonic properties of thyme make it a
useful tonic for the immune system in
chronic, especially fungal, infections, as
well as an effective remedy for throat
and chest infections.

= Asthma & hay fever Thyme

is prescribed with other herbs for
asthma, especially in children. Its
invigorating qualities balance the
sedative effect of many herbs used
for asthma. Thyme is also helpful

in hay fever.

Leaves have
an aromatic,
bitter taste

Fresh leaves

Fi Key Preparations

& Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take the essential oil internally.
Do not use the essential oil externally during pregnancy.

-_

Infusion (to make, p. 291).
For colds, take 2 cup

| (100 ml) 3 times daily.
f

4

Essential oil for acne,
dilute to 5% and dab
onto inflamed spots.

Syrup (to make,
p. 293) is a traditional
cough remedy. Take

| tbsp 3 times a day.

.-® Tincture (to make, p. 292). For thrush, apply 40 drops, 2-3 times daily.

a Worms Thyme is often used to
treat worms in children.

= External uses Applied to the
skin, thyme relieves bites and stings,
and is used for sciatica and rheumatic
pains. It helps ringworm, athlete's foot,
thrush, and other fungal infections,

as well as scabies and lice. Thyme
infusion and diluted oil are also
massaged into the scalp to encourage
hair growth and reverse hair loss.

Self-help Uses

= Allergic rhinitis, p. 300.

= Back pain, p. 313.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Colds & flu, p. 311.

= Coughs & bronchitis, p. 310.

= Earache, p. 312.

= Fungal infections, pp. 304 & 314.
= Maintaining vitality, p. 319.

a Mild asthma, p. 301.

= Tired & aching muscles, p. 31 2.

SLNV1Id TVNIDOIGHW AM

Je

a

143

----- PAGE 146 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Turnera diffusa syn. T. diffusa var. aphrodisiaca (Passifloraceae)

Damiana

Damiana is a traditional aphrodisiac of the Maya
people in Central America. It continues to be
considered valuable as an aphrodisiac and general
tonic, and its stimulant, tonic action also makes it

a valuable remedy for those suffering from mild
depression. Damiana has a strongly aromatic, slightly
bitter taste. The leaves are used to flavor liqueurs and
are taken in Mexico as a substitute for tea.

Damiana is an excellent tonic herb for
physical weakness and nervous exhaustion.

Habitat & Cultivation
Damiana is native to the Gulf of
Mexico, southern California, the
northern Caribbean Islands, and
Namibia. It is also cultivated in these
areas. Damiana is grown from seed
in spring and prefers a hot, humid
climate. The leaves are harvested
when the herb is in flower

in summer.

Related Species

T. opifera and T. ulmifolia are used
as tonics in Brazil and Central
America, respectively.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (about 0.5—1%),
including caryophylene,
thymol, and cadinene

= Flavonoids

= Hydroquinones (arbutin)

= Tannins

Key Actions
= Tonic

= Nerve tonic

= Aphrodisiac

a Mild stimulant

a Mild antidepressant
= Mild laxative and diuretic

Research

= Initial research The first
study into the aphrodisiac activity
of damiana (published in 1999)
found that male rats with low
sexual activity became more
sexually active when given damiana
extract. One cannot generalize
from animals to humans, but this
does correspond with traditional
views of the herb. Other recent
research suggests that damiana

helps to prevent raised blood-
sugar levels in diabetics.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Tonic Damiana is a tonic and
restorative for the nervous system,
and has always been considered an
aphrodisiac. Its tonic action is partly
due to the constituent thymol, which
is antiseptic and tonic.

= Antidepressant Technically,
damiana is a thymoleptic (having a
stimulating action on the body and
mind). It is given to people suffering
from mild to moderate depression
or nervous exhaustion. Its stimulating
and restorative properties make it
valuable when anxiety and depression
happen together.

= Sexual restorative Due to its
reputed testosterogenic activity,
damiana has always been seen as

an herb for men, helpful in treating
premature ejaculation and
impotence. It is, however, beneficial
for both men and women, being
considered restorative to the
reproductive organs of both sexes.

Parts Used

Leaves are harvested

in summer. They make a
pleasant-tasting tea and
are used for a wide range
of medicinal preparations.

Damiana

An aromatic shrub

* growing to 6% ft (2 m),
with smooth, pale
green leaves and small,
single yellow flowers.

Fresh leaves

Dried leaves

es Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Tincture (to make, p. 292) isa
nerve tonic and antidepressant.
For mild depression, take 30
drops with water 4 times a day.

= Gynecological problems
Damiana is often given for painful
and delayed periods, and is used
specifically for headaches connected
to menstruation.

= Urinary antiseptic Being a
diuretic and urinary antiseptic, damiana
is useful in the treatment of urinary
infections such as cystitis and urethritis.
This action is partly due to the
constituent arbutin, which is converted
into hydroquinone, a strong urinary

Tablets usually also
contain other herbs.
Take as a relaxing tonic.

Infusion (to make, p. 291) isa
tonic and is useful for urinary
infections. Drink % cup (150 ml)
daily as a general tonic.

antiseptic, in the urinary tubules. This
constituent is also found in a number:
of other plants, notably uva-ursi
(Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, p. 170).

= Laxative Damiana is a mild
laxative, useful in the treatment of
constipation due to poor bowel
muscle tone.

Self-help Use
= Anxiety, depression, &
tension, p. 308.

----- PAGE 147 -----
Ulmus rubra (Ulmaceae)

Slippery Elm

This marvellous herb is a gentle and effective remedy
for irritated states of the mucous membranes of
the chest, urinary tubules, stomach, and intestines.

It was used in many different ways by Native
Americans—as a poultice for wounds, boils, ulcers,
and inflamed eyes, and internally for fevers, colds, and
bowel complaints. Slippery elm has a strongly

Slippery elm

A large tree growing
to 59 ft (18 m) with

a brown trunk and
rough gray-white bark
on the branches.

& Parts Used

Inner bark of |0-year-old
slippery elm trees is collected
in spring and powdered.

Bark contains mucilage that
soothes irritated tissues

mucilaginous “‘slippery’’ taste and texture.

Slippery elm produces red-brown fruit,
each consisting of a single seed,
in summer.

Habitat & Cultivation
Slippery elm is a native of the U.S.
and Canada, and is most commonly
found growing in the Appalachian
Mountains. The tree thrives on high
ground and dry soil. The inner bark
of the trunk and branches is collected
in spring.

Related Species

White elm (U. americana) is used in

a similar way to slippery elm, and was
taken for coughs by the Mohicans. In
Europe, the dried bark of elm (Ulmus
spp.) was used as a demulcent, and
was first mentioned by Dioscorides
in the Ist century ce.

Key Constituents
a Mucilage

= Starch

= Tannins

Key Actions
= Demulcent

= Emollient

= Nutritive

= Laxative

Research

= Mucilage There is limited
research into slippery elm, but its
action as an herb with large quantities
of mucilage is well understood. When
the herb comes into direct contact
with inflamed surfaces such as the
skin or the intestinal membranes,

it soothes and coats the irritated
tissue, protects it from injury, and
draws out toxins or irritants.

= Reflex action When slippery
elm is taken internally, it is thought
likely that it causes a reflex
stimulation of nerve endings in

the stomach and intestines that
leads to secretion of mucus by the
membranes of the urinary tract.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Nourishing Taken regularly,
slippery elm is a nutritious and
soothing food that acts as a prebiotic,
supporting beneficial bacterial growth
within the gut. It is excellent as a baby
food and during convalescence.

= Digestive disorders Slippery elm
is a particularly soothing herb and can
bring instant relief to acidity, diarrhea,
and gastroenteritis. It will also help
alleviate conditions such as colic,
inflammation of the gut, constipation,
hemorrhoids, diverticulitis, and
irritable bowel syndrome.

a Urinary problems This herb

is a useful remedy for urinary
problems such as chronic cystitis.

= Respiratory conditions
Slippery elm has been used to treat
all manner of chest conditions and
has a soothing effect on everything
from coughs and bronchitis to pleurisy
and tuberculosis.

Dried bark

fi Key Preparations
& Their Uses

Infusion Mix | heaped tsp with
3 cups (750 ml) of warm water.
Infuse for 5 minutes. For
diarrhea, drink a whole dose
|-2 times a day.

Capsules (to make, p. 292)
For bronchitis, take a 200 mg
capsule 2-3 times a day.

Fresh bark

Poultice For wounds, add several
drops of calendula tincture to
| tsp of powder. Mix into a paste
and apply (see p. 295).

waa}

«-» Powder For acid indigestion, take | tsp with water 2-3 times daily.

«> Tablets Take for diarrhea.

= External uses Applied externally,
the herb softens and protects the
skin. It also works very well as a
“drawing” poultice for boils

and splinters.

Self-help Uses

= Acidity & indigestion, p. 307.

= Acne & boils, p. 305.

= Constipation in children, p. 318.
= Hemorrhoids, p. 302.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM ©

----- PAGE 148 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Urtica dioica (Urticaceae)

Nettle

Known for its sting, nettle has long been appreciated
for its medicinal uses. In the Ist century cE, the Greek
physician Dioscorides listed a range of uses—the fresh
chopped leaves as a plaster for septic wounds, the juice
for nosebleeds, and the cooked leaves mixed with myrrh
to stimulate menstruation. Today, nettle is used for hay
fever, arthritis, anemia, and, surprisingly, even for
some skin conditions.

Key Actions
Diuretic

Astringent

Prevents hemorrhaging
Anti-allergenic

Reduces prostate
enlargement (root)

= Anti-inflammatory

Research

= Root Clinical trials over the past

20 years have supported the root's use
in treating an enlarged prostate and

Nettle can be cooked as a vegetable and
tastes like spinach.

easing lower urinary tract symptoms,
though several tested it in combination
with saw palmetto (Serenoa repens,

p. 136) rather than on its own.

= Antiarthritic Studies into nettle’s
benefit in osteoarthritis have had
mixed results, though a 2009 French
trial found it reduced patients’
required daily intake of anti-

Habitat & Cultivation
Nettle grows in temperate regions
worldwide. The shoots are picked
in spring for use as a tonic anda
vegetable. Aerial parts are picked in
summer when the plant is in flower.
The root is harvested in autumn.

inflammatories when combined
with Vitamin E, zinc, and fish oil.

= Seeds Results of a 2009 Iranian
laboratory study suggested that the
seeds are antioxidant and protect

Related Species

The annual nettle (U. urens) is used in
similar ways to U. dioica. Roman nettle
(U. pilulifera) was the species most
used by the Romans for “urtication”
(beating with nettles to encourage
blood to the surface), which they

did to keep themselves warm.

liver function.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Cleansing Nettle's key traditional
use is as a cleansing, detoxifying herb.
It has a diuretic action, possibly due
to its flavonoids and high potassium
content, and increases urine
production and the elimination of
waste products. It helps many skin
conditions and arthritic problems.

= Astringent Nettle slows or

Key Constituents

Aerial parts:

= Flavonoids (quercitin)

= Amines (histamine, choline,
acetylcholine, serotonin)

= Glucoquinone

= Minerals (calcium, potassium,
silicic acid, iron)

Root:

= Plant sterols (stigmast-4-en-zone
and stigmasterol)

= Phenols

stops bleeding from wounds and
nosebleeds, and is good for heavy
menstrual bleeding.

Parts Used

Aerial parts are eaten as a tonic vegetable
and used to make medicinal preparations.

re
Dried aerial parts

Root has important diuretic
properties that make it useful
for prostate problems.

Dried root

Fresh root

Nettle

“4 A perennial growing
to 5 ft (1.5 m), with
lance-shaped leaves
and green flowers
with yellow stamens.

High levels of
nutrients are
concentrated
in the leaves

Fresh aerial parts

Seeds are thought to
act to protect the liver.

Seeds

fiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Decoction of root (see
p. 291). For enlarged prostate,
drink % cup (150 ml) daily.

Ointment of leaves
(to make, p. 295). For
eczema, rub liberally.

Soup with nettle leaves,
carrots and onions is rich
in iron. Drink regularly.

“1 Capsules of leaf, (to make, p. 292). For enlarged prostate take a 300 mg capsule
2-4 times a day. For heavy periods, take a 100 mg capsule 3 times a day.

<=) Infusion of leaves (to make, p. 291). Drink #4 cup (200 ml) daily as a tonic.

_* Tincture of root (to make, p. 292) helps allergies and skin conditions.
For hay fever, take | tsp diluted with 2 cup (100 ml) water twice a day.

= Allergies Nettle is antiallergenic.
It treats hay fever, asthma, itchy skin
conditions, and insect bites. The juice
can be used as a treatment for
nettle stings.

= Enlarged prostate

Following research, nettle root has
now become a common treatment
for symptoms linked to having an
enlarged prostate.

Self-help Uses

= Allergic rhinitis including
hay fever, p. 300.

= Anemia due to heavy
menstrual bleeding, p. 301.

= Bites & stings, p. 303.

= Mild asthma, p. 301.

= Diaper rash, p. 318.

= Hives, p. 303.

= Nosebleeds, p. 310.

----- PAGE 149 -----
Bilberry

A deciduous shrub,
growing to 16 in

(40 cm) tall, with white
or pink flowers and
purple-black berries.

Vaccinium myrtillus (Ericaceae)

Bilbe Pry, Blueberry

Bilberry fruit first came to attention in the World War II
(1939-45) when pilots found that their night vision
improved on eating bilberry jam. Since then research has
shown that bilberries help the eyes to adjust to the dark,
and stimulate the part of the retina most involved in
seeing clearly, especially in dim or dark conditions.
There is also the suggestion that bilberry fruit helps

to correct nearsightedness.

& Parts Used

Leaves make a useful urinary antiseptic
and astringent for urinary tract problems
such as cystitis and irritable bladder.

Berries have a strong healing
effect on capillaries, especially
on the micro-circulation within

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM ©

Bilberry fruit can be used as a natural
antioxidant supplement.

Habitat & Cultivation
Bilberry thrives in moist undergrowth
on moors, hillsides, and heathland,
throughout temperate regions of
the northern hemisphere—Asia,
Europe, and North America. Widely
cultivated around the world, bilberry
is propagated from seed in autumn,
or from cuttings. The leaves are
collected in summer, the fruit

when ripe in late summer or

early autumn.

Related Species

Other members of the Ericaceae,
such as bearberry (Arctostaphyllos
uva-ursi, p. |70), cowberry (V. vitis-
idaea), and cranberry (V. macrocarpon,
p. 280) are used principally as

urinary antiseptics.

Key Constituents

= Tannins (approximately 7%)
= Proanthocyanins

= Flavonoids

= Fruit acids

= Phenolic acids

= Pectin

= Vitamin B,, C, and carotene

Key Actions

= Circulatory tonic
= Antioxidant

= Anti-inflammatory
= Astringent

= Urinary antiseptic

Research

= Circulation Clinical trials from
1964 onward have shown that
bilberry fruits protect peripheral
circulation and capillaries. Symptoms
that have been shown to improve
with bilberry extracts include fluid
retention, pain, pins and needles
(paresthesia), and cramps—all
resulting from impaired peripheral
blood flow.

= Eyesight Different trials have
also shown improvement to eyesight
in the nearsighted, in those with
retinal damage due to diabetes, and
to high blood pressure in patients.
taking bilberry extracts, beta-
carotene, and retinol. Other
conditions such as period pain and
recovery from hemorrhoid
operations may improve with bilberry.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Digestive problems Bilberry
fruit has long been used as a mild
laxative (because of its sugars),
and to relieve diarrhea (due to
the tannins). It is also moderately
antibacterial and, since it tastes
pleasant, is useful for treating
diarrhea and indigestion in children.
= Circulatory disorders Many
circulatory disorders will benefit from
the fruit's ability to improve capillary
function and heal inflammation.
These include intermittent

Fresh leaves

Ei Key Preparations
& Their Uses

berries

Dried berries

@ Caution If taking anticoagulants or diagnosed with a bleeding disorder, take

medicinal doses on professional advice only.

Me

Capsules Take up to 4 x 500 mg
capsules a day to improve
circulation within the eye.

e

Tincture (to make, p. 292). Take
4 tsp a day for poor circulation.

= Decoction (to make, p. 291) is pleasant-tasting and useful for short-term

treatment of diarrhea in children.

‘\—» Tablets, like capsules, are convenient for long-term use.

claudication, Raynaud's disease,
varicose veins, hemorrhoids, easy
bruising, and all conditions impairing
blood flow to the eyes, particularly
diabetes and high blood pressure.

= Antioxidant The fruit is used to
protect against tissue damage (it may
prevent cataract formation) and to
promote tissue healing, for example
in the gastrointestinal tract or in
rheumatoid or osteoarthritis.

= Antiseptic The leaves have a
marked antiseptic effect within the
bladder and urinary tubules, and can
be used to treat urinary infections
such as cystitis.

= Antidiabetic The leaves and
fruit have antidiabetic activity,
helping especially in pre-diabetic
states. There is growing evidence
that the fruit can help to promote
weight loss.

----- PAGE 150 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Valeriana officinalis (Valerianaceae)

Valerian

Valerian has been used as a sedative and relaxant at
least since Roman times. It was known to Dioscorides
in the Ist century ce, who named it phu, the sound of
the word reflecting its unpleasant smell. Valerian helps
relieve stress and has become an increasingly popular
remedy in recent decades. It is a safe, nonaddictive
relaxant that reduces nervous tension and anxiety and

Valerian

Erect perennial
growing to 4 ft

(1.2 m), with pinnate
divided leaves and
pink flowers.

& Parts Used

Root and rhizome are harvested in autumn when
they contain the highest level of active ingredients.

promotes restful sleep.

Valerian helps reduce stress. Its name is
thought to be derived from the Latin valere,
“to be well.”

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Europe and northern
Asia, valerian grows wild in
damp conditions. It is cultivated

in central and eastern Europe.
The plant is grown from seed in
spring, and the root and rhizome
of 2-year-old plants are unearthed
in autumn.

Related Species
V. capensis is given in South Africa

for hysteria and epilepsy; V. hardwickii,
found in China and Indonesia, is taken

as an antispasmodic; V. ulginosa was
used for cramps and menopausal

symptoms by the Menominee people

in North America; and V. wallichi is
used in the Himalayas in almost
exactly the same way as valerian.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (up to 1.4%),
including bornyl acetate,
beta-caryphyllene

a lridoids (valepotriates)—
valtrate, isovaltrate

a Alkaloids

Key Actions

m= Sedative

= Relaxant

= Relieves muscle spasms
= Relieves anxiety

= Lowers blood pressure

Research

= Therapeutic properties
Extensive research in Germany and
Switzerland has endorsed the use of
valerian to aid sleep, improve sleep
quality, and lower blood pressure.
A German trial carried out in 2002
that tested valerian and oxazepam

(a conventional sleep treatment)
found both to be effective—83% of
those taking valerian rated the
treatment as very good compared to
73% of those taking oxazepam.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Historical uses Known as “all-
heal’ in the Middle Ages, valerian
was credited with many virtues, in
particular with healing epilepsy.

n 1592, Fabius Calumna published
a detailed work on herbal medicine
in which he claimed to have cured
his epilepsy with the herb.

= Stress-related disorders
Valerian reduces mental over-
activity and nervous excitability,
helping people who find it hard

to “switch off.” It is beneficial for
almost any stress-related condition,
and, in general, has a calming, rather
than directly sedative, effect on
the mind.

= Anxiety & insomnia Many
symptoms of anxiety, including
tremors, panic, palpitations, and
sweating, can be relieved with

Fresh root

Dried root
and rhizome

Valepotriates in
the rhizome and
root induce sleep

and rhizome

iKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Can cause drowsiness. Do not take valerian if already taking

sleep-inducing drugs.

Tablets often also contain other
herbs. Take for stress or anxiety.

Powder can be taken as
capsules (to make, p. 292).
For insomnia, take 1-2

Tincture (to make, p. 292).
For anxiety, take 20 drops in
hot water up to 5 times a day.

doses of 500 mg at night.

“ew Decoction (to make, p. 291). Take I—5 tbsp as a sedative at night.

valerian. It is a useful remedy for
insomnia, whether caused by anxiety
or overexcitement.

= Effective relaxant Valerian relaxes

overcontracted muscles, and is helpful
for shoulder and neck tension, asthma,
colic, irritable bowel syndrome, period
pain, and muscle spasms.

= High blood pressure Valerian
is used with other herbs in remedies

for high blood pressure caused
by stress and anxiety.

Self-help Uses
= Chronic anxiety, p. 308.
= Insomnia, p. 309.
= Nervous exhaustion, p. 309.
= Premenstrual syndrome, p. 315.
= Sleeplessness due to
backache, p. 313.

----- PAGE 151 -----
Verbena officinalis (Verbenaceae)

Vervain, Ma Bian Cao (Chinese)

Vervain has long been credited with magical properties
and was used in ceremonies by the Druids of ancient
Britain and Gaul. It is a traditional herbal medicine in both
China and Europe. Dioscorides in the Ist century CE
called vervain the ‘‘sacred herb,’ and for many centuries
it was taken as a cure-all. t has tonic, restorative properties,

Vervain

A slender perennial
growing to 3 ft (I m),
with stiff, thin stems
and spikes of small
lilac flowers.

& Parts Used

Aerial parts have a tonic
effect on the nervous system
and digestion, and have been
used medicinally for thousands

Vervain has
slender, almost

and is used to relieve stress and anxiety and to improve

digestive function.

Vervain was carried in the Middle Ages
to bring good luck.

Habitat & Cultivation
Vervain grows wild throughout
much of Europe and North Africa.
as well as in China and Japan. It is
propagated from seed in spring or
autumn and thrives in well-drained
soil in a sunny position. The aerial
parts are harvested in summer
when the plant is in flower.

Related Species

Blue vervain (V. hastata), which
is native to North America, is
used medicinally in the same
way as vervain.

Key Constituents
m Bitter iridoids
(verbenin, verbenalin)
= Volatile oil
= Alkaloids
= Triterpenes (beta-sitosterol)
= Flavonoids

Key Actions

= Nervine

= Tonic

= Mild bitter

a Mild antidepressant

Research

= Hormonal effects Early
indications from research into vervain
are that it has both estrogenic

and progestogenic activity. It also
stimulates the muscles of the womb,
and production of breast milk.

= Lack of research For an herb
with such long traditional use,
surprisingly little research into vervain
has occurred to date. Laboratory
studies indicate that vervain has
significant anti-inflammatory activity.

It may also have antiviral and liver-
protective properties. Verbenalin, an
active compound within vervain, is
strongly bitter, may cause vomiting at
high doses, and stimulates contraction
of the womb.

Traditional &

Current Uses

= Digestive tonic Vervain improves
the function of the digestive system
and absorption of food.

= Nervous system Vervain is
prized as a restorative for the nervous
system and is especially helpful for
nervous tension. It is thought to have
a mild antidepressant action, and is
used specifically to treat anxiety and
the nervous exhaustion that follows
long-term stress.

= Convalescence By aiding
digestion and restoring the nervous
system, vervain is an ideal tonic for
people recovering from chronic illness.
= Headaches & migraines
Vervain alleviates headaches, and in
Chinese herbal medicine it is used
for migraines connected with the
menstrual cycle.

= Other uses Among its other
medicinal uses, vervain is given

of years in Europe and China.

Dried aerial parts

“wandlike,”
flowering stems

Fresh aerial parts

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not exceed the stated dose. Vervain can cause vomiting if taken

in excess. Do not take during pregnancy.

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is a relaxing,

calming tonic. For stress and anxiety,
take /4 tsp diluted in a glass of water
3 times a day.

for jaundice, gallstones, asthma,
insomnia, premenstrual syndrome,
flu, and fevers.

4

Infusion (to make, p. 291) helps stimulate
digestion and improves effective
absorption of food. Drink 74 cup (150 ml)
regularly, particularly after heavy meals.

Powder can be used as a toothpaste.
Rub on the teeth regularly to clean
and protect them.

Self-help Uses
= Nervous exhaustion, p. 309.
= Premenstrual syndrome, p. 315.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 152 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

7
ae

150

Viburnum opulus (Caprifoliaceae)

Cramp Bark, Guelder Rose

Native to both North America and Europe, cramp
bark was recognized as recently as 1960 in the US
National Formulary as a sedative remedy for nervous
conditions and as an antispasmodic in the treatment
of asthma. As its name implies, the herb’s primary
medicinal use is to relieve cramps and other conditions,
such as colic or painful menstruation, caused by

overcontraction of muscles.

Cramp bark has distinctive bright red
berries in autumn.

Habitat & Cultivation
Cramp bark grows in woodlands,
hedges, and thickets in Europe
and eastern North America. It
is propagated from seed sown
in autumn. Bark from the
branches is collected in spring
and summer, when the plant is
in flower.

Related Species

Black haw (V. prunifolium, p. 281)
is often used interchangeably
with cramp bark, but it is thought
to have a more specific action

on the uterus.

Key Constituents

= Hydroquinones (arbutin)
= Coumarins (scopoletin)
= Tannins (3%)

= Proanthocyanidins

= Polysaccharides

Key Actions
= Antispasmodic
m= Sedative

= Astringent

m= Relaxant

Research

= Active constituents To date,
cramp bark has been poorly
researched, and there is also some
confusion over which active
constituents it contains and which
occur in the closely related black
haw (V. prunifolium).

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Native American remedy
Cramp bark has a history of use

in Native American herbalism.

The Meskwaki people took

ramp bark for cramps and pains
hroughout the body, while the
enobscot used it to treat swollen
lands and mumps.

= Muscle relaxant Cramp bark
is effective at relieving any tense
muscle, whether smooth muscle in
the intestines, airways, or uterus,
or striated muscle (attached to

the skeleton) in the limbs or back.
It may be taken internally, or applied
topically to relieve muscle tension.
The herb also treats symptoms
arising from excess muscle tension,
including breathing difficulties in
asthma, and menstrual pain caused
by excessive contraction of the
uterus. For night cramps and back
pain, lobelia (Lobelia inflata, p. | 10)
is often mixed with cramp bark.
The herb also relieves constipation,
colic, and irritable bowel syndrome,
as well as the physical symptoms of
nervous tension.

woo

oa

= Arthritis In some cases of
arthritis, where joint weakness
and pain have caused muscles to

contract until they are almost rigid,

cramp bark can bring remarkable

& Parts Used

Bark is peeled off the tree
in strips during spring and
summer. Care must be taken
to leave enough bark for the
tree to stay alive.

Dried bark

Cramp bark

A deciduous shrub

or tree growing to

13 ft (4 m), with lobed
leaves, white flowers,
and red oval fruit.

Fresh bark

fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

Decoction (to make, p. 291)
For period pain, take 4 cup
(75 ml) every 3 hours.

Tincture (to make, p. 292) is
used for long-term treatment
of muscular tension. For irritable
bowel syndrome, take 4 tsp
diluted with hot water twice a day.

Lotion (to make, p. 296) relieves
aching muscles. Rub into tense
neck and shoulders.

relief. As the muscles relax, blood
flow to the area improves, waste
products such as lactic acid are
removed, and normal function
can return.

= Other uses Cramp bark is
commonly used in treatments

for high blood pressure and other
circulatory conditions.

Self-help Uses
= Back pain, p. 313.
= Breathing difficulties, p. 301.
= Cramps & muscle spasms, p. 31 2.
= Period pain, p. 315.
= Poor circulation to the
hands & feet, p. 302.
= Spastic constipation, p. 307.
= Stomach spasm, p. 305.

----- PAGE 153 -----
Vitex agnus-castus (Verbenaceae)

Chaste Tree, Agnus Castus

Chaste tree was well known in ancient times and
featured in Homer's 6th-century BcE epic, the lliad, as

a symbol of chastity capable of warding off evil. As the
name ‘chaste tree” implies, it was thought to reduce
sexual desire, and traditionally it was chewed by monks
to reduce unwanted libido. Research has confirmed that
chaste tree has a hormonal action, and today it is used
for menstrual problems and infertility.

Chaste tree has small, fragrant, lilac flowers in
summer that grow in whorls on long spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation
Chaste tree is native to the
Mediterranean region and western
Asia. It is cultivated in subtropical
areas around the world, and has
become naturalized in many regions.
It is grown from seed in spring

or autumn. The ripe berries are
collected in autumn.

Related Species

As a member of the Verbenaceae
genus, chaste tree is a distant
relative of vervain (Verbena officinalis,
p. 149) and lemon verbena (Lippia
citriodora, p. 228).

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (cineol)

= Flavonoids (casticin)

a lridoids (aucubin, agnoside,
eurostoside)

= Diterpenes

Key Actions

= Regulates hormones

= Progesterogenic

= Increases breast-milk production
a Aids sleep

Research

= Hormonal properties The
berries are thought to induce subtle
hormonal effects within the brain,
leading to increased levels of the
neurotransmitters dopamine and
melatonin. These changes are
thought to promote better hormonal
regulation of the menstrual cycle,
notably through raised progesterone
levels. In some people, the raised
melatonin levels may aid sleep quality.
The diterpenes are thought to be
chiefly responsible for these effects.
= Gynecological problems
Clinical research by and large
supports the use of chaste tree in
many female hormonal problems,
including premenstrual syndrome
(PMS), irregular menstruation,
breast tenderness, and infertility.

A 2001 clinical trial tested chaste
berry against placebo in 178 women
with PMS. After 3 months, those
taking chaste tree had a 50%
reduction in symptoms compared
to placebo.

= Sleep aid Since researchers
found that chaste berry increases
melatonin levels, chaste berry has
been thought of as a possible sleep
aid. Some small studies indicate that
chaste berry might help people with
insomnia due to unhealthy melatonin
levels, such as shift workers or those
who are jet lagged.

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Menstrual problems Chaste
tree is probably the most used herb
in Western herbal medicine for
regulating the menstrual cycle. With
its progestogenic action, chaste tree

& Parts Used

Berries, harvested in
autumn, are used to treat
female fertility problems.

Dried berries

Pikey Preparations
& Their Uses

Chaste tree

A deciduous aromatic
tree growing to 23 ft
(7 m), with palm-
shaped leaves and
small lilac flowers.

Tiny yellow-red
berries contain
hormonal
substances

Fresh berries

@ Caution Excess can cause formication (a sensation of ants
crawling on the skin). Concurrent use with the contraceptive pill
or fertility treatment is not advisable. Avoid in pregnancy. In rare
cases may cause gastrointestinal upset, headache, or dizziness.

Tablets Take for premenstrual syndrome.

_-® Tincture (to make, p. 292). For an irregular cycle, take 40 drops with water

daily for 3 months.

is often helpful in relieving
premenstrual symptoms, including
irritability and lowered mood,
headache, acne, and breast
tenderness. Chaste tree also
promotes greater menstrual
regularity, and this use extends to
more significant hormonal problems
including polycystic ovary syndrome,
fibroids, and endometriosis.

a Irregular periods The herb
helps to regulate irregular periods,
tending to shorten a long cycle and
lengthen a short one.

a Infertility Chaste tree can be

of help to some women trying to
conceive if infertility is due to low
progesterone levels.

= Difficulty in breastfeeding The
berries are taken to increase breast-
milk production.

= Acne Though rarely used on its
own, chaste tree can be extremely
helpful in treating acne in both men
and women. Used in combination
with herbs such as echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92), it will often
reduce the frequency and intensity
of acne blemishes where hormonal
imbalance is a major factor.

Self-help Uses

= Aiding conception, p. 316.
= Decreased estrogen &
progesterone levels, p. 316.
a Irregular cycle, p. 315.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM ©

----- PAGE 154 -----
KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Withania somnifera (Solanaceae)

Ashwagandha

Ashwagandha has been called ‘Indian ginseng” because it is
used in Ayurveda in much the same way that ginseng is
used in Chinese medicine: to improve vitality and to aid
recovery after chronic illness. Today, ashwagandha seems to
be an herb designed to deal with the busy nature of
modern life. It invigorates when fatigued, eases the impact
of stress and anxiety, and aids sleep—all traditional uses
largely supported by clinical research.

Ashwagandha has powerful medicinal
properties proven by research.

Habitat & Cultivation
Ashwagandha is found in India,
the Mediterranean, and the Middle
East. It is propagated from seed
or cuttings in spring. The leaves are
harvested in spring, and the fruit
and root in autumn.

Key Constituents

a Alkaloids

= Steroidal lactones (withanolides)
alron

Key Actions
= Adaptogenic
= Tonic

a Mild sedative

Research

= Chronic stress Clinical research
has been wide-ranging and examined
many aspects of ashwagandha's
potential medicinal uses, many linked
to the withanolides, compounds
similar to the body's own steroid
hormones. A 2012 Indian clinical
trial noted that those taking
ashwagandha had lower stress

levels and an increased sense of

well-being, as well as lower cortisol
and blood pressure levels.

= Anxiety and tension
Ashwagandha has been proven to
reduce anxiety and tension in at least
6 clinical trials. In a 2009 Canadian
trial, ashwagandha, paired with dietary
advice and a multivitamin supplement,
was found more effective in decreasing
anxiety than psychotherapy and a
placebo. Those taking ashwagandha
also reported improved concentration
and less fatigue.

= Male fertility Two clinical trials
testing ashwagandha’ role as a male
sexual tonic indicate that the herb
markedly improves semen quality.
Another clinical trial failed to find any
benefit in aiding erectile dysfunction.
= Other actions Ashwagandha has
also been researched for its use as a
tonic suitable for children, to
improve muscle strength and mental
function in the elderly, for arthritis,
and to enhance immune function.
Ashwagandha is thought to have
anticancer activity.

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Ayurvedic tonic Ashwagandha
has always been valued in Ayurveda
for its tonic, strengthening, and
relaxing properties. Robert Svoboda
in Ayurveda: Life, Health, and Longevity
states that it “clarifies the mind, calms
and strengthens the nerves, and
promotes sound restful sleep.’

= Restorative Today, the herb is still
prized as a tonic, but valued also for its
unusual combination of actions. As a
tonic, it strengthens and supports
physical and mental performance, yet
at the same time it relieves anxiety

Leaves contain the most
withanolides, constituents that
inhibit cancer cell growth.

Dried leaves

Root is powdered or
made into decoctions and
taken as a strengthening
and calming tonic.

Dried root

Ss
vo Ashwagandha
“A stout shrub growing
to 5 ft (1.5 m), with
oval leaves and
greenish or yellow
flowers.

Fresh plant

Fresh root

Berries are chewed in India Ded &

to help in convalescence.

Fresh berries

Dried berries

PiKey Preparations & Their Uses

Decoction of the root (to make, p. 291).
For stress, decoct 5 g with 4 cup (75 ml)
water and take over 2 days.

Powder made from the leaves.
For anemia, take 4 tsp in a little
water once a day.

“<*> Capsules of powdered root (to make, p. 292). For nervous exhaustion,

take |-2 ga day with water.

and, as its botanical name suggests,
encourages better sleep quality. It is
an excellent herb for convalescence.
a Inflammatory conditions
Ashwagandha can be a useful
addition to treatment for chronic
inflammatory diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis.

= Long-term stress By reducing
overactivity and encouraging rest and

relaxation, ashwagandha is

useful in countering the debility that
accompanies long-term stress.

= Anemia Aswagandhas high iron.
content makes it useful in anemia.

Self-help Uses

= Long-term stress &
convalescence, pp. 308 & 319.

a Male fertility, p. 316.

----- PAGE 155 -----
Zanthoxylum americanum (Rutaceae)

Prickly ash, Toothache Tree

Indigenous to North America, prickly ash is

a warming, stimulating herb for circulation. It was

held in high regard by Native North Americans for its
medicinal properties, and both the bark and berries
were chewed to alleviate rheumatism and toothache.
Today, prickly ash is mainly given for arthritic

and rheumatic conditions, but it is also helpful for
certain digestive problems and for leg ulcers.

Parts Used

Bark is considered to
have a stronger effect
than the berries. It is
used in preparations
to stimulate blood flow.

i

Fresh bark

Key Actions

= Circulatory stimulant
= Increases sweating

= Antirheumatic

= Antifungal

Research

= Antifungal Research into prickly
ash is limited, though a 2005 study
found extracts from prickly ash fruit
and leaf demonstrated antifungal
activity.

Prickly ash is antirheumatic and improves
circulation.

Traditional

& Current Uses

= North American herb Prickly
ash was a Native American remedy
for toothache and rheumatism. It was
used in the U.S. during the 19th
century as a circulatory stimulant and
to treat arthritis.

= Arthritic conditions Western
herbalists regard northern prickly

Habitat & Cultivation
Prickly ash is native to southern
Canada and northern, central, and
western parts of the U.S., preferring
moist, shady sites such as woodlands.
It is propagated from seed in
autumn. The bark is harvested in
spring and the berries are collected

Dried chopped bark

in summer. ash as a prime remedy for rheumatic
and arthritic problems. It stimulates
Related Species blood flow to painful and stiff joints,

Southern prickly ash (Z. clava-herculis)
grows in the central and southern
US, where it is used interchangeably
with prickly ash. Chuan jiao

(Z. bungeanum) is given in Chinese
herbal medicine for cold” patterns
of illness causing abdominal pain.

Z. capense is taken for colic in

South Africa. Z. zanthoxyloides is a
traditional West African herb for
rheumatic conditions.

promoting the supply of oxygen and
nutrients to the area and removing
waste products.

= Circulation The herb improves
circulation in intermittent claudication
and Raynaud's disease, conditions
where the arteries of the limbs have
narrowed, preventing sufficient blood
reaching the hand or leg muscles.

= Other uses Prickly ash relieves gas
and diarrhea and tones the digestive
tract. It is applied topically to treat leg
ulcers and chronic pelvic
inflammatory disease.

Key Constituents
= lsoquinoline alkaloids
= Furanocoumarins

¥

Lignans Self-help Uses r°)
= Volatile oil = Back pain, p. 313.
= Tannins = Poor circulation, p. 302

Prickly ash

A deciduous shrub:
growing to 10 ft (3 m),
with thomy gray
branches and

! compound leaves.

Fresh plant

Berries are made
into remedies for
poor circulation.

Berries and bark
were chewed
for toothache

Dried berries

fiKey Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Avoid in pregnancy and while breastfeeding.

@o ©

Tincture of bark (to make, p. 292).
For arthritis, take 20 drops with
water 3 times a day.

Decoction For poor circulation, decoct

3 tsp ginger and 3 tsp prickly ash berries

with 3 cups (750 ml) water (see p. 291).
Take 4 cup (150 ml) twice a day.

Tablets Take tablets, which often contain
other herbs, for arthritis and rheumatism.

Lotion For poor circulation in the legs, make
a decoction of bark (p. 291) and apply.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW AM

----- PAGE 156 -----
Corn

Zea mays (Poaceae) An annual grass

reaching 10 ft (3 m),
. . . . with plumelike

Corn, Maize, Cornsilk, Yu Mi Shu (Chinese) male flowers, Fernale
flowers produce cobs.

The staple food of Central and South America for at least

4,000 years, corn is also used medicinally in countless & Parts Used

’ - .. 3 Meal is used
different ways. The Aztecs gave a corn meal decoction Cornsilk (stamens) , externally to treat

for dysentery and “‘heat in the heart,’ and to increase can be used fresh or bruises and other
breast-milk production. Cornsilk (the silky fronds dried as a remedy for skin problems.
wrapped around the cob) has always been the part most | U"inary disorders.

used medicinally, and it is of particular value in treating

urinary conditions. Yellow, inner

cornsilk is
used medicinally

KEY MEDICINAL PLANTS &

a Mildly stimulates bile secretion
= Gently lowers blood pressure

Research

= Purple corn Purple corn contains
unusually high levels of anthocyanins,
dark red or blue plant pigments

that have strong antioxidant and
protective effects within the body.

A 2007 paper reported that, weight
for weight, purple corn contained
nearly four times more anthocyanins
than blueberries, suggesting that

Corn’s Latin name reflects its value—

zea means “cause of life” and mays means purple corn could be a key dietary Dri - ese

“our mother.” source of anthocyanins. ried cornsilk cornsilk Fresh meal
= Carotenoids Corncob and . .

Habitat & Cultivation cornsilk contain high levels of s) Key Preparations & Their Uses

Cultivated almost universally as a carotenoids (including lutein and en

food crop, corn is native to the zeaxanthin), compounds that are

Andes and Central America, possibly | thought to protect the eye from

originating in Peru. It is propagated oxidative damage. Zeaxanthin in

from seed in spring. The cornsilk particular is thought to protect against

is harvested with the ripe cob in age-related macular degeneration.

summer, then separated and dried.
Traditional & Infusion of cornsilk (to make, Decoction of meal (to make, p. 291).

Related Species Current Uses p. 291) is soothing. For cystitis, Apply as a poultice (see p. 295) to

drink 2 cups (500 ml) daily. sores and boils.
Cornsmut (Ustilago zeae), a fungus that = Traditional herb Corn meal has

grows on corn, is used by the Zuni of | been used by Native Americans for
New Mexico to speed childbirth and a wide range of ailments. It makes

stop uterine hemorrhage. an effective poultice and has been The outer leaves of corn are
given in Mayan, Incan, and American stripped to reveal the cornsilk
Key Constituents medicine to treat bruises, swellings, and meal
m= Flavonoids sores, boils, and similar conditions. ;
= Carotenoids Virgil J. Vogel writes that “the => Capsules of cornsilk (to make, p. 292). For edema, take 2 g daily.
Cob: Chickasaw Indians treated itching _-® Tincture of cornsilk (to make, p. 292). For cystitis, combine /4 cup (80 ml) with
m Anthocyanins (purple corn) skin, followed by sores when scratched, dt sp.01, DUcHU EINctus afd take. |-isp With. Water. 3.tims.a cy,
Cornsilk: by burning old corncobs and holding
= Carotenoids the affected part over the smoke.” urination and bladder irritability. cornsilk is used to treat fluid
|| = Volatile oil a Urinary remedy Cornsilk is = Kidney stones Cornsilk is retention and jaundice.
= Sterols a gentle-acting diuretic with mild thought to have a beneficial effect
A antibiotic activity. It can help in acute on the kidneys, reducing kidney stone Self-help Uses
g Key Actions and chronic cases of cystitis and is formation and relieving some of = Fluid retention in
= Urinary demulcent commonly used in prostate disorders. _ the symptoms of existing stones. pregnancy, p. 317.

154 = Diuretic It may also prove useful in frequent = Chinese remedy In China, u Urinary infections, p. 314.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Zingiber officinale (Zingiberaceae)

Ginger, Sheng Jian (Chinese), Singabera (Sanskrit)

Familiar as a spice and flavoring, ginger is also one of

the world’s best medicines. It has been revered in Asia
since the earliest times, and in medieval Europe it was
thought to have derived from the Garden of Eden. Ginger's
warming and anti-inflammatory properties can bring relief
to problems as varied as headache and migraine, joint
pain, indigestion, motion sickness, and morning sickness.
Fresh ginger has a pungent, slightly lemony taste.

Research

= Digestive health Ginger speeds
up the rate of gastric emptying and
aids the absorption of nutrients from
the digestive tract. By improving iron
absorption, it helps to treat anemia.
Clinical trials indicate that it can
relieve nausea and vomiting.

= Morning sickness A 2013
Australian review of clinical trials
using ginger to relieve pregnancy-

Ginger

A perennial growing
to 2 ft (60 cm), with
lance-shaped leaves

and spikes of white

or yellow flowers.

;
x
L4

& Parts Used

Rhizome contains high levels of a volatile

oil that is warming and stimulating. Yellowish fresh rhizome

is strongly aromatic

Fresh rhizome

Sliced
dried rhizome

Fi Key Preparations & Their Uses

@ Cautions Do not take ginger in medicinal doses if suffering from peptic ulcers.
Do not take the essential oil internally except under professional supervision.
Maximum recommended dose in pregnancy and if taking anticoagulants is 2 g dried

Ginger, widely used as a spice, is also an
important digestive remedy.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Asia, ginger is grown
throughout the tropics. It is
propagated by dividing the
rootstock. Ginger flourishes in
fertile soil and needs plenty of

rain. The rhizome is unearthed
when the plant is 10 months old.

It is washed, soaked, and sometimes
boiled and peeled.

Related Species

Various Zingiber species are used
medicinally, but no other has benefits
equal to ginger. Turmeric (Curcuma
longa, p. 90) is a close relative.

Key Constituents

= Volatile oil (13%)
—zingiberene (20-30%)

= Oleoresin (4—7.5%)
—gingerol, shogaols

Key Actions

= Anti-inflammatory

= Circulatory stimulant
= Antiemetic

= Antiviral

= Digestive stimulant

induced nausea and vomiting
concluded that ‘The best available
evidence suggests that ginger is a safe
and effective treatment for PNV.”

= Pain relief Several small-

scale research studies have found
that ginger reduces muscle pain,
for example, after exercise.

This is because of a potent anti-
inflammatory action. One study
found that after 2 months of
treatment, ginger was as effective
in relieving menstrual cramps as
mefenamic acid (an aspirin-type
painkiller). A 2014 Iranian clinical
trial compared the effects of ginger
and sumatripan (a painkiller) in
relieving migraine, and reported
that the two treatments were
similarly effective.

Traditional

& Current Uses

= Digestive problems Ginger
is thought to be helpful for almost
all digestive complaints. It is an
excellent remedy for symptoms
such as indigestion, nausea, gas,
bloating, and cramps—whether
taken as an infusion, juice, tincture,
or powder, or with food. Its
antiseptic activity makes it valuable
in all gastrointestinal infections,

(4 g fresh) root a day.

Infusion (to make, p. 291).
For nausea, drink 74 cup
(150 ml) 3 times a day.

Essential oil For arthritic

aches and pains, dilute

5 drops in 20 drops carrier

“> Capsules (to make, p. 292). For morning sickness, take a 75 mg capsule every hour.

oil and apply (see p. 297).

_* Tincture (to make, p. 292). To improve digestion, take 30 drops with water

twice a day.

including food poisoning.

= Circulatory stimulant Ginger
stimulates circulation, and helps
blood to flow to the surface, making
it an important remedy for chilblains
and poor circulation to the hands
and feet. Juice squeezed from fresh
ginger root can be applied to
chilblains (and cold sores), bringing
quick relief.

= Respiratory conditions Ginger
has antiviral activity and is a first-rate
remedy for coughs, colds, flu, and
other respiratory problems. Despite
its warming properties, ginger

stimulates sweating and helps to
cool and control fevers.

Self-help Uses
= Chilblains, p. 302.
= Colds, flu, & fevers, p. 3! |.
= Cold sores, p. 304.
= Constipation, p. 307.
= Digestive upsets,
gas, & colic, p. 318.
= High blood pressure &
arteriosclerosis, p. 301.
= Morning sickness, p. 317.
= Nausea & motion sickness,
p. 306.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW Ad

----- PAGE 158 -----


----- PAGE 159 -----
D
a
®
t
¢g
a
r
&
wh

OTHER MEDICINA
PLANTS

The index of Other Medicinal Plants features in Latin name order over 450 plants that have
played a significant role in herbal medicine worldwide. They include familiar plants such as
oats (Avena sativa, p.175) and exotic herbs like ylang-ylang (Cananga odorata, p. |82). Some
are well researched, while others are known only within their native region. A number of
medicinal plants included have fallen out of favor but remain historically significant. In
addition, the index features plants such as eucommia bark (Eucommia ulmoides, p. 207)

that research shows have the potential for a more prominent medicinal role in the future.

PLANT NAMES

The Latin name given is the one by which the plant is most
generally known in medical herbalism. Latin synonyms are
also provided. The first part of the Latin name designates
the plant's genus (sub-family). The second part specifies the
species name. In brackets after the Latin name(s) comes
the plant's family name, the broader class to which the genus.
belongs. The plant's common name(s) are beneath the family
name. If more than one common name is in popular use,
they are listed in order of importance. Where appropriate,
the origins of common names are given in brackets.

DESCRIPTION

Lists significant botanical information, including whether
the plant is evergreen or deciduous and whether it is
annual, biennial, or perennial. Gives identifying
characteristics of the plant.

HABITAT & CULTIVATION

Includes the plant's origins, its distribution, preferred
growing conditions, and the seasons when it is propagated
and harvested.

PARTS USED
Lists those parts of the plant that are used medicinally in
order of importance

CONSTITUENTS

Gives the key active constituents of the plant in order of
significance. Sometimes includes details of a constituent's
specific medicinal action on the body. Note: To find out
more about constituents and their actions, see How
Medicinal Plants Work, pp. 10-16.

HISTORY & FOLKLORE

Provides information such as the derivation of the herb's
name, traditional lore, and quotations from old herbals
showing how the plant was regarded in the past, and
how it was used medicinally. Also includes details of the
plant's other uses.

MEDICINAL ACTIONS & USES

Encompasses both the confirmed and presumed actions of
the whole plant (as opposed to isolated active constituents).
Discusses the symptoms and illnesses that the plant is

used to treat and the varying ways that the herb is used
medicinally in different herbal traditions.

RESEARCH

Gives details of scientific research into the plant, its
constituents, and its extracts, including the results of any
clinical trials.

RELATED SPECIES

Provides information on related species that have a
medicinal use. Gives a cross-reference to those species
that have an entry in the Encyclopedia.

CAUTIONS

Gives cautions about using the herb medicinally and about
the plant in general. States if the plant, its constituents, or
its extracts are legally restricted.

@ Considered safe as a medicine but potentially harmful
if used inappropriately. Particular safety issues are listed.
Where a plant is listed as “Take only under professional
supervision,” it is not suitable for home use.

@ Known to be toxic or unsafe as a medicine. Do not self-
medicate with these plants. Some plants with this symbol
may be safely prescribed by experienced healthcare
practitioners within a very narrow dosage range. At a
higher dose, such plants will be poisonous.

SELF-HELP USES

Cross-refers to the self-help treatments in Remedies

for Common Ailments. Note: Always read the cautions about
the herb and the information on pp. 290 & 298-299 before
attempting a self-help use.

----- PAGE 160 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Abies balsamea (Pinaceae)

Balsam Fir

Description Conical evergreen tree growing
to 90 ft (27 m). Has aromatic needle-like leaves
and purple fir cones.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, balsam fir is commercially grown for

its timber. The resin is tapped from 60- to 80-
year-old trees in spring.

Parts Used Oleoresin, leaves.
Constituents Balsam fir leaves contain a
liquid oleoresin.

History & Folklore Balsam fir resin, often
known as Canada balsam, was used for many
illnesses by both Native Americans and settlers.
The Penobscot smeared the resin on burns, cuts,
and sores, while others applied it to the chest and
back for colds and chest problems. The Pillagers
used the aromatic needles in their sweat lodges,
inhaling smoke from the burning leaves. Dr.
Wooster Beech (1794-1868), founder of the
Eclectic healing movement, regarded balsam fir as
stimulating and axative when taken internally, and
emollient and cooling when used externally. Balsam
fir leaves, cones, and resin are commonly added
to potpourri.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Balsam fir is
antiseptic and stimulant, and has been used in
North America and Europe for congestion, chest
infections such as bronchitis, and urinary tract
conditions such as cystitis and frequent urination.
Externally, balsam fir was rubbed on the chest or
applied as a plaster for respiratory infections. It is
not used much in herbal medicine today.

Abrus precatorius (Fabaceae)
Jequirity
Description Deciduous climber growing to
12 ft (4 m). Has compound leaves, clusters of
pink flowers, and seed pods containing scarlet
or (rarely) white seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Jequirity is native
to India, and now grows in hedges and among
bushes in all tropical regions.
Parts Used Root, leaves, seeds.
Constituents Jequirity seeds contain
abrin, indole alkaloids, triterpenoid saponins,
and anthocyanins. The root and leaves contain
glycyrrhizin and traces of abrin. Abrin is
extremely toxic.
History & Folklore Jequirity seeds have been
used since ancient times in India to help weigh
precious materials, including the famous Koh-i-noor
diamond. The seeds are notorious as a poison.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Jequirity seeds
have been used medicinally in the past as a

ABIES BALSAMEA

contraceptive, abortifacient (to induce a
miscarriage), and as a treatment for chronic
conjunctivitis. However, they are so poisonous
that even external application can be fatal. In
laboratory experiments, extracts of the seeds
had a strong antifertility effect on sperm
production and fertility. The ground root is
traditionally taken to treat worm infestation.
@ Cautions Never use the seeds. Use the
leaves and roots only under professional
supervision. Jequirity is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Jequirity seeds were used medicinally in former times,
but are also extremely poisonous.

Abutilon indicum (Malvaceae)
Kanghi,
Indian Mallow

Description Upright, woody shrub growing to 5
ft (1.5 m). Has a downy, slightly oily surface, single
yellow flowers, and kidney-shaped seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Kanghi grows
throughout much of India in addition to

Southeast Asia.

Parts Used Root, bark, leaves, seeds.
Constituents Kanghi contains mucilage, tannins,
and asparagine. Asparagine is diuretic.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Also known as
Indian mallow, kanghi is used in much the same
way as marshmallow (Althaea officinalis, p. 165),
one of the main European demulcent herbs. The
root, leaves, and bark of kanghi are mucilaginous
and are used to soothe and protect the mucous
membranes of the respiratory and urinary systems.
A decoction of the root is given for chest conditions
such as bronchitis. The mucilaginous effect benefits
the skin; an infusion, poultice, or paste made from
the powdered root or bark is applied to wounds
and used for conditions such as boils and ulcers.

A decoction of the root can also be used to good
effect as a mouthwash for toothache and sore and

infected gums. The seeds are laxative and “useful
in killing threadworms, if the rectum of the
affected child be exposed to the smoke of the
powdered seeds” (Herbs that Heal, H. K. Bakhru,
1992). The plant has an antiseptic effect within the
urinary tract.

Related Species A. trisulcatum, native to
Central America, is used to treat asthma in
children, and is applied as a poultice for treating
cancerous sores and ulcers, especially of the
mouth and cervix.

Acacia catechu syn. Senegalia
catechu (Fabaceae)

Black Catechu,
Cutch

Description Tree growing to 49 ft (15 m)

with thorny branches and divided, feathery leaves.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to India,
Myanmar (Burma), Sri Lanka, and East Africa, this
tree is cultivated for its timber. It grows to altitudes
of 4,900 ft (1,500 m).

Parts Used Bark, heartwood, leaves, shoots.
Constituents The shiny, black-brown extract
of leaves and young shoots, which is called “‘cutch,”
becomes a brittle solid when dried, and is the
form in which black catechu is generally sold.
Cutch contains 25-60% tannins, 20-30% mucilage,
flavonoids, and resins.

Black catechu is an astringent and antiseptic.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Black catechu

is a strong astringent and clotting agent. It helps
reduce excess mucus in the nose, the large
intestine, or vagina. It is also used to treat
eczema, hemorrhages, diarrhea, and dysentery.
It may be used as an infusion, tincture, powder,
or ointment. A small piece of cutch dissolved in
the mouth is an excellent remedy for bleeding
gums and canker sores. The powder and tincture

----- PAGE 161 -----
are also applied to infected gums and have been
used to clean the teeth. In Ayurvedic medicine,
decoctions of the bark and heartwood are

used for sore throats.

Research Cutch has been shown to lower
blood pressure.

Related Species See also babul (Acacia nilotica,
following entry).

Cautions Do not take for more than 2-3 weeks
at atime, or if suffering from kidney inflammation.
There are some countries where cutch is subject
to legal restrictions.

Self-help Use Diarrhea, p. 307.

Acacia nilotica syn. A. arabica
(Fabaceae)

Babul

Description Tree growing to 65 ft (20 m) with
hard, rust-brown bark and feathery leaves. Small,
bright yellow flower heads produce pods up to 6 in
(15 cm) long.

Habitat & Cultivation Babul is native to
North Africa. Today it is commonly found in Egypt
and is cultivated in India.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Babul contains tannins (12-20%),
mucilage, and flavonoids.

History & Folklore In ancient Egypt, the
wood of the babul tree was used to make
dwellings, wheels, and tool handles. The leaves,
flowers, and pods were used to expel worms, heal
wounds, alleviate diarrhea, and suppress the
coughing up of blood.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Strongly
astringent, babul is used to contract and toughen
mucous membranes throughout the body in

much the same way as witch hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana, p. 102) or oak bark (Quercus robur,

p. 260). Babul may be made into a variety of
preparations: for instance, a lotion for treating
bleeding gums, a gargle for easing the irritation of
sore throats, a wash for eczema, an eyewash for
conjunctivitis and other eye problems, and a
douche for excessive vaginal discharge. It is also
taken internally to treat diarrhea.

Research Research published in 1993 concluded
that babul may be clinically effective in periodontal
infections. Another study indicates that the gum
stimulates insulin release from the pancreas and
lowers blood-sugar levels.

Related Species Australian wattle (A. decurrens),
native to Australia, is used in much the same way
as babul. See also black catechu (A. catechu,
preceding entry).

Cautions Do not take babul internally for more
than 2-3 weeks. Acacia species are subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Acanthus mollis (Acanthaceae)

Acanthus,
Bear’s Breeches

Description Perennial growing to 3 ft (| m).
Has a black, branched taproot; white, purple, or
blue flowers; and dark green basal leaves up to
3 ft (I m) in length.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
acanthus is most commonly found as a garden
plant. It prefers damp sites and low-lying ground.
The leaves are gathered in early summer and

the roots in autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, roots.

Constituents Acanthus contains large
quantities of mucilage and tannin.

History & Folklore Acanthus was well
known in the ancient world. Callimacus, a Greek
architect of the 5th century Bce, reputedly
created the decorative pattern of foliage at the
top of Corinthian columns after being inspired

by the perfect symmetry of acanthus leaves. The
description of acanthus in Materia Medica, written
in the Ist century ce by the Greek physician

Acanthus flowers blossom
on a tall spike.

Dioscorides, is one of the most accurate botanical
descriptions to survive from the ancient world.
Dioscorides recommended the roots in the form
of a plaster to treat burns and to wrap around
dislocated joints. As an infusion, acanthus was
thought to be diuretic. It was also used to relieve
gas and spasms and to soothe damaged nerves.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The herbs
appreciable quantities of mucilage and tannin
substantiate its traditional use as a treatment for
dislocated joints and burns. Its emollient properties
make it useful in the treatment of irritated mucous
membranes in the digestive and urinary tracts.
Acanthus is similar to marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis, p. 165) in that it can be used externally
to ease irritation, and internally to heal and protect.

Achyranthes bidentata
(Amaranthaceae)

Chaff flower,
Huai Niu Xi (Chinese)

Description Erect perennial herb growing

to 3 ft (I m). Has slender, rambling branches,
elliptical leaves, and greenish-white flowers on
terminal spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Chaff flower is found
in China at the edge of forests, along streams, and
amid bushes. Grown commercially in the eastern
provinces, the root is unearthed in winter once the
foliage has died back.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Achyranthes species contain
triterpenoid saponins and sterones.

History & Folklore Chaff flower's

potent ability to bring on menstruation led the
|3th-century Chinese gynecologist Chen Ziming
to prohibit its use during pregnancy to avoid
causing miscarriage.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In traditional
Chinese medicine, chaff flower is believed to
invigorate blood flow. It is used to stimulate
menstruation when a period is delayed or scanty.
The herb is also prescribed to ease period

pain. Chaff flower is used to relieve pain in the
lower back, especially where the discomfort

is attributable to kidney stones. The herb is

also taken as a treatment for canker sores,
toothache, bleeding gums, and nosebleeds.
Research Research suggests that chaff flower
may lower blood pressure by reducing heart

rate and dilating the peripheral arteries.
Related Species A. aspera, found in tropical
areas worldwide, is used in Ayurvedic medicine
to treat chest conditions and a range of
digestive problems.

Caution Do not take chaff flower

during pregnancy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

159

----- PAGE 162 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Aconitum napellus (Ranunculaceae)

Aconite,
Monkshood

Description Perennial herb growing to 5 ft

(1.5 m). Has dark green lobed leaves with violet or
blue delphinium-like flowers on long spikes.
Habitat & Cultivation Aconite grows mainly
in southern and central Europe. It prefers damp
and shady sites, and is cultivated as a garden plant.
The root is unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Aconite contains 0.3-2%
terpenoid alkaloids, principally aconitine.
History & Folklore Aconitum species have
traditionally been used as arrow poisons.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Aconite is
poisonous in all but the smallest doses, and is
rarely prescribed for internal use. More commonly,
it is applied to unbroken skin to relieve pain from
bruises or neurological conditions. In Ayurvedic
medicine, aconite is used to treat neuralgia, asthma,
and heart weakness. Aconite is also used extensively
in homeopathy as an analgesic and sedative.
Related Species Chinese aconite (A. carmichaeli’)
is used in China for shock and to support the
circulatory system in emergencies. Trials in China
indicate that it is helpful in congestive heart failure.
2 @ Cautions Aconite is highly toxic and

is subject to legal restriction in some countries.
Use only under professional supervision.

Adhatoda vasica (Acanthaceae)

Malabar Nut,

Vasaka

Description Evergreen shrub growing to 10 ft
(3 m), with lance-shaped leaves, white or purple
flowers, and 4-seeded fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
India, malabar nut grows in low-lying regions up
to the Himalayan foothills.

Parts Used Leaves, root, flowers, fruit (nut).
Constituents Malabar nut contains
pyrroloquinoline alkaloids and an unidentified
volatile oil.

History & Folklore The highly bitter-tasting
malabar nut is a traditional Ayurvedic remedy for
chest problems.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Due to its
expectorant qualities, malabar nut is useful for
bronchitis and other chest conditions. An Ayurvedic
preparation that includes malabar flowers is used to
treat tuberculosis. All parts of the plant are used
to expel worms. A poultice of the fresh leaves

is applied to wounds and to inflamed joints.
Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Adiantum capillus-veneris
(Polypodiaceae)

Maidenhair Fern

Description Fern with delicate fronds growing
to | ft (30 cm) long.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
Asia, most of the Americas, and Australasia.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Maidenhair fern contains
flavonoids (including rutin and isoquercitin),
terpenoids (including adiantone), tannin,
proanthocyanidins, and mucilage.

History & Folklore Maidenhair fern has been
used since ancient times. Pliny the Elder (23-79 ce)
states that the herb “is of singular efficacy in
expelling and breaking calculi of the bladder.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Commonly

used in Latin America and occasionally in Europe,
a decoction or tincture of maidenhair fern is used
as an expectorant to treat coughs, bronchitis, sore
throat, and chronic nasal congestion. The plant has
a longstanding reputation as a remedy for
conditions affecting the hair and scalp.

Related Species A. caudatum has been shown
to act as an antispasmodic and could be useful in
the treatment of asthma.

Maidenhair fern is used
for chest complaints.

Adonis vernalis (Ranunculaceae)

False Hellebore,
Yellow Pheasant's Eye

Description Perennial herb growing to 8 in
(20 cm). Has a scaly stem and feathery compound
leaves. Stem bears large, bright yellow flowers up
to 3 in (8 cm) across.

False hellebore’s cardiac glycosides help to slow
down heart rate.

Habitat & Cultivation Originating from the
steppes of Russia and from the Black Sea region,
this herb is native to much of Europe but not to
Britain. It grows in mountain pasture undergrowth.
It is rare and legally protected in Western Europe.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents False hellebore contains cardiac
glycosides, including adonitoxin.

History & Folklore False hellebore's botanical
name refers to Adonis, a figure in Greek mythology
associated with the seasonal renewal of plant life.
Medicinal Actions & Uses False hellebore
contains cardiac glycosides similar to those found
in foxglove (Digitalis purpurea, p. 202). These
substances improve the heart's efficiency, increasing
its output while at the same time slowing its rate.
Unlike foxglove, however, false hellebore's effect
on the heart is slightly sedative, and it is generally
prescribed for patients with hearts that are beating
too fast or irregularly. False hellebore is also
recommended as a treatment for certain cases of
low blood pressure. In common with other plants
containing cardiac glycosides, false hellebore is
strongly diuretic and can be used to counter water
retention, particularly in cases of poor circulatory

function. False hellebore is used in homeopathic
medicine as a treatment for angina.
@ Cautions Take only under professional

supervision. Gathering wild plants and their
medicinal use are subject to legal restrictions in
some countries.

----- PAGE 163 -----
Aegle marmelos (Rutaceae)

Bael,
Bengal Quince

Description Thorny deciduous tree growing
to 26 ft (8 m). Has aromatic oval- to lance-shaped
leaves, greenish-white flowers, and yellow plum-
shaped fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to India, bael
grows throughout much of Southeast Asia in dry
forests. It is also cultivated throughout the region.
Parts Used Fruit, leaves, root, twigs.
Constituents Bael contains coumarins,
flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, carotinoids, and
volatile oil.

History & Folklore The bael tree is sacred to
the Hindu deities Lakshmi (the goddess of wealth
and good fortune) and Shiva (the god of health),
and it is commonly planted near temples. Its
medicinal virtues are described in the Charaka
Samhita, an herbal text written c. 400 sce.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
half-ripe bael fruit reduces irritation in the digestive
tract and is excellent for diarrhea and dysentery.
The ripe fruit is demulcent and laxative, with a
significant vitamin C content. It eases stomach pain
and supports the healthy function of this organ.
Bael's astringent leaves are taken to treat peptic
ulcers. The tree's most unusual application is for
earache. A piece of dried root is dipped in the oil
of the neem tree (Azadirachta indica, p. 70) and set
alight. Oil from the burning end is dripped into the
ear. (This is not a recommended practice.)
Self-help Use Diarrhea, p. 307.

Agastache rugosa (Lamiaceae)

Korean Mint,
Huo Xiang (Chinese)

Description Aromatic perennial or biennial
herb growing to 4 ft (1.2 m). Has a square stem,
triangular leaves, and purple flowers growing in
dense spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China
and also found in Japan, Korea, Laos, and Russia,
Korean mint grows wild on slopes and roadsides.
It is cultivated throughout China and
gathered in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.
Constituents Korean mint contains a volatile
oil, including methylchavicol, anethole, anisaldehyde,
and limonene.

History & Folklore Korean mint was first
mentioned in a Chinese medicinal text—Tao
Hongjing's revision of the Divine Husbandman's
Classic (Shen’nong Bencagjing), which he wrote in
about 500 ce.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The acrid
Korean mint is considered a warming herb in
Oriental herbal medicine (see pp. 40-43) and is
used to treat dampness” within the digestive
system. In Korea, as its name suggests, the leaves
are eaten as a condiment to aid digestion. The
herb stimulates and warms the digestive tract,
relieving symptoms such as abdominal bloating,
indigestion, nausea, and vomiting. It is commonly
used to relieve vomiting and morning sickness.
Korean mint is used to treat the early stages of viral
infections that feature symptoms such as
stomachache and nausea. A lotion containing
Korean mint may be applied to fungal conditions
such as ringworm.

Research Laboratory experiments indicate
that Korean mint has marked activity against
fungal infections.

Related Species In southern China and
Taiwan, Pogostemon cablin is used interchangeably
with Korean mint. P. cablin is a close relative of
the Indian plant P. patchouli, from which patchouli
oil is produced.

Korean mint is used to
treat fungal infections
such as ringworm.

Agave americana (Agavaceae)

Agave,
Century Plant

Description Succulent perennial with large
rosette of 30-60 fleshy, sharply toothed leaves
that reach a height of 6/4 ft (2 m). After 10 years
or more, clusters of yellow flowers, growing to
2% in (7 cm) across, bloom on a pole-like stem
26-30 ft (8-9 m) tall.
Habitat & Cultivation Agave is native to
deserts of Central America. It is now grown as an
ornamental plant in tropical and subtropical areas
around the world.
Part Used Sap.
Constituents Agave sap contains estrogen-like
isoflavonoids, alkaloids, coumarins, and vitamins
pro-A, B,, B,, C, D, and K.
History & Folklore Unlike Europeans at
the time of the Spanish conquest of America,
the Aztec and Maya people were skilled in
wound healing. They used agave sap (often
with egg white) to bind powders and gums in
pastes or poultices to be applied to wounds.
The Badianus Manuscript (1552 ce), which was
the first herbal text to list the plants of the New
World, describes an Aztec treatment for diarrhea
and dysentery, in which agave juice, combined
with freshly ground maize (Zea mays, p. 154) and
extract of bladderwort (Utricularia species), is
given as an enema, using a syringe made from the
bladder of a small animal and a hollow bone or
reed. Both tequila and mescal, popular Mexican
alcoholic drinks, are distilled from the fermented
sap or juice of agaves.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Demulcent,
laxative, and antiseptic, agave sap is a soothing and
restorative remedy for many digestive ailments.
It is used to treat ulcers and inflammatory
conditions affecting the stomach and intestines,
protecting these parts from infection and
irritation and encouraging healing. Agave has
also been employed to treat many
other conditions, including
constipation, jaundice, liver
disease, and tuberculosis.
Related Species Agave is a
fairly close relative of aloe (Aloe vera,
p. 60). The two plants have similar medicinal uses.
The sisal agave (A. sisalana) is cultivated in sub-
tropical America and in Kenya as a source of
hecogenin, the substance that is the starting
point in the production of corticosteroids
(steroid hormones).
Cautions Do not use during pregnancy. Do
not exceed the dose as this may cause digestive
irritation and eventual liver damage. External use
may cause skin irritation.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 164 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Agrimonia eupatoria (Rosaceae)
Agrimony

Description Erect, downy, and slightly
aromatic perennial growing to 3 ft (1 m). Has
paired leaves, green above and silvery-green
beneath, and small 5-petaled yellow flowers
growing on terminal spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Agrimony is a native
European herb commonly found in marshes, wet
meadows, and open areas. It is harvested when in
flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Agrimony contains tannins,
coumarins, flavonoids (including luteolin, a volatile
oil), and polysaccharides.

History & Folklore The species name
Eupatoria has regal associations. Mithridates Eupator
(d. 63 Bce), King of Pontus in northern Turkey, was
said to have had a profound knowledge of plant
lore and antidotes to poisons.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Agrimony has
long been used by herbalists to heal wounds
because it staunches bleeding and encourages
clot formation. An astringent and mild bitter,

it is also a helpful remedy for diarrhea and

a gentle tonic for digestion as a whole.
Combined with other herbs such as cornsilk
(Zea mays, p. 154), it is a valuable remedy for

Agrimony is gentle and
suitable for children.

cystitis and urinary incontinence, and has also been
used for kidney stones, sore throats, hoarseness,
rheumatism, and osteoarthritis.

Research Agrimony's blood-staunching and
anti-inflammatory properties have been established
by experiments in China.

Related Species Xian he cao (A. pilosa)

is used in China for comparable conditions.
Self-help Uses Diarrhea, p. 307;

Diarrhea in children, p. 318.

Agropyron repens syn.
Elymus repens (Graminaceae)

Couch Grass

Description Vigorous perennial growing to
32 in (80 cm). Has a long, creeping rhizome,
slender leaves, and erect spikes bearing green
flowers aligned in two rows.

Habitat & Cultivation Found in Europe,
the Americas, northern Asia, and Australia, couch
grass is an invasive weed. It is harvested
throughout the year.

Parts Used Rhizome, seeds, root.
Constituents Couch grass contains
polysaccharides (such as triticin), a volatile oil
(mainly agropyrene), mucilage, and nutrients.
Agropyrene has antibiotic properties.

History & Folklore In classical times, both
Dioscorides (40-90 ce) and Pliny (23-79 ce)
recommended couch grass root for poor urine
flow and kidney stones. In 1597, the herbalist
John Gerard wrote that ‘‘Couch-grasse be an
unwelcome guest to fields and gardens, yet his
physicke virtues do recompense those hurts; for
it openeth the stoppings of the liver and reins
ureters] without heat.” In times of famine, the
root has been roasted and ground as a substitute

for coffee and flour.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A gentle, effective
diuretic and demulcent, couch grass is most
commonly used for urinary tract infections such as
cystitis and urethritis. It both protects the urinary
tubules against infection and irritants, and increases
the volume of urine, thereby diluting it. It can be
taken, usually with other herbs, to help treat kidney
stones, reducing the irritation and laceration they
cause. Couch grass is also thought to dissolve kidney
stones (insofar as this is possible), and in any case will
help to prevent their further enlargement. Both an
enlarged prostate and prostatitis (infection of the
prostate gland) will benefit from a couch grass
decoction taken over the course of several months.
In German herbal medicine, heated couch grass
seeds are used in a hot and moist pack that is
applied to the abdomen for peptic ulcers. Juice from
the roots of couch grass has been advocated for
treating jaundice and other liver complaints.

Ailanthus altissima syn.
A. glandulosa (Simaroubaceae)

Tree of Heaven,
Chun Pi

Description Deciduous tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has large leaves with up to |2 lance-
shaped leaflets, and small greenish-yellow flowers.
It has an unpleasant odor.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China and

India, tree of heaven is now naturalized in some
parts of Europe, Australia, and North America.
It is cultivated as a garden tree. The bark and
root bark are harvested in spring.

Tree of heaven has an unpleasant, bitter taste.

Parts Used Bark, root bark.

Constituents The bark contains quassinoids
(such as ailanthone and quassin), alkaloids,
flavonols, and tannins. Quassinoids are intensely
bitter, antimalarial, and act against cancerous cells.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Chinese
herbal medicine, tree of heaven is used to

treat diarrhea and dysentery, especially if there
is blood in the stool. The bark of the tree has
been used in Asian and Australian medicine to
counter worms, excessive vaginal discharge,
gonorrhea, and malaria, and it has also been
given for asthma. Tree of heaven has marked
antispasmodic properties and acts on the body
as a cardiac depressant.

Research Chinese researchers gave tree of
heaven to 82 patients with acute dysentery, and
cured 81, Abdominal pain generally eased within
2 days. The anti-cancer properties of quassinoids
are being extensively investigated. Laboratory
research indicates that the whole plant has a
marked antimalarial activity.

----- PAGE 165 -----
Related Species A. malabrica is used in herbal
medicine in Southeast Asia for its tonic properties
and to reduce fever.

@ Caution Use tree of heaven only under
professional supervision.

Ajuga reptans (Lamiaceae)

Bugle

Description Low-growing, creeping perennial
up to | ft (30 cm) in height. Has rooting runners,
erect hairy stems, oblong to oval leaves, and
purplish-blue flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
North Africa, and parts of Asia, bugle has become
naturalized in North America. It prefers damp
woods and grassy and mountainous areas, and is
usually gathered when in flower in early summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Bugle contains iridoid glycosides,
diterpene bitters, phytoecdysone, and caffeic acids.

Bugle was once
thought to be a
remedy for hangovers.

History & Folklore In the European tradition,
bugle has long been valued as a wound-healing
herb. Nicholas Culpeper praised it in 1652: “The
decoction of the leaves and flowers made in wine
and taken, dissolveth the congealed blood in those
that are bruised inwardly by a fall or otherwise, and
is very effectual for any inward wounds, thrusts or
stabs into the body or bowels.’ The herbalist Mrs.
Grieve, writing in 1931, reported that it lowers the
pulse rate and “equalizes the circulation.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Bugle is bitter,
astringent, and aromatic, but opinion varies as to its
value as a medicine. It has mild analgesic properties,
and it is still used occasionally as a wound healer.

It is also mildly laxative and traditionally has been
thought to help cleanse the liver.

Related Species Ground pine (A. chamaepitys)
is used to treat gout and rheumatism. It is believed
to have diuretic, menstruation-inducing, and
stimulant properties. A. decumbens is used in
Chinese medicine as an analgesic.

Albizzia lebbeck (Fabaceae)
Albizzia,
Siris Tree, Pit Shirish

Description Deciduous tree growing to
65 ft (20 m). Has compound leaves, white
fragrant flowers, and long, shiny, pale yellow
seed pods.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Indian
subcontinent, albizzia grows in moist teak-bearing
forests. It is also cultivated.
Parts Used Stem bark; also flowers and seeds.
Constituents Albizzia contains saponins, cardiac
glycosides, tannins, and flavonoids.
History & Folklore Albizia has been used for
several thousand years within Ayurvedic medicine
to treat allergies, skin eruptions, glandular
disorders, and poisoning.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Albizzia bark
has anti-allergenic properties and is used orally
(and topically) to relieve problems such as
eczema, hives, hay fever, and asthma. The herb
helps to lower cholesterol and may be
useful as part of a broad approach to
treating abnormal fat levels in the
blood. It is usually taken as a decoction
or tincture. In Ayurveda, the bark is
given for pitta (fire) and kapha (water)
conditions such as asthma; the flowers
for coughs and bronchitis; and the seeds
for skin diseases.
Research Laboratory research has shown that
the plant helps to reduce allergic sensitivity, and

one clinical study has indicated potential value in
the treatment of asthma. In another clinical
study, weeping eczema improved significantly with

a topical application of albizzia. Extracts of the
plant also have antifungal and antibacterial activity.
Saponins from the seed pods have spermicidal and
antiprotozoal activity.

Alchemilla vulgaris (Rosaceae)

Lady's Mantle

Description Herbaceous perennial growing to
| ft (30 cm). Has a basal rosette of lobed leaves
and insignificant green flowers 4-4 in (3-5 mm)
across in loose clusters.

Habitat & Cultivation Lady's mantle is
native to Britain and continental Europe. It is
gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.
Constituents Lady's mantle contains tannins,
a glycoside, and salicylic acid.

Lady's mantle is chiefly
used to reduce heavy
menstrual bleeding.

History & Folklore Andres de Laguna’s
translation (1570) of Dioscorides’ Materia Medica
recommends two preparations of lady's mantle—
the root, powdered and mixed with red wine,
for internal and external wounds, and an infusion
of the aerial parts, for “‘greenstick” fractures
and broken bones in babies and young

children. When taken regularly for 15 days,
lady's mantle was said to reverse sterility due

to “'slipperiness” of the womb. The plant's
astringent effect is sufficiently marked that

the infusion was used to contract the female
genitalia, and it was ‘‘a thousand times sold”

to those wishing to appear to be virgins!
Medicinal Actions & Uses Lady's mantle
has always been prized as a wound healer. Its
astringency ensures that blood flow is staunched
and the first stage of healing soon gets under
way. As the name implies, it is a valuable herb

for women's complaints and is thought to have a
progesterogenic action. It is commonly taken to
reduce heavy menstrual bleeding, to relieve
menstrual cramps, and to aid menstrual regularity.
Lady's mantle is also prescribed for fibroids and
endometriosis. It has been used to facilitate
childbirth, and is thought to act as a liver

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

163

----- PAGE 166 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

164

decongestant. Its astringent properties make it
a useful herb for the treatment of diarrhea

and gastroenteritis.

Research Russian research indicates that lady's
mantle reduces blood viscosity.

Caution Do not use lady's mantle when pregnant.

Aletris farinosa (Liliaceae)

Star Grass,

True Unicorn Root,
Colic Root

Description Perennial growing to 3 ft (| m).
Has a flowering stem, smooth lance-shaped leaves,
and white bell-shaped flowers that appear to be
covered with frost.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America, star grass grows mainly in swamps
and wet sandy woodland, especially near the
seashore. It is harvested commercially in Virginia,
Tennessee, and North Carolina.

Parts Used Rhizome, leaves.

Constituents Star grass contains steroidal
saponins based on diosgenin, as well as a bitter
principle, volatile oil, and a resin.

History & Folklore The Native North
American Catawba used a cold-water infusion of
star grass leaves for stomachache. Star grass was
also advocated for snake bite.

Medicinal Actions & Uses It is

difficult to gain a clear picture of star

grass's medicinal value. Due to its

estrogenic action, it is employed chiefly

for gynecological problems, particularly

at menopause. It is also given for period

pain and irregular periods. Some

authorities hold that it prevents

threatened miscarriage. Star grass is also a
good digestive herb, proving beneficial in
treating loss of appetite, indigestion, flatulence,
and bloating.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. The dried, and especially the fresh,
rhizome can be toxic when taken in overdose,
causing colic, diarrhea, and vomiting.

Allium cepa (Liliaceae)

Onion

Description Bulbous perennial growing to 3 ft
(1 m). Has hollow stems and leaves, and white or
purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
northern hemisphere, onion has been cultivated
in the Middle East for millennia. It is now grown
worldwide as a vegetable.

Part Used Bulb.

Constituents Onion contains a volatile oil
with sulphur-containing compounds such as
allicin (an antibiotic) and alliin, flavonoids,
phenolic acids, and sterols.

History & Folklore Authorities throughout
the ancient world recommended onion for a
variety of health problems. Bunches were hung

on doors to ward off the plague in medieval
Europe. Wild onion (A. sibiricum) was also used
extensively by Native North Americans to treat
stings and help relieve colds.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Onion boasts a
long list of medicinal actions—diuretic, antibiotic,
anti-inflammatory, analgesic, expectorant, and
antirheumatic. It is also beneficial to the circulation.
Onions are taken the world over for colds, flu, and
coughs, much like garlic (A. sativum, p. 59). Onion
offsets tendencies to angina, arteriosclerosis, and
heart attack. It is also useful in preventing oral
infection and tooth decay. The warmed juice can
be dropped into the ear for earache, and baked
onion is used as a poultice to drain pus from sores.
Onion has a longstanding reputation as an
aphrodisiac, and it is also used cosmetically
to stimulate hair growth.

Onion juice is mixed
with honey as a
remedy for colds,

Related Species |n Chinese herbal medicine, the
scallion (A. fistulosum) is given to encourage sweating,
to unblock the nose, and to relieve bloating. It is
also used to help drain boils and abscesses.
Self-help Use Mild fever, p. 31 |.

Allium ursinum (Liliaceae)

Ramsons

Description Bulbous perennial smelling strongly
of garlic, growing to || in (28 cm). Has a triangular
stem and broad elliptical leaves. Clusters of white,
star-like flowers grow from a common stem.
Habitat & Cultivation Ramsons are native
to Europe and Asia. They carpet shady sites in
damp woods and by streams. The plants are
gathered in early summer.

Parts Used Bulb, aerial parts.

Constituents Ramsons contain volatile oil,
aldehydes, vinyl sulfide, and vitamin C.

History & Folklore Ramsons (and many other
onion-like plants) have been highly regarded as
preventative medicines, as an old English rhyme
attests: “Eat leeks in Lide and ramsons in May/And
all the year after physicians may play!” More
prosaically, Gerard (1597) wrote that the leaves
“maye very well be eaten in April and Maie with
butter [by those of] a strong constitution.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Used mainly as

a folk remedy and as a food, ramsons are similar

to garlic (A. sativum, p. 59) but weaker in
action. They lower high blood pressure and
help to prevent arteriosclerosis. As ramsons
ease stomach pain and are tonic to the
digestion, they have been used for diarrhea, colic,
gas, indigestion, and loss of appetite. The whole
herb is used in an infusion against threadworms,
either ingested or given as an enema. Ramsons are
also thought to be beneficial for asthma, bronchitis,
and emphysema. The juice is used as an aid to
weight loss.

Alnus glutinosa
syn. A. rotundifolia (Betulaceae)

Alder

Description Small tree with fissured bark,
growing to 65 ft (20 m). Has notched oval leaves
and male and female catkins.

Habitat & Cultivation Alder is native to
Europe, Asia, and North Africa. It thrives in damp
places and along riverbanks. The bark and leaves
are gathered in spring.

Parts Used Bark, leaves.

Constituents Alder contains lignans, tannin
(10-20%), emodin (an anthraquinone), and glycosides.

----- PAGE 167 -----
History & Folklore Water-resistant, alder
was used in the construction of Venice. Wooster
Beech (1794-1868), founder of the Eclectic
healing movement, used a decoction of the bark to
“purify the blood.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Alder is most
often used as a mouthwash and gargle for tooth,
gum, and throat problems. The drying action of

a decoction of the bark helps to contract the
mucous membranes and reduce inflammation.

A decoction may also be used to staunch internal
or external bleeding, and to heal wounds. It is also
used as a wash for scabies. In Spain, alder leaves
are smoothed and placed on the soles of the feet
to relieve aching. Leaves are used to help reduce
breast engorgement in nursing mothers.

Alstonia spp. (Apocynaceae)
Fever Bark

Description Evergreen trees growing to 49 ft
(15 m). Have glossy oblong leaves and creamy-
white, star-shaped flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation A. constricta is native
to Australia, and A. scholaris to Australia and
Southeast Asia. Both are now found in tropical
regions around the world.

Parts Used Stem bark, root bark.
Constituents The bark of both species contains
indole alkaloids. A. constricta contains reserpine,

a powerful hypotensive.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Fever bark has
been taken to treat malarial fever (and has been
called Australian quinine), but its efficacy against
malaria remains unclear. The bark is antispasmodic
and lowers blood pressure, and is now used mainly
to reduce high blood pressure. Strongly bitter, the
bark is also taken to treat diarrhea.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Fever bark is toxic in large doses.
The herb is subject to legal restrictions in
some countries.

Althaea officinalis (Malvaceae)

Marshmallow

Description Downy perennial growing to 7 ft
(2.2 m). Has thick white roots, heart-shaped leaves,
and pink flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
marshmallow is naturalized in the Americas. It
prefers marshy fields and tidal zones and is
cultivated for medicinal use. The aerial parts are
gathered in summer as the plant begins to flower
and the root is unearthed in autumn.

Parts Used Root, leaves, flowers.

Constituents Marshmallow root contains about
37% starch, | 1% mucilage, | 1% pectin, flavonoids,
phenolic acids, sucrose, and asparagine.

History & Folklore The philosopher
Theophrastus (c. 372-286 sce) reported that
marshmallow root was taken in sweet wine for
coughs. Marshmallow was once a key ingredient

in the sweets of the same name.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Useful
whenever a soothing effect is needed,
marshmallow protects and soothes the mucous
membranes. The root counters excess stomach
acid, peptic ulceration, and gastritis. Marshmallow
is also mildly laxative and beneficial for many
intestinal problems, including regional ileitis,
colitis, diverticulitis, and irritable bowel syndrome.
The leaves treat cystitis and frequent urination.
Marshmallow’s demulcent qualities bring relief

to dry coughs, bronchial asthma, chronic

bronchitis, and pleurisy. The flowers are applied
to help soothe inflamed skin. The root is used
in an ointment for boils and abscesses, and in

a mouthwash for inflammation. The peeled root
may be given as a chewstick to teething babies.
Other Species Hollyhock (A. rosea) and
common mallow (Malva sylvestris, p. 232) are
used in a similar fashion.

Self-help Uses Allergic rhinitis with mucus,
p. 300; Earache due to chronic mucus, p. 312;
Urinary infections, p. 314.

Marshmallow infusion,
made from the flowers,
soothes sore skin.

Amaranthus hypochondriacus
(Amaranthaceae)

Amaranth

Description Sturdy, upright annual growing
to about 3 ft (1 m). Has deeply veined, lance-
shaped, purple-green leaves that grow to 6 in
(15 cm) and tufts of small, deep crimson flowers
on long spikes.

Amaranth’s long-lasting flowers gave rise to its name,
meaning “unwithering” in Greek.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to India,
amaranth grows wild in many countries, including
the U.S. A common garden plant, it is harvested
when in flower in late summer and early autumn.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Amaranth contains tannins,
including a red pigment used to dye foods

and medicines.

History & Folklore Amaranth comes from
the Greek word meaning “unwithering.’ The
amaranth was sacred to the goddess Artemis,
worshipped at Ephesus, and was thought to have
special healing powers. As a symbol of immortality,
it was used to decorate tombs and images of

the gods.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Amaranth is an
astringent herb that is used primarily to reduce
blood loss and to treat diarrhea. A decoction of
amaranth is taken as a remedy in cases of heavy
menstrual bleeding, excessive vaginal discharge,
diarrhea, and dysentery. It is also used as a gargle to
soothe inflammation of the pharynx and to hasten
the healing of canker sores.

Related Species Quinoa (A. caudatus, also
known as Inca wheat) is a nutritious Andean grain.
It is used to make bread and is eaten in salads. The
seeds of A. grandiflorus are used as a foodstuff by
Australian Aborigines.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 168 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

166

Ammi majus (Apiaceae)

Bishops Weed

Description Erect annual herb growing to
32 in (80 cm), with tangled leaflets and umbels
of small white flowers.

Bishop’s weed, like most members of the carrot family,
has highly aromatic seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Bishop’ weed is
native to the Mediterranean region and as far
east as Iran. It is cultivated for its seeds, which

are harvested in late summer.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents The seeds contain
furanocoumarins (including bergapten), flavonoids,
and tannins.

History & Folklore Bishop's weed has

been grown as a medicinal plant since the Middle
Ages, but has been less often used than visnaga
(A. visnaga, p. 62).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bishop's weed
produces strongly aromatic seeds. In an infusion
or as a tincture, they calm the digestive system.
They are also diuretic, and, like visnaga, have been
used to treat asthma and angina. Bishops weed
reputedly helps treat patchy skin pigmentation

in vitiligo. It has also been used for psoriasis.
Cautions Bishop’ weed increases sensitivity

to sunlight and can provoke sunburn and sunlight-
related allergic reactions. Side effects can include
nausea, vomiting, and headaches. It is subject to
legal restrictions in some countries.

Anacardium occidentale
(Anacardiaceae)

Cashew

_ Description Evergreen tree growing to a height

of 49 ft (15 m). Has large oval leaves and pink-
streaked yellow flowers on long spikes. Its greenish-
grey “fruit” or “apple” is in fact a thickened stem.

The true fruit hangs just below this stem and
contains the nut, which is encased in red or
yellow flesh.

Habitat & Cultivation This tree is native to
tropical American forests and grasslands. It is now
cultivated for its highly prized nuts throughout the
tropics, especially in India and eastern Africa.
Parts Used Nuts, leaves, bark, root, gum.
Constituents The gum contains anacardic acid,
which is bactericidal and fungicidal, and kills worms
and protozoa.

History & Folklore The “apple” is made into
jams, and, in Brazil, into a liquor called cajuado.
The gum exuded by the stem wards off ants

and other insects.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though many
parts of the plant are used medicinally, cashew nut
is chiefly a food—after removal of its toxic lining.
The nut is highly nutritious, containing 45% fat and
20% protein. The leaves are used in Indian and
African herbal medicine for toothache and gum
problems, and in West Africa for malaria. The
bark is used in Ayurvedic medicine to detoxify
snake bite. The roots are purgative. The gum is
applied externally for skin conditions such as corns
and fungal infection. The oil between the outer
and inner shells of the nut is caustic and causes an
inflammatory reaction even in small doses. In

folk medicine in the tropics, the oil is used very
sparingly to eliminate warts, corns, ringworm,

and ulcers.

Research Research at the University of Berkeley
(California) has shown anacardic acids to have
significant antibacterial activity against Heliobacter
pylori, the bacterium thought to be the main cause
of stomach ulcers.

Caution The shell oil and its vapor are highly
irritant—do not use in any form.

Anacyclus pyrethrum
(Asteraceae)

Pellitory

Description Perennial herb growing to | ft
(30 cm). Has smooth alternate leaves and large
white flowers with yellow centers.

Habitat & Cultivation Pellitory is native to
the Mediterranean region as far east as the Middle
East. It is cultivated in Algeria, and the root is
unearthed in autumn.

Parts Used Root, essential oil.
Constituents Pellitory contains anacycline,
inulin, and volatile oil.

History & Folklore The herbalist Nicholas
Culpeper wrote in | 652 that pellitory “‘purgeth
the brain of phlegmatic humours... easing pains
in the head and teeth,” It has been listed in the
British Pharmacopoeia and was used in the form

of lozenges to relieve dryness of the mouth. It
was also taken to help ease neuralgia and paralysis
of the tongue or lips.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pellitory root

is taken as a decoction or chewed to relieve
toothache and increase saliva production. The
decoction may also be used as a gargle to soothe
sore throats. In Ayurvedic medicine, pellitory root
is considered tonic and is used to treat paralysis
and epilepsy. Diluted pellitory essential oil is used
in mouthwashes and to treat toothache.
Caution Do not take the oil internally except
under professional supervision.

Anagallis arvensis (Primulaceae)

Scarlet Pimpernel

Description Creeping annual growing to

2 in (5 cm) with oval- to lance-shaped leaves

and salmon-red flowers on long stems.

Habitat & Cultivation Scarlet pimpernel

is found in Europe and in temperate regions
generally. It prefers open areas and untended sandy
ground, and is gathered in summer toward the end
of its flowering period.

Scarlet pimpernel
was called “poor
man's weather
glass” because

its flowers close
before rain.

----- PAGE 169 -----
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents The herb contains saponins
(including anagalline), tannins, and cucurbitacins.
The latter are cytotoxic (damaging to cells).
History & Folklore Classical Greek writers
believed scarlet pimpernel helped melancholy.

In her Modern Herbal (1931), Mrs. Grieve quotes
an old saying: “No heart can think, no tongue
can tell/The virtues of the pimpernel.’” It has
been employed in European folk medicine as

a treatment for gallstones, liver cirrhosis, lung
problems, kidney stones, urinary infections, gout,
and rheumatism. This pattern of use suggests a
detoxifying action for the plant.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Little used by
medical herbalists today, scarlet pimpernel has
diuretic, sweat-inducing, and expectorant
properties. As an expectorant, it was used to
stimulate the coughing up of mucus and help
recovery from colds and flu. It has been used to
treat epilepsy and mental problems for 2,000 years,
but there is little evidence to support its efficacy.
Caution Scarlet pimpernel is not recommended
for medicinal use for more than 2—3 weeks.

Anamirta cocculus
(Menispermaceae)

Indian Berry,
Cocculus

Description Large, woody climbing plant
with alternate oval leaves and long hanging
clusters of greenish flowers. Has male and “
female flowers on separate plants. Bears
red-brown kidney-shaped fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Indian berry is found
in forests in Southeast Asia from India and Sri
Lanka across to Indonesia.

Parts Used Leaves, fruit.

Constituents Indian berry contains picrotoxin
(up to 5%) and alkaloids. Picrotoxin is a very
powerful poison and nerve stimulant.

History & Folklore The fruit is used as a fish
Poison. Scattered in the water, it stupefies fish in the
surrounding area, causing them to float to the surface.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Indian berry fruit
is sold commercially as a remedy for parasites.

The plant is so toxic that it is rarely taken internally.
It is mainly applied externally to kill parasites

such as lice. In Ayurvedic medicine, Indian berry
fruit is classified as astringent, antifungal, and
anthelmintic (de-worming), and is used for skin
ulcers and fungal conditions such as ringworm.
The herb is used in homeopathic medicine as

a remedy for heart conditions.

2 @ Cautions Indian berry is highly toxic. Do
not take internally. Use externally only under
professional supervision.

Ananas comosus (Bromeliaceae)

Pineapple

Description Herbaceous perennial

growing to 3 ft (1 m). Has a short, sturdy

stem; spiny, lance-shaped leaves; and succulent
reddish-yellow fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Pineapple is native

to South America. It is cultivated throughout the
tropics for its fruit and, to a lesser extent, its

leaf fiber.

Parts Used Fruit, leaves.

Constituents Pineapple fruit contains bromelain,
a protein-splitting enzyme that aids digestion. It has
significant levels of vitamins A and C.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The sour,

unripe fruit improves digestion, increases
appetite, and relieves dyspepsia. In Indian herbal
medicine, it is thought to act as a uterine tonic.
The ripe fruit cools and soothes, and is used

to settle gas and reduce excessive gastric acid. Its
significant fiber content makes it useful in relieving
constipation. The juice of the ripe

Pineapple contains
an enzyme,
bromelain, that
acts as an aid

to digestion.

fruit is both a digestive tonic and a diuretic.
The leaves are considered to be useful in
encouraging the onset of menstrual periods
and easing painful ones.

Andrographis paniculata
(Acanthaceae)

Andrographis,

Green Chiretta,
Kiratatiktah (Sanskrit)

Description Upright, branched annual,
growing to 3 ft (90 cm), with lance-shaped leaves,
spotted, pale brown or purple flowers, and long,
thin seed capsules containing numerous yellow-
brown seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Andrographis grows
throughout India, on plains, and as undergrowth in
forests. It is commonly cultivated for medicinal use
in northern India and China, and is also grown as

a garden plant.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Contains bitter diterpene
lactones, diterpene glucosides, and flavonoids.
History & Folklore |n Ayurveda, andrographis
is used mainly for the liver, to treat infection, and
for intestinal worms. In the past it has been used
chiefly to treat malaria.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A classically bitter
and tonic herb, andrographis exerts a wide range
of protective effects on the body—mostly through
its ability to stimulate the immune system,
especially macrophages, and to protect the liver
from damage, whether by infection or poisoning.
Like most bitters, it will help to counter fever. In
China, andrographis is used to treat a wide range
of infections including bacillary dysentery and
enteritis. It may be taken for chronic infection,

and in any situation where the immune system

is underperforming. Although it has no antiviral
activity, andrographis can speed up recovery

from the common cold.

Research In mostly Indian and Chinese
research, the herb has been shown to stimulate
the immune system, particularly helping to protect
against poisoning (such as from snake bite).
The glucosides are strongly antioxidant, and
extracts of the whole herb have demonstrated an
effect similar to, or better than, silymarin (from
Silybum marianum, p. 137) in supporting the
function of the liver. Thai research published in

1991 indicated that 6 g per day of andrographis
was as effective as acetaminophen in relieving fever
and sore throat. The herb also has reported
effectiveness against fertility.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. High
doses may cause nausea and vomiting.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 170 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

168

Anemarrhena asphodeloides
(Liliaceae)

Zhi Mu

Description Perennial herb with a thick
rhizome, thin leaves up to 28 in (70 cm) long, and
clusters of small white or light purple flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
China, zhi mu grows wild on exposed slopes and
hills. It is cultivated in the northern and north-
eastern provinces.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Contains steroidal saponins,
lignans, phenolic compounds, and xanthones.
History & Folklore Zhi mu is first mentioned
in the Ist-century ce herbal, the Divine Husbandman's
Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Zhi mu has a
bitter taste and a “‘cold’’ temperament and is
used in Chinese herbal medicine for ‘excess
heat'—fever, night sweats, and coughs. It has
been shown to have significant antibacterial
activity and is commonly used to treat sores

and mouth ulcers.

Anemone pulsatilla syn. Pulsatilla
vulgaris (Ranunculaceae)

Pulsatilla

Description Hairy perennial growing to

6 in (15 cm). Has feathery leaves, and large,
purple-blue, bell-shaped flowers, with bright
yellow anthers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
this herb thrives in dry grassland in central

and northern parts of the continent, preferring
chalky soil. The aerial parts are harvested when

it flowers in spring.

Parts Used Dried aerial parts.

Constituents Pulsatilla contains the lactone
protoanemonin (which on drying forms anemonin),
triterpenoid saponins, tannins, and volatile oil.
History & Folklore In Greek mythology, the
goddess Flora was jealous of her husband's
attentions to the nymph Anemone and so
transformed her into a flower, at the mercy of the
North Wind. Anemone literally means ‘daughter
of the wind” in Greek. The alternate name
“pasque flower” derives from the French name
for Easter, when the plant is often in flower.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Pulsatilla

is less commonly used now in herbal medicine than
in the past, though it is still considered a valuable
remedy for cramping pain, menstrual problems,
and emotional distress. It is considered a specific
treatment for spasmodic pain of the reproductive
system, both male and female, and is given quite

frequently for premenstrual syndrome and period
pain, especially when these are accompanied by
nervous exhaustion. In France, it has traditionally
been used for treating coughs and as a sedative
for sleep difficulties. Pulsatilla is also used to treat
eye problems such as cataracts. The fresh plant
is not used because it is strongly irritant. Pulsatilla
is one of the most commonly used of all
homeopathic remedies.

Related Species The meadow anemone

(A. pratensis) is used interchangeably with pasque
flower; wood anemone (A. nemorosa) is now
rarely used in herbal medicine.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Do not take the fresh plant, which is toxic.

Anethum graveolens syn.
Peucedanum graveolens
(Apiaceae)

Dill

Description Aromatic annual that grows to a
height of 30 in (75 cm). Has an erect hollow stem,
feathery leaves, and numerous yellow flowers in
umbels. Fruit is very lightweight and pungent.
Habitat & Cultivation Dill is native to
southern Europe and central and southern

Asia, growing wild in open areas. It is also widely
cultivated, notably in England, Germany, and
North America. The leaves are picked as a
culinary herb. The seeds are harvested in

late summer.

Parts Used Seeds, essential oil, leaves.

Constituents Dill seeds contain up to 5% volatile

oil (about half of which is alpha-phellandrene),
flavonoids, coumarins, xanthones, and triterpenes.
History & Folklore An ancient Egyptian
remedy in the Ebers papyrus (c. 1500 Bce)
recommends dill as one of the ingredients in a
pain-killing mixture. The ancient Greeks are
believed to have covered their eyes with fronds
of the herb to induce sleep. Dill was commonly
used as a charm against witchcraft in the Middle
Ages, when it was burned to clear thunderclouds.
Its name comes from the Norse dylla—meaning
“to soothe.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Dill has always
been considered a remedy for the stomach,
relieving gas and calming digestion. Dill’s essential
oil relieves intestinal spasms and cramps and helps
to settle colic, hence it is often used in gripe water
mixtures. Chewing the seeds improves bad breath.
Dill makes a useful addition to cough, cold, and flu
remedies, and is a mild diuretic. Like caraway
(Carum carvi, p. 184), it can be used with
antispasmodics, such as cramp bark (Viburnum
opulus, p. 150), to relieve period pain.

Dill increases milk production, and when taken
regularly by nursing mothers, helps to prevent
colic in their babies.

Caution Take the essential

oil internally only under
professional supervision.

Dill was used as a
remedy by the ancient
Greeks to encourage
a good night's sleep.

Angelica archangelica (Apiaceae)

Angelica

Description Aromatic biennial herb growing
to 6% ft (2 m). Has ridged upright hollow stems,
large bright green leaves, and greenish-white
flowers in umbels.

Habitat & Cultivation Angelica grows in
temperate regions in western Europe, Siberia, and
the Himalayas. It prefers damp sites and is often
found near running water. Leaves and stems are
harvested in early summer, seeds as they ripen in
late summer, and roots in late autumn after one
year's growth.

Parts Used Root, leaves, stems, seeds.

----- PAGE 171 -----
Constituents Angelica root contains a volatile
oil (consisting mainly of beta-phellandrene),
lactones, and coumarins. An extract of the root
has been shown to be anti-inflammatory.
History & Folklore The British Flora Medica
(1877) reports that “the Laplanders considered
this plant as one of the most important
productions of the soil ... They are subject to

a severe kind of colic, against which the root

of angelica is one of their chief remedies.’ The
stems are candied for culinary use.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Angelica is a
warming and tonic remedy, having a role to play

in a wide range of illnesses. All parts of the plant
will help relieve indigestion, gas, and colic. Angelica
can also be useful in cases of poor circulation, as it
improves blood flow to the peripheral parts of the
body. It is considered a specific treatment for
Buerger's disease, a condition that narrows the
arteries of the hands and feet. By improving blood
flow and stimulating the coughing up of phlegm,
angelica’s warm, tonic properties bring relief from
bronchitis and debilitating conditions affecting the
chest. For respiratory conditions, the roots are
most commonly used, but the stems and seeds
may be employed as well.

Caution Do not take as a medicine during

pregnancy. Do not confuse with Chinese Angelica.

Self-help Use Stomach spasm, p. 305.

Angelica dahurica (Apiaceae)

Bai Zhi

Description Aromatic perennial growing

to 8 ft (2.5 m). Has a hollow stem, large
3-branched leaves, and umbels bearing many
white flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Grows wild in thickets
in China, Japan, Korea, and Russia. Cultivated mainly
in central and eastern regions of China.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Bai zhi contains a volatile oil

and the coumarins imperatorin, marmesin,

and phellopterin.

History & Folklore Bai zhi is first mentioned
in Chinese herbal medicine in the Divine
Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing) of
the Ist century ce. The famous military physician
Zhang Congzheng (| |50—| 228) classified bai zhi
as a sweat-inducing herb able to counter harmful
external influences on the skin, such as cold, heat,
dampness, and dryness.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The pungent,
bitter bai zhi is used for headaches and aching eyes,
nasal congestion, and toothache. Like its cousins
angelica (A. archangelica, see preceding entry) and
dong quai (A. sinensis, p. 63), it is warming and
tonic, and tt is still given for problems attributed

to “damp and cold” conditions, such as sores,
boils, and ulcers affecting the skin. Bai zhi also
appears to be valuable in treating the facial pain
of trigeminal neuralgia.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Annona squamosa (Annonaceae)

Custard Apple

Description Tree growing to 33 ft (10 m). Has
oblong- to lance-shaped leaves, greenish flowers,
and segmented green fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
America and the Caribbean, this herb is cultivated
throughout the tropics.

Parts Used Leaves, bark, fruit, seeds.
Constituents Custard apple contains fruit
sugars and mucilage.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In the West
Indies, the young shoots are used with peppermint
(Mentha x piperita, p. | 14) to relieve colds and
chills. In Cuban medicine, the leaves are taken to
reduce uric acid levels. The leaves, bark, and unripe
fruit are all strongly astringent and are used to
treat diarrhea and dysentery. The crushed seeds
are mixed with an inert powder and employed as
an insecticide.

Research Custard apple has been shown to
have antiprotozoal and anthelmintic (worm-
repelling) activity.

Anthemis cotula (Lamiaceae)
Mayweed,
Stinking Mayweed

Description Annual or perennial resembling
German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita, p. 77).

Has slightly hairy stems and large solitary daisy-type

flowers. As the name stinking mayweed suggests,
this plant has an unpleasant smell and taste.
Habitat & Cultivation This herb commonly
grows wild in Europe, the Americas, Australia,
New Zealand, and Siberia. The flowers and leaves
are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Flowers, leaves.

Constituents Mayweed contains sesquiterpene
lactones (including anthecotulide).

History & Folklore In his Irish Herbal of
1735, the herbalist K’Eogh states that mayweed
is ‘good for women with the falling down of the
womb, if they but wash their feet with a
decoction of it.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Although it looks
similar to German chamomile, mayweed is far less
effective as a medicine. It has been used as an
antispasmodic and to induce menstruation, and

was traditionally employed for supposedly
hysterical conditions relating to the uterus.
Cautions The whole plant can cause blistering
if applied fresh to the skin. Do not take during
pregnancy or if breastfeeding.

Anthriscus cerefolium (Apiaceae)

Chervil

Description Annual herb growing to 2 ft

(60 cm). Has finely grooved stems, opposite leaves,
and many small white flowers arranged in
compound umbels.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
Asia Minor, lran, and the Caucasus, chervil grows
freely in open areas. It is cultivated throughout
the world. The herb is gathered when in flower
in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Chervil contains a volatile oil,
coumarins, and flavonoids.

Chervil is an aromatic herb
that plays a role in healing
as well as in cooking.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

169

----- PAGE 172 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

170

History & Folklore A basket of chervil seeds
was one of the items found in Tutankhamun's tomb.
The herb is traditionally used as a ‘spring tonic” in
central Europe. Chervil is aromatic and is used
extensively in cooking.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Chervil is a good
remedy for settling the digestion. It is also used to
“purify the blood” and to help lower blood
Pressure, as well as being considered a diuretic.

Juice from the fresh plant is applied to various skin
conditions, including wounds, eczema, and abscesses.

Aphanes arvensis (Rosaceae)

Parsley Piert

Description Prostrate, hairy annual growing to
4 in (10 cm). Has small wedge-shaped leaves and
tiny green flowers in tufts.

Habitat & Cultivation Parsley piert is native
to Europe, North Africa, and North America. It
grows to an altitude of |,600 ft (500 m), thriving

in dry sites, including the top of walls. The herb is
harvested when in flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Parsley piert contains tannins.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Astringent,
diuretic, and demulcent, parsley piert is used to
treat kidney and bladder problems, especially kidney
stones. It is also frequently used in the treatment
of bladder stones (gravel), which cause pain and
irritation and obstruct urine flow. Best taken in an
infusion, the herb is also a useful remedy for cystitis
and recurrent urinary infections.

Aralia racemosa (Araliaceae)

American Spikenard

Description Aromatic perennial bush growing
to 6% ft (2 m). Has thick fleshy roots, large
leathery leaves, small greenish-white flowers, and
red or purple berries.

Habitat & Cultivation American spikenard
is native to North America. The root is unearthed
in summer or autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents American spikenard contains a
volatile oil, tannins, and diterpene acids.

History & Folklore The Cherokee made a
tea for backache from American spikenard, and
the cure was later adopted by New World settlers.
The Shawnee used it for flatulence, coughs,
asthma, and breast pain; the Menominee as a cure
for blood poisoning. The plant was included in the
US National Formulary from 1916 to 1965.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Many of
American spikenard's current uses come directly
from Native American precedents. The herb

encourages sweating, is stimulant, and detoxifying.
It is taken for rheumatism, asthma, and coughs.
Applied externally as a poultice, the herb is used
to treat a number of different skin conditions,
including eczema.

Related Species Wild sarsaparilla (A. nudicaulis)
is a North American relative used medicinally

in much the same way as American spikenard.
The leaves and stalks of two East Asian Aralia,

A. chinensis and A. cordata, are eaten as vegetables.
Cautions Do not take during pregnancy.

Arbutus unedo (Ericaceae)

Strawberry Tree

Description Evergreen shrub growing to 20 ft
(6 m). Has an upright stem with reddish bark,
leathery serrated leaves, white or pink bell-
shaped flowers, and round warty red fruit
resembling strawberries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
Mediterranean coasts, strawberry tree also grows
in western Ireland, Australia, and Africa. The leaves

are gathered in late summer and the fruit in autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, fruit.

Constituents Strawberry tree contains up
to 2.7% arbutin, methylarbutin, and other
hydroquinones, a bitter principle, and tannins.

Arbutin is powerfully antiseptic in the urinary system.

History & Folklore The fruit of strawberry
tree is used in preserves, but it is not palatable
fresh. The Latin unedo comes from un ede, meaning
“Tonly] one | eat.”

Strawberry tree’s leaves
and fruit are astringent
and antiseptic.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Strawberry tree
is valued as an astringent and antiseptic herb. Its
antiseptic action within the urinary tract makes it
a useful remedy for treating cystitis and urethritis.
Strawberry tree's astringent effect has been put to
use in the treatment of diarrhea and dysentery.
Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or if
suffering from kidney disease.

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (Ericaceae)

Uva-ursl,
Bearberry

Description Low-lying evergreen shrub growing
to 20 in (50 cm). Has long trailing stems, dark green
leaves that are glossy on the upper side, bell-shaped
pink flowers, and small glossy red berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Uva-ursi is native to
Europe, and naturalized throughout the northern
hemisphere up to the Arctic. It grows in damp
conditions in undergrowth, heathland, and
grassland. The leaves are gathered in autumn.
Parts Used Leaves, berries.

Constituents The leaves of uva-ursi contain
hydroquinones (mainly arbutin, up to 17%), tannins
(up to 15%), phenolic glycosides, and flavonoids.
Arbutin and other hydroquinones have an
antiseptic effect in the urinary tract.

History & Folklore The name uva-ursi means
“bear's grape” in Latin. Bears are fond of the fruit.
The plant is first documented in The Physicians of
Myddfai, a | 3th-century Welsh herbal text.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Uva-ursi is one of
the best natural urinary antiseptics. It has been used
extensively in herbal medicine to disinfect and astringe
the urinary tract in cases of acute and chronic cystitis
and urethritis. However, it is not a suitable remedy if
there is a simultaneous infection of the kidneys.
Research Experiments have shown that uva-ursi
extracts have an antibacterial effect. This action is
thought to be stronger in alkaline urine—thus the
efficacy of uva-ursi is likely to increase if it is taken
in combination with a vegetable-based diet.
Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or with
kidney disease. Unsuitable for children under |2.

It is generally advisable to take uva-ursi for no
more than 7-10 days at a time.

Arenaria rubra (Carophyllaceae)

Sandwort,
Sand Spurrey

Description Herbaceous, low-growing, sticky,
and hairy annual. Has small thin leaves and pale
pink flowers growing to A in (6 mm) across.

----- PAGE 173 -----
Habitat & Cultivation Found in the wild
throughout Europe, Asia, and Australia, sandwort
thrives in sandy and gravelly places, especially close
to the sea.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Sandwort is a
diuretic herb that is thought to relax the muscle
walls of the urinary tubules and bladder. Sandwort
is most commonly taken in the form of an infusion
to treat kidney stones, acute and chronic cystitis,
and other conditions of the bladder.

Related Species Seabeach sandwort

(A. peploides), a closely related northern plant,

is eaten by the Inuit of Alaska as a fresh, pickled,
or oil-preserved vegetable. In Iceland, this plant

is fermented and eaten in the same way as
sauerkraut. Rupturewort (Herniaria glabra, p. 219),
which is a European plant, has medicinal properties
that are similar to those of sandwort.

Argemone mexicana
(Papaveraceae)

Mexican Poppy,
Chicalote

Description Prickly annual growing to 3 ft

(| m). Has spiny white-veined leaves and large
yellow flowers with delicate petals.

Habitat & Cultivation Mexican poppy grows
in tropical regions from the southernmost U.S. to
South America. It favors dry soil and is often found
in tobacco fields.

Parts Used Aerial parts, latex, seeds.
Constituents Mexican poppy contains
isoquinoline alkaloids similar to those in the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum, p. 244).

History & Folklore Like most poppies, this
plant exudes a milky latex, which was traditionally
used in Ecuador to treat cataracts.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Commonly used
through much of Latin America, the whole plant
acts as a mild painkiller and sedative, and is taken

Mexican poppy flowers have expectorant properties
and are useful for treating coughs.

to relieve muscle ache, toothache, and neuralgic
pain. The fresh latex contains protein-dissolving
properties and is traditionally applied to warts

and cold sores. The flowers and seeds are mildly
expectorant and can be used to treat irritable
coughs and asthma.

Related Species In Hawaii, the latex of A. glauca
is also used to treat warts.

@ Cautions Excessive use can cause glaucoma.
Use only under professional supervision.

Arisaema spp. (Araceae)

Tian Nan Xing

Description Perennial herb growing to 3 ft

(| m). Has star-shaped leaves and purple-white

or green pitcher-like bracts.

Habitat & Cultivation Tian nan xing grows
wild in eastern Asia, especially in China, where it

is widely cultivated. The rhizome is unearthed in
autumn or winter.

Part Used Dried rhizome.

Constituents Tian nan xing contains
triterpenoid saponins and benzoic acid.
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Chinese herbal
medicine, tian nan xing is thought to encourage the
coughing up of phlegm. The dried rhizome is used
principally for chest problems. When prescribed
internally it is always combined with fresh ginger
root (Zingiber officinale, p. 155). The fresh rhizome
is only ever used externally, for ulcers and other
skin conditions.

Related Species Jack-in-the-pulpit or Indian
turnip (A. triphyllum), a North American species,

is a treatment for chest conditions.

@ @ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. The fresh rhizome is very toxic;

use only the dried rhizome internally.

Aristolochia clematitis
(Aristolochiaceae)

Birthwort

Description Unpleasant-smelling perennial with
heart-shaped leaves and tubular yellow flowers
with flattened lips.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to central

and southern Europe, birthwort is also found in
southwestern Asia. The root is unearthed in
spring or autumn.

Parts Used Root, aerial parts.

Constituents Birthwort contains aristolochic
acids, a volatile oil, and tannins. While stimulating
white blood cell activity, aristolochic acid is
carcinogenic and toxic to the kidneys (see Research).
History & Folklore Aristolochia means
“excellent birth,’ and refers to the traditional use

of the fresh juice to induce labor. Theophrastus
(c. 372-286 Bce) records that the plant was used
to treat disorders of the uterus, reptile bites, and
sores on the head.

Medicinal Actions & Uses No longer in use
today and banned in Europe and North America,
birthwort was formerly used to treat wounds,
sores, and snake bite. It has been taken after
childbirth to prevent infection and is also a potent
menstruation-inducing herb and a (very dangerous)
abortifacient. A decoction was taken to encourage
healing of ulcers. Birthwort has also been used for
asthma and bronchitis.

Research Birthwort illustrates the fact that though
a plant is natural, this has no bearing on its safety.
Aristolochic acid (present within birthwort) is a
kidney toxin that induces kidney failure and cancer
within the kidneys and urinary tract. However, the
slow rate of development of symptoms has meant
that in the past no connection was made between
these kidney symptoms and the herb. These toxic
effects apply to birthwort and all Aristolochia species
that contain aristolochic acid. Kidney failure and
death from aristolochic acid is relatively rare in the
West but is ‘reaching potentially epidemic
proportions in the East,’ according to research
published in Taiwan in 2013. Many species of
Aristolochia continue to be used in Oriental herbal
medicine in countries such as China, Japan, and
Taiwan. All species of Aristolochia are banned in
most Western countries.

@ Caution Under no circumstance use
birthwort or any Aristolochia species as medicines.

Armoracia rusticana syn.
Colchlearia armoracia
(Brassicaceae)

Horseradish

Description Perennial with a deep tap root,
leaves up to 20 in (50 cm) long, and clusters of
4-petaled white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
western Asia, this herb is widely cultivated for its
root, unearthed in autumn.

Parts Used Root, leaves.

Constituents Horseradish root contains
glucosilinates (mainly sinigrin), flavonoids,
asparagine, resin, and vitamin C. On being crushed,
sinigrin produces allyl isothiocyanate, an antibiotic
substance. The flavonoids have been shown to

be antioxidant.

History & Folklore Pliny (23-79 ce) probably
had horseradish in mind when describing a plant
that warded off scorpions, but for most of its long
history, horseradish has been used mainly as a
diuretic herb. It is a popular condiment, particularly
in Britain and central Europe.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

171

----- PAGE 174 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

172

Medicinal Actions & Uses Now undervalued
as a medicinal herb, horseradish has many healing
properties. It strongly stimulates digestion,
increasing gastric secretions and appetite. It is

a good diuretic and promotes perspiration,
making it useful in fevers, colds, and flu. It is also
expectorant and mildly antibiotic, and can be of
use in both respiratory and urinary tract infections.
A sandwich of freshly grated root is a home
remedy for hay fever. Externally, a poultice of the
root can soothe chilblains.

Cautions Over-consumption of horseradish
may irritate the gastrointestinal tract. The

plant should be avoided by those with low
thyroid function. A horseradish poultice may
cause blistering.

Arnica montana (Asteraceae)

Arnica

Description Aromatic perennial growing to

| ft (30 cm). Has downy egg-shaped leaves and
bright yellow daisy-like flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Arnica grows in
mountain woods and pastures in central

Europe, the Pyrenees, Siberia, Canada, and the
northwestern U.S. Its flowers are harvested
when in full bloom; the rhizomes after the

plant has died back in autumn.

Parts Used Flowers, rhizome.
Constituents Arnica contains sesquiterpene
lactones, flavonoids, a volatile oil that includes
thymol, mucilage, and polysaccharides.

History & Folklore Arnica has been used
extensively in European folk medicine. Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832), the German
philosopher and poet, drank arnica tea to ease his
angina in old age.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Best known as
an effective ointment and compress for bruises,
sprains, and muscle pain, arnica improves the local
blood supply and accelerates healing. It is anti-
inflammatory and increases the rate of reabsorption
of internal bleeding. Generally the plant is now
taken internally only at a homeopathic dilution,
principally for shock, injury, and pain. If taken as a
decoction or tincture, it stimulates the circulation
and is valuable in the treatment of angina and a
weak or failing heart, but it can be toxic even at
low dosage and thus is rarely used in this way.
Related Species In North America A. fulgens
is used.

2 @ Cautions Do not take internally. Do not
apply arnica preparations to broken skin. External
use may cause dermatitis. Arnica is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Self-help Uses Bruises, p. 304; Sprains, p. 3! 2;
Tired & aching muscles, p. 312.

Artemisia abrotanum (Asteraceae)

Southernwood

Description Strongly aromatic, shrubby
perennial, growing to 3 ft (| m). Has woody stems,
feathery silver-green leaves, and yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe, this herb is rare in the wild but is cultivated
for the perfume industry and, to a lesser extent,
for herbal medicine. The aerial parts are harvested
in late summer.

Southernwood leaves were traditionally placed among
clothing to repel moths.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Southernwood contains a volatile
oil, abrotanin, and tannins.

History & Folklore Much prized during the
Middle Ages and the Renaissance, southernwood
is now used infrequently in herbal medicine.

The closely related wormwood (A. absinthium,

p. 66) is considered superior. Like wormwood,
southernwood contains a strong volatile oil that
repels insects, and the leaves are placed among
clothes to repel moths. Mrs. Grieve (A Modern
Herbal, 1931) reports that in England “even in

the early part of the last century a bunch of
southernwood and rue [Ruta graveolens, p. 265]
was placed next to the prisoner in the dock as

a preventive from the contagion of jail fever.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Southernwood is
a bitter tonic. It strengthens and supports digestive
function by increasing secretions in the stomach
and intestines. An infusion of southernwood has
been given to children as a treatment for worms,
but this is not recommended without professional
supervision. Like other Artemisias, southernwood
stimulates menstruation and is commonly

taken to encourage the onset of irregular or
absent periods.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy.
Not suitable for children under |2 unless
prescribed professionally.

Artemisia capillaris (Asteraceae)

Yin Chen Hao

Description Medium-sized perennial herb with
an erect stem, thin feathery leaves, and clusters of
small composite flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Southeast
Asia, yin chen hao is cultivated in China and other
Far Eastern countries. The young plants are
gathered in spring.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Yin chen hao contains a volatile
oil and coumarins. The volatile oil is antifungal.
History & Folklore Yin chen hao has been
used in Chinese herbal medicine for more than
2,000 years. Its medicinal properties were first
listed in Divine Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong
Bencaojing), written in the Ist century cE.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Yin chen hao

is an effective remedy for liver problems, being
specifically helpful for treating hepatitis with jaundice.
Traditional Chinese medicine (see pp. 40-43) holds
that it is bitter and cooling, clearing ‘damp heat”
from the liver and gall ducts and relieving fevers.
Yin chen hao is also anti-inflammatory and diuretic.
It was formerly applied in the form of a plaster to
treat headaches.

Research Investigation undertaken in China
indicates that like many Artemisia species, yin chen
hao has a tonic and strengthening effect on the
liver, gallbladder, and digestive system.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy.
Unsuitable for children under | 2 unless
prescribed professionally.

Artemisia cina (Asteraceae)

Levant Wormwood

Description Shrubby perennial with long thin
leaves and tiny round tufts of flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is native
to the region stretching from the eastern
Mediterranean to Siberia. The unopened flower
heads are gathered from wild and cultivated plants.
Parts Used Flower heads.

Constituents Levant wormwood contains
santonin (a sesquiterpene lactone), artemisin, and
a volatile oil (with up to 80% cineole). Santonin

is directly toxic to roundworms and, to a lesser
extent, threadworms.

History & Folklore Levant wormwood was
known to the classical Greek world as a remedy
for intestinal worms, and it has been used for this

----- PAGE 175 -----
purpose ever since. Its active constituent, santonin,
was first isolated in 1830, and is now more
commonly employed than the plant itself.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Used almost
exclusively to expel worms, Levant wormwood

is strongly bitter and aromatic and has a tonic

and stimulant effect on digestion. The dried flower
heads are occasionally mixed with honey to
disguise their bitterness.

@ Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. Use
only under professional supervision, especially in
the case of children under 12.

Artemisia dracunculus (Asteraceae)

Tarragon

Description Aromatic perennial growing

to 3 ft (| m). Has narrow lance-shaped leaves

and small greenish flower heads in long

drooping clusters.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Russia,
western Asia, and the Himalayas, tarragon is now
cultivated as a culinary herb in gardens around the
world, The aerial parts are picked in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents ‘Tarragon contains tannins,
coumarins, and flavonoids, and up to 0.8% volatile
oil, consisting of up to 70% methylchervicol, which
is toxic and potentially carcinogenic.

Tarragon sweetens
the breath and
helps to stimulate
digestion.

History & Folklore Tarragon is widely used
as an herb in cooking. In French, it is sometimes
known as herbe au dragon, because of its reputed
ability to cure serpent bites.

Medicinal Actions & Uses While tarragon
stimulates digestion, it is reputed to be a mild
sedative and has been taken to aid sleep. With its
mild menstruation-inducing properties, it is taken
if periods are delayed. The root has traditionally
been applied to aching teeth.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. Do
not exceed the standard dose, and do not take
for longer than 4 weeks at a time.

Artemisia vulgaris (Asteraceae)

Mugwort

Description Shrubby perennial growing to
about 3 ft (1 m). Has dark green deeply indented
leaves and numerous clusters of small reddish or
yellow flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Mugwort is found in
temperate regions of the northern hemisphere. It
flourishes in open areas and along roads, and is
gathered in late summer just before flowering.
Parts Used Leaves, root.

Constituents Mugwort contains a volatile oil
(mainly caryophyllene), a sesquiterpene lactone,
flavonoids, coumarin derivatives, and triterpenes.
History & Folklore Known as Mater
Herbarum (mother of herbs), mugwort was used
from the earliest times in Europe and Asia. Roman
centurions reputedly placed it in their sandals to
keep the soles of their feet in good shape. The
Greek physician Dioscorides (| st century ce)
recounts that the goddess Artemis (who inspired
the plant's genus name) was believed to give
succor to women in childbirth. The | 3th-century

Welsh herbal The Physicians of Myddfai recommends:

“Ifa woman be unable to give birth to her child
let the mugwort be bound to her left thigh. Let
it be instantly removed when she has been
delivered, lest there should be hemorrhage.’

An |8th-century Spanish herbalist, Diego de
Torres, recommends the application of a mugwort
plaster below the navel as an effective method
of inducing labor. In the Isle of Man (UK), sprigs
of mugwort are worn at the annual open-air
parliamentary assembly, held on Tynwald Hill. In
China, mugwort has been valued for millennia.

It is the principal ingredient of moxa and is used
in moxibustion, a process in which heat from

a burning, cigar-shaped roll of chopped leaves

is applied to acupuncture points.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A digestive

and tonic herb, mugwort has a wide variety of
traditional uses. Milder in action than most other
Artemisia species, it can be taken over the long

term at a low dose to improve appetite, digestive
function, and absorption of nutrients. In addition,
it can be taken to encourage the elimination of
worms. Mugwort also increases bile flow and
mildly induces the onset of menstruation. The
European conception of mugwort as a uterine
stimulant is contradicted by Chinese usage, in
which it is prescribed to prevent miscarriage

and to reduce or stop menstrual bleeding.
Mugwort is also antiseptic, and has been used

in the treatment of malaria.

Caution Do not take mugwort during pregnancy.

Asclepias tuberosa
(Asclepiadaceae)

Pleurisy Root

Description Perennial, upright herb growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has narrow lance-shaped leaves
and spikes of numerous 5-petaled orange or
yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation This
herb is native to the southern U.S.
The root is unearthed in spring.
Part Used Root.
Constituents Pleurisy root
contains cardenolides and
flavonoids. It is estrogenic.
History & Folklore |n
North American herbal
medicine, pleurisy root

was considered a cure-all.

It was used to treat
conditions as diverse as
pleurisy, typhoid, pneumonia,
congestion, dysentery, colic,
eczema, and hysteria. The
Omaha ate the raw root for
bronchitis and other chest
conditions. Many tribes
thought pleurisy root was
a good remedy for hot
dry fevers.

Medicinal Actions

& Uses Though its most
specific usage is relieving the
pain and inflammation

of pleurisy, pleurisy root has
other applications. It is useful
for hot, dry, and tight conditions
in the chest. It promotes the
coughing up of phlegm,
reduces inflammation,
and, in addition,

Pleurisy root was used
by Native Americans
as a chest remedy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 176 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

helps reduce fevers by stimulating perspiration.
The root is also taken for the treatment of chronic
diarrhea and dysentery.

Related Species A. incarnata and A. syriaca
have both been used in Native American herbal
medicine to treat asthma.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy.
Excessive doses may cause vomiting.

Aspalathus linearis (Fabaceae)

Rooibos,
Red Bush

Description Variable shrub growing to 6% ft (2
m) in height, with green, needle-like leaves, yellow,
pea-like flowers, and small seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
South Africa, rooibos is now widely cultivated as

a commercial crop, particularly in the Cedarberg
mountain area. The seed is hard to germinate

and must first be scarified. The young leaves are
harvested once a year, chopped, and left to “sweat”
or ferment before being dried.

Parts Used Young leaves.

Constituents Rooibos contains polyphenols,
including flavonoids, with a low tannin content.
History & Folklore Rooibos was first used as
an appetizing tea by the Khoisan people, indigenous
to the Cedarberg region, but also as a sleep aid and
for headaches.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Drunk mostly

as a pleasant tasting, caffeine-free drink, rooibos,
like green tea, has significant antioxidant activity.
There is evidence to suggest that the fermented
leaves exert a protective effect on the heart and
circulation. In view of the herb's traditional use, it
might also prove helpful as a nighttime drink to
promote sound sleep.

Asparagus officinalis (Liliaceae)

Asparagus

Description Slender-stemmed perennial
growing to 6 ft (2 m). Has long fronds of
delicate needle-like leaves and bell-shaped
yellow-green flowers that produce small

bright red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to temperate
regions in Europe, North Africa, and Asia,
asparagus is cultivated worldwide as a vegetable.
The shoots grow into tender green (and, if
sheltered from sunlight, white) stems in spring. The
root is gathered after the shoots have been cut.
Parts Used Root, shoots.

Constituents Asparagus contains steroidal
glycosides (asparagosides), bitter glycosides,

asparagine, and flavonoids. Asparagine is a

strong diuretic.

History & Folklore To judge from ancient
Egyptian tomb drawings, asparagus was cultivated
as long ago as 4000 ce. In the Ist century ce,

the Greek physician Dioscorides recommended a
decoction of asparagus root to improve urine flow
and to treat kidney problems, jaundice, and sciatica.

Asparagus is used to treat a range of urinary problems.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Asparagus is a
strong diuretic that is useful for a variety of urinary
problems, including cystitis. It is also useful for
rheumatic conditions, helping to ‘‘flush” waste
products accumulated in the joints out of the
body in the urine. Asparagus is also bitter, mildly
laxative, and sedative.

Caution Do not take if you suffer from

kidney disease.

Asparagus racemosus
(Liliaceae)

Shatavari,
Indian Asparagus

Description Slender perennial fern growing

to 23 ft (7 m) in height. Shatavari has fronds of
needle-like leaves, tiny white flowers, and purple-
black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Himalayas and the Indian subcontinent, shatavari
grows wild in gravelly soils up to 3,900 ft (1,200 m)
above sea level. It is also found in western China.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Shatavari contains steroidal
saponins, alkaloids, and mucilage.

History & Folklore Shatavari is known as the
“Queen of herbs” in Ayurvedic medicine. Its name
literally means “100 spouses,” signifying the herb’s
ability to act as a sexual tonic and promote fertility.
Medicinal Actions & Uses A key Ayurvedic
remedy, shatavari is first and foremost a women’s
herb, aiding fertility and promoting conception, and

acting as a general reproductive and sexual tonic.
Shatavari can prove particularly helpful in easing
menopausal symptoms, such as hot flashes and poor
stamina. It appears to improve fertility in both men
and women, and may also be taken to treat
impotence. A tonic, strengthening herb, shatavari
supports immune function and has a place in the
treatment of immunosuppressed conditions.
Related Species Asparagus (A. officinalis, see
preceding entry) is a relative.

Asperula odorata syn. Galium
odoratum (Rubiaceae)

Sweet Woodruff

Description Perennial growing to |8 in (45 cm).
Has a square stem, whorls of narrow elliptical
leaves, and small white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Sweet woodruff is
native to Europe, and is also found in Asia and North
Africa. It grows in woodlands and shaded places.
The herb is gathered when in flower in late spring.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Sweet woodruff contains iridoids,
coumarins (0.6%), tannins, anthraquinones, and
flavonoids. The flavonoids act on the circulation
and are diuretic.

History & Folklore When it dries, sweet
woodruff takes on the scent of newly cut grass,
and it has often been placed between clothes

to impart its aroma. In his Irish Herbal of 1735,
K’Eogh records that “It is good in healing wounds

if bruised and then applied, and also in curing boils
and inflammations.” In Germany Maiwein, made

of sweet woodruff steeped in white wine, is drunk
to celebrate May Day.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Sweet woodruff
is considered tonic, with significant diuretic and
anti-inflammatory effects. Its coumarin and flavonoid
constituents make it helpful for varicose veins and
phlebitis. It has been used as an antispasmodic, and
it is given to children and adults for insomnia.

Sweet woodruff aerial parts are dried for medicinal use.

----- PAGE 177 -----
Cautions In excessive doses, sweet woodruff
can cause internal bleeding. Do not use if taking
conventional medication for circulatory problems,
or during pregnancy.

Aspidosperma quebracho-blanco
(Apocynaceae)

Quebracho

Description Tree growing to 100 ft (30 m).
Has thick corky bark, leathery leaves, and tubular
white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Quebracho is found
in the southern half of South America. The bark
and timber are used commercially.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Quebracho contains indole
alkaloids (including yohimbine) and tannins.
History & Folklore The name quebracho
comes from the Spanish quebrar (to break) and
hacha (axe), an allusion to the hardness of this
tree's wood.

Medicinal Actions & Uses With its
antispasmodic effect on the bronchial tubes,
quebracho is used therapeutically to treat asthma
and emphysema. It is also a tonic and reduces
fever. This herb is astringent and has been used
externally on wounds and burns.

Related Species Many other species of
Aspidosperma are grown for tanning and timber in
South America. Some are also considered fever
remedies. One, A. excelsum, is used to relieve gas,
stomach problems, and indigestion.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Quebracho is toxic in excessive doses.
It is subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

Atractylodes macrocephala
(Asteraceae)

Bai Zhu

Description Erect perennial herb growing to

2 ft (60 cm). Has alternate oval- to lance-shaped
leaves and purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Bai zhu is rare in the
wild. It is cultivated in China, Japan, and Korea. The
rhizome is unearthed in late autumn or winter.
Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Bai zhu contains a volatile oil
(0.35—1.35%), which includes atractylol, and the
lactones atractylenolide II and Ill. Atractylol has

a liver-protective activity.

History & Folklore The first record of the
use of bai zhu is in the Tang Materia Medica, written
in China in 659 ce. Later, it was one of the 4 herbs
that made up the “decoction of the 4 rulers,’ a

mixture prescribed by Wang Ji (1463-1539)

as a treatment for syphilis.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bai zhu has
traditionally been used as a tonic, building gi

(see p. 40) and strengthening the spleen. The
rhizome has a sweet, pungent taste, and is used

to relieve fluid retention, excessive sweating, and
digestive problems such as diarrhea and vomiting.
Combined with Baical skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis,
p. 134), it is employed to prevent miscarriage.

Avena sativa (Poaceae)

Oats

Description Annual grass growing to 3 ft (| m).
Has straight hollow stems, blade-like leaves, and
small spikes holding seeds (grain).

Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
Europe, oats are now grown in temperate regions
worldwide as a cereal crop. They are harvested in
late summer.

Parts Used Seeds, straw (dried stems).
Constituents Oats contain saponins, alkaloids,
sterols, flavonoids, silicic acid, starch, proteins
(including gluten), vitamins (especially B vitamins),
and minerals (especially calcium).

History & Folklore Formerly, oat straw was
used to fill mattresses, proving beneficial to those
suffering from rheumatism. In The English Physitian
(1652) Nicholas Culpeper states that ‘a poultice
made of meal of oats and some oil of bay helpeth
the itch and the leprosy.’ Earlier, in 1597, John
Gerard was less enthusiastic: “Oatmeal is good to
make a fair and well-coloured maid to look like a
cake of tallow.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Oats are best
known as a nutritious cereal, but they benefit health
in many other ways. Oat bran lowers cholesterol,

and an oat-based diet may improve stamina (see
Research). Oats, and oat straw in particular, are tonic
when taken medicinally. Oat straw is prescribed by
medical herbalists to treat general debility and a
wide variety of nervous conditions. The grains and
straw are mildly antidepressant, gently raising energy
levels and supporting an overstressed nervous
system. Oats are used to treat depression

and nervous debility, and insomnia in those
suffering from nervous exhaustion. Oats

are one of the principal herbal aids to
convalescence after a long illness. Externally,
the grain is emollient and cleansing, and a
decoction strained into a bath can help soothe
itchiness and eczema.

Research In research undertaken in
Australia, athletes who were placed on an oat-
based diet for 3 weeks showed a 4% increase
in stamina. Oats are thought to help maintain
muscle function during training and exercise.

Self-help Uses Depression & decreased
vitality, p. 316; Eczema, p. 300; Nervous
exhaustion & stress, p. 319; Poor sleep & nervous
exhaustion, p. 309.

Bacopa monnieri
(Scrophulariaceae)

Water Hyssop,
Brahmi (Hind) P

Description Creeping succulent perennial
growing to 20 in (50 cm). Has spatula-shaped
fleshy leaves and pale blue or white flowers on
long, slender stalks.
Habitat & Cultivation Water hyssop grows
in warmer temperate and tropical climates,
especially in southern Asia. It thrives in marshland,
developing into dense mats on mudflats and at the
edges of mangrove swamps.
Parts Used Aerial parts.
Constituents Water hyssop contains
triterpenoid saponins, including bacosides.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In India, water
hyssop is used principally for disorders of the
nervous system, such as neuralgia, epilepsy, and
mental illness, but it is also employed for a wide
range of other disorders, including indigestion,
ulcers, gas and constipation, asthma and bronchitis,
and infertility. In China, it is taken as a yang tonic for
impotence, premature ejaculation, infertility,
and rheumatic conditions. In Indonesia,
the plant is a remedy for filariasis
(a tropical disease caused by
worms). In Cuba, water hyssop
is used as a purgative,
and a decoction of the
whole plant is taken as
a diuretic and laxative.
The expressed juice is
mixed with oil and
applied as a rub for
arthritic pain.
Research
Indian research

suggests that water
hyssop improves mental
function, memory, and
concentration, as well as
reduces learning time.

Water hyssop, a swamp
plant, may have a tonic
effect on the brain.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

175

----- PAGE 178 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Ballota nigra (Lamiaceae)

Black Horehound

Description Straggling perennial growing to 3 ft
(| m). Has oval, toothed leaves and pink-purple
flowers in whorls at the base of the upper leaves.
Habitat & Cultivation This herb is found
throughout much of Europe, in North America,
and in Asia. It thrives in open areas, in pavement
cracks, and by roadsides, mostly near human
habitation. It is harvested when in flower in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Black horehound contains
diterpenoids, including marrubiin, flavonoids,
tannins, saponins, and a volatile oil.

History & Folklore The Greek physician
Dioscorides, writing in the Ist century ce,
recommends a plaster of black horehound leaves
and salt for dog bites. He also advocates a balm,
made from the dried leaves and honey, to purify
infected wounds and ulcers.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though long
considered a remedy for convulsions, low spirits,
and menopausal problems, black horehound is rarely
used today. Authorities differ over whether there is
any substance to claims for its earlier applications.
The herb is currently used by Anglo-American
herbalists as an antiemetic—preventing or reducing
nausea or vomiting. It is perhaps most useful when
nausea arises from disorders of the inner ear (such

Black
horehound
was an ancient
Greek remedy
for dog bites.

as Méniére's disease) as opposed to those of the
digestive system. Black horehound is thought to be
mildly sedative and antispasmodic, and is occasionally
taken for arthritis and gout.

Bambusa arundiaceae
(Poaceae)

Spiny Bamboo

Description Perennial tree, up to 00 ft (30 m),
with multiple stems from its base. Has narrow
pointed leaves and long loose clusters of yellow

to yellowish-green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
tropical Asia, especially in India and China, spiny
bamboo thrives up to 6,900 ft (2,100 m) above
sea level.

Parts Used Root, leaves, sprouts.
Constituents Spiny bamboo juice contains

high levels of silica.

History & Folklore Spiny bamboo is arguably
the most useful plant on earth, being used to make
scaffolding, rafts, furniture, paper, and dozens of
other items. It also has an important role to play

in herbal medicine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Various parts of
spiny bamboo are used in Indian and Ayurvedic
medicine. The root is considered astringent and
cooling, and is used to treat joint pain and general
debility. The leaves are used to stimulate
menstruation, and, being antispasmodic, to help
relieve period pain. They are also taken to tone and
strengthen stomach function and to expel worms.
They are reputed to be aphrodisiac. The young
sprouts are eaten to relieve nausea, indigestion, and
gas, and a poultice of the sprouts is applied to help
drain wounds that have become infected. The juice is
rich in silica, and aids in the strengthening of cartilage
in conditions such as osteoarthritis and osteoporosis.
Related Species In Chinese herbal medicine,
the juice and shavings of the black bamboo

(B. breviflora) are prescribed to counter “excess
heat,’ coughs, and a congested chest. Its roots are
used as a diuretic and to treat fevers.

Banisteriopsis caapi
(Malpighiaceae)

Ayahuasca

Description Woody vine growing to |00 ft

(30 m). Has smooth bark, oval leaves, and bunches
of small red or yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Ayahuasca is native
to jungles of the Amazon basin. It is cultivated by
indigenous peoples, but the wild herb is preferred
for medicinal use.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Ayahuasca contains beta-carboline
alkaloids (including harmine, harmaline, and delta-
tetrahycroharmine), which stimulate hallucinations.
History & Folklore In the Quechua language,
widely spoken in Peru and neighboring countries,
ayahuasca means ‘‘spirit of the dead,” indicating
the awesome powers traditionally attributed

to this plant. Another native Indian name is nixi
honi xuma, meaning ‘vine from which the vision
extract is made.’ Ayahuasca bark, which is often
used in combination with members of the Datura
genus, is the primary hallucinogen among many
Amazonian tribes, being prepared as part of
complex ritual ceremonies.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though known

as a powerful hallucinogen, ayahuasca is also a
medicine, being used as a remedy to cure a range of
diagnosed conditions. However, ayahuasca is usually
taken by the healer rather than by the patient. In
the shamanistic societies of the Amazon, ayahuasca
allows the healer to communicate with the spirit
world where illness arises, interceding on behalf of
the ill person and the community to restore health
and harmony to all—quite unlike the individualized
approach of Western medicine. Beyond its ability
to affect mood, the bark is emetic and purgative.
At low doses it is used as a mild detoxifier.

2 @ Caution Ayahuasca is taken traditionally as
part of a rich, complex ritual which affects the
experience produced. Medicinal use of this plant

is not advised.

Baptisia tinctoria (Fabaceae)

Wild Indigo

Description Herbaceous perennial growing to
3 ft (I m). Has a smooth stem, clover-like leaves,
and purplish-blue flowers in small terminal clusters.

Wild indigo, a North American plant, was used by the
Penobscot to treat wounds.

----- PAGE 179 -----
Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern parts
of North America, wild indigo grows from North
Carolina to southern Canada in dry, hilly woods.
Parts Used Root, leaves.

Constituents Wild indigo contains isoflavones,
flavonoids, alkaloids, coumarins, and polysaccharides.
The isoflavones are estrogenic, while the
polysaccharides are immunostimulant.

History & Folklore Wild indigo was
commonly used as a poultice by Native Americans
and New World settlers to treat snake bite. The
Mahicans used a decoction of the root to bathe
cuts and wounds.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wild indigo is

a strong antiseptic and immunostimulant, though at
more than moderate doses it can produce nausea
and vomiting. It is considered particularly effective
for upper respiratory infections such as tonsillitis
and pharyngitis, and is also valuable in treating
infections of the chest, gastrointestinal tract, and
skin. Its antimicrobial and immunostimulant
properties combat lymphatic problems—when
used with detoxifying herbs such as burdock
(Arctium lappa, p. 65), it helps to reduce enlarged
lymph nodes. Wild indigo is frequently prescribed
along with echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92) for
chronic viral conditions or chronic fatigue
syndrome. A decoction of the root soothes sore
or infected nipples and infected skin conditions.
When used as a gargle or mouthwash, the
decoction treats canker sores, gum
infections, and sore throats.
@ Caution Best taken on
professional advice.

Benincasa hispida syn. B. cerifa
(Cucurbitaceae)

Wax Gourd,
Petha

Description Hairy annual climber. Has 3-lobed
leaves, tendrils, and large yellow flowers. Produces
rounded fruit (gourds) about | 6 in (40 cm) long.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
Asia and Africa, this herb is cultivated in India

and China as a vegetable. The fruit is harvested

in late summer.

Parts Used Fruit rind, fruit, seeds.
Constituents Wax gourd contains saponins
and guaridine.

History & Folklore
Wax gourd has been used
as a food and medicine
for thousands of years. It
was first documented in
the Tang Materia Medica,
written in 659 ce.

Wax gourd

Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Chinese
herbal medicine, a decoction of wax gourd seeds
is used to “drain dampness” and “clear heat.” It is
given for chest conditions and vaginal discharge.
In combination with Chinese rhubarb (Rheum
palmatum, p. 126), it is prescribed for intestinal
abscesses. In Ayurvedic medicine, the seeds are
used to treat coughs, fever, and excessive thirst,
and to expel tapeworms. In an ancient Indian
recipe, the fruit juice is mixed with lime juice
(Citrus aurantiifolia) to prevent or stop bleeding.
Research The fruit appears to have a cancer-
fighting effect.

Berberis aquifolium, syn. Mahonia
aquifolium (Berberidaceae)

Oregon Grape

Description Evergreen shrub growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m). Has shiny leaves, clusters of small yellowish-
green flowers, and purple berries in autumn.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
North America, Oregon grape grows in the Rocky
Mountains up to 6,600 ft (2,000 m), and in woods
from Colorado to the Pacific coast. It is abundant
in Oregon and northern California.

Oregon grape has
evergreen leaves, clusters
of small yellow flowers,
and purple berries.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Oregon grape contains
isoquinoline alkaloids (including berberine,
berbamine, and hydrastine) and other alkaloids
of aporphine-type. These alkaloids are strongly

antibacterial and are thought to reduce the severity

of psoriasis.

History & Folklore Californian Native peoples
took a decoction or tincture of the bitter-tasting
root for loss of appetite and debility. In the 19th
and early 20th centuries, Oregon grape was an
important herb in the Physiomedicalist movement,
based on a combination of orthodox and Native
American practices. In this context, it was
prescribed as a detoxifier and tonic.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Oregon grape

is chiefly used for gastritis and general digestive
weakness, to stimulate gallbladder function, and to
reduce congestion problems (mainly of the gut). It
also treats eczema, psoriasis, acne, boils, and
herpes, and skin conditions linked to poor
gallbladder function.

Research Clinical use of extracts of Oregon
grape has been investigated in Germany, and there
is now evidence that the root can be effective in
relieving psoriasis. Extracts can be taken internally
and applied locally on the skin. The alkaloid
berberine is thought to prevent cell proliferation.
Related Species Barberry (B. vulgaris, see
following entry) is similar to Oregon grape in its
overall action, but it is generally stronger in the
effect it produces.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Berberis vulgaris (Berberidaceae)

Barberry

Description Thorny deciduous shrub growing
to 10 ft (3 m), with leathery leaves, yellow flowers,
and red berries in autumn.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
barberry is naturalized in North America. It is
cultivated as a garden plant and medicinal herb.
The bark is gathered in spring or autumn, and the
berries in autumn.

Parts Used Stem bark, root bark, berries.
Constituents Barberry contains isoquinoline
alkaloids, including berberine and berbamine.
Berberine is strongly antibacterial and amoebicidal,
and stimulates bile secretion. Berbamine is strongly
antibacterial. Many of the alkaloids are thought to
be cancer-inhibiting.

History & Folklore In ancient Egypt,

Berberis berries were macerated with fennel

seed (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212) to make a

drink for fevers. The berries are extremely

sour but have been used in the past to make
preserves—the French confiture d’épine vinette

is one example.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Barberry acts

on the gallbladder to improve bile flow and
ameliorate conditions such as gallbladder pain,
gallstones, and jaundice. Its strongly antiseptic
property helps amoebic dysentery, cholera, and
other similar gastrointestinal infections. The bark is

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

oe

177

----- PAGE 180 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

astringent, antidiarrheal, and healing to
the intestinal wall—in short, barberry
has a strong, highly beneficial effect on
the digestive system as a whole. Like
Oregon grape (B. aquifolium,
preceding entry) and goldenseal
(Hydrastis canadensis, p. 105),
barberry helps chronic skin
conditions such as eczema and
psoriasis. The decoction makes
a gentle and effective wash for
the eyes, although it must be
diluted sufficiently before use.
Research Berberine has
been shown to have antibiotic
activity against cholera,
giardia, shigella, salmonella,
and E. coli.

@ Cautions Take only
under professional
supervision. Do not
take during pregnancy.

Barberry berries were
traditionally used in a
decoction to treat
peptic ulcers.

Beta vulgaris (Chenopodiaceae)

Red Beet, White Beet *

Description Perennial with swollen edible red
or white root, upright shoots, large deep green
leaves tinged with red, and spikes of green-
petaled flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Sea beet (the wild
subspecies) is native to coastal regions of Europe,
North Africa, and Asia from Turkey to the East
Indies. Red beet is widely cultivated as a vegetable,
white beet as a vegetable and source of sugar.
Part Used Root.

Constituents White beet contains betaine,
which promotes liver regeneration and fat
metabolism. Red beet contains betanin (also
found in red wine), which is partly responsible
for its immune-enhancing effect, and inorganic
nitrate, which increases nitric oxide levels within
the body and thus lowers blood pressure.
History & Folklore The Materia Medica,
written by Dioscorides in the Ist century cE,
recommends the following prescription for
clearing the head and relieving earache—mix beet
juice with honey and sniff it up the nose.
Medicinal Actions & Uses White beet
acts to support the liver, bile ducts, and

<<

BETA VULGARIS

gallbladder, influencing fat metabolism and

#

helping to lower blood fat levels. Several
clinical trials have shown that red beet juice
(due to its high nitrate content) relaxes
the arteries and lowers blood pressure
in people with high blood pressure. A
glass a day of juice will help to support
lower blood pressure. Red beet juice is also
thought to support immune function and is
prescribed by herbalists as part of a cancer-
treatment regime—though large quantities
must be taken (up to | quart a day) to
be effective.

Betula pendula syn. B. verrucosa
(Betulaceae)

Silver Birch

Description Handsome slender deciduous
tree growing to a height of 100 ft (30 m). Has
pale grey papery bark, toothed leaves, and catkins
in spring.

Habitat & Cultivation Silver birch is
common in Europe, in temperate regions of Asia,
and in North America. It flourishes in woods and

thickets, and is also planted as a garden ornamental.

The leaves are gathered in late spring.

Silver birch is widespread in temperate regions throughout
the northern hemisphere. Its leaf oil is used to improve
eczema and psoriasis.

Parts Used Leaves, bark, sap.
Constituents Silver birch contains saponins,
flavonoids, tannin, and a volatile oil that includes
methy| salicylate.

History & Folklore Silver birch has been
used as a medicinal herb in northern Europe and
Asia since the earliest times. Its name is thought
to derive from the Sanskrit word bhurga, meaning
“tree whose bark is used for writing on.” In the
highlands of Scotland, silver birch sap—tapped in
the spring—was drunk as a treatment for bladder
and kidney complaints.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An infusion
made with silver birch leaves hastens the removal
of waste products in the urine, and is beneficial
for kidney stones and bladder stones (gravel),
rheumatic conditions, and gout. The leaves are
also used, in combination with diuretic herbs, to
reduce fluid retention and swelling. Silver birch
sap is a mild diuretic. The oil distilled from the
leaves is antiseptic and is commonly used in
preparations to treat eczema and psoriasis.

A decoction of silver birch bark can be used as

a lotion for chronic skin problems. The bark can
also be macerated in oil and applied to joints for
the relief of rheumatism.

Related Species The Himalayan silver

birch (B. utilis), a close relative, is used to

treat convulsions, dysentery, hemorrhages,

and skin diseases.

Bidens tripartita (Asteraceae)

Bur Marigold

Description Annual growing to a height

of 2 ft (60 cm). Has toothed lance-shaped

leaves, yellow button-like flower heads, and
burrlike fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Bur marigold

grows throughout Europe and in other

temperate regions, including Australia and

New Zealand. It is found in damp places and

near fresh water.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Bur marigold contains
flavonoids, xanthophylls, volatile oil, acetylenes,
sterols, and tannins.

History & Folklore The herbalist Nicholas
Culpeper, writing in 1652, extolled bur marigold:
“It helps the cachexia or evil disposition of the
body, the dropsy and yellow jaundice, it opens
obstructions of the liver, and mollifies the hardness
of the spleen being applied outwardly.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Little used in
medicine today, bur marigold is astringent and
diuretic, and employed to treat bladder and kidney
problems. It has a longstanding reputation for
staunching blood flow, and can be used for uterine
hemorrhage and conditions causing blood in the
urine. Bur marigold's astringency is beneficial in
counteracting peptic ulceration, diarrhea, and
ulcerative colitis.

----- PAGE 181 -----
Bignonia catalpa syn. Catalpa
bignonioides (Bignoniaceae)

Catalpa

Description Deciduous tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has large oval leaves in whorls of 3, white
flowers in conical clusters, and long thin fruits
(bean pods).

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
southeastern U.S., this tree is often planted in
gardens in southern and western Europe.

Parts Used Bark, fruit.

Constituents The bark contains catalpine,
and oxylenzoic and protocatechetic acids.
History & Folklore Catalpa bark was
formerly used as a substitute for quinine in
treating malaria.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The mildly
sedative and narcotic bark is used to treat
asthma, whooping cough, and other spasmodic
coughs in children. The distilled water of the
fruit, in combination with herbs commonly used
to treat eye problems, such as eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis, p. 209) and rue (Ruta graveolens, p. 265),
makes an effective eyewash for conjunctivitis and
other eye infections.

@ Caution Never use the roots, which are
highly poisonous.

Bixa orellana (Bixaceae)

Annatto

Description Evergreen tree growing to 26 ft
(8 m). Has large leaves, pink or white flowers, and
red fruit capsules containing red seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
forests in the Americas and the West Indies,
annatto is widely cultivated in similar climatic zones,
notably in India. Seeds are collected as the fruit
splits open.

Parts Used Seeds, leaves, root.

Constituents The seed pulp contains carotinoid
coloring principles.

History & Folklore In tropical South

America, the brilliant red pigment in the seed

pulp has traditionally been used in body painting.
Annatto dye is also used as a colorant for
margarine and cheese.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In the Caribbean,
annatto leaves and roots are used to make an
astringent infusion that is taken to treat fever,
epilepsy, and dysentery. The infusion is also taken
as an aphrodisiac. The leaves alone make an
infusion that is used as a gargle. The seed pulp
reduces the severity of blistering when applied
immediately to burns. Taken internally, the seed
pulp acts as a general antidote for poisoning.

Borago officinalis (Boraginaceae)

Borage

Description Hairy annual growing to 2 ft

(60 cm). Has a pulpy stem, large basal leaves, and
attractive blue flowers in summer.

Habitat & Cultivation Borage is a common
Mediterranean weed thought to originate from
southern Spain and Morocco. Often grown as a
garden herb, it is also extensively cultivated for its
seed oil.

Parts Used Aerial parts, flowers, seed oil.
Constituents Borage contains mucilage,
tannins, and pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which in
isolation are toxic to the liver. The seeds contain
up to 24% gamma-linolenic acid.

Borage’s attractive blue
flowers are traditionally
used to decorate salads.

History & Folklore The herbalist John Gerard,
writing in 1597, extols borage's virtues, “A syrup
made of the flowers of borage comforteth

the heart, purgeth melancholy, and quieteth

the phreneticke or lunaticke person.’ Gerard
also quotes the old saying, “I, Borage, bring
always courage.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses With its high
mucilage content, borage is a demulcent herb
and soothes respiratory problems. Its emollient
qualities make it helpful for sore and inflamed
skin—prepared either as freshly squeezed juice,

in a poultice, or as an infusion. The flowers
encourage sweating and the leaves are diuretic.
The seed oil is particularly rich in polyunsaturated
fats, and is superior in this respect to evening
primrose oil (Oenothera biennis, p. 241). Borage
seed oil is used to treat premenstrual complaints,
rheumatic problems, eczema, and other chronic
skin conditions.

Cautions Due to the presence of toxic
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, there is uncertainty over
borage's safety as a medicine. It is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries and should not be
taken internally. These restrictions and cautions
do not apply to borage seed oil.

Boswellia serrata (Burseraceae)

Boswellia,

Indian Olibanum,
Sallaki (Sanskrit)

Description Deciduous tree, growing to about
49 ft (15 m), with pale papery bark, compound
leaves, and clusters of small white flowers. The
gum resin exudes from the bark and is transparent
gold in color.
Habitat & Cultivation Boswellia grows in
dry, hilly regions of central and northern India.
Parts Used Gum resin, bark.
Constituents Boswellia contains triterpene
acids (including beta-boswellic acid), essential
oil, terpenols, monosaccharides, uronic
acids, sterols, and tannins.

History & Folklore Boswellia,

a close relative of frankincense
(B. sacra), has been used for many thousands of
years as an astringent and anti-inflammatory.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Boswellia
makes an effective mouthwash and gargle, the
antiseptic and astringent resin helping to heal
and tighten inflamed mucous membranes. Sore
throat, laryngitis, canker sores, and gum disease
ll all benefit. Boswellia is also markedly anti-
inflammatory and antiarthritic. This makes it
potentially useful in chronic inflammatory diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis,
and psoriasis. Other conditions that may benefit
Include gout, asthma, hay fever, and nettle rash.
Research Research into Boswellia is ongoing
and has expanded in recent years. Clinical trials
(mostly in India and Germany) indicate that
Boswellia counteracts inflammation in conditions
such as arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
The majority of trials noted that symptoms such
as pain, stiffness, and poor grip strength all
improved. There is increasing evidence that
Boswellia has marked pain-relieving activity, and
that it promotes stable blood glucose levels in
people with type 2 diabetes.

wil

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

179

----- PAGE 182 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

180

Brassica oleracea (Brassicaceae)

Cabbage

Description Biennial or perennial herb growing
to 8 ft (2.5 m). Has a thick stem, grey leaves, and
4-petaled yellow flowers. Within the first year,
it produces a greatly enlarged terminal bud
that develops into the familiar cabbage head
in late summer.
Habitat & Cultivation Wild cabbage is
native to coasts of the English Channel and the
Mediterranean. Cultivated varieties are produced
worldwide as a vegetable.
Parts Used Leaves.
Constituents Cabbage is rich in vitamins A, B,,
B,, and C.
History & Folklore The wholesome cabbage
is one of the oldest vegetables. According to Greek
myth, the plant sprang into existence from the
perspiration of Zeus. In a Greek ritual, cabbage was
given to expectant mothers shortly before birth in
order to establish good breast-milk
production. The Romans used
cabbage as an antidote,
- especially to alcohol, believing
it countered intoxication
and prevented or reduced a
hangover. They also used cabbage
leaves to cleanse infected wounds.
It is thought to have been cultivated
in Britain from around 500 ce.
One traditional method of making a cabbage
poultice, still used today, is to cut out the thick
midrib of a leaf and iron it, placing it while still hot
on the area to be treated.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Cabbage's best-
nown medicinal use is as a poultice—the leaves
of the wild or cultivated plant are blanched, crushed,
or chopped, and applied to swellings, tumors, and
painful joints. Wild cabbage leaves eaten raw or
cooked aid digestion and the breakdown of toxins
in the liver-—so the Romans’ eating it to ease a
hangover was in fact quite justified. Cabbage is also
detoxifying and helpful in the long-term treatment
of arthritis. The high vitamin C content of cabbage
has made it useful in the prevention of scurvy.
Caution A cabbage poultice may cause blisters
if left on for several hours.

Cabbage

Bryonia dioica syn. B. cretica
subsp. dioica (Cucurbitaceae)

White Bryony

Description Perennial climbing vine with fleshy
taproot up to 6 in (15 cm) thick. Straggling stem
with tendrils, greenish flowers, and red berries.
Habitat & Cultivation White bryony is native

to southern England and parts of Europe. The root
is dug up in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents White bryony contains
cucurbitacins, glycosides, volatile oil, and tannins.
The cucurbitacins kill cells and so act on tumors.
History & Folklore From prehistory to

the Middle Ages, the thick roots of white bryony
were cut into a human shape as a substitute (or
a counterfeit) for mandrake root (Mandragora
officinarum, p. 232), which was believed to afford
magical protection. The Greek physician Dioscorides
(Ist century ce) reports that the leaves, fruit, and
root of white bryony were applied to gangrenous
wounds. In medieval England, the plant was used to
treat leprosy.

White bryony has
antitumor and
antirheumatic
properties.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A powerful
cathartic and purgative, bryony is used with great
caution in herbal medicine today. It is principally
prescribed for painful rheumatic conditions. It may
be taken internally, or applied as a counterirritant,
causing swelling and increased blood flow to

the area. White bryony is also given for other
inflammatory conditions such as duodenal ulcers,
asthma, bronchitis, and pleurisy, and may be used
to reduce high blood pressure. The whole herb
has antiviral activity and research is now suggesting
that it acts as an adaptogen—helping the body to
adapt more effectively to stress and strain.

Related Species B. alba is used in homeopathic
medicine. Black bryony (Tamus communis) is an
unrelated plant with approximately similar uses.
2 @ Cautions Bryony is a toxic plant. Use
only under professional supervision. Do not take
during pregnancy.

Butea monosperma (Fabaceae)

Palas,

Flame of the Forest,
Bengal Kino

Description Deciduous tree growing to 49 ft
(15 m). Has 3-lobed leaves and large orange-red
flowers in clusters.

Habitat & Cultivation Palas is native to India
and Southeast Asia. It grows in forests and in open
areas to altitudes of 3,900 ft (1,200 m).

Parts Used Bark, flowers, leaves, gum, and seeds.
Constituents All parts of the tree except the
seeds contain tannins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The gum that
oozes from incisions made in palas bark is known
as Bengal kino. Mildly astringent, it is used as a
substitute for the kino derived from bastard teak
(Pterocarpus marsupium). Bengal kino is taken as

a decoction or a tincture for acid indigestion,
diarrhea, and dysentery, and used as a gargle for
sore throats and as a douche for vaginitis. Early
research suggests that the leaves and bark have
the potential to treat diabetes, and that the leaves
exert a beneficial action on diarrhea.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Caesalpinia bonduc
(Caesalpiniaceae)

Nikkar Nut

Description Thorny bush growing to 30 ft (9 m),
with spiny compound leaves, yellow flowers in
dense clusters, and prickly pods containing yellow
seeds (nuts).

Habitat & Cultivation Nikkar nut is pan-
tropical, common in both tropical Asia and Africa.
Its seeds are gathered when ripe.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents The seeds contain isoflavonoids,
diterpenes, a bitter principle, and a fixed oil (20%)
rich in linoleic acid (68%).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Nikkar seeds are
used to treat fevers and are taken as a tonic and
aphrodisiac. In India, they are often mixed with
black pepper (Piper nigrum, p. 250) for medicinal
use. The seeds are also taken for inflammatory
conditions such as arthritis. Roasted nikkar seeds
are used in the treatment of diabetes.

----- PAGE 183 -----
Related Species A decoction of the bark of

the Caribbean C. bahamensis is used for liver and
kidney infections, and a decoction of the wood
is used for diabetes. An infusion of the leaves of
C. pulcherrima (native to Asia and Africa) is taken
for liver problems and mouth ulcers.

Calamintha ascendens
syn. C. sylvatica, C. officinalis
(Lamiaceae)

Calamint

Description Mint-scented perennial growing
to 2 ft (60 cm). Has hairy oval leaves, and purple
flowers in late summer.

Habitat & Cultivation Calamint grows wild
in Europe and Asia from the British Isles eastward
to Iran, especially in the Mediterranean region. It
flourishes along roads and in dry places.

Parts Used Aerial parts.
Constituents Calamint contains a volatile oil
(about 0.35%) consisting mainly of pulegone.
History & Folklore In classical legend, calamint
had the power to drive away the Basilisk, a serpent
credited with the ability to kill with its gaze

or breath.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Calamint stimulates
sweating, and hence helps lower fevers. It also settles

gas and indigestion. It is expectorant, and is a good
cough and cold remedy. This range of applications
makes it a good medicinal herb for mild respiratory
infections. It should preferably be mixed with other
herbs such as yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56) and
thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143).

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Calluna vulgaris (Ericaceae)

Heather,

Ling

Description Small, branched shrub growing
to 2 ft (60 cm). Has tiny leaves and white or pink
to pale-purple flowers growing on spikes.
Habitat & Cultivation Heather grows in
temperate regions of the northern hemisphere.
It is found on heaths, moors, bogs, and in open
woods. The herb is gathered when in flower in
late summer.

Parts Used Flowering tips.
Constituents Heather contains flavonoids,
arbutin, tannin, and an alkaloid, ericodin. This
constituent has a strongly disinfectant effect
within the bladder and urinary tubules.

History & Folklore |f the “erica” that
Dioscorides discusses in his |st century ce Materia

Medica is indeed heather, as has been surmised, then
the flowering tips were used in classical times to
treat snake bite. Galen (13 |—200 ce) wrote of
the plant's ability to induce sweating. The rootstock
of heather is made into musical pipes, the foliage
provides mattress stuffing, and the flowers produce
a delicate honey. White heather is considered very
lucky, especially in Scotland.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Heather is a good
urinary antiseptic and diuretic, disinfecting the
urinary tract and mildly increasing urine production.
Besides its role in treating cystitis and inflammatory
bladder conditions, heather has been used to
treat kidney and bladder stones. Cleansing and
detoxifying, it is helpful for rheumatism, arthritis,
and gout. A hot poultice of heather tips is a
traditional remedy for chilblains and rheumatism.

Heather
flowering tips in a
poultice ease the
aches and pains
of rheumatism.

Camellia sinensis syn. Thea sinensis
(Theaceae)

Tea

Description Evergreen shrub clipped to 5 ft
(1.5 m) in cultivation, with leathery, dark green
leaves and fragrant white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Cultivated principally in
India, Sri Lanka, and China, tea has been grown
since the earliest times.

Parts Used Leaves, buds.
Constituents Tea contains xanthines, caffeine
(1-5%), theobromine, tannins including polyphenols,
flavonoids, fats, and vitamin C. Green tea contains
significant levels of polyphenols; black tea, which
is produced by a process of fermentation, has
lower levels.
History & Folklore In China and Japan
many rituals have developed around tea drinking.
Significantly it is mostly green tea that is drunk in
this way.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Due to its
astringency, tea is useful in digestive infections,
helping to tighten up the mucous membranes of
the gut and reduce looseness. A strong brew of tea
may be used to soothe irritated eyelids,
insect stings, swellings, and sunburn, and
in an emergency, if nothing better is at
hand, tea makes a serviceable treatment
for minor burns. In Ayurvedic medicine tea
is considered astringent and a nerve tonic.
The caffeine in tea may help to relieve
headaches, though less effectively than
coffee (Coffea arabica, p. 192). In light of
research, green tea is recognized as being a
much healthier drink than black tea.
Research Green tea’ strong antioxidant
activity is due to polyphenols, which give the
leaf potential as a cancer preventative.
The high intake of green tea in China and
Japan is thought to be partly responsible for
the low incidence of cancer in these countries.
Clinical trials indicate that green tea may help to
promote weight loss and treat hepatitis, and
there is the suggestion that it helps to prevent
tooth decay. A recent clinical trial indicated that
green tea has a genoprotective action, helping to
prevent degenerative changes within the body, and
potentially slowing the aging process. A 2013 clinical
trial found that green tea extract taken by women
for 4 months successfully shrank uterine fibroids.

Tea leaves are picked throughout the year and used both

as a beverage and medicinally.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHW YAHLO &

----- PAGE 184 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

182

Cananga odorata syn. Canangium
odoratum (Annonaceae)

Ylang-Ylang

Description Evergreen tree growing to 80 ft
(25 m). Has lance-shaped leaves and strongly
scented yellow-green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Indonesia
and the Philippines, ylang-ylang is cultivated in
tropical Asia and Africa.

Parts Used Flowers, essential oil.
Constituents The essential oil contains
linalool (1 |-309%), safrole, eugenol, geraniol, and
sesquiterpenes (including 15-25% germacrene).
History & Folklore The flowers are a traditional
adornment in the Far East. Their scent is thought to
have aphrodisiac qualities.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The flowers
and essential oil are sedative, antimicrobial, and
antioxidant. The oil has a soothing effect, and its
main therapeutic uses are to slow an excessively
fast heart rate and to lower blood pressure. With
its reputation as an aphrodisiac, ylang-ylang may be
helpful in treating impotence.

@ Caution Do not take the essential oil
internally without professional supervision.

Canella winterana syn. C. alba
(Canellaceae)

Canella,
Wild Cinnamon

Description White-barked tree growing to

49 ft (15 m). Has elliptical leaves, red flowers, and
purple-black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Caribbean and Florida, canella is found in coastal
swamps and scrubland. The bark is collected by
gently beating the branches.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Canella contains about

1% volatile oil (including eugenol, alpha-pinene, and
caryophyllene), alpha-aldehydes (including canellal),
resin, and mannitol.

History & Folklore Canella has for a long
time been used as a flavoring for tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum, p. 240).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Canella is cytotoxic
(kills cells), antifungal, and repels insects. It is also
aromatic, stimulant, and antiseptic. Canella is often
used in the West Indies and Latin America as a
substitute for cinnamon (Cinnamomum spp.,

p. 81). The infusion is drunk for its pleasant flavor
and tonic effect (the bark is considered a sexual
stimulant). Canella is also used for stomach problems
and indigestion.

Cannabis sativa (Cannabinaceae)

Marijuana,
Huo Ma Ren (Chinese)

Description Erect, branching annual growing to
13 ft (4m). Has fine, serrated, segmented leaves.
Both male and female plants flower; the female
plant produces seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Caucasus,
China, Iran, and northern India, marijuana is culti-
vated the world over, both legally (for the fiber and
seeds) and illegally (for use as a recreational drug).
Parts Used Flowering tops of female plants, seeds.
Constituents Marijuana contains
over 60 different types of cannabinoids,
including THC (delta
9-tetrahydrocannabinol).
It also contains flavonoids,
volatile oil, and alkaloids. It
is the only plant to contain
THC, one of the main
psychoactive
constituents. The
seed oil contains
approximately 55%
inoleic acid, 20% alpha-
inolenic acid and |.5% gamma-
inolenic acid.

History & Folklore

In ancient Egypt, marijuana was used to treat
inflammations of the eye and ‘‘to cool the uterus’
First records of marijuana’ use in India date back
to about 800 sce, where it is recommended
for congestion. Famously, Queen Victoria took
marijuana as an analgesic—in the | 9th century
the plant was a standard painkiller for menstrual
pain and cramps. From 1840 to 1900, over 100
Papers were published recommending marijuana
as a medicine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses |n view of its

long history as a medicinal treatment, it is hardly
surprising that marijuana has, at one time or another,
been recommended for almost every illness. As
an analgesic, it appears to relieve pain with minimal
side effects, being particularly helpful for cancer and
AIDS patients undergoing chemotherapy. For those
suffering from multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, and
other muscular illnesses, marijuana can reduce
neurological overactivity and muscle spasm. The
plant provides effective treatment for glaucoma,
in which pressure within the eye is abnormally
high, and is hypotensive, lowering blood pressure.
Marijuana relieves asthma, menstrual pains, the pain
of childbirth, and of arthritis and rheumatism, and
may have value as an antidepressant. It encourages
and induces sleep. The seeds are used in Chinese
medicine as a strong but well-tolerated laxative,
especially for constipation in the elderly; and as a

Marijuana leaf

dietary supplement to provide a balanced and
healthy supply of polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Research Modern research shows marijuana to
be a sedative, an anti-inflammatory agent, and an
analgesic as effective as codeine. Research has
focused on the constituent THC, but it is clear that
the complex of constituents within marijuana has a
significantly wider range of applications. Clinical
studies from 1975 onwards have shown that the
cannabinoids are powerfully antiemetic, especially
in those having chemotherapy. To varying
degrees, clinical trials indicate that marijuana or its
cannabinoids relieves symptoms in multiple
sclerosis (such as tremor, muscle spasm, and poor
coordination), in spinal cord injuries, epilepsy,
glaucoma, chronic pain, and loss of appetite. Now
that medical marijuana is legally available
in anumber of U.S. states, there is
accumulating evidence of just how
effective the herb, and extracts of it, are in
relieving pain. A 2015 article in the Journal of
the American Medical Association found "30%
or greater improvement in pain with
cannabinoid compared to placebo,”
ie., marijuana extracts on average
produced a 30% or more improvement
when compared to an inert substance. It also
found that availability of medical-grade marijuana
was associated “with a 15-35% decrease in
substance abuse admissions.’ Not only is medical
marijuana a valuable analgesic, it also helps to
prevent addiction to other painkillers, in particular
opioids, such as codeine and morphine.
Caution Marijuana is a controlled substance in
North America. Research your local laws.

Capparis spinosa (Capparaceae)

Caper

Description Shrub growing to 3 ft (| m), with
spiny trailing stems, fleshy oval leaves, green buds,
large white flowers, and red berries in autumn.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
lediterranean region, caper thrives in open
areas, often growing on stony terrain. The buds
are harvested before the flowers open and are
pickled for culinary use.

Parts Used Root bark, bark, flower buds.
Constituents Contains phenolic compounds.
History & Folklore Though much favored as a
piquant food by the ancient Greeks, capers were
said to disagree with the stomach. They remain a
popular condiment to this day.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The unopened
flower buds are laxative and, if prepared correctly
with vinegar, are thought to ease stomach pain.
The bark is bitter and diuretic and can be taken
immediately before meals to increase the appetite.

----- PAGE 185 -----
Caper’s buds pickled
with vinegar have been
used as a condiment
since ancient times.

The root bark is purifying and stops internal
bleeding, It is used to treat skin conditions,
capillary weakness, and easy bruising, and is also
used in cosmetic preparations. A decoction of the
plant is used to treat yeast and vaginal infections
such as candidiasis.

Related Species A decoction of the North
American C. cynophallophora is taken to encourage
the onset of menstruation, and is used as a gargle
for throat infections.

Capsella bursa-pastoris syn. Thlaspi
bursa-pastoris (Brassicaceae)

Shepherd's Purse

Description Annual or biennial with an erect
stem, rosette of basal leaves, 4-petaled white
flowers, and heart-shaped seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Thought to be native
to Europe and Asia, shepherd's purse is now found
throughout most temperate regions, and grows
profusely as a weed. It is harvested throughout
the year.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Contains flavonoids, polypeptides,
choline, acetylcholine, histamine, and tyramine.
History & Folklore This herb’s name derives
from the appearance of the seed pods, which
resemble heart-shaped purses. During the First
World War, when the standard herbal medicines

for staunching blood—goldenseal (Hydrastis
canadensis, p. 105) and ergot (Claviceps
purpurea)—were unobtainable in Britain,
shepherd's purse was used as an alternative.
Medicinal Actions & Uses One of the best
remedies for preventing or arresting hemorrhage,
shepherd's purse has long been a specific treatment
for heavy uterine bleeding. While weaker-acting in
this respect than ergot, shepherd's purse has none
of ergot's toxicity and is better tolerated by the body.
It may be used for bleeding of all kinds—from
nosebleeds to blood in the urine. An astringent herb,
it disinfects the urinary tract in cases of cystitis, and
is taken for diarrhea. It is used in Chinese medicine
to treat dysentery and eye problems.

Research Reports suggest that the plant is
anti-inflammatory and reduces fever.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.
Self-help Use Heavy menstrual bleeding, p. 315.

Cardiospermum spp. (Sapindaceae)

Balloon Vine

Description Deciduous perennial climbers
growing to 10 ft (3 m), with compound leaves,
small white flowers, and black seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Balloon vine is found
growing in tropical regions around the world.
Parts Used Root, leaves, seeds.

r
")

La

4

Balloon vine leaves are
applied to relieve aching joints.

Constituents Most Cardiospermum species
contain cyanogenic glycosides.

History & Folklore Native Amazonians string
balloon vine seeds into armbands that are worn to
ward off snakes.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In Indian herbal
medicine, balloon vine root is used to bring on
delayed menstruation and to relieve backache and
arthritis. The leaves stimulate local circulation
and are applied to painful joints to help speed
the clearing of toxins. The seeds are also thought
to help in the treatment of arthritis. The plant as

a whole has sedative properties.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Carica papaya (Caricaceae)
Papaya

Description Herbaceous tree growing very
rapidly to 26 ft (8 m). Has segmented leaves,
yellow flowers, and large, black-seeded yellow

to orange fruits weighing up to | | Ib (5 kg).
Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
America, papaya is now cultivated in tropical regions
throughout the world.

Parts Used Fruit, latex, leaves, flowers, seeds.
Constituents The fruit contains proteolytic
enzymes (papain and chymopapain), and traces
of an alkaloid, carpaine. Papain, which is found in
the milky white latex that flows from incisions

in the unripe fruit, is a protein-dissolving enzyme
that aids digestion.

History & Folklore Papaya juice, shoots,

and latex were used in Mayan herbal medicine. In
tropical Latin America, the leaves are used as a
meat tenderizer.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Papaya’ main
medicinal use is as a digestive agent. The leaves
and the fruit can both be used (the unripe fruit is
especially effective). The latex from the trunk of
the tree is applied externally to speed the healing
of wounds, ulcers, boils, warts, and cancerous
tumors. The seeds are used as a gentle purgative
for worms. The latex has a similar but more violent
effect. The flowers may be taken in an infusion to
induce menstruation, and a decoction of
the ripe fruit is helpful for
treating persistent
diarrhea and
dysentery in
children. The ripe
fruit is mildly
laxative and the

leaves are used
to dress wounds.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 186 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

184

Carthamus tinctorius (Asteraceae)

Safflower,
Hong Hua (Chinese)

Description Annual herb growing to 3 ft (90
cm). Has long spiny leaves with 6 oblong-oval
leaflets, and groups of yellow flowers arising from
the leaf axils.

Habitat & Cultivation Thought to be native
to Iran and northwestern India, this herb is also
found in North America and the Far East. It grows
in open areas and is gathered in summer.

Parts Used Flowers, seeds, seed oil.
Constituents Safflower contains lignans,
polysaccharides and a volatile oil. The seeds
contain a fixed oil, up to 80% linoleic acid.
History & Folklore In | 9th century North
American herbal medicine, safflower was used
to induce sweating, to promote the onset of a
menstrual period and as a treatment for measles.
Safflower flowers are falsely sold as saffron
(Crocus sativus, p. 89).

Medicinal Actions & Uses In Chinese
herbal medicine, the flowers are given to stimulate
menstruation and to relieve abdominal pain. The
flowers are also used to cleanse and heal wounds
and sores and to treat measles. In the Anglo-
American herbal tradition, the flowers are given
as a treatment for fever and skin rashes. The
unpurified seed oil is purgative.

Research Chinese research indicates that
safflower flowers can reduce coronary artery
disease, and lower cholesterol levels. Safflower
contains a polysaccharide that has been shown to
stimulate immune function in mice. Safflower oil
also lowers cholesterol levels.

Caution Do not take the flowers or seeds during
pregnancy (seed oil is safe).

Carum carvi (Apiaceae)

Caraway

Description Aromatic annual growing to 2 ft
(60 cm). Has ridged stem, feathery leaves, and
umbels of white flowers in midsummer. Exploding
capsules each contain 2 small narrow seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Caraway grows wild
in Europe, North Africa, and Asia. It prefers sunny
sites up to 6,600 ft (2,000 m) above sea level. It
is cultivated in Europe, Russia, North Africa, and
the US, and the seeds are harvested ripe in

late summer.

Parts Used Seeds, essential oil.
Constituents Caraway contains a volatile oil
high in carvone (about 50%) and limonene. It also
contains a fixed oil, flavonoids, polysaccharides,
proteins, and furanocoumarins.

History & Folklore Caraway seed is
“conducive to all the cold griefs of the head and
stomach... and has a moderate quality whereby
it breaketh wind, and provoketh urine” (Nicholas
Culpeper, The English Physitian, 1652). The seeds
are commonly used in cooking.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Caraway is similar
in action to anise (Pimpinella anisum, p. 248)

and fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212). Being
antispasmodic, the seeds soothe the digestive tract,
acting directly on the intestinal muscles to relieve
colic and cramps as well as bloating and flatulence.
They sweeten the breath, improve appetite, counter
heart irregularity caused by excess digestive gas,
and ease cramping period pain. In addition, the
seeds are expectorant and tonic and are frequently
used in bronchitis and cough remedies, especially
those for children. Caraway has a reputation for
increasing breast-milk production. The diluted

essential oil is useful for scabies.
Research In a German clinical trial (1999),
patients with dyspepsia were given a combination

of peppermint and caraway essential oils. Overall,
patients experienced a significant reduction

in symptoms.

Caution Do not use the essential oil internally
except under professional supervision.

Caraway is
antispasmodic,
diuretic, and
expectorant. It is
amild remedy,
suitable for children.

Castanea sativa (Fagaceae)

Sweet Chestnut

Description Deciduous tree growing to a height
of 100 ft (30 m). Has smooth silver-grey bark,
lance-shaped dark green leaves, male and female
catkins, and spiny yellow-green seed cases containing
2-3 glossy brown nuts.

Sweet chestnut nuts are a nutritious food and the leaves are
useful for treating coughs.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean, Asia Minor, and the Caucasus,
sweet chestnut grows freely across Europe,
including Britain. It is cultivated for its timber and
for its nuts, which are collected in the autumn.
Parts Used Leaves, bark.

Constituents Sweet chestnut contains tannins,
plastoquinones, and mucilage.

History & Folklore Tradition has it that the
sweet chestnut tree was carried from Turkey to
Sardinia and from there it subsequently spread
through Europe, arriving in Britain with the
Romans. The nuts are a nutritious foodstuff that
can be roasted, candied, or made into a flour.

The flowers are sometimes added to blends of
aromatic tobaccos.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An infusion of
sweet chestnut leaves is taken to treat whooping
cough, bronchitis and bronchial congestion. The
preparation tightens the mucous membranes and
inhibits racking coughs. A decoction of leaves or bark
is also valuable as a gargle for sore throats, and may
be taken for diarrhea. The leaves are used in the
treatment of rheumatic conditions, to ease lower
back pain and also to relieve stiff joints or muscles.
Related Species The Mohicans in North
America used an infusion obtained from American
chestnut leaves (C. dentata) to treat whooping
cough. In his Natural History of North Carolina (1737),
John Brickell reports that the “‘leaves or bark of the
tree boiled in wine are good against the bloody
flux [excessive bleeding].”

----- PAGE 187 -----
Catha edulis (Celastraceae)

Khat,
Catha

Description Tree growing to 49 ft (15 m). Has
reddish twigs, oval leathery leaves, and small yellow
or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Middle
East and the Horn of Africa, khat prefers grassland
and arid conditions. It is cultivated in Ethiopia,
Somalia, East Africa, and the Arabian peninsula.
Parts Used Leaves, twigs.

Constituents Khat contains alkaloids similar to
those in Ephedra species—norpseudoephedrine
(up to 1%) and ephedrine, tannins, and a volatile
oil. Ephedrine-type alkaloids strongly stimulate
the central nervous system, are antiallergenic,
and suppress the appetite.

History & Folklore Khat is taken in some
African and Middle Eastern countries as a stimulant,
tonic, and appetite suppressant. Infused, smoked,
or chewed, khat produces an effect somewhat
similar to that of coca leaves (Erythroxylum coca,
p. 206). Whether khat is addictive is unclear, but
withdrawal can produce lethargy.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Mainly used as a
social drug, khat is also chewed fresh or taken in an
infusion to treat ailments such as malaria. In Africa, it
is taken in old age, stimulating and improving mental
function. Khat is used in Germany to counter obesity.
@ Cautions Khat may cause headaches, raised
blood pressure, and general overstimulation if used
more than a few weeks at a time. Do not take
during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Caulophyllum thalictroides
Berberidaceae)

Blue Cohosh

Description Upright perennial growing to 3 ft

(| m) with large, 3-lobed leaves, yellow to purple
flowers, and striking blue berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Blue Cohosh grows
wild in much of eastern North America from
janitoba to Alabama, preferring woodland valleys
and damp, north-facing slopes. It is mainly wild-
harvested but is also cultivated commercially.
Parts Used The root and rhizome are harvested
in the autumn.
Constituents Blue cohosh contains alkaloids,
steroidal saponins, and resin.

History & Folklore “Cohosh" is an Algonquin
name, and blue cohosh was a popular herb with
many Native American tribes. Though it was taken
by both sexes to treat genitourinary problems, it
was primarily considered a women's herb.

=

Blue cohosh is mainly wild-harvested but is also
cultivated commercially.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Current
medicinal uses of blue cohosh are not that
different from the past—the root is still valued
as a women's remedy. It is often prescribed as

a uterine tonic, bringing relief from uterine and
ovarian pain, while regulating to improve menstrual
blood flow. The herb also has anti-inflammatory
activity and may be used in treatments for
arthritic and rheumatic conditions.

@ Cautions Only take under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy or while
breastfeeding. The plant can cause contact dermatitis.

Cedrus spp. (Pinaceae)

Cedar

Description Cedar of Lebanon (C. libani) is a
majestic flat-topped tree growing to 130 ft (40 m).
It has dark green needle-like leaves and oval cones.
African cedar (C. atlantica) grows to 115 ft (35 m).
Habitat & Cultivation Cedar of Lebanon

is native to mountain forests of Lebanon, Israel,
and southwest Turkey. Atlas cedar is native to
the Atlas Mountains of Morocco, growing from
4,600-7,200 ft (1,400—2,200 m) above sea level.
Parts Used Leaves, wood, essential oil.
Constituents The essential oil of Atlas cedar
wood contains mainly alpha-pinene (up to 79%).
History & Folklore Cedar of Lebanon is
thought to have been used in building Solomon's
Temple and the Hanging Gardens of Babylon.
The oil has been used for thousands of years in
incense, perfumes, and embalming.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cedar of Lebanon
is antiseptic and expectorant, acting to disinfect the
respiratory tract. Cedarwood essential oil has been
used for thousands of years for perfumes and for
embalming. It is most commonly distilled from Atlas
cedar and eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginicus).
The oil is strongly antiseptic, astringent, diuretic,
expectorant, and sedative. Diluted and massaged

into the skin, it treats congestion, chest infections,
and cystitis. It is used to treat skin wounds and ulcers.
Caution Do not take essential oil of cedar
internally except under professional supervision.

Celtis australis (Ulmaceae)

European Nettle Tree

Description Dome-shaped deciduous tree
growing to 80 ft (25 m). Has lance-shaped leaves,
green flowers, and small round purple-black fruits.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean region and southwestern Asia,
European nettle tree is also planted as a border
tree in Italy and France.

Parts Used Leaves, fruit.

Constituents European nettle tree contains
tannins and mucilage.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Due to their
astringent properties, both the leaves and the fruit
of European nettle tree may be taken as a decoction
to reduce heavy menstrual and intermenstrual
uterine bleeding. The fruit and leaves may be used
to astringe the mucous membranes of the gut in
peptic ulcers, diarrhea, and dysentery.

Centaurea cyanus (Asteraceae)

Cornflower

Description Annual or biennial plant growing
to 3 ft (90 cm). Has a multi-branched stem, a basal
rosette of leaves, and sky-blue flowers in summer.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Near
East, cornflower grows wild in all temperate regions,
often in cornfields. The flowers are gathered just
after they open.

Parts Used Flowers, seeds, leaves.
Constituents Cornflower contains flavonoids,
sesquiterpene lactones (including cnicin), acetylenes,
and coumarins. Cnicin is slightly antibiotic.
History & Folklore Cornflower's medicinal
properties were first mentioned in the | 2th-century
writings of Hildegard of Bingen. Later, the herbalist
Pierandrea Mattioli (1501-1577) recommended it
on the basis of the Doctrine of Signatures, which
held that a plant's appearance indicated the ailments
it would cure. Cornflower's deep blue color
symbolized healthy eyes, and for this reason it
became a treatment for eye ailments. (In France,
the plant is called casse-lunette, or “break glasses.”)
Medicinal Actions & Uses Cornflower is still

used in French herbal medicine as a remedy for the
eyes (the strained infusion is used as an eyewash,
and the petals applied as a poultice), but opinion
differs as to its efficacy. The petals are also taken as
a bitter tonic and stimulant, improving digestion

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

a

5

----- PAGE 188 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

&

186

and possibly supporting the liver as well as improving
resistance to infection. The seeds have been used
as a mild laxative for children. A decoction of the
leaves is used to treat rheumatic complaints.
Related Species Greater knapweed (C. scabiosa)
formed part of the medieval salve, an ointment
applied to heal wounds and to treat skin infections.
Self-help Use Conjunctivitis, p. 310.

Cephaelis ipecacuanha (Rubiaceae)

Ipecac

Description Small s
growing to | ft (30 cm). Has a few oblong leaves,
small white flowers, and purple-black berries.
Habitat & Cultivation This herb grows mainly
in Brazil. Cultivation has been attempted in Southeast
Asia with limited success. The root of 3-year-old plants
is unearthed when the plant is in flower.

Parts Used Root, rhizome.

Constituents Ipecac contains isoquinoline
alkaloids, tannins, and glycosides. The alkaloids are
expectorant and, at a larger dose, cause vomiting
and diarrhea. They are also strongly amebicidal.
History & Folklore Ipecac came to Europe
in 1672, and achieved fame as a cure

for dysentery. But the cure was not without
controversy. It appeared to work well in some cases
but to have no effect in others. Now it is possible
to see why. There are two types of dysentery—
amebic and bacillary. While the herb is strongly
amebicidal, it has little effect against bacilli.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Though a highly
effective emetic (even moderate doses of ipecac will
stimulate vomiting until the contents of the stomach
are cleared), it is now rarely used in conventional
medicine as safer substitutes have been developed.
Ipecac continues to be a common ingredient in patent
over-the-counter cough medicines, as its strong
expectorant action helps to clear phlegm and ease
irritable coughs. It is used in the treatment of
bronchitis and whooping cough. Ipecac is also still used
for amebic dysentery.

@ Cautions Do not use the root or rhizome.
Take formulations containing ipecac carefully and
only as instructed on the label. Several deaths have
resulted from overdose.

rub with a slender stem

Ceratonia siliqua (Fabaceae)

Carob

Description Evergreen tree growing to a height
of 30 ft (10 m). Has compound leaves, green
flowers, and large violet-brown fruit (bean pods).
Habitat & Cultivation Native to south-
eastern Europe, western Asia, and North Africa,
carob flourishes in poor soil in warm temperate

climates; it is said to “want sight of the sea.” It is
cultivated for its fruit, and harvested in late summer
or autumn.

Parts Used Fruit, bark.

Constituents The fruit contains up to 70%
sugars, fats, starch, proteins, vitamins, and tannins.
History & Folklore In ancient Egypt, carob
pods were combined with porridge, honey, and
wax as a remedy for diarrhea. They also featured in
recipes for expelling worms, and treating poor
eyesight and eye infections.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Carob pods are
nutritious and, due to their high sugar content,
sweet-tasting and mildly laxative. A decoction of
the pulp can be used as an antidiarrheal, gently
helping to cleanse and relieve irritation within

the gut.

Carob seeds were used to
weigh gold and gave rise
to the word “carat.”

Cetraria islandica (Parmeliaceae)

Iceland Moss

Description Yellow-green lichen growing in
undulating, leathery tufts up to 3 in (8 cm) across.
Habitat & Cultivation Iceland moss is native
to northern and alpine areas of Europe. It flourishes
in sub-Arctic and mountainous regions on rocks
and on the bark of trees, especially conifers. It is
harvested throughout the year.

Part Used Whole plant.

Constituents Iceland moss contains lichen acids
(including usnic acid) and about 50% polysaccharides.
Usnic acid and the other lichen acids are powerfully
antibiotic. The polysaccharides are antiviral.
History & Folklore Iceland moss has been
used since ancient times as a cough remedy, and
has also been used in European folk medicine as

a cancer treatment.

Iceland moss is used
to ease coughs and
treat congestion. It
also has a soothing
and bitter tonic effect
on the digestive tract.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Strongly demulcent,
Iceland moss soothes the mucous membranes of
the chest, counters congestion, and calms dry and
Paroxysmal coughs, being particularly helpful as a
treatment for elderly people. Iceland moss is also
very bitter and, within the gut, has both a
demulcent and bitter tonic effect—a combination
almost unique in medicinal herbs. It is thus of value
in all kinds of chronic digestive problems, for
instance irritable bowel syndrome.

Chamaelirium lutea (Liliaceae)

Helonias,
False Unicorn Root

Description Herbaceous perennial growing to
3 ft (I m) with large, green leaves forming a basal
rosette from which emerges a tall spike of green-
white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, helonias grows in low, moist, well-drained
ground east of the Mississippi river. In view of its
rarity in the wild, it is best to use alternative herbs
such as black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa, p. 79)
and wild yam (Disocorea villosa, p. 91).

Parts Used Rhizome (lifted in autumn).

Helonias root was chewed
by Native American women
to prevent miscarriage.

Constituents Root contains steroidial saponins
(up to 9%), including chamaelirin and diogenin.
History & Folklore A traditional Native
American medicine, Helonias was prized as

a woman's herb and used to treat a range of
gynecological problems. There is some confusion
about its precise use since several herbs share the
same (or similar) name.

----- PAGE 189 -----
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Western
herbal medicine, helonias has been valued as a key
remedy for conditions affecting the uterus and
ovaries. It is thought to have a “normalizing” effect
on the female reproductive system. It is thought to
regulate the release of hormones by the ovaries
and encourage a regular menstrual cycle. It has
also been used to treat conditions such as
endometriosis, ovarian cysts, and menopausal
problems. As it is now an endangered species,
other herbs (notably black cohosh) are routinely
used in its place.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Chamaemelum nobile syn.
Anthemis nobilis (Asteraceae)

Roman Chamomile

Description Aromatic perennial growing to
20 in (50 cm). Has feathery leaves and daisy-like
flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
Europe, Roman chamomile is now cultivated
across Europe, and also in other temperate regions.
The flowers are harvested as they open in summer.
Parts Used Flowers, essential oil.
Constituents Roman chamomile contains up
to 1.75% essential oil (including tiglic and angelic
acid esters, chamazulene and other sesquiterpene
lactones), flavonoids, coumarins,
and phenolic acids.
History & Folklore
Though called Roman
chamomile, this herb was
not cultivated in Rome
until the | 6th century,
probably arriving there
from Britain.
Medicinal Actions & Uses A remedy for
the digestive system, Roman chamomile is often
used interchangeably with German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77). However, an infusion
of Roman chamomile has a more pronounced bitter
action than its German namesake. It is an excellent
treatment for nausea, vomiting, indigestion, and
loss of appetite. It is also sedative, antispasmodic,
and mildly analgesic, and will relieve colic, cramps,
and other cramping pains. By stimulating digestive
secretions and relaxing the muscles of the gut,
it helps normalize digestive function. Roman
chamomile may also be taken for headaches
and migraine, even by children. Its marked anti-
inflammatory and antiallergenic properties make
it helpful when applied to irritated skin.
Cautions Do not use the essential oil

Dried flower heads

internally except under professional supervision.
The essential oil is subject to legal restrictions in
some countries.

Chamaenerion angustifolia
syn. Epilobium angustifolium
(Onagraceae)

Rosebay Willowherb

Description Perennial growing to 6% ft (2 m).
Has an erect stem, narrow leaves, and long spikes
of pink-purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is found in
Europe and western Asia, and grows in clearings,
along roads, and in open areas. It is picked

when in flower in late summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Rosebay willowherb contains
flavones and tannins.

History & Folklore In Siberia, an alcoholic
drink has been made from this herb and the fly
agaric mushroom (Amanita muscaria).
Medicinal Actions & Uses Demulcent and
astringent, rosebay willowherb treats diarrhea,
mucous colitis, and irritable bowel syndrome. It has
also been made into an ointment to soothe skin
problems in children. Rosebay willowherb is used
to treat prostate problems.

Cheiranthus cheiri (Brassicaceae)

Wallflower

Description Evergreen perennial growing
to 18 in (45 cm). Has lance-shaped leaves and
yellow-orange flowers appearing in spring.

The Greek physician Dioscorides (| st century ce) used
wallflower roots to treat gout.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe, wallflower is now found throughout the
continent. It grows on cliffs and old walls, and is

a common garden plant.

Parts Used Leaves, flowers.

Constituents The herb contains cheiranthin and
other cardioactive glycosides.

History & Folklore In | 735, the lrish
K'Eogh described wallflower thus: ‘It provokes
urination and menstruation and expels a stillborn
child, and the afterbirth if a decoction of the dried
flowers or a little seed is drunk in wine.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Althoug
wallflower was formerly used as a diuretic, there
was no understanding of its powerful effect on
the heart. In small doses it is cardiotonic, supporting
a failing heart in a manner similar to foxglove
(Digitalis purpurea, p. 202). In more than small
doses it is toxic, and is therefore rarely used in
herbal medicine.

2 @ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

erbalist

Chelidonium majus
(Papaveraceae)

Greater Celandine

Description Thin-stemmed perennial herb
growing to a height of 3 ft (90 cm). Has indented
yellow-green leaflets and 4-petaled flowers, which
appear in clusters in late spring.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
western Asia, and North Africa, greater celandine
flourishes close to human habitation, preferring
open areas, the banks of roadsides, and damp
places. The aerial parts of the herb are collected
in late spring or early summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, latex.
Constituents Greater celandine contains
isoquinoline alkaloids, including allocryptopine,
berberine, chelidonine and sparteine. Several

of these alkaloids are analgesic. Chelidonine is
antispasmodic and also lowers blood pressure.
Sparteine, by contrast, raises it.

History & Folklore In folk medicine, greater
celandine has often been viewed as a cure-all. It
has also been used for thousands of years to treat
and clear the eyesight, especially cataracts. According
to Pliny and Dioscorides (both writing in the

Ist century ce), swallows used the latex that
flows from cuts in the stems or leaves as a
means to sharpen their eyesight. In 1598, Gerard
recommended the herb for eye disorders “for it
clenseth and consumeth awaie slimie things that
cleave about the ball of the eie.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Greater celandine
acts as a mild sedative, relaxing the muscles of the
bronchial tubes, intestines, and other organs.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

a

187

----- PAGE 190 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

188

In both Western and Chinese herbal traditions, it
has been used to treat bronchitis, whooping cough,
and asthma. The herb's antispasmodic effect
extends to the gallbladder, where it helps to
improve bile flow. This would partly account for its
use in treating jaundice, gallstones, and gallbladder
pain, as well as its longstanding reputation as a
detoxifying herb. Greater celandine's sedative
action does not, however, extend to the uterus—
it causes the muscles of this organ to contract.
The herb is applied externally to soothe and
encourage the healing of skin conditions such as
eczema. The yellow latex of greater celandine is
applied to warts, ringworm, and malignant skin
tumors, which are slowly broken down by the
effect of its protein-dissolving enzymes.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Can cause liver damage in rare cases.

It is subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

Chelone glabra (Scrophulariaceae)

Balmony

Description Perennial herb growing to 2 ft (60
cm). Has narrow leaves and short spikes of
creamy-white to purple double-lipped flowers.

Balmony’s bile-inducing
property makes it useful
for gallbladder problems.

Habitat & Cultivation Balmony is native
to eastern North America, balmony thrives in
habitats such as marshland, wet woodland, and
riverbanks. It is harvested when in flower during
summer or autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Contains resins and bitters.
History & Folklore Balmony’s genus name,
Chelone, means ‘‘tortoise” in Greek, referring to
the flower head's supposed resemblance to the
head of the tortoise.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A strongly bitter
remedy, balmony is principally used to treat
gallstones and other gallbladder problems. It
stimulates bile flow and has a mildly laxative action.
It can be taken to relieve nausea, vomiting, and
intestinal colic, and to expel worms. It may also
be antidepressant. Balmony is a suitable remedy
for children.

Chenopodium ambrosioides
(Chenopodiaceae)

VWormseed

Description Annual herb growing to 3 ft (| m)
with toothed lance-shaped leaves. Yellow-green
flowers in round clusters bloom in summer,
producing small black seeds in autumn.
Habitat & Cultivation Wormseed is native
to Central and South America and the Caribbean.
It has been extensively cultivated in Maryland, and
in China.

Parts Used Aerial parts, flowering tops.
Constituents Wormseed contains a volatile
oil (up to 90% ascaridol, plus geraniol and methyl
salicylate), and triterpenoid saponins. Ascaridol is
a powerful worm expellent.

History & Folklore An herbal remedy that
has been used for centuries, wormseed was used
by the Maya in Central America to expel worms.
In the eastern U.S., European settlers employed it
for the treatment of worms, especially in children.
The Catawba made a poultice from the plant,
which they used to detoxify snake bite and

other poisonings.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wormseed is
principally known for its ability to expel worms,
especially roundworm and hookworm. It is also
used in the Americas as a digestive remedy, the

leaves being taken to settle colic and stomach pains.

Wormseed's muscle-relaxing action has led to its
use in the treatment of spasmodic coughs and
asthma. Externally, juice expressed from the whole
herb is applied as a wash for hemorrhoids.
Related Species Many species of Chenopodium
are used as foods, and some medicinally. The seeds
of C. rhadinostachyum are used as food by Aborigines
in central Australia. Good King Henry (C. bonus-

henricus), a species that is native to Europe, is
both eaten as a vegetable and used medicinally
to treat anemia.

@ @ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Wormseed is toxic when taken in
overdose. Do not take during pregnancy. The herb
is subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

Chimaphila umbellata (Pyrolaceae)

Pipsissewa

Description Evergreen plant with several stems,
growing to 8 in (20 cm). Has shiny wedge-shaped
leaves and small flat-topped clusters of white flowers
tinged with red.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, Europe, and Asia, pipsissewa grows in
woods and shady places, in sandy soils. The leaves
are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Pipsissewa contains hydroquinones
(including arbutin), flavonoids, triterpenes, methy|
salicylate, and tannins. The hydroquinones have

a pronounced disinfectant effect within the
urinary tract.

History & Folklore Pipsissewa was much used
by Native North Americans to induce sweating
and treat fevers, including typhus. European settlers
used the herb for rheumatism and for urinary and
kidney problems. It was listed in the Pharmacopoeia
of the United States from 1820 to 1916.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Astringent, tonic,
and diuretic, pipsissewa is mainly used in an infusion
for urinary tract problems such as cystitis and
urethritis. It has also been prescribed for more
serious conditions such as gonorrhea and kidney
stones. By increasing urine flow, it stimulates the
removal of waste products from the body, and is
therefore of benefit in the treatment of rheumatism
and gout. The fresh leaves of pipsissewa may be
applied externally to rheumatic joints or muscles,
as well as to blisters, sores, and swellings.
Research In tests on animals, pipsissewa leaves
appear to lower blood-sugar levels.

Chionanthus virginicus (Oleaceae)

Fringe Tree

Description Deciduous shrub or tree growing
to a height of 33 ft (10 m). Has elliptical dark green
leaves and long flowering stems with spikes of white
flowers. Produces dark blue oval fruits.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the US.,
fringe tree grows from Pennsylvania south to
Florida and Texas. It is also now found in eastern
Asia, and thrives on riverbanks and in damp

----- PAGE 191 -----
Fringe tree
is a valuable
tonic for the

liver, gallbladder,
and pancreas.

shrubby areas. The root is
unearthed in spring or autumn,
mostly in Virginia and North Carolina.

Parts Used Root bark, bark.

Constituents Contains saponins (including
chionanthin) and glycosides (including phyllirine).
History & Folklore Fringe tree was
commonly used by Native Americans and
European settlers to treat inflammations of the
eye, canker sores, and spongy gums. The Choctaw
of Louisiana applied the mashed bark to cuts and
bruises. Native Americans in Alabama used the
bark as a treatment for toothache. In the | 9th
century Anglo-American Physiomedicalist
tradition, fringe tree was valued as a bitter tonic,
and the bark was often used to aid recovery from
long-term illness.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The root bark is
a liver tonic, stimulates bile flow, and acts as a mild
laxative. It is prescribed mainly for gallbladder pain,
gallstones, jaundice, and chronic weakness. While it
appears to be of benefit to liver and gallbladder
function, there is as yet no research to substantiate
its effects. The root bark also appears to strengthen
function in the pancreas and spleen. Anecdotal
evidence indicates that it may substantially reduce
sugar levels in the urine. Fringe tree also stimulates
the appetite and digestion and is an excellent
remedy for chronic illness, especially where the
liver has been affected. For external use, the
crushed bark may be made into a poultice for
treating sores and wounds.

Chondrodendron tomentosum
(Menispermaceae)

Pareira

Description Vine climbing to a great height in
tropical rainforests. Reaches |00 ft (30 m). Has
large leaves up to | ft (30 cm) long and trailing
clusters of flowers.

CICHORIUM INTYBUS

Habitat & Cultivation Pareira grows wild
in rainforests in the upper Amazon region and in
Panama. It is collected from the wild as available.
Parts Used Root, stem.
Constituents Pareira contains alkaloids,
including delta-tubocurarine and L-curarine.
Tubocurarine is a potent muscle relaxant.
History & Folklore Pareira and similar species
are famous for being the source of curare,
the paralyzing arrow poison used by
Amazonian and other South
American Indians to catch their
prey. A dart or spear tipped with
curare causes instantaneous paralysis
on entering the bloodstream of the
animal. Traditional recipes for toxins
usually involve blending 10 or more different
plants, but pareira or a plant with similar action
is always present in the mix.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Pareira’s notoriety
as a poison hinges on the effect of its toxic derivative
entering directly into the bloodstream. Provided
there are no cuts or sores in the mouth, the plant is
reasonably safe taken orally as a medicinal remedy.
The bitter and slightly sweet-tasting roots and stems
are mildly laxative, tonic, and diuretic, and also act
to induce menstruation. The plant is chiefly used to
relieve chronic inflammation of the urinary tubules.
In Brazil, it is also used for snake bite.
Research Pareiras powerful ability to paralyze
has led to its being extensively researched.
Tubocurarine—one of the many alkaloids within
the plant—is now used (as tubocurarine chloride)
as an anesthetic to paralyze the muscles
during operations.
Related Species At least four other closely
related species of Chondrodendron are used to
produce the traditional poison known as curare.
@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Pareira and/or curare are subject
to legal restrictions in some countries.

Chondrus crispus (Gigartinaceae)

Irish Moss,
Carragheen

Description Reddish-brown seaweed growing
tol0 in (25 cm). Plant body is flat and forked, with
a fan-shaped outline.

Habitat & Cultivation Irish moss is found on
the Atlantic coasts of Europe and North America.
It grows just below the waterline, attached to rocks
and stones. In summer in North America, and in
autumn in Ireland, it is pulled up by hand or with a
rake at low tide and dried in the sun.

Part Used Whole herb.

Constituents Irish moss contains large
amounts of polysaccharides, proteins (up to 10%),

amino acids, iodine, and bromine, plus many other
minerals. The polysaccharides become jelly-like and
demulcent when the plant is immersed in water.
History & Folklore Irish moss is used
extensively in the food and pharmaceutical
industries as an emulsifying and binding agent,

for example in toothpastes.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A useful
demulcent and emollient, Irish moss is mainly
taken for coughs and bronchitis. Its expectorant
effect encourages the coughing up of phlegm, and
it soothes dry and irritated mucous membranes. It
is of value for acid indigestion, gastritis, and urinary
infections such as cystitis. For these conditions it is
normally combined with other appropriate herbs.
Mucilaginous in texture and slightly salty in taste,
Irish moss makes a valuable nutrient in
convalescence. Applied externally, this emollient
herb soothes inflamed skin. Irish moss also acts

to thin the blood.

Caution Due to its blood-thinning property,
carragheen should not be used by people taking
anticoagulant medicines.

Cichorium intybus (Asteraceae)

Chicory

Description Deep-rooted perennial growing to
5 ft (1.5 m). Has a hairy stem, oblong leaves, and
blue flowers.

Chicory leaves make a settling digestive tea.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
chicory also grows in North Africa and western
Asia. It flourishes along paths and roadsides, and

in banks and dry fields. The root is unearthed in
spring or autumn.

Parts Used Root, leaves, flowers.
Constituents The root contains up to 58%
inulin, caffeic acids, coumarins, flavonoids, polyynes,
an essential oil including sesquiterpene lactones,

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 192 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

and vitamins and minerals. There is now significant
evidence to show that chicory root protects the
liver from damage.

History & Folklore According to Pliny

(23-79 ce), chicory juice was mixed with rose oil
and vinegar as a remedy for headaches. The roasted
root is commonly used as a coffee substitute. The
young root can be boiled and eaten like parsnips.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Chicory is an
excellent mild bitter tonic for the liver and digestive
tract. The root is therapeutically similar to dandelion
root (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141), supporting the
action of the stomach and liver and cleansing the
urinary tract. Chicory is also taken for rheumatic
conditions and gout, and as a mild laxative, one
particularly appropriate for children. An infusion

of the leaves and flowers also aids digestion.
Related Species The endive (C. endiva) has
similar though milder effects.

Cinnamomum camphora
syn. Laurus camphora (Lauraceae)

Camphor

Description Evergreen tree growing to 100 ft
(30 m). Produces red leaves that turn dark green
as they mature, small fragrant yellowish flowers,
and oval red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China

and Japan, this tree is cultivated in tropical and
sub-tropical regions for its wood, from which
camphor oil is derived.

Parts Used Stems, root, wood, leaves, twigs,
volatile oil.

Constituents The plant contains a volatile oil
comprising camphor, safrole, eugenol, and terpineol.
It also contains lignans. Camphor is irritant and
antiseptic; safrole is thought to be carcinogenic.

A white crystalline substance derived from the
stems, root, and other parts of the tree, also called
camphor, has powerful antiseptic, stimulant, and
antispasmodic properties.

History & Folklore In the | 3th century,
Marco Polo noted that camphor oil was highly
valued by the Chinese as a medicine, scent, and
embalming fluid.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Camphor is most
commonly applied externally as a counterirritant and
analgesic liniment to relieve arthritic and rheumatic
pains, neuralgia, and back pain. It may be applied to
skin problems, such as cold sores and chilblains, and
used as a chest rub for bronchitis and other chest
infections. Though the oil has been taken for
various complaints, internal use is not advised.
Related Species See also cinnamon
(Cinnamomum spp., p. 81).

Cautions Do not take internally. Camphor oil is
subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

Citrullus vulgaris (Cucurbitaceae)

Watermelon

Description Annual vine with hairy, 3-5 lobed
leaves, yellow flowers, and green fruit typically
growing to 10 in (25 cm) across.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
Africa, watermelon is grown throughout warm
temperate to tropical regions. The fruit is gathered
when ripe.

Parts Used Fruit, seeds.

Constituents Watermelon contains citrullin
and arginine, both of which are thought to
increase urea production in the liver, so
increasing the flow of urine.

History & Folklore Watermelon species have
been used in Egypt for more than 4,000 years,
figuring in wall paintings dating to the Old Kingdom
(2686-2181 sce). They appear to have been a
component in remedies for trembling fingers,
constipation, and expelling disease brought on

by demons. Egyptian myth recounts that the
watermelon originated from the semen of

the god Seth.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Watermelon is
best known as a thirst-quenching fruit that comes
into season when temperatures are at their hottest.
In traditional Chinese medicine it is used precisely
to counter “summer heat’’ patterns—characterized
by excessive sweating, thirst, raised temperature,
scanty urine, diarrhea, and irritability or anger.
Watermelon fruit and juice soothe these symptoms,
increasing urine flow and cleansing the kidneys. The
fruit's refreshing properties extend to the digestive
system, where it clears gas. Watermelon may also
be used in the treatment of hepatitis. In hot, stifling
weather it is helpful for those suffering from
bronchitis or asthma. The cooling fruit pulp may
be applied to hot and inflamed skin and to soothe
sunburn. The seeds can be mashed and used to
expel worms.

Related Species The watermelons of Egypt

(C. lanata and C. colocynthoides) are very similar
species. The colocynth (C. colocynthus), native to
dry areas of Africa and Asia, is extremely bitter
and contains a cucurbitacin glycoside with
antitumor properties.

Citrus aurantium (Rutaceae)

Bitter Orange

Description Evergreen tree growing to 30 ft
(10 m). Has leathery, dark green leaves, delicately
perfumed white flowers, and orange fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical Asia,
this tree is now grown throughout the tropics and
subtropics. Orchards of bitter orange are found
along the Mediterranean coast, especially in Spain.

Bitter orange has
a wide range of
medicinal uses.

Parts Used Fruit, peel, leaves, flowers, seeds,
essential oil.

Constituents Bitter orange peel contains a
volatile oil with limonene (around 90%), flavonoids,
coumarins, triterpenes, vitamin C, carotene, and
pectin. The flavonoids are anti-inflammatory,
antibacterial, and antifungal. The composition of
the volatile oils in the leaves, flowers and peel varies
significantly. Linalyl acetate (50%) is the main
constituent in oil from the leaves (petitgrain) and
linalool (35%) in oil from the flowers (neroli). The
unripe fruit of the bitter orange contains cirantin,
which reportedly is contraceptive.

History & Folklore The bitter orange has
provided food and medicine for thousands of
years. It yields neroli oil from its flowers, and the oil
known as petitgrain from its leaves and young
shoots. Both distillates are used extensively in
perfumery. Orange flower water is a by-product
of distillation and is used in perfumery and to
flavor candies and cookies, as well as being

used medicinally.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The strongly acidic
fruit of the bitter orange stimulates digestion and
relieves flatulence. An infusion of the fruit is
thought to soothe headaches, calm palpitations,
and lower fevers. The juice helps the body
eliminate waste products and, being rich in vitamin
C, helps the immune system ward off infection. If
taken to excess, however, its acid content can
exacerbate arthritis. In Chinese herbal medicine,
the unripe fruit, known as zhi shi, is thought to
“regulate the qj,” helping to relieve flatulence and
abdominal bloating, and to open the bowels. The

----- PAGE 193 -----
essential oils of bitter orange, especially neroli, are
sedative. In Western medicine, these oils are used
to reduce heart rate and palpitations, to encourage
sleep, and to soothe the digestive tract. Diluted neroli
is applied as a relaxing massage oil. The distilled flower
water is antispasmodic and sedative.
Related Species The lime (C. aurantifolia)
and lemon (C. limon, p. 82) have nutritional
properties that are similar to those of bitter
orange. See also bergamot (C. bergamia,
following entry).

Caution Do not take the essential oils internally
except under professional supervision.

Citrus bergamia syn. C. aurantium
var. bergamia (Rutaceae)

Bergamot

Description Evergreen tree growing to 30
ft (10 m). Has pointed oval leaves, scented
white flowers, and fruit with aromatic peel.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
Asia, bergamot is cultivated in sub-tropical regions,
especially in southern Italy.

Part Used Essential oil.

Constituents Bergamot contains a volatile

oil including linalyl acetate (30-60%), limonene
(26-42%), and linalool (| |-22%), bergapten,
and a diterpene.

History & Folklore Bergamot oil, expressed
from the peel, provides the distinctive flavor of
Earl Grey tea. The oil (or constituents of it) is
sometimes added to suntanning oils.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bergamot is
little used in herbal medicine, but it can be used
to relieve tension, relax muscle spasms, and
improve digestion.

Caution Do not take bergamot essential

oil internally.

Clerodendrum trichotomum
(Verbenaceae)

Chou Wu Tong

Description Upright, deciduous shrub growing
to 10 ft (3 m). Has large leaves, clusters of white
flowers, and blue berries.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb grows

in central and southern China. The leaves are
harvested just before it flowers.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Chou wu tong contains clerodendrin,
acacetin, and mesoinositol.

History & Folklore Chou wu tong was first
documented in the Illustrated Classic of the Materia
Medica (1061 ce).

Chou wu tong has been
shown by research to lower
high blood pressure.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In Chinese herbal
medicine, chou wu tong is prescribed for joint pain,
numbness, and paralysis, and occasionally for
eczema. Traditionally regarded as a plant that
“dispels wind-dampness,” it is now also being used
to help lower blood pressure. The plant is mildly
analgesic and, when used with the herb
Siegesbeckia pubescens, is anti-inflammatory.
Research In a Chinese trial, |71 people with high
blood pressure were given chou wu tong. In 81%
of those tested, blood pressure levels dropped
significantly. This effect was reversed when the
treatment was stopped.

Related Species C. serratum is commonly used
in Ayurvedic medicine for respiratory conditions.

Cnicus benedictus syn. Carbenia
benedicta, Carduus benedictus
(Asteraceae)

Holy Thistle

Description Erect, red-stemmed annual growing
to 26 in (65 cm). Has spiny leathery leaves, a spiny
stem, and yellow flowers in summer and autumn.
Habitat & Cultivation This Mediterranean
plant flourishes on dry stony ground and in open
areas. The leaves and flowering tops are collected
in summer.

Parts Used Leaves, flowering tops.
Constituents Holy thistle contains lignans,
sesquiterpene lactones (including cnicin), volatile
oil, polyacetylenes, flavonoids, triterpenes,
phytosterols, and tannins. Cnicin is bitter and anti-
inflammatory; the volatile oil is thought to have
antibiotic properties.

History & Folklore In the Middle Ages,
holy thistle was thought to cure the plague. In his
herbal of 1568, Nicholas Turner wrote: ‘There
is nothing better for the canker [ulcerous sore]
and old rotten and festering sores than the
leaves, juice, broth, powder, and water of
holy thistle.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Holy thistle
is a good bitter tonic, stimulating secretions
within the salivary glands, stomach, gallbladder,
and intestines, and thereby improving digestion.
It is taken, generally as a tincture, for minor
digestive complaints. It has also been a treatment
for intermittent fevers. Holy thistle is mildly
expectorant and antibiotic. It makes a healing balm
for wounds and sores.
Cautions In excessive doses, holy thistle
may cause vomiting. It is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Holy thistle was a
| 6th-century remedy for
migraine headaches.

Cochlearia officinalis (Cruciferae)

Scurvy Grass

Description Low-growing perennial with

fleshy heart-shaped leaves, dense clusters of white
4-petaled flowers, and rounded swollen seed pods.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe

and temperate regions of Asia and North America,
but now rare, scurvy grass thrives in the salty

soil of coastal areas and salt marshes. It is
occasionally cultivated.

Parts Used Leaves, aerial parts.
Constituents Scurvy grass contains glucosilinates,
a volatile oil, a bitter principle, tannin, vitamin C,
and minerals.

History & Folklore As the common name
suggests, this plant has long been used for its high
vitamin C content. It was used by sailors and others

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 194 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

to prevent the onset of scurvy, a potentially

fatal vitamin C deficiency marked by bleeding

of the gums.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Besides having a
high vitamin C content, scurvy grass has antiseptic
and mild laxative actions. The young plant, which
has a general detoxicant effect and contains a wide
range of minerals, is taken as a spring tonic. Like
watercress (Nasturtium officinale, p. 239), it has
diuretic properties and is useful for any condition
in which poor nutrition is a factor. It can be used in
the form of a juice as an antiseptic mouthwash for
canker sores, and can also be applied externally to
spots and pimples.

Cocos nucifera (Arecaceae)

Coconut,
Coconut Palm

Description Too familiar to need description,
the coconut is a large palm reaching up to 100 ft
(30 m) in height with a single, smooth trunk and
long-ribbed leaves up to 20 ft (6 m) in length.
Habitat & Cultivation Thought to have
originated in Southeast Asia, coconut is now found
throughout the tropics. It thrives in sandy, salty soils
(typically coastal) and requires abundant sun and
rain. Propagated by seed, the one-seeded nut
grows out through one of the three germinating
pores at its base. In 2009, coconut was grown
commercially in 80 countries, with a total production
of 61.7 million tons. A coconut palm can produce
up to 10,000 nuts during its lifetime.

Parts Used Kernel (fresh or dried), water. Every
part of coconut is useful.

Coconut palms have spread across the tropical regions of the
globe. The oil has antimicrobial properties.

COCOS NUCIFERA

Constituents Coconut oil is about 90%
saturated fat, mostly medium-chain fatty acids
(lauric, myristic, caprylic, and capric acids). Coconut
water contains significant levels of minerals, notably
potassium. Virgin coconut oil is entirely non-toxic.
History & Folklore The coconut palm is
described as “Kalpavriksha’” (meaning ‘‘the all-giving
tree’) in ancient Indian texts.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Coconut oil

and cream have established antimicrobial and
immunostimulant activity. With antibacterial,
antifungal, and antiviral properties, the oil and
cream can be used to counter many commonly
occurring infections, such as influenza, cold sores,
shingles, and fungal problems. Coconut has a
beneficial action on the gut flora and can prove
useful (alongside other treatment) in clearing
intestinal worms and parasites. Coconut oil and
cream aid digestion and the absorption of nutrients
(notably calcium and magnesium), and may be
taken as part of a regimen to prevent or treat
osteoporosis. Coconut water is reported to lower
blood pressure, in part due to its high potassium
content, while the oil helps prevent arteriosclerosis.
It is also thought to lower cholesterol levels, aid
weight loss, and lower blood glucose levels.
Coconut oil helps keep skin and hair healthy and is
a common ingredient in skin creams and shampoos.
Coconut merits its name of “all-giving tree.”

Coffea arabica (Rubiaceae)

Coffee

Description Evergreen shrub or small tree
growing to 30 ft (9 m). Has dark green, shiny oval
leaves and white star-shaped flowers. Produces
small red fruit, each containing 2 seeds (beans).
Habitat & Cultivation Coffee is native

to tropical East Africa, and is now cultivated in
tropical areas worldwide. The best-quality beans
are produced by fermenting, sun-drying, and
roasting the seeds.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents Coffee contains chlorogenic
acids, tannins, and xanthines—caffeine (0.6—-0.32%),
theobromine, and theophylline. Caffeine is a strong
stimulant. Theophylline is a stimulant and smooth
muscle relaxant. Chlorogenic acids are anti-
inflammatory.

History & Folklore Native to the plateaus of
central Ethiopia, where it is thought to have
originated, coffee spread to Yemen in the 6th
century ce and then on into the Arabian
peninsula. The Arabian physician Rhazes first
recorded coffee's use in the | Oth century ce.
While coffee drinking formed part of Sufi prayer
rituals, being taken to enable longer, more ecstatic
prayer through the night, coffee gradually became

Coffee, native to East Africa, can be used to
relieve headaches.

the popular stimulant drink that we know

today, spreading to Europe in the |7th century.

By 2015, the annual trade in coffee exceeded

$10 billion.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Coffee is an
effective and much-loved stimulant of central
nervous function, aiding mental alertness and
perception. Coffee (and extracts) increase physical
performance and heart output, stimulate digestive
juices, and act as a powerful diuretic. It can be taken
to counter drowsiness and to relieve headaches and
migraines. It is non-addictive, although excess intake
or sudden withdrawal from coffee may cause
headaches. Many natural medicine practitioners
consider overuse of coffee to be unhealthy as it is
associated with nervous and endocrine exhaustion.
Decaffeinated green coffee bean extract is taken
to promote weight loss.

Research Regular coffee drinking is associated
with a significantly decreased risk of colon cancer.
Coffee may have a protective effect against
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Cautions Percolated or boiled coffee is thought
to have potentially harmful effects on the heart
and circulation and to raise cholesterol levels.
Caffeine can increase pre-menstrual symptoms
and period pains.

Cola acuminata (Sterculiaceae)

Kola Nut,
Cola Nut

Description Evergreen tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m) with dark green leaves and yellowish-white
flowers. Large woody seed pods contain 5-10
white or red seeds (nuts).

Habitat & Cultivation Native to West
Africa, kola nut is cultivated widely in the tropics,
especially in Nigeria, Brazil, and the West Indies.

----- PAGE 195 -----
The seeds are harvested when ripe and dried

in the sun.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents Kola nut contains up to

2.5% caffeine (generally higher than coffee),
theobromine, tannins, phlobaphene, and an
anthocyanin.

History & Folklore Chewed for their
digestive, tonic, and aphrodisiac properties, kola
nuts have been an integral part of western and
central African life for thousands of years. Kola
nuts are used in huge quantities today to flavor
soft drinks.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Kola nut
stimulates the central nervous system and the body
as a whole. It increases alertness and muscular
strength, counters lethargy, and has been used
extensively both in western African and Anglo-
American herbal medicine as an antidepressant,
particularly during recovery from chronic illness.
Like coffee (Coffea arabica, preceding entry), kola
is used to treat headaches and migraine. It is
diuretic and astringent, and may be taken for
diarrhea and dysentery.

Related Species C. nitida, which grows in
Africa, Brazil, and the West Indies, is used in the
same fashion.

Cautions Do not take if suffering from high
blood pressure, peptic ulcers, or palpitations.

Colchicum autumnale (Liliaceae)

Meadow Saffron

Description Attractive perennial growing from
a bulb-like corm to 4 in (10 cm). Has pointed
lance-shaped leaves and tubular 6-petaled pink
flowers in autumn.

Habitat & Cultivation Common in Europe
and North Africa, meadow saffron grows wild in
woods and damp meadows. It is also cultivated.
The corm is gathered in early summer, the seeds
in late summer.

Parts Used Corm, seeds.

Constituents Meadow saffron contains
alkaloids (including colchicine) and flavonoids.
Colchicine is anti-inflammatory and is used in
conventional medicine for acute attacks of gout.
As it affects cell division it can cause fetal
abnormality. It has been used in the laboratory

to create new genetic strains.

History & Folklore Meadow saffron was not
used in classical times due to its poisonous nature.
Arabian physicians used it in the Middle Ages to
treat joint pain and gout, but otherwise herbalists
disregarded the plant until the 19th century.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Despite its
toxicity, meadow saffron is considered one of the
best remedies for acute gout pain. Leukemia has

Meadow saffron is an
attractive yet highly toxic
herb, requiring great
caution in usage. It is a
well-established remedy
for treating gout.

*

~
been successfully treated with meadow saffron,
and the plant has also been used with some
success to treat Behcet's syndrome, a chronic
disease marked by recurring ulcers and leukemia.
Taken internally, the herb has significant side effects
even at low dosage. Externally, it is applied to
relieve neuralgia and itchiness.
2 @ Cautions This herb is highly toxic. Use
only under professional supervision. Do not use
during pregnancy. Meadow saffron is subject to
legal restrictions in some countries.

Collinsonia canadensis (Lamiaceae)

Stone Root

Description Perennial herb growing to 3 ft

(| m). Has a square stem, oval leaves, and clusters
of greenish-yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is native
to moist woodlands of eastern North America.
The root is dug up in autumn.

Parts Used Root, leaves.

Constituents Stone root contains a volatile oil,
tannins, and saponins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Stone root

has diuretic and tonic properties, and is chiefly
employed in the treatment of kidney stones. It is
also prescribed to counteract fluid retention. It has

been used to reduce back pressure in the veins,
which in turn helps prevent the formation or
worsening of hemorrhoids and varicose veins.

As an astringent, stone root contracts the inner
lining of the intestines, and can be helpful in treating
disorders of the digestive system such as irritable
bowel syndrome and mucous colitis. The fresh leaves
or roots of stone root are applied as a poultice to
bruises and sores.

Commiphora mukul (Burseraceae)

Gugeul

Description Spiny shrub or tree, growing to 6/4
ft (2 m), with oval, serrated leaves, brownish-red
flowers, and red fruits. Guggul, the gum resin
obtained from the bark, forms pale yellow to
brown “‘tears” on the stems.

Habitat & Cultivation Guggul thrives in dry,
semi-arid and desert environments across much
of the Indian sub-continent and the Middle East.
Parts Used Gum resin.
Constituents Guggul is an oleo-gum resin, its
main active constituents being fat-soluble steroids
(guggulipids), in particular guggulsterones E and Z.
History & Folklore Early Ayurvedic texts
describe guggul as being effective in treating
obesity. This has led to research into whether the
gum resin might be useful for problems associated
with fat metabolism, such as raised blood
cholesterol levels.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Guggul has
anti-inflammatory, blood-thinning, and
cholesterol-lowering activity, amd—true to
ancient understanding of the herb—can be
helpful in treating obesity. In Ayurveda, guggul

is principally used to treat arthritic problems, such

as osteoarthritis, though it is also considered to
have tonic and rejuvenating properties. As a result
of research in the 1980s and 1990s, guggul is
now most commonly used to lower raised blood
cholesterol levels and to improve blood fat
profiles in general. It reduces the stickiness of
platelets and thins the blood, and may have a
protective activity on the heart. Guggul is also
useful in the treatment of acne. The normal dose
of guggulipid extract is |—1.5 ga day (equivalent
to 50-75 mg of guggulsterones).

Research Extensive research has shown that
the guggulipids have anti-inflammatory and
antiarthritic activity and prevent or reverse raised
blood cholesterol levels. In several clinical trials,
patients showed an average fall in cholesterol
levels of about 12%, and in triglycerides of about
14%. The overall blood-fat profile was also shown
to improve. Some clinical trials recorded weight
loss for patients taking guggulipids.

Caution Avoid if breastfeeding.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

193

----- PAGE 196 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Conium maculatum (Apiaceae)

Hemlock

Description Graceful biennial growing to a
height of 8 ft (2.5 m). Has slender, red-speckled
stems, finely divided leaves, small clusters of white
flowers, and small seeds that have beaded ridges.

Hemlock is highly poisonous and
was used for capital punishment.

Habitat & Cultivation Commonly found in
Europe, hemlock also grows in temperate regions
of Asia and North America. It flourishes in damp
meadows, on riverbanks, and in open areas. The
seeds are gathered when almost ripe in summer.
Parts Used Leaves, seeds.

Constituents Hemlock contains alkaloids,
mainly coniine, and a volatile oil. Coniine is extremely
toxic and causes congenital deformities.
History & Folklore Hemlock is notorious
as the poison administered as a capital punishment
in ancient Greece. The Greek philosopher Socrates
died in 399 ace after drinking hemlock juice.
According to an old English tradition, the stems
took their color in sympathy with the mark placed
on Cain's forehead after he murdered Abel. In the
19th century, hemlock was used in conventional
medicine as a painkiller.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In extremely
small quantities, hemlock is sedative and analgesic;
in larger doses it causes paralysis and death. Rarely
used today, it has been prescribed in the past as a
treatment for epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, and
Sydenham's chorea. Hemlock has also been used
to treat acute cystitis.

Cautions Do not take internally. Use externally
only under professional supervision. Hemlock is
subject to legal restrictions in many countries.

PF a
2

CONIUM MACULATUM

Convallaria majalis (Liliaceae)

Lily of the Valley

Description Attractive perennial growing to

9 in (23 cm). Has a pair of elliptical leaves, clusters
of bell-shaped white flowers on one side of the
stem, and red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
this herb is also distributed over North America
and northern Asia. It is widely cultivated as a
garden plant. The leaves and flowers are
gathered in late spring as the plant comes

into flower.

Parts Used Leaves, flowers.
Constituents Lily of the valley contains cardiac
glycosides, including the cardenolides convallotoxin,
convalloside, convallatoxol, and others, and
flavonoid glycosides. The cardiac glycosides
act to strengthen a weakened heart.
History & Folklore The herbalist Apuleius,
writing in the 2nd century ce, records that Apollo

gave lily of the valley as a gift to Asclepius, the
god of healing. In the | 6th century, the herbalist
John Gerard had the following to say about its
therapeutic value: “The flowers of the valley lillie
distilled with wine, and drunke to the quantitie of
a spoonful, restore speech unto those that have
the dumb palsie and that are fallen into apoplexy,

and are good against the gout, and comfort
the heart.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Lily of the
valley is used by European herbalists in
place of common foxglove (Digitalis
purpurea, p. 202). Both herbs
have a profound effect

Lily of the valley encourages
a regular heartbeat and
acts as a strong diuretic.

in cases of heart failure, whether due in the long
term to a cardiovascular problem, or to a chronic
lung problem such as emphysema. Lily of the valley
encourages a failing heart to beat more slowly and
regularly, and to pump more efficiently, thereby
improving blood flow to the heart itself via the
coronary arteries. It is also diuretic and lowers
blood volume. The herb is better tolerated than
foxglove, as it does not accumulate within the body
to the same degree. Relatively low doses are
required to support heart rate and rhythm, and to
increase urine production.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Lily of the valley is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Conyza canadensis syn. Erigeron
canadensis (Asteraceae)

Canadian Fleabane

Description Erect annual herb growing to 3 ft
(1 m). Has narrow, dark green, lance-shaped leaves
and clusters of small white flower heads that
quickly fade into silky white tufts.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, Canadian fleabane is now common

in South America and Europe. It thrives on
uncultivated and recently cleared land, often
invading in large swaths. It is gathered from

the wild when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Canadian fleabane contains

a volatile oil (including limonene, terpineol,

and linalool), flavonoids, terpenes, plant

acids, and tannins.

Canadian fleabane was used both ritually and medicinally by
Native North Americans.

----- PAGE 197 -----
History & Folklore In traditional North
American herbal medicine, Canadian fleabane
was boiled to make steam for sweat lodges,
taken as a snuff to stimulate sneezing during

the course of a cold, and burned to create a
smoke that warded off insects—hence its
common name.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An astringent
herb, Canadian fleabane is taken for
gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhea and
dysentery. A decoction of Canadian fleabane is
reportedly a very effective treatment for bleeding
hemorrhoids. The herb is occasionally used as a
diuretic for bladder problems, to clear toxins in
rheumatic conditions, and to treat gonorrhea and
other genitourinary diseases.

Related Species The Philadelphia fleabane
(E. philadelphicus) was used by the Houma as

a treatment for menstrual problems. E. affinis, a
Mexican relative, is used to make a tooth powder
and to treat toothache.

Copaifera spp. (Fabaceae)
Copaiba

Description Evergreen trees growing to

59 ft (18 m). Have compound leaves and small
yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Copaiba is native to
tropical South America, and also found in southern
Africa. Oleoresin, a blend of volatile oil and resin
often also referred to as copaiba, is obtained by
drilling holes in the trunk.

Part Used Oleoresin.

Constituents The oleoresin contains a volatile
oil (30-90%), which in turn contains alpha- and beta-
caryophyllene, sesquiterpenes, resins, and
terpenic acids.

History & Folklore Copaiba was used by
native Brazilians long before the arrival of
Europeans. In 1625, the Portuguese monk Manoel
Tristaon observed that it was employed to heal
wounds and remove scars.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Antiseptic,
diuretic, and stimulant, copaiba is still used
extensively in Brazil. Chiefly employed to counter
mucus in the chest and genitourinary system, it
irritates the mucous membranes and promotes
the coughing up of mucus. A solution or tincture
of copaiba may be taken for bronchitis, chronic
cystitis, diarrhea, and hemorrhoids. Eczema

and other skin diseases reportedly benefit

from its application.

Related Species Several of the 40 Copaifera
species yield a medicinal oleoresin.

@ Caution Copaiba is toxic in overdose. Use
only under professional supervision.

Coptis chinensis (Ranunculaceae)

Huang Lian (Chinese),
Chinese Goldthread

Description Perennial herb growing to 20 in
(50 cm). Has basal leaves and small whitish-green
flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is native
to the mountains of China, and is most commonly
cultivated in Szechwan province. The root is dug
up in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Huang lian contains isoquiniline
alkaloids, including berberine, coptisine, and
worenine. Berberine is antibacterial, amebicidal,
and antidiarrheal.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A bitter-tasting
herb, huang lian is given in the Chinese herbal
tradition as a decoction to ‘clear heat’ and “dry
dampness,” relieving fever, red and sore eyes, and
sore throats. The herb is particularly helpful for
diarrhea and dysentery, and has been used to quell
vomiting. Skin problems such as acne, boils,
abscesses, and burns are also treated with huang
lian. Like the root of goldthread (C. trifolia, see
following entry), huang lian is taken as a gargle for
mouth and tongue ulcers, and for swollen gums
and toothache.

Research In a Chinese trial, 30 patients with
tuberculosis were given huang lian, and all of them
showed marked improvement in their symptoms.
@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Coptis trifolia (Ranunculaceae)

Goldthread

Description Perennial growing to 6 in (15 cm).
Has a slender golden root, 3-lobed leaves, and single
small white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America from Labrador to Tennessee,
this herb prefers damp sites. The rhizome is dug
up in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Goldthread contains isoquiniline
alkaloids (including berberine and coptisine).
History & Folklore Though little used in
herbal medicine today, goldthread was once highly
valued. In a book recounting his travels in North
America, published in 1779, Jonathan Carver states
that the plant “was greatly esteemed both by the
Indians and the colonists as a remedy for any
soreness in the mouth.” The Montagnais used

a decoction of the root for problems associated
with the mouth, lips, and eyes. The Menominee
used the plant as a gargle for children’s throat

problems and also to treat ulcers and tumors

in the mouth.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A strongly bitter
tonic, goldthread has been prescribed in the North
American tradition principally for indigestion and
stomach weakness, though it has also come under
consideration as a treatment for peptic ulcers, and
has been applied as a wash for vaginal yeast
infection. Goldthread has been used as a
mouthwash, gargle, or lotion for mouth ulcers,
sore lips, and throats. The herb's constituents (and
to some degree its actions) are similar to those of
goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis, p. 105) and it has
been used as a substitute for this herb.

Related Species Huang lian (C. chinensis,
preceding entry) is a close relative that has

similar actions.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Coriandrum sativum (Apiaceae)

Coriander,
Cilantro

Description Strongly aromatic annual growing
to 20 in (50 cm). Has finely cut upper leaves
(known as cilantro), small white or pink flowers,
and rounded seeds (coriander) in beige seed coats.

Coriander was used as a digestive aid and a treatment for
measles in 6th-century China.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe and western Asia, the herb is cultivated
throughout the world. The seeds are gathered
ripe in late summer.

Parts Used Seeds, essential oil, leaves.
Constituents Coriander contains up to

1.5% volatile oil, consisting mainly of delta-linalool
(at around 70%), alpha-pinene and terpinine. It
also contains flavonoids, coumarins, phthalides,
and phenolic acids.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

as
3S

195

----- PAGE 198 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

196

History & Folklore Coriander has been used
throughout Asia, northern Africa, and Europe for
well over 2,000 years. It is listed in the Ebers papyrus
(dating to about |500 sce), and apparently was
much employed in ancient Egypt. The herb reached
China during the Han Dynasty (202 sce-220 ce).
Pliny (23-79 ce) describes its use “for spreading
sores ... diseased testes, burns, carbuncles, and
sore ears, fluxes of the eyes, too, if woman's milk
be added.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Coriander is
more often used as a spice than as a medicine.
Nevertheless, an infusion of the herb is a gentle
remedy for flatulence, bloating, and cramps. It
settles spasms within the gut and counters the
effects of nervous tension. Coriander is also
chewed to sweeten the breath, especially after
consumption of garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59).
Coriander seed has been used as an expectorant
to treat coughs and bronchitis, and in traditional
Middle Eastern medicine it is taken to calm
anxiety and aid sleep. The ground seed is

applied externally as a rub for rheumatic pain.

In Europe, it has traditionally been thought

Caution Do not take coriander essential
oil internally.

Cornus officinalis (Cornaceae)

Shan Zhu Yu

Description Deciduous tree reaching |3 ft (4m)
with glossy elliptical leaves and bright red oval
berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
Japan, and Korea, this tree is cultivated in central
and eastern China. The fruit is harvested when
ripe in autumn.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Shan zhu yu contains an iridoid
glycoside (verbenalin), saponins, and tannins.
Verbenalin produces a mild tonic effect on the
involuntary nervous system, especially that
governing the digestive system.

History & Folklore Listed in the | st-century ce
Divine Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing),
shan zhu yu is one of the constituents of the “Pill of
Eight Ingredients,” used to “warm up and
invigorate the yang of the loins.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses As an herb that
“stabilizes and binds,’ shan zhu yu is used principally
to reduce heavy menstrual bleeding and unusually
active secretions, including copious sweating,
excessive urine, spermatorrhea (involuntary
discharge of semen), and premature ejaculation.
Related Species Several Cornus species are
used medicinally around the world. In Europe,

the fruit and bark of the cornelian cherry (C. mas)

to possess aphrodisiac properties. +

and the bark of common dogwood (C. sanguinea)
are used as astringents and to relieve fever. The
American boxwood (C. florida) was used by
Native Americans as a fever remedy.

Crithmum maritimum (Apiaceae)

Sea Fennel,
Samphire

Description Maritime herb growing to a height
of 2 ft (60 cm). Has long, succulent, bright green
leaves and clusters of small yellowish-green flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Sea fennel grows on
the Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Black Sea coasts of
Europe and Asia Minor. It is found on rocks and cliffs
close to the sea, and gathered in early summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

ye
1%

Sea fennel is rich in vitamin C and minerals.

Constituents Sea fennel contains a volatile oil,

pectin, vitamins (especially vitamin C), and minerals.

History & Folklore A much-valued herb in
the past, sea fennel fell into disfavor but is slowly
becoming popular again as a vegetable, either
pickled or eaten fresh. The English herbalist John
Gerard described it in 1597 as ‘the pleasantest
sauce, most familiar, and best agreeing with man’s
body, both for the digestion of meates, breaking of
stone, and voiding of gravel.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though it is
currently little used in herbal medicine, sea fennel is a
good diuretic, and it has potential as a treatment for
obesity. Sea fennel has a high vitamin C and mineral
content, and is thought to relieve flatulence and
soothe the digestion. In this, the plant resembles its
inland namesake, fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212).
Glasswort (Salicornia europeae), also known as
samphire, is an unrelated coastal plant with a high

mineral content and is commonly eaten as a vegetable.

Croton spp. (Euphorbiacea)

Dragon's Blood,
Sangre de Drago

Description Fast-growing tree reaching 49 ft
(15 m) in height. It has large, heart-shaped leaves
and greenish-white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Dragon's blood
is a rainforest tree native to northwestern
Amazonia (from Bolivia to Colombia), preferring
riverbanks and sites with disturbed soil. It is
cultivated by the indigenous peoples there as
an environmentally sustainable crop.
Parts Used Latex, sap, resin (fresh or dried), bark.
Constituents Key constituents within dragon's
blood include proanthocyanidins, mono- and
diterpenes, an alkaloid (taspine), and a lignan
(dimethylcedrusine). Many constituents, notably
taspine and dimethyldedrusine, have potent
anti-inflammatory and wound healing properties.
Taspine also has cancer-fighting and antiviral activity.
History & Folklore Dragon's blood derives its
name from the deep red sap or latex that oozes
from the tree when the bark is cut. A prized
rainforest medicine, the latex is applied to wounds,
fractures, skin infections, and insect bites. Internally,
it is taken to treat diarrhea and dysentery,
stomach ulcers, viral infections, and as a vaginal
bath before and following childbirth. The first
written record of its use was in 1653 (Bernabe
Cobo, Historia del Nuevo Mundo).
Medicinal Actions & Uses Dragon's blood is
a first-rate wound healer and has been described
as a ‘liquid bandage.” Tissue healing and repair is
strongly stimulated, while the chances of infection

developing in open wounds and sores is minimized
due to the marked antiseptic action of the latex
and its ability to seal off the wound from the open
air. The latex (fresh or dried) is a key remedy for
herpes, including shingles and genital herpes, and
fungal skin infections. Taken internally, it helps to
treat and prevent gastrointestinal infection and
peptic ulcers, and to control diarrhea in conditions
such as ulcerative colitis. A patent U.S. medicine
(Crofelemer) derived from dragon's blood is
licensed for the treatment of chronic diarrhea,
typically in patients with HIV.
Related Species C. lecheri is most commonly
used to make dragon's blood, although similar
Croton species grow in Central America. C. flavens
(Yellow balsam), a traditional Mayan and Aztec
remedy, is used for fever and infections, and as a
wound salve. Dragon trees, such as the Socotra
dragon tree (Dracaena cinnabari), are desert trees
and unrelated to dragon's blood, though some also
produce a red latex.

Caution Can permanently stain clothing.

----- PAGE 199 -----
Cucurbita pepo (Cucurbitaceae)
Pumpkin

Description Annual plant with twining stems,
lobed leaves, yellow flowers, and large orange fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Probably native to
North America, pumpkin is now found worldwide.
It is harvested in autumn.

Parts Used Seeds, pulp.

Constituents Pumpkin seeds contain a fixed oil
(30-50%), which is mostly linoleic acid (43-56%)
and oleic acid (24-38%). The oil also contains
protein (31-51%), sterols, cucurbitin, vitamin E,
beta-carotene, and minerals (45%), including
significant levels of iron, zinc, and selenium.
History & Folklore The pumpkin has been
much used as a medicine in Central and North
America. The Maya applied the sap of the plant

to burns, the Menominee used the seeds as a
diuretic, and European settlers ground and mixed
the seeds with water, milk, or honey to make a
remedy for worms. This practice became so
widespread in homes across North America that
the medical profession eventually adopted it as a
standard treatment.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pumpkin has
been used mostly as a safe and effective deworming
agent, particularly in children and pregnant women
for whom strong-acting and toxic preparations are
inappropriate. It is thought most effective in
removing tapeworms. The seeds are diuretic and
tonic to the bladder, and they have distinct value in
treating the early stages of prostate enlargement.
The fruit pulp is used as a decoction to relieve
intestinal inflammation and is applied as a poultice
or plaster for burns.

Research Pumpkin seeds’ range of medicinal and
nutritional compounds ensures that they have great
value as a “natural” food supplement. A good
dietary source of zinc, the seeds also contain

Pumpkin was a popular medicinal plant in the Americas;
its seeds are still used to treat worms.

relatively high levels of selenium, a mineral with
important antioxidant and anticancer activity in
the body. Cucurbitin repels intestinal worms, and the
sterols are anti-inflammatory. Research suggests
that pumpkin seed is effective in helping reduce
benign enlargement of the prostate gland (BPH),
due to both the hormonal influence of the sterols
and this anti-inflammatory activity. In one clinical
trial pumpkin seeds were combined with saw
palmetto (Serenoa repens, p. 136) to treat BPH:
those taking the herbal extract showed improved
urine flow and reduced frequency of urination.

Cuminum cyminum (Apiaceae)

Cumin

Description Small annual growing to | ft
(30 cm). Has long, narrow segmented leaves,
clusters of pink or white flowers, and small
oblong ridged fruits.

Habitat & Cultivation Cumin is native to
Egypt and widely cultivated in southern Europe
and Asia. The seeds are gathered when ripe in
late summer.

Parts Used Seeds.
Constituents
Cumin seeds contain
2-5% volatile oil,
which consists of
25-35% aldehydes,
pinene, and alpha-
terpineol. The seeds
also contain flavonoids.

History & Folklore

A popular spice and medicinal herb in ancient
Egypt, cumin was used for illnesses of the
digestive system, for chest conditions and coughs,
as a painkiller, and to treat rotten teeth. The
herb is mentioned in the Old Testament and was
widely used in the Middle Ages. It has declined

in popularity since that time, although it is still
frequently used in contemporary Egyptian

herbal medicine. In cooking, cumin is an
ingredient that is found in many Chinese,

Indian, and Middle Eastern recipes, especially
curries and pickles.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cumin, like

its close relatives caraway (Carum carvi, p. 184)
and anise (Pimpinella anisum, p. 248), relieves
flatulence and bloating, and stimulates the entire
digestive process. It reduces abdominal gases and
distension and relaxes the gut. In Indian herbal
medicine, cumin is used for insomnia, colds and
fevers, and, mixed into a paste with onion juice,
has been applied to scorpion stings. The seeds
can be taken to improve breast-milk production—
a role it shares with fennel seeds (Foeniculum
vulgare, p. 212).

~

‘-

Seeds

Cupressus sempervirens
(Cupressaceae)

Cypress

Description Evergreen tree growing to 100 ft
(30 m). Has tiny dark green leaves, and male and
female cones.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Turkey
and cultivated in the Mediterranean, this herb

is gathered in spring.

Parts Used Cones, branches, essential oil.
Constituents Cypress contains a volatile oil
(with pinene, camphene, and cedrol) and tannins.
History & Folklore Ancient Greeks took

the cones, mashed and steeped in wine, to treat
dysentery, the coughing up of blood, asthma,

and coughs.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Applied
externally as a lotion or as a diluted essential oil,
cypress astringes varicose veins and hemorrhoids,
tightening up the blood vessels. A footbath of
the cones is used to cleanse the feet and counter
excessive sweating. Taken internally, cypress acts
as an antispasmodic and general tonic, and is
prescribed for whooping cough, the spitting up
of blood, and spasmodic coughs.
Colds, flu, and sore throats,

and rheumatic aches and
pains, also benefit from
this remedy.

Caution Do not take
the essential oil internally
without professional
supervision.

Cypress has properties
similar to those of
witch hazel.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

NN

197

----- PAGE 200 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

a

198

Curcuma zedoaria
(Zingiberaceae)

Zedoary

Description Perennial herb with large, tapering,
elliptical leaves, pink or yellow flowers, and an
aromatic, pale yellow root.
Habitat & Cultivation Zedoary is a common
Indian and East Asian plant. It is cultivated in India,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, China, and Madagascar.
Part Used Rhizome.
Constituents Zedoary contains a volatile oil,
sesquiterpenes, curcumemone, curcumol, and

curdione. Curcumol and curdione have cancer-
fighting properties.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An aromatic,
bitter digestive stimulant, zedoary is used in much
the same way as ginger (Zingiber officinale, p.
155)—to relieve indigestion, nausea, flatulence,
and bloating, and generally to improve digestion.
The rhizome is used in China to treat certain types
of tumors.

Research In trials carried out in China, zedoary
was found to reduce cervical cancer, and
increase the cancer-killing effects of radiotherapy
and chemotherapy.

Related Species In Chinese herbal medicine,
zedoary is often substituted for turmeric

(C. longa, p. 90).

Cuscuta epithymum
(Convolvulaceae)

Dodder,
Hellweed, Devil's Guts

Description Leafless parasitic plant. Has
threadlike stems, which are usually yellow-red in
color, and small, scented, pale pink flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Dodder grows
throughout Europe, Asia, and southern Africa. It
prefers coastal and mountainous regions, and is
gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Dodder contains flavonoids
(including kaempferol and quercitin), and
hydroxycinnamic acid.

History & Folklore Dodder has always

been an unpopular country plant. It is also known
as hellweed and devil's guts, due to its tendency to
overrun and strangle the plant on which it feeds.
This host can be thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143),
gorse (Ulex europeaus), or a crop such as beans.
Dodder does, however, have medicinal benefits.
In his Materia Medica, Dioscorides (| st century ce)
notes its use in classical times in combination

with honey to purge “black bile” and to lift a
melancholy humor. In 1652, the herbalist Nicholas

Culpeper similarly recommended it ‘to purge
black or burnt choler.’ Culpeper further states
that dodder plucked off thyme is the most
efficacious, making the interesting point that the
Parasite’s medicinal benefits are determined in
Part by its host.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In line with its
traditional use to purge black bile, dodder is still
considered a valuable, though little-used, herb for
problems affecting the liver and gallbladder. It is
thought to support liver function and is taken for
jaundice. Dodder has a mildly laxative effect, and is
also taken for urinary problems.

Related Species Greater dodder (C. europaea)
and flax dodder (C. epilinum) may be used in the
same way as C. epithymum. C. reflexa is employed in
Ayurvedic medicine to treat difficulty in urinating,
jaundice, muscle pain, and coughs.

Cyanopsis tetragonoloba
(Fabaceae)

Guar Gum

Description Erect annual growing to 2 ft (60 cm),
with hairy 3-lobed leaves, small purple flowers, and
fleshy seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Indian
subcontinent, guar gum is cultivated extensively

in India and Pakistan. The seed pods are harvested
when ripe in summer.

Parts Used Pods, seeds.
Constituents Guar gum contains about
86% water-soluble mucilage, comprising
mainly galactomannan.

History & Folklore Guar gum isa
viscous substance made from ground guar
seed mixed with water. It has been
used as a filter in the mining
industry, in paper manufacturing,
and in cosmetics.
Medicinal Actions &
Uses Guar gum is an
effective bulk laxative,
similar in action to
Psyllium (Plantago
ovata, p. 123). It delays
the emptying of the
stomach and thus slows down absorption of
carbohydrates. As this appears to help stabilize
blood-sugar levels, guar gum may prove useful in
prediabetic conditions and in the early stages of
type 2 diabetes. Research also indicates that
guar gum lowers cholesterol levels. In Indian
medicine, guar seed is a laxative and a

digestive tonic.

Caution Do not exceed the dose. Guar gum
can cause flatulence, abdominal distension, and
intestinal obstruction.

Cydonia oblonga (Rosaceae)

Quince

Description Deciduous tree growing to 26 ft
(8 m). Has green-grey oval leaves, pink or white
flowers, and yellow, pear-shaped sweet-smelling fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southwest
and central Asia, quince has become naturalized
in Europe, especially in the Mediterranean region.
lt grows in damp, rich soils in hedges and copses.
The fruit is harvested when ripe in autumn.
Parts Used Fruit, seeds.
Constituents The fruit contains tannin,
pectin, and fruit acids; the seeds contain about
20% mucilage, cyanogenic glycosides (including
amygdalin), fixed oil, and tannins.
History & Folklore The quince has long been
prized as a fruit and medicine in Greece and the
eastern Mediterranean. It was used as an astringent
in the time of Hippocrates (460-377 sce).
Dioscorides (40-90 ce) records a recipe for quince
oil, which was applied to itchy and infected wounds
and spreading sores. In northerly climates, quince is
often cooked to make a preserve. The English word
“marmalade,” meaning citrus fruit jam, comes from
the Portuguese word for quince, marmelo.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The great
astringency of the unripe fruit makes it useful as
a remedy for diarrhea, one that is particularly
safe for children. The fruit and its juice can also
be taken as a mouthwash or gargle to treat canker
sores, gum problems, and sore
throats. When cooked,
much of the fruit's

astringency is lost;
quince syrup is
recommended as a
pleasant, mildly astringent,
digestive drink. The seeds contain
significant quantities of mucilage
and are helpful both in
treating bronchitis and
as a bulk laxative.
Caution Do not use the
seeds except under
professional supervision.

Quince

Cymbopogon citratus
(Graminaceae)

Lemon Grass

Description Sweetly scented grass growing in
large clumps up to 5 ft (1.5 m). Has narrow leaf
blades and branched stalks of flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
India and Sri Lanka, lemon grass is now cultivated
in tropical regions around the world.

----- PAGE 201 -----
Lemon grass makes
a soothing tea.

Parts Used Leaves, essential oil.
Constituents Lemon grass contains a volatile oil
with citral (about 70%) and citronellal as its main
constituents. Both are markedly sedative.
History & Folklore Lemon grass is cultivated
for its oil, which is used as a culinary flavoring,

a scent, and medicinally.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Lemon grass

is principally taken as a tea to remedy digestive
problems. It relaxes the muscles of the stomach
and gut, relieves cramping pains and flatulence, and
is particularly suitable for children. In the Caribbean,
lemon grass is primarily regarded as a fever-reducing
herb (especially where there is significant
congestion). It is applied externally as a poultice or
as diluted essential oil to ease pain and arthritis. In
India, a paste of the leaves is smeared on patches
of ringworm.

Related Species C. martini and C. nardus yield
essential oils that are widely used in soaps and
detergents. In Tanzania, medicine men smoke the
flowers of C. densiflorus to produce dreams
foretelling the future.

Caution Do not take the essential oil internally
without professional supervision.

Cynara scolymus
syn. C. cardunculus (Asteraceae)

Artichoke

Description Perennial herb growing to 5 ft
(1.5 m). Has large, thistle-like leaves, grey-green
above and woolly white beneath, and very large
purple-green flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean region, artichoke thrives in rich
loam in warm temperate climates. Commercially
grown plants are renewed after 4 years. The
unopened flower heads and leaves are picked in
early summer.

Parts Used Flower heads, leaves, root.
Constituents All parts of the plant contain the
sesquiterpene lactone cynaropicrin (which is strongly
bitter) and much inulin. The leaves also contain
cynarin, which has liver-protective properties.
History & Folklore Artichokes were

greatly valued by the ancient Greeks and Romans.
Dioscorides (Ist century Ce) recommended
applying the mashed roots to the armpit or
elsewhere on the body to sweeten offensive odors.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Artichoke is a
valuable medicinal plant. Like milk thistle (Silybum
marianus, p. 137), it benefits the liver, protecting
against toxins and infection. Though the leaves are
particularly effective, all parts of the plant are
bitter and stimulate digestive secretions, especially
bile. This makes artichoke useful for the treatment
of gallbladder problems, nausea, indigestion, and
abdominal distension, with the added benefit that
it lowers blood cholesterol levels. A home recipe
from the Mediterranean region uses fresh artichoke
leaf juice mixed with wine or water as a liver tonic.
Artichoke is also taken during the early stages of
type 2 diabetes. It is a good food for diabetics,

as it significantly lowers blood sugar. It is also a
useful diuretic, and in France it has been used to
treat rheumatic conditions.

Research Research with laboratory animals

in the late 1990s has shown that artichoke has

a powerful positive effect on the liver. Artichoke
extracts, and cynaroside in particular, appear to
reduce cholesterol synthesis in the liver, while leaf
extracts are strongly antioxidant and liver protective.

Artichoke flower heads are nourishing and beneficial for the
liver and digestion.

Cyperus esculentus (Cyperaceae)

Chufa,
Tiger Nut

Description Erect, grass-like plant growing to
20 in (50 cm). Has cylindrical brown tubers, lance-
shaped leaves, and rays of small spikes of green-
brown flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean region, chufa was first introduced to
Spain and North Africa by the Arabs. It now grows
worldwide, including in India. The tubers (called
“nuts’’) are unearthed in winter and summer.
Parts Used Tubers.

Constituents Chufa contains 20-36% fixed oil,
known as chufa or tiger nut oil.

History & Folklore Chufa nuts have been
found in the excavations of the earliest settlements
in the Nile Valley, and since ancient times they have
remained a popular food in the region. The Greek
physician Dioscorides, writing in the Ist century CE,
mentions their ability to comfort the stomach.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Chufa is regarded
as a digestive tonic, having a heating and drying effect
on the digestive system and alleviating flatulence. It
also promotes urine production and menstruation.
The juice is taken to heal ulcers of the mouth and
gums. Ayurvedic medicine classifies the nuts as
digestive, tonic, and aphrodisiac.

Related Species Many other species of
Cyperus are used as foods or medicines. For
example, in Chinese herbal medicine C. rotundus
is used as a liver tonic, to counter indigestion and
to promote menstruation. C. stolonifera, native to
tropical regions of Asia and Australia, is thought
to ease stomach pain and act as a heart stimulant.
Perhaps the most famous Cyperus species of all

is papyrus (C. papyrus). This plant provided fiber
for the first writing paper, invented by the ancient
Egyptians. Papyrus was also chewed like sugar cane,
and used medicinally in eye compresses and to
bandage wounds.

Cypripedium pubescens
(Orchidaceae)

Lady's Slipper,
American Valerian

Description Perennial orchid with several
stems sheathed by broad lance-shaped leaves.
Has beautiful, complex golden-yellow and purple
flowers in late summer.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is native to
eastern North America. Its natural habitat is woods
and pastures, but due to overharvesting, it is rarely
found in the wild. It is cultivated to a limited degree.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

i

ae

199

----- PAGE 202 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Part Used Rootstock.

Constituents Lady’ slipper is poorly
researched, but it is known to contain a volatile oil,
resins, glucosides, and tannins.

History & Folklore Lady’ slipper was held in
high regard by Native Americans, who used it as a
sedative and antispasmodic. It was commonly taken
to ease menstrual and labor pains, and to counter
insomnia and nervous conditions. The Cherokee
used one variety to treat worms in children. In the
Anglo-American Physiomedicalist tradition, lady's
slipper had many uses. Swinburne Clymer (in Nature's
Healing Agents, 1905) considered the plant “of special
value in reflex functional disorders, or chorea,
hysteria, nervous headache, insomnia, low fevers,
nervous unrest, hypochondria, and nervous
depression accompanying stomach disorders.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Due to its scarcity
and cost, lady's slipper is now rarely used. A sedative
and relaxing herb, it treats anxiety, stress-related
disorders such as palpitations, headaches, muscular
tension, panic attacks, and neurotic conditions
generally. Like valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148),
lady's slipper is an effective tranquilizer. It reduces
emotional tension and often calms the mind
sufficiently to allow sleep. Indeed, its restorative
effect appears to be more positive than that

of valerian.

Caution In view of its rarity, lady's slipper should
no longer be used medicinally.

Cytisus scoparius syn. Sarothamnus
scoparius (Fabaceae)

Broom

Description Tall deciduous shrub growing

to 6% ft (2 m). Has narrow ridged stems, small
trefoil leaves, and bright yellow flowers in leafy
terminal spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
broom is commonly found on heaths and verges,
and in open woodland. It is naturalized in many
temperate regions, including in the U.S. The
flowering tops are picked from spring to autumn.
Parts Used Flowering tops.

Constituents Broom contains quinolizidine
alkaloids (particularly sparteine and lupanine),
phenethylamines (including tyramine), isoflavones
(such as genistein), flavonoids, a volatile oil, caffeic
and p-coumaric acids, tannins, and pigments.
Sparteine reduces the heart rate and the
isoflavones are estrogenic.

History & Folklore Both the common and
species names of this plant indicate its usefulness
as a sweeper (‘‘scopa”’ means “broom” in Latin).
Brooms medicinal value is not mentioned in
classical writings, but it does appear in medieval
herbals. The | 2th-century Welsh Physicians of

Broom, taken under professional guidance, helps to
regulate an overly rapid heartbeat.

Myddfai recommend broom as a means to treat
suppressed urine: “seek broom seed, and grind
into fine powder, mix with drink and let it be
drank. Do this till you are quite well!’ Broom tops
have been pickled and used as a condiment similar
to capers (Capparis spinosa, p. 182).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Broom is used
mainly as a remedy for an irregular, fast heartbeat.
The plant acts on the electrical conductivity of the
heart, slowing and regulating the transmission

of the impulses. Broom is also strongly diuretic,
stimulating urine production and thus countering
fluid retention. Since broom causes the muscles of
the uterus to contract, it has been used to prevent
blood loss after childbirth.

@ Cautions Take broom internally only under
professional supervision. Do not take during
pregnancy, or if suffering from high blood pressure.
The plant is subject to legal restrictions in

some countries.

Daphne mezereum
(Thymelaeaceae)

Mezereon

Description Hardy deciduous shrub growing
to 4 ft (1.2 m). Has oval to lance-shaped leaves,
clusters of red or pink flowers, and small

red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Mezereon is found in
Europe, North Africa, and western Asia, in damp
mountain woodlands. It is cultivated as a garden
plant. The root and bark are gathered in autumn.
Parts Used Root, root bark, bark.
Constituents Mezereon contains diterpenes
(including daphnetoxin and mezerein), mucilage,
and tannins. Though highly toxic, daphnetoxin and
mezerein have antileukemic properties and have
been used to treat cancer.

History & Folklore Mezereon was formerly
well used in northern Europe, both internally as

a purgative and externally as an ointment for
cancerous sores and skin ulcers. The Swedish
naturalist Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778) recorded
that the bark was applied to the bites of poisonous
reptiles and rabid dogs. People have reportedly
died simply from eating birds that have eaten the
highly poisonous berries.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Today, mezereon
is considered too poisonous to be ingested.
Mezereon is used occasionally as an external
counterirritant and is effective on rheumatic

joints, increasing blood flow to the affected area.
@ Cautions Under no circumstances should
mezereon be taken internally. It should only be
used externally under professional supervision,
and never on open wounds.

Mezereon was once
used as a remedy
for rheumatic joints.

Datura stramonium (Solanaceae)

Thornapple

Description Robust annual growing to 3 ft

(| m). Has lobed oval leaves, long white or violet
trumpet-shaped flowers, and spiny fruit capsules.
Habitat & Cultivation Thornapple grows in
the Americas, Europe, Asia, and North Africa. It
is cultivated for medicinal use in Hungary, France,
and Germany. The leaves and flowering tops are
harvested in summer, and the seeds in early
autumn when the capsules burst.

Parts Used Leaves, flowering tops, seeds.

----- PAGE 203 -----
Thornapple seeds and
leaves ease asthma, but are
hallucinogenic in large doses.

Constituents Thornapple contains 0.2-0.45%
tropane alkaloids (especially hyoscyamine and
hyoscine), flavonoids, steroidal lactones,
withanolides, coumarins, and tannins. The tropane
alkaloids are similar to those found in deadly
nightshade (Atropa belladonna, p. 69), acting to
reduce secretions and relax smooth muscle.
History & Folklore Thornapple has a long
history of medicinal use. If taken in sufficient doses,
it causes hallucinations; the Delphic oracle in ancient
Greece and the Inca in South America may have
used it as an aid to making prophecies. Though it is
hallucinogenic, thornapple has traditionally been
used to treat insanity.

Medicinal Actions & Uses At low doses,
thornapple is a common remedy for asthma,
whooping cough, muscle spasms, and the
symptoms of Parkinsonism. It relaxes the muscles
of the gastrointestinal, bronchial, and urinary tracts,
and reduces digestive and mucous secretions. Like
deadly nightshade, thornapple may be applied
externally to relieve rheumatic pains and neuralgia.
Related Species D, metel and D. innoxia are both
native to India. These plants are employed in treating
asthma, coughs, fevers, and skin conditions.

@ @ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Since it is toxic at more than small
doses, thornapple is subject to legal restrictions

in most countries.

Daucus carota (Apiaceae)

Carrot

Description Annual (cultivated varieties) or
biennial (wild). Has erect stem, which grows to a
height of 3 ft (1 m), with feathery leaves, small
white flowers, and flat green seeds. Cultivated
subspecies have fleshy orange taproots.

Habitat & Cultivation Wild carrot is native
to Europe, although cultivated subspecies are now
grown around the world. The root is harvested in
late summer, and the seeds are gathered in late
summer or early autumn.

Parts Used Seeds, root, leaves.
Constituents Wild carrot seeds contain
flavonoids, and a volatile oil including asarone,
carotol, pinene, and limonene. Cultivated carrot
root contains sugars, pectin, carotene, vitamins,
minerals, and asparagine. Carrot leaves contain
significant amounts of porphyrins, which stimulate
the pituitary gland and lead to the release of
increased levels of sex hormones.

History & Folklore The origins of the familiar
garden carrot are a mystery—it was cultivated as a
nutritious and cleansing food at least as long ago as
ancient Greece and Rome. In the Ist century ce, the
physician Dioscorides recommended the seeds to
stimulate menstruation, to relieve urinary
retention, and to “wake up the genital virtue.”
The cultivated variety did not reach Britain until the
| 6th century, when women used its beautiful,
finely divided leaves to adorn their hair.
Medicinal Actions & Uses This common
vegetable is also a wonderfully cleansing medicine.
It supports the liver, and stimulates urine flow and
the removal of waste by the kidneys. The juice of
organically grown carrots is a delicious drink and

a valuable detoxifier. Carrots are rich in carotene,
which is converted to vitamin A by the liver. The
raw root, grated or mashed, is a safe treatment for
threadworms, especially in children. Wild carrot
leaves are a good diuretic. They have been used to
counter cystitis and kidney stone formation, and
to diminish stones that have already formed. The
seeds are also diuretic. They stimulate menstruation
and have been used in folk medicine as a treatment
for hangovers. Both leaves and seeds relieve
flatulence and settle the digestion.

Research In a study published in 1995, a carrot
extract was shown to protect the liver from toxicity.
Cautions Do not take carrot seeds during
pregancy. Use only organic carrot juice since

the root concentrates artificial fertilizers

and insecticides.

Desmodium adscendens (Fabaceae)

Desmodium

Description Perennial, much-branched herb,
growing to 20 in (50 cm). Desmodium has light
purple flowers, and the leaves each have three
small oval leaflets.

Habitat & Cultivation A native of West
Africa, including Sierra Leone, northern Liberia and
Ghana. The aerial parts are harvested as required
or after flowering.

Parts Used Leaves and stems.
Constituents Contains indole alkaloids.
History & Folklore Desmodium has long
been used in West African herbal medicine as a
treatment for asthma, and also for jaundice.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Desmodium is
chiefly a remedy for asthma and has been used as
an antiasthmatic in Ghanaian hospitals. In France,
the herb is taken for liver disorders including viral
hepatitis—both A and B—apparently having most
effect during the early stages. Desmodium may
also be used to relieve headache, backache, and
muscle and joint pain—a decoction being taken
internally or applied as a lotion.

Research Ghanaian research has shown the herb
to have antispasmodic and antiasthmatic activity. It
also appears to increase the resistance of liver cells
to inflammation, whether resulting from infection
or toxicity. When taken in the early stages of
illness, it normalizes liver function.

Caution In rare cases, desmodium can cause
nausea or diarrhea.

Dianthus superbus
(Caryophyllacaea)

Fringed Pink,
Qu Mai (Chinese)

Description Upright perennial herb growing to
32 in (80 cm) or more. Has narrow, lance-shaped
leaves and large, delicate, fragrant pink or lilac flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Fringed pink is native
to Europe and northern Asia (including China

and Japan) growing at altitudes of up to 7,900 ft
(2,400 m). It grows in clumps on hillsides and
crevices, and is cultivated from seed in eastern
China. It is only harvested when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Fringed pink contains saponins,
dianthins, tannins and flavonoids.

History & Folklore Fringed pink is first
mentioned in the Chinese herbal known as the
Divine Husbandman’s Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing),
which was written in the Ist century CE.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Although fringed
pink is common in Europe, there is little indication
that people there have used it as anything other
than a vegetable (the young leaves are best boiled
or steamed). In Mongolia, it is used to promote
contractions and childbirth, and is considered a
diuretic, hemostatic, and anti-inflammatory. In
Chinese medicine it is widely used for “'damp-heat’”
conditions, and prescribed for kidney stones and
urinary tract infections.

Research Research, mostly conducted in

Korea and China, indicates that fringed pink has
marked anti-inflammatory activity and possible
cancer-fighting properties.

Related Species The gillyflower (D. caryophyllus),
of Mediterranean origin, has similar constituents
and is traditionally prescribed in European herbal
medicine for coronary and nervous disorders.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

Ny

201

----- PAGE 204 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

202

Dictamnus albus (Rutaceae)

Dittany,
Burning Bush

Description Strongly aromatic, bushy, and hairy
perennial growing to 32 in (80 cm). Has compound
leaves and spikes of 5-petaled white or pink flowers
streaked with purple.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb grows in
southern and central Europe and northern Asia,
preferring warm, wooded areas. The flowering
tops are gathered in late summer, the root
generally in autumn.

Parts Used Root, flowering tops.

Dittany flowers were formerly used to make a preparation
that was sniffed up the nose as a treatment for head colds.

Constituents Dittany’s potent volatile oil
contains estragol and anethole, and a toxic
alkaloid, dictamnin.

History & Folklore Dittany exudes such large
amounts of volatile oil that in hot, dry conditions, a
match held close will cause the whole plant to burst
into flames. The plant has been used to flavor
liqueurs and has been brewed as a tea in parts
of Siberia. In European folk medicine, dittany was
considered an antidote to poison, pestilence, and
the bites of all types of venomous animals.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Very rarely used
by herbalists today, dittany has an action similar
to that of rue (Ruta graveolens, p. 265), in that

it strongly stimulates the muscles of the uterus,
inducing menstruation and sometimes causing
abortion. By contrast, its effect on the
gastrointestinal tract is antispasmodic. Dittany
relaxes the gut and acts as a mild tonic for the
stomach. The plant has also been used as a
treatment for nervous conditions.

2 @ Cautions This herb is toxic. Take only
under professional supervision. Do not take
during pregnancy.

Digitalis lutea (Scrophulariaceae)

Yellow Foxglove

Description Erect perennial growing to 3 ft

(1 m). Has narrow, lance-shaped leaves, and long
spikes of yellow, bell-shaped flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
and central Europe, this herb grows in woodland
areas, on roadsides, and in mountainous regions. It
is cultivated for medicinal use in Russia. The leaves
are harvested in the second summer of growth.
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Yellow foxglove contains
cardiac glycosides (including the cardenolides
alpha-acetyldigitoxin, acetyldigitoxin, and
lanatoside). All act to strengthen the beating

of a weakened heart.

History & Folklore Unlike the closely
related common foxglove (D. purpurea,

following entry), yellow foxglove does not

appear to have played a significant role in
European herbal medicine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Yellow foxglove
is little employed in herbal medicine, but in fact
it is a less toxic alternative to purple foxglove and
woolly foxglove (D. lanata). It has similar medicinal
actions but its alkaloids are more readily metabolized
and flushed out by the body. Like other foxgloves,
this plant supports a weakened or failing heart,
increasing the strength of contraction, slowing
and steadying the heart rate, and lowering blood
pressure by strongly stimulating the production
of urine, which reduces overall blood volume.
Related Species Common foxglove

(following entry).

2 @ Cautions Excessive doses of yellow
foxglove can prove fatal. Use only under
professional supervision. This plant is subject

to legal restrictions in some countries.

Digitalis purpurea
(Scrophulariaceae)

Common Foxglove,
Purple Foxglove

Description Perennial growing to 5 ft (1.5 m).
Has a single erect stem, broad lance-shaped leaves,
and bell-shaped, purple-pink or white flowers in
long spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation This herb is native to
western Europe. Though it is also cultivated, the
wild plant is considered superior. The leaves are
picked in summer.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Foxglove contains cardiac glycosides

(including digoxin, digitoxin, and lanatosides),
anthraquinones, flavonoids, and saponins. Digitoxin

rapidly strengthens the heartbeat, but is excreted
very slowly. Digoxin is therefore preferred as a
long-term medication.
History & Folklore |n medical history, foxglove
is best known as the discovery of William Withering,
an | 8th-century English country doctor. Curious
about the formula of a local herbalist, he explored
the plant's potential medical uses. His work led to
the production of a life-saving medicine.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Foxglove has a
profound tonic effect on a diseased heart. Heart
disease worsens when the heart's ability to maintain
normal circulation decreases. Foxglove's cardiac
glycosides enable the heart to beat more strongly,

slowly, and regularly, without requiring more oxygen.
At the same time, it stimulates urine production,
which lowers the volume of blood, and thus lessens
the load on the heart.

Related Species Woolly foxglove (D. anata)

is today the main source of cardiac glycosides.

2 @ Cautions
Potentially fatal in
overdose. Use only
under professional
supervision. This
plant is subject to
legal restrictions.

Common foxglove
enables the heart
to beat more
evenly and is an
invaluable remedy
for heart disease.

----- PAGE 205 -----
Dipsacus fullonum (Dipsacaceae)

Teasel

Description Perennial with a spiny ridged stem
growing to 6/4 ft (2 m), lance-shaped leaves, and
lilac-colored flowers blooming from hooked heads.
Habitat & Cultivation Common throughout
Europe and western Asia, teasel thrives on open
areas, roadsides, and banks. It is cultivated only on a
small scale. The root is unearthed in late summer.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Teasel contains inulin, bitter
substances, and a scabioside.

History & Folklore Traditionally, the root
was used to treat conditions such as warts, fistulas
(abnormal passages opening through the skin), and
cancerous sores. The water that collects in the leaf
was called ‘‘Venus's bath” by early herbalists, and was
thought to be very beneficial for the eyes.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Teasel root is
little used medicinally today, and its therapeutic
applications are disputed. It is thought to have
diuretic, sweat-inducing, and stomach-soothing
properties, cleansing the system and improving
digestion. Due to its apparent astringency, teasel is
considered helpful in diarrhea. It is also thought to
increase appetite, to tone the stomach, and to act on
the liver, helping with jaundice and gallbladder
problems. A new application of teasel, so far
unsubstantiated, is in the treatment of Lyme disease.

Teasel was traditionally used to treat warts and fistulas.

Dorema ammoniacum (Apiaceae)

Ammoniacum

Description Very large perennial herb growing
to a height of 10 ft (3 m), with a stout stem,
compound leaves, and umbels of white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Ammoniacum is native
to central Asia, lran, and northern Russia. When
pierced, the stem exudes a milky gum, which is
pressed into blocks and then ground into a powder.
Part Used Oleo-gum-resin.

Constituents Ammoniacum contains a resin
(60-70%), gum, volatile oil (including ferulene and
linalyl acetate), free salicylic acid, and coumarins.
History & Folklore Ammoniacum's medicinal
value has been appreciated since ancient times, and
is mentioned by Hippocrates (460-377 sce). The
herb’s common name reputedly derives from

the Temple of Jupiter Ammon in Libya, in an area
where it was commonly collected.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Used in both
Western and Indian medicine, ammoniacum is still
listed in the British Pharmacopoeia as an antispasmodic
and as an expectorant that stimulates the coughing
up of thick mucus. It is a specific treatment for
chronic bronchitis, asthma, and persistent coughs.
Ammoniacum is also occasionally used to induce
sweating or menstruation.

Other Species Ammoniacum is medicinally
similar to asafoetida (Ferula assa-foetida, p. 210)
and galbanum (Ferula gummosa, p. 21 1).

Dorstenia contrajerva (Urticaceae)

Contrayerva

Description Stemless perennial herb growing
to | ft (30 cm). Has palm-shaped leaves and long-
stalked greenish flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Central
and South America and the Caribbean islands,
contrayerva is generally gathered from the wild.
Part Used Rhizome.

History & Folklore Contrayerva means
“antidote” in Spanish, indicating its traditional use
in the treatment of poisoning and venomous bites.
The herb was employed in Mayan and Aztec
medicine for a variety of purposes, including as

a poultice to draw pus.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Contrayerva
rhizome is considered aromatic, stimulant, and
sweat-inducing. Occasionally used in the early
stages of serious fevers such as typhoid, it is also
given for gastrointestinal problems such as
diarrhea and dysentery. There is no scientific
substantiation of its reputation as an antidote.
Related Species D. convexa, native to Zaire, is
used as a wound healer; D. klainei is used in tropical
Africa as a gargle.

Drosera rotundifolia
(Droseraceae)

Sundew

Description Evergreen, insectivorous perennial
growing to 6 in (15 cm). Has small white flowers.
The hinged, spoon-shaped leaves edged with spines
secrete a sticky fluid (“sundew”), which traps
insects. They are digested when the leaf closes.

Sundew was once considered a refreshing herb because
it maintained its “dew” even in full sun.

Habitat & Cultivation Sundew grows in
Europe, Asia, and North America, and is found

in marshy ground at altitudes up to 5,900 ft
(1,800 m). Formerly it was picked while in flower
in summer. As it is now rare, it should not be
gathered from the wild.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Sundew contains naphthaquinones,
enzymes, flavonoids, and volatile oil. The
naphthaquinones are antimicrobial, antispasmodic,
and also cough-suppressing.

History & Folklore In the | 6th and |7th
centuries, sundew was thought to be a remedy
for melancholy. In his Irish Herbal (1735), K’Eogh
advised using sundew to “eat away rotten sores.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sundew is of
greatest value in the treatment of spasmodic chest
conditions such as whooping cough, bronchial
asthma, and asthma. In relaxing the muscles of the
respiratory tract, the plant eases breathing, relieves
wheezing, and lessens the spasms of whooping
cough. Commonly mixed with thyme in a syrup,
sundew is a helpful remedy for coughs in children.
The herb is also prescribed for gastric problems.

Echium vulgare (Boraginaceae)

Viper’s Bugloss

Description Abundantly hairy perennial growing
up to 3 ft (1 m). Has narrow prickly leaves and pink
to violet clusters of flowers in dense spikes.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
viper's bugloss is commonly found on uncultivated
land, by roadsides, and in low-lying and coastal
regions. The flowering tops are gathered in

late summer.

Parts Used Flowering tops.

Constituents Viper's bugloss contains
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, allantoin, alkannins, and
mucilage. In isolation, pyrrolizidine alkaloids are
toxic to the liver. The alkannins are antimicrobial
and allantoin helps wounds to heal.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 206 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

204

History & Folklore As its name suggests,
viper's bugloss was once considered a preventative
and remedy for viper bite. In his 1656 The Art of
Simpling, herbalist William Coles described the
plant: “‘its stalks all to be speckled like a snake or
viper, and is a most singular remedy against poison
and the sting of scorpions.’ Four years earlier, the
English herbalist Nicholas Culpeper had praised its
action against ‘‘the biting of vipers.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses In many respects,
viper's bugloss is similar to borage (Borago officinalis,
p. 179), in that both herbs have a sweat-inducing
and diuretic effect if taken internally. Viper’s bugloss
has also been taken to treat chest conditions, as its
mucilage soothes dry coughs and encourages
expectoration. The significant mucilage content in
viper's bugloss has also proved helpful in treating
skin conditions. Prepared in a poultice or plaster,

it is an effective balm for boils and carbuncles. In
recent times, this herb has fallen out of use, due
partly to lack of interest in its medicinal potential,
and partly to its pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which in
isolation are toxic. Viper's bugloss may be safely
used externally on unbroken skin.

@ Caution Do not take internally.

Viper’s bugloss makes a
soothing poultice for treating
boils and carbuncles.

Eclipta prostrata syn. E. alba
(Asteraceae)

Trailing Eclipta

Description Multi-branched annual growing

to 2 ft (60 cm). Has lance-shaped leaves and
white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Trailing eclipta is
native to Africa, Asia, and Australia. It is now found
throughout the tropics, being particularly common
in India, China, and Queensland and New South
Wales in Australia. It is harvested in early autumn.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Trailing eclipta contains
triterpenoid saponins, including ecliptine and
alpha-terthienylmethanol, isoflavonoids,

and phytosterols.

Trailing eclipta is taken in India and China to stop premature
graying of the hair.

History & Folklore Trailing eclipta is first
mentioned in herbal literature in the Chinese
Tang Materia Medica of 659 ce. The herb contains a
black pigment that has been used to color the hair
in India, and mothers wash babies’ heads in a
decoction of the leaves to encourage hair growth.
It is also used as an ink for tattooing. The leaves
are also eaten as a vegetable.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Trailing eclipta has
remarkably similar uses in Ayurvedic and Chinese
herbal medicine. In both of these traditions, a
decoction is used to invigorate the liver, to prevent
premature graying of the hair, and to staunch
bleeding, especially from the uterus. In the Chinese
tradition, the herb is considered a yin tonic;

in Ayurvedic medicine it is thought to prevent
aging. In the Caribbean, the juice is sometimes
taken for asthma and bronchitis. Trailing eclipta

is also used there as a treatment for enlarged
glands, as well as for dizziness, vertigo, and
blurred vision.

Research Several laboratory experiments

have shown that eclipta regulates enzyme levels
within the liver and exerts a protective activity

on it.

Embelia ribes (Myrsinaceae)

Embelia

Description Climber with short, elliptical leaves,
white or white-green flowers, and round red or
black fruits.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to India and
Southeast Asia, embelia grows in hilly regions.

The fruit is harvested when ripe.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Embelia contains naphthaquinones,
including embelin. Embelin stimulates the production
of estrogen and progesterone, and it may have a
contraceptive effect.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Embelia has
been used in Asia as a home remedy for expelling
worms. The herb is also diuretic and relieves
flatulence, and is used for indigestion, colic,
constipation, and debility.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Emblica officinalis
(Euphorbiaceae)

Indian Gooseberry

Description Deciduous tree with feathery
leaves, pale green flowers, and round pale green
or yellow fruit. Also known as amla.
Habitat & Cultivation Indian gooseberry
grows in China, India, and Southeast Asia and is
widely cultivated for its fruit.
Part Used Fruit.
Constituents Indian gooseberry contains
tannins, polyphenols, flavonoids, a fixed oil, and
a volatile oil.
History & Folklore The Indian gooseberry
features in a 7th-century Ayurvedic medical text.
The sage Muni Chyawan reputedly restored his
vitality with this fruit.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
Indian gooseberry is given to allay the effects of
aging and to restore the organs. In Ayurvedic
medicine, the fruit juice is given to strengthen
the pancreas of diabetics. It is one of the three
herbs in the classic Ayurvedic herbal formula
nown as ‘Triphala.’
Research Recent research suggests that Indian
gooseberry might have a remarkably wide range
of potential medicinal benefits. A study in Kerala,
ndia, showed that it may have protective activity
against liver cancer. Other studies indicate
potential anti-inflammatory and fever-inhibiting
effects, and a cholesterol-lowering action.
A study undertaken in Bombay concluded that
the fruit might prove useful in the treatment of
acute pancreatitis.

----- PAGE 207 -----
Entada phaseoloides (Fabaceae)

Matchbox Bean

Description Woody vine with compound
leaves and clusters of pea-type flowers. Huge,
flat brown seed pods, containing black glossy
seeds, grow to 5 ft (1.5 m) in length, making
them the largest-growing legumes in the world.
Habitat & Cultivation Matchbox bean is
native to Australia and tropical regions of Asia
and Africa. The seeds are collected when the
pods are ripe.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents Matchbox bean contains
significant amounts of saponins.

History & Folklore The young leaves and
roasted bean are eaten as vegetables, whereas
fiber from the stems is made into nets, ropes, and
sails. Due to the plant's high saponin content, it is
used as a shampoo.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Australian
Aborigines use the seeds to treat female
sterility and indigestion, and as a painkiller.

In the Philippines, juice made from the bark

is used to treat conjunctivitis.

Equisetum arvense (Equisetaceae)
Horsetail,
Bottlebrush

Description Perennial plant with a yellowish
fruiting stem growing to |4 in (35 cm), followed
by a sterile segmented and toothed stem growing
to 2 ft (60 cm). The latter has whorls of needle-
shaped leaves.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to

Europe, North Africa, northern Asia, and the
Americas, horsetail is a common plant, preferring
damp soil. The sterile stems are harvested in
summer and carefully dried, all discolored parts
being discarded.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Horsetail contains large amounts
of silicic acid and silicates (about 15%), flavonoids,
phenolic acids, alkaloids (including nicotine), and
sterols. Much of the therapeutic effectiveness of
this herb is due to its high silica content, a large
proportion of which is soluble and can be
absorbed. Silica supports the regeneration

of connective tissue.

History & Folklore Horsetail is a primitive
plant that is descended from huge trees that
lived during the Palaeozoic era (600-375 million
years ago). The herb's high silica content makes it
abrasive, and in the past it was used to polish metal
and wood. Its common name, bottlebrush,
indicates another of its uses. Horsetail was also

tied to the tails of livestock to help them ward off
flies. It was long considered a wound-healing herb.
The English herbalist John Gerard, writing in 1597,
recounted: “Dioscorides saith, that the horse-taile
being stamped and laid to, doth perfectly cure
wounds, yea although the sinues be cut in sunder, as
Galen addeth.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses As its traditional
usage indicates, horsetail is an excellent clotting
agent. It staunches wounds, stops nosebleeds, and
reduces the coughing up of blood. In addition,
horsetail has an astringent effect on the
genitourinary system, proving especially valuable
where there is bleeding within the urinary tract,
and in cases of cystitis, urethritis, and prostate
disease. Horsetail helps to speed the repair of
damaged connective tissue, improving its strength
and elasticity. The herb is also prescribed to treat
problems related to rheumatic and arthritic
problems, for chest ailments (such as emphysema),
for chronic swelling of the legs, and for various
other conditions. A decoction of the herb'’s aerial
parts added to a bath benefits slow-healing sprains
and fractures, as well as
certain irritable skin
conditions such

as eczema.

Dried aerial parts

Horsetail staunches bleeding,
and is astringent and diuretic.

Cautions Horsetail breaks down vitamin B,
(thiamine) and should generally be taken long
term only in tandem with a B vitamin supplement.

Eriodictyon californicum
(Hydrophyllaceae)

Yerba Santa

Description Sticky evergreen shrub growing
to 8 ft (2.5 m). Its narrow lance-shaped leaves are
shiny green on the upper side and hairy white
underneath. Trumpet-shaped white or blue
flowers grow in clusters.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to California
and Oregon in the U.S., and northern Mexico,
yerba santa flourishes on dry mountain slopes.
It grows at altitudes of up to 3,900 ft (1,200 m).
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Yerba santa contains a volatile
oil, flavonoids (including eriodictyol), and resin.
History & Folklore The name yerba santa
(holy weed) was given to this plant by Spanish
colonists who learned of its medicinal virtues
from Native Americans. Traditionally, the leaves
were infused and taken for coughs, colds, sore
throats, mucus, and asthma. The infusion was
also used as a wash to ease fever, and the mashed
leaves were applied as a poultice to treat sores.
Medicinal Actions & Uses An aromatic
herb with a pleasant sweet taste, yerba santa is

a valuable expectorant that can be used to treat
tracheitis, bronchitis, and asthma, and similar
respiratory tract ailments.

Ervatamia coronaria (Apocynaceae)
Grape Jasmine,
East Indian Rosebay

Description Perennial shrub growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m). Has dark green, elliptical leaves and
strongly perfumed white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Grape jasmine is
grown in India, Malaysia, and Indonesia.

Parts Used Root, leaves, latex.
Constituents Grape jasmine contains alkaloids
and resins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Ayurvedic
medicine, the root and the latex are used to
expel worms. The root is also chewed to relieve
toothache. The latex is used to treat cataracts
(especially in the early stages), eye inflammations,
and poor eyesight. The leaf juice makes a soothing
treatment for skin irritations and wounds.

@ Caution Use grape jasmine only under
professional supervision.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

205

----- PAGE 208 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

206

Eryngium maritimum (Apiaceae)
Sea Holly,

Eryngo

Description Evergreen perennial growing
to 2 ft (60 cm). Has spiny silver leaves, and tiny
flowers in summer.

Habitat Sea holly is found in coastal areas
of Europe, preferring sandy soils. The root is
unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Sea holly contains saponins,
coumarins, flavonoids, and plant acids.

Sea holly has distinctive silver
leaves and is often seen in
coastal areas of Europe.

History & Folklore In | 7th-century England,
sea holly root was candied and eaten as a
sweetmeat. It was also consumed as a means of
preventing scurvy. In his Irish Herbal (1735), K'Eogh
states that the herb “provokes urination and
menstruation, encourages flatulence, and removes
obstructions of the liver, kidneys, and bladder.” In
K'Eogh's time, sea holly was a popular medicinal
herb, and was considered helpful in the treatment
of a wide array of neurological conditions, including
paralysis and convulsions.

Medicinal Actions & Uses |n contemporary
European herbal medicine, sea holly is used as a
diuretic. It is prescribed as a treatment for cystitis
and urethritis, and taken as a means to alleviate
kidney stones. It is unlikely that the herb actually
dissolves established stones, but it probably helps
retard their formation. Sea holly is also used

to treat enlargement or inflammation of the
prostate gland, and may be of benefit in treating
chest problems.

Erythraea centaurium
(Gentianaceae)

Centaury

Description Biennial herb growing to 94 in
(24 cm) with a basal rosette of leaves and
5-petaled pink flowers in clusters.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and southwestern Asia, centaury is now found in
temperate regions throughout the world. The plant
is harvested in summer when just about to flower.
Parts used Aerial parts.
Constituents Centaury contains many bitter
constituents, including secoiridoids, also found in
gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99).
History & Folklore In classical myth, the
centaur Chiron used this herb to treat a poisoned
arrow wound.
Medicinal Actions & Uses One of the most
useful bitter herbs, centaury has a relatively mild
bitter action, stimulating appetite as well as digestive
secretions from the salivary glands, stomach,
intestines, and gallbladder. With increased
digestive juices, food is processed and
broken down more effectively, leading
to better absorption of nutrients. For
best results, centaury should be taken
over several weeks. The preparation
should be slowly sipped so that the
components (detectable at a dilution of
up to 1:3,500) can stimulate reflex activity
throughout the upper digestive tract.
Self-help Uses Weak digestion, p. 306; Gas &
bloating, p. 306.

Erythrina variegata (Fabaceae)
Indian Coral Tree,
Dadap (Hindi)

Description Deciduous tree growing to 59 ft
(18 m). Has prickly stems, leaves with triangular
leaflets, and pea-like red flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Indian coral tree
grows in deciduous forests throughout much

of the Indian subcontinent.

Parts Used Bark, leaves.

Constituents Indian coral tree contains
alkaloids, isoflavonoids, triterpenoids, and lectins.
The alkaloids are anti-inflammatory and analgesic,
and the isoflavonoids display antibacterial activity.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Ayurvedic
medicine, Indian coral tree is used to treat
inflammatory conditions, period pain, and
problems related to eating and digestion, including
anorexia, flatulence, colic, and worms. The bark is
used to treat skin problems and fever. A paste
made from the leaves is applied to heal wounds.

Erythronium americanum
(Liliaceae)

Trout Lily

Description Perennial growing to 10 in (25 cm)
from a small, bulblike corm. Has two oblong leaves
mottled with purple and a large, bright yellow

lily flower.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, trout lily is found mainly in the east,

from New Brunswick to Florida. It prefers damp
woodland and open ground. The leaves are
gathered in summer.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Very little is known about

the constituents of this plant. It contains alpha-
methylenebutyrolactone.

History & Folklore Trout lily was little used
by Native Americans. European settlers considered
its medicinal properties to be similar to those of
meadow saffron (Colchicum autumnale, p. 193).
Trout lily was listed in the Pharmacopoeia of the
United States from 1820 to 1863 as a treatment
for gout.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An infusion of
the leaves is taken for skin problems such as ulcers
and tumors, and for enlarged glands. The leaves
(or the whole plant) may also be applied as a
poultice for skin conditions. The fresh leaves are
strongly emetic.

@ Caution Take trout lily only under
professional supervision.

Erythroxylum coca
(Erythroxylaceae)

Coca

Description Evergreen shrub growing to

10 ft (3 m). Has alternate oval leaves, small white
flowers, and small red berries that each contain
a single seed.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Peru and
Bolivia, coca grows in high-rainfall areas of the
eastern Andes to altitudes of 4,900 ft (1,500 m).
It is mostly cultivated for the illegal market. The
leaves are picked when they begin to curl.
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Coca contains cocaine and
various other alkaloids, a volatile oil, flavonoids,
vitamins A and B,, and minerals. The plant's
stimulant and anesthetic action is due largely

to cocaine.

History & Folklore The indigenous peoples
of the Andes carry pouches containing coca leaves
and lime, which they chew throughout the day.
Early European travelers noted that individuals
chewing coca never had tooth or gum problems,

----- PAGE 209 -----
and local folk medicine traditionally considered the
plant a treatment for toothache. Coca leaf extract
is still used as a flavoring for cola drinks—but
cocaine has long been banned from the formulas.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Bolivia and
Peru, coca leaves play an important part in the
culture and herbal medicine of the indigenous
Aymara and Quechua peoples. High altitudes,
cold, and an impoverished diet place great physical
demands on the population. Coca leaves, chewed
with lime or ashes, release small amounts of the
active constituents, which act as a tonic and help
block the effects of cold, exhaustion, and poor
nutrition. Coca leaves are also used in South
American herbal medicine to treat nausea,
vomiting, and asthma, and have been used to
speed convalescence. Cocaine extracted from
coca leaves is used legally in conventional medicine
as a local anesthetic. It is also taken illegally as a
narcotic, stimulant drug, As an isolated chemical,
cocaine is extremely addictive.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Coca is subject to legal restrictions

in most countries.

Coca is cultivated in the Andes and chewed as a tonic to help
counter the effects of cold.

Eschscholzia californica
(Papaveraceae)

California Poppy

Description Annual or perennial growing to

2 ft (60 cm). California poppy has finely cut leaves
and bright orange, yellow, pink, or red flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation California poppy

is native to western North America. Widely
cultivated as a garden plant, it prefers sandy soils.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents California poppy contains iso-
quinoline alkaloids (including protopine, crypto-
pine, and chelidonine) and flavone glycosides.

California poppy contains a
latex that has sedative, pain-
killing, and antispasmodic
properties. It is a gentle
remedy, suitable for children.

History & Folklore Native American
peoples were known to use the sap of California
poppy for its pain-killing properties, particularly
for toothache. The leaves were also eaten as a
vegetable. Early settlers used California poppy
for sleep problems, especially in children, and for
whooping cough. It is California's state flower.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Though the
California poppy is a close relation of the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum, p. 244), it has a
significantly different effect on the central
nervous system. California poppy is not a
narcotic. In fact, rather than disorienting the user,
it actually tends to normalize psychological
function. California poppy's gently antispasmodic,
sedative, and analgesic effects make it a valuable
herbal medicine for treating physical and
psychological problems in children. The herb
may prove beneficial in attempts to overcome
nervous tension and anxiety, bedwetting, and
difficulty in sleeping.

Research A French study confirmed the
traditional usage of California poppy by showing
that extracts were sedative, reduced anxiety levels,
and were non-toxic.

Eucalyptus smithii (Myrtaceae)

Gully Gum

Description Aromatic evergreen tree growing
to 165 ft (50 m).

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Australia,
eucalyptus now grows in temperate and subtropical
zones across the globe. It prefers moist soil, and so
is found in swamps, gullies, and at the foot of slopes.
Part Used Essential oil.

Constituents The volatile oil contains about
70% eucalyptol (1, 8-cineole), as well as pinene,
limonene, alpha-terpineol, and linalool. While it is
similar to the oils of related species, this oil appears
to be better tolerated by the skin.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Eucalpytus smithii
oil is an antiseptic and decongestant, and is used
for inhalations as well as aromatherapy massages.
See eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus, p. 96) for
further details.

Cautions Though less toxic than the oils of other
eucalyptus species, E. smithii essential oil should be
used with care. Follow the label instructions, or take
on professional advice.

Eucommia ulmoides
(Eucommiaceae)

Eucommia Bark,
Du Zhong (Chinese)

Description Deciduous tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has elliptical leaves, with male flowers in
loose clusters and solitary female flowers in the
leaf axils.

Habitat & Cultivation Eucommia bark grows
in temperate zones in China. It is cultivated, but
only in small amounts.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Eucommia bark contains gutta-
percha, alkaloids, flavonoids, iridoids and other
glycosides, and phenolic compounds.

History & Folklore The herb is mentioned
in the Chinese herbal, the Divine Husbandman's
Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing), which was written
in the Ist century ce.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Eucommia bark
is considered an excellent tonic for the liver and
kidneys. Eucommia bark is said to “tonify the yang,”
to improve the circulation, and also to prevent
miscarriage in women who are weak or suffering
from back pain.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

207

----- PAGE 210 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

208

Research Much interest has been aroused

by eucommia bark’s ability to reduce high blood
pressure, which it is thought to do by increasing
nitrous oxide levels within the arteries. In a clinical
trial in China involving | 19 people, 46% of those
treated with the herb showed a significant blood
pressure reduction. However, eucommia bark
appears to have little effect in cases of severe
hypertension. Recent studies indicate that eucommia
bark is an antioxidant and may help to prevent the
onset of type 2 diabetes. A small clinical trial in
japan published in 1996 concluded that an infusion
of eucommia bark reduced the body's exposure
to mutagen-forming compounds naturally present
within the diet.

Euonymus atropurpureus
(Celastraceae)

Wahoo Bark

Description Deciduous tree growing to
26 ft (8 m). Has smooth branches, serrated
elliptical leaves, clusters of purple flowers,
and 4-lobed scarlet fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America, wahoo bark thrives in damp
woods and close to water. The bark is
gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Stem bark, root bark.
Constituents Wahoo bark contains
cardenolides (cardiac glycosides) similar
to digitoxin, asparagine, sterols, and tannins.
History & Folklore The Sioux, Cree, and
other Native American peoples used wahoo
bark in various ways, for example as an eye
lotion, as a poultice for facial sores, and
for gynecological conditions. Native
Americans introduced the plant to early
European settlers, and it became very
popular in North America as well as in
Britain in the | 9th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wahoo
bark is considered a gallbladder
remedy with laxative and diuretic
properties. It is prescribed for
biliousness and liver problems, as well as for
skin conditions such as eczema (which may
result from poor liver and gallbladder function)
and for constipation. In the past, it was often
used in combination with herbs such as
gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99) as a fever
remedy, especially if the liver was under
stress. Following the discovery that it
contains cardiac glycosides, wahoo bark
has been given for heart conditions.

@ Cautions Wahoo bark is toxic. Use only
under professional supervision. Do not take
during pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Eupatorium cannabinum
(Asteraceae)

Hemp Agrimony
Description Perennial growing to a height of

5 ft (1.5 m). Has a red stem, downy leaves, and
dense bunches of pink to mauve florets.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
hemp agrimony is now also found in western Asia
and North Africa. It grows in damp woods, ditches,
marshes, and in open areas, and is gathered when
in flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Hemp agrimony contains a volatile
oil (with alpha-terpinene, p-cymene, thymol and

an azulene), sesquiterpene lactones (especially
eupatoriopicrin), flavonoids, pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
and polysaccharides. P-cymene is antiviral, while
eupatoriopicrin has anti-cancer properties and
inhibits cellular growth. The polysaccharides
stimulate the immune system. In isolation, the
pyrrolizidine alkaloids are toxic to the liver.
History & Folklore Hemp agrimony was
known to Avicenna (980-1037 ce) and other
practitioners of Arabian medicine in the early
Middle Ages.

Hemp agrimony was
formerly taken as a
spring tonic in Holland.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Hemp agrimony
has been employed chiefly as a detoxifying herb
for fever, colds, flu, and other acute viral conditions.
The root is laxative and diuretic, and the whole
herb is considered to be tonic. Recently, hemp
agrimony has found use as an immunostimulant,
helping to maintain resistance to acute viral and
other infections.

Related Species See also boneset

(E. perfoliatum, following entry) and gravel root

(E. purpureum, subsequent entry).

@ Caution In view of hemp agrimonys
pyrrolizidine alkaloid content, take only under
professional supervision.

Eupatorium perfoliatum
(Asteraceae)

Boneset

Description Erect perennial growing to

5 ft (1.5 m). Has tapering lance-shaped leaves
and many white or purple florets.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America, boneset is found in meadows
and marshland. It is gathered when in flower
in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.
Constituents Boneset contains sesquiterpene
lactones (including eupafolin), polysaccharides,
flavonoids, diterpenes, sterols, and volatile oil. The
sesquiterpene lactones and polysaccharides are
significant immunostimulants.
History & Folklore Native American people
used boneset to make an infusion for treating
colds, fever, and arthritic and rheumatic pain.
European settlers learned of the plant's benefits,
and by the | 8th and | 9th centuries it was regarded
as a virtual cure-all. Boneset's common name
derives from its ability to treat “‘break-bone fever.”
Commonly used to treat malaria, constituents
within boneset are now known to have

antiprotozoal activity.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A hot infusion

of boneset will bring relief to symptoms of the
common cold. The plant stimulates resistance to
viral and bacterial infections, and reduces fever by
encouraging sweating. Boneset also loosens phlegm
and promotes its removal through coughing, and it
has a tonic and laxative effect. It has been taken for
rheumatic illness, skin conditions, and worms.
Related Species Wild horehound (E.
teucrifolium) was used as a substitute for boneset.
E. occidentale was used by the Zuni of the south-
western U.S. to treat rheumatism. See also

hemp agrimony (E. cannabinum, preceding entry)
and gravel root (E. purpureum, following entry).
Self-help Uses Allergic rhinitis with mucus,
p. 300; Colds, flu & fevers, p. 311; High fever, p. 31 1.

----- PAGE 211 -----
Eupatorium purpureum
(Asteraceae)

Gravel Root,
Joe Pye Weed

Description Erect perennial growing to 5 ft
(1.5 m). Has whorls of pointed oblong leaves and
clusters of purple-pink florets.

Habitat & Cultivation Gravel root is native
to eastern North America. The root is unearthed
in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Gravel root contains a volatile oil,
flavonoids, and resin.

History & Folklore The plant's alternative
name, Joe Pye weed, is in honor of the Native
American said to have used it to cure New
Englanders of typhus. Native Americans used

the herb as a diuretic and as a

remedy for genitourinary
conditions. The root was
listed in the Pharmacopoeia
of the United States from
1820 to 1842.

Gravel root is
especially helpful for
urinary tract problems.

Medicinal Actions & Uses As its common
name indicates, gravel root is a valuable herb for
urinary tract problems. It helps to prevent the
formation of kidney and bladder stones and may
diminish existing stones. Gravel root is also useful
for cystitis, urethritis, prostate enlargement (and
other forms of obstruction), and for rheumatism
and gout. The root is thought to help the latter
two conditions by increasing the removal of waste
by the kidneys.

Related Species £. maculatum, native to
eastern North America, is used to treat kidney and
urinary problems. See also E. cannabinum, p. 208,
and E. perfoliatum, preceding entry.

Euphorbia hirta syn. E. pilulifera
(Euphorbiaceae)

Pill-bearing Spurge,
Asthma Plant

Description Erect annual or perennial plant
growing to 20 in (50 cm), with pointed oval leaves
and clusters of small flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to India and
Australia, pill-bearing spurge is now widespread
throughout the tropics. The aerial parts of the
plant are gathered when it is in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Pill-bearing spurge is recommended as a treatment
for asthma.

Constituents Pill-bearing spurge contains
flavonoids, terpenoids, alkanes, phenolic acids,
shikimic acid, and choline. The latter two
constituents may be partly responsible for

the antispasmodic action of this plant.

History & Folklore As its name suggests, this
plant was traditionally used in Asia to treat asthma.
Medicinal Actions & Uses A specific
treatment for bronchial asthma, pill-bearing spurge
relaxes the bronchial tubes and eases breathing.
Mildly sedative and expectorant, it is also taken for
bronchitis and other respiratory tract conditions. It is
most often used along with other anti-asthmatic
herbs, notably gumplant (Grindelia camporum,

p. 218) and lobelia (Lobelia inflata, p. | 10). In the
Anglo-American tradition, pill-bearing spurge is
taken to treat intestinal amebiasis.

Related Species The Cherokee used E. maculata
to treat sore nipples and skin disorders. Many
other North American Euphorbia species were
used for constipation. A decoction of E. lancifolia,
native to the West Indies, is used to stimulate
breast-milk production. E. atoto is used in Malaysia
and Indochina to induce a delayed period and as
an abortifacient. Many species of Euphorbia are
used as arrow poisons.

@ Caution Take pill-bearing spurge only under
professional supervision.

Euphorbia pekinensis
(Euphorbiaceae)

Da ji

Description Erect annual or perennial

plant with oblong leaves and dense clusters

of small flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,

da ji is cultivated mainly in the eastern and

central provinces. The root is unearthed in

early spring.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Da ji contains euphorbon.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Da ji is classified
as a toxic herb in Chinese herbal medicine, and
therefore it is prescribed only for relatively serious
illnesses. It is taken as a cathartic to purge excess
fluid in conditions such as pleurisy and ascites
(excess fluid in the abdomen), and for the
treatment of kidney problems, especially nephritis.
Da ji is applied externally to inflamed sores to
reduce swelling.

Research Research in China indicates that da ji
is therapeutically useful in the treatment of ascites
and nephritis; however, it produces significant

side effects.

Related Species E. kansui is similar to da ji
but has a stronger cathartic action. In Chinese
herbal medicine it is only given to people with
strong constitutions.

@ Caution Da ji is a toxic plant. Take only under
professional supervision.

Euphrasia spp. (Scrophulariaceae)
Eyebright

Description Creeping semi-parasitic annual
growing to 20 in (50 cm). Has tiny oval leaves and
small scallop-edged white flowers with yellow spots
and a black center, somewhat resembling an eye.
Habitat & Cultivation Common in Europe,
eyebright thrives in meadows and open grassland.
It is gathered in summer when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Eyebright contains iridoid
glycosides (including aucubin), flavonoids, tannins,
lignans, and phenolic acids. Aucubin has antibac-
terial, anti-inflammatory, and antispasmodic activity.
History & Folklore Eyebright's use for eye
problems was due in part to the Doctrine of
Signatures, an ancient belief that the way that a
plant looks—its "sign" —indicates the ailments

for which it should be used as a medicine.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Eyebright relieves
inflammation and tightens mucous membranes
and finds specific use in the treatment of
conjunctivitis and blepharitis. Its ability to counter
mucus means that it is often used for infectious

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 212 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

210

and allergic conditions affecting the eyes, middle
ear, sinuses, and nasal passages. Eyebright counters
liquid mucus, but it should be used guardedly for
dry and stuffy congestion, which tends to be made
worse by the plant's astringency.

Self-help Uses Allergic rhinitis with mucus,

p. 300; Conjunctivitis, p. 310; Prevention of
nosebleeds, p. 310.

Eyebright, as its
name suggests,
helps eye problems.

Euterpe oleracea (Arecaceae)

Acal

Description A rainforest palm reaching 80 ft
(25 m), with 4-8 slender trunks and pinnate leaves
up to 10 ft (3 m) long. The berries (about the size
of a grape) hang down in large bunches.

Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
much of Central America and northern South
America, the acai palm is widely grown for its
berries and palm hearts.

Parts Used Drupe (the berries"), seed, root,
palm heart.

Constituents The berries contain high

levels of polyphenols, especially anthocyanins

and proanthocyanidins (as found in other dark
purple berries, such as blueberry). They are
strong antioxidants and anti-inflammatories.
History & Folklore Acai berries and their juice
are a nutritious part of many Brazilians’ diet. In Brazil
and Peru, the crushed seeds (which make up 80% of
the berry) are used to treat fever. Traditionally, the
essence of the root is extracted to treat conditions
such as hepatitis and enlarged prostate.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Less a medicine
than a nourishing addition to the diet, acai supports
vitality and a healthy heart and circulation. Acai
juice has much in common with blueberry and
pomegranate (Punica granatum, p. 259) juices—

all helping to sustain good health. The Acai palm is
the main source of palm hearts, which are eaten
worldwide as a vegetable.

Evodia rutaecarpa (Rutaceae)

Evodia,
Wu Zhu Yu (Chinese)

Description Deciduous tree growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has compound leaves, clusters of white
flowers, and greenish-red fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
Tibet, and the eastern Himalayas, evodia is
cultivated in China. The partially ripe fruit

is gathered in late summer.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Evodia contains the alkaloids
evodine, evodiamine, and rutaecarpine.
History & Folklore Evodia is listed in the
Divine Husbandman’s Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing)
of the Ist century ce.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Evodia has a
marked warming effect on the body, helping to
relieve headaches and a wide range of digestive
problems. In Chinese herbal medicine, evodia is
used mainly for abdominal pains, vomiting, diarrhea,
headaches, and a weak pulse.

Research Chinese studies indicate that
evodia is analgesic and reduces blood pressure.
@ Caution Use evodia only under
professional supervision.

Fagopyrum esculentum
(Polygonaceae)

Buckwheat

Description Annual growing to about 20 in

(50 cm). Has arrow-shaped leaves and clusters of
white or pink 5-petaled flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Buckwheat is native
to central and northern Asia, and is cultivated
extensively in temperate regions, especially the
US. It is harvested in summer.

Parts Used Leaves, flowers.

Constituents Buckwheat contains bioflavonoids,
especially rutin, which is strongly antioxidant. Rutin
strengthens the inner lining of blood vessels.
History & Folklore Buckwheat's French name,
blé Sarrasin, alludes to its ancient Middle Eastern
origins. The grain was either introduced to Europe

during the Crusades (1 Ith and |2th centuries),

or it was brought to Spain by the Arabs several
centuries earlier.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Used for a wide
range of circulatory problems, buckwheat is best
taken as a tea or tablet, accompanied by vitamin C
or lemon juice (Citrus limon, p. 85) to aid absorption.
Buckwheat is used particularly to treat fragile
capillaries (seen as small bruises with no apparent
cause), but also helps strengthen varicose veins and
heal chilblains. Often combined with linden flowers
(Tilia spp., p. 276), buckwheat is a specific treatment
for hemorrhage into the retina. Buckwheat is also
commonly taken in combination with other herbs
for high blood pressure.

Related Species Recent research has shown
that the Chinese F. dibotrys and F. cymosum are
immunostimulant. They are prescribed for
chronic bronchitis, inflamed gallbladder, and
pulmonary abscesses.

Cautions Interacts with blood-thinning
medication. Do not take as a medicine if taking
prescribed anticoagulants.

Self-help Uses High blood pressure &
arteriosclerosis, p. 301; Poor circulation & high
blood pressure, p. 319.

Feronia limonia (Rutaceae)

Wood Apple

Description A spiny tree growing to 30 ft

(9 m), it has feathery leaves, red flowers, and
round whitish fruit the size of oranges.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
India, wood apple is cultivated in tropical Asia.
Parts Used Fruit, leaves.

Constituents The fruit contains fruit acids,
vitamins, and minerals. The leaves contain tannins
and a volatile oil.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wood apple
fruit is used mainly to stimulate the digestive
system. In India, the fruit forms part of a paste
applied to tone the breasts. The astringent leaves
are used to treat indigestion, flatulence, diarrhea,
dysentery (particularly in children), and
hemorrhoids. It is traditionally thought to act

as a male contraceptive, although there is limited
research to support this.

Ferula assa-foetida (Apiaceae)

Asafoetida,
Devil's Dung

Description Perennial plant growing to about
6/4 ft (2 m). Has a fleshy taproot, hollow stem,
compound leaves, and many white flowers in umbels.

----- PAGE 213 -----
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Iran,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan, asafoetida produces a
gum obtained in summer from 4-year-old plants.
The stems are cut off and successive slices are
made through the roots. The gum wells up and

is collected after it has hardened.

Part Used Oleo-gum-resin.

Constituents Asafoetida exudate contains
6-17% volatile oil, as well as resin and gum. The
volatile oil contains disulphides (about 58%),
which have an expectorant action. The oil also
settles the digestion. Asafoetida resin contains
sesquiterpenoid coumarins, including foetidin.
History & Folklore In the 4th century

ace, Charaka Samhita, a Hindu medical treatise,
proclaimed asafoetida the best remedy for
clearing gas and bloating. The name devil's

dung notwithstanding, the plant is thought to
have been the most popular spice in ancient
Rome. Asafoetida is as persistent in aroma as
garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), and is still used

as a flavoring.

Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Middle Eastern
and Indian herbal medicine, asafoetida is used for
simple digestive problems such as gas, bloating,
indigestion, and constipation. Asafoetida's volatile
oil, like that of garlic, has components that leave
the body via the respiratory system and aid the
coughing up of congested mucus. Asafoetida

is taken (usually in tablet form) for bronchitis,
bronchial asthma, whooping cough, and other
chest problems. Asafoetida also lowers blood
pressure and thins the blood. The herb has a
reputation for helping in neurotic states.
Related Species F.silphion was used in ancient
Rome as a contraceptive. It was overharvested and
died out in about 300 ce. F persica is used in the
Middle East for rheumatic problems and backache.
The central Asian F sumbul is used as a nerve tonic.
F. jaeschkeana has recently been investigated as a
potential contraceptive. See also F gummosa
(following entry).

Caution While safe in adults, asafoetida may be
harmful to young babies.

Ferula gummosa syn. F. galbaniflua
(Apiaceae)

Galbanum

Description Perennial with a smooth, hollow
stem, finely toothed compound leaves, and umbels
of small white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to central
Asia, galbanum produces a gum that is obtained
when stems are cut off and successive slices are
made through the roots. Gum wells to the surface
and is collected after it has hardened.

Part Used Oleo-gum-resin.

Constituents Galbanum exudate contains

a volatile oil, resins, gums, as well as a

coumarin (umbelliferone).

History & Folklore Galbanum has been used
medicinally for centuries.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Galbanum is a
digestive stimulant and antispasmodic, reducing
flatulence, cramps, and colic. It is also
expectorant. Applied as an ointment, the gum
may help heal wounds.

Related Species See asafoetida (F assa-foetida,
preceding entry).

Self-help Use Acidity & indigestion, p. 307.

Ficus benghalensis (Moraceae)

Banyan Tree

Description Tree growing to 65 ft (20 m) with
oval leaves, fig-type fruit, and roots that grow into
the ground from branches.

Habitat & Cultivation Growing wild in India
and Pakistan, the banyan tree is also cultivated
across the Indian subcontinent.

Parts Used Fruit, bark, leaves, latex,
aerial roots.

Constituents Banyan tree contains
ketones, sterols, ficusin, and bergaptin.
History & Folklore The banyan tree is
sacred to Hindus and is frequently found in
the proximity of Hindu temples. The god Shiva

is often shown sitting peacefully in the shade of

a banyan tree. The banyan tree is the national

tree of India.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
leaves and bark of the tree are employed to relieve
diarrhea and dysentery and to reduce bleeding. As
with other Ficus species, the latex is applied to

Banyan tree leaves are astringent and are used to tighten
mucous membranes.

hemorrhoids, warts, and aching joints. The fruit is
laxative and the roots are chewed to prevent gum
disease. The bark is used in Ayurvedic medicine
for diabetes.

Research In laboratory studies an extract of the
leaves was shown to counter diarrhea. Glycosides
in banyan have been shown to have an antidiabetic
activity, lowering blood-sugar levels.

Related Species See fig (F carica, following entry).
Caution The latex is toxic and should not be
taken internally.

Ficus carica (Moraceae)
Fig
Description Deciduous tree growing to 13 ft

(4 m). Has large leaves and fleshy receptacles that
ripen into purple-brown, pear-shaped fruit.

Fig’s pulpy flesh is
emollient and soothing
to inflamed skin.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
Asia, fig now grows wild and is cultivated in many
temperate and subtropical regions. Fruit is
harvested in summer.

Parts Used Fruit, latex.

Constituents Figs contain around 50% fruit
sugars (mainly glucose), flavonoids, vitamins,

and enzymes.

History & Folklore The fig leaf was used

by Adam and Eve to hide their nakedness in the
Garden of Eden. There are many other references
to the plant in the Old Testament, mainly to the
sweetness of the fruit and to its use as a medicine.
Spartan athletes in Ancient Greece were said to
eat figs in order to improve their performance.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The fruit sugars
within the fig (especially the dried fruit) have a
pronounced but gentle laxative effect; syrup of figs
is still a remedy for mild constipation. The fruit's

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

211

----- PAGE 214 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

a

212

emollient pulp helps relieve pain and inflammation,
and it has been used to treat tumors, swellings, and
gum abscesses—the fruit often being roasted
before application. Figs are also mildly expectorant
and, when used with herbs such as elecampane
(Inula helenium, p. 107), are helpful in treating dry
and irritable coughs and bronchitis. The milky latex
from leaves and stems is reputed to be analgesic,
and has long been used to treat warts, insect bites,
and stings.

Related Species Research published in 1999
showed that an extract of leaves of F racemosa,

a native of northern India, had a marked
protective activity on the liver in rats. The juice
and powdered bark of the Central American

F. cotinifolia are applied to wounds and bruises.

F. indica is used in Ayurvedic medicine as a tonic,
diuretic, and treatment for gonorrhea. F lacor

is used in Chinese herbal medicine to induce
sweating, while F. retusa, which is native to China,
Indonesia, and Australia, is used in the Chinese
tradition to treat toothache and tooth decay. See
also banyan tree (F. benghalensis, preceding entry)
and peepal (F. religiosa, following entry).

Cautions The latex is toxic and should not be
used internally. Applied to the skin, it may cause
an allergic reaction to sunlight.

Ficus religiosa (Moraceae)

Peepal

Description Tree growing to around 26 ft (8 m)
with large, leathery, heart-shaped leaves and purple
fruit growing in pairs.

Habitat & Cultivation Peepal grows in
northern and central India, in forests, and alongside
water. It is also widely cultivated throughout the
subcontinent and southern Asia. The fruit is
gathered when ripe.

Parts Used Fruit, leaves, bark, latex.
Constituents The fruit contains fruit sugars,
flavonoids, and enzymes.

History & Folklore Sacred to Hindus and
Buddhists, the peepal is the tree under which the
Buddha attained enlightenment. It is a long-living
tree; a peepal in Sri Lanka is thought to be over
2,000 years old.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Peepal’s uses

are similar to those of the banyan (F. benghalensis,
p. 21 1). Its astringent bark and leaves are taken for
diarrhea and dysentery, whereas the leaves alone
are used for constipation. The leaves are applied
with ghee (clarified butter) as a poultice to boils
and to swollen salivary glands in mumps. The
powdered fruit may be taken for asthma and

the latex is used to treat warts.

Related Species See preceding entries, fig

(F carica) and banyan tree (F. benghalensis).

Foeniculum vulgare (Apiaceae)

Fennel

Description Aromatic perennial growing to
about 5 ft (1.5 m). Has dark green, feathery leaves,
umbels of yellow flowers, and small, ridged, oval-
shaped seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean region, fennel is now cultivated in
temperate regions around the world. The seeds
are gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Seeds, essential oil.

Constituents “Sweet” fennel seeds contain
about 8% volatile oil (about 80% anethole, plus
fenchone and methylchavicol), flavonoids,
coumarins (including bergapten), and sterols.

The volatile oil relieves gas and is antispasmodic.
“Bitter” fennel seeds contain significantly higher
levels of fenchone.

History & Folklore Dioscorides, in the Ist
century Ce, states that ‘the juice, when put into the
eye, aids vision, and into the ear, kills the worms
(ie. bacteria) that develop there.’

Fennel has a long history of use as a remedy for ailments
of the digestive tract.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The primary use
of fennel seeds is to relieve bloating, but they also
settle stomach pain, stimulate the appetite, and
are diuretic and anti-inflammatory. Like anise
(Pimpinella anisum, p. 248) and caraway (Carum
carvi, p. 184), the seeds make an excellent infusion
for settling digestion and reducing abdominal
distension. The seeds help in the treatment of
kidney stones, and, combined with urinary
antiseptics such as uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,

p. 170), make an effective treatment for cystitis. An
infusion of the seeds may be taken as a gargle for
sore throats and as a mild expectorant. Fennel is
safe for children when taken at a low dose and,

as an infusion or syrup, can be given for colic and
painful teething in babies. Fennel increases breast-
milk production and the herb is still used as an

eyewash for sore eyes and conjunctivitis. The
seeds have a longstanding reputation as an

aid to weight loss and to longevity. Essential oil
from the sweet variety is used for its digestive
and relaxing properties. It also has estrogenic
activity and may prove helpful in relieving
menopausal symptoms.

Cautions Fennel seeds are potentially toxic; do
not exceed the recommended dose. Do not take
the essential oil internally.

Self-help Uses Acidity & indigestion, p. 307;
Morning sickness & nausea, p. 317; Stomach
spasm, p. 305; Gas & bloating, p. 306.

Forsythia suspensa (Oleaceae)
Weeping Forsythia,
Lian Qiao (Chinese)

Description Deciduous shrub growing to

16 ft (5 m). Has toothed leaves, bright yellow
flowers, and woody fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China

and Japan, weeping forsythia is grown for its bright
yellow blossoms in temperate gardens all over the
world. The fruit is harvested in autumn, just before
it is fully ripe.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents The fruit contains flavonoids,
including rutin, lignans, glycosides, and forsythin.
Research suggests that forsythin is antimicrobial,
anti-emetic, and anti-inflammatory.

History & Folklore Weeping forsythia was
first listed in the Divine Husbandman’s Classic
(Shen’nong Bencagjing), written in the Ist century
ce. Weeping forsythia features in a remedy for
infections devised in the | 8th century.
Medicinal Actions & Uses A bitter-tasting,
pungent herb with antiseptic and antiviral activity,
weeping forsythia is used to treat infections such
as colds, flu, sore throats, and tonsillitis. In
traditional Chinese medicine, it is used to treat

a range of other conditions (including boils,
swollen glands, and skin infections). The American
herbal scientist James A. Duke recommends it be
taken as a warm tea, combined with honeysuckle
(Lonicera spp., p. 229) and lemon balm (Melissa
officinalis, p. 113), at the onset of colds and similar
viral infections.

Caution Not advisable in pregnancy.

Fragaria vesca (Rosaceae)

Wild Strawberry

Description Low-growing perennial herb
spread by runners. Has 3-lobed leaves, white
flowers, and small red berries.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Wild strawberry was said
to “comfort fainting spirits.”

Habitat & Cultivation Wild strawberry is
native to Europe and temperate regions of Asia.
The leaves and fruit are gathered in early summer.
Parts Used Leaves, fruit.

Constituents The leaves contain flavonoids,
tannins, and a volatile oil. The fruit contains fruit acids
and a volatile oil with methyl salicylate and borneol.
History & Folklore Wild strawberry appears
to have been little used medicinally until the Middle
Ages. Writing in 1652, Nicholas Culpeper listed its
benefits: the berries are excellent good to cool
the liver, the blood, and the spleen, or a hot
cholerick stomach ... the leaves and roots thereof
[are] also good to fasten loose teeth and to heal
spongy foul gums.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wild strawberry
leaves are mildly astringent and diuretic. The plant
is little used medicinally today, but it can be taken
to treat diarrhea and dysentery. The leaves were
used as a gargle for sore throats, and in a lotion

for minor burns and grazes. In Europe, the fruit

is considered to have cooling and diuretic
properties, and has been prescribed as part of

a diet in cases of tuberculosis, gout, arthritis,

and rheumatism.

Fraxinus excelsior (Oleaceae)

Ash

Description Deciduous tree growing to 130 ft
(40 m). Has pale grey bark, black conical leaf buds,
and bright green leaves with 7-13 oval leaflets.

Habitat & Cultivation Common in Europe,
ash thrives in lowland and moorland. The leaves
are gathered in summer, but the bark is gathered
in spring.

Parts Used Leaves, bark, seeds.
Constituents Ash leaves contain flavonoids,
tannins, mucilage, triterpenes, and iridoids.
History & Folklore The ash was the “world-
tree” of Norse mythology, its roots spreading to
the domain of the gods, and its branches extending
to the remotest corners of the universe. In Norse
myth, the first man was carved from a piece of ash
wood. In parts of Europe, ash bark was used as

a cost-free substitute for quinine in the home
treatment of malaria. Such use probably continued
in rural areas into the 20th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Ash bark is tonic
and astringent. Little used in herbal medicine today,
it is occasionally taken for fever. The leaves are also
astringent, and they have a laxative and diuretic
effect. They have been used as a mild substitute
for senna (Cassia senna, p. 75).

Related Species The bark of the American
white ash (F americana) has been used as a bitter
tonic and astringent. Several ash species exude a
nutritious sap, called ‘manna,’ which is used as

a laxative for children. In particular, the manna ash
(F ornus), which has antioxidant activity, has been
cultivated in southern Europe for its high yield of
manna sap.

Fucus vesiculosus (Fucaceae)

Bladderwrack,
Kelp

Description Brownish-green alga growing

to 3 ft (| m) in length. Has flat, usually forked,
fronds containing air bladders.

Habitat & Cultivation Bladderwrack is
native to the North Atlantic shores and western
Mediterranean, and is harvested all year.

Part Used Whole plant.

Constituents Bladderwrack contains polyphenols,
polysaccharides, and minerals, especially iodine
(up to 0.1%). The polysaccharides are
immunostimulant. The iodine may stimulate the
thyroid gland.

History & Folklore Bladderwrack has been
employed as a fuel, as a winter feed for cattle, and
as a source of iodine and potash.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Due to its iodine
content, bladderwrack is taken as an antigoiter
remedy. The plant appears to raise the metabolic
rate by increasing hormone production by the
thyroid gland, though this increase may be limited
to poorly functioning thyroids. Bladderwrack is
reputedly helpful in rheumatic conditions.

Research In one clinical trial (Italy 1976), patients
taking bladderwrack lost much more weight than
the control group. In more recent German
research, the polyphenols and polysaccharides
appeared to have antiviral and anti-HIV activity.
Cautions Do not take if pregnant or
breastfeeding. If suffering from a thyroid illness or
taking insulin, take only under professional advice.

Fumaria officinalis (Fumariaceae)

Fumitory

Description Climbing annual growing to | ft
(30 cm). Has compound leaves and maroon-tipped
pink tubular flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
North Africa, fumitory also grows in Asia, North
America, and Australia.

Parts Used Flowering aerial parts.
Constituents Fumitory contains isoquinoline
alkaloids and flavonoids.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A notably
bitter-tasting herb, fumitory has a stimulant and
cleansing action on the liver and gallbladder,

and is principally used to treat chronic itchy skin
problems such as eczema. It is also diuretic and
mildly laxative.

Related Species Fumitory is related to
corydalis (Corydalis yanhusuo, p. 86), and

F. parviflora from central Asia. The latter, like
fumitory, is used as a detoxifying, laxative,

and diuretic herb.

Caution Fumitory is toxic in excessive doses.
Use only with professional advice.

Fumitory may be applied externally as a treatment
for eczema.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 216 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Galega officinalis (Fabaceae)
Goat's Rue

Description Bushy perennial growing to about
3 ft (I m) in height. Goat's rue has compound
leaves with lance-shaped leaflets and delicate pink
pea-type flowers on terminal spikes, and produces
red-brown seed pods in autumn.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Asia and
continental Europe, and naturalized in Britain, goat's
rue grows in damp and low-lying areas. It is
harvested in summer.

Goat's rue was once taken to treat the plague.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Goat's rue contains alkaloids
(including galegine), lectins, flavonoids, and tannins.
Galegine strongly reduces blood-sugar levels.
History & Folklore Formerly used as a
treatment for the plague, goat's rue has been
widely cultivated as a cattle feed.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Today, goat's rue
is chiefly used as an anti-diabetic herb, having the
ability to reduce blood-sugar levels. It is not a
substitute for conventional drugs, but can be
valuable in the early stages of type 2 diabetes and
is best used as an infusion. The herb has the effect
of increasing breast-milk production. It is also a
useful diuretic.

Caution Use as part of the treatment of
diabetes only under professional supervision.

Galipea officinalis
syn. G. cusparia (Rutaceae)

Angostura

Description Evergreen tree growing to

49 ft (15 m) with grey bark, shiny bright green
leaflets, and foul-smelling flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Angostura is native

to some Caribbean islands and to tropical South
America. The bark is gathered throughout the year.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Angostura bark contains bitter
principles, quinoline alkaloids including cusparine,
and |—2% volatile oil. The alkaloids have antimicrobial
activity against the tuberculosis bacillus.

History & Folklore Angostura is a traditional
tonic and fever remedy in South America, used
chiefly for digestive infections. Native Amazonians
also use the plant as a fish poison. Angostura has
been used as a source of “bitters,” although it is
unknown whether it is an ingredient of the cocktail
flavoring bearing its name as the drink’s
composition is a trade secret.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A strong bitter
with tonic properties, angostura stimulates

the stomach and digestive tract as a whole. It is
antispasmodic and is reported to act on the spinal
nerves, helping in paralytic conditions. Angostura is
typically given for weak digestion, and is considered
valuable as a remedy for diarrhea and dysentery.

In South America, it is sometimes used as a
substitute for cinchona (Cinchona spp., p. 80)

to control fevers.

@ Caution Use under professional guidance only.

Galium aparine (Rubiaceae)

Cleavers,
Goose Grass

Description Straggling, square-stemmed
annual growing to a height of 4 ft (1.2 m) with
whorls of lance-shaped leaves, clusters of small
white flowers, and small, round, green fruit with
hooked prickles.

Habitat & Cultivation Common throughout
Europe and North America, cleavers is found

in many other temperate regions, including in
Australia. It grows prolifically in gardens and along
roadsides, and is gathered when just about to
flower in late spring.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Cleavers contains iridoids
(including asperuloside), polyphenolic acids,
anthraquinones (only in the root), alkanes,
flavonoids, and tannins. Asperuloside is a

mild laxative.

History & Folklore The name cleavers
refers to the plant's ability to cling (or cleave)

to fur or clothing. Dioscorides,

a Greek physician of
the Ist century cE,
considered it useful for
countering weariness,
and described how
shepherds used the
stems to make sieves
for straining milk.

Dried aerial parts

Medicinal Actions & Uses A valuable
diuretic, cleavers is often taken for skin diseases
such as seborrhea, eczema, and psoriasis; for
swollen lymph glands; and as a general detoxifying
agent in serious illnesses such as cancer. The plant
is commonly prepared in the form of an infusion,
but for conditions such as cancer, it is best taken as
a juice, which is strongly diuretic. The juice and the
infusion are also taken for kidney stones and other
urinary problems.

Research According to French research (1947), an
extract of the plant appears to lower blood pressure.
Related Species The Mexican G. orizabense is
used by the Mazatecs to treat intestinal parasites
and to relieve fever. G. umbrosum from New
Zealand has been used to treat gonorrhea. See
also lady's bedstraw (G. verum, following entry).

Galium verum (Rubiaceae)

Lady's Bedstraw

Description Short, sprawling perennial growing
to 32 in (80 cm). Has whorls of narrow dark green
leaves and tufts of very small bright yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
Europe and western Asia, and naturalized in North
America, lady's bedstraw thrives in dry meadows,
along roadsides, and in wayside places. It is
gathered when in flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Lady's bedstraw contains iridoids
(including asperuloside), flavonoids,
anthraquinones, alkanes, and rennin.

History & Folklore The name of this
pleasant-scented herb derives from its traditional
use as a stuffing for mattresses. In medieval times,
it was used as a “‘strewing”’ herb on floors. Lady's
bedstraw curdles milk and gives a yellow color to
cheese produced from the curd. In his Irish Herbal
(1735), K'Eogh states, “when applied to burns, the
crushed flowers alleviate inflammation, and when
applied to wounds, they can heal them.’

Lady’s bedstraw is used as a diuretic.

----- PAGE 217 -----
Medicinal Actions & Uses A slightly bitter-
tasting remedy, lady's bedstraw is used mainly as a
diuretic and for skin problems. Like its close relative,
cleavers (G. aparine, preceding entry), the herb is
given for kidney stones, bladder stones, and other
urinary conditions, including cystitis. It is occasionally
used as a means to relieve chronic skin problems
such as psoriasis, but, in general, cleavers is preferred
as a treatment for this condition. Lady's bedstraw
has had a longstanding reputation, especially in
France, of being a valuable remedy for epilepsy,
though it is rarely used for this purpose today.
Related Species G. elatum has also been
considered a remedy for epilepsy in France.

(See also G. aparine, preceding entry.)

Gardenia jasminoides syn.
G. augusta, G. florida (Rubiaceae)

Gardenia,
Zhi Zi (Chinese)

Description Evergreen shrub growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m). Has green leaves, scented double flowers,
and orange-red fruit.

Gardenia plays a
significant role in
Chinese herbalism.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
southeastern provinces of China, gardenia prefers
humid, tropical climates. The fruit is gathered
when it turns reddish-yellow.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Gardenia fruit contains iridoid
glycosides. The flowers are the source of the
essential oil.

History & Folklore Gardenia has been used in
Chinese medicine for at least 2,000 years. It provides
an important essential oil used to flavor teas. The oil
is also used to make perfumes. Gardenia perfumes
often blend gardenia, jasmine, and tuberose.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In the Chinese
herbal tradition (pp. 40-43), gardenia is a “bitter,

cold” herb used mostly to relieve symptoms
associated with heat. These include fever, irritability,
restlessness, insomnia, cystitis, painful urination, and
jaundice. The fruit staunches bleeding and

is taken for nosebleeds, and urinary and rectal
bleeding. The essential oil is an antiseptic and has
a reputation for being an aphrodisiac.

Related Species The fruit of the northern
Indian G. campanulata is cathartic and used to
expel worms. G. gummifera, from eastern India,

is antiseptic and digestive. The Pacific region

G. taitensis relieves headaches. The African

G. thunbergia is used to relieve constipation.
Cautions Avoid in diarrhea. Do not take if taking
prescribed medication for high blood pressure.

Gaultheria procumbens
(Ericaceae)

Wintergreen

Description Aromatic low-lying shrub growing to
6 in (15 cm). Has leathery, oval leaves, small white or
pale pink bell-shaped flowers, and brilliant red fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, wintergreen is found in woodland and
exposed mountainous areas. The leaves and fruit
are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Leaves, fruit, essential oil.
Constituents Wintergreen contains phenols
(including gaultherin and salicylic acid), 0.8% volatile
oil (up to 98% methy! salicylate), mucilage, resin,
and tannins.

History & Folklore Wintergreen was popular
with Native Americans, who used it for treating back
pain, rheumatism, fever, headaches, sore throats, and
many other conditions. Samuel Thomson, founder
of the | 9th-century Physiomedicalist movement,
combined it with hemlock (Conium maculatum, p.
193) to treat severe fluid retention. The leaves have
been used as a substitute for tea (Camellia sinensis, p.
181), for example during the American
Revolutionary War (1776-1784).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wintergreen is
strongly anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, and soothing to
the digestive system. It is an effective remedy for
rheumatic and arthritic problems, and, taken as a tea,
it relieves flatulence and colic. The essential oil, in the
form of a liniment or ointment, brings relief to
inflamed, swollen, or sore muscles, ligaments, and
joints, and can also prove valuable in treating
neurological conditions such as sciatica (pain resulting
from pressure on a nerve in the lower spine) and
trigeminal neuralgia (pain affecting a facial nerve).
The oil is sometimes used to treat cellulitis, a bacterial
infection causing the skin to become inflamed.
Cautions People who are sensitive to aspirin
should not take wintergreen internally. Oil of
wintergreen should never be taken internally,

nor applied (even well diluted) to the skin of
children under the age of |2 unless with
professional supervision.

Wintergreen makes an
effective liniment for
sore muscles and joints.

Gelidium amansii (Rhodophyceae)
Agar

Description Seaweed with red-brown,
translucent, multi-branched ribbons and fronds
growing to about 3 ft (1 m) in length. It has spherical
fruit that appears in late autumn and winter.
Habitat & Cultivation Agar is native to the
Pacific coasts of China and Japan and the coast of
South Africa. It grows to a depth of 100 ft (30 m)
below sea level. Commercial harvesters rake plants
off banks and rocks. The cleaned seaweed, after
being boiled with sulphuric acid for 6 hours, yields
agar, which sets to form a jelly. Around 6,500 tons
of processed agar are produced each year.

Part Used Seaweed extract (agar).
Constituents Agar contains polysaccharides,
mainly agarose and agaropectin (up to 90%), which
are very mucilaginous.

History & Folklore Agar is commonly used

as a thickening agent in food preparation, but its
most widespread application is in scientific research,
where it is used as a culture medium for growing
micro-organisms in petri dishes.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Like most
seaweeds and their derivatives, agar is nutritious
and contains large amounts of mucilage. Its chief
medicinal use is as a bulk laxative. In the intestines,
agar absorbs water and swells, stimulating bowel
activity and the subsequent elimination of feces.
Related Species While G. amansii is the main
agar-producing species, G. cartilagineum (found

on the Pacific coast of North America) and other
closely related species around the world are being
used as alternative sources.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO ©

My

215

----- PAGE 218 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

216

Gelsemium sempervirens
(Loganiaceae)

Yellow Jasmine,
Gelsemium

Description Evergreen woody climber growing
to 20 ft (6 m). Has shiny, dark green leaves and
clusters of fragrant, trumpet-shaped yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
southern U.S. and Central America,

yellow jasmine prefers

damp sites. The rootstock

is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Rootstock.
Constituents Yellow
jasmine contains indole
alkaloids (including gelsemine
and gelsedine), iridoids,
coumarins, and tannins. The alkaloids are toxic and
act as a depressant to the central nervous system.
History & Folklore It is unclear whether
yellow jasmine was used in Native American
medicine. The plant came into regular use only

in the middle of the 19th century. It was first
employed by followers of the Eclectic herbal
movement, and then later became an official
medicine, listed in the Pharmacopoeia of the

United States from 1863 to 1926.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A potent medicinal
herb, yellow jasmine is prescribed in small doses

as a sedative and antispasmodic, most commonly
for neuralgia (pain caused by nerve irritation or
damage). Yellow jasmine is often given for nerve
pain affecting the face. The herb is also applied
externally to treat intercostal neuralgia (nerve pain
between the ribs) and sciatica (pain resulting from
pressure on a nerve in the lower spine). Yellow
jasmine’s antispasmodic property is used in treating
whooping cough and asthma. The herb is
occasionally taken for migraine, insomnia, and bowel
problems, and also to reduce blood pressure. Yellow
jasmine is also used in homeopathic medicine.

2 @ Cautions Yellow jasmine is an extremely
toxic plant that should be used only under
professional supervision. The plant is subject to
legal restrictions in some countries.

Dried rootstock

Geranium maculatum (Geraniaceae)

Wild Geranium

Description Perennial growing to 2 ft (60 cm).
Has deeply cleft leaves, pink-purple flowers, and
beak-shaped fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to woodlands
of eastern and central North America, the root

is dug up in early spring, and the aerial parts are
gathered in summer.

Parts Used Root, aerial parts.

Constituents Wild geranium contains up to
30% tannins.

History & Folklore Native American peoples
used wild geranium for sore throats, mouth ulcers,
infected gums, and oral thrush. The herb was later
used by European settlers for diarrhea, internal
bleeding, cholera, and venereal diseases.
Medicinal Actions & Uses An astringent and
clotting agent, wild geranium is used today much as
in earlier times. The herb is often prescribed for
irritable bowel syndrome and hemorrhoids, and it
is used to staunch wounds. It may also be used to
treat heavy menstrual bleeding and excessive
vaginal discharge.

Related Species See herb robert

(G. robertianum, following entry).

Caution Wild geranium should only be taken for
a few weeks at a time.

Geranium robertianum
(Geraniaceae)

Herb Robert

Description Strong-smelling annual or biennial
herb growing to 20 in (50 cm). Has deeply cleft
red-green leaves, bright pink flowers, and pointed
seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
Asia, herb robert is naturalized in North America.
It is gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Herb robert contains tannins, a
bitter principle (geraniin), traces of volatile oil, and
citric acid.

History & Folklore Herb roberts unpleasant
odor has earned it the name ‘stinking Bob” in
parts of England.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Herb robert

is little used in contemporary European herbal
medicine. It is occasionally employed in much the
same way as Wild geranium (G. maculatum,
preceding entry), as an astringent and wound
healer. The herb bears closer investigation as a
remedy. According to one authority it is effective
against stomach ulcers and inflammation of the
uterus, and it holds some potential as a treatment
for cancer.

Geum urbanum (Rosaceae)

Avens

Description Downy perennial growing to

60 cm (2 ft). Has wiry stems, compound leaves,
small, yellow 5-petaled flowers, and fruit covered
with hooks.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
central Asia, avens is a common wayside plant. The
root is dug up in spring, and the aerial parts are
picked in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Avens contains phenolic
glycosides (including eugenol), tannins, a volatile

oil, and possibly a sesquiterpene lactone (cnicin).
History & Folklore Once known as herba
benedicta (blessed herb), avens was credited with
significant magical powers in the Middle Ages. A’
German text of 1493 states that if avens root is in the
house, the devil is powerless. According to tradition,
the root should be unearthed on March 25th.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Avens is an
astringent herb, used principally for problems
affecting the mouth, throat, and gastrointestinal
tract. The herb tightens up soft gums, heals mouth
ulcers, makes a good gargle for infections of the
pharynx and larynx, and reduces irritation of the
stomach and gut. It may be taken for peptic ulcers,
irritable bowel syndrome, diarrhea, and dysentery.
Avens has been used in a lotion or ointment as a
soothing remedy for hemorrhoids. The herb may
also be used as a douche for treating excessive
vaginal discharge. Avens reputedly has a mild
quinine-type action in lowering fever.

Glechoma hederacea
syn. Nepeta glechoma (Lamiaceae)

Ground lvy,
Alehoof

Description Creeping perennial herb growing
to 15 cm (6 in). Has long rooting runners, notched
kidney-shaped leaves, and purple-blue flowers

in whorls.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
western Asia, ground ivy is now naturalized in other
temperate regions, including North America. It
thrives on the outskirts of woods and alongside
paths and hedges. It is gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Ground ivy contains
sesquiterpenes, flavonoids, a volatile oil, a bitter
principle (glechomine), caffeic acids, and tannins.
History & Folklore Known in parts of
England as “alehoof,’ ground ivy was used to flavor
and clarify ale, the traditional drink of

the Anglo-Saxons. In Medieval times, it was
recommended for fever, and was a popular
treatment for chronic coughs. The | 6th-century
herbalist John Gerard considered it a valuable
remedy for tinnitus.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Ground ivy

is tonic, diuretic, and decongestant, and is used

to treat many problems involving the mucous

----- PAGE 219 -----
membranes of the ear, nose, throat, and digestive
system. A well-tolerated herb, it can be given

to children to clear lingering congestion and to
treat chronic conditions such as “glue ear” and
sinusitis. Throat and chest problems, especially
those due to excess mucus, also benefit from this
remedy. Ground ivy is also a valuable treatment for
gastritis and acid indigestion. Further along the
gastrointestinal tract, its binding nature helps to
counter diarrhea and to dry up watery and mucoid
secretions. Ground ivy has been employed to
prevent scurvy and as a spring tonic, and is
considered beneficial in kidney disorders.

Ground ivy is useful
for many disorders of
the digestive system.

Glycine max (Fabaceae)

Soy

Description Annual growing to 6/4 ft (2 m).
Has leaves with 3 leaflets, white or purple flowers,
and pods with 2-4 beans.

Habitat & Cultivation Soy is native to south-
western Asia, and is cultivated in warm temperate
regions. The pods are gathered when ripe.

Parts Used Beans, sprouts.

Constituents Soy contains protein (about
30%), fixed oil (about 17%), including lecithin

(2% or more), linoleic acid, and alpha-linolenic acid,
isoflavones, coumestrol, sterols, saponins, vitamins,
and minerals. Coumestrol and the isoflavones
closely mimic estrogen within the body.

History & Folklore A staple food in much of
Asia, soy has been used in China for at least 5,000
years. Soy was introduced in the United States in
1804 and has become a major crop in the South
and Midwest. It is now one of the world’s most
important food crops.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Although
soybeans and soy produce have little direct
medicinal value, they are highly important as foods,
providing unusually high levels of protein, lecithin,
and essential fatty acids. However, the beans may
have a protective role against cancer, notably
breast cancer. Their significant estrogenic activity
makes them a particularly good medicinal food for
women going through menopause, helping

to relieve symptoms such as hot flashes, and to
protect against osteoporosis. In Chinese medicine,
soybean sprouts (also highly nutritious) are
thought to help relieve “summer heat’’ and fever.
Research Soybean is a remarkable nutrient, rich
in protein, fats, and estrogenic substances, all of
which make it an excellent food. The isoflavones,
sterols, saponins, and fiber contribute to soy's
protective activity against cancer, and countries such
as Japan are thought to have lower levels of cancer
because of the great quantity of soy produce eaten
there. The isoflavones, coumestrol, and sterols are
all phytoestrogens. These appear to inhibit estrogen
within the body when estrogen levels are too high
(for example, in menstrual disorders), and to
compensate when estrogen levels are low (such as
during menopause). Unrefined soybean oil
contains high levels of lecithin and polyunsaturated
essential fatty acids, which support healthy levels of
blood fat such as cholesterol.

Gnaphalium uliginosum
(Asteraceae)

Marsh Cudweed

Description Annual plant growing to 8 in

(20 cm). Has narrow silver-grey leaves and tiny
yellow flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Marsh cudweed is
native to Europe, the Caucasus, and western Asia,
and is naturalized in North America. It prefers damp
areas, and is gathered in summer when in flower.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Marsh cudweed contains a volatile
oil and tannins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses While little used
medicinally today, marsh cudweed has astringent,
antiseptic, and decongestant properties. In British
herbal medicine, it is occasionally taken for tonsillitis,
sore throat, and hoarseness, and for mucus in the
throat, nasal passages, and sinuses. Marsh cudweed
is used in Russia to reduce high blood pressure. It is
thought to be antidepressant and aphrodisiac.

Related Species A North American relative,
G. polycephalum, was used to treat respiratory and
intestinal congestion, and was applied as a poultice
for bruises. G. keriense, native to New Zealand, is
also considered a remedy for bruises.

Marsh cudweed is commonly found in damp areas
in Europe, North America, and Asia.

Gossypium herbaceum (Malvaceae)

Cotton

Description Biennial or perennial growing to
about 8 ft (2.5 m). Has lobed leaves, large white
or pink flowers, and seed capsules surrounded by
fluffy white tufts.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Americas, Africa, and Asia, cotton thrives in warm
temperate and tropical climates. It is widely
cultivated for its fiber. The root and seeds of the
plant are harvested in autumn.

Parts Used Root bark, seed oil.
Constituents Cotton root bark contains
gossypol (a sesquiterpene) and flavonoids. Cotton
seed contains a fixed oil, which is about 2% gossypol,
and flavonoids. Gossypol causes infertility in men.
History & Folklore In India and the Middle
East, cotton has been cultivated since the earliest
times for its fiber and medicinal properties. The
plant was particularly valued for its ability to induce
menstruation. Cotton seed oil's contraceptive effect
in men was first discovered in China when men
became infertile after eating food cooked in the oil.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Cotton root
bark is rarely used medicinally today. It was once
employed as a substitute for ergot (Claviceps
purpurea), the widely used labor-inducing herb.
Cotton root bark is both milder-acting and safer

in effect, stimulating uterine contractions and
hastening a difficult labor. It also promotes
abortion or the onset of a period, and reduces
menstrual flow. Cotton root bark encourages

the blood to clot and the secretion of breastmilk.
Cotton seed oil is used to treat heavy menstrual
bleeding and endometriosis.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

----- PAGE 220 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Research Cotton seeds and seed oil cause
infertility in men, and have been tested as a male
contraceptive in China. However, in addition to
lowering sperm count, cotton seed oil causes the
degeneration of sperm-producing cells.

Related Species The American species

G. hirsutum was used extensively as a medicinal herb
by the Maya and Aztecs, and was also cultivated for
its fiber. Columbus carried samples of this species
back to Europe from his first voyage. Native
American people used the bark to ease the pain
of childbirth, and by the 19th century it was used
as an inducer of menstruation and abortion.

® @ Cautions Cotton root bark and seed

oil are potentially toxic and should only be used
under professional supervision. Do not use

during pregnancy.

Grindelia camporum syn.
G. robusta var. rigida (Asteraceae)

Gumplant

Description Perennial herb growing to 3 ft

(1 m). Has triangular leaves and yellow-orange
daisy-type flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
southwestern U.S. and Mexico, gumplant grows in
arid and saline soil. It is harvested in late summer
when in flower.

Parts Used Leaves, flowering tops.
Constituents Gumplant contains diterpenes
(including grindelic acid), resins, and flavonoids.
History & Folklore Gumplant was used by
Native Americans to treat bronchial problems and
skin afflictions. Gumplant was officially recognized
in the Pharmacopoeia of the United States from
1882 to 1926.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Gumplant is

a valuable remedy for bronchial asthma, and for
states where phlegm in the airways impedes
respiration. Both antispasmodic and expectorant,
gumplant helps to relax the muscles of the smaller
bronchial passages and to clear congested mucus.
Additionally, it is thought to desensitize the nerve
endings in the bronchial tree and to slow the heart
rate, both leading to easier breathing. Gumplant is
also taken for bronchitis and emphysema, and to
clear mucus buildup in the throat and nose. It has
been employed in the treatment of whooping
cough, hay fever, and cystitis, and externally to help
speed the healing of skin irritation and burns.
Related Species G. squarrosa, a North American
species used interchangeably with G. camporum, was
taken by Native Americans to treat respiratory
problems such as colds, coughs, and tuberculosis.
@ @ Cautions Toxic in excessive doses. Only
take under professional supervision. Do not take if
suffering from kidney or heart problems.

Guaiacum officinale
(Zygophyllaceae)

Lignum Vitae,
Guayacan (Spanish)

Description Evergreen tree growing to 10 m
(33 ft). Has compound oval leaves, small, deep blue
star-shaped flowers, and heart-shaped seed capsules.
Habitat & Cultivation Lignum vitae is native
to South America and the Caribbean islands. It
grows in tropical rainforests. The tree is felled for its
timber, and resin is extracted from the heartwood.
Parts Used Wood, resin.

Constituents Lignum vitae contains lignans
(furoguaiacidin, guaiacin, and others), triterpene
saponins, 18-25% resin, and volatile oil.

Lignum vitae was once in high demand in Europe as
a purported cure for syphilis.

History & Folklore In |519, Ulrich von Hutten,
a German satirist, was said to have cured himself
of syphilis after a 40-day regimen involving fasting,
profuse sweating, and drinking decoctions of
lignum vitae. Furthermore, in 1526, Oviedo, one of
the earliest chroniclers of American natural history,
wrote that ‘Caribbean Indians cure themselves
very easily’’ of venereal disease with this plant. For
some years, lignum vitae was in great demand in
Europe but it slowly fell into disrepute, its use as a
cure for syphilis being seen as a long-lasting hoax.
However, it is possible that the herb might have
some effect if combined with an intensive
naturopathic regimen.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Used in Europe,
especially in Britain, as a remedy for arthritic and
rheumatic conditions, lignum vitae has anti-
inflammatory properties that help to reduce joint
pain and swelling. It is also diuretic, laxative, and
sweat-inducing and speeds the elimination of
toxins, which makes it valuable for treating gout.
Tincture of lignum vitae is commonly used as a

friction rub on rheumatic areas. Absorbent cotton
moistened with the resin may be applied to aching
teeth. A decoction of the woodchips acts as a local
anesthetic, and is used to treat rheumatic joints
and herpes blisters.

Related Species G. sanctum, which grows

in Central America and parts of Florida, and

G. coulteri, native to Mexico, are used in the

same manner as lignum vitae.

Caution Lignum vitae is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries and is endangered.

Guarea rusbyi syn. G. guidonia
(Meliaceae)

Cocillana,
Guapi Bark

Description Evergreen tree growing to 150 ft
(45 m) with pale grey bark, compound lance-
shaped leaves, and green-white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Cocillana is native

to the eastern Andes. The bark is gathered
throughout the year.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Cocillana contains anthraquinones,
proanthocyanids, and a volatile oil.

History & Folklore Cocillana has been used
as an emetic in traditional South American and
Caribbean medicine, probably for many centuries.
The plant was first introduced to Western medicine
by H. H. Rusby, who collected samples in Bolivia

in 1886.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cocillana is used
in cough mixtures, being an even more powerful
expectorant than ipecac (Cephaelis ipecacuanha,
p. 186). Cocillana is taken as a treatment for
coughs, excessive mucus production in the throat
and chest, and bronchitis. At a high dosage, the
plant induces vomiting.

Related Species A gum resin derived from
the Caribbean G. guara is used as a clotting agent,
and a decoction of the leaves is taken as a treatment
for internal bleeding.

@ Caution Use cocillana only under
professional supervision.

Gymnema sylvestre
(Asclepiadaceae)

Gymnema,
Gurmar (Hindi)

Description Large, evergreen, twining plant,
climbing up through forest trees, sometimes to a
considerable height. Has dull green leaves about

2 in (5 cm) long, and umbels of small yellow flowers.

----- PAGE 221 -----
Habitat & Cultivation Gymnema is native
to forests of central and southern India, Southeast
Asia, and as far south as northern Australia. It
prefers loamy soil.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Gymnema contains saponins
(gymnemic acids) and a polypeptide (gurmarin).
History & Folklore Gymnema has long been
used in Indian domestic medicine as a remedy for
sugar cravings and diabetes. Its Hindi name means
“sugar destroyer.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Gymnema has
real value in treating diabetes, especially in the
early stages of type 2 diabetes, which develops

in middle to old age. If taken consistently for a
year or more, it will help to prevent the condition
deteriorating. Gymnema may help to regenerate
cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin, so

it may be possible to control or reverse mild
diabetes with diet and gymnema. The plant's
remarkable ability to block sweet tastes means
that it can reduce sugar cravings and contribute
to weight-loss programs.

Research In recent research in India and

Japan, gymnema has shown promise as a safe

and effective natural treatment for diabetes. In
two clinical trials in India, patients with diabetes
needed less insulin or other treatments to lower
blood-sugar levels. There is an indication that
gymnema may encourage repair of the islet cells
of the pancreas, responsible for insulin secretion.
The leaves have been shown to anesthetize the
sweet taste buds of the tongue, and temporarily
reduce appetite.

Haronga madagascariensis
(Guttiferae)

Haronga

Description Small evergreen tree growing

to 26 ft (8 m). Has black-dotted leaves with

a dark green upper surface and red-brown

hairs underneath, and clusters of creamy-

white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Haronga is native

to Madagascar and East Africa, and grows in
tropical areas. The leaves and bark are collected
throughout the year.

Parts Used Leaves, bark.

Constituents Haronga bark contains phenolic
pigments, triterpenes, anthraquinones, and tannins.
The leaves contain phenolic pigments, the diterpene
hypericin, flavonoids, and tannins. Hypericin, which
is also found in St. John’s wort (Hypericum
perforatum, p. 106), has antiviral properties.
History & Folklore Haronga resin has
traditionally been used in Africa to secure
arrowheads onto shafts.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Thought to
stimulate bile secretion, haronga is used in European
herbal medicine to treat indigestion and poor
pancreatic function. In African herbal medicine,
haronga is chiefly employed as an astringent and
mild laxative, and is also given for digestive system
ailments such as diarrhea and dysentery.

Hedera helix (Araliaceae)
Ivy,
English lvy

Description A woody climber up to 100 ft
(30 m) with leathery, dark green leaves, clusters of

greenish-yellow flowers and black or orange berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
northern and central Asia, ivy has been introduced,
often as a garden climber, in many parts of the world.
In the wild, it typically grows on trees and in hedges.
Parts Used Leaves, berries.
Constituents lvy contains saponins, sterols,
polyacetylenes, a volatile oil, and flavonoids.
The saponins are expectorant, amebicidal, and
antifungal, and kill liver flukes.
History & Folklore In the classical world,
common ivy was dedicated to Dionysus, the god
of wine making and intoxication. lvy was thought
to be able to prevent or undo drunkenness. The
leaf was traditionally used in England to treat corns
and warts—it was soaked in vinegar and bound
on as a poultice, or placed inside a sock, overlying
the corn.

Medicinal Actions & Uses | is chiefly
used for congestion of the ear, nose, and

throat, as well as for bronchitis. It acts as

Ivy was thought, in the classical world, to undo drunkenness.

an expectorant, stimulating the coughing up

and clearance of phlegm. It has a beneficial effect
on mucous membranes and is generally combined
with tonic herbs, especially thyme (Thymus vulgaris,
p. 143). lvy extracts are common ingredients in
cosmetic formulations for cellulite.

Caution Fresh leaves can irritate the skin.

Herniaria glabra
(Caryophyllaceae)

Rupturewort

Description Prostrate annual or perennial

with bright green oval leaves and clusters of

green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Rupturewort is found
throughout Europe and western Asia. It thrives in
barren areas, in lime and sandy soils. It is gathered
when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Rupturewort contains coumarins
(including 3% herniarin and scopoletin), flavonoids,
phenolic acids, and saponins.

History & Folklore Rupturewort was first
documented in European herbals of the | 6th
century. Its genus name, Herniaria, refers to its
reputed ability to heal hernias.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Rupturewort is
of value chiefly as a diuretic herb. The fresh plant
treats urinary problems such as cystitis, irritable
bladder, and kidney stones. It is also astringent, and
has been applied as a poultice to speed the healing
of ulcers. The whole plant appears to have an
antispasmodic effect on the bladder.

Hibiscus sabdariffa (Malvaceae)
Hibiscus,

Jamaica

Description Shrub growing to 6/4 ft (2 m)

in height.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
Africa and Southeast Asia, hibiscus grows in tropical
regions around the world. It is primarily cultivated
across Africa and in Thailand, China, and Mexico.
Parts Used Calyx (the outer base of the flower),
flowers, leaves.

Constituents The calyx and flowers contain
flavonoids, including anthocyanins.

History & Folklore ‘Hibiscus’ means “plant
that is consecrated to the ibis,” a bird held sacred in
ancient Egypt.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Hibiscus makes

a refreshing, pleasant-tasting tea that is cooling

and mildly sedative, soothing hot and feverish

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

a

219

----- PAGE 222 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

a

220

conditions. The calyces are gently tonic and will
ease colds, coughs, and chest problems. They also
aid digestion and gently stimulate appetite. Both
the calyces and flowers act to reduce cholesterol
levels. All parts of hibiscus are demulcent, mildly
soothing sore or inflamed mucous membranes
within the digestive and respiratory tracts.
Research Various clinical studies have shown
that hibiscus helps to lower high blood pressure.

Hieracium pilosella syn. Pilosella
officinarum (Asteraceae)

Mouse-ear
Hawkweed

Description Perennial herb growing to a height
of 8 in (20 cm) from a rosette of basal leaves. Stems
bear single bright yellow flower heads.

Habitat & Cultivation Mouse-ear hawkweed
is common throughout much of Europe and
temperate regions of Asia and North America.
Found growing in dry pastures and on sandy soil,
it is collected when in flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Mouse-ear hawkweed contains
a coumarin (umbelliferone), flavonoids, and caffeic
acid. It is thought to be mildly antifungal.
History & Folklore In his Irish Herbal (1735),
K’Eogh summarizes mouse-ear hawkweed's
medicinal benefits: ‘good against the spitting of
blood, all kinds of flow, coughs, ulcers of the lungs,
mouth and eyes, and shingles.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Mouse-ear
hawkweed relaxes the muscles of the bronchial
tubes, stimulates the cough reflex, and reduces
the production of mucus. This combination of
actions makes the herb effective in respiratory
problems, including asthma and wheeziness,
whooping cough, bronchitis, and other chronic
and congested coughs. The herb is used to
control heavy menstrual bleeding, and to ease

the coughing up of blood. It may be applied as

a poultice to heal wounds.

Hippophae rhamnoides
(Elaeagnaceae)

Sea Buckthorn

Description Thorny deciduous shrub growing to
16 ft (5 m). Has narrow silvery leaves, male or female
flowers, and clusters of brownish-orange berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
Asia, sea buckthorn grows mainly in sandy coastal
areas and in dry riverbeds in mountainous regions.
The berries are harvested in the autumn.

Sea buckthorn is distinguished by its thorny stems
and narrow silvery leaves. The berries help improve
the body's resistance to infection.

Parts Used Berries.
Constituents The fruit contains flavonoids,
flavones, carotenoids, vitamins A, C (present in
very high quantities), and E, and high levels of
minerals including sulphur, selenium, zinc, and
copper. The seeds contain appreciable levels of
alpha-linolenic acid.

History & Folklore The sour-tasting berries
have traditionally been eaten with milk and cheese
by Siberians and Tartars, who also used them to
make a pleasant-tasting jelly.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Sea buckthorn
berries are very high in vitamin C. They
have principally been used to help
improve resistance to infection. The
berries are mildly astringent, and a
decoction of them has been used as a
wash to treat skin irritation and eruptions,
and to promote healing.

Research Research into sea buckthorn fruit,
seed, and seed oil indicates that they have

definite therapeutic value. The fruit especially
supports heart and circulatory health and is useful
in treating conditions such as capillary fragility,
arteriosclerosis, and a weak heart. The seed oil
nourishes the skin, promotes tissue healing, and will
often prove useful in treating eczema.

Hoodia gordonii (Apocynaceae)

Hoodia

Description Unusual-looking succulent growing
to 3 ft (| m), hoodia has multiple spiny, grey-green
stems and light purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Kalahari
desert, hoodia is now extensively cultivated in
Namibia and South Africa. The plant is grown from
seed or cuttings. Trade in the hoodia plant is legally
restricted due to its threatened survival in the wild.

Parts Used The peeled stem.
Constituents Hoodia contains a steroidal
glycoside, which is thought to act as an appetite
suppressant.

History & Folklore The San people of the
Kalahari traditionally used this plant to suppress
sensations of thirst and hunger, when on journeys
through the desert. Such use was first recorded
in 1937.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Hoodia
provides a cautionary tale for herbal medicines
and supplements in the 2|st century. There is
ittle evidence that taking it leads to weight loss
other than the plant's traditional use as an appetite
suppressant, while its safety profile is unknown.
Despite this, after media coverage by the BBC

in 2003, sales of hoodia supplements rocketed,
with prices in the LA Times reaching $40 per
ounce (30 g) in 2006. At such a price, it is not
hard to see why hoodia’ survival in the wild is
severely threatened. It would seem sensible to
opt instead for herbs that are endorsed for their
use for weight loss by scientific studies and

where there is no risk of the herb disappearing
from the wild, such as Gymnema (Gymnema
sylvestre, p. 218).

@ Cautions Seek professional advice before
taking hoodia products, especially if taking
prescribed blood-thinning medication for
conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure.

Hordeum vulgare (Poaceae)

Barley

Description Annual grass growing to about
3 ft (I m). Has an erect hollow stem, lance-

NS shaped leaves, and ears bearing twin rows
4

of seeds and long bristles.
Habitat & Cultivation Barley is

cultivated in temperate regions
worldwide. It is harvested when the

seeds are mature.

Parts Used Seeds.
Constituents Barley contains
polysaccharides, proteins,

sugars, fats, and vitamins B and
E. The young seedlings also
contain the amines tyramine
and gramine.

}

Barley has been
eaten since
Neolithic times.

----- PAGE 223 -----
History & Folklore Barley has been
consumed for many thousands of years.
Dioscorides (Ist century Ce) recommended

it “to weaken and restrain all sharp and subtle
humours, and sore and ulcerated throats.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses An excellent
food for convalescence in the form of porridge

or barley water, barley is soothing to the throat
and provides easily assimilated nutrients. It can
also be taken to clear mucus. Its demulcent quality
soothes inflammation of the gut and urinary tract.
Barley aids in the digestion of milk and is given to
babies to prevent the development of curds within
the stomach. It is commonly given to children
suffering from minor infections or diarrhea, and it
is particularly recommended as a treatment for
feverish states. Made into a poultice, barley is an
effective remedy for soothing and reducing
inflammation in sores and swellings.

Research The fiber in barley, like that in oats,
has an established action in reducing fat absorption
from the gut, aiding lower cholesterol levels. In
common with other fiber foods, it may also help
to stabilize blood sugar levels and to prevent
bowel cancer.

Hydrangea arborescens
(Hydrangeaceae)

Wild Hydrangea

Description Woody-stemmed deciduous shrub
growing to a height of about 10 ft (3 m). Has oval
leaves and clusters of small, creamy-white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the eastern
US. from New York to Florida, wild hydrangea
grows in woodlands and on riverbanks. The root
is dug up in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Hydrangea is thought to contain
flavonoids, a cyanogenic glycoside (hydrangein),
saponins, and a volatile oil.

Wild hydrangea is used to treat kidney and bladder stones.

History & Folklore The Cherokee used
ydrangea as a remedy for kidney and bladder
stones. The | 9th-century Physiomedicalist
erbal movement used a formula comprising
ydrangea, couch grass (Agropyron repens, p. 162),
and hollyhock (Althaea rosea) to treat serious
idney disorders, including nephritis.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Western

erbal medicine considers the diuretic
ydrangea as being particularly helpful in

the treatment of kidney and bladder stones.

It is thought both to encourage the expulsion
of stones and to help dissolve those that
remain. The herb is given for many other
troubles affecting the genitourinary system,
including cystitis, urethritis, enlarged prostate,
and prostatitis.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or
while breastfeeding. Wild hydrangea is best taken
on professional advice.

Hygrophila spinosa
(Acanthaceae)

Gokulakanta

Description Thorny, red-stemmed annual
growing to 2 ft (60 cm). Has bright blue flowers
and small, flat, dark red seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to India,
gokulakanta is now widely distributed throughout
tropical regions. It is gathered when in flower.
Parts Used Aerial parts, root.
Constituents Gokulakanta contains mucilage,
fixed and volatile oils, and an alkaloid.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Commonly used
as a remedy in India, gokulakanta is taken chiefly
for its reputed aphrodisiac properties. Both the
aerial parts and ash of the burned plant are strongly
diuretic, and are used to flush water from the body
in cases of excess fluid retention.

Related Species The South American

H. guayensis is bactericidal and has been used as a
local treatment for the tropical disease, leishmaniasis.

Hyoscyamus niger (Solanaceae)

Henbane

Description Annual or biennial herb growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has delicate, slightly lobed leaves
and bell-shaped flowers, pale yellow in color
with fine purple veining.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
Asia and southern Europe, henbane is now
found across much of western and
central Europe, and North and
South America. It is cultivated for

therapeutic use in parts of Europe, including
England, and in North America. The leaves and
flowers are picked just after the plant has
flowered, in the first year for the annual variety
and in the second year for the biennial.

Parts Used Leaves, flowering tops.
Constituents Henbane contains 0.045—0.14%
tropane alkaloids, especially hyoscyamine and
hyoscine, and flavonoids. Hyoscyamine and hyoscine
are common to other members of the Solanaceae
family, but henbane's relatively high hyoscine content
gives it a more specifically sedative action than its
relatives thornapple (Datura stramonium, p. 200)
and deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna, p. 69).
History & Folklore Henbane has been used
as a medicinal herb for thousands of years.
Babylonian accounts and the Egyptian Ebers papyrus
(c. 1500 sce) record that henbane was smoked to
relieve toothache. In Greek myth, the dead were
adorned with henbane when they arrived in Hades.
Writing in the Ist century ce, Dioscorides
recommended henbane for insomnia, coughs,
congestion, heavy menstrual bleeding, eye pain,
gout, and as a general pain reliever, and advised
that the herb should be used within a year as it
deteriorates quickly. In the Middle Ages, henbane
had the Latin name dentaria, denoting its use as a
remedy against toothache. Henbane reputedly
produces a sensation of lightness, as though one
were flying, and it was one of the chief
components of witches’ “flying ointments.’

Henbane has distinctive
yellow flowers veined with
purple. The plant was
used in classical times

as a general painkiller.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 224 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Medicinal Actions & Uses Henbane is
used extensively in herbal medicine as a sedative
and painkiller. Its specific use is for pain affecting
the urinary tract, especially pain due to kidney
stones, though it is also given for abdominal
cramping. Its sedative and antispasmodic effect
makes it a valuable treatment for the symptoms
of Parkinson's disease, relieving tremor and rigidity
during the early stages of the illness. Henbane

has also been used to treat asthma and bronchitis,
usually as a “burning powder” or in the form

of a cigarette. Applied externally as an oil, it can
relieve painful conditions such as neuralgia, sciatica,
and rheumatism. Henbane reduces mucus
secretions, as well as saliva and other digestive
juices. Like its cousin deadly nightshade, it dilates
the pupils. Hyoscine is commonly employed as

a pre-operative anesthetic and in motion

sickness formulations.

Related Species Other Hyoscyamus species
are used in a similar way. The North African

H. muticus is traditionally smoked by Bedouins

to relieve toothache. See also deadly nightshade
(Atropa belladonna, p. 69).

2 @ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Potentially toxic in overdose,
henbane is subject to legal restrictions in

some countries.

Hyssopus officinalis (Lamiaceae)
Hyssop

Description Semi-evergreen shrub growing
to 2 ft (60 cm). Has narrow leaves and clusters
of blue double-lipped flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern

Europe, hyssop grows freely in Mediterranean
countries, especially in the Balkans and Turkey.

Hyssop has a positive effect on respiratory infections.

It prefers sunny, dry sites and is a common garden
herb. The flowering tops are harvested when

the plant is in flower in summer.

Parts Used Flowering tops, essential oil.
Constituents Contains terpenes (including
marubiin, a diterpene), a volatile oil (consisting
mainly of camphor, pinocamphone, and beta-
pinene), flavonoids, tannins, and resin. Marubiin is a
strong expectorant. Pinocamphone is toxic, and
the volatile oil can cause epileptic seizures.
History & Folklore In the past, hyssop

was so highly esteemed it was regarded as a
virtual cure-all. An old saying went, ‘Whoever
rivals hyssop’s virtues, knows too much.” In the
Ist century ce, Dioscorides recommended

a recipe containing a mixture of hyssop, figs

(Ficus carica, p. 211), rue (Ruta graveolens,

p. 265), honey, and water for treating a

number of conditions, including pleurisy,

asthma, tight-chestedness, respiratory congestion,
and chronic coughs.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Currently

an undervalued medicinal herb, hyssop is
potentially useful as it is both calming and tonic.

It has a positive effect when used to treat
bronchitis and respiratory infections, especially
where there is excessive mucus production.
Hyssop appears to encourage the production

of a more liquid mucus, and at the same time
gently stimulates expectoration. This combined
action clears thick and congested phlegm. Hyssop
can irritate the mucous membranes, so it is best
given after an infection has peaked, when the
herb's tonic action encourages a general recovery.
As a sedative, hyssop is a useful remedy against
asthma in both children and adults, especially
where the condition is exacerbated by mucus
congestion. Like many herbs with a strong
volatile oil, it soothes the digestive tract and can
be an effective remedy against indigestion, gas,
bloating, and colic.

Cautions Hyssop essential oil can induce
epileptic seizures. It should only be used under
professional supervision. Hyssop essential oil is
subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

llex paraguariensis
syn. |. paraguensis (Aquifoliaceae)

Maté

Description Evergreen shrub or small tree
growing to 20 ft (6 m). Has large leaves, white
flowers, and small reddish fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Maté grows wild
in northern Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and
southern Brazil, and is widely cultivated in
Argentina, Spain, and Portugal. The leaves are
picked when the berries are ripe, heated over a

wood fire, ground, and then stored in sacks for

a year before being sold.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Maté contains xanthine
derivatives, including about |.5% caffeine, about
0.2% theobromine, theophylline, and up to 16%
tannins. The high tannin content means that maté
should not be consumed with meals, as tannins
impair the absorption of nutrients.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Maté is a

Maté makes a pleasant-tasting tea that has a stimulant,
mildly analgesic, and diuretic effect.

traditional South American tea that increases
short-term physical and mental energy levels. It

is taken as a fortifying beverage in much the same
way as tea (Camellia sinensis, p. 181) is consumed
throughout Asia and Europe. Maté has properties
similar to those of tea and coffee (Coffea arabica,
p. 192). It stimulates the nervous system and is
mildly analgesic and diuretic. As a medicinal herb,
maté is used to treat headaches, migraine,
neuralgic and rheumatic pain, fatigue, and mild
depression. It has also been used in the treatment
of diabetes.

Related Species |. guayusa, from Ecuador, is
used in much the same way as maté but is also
employed medicinally to treat malaria, liver pain,
and syphilis. It is thought to aid digestion and
cleanse the digestive tract.

Illicium verum (Schisandaceae)

Star Anise,
Ba Jiao Hui Xian (Chinese)

Description Evergreen tree growing to 59 ft
(18 m). Has tapering leaves, pale greenish-yellow
flowers and star-shaped segmented fruit (seed pods).
Habitat & Cultivation Native to China, India
and Vietnam, star anise grows in tropical regions
across the world. The fruit is harvested when ripe.
Parts Used Fruit and seeds.

----- PAGE 225 -----
Dried star anise fruit is
a digestive, stimulant,
and diuretic remedy.

Constituents Star anise contains a volatile

oil (mostly anethole), sesquiterpenoids, and
flavonoids, including quercetin. Anethole calms
the digestive system and relieves gas. The
sesquiterpenoids have analgesic activity. Shikimic
acid, found in the seed pods, was until recently
used as the main source for the production of
Tamiflu, a prescribed anti-viral medicine.
History & Folklore Due to its high anethole
content, star anise has a similar taste to anise
(Pipinella anisum, p. 248), and both are used
principally as spices. The herb’s Chinese name,

ba jiao hui xian, means “8-horned fennel.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses Used in
Chinese herbal medicine as a remedy for
rheumaism, back pain, and hernias, star anise

has stimulant, diuretic, and digestive properties.
It makes an effective remedy for gas and
indigestion—especially colic—and can safely

be given to children. To treat hernias of the
intestine or bladder, star anise is often mixed
with fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212). Both
herbs help to relax the organ’s muscles and
relieve spasm. Star anise is also used for toothache.
Caution Japanese star anise (Illicium anisatum),
which is very similar to star anise, contains a toxic
compound and can cause serious side effects.

Imperatoria ostruthium, syn.
Peucedanum ostruthium

Masterwort

Description Perennial growing to 2 ft (60 cm)
with green leaves divided into 3 leaflets with 3 lobes,
white flowers on large umbels, and winged seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to central and
southern Europe and Asia, most often found in the
wild. The root is unearthed in autumn or spring.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Masterwort contains a
camphoraceous volatile oil (including limonene,
phellandrene, alpha-pinene, and a sesquiterpene),
peucadanin, oxipeucadanin, and ostrutol.
History & Folklore From the late Middle
Ages onward, masterwort was held in high regard

by herbalists. Pierandrea Matteoli’s Materia
Medica of 1548 explains: “Masterwort powerfully
resolves all flatulence in the body, stimulates
urine and menstruation, is an admirable remedy
for paralysis and cold conditions of the brain, and
helps against pestilence and the bites of rabid
dogs.’ A century later, Nicholas Culpeper was
no less fulsome in recommending masterwort
for rheumatic conditions, shortness of breath,
kidney and bladder stones, water retention,
“falling sickness,’ and wounds.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Masterwort

is little used today, but it may well be an herb that
bears further investigation. The root is aromatic,
warms central areas of the body, and is a bitter
tonic. It has a strong action within the stomach
and gut, settling indigestion and relieving gas

and cramping. Masterwort is also beneficial for
chest conditions, and is used for colds, asthma,
and bronchitis. It can also be helpful for
menstrual problems.

Caution If applied to the skin, masterwort
may cause an allergic reaction to sunlight.

Ipomoea purga syn. Convolvulus
jalapa (Convolvulaceae)

Jalap

Description Evergreen vine reaching about
13 ft (4 m). Has heart-shaped leaves and trumpet-
like purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Mexico,
jalap is cultivated in Central America, the West
Indies, and Southeast Asia. The root is unearthed
In summer.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Jalap contains the resin
convolvulin.

History & Folklore Spanish colonizers
learned of jalap’s strong purgative effect from
Mexican native peoples. Introduced into Europe
in 1565, the herb was used for all types of
illnesses until the 19th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Jalap is such

a powerful cathartic that its medicinal value

is questionable. Even in moderate doses it
stimulates the elimination of profuse watery
stools, and in larger doses it causes vomiting.
Related Species |. turpethum, native to Asia
and Australia, is also a drastic purgative. Other
Ipomoea species, such as the sweet potato

(I. batatas, from South America), are important
food plants. The seeds of morning glory

(. violacea), native to Mexico, contain
compounds similar to LSD, and were taken
ritually by the Zapotecs and Aztecs.

@ Caution Do not take jalap under any
circumstances.

Iris versicolor (lridaceae)

Blue Flag,
Wild Iris

Description Perennial growing to about 3 ft

(| m). Has erect stems and long sword-shaped
leaves. Each stem bears 3—5 resplendent blue

to violet flowers with white-veined areas on

the petals.

Habitat & Cultivation Blue flag is native to
North America. Preferring damp and marshy areas
in the wild, it is also widely cultivated as a garden
plant. The rhizome is unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Blue flag contains triterpenoids,
salicylic, and isophthalic acids, a very small amount
of volatile oil, starch, resin, an oleoresin, and tannins.
History & Folklore Blue flag was one of the
medicinal plants most frequently used by Native
Americans. Different tribes made use of it variously
as an emetic, cathartic, and diuretic, to treat wounds,
and for colds, earache, and cholera. In the Anglo-
American Physiomedicalist tradition, blue flag was
used as a glandular and liver remedy. Blue flag is
Quebec's provincial flower.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Blue flag is
currently used mainly to detoxify the body,
increases urination and bile production, and has

a mild laxative effect. This combination of cleansing
actions makes it a useful herb for chronic skin

=

diseases such as acne and eczema, especially where
gallbladder problems or constipation contribute to
the condition. Blue flag is also given for biliousness
and indigestion. However, in large doses blue flag
will itself cause vomiting. The traditional use of blue
flag for gland problems persists. It is also believed

by some to aid weight loss.
Cautions Excessive doses cause vomiting.
Do not take this plant during pregnancy.

Blue flag was very widely used by Native Americans
to treat wounds and sores.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 226 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Jasminum grandiflorum (Oleaceae)

Jasmine

Description Slender evergreen rambler growing
to 20 ft (6 m). Has dark green compound leaves and
large, sweetly scented tubular white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
India, Pakistan, and the northwestern Himalayas,
jasmine is now cultivated as a garden plant and for
its essential oil.

Parts Used Flowers, essential oil.

Jasmine flowers are the source of an essential oil that
is used to treat stress and depression.

Constituents Jasmine’ volatile oil contains
benzyl alcohol, benzy! acetate, linalool, and

linalyl acetate.

History & Folklore Jasmine was introduced
to Europe in the | 6th century, and is mainly used
as a source of perfume.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Jasmine flowers
make a calming and sedative infusion, taken to
relieve tension. The oil is considered antidepressant
and relaxing. It is used externally to soothe dry
or sensitive skin. Due to frequent adulteration,
the oil is rarely used in aromatherapy.

Related Species Actually native to Southeast
Asia, Arabian jasmine (J. sambac) is used

as an eyewash, is added to tea (Camellia sinensis,

p. 181) to produce jasmine tea, and is used in
Buddhist ceremonies.

Caution Jasmine essential oil should not be
taken internally.

Jateorhiza palmata
(Menispermaceae)

Calumba

Description Creeping vine with a perennial
rootstock, growing to a great height and often
reaching the tops of trees. Has large palm-shaped

leaves, small greenish-white flowers, with male
and female flowers on separate plants, and

round, fleshy fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
rainforests of eastern Africa, especially Mozambique
and Madagascar, calumba is also grown in other
tropical regions. The roots are dug up in dry
weather in March and dried.

Parts Used Bark.

Constituents Calumba contains isoquinoline
alkaloids (notably palmatine, columbamine, and
jatrorrhizine), diterpene bitter principles, mucilage,
and volatile oil (about 1%).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Profoundly bitter,
calumba is an extremely good remedy for
underactive or weakened digestion, stimulating
stomach acid production and increasing appetite. It is
a specific for loss of appetite and anorexia, and by
making the stomach more acidic (and therefore
hostile to pathogens) helps to prevent digestive
infections and improve the breakdown and
absorption of foods. It is a useful treatment for
chronic intestinal infection such as dysentery.
Research Calumbas bitterness is due both to the
bitter principles and the alkaloids. Palmatine and
jatrorrhizine reduce blood pressure, palmatine

is a uterine stimulant, and jatrorrhizine is sedative
and antifungal.

Other Species Calumba has much in common
with gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99), although it owes
its bitterness to a different range of constituents.
Caution Avoid during pregnancy.

Juglans cinerea (Juglandaceae)

Butternut

Description Deciduous tree growing to
100 ft (30 m). Has gray bark, long leaves with
many leaflets, male catkins and female flowers,
and an oval-shaped fruit containing a hard
dark-colored nut.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
American forests, butternut is cultivated for its
timber in other temperate regions. The bark is
collected in autumn.

Part Used Inner bark.

Constituents Contains naphthaquinones
(including juglone, juglandin, and juglandic acid),
a fixed and a volatile oil, and tannins. The

naphthaquinones have an approximately similar
laxative effect to the anthraquinones found in
plants such as senna (Cassia senna, p. 75) and
Chinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum, p. 126).
Juglone is purgative, antimicrobial, antiparasitic,
and cancer-inhibiting.

History & Folklore Butternut bark was
employed by Native Americans and New World
settlers as a laxative and tonic remedy. Butternut

was used to treat a variety of conditions, including
rheumatic and arthritic joints, headaches, dysentery,
constipation, and wounds.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Used to this

day as a laxative and tonic, butternut is a valuable
remedy for chronic constipation, gently encouraging
regular bowel movements. It is especially beneficial
if combined with a carminative herb, such as ginger
(Zingiber officinale, p. 155) or angelica (Angelica
archangelica, p. 168). Butternut also lowers
cholesterol levels, and promotes the clearance

of waste products by the liver. It has a positive
reputation in treating intestinal worms, and, being
antimicrobial and astringent, it has been prescribed
as a treatment for dysentery.

Related Species Black walnut (J. nigra) is used
in the same way as butternut. The bark of the
walnut tree (J. regia) is used as a gentle purgative,
and is also applied to skin afflictions. The nut is
used in Chinese herbal medicine as a kidney tonic.
The nuts of both varieties are highly nutritious,
lower cholesterol levels, and contain significant
quantities of alpha-linolenic acid.

Juniperus communis
(Cupressaceae)

Juniper

Description Coniferous shrub sometimes
growing to 49 ft (15 m). Has slender twigs with
whorls of needle-like leaves, yellow male and blue
female flowers on separate plants, and spherical
blue-black fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Juniper is found in
Europe, southwestern Asia up to the Himalayas,
and North America, where it grows from southern
coastal sites to more northerly moorland and
mountainous regions. The ripe fruit (berries) is
gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Fruit, essential oil.

Constituents Juniper contains |-2% volatile oil,
consisting of over 60 compounds, which include
myrcene, sabinene, alpha- and beta-pinene, and
cineole. Juniper also contains tannins, diterpenes,
sugars, resin, and vitamin C.

History & Folklore juniper is the main
flavoring used in gin. Juniper berries are still mostly
gathered from the wild. In former times, sprigs of
juniper flung into the fire were thought to protect
against evil spirits.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Juniper is tonic,
diuretic, and strongly antiseptic within the urinary
tract. It is a valuable remedy for cystitis, and helps
relieve fluid retention, but should be avoided in
cases of kidney disease. In the digestive system,
juniper is warming and settling, easing colic and
supporting the function of the stomach. Taken
internally or applied externally, juniper is helpful

----- PAGE 227 -----
Juniper is powerfully
antiseptic in the
urinary tract.

in the treatment of chronic arthritis, gout, and
rheumatic conditions. Applied externally as

a diluted essential oil, it has a slightly warming
effect on the skin and is thought to promote

the removal of waste products from underlying
tissues. Juniper also stimulates menstruation and
tends to increase menstrual bleeding.

Related Species Oil of Cade is produced from
J. oxycedrus and is applied to treat skin rashes. Savin
(|. sabina) is toxic and a powerful abortifacient.
The Japanese J. rigida is used as a diuretic.
Cautions Do not use juniper during pregnancy

or if prone to heavy menstrual bleeding. Do not
take if suffering from a kidney infection or kidney
disease. Do not take the essential oil internally
except under professional supervision.
Self-help Use Urinary infections, p. 3 | 4.

K. pinnata syn. K. africana
(Bignoniaceae)

Kigelia,
African Sausage Tree

Description Semi-deciduous tree growing to
80 ft (25 m) with smooth, gray-brown bark and
brown-purple flowers. The tree gets its name
from the spectacular sausage-shaped fruit, up
to 3 ft (1 m) in length, which hangs from a rope-
like stalk and weighs up to 22 Ib (10 kg).
Habitat & Cultivation Kigelia grows
throughout sub-Saharan Africa but is native to
the eastern half of the continent from Tanzania
to South Africa. The tree is cultivated from seed
or cuttings and flowers after 6 years. The fruit is
harvested when ripe.

Parts Used Fruit pulp, leaves, bark, roots.

Constituents Kigelia fruit contains norviburtinal,
coumarins, iridoids, flavonoids, fatty acids, sterols,
glycosides, and napthaquinones. Norviburtinal has
tumor-reducing activity, the iridoids and sterols are
anti-inflammatory, the flavonoids are antifungal,
and the napthaquinones are thought to

be cytotoxic.

History & Folklore Prized by traditional
healers throughout sub-Saharan Africa, kigelia has
been put to many uses. The Shona of southern
Africa use the bark or root to treat skin infections
and ulcers, toothache, backache, and pneumonia.
In Central Africa, the unripe fruit is used as a dressing
for wounds, hemorrhoids, and rheumatism.

In West Africa, the leaves are given for stomach
and kidney problems, and the fruit is used as a
purgative and applied as a paste to sores. Kigelia

is commonly included in traditional herbal
formulations for malaria.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Thanks to the
knowledge and experience of African traditional
healers, kigelia is now understood to be a valuable
remedy for skin problems, particularly sores and
ulcers, produced by bacterial and fungal infection.
Kigelia has been described as a “natural antibacterial.’
Given its marked anti-inflammatory and wound
healing properties, kigelia is also being investigated
as a skin toner and restorer, as well as potential

treatment for skin disorders such as eczema,
psoriasis, and solar keratosis (a precancerous skin
problem caused by overexposure to sunlight).
Various patents exist for kigelia products, and
over time kigelia may become widely known as

a key herbal resource for the skin.

Kigelia is a key remedy for treating skin problems.

@ Cautions Take kigelia internally only under
professional guidance. Do not take during
pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Krameria triandra (Krameriaceae)

Rhatany

Description Dense evergreen shrub growing
to 3 ft (90 cm). Has a deep root, oblong leaves,
and large red flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Rhatany is found

in Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia on western slopes

of the Andes at altitudes of 3,000-9,800 ft
(900-3,000 m). The root is unearthed throughout
the year.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Rhatany contains |0-20%
tannins, including phlobaphene, benzofurans,

and n-methyltyrosine.

History & Folklore A traditional South
American remedy, rhatany was used by indigenous
peoples as an astringent and a tooth preservative
Its Spanish name, raiz para los dientes (root for the
teeth), points to this traditional usage.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Rhatany is
astringent and antimicrobial. It is a useful remedy
taken principally for problems affecting the
gastrointestinal tract. It is most commonly used
for diarrhea and dysentery. In addition, rhatany
makes a good mouthwash and gargle for bleeding
and infected gums, mouth ulcers, and sore throats.
The plant's astringency makes it useful in the form
of an ointment, suppository, or wash for treating
hemorrhoids. Rhatany may also be applied to
wounds to help staunch blood flow, to varicose
veins, and over areas of capillary fragility that may
be prone to easy bruising

Related Species The Mexican K. cystisoides

is an astringent remedy used in much the same way
as rhatany. Another species native to North and
Central America, K. parvifolia, was used by the
Papago as an eyewash.

Lactuca virosa (Lamiaceae)

Wild Lettuce

Description Hollow-stemmed biennial growing
to about 4 ft (1.2 m). Has broad spiny leaves and
clusters of pale yellow composite flowers. All parts
of the plant exude a white milky latex.

Habitat & Cultivation Common throughout
Europe, wild lettuce grows in open areas, along
roadsides, and in hedges. It is gathered when

in flower in late summer.

Parts Used Leaves, latex, seeds
Constituents The latex contains sesquiterpene
lactones (including lactucopicrin and lactucerin);

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 228 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

the leaves also contain flavonoids and coumarins.
The sesquiterpene lactones have a sedative effect.
History & Folklore In Assyrian herbal
medicine, lettuce seeds were reportedly used with
cumin (Cuminum cyminum, p. 197) as a poultice
for the eyes. Dioscorides (Ist century Ce) wrote
that the plant's effect resembled that of the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum, p. 244).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Wild lettuce is a
safe sedative that can be given to adults and children
to encourage a sound night's sleep or to calm
overactivity or overstimulation. Most commonly,

it is recommended for excitability in children. It is
also taken to treat coughs, often in combination
with herbs such as licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra,

p. 101). Wild lettuce is thought to lower the libido.
It may also be used to relieve pain.

Research A 201 | Egyptian clinical trial found
that lettuce seed oil improved sleep in people
suffering from insomnia. Lettuce seed oil has
traditionally been used in Egypt for sleep problems.
Related Species Garden lettuce (L. sativa) may
be used like wild lettuce, but has a much weaker
therapeutic action.

Lamium album (Lamiaceae)

White Deadnettle

Description Perennial growing to 2 ft (60 cm).
Has a square stem, toothed oval leaves, and
clusters of white double-lipped flowers.

White deadnettle is used to treat gynecological
conditions.

Habitat & Cultivation White deadnettle
is native to and widespread in Europe and
central and northern Asia. It thrives in fields
and in open areas. It is gathered when in
flower in summer.

Parts Used Flowering tops.

Constituents White deadnettle contains

a saponin, flavones, mucilage, and tannins.

History & Folklore Deadnettle is so called
because it resembles true nettle (Urtica dioica,

p. 146), without the stinging hairs. It was also known
as archangel, a plant “to make the heart merry,

to make a good colour in the face, and to refresh
the vital spirits” (John Gerard, The Herball, 1597).
Medicinal Actions & Uses White deadnettle
is astringent and demulcent. It is chiefly used as

a uterine tonic, to arrest intermenstrual bleeding,
and to reduce excessive menstrual flow. It is also

a traditional treatment for abnormal vaginal
discharge. The herb is sometimes taken to relieve
painful periods. Its astringency helps treat diarrhea,
and, used externally, it can relieve hemorrhoids and
varicose veins.

Larix decidua
syn. L. europaea (Pinaceae)

Larch

Description Deciduous conifer growing to 165 ft
(50 m). Has clusters of needle-like leaves, male and
female flowers, and small, light brown cones.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Alps
and the Carpathian mountains of eastern Europe,
larch grows to altitudes of 6,600 ft (2,000 m). It is
widely cultivated for its timber. The resin is tapped in
autumn; the bark is collected when the tree is felled.
Parts Used Inner bark, resin.

Constituents Larch contains lignans, resins,
and volatile oil (consisting mainly of alpha- and
beta-pinene and limonene).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Larch has
astringent, diuretic, and antiseptic properties.

The bark may be used to treat bladder and urinary
tubule infections such as cystitis and urethritis,
and respiratory problems, including bronchitis.
The resin is applied to wounds, where it protects
and counters infection. A decoction of the bark

is used to soothe eczema and psoriasis.

Caution Do not take larch if suffering from
kidney disease.

Larrea tridentata (Zygophyllaceae)

Chaparral,
Creosote Bush

Description Thorny shrub growing to 6/4 ft
(2m), with small finely divided leaves.

Habitat & Cultivation Chaparral is found
in large numbers in the deserts of the
southwestern U.S. and Mexico.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Chaparral contains about 12%
resin and lignans, including nordihydroguaiauretic

acid. The latter is reportedly harmful to the lymph
glands and kidneys, though recent research shows
that it has beneficial antidiabetic properties. U.S.
research published in 1996 demonstrated that
other lignans have antiviral activity against HIV.
History & Folklore Widely used by Native
Americans, chaparral was taken in the form of a
decoction to treat stomach troubles and diarrhea.
Young twigs were used for toothache. The leaves
were applied as a poultice for respiratory problems
and as a wash for skin problems.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Until the 1960s,
chaparral remained in wide use in the U.S., with an
average of 10 tons (9.07 tonnes) consumed each
year. lt was thought to be a beneficial remedy for
rheumatic disease, venereal infections, urinary
infections, and certain types of cancer, especially
leukemia. Chaparral was also taken internally for
skin afflictions such as acne and eczema, and applied
as a lotion to sores, wounds, and rashes. In the
early 1990s, sales of chaparral were banned in the
US. and Britain due to concern over its potential
toxic effect on the liver. It now seems likely that this
is another herb that can, in rare cases, cause liver
damage, as with some conventional medicines. In
view of the uncertainty about its safety, any
potential benefit from taking the herb must be
weighed against the risks.

Related Species The North American

L. divaricata, a close relative of chaparral, contains
lignans, which have been shown to inhibit lymphoid
tumor growth with no apparent harmful effect on
normal lymphatic tissue.

@ Cautions Only take chaparral on
professional advice. People with a history of liver
disease should never take chaparral.

Laurus nobilis (Lauraceae)

Bay Laurel

Description Aromatic evergreen shrub or tree
growing to 65 ft (20 m). Has leathery, dark green
leaves, small yellow male and female flowers, and
shiny black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
Mediterranean countries, bay laurel prefers damp
and shady sites. It is also a popular garden herb,
cultivated largely for culinary use. The leaves are
picked year round.

Parts Used Leaves, essential oil.
Constituents Bay laurel contains up to 3%
volatile oil (including 30-50% cineole, linalool,
alpha-pinene, alpha-terpineol acetate, mucilage,
tannin, and resin).

History & Folklore In ancient Greece, bay
laurel was used in divination by the Delphic Oracle.
From ancient Rome comes the tradition that the
sudden withering of a bay laurel tree bodes disaster

----- PAGE 229 -----
| for the household. In ancient Rome, bay laurel
leaves were used as a medicine, a spice, anda
decorative garland during the December festival of
Saturnalia. Bay laurel was sacred to the gods Apollo
and Asclepius, who together oversaw healing and
medicine. The herb was thought to be greatly
protective and healing. An infusion of the leaves
was taken for its warming and tonic effect on the
stomach and bladder, and a plaster made from
the leaves was used to relieve wasp and bee stings.

Bay laurel
adorned victors in
ancient Greece.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bay laurel is used
mainly to treat upper digestive tract disorders
and to ease arthritic aches and pains. It is settling
to the stomach and has a tonic effect, stimulating
the appetite and the secretion of digestive juices.
When used as an ingredient in cooking, bay laurel
leaves promote the digestion and absorption

of food. The leaves have much the same kind of
positive effect as spearmint (Mentha spicata) and
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128) in assisting
the breakdown of heavy food, especially meat.
Bay laurel has also been used to promote the
onset of menstrual periods. The essential oil is
chiefly employed as a friction rub, being well
diluted in a carrier oil and massaged into aching
muscles and joints. A decoction of the leaves
may be added to a bath to ease aching limbs.
Cautions Never take bay laurel essential oil
internally. An allergic reaction may result from
external use, therefore the oil should only be
applied in very dilute (2%) concentrations.

Lawsonia inermis
syn. L. alba (Lythraceae)

Henna

Description Heavily scented evergreen shrub
or tree growing to 20 ft (6 m). Has narrow
pointed leaves, clusters of small white or pink
flowers, and blue-black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Middle
East, North Africa, and the Indian subcontinent,
henna grows in sunny areas and is widely
cultivated for use as a hair restorative and dye.
The leaves are picked during the growing season.
Parts Used Leaves, bark.

Constituents Henna contains coumarins,
naphthaquinones (including lawsone), flavonoids,
sterols, and tannins.

History & Folklore Henna has been used for
thousands of years in North Africa and Asia as a red
dye and as a scent. Mummies were wrapped in
henna-dyed cloth in ancient Egypt. In the Middle
East and India, the leaves have traditionally
been used to make a pigment for dyeing
intricate linear patterns on the fingers, palms,
and feet. The leaves have also been used to dye not
only human hair but the manes and tails of horses.
Before meeting Antony, Cleopatra reputedly

Medicinal Actions & Uses Used mainly
within Ayurvedic and Unani medicine, henna leaves
are commonly taken as a gargle for sore throats,
and as an infusion or decoction for diarrhea and
dysentery. The leaves are astringent, prevent
hemorrhaging, and strongly promote menstrual
flow. A decoction of the bark is used to treat liver
problems. Applied in the form of a plaster, henna
treats fungal infections, acne, and boils.

Leonurus cardiaca (Lamiaceae)

Motherwort

Description Perennial herb growing to 5 ft
(1.5 m). Has toothed, palm-shaped leaves and
double-lipped pink flowers blossoming in clusters.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to central
Asia, motherwort is now naturalized in much

of Europe and North America. It grows wild in
woodlands, in open areas, and along roadsides.

It is also cultivated as a garden plant. Motherwort
is harvested when it comes into flower in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Motherwort contains alkaloids
(including L-stachydrine), an iridoid (leonurine),
diterpenes, flavonoids, caffeic acid, and tannins.
History & Folklore As its species name
cardiaca indicates, motherwort has long been
considered a heart remedy. The herbalist Nicholas

soaked the sails of her barge in heady henna flower oil.

Culpeper stated that “there is no better herb to
drive away melancholy vapours from the heart, to
strengthen it and make the mind cheerful” (1652).
The Italian physician and herbalist Pierandrea
Matteoli held it “useful for palpitations and a
pounding heart, spasms and paralysis... [it] thins
thick and viscid humours [and] stimulates urine
and menstrual bleeding” (1548).

Medicinal Actions & Uses A remedy for
the heart and nerves and often prescribed for
palpitations, motherwort strengthens heart function,
especially where it is weak. Antispasmodic and
sedative, the herb promotes relaxation rather than
drowsiness. However, motherwort stimulates the
muscles of the uterus, and is particularly suitable for
delayed periods, period pain, and premenstrual
syndrome (especially if shock or distress is a factor). It
should not be used if menstrual bleeding is heavy.

Motherwort has been used to treat palpitations since
at least the | 6th century.

Related Species Two East Asian species,
L. heterophyllus (from China) and L. sibiricus
(from Siberia), are both used therapeutically
for the same purposes as motherwort.

L. heterophyllus appears to lower blood pressure
and to induce menstruation.

Cautions Do not take motherwort during
pregnancy. It should also be avoided where
there is heavy menstrual bleeding.
Self-help Uses Menstrual problens—
irregular cycle, p. 315; Panic attacks, p. 302.

Lepidium virginicum (Brassicaceae)
Virginia Peppergrass
Description Annual herb growing to about

2 ft (60 cm). Has slender lance-shaped leaves

and small white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Virginia peppergrass is
native to eastern North America and the Caribbean,

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 230 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

228

and is naturalized in Australia. The leaves are
gathered in spring and are consumed as food. The
seedpods can serve as a subsitute for black pepper.
Parts Used Leaves, root.

Constituents Virginia peppergrass contains high
levels of vitamin C.

History & Folklore The Menominee of
eastern North America applied a lotion of Virginia
peppergrass (or a bruised fresh plant) to poison
ivy eruptions.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Virginia
peppergrass is nutritious and generally detoxifying.
It has been used to treat vitamin C deficiency and
diabetes, and to expel intestinal worms. The herb
is also diuretic and of benefit in easing rheumatic
pain. The root is taken to treat excess phlegm
within the respiratory tract.

Related Species Maca (L. meyenii) is a
low-growing Andean perennial. The root is valued
as a staple food and medicine by Andean peoples,
notably to support immune function and for
hormonal disorders including sterility. Maca is
now commonly available in supplement stores and
has acquired a reputation as a tonic, hormone
balancer, and aphrodisiac.

Leptandra virginica
syn. Veronicastrum virginicum
(Scrophulariaceae)

Black Root

Description Perennial herb growing to 3 ft
(| m). Has an erect stem, lance-shaped leaves,
and white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Black root grows across
North America in meadows and woodlands. The
root is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Dried root.
Constituents Black root contains a volatile oil,
saponins, sugars, and tannins.
History & Folklore Known to the Native
Americans of Missouri and Delaware as a
violent purgative, black root was used
in moderate doses as a laxative, a
detoxifier, and a remedy for liver
disorders. In the 19th century
Physiomedicalist tradition, black
root was taken to stimulate
bile production.
Medicinal Actions & Uses
Black root is used in small doses
today as a laxative and a remedy
for liver and gallbladder disorders.
The herb also treats flatulence and bloating, and
eases the discomfort of hemorrhoids, chronic
constipation, and rectal prolapse.
Cautions Do not use the fresh root. Do not
take during pregnancy.

Levisticum officinale
syn. Ligusticum levisticum
(Apiaceae)

Lovage

Description Perennial growing to 6/4 ft (2 m).
Has glossy, toothed compound leaves, greenish-
yellow flowers, and tiny oval seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Lovage is found in
southern Europe and southwestern Asia. It thrives
on sunny mountain slopes. The leaves are gathered
in spring or early summer, the seeds in late summer,
the root in autumn.

Parts Used Root, seeds, leaves.
Constituents Lovage root contains a volatile
oil (about 70% phthalides), coumarins (including
bergapten, psoralen, and umbelliferone), alkynes,
plant acids, sterols, resins, and gums. The phthalides
are sedative and anticonvulsant.

History & Folklore The Trotula texts, written
in Salerno during the | 2th century, recommend
lovage for skin lightening. The Irish herbalist K'Eogh
follows this recommendation: “‘lovage clears the
sight and removes spots, freckles and redness
from the face.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Lovage is a
warming and tonic herb for the digestive and
respiratory systems. It treats indigestion, poor
appetite, gas and colic, and bronchitis. Lovage

is significantly diuretic and antimicrobial and is
commonly taken for urinary tract problems. It also
promotes menstruation and relieves period pain.
Its warming nature improves poor circulation.
Related Species The Chinese chuan xiong
(Ligusticum chuanxiong) is used principally as a
means to bring on absent menstrual periods

and to treat period pain. The Chinese gao ben
(Ligusticum sinense) is also used for pain.
Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. Do
not take if you suffer from kidney disease. Can
increase sensitivity to sunlight.

Self-help Use Heavy menstrual bleeding, p. 315.

Lippia alba (Verbenaceae)

Lippia,
Bushy Lippia, Prontoalivio

Description Multi-branched, square-stemmed,
aromatic shrub growing to 5 ft (1.5 m), with
opposite leaves and small white or pink flowers
close to the leaf axils.

Habitat & Cultivation Lippia grows
throughout South and Central America from
northern Argentina to the southern U.S. It

is acommon garden herb, and may be grown
from seed or cuttings, the latter being used for
commercial cultivation.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Lippia leaves contain about
0.15% volatile oil with different plant strains, or
chemotypes, producing several essential oils with
quite a distinct range of compounds, notably citral
and carvone. The citral chemotype oil is thought
to have strong anti-Candida activity.

History & Folklore In many parts of

Central and South America, Lippia is valued for
its ability to resolve common illnesses, such as
stomach upset, nausea, gas and bloating, coughs,
colds, sore throat, and headache. Its Colombian
name, Prontoalivio (meaning “quick relief’) points
to its place in popular Latin American medicine.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Lippia has
pain-relieving, anti-inflammatory, relaxant, and
antispasmodic properties, making it useful in many
non-severe health problems. In Brazil, where it is
regulated as a medicinal herb, the herb is typically
used for upper digestive problems, coughs, colds,
and bronchitis, as well as for high blood pressure
and as a sedative. The herb has been little
researched, though a small clinical trial

in Brazil found it effective in treating migraine
headache. The essential oil is increasingly used

in pharmaceutical and cosmetic preparations,

for example, within Europe, and has significant
antifungal and antibacterial activity on the skin.
Related Species The sweet tasting L. dulcis has
broadly similar medicinal use and is found across
Central America and the Caribbean. See also
Lemon Verbena (Lippia citriodora, following entry).

Lippia citriodora syn. Aloysia
triphylla (Verbenaceae)

Lemon Verbena

Description Deciduous shrub growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m). Has strongly scented lance-shaped leaves and
clusters of tubular, pale green to mauve flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Lemon verbena

is native to South America. It is cultivated in
temperate climates as an aromatic, ornamental
plant and for its leaves, which are used to make
herbal tea. The leaves are gathered in late summer.
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Lemon verbena contains a volatile
oil (mainly consisting of citral, cineole, limonene, and
geraniole), mucilage, tannins, and flavonoids.
History & Folklore Lemon verbena was
introduced to Europe in 1784. In Spain, France, and
elsewhere in Europe, the infusion is a popular drink.
Medicinal Actions & Uses An undervalued
medicinal herb, lemon verbena shares qualities with
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13). Both herbs
contain a strong lemon-scented volatile oil that has
calming and digestive properties. Lemon verbena
has a gentle sedative action and a reputation for

----- PAGE 231 -----
soothing abdominal discomfort. Its tonic effect on
the nervous system is less pronounced than that
of lemon balm, but it nonetheless helps to lift the
spirits and counter depression.

Related Species Yerba dulce (L. dulcis), native
to Mexico, is used therapeutically as a demulcent
and expectorant remedy. In Mexico, many other
Lippia species are used for their antispasmodic,
period-inducing, and stomach-soothing properties.
L. adoensis is drunk as a tea in West Africa. See also
lippia (Lippia alba, preceding entry).

Self-help Use Gas & bloating, p. 306.

Liquidambar orientalis
(Hamamelidaceae)

Levant Storax

Description Deciduous tree growing to 20 ft
(6 m). Has purplish-gray bark, lobed leaves, and
small single yellow-white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Levant storax is
found in southwestern Turkey. Storax balsam,

a viscid gray-brown liquid, is extracted from the
bark, which is pried off the tree in autumn.
Part Used Bark extract.

Levant storax is used to relieve congestive chest problems.

Constituents Levant storax contains cinnamic
acid, cinnamyl cinnamate, phenylpropy! cinnamate,
triterpene acids, and a volatile oil.

History & Folklore Levant storax has been
the Liquidambar species most commonly used
medicinally since the 19th century. Levant storax
is also employed as a fixative for perfumes.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Levant storax
balsam acts as both an irritant and an expectorant
within the respiratory tract, and it is one of the
ingredients of Friar’s Balsam, an expectorant
mixture that is inhaled to stimulate a productive
cough. In addition, levant storax balsam is applied
externally to encourage the healing of skin diseases
and problems such as scabies, wounds, and ulcers.

Mixed with witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana,

p. 102) and rosewater (Rosa species), levant storax
makes an astringent face lotion. In China, storax
balsam is used to clear mucus congestion and to
relieve pain and constriction in the chest.
Related Species American storax (L. styraciflua),
which grows mainly in Honduras but is also found
farther north, has been used since the time of the
Maya for its healing properties.

Lobaria pulmonaria
(Stictaceae)

Tree Lungwort

Description Gray or light green lichen with
forked irregular lobes measuring up to % in

(1.5 cm) across.

Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
Europe, tree lungwort grows on trees and rocks

in woodland areas. It is gathered year round.

Part Used Lichen.

Constituents Tree lungwort contains a variety
of plant acids (including stictic and sticinic acid),
fatty acids, mucilage, and tannins.

History & Folklore Tree lungwort has been
used since ancient times as a remedy for lung
problems. The Italian physician and herbalist
Pierandrea Matteoli (1501-77) recommended it for
healing pulmonary ulcers and for treating blood-
flecked phlegm. It was also used to treat wounds,
heal ulcers, reduce excessive menstrual bleeding,
relieve dysentery, and halt ‘‘choleric vomiting.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses A beneficial but
underused remedy, tree lungwort has expectorant
and tonic properties. It aids in clearing congested
mucus, reduces phlegm, and helps to increase the
appetite. In a decoction sweetened with honey, it
is appropriate for all conditions that are marked by

chronic respiratory infections, especially coughs
and bronchitis. The plant also treats asthma,
pleurisy, and emphysema. Being astringent and
demulcent, tree lungwort makes a useful
treatment for pulmonary ulcers as well as for a
variety of gastrointestinal problems. It is highly
suitable for treating ailments in children.

Lomatium dissectum (Apiaceae)

Lomatium,
Toza

Description Erect perennial, growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m), with a large woody taproot, divided,
triangular leaves, and flowers in flat-topped umbels.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to coastal
and inland regions of western North America
from California as far north as British Columbia.

Parts Used Root.

Constituents Lomatium contains flavonoids,
coumarins, tetronic acids, and volatile oil.
History & Folklore One of the most
important medicinal plants of the Pacific
Northwest, lomatium was ‘big medicine” for
Native Americans and widely used for respiratory
infections such as coughs, colds, and flu. In Nevada,
lomatium root was combined with yarrow (Achillea
millefolium, p. 56) to treat sexually transmitted
diseases. In Oregon, a decoction of the root was
applied to horses to rid them of ticks. During the
1917 influenza epidemic an American doctor,
Ernest Krebbs, successfully used lomatium in his
own practice, after noting the effective use of

the herb by Native Americans.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Lomatium is
today used mostly by botanical practitioners in
North America to treat a broad range of viral
infections, from chronic fatigue syndrome to
influenza and herpes infections. A good tonic
herb, it promotes peripheral blood flow and
stimulates immune function. It is usually
combined with other herbs such as echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92) or wild indigo root
(Baptisia tinctoria, p. 176).

Research The tetronic acids have been shown to
be markedly antimicrobial and toxic to fish (Native
Americans used to place the fresh root in streams
or pools in order to stun fish). Preliminary studies
in Canada and the U.S. suggest that lomatium has
significant antiviral activity.

Cautions A red measles-like rash, which

clears on stopping treatment, may develop

when taking lomatium. Like other members of
the carrot family, lomatium can increase sensitivity
to sunlight.

Lonicera spp. (Caprifoliaceae)
Honeysuckle,
& Jin Yin Hua

Description A climber growing to 13 ft (4 m)
that is deciduous (honeysuckle, L. caprifolium)

or semi-evergreen (jin yin hua, L. japonica). Has
paired oval leaves, yellow-orange (honeysuckle)
or yellow-white (jin yin hua) tubular flowers, and
red (honeysuckle) or black (jin yin hua) berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Honeysuckle is
native to southern Europe and the Caucasus.

Jin yin hua is native to China and Japan. Both
plants are commonly found growing on walls,

on trees, and in hedges. The flowers and leaves are
gathered in summer just before the flowers open.
Parts Used Flowers, leaves, bark.
Constituents In Europe, L. caprifolium and

L. japonica are often used interchangeably and

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

229

----- PAGE 232 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

contain approximately the same quantity of
volatile oil. Nonetheless, Romanian research
indicates that the Asian species contains a
much wider range of therapeutically active
antiseptic compounds.

History & Folklore Honeysuckle is one of
the Bach Flower Remedies, and in this system
of herbal cures it is believed to counter feelings of
nostalgia and homesickness. Jin yin hua has long
been used in Chinese medicine to “clear heat
and relieve toxicity.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Honeysuckle
flowers from both species can be successfully
used to treat fever, colds, and upper respiratory
tract infections. The leaves are traditionally used
as a gargle for sore throats and as a mouthwash.
In Chinese herbal medicine, honeysuckle finds
frequent use in inflammatory conditions, such
as conjunctivitis, mastitis (inflammation of the
breasts), and rheumatism.

Research Chinese research indicates that the
Asian species has significant antimicrobial activity,
including against the tuberculosis bacillus. Clinical
studies suggest that this species can also help to
lower high blood pressure.

Caution Do not eat the berries, which are
thought to be toxic.

Lophophora williamsii (Cactaceae)

Peyote

Description Cactus growing to 2 in (5 cm).
Has a squat gray-green body with tufted hairs,
and pink or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Peyote is native

to northern Mexico and the southwestern region
of the U.S.

Part Used Whole plant.

Peyote is a powerful hallucinogen. It is used in
Native American ceremonies.

Constituents Peyote contains alkaloids, principally
mescaline, which is a powerful hallucinogen.
History & Folklore Peyote has been used

in Native American religious ceremonies for

over 3,000 years. Its use as a hallucinogen was
popularized by Aldous Huxley in his book

The Doors of Perception.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Peyote is a
shamanistic plant, taken in Native American rituals
to deepen spiritual understanding. It plays an
important part in the emotional and mental state
of the community. It is also used to treat fevers, as
a painkiller for rheumatism, and to treat paralysis. It
is applied as a poultice for fractures, wounds, and
snake bite. Peyote is also used to induce vomiting.
Caution The use of peyote and mescaline is
illegal in most countries.

Luffa cylindrica syn. L. aegyptica
(Cucurbitaceae)

Loofah,
Si Gua Luo (Chinese)

Description Annual vine climbing to 49 ft
(15 m). Has large lobed leaves, tendrils, and
yellow female flowers producing long cylindrical
marrow-like fruit.

Loofah fruit is dried and used in Chinese medicine to treat
muscle and joint pain.

Habitat & Cultivation Loofah is native to
the tropics of Asia and Africa. It is now grown

as a fruit in tropical regions around the world.

It is harvested when ripe in summer.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Loofah contains polysaccharides,
xylan, xylose, and galactan.

History & Folklore Loofah was brought from
India to China in the Tang Dynasty (618-907 ce).

It is best known in the West as a bathroom
accessory—the fibrous skeleton makes a good
skin scrubber.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In Chinese
medicine, the inner skeleton of the dried fruit

is used to treat pain in the muscles, joints, chest,
and abdomen. It is prescribed for chest infections
accompanied by fever and pain, and is used to
clear congested mucus. Loofah is also given

to treat painful or swollen breasts.

Research Chinese research indicates that the
fresh vine has a stronger expectorant effect than
the dried fruit. German research (1999) using a
homeopathic preparation of the plant showed it
to be as effective as a standard nasal spray for
relief of hay fever.

Lycopodium clavatum
(Lycopodiaceae)

Club Moss

Description Creeping evergreen moss growing
to 4% in (12 cm). Has numerous straggling
branchlets covered with bright green linear leaves,
and scaly spikes bearing yellow spores.

Habitat & Cultivation Club moss is found
throughout temperate regions of the northern
hemisphere. It is common on mountains and in
moorland. The plant is gathered in summer.
Parts Used Moss, spores.

Constituents Club moss contains about
0.1-0.2% alkaloids (including lycopodine),
polyphenols, flavonoids, and triterpenes.
History & Folklore Club moss

has been used medicinally since at
least the Middle Ages. The whole
plant was employed as a diuretic
to aid in the flushing out of
kidney stones. In Wales, club
moss was used for certain

back problems and for colds

and sore throats. Being strongly
water-resistant, the spores are still
used to coat tablets. The spores ignite

explosively and have been used in

making fireworks.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Club moss is
diuretic, sedative, and antispasmodic, and is
particularly useful for treating chronic urinary
issues. The herb may also be taken for indigestion
and gastritis. The spores can be applied to the skin
to relieve itchiness. Club moss is frequently used in
homeopathic medicine, being prescribed for
headache, liver problems, and digestive symptoms
such as gas and burping.

@ Caution Club moss is potentially toxic in
overdose. This plant should only be used with the
supervision of a professional practitioner.

Club moss

----- PAGE 233 -----
Lycopus virginicus (Lamiaceae)

Bugleweed

Description Perennial herb growing to 2 ft
(60cm). Has a square stem, lance-shaped leaves,
and whorls of whitish flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Bugleweed is common
throughout most of North America, thriving close
to water. It is harvested in summer when in flower.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Bugleweed contains phenolic
acids (including derivatives of caffeic, chlorogenic,
and ellagic acids).

History & Folklore In the | 9th-century
Physiomedicalist tradition, bugleweed was regarded
as astringent and calming to the nerves, and was
given for loose coughs, internal bleeding, and
urinary incontinence. Herbal practitioners once
considered the plant to be a mild narcotic.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Bugleweed

has sedative properties and today the herb is
principally prescribed to treat an overactive
thyroid gland and the racing heartbeat that often
accompanies this condition. Bugleweed is also
considered an aromatic and tonic astringent

that reduces the production of mucus.
Research Studies indicate that bugleweed and,
to some degree, gipsywort (see Related Species,
below) reduce the activity of the thyroid gland.
Related Species Gipsywort (L. europaeus), a
European native, has astringent and cardiotonic
properties. It is taken for palpitations and anxiety,
and has been used to lower fever.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Lysimachia vulgaris (Primulaceae)

Yellow Loosestrife

Description Attractive perennial growing to
3 ft (I m) with whorls of broadly lance-shaped
leaves and bright yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
yellow loosestrife commonly grows in damp
hedgerows and near water. It is also cultivated

as a garden plant. It is gathered when in flower

in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Yellow loosestrife contains a
benzoquinone, triterpenoid saponins, flavonoids,
and tannins.

History & Folklore Pliny (23-79 ce)
recorded that lysimachia, the plant's Latin name,
was a tribute to King Lysimachus of Sicily, who
discovered its medicinal benefits. The name
“loosestrife’ refers to the plant's reputed power
to prevent conflict, particularly between animals,
and to repel insects. The Greek physician

Dioscorides (40-90 ce) recommended loosestrife
to staunch wounds and for nosebleeds, and noted
that its smoke would drive away snakes and flies.
Medicinal Actions & Uses An astringent
herb, yellow loosestrife is principally used to treat
gastrointestinal conditions such as diarrhea and
dysentery, to stop internal and external bleeding,
and to cleanse wounds. It makes a workable
mouthwash for sore gums and mouth ulcers, and
may be used to treat nosebleeds. Yellow loosestrife
has also been taken as an expectorant.

Related Species The yellow pimpernel

(L. nemorum), another European native, is
astringent and staunches blood. Jin gian cao

(L. christinae), from China, is a diuretic used to
treat urinary pain. A Chinese trial showed that
the latter is also effective in treating both kidney
stones and gallstones.

Lythrum salicaria (Lythraceae)

Purple Loosestrife

Description Attractive perennial growing to
about 5 ft (1.5 m). Has straight red stems,
pointed lance-shaped leaves, and spikes
of brilliant purple flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Purple
loosestrife is native to Europe
but well-established in the
wild in North America.

It thrives in marshes

y

Purple loosestrife is
used to relieve
diarrhea and
dysentery in breast-
feeding babies.

and along rivers and streams, to altitudes of

3,300 ft (1,000 m). It is gathered when in flower

in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Purple loosestrife contains salicarin,
a glycoside (vitexin), tannins, a volatile oil, mucilage,
and plant sterols.

History & Folklore In | 654, the herbalist
Nicholas Culpeper praised this herb, writing that
“the distilled water is a present remedy for hurts
and blows on the eyes, and for blindness ... it also
cleareth the eyes of dust or any other thing gotten
into them, and preserveth the sight.’ A common
plant in Ireland, purple loosestrife was much used
there against diarrhea.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
purple loosestrife is mainly employed as a
treatment for diarrhea and dysentery. It can be
safely taken by people of all ages; some herbalists
recommend it to help arrest diarrhea in breast-
feeding babies. The herb may also be used

to treat heavy periods and for inter-menstrual
bleeding. Externally, it is applied as a poultice

or lotion to wounds, leg ulcers, and eczema,
and used to treat excess vaginal discharge and
vaginal itching. Purple loosestrife is now little used
to treat eye problems, but, as Culpeper's
experience suggests, the herb could be worth
further investigation as a remedy for disorders

of the eyes and vision.

Research In animal experiments, extracts of
the flowers and leaves have been shown to be

hypoglycemic—lowering blood-sugar levels. The
plant is also thought to have antibiotic activity.

Madhuca spp. (Sapotaceae)
Butter Tree

Description Deciduous tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has leathery leaves, clusters of scented
white flowers, and greenish fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Madhuca species are
native to central and northern India. The flowers,
leaves, and seeds are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Flowers, seed oil.

Constituents The leaves contain an alkaloid
and a saponin; the seeds a saponin and fixed oil.
History & Folklore Butter tree has been a
source of food and medicine in India for at least
2,000 years. Its flowers are eaten and are
fermented to make alcoholic drinks.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The
expectorant flowers are used to treat chest
problems such as bronchitis. They are also taken
to increase breast-milk production. The leaves are
applied as a poultice to eczema. The seed oil is
laxative and is taken for constipation and to loosen
the stool of hemorrhoid sufferers.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

231

----- PAGE 234 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

|

232

Magnolia officinalis (Magnoliaceae)

Magnolia,
Hou Po (Chinese)

Description Deciduous tree growing to 80 ft
(25 m). Has aromatic bark, large leaves, and
fragrant creamy-white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
magnolia grows wild in mountainous regions. It
is now planted in many parts of the world as an
ornamental tree. The bark is stripped in spring.

Magnolia is distinguished by its
beautiful creamy-white flowers.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Magnolia bark contains alkaloids,
coumarins, flavonoids, and lignans. The lignan,
honokiol, found in the bark of several magnolia
species appears to have antitumor and anti-
anxiety activity. Another lignan, magnolol, has
antibacterial and anti-anxiety activity.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Magnolia bark

is aromatic, warming, and pungent. It relieves
cramping pain and flatulence, and is taken for
abdominal distension, indigestion, loss of appetite,
vomiting, and diarrhea. It is now also used to treat
anxiety, chronic stress, and lowered mood, and as a
neuroprotective remedy that aids memory and
mental function.
Research Research suggests that magnolia bark
extract is antimicrobial and may have specific use
as an oral antiseptic to control bacteria and relieve
bad breath (halitosis). Two Italian clinical studies
found that magnolia extract helped relieve anxiety
and support positive mood in menopausal women.
A 2012 Korean study concluded that magnolia may
be useful in treating Alzheimer's disease.

Related Species North American species,
notably M. grandiflora, are used in much the same
way as magnolia (above), with traditional uses
including for fever and rheumatism.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Malva sylvestris (Malvaceae)

Common Mallow

Description Biennial growing to 5 ft (1.5 m).
Has a pulpy taproot, 5-lobed scalloped leaves,
and pink to mauve flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Common mallow is
native to Europe and Asia. It is naturalized in the
Americas and Australasia, growing in open areas
and on hedges and fences. The leaves are gathered
in spring, the flowers when in bloom in summer.
Parts Used Leaves, flowers, root.
Constituents Common mallow contains
flavonol glycosides, mucilage, and tannins. The
flowers also contain malvin (an anthocyanin).
History & Folklore The young leaves and
shoots of this plant have been eaten since at
least the 8th century Bce. The plant's many
uses gave rise to the Spanish adage, "A
kitchen garden and mallow, sufficient
medicines for a home.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses
Though less useful than marshmallow
(Althaea officinalis, p. 165), common
mallow is an effective demulcent. The flowers
and leaves are emollient and good for sensitive
areas of the skin. It is applied as a poultice to
reduce swelling and draw out toxins. Taken
internally, the leaves reduce gut irritation and
have a laxative effect. When common mallow
is combined with eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus,
p. 96), it makes a good remedy for coughs and
other chest ailments. As with marshmallow, the
root may be given to children to ease teething.

Mandragora officinarum
(Solanaceae)

Mandrake

Description Perennial growing to 2 in (5 cm).
Has a deep branching root, a rosette of broad
floppy leaves, funnel-shaped white to purple
flowers, and yellow fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
Mediterranean region of Europe, mandrake grows
on dry riverbeds. Its leaves are picked in summer.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Mandrake contains 0.4% tropane
alkaloids (hyoscine and hyoscyamine).

History & Folklore Legend held that the
mandrake, on being uprooted, emitted a scream
that was so powerful it could kill the person
harvesting the plant. Consequently, reported one
classical authority, mandrake was pulled up by dogs
that had the stems tied to their tails. The fantastic
powers attributed to the plant were partly due

to the narcotic-like properties of the root. Also

influential was the root's shape, which often vaguely
resembles the human form. The roots have been
carved and used as talismans for thousands of years,
especially to aid fertility in women, and as a charm
against misfortune. From Roman times onward,
mandrake root bark was used as an anaesthetic
and analgesic, and as a treatment for insanity.

Mandrake’s narcotic properties and human-shaped root have
inspired much legend and lore.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Mandrake

has now largely fallen out of use. The herb is
sometimes applied as a poultice or plaster for
rheumatic and arthritic pains, or, as a decoction,
for ulcers and similar kinds of skin disorders.

@ Cautions Mandrake is toxic. Do not take
internally. Use externally only under professional
supervision. The plant is subject to legal restrictions
in some countries.

Manihot esculenta
(Euphorbiaceae)

Cassava,
Manioc

Description Shrub growing to 6/4 ft (2 m).

Has fleshy roots, woody stems, large palm-shaped
leaves, and green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Cassava is native to
tropical Central and South America. Possibly the
most grown root crop in the world, bitter and
sweet varieties are grown commercially throughout
the tropics (Nigeria, Thailand, and Brazil being the
foremost producers). The plant was first cultivated
in Peru around 4,000 years ago. The root is
unearthed 8 to 24 months after planting.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Cassava contains cyanogenic
glycosides (0,02—0,03% in the bitter varieties,
0.007% in the sweet) and starch.

----- PAGE 235 -----
Cassava is a staple food in many tropical regions
of the world.

History & Folklore Bitter cassava has large
quantities of highly toxic glycosides, and must be
carefully soaked and cooked before it is safe to eat.
(Sweet cassava is safe to eat without such processing.)
Tapioca is a native Brazilian name for the processed
root, which is used in commercial food preparation
as a thickening agent. The Witoto of the Colombian
Amazon poison fish with the water used to wash
bitter cassava. The Makuna use the wash water
to treat scabies.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cassava root is
easily digestible and makes a suitable, if low-protein,
food for convalescence. The bitter variety may

be used to treat scabies, diarrhea, and dysentery.
Cassava flour may be used to help dry weeping
skin. In China, a poultice is made of cassava, wheat
flour, and ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155) to draw
out pus when infection is present.

Caution Raw bitter cassava is toxic and has
caused many deaths. The root must be carefully
soaked and cooked before eating.

Maranta arundinacea
(Marantaceae)

Arrowroot

Description Perennial growing to 6/4 ft (2 m).
Has a creeping rhizome, many long-stemmed oval
leaves, and flowering stems with clusters of creamy-
white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
South America and the Caribbean islands, arrowroot
is cultivated mostly on the island of St. Vincent. The
rhizome is unearthed 10 to | | months after planting.
Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Arrowroot contains 25-27%
neutral starch.

History & Folklore |n Central America, the
Maya made the root into a poultice for smallpox
sores, and an infusion for urinary infections.
Arrowroot was a staple food of the Arawak people
of the Caribbean. The plant reputedly gets its name
from its use to treat poisoned arrow wounds—
presumably as a drawing poultice.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Arrowroot is
used in herbal medicine in much the same manner
as slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145), as a soothing
demulcent and a nutrient of benefit in convalescence
and for those with weak digestions. It helps to relieve
acidity, indigestion, and colic, and is mildly laxative.
lt may be applied as an ointment or poultice mixed
with antiseptic herbs such as myrrh (Commiphora
molmol, p. 85).

Self-help Use Acidity & indigestion, p. 307.

Marrubium vulgare (Lamiaceae)

White Horehound

Description Square-stemmed perennial
growing to about 20 in (50 cm). Has toothed,
downy leaves and double-lipped white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
white horehound is naturalized in North and
South America. It flourishes in dry, bare, or open
areas, and is gathered in spring.
Parts Used Leaves.
Constituents White horehound
contains the diterpenes marrubiin
(0.3-1.0%) and marrubenol,
tannins, and 0.06% volatile oil.
larrubiin is thought to be
chiefly responsible for the

erb’s expectorant and bitter
activity. It also acts on the heart
to correct an irregular heartbeat.
History & Folklore White
jorehound has been a remedy for
chest problems since ancient times, perhaps

most frequently taken as a syrup made with

joney or sugar. The Greek physician Dioscorides
(40-90 ce) recommended a decoction of white
jorehound as a treatment for tuberculosis,
asthma, and coughs.

Medicinal Actions & Uses White horehound
is helpful for wheeziness, bronchitis, bronchiectasis
(a damaged air passage within the lung), bronchial
asthma, non-productive coughs, and whooping
cough. The herb apparently causes the secretion
of amore fluid mucus, which is readily cleared

by coughing. As a bitter tonic, white horehound
increases the appetite and supports the function
of the stomach. It is widely used in Mexico to
help control type 2 diabetes. The herb may also
act to normalize heart rhythm, improving

its regularity.

Dried herb

Marsdenia condurango
syn. Gonolobus condurango
(Asclepiadaceae)

Condurango

Description Climbing vine growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has heart-shaped leaves and funnel-
shaped, white-green flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Condurango is native
to deciduous forests of the Andes in Peru and
Ecuador. It generally grows at altitudes between
3,300-6,600 ft (1,000—2,000 m). The bark is
collected year round.
Parts Used Bark, latex.
Constituents Condurango bark contains
glycosides (based on condurangogenins), a volatile
oil, and phytosterols.
History & Folklore Early in the last century,
condurango was erroneously yet widely believed
to be a remedy for cancer.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The bark's
main effect is to stimulate stomach secretions.
It is often used in South American folk medicine
as a potent bitter and digestive tonic. Condurango
is a specific treatment for nervous indigestion
and anorexia nervosa, since its bitterness slowly
increases the appetite as well as the stomach's
ability to process more food. The herb is also
thought to stimulate the liver and pancreas, and
may be taken for liver disorders. Condurango
also encourages menstruation. The caustic
white latex has been applied topically to
remove warts.

Research The condurangogenins in

condurango may act to counter tumors.

The whole plant, however, does not seem

to impede cancer development.

Caution The latex is poisonous and should not

be taken internally.

Medicago sativa (Fabaceae)

Alfalfa,
Lucerne

Description Perennial herb growing to 32 in
(80 cm). Has 3-lobed leaves, flowers that range

in color from yellow to violet-blue, and spiraling
seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
Asia, and North Africa, alfalfa is found in meadows
and in both open and cultivated areas. Grown as

a fodder crop in temperate climates, it is harvested
in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, seeds, sprouting seeds.
Constituents A\falfa contains isoflavones,
coumarins, alkaloids, vitamins, and porphyrins.
The isoflavones and coumarins are estrogenic.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

233

----- PAGE 236 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Alfalfa has been cultivated for centuries for its nutritional
and medicinal properties.

History & Folklore Though mostly used as
an animal feed, alfala seeds have been consumed
as food for thousands of years. Pliny (23-79 ce)
records that alfalfa was brought to Greece by
Darius, King of Persia (550-486 sce), during his
attempt to conquer Athens.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A\falfa is perhaps
more therapeutically useful as a food than a
medicine as the seeds are taken to help lower
cholesterol levels. In view of alfalfa’s estrogenic
activity, it can prove useful in treating problems
relating to menstruation and menopause.
Cautions Do not take alfalfa alongside the
anticoagulant medication warfarin. Avoid sprouted
seeds in compromised immune states. Using large
amounts is not advisable in pregnancy or in
autoimmune diseases.

Melaleuca leucadendron
(Myrtaceae)

Cajuput

Description Aromatic, evergreen tree growing
to 130 ft (40 m). Has peeling bark, pale green
oval leaves, and clusters of small white flowers

on long spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Southeast
Asia, cajuput is cultivated for its essential oil and
timber. The leaves and twigs are gathered
throughout the year.

Part Used Essential oil.

Constituents The volatile oil contains
terpenoids, mainly cineole (50-60%), beta-pinene,
alpha-terpineol, and others. Cineole is strongly
antiseptic. Early investigations suggest the fruit
may have antiviral properties.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cajuput is
normally combined with other essential oils such as
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus, p. 96). Its antiseptic

properties treat colds, sore throats, coughs, and,
especially, chest infections. The diluted oil may
either be steam-inhaled or applied to the chest

or throat to treat laryngitis, tracheitis, and
bronchitis. As cajuput stimulates the circulation
and is antispasmodic, it is used as a friction rub
for rheumatic joints and neuralgia.

Related Species Niaouli (M. viridiflora), of New
Caledonia, has properties similar to those of cajuput.
See also tea tree (M. alternifolia, p. | 12).
Cautions Take internally only under
professional supervision. Do not use during
pregnancy. Cajuput essential oil is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Self-help Use Chest coughs & bronchitis,

p. 310.

Melilotus officinalis
syn. M. arvensis (Fabaceae)

Melilot

Description Biennial herb growing to about 3 ft
(| m). Has 3-lobed leaves, spikes of yellow flowers,
and brown seedpods.

Melilot is an
effective remedy for
venous disorders.

Habitat & Cultivation Meiilot is native to
Europe, North Africa, and temperate regions

of Asia, and is naturalized in North America. It
grows in dry and open areas. It is harvested in
late spring.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Melilot contains flavonoids,
coumarins, resin, tannins, and volatile oil. If allowed
to spoil, the plant produces dicoumarol, a powerful
anticoagulant.
History & Folklore The Irish herbalist
K’Eogh reported in 1735, “a gentlewoman of my
acquaintance ... had a swelling for a year or more
on her right side, which was cured by three or four
times rubbing the grieved part with an oil made of
this herb.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses As with horse
chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum, p. 58), long-term
use of melilot—internally or externally—can help
varicose veins and hemorrhoids. Melilot also helps
reduce the risk of phlebitis and thrombosis. The
plant is mildly sedative and antispasmodic, and is
given for insomnia (especially in children) and anxiety.
It has been used to treat flatulence, indigestion,
bronchitis, problems associated with menopause,
and rheumatic pains.

Cautions Do not take melilot if using
anticoagulants. If harvested from the wild,

melilot should be dried or used immediately,

as the spoiled plant is toxic.

Mentha haplocalyx (Lamiaceae)

Bo He (Chinese),
Corn Mint

Description Perennial herb growing to 2 ft

(60 cm). Has a square stem, oval toothed leaves,
and whorls of pale lilac flowers growing from

the leaf axils.

Habitat & Cultivation Bo he is native to
temperate regions of the northern hemisphere,
and is widely cultivated in China. Harvested 2-3
times a year, the best crops are in early summer
and early autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Bo he contains a volatile oil
comprising mainly menthol (up to 95%) with
menthone, menthyl acetate, camphene, limonene,
and other terpenoids.

History & Folklore Bo he was first mentioned
in Grandfather Lei's Discussion of Herb Preparation
(c. 470 ce). A | 5th-century Chinese prescription
recommends bo he for dysentery with blood.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Chinese
herbal medicine (see pp. 40-43) bo he is a popular
treatment for colds, sore throats, sore mouth and
tongue, and a host of other conditions ranging from

----- PAGE 237 -----
toothache to measles. Like peppermint (M. x piperita,
p. | 14), it helps to lower the temperature, has
antimucus properties, and may be taken for
dysentery and diarrhea. The juice has also been
used to treat earache. Bo he is often combined
with ju hua (Chrysanthemum x morifolium, p. 78)

to treat headaches and bloodshot or sore eyes.
Related Species The Japanese variety of bo he
(M. arvensis) is widely cultivated as a source of
menthol. The closely related spearmint (M. spicata)
native to Europe and Asia, is used mainly as a
flavoring and culinary herb. See also peppermint
(M. x piperita, p. | 14) and pennyroyal (M. pulegium,
following entry).

Mentha pulegium (Lamiaceae)

Pennyroyal

Description Powerfully aromatic perennial
growing to 16 in (40 cm). Has oval, toothed leaves
and whorls of lilac flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Pennyroyal is native
to Europe and western Asia, and has become
naturalized in the Americas. It thrives in damp
areas and is gathered when in flower in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Pennyroyal's volatile oil contains
pulegone (27-92%), isopulegone, menthol, and
other terpenoids. Pennyroyal also contains bitters
and tannins.

History & Folklore The Roman natural
historian Pliny (23-79 ce) wrote that pennyroyal
was considered a better medicinal herb than roses,
and that it purified bad water. His contemporary,
Dioscorides, stated that pennyroyal ‘provokes
menstruation and labour” In 1597, John Gerard
wrote that ‘a garland of pennie royal made and
worne about the head is of great force against

the swimming of the head, and the pains and
giddiness thereof.” The name pulegium derives
from the Latin word for flea, referring to
pennyroyal’s traditional use as a flea-repellent.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Similar in many
respects to peppermint (M. x piperita, p. | 14),
pennyroyal is a good digestive tonic. It increases
the secretion of digestive juices, relieves flatulence
and colic, and occasionally is used as a treatment
for intestinal worms. It makes a good remedy for
headaches and for minor respiratory infections,
helping to check fever and reduce mucus.
Pennyroyal powerfully stimulates the uterine muscles
and encourages menstruation. An infusion of
pennyroyal can be used externally to treat itchiness
and formication (a sensation of ants crawling over
the body) and rheumatic conditions including gout.
Related Species See peppermint (M. x piperita,
p. | 14) and bo he (M. haplocalyx, preceding entry).
American pennyroyal (Hedeoma pulegoides), while

only distantly related, has constituents similar

to those of pennyroyal. American pennyroyal is
traditionally used as a remedy for colds, headaches,
and delayed menstrual periods.

Cautions Do not use the essential oil, which

is highly toxic. Do not take pennyroyal during
pregnancy, or if menstrual periods are heavy.
Self-help Uses Digestive headaches &
biliousness, p. 309; Nausea with headache, p. 306

Menyanthes trifoliata
(Menyanthaceae)

Bogbean

Description Perennial aquatic plant growing

to 9 in (23 cm). Has trefoil leaves and spikes of
pink and white flowers with fringed petals.
Habitat & Cultivation Bogbean is native

to Europe, Asia, and America. It is found in shallow
fresh water. The leaves are picked in summer.
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Bogbean contains iridoid
glycosides, flavonol glycosides, coumarins, phenolic
acids, sterols, triterpenoids, tannin, and very small
amounts of pyrrolizidine alkaloids. The iridoids are
strongly bitter and stimulate digestive secretions.

Bogbean leaves are gathered in summer, after the plant
has come into flower.

History & Folklore Long used as a folk remedy
for rheumatism and arthritis, bogbean has also been
taken to treat fluid retention, scabies, and fever. In
the past, because of the herb’s pronounced
bitterness, it was used as an adulterant of, or a
substitute for, hops (Humulus lupulus, p. 104).
Medicinal Actions & Uses Bogbean is a
strongly bitter herb that encourages the appetite
and stimulates digestive secretions. It is taken to
improve underactive or weak digestion, particularly

if there is abdominal discomfort. This herb is also
used as an aid to weight gain. Bogbean is thought
to be an effective remedy for rheumatism, especially
when this condition is associated with weakness,
weight loss, and lack of vitality. Mostly, bogbean is
prescribed in combination with other herbs such
as celery seed (Apium graveolens, p. 64) and white
willow (Salix alba, p. 129).

Cautions Do not take if suffering from
diarrhea, dysentery, or colitis. Excessive doses
may cause vomiting.

Milletta reticulata (Fabaceae)

Ji Xue Teng

Description Climber growing to |6 ft (5 m)
with compound leaves and clusters of pea-type
flowers producing large beanpods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China, ji xue
teng is cultivated in the southeast of that country.
Parts Used Root, vine.

Constituents It contains flavonoids and
isoflavones. In common with other members

of the bean family, it also contains rotenone, a
naturally occurring broad-spectrum insecticide.
History & Folklore This plant was first
recorded in Chinese medical texts in about

720 ce. It is called ji xue teng, literally “chicken
blood vine,’ because of the red sap that

exudes when the stem is cut.
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Chinese herbal
medicine (see pp. 40-43), pain is often thought to
be due to poor or obstructed blood flow. In this
tradition, ji xue teng is classified as an herb that
invigorates the blood, and is mainly used to treat
menstrual problems. Ji xue teng is used to relieve

period pain or normalize an irregular or absent
cycle, especially where this may be due to anemia.
This herb is also prescribed for certain types of
arthritic pain, as well as for numbness of the hands
and feet.

Research Limited investigation indicates that

ji xue teng may be anti-inflammatory and may
lower blood pressure.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy or
while breastfeeding.

Mitchella repens (Rubiaceae)

Squaw Vine,
Partridge Berry

Description Evergreen herb growing to

| ft (30 cm) and forming mats on the ground.

Has rounded shiny leaves, a flowering stem bearing
fragrant white flowers and small, bright red berries.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

235

----- PAGE 238 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Habitat & Cultivation
Squaw vine is native to the
eastern and central U.S. It grows in
dry sites in woodlands, and is
harvested in late summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, berries.
Constituents Squaw vine is
believed to contain tannins,
glycosides, and saponins.
History & Folklore

An infusion of squaw vine was
commonly taken by Native American women to
hasten childbirth. It was also occasionally used for
a variety of other complaints, including insomnia,
rheumatic pain, and fluid retention.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Squaw vine is
still extensively used to aid labor and childbirth,
and is considered to have a tonic action on the
uterus and the ovaries. It is taken to normalize
menstruation and to relieve heavy periods and
period pain. This herb has also been recommended
for stimulating breast-milk production, but other
herbs with a similar action, such as fennel
(Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212), are preferred. The
berries, crushed and mixed with tincture of myrrh
(Commiphora molmol, p. 85), are helpful for sore
nipples. An astringent herb, squaw vine has also
been prescribed for diarrhea and colitis.

Caution Do not take during the first 6 months
of pregnancy.

Aerial parts

Momordica charantia
(Cucurbitaceae)

Bitter Melon,
Kerala

Description Annual climber growing to about
6/4 ft (2 m). Has deeply lobed leaves, yellow
flowers, and orange-yellow fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Asia, bitter melon is common throughout tropical
regions of the world. It is harvested year round.
Parts Used Leaves, fruit, seeds, seed oil.
Constituents Bitter melon contains a fixed oil,
an insulin-like peptide, cucurbitacins, glycosides
(mormordin and charantin), and an alkaloid
(mormordicine). The peptide is known to lower
sugar levels in the blood and urine.

History & Folklore Bitter melon is
traditionally taken in Asia, Africa, and the
Caribbean to treat the symptoms of diabetes.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The unripe fruit
is mainly used to treat type 2 diabetes. The ripe
fruit is a stomach tonic, and induces menstruation.
In Turkey, it is used to treat ulcers. The fruit is
much used in the West Indies for worms, urinary
stones, and fever. The fruit juice is taken as a

purgative, and is prescribed for colic. A decoction

of the leaves is taken for liver problems and colitis,

and it may be applied to skin conditions. The seed
oil is used to help heal wounds.

fe5)

_ 8 Research Seeds are androgenic and

é

» inhibit sperm production, and were tested
asa contraceptive in China in the 1980s.
In diabetic laboratory animals, the fruit juice
stimulated regeneration of the pancreatic cells,
which secrete insulin. A major body of evidence
now supports the traditional use of the fruit juice
to treat non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
Related Species The seeds of the Asian
M. cochinchinensis are applied as a poultice to
relieve abscesses, hemorrhoids, and scrofula.
Recent research indicates that a paste of the
seeds may help psoriasis and ringworm.
Cautions While bitter melon is relatively safe at
low dosage, do not use for more than 4 weeks. Do
not take if prone to low blood-sugar levels.

Monarda punctata (Lamiaceae)

Horsemint

Description Strongly aromatic perennial
growing to 3 ft (90 cm). Has downy lance-shaped
leaves, and double-lipped, red-spotted yellow
flowers growing in whorls from the leaf axils.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the eastern
and central U.S., horsemint is found in dry and
sandy areas. It is gathered when in flower in
summer and autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Horsemint’s volatile oil has
thymol as the main constituent.

Horsemint strongly encourages sweating and the onset
of menstruation.

History & Folklore Horsemint'’s genus name,
Monarda, was bestowed in honor of Nicolas
Monardes, a Spanish physician, whose herbal

of 1569 detailed the medicinal uses of a number of
New World plants. Horsemint was used by the

Winnebagos and Dakotas as a stimulant and as a
treatment for cholera. Other Native Americans
used the herb for a wide variety of problems,
including nausea, backache, fluid retention, chills,
and headache.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Having a

strong volatile oil, horsemint is primarily used for
digestive and upper respiratory problems. It is
taken as an infusion to relieve nausea, indigestion,
flatulence, and colic. It is also employed to reduce
fevers and upper respiratory mucus. The herb
has an antiseptic action within the chest. Taken
internally or applied externally, horsemint reduces
fever by encouraging sweating. It also strongly
stimulates menstruation.

Related Species In | 9th-century America,
Oswego tea (M. didyma) was considered a tonic
for young mothers, and was traditionally given

to brides. It is thought to be a mild menstrual
regulator and an appetite stimulant.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Monsonia ovata (Geraniaceae)

Monsonia

Description Small herbaceous plant with multi-
branched stems, very small oblong leaves and
white solitary or paired geranium-like flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to South
Africa and Namibia, monsonia is found growing
in arid conditions. It is gathered when in flower.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

History & Folklore In Zulu medicine,
monsonia is used to treat snake bite.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Monsonia is
used throughout southwestern Africa as a
treatment for diarrhea, acute and chronic
dysentery, and ulcerative colitis. The plant's
astringent properties act to tighten and protect
the inner linings of the intestinal tract. Given
monsonia's long traditional use for intestinal
disorders and infections, it is possible—but as
yet unsubstantiated by research—that the plant
has a direct antimicrobial effect.

Montia perfoliata (Portulacaceae)

Miner’s Lettuce

Description Annual growing to 4 in (10 cm)
with pointed oval leaves (one pair enveloping

the stem), and white 5-petaled flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Miner's lettuce

is native to western North America, and has
become naturalized in temperate regions around
the world, especially in Australia. The plant thrives
in acid sandy soils. It is generally gathered from

----- PAGE 239 -----
the wild before and during the flowering period.

It has also been cultivated as a vegetable.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Miner's lettuce is rich in vitamin C.
History & Folklore Miner's lettuce was a
readily available salad vegetable on the West Coast
of America. It most probably acquired its name
during the California gold rush of 1849. Itinerant
miners may have later taken the plant with them
to Australia, where it is now common.

Miner's lettuce may have
been spread around the
world by itinerant miners.

Medicinal Actions & Uses
Apart from its value as a vegetable,
miner's lettuce, like its relative purslane
(Portulaca oleracea, p. 255), may also be
taken as an invigorating spring tonic and
an effective diuretic.

Morinda citrifolia (Rubiaceae)

Noni,
Indian Mulberry

Description Shrub or small tree, growing to

26 ft (8 m), with 4-angled stems, and elliptical to oval
leaves to 14 in (35 cm) long. Large creamy-white
flowers produce a fruit resembling a breadfruit,
about 4% in (12 cm) long, green turning yellow to
white, with a pungent, very unpleasant odor.
Habitat & Cultivation Originally native only
to Southeast Asia, noni has spread to India in the
west and across the Pacific to eastern Polynesia and
Hawaii. It prefers volcanic soils in coastal areas
and lowland forests up to about 1,300 ft (400 m)
above sea level, and until recently was infrequently
cultivated. The fruit is gathered when ripe; other
parts of the tree are picked as required.

Parts Used Fruit and juice, leaves, bark.
Constituents Noni fruit contains polysaccharides,
coumarins, iridoids, flavonoids and alkaloids.

No active compounds unique to noni have

been identified.

History & Folklore Different parts of the
plant have been used in Polynesia for at least 2,000
years, chiefly to counter infection and to treat

chronic disease. For example, noni leaves are used
to treat boils and stomach ulcers and, chewed,

are applied as a poultice to relieve inflammation.

In Hawaii, traditional healers have long used noni in
order to promote recovery from bouts of
serious illness.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Since the late
1990s, word of noni's reputed medicinal benefits
has spread and noni is being presented as a
medicinal food with an astonishing variety of
potential uses. These include treating obesity,
diabetes, cancer, pain, lowered immunity, high blood
pressure, heart disease, and depression. With lists
like this, many people are justifiably skeptical about
noni's value as a medicinal food. Nonetheless, noni
fruit and juice is highly unlikely to do harm and may
well prove useful in treating chronic illness, including
pain, inflammatory disorders, heart and circulatory
problems, and cancer. Traditionally, juice from

the fruit is used as a mouthwash and gargle for
infections in the mouth and throat. Noni juice is
probably best drunk on an empty stomach.
Research The limited research into noni suggests
that it may support immune function and be useful
in treating chronic inflammation. A 2012 review

of noni research concluded that the fruit “may
have a small degree of anticancer activity.’ One
theory advanced is that noni contains appreciable
levels of proxeronine, which the body needs to
produce xeronine. This alkaloid appears to enable
cells throughout the body to counter inflammation,
promote healing, and support cellular regulation. In
times of stress or infection, the body's need for
xeronine increases, and many people are thought
to lack sufficient proxeronine to maintain adequate
xeronine levels.

Morinda officinalis (Rubiaceae)

Morinda,
Ba Ji Tian (Chinese)

Description Deciduous plant with white
flowers and a root that yields a yellow dye.
Habitat & Cultivation Morinda is native

to China. It is cultivated in Guangdong, Guangxi,
and Fujian provinces. The root is unearthed in
early spring.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Morinda contains anthraquinones,
terpenoids, and polysaccharides.

History & Folklore The earliest written record
of morinda's use is in the Divine Husbandman's Classic
(Shen’nong Bencaojing) of the Ist century ce.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Pungent and
sweet-tasting, morinda root is an important tonic
herb within traditional Chinese medicine. It has
hormonal and antidepressant properties. As a
sexual tonic, it is commonly used to treat impotence

and premature ejaculation in men, and is
taken by both sexes to aid fertility. Morinda is
employed in various other conditions, notably
in the treatment of menstrual disorders.
Researchers are investigating the root for its
potential to prevent bone loss and help in
treating osteoporosis.

Morus alba (Moraceae)

White Mulberry,
Sang Ye (Chinese)

Description Deciduous tree growing to about
49 ft (15 m). Has toothed leaves, flowers in catkins,
and white berries.

Habitat & Cultivation White mulberry

is native to China. It is grown worldwide as a
garden ornamental. The leaves are gathered in
late autumn, the twigs in early summer, and the
berries when ripe in summer. The root is dug up

in winter.

Parts Used Leaves, twigs, fruit, root bark.
Constituents The leaves contain flavonoids,
anthocyanins, and artocapin. The flavonoids are
antioxidant. The fruit contains the vitamins A, B,,
B,, and C.

White mulberry is grown
to feed silkworms.

History & Folklore White mulberry has
been cultivated for over 5,000 years for its leaves
(sang ye), the preferred food of the silkworm. The
silkworm’s feces are used in Chinese medicine to
treat vomiting.

Medicinal Actions & Uses White mulberry
leaves are expectorant, encouraging the loosening
and coughing up of phlegm, and are prescribed in
China as a treatment for coughs. The leaves are
also taken to treat fever, sore and inflamed eyes,
sore throats, headaches, dizziness and vertigo.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO ©

M

237

wg

----- PAGE 240 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

The fruit juice is cleansing and tonic, and has often
been used as a gargle and mouthwash. The root
bark may be used for toothache, and it is
considered laxative. An extract of the leaves has
been given by injection for elephantiasis. The twigs
are used to combat excess fluid retention and
joint pain. The fruit is taken to prevent premature
graying of the hair, and to treat dizziness, ringing in
the ears, blurred vision, and insomnia.

Related Species The black mulberry (M. nigra),
native to Iran, is cultivated for its sweet, deep

red fruit.

Murraya koenigii (Rutaceae)

Curry Tree

Description Aromatic deciduous shrub or tree
growing to 20 ft (6 m). Has strongly scented leaves,
clusters of small, fragrant white flowers, and pink
to black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Curry tree

is native to subtropical forests in much of
southern Asia. It is widely cultivated in India

for its leaves.

Parts Used Leaves, berries.

Constituents Curry tree contains over

20 alkaloids, a glycoside (koenigin), volatile oil,

and tannins.

History & Folklore Curry tree, also known as
curry patta, is a common flavoring in Indian food.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Curry tree leaves
increase digestive secretions and relieve nausea,
indigestion, and vomiting. They are also used to
treat diarrhea and dysentery. Curry tree aids
healing, for example in gastric ulcers, and the
leaves are applied as a poultice on wounds and
burns. It helps to stabilize blood-sugar levels and is
useful for type 2 diabetes.

Related Species The very bitter leaves

of cosmetic bark (M. paniculata) are taken

to treat stomach ache, dysentery, toothache,

and bruises.

Musa spp. (Musaceae)

Banana,
Plantain

Description Evergreen, palm-like perennials
growing to 30 ft (9 m). Have large, shiny green
leaves, hanging flowering stems, and bunches of
elongated green fruit that turn yellow on ripening.
Habitat & Cultivation Musa species

are native to India and Southeast Asia, and are
extensively cultivated in tropical and subtropical
regions. The fruit is generally picked when

Bananas are picked before they fully ripen. They are
a useful remedy for diarrhea.

immature and then allowed to ripen. The leaves
are gathered as required.

Parts Used Fruit, leaves, root.
Constituents The fruit contains flavonoids and
is rich in vitamins B, C, and E, potassium, serotonin,
and noradrenaline.

History & Folklore The delicious and highly
nutritious banana fruit is the yield of careful
horticulture, which had its origins with wild
plants in prehistoric times.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Ripe banana
fruit is gently laxative, while the unripe fruit is
astringent and used to treat diarrhea. The fruit
stimulates hemoglobin production and can
therefore prove useful in preventing or treating
anemia. Banana makes a simple addition to diets
aimed at lowering high blood pressure. Given the
fruit’s serotonin content, some practitioners
recommend taking three bananas a day to help
treat migraines and depression. A syrup made
from plantain is taken for coughs and chest
conditions such as bronchitis.

Myrica cerifera (Myricaceae)

Bayberry

Description Evergreen shrub or small tree
growing to 33 ft (10 m). Has narrow leaves, small
yellow flowers in catkins, and waxy gray berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Bayberry is found in
coastal regions of the eastern and southern U.S.,
as far west as Texas. The root bark is collected in
autumn or spring.

Part Used Root bark.

Constituents Bayberry contains triterpenes
(including taraxerol, taraxerone, and myricadiol),
flavonoids, tannins, phenols, resins, and gums.
Myricadiol has a mild effect on potassium and
sodium levels.

History & Folklore Settlers in North America
extolled the medicinal benefits of bayberry. A 1737
account stated that the plants ‘expel wind and ease
all manner of pains proceeding from cold, therefore
are good in colic, palsies, convulsions, epilepsies, and
many other disorders.’ The root bark was listed in
the U.S. National Formulary from 1916 to 1936.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Bayberry is used
to increase circulation, stimulate perspiration, and
keep bacterial infections in check. Colds, flu,
coughs, and sore throats benefit from treatment
with this herb. It helps to strengthen resistance to
infection and to tighten and dry mucous
membranes. An infusion is helpful for spongy
gums, and a gargle is used for sore throats.
Bayberry’s astringency is beneficial for irritable
bowel syndrome and mucous colitis. An infusion
can help treat excess vaginal discharge. A paste of
the powdered root bark may be used externally on
ulcers and sores.

Caution Do not take in pregnancy.

Myrica gale (Myricaceae)
Sweet Gale,
Bog Myrtle

Description Low-growing, fragrant shrub,
growing to 6% ft (2 m), with lance-shaped leaves.
Male plants produce resinous catkins in spring.
Habitat & Cultivation Sweet gale thrives

in wet and damp heaths and moorlands across
northerly regions of the northern hemisphere. The
leaves are collected in summer, the catkins in spring.
Parts Used Leaves, branches, catkins.
Constituents Sweet gale contains an essential
oil (chiefly alpha-pinene and delta-cadinene),
flavonoids, and resin.
History & Folklore In Scotland, where the
plant grows freely, Highlanders slept on fleaproof
beds of sweet gale and placed it among linen to
repel moths. Enterprising anglers are also reported
to have worn sprigs of sweet gale to keep away
midges. In Scotland and Sweden, a strong decoction
was used to kill insects and intestinal worms.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sweet gale is
mostly used as an insect repellent and insecticide and
offers a safe and ecologically sound way to protect
against insect bites. Over-the-counter preparations
are available, though a decoction of the plant bathed
on exposed areas will also prove effective.
Research Since the 1990s, the essential oil of
sweet gale has become recognized as an effective
insect repellent (especially of midges), and is now
available in blended formulations. In one trial in
Scotland, volunteers exposed their arms to midges,
with one arm covered in a gel containing essential
oil of sweet gale. After 10 minutes, the protected
arms averaged |.6 bites, the unprotected arms 9.4.

----- PAGE 241 -----
Cautions Do not take the essential oil internally.
Do not use sweet gale internally in pregnancy or
while breastfeeding. The essential oil is thought
to be toxic.

Myroxylon pereirae
syn. M. balsamum var. pereirae
(Fabaceae)

Peruvian Balsam

Description Evergreen tree growing to | 15 ft
(35 m). Has grey bark, compound leaves dotted
with oil glands, white pea-like flowers, and yellow
seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Central
America, Peruvian balsam grows wild in tropical
forests. It is cultivated in Central and South America
and India. Oleoresin (balsam) is taken from cuts

in the bark.

Part Used Oleoresin.

Constituents The oleoresin contains 50-65%
volatile oil (mainly benzyl benzoate and benzy|
cinnamate) and resins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Peruvian balsam is
strongly antiseptic and stimulates repair of damaged
tissue. It is most commonly taken internally as an
expectorant and antimucus remedy to treat
bronchitis, emphysema, and bronchial asthma. It may
also be taken to treat sore throats and diarrhea,
and applied topically to skin disorders.

Related Species The balsam from similar species
was used by the Inca to relieve fevers and colds.
Caution Peruvian balsam may cause allergic

skin reactions.

Myrtus communis (Myrtaceae)

Myrtle

Description Evergreen shrub growing to a
height of 10 ft (3 m). Has dark green leaves, white
flowers, and purple-black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Myrtle is native to
the Mediterranean region and it is cultivated for

its essential oil. The leaves are gathered in spring.
Parts Used Leaves, essential oil.
Constituents Myrtle contains tannins,
flavonoids, and a volatile oil (mainly alpha-pinene,
cineole, and myrtenol).

History & Folklore In ancient Greece, myrtle
was dedicated to Aphrodite, who was the goddess
of love, and brides bedecked themselves with myrtle
leaves. A liqueur is made from the berries.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Myrtle leaves

are astringent, tonic, and antiseptic. An infusion of
the leaves can be used externally to clean and heal
wounds and ulcers, or internally to remedy disorders

of the digestive and urinary systems. The essential oil
is strongly antiseptic and anti-mucus, and in Spain is
used to treat bronchial and lung infections.
Caution Do not take the essential oil internally
except with professional advice.

, q Myrtle was described by the
Greek physician Dioscorides
as “a friend to the stomach.”

Nasturtium officinale (Cruciferae)

Watercress

Description Creeping perennial growing to

2 ft (60 cm), with compound leaves, spikes of white
4-petaled flowers, and small sickle-shaped pods.
Habitat & Cultivation Found in temperate
regions throughout the world, watercress thrives
alongside or in fresh running water. While
commonly found in the wild, it is also widely
cultivated as a salad herb. Watercress is best
gathered before it flowers in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Watercress contains
isothiocyanates and is rich in vitamins A, B,, B,, C,
and E, and minerals (especially iodine, iron, and
phosphorus). Allyl isothiocyanate has broad-spectrum
antibiotic activity. Research in the 1960s suggested
that watercress might have antitumor activity.
History & Folklore Watercress has long been
valued as a food and medicinal plant. Xenophon, a
Greek general in the 5th century sce, attributed
other virtues to it, recommending the Persians to
feed it to their children to build up their strength.

In European folk medicine, watercress has primarily
been considered a “blood-cleanser;’ and was used
in former times as a spring tonic.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Watercress
provides excellent, easily digested nutrition. Its high
mineral and vitamin C content makes it particularly
suited for chronic ill health and convalescence. It

is thought to stimulate appetite, ease indigestion,
and counter mucus. A detoxifying herb and food,
watercress cleanses the liver, blood, kidneys,

and lungs.

Nepeta cataria (Lamiaceae)

Catnip

Description Downy, aromatic perennial growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has heart-shaped, gray-green leaves
and whorls of white flowers with purple spots.
Habitat & Cultivation Catnip is native to
Europe and naturalized in North America. It grows
in dry wayside places and in mountainous regions up
to altitudes of 5,000 ft (1,500 m). Catnip is gathered
when in flower in summer and autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Catnip helps to lower
fever by strongly
encouraging sweating.

Constituents Catnip contains iridoids, tannins,
and volatile oil (mainly comprising alpha- and
beta-nepetalactone, citronellol, and geraniol).
History & Folklore Pechey's Compleat Herbal
(1694) describes catnip: “’Tis hot and dry. 'Tis
chiefly used for obstructions of the womb, for
barrenness, and to hasten delivery, and to help

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO ©

239

----- PAGE 242 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

expectoration. Tis used outwardly in baths for
the womb, and the itch.’ Catnip has an excitatory
effect on cats.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Catnip settles the
stomach, is sedative and, as it stimulates sweating,
reduces fever. The herb's pleasant taste and gentle
action make it suitable for colds, flu, and fever in
children, especially when mixed with elderflower
(Sambucus nigra, p. 132) and sweetened with honey.
Catnip is markedly antiflatulent, helping to settle
indigestion and colic. The herb is also useful in
treating headaches related to digestive problems.
A tincture is beneficial as a friction rub for
rheumatism and arthritis.

Self-help Use Digestive infections, p. 305.

Nicotiana tabacum (Solanaceae)

Tobacco

Description Annual or biennial plant growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has an erect stem, large oval leaves,
and pink or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Tobacco is native
to tropical America. It is now grown worldwide,
chiefly for smoking tobacco but also as the source
of an insecticide. Leaves for smoking are gathered,
dried, and cured.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Tobacco contains alkaloids (notably
nicotine) and a volatile oil. Nicotine is stimulant
and addictive.

History & Folklore Even in |7th-century
England, opinions on smoking were sharply divided.
King James | unsuccessfully tried to ban “a custome
loathsome to the eye, hatefull to the nose, harmfull
to the braine [and] dangerous to the lungs.” In
Central America, tobacco was prescribed by the
Maya as a treatment for asthma, convulsions, and
skin disease. Tobacco has been used as part of
rituals in many Native American cultures.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Tobacco is no
longer used medicinally. The dried leaves make a
good insecticide, but external application should
be avoided as nicotine is readily absorbed through
the skin.

Caution Tobacco should not be taken in

any form.

Nigella sativa (Ranunculaceae)

Black Cumin

Description Annual herb growing to | ft
(30 cm). Has an upright branching stem, fine
deeply cut leaves, gray-blue flowers, and
toothed seedpods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
Asia, black cumin is grown throughout much

of Asia and the Mediterranean region for its seeds
and as a garden plant. The seeds are gathered once
they are ripe.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents The seeds contain 40% fixed

oil, a saponin (melantin), alkaloids, and up to

1.4% volatile oil.

History & Folklore Black cumin was found in
the tomb of Tutankhamun, but its role in ancient
Egypt, medicinal or otherwise, is unknown.
Dioscorides, a Greek physician of the Ist century
ce, recorded that black cumin seeds were taken
to treat headaches, nasal congestion, toothache,
and intestinal worms, and, in large quantities, as a
diuretic, to promote menstrual periods, and to
increase breast-milk production.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Like many
culinary herbs, black cumin seeds are beneficial for
the digestive system, soothing stomach pain and
spasms and easing gas, bloating, and colic. The
seeds are also antiseptic and are used to treat
intestinal worms, especially in children. Cumin
seeds are much used in India to increase the
production of breast milk.

Research Recent research indicates that

black cumin seed may prove useful in metabolic
syndrome, a condition that typically involves raised
cholesterol levels, raised blood pressure, and type
2 diabetes. The seeds are also antiviral and show
promise in the treatment of chronic viral infections,
such as hepatitis C.

Caution Love-in-a-mist (N. damascena) should
not be used as a substitute for black cumin seeds.

Notopterygium incisium
(Apiaceae)

Notopterygium Root,
Qiang Huo (Chinese)

Description Carrot-family member with an
upright ridged stem, deeply cut leaves, and flowers
in dense clusters.

Habitat & Cultivation Notopterygium root
is native to central and western China. The root is
unearthed in spring or autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Notopterygium root contains
furanocoumarins, sterols, and a volatile oil.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Notopterygium
root is taken mainly for colds and chills, fevers,
headache, general aches and pains, and malaise.
The herb is warming and pungent, counters cold
and damp conditions, and promotes sweating,
especially in fevers. It is also prescribed for neck
and back pain.

Caution At high dosage notopterygium root
may cause vomiting.

Nymphaea alba (Nymphaceae)

White Water Lily

Description Perennial aquatic plant with deep
roots, plate-shaped leaves on long cylindrical stems,
and large-petaled white flowers occasionally tinged
with pink.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
white water lily is found in ponds and in still water in
lakes, rivers, and canals. The rhizome is gathered
in autumn.

Parts Used Rhizome, flowers.

Constituents The rhizome contains alkaloids
(nymphaeine and nupharine), resin, glycosides,

and tannins.

History & Folklore According to the
|7th-century herbalist Nicholas Culpeper, “The
leaves do cool all inflammations ... the syrup
helpeth much to procure rest, and to settle the
brains of frantic persons.”

White water lily flowers have a sedative effect, calming
nervous tension and anxiety.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The rhizome

of the white water lily is astringent and antiseptic.
A decoction treats dysentery, or diarrhea due

to irritable bowel syndrome. White water lily has
also been employed to treat chronic bronchitis
and kidney pain, and taken as a gargle for sore
throats. The rhizome may be used to make a
douche for vaginal soreness and discharge, or to
make a poultice for boils and abscesses. White
water lily flowers have long been reputed to

reduce sexual drive. Their generally calming and
sedative effect on the nervous system makes
them useful in the treatment of insomnia, anxiety,
and similar disorders of this nature.

Research Studies suggest that white water lily
may, as has been claimed, act as an anaphrodisiac,
diminishing sexual drive. The plant has been found
to lower blood pressure in animals.

Related Species The white pond lily (N. odorata)
is a close American relative used for much the same
purposes. The rhizome of the white lotus (N. lotus),

----- PAGE 243 -----
native to tropical Africa and Asia, has been used
medicinally since the earliest times, and is taken
for indigestion, dysentery, and other
gastrointestinal problems.

Ocimum basilicum (Lamiaceae)

Sweet Basil,
Basil

Description Strongly aromatic annual growing
to 20 in (50 cm). Has shiny oval leaves, a square
stem, and small white flowers in whorls.
Habitat & Cultivation Sweet basil, also
known as basil, is probably native to India. Over
150 varieties are now grown around the world for
their distinctive flavor and essential oil. The leaves
and flowering tops are gathered as the plant comes
into flower.

Parts Used Leaves, flowering tops, essential oil.
Constituents Sweet basil contains a volatile oil
(about 1%), which consists principally of linalool
and methylchavicol, along with small quantities

of methyl cinnamate, cineole, and other terpenes.
History & Folklore In his | st-century ce
Materia Medica, the Greek physician Dioscorides
described the African belief that eating sweet
basil stopped the pain caused by a scorpion’ sting.
The herb was used in Roman times to relieve
flatulence, to counteract poisoning, as a diuretic,
and to stimulate breast-milk production. Basil also
has a history of use in Ayurvedic medicine.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sweet basil acts
principally on the digestive and nervous systems,
easing flatulence, stomach cramps, colic, and
indigestion. lt can be used to prevent or relieve
nausea and vomiting, and

helps to kill intestinal

worms. Sweet basil

Sweet basil is a mildly
sedative herb with
antibacterial properties.

has a mildly sedative action, proving useful in
treating nervous irritability, depression, anxiety,

and difficulty in sleeping. It may also be taken for
epilepsy, migraine, and whooping cough. The herb
has been traditionally taken to increase breast-milk
production. Applied externally, sweet basil leaves
act as an insect repellent. The juice from the leaves
brings relief to insect bites and stings. Sweet basil
has an established antibacterial action.

Related Species See also holy basil (Ocimum
tenuiflorum, p. | 16). Bush basil (O. basilicum var.
minimum) has a much milder action than sweet basil,
and is used to relieve cramping pain and flatulence.
Caution Sweet basil essential oil should not be
taken internally.

Self-help Use Minor bites, stings & swellings,
p. 303.

Oenothera biennis (Onagraceae)

Evening Primrose

Description Biennial herb growing to 8 in

(20 cm). Has red blotches on stem, crinkled lance-
shaped leaves, 4-petaled yellow flowers, and
elongated seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, evening primrose is now commonly
found in many temperate zones around the world.
It thrives in open areas, especially in dunes and
sandy soil. Evening primrose is grown commercially
for its seed oil.

Parts Used Leaves, stem bark, flowers, seed oil.
Constituents Evening primrose oil is rich in
essential fatty acids—linoleic (about 70%) and
gammalinolenic acid (about 9%) in particular. Its
action mostly depends on the gammalinolenic acid
(GLA), which is a precursor of prostaglandin E,.
The oil is often combined with vitamin E to
prevent oxidation.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The flowers,
leaves, and stem bark of evening primrose have
astringent and sedative properties. All
three parts have been employed in
the treatment of whooping cough.
Evening primrose has also been
taken for digestive problems and
asthma, and used as a poultice to
ease the discomfort of rheumatic
disorders. The oil, applied externally, is
beneficial in the treatment of
eczema, certain other itchy skin
conditions, and breast tenderness.
Taken internally, the oil has an effect
in lowering blood pressure, and in
preventing the clumping of platelets.
The oil is now commonly taken for
premenstrual problems, including
tension and abdominal bloating, and

Evening
primrose

may prove helpful in conditions as diverse as dry
eyes and multiple sclerosis.

Caution Do not take evening primrose oil if
suffering from epilepsy.

Olea europaea (Oleaceae)

Olive

Description Evergreen tree growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has a deeply grooved gray trunk, small
leathery leaves, clusters of small greenish-white
flowers, and a green fruit ripening to black.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

Olive harvesting is carried out in many groves much
as it was centuries ago.

Habitat & Cultivation Olive trees grow wild
in the Mediterranean region and are cultivated in
Mediterranean countries and in regions with a
similar climate in the Americas. The leaves may

be gathered throughout the year, the fruit in late
summer. The leaves of wild trees are believed to
contain a higher concentration of active principles.
Parts Used Leaves, oil.

Constituents Olive leaves contain oleoropine,
olesterol, and leine. Olive oil contains about 75%
oleic acid, a monounsaturated fatty acid.

History & Folklore The olive was probably first
cultivated in Crete around 3500 sce. The tree has
many symbolic associations: the olive branch is an
emblem of peace, and the leaves crowned victors in
the ancient Olympic Games. The leaves have been
used since those times to clean wounds. The oil has
been used for ritual anointing in some religions.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Olive leaves lower
blood pressure and help to improve the function of
the circulatory system. They are also mildly diuretic
and may be used to treat conditions such as cystitis.
Possessing some ability to lower blood-sugar levels,
the leaves have been taken for diabetes. The oil is
nourishing and improves the balance of fats within
the blood. It is traditionally taken with lemon juice

in teaspoonful doses to treat gallstones. The oil has a
a generally protective action on the digestive tract

and is useful for dry skin. 24

----- PAGE 244 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

7
ae

242

Research Clinical trials have shown that olive
leaves lower blood pressure.

Self-help Uses Cradle cap, p. 318; Stretch
marks, p. 317.

Ononis spinosa (Fabaceae)

Spiny Restharrow

Description Spiny perennial with 3 small leaflets
per leaf, bright pink, pea-like flowers, and small
seed pods.

Habitat & Cultivation A relatively common
European plant, spiny restharrow thrives in dry
grassland and along roadsides.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Spiny restharrow root contains
phenols, lectins, triterpenoids, and a volatile oil
(comprising mainly trans-anethole). The volatile
oil in the root is diuretic; the non-volatile oil
content is antidiuretic. A decoction of the root
has an antidiuretic effect, as the volatile oil is lost in
the steam. If a diuretic is desired, the root is made
into an infusion.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The root is used as
a diuretic and to prevent kidney and bladder stones.
It is of value in a range of urinary system problems,
including stones, gout, and cystitis. For excess fluid
retention, spiny restharrow is best taken as a short-
term treatment, in the form of an infusion.

Operculina turpethum
(Convolvulaceae)

Turpeth

Description Twining climber with white tuberous
roots, hairy, oval leaves, white funnel-shaped
flowers, and round fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical India,
turpeth is now found in tropical regions around the
world. The root is unearthed throughout the year.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Turpeth root contains turpethin
resin (approximately 4%) and a volatile oil.
History & Folklore Turpeth has been used
for several thousand years as a purgative in
Ayurvedic medicine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Turpeth root is
chiefly used in small doses to clear the bowels. It

is sometimes known as “‘Indian jalap,” and is used

in much the same way as this plant (/pomoed purga,
p. 223), though its action is slower and less drastic.
In Ayurvedic medicine, turpeth is prescribed
with picrorrhiza (Picrorrhiza kurroa, p. 248) to
treat jaundice.

Cautions Take only under professional supervision.
Do not take during pregnancy.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Mainly used

as a culinary herb, sweet marjoram is also
medicinally valuable due to its stimulant and
antispasmodic properties. Like oregano

(O. vulgare, following entry), it treats flatulence,
colic, and respiratory problems, but it appears
to have a stronger effect on the nervous system
than its wild cousin. Sweet marjoram is a good
general tonic, helping to relieve anxiety,headaches,
and insomnia. The herb is also thought to lower
sexual drive.

Cautions Do not take as a medicine during
pregnancy. Do not take sweet marjoram essential
oil internally.

Opuntia ficus-indica (Cactaceae)

Prickly Pear

Description Perennial cactus growing to 10 ft
(3 m). Has large spatula-shaped stems covered

in clusters of spines, brilliant yellow flowers, and
roundish purple fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Prickly pear is native
to Mexico and naturalized in semitropical regions
around the world. The fruit is harvested when ripe,
the stems when required.

Parts Used Flowers, fruit, stems.
Constituents The fruit contains mucilage, sugars,
vitamin C, and other fruit acids.
History & Folklore Prickly
pear fruit is used to make
conserves and an alcoholic
drink in Mexico. The split
stems have been bound
around injured limbs as a
first-aid measure.

Medicinal Actions

& Uses Prickly pear flowers
are astringent and reduce bleeding, and are used
for problems of the gastrointestinal tract—
particularly diarrhea, colitis, and irritable bowel
syndrome. The flowers are also taken to treat an
enlarged prostate gland. The fruit is nutritious.

Origanum vulgare (Lamiaceae)

Oregano,
Wild Marjoram

Description Upright perennial herb
growing to about 32 in (80 cm). Has square
red stems, elliptical leaves, and clusters of deep
pink flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Oregano is native
to Europe and naturalized in the Middle East.
The plant thrives in chalky soils close to the sea.
It is gathered when in flower in summer.

Prickly pear fruit

Origanum majorana
syn. Majorana hortensis
(Lamiaceae)

Sweet Marjoram

Description Woody perennial herb growing
to 20 in (50 cm). Has aromatic oval leaves and
pinkish-white flowers emerging from the

upper leaf axils.

Habitat & Cultivation Sweet marjoram is
native to countries bordering the Mediterranean.
It is much cultivated as a culinary herb, and for its
essential oil.

Parts Used Aerial parts, essential oil.
Constituents Sweet marjoram
contains about 3% volatile oil
(comprising sabinene hydrate,
sabinene, linalool, carvacrol, and
other terpenes), flavonoids, caffeic
and rosmarinic acid, and triterpenoids.
History & Folklore In |597, the
herbalist John Gerard made this assessment:
“Sweet marjoram is a remedy against cold diseases
of the braine and head, being taken anyway

to your best liking; put up into the nostrils it
provokes sneesing, and draweth forth much
baggage flegme; it easeth the toothache being
chewed in the mouth.”

Oregano’s essential ail, well
diluted, is a traditional
remedy for toothache.

----- PAGE 245 -----
Parts Used Aerial parts, essential oil.
Constituents Oregano contains a volatile oil
(comprising carvacrol, thymol, beta-bisabolene,
caryophyllene, linalool, and borneol), tannins, resin,
sterols, and flavonoids. Both carvacrol and thymol
are antibacterial and antifungal.

History & Folklore Esteemed by the ancient
Greeks, oregano was considered a cure-all in
medieval times. It was one of the medicinal
plants cultivated by early New England settlers.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Oregano and
its oil are strongly antiseptic with potent activity
against many bacteria and fungi, notably E. coli
and Candida strains. It can aid many acute and
chronic infections affecting the gastrointestinal
and respiratory tracts, especially gastroenteritis,
dysentery, bronchitis, coughs, and tonsillitis.
Both herb and oil inhibit the gut flora (bacteria
naturally occurring within the gut) and have an
important role to play in gut dysbiosis, a condition
where the presence of harmful gut bacteria leads
to symptoms such as gas, bloating, and abdominal
discomfort. The diluted oil can be applied to
toothache or painful joints.

Cautions Do not take as a medicine during
pregnancy. External use may cause irritation of
the skin. Do not take essential oil internally.

Orthosiphon aristata (Lamiaceae)

Java Tea

Description Shrub growing to about 3 ft (| m).
Has pointed leaves and lilac-colored flowers with
very long stamens.

Habitat & Cultivation Java tea is native to
Southeast Asia and Australia. Now cultivated as a
medicinal plant, it is picked as required throughout
the year.

Part Used Leaves.

Constituents Java tea contains flavones
(including sinensetin), a glycoside (orthosiphonin),
a volatile oil, and large amounts of potassium.
History & Folklore The plant's Dutch
Indonesian name, koemis koetjing (cat's whiskers),
probably derives from its long whiskery stamens.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Java tea is

listed in the French, Indonesian, Dutch, and Swiss
pharmacopoeias (official documents containing a list
of drugs and their medicinal uses, preparations, and
dosages). It is thought to increase the kidneys’ ability
to eliminate nitrogen-containing compounds. The
herb is much used as a diuretic and as a
treatment for kidney infections, stones, and poor
renal function resulting from chronic nephritis. It
is also used to treat cystitis and urethritis.
Research Java tea’ diuretic activity has been
confirmed in scientific experiments. Extracts
significantly increase potassium levels in the urine.

Paeonia officinalis (Paeoniaceae)

Peony

Description Perennial growing to 2 ft (60 cm).
Has a tuberous root, upright stems, oval to lance-
shaped leaflets, and attractive large red, red-purple
or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation A native of southern
Europe, peony grows in mountain woodlands
and is widely cultivated. The root is unearthed

in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Peony is thought to contain
alkaloids, tannins, saponins, flavonoids and
triterpenoids, and a volatile oil.
History & Folklore Since the time of
Hippocrates (470-377 sce), peony has been

used to treat epilepsy. Ibn el Beitar, a medieval
Arab physician, recommended a necklace of peony
seeds to ward off epilepsy in children. Mrs. Grieve,
the author of A Modern Herbal (1931), recounted
how “‘in ancient times, peony was thought to be
of divine origin, an emanation from the moon, and
to shine during the night protecting the shepherds
and their flocks.”

Peony is named after Paean, the physician of the Greek gods.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though little used
in contemporary European herbal medicine, Peony
is greatly valued within Unani herbal medicine
from the Middle East. It has anti-inflammatory,
antispasmodic, and sedative activity, and is
prescribed for conditions as varied as nervous
debility, epilepsy, and high blood pressure, and as a
heart tonic. The root has also been taken to treat
whooping cough, and suppositories are made of
the root to relive anal and intestinal spasms.
Related Species Chinese peony (Paeonia
lactiflora, p. 117) is much used in Chinese

herbal medicine.

@ Cautions Take peony only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Panax notoginseng (Araliaceae)

Notoginseng,
San Qi (Chinese)

Description Deciduous perennial with an erect
stem growing to 3 ft (1 m), compound leaves, small
greenish flowers, and small, berrylike fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
notoginseng is now rare in the wild. It is cultivated
commercially in southern and central China. The
root is unearthed before flowering or after

the fruit has ripened.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Notoginseng contains steroidal
saponins, polysaccharides, and a flavonoid.
History & Folklore Despite its importance as
a tonic, notoginseng was only recorded in Chinese
herbal medicine in 1578, in the Compendium of
Materia Medica by Li Shizen. He described the
root as being “more valuable than gold.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Like ginseng

(P. ginseng, p. | 18), notoginseng is a tonic that
supports the function of the adrenal glands,

in particular the production of corticosteroids

and male sex hormones. Notoginseng also helps to
improve blood flow through the coronary arteries,
thus finding use as a treatment for arteriosclerosis,
high blood pressure, and angina. Notoginseng
treats internal bleeding of almost any kind. The
herb may also be applied externally as a poultice
to help speed the healing of wounds and bruises.
Research Clinical studies have confirmed
notoginseng’s longstanding reputation as a means
to arrest bleeding. A Chinese trial indicated that
the herb hastens blood clotting. Another clinical
trial and extensive scientific studies, again in
China, associated the herb with positive
improvements in coronary circulation, in lessening
the symptoms of angina, and in the reduction of
blood pressure levels. In common with other
ginseng-type herbs, notoginseng has been shown
to enhance physical performance.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Panax quinquefolium (Araliaceae)

American Ginseng

Description Deciduous perennial growing to
about | ft (30 cm). Has a smooth stem, leaves
with oblong to oval leaflets, small greenish

flowers, and kidney-shaped scarlet-red berries.
Habitat & Cultivation American ginseng

is native to North America and the Himalayas.

A woodland plant, it is rarely seen in the wild due
to overharvesting. It is cultivated in Wisconsin,
China, and France. The root is gathered in autumn.
Part Used Root.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

a

243

----- PAGE 246 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

244

Constituents American ginseng contains
steroidal saponins, including panaquilon.

History & Folklore Native American peoples
may have considered this herb a means to increase
female fertility. From the mid-| 8th century, the
collection of the herb for export to China became
a virtual goldrush, with so many Native Americans
out harvesting American ginseng that settlers
reported finding villages almost deserted. The
Ojibwa people always planted a seed to replace
the herb, but this was not universal practice.
American ginseng became rare toward the end

of the 19th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The action of
American ginseng is presumed to be similar to,
but milder than, that of its Chinese cousin, ginseng
(P. ginseng, p. | 18). American ginseng increases the
ability to tolerate stress of all kinds. In traditional
Chinese medicine, American ginseng is employed
as a yin tonic, treating weakness, fever, wheezing,
and coughs.

Related Species See ginseng, nototginseng

(P. notoginseng, preceding entry), and Siberian
ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus, p. 94).
Caution Do not take American ginseng

during pregnancy.

Papaver rhoeas (Papaveraceae)

Red Poppy

Description Delicate hairy-stemmed annual
growing to 3 ft (90 cm). Has basal rosette of
lance-shaped leaves and deeply incised stem
leaves, 4-petaled red flowers with black anthers,
and small rounded seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Red poppy is native
to Europe, North Africa, and temperate regions
of Asia, and is naturalized in North and South
America. It thrives on cultivated land and on
road verges. The flowers are picked in summer.
Parts Used Flowers.

Constituents Red poppy contains alkaloids
(including papaverine, rhoeadine, isorhoeadine, and
many others), meconic acid, mekocyanin, mucilage,
and tannin. The alkaloids are similar to those in the
opium poppy (P. somniferum, see following entry),
but are much milder.

History & Folklore According to Agnus
Castus, writing in the | 4th century, “If a man hawe
ony peyne aboutyn his eyne or if a man hawe a
mygreyn tak this herb and stamp it and nedle it
with oyle de olywe and anoynt ther-with the
forhed and it schal amende the syth and slake
the peyne and distroye the mygreyn.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Red poppy
flowers are mildly analgesic and sedative, and
have long been used in European herbal medicine,
particularly for ailments in children and the elderly.

Chiefly employed as a mild pain reliever and as a
treatment for irritable coughs, red poppy also helps
reduce nervous overactivity. The herb may be used
in the treatment of insomnia, general irritability,
coughs—especially paroxysmal coughs—and
asthma, and is generally given as a syrup.

Related Species See also opium poppy

(P. somniferum, following entry), Mexican poppy
(Argemone mexicana, p. |71), and California poppy
(Eschscholzia californica, p. 207).

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. All parts of red poppy except the
seeds are potentially toxic if eaten.

Papaver somniferum
(Papaveraceae)

Opium Poppy

Description Thick-stemmed annual growing

to about 3 ft (| m). Has many dull green leaves,
solitary pink, purple or white flowers, and globe-
shaped seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to western
Asia, opium poppy is now cultivated commercially
around the world as the source of morphine and
codeine, and as an illegal crop for the production
of opium and heroin. During the summer, the seed
capsules are cut and the white latex that exudes is
gathered the next day and dried.

Part Used Latex.

Constituents Opium poppy contains more
than 40 opium alkaloids, including morphine

(up to 20%), narcotine (about 5%), codeine
(about 1%), and papaverine (about 1%). It also
contains meconic acid, albumin, mucilage, sugars,
resin, and wax. Many of the opium poppy’s
alkaloids have a well-established therapeutic
action. Morphine is one of the most powerful
analgesics of all, used extensively in conventional
medicine to relieve pain, especially in terminal
illness. Codeine is a milder analgesic used for
headaches and other pain, and in the symptomatic
treatment of diarrhea. Opium's strongly addictive
nature is well established.

History & Folklore Cultivated for its
medicinal properties for at least 4,000 years,

the opium poppy was introduced to Greece
about 3,000 years ago, and from there spread
throughout Europe. It was unknown in China
until the 7th century ce, and in Japan until the

| 5th century. It is mentioned in the Assyrian
herbals (c. 1700 sce), and the Greek physician
Dioscorides (40-90 ce) wrote that ‘a decoction of
the leaves and flowerheads if drunk and bathed on
the head is unrivaled in inducing sleep. The mashed
heads, mixed with flour, make a useful plaster in
inflammations and St. Anthony's fire [erysipelas, a
bacterial infection of the skin}.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Opium (the
dried latex) is a potent narcotic, analgesic, and
antispasmodic, and has been taken to relieve pain
of various kinds. In all the main herbal traditions it is
regarded as a powerfully “cold” remedy, reducing
physical function and sedating or suppressing
nervous activity, pain, and coughs. In view of its
addictive nature, opium is mainly used after other
less powerful analgesics have failed to bring relief. It
is also an effective remedy for acute diarrhea and
severe coughs. Pharmaceutical drugs produced
from opium poppy include morphine and codeine.
Research Much research has been done,
confirming most of the uses of opium poppy
listed above.
Related Species See also red poppy

(P. rhoeas, preceding entry), Mexican poppy
(Argemone mexicana, p. 171), and California
poppy (Eschscholzia californica, p. 207).

@ Cautions Use opium poppy only under
professional supervision. It is subject to legal
restrictions in most countries.

7

Flowerhead

Opium poppy’s seed
capsules contain a
latex that is the source
of morphine.

----- PAGE 247 -----
Parietaria officinalis syn. P. diffusa
(Urticaceae)

Pellitory-of-the-VWall

Description Annual growing to 28 in (70 cm).
Has deep green leaves, greenish flowers, and small
dark seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
this plant is commonplace in southern countries,
where it is found on walls and in dry stony sites.

It is gathered in summer when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Pellitory-of-the-wall contains
flavonoids and tannins.

History & Folklore For more than 2,000
years, pellitory-of-the-wall has been valued as a
diuretic, as a soother of chronic coughs, and as

a balm for wounds and burns.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pellitory-of-the
wall is chiefly employed as a diuretic, demulcent,
and stone-preventing herb. In European herbal
medicine, it is regarded as having a restorative
action on the kidneys, supporting and strengthening
their function. It has been prescribed for conditions
such as nephritis, pyelitis (inflammation of the
kidney), kidney stones, renal colic (pain caused
by kidney stones), cystitis, and edema (fluid
retention). It is also occasionally taken as a laxative.
Caution Do not take if suffering from hay fever
or other allergies.

Paullinia cupana syn. P. sorbilis
(Sapindaceae)

Guarana

Description Woody vine growing to a height
of 33 ft (10 m). Has divided compound leaves,
clusters of inconspicuous yellow flowers, and pear-
shaped fruit that contains small shiny brown seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Guarana is native
to tropical forests of the Brazilian Amazon, and
is also cultivated in Brazil. The seeds are gathered
when ripe.
Parts Used Seeds.
Constituents Guarana contains xanthine
derivatives (including up to 7% caffeine, together
with theobromine and theophylline), tannins, and
saponins. The xanthines are stimulant and diuretic,
and reduce fatigue over the short term.
History & Folklore |n Brazil,
guarana is traditionally prepared
by roasting, crushing, and drying
the seeds. The resulting “cakes”
are made into a tea, which is taken
to counter fatigue or to treat
diarrhea. Guarana has recently

Seeds become a popular alternative to coffee.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Guarana’
medicinal uses are similar to those of coffee
(Coffea arabica, p. |92)—it is taken for headache
and migraine, for mild depression, and to boost
energy levels. The problems that apply to long-
term or excessive consumption of coffee also
apply to guarana—both stimulate over the short
term but tend to inhibit the body's restorative
processes over the longer term. In view of
guarana's high tannin content, long-term use

is even less advisable, because tannins impair
the intestines’ ability to absorb nutrients.
Nevertheless, guarana is a useful short-term
remedy for boosting energy, or for treating

a tension headache that cannot be treated

with rest. Guarana's astringency also treats
chronic diarrhea.

Related Species P. yoco, native to the Colombian
Amazon, is used by indigenous peoples to reduce
fevers, as a stimulant, and as a post-malarial treatment.
Caution Do not take guarana if suffering

from cardiovascular disease or from high blood
pressure. It should also not be taken during
pregnancy or while breastfeeding.

Pausinystalia yohimbe
syn. Corynanthe yohimbe
(Rubiaceae)

Yohimbe

Description Evergreen tree growing to

100 ft (30 m). Has reddish-brown bark,

oblong or elliptical leaves, and clusters of small
yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Yohimbe is native to

the forests of western Africa, especially Cameroon,

Zaire, and Gabon. The bark is gathered at any time
of year.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Yohimbe contains approximately

6% indole alkaloids (including yohimbine), pigments,

and tannins. The alkaloids have a cerebral stimulant
action at moderate doses, but are highly toxic in
large doses.

History & Folklore Yohimbe has an ancient
reputation in western Africa, especially among
the Bantu people, as a male aphrodisiac and

mild hallucinogen.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Yohimbe is little
used in herbal medicine owing to its potential
toxicity. In western Africa, it is often employed
as a stimulant and as a means to counter erectile
dysfunction. Yohimbine has been used in
conventional medicine in the treatment of
erectile dysfunction.

@ Cautions Take yohimbe only under
professional supervision. The herb is subject to
legal restrictions in many countries.

Peganum harmala
(Zygophyllaceae)

Harmala,
African Rue

Description Multi-branched shrubby perennial
growing to 20 in (50 cm). Has deeply cleft linear
leaves, white 5-petaled flowers, and rounded
3-celled seed capsules.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Middle
East, North Africa, and southern Europe, harmala
is naturalized in other subtropical regions, including
Australia. It thrives in saline soil in semidesert areas.
The seeds are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Seeds, root.
Constituents Harmala contains up to 4%
indole alkaloids (including harmine, harmaline,
and harmalol). Harmine has been used to help
alleviate the tremors of Parkinsonism.

Harmala, which thrives in dry conditions, has been used
as an intoxicant in the Middle East.

History & Folklore Since the earliest times,
harmala has been used in the Middle East as

a means to induce intoxication. Known to the
Greek physicians Dioscorides (40-90 ce) and
Galen (131-200 ce), as well as to their Arabic
counterpart Avicenna (980-1037 ce), harmala
was also used to expel intestinal worms and to
promote the onset of menstrual flow.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Despite its long
history as a euphoric and purportedly aphrodisiac
herb, harmala is little used in contemporary
Western herbal medicine because of its potential
toxicity. The seeds have been taken, especially

in the Middle East, to treat a very wide range

of conditions, including high blood pressure, eye
problems, psychiatric disorders, depression,
Parkinson's disease, and cancer. In central Asia, the
root is a popular medicinal remedy that is used to
treat rheumatism and nervous conditions.
Caution This plant is toxic and should not be
used under any circumstances.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

245

----- PAGE 248 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

246

Pergularia extensa
(Asclepiadaceae)

Pergularia

Description Perennial climber with broad oval
leaves and small greenish-white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Pergularia is native
to India. Its aerial parts are gathered throughout
the year.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Pergularia contains a resin, bitter
principles, and plant sterols.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pergularia is
thought to have bitter, expectorant, diuretic, and
laxative properties, and is employed in several
ways in Indian herbal medicine. It is prescribed as
a treatment for bronchitis and asthma. Pergularia
is also used as a means to curtail heavy menstrual
or non-menstrual uterine bleeding. Juice from the
leaves may be applied to relieve the pain and
swelling of cysts and rheumatic joints.

Petroselinum crispum (Apiaceae)

Parsley

Description Annual herb growing to | ft

(30 cm). Has an erect stem, bright green
compound smooth or crinkled leaves, small white
flowers growing in clusters, and small ribbed seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Parsley is native to
Europe and the eastern Mediterranean. Today

it is rarely found in the wild, but is cultivated
throughout the world as a nutritious salad herb.
The leaves may be picked from spring to autumn,
and the seeds are gathered when just ripe.
Parts Used Leaves, root, seeds.
Constituents Parsley contains a volatile oil
(including about 20% myristicin, about 18% apiole,
and many other terpenes), flavonoids, phthalides,
coumarins (including bergapten), vitamins A, C,
and E, and high levels of iron. The flavonoids are
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant. Myristicin and
apiole have diuretic properties. The volatile oil
relieves cramping pain and flatulence, and is a
strong uterine stimulant.

History & Folklore Parsley was known in
ancient Greece and Rome—but more as a diuretic,
digestive tonic, and menstrual stimulant than as a
salad herb. In Rome, parsley was associated with
the goddess Persephone, queen of the
underworld, and was used in funeral ceremonies.
Parsley was introduced to Britain in 1548.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The fresh

leaves are highly nutritious and can be considered
a natural vitamin and mineral supplement in their
own right. The seeds have a much stronger diuretic
action than the leaves, and may be substituted for
celery seeds (Apium graveolens, p. 64) in the

treatment of gout, rheumatism, and arthritis. Both
plants act by encouraging the flushing out of waste
products from the inflamed joints, and the waste's
subsequent elimination via the kidneys. Parsley root
is taken as a treatment for flatulence, cystitis, and
rheumatic conditions. Parsley is also valued as a
promoter of menstruation, being helpful both

in stimulating a delayed period and in relieving
menstrual pain.

Cautions Parsley is a safe herb at normal dosage
and consumption levels, but excessive quantities of
the seeds are toxic. Do not take the seeds during
pregnancy or if suffering from kidney disease.

Peumus boldus (Apiaceae)

Boldo

Description Strongly aromatic multibranched
evergreen shrub or tree growing to 20 ft (6 m).
Has egg-shaped leathery leaves with a lemony
scent, clusters of white or yellow bell-shaped
flowers, and small yellow berries.

Habitat & Cultivation

Boldo is native to Chile
and Peru, and has
become naturalized in the
Mediterranean region and
the West Coast of North
America. It grows on dry
sunny slopes and in mountain pastures in the
Andes, where it is widely cultivated. The leaves

are gathered throughout the year.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Boldo contains 0.7% isoquinoline
alkaloids (including boldine), as well as a volatile oil
and flavonoids.

History & Folklore Boldo is a valued remedy
in Latin American herbal medicine and is used by
the Araucanian people in Chile as a tonic.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Boldo stimulates
liver activity and bile flow and is chiefly valued as a
remedy for gallstones and liver or gallbladder pain.
It is normally taken for a few weeks at a time, either
as a tincture or infusion. Boldo is also a mild urinary
antiseptic and demulcent and may be taken for
infections such as cystitis.

Cautions Do not take during pregnancy. This herb
is subject to legal restrictions in some countries.

Dried leaves

Pfaffia paniculata (Amaranthaceae)

Suma,
Brazilian Ginseng

Description Climbing perennial with a thick
rootstock, growing up through rainforest trees into
the forest canopy.

Habitat & Cultivation Suma is native to
rainforests of South America, from Venezuela

to southern Brazil.

Parts Used Root.

Constituents Suma contains triterpene
saponins (pfaffosides), sterols (including beta-
ecdysone), and minerals (including significant

levels of germanium).

History & Folklore Suma has been used by
the people of the Amazon rainforest from the
earliest times for conditions as varied as wound
healing, diabetes, and cancer. Also taken for its
aphrodisiac qualities, suma has become a popular
herbal medicine in Brazil, where it is known as
para todo (‘for all’), or Brazilian ginseng.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Suma has many
medicinal applications, most centred around three
areas of activity: as a hormonal and glandular tonic,
as an immune stimulant and detoxifying agent,

and in cancer prevention and treatment. Suma

is perhaps best known as a male sexual tonic, but
it is equally effective for women and has value in
treating menstrual and menopausal problems. Suma
root enhances nonspecific immunity and has a role
to play in treating chronic infection and lowered
immune resistance.

Research Research into suma suggests that it can
be useful in cancer prevention and treatment;
several of the pfaffosides have been shown to
prevent tumor growth in laboratory conditions. The
pfaffosides are chemically similar to the ginsenosides
found in ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. | 18), and, like
ginseng, suma’s acclaimed value as an aphrodisiac
appears to have a scientific basis. Male rats with
depressed sexual function were observed to become
more sexually active on being given a suma extract.
Cautions Avoid taking suma during pregnancy
and while breastfeeding.

Phaseolus vulgaris (Fabaceae)

French Bean,
Haricot Bean

Description Slender-stemmed, annual climber
growing to 13 ft (4 m). Has pointed oval leaflets,
curly tendrils, clusters of white or lilac flowers,
and a beanpod containing kidney-shaped seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation French beans are
thought to have originated from South America.
Today, varieties are cultivated all over the world.
The ripe beans are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Beanpods, beans.

Constituents French beans contain lectins,
saponins, flavonoids, allantoin, amino acids,

and sugars.

History & Folklore French beans have been
used since antiquity to treat diabetes. In A Modern
Herbal (1931), Mrs. Grieve records that ‘because

----- PAGE 249 -----
of the seed’s close resemblance to a male
testicle... [ancient Egyptians] made it an object
of sacred worship and forbade its use as a food.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses In addition to
being an important food in many parts of the
world, French beans, and beans in general, offer
several health benefits. As part of a balanced
nutritious diet, they help to lower high blood
pressure and raised cholesterol levels. They are
hypoglycemic and promote more stable blood-
sugar levels. Like soy (Glycine max, p. 2.17), they
are estrogenic and will help reduce menopausal
symptoms. The pods act as a medium-strength
diuretic, stimulating urine flow and the clearance of
toxins from the body. Powdered beans may be
dusted onto eczema to ease itching and dry skin.

French beans are intensively cultivated all over the world.

Phellodendron amurense
(Rutaceae)

Huang Bai

Description Deciduous tree growing to 39 ft
(12 m). Has compound leaves with 7 lance-shaped
leaflets, clusters of green flowers, and round berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Huang bai is native

to China, Japan, and Korea, and is cultivated in
northeastern China. The bark of 10-year-old
trees is collected in spring.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Huang bai contains isoquinoline
alkaloids (including berberine), sesquiterpene
lactones, and plant sterols. Due to its alkaloid
content, huang bai is antimicrobial and antibiotic.
History & Folklore Listed in the Divine
Husbandman's Classic (Shen’nong Bencaojing),

of the Ist century ce, huang bai was regarded

as an herb to be used with care.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Strongly bitter,
huang bai is used within Chinese herbal medicine
to “drain damp heat.” It is prescribed for conditions

such as acute diarrhea, jaundice, vaginal infection
(including trichomonas), and certain skin conditions.
It is also given for urinary system disorders such as
frequent urination, pain, and infection.

Research Clinical trials in China indicate that

the bark is useful in the treatment of meningitis
and conjunctivitis.

@ Cautions Take huang bai only under
professional supervision. Do not take huang bai
during pregnancy.

Phyllanthus amarus
(Euphorbiaceae)

Phyllanthus

Description Slender annual herb, to 2 ft

(60 cm) in height, with oval leaves and small
yellowish-green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Phyllanthus is native
to the Indian subcontinent and found commonly in
central and southern India. The plant is harvested
when required.

Parts Used Leaves, aerial parts.
Constituents Phyllanthus leaves contain lignans
(including phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin),
flavonoids, and alkaloids.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Phyllanthus is

a traditional Ayurvedic remedy used to treat liver
and cardiovascular problems. It combines well
with picrorrhiza (Picrorrhiza kurroa, p. 248) in
treating hepatitis B and other liver disorders.
Research A growing body of research shows
that phyllanthus has antiviral activity, specifically
against the hepatitis B virus. Research also indicates
that the leaves are diuretic, and lower blood
pressure and blood-sugar levels. Not all the studies
have shown that phyllanthus works effectively in
treating hepatitis B, but overall the evidence

is positive, with some trials showing significant
improvement in measures of infection. In
laboratory experiments, phyllanthus inhibits

RNA replication of the hepatitis B virus.

@ Caution Use on professional advice only.

Physalis alkekengi syn. P. franchetti
(Solanaceae)

Winter Cherry,
Cape Gooseberry

Description Perennial herb growing to

32 in (80 cm). Has oval- to diamond-shaped leaves,
long-stemmed white flowers, and a translucent
papery sheath surrounding an orange-red fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Winter cherry is
native to central and southern Europe and China. It
grows wild along damp roadsides. It is widely

cultivated in warm temperate and

subtropical regions, including North and South
America and South Africa. The fruit is gathered
once it has ripened in summer.

Parts Used Fruit.

Constituents Winter cherry contains
flavonoids, plant sterols, and vitamins A (carotene)
and C. The roots contain tropane-type alkaloids,
physalin A and B. Water extracts of the plant may
have an anti-estrogenic effect.

History & Folklore The Greek physician
Dioscorides (Ist century ce) considered winter
cherry to be medicinally beneficial as a diuretic and
a treatment for jaundice. In Spain, a therapeutic
wine made with the fruit was taken to treat excess
fluid retention and problems of the urinary tract.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Though commonly
eaten as a fruit, winter cherry is also a useful diuretic.
The fruit is traditionally used within European herbal
medicine to treat kidney and bladder stones, fluid
retention, and gout. It has also been taken to
reduce fever.

Caution The foliage and unripe fruit are
harmful if eaten.

Phytolacca americana
syn. P. decandra (Phytolaccaceae)

Pokeweed

Description Herbaceous perennial
growing to 10 ft (3 m). Has alternate
lance-shaped leaves, spikes of greenish-
white flowers, and clusters of fleshy,
purple berries.
Habitat &
Cultivation
Native to North
America, pokeweed is
now naturalized in the
Mediterranean region. It
thrives in damp woodland
and in open areas. The root
is unearthed in late autumn.
Part Used Root.
Constituents Pokeweed
contains triterpenoid saponins,
lectins, lignans, resin,

and mucilage. The
triterpenoid saponins are
strongly anti-inflammatory,
the lignans are antiviral, and
the lectins are mitogenic
(break up chromosomes).
History & Folklore Pokeweed
was widely used by Native
Americans and European settlers

Pokeweed contains proteins
that act against viral infection.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 250 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

248

as a poultice for skin diseases, sores, ulcers, and
tumors. It was also given internally to relieve

pain and to induce vomiting.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pokeweed is
taken internally as a tincture in small amounts

to treat rheumatic and arthritic conditions.

The root has also been used to treat respiratory
tract infections, such as sore throats and tonsillitis,
as well as swollen glands and chronic infections.
The herb is sometimes prescribed for pain and
infection of the ovaries or testes, and as a lymphatic
“decongestant,” stimulating the clearance of waste
products. As a poultice or ointment, it is applied
to sore and infected nipples and breasts, acne,
folliculitis, fungal infections, and scabies.

2 @ Cautions The plant is highly toxic in
overdose. Use only under professional
supervision. Do not take during pregnancy.

Picrasma excelsa syn. Picraenia
excelsa (Simaroubaceae)

Quassia

Description Deciduous tree growing to

100 ft (30 m). Has smooth gray bark, compound
leaves, small yellow flowers, and pea-sized

black fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to tropical
America and the Caribbean, quassia grows in forests
and near water. It is cultivated mainly for medicinal
use. The bark is harvested throughout the year.
Part Used Bark.

Constituents Quassia contains quassinoid
bitter principles (including quassin), alkaloids, a
coumarin (scopoletin), and vitamin B,. Some of
the quassinoids have been shown to have cytotoxic
(cell-killing) and anti-leukemic actions.

History & Folklore Quassia bark was first
introduced into Europe from Surinam, then a
Dutch colony, in 1756. The herb is named after
Quassi, a native healer, who told Europeans of
its therapeutic value.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The strongly
bitter quassia supports and strengthens weak
digestive systems. It increases bile flow and the
secretion of salivary juices and stomach acid,

and improves the digestive process as a whole.
Quassia is commonly used to stimulate the
appetite, especially in the treatment of anorexia.
Its bitterness has led to it being used for malaria
and other fevers, and it is given in the Caribbean
for dysentery. The bark has been used in the
form of an enema to expel threadworms and
other parasites. A decoction of the bark may

be used as an insect repellent and to treat headlice.
Cautions Excessive doses may, in some cases,
cause digestive irritation and vomiting. Do not
take during pregnancy.

Picrorrhiza kurroa
(Scrophulariaceae)

Picrorrhiza

Description Hairy perennial with serrated
elliptical leaves and white or lilac flowers growing
in spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Picrorrhiza is native
to the mountains of India, Nepal, and Tibet. The
rhizome is gathered in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Picrorrhiza contains the bitter
glycoside kutkin (composed of picrosides | to Ill
and kutkoside), iridoids, cucurbitacins, and apocynin.
Apocynin is powerfully anti-inflammatory and
reduces platelet aggregation.

History & Folklore Picrorrhiza has been used
in Ayurvedic medicine as a laxative and bitter tonic
since the earliest times.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In Incia,
picrorrhiza is used as a bitter tonic, equivalent in
many respects to gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99),
and given for a wide range of digestive and liver
troubles, such as indigestion, constipation, jaundice,
and hepatitis. In China, it is chiefly employed to
treat chronic diarrhea and dysentery. Picrorrhiza
also helps treat asthma, acute and chronic
infections, conditions where the immune system

is compromised, and autoimmune diseases,
including psoriasis and vitiligo. The herb's
traditional use for liver disorders is well founded,
and picrorrhiza may play an important role in
treating liver disease.

Research In |992 Indian trials, extracts of
picrorrhiza were shown to boost immunity, and to
have a specific action against Leishmania donovani,
which causes the tropical parasitic disease known
as leishmaniasis. Indian research also indicates that
picrorrhiza is of therapeutic value in the treatment
of autoimmune disease.

@ Caution Take picrorrhiza only under
professional supervision.

Pimenta officinalis
(Myrtaceae)

Allspice

Description Aromatic evergreen tree growing
to 39 ft (12 m). Has leathery oblong leaves, clusters
of small white flowers, and tiny green berries that
turn brown as they become ripe.

Habitat & Cultivation Allspice is native to the
Caribbean and to Central and South America.
The berries are gathered before they are fully

ripe because the volatile oil content reduces as
they mature.

Parts Used Berries, leaves, essential oil.

Constituents Allspice contains volatile oil
(about 4%, mostly eugenol—up to 80%),

lignins, and terpenoids.

History & Folklore Used as a spice in the
Caribbean before the arrival of Europeans, allspice
is now an ingredient in many well-known sauces,
chutneys, and condiments.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A digestive
stimulant, allspice is taken to relieve flatulence and
indigestion. It may also be used to treat diarrhea.
Allspice is often combined with herbs that have a
tonic or laxative effect. The herb has an action that
is similar to that of cloves (Eugenia caryophyllata,
p. 97); both are stimulant, stomach-settling, and
antiseptic. Allspice essential oil is markedly
antiseptic and analgesic.

Research Taking a lead from allspice’s use in
Costa Rica as a menopause remedy, scientists
found that the berries have a strong estrogenic
activity. A 2009 paper suggested that allspice

may well help with menopausal symptoms.

Studies also indicate that allspice lowers high
blood pressure.

Cautions Do not take essential oil internally
without professional guidance. Do not take allspice
as a medicine during pregnancy.

Pimpinella anisum (Apiaceae)

Anise

Description Erect annual growing to 2 ft

(60 cm), with feathery leaves, umbels of yellow
flowers, and ridged, gray-green seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Anise is native to
the eastern Mediterranean, western Asia, and
North Africa. It is widely cultivated for its seeds,
which are used for medicinal purposes and as a
flavoring in cooking.

Parts Used Seeds, essential oil.
Constituents Anise contains a volatile oil
(comprising 70-90% anethole, together with
methylchavicol and other terpenes),
furanocoumarins, flavonoids, fatty acids,
phenylpropanoids, sterols, and proteins. Anethole
has an observed estrogenic effect, and the seeds as
a whole are mildly estrogenic. This effect may
substantiate the herb's use as a stimulant of sexual
drive and of breast-milk production.

History & Folklore After examining the
records of Cyprus hospital monastery, historians
discovered that anise was used to treat plague
and cholera during the Ottoman Period
(1571-1878 ce).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Anise seeds are
known for their ability to reduce gas and bloating,
and to settle digestion. They are commonly given
to infants and children to relieve colic, and to
people of all ages to ease nausea and indigestion.

----- PAGE 251 -----
Anise seeds’ antispasmodic properties make
them helpful in countering period pain, asthma,
whooping cough, and bronchitis. The seeds’
expectorant action justifies their use for these
respiratory ailments. Anise seeds are thought
to increase breast-milk production and may be
beneficial in treating impotence and frigidity. Anise
essential oil is used for similar complaints, and is
also used externally to treat lice and scabies.
Research Anise essential oil has been shown to
have significant antifungal activity, including against
Candida albicans.
Cautions Do not take anise essential oil
internally except under professional supervision.
Do not take anise during
tty pregnancy, except in amounts
4 normally used in cooking,

\ Self-help Uses Acidity &
indigestion, p. 307; Digestive
upsets, gas & colic, p. 318;
Stomach spasm, p. 305; Gas

& bloating, p. 306.

Anise seeds, which
benefit digestion, are
harvested when ripe
in autumn.

Pinguicula vulgaris
(Lentibulariaceae)

Butterwort

Description Insectivorous perennial growing
to 4 in (10 cm). Has fleshy leaves in a basal rosette
and double-lipped, purple-blue flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
and western Europe, butterwort grows in moorland
and on mountains. The leaves are gathered

in midsummer.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Butterwort contains mucilage,
tannins, benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, and valeric
acid. Cinnamic acid has antispasmodic properties.
History & Folklore Butterwort was much
used in Welsh herbal medicine as a purgative.

In Norway, the plant has been used to curdle
reindeer milk, and medicinally, to treat wounds
and ringworm.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Butterwort is
little employed in European herbal medicine
today. Its main use is as a cough remedy, with
properties similar to those of sundew (Drosera
rotundifolia, p. 203), another insect-eating plant.
Butterwort may be used to treat chronic and
convulsive coughs.

Related Species The similar P. grandiflora,
native to the Pyrenees, has been used to treat
spasmodic coughs.

@ Caution Take butterwort only under
professional supervision.

Pinus sylvestris (Pinaceae)

Scots Pine

Description Coniferous tree growing to

100 ft (30 m). Has reddish-brown bark, pairs of
fine, needle-like leaves, yellowish buds in winter,
and oval to conical cones.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to mountainous
regions of Europe and north and west Asia, Scots
pine is now found throughout the northern
hemisphere. The leaves are gathered in summer.
The stems are usually harvested when the tree

is felled.

Parts Used Leaves, branches, stems, seeds,
essential oil.

Constituents The leaves of Scots pine contain
a volatile oil (consisting mainly of alpha-pinene),
resin, and bitter principles.

History & Folklore Pine oil is added to
disinfectants and other preparations. The distilled
resin produces turpentine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Scots pine leaves,
taken internally, have a mildly antiseptic effect within
the chest, and may also be used for arthritic and
rheumatic problems. Essential oil from the leaves

may be taken for asthma, bronchitis, and other
respiratory infections, and for digestive disorders
such as gas. Scots pine branches and stems yield

a thick resin, which is also antiseptic within the
respiratory tract. The seeds yield an essential oil
with diuretic and respiratory-stimulant properties.
Cautions Do not use Scots pine if prone to
allergic skin reactions. Do not take the essential oil
internally except under professional supervision.

Scots pine leaves, seeds, and oil have a mildly antiseptic
effect within the respiratory and urinary tracts.

Piper angustifolia (Piperaceae)

Matico

Description Perennial shrub reaching 23 ft (7 m).
Has deeply veined aromatic lance-shaped leaves,
spikes of tiny yellow flowers, and small black fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Matico is native to
mountainous regions of Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador.
It is found in the wild and widely cultivated in these
and other countries in tropical South America. The
leaves are gathered throughout the year.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Matico contains a volatile oil
(including camphor, borneol, and azulene),
alkaloids, tannins, mucilage, and resins.

History & Folklore Matico was and is

used by Andean and Amazonian people as a
wound-healing remedy and urinary antiseptic.
European settlers learned of it in the | 9th century
and it became an official drug in some South
American pharmacopoeias.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Matico is an
aromatic stimulant, diuretic, and astringent used
extensively for gastric and intestinal problems,
including peptic ulcers, diarrhea and dysentery.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 252 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

It is commonly used in South American herbal
medicine for internal bleeding, particularly within
the digestive tract—for example, rectal bleeding
and hemorrhoids. It is also taken for bleeding in the
urinary tract. Applied externally, a decoction

of matico makes a valuable remedy for minor
wounds, sore and inflamed skin, and insect bites
and stings. The decoction may also be used as
either a mouthwash or a douche.

Piper betle (Piperaceae)

Betel

Description Slender climbing vine growing to

16 ft (5 m). Has heart-shaped leaves, tiny yellow-
green flowers, and small spherical fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Betel is native to
Malaysia and southern India. It is widely cultivated in
much of southern Asia, East Africa and Madagascar,
and the Caribbean. The leaves are gathered
throughout the year and dried for extracts or

to use whole.

Betel leaves, traditionally chewed with areca nut and lime,
give a mild sensation of well-being.

Parts Used Leaves, root, fruit.

Constituents Betel leaves contain up to

1% volatile oil (including cadinene, chavicol,
chavibetol and cineole). As with many volatile oils,
the percentages are variable. Malaysian samples
have been shown to contain up to 69% chavibetol.
History & Folklore Betel leaves, wrapped
around areca nut (Areca catechu) and lime

(Citrus aurantiifolia), are known to have been
chewed in India and Southeast Asia for several
thousand years. Betel leaves are described in the
Mahavasama, the most ancient Sri Lankan text.
Chewing quickly produces a red-stained saliva and
does not, despite what is commonly thought, lead
to blackened teeth. However, long-term use of
betel leaves and areca nut is considered to increase

the incidence of cancer of the mouth and tongue.
Ironically, the habit of chewing betel leaves is now
giving way in many regions to cigarette smoking.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Betel leaves

are chiefly used as a gentle stimulant, since they
apparently induce a mild sensation of well-being.
They also affect the digestive system, stimulating
salivary secretions, relieving flatulence, and
preventing worm infestation. In many Asian
traditions, including Ayurvedic medicine, betel
leaves are thought to have aphrodisiac and nerve
tonic properties. In Chinese herbal medicine,
betel root, leaves, and fruit are sometimes used
as a mild tonic and stomach-settling herb. The
root has been used with black pepper (P. nigrum,
below) or jequirity (Abrus precatorius, p. 158)

to produce sterility in women.

Caution The observed increase in the occurrence
of oral cancers in regular users makes it unwise to
chew betel.

Piper cubeba (Piperaceae)

Cubeb

Description Climbing evergreen perennial
growing to 20 ft (6 m). Has oval to oblong

leaves, small flowers forming spikes, and round
brown fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Indonesia,
cubeb is cultivated in much of tropical Asia, especially
in the shade of coffee bushes (Coffea arabica,

p. 192). The fruit is gathered when immature.
Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Cubeb contains a volatile oil

(up to 20%), a bitter principle (cubebin), an
alkaloid (piperidine), resin, and fixed oil.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Like other
members of the pepper family, cubeb has a
significant antiflatulent and antiseptic action. The
fruit is used medicinally as a means to counter
infections of the urinary tract, and has been taken
in the past as a treatment for gonorrhea. In
addition, the fruit is helpful in relieving digestive
problems such as flatulence and bloating. Cubeb
is occasionally employed as an expectorant in the
treatment of chronic bronchitis.

Cautions Cubeb should not be taken by people
suffering from kidney disease or inflammatory
conditions of the digestive tract.

Piper nigrum (Piperaceae)

Pepper

Description Perennial woody climber growing
to about |6 ft (5 m). Has large oval leaves, spikes

of small white flowers, and clusters of small round
fruits, which ripen from green to red.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
southwestern India, pepper is now cultivated in
tropical areas around the world. The fruit is
harvested from plants that are at least 3 years old.
Green peppercorns are picked unripe and pickled,
black peppercorns are picked unripe and dried,

red peppercorns are picked ripe and dried, and
white peppercorns are picked ripe and soaked

in water for 8 days before drying.

Pepper, here drying after the harvest, is still highly valued
both medicinally and in cooking.

Parts Used Fruit, essential oil.

Constituents Pepper contains a volatile

oil (including beta-bisabolene, camphene, beta-
caryophyllene, and many other terpenes and
sesquiterpenes), up to 9% alkaloids (especially
piperine, which is largely responsible for the

herb’ acrid taste), about | 1% proteins, and

small quantities of minerals.

History & Folklore Cultivated as a spice and
a medicine since ancient times, pepper was a vital
commodity in world trade for thousands of years.
Attila the Hun is reputed to have demanded
3,000 Ib (1,360 kg) of pepper as ransom during
his siege of the city of Rome (408 ce).
Medicinal Actions & Uses The familiar sharp
taste of pepper reflects the stimulant and antiseptic
effect it has on the digestive tract and the circulatory
system. Pepper is commonly taken to warm the
body, or to improve digestive function in cases

of nausea, stomachache, flatulence, bloating,
constipation, or lack of appetite. The essential oil
eases rheumatic pain and toothache. It is antiseptic
and antibacterial, and reduces fever.

Research Piperine, the main active constituent
within black pepper, has significant therapeutic
benefits, with a 2012 research paper listing
"immunomodulatory, antioxidant, antiasthmatic,
anticarcinogenic, antiinflammatory, antiulcer and
antiamebic properties." Piperine appears to aid the
absorption of herbal and chemical medicines, e.g.
curcumin (from turmeric, Curcuma longa, see

p. 90), and in some cases, to slow their clearance
by the liver.

Caution Do not take the essential oil internally
without professional supervision.

Self-help Use Back pain, p. 313.

----- PAGE 253 -----
Piscidia erythrina (Fabaceae)

Jamaica Dogwood

Description Deciduous tree or shrub growing
to 49 ft (15 m). Compound leaves, blue to white
flowers with red stripes, and winged seed pods.
Habitat & Cultivation Jamaica dogwood

is native to the southern U.S., Central America,
northern South America, and the Caribbean. It

is grown mainly for its wood, which is used in
boat-building. The root bark is stripped when
the tree is felled.

Part Used Root bark.

Constituents Jamaica dogwood contains
isoflavones, phytosterols, tannins, and organic acids.
The isoflavones are antispasmodic.

History & Folklore The pounded bark and
twigs have been used by Native Caribs and Afro-
Caribbeans to stupefy fish.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Jamaica dogwood
is a useful and undervalued remedy that acts
both as a sedative and as a painkiller. It is chiefly
employed in the treatment of insomnia and
overexcitability, as it calms mental activity. It is also
prescribed for nerve pain, toothache, and period
pain. As an antispasmodic, it is useful for treating
muscle spasms, especially in the back, and
spasmodic respiratory ailments such as asthma
and whooping cough.

Cautions Do not take Jamaica dogwood
during pregnancy or if you are suffering from
heart problems.

Pistacia lentiscus (Anacardiaceae)

Mastic Tree

Description Multibranched perennial growing
to 10 ft (3 m). Has small elliptical leathery leaves,
clusters of reddish flowers, and round scarlet fruit
that ripens to black.

Habitat & Cultivation Mastic tree is native
to the Mediterranean region. It grows wild in scrub
and on wasteground and is cultivated for its resin,
which is collected from incisions made in the bark
in summer and autumn.

Part Used Resin.

Constituents The resin contains alpha- and
beta-masticoresins, a volatile oil (comprising
mainly alpha-pinene), tannins, masticin, and mastic
acid. Pinenes are strongly antiseptic.

History & Folklore Mastic resin was used

by the ancient Egyptians for embalming the dead.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In the recent

past, mastic resin was little used, but contemporary

research indicates that this should be reconsidered.
Traditionally mastic extracts have been taken for
coughs and bronchitis, and applied to the skin

for boils, sores, and ulcers. Recent studies point to

the gum resin being useful in treating and preventing
atheroma (fatty deposits in the arteries), to have
antifungal and liver-protective activity, and to aid in
conditions such as arthritis and gout.

Related Species The pistachio is produced by
P. vera, also native to the Mediterranean region.

Plantago major (Plantaginaceae)

Common Plantain

Description Perennial plant growing to 10 in

(25 cm). Has a basal rosette of broad, deeply

veined leaves and dense clusters of tiny green

flowers on spikes.

Habitat & Cultivation Common plantain

is native to Europe and temperate regions of Asia.

Rarely cultivated, it is normally picked from the

wild. The leaves are gathered throughout

the summer.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Common plantain contains

iridoids (such as aucubin), flavonoids (including

apigenin), tannins, plant acids, and mucilage.

Aucubin increases uric acid excretion by the

kidneys; apigenin is anti-inflammatory.

History & Folklore In Gaelic, this herb
is known as “‘the healing plant” because it
was used in Ireland to treat wounds and
bruises. It is a plant that has accompanied
European colonization around the

Common plantain is a
perennial herb that grows
wild in temperate regions.

world—some Native Americans called it
Englishman's foot,” because it seemed to spring

up in the footsteps of white settlers.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Common plantain
quickly staunches blood flow and encourages the
repair of damaged tissue. It is possible to use it as
a substitute for comfrey (Symphytum officinale,

p. 138) in treating bruises and broken bones.

An ointment or lotion may be used to treat
hemorrhoids, fistulae (abnormal passages in the
skin), and ulcers. Taken internally, common plantain
is diuretic, expectorant, and antimucus. It is
commonly prescribed for conditions including
gastritis, peptic ulcers, diarrhea, dysentery, irritable
bowel syndrome, respiratory inflammation, loss of
voice, and urinary tract bleeding.

Related Species Ribwort plantain (P. lanceolata)
is used in the same way as common plantain. Che
qian cao (P. asiatica) is used in Chinese medicine as
a diuretic and to counter mucus.

Self-help Uses Allergic rhinitis with mucus,

p. 300; Diarrhea, p. 318.

Plumbago zeylanica
(Plumbaginaceae)

Ceylon Leadwort

Description Evergreen shrub, often a climber,
growing to 16 ft (5 m). Has oval pointed leaves,
spikes of 5-petaled white flowers, and angled

seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Ceylon leadwort

is native to southern India and Malaysia, and is
now naturalized in much of Southeast Asia and

in Africa. The leaves and root are gathered
throughout the year.

Parts Used Leaves, root.

Constituents Ceylon leadwort contains
apthaquinones, including plumbagin, and phytosterols.
History & Folklore In Africa, the juice of
Ceylon leadwort is used as a tattoo dye.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Ceylon

leadwort root is acrid and stimulates sweating,

and is commonly used as a paste for skin infections
such as ringworm and scabies. The paste is also
applied as a counter-irritant to relieve rheumatic
aches and pains. In India, extracts of the leaves and
root are taken for digestive infections such

as dysentery. In Nepal, a decoction of the root

is used to treat baldness.

Related Species The root of European
leadwort (P. europaea) has been used to treat
toothache and, in the form of a poultice or plaster,
back pain and sciatica.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Taken internally, the root may be toxic,
and may induce abortion. Do not use Ceylon
leadwort during pregnancy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

251

----- PAGE 254 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

252

Podophyllum peltatum
(Berberidaceae)

American Mandrake

Description Perennial plant growing to

16 in (40 cm). Has a forked stem, two deeply
lobed umbrella-like leaves, white flowers, and
small yellow fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation American mandrake
is native to northeastern North America. It is
commonly found in damp
woodland and pastureland.
The rhizome is unearthed
in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.
Constituents The rhizome

of American mandrake contains
lignans (especially podophyllotoxin),
flavonoids, resin, and gums.

|
The lignans are responsible for 3
ad rhizome’ purgative action. american
History & Folklore mandrake

American mandrake was much

used as a purgative, emetic, and worm-expelling
herb by Native Americans. In the U.S. in the

19th century, both herbal and conventional
medical practitioners regarded the plant as

the safest and most readily available purge.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Despite

| 9th-century beliefs in its safety, American mandrake
is no longer taken internally on account of its
cytotoxic (cell-killing) action. However, applied
externally as a poultice, lotion, or ointment, the root
can be an effective treatment for all kinds of warts.
Research The lignans in American mandrake—
podophyllotoxin in particular—act against tumors
and have been extensively researched for their
anticancer potential. Semisynthetic derivatives of
podophyllotoxin appear to be the most promising,
having minimal toxicity.

Related Species The Himalayan P. hexandrum
may have similar actions.

Cautions Do not take internally. The plant

is subject to legal restrictions in most countries.

Pogostemon cablin syn. P. patchouli
(Lamiaceae)

Patchoull

Description Hairy, aromatic perennial growing
to 3 ft (I m). Has square stems, oval leaves, and
spikes bearing whorls of white to light-purple flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Malaysia and
the Philippines, patchouli is now cultivated in tropical
and subtropical regions around the world. The
shoots and leaves are picked 2 or 3 times a year.
Parts Used Young leaves and shoots, essential oil.

Constituents Patchouli contains a volatile oil
comprising mainly the sesquiterpenes patchoulol
(35%) and bulnesene.

History & Folklore Patchouli has been used
extensively in Asian medicine, featuring in the
Chinese, Indian, and Arabic traditions. Its most
common use has been as an aphrodisiac. The
essential oil is widely employed in India as a
fragrance and as an insect repellent.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Patchouli is
used in herbal medicine in Asia as an aphrodisiac,
antidepressant, and antiseptic. It is also employed
for headaches and fever. Patchouli essential oil is
used in aromatherapy to treat skin complaints. It
is thought to have a regenerative effect on skin
tone and to help clear conditions such as eczema
and acne. The oil may also be used for varicose
veins and hemorroids.

Caution Do not take essential oil internally.

Patchouli is the source of an essential oil.

Polygala senega (Polygalaceae)
Seneca Snakeroot

Description Perennial growing to about 16 in
(40 cm). Has narrow lance-shaped leaves with
toothed edges, and spikes of whitish-pink flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Seneca snakeroot is
native to North America, and found in dry stony
open ground and woodland. It is cultivated in
western Canada. The root is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Seneca snakeroot contains
phenolic acids, methyl salicylate, triterpenoid
saponins (including sengins), polygalitol, and plant
sterols. The triterpenoid saponins promote the
clearing of phlegm from the bronchial tubes.
History & Folklore This plant's name refers
to the Seneca tribe of North America, who
employed the root as a remedy for snake bite. Seneca
snakeroot was highly valued as a medicine by both
Native Americans and European settlers. In 1768, Dr.
Alexander Garden of Charleston wrote that ‘The

Seneka is the most powerful and efficacious
antiphlogistic [fever- and inflammation-reducing
substance] attenuant among the Galenical medicines.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses In North
American and European herbal medicine,

Seneca snakeroot is used as an expectorant to
treat bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
whooping cough. The root has a stimulant action
on the bronchial mucous membranes, promoting
the coughing up of phlegm from the chest. Seneca
snakeroot is also thought to encourage sweating
and to stimulate the secretion of saliva.

Related Species Yuan zhi (P. tenuifolia), native
to China and Japan, has similar constituents. Yuan
zhi is taken to treat congestion in the chest and to
“calm the spirit and quieten the heart.” See also
milkwort (P. vulgaris, following entry).

Cautions Do not take if pregnant. Causes
diarrhea and vomiting in excessive doses.

Polygala vulgaris (Polygalaceae)
Milkwort

Description Short perennial with pointed
lance-shaped leaves and spikes of small blue,
mauve, or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Milkwort is common
in grassy and moorland areas in much of western
and northern Europe. It is gathered from the wild
when the plant is in flower in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Milkwort contains triterpenoid
saponins, a volatile oil, gaultherin, and mucilage.
History & Folklore Milkwort has been most
often used to treat chest problems such as pleurisy
and dry coughs. In larger doses, the plant acts as an
emetic. In his Irish Herbal (1735), K'Eogh states that
“it has a hot dry nature, and it encourages the
production of milk in nursing mothers.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses While milkwort
is infrequently used in European herbal medicine
today, it—like Seneca snakeroot (P. senega,

see preceding entry)—is a valuable herb for the
treatment of respiratory troubles such as chronic
bronchitis, bronchial asthma, and convulsive coughs,
including whooping cough. Milkwort is also thought
to have sweat-inducing and diuretic properties.

Polygonatum multiflorum
(Liliaceae)

Solomon's Seal

Description Perennial growing to about 20 in
(50 cm). Has arching stems, alternate elliptical
leaves, delicate greenish-white, bell-shaped flowers,
and blue-black fruit.

----- PAGE 255 -----
Solomon’s seal is
mostly used for throat
and chest problems.

Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Europe and to
temperate regions of Asia and
North America, Solomon's seal is

quite rare in the wild. However, it is a
common ornamental garden plant. The
rhizome is unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Solomon’ seal contains steroidal
saponins (similar to diosgenin), flavonoids, and
vitamin A.

History & Folklore Solomon's seal has been
used in Western herbal medicine since classical
times. In China, the herb's first recorded use
stretches back to the Divine Husbandman’s Classic
(Shen’nong Bencagjing) of the Ist century CE.

In North America, the species P. biflorum was
known to various native tribes. The Penobscot
used Solomon's seal as part of a formula for
treating gonorrhea.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Like arnica
(Arnica montana, p. 172), Solomon's seal is believed
to prevent excessive bruising and to stimulate
tissue repair. The rhizome, which is mainly used

in the form of a poultice, has astringent and
demulcent actions that undoubtedly contribute
to its ability to accelerate healing. Solomon's seal
has also been recommended for tuberculosis, as

a remedy for menstrual problems, and as a tonic.
In Chinese herbal medicine, it is considered a yin
tonic, and is thought to be particularly applicable
to respiratory system problems—sore throats,
dry and irritable coughs, bronchial congestion, and
chest pain.

Related Species Angular or scented Solomon's
seal (P. odoratum) is used in much the same way as
P. multiflorum.

@ Caution Do not take internally except under
professional advice. The aerial parts, especially
the berries, are harmful if eaten.

é
im .
Polygonum aviculare
(Polygonaceae)

Knotgrass,
Bian Xu (Chinese)

Description Annual creeper growing to 20 in
(50 cm). Has lance-shaped leaves and clusters of
small pink or white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Knotgrass is found in
temperate regions throughout the world. It thrives
on wasteground and along shorelines. The plant is
gathered throughout the summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Knotgrass contains tannins,
flavonoids, polyphenols, silicic acid (about 1%),
and mucilage.

History & Folklore Knotgrass has been

used as a diuretic in Chinese herbal medicine

for over 2,000 years. In the Western tradition,
the |st-century ce physician Dioscorides

likewise considered knotgrass to be a diuretic,

as well as a remedy for heavy menstrual bleeding
and snake bite.

Medicinal Actions & Uses An herb with
astringent and diuretic properties, knotgrass is
used in European herbal medicine to treat many
conditions—diarrhea and hemorroids, to expel
worms, to staunch bleeding wounds, to reduce
heavy menstrual flow, and to stop nosebleeds.

Knotgrass is also taken for pulmonary complaints,
since its silicic acid content strengthens connective
tissue within the lungs. In Chinese medicine, it is
given to expel tapeworm and hookworm, to treat
diarrhea and dysentery, and as a diuretic,
particularly when urination is painful.

Research Chinese research indicates that the
plant is a useful medicine for bacillary dysentery.
Of 108 people with this disease treated with a
paste of knotgrass (taken internally), 104
recovered within 5 days. Results from Iranian
laboratory studies indicate that knotgrass
stimulates apoptosis (programmed cell death) and
might be of use in treating breast cancer.
Related Species See also bistort (P. bistorta,
following entry), and he shou wu

(P. multiflorum, p. 124).

Polygonum bistorta
(Polygonaceae)

Bistort

Description Perennial growing to |2 in (30 cm).
Has long basal leaves, dense spikes of small pink
flowers, and dark nutlets.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
Asia, and North America, bistort prefers damp
conditions. The leaves are gathered in spring, the
rhizome in autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, rhizome.

Constituents Bistort contains polyphenols
(including ellagic acid), tannins (15-20%),
phlobaphenes, flavonoids, and a trace of the
anthraquinone emodin.

History & Folklore Bistort rhizomes have
long been employed for their astringency. As the
rhizomes also contain large amounts of starch, they
have been steeped in water, roasted, and eaten as
a vegetable in Russia and North
America. In addition, the young,
tender leaves of bistort may

be used in salads or,

alternatively, cooked

in the same way as

spinach (Spinacia oleracea).
Medicinal Actions

& Uses One of the most
strongly astringent of all
herbs, bistort is used to
contract tissues and staunch
blood flow. It makes a valuable
mouthwash and gargle for
treating spongy gums, mouth
ulcers, and sore throats, and is also
useful as a wash for small burns and

wounds, a douche for excessive

Rhizome

Bistort is one of the most
astringent of all medicinal plants.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 256 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

254

vaginal discharge, and an ointment for hemorroids
and anal fissures. Internally, bistort may be taken to
treat peptic ulcers, ulcerative colitis, and conditions
such as dysentery and irritable bowel that give rise
to diarrhea.

Related Species P. hydropiper, which is

native to Europe, may be used to relieve heavy
menstrual bleeding. See also knotgrass (P. aviculare,
preceding entry).

Caution Use bistort internally for no more than
3 weeks at a time.

Self-help Use Diarrhea, p. 307.

Polymnia uvedalia (Asteraceae)

Bearsfoot

Description Perennial herb growing to 6 ft
(2 m) with large 3-lobed leaves and yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Bearsfoot is native
to the eastern U.S. It grows from New York
southward, preferring rich soil. The root is
unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Root.

History & Folklore Bearsfoot root was used
by Native Americans as a stimulant and laxative
remedy. In the 19th century, it became a widely
popular healing herb in North America, having

a specific use as a treatment for mastitis
(inflammation of the breast tissue).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bearsfoot is
perhaps best known for its use as a hair tonic,
having traditionally been a popular ingredient in
hair lotions. It is still used in this way, but today the
root is more often taken internally as a treatment
for nonmalignant swollen glands and especially for
mastitis. The root is thought to have a beneficial
effect on the stomach, liver, and spleen, and may
be taken to relieve indigestion and counteract
liver malfunction.

Polypodium vulgare (Polypodiaceae)

Polypody

Description Delicate perennial fern growing
to a height of | ft (30 cm). Has slender knotty
rhizomes and curving fronds that are dotted
with brown spores (sori) on their lower surface.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and northern Asia, polypody is commonly found
growing in damp woodland and hedgerows, and
on walls. The rhizome is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Polypody rhizome contains
saponins (based on polypodosapogenin),
ecdysteroids, phloroglucins, volatile oil, fixed

oil, and tannins.

History & Folklore Polypody has been

used medicinally in Europe since ancient times.
Like mistletoe (Viscum album, p. 283), polypody
often grows on host trees, for example oak
(Quercus robur, p. 260). This was thought to impart
great medicinal value to the plant. The Greek
physician Dioscorides, writing in the Ist century CE,
noted that polypody was used to purge phlegm
and was an ingredient of a plaster applied to
dislocated fingers and to sores that occur between
the fingers.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Polypody
stimulates bile secretion and has been used to
treat such conditions as hepatitis, jaundice, and
indigestion. A gentle laxative, polypody makes a
safe treatment for constipation in children. The
rhizome is also expectorant, having a supportive
and mildly stimulating effect on the respiratory
system. It may be taken for the relief of congestion,
bronchitis, pleurisy, and dry irritable coughs.
Caution Polypody may cause a skin rash when
applied externally.

Polypody is often seen growing in damp woodland in
Europe and northern Asia.

Pomaderris elliptica (Rhamnaceae)

Kumarhou

Description Branching tree growing to about
10 ft (3 m). Has shiny leaves and clusters of yellow-
white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Kumarhou is native
to New Zealand.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Kumarhou is a
traditional Maori remedy that has been used to
treat a wide range of illnesses. Its most common
use is as a remedy for problems of the respiratory
tract, such as asthma and bronchitis. However, it
has also been used in the treatment of indigestion
and heartburn, diabetes, and kidney problems.

Kumarhou is considered to be a detoxifier and

“blood cleansing” plant, and is used to treat skin
rashes and sores, including lesions produced by
skin cancer.

Populus x candicans syn.
P. x gileadensis (Salicaceae)

Balm of Gilead

Description Deciduous tree growing to 80 ft
(25 m). Has heart-shaped leaves, buds producing

a sticky resin, and female catkins.

Habitat & Cultivation Naturalized in northern
temperate regions, balm of Gilead is also cultivated
as an ornamental tree. The buds and bark from
young branches are collected in spring.

Parts Used Buds, stem bark.

Constituents Balm of Gilead buds contain
flavonoids, phenolic glycosides (including salicin),
and fatty acids. Salicin's analgesic, anti-inflammatory,
and fever-reducing actions resemble those of aspirin.
Many poplars have a similar chemical profile and
are often used interchangeably as medicines.
History & Folklore Balm of Gilead has been
used for several thousand years to soothe inflamed
or irritated skin. The | 7th-century herbalist
Nicholas Culpeper recorded that “The oyntment
called populeon, which is much of this poplar, is
singular for all heat and inflammation in any part of
the body and tempereth the heat of wounds: It is
much used to dry up the milk in women's breasts.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Balm of Gilead

is a common ingredient of cough mixtures. Its
expectorant, antiseptic, and analgesic properties
make it an excellent remedy for sore throats, dry
irritable coughs, bronchitis, and other respiratory
ailments. In France and Germany, balm of Gilead

is applied as a salve to scrapes, small wounds,
chapped and itchy skin, sunburn, chilblains, and
hemorroids. A preparation of balm of Gilead,
applied externally, may also help relieve the pain

of rheumatic joints and strained muscles. As
Culpeper noted, the plant is also thought to reduce
breast-milk production.
Research Studies
have demonstrated
that balm of Gilead
buds have significant
expectorant, antibacterial,
antifungal, and anti-
inflammatory properties.
Research undertaken into
the bud resin of this and
other poplar species has been
prompted largely by the resin's
chemical similarity to propolis,
a natural antibiotic resin that

is gathered by bees.

Balm of Gilead

----- PAGE 257 -----
Cautions Best avoided while breastfeeding.
Do not take if allergic to aspirin.
Self-help Use Coughs, p. 310.

Populus tremuloides (Salicaceae)

Quaking Aspen

Description Deciduous, spreading tree
growing to 65 ft (20 m). Has oval, slightly sticky
buds and round, finely toothed leaves that quiver
in the wind.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, quaking aspen prefers damp and moist
areas, and grows alongside rivers and in valleys,
hedgerows, and groves. It is also widely cultivated
in temperate regions. The bark is collected in

early spring.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents The bark contains phenolic
glycosides (including salicin and populin) and
tannins. Salicin and populin are salicylates, substances
that have fever-reducing, pain-relieving, and
anti-inflammatory properties that are
similar to those of aspirin.

Quaking aspen bark contains salicin, a substance
with aspirin-like effects.

History & Folklore The Ojibwa people used
an oily compound made from quaking aspen and
bear fat to treat earache. Other Native Americans
used the bark for a variety of purposes, including
as an eyewash for sore eyes.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Like willow bark
(Salix alba, p. 129), quaking aspen bark has widely
recognized anti-inflammatory and pain-relieving

properties. It is often taken to treat arthritic

and rheumatic aches and pains. It is also used

to lower fever, especially when this condition

is associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Being
stimulant, quaking aspen bark acts as a tonic
remedy in the treatment of anorexia and other
debilitated states. The bark’s significant astringent
and antiseptic qualities make it useful for treating
diarrhea and the symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome. It is also used to treat urinary

tract infections.

Caution Do not take quaking aspen if allergic
to aspirin.

Portulaca oleracea (Portulacaceae)

Purslane

Description Succulent annual plant growing
to 6 in (15 cm). Has small, thick rounded leaves
and small yellow flowers growing in clusters.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and Asia, purslane is now one of the most

widely distributed plants, growing
from Australia and China to the

Americas. Often found growing

near water, it is gathered
throughout the summer. Wild
purslane is the variety chiefly used
as a medicine; the golden variety,
P. oleracea var. sativa, is cultivated
mostly as a kitchen potherb.

Parts Used Aerial parts.
Constituents Purslane contains flavonoids,
alkaloids, fatty acids (significant omega-3 oil
content), terpenoids, polysaccharides, vitamins A,
B,, and C, proteins and minerals (especially calcium).
History & Folklore Purslane’ use as a
medicinal herb in Europe, Iran, and India dates
back at least 2,000 years, and it was probably
eaten as a vegetable well before then. In ancient
Rome, purslane was used to treat headaches,
stomach ache and dysentery, intestinal worms,
and lizard bite.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Purslane has
long been considered valuable in the treatment
of urinary and digestive problems. The diuretic
effect of the juice makes it useful in the alleviation
of bladder ailments, for example difficulty in
passing urine. The plant's mucilaginous properties
also make it a soothing remedy for gastrointestinal
problems such as dysentery and diarrhea. In
Chinese herbal medicine, purslane is employed for
similar problems and, additionally, for appendicitis.
The Chinese also use the plant as an antidote for
wasp stings and snake bite. Used as an external
wash, the juice or a decoction relieves skin ailments
such as boils and carbuncles, and also helps to
reduce fever.

Purslane is a good
source of vitamins and
calcium. It also has
antibiotic properties.

Research Purslane is being intensively researched.
Extracts of the herb show antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, analgesic, and antidiabetic activity,
underlining that fact that purslane is valuable as
food and as medicine. The alkaloids have
neuroprotective activity and inhibit
acetylcholinesterase, making the herb

theoretically of use in Alzheimer's disease.
Caution Do not take purslane as a medicine
during pregnancy.

Potentilla anserina (Rosaceae)

Silverweed

Description Perennial plant growing to

16 in (40 cm). Has toothed compound leaves
that are silvery on the underside, and 5-petaled
yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Silverweed is found
in Europe, Asia, and North America, where it
flourishes in dry grassy places. The aerial parts are
collected in late summer, the root at the same time
or in autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Silverweed contains 2—10%
ellagitannins, flavonoids, choline, and bitters.
History & Folklore William Withering, the

| 8th-century doctor who discovered the
cardiotonic effects of foxglove (Digitalis purpurea,
p. 202), recommended a teaspoon of dried leaves
to be taken at 3-hour intervals to assuage bouts
of malarial fever.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Silverweed's
main medicinal value lies in its astringent and anti-
inflammatory activity. It makes an effective gargle

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

255

----- PAGE 258 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

256

for sore throats, and is a helpful remedy for
diarrhea. Less astringent than its close relative
tormentil (P. erecta, see following entry), it also has
a gentler action within the gastrointestinal tract.
It is used externally as a lotion or ointment for
bleeding hemorroids.

Caution Use internally for more no more than
3 weeks at a time.

Potentilla erecta syn. P. tormentilla
(Rosaceae)

Tormentil

Description Downy creeping perennial growing
to 4 in (10 cm). Has leaves bearing 5 leaflets, and
many 4-petaled yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to temperate
regions of Asia and Europe, tormentil thrives in
grassy sites and on heaths and moorland. The aerial
parts of tormentil are harvested in summer and
the root is gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Tormentil contains |5—20%
tannins, catechins, ellagitannins, and a phlobaphene.
History & Folklore According to the
|7th-century herbalist Nicholas Culpeper, the
herb “is most excellent to stay all kinds of fluxes
of blood or humours in man or woman, whether
it be at nose, mouth, belly, or any wound in the
veins or elsewhere.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Containing even
more tannins than oak bark (Quercus robur, p. 260),
all parts of tormentil are strongly astringent, finding
use wherever this action is required. The plant
makes a beneficial gargle for throat infections, and
an effective mouthwash for treating mouth ulcers
and infected gums. Tormentil may be taken for
conditions that give rise to diarrhea, such as
irritable bowel syndrome, colitis, ulcerative colitis,
and dysentery, and for rectal bleeding. Applied
externally as a lotion or ointment, tormentil helps
relieve hemorroids (especially those that are
bleeding). In the form of a lotion, tormentil is used
to help staunch wounds and protect areas of
damaged or burned skin.

Caution Use internally for more no more than
3 weeks at a time.

Primula veris (Primulaceae)

Cowslip,

Primula

Description Hairy perennial growing to 4 in
(10 cm). Has a basal rosette of slightly rough
oblong leaves. Stems bear clusters of bright yellow,
bell-shaped flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Cowslip grows in
Europe and western Asia, preferring fields and
pastures with chalky soils. The flowers and leaves
are gathered in spring and summer, the root in
autumn. This increasingly rare plant should not

be picked from the wild.

Parts Used Flowers, leaves, root.
Constituents Cowslip contains triterpenoid
saponins, flavonoids, phenols, tannins, and a trace
of volatile oil. The flavonoids, mainly in the flowers,

are antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic.

The triterpenoid saponins, which are concentrated
in the root (5—10%), are strongly expectorant.

Cowslip has
calming properties.

History & Folklore This plant is so closely
associated with springtime that it is known as
primavera (spring) in Spanish and Italian. Cowslip
has long been reputed to preserve beauty. The

| 6th-century herbalist William Turner wrote:
“Some weomen ... sprinkle ye floures of cowslip
with whyte wine and after ... wash their faces with
that water to... make them fayre in the eyes of the
worlde rather than in the eyes of God, whom they
are not afryd to offend.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Cowslip is an
underused but valuable plant. The root is strongly
expectorant, stimulating a more liquid mucus

and so easing the clearance of phlegm. It is given
for chronic coughs, especially those associated
with chronic bronchitis and mucus congestion.
The root is also thought to be mildly diuretic

and antirheumatic and to slow blood clotting.
The leaves have similar properties to the root,
but are weaker in action. The flowers are
believed to be sedative and are recommended
for overactivity and sleeplessness, particularly in
children. Cowslip flowers’ antispasmodic and anti-
inflammatory properties make them potentially
useful in the treatment of asthma and other
allergic conditions.

Cautions Do not take cowslip during pregnancy,
if allergic to aspirin, or if taking anticoagulant
medication. Excessive doses can cause vomiting
and diarrhea.

Prunella vulgaris (Lamiaceae)

Self-Heal

Description Creeping perennial, growing to
20 in (50 cm) tall, with pointed oval leaves and
violet-blue or pink flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and Asia, self-heal can be found in temperate
regions worldwide. It is a wayside plant, growing
in meadows and by roadsides, and thrives in sunny
areas. Rarely cultivated, self-heal can easily be grown
from seed or by root division. The aerial parts are
picked in summer when in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Self-heal contains
entacyclic triterpenes, tannins, caffeic

and rosmarinic acids, and vitamins B,,

C, and K.
History & Folklore As its name indicates,
self-heal has been used for centuries to staunch
bleeding and heal wounds. The | 7th-century
herbalist John Gerard wrote: “there is not a
better wounde herbe in the world than that of
selfe-heale.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses Self-heal is
an undervalued astringent and wound-healer with
tonic activity. In common with other members
of the mint family, such as rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis, p. 128) and sage (Salvia spp., p. 131), it
has powerful antioxidant and tissue-protective
activity—making it potentially of value in many
chronic illnesses. Its antioxidant and astringent
activity makes it beneficial in conditions such as
sore throat, inflammatory bowel disease, and
diarrhea, and to heal internal bleeding. Externally, a
lotion can be applied to treat leukorrhea (vaginal
discharge). In Chinese medicine, self-heal
is taken with ju hua (Chrysanthemum x morifolium,
p. 78) for fevers, headaches, dizziness, and vertigo,
and is thought to cool “liver fire.”

----- PAGE 259 -----
Prunus armeniaca (Rosaceae)
Apricot

Description Sturdy deciduous tree growing
to 33 ft (10 m). Has finely serrated oval leaves,
clusters of white (or, rarely, pink) 5-petaled
flowers, and lightly freckled pale yellow to

deep purple fruits.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to China and

Japan, apricot is now cultivated in Asia, North
Africa, and California. The fruit is collected when
ripe in late summer.

Apricot seeds yield Iaetrile,
which has been

used as a controversial
treatment for cancer.

Parts Used Fruit, seeds, bark.
Constituents Apricot fruit contains fruit
sugars, vitamins, and iron. The seeds contain up
to 8% amygdalin, the cyanogenic glycoside that
yields laetrile and hydrocyanic (prussic) acid. The
bark contains tannins.
History & Folklore In India and China, the
apricot has been appreciated for well over 2,000
years. Dong Feng, a physician who practiced at the
end of the 2nd century ce, is said to have asked for
his payment in apricot trees.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Apricot fruit

is nutritious, cleansing, and mildly laxative. A
decoction of the astringent bark soothes
inflamed and irritated skin conditions. Though

the seeds contain highly toxic prussic acid, they
are prescribed in small amounts in the Chinese
tradition as a treatment for coughs, asthma, and
wheezing, and for excessive mucus production
and constipation. An extract from the seeds,
laetrile, has been used in Western medicine as a
controversial (and illegal in the U.S.) treatment for
cancer. The seeds also yield a fixed oil, similar to
almond oil (from P. amygdalus), that is often used
in the formulation of cosmetics.

Research Chinese trials show that apricot seed
paste helps combat vaginal infection.

Caution Apricot seeds are highly toxic in

all but the smallest amounts and should not

be consumed.

Prunus avium & P. cerasus
(Rosaceae)

Sweet Cherry,
& Tart Cherry

Description Deciduous shrub or tree growing
to 26 ft (8 m). It has reddish-brown bark, oval to
elliptical leaves, clusters of 2-6 white flowers, and
almost spherical red fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
southwestern Asia, cherry is naturalized in Europe
and cultivated in temperate regions around the
world. The stems and ripe fruit are collected

in summer.

Parts Used Stems, fruit.

Constituents Cherry stems contain phenols,
including salicylic acid, and tannins. Cherry fruit
contains anthocyanins and flavonoids, including
quercetin, carotenoids, sugars, fruit acids, vitamin
C, and melatonin.

History & Folklore The | 6th-century herbalist
John Gerard recorded the French custom of
hanging cherries in houses to ward off fever.
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n European
herbal medicine, cherries and cherry stems have
long been used for their diuretic and astringent
properties. They have been prescribed for cystitis,
nephritis, and urinary retention, and for arthritic
problems, notably gout. Cherries and cherry juice
can be useful in treating gout and arthritic
problems. Their fruit sugar content makes them
mildly laxative.

Sweet cherry fruit and stems have been harvested for
medicinal use since classical times.

Research In a 2012 American-Australian clinical
study involving 633 people with gout, the risk of an
acute gout attack was reduced by 35% for those
taking cherry extract. One laboratory study

concluded that the anti-inflammatory activities of
anthocyanins within cherry fruit are comparable
to those of ibuprofen.

Caution The seeds are toxic and should not
be consumed.

Prunus mume (Rosaceae)

Asian Plum,
Wu Mei (Chinese)

Description Deciduous tree growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has pointed oval to elliptical leaves, white
flowers, and yellow fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
Asian plum grows wild and is planted in the
southern and eastern provinces. The fruit is picked
in late spring.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Asian plum contains fruit acids
and sugars, vitamin C, and plant sterols.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The sour-tasting
astringent Asian plum is used in Chinese medicine
to counter diarrhea and dysentery, to stop bleeding,
and to ease coughs. It may also be effective in
expelling hookworms. Externally, a plaster of the
fruit is applied to the sites of removed corns and
warts to hasten healing.

Research Laboratory research undertaken in
China indicates that the fruit of Asian plum has
antibiotic properties.

Prunus seroting (Rosaceae)

Wild Cherry

Description Deciduous tree growing to 100 ft
(30 m). Has elliptical to oblong leaves, white
flowers, and purple-black fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, wild cherry grows throughout much

of the U.S. It is cultivated in central Europe for its
timber. The bark is collected in late summer and
early autumn.
Part Used Inner bark.

Constituents Wild cherry contains prunasin
(a cyanogenic glycoside that yields hydrocyanic
acid), benzaldehyde, eudesmic acid, coumarins,
and tannins. Prunasin reduces the cough reflex.
History & Folklore Cherokee women
traditionally took wild cherry bark to ease labor
pain. Other Native Americans used it in the
treatment of coughs and colds, hemorroids, and
diarrhea. European settlers learned of the bark's
medicinal properties, and in the 19th century it
became a widely used remedy.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Figuring in
official pharmacopoeias and much used in the
Anglo-American tradition, wild cherry bark is an

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 260 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

effective remedy for chronic dry and irritable
coughs. It combines well with coltsfoot (Tussilago
farfara, p. 278) as a treatment for asthma and
whooping cough. The astringent bark also helps
treat indigestion and the symptoms of irritable
bowel syndrome, especially when these conditions
are of nervous origin.

Caution Wild cherry bark is highly toxic in

excessive doses.

Wild cherry bears long spikes of white flowers,
followed by fleshy, blue-black fruit.

Psoralea corylifolia (Fabaceae)

Bu Gu Zhi

Description Perennial growing to 3 ft (90cm).
Has oval leaves, yellow clover-like flowers, and
black seed pods containing yellow-black seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Bu gu zhi is native to
southern and southeastern Asia and cultivated in
China. The fruit is gathered when ripe in autumn.
Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents The seeds contain a volatile oil,
flavonoids, a flavone, and furanocoumarins.
History & Folklore In the Chinese tradition,
bu gu zhi has long been considered a tonic remedy.
It was first documented in Grandfather Lei’s
Discussion of Herb Preparations, which was written
in about 490 ce.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Valued as a yang
tonic, bu gu zhi is taken in China to treat impotence
and premature ejaculation and to improve vitality.
The seeds are also used to counter debility and
other problems reflecting “kidney yang deficiency,’
such as lower back pain, frequent urination,
incontinence, and bed-wetting. Bu gu zhi is used
externally to treat skin conditions such as psoriasis,

alopecia (loss of hair), and vitiligo (loss of skin
pigmentation). In Vietnam, a tincture of the seeds
is used in the treatment of rheumatism.
Research Studies in China indicate that this

herb is of value in the treatment of skin disorders,
including vitiligo.

Caution Applied externally, this herb may sensitize
the skin, resulting in an allergic reaction to sunlight.

Pterocarpus marsupium (Fabaceae)
Kino
Description Handsome deciduous tree growing
to 52 ft (16 m). Has leaves with 5—7 oval leathery
leaflets, and numerous small yellow
or white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation
Native to Sri Lanka, India, Malaysia
and the Philippines, kino grows in
tropical rainforests. The tree is
cultivated for its timber and for the
sap (‘‘kino”’) that exudes from cuts made
in the trunk. The sap is collected year round.
Part Used Sap.
Constituents Kino contains tannins, flavonoids,
and marsupsin.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Kino is a
strongly astringent herb that tightens the mucous
membranes of the gastrointestinal tract. Kino
relieves chronic diarrhea and the irritation caused
by intestinal infection and colitis. Though its taste is
unpleasant, this herb makes a good mouthwash
and gargle. It is widely used in Asia as a douche for
excessive vaginal discharge.
Research Clinical trials have found that the herb
is therapeutically useful in treating the early stages
of non-insulin-dependent diabetes.

Ptychopetalum olacoides
syn. P. uncinatum (Oleaceae)

Mutra Puama

Description Tree growing to 49 ft (15 m) with
a gray trunk, dark brown leaves, white flowers,
and orange-yellow fruits.

Habitat & Cultivation Muira puama is
native to Brazilian rainforests, especially the

Rio Negro and Amazonas regions.

Part Used Root, bark, wood.

Constituents Muira puama contains esters
and plant sterols.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Muira puama
has long been used in Amazonian medicine as

a tonic and aphrodisiac. Considered useful as an
aid for impotence, it is thought to help with both
physical and psychological aspects of the problem.

It is also used to treat or prevent baldness.
The bark is strongly astringent and is employed
as a gargle for sore throats and taken in the
form of an infusion in order to treat diarrhea
and dysentery.

Related Species Lirisoma ovata, another
Brazilian tree, is also known as muira puama,
but has quite distinct chemical constituents.

Pueraria lobata
syn. P. thunbergiana (Fabaceae)

Kudzu,
Ge Gen (Chinese)

Description Deciduous climber growing to
100 ft (30 m). Has leaves with 3 broadly oval
leaflets, curling tendrils, and spikes of pea-type
purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China,
Japan, and eastern Asia, kudzu is naturalized in
the USS. It is cultivated in the central and eastern
provinces of China. The root is unearthed in
spring or autumn.

Kudzu is used in China to treat alcoholism and is an
ingredient in a remedy for hangovers.

Parts Used Root, flower.

Constituents Kudzu contains triterpenoid
saponins, isoflavones, and phytosterols. The
isoflavones are estrogenic.

History & Folklore From the 6th century Bce
onward, Chinese herbalists have considered kudzu
to be a remedy for muscular pain and

a treatment for measles. Zhang Zhongjing
(150-c. 219 ce) recommended kudzu if the
patient “has a stiff back and muscles, does not
breathe easily, and is susceptible to wind.”
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n China, kudzu
is frequently used as a remedy for measles, often
in combination with sheng ma (Cimicifuga foetida).

----- PAGE 261 -----
Kudzu is also given for muscle aches and pains,
especially when they are linked with fever or are
affecting the neck and upper back. The root may be
taken to treat symptoms of headache, dizziness, or
numbness caused by high blood pressure. Kudzu also
treats diarrhea and dysentery. Kudzu flowers are
traditionally taken to treat alcohol intoxication and
hangovers, and are thought to increase the rate of
clearance of alcohol from the body, aiding recovery
from intoxication. Kudzu root, however, is thought
to act in a more or less opposite way—it slows the
liver's ability to break down (and clear) alcohol from
the system. Kudzu root may therefore increase the
risks associated with alcohol consumption, and
should not be taken as a “hangover cure.”
Research Chinese studies indicate that kudzu
increases cerebral blood flow in patients with
arteriosclerosis, and eases neck pain and stiffness.
US. research indicates that kudzu may suppress
the desire for alcohol.

Related Species The closely related P. mirifica
and P. tuberosa have been investigated for their
contraceptive effect.

Pulmonaria officinalis
(Boraginaceae)

Lungwort

Description Perennial growing to | ft (30 cm).
Has broad oval basal leaves, smaller upper leaves
mottled with white spots, and clusters of
pink-purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Lungwort is native to
Europe and the Caucasus. It flourishes in mountain
pastures and in damp sites. The leaves are gathered
in late spring.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Lungwort contains allantoin,
flavonoids, tannins, mucilage, and saponins.
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids occur in the roots, but in
negligible quantities in the leaves.

Lungwort’s speckled leaves were once considered a sign of
its ability to cure lung problems.

History & Folklore According to the
medieval Doctrine of Signatures, which held
that a plant's appearance pointed to the ailment

it treated, lungwort was effective for chest
ailments because its leaves were said to resemble
lung tissue.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Given its high
mucilage content, lungwort is indeed a useful
remedy for chest conditions, and it is particularly
beneficial in cases of chronic bronchitis. It combines
well with herbs such as coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara,
p. 278) as a treatment for chronic coughs (including
whooping cough), and it can be taken for asthma.
Lungwort can also be used as a treatment for
sore throats and congestion. In the past, lungwort
was given for the coughing up of blood arising
from tubercular infection. Lungwort leaves are
astringent, and have been applied externally to
stop bleeding.

Caution Lungwort is subject to legal restrictions
in some countries.

Pulsatilla chinensis
(Ranunculaceae)

Chinese Anemone,
Bai Tou Weng (Chinese)

Description Perennial herb growing to
10 in (25 cm). Has erect downy stems,
compound leaves, bell-shaped flowers,
and feathery seedheads.

Habitat & Cultivation Chinese anemone
is native to eastern Asia, and is found in Mongolia,
China, and Japan. The root is unearthed either
before the plant comes into flower in spring,

or in autumn. ‘
Part Used Root.

Constituents Chinese anemone contains
lactones (including protoanemonin and anemonin),
pulsatoside, and anemonol.

History & Folklore Chinese anemone root
was first documented in Chinese medicine in the
Divine Husbandman’s Classic (Shen’nong Bencagjing),
a herbal written in the Ist century cE.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Chinese
anemone is thought to clear toxicity and to lower
fever. It is most commonly taken as a decoction

to counter infection within the gastrointestinal
tract. The root is also used to treat malarial fever
and vaginal infections.

Research Chinese studies have shown the root
to be potentially valuable as a treatment for
amoebic dysentery.

Related Species See pasque flower (Anemone
pulsatilla, p. 168).

Caution Take Chinese anemone only under
professional supervision.

Punica granatum (Lythraceae)

Pomegranate

Description Deciduous shrub or tree growing
to 20 ft (6 m). Has branches tipped with spines,
whorls of lance-shaped leaves, scarlet flowers, and
leathery-rinded round fruit containing many pulp-
covered seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
southwestern Asia, pomegranate has become
naturalized in Europe. The tree is widely cultivated
for its fruit, which is gathered in autumn when it is
ripe. The bark is also gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Juice, fruit pulp, rind, bark.
Constituents The fruit and juice contain
pelletierene alkaloids, elligatannins (up to 25%),
and triterpenoids. The alkaloids are highly toxic.

Pomegranate
fruit

Pomegranate’s leathery
fruit and jewel-toned
seeds feature in ancient
Greek mythology.

History & Folklore In | 500 ace, the pharaoh
Tuthmosis reputedly brought back pomegranate to
Egypt from Asia. Prized as a fruit, it was also sought
after as a remedy for worms. The Greek physician
Dioscorides, in the Ist century ce, knew of the
herb’s ability to expel worms, but this attribute was
subsequently forgotten in Europe for nearly |,800
years. In the early 19th century, after an Indian
herbalist used pomegranate to cure an Englishman
of tapeworms, English doctors in India became
interested in pomegranate and its medicinal
properties were investigated.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO ©

259

----- PAGE 262 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

260

Medicinal Actions & Uses Until recently,
the chief medicinal value of pomegranate was
as a deworming agent, with the rind and bark being
considered specific remedies for tapeworm
infestation. Now, pomegranate juice is widely
available and known for its positive effects on the
heart and circulation. Like other medicinal plants
with a high anthocyanidin content, pomegranate
fruit and juice have potent protective activity on
all aspects of the circulation, supporting healthy
circulation and countering local inflammatory
activity, which damages the inner lining of the
blood vessels. The juice is commonly taken to
help with cardiovascular problems, including
high blood pressure, capillary fragility, angina,
and congestive heart failure. It also appears

to help prevent dental plaque.

Research In recent years, there has been
significant interest in the medicinal properties
of pomegranate fruit and juice. As above,
pomegranate has a strongly beneficial activity
on the cardiovascular system, but it also appears
to have an unusually wide range of potential
therapeutic properties, including antibacterial,
antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, and estrogenic
activity. James A. Duke, a former USDA
botanist, has described it as an “‘antimenopausal
fruit.’ Pomegranate shows signs of having
anticancer activity and has been recommended
as a preventative and treatment for prostate
cancer. New potential uses are likely to emerge
over time.

Cautions Do not use the rind or bark unless
under professional supervision. This plant, and
especially its bark extracts, is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Pygeum africanum (Boraginaceae)

Pygeum

Description Evergreen tree growing to

115 ft 5 m). Has oblong leaves, white flowers,
and red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Pygeum is native

to Africa. It is still harvested from the wild, but
severe shortages have led to the establishment

of plantations.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Pygeum contains phytosterols
(beta-sitosterol), triterpenes (ursolic and oleanolic
acids), long-chain alcohols (n-tetracosanol), as well
as tannins.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In conventional
medicine in France, the fat-soluble extract of
Pygeum bark has become the primary treatment
for an enlarged prostate gland. A decoction of the
bark may reduce the severity of chronic prostate
inflammation, and it may also help reverse male

sterility when this is due to insufficient prostate
secretions. In combination with other plants,
pygeum may be valuable in the treatment of
prostate cancer.

Research Trials carried out since the 1960s,
many of them in France, have established that
pygeum extract has positive effects on the
prostate gland. Specifically, the extract increases
glandular secretions and reduces levels of
cholesterol within the organ. In some Western
countries, surgery is the main option for enlarged
prostates, but in France pygeum is prescribed in
81% of cases.

Related Species The fruit kernels of the
Asian P. gardneri are used to poison fish.

@ Caution Only take pygeum under
professional supervision.

Quercus robur (Fagaceae)

English Oak

Description Slow-growing, long-lived
deciduous tree reaching 150 ft (45 m). Has
deeply lobed leaves, long catkins, and green to
brown fruit (acorns).

Habitat & Cultivation English oak

grows throughout the northern hemisphere, in
woods and forests, and along roadsides. The bark
is collected in spring and the fruit is harvested

in autumn.

Parts Used Bark, galls (growths produced by
insects or fungi).

Constituents English oak bark contains
15-20% tannins (including phlobatannin,
ellagitannins, and gallic acid). Oak galls contain
about 50% tannins.

History & Folklore Sacred to the Druids, the
oak tree has been esteemed in European herbal
medicine for its astringent bark, leaves, and acorns.
Medicinal Actions & Uses English oak bark,
prepared as a decoction, is

often used as a gargle
to treat sore throats
and tonsillitis. It may
also be applied as a
wash, lotion, or
ointment to treat

Oak bark

conditions such as
hemorroids, anal fissures, small
burns, or other skin problems. Less commonly,

a decoction of the bark is taken in

small doses to treat diarrhea, dysentery, and

rectal bleeding. Powdered oak bark may be sniffed
to treat nasal polyps, or sprinkled on eczema to
dry the affected area.

Caution Do not take oak bark internally for
more than 4 weeks at a time.

Self-help Use Hemorroids, p. 302.

Quillaja saponaria (Rosaceae)

Soap Bark

Description Evergreen tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has glossy oval leaves, white flowers, and
star-shaped fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Soap bark is native to
Chile and Peru, and is cultivated in California and
India. The bark is gathered throughout the year.
Part Used Inner bark.

Constituents Soap bark contains up to 10%
triterpenoid saponins, calcium oxalate, and tannins.
The saponins are strongly expectorant and can
cause inflammation of the digestive tract.
History & Folklore In Peru and Chile, soap
bark has traditionally been used by Andean peoples
as an alternative to soap. The bark has been used
medicinally as an expectorant remedy.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Soap bark has

a long tradition of use as a treatment for chest
problems. Its strong expectorant effect is beneficial
in the treatment of bronchitis, especially in the
early stages of the illness. Like other medicinal
plants that contain saponins, soap bark stimulates
the production of a more fluid mucus in the
airways, facilitating the clearing of phlegm through
coughing. Soap bark is useful for treating any
condition featuring congested mucus within the
chest, but it should not be used for dry irritable
coughs. Soap bark is also used externally, appearing
in the formulations of dandruff shampoos.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. As soap bark is irritant to the digestive
tract, internal use must be carefully monitored.

Ranunculus ficaria
(Ranunculaceae)

Lesser Celandine,
Pilewort

Description Mat-forming perennial growing to
6 in (15 cm). Has small tubers, fleshy heart-shaped
leaves, and shiny-petaled, brilliant yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Lesser celandine is
native to western Asia, North Africa, and Europe.
Commonly found in woods, roadsides, and bare
open spaces, it is collected when in flower in spring.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Lesser celandine contains
saponins, protoanemonin and anemonin, tannins,
and vitamin C.

History & Folklore Lesser celandine has
been used from the earliest times as a medicine
for the relief of hemorroids and ulcers. In
medieval times it was believed that simply carrying
lesser celandine on one’s person was sufficient to
cure hemorroids.

----- PAGE 263 -----
Lesser celandine is
used fresh in ointments
and suppositories to
treat hemorroids.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Lesser celandine
makes a useful ointment or suppository for treating
hemorroids.

Related Species Various other Ranunculus
species have been used in herbal medicine, even
though all are toxic and irritant to a greater or
lesser degree. In North America, the Meskawi
people used the flowers and stigma of the yellow
water crowfoot (R. delphinifolius) as a snuff to
provoke sneezing, and mixed it with other herbs
to treat respiratory conditions such as mucus

and nasal congestion.

@ Caution Do not take lesser celandine orally.
Self-help Use Hemorroids, p. 302.

Raphanus sativus (Brassicaceae)

Radish

Description Bristly annual growing to about
3 ft (I m). Has a swollen taproot, deeply cut
compound leaves, pale violet to lilac flowers, and
cylindrical seed pods.

Radish has been used since the 7th century
to aid digestion.

Habitat & Cultivation Radish is believed to
be native to southern Asia. Cultivated varieties are
grown around the world both as vegetables and
for medicinal use. The root is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Root.
Constituents Radish contains
glucosilinates, which yield a volatile
oil, raphanin, phenolic compounds,
and vitamin C. Raphanin is antibiotic;
the phenolic compounds are
antioxidant. The leaves are a highly
nutritious and underused food.
History & Folklore Herodotus
(c. 485—c. 425 Bce) wrote that the builders of the
pyramids in ancient Egypt were paid in radishes,
onions, and garlic. In Egypt, the plant was used as a
vegetable and a medicine. In ancient Rome, radish
oil was applied to treat skin diseases. In China,
radish was listed in the Tang Materia Medica
(659 ce) as a digestive stimulant.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Radish stimulates
the appetite and digestion. The common red
radish is eaten as a salad vegetable and an
appetizer. The juice of the black radish is drunk to
counter gassy indigestion and constipation. Black
radish juice has a tonic and laxative action on the
intestines, and indirectly stimulates the flow of bile.
Consuming radish generally results in improved
digestion, but some people are sensitive to its
acridity and robust action. In China, radish is eaten
to relieve abdominal distension. The root is also
prepared “‘dry-fried” to treat chest problems.
Caution Avoid if gallstones are present.

Rauvolfia serpentina (Apocynaceae)

Indian Snakeroot,
Sarpagandha (Hindi)

Description Evergreen shrub growing to

3 ft (Im). Has whorls of elliptical leaves, tiny pink
and white tubular flowers, and glossy red berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Indian snakeroot is
native to much of southern and southeastern
Asia, including India, Malaysia, and Indonesia. It is
widely cultivated for medicinal use, notably in India
and the Philippines. The root of plants at least

|8 months old is unearthed in late winter.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Indian snakeroot contains a
complex mixture of indole alkaloids, including
reserpine, rescinnamine, ajmaline, and yohimbine.
Ajmaline has been used to regulate heartbeat.
History & Folklore Indian snakeroot is listed
in the Charaka Samhita, the earliest Ayurvedic
medical text (c. 400 sce). The plant has been used
since at least that time to treat mental illness and
insomnia. Indian snakeroot's status as a healing plant
was first recorded in Europe in | 785, but it was not

until 1946 that conventional Western medicine
recognized the herb's efficacy. After that date, the
whole plant, and its reserpine extract in particular,
were widely used in conventional medicine to lower
high blood pressure and lessen the symptoms of
mental illness.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Indian snakeroot
is useful in the treatment of high blood pressure
and anxiety. The root has a pronounced sedative and
depressant effect on the sympathetic nervous
system. By reducing the system's activity, the herb
brings about the lowering of blood pressure. It may
also be used to treat anxiety and insomnia, as well
as more serious mental health problems such as
psychosis. Indian snakeroot is a slow-acting remedy
and it takes some time for its effect to become
fully established.

Research As indicated above, Indian snakeroot
and its alkaloids have been extensively researched
since the 1930s. Despite concerns raised in the
medical journal The Lancet in 1974, there is little
evidence to show that the root has serious side-
effects at normal dosage.

Related Species The West African species

R. vomitoria is used as a sedative, aphrodisiac, and
anticonvulsant in traditional African medicine.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Indian snakeroot is subject to legal
restrictions in some countries.

Rhamnus frangula
syn. Frangula alnus (Rhamnaceae)

Alder Buckthorn

Description Deciduous shrub or small tree
growing to 16 ft (5 m). Has smooth brown bark,
oval to elliptical leaves, white flowers in late spring,
and small round berries ripening from yellow to black.
Habitat & Cultivation Alder buckthorn grows
in Europe (except for the Mediterranean region and
the extreme north), and in northeastern parts

of the U.S. It prefers marshy woodland. The bark of
trees at least 3-4 years old is collected in late spring
and early summer, and is dried and stored for at
least | year before use.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Alder buckthorn contains 3-7%
anthraquinones (including frangulin and emodin),
anthrones, anthranols, an alkaloid (armepavine),
tannins and flavonoids. The anthrones and anthranols
induce vomiting, but the severity of their effect
lessens after long-term storage. The anthraquinones
found in alder buckthorn and closely related species
act on the wall of the colon, stimulating a bowel
movement approximately 8-12 hours after ingestion.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Alder buckthorn
is a laxative and a cathartic, and is most commonly
taken as a treatment for chronic constipation.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 264 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Once dried and stored, it is significantly milder than
senna (Cassia senna, p. 75) or common buckthorn
(R. catharticus) and may be safely used over the
long term to treat constipation and to encourage
the return of regular bowel movements. Alder
buckthorn is a particularly beneficial remedy if

the muscles of the colon are weak, and if there is
poor bile flow. The plant should not be used for
constipation caused by excessive tension in the
colon wall.

Alder buckthorn bark is toxic when fresh but is safe to use
once dried and stored for a year.

Related Species Cascara sagrada (R. purshiana),
native to woodlands along the Pacific coast of
North America, is used medicinally in much the
same way as alder buckthorn. Common buckthorn
(R. cartharticus), a European native, is today used
mainly in veterinary medicine.

Cautions Use only dried bark that has been
stored for at least a year, as the fresh bark is violently
purgative. The berries may also be harmful if eaten.

Rhus glabra (Anacardiaceae)

Smooth Sumac

Description Deciduous shrub growing to a
height of about 6/4 ft (2 m). Has straggling branches,
compound leaves in pairs, large clusters of
greenish-red flowers, and downy deep red berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, smooth sumac is found on the

borders of woods, along fences and roadsides, and
in neglected sites. The root bark is collected

in autumn, the berries when ripe in late summer.
Parts Used Root bark, berries.
Constituents Smooth sumac contains tannins.
Its other constituents are unknown.

History & Folklore Indigenous peoples across
North America used smooth sumac and closely
related species to treat hemorroids, rectal
bleeding, dysentery, venereal disease, and bleeding
after childbirth. John Josselyn, a | 7th-century New
England naturalist, observed: “the English use to

boyl [the plant] in beer, and drink it for colds;
and so do the Indians, from whom the English
had the medicine.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
root bark of smooth sumac is often used as a
decoction. It is taken to alleviate diarrhea and
dysentery, applied externally to treat excessive
vaginal discharge and skin eruptions, and used
as a gargle for sore throats. The berries are
diuretic, help reduce fever, and may be of use in
type 2 diabetes. The berries are also astringent
and can be used as a gargle for both mouth and
throat complaints.

Related Species Sweet sumac (R. aromatica)
has a similar range of uses. Poison ivy

(R. toxicodendron) was formerly used in herbal
medicine as a treatment for rheumatism, paralysis,
and certain skin disorders. It is itself highly irritant
to the skin, and causes severe dermatitis.

Ribes nigrum (Grossulariaceae)

Blackcurrant

Description Erect deciduous shrub growing
to 5 ft (1.5 m). Has serrated, palm-shaped lobed
leaves, small greenish-white flowers, and clusters
of black berries.

Blackcurrant fruit is harvested in summer. The juice
is extremely rich in vitamin C.

Habitat & Cultivation Blackcurrant is native
to the temperate regions of Europe, western and
central Asia, and the Himalayas. It is grown mainly
in eastern Europe for its sour-sweet fruit. The
leaves are gathered in early summer, the berries
when ripe in mid to late summer.

Parts Used Leaves, berries.

Constituents Blackcurrant leaves contain
flavonoids, tannins, proanthocyanidins,
prodelphinidins, and a volatile oil. The berries
contain flavonoids, flavonols, proanthocyanidins and
sugars (10-15%). The seeds contain the essential
fatty acids linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids, and up
to 18% gammaz-linolenic acid and 9% stearidonic

acid. (However, most blackcurrant oil available on
the market has been refined and will not contain
these oils.) The proanthocyanidins, especially in

the fruit, are strongly antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory, and like bilberry (Vaccinium myrtilis,
p. 147) exert a protective activity on the capillaries.
The prodelphinidins are anti-inflammatory.
Medicinal Actions & Uses In Europe,
blackcurrant leaves are used for their diuretic
effect. By encouraging the elimination of fluid, the
leaves help to reduce blood volume and thereby to
lower blood pressure. The leaves are also used as a
gargle for sore throats and mouth ulcers. According
to French investigators, blackcurrant leaves increase
the secretion of cortisol by the adrenal glands, and
thus stimulate the activity of the sympathetic nervous
system. This action may prove useful in the
treatment of stress-related conditions. Blackcurrant
berries and their juice are high in vitamin C. They
help improve resistance to infection and make a
valuable remedy for treating colds and flu. According
to the herbal authority R. F Weiss, the juice is ‘as
good as, if not better than, lemon juice (Citrus
limon) for patients with pneumonia, influenza, etc.”
The juice also helps to stem diarrhea and calms
indigestion. Juice that is fresh or vacuum-sealed is
more effective than concentrate.

Ricinus communis
(Euphorbiaceae)

Castor Oil Plant

Description Evergreen shrub growing to
about 33 ft (10 m) in its natural state, but a
much smaller annual when cultivated. Has large,
palm-shaped leaves, green female flowers, and
prickly red seed capsules.

Castor oil plant is widely
cultivated for its seed

oil, which is used
medicinally, in cosmetics,
and as a lubricant.

----- PAGE 265 -----
Habitat & Cultivation Castor oil plant is
probably native to eastern Africa. It is cultivated in
hot climates around the world. The seed capsules
are gathered throughout the year when nearly ripe
and are then put out in the sun to mature.

Parts Used Seed oil, seeds.

Constituents The seeds contain 45-55% fixed
oil, which consists mainly of glycerides of ricinoleic
acid, ricin (a highly toxic protein), ricinine (an
alkaloid), and lectins. The seeds are highly
poisonous—2 are sufficient to kill an adult—but the
toxins do not pass into the expressed oil.

History & Folklore Castor oil has been used
medicinally for about 4,000 years. Until recently, it
was a common remedy given regularly to children
“to help keep the system clear” Owing to its
unpleasant taste, castor oil is remembered
as the bane of many childhoods.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Castor oil
is Well known for its strongly laxative
(and, in higher doses, purgative) action,
prompting a bowel movement about
3-5 hours after ingestion. The
oil is so effective that it is
regularly used to clear the
digestive tract in cases of
poisoning. Castor oil is well
tolerated by the skin, and it is
sometimes used as a vehicle for medicinal
and cosmetic preparations. In India, the oil is
massaged into the breasts after childbirth to
stimulate milk flow. Indian herbalism uses a poultice
of castor oil seeds to relieve swollen and tender
joints. In China, the crushed seeds are used to
treat facial palsy.

@ Cautions Do not ingest the seeds, which are
extremely poisonous. Do not take castor oil during
pregnancy, and do not take more often than once
every few weeks as a treatment for constipation.

Rosa canina (Rosaceae)

Dog Rose

Description Climbing perennial growing to a
height of 10 ft (3 m). Has curved thorns, leaves
with 2-3 pairs of toothed leaflets, pink or white
flowers, and scarlet fruit (called “hips”’).
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
temperate areas of Asia, and North Africa, dog
rose grows in hedgerows and thickets and in open
areas. The fruit is picked in autumn.

Part Used Hips.

Constituents Dog rose hips contain vitamins C
(up to 1.25%), A, B,, B,, B;, and K, flavonoids,
tannins (2-3%), invert sugar, pectin, plant acids,
polyphenols, carotenoids, volatile oil, and vanillin.
History & Folklore The hips of the dog rose
were a popular sweetmeat in the Middle Ages.

The plants were not esteemed to the same degree
as were cultivated roses (R. gallica, following entry),
but dog rose was valued as the source of a widely
used folk remedy for chest problems.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Dog rose hips
have extremely high levels of vitamins. When
consumed fresh, they provide vitamins and other
nutrients in a form that is readily absorbed by the
body. This makes rose-hip syrup a nourishing drink
for young children. The tannin content of rose hips
makes them a gentle remedy for diarrhea. The hips
are mildly diuretic.

Hips

Dog rose hips are an
excellent source of
readily absorbed vitamins.

Research Clinical studies investigating the use

of rose-hip extracts for osteoarthritis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and lower back pain have produced mixed
results. Some have shown positive benefits, others
none. It is likely that some people will benefit more
than others, and given that rose-hip extracts are
very safe, rose hips and rose-hip extract are well
worth trying for arthritic conditions.

Rosa gallica (Rosaceae)

Rose

Description Deciduous shrub growing to about
5 ft (1.5 m). Has a smooth stem, sharp thorns,
serrated leaves with 2-3 pairs of leaflets, semi-
double deep pink or red flowers, and scarlet hips.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Middle
East, the rose is not now found in the wild except

as a garden escape. It has been cultivated for at least
3,000 years. The flowers are gathered in summer.
Parts Used Flowers, essential oil.
Constituents Rose contains a volatile oil
consisting of geraniol, nerol, citronellol, geranic acid
and other terpenes, and many other substances.
History & Folklore The rose comes originally
from Iran and has been cultivated there since
antiquity. Sappho, the 6th-century Bce Greek poet,
described the red rose as the ‘Queen of flowers.’
In Rome, it was much used in festivities and the
petals were consumed as food. Rosewater

was prepared by the Arab physician Avicenna
(980-1037 ce). During the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance, the rose was esteemed as a remedy
for depression.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The rose is
currently little used in herbal medicine, but it is
probably time for a reevaluation of its medicinal
benefits. The essential oil, called “attar of rose,’

is used in aromatherapy as a mildly sedative,
antidepressant, and anti-inflammatory remedy.
Rose petals and their preparations have a similar
action. They also reduce high cholesterol levels.
Rosewater is mildly astringent and makes a valuable
lotion for inflamed and sore eyes.

Caution Do not take the essential oil internally
without professional supervision.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

Rubia tinctorum (Rubiaceae)

Madder

Description Evergreen perennial growing to

3 ft (I m). Has whorls of finely toothed lance-
shaped leaves, greenish-white flowers, and black
berries containing 2 seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Madder is native to
southern Europe, western Asia, and North Africa.
It flourishes in open areas and on roadsides, and
amid rubble. The root is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Root.
Constituents Madder contains anthraquinone
derivatives (including ruberythric acid, alizarin,
and purpurin), an iridoid (asperuloside), resin,
and calcium.
History & Folklore Throughout history,
madder has been used principally as a red dye for
a variety of fabrics. In the ancient world, madder
root was taken medicinally to treat jaundice,
sciatica, and paralysis, and it was also used as a
diuretic. When ingested, madder imparts its
distinctive color to bones, milk, and urine, and it
probably owed much of its reputation as a diuretic
to this property.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Madder fell
largely out of use in the 19th century, and is a
now only rarely employed to treat kidney and
bladder stones.

263

----- PAGE 266 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

a

264

Rubus fruticosus (Rosaceae)

Blackberry

Description Sprawiing prickly
shrub growing to 13 ft (4 m).
Has palm-shaped leaves with
3-5 lobes, white to pale pink
flowers and clusters of black berries.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to
temperate areas of Europe, blackberry is
naturalized in the Americas and in Australia. It

is commonly found along roads, in open areas, and

Fruit

in woodlands. The leaves are gathered in summer,
the berries in summer and autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, berries.

Constituents Blackberry leaves contain tannins,
flavonoids, and gallic acid. The fruit contains
anthocyanins, pectin, fruit acids, and vitamin C.
History & Folklore As early as the Ist century
ce, the physician Dioscorides recommended ripe
blackberries in a gargle for sore throats. In European
folk medicine, blackberry leaves have long been
used for washing and staunching wounds. Arching
blackberry runners that had rooted at both ends
were credited with magical properties. In England,
for example, children with hernias were pushed
under arched runners for a magical cure.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Blackberry

leaves are strongly astringent and may be used

as a mouthwash to strengthen spongy gums and
ease mouth ulcers, as a gargle for sore throats,
and as a decoction to relieve diarrhea and
hemorroids. Like many red or purple fruits,

such as bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus, p. 147),
blackberry fruit and juice has significant antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory activity, helping to maintain
a healthy circulation.

Related Species See raspberry (R. idaeus,
following entry).

Rubus idaeus (Rosaceae)

Raspberry

Description Deciduous shrub growing to

6/4 ft (2 m). Has woody stems with prickles, pale
green leaves with 3-7 leaflets, white flowers, and
red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
Asia, raspberry now grows wild and is cultivated in
many temperate regions. The leaves are collected
in early summer, the fruit when ripe in summer.
Parts Used Leaves, fruit.

Constituents The fruit contains polyphenols,
especially anthocyanins, which have antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory activity, pectin, fruit sugars,
and acids. Raspberry seed oil is rich in vitamin E,
carotenes, and essential fatty acids, and is
increasingly used in cosmetic skin products.

History & Folklore In | 735, the Irish herbalist
K'Eogh described uses for raspberry: “an application
of the flowers bruised with honey is beneficial for
inflammations of the eyes, burning fever and boils
... The fruit is good for the heart and diseases of
the mouth.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Raspberry

leaves are mainly used to encourage easy labor.
While the specific mode of action is unknown,

the leaves are thought to strengthen the longitudinal
muscles of the uterus, increasing the force of
contractions and thereby hastening childbirth.

A decoction of raspberry leaves may be used to
relieve diarrhea. The leaves also find use as an
astringent external remedy—as an eyewash for
conjunctivitis, a mouthwash for mouth problems,

or a lotion for ulcers, wounds, or excessive

vaginal discharge.

Raspberry leaves
and fruit have been
used since classical
times as an
astringent remedy.

Research A laboratory study in 2012 found that
a raspberry fruit extract reduced joint inflammation,
cartilage damage, and bone resorption.

Caution Do not take medicinally during the early
stages of pregnancy.

Self-help Use Preparing for childbirth, p. 317.

Rumex acetosella (Polygonaceae)

Sheeps Sorrel

Description Slender low-growing perennial.
Has arrow-shaped leaves and terminal spikes
bearing small green flowers that turn red as their
seeds ripen.

Habitat & Cultivation Sheep’ sorrel is found
in most temperate regions of the world. It grows in
open areas and in meadows, and is gathered in
early summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Sheep's sorrel contains oxalates
and anthraquinones (including chrysophanol,
emodin, and physcion).

History & Folklore Apart from its role as a
salad vegetable, sheep's sorrel is an ingredient of
an anticancer remedy known as essiac. A Native
American formula, essiac also includes burdock
(Arctium lappa, p. 65) and slippery elm (Ulmus rubra,
p. 145). Western herbalists learned of it early in

the 20th century, after a Canadian nurse
observed the recovery from breast cancer of

a patient who had taken the formula. Essiac has
since had a checkered history. Despite attempts
to initiate proper clinical trials, none has yet
been undertaken.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sheep’ sorrel

is a detoxifying herb, the fresh juice having a
pronounced diuretic effect. Like other members
of the dock family, sheep's sorrel is mildly laxative,
and holds potential as a long-term treatment for
chronic disease, in particular that of the
gastrointestinal tract.
Related Species Sorrel (R. acetosa) is a
European relative that is also taken for its detoxifying
effect. See also yellow dock (R. crispus, following entry)
and Chinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum, p. |26).
Caution Sheep’ sorrel should not be taken by
anyone with a tendency to develop kidney stones.

Rumex crispus (Polygonaceae)

Yellow Dock,
Curled Dock

Description Perennial, growing to 3 ft (| m),
with lance-shaped leaves and many small green
flowers arranged in whorls on the upper part

of the stem.

Habitat & Cultivation A common wayside
plant in many regions of the world, yellow dock
thrives in ditches, on verges and in open areas,
and barely needs cultivation. The roots are dug
up in autumn, chopped, and dried.

Parts Used Root.

Constituents Yellow dock contains
anthraquinones (about 2.5%), tannins (3—-6%),
flavonoids, and oxalates.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though a
valuable herb, yellow dock is not often used on
its own, being combined with other alterative
herbs such as burdock root (Arctium lappa, p. 65)
and dandelion root (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141)
for long-term toxic conditions. Its gentle laxative
action makes it a valuable remedy for constipation,
particularly when combined with changes to the
diet such as increased bulk and fiber. By stimulating
large intestine function, the feces are eliminated
more efficiently, with reduced reabsorption of
waste products, a form of toxicity that tends

to occur in a poorly functioning colon. Yellow
dock is also thought to improve the flow of
bile, which further contributes to its detoxifying
activity. It is also typically taken for skin conditions
such as acne, eczema, and fungal infections, and
for arthritic problems.

Research The anthraquinones are purgative
and laxative (see Cassia senna, p. 75), but this
activity is tempered by the tannins, which counter

----- PAGE 267 -----
the irritant effect of the anthraquinones within
the gut. The presence of oxalates suggests that
yellow dock is best avoided in gout and kidney
stones. The leaf has high levels of oxalates, and
poisoning and death have resulted from eating
the leaves as a salad vegetable.

Caution Avoid during pregnancy and while
breastfeeding.

Ruscus aculeatus (Liliaceae)

Butcher’s Broom

Description Bushy evergreen perennial growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has leaf-like leathery branches with
a terminal spine, greenish-white flowers, and shiny
red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Butcher's broom

is found throughout much of Europe, western
Asia, and North Africa. It is a protected species,
growing wild in woodland and on uncultivated
ground, Cultivated plants are gathered in autumn
when in fruit.

Parts Used Aerial parts, rhizome.
Constituents Butcher's broom contains saponin
glycosides, including ruscogenin and neoruscogenin.
These constituents have a structure similar to that
of diosgenin, found in wild yam (Dioscorea villosa,

p. 91). They are anti-inflammatory and cause the
contraction of blood vessels, especially veins.
History & Folklore Much used in antiquity,
butcher's broom was described by the I st century
ce Greek physician Dioscorides as having the ability
to promote urine flow and menstrual bleeding.
The plant's name comes from its use

as a broom in butchers’ shops in Europe up until
the 20th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though little

used in Anglo-American herbal medicine, butcher's
broom is now a common remedy in Germany

for venous problems. It has been shown to have

a directly positive effect on varicose veins and
hemorroids, preventing increased tensing of the
veins and helping the return of excess fluid into
the veins. Extracts can be taken orally or applied
to affected legs.

Research A growing body of research is
demonstrating that butcher's broom is a valuable
medicine for venous disorders. In a clinical trial,
patients with varicose veins who applied a
butcher's broom extract to their legs showed a
contraction of |.25 mm in their femoral artery
within 2/4 hours. A paper published in the Journal
of Complementary and Alternative Medicine in 2000
identifies butcher's broom as having great potential
as a medicine for orthostatic hypotension (a
specific form of low blood pressure).

Caution Do not take butcher's broom if suffering
from high blood pressure.

Ruta graveolens (Rutaceae)

Rue

Description Strongly aromatic evergreen
perennial growing to 3 ft (| m). Has fleshy 3-lobed
leaves, yellow-green 5-petaled flowers, and round
seed capsules.

Rue powerfully
induces menstruation.

Habitat & Cultivation Rue grows in the
Mediterranean region, preferring open sunny sites.
It is also cultivated in many parts of the world as
both a garden ornamental and a medicinal plant.
The aerial parts are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Rue contains about 0.5% volatile
oil (including 50-90% 2-undecanone), flavonoids
(including rutin), furanocoumarins (including
bergapten), and about |.4% furoquinoline alkaloids
(including fagarine, arborinine, skimmianine,

and others). Rutin has the effect of supporting and
strengthening the inner lining of blood vessels

and reducing blood pressure.

History & Folklore In ancient Greece and
Egypt, rue was employed to stimulate menstrual
bleeding, to induce abortion, and to strengthen
the eyesight.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Rue is chiefly
used to encourage the onset of menstruation. It
stimulates the muscles of the uterus and promotes
menstrual blood flow. In European herbal medicine,
rue has also been taken to treat conditions as
varied as hysteria, epilepsy, vertigo, colic, intestinal
worms, poisoning, and eye problems. The latter
use is well founded, as an infusion used as an
eyewash brings quick relief to strained and tired
eyes, and reputedly improves the eyesight. Rue
has been used to treat many other conditions,
including multiple sclerosis and Bell's palsy.
Research Rue is currently being investigated for
its potential use as an anticancer treatment.
Related Species The related species,

R. chalepensis, which is also native to the
Mediterranean region, is used to expel worms, to
promote menstrual flow, and to soothe sore eyes.
Cautions Rue is toxic in excess. Never take
during pregnancy. The fresh plant frequently causes
dermatitis, so wear gloves while handling it. Taken
internally, rue may cause an allergic skin reaction
to sunlight.

Salvia sclarea (Lamiaceae)

Clary Sage

Description Square-stemmed biennial growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has hairy wrinkled leaves and whorls
of pale blue flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe and the Middle East, clary sage is now
cultivated in France and Russia for its essential oil. It
prefers sunny conditions and dry soil. It is gathered
in summer, usually in its second year.

Parts Used Aerial parts, seeds, and the
essential oil.

Constituents Clary sage contains 0.1% volatile
oil (consisting mainly of linalyl acetate and linalool),
diterpenes, and tannins.

History & Folklore Clary sage has been
perceived both as a weaker version of its close
relative, sage (S. officinalis, p. 131), and as a significant
herb in its own right. Since the seeds were once
commonly used to treat eye problems, clary sage
was also known as ‘‘clear eye.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses An antispasmodic
and aromatic plant, clary sage is used today mainly
to treat digestive problems such as gas and
indigestion. It is also regarded as a tonic, calming
herb that helps relieve period pain and premenstrual
problems. Owing to its estrogen-stimulating action,
it is most effective when levels of this hormone are
low. The plant can therefore be a valuable remedy
for complaints that are associated with menopause,
particularly hot flashes.

Cautions Do not take clary sage essential oil
internally. Do not use clary sage during pregnancy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO ©

265

----- PAGE 268 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

266

Sanguinaria canadensis
(Papaveraceae)

Bloodroot

Description Perennial plant growing to

6 in (15 cm). Has palm-shaped leaves and solitary
flower stems bearing attractive white flowers with
8-12 petals.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to
northeastern North America, bloodroot grows in
shady woods. It is cultivated as a garden plant.

The rhizome is unearthed in summer or autumn.
Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Bloodroot contains isoquinoline
alkaloids, notably sanguinarine (1%), and many
others, including berberine. Sanguinarine is a
strongly expectorant substance that also has
antiseptic and local anaesthetic properties.
History & Folklore Bloodroot was a
traditional remedy of Native Americans, who
used it to treat fevers and rheumatism, to induce
vomiting, and as an element in divination. The
rhizome's bright red juice has been used as a
rouge. From 1820 to 1926, bloodroot was listed
as an expectorant in the Pharmacopoeia of the
United States.

Medicinal Actions & Uses
In contemporary herbal medicine,
bloodroot is chiefly employed
as an expectorant, promoting
coughing and the clearing of
mucus from the respiratory
tract. The plant is prescribed
for chronic bronchitis and—
as it also has an antispasmodic
effect—for asthma and
whooping cough. Bloodroot
may also be used as a gargle
for sore throats, and as

a wash or ointment for fungal and viral skin
conditions such as athlete's foot and warts.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision and do not exceed the dose.
Bloodroot induces vomiting in all but very small
doses, and at excessive doses it is toxic. Do not
take during pregnancy, while breastfeeding, or if
suffering from glaucoma.

Blood root

Sanguisorba officinalis
syn. Poterium officinalis (Rosaceae)

Greater Burnet

Description Perennial herb growing to 2 ft
(60 cm). Has long-stalked compound leaves with
13 leaflets, and purple flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
North Africa, and temperate regions of Asia,

greater burnet flourishes in damp pastures,
especially in mountainous regions. It is cultivated
as a fodder crop and as a salad vegetable, and is
gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts, root.
Constituents Greater burnet contains tannins,
including sanguisorbic acid, dilactone (a phenolic
acid), and gum.

History & Folklore In Europe, greater burnet
has long been used as a fodder for animals and
as an ingredient in beer-making. As its Latin name
implies, it has also been employed as a wound
healer: sanguis means ‘‘blood’’; sorbeo means

“IT staunch.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Greater burnet
is still used to slow or arrest blood flow. In both
the Chinese and European traditions, it is taken
internally to treat heavy periods and uterine
hemorrhage. Externally, a lotion or ointment
may be used for hemorrhoids, burns, wounds,
and eczema. Greater burnet is also a valuable
astringent and is employed for a variety of
gastrointestinal problems, including diarrhea,
dysentery, and ulcerative colitis, particularly if
accompanied by bleeding.

Research Chinese research indicates that

the whole herb heals burns more effectively
than the extracted tannins. Patients suffering
from eczema showed marked improvement
when treated with an ointment made from
greater burnet root and petroleum jelly.

Sanicula europaea (Apiaceae)

Sanicle

Description Perennial growing to |6 in (40 cm).
Has long-stalked, palm-shaped, shiny leaves, with
clusters of pale pink to greenish-white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
most of Europe and western and central Asia,
sanicle is common in woodland areas, particularly
in damp shady sites. It is collected in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Sanicle contains up to 13%
saponins, allantoin, a volatile oil, tannins, chlorogenic
and rosmarinic acid, mucilage, and vitamin C.
Allantoin increases the healing rate of damaged
tissue. Rosmarinic acid is anti-inflammatory.
History & Folklore Sanicle derives from sanus,
meaning “whole” or “sound” in Latin. St. Hildegard
of Bingen (1098-1179), who wrote the earliest
extant description of sanicle's use in healing wounds,
states of the herb that it “is hot, and there is much
purity in it, and its juice is sweet and healthful, that
is wholesome.” During the | 5th and | 6th centuries
sanicle became a popular herbal medicine. The
|7th-century English herbalist Nicholas Culpeper
praised sanicle's ability ‘‘to heal all green wounds

speedily, or any ulcer, imposthumes, or bleedings
inwardly,’ and compared its benefits to those of
comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138) and self-heal
(Prunella vulgaris, p. 256).

Medicinal Actions & Uses With its
longstanding reputation for healing wounds and
treating internal bleeding, sanicle is a potentially
valuable plant, but it is little used in contemporary
herbal medicine. Sanicle may be used to treat
bleeding within the stomach or intestines, the
coughing up of blood, and nosebleeds. It may also
be of use in treating diarrhea and dysentery,
bronchial and congestive problems, and sore
throats. This herb is traditionally thought to be
detoxifying and has also been taken internally for
skin problems. Externally, sanicle may be applied in
the form of a poultice or ointment for the
treatment of wounds, burns, chilblains,
hemorrhoids, and inflamed skin.

Santalum album (Santalaceae)
Sandalwood,
Chandan

Description Semiparasitic evergreen tree
growing to 33 ft (10 m). Has lance-shaped leaves,
clusters of pale yellow to purple flowers, and small,
nearly black fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
India, sandalwood is cultivated in Southeast Asia for
its wood and essential oil. The trees are felled
throughout the year.

Parts Used Wood, essential oil.
Constituents Sandalwood

contains 3-6% volatile
oil (which consists
predominantly of
the sesquiterpenols
alpha- and beta-
santalol), resin, f,
and tannins.

History & Folklore
Sandalwood's aroma has
been highly esteemed in
China and India for thousands of years. The

wood is often burned as incense and plays a part

in Hindu ritual. The heartwood is most often

used in perfumery, but it has also been taken

as a remedy in China since around 500 ce.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sandalwood

and its essential oil are used for their antiseptic
properties in treating genitourinary conditions such
as cystitis and gonorrhea. In Ayurvedic medicine, a
paste of the wood is used to soothe rashes and
itchy skin. In China, sandalwood is held to be useful
for chest and abdominal pain.

Caution Do not take sandalwood essential

oil internally.

f
o! A,

Sandalwood

----- PAGE 269 -----
Saponaria officinalis
(Caryophyllaceae)

Soapwort

Description Perennial growing to a height of
3 ft (I m). Soapwort has lance-shaped leaves and
clusters of delicate pink 5-petaled tubular flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to temperate
regions of Europe, Asia, and North America,
soapwort thrives in open woodland areas and

on railroad embankments. It has been widely
cultivated as a garden plant. The herb is gathered
while in flower in summer; the root is unearthed
in autumn.

Parts Used Root, aerial parts.
Constituents All parts of soapwort contain
saponins (around 5%), resin, and a small quantity
of volatile oil.

Soapwort is an expectorant
plant used to relieve
bronchitis and coughs.

History & Folklore Soapwort has mostly
been used as a substitute for soap, especially in
washing clothes. Boerhaave (1668-1! 738), a Dutch
physician, recommended soapwort as a treatment
for jaundice.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Soapwort's

main internal use is as an expectorant. Its strongly
irritant action within the gut is thought to stimulate
the cough reflex and increase the production of a
more fluid mucus within the respiratory passages.
Consequently, the plant is prescribed for bronchitis,
coughs, and some cases of asthma. Soapwort may
be taken for other problems, including rheumatic

and arthritic pain. A decoction of the root, and, to
a lesser extent, an infusion of the aerial parts of
the herb, make soothing washes for eczema and
other itchy skin conditions.

@ Cautions Soapwort is a potentially toxic herb.
Take internally only under professional supervision.

Sargassum fusiforme (Sargassaceae)

Hal Zao,

Hijiki

Description Brown seaweed (alga) with long
thin fronds.

Habitat & Cultivation Hai zao is found
along the coastlines of China and Japan, where it

is often seen floating in large masses. It is gathered
throughout the year.

Part Used Whole plant.

Constituents Hai zao contains polysaccharides,
alginic acid, and significant levels of potassium

and iodine.

History & Folklore Wang Tao, an 8th-century
Chinese physician, recommended hai zao for goiter
(an enlargement of the thyroid gland due to iodine
deficiency). Hai zao is eaten as a vegetable in
Chinese and Japanese cuisine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Hai zao is used

in a similar way to its European counterpart, the
seaweed bladderwrack, or kelp (Fucus vesiculosus,

p. 213). In Chinese medicine, it is given principally

to treat thyroid problems caused by low iodine levels
within the body. The herb also helps to combat other
thyroid conditions that produce enlargement of the
gland, for example Hashimotos thyroiditis. Hai zao is
prescribed to treat cases of scrofula (enlargement of
the lymph glands in the neck due to tubercular
infection) and edema (fluid retention).

Research Chinese research indicates that hai zao
has antifungal and immunomodulating activity.
Related Species In Chinese medicine,

S. fusiforme is used interchangeably with S. pallidum.
@ Caution Do not take hai zao for thyroid
problems without professional supervision.

Satureja montana (Lamiaceae)

Winter Savory

Description Semi-evergreen aromatic herb
growing to 16 in (40 cm). Has lance-shaped leaves
and white-pink flowers appearing in clusters.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe, winter savory thrives in sunny, well-drained
sites. It is commonly cultivated as a garden herb.
The flowering tops are collected in summer.
Parts Used Flowering tops, essential oil.

po

Winter savory helps
to alleviate flatulence,
indigestion, and colic.

Constituents Winter
savory contains about
1.6% volatile oil, composed
mainly of carvacrol, p-cymene,
linalool, and thymol.

History & Folklore
Winter savory was classified
as “heating and drying” by the
classical physicians Dioscorides
and Galen, and was thought to have
therapeutic benefits similar to those
of thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143).
Medicinal Actions & Uses
Winter savory is most often used in
cooking, but it also has marked medicinal benefits.
It settles gas and stimulates digestion, helping to
alleviate flatulence and colic. It is warming and has
been taken for chest infections and bronchitis.
The essential oil is strongly antibacterial and

may be used to treat candidiasis and other

fungal conditions.

Related Species Summer savory (S. hortensis)
is a similar herb that has a milder essential oil.
Calamint (Calamintha ascendens, p. 181) is another
close relative.

Cautions Do not take the essential oil internally
without professional supervision. Do not take
winter savory during pregnancy.

Saussurea lappa
syn. S. costus (Asteraceae)

Kuth

Description Upright perennial herb growing
to 10 ft (3 m). Has heart-shaped leaves and
blue-black flowerheads.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Indian
subcontinent, kuth is most commonly found in
mountainous areas of Kashmir. The root is
gathered in autumn.

Parts Used Root, essential oil.
Constituents Kuth contains a volatile oil
(consisting of terpenes, sesquiterpenes, and
aplotaxene), an alkaloid (saussarine), and a resin.
Saussarine depresses the parasympathetic
nervous system.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

267

----- PAGE 270 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

History & Folklore Kuth root has been used
in Indian medicine for at least 2,500 years. It has
also been exported to China and the Middle East.
The fragrant root is often used in perfumery. In
India, it is valued as an aphrodisiac and for its
reputed ability to prevent gray hair.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Kuth is used in
the Ayurvedic and Unani Tibb traditions in India
for its tonic, stimulant, and antiseptic properties.
The root is commonly taken, in combination with
other herbs, for respiratory system problems such
as bronchitis, asthma, and coughs. It is also used to
treat cholera.

Related species S. amara is used in Mongolian
herbal medicine to treat bacterial infections and
gallbladder disease.

Caution Do not take kuth essential oil internally.

Schizonepeta tenuifolia
(Lamiaceae)

Jing Jie

Description Perennial plant growing to 26 ft

(8 m) with upright square stems, lance-shaped
leaves, and whorls of small flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Far East,
Jing jie is widely cultivated in eastern China. The
aerial parts of the plant are gathered in autumn.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents jing jie contains a volatile oil,

the main constituents of which are menthone

and limonene.

Medicinal Actions & Uses In the Chinese
tradition, jing jie is valued as an aromatic and
warming herb. It is taken to alleviate skin conditions
such as boils and itchiness. Jing jie also induces
sweating and is used to treat fever and chills, and

as a remedy for measles. It is often combined with
bo he (Mentha haplocalyx, p. 234).

Research Chinese studies have confirmed jing jie’s
ability to increase blood flow in the vessels just
beneath the skin.

Scolopendrium vulgare
(Polypodiaceae)

Hartstongue

Description Evergreen fern growing to 2 ft

(60 cm). Has long, tongue-shaped fronds with twin
rows of spores on the underside.

Habitat & Cultivation Hartstongue is found
throughout much of Europe, North Africa, East
Asia, and North America. It prefers shaded sites

in woodlands and on banks and walls. The fronds
are gathered throughout the summer.

Parts Used Fronds.

Hartstongue is found growing in shady woodland sites across
the northern hemisphere.

Constituents Hartstongue contains tannins,
mucilage, and flavonoids (including leucodelphidin).
History & Folklore Hartstongue has been
prescribed as a treatment for diarrhea and
dysentery for at least 2,000 years. In Wales and
the Scottish Highlands, it was traditionally used as
a poultice for wounds, scalds, and burns, and as an
ointment for hemorrhoids. In Japan, the fronds
were smoked by the Ainu people.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Hartstongue was
valued in the past for its ability to heal wounds, but
today it is employed chiefly as a mild astringent. It
is sometimes used in the treatment of diarrhea
and IBS, and it may be of benefit to the liver and
spleen. Hartstongue appears to have expectorant
properties, and it is also mildly diuretic.

Scrophularia nodosa
(Scrophulariaceae)

Figwort

Description Upright perennial herb growing
to 3 ft (| m). Has a square stem, oval leaves, small
round brown flowers in clusters, and green

seed capsules.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
Central Asia, and North America, figwort thrives
in wet or damp places, in open woodland, on
riverbanks, and alongside ditches. The herb is
gathered in the summer while in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Figwort contains iridoids
(including aucubin, harpagoside, and acetyl
harpagide), flavonoids, cardioactive glycosides,
and phenolic acids. Harpagoside and harpagide
are thought to account for its antiarthritic activity.
History & Folklore Figwort'’s genus name,
Scrophularia, alludes to the plant's age-old use as a
treatment for scrofula. In this condition, the lymph

nodes of the neck, infected with tuberculosis, swell
to form hard protruding lumps beneath the skin.
Figwort root resembles these swollen glands and
therefore, according to the Doctrine of Signatures
(which holds that a plant’s appearance indicates
the ailments it treats), the herb was considered

to be an appropriate remedy for treating scrofula.
Indeed, in the | 6th and | 7th centuries, figwort was
esteemed as the best medicinal plant to help
relieve all manner of swellings and tumors.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Figwort is an
herb that supports detoxification of the body

and may be used as a treatment for various types
of skin conditions. Taken internally as an infusion

or applied externally, figwort is of value in treating
chronic skin diseases such as eczema and psoriasis.
Applied externally, it will also help speed the healing
of burns, wounds, hemorrhoids, and ulcers. The
traditional use of figwort as a treatment for swellings
and tumors continues in Europe to this day. The
herb is also mildly diuretic, and it is reputed to be
effective when used to expel worms.

Related Species Water figwort (S. aquatica),
another plant that is native to Europe, has similar
properties, as does the American S. marylandica.

In China, S. ningopoensis is used to treat infections
and to clear toxicity.

Caution Do not take figwort if suffering from

a heart condition.

Selenicereus grandiflorus
(Cactaceae)

Night-blooming
Cereus

Description Climbing multibranched perennial
cactus with upright cylindrical stems and aerial
roots. Produces large flowerbuds opening into
night-blooming white flowers that grow to 8 in
(20 cm) across, and red oval fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Mexico
and Central America, night-blooming cereus is now
rarely found in the wild. It is cultivated both as an
ornamental and a medicinal plant. The flowers and
young stems are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Flowers, young stems.
Constituents Night-blooming cereus contains
alkaloids (including cactine), flavonoids (isorhamnetin),
and a pigment. Cactine'’s cardiotonic effect is
considered similar to that of cardiac glycosides (see
foxglove, Digitalis species, p. 202).

Medicinal Actions & Uses As it is in short
supply, night-blooming cereus is little used at
present, but it is a valuable remedy for the heart.
It stimulates the action of the heart, increasing the
strength of contractions while slowing heart rate. It
is prescribed as a treatment for various conditions,

----- PAGE 271 -----
including angina and low blood pressure, and is
often given as a tonic during recovery from a heart
attack. In the Caribbean, the juice of the whole
plant is used to expel worms, and the stems and
flowers are used in the treatment of rheumatism.
@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Excessive doses may cause stomach
upset and hallucinations.

Night-blooming cereus has spectacular flowers that open
at dusk and close at dawn.

Sempervivum tectorum
(Crassulaceae)

Houseleek

Description Succulent perennial growing to
4 in (10 cm). Has round rosettes of leaves, and
flowering stems bearing clusters of bell-shaped
red flowers.

yo

e:

ot

Houseleek’s succulent leaves contain tannins and mucilage,
both soothing to the skin.

SESAMUM INDICUM

Habitat & Cultivation The herb is native
to central and southern Europe and now grows
wild in northern Europe, North Africa, and
western Asia, preferring sandy dry soil. Houseleek
is widely cultivated as a garden plant. The leaves
are picked in summer.

Parts Used Leaves, leaf juice.

Constituents Houseleek contains polyphenols,

including procyanidins and mucilage.

History & Folklore The Frankish King
Charlemagne (742-814 ce) told his subjects

to plant houseleek on their roofs, as the plant
reputedly warded off lightning and fire.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Houseleek
leaves and their juice are used for their cooling
and astringent effect, being applied externally
to soothe many skin conditions, including burns,
wounds, boils, and corns. As with many other
remedies that are both astringent and soothing,
houseleek simultaneously tightens and softens
the skin. Traditionally, the leaves have been
chewed to relieve toothache, and the juice

has been sniffed to stop nosebleeds. Houseleek
is still used externally, but internal use of this
herb is not advised because in large doses it
will induce vomiting.

Caution Do not take houseleek internally.

Senecio aureus syn. Packera aurea

Life Root,
Squaw Weed

Description Upright perennial growing to

3 ft (I m). Has lance-shaped leaves and clusters
of yellow daisy-type flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America, life root is found in marshes, and
on damp ground and riverbanks. The aerial parts
are gathered in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Life root contains a volatile
oil, pyrrolizidine alkaloids (including senecine,
senecionine, and otosenine), tannins, and resin.
In isolation, the pyrrolizidine alkaloids are highly
toxic to the liver.

History & Folklore The North American
Catawba people used life root to treat
gynecological problems in general, and

to relieve labor pains in particular.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Until

recently, life root was employed in Anglo-
American herbalism much as it was in earlier
times—as a means to induce menstrual periods
and to bring relief to menopausal complaints.
Today, the plant is recommended only for
external use, as a douche for excessive

vaginal discharge.

Related Species Ragwort (5. jacobaea)
has traditionally been used as a poultice or
lotion to relieve rheumatic aches and pains.
Cautions Do not take life root internally.
The plant is subject to legal restrictions in
some countries.

Sesamum indicum (Pedaliaceae)

Sesame,
Hei Zhi Ma

Description Erect annual growing to 6/4 ft

(2 m). Has lance-shaped to oval leaves, white, pink,
or mauve flowers, and oblong seed capsules
bearing many small gray seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Africa,
sesame is cultivated in tropical and subtropical
areas around the world. The root is unearthed in
summer; the seeds are collected after the seed
capsules have turned brown-black.

Sesame seeds are a rich source of unsaturated fatty acids
and calcium.

Parts Used Seeds, seed oil, root.
Constituents The seeds are highly nutritious
and contain about 55% oil (mainly polyunsaturated
fats), about 20% protein, lignans (notably sesamin
and sesamolin), vitamins B; and E, and minerals.

The lignans are thought to lower blood cholesterol A

levels and blood pressure.
History & Folklore Sesame was one of
the plants found in the tomb of Tutankhamun

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

|
fe

a

269

----- PAGE 272 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

q
ae

270

(1370-1352 sce). In ancient Egypt, the nutritionally
valuable seeds were eaten and also pressed to yield
oil, which was burned in lamps and used to make
ointments. Sesame has long been considered to have
magical powers, and the phrase ‘Open sesame!” from
the Arabian Nights, remains a well-known magical
command. The Middle Eastern confection halvah is
made from crushed and sweetened sesame seeds.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Sesame is
principally used as a food and flavoring agent in
China, but it is also taken to redress “states of
deficiency,’ especially those affecting the liver and
kidneys. The seeds are prescribed for problems
such as dizziness, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), and
blurred vision (when due to anemia). Owing to
their lubricating effect within the digestive tract,
the seeds are also considered a remedy for “dry”
constipation. The seeds have a marked ability to
stimulate the production of breast milk. Sesame
seed oil benefits the skin and is used as a base for
cosmetics. It can be used to treat fungal skin
problems such as athlete's foot.

Research Research suggests that sesame

seeds have antibacterial and antifungal activity.
They also lower cholesterol and support levels

of “good cholesterol” (HDL).

Smilax spp. (Liliaceae)

Sarsaparilla

Description Perennial woody climber growing
to 16 ft (5 m). Has broadly ovate leaves, tendrils,
and small greenish flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Sarsaparilla species
are found in tropical rainforests and in temperate
regions in Asia and Australia. The root is gathered
throughout the year.

Part Used Root.
Constituents Sarsaparilla
contains |—3% steroidal
saponins, phytosterols (including
beta- and e-sitosterol), about 50%
starch, resin, sarsapic acid, and minerals.
Despite the herb’s reputation for being
testosterogenic, the steroidal saponins and
sterols are estrogenic and anti-inflammatory.
The saponins also have antibiotic activity.
History & Folklore Brought from
the New World to Spain in 1563,
sarsaparilla was heralded as a cure

for syphilis, reportedly having been
used in the Caribbean with some
success. The claims, however, were
grossly inflated and the herb’s popularity
soon waned. In Mexico, sarsaparilla has traditionally
been used to treat a variety of skin problems.
Before it was replaced by artificial agents, sarsaparilla
root was the original flavoring for root beer.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Sarsaparilla is
anti-inflammatory and cleansing, and the herb
can bring relief to skin problems such as eczema,
Psoriasis, and general itchiness, and help treat
rheumatism, rheumatoid arthritis, and gout. Its
estrogenic action makes it beneficial in
premenstrual problems, and menopausal
conditions such as debility and depression. Native
Amazonian peoples take sarsaparilla to improve
virility and to treat menopausal problems. In
Mexico, the root is still frequently consumed for its
reputed tonic and aphrodisiac properties.
Research Some of the steroidal saponins have
been shown to bind to toxins within the gut,
reducing their absorption into the bloodstream.
This may account for sarsaparilla’s usefulness in
autoimmune conditions such as psoriasis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and ulcerative colitis, which
can be associated with this sort of toxicity. Clinical
research in China suggests that sarsaparilla might
hold potential in the treatment of leptospirosis,
arare disease transmitted to humans by rats, and
the acute stage of syphilis.

Solanum dulcamara (Solanaceae)

Common Nightshade

Description Slender-stemmed, woody climber
growing to 13 ft (4 m). Has deeply lobed oval
leaves, dark purple flowers with yellow anthers,
and scarlet oval berries.

Common nightshade
treats skin problems
and bronchitis.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
North Africa, and northern Asia, this herb has
been naturalized in North America. A common
wayside plant, it flourishes in open areas. The twigs
are collected in spring or autumn, and the root
bark in autumn.

Parts Used Twigs, root bark.

Constituents Common nightshade contains
steroidal alkaloids (including solasodine and
soldulcamaridine), steroidal saponins, and about
10% tannins.

History & Folklore The Swedish botanist
Carolus Linnaeus (1707-1778) considered the
herb to be a valuable remedy for fever and
inflammatory disorders. The herb is also called
bittersweet, perhaps referring to the initial bitter
taste of the berries, followed by a sweet aftertaste.
Medicinal Actions & Uses This plant has
stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, detoxifying, and
antirheumatic properties. It appears to be most
effective taken internally to treat skin problems
such as eczema, itchiness, psoriasis, and warts.
A decoction of the twigs, applied as a wash,
may also help to lessen the severity of these
conditions. The herb may also be taken to relieve
asthma, chronic bronchitis, and rheumatic
conditions, including gout.

@ Caution Common nightshade is toxic in
excess. Take only under professional supervision.

Solanum melongena (Solanaceae)

Eggplant,
Aubergine

Description An erect, herbaceous perennial
growing to 28 in (70 cm). Has slightly woolly leaves,
violet flowers, and large purple fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to India and
Southeast Asia, the eggplant is now cultivated in
many tropical areas and also grown under glass
in cooler climates. The fruit is gathered when ripe
in summer or autumn.
Parts Used Fruit, fruit juice, leaves.
Constituents Eggplant contains proteins,
carbohydrates, and vitamins A, B,, B,,
and C.
History & Folklore Eggplant has been
cultivated as a food in southern and eastern Asia
since ancient times.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Eggplant fruit
helps to lower blood cholesterol levels and is
suitable as part of a diet to help regulate high
blood pressure. The fruit can be applied fresh
as a poultice for hemorrhoids, but it is more
commonly used in the form of an oil or ointment.
The fruit and its juice are effective diuretics. A
soothing, emollient poultice for the treatment of
burns, abscesses, cold sores, and similar conditions

----- PAGE 273 -----
can be made from eggplant leaves. The mashed
fruit can also be applied to sunburn.

Research German research (published in 1975)
indicates that eggplant helps to prevent the
accumulation of fatty deposits within arteries.
Caution Eggplant leaves are toxic and should
only be used externally.

Solanum tuberosum (Solanaceae)

Potato

Description Perennial growing to 3 ft (| m).
Has branching stems with compound leaves,

white or purple flowers, green berries, and swollen
tubers (potatoes).

Potato can be helpful in relieving the painful symptoms of
a gastric ulcer.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Chile,
Bolivia, and Peru, the potato plant with its many
varieties is cultivated around the world. The tuber
is normally unearthed from autumn to early spring.
Part Used Tuber.

Constituents Potato contains starch, large
amounts of vitamins A, B,, B,, C, and K, minerals
(especially potassium), and very small quantities of
atropine alkaloids. One property of these alkaloids
is the reduction of digestive secretions, including
acids produced in the stomach.

History & Folklore Many different potato
species and varieties were cultivated by the
Quechua and Aymara peoples of the central
Andes. In the early | 6th century, the potato

was introduced into Europe by Spanish voyagers
returning from the New World. It was not until
the | 8th century that the potato became a staple
ingredient in the European diet.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Taken in
moderation, potato juice can be helpful in the
treatment of peptic ulcers, bringing relief from

pain and acidity. The juice or the mashed pulp

may be used externally to soothe painful joints,
headache, backache, skin rashes, and hemorrhoids.
Potato skins are used in India to treat swollen gums
and to heal burns.

Related Species The root of the Brazilian

S. insidiosum is used as a diuretic and stomach-
supporting remedy.

Cautions Al parts of the plant except the tuber
are poisonous. Excessive doses of potato juice are
toxic. Do not drink the juice of more than one
large potato per day.

Solidago virgaurea (Asteraceae)

Goldenrod

Description Perennial plant growing to 28 in
(70 cm). Has toothed leaves and branched spikes
of golden-yellow flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe and
Asia and naturalized in North America, goldenrod
prefers open areas and hillsides. It is gathered in
summer while in flower.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Goldenrod is a
valuable remedy for
urethritis, nephritis,
cystitis, and other
ailments of the
urinary tract.

Constituents Goldenrod contains saponins,
diterpenes, phenolic glucosides, acetylenes,
cinnamates, flavonoids, tannins, hydroxybenzoates,
and inulin. The saponins are antifungal.

History & Folklore The herbalist John Gerard
commented wryly in 1597 that “goldenrod has in
times past been had in greater estimation and regard
than in these days: for within my remembrance,

| have known the dry herb which came from
beyond the seas, sold ... for half a crown an
ounce. But since it was found in Hampstead

wood [London] ... no man will give half a

crown for an hundredweight of it: which plainly
setteth forth our inconstancy and sudden
mutability, esteeming no longer of any thing

(how precious soever it may be) than whilst

it is strange and rare.” Four hundred years on,

one can only agree.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Antioxidant,
diuretic, and astringent, goldenrod is a valuable
remedy for urinary tract disorders. It is used both
for serious ailments such as nephritis, and for more
common problems like cystitis. The herb also has
a reputation for helping to flush out kidney and
bladder stones. Goldenrod's saponins act
specifically against the Candida fungus, the cause
of vaginal yeast infection and oral thrush. The herb
can also be taken for conditions such as sore
throats, chronic nasal congestion, and diarrhea.
Due to its mild action, goldenrod is used to treat
gastroenteritis in children. Externally, it may be
used as a mouthwash or douche for thrush.
Related Species Various Solidago species are
used medicinally in North America. Several species,
including Canadian goldenrod (S. canadensis), have
been taken to relieve colds, fevers, and chest pain.
Sweet-scented goldenrod (S. odora) was listed

as a stimulant, carminative, and diaphoretic
(sweat-inducer) in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia

from 1820 to 1882.

Self-help Uses Allergic rhinitis with
congestion, p. 300; Urinary infections, p. 314.

Sorbus aucuparia (Rosaceae)

Eastern Mountain Ash

Description Deciduous tree growing to

12 m (39 ft). Has reddish bark, compound leaves,
clusters of small white flowers, and clusters of round
red-orange fruit (berries). Also known as Rowan.
Habitat & Cultivation Mountain ash grows in
woodlands throughout the Northern Hemisphere.
It is also cultivated as an ornamental tree.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents The fruit contains tannins,
sorbitol, malic and sorbic acids, sugars, and
vitamin C. The seeds contain cyanogenic
glycosides, which, in a reaction upon

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 274 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

272

contact with water, produce
the extremely poisonous
prussic acid.

History & Folklore |n
the Scottish Highlands, this
tree was believed to be a
reliable antidote to

witchcraft. Highlanders
planted it near their houses,
and cowherds believed that by using an ash switch
to drive their cattle they could protect them from
evil influences. The fruit has long been used to
make preserves and alcoholic drinks.

Medicinal Actions & Uses The astringent
mountain ash is most often taken as a jam or an
infusion to treat diarrhea and hemorrhoids. In
addition, infusions may be used as a gargle for sore
throats and as a wash to treat hemorrhoids and

Ash berries

excessive vaginal discharge.
Caution Remove the toxic seeds prior to using
the fruit as a medicine or a food.

Spigelia marilandica (Loganiaceae)

Pinkroot

Description Perennial plant with oval to
lance-shaped leaves, spikes of brilliant red-pink
flowers, and a double seed capsule.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
southern regions of the U.S., pinkroot flourishes

in dry rich soil in clearings and along woodland
borders. The root is unearthed in autumn.

Part Used Root.

Constituents Pinkroot contains alkaloids
(mainly spigeleine), a volatile oil, tannin, and resin.
Spigeleine is emetic and irritant to the stomach.
History & Folklore Pinkroot was used
extensively by Native Americans as a worm-expelling
herb. It was gathered for trade with white settlers
by the Creek and Cherokee peoples. From the late
18th century onward, pinkroot became one of the
chief deworming herbs used in North America
and Europe.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Pinkroot is used
today solely to expel intestinal worms—particularly
tapeworms and roundworms. It is prescribed with
other herbs such as senna (Cassia senna, p. 75) and
fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212) to ensure the
elimination of both the worms and the root itself,
which is potentially toxic if it is absorbed through
the gut.

Related Species Several Spigelia species act as
worm-expelling herbs, for example S. flemmingania,
native to Brazil, and S. anthelmia, native to the
Caribbean, Venezuela, and Colombia. S. anthelmia
also contains isoquinoline alkaloids and is used

in the treatment of heart disease.

@ Caution Only use pinkroot with the
supervision of a professional practitioner.

Stachys officinalis
syn. S. betonica (Lamiaceae)

Betony

Description Mat-forming perennial growing
to a height of 2 ft (60 cm). Has toothed elliptical
leaves and spikes of pink or white flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Betony grows
throughout most of Europe, and occurs in Asia
as far east as the Caucasus, where it is found in
meadows, heathland, and hilly areas. The aerial
parts are collected when the plant is in flower
during early summer.

Betony is an age-old headache remedy. Its name may
derive from the Celtic for “good head.”

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Betony contains alkaloids
(including stachydrine and betonicine), as well as
phenolic compounds, betaine, choline, and tannins.
History & Folklore Betony has been regarded
as a panacea since classical times, even attributed
with the ability to ward off evil spirits. Antonius
Musa, physician to Emperor Augustus (63 Bce—|4
ce), Claimed that betony would cure 47 different
illnesses. The herb has always been particularly
valued as a remedy for headaches.

Medicinal Actions & Uses No longer
regarded as a panacea, betony nevertheless has real
value as a remedy for headaches and facial pain. The
plant is also mildly sedative, relieving nervous stress
and tension. In British herbal medicine, betony is
thought to improve nervous function and to counter
overactivity. It is taken to treat “frayed nerves,’
premenstrual complaints, poor memory, and
tension. The plant has astringent properties, and in
combination with other herbs, such as comfrey
(Symphytum officinale, p. 138) and linden flowers
(Tilia species, p. 277), it is effective against sinus
headaches and congestion. Betony may be taken

alone or with yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56)

to help staunch nosebleeds. Betony is also mildly
bitter. It stimulates the digestive system and the
liver, and has an overall tonic effect on the body.
Caution Do not take betony if you are pregnant.

Stellaria media (Caryophyllaceae)

Chickweed

Description Sprawling perennial growing to
about 6 in (15 cm). Has hairy stems, oval leaves,
and starlike white flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and Asia, chickweed is now found in most regions
of the world. It grows easily in wasteground, and is
generally regarded as a troublesome weed. The
plant is harvested in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Chickweed contains triterpenoid
saponins, coumarins, flavonoids, carboxylic acids,
and vitamin C. The saponins may account for the
herb’ ability to help reduce itchiness.

History & Folklore Dioscorides, a Greek
physician writing in the Ist century ce, described
chickweed's applications as follows: “‘it [chickweed]
may usefully be applied with corn meal for
inflammation of the eyes.
The juice may also

Chickweed can help to soothe
eczema and other skin conditions.

----- PAGE 275 -----
be introduced into the ear in earache.” Apart from
its medicinal uses, chickweed is a tasty and
nutritious vegetable.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Chickweed is
chiefly used to treat irritated skin, being applied

as juice, poultice, ointment, or cream. In certain
cases, chickweed may soothe severe itchiness
where all other remedies have failed. It is often
used to relieve eczema, varicose ulcers, and nettle
rash (hives). An infusion of the fresh or dried
plant may be added to a bath, where the herb's
emollient properties will help to reduce
inflammation—in rheumatic joints, for example—
and encourage tissue repair. Chickweed may also
be taken internally to treat chest ailments. There

is some suggestion that chickweed has an
antiobesity action.
Cautions If taken in excessive doses, chickweed
may cause diarrhea and vomiting. Do not take
during pregnancy.

Self-help Uses Eczema, p. 300; Diaper rash

& inflamed skin rashes, p. 318; Nettle rash, p. 303.

Stillingia sylvatica (Euphorbiaceae)

Queen's Delight

Description Perennial growing to |.2 m (4 ft).
Has leathery leaves, yellow flowers without petals,
and 3-lobed fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Queen’ delight is
native to the southeastern U.S., where it prefers
sandy soils. The root is unearthed in autumn.
Part Used Root.

Constituents Queen's delight contains
diterpenes, fixed oil, volatile oil, resin, and
tannins. The fresh root is considered to
be most active.

History & Folklore Queen's delight
was used by Native Americans as a
purgative, a treatment for skin eruptions,
and a remedy for venereal disease.
Creek women who had just
given birth took a decoction

of the root or were bathed with
an infusion. Queen's delight was
included in the Pharmacopoeia of
the United States from 1831 to 1926.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Queen's
delight appears to promote general detoxification.
It is taken internally to help clear constipation,
boils, weeping eczema, and scrofula (tubercular
infection of the lymph glands of the neck). The
root is also taken to treat bronchitis and throat
infection. Externally, it is applied as a lotion to
hemorrhoids, eczema, and psoriasis.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Queen's delight is emetic and
purgative in large doses.

Strychnos nux-vomica
(Loganiaceae)

Nux Vomica

Description Evergreen tree growing to

49 ft (15 m). Has glossy oval leaves, tubular

white flowers, and yellow fruit containing 5-8
disk-shaped seeds.

Habitat & Cultivation Nux vomica is native
to Southeast Asia. It grows wild and is cultivated
commercially. The seeds are gathered when mature.
Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents Nux vomica contains 3% indole
alkaloids (predominantly strychnine, with many
others), loganin, chlorgenic acid, and fixed oil.
Strychnine is a lethal poison, producing intense
muscle spasms.

History & Folklore Nux vomica seeds

were first brought to Europe in the | 5th century,
probably as a poison for game and rodents. In
1640, the seeds were first used in European
medicine, as a stimulant.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though rarely
used internally due to its toxicity, nux vomica

can be an effective nervous system stimulant,
particularly in the elderly. In Chinese herbal
medicine the seeds are used externally to relieve
pain, to treat various types of tumors, and to
relieve paralysis, including Bell's palsy (facial
paralysis). Nux vomica is a common
homeopathic remedy prescribed
mainly for digestive problems,
sensitivity to cold, irritability,
and melancholia.

Seeds

Nux vomica is used in
homeopathic preparations.

Research In a Chinese clinical trial, a paste

made from nux vomica seeds was applied to
15,000 patients with Bell's palsy. The treatment
was reported to have been effective in more

than 80% of the cases.

Related Species Many Strychnos species are
equally potent and have been used as arrow poisons.
@ Cautions Take nux vomica only in
homeopathic preparations. This herb and strychnine
are subject to legal restrictions in most countries.

Styrax benzoin (Styraceae)

Benzoin Gum

Description Shrubby deciduous tree growing to
30 ft (9 m). Has pointed oval leaves and clusters of
white, fragrant, bell-shaped flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Southeast
Asia, benzoin grows in tropical rainforests. It is

also cultivated for ts gum, which exudes from
incisions made in the bark of trees that are at

least 7 years old.

Part Used Gum.

Constituents Benzoin gum contains variable
quantities of cinnamic, benzoic, and sumaresinolic
acid esters, free acids (such as benzoic acid),
benzaldehyde, and vanillin.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Benzoin gum is
strongly antiseptic and astringent. It may be used
externally on wounds and ulcers to tighten and
disinfect the affected tissue. When taken internally,
benzoin gum acts to settle cramping, to stimulate
coughing, and to disinfect the urinary tract. Benzoin
gum is an ingredient of Friar’s Balsam, an antiseptic
and expectorant steam inhalation for sore throats,
head and chest colds, asthma, and bronchitis.

Swertia chirata (Gentianiaceae)

Chiretta,
Chirayata (Hindi)

Description Annual, growing to about 3 ft
(| m), with a much-branched stem, smooth,
pointed, lance-shaped leaves, and numerous
purple-tinged, pale green flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Chiretta grows at
high altitudes in northern India and Nepal. The
whole herb is harvested while in flower.
Parts Used Whole herb.

Constituents Chiretta contains xanthones,
bitter iridoids (including amarogentin), alkaloids,
and flavones.

History & Folklore Chiretta was a
common treatment for malaria, until Peruvian
bark (Cinchona spp., p. 83) became readily
available in Europe and Asia.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 276 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Medicinal Actions & Uses A strongly bitter
herb, chiretta is powerful medicine for a weak
stomach, especially when linked to nausea,
indigestion, and bloating. It is taken in small,
frequent doses to improve appetite and digestive
function. For hiccups, small, frequent doses are
taken with honey. Like most bitters it reduces fever,
cooling the body and increasing blood flow to the
liver. In Ayurvedic medicine the herb is used for
pitta (fire) conditions, and is best known as the
major herb in mahasudarshana churna—a standard
mixture of more than 50 herbs prescribed for
fevers such as malaria, liver problems, gallstones,
and indigestion. Recently it has been used with
other herbs to treat allergies.

Research The xanthones are thought to be
antituberculous and antimalarial. Amarogentin

has a protective action on the liver.

Caution Avoid in digestive hyperacidity.

Symplocarpus foetidus (Araceae)

Skunk Cabbage

Description Unpleasant-smelling perennial
plant growing to 30 in (75 cm). Has a thick
tuberous rootstock, cabbage-like leaves, and
small purple flowers on a hooded spike.

Skunk cabbage is a foul-smelling plant with a powerful
expectorant action

Habitat & Cultivation Native to northern
North America, skunk cabbage thrives in meadows,
swamps, and marshes. The root and rhizome are
collected in autumn or early spring.

Parts Used Root, rhizome.

Constituents Skunk cabbage contains a volatile
oil, serotonin (SHT), and resins.

History & Folklore The Winnebago and
Dakota peoples used the expectorant and
antispasmodic skunk cabbage root to treat asthma

and bronchitis. The root was also employed as

a poultice to draw splinters and thorns, to heal
wounds, and to relieve headaches. It was much
used in America in the 19th century.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Skunk cabbage
continues to be used primarily as an expectorant,
treating cases of asthma, bronchitis, and whooping
cough, It is also taken for upper respiratory
problems such as nasal congestion and hayfever.
Less commonly, skunk cabbage is used as a
treatment for epilepsy, headaches, vertigo, and
rheumatic problems, and to stop bleeding.
Cautions Handling fresh skunk cabbage may
cause the skin to blister. Excessive doses can bring
on nausea and vomiting, headaches, and dizziness.

Syzygium cumini (Myrtaceae)

Jambul

Description Evergreen tree growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has lance-shaped leaves and green-yellow
flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation A native of southern
Asia and Australia, jambul is now also found in
tropical regions of Africa. The tree is cultivated
commercially for its fruit and is propagated from
seed or semiripe cuttings in summer. It requires
well-drained soil and plenty of sun. The fruit is
harvested when ripe.

Parts Used Fresh and dried fruit, seeds.
Constituents Jambul contains triterpenes,
anthocyanins, flavonoids, and volatile oil.
History & Folklore Jambul is a typical
example of a medicinal plant that is both food
and medicine. The fruit when ripe has the scent
and taste of a ripe apricot and is eaten as a
preserve. While both fruit and seed have a

tonic and astringent effect on the digestion,

the seeds have long traditional use in Ayurveda

as a preventative and treatment for diabetes.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Following
traditional use, jambul continues to be employed
for a wide variety of health problems. The
powdered seed is commonly taken to treat
diabetes and the frequent urination that
accompanies it, as well as a remedy for mouth
ulcers, stomachache, diarrhea, dysentery, and
worms. Case reports over the last 100 years and
more recent pharmacological research supports
the use of jambul for diabetes and poor blood
glucose control. It is thought to lower blood-sugar
levels by about 30%.

Related Species Many other closely related
species have notable therapeutic activity. Cloves
(Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97) are taken for digestive
problems and to treat infection. Syzygium gerrardii
from South Africa and Luma chequen from Chile
are used to treat coughs and congestion.

Tamarindus indica (Fabaceae)

Tamarind

Description Evergreen tree growing to 80 ft
(25 m). Has fine compound leaves, clusters of
orange-yellow flowers, and brittle gray-brown
seed pods (fruit) containing up to |2 round seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation While native to
Madagascar, the tamarind is now cultivated in
many of the world's tropical regions, including
the Caribbean, India, Southeast Asia, and China.
Parts Used Fruit, leaves, seeds.
Constituents Tamarind contains
16-18% plant acids (including
nicotinic acid—vitamin B,), a volatile
oil (with geranial, geraniol, and
limonene), sugars, pectin, 0.8%
potassium, and fats. Vitamin C

was formerly believed to be among
the constituents of tamarind, but
this is now being disputed.
History & Folklore Sailors

ate tamarind fruit as a nourishing
complement to their otherwise
starchy diet, in the belief that
eating the fruit would prevent
scurvy. However, it appears that tamarind does
not in fact contain vitamin C. Tamarind is a major
ingredient in many chutneys and condiments,
notably Worcestershire sauce.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Tamarind is

a wholesome and cleansing fruit that improves
digestion, relieves gas, soothes sore throats,

and acts as a mild laxative. However, mixed with
cumin and sugar, tamarind is also prescribed as a
treatment for dysentery. It is given for loss of
appetite and nausea, and as a stomach tonic and
mild laxative. It may help with nausea and vomiting
in pregnancy. In southern India, tamarind soup is
taken to treat colds and other ailments that
produce excessive phlegm. In Chinese medicine,
it is considered a cooling herb, appropriate for
treating “summer heat.” The fruit is also given

for loss of appetite, for nausea and vomiting in
pregnancy, and for constipation. The seeds’
traditional use as an antivenin in snake bite has
been partly confirmed in laboratory research.
Self-help Use Sore throats, p. 3! |

Fruit

Tanacetum vulgare (Asteraceae)

Tansy

Description Strongly aromatic perennial
growing to 3 ft (| m). Has an erect stem, feathery
compound leaves, and clusters of yellow disk-
shaped flowerheads.

Habitat & Cultivation Found throughout
temperate zones in the northern hemisphere,

----- PAGE 277 -----
tansy grows in open areas, alongside roads, and
close to water. The flowering tops are collected as
the flowers open in summer.

Parts Used Flowering tops.

Constituents Tansy contains a volatile oil, which
includes significant levels of thujone and camphor,
sesquiterpene lactones, flavonoids, and resin. The
volatile oil strongly induces menstruation.
History & Folklore While it is not
mentioned in surviving classical texts, tansy

was described by medieval herbalists, notably

St. Hildegard of Bingen (12th century). Ever since
that time, tansy has been used most commonly as
a worm-expelling plant. In England, tansy puddings
were consumed during Lent.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Tansy is little
used today because of its potential toxicity. When
the plant is taken, it is chiefly in order to expel
intestinal worms, and, to a lesser degree, to help
stimulate menstrual bleeding. Tansy may be used
externally to kill scabies, fleas, and lice, but even
external application of tansy preparations carries
the risk of toxicity.

@ Cautions Use only under professional
supervision. Tansy is possibly unsafe for internal
and external use, and should never be taken

during pregnancy. The plant, and especially its
essential oil, are subject to legal restrictions in
some countries.

Tansy is a strong
deworming remedy
for use only under
professional guidance.

Taxus baccata (Taxaceae)

Yew

Description Slow-growing evergreen tree
reaching 80 ft (25 m) in height. Has rust-red bark
and flattened, dark green needle-like leaves. The
female trees produce fleshy red cup-like fruit.

Yew, no longer used
in herbal medicine,

is currently under
research as a potential
anticancer drug.

Habitat & Cultivation Yew grows throughout
northern temperate zones. More often found in
cultivation than in the wild, it prefers lime-rich soil.
The leaves are gathered in spring.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Yew contains a mixture of alkaloids
known as taxine, and also diterpenes (including
taxol in some varieties), lignans, tannin, and resin.
History & Folklore The yew tree was sacred
to the Druids, who are believed to have considered
it an emblem of immortality. The Druids planted
yews in holy sites, a practice that continued with the
coming of Christianity. Many medieval churchyards
contain ancient yews, some thought to be over
2,000 years old. In the Middle Ages, the best
longbows were made from yew wood, as were
magic wands.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though yew has
been used in small doses to treat rheumatic and
urinary problems, its extreme toxicity makes it an
unsafe medicinal plant.

Research Taxol inhibits cell division, and has thus
been extensively researched for its use as an anti-
cancer drug. Taxol is most commonly found in the
Pacific yew (T. brevifolia), though some varieties of

T. baccata also contain the substance. Studies

have been conducted since the 1980s in search
of potential cancer treatments.

@ Caution Yew is extremely toxic. Do not take
under any circumstances.

Terminalia belerica
(Combretaceae)

Beleric Myrobalan

Description Evergreen tree with clusters of
oval leaves, spikes of small greenish unpleasant-
smelling flowers, and hairy brown fruit.

Habitat & Cultivation Beleric myrobalan

is native to India, Malaysia, and the Philippines. It is
found in forests and is cultivated for its astringent
fruit, which is gathered both immature and ripe.
Part Used Fruit.

Constituents The fruit contains tannins

and anthraquinones.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Beleric myrobalan
fruit is astringent, tonic, and laxative. It is principally
employed as a treatment for digestive and
respiratory problems. In Indian herbal medicine,
the ripe fruit is taken for diarrhea and indigestion,
and the unripe fruit is used as a laxative for chronic
constipation. It forms part of the classic Ayurvedic
Triphala formula, chiefly used as a bowel tonic.
Beleric myrobalan is also often used to treat upper
respiratory tract infections that cause symptoms
of sore throats, hoarseness, and coughs.

Related Species Many Terminalia species are
used to make astringent remedies, and also for
their timber. See chebulic myrobalan (T. chebula,
following entry).

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Terminalia chebula
(Combretaceae)

Chebulic Myrobalan

Description Evergreen tree growing to 65 ft
(20 m). Has egg-shaped leaves, white flowers in
terminal spikes, and small, 5-ribbed fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Central
Asia and India, chebulic myrobalan is found
throughout Iran, Pakistan, and India. The fruit

is collected when ripe.

Part Used Fruit.

Constituents Chebulic myrobalan contains
triterpenes, polyphenols, a coumarin (chebulic
acid), resin, and fixed oil.

History & Folklore Chebulic myrobalan has
been used in Indian medicine for several thousand
years, and the fruit has long been considered a
prime remedy for all manner of digestive problems.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO &

----- PAGE 278 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

Medicinal Actions & Uses Laxative and
astringent, the fruit gently improves bowel regularity
without excessively irritating the colon. It forms part
of the classic Ayurvedic Triphala formula, used
chiefly as a bowel tonic. Like Chinese rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum, p. 126), chebulic myrobalan may
be used as a treatment for diarrhea and dysentery.
The fruit’s tannins protect the gut wall from
irritation and infection, and tend to reduce intestinal
secretions. Likewise, the fruit helps to counter acidic
indigestion and heartburn. A decoction of chebulic
myrobalan may be used as a gargle and mouthwash,
as a lotion for sore and inflamed eyes, and as a
douche for vaginitis and excessive vaginal discharge.
The fruit has been also shown to have liver-
protective and antidiabetic properties.

Caution Do not take chebulic myrobalan

during pregnancy.

Theobroma cacao (Sterculiaceae)

Cacao,
Cocoa

Description Evergreen tree growing to 26 ft
(8 m). Has pale brown bark, glossy oval leaves,
clusters of small yellow flowers, and large, pear-
shaped, red-yellow seed pods.

Cacao is cultivated in tropical regions around the world.
The seed pulp is the source of cocoa.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Mexico

and Central America, cacao is now a major crop
throughout the tropics. The seed pods are harvested
several times a year and are cut directly from the
trunk of the tree (where they grow). One pod
contains up to 50 beans, with roughly 900 weighing
2/A |b (| kg). According to the World Cocoa
Foundation, world production of cacao in 2012
was more than 3.8 million tons.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents The unprocessed seed pulp
contains high levels of polyphenols (mostly
proantocyanidins and catechins), xanthines
(including caffeine), a fixed oil, and many
constituents responsible for chocolate's flavor. Due
to fermentation and the processing involved,
chocolate has significantly reduced levels of
polyphenols. Minute quantities of endorphins
(powerful painkillers that occur naturally within
the body) are also present in cacao,

History & Folklore The word “chocolate”
derives from chécolatl, the name given to this

tree by the Aztecs. In 1720, Cotton Mather, an
American preacher and natural historian, praised
cacao, writing that the plant ‘supplies the Indian
with bread, water, wine, vinegar, brandy, milk, oil,
honey, sugar, needles, thread, linen, clothes, caps,
spoons, besoms, baskets, paper, and nails; timber,
coverings for their houses; masts, sails, cordage for
their vessels; and medicine for their diseases; and
what can be desired more?”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Though cacao is
most often used as a food, it also has therapeutic
value as a nervous system stimulant. In Central
America and the Caribbean, the seeds are taken
as a heart and kidney tonic. The plant may be used
to treat angina, and as a diuretic. Cacao butter (the
fixed oil) makes a good lip salve and is often used
as a base for suppositories and pessaries.
Research The potent mix of polyphenols in the
unprocessed seed pulp has been the main focus of
research into cacao. These have a protective
activity on the heart and blood vessels, particularly
supporting the capillaries or microcirculation.
Cacao consumption is linked with lower blood
pressure and cholesterol levels, as well as a

reduced risk of coronary heart disease and stroke.
It also appears to have an antidiabetic activity,
stimulating the pancreas to regulate blood sugar
levels more effectively. Other potential uses of
cacao that have been investigated include the
prevention of tooth decay, as an aid to weight loss,
as a cancer-preventative food within the diet, and
as a treatment for chronic fatigue.

Thuja occidentalis (Cupressaceae)

Arborvitae

Description Evergreen tree growing to 33 ft
(10 m). Has scale-like leaves, male and female
flowers, and small, egg-shaped cones.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to the
northeastern US. and also known as white cedar,
arborvitae flourishes in wet, marshy ground and along
riverbanks. It has become a popular ornamental tree
in Europe. The leaves are gathered in summer.
Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Arborvitae contains a volatile

oil (up to 60% thujone), coumarins, flavonoids
(including procyanidin), tannins, and polysaccharides.
History & Folklore Many Native American
peoples prized arbor-vitae as a medicine for fever,
headaches, coughs, swollen hands, and rheumatic
problems. The herb was burned as a smudge
(smoky fire) for its scent and to ward off evil
spirits. The | 9th-century Eclectic herbalists

used arbor-vitae as a remedy for bronchitis,
rheumatism, and uterine cancer. Arborvitae has
also been used to treat the side-effects of the
smallpox vaccination.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Arborvitae has
an established antiviral activity. It is most often used
to treat warts and polyps, being prescribed both
internally and externally for these conditions. It is
also used as part of a regime for treating cancer—
especially cancer of the uterus. Arborvitae makes
an effective expectorant and anti-congestion
remedy, and may be used to treat acute bronchitis
and other respiratory infections. It induces
menstruation and can be taken to
bring on delayed periods, though
this use is inadvisable if menstrual

pain is severe. Arborvitae is
diuretic and is used to treat
acute cystitis and bed-wetting
in children. Extracts of the
herb may be painted on
painful joints or muscles as a
counterirritant, improving
local blood supply and easing
pain and stiffness.

@ Cautions Take only under professional
supervision. Do not take arborvitae during
pregnancy or while breastfeeding.
Self-help Use Warts, p. 304.

Arborvitae twig

Thymus serpyllum (Lamiaceae)

Wild Thyme

Description Tuft-forming evergreen herb
growing to a height of 3 in (7 cm). Has square
stems, small aromatic oval leaves, and spikes of
bright mauve flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
thyme prefers heaths, moorland, and barren places.
The herb is collected when in flower in summer.
Parts Used Flowering tops.
Constituents Wild thyme contains a volatile oil
(with thymol, carvacrol and linalool), flavonoids,
caffeic acid, tannins, and resin. The volatile oil's
properties are similar to, but less potent than,
those of thyme oil (from Thymus vulgaris, p. 143).
History & Folklore The |7th-century
herbalist Nicholas Culpeper advised taking wild
thyme to treat internal bleeding, coughing, and

----- PAGE 279 -----
vomiting. He noted that “it comforts and
strengthens the head, stomach, reins [ureters] and
womb, expels wind and breaks the stone.” Carolus
Linnaeus, the | 8th-century Swedish naturalist, used
the plant to treat headaches and hangovers.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Like its close
relative thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), wild thyme
is antiseptic and antifungal. It may be taken as an
infusion or syrup to treat flu and colds, sore
throats, coughs, whooping cough, chest infections,
and bronchitis. Wild thyme has anticongestion
properties and helps clear a stuffy nose, sinusitis,
ear congestion, and related complaints. It has been
used to expel threadworms and roundworms in
children, and is used to settle gas and colic. Wild
thyme's antispasmodic action makes it useful in
relieving period pain. Externally, it may be applied
as a poultice to treat mastitis (inflammation of the
breast), and an infusion may be used as a wash to
help heal wounds and ulcers. Wild thyme is also
used in herbal baths and pillows.

Related Species See thyme (T. vulgaris, p. 143).
Caution For worms in children, use only under
professional supervision.

Tilia spp. (Tiliaceae)
Linden,
Lime
Description Deciduous trees growing to a
height of 100 ft (30 m), with smooth gray bark,
heart-shaped leaves, and clusters of pale yellow
flowers with winglike bracts.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
linden is found in the wild, but is also much planted
in gardens and along roads. The flowers are
collected in summer.
Parts Used Flowers
and bracts.
Constituents Linden
contains flavonoids
(especially quercetin and
kaempferol), caffeic and
other acids, mucilage
(about 3%), tannins, volatile
oil (0.02%-0.1%), and traces
of benzodiazepine-like
compounds. The flavonoids
improve circulation.
History & Folklore
Greek myth recounts how
Philyra, a nymph, was
raped by the god Cronus
in the guise of a horse,
and eventually gave birth
to the famed centaur,
Chiron. Philyra was so
devastated that she

Linden flowers from
several species,
including Tilia
europaea, are used
in herbal medicine.

begged the gods not to leave her amongst mortals.
The gods granted her wish by transforming her
into a linden tree.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Linden is an
antispasmodic, sweat-inducing, and sedative
remedy. It relieves tension and sinus headaches,
helping to calm the mind and allow easy sleep.
Linden is an excellent remedy for stress and panic,
and is used specifically to treat nervous palpitations.
The flowers bring relief to colds and flu by
reducing nasal congestion and soothing fever.
Linden flowers are commonly taken to lower high
blood pressure, particularly when there are
emotional factors involved. The flowers are used
over the long term to treat high systolic blood
pressure associated with arteriosclerosis. Because
of their emollient quality, linden flowers are used in
France to make a lotion for itchy skin.

Trifolium pratense (Fabaceae)

Red Clover

Description Perennial herb growing to 16 in

(40 cm). Has a hairy upright stem, leaves with 3 (or,
rarely, 4) oval leaflets with a white crescent marking,
and pink to purple egg-shaped flowerheads.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe

and Asia, and naturalized in North America and
Australia, red clover is widely cultivated for hay

and as a nitrogen-fixing crop. The flowerheads

are collected when newly opened in summer.
Parts Used Flowerheads.

Constituents Red clover contains volatile

oil, including benzyl alcohol and methyl salicylate,
isoflavones, coumarins, and cyanogenic glycosides.
The isoflavones occur at relatively high levels and
are phytoestrogenic. The isolated isoflavones are
marketed as a treatment for menopausal problems.
History & Folklore This herb has traditionally
been used to treat breast cancer. A concentrated
decoction was applied to the site of the tumor in
order to encourage it to grow outward and clear
the body.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Red clover is
in

used to treat skin conditions, normally
combination with other purifying herbs such as
burdock (Arctium lappa, p. 65) and yellow dock
(Rumex crispus, p. 264). It is also expectorant and
may be used for spasmodic coughs. Red clover's
significant phytoestrogenic activity has led to
increasing use of the herb to relieve menopausal
symptoms. In most cases it will be preferable to
use extracts of red clover flowers rather than the

isoflavones on their own.

Research The isoflavones have an established
phytoestrogenic activity. Red clover isoflavones
have been shown to have not only therapeutic use
during menopause, helping to reduce the impact of

falling estrogen levels, but also to exert a protective
effect on the heart and circulation in menopausal
women with low estrogen levels. Early-stage
research points to the isoflavones countering bone
loss, making them potentially of use in
osteoporosis. Due to the isoflavones’ ability to
“compete” with the body's own estrogen, it is now
thought that red clover may be helpful in both
preventing and treating breast cancer.

Red clover is a common wayside plant, but it is also
cultivated as a fodder crop.

Trigonella foenum-graecum
(Fabaceae)

Fenugreek

Description Strongly aromatic annual

growing to about 32 in (80 cm). Has trifoliate
leaves, yellowish-white pealike flowers, and
sickle-shaped pods.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North Africa
and countries bordering the eastern Mediterranean,
fenugreek grows in open areas and is widely
cultivated, notably in India. The seeds are collected
during the autumn months.

Parts Used Seeds.

Constituents Fenugreek contains a volatile oil,
alkaloids (including trigonelline), saponins (based
on diosgenin), flavonoids, mucilage (about 27%),
protein (about 25%), fixed oil (approximately 8%),
vitamins A, B, and C, and minerals.

History & Folklore The Egyptian Ebers
Papyrus, which dates from c. 1500 sce, records a
prescription for burns that includes fenugreek. The
seeds were also used in ancient Egypt to induce
childbirth. In the Sth century sce the Greek
physician Hippocrates considered fenugreek to be
a valuable soothing herb. Dioscorides, writing in the
Ist century ce, recommended fenugreek as a

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHWN YFHLO %

----- PAGE 280 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

q
ae

278

remedy for all manner of gynecological problems,
including infection of the uterus and inflammation
of the vagina and vulva.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Fenugreek is much
used in herbal medicine in North Africa, the Middle
East, and India, being esteemed as a remedy for

a wide variety of conditions. The nourishing

seeds are given during
convalescence and to
encourage weight gain,
especially in anorexia.

They are also helpful in
lowering fever, with some
authorities comparing

their ability to that of quinine.
The seeds’ soothing effect makes them of value

in treating gastritis and gastric ulcers. They are used
to induce childbirth and to increase breast-milk
production. Fenugreek is also thought to be
antidiabetic and to lower blood cholesterol levels.
Externally, the seeds may be applied as a paste to
treat abscesses, boils, ulcers, and burns, or used as
a douche for excessive vaginal discharge.
Research Research indicates that fenugreek seed
(preferably powdered) can prove effective in
controlling insulin resistance and late-onset diabetes.
The seeds help to stabilize blood-sugar levels,
though the recommended dosage of seed required
is unclear. The seeds also lower blood cholesterol
levels. Other potential uses for the seeds include
cramping period pains, polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS), and Parkinson's disease. An Iranian clinical
trial in 2014 found that /o oz (2-3 g) of powdered
seed helped to reduce menstrual cramps.
Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Fenugreek seeds

Trillium erectum (Liliaceae)

Bethroot

Description Attractive perennial with an erect
stem growing to | 6 in (40 cm). Has 3 wavy leaves
and an unpleasant-smelling, 3-petaled, red to
yellow flower.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to North
America, bethroot grows in shady areas in
woodlands. The rhizome is usually unearthed
after the leaves have fallen in autumn.

Part Used Rhizome.

Constituents Bethroot contains steroidal
saponins (such as trillin), tannin, resin, fixed oil,
and a trace of volatile oil.

History & Folklore Various Trillium species
were used by Native Americans to aid childbirth,
to treat irregular menstrual periods, period pain
and excessive vaginal discharge, and, as a poultice,
to soothe sore nipples.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Bethroot is a
valuable remedy for heavy menstrual or

intermenstrual bleeding, helping to reduce blood
flow. It is also used to treat bleeding associated
with uterine fibroids. Bethroot may also be taken
for bleeding within the urinary tubules and, less
commonly, for the coughing up of blood. It remains
a valuable herb in facilitating childbirth. A douche
of bethroot is useful for excessive vaginal discharge
and yeast infections.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy except
under professional supervision.

Tropaeolum majus
(Tropaeolaceae)

Nasturtium

Description Climbing annual growing to 10 ft
(3m). Has straggling stems, rounded leaves, and
orange to yellow trumpet-shaped flowers with a
long spur.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Peru,
nasturtiums flourish in sunny sites. They are
grown as an ornamental and as a salad herb.

All parts of the plant are harvested in summer.
Parts Used Flowers, leaves, seeds.
Constituents Nasturtiums contain
glucosinolates, sulphur glycosides, glucotropaeolin,
flavonoids, spilantolic acid, and iodide.
Glucotropaeolin is converted into mustard oils by
gut bacteria and acts as an antibiotic within the
urinary and respiratory systems.

History & Folklore The nasturtium has long
been used in Andean herbal medicine as a
disinfectant and wound-healing herb, and as an
expectorant to relieve chest conditions.

Nasturtium flowers
have antibiotic
properties, and
may be used to
heal wounds.

Medicinal Actions & Uses A\l parts of

the nasturtium appear to have antibiotic activity.
An infusion of the leaves may be used to

increase resistance to bacterial infections and to
clear nasal and bronchial congestion—apparently
the remedy both reduces congestion formation
and stimulates the clearing and coughing up of
phlegm. It can also prove useful in bacterial cystitis
and it makes an effective antiseptic wash for
external application.The juice of the plant has
been taken internally for the treatment of
scrofula (tubercular infection of the lymph nodes).
The piquant-tasting leaves and flowers (and juice)
of nasturtium are high in vitamin C, and make a
good salad vegetable, while the ground seeds have
purgative properties.

Tsuga canadensis (Pinaceae)

Canada Hemlock

Description Evergreen tree growing to 100 ft
(30 m). Has reddish-brown bark, short narrow
needle leaves, and small male and female cones.
Habitat & Cultivation Canada hemlock is
native to eastern parts of North America, growing
in woodland and marshy sites. The bark is collected
from mature trees throughout the year.

Part Used Bark.

Constituents Canada hemlock contains volatile
oil (with alpha-pinene, bornyl acetate, and
cadinene), 10-14% tannins, and resin.

History & Folklore Native Americans may
have given Canada hemlock to the explorer
Jacques Cartier in 1535. He and his crew, exploring
the St. Lawrence river, had fallen sick with scurvy,
but all made a quick recovery upon taking a
decoction of leaves and bark. Many Native
American peoples used the bark to treat wounds.
Medicinal Actions & Uses The bark

of Canada hemlock is astringent and antiseptic.

A decoction may be taken to treat diarrhea,
colitis, diverticulitis, and cystitis. Externally, Canada
hemlock can be employed as a douche to treat
excessive vaginal discharge, yeast infection, and a
prolapsed uterus; as a mouthwash and gargle for
gingivitis and sore throats; or as a wash to cleanse
and tighten wounds.

Tussilago farfara (Asteraceae)

Coltsfoot

Description Perennial herb growing to |2 in
(30 m). Has flowering stems with purple scales,
yellow-gold flowers, and heart-shaped leaves.
Habitat & Cultivation Indigenous to
Europe and northern Asia, and naturalized in

----- PAGE 281 -----
North America, coltsfoot is a common plant

often found along roadsides and on verges and

in open areas. The flowers are gathered in late
winter, the leaves in summer.

Parts Used Leaves, flowers.

Constituents Coltsfoot contains flavonoids,
about 8% mucilage (polysaccharides), 10% tannins,
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, vitamin C, and zinc. The
pyrrolizidine alkaloids may have a toxic effect

on the liver, but are largely destroyed when

the parts are boiled to make a decoction.

The polysaccharides are anti-inflammatory

and immunostimulant. The flavonoids are
anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic.

History & Folklore For at least 2,500 years,
coltsfoot has been taken as a cough remedy

and smoked as a means to ease breathing.
Dioscorides, a Greek physician of the Ist century cE,
recommended it for dry coughs, and ‘for those
who are unable to breathe except standing upright”
Medicinal Actions & Uses An effective
demulcent and expectorant herb, coltsfoot is

one of the most popular European remedies for
treating chest problems. In Europe, the leaves are
preferred to the flowers (which contain higher
amounts of pyrrolizidine alkaloids), but in China
the flowers are preferred. Both parts of the plant
are taken as a decoction for chest conditions.
When used as a syrup or a medicinal cigarette,
coltsfoot relieves asthma. This herb is used as a
specific treatment for spasmodic coughs. It is
particularly effective when used in combination
with licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), and wild cherry (Prunus
serotina, p. 257).

Research Extracts of the whole plant have been
shown to increase immune resistance. In a Chinese
trial involving 36 patients
suffering from bronchial
asthma, 75% showed
some improvement
after treatment, but
the antiasthmatic
effect was short-lived.

Cautions Do not use
coltsfoot flowers. Do
not take the leaves

for more than 3-4
weeks at a time.

Do not take coltsfoot
during pregnancy or
while breastfeeding.
The herb is not suitable
for children under 6.
Coltsfoot is subject to
legal restrictions in
some countries.

Coltsfoot has long been used
as a remedy for coughs.

Tylophora asmatica (Asclepidaceae)

Asmatica,
Indian Lobelia

Description Perennial twining climber with
lance-shaped leaves and greenish flowers
producing many flat seeds.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to the Indian
subcontinent, asmatica grows wild on the plains
of India. The leaves are gathered when the plant
is in flower.
Parts Used Leaves.
Constituents Asmatica contains alkaloids
(including tylophorine), flavonoids, sterols, and
tannins. Tylophorine has anti-inflammatory and
antitumor properties.
History & Folklore Asmatica has long been
used in Ayurvedic medicine to induce vomiting
and expectoration, and to treat dysentery and
rheumatic conditions.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Considered a
specific remedy for asthma, asmatica may relieve
symptoms for up to 3 months. It is also beneficial
in cases of hay fever, and is prescribed for acute
allergic problems such as eczema and hives. It
holds potential as a treatment for chronic fatigue
syndrome and other immune system disorders.
Asmatica may relieve rheumatoid arthritis, and
may also be of value in the treatment of cancer.
Research Extensive laboratory and clinical
research in India has established that asmatica
is an effective remedy for asthma. In the 1970s,
a number of clinical trials showed that a majority
of asthmatic patients taking the herb for just
6 days gained relief from asthma for up to a
further |2 weeks. However, subsequent studies
have failed to reproduce these results. The
leaves produce side-effects including nausea
and vomiting.
@ Caution Take asmatica only under
professional supervision.

Typha angustifolia (Typhaceae)

Cattail,
Pu Huang (Chinese)

Description Stout upright plant growing to a
height of 6% ft (2 m). Has long, flat, narrow leaves
rising parallel to the stem, a distinctive brown
cylindrical head of female flowers, and straw-
colored male flowers immediately above.
Habitat & Cultivation Cattail flourishes

in marshes, swamps, and other freshwater sites

in both temperate and tropical zones, and is
cultivated. The pollen is shaken off the plant
while it is in bloom.

Part Used Pollen.

Constituents Cattail contains isorhamnetin,
pentacosane, and sterols.

History & Folklore The pollen is highly
inflammable and has been used in the manufacture
of fireworks. The root is edible and has been eaten
in times of famine. The young shoots can be eaten
raw or cooked in spring, and are said to taste

like asparagus (Asparagus officinalis, p. 174).

Cattail or pu huang is used to staunch wounds and stop
internal bleeding.

Although “bulrushes”’ (the British and Irish name for
cattails) are mentioned in the Bible, it is likely the
plant being referred to is actually Cyperus papyrus.
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Chinese herbal
medicine, the astringent pollen has been employed
chiefly to stop internal or external bleeding. The
pollen may be mixed with honey and applied to
wounds and sores, or taken orally to reduce
internal bleeding of almost any kind—for example,
nosebleeds, uterine bleeding, or blood in the urine.
The pollen is now also used in the treatment of
angina (pain in the chest or arm due to lack of
oxygen to the heart muscle). In India, the dried
pollen has been used for kidney stones, to treat
nosebleeds and internal bleeding, as well as for
painful menstruation. Cattail does not appear to
have been used as a medicine in the European
herbal tradition.

Research Chinese research suggests that cattail
pollen protects blood vessels from inflammation
and acts as an immunosuppressant.

Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 282 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

280

Uncaria rhynchophylla (Rubiaceae)

Gou Teng

Description Climbing perennial growing to

33 ft (10 m). Has opposite lance-shaped leaves,
thorns, and composite flowerheads.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to China and
Southeast Asia, gou teng is cultivated in the southern
and eastern provinces of China. The stems and
thorns are collected in autumn and winter.

Parts Used Stems, thorns.

Constituents Gou teng contains indole alkaloids,
flavonoids, triterpenoid, and polysaccharides.
History & Folklore The first recorded use of
gou teng in Chinese medicine is in the Miscellaneous
Records (c. 500 ce).

Medicinal Actions & Uses Gou teng is a
sedative and antispasmodic, and is mainly used to
ease symptoms such as tremors, seizure, spasms,
headache, and dizziness. It is also prescribed for
infantile convulsions. In Chinese herbal medicine

it “extinguishes [internal] wind [gas] and stops
tremors.” It is also used by the Chinese to reduce
high blood pressure and excess liver “fire.”
Research Chinese tests on laboratory animals
indicate that gou teng lowers blood pressure,
reduces anxiety, and has notable sedative activity.
Related Species Like gou teng, pale catechu

(U. gambier) contains a constituent that lowers
blood pressure. See also cat's claw (U. tomentosa,
following entry).

@ Caution Take gou teng only under
professional supervision.

Uncaria tomentosa (Rubiaceae)

Cat's Claw,
Una de Gato

Description Climbing vine growing to 100 ft
(30 m) or more, with stems up to 8 in (20 cm)

in diameter, large, glossy leaves, and sharp hooks
(the ‘cat's claws’).

Habitat & Cultivation A native of tropical
rainforests in the central and eastern Andes,
especially Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia, cat's claw
has also been found in Guatemala, Costa Rica, and
Panama. Until recently, the root bark was the part
most commonly used as medicine. However, by the
early 1990s collection from the wild threatened
the species’ survival. Only the stem bark, from
ecologically sustainable sources, should be used.
Parts Used Stem bark.
Constituents Cat's claw contains pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids (POA), tetracyclic oxindole
alkaloids (TOA) in one chemotype only, triterpenoid
glycosides, sterols, flavonoids, and tannins, including
epicatechin and proanthocyanidins.

History & Folklore Known by the Ashaninka
and other indigenous peoples of central Peru for
its power in regulating illness, cat's claw has been
used since the earliest times to treat serious

illness, from asthma and diabetes to arthritis

and cancer. Native healers are able to distinguish
between what are botanically identical plants,
selecting those that have a low TOA content

and are therefore most likely to prove effective

in strengthening immunity.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Like echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92), with which it combines
effectively, cat's claw supports a weakened
immune system, and can reinvigorate the body's
efforts to counter infection and inflammation.
The herb's antioxidant activity also helps to
contain the widespread cellular damage that
occurs in chronic degenerative disease.
Conditions that may benefit include infections
such as chronic fatigue syndrome and HIV/AIDS;
chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and ulcerative colitis; and asthma.

Cat's claw may also be taken to help prevent
cancer, particularly breast cancer, and is

useful in countering the damaging effects

of chemotherapy.

Research Investigations into the root and stem
bark have established that cat's claw has potent
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and immune-stimulant
activity. The POAs and water extracts of the bark
stimulate production of white blood cells and
nonspecific immune resistance, and appear to inhibit
tumor development and growth; extracts of the
bark are strongly anti-inflammatory and may inhibit
inflammatory gene expression. Nevertheless, the
bark’s medicinal activity probably results from the
synergistic effect of several compounds, including
the tannins. Clinical research in Peru indicates that
cat's claw may have use in the treatment for HIV and
AIDS. Of the two types of cat's claw, only the one
containing POAs should be used as medicine, since
the TOAs may suppress immune function. Cat's claw
has a contraceptive activity. A small-scale clinical trial
in Brazil found that patients with advanced cancer
had more energy and some improvement in quality
of life when taking a cat's claw extract.

Caution Avoid taking Cat's Claw during
pregnancy and while breastfeeding.

Urginea maritima

syn. Drimia maritima (Liliaceae)
Squill

Description Perennial growing to 5 ft (1.5m)
from a large white or red bulb. Has a single

flowering stem, a rosette of large basal leaves,
and a dense spike of white flowers.

Squill contains substances
that have a strongly tonic
effect on the heart

Habitat &
Cultivation
Native to southern
Spain, the Canary
Islands, and South Africa,
squill is cultivated in the
Mediterranean region. The
bulb of the white (but not
the red) variety is unearthed
in late summer.
Part Used Bul.
Constituents Squill contains cardiac
glycosides (0.15—2.4% bufadienolides,
including scillaren A), flavonoids,
stigmasterol anthocyanidins, and
mucilage. The cardiac glycosides are
strongly diuretic and relatively quick-
acting. They do not have the same cumulative
effect as those present in foxglove (Digitalis
purpurea, p. 202).
History & Folklore Squill appears in the
Egyptian Ebers papyrus (c. 1500 sce). In Greece
it was used by Pythagoras and Hippocrates in the
6th and Sth centuries Bce.
Medicinal Actions & Uses Squill is a diuretic,
emetic, cardiotonic, and expectorant plant that
finds use in a wide range of conditions. It makes a
good diuretic in cases of water retention. Since its
active constituents do not accumulate to a great
degree within the body, it is a potential substitute
for foxglove in aiding a failing heart. At low dosage,
squill is an effective expectorant. At higher doses,
the herb acts as an emetic. Squill is also used in
homeopathic preparations.
@ Caution Use only under professional
supervision. Squill is toxic in excessive doses.

Vaccinium macrocarpon
(Ericaceae)

Cranberry

Description Small, slender, evergreen shrub,
growing to | ft (30 cm), with oval, dark green
leaves, pink flowers, and round or slightly pear-
shaped red berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to eastern
North America and northern Asia, cranberry

----- PAGE 283 -----
thrives in acidic soils and in wet, boggy ground.

It is widely cultivated in the northeastern U.S.
Parts Used Berry (fruit).

Constituents Cranberry contains tannins
(catechins, proanthocyanidins, and polyphenols),
flavonoids, and vitamin C.

History & Folklore Best known for cranberry
sauce, cranberry has traditionally been taken as a
tart, acidic drink in Sweden. Cranberry was first
cultivated in Britain in 1808 by the English botanist
Joseph Banks, and in the U.S.—now the principal
grower of cranberries—in the 1840s.
Medicinal Actions & Uses A classic remedy
for urinary tract infections, cranberry can be used
both to prevent and to treat problems such as
cystitis and urethritis. Taken as berries, juice, or
extract, it will help to disinfect the urinary tubules
and may be taken for problems associated with
poor urinary flow such as enlarged prostate, as
well as bladder infections. In cases of acute infection,

cranberry is likely to work better in combination
with herbs such as buchu (Barosma betulina, p. 71)
and uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, p. |70).
Cranberry may also be used long term to prevent the
development of calcium carbonate urinary stones.
Research Research published in 1994 found that
cranberry juice reduced the need for antibiotics
in women suffering from chronic urinary tract
infection. It seems likely that cranberry works by
making it more difficult for bacteria to cling to the
urinary tract wall, and infection is therefore more
easily flushed out. The proanthocyanidins and
catechins are probably responsible for this action.
Cautions In kidney disease, use only on
professional advice.

Verbascum thapsus
(Scrophulariaceae)

Mullein

Description Upright biennial growing to 6/4 ft
(2 m). Has slightly hairy, gray-green, oval to lance-
shaped leaves, and spikes of bright yellow flowers.
Habitat & Cultivation Mullein is native to
central and southern Europe and western Asia.

It is now also naturalized in many other temperate
regions. Mullein grows on open uncultivated land
and along roadsides. The leaves and flowers are
collected during the summer.
Parts Used Leaves, flowers.
Constituents Mullein contains mucilage,
flavonoids, triterpenoid saponins, volatile oil,

and tannins.

History & Folklore Mullein was once credited
with magical as well as medicinal virtues. John Gerard,
a | 6th-century herbalist, expressed doubts about
the former: “there be some who think that this
herbe being carryed aboute one, doth help

the falling sickness... which thing is vaine and
superstitious.’ However, he did affirm mullein’s
value as a cough medicine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Mullein is a
valuable herb for coughs and congestion, and is a
specific treatment for tracheitis and bronchitis.
The leaves and the flowers may be used as an
infusion to reduce mucus formation and stimulate
the coughing up of phlegm. Mullein combines
well with other expectorants such as coltsfoot
(Tussilago farfara, p. 278) and thyme (Thymus
vulgaris, p. 143). Applied externally, mullein

is emollient and makes a good wound healer.

In Germany, the flowers are steeped in olive

oil, and the resulting fixed oil is used as a remedy
for ear infections and hemorrhoids.

Mullein is a good expectorant remedy for coughs and other
chest problems.

Veronica officinalis
(Scrophulariaceae)

Speedwell

Description Creeping hairy perennial growing
to 20 in (50 cm). Has oval leaves and darkly veined
lilac flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation A common wild plant
in Europe and North America, speedwell is most
often found on heaths and in dry grassy places. It is
picked in summer.

Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Speedwell contains iridoid
glycosides (including aucubin), acetopenone
glucosides, and flavonoids (including apigenin

and scutellarin).

History & Folklore Speedwell was

formerly considered a useful diuretic and
expectorant. It was much used to treat congestion,
coughs and chronic skin conditions. It was also

given to counter nervous exhaustion due to
excessive mental activity or concentration.
However, in 1935, the French medicinal plant
specialist Leclerc stated that “the infusion has

no more virtue than the hot water used to
prepare it.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Speedwell is now
considered to have only a slight therapeutic effect.
It is little used today.

Viburnum prunifolium
(Caprifoliaceae)

Black Haw

Description Deciduous shrub growing to 16 ft
(5 m). Has serrated oval leaves, clusters of white
flowers, and blue-black berries.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to central

and southern North America, black haw grows in
woodland. The branch bark is stripped in the spring
or autumn, the root bark in the autumn only.
Parts Used Bark, root bark.

Constituents Black haw contains coumarins
(including scopoletin and aesculetin), salicin,
|-methyl-2,3-dibutyl hemimellitate, viburnin, plant
acids, a trace of volatile oil, and tannin.

History & Folklore The Catawba people
used black haw bark to treat dysentery. In the | 9th
century, the bark was considered to be a uterine
tonic, and a decoction was commonly used to help
arrest hemorrhage of the uterus.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Black haw is
antispasmodic and astringent, and is regarded as a
specific treatment for menstrual pain. Echoing its
|9th-century applications, the bark is also used to
treat other gynecological conditions, such as
prolapse of the uterus, heavy menopausal bleeding,
morning sickness, and threatened miscarriage. Black
haw's antispasmodic property makes it of value in
cases where colic or other cramping pain affects the
bile ducts, the digestive tract, or the urinary tract.
Related Species The closely related V. rufidulum
was used by the Menominee people to treat
cramps and colic. See also cramp bark (Viburnum
opulus, p. 150).

Caution People who are allergic to aspirin should
not take black haw.

Self-help Use Period pain, p. 315.

Vinca minor (Apocynaceae)

Lesser Periwinkle

Description A mainly ground-hugging
evergreen shrub arching to |8 in (45 cm).
Has rooting stems, shiny elliptical leaves, and
5-petaled, violet-blue flowers.

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 284 -----
OTHER MEDICINAL PLANTS &

&

282

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe,
lesser periwinkle grows in along roadsides and
woodland borders. It is also cultivated as a garden
plant. The leaves are gathered in spring.

Parts Used Leaves.

Constituents Lesser periwinkle contains about
7% indole alkaloids (including vincamine, vincine,
and vincaminine), a bisindol alkaloid (vincarubine),
and tannins. Vincamine increases blood flow and
oxygen supply to the brain.

History & Folklore In his Herbarium, the
2nd-century ce Roman writer Apuleius describes
lesser periwinkle's virtues “against the devil sickness
and demoniacal possessions and against snakes and
wild beasts.” He also specifies the rituals used in
harvesting the herb: “This wort thou shalt pluck
thus, saying, ‘| pray thee, vinca pervinca, thee that
art to be had for thy many useful qualities... outfit
me so that | be shielded and ever prosperous and
undamaged by poisons and by water’ When thou
shalt pluck this wort, thou shalt be clean of every
uncleanness, and thou shalt pick it when the moon
is nine nights old.”

Medicinal Actions & Uses Lesser periwinkle
is employed as an astringent and blood-staunching
herb. Its astringency makes it a useful mouthwash
for sore throats, gingivitis, and mouth ulcers. Its
staunching ability is effective against internal
bleeding, heavy menstrual bleeding, and
nosebleeds. Since vincamine was discovered in the
leaves, lesser periwinkle has been used to treat
arteriosclerosis and for dementia due to
insufficient blood flow to the brain.

Related Species Greater periwinkle (V. major)
also has similar astringent activity. See also
Madagascar periwinkle (V. rosea, following entry).
Caution Do not take during pregnancy.

Vinca rosea (Apocynaceae)

Madagascar
Periwinkle

Description Fleshy perennial growing to 32 in
(80 cm). Has glossy oval leaves and bright, white to
red 5-petaled flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Thought to be a native
of Madagascar, this herb is now common in many
tropical and subtropical regions worldwide. It is
cultivated commercially as a garden ornamental.
The herb and root are gathered in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts, root.

Constituents Madagascar periwinkle contains
over 70 different indole alkaloids, including
vinblastine, vincristine, alstonine, ajmalicine,
leurocristine, and reserpine.

Medicinal Actions & Uses This plant is used
in folk medicine in the Philippines as a remedy for

diabetes. In the Caribbean, the flowers are used

as a soothing eyewash.

Research Madagascar periwinkle'’s traditional use
as a treatment for diabetes has led to extensive
investigation into its properties. Vincristine and
vinblastine are powerful anticancer agents, and are
two of the most important medicinal compounds
found in plants in the last 40 years. Vincristine is a
standard treatment for Hodgkin's disease, and
vinblastine for childhood leukemia. While extracts
from Madagascar periwinkle have been shown to
lower blood-sugar levels, simple preparations of
the whole plant may not be effective.

2 @ Caution Take Madagascar periwinkle only
under professional supervision.

Viola odorata (Violaceae)

Sweet Violet

Description Creeping perennial growing to 6 in
(15 cm). Has toothed oval leaves, and attractive,
violet-blue or white flowers with a 5-petaled corolla.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to much of
Europe and Asia, sweet violet is a common wayside
plant also found along roadsides and in woodlands.
The flowers and leaves are collected in spring, the
root in autumn.

Parts Used Flowers, leaves, root.
Constituents Sweet violet contains phenolic
glycosides (including gaultherin), saponins (myrosin
and violin), flavonoids, an alkaloid (odoratine),

and mucilage.

History & Folklore In classical myth, sweet
violet was associated with death, but classical
physicians also knew it as an effective emetic and
cough remedy. The | 7th-century herbalist Nicholas
Culpeper stated that: "All the violets are cold and
moist while they are fresh and green, and are used
to cool any heat or distemperature of the body
either inwardly or outwardly.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Sweet violet

flowers and leaves have a gentle expectorant and
demulcent action and they induce light sweating.
They are often used as an infusion or syrup for
treating coughs, chest colds and congestion. They
are used in British herbalism to treat breast and
stomach cancer. The root is a much stronger
expectorant and, at higher doses, is emetic.
Research Iranian researchers investigated the
use of two drops of sweet violet essential oil
applied to the nostrils as a remedy for insomnia.
The study, which lasted a month, found positive
improvements in sleep measurements in those
using the oil. A 2015 study of children with asthma
concluded that sweet violet syrup helped to
reduce symptoms of dry irritable cough.
Related Species The related dog violet

(V. canina) has approximately the same uses as
sweet violet. The Chinese V. yedoens is prescribed

for hot swellings and tumors, mumps, and abscesses.
See also heartsease (V. tricolor, following entry).

Viola tricolor (Violaceae)

Heartsease

Description Annual, biennial, or perennial

plant growing to |5 in (38 cm). Has lobed, oval
leaves and handsome violet, yellow, and white
Pansy-type flowers.

Habitat & Cultivation Heartsease is native
to Europe, North Africa, and temperate regions of
Asia, and has become naturalized in the Americas. It
thrives in many habitats, from grasssy mountainous
areas to coastal sites, and is also cultivated as a garden
plant. The aerial parts are gathered in summer.
Parts Used Aerial parts.

Constituents Heartsease contains saponins,
flavonoids, salicylates, mucilage, gums, and a resin.
History & Folklore K'Eogh wrote in his 1735
Irish Herbal that heartsease flowers ‘cure convulsions
in children, cleanse the lungs and breast and are very
good for fevers, internal inflammations and wounds.’
Medicinal Actions & Uses |n Western
herbal medicine, heartsease is used as an anti-
inflammatory and purifying herb and is taken

for skin conditions such as eczema. An infusion
also makes a useful wash for itchiness. Being
expectorant, heartsease is used to treat bronchitis
and whooping cough. The plant's established
diuretic action makes it useful for treating
rheumatism, cystitis, and difficulty in passing urine.
Research Recent research has found that
heartsease has potential anticancer properties. It
promoted programmed cell death (apoptosis) and
inhibited blood vessel growth (angiogenesis), both
important anticancer effects. A clinical trial in
children with asthma found that heartsease syrup
helped to control dry irritable cough alongside
prescribed medication for asthma.

Self-help Use Hives, p. 303.

Heartsease grows wild in temperate areas, and is widely
cultivated as a garden plant.

----- PAGE 285 -----
Viscum album (Loranthaceae)

European Mistletoe

Description Parasitic evergreen shrub that forms
bunches up to !0 ft (3 m) across on host trees. Has
narrow leathery leaves, yellowish flowers in clusters
of 3, and sticky, round, white berries.

df ® ! wrry ‘
Mistletoe was the “golden” bough that saved the legendary
Aeneas from the underworld.

Habitat & Cultivation Native to Europe
and northern Asia, European mistletoe grows on
host trees, especially apple trees (Malus species).

It is harvested in autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, branches, berries.
Constituents Mistletoe contains glycoproteins,
polypeptides (viscotoxins), lectins, flavonoids,
caffeic and other acids, lignans, acetylcholine, and,
in the berries, polysaccharides. Viscotoxins inhibit
tumors and stimulate immune resistance.
History & Folklore In Norse mythology,

a mistletoe bough was used to slay Balder, the

god of peace. The plant was subsequently
entrusted to the goddess of love, and kissing
under it became obligatory.

Medicinal Actions & Uses European
mistletoe is chiefly used to lower blood pressure
and heart rate, ease anxiety, and promote sleep. In
low doses it also relieves panic attacks and
headaches, and improves the ability to concentrate.
The plant is also prescribed for tinnitus and
epilepsy. It may be used to treat hyperactivity in
children. In anthroposophical medicine, extracts of
the berries are injected to treat cancer.
Research European mistletoe’s efficacy as an
anticancer treatment has been subject to significant
research. There is no doubt that certain
constituents, especially the viscotoxins, exhibit

an anticancer activity, but the value of the whole
plant in cancer treatment is not yet fully accepted.
@ Caution European mistletoe, and especially
the berries, is highly toxic. Take only under
professional supervision.

Vitis vinifera (Vitaceae)

Grape

Description Deciduous climber with erect
stems, tendrils, palm-shaped leaves, clusters of
small, pale green flowers, and bunches of fruit
(grapes) that vary in color from green to black.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to southern
Europe and western Asia, grapes are cultivated in
warm temperate regions throughout the world for
their fruit and to produce wine. The leaves are
collected in summer, the fruit in autumn.

Parts Used Leaves, fruit, seeds, sap.
Constituents Grapes contain flavonoids,
tannins, tartrates, inositol, carotenes, choline, and
sugars. The fruit contains tartaric and malic acids,
sugars, pectin, tannin, flavone glycosides,
anthocyanins (in red leaves and red grapes),
vitamins A, B,, B,, and C, and minerals. The
anthocyanins reduce capillary permeability.
History & Folklore Nicholas Culpepper in
1652 extolled the virtues of the grape vine,
describing it as “‘a most gallant tree of the sun very
sympathetical to the body of man, and that's the
reason spirit of wine is the greatest cordial
amongst all vegetables.’

Medicinal Actions & Uses Grape

leaves, especially the red leaves, are astringent and
anti-inflammatory. They are taken as an infusion

to treat diarrhea, heavy menstrual bleeding, and
uterine hemorrhage, as a wash for mouth ulcers,
and as a douche for vaginal discharge. Red leaves
and grapes are helpful in the treatment of varicose
veins, hemorrhoids, and capillary fragility. The sap
from the branches is used as an eyewash. Grapes
are nourishing and mildly laxative and they support
the body through illness, especially of the
gastrointestinal tract and liver. Because the nutrient
content of grapes is close to that of blood plasma,
grape fasts are recommended for detoxification.

Fp

Grapes are highly
nutritious, and together
with the leaves are used
to treat varicose veins.

The dried fruit (raisins or currants) is mildly
expectorant and emollient, with a slight effect
in easing coughs. Wine vinegar is astringent,
cooling, and soothing to the skin.

Research Grape-seed extract has potent
antioxidant and circulatory-protective activity.
lt appears to normalize blood pressure and
heart rate, working best as a preventative, antiaging
remedy that supports healthy circulation. One
study found grape-seed extract reduced leg
swelling in healthy women required to sit for
long periods of time at work. Recent studies
also indicate that grape-seed extract can be
useful in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
type 2 diabetes.

Ziziphus jujuba (Rhamnaceae)
Jujube,
Da Zao (Chinese)

Description Spiny deciduous tree growing to
approximately 26 ft (8 m). Has oblong, bluntly
toothed leaves, clusters of small greenish-yellow
flowers, and reddish-brown or black oval fruit.
Habitat & Cultivation Native to China, Japan
and Southeast Asia, the jujube is widely cultivated
in tropical and subtropical regions of Asia and the
Mediterranean. The fruit is collected in early autumn.
Part Used Fruit.
Constituents Jujube contains saponins,
bioflavonoids, polyphenols, polysaccharides, volatile
oil, mucilage, vitamins A, B,, and C, in addition to
calcium, phosphorus, and iron. It contains 20 times

more vitamin C than citrus fruit.

History & Folklore Used in Chinese herbal
medicine for at least 2,500 years, jujube has a
pleasant, sweet taste and high nutritional value. It is
mentioned in the Classic of Odes, a 6th-century BCE
anthology of Chinese poetry.

Medicinal Actions & Uses Jujube is both a
delicious fruit and an effective herbal remedy. It
aids weight gain, improves muscular strength, and
increases stamina. In Chinese medicine, jujube is
prescribed as a qi tonic to strengthen liver function.
Mildly sedative and antiallergenic, it is given to
reduce irritability and restlessness. It is also used
to improve the taste of unpalatable prescriptions.
Research In Japan, jujube has been shown to
increase immune-system resistance. In China,
laboratory animals fed a jujube decoction gained
weight and showed improved endurance. In one
clinical study, 12 patients with liver ailments were
given jujube, peanuts, and brown sugar nightly. In

4 weeks, their liver function had improved.
Related Species The sedative Z. spinosa is used
in Chinese medicine to “nourish the heart and
quieten the spirit!”

SLNV1Id TVNIDIGHN YFHLO

----- PAGE 286 -----


----- PAGE 287 -----
HERBAL
REMEDIES FOR
HOME USE

ri Herbal medicines have been used since the earliest times. They are a vital

part of our natural and medical heritage, and there is immense satisfaction
to be had in growing, harvesting, and processing herbs for home use.

Taken sensibly, and with the respect due to medicines of all kinds, medicinal
plants can greatly improve health. This section provides practical cultivation

advice and step-by-step instructions on how to make and use safe and
effective herbal remedies for a range of common ailments, from allergies
and digestive complaints to skin conditions and stress-related disorders.

:
»

----- PAGE 288 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

Growing Medicinal Plants

Growing medicinal plants may be more time-consuming than buying them,
but it brings with it the unique pleasure of producing your own herbal
remedies. Many medicinal herbs are easy to grow and will flourish indoors,
on a windowsill, or in the garden, providing a year-round supply of fresh,

sweet-smelling natural medicines.

The Medicinal Herb Garden

Planning an herb garden depends on a range of
factors including the space available, exposure, soil,
conditions, and climate. As a starting point, details
of ten of the most common and useful medicinal
plants for growing in temperate climates are given
in the chart below. Some of them, such as thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143) and sage (Salvia officinalis,
p. 131), may be grown indoors. A number of other
medicinal herbs, including German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77), lady’s mantle (Alchemilla
vulgaris, p. 163), and lavender (Lavandula officinalis,
p. 108) also grow well in a temperate climate and
are well worth cultivating. If in doubt about how

to care for plants or what will grow well in your

garden, consult a nursery.

Outdoor Gardens

Choose a range of hardy herbs to grow in your
garden that will establish themselves easily and
produce plenty of foliage that can be harvested.
Plant exotic or less hardy herbs in sheltered sunny
sites or in containers.

Container Gardens

Many medicinal plants such as peppermint
(Mentha x piperita, p. | 14) or bay laurel
(Laurus nobilis, p. 226) can be grown in pots,

Useful Herbs to Grow

hanging baskets, or window boxes. Care must
be taken to prevent them from drying out or
becoming pot-bound (when the plant becomes
too large for the container). Less hardy plants
should be moved to sheltered sites or indoors
during winter.

Growing Plants Under Cover

Sheltered gardening offers the opportunity to
grow more unusual plants. Use the greenhouse
to cultivate exotic plants, such as lemon grass
(Cymbopogon citratus, p. 198), for medicinal and
culinary use, as well as for growing seedlings to
be planted outdoors. Tender plants, such as holy
basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum, p. | 16), thrive indoors,
and some indoor plants, such as aloe vera (Aloe
vera, p. 60), have the added advantage of absorbing
polluting chemicals from the air.

Buying Medicinal Herbs
Reputable herb nurseries are the best place
to buy herbs when particular varieties or
species are required. Be clear about what
plants you want before visiting the nursery.

When buying for medicinal use, purchase the
standard medicinal, rather than an improved
or ornamental variety.

Cultivation

Bear in mind the following points when planning
the garden and choosing herbs.

Site

The majority of medicinal plants prefer a sunny
exposure and moderately well-drained soil. It is
possible to improve a site, for example by planting
hedges as windbreaks. Choose sheltered, sunny
corners for delicate and half-hardy herbs, and
avoid planting on land formerly used for industrial
purposes, which may be contaminated.
Temperature
Some plants tolerate only very specific
temperature ranges, and many herbs, such as
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128), are only
half-hardy and will not survive exposure to deep
or long periods of frost. Protect tender and half-
hardy plants from the wind to avoid the windchill
factor. Spring is the best time to plant most herbs.
Wintering plants in a greenhouse or cool indoor
site is often the only way to keep subtropical plants
in cool temperate climates, while other herbs will
thrive indoors all year round in a warm, sunny
position.

Soil

Soils vary greatly depending on the proportions

of sand, silt, and clay content. Sandy soils drain
easily and need feeding, while clay soils can become
waterlogged and require drainage.

Pruning

Pruning is used to remove dead wood and
improve the shape, size, and quality of growth.

It is an important garden activity and needs to

be done correctly for different woody plants

to benefit—check the best time of year for each
plant. Deadheading plants, especially shrubs,

PLANT WHEN CULTIVATION CONDITIONS & CARE MEDICINAL USES

TO PLANT METHOD
Aloe vera spring/autumn offsets m= sunny site indoors; pot up as = fresh plant gel for minor burns and
(Aloe vera, p. 60) needed; do not overwater wounds
Comfrey spring/autumn seed/division = warm sunny site; moist soil = ointment or poultice for sprains and bruises
(Symphytum officinale, p. 138) (use the leaf only)
Feverfew autumn/spring seed/cutting/division = well-drained or dry, stony soil m fresh leaf or tincture for headaches and
(Tanacetum parthenium, p. 140) in sun migraines
Lemon balm spring/autumn seed/cutting/division = moist soil in sun; cut back after m infusion for anxiety, poor sleep, and nervous
(Melissa officinalis, p. | 13) flowering indigestion; lotion for cold sores
Calendula spring/autumn seed = well-drained soil; full sun; remove = cream for cuts, scrapes, inflamed skin; infusion
(Galendula officinalis, p. 73) dead flower heads. for fungal infections
Peppermint spring/autumn cutting/division m sunny but moist site; do not allow —_m infusion for indigestion and headaches; lotion
(Mentha x piperita, p. 114) to dry out for itchy skin
Rosemary spring/autumn seed/cutting m sunny sheltered site; protect with m infusion as a stimulating nerve tonic and to aid
(Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128) burlap in winter weak digestion
Sage autumn/spring seed/cutting/layering = well-drained or dry, sunny, m infusion for sore throats, mouth ulcers, and
(Salvia officinalis, p. 131) sheltered site diarrhea
St. John’s wort spring/autumn seed/division = well-drained to dry soil with sun m tincture for depression and menopause;
(Hypericum perforatum, p. 106) or partial shade infused oil is antiseptic and heals wounds
Thyme spring/summer seed/cutting/division = well-drained soil, may need a layer —_m infusion for coughs, colds, and chest

(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

of gravel, sunny site

infections, lotion for fungal infections

----- PAGE 289 -----
Cultivated herb gardens can create a colorful, aromatic area with the added benefit of providing a ready supply of fresh herbs

to use both medicinally and in cooking.

encourages fresh growth. Pruning and tidying the
garden regularly also reduces pests and diseases.
Watering

Water well after planting and then, if needed,
once a week (rather than a little each day) in the
morning or early evening. Do not overwater as
many herbs produce medicinally active constituents
in dry conditions. Water dry potted plants
thoroughly before planting.

Weeding & Fertilizing

Weeding is necessary since weeds compete with
other plants for nutrients and water. Keep beds
and containers as free from weeds as possible.
Most medicinal herbs should not be fed or
mulched as this tends to reduce their therapeutic
strength. However, sandy soils should be fed with
a good-quality fertilizer to maintain the nutrients
in the soil.

Pests & Diseases

Use only organic methods to treat pests, diseases,
and insect infestation. Aphids can be eradicated
using soapy water or water in which garlic skins
have been soaked for 2 days. Separate any infected
plants to prevent further contamination.

Sowing Seeds in Containers

Fill a seed tray with seed soil mix and water well.

Sprinkle on the seeds, covering large seeds with
a fine layer of compost. Cover the tray with glass or
place in a plastic bag and store in a warm place (up
to 70°F/21°C).

Propagation Methods
There is a wide variety of
propagation methods. Choose

the one most suited to the plant.
When planting, prepare the ground
in advance, taking into account the
requirements of the individual plant,
and the soil, site, and time of year, as well
as the anticipated size of the mature plant.
Seed

Seeds can be sown either in containers or in
prepared soil in open ground. It is important to

time the sowing of seeds to enable seedlings to

be planted outdoors when weather and soil become
sufficiently warm. Annuals and biennials can be grown
with ease from seed and will grow vigorously
throughout the summer. Check the germination
requirements of perennials before buying seeds, as
some varieties germinate easily, while others, such as
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus, p. 94), can
be far more difficult.

if

Cuttings
This is one of the most popular methods of
propagation. It is suitable for woody perennial

Once the seeds have germinated, fill a number
of pots with soil mix. Gently lift up a seedling,
insert it in a small hole in the soil mix, and pack the
soil around it. Water thoroughly and do not allow to

dry out.

herbs. Cuttings are usually taken from the stem,
although some plants may also be propagated
from roots. Choose young, healthy plants and take
the cutting just below a leaf and stem joint using
a clean, sharp knife. Strip off the lowest leaves and
dip the stem in hormone rooting preparation before
inserting it in suitable soil mix. Some plants are
very difficult to propagate this way, so check before
attempting this method.
Root Division

This is an easy way to propagate plants that form
clumps. Divide spring-flowering herbaceous plants
in autumn, and autumn-flowering herbaceous
plants in spring. Carefully lift a mature plant, divide
it into smaller sections, and replant both the new
and the mature plant.

Plants from Produce
Purchase pots of culinary herbs from a grocery
or supermarket, split the seedlings into 3 to 4
small clumps, and pot them
separately. Fresh roots, such as
ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155),
or bulblets, such as garlic (Allium
sativum, p. 59), can be planted in pots
or in prepared ground outside, if
temperature allows.
Layering
Layering involves encouraging a
shoot or stem to form roots by
making a small slit in its underside
and burying it, with the growing tip
above ground. When the layer
roots emerge, remove and pot.
: “Mound layering" is suitable for
woody herbs such as
* sage (Salvia officinalis, p. 131).
Pile free-draining soil over
the base of the plant, and
when the layered stems
form new roots, remove
and pot.

Fresh ginger root rapidly produces many new shoots if
planted in moist compost in warm conditions above 70°F
(21°C).

Offsets

Offsets are produced from most herbs that grow
from a bulb or corm, such as garlic (Allium sativum,
p. 59). These can be detached during dormancy
and replanted.

4SN HINOH YOd SHICHNAY TVEddH

287

----- PAGE 290 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

288

Harvesting & Processing

Although there are some herbs that may be collected year round, most have
a particular growing season and must be harvested and either used immediately
or preserved for use in the following year. See the individual entries on

Harvesting from the Wild

Wild plants offer a free and natural source of
herbal remedies. Furthermore, active constituents
are often more highly concentrated in wild
plants since the herb is likely to be growing in its
preferred habitat.

Identification

Proper identification of wild plants is essential.
Use a field or wildflower guide to help you. If

in doubt, do not pick the plant, as poisoning can
result from misidentification.

Ecological & Legal Factors

While common species, such as nettle (Urtica
dioica, p. 146), may be readily harvested from
the wild, many rarer species are under great
pressure due to the lack of a suitable habitat.
In many countries it is illegal to uproot any wild
plant, and certain species may be protected.
Although gathering medicinal plants such as
gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99) may be legal in
some countries, it will only reduce their future
chances of survival in the wild. Never pick rare
or uncommon plants from the wild, even if they
are locally plentiful, and do not collect more than

pp. 56-283 for harvesting times. Herbs need to be processed quickly to
prevent deterioration and retain their healing action.

you will use. Do not harvest bark from the wild.
Before harvesting, consider where the plant is
growing and whether it could be contaminated
by pollution. Do not collect from roadsides,
close to factories, or in areas where crop
spraying has occurred.

Harvesting from Your Garden
Cultivated herbs provide a ready supply of
fresh material in a controlled environment.
Cut perennials carefully so that plants can
quickly regrow. Some plants, such as lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13), provide two
or more crops per year.

General Advice

Harvesting medicinal herbs requires careful
planning to ensure the parts are processed in
peak condition and fast enough to retain their
active ingredients.

Equipment

ideally, use a wooden tray or open basket for
collecting herbs. This prevents the plant being
crushed. In the wild, a non-nylon rucksack or

Ramsons can be found carpeting shady sites in damp woods in Europe. The bulb and aerial parts are harvested in early

summer for their antibiotic, healing properties.

sack may be more appropriate. Always cut with

a sharp knife or scissors to minimize damage to
the plant and try to handle plants as little as
possible. Wear gloves if gathering prickly or
allergenic plants, such as rue (Ruta graveolens,

p. 265).

What to Look For

Collect material from healthy plants, free from
insect damage and pollution. It is important

to discard damaged plants because they can lead
to disease or decay in dried plant material. Do

not mix cut plant material to avoid mistakes

in identification.

When to Harvest

Gather herbs in dry weather, preferably on a
sunny morning after the dew has evaporated.
Picking when the plant is at its peak of maturity
ensures that it will have a high concentration of
active constituents. Unless otherwise stated in
the individual plant entries on pp. 56-283, leaves
are best collected as they open during the spring
or summer months, flowers as they start to
bloom, fruit and berries just as they become

ripe, and roots in the autumn once the plant

has drawn its vitality back beneath ground. Bark
must be gathered with great care if the shrub

or tree is to survive—in most cases, harvest it

in spring or autumn.

The Correct Medicinal Part

In many cases, different parts of the same plant,
for example the leaves and seeds, can have quite
different actions and uses. Make sure that you
harvest the correct medicinal part of the plant
for your purposes.

Processing Quickly

Only collect plant material that you will be able to
use or process immediately after harvesting. This
is because fresh plant material deteriorates very
quickly and the medicinally active constituents are
often the first to be affected. In particular, aromatic
herbs can lose their volatile oils within hours. Salad
leaves and culinary herbs are best eaten right
away to make the most of their nutrients, although
they can be stored for a few days in a plastic bag
filled with air in a refrigerator.

Storing Herbs

It is vital to store dried herbs properly or they
will not last. Leaves, flowers, roots, and other
parts should be stored in sterilized, dark glass
containers with airtight lids. They may also be
stored in new brown paper bags, which must be
ept dry and away from light. Metal and plastic
containers are inadvisable because they may
contaminate the herb. If stored in a cool, dark
place, herbs can be kept for about |2 months
after harvesting. Herbs frozen in plastic bags can
be used for up to 6 months. Label the container
with the herb, source, date of harvesting, and
strength of preparation if appropriate. Watch out

----- PAGE 291 -----
for insect infestation. If this occurs, discard all
affected material and sterilize the container.

Processing

Herbs can be preserved in a number of ways, the
simplest being air or oven drying. A warm, dry
place such as an airing cupboard is ideal. Use plain
paper for drying herbs, never printed newspaper.
Dried herbs can be stored for many months ina
dark glass jar or a brown paper bag (see p. 288).
Aerial Parts

These include all the parts of the plant growing
above ground—stems, leaves, flowers, berries, and
seeds. The stems are normally cut 2-4 in (5-10
cm) above ground shortly after the plant has
begun to flower, when it is putting most effort into
growth. Perennials may be cut higher above
ground to encourage further crops. Remove and
dry large flowers and leaves separately; smaller
ones can be dried on the stem.

a Hang bunches of about 8-10 stems in a warm
(but not hot), well-ventilated, dark place. Ensure
that the stems and leaves are not too tightly
packed together to enable air to circulate freely
around them.

= Once brittle but not bone dry, separate small
stems, leaves, flowers, and seeds from the stems by
rubbing the bunches over a large sheet of plain paper.
= Carefully pour the dried material into a dark glass
jar or a brown paper bag.

Large Flowers

In most cases, flowers are picked just after they
have opened. Sometimes only specific parts of
the flower are used, such as the petals of calendula
(Calendula officinalis, p. 73), while other flowers are
used whole.

= Separate large flower heads from stems and
remove any insects or dirt. Place the flowers on
absorbent paper on a tray in a dry place, allowing
sufficient room between them for air to circulate.
a Once dry, store flower heads in a brown paper
bag or dark glass jar. Remove calendula petals from
the central part of the flower before storing.
Small Flowers

Small blooms can be picked with the stalk attached
and separated later. Hang small flowers, such as
lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108), upside down
in a paper bag, or suspended over a tray (see
drying seeds below). If the stems are fleshy, dry

as for large flowers, above.

Fruit & Berries

Harvest fruit and berries in early autumn when
ripe but still firm. If left to become over-ripe,
they may not dry properly. They can be picked
individually or in bunches.

a Place berries or fruit on absorbent paper on
trays. Put in a warmed oven (turned off) with the
door ajar for 34 hours. Move to a dry, warm, dark
site and turn occasionally. Discard any moldy
berries or fruit.

Brightly colored petals indicate high levels of |
active constituents.

Roots, Rhizomes, Tubers, & Bulbs

The underground parts of the plant are usually
gathered in autumn after the aerial parts have
withered or become inactive and before the soil
is waterlogged or frozen. Many roots may also
be collected in early spring before the aerial parts
begin to grow. Dig deeply around the root, prying
it out of the ground. Some tap roots are difficult to
uproot completely. Remove the required amount
and replant the remaining root.

a Shake off any soil and wash thoroughly in warm
water, removing any small, unwanted side roots
or damaged soft spots. Chop into small slices or
pieces with a sharp knife.

a Spread out the root pieces on absorbent paper
on a tray and place in a warmed oven (turned off)
with the door ajar for 2-3 hours. Move to a warm
place until dry.

Seeds

Collect ripe seed pods, capsules, or flowering
stems in late summer before the seeds have
been scattered.

For tiny seeds, hang small bunches of seedheads
upside down over a paper-lined tray, or place in a
paper bag. Allow to dry and gently shake. Remove
larger seeds by hand when dry.

Sap & Gel

Only harvest sap from your own garden. Collect
sap in the spring as it rises, or as it falls in the
autumn. Trees such as silver birch (Betula pendula,
p. 178) produce huge quantities of sap if tapped,
although this reduces the tree's vitality. Bore a deep
hole into the trunk—no more than a quarter of
its diameter—and place a collecting cup under
the hole. In spring, quarts of sap may be
produced, and it is essential to stop the hole
with resin or wood filler after about a quart (liter)
of fluid has been removed. Collect milky juices or
latex from plants such as dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale, p. 141) by squeezing the stems over a
bowl. Wear gloves, because latex or sap can be

corrosive. The gel from aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60)
is scraped out after slicing the leaf lengthwise and
peeling back the edges.

Bark

Only harvest bark from your own shrubs

or trees as it carries the risk of losing the whole
plant through overstripping or “ringing” (removing
a whole band of bark). It is best to collect bark
from outlying branches, which can then be pruned
back. If stripping bark from a plant, gather it in
autumn when the sap is falling. Remove insects,
lichen, and moss from the bark, cut it into small
pieces, and place it on a tray to dry.

Other Ways to Preserve Herbs

Apart from simply air-drying herbs, there are a
number of other ways to preserve their medicinal
benefits.

Dehumidifying

An effective but expensive way to dry herbs is to
use a dehumidifier, which literally sucks water out
of the plant. The dehumidifier should be placed

in amore or less sealed small room in which the
herbs are hung in loose bunches or placed on
mesh trays.

Freeze-drying

Freeze-drying retains color and flavor but is more
suited to culinary than to medicinal herbs. Whole
sprigs of herbs can be frozen in plastic bags. There
is no need to defrost before use as the leaves
crumble easily when still frozen. Chickweed (Stellaria
media, p. 272) can also be frozen and used topically
for itchy and weeping skin conditions. Many plants
may be juiced (see p. 297), frozen as ice cubes, and
thawed as required.

Microwaving

It is possible to dry herbs in a microwave oven,
though this is not recommended. The cut parts
should be spread out on kitchen paper and dried

in the microwave according to the manufacturer's
guidelines.

A drying rack for herbs can be simply made by covering a
wooden frame with wire mesh.

ASN A4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEUNEH ©

289

----- PAGE 292 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

i * colds, flu, and infections

Making Herbal Remedies

In the past, medicinal herbs have been made into an extraordinary variety of
formulations—not only infusions, decoctions, and tinctures, but also
preparations such as oxymels and elixirs. The following pages give simple step-
by-step instructions on making common herbal preparations. Making most
types of herbal medicine is not difficult, but it can be time-consuming—if you lack
time or equipment, buy ready-made remedies from an herbal supplier (see

Buying Herbal Medicines, p. 17).

Identification

Before using medicinal plants that have been
collected from the wild, it is essential that they be
correctly identified. If in doubt, do not use the herb.
The wrong identification of herbs has led to many
cases of poisoning. Foxglove leaves (Digitalis purpurea,
p. 202), for example, are often mistaken for comfrey
(Symphytum officinale, p. 138).

Utensils

Use glass, enamel, or stainless steel pots and pans,
wooden or steel knives and spatulas, and plastic
or nylon sieves. A wine press is useful for making
tinctures. Do not use aluminium utensils, as

this potentially toxic element is easily absorbed

by herbs.

Sterilization

All utensils used to make herbal remedies should
be sterilized for at least 30 minutes in a well-
diluted sterilizing solution, such as the type used
for a baby’s bottle. After soaking, rinse thoroughly

with boiled water and dry in a hot oven or wash
in a dishwasher. Proper sterilization maintains
hygiene and prevents remedies, especially creams
and syrups, from becoming moldy.

Weights & Measures

For most purposes, ordinary kitchen scales are
suitable, although electronic scales are more
accurate. Metric measurements of grams and liters
are generally much easier to use than imperial
measures when making remedies. If it is difficult
to weigh a small quantity, such as 10 g, on your
scales, measure double the weight; i.e., 20 g, then
halve the quantity. Liquids can be measured

in a kitchen measuring jug, although conical or
straight-sided glass measures are more accurate.
Very small volumes of liquid can be measured in
drops (see Measuring Remedies, right).

Storage

Different preparations may be kept for varying
periods of time before they begin to lose their

medicinal properties. Infusions should be made
fresh each day and decoctions must be consumed
within 48 hours. Store both in a refrigerator or
cool place. Tinctures and other liquid preparations,
such as syrups and essential oils, need to be stored
in dark glass bottles in a cool environment away
from sunlight, but can be kept for a number of
months or years. Ointments, creams, and capsules
are best kept in dark glass jars, although plastic
containers are also acceptable. See also Storing
Herbs, p. 288.

rr

Measuring Remedies

Iml = 20 drops
5ml =| teaspoon
15 ml =| tablespoon

150 ml = | herbal cup
250 ml = | cup

Never exceed the quantity of herbs used or
the recommended dosage. Although these
measurements are approximate, they are
accurate enough for most purposes and

are used as standard throughout this book.
The number of drops to | ml depends on the
caliber of the pipette (or size of the dropper tip)
being used. This can be checked by counting
the number of drops required to fill a 5 ml
measuring spoon (this book assumes that
100 drops is equal to 5 ml) and then adjusting
the drop dosage as necessary.

The Basic First Aid Kit

Adding herbal remedies to the conventional first aid kit in your home
increases the options available to you and your family when accidents happen
or illness strikes. The 13 remedies in this first aid kit can generally be found in

Bandage

Thermometer

Bandages

Feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium, p. 140)
capsules for headaches
and migraines

Slippery Elm

(Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
powder for coughs
and digestive upsets

Echinacea (Echinacea
spp., p. 92) capsules for

Lavender (Lavandula officinalis,

p. 108) essential oil for insect bites

and stings, burns, and headaches

each herb before use.

Tea Tree (Melaleuca alternifolia,
p. 112) essential oil is antiseptic
and antifungal

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis,
p. 148) tablets for stress
and insomnia

pharmacies, herbal stores, and health food stores. Alternatively, some can
be made at home, as detailed on the following pages. Check any cautions for

Comfrey (Symphytum
officinale, p. 138) ointment
for bruises and sprains, and
for healing fractures

Calendula (Calendula officinalis,
p. 73) cream for inflamed or
minor wounds, skin rashes,
and sunburn

Myrrh (Commiphora molmol,
p. 85) tincture for sore throats
and acne

Thyme (Thymus vulgaris,
p. 143) syrup for coughs,
colds, and chest infections

Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana, p. 102) distilled
water for healing cuts
and scrapes

Arnica (Arnica montana,
p. 172) cream for painful
bruises and muscle pain

Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)
capsules for infections; the oil
from the capsules for earache

----- PAGE 293 -----
Infusions

An infusion is the simplest way to prepare the more delicate aerial parts of
plants, especially leaves and flowers, for use as a medicine or as a revitalizing
or relaxing drink. It is made in a similar way to tea, using either a single herb or
a combination of herbs, and may be drunk hot or cold.

The medicinal value of many herbs lies chiefly in
their volatile oils, which will disperse into the air if
a lid is not used. This is especially important in the
case of German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77). Use a teapot, or place a lid or saucer over
a cup if making a small quantity. Use water that has
just boiled. Popular herbal teas, such as German
chamomile, are often taken as much for their
refreshing taste as for their medicinal value and
can be safely consumed in quantities of up to 5 or
6 cups a day. Some herbs, however, such as yarrow
(Achillea millefolium, p. 56), are significantly stronger
and must be taken in less frequent doses. Other
herbs, such as feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium,

p. 140), are so strong that they are not suitable for
use in infusions. Always check the recommended
dosage and quantity of herb to use, as infusions
have medicinal actions and can produce unwanted
effects at the wrong dosage.

Decoctions

Place the herb in the

strainer of the teacup and
place a strainer in the cup. Fill
the cup with freshly boiled

s water.

Cover the cup with

the lid and infuse
for 5—1.0 minutes
before removing the
tea strainer. Add a
teaspoon of honey to
sweeten, if desired.

Ww

Roots, bark, twigs, and berries usually require a more forceful treatment than
leaves or flowers to extract their medicinal constituents. A decoction involves
simmering these tougher parts in boiling water. Fresh or dried plant material
may be used and should be cut or broken into small pieces before decocting.
Like infusions, decoctions can be taken hot or cold.

Decoctions are generally made using roots,
bark, and berries, but sometimes leaves and
flowers may be included. Add these more
delicate parts of a plant once the heat is turned
off and the decoction has finished simmering
and is beginning to cool. Then strain and use

as required.

Chinese Decoctions

In traditional Chinese medicine, decoctions are
the main way in which herbal medicines are
prepared. Large quantities of herb are often used
to produce a highly concentrated liquid, or the
decoction is further reduced so that there is
only % cup (200 ml) of liquid remaining. This
increases the preparation’s concentration. This
process is useful for astringent barks such as
babul (Acacia nilotica, p. 159) and common oak
(Quercus robur, p. 260), which may be used
externally to tighten gums or wash weeping skin
rashes. (Do not take internally.)

Place the herbs in a saucepan. Cover with

cold water and bring to a boil. Simmer for
about 20-30 minutes, until the liquid is
reduced by about one-third.

Standard Quantity

CUP | tsp (2-3 g) dried or 2 tsp (4-6 g) fresh
herb (or mixture of herbs) to a cup of water
(this makes | dose)

POT 20 g dried herb or 30 g fresh herb (or a
mixture of different herbs) to 2 cups (500 ml)
of water

Standard Dosage
Take 3—4 doses (2 cups/500 ml) each day.

Storage
Store in a covered jug in a refrigerator or cool
place for up to 24 hours.

a
=

Pot Infusion
Warm the pot, then add the herb.
Pour in water that has just
boiled, replace the lid, and
infuse for 10 minutes.
Strain some of the

infusion into a cup.
A teaspoon of
honey may be
added if desired.

*
al

Standard Quantity

20 g dried or 40 g fresh herb (or mixture of
herbs) to 3 cups (750 ml) cold water, reduced
to about 2 cups (500 ml) after simmering (this
makes 3—4 doses)

Standard Dosage
Take 3—4 doses (2 cups/500 ml) each day.

Storage
Store in a covered jug in a refrigerator or cool
place for up to 48 hours.

Strain the liquid through a sieve into =

a jug. Pour the required amount into
a cup, then cover the jug and store in a

cool place.

aSN ¢4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEUNEH ©

291

----- PAGE 294 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

Tinctures

Tinctures are made by soaking an herb in alcohol. This encourages the active
plant constituents to dissolve, giving tinctures a relatively stronger action than
infusions or decoctions. They are convenient to use and last up to two years.
Tinctures can be made using a jug and a jelly bag, instead of a wine press.
Although mainly used in European, American, and Australian herbal medicine,
tinctures play a part in most herbal traditions.

Tinctures are strong preparations, and it is essential
to check the recommended dosage. Never use
industrial alcohol, methylated spirits (methyl alcohol)
or rubbing alcohol (isopropyl alcohol) in tinctures.

Alcohol-reduced Tinctures =
Alcoholic tinctures should sometimes be avoided,
for example during pregnancy or a gastric
inflammation. Adding | tsp (5 ml) of tincture to a
small glass of almost boiling water and leaving it
for 5 minutes allows the alcohol to evaporate. To

label the jar. Shake well for |
dark place for | 0-

Noa

make nonalcoholic tinctures, replace the alcohol
with vinegar or glycerol.

Tincture Ratios

Tinctures are made in different strengths,
expressed as ratios. In this book, a 1:5 ratio
(| part herb to 5 parts alcohol) is used, unless
otherwise stated.

Set up the wine press, placing a muslin or nylon
mesh bag securely inside. Pour in the mixture and
collect the liquid in the jug.

Slowly close the wine press, extracting the
remaining liquid from the herbs until no more
drips appear. Discard the leftover herbs.

Capsules & Powders

Powdered herbs are most easily taken as capsules but can be sprinkled on food
or taken with water. Externally, they can be applied as a dusting powder to the
skin or mixed with tinctures as a poultice (see p. 295).

Reputable herbal suppliers are the best place Making Capsules
to buy powdered herbs and, in general, the
finer the powder the better the grade and
quality. Gelatin or vegetarian capsule cases
are also available from specialist outlets.
Powdered slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
makes a useful base for poultices (see p. 295),
and astringents such as witch hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana, p. 102) may be applied to weeping
skin or mixed into ointments (see p. 295) for
hemorrhoids and varicose veins.

Pour the powder into a saucer and slide the
capsule halves toward one another, scooping
up the powder (or use a capsule-making tray).

Place the herb in a large, clean glass jar and pour on

the alcohol, ensuring that the herb is covered. Close and
—2 minutes and store in a cool
14 days, shaking the jar every |—2 days.

Standard Quantity

200 g dried or 300 g fresh herb chopped into

small pieces to | quart (1 liter) alcohol—vodka
of 35-40% alcohol is ideal, although rum hides
the taste of bitter or unpalatable herbs

Standard Dosage
Take | tsp (5 ml) 2-3 times a day diluted in
| tbsp plus | tsp (25 ml) of water or fruit juice.

Storage
Store in sterilized, dark glass bottles in a cool
dark place for up to 2 years.

ee

Pour the tincture into clean, dark glass bottles
using a funnel. When full, stopper with a cork
or screw top and label the bottles.

Standard Quantity
Fill size 00 capsules, which contain approximately
250 mg of powdered herb

Standard Dosage
Take 2—3 capsules twice a day.

Storage
Store in airtight, dark glass containers in a cool
place for up to 3-4 months.

When the halves of the capsule are full of powder,
slide them together without spilling the powder,
and store.

----- PAGE 295 -----
Tonic Wines

Tonic wines are an agreeable way to take strengthening and tonic herbs to
increase vitality and improve digestion. Neither strictly medicinal, nor simply
appealing to the palate, they are easy to prepare at home. Tonic wines are
made by steeping tonic herbs, such as dong quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63), or
bitter herbs, such as southernwood (Artemisia abrotanum, p. |72), in red or
white wine for several weeks.

A simple and effective way to make a tonic wine
is in a jar or a ceramic vat with a tap at the base to
enable the wine to be drawn off without disturbing
the herbs. Wine can be added periodically to
keep the herbs covered, although, in time, this
will reduce the wine's tonic effectiveness. If
exposed to the air, the herbs may get moldy,
making the remedy not only ineffective but unsafe
to take.

Herbal Wines

Herbal wines are made by fermenting the herb

in the same way that wine is produced from
grapes. With the correct equipment this is

a simple process, but fermentation alters the
activity of the herbs and tends to reduce their
medicinal value.

Syrups

Honey and unrefined sugar are effective preservatives and can be combined
with infusions or decoctions to make syrups and cordials. They have the
additional benefit of having a soothing action, and therefore make a perfect
vehicle for cough mixtures as well as relieving sore throats. With their sweet
aste, syrups can disguise the taste of unpalatable herbs and are therefore
greatly appreciated by children.

A syrup is made with equal proportions of an
herbal infusion or decoction and honey or unre-
fined sugar. When making an infusion or decoction

for a syrup, it needs to be infused or simmered for
the maximum time to optimize its medicinal
action. Infusions should be infused for |5 minutes
and decoctions should be simmered for 30 minutes.
Press the soaked herb through the strainer or sieve
to remove as much liquid as possible. Small amounts
of neat tincture can be added to the cooled syrup to
increase its effectiveness.

Syrups Made with Tinctures

Syrups may also be made with tinctures instead of
infusions or decoctions. Combine 500 g of honey
or unrefined sugar with | cup (250 ml) of water.
Gently heat until all the sugar or honey has
dissolved and the mixture has thickened. Remove
from the heat. Once cool, stir | part of the
tincture, or mixture of tinctures, into 3 parts of the
syrup and bottle as directed opposite.

Pour the infusion or decoction into a pan. Add the

honey or sugar. Gently heat, stirring constantly
until all the honey or sugar has dissolved and the
mixture has a syrupy consistency. Remove from the
heat and cool.

Standard Quantity

100 g dried or 200 g fresh tonic herbs or

25 g dried bitter herbs and | quart (1 liter) of
red or white wine

Standard Dosage
Drink ‘4 cup (70 ml) each day before a meal.

Storage

Use a ceramic vat with a tap at its base, or a
sterilized glass jar. Store for 3-4 months, ensuring
wine covers the herbs. If the herbs become
moldy, discard the remedy.

Place the herb in a large, clean jar or vat.

Pour in enough wine to cover the herb
completely. Close the jar securely, shake
carefully, and leave to stand.

Allow the wine to mature over 2-6

weeks, then take a dose from the
tap or jar. Regularly top off the mixture
with wine.

Standard Quantity

2 cups (500 ml) infusion or decoction (see p.
291), infused or heated for the maximum time
(see left); 500 g honey or unrefined sugar

Standard Dosage
Take 1-2 tsp (5-10 ml) 3 times a day.

Storage
Store in dark glass bottles with cork tops in a
cool place for up to 6 months.

Pour the cooled syrup into sterilized glass

jars using a funnel and store in a cool, dark
place. Seal the jars with cork stoppers, because
syrups are prone to ferment and may explode if
kept in screw-topped bottles.

aSN ¢4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEGUNEH ©

----- PAGE 296 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

Infused Oils

Infusing an herb in oil allows its active, fat-soluble ingredients to be extracted;
hot infused oils are simmered, while cold infused oils are heated naturally by
the sun. Both types of oil can be used externally as massage oils or added to
creams and ointments. Infused oil should not be confused with essential oil,

Standard Quantity (infused oils)

250 g dried or 500 g fresh herb to 3 cups (750
ml) olive, sunflower, or other good-quality
vegetable oil

Storage
Store in sterilized, airtight, dark glass bottles
for up to | year; for the best results, use within

which is an active constituent naturally present in a plant and has specific

6 months.

medicinal properties and a distinct aroma. Essential oil may be added to an
infused oil to increase its medicinal efficacy.

Hot Infused Oils

Although hot infused oils can last up to a year,
they are most potent when used fresh. If only
using infused oils occasionally, make a smaller
quantity than the standard amount with the same
proportion of herb to oil. The wine press may be
replaced with a jug—when cool enough to touch,
squeeze the oil through the jelly bag as illustrated
in Cold Infused Oils below.

Many herbs make effective hot infused oils,
especially spicy herbs such as ginger (Zingiber
officinale, p. 155), cayenne (Capsicum frutescens,
p. 74), and pepper (Piper nigrum, p. 250). These oils
can be rubbed into the skin to relieve rheumatic
and arthritic pain, improve local blood flow, and
relax muscles. Other hot infused oils from leafy
herbs, such as comfrey (Symphytum officinale,

p. 138), speed wound healing. Oil infused with
mullein (Verbascum thapsus, p. 281) is used for
earache and ear infections, and chickweed (Stellaria
media, p. 272) ointment may be produced from

a hot infused oil (see p. 295).

Cold Infused Oils
Making a cold infused oil is a slow process and
involves leaving a jar packed with herbs and oil
to stand for several weeks. Sunlight encourages
the plant to release its active constituents into
the oil. It is the most suitable method of oil
infusion for fresh plant material, especially the
more delicate parts, such as flowers. St. John's
wort (Hypericum perforatum, p. 106), calendula
(Calendula officinalis, p. 73), and melilot (Melilotus
officinalis, p. 234) are three of the most
commonly produced cold infused oils. St. John's
wort oil is anti-inflammatory and analgesic, and
may be applied topically or taken internally (after
consulting an herbalist) for peptic ulceration.
Olive oil is particularly suitable for cold
infusion as it rarely turns rancid. The intensity
of sunlight and length of time an herb is infused
affects the concentration of its medicinal
constituents. For greater strength, add the
extracted oil to a fresh supply of herbs and
infuse again.

Stir the chopped herb and oil together in a
glass bowl over a saucepan of boiling water.
Cover and simmer gently for 2-3 hours.

Remove from the

heat and allow the
mixture to cool, then
pour into the wine press
(or jug if not available)
with a jelly bag in place.
Collect the strained oil in
a jug, pressing all the
liquid out of the herb.

Pour the infused oil

into clean, dark
glass bottles, using a
funnel. Seal and label
each bottle.

Place the herb in a clear

glass jar. Pour in oil until it
completely covers the herb,
close the jar, and shake well.
Place the jar in a sunny spot,
such as on a windowsill, and
leave for 2—6 weeks.

Pour the oil and herb

mixture into a jelly bag,
secured to the rim of a jug or
bowl with string (or use a
wine press as pictured above
in hot infused oils). Allow the
oil to filter through the bag.

Squeeze out the remaining

oil from the bag. Pour the
infused oil into dark glass
bottles, label, and store.
Alternatively, repeat the whole
process with the infused oil
and fresh herbs.

----- PAGE 297 -----
Ointments

Ointments contain oils or fats heated with herbs and, unlike creams, contain no
water. As a result, ointments form a separate layer on the surface of the skin.
They protect against injury or inflammation of damaged skin and carry active
medicinal constituents, such as essential oils, to the affected area. Ointments
are useful in conditions such as hemorrhoids or where protection is needed
from moisture, as in chapped lips and diaper rash.

Ointments can be made with dozens of bases
and they vary in consistency, depending on the
constituents and proportions used. The simplest
way to make a soft, all-purpose ointment is to use
petroleum jelly or soft paraffin wax (other methods
are explained below). Petroleum jelly is impermeable
to water and provides a protective barrier for the
skin. Single herbs or mixtures of herbs may be
used as required, provided they are finely cut, and
essential oil can be stirred into the ointment just
before straining.

Different Consistencies

A solid and relatively grease-free ointment will
spread easily and is useful for preparations such as
lip balms. This may be made by using alternatives
to mineral oils. Melt 140 g of coconut oil with
120 g of beeswax and 100 g of powdered herb.
Simmer gently for 90 minutes in a glass bowl set
in a pan of boiling water or a double boiler, then
strain and pour into jars.

A less solid ointment, for conditions such as skin
rashes, may be made by combining olive oil and
beeswax. Melt 60 g of beeswax with 2 cups (500
ml) of olive oil and |20 g of dried or 300 g of
fresh herb in a glass bowl. Cover and place in a
warm oven for 3 hours, then remove, strain, and
pour into Jars. This ointment can also be made by
combining 2 cups (500 ml) of hot infused oil (see
p. 294) with 60 g of melted beeswax.

Poultices

Melt the petroleum jelly or wax

in a glass bowl set in a pan of
boiling water, or use a double
boiler. Add the finely cut herb
and simmer for |5 minutes,
stirring continuously.

Wearing rubber gloves, squeeze as much of the
hot herb mixture as possible through the bag into
the jug.

A poultice is a mixture of fresh, dried, or powdered herbs that is applied to an
affected area. Poultices are used to ease nerve or muscle pains, sprains, or broken
bones, and to draw pus from infected wounds, ulcers, or boils.

A poultice of self-heal (Prunella vulgaris, p. 256)
relieves sprains and fractures, while St. John’s wort
(Hypericum perforatum, p. 106) can help ease muscle
or nerve pains.

Drawing Boils & Infected Wounds

Slippery elm powder (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)

mixed with calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
tincture or myrrh (Commiphora molmol, p. 85)
tincture makes a useful poultice for drawing boils
and wounds.

Simmer the herb for 2 minutes. Squeeze out any
excess liquid, rub some oil on the affected area to
prevent sticking, and apply the herb while hot.

ooo
Standard Quantity
60 g dried or 150 g fresh herb (or mixture
of herbs) to 500 g of petroleum jelly or soft
paraffin wax

Standard Application
Apply a little 3 times a day.

Storage
Store in sterilized, dark glass jars with lids for up
to 3 months.

¢ ‘ Pour the herb mixture

into a jelly bag secured
to the rim of a jug with
string, and allow the liquid
to filter through.

Quickly pour the molten
ointment into jars before
it sets in the jug. Place the
lid on each jar without
securing it firmly. When
cool, tighten the lids
and label.

Standard Quantity
Sufficient herb to cover the affected area

Standard Application
Apply a new poultice every 2-3 hours. Repeat
as often as required.

Bandage the
herb securely
in place using gauze or
cotton strips. Leave on for
up to 3 hours, as required.

ASN 4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEGUNEH ©

----- PAGE 298 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

296

Creams

Making a cream involves combining oil or fat and water in an emulsion. If the
process is rushed, the oil and water may separate. Unlike ointments, creams
blend with the skin and have the advantage of being cooling and soothing
while at the same time allowing the skin to breathe and sweat naturally. They
can, however, deteriorate quite quickly and are best stored in dark, airtight
jars in a refrigerator.

Small quantities of additional ingredients such as
tinctures, powders, and essential oils can be added
to a cream before or after it is put in jars. Adding
an essential oil, such as | ml of tea tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia, p. 112), to “2 cup (100 ml) of cream,
counters mold growth and lengthens shelf life, as
does | tsp (5 ml) of borax. Other recipes for
making cream use infusions, tinctures, or infused
oils.

Melt the emulsifying

wax in a glass
bowl set in a pan
of boiling water,
or a double boiler.
Add the glycerine,
water, and herb
while stirring, and
simmer for 3 hours.

Strain the mixture through a wine press or
a jelly bag. Stir slowly but continuously until
it cools and sets.

Compresses & Lotions

Lotions are water-based herbal preparations such as infusions, decoctions,
or diluted tinctures that are used to bathe inflamed or irritated skin.
Compresses are cloths soaked in a lotion and held against the skin. Lotions
and compresses are both simple ways to use herbs externally and can be very
effective in relieving swelling, bruising, and pain, soothing inflammation and
headaches, and cooling fevers.

After an accident or sports injury, bruising and
swelling can often be reduced or prevented
if a hot compress is swiftly applied, provided
the skin is unbroken. Cold compresses are
particularly useful in soothing inflammation,
cooling fevers, and easing headaches. Both hot
and cold compresses should be frequently
soaked and reapplied for maximum benefit.

Applying a Compress

Applying a Lotion

As specified, make an infusion or decoction
(see p. 291), and strain it well. Alternatively,
dilute a tincture with water. Soak a clean cloth
in the lotion and wring it out thoroughly. Then
gently bathe the affected area with the cloth
(rather than laying it on the skin as you would
a compress).

Wash your hands thoroughly and soak a soft cloth

or clean washcloth in the lotion. Wring out the
excess liquid. Before applying, rub some oil on the
affected area to prevent sticking.

Standard Quantity
30 g dried or 75 g fresh herb, | 50 g emulsifying
wax, 70 g glycerine, and 4 cup (80 ml) water

Standard Dosage
Rub a little into the affected area 2-3 times a day.

Storage
Store in sterilized, airtight, dark glass jars in a
refrigerator for up to 3 months.

With a small knife or spatula, place the set cream
into dark glass jars. Tighten the lids and label. Store

in a refrigerator as soon as possible.

Standard Quantity of Lotion
2 cups (500 ml) infusion or decoction, or 5 tsp
(25 ml) tincture in 2 cups (500 ml) water

Standard Application of

Compress or Lotion

Use as required. Prepare a fresh compress or
lotion when it cools (if hot) or when it dries
(if cool).

Storage
Store lotions in sterilized bottles, with lids, ina
refrigerator for up to 2 days.

Place the compress against the affected area. For
pain and swellings, secure the compress with

plastic film and safety pins and leave for up to |—2
hours. Reapply as required.

----- PAGE 299 -----
Other Preparations

Different herbal preparations suit different ailments. Most of the following
preparations provide localized relief. Steam inhalations, for example, help
clear various respiratory complaints; gargles and mouthwashes soothe sore
throats and mouth ulcers; massage oils can ease aching muscles; and skin

washes relieve inflamed skin conditions.

Steam Inhalations
Steam inhalations are an effective way to clear
congestion and relieve sinusitis, hay fever, and
bronchial asthma. The combination of steam and
antiseptic ingredients clears the airways
throughout the respiratory system.

To make Pour | quart of freshly boiled water into
a large bowl, add 5-10 drops of essential oil, and
stir well. Alternatively, make an infusion of 25 g of
herb to | quart of water, brew for 15 minutes, and
pour into a bowl. Cover the head and bowl with a
towel, close the eyes, and inhale the steam for
about 10 minutes or until the preparation

cools. After a steam inhalation, it
is advisable to stay in a warm

Zp
room for 15 minutes to allow

the airways to adjust and

any congestion to clear.

~ y

Inhalations
using essential
oil relieve many
respiratory complaints.

Gargles & Mouthwashes

Gargles and mouthwashes usually contain astringent
herbs, which tighten the mucous membranes of the
mouth and throat. Astringent herbs such as rhatany
(Krameria triandra, p. 225) and myrrh (Commiphora
molmol, p. 85), can be made more palatable and
more effective for sore throats by adding a little
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101) or a pinch of
cayenne pepper (Capsicum frutescens, p. 74) to the
preparation. As gargles and mouthwashes are made
from infusions, decoctions, or diluted tinctures, they
can generally be swallowed for internal treatment.
Ensure you do not exceed the daily internal dose
of an herb.

To make Make an infusion (see p. 291) but allow it
to stand for 15-20 minutes in order to increase its

Infusions made with
antiseptic herbs make
useful gargles and
mouthwashes for sore
throats and mouth ulcers.

astringency. Strain, then gargle, or rinse the mouth
with a cupful. Alternatively, use a decoction (p. 291)
or dilute about | tsp (5 ml) of tincture in 4 cup
(100 ml) of hot water and use in the same way.
Repeat as often as required unless specified.

Pessaries & Suppositories

Pessaries and suppositories are waxy pellets
containing essential oil or fine powder. They are
used when oral medicine is likely to be broken
down during digestion before reaching its intended
site. Pessaries are inserted into the vagina and
suppositories into the anus, where they melt at
body temperature. The herb is quickly absorbed
into the bloodstream, providing fast relief. It is best
to buy ready-made suppositories.
To make pessaries Use a pessary mold or make 24
molds from cooking foil shaped around a

thimble. Mix 10 g of soft soap, 2 tbsp plus 2 tsp

(50 ml) of glycerine and 2 tbsp (40 ml) of
methylated spirits and pour into the molds. Leave
for a few minutes to coat the molds, then pour out
the excess and leave to harden. Melt 20 g of cocoa
butter, remove from the heat, and add 30 drops of
essential oil or 5 g of powder. Pour into the shells
and leave to set for 3 hours, before removing the
pessaries. Store in a cool place in a pot lined with
greaseproof paper for up to 3 months.

Essential Oils

Essential oils can be used in massage to soothe minor
aches and pains. Before use, they should be diluted
with a carrier oil as they can irritate the skin. Essential
oils deteriorate rapidly after dilution, so it is best to
mix small quantities as you need them.

For massage Mix 5—|0 drops of essential oil with

| tbsp of carrier oil, such as wheatgerm

or almond oil, and massage gently into === —*
the skin.

Oil burner Use 5—10 drops of neat

essential oil mixed with water. Burn

for 30 minutes.

Essential oils are
used in baths and
oil burners, and in
massage to relieve
tension and stress.

‘4
The eyebath is applied to the affected eye and the head is
tilted well back.

Baths & Skin Washes

Herbal baths and skin washes can relieve many
conditions, including aching limbs and stuffy
sinuses. They are made from diluted essential oils
or infusions. Eyebaths soothe sore, inflamed, or
irritated eyes.

To make an herbal bath Add 2 cups (500 ml) of
strained infusion (see p. 291) or 5—10 drops of
essential oil to a running bath.

To make a skin wash Make an infusion, strain it,
and bathe the affected area.

To make an eyebath Make a small quantity of an
infusion or use an herbal teabag. Strain the liquid
carefully into a sterilized eyebath. Alternatively, add
2-3 drops of a tincture to an eyebath filled with
water that has just boiled. Allow to cool and place
the eyebath firmly over the eye. Tip the head back
and bathe the eye by continuously blinking. Repeat
up to 3 times a day.

General cautions Eyebaths should be very weak, so as
not to sting the eyes. Always use boiled, cooled water in a
sterilized container. Do not bathe eyes over a period of
more than 2-3 weeks at a time. If bathing eyes frequently,
add a tiny pinch of salt to each eyebath to counter
leaching of salts and minerals from the eye.

Cold Macerations

Heat destroys the active constituents of some
herbs, and a cold maceration is more appropriate
than a decoction.

To make Pour 2 cups (500 ml) of cold water over
25 g of herb and leave to stand overnight. Strain
and use as you would a decoction

Juices

The juices extracted from many herbs can be taken
internally or applied externally.

To make Pulp the plant, preferably using a
mechanical juicer. Otherwise use a food processor.
Squeeze the pulp through a jelly bag to collect the
juice. Some herbs need to be cooked in order to
extract their juice.

ASN 4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEGUNEH ©

N

&

297

----- PAGE 300 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

Using Herbal Remedies Safely

One reason that herbal remedies are so popular is that plant medicines are
safer and cause fewer side effects than conventional ones. However, herbal
remedies are not always safe, and—like medicines of every kind—they need

to be used with care.

What Can Go Wrong?

Following a few simple rules will normally ensure
that the worst that happens when taking an herbal
medicine is that there is no improvement in your
condition. Nevertheless, there are situations in which
herbal remedies can cause damage, and several
medicinal herbs have been shown to interact with
conventional medicines. In very rare circumstances
people have become seriously ill or have died from
taking herbal medicines, though in almost every
case the problem has resulted from one of the
following safety factors being ignored. If at any time
you think that you are reacting badly to an herbal
medicine, stop taking it immediately, and contact a
qualified herbalist or naturopath, or your doctor.

How Problems Can Occur

The wrong herb is used due to mistaken
identification. Usually, when herbs are bought over
the counter you have no need to worry, as the
necessary checks have been made to ensure it
has been correctly identified. If you are harvesting

Ragwort is a toxic plant and,
with its yellow flowers, easily
mistaken for St. John’s wort.

herbs from the wild, you must be certain
what herb it is that you are collecting. For
example, ragwort (Senecio jacobaea), which
is very toxic to the liver, can easily be
mistaken for St. John’s wort (Hypericum
perforatum, p. 106): both grow in open
areas and produce clusters of bright
yellow flowers in the summer. In rare
cases, the physical act of picking certain
highly toxic herbs could be dangerous,
because absorption takes place across the skin.
Hemlock (Conium maculatum, p. 194), for example,
is so toxic that serious side effects can result from
simply handling the plant.

The wrong part of an herb is used. It is important
to use the correct part of the herb. Sometimes
one part of a plant is safe, while all other parts
are poisonous. For example, while the potato
tuber (Solanum tuberosum, p. 271) makes good,
nutritious food, all other parts of the plant are
highly toxic.

Poor-quality material is used or the herb has
been poorly prepared. If you are making up your
own remedy, follow the recommended methods
for storage and preparation (see Harvesting &
Processing, pp. 288-289). If buying over the counter,
check the section on Quality Control (see p. |7) for
advice on purchasing good-quality products.

The wrong herbal remedy is being used. You can
avoid this problem if you stick to using well-known
herbs and take them to treat the conditions for
which they are usually recommended. Ginger
(Zingiber officinale, p. 155) and sweet flag (Acorus
calamus, p. 57) both help to relieve nausea and
indigestion, but ginger is an altogether safer
medicine—it is better known, is a common
treatment for motion and morning sickness, and,
unlike sweet flag, has no known side effects.

The herbal remedy interacts with other
medicines. Herbal remedies are medicines, so

it should come as no surprise that conventional
medicines can interact with them. Several herbs
are known to interact with conventional medicines.
St. John's wort, for example, speeds up the rate
at which the liver breaks down a range of drugs,
including certain antibiotics, antiepileptics, and
immune-suppressants. This reduces their

Dong quai has been shown
to thin the blood and is
known to interact with
conventional anticoagulants
such as warfarin.

effectiveness within the body, and in extreme
situations could threaten life. It is also inadvisable
to take St. John’s wort at the same time as other
antidepressants. A number of herbs, notably
dong quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63), interact with
anticoagulant drugs, such as warfarin and
clopidogrel. These drugs are prescribed to prevent
blood clotting. Herbal products containing these
herbs will interact with anticoagulants and increase
the risk of internal or external bleeding. Always tell
health-care professionals what medicines you are
using—both herbal and conventional. If you are
taking medicines prescribed by your doctor, it is
always sensible to seek advice before starting to
take herbal remedies.

The herbal remedy causes an allergic reaction.
By and large, allergic reactions to herbs result from
touching the herb (contact dermatitis) and from
breathing in pollen or powdered herb (airborne
allergies). Some plants are well known for causing
contact dermatitis—rue (Ruta graveolens, p. 265)
for example—and should not be handled by those
prone to allergies. Some powdered herbs can
stimulate sneezing attacks in the sensitive—for
example linden (Tilia spp., p. 277). In some cases,
herbal medicines may trigger allergic reactions
within the body. This kind of response is more
worrying, and if you are prone to allergies it is
advisable to see a qualified herbalist before taking
all but the most common herbs.

Other treatment is needed. Sometimes herbal
medicine is not the appropriate form of treatment.
If you have an acute illness or injury, are seriously ill,
or do not recover as expected after taking an
herbal remedy, do not delay—seek professional
advice or emergency treatment.

----- PAGE 301 -----
Remedies for Common Ailments

Herbal knowledge is continuing to grow as more people choose herbs as

an alternative to pharmaceutical drugs. The following remedies are safe and
effective treatments for a range of common ailments; but, like all medicines,
they must be treated with respect. The suggestions given here are mostly quite
straightforward. However, if you are unsure about what to do, always seek
professional advice (see p. 320). For instructions on how to make herbal

preparations, see pp. 290-297.

Essential Information

Before using remedies read the following.

Dosage

a Except in Infants & Children (see p. 318), all dosages
given are for adults.

= Do not exceed the stated dose; doubling it will
not make the medicine twice as effective.

a Before taking a remedy, check the cautions in the
relevant herb entry (see pp. 56-283).

= Do not take more than 2 internal remedies at any
one time or more than | internal and | external
remedy for the same complaint, unless specified.
Where different forms of a remedy are given (e.g.
take tincture or infusion), the first is preferable.
How Long to Take Remedies

Take remedies until symptoms disappear. If there is
no improvement within 2-3 weeks, if the condition
worsens, or if in doubt, consult a professional
practitioner (see p. 320).

Professional Advice

a Advice is given on when to seek professional
guidance. Consult a professional if taking a remedy
for over 3 weeks.

Infants & Children

= Do not give babies under 6 months any

internal herbal (or other) medicine without
professional advice.

alnfants & Children, p. 318, gives children’s dosages.

Infusions make effective remedies; some
are also relaxing or refreshing drinks.

Remedies elsewhere can be used for children
under |2. Reduce doses as follows:

= 6~12 months old—/o adult dose

a |-6 years old—/ adult dose

= 7-12 years old—/4 adult dose.

Older People

Older adults, due to slower metabolism, may
require less than the standard dose. Those over
70 should usually take % of the adult dose.
Pregnancy

= During the first 3 months of pregnancy, avoid
all medicines, herbal or otherwise, unless
absolutely essential.

= Avoid alcoholic tinctures in pregnancy.

a The herbs mentioned in Pregnancy (see p. 317)
are safe to use. Many of the remedies elsewhere
in this section are also safe, but some are not.
Always check the cautions for the remedy and in
the relevant herb entry (see pp. 56-283) before
taking an herb during pregnancy.

Prescription Medicine

As explained opposite, some herbs are known
to interact with pharmaceutical drugs; others
may interact in as-yet unknown ways. If you
are taking a prescribed medicine, consult a
professional practitioner before taking an herb,
and do not discontinue any medicine without
their approval.

Herbal Preparations

= All quantities are for dried herbs unless specified.
a Where more than one part of an herb is used,
the instructions specify which part to use. Only
use that part. Do not use seeds sold for
horticultural purposes.

a Unless specified otherwise, preparations are
made with standard quantities of dried herb,

as follows:

Infusions (to make, see p. 291). Use a teaspoon of
herb to a cup of water, or make enough for 3-4
doses using 20 g of herb to 2 cups (500 ml) of
water. Use a covered container to retain the herb's
valuable volatile oils.

Decoctions (to make, see p. 291). Use 20 g herb
to 3 cups (750 ml) of water.

Inhalations (to make, see p. 297). Add 5—10 drops
essential oil to | quart (1 liter) of steaming hot
water or use an infusion.

Lotions (to make, see p. 296). Use 2 cups (500 ml)
infusion or decoction, or 5 tsp (25 ml) tincture
diluted in 2 cups (500 ml) of water.

Tablets or capsules (to make, see p. 292). Many
herbs are available over the counter in both forms.
Take according to the instructions on the packet.

Tinctures (to make, see p. 292). Some tinctures
are available ready-made. Take tinctures with cold
water unless specified. Sometimes the number
of drops recommended is given as a range, e.g.
20-40 drops. In these cases, start with the lowest
amount and increase by 5—!0 drops per dose

as required.

Essential Oils

Do not take essential oils internally unless advised
to do so by a professional practitioner. For
external use, dilute essential oils with a carrier oil,
such as sunflower or almond, in a ratio of | part
essential oil to 20 parts carrier oil; e.g., 5 drops
essential oil to | tsp (5 ml) carrier oil. For a bath,
add 5—10 drops of neat essential oil to the
running water. To use essential oils in massage,
see p. 297.

Other Information

For other preparations, weighing & measuring,
and equipment, see pp. 29|—297.

Self-help

Lifestyle, diet and exercise advice is given in this
section. In general, these suggestions do not
provide a “quick-fix” solution and need to be
followed long term if they are to be effective.
They should be used in addition to the
recommended herbal remedy. By ensuring that
your body has the right nutrition and level of
fitness, you protect yourself against many ailments
such as infections and circulatory problems, as
well as increase your chances of a speedy and
effective recovery.

aSN ¢4NOH YOd SHIGHANAY TVEUNEH ©

----- PAGE 302 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

a

300

Allergies
Ea

Nettle
(Urtica dioica)

Allergies often develop when the body's immune system
overreacts to an external irritant such as pollen, insect stings, and
certain plants, or internal substances such as chemicals and foods.
The allergens trigger a reaction in those who have a built-in or
natural sensitivity. In the long term, allergies are treated by both
reducing contact with allergens (if known) and working to reduce
the body's oversensitivity. Herbal remedies can bring relief to some

allergic states and are helpful in gradually reducing allergic reactions. See also

Skin Rashes, p. 303.

Allergic rhinitis is an umbrella term for allergic
reactions to irritants such as pollution, dust,
or pollen. Allergic rhinitis may occur year
round, while hay fever is usually caused by
seasonal grass or pollens. Symptoms include
sneezing; copious nasal mucus; sinus congestion;
watery, irritated eyes; and even asthmalike
wheezing. Self-treatment will help relieve mild
conditions, but for severe attacks, consult
a professional practitioner who can prescribe
herbs such as ma huang (Ephedra sinica, p. 95).
See also Congestion, Sinus Problems, & Earache,
p.312.

Diet

Reduce your intake of or cut out mucus-forming
foods such as dairy, eggs, sugar, white flour, fatty
foods, and alcohol.

Eczema

Characterized by red, inflamed skin, eczema
causes irritation, flaking, scaling, and tiny blisters.
Although it is often the result of an allergic
reaction to certain substances, eczema can also
be inherited, result from prolonged contact
with an irritant, or it may simply appear for

an unknown reason. It is best to consult a
professional practitioner as eczema is difficult
to self-treat. However, the following remedies,
taken for at least a week, can bring relief. Two
remedies may be used at once. Chickweed
reduces soreness or itchiness, and oats can be
used to impart a soothing, emollient effect to
bathwater. See also Skin Rashes, p. 303.

Self-help

To avoid scratching, cover the affected area
with an absorbent, non-irritating material such
as cotton.

@General caution If there is no improvement,
or if the condition deteriorates, consult a
professional practitioner.

Fi Allergic Rhinitis, Including Hay Fever

General Remedies

Herbs Nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146), elderflower
(Sambucus nigra, p. 132)

Remedy Make a nettle infusion. Take |74—2/4
cups (450-600 ml) a day for 3 months at a time.
Alternatively, make an infusion with | tsp of each
herb to |'% cups (300 ml) of water and take daily
for 3 months at a time.

Herb Baical skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis, p. 134)
Remedy Make a decoction from the herb and
take |'/ cups (300 ml) a day.

Hay Fever
Herb Elderflower (Sambucus nigra, p. 132)
Remedy Make an infusion and take | 4-17 cups
(300-450 ml) a day. Take for a few months before,
as well as during, the hay fever season.

General Remedies

Herbs Peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. | 14),
chickweed (Stellaria media, p. 272)

Remedy | Make peppermint lotion by infusing

| tsp of herb to % cup (150 ml) of water. Leave
for |0 minutes, then strain and cool. Use to wash
gently over the affected skin 2-3 times a day.
Remedy 2 Apply chickweed ointment, cream,
or freshly squeezed juice up to 5 times a day.
Option Add 2 drops of peppermint oil to

| tsp of any of the chickweed preparations.

Herb Gotu kola (Centella asiatica, p. 76)
Remedy Dust the affected area with powder
2-3 times a day. Alternatively, mix the powder
with enough water to make a thick paste and
spread over the affected area |—2 times a day.

Eczema with Weeping Skin

Herb Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana, p. 102)
Remedy Apply lotion or cream up to 5 times

a day (the lotion is preferable). Alternatively,
make a decoction with 2 tsp of leaves to 7% cup

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

a Life-threatening allergies, such as asthma.
Consult a professional practitioner prior to
taking any herbal remedies for such conditions

a Any allergy that shows signs of deterioration
after taking an herbal remedy

Allergic Rhinitis with Congestion
Herbs Eyebright (Euphrasia spp., p. 209),
common plantain (Plantago major, p. 251),
goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea, p. 271), boneset
(Eupatorium perfoliatum, p. 208)

Remedy Make an infusion with one or a mixture
of all of the herbs and drink up to 17 cups a day.
Note Use this remedy especially for copious, watery
mucus.

Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92),
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis, p. 165),
elderflower (Sambucus nigra, p. 132), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Take | tsp of equal parts of each
tincture 3 times daily with warm water.

Note Use this remedy especially for thick
yellow/green mucus and sinus congestion.

(150 ml) of water. Leave for |5 minutes, strain,
and cool. Use as a wash up to 5 times a day.

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita, p. 77)

Remedy Make an infusion using 50 g of herb
to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Apply directly to
the itchy area when cool, or add the hot
infusion to a warm bath and soak in it for at
least 20 minutes.

Herb Oats (Avena sativa, p. 175)
Remedy Fill a muslin (or similar) bag with
milled oats and place under a hot tap while
running a bath. Relax in the bath for

5-10 minutes.

SSS =i

----- PAGE 303 -----
Asthma is usually triggered by an allergic
reaction to substances such as pollen, dust,
animal hair, or certain foods, but may also be
related to an infection. The listed remedies will
relieve immediate symptoms, but in order to
find the cause of your ailment, or for long-term
treatment, it is best to consult an herbalist. All
the herbal remedies that are suggested here can
be taken alongside conventional treatment.
Herbs such as nettle, thyme, cramp bark, and
echinacea help to ease breathing, while essential
oil of German chamomile reduces inflammation.
@ General cautions Seek professional help for asthma.
Do not stop using steroidal or other inhalants. Their

use should be phased out gradually and only with
professional guidance.

Fi Mild Asthma, Wheezing, & Shortness of Breath

Wheezing & Shortness of Breath

Herbs Nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Make an infusion using 15 g of each herb
to 3 cups of water and drink throughout the day.

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p.77)

Remedy Make an infusion with 2 heaping tsp of
the herb to % cup (150 ml) of water and leave to
stand for 10 minutes in a covered saucepan. Remove
the lid, inhale the steam, and strain and drink the tea.

Option Use the essential oil in a steam

inhalation, or inhale 2 drops of undiluted oil placed
on a handkerchief.

Circulatory Problems

Witch Hazel
(Hamamelis virginiana)

To maintain good health, the body's ten trillion cells need

removes waste products. When this process is undermined
by poor circulation, the body may react with conditions such
as raised blood pressure, which places a long-term strain
on the heart. A high-vegetable, low-sugar diet and regular

aerobic exercise help to keep the heart active and the arteries clear of fatty
deposits that can clog up their linings. A number of herbs act preventively to
sustain good circulation—few more so than garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59).

Fi Anemia

There are several types of anemia. Iron
deficiency anemia, caused by blood loss
from a wound or menstrual bleeding, can be
countered with herbs. Bitter herbs, such as
gentian, improve the absorption of nutrients,
and nettle contains plenty of iron. Increase
your intake of other green herbs that
contain iron.

@ General caution Seek professional advice to
determine the type of anemia you have before
home treatment.

Mild cases of high blood pressure and
arteriosclerosis (hardening of the arteries)

can benefit from herbs. Garlic thins the blood,
reduces fatty deposits, and lowers blood pressure;
beetroot and ginkgo aid circulation, reduce blood
pressure, and prevent arteriosclerosis; and ginger
improves circulation, especially to the capillaries.

@ General caution Seek professional advice, especially
if already taking medication for a circulatory condition.

General Remedies

Herbs Gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99), wormwood
(Artemisia absinthium, p. 66)

Remedy Take 2—5 drops of either tincture with
water, half an hour before meals.

Caution Do not take wormwood during pregnancy.
Herb Chiretta (Swertia chirata, p. 273)

Remedy Take 5—|0 drops of tincture with water
3 times a day before meals.

Fi High Blood Pressure & Arteriosclerosis

General Remedies

Herbs Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), beet
(Beta vulgaris, p. 178), pomegranate (Punica
granatum, p. 259)

Remedy Take a garlic tablet or eat |—2 fresh
garlic cloves each day. Drink 2 cup (125 ml) of
beetroot or pomegranate juice once a day.

Note These are most effective when used to support a
healthy circulation and prevent illness.

Herb Baical skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis, p. 134)
Remedy Make a decoction and take up to
| cups (300 ml) a day.

Breathing Difficulty & Tight Chest
Herb Cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150)
Remedy Take | tsp of tincture with water up
to 8 times a day for 3 days, then reduce the dose
to a maximum of | tsp 3 times a day for 7 days.

Mild Bronchial Asthma from
Colds & Chest Infections

Herb Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92)
Remedy Take tablets or capsules, or 4 tsp
of tincture with water 2-3 times a day.

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Severe chest pain

a Palpitations lasting several minutes

= Hot, swollen, or ulcerated tender veins, or
dark red discoloration of the skin or veins

= Fainting or dizziness with weakness,
numbness, or tingling in any part of the body

Anemia due to Heavy

Menstrual Bleeding

Herb Nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146)

Remedy Make an infusion using 25 g of herb to
3 cups (750 ml) of water. Sip the whole dose at
intervals throughout the day.

See also Heavy Menstrual Bleeding—

Four Things Soup remedy, p. 315.

Herb Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p. 100)

Remedy Take tablets or / tsp of fluid extract
with water twice a day for approximately 2-3
months at a time.

Herb Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155)
Remedy Grate | tsp of fresh ginger into your
food each day.

|

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

ASN 4NOH YOd SHICHANAY TVEUEH a

301

----- PAGE 304 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

302

Palpitations occur when the heart suddenly
beats faster or irregularly. They can result from
stress, anxiety, and nervous tension; however,
they may also be caused simply by drinking too
much caffeine (in tea, coffee, and cola drinks). In
rare cases, palpitations indicate a heart problem.
They are a key symptom of panic attacks, which
are characterized by sudden, acute feelings of
fear and anxiety. Linden flowers and valerian
root are especially relaxing and calming for the
nervous system, specifically helping to reduce
underlying anxiety.

@ General caution Seek immediate professional
advice if palpitations last for several minutes.

Poor circulation can cause discomfort and painful
chilblains (sores caused by poor local blood
flow) on the fingers and toes. By stimulating
the circulation and getting more “warmth” into
the system with herbs and exercise, the blood
flow to the hands and feet is improved. Hot,
acrid herbs, such as cayenne or ginger, stimulate
the flow of blood through the arteries, helping
to prevent the development of chilblains.

Exercise
Aerobic exercise is often the key to improving
this condition.

@ General caution Seek professional advice if fingers
and toes frequently become cold and numb.

Varicose veins result from a weakness, or
increased pressure, in the veins. This causes the
thin supporting walls of the veins to bulge out,
resulting in distended veins and the pooling of
blood. Hemorrhoids are usually caused by
constipation. Many herbs can be of use in
relieving these conditions. Distilled witch hazel is
an excellent astringent, and yarrow has healing,
astringent, and anti-inflammatory properties.

Self-help

Home treatment should aim to relieve pressure
on the veins. Varicose vein sufferers should
avoid tight clothing around the waist or legs.

To ease hemorrhoids, try to maintain regular
bowel movements (see Constipation & Diarrhea,
p. 307).

General caution Do not massage or rub
varicose veins.

cae |
©) Palpitations & Panic Attacks

Palpitations

Herb Linden (Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy Make an infusion with up to 20 g of
linden to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Divide into 3-4
doses and drink throughout the day.

Herb Dan shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza, p. 130)
Remedy Make a decoction and take

3-4 doses during the day for up to | week.
Alternatively, take half the daily dose for up
to 2-3 weeks.

Cautions Do not take dan shen with anticoagulant or
antiplatelet drugs, or during pregnancy.

a
Fi Cold Extremities & Chilblains

Poor Circulation to the Hands & Feet
Herb Cayenne (Capsicum frutescens, p. 74)
Remedy Take cayenne tablets in winter.
Option Add a pinch of cayenne powder or
cayenne sauce to every main meal.

Caution Do not take tablets during pregnancy.

Herbs Cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150),
northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americanum,

p. 153)

Remedy | Make a decoction using |5 g of cramp
bark to 3 cups (750 ml) of water and take 3 doses
each day.

Remedy 2 Mix 5 g of prickly ash and 10 g of
cramp bark and make a decoction using 3 cups
(750 ml) of water. Take 3 doses each day.

(sss

Fi Varicose Veins & Hemorrhoids

Varicose Veins

Herbs Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana,

p. 102), calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Gently apply distilled witch hazel or
witch hazel cream or ointment to the affected area
|-2 times a day, or combine equal parts of the
creams of both herbs and apply |—2 times a day.
NOTE This remedy is particularly effective on
painful varicose veins.

Herb Yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56)
Remedy (External) Wash varicose veins

in a cool infusion, or apply the ointment

|—2 times a day.

Remedy (Internal) Make an infusion and leave
for 10 minutes. Take 7-1! cups (150-300 ml)

a day for up to 10 weeks.

Caution Do not take yarrow during pregnancy.

Panic Attacks

Herbs Linden (Tilia spp., p. 277), valerian
(Valeriana officinalis, p. 148)

Remedy Make an infusion using | tsp of linden
and 4 tsp of powdered valerian to 7 cup

(150 ml) of water. Drink 2/4 cups (600 ml) a day.

Herbs Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca, p. 227),
linden (Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy Make an infusion of motherwort or
make an infusion using 4 tsp of each herb to

| cup (150 ml) of water. Drink up to 4 cups
(600 ml) of either remedy a day.

Caution Do not take motherwort during pregnancy.

Caution Do not take prickly ash during pregnancy.

Chilblains

Herbs Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155),
lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82), echinacea (Echinacea
Spp., p. 92)

Remedy (Internal) Grate | tsp of fresh
ginger into your food each day. Alternatively,
drink 4 cup (70 ml) of ginger wine each day.
Remedy (External) Apply either fresh ginger,
undiluted lemon juice, or neat echinacea tincture
to unopened chilblains twice a day.

Note The external remedy helps to prevent blistering
and weeping. Once the blister opens you can continue
to apply, but it will sting upon contact.

Hemorrhoids

Herbs Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana,

p. 102), lesser celandine (Ranunculus ficaria,

p. 260), common oak (Quercus robur, p. 260),
calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)

Remedy | Apply either distilled witch hazel or
witch hazel ointment, or lesser celandine
ointment, |—2 times a day.

Remedy 2 Mix | tsp of common oak bark
powder with 2/4 tbsp of calendula ointment and
apply 1-2 times a day.

Difficult Passage of the Stool

& Painful Hemorrhoids

Herb Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
Remedy Take either slippery elm “food”
(see Acidity & Indigestion, p. 307) or tablets.

Herb Psyllium (Plantago spp., p. 123)
Remedy Take |—2 tsp of seeds soaked in 7% cup
(150 ml) of water overnight, twice a day.

----- PAGE 305 -----
Skin Problems

Calendula

(Calendula offcinais) a WhOle. While many minor skin problems respond promptly to
simple external remedies, severe or chronic skin conditions need internal
reatment and usually require professional advice. See also Eczema, p. 300.

Inflamed, swollen areas of skin are a common
reaction to bites and stings. Although they can
be very uncomfortable, most only cause local
itching and inflammation, which usually subside
within a few hours. All the remedies listed will
help to ease irritation and soreness. For the
most effective relief, use both an external and
internal remedy. Lavender relieves irritation
as well as being an insect repellent, aloe vera
is soothing and healing, and both calendula
and St. John’s wort reduce inflammation.
Echinacea stimulates the immune system

and nettle is antiallergenic.

@ General cautions Seek immediate professional
attention if prone to, or if there are signs of, extreme
allergic reactions, or if there is a sting in the mouth
and the throat starts to swell. Some stings and animal
bites are poisonous and may need inoculations and
immediate medical attention.

More annoying than debilitating, skin rashes and
minor burns, including sunburn, usually clear up
without assistance, although herbal treatment
can speed recovery.

Hives (urticaria) are usually caused by an
allergic reaction, but can also be triggered by
heat, cold, or sunlight. They only last for a few
hours but will often recur. For the most
effective relief, apply chickweed cream and
take one of the internal remedies.

Skin rashes have many causes, such as allergy,
infection, irritation, bites, stings, and temperature
changes. Use these remedies to alleviate
itchiness and swelling.
Small-scale burns usually respond well to
herbal medicine, but even small burns may be
deep and can quickly become infected. Before
using a remedy, bathe the burned area in clean,
cold water and keep the area cool for up to 3
hours with a clean cotton cloth that has been
soaked in cold water.

@ General caution If there is any sign of infection seek
professional advice.

The largest organ of the body, the skin protects against heat, cold,
infection, and trauma from the outside world. Although
continuously shedding its surface, the skin needs regular cleansing
and nourishing to remain healthy. Its ability to resist injury and
recover from damage largely depends on the health of the body as

Fi Minor Bites, Stings, & Swellings

External Remedies

Herb Lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108)
Remedy Rub fresh leaves, neat tincture, or
essential oil on and around the bite or sting.

Other uses This will also repel insects.

Herbs Sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum, p. 241),
holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum, p. 116), sage (Salvia
officinalis, p. 131), thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)
Remedy Apply freshly squeezed juice from the
leaves of one of the herbs.

Herbs Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60), calendula
(Calendula officinalis, p. 73), St. John’s wort
(Hypericum perforatum, p. 106)

Remedy Apply either aloe vera gel, calendula
ointment, cream, lotion, or tincture, or St. John's
wort oil. To make the calendula lotion, infuse

2 heaping tbsp of calendula in % cup (150 ml) of
water. Strain, cool, then apply.

Option Add 5 drops each of lavender (Lavandula

FP] Skin Rashes, Minor Burns, & Sunburn

Hives (Urticaria)

Herbs Nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146), heartsease
(Viola tricolor, p. 282), calendula (Calendula
officinalis, p. 73)

Remedy (Internal) Drink an infusion of 5 g of
each herb and 3 cups (750 ml) of water regularly
during the day. Repeat for | week. If symptoms
persist, take for another week.

Herbs Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141),
yellow dock (Rumex crispus, p. 264), burdock
(Arctium lappa, p. 65)

Remedy (Internal) Make a decoction with

5 g of each root to 3 cups (750 ml) of water.
Drink |'% cups (300 ml) a day and repeat for at
least | week.

Caution Do not take yellow dock in pregnancy.

Herb Chickweed (Stellaria media, p. 272)
Remedy (External) Apply cream as required.

Inflamed Skin Rashes
Herbs Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73),
comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138)

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Changes to freckles, moles, or warts
= Sudden swelling or allergic reaction
= Non-minor burns, including sunburn
= Shingles or suspected shingles

= Boils that do not disperse or burst

= Serious wounds, scrapes, bruising, bites,
and stings

officinalis, p. 108) and German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77) essential oils to | tsp
of one of the above preparations.

Caution Do not apply chamomile oil in pregnancy.

Tip Apply neat lemon juice (Citrus limon, p. 82) if
there is nothing else available.

Internal Remedies

Herb Nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146)

Remedy Make an infusion and drink 174 cups
(450 ml) a day, or take | tsp of tincture with
water 3 times a day for up to 3 days.

Herb Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92)
Remedy Take tablets or tincture.

Remedy Apply calendula or comfrey ointment,
cream, or lotion to troubled areas 2—4 times

a day. For the lotion, make an infusion, strain,
cool, and then apply.

Caution Do not apply comfrey to broken skin

Weeping Skin

Herbs Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60), witch hazel
(Hamamelis virginiana, p. |02)

Remedy Apply aloe vera gel or distilled witch
hazel or witch hazel ointment to the affected
area 2-4 times a day.

Minor Burns & Sunburn

Herbs Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60), lavender
(Lavandula officinalis, p. 108)

Remedy Apply aloe vera gel or neat lavender
essential oil to the affected area as needed.

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Infuse | heaping tbsp of herb in 7% cup
(150 ml) of water. Strain, cool, and apply as a
lotion to the affected area as required.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

303

----- PAGE 306 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

304

©] Minor Wounds & Bruises

Minor wounds, bruises, and grazes are part

of everyday life, and the remedies listed make
effective home treatments. Witch hazel is a very
good astringent for minor scrapes, bruises, and
swellings, protecting and soothing the damaged
area. Arnica can be used to relieve bruising, pain,
and swelling, and it combines well with witch
hazel. Wounds can be cleansed with aloe vera
gel which, like comfrey, is an excellent wound
healer. Comfrey ointment is helpful in clearing
old scars. See also Sprains & Fractures, p. 312.

@ General caution Seek immediate medical attention
for serious or deep wounds, bruising, or scrapes,

especially if the pain has not considerably lessened
after 24 hours.

Herbal medicine can help all these viral infections
that affect the skin.

Cold sores are caused by the herpes simplex
virus, and usually occur when the body has an
infection or has been exposed to sunshine or
wind. Tiny blisters form, mainly around the
nostrils and lips.

Shingles and chicken pox are the result of

a similar virus, causing sores to form all over the
body. Shingles are a sign that the nervous system
is run down and open to infection, so herbs that
support the nerves and the immune system as a
whole are as important as ones that work topically.
Warts, caused by the papilloma virus, can be
difficult to clear. With persistence, the remedies
here are often effective.

@ General cautions Always consult a professional
practitioner if you have, or suspect you have, shingles.
Take professional advice if you notice a sudden change
toa wart.

Fungal skin infections are easily picked up through
physical contact, and can be hard to clear. Athlete's
foot is a fungus (tinea) that grows in the skin
between and under the toes, causing it to split
and peel away. This itchy, sore condition can be
difficult to treat at home.

Self-help
Keep feet dry and clean and do not wear
synthetic socks or tightly fitting shoes.

——.

Cleansing Wounds

Herb Yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56)
Remedy Make a yarrow lotion, allow to cool, and
use as a wash.

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Make a calendula lotion with 2 heaping
tsp of herb to % cup (150 ml) of water, or use the
tincture neat or diluted in water. Apply either
preparation to the wound.

Note Calendula tincture will sting strongly, but it has a
greater antiseptic action.

Herb Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60)
Remedy Cleanse the wound with the gel

and cover with a dressing soaked in gel.
Change frequently.

Herb Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana, p. 102)
Remedy Apply distilled witch hazel (available over
the counter) to the affected area 2-3 times a day.

© Cold Sores, Chicken Pox, Shingles, & Warts

Cold Sores, Chicken Pox, & Shingles
Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), St. John’s
wort (Hypericum perforatum, p. 106)

Remedies Take /4 tsp of tincture of either

herb with water 2-3 times a day. Alternatively,
take echinacea tablets or capsules, or make

an infusion of St. John’s wort and drink up to

¥s cup (150 ml) a day.

Herbs Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), ginger
(Zingiber officinale, p. 155), lemon (Citrus

limon, p. 82)

Remedy (Internal) Eat |—2 cloves of garlic and
|-2 slices (| g) of fresh ginger a day.

Remedy (External) Apply either fresh ginger, half
a clove of garlic, or lemon juice to unopened cold
sores, shingles, or pockmarks up to 6 times a day.

TTS ee ee ee eee eee —<@Ccomml
©) Fungal Skin Infections, Including Athlete’s Foot

General Remedies

Herb Comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138)
Remedy Make a poultice and firmly apply to the
affected area for |—2 hours each day.

Caution Do not use comfrey on broken skin.

Herbs Tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. | 12),
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97), calendula
(Calendula officinalis, p. 73), thyme (Thymus vulgaris,
p. 143)

Remedy Mix 5 drops of tea tree, clove, or
thyme essential oil with | tsp of calendula
ointment. Apply |—2 times a day.

Caution Do not use thyme oil during pregnancy.

Healing Wounds

Herbs Comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138),
aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60)

Remedy Apply comfrey ointment at the edges
of the wound or, once a scab has formed, use a
comfrey poultice. Use aloe vera gel to cleanse
the wound (see left).

Caution Do not use comfrey on an open wound.

Bruises

Herbs Arnica (Arnica montana, p. 172), witch
hazel (Hamamelis virginiana, p. 102)

Remedy Apply arnica ointment to bruises and
swellings 2-3 times a day, or use distilled witch
hazel, as above.

Caution Do not use arnica on broken skin.

Herb Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13)
Remedy (Internal) Make an infusion and
drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Remedy (External) Make a lotion by infusing
| tbsp of fresh or 3 tsp of dried leaves in

¥s cup (150 ml) of water for 10 minutes. Strain
and dab onto spots 3—5 times a day.

Warts
Herb Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60)

Remedy Apply the gel directly to the wart 2-3
times a day for up to 3 months.

Herb Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis, p. 276)
Remedy Apply neat tincture to the wart 1-2
times a day for up to 3 months.

Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)
Remedy Rub on / clove 2-3 times a day.

Athlete’s Foot

Herbs Turmeric (Curcuma longa, p. 90),
calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Mix 4 tsp of turmeric powder with
3 tsp (15 ml) of calendula ointment. Rub in
between and under the toes each day.

----- PAGE 307 -----
Fl Acne & Boils

Acne and boils are the result of local infection,
hormonal imbalance, or internal toxicity, which
cause inflammation of the hair follicles and, with
acne, sebaceous glands. They should be treated
on the surface of the skin and internally.

Acne generally occurs during the teenage years
and results in whiteheads, pustules, and cysts,
usually on the face and back.

Boils are large, pus-filled areas of skin. They either
disperse or burst in a week. As boils are often
the body's way of expelling toxins, recurrent
boils may indicate a weakened immune system.
They can also suggest diabetes or a deep-seated
bacterial infection.

Herbs such as tea tree and garlic are antiseptic
and antibiotic. Calendula and comfrey promote
healing, and comfrey helps to mend scarring.

Self-help
Increase intake of vitamin C and garlic.

@General cautions Do not squeeze or burst boils
or acne pimples as the infection may spread. Seek
professional advice for recurrent boils.

External Remedies

Herbs Tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. 112),
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97), garlic (Allium
sativum, p. 59)

Remedy Dab | drop of neat tea tree or clove
essential oil onto the pus-filled head of a boil or
pimple twice a day. Alternatively, cut a clove of
garlic in half and rub over the area twice a day.

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Apply ointment or cream, or dab
undiluted tincture onto the pus-filled area
twice a day.

Herb Comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138)
Remedy Apply comfrey ointment or cream to
the pus-filled area twice a day.

Caution Do not use comfrey on broken skin.

Herb Lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82)
Remedy Dab pure lemon juice onto the
pus-filled area, or dilute | tsp of lemon juice
with | tbsp of water and use as a skin wash
twice a day.

Digestive Disorders

Ginger
Zingiber officinale

Fl Stomachache

Cramping pain is a sign that the stomach and
intestines are sore and irritated. This is normally
due to poor digestion, excessive nervous tension,
food poisoning, or infection. Stomachache may
occur on its own or lead to vomiting and
diarrhea (in which case, use the remedies on

p. 306). Garlic and calendula are antiviral and will
help clear digestive infections. Relaxing herbs,
such as German chamomile and cramp bark,
relieve stomach spasm. For maximum benefit,
they are mixed with carminative herbs to help
relieve gas.

@ General cautions Seek professional advice if
stomach pain is severe or recurrent. All species of mint
(Mentha spp.) are unsuitable for children under 5.

ty Everyone falls prey to certain digestive problems and, for those
with weak or unsettled digestion, life can be miserable. Poor
digestive health usually results from insufficient digestive
secretions, infections (such as gastroenteritis), disordered gut
bacteria, stress, and anxiety. Herbal medicines can improve the
complex functioning of the digestive system, helping to relieve
acidity, nausea, and bloating. Eating simple, wholesome food can be beneficial,
but it is difficult to generalize about diet. Some conditions may require fasting,
while in other cases, a certain type of food might need to be avoided.

Stomach Spasm

Relaxing herbs German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77), lemon balm (Melissa
officinalis, p. 113), cramp bark (Viburnum opulus,
p. 150)

Carminative herbs Anise (Pimpinella anisum,
p. 248), fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 2.12), mint
(Mentha spp., pp. 234-235), angelica (Angelica
archangelica, p. 168)

Remedy Mix 3 parts of a relaxing herb to | part
of a carminative herb and make an infusion. (For
the carminative herbs, use fennel seeds, aniseed,
mint leaves, or angelica root.) Drink up to 3 cups
(750 ml) a day.

Herbs Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145),
calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73), myrrh
(Commiphora molmol, p. 85), echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92)

Remedy Mix | level tsp of slippery elm
powder with sufficient calendula, myrrh, or
echinacea tincture to make a thick, smooth
paste. Place on and around the boil, and bandage
securely, Remove after |—2 hours.

Note This remedy is especially useful for drawing
painful boils and splinters.

Internal Remedies

Herbs Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale, p.141),
burdock (Arctium lappa, p. 65)

Remedy Make a decoction using 5 g of
burdock root and 10 g of dandelion root
with 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Divide into 3
doses and drink during the day.

Herb Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92)
Remedy Take echinacea tablets or capsules,
or make a decoction of |0 g of root to 3 cups
(750 ml) of water and drink during the day.

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Difficulty in swallowing

= Severe pain

a Vomiting blood

= Blood in the stool

Important Note

For continuing or recurrent digestive
problems, seek professional advice to
determine the cause.

Digestive Infections
Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)
Remedy Eat |—2 fresh cloves a day.

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Infuse 2 tsp of herb in 3 cups
(750 ml) of water and drink up to 3 cups a day.

Herbs Yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56),
peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. 114),

catnip (Nepeta cataria, p. 239)

Remedy Mix equal parts of each herb. Make
an infusion of 2 tsp of mixture to 7% cup (150
ml) of water. Drink |’ cups (300 ml) a day.

Caution Do not take yarrow in pregnancy.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

305

----- PAGE 308 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

306

Nausea and vomiting can occur for various
reasons, including food poisoning, infections,
fever, migraine, stress, or emotional problems, as
well as travel sickness. For short-term conditions,
there are many herbs that reduce or relieve the
unpleasant, empty, gnawing symptoms of nausea
and vomiting. Most of the herbs listed are also
very useful for travel sickness.

Ginger, in particular, and other close relatives
such as galangal and turmeric, are widely used
for nausea and vomiting. They help to ‘warm’
and settle the digestion.

Chiretta strengthens weak digestion and
relieves nausea.
Lemon is an excellent cleansing remedy for
weak and sluggish digestion.

If you are pregnant, or suspect you may be
pregnant, see Morning Sickness, p. 317, before
taking any of these remedies.

@ General caution Seek professional advice if nausea
is severe or is recurrent. All types or species of mint
(Mentha spp.) are unsuitable for children under 5.

Fi Gas & Bloating

Gas and bloating are common digestive
problems. As a preventative, take bitter herbs,
such as centaury and gentian, which improve
digestion. Infusions of aromatic plants such as
fennel, cardamom, anise, lemon verbena, or
peppermint are effective remedies. All the herbs
listed under General Remedies can be combined
by adjusting the measurements of each herb
using the same proportion to water.

General cautions Bitters are generally unsuitable and
unpalatable for children under 5. All types or species of
mint (Mentha spp.) are unsuitable for children under 5.

Many astringent herbs can be used to treat
mouth ulcers and tighten up weak gums and
loose teeth. Sage is particularly effective as it also
disinfects the mouth. Myrrh tincture will sting
but it will also increase the rate of healing.

Fi Nausea & Vomiting, Including Motion Sickness

Nausea & Motion Sickness

Herbs Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155), galangal
(Alpinia officinarum, p. 61), turmeric (Curcuma longa,
p. 90)

Remedy Make an infusion with one of the herbs
listed using about |—2 slices (0.5 g) of fresh root
or “A-/A tsp of dried, powdered, or grated root to
¥s cup (150 ml) of water. Use the fresh root if
possible. Infuse for at least 5 minutes and sip while
hot. Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day. Add 1-2
cloves (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97) if desired.
Option Use the remedy under Nausea with
Headache.

Tip For travel sickness, take the infusion in a flask or
chew crystallized ginger.

Weak Digestion

Herbs Chiretta (Swertia chirata, p. 273), centaury
(Erythraea centaurium, p. 206)

Remedy Take 2-4 drops of one of the tinctures on
the tongue each hour.

Herb Lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82)
Remedy Drink the freshly squeezed juice of a
lemon, neat or diluted, each morning.

Nausea due to Emotional Problems
Herb Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13)
Remedy Make an infusion with the dried herb or
use 2 tsp of fresh herb per % cup (150 ml) of
water. Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Protection & Prevention

Herbs Centaury (Erythraea centaurium, p. 206),
gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99)

Remedy Take 5—10 drops of tincture 3 times a
day with water.

General Remedies

Herbs Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 2.12), anise
(Pimpinella anisum, p. 248)

Remedy Make an infusion with —/ tsp of fennel
or anise seeds per 7% cup (150 ml) of water and
drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

©) Mouth Ulcers & Gum Problems

General Remedies

Herb Myrrh (Commiphora molmol, p. 85)
Remedy Dab neat tincture onto mouth ulcers
and infected gums once every hour.

Herb Sage (Salvia officinalis, p. 131)
Remedy Use an infusion as a mouthwash, or
rub gums with leaves or powder.

Vomiting with Dizziness & Vertigo

Herb Black horehound (Ballota nigra, p. 176)

Remedy Make an infusion and drink up to 3

cups (750 ml) a day.

@ Caution Seek professional advice if symptoms do
not immediately improve.

Nausea with Headache

Herbs Peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. | 14),
pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium, p. 235), bo he
(Mentha haplocalyx, p. 234)

Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp of
one herb per % cup (150 ml) of water. Drink up
to 24-3 cups (600-750 ml) a day.

Other uses This remedy combats abdominal fullness
and helps improve the appetite and digestion.

Caution Do not give these herbs to children under 5.
Do not take pennyroyal during pregnancy.

Loss of Appetite & Vomiting

Herb Codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula, p. 83)
Remedy Make a decoction and sip 2/4 tbsp

(50 ml) every 2-3 hours until the vomiting stops
or the dose has been taken over 2 days.

Other uses For anorexia, add 5 g of licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101).

Caution Do not take licorice during pregnancy.

Herb Cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum, p. 93)
Remedy Make an infusion with the crushed
seeds of 2 cardamoms per 7% cup (150 ml) of
water. Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herb Lemon verbena (Lippia citriodora, p. 228)
Remedy Make an infusion using | tsp of dried
or 2 tsp of fresh leaves per | cup (150 ml) of
water and take up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herb Peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. | 14)
Remedy Make an infusion and drink up to 3
cups (750 ml) a day. (See General cautions.)

Mouth & Tongue Ulcers

Herbs Myrrh (Commiphora molmal, p. 85),
echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101)

Remedy Mix equal parts of the tinctures and
apply neat or diluted (| part tincture to 5 parts
water) every hour.

----- PAGE 309 -----
Fi Constipation & Diarrhea

Herbs help both constipation and diarrhea

by gently restoring normal bowel function.
Constipation often results from insufficient
intake of fruit, vegetables, and whole grains,
while diarrhea is usually caused by intestinal
infection or inflammation, such as food
poisoning. Irritable bowel syndrome gives rise to
alternating bouts of constipation and diarrhea,
and spastic constipation results from tension
and muscle spasm in the colon.

Herbs

Dandelion root, licorice, and yellow
dock are mild laxatives.

Senna is a strong laxative and should only be
taken when other herbs have failed.

Psyllium seeds and husks cleanse the colon and
encourage normal bowel habits.

Cramp bark has antispasmodic properties and
can help spastic constipation.
Agrimony, bael, bistort, and black
catechu are astringent herbs that dry and
tighten the bowel lining. Only take in the short
term, as they impair absorption of food. They
are taken mixed with soothing, demulcent herbs,
such as psyllium or marshmallow, for diarrhea.

Diet for Constipation

Fruit acts as a gentle laxative within the large
intestine. Eat plenty of fresh fruit each day, such
as figs (Ficus carica, p. 21 1), apples, or tamarind
(Tamarindus indica, p. 274), which also counter
vomiting, gas, and indigestion.

@General caution Seek professional advice for
persistent constipation or diarrhea.

Fi Acidity & Indigestion

Indigestion, caused by too much acid production,
suggests a poor or inappropriate diet. To coat
the inner lining of the stomach and intestines
and protect them from excess acidity, take
slippery elm, arrowroot, or Iceland moss, which
are sticky, mucilaginous herbs when soaked in
water. Meadowsweet strengthens the lining of
the stomach and reduces acidic symptoms, while
German chamomile is amazingly versatile for a
number of gastrointestinal problems.

Diet

Cut out acidic foods, such as oranges, red meat,
spinach, and tomatoes, as well as alcohol and
tobacco if possible.

Constipation

Herbs Yellow dock (Rumex crispus, p. 264),
Chinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum, p. 126)
Remedy Make a decoction using | tsp of either
herb to % cup (150 ml) of water. Take last thing
at night.

Note Yellow dock is one of the mildest laxatives and
should be tried first. If this has no effect, take a single
dose of Chinese rhubarb each day. This has

a stronger action than yellow dock.

Cautions Do not take Chinese rhubarb or yellow dock
during pregnancy.

Persistent Constipation

Herbs Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141),
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101), yellow dock
(Rumex crispus, p. 264)

Remedy | Make a decoction using 20 g of
dandelion root to 3 cups (750 ml) of water and
drink each day, or use the ground root to make an
infusion and drink |74—2/4 cups (450-600 ml) a day.
Remedy 2 Mix 3 tsp of dandelion root and
yellow dock and | tsp of licorice. Use the mixture
to make a decoction with 3 cups (750 ml) of
water and drink 74-1 // cups (150-300 ml) a day.
Cautions Do not take yellow dock or licorice

during pregnancy.

Herbs Senna (Cassia senna, p. 75), ginger (Zingiber
officinale, p. 155)

Remedy Steep 3-6 senna pods and 2-3 slices
(1g) of fresh ginger in 7% cup (150 ml) of warm
water. Alternatively, take senna tablets. Take either
preparation for up to 10 days.

Note This is the strongest laxative listed.

@ Cautions Take for up to 10 days at a time. During
pregnancy, take on advice of a health care practitioner.
Do not give to children under 5.

General Remedies

Herbs Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145),
arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea, p. 233), Iceland
moss (Cetraria islandica, p. 186)

Remedy | Make an infusion with 2 heaping tsp
of one of the herbs to 2 cup (100 ml) of water.
Leave for 15 minutes. Take 2 cup (100 ml) up to
4 times a day.

Remedy 2 Make slippery elm ‘‘food” by mixing

| heaping tsp of powder and 3 tsp of cold water.
Stir in | cup (250 ml) of boiling water. Add a
pinch of cinnamon (Cinnamomum spp., p. 81) or
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans, p. | |) to taste. Take |
cup (250 ml) 3 times a day.

Herbs Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212),
galbanum (Ferula gummosa, p. 211), anise
(Pimpinella anisum, p. 248), or any one of the
Nausea & Vomiting herbs listed on p. 306.

Spastic Constipation

Herb Cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150)
Remedy Make a decoction using |5 g of the
root to 3 cups (750 ml) of water and take 7-4
cups (150-300 ml) a day or take 2 tsp of tincture
with water once per day.

Diarrhea

Herbs Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria, p. 162),
sage (Salvia officinalis, p. 131), bael (Aegle
marmelos, p. 161), bistort (Polygonum bistorta,

p. 253), black catechu (Acacia catechu, p. 158)
Remedy The above herbs are listed in ascending
order of astringency. Make a decoction using |
heaping tsp of one herb to | cup (225 ml) of
water and simmer for |5—20 minutes. Take up to
| cups (450 ml) a day for no longer than 3 days.

Note If using bistort or black catechu (the most
astringent herbs), mix with demulcents such as
Psyllium seeds (Plantago spp., p. 123) or marshmallow
root (Althaea officinalis, p. 165). Add | tsp, plus a pinch
of peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. | 14) or other
mint (Mentha spp., pp. 234-235), per | cup

(225 ml) of decoction.

@Cautions Do not take for more than 3 days at

a time and do not take again for 3 days. If there is

no improvement, seek professional advice. Do not
take sage in pregnancy. Do not give mint to children
under 5

Chronic Diarrhea &

Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Herb Psyllium (Plantago spp., p. 123)

Remedy Take | heaping tsp of seeds and husks
with at least % cup (150 ml) of water, 2-3 times
daily, or mix with food and then drink at least
cup (150 ml) of water. Seeds may be soaked in
cool water overnight before taking.

Remedy Make an infusion using | heaping tsp
of fennel or anise seeds, or galbanum herb,

to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Drink during

the day.

Indigestion, Abdominal Pain,
Bloating, & Hiccups

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p77)

Remedy Make an infusion in a covered
container. Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Acidity with Gastritis

Herb Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria, p. 98)
Remedy Make an infusion with the flowering
tops. Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

307

----- PAGE 310 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

a

308

Nerve & Stress-Related Problems

Valerian
(Valeriana officinalis)

Most of us have little opportunity to escape from daily
pressures, and consequently the nervous system is unable to
recover its natural vitality. Long-term stress can lead to anxiety,
nervousness, depression, insomnia, palpitations, and irritability.
Herbal medicines can be wonderfully effective for nourishing
the nervous system, calming and relaxing the mind, and gently
stimulating or sedating the body. Headaches and migraine

respond well to treatment with herbs, as can conditions directly affecting the

nerves, such as neuralgia.

Many people have experienced lack of well-being
and feelings of powerlessness that develop as
stress, anxiety, and tension take hold. There

is no instant answer, but a remarkable number
of herbs can reduce these symptoms, and, by
supporting the nervous system, gradually
restore health.

Lemon balm, skullcap, and damiana are
all calming herbs that ease physical tension and
help maintain a balanced mental and emotional
state. Lemon balm alleviates stress-related
digestive problems, skullcap combats panic
attacks, and damiana acts as a gentle ‘pick-me-up’
Valerian has tranquilizing qualities.

Ginseng and Siberian ginseng are
excellent for coping with stressful events

such as competitive sports, examinations, or
moving a household.

Ashwagandha is a supportive tonic herb,
strengthening and encouraging recovery

from long-term stress or chronic illness.

Lifestyle

When emotionally stressed, it is important
to eat well, exercise regularly, and allow time
for relaxation. Yoga and Tai Chi can be
particularly helpful.

©] Neuralgia (Nerve Pain)

Neuralgia is the pain caused by an irritated,
damaged, or trapped nerve. It usually occurs

in brief, severe bouts and can be felt shooting
along the nerve. Although it is difficult to treat,
the following remedies may bring relief to minor
problems. St. John's wort is analgesic and
antiviral, helping to relieve sciatica (pain caused
by a trapped spinal nerve) and head pain. Cloves
have an anesthetic effect, and peppermint

eases pain. Try also the St. John's wort oil rub
(see Back Pain, p. 313).

@General caution Seek professional advice if there is
fever, or swelling of the gums with toothache.

Fi Anxiety, Depression, & Tension

General Remedies

Herbs Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13),
damiana (Turnera diffusa, p. 144), skullcap
(Scutellaria lateriflora, p. 135)

Remedy Make an infusion using one of the herbs.
Drink up to 2/4 cups (600 ml) a day.

Herb St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. 106)

Remedy Take tablets or make an infusion and
drink up to 2/4 cups (600 ml) a day.

Note This remedy may take 2-3 weeks before there is a
noticeable effect.

Digestive Problems due to Stress

Herb Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis, p. | 13)
Remedy Make an infusion with a handful of fresh
leaves and % cup (150 ml) water, or make an
infusion with the dried herb. Drink up to 3 cups
(750 ml) a day, or add the daily dose to a bath.
NOTE This remedy also calms palpitations and
encourages sleep.

Panic Attacks & Headaches

Herb Skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora, p. 135)
Remedy Make an infusion and drink up to 3 cups
(750 ml) a day.

General Remedies

Herbs St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. 106), lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108),
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97)

Remedy Apply neat St. John’s wort infused oil
to painful areas, or add 20 drops each of clove
and lavender essential oil to 2 tbsp plus 2 tsp
(50 ml) of St. John’s wort infused oil and then
apply every 2-3 hours as required.

Herb Peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. | 14)
Remedy Make an infusion with 25 g of herb to 3
cups (750 ml) of water and bathe the affected area.
Alternatively, dilute 20 drops of essential oil in

SSS _i

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Severe nerve, chest, or head pain

= Headache or pain that does not improve
within 48 hours despite self-medication

a Loss of sensation or loss of movement
= Double vision

= Severe depression

Chronic Anxiety & Hyperactivity
Herb Valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148)
Remedy Take |0 drops of tincture in water
every hour for up to 2 weeks at a time.

Nervous Exhaustion,

Muscle Tension, & Headaches

Herb Codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula, p. 83)
Remedy Make a decoction and drink in equal
doses during the day, or cook up to 25 g of
the root a day in a soup or stew.

Short-term Stress

Herbs Ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. 118), Siberian
ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus, p. 94).
Remedy Either take ginseng tablets, chew 0.5—|
g of root a day, or use it in cooking. Alternatively
take |—2 g of Siberian ginseng capsules up to
twice day.

Cautions Do not take for more than 6 weeks at a

time. Do not give to children under 12. Do not take
during pregnancy. Avoid drinks that contain caffeine.

Long-term Stress & Convalescence
Herb Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera, p. 152)
Remedy Make a decoction using 3 g of root to
¥s cup (150 ml) of water and take during the
day, or chew the same amount of root.

2 tbsp plus 2 tsp (50 ml) of carrier oil and gently
massage into the painful area.
Caution Do not use on children under 5.

Head Pain

Herb Clove (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97)
Remedy Mix /4 tsp of powder with water to
make a thick paste and apply to the head.

Toothache

Herb Clove (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97)
Remedy Chew a clove or rub |—2 drops of
neat essential oil onto the affected tooth 2-3
times a day for up to 3 days.

----- PAGE 311 -----
————ume ee ee"

fl Headaches & Migraine

Headaches and migraine can be very debilitating,
especially when they occur frequently.
Headaches are caused by many factors, such
as toothache, neck tension, eyestrain, and
hangovers. It is important to diagnose and treat
the underlying cause, which could mean visiting
a dentist, optician, or osteopath in the first
instance. Herbal medicine can be very helpful
for headaches, although choosing the right herbs
can be difficult. The following remedies contain
relaxing herbs that alleviate headaches triggered
by stress as well as other more specific factors.
Lavender is soothing, while vervain is a tonic
and relaxing herb for nervous exhaustion.
Peppermint is effective for headaches that are
linked to indigestion.

Migraine is a more specific problem. The
remedies aim both to prevent the onset of a
migraine as well as treat the symptoms.
Hangovers are not a nerve problem in a direct
sense, but they should be treated in the same
way as any other type of mild poisoning that
requires detoxification and headache relief.
Make sure you also drink plenty of water.

@ General caution For migraine or recurrent

headaches, consult a professional practitioner to
diagnose and treat the underlying cause.

©) Insomnia

Difficulty in sleeping affects everyone at one time
or another. Herbs can provide a safe and gentle
solution to this problem.

Sedative herbs such as German chamomile,
linden, lavender, hops, and passionflower are
relaxing and, unlike some herbs, are most likely
to be effective against insomnia when taken at
night. Hops are excellent when the mind refuses
to "switch off?

Stimulant herbs are effective when the
body suffers from nervous exhaustion and

feels, paradoxically, too tired for sleep. Oats

and ginseng encourage a good night's sleep,
especially for people suffering from nervous
tension and fatigue.

Herbal sleeping pills, containing
combinations of valerian, hops, passionflower,
and similar herbs, are often helpful in
overcoming mild sleep problems and in
reducing feelings of anxiety and stress.

General Remedy

Herb Lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108)
Remedy Rub a few drops of neat essential oil on
the temples.

Tension & Sinus Headaches

Herb Linden (Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy Make an infusion using | heaping tsp of
linden to % cup (150 ml) of water, or use teabags.
Drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Nervous Exhaustion & Overactivity
Herbs Vervain (Verbena officinalis, p. 149), valerian
(Valeriana officinalis, p. 148)

Remedy Make an infusion of vervain and drink up
to 2// cups a day. Alternatively, mix 4 tsp of each
tincture and take with water up to 3 times a day.

Caution Do not take vervain during pregnancy.

Digestive Headaches & Biliousness
Herbs Peppermint (Mentha x piperita, p. 114),
pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium, p. 235)

Remedy Make an infusion of either herb ina
covered container, using a teabag, a small handful
of fresh leaves, or | level tsp of dried herb per
¥s cup (150 ml) of water. Drink up to 3 cups
(750 ml) a day for up to | week, or up to 2/4
cups (600 ml) a day if taking for 2-3 weeks.

Cautions Do not give to children under 5. Do not take
pennyroyal during pregnancy.

General Remedies

Herbs German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77), linden (Tilia spp., p. 277), lavender
(Lavandula officinalis, p. 108), passionflower
(Passiflora incarnata, p. 119)

Remedy The above herbs are listed in
ascending order of strength. Start with the
weakest, German chamomile, and if it does not
help, try the next strongest. Make an infusion in
a covered container using |—2 heaping tsp per 4
cup (150 ml) of water. Take prior to sleeping.
Alternatively, take | tsp of tincture with water
up to 3 times a night.

Herbs Valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148), hops
(Humulus lupulus, p. 104), passionflower (Passiflora
incarnata, p. 119)

Remedy | Take tablets containing one or more

of the herbs.

Remedy 2 Make a sachet with dried hops

(see p. 104) and place inside your pillow.

Caution Do not take hops internally if feeling low
or depressed.

Migraine Prevention

Herb Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium,

p. 140)

Remedy At the first sign of an impending
attack, take tablets or 10 drops of tincture with
water. Alternatively, place a fresh leaf between
slices of bread and eat as a sandwich.

Cautions Do not give to children under 12. Do not
take in pregnancy.

Migraine

Herb Skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora, p. 135)
Remedy Make an infusion using | heaping tsp
of herb to % cup (150 ml) of water. Drink up to
3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herb Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128)
Remedy Make an infusion using | level tsp of
herb per % cup (150 ml) of water and take up
to 2/4 cups (600 ml) each day.

Detoxification for Hangover

Herb Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141)
Remedy Make a decoction using |5 g of
root to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Take the
decoction in small quantities at frequent
intervals throughout the day.

Overactive Mind

Herb Hops (Humulus lupulus, p. 104)
Remedy Take the tincture with water at night.
Start with 10 drops up to a maximum of 40
drops each night.

Caution Do not take hops internally if feeling low
or depressed.

Poor sleep & nervous exhaustion
Herb Oats (Avena sativa, p. 175)

Remedy Eat oats daily, for example as a hot
cereal, and take | tsp of oat straw tincture with
water 3 times a day.

Herbs Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera,

p. 152), Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus, p. 94)

Remedy Take |—2 g of ashwagandha or
Siberian ginseng up to 3 times a day. Either

chew the root, or cook it in a soup. Alternatively,
take tablets.

Cautions Avoid taking caffeine while taking
ashwagandha and Siberian ginseng. Do not take
Siberian ginseng for more than 6 weeks at a time.

Do not take during pregnancy. Do not give to children
under 12.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

309

----- PAGE 312 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

310

Respiratory Tract Problems

Thyme
(Thymus vulgaris)

The respiratory system stretches from the lining of the eyes
and sinuses to the base of the lungs, and is constantly exposed
to dust, dirt, and organisms in the air. It is no surprise that in our
ever more polluted world we often face problems such as
sinus congestion and asthma. Herbal remedies aim to protect
the linings of the eyes, ears, sinuses, nose, and throat, as well
as the respiratory ‘‘tree’ of the lungs by countering infection,

clearing congestion, soothing the mucous membranes, and relieving

inflammation or allergy.

Fi Coughs & Bronchitis

The act of coughing is usually a reaction to irritant
particles in the bronchial tubes. It is worthwhile
to consider the type of cough you have and
where it is centered. Herbal remedies can then
be chosen to work effectively to clear or ease
the cough.

Productive, chest coughs may produce
white, yellow, or green phlegm.

Unproductive coughs are dry and irritant
and often take a long time to clear.

Bronchitis occurs when the lining of the lungs’
airways becomes inflamed, resulting in a chest
cough, possible breathlessness, and a raised
temperature. Use both an external and an
internal remedy.

Herbs Thyme is an effective antiseptic for

the whole system. Licorice acts as a soothing
expectorant for persistent coughs and makes
any remedy more palatable. Take plenty of garlic
to fight bronchitis.

@ General caution Seek professional advice if a cough
lasts for more than | week without a cold or infection.

©) Nosebleeds

Many herbs are reputed to stop nosebleeds,
and most are effective. Using an herb as snuff is
a traditional way of staunching a nosebleed.

@ Caution If the nosebleed continues for some hours
or is very heavy, seek immediate professional advice.

© Eye Problems

Rather than treating the eyes themselves, these
remedies benefit the mucous tissue lining the
eyes, which is contiguous with the nose and
throat. Problems affecting the linings of the eyes
often respond well to local treatment with herbal
remedies, but care must be taken not to irritate
the eyes with particles of herbs left in the lotion.

General Remedies
Herb Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)
Remedy Take 3 cups (750 ml) of infusion a day.

Dry Coughs in the Throat & Chest
Herbs Balm of Gilead (Populus x candicans,

p. 254), thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. |43), licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101)

Remedy Make an infusion using equal parts of
thyme, balm of Gilead buds, and licorice powder.
Take 4 cup (75 ml) 6 times a day, or mix equal
parts of each tincture and take | tsp up to 5 times
a day with water. Reduce the dosage as the cough
eases.

@ Cautions Seek professional advice if no improvement
occurs after | week. Do not take licorice if pregnant.

Chest Coughs & Bronchitis

Herbs Elecampane (Inula helenium, p. 107),
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus, p. 96), licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101)

Remedy (Internal) Make a decoction of
elecampane and take | 4-174 cups (300-450 ml) a
day. Add 5 g licorice powder to improve flavor.

Prevention of Nosebleeds

Herbs Eyebright (Euphrasia spp., p. 209), nettle

(Urtica dioica, p. 146)

Remedy Make an infusion using 25 g of either
herb to 3 cups of water. Take up to 2! cups a day.

Sore & Tired Eyes

Herbs German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77), ju hua (Chrysanthemum x morifolium, p. 78)
Remedy Make a compress by infusing a German
chamomile teabag, or make a poultice with 15 g
of either herb to | cup (250 ml) of water. Cool,
squeeze out the excess, and place the teabag or
poultice over the eye.

@Seek immediate professional
advice for:

a Difficulty in breathing or chest pain

= Cough that lasts for more than 2 weeks
= Severe pain in the respiratory tract

= Coughing up blood

a Fever of 102°F (39°C) or more

= Heavy nosebleed lasting longer than
| hour

Note For acute bronchitis and coughs, add
5 g of eucalyptus leaf to the decoction.

Caution Do not take elecampane during pregnancy.

Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), garlic
(Allium sativum, p. 59)

Remedy (Internal) Take 4 tsp of echinacea
tincture with water 2-3 times a day, or take
tablets. In addition, eat 2 garlic cloves daily.

Herbs Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), cajuput
(Melaleuca leucadendron, p. 234), eucalyptus
(Eucalyptus globulus, p. 96)
Remedy (External) Mix 5 drops each of
eucalyptus and thyme essential oils with 2 tsp

of olive or sunflower oil. Massage over the chest
and back, up to twice a day. Alternatively, burn
5-10 drops of one of the oils in a burner for

30 minutes.

Caution Do not apply thyme oil during pregnancy.

Nosebleeds

Herbs Wild geranium (Geranium maculatum,
p. 216)

Remedy First, pinch the nostrils and tilt back the
head. Then sniff 4 tsp of the powdered herb.

Conjunctivitis

Herbs Eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis, p. 209),
cornflower (Centaurea cyanus, p. 185)

Remedy Make an infusion with either herb and
strain. When warm (not hot), put in an eyebath
and bathe eyes well. Use no more than twice a day.

@ Caution Seek professional advice if there is no
improvement in 3—4 days.

----- PAGE 313 -----
Fi Colds, Flu, & Fevers

The common cold, with which most of us are
only too familiar, is a viral infection normally
affecting the nose and throat. Flu is considerably
more debilitating and may include fever, headache,
muscular pain, nausea, and vomiting. Both have a
habit of striking when we are stressed or run
down. Herbal home treatment is especially suitable
for these familiar “self-limiting” ailments since it
enables us to make life more comfortable, control
fever, and improve the body's recovery rate.
Garlic, ginger, and lemon combine to
create the classic flu remedy that can also be
used to relieve colds, sore throats, and tonsillitis.
Ginger, cinnamon, cloves, and cayenne
have heating properties and stimulate sweating.
This helps to lower the body's temperature
during fever.

Elderberry and yarrow are antiviral, stimulate
sweating, and astringe the mucous membranes
of the nose and throat, reducing the production
of mucus.

Boneset and cayenne are particularly helpful
for respiratory infections.

Wormwood and gentian are bitter herbs
that cool the body and combat high fever.

Diet

For all these problems, eat lightly. Fruit and
vegetables are best, the latter perhaps in a
soup. Avoid greasy, fatty, sugar-rich food and
dairy products.

Self-help

Reduce fever and temperature by washing with
cool or cold water and drinking plenty of liquid,
especially when sweating.

@General cautions Remember that in the very
young and very old, even a common cold can develop
into pneumonia. Always seek professional advice if
symptoms persist or suddenly get worse.

Fi Sore Throats & Tonsillitis

The garlic, ginger, and lemon mixture listed
under General Remedies for Colds, Flu, & Fevers
(see above) can alleviate the symptoms of both
sore throats and tonsillitis. The brave can slowly
chew a clove of garlic; sage and echinacea are
also strongly antiseptic. All these herbs will
relieve symptoms and aid a speedy recovery.

@ General caution Always seek professional
advice and treatment for children under 5 suffering
from tonsillitis.

General Remedies

Herbs Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), ginger (Zingi-
ber officinale, p. 155), lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82)
Remedy Crush a medium-sized garlic clove, grate
a similarly sized piece of fresh ginger, and squeeze
the juice from | lemon. Mix together with | tsp of
honey. Add % cup (150 ml) of warm water and stir.
Drink up to 1% cups (450 ml) a day while
symptoms last.

Herbs Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), boneset
(Eupatorium perfoliatum, p. 208)

Remedy Make an infusion using 4 tsp of each
herb with % cup (150 ml) of water and then drink
174-24 cups (450-600 ml) a day.

Note This remedy is very effective if thick green mucus
and nasal congestion occur.

Colds

Herbs Lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82), cinnamon
(Cinnamomum spp., p. 81)

Remedy Drink the freshly squeezed juice of

| lemon, neat or diluted in warm water.

Option Add | tsp of honey to the juice and / tsp
of cinnamon powder.

Herb Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155)
Remedy Infuse 2-3 slices (| g) of fresh ginger
with % cup (150 ml) of water for 5 minutes. Take
up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herbs Elderberry (Sambucus nigra, p. 132), lemon
(Citrus limon, p. 82)

Remedy Take | tsp (5 ml) of elderberry tincture
or extract in warm water up to 3 times a day. Add
in freshly squeezed juice from half a lemon.

High Fever

Herbs Yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56), boneset
(Eupatorium perfoliatum, p. 208), cayenne
(Capsicum frutescens, p. 74)

Remedy Make an infusion using | tsp each of
yarrow and boneset, with a pinch of cayenne, to
¥s cup (150 ml) of water. Brew for 5 minutes and
drink hot. Take up to 2/4 cups (600 ml) a day.

Sore Throats

Herbs Tamarind (Tamarindus indica, p. 274),
lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82)

Remedy Gargle with either a decoction of
tamarind fruit or | tbsp (20 ml) of lemon juice,
either neat or diluted in warm water.

Herbs Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128),
sage (Salvia officinalis, p. 131), myrrh (Commiphora
molmol, p. 85), echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92)
Remedy | Dilute | tsp of equal parts of all
tinctures in 5 tsp of warm water and gargle.
Swallow the mixture (except if pregnant).
Remedy 2 Make a sage infusion, brew for

Options Add | or 2 of the following herbs:
2-3 cloves (Eugenia caryophyllata, p. 97), A tsp
of powdered or grated fresh ginger (Zingiber
officinale, p. 155), A tsp of chopped or
powdered cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum spp.,
p. 81), |-2 crushed cardamom seeds (Elettaria
cardamomum, p. 93), 2-3 crushed peppercorns
(Piper nigrum, p. 250).

Caution Do not take yarrow during pregnancy.

Herbs Wormwood (Artemisia absinthium,

p. 66), gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99)

Remedy Take |0 drops of either tincture with
water 3 times a day in addition to the above remedy.

Caution Do not take wormwood during pregnancy.

Mild Fever

Herbs Yarrow (Achillea millefolium, p. 56),
elderberry (Sambucus nigra, p. 132)

Remedy Make an infusion with /A tsp of each
herb in 4 cup (100 ml) water. Brew for 10
minutes and drink up to 2/4 cups (600 ml) a day.

Caution Do not take yarrow during pregnancy.

Herb Onion (Allium cepa, p. 164)

Remedy Bake a large onion at 400°F (200°C)
for 40 minutes. Remove, and mix the juice with
an equal amount of honey. Take |—2 tsp an hour
up to 8 times a day.

Flu with Muscle Aches & Pains
Herbs Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis, p. 113), elderflower
(Sambucus nigra, p. 132)

Remedy Make an infusion using 5 g of each
herb to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Brew for 10
minutes and drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herb Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92)
Remedy Take tablets or capsules, or up to 4 tsp
of tincture with water twice a day. Alternatively,
make a decoction with 5 g of root to 3 cups

(750 ml) of water and then drink |/4-2'4 cups
(300-600 ml) a day.

10 minutes, and allow to cool a little. Gargle,
then swallow. Add | tsp (5 ml) of vinegar
and | tsp of honey to strengthen its action.

Caution Do not swallow sage during pregnancy.

Tonsillitis

Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), all
herbs listed under Sore Throats

Remedy Take echinacea (see Flu with Muscle
Aches & Pains above), or use one of the
gargles listed under Sore Throats.

@ Caution Seek professional advice if there is no
improvement after 2 days.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

311

----- PAGE 314 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

312

Excessive nasal congestion is not always easy to
treat and suggests poor air quality, inappropriate
diet, or an allergy. The shape of the nose and
sinuses (the air-filled cavities in the bones around
the nose) can also play a role in this condition.
Sinuses can become blocked with fluid, causing
painful pressure. Earache may be caused by local
infection—in which case garlic is particularly
effective—or congestion. Lavender is helpful in
soothing the pain of all types of earache.

Diet

Asa first step, reduce foods thought to
increase mucus production, such as dairy,
eggs, fried and fatty food, sugar, and refined
carbohydrates, such as white flour, as well
as alcohol.

@ General caution Seek professional advice for
earache, especially in children

Cramp bark
(Viburnum opulus)

General Remedy

Herb Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus, p. 96)
Remedy Make a steam inhalation by infusing

15 g of herb, or put 5-10 drops of essential oil in
3 cups (750 ml) water. Inhale for 10 minutes.

Allergic States with Excessive Nasal
Mucus, such as Hay Fever

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p.77)

Remedy Make a steam inhalation by infusing
15 g of herb, or put 5-10 drops of essential oil in
3 cups (750 ml) water. Inhale for 10 minutes.

Earache

Herb Lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108)
Remedy Place 2 drops of essential oil on a cotton
ball and plug into the ear.

Earache Caused by Infection
Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)

Musculoskeletal Problems

Whether caused by accident, sports injury, or simple wear
and tear, musculoskeletal problems can lead to a significant

treatment, but herbal remedies can reduce pain and inflammation,
relax muscles, detoxify the body, and speed up the rate of healing.
External treatments soothe back muscles and joints, and sprained
or sore limbs. Persevering with the simple home treatments given below can bring

about a marked improvement of many problems.

Sprains & Fractures

Minor damaged areas benefit from herbs such as
arnica and comfrey, which soothe bruising and
speed up the healing process. Apply as soon as
possible after treatment.

@ General caution Always seek professional
treatment for broken bones, fractures, and
severe sprains.

©] Muscle Aches & Cramps

Muscle aches and cramps are entirely normal,
particularly after strenuous activity, and the pain
should lessen in time. Meanwhile, rubs and
ointments containing soothing herbs, such

as arnica, thyme, and cramp bark, can alleviate
aching muscles. Rheumatism is a general term for
muscle or joint pain and stiffness, and the remedies
listed here and under Joint Pain & Stiffness, p. 313,
are appropriate for this condition.

Sprains

Herb Arnica (Arnica montana, p. 172)

Remedy Apply ointment or cream to the
damaged area and gently massage into the skin at
least 3 times a day.

Caution Do not use arnica on broken skin.

Tired & Aching Muscles
Herb Arnica (Arnica montana, p. 172)
Remedy Apply cream or ointment.

Caution Do not use arnica on broken skin.

Herbs Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), rosemary
(Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128)

Remedy Make an infusion with 25 g of one herb
to 3 cups (750 ml) water. Brew for 10 minutes,
strain into a bath, and soak for 20 minutes.

acacia |
Fi Congestion, Sinus Problems, & Earache

Remedy Break open a garlic oil capsule, place
2 drops on a cotton ball, and plug into the
affected ear. Alternatively, crush a large clove of
garlic and soak in | tbsp of sunflower or olive oil
for at least 24 hours. Strain the oil and warm it
to body temperature. Then place 2 drops ona
cotton ball and plug into the ear.

Earache due to Chronic Congestion
Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143), marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis, p. 165), elderflower (Sambucus nigra,
p. 132)

Remedy Mix equal parts of each tincture and
take | tsp 3 times a day with water.

Copious Liquid Mucus &
Sinus Congestion
See Allergic Rhinitis, p. 300.

Sinus Headaches
See Tension & Sinus Headaches, p. 309.

@Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Severe pain

a Significant or sudden joint swelling

= Broken or suspected broken bones
a Any injury that may need an X-ray

@ Caution Only give external remedies to
children. Seek professional advice before giving
internal remedies to them.

Fractures

Herb Comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138)
Remedy Gently apply ointment, cream, or
infused oil to the area at least 3 times a day.

Caution Do not use comfrey on broken skin.

Option Try also the rub containing St. John’s
wort oil, listed under General Remedies for Back
Pain, p. 313.

Cramps & Muscle Spasms

Herb Cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150)
Remedy (Internal) Take | tsp of tincture with
water up to 3 times a day.

Remedy (External) Rub neat tincture firmly
into the affected area.

----- PAGE 315 -----
The most common ailment characterized by joint
pain and stiffness is arthritis, which is caused by
inflammation of the joints. Aging or wear and
tear may be the cause, but some arthritic
conditions, and other joint problems such as
gout, are due to the buildup of waste products
in the joints.
Devil’s claw is anti-inflammatory, relieving
swollen and inflamed joints.

Lemon juice reduces acidity in the body, White
willow relieves inflammation and pain and, when
combined with other herbs, can lead to significant
improvement in mild to moderate arthritis.
Meadowsweet and celery combine well to
reduce acidity. All the herbal remedies here can
be safely taken for |—2 months.

Self-help

Improving posture, managing anxiety, and using
herbal remedies to help the body eliminate toxins
can all help control these conditions. Avoid acid-
forming foods such as red meat, spinach, tomatoes,
and oranges. Regular (but not excessive) exercise
is beneficial, as is a relaxed, positive attitude.

@ General cautions For severe arthritis, consult a
professional practitioner. Do not take devil's claw, black
cohosh, or celery seed during pregnancy.

Fi Back Pain

Above all, back problems require specialist
attention and plenty of rest. Herbal remedies
contribute to overall improvement by alleviating
pain and muscle tension, and helping to make life
more comfortable.

Cramp bark and prickly ash are warming,
relaxing herbs, which, when rubbed into the
affected area, help to “unknot” taut muscles.
Lavender and St. John’s wort are useful
herbs when nervous tension is contributing

to the problem.

Devil’s claw and cramp bark have effective
anti-inflammatory properties and help reduce
swollen joints.

Passionflower encourages sleep, particularly
when back pain is accompanied by nervous
tension.

Sciatica (a painful condition caused by a
trapped spinal nerve) and neuralgia can both

be relieved by using an external rub containing
St. John's wort infused oil.

@ General cautions Back problems need specialist
care. For chronic or severe back pain, seek the advice
of a professional practitioner to gain the most benefit
from herbal medicine.

Fi Joint Pain & Stiffness, Including Arthritis & Gout

Arthritis & Inflamed Joints

Herb Devil's claw (Harpagophytum procumbens,
p. 103)

Remedy Take tablets (see General cautions).

Herb Lemon (Citrus limon, p. 82)
Remedy Squeeze the juice from a lemon and
drink neat or diluted in water each morning.

Herb White willow (Salix alba, p. 129)

Remedy Take tablets, or make a decoction using
10 g of root to 3 cups (750 ml) water. Take in

3 doses over |—2 days as required.

Herbs Devil's claw (Harpagophytum procumbens,
p. 103), celery (Apium graveolens, p. 64), white
willow (Salix alba, p. 129)

Remedy Make a decoction with 8 g of each
herb to 3 cups (750 ml) of water, divide into

4 doses, and take 2-3 doses a day; or mix equal
parts of the tinctures and take | tsp with water
3 times a day (see General cautions).

Option If arthritis develops during menopause,
replace devil's claw with 8 g of black cohosh
(Cimicifuga racemosa, p. 79)

Herb Deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna, p. 69)
Remedy Apply belladonna bandages in addition
to one of the above remedies.

General Remedies

Herbs Cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150),
prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americanum, p. 153)
Remedy Make a decoction using |5 g of cramp bark
and 5 g of prickly ash bark to 3 cups (750 ml) of water.
Strain and rub into the affected area, or use | tbsp of
tincture and apply in the same way.

Note Use especially for tense neck and

lumbar regions.

Herb Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Make an infusion using 25 g of herb to 3
cups (750 ml) of water and strain into a bath. Soak
for 20 minutes.

Herbs St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. 106), lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108),
pepper (Piper nigrum, p. 250), crampbark
(Viburnum opulus, p. 150)

Remedy Take 2 tbsp of sunflower oil or St. John’s
wort infused oil, add 20 drops of lavender
essential oil, 10 drops each of rosemary and
pepper essential oil, and | tsp of cramp bark
tincture. Shake and rub into tense areas, either
after a bath or having first warmed the area with
a hot towel.

Arthritis Associated with Acid
Indigestion or Peptic Ulcer

Herbs Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria,

p. 98), celery (Apium graveolens, p. 64)
Remedy Make an infusion with meadowsweet
and drink up to 3 cups (750 ml) a day, or mix
2 parts meadowsweet tincture with | part
celery tincture and take 4 tsp with water

2-3 times a day (refer to General cautions).

Stiff & Aching Joints

Herbs St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. 106), comfrey (Symphytum officinale, p. 138),
lavender (Lavandula officinalis, p. 108)
Remedy Mix 2/4 tbsp of St. John’s wort or
comfrey infused oil with 20-40 drops of
lavender essential oil and gently massage into
the affected area.

Option Try the rub containing St. John’s wort
infused oil under General Remedies for Back
Pain below.

Gout

Herb Celery (Apium graveolens, p. 64)
Remedy Take tablets, or make a decoction
with the seeds. Divide into 3 doses and drink
during the day or add 25 g of seeds to food per
day (see General cautions).

Other uses Use for sciatica and other back problems
that cause neuralgia, as well as for stiff joints and
chronic muscle ache.

Back Pain due to Joint Inflammation
Herbs White willow (Salix alba, p. 129),

cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150), devil's claw
(Harpagophytum procumbens, p. 103)

Remedy Mix equal parts of each root and
make a decoction. Divide into 6 doses and take
over 2 days. If there is no improvement after

7 days, divide the decoction into 3 doses and
take daily for up to a week.

Caution Do not take devil’s claw during pregnancy.

Sleeplessness due to Backache

Herbs Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata,

p. 119), valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148),
cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150)

Remedy Make a decoction using 8 g each of
passionflower, valerian, and cramp bark to 3
cups (750 ml) of water and drink %—|'% cup
(150-300 ml) at night (the decoction is sufficient
for 2 days).

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

313

----- PAGE 316 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

q
ae

314

Urinary & Fungal Infections

Echinacea
(Echinacea spp.)

nfections signal that the body's resistance to disease has become
weakened, particularly if they are long-lasting or recurrent. Minor
infections affecting the kidneys and urinary system are common
and, despite being hard to shake off, can be treated by boosting
he body's natural defenses. Fungal infections can also be difficult to
clear and may require professional treatment, although herbs such
as garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59) and tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia,

p. | 12) are strongly antifungal. If the infection is chronic, it is

necessary to support the immune system as a whole, with herbs such as

echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92).

Fi Urinary Infections

Cystitis (an infection of the bladder and urinary
tubules) can be a serious problem if it spreads to
the kidneys. Mild cystitis and other urinary
infections can be cured with a mixture of
antiseptic herbs such as buchu and soothing
herbs such as marshmallow. Taking echinacea
or garlic at the same time improves the body's
resistance to infection. Bilberry or cranberry,
which are from the same genus, are excellent
for urinary infections.

@General cautions Seek immediate professional help if
cystitis is severe or recurrent, or if there is blood in the
urine or pain around the kidneys or small of the back.

©) Fungal Infections

Fungal infections are common and can be hard
to treat. Vaginal yeast infection is increasingly
found as a side effect of conventional antibiotic
treatment. Calendula is helpful for treating this
troublesome condition. Candidiasis (accelerated
growth of Candida albicans, a yeastlike organism
within the gut) can cause considerable problems,
but mild cases may be helped with antiseptic
and antifungal herbs, such as garlic. All types of
fungal infections can be helped with herbs that
boost the immune system, such as echinacea,

as well as by applying an external remedy to

the affected area.

Diet
Diet is an important factor when treating
fungal problems. Cut out or reduce intake
of bread, alcohol, and other foods containing
yeast or sugar.

Self-help

Candidiasis sufferers can take probiotic capsules
or live yogurt to help the growth of beneficial
bacteria in the intestines. For yeast infection, live
yogurt can be inserted into the vagina.

@General caution Seek professional advice for
candidiasis, as it is often a difficult condition to treat.

General Remedies

Herbs Buchu (Barosma betulina, p. 71), cornsilk
(Zea mays, p. 154), marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis, p. 165)

Remedy Make an infusion with 5 g of each herb
to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Divide into 4 doses
and drink throughout the day.

Option Substitute juniper (Juniperus communis,

p. 224) or goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea, p. 271)
for buchu.

Caution Do not take juniper or buchu during pregnancy.

General Remedies

Herbs Echinacea (Echinacea spp., p. 92), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Mix 2 parts echinacea tincture to

| part thyme tincture and take | tsp twice a day
with water.

Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)
Remedy Take |—2 garlic cloves a day, crushed
and swallowed with water or mixed with food.

Vaginal Yeast Infection

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Make an infusion and allow to cool.
Strain and use as a douche or wash.

Option Add the infusion to a bath and soak for
20 minutes.

Herb Tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia, p. | 12)
Remedy Use pessaries or place |—2 drops of
essential oil diluted with 3 drops of olive oil on a
tampon and insert into the vagina (this may sting).
Remove after 2-3 hours and only use once a day.

@ Caution During pregnancy, use these pessaries and
tampons only with professional advice.

@Seek immediate professional
advice for:

a Infections that show no signs of
improvement, or deteriorate after taking
an herbal remedy

= Temperatures above |02°F (39°C)
a Pain in the kidneys
= Blood in the urine

_ EEE eee

Herb Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus, p. 147)
Remedy Make a decoction of the berries and
drink |74—-2/4 cups (450-600 ml) a day.

Tip Cranberry juice may be substituted for bilberry
decoction.

Herbs Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92)

Remedy Take either or both herbs in capsule
or tablet form.

Note Take in addition to other remedies.

Oral Thrush

Herbs Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra, p. 101),
myrrh (Commiphora molmol, p. 85), echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92)

Remedy Mix equal parts of the tincture of
each herb. Take | tsp as a mouthwash with
water every 3—4 hours, as required.

Candidiasis

Herbs Elderflower (Sambucus nigra, p. 132),
calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73), thyme
(Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Make an infusion with 8 g of each
herb to 3 cups (750 ml) water and drink
|'4-|% cups (300-450 ml) each day.

Herb Pau d’Arco (Tabebuia spp., p. 139)
Remedy Make a decoction with |2 g bark to 3
cups (750 ml) of water. Divide into 3-4 doses
and drink throughout the day. Alternatively,
take capsules or 4 tsp of tincture with water
up to 3 times a day.

Fungal Skin Infections, Including
Athlete’s Foot
See p. 304.

| neeennnnteneneeeeneneeenneneneneeenenesneneeenenensessenenenenenensnssnenensnenenssennenenenenenseenenenensnsnensseneenenenesenessnnenenentnenesettnenenenenenseeenenenenenenessesesnenenenensnennenennenenenend

----- PAGE 317 -----
Reproductive & Menstrual Problems

Chaste Tree
(Vitex agnus-castus)

Women have always tended to use herbal medicine more
than men, traditionally in their role as healers in the home
and now, in part, due to the proven effects of many herbs on
the reproductive system. Herbs such as wild yam contain
constituents similar to the female sex hormones, estrogen
and progesterone, which can help regulate the menstrual cycle,

increase or decrease fertility, and support the body through menopause.
Common menstrual problems, such as cramps, premenstrual syndrome, and

Fi Menstrual Problems

The menstrual cycle can be disturbed for many
reasons, most of them relating to hormonal
imbalances. Other causes include stress, too
much or too little exercise, weight problems, food
sensitivity or allergy, steroids, the contraceptive
pill, chronic illness, vitamin and mineral deficiency,
and even excess caffeine, alcohol, or smoking, To
determine the underlying cause, it is important
to consult a professional practitioner.

Taking remedies for menstrual
problems. The remedies listed should all be
taken at the appropriate point in the cycle for
2-3 cycles.

The normal menstrual cycle lasts about
28 days. If this cycle varies greatly from one
period to another without reason, it could be
termed irregular.

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and
period pain have many causes and are
experienced at some stage by most women.
Breast tenderness, sore nipples, and fluid
retention are common symptoms.

Heavy periods can result in anemia. If your
period lasts longer than 5 days or if you have
to change your protection every 2 hours, your
periods may be too heavy. Nettle (Urtica dioica,
p. 146) is an excellent tonic, especially for heavy
bleeding, as it contains more iron than spinach
and can be eaten as a nourishing vegetable.

Self-help

Combine herbal remedies with a diet high

in fresh vegetables and fruit, and low in fatty
foods, sugar, and alcohol. Try not to smoke.
Regular exercise, particularly of the waist and
pelvis, is helpful, as is a relaxed attitude to life.
All reproductive problems will benefit from this
simple approach.

@ General caution For any chronic menstrual
problem, it is wise to seek professional attention,
especially if your periods are very heavy or painful.

heavy bleeding, respond well to self-treatment. However, chronic conditions
or infertility in ether women or men require professional attention.

Irregular Cycle

Herb Chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus, p. 151)
Remedy Take tablets, or take 30-40 drops
(1.5—2 ml) of tincture with water each morning
on waking for at least 2 months.

Herb Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca, p. 227)
Remedy Make an infusion and take 4-1/4 cups
(150-300 ml) a day for up to 3 monthly cycles.

Caution Do not take if menstrual bleeding is heavy.

Premenstrual Syndrome

Herbs Vervain (Verbena officinalis, p. 149), linden
(Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy (Internal) Make an infusion using
either herb (or an equal mix of both) and drink up
to 3 cups (750 ml) throughout the day.

Herb Valerian (Valeriana officinalis, p. 148)
Remedy (Internal) Take tablets containing
valerian, or take 20-40 drops of tincture with
water up to 5 times a day.

Herb Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis, p. 128)
Remedy (External) Make an infusion with

| tbsp of dried or 2 tbsp of fresh leaves to

| quart (liter) of water and strain into a warm bath
each morning. Alternatively, add 5—10 drops

of essential oil to a bath.

Note A\so try the chaste tree remedy under Irregular
Cycle above.

Breast Tenderness & Sore Nipples
Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77)

Remedy Make a compress with an infusion of
50 g of herb and | cup (250 ml) of water. Place
gently over the breasts. Repeat as often as
required to achieve relief.

Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Apply ointment to the nipples.
If breastfeeding, wipe off the ointment
before feeding.

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Severe pain in the abdomen or pelvis

= Significant or sudden change in menstruation,
such as prolonged, heavy, or irregular periods

Important Note

For the best treatment, consult an herbalist.
Seek professional advice before taking a
remedy if you believe that you may be
pregnant. See Pregnancy, p. 317.

Fluid Retention

Herb Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale, p. 141)
Remedy Make an infusion with the leaves and
drink up to 174 cups (450 ml) a day.

Heavy Menstrual Bleeding

Herb Chuang xiong (Ligusticum wallachii),
white peony (Paeonia lactiflora, p. 117), dong quai
(Angelica sinensis, p. 63), rehmannia (Rehmannia
glutinosa, p. 125)

Remedy Mix equal parts of each root and
make a decoction using |5 g of the mixture

to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Drink in 3 equal
doses throughout the day.

Note Any of these herbs will help, but they are
best together, in which form they are known as
Four Things Soup.

Herb Shepherd's purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris,
p. 183), nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146)

Remedy Make an infusion using 7.5 g of each
herb (or |5 g of shepherd's purse only) to 3
cups (750 ml) of water. Divide into 3-4 doses
and drink throughout the day.

Period Pain

Flavor the decoctions with | heaping tsp

of caraway seeds (Carum carvi, p. 184). Mix
before decocting.

Herbs Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa, p. 91),
cramp bark (Viburnum opulus, p. 150), black haw
(Viburnum prunifolium, p. 28 1)

Remedy Make a decoction using |5 g of herb
to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Sip small amounts
during the day; or take 2 tsp of tincture with
water 3—4 times a day for up to 3 days, then
reduce the dose to | tsp a day for 5 days, or
take tablets.

Herb White peony (Paeonia lactiflora, p. | 17)
Remedy Make a decoction using 20 g of root
to 3 cups (750 ml) of water. Sip this throughout
the day.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

ASO ANOH UOd SHIGHWNAY IVAUAH ©

----- PAGE 318 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

316

a

Although much more research is needed, herbal
medicine does appear to increase fertility in
women who are trying to conceive, especially
if the problem is related to hormonal imbalances,
age, or the amount of mucus produced by the
cervix. Where there appears to be no physical
problem preventing conception, for example a
blocked fallopian tube, ovarian cysts, or internal
scarring, herbal medicines are well worth trying.
Diet, exercise, and lifestyle may also play a
significant role in improving fertility.

Fertility Problems in Men

Impotence in men is a common problem, and
herbal medicine has been used throughout
history to help restore healthy sexual function.
A low sperm count, which is a common cause
of infertility, is often related to lifestyle and
general state of health.

Saw palmetto is a tonic herb that increases
stamina. It benefits the male sexual organs and
is reputed to increase potency.
Ashwagandha is an all-around tonic that is
not as stimulating as ginseng, but is nonetheless
helpful in restoring normal vitality after a long-
term illness or stress.

Menopausal Problems

Menopause is defined as the cessation of
menstruation. It usually takes place between
the ages of 45 and 55. After two years without
having a period, you can be sure that the
“change of life” has occurred.

Both estrogen and progesterone levels
decline during menopause despite opinion

to the contrary. Herbs such as chaste tree,
which have a progesterogenic effect, are as
important

as those that support estrogen levels, since both
hormones appear to help maintain bone density,
reducing the risk of osteoporosis.
Maintaining vitality is important during
menopause, since many problems result

as much from being run-down and tired, as
from hormonal changes. If you feel low and
exhausted, some of these remedies may help

to raise vitality and spirits. St. John’s wort is an
excellent medicine for depression.

Hot flashes and night sweats are principally
caused by hormonal changes. However, nervous
exhaustion increases the occurrence of these
conditions.

@ General caution Seek professional advice if there
is prolonged or irregular menstrual bleeding.

Fl Fertility Problems in Women

Aiding Conception

Herb Chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus, p. 151)
Remedy Take tablets or take 20-40 drops of
tincture with water each morning for a maximum
of 3 months at a time.

Herb Dong quai (Angelica sinensis, p. 63)
Remedy Take tablets or make a decoction using
12 g of root to 3 cups (750 ml) of water and drink
each day for up to 3 months.

Caution Discontinue if you become pregnant.

j

General Vitality

Herb Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera, p. 152)
Remedy Take 2 g of the dried root a day, either
by chewing it, or taking it in powder form mixed
with honey and, if required, water. Take for up to
6 weeks.

Impotence & Premature Ejaculation
Herb Ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. | 18)
Remedy Take 0.5—| g up to 3 times a day for
6 weeks at a time, either by chewing the root,
cooking it in a soup or stew, or taking it in
tablet form.

sss sss

Decreased Estrogen

& Progesterone Levels

Herb Chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus, p. 151)
Remedy Take tablets, or 20-40 drops of tincture
with water each morning.

Herb Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus, p. |74)
Remedy Take 4 tsp of tincture 2-3 times daily
with water.

Herb Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa, p. 79)
Remedy Take tablets, or take 25 drops of
tincture with water 3 times a day.

Option Black cohosh combines well with sage.
Mix equal parts of each tincture and take 30-40
drops (1.5—2 ml) with water 3 times a day.

Depression & Decreased Vitality
Herb St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum,
p. 106)

Remedy Take tsp of tincture with water
3 times a day.

Herb Oats (Avena sativa, p. 175)

Remedy Eat 25-50 g of oats as a breakfast cereal,
or with other food.

Option In addition, make an infusion with oat
straw. Divide into 3 doses and drink throughout
the day.

Low Sex Drive

Herb Schisandra (Schisandra chinensis, p. 133)
Remedy Soak 5 g (a small handful) of berries
in water overnight. Strain the berries and make

a decoction with | cup (250 ml) of water. Brew
for 15 minutes and take the dose each day.

Herb Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus, p. | 74)
Remedy Take | tsp of tincture twice a day
with water.

Note Ginseng is the best-known remedy for this
condition. However, schisandra (Schisandra chinensis,

p. 133) berries also benefit male sexuality. Take as
listed above in Fertility Problems in Women under Low Sex
Drive for up to 6 weeks.

Caution Do not take caffeine while taking ginseng

Herb Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens, p. 136)
Remedy Take /4 tsp of tincture with water
up to 3 times a day for up to 6 weeks.

Note Saw palmetto is also an excellent remedy for
symptoms associated with an enlarged prostate.

Hot Flashes & Night Sweats

Herb Sage (Salvia officinalis, p. 131)

Remedy Make an infusion and drink 174 cups
(450 ml), either during the day, or mainly at
night, if this is when the problem chiefly occurs.

Herbs White willow (Salix alba, p. 129), black
cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa, p. 79)

Remedy Take one of the above herbs in
tablet form, or take | tsp of tincture with
water at night.

Herb White peony (Paeonia lactiflora, p. | 17)
Remedy Make a decoction with 20 g root to 3
cups (750 ml) of water. Sip throughout the day.

----- PAGE 319 -----
Pregnancy

m ., Although in many cultures herbs have traditionally been taken

Chamomile

(Chamomilla ecutite) avoided altogether, as they have constituents that stimulate the
muscles of the uterus and, in large doses, could cause a miscarriage. It is safe

Fi Maintaining Vitality

Pregnancy is a time of great change for the

body. Many minor ailments can be relieved by
homemade herbal remedies.

Morning sickness (sensations of nausea)
need not be restricted to the morning.
Generally starting in the 4th—6th week and
lasting until the 14th—| 6th week, morning
sickness has many causes, including hormone
fluctuations, low blood pressure, low sugar
levels, food allergies, poor diet, and stress.
Edema (fluid retention and bloating) is
extremely common during pregnancy. Water
seeps from the blood vessels into the surrounding
tissue, causing puffiness. The ankles and calves
are mostly affected.

Constipation often occurs as pregnancy
develops. Pressure increases on the lower
bowel, impeding circulation.

Heartburn (pain in the center of the chest)
may also be caused by increased pressure within
the body.

Stretch marks sometimes appear as the body
swells. They can be minimized by rubbing aloe
vera gel or olive oil into the skin to maintain

its elasticity.

Childbirth can be helped by drinking raspberry
leaf tea, a traditional remedy that prepares the
uterine muscles for labor and giving birth.

Herbs During Pregnancy

= For the first 3 months avoid all herbal remedies,
including essential oils, unless professionally
prescribed.
= The following herbs are particularly dangerous
and should on no account be taken during
pregnancy: blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides,
p. 185), goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis, p. 105),
juniper (Juniperus communis, p. 224), pennyroyal
(Mentha pulegium, p. 235), yarrow (Achillea
millefolium, p. 56), and therapeutic doses of sage
(Salvia officinalis, p. 131).

‘© continue using herbs in cooking throughou

throughout pregnancy, it is wise to take herbs medicinally only
when essential. Some herbs such as German chamomile
(Chamomilla recutita, p. 77), linden (Tilia spp., p. 277), and cornsilk
(Zea mays, p. 154) are very useful and can be taken safely for
2-3 weeks at a time during pregnancy. Other herbs should be

pregnancy.

Morning Sickness & Nausea
The following remedies are an exception and can
be taken during the first 3 months of pregnancy.

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77)

Remedy Make an infusion in a covered
container. Sip small quantities during the day.
Do not drink more than 3 cups (750 ml) a day.

Herb Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155)
Remedy Make an infusion with 4-1 tsp of
grated fresh ginger per 7% cup (150 ml) of water.
Sip small amounts frequently throughout the day,
rather than drinking 7 cup (150 ml) at a time.
Take a maximum of 1% cups (450 ml) a day.

Herb Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212)
Remedy Make an infusion with /A tsp of seeds
per % cup (150 ml) of water and then drink up to
1% cups (450 ml) a day.

Edema
Herb Cornsilk (Zea mays, p. 154)

Remedy Make an infusion and drink up to 3 cups
(750 ml) a day.

Constipation

Herbs Psyllium (Plantago spp., p. 123), flaxseed
(Linum usitatissimum, p. 109)

Remedy Take |—2 tsp of either of the seeds
with a large glass of water each day or soak them
in cold water overnight before taking.

Note Eat more dried fruit, especially figs.

Heartburn

Herb Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria, p. 98)
Remedy Make an infusion and drink %—|'/ cup
(150-300 ml) a day.

Headache & Nervous Tension

Herb Linden (Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy Make an infusion and drink |74—2/4 cups
(450-600 ml) a day.

@ Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Prolonged nausea causing an inability to
eat properly and frequent vomiting leading
to dehydration

= Frequent urination lasting for more than
3 days (or with pain after 2 days)

= Breast pain with swollen glands under the
arms or fever

a Fluid retention that has not reduced after
3 days

oe

Preparing for Childbirth

Herb Raspberry (Rubus idaeus, p. 264)
Remedy Make an infusion using | tsp of

the chopped fresh or dried leaf per 7% cup
(150 ml) of water. Brew for 5—6 minutes and
drink %—| cup (150-300 ml) a day during the
last 10 weeks of pregnancy.

Cautions Do not leave the infusion to brew for
more than 5-6 minutes. Do not take until the last
10 weeks of pregnancy.

Stretch Marks

Herbs Aloe vera (Aloe vera, p. 60), olive
(Olea europaea, p. 241)

Remedy Rub aloe vera gel over the affected
areas or massage olive oil firmly into the skin
|—2 times a day.

Poor Sleep

See Insomnia (the German chamomile, linden,
lavender, and passionflower remedy under
General Remedies), p. 309.

Anemia & High Blood Pressure
See Circulatory Problems, p. 301.

Hemorrhoids
See Varicose Veins & Hemorrhoids, p. 302
and Constipation & Diarrhea, p. 307.

Backache
See Back Pain, p. 313.

Varicose Veins
See Varicose Veins & Hemorrhoids, p. 302.

Vaginal Yeast Infections
See Fungal Infections, p. 314.

Bladder & Kidney Infections
See Edema, left.

Healing After Childbirth
See Cleansing Wounds & Healing Wounds,
p. 304.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

----- PAGE 320 -----
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR HOME USE &

318

s & Children

Slippery Elm
(Ulmus rubra)

« The following herbs are considered particularly suitable for
children, easing symptoms and speeding recovery. Most of the
remedies are best given as infusions, and can be given in a bottle.
Infusions can be flavored with honey (see Cautions right) or
maple syrup if necessary, but they are better given unsweetened.
The dosages given are for |—6-year-olds, but they can be adjusted
to suit other age groups (see below). Many of the remedies listed

in other sections are also suitable for babies and children; herbs that are not
appropriate are clearly identified (see p. 299 for dosage requirements before

administering any adult remedies).

©) General Ailments

Infants and children are susceptible to a wide
array of ailments.

Digestive upsets that result in diarrhea

and constipation can be the result of food
intolerance or allergy in infants, especially

when foods such as dairy are being introduced
into the diet. Other minor digestive upsets due
to infection or inflammation can cause loss

of appetite.

Colic is a spasm of the gut causing cramping
pain in the abdomen. It usually occurs during the
first 3 months of life, particularly after feeding

in the evening, when the digestion may not be
working so well.

Diaper rash occurs when urine, moisture, and
irritants in the diaper cause the baby’s skin to
become red, sore, and damp. It's essential to clean
the baby thoroughly at each diaper change. Ensure
that cloth diapers are thoroughly rinsed, avoid
leaving a wet, chafing diaper on the baby, and

Cradle cap is a thick yellow-brown
encrustation on the baby's scalp, caused by
overactivity of the sebum oil glands.
Headaches, colds, congestion, and chest
coughs are common problems in childhood
and often respond well to herbal treatment.
Insomnia is a common childhood problem
even though children require more sleep
than adults and should sleep with ease. Over-
excitement, teething, a wet diaper, or being too
hot or cold may interfere with sleep patterns.
Herbs such as linden will encourage a relaxed
night's sleep.

Dosage

The dosages on this page are for |—6-year-olds.
For other ages, adapt the doses as follows:
6-12 months old—/4 dose

7-12 years old—I A dose

To adapt remedies from elsewhere in the book
for children, see p. 299.

remove the diaper completely whenever possible.

Digestive Upsets, Gas, & Colic

The following infusions are suitable for infants over
6 months. For those under 6 months, the infusions
can be taken by breastfeeding mothers.

Herb Ginger (Zingiber officinale, p. 155)
Remedy Give % level tsp of powder with /% cup
(75 ml) of hot water |—2 times a day.

Herb German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p.77)

Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp to
¥s cup (150 ml) of water. Give up to 1% cups
(450 ml) a day.

Herbs Anise (Pimpinella anisum, p. 248), fennel
(Foeniculum vulgare, p. 212)

Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp of either
of the seeds to % cup (150 ml) of water. Give up to |
cup (300 ml) a day.

Herb Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
Remedy Mix | tsp of powder with hot water to
make a paste, then blend with cold or warm water
as required and flavor with honey, cinnamon, or
maple syrup. Give up to 50 g powder in doses
during the day.

Constipation

Herbs Flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum, p. 109),
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)

Remedy Give | tsp of flaxseed or slippery elm
with a large glass of water each day.

Diarrhea

Herbs Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria, p. 162),
common plantain (Plantago major, p. 251)
Remedy Make an infusion using 15 g of either
herb to /4 liter of water and give up to |'/ cup
(300 ml) each day.

Diaper Rash & Inflamed Skin Rashes
Herb Chickweed (Stellaria media, p. 272)
Remedy Apply ointment |—2 times a day.
Herb Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73)
Remedy Apply ointment or cream to clean, dry

@Seek immediate professional
advice for:

= Severe diarrhea or vomiting; a temperature
of 102°F (39°C); fever with convulsions;
breathing difficulties; unusual drowsiness;
high-pitched crying

@ Cautions Do not give babies under 6 months any
medicine without professional advice. Do not give

honey to children under | year as in rare cases it can
cause food poisoning.

ss acwq_4qwq4_e#4uwewr>wq_4+§__—- _

skin at each diaper change.

Note For diaper rash, the ointment is best.
Herbs Calendula (Calendula officinalis, p. 73),
nettle (Urtica dioica, p. 146)

Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp

of each herb to % cup (150 ml) of water. Give
¥—|'/4 cup (150-300 ml) a day.

Cradle Cap

Herb Olive (Olea europaea, p. 241)
Remedy Apply olive oil to the affected area
|-2 times a day.

Colds, Congestion, & Chest Coughs
Herb Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)
Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp herb
to % cup (150 ml) of water. Give 74—I cup a day.

Herbs Elderberry (Sambucus nigra, p. 132),
pelargonium (Pelargonium sidoides, p. |20),
thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)

Remedy Make an infusion with | level tsp thyme
leaves to 7 cup of water. Give 74—| cup a day.
Remedy Give elderberry or pelargonium
extract, as recommended by practitioner

or supplier.

Earache

Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)
Remedy Break open a garlic oil capsule, put
| drop on a cotton ball, and plug into the ear.

Teething
Herbs German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77), slippery elm (Ulmus rubra, p. 145)
Remedy Give German chamomile infusion
(see Digestive Upsets) or make a paste from
slippery elm powder and the infusion, and rub
on the gums.

Difficulty in Sleeping

Herbs German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita,
p. 77), linden (Tilia spp., p. 277)

Remedy Make an infusion using either herb and
give %—I'/ cups (150-300 ml) before bedtime.

NaS

----- PAGE 321 -----
Older Adults

Tradi
brigh

diges
help

Ginseng
(Panax ginseng)

ionally, as we age, the ‘‘fire’” or gi within us glows less

ly and our vitality slowly weakens. Many herbal medicines

=~ are ideally suited to treating the health problems that begin when
people reach their late fifties, such as circulatory problems, weak

ion, and poor memory. The herbs recommended here can

‘© maintain good health, preventing or reducing the severity

of symptoms that are often accepted as an inevitable consequence

of aging. Self-treatment for other problems often experienced later in life, such
as arthritis, is suggested in earlier sections.

F] Maintaining Vitality

Many herbs help to maintain vitality.

Thyme is a much underrated herb. Recent
research has discovered that it has antiaging
and tonic properties that maintain vitality and
reduce the chance of catching colds, flu, and
other respiratory infections.
Ashwagandha is a tonic, calming herb that
may slow the aging process. It is particularly
suited to aid recovery from long-term illness.
Ginseng is well known as a remedy that
supports vitality and resistance to stress and
infection in older people.

Rhodiola has similar tonic, restorative
properties to ashwagandha and ginseng, but
enhances mental performance and has a mild
antidepressant activity.

Fi General Conditions

Conditions that arise through aging need patient,
long-term treatment.

Ginkgo is the oldest tree on the planet. Its
leaves maintain good circulation to the head and
brain, improving memory, concentration, and
energy levels. Evidence suggests it may reduce
the risk of a stroke.

Gotu kola has significant anti-inflammatory
activity, for example in arthritis, but is also a tonic
that helps to protect the nervous system and to
maintain memory and cognition.

Garlic has great value as a long-term dietary
supplement, helping to maintain healthy
circulation, balance blood-sugar levels, reduce
high blood pressure and fat levels in the blood,
and improve resistance to infection, especially
bronchitis.

Rehmannia, a Chinese tonic herb with
strengthening and mildly stimulant properties,
appears to lower blood pressure and blood fat
levels. It is suitable for people who have a weak
liver and metabolism.

Gentian, a bitter herb, helps the absorption
of food by maintaining digestive secretions,
which diminish with age.

General Remedy

Herb Thyme (Thymus vulgaris, p. 143)
Remedy Make a standard infusion.
Take | 4-17 cups (300-450 ml) a day.

Stress or Convalescence

Herb Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera, p. 152)
Remedy Take | g of the root 2-3 times a day,
either by chewing it or chopping it and mixing with
a little water.

Herb Ginseng (Panax ginseng, p. | 18)
Remedy Take | g |—2 times a day for up to
3 months. Chew the fresh or dried root, cook
it in a soup, or take in tablet form.

Caution Do not take caffeine while taking ginseng.

Failing Memory & Concentration
Herb Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba, p. 100)

Remedy Take ginkgo tablets. These need to be
taken regularly for at least 3 months.

Herb Gotu kola (Centella asiatica, p. 76)
Remedy Take tablets or 4 tsp tincture twice
a day.

Poor Circulation & High Blood Pressure
Herb Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59)

Remedy Take |—2 raw cloves a day with food,
or take garlic tablets or capsules on a regular basis.

Herb Buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum,
p. 210)
Remedy Make a standard infusion and drink up
to 1’ cup (300 ml) a day.

Chronic Infections

Herbs Garlic (Allium sativum, p. 59), echinacea
(Echinacea spp., p. 92)

Remedy Take |—2 raw cloves of garlic each day
with food, or take either herb in tablet or capsule
form on a regular basis.

Important Note

a If taking conventional medication, tell your
doctor if you intend to take an herbal remedy.
This is especially important for the elderly.

a All remedies on this page need to be taken
continuously for up to 3 months.

= If you are over 70 years of age, take “4 of
the stated dose for remedies given on other
Pages in this book.

Option If ginseng is too stimulating, take 3 g of
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula, p. 83) a day in
the same way as ginseng. This has a milder, but
nonetheless tonic and strengthening, effect.

Nervous Exhaustion & Stress

Herb Oats (Avena sativa, p. 175)

Remedy Eat 25 g of oats each day (for example,
as a hot cereal). Alternatively, take 4 tsp of the
tincture twice a day.

Herb Rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea, p. 127)
Remedy Take / tsp (2.5 ml) of tincture 2-3
times a day or as recommended by supplier.

Weakened Liver & Metabolism

Herb Rehmannia (Rehmannia glutinosa,

p. 125)

Remedy Chew 5 g of root |—3 times a day, or
make a decoction with 5 g of root to | cup
(250 ml) of water and take |—3 times a day.

Weakened Digestion

Herb Gentian (Gentiana lutea, p. 99)
Remedy Take 5—!0 drops of tincture with
water about 30 minutes before eating,

3 times a day.

Caution Do not take gentian if you suffer from
acid indigestion or a peptic ulcer.

Arthritic Pain & Rheumatism
See Joint Pain & Stiffness, Including Arthritis
& Gout, p. 313.

Note Take one of the remedies for a maximum of
2-3 weeks. If there is no improvement, consult an
herbal practitioner.

Before taking any herbal remedies, see pages 290 & 298-299

aSN ¢4NOH Od SHIGHANAY TVENEH ©

js

e

319

----- PAGE 322 -----
CONSULTING AN HERBAL PRACTITIONER &

Consulting an Herbal Practitioner

Many common health problems, such as colds and indigestion, do not require
a professional consultation and can be successfully treated using herbs at home.
However, persistent or more serious ailments, such as stomach ulcers and
shingles, can be difficult or dangerous to treat on one's own and need the
advice and treatment of a qualified herbal practitioner or naturopath.

What Does Herbal Medicine

Treat Best?

It is difficult to state exactly which ailments

best respond to herbal medicine, since almost

no research has been undertaken with this
question in mind. Nevertheless, the experience
of herbal practitioners and their patients suggests
that many chronic and some acute illnesses readily
improve with herbal medicine. Conditions that
are commonly treated by herbalists include
allergies, arthritis, chronic or frequent infections,
circulatory problems, liver disease, menstrual and
gynecological problems, skin disorders, and stress-
related complaints such as headaches, insomnia,

and palpitations.

Choosing a Practitioner

Herbal practitioners tend to treat ill health more
effectively as they gain greater experience. Anyone
with a serious illness, such as rheumatoid arthritis
or cancer, should seek an experienced practitioner.
levertheless, herbalists newly launched into
practice often bring a more flexible approach to
treatment, having the time and enthusiasm for
patients that may be lacking in their more senior
counterparts. That said, a trusting relationship is as

important as the treatment itself—always find a

practitioner in whom you feel confident. The best

way to find an herbalist is by recommendation, or

by looking on the websites of the herbal
organizations listed on this page.

The Consultation

On visiting an herbalist you should be made to feel
welcome, receiving an attentive and sympathetic
ear. The first consultation takes about an hour, so
there is ample time for the practitioner to gain a
rounded view of your health problems and life as
a whole.

You will probably be asked about family traits,
diet, lifestyle, levels of stress, and any particular
anxieties that you may have. If appropriate, a
physical examination will take place, and the
practitioner will explain as far as possible what
is wrong and how much improvement can be
expected. Clinical tests may include urine analysis

or measuring hemoglobin levels from a drop

of blood. The herbalist will then recommend
appropriate treatment, usually involving an herbal
prescription, dietary advice, and a suggested
exercise regimen. If you are already undergoing
conventional treatment, the herbalist will advise
you on its compatibility with herbal medicine and,
if necessary, devise a program to discontinue
pharmaceutical medicines gradually.

Subsequent consultations generally last about
30 minutes and are likely to take place every 4 to
6 weeks for a period of 3 months. This, of course,
may vary, depending on the nature of the treatment.

Safety of Herbs

Although herbal medicine is extremely safe, the
fact that it is natural does not necessarily mean it

is harmless. The best guarantee against poor
treatment is to consult a well-trained practitioner
who belongs to a recognized professional association
and prescribes high-quality herbal medicines.

Professional Training

Traditionally, herbalists learned their craft by
apprenticeship. Nicholas Culpeper (1616-1654),
for example, was apprenticed to an apothecary for
10 years. Today, herbal practitioners are generally
trained at a college or university, acquiring their
clinical skills in herbal and, in some cases, hospital
clinics. The curriculum typically includes an in-depth
study of medical sciences, such as physiology,
pathology, pharmacology, and botany, as well as what

can be called the herbal sciences, materia medica,
nutrition, and therapeutics. Modern training
attempts to honor and retain the best of traditional
herbal medicine, while incorporating the insights of

contemporary medical science and research.

Herbalism Worldwide

Western medical herbalism is the traditional form
of herbal medicine practiced in Britain. However,
the Chinese and Ayurvedic traditions, among others,
are becoming more popular and are raising their
standards of training. If you wish to consult a
Chinese or Ayurvedic herbalist, it is strongly
recommended that you select a member of the
associations listed on this page.

The regulation of medical herbalism varies
considerably around the world. In the Far East,
practitioners and hospitals routinely offer herbal
medicine, acupuncture, and other traditional
healing practices alongside Western conventional
medicine. In the U.S., the leading practitioner
organization is the American Herbalists Guild.

Herbal practitioners in continental Europe
are known as phytotherapists, and are usually
conventional medical practitioners who have
studied plant medicine at the postgraduate level.

In Australia, the National Herbalists’ Association
of Australia (NHAA) is the leading professional
body of herbal practitioners.

In many parts of the world, herbal medicine is
unregulated. In this situation, it is wise to be
cautious and, as far as possible, to find a practitioner
based on personal recommendation.

Herbal Practitioner Organizations
This list is made up of recommended herbal
practitioner organizations active in the U.S.
and Canada.

UNITED STATES
American Herbalists Guild
www.americanherbalistsguild.com

American Association of
Naturopathic Physicians
www.naturopathic.org

National Certification Commission for
Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine
(NCCAOM)
https://mx.nccaom.org/FindAPractitioner

National Ayurvedic Medical Association
www.ayurvedanama.org

California College of Ayurveda
www.ayurvedacollege.com/resources/
Ayurveda-practitioner-CAS

CANADA

The Canadian Herbalist’s Association
of British Columbia

www.chaofbc.ca

Ontario Herbalists Association
www.herbalists.on.ca

----- PAGE 323 -----
Glossary

Many plant constituents and their actions
are explained in How Medicinal Plants Work,
pp. 10-16.

Medical
Abortifacient Causes abortion

Adaptogenic Helps the body adapt to stress and supports
normal function

Anabolic Promotes tissue growth

Anesthetic Numbs perception of external sensations
Analgesic Reduces pain

Anaphrodisiac Inhibits libido and sexual activity
Anorexia Lack of appetite

Anthelmintic Expels or destroys parasitic worms

Anthraquinones Irritate the intestinal wall causing a
bowel movement

Anti!
Anticoagulant Prevents blood clotting

tic Destroys or inhibits microorganisms

Antifungal Combats fungal infections
Anti-inflammatory Reduces inflammation
Antimicrobial Destroys or inhibits microorganisms
Antioxidant Prevents oxidation and breakdown of tissues

Antiseptic Destroys or inhibits microorganisms that
cause infection

Antispasmodic Relieves muscle spasm, or reduces
muscle tone

Antitussive Soothes and relieves coughing
Aperient Mild laxative
Aphrodisiac Excites libido and sexual activity

Aseptic Free from contamination by harmful bacteria,
viruses, or other microorganisms

Astringent Tightens mucous membranes and skin, reducing
secretions and bleeding from abrasions

Autonomic nervous system Part of the nervous system
responsible for the control of bodily functions that are not
consciously directed; e.g., sweating, beating of the heart

Ayurveda Traditional Indian system of medicine
(see pp. 36-39)

Bitter Stimulates secretions of saliva and digestive juices,
increasing appetite

Carcinogenic Causes cancer
Cardiotonic Improves heart function
Carminative Relieves digestive gas and indigestion

Carrier oil Oil such as wheatgerm, to which essential oils
are added in order to dilute them for use

Cathartic A drastic purgative

Circulatory stimulant Increases blood flow, usually to a
given area; e.g, hands and feet

Colic Abdominal pain produced by strong contractions of
intestines or bladder

Compress A cloth pad soaked in a hot or cold herbal
extract and applied to the skin

Counterirritant Superficial irritant used to relieve more
deep-seated pain or discomfort

Cream A mixture of water and fat or oil that blends with
the skin

Decoction Water-based preparation of bark, roots, berries,
or seeds simmered in boiling water

Demulcent Coats, soothes, and protects body surfaces
such as the gastric mucous membranes

Depurative Detoxifying agent

Detoxification The process of aiding removal of toxins and
waste products from the body

Diaphoretic Induces sweating
Diuretic Stimulates urine flow

Doctrine of Signatures Theory that the appearance of
a plant reveals its medicinal properties

Eclectic Popular system of herbal medicine in | 9th- and
early 20th-century North America

A liquid herbal preparation with a pleasant taste, due
to the addition of honey or sugar

Emetic Causes vomiting
Emmenagogue Stimulates menstrual flow

Emollient Softens or soothes the skin

Essential oil Distillation of volatile oils derived from
aromatic plants

Expectorant Stimulates coughing and helps clear phlegm
from the throat and chest

Febrifuge Reduces fever

Fixed oil A nonvolatile oil (plant constituent). An oil
produced by hot or cold infusion (preparation)

Galenical A medicine, in a standard formula, prepared
from plants

Hemostatic Stops or reduces bleeding
Hallucinogenic Causes visions or hallucinations
Hepatic Affects the liver

Hepatoprotective Protects the liver

Humor An important body fluid in traditional European or
Indian medicine (see p. 32)

Hypertension High blood pressure
Hypnotic Induces sleep

Hypoglycemic Lowers blood glucose levels
Hypotension Low blood pressure

Immune stimulant Stimulates the body's immune
defenses to counter infection

Infusion Water-based preparation in which flowers, leaves,
or stems are brewed in a similar way to tea

Inhalation Breathing of medicinally infused steam or liquid
through the nasal passages

Intermittent fever A fever that recurs regularly; e.g.,
malaria

Laxative Promotes evacuation of the bowels

Liniment External medication applied by rubbing
Mydriatic Dilates the pupil of the eye

Narcotic Causes drowsiness or stupor and relieves pain
Nervine Restores the nerves; relaxes the nervous system

Neuralgia Pain resulting from irritation or inflammation of
anerve

Edema Fluid retention

Estrogenic With a similar action to estrogen in the
body, supporting and maintaining the female reproductive
organs

Ointment A blend of fats or oils that form a protective
layer over the skin

Oxytocic Induces contractions of the uterus

Parasi le Kills parasites

Parasympathetic nervous system Part of the nervous
system involved in vegetative functions, especially digestion

Pectoral Acts on the lungs

Photosensitive Heightened sensitivity to sunlight

Physiomedicalism | 9th- and 20th-century American and
British system of herbal medicine

Poultice Herbal preparation usually applied hot to affected
area to alleviate pain and reduce swelling

Prostaglandins Chemicals in plants and the human
body that have a hormonal action affecting a wide range
of conditions including pain and inflammation

Purgative A very strong laxative
Qi Vital energy force in Chinese philosophy (see pp. 24-25)

Rubefacient Stimulates blood flow to skin, causing
reddening and warming

Sedative Reduces activity and nervous excitement
Simple An herb used on its own

Spasmolytic Relaxes muscles

Steroids Active chemicals, of animal and plant origin, with
powerful hormonal actions

Stimulant Increases rate of activity and nervous excitement
Stomachic Eases stomach pain or increases stomach activity
Styptic Stops bleeding when applied topically

Sympathetic nervous system Part of the nervous system
involved in maintaining arousal, alertness, and muscle tone

Systemic Affecting the body as a whole rather than
individual organs

Terpenes Molecules that form the base of most constituents
of volatile oils

Tincture Plant medicine prepared by macerating herb in
water and alcohol

Tonic Exerts a restorative or nourishing action on the body
Tonify Strengthens and restores body systems

Topical Application of herbal remedy to body surface
Vasoconstrictor Contracts and narrows blood vessels
Vasodilator Relaxes and widens blood vessels

Vermifuge Expels intestinal worms

Volatile oil Plant constituent distilled to produce essential oil
Vulnerary Heals wounds

Yin and yang Complementary opposites in Chinese
philosophy (see pp. 40-42)

Botanical

Aerial parts Parts of plant growing above ground
Annual Plant that completes its life cycle in a year
Aril Secondary covering over the seed in certain plants
Aromatic Plant with high levels of volatile oil

Axil Upper angle formed by leaf stem and supporting stem
or branch

Basal leaves Leaves growing from the base of the stem

Biennial Plant that completes its life cycle in 2 years,
generally flowering in the second year

Capsule Dry fruit that splits open when ripe to scatter seeds

Composite flowers Flowers made up of usually 2 types of
tiny florets, disc and ray; some have disc florets only

Compound Leaves or flowers made up of many individual
small flowers or leaflets

Cordate Having heart-shaped leaves

Corm Bulblike, underground storage organ formed by a
swollen stem base

Corolla Collective term for the petals of a flower
Deciduous Plant that sheds leaves each year

Dioecious Species with male and female parts on
separate plants

Herbaceous Plant that dies down at the end of the
growing season

Insectivorous Plant that traps and digests insects and other
small animals

Lanceolate Lance-shaped
Latex Milky fluid found in various plants and trees

Panicle A branched cluster of flowers on stalks in a
pyramid-shaped arrangement

Perennial Plant that lives for at least 3 seasons

Pinnate A compound leaf with leaflets growing in 2 rows
on each side of its mid-rib

Rhizome Underground storage stem

Stamen Male fertilizing organ of a flowering plant
Stigma Female organ of a flower

Succulent Plant with thick, fleshy leaves and/or stems
Trifoliate Plant with 3 leaves or leaflets

Tuber Thickened part of underground stem

Umbel Umbrella-like arrangement of flowers with all flower
stems arising from the same point

Whorl Ring of leaves or flowers radiating out horizontally
from a central point

Wildcrafting Harvesting herbs from the wild

AUVSSOTS ©

----- PAGE 324 -----
BIBLIOGRAPHY &

&
ae

322

Bibliography

This selected listing of references is provided as a guide to those interested
in learning more about the history, science, and present-day practice of

herbal medicine.

Herbal Medicine
Allen, D. & Hatfield, G.
Medicinal Plants in Folk Tradition
(USA, Timber Press, 2004)

Barker, J.

The Medicinal Flora of Britain and
Northwestern Europe

(UK, Winter Press, 2001)
Barnes, J., Anderson, L. A.,
& Phillipson, J. D.

Herbal Medicines

(UK, Pharmaceutical Press, 2007)

Bartram, T.

Encyclopaedia of Herbal Medicine

(UK, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1995)
Bensky, D. & Gamble, A.

Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia Medica
(USA, Eastland Press, 1993)

Bone, K.
Clinical Guide to Blending Liquid Herbs
(UK, Churchill Livingstone, 2003)

Bown, D.

The Royal Horticultural Society Encyclopedia
of Herbs & Their Uses

(UK, Dorling Kindersley, 1995)

Bradley, P. (ed.)
British Herbal Compendium
(UK, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992)

Bremness, L.
Herbs
(UK, Dorling Kindersley, 1994)

British Herbal Medicine Association
British Herbal Pharmacopoeia
(UK, British Herbal Medicine Association, 1983)

Bruneton, J.

Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry of
Medicinal Plants

(UK, Intercept, 1995)

Bruton-Seal, J. & Seal, M.
Hedgerow Medicine
(UK, Merlin Unwin Books, 2008)

Chevallier, A.
Herbal First Aid
(UK, Amberwood, 1993)

Chevallier, A.
Herbal Remedies
(UK, Dorling Kindersley, 2007)

Chevallier, A.

Hypericum: Natural Antidepressant and More
(UK, Souvenir Press, 1999)
Chisti, G.

The Traditional Healers’ Handbook
(USA, Healing Arts Press, 1991)
Corrigan, D.

Indian Medicine: Echinacea

(UK, Amberwood)

Corrigan, D.

Sleep and Relaxation

(UK, Amberwood, 1986)
Duke, J.

The Green Pharmacy

(USA, Rodale Press, 1997)
Erasmus, U.

Fats That Heal, Fats That Kill
(Canada, Alive, 1993)

Felter, J. & Lloyd, J.
King’s American Dispensatory
(USA, Eclectic Medical, 1983)

Fulder, S.
The Book of Ginseng
(USA, Arts Press, 1993)

Fulder, S.
Ginger, The Ultimate Home Remedy
(UK, Souvenir Press, 1993)

Grieve, M. (ed. Leyel, C. F)
A Modern Herbal (free download available)
(UK, Penguin, 1980)

Hoffman, D.

Holistic Herbal: A Safe and Practical Guide to
Making and Using Herbal Remedies (4th ed.)

(UK, Thorsons 2003)
Lis-Balchin, M

Aromatherapy Science

(UK, Pharmaceutical Press, 2006)

Low, T.
Wild Herbs of Australia and New Zealand
(Australia, Angus & Robertson, 1985)

Martindale, W.
The Extra Pharmacopoeia (26th ed.)
(UK, The Pharmaceutical Press, 1972)

Mcintyre, M.
Herbal Medicine for Everyone
(UK, Penguin, 1985)

Mills, S.
The Essential Book of Herbal Medicine
(UK, Penguin, 1991)

Mills, S.
Woman Medicine: Vitex Agnus-castus
(UK, Amberwood, 1992)

Mills, S. and Bone, K.
The Essential Guide to Herbal Safety
(UK, Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2005)

Mills, S. and Bone, K.
Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy (2nd ed.)
(UK, Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, 2013)

Murray, M.

The Healing Power of Herbs
(USA, Prima, 1995)

Ody, P.

The Complete Medicinal Herbal
(UK, Dorling Kindersley, 1993)
Ody, P.

Home Herbal

(UK, Dorling Kindersley, 1995)

Price, S. & Price, L.
Aromatherapy and Health Professionals (4th ed.)
(UK, Churchill Livingstone, 201 1)

Priest, A. W. & Priest, L. R.
Herbal Medication

(UK, Fowler, 1984)

Rogers, C.

The Woman's Guide to Herbal Medicine
(UK, Hamish Hamilton, 1995)

Romanucci-Ross, L., et al

The Anthropology of Medicine: from Culture
to Method

(USA, Bergin & Garvey, 1983)
Schauenberg, P. & Paris, F.
Guide to Medicinal Plants

(UK, Lutterworth Press, 1977)

Schultes, R. & Raffauf, R.
The Healing Forest
(USA, Dioscorides Press, 1990)

de Sloover, J. & Goossens, M.
Wild Herbs, a Field Guide

(UK, David & Charles, 1981)
Stargrove, M., Treasure, J.

& McKee, D. L.

Herb, Nutrient, and Drug Interactions: Clinical
Implications and Therapeutic Strategies

(UK, Mosby Elsevier, 2008)

Svoboda, R.
Ayurveda: Life, Health and Longevity
(UK, Arkana, 1992)

Talalaj, S. & Czechowicz, A.

Herbal Remedies, Harmful and
Beneficial Effects

(Australia, Hill of Content, 1989)

Trease, C. & Evans, W.
Pharmacognosy (13th ed.)

(UK, Balliére Tindall, 1989)
Uphof, J.

Dictionary of Economic Plants
(UK, Wheldon & Wesley, 1970)

Valnet, J.

The Practice of Aromatherapy
(UK, C. W. Daniel, 1980)
Vogel, H.

The Nature Doctor

(UK, Mainstream, 1990)
Wagner, H. et al. (ed.)

Economic and Medicinal Pl
(vols. |-5)

(UK, Sangam, 1993)

Warrier, P. et al. (ed.)

Indian Medicinal Plants (vols. |—-5)
(UK, Sangam, 1993)

Weiss, W.

Herbal Medicine

(UK, Arcanum, 1988)

White, A.

Herbs of Ecuador

(Ecuador, Imprenta Mariscal, 1976)

lant Research

Williamson, E.
Potters Herbal Cyclopaedia
(UK, C. W. Daniel, 2003)

History of Herbal Medicine
Bruton-Seal, J. & Seal, M.

Herbalist’s Bible: John Parkinson's Lost Classic
Rediscovered, The

(UK, Merlin Unwin Books, 2014)
Culpeper, N.

The English Physitian Enlarged
(UK, George Sawbridge, | 653)

Gerard, J.

The Herball or General History of Plants
(UK, John North, 1597)

Griggs, B.

New Green Pharmacy

(UK, Vermilion, 1997)

Gunther, R.

The Greek Herbal of Dioscorides

(UK, Oxford University Press, 1934)
Hoizey, D. & Hoizey, M. J.

A History of Chinese Herbal Medicine
(UK, Edinburgh University Press, 1993)
K’Eogh, J. (ed. Scott, M.)

An Irish Herbal

(UK, Aquarian Press, 1986)

Larre, C.

The Way of Heaven (Neijing suwen)
(UK, Monkey Press, 1994)

Lloyd, G. (ed.)
Hippocratic Writings
(UK, Penguin, 1978)

Manniche, L.
An Ancient Egyptian Herbal
(UK, British Museum Publications, 1989)

Pliny the Elder (ed. Healey, J.)
Natural History: A Selection
(UK, Penguin, 1991)

Porter, R.
The Greatest Benefit to Mankind
(UK, Harper Collins, 1997)

Swinburne Clymer, R.

Nature's Healing Agents

(USA, The Humanitarian Society, 1973)
Tobyn, G., Denham, A. &
Whitelegg, M.

The Western Herbal Tradition: 2000 Years
of Medicinal Plant Knowledge

(UK, Churchill Livingstone, 2010)
Unschuld, P.

Medicine in China

(UK, University of California Press, 1985)
Vogel, V.

American Indian Medicine

(UK, University of Oklahoma Press, 1970)

Journals

Australian Journal of Medical Herbalism
British Medical Journal

Canadian Journal of Herbalism
Herbalgram

Journal of Alternative and Complementary
Medicine

Journal of Ethnopharmacology

Journal of Herbal Medicine

Lancet

New Scientist

Phytomedicines

Planta Medica

Review of Aromatic and Medicinal Plants

Useful Websites
American Botanical Council
Magazine and articles
www.herbalgram.org

Herbmed
An online herbal database
www.herbmed.org

Health World Online

An online herbal materia medica
www.healthy.net/clinic/therapy/herbal/herbic/
herbs/index.asp

Henriette'’s Herbal Homepage

Culinary and medicinal herb site
www.henriettes-herb.com

Natural Medicines Database
www.naturaldatabase.com

North American Institute of Medical Herbalism
www.medherb.com

Raintree's Tropical Plant Database
www.rain-tree.com/plants.htm

US. National Library of Medicine
https://www.nim.nih.gov/
MEDLINEPLUS

Provides health and herb information
wwwa.nim.nih.gov/medlineplus
PUBMED.

Database of research articles
wwwancbi.nim.nih.gov/pubmed

----- PAGE 325 -----
General

ndex

Bold page numbers refer to main plant entries in Key Medicinal Plants
and Other Medicinal Plants. Ailments for which there is a self-help

treatment are in bold.

A

abdominal pain 307
Abies balsamea 158
Aboriginal medicine 46
Abrus precatorius 38, 158
absinthe 66
Abutilon, A. indicum 158
A. trisulcatum 158
Acacia spp., A. catechu syn. Senegalia
catechu 14, 158-59
A. decurrens 46, 159
A. nilotica syn. A arabica 159
acai 210
Acanthopanacis gracilistylus 94
acanthus 159
Acanthus mollis 159
Achillea millefolium 33, 56, 291
Achyranthes, A. aspera 159
A. bidentata 159
acidity, stomach 307
acne 305
aconite 22, 160
Aconitum, A. carmichaelii 160
A. napellus 22, 160
Acorus, A. calamus 13, 39, 57, 298
A. calamus var. americanus 57
A. gramineus 57
adaptogenic herbs |2, 13, 118, 127
Adhatoda vasica 160
Adiantum, A. capillus-veneris 160
A. caudatum 160
Adonis vernalis 160
adulteration of herbal products |7
Aegle marmelos 18, 19, 161
Aesculus hippocastanum |5, 58
Aframomum melegueta 45
African cedar 185
African medicine 44-45
African rue 245
agar 215
Agastache rugosa 42, 161
agave 161
Agave, A. americana 161
A sisalana 161
agnus castus |5|
Agrimonia, A. eupatoria 162
A. pilosa 162
agrimony 162
Agropyron repens syn. Elymus repens 162
Ailanthus, A. altissima syn. A. glandulosa 162
A. malabrica 163
Ajuga, A. chamaepitys 163
A. decumbens | 63
A. reptans 163
albizzia 163
Albizzia lebbeck 163
Alchemilla vulgaris 163-64, 286
alchemy 24
alder 164-65
alder buckthorn 261-62
alehoof 216
Aletris farinosa 164
Alexandrian senna 75
alfalfa 233-34
alkaloids 16, 26
“all-heal” (valerian) 148

allergic rhinitis 300
allergies 300-301, 312
Allium, A. cepa 11,59, 164

A. fistulosum 164

A. sativum 13, 19, 28, 36, 49, 51, 59,

164, 287
A. sibiricum 164
A. ursinum 59, 164
allspice 248
Alnus glutinosa syn. A. rotundifolia 164-65
Aloe, A. ferox 60

A. vera syn. A. barbadensis 45, 60,

286, 289
aloe vera 45, 60, 161, 286, 289
Aloysia triphylla see Lippia citriodora
Alpinia, A. officinarum 61

A. katsumadai 6 |

A. officinarum 22, 41, 61

A. oxyphylla 61
Alstonia spp. 46, 165

A. constricta 165

A. scholaris 165
Althaea, A. officinalis 13, 34, 35, 158, 165

A. rosea 165, 221
Amanita muscaria 18, 187
amaranth 165
Amaranthus, A. caudatus |65

A. grandiflorus 165

A. hypochondriacus 165
amarogentin 99
American angelica 63
American Botanical Council 5 |
American boxwood 196
American chestnut 184
American cranesbill 120,216
American ginseng | 18, 243-44
American hellebore 281
American mandrake 252
American pennyroyal 235
American spikenard 170
American storax 229
American valerian 199-200
American white ash 213
Ammi, A. majus 62, 166

A. visnaga syn. Daucus visnaga 13, 15, 19,

44, 47, 62
ammoniacum 203
Anacardium occidentale 166
Anacyclus pyrethrum 45, 166
anemia 301
anesthetic herbs | |
Anagallis arvensis 166-67

analgesic herbs |, 13, 21, 86, 96, 97, 103,

114, 122, 155
Anamirta cocculus 167
Ananas comosus 53, 167
andrographis 167
Andrographis paniculata 167
Anemarrhena asphodeloides 168
Anemone, A. nemorosa | 68
A. pratensis 168
A. pulsatilla syn. Pulsatilla vulgaris 35, 168
Anethum graveolens syn. Peucedanum
graveolens 168
angelica 33, 63, 168-69
Angelica, A. archangelica 33, 63, 168-69
A. atropurpurea 63

A. dahurica 169
A. sinensis syn. A. polymorpha 41, 42, 63,
68, 117, 124
angostura 214
angular Solomon's seal 253
anise 53, 223, 248-49
annatto 179
Annona squamosa 169
annual nettle 146
Anthemis, A. cotula 169
A. nobilis see Chamaemelum nobile
anthraquinones 15, 126
Anthriscus cerefolium 169-70
anti-inflammatory herbs 13, 5|
antibiotic herbs |3, 28, 85
antiseptic herbs 12, 13,97, 112, 122
see also aseptic dressing
antispasmodic herbs 13, 97, 114, 135, 150
anxiety, chronic 308
Aphanes arvensis 170
aphrodisiacs 57, 97, 115, 118, 122, 144
Apium graveolens |5, 64
A. graveolens var. rapaceum 64
appetite, loss of 306
apricot |5, 257
Apuleius 194
Arab medicine see Islamic medicine
Arabian jasmine 224
Aralia, A. chinensis 170
A. cordata 170
A. nudicaulis 170
A. racemosa 170
arborvitae 276
Arbutus unedo 170
Arctium, A. lappa 12, 13, 20, 65, 177, 264
A. minus 65
A. tomentosum 65
Arctostaphylus uva-ursi 71, 144, 147, 170,
212, 281
Areca catechu 250
areca nut 250
Arenaria, A. peploides |71
A. rubra 170-71
Argemone, A. glauca 171
A. mexicana 171
Arisaema spp. 171
A. triphyllum 171
Aristolochia clematitis 171
Aristotle 18, 32
arjun 142
Armoracia rusticana syn. Colchlearia
armoracia 171-72
arnica 35, 172
Arnica, A. fulgens 172
A. montana 35, 172
arquitecta 53
arrow poisons 22, 160, 189
arrowroot 52, 233
Artemisia, A. abrotanum 66, 67, 172
A. absinthium 13, 16, 66, 67, 172
A. annua 10, 43, 66, 67
A. anomala 66
A. apiacea 67
A. capillaris 66, 67, 172
A. cina 66, 67, 172-73
A. dracunculus 66, 67, 173
A. vulgaris 66, 67, 173
artemisinin 67
arteriosclerosis 301
arthritis, with acid indigestion/peptic ulcer 313
inflamed joints 313
old age 319
artichoke 13, 137, 199
asafoetida 38, 203, 210-11
Asclepias, A. incarnata 174

A. syriaca 174
A. tuberosa 49, 173-74
aseptic dressing 28
ash 213
ashwagandha 38, 152
Asian plum 257
asiaticocide 76
asmatica 279
Aspalanthus linearis 174
asparagus 174
Asparagus, A. officinalis 174
A. racemosus 174
Asperula odorata syn. Galium odoratum
174-75
Aspidium filix-mas see Dryopteros
filix-mas
Aspidosperma, A. excelsum 175
A. quebracho-blanco 175
aspirin 26, 98, 129
asthma, mild 301
asthma plant 209
astragalus 68
Astragalus membranaceus 68
astringent herbs, action of 13
athlete's foot 304
Atlas cedar 185
Atractylodes macrocephala 175
Atropa belladonna |6, 35, 69
aubergine 69, 270-71
Australian medicine 46-47
Australian quinine 165
Australian wattle 46, 159
Avena sativa ||-12, 13, 175
avens 216
Avicenna 21, 33, 89
avocado 50, 121
ayahuasca 18, 53, 176
Ayurvedic medicine 21, 22, 24, 29, 36-39
chakras 37, 38
doshas 37-38
five elements 37
life force 24
practitioners 38, 39
prana 38
preparations and treatments 38-39
Western influence 27
Azadirachta indica 70, 161
Aztec and Mayan cultures 21, 26, 48

B

ba ji tian 237
ba jiao hui xian (star anise) 222-23
babul 159
bacc (sweet flag) 57
Bach Flower Remedies 230
back pain/backache 313, 317
Bacopa monnieri 175
Badianus Manuscript (Martin de la Cruz)
48, 161
bael 18, 19, 161
bai guo (ginkgo) 100
bai shao yao (white peony) | 17
bai tou weng (Chinese anemone) 259
bai zhi 169
bai zhu 175
Baical skullcap 40, 42, 134, 135, 175
balloon vine 37, 183
Ballota nigra 176
balm of Gilead 254-55
balmony 188
balsam fir 158
Bambusa, B. arundiaceae 176
B. breviflora 176
ban bian lian (Chinese lobelia) | 10

XHANI TVUENHD &

----- PAGE 326 -----
GENERAL INDEX &

A
a

324

banana 238
Banisteriopsis caapi 18, 53, 176
banyan tree 211
Baptisia tinctoria 176-77
barberry 177-78
“barefoot doctors" 29
barley 220-21
Barosma, B. betulina syn. Agathosma
betulina 13, 26, 44, 71, 281
B. crenulata 7|
B. serratifolia 7 |
barun (varuna) 88
basil 241
baths & skin washes 297
bay laurel 226-27, 286
bayberry 238
bearberry 147, 170, 281
bear's breeches 159
bearsfoot 254
Beech, Dr. Wooster 50, 158, 165
beleric myrobalan 142, 275
belladonna 69
Bengal kino 180
Bengal quince |61
Benincasa hispida syn. B. cerifa 177
benzoin gum 273
Berberis, B. aquifolium syn. Mahonia
aquifolium 177
B. vulgaris 177-78
bergamot I91
Beta vulgaris 178
betel 122,250
bethroot 278
betony 272
Betula, B. pendula syn. B. verrucosa 178
B. utilis 178
bian xu (knotgrass) 253
Bidens tripartita 178
Bignonia catalpa syn. Catalpa bignonioides 179
bilberry 147
biomedicine | |, 26, 27, 28
birthwort 171
bishop's weed 62, 166
bistort 13, 124, 253-54
bites, minor 303
bitter aloes 60
bitter herbs, action of 13
bitter melon 236
bitter orange 190-91
bitters 16
bittersweet 270
Bixa orellana 179
black bamboo 176
black bryony 180
black catechu 14, 158-59
black cohosh 13, 17,51, 79, 106, 186
black cumin 240
black haw 150, 281
black horehound 176
black mulberry 238
black pepper | 16, 180
black root 228
black walnut 224
black willow 129
blackberry 15, 34, 264
blackcurrant 262
bladder infections see urinary infections
bladderwort 161
bladderwrack 213
bloating 306, 307
blood clotting 12, 100
blood pressure, high 301
during pregnancy 317
in old age 319
blood tonics 63, || |

bloodletting 24
bloodroot 266
blue cohosh 50, 185
blue flag 223
blue gum 96
blue toadflax 227
blue vervain 149
blueberry 147
bo he 234-35
bog myrtle 238-39
bogbean 235
boils 305
boldo 52, 246
boneset 208
borage 179, 204
Borago officinalis 179, 204
boswellia 179
Boswellia, B. sacra 179

B. serrata 179
bottlebrush 205
brahmi (water hyssop) !75
Brassica oleracea |6, 180
Brazilian ginseng 246
breast tenderness, menstrual 315
breathing difficulty & tight chest 301
Brickell, John 184
broad-leaved paperbark tree |12
bronchial asthma 301
bronchitis see coughs & bronchitis
broom 200
bruises 304
Bryonia, B. alba 180

B. dioica syn. B. cretica subsp. dioica | 80
bu gu zhi 258
buchu 13, 26, 44, 71, 281
buckwheat 14,210
bugle 163
bugleweed 231
bupleurum 13, 20, 72
Bupleurum chinense syn. B.
scorzoneraefolium 20, 72
bur marigold 178
burdock 12, 13, 20, 65, 177, 264
burning bush 202
burns, minor 303
bush basil 241
bushy lippia 228
butcher's broom 265
Butea monosperma 180
butter tree 231
butternut 50, 224
butterwort 249
buying herbs 17, 286

Cc

cabbage | 6, 180
cacao 276
Caesalpina, C. bahamensis 181

C. bonduc 180-81

C. pulcherrima 181
cajuput | 12,234
calamint 181, 267
Calamintha ascendens syn. C. sylvatica,
C. officinalis 181, 267
calamus 57
calendula 13, 17, 32, 73, 123, 286, 290
Calendula, C. arvense 73

C. officinalis 13, 17, 32, 73, 123, 286
California poppy 50, 207
Calluna vulgaris 181
calomel (metallic purgative) 24
calumba 44, 224
Camellia sinensis syn. Thea sinensis | 1, 39,
81, 181, 215, 224

camphor 190
Canada balsam see balsam fir
Canadian fleabane 47, 194-95
Canadian goldenrod 27 |
Cananga odorata syn. Canangium
odoratum 182
candidiasis 314
canella 182
Canella winterana syn. C. alba 182
Cannabis sativa 21, 104, 182
cao dou cou (galangal) 61
Cape aloes 60
Cape gooseberry 247
caper 182-83
Capparis, C. cynophallophora | 83
C. spinosa 182-83, 267
capsaicin 74
Capsella bursa-pastoris syn. Thlaspi
bursa-pastoris 183
Capsicum, C. annuum 74
C. frutescens 13, 27, 38, 49, 51, 74, 110
capsules 292, 299
caraway 184
Carbenia benedicta see Cnicus benedictus
cardamom 13, 22, 38, 93
cardiac glycosides 15, 26, 201
cardiac tonic 142
cardinal lobelia 49
Cardiospermum spp. 37, 183
Carduus, C. benedictus see Cnicus
benedictus
C. marianus see Silybum marianum
Caribbean medicine 48-49
Carica papaya | 1, 183
carminative herbs, action of 13
carob 186
carragheen |89
carrot 16, 64, 201
Carthamus tinctorius 42, 184
Carum carvi 184
cascara sagrada 262
cashew 166
cassava 232-33
cassia 81
Cassia, C. angustifolia 75
C. obtusifolia 75
C. senna syn. Senna alexandrina 13, 15,
22, 30, 45, 75
Castanea, C. dentata 184
C. sativa 184
castor oil plant 19, 36, 262-63
catalpa 179
Catalpa bignonioides see Bignonia catalpa
catha 185
Catha edulis 185
catnip 239-40
cat's claw 280
cattail 279
Catton, Christopher 89
Caulophyllum thalictroides 50, 185
cautions about using herbs and herbal
preparations 55, 290, 298
cayenne 13, 27, 38, 49, 50, 51, 74, 110
cedar 185
Cedar of Lebanon 185
Cedrus spp. 185
C. atlantica 185
C. libani 185
celeriac 64
celery 15, 64
Celtis australis 185
Centaurea, C. cyanus 185-86
C. scabiosa 186
centaury 206
Centella asiatica syn. Hydrocotyle asiatica

19, 47, 78
Central American medicine 21, 48
century plant 161
Cephaelis ipecacuanha 52, 186
Ceratonia siliqua 186
Cetraria islandica 186
Ceylon leadwort 251
chaff flower 159
chai hu (bupleurum) 72
chakras (Ayurvedic medicine) 37, 38
Chamaelirium lutea 51, 186-87
Chamaemelum nobile syn. Anthemis nobilis
77, 187
Chamaenerion angustifolia syn. Epilobium
angustifolium 187
Chamomilla recutita syn. Matricaria recutita
14, 35, 77, 187, 286, 291
chandan 266
chaparral 226
Charaka Samhita (Indian treatise) 19, 36,
161,211, 261
chaste tree 13, 33, ISI
che gian cao 25 |
che gian zi (psyllium) 123
chebulic myrobalan |42, 275-76
Cheiranthus cheiri 187
Chelidonium majus 187-88
Chelone glabra 188
chemical constituents of plants 10-11, 12,
14-16, 17,31
Chenopodium, C. ambrosioides 188
C. bonus-henricus 188
C. rhadinostachyum |88
chervil 169-70
chest coughs & bronchitis 310
chicalote 171
chicken pox 304
chickweed 272-73, 289
chicory 189-90
chilblains 302
childbirth 317
children see infants & children
Chimaphila umbellata 188
Chinese aconite 160
Chinese anemone 259
Chinese figwort 125
“Chinese foxglove” (rehmannia) |25
Chinese goldthread 195
Chinese lobelia | 10
Chinese medicine 21, 36-37, 40-43, 47
choice of herbs 42
cold-induced illness and febrile illness 27
decoctions 291
development of medical systems 20
diagnosis and treatment 41-42
early texts 19-20
five elements 40-41
formulas 42
holistic approach to treatment 29
key theories 40-41
life force 24
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) 29,
40
Western influences 27
yin and yang 40-42, 43
Chinese peony | 17, 243
Chinese rhubarb ||, 15, 42, 126,
177, 264
Chinese sage 130
Chinese wolfberry |||
Chionanthus virginicus 13, 188-89
chirayata 273-74
chiretta | 6, 39, 273-74
chiropractic 27, 51
cholagogue herbs, action of 13

----- PAGE 327 -----
Chondrodendron tomentosum ||, 52, 189
Chondrus crispus 189
chou wu tong 40, 191
chronic infections in old age 319
Chrysanthemum, C. indicum 78

C. x morifolium 13, 43, 78, 235, 256
chuan jiao 153
chuan xiong 42, 117, 228
chufa 199
chun pi (tree of heaven) 162
Chyawan, Muni 204
Cichorium, C. endiva 190

C. intybus 189-90
cilantro 195-96
Cimicufuga, C. dahurica 79

C. foetida 79

C. racemosa syn. Actaea racemosa 13, 17,

51,79, 106, 186
cinchona | 3, 23, 52, 80
Cinchona spp. | 1, 13, 23, 52, 80
C. calisaya 80
C. ledgeriana 80
C. officinalis 80
Cinnamomum, C. camphora syn. Laurus
camphora 190
C. cassia 41, 81
C. verum 81
C. zeylanicum 22, 27, 38, 81
cinnamon 22, 27, 38, 81
circulation, effect of herbs 12, 13
circulatory problems 301, 302, 319
Citrullus, C. colocynthoides 190
C. colocynthus 190
C. lanata 190
C. vulgaris 190
Citrus, C. aurantifolia 177, 191, 250
C. aurantium 190-91
C. bergamia syn. C. aurantium var.
bergamia 191
C. limon 11, 14, 38, 82, 191
C reticulata 124
clary sage 131, 265
Claviceps purpurea 217
cleansing herbs see detoxifying herbs
cleavers 214
Clerodendrum, C. serratum 191
C. trichotomum 40, 191
clove 20, 36, 97
club moss 230
Cnicus benedictus syn. Carbenia benedicta,
Carduus benedictus 137, 191
coca 18, 52-53, 206-207
cocaine ||, 28, 52, 206-207
Cochlearia, C. armoracia see Armoracia
rusticana
C. officinalis 191-92
cocillana 218
cocoa 276
coconut 192
coconut palm 192
Cocos nucifera 192
codeine, source of 10, 244
codonopsis 40, 61, 83
Codonopsis pilosula 40, 61, 83
Coffea arabica 44, 192
coffee 44, 192
Cola, C. acuminata 13, 45, 192-93
C. nitida 193
cola nut 192-93
Colchicum autumnale 89, 193
cold extremities 302
cold sores 304
colds 311,318
see also flu; hay fever
coleus 84

Coleus, C. amboinicus 84
C. forskohlii syn. Plectranthus barbatus 84
colic 318
colic root 91, 164
Collinsonia canadensis 193
colocynth 190
coltsfoot 13, 20, 278-79
comfrey 10, 12, 13, 35, 138, 286, 290
Commiphora, C. molmol syn. C. myrrha 19,
44, 85
C. mukul 85, 193
common buckthorn 262
common dogwood 196
common fleabane |07
common foxglove 26, 35, 194, 201,
202, 290
common mallow 165, 232
common nasturtium 278
common oak 260
common plantain 123, 251
compresses 296
concentration, failing 319
conception, aiding 316
condurango 233
congestion, with allergic rhinitis 300
earache and 312
infants & children 318
sinus congestion and 312
Conium maculatum 194, 215
conjunctivitis 310
constipation 307, 317,318
contraceptive pill, first 9 |
contrayerva 203
convalescence 308, 309, 319
Convallaria majalis 31, 194
Convolvulus jalapa see Ipomoea purga
Conyza, C. canadensis syn. Erigeron
canadensis 47, 194-95
copaiba 195
Copaifera spp. 195
Coptis, C. chinensis 43, 195
C. trifolia 195
coriander 195-96
Coriandrum sativum 195-96
corn 23, 154, 161
corn mint 234-35
cornelian cherry 196
cornflower 185-86
cornsilk 13, 23, 48, 71, 154, 162
cornsmut | 54
Cornus, C. florida 196
C. mas 196
C. officinalis 196
C. sanguinea 196
corydalis 43, 86, 213
Corydalis, C. cava 86
C. gariana 86
C. yanhusuo 43, 86, 213
Corylus avellana 102
Corynanthe yohimbe see Pausintstalia

yohimbe
cosmetic bark 238
cotton 217-18

couch grass 162, 221
coughs & bronchitis 310, 318
coumarins |5
cowberry 147
cowslip 15, 35, 256
crack willow 129
cradle cap 318
cramp bark 13, 33, 49, 150
cramps 312
cranberry |47, 280-81
Crataegus spp. 87

C. monogyna 87

C. oxyacantha 15, 31, 35, 47, 87
Crataeva nurvula 88
creams 296
creosote bush 226
Crithmum maritimum 196
Crocus sativa 89, 184
Croton spp. 196

C. flavens 196

C. lecheri 196
cubeb 122, 250
Cucurbita pepo 197
Culcitium reflexum 53

Culpeper, Nicholas 24, 34, 65, 140, 163,
166, 175, 178, 184, 198, 204, 213, 223,

227, 231, 254, 256, 266, 276-77, 282,
283, 336

cumin 197, 226

Cuminum cyminum 197, 226

Cupressus sempervirens 197

curare 11,52, 189

Curcuma, C. longa syn. C. domestica 22, 35,

37, 38, 51, 90, 155, 198
C. zedoaria 198
“cure-all” herb (kerala) 48-49
curled dock 264-65
curry tree 238
Cuscuta, C. epilinum 198
C. epithymum 198
C. europaea 198
C. reflexa 198
custard apple 169
cutch 158-59
cuts and grazes 304
cyanogenic glycosides |5
Cyanopsis tetragonoloba 198
Cydonia oblonga 198
Cymbopogon, C. citratus 48, 199, 286
C. densiflorus 199
C. martini 199
C. nardus 199
Cynara scolymus syn. C. cardunculus 13,
137, 199
Cyperus, C. esculentus 199
C. papyrus 199
C. rotundus 199
C. stolonifera 199
cypress 197
Cypripedium pubescens 199-200
cystitis 314
Cytisus scoparius syn. Sarothamnus
scoparius 200

D

da huang (Chinese rhubarb) 126
da ji 209
da zao (jujube) 283
dadap (Indian coral tree) 206
dalcini (cinnamon) 81
damiana 48, 51, 144
dan shen 13, 42, 130, 131
dandelion 16, 47, 65, 141, 289
dang gui (Chinese angelica) 63
dang shen (codonopsis) 83
Daphne mezereum 200
Datura, D. innoxia 201
D. mete! 201
D. stramonium 200-201
Daucus, D. carota 16, 201
D. visnaga see Ammi visnaga
De Materia Medica (Dioscorides) see
Dioscorides
deadly nightshade | 6, 35, 69
decoctions 291, 299
Aboriginal 46

“decoction of the 4 rulers” 175
Native American 49
demulcent herbs, action of 13
depression 308
menopausal 316
depurative herbs, action of 13
Descartes, René 25
desert tea 95
desmodium 201
Desmodium adscendens 201
detoxifying herbs, action of 12, 13
South American 53
development of herbal medicine | 8-53
African medicine 44-45
and the ascendancy of biomedicine ||,
26, 27, 28
Australian and New Zealand medicine
46-47

Central & South American medicine 21,

23, 48, 52-53
Chinese medicine 21, 36-37, 40-43
city-based herbalism 34
development of medicinal lore 19
earliest written accounts 19
establishment of medical schools 2!, 22
in Europe 20-21, 22-24, 27, 32-35
first professional body 27
foundation of major herbal traditions 20
herbal synergy 31
herbalism outlawed 27, 28, 34, 51
holism 29, 30, 34, 37
Islamic & Indian medicine 21, 36-39
Japanese and Korean medicine 22,
42-43
medieval folk healing 20-21
modern attitudes to 28-30, 34-35
mystical origins 18
Native American medicine 25-27,
49-50
North American medicine 48-5 |
pharmaceutical industry and 31
scientific rationalism, impact of 25, 34
shamanistic medicine 18-19

trade and trade routes, effects of 20, 21,

22-23, 36, 37, 44
university courses 3 |
women physicians 22
working alongside conventional
medicine 29, 30
devil's claw 44, 103
devil's dung 210-11
devil's guts 198
di huang (rehmannia) 125
diagnosis, modern methods 34-35
Dianthus, D. caryophyllus 20 |
D. superbus 201
diaper rash 318
diaphoretic herbs, action of 13
diarrhea 307
infants & children 318
Dictamnus albus 202
digestion/digestive organs, effect of herbs
12, 13
digestive disorders 305-307
caused by stress 308
headaches and biliousness with 309
infants & children 318
infections 305
weak digestion 306
weakened in old age 319
see also colic
Digitalis spp. ||
D. lanata 202
D. lutea 202
D. purpurea 15, 26, 35, 194, 202, 290

XHANI TVUENHD ©

----- PAGE 328 -----
GENERAL INDEX &

&

326

digoxin | |

dill 168

Dioscorea, D. opposita 43, 91
D. villosa 15, 49, 91, 186

Dioscorides 20, 24, 32, 34, 129, 138, 145,

146, 148, 149, 159, 173, 174, 176, 178,
180, 181, 198, 199, 201, 214, 222, 226,
231, 235, 241, 247, 254, 264, 265, 272—
73, 277-78, 279
diosgenin 91
Dipsacus fullonum 203
dittany 202
diuretic herbs, action of 13
South American 53
divination herbs, Native American 49
Divine Husbandman's Classic (Chinese
text) 20, 42, 111, 126, 130, 161, 168,
169, 196, 201, 212, 237, 247, 253, 259
dizziness 306
Doctrine of Signatures 18, 24, 259
dodder 198
Dodderige, Joseph 50
dog rose 263
dog violet 282
dong quai 41, 42, 63, 68, 117, 124
Dorema ammoniacum 203
Dorstenia, D. contrayerva 203
D. convexa 203
D. Klainei 203
dosage 24, 31, 290
essential information 299
doshas (Ayurvedic medicine) 37-38
Dracaena cinnabari 196
dragon's blood 196
dried herbs, buying 17
drying at home 289
Drimia maritima see Urginea maritima
Drosera rotundifolia 203
Druidic herbs 18, 149, 283
dry coughs 310
Dryopteris filix-mas syn. Aspidium filix-mas
202-203
du zhong 208

E

earache 312, 318
East Indian rosebay 205
eastern red cedar 185
Ebers papyrus 19, 44, 62, 168, 196
echinacea 13, 27,51, 92, 107, 151, 177
Echinacea spp. 13, 27, 51, 92, 107,
151, 177
E. angustifolia 92
E. pallida 92
E. purpurea 92
Echium vulgare 203-204
Ecklonia maxima 44
Eclecticism 27, 50-51
Eclipta prostata syn. E. alba 204
eczema 300
edema during pregnancy 317
edible rhubarb 126
eggplant 69, 270-71
elaci (cardamom) 93
elder 15, 18, 34, 132
elderberry 51, 132
elecampane |3, 26, 107
Eletteria cardamomum 13, 22, 38, 93
eleuthero 94
Eleutherococcus senticosus 94
elm 20, 145
Elymus repens see Agropyron repens
embelia 204
Embilia ribes 204

Emblica officinalis 31, 204
emetic herbs, Native American 51
emmenagogue herbs, action of 13
emollient herbs, effects of 13
endive 190
endocrine system, effect of herbs 12, 13
English ivy 219
English Physitian, The (Culpeper) see
Culpeper, Nicholas
Entada phaseoloides 205
ephedra 10, | 1, 18, 31,42, 95
Ephedra sinica 10, 11, 18, 42, 95
ephedrine |1,95
Epilobium angustifolium see Chamaenerion
angustifolia
Equisetum arvense 13, 16, 136, 205
ergot 217
Erigeron, E. affinis 195
E. canadensis see Conyza canadensis syn.
Erigeron canadensis
E. philadelphicus 195
Eriodictyon californicum 205
Ervatamia coronaria 205
Eryngium maritimum 206
eryngo 206
Erythraea centaurium 206
Erythrina variegata 206
Erythronium americanum 206
Exythroxylum coca | 1, 18, 28, 52-53, 206-207
Eschscholzia californica 50, 207
essential oils 297, 299
essiac (anticancer remedy) 264
estrogen levels, menopausal 316
eucalyptus 46, 47, 96, 207
Eucalyptus, E. camaldulensis 47
E. globulus 46, 47, 96
E. smithii 96, 207
eucommia bark 207-208
Eucommia ulmoides 207-208
Eugenia caryophyllata syn. Syzgium
aromaticum 20, 36, 97
Euonymus atropurpureus 208
Eupatorium, E. cannabinum 208
E. maculatum 209
E. occidentale 208
E. perfoliatum 208
E. purpureum 48, 209
E. teucrifolium 208
Euphorbia, E. atoto 209
E. hirta, syn. E. pilulifera 209
E. kansui 209
E. lancifolia 209
E. maculata 209
E. pekinensis 209
Euphrasia spp. 179, 209-10
European angelica 63
European hazel 102
European herbal medicine 32-35
bans on 27, 28, 34
Dark Ages 21
four humors theory 32, 33
influence in South America 53
medical schools 22
medieval folk healing 20-21
modern practitioners 34-35
popular herbs 35
scientific medicine's break away from 23,
25, 34
use of native medicines 26-27
European leadwort 251
European nettle tree 185
European skullcap 135
Euterpe oleracea 210
Evelyn, John | 13
evening primrose 51, 241

oil 30, 179
evodia 210
Evodia rutaecarpa 210
expectorant herbs, action of 13
eye problems 310
eye tonic 21, 48, 147
eyebright 179, 209-10

F

Fagopyrum, F. cymosum 2.10
FE dibotrys 210
F esculentum 14, 210
“false fire” tonic 83
false hellebore 160
false unicorn root |86-87
fennel 177, 197,212, 223
fenugreek 277-78
Feronia limonia 210
fertility problems 316
Ferula, F. assa-foetida 38, 203, 210-11
F gummosa syn. F. galbaniflua 203, 21 |
F jaeshkeana 21 |
EF persica 21 |
E silphion 21
F sumbul 21 |
fever bark 46, 165
feverfew 33, 35, 78, 140, 286, 291
fevers 31 |
Ficus, F. benghalensis 211
F carica 211-12, 222
F. cotinifolia 212
F indica 212
F lacor 212
F racemosa 212
E religiosa 212
F retusa 212
fig 211-12, 222
figwort 268
Filipendula ulmaria 35, 98
first aid see bites, minor; cuts and grazes;
nosebleeds; sprains
first aid kit 290
"'5-flavored herb” (schisandra) 133
flame of the forest 180
flavonoids 14
flax dodder 198
flaxseed 16, 109
flea seed |23
Fleming, Alexander 28
florists’ chrysanthemum 78
flu 311
fluid retention, during pregnancy see
edema
menstrual 315
fly agaric 18, 187
foti4l, 43, 124
Foeniculum vulgare 177, 197,212, 223
food plants | |—-12, 23, 35
forskolin 84
Forsythia suspensa 212
four humors, theory of 20, 32, 33
“Four Things Soup” 42, 117
foxglove 15, 26, 35, 194, 202, 290
fractures 312
Fragaria vesca 212-13
Frangula alnus see Rhamnus frangula
frankincense 179
Fraxinus, F americana 213
F excelsior 213
F ornus 213
French bean 246-47
fringe tree 13, 188-89
fringed pink 201
Fritillaria thunbergii 43

fruit & berries, harvesting & processing 289
fu ling 40, 61
Fucus vesiculosis 16, 213
Fumaria, F. officinalis 86, 213
E parviflora 213
fumitory 86, 213
fungal infections 314
skin 304

G

galangal 22, 41, 61
galbanum 203, 211
Galega officinalis 214
Galen 20, 21, 32, 33, 181
Galipea officinalis syn. G. cusparia 214
Galium, G. aparine 214
G. elatum 215
G. odoratum see Asperula odorata
G. orizabense 214
G. umbrosum 214
G.verum 214-15
gan cao 20, 101
gao ben 228
gao liang (galangal) 61
garden lettuce 226
garden thyme 143
gardenia 215
Gardenia, G. campanulata 215
G. gummifera 215
G. jasminoides syn. G. augusta, G. florida
215
G.taitensis 215
G. thunbergia 215
gargles 297
garlic 13, 19, 23, 28, 36, 49, 51, 59,
164, 287
gas 306
infants & children 318
Gaultheria procumbens 14, 215
ge gen 258-59
Gelidium, G. amansii 215
G. cartilagineum 2.15
gelsemium 216
Gelsemium sempervirens 13, 216
gentian 99, 288
Gentiana, G. lutea 99, 288
G. macrophylla 99
G. scabra 99
Geranium, G. maculatum 120, 216
G robertianum 120, 216
Gerard, John 34, 98, 137, 162, 164, 175,
187, 196, 205, 226, 257, 271
germ theory of disease 30
German chamomile 14, 35, 77, 187,
286, 291
Geum urbanum 216
gillyflower 201
ginger 13, 22, 38, 39, 61, 81, 116, 155,
287, 298
ginkgo |1, 31, 35,41, 87, 100
Ginkgo biloba 11, 31, 35, 41, 87, 100
ginseng 21, 27, 40, 42, 43, 68, 83, 118,
124, 127, 243
adaptogenic properties |2, 13
gipsywort 231
glasswort 196
Glechoma hederacea syn. Nepeta glechoma
216-17
glucosilinates 16
Glycine max 38, 217
Glycyrrhiza, G. glabra 15, 36,72, 101, 117,
136, 226
G.uralensis 20, 101
Gnaphalium, G. keriense 217

----- PAGE 329 -----
G. polycephalum 217
G. uliginosum 217
goat's rue 214
goji berry 42, III
gokulakanta 221
golden root 127
goldenrod 32, 271
goldenseal 27, 49,51, 105, 178
goldthread 195
Gonolobus condurango see Marsdenia
condurango
good King Henry 188
goose grass 213-14
gorse 198
Gossypium, G. herbaceum 217-18
G hirsutum 218
gotu kola 19, 47, 76
gou teng 280
gout 313
grains of paradise 45
grape jasmine 205
grape vine 15, 81, 283
gravel root 48, 209
great lobelia 110
greater burnet 266
greater celandine 187-88
greater dodder 198
greater galangal 61
greater knapweed |86
greater periwinkle 282
green chiretta 167
green tangerine 124
Grieve, Mrs. (herbalist) 163, 167, 172,
243, 246-47
Grindelia, G. camporum syn. G. robusta
var. rigida 209, 218
G. squarrosa 218
ground ivy 216-17
ground pine 163
growing medicinal plants 286-87
Propagation 287
Guaiacum, G. coulteri 2.18
G. officinale 23, 218
G. sanctum 218
guapi bark 218
guar gum 198
guarana 53, 245
Guarea, G. guara 218
G. rusbyi syn. G. guidonia 218
guayacan 218
guelder rose 150

guggul 85, 193
gui zhi 41
gully gum 207

gum problems 306

gumplant 209, 218

gurmar 218-19

gymnema 218-19

Gymnema sylvestre 218-19

gynecological problems see fertility
problems; menopausal problems;
reproductive & menstrual problems

H

hemorrhoids 302, 317
Hahnemann, Samuel 80
hai zao 267
haldi (turmeric) 90
hallucinogenic herbs 115, 130
Native American 49
shamanistic 18-19
South American 18, 53
Hamamelis virginiana 13,50, 102
hangover 309

hare's ear root 72
haricot bean 246-47
harmala 245
“harmony” herbs 71
haronga 219
Haronga madagascariensis 218
Harpagophytum procumbens 44, 103
hartstongue 268
harvesting herbs 288
Harvey, William 25
hawthorn 15, 31, 35, 47, 87
hay fever 300
he shou wu 124
headaches 309
biliousness and 309
during pregnancy 317
infants & children 318
nausea with 306
sinus 312
stress-related 308
see also migraine
heart, effect of herbs 13

see also circulation; circulatory problems

heartburn 317
heartsease 35, 281-82
heather 181
Hedeoma pulegoides 235
Hedera helix 219
hei zhi ma (sesame) 269-70
Helen of Troy 107
Helianthus annuus 49, 107
Helleborus niger 218
hellweed 198
helonias 51, 186-87
hemlock 194, 215
hemlock spruce 278
hemp agrimony 208
henbane 69, 221-22
henna 227
hepatic herbs, action of 13
herb gardens 286-87
herb robert |20, 216
herba benedicta (avens) 216
herba militaris (yarrow) 56
herbal medicine, benefits of 10
development of 18-53
outlawed 27, 28, 34, 51
herbal practitioners 336
professional training 336
herbal remedies/treatments, making
290-97
baths & skin washes 297
capsules & powders 292
compresses & lotions 296
creams 296
decoctions 291
equipment 290
essential oils 297
gargles & mouthwashes 297
infused oils 294
infusions 29 |
juices 297
macerations 297
ointments 295
pessaries & suppositories 297
poultices 295
safety 55, 290, 298
side effects 10, 298
steam inhalations 297
storage 290
syrups 293
tinctures 292, 293
tonic wines 293
weights & measures 290
herbal wines 293

Herball, The (Gerard) see Gerard, John
herbals 20, 22, 24, 33-34
herbe au dragon (tarragon) 173
Herniaria glabra 171, 219
hibiscus 219-20
Hibiscus sabdariffa 219-20
hiccups 307
Hieracium pilosella syn. Pilosella officinarum
220
hijiki 267
Hildegard of Bingen 22, 61, 185, 266, 275
Himalayan silver birch 178
Hindu sacred plants 18
Hippocrates 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 32, 277
Hippophae rhamnoides | 6, 220
holism 29, 30, 34, 37
see also Ayurvedic medicine
hollyhock 165, 221
holy basil 37, 116, 286
holy thistle 137, 191
holy weed (yerba santa) 205
homeopathy 80
homeostasis |2
honeysuckle 229-30
hong hua (safflower) 42, 183
hoodia 220
Hoodia, H. currori 44
H. gordonii 220
hops 16, 33, 104
Hordeum vulgare 220-21
hormonally active herbs, action of 13
horse chestnut 15, 58
horsemint 236
horseradish 171-72
horsetail 13, 16, 136, 205
hot flashes 316
hou po 40, 232
houseleek 269
huai niu xi (chaff flower) 159
huang bai 247
huang lian 43, 195
huang qi (astragalus) 68
huang quin (Baical skullcap) 134
Humulus lupulus |6, 33, 104
Hungarian pepper 74
huo ma ren (marijuana) 182
huo xiang 42, 161
Hydrangea aborescens 221
Hydrastis canadensis 27, 47, 49, 51,
105, 178
Hydrocotyle vulgaris 76
Hygrophila, H. guayensis 221
H. spinosa 221
Hyoscyamus, H. muticus 222
H. niger 69, 221-22
hyperactivity 308
Hypericum perforatum 30, 31, 32, 51, 79,
106, 286, 298
hyssop 33, 222
Hyssopus officinalis 33, 222

Ibn Cordoba 21
Ibn El Beitar 44
iboga 44-45
Iceland moss 186
llex, |. guayusa 222

|. paraguariensis syn. |. paraguensis 222
Ilicium verum 222-23
immune system, effect of herbs 12, 13
Imperatoria ostruthium syn. Peucedanum
ostruthium 223
impotence & premature ejaculation 316
Inca wheat 165

Indian asparagus |74
Indian berry 167
Indian borage 84
Indian coral tree 206
Indian corn 154
“Indian ginseng” (withania) 152
Indian gooseberry 31, 204
Indian lobelia 279
Indian mallow 158
Indian medicine 19, 20, 21, 36-39
see also Ayurvedic medicine
Indian mulberry 237
Indian olibanum 179
Indian pennywort 76
Indian snakeroot 261
Indian tobacco |10
Indian turnip 171
indigestion 307
infants & children 299, 318
influenza see flu
infused oils 294
infusions 291, 299
inhalations see steam inhalations
insecticides/insect repellents 66, 70,
97, 108
insomnia 309, 313, 317,318
intoxicant herbs, African 45
Inula, |. helenium 13, 26, 107
|. japonica 107
inulin 26
ipecac 52, 186
Ipomeoea, |. batatas 223
|. pandurata 49
|. purga syn. Convolvulus jalapa 223
|. turpethum 223
|. violacea 223
Iris versicolor 223
Irish moss 189
irritable bowel syndrome 307

Islamic medicine (Unani Tibb) 21, 33,

36-37, 39
ispaghula (psyllium) 123
ivy 219

J

Jack-in-the-pulpit 171
jalap 223
Jamaica dogwood 251
jambul 274
Japanese gentian 99
Japanese medicine 22, 42-43
jasmine 224
Jasminum, J. grandiflorum 224
J. officinale 41
J. sambac 224
Jateorhiza palmata 44, 224
java tea 243
jequirity 38, 158
jixue teng 235
jiang huang (turmeric) 90
jin qian cao 231
jinyin hua 78, 229-30
jing jie 40, 268
Joe Pye weed 209
joint pain & stiffness 313
ju hua 13, 43, 78, 229, 256
jue ming zi 75
Juglans, J. cinerea 50, 224
J. nigra 224
J. regia 224
juices 297
jujube 283
juniper 20, 71, 224-25
Juniperus, J. communis 20, 71, 224-25

XHANI TVUENHD ©

----- PAGE 330 -----
GENERAL INDEX &

A
a

328

J. oxycedrus 225
J. rigida 225
Jj. sabina 225
J. virginicus 185

K

kampoh see Japanese medicine
kanghi 158

kanna 44-45

kava 46, 122

kava kava 122

kelp 16, 213

K'Eogh 169, 174, 187, 203, 206, 214, 220,

252, 264

kerala 48-49, 236

khat 185

khellin 62

kigelia 45,225

Kigelia pinnata syn. K. africana 45, 225

kino 46, 258

kiratatiktah 167

knitbone 137

knotgrass 124, 253

kola nut 13, 45, 192-93

Korean medicine 42-43

Korean mint 161

Krameria, K. cystisoides 225
K. parvifolia 225
K. triandra 225

kudzu 258-59

kumarhou 254

kuth 267-68

L

Lactuca, L. sativa 226

L. virosa 225-26
lady's bedstraw 214-15
lady's mantle 163-64, 286
lady's slipper 199-200
Lamium album 226
lapacho 13, 139
larch 226
Larix decidua syn. L. europaea 226
Larrea, L. divaricata 226

L. tridentata 226
Laurus, L. camphora see Cinnamomum
camphora

L. nobilis 226-27, 286
Lavandula, L. angustifolia syn. L. officinalis
35, 108, 286

L. spica 108

L. stoechas 108
lavender 35, 108, 286
Lawsonia inermis syn. L. alba 227
laxative herbs, action of | 1, 13
lemon I 1, 14, 16, 38, 82, 191
lemon balm 13, 113, 286
lemon grass 48, 198-99, 286
lemon verbena 52, 151, 228-29
Leonurus, L. cardiaca 227

L. heterophyllus 227

L. sibiricus 227
Lepidium, L. meyenii 228

L. virginicum 227-28
Leptandra virginica syn. Veronicastrum
virginicum 228
lesser celandine 260-61
lesser periwinkle 282
lesser skullcap 135
Levant storax 229
Levant wormwood 172-73
Levisticum officinale syn. Ligusticum
levisticum 228

lian giao 212
life root 269
lignum vitae 23, 218
Ligusticum, L. chuanxiong 228
L. levisticum see Levisticum officinale
L. sinense 228
L. wallachii 42, 117
lily of the valley 31, 194
lime (Citrus aurantiifolia) 177, 191, 250
lime (Tilia spp.) 277
Lind, James 25
linden 277
ling 180
Linnaeus, Carolus 200, 270, 277
linseed 16, 18, 109
Linum, L. catharticum 109
L. usitatissimum 16, 18, 109
lippia 227
Lippia, L. adoensis 229
L. alba 228
L. citriodora syn. Aloysia triphylla 52, 151,
228-29
L. dulcis 228, 229
Liquidambar, L. orientalis 36, 229
L. styraciflua 229
licorice 15, 36, 72, 101, 117, 136,226
Liriosma ovata 258
liver tonics 72, | 11, 124, 125, 133, 137
liver, weakened 319
Lobaria pulmonaria 229
lobelia 27, 49, 50, 110, 150, 209
Lobelia, L. cardinalis 49
L. chinensis | 10
L. inflata 27, 49, 110, 150, 209
L. siphilitica 110
lomatium 229
Lomatium dissectum 229
“longevity” herb 125
Lonicera spp. 78, 229-30
L. caprifolium 229
L japonica 229-30.
loofah 230
Lophophora williamsii 49, 230
lotions 296, 299
lovage 228
love-in-a-mist 240.
lucerne 233-34
Luffa cylindrica syn. L. aegyptica 230
Luma chequen 274
lungwort 18, 259
Lycium chinense syn. L. barbarum 42, 111
Lycopodium clavatum 230
Lycopus, L. europaeus 23 |
L. virginicus 231
Lysimachia, L. christinae 23 |
L. nemorum 23 |
L. vulgaris 231
Lythrum salicaria 231

M

ma bian cao (vervain) 149

ma huang (ephedra) 95

maca 228

mace 37, 115

macerations 297

mad dog 135

Madagascar periwinkle |6, 282

madder 263

Madhuca spp. 231

"magical" herbs, African 44
Native American 49

magnolia 232

Magnolia, M. grandiflora 232
M. officinalis 40, 232

maidenhair fern 160
maidenhair tree 100
maize see corn
Mgjorana hortensis see Origanum majorana
malabar nut 160
male fern 202
Malva sylvestris 165, 232
Mandragora officinarum 33, |80, 232
mandrake 33, 180, 232
Manihot esculenta 232-33
manioc 232-33
manna ash 213
Maori remedies 254
Maranta arundinacea 52, 233
margoas tree (neem) 70
marijuana 21, 104, 182
Marrubium vulgare 233
Marsdenia condurango syn. Gonolobus
condurango 233
marsh cudweed 217
marsh pennywort 76
marshmallow 13, 34, 35, 158, 165
Mary thistle 137
masterwort 223
mastic tree 251
matchbox bean 205
maté 52, 222
matico |22, 249-50
Matricaria recutita see Chamomilla recutita
Mattiolo, Pierandrea | 85, 223, 227, 229
maypop | 19
mayweed 169
meadow anemone | 68
meadow saffron 89, 193
meadowsweet 35, 98
Medicago sativa 233-34
medical schools, establishment of 21, 22
medicinal plants, active constituents
14-16, 17
cultivation of 35
as food & medicines | 1-12
growing 286-87
harvesting & processing 288-89
plant chemicals 10-11, 26, 28, 31
plant names 55
value of whole plants 11, 31
see also individual plants
medicine man see shamanistic medicine
medieval folk healing 20-21

Melaleuca, M. alternifolia 13, 14,26, 46, 47,

112
M. leucadendron | 12, 234
M. linariifolia 112

M. viridiflora | 12, 234
Melia azedarach 70
melilot 15, 234
Melilotus officinalis syn. M. arvensis 15, 234
melissa | 13
Melissa officinalis 13, 113, 286
Membryanthemum spp. 44—45
memory failing 319
menopausal problems 316
menstrual problems 301, 315
Mentha, M. aquatica | 14

M. arvensis 235

M. haplocalyx 234-35

M. x piperita 30, 114, 286

M. pulegium 48, 71,235

M. spicata 114, 235
Menyanthes trifoliata 235
mercury poisoning 24
mescaline 230
mesquite 48
metabolism, weakened in old age 319
metallic poisons 24

Mexican poppy 171
mezereon 200
migraine 309
milfoil 56
milk thistle 34, 72, 137
milk vetch 68
milkwort 252
Milletta reticulata 235
mind-altering remedies, South American 52-53
minerals 16
miner's lettuce 236-37
mistletoe 13, 18, 283
Mitchella repens 235-36
Momordica, M. charantia 48-49, 236
M. cochinchinensis 236
Monarda, M. didyma 236
M. punctata 236
monkshood 160
monsonia 236
Monsonia ovata 236
Montia perfoliata 236-37
Moreton Bay chestnut tree 31
morinda 237
Morinda, M. citrifolia 237
M. officinalis 237
morning glory 49, 223
morning sickness 317
morphine 10, | |, 26, 28, 86, 244
Morus, M. alba 40, 237-38
M. nigra 238
motherwort 227
motion sickness 306
mouse-ear hawkweed 220
mouth problems see mouth ulcers;
oral thrush; toothache
mouth ulcers 306
mouthwashes 97, 112, 122,297
mucilaginous herbs |6
mugwort 173
muira puama 258
mullein 47, 281
Murraya, M. koenigii 238
M. paniculata 238
Musa spp. 238
muscle aches 31 |, 312
muscle tension 308
musculoskeletal problems 3 | 2—!3
musculoskeletal system, effect of herbs |3
Myddfai, Physicians of 21, 141, 170,
173, 200
Myrica, M. cerifera 238
M. gale 14, 238-39
Myristica fragrans 22, 37, 115
Myroxylon pereirae syn. M. balsamum var.
pereirae 239
myrrh 19, 44, 85
myrtle 36, 239
Myrtus communis 36, 239

N

nan wu wei zi (schisandra) |33
nasturtium 52
Nasturtium officinale 239
National Institute of Medical Herbalists
16, 27, 336
Native American medicine 25, 26-27,
49-50
see also Central American medicine;
shamanistic medicine; South American
medicine
Natural History (Pliny the Elder) see Pliny
the Elder
naturopathy 27
nausea & vomiting 306, 317

----- PAGE 331 -----
neem 70
neem oil 70, 161
Nepeta, N. cataria 239-40
N. glechoma see Glechoma hederacea
Nerium oleander 19
neroli oil (bitter orange oil) 190-91
nerve & stress-related problems 308—
309, 319
nervine herbs, action of 13
nervine tonics 57, 106, 131, 135
nervous exhaustion 308-309, 319
nervous system, effect of herbs 12, 13
nettle 33, 63, 146
nettle rash 303
neuralgia 308
New Zealand medicine 47
niaouli 234
Nicotiana tabacum 49, 69, | 10, 182, 240
Nigella, N. damascena 240
N. sativa 240
night sweats 316
night-blooming cereus 268-69
nikkar nut 180-81
niu bang zi (burdock) 65
noni 237
North American medicine 48-5 |
see also Native American medicine
northern prickly ash 153
“nosebleed” (yarrow) 56
nosebleeds 310
notoginseng 243
Notopterygium incisium 41, 240
notopterygium root 240
nutmeg 22, 37, IIS
“nutmeg butter” 115
nux vomica 273
Nymphaea, N. alba 240-41
N. lotus 240-41
N. odorata 240

O

oats | |-12, 13, 175
Ocimum, O. basilicum 116, 241
O. basilicum var. minimum 241
O. tenuiflorum syn. O. sanctum 37,
116, 286
Oenothera biennis 30, 51, 179, 241
oil of Cade 225
oils, essential 297, 299
infused 294
ointments 295
older adults 319
Olea europaea 241-42
oleander 19
olive 241-42
omega-3 oils 109
onion 11, 59, 164
Ononis spinosa 242
Operculina turpethum 242
Ophelia chirata see Suvertia chirata
opium poppy 10, 21, 26, 28, 46, 47,
244
Opuntia ficus-indica 47, 242.
oral thrush 314
oregano 242-43
oregon grape 177
Origanum, O. majorana syn. Majorana
hortensis 242
O. vulgare 242-43
Orthosiphon aristata 243
osteopathy 27, 51
Oswego tea 236
over-the-counter medicines 17, 35
overactivity, insomnia and 309

nervous exhaustion and 309

P

Pacific yew 31, 275
Paeonia, P lactiffora syn. P. albiflora 42, 117, 243
P officinalis 20, | 17, 243
P suffructicosa | 17
pain relief | 1, 21, 86, 96, 97, 103, 114,
122, 155
palas 180
pale catechu 280
palpitations 302
Panax, P. ginseng 12, 13, 21, 40, 42, 43, 68,
79, 83, 118, 124, 127, 243
P notoginseng | 18, 243
P. quinquefolium | 18, 243-44
panic attacks 302, 308
Papaver, P. rhoeas 244
P. somniferum 10, 11, 21, 26, 28, 46, 244
papaya | 1, 183
paprika 74
Papyrus 199
Paracelsus 23-24, 30
pareira 52, 189
Parietaria officinalis syn. P. diffusa 245
Parkinson, John 108
parsley 246
parsley piert 170
partridge berry 235-36
passiflora 119
Passiflora, P. incarnata 119
P. quadrangularis | 19
passionflower 119
Pasteur, Louis 28
patchouli 161, 252
pau d'arco 53, 139
Paullinia, P. cupana syn. P. sorbilis 53, 245
P. yoco 245
Pausinystalia yohimbe syn. Corynanthe
yohimbe 245
peepal 212
Peganum harmala 245
pelargonium 120
Pelargonium, P. reniforme |20
P sidoides 120
pellitory 45, 166
pellitory-of-the-wall 245
penicillin 28
pennyroyal 48, 71, 235
peony 20, 117,243
pepper |22, 250
peppermint 30, 114, 286
peptic ulcers 35, 313
pergularia 246
Pergularia extensa 246
period pain 315
Persea americana 50, 121
Peruvian balsam 239
Peruvian bark 80
pessaries 297
petha 177
Petroselinum crispum 246
Peucedanum graveolens see Anethum
graveolens
Peumus boldo 52, 246
peyote 49, 230
Pfaffia paniculata 246
Phaseolus vulgaris 246-47
Phellodendron amurense 247
phenols |4
Philadelphia fleabane 195
phu (valerian) 148
phyllanthus 247
Phyllanthus amarus 247

Physalis alkekengi syn. P. franchetti 247
Physiomedicalism 27, 50-51, 221, 231
Phytolacca americana syn. P. decandra 49,
51, 247-48
phytotherapy 31
Picrasma excelsa syn. Picraenia excelsa 248
picrorrhiza 248
Picrorrhiza kurroa 248
pilewort 260-61
“Pill of Eight Ingredients” 125, 196
pill-bearing spurge 209
Pilosella offoconarum see Hieracium pilosella
Pimenta officinalis 248
Pimpinella anisum 53, 248-49
pineapple 53, 167
Pinguicula, P. grandiflora 249
P. vulgaris 249
pinkroot 272
Pinus sylvestris 14,249
Piper, P. angustifolia 122, 249-50
P betle 122, 250
P. cubeba 122, 250
P. methysticum 46, 122
P nigrum 116, 180, 250
P sanctum 122
Pipinella anisum 223
pipsissewa 188
Piscidia erythrina 251
pistachio nut 251
Pistacia, P. lentiscus 251
P. vera 251
pit shirish 163
plague, spread of 23
plant names 55
plant spirits, belief in 18
Plantago spp. 13, 123
P asiatica 123, 251
P indica 123
P lanceolata 25 |
P major 123, 251
P ovata |23
P. psyllium 123
plantain 238
Plasmodium parasite 28, 67
Plectranthus barbatus see Coleus forskohlii
pleurisy root 49, 173-74
Pliny the Elder 32-34, 160, 190, 196, 234,
235
Plumbago, P. europaea 25 |
P. zeylanica 251
Podophyllum, P. hexandrum 252
P. peltaturn 252
Pogostemon cablin 161,252
Poison ivy 262
pokeweed 49, 51, 247-48
Polo, Marco 22, 190
Polygala, P. senega 252
P. tenuifolia 252.
P. vulgaris 252
Polygonatum, P. biflorum 253
P. multiflorum 253
P. odoratum 253
Polygonum, P. aviculare 124, 253
P bistorta 13, 124, 253-54
P. cuspidatum 124
P. hydropiper 254
P. multiflorum 41, 43, 124
Polymnia uvedalia 254
Polypodium vulgare 254
polypody 254
polysaccharides |6
Pomaderris elliptica 254
pomegranate 39, 259-60
populeon see balm of Gilead
Populus, P. x candicans syn. P. x gileadensis

254-55
P. tremuloides 255
Poria cocos syn. Sclerotium cocos 40, 61
Portulaca oleracea 255
P oleracea var. sativa 255
pot infusion 291
pot marigold 73
potato 23, 52, 271, 298
Potentilla, P. anserina 255-56
P. erecta syn. PR. tormentilla 256
Poterium officinalis see Sanguisorba officinalsi
poultices 52, 145, 295
powders 292
prana 24
premenstrual syndrome 315
pregnancy 299, 317
prickly ash 48, 153
prickly pear 47, 242
primula 256
Primula veris 15, 35, 256
printing, invention of 24, 33-34
proanthocyanins |5
progesterone levels 316
prontoalivio 228
Prosopis juliflora 48
Prunella vulgaris 256
Prunus, P.armeniaca 15,257
P. avium 257
P. cerasus 257
P. mume 257
P serotina 15, 257-58
Psoralea corylifolia 258
psyllium 13, 123
Pterocarpus marsupium 46, |80, 258
Ptychopetalum olacoides syn. P. uncinatum 258
pu gong ying 141
pu huang 279
Pueraria, P lobata syn. P. thunbergiana 258-59
P. mirifica 259
P. tuberosa 259
Pulicaria dysenterica 107
Pulmonaria officinalis 18, 259
pulsatilla 35, 168
Pulsatilla, P. chinensis 259
P. vulgaris see Anemone pulsatilla
pumpkin 197
Punica granatum 39, 259-60
purging 24, 109
purging flax 109
purple coneflower 92
purple foxglove 15, 26, 35, 194, 202
purple loosestrife 231
purslane 255
pygeum 45, 260
Pygeum, P. africanum 45, 260
P. gardneri 260

Q

qi (primal energy) 24, 43
giang huo 240

qin jiao 99

qing hao 67

qu mai 201

quaking aspen 255
quality control 17
quassia 248

quebracho 175

queen of the meadow 98
queens delight 273
Quercus robur 14,260
Quillaja saponaria 53, 260
quince 198

quinine | 1, 52, 80, 165
quinoa 165

XHANI TVUENHD ©

----- PAGE 332 -----
GENERAL INDEX &

A
a

330

R

radish 16, 261
ragwort 19, 298
ramsoms 59, 164
Ranunculus, R. delphinifolius 26 |
R. ficaria 260-61
Raphanus sativus |6, 261
raspberry 264
Rauvolfia, R. serpentina 261
R. vomitoria 261
red beet 178
red bush 174
red clover 14, 277
red poppy 244
red river gum 47
rehmannia 42, 95, 117, 125
Rehmannia, R. glutinosa 42, 95, 117,
125
R. lutea 125
“rejuvenator” tonics 76, 124
relaxant herbs, action of 13
ren shen (ginseng) 118
reproductive and menstrual problems
315-16
respiration/respiratory system, effect of
herbs 12, 13
respiratory tract problems 3|0—|2
Rhamnus, R. carthaticus 262
R. frangula syn. Frangula alnus 261-62
R. purshiana 262
rhatany 225
Rheum, R. officinale 126
R. palmatum ||, 15, 42, 126, 177,
264
R. rhaponticum 126
R. tanguticum |26
rheumatism 319
rhodiola 127
Rhodiola, R. crenulata 127
R. quadrifida 127
R. rosea 127
Rhus, R. aromatica 262
R. glabra 262
R. toxicodendron 262
Ribes nirgum 262
ribwort plantain 251
Ricinus communis 19, 36, 262-63
Rig Veda (Ayurvedic text) 36
Roman chamomile 77, 187
Roman nettle 146
rooibos 174
roots, rhizomes, tubers, & bulbs,
harvesting & processing 289
Rosa, R. canina |6, 263
R. gallica 263
rose 263
rosebay willowherb 187
rosemary |3, 33, 128, 286
Rosmarinus officinalis 13, 33, 128, 286
rou dou kou (nutmeg & mace) 115
rou gui (cinnamon) 81
rowan 271-72
Rubia tinctorum 263
Rubus, R. fruticosus 15, 34, 264
R. idaeus 264
rue 179, 222, 265
Rumex, R. acetosa 264
R. acetosella 264
R. crispus 65, 264-65
rupturewort 171,219
Ruscus aculeatus 265
Rush, Dr. Benjamin 24
Ruta, R. chalepensis 265
R. graveolens 179, 222, 265

s)

Sabal serrulata see Serenoa repens
safflower 184
saffron 89, 184
sage 22, 23, 34, 130, 131, 286, 287
saikosides 72
St. John's wort 30, 31, 32, 51, 79, 106,
286, 298
Salicornia europeae 196
salicylic acid 14, 26, 129
Salix, S. acmophylla 129
5. alba 13, 14, 26, 129, 140
S. fragilis 129
S. nigra 129
sallaki 179
Salvia, S. divinorum 130
S. lavandulifolia 131
$. miltiorrhiza 13, 42, 130, 131
S. officinalis 22, 23, 34, 130, 131,
286, 287
5. sclarea 131, 265
Sambucus nigra 15, 18, 34, 51, 132
samphire 196
san qi 118, 243
sand spurrey | 70-71
sandalwood 266
sandwort 170-71
sang yebl (white mulberry) 40, 237-38
sangre de drago 196
Sanguinaria canadensis 266
Sanguisorba officinalis syn. Poterium
officinalis 266
sanicle 266
Sanicula europaea 266
Santalum album 266
sap & gel, harvesting & processing 289
Saponaria officinalis 267
saponins |5
Sargassum, S. fusiforme 267
S. pallidum 267
sarpagandha (Indian snakeroot) 261
sarsaparilla 21,270
Satureja, S. hortensis 267
5S. montana 267
Saussurea, S. amara 268
S. lappa syn. S. costus 267-68
savin 225
saw palmetto 48, 51, 136, 197
scallion 164
scarlet pimpernel 166-67
scented Solomon's seal 253
schisandra 40, 133
Schisandra, S. chinensis 40, 133
S. sphenanthera 133
Schizonepeta tenuifolia 40, 268
Sclerotium cocos see Poria cocos
Scolopendrium vulgare 268
Scots pine 14, 249
Scrophularia, S. aquatica 268
S. marylandica 268
S. ningopoensis 268
5. nodosa 268
scurvy 25
scurvy grass 191-92
Scutellaria, S. baicalensis syn. S. macrantha
40, 42, 134, 135, 175
S. galericulata 135
S. lateriflora 49, 134, 135
S. minor 135
sea beet 178
sea buckthorn 16, 220
sea fennel 198
sea holly 206
seabeach sandwort 171

seaweed 44
see also bladderwrack; help
sedative herbs, action of 13
seeds, collecting 289
Selenicereus grandiflorus 268-69
self-heal 256
Sempervivum tectorum 269
Seneca snakeroot 252
Senecio, S. aureus syn. Packera aureus 269
S. jacobaea 19, 269, 298
senna 13, 15, 22, 30, 45, 75
Senna alexandrina see Cassia senna
Serenoa, S. adamsonii 136
S.japa 136
5. repens syn. Sabal serrulata 48, 51, 136,
197
sesame 269-70
Sesamum indicum 269-70
sex drive, low 316
sex hormones 12, 13
shamanistic medicine 18-19, 25
North American 49
South American 53
shan yao 43, 91
shan zhu yu 196
shatavari 174
sheep's sorrel 264
sheng di huang 125
sheng jian 155
sheng ma 79
shepherd's purse 183
shi chang pu 57
shingles 304
shu di huang 125
si gua luo 230
Siamese ginger 61
Siberian ginseng 94
Siddha medicine 36
side effects from herbal treatments |0,
298
silver birch 178
silverweed 255-56
Silypum marianum syn. Carduus marianus
34, 72, 137
silymarin 137
singabera 155
sinus problems 309, 312
siris tree 163
sisal agave 161
skin health, effects of herbs 12, 13
skin problems 303-305
skin rashes 303, 318
skullcap 49, 134, 135
skunk cabbage 274
sleep problems see insomnia
slippery elm 16, 48, 50, 145, 264
Smilax spp. 21, 270
smooth sumac 262
soap bark 53, 260
soapwort 267
Socotra dragon tree 196
Solanum, S. dulcamara 270
S. insidiosum 271
S. melongena 69, 270-71
5. tuberosum 23, 52, 271, 298
Solidago, S. canadensis 27 |
5. odora 271
S. virgaurea 32, 271
Solomon's seal 252-53
Sorbus aucuparia 271-72
sore nipples 315
sore throats 31 |
sorrel 264
South American medicine 21, 52-53
southern prickly ash 153

southernwood 172
soya 38, 217
Spanish sage 131
spasmolytic herbs, action of 13
spastic constipation 307
spearmint 114, 235
speedwell 281
sphagnum moss 28
Spigelia, S. anthelmia 272

S. flemmingania 272

$. marilandica 272
spike lavender 108
spiny bamboo 176
spiny restharrow 242
spirits, plant spirits 18

see also “vital spirits”
sprains 312
“spring” tonics 137
squaw root 79
squaw vine 235-36
squaw weed 269
squill 280
Stachys officinalis syn. S. betonica 272
star anise 222-23
star grass 164
steam inhalations 297, 299
Stellaria media 272-73, 289
steroid anti-inflammatories 28
Stillingia sylvatica 273
stimulant herbs, action of 13
stings 303
stinking mayweed | 69
stomachache 305
stomachic herbs, action of 13
stone root 193
storax 36, 229
storing herbs 288-89
strawberry tree 170
stress |18, 148, 152, 308

in old age 319
stretch marks 317
strewing herb 98
Strychnos nux-vomica 273
Styrax benzoin 273
su xian hua 41
suan zhoa ren 43
suma 246
summer savory 267
sunburn 303
sundew 203
sunflower 49, 107
suppositories 297
sutherlandia 45
Sutherlandia frutescens 45
sweet basil 116, 241
sweet cherry 257
sweet chestnut 184
sweet flag |3, 39, 57, 298
sweet gale 14, 238-39
sweet marjoram 242
sweet potato 223
sweet sedge 57
sweet sumac 262
sweet violet 282
sweet woodruff 174-75
sweet wormwood 10, 43, 67
sweet-scented goldenrod 271
swellings 303
Swertia chirata |6, 39, 273-74
Symphytum officinale 10, 12, 13, 35, 138,

286, 290
Symplocarpus foetidus 274
synergy, herbal 31
syphilis 23, 24
syrups 293

----- PAGE 333 -----
Syzygium, S. cumini 274
S. gerrardii 274

T

Tabebuia spp. 139

T. avellanedae 139

T. impetiginosa 53, 139
Tabernanthe iboga 45
tai chi symbol 43
tamarind 274
Tamarindus indica 274
Tamus communis |80

Tanacetum, T. parthenium 33, 78, 140, 286,

291
T. vulgare 78, 140, 274-75
Tang Materia Medica 177, 204, 261
tannins | |, 14
tansy 78, 140, 274-75
Taraxacum, T. mongolicum 141
T. officinale 16, 47, 65, 141, 289
tarragon 173
tart cherry 257
taxol 31
Taxus, T. baccata 275
T. brevifolia 31, 275
tea 39, 81, 181, 215, 222, 224
tea tree 13, 16,26, 46, 47, 112
tease! 203
teething 318
tension 308
during pregnancy 317
premenstrual 315
sinus headaches and 309
Terminalia, T. arjuna 142
T. belerica 142, 275
T. chebula 142, 275-76
thalidomide tragedy 28-29
Thea sinensis see Camellia sinensis
Theobroma cacao 276
Theophrastus 165, 171
Thlaspi bursta-pastoris see Capsella
bursa-pastoris
Thomson, Samuel 27, 50, 110, 215
thornapple 200-201
three-leaved caper 88
thrush 314
Thuja occidentalis 276
thyme 31, 35, 48, 143, 198, 276-77, 286
thymol 14, 143, 276
Thymus, T. serpyllum 143, 276-77
T. vulgaris 31, 35, 48, 143, 198, 276, 286
tian nan xing 171
tiger nut 199
Tilia spp. 277
tinctures 292, 293, 299
tinnevelly senna 75
tobacco 49, 69, 110, 182, 240
tongue ulcers 306
tonic herbs, action of 13
tonic wines 293
tonsillitis 3 | |
toothache 308
toothache tree 153
tormentil 256
toxic herbs 19, 22, 55
toxicity in the body, effect of herbs 12
toza 229
trade and trade routes, effects of 20, 21,
22-23, 36, 37, 44
trailing eclipta 204
tree of heaven 162-63
tree lungwort 229
Trifolium pratense 14,277
Trigonella foenum-graecum 277-78

Trillium erectum 278
Tropaeolum majus 52, 278
tropane alkaloids 69
Trotula (woman physician) 22
trout lily 206
true unicorn root 164
Tsuga canadensis 278
tulsi (holy basil) 116
turmeric 22, 35, 37, 38, 51, 90, 155, 198
Turnera, T. diffusa syn. T. diffusa var.
aphrodisiaca 48, 51, 144
T. opifera 144
T. ulmifolia 144
turpeth 242
Tussilago farfara 13, 20, 278-79
Tylophora asmatica 279
Typha angustifolia 279

U

ulcers see mouth ulcers; peptic ulcers
Ulex europaeus 198
Ulmus, U. americana 145

U. carpinifolia 20

U. rubra 16, 48, 50, 145, 264
umckaloabo |20
una de gato 280
Unani Tibb see Islamic medicine
Uncaria, U. gambier 280

U. rhynchophylla 280

U. tomentosa 280
Urginea maritima syn. Drimia maritima 280
urinary infections 314

during pregnancy 317
urinary system, effect of herbs 13
Urtica, U. dioica 33, 63, 146

U. pilulifera 146

U.urens 146
urticaria 303
Ustilago zeae 154
Utricularia spp. 161
uva-ursi 71, 144, 170, 212

Vv

Vaccinium, V. macrocarpon 147, 280-81
V. myrtillus 147
V. vitis-idaea 147
vaginal yeast infection 314, 317
valerian 10, 32, 148
Valeriana, V. capensis 148
V. hardwickii 148
V. officinalis 10, 32, 148
V. ulginosa 148
V. wallichi 148
varicose veins 302, 317
varuna 88
vasaka | 60
Verbascum thapsus 47, 281
Verbena, V. hastata 149
V. officinalis 46, 47, 149, 151
vermouth 66
Veronica officinalis 281
Veronicastrum virginicum see Leptandra
virginica
vertigo 306
vervain 46, 47, 149, 151
Viburnum, V. opulus 13, 33, 49, 150
V. prunifolium 150, 281
V. rufidulum 28 |
Vietnamese herbal medicine 22
Vinca, V. major 282
V. minor 281-82
V. rosea 16, 282
Viola, V. canina 282

V. odorata 282

V. tricolor 35, 282

V. yedoens 282
viper's bugloss 204
Virginia peppergrass 227-28
Virginian skullcap 135
Viscum album 13, 283
visnaga 13, 15, 19, 44, 47, 62
“vital force” 24-25
“vital spirit” 32, 35
vitality, general 316,317,319
vitamins 16
Vitex agnus-castus 13, 33, 151
Vitis vinifera 15, 81, 283
volatile oils 14
vomiting see nausea & vomiting
vulnerary herbs, action of 12, 13

WwW

wahoo bark 208
wallflower 187

walnut 224

Wang Lu 27

“warming” herbs 27, 38
warts 304

washes 297

water figwort 268

water hyssop 175
watercress |6, 239
watermelon 190
watermint | 14

wax gourd 177

weeping forsythia 212
weeping skin 300, 303
wheezing & shortness of breath 301
white beet 178

white bryony 180

white deadnettle 226
white elm 145

white horehound 233
white lotus 240-4 |

white mulberry 237-38
white peony 42, 117
white pond lily 240

white water lily 240-41
white willow 13, 14, 26, 129, 140
wild cherry 15, 257-58
wild chrysanthemum 78
wild cinnamon 182

wild herbs, harvesting 288
wild horehound 208

wild hydrangea 221

wild indigo 176-77

wild iris 223

wild lettuce 225-26

wild marjoram 242-43
wild onion 164

wild sarsaparilla |70

wild strawberry 212-13
wild thyme 143, 276-77
wild yam 9, 15, 49, 186
winter cherry 247

winter savory 267
wintergreen 14,215
witch hazel 13, 50, 102
withania 38, 152

Withania somnifera 38, 152
Withering, William 26, 202
wood anemone |68
wood apple 210

woolly foxglove 202
World Health Organization 29, 45
wormseed 188
wormwood 13, 16, 66, 67, 172

wound-healing herbs |2, 13
wounds, minor 304
see also cuts & grazes
wu jia pi 94
wu mei 257
wu wei zi 133
wu zhu yu 209

x

xian he cao 162
xuan fu hua 107

Y

yan hu suo (corydalis) 86

yang (Chinese concept) 40-42, 43
tonics 81

yarrow 33, 56, 291

ye hu hua 78

yellow balsam 196

yellow dock 65, 264-65

Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine
(Chinese text) | 9-20, 40

yellow foxglove 202

yellow jasmine 13, 216

yellow loosestrife 231

yellow pheasant's eye | 60

yellow pimpernel 231

yellow water crowsfoot 261

yerba dulce 229

yerba santa 205

yew 275

yi zhi ren 61

yin (Chinese concept) 40-42, 43
tonics 83,95, 125

yin chen hao 172

ylang-ylang 182

yohimbe 245

yumi shu 154

yuan zhi 252

Z

Zanthoxylum, Z. americanum 48, 153
Z. bungeanum 153
Z. capense |53
Z. clava-herculis 153
Z. zanthoxyloides 153
Zea mays 13, 23, 48,71, 154, 161, 162
zedoary 198
zhe bei mu 43
zhi mu 168
zhi zi 215
Zingiber officinale 13, 22, 38, 39, 61, 81,
116, 155, 287, 298
Ziziphus, Z. jujuba 283
Z. spinosa 43, 283

XHANI TVUENHD ©

----- PAGE 334 -----
INDEX OF HERBS BY AILMENT &

332

Index of Herbs

by Ailment

This index includes a wide range of ailments, listing key herbs used to
treat each one. Page numbers in bold denote a self-help use.

A

Abdominal pain see Stomach spasm
Acidity see Indigestion
Acne & boils
burdock (Arctium lappa) 65, 305
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 305
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138, 305
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) 141, 305
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 305
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 305
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 305
myrrh (Commiphora molmol) 85, 305
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 305
tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) 112, 305
Aging & debility
ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) 152,
319
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83, 319
fo ti (Polygonum mutiflorum) 124
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 319
ginseng (Panax ginseng) 118, 319
goji berry (Lycium chinense) ||
oats (Avena sativa) 175, 319
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 319
see also Blood pressure, high; Circulatory
problems; Digestive problems; Joint pain
& stiffness; Liver function; Memory &
concentration failure
Alcoholic poisoning, milk thistle (Silybum
marianum) 137
Allergic rhinitis & hay fever
Baical skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis)
134, 300
boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) 208, 300
common plantain (Plantago major) 251,
300
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 300
elder (Sambucus nigra) 132, 300
eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis) 209, 300
goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea) 271, 300
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165, 300
nettle (Urtica dioica) 146, 300
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 300
Anemia
chiretta (Swertia chirata) 273, 301
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 301
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 301
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) 66, 301
Angina
arjun (Terminalia arjuna) 142
cattail (Typha angustifolia) 279
dan shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) 130
hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha) 87
notoginseng (Panax notoginseng) 243
visnaga (Ammi visnaga) 62
Anorexia see Appetite loss
Anxiety & tension
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83, 308
damiana (Turnera difusa) 144, 308
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) | 13, 308
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) |19
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 308

Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 94, 308
skullcap (Scutelleria lateriflora) 135, 308
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 308
see also Stress
Appetite loss
bay laurel (Laurus nobilis) 226-27
bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata) 235
calumba (Jateorhiza palmata) 225
cinchona (Cinchona spp.) 80
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83, 306
condurango (Marsdenia condurango) 233
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 301
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 306
lovage (Levisticum officinale) 228
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
radish (Raphanus sativus) 26 |
sweet flag (Acorus calamus) 57
Arthritis & gout
avocado (Persea americana) 121
bay laurel (Laurus nobilis) 226-27
black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) 79, 313
bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata) 235
boswellia (Boswellia serrata) 179
celery (Apium graveolens) 64, 313
deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna)
69, 313
devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens) 103, 311
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 313
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria) 98, 313
northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum
americanum) 153
pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) 247-48
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90
white willow (Salix alba) 129, 313
see also Joint pain & stiffness; Rheumatism
Asthma
Baical skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis) 134,
301
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 301
desmodium (Desmodium adscendens) 201
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 301
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 301
gumplant (Grindelia camporum) 218
lobelia (Lobelia inflata) 110
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 301
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) | 19
pill-bearing spurge (Euphorbia hirta) 209
Seneca snakeroot (Polygala senega) 252
thornapple (Datura stramonium) 200-201
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 301
visnaga (Ammi visnaga) 62
wild cherry (Prunus serotina) 257-58
Athlete's foot
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90, 304

B

Back pain
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 313
devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens) 103, 313

lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 313
lobelia (Lobelia inflata) 110
pepper (Piper nigrum) 250, 313
northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum
americanum) 153, 313
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 313
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 313
white willow (Salix alba) 129, 313
Bedwetting, California poppy (Eschscholzia
californica) 207
Bites see Stings, bites, & swellings
Bladder stones see Stones
Bleeding
American cranesbill (Geranium
maculatum) 216
bistort (Polygonum bistorta) 253
cattail (Typha angustifolia) 279
common plantain (Plantago major) 251
greater burnet (Sanguisorba officinalis) 266
horsetail (Equisetum arvense) 205
lesser periwinkle (Vinca minor) 281-82
notoginseng (Panax notoginseng) 243
self-heal (Prunella vulgaris) 256
Bloating see Gas & bloating
Blood pressure, high
asafoetida (Ferula assa-foetida) 210—| |
beetroot (Beta vulgaris) 178, 301
blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum) 262
buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum) 210,
319
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 301, 319
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 301
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) 100, 301
hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha) 87
Indian snakeroot (Rauvolfia serpentina) 261
linden (Tilia spp.) 277
olive (Olea europaea) 241-42
pomegranate (Punica granatum) 259, 301
Blood-sugar levels, high see Diabetes
Boils see Acne & boils
Breast tenderness & sore nipples
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 315
German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita)
77,315
Bronchitis
cajuput (Melaleuca leucadendron) 234, 310
cowslip (Primula veris) 256
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 310
elecampane (Inula helenium) 107, 310
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) 96, 310
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 310
gumplant (Grindelia camporum) 218
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 310
lovage (Levisticum officinale) 228
lungwort (Pulmonaria officinalis) 259
Seneca snakeroot (Polygala senega) 252
soap bark (Quillaja saponaria) 260
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 310
white horehound (Marrubium vulgare) 233
Bruises
arnica (Arnica montana) 172, 304
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138
common plantain (Plantago major) 251
Solomon's seal (Polygonatum multiflorum)
252-53
witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102,
304
Burns & scalds
aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 303
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 303
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 303
tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) | 12

C

Cancer
arborvitae (Thuja occidentale) 276
flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum) |09
mistletoe (Viscum album) 283
pau d’arco (Tabebuia spp) 139
suma (Pfaffia paniculata) 246
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90
Candidiasis see Fungal infections; Thrush
Cellulitis, wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens) 2.15
Chicken pox see Cold sores, chicken pox,
& shingles
Chilblains
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 302
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 302
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 302
Childbirth
bethroot (Trillium erectum) 278
broom (Cytisus scoparius) 200
cotton (Gossypium herbaceum) 217-18
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum)
227-28
raspberry (Rubus idaeus) 264, 317
squaw vine (Mitchella repens) 235-36
Cholesterol levels, high
alfalfa (Medicago sativa) 233-34
butternut (Juglans cinerea) 224
eggplant (Solanum melongena) 270-71
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum)
227-28
guggul (Commiphora mukul) 193
oats (Avena sativa) 175
rose (Rosa gallica) 263
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90
Crohn's disease
German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita)
77
psyllium (Plantago spp.) 123
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) 66
Circulatory problems
beet (Beta vulgaris) 178, 301
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74, 302
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 302
dan shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) 130
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 302
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 301
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 301
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) 100, 301
goji berry (Lycium chinense) |||
northern prickly ash (Zanthaxylum
americanum) 153, 302
pomegranate (Punica granatum) 259, 301
Cold sores, chicken pox, & shingles
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 304
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 304
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 304
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 304
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) | 13, 304
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 304
Colds & flu
boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) 208, 311
cardamom (EFletteria cardamomum) 93, 311
catnip (Nepeta catoria) 239-40
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74, 311
cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum spp.) 81,
311
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 311
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 311
elder (Sambucus nigra) 132, 311
elderberry (Sambucus nigra) 132, 311, 318
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) 96
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 311

----- PAGE 335 -----
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 311
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 311
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 311
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) 113, 311
onion (Allium cepa) 164, 311
pelargonium (Pelargonium sidoides) |20,
318
pepper (Piper nigrum) 250, 311
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 311, 312, 318
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) 66, 311
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) 56, 311
Colic
anise (Pimpinella anisum) 248, 318
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 318
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 318
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 318
star anise (Illicium verum) 222-3
sweet flag (Acorus calamus) 57
winter savory (Satureja montana) 267
Congestion & sinus problems
asafoetida (Ferula assa-foetida) 210-1 |
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 312
elder (Sambucus nigra) 132, 312
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) 96, 312
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 312
ground ivy (Glechoma hederacea) 216-17
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 312
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165, 312
mullein (Verbascum thapsus) 28 |
Peruvian balsam (Myroxylon pereirae) 239
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 312
tree lungwort (Lobaria pulmonaria) 229
white mulberry (Morus alba) 237
see also Allergic rhinitis; Earache
In children
catnip (Nepeta catoria) 239-40
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 318
Constipation
alder buckthorn (Rhamnus frangula)
261-62
butternut (Juglans cinerea) 224
Chinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum)
126, 307
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 307
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) 141, 307
fig (Ficus carica) 211, 307
flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum) 109, 317
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 307
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 307
Psyllium (Plantago spp.) 123, 317
senna (Cassia senna) 75, 307
yellow dock (Rumex crispus) 264, 307
In children
flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum) 109, 318
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 318
Convalescence
arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea) 233
ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) 152,
308
barley (Hordeum vulgare) 220-21
cinnamon (Cinnamomum spp.) 81
manioc (Manihot esculenta) 232-33
oats (Avena sativa) 175
vervain (Verbena officinalis) 149
Convulsions
gou teng (Uncaria rhynchophylla) 280
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) |19
Coronary heart disease see Heart disease
Coughs
balm of Gilead (Populus x candicans) 254,
310
cajuput (Melaleuca leucadendron) 234, 310

coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara) 278-79
cowslip (Primula veris) 256
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 310
elderberry (Sambucus nigra) 132, 318
elecampane (Inula helenium) 107, 310
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) 96, 310
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 310
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 310
lungwort (Pulmonaria officinalis) 259
mullein (Verbascum thapsus) 28 |
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 310
wild cherry (Prunus serotina) 257-58
Cradle cap
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73
olive (Olea europaea) 241, 318
Cramps see Muscle aches & cramps;
Period pain
Cuts see Wounds, cuts, & scrapes
Cystitis
agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) 162
buchu (Barosma betulina) 71, 314
celery (Apium graveolens) 64
cornsilk (Zea mays) 154, 314
gardenia (Gardenia jasminoides) 2.15
juniper (Juniperus communis) 224, 314
larch (Larix decidua) 226
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165
sandalwood (Santalum album) 266
sea holly (Eryngium maritimum) 206
uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) 170.

D

Dementia
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) 100
lesser periwinkle (Vinca minor) 28|-82
Depression
damiana (Turnera difusa) 144
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) | 13
lemon verbena (Lippia citriodora) 228
patchouli (Pogostemon cablin) 252
rose (Rosa gallica) 263
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 308
Dermatitis see Eczema
Diabetes
artichoke (Cynara scolymus) 199
bitter melon (Momordica charantia) 236
boswellia (Boswellia serrata) 179
cinnamon (Cinnamomum spp.) 8 |
French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) 246-47
guar gum (Cyanopsis tetragonoloba) 198
gymnema (Gymnema sylvestre) 218-19
holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum) 116
jambul (Syzygium cumini) 274
neem (Azadirachta indica) 70
nikkar nut (Caesalpinia bonduc) 180-81
Diaper rash
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 318
chickweed (Stellaria media) 272, 318
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 318
Diarrhea
agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) |62, 307
Asian plum (Prunus meme) 257
bael (Aegle marmelos) 161, 307
bistort (Polygonum bistorta) 253, 307
black catechu (Acacia catechu) 158, 307
chebulic myrobalan (Terminalia chebula)
275-6
hartstongue (Scolopendrium vulgare) 268
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165, 307
mint (Mentha spp.) 234-35, 307
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
peepal (Ficus religiosa) 212
peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 307

Psyllium (Plantago spp.) 123, 307
rowan (Sorbus aucuparia) 27 |—72
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 307
silverweed (Potentilla anserina) 255-56
tamarind (Tamarindus indica) 274, 307
tormentil (Potentilla erecta) 256
In children
agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) |62, 318
barley (Hordeum vulgare) 220-21
common plantain (Plantago major) 251,
318
Digestive problems
asafoetida (Ferula assa-foetida) 210—| |
beleric myrobalan (Terminalia belerica)
275
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 305
calumba (Jateorhiza palmata) 224
catnip (Nepeta cataria) 239, 305
centaury (Erythraea centaurium) 206
chebulic myrobalan (Terminalia chebula)
275-76
chiretta (Swertia chirata) 273-74
cinnamon (Cinnamomum spp.) 81
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 305
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 319
Iceland moss (Cetraria islandica) |86, 307
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 306
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) | 13, 308
purslane (Portulaca oleracea) 255
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria) 98, 307
peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 305
tamarind (Tamarindus indica) 274
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90
vervain (Verbena officinalis) 149
winter savory (Satureja montana) 267
wood apple (Feronia limonia) 210
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) 56, 305
In children
anise (Pimpinella anisum) 248, 318
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 318
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 318
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 318
see also Colic; Constipation; Diarrhea;
Diverticulitis; Gas & bloating;
Indigestion; Stomach spasm
Diverticulitis
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145
wild yam (Dioscorea villosa) 9|
Dysentery see Diarrhea

E

Earache
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 312
elder (Sambucus nigra) 132, 312
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 312
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 312
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165, 312
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 312
Eczema
albizzia (Albizzia lebbeck) | 63
chickweed (Stellaria media) 272, 300
fumitory (Fumaria officinalis) 213
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 300
gotu kola (Centella asiatica) 76, 300
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
oats (Avena sativa) 175, 300
peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 300
witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102, 300
Epilepsy see Convulsions
Eye problems
cornflower (Centaurea cyanus) 185, 310
eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis) 209, 310

German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 310

goji berry (Lycium chinense) || |

ju hua (Chrysanthemum morifolium) 78, 310

see also Glaucoma

F

Fatigue
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83
goji berry (Lycium chinense) || |
maté (lex paraguariensis) 222
rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea) |27
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 94
Fertility problems in men & women
ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) |52,
316
chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus) 151,316
Chinese angelica (Angelica sinensis) 63, 316
morinda (Morinda officinalis) 237
see also Impotence & premature
ejaculation
Fevers
avens (Geum urbanum) 216
boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) 208, 311
bupleurum (Bupleurum chinense) 72
cardamom (Eletteria cardamomum) 93, 311
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74, 311
cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum spp.) 81,
311
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 311
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum)
227-8
gardenia (Gardenia jasminoides) 2.15
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 311
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 311
horsemint (Monarda punctata) 236
onion (Allium cepa) 164, 311
pepper (Piper nigrum) 250, 311
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) 66, 311
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) 56, 311
In children
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) 239-40
Flu see Colds & flu
Fluid retention
blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum) 262
celery (Apium graveolens) 64
cornsilk (Zea mays) 154, 317
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) 141, 315
squill (Urginea maritima) 280
Fractures see Sprains & fractures
Fungal infections
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304,
314
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 304
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138, 304
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 314
elder (Sambucus nigra) 132, 314
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 304, 314
pau d'arco (Tabebuia spp.) 139, 314
tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) 112, 304,
314
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 304, 314
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90, 304
see also Thrush

G

Gallbladder problems
black root (Leptandra virginica) 228
boldo (Peumus boldo) 246
wahoo bark (Euonymus atropurpureus) 208
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) 66
Gallstones see Stones
Gas & bloating

LNAWNTIV Ad SAUXH AO XHCNI &

333

----- PAGE 336 -----
INDEX OF HERBS BY AILMENT &

g

334

y\\

anise (Pimpinella anisum) 248, 306
black root (Leptandra virginica) 228
cardamom (Eletteria cardamomum) 93, 306
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74
centaury (Erythraea centaurium) 206, 306
fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) 212, 306
gentian (Gentiana lutea) 99, 306
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 318
lemon verbena (Lippia citriodora) 228, 306
lovage (Levisticum officinale) 228
pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) 235
Peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 306
sweet flag (Acorus calamus) 57
winter savory (Satureja montana) 267

Gastritis see Indigestion

Glaucoma
coleus (Coleus forskohlii) 84
marijuana (Cannabis sativa) 182

Gout see Arthritis & gout

Gum problems
myrrh (Commiphora molmol) 85, 306
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 306
see also Mouth & tongue ulcers

H

Hemorrhoids
American cranesbill (Geranium
maculatum) 216
blackberry (Rubus fruticosus) 264
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 302
common oak (Quercus robur) 259, 302
common plantain (Plantago major) 25 |
lesser celandine (Ranunculus ficaria) 260,
302
Psyllium (Plantago spp.) 123, 302
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 302
witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102,
302
Halitosis
cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum) 93
dill (Anethum graveolens) 168
ju hua (Chrysanthemum morifolium) 78
rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea) |27
Hangover
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) 141, 309
kudzu (Pueraria lobata) 258-59
milk thistle (Silybum marianum) 137
Hay fever see Allergic rhinitis
Headaches
betony (Stachys officinalis) 272
bo he (Mentha haplocalyx) 234, 306
catnip (Nepeta catoria) 239-40
feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) |40
gou teng (Uncaria rhynchophylia) 280
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 309
linden (Tilia spp.) 277, 309, 317
pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) 235, 306,
309
Peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114,
306, 309
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) 128, 309
skullcap (Scutelleria lateriflora) 135, 308
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 309
vervain (Verbena officinalis) 149, 309
Heart disease
arjun (Terminalia arjuna) 142
broom (Cytisus scoparius) 200
coleus (Coleus forskohlii) 84
hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha) 87
night-blooming cereus (Selenicereus
grandiflorus) 268-9
Heartburn
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria) 98, 317
see also Gas & bloating

Hepatitis see Liver problems

HIV/AIDS
bladderwrack (Fucus vesiculosus) 213
cat's claw (Uncaria tomentosa) 280
ju hua (Chrysanthemum x morifolium) 78

Impotence & premature ejaculation
bu gu zhi (Psoralea corylifolia) 258
ginseng (Panax ginseng) 118, 316
morinda (Morinda officinalis) 237
muira puama (Ptychopetalum olacoides) 258
saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) 136, 316
schisandra (Schisandra chinensis) 133, 316
Indigestion
allspice (Pimenta officinalis) 248
anise (Pimpinella anisum) 248, 307
arrowroot (Maranta arundinacea) 233, 307
clary sage (Salvia sclarea) 265
fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) 212, 307
galbanum (Ferula gummosa) 211, 307
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 307
Iceland moss (Cetraria islandica) 186, 307
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria) 98,
307, 313
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 307
sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum) 241
Insomnia
ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) 152,
309
hops (Humulus lupulus) 104, 309
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 309
linden (Tilia spp.) 277, 309
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
oats (Avena sativa) 175, 309
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) | 19,
309, 313
red poppy (Papaver rhoeas) 244
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 94, 309
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 309, 313
In children
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 309, 318
Irritable bowel syndrome see Diarrhea

Joint pain & stiffness
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138, 313
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 313
ephedra (Ephedra sinica) 96
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 313
see also Arthritis & gout; Rheumatism

K

Kidney problems
da ji (Euphorbia pekinensis) 209
eucommia bark (Eucommia ulmoides) 207
Java tea (Orthosiphon aristata) 243
ephedra (Ephedra sinica) 95
rehmannia (Rehmannia glutinosa) 125
schisandra (Schisandra chinensis) 133
Kidney stones see Stones

L

Laryngitis see Sore throats

Liver problems
andrographis (Andrographis paniculata) |67
chiretta (Swertia chirata) 273
desmodium (Desmodium adscendens) 201
eucommia bark (Eucommia ulmoides) 207

goji berry (Lycium chinense) |||

milk thistle (Silybum marianum) 137
phyllanthus (Phyllanthis amarus) 247
picrorrhiza (Picrorrhiza kurroa) 248
quassia (Picrasma excelsa) 248
rehmannia (Rehmannia glutinosa) 125, 310
schisandra (Schisandra chinensis) 133
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90

M

Malaria
boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) 208
cinchona (Cinchona spp.) 80
fever bark (Alstonia spp.) 165
fo ti (Polygonum mutiflorum) 124
neem (Azadirachta indica) 70
sweet wormwood (Artemisia annua) 67
tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima) 162
Measles
kudzu (Pueraria lobata) 258-59
safflower (Carthamus tinctoria) 184
Memory & concentration failure
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) 100, 319
gotu kola (Centella asiatoca) 76, 319
hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha) 87
Menopausal problems
black cohosh (Cimicifuuga racemosa) 79,
316
chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus) 151, 316
oats (Avena sativa) 175, 316
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 316
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 316
shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) |74, 316
white peony (Paeonia lactiflora) 117, 316
white willow (Salix alba) 129, 316
Menstrual problems see Period pain;
Periods, heavy or irregular; Premenstrual
syndrome
Migraine
feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) 140, 309
skullcap (Scutelleria lateriflora) 135, 309
see also Headaches
Morning sickness
fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) 212, 317
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 317
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 317
Mouth & tongue ulcers
avens (Geum urbanum) 216
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 306
lesser periwinkle (Vinca minor) 281-82
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 306
myrrh (Commiphora molmol) 85, 306
rhatany (Krameria triandra) 225
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 306
tormentil (Potentilla erecta) 256
Mumps, peepal (Ficus religiosa) 212
Muscle aches & cramps
arnica (Arnica montana) 172, 312
cinchona (Cinchona spp.) 80
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 312
lobelia (Lobelia inflata) 110
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) | 19
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) 128, 312
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) 106
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 312

N

Nausea & motion sickness
bo he (Mentha haplocalyx) 234, 306
centaury (Erythraea centaurium) 206, 306
chiretta (Swertia chirata) 273, 306
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 306

galangal (Alpinia officinarum) 61, 306
ginger (Zingiber officinale) 155, 306
horsemint (Monarda punctata) 236
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 306
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) 113, 305
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) 235, 306
peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 306
turmeric (Curcuma longa) 90, 306
see also Morning sickness; Vomiting.
Nephritis see Kidney problems
Nerve pain see Neuralgia
Nettle rash, nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 303
Neuralgia
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 308
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) |08, 308
peppermint (Mentha x piperita) 114, 308
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 308
see also Pain relief
Nipples, sore see Breast tenderness &
sore nipples
Nosebleeds
American cranesbill (Geranium
maculatum) 216, 310
eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis) 209, 310
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 310

O

Osteoarthritis see Arthritis & gout

P

Pain relief
boswellia (Boswellia serrata) 179
corydalis (Corydalis yanhusuo) 86
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 312,
313, 315
eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) 96
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) 22 |—2
Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia erythrina) 25 |
kava (Piper methysticum) |22
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) 244
passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) |19
quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) 255
In children
red poppy (Papaver rhoeas) 244
see also Joint pain & stiffness; Muscle
aches & cramps; Neuralgia
Palpitations
dan shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) 130, 302
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) 113, 308
linden (Tilia spp.) 277, 302
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 302
see also Panic attacks
Panic attacks
linden (Tilia spp.) 277, 302
motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca) 227, 302
skullcap (Scutelleria lateriflora) 135, 308
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 302
see also Palpitations
Parkinson's disease
deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) 69
harmala (Peganum harmala) 245
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) 221-22
thornapple (Datura stramonium) 200-201
Peptic ulcers
curry tree (Murraya koenigii) 238
deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) 69
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum)
227-8
matico (Piper angustifolia) 249-50
potato (Solanum tuberosum) 27 |
Period pain
black haw (Viburnum prunifolium) 2.18, 315

----- PAGE 337 -----
caraway (Carum carvi) 184, 315

corydalis (Corydalis yanhusuo) 86

crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 315

white peony (Paeonia lactiflora) 117, 315

wild yam (Dioscorea villosa) 91, 315
Periods, heavy or irregular

bethroot (Trillium erectum) 278

chaste tree (Vitex agnus-castus) 151,315

chuang xiong (Ligusticum wallachii) 117,315

cotton (Gossypium herbaceum) 217-18

dong quai (Angelica sinensis) 63, 315

greater burnet (Sanguisorba officinalis) 266

ji xue teng (Milletta reticulata) 235

motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca) 227, 315

nettle (Urtica dioica) 146, 315

rehmannia (Rehmannia glutinosa) 125, 315

shepherd's purse (Capsella bursa-

pastoris) 183, 315

squaw vine (Mitchella repens) 235-36

white deadnettle (Lamium album) 226

white peony (Paeonia lactiflora) 117, 315
Pleurisy

da ji (Euphorbia pekinensis) 209

marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165

milkwort (Polygala vulgaris) 252

pleurisy root (Asclepias tuberosa) | 73-74
Polyps, arborvitae (Thuja occidentale) 276
Premenstrual syndrome

linden (Tilia spp.) 277, 315

rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) 128, 315

valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 315

vervain (Verbena officinalis) 149, 315
Prostate, enlarged

couch grass (Agropyron repens) |62

garlic (Allium sativum) 59

gravel root (Eupatorium purpureum) 309

nettle (Urtica dioca) 146

pumpkin (Curcubita pepo) 197

Pygeum (Pygeum africanum) 260.

saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) 136

sea holly (Eryngium maritimum) 206

R

Rashes see Diaper rash; Skin disorders
Raynaud’s disease, northern prickly ash
(Zanthoxylum americanum) |53
Respiratory problems
beleric myrobalan (Terminalia belerica) 275
bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis) 266
elecampane (Inula helenium) 107
ground ivy (Glechoma hederacea) 216-17
holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum) 116
hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis) 222
levant storax (Liquidambar orientalis) 229
lobelia (Lobelia inflata) 110
mouse-ear hawkweed (Hieracium
pilosella) 220
soapwort (Saponaria officinalis) 267
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 301, 310
yerba santa (Eriodictyon californicum) 205
see also Allergic rhinitis & hay fever;
Asthma; Bronchitis; Congestion & sinus
problems; Colds & flu; Coughs
Rheumatism
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74
devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens) 103, 311
gotu kola (Centella asiatica) 76
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger) 221-22
lignum vitae (Guaiacum officinale) 219
northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum
americanum) 153
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) 255

Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) 249
star anise (Illicium verum) 222-3
wintergreen (Gaultheria procumbens) 215
see also Arthritis & gout
Ringworm, Ceylon leadwort (Plumbago
zeylanica) 25 |

S

Scabies, Ceylon leadwort (Plumbago
zeylanica) 25 |
Sex drive, low
damiana (Turnera difusa) 144
gokulakanta (Hygrophila spinosa) 221
schisandra (Schisandra chinensis) 133,
316
shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) 174, 315
Shingles see Cold sores, chicken pox,
& shingles
Sinus problems see Allergic rhinitis & hay
fever; Congestion & sinus problems
Skin disorders
aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 303
avocado (Persea americana) 121
bittersweet (Solanum dulcamara) 270
burdock (Arctium lappa) 65, 303
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 303,
304
chickweed (Stellaria media) 272, 303
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 304
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138,
303, 304
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) 141, 303
garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 304
gotu kola (Centella asiatica) 76, 300
houseleek (Sempervivum tectorum) 269
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 303
tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) | 12, 304
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 304
witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102,
303
yellow dock (Rumex crispus) 264, 303
see also Acne & boils; Burns & scalds;
Cold sores, chicken pox, & shingles;
Diaper rash; Stings, bites, & swellings;
warts
Sore throats
bistort (Polygonum bistorta) 253
blackberry (Rubus fruticosus) 264
blackcurrant (Ribes nigrum) 262
cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) 74
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 311
henna (Lawsonia inernis) 227
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 311
lesser periwinkle (Vinca minor) 281-82
myrrh (Commiphora molmol) 85, 311
rhatany (Krameria triandra) 225
rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) 128, 311
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 311
silverweed (Potentilla anserina) 255-56
tamarind (Tamarindus indica) 274, 311
Sprains & fractures
arnica (Arnica montana) 172, 312
comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138, 312
Stings, bites, & swellings
aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 303
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 303
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 303
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 303
holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum) | 16, 303
lavender (Lavandula officinalis) 108, 303
lemon (Citrus limon) 82, 303
nettle (Urtica dioca) 146, 303
sage (Salvia officinalis) 131, 303

St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum)
106, 303
sweet basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum) 241, 303
thyme (Thymus vulgaris) 143, 303
Stomach spasm
angelica (Angelica archangelica) 168, 305
anise (Pimpinella anisum) 248, 305
crampbark (Viburnum opulus) 150, 305
fennel (Foeniculum vulgare) 212, 305
German chamomile (Chamomilla
recutita) 77, 305
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) 113, 305
mint (Mentha spp.) 234-5, 305
see also Digestive problems
Stones (bladder, gall, & kidney)
carrot (Daucus carota) 201
couch grass (Agropyron repens) 162.
gravel root (Eupatorium purpureum) 309
heather (Calluna vulgaris) 181
pellitory-of-the-wall (Parietaria officinalis)
245
sea holly (Eryngium maritimum) 206
spiny restharrow (Ononis spinosa) 242
varuna (Crataeva nurvula) 88
visnaga (Ammi visnaga) 62
wild hydgrangea (Hydrangea arborescens)
221
Stress
ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) 152,
319
betony (Stachys officinalis) 272
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83, 319
ginseng (Panax ginseng) |18, 308, 319
holy basil (Ocimum tenuiflorum) 116
lemon balm (Melissa officinalis) | 13, 308
oats (Avena sativa) 175, 319
rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea) 127, 319
schisandra (Schisandra chinensis) 133
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 94, 308
valerian (Valeriana officinalis) 148, 308, 309
see also Anxiety & tension
Stretch marks
aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 317
olive (Olea europaea) 241, 317
Sunburn see Burns & scalds

T

Teething
German chamomile (Chamomilla recutita)
77,318
slippery elm (Ulmus rubra) 145, 318
Thrush, oral
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 310
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 101, 314
myrrh (Commiphora molmol) 85, 314
Tonsillitis
echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 311
pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) 247-8
wild marjoram (Origanum vulgare) 242-3
see also Sore throats
Toothache
clove (Eugenia caryophyllata) 97, 308
Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia erythrina) 25 |
kava (Piper methysticum) 122
Travel sickness see Nausea & motion sickness

U

Ulcerative colitis see Diarrhea
Ulcers see Mouth & tongue ulcers; Peptic
ulcers
Urinary infections
bilberry (Vaccimium myrtillus) 147, 314
buchu (Barosma betulina) 71, 314

celery (Apium graveolens) 64

cornsilk (Zea mays) 154, 314

cranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpon)
280-281

echinacea (Echinacea spp.) 92, 314

garlic (Allium sativum) 59, 314

goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea) 271, 314

gravel root (Eupatorium purpureum) 309

juniper (Juniperus communis) 224, 314
marshmallow (Althaea officinalis) 165,
314

saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) 136
spiny restharrow (Ononis spinosa) 242
see also Cystitis; Kidney problems

Vv

Vaginal discharge
amaranth (Amaranthus hypochondriacus)
165
American cranesbill (Geranium
maculatum) 216
buchu (Barosma betulina) 71
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) 100
white deadnettle (Lamium album) 226
Varicose veins
butcher's broom (Ruscus aculeatus) 265
calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 302
witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102,
302
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) 56, 302
Vertigo
black horehound (Ballota nigra) 176, 306
bupleurum (Bupleurum chinense) 72
self-heal (Prunella vulgaris) 256
Vomiting
black horehound (Ballota nigra) 176, 306
codonopsis (Codonopsis pilosula) 83, 306
nutmeg (Myristica fragrans) 115
sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum) 241
see also Nausea & travel sickness

WXYZ

Warts

aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 304

arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis) 276, 304

banyan tree (Ficus benghalensis) 2! |
Worms

avocado (Persea americana) 121

embelia (Embelia ribes) 204

grape jasmine (Ervatamia coronaria) 205

pinkroot (Spigelia marilandica) 272

pomegranate (Punica granatum) 259

pumpkin (Curcubita pepo) 197

In children

black cumin (Nigella sativa) 240

Wounds, cuts, & scrapes

aloe vera (Aloe vera) 60, 304

benzoin gum (Styrax benzoin) 273

calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304

comfrey (Symphytum officinale) 138, 304

gotu kola (Centella asiatica) 76

myrtle (Myrtus communis) 239

Self-heal (Prunella vulgaris) 256

tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) |12

witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 102,

304

yarrow (Achillea millefolium) 56, 304
Yeast infection, vaginal

buchu (Barosma betulina) 71

calendula (Calendula officinalis) 73, 304

goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) 105

tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia) 112, 314

LNAWNTIV Ad SAUXH AO XHCNI &

Jr

e

335

----- PAGE 338 -----
USEFUL ADDRESSES &

336

Useful
Websites

Herbalist organizations
See p. 320 for a list of herbalist
organizations.

Finding an herbal practitioner

Use the American Herbalists Guild's Find
an Herbalist National Locator Service to
find AHG professional members in your

area.
www.americanherbalistsguild.com/

member-profiles

American Herbalists Guild
regional chapters

AHG chapters bring herbal communities
together to share their love of herbs, and
to provide support for the important
work of clinical herbalism all over the
country. Each chapter is unique, reflecting
the needs and interests of their
community. Check this list to see whether

there is chapter in your area.
www.americanherbalistsguild.com/

ahg-chapters

Herbal education

There are a plethora of educational
options in the U.S. and Canada, ranging
from introductory to postgraduate level.
The best guide to this richness can be

found at the AHG listing:
www.americanherbalistsguild.com/

school-profiles

A characteristic of the north American
herbal world is the wonderful range of
herb schools established by herbalists
around the country. Many are listed by
the AHG, but an example is the following:

California School of Herbal Studies
www.cshs.com

Degree courses
A number of universities now offer

degree courses at various levels. For
example:

Maryland University of Integrative

Health
www.muih.edu

Offers a Master of Science in
Therapeutic Herbalism

Bastyr University
www.bastyr.edu/academics/areas-study/

bs-major-herbal-sciences
The flagship school of naturopathic medicine
offers a well-respected Bachelor of Science

Online and distance learning

Many online and correspondence courses
are offered by herbal teachers. For
example:

Sage Mountain

Rosemary Gladstar
www.sagemountain.com

Center for Herbal Studies

David Winston
www.herbalstudies.net

Foundations in Herbal Medicine

Tieraona Low Dog, MD
drlowdog.com

East West School of Planetary
Herbology

Michael and Leslie Tierra
www.planetherbs.com

The School of Natural Healing
Dr. John R. Christopher MH

www.snh.cc
Northeast School of Botanical Medicine

7Son
www.7song.com

Herbal suppliers

Mountain Rose Herbs

The most comprehensive North
American supplier of all things herbal
www.mountainroseherbs.com

Frontier Co-op

Member-owned supplier of herbs, spices,
foods, and more since 1976

Floracopeia
Suppliers of essential oils and flower

essences .
www.floracopeia.com

Starwest Botanicals
One of the largest suppliers of organic

herbs in the United States
www.starwest-botanicals.com

Verditas Botanicals
Suppliers of 100 percent organic

essential oils _
verditasbotanicals.com

Simplers Botanicals

A leading source of therapeutic-quality,
certified organic essential oils and herbal
extracts

https://simplers.com

Neal’s Yard

Aworld leader of natural health and
beauty, supplying essential oils and herbal
remedies
https://us.nyrorganic.com/shop/corp/

Equipment suppliers

An excellent guide with links to herbal

medi making supplies can be found at:
www.livingawareness.com/medicine-

making-resources/

Mountain Rose Herbs is also a

comprehensive equipment supplier:
www.mountainroseherbs.com

degree with a Major in Herbal Sciences

www.frontiercoop.com

Acknowledgments

Author’s Acknowledgments

Without the unfailing good humour and commitment of the
team at Dorling Kindersley this book would not have been
possible. My sincere and heartfelt thanks to Penny Warren,
Valerie Horn, Spencer Holbrook, Christa Weil and Rosie
Pearson. The responsibility for faults or omissions in this
encyclopedia is entirely mine, though | have been greatly
helped in compiling sections of this book by Anne McIntyre
MNIMH, Noel Rigby MNHAA and Eve Rogans MRTCM.
Many other fellow medical herbalists and colleagues have
contributed in discussion or ideas, whether knowingly or not,
‘to the writing of this book. The list cannot be exhaustive but
in particular | would like to thank Richard Adams MNIMH,
Celia Bell PhD, Christopher Hedley MNIMH, Michael McIntyre
FNIMH, Ellis Snitcher MD, Christine Steward MNIMH, Midge
Whitelegg PhD MNIMH and John Wilkinson PhD. Above all,
lam indebted to those who kept the fires of herbal medicine
burning in the mostly chill and dispiriting winds of the mid-
twentieth century. Without their commitment and love for
herbal medicine, the current renaissance in plant medicine
would not be taking place. Lastly, to Maria, Leon and Tamara
for whom | have had so little time while writing, my deepest
‘thanks for your patience, love and understanding.

For the 2016 Edition

For this revised edition, DK staff have (as always) proved
themselves to be efficient, helpful, and gentle (but accurate)
in their critical comments. In particular, | want to thank Toby
Mann, for his thoughtful and skilful input during the editorial
process, and Lisa Dyer for steering the project to a successful
conclusion. | would also like to thank Julie Bruton-Seal, Kofi
Busia, Nikki Darrell, Jill Davies and Rowan Hamilton, who all (in
different ways) made essential contributions to this new edition.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments

DK would like in particular to thank Ruth Midgley for her
editorial expertise and Colin Nicholls MNIMH for his expert
advice and knowledge. Many thanks also to Tracey Beresford,
Polly Boyd, Joanna Chisholm, Charlotte Evans, Fay Franklin,
Fred Gill, Nell Graville, Constance Novis, Frank Ritter, Blanche
Sibbald, Linda Sonntag and Clare Stewart for editorial

assistance; to Tracey Clarke who contributed to the original
design and to Maxine Chung for design assistance; to Zoé
Saunders for modelling; to Raquel Leis and Ana Pedro for help
with finding plants; and to Kathie Gill for the index. Dorling
Kindersley are particularly grateful to Duncan Ross of
Poyntzfield Herb Nursery for photographing plants in the
Himalayas; to Fiona Crumley and the staff of the Chelsea
Physic Garden for their invaluable advice and to Dr Yongfeng
Wang at Aston University and Dr Y. Wong at Hosten
University, who helped track down and verify elusive Chinese
herbs. Many thanks also to Jacqueline Horn, Professor
Shouming Zhong of East-West Herbs; Noel Rigby and Woods
& Woods in Australia; Neal's Yard in Covent Garden; Anthony
Lymon-Dixon of Arne Herbs; Hambledon Herbs and Iden
Croft Herbs of Kent. Grateful thanks also to Deni Bown, and
to James Morley and the staff of the Royal Botanic Gardens
Kew for their expertise. Also: University of Oklahoma Press,
University of California Press and Arkana.

For the 2016 Edition

DK would like to thank Jane Simmonds for proofreading, Marie
Lorimer for preparing the index, Karen Constanti and Philippa
Nash for design assistance, Alastair Laing for editorial advice
and support, and Vanessa Hamilton for additional illustrations.

2001 Edition Team

Project Editor Jennifer jones, Art Editor Karen Sawyer,
Editor Lesley Riley, Picture Researcher Louise Thomas,
Category Publisher Mary-Clare Jerram, Art Director
‘Tracy Killick, Production Bethan Blase

Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine Reissue,
ISBN - 9780241229446; Picture Credits

The publisher would like to thank the following for their kind
permission to reproduce their photographs:

(Key: a-above; b-bottom; c-centre; f-far; left; rright; t-top)
A-Z Botanical Collection Ltd: Pallava Bagla: p80tla; Chris
Martin Bahr: 279tra; Pam Collins: 229cl, AKG/Musée du
Louvre, Paris: p24t; American Museum of Natural History/
Lynton Gardiner: p25br; Heather Angel: p|25tla, p|94brf;
Ardea: p!23tla; The Bodleian Library, University of Oxford,
LIS Med: p35tl; Deni Bown: p94tl, p | 00tl, p | 06tl, p!07tl,
plIStl, pl 17tl, pl2Itl, p149tl, p214tl, p226bl, p234tl, p259bI,
p274cl, Bridgeman Art Library: Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris:

p22tl; National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian
Institute, Permlet Art Resource: p46tr; By Permission of the
British Library: p22br; Neil Campbell Sharp: p! | 9tl; J. Allan
Cash: p40b, p52tr; Bruce Coleman: Atlantide Sdf: p241tr;
Robert P. Carr: p102tl; Alain Compost: p97tl, p!92tr; Geoff
Doré: p288bI; J. Fennell: p | Obl; Michael Freeman: p93tl; Dennis
Green: p1|48tl; Dr. Eckart Pott: p | 50tl; Hans Reinhard: p6%tl,
p87tl, p98tl, p1O8tl, p!32tl; E.T. Archive/British Museum:
p43t; Mary Evans Picture Library/Wolf: p263c; © Steven
Foster 1996: p51 tl, p59tl, p63tl, p68tl, p75tl, p9Stl, p! | 8tl,
p!22tl, p136tl, p!39tl; Garden Picture Library: |.S. Sira: 58tla;
Giraudon/Bibl. Municipale, Reims: p34br; Robert Harding
Picture Library: p275bl; Richard Ashworth: p4étr; Holt
Studios International: Nigel Cattlin: p80tl, p 104cla, p154tl,
p233tl, p262c, p264c; Bob Gibbons: p| 8bl, péétl, p10! tl;
Willem Harinck: p1 141, p247I, p257b, p27 | cl; Rosie Mayer:
p1!38tl; Primrose Peacock: p! 84tr; Inga Spence: p238tc,
p250tr; Hutchison Library: p36b, p42c; Moser: p|94brf;
Icorec/Circa Photo Library: William Holtby: | 9tl; Images
Colour Library: p20cl; The Charles Walker Collection:
p37tc; Images of India/Roderick Johnson: p39; Tim Low:
p!|2tl; Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek: p20tr; Oxford
Scientific Library: G.. Bernard: p|03tl; Sally Birch: p|13tl Deni
Bown: pé0tl, p64tl, p77tl, p8 tl, p! 16tl, p13 Itl, piS3tl, p203tr;
MJ. Coe: p85cla; Jack Dermid: p258cr; Geoff Kidd: p 146tl;
Chris Sharp: p9 I tl; Avril Ramage: p74tl; Photo Researchers
Inc./National Audubon Society/Alvin E. Staffan: p | 45tl;
Photos Horticultural Picture Library: p82tl, p!43t!;
Premaphotos: p|44tl;, Howard Rice: p! |tl; Scala/Duomo
Anagni: p2|b; Science Museum/Adrian Whicher: p | 9br,
p45c; Science Photo Library: Moredun Animal Health Ltd:
p28cl; National Library of Medicine: p26tr; Harry Smith
Collection: p|37tl, p90cla, p96tl, p! | ltl, p236bc; Still Pictures/
Mark Edwards: p | | bl; Tony Stone Worldwide: Jacques
Jangoux: p29tl, p!80c; Wellcome Institute Library, London:
p23br, p50b. 123REcom: Natalia Pauk |27cra; Alamy Images:
Carole Drake |20cla, WILDLIFE GmbH | 20cra, Rezeda
Kostyleva |27crb; Dorling Kindersley: Hampton Court Flower
Show 222bl, RHS Wisley | 85tc, 219bc, 221 bl; Getty Images:
Rosemary Calvert 28tr.

All other images © Dorling Kindersley
For further information see: www.dkimages.com


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: extracted_data.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
AYUSH DIVISION
dare Wes Sat Fea uf

Employees' State Insurance Corporation

Pace Bhawan C.I.G. Me, New Debhi- 11000258
Website: www.esic.nic.in, www.esic.in, www.esichospitals.gov.

| ss [i wwwiacebook.comlesichg (3 @esichq
-------------------------

----- PAGE 2 -----

-------------------------

----- PAGE 3 -----
Ayurveda offering
Herbal healing

as)

4 eaic
i

AYUSH DIVISION

Mra weg Sr Frera

Employees' State Insurance Corporation

Panchdeep Bhawan C.1.G. Marg, New Delhi-110002
Website: www.esic.nic.in, www.esic.in, www.esichospitals.gov.in

[E} ww facebook.com/esichg © @esichg
-------------------------

----- PAGE 4 -----
Copy right: AYUSH DIVISION, ESI Corporation, Head Quarters, Panchdeep Bhawan, C.I.G
Marg, New Delhi

Publisher: ESI Corporation, Head Quarters, Panchdeep Bhawan, C.I.G Marg, New Delhi

Disclaimer: This book entitled "Ayurveda offering Herbal healing” has been prepared
based on calssical texts of Ayurveda, research works and emphasis was given to
incorporate commonly available Medicinal plants which are used in day today clinical
practice. The Ayush Division has taken due care to ensure correctness of contents before
publication and cannot be held responsible for any omission or inadvertent errors, nor
can it warrant that all aspects of the subject have been covered. This book is a ready
recknor for the Ayurvedic physicians and also general public.

Feedback and sugestions are welcome for any correction or improvement to Dy.
Medical Commissioner (AYUSH), ESI Corporation Headquarters, Panchdeep Bhawan,
C.I.G. Marg, New Delhi-110002 and may be by post or by e-mail at dmc-ismhq@esic.in
-------------------------

----- PAGE 5 -----
arthant wa ater Feet

Employees’ State Insurance Corporation

adie Fa, Vane, art, aE Reet - 110 002

Panchdeep Bhawan, C.I.G. Marg, New Delhi-110002
www.esic.nic.in, www.esic.in

SS Foreword x

Ayurveda is the oldest system of Indian medicine. The awareness and demand of this
ancient life science (Ayurveda) is practiced across the country and its principles and
practices emphasize on prevention of diseases and promotion of positive health.

Ayurveda medical system is very effective in prevention & treatment of non -
communicable diseases and life style disorders. There are three types of treatment
modalities in Ayurveda viz shodhana(Panchakarma) therapy, shamana(Palliative)
therapy and nidana parivajana (avoidance of causative factors of the disease) described
by ancient Acharyas in Ayurvedic Classical literature in order to purify the body and
mind, cure the diseases and prevent the diseases, respectively.

ESI Corporation is giving due importance to promote AYUSH systems of medicine in its
hospitals and dispensaries for the benefit of IPs and their family members. AYUSH policy
in ESIC designed in 2015 also promises to expand AYUSH facilities in ES! Hospitals and
dispensaries as per the preference of local population. At present, AYUSH services are
being provided in 293 units across the country and in house panchakarma treatment
facilities are being developed in ES! hospitals.

The Ministry of AYUSH, Govt.of India has decided to celebrate ‘Lord Dhanwantari Jayanti’
as ‘National Ayurveda Day’ every year since 2016. This year, the theme of the day is “Pain
management through Ayurveda”. ESIC is also celebrating this day in all ESI hospitals and
dispensaries through medical camps and awareness activities.

The AYUSH division of ES! Corporation has compiled a book entitled “Ayurveda offering -
Herbal healing” with the details of vernacular names, therapeutic uses of medicinal
plants to help the common public and Ayurveda fraternity. | congratulate the efforts of
the AYUSH division in bringing this valuable book to popularize the AYUSH system

through ESI dispensaries & hospitals.

Raj Kumar, IAS
Director General
-------------------------

----- PAGE 6 -----
Vaidya Devendra Triguna
Receipent of Padmabhushan & Pamashri Award
President All India Ayurvedic Congress
President, Governing Body,

Rashtriya Ayurved Vidyapeeth
Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India, New Delhi

ss Message 7

Itis my immense pleasure to note that AYUSH division of ESI Corporation is bringing out
an important book entitled “Ayurveda offering Herbal healing” with a lucid and
systematic manner for the benefit of common publicas well as Ayurveda fraternity.

Ayurveda is time tested traditional system of health offering the physical, mental,
sensorial, spiritual, social and environmental well being and deals with preventive as well
as curative aspects medicine.

The principles of dinacharya (daily regimen), ritucharya (seasonal regimen) sadvirtta
(positive behavioral regimen) are the mantras for prevention of disease, while the drugs,
diet, do’s and don'ts are the essentials for treatment of disease.

The drugs containing single or multiple ingredients are used in Ayurveda for the
treatment of different diseases based on the need as well as condition of the patient.
Most of the drugs are herbal in origin, used in general practice while minerals and metals
are prescribed in special conditions with at most care under the Ayurvedic expertise
medical supervision. This book describes only herbal remedies for common maladies,
which are very safe and effective, meeting the interest of common public. Simple, single,
and selective combinations, which are easily available in the Indian kitchen, gardens and
local market, are included in this book making it highly appreciable.

The plant figures with useful parts and vernacular names in this book are highly useful
for identification of the plants and its useful parts at large as it covers almost all the
languages in India apart from Sanskrit and scientific name with botanical family.

On this great occasion of 2nd National Ayurveda Day, | congratulate the Director General
and AYUSH division for doing commendable work to promote and propagate AYUSH
facilities in ES! Hospitals and dispensaries and also inculcate innovative activities for
popularizing Ayurveda, Yoga and other AYUSH systems in ESI Corporation.

et

Vaidya Devendra Triguna
-------------------------

----- PAGE 7 -----
dats sas, argo, art, ag fe — 110 002
Panchdeep Bhawan, C..G. Marg, New Delhi-110002
www.esic.nic.in, www.esic.in-

ata wa dtr Fem
@ Employees’ State Insurance Corporation

jm Message py

Awareness of Ayush Systems in India is increasing day by day. Earlier, all the Indian
Systems of Medicine come under one group i.e. ISM, which was under the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. Later, in 2014, all these Indian Systems of Medicines have
been renamed as AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy) under the
separate Ministry i.e. as Ministry of Ayush, Government of India.

Ayurveda System has started in ESIC in 1977 on pilot basis to meet the demand of IPs and
their family members in Delhi in two ESIC Dispensaries. Later on looking into the
importance and acceptance, more units are opened in various hospitals and
dispensaries. With the awareness of traditional medical systems in 2003, the
Homeopathy and Yoga systems are also started in ESIC. Presently, we have 154 Ayurveda
Units, 77 Homeopathy Units, 32 Yoga Units, 27 Siddha Units, 03 Unani Units in total 293
units present in various ESIC and ESIS Hospitals and Dispensaries across the India. In
addition, at present there are 16 Pancha karma units and 4 Kshra sutra units in ESIC and
ESIS.

The Ayush Division of ESIC Head Quarters celebrates International Day of Yoga on 21st
June every year and National Ayurveda Day on the day of Dhanteras every year. During
first National Ayurveda Day AYUSH division has released a book entitled Essential
Ayurvedic Drug list of ESIC. This year also, third international Yoga Day was celebrated by
conducting the yoga competitions and yoga lession among staff of Head Quarters on
21.06.2017 as a part of awareness and promotion or Ayush services.

It is my pleasure to release the book “Ayureda Offering Herbal Healing on the occasion of
2nd National Ayurveda Day at Headquarters Office, ESI Corporation, New Delhi.

Dr. S.L. Vig
Medical Commissioner (AYUSH)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 8 -----
tert ara ater Prev
Employees’ State Insu: Corporation
dade aa, Sse. pee es = 110 002

Panchdeep Bhawan, C..G. Marg, New Delhi-110002
www.esio.nic.in, www.esic.in

Ayurveda, the traditional knowledge of life, is transmitted through a system called Guru
Sishya Parampara (Teacher taught system). The knowledge and experience of Gurus
was recorded by their intelligent disciples in the form of compendium (Samhita). The
Ayurvedic classical texts Charaka Samhita, Susruta Samhita and Kasyapa Samhita are the
best examples, which are the compilation of observations of thousands of years and time
tested experiences.

In ancient times, the Ayurvedic Physicians themselves used to collect the raw materials
and prepare the drugs for their routine practice. The Physicians were well aware of the
identification, selection, collection, processing, and preparation of the drug for a
particular disease, based on the constitution of the patient. Presently, this practice is
obsolete due to industrialization, modernization of the technology, urbanization and
also some environmental factors. Most of Physicians now depend upon the readily
available marketed preparations in their clinical practice. However, there is a need of
recollection, identification features, processing techniques of herbs, which are
commonly used, in Ayurvedic clinical practice, hence this book entitled “Ayurveda
Offering Herbal Healing” is prepared in easy, understandable, and systematic manner.

This book has details of more than hundred herbs, which are easily available and are
commonly used in routine ailments by the Ayurvedic practitioners apart from the
traditional practitioners from generations to generations. The plants and their useful
parts vernacular names, botanical names and therapeutic uses are described in this
book.

| hope this book would be a useful source of information for everyone in preserving
health, preventing and cure their diseases. Further, they may consult the Ayurvedic
physician for better understanding. a

CO hn”
Dr. G. Prabhakara Rao

Dy. Medical Commissioner
Advisor I/C (AYUSH)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 9 -----
Contents

Sr.No. Name of the plant Page No.
‘L Agastya 1
2. Amalaki 2
3. Amruta -phalam 3
4, Apamarga 4
5s Aparajita 5
6. Aragavadha 6
ve Ardraka 7
8. Arishtaka 8
9. Arjuna 9
10. Ashoka 10
The Asthisamharaka 11
12. Asvagandha 12
13. Asvattha 13
14. Atasi 14
15. Atmagupta 15
16. Avartani 16
17. Bhringaraja 17
18. Bhumyamlaki 18
19. Bibhitaka 19
20. Bilva 20
21. Bimbi 21
22. Brahmi 22
23. Changeri 23
24. Chitraka 24
25. Dadima 25
26. Dhanyaka 26
27. Dronapushpi 27
28 Dugdhika 28
29. Durva 29
-------------------------

----- PAGE 10 -----
Sr.No. Name of the plant Page No.

30. Edagaja 30
ot Eranda 31
32; Erandakarkati 32
33. Gokshura 33
34, Guduchi 34
35; Gunja 35
36. Haridra 36
37. Haritaki a7
38. Harita manjari 38
39, Hingu 39
40. Indravalli 40
41, Indravaruni 41
42. Isvari 42
43. Jalapippali 43
44. Jambu 44
45. Japa 45
46. Jatiphala 46
47, Jiraka 47
48. Kadali 48
49. Kalamegha 49
50. Kamala 50
5, Kanchanara 51
52. Karanja 52
53. Karavellaka 53
54. Karpura 54
35: Katuka 55
56. Kharjura 56
57. Khaskhasa 57

58. Krishna musali(talamuli) 58
-------------------------

----- PAGE 11 -----
Sr.No. Name of the plant Page No.

59. Kulanjana (rasna variety) 59
60. Kuluttha 60
61. Kumari 61
62. Kumkuma 62
63. Kutaja 63
64. Lajjalu 64
65. Lashuna 65
66. Lavanga 66
67. Madayanti 67
68. Manjishta 68
69. Maricha 69
70. Masha 70
7s Meshashringi 71
72. Methi 72
73. Mishreya 3
74. Mulaka 74
25: Mundi 75
76. Musta 76
rr Nagakesara 77
78. Nagavalli 78
79. Narikela 79
80. Nimba 80
81. Nirgundi 81
82. Palandu 82
83. Palasha 83
84. Parisha(kapitana) 84
85. Parnabija 85

86. Parnayavani 86
-------------------------

----- PAGE 12 -----
Sr.No. Name of the plant Page No.

87. Pippali 87
88. Punarrnava 88
89. Rajaudumbara 89
90. Sadapushpa 90
91. Sariva 91
92. Sarshapa 92
93. Satavari 93
94 Satyanashi 94
95, Saurabhanimba 95
96. Shigru 96
97. Sukshmaila 97
98. Svetachandana 98
99. Thakkolam 99
100. Tila 100
101. Tulasi 101
102. Tvak 102
103. Tvakpatra 103
104, Vacha 104
105. Vasa 105
106, Vatama 106
107. Yashtimadhu 107
108. Yavani 108
Referances 109-111
Images of First National Ayurveda Day 112-114

at ESIC Head Quarters, New Delhi.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 13 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing a d
Cy

ope he

Vernacular names

Agastya

English West Indian pea, white dragon
Sesbania grandiflora, i August flower, Flamingo
Fabaceae eal,

Hindi : Agastha, Agasti, chogache,
gaach-munga, agathiya,
sadabasna,

Kannada Agase, agache, kempagase,
chogache, agasi, chogachi,

Tamil : Agati

Malayalam : akatti, aagatti, atti, argatti,
akatti, athi, agatti

Telugu : Avisa, Avishi

Oriya : agastee

Gujarati Agathiyo,ayathio,agath-thi-nar

Bengali Bak, Bagphal, Bak, basnapul,

vak, agashi, basna, vasna,

=
>=

1. Worm infestation: Intake of of 3gms of agastya flowers paste

agastya leaves juice 10-20ml in
empty stomach, early morning for
2weeks can expel the intestinal
worms.

. Headache: 2 -3 drops of agastya
leaves juice is used as nasal drops
in the morning to cure sinusitis
and headache.

. Fever: The paste of agastya leaves
can be externally applied over the
body to subside the fever.

. Night Blindness: Administration

processed in ghee recommended
for night blindness.

. Colic: 5 grams of agastya bark

powder is boiled in 100ml of
water till it reduced to 25ml. Oral
administration of this decoction
added with salt and hing relieve
abdominal colic.

. Arthritis: Root and bark paste of

agastya is applied externally to
relieve pain and_ inflammation
associated with arthritis and gout.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 14 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

° Vernacular names
Am a la ki Assamese : Amlaku, Amlakhi, Amlakhu

Emblica officinalis, Euphorbiaceae Banigell : ule, Bet

English : Emblic Myrobalan

Gujrati : Ambala, Amala

Hindi : Amla, Aonla

Kannada: Nellikayi

Kashmiri : Embali, Amli

Malayalam : Nellikka

Marathi =: Anvala, Avalkathi

Oriya : Anala, Ainla

Punjabi : Aula, Amla

Tamil : Nellikkai, Nelli

Telugu : Usirika

Urdu : Amla, Amlaj

1. Prameha (Diabetes) : Intake of
25ml Amalaki juice added with 3
gms of turmeric powder twice
a day before food is useful in 5. Grey hair: External application
prameha, (urinary disorders of the paste of 50gms henna
including Diabetes). leaves, 50gms_ amalaki, 10

Hibiscus flowers over the scalp

and hairs, keep it for 1Ihour before

taking head bath once or twice a

week is beneficial in premature

greying hair.

hot water after food at night.

2. Rejuvenation: Regular intake of
amalaki fruits is recommended
for rejuvenation. In retains vitality,
increases life span, youthfulness
and resistance power.

6. Amlapitta (Acid peptic
disorders): Equal auantity of
Amalaki fruits, shatavari root,
sugar made into fine powder.
Taking 5gms of this mixture along
with ghee and honey in early
morning on empty stomach for

4. Laxative: 10-15 gms of Triphala 40 days is beneficial.

Powder (amalaki, haritaki and
vibhethaki) is used internally with

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

3. Eye diseases: 3 gms of Triphala
churna (amalaki, haritaki and
vibhitaki, along with honey and
ghee is used internally in early
morning on empty stomach,
beneficial for Eye diseases.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 15 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Am ruta-phalam Vernacular names

Psidium guajava, Bengali : Goaachhi, peyara
Myrtaceae Gujarati =: Jamrud, Jamrukh, Peru

English : Trade name: Common Guava

Hindi : Amrood

Kannada _ : Gova, Jamaphala, Perala, Sibi,
Sebehabbu

Malayalam : Pera, Koyya

Marathi : Jamba, Tupkel

Oriya : Bodojamo, Jamo, Julabojamo,
Pijuli

Tamil : Koyya, Segappugoyya,

Sengoyya, Vellaikoyya
Telugu : Jama

powder of guava 5gm with honey

should be given in case of cholera

and vomiting etc.

1. Diarrhoea: The leaves decoction 4 jMouyth Ulcers:
of guava (one fistful of leaves
boiled in 100 ml of water till it
reduced to 25 ml) can be given
twice daily in Diarrhoea.

Guava leaves

decoction can be used externally

for rectal prolapse in children,
and used as gargling for chronic
ulcers and mouth ulcers.

2. Toothache: The leaves guava 5
can be chewed and this paste can
be kept in contact with the teeth
for some time. The antiplaque
properties of guava leaves are
effective in preventing and
treating oral problems.

. Constipation: Guava fruit is
nutritious as well as a good
Laxative. This fruit is good for
Diabetes also.

6. Leucorrhoea: Decoction of
guava leaves is used as a vaginal
and uterine wash, especially in
leucorrhoea.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)

3. Vomiting: The bark or roots
-------------------------

----- PAGE 16 -----
Apamarga

Achyranthes aspera, Amaranthaceae

. Petechial hemorrhage: The
paste red colored apamarga
leaves paste is applied over the
oedematous lesions, inflamed
area and over the petechial parts
of the body. This helps to cure is
discase within 2-3 days.

. Prameha( Diabetes): 3 gram each
of Apamarga seeds and Methi
seeds powder is taken early in the
morning in empty stomach along
with one cup of warm water. This
is very effective against diabetes
and obesity. This decreases the
excessive hunger and thirst.

. Dysmenorrhea: 10gms of whole
plant coarse powder is boiled in
200ml of water and till it reduced
to 50ml. This filtered decoction
consumed 1-2 days prior to

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Bengali Apamg
English Prickly Chaff Flower
Gujrati Aghedo
Hindi Chirchita, Latjira
Kannada Uttarani
Malayalam :  Katalati
Marathi Aghada
Punjabi Puthakanda
Tamil Nayuruvi
Telugu Uttarenu
Urdu Chirchita

4.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

expected date of menstruation
till it stops. This relieves pain and
irregularity of the menses.

Urirary Calculi: 6-8 twigs of
Apamarga soaked in sour
buttermilk (100-200 ml) over
night. Next day morning it is
macerated well, filtered and
consumed. This helps to relieve
chronic dysuria, recurrent UTI,
urinary calculi and gall stones.

Bleeding disorders: 5-10 ml of
leaf juice is mixed with turmeric
powder to made fine paste . This
paste applied over the bleeding
wound to arrest the bleeding
immediately.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 17 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Apa rajita Vernacular names
Assamese : Aparajita
Ciitoria ternatea, Bengali : Aparajita
(ralearasa English : Clitoria

Gujrati > Gokarni
Hindi : Aparajita
Kannada: Girikarnika Balli, Girikarnika
Malayalam : Shankhapushapam
Marathi : Gokarna, Aparajita
Oriya : Aparajita
Punjabi =: Koyal
Tamil : Kakkanam
Telugu : Dintena

thrice daily with honey for
bleeding disorders of uterus.

1, Leucoderma: The leaves paste
of aparajita applied thickly on
the vitiligo patches and expose 5. Conjunctivitis: The flowers of

aparajita are pounded with
cow milk and applied over the

to sunlight. It has to continue for
minimum 1 month to stimulate

melanocytes.

. Filarial swelling: 5Sgms_ of
aparajita root paste should be
given internally twice daily in
filariasis to relieve the swelling.

. Memory Enhancer: The fresh root
paste of aparajita should be given
in a dose of 1-3 grams with ghee
twice daily for increasing memory
and intelligence.

. Menorrhagia: 1 gram of aparajita
flowers powder should be given

closed eyes. It alleviates the
conjunctivitis.

. Toothache: Aparajita root with

black pepper should be kept in
mouth to pecify the toothache.

. Wound: Fine leaves paste of

aparajita should be applied over
the wound is beneficial as it has
antifungal and anti bacterial
properties greatly reduce the
infection and heals the wound
very fast.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 18 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ara avad ha Vernacular names
9g Assamese : Sonaroo
Cassia fistula, Caesalpiniaceae Banigell Sernkle
English Indian Laburnum,
Purging cassia
Gujrati : Garamala, Garamalo
Hindi : Amaltas
Kannada Aragvadha, Kakke, Kakke-gida,
Kakkernara, Kakkedai, Rajataru
Kashmiri Kriyangal Phali
Malayalam : Konna, Kritamalam.
Marathi Bahava, Garamala, Amaltas
Oriya > Sunari
Punjabi Amaltas
Tamil : Sarakonrai, Sarak konnai, Sarak

kondi, Sharakkonrai

1. Eczema: Leaves of aragavadha Telugu : Rela
fine paste applied over the skin Urdu > Khiyar Shambar
lesions once in a day is effective
in curing ring worm infection and
eczema.

2. Worm infestation: 10m! of
aragavadha leaves juice is given

soaked in water overnight . In
the morning ,this water is taken
with little jaggery. This relieves
gaseous distention by 2-3 safe

in empty stomach for 5-6 days
helps to relieve intestinal worms
effectively.

. Constipation: 15-20gms__ of
aragavadha bark powder cooked
in 100ml of water till it reduced
to 1/4th. This decoction is orally
consumed daily once to relieve
constipation, distention of
abdomen and chronic diseases
due to vitiation of blood.

. Purgative: 3-4 inches of the
mature fruit pulp de-seeded and

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

purging.

. Jaundice: A fist full of tender leaf

buds yellow coloured flowers of
aragavadha are taken and soup
is made by adding salt, jaggery
and pepper. This soup is not only
whole some diet and also cures
jaundice.

. Aguesia: Aragavadha pulp is

useful in loss of taste due to
excessive use of cocaine. 25gms
of fruit pulp is mixed with 250ml
of hot milk and used as a mouth
wash regularly is beneficial.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 19 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ardraka

Zingiber officinale,
Zingiberaceae

. Loss of appetite: Eating slices of
ginger sprinkling with salt before
meals. It Stimulates digestion,
add relish and purifies tongue
and throat.

. Diarrhea: A basin is formed
around the umbilicus by the
paste of black gram and amalaki
(Indian gooseberry) . The naval is
filled with fresh ginger juice and
retained for 15 to 20min once
daily till the diarrhea subsides.

. Earache: Prepare the oil with
equal quantity of rocksalt, ginger
juice, honey and mustard oil. Put
2 drops in the ear is very effective
to cure earache.

Vernacular names
Hindiname: Adarakh (fresh)
English Fresh Ginger
Kannada Hasi Shunti, Alla
Telugu : Allamu
Bengali : Ada
Marathi : Aale
Gujarati : Adu
Tamil Inji
Punjabi : Adi, Adrak
Malayalam : Inchi
Urdu Adrak

4.

6.

Vomiting: Mix 1 teaspoonful each
of ginger juice and lemon juice
and consume it several times a
day as per the condition.

Cholera: Mix 2 teaspoonful
of grated fresh ginger with
lteaspoonful of honey and

consume this mixture 4 times
a day to improve digestion in
cholera.

Urticaria: Take 10ml fresh ginger
juice with old jaggery twice daily
before food till the reduction of
swelling and itching.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 20 -----
Arishtaka

Sapindus mukorossi,
Sapindaceae

. Menstrual pain (Dysmenorrhea):
The seed of arishtaka (soap nut)
has a small white or greenish
yellow marrow. 5 seeds marrow
paste is administered along with 2
teaspoonful of sesame oil in case
of abdominal pain and menstrual
pain.

. Food poisoning: 5 seeds are
crushed and soaked in 1 litre
of water. This water is given to
drink in the individuals who
are poisoned (internally). This
induces vomiting and hence the
poisonous effects are reduced.

. Distention of abdomen: The
paste of soapnut seed marrow
500-600 mg of is mixed with
jaggery and administered
internally twice a day.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Aritha
English Indian soapnut
Hindi Risht,Rishtak
Marathi Phenil,Rinthi,Ritha
Tamil Punalai, Punthi, Puvanti
Malayalam : Cavakkaay,Pasakkottamaram,
uruvanchi
Telugu Kunkuduchettu,Phenilam
Kannada Amtalakaayi, Norekaayi,
togate mara
Bengali Ritha
Urdu Phenil
4. Wound: 20gms of fresh bark of

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

arishtaka is boiled with 200ml of
water till it reduced to 1/4th. This
decoction is used to wash the
wounds. The same decoction is
used for washing gangrene and
get rid of slough, which quickens
healing process.

Eczema: 50 grams of soapnut
fresh leaf paste cooked well
with 100 ml of sesame oil till
the evaporation of moisture.
This oil is used to apply over the
eczematous lesions.

Herpes: 100ml of Fresh Soapnut
juice in 200ml of ghee is cooked
well till complete evaporation
of water content. This ghee is
applied over the lesions of herpes
and chronic itch.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 21 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv
(f&
Hwee)

Ot ep are
Ari una Vernacular names
J Assamese : Arjun

Terminalia arjuna, Combretaceae Bengali : Arjuna
English : Arjun tree, Arjunolis myrobalan.
Gujrati : Sadad, Arjuna, Sajada
Hindi : Arjuna
Kannada: Matti, Bilimatti, Neermatti,

Mathichakke, Kudare Kivimase

Malayalam : Nirmasuthu, Vellamaruthi,
Kellemasuthu, Mattimora,

Torematti
Marathi : Arjuna, Sadada
Oriya : Arjuna
Punjabi : Arjon
CS | sarudam
1. Heart tonic: 5gms of arjuna bark Telugu =: Maddi
powder boiled in 100ml of milk till Urdu : Arjun

it reduce to 50ml . Taking orally
this Arjuna milk daily at bed time
is very useful in heart discases.

washed after 30 minutes. This

2. Osteoporosis: 10 grams o' improves shining and quality of
arjuna bark powder is boiled in hair.
200ml of water till it reduced to 4
% th and filtered. This decoction
is consumed along with half
a teaspoonful of jaggery and
A teaspoonful of honey. This 5. Peripheral neuritis: Equal

. Wound: Dusting the arjuna bark
powder over the wounds/ulcers,is
beneficial in fast healing.

is useful for the treatment o quantity of Arjuna, Asana
osteoporosis and fatigue caused (Pterocarpus marsupium) and
during old age. Bilva  (bael tree) barks fine

powders mixed well. 3 gms_ of
this mixture is given in empty
stomach along witha cup of water
for the treatment of peripheral
neuritis or numbness.

3. Hair fall: Mature green leaves o
Arjuna are soaked in water for 2-3
hours and macerated well with
hands. It yields a mucilagenous
mix. It is used for washing the
hairs. It is applied over scalp and

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 22 -----
Ashoka

Saraca indica, Fabaceae

. Menorrhagia: 10 grams of
Ashoka bark is boiled in 200ml of
water till it reduced nto % th . This
filtered decoction is administered
orally twice daily before food. If
required, a teaspoon of honey
or jaggery can be added to this.
It subsides excessive bleeding
during menses.

. Irregular periods: Equal quantity
of Ashoka, Yashtimadhu, Lajjalu
powders are taken. 10gms of
this mixure boiled in 200ml of
water till it reduced to % th . This
filtered decoction consumed 3-5
days prior to the date of periods
and continued till 10 days after
periods twice daily.

. Wound: Ashoka bark decoction is
prepared and used for washing

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Ashoka
Bengali : Ashoka
English : Asok Tree
Gujrati : Ashoka
Hindi : Ashoka
Kannada : Ashokadamara, Ashokamara,
Kankalimara
Kashmiri : Ashok
Malayalam : Asokam
Marathi : Ashok
Oriya : Ashoka
Punjabi : Asok
Tamil : Asogam, Asogu, Asokam
Telugu : Ashokapatta

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

. Mouth ulcers:

the wounds and non healing
ulcers.

One fistfull of
Ashoka flowers and half fist of
coconut pulp are taken and
churned well in mixer grinder.
To this, as per taste, salt, black
pepper, curry leaves and coriander
can be added. This recipe is very
useful in treating gastritis, mouth
ulcers, GERD.

Leucorrhoea: Equal quantity of
Ashoka bark, Amalaki fruit and
Nagakesar powders are mixed
well. 1-2 gram of this powder is
mixed with a cup of rice washed
with water or sweet buttermilk
and administered twice daily.
This pacifies leucorrhea very
effectively.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 23 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Asthisamharaka Vernacular names

Assamese : Harjara

Cissus quadrangularis, Bengali: Hadajora

Vitaceae . |
English Eldt grape, devil's backbone,
adamant creeper

Gujarati : Hadasankala
Hindi : Hadjod
Kannada: Mangaraballi
Malayalam : Changalam Parande
Marati : Kandvel
Oriya : Hadbhanga
Punjabi : Haddjor
Tamil : Perandai
Telugu > Nalleru
Urdu :_ Hathjod

1. Fracture: The stem of
asthisamharaka is used tO 4 Bone fractures: The dried root

bandage the part of fracture.The powder of asthisamharaka can
oil prepared from juice of this be given in dose of 1-3 gm twice
plant and gingerly oil (1:4 Plant daily and this can also be applied
Juice : Gingerly Oil)is externally externally after mixing with hot
applied over fractured part. The water for bone fracture.

dried root powder can be given . . ;
in dose of 1-3 gm twice daily and 5: Indigestion: Equal quantity

this can also be applied externally of asthisamharaka leaves, dry

after mixing with hot water for ginger, black pepper are made

bone fracture. into fine powder and mixed

. together. 5gms of this powder

2. Irregular menstruation: 15-20m| should be given along with warm

ofasthisamharakastemandleaves water twice daily before food to
juice along with honey twice treat indigestion.

daily for 3 months is beneficial for

irregular menstruation. 6. Joint pains: Asthisamharaka stem

is fried in ghee and administered

3. Earache: Heating the stem in little in dose of 10-15 gms with milk
flame, extracting the juice and for the treatment of fractures and
using it as ear drops. Instillation of also osteo arthritis.

2-3 drops can be cured earache.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 24 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Asvagandha Vernacular names
Assamese : Ashvagandha
Withania somnifera, Solanaceae Bengali Ashvagandha
English : Indian ginseng, Winter Cherry
Gujrati : Asgandha
Hindi : Asgandh
Kannada Angarberu, Hiremaddina-gida
Kashmiri Asagandh
Malayalam : Amukkuram
Marathi Asagandha, Askagandha
Oriya : Aswagandha
Punjabi Asgandh
|MedicinalUses Tamil Amukkaramkizangu
1, Rejuvenation:SgmsAshwagandha _ Telugu Pennerugadda
powder is cooked with 200 ml of — Urdu Asgand

milk till it reduced to 100ml. This
is filtered and consumed when
it is lukewarm. This promotes
the vigor and is an established

powder is consumed twice daily
with milk before food to relieve

rejuvenator.

. Geriatric tiredness : Equal
quantity of fine powders
of Ashwagandha, Kapikacchu and
black sesame seeds are mixed
thoroughly. It is administered
in a dose of 5 grams, with a cup
of warm milk is useful to relieve
tiredness, fatigue and geriatric
problems such as arthritis.

. Allergic rhinitis: Equal quantity
of Turmeric, Ginger and
Ashwagandha powders are
mixed well. 5 grams of this

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

allergic rhinitis.

. Oligospermia: Regular intake of

5 grams of Ashwagandha root
powder mixed with honey and
ghee twice daily is helpful to
relieve the senile debility and
seminal disorders especially
oligospermia.

. Insomnia: 5gms of Ashwagandha

root powder mixed in a cup of
milk with sugar bed time regularly
is beneficial in case of insomnia.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 25 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Asvattha

Ficus religiosa,
Moraceae

1. Wound: 50 gram of peepal stem
bark is boiled in 400 ml water till it
reduces to 100 ml. This lukewarm
decoction is used to wash the
wounds . This is helpful in infected
as well as non infected wounds
and it facilitates quick healing.
The root bark fine powder of
Asvattha is used for dusting over
the oozing skin lesions to stop
secretion.

2. Mouth ulcer: 5-6 tender shoots
paste of Asvattha is retained
in the mouth and chewing for
5-10 minutes is helps to relieve
stomatitis.

3. Hyper Pigmentation: Early morning
fresh latex of Asvattha is collected
andis applied overthe skin lesions.

VAY)

Cd

Vernacular names

Assamese : Ahant

Bengali : Asvattha, Ashud, Ashvattha

English Pipal tree

Gujrati Piplo, Jari, Piparo, Pipalo

Hindi Pipala, Pipal

Kannada : Arlo, Ranji, Basri, Ashvatthanara,
Ashwatha, Aralimara, Aralegida,
Ashvathamara, Basari, Ashvattha

Kashmiri : Bad

Malayalam : Arayal

Marathi Pipal, Pimpal, Pippal

Oriya : Aswatha

Punjabi Pipal, Pippal

Tamil : Ashwarthan, Arasamaram,
Arasan, Arasu, Arara

Telugu Ravichettu

This relieves hyper pigmentation
as well as discoloration of the
face.

4, Leucorrhoea: 2 ml of fresh latex

is added to 100m! of milk and
taken early in the morning in
empty stomach. This pacifies
long persisting non specific
leucorrhoea by 20-30 days
medication.

5. Colic: Internal administration of

50m! decoction of root bark of
Asvatta (10gms of bark powder
is boiled in 200ml of water till it
reduced to 50ml) added with salt
and jaggery twice daily, alleviates
severe colic.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 26 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

At a si Vernacular names

Assamese :  Tisi, Tusi

Linum usitatissimum, Linaceae Bengali Masina, Atasi
English Linseed
Gujrati Alshi, Arasi
Hindi Alsi
Kannada Agasebeeja, Semeagare, Agasi
Kashmiri Alsi
Malayalam : Agastha, Agasi, Cheru charm
Marathi =: Atshi
Oriya Atushi
Punjabi Ali
Tamil Ali, Virai
Telugu Avisa
Urdu Alsi, Katan

1. Dysuria: 5gms of Atasi seeds are
soaked in a 100ml of hot water for

overnight. Next day morning, itis 4. Wasp sting: Fresh, mature flax

macerated well and filtered. This leaves are crushed to obtain fresh

is consumed before food for the
treatment of burning urination.

. Dyslipidaemia: Early in the
morning 2-3 ml linseed oil is
added to a cup of warm water
and taken in empty stomach.
This helps to reduce the total
cholesterol, and also beneficial in
obesity.

. Lactation: Equal quantity of
Linseed, cumin seeds and
fenugreek seeds are made into
fine powder . This mixer is taken
twice a day in the dose of 5 gram
along with milk. This improves
lactation.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

juice. In case of emergency, as a
first aid this juice is applied over
the wasp sting area. This quickly
relieves burning sensation and
pain.

. Throat pain: Fine paste of 2-3

fresh flowers of atasi is applied
around the throat. This pacifies
throat pain.

. Arthritis: One fist full of seeds are

soaked in sour buttermilk through
out the night. Next day morning,
made into fine paste and applied
over the joints. This relieves joint
pain by one or two weeks.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 27 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

S

opeye tre
Atmagupta Vernacular names
Assam : Banar Kakua
(Ka pikacch u) English  : Cowhage
Mucuna prurita, Fabaceae Gujarati : Kavach, Kaucha
Hindi : Kewanch, Kaunch
Kannada: Nasugunne, Nasugunnee
Malayalam : Naikuruna
Marati : Khajkuhilee, Kavach
Oriya : Baikhujnee
Punjabi =: Tatgajuli, Kawach
Tamil : Poonaikkali
Telugu : Doolagondi, Duradagondi
Urdu : Kanwach, Konch

water and reduced to 50 ml. Oral

1. Venereal Diseases: Internal intake of this decoction twice

administration of 3gms_ of daily beneficial in dysuria.
atmagupta seed powder boiled 4
in 100 ml of cow’s milk with
sufficient sugar twice daily to
cure venereal diseases.

. Kampavata(Parkinson’s
disease): 5gms of Kapikacchu
churnam cooked in milk for
5-10 min in low flame. Take this

2. Sciatica: 5gms of atmagupta root milk by adding sugar and one
powder boiled in 200 ml of water teaspoon Ghee twice a day to
and reduced it into 50ml. Drinking cure Parkinsonism and Male
this filtered decoction twice daily Infertility.
for a month in Sciatica . 6. Filarial swelling (Sleepada):

3. Dysuria:Atmagupta(Kapikacchu), Regular application of atmagupta
Shatavari and Gokshura powders root paste externally over the
are taken equal quantity. 10 gms affected region will reduce the
of this mixture boiled in 200ml of swelling.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 28 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Avartani Vernacular names

English : Indian screw tree
Helicteres isora, — .
Sterculiaceae Hindi : Marod phali
Tamil : Valipiri
Telugu : Nunidala guba tasa,
guvardara
Gujarati : Maradasing
Urdu : Murmuriya

Malayalam :  Isvaramuri
Bangali : Antmora

Kannada: Peda muri

4. Eczema: External application of
the Leaves Paste is effective for
various skin ailments like scabies,
eczema etc.

1. Earache: The crushed pods of
avartani added with gingerly oil
and boiled . The prepared oil is
used as ear drops(2 - 3 drops) for 5. Colic: 3-6grams of fruit powder
pricking pain in ears and other ear of avartani with warm water
ailments. twice daily is useful in colic. The

fruits give an imagination about

intestines. The fruits are twisted,
hence they are useful in twitching
pain of abdomen.

2. Hiccup: 4 - 6 grams of avartani
pod powder with honey 2 times
a day is useful in cases of hiccup,
fever etc.

6. Scabies: The root paste is applied

3. Diarrhea: 5 gms of crushed bark topically for Scabies.

& pod of avartani is boiled in
100ml of water and reduced to
25ml . This decoction is given for
diarrhea twice or thrice daily.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 29 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Bhringaraja

Eclipta alba,
Asteraceae

. Throatirritation: 5 grams of dried
bhringaraja powder is mixed with
honey and licked. This is effective
in the treatment of cold, cough,
throat irritation, anaemia, asthma
etc.

. Liver disorders: Fresh juice
bringaraja 10-15 ml is taken
early in the morning preferably
in the empty stomach for 7-12
days helps significantly in the
treatment of liver disorders and
obstructive jaundice.

. Male infertility: 3 grams seeds or
seed powder is soaked in sugar
water for half an hour and taken
daily in the morning and evening.
This helps to improve the sexual
vigour and promotes the sperm
count.

Vernacular names
Assamese : Bhrngaraja
Bengali Bheemraja, Kesuriya, Kesari
English Trailing Eclipta, Thistles,
False Daisy
Gujrati Bhangaro, Bhangro
Hindi Bhangara, Bhangaraiya
Kannada Garujalu, Gurugada, Soppu,
Keshavardhana, Kodigaraju
Malayalam : Kayyonni, Knnunni
Marathi Bhangra, Bhringiraja, Maka
Punjabi Bhangra
Tamil Karisalankanni, Karisalanganni,
Karisalai
Telugu Guntakalagara, Guntagalagara
Urdu Bhangra
4. Chronic skin diseases: Daily

5.

6.

intake of 5gms of bringaraj in
one cup of water and made this
decoction is consumed twice
daily. This has good benefit over
the steroid resistant skin diseases
and in psoriasis.

Hair care: 25 gram of Bhringaraja
paste, 100 ml of sesame or
coconutoiland400 ml Bhringaraja
decoction or 200 ml of fresh juice
are taken and oil is cooked. This is
effective in dandruff, hair fall and
premature greying of hair.

Rejuvenation: Intake of powder
of bringaraja leaves, black
sesamum, amalaki and sugar in
equal quantity acts as a Rasayana.
(Immuno modulator).

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 30 -----
Bhumyamlaki

Phyllanthus niruri,
Euphorbiaceae

. Jaundice: The juice of whole
plant of bhumyamlaki is given in
the dose of 10-20ml three times
daily. It cures inflammation of
the liver. The extract of the whole
plant is used to cure Hepatitis A,
Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C.

. Leucorrhoea: The juice of
whole plant of bhumyamlaki
in the dose of 20-30ml in early
morning should be administered
once daily in case of leucorrhoa,
menorrhagia, and other urinary
disorders.

. Diabetes: 10gms of whole plant
of bhumyamlaki paste boiled
in 100 ml of water till it reduced

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Bhuin Amla
Bengali Bhumamla, Bhumi amalaki
English Country gooseberry
Gujrati : Bhoi Amali, Bhony amari,
Bhonyamali
Hindi Jangliamli, Hazardana, Jaramala,
Bhui amla
Kannada: Nelanelli
Kashmiri Kath
Malayalam : Kizanelli, Keezhanelli, Ajjhada
Marathi Bhuiawali
Oriya Bhuin Amla
Punjabi Lodhar
Tamil Kizhukai nelli, Kizanelli
Telugu Nela usirika

4.

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

to 25ml. Administration of this
decoction orally twice a day is
very effective in diabetes.

Mouth Ulcers: The decoction
prepared from leaves and roots of
bhumyamlaki is used for gargling
for aphthous ulcers.

Renal calculi: Regular intake of
20ml of bhumyamlaki whole
plant juice daily once is very
effective in breaking the stones.

. Wound: The whole plant paste

of bhumyamlaki prepared along
with rice gruel should be applied
locally for healing of ulcers and
wounds.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 31 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing @

opt ap fore
Bibhita ka Vernacular names

Assamese : Bhomora, Bhomra, Bhaira

Terminalia belerica, Bengali Bayada, Baheda
Combretaceae .

English  : Beleric Myrobalan

Gujrati : Bahedan

Hindi : Bahera

Kannada: Tare kai, Shanti Kayi

Kashmiri Babelo, Balali

Malayalam : Tannikka

Marathi Baheda

Oriya : Baheda

Punjabi : Bahera

Tamil : Thanrikkai

Telugu : Thanikkaya

Urdu : Bahera

. Mouth ulcers: 10 gms coarse
powder of Bibhitaka stem bark
in one cup of water made a
decoction is used for gargling in
case of mouth ulcers.

. Bleeding wound: The fruit rind is
made into fine paste and applied
over the bleeding spots. This
helps to arrest bleeding in wound
instantly.

. Grey hair: The seed marrow into
fine paste 50 gram, 200 ml sesame
oil is added and exposure to
sunshine for 10-12 days. Later it is

filtered and stored in glass bottle.
This oil is applied to the base of
the scalp in case of premature
graying of hairs .

. Cough: 10gms vibithaki powder

with honey taken after meals
alleviates cough and dyspnoea.

. Urinary calculus: 5gms of seed

powder of bibhitaki taken with
cup of radish juice removes
defects of urine and eliminates
calculus.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 32 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Bil Vernacular names
I va Assamese : Bael, Vael
Aegle marmelos, Rutaceae Bengalis Bela, Bilva
English : Bengal Quince, Bael fruit
Gujrati : Bill, Bilum, Bilvaphal
Hindi : Bela, Sriphal, Bel
Kannada _ : Bilva
Kashmiri : Bel
Malayalam : Koovalam
Marathi : Bel, Baela
Oriya : Bela
Punjabi: Bil
Tamil : Vilvam
Telugu : Maredu
Urdu : Bel

1. Prameha(Diabetes): Take 15ml
of leaf juice once in a day before
food to manage diabetes and and indigestion.
reduce excess urination.

5. Chronic diarrhea: Dry the slices

2. Intestinal worms: 5 grams o of an unripe bilva fruit in sun and
dried and powdered pulp of the grind them into powder. intake
bilva fruit with butter milk should of 5gms of this powder along
be administered twice a day with warm water 2 times a day is
for one week for elimination o useful.

initial reads 6. Jaundice: Administration of

3. Piles: Crush an unripe bilva fruit, 3gms of black pepper in a 15ml
3gms of dried ginger and 3gms o} of bilva leaves juice followed by
fennel soak this mixture in 200ml butter milk twice or thrice a day
of Hot water over night. Consume in beneficial in Jaundice.

this water in dose of 50ml 3 to 4

. . 7. Mouth ulcers: Consume the
times a day to heal piles.

mixture of a 20ml of bilva fruit

4. Constipation: Intake of 5gms o pulp and a teaspoon of sugar
bilva fruit pulp mixed in a glass o' in the morning on an empty
butter milk or warm water twice stomach for 3 days. It heals
a day to get relief from irritable stomach and mouth ulcers.

bowel syndrome, constipation

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 33 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Bim bi Vernacular names
Assam : Kawabhaturi
Coccinia indica, Cucurbitaceae Bengli : Bimbu, Telakucha
English : Ivy-Gourd
Gujarati =: Kadavighilodi, Ghilodi
Hindi : Kundaruki-Bel
Kannad : Tonde-Balli

Malayalam : Kova, Nallakova

Marati : Tondale

Oriya : Pitakundii, Kainchikakudi
Punjabi > Kanduri

Tamil : Kovai

Telugu : Donda Tiga

Urdu > Kunduru

1. Fever: The leaf paste of bimbi is
applied externally over the body
in order to induce perspiration in
fever.

bimbi root juice twice a day
before food is useful to control
sugar lavels in diabetes. It can also
be administered as a adjuvant for

2. Scabies: Fistful of leaves are medicines of diabetes.
soaked in 100 ml of coconut oil 5
and placed in the sun for three
days. This oil is applied over
fungal infections in order to get
the relief in itching and scabies.

. Worm Infestation: Intake of 10
ml of Bimbi Juice early morning
on empty stomach for one week
relieves intestinal worms.

6. Bed Wetting: Internal
administration of 3-5 gms of
bimbi root paste daily is useful
to control bed wetting in young

4. Prameha(Diabetes): 15 ml of children.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)

3. Mouth Ulcers: Raw tender fruits
chewing regularly is beneficial to
heal mouth ulcers.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 34 -----
Brahmi

Bacopa monnieri,
Scrophulariaceae

. Insomnia: Take 3 gm of Brahmi
powder with 100ml of cow's milk
at bed time. It cures sleeplessness.

. Memory Boster: Take 1 part of dry
Brahmi, 1 part almonds as well as
1/4th part of black pepper. Grind
all of them in water and prepare
tablets of 3 gm each. Give 1 tablet
twice daily with milk. It increases
the memory power and intellect.

. Acne: Mash few leaves of Brahmi
along with lemon juice and
turmeric powder. Make the paste
and apply on face, once per week.
It erases all of the scars and acne.

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Brahmi
English : Thyme Leaved Gratiola
Gujrati Neerbrahmi, Bamanevari
Hindi > Manduka Parni
Kannada: Nirubrahmi, Valabrahmi,
Ondelaga, Mandukaparni
Malayalam : Bhahmi
Marathi : Jalnam, Brahmi, Birami
Oriya Brahmi
Punjabi Brahmibuti
Tamil Nirabrahmi, Brahmi vazhukkai
Telugu : Sambarenu, Sambrani
Urdu Brahmi
4. Anxiety: Grind 3 gm Brahmi along
with few black pepper in water.

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

Strain the solution and provide
this to the patient 3-4 times a day.
It cures long-term headache and
also decreases anxiety.

Hair fall: Brahmi oil massaged on
the scalp promotes hair growth
and also good for the brain, the
nervous system, and also the
mind.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 35 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

€

ope a qh tre
Ch an eri Vernacular names
g Assamese : Chengeritenga
Oxalis corniculata, Bengali : Amrul
Qhettenasee English : Indian Sorrel
Gujarati : Ambolee, Changeri, Teen
Panaki, Rukhadi
Hindi : Tinpatiya, Changeri, Ambilosa
Kannada: Pullamouradi, Sivargee,
Purachi Soppu
Malayalam :  Pulliparel
Marati : Ambutee, Ambatee, Ambti,
Bhui Sarpati
Punjabi : Khatkal, Khattibootee,
Khatmittha
Tamil : Puliyarai
Telugu : Pulichinta
Urdu : Changeri, Teen Patiya

1. Diarrhoea: 15-25ml of leaves
juice of changeri is administered
twice daily bloody diarrhoea,
prolapse of rectum etc. It can
also be administered along with
butter milk for better results.

4. Warts: Equal quantity of changeri
leaves juice and onion juice
is mixed and applied in the
areas of wart and molluscum

contagiosum. The daily use of this
2. Painful swelling: Luke warm will show good results.

leaves paste of changeri used
as an external application in
the painful swelling or any
inflammation. This will provide a
cooling effect to these areas and 6. Hyperemesis gravidarum:
reduce the symptoms. External application of chutney
prepared from the  changeri
leaves, ground coconut, salt and
lemon juice can give relief this
condition.

5. Headache: Fine leaves paste of
changeriis applied externally over
forehead is useful in headache.

3. Fever: 10gms of changeri whole
plant paste boiled in 100ml of
water till it reduced to 25ml.
The decoction is taken internally
twice daily in case of fever.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 36 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ch itra ka Vernacular names

Assamese : Agiyachit, Agnachit

Plumbago zeylanica, Bengali : Chita
Plumbaginaceae .
English : Lead war
Gujrati : Chitrakmula
Hindi : Chira, Chitra
Kannada: Chitramula, Vahni,

Bilichitramoola
Kashmiri : Chitra, Shatranja

Malayalam : Vellakeduveli, Thumpokkoduveli

Marathi : Chitraka

Oriya : Chitamula, Chitoparu
Punjabi : Chitra

Tamil : Chitramoolam, Kodiveli
Telugu : Chitramulam

Urdu : Sheetraj Hindi, Cheetah

1. Piles: Chitraka root powder is 4: Indigestion: 2gms of Chitramoola
with 2 gms of dry ginger should
be taken twice daily with butter
milk in case of indigestion.

taken in dose of 2 gms with
butter milk thrice a day.

2. Lymphadenitis: A paste of
Chitraka roots and gingelly oil is
used as an external application for
pile mass, cervical lymphadinitis,

5. Obesity: Administration — of
3gms of Chitraka root powder
with honey and keeping on
wholesome diet for 3 months is

and inguinal lymphadinitis. useful in reducing Obesity.

3. Scabies: Chitraka mula tailam is 6, Diarrhoea: Intake of 2 gms of
helpful external remedy in skin Chitraka powder and 2gms of
infections like scabies, carbuncles, pippali powder with Buttermilk
and ulcers. beneficial in Diarrhoea.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 37 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

abe
D a d i ma Vernacular names
Bengali : Ddima
Punica granatum, .
Lythraceae English : Pomegranate
Gujrati : Dadama
Hindi : Anar
Kannada : Dalimba
Malayalam : Matalam
Marathi : Dadimba
Punjabi =: Anar
Tamil : Madalai, Maadalai. Madalam
Telugu : Danimma
Urdu : Anar, Rumman
1. Intrinsic Hemorrhage: = Two for eliminating white heads and
teaspoonful of dadima flowers black heads.
mixed with goat's milk and sugar
twice daily is beneficial. 4. Increase sperm count: Drink 1
glass of pomegranate juice daily
2. Piles: Dry the peel of a sweet to increase the sperm count and
pomegranate and make a fine motility .

powder. Take five grams of this . ,
powder twice a day regularly 5 Diarrhea: 3 grms of fruit peel

with butter milk inorder to get powder along with butter milk

the relief from piles. with one teaspoonful cumin

seeds powder twice a day is

3. Acne: Water boiled — with beneficial in diarrhea especially
pomegranate fruit peels should Irritable bowel syndrome.

be used to wash the face for Acne.

Powdered pomegranate skin ©. Intestinal worms: Eat 150 gms of
should be combined with rose pomegranate seeds on an empty
water or lemon juice and applied stomach every morning.

like a face pack for calming

pimples, boils, acne as well as

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 38 -----
f Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing
( o/

Dha nya ka Vernacular names

Assamese : Dhaniya

Coriandrum sativum, Bengali Dhane, Dhania

Apiaceae . ; .

English : Coriander fruit
Gujrati Dhana
Hindi : Dhaniya
Kannada Havija, Kothambari bija
Kashmiri Dhaniwal, Dhanawal
Malayalam : Malli, Kothampatayari
Marathi Dhane, Kothimbir
Oriya Dhania
Punjabi Dhania
Tamil : Kottamatli virai, Dhaniya
Telugu : Dhaniyalu
Urdu : Kishneez

1. Baldness: Regular application of
fresh pulp of Coriander(Dhaniya)
on bald areas regularly can cure 4. Menstrual cramps: 20gms_ of
the problem of baldness. Coriander seeds boiled in 100ml

of water and reduced to 1/4th

2. Indigestion: Equal quantity of and administered twice daily is
Coriander seeds, Black pepper, beneficial in menustral cramps.
Cumin powder and rock Salt (as
per taste) powders are mixed well.
This can consume along with rice
helps in stimulating appetite and
easy digestion.

5. Thirst: Mix 10gms of Coriander
powder in hot water. Cool and
have this drink to satisfy excessive
thirst.

6. Fever: Mix 20gms of coriander
seeds powder in 100ml of Hot
water. Consume this water along

for 2 to 3 times a day, will get with sugar twice daily. It is useful
relief from mouth ulcers. to pecify the fever.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

3. Mouth ulcers: Paste of Coriander
leaves apply on to mouth ulcer
-------------------------

----- PAGE 39 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Dronapushpi Vernacular names
henean ezehpetores Assamese : Dronaphool
Lamiaceae Bengali Bholghasiya
English : Spider wort
Gujrati : Kubo
Hindi : Guma
Kannada : Tumbe
Malayalam : Tumba
Marathi : Tumba
Oriya : Gaisha
Punjabi : Gomobati, Gumma, Mal-bheda
Tamil > Tumbai
Telugu > Tummi

4. Headache: The oil prepared from
dronapushpi flowers should be
applied externally in headache,
sinusitis etc.

1. Nasal congestion: The whole
plant of dronapushpi is crushed
and boiled in water. The steam
is used for inhalation in nasal
congestion, cough, cold, fever
and headache etc.

5. Intestinal worms: In children,
5-10 ml juice extracted from the
flowers of dronapushpi and the
paste of dronapushpi leaves are
given internally 1-2gms once a
day for 10-15 days.

2. Sinusitis: 3-5 drops of
dronapushpi flowers juice is used

as nasal drops in order to get the
relief from sinusitis. 6. Scorpion bite: The constant

rubbing of dronapushpi leaves

3. Eye fatigue: The flowers of paste over bitten skin region

dronapushpi are soaked in breast
milk and then applied over closed
eyes is beneficial in eye fatigue.

can provide relief from pain and
burning wasp bite, scorpion bite
other insect bites.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 40 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

spree
Du g d h i ka Vernacular names
Euphorbia hirta, Bengali : Barakherui
Euphorbiaceae English : Asthma weed
Gujarati : Dudhelo, Dudeli, Dudhi
Hindi : Dudhi, Badi dudhdi

1. Wound: Paste of Dugdhika leaves >.
and tulasi should be applied
externally to cure swellings and
ulcers.

2. Warts: The milky extract of
dugdhika is applied regularly to
cure warts. 6

3. Leucorrhoea: The paste of the
leaves 5- 10 gms_is given orally
along with butter milk twice daily
is useful in leucorrhoea.

4. Laxative: The leaves can be
prepared as chutney and taken

Malayalam : Nelapalai

Marati : Mothi dudhi, Naayato, Dudhi,
Dudali, Mothi naayati

Oriya : Dudili, Dudoli

Punjabi > Dudhi

Tamil : Ammanpatchaiarisi

Telugu : Reddivarinanubalu, Nanubalu

along with food. This acts as a
Laxative and Coolant.

Dengue fever: 10gms of leaves
paste of dugdhika boiled in 100
ml of water till it reduced to
25 ml. This Decoction is taken
twice daily is very effective herb
to increase platelets and cure
dengue fever.

. Lactation: Administration of

10gms of leaves paste of dugdhika
early in the morning regularly
promots the milk production in
lactating mothers.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 41 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Du rva Vernacular names
Bengli : Durva
Cynodon dactylon, Poaceae English : Creeping Cynodon, Conch Grass
Gujarati : Khadodhro, Lilidhro, Dhro
Hindi : Doob
Kannada: Garike Hullu

Malayalam : Koruka Pullu

Marati : Doorva, Hariyalee, Harlee
Punjabi : Dubada

Tamil > Aruvam Pullu

Telugu : Garika, Pacchgaddi

Urdu : Doob Ghas, Doob

fresh Juice of Durva with one
cup of milk is administered
once or twice a day before
food is beneficial in gastritis,
hyperacidity, gastric ulcer and
heart burn.

1. Obesity: A fistful of whole plant
of Durva washed thoroughly
and is crushed and fresh juice
is obtained. This is administered
internally in the dose of 5-10 ml
two to three times a day.

5. Nasal bleeding: Administration
of 2-5 drops fresh juice of durva
grass and ghee to each nostril is
useful to stop nasal bleeding.

2. Headache: 10 gms of Durva grass
powder boiled in 200ml of water
till it reduced to % th . Drinking
this filtered decoction along
with half a teaspoon of sugar 6. Piles: 10 gms of Durva grass paste
or jaggery twice a day relieves is boiled in 100mI of water till it
headache, debility and lethargy. reduced to 50ml and consumed

3. Dandruff: 25 gram of durva grass ls Ket ARS es

paste in 100 ml sesame oil cooked = 7, As Blood Purifier: The decoction

till the moisture evaporated. This prepared from one fistful of durva
is filtered and stored. This oil is grass, 3 betel leaves and 3gms
very much useful in itching skin of black pepper is an excellent
lesions, dandruff, eczema etc blood purifier.

4. Acid peptic disorders: 10 ml of

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 42 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ed a g a j a Vernacular names
English : Candle bush, Ringworm shrub,
Cassia alata, Hindi Dadmurdan , Prapunnad
Caesalpiniaceae | ; ;

Tamil : Seemaiagathi

Malayalam : Simayakatti, Malamtakara,
Aanattakara

Kannada Sime Agase

Marathi Shimai Agase

Telugu : Avicicettu, Metta-tamara, Siima
Avise

Urdu : Ergaj

=
=

wash the hair with mild herbal
shampoo to cure dendruff.

4. Wound: The paste of edagaja
leaves and bark — external
application heals the wounds
very effectively.

infection: External

1. Fungal
application of the paste of
edagaja leaves over the affected
areas is very effective in reducing
Ringworm infections. 5. Constipation: 3- 5gms of edagaja

flowers powder taken with

. Foot crack: Edagaja leaves paste
prepared by adding coconut oil
or sesame oil applied externally
over affected area is very good
remedy to heel foot cracks.

. Dandruff: The leaves of edagaja
ground with lemon juice and
applied externally as a paste
over scalp for 30 min . After that

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

honey in early morning. It works
as a good laxative.

. Aphthous Ulcer: Gargling with

leaves decoction of edagaja (A
fist full of leave boiled in 100ml
of water till it reduced to 25 ml)
relieves pain due to aphthous
ulcer.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 43 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Eran d a Vernacular names
Assamese : Eda, Era

Ricinus communis, Bengali Bherenda

Euphorbiaceae English Castor oil plant

Gujrati : Erandio, Erando
Hindi : Arand, Erand, Andi, Rend
Kannada Haralu, Oudala gida
Kashmiri : Aran, Banangir
Malayalam : Avanakku
Marathi : Erand
Oriya : Jada, Gaba
Punjabi : Arind
Tamil : Amanakku
Telugu : Amudapu veru
Urdu : Bedanjir, Arand

1. Jaundice: Fine paste of 5gms orally twice daily to relieve the

Tender leaves of eranda_ is
administered orally early in the
morning in empty stomach , helps
to cure jaundice.

. Joint Pains: Mature leaves paste
mixed with little crystal salt and
warmed. This luke warm paste is
applied over the muscular swelling
and joint pains. This pacifies the
swelling and reduces the pain.

. Scrotal Enlargement: 10ml of castor
oil mixed with one cup of milk
should be taken daily once during
night time after food for a month.

. Sciatica: 10 grams of eranda root
powder boiled in 100ml of milk
and reduced to half is administered

pain in sciatica. It also cures
constipation.

. Colic: Whole leaf of castor is

smeared with sesame oil and
warmed slightly. This is applied
over the abdomen (Umbilicus) to
pacify abdomen colic.

. Worminfestation: 2 gms of Palasha

seeds powder is taken along with
10 ml of castor oil as bed tome. The
pin worms are relieved within 3-4
days by this medication.

. Lactation: The leaves are heated

and applied over the breast as a
bandage to induce milk secretion
in lactating mothers. It is also
beneficial in breast abscess.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 44 -----
o Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing
7a®
C»)

tH aah fore
Era ndakarkati Vernacular names
Carica papaya, Bengali : Papeyaa, Pappiyaa
Caricaceae English : Papaya, Melon tree, Pawpaw

Gujarati Erandakaakadi, Papaiyu, Papita
Hindi : Papitaa
Kannada: Pirangi, Pappaay
Malayalam : Karmaasu, Pappaay, Karumatti
Marati : Papaayaa, Papai
Punjabi Erandakharbujaa
Tamil : Pappali
Telugu : Boppayi, Bobbaasi, Paringi

fruit pulp with fresh milk is an
excellent face pack. It moisturizes
the skin and removes the hyper
pigmentation of the face.

1. Worminfestation: Administration
of 30ml of raw fruit juice of 4 Dengue fever: Papaya leaves

Erandakarkati (papaya) with
honey once a day for 1 week
is beneficial to expel intestinal
worms. Regular intake of boiled
fruit expels the worms especially
Pin worm.

juice administered in the dose
of 10 to 20 ml, 3 to 4 times a day,
helps in restoring the normal
platelet count and decreases
fever in Dengue.

5. Eye disease: Papaya fruit rich

. Menstrual irregularities: Regular
intake of raw papaya also acts as
a uterine tonic and cures ailments
pertaining to reproductive
organs. However consumption
of the fruit should be avoided
during pregnancy as some times
it may lead to abortion.

. Face pigmentation: The paste
prepared from ripened papaya

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

in Vitamin A and Carotene so
regular intake of fruit prevents
eye disease, age related macular
degenerative diseases and
promotes vision.

. Dysentry: 3gms of papaya seed

powder with warm water twice
daily before food is beneficial as it
has antibacterial properties.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 45 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Gokshura

Tribulus terrestris,
Zygophyllaceae

. Male infertility; The mixer of
5gms of Gokshura powder and
5gms of Ashwagandha powder
is boiled in 100 ml of milk till it
reduced to 50ml. Administration
of this decoction twice a day for
ten days stimulates secretion
of Testosterone and promotes
spermatogenesis.

. Urinary calculi: (i) 10gms_ of
gokshura fruit coarse powder
boiled in 100 ml of water till
it reduced to 25ml and drink
twice a day. (ii) Equal quantity
of gokshura, sonth (dry ginger),
methi (fenugreek seeds) and
ashwagandha powders are mixed
well. 5gms of this powder taken
twice daily with coconut water
decreases Uric acid and gives
relief in swelling.

. Painful urination: 5gms_ of

Vernacular names

Assamese : Gokshura, Gukhurkata

Bengali : Gokshura, Gokhri

English : Caltrops root

Gujrati : Be tha gokharu, Nana gokharu,
Mithogokharu

Hindi : Gokhru

Kannada : Sannanaggilu, Neggilamullu,
Neggilu

Kashmiri : Michirkand, Pakhda
Malayalam : Nerinjil

Marathi : Sarate, Gokharu
Oriya : Gukhura, Gokhyura
Punjabi : Bhakhra, Gokhru
Tamil > Nerinjil, Nerunjil
Telugu : Palleruveru

Urdu : Khar-e-Khasak Khurd

gokshura fruit powder and 3gms
of coriander seeds are boiled
in 100ml of water till it reduced
to 25ml. Administration of this
decoction twice a day for few days
is beneficial in painful micturition.

4. Jaundice: 5gms_ of whole
gokshura plant powder, 2gms
of cinnamom, 6 cardamom and
2tsp of misri powders are taken
internally along with luke warm
water three times a day is useful
in jaundice.

5. Alopecia: Equal quantity of
gokshura and sesame flowers are
made into paste by adding honey.
Apply this paste on the bald areas
to stimulate re growth of hair and
nourish the scalp.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 46 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

G d h ° Vernacular names
u u Cc l Assamese : Siddhilata, Amarlata
Tinospora cordifolia, Menispermaceae | Bengali : Gulancha
: English : Indian Tinospora, Heartleaved
moonseed

Gujrati : Galac, Garo

Hindi : Giloe, Gurcha

Kannada: Amrutaballi

Kashmiri : Amrita, Gilo

Malayalam : Chittamrutu

Marathi : Gulvel

Oriya : Guluchi

Punjabi : Gilo

Tamil : Seendal, Seendil kodi

Telugu : Thippateega

Urdu : Gilo

1. Diabetes: The whole plant is

crushed and juice is extracted. . :
10 ml juice is given 3 times daily 4. Gastritis: 5gms of guduchi stem,

before food is a very effective fistful of nimba leaves, fistful of
remedy to control the glucose patola leaves cooked in 100ml
level. of water and reduced it into
1/4th. Internal administration of
2. Jaundice: Adminstration __ of this decoction along with honey
10 gms of paste of guduchi leaves twice daily is useful in gastritis.
with butter milk twice daily for ;
one week, relieve the jaundice 5. As Rasayana: 20ml of Guduchi
juice is recommended daily in
3. Fever: 5gms of Guduchi stems the case of AIDS. Research work
boiled in 100ml of water till on this plant has proved that
it reduced to 1/4th. Intake of it increases the immunity and
this decoction twice a day is an defense mechanism against the
effective remedy for fever. For retro virus and increases the
better results parpataka (Fumaria lifespan of the patient.

officinalis), chandana, dry ginger, - ,
mustha (Cyperus rotundus )can ©. Arthritis: 20 = ml of Guduchi

be used for preparation of this juice is advised twice daily in
decoction. Rheumatoid arthritis.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 47 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

ld
° Vernacular names
G U nj a Assamese : Rati
Abrus precatorius, Bengali : Kunch, Shonkainch
Fabaceae English : Jequirity

Gujrati : Rati, Chanothee
Hindi : Ratti, Ghungchi
Kannada Galuganji, Gulagunjee
Kashmiri : Kath
Malayalam : Kunni, Cuvanna Kunni
Marathi : Gunja
Oriya : Kainch
Punjabi > Ratti
Tamil : Kuntri, Kunrimani, Kundamani
Telugu : Guriginja, Gurivinda
Urdu : Ghongcha, Ratti

Nirgundi leaves, Eranda leaves,
Gunja seeds luke warm paste
poultice applied externally to
relieve joint pains, swelling,

1. Dandruff: External application of
the paste of the root, seed and
leaves of Gunja over the scalp .

cervical

Wash the hair with mild shampoo
after % hour. Regular application
once in a week is beneficial in
destroy the dandruff.

. Leucorrhoea: Intake of 5 gm
gunja root powder with rice water
after food twice daily is beneficial
in leucorrhoea.

. Hair growth: Oil cooked with
coarse powder of gunja seeds
along with bhringaraja(Eclipta
alba), external application over
scalp in good for hair growth.

. Joint pains: Equal quantity of

. Leucoderma

sciatica pain and
spondylosis etc

(Switra): The
mixture of equal quantity of
Gunja_ seeds, paste Chitrak
(plumbago) root paste is
applied over the white patches
and exposure to the sunlight
10-15min during early morning is
beneficial.

. Erysipelas (Visarpa): Regular

application of Fine paste of the
gunja leaves over the affected part
relieves the burning sensation.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 48 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

H a ri d ra Vernacular names
Assamese : Haldhi, Haladhi
Curcuma longa, Bengali : Halud, Haldi
Zingiberaceae Enalish .
glis urmeric
Gujrati : Haldar
Hindi : Haldi, Hardi
Kannada: Arishina
Kashmiri : Ledar, Ladhir
Malayalam : Manjal
Marathi : Halad
Oriya : Haladi
Punjabi : Haldi, Haldar
Tamil : Manjal
Telugu : Pasupu
Urdu : Haldi

1. Cancer prevention: Every day 5. Sorethroat: Take 1 cup milk, 3gms

morning, take 10 gms of turmeric
powder mix in a cup of warm
water for 40 days. This prevents
cancer as turmeric has strong
cytotoxic effects against certain
forms of cancer.

. Halitosis: Burn turmeric rhyzome
and make it into fine powder and
use this powder with salt as a

‘ooth powder. This will maintain

he gums and teeth in a healthy

condition and prevent halitosis.

. Burns: Mix 1 tsp of turmeric with

1 tsp of aloevera gel and apply

his paste over burnt area.

. Dental problems : Mix 1

easpoonful of turmeric, 1%

easpoonful of salt and sufficient

mustard oil to make a paste. Rub
he teeth and gums with this
paste twice daily.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

of turmeric powder and 3gms
of black pepper powder,heat on
medium flame for 4 to 5 minutes.
Drink this Golden milk daily at
bed time.

. Jaundice: Mix 1 teaspoonful of

turmeric powder with 1 glass of
warm water 3 times a day for 2
weeks or until you see the positive
results.

. Filariasis: Take 3gms_ turmeric

powder and 3gms jaggery with
half cup of Cow’s urine twice
daily internally . It destroys Filarial
worms.

. Conjunctivitis: Eyes are washed

with turmeric water(5 gms boiled
in 100ml water) and bandaging
the eyes with white cloth soaked
in turmeric water during night
times while sleeping.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 49 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

H a rita ki Vernacular names
Assamese : Shilikha

Terminalia chebula, Bengali : Haritaki

Combretaceae English — : Myrobalan

Gujrati : Hirdo, Himaja, Pulo-harda
Hindi Harre, Harad, Harar
Kannada Alalekai
Kashmiri Halela
Malayalam : Katukka
Marathi Hirda, Haritaki, Harda, Hireda
Oriya : Harida
Punjabi Halela, Harar
Tamil Kadukkai
Telugu Karaka, Karakkaya
Urdu Halela

the stomach forming a protective
barrier, preventing heartburn and

1. Piles: A sitz bath with 10gms of
Haritaki or Triphala powder, in ulcer.
half a bucket of hot water, for 10
minutes, before bath, is useful in
reducing the swelling and pain in

6. Dandruff: Take a cup of coconut
oil in a pan and add 3 haritaki

piles.

. Acne: Local application of haritaki
paste on acne will not only cure
acne but also prevents scarring.

. Cough: Administration of haritaki
powder 2 gms with honey two
to three times a day internally
alleavates cough.

. Gastritis: Internal administration
of 5gms of haritaki powder
mixed in hot water and regularly,
increases mucus production in

pods and heat it. Once it turns
brown, with outer shell cracks
turn off the flame, let it be cool
and store in a glass bottle. Apply
this oil regularly to prevent from
dandruff and lice.

. Obesity: Intake of 5gms of

haritaki powder with warm water
in the early morning on empty
stomach can regulate hunger
when combined with proper
diet and exercise help to reduce
weight naturally.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 50 -----
Harita manjari

Acalypha indica, Euphorbiaceae

. Worm _ infestation: Internal
administration of the harita
manjari leaves juice 10 ml for
children and 15-30ml in case of
adults early in the morning for
15days is useful to expel the
intestinal worms.

. Scabies: The paste of harita
manjari leaves with salt and
applied externally is beneficial to
cure scabies.

. Wound: The paste of harita
manjari leaves and turmeric is
applied externally useful in case
of ulcers and insects bites.

. Arthritis: Harita manjari leaves
are mildly fried in gingerly oil and
is applied externally to get the

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Patrasaki, Mukuta manjari
Bengali Muktajhuri
English Indian Acalypha
Gujarati =: Vanchi Kanto
Hinndi Kuppi, Aamaabhaaji
Kannada Kuppigida
Malayalam : Kuppameni
Marati Khokli, Khajoti
Oriya Indramaris, Nakachana
Punjabi Kuppi
Tamil Kupaaimeni
Telugu Kuppichettu, Kuppinta,

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

Muripindi

relief from painful arthritis.

Bedsores: The dried leaf powder
of harita manjari dusted and
bandaged over the bed-sore
areas for healing.

Food poisoning: Equal quantity
of harita manjari leaves juice
and neem oil is applied over
uvula of children. This will induce
emesis and eliminate mucus from
intestine.

Stomach infection: Intake of
the paste prepared from harita
manjari leaves and garlic ina dose
of 3gms along with the first bolus
of food alleiavates stomach
infection.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 51 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Hingu

Ferula foetida, Apiaceae.

1. Dysmennohea: Intake of 100ml
of buttermilk with a pinch of
Asafoetida(Hing), 1/2 teaspoon
of Fenugreek(Methi) powder and
little salt twice daily for 3 days is
beneficial.

2. Toothache: Mix 12 teaspoon of
Asafoetida(Heeng) powder in 2
teaspoons of lime juice and heat
the solution slightly. Dip a small
cotton ball in the solution and
place it on the aching place for
20-30 minutes to get relief.

3 Headache: Prepare the paste of
1 part of hingu, 1 part of dry
ginger, 1 part of camphor, 2 parts
of tailed pepper by adding some
milk. External application of this
fine paste on the forehead to
cure tension headaches as well as
migraine.

©

ope a qh tre
Vernacular names

Assamese : Hing

Bengali : Hing

English : Asfoetida

Gujrati : Hing, Vagharni

Hindi : Hing, Hingda

Kannada: Hing, |Ingu

Kashmiri Eng

Malayalam : Kayam

Marathi : Hing, Hira, Hing

Oriya : Hengu, Hingu

Punjabi : Hing

Tamil : Perungayam

Telugu nguva

Urdu : Hitleet, Hing

4. Flatulence: Mix 1gm of dry

ginger powder, a pinch of Hing,
little black salt added in 100ml
of warm water or butter mik and
consume twice daily.

5. Indigestion: Take 5gms_ of
powder prepared from equal
quantity of dried ginger, long
pepper, curry leaves, ajwain,
black pepper, Cumin and
Asafoetida(Heeng) with a little
ghee and salt and taken with
the first bolus of food is useful in
indigestion and flatulance etc.

6. Piles: Regular intake of 100 ml of
buttermilk with a pinch of hing
twice or thrice a day is highly
beneficial in piles.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 52 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Indravalli Vernacular names

Bengali : Jyotishmati

Cardiospermum halicacabum, English Ballon Vine, Heart's Pea

Sapindaceae oo,
Gujrati : Bodha, Kapaalphodi, Shivajaala,
Nayaphataki

Hindi : Kaanphuti, Lataaphataki
Kannada Kanakayya

Malayalam : Ulinna

Marathi Fatphati

Tamil : Modikkottan,
Mudakkarutana(Siddha),
Mudukkottan

Telugu : Vekkudutiga

1. Arthritis: The tila oil cooked
with the leaves of indravalli acts
as a very effective on external
application for arthritis . 5

week after delivery. This helps in
expulsion of waste products out
of the uterus.

. Dandruff: The leaves are soaked

2. Ear ache: 2 to 3 drops of juice in hot water for 3-4 hours and

of the indravalli leaves can be
used as a ear drops for ear ache,
purulent discharge from ears.

. Piles: The decoction prepared
from the roots or Whole plant
of indravalli (20gms of paste is
boiled in 200m! of water and till it
reduced to 50ml) twice daily can
be given for piles.

. Postpartum care: —_Indravalli
leaves paste applied and tied
over the lower abdomen of
the delivered woman for one

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

then crushed well. This water is
used in cleaning the hairs. The
oil prepared from the paste of
the leaves and gingerly oil can be
used as a hair tonic and cure for
dandruff.

. Cold & Cough: Soup prepared

with fistful of indravalli (ballon
vine) leaves, pepper, cumin
seeds, salt (as per taste) cooked
in 100ml of water for 5-10 min.
This soup is perfect for cold and
cough in children.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 53 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Indrava runi Vernacular names
Bengali : Rakhal Sasa Mul
Citrullus colocynthis, English  : Colocynth, Bitter apple
Cucurbitaceae Gujrati : Indravaran, Indrayan,
ndramanoa, Indarvaranova
Hindi : Indrayan
Kannada: Havumekke, Havumakke,
ndravaruni, Tuntikai,
Kadukavadi
Malayalam : Valiyakattuvell, Valiya
Pekkumatti, Cheeiyakattuvellari

Marathi =: Endrayana, Indravarana

Oriya : Gothakakucti, Indrayanalata,
Garukhiya

Punjabi : Kaudatumma, Tumbi

Varithummati, Aruthununatti
1. 1 Premature graying of hair: telugu —- CheduPuchcha

50 gram of dried seeds paste of urdu + Hanzal, Indrayan
Indravaruni cooked in 400 ml
of sesame oil until it becomes

moisture free. Regular application danger is checked. Fishermen use
of this oil over the scalp is found this kind of practice abundantly
to be effective in preventing as they are repeatedly poisoned
premature greying of hair. by poisonous fish intake.

2. Constipation: 1-3gms of 4. Foot ulcers: One fist full of dried
Indravaruni root powder taken seeds of Indravaruni boiled in
orally with warm water daily 500m! of water and till it reduced
night before going to bed to 1/4th. This decoction is used to
relieves constipation, abdominal soak the foot for 15-30minutes,
distension, menstrual pain etc. in case of foot ulcers and cracks

Lo. caused during rainy seasons.
3. Food poisoning: In case of
food poisoning 2-3 gram of 95. Scrotal Enlargement: 3grams of

Indravaruni seeds powder is Indravaruni root powder mixed
administered twice or thrice with castor oil and is taken along
in a day. This helps to induce with Cow's milk twice daily is
vomiting and hence the probable beneficial in scrotal enlargement.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 54 -----
Isvari

Aristolochia indica,
Aristolochiaceae

. Insects bite: Isvari leaves paste
applied or rubbed well over the
bitten area. Also 10-20 ml of leaf
juice is given with pepper powder
internally for 6-7 times daily for
insects bite and also in poisonous
bites of snakes. The leaf juice is
the best medicine for all sort of
toxic bites.

. Fever: The juice of the whole
plant of Isvari in the dose of 5-10
ml given thrice a day is useful in
fever and diarrhoea etc.

. Joint pains: The whole plant

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Jarvande
Bengali Isheri
English Indian Birthwort, Serpent Root
Gujarati Ruhimool, lswarimool
Hindi Ishwari
Kannada Ishwari Beru, Toppalu
Malayalam : Karaleyan
Marati Sapsan
Oriya Gopikaron
Tamil Perumarundu, Ichchuramule
Telugu Iswari, Nallaiswari
Urdu Zarawand Hindi

4.

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

paste of Isvari, mildly heated with
castor oil and applied locally is
beneficial in joint pains.

Bronchial asthma: The root
powder of Isvari is given in dose
of 3 grams with honey in cases
of toxicities, bronchial asthma,
cough and fever.

Anaemia: Administration of 5gms
of Isvari leaves powder along with
water twice daily is beneficial in
anaemia.

Headache: The paste of Isvari
leaves and turmeric is applied on
forehead twice daily is beneficial.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 55 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing fr dv
of mage fore
Jalapippali Vernacular names
Bengali : Bukkana, Kaanchadaa
Phyla nodiflora, . . oo
a English : Purple Lippia
Gujrati : Rataveliyo
Hindi : Jalpipali, Panisigaa, Bhuiokaraa

Kannada: Nelahippali

Malayalam : Nirtippali, Podutalai (Siddha)

Marathi : Jalpippali, Ratavel
Tamil : Potuttali
Telugu : Bokkena

useful in healing the wounds.
Since it has anti bacterial
properties, it treats the infections
well.

1. Leucorrhoea: The leaves of
jalapippali powder along with
cumin seeds in equal quantity, is
mixed well and given in the dose
of 5 to 10 grams twice daily is
beneficial in Leucorrhoea.

4. Dandruff: The leaves of
jalapippali paste applied on the
scalp is useful in case of dandruff.
A Siddha _ preparation called
Poduthalai tailam is very effective
in dandruff.

2. Piles: Administration of the
chutney prepared with leaves of
jalapippali is effective in curing

5. Urinary calculi: Infusion of leaves
and tender stalk (Soak 10 gm of
Jalapippali in 50m! of hot water

piles. for 3-4 hours) used in cold with
3. Wound: External application fever; also as diuretic and for
of leaves paste is helpful in the Lithiasis.

ripening of pustules and also

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 56 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names

Jambu

Bengali Badjam, Kalajam
Syzygium cuminil, Myrtaceae English  : Jambul tree

Gujrati : Gambu, Jamun

Hindi : Jamuna

Kannada Nerale Beeja, Jambu Nerale

Malayalam : Njaval

Marathi : Jambul

Oriya : Jam Kol, Jamu Kol

Punjabi : Jaamun

Tamil : Naval

Telugu : Alla Nereduchettu, Neredu
chettu

Urdu : Jamun

seeds and gargle with that water
frequently.

1. Diabetes: 10 gm of Jambu seeds
powder boiled in 100 ml of water 5
till it reduced to 1/4th. Take this
decoction on empty stomach

. Acne: Mix Jamun seed powder
with some cow’s milk and apply
on the pimples while going to
bed at night. Wash in the morning
and continue this for few days for

early morning reduces blood

sugar levels.

. Boils: Apply the paste of Jamun
seeds powder mixed with a little
sesame oil on the Boils.

. Bedwetting: Consume 5gms of
Jamun seeds powder with water
2 times a day for 15 days to 1
month in children.

. Hoarseness of voice: To maintain
good voice and relieve from
hoarseness, boil the Jamun

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

good results.

. Joint pains: External application

warm paste prepared from jamun
bark powder mixed with sufficient
water by rubbing followed by
heating is useful to relieve the
joint pains.

. Piles: Regular intake of Jamun

fruits for 2 to 3 months will help
healing bleeding piles.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 57 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing Z

OT ore

Ja p a Vernacular names
English : Chinese hibiscus, Chinese rose,
Hibiscus rosa-sinensis, Rose of China, Shoe Flower
Malvaceae Hindi : Jasut, Jasun, Gudhal, Gurhal
Bengali : Joba, Javaphul, Jaba
Gujarati : Jasuva, Jasus
Kannada _ : Daasavala, Kempu daasavala,
Kempu pundrike
Malayalam : Ayamparathi, Chembarathi
Telugu : Mandaram
Tamil : Sembarattai, Semparuthi
Oriya : Mondaro
Assam : Joba
Punjabi : Jasun
Unani : Gul-e-Gurhal
1, Leucorrhoea: 3-5 flowers of japa oil on head gives coolness to the
paste boiled in 100ml of milk till it entire body and a very effective

reduced to 50ml added with little remedy for hair fall.
jaggery and 3 grams of yavani
(Trachyspermum ammi) should
be given in leucorrhoea daily

4. Dandruff: The leaves are crushed
well and squeezed to extract
the mucilaginous content. This

once. should be applied on head before

2. Insomnia: The petals of the 2 hours of head bath. It relieves
flowers of japa one part and six dandruff and promotes hair
parts of water is mixed and heated growth.

on little flame and reduced to
1/4th part. Then jaggery is added
to it and prepared into syrup. This
is given in the dose of 10 ml for
urinary diseases, Insomnia and 6. Cough: Drinking twice daily
psychiatric ailments. Hibiscus tea (1-2 Flowers boiled
in 50ml of water 5 to 10 min) is
rich in antioxidants, can protect
liver, relieves cough and reduce
fever too.

5. Boils: The leaves and young
flower buds paste of japa is used
as a poultice on boils.

3. Hair fall: The juice of japa petals
boiled in coconut oil till the
water content of the mixture
disappears. Application of this

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 58 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Jati p ha la Vernacular names
Myristica fragrans, Assamese 5 Gifs lenis
Myristicaceae Bengali :  Jaiphala, Jaitri
English : Nutmeg
Gujrati : Jaiphala, Jayfar
Hindi : Jaiphal
Kannada: Jadikai, Jaykai, Jaidikai
Kashmiri : Jafal
Malayalam : Jatika
Marathi =: Jaiphal
Oriya : Jaiphal
Punjabi : Jaipha
Tamil : Sathikkai, Jathikkai, Jatikkai,
Jadhikai, Jadhikkai
Telugu : Jajikaya
Urdu : Jauzbuwa, Jaiphal

1. Flatulence: 2 grams of Jatiphala

(Nutmeg) powder should be
given with honey twice or thrice a
day before food to treat flatulence
etc abdominal disorders.

6. Indigestion: The powder
prepared from equal quantity
of Jatiphala shunthi and _jirika,

2. Diarrhoea: Administration of 2 administered in a dos of 5

gram of Jatiphala powder with
butter milk twice daily helps to
treat Diarrhoea.

. Insomnia: 2 gram of Jatiphala
powder can be given with milk at
bed time in case of insomnia.

. Headache: The paste of nutmeg
(Jatiphala) can be applied thickly
over forehead during head ache.

. Rhinitis: For Chronic cold and
thinitis in children , powder of
nutmeg mixed with mustard oil
can be applied at the middle of
the head regularly.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

gms before food twice daily is
highly beneficial in indigestion,
flatulence and abdominal
discomfort.

. Acne: Equal quantity of Nutmeg

and cinnamon powder mixed
with honey and applied over the
face daily in the morning and
keep it for approximately 10-15
minutes. Then rinse with cold
water. It will help in relieving acne
as well as reducing scars.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 59 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Jiraka

Cuminum cyminum, Apiaceae

1. Memory enhancement: This spice
is known to be the brain food and
it enhances memory. Take 3 grams
of powdered black cumin seeds
mixed with a little honey and lick
it every morning for a few weeks.
This will improve memory.

2. Diabetes: Take one teaspoonful
powdered cumin seeds with
one glass of water twice a day to
control sugar levels in diabetes
patients.

3. Piles: Add one teaspoonful of
roasted cumin (jeera) powder to
a glass of buttermilk and have it
twice daily for a few weeks

4. Diarrhoea: Roast one tsp of cumin
seeds and powder them. Add a
pinch each of dry ginger powder

Vernacular names

Assamese : Jira

Bengali : Jira, Sadajira

English =: Cumin seed. Cumin

Gujrati : Jirautmi, Jin, Jiraugi, Jeeru, Jirun
Hindi : Jira, Safed jira

Kannada : Jirage, Bilejirege

Kashmiri : Safed Zoor

Malayalam: Jeerakam

Marathi : Pandhare jire

Oriya : Dhalajeera, Dalajira, Jira
Punjabi: Safed Jira, Chitta Jira

Tamil : Sheeragam, Chirakam, Jeerakam
Telugu : Jilakarra

Urdu : Zirah, Zirasafed

(Sunthi), cinnamon powder and
black pepper. Mix in 1 cup of
butter milk. Drink twice or thrice a
day.

5. Flatulence: Administration of the

decoction of crushed cumin seeds,
black pepper and dry ginger twice
a day for several days is beneficid.

6. Lactation: To increase lactation,

mix 1 teaspoonful of cumin and
sugar. Drink with warm milk daily
in evening.

7. Intermittent fever: Intake of 3gms

of Krishna jeera, 1gm of Marica(
Black pepper) with equal jaggery
twice daily is useful in Vishama
jwara.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 60 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assam : Kal, Talha
Musa paradisiaca, Bengali Kela, Kala, Kanch Kala, Kodali
Musaceae
English : Banana tree, Plantain tree
Gujarati : Kela
Hindi : Kela
Kannada Bale gadde
Malayam : Vazha
Marati : Kela
Oriaya : Kadali, Kadila
Punjabi : Kela
Tamil : Vazhai
Telugu : Arati gadda
Urdu : Kela

. Peripheral
crushed flowers of kadali (banana)
tree fried with castor oil slightly
and be used for fomentation or
as a bandage on the extremities
for burning sensation.

Neuropathy: The

. Constipation: Ripened banana as
a fruit is a good Laxative, Nutritive
and Diuretic.

. Indigestion: It is good to eat food
in Plantain leaf as it helps to treat
Indigestion and body heat.

. Traumatic swellings: The roots

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

of Plantain tree is crushed well
and the paste used for bandaging
over traumatic swellings.

. Urinary Calculi: Regular intake of

20ml of Plantain stem juice twice
daily for 3 months is beneficial to
eliminate Urinary calculi.

. Fungal infection (Sidhma): Paste

of 2 gms of Banana leaf alkali
(Burned leave ash) mixed with
2 gms of turmeric powder applied
over the affected skin is beneficial
in Fungal infection.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 61 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Kalamegha

Andrographis paniculata,
Acanthaceae

. Eczema: 50 gram total plant paste
mixed in 200 ml of sesame oil. This
mixture is cooked until, it is free of
moisture. This oil apply over the
skin lesions especially in eczema.
it is also effective in dandruff and
seborrhic dermatitis.

. Vishama jwara: Equal quantity
of Kalamegha plant powder,
Shunthi, black pepper powders
are mixed well. Taking this
mixture 3-5gms will hot water
three to four times a day, pacifies
recurrent fevers.

. Intestinal worms: 3gms_ of
the leaves paste of kalamegha
consumed early morning on
empty stomach for a week, is very
beneficial in intestinal worms
especially in pin worms. it is also

Vernacular names

English : The creat, king of bitters

Hindi Kalamegha, Kalpanath

Bengali Kalamegh

Gujarathi Kariyathu, Litu Kariyat

Kannada Nelabevu

Marathi Kiriath

Malayalam : Nelavepu, Nelavemu, Nilavaepu
Tamil Nelavemu, Nilavembu

Telugu Nelavemu

Urdu Bhooinimo

4.

==

found to be effective in recurrent
spasmodic pains and menstrual
pain.

Skin diseases: Equal amount of
neem and triphala powders are
mixed well. Administration of the
decoction (5gms of this mixture
boiled in 100ml of water till it
reduced to 1/4th), is used both
for internal and external purpose.
Externally it is used to wash the
wounds in case of chronic skin
diseases and in ulcers. Internal
administration twice daily is
effective in diabetes, itching skin
diseases and even in several eye
disorders.

Liver disorders: Intake of 10 ml
fresh juice of kalamegha with
honey twice or thrice daily is very
good for liver as Andrographis
protects the liver against toxins.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 62 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Kam al a Vernacular names
Nelumbo nucifera, Assamese: Podum
Nelumbonaceae Bengali Padma Phool, Salaphool
English : Lotus
Gujrati : Kamal,
Hindi : Kamal, Kanwal
Kannada Kamal, Tavare, Naidile,
avaregedd
Malayalam : Tamara, Venthamara,
Chenthamara, Senthamara
Marathi Komala
Oriya : Padma
Punjabi Kanwal, Pamposh
Tamil : Tamarai, Thamaraipoo,
Aravindan, Paduman, Kamalam,
Sarojam
Telugu : Kaluva, Tamarapuvow
Urdu : Kamal

1. Burning micturation: 3gms Lotus
flower paste or rhizome paste
along with milk can be given
internally twice daily for burning
micturation.

twice daily for bleeding piles,
bloody diarrhoea and cough etc.

5. Hypertention: Venthamarai poo

. Snake bites: For toxic snake bites,
one Lotus flower can be ground
well and given along with water
internally at regular intervals.

. Diarrhoea: 5ml of lotus flower
juice can be administered twice
daily for diarrhoea. It is also good
for Heart .

. Bleeding piles: 3gms of lotus
flower/rhizome powder mixed
in one cup of milk can be given

. Hyper

choornam a Siddha Medicine is
very effective for Management
of Hypertension and given in
the dose of 2- 3 grams with milk
before food twice a day.

pigmentation: — Fine
paste of lotus flower should be
applied on the face once daily.
This enhances the complexion
and luster of the face, relieves the
black spots and freckles.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 63 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Kanchanara

Bauhinia variegata,
Caesalpiniaceae

1. Mouth Ulcers; 20 gms _ of
Kanchanara bark powder boiled
in 200 ml of water till it reduced
to 50 ml. Use this decoction for
gargle 2-3 times adayis extremely
effective cure for mouth ulcers

2. Diarrhea: Internal administration
of 3 gms of kanchanara bark
powder along with warm water
twice daily is useful to control
diarrhea.

3. Hepatomegaly: consumption of
10-20ml of leaves juice 2 times
a day will increases the liver
function as well as decreases
enlargement of the liver.

4. Tonsilites: 10 grams of kachanara
bark boiled in 100 ml of water

6. Burning Sensation

VAY)

oath fe

Vernacular names

Assamese : Kancan, Kanchan
Bengali Kanchana, Rakta Kanchana
English Mountain Ebony
Gujrati Champakati, Kanchnar, Kachnar
Hindi Kachanar, Kanchanar, Kachnar
Kannada Keyumandar, Kanchavala
Kashmiri Kalad
Malayalam : Chuvanna Mandharam
Marathi Kanchana, Raktakancana
Oriya Kachana, Kaniara
Punjabi Kanchnar
Tamil Sigappu mandarai, Sihappu

mantarai
Telugu Deva Kanchanam

until it reduces to 25 ml. Strain
and drink twice daily

5. Cysts & Fibroids in Uterus: 20

grams of fresh bark of kanchanara
is boiled in 200 ml of water until
the water is decreased to 50 ml.
Strain and drink. This is useful in
curing cysts and fibroid uterus.

In Urine:
10 gms of bark ,3gms of cumin
seed,1 3gms of coriander seeds
are boiled in 100 ml of water till it
reduced to 50 ml. Administration
of this decoction by adding some
jaggary twice daily is beneficial in
burning micturition.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 64 -----
dv Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names

Karanja

Pongamia pinnata,

Assamese : Korach

Bengali Nata Karanja, Dahara Karanja
Fabaceae English : Smooth leaved pongamia

Gujrati : Kanajo, Karanji

Hindi : Dithouri, Karuaini

Kannada Honge, Hulagilu

Kashmiri : Kath

Malayalam : Avittal, Ungu, Unu, Pungu

Marathi Karanja

Oriya : Karnja

Punjabi =: Karanj

Tamil : Pungan, Pongana

Telugu : Lamiga, Kanuga

Urdu : Karanj

1. Wounds: 20-30 gram of karanja

bark is boiled with 200ml of macerate the leaves and filter it, to

water and reduced it in to %. This
decoction is used to wash the
chronic ulcers and wounds. For sitz
bath also it is useful, especially after
the anorectal surgeries and kshara
therapies.

. Insect and wasp bite : The fresh leaf
juice is applied over the lesions of
wasp bite or insect bite frequently
.This reduces the swelling and pain
instantly.

. Eczema: Equal quantity of fresh
rhizomes of turmeric and pongamia
seeds paste is applied externally to
tred the eczema and scabies etc.

. Conjunctivitis: 20 young leaves of
karanja should be soaked in hot
water over night. Next day morning

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

obtain cold infusion. This is used to
wash the eyes. This relieves pain,
discoloration and gritty feeling
caused during the conjunctivitis.

. Piles: Karanja bark 3 gms and

Triphala powder 3gms are boiled
in 200ml of water and reduced it
into 1/4th ,to made decoction. It
is administered internally (in the
dose of 25 ml twice a day) and
externally (for sitz bath ) in case of
post operative care of ano-rectal
alkaline therapies (Kshara therapy).

. Boils: Equal quantity of Karanja

seeds, sesamum seeds, mustard
seeds, dugdhika plant, castor
seeds are made into fine paste and
applied over the boils is beneficial.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 65 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Karavellaka Vernacular names

Assamese : Kakiral, Kakral

Momordica charantia, Bengali: Karolla

Cucurbitaceae |

English Bitter gourd
Gujrati : Karela
Hindi : Karela
Kannada Hagalakai
Malayalam : Kaippa, Pavackkai
Marathi =: Karla
Oriya : Kalara, Salara
Punjabi : Karela
Tamil : Paharkai
Telugu : Kaakara Kaaya
Urdu : Karela

1. Lactation : Prepare the paste of
bitter gourd (karela) leaves and
apply it overthe breasts overnight,
or, if possible, throughout the
day. Use fresh leaves every day. It
Promotes the location.

applied over the wounds,

promotes in fast healing.

4. Intestinal worms: The fresh juice
of the fruit is given in a dose of
20ml early morning on empty
stomach for 3-5 days to treat

2. Diabetes: Research has proved intestinal worms.

that karela contains insulin like
properties and thus is called
plant-insulin, which is highly
beneficial in lowering the sugar
levels. Drink one cup of fresh

5. Blood purifier: The juice of the
fruit is consumed daily in a dose of
20-25ml to detox the blood and
acts as blood purifier.

karela juice (3 — 4 karelas) daily in 6. Prolapse of Uterus: The uterus

the morning.

. Wound: Externed application
of the paste prepared from the
leaves of karela and dhattura
(Datura metel) paste external

prolapsed is restored to its
normal position by application of
Karavellaka root paste followed
by press up prolapse to its
position and give T bandage.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 66 -----
Karpura

Cinnamomum camphora,
Lauraceae

. Mosquito repellent: Soaking a
bit of cloth within camphor oil as
well as leaving it in the corners
of the house. It helps drive away
mosquitoes as well as flies.

. Skin Itching: Camphor oil
application is good for skin and
also removes skin itching, rashes
and also inflammation.

. Joint Pains: Warm sesame oil
with camphor and massaging the
body with this oil just before a Hot
water bath will give relief to the
aching body. Camphor is actually
a rubefacient as well as energizes
the dilation of capillaries.

. Fungal nail: Camphorated oil
may be used locally to cure
fungus-infected toe nails.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Karpura
Bengali Karpur
English : Camphor
Gujarati Kapur
Hindi Kapur
Kannada Karpur
Malayalam : Karpuram, Chutakkapuram
Marati Kaapur
Oriya Karpur
Punjabi Kapura
Tamil Karpuram
Telugu Karpram, Karpuraamu
Urdu Riyaahi Kapphur, Kaaphoraa
5. Burn scars: Water mixed with a

7.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

bit of camphor should be applied
regularly on burn scars till it
disappears.

Head lice: 10grams of camphor
is dissolved in 100 ml of warm
coconut oil and allowed to cool.
This is applied on the scalp at
night. Next day morning wash
the hair. It is helpful in destroying
the head lice.

Chest congestion: 5grams of
camphor added in 100 ml of warm
sesame oil and dissolved. This is
applied over the chest followed
by hot water fomentation overthe
chest to relieve the congestion in
chest.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 67 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

ope a qh tre
Ka tu ka Vernacular names
Assamese : Katki, Kutki
Picrorhiza kurroa, Bengali: Katki, Kutki, Kuru
scrophulariaceae
English : Hellebore
Gujrati : Kadu, Katu
Hindi > Kutki
Kannada: Katuka rohini, katuka rohini
Malayalam : Kaduk rohini, Katuka rohini
Marathi : Kutki, Kalikutki
Oriya : Katuki
Punjabi : Karru, kaur
Tamil : Katuka rohini, Katuku rohini,
Kadugurohini
Telugu : Karukarohini
Urdu > Kutki

1. Fatty liver : 2- 3gms of Katuki root
powder with warm water taken
orally twice a day for 3 months to
reversal of fatty changes in the liver.

are mixed well and taking orally
3gms with warm water twice daily
2. Upper respiratory tract infections: is found to be effective in treating
1gm of katuki root powder is hyperlipidemia.
mixed with honey and licked 4-5
times a day. This pacifies URTI very
effectively in children including
productive cough.

5. Gastritis: 2gms of katuki powder
mixed with sugar taken internally
after food twice daily is beneficial in
acid peptic disorders as it decreases

3. Fever: 2 gms of katuki powder inflammation and potentially heal
boiled in 100ml of water till it the ulcer.
reduced to 1/4th. This decoction is
beneficial in fever, eosinophilia and
cold. Honey or jaggery can be used
as adjuvants.

6. Hepatites: The paste prepared
from katuki and bhumya malaki
should be administed 3 gsm twice
daily with butter milk is beneficial

4. High Cholesterol: Equal quantity to cure hepatites.
of Katuki and Haridra powders

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 68 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Kh a rj ura Vernacular names
Assamese : Tamar
Phoenix dactylifera, Bengali : Sohara
ASRS English : Dried Dates
Gujrati : Kharek, Kharika
Hindi : Chuhara, Chohara
Kannada: Karinchula, Khajura
Malayalam : Intappazham, Inthappana
Marathi : Kharika, Kharik Phala,
Khajur, Kharik
Oriya Kharjjuri, Khajur
Punjabi Khajur
Tamil : Pericham, Karchuram,
Perichehantay
Telugu Kharjura, Kharjuramu
Urdu Khurma (Khajoor)

3. As Rejuvenation: A drink in
which milk is processed with
Dates(Dates milk shake) acts as a
rejuvinator.

1. Constipation: Intake of 5-6 fresh
dates mixed with 1 teaspoonful
of ghee and a pinch of pepper
powder on empty stomach in the
morning followed by one glass of 4 Acidity: Soak a few dates

warm water. relieves constipation overnight in water and eat them

and strengthen the digestive in the morning regularly along

system. with the water in which they were
soaked.

2. Erectile dysfunction: Chop 7 ; ;
fresh dates mix with 3 teaspoons 5. Weight gain: Intake of 10-15
of ghee add a pinch of dry ginger dates per day followed by glass

powder, cardamom powder and of milk daily is useful to increase

few stands of saffron , consume body bulk.

it in early morning. This is an 6, Irritable bowel syndrome: 50m

effective remedy in Erectile fermented Juice of Grapes,

dysfunction. Sugarcane and Dates twice daily
is beneficial.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 69 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Khaskhasa Vernacular names
Bengali : Aaphim, Postadaanaa,
; Postabeej
Papaver somniferum, English : Opium, Poppy Seeds
Papaveraceae -
Gujrati : Khaskhas
Hindi : Apheem, Postadaanaa,

Khaskhas, Khasabija
Kannada: Gasgase, Aapheen, Aphini
Malayalam : Avin, Karappu, Kashkash, Aalan

Marathi : Khaskhas

Oriya : Aapu

Tamil : Kasakash, Posttakkaai, Avinee

Telugu : Gasgashaalu, Nallamandu

Urdu : Apheem

1. Quicker chemotherapy recovery: 100ml of milk. This is macerated

5 gms of Poppy seeds and 5 or churned well. According to the
badam soaked in 100ml of milk. need sugar or jaggery can also be
Deskinned badam and_ blended added. This gives instant energy
together in a mixer. Drink this and pacifies tiredness.

milk once a day is an excellent
remedy for all cancer patients
undergoing chemotherapy and
suffering from burning sensation
from tongue to intestines.

4. Insomnia: Khas khas_ kheer
prepared by cooking with
coconut milk, sugar/jaggery
and little amount of Rava/wheat
pieces is very effective in cases

2. Mouth ulcers : 5-10 grams of khas like insomnia, head ache etc.
khas seeds are soaked in 100ml
of water. This is made into fine
paste and applied to the lesions
of mouth ulcers.

5. Acne: 1 spoon of poppy seeds
are soaked in curd and made
into paste and applied over the
scars, acne marks or over the dark

3. General weakness: 10-15 gram circles. This helps to vanish all
of khas khas seeds added to these lesions.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 70 -----
Krishna musali
(Talamuli)

Curculigo orchioides, Amaryllidaceae

. Dysuria: Administration of 5
grams of root powder of krishna
musali with honey or jaggery
twice a day is useful to treat
leucorrhoea, burning micturition
of urine and loss of libido.

. Loss of libido: Equal quantity of
Musali root, Aswagandha root,
Gokshura fruit, Kapikacchu seed,
Amalaki fruit are taken together.
Take 5gms of this mixture in
100ml of milk and little jaggery
added to cure sterility and loss of
libido.

. Skin Allergy: External application
of leaves paste of krishna musali
over the effected area of skin is
useful.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Talmuli, Tailmuli
Bengali : Talmalu, Tallur
English Golden Eye-Grass
Gujrati : Kalirnusali
Hindi Syahmusali, Kalimusli
Kannada Neltal, Neltathigodde, Nelatale,
Nelatelegadde
Malayalam : Nilappenea
Marathi : Kali musali, Bhuimaddi
Oriya > Talamuli
Punjabi Syah musali, Musali safed,
Tamil : Nilappanai
Telugu Nel tadigadda
Urdu Musali Siyah, Kali Musali
4. Cough: Inhalation of the smoke

7.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

from burnt krishna musli root is
beneficial in chronic cough, cold
and asthma.

Hyper pigmentaion: External
application of the paste of krishna
musli root with Goat's milk is
useful to cure hyper pigmentaion.

Jaundice: 5gms_ of krishna musli
root powder is given with water
twice daily for a week

General tonic: The dried rhizome
is a tonic, and provides immunity
and protection against diseases.
krishna musli powder 5 gms with
milk daily is recommended to
promote immunity.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 71 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

of mage fore
K | ‘. Vernacular names
ulanjana
. English : Greater galangal
(Rasna Va riety) Hindi > Kulanjan
ay Kannada: Dhumarasmi
Alpinia galanga,
Zingiberaceae Bengali : Kulingjan, Barakulanjan
Gujarati : Kulinjan

Malayalam : Arattha, Kolinji, Pararatta

Tamil : Pera-rattai

Kannada: Dhoomraasmi

Telugu : Pedda-dhumpa, Dumpa
rastramu

Marathi : Kulinjan

4. Fever: Powder prepared from
equal quantity of kulanjana
Licorice, and pippali should be

1. Cough: A small piece of rhizome( administered 3gms with honey
1-2 gram) of Kulanjana kept in twice daily is highly beneficial
the mouth and chewed slowly in cough, headache, fever and
will certainly give a relieves from indigestion.
cough. It also releives nauseaand 5 Joint pains: Paste of kulanjana
vorniting sensation. leaves slightly heated in castor

2. Indigestion: For all sorts of oil and applied externally over
digestive and respiratory ailments the inflamed joints, relieves the
in infants and children, this muscle spasm and pains.
rhizome of kulanjan is baked or 6, Hypothermia: Kulanjana powder
heated and given 1 gm dose with is rubbed all over the body to
honey and breast milk twice daily. increase the peripheral circulation

3. Arthritis: 3 gram of kulanjana in order to increase the body
(rhizome) powder is administered temperature.
thrice daily for rheumatic
ailments.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 72 -----
Kuluttha

Dolichos biflorus, Fabaceae

. Renal calculi: Take 20gms_ of
kuluttha (horse gram) in 500ml
of water and boil in pressure
cooker about 5 to 7 whistles.
Collect soup, add 2 teaspoon
crushed pomegranate seeds and
take once a day. This is especially
useful in kidney and bladder
stones.

. Amenorrhea: The horse gram
seeds, induces menstrual periods.
Hence people with prolonged
menstrual cycle, scanty bleeding
(oligomenorrhoea), are advised
to use horse gram in their diet
regularly. Decoction of seeds is
also useful in the management
of postpartum syndrome or to
promote the discharge of lochia.

. Jaundice: Kanji (gruel) of horse
gram seeds with jaggery is a
remedy for jaundice.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
English Horsegram, Cowpea
Hindi Kulathi
Telugu Ulavalu
Kannada Huruli
Bengali Kurtikalai,
Malayalam : Muthiva,
Muthera Marathi: Kulith
Gujarati Kalathi, Kulit;
Tamil Kollu
Unani Kulthi
4. Obesity: Regular in take of horse

gram soup daily once is beneficial
in reducing obesity.

5. Joint Pains: The paste of Kulattha

6.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

seeds is used for fomentation to
relieve localized swelling. The
seeds stimulate and _ increase
sweating, thus opening the sweat
pores of the body to push out the
toxins from the body.

Intestinal worms: Decoction
of horse gram seeds advised
internally to relieve intestinal
worms and also treat the piles by
relieving the constipation.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 73 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Kumari

Aloe barbadensis,
Liliaceae

. Gastritis; Consume 20gms_ of
Aloevera gel at night before going
to bed for 30 days. It decreases
the inflammation and ulcers in
the stomach and intestine

. Burns: External application of
aloevera gel along with turmeric
several times a day is useful in
healing of wound due to burns.

. Fatty liver: Regular intake of
10gm of fresh aloevera gel twice
a day purifies the blood and
promotes liver function.

. Skin Care: External application
the aloevera gel with honey
followed by massage and leave it
for 2 hours regularly. its promotes
the softness of skin and dark spots
become light.

Vernacular names
Assamese : Musabhar, Machambar
Bengali Ghritakalmi
English Indian Aloe
Gujrati Eliyo, Eariyo
Hindi Musabhar, Elva
Kannada Karibola, Lolesara satva,
Lovalsara, Lolesara
Kashmiri : Musabbar, Siber
Malayalam : Chenninayakam
Marathi Korphad
Oriya Musabara
Punjabi Kalasohaga, Mussabar, Alua
Tamil Kattazhi, Satthukkathazhai
Telugu Musambaram
Urdu Musabbar, Ailiva, Siber
5. Hair fall: Mix aloevera gel
and lemon juice, apply this

6.

7.

mixture to the hair, leave this for
30-40 minutes and then rinse
with water.

Jaundice: 20gm fresh aloevera
gel with lukewarm water on
empty stomach early morning is
very effective for Jaundice.

Irregular periods: Consume 20
gm of fresh aloevera gel with
3gms of pepper powder twice
daily for 3 months corrects the
anaemia and irregular periods.

Obesity: Daily intake of aloevera
juice (20ml) on empty stomach
early morning helps to reduce
body weight, treats menstrual
irregularities and pain during
menstrual periods.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 74 -----
Kumkuma

Crocus sativus, Iridaceae

. Pregnant diet: Saffron advised to
pregnant women starting about
7th month onwards. 5-6 stigmas
of saffron have to be given with a
cup warm milk at night.

. Acne: Prepare a paste of saffron
(10 stigmas), 10 gms of sandal
wood and rose water. Apply itas a
face pack helps to reduce pimple,
dark circle, acne, and increase
fairness .

. Promotion of vision: Internal
administration of 20mg of Saffron
for 3 months proved significant
improvement in vision acuity and
retinal function. Also beneficial in
macular degeneration.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Kumkum
Bengali : Jafran
English Saffron
Gujrati Keshar, Kesar
Hindi Keshar, Keshara
Kannada Kunkuma, Kesari
Malayalam : Kunkuma Puvu
Marathi Keshar
Punjabi Kesar, Keshar
Tamil Kungumapuvu
Telugu Kunkuma Puvvu
Urdu : Zafran

4. Alzheimer’s disease:

5.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

Intake of
15 mg of saffron twice daily is
effective in mild to moderate
Alzheimer's disease

Debility: Consuming _ saffron
badam milk (6 badam fried in
Ghee, 7 saffron stigma are made
paste and boiled in 100ml of milk
in low flame for 5-10min) at night
benefits to restore the functions
of female and male reproductive
system. It is indicated in low
sperm motility premature
ejaculation, erectile dysfunction
and low sperm count.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 75 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

tte ore
K t ° Vernacular names
Uu aj a Assamese : Dudhkuri
Holarrhena antidysenterica, Bengali =: Kurchi

Apocynaceae English : Ester tree, Conessi bark
Gujrati : Kuda, Kadachhal, Kudo
Hindi : Kurchi, Kuraiya
Kannada Kodasige, Halagattigida,

Halagatti Mara
Kashmiri : Kogad
Malayalam : Kutakappala
Marathi Pandhra Kuda
Oriya : Kurei, Keruan
Punjabi : Kurasukk, Kura
Tamil : Kudasapalai
Telugu : Kodisapala, Palakodisa
Urdu > Kurch

1. Diarrhea: Consuming
decoction( 3gms of bark boiled
in 100 ml of water reduced into
1/4th ) three or four times a day is
effective in diarrhoea, dyscentery,
IBS etc.

Kutaja

2. Intestinal worms: Take 3gms

kutaja bark and 3 gms beal leave
boiled in 100 ml of water reduced
into 1/4th made a decoction.
Taking this decoction twice
daily pacifies intestinal worms,
ulcerative colitis and simple
abdomen colic too.

. Indigestion: Kutaj flower soup
(500mg _ kutaja flower powder
in one cup of water & add little

salt, ghee, pinch of pepper boiled
in low flame & made a soup) is
a good appetizer in post fever,
diarrhea and dyspepsia.

. Fever: Equal auautity of Kutaja

seed, cumin seeds and fennel
seeds made in to Powder. Internal
administration of 5gms of this
powder along with warm water
twice or thrice a day relieves
evening rise of temperature.

. Wound: Kutaja bark powder used

to dust over the oozing ulcers.
This relieves the secretion and
helps in fast healing.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 76 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

La Af alu Vernacular names
JJ Assamese : Lajubilata, Adamalati
Mimosa pudica, Bengali : Lajaka, Lajjavanti
Mimosaceae English © : Touch-me-not
Gujrati : Risamani, Lajavanti, Lajamani
Hindi + Chhuimui, Lajauni

Kannada : Muttidasenui, Machikegida,
Lajjavati

Malayalam : Thotta Vati

Marathi =: Lajalu

Oriya : Lajakuri

Punjabi : Lajan

Tamil : Thottavadi, Tottalchurungi
Telugu : Mudugudamara

Urdu > Chhuimui

4. Wound: 20gms of whole plant
of Lajjalu paste boiled in 200
ml of water till it reduced to
50ml decoction. This is used to
wash ulcers, diabetic ulcers, skin
infections etc as it has significant
wound healing activity.

1. Diabetes: Intake of 15-20ml of
whole plant juice of Lajjalu in
early morning on empty stomach
is beneficial in diabetes.

2. Leucorrhea: The whole plant of
Lajjalu. powder given in the dose
of 5 grams with rice water twice 5

: . Piles: Lajjalu leaves fine paste
daily cures leucorrhea.

should be applied as a poultice
regularly on piles. it will greatly

3. Fungal infection: One part of ; .
ease the burning and bleeding.

the juice of Lajjalu plant is boiled
with 4 parts of tila oil. This oil
is externally applied over the
affected area is useful to treat
fungal infections.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 77 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

La shuna Vernacular names

Assam. : Maharu
Allium sativum, an
oh Bengali. : Lasuna
Liliaceae

English : Garlic
Gujarati : Lasan, Lassun
Hindi : Lahasun
Kannada: Bulluci

Malayalam :  Vellulli, Nelluthulli

Marati : Lasun

Punjabi : Lasan

Tamil : Vellaipoondu

Telug : Vellulli, Tellapya, Tellagadda
Urdu : Lahsan, Seer

cholesterol level thus preventing

1. Cancer prevention: Garlic is the ‘heart diseases.
most powerful known enemy of 3. Earache: Crush 5 cloves of garlic
carcinogens. Garlic also interferes and heat them in some sesame
with the growth or progress of oil till they turn brown. Put 2 - 3
cancer. Taking 7 cloves of fresh, drops of this oil in the painful ear.

raw garlic in the morning is
one of the best steps towards
prevention and recovery.

4. Head lice: Apply a mixture of
garlic paste and lemon juice to

the hair roots and then wash the
2. High Cholesterol: Garlic is a hair after two hours.

powerful anti-coagulant food.
It prevents blood clotting.
It also prevents and_ treats
atherosclerosis. Garlic will help in
thin the blood, thereby reducing 6. Lactation: To increase lactation,

5. Digestive disorders: Crush 5-6
cloves of garlic and take with
warm water or milk.

formation of blood clots within mix 1 tsp of cumin, 7 cloves of
the arteries. Take 7 raw cloves of fresh garlic, 1 tsp sugar in warm
garlic every morning on empty milk . Drink this garlic milk thrice a

stomach. This reduces the high day

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 78 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names

Lavanga

Assamese : Lavang, Lan, Long
Syzygium Aromaticum, Myrtaceae Bengali Lavang
> English : Clove
Gujrati : Lavang, Laving
Hindi : Lavanga, Laung
Kannada Lavanga
Kashmiri : Rung
Malayalam : Karampu, Karayarnpoovu,
Grampu
Marathi Lavang
Oriya : Labanga
Punjabi Laung, Long
Tamil : Kirambu, Lavangam
1. Asthma: Coarse powder of 3 Telugu Lavangalu
cloves, 12-15 basil (Ocimum Urdu + Qarnful, Laung

sanctum) leaves, 10 black pepper
is boiled in 200 ml of water till it
reduced to 50ml. Administration
of this decoction mixed with
honey two times a day is
beneficial in asthma.

tooth pain or massage the teeth
and gums gently with the clove
powder twice daily followed by
rinse the mouth with luke warm

water is beneficial in dental caries.

2. Headache: Local application of . .
the fine paste of clove relives 6. Joint pains: Application of a few
headache. drops of clove oil combined with

mustard oil is beneficial in joint

3. Nausea: In cases of nausea pain as well as muscular cramps.

and vomiting, make a paste by

combining clove powder with
honey. Licking of this paste would
relieve the nausea. Nausea can
also be relieve by chewing 1 or 2
cloves.

. Bad Breath: Simply chew a few
pieces of cloves .

. Dental caries: Clove oil is soaked
in cotton applied on area of

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

7. Acne: Use a paste of clove

powder with honey over the acne
is beneficial.

. Diarrhoea: Take equal quantity

of cloves and pomegranate skin
fine powder and mixed together.
Take 5gms of the mixture along
with 1/2 teaspoonful of honey
3 times a day.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 79 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing Li - Ly)

= J
opt ap fore
Madayanti Vernacular names
Bengali : Mehadi
Lawsonia inermis, .
Lythraceae English : Henna
Gujrati : Mendi
Hindi : Mehandi
Kannada: Goranta, Korate, Madarangi

Malayalam : Mailanelu

Marathi : Mendi

Tamil : Marudum
Telugu : Gorinta

Urdu : Mehendi, Hin

iMedicinalUses si 4. Fungal infection: Nail caused by

ina f, 7" f fresh Tinea unguium and conditions
1. Burning feet: The paste o Ue like Athlete’s foot can be treated
leaves of Henna and lemon juice

. . by applying fresh leaf paste over
is bandaged onto the soles during the affected area and bandaged.
night times relieves burning in

burning feet syndrome. 5. Dandruff: The oil prepared from
the seeds and leaves of henna is
used as an external application
over the body to cure burning
sensation, itching and dandruff.
It also acts as a coolant.

2. Hairfall: The paste of henna
flowers 3-5 gms twice daily can
be administered internally with
water to prevent hairfall, itching
of scalp and insomnia.

3. Jaundice: 5 grams of henna plant
boiled in 100ml of water and
reduced to 1/4th . This decoction
taken daily to treat jaundice.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 80 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

M a nji shta Vernacular names
Assam : Phuvva
Rubia cordifolia, Bengali : Manjistha, Manjith
fuubiaceae English : Indian Maddar
Gujarati =: Manjitha
Hindi : Manjitha, Manjit
Kannada : Manjustha
Malayalam : Manjatti
Marati : Manjihtha
Punjabi : Manjistha, Manjit
Tamil : Manjitte
Telugu : Manjishtha
Urdu : Majeeth

effective in burning of the

1. Pimples and dark spots: Take 1 body (summer season and in
teaspoonful of Raktachandana, 1 menopausal period), blisters and
teaspoonful of Manjishta powder, boils.

5-7 drops of lemon juice and
rose water. Mix all ingredients to
form fine paste. Apply this paste
over the face and let it dry for
20 minutes, wash off with cold
water. This face pack used 2 times
a week is beneficial.

2. Chronic ulcers: 10gms Manistha
in 200ml of water and decoction
is made and used to wash the

4. Skin diseases: 3gms Manjishta
and 3gms_ Sariva (Hemidesmus
indicus) in one cup of water ,
prepare a decoction in herbs are
well known blood purifiers. Their
combination cures several skin
diseases very effectively.

5. Burns: Manjistha, Teak wood
tender leaves and red sandal

wounds in case of chronic else eU OED in ae elie

P and processed in ghee or oil is
wounds, non healing ulcers etc.
. used to apply over the burns and

3. Summer boils: 20-30 gram of scalds. It pacifies burning, pain
coarse powder is soaked in 200- and reduces skin discoloration.

JY Call Of Wiles eine! Mele Cea 6. Piles: Intake of 3gms of Manjishta

night. Internal administration .
: . : root powder along with ghee
of this water in early morning , . a
twice a day is beneficial in

on empty stomach. This is very Bleeding piles.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 81 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Maricha

Piper nigrum, Piperaceae,

. Increase appetite: Intake of
1 tablespoonful of Jaggery mixed
with 3gms of black pepper
everyday before food is useful to
increase the appetite.

. Indigestion: Mix equal quantities
of black pepper, dry ginger, rock
salt powders. Add 3gms of this
mixture to a glass of buttermilk
and consume it regularly to cure
indigestion.

. Cold: 3 grams of Black Pepper,
3grams of dry Ginger, crushed
4 Cloves and a few Basil leaves
in 100ml of water and boil the
solution in low flame for 5-10min.
While drinking mix 5ml_ of
Lemon juice and Honey into the
decoction and drink twice a day
relieves the cold.

. Swollen Gums: The Pepper
powder added in mustard oil and
made a paste use to massage

Vernacular names
Bengali : Golmorich, Kalamorich, Morich
English : Black Pepper
Gujarati =: Kalimori
Hindi : Kalimirch
Kannada: Karimonaru, Menaru
Malayalam : Kurumulaku
Marati > Kalamiri
Punjabi : Galmirich, Kalimirch
Tamil : Milagu
Telugu : Miriyalu, Marichamu
Urdu : Filfil Siyah, Kalimirich

=
>=

the teeth. Its frequent massage
enables you to stay clean of the
dental problems.

5. Cholera: Take equal quantity of

Black pepper Hing, Long pepper,
dry ginger, rock salt and Camphor
are grind well and create small
pills (1/2 gm-Ipill).Use one pill
every half hour to avoid and
manage Cholera.

6. Nasal Block: Equal quantity of

black pepper, Cardamom, Cumin
seeds, Cinnamon are mix and
grind into fine powder. Pinch of
this fine powder, Sniff 3 to 4 times
a day help in opening the nasal
block.

7. Seasonal allergy: Tea prepared

with equal quantity of black
pepper, liquorice root, cardamom
seeds, basil and dry ginger must
be taken warm a couple of times
each day to alliavate seasonal

allergy.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 82 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Bengali Mashance, Bankalaai, Mashani
English : Vogel-Tephrosis
Gujarati Banudad, Janglee, Adad
Hindi : Mashvan, Banvdad, Mashoni
Kannada Kadu Uddu
Malayalam : Katu Ulandu
Marati : Ran Udid
Punjabi : Jangali Urad
Tamil : Kattu-Ulandu
Telugu : Karuminum, Mashperniraphanu

reduce the swelling as well as
to relieve the pain. This remedy
is useful in both rheumatoid
arthritis and osteoarthritis.

1. Sexual libido: Equal quantity
of fried black gram and sesame
powders are mixed well . 5 gms
of this powder is mixed with a
teaspoon of jaggery and taken 4. Generalized weakness: 20 gram

daily along with milk, after food.
This acts as a very good energizer.
It is traditionally used as a tonic
to improve sexual libido. This
remedy can be continued for a

of black gram is cooked with 100
ml of milk and later add sugar and
it should be consumed during the
evening hours. This serves as an
energy drink and it improves the

period of 4 — 6 weeks time and is
not suitable for diabetic patients.

. Head lice: 30 gram of black gram
seeds are cooked in 100 ml
sesame oil for 10-15 min in low
flame. Regularly applying this oil
over the scalp to cure head lice.

. Joint pains: Black gram powder
paste is made by adding little
sesame oil. This paste is applied
luke warm, over the joints to

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

reproductive health in men and
women.

. Constipation: Fried seeds of black

gram (20grams) are made into
fine powder. This is consumed
along with 100ml of sour butter
milk. This improves the bulk of the
stool. It is specifically beneficial
in those having improper bowel
habit and irregular passage of the
stool.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 83 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Meshashringi Vernacular names
Grmmemag ania, Bengali Medhasingi
Apocynaceae English Periploca of the wood
Gujrati : Kaavalee, Medhasinge
Hindi : Gudmaar, Medhaa Singee
Kannada Kadhasige
Malayalam : Cakkarakkolli, Madhunaashini
Marathi Kaavalee, Medhaashingi
Tamil : Shirukurum Kaay,
Shakkaraikkolli
Telugu : Podapatro

decoction administered twice a

1. Diabetes: Intake of 5 grams of

meshashringi leaves powder
daily 2 to 3 times a day before
food regularly is useful to control
diabetes mellitus. High doses
of this medicine may help to
regenerate Beta cells of Pancreas
study and research says.

. Polyurea: 5 gms of meshashringi
leaves powder should be
administered with warm milk in
case of polyurea.

. Obesity: 10gms of meshashringi
leaves paste boiled in 100ml of
water till it reduced to 25ml. This

. Wound: Root

. Constipation:

day for 3 to 4 weeks is beneficial in
obesity and hypercholestrolemia
etc.

powder of
meshashringi can be dusted or
applied as a paste on the wounds
for healing.

5gms of
meshashringi leaves powder with
warm water should be taken at
bed time to cure gastrointestinal
disorders like constipation and
gas trouble.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 84 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
English Fenugreek
Gujrati : Methi
Hindi : Methi
Kannada: Menthe, Mente
Malayalam : Uluva
Marathi =: Methi
Punjabi : Methi
Tamil : Mendium, Ventaiyam
Telugu : Mentulu
Urdu : Methi

5. Lactation: 10gms of methi seeds

. Dyslipidaemia: 10 gram Methi
powder is administered along
with warm water or buttermilk

twice daily reduces cholesterol
significantly.

. Prameha (Diabetes): The powder
prepared from equal quantity of
methi seeds and turmeric should
be administered in the dose of
5 -10 grams daily along with
water, preferably on empty
stomach.

. Gastritis: 10 gram of seeds are
soaked in water overnight. Next
day morning this is macerated
well and is consumed this paste,
30 minutes before food. It relieves
the reflux esophagitis and
gastritis.

. Indigestion: 5-10gms Fenugreek
seeds are fried a little and cooked
well with milk (by adding little
sugar, if necessary). This gives
good strength to the intestines
and improves the digestion.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

are cooked well with 200 ml of
milk and add jaggery till it reduced
to 100ml. Internal administration
of this milk twice daily helps to
increase breast milk production.

. Piles: 10gram methiseeds powder

consumed with lukewarm water
along with half spoon of ghee.
This relieves constipation as well
as piles.

. Hair fall: 50 gram of fenugreek

seeds, 150 ml coconut or sesame
oil is added and kept in sunshine
for 6 days. Then it is filtered and
stored. Regular application of this
oil acts as a good hair tonic.

. Hair conditioner: 10 gram of

methi seeds are soaked in water
and kept overnight. Next day
morning made into fine paste
and is applied to the scalp as hair
mask. This is retained for 30-45
minutes and rinsed with water.
This acts as a natural conditioner
for hair.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 85 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

M ° h Vernacular names
I Ss reya Assamese : Guvamuri
Foeniculum vulgare, Apiaceae Bengali : Marui, Panmauri
English Fennel seeds
Gujrati : Variyali
Hindi : Saunf
Kannada Badisompu, Doddasompu
Kashmiri : Sanuf, Badnai
Malayalam : Kattusatakuppa, Parinjaeragum
Marathi Badishop
Oriya : Panamadhuri
Punjabi : Saunf
Tamil : Shombu
Telugu : Sompu
Urdu : Saunf

. Indigestion: Equal quantity of
Mishreya (Fennel) seeds and
cardamom are made into fine
powder. Take 3gms of this mixture
along with luke warm water after
meals.

. Bad breath: Gargle with warm
Mishreya (Fennel) water (10gms
of fennel seeds boiled in 100ml of
water in low flame for 5-10 min)
daily once for 7days.

. Heat stroke: Keep handful of
Mishreya (Fennel) seeds soaked
in 200ml of Hot water overnight.
Next morning, strain the solution.
Mix a pinch of Black salt and little
sugar in it and drink this solution.

. Colic: Take 10 gms of Mishreya

(Fennel) seeds in 100ml of water
and add 100gms of sugar. Boil
this mixture until it become thick
like syrup consistency. Feed 5ml
of this syrup to the baby 2-3 times
a day.

. Obesity: 5gms of haritaki powder,

5gms of Mishreya (Fennel) seed
powder are boiled in 100ml of
water till in reduced to 1/4th.
Strain and mix a teaspoon of
honey and drink this solution
in the morning on an empty
stomach.

. Lactation: Take 5gms of Mishreya

(Fennel) powder ina cup of barley
soup 2 to 3 times a day to increase
breast milk.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 86 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Mula ka Assam : Mulo

Raphanus sativus, Brassicaceae tang 8 fl a

English : Radish

Gujarati =: Mulo

Hindi > Muli

Kannada : Moolangi, Moolaogi, Mullangi,
Mugunigadde

Malayalam : Mullanki

Marati : Mula

Oriya : Mula, Rakhyasmula

Punjabi : Moolak, Moolee, Moola

Tamil : Mullangi, Mulakam, Mullangu,
Millangi

Telugu : Mullangi

Urdu : Turb, Mooli

1. Obesity: 1-2 big radish roots are
chopped and is added into 500m! 4. Leucoderma: 50 ml of radish juice

of hot water and kept for 1-2 hours. is cooked with 100 ml of sesame oil
Later it is filtered and this water is till all the moisture is last from the
used for drinking throughout the oil. Then it is filtered and stored.
day. This helps to reduce the body Regular application of this oil over
weight. the lesions of leucoderma has

good benefits followed by suitable

2. Dyslipidaemia: 20-30ml of radish Arenal aaaclieniian,

juice is mixed with equal quantity
of water and one tsp of lemon 5. Skin Allergy: Paste of1-2 Raddish

juice and little honey. This is taken roots is applied over the skin/face.
on empty stomach daily for 30- This is retained for 15-20 minutes
40 days. This reduces the bad and washed thoroughly (avoid
cholesterol significantly. those highly sensitive to radish).

This rehydrates and detoxifies the

3. Eyecare: Fresh juice of radish
green leaves in the dose of 20- ; ; ;
30ml consumed twice daily, before 6. Urinary Calculi: Regular intake of

skin.

food is considered good for eyes, 20-30 ml of Radish juice daily once
relieves burning, itching and excess after food for 3months is beneficial
lacrimation and useful in night in Urinary calculi.

blindness.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi \"
-------------------------

----- PAGE 87 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Mun di Vernacular names

Assamese : Kamadarus

Sphaeranthus indicus, Bengali : Surmuriya, Mudmudiya

Asteraceae

English : East India Globe Thistle.
Gujrati : Gorakhmundi
Hindi : Mundi, Gorakhmundi
Kannada _ : Mudukattanagida, Karande

Malayalam : Manni

Marathi : Mundi, Gorakhmundi
Oriya : Bhuikadam

Punjabi : Gorakhmunda

Tamil : Karandai

Telugu : Bodasarumu Badataramu
Urdu : Mundi

1. Skin disease: The leavesofmundi 4. Menorrhagia:Internal

are dried in shade, powdered Administration of 5gms of plant
and given in the dose of 3 grams paste of mundi with butter milk
twice daily internally useful for twice daily beneficial in treating
skin ailments as blood purifier. bleeding piles and menorrhagia.

2. Body Heat: The powdered 5. Joint pains: Internal administration
, of 3gms of Mundi powder with

3gms of Dried ginger powder
with warm water twice daily
relieves arthritis (joint pains).

flowers of mundi given in the
dose 1 gram with water twice
daily provides coolness to the

body and also acts as a tonic.
6. Headache: Internal administration

3. Worm Infestation: Consume of 10ml of mundi juice with a

S5gms of root powder of mundi pinch of black pepper twice daily
with jaggery twice daily for a alleviates hemicrania (a type of
week is useful in expulsion of headache) with in a week.

intestinal worms.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 88 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Must a Vernacular names

Assam : Mutha, Somad Koophee
Cyperus rotundus, Bengali : Mutha, Musta
Cyperaceae English  : Nut Grass
Gujarati : Moth, Nagarmoth
Hindi : Motha, Nagarmotha
Kannada Konnari Gadde
Malayalam : Muthanga, Kari Mustan
Marati : Moth, Nagarmoth, Motha,
Bimbal

Punjabi : Mutha, Motha
Tamil : Korai, Korai-Kizhangu
Telugu : Tungamustalu
Urdu : Sad Kufi

=
=

is useful in diarrhoea, indigestion,
etc.

. Fever: The powder prepared
from equal quantity of Mustha,
Parpata, Dry ginger, Long pepper
administered in a dose of 5gms
with hot water thrice daily cures
fever.

. Breast abcess: Administration
of decoction (5gms of mustha
tuber boiled in 100 ml water till
it reduced to 25ml) twice daily
for 15 days is useful to treat pus
discharge from breast or any
swellings in breast.

. Diarrhoea: Musta tuber powder
can be administered in a dose of
3 gms thrice daily with butter milk

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

. Common cold: 5 gms of coarse

powder of musta boiled in 100ml
of milk till it reduced to 50ml. This
milk is given daily once to both
children and adults in case of
asthma, common cold and chest
congestion etc.

. Gastritis: The decoction of musta

(5gms of mustha cooked in 100ml
of water and reduced it into 25
ml) is very effective in peptic ulcer
and inflammatory conditions.

. Bad odour: External application

of the musta paste all over the
body daily before bath for bad
odour due to sweat .
-------------------------

----- PAGE 89 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names

Nagakesara

Mesua ferrea,

Assamese : Negeshvar, Nahar

Guttiferae Bengali: Nageshvara, Nagesar
English — : Cobras Saffron
Gujrati : Nagkesara, Sachunagkeshara,
Nagchampa, Pilunagkesar,
Tamranagkesar
Hindi : Nagkesara, Pila Nagkesara
Kannada __: Nagsampige, Nagakesari

Malayalam : Nangaa, Nauga, Peri, Veluthapala,
Nagppu, Nagappovu

Marathi —: Nagkesara
Punjabi —: Nageswar
Tamil : Naugu, Naugaliral,
Nagachampakam, Sirunagappu
1. Diarrhea with blood: 3grams of Telugu —_: Nagachampakamu

Nagakesar stamen powder with — Urdu
warm water twice daily is an
excellent remedy.

: Narmushk, Nagkesar

the uterus in the conditions like

4% [les 23 gens a Nagase abortion and after delivery

powder is taken and rubbed

well with ghee and made a fine 4. Skin glow:

paste. This is applied to the anal
region in cases of piles. It is given
internally also in the dose of 3
grams once or twice a day to stop
heavy bleeding caused due to
piles.

. Postpartum Care : Equal (Each
3 gms) of Nagakesar and seeds
of sounf(fennel seeds) are taken
and fine powder is made or else
its decoction is made. This is
consumed twice daily for 3-4 days
regularly. This helps to cleanse

1-2. pinches of
Naganeear rubbed well with
water and add_ red sandalwood
(Raktachandan). This paste
is applied over the face after
thorough wash of face. Regular
application helps to get lustrous
skin and to remove the dark
marks over the face.

Leucorrhoea: 3gms of Nagakesar
powder taken with one cup of
buttermilk for twice a day and
keeping on diet of buttermilk is
beneficial.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 90 -----
o Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing
7a®
Cc»)

N agava ili Vernacular names

Piper betle, Assamese : Pan
Piperaceae Bengali : Pan
English : Betel Leaf
Gujarati =: Pan
Hindi : Pan
Kannada : Veelyadele Ele
Malayalam : Vettila
Marati : Pan, Nagvel, Vidyachepan
Punjabi : Pan
Tamil 2 Vettilai
Telugu : Tamalapaku, Tamulapaku
Urdu : Pan

1. Colic: Apply castor oil on smooth 4. Burns: Mix betel leaves paste with
surface of 2-3 broad betel leaves. honey and apply over the burns.
Warm them little and place them
on stomach. By doing this 3-4
times the colic pain will subside.

5. Sore throat: Take 5 ml of betel
leaves juice and 5gms_ of
licorice powder mix in a glass

2. Bad breath: Chewing betel leaves of warm water. This water can
after meals helps to reduce foul take internally as well as gargle.
breath as well as eases digestion. Singers can frequently utilize
It will increase secretion of this cure to maintain their vocal
digestive juices, | decreases chords healthy.

bloating of stomach, cleanses the

: ar 6. Cough: Betel leaves drenched in
oral cavity, reduces constipation.

mustard oil, slightly warmed and

3. Wound: Grind the leaves, extract applied on the chest, reduces
the juice, apply on the wounds, cough as well as breathing
wrap a betel leaf as well as problems in children.

bandage the wound.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 91 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Narikela

Cocos nucifera,
Arecaceae

1. Renal calculi: Intake of coconut
flower paste 2gms with curd once
a day is effective against kidney
stones.

2. Postpartum Care: Administration
of linctus prepared from flowers
of narikela helps to improve
health of uterus, regulate
bleeding after delivery and acts
as galactogogue

3. Diaper Rash: coconut oil regular
massage of the body of infants
prevent skin ailments and
diaper rash. It prevents flaking
and dryness of skin, dry
eczema, wrinkling, sagging,
skin inflammation, itching and
ringworm infection etc.

4. Burning Micturation: Regular
consumption of tender coconut

6. Diarrhoea:

7. Bleeding Gums:

Cd

Vernacular names
Assamese : Khopra
Bengali Narikel, Narikel
English Coconut Palm
Gujarati Naliar, Nariyel, Shriphal, Koprun
Hindi Nariyal, Gola
Kannada Khobbari, Tengnamara, Temgu,

Thengu, Thenginamara

Malayalam : Nalikeram, Ten, Thengu, Keram
Marati Naral
Oriya Nariyal
Punjabi Narela, Khopra, Garigola
Tamil Tenkai, Kopparai
Telugu Narikelamu, Tenkay, Kobbari
Urdu Narjil, Narial

water acts as a diuretic, prevents
U.T.1 (Urinary Tract Infection)
and helps in flushing out kidney
stones.

5. Hair fall: Coconut oil massage for

scalp is good and improves hair
growth.

Intake of tender
coconut water helps to maintain
fluid balance and prevent
dehydration especially during
scotching summer or in diseases
like diarrhea, malaria, typhoid and
Chicken-pox etc.

The — burnt
coconut | shell fine powder
mixed with edible camphor has
to be massaged on gums to
treat bleeding gums and also
strengthen the gums.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 92 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Nimb a Vernacular names
. oo Assamese : Mahanim
Azadirachta indica, Bengali : Nim,Nimgach
Meliaceae.

English : Margosa Tree

Gujrati : Limba, Limbado, Limado,
Kohumba

Hindi : Nim, Nimba

Kannada Nimba, Bevu, Oilevevu,
Kahibevu, Bevinama

Malayalam : Veppu, Aryaveppu,
Nimbam, Veppa

Marathi Balantanimba, Limba, Bakayan,
Nim, Kadunimb

Oriya : Nimba

Punjabi : Nimba, Bakan, Nim

Tamil : Vemmu, Veppu, Arulundi,
Veppan

Telugu : Vemu, Vepa

Urdu : Neem

1. Blood purifier: Neem leaves help
in purify the blood. The patient
should chew 10-12 neem leaves

neem should be applied on acne.

5. Urticaria: 3gms of neem leaves

or have half cup of fresh juice of
neem leaves daily in the morning.

. Diabetes: One cup of juice of
neem leaves mixed with a pinch
of black pepper powder must
be taken in the morning on an
empty stomach for three months.
This helps to reduce the blood
sugar the diabetes.

. Wound: The paste of Neem leaf
powder and honey should be
applied over the wound.

. Acne: The paste of fresh leaves of

©

. Mosquitoes

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

paste and 3gms of amalaki
powder mixed with ghee taken
internally two times a day useful
in Urticaria.

. Head lice: Regular Massaging

the scalp with Neem oil, removes
head lice and prevent dandruff .

Repellent:
Fumigating the house with dried
neem leaves or all parts of the
plant mixed with ghee, acts as
mosquitoes repelleut.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 93 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

N ° d ° Vernacular names
I rg Uu n I Assam : Aslak
. . Bengali : Nirgundi, Nishinda
ines) undo, Vrbinaceae English : Five Leaved Chaste tree
, — Gujarati : Nagod
Pe, Hindi : Nirgundi, Sinduar, Sambhalu

1. Joint pains: Take 20 nirgundi leaves
and cut into small pieces. Put into a
pan,slightly warm leaves by adding
sesame oil and applied over the
joint with cotton cloth bandage.
This kind of poutlies are helpful to
relieve the joint pain and swelling.

2. Cough: Consume the Nirgundi

leaf decoction (10 gms of leaves 6.

paste boiled in 100m of water
and reduced into 1/4th) twice or
thrice daily is pacifies cough, throat
irritation, fever, URTI etc.

3. Wounds: The freshly prepared
nirgundi leaf decoction (20 gms

leaf paste boiled in 200 ml of water 7.

and reduced into 1/4th) is used to
wash the wounds and helps in early
healing .

4. Nasal polyps: Internal administration
of 3gms of fruit powder with warm
water daily once is cures disorders
of nasal passages, especially rhinitis

Kannada: Lakkigida, Nekkigida
Malayalam : Indranee, Nirgundi

Marati : Nirgundi

Punjabi : Sambhalu, Banna

Tamil : Karunochchi, Nocchi
Telugu > Nallavavilli, Vavili

Urdu : Sambhalu, Panjangusht

=
>=

and nasal polyps.

. Lowbackache: 50 gram of Nirgundi

leaves , 200 ml of sesame oil and
800 ml of water or leaf decoction/
fresh juice are taken together and
oil is cooked until free of moisture.
This oil is used to apply over the
joints and painful area of low back
acts as very good analgesic and
anti inflammatory .

Splenomegaly: 20-30 ml of leaf juice
along with the same quantity of
cows urine is mixed and given early
morning for spleenomegally for 2-3
month. Also external application of
the leaf paste over the inflammed
spleen area also beneficial.

Puerperal disorders: 3gms_ of
nirgundi leaf paste, 3gms of garlic
clove paste, 3gms of dry ginger
powder and 2 gms of pippali
powder boiled in 100 ml of water
and reduced to 25ml. Intake of
this decoction daily once for 15
days after delivery, will destroys all
disorders caused in puerperal stage.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 94 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Pal an du Vernacular names
English : Onion
Allium cepa,
Liliaceae Hindi Piaz, Piyaj, Piyaz,
Kannada Eerulli, lrulli, Kunbali, Neerulli,
Nirulli, Ullagaddi
Malayalam : Bawang, Ceriyaulli,
Cuvannulli, Eerulli,
Marathi Kamdo, Kanda, Kandaa, Piyav
Telugu : Ulligadda, Erragaddalu

si

4. Cough: The slices of onion is fried
in ghee and taken internally is
beneficial to treat cough.

1. Bleeding piles: 20m! of raw white
onion juice should be taken on
an empty stomach daily in the
morning. 5. Nasal bleeding: White onion juice

2-3 drops is installed into nostrils.

2. High Cholesterol: Take half a cup

of raw onion juice mixed with
one teaspoonful of honey and
ginger juice; this reduces the bad
cholesterol levels in the blood.

. Vision: Internal administration of
the juice of onion in a dose of 10-
15ml daily is beneficial to improve
the vision.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

. Dental caries: The paste of onion

is kept over the area affected with
dental caries and inflammation of
the gum.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 95 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names

Palasha

Bengali Palash Gachha, Palash, Palas
Butea monosperma, .
Fabaceae English Bastard peak
Gujrati : Kesudo, Khakharo, Khakhapado
Hindi : Dhak, Tesu
Kannada Muttug, Muttuga, Muttala
Malayalam : Plasu, Camata, Plas, Chama Tha
Marathi : Palas
Punjabi Palash, Dhak, Tesu
Tamil : Purasu, Paras
Telugu : Moduga
Urdu : Dhak, Palaspapda

intestinal worms.

3. Piles: The Palash resin (oozed
out from the stem of the tree) is
taken 2-3 gram and mixed with
warm water and administered,
especially to the children. This
pacifies haemorrhoids quite

1. Menstrual irregularities: 10-15
gram of Palasha bark is taken and
decoction is made. This is taken
twice daily for 12-14 days prior to
expected date of menstruation.
This should be carried till the date .
of menstruation. The medication effectively.
iscontinued for three consecutive 4. Skin discoloration: — Fresh
cycles. Flowers of palasa 160gms flowers paste is applied over
mixed with double sugar should the discolored area of the skin
be taken with milk twice daily regularly, twice or thrice a day.
also. beneficial in Menstrual This helps to restore the original
irregularities. skin color.

. Intestinal worms: 1-2 gram for 5. Nasal congestion: 10-20ml of

children and 4-5 grams for adults
of Palash Seed powder along
with warm water. This helps to
check the repeated episodes of

bark decoction is administered
along with a pinch of salt. This
relieves the nasal congestion
significantly.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 96 -----
oS dv Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

maak or
Parisha Vernacular names
° Bengali : Gajashundi,
(Kapitana) Paraasapipula
Thespesia populnea, English : Portia tree,
Malvaceae Umbrella tree
Gujrati : Paaraspipalo
Hindi : Paaraspipal
Kannada: Huvarasi

Malayalam : Punavasu,

Pupparutti
Marathi : Parasa pimpala
Tamil : Chilanti, Punarasu
Telugu : Gangaraavi,

Munigangaraavi

over the inflamed joints to get the
relief from joint pains.

1. Wound: The leaves paste of
parisha externally applied as a 4 Leycoderma: Paste prepared

bandage over the wound is good from bark powder of parisha and
for healing. Bark decoction is also cow's urine, is applied externally
used to clean the wounds. over leucoderma to get the

2. Scabies: Paste of flowers of WoT CSU esI Seta

parisha is applied over skin 5 Jaundice: The bark decoction
diseases like pruritis and scabies. of parisha (5 gms of bark cooked
in 100ml of water and reduced it

3. Joint pains: Leaves paste of ; oo, ;
into 25ml) is given internally twice

parisha and little castor oil are
fried in pan. Applied this poultices

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

a day for ascites and Jaundice.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 97 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

opt ap fore
ee
Parna bija Vernacular names
Bryophyllum Pinnatum, English : Good luck leaf, Life plant,
Crassulaceae American Life Plant, Miracle Leaf
Hindi : Patharchattam, Patharchur,
Pather Chat,
Bengali Koppat, Patharkuchi, Gatrapuri,

Kaphpata, Koppata, Pathorkuchi

Kannada Kaadubasale, Dadabadike,
Patrajeeva
Malayalam :  Elachedi, Elamulachi,
lamarunnu, llamulachi
Telugu : Ranapala
Tamil : Runa kalli, Ranakkalli
. . Unani : Zakhm-hayaat, Zakhm-e-
1. Urinary calculi: 10 gms _ of Hayaat, Pattharchoor,
parnabija leaves in 100ml of Pattharchat.

water, take twice a day. You can
also give the decoction with 500
mg shilajit and 2tsf of honey 4. Bleeding diarrhea: Administration
mixed in it for more effective. of 3-6 gms juice of parnabija
leaves with cumin seeds and
double quantity of ghee, thrice
a day controls the blood flow in
diarrhea.

2. Boils: Slightly warm parnabija
leaves and crush them. Tie it
as poultice and applied on

the affected area to cure boils,
redness and swelling too. 5. Cold: Administration of 5 ml juice

of parnabija three times a day is

3. Wounds: Slightly warm the beneficial in cold.

parnabija leaves and then crush
them and tie on the wound. It 6. Joint pains: Grind 7 fresh leaves

helps the wound heal faster and into a poultice. Apply the poultice

also eliminates the scar. It also
bring relief from insect bites,
bruises, boils, and also skin ulcers.

evenly to the affected area twice
a day, morning and night, as
often as needed to get the relief
from joint pains.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 98 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Pa rnayavani Vernacular names
° English : Cuban Oregano, Indian borage,
(ka rpooravalli) Indian mint, Mexican mint,
Hindi : Patta ajwain
Coleus Amboinicus, Lamiaceae me . pe
= = Marathi : Pathurchur
Tamil > Karpuravalli
Malayalam : Panikkurkka, Kannikkurkka
Telugu : Karpoora valli, vamu aaku

Kannada :_ karpurahalli, dodda pathre,
dodda pathre soppu,

paste of ajwain seeds and leaves
with mustard oil and place this
paste in room corners will prevent
1. Cough: Paste prepared from the entry of mosquitoes in room.

5 leaves of karpooravalli and 4 Asthma: Boil hand full of
10 leaves of tulasi is boiled in Karpooravalli seeds and leaves in

100 ml of water for 5-10min. water and inhale the vapour to
Cool the water and add one control asthma effectively.

teaspoonful of honey. Intake of .
this mixture will give a relief from > Acne: External application of

dry cough. Intake of fresh leaves leaves paste mixed with curd
(3 or 4) along with pepper, will is highly beneficial in removing
also give a relief from cough and acne effectively.
cold. 6. Chest congestion: Take equal
2. Abdominal colic: 4 leaves of  qwantity of karpooravalli juice
parnayavani crushed and put in and honey, add a pinch of dry
to 20mlI of hot water. Intake of ginger powder, a pinch of fresh
this water frequently will cure the pepper powder. Mix well and take
stomach ache. internally twice a day to relieve

. chest congestion.
3. Mosquito repellent: Leaves of . .
parnayavani crushed and placed 7. Insect bites: Karpooravalli can
im 2 fee will ake 2s © manuel be used for bee stings and insect

mosquito repellent. Or Make a bites. Crush the leaves and apply
on the affected area of the skin.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 99 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

3
4
i

Pipp ali Vernacular names

Assamese : Pippali

Piper longum, Bengali =: Pipul
Piperaceae
English : Long Pepper
Gujrati : Lindi Peeper, Pipali
Hindi : Pipar

Kannada: Hippali
Malayalam : Pippali

Marathi : Pimpali, Lendi Pimpali
Oriya : Pipali, Pippali

Punjabi =: Magh, Magh Pipali
Tamil : Arisi Tippali, Thippili
Telugu : Pippalu

Urdu : Filfil Daraz

[MedicinalUses 4. Chronic fever & splenomegaly:
. . Internal administration of Pippalli

1. Cough: Pippali powder 2-3 grams ; F
is mixed with honey and licked. pele ey (efutis Cubed XA

This helps to pacify cough, cold, en) twice cally einen tices
has significant benefits on low
sore throat etc.

. digestion, diarrhea, fever, lack of
2. Hoarseness of the voice: strength, splenomegaly and loss
10-20 ml of Pippali decoction

of appetite.
is administered twice or thrice . PP |
daily in case of indigestion, poor > Piles: The use of butter milk kept
appetite, cold, hoarseness of the inavessel anointed internally with
voice, rhinitis etc. the paste of pippali, pippalimula,

3. Intestinal worms: — Pippali Ae (ase rele) Cileelite
aah black pepper artal (Embelia ribes), sunthi (zingiber

Vidanga(Embelia ribes) are officinale) and haritaki (terminalia

taken in equal quantity and chebula) is wholesome.

fine powder is made. This is 6. Toothache: Pippali powder
administered in the dose of 3-5 mixed with honey should be kept
gram twice or thrice a day. This in mouth. It is excellent remedy
is very effective against intestinal for toothache.

worms and colic pain.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 100 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Pu narnava Vernacular names

Assamese : Ranga Punarnabha

Boerhaavia diffusa, Nyctaginaceae.

Bengali : Rakta punarnava

English : Horse Purslene, Hog Weed

Gujrati : Dholisaturdi, Motosatodo

Hindi : Gadapurna, Lalpunarnava

Kannada : Sanadika, Kommeberu, Komma

Kashmiri : Vanjula Punarnava

Malayalam : Chuvanna Tazhutawa

Marathi : Ghetuli, Vasuchimuli,
Satodimula, Punarnava,
Khaparkhuti

Oriya : Lalapuiruni, Nalipuruni

Punjabi —:  Itcit (lal), Khattan

Tamil : Mukurattai (Shihappu)

Telugu : Atukamamidi, Erra galijeru

1. Dysuria and urinary obstruction:
The roots of Punarnava(15-20 Tribulus (go kshura) ~~ and

gram) is taken and decoction is coriander (dhaniya) are taken
made and consumed in the dose in equal quantities. Decoction
of 30-40 ml twice or thrice a day. or hot infusion is prepared. This
This is effective in the conditions is administered twice or thrice
like  dysuria and urinary daily. It is very effective against
obstruction. the burning, micturition dysuria

2. Indigestion: 20-30 ml of fresh and in urinary tract infections.
juice is obtained from the whole 5. Pedal oedema: Whole plant is

plant of Punarnava with pinch of made into fine paste and warmed
black salt is taken internally. This is a little. This is applied to the
effective in abdominal distention, extremities where the swelling
acid belching and burping. is found. Regular application

3. Urinary calculi: Fine powder (1-2 fesute CNS
gram) of Punarnava seeds or its 6. Anaemia: The Leafy vegetable of
decoction (30-40 ml) is taken Punarnava is particularly effective
regularly for a period of 10-12 in Anaemia and Oedema.
days. This helps to flush out the 7. Eye disease: Freshly obtained
urinary calculi of 5-8 mm size. leaves are made into fine paste

4. Recurrent UTI: — Punarnava and applied over closed eyes. This
, , ' brings cooling effect to the eyes.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 101 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

ope a qh tre
Raiaudumbara Vernacular names
y English : common fig
Ficus carica, Moraceae
Hindi : Anjeer
Marathi : Anjeer
Malayalam : Atti Pazham
Tamil : Semaiyatti
Telugu : Athi Pallu, Bodda
Kannada: Anjura
Urdu : Anjeer

. Mouth ulcer: 30gms of bark
coarse powder boiled in 200ml of
water till the mixture is reduced
to 1/4th. The filtered decoction
of this mixture is used for mouth
gargling (rinsing), 3-4 times in
a day. This helps to cure mouth
ulcers and stomatitis.

. Pharyngitis: 1- 2 Tender leaves
chewed of anjeer and retained in
the mouth for 10 minutes then
spit it out. This helps to pacify the
sore throat and pharyngitis

. Acid peptic disorders: 20gms of
bark powder boiled in 100ml of
cow's milk and till the mixture
reduced to 50ml . Consuming
this milk early in the morning will
pacify Gastritis and acid peptic
disorders.

4. Hiccup: 5 Mature fruits pulp of

anjeer is added in 100ml of milk
and blend in a mixer grinder to
prepare milk shake (by adding
little sugar or jaggery). This thick
milk juice orally taken once in a
day is beneficial relieve hiccup.

. Urinary Calculi: Boil 6 anjeer fruits

in a cup of water for 5-10minutes.
Consuming this water early
morning daily for a month is
useful to remove Kidney stones.

. Acne: Apply mashed fresh figs

all over the face and let it dry for
15-20min and wash with normal
water. Regular application of this
paste is useful to cure acne.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 102 -----
oS dv Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

€

tH aah fore
S d h Vernacular names
a a p us pa English : Periwinkle, Madagascar
Catharanthus roseus, Apocynaceae periwinkle, Vinca
Hindi : Sadabahar
Malayalam : Shavam Naari
Marathi Sadaphuli
Bengali Nayantara
Tamil : Nithyakalyani, Sudukattu
Mallikai
Telugu : Billaganneru

of juice of Sadabahar flower and
pomegranate tender buds are
instilled to the nostrils (3drops
in each nostril) in case of nasal
bleeding.

1. Wounds: The
Sadapushpa with turmeric paste
is applied on the wounds 2 to 3
times a day. This serves asa good 5

leaves of

. Insect and wasp bites: Fine paste

wound healer.

. Urinary disorders: 250-500 mg of
root powder is taken along with
honey. This has potent effect in
Urinary disorders .

. Irregular menstruation: 6 to 8
fresh leaves of the plant are boiled
in 200ml of water till it reduced
to % th . This is taken regularly
for three consecutive menstrual
cycles twice daily. This controls
the heavy menstrual flow and
regularizes scanty flow too.

. Nasal bleeding: Equal quantity

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

of the leaves applied over the bite
area of the insects and wasps to
reduce the irritation and swelling.

. Acne: Equal quantity of fresh

leaves of vinca and neem and
turmeric fresh rhizome are made
into a fine paste and is applied
over the acne lesions and skin
scars. Regular application gives
excellent results in this condition.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 103 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing mn dv
(f&
Ht te Gfa

OT ore

Vernacular names

Sariva

Assamese : Vaga Sariva

Hemidesmus indicus, Bengali Anantamul, Shvetashariva

Apocynaceae English Indian Sarsaparilla
Gujrati : Upalsari, Kabri
Hindi : Anantamul
Kannada Namada veru, Bili Namadaberu,
Anantamool, Sogadeberu,

Kashmiri Anant mool
Malayalam : Nannari, Nannar, Naruneendi
Marathi Upalsari, Anantamula
Oriya : Dralashvan Lai Anantamool
Punjabi Anantmool, Ushbah
Tamil : Ven Nannar
Telugu : Sugandhi Pala, Tella Sugandhi
Urdu : Ushba Hindi

1. Dysuria: 5 gms of sariva root

powder is given along with till it reduced to 25ml. Intake
milk. for urinary problems like of this decoction twice daily is

dysuria oliguria, and BPH(Benign
prostatic hyperplasia),

. Acne: Regular intake of 5gms of
sariva root powder with water
twice daily is useful in acne and
acts as very good blood purifier.
Regular washing the face with the
decoction of sariva is also helpful
to cure acne.

. Eye disease: External application
of the sariva root thick paste over
the closed eye is effective for
burning sensation of the eyes.

. Fever: 5gms of sariva root coarse
powder boiled in 100ml of water

. Lactation:

beneficial for fever and urinary
infections. It is also helpful to
decrease the body heat during
summer.

. Piles: 5 gms of sariva root powder

is administered twice daily for
dysentery, leucoderma and piles
etc.

Administratino of
3 grams of sariva root powder
twice daily is useful to increase
breast milk.

. Wound: Sariva root paste external

application on wounds will
promotes fast healing.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 104 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

S h Vernacular names
a rs a pa Bengali : Sarisa
Brassica campestris, English. Mustard
Brassicaceae Gujarati Sarasad, Rai
Hindi : Saraso
Kannada. Sasuve, Sasuvae, Sasive

Malayalam : Katuka

Marati : Mohari
Punjabi Sarayo, Sarson
Tamil : Kaduga
Telugu : Avalu

Urdu : Sarson

oil is instilled luke warmly into
each nostrils for the treatment
of nasal polyps. It is also applied
externally over pile mass to shrink
the mass and to relieve pain.

1. Headache: Fine paste of red or
black mustard seeds is applied
over the fore head helps to
reduce the vascular headache
quite effectively.

5. Skin rashes: 50 gms of turmeric
paste is cooked with 100 ml of
Mustard oil till the evaporation
of moisture content. This oil is
applied all over the body to pacify
itchy rashes.

2. Toothache: Black mustard seeds
fine paste mixed with little salt
and applied near the painful
area of gum for a few minutes is
beneficial.

3. Wounds: 20 grams of mustard 6
seeds are heated in an earthen
pan and burnt the seeds. This is
pounded well and made a fine
powder (black colored) mixed
with sesame oil. This paste is
applied over the ulcers and non
healing wounds.

. Recurrent cold in children: Equal
quantity of Mustard and pepper
powder are taken in small piece
of cloth (or cotton gauge can be
used). This is kept in the middle
of the scalp and tied properly for
30-45 minutes every day
preferably in early morning or late

4. Nasal polyp: In 25 ml of mustard

oil add with 2 pinch of salt and
heated and cooled. 3 drops of this

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

evening. This is used as a remedy
for recurrent cold, rhinitis, cough,
pharyngitis, tonsillitis, in children.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 105 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Satavari

Asparagus recemosus, Asparagaceae

. Lactation: 10 gms fresh or dry
roots of satavari is boiled in 100ml
of milk, till it reduced to 50ml. This
milk is filtered and added with
sugar. It is given to the lactating
mothers, early in the morning to
improve breast milk production.

. Rejuvenation: 5-10 gram of root
powder of Shatavariis administered
along with powdered sugar candy,
twice a day. This relieves work
exhaustion, numbness, neuritis,
fatigue, lethargy, loss of libido etc.

. Urinary tract infections: Regular
consuming the 5 gram of the
Shatavari root powder, during night
times in recurrent UTI, spermaturia,
haematuria and backache are
cured successfully.

. Haematuria: 5 gram powder of
shatavari with sugar is taken twice
a day after food .This is given to the

Vernacular names

Assamese : Satmull

Bengali Satamuli, Satmuli, Shatamuli

English Asparagus

Gujrati Satavari

Hindi Satavar, Satamul

Kannada Ashadi poeru, Halavu Bau,
Narayani, Makkala

Malayalam : Satavari Kizhangu

Marathi Shatavari

Punjabi Satavar

Tamil Shimai-Shadvari, Nilichedi
Kishangu

Telugu Sima-Shatawari (Dry Root),
Pippipichara, Pilliteegalu
(Fresh Root)

Urdu Satawari

5.

individuals, suffering from burning

urination and bleeding from
urethra.
Oligospermia: Fine powder

of equal quantity of Shatavari,
Ashwagandha and Kapikacchu
are mixed together. 3-5 grams of
this mixture is cooked with a cup
of milk for 5 minutes, filtered and
consumed. This promotes sexual
libido and increases the sperm
count too.

. Weight loss: 5gms Shatavari and

3gms_Pippali powder is taken
during night or early in the morning
along with Banana milkshake.
Good weight gain is observed
within 30-40 days.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 106 -----
Z dv Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Satyana shi Vernacular names
Argemone Mexicana, Hindi : Pila-dhatura, Shialkanta,
Papaveraceae Bharbhand, Satyanashi

English : Prickly poppy, Mexican poppy
Bengali : Shialkanta
Malayalam : Brahmdanti
Gujarati : Darudi
Marathi =: Daruri
Rajasthani : Dhaturi

Oriya : Kantakusham
Tamil : Karukkansedi
Telugu : Brahmdandidandu

1. Eczema: If any part of the plant
breaks then yellow latex flows.
The yellow latex possesses anti-
bacterial properties. The yellow

4. Ringworm: 20 gms of fresh
leaves paste boiled in 200 ml of
water till it reduced to 50 ml. This

latex along with turmeric applied
locally to the affected area to
treat the skin infections such as
eczema, itching, boils and skin
ulcers.

. Wounds: The leaves could be
applied as a paste or poultice.
This is helps to heal a wound.

. Mosquito repellant: The leaf and
seed extract of Mexican poppy

possess larvicidal _ properties
which acts as a mosquito
repellant.

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

decoction is used to wash the
ringworm affected area.

. Headache: 5gms of satyanashi

plant root is boiled in 100ml of
water till it reduced to 25ml.
This decoction is used along
with jaggery in migraine type of
headaches.

. Joint pains: Sesame oil processed

in Mexican poppy seeds external
application is beneficial in Joint
pains.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 107 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Saurabhanimba

Murraya koenigij, Rutaceae

. Prameha (Diabetes): 5-10
gram of dried powder of curry
leaves is consumed twice daily
for significant decrease in blood
sugar levels. Hence, this can

be administered safely as an 4.

adjuvant along with any of the
anti diabetic drug.

. Premature greying of hair: 20

gram of fresh curry leaves paste 5.

cooked in 100 ml of coconut oil
(or sesame oil) till the moisture
evaporates. Regular application
of this oil to the scalp helps to
reduce greyhair, promotes hair
growth and useful in dandruff as
well.

. Motion sickness: 10gms of curry
leaf fine powder is mixed with
1 teaspoon of cardamom fine
powder and mixed thoroughly.
During journey, this mixture
is taken (1-2 pinch) with a cup
of hot water. This reduces the

Vernacular names
Assmi : Narasingha
Bengali : Bansang, Kariaphulli
English > Curry leaf
Gujarati : Gornimb, Kadhilimdo
Hindi : Mitha neem, Kadhi Patta,

Kadi Patta

Kannada: Karibaevu
Malayalam : Kariveppu
Marati Kadhinim, Poospala, Godnimb
Oriya Bhursunga
Punjabi Kadhi Patta
Tamil Karivempu, Karuveppilei
Telugu Karivepaku, Karivemu

7.

=r
=

chances of food poisoning and
keeps healthy during travel.

Mouth ulcer: Curry leaves powder
is mixed with honey and applied
over the mouth ulcer for 2-3 days
relieves stomatitis.

Obesity: 10 grams of curry leaves
powder boiled in 100 ml of hot
water till it reduced to 1/4th . It
is consumed, preferably during
empty stomach in the early
morning (before going to walk).
regularly for 2-3 weeks helps to
reduce the body fat.

Acne: A fistful of fresh curry leaves
and one small turmeric (fresh
rhizome) are made into fine paste
and applied over the lesions of
acne. This helps to relieve the oily
skin acne, dark circles and black
heads.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 108 -----
Shigru

Moringa oleifera,
Moringaceae

. Obesity: Daily 1 drumstick is
cut into pieces and cooked in
100ml of water till it reduced to
1/4th .This is taken once daily,
preferably during evening, before
food. This has good benefit
hyper cholesterol, improper fat
metabolism, and lethargy.

. Conjunctivitis: Fine Leaf paste is
applied around the closed eyes
daily once.

. Dysmenorrhoea: Leaves decoction
of drum stick (prepared from
a fistful of leaves in 100ml of
water cooked till it reduced to
1/4th administered twice daily
is helpful to overcome the back
ache and dysmenorrhoea. Being
a blood purifier it also pacifies the
pimples and black heads too.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Bengali Sajina, Sajna, Sajne
English Horse Radish Tree, Drum
stick tree
Gujrati Sargavo, Sekato, Saragavo Parna
Hindi Shajoma, Mungna
Kannada Neegge, Nugge ele
Malayalam : Murinna, Tishnagandha,
Muringa, Muringa Elai
Marathi Sevaga, Segata, Segata pana,
Shewgachi pane
Oriya Sajana, Munga, Munika
Punjabi Sohanjana
Tamil Murungai, Murungai Ilai
Telugu Munaga Aku
Urdu Sehjan
4. Abdominal distention: A fistful of

6.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

moringa flowers are cooked well
with little salt and black pepper (or
garlic and ginger paste can also
added). This is very good effect in
subsiding gaseous distension of
abdomen and anorexia.

. Acne: Leaf paste with lemon juice

can be mixed and applied over
face. This is useful to overcome
black heads and acne.

Strengthens the bone: The soup
prepared from drumstick pods is
very much useful in treating the
diseases of liver, spleen, pancreas
etc. This is an aphrodisiac also. It
strengthens the bones and joints
too.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 109 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Sukshmaila Vernacular names
Assamese : Sarooplaachi
Flettaria cardamomum, Zingiberaceae Bengali Chota elaich
English : Cardamom
Gujrati : Elchi, Elachi, Elayachi
Hindi : Choti llayachi
Kannada Elakki, Sanna Yalakki
Kashmiri : Kath
Malayalam : Elam, Chittelam
Marathi : Velloda, Lahanveldoda, Velchi
Oriya : Gujurati, Chotaa leicha, Alaicha
Punjabi Illachi, Chhoti Lachi
Tamil : Siruelam
Telugu : Chinne Elakulu, Sanna Elakulu
1. Bad breath: 2-3 gram of Uidu 8 (ntsel hie

cardamom powder is added to

150-200 ml of hot water and
is used for mouth gargling.
This helps to relieve nausea,
tastelessness, sore throat and bad
breath.

. Dysuria: 3gms of cardamom
powder mixed in 20ml of Amalaki
juice taken orally twice a day to
alleviate suppression of urine and
dysuria.

. Cough: Cardamom and_ sugar
candy are taken in 1:2 ratio and
powdered well. This is chewed
in the dose of 2 gram 3-4 times
a day. This is very effective in the
conditions like cold, cough, throat
congestion, asthma, dryness of
the mouth etc.

. Indigestion: Cardamom, rock salt
and dry ginger(Shunti) are taken
in equal amount and made into
fine powder. This is consumed in
the dose of 3 grams twice or thrice

a day along with warm water. This
is useful in indigestion, abdominal
bloating and food poisoning.

. Hiccup: 20 Dried cardamom pod

and one matured banana leaf are
taken together and burnt into
ashes. This is taken in the dose
of 2-3 gram along with honey
and licked frequently. This helps
to reduce the hiccup and gastric
irritation.

. Travelling sickness and nausea:

3 gms of Cardamom fine powder
with jaggery made into tablet and
keep it in mouth during travelling
is very effective in travelling
sickness and nausea.

. Head ache: If cardamom powder

is added to traditional tea or green
tea it helps to relieve head ache
and stress due to its good aroma.
This acts as a mood elevator also.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 110 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Guduchi juice should be applied
externally over the skin.

. Conjunctivitis: The cool decoction
of Sandal Wood (5gms of sandal
wood cooked in 100ml of water
and reduced it to 1/4th.) is used
for washing of the eyes.

. Burning sensations of body:
Take 5gms Sandal wood powder
in 100ml of rice water and add
little amount of sugar or honey
and take it internally twice daily
for curing burning sensations of
body.

. Acne: Equal quantity of Sandal
wood powder and almond
powder are made a paste by
adding milk. Apply this paste
on the face and neck to get
relief from acne and to get fair

©

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

Svetachandana Vernacular names
Assam : Sandale Avyaj
Santalum album, Santalaceae Bengali : Chandan
English : Sandal Wood
Gujarati =: Sukhad
Hindi : Chandan, Safed Chandan
Kannada : Shrigandhamara, Shrigandha,
Chand
Malayalam : Chandanam
Marati : Chandan
Punjabi : Chandan
Tamil : Chandana maram,
Sandanam, Ingam
Telugu : Gandhapu Chekka, Manchi
Gandham, Tella Chandanam,
Sriga
. Allergic rashes : Paste prepared Urdu —_:_ Sandal Safed
from equal quantity of chandana ;
(Sandal wood) powder and complexion.

. Prameha(Diabetes): Take 5gms

of Amalaki powder and 5gms of
sandal powder along with warm
water twice daily effective in
urinary related problem including
Diabetes.

. Headache: 5gms of sandal wood

powder made a paste by adding
few tulasi leave juice. Apply on
forehead and temples to relieve
from headache and reduce the
body temperature.

. Sun tan: 10gms of Sandal wood

powder, 4 almond seed powder
are made paste by adding little
Rose water. Apply on face for 15
min and wash with warm water.
The calming and healing property
of sandalwood softens the skin
helping in treating sun tan.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 111 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

op eye tre
Vernacular names
Takkolam
_. . English : Star anise
Micium anisatum,

Schisandraceae Hindi : Chakra Phool, Anasphal

Malayalam : Takkolam

Marathi : Badian
Oriya : Anasphul
Tamil : Anashuppu
Telugu : Anaspuvu
Urdu : Badyani

like flatulence, bloating, colicky
stomach pain.

3. Lactation: The seed decoction of
takkolam (5 seeds boiled 100ml of
water and reduced it into 25ml) is
recommended to breastfeeding
mothers to enhance breast-milk
secretion.

4. Bad breath: The seeds usually
are chewed just after a meal to
invigorate the breath.

1. Indigestion: 3gms of of crushed
anise seeds in the cup of boiling

water boil it for Ten minutes. 5 Nasal congestion: Steam
Drink the tea after having a huge inhalation (10gms seeds powder
meal. It helps the digestion of the put in hot water to get steam) of
food and relieves flatulence. star anise acts as a decongestant

2. Cough: Anise powder 5gms with 6, Joint pain: Star anise essential oil
honey is a fantastic treatment applied topically is an excellent
for asthma, bronchitis cough in remedy for rheumatism and back
addition to digestive disorders pain.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 112 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ti | a Vernacular names
oo Assamese : Simmasim
Sesamum indicum, Bengali : Tilagachh
Pedaliaceae - ; ;

English : Sesame, Gingelly-oil Seeds
Gujrati : Tall
Hindi : Tila, Teel, Tili
Kannada : Accheellu, Ellu
Malayalam :  Ellu
Marathi =: Tila
Oriya : Ti
Punjabi : Ti
Tamil > Ellu
Telugu > Nuvvulu
Urdu : Kunjad

=r
>=

1. Anemia: Make chikkis or any taken with hot water twice daily,

other homemade sweets using acts as an excellent remedy in
black sesame seeds and jaggery reducing the spasmodic cramps
and have them regularly. Black during menstruation.

sesame seeds are richer source
of iron than white sesame seeds,
are highly beneficial in treating
anemia.

4. Hair growth : Scalp is massaged
regularly with the sesame
oil increases the hair growth,

prevents dandruff and splitting of
2. Earache: Warm 10 ml of sesame the hair.

oil along with a couple of garlic
cloves and put 2 — 3 drops luke
warm of prepared oil,in the ears.
This will soften the wax in the
ears, which can then be easily 6. Piles: 5gm Sesame seeds powder
cleaned. This is also beneficial in is administered with butter
treating earache. reduces the pain and bleeding in
Haemorrhoids.

5. Toothache: Chewing sesame
seeds early morning regularly
reduce the toothache.

3. Dysmerrhoea: one teaspoonful
of the powder of sesame seeds,

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 113 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Tulasi

Ocimum sanctum,
Lamiaceae

. Intermittent fever (Vishama
jwara): Admnistration of 10 ml
Krishna tulasi leaf juice mixed
with 2 gm Maricha (Pepper)
powder thrice a day is beneficial.

. Cough: Consuming 10ml of

Krishna tulasi leaves juice with 6,

honey, twice or thrice a day is
useful in cough and cold.

. Itching rashes (Skin Allergy):

External application of Tulasi leaf 7,

paste over the affected skin is
useful.

. Headache: Installation of the 2
drops of tulasi fresh leaves juice in
both nostrils on empty stomach

Vernacular names

Assamese : Tulasi
Bengali ulasi
English Holy Basil
Gujrati ulasi, Tulsi
Hindi ulasi
Kannada ulasi, Shree Tulasi,

Vishnu Tulasi
Malayalam : Tulasi, Tulasa
Marathi ulas
Punjabi ulasi
Tamil ulasi, Thulasi, Thiru Theezai
Telugu ulasi
Urdu : Raihan, Tulsi

st
daily helps to relieve sinusitis

5.

related headache.

Wound: Regular External
application of tulasi leaves and
garlic fine paste over the wound
will destroy the maggots in
wound.

Bad breath: chewing one or two
holy basil (tulasi) leaves daily
helps to relieve bad breath issue.
It also improves digestion.

Fungal infection: Take equal
quantity of Basil tulasi leaves and
neem leaves paste added with
pinch of turmeric. Application
of this paste is useful to cure the
fungal infection.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 114 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

TV A IK Vernacular names
. . Assamese : Dalcheni
Cinnamomum zeylanicum, Bengali : Daruchini, Darchini
Lauraceae - .

English : Cinnamon bark
Gujrati : Dalchini
Hindi : Dalchini
Kannada: Dalchini Chakke
Kashmiri : Dalchini, Dalchin
Malayalam : Karuvapatta, llavarngathely
Marathi =: Dalchini
Oriya : Dalechini, Guda twak
Punjabi : Dalchini, Darchini
Tamil : Lavangapattai, Karuvapattai
Telugu : Lavangapatta, Dalchini chekka
Urdu : Darchini

| MedicinalUses Diabetes: This is a popular

1. Anaemia: Mix % teaspoonful spice and is a strong stimulator
of cinnamon powder and two of insulin activity and thus

teaspoonfuls of honey in one Sey er te er
cup of pomegranate juice and labetes. intake oF 2 teaspoonru

have it for a few months. It will Of Peteltisd citmenien wild

help the anaemic patients to water daily.

improve the hemoglobin. 5. Fever: Add 3 crushed cloves,

2 cardamoms, 6-7 basil leaves
and 1 tsp of cinnamon to 2 cups
of water. Boil and drink this

2. Memory enhancement: Every
night, take half a teaspoonful
of honey mixed with 3gms

of powdered cinnamon. This
improves memory.

Palpitation: In cases of
palpitation one should, chewed
a piece of cinnamon.

decoction, once or twice a day.

Insomnia: Add % teaspoonful
of cinnamon powder and 1
teaspoonful of honey to 1 cup
of warm milk. Drink before going
to bed.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 115 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

Vernacular names
Assamese :

Tvakpatra

Tejpat, Mahpat

CGinnamomum tamala, Lauraceae Bramngel Clete Teste
English indian Cinnamon
Gujrati : Tamala patra, Develee
Hindi : Tejpatra
Kannada amalapatra, Dalchini Ele
Kashmiri Dalchini pan, Tajpatra
Malayalam : Karuvapatta patram
Marathi amalpatra
Oriya : Tejapatra
Punjabi ajpater
Tamil : Lavangapatri
Telugu : Akupatri
1. Dandruff: Make an infusion of Tey U4 + Tezpat

patta( soak 10 leaves in 50ml of

hot water for 1-2 hours), add it to stimulant and beneficial in

the shampoo and use it. It helps indigestion.

OWEBCEMEEL 5. Clean Teeth: To get sparkling

2. Dyslipidaemia: Consume 5gms of

Bay leaves (tej patta) powder with
honey daily on empty stomach in
morning for 30 days. It reduce the
blood glucose and cholesterol .

. Constipation: Intake of tej patta
tea (Boil 3 bay leaves in 50ml of
water for 5-10min) can alleviate
common digestive disorders
like constipation, acid reflux and
irregular bowel movements

. Indigestion: 3 grams of bay
leaves powder, a piece of ginger
are boiled in 200 ml of water till
Ya water remains. Consume this
decoction with honey twice a
day. It also acts as an appetite

white teeth, brush teeth with
powdered bay leaves once in 3
days.

. Insect Repellent: Bay leaves

are a great insect repellent as
they contain lauric acid. Topical
application of the paste made
from leaves powder and little
coconut oil relieves stings and
bites when applied topically

. Urinary calculi: Boil 3 grams of

bay leaves, 3 cardamom in 200
ml of water till 50 ml of water
remains. Strain and drink this
twice daily. This will stop the
formation of kidney stones.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 116 -----
Vacha

Acorus calamus,
Araceae

. Headache: A pinch of powder
prepared from equal quantities of
pippali and vacha is blown (Snuff)
in each nostrils which induces
sneezing and nasal discharge

thereby reduce the tension
headache.
. Memory and speech

improvement: Regular intake of
vacha (500mg) mixed with honey
and ghee, early morning in empty
stomach for 1 month is highly
beneficial.

. Anxiety: Vacha_ oil has
tranquilizing effect, hence regular
use over the scalp will reduce the
anxiety.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
English : The Sweet Flag
Gujrati : Ghoduvaj, Ghodvach
Hindi Bach, Gora-bach
Kannada Baje, Narru Berua
Malayalam : Vayambu
Marathi : Vaca, Vekhandas
Punjabi : Varch, Ghodavaca
Tamil : Vasambu, Pillai maruntho
Telugu : Vasa
Urdu : Waja-e-Turki
4. Epilepsy: Vacha powder 500mg

6.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

with honey —_ administered
internally twice a day is beneficial
in epilepsy. During this treatment
only milk diet advised for more
effectiveness.

. Cough: Administration of 250mg

vacha powder and 1gm_ of
licorice powder along with honey
twice a day is useful in common
paediatric problems like cough,
fever, pain in the abdomen etc.

Stammering: Vacha_ rhizome
powder, if consumed daily in the
dose of 100 to 500 mg with honey
is very beneficial for stammering
speech and also in strengthening
the nervous system. It should be
noted that a dose above 1 gram
may lead to vomiting.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 117 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vas a Vernacular names
Assamese : Titabahak, Bahak, Vachaka
Adhatoda vasica, Bengali : Baksa, Vasaka
Acanthaceae
English : Vasaka
Gujrati : Aduso, Ardusi, Adulso
Hindi : Aduss, Arusa
Kannada: Adsale, Adusoge, Atarusha,

Adsole, Adasale
Kashmiri : Vasa

Malayalam : Attalataka m, Atalotakam

Marathi : Vasa, Adulsa

Oriya : Basanga

Punjabi : Bhekar, Vansa, Arusa
Tamil : Vasambu, Adathodai
Telugu : Addasaramu

Urdu : Adusa, Basa

1. Jaundice: 5ml of vasa leaves
juice and 5 ml honey should be
given three times daily in cases 4. Joint pains: A poultice of vasa

=
>=

of cough, fever, bronchial asthma leaves applied over the swelling
and jaundice. of joints in order to get the relief
from pain.

2. Bleeding piles: 20 gms of vasa
leaves paste boiled in 100 ml
of water till it reduced to 25ml.

5. Menorrhagia: Internal
administration of 15 ml of vasa
leaves juice with jaggery twice a

Internal administration of this . .
day is beneficial.

decoction twice daily is useful to
cure bloody diarrhoea, bleeding 6. Bronchial Asthma: 10ml of vasa

piles etc. leaves juice added with 3gms of

. dry ginger, 2gms of long pepper

3. Tuberculosis: Gulkand prepared and honey is given twice daily

from Vasa flowers is beneficial in is useful in cases of bronchial
tuberculosis. asthma, and cough.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 118 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vatama Vernacular names

Prunus amygdalus, English : Almond
Rosaceae Hindi : Badam

Kannada : Baadaami, Badaami, Badamu

Malayalam : Badam, Badamkotta

Marathi : Baadaam

Tamil : Vaadumai, Vatamkottai

Telugu : Baadaamu
+

4. As Rejuvenation : 5 no Almonds,
3gms Ashwagandha root, pinch
of pippali root powder with Ghee
followed by Sugar mixed milk ,
before going to bed. It also induces
good sleep. This boosts the energy
and provides stamina. This acts as a
immune-modulator too.

1. Memory enhancement: Soak a
few almonds in water overnight
and next morning peel off the thin
red skin and ground it into a paste. 5
Have one teaspoonful of this paste
daily with milk before breakfast
regularly for a period of three to
four months will prove to be to
improve the memory in children. 6. Dark circles and black heads:

Regular application of almond
oil over the lesions of black head
and dark circles around the eyes
will relieve the complaints very
effectively. 14-21 days application
brings considerable change.

. Anxiety: Inhalation of almond oil
soothes nerves (goes to sinus and a
part gets absorbed by nerve tissue)
and reduce the anxiety.

2. Lactation: Eating four almonds
in the morning that have been
soaked overnight helps to improve
the flow of milk.

3. High Cholesterol: Almonds are
highly nutritious nuts and contain 7
monounsaturated fat, which is
known to reduce cholesterol
markedly reverse the altered lipid
levels to normal range.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

. Toothache: In the case of tooth
ache as well as gum diseases, burn
the shells of almonds, powder, and
make use of as tooth powder.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 119 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing oi dv

Ot ep are
Yashtimadhu Vernacular names
Assamese : Jesthimadhu, Yeshtmadhu
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Fabaceae Bengali : Yashtimadhu
English : Liquorice root
Gujrati : Jethimadha, Jethimard,
Jethimadh
Hindi : Mulethi, Mulathi, Muleti,
Jethimadhu, Jethimadh
Kannada: Jestamadu, Madhuka,

Jyeshtamadhu, Atimadhura
Kashmiri =: Multhi
Malayalam :  lrattimadhuram

Marathi : Jesthamadh
Oriya : Jatimadhu, Jastimadhu
Punjabi : Jethimadh, Mulathi
Tamil : Athimadhuram
| MedicinalUses Telugu : Atimadhuramu
1. Insomnia: Consume 5gms of Urdu : Mulethi, Asl-us-sus
Yashtimadhu (licorice) — root =

powder in 100 ml of warm milk
daily night before going to bed
for 30 days is good for insomnia.

2. Asthma drink: Take 3gms_ of
licorice root powder in 100ml
of water and boiled like tea.
Drinking this tea two to three
times a day good for asthma.
Yashtimadhu (Licorice) tea can
also treat depression.

with normal water will help to
keep the skin moisturized for dry
skin persons.

4. Gastritis: 5 gms of Yashtimadhu
(Licorice) boiled in 100ml of milk
and reduced it into 50m . Internal
administration of this milk twice
daily relieves peptic ulcer disease,
heartburn, as well as gastritis

5. Menstrual cramps: Consuming
Yashtimadhu (licorice) root tea
every day starting three days
before suspected Menstrual cycle
periods of the month can help
to reduce PMS symptoms and
muscle cramps.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)

3. Face pigmentation: Make a paste
with Yashtimadhu — (Licorice)
powder mixed with few drops of
coconut oil, Almond oil and milk.
Use this pack on the face and
allow it to dry. Rinse the face pack
-------------------------

----- PAGE 120 -----
Yavani

Trachyspermum ammi,
Apiaceae

. Earache: 3 grams of Ajwain seeds
with 5 Garlic cloves are boiled in
50 ml of sesame oil until it turns
red. Filter the oil and instill 2-3
drops in the ear for earache.

. Cold: 5 grams of Ajwain seeds
crush them and tie in a cloth and
inhale it. Or add 10 gms of Ajwain
to a bowl of boiling water and
inhale the steam to relieve Nasal
block

. Flatulence & Colic: 3 gms of
Ajwain seed powder and 3 gms of
dried Ginger powder with a little
amount of Black salt are mixed
and consume with warm water
twice or thrice a day internally.

©

Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Vernacular names
Assamese : Jain
Bengali : Yamani, Yauvan, Yavan, Javan,
Yavani, Yoyana
English Bishop’s weed
Gujrati Ajma, Ajmo, Yavan, Javain
Hindi Ajwain, Jevain
Kannada Oma, Yom, Omu
Kashmiri Kath
Malayalam : Omam, Ayanodakan
Marathi Onva
Oriya + Juani
Punjabi Lodhar
Tamil Omam
Telugu : Vamu
4. Chronic bronchitis: Mix Ajwain

6.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi

powder with Jagger in equal
quantity, heat the mixture to make
a paste and take 2 teaspoonful
twice a day.

Sprains: Make paste of 10 gms
of Ajwain seed powder, little salt
and turmeric in gingerly oil and
apply thick luke warm paste on
the sprained area.

Sore throat: 5gms of Ajwain seed
powder boiled in 100ml of water.
Use this water for Gargling for
Sore throat.
-------------------------

----- PAGE 121 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

oO ONAN PWN

Oo

References

. Alternative Herbal Index http://onhealth.webmed.com/alternative/resource/herbs/

index.asp

Alternative Medicine Connection: www.arxc.com

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia: http://www.herbal-aph.org

Ayurvedic medicines: www.dabur.com, www.thehimalayadrugco.com

British HerbalMedicine Association: http://www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/bhma.html
Chinese Medicine: http://www.cintcm.com/index.htm

Congress on Alternative and Complimentary Therapies: www.alternativemed.com
European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy (ESCOP): http://www.escop.com

Facts and Comparisons, The Review of Natural Products: www.factsandcomparisons.
com

. Herbs, Chemistry:

http://friedle.com (flavonoids)
http://realtime.net/anr (Austin Nutritional Research)
http://www.aspp.org (Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of plants)

. HerbMed: http://www.herbmed.org

Herbal Past and Present Database:
http://www.extra.hu/hbock/dbase/index.html

. Herb Research Foundation (HRF): http://www.herbs.org

Links to Medline: www.herbmed.org
http://www.nlIm.nih.gov/medlineplus/herbalmedicine.html

. National Centre for Complimentary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM):

http://nccam.nih.gov

. National Library of Medicine: www.nlmgateway.com
. Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database: www.naturaldatabase.com
6. World Health Organization (WHO):

http://who.int/medicines/library/trm/medicinalplants/monographs.shtm

. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India. Vol |

to VII New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

8. Easy Ayurveda - Health and lifestyle blog by Dr JV Hebbar https://easyayurveda.com/

9. Prabhakara Rao G, Sahasrayogam Compendium of 1000 Ayurvedic Formulation,

Chaukhamba Publications, New Delhi, 2016

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 122 -----
A) Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing
oft wg tore
20. Siddha Medicine & Natural Treatment www.siddham.in/
21. Planet Ayurveda - Herbal Remedies | Natural Supplements | Products
www.planetayurveda.com/
22. Bimbima - Daily life experience of ayurvedic medicines ...
https://www.bimbima.com/
23. Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. ,New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2002.
24. Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1986.

25. Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Vol. 2. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Bharati, 1982.

26. Warrier PK et al. eds. Indian medicinal plants. Madras:
Orient Longman Ltd., 1995.

27. Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi:
Springer (India) Private Limited, 2007.

28. Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Allahabad:
LM Basu, 1989.

29. Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

30. Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Vishvabharati, 1996.

31. Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Vol. Il. Varanasi:
Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 2001.

32. Caraka, Caraka Samhita, Part Il, Pande, G., Ed., Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office,
Varanasi, U.P. India, 1970,

33. Anon., Hand Book of Domestic & Common Ayurvedic Remedies, 1st ed., Central
Council for Research in Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, New Delhi, India, 1978,

34. Das, G., Bhaishajyaratnavali, Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi, U.P. India,
1997,

35. Raghunathan, K., Pharmacopoeial Standards for Ayurvedic Formulations, Central
Council for Research in Indian Medicine and Homeopathy, New Delhi, India, 1976,

36. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary of India. New Delhi:
Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2000.

e) Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 123 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

37. Lavekar GS et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. New Delhi:

Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2007.

38. Nadkarni AK. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay: Popular Prakashana,

1976.

39, Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian medicinal plants Vol. 1.lI, Lucknow:

Central Drug Research Institute, and New Delhi: Publications and Information

Directorate, Council of Science and Industrial Research, 1993.

40. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary of India. New Delhi:

Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2000.

41. Chatterjee A, Prakashi SC. The treatise on Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi:

Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science and Industrial

Research, 1992.

42. Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India. New Delhi: ICMR,
1976.

43. Mitra Roma. Bibliography on pharmcognosy of medicinal plants. Lucknow: National
Botanical Research Institute, 1985.

44. Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Wealth of India: raw materials.
New Delhi: CSIR, 1985.
45. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants, Ram P. Rastogi and BN Mehrotra, Central
Drug Research Institute, Lucknow. Published by NISCAIR, CSIR, New Delhi.
46. Dictionary of Indian Medicinal Plants, Akhtar Husain et al., Central Institute of
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow.
47. ESCOP (European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy), The Scientific Foundation
or Herbal Medicinal Products, completely revised and expanded, second edn.,
Georg Thieme Verlag, Germany.
48. Formulary of Siddha Medicines, The Indian Medical Practitioners’ Cooperative
Pharmacy and Stores Ltd., (IMPCOPS), Chennai.

49. Medicinal Plants used in Ayurveda, Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (National
Academy of Ayurveda), New Delhi.

50. Phytochemical Investigations of Certain Medicinal Plants used in Ayurveda, Central
Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS), New Delhi.

51. Plants of Bhava Prakash, Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (National Academy of
Ayurveda), New Delhi.

52. Plants of Sharangadhara Samhita, Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (National
Academy of Ayurveda), New Delhi.

53. The Wealth of India, Vol. | to XI, original series, NISCAIR, New Delhi.

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi e)
-------------------------

----- PAGE 124 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

First National Ayurveda Day celebrations at
ESIC Head Quarters New Delhi

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 125 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 126 -----
Ayurveda offering Herbal Healing

as
4 {ai
ivg

Ayush Division , Head Quarters, Employees’ State insurance Corporation, New Delhi
-------------------------

----- PAGE 127 -----

-------------------------

----- PAGE 128 -----

-------------------------


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: herbal-treatment-common-diseases-west-africaok.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal Treatment of Common
Diseases in West Africa

----- PAGE 2 -----
ORGANISATION OUEST AFRICAINE DE LA SANTE
BOBO-DIOULASSO (BURKINA FASO)
Tel. (226) 20 97 57 75/Fax (226) 20 97 57 72
E-mail : wahooas@fasonet.bf -
Site web: www.wahooas.org

Herbal Treatment of Common Diseases
in West Africa

Bobo-Dioulasso, Décembre 2011.

----- PAGE 3 -----
Contents

Introduction ...........
Sickle cell anaemia
HIV/AIDS.........020
Tuberculosis
Malaria
Diabetes ...
Arterial hypertension
Asthma
Azoospermia
Gallstones ......
Kidney stones ....
Liver cirrhosis ..........
Erectile dysfunction .
Gonorrhoea
Haemorrhoids
Hepatitis
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Urinary tract infections
Sexually transmitted infections
Male infertility-oligospermia ...
Otitis media ....
Allergic rhinitis .
Sinusitis ..........
Breast cancer
Prostate cancer
Leukaemia
Diarrhoea

Peptic ulcer disease
Insomnia ............200++
Depression ..
Schizophrenia ...
Alcoholism .........
Anxiety disorders
Boils
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Gingivitis and stomatitis
Oral thrush
Malnutrition...
Stroke ..........
Eczema (Dermatitis) ...
Rheumatoid arthritis .
Osteoarthritis ...........
Liver cancer

----- PAGE 4 -----
Foreword

The manner in which herbal medicines are used varies widely among populations worldwide.
Whilst some people use herbal medicines alone (often as an alternative to a conventional
medical treatment), others used them in combination with other alternative therapies, or
along with conventional medical therapies.

Given the increasing popularity of herbal medicine globally, it is imperative that all healthcare
professionals, health training and research institutions as well as all other stakeholders have
some basic knowledge of the most common herbs patients often use for disease treatment.

This is important for two main reasons. Firstly, it is important for health personnel to have an
understanding of all the health services their patients may be accessing. Secondly, since
health personnel (especially doctors, nurses and pharmacists) are often used by patients to
access information on all health and health-related issues, knowledge of the main indications
and actions of these herbs will enable them to advise their patients appropriately.

In view of this, the WHO/AFRO developed some generic training modules, guidelines and
model protocols, with the aim of deepening understanding of both Traditional Medicine
Practitioners and Conventional Medical Practitioners in key aspects of traditional medicine,
especially herbal medicine. These tools included a training module on primary health care
and malaria for conventional health practitioners and traditional health practitioners; and
model protocols for priority diseases such as HIV/AIDS, sickle cell anaemia, diabetes and
hypertension. PROMETRA International has also added to this repertoire of training tools
and protocols.

Using these materials, some institutions in Ghana, Kenya, Burkina Faso, Mali, Benin, Guinea
and Nigeria have already conducted systematic research on traditional medicines used for
the management of diseases such as malaria, hypertension, diabetes, sickle cell anaemia
among others.

However, to date there appears to be no reference document of African origin that provides
basic information on the herbal treatment of the most common diseases that affect the
populations.

The development of this booklet is a modest attempt by the West African Health
Organisation to address this need.

Among other things, the booklet will serve as a useful source of information on the herbal
treatment of these diseases for doctors, pharmacists, Traditional Medicine Practitioners,
medical herbalists and students of African Traditional Medicine.

Dr Johanna Austin Benjamin
Director, Department of Primary Healthcare and Disease Contol

----- PAGE 5 -----
Preface

Herbal medicines are assuming greater importance in the primary health care of many
countries around the world, with an attendant increase in international trade. For example,
between 2003-2004 annual revenues in Western Europe reached US$ 5 billion, whilst in
China, sales of products totaled US$ 14 billion in 2005. Revenue from herbal medicines in
Brazil amounted to US$ 160 million in 2007.

Herbs are used to treat a wide variety of both acute and chronic conditions such as simple
bruises, skin disorders, fever, malaria, hypertension, diabetes, sickle cell anaemia, sexual
weakness, piles, and even for combating rapid development of AIDS in People Living With
HIV.

Apart from being used directly as therapeutic agents, medicinal plants are also important for
pharmacological research and drug development, as they provide new leads for the
synthesis of essential medicines.

Herbs contain a multiplicity of related compounds that interact. For this reason, herbalists
argue that the sum of the biological effects of these compounds is often greater than the so-
called "major active ingredient", and that these families of compounds can act on several
different targets simultaneously to give overall biological benefit. For example, the compound
lycopene found in tomato is thought to be a potent antioxidant, but has also been found to
have effects on prostate cells, on DNA and on cellular communication. However, research in
experimental animals have shown that purified lycopene lacks the anti-prostate cancer
activity characteristic of tomato paste, which contains the plant’s full complement of related
phytochemicals including lycopene, phytoene, and phytofluene. Furthermore, it has been
shown that the contributions of other analogues of the so-called active compound, or even
unrelated compounds to the biologically effective dose, can minimize the risk of toxicity.

In the light of the foregoing, vis-a-vis the current upsurge of interest in herbal preparations as
alternatives to pharmaceuticals, it has become even more necessary for doctors and other
health care professionals to understand the actions and indications of medicinal plants to
ensure consumer safety. This is all the more pertinent given the erroneous view many
people have of herbal medicines as being totally free of adverse effects because they are
natural.

This document, which has been prepared through a series of meetings of experts drawn from
the ECOWAS sub-region and coordinated by the Programme Officer for Traditional
Medicine, Dr Kofi Busia, outlines the causes, clinical features, methods of investigation and
the the modern approach to treatment of some of the most common diseases that affect
West Africans. Above all, information on the herbs used to treat the various diseases
together with prevention and control measures is also provided.

It is hoped that this booklet, together with others yet to be produced, will serve as a useful
adjunt to the West African Herbal Pharmacopoeia.

Dr Placido Cardoso
Director General

----- PAGE 6 -----
List of Abbreviations

ECOWAS

WHO

WAHO

TMP

PROMETRA

WAHP

Economic Community of West African States
World Health Organisation

West African Health Organisation

Traditional Medicine Practitioner

Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle

West African Herbal Pharmacopoeia

----- PAGE 7 -----
Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), nearly four billion people, 80% of the
world's especially in Asia and Africa presently use herbal medicine for some aspect of
primary health care.

Interest in and usage of herbal preparations as alternatives to pharmaceuticals and the
search for drugs and dietary supplements derived from plants have accelerated in recent
years. Many of the pharmaceuticals currently available to physicians, such as opium, aspirin,
digitalis, and quinine, are derived from herbal remedies. In fact, according to the World
Health Organisation, approximately 25% of modern drugs used in the United States have
been derived from plants.

The rise in popularity of herbal medicine is also attributed to disenchantment with the cost,
complexity and perceived limitations of modern medicine.

Herbal remedies are available in many forms, such as teas, infusions, pills, powders,
capsules, extracts, and syrups. Many can be bought over the counter. While complete safety
and efficacy data for all herbal remedies are not available, many have been well established
through historic use.

This manual is brilliantly organized to serve as a “ready reference” on the most common
diseases that affect West Africans and the available treatment methods (conventional and
traditional).

The information presented in the following pages has been obtained from extensive
academic research of herbal literature that ranges from ancient herbal texts to modern
phytopharmaceutical journals. Moreover, much of the language used throughout the text is in
the vernacular of modern orthodox medicine and the diseases are outlined using
conventional medical terminology, and the plants indicated for diseases have been listed as
it is done in conventional medicine.

However, it must be emphasized that in herbal medicine, disease is not seen as a separate
entity and therefore is not treated as such. Herbs work to strengthen weakened body
systems by stimulating the body's own innate, self healing mechanisms. Indeed, the best
way to obtain the benefits of herbal medicine is to combine herbs with each other. Although a
single herb such as echinacea can be helpful, the really dramatic results are obtained
through the synergistic reaction that occurs when herbs are combined together.

Thus, herbal treatment must be part of a multi-modal holistic programme that embodies a
natural wholesome diet, ample exercise and rest, a positive attitude, fulfilling work, and a
simple lifestyle. This combination will almost always have a favorable influence on one's
health and often induces healing where modern medicine has failed.

However, it must be understood that there can never be any guarantees that herbs will
always help or heal every health problem for which they are indicated. There is no form of
medicine, herbal or otherwise, that can make such a guarantee.

Dr Kofi Busia

Programme Officer, Traditional Medicine

West African Health Organisation

01 BP 153 Bobo Dioulasso 01, Burkina Faso

Tel: (226) 20 97 57 75/20 97 01 00

Cel: +226 76 74 62 89

Fax: (226) 20 97 57 72

Email: kbusia@wahooas.org/Kofi_busia@hotmail.com

----- PAGE 8 -----
N° 1: SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA

1. Description

Sickle cell anaemia (or anaemia, SCA) or “drepanocytosis” is caused by an inherited
abnormal haemoglobin (an oxygen-carrying protein within the red blood cells). The abnormal
haemoglobin causes distorted (sickled) red blood cells, which are fragile and prone to
rupture. Decrease in the number of red blood cells from rupture (haemolysis), results in
anemia. The irregular sickled cells can block blood vessels causing tissue and organ
damage and pain.

Sickle-cell disease occurs more commonly in people (or their descendants) from parts of
tropical and sub-tropical regions where malaria is or was endemic. In these areas, carrying
only a single sickle-cell gene (sickle cell trait) appears to confer immunity from malaria.
Those with only one of the two alleles of the sickle-cell disease, while not totally resistant, are
more tolerant to the infection and thus show less severe symptoms when infected.

Nearly 120 million people worldwide are carriers. According to the WHO in the coming
decades, the number of carriers of hemoglobin disorders would peak at around 8% of the
world population. Approximately one fifth of those who have the disease may show
symptoms. The incidence in Africa varies from 8-15%, sometimes 20 to 30%. Previously,
patients had shortened life expectancy. For example in 1994, in the US, the average life
expectancy of persons with this condition was estimated to be 42 years in males and 48
years in females, but today, due to improved diagnostic methods and better management of
the disease, patients can live into their 50s or beyond.

2. Causes

Sickle cell anaemia is inherited as an autosomal (i.e. the gene is not linked to a sex
chromosome) recessive condition, which is passed from parent to child. The inheritance of
just one sickle gene is called sickle cell trait or the "carrier" state. Sickle cell trait does not
cause sickle cell anemia. Persons with sickle cell trait usually do not have many symptoms of
disease and have normal hospitalization rates and life expectancies. In order for sickle cell
anaemia to occur, a sickle cell gene must be inherited from both the mother and the father,
so that the child has two sickle cell genes. The offspring of two carriers of sickle cell trait, a
one in four chance of having sickle cell anemia. (In some parts of Africa, one in five persons
is a carrier for sickle cell trait.) This is why some communities discourage marriages between
two people with the disease or trait.

The sickling is promoted by conditions which are associated with low oxygen levels, cold,
humidity, increased acidity, or low volume (dehydration) of the blood. These conditions can
occur as a result of injury to the body's tissues, dehydrating states, or anesthesia.When not
receiving enough oxygen, red blood cells become sickle-shaped and grows, and can not
easily pass through small capillaries that are in the body, causing pain.

3. Signs and symptoms

Virtually all of the major symptoms of sickle cell anemia are the direct result of the
abnormally shaped, sickled red blood cells blocking the flow of blood that circulates through
the tissues of the body. The tissues with impaired circulation suffer damage from lack of
oxygen. Damage to tissues and organs of the body can cause severe disability in patients
with sickle cell anemia. The patients endure episodes of intermittent "crises" of variable
frequency and severity, depending on the degree of organ involvement.

Some features of sickle cell anemia, such as fatigue, anaemia, pain crises, and bone infarcts
can occur at any age. Many features typically occur in certain age groups.

Sickle cell anemia usually first presents symptoms in the first year of life. Infants and younger
children can suffer with fever, abdominal pain, pneumococcal bacterial infections, painful
swellings of the hands and feet (dactylitis), and splenic sequestration. Adolescents and
young adults more commonly develop leg ulcers, aseptic necrosis, and eye damage.

----- PAGE 9 -----
Symptoms in adult typically are intermittent pain episodes due to injury of bone, muscle, or
internal organs.

Complications of sickle cell disease are: priapism leading to impotence, circulatory collapse
and stroke.

4. Investigations

Sickle cell anemia is suggested when the abnormal sickle-shaped cells in the blood are
identified under a microscope. In industrialized countries, the diagnosis is made in the
neonatal period when parents are at risk or afflicted. In non-industrialized countries, the
diagnosis is often the first manifestation or complication.

Apart from the findings common to all hemolytic anemias, diagnosis relies on the detection of
hemoglobin S. This can be done:

- Observation under a microscope of a smear of blood using a special low-oxygen
preparation, called sickle prep. Other prep tests can also be used to detect the
abnormal hemoglobin S, including solubility tests performed on tubes of blood
solutions.

By haemoglobin electrophoresis test of the hemolysate of red blood cells which show, in the
homozygote, a single band of hemoglobin migrating abnormally slowly, and in the
heterozygous presence of two bands of hemoglobin, which is the fastest hemoglobin A and
the other hemoglobin S. Prenatal diagnosis (before birth) of sickle cell anemia is possible
using amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. The sample obtained is then tested for
DNA analysis of the fetal cells.

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern

The treatment of sickle cell anemia is designed according to which of the individual features
of the illness are present. In general treatment is directed at the management and prevention
of the acute manifestations as well as therapies directed toward blocking the red blood cells
from stacking together. There is no single remedy to reverse the anemia. It is, therefore,
important that family members have an optimal understanding of the illness and that
communication with the doctors and medical personnel be maintained.

Treatment of sickle cell anaemia is based on:
- Treatment of vaso-occlusive crisis: painkillers and oxygen therapy;
- Prevention of the triggers of the crisis (cold, altitude, infections, dehydration);
- Folate supplementation;
- Preventive treatment of meningococcal and pneumococcal infections;
- Blood transfusion in cases of severe anaemia or severe infection.

Hydroxyurea is a medication that is currently being used in adults and children with severe
pain from sickle cell anemia. It acts by increasing the amount of fetal haemoglobin (a form of
haemoglobin resistant to sickling of the red blood cells) in the blood. This drug appears to
significantly reduce the number of painful crises and mortality of the disease. However, its
effect is variable and unpredictable from patient to patient. Hydroxyurea can be toxic to the
bone marrow. The other obstacle to its use is its cost.

5.2. Herball treatment

Treatment may be beneficial through: education, empowerment, symptomatic pain
management, use of medicinal plants such as Zanthoxylum zanthoxyloides, Calotropis
procera, Khaya senegalensis, Sorghum bicolor and Carica papaya.

6. Prevention and control

Prevention of pneumococcal infections in young children is by vaccination. Blood
transfusions could significantly reduce the risk of vascular-cerebral accidents in some

----- PAGE 10 -----
children particularly at risk. To avoid attacks, it is recommended to follow the following simple
steps:

Drink water frequently;

Sleep in or use well-ventilated rooms

Maintain stable weigh

Keep warm

Eat foods rich in iron, or facilitate iron absorption (red meat, liver pate ...)

Avoid cold environments and respiratory infections;

Wear loose clothing;

Avoid extreme heat (dehydration triggers crises by increasing blood viscosity).

7. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html
http://www.medicinenet.com/sickle_cell/article.htm

----- PAGE 11 -----
N° 2: HIV/AIDS

1. Description

HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is the cause of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome). HIV is a type of virus called a retrovirus, which infects humans when it comes
into contact with a break in the skin or tissues such as those that line the vagina, anal area,
mouth, or eyes or through a break in the skin.

All countries of the world are affected by the disease, but Sub-Saharan Africa is by far the
worst affected region. According to the World Bank, in 2008, more than five million adults
and children were infected with HIV. In Céte d'Ivoire, the prevalence is 4.7%, Ghana 2.2%,
rising 1.8% in Burkina Faso. In Benin, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Togo, the prevalence rate is between 1.2% and 1.5%, while the
prevalence rate according to the Centers ANC is between 2.8% and 6.7%. Senegal, Niger
and Cape Verde have a prevalence of less than 1%. The available data is much more
"mixed" and complex. AIDS is the final stage of infection with HIV. An AIDS patient
necessarily has HIV infection, while all people infected with HIV do not necessarily have
developed AIDS.

Generally, three stages of HIV infection are described:

Initial stage (primary infection): occurs within weeks of acquiring the virus; often
characterized by a flu- or mono-like illness that generally resolves within weeks.

Stage of chronic asymptomatic infection: a long duration of infection without symptoms,
which lasts an average of 8-10 years.

Stage of symptomatic infection: the body's immune (or defence) system has been
suppressed and complications have developed, i.e. acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS). The symptoms are caused by the complications of AIDS, which include one or more
unusual infections ("opportunistic infections") or cancers, severe loss of weight, and
intellectual deterioration (called dementia).

2. Causes

HIV is present to variable degrees in the blood and genital secretions of virtually all
individuals infected with HIV, regardless of whether or not they have symptoms. The spread
of HIV can occur when these secretions come in contact with tissues such as those lining the
vagina, anal area, mouth, eyes (the mucus membranes), or with a break in the skin, such as
from a cut or puncture by a needle. The most common ways in which HIV is spreading
throughout the world include sexual contact, sharing needles, and by transmission from
infected mothers to their newborns during pregnancy, labour (the delivery process), or
breastfeeding.

3. Signs and symptoms

Rarely, some individuals develop complications of HIV that define AIDS within one year,
while others remain completely asymptomatic after as many as 20 years from the time of
infection. However, in the absence of antiretroviral therapy, the time for progression from
initial infection to AIDS is approximately eight to10 years.

Within weeks of infection, many people will develop the varied symptoms of primary or acute
infection, which typically has been described as a "mononucleosis" or "influenza"-like illness
but can range from minimal fever, aches and pains to very severe symptoms. The most
common symptoms of primary HIV infection are

e fever,

e aching muscles and joints,

e sore throat,

e swollen glands (lymph nodes) in the neck

Shortly after primary infection, most individuals enter a period of many years where they
have no symptoms at all. During this time, CD4 cells may gradually decline, and with this
decline in the immune system, patients may develop the mild symptoms of HIV such as
vaginal or oral candidiasis thrush (a fungal infection), fungal infections of the nails, a white

10

----- PAGE 12 -----
brush-like border on the sides of tongue called hairy leukoplakia, chronic rashes, diarrhoea,
fatigue, and weight loss. With a further decline in function of the immune system, patients are
at increasing risk of developing more severe complications of HIV, including many more
serious infections (opportunistic infections), malignancies, severe weight loss, and decline in
mental function.

4. Investigations
e ELISA for HIV antibodies-confirmed by a Western blot tes
e Tests can be done for these same antibodies in saliva, some providing results within
one to 20 minutes of testing

HIV antibodies usually develop within several weeks of infection. During this period, patients
may have symptoms of primary HIV infection, but will test negative by the standard testing
methods ("window period"). For the avoidance of doubt, a test that specifically detects the
presence of virus in the blood rather than the antibodies (e.g. tests for HIV RNA or p24
antigen) or a test that measures both HIV antibodies and p24 antigen, reducing the duration
of the window period from infection to diagnosis. Identifying and diagnosing individuals with
primary infection is important for early care and counseling and prevention of transmission to
others.

5. Treatment

e When HIV grows (that is, by reproducing itself), it acquires the ability to change
(mutate) its own structure. This mutation enables the virus to become resistant to
previously effective drug therapy.

e The goals of drug therapy are to prevent damage to the immune system by the HIV
virus and to halt or delay the progress of the infection to symptomatic disease.

e Therapy for HIV includes combinations of drugs that decrease the growth of the virus
to such an extent that the treatment prevents or markedly delays the development of
viral resistance to the drugs.

The best combination of drugs for HIV has not yet been defined, but one of the most
important factors is that the combination be well tolerated so that it can be followed
consistently without missing doses.

It is important to note that with effective antiretroviral therapy many of the signs and
symptoms of HIV as well as severity of immunosuppression can be completely reversed,
restoring even the most symptomatic patients to a state of excellent health.

5.1. Modern treatment

Management of HIV/AIDS is primarily assumed by practitioners of conventional medicine
including diagnosis, treatment with anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs, biological monitoring and
prevention.

5.2. Herbal treatment

Many patients use herbal therapy to treat HIV/AIDS symptoms. These resources, however,
remain poorly explored and exploited. Although many traditional healers consider themselves
able to treat HIV / AIDS, the evidence is insufficient. Among the most commonly used herbs
are: Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (root bark); Guiera senegalensis (leaves); Moringa oleifera
(leaves); Spirulina platensis; Adansonia digitata (stem bark); Momordica charantia (leaves);
Phyllanthus niruri (leaves); Alstonia boonei (stem bark) and Allium sativum (bulb).

6. Prevention and control

In Africa, five main sources for the spread of HIV have been noted:
e Multiplicity of sexual partners/infidelity;
e Poor perception of risk and denial of AIDS;
e The socio-economic subordination of women;
e Poverty;
e Prostitution

Other determinants that play a role in the spread of HIV are:
11

----- PAGE 13 -----
Degeneration of moral and social values
Illiteracy

Refusal to use condoms

Migration

Early sexual activity of girls with older partners
Prevalence of STls

Stigmatization of PLWHA

Lack of support for PLHHA

7. References

République du Bénin (2007) : Manuel de formation des praticiens de la médecine
traditionnelle sur la prise en charge des IST et du VIH/sida, Cotonou.

Banque Mondiale (2008) : Synthése de la réponse et épidémiologie du VIH/sida en
Afrique de l’ouest: implications pour la prévention, Programme mondial de lutte
contre le VIH/sida de la Banque mondiale.

ONUSIDA (2006) : Rapport sur Il’épidémie mondiale de Sida : profils de pays.

12

----- PAGE 14 -----
N° 3: TUBERCULOSIS

1. Description

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious, transmissible disease, caused by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. |t is the third leading cause of death from infectious disease worldwide,
affecting mostly people living in poor conditions, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Over 8
million new cases of TB occur each year worldwide. The incidence of the disease is very
high in Africa, with almost 13% against less than 1% in Asian countries. It is common among
intravenous drug users and HIV patients. TB can affect anyone, but the most susceptible
groups are people, who live with individuals with an active TB infection, poor or homeless
people, nationals from countries that have a high prevalence of TB, nursing-home residents
and prison inmates, alcoholics, and intravenous drug users, diabetics, certain cancers, and
HIV infection and health-care workers. Because of the frequent occurrence of relapses
(emergence of multidrug-resistance) and the fact that it is one of the opportunistic infections
of HIV/AIDS, pulmonary tuberculosis remains a public health concern in Africa and is
responsible for many deaths.

2. Causes

TB is most often caused by a germ called Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Mycobcaterium
Koch (BK). Tuberculosis is spread (transmitted). Human transmission is primarily from
person to person by inhaling infected air during close contact. The bacteria get into the air
when an infected person coughs, sneezes, shouts or spits. Thus, TB cannot be contrated by
just touching the clothes or shaking the hands of someone who is infected. When the inhaled
tuberculosis bacteria enter the lungs, they can reproduce and cause a local lung infection
(pneumonia). This may then provoke an enlargement of the local lymph nodes associated
with the lungs are even those adjacent to the heart in the central part of the chest. TB can
also spread to other parts of the body. There is also a form of atypical tuberculosis, caused
by the bacteria Mycobacterium bovis that is transmitted by drinking unpasteurized milk. It
used to be a major cause of TB in children, but it rarely causes TB now with the introduction
of pasteurized. Other forms of TB causatives agents are Mycobacterium africanum and
Mycobacterium canetti (mainly in Djibouti).

3. Signs and symptoms

TB can remain in an inactive (dormant) state for years without causing symptoms or
spreading to other people. The most common symptoms are generalized tiredness or
weakness, fever, weight loss, coughing, and night sweats, but in general the disease
progresses in two phases:

e A phase marked by early signs of tuberculosis comprising of a fever in the evening,
wasting (weight loss more than 10 kg), asthenia (fatigue), anorexia (lack of appetite),
amenorrhoea (absence of menstruation) in women, night sweats, etc.

e A phase state where cough is the main sign- chronic cough of more than three weeks
with muco-purulent, blood-stained sputum or chest pain and shortness of breath,
combined with the early signs of TB.

4. Investigations

The diagnosis of TB involves skin tests, chest X-rays, sputum analysis (smear and culture),
and PCR tests to detect the genetic material of the causative bacteria.

5. Treatment

5.1. Modern

The body's immune system is capable of fighting off the infection and stopping the spread of
the bacteria. However, when the immune system of a patient with dormant TB is weakened,
the TB can become active and cause infection in the lungs or other parts of the body.
e Inactive TB-treated with an antibiotic, isoniazid (INH), to prevent the infection from
becoming active

13

----- PAGE 15 -----
Active TB-treated with INH in combination with one or more of several drugs,
including rifampin (Rifadin), ethambutol (Myambutol), pyrazinamide, and
streptomycin.

Poor patient compliance, lack of detection of resistant strains, and unavailable
therapy are key reasons for the development of drug-resistant TB.

5.2. Herbal treatment

The most commonly used herbs for the treatment of TB include: Albizia lebbeck (stem bark);
Cassia sieberiana (stem bark); Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (stem bark)

6. Prevention and control

Bacille Calmette Guérin (BCG), derived from an atypical Mycobacterium, but offers some
protection from developing active tuberculosis, is a vaccine given throughout many parts of
the world, especially in infants and children.

Other preventative measures include:

Referrals to speciaist/TB clinics to avoid spread of the disease

Cover mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing,

Avoid spitting

Spit in a box with a lid containing bleach

Empty the contents every night in the toilet

Do not use the other covered during the treatment

Sleep alone if possible during the first month of treatment in a well ventilated room
Do not consume alcohol or tobacco

7. References

Tuberculose, Wikipédia

Guide de formation des ASC sur la prise en charge de la tuberculose, PNLT, Céte
d'Ivoire

Méthode FAPEG, PROMETRA

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.

http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

14

----- PAGE 16 -----
N° 4: MALARIA

1. Description

Malaria is an infectious disease caused by the Plasmodium parasite, which infects red blood
cells. The term "mal aria" (meaning "bad air" in Italian) was first coined in 1740 by H. Walpole
when describing the disease, and was shortened to "malaria" in the 20th century. Malaria
can be life-threatening, and is usually characterized by cycles of chills, fever, pain, and
sweating. Currently, about 2 million deaths per year worldwide are due to Plasmodium
infections. The majority occur in children under 5 years of age in sub-Saharan African
countries. There are about 400 million new cases per year worldwide. Plasmodium is
transmitted to humans by the bite of the female Anopheles mosquito. Mosquitoes breed in
stagnant water.

2. Causes

Four common species of the parasite cause malaria, but the most serious type is
Plasmodium falciparum, which causes 80% of cases and 90% of deaths. However, another
relatively new species, Plasmodium knowlesi, is also dangerous and is typically found only in
long-tailed and pigtail macaque monkeys. The other three common species of malaria (P.
vivax, P. malariae, and P. ovale) are generally less serious and are usually not life-
threatening.

3. Signs and symptoms

The symptoms characteristic of malaria include:

e Flulike illness with cycles of chills, fever, and sweating that repeat every one, two, or
three days

e Muscle ache ; headache ; nausea, repeated vomiting

e Lack of appetite, coughing, diarrhoea and yellowing (jaundice) of the skin and whites
of the eyes due to destruction of red blood cells and liver cells

e Inability to drink or breastfeed

e Convulsions, lethargy, severe pallor, difficulty breathing

e Dark coloured urine

People with severe P. falciparum malaria can develop bleeding problems, shock, liver or
kidney failure, central nervous system problems, coma, and can die from the infection or its
complications. Cerebral malaria (coma, or altered mental status or seizures) can occur with
severe P. falciparum infection. It is life-threatening if not treated quickly; even with treatment,
about 15%-20% die.

4. Investigations

e Blood smear on a microscope slide that is stained (Giemsa stain) to show the
parasites inside red blood cells-classic and most used diagnostic test

e Other tests based on immunologic principles exist; including RDTs (rapid diagnostic
tests) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests

e Detailed consultation to elicit onset the first signs, progression of the signs and
treatments received (including traditional)

e Physical examination for the following: temperature, weight, height and blood
pressure for adults.

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern

Three main factors determine treatments: the infecting species of Plasmodium parasite, the
clinical situation of the patient (e.g. adult, child, or pregnant female with either mild or severe
malaria), and the drug susceptibility of the infecting parasites (different areas of the world
have malaria types that are resistant to certain medications)
e Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen) is the drug of choice for all malarial parasites except
for chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium strains

15

----- PAGE 17 -----
Multiple drug-treatment protocols for treatment of drug-resistant Plasmodium strains
(for example, quinine sulfate plus doxycycline [Vibramycin, Oracea, Adoxa, Atridox] or
tetracycline [Achromycin], or clindamycin [Cleocin], or atovaquone-proguanil
[Malarone])

The WHO's treatment policy, recently established in 2006, is to treat all cases of
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with artemisinin-derived combination therapy
(ACTs). ACTs are drug combinations (for example, artesunate-amodiaquine,
artesunate-mefloquine, artesunate-pyronaridine, dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine, and
chlorproguanil-dapsoneartesunate) used to treat drug-resistant P. falciparum.
Unfortunately, as of 2009, a number of P. falciparum-infected individuals have
parasites resistant to ACT drugs.

5.2. Herbal treatment

In many countries category | and II herbal medicines are approved and even on the list of
essential medicines for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria. Some of the plants
commonly used in the preparation of these medicines are part of the WAHO monographs:
Moringa lucida (stem bark), Guiera senegalensis, Senna occidentalis (leaves), Tinospora
baki, Combretum micranthum, Khaya senegalensis (inner bark), Carica papaya, Cryssopterix
febrifuga; Cryptolepis sanguinolenta (root); Moringa oleifera (leaves); Cymbopogon citratus
(leaves); Cassia alata (leaves); Psidium guajava (leaves)

6. Prevention and control

The goals of prevention are:

Avoid contact with mosquitoes. Thus the use of nets designed to repel or kill
mosquitoes and;

Prevent mosquito breeding in the immediate environment

Reduce the susceptibility of vulnerable people being infected by mosquitoes

Avoid traveling in areas of known malaria outbreaks

Wear appropriate clothing: travelers can minimize areas of exposed skin by wearing
long-sleeved shirts, long pants, boots, and hats. Tucking in shirts and wearing socks
and closed shoes instead of sandals may reduce risk.

Insecticides: aerosol insecticides, vaporizing mats, and mosquito coils can help to
clear rooms or areas of mosquitoes; however, some products available internationally
may contain pesticides that are not registered in the United States. Insecticides
should always be used with caution, avoiding direct inhalation of spray or smoke.
Apply repellents (containing up to 50% DEET (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide) to clothing
and gear

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

16

----- PAGE 18 -----
N° 5: DIABETES

1. Description

Diabetes is a chronic condition characterized by persistent high levels of sugar (glucose) in
the blood. It is caused by multiple genetic and environmental factors that result from defects
in insulin secretion, or its action or both. Insulin lowers the blood glucose level. As a result,
absence or insufficient production of insulin causes diabetes. Elevated levels of blood
glucose (hyperglycaemia) lead to spillage of glucose into the urine, hence the term “sweet
urine”. According to the World Health Organization, an estimated seven million Africans
suffer from the disease, which is now ranked as the fourth leading cause of death in most
developing countries.

The two types of diabetes are referred to as type 1 and type 2. Former names for these
conditions were insulin-dependent and non-insulin-dependent diabetes, or juvenile onset and
adult onset diabetes. Type II Diabetes is increasing and is a major public health concern. It is
increasing in line with increasing life expectancy, urbanization, sedentary lifestyle and obesity
development.

2. Causes

Diabetes is due to insufficient or total lack and/or dysfunction of insulin in the blood. Three
common forms of diabetes are known:

* Type 1 diabetes (formerly called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus): juvenile onset;

* Type 2 diabetes (formerly called non-insulin diabetes dependent): onset in adulthood;

* Gestational diabetes (diabetes that occurs during pregnancy in cases before non-
diabetics)

3. Signs and symptoms
Symptoms of diabetes include increased urine output, thirst, hunger, and fatigue.

The number of people seeking medical care for diabetes is increasing in Africa at a time
when health experts are overloaded, health care systems are ill-equipped to diagnose the
disease and the majority of the poor cannot afford the cost of treatment. Many patients with
diabetes have no symptoms. Their diabetes is only detected by the test. Patients may
present with the following symptoms:

e Polyuria (passing large amounts of urine);

e Polydipsia (thirst and excessive consumption of alcohol and water)

e Polyphagia
e Recurrent boils
e Pruritus vulvae
e Nocturia

The risk factors are: sedentary lifestyle, obesity, genetic factors/family history, pregnancy,
hypertension, drug therapy - hormonal/contraceptive, diet, age, etc.

Complications

The major complications of diabetes are both acute and chronic.

e Acute complications: dangerously elevated blood sugar (hyperglycemia), abnormally
low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) due to diabetes medications leading to dizziness,
confusion, weakness and tremors; severe nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diabetic
ketoacidosis leading to shock, coma, or death. Abnormally low blood sugar due to
excessive levels of insulin or other hypoglycemic drugs causes

e Chronic complications: disease of the blood vessels (both small and large) which can
damage the feet, eyes, kidneys, nerves, and heart (e.g. impotence, foot
gangrene/ulcer, poor vision, heart attack, infertility, obese children, miscarriages,
kidney failure).

Over time, diabetes can lead to blindness, kidney failure, and nerve damage. These types of
damage are the result of damage to small vessels, referred to as microvascular disease.

17

----- PAGE 19 -----
Diabetes is also an important factor in accelerating the hardening and narrowing of the
arteries (atherosclerosis), leading to strokes, coronary heart disease, and other large blood
vessel diseases. This is referred to as macrovascular disease.

4. Investigations

a) Fasting blood glucose (sugar) test- preferred way to diagnose diabetes; easy to
perform and convenient. After the person has fasted overnight (at least 8 hours), a single
sample of blood is drawn and sent to the laboratory for analysis.

e Normal fasting plasma glucose levels are less than 100 milligrams per deciliter
(mg/dl).

e Fasting plasma glucose levels of more than 126 mg/dl on two or more tests on
different days indicate diabetes.

e A random blood glucose test can also be used to diagnose diabetes. A blood
glucose level of 200 mg/dl or higher indicates diabetes.

b) Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)- though not routinely used anymore, it is a gold
standard for making the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and also gestational diabetes and in
conditions of pre-diabetes, such as polycystic ovary syndrome. Glucose tolerance tests
may lead to one of the following diagnoses:

e Normal response: A person is said to have a normal response when the 2-hour
glucose level is less than 140 mg/dl, and all values between 0 and 2 hours are less
than 200 mg/dl.

e Impaired glucose tolerance: A person is said to have impaired glucose tolerance
when the fasting plasma glucose is less than 126 mg/dl and the 2-hour glucose level
is between 140 and 199 mg/dl.

e Diabetes: A person has diabetes when two diagnostic tests done on different days
show that the blood glucose level is high.

e Gestational diabetes: A pregnant woman has gestational diabetes when she has
any two of the following:, a fasting plasma glucose of 92 mg/dl or more, a 1-hour
glucose level of 180 mg/dl or more, or a 2-hour glucose level of 153 mg/dl, or more.

5. Treatment

An important goal of diabetes treatment is to keep the blood glucose levels near the normal
range of 70-120 mg/dl before meals and under 140 mg/dl at two hours after eating. Diabetes
treatment depends on the type and severity of the diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is treated with
insulin, exercise, and a diabetic diet. Type 2 diabetes is first treated with weight reduction, a
diabetic diet, and exercise. When these measures fail to control the elevated blood sugars,
oral medications are used. If oral medications are still insufficient, insulin medications and
other injectable medications are considered.

5.1. Modern

Non-pharmacological: in patients with type 2 diabetes, diet should be tried first.

Diet: all patients with diabetes need diet therapy. In general, patients should avoid soft
drinks, alcohol, tobacco, dates, sugar cane, pineapple, plantain, condensed milk, pastries,
croissants, ice cream, honey, etc.. Feeding a day should consist of carbohydrates (60%),
protein (15%) and fat (25%), mainly of plant origin.

Exercise: do simple exercises (walking 45 minutes to an hour per day) is useful to ensure
good glycaemic control. Any advice on exercise should take into account the patient's age
and the presence of complications and other medical conditions.

18

----- PAGE 20 -----
5.2. Herbal treatment

Mangifera indica, Momodica charantia, Psidium guajava, Anthocleista nobilis, Desmodium
adscendens, Vernonia amygdalina, Lippia multiflora, Nauclea latifolia, Tetrapleura
tetraptera, Catharantus roseus, Bridelia ferruginea, Sclerocarya birrea, Moringa oleifera,
etc.

6. Prevention and control

Preventative measures will help prevent the chronic complications of diabetes.

e Maintain a steady weight-get as close to your ideal weight as possible; more than 80
percent of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight.

e Undertake regular exercise in your schedule-working out regularly, at least four hours
a week, can significantly lower your risk for diabetes.

e Avoid diets high in saturated fat (animal products)-can raise the LDL (bad) levels of
cholesterol in your body

e Don't overeat on a regular basis

e Increase intake of fiber

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

19

----- PAGE 21 -----
N° 6: ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION

1. Description

Hypertension is a condition in which the blood pressure of an adult aged 18 or over is
consistently higher than 140/90 mm Hg in a non-diabetic, or above 130/80 mm Hg in a
diabetic. Hypertension leads to an increased risk of damage to blood vessels in the eye,
thickening of the heart muscle and heart attacks, hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis),
kidney failure, and strokes and early death, if it is not properly controlled. Once the diagnosis
of hypertension is made, the individual must be monitored regularly and treated for life. In
Africa, hypertension is a public health problem with an average incidence of 15 to 40%. The
average incidence of hypertension in West Africa is 16% in adults, ranging from 3 to 30%,
from rural to urban areas. In Ghana, it is 4.5% in rural and 13% in urban areas. In Guinea,
the prevalence is 43.6% in urban and 14.9% in rural areas, whilst in Senegal it is 25% and
23.7% in rural Mali. High blood pressure is called "the silent killer" because it often causes no
symptoms for many years, even decades, until it finally damages certain critical organs.
High blood pressure in pregnancy can lead to preeclampsia or eclampsia (toxemia of
pregnancy). Pregnant women should be monitored closely by their obstetrician for
complications of high blood pressure.

2. Causes

Genetic factors (approximately 30%) are thought to play a prominent role in the development
of essential hypertension.

Risk factors are increasing age, family history, obesity, excessive alcohol consumption,
smoking, type 1 or type 2 diabetes, kidney disease, sedentary lifestyle/lack of exercise,
steroids/contraceptives, etc. High salt intake, obesity, lack of regular exercise, excessive
alcohol or coffee intake, and smoking may all adversely affect the health of an individual with
high blood pressure

3. Signs and symptoms

Most patients with uncomplicated hypertension may have no symptoms. Some people with
uncomplicated hypertension, however, may experience symptoms such as headache (which
do not respond to analgesics), tinnitus, palpitation, dizziness, shortness of breath, and
blurred vision usually with blood pressure that is very high. About 1% of people with
hypertension is diagnosed with severe high blood pressure (accelerated or malignant
hypertension) at their first visit to the doctor. In these patients, the diastolic blood pressure
exceeds 140 mm Hg. Affected persons often experience severe headache, nausea, visual
symptoms, dizziness, and sometimes kidney failure. Malignant hypertension is a medical
emergency and requires urgent treatment to prevent a stroke (brain damage).

Complications are: atherosclerosis (narrowing of the arteries), stroke (bleeding or blood clot
in the brain), aneurysm (dangerous extension of the main artery or in the chest or abdomen,
which weakens and can break) heart attack, heart failure (reduced pumping capacity - pedal
edema), renal failure - periorbital edema, eye injuries, etc.

4. Investigations

Measurement of blood pressure.

5. Treatment

Most antihypertensive medications can be used alone or in combination. Some are used only
in combination. Some are preferred over others in certain specific medical situations. And
some are not to be used (contraindicated) in other situations.
e Several classes of antihypertensive medications are available, including ACE
inhibitors, ARB drugs, beta-blockers, diuretics, calcium channel blockers, alpha-
blockers, and peripheral vasodilators.

20

----- PAGE 22 -----
e The goal of therapy for hypertension is to bring the blood pressure down below
140/85 in the general population and to even lower levels in diabetics, African
Americans, and people with certain chronic kidney diseases.

5.1. Modern

Lifestyle changes in diet and exercise and compliance with medication regimes contribute
significantly to the reduction of blood pressure: low salt intake, low fat intake, weight
reduction in obese and overweight people, regular exercise among sedentary patients,
reducing alcohol consumption and smoking, stress management. These lifestyle changes
must be pursued even when treatment is completed.

5.2. Herbal treatment

Common plants used are: Rauwolfia vomitoria, Bridelia feruginea, Ceiba pentandra, Allium
sativum, Persia americana, Lippia multiflora, Taraxacum officinalis, Cassia occidentalis,
Desmodium adscendens

6. Prevention and control

Prevention and control measures should aim at:
e Recognizing the signs and symptoms of hypertension;
Identifying the two forms of hypertension;
Recognizing the complications of hypertension;
Recognizing the relationship between hypertension, diabetes and
hypercholesterolemia.

Each middle-aged person of over 40 years should know his/her height, weight, blood
pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol. They should also make regular blood pressure tests if
there is a familial tendency to hypertension. In this way, treatment can be started before any
complications.
Adjustments in the following lifestyle habits are necessary:

e Lose weight
Exercise regularly
Reduce alcohol consumption
Adopt a balanced diet
Reduce stress by trying different relaxation techniques, or avoid stressful situations.

7. Reference

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

21

----- PAGE 23 -----
N° 7: ASTHMA

1. Description

Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the bronchial tubes (airways)
that causes swelling and narrowing (constriction) of the airways. The result is difficulty
breathing. Asthma attacks may be interspersed with periods where breathing is normal. In
some people, however, asthma may induce permanent respiratory discomfort that interferes
with daily activities. In sensitive individuals, the bronchial tubes are more likely to swell and
constrict when exposed to triggers such as allergens, tobacco smoke, or exercise.

2. Causes

The causes of asthma are not well known, although both genetic and environmental factors

are thought to be implicated. The following factors may contribute to trigger an asthma attack

or aggravate respiratory problems, but they are not the cause of asthma. The risk factors are:

Airborne allergens (dust, pollen, pet dander, dust mites)

Air pollutants (irritants in the workplace, fire smoke, exhaust fumes, air pollution, etc.)

Tobacco smoke

Foods (food allergies) or food additives

Certain drugs (aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, beta-blockers

used for heart problems or high blood pressure)

e Respiratory infections (colds, bronchitis, sinusitis, etc.). Because they cause
inflammation

e Exercise, especially if practiced outside in winter, cold weather and dry

e Strong emotions (laughter, tears, anger, excitement), especially in children;

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms may be intermittent or persistent. They may occur after exercise or in the
presence of another trigger, and they are usually worse at night and early morning
The following are the four major recognized asthma symptoms:

e Shortness of breath, especially with exertion or at night

e Wheezing is a whistling or hissing sound when breathing out

e Coughing may be chronic, is usually worse at night and early morning, and may occur

after exercise or when exposed to cold, dry air
e Chest tightness may occur with or without the above symptoms

The above symptoms may be accompanied by:

Sweating

Increase in heart rate

Difficulty speaking or coughing

High anxiety, confusion and restlessness (especially in children)
Bluish fingers or lips

4. Investigations

Asthma is usually diagnosed based on the presence of wheezing and confirmed with
breathing tests.
e Spirometry (lung function test)
e Endurance test (if test show normal lung function despite the problems described by
the patient),

Chest X-rays are usually normal in asthma patients.

5. Treatment

The treatment of asthma is based on three pillars: avoid inhalation of allergens, treatment of
airway inflammation and bronchial constriction treatment.
e Most asthma medications work by relaxing bronchospasm (bronchodilators) or
reducing inflammation (corticosteroids).

22

----- PAGE 24 -----
Inhaled medications include beta-2 agonists, anticholinergics, corticosteroids, and
cromolyn sodium. Oral medications include aminophylline, leukotriene antagonists,
beta-2 agonists, and corticosteroid tablets

5. Herbal treatment

Abrus precatorius (leaves) and Euphorbia hirta with honey

Allium sativum (bulb) and Zingiber officinale (rhizome) with honey

Abrus precatorius (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves) and Tetrapluera tetraptera (fruit)
Otherm are Boswellia, Lobelia, Gingko biloba

Magnesium

Combination of vitamins C and E

Buteyko Method

Dietary advice: Foods rich in quercetin, chiropractic, homeopathy, fish oils, autogenic
training, vitamin C, pycnogenol

Exercise: Yoga and psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control

Avoiding precipitating factors is important in the management of asthma.

General measures to prevent asthma include:

Develop an action plan with the doctor to identify the factors (e.g. allergies, activities,
behaviours, etc.) that cause crises in order to avoid them

Be alert to precipitating signs in order to quickly act

Avoid exposue to moisture, animals, pollen and other respiratory irritants

Avoid exposure to tobacco smoke.

Exercise; make time for relaxation.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

23

----- PAGE 25 -----
N° 8: AZOOSPERMIA

1. Description

Azoospermia refers to the complete absence of sperm in the semen during ejaculation.
Azoospermia affects about 1% of men, in whom it is the cause of infertility. It must be
differentiated from oligospermia which is defined as a small amount of sperm in the semen
and asthenospermia, which is inadequate sperm motility.

There are two types of azoospermia:

e Excretory azoospermia: usually due to an infectious disease of the reproductive
system, inflammation or surgery performed in the groin area. In this case, the sperm
are quite normal but can not migrate to the seminal vesicles.

e Secretory azoospermia: the formation of spermatozoa is either incomplete or
impossible.

2. Causes

The causes of azoospermia are:

Cancer treatment;

Epididymo-orchitis (inflammation of the testes and epididymis)
Klinefelter's syndrome (presence of an extra X chromosome)
Cryptorchidism (testicle remains in the abdomen)

Cystic fibrosis (too high viscosity of bronchial secretions and digestive)

Diseases commonly encountered in the epididymis in order of frequency of occurrence, are:
e Epididymal agenesis, a congenital incomplete development of the epididymis
e Inflammation of the epididymis, also called epididymitis, which is almost always
associated with inflammation of the testicle
e Cyst of the epididymis
e Epididymectomy-removal of all or part of the epididymis

3. Signs and symptoms

Usually asymptomatic, but may be confirmed wih testicular biopsy. The main complication is
male infertility.

4. Treatment

4.1. Pharmacologic

The treatment of secretory azoospermia is impossible for the moment.
- Modern treatment
- Herbal treatment

4.2. Herbal treatment
e Saba camorensis (stem bark), Entandrophragma angolensis (leaves) and Cyperus
esculentus (root).
e Dietary advice
e Exercise
e Psychotherapy

5. Prevention and control

Treat all urinary tract infections

6. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

24

----- PAGE 26 -----
N° 9: GALLSTONES

1. Description

Gallstones are "stones" that form in the gallbladder or bile ducts. The common types of
gallstones are cholesterol, black pigment, and brown pigment. Cholesterol gallstones occur
more frequently in several ethnic groups and are associated with female gender, obesity,
pregnancy, oral hormonal therapy, rapid loss of weight, elevated blood triglyceride levels,
and Crohn's disease. Black pigment gallstones occur due to increased destruction of red
blood cells, whereas brown pigment gallstones occur when bile flow is slowed. The risk of
gallstones increases with age, probably due to the decreased efficiency of the contractions of
the gallbladder.

2. Causes

Bile is composed mostly of water, bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipids, pigments and
electrolytes. Gallstones form when cholesterol:

a) Bile contains too much cholesterol;

b) Bile does not contain sufficient bile salts;

c) Gallbladder does not contract regularly (the gallbladder is then called "lazy").

The risk factors for developing cholesterol gallstones include:

Gender-gallstones occur more commonly in women than men.

Age-gallstone prevalence increases with age.

Obesity-obese individuals are more likely to form gallstones than thin individuals.

Pregnancy-pregnancy increases the risk for cholesterol gallstones because during

pregnancy, bile contains more cholesterol, and the gallbladder does not contract

normally.

e Birth control pills and hormone therapy-the increased levels of hormones caused by
either treatment mimics pregnancy

e Rapid weight loss-rapid weight loss by whatever means, very low calorie diets or
obesity surgery, causes cholesterol gallstones in up to 50% of individuals

e Crohn's disease-individuals with Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum are more likely
to develop gallstones. Gallstones form because patients with Crohn's disease lack
enough bile acids to solubilize the cholesterol in bile

e Increased blood triglycerides-gallstones occur more frequently in individuals with
elevated blood triglyceride levels

3. Signs and symptoms

In the vast majority of cases gallstones do not cause symptoms. The most common
symptoms of gallstones are biliary colic (usually lasts from 30 minutes to 4 hours) and
cholecystitis, an intense and sustained pain felt in the middle or upper right abdomen.
Sometimes the pain radiates to the shoulder blade, nausea and vomiting Gallstones do not
cause intolerance to fatty foods, belching, abdominal distention, or gas.

In most cases, gallstones do not cause complications, but untreated it can lead to situations
that would be life threatening. Complications of gallstones include acute cholecystitis
(inflammation of the gallbladder), acute cholangitis (inflammation of the bile ducts) or acute
pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), gangrene, jaundice, sepsis, fistula, and ileus.
Gallbladder sludge is associated with symptoms and complications of gallstones;

4. Treatment

4.1. Pharmacologic

Modern treatment (medical, surgical, ultrasound)

Gallstones are managed primarily with observation (no treatment) or removal of the
gallbladder (cholecystectomy). Less commonly used treatments include sphincterotomy and

25

----- PAGE 27 -----
extraction of gallstones, dissolution with oral medications, and extra-corporeal shock-wave
lithotripsy (ESWL).

Herbal treatment
e Artichoke, combination of essential oil of peppermint and caraway
e Boldo, milk thistle, turmeric, peppermint (leaf), dandelion
e Dietary advice
e Intake of olive oil

5. Prevention and control
e Maintain a normal weight
e Regular exercise
e Eat good "fat", especially polyunsaturated fats and monounsaturated fats lower risk of
gallstones. The main sources of these "fata" are vegetable oils, nuts and seeds
e Eat fiber
e Limit the intake of sugars (carbohydrates), especially those with high glycemic index

6. Verification

The best single test for diagnosing gallstones is transabdominal ultrasonography. Other tests
include endoscopic ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography
(MRCP), cholescintigraphy (HIDA scan), endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography
(ERCP), liver and pancreatic blood tests, duodenal drainage, oral cholecystogram (OCG),
and intravenous cholangiogram (IVC).

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html
http://www.passeportsante.net/fr/Maux/Problemes/Fiche.aspx?doc=lithiase_biliaire pm#P58
6051.

26

----- PAGE 28 -----
N° 10: KIDNEY STONES

1. Description

Kidney stones, also called renal stones or nephrolithiasis are hard, crystalline mineral
materials formed within the kidney or urinary tract. Kidney stones are a common cause of
blood in the urine (haematuria) and often severe pain in the abdomen, flank, or groin. Kidney
stones are sometimes called renal calculi.

2. Causes

Kidney stones form when there is a decrease in urine volume and/or an excess of stone-
forming substances in the urine. The main risk factors include:
e Dehydration
e Certain medications (diuretics such as triamterene, antacids containing calcium,
sulfonamides and some antiviral drugs such as indinavir), or supplements
Diet very rich in salt or sugar
Diet containing excess protein or deficient in calcium
Genetic disease (cystic fibrosis)
Metabolic disease (diabetes)
Urinary tract malformations (especially in children)
Family history of kidney stones (more common in Asians and Caucasians than in
Native Americans, Africans, or African Americans)
e People with certain medical conditions, such as gout
e Some pregnant women

Possible complications include:
e Sepsis related to infection and secondary to obstruction of a ureter by a calculus;
e Colic in a patient with only one kidney

3. Signs and symptoms

The main signs and symptoms include:

Flank pain (sudden and intense pain in the back (one side of the trunk, under the ribs)
Nausea and vomiting

Blood in the urine or cloudy urine

Sometimes an urge to urinate and frequent

Burning sensation during urination and frequency (in case of concomitant urinary tract
infection)

e Fever and chills

4. Investigations
e Diagnosis of kidney stones is best done with a computed tomography (CT) of the
kidneys, ureters and bladder
e Also urinalysis to check for blood and crystals in the urine, and to determine its pH

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern treatment

With time, most kidney stones will pass through the ureter to the bladder on their own.
Treatment includes pain control medications and, in some cases, medications to facilitate the
passage of urine. Where necessary, lithotripsy or surgical techniques may be used for stones
which do not pass through the ureter to the bladder on their own.

5.2. Herbal treatment and Supplementation
e Prevention: asparagus, nettles, parsley, dandelion, goldenrod
e Treatment: nettle, parsley, horsetail, goldenrod, butterbur, magnesium, pumpkin
seeds, fish oils, vitamin B6 prevention
Dietary advice

27

----- PAGE 29 -----
6. Prevention and control

NB:

Preventive measures are intended primarily for those at risk or those who have had
kidney stones. Measures to reduce the risk or prevent recurrences:

Drink enough: the best way to prevent kidney stones is to drink at least 2 liters of
water or other beverages every day (juices, soups, coffee, etc.). Attention! It is best
not to drink grapefruit juice

Reduce intake of foods rich in oxalate (spinach, rhubarb, beets, chard, peanuts,
chocolate, tea, wheat germ, okra, sweet potatoes and soybeans)

Ensure good dietary intake of calcium

Eat foods rich in potassium: potatoes (with skin), cantaloupe, avocado, lima beans
and bananas

Eat enough fiber

Medications: to prevent recurrence of stones, various medications or supplements
that vary depending on the type of calculation (thiazide diuretics, allopurinol,
potassium citrate, etc.) may be prescribed

Prolonged use of high doses of vitamin D can cause kidney stones;

Long-term intake of high doses of vitamin C contributes to the formation of kidney
stones. The recommended dose to benefit from the antioxidant effect of vitamin C is
500 mg per day

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

28

----- PAGE 30 -----
N° 11: LIVER CIRRHOSIS

1. Description

Cirrhosis is an irreversible liver disease characterized by progressive scarring that disrupts
the liver’s normal lobular architecture and nodule formation. This leads to three major effects:
e Hepatic insufficiency- functional deficit related to the decrease in the number of
hepatocytes and poor quality of vascularization;
e Portal hypertension-cause gastrointestinal bleeding;
e Precancerous condition: the development of carcinoma after 15-20 years of evolution

Cirrhosis can cause yellowing of the skin (jaundice), itching, and fatigue.

2. Causes

There are many causes of cirrhosis, which include:

e Chemicals (such as alcohol, fat, and certain medications), viruses, toxic metals (such
as iron and copper that accumulate in the liver as a result of genetic diseases)

e Chronic hepatitis C: 15 to 25% of cases;

e Chronic hepatitis B: 5% of cases

e Other causes: 5% of cases (hemochromatosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, autoimmune
hepatitis, Wilson's disease, alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency, secondary biliary cirrhosis,
etc.)

3. Signs and symtoms

Patients with cirrhosis may have few or no symptoms and signs of liver disease. Some of the
symptoms may be nonspecific, and may not suggest that the liver is their cause. Some of the
more common symptoms and signs of cirrhosis include:

e Increase in size of the liver (hepatomegaly) with a hard consistency

e Signs of liver failure such as jaundice, spider naevi, palmar and plantar erythema
(very red palms), foul odor of the breath, flapping tremor
Yellowing of the skin (jaundice) due to the accumulation of bilirubin in the blood
Fatigue
Weakness
Loss of appetite
Itching
Easy bruising from decreased production of blood clotting factors by the diseased
liver.
e Signs of portal hypertension: splenomegaly (enlarged spleen),

Complications of cirrhosis include mental confusion, coma, fluid accumulation (ascites),
internal bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, jaundice and kidney failure.

4. Investigations

Diagnosis is suggested by physical examination and blood tests, and it can be confirmed by
liver biopsy.

e Liver function test

e Abdominal ultrasound

e Endoscopy of the Upper GI tract

5. Treatment

5.1. Pharmacologic

There is no cure for cirrhosis, but early treatment can prevent the development of
complications. Treatment includes 1) preventing further damage to the liver, 2) treating the
complications of cirrhosis, 3) preventing liver cancer or detecting it early, and 4) liver
transplantation.

29

----- PAGE 31 -----
Modern

Suppress the immune system with drugs such as prednisone and azathioprine to
decrease inflammation of the liver in autoimmune hepatitis.

Treat patients with a bile acid preparation, ursodeoxycholic acid. Other medications
such as colchicine and methotrexate also may have benefit in subsets of patients with
PBC.

Herbal treatment

Viscum album (leaves), Mangifera indica (leaves), Anthocleista nobilis (leaves),
Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves)
Dietary advice

6. Prevention and control

Consume a balanced diet and one take multivitamin daily

Avoid drugs (including alcohol) that cause liver damage

Avoid nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, e.g., ibuprofen)

Eradicate hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus by using anti-viral medications

Remove blood from patients with hemochromatosis to reduce the levels of iron and
prevent further damage to the liver. In Wilson's disease, medications can be used to
increase the excretion of copper in the urine to reduce the levels of copper in the
body and prevent further damage to the liver.

Immunize patients with cirrhosis against infection with hepatitis A and B to prevent a
serious deterioration in liver function

7. References

http://sante-guerir.notrefamille.com/sante-a-z/cirrhoses-du-foie/cirrhose-prevention-et-
traitement-073392.html

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

30

----- PAGE 32 -----
N° 12: ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION

1. Description

Erectile dysfunction (ED), also known as impotence, is the repeated inability to achieve or
sustain an erection for satisfactory sexual activity over a period of at least three months. It
varies in severity thus:

e Recurring difficulty or inability to achieve erection;

e Getting an erection but with a penis that is not firm enough for penetration;

e Inability to maintain a satisfactory erection after penetration;

It is more common in men over 50 years, but can occur at the end of adolescence. The risk
of erectile dysfunction increases with age. The ability to achieve and sustain erections
requires

e ahealthy nervous system

e healthy arteries in and near the corpora cavernosa,

e healthy smooth muscles and fibrous tissues within the corpora cavernosa,

e adequate levels of nitric oxide in the penis.

2. Causes

The following are causes of erectile dysfunction:

Aging

Diseases (e.g. hypertension; atherosclerosis, Diabetes mellitus)

Cigarette smoking-aggravates atherosclerosis

Nerve or spinal chord damage

Substance abuse (e.g. marijuana, heroin, cocaine, methamphetamines, crystal meth,

and alcohol)

Low testosterone levels

e Medications (e.g. antihistamines, antidepressants, tranquilizers, and appetite
suppressants)

e Depression and anxiety

3. Signs and symptoms
e Inability to achieve an erection;
e Lack of stiffness which does not allow adequate penetration

4. Investigations

e Candid communication between the patient and the doctor

e Physical examination

e Lab tests (complete blood counts, urinalysis, lipid profile, blood glucose levels, serum
creatinine, liver enzymes and liver function tests, total testosterone levels, PSA levels,
etc.)

e Imaging tests

e Prostaglandin E1 injection test

5. Treatment

5.1. Pharmacologic

Making life style changes (e.g. quitting smoking and exercising more)

Taking drugs such as sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra) or tadalafil (Cialis)
Inserting medications into the urethra (intraurethral suppositories)

Injecting medications into the corpora cavernosae (intracavernosal injections)
Vacuum constrictive devices for the penis

Penile prostheses

Herbal treatment
e Mondia whitei (root), Sphenocentrum jollyanum (root), Paullinia pinnata (root) and
Sida acuta (root)

31

----- PAGE 33 -----
Cissus populnea (stem), Paullinia pinnata (root), Mondia whitei (root) and Zea mays
(silk)

Mondia whitei (root), Sphenocentrum jollyanum (root), Paullinia pinnata (root),
Bombax buonopozense (stem)

Aframomum melegueta (seed), Hymenocardia acida (leaves), Zanthoxylum
xanthozyloides (stem bark) and Zingiber officinale (rhizome)

6. Complications

None

7. Prevention and control

Limit alcohol consumption.

Quit smoking.

Exercise regularly

Lose excess weight

Curtail excessive alcohol consumption
Control hypertension

Optimize blood glucose levels in patients with diabetes
Relaxation

Get enough sleep

Adopt a healthy lifestyle

Eat healthy foods

8. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

32

----- PAGE 34 -----
N° 13: GONORRHOEA

1. Description

Gonorrhoea, commonly known as "the clap" is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused
by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae. It occurs more often in men than women. Men aged
20-24 years and young women aged 15 to 19 are the most affected. It can infect the penis,
vagina, urethra, rectum, throat and sometimes the eyes. In women, the cervix may also be
damaged.

Men with gonorrhoea may have a yellowish discharge from the penis accompanied by itching
and burning. More than half of women with gonorrhoea do not have any symptoms.

2. Causes

Gonorrhoea is spread during unprotected anal or vaginal sex with an infected partner,
through the exchange of bodily fluids and contact with mucous membranes. It is rarely
transmitted by oral sex. It can also be transmitted from an infected mother to an infant during
delivery, causing eye infection.

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms usually appear 2 to 5 days after the time of infection, but they can take up to 30
days before being noticed. Symptoms may include burning or frequent urination, yellowish
vaginal discharge, redness and swelling of the genitals, and a burning or itching of the
vaginal area.

Men: some men have little or none of these symptoms:
e tingling or urethral discharge;
e burning on urination;
e pain or swelling in the testicles;
e pain or discharge from the rectum.

Women: many women have no symptoms:
e burning sensation during urination;
yellowish vaginal discharge, or sometimes bloody;
Abnormal vaginal bleeding;
Lower abdominal pain;
Pain during intercourse.

If untreated, gonorrhoea can lead to severe pelvic infections and even sterility. Complications
in later life can include inflammation of the heart valves, arthritis, and eye infections.
e In women, gonorrhoea can cause pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, chronic
pelvic pain or increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy.
e In men, gonorrhoea can cause inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis) or testicles
(epididymitis), which can cause infertility.

Gonorrhoea also increases the risk of HIV transmission.

4. Investigations

Urethral or vaginal sampling with culture and susceptibility testing

5. Treatment
5.1. Pharmacologic
Treated with antibiotics (e.g. examples are ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin and levofloxacin)

Herbal treatment
e Alchornea cordifolia (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Bridelia ferruginea (leaves),
Combretum smeathannii (leaves)

33

----- PAGE 35 -----
6. Prevention and control
e Basic preventive measures: use of condoms helps prevent transmission of
gonorrhoea during vaginal or anal sex.
e Screening measures: a regular screening helps to prevent the spread of infection to
new partners. In the case of a positive result, it is important to notify any person with
whom you have had sex and could have been exposed.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

34

----- PAGE 36 -----
N° 14: HAEMORRHOIDS

1. Description

Haemorrhoids also known as piles are dilated veins that form in the walls of the anus and
sometimes around the rectum. They are usually caused by untreated constipation but
occasionally associated with chronic diarrhoea. Although haemorrhoids occur in everyone,
they become large and cause problems in only 4% of the general population including both
men and women. Their prevalence peaks between 45 and 65 years of age.

There are two main types of haemorrhoids:
e Internal haemorrhoid-the haemorrhoid originates at the top (rectal side) of the anal
canal
e External haemorrhoid- the haemorrhoid originates at the lower end of the anal canal
near the anus

2. Causes

There are several theories about the cause of haemorrhoids. The main physiological causes
are: prolonged sitting on the toilet, constipation, pregnancy and age. Other common causes
include: prolapsed haemorrhoids, tumours in the pelvis and colorectal tumours. Rare causes
include anal fissure, skin abrasions from scratching, diverticular disease (excessive
bleeding), proctitis: inflammatory, infectious or iatrogenic (NSAID suppositories, external
radiotherapy) and squamous cell carcinoma of the anus

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms start with bleeding after defecation. Untreated haemorrhoids can worsen, and
protrude from the anus. The signs and symptoms are:

e Internal haemorrhoids-are usually painful and somewhat inconspicuous; sometimes
associated with bleeding and anal itching; often the first and second stage (stage 1
and 2) of hemorrhoids.

e External haemorrhoids: at more advanced stages (stages 3 and 4), haemorrhoids

protrude from the anus and become visible; more pronounced pain, especially during
defecation.
External haemorrhoids cause a few of the symptoms that are typical of internal
haemorrhoids, perhaps, because they are low in the anal canal and have little effect
on the function of the anus. External haemorrhoids rarely cause serious
complications, however, blood can clot inside them (thrombosis) causing a painful
anal lump that often requires medical attention. The thrombosed haemorrhoid may
heal with scarring and leave a tag of skin protruding from the anus, which can make
anal cleaning difficult or irritate the anus.

4. Investigations

e Rectal examination with a gloved finger may uncover an internal hemorrhoid high in
the anal canal-helpful in excluding rare cancers that begin in the anal canal and
adjacent rectum

e Anoscope (a three-inch long, tapering, metal or clear plastic hollow tube
approximately one inch in diameter at its viewing end)

e Flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy-helps to exclude important causes of bleeding
other than haemorrhoids

5. Treatment

Treatment involves changing the diet to prevent constipation and avoid further irritation, the
use of topical medication, and sometimes surgery. Products used for the treatment of
hemorrhoids are available as ointments, creams, gels, suppositories, foams, and pads.

The main forms of treatment are:
a) Local anesthetics- e.g. benzocaine; benzyl alcohol, dibucaine; lidocaine, etc
b) Vasoconstrictors-ephedrine sulfate; epinephrine; phenylephrine
35

----- PAGE 37 -----
c) Protectants-e.g. aluminum hydroxide gel, cocoa butter; glycerin; kaolin; lanolin;
mineral oil (Balneol); white petrolatum; starch; zinc oxide or calamine (which contains
zinc oxide) in concentrations of up to 25%; cod liver oil or shark liver oil

d) Astringents-e.g. calamine, zinc oxide; witch hazel

e) Antiseptics: e.g. boric acid; hydrastis; phenol; benzalkonium chloride; benzethonium
chloride

f) Keratolytics: e.g. aluminum chlorhydroxy allantoinate; resorcinol

g) Analgesics: e.g. menthol; camphor; juniper tar

Herbal treatment

e Venotonics: witch hazel, usually taking in the form of tablets, ointments, suppositories

e Chamomile added to a sitz bath or wipe

e Chestnut, usually taking the form of a capsule

e Picralima nitida (seed), Garcinia kola (seed), Aloe vera (leaves), Eugenia aromaticum
(flower bud)

e Picralima nitida (seed), Cassia podocarpa (eaves), Eugenia aromaticum (flower bud),
Xylopia aethiopica (fruit)

e Nauclea latifolia (root), Khaya senegalensis (bark), Xylopia aethiopica (fruit), Zingiber
officinale (rhizome)

e Exercise

e Psychotherapy

e Dietary advice

e Sitting in a sitz bath with a solution of witch hazel ointment

6. Prevention and control

e Increase intake of dietary fibre-found in numerous foodstuffs including fresh and dried
fruits, vegetables, grains, and cereals; supplemental fiber (psyllium, methylcellulose,
or calcium polycarbophil) also may be used to increase the intake of fiber

e Take stool softeners and increase drinking of liquids

e Eat breakfast in the morning

e Regular exercises— twenty minutes of walking per day at a good pace can stimulate
intestinal transit.
Avoid sitting for long hours; if not possible, get up for 1 or 2 minutes.

e Empty bowels regularly-do not delay the time to defecate if the need arises

e At the time of defecation, avoid forcing with bated breath

e Do not sit on the toilet seat for longer than necessary

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

36

----- PAGE 38 -----
N° 15: HEPATITIS

1. Description

Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver, most commonly caused by a viral infection (hepatitis
A, B, C ...), but sometimes by alcohol, or by a drug or a chemical. There are several hepatitis
viruses; they have been named types A, B, C, D, E, F (not confirmed), and G. The most
common hepatitis viruses are types A, B, and C.

Hepatitis A (acute viral hepatitis): This is the least serious of the hepatitis viruses. Hepatitis
A is transmitted through the ingestion of food or water contaminated by human waste
containing hepatitis A (the faecal-oral mode of transmission). It is typically spread among
household members and close contact through the passage of oral secretions (intimate
kissing) or stool (poor hand washing).

Hepatitis B ("serum hepatitis"): Hepatitis B is transmitted by sexual intercourse and the
transfer of blood through shared needles in drug abusers, accidental needle sticks with
needles contaminated with infected blood, blood transfusions, haemodialysis, and by
infected mothers to their newborns. Hepatitis B also can be spread by tattooing, body
piercing, and sharing razors and toothbrushes. About 6-10% of patients develop chronic HBV
infection, which may last for about six months and often years to decades. Patients with
chronic hepatitis B infection also are at risk of developing cirrhosis, liver failure and liver.

Hepatitis C ("non-A, non-B hepatitis"): it is the most insidious form of viral hepatitis. Up to
80% of infections with hepatitis C become chronic. The virus is most often transmitted by
direct contact with infected human blood, through shared needles among drug abusers,
blood transfusion, haemodialysis, and needle sticks. Approximately 90% of transfusion-
associated hepatitis is caused by hepatitis C. Transmission of the virus by sexual contact has
been reported, but is considered rare. Patients with chronic hepatitis C infection are at risk
for developing cirrhosis, liver failure, and liver cancer.

Hepatitis types D, E, F (not confirmed yet), and G-the most important of these at present
is the hepatitis D virus (HDV), also known as the delta virus or agent. HDV requires
concomitant infection with hepatitis B to survive, because it needs a protein that the hepatitis
B virus makes to enable it to infect liver cells. Hepatitis D is spread by shared needles among
drug abusers, contaminated blood, and by sexual contact, essentially the same ways as for
hepatitis B. Patients with chronic hepatitis due to hepatitis B and hepatitis D viruses develop
cirrhosis (severe liver scarring) rapidly. Moreover, the combination of delta and B virus
infection is very difficult to treat.

Autoimmune hepatitis: this is a chronic inflammatory disease of the liver characterized by
the presence of autoantibodies.

The most common risk factors of viral hepatitis are health care professionals, people with
multiple sexual partners, intravenous drug users, and hemophiliacs. Viral hepatitis is
generally thought to be as much as ten times more common among lower socioeconomic
and poorly educated individuals and about one third of all cases of hepatitis come from an
unknown or unidentifiable source.

The period of time between exposure to hepatitis and the onset of the illness is called the
incubation period. This period varies depending on the specific hepatitis virus. For example,
Hepatitis A has an incubation period of about 15-45 days; hepatitis B from 45-160 days, and
hepatitis C from 2 weeks to 6 months.

2. Signs and symptoms

In many cases, patients infected with hepatitis A, B, and C have few or no symptoms. For
those who do develop symptoms, the most common are flu- like symptoms including loss of
appetite, nausea, vomiting, fever, weakness, tiredness and abdominal discomfort (especially
right side)aching in the abdomen. Less common symptoms include dark urine (the color of
tea), light-colored stools, fever and jaundice (yellow skin and cornea).

Rarely, individuals with acute hepatitis A and hepatitis B infections develop severe
inflammation, and the liver fails (acute fulminant hepatitis). These patients show the typical

37

----- PAGE 39 -----
symptoms of acute hepatitis and the additional problems of confusion or coma (due to the
liver's failure to detoxify chemicals) and bruising or bleeding (due to a lack of blood clotting
factors). The condition is life-threatening and up to 80% of people who develop it can die
within days to weeks.

3. Investigations

Testing for hepatitis A, B or C is recommended for people at high risk, in particular: people
with HIV, pregnant women and people with pre-existing liver disease. There are three types
of blood tests for evaluating patients with hepatitis: liver enzymes, antibodies to the hepatitis
viruses, and viral proteins or genetic material (viral DNA or RNA). Ultrasound testing can be
used to exclude the possibility of gallstones or cancer.

4. Treatment

Treatment of acute viral hepatitis involves relieving symptoms and maintaining adequate
intake of fluids. Treatment of chronic viral hepatitis involves medications to eradicate the
virus and taking measures to prevent further liver damage.

Herbal treatment:
e Cochlospermum tinctorium (rhizome), Entada africana (roots), Combretum
micranthum (leaves), Phyllanthus amarus (leaves)
e Cochlospermum tinctorium (rhizome), Tinospora bakis (rhizome)
e Phyllanthus amarus (aerial parts), Chrysantellum americanum, Combretum
micranthum (leaves), Cochlospermum tinctorum (rhizome), Entada africana (roots)
e Others are liquorice, schisandra, milk thistle
e Dietary and lifestyle advice to relieve discomfort and promote healing:
stop drinking
have adequate rest
stop smoking
avoid large meals
seek support
avoid exposure to toxic chemicals, etc.

>oaoom

6. Prevention and control

Hepatitis A and B
e Never eat mussels or shells found on the sea without cooking for less than 6 minutes.
e When traveling to areas where hepatitis A is common, be vaccinated one month
before departure
Always use condoms during sexual intercourse
Wash hands routinely after defaecating, before handling food and before eating
Ensure that equipments/tools for tattoos or body piercing are sterilized or disposable
Wear gloves before touching a person's blood (infected or not)
Avoid sharing a razor or toothbrush with another person
Never share needles or syringes to inject drugs
Vaccination is highly recommended

Toxic hepatitis
e Follow the dosage on the package of drugs (including those OTC) and natural health
products.
Pay attention to possible interactions between drugs and alcohol
Store medicines in a safe place away from children
Adopt adequate safety measures in the workplace
Take only herbal medicines that are safe and of good quality

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

38

----- PAGE 40 -----
N° 16: BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA

1. Description

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is nonmalignant (noncancerous) enlargement of the
prostate gland. Almost all men suffer from BPH one time or another. It generally begins in
men from the age of 30, evolves slowly, and most commonly only causes symptoms after 50.
BPH occurs in more than 50% of men aged 60 and 90% of those over 80 years. The cause
of BPH is unknown, although it has been speculated that it may be due to reduced
testosterone levels, which occurs naturally with age.

2. Signs and symptoms

Growth in size of the prostate gland in BPH may compress the urethra and thus impede the
flow of urine from the bladder through the urethra to the outside. Common symptoms include:
Compelling urge to urinate

Urinary retention leading to the need to urinate frequently during the day and night
Slow flow of urine

Urgency and difficulty starting the urinary stream

Painful urination

Intermittent flow

Sensation of not emptying your bladder completely

Signs of complications observed are:
e Lack of sleep
Urinary tract infections
Kidney stones
Distension of the bladder wall
Complete blockage of the urethra leading to kidney damage

3. Investigations
e Rectal examination of the urethra, prostate, and bladder
Urine culture
Assessment of renal function
Abdominal x-ray
Renal ultrasonography
Watching act of urination and measuring the flow rate

4. Treatment

Medical treatment of BPH is usually reserved for men who have significant symptoms. The
available drugs include alpha blockers to relax the smooth muscles of the prostate, and the
bladder neck, which helps to relieve urinary obstruction. Surgery or office procedures may
also be used to treat BPH, most commonly in men who have not responded satisfactorily to
medication or those who have more severe problems, such as a complete inability to urinate.
Other treatment methods include transurethral resection of the prostate, laser procedures
and microwave therapy

Herbal treatment

Alchornea cordifolia (leaves), Flugea virosa (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (aerial part) or;

Tetrapleura tetraptera (fruit), Flugea virosa (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (aerial parts)

Sabal serrulata Serenoa repens

Stinging nettle: Urtica dioica

African plum: Prunus africanus = Pygeum africanum

Squash or Pumpkin, Cucurbita pepo

Pollen of certain grasses.

Empty bladder as much as possible at each urination

Reduce alcohol and coffee

Regular urination, e.g. every 4 hours

Intake of dietary supplements containing zinc

Stay physically active: physical activity diminishes retention of urine in the bladder
39

----- PAGE 41 -----
e Psychotherapy
e Avoid stress

5. Prevention and control

The best protection against prostate problems is to have regular medical checkups that
include a careful prostate examination. Regular checkups are important even for men who
have had surgery for BPH.

6. References

http://www. passeportsante. net/fr/Maux/Problemes/Fiche.aspx?doc=hypertrophie_benigne_pr
ostate_pm

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

40

----- PAGE 42 -----
N° 17: URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS

1. Description

A urinary tract infection is an infection that may affect one or more parts of the urinary
system: kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The majority are caused by E. coli bacteria,
but many other bacteria, fungi, and parasites may also cause UTIs. The type of UTI depends
on the affected part of the urinary system:

e Cystitis is an infection of the bladder and urethra. It is very common among women.

e Urethritis only affects the urethra. It is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) common

in men.
e Pyelonephritis means inflammation of the kidney and is a serious condition.

2. Causes

Urinary tract infections are usually caused by the abnormal proliferation of bacteria. Factors
that increase the risk are:

In women
e Poor hygiene of the genital area
e Frequent and intense sexual intercourse after a period of abstinence
e Pregnancy
e Contraceptives-diaphragm or spermicide

In men
e Benign prostatic Hyperplasia or prostatitis
e Anal sex without a condom

Generally
e Malformation of the urinary tract
e Kidney Stones
e Urinary catheter

In a pregnant woman, UTIs can cause:
e Threatened abortion
e Premature birth

In men, repeated UTIs can cause:
e = Male infertility
e Prostatitis
e Pyelonephritis

In severe cases, urinary tract infection may progress to renal failure

3. Signs and symptoms

Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in women include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
e =Burning with urination
e Cloudy urine
e Strong unpleasant smell of urine
e Dark or bloody urine
e Pelvic pain
e Flank or back pain (kidney infection)
e Fever, chills (usually with kidney infection)
e Other possible symptoms include bloating, vaginal discharge
Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in men include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
e ~=Burning with urination
e Cloudy urine
e Strong unpleasant smell of urine
e Dark or bloody urine

41

----- PAGE 43 -----
e Rectal pain (kidney infection)

e Flank or back pain (kidney infection)

e Other symptoms may include penile, testicular and abdominal pain, and penile
discharge

Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in children include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
Burning with urination
Cloudy urine
Strong unpleasant smell of urine (not as reliable in children)
Dark or bloody urine
Abdominal pain
Fever
Vomiting
Other symptoms (especially in newborns and infants) may include hypothermia,
diarrhea, jaundice, poor feeding and in some children, bedwetting

There can be many complications of urinary tract infections, including dehydration, sepsis,
kidney failure, and death. If treated early and adequately, the prognosis is good for most
patients with a UTI.

4. Investigations
e Urinalysis
e Other tests may include blood cultures, a complete blood count, intravenous
pyelogram, a CT scan, or other specialized tests.

In general, UTIs are diagnosed usually by isolating and identifying the urinary
pathogen from the patient.

5. Treatment

Although there is no vaccine available for UTIs, there are many ways a person may reduce
the chance of getting a UTI.
e UTIs are treated with antibiotics
e Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines offer relief from the pain and discomfort of UTIs
but they don't cure UTIs

Herbal treatment

e There are home remedies for UTI, but most may, at best, help reduce the risk or
discomfort of UTIs. Common herbs used include echinacea, nettle, horsetail,
horseradish, bearberry (Uva ursi), golden rod.

e Others are Ageratum conyzoides (leaves), Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (bark) and
Cassia alata

e Dietary advice

e Intake of cranberry juice for people prone to recurrences
Physical exercise

e Psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control

Increase fluid intake: 6 to 8 glasses of water or various beverages (juice, broth, tea, etc..) per
day can increase urinary flow and prevent bacteria from forming in the bladder.

Women:
e Wash the vulva and around the anus daily
e Avoid genital deodorant and douching
e Urinate shortly after sex
e After urination or a bowel movement, wipe from front to back to avoid contaminating
the urethra with bacteria from faeces

42

----- PAGE 44 -----
Men:
e Use condoms with a new partner or in the case of anal sex
e Must treat enlarged prostate, if applicable
e Temporarily avoid coffee, alcohol, soft drinks containing caffeine, orange juice or
grapefruit and spicy foods. These foods irritate the bladder and make you want to
urinate more frequently.

7. References
Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

43

----- PAGE 45 -----
N° 18: SEXUALLY-TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS

1. Description

Sexually-transmitted Infections (STI) are diseases transmitted by sexual contact including
sexual intercourse (vaginal and anal) and also kissing, oral-genital contact, and the use of
sexual "toys," such as vibrators. Examples of some of the sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) are HIV/AIDS, chlamydia, chancroid, trichomoniasis, genital herpes, genital warts,
gonorrhoea, hepatitis B, and syphilis.

2. Causes

The main causes are bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi. Currently, the most common
Sexually transmitted infections are:
e Chlamydia;
Warts (HPV infection);
Genital herpes;
Hepatitis B;
HIV / AIDS

3. Signs and symptoms

The signs and symptoms vary because they are symptomatic of the underlying disease.
Sexually transmitted infections can have an impact on fertility and the foetus.

4. Investigations

e General examination for neurological or cardiovascular evidence of advanced
syphilis, lymphadenopathy, Kaposi’s sarcoma and opportunistic infection in patients
suspected of AIDS

e Gram-stain for leucocytes and organisms should be made and wet prepartation
should be examined for Trichomonas vaginalis

e Immunofluorescent technique

e Micobiological culture

e Protoscopy

5. Treatment

Many STIs are treatable, but effective cures are lacking for others, such as HIV, HPV, and
hepatitis B and hepatitis C. Even gonorrhea, once easily treated, has become resistant to
many of the older traditional antibiotics. Many STDs can be present in, and spread by,
people who do not have any symptoms of the condition and have not yet been diagnosed
with an STD. Therefore, public awareness and education about these infections and the
methods of preventing them is important.

Herbal treatment
e Parkia biglobosa (stem bark), Zanthoxylum xanthxyloides (stem bark), Spathodea
campanulata (stem bark)
e Drink cranberry juice
e Physical exercises
e Psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control
e The most effective way to prevent the spread of STDs is abstinence. Alternatively, the
diligent use of latex barriers, such as condoms, during vaginal or anal intercourse and
oral-genital contact helps decrease the spread of many of these infections.
e Health education
e Avoidance of sexual contact with individuals known to have STD or in high risk
groups

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

44

----- PAGE 46 -----
N° 19: MALE INFERTILITY-OLIGOSPERMIA

1. Description

Oligospermia or oligozoospermia refers to abnormally low sperm count (less than 20 million
spermatozoa per millilitre of ejaculate) and is a common finding in male infertility. We talk
about Cryptozoospermia (or extreme oligozoospermia) in the case of sperm showing the
presence of less than one million sperm per ml of semen. It differs from azoospermia, which
is the complete absence of sperm in the ejaculate and asthenospermia, which is the absence
of sperm motility.

2. Causes

Causes of oligospermia include:

e Obstruction of the normal flow of sperm due to such conditions as testicular trauma
and vasectomy

e Scarring due to surgery on the male reproductive system or from infection and
sexually transmitted diseases.

e Decrease in sperm production due to such conditions as varicoceles, hormonal
disorders, diseases of the testicles, and obesity

e Sexually transmitted disease, such as chlamydia, and gonorrhea

e Other causes include stress, smoking, drug or alcohol use, some medications,
exposure to some toxins, malnutrition, and being underweight. Some

e Hormone deficiency (congenital or induced by an external cause)
Abnormally located testis (undescended, cryptorchidism) or exposure to high
temperatures

e Drug inhibition of spermatogenesis (eg high doses of spironolactone or ketoconazole)
and/or the effects of chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, especially if it is testicular
cancer

e Autoimmune disorders

3. Signs and symptoms

The main symptoms and complications of oligospermia are sub-fertility or infertility. There are
also a variety of symptoms of underlying causes of oligospermia, such as sexually
transmitted diseases and hormonal disorders.

4. Investigations
e Making a diagnosis of oligospermia includes:
e Taking a medical and sexual history and completing a general physical examination
as well as an exam of the penis and testicles
e Diagnostic testing includes performing a semen analysis, lab tests, testicular biopsy
e Other tests may be done to rule-out other potential causes of oligospermia, such as a
hormonal disorder

5. Treatment

Treatment varies depending on the type and severity of oligospermia, the individual case,
and the presence of complications.

e The first step in the treatment of oligospermia is prevention, which includes
preventing sexually transmitted diseases by abstaining from sexual activity or having
sex only within a mutually monogamous relationship in which neither partner is
infected with oligospermia

e Latex condoms also provide some protection from some sexually transmitted
diseases when used properly

e Oligospermia caused by chlamydia or gonorrhea can be treated with oral antibiotic
medication Surgery may be needed if the cause is a varicocele or if scarring is
causing a blockage of the flow of sperm.

e Vitamin E, vitamin C, antioxidants suplementation may be helpful

45

----- PAGE 47 -----
Herbal treatment

Harungana madagascariensis (leaves), Bridelia ferruginea (leaves) and Euphorbia
hirta (eaves)

Dietary advice

Exercise

Psychotherapy

6. Complications

Severe oligospermia
Male infertility

7. Prevention and control

Improving the diet

Losing or gaining weight as needed

Avoiding smoking

Reducing alcohol intake

Avoiding hot tubs, tight underwear, and other factors that may create excessive heat
around the testicles and reduce sperm count

Proper treatment of STIs

8. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

46

----- PAGE 48 -----
N° 20: OTITIS MEDIA

1. Description

Otitis media is an infection or inflammation of the middle ear. "Otitis" means inflammation of
the ear, and "media" means middle. The inflammation often begins with infections that cause
sore throats, colds or other respiratory problems, and spreads to the middle ear. Infections
can be caused by viruses or bacteria, and can be acute or chronic.

Acute otitis media: usually of rapid onset and short duration. It is typically associated
with fluid accumulation in the middle ear together with signs or symptoms of ear
infection; a bulging eardrum usually accompanied by pain, or a perforated eardrum,
often with drainage of purulent material (pus, also termed suppurative otitis media).
Fever can be present.

Chronic otitis media: is a persistent inflammation of the middle ear, typically for a
minimum of a month. Following an acute infection, fluid may remain behind the ear
drum for up to three months before resolving. Chronic otitis media may develop after
a prolonged period of time with fluid or negative pressure behind the eardrum. It can
cause ongoing damage to the middle ear and eardrum, and there may be continuing
drainage through a hole in the eardrum. Chronic otitis media often starts painlessly
without fever and sometimes a subtle loss of hearing can result

2. Causes

Risk factors are many in children, which is not the case in adults. Factors that
increase the risk in children are:

Attending a daycare or nursery

Exposure to tobacco smoke or high levels of pollution

Bottle feeding rather than breastfeeding

The frequent use of dummies

Malfunction of the Eustachian tube that drains liquids poorly

3. Signs and symptoms

In children and infants

Fever

Signs of upper respiratory infection such as a runny or stuffy nose, or a cough
Pain in one or both ears, leading the child to touch the ear frequently

Tears, irritability, difficulty falling asleep

Lack of appetite

Liquid flowing in one ear

Loss of hearing (the child does not respond to soft sounds)

In some children, otitis is manifested by digestive disorders (diarrhea, vomiting)
Severe ear infections may cause the eardrum to rupture ; the pus then drains
from the middle ear into the ear canal

Complications of otitis media include:

Adults

Perforation of the eardrum with risk of deafness
Risk of sinusitis and meningitis

Throbbing (punctuated by heartbeats) in the ear, which may radiate into the head
Sensation of plugged ear causing hearing loss

General malaise (lack of energy, irritability, difficulty sleeping, etc.); sometimes
accompanied by a high fever

Tinnitus

Sometimes a yellowish secretions flow through the ear canal (which indicates that the
eardrum is perforated)

Dizziness, loss of balance, dizziness

Cold, which often precedes otitis media

47

----- PAGE 49 -----
4. Investigations

Three criteria are needed to diagnose acute otitis media; acute onset, middle ear effusion,
and middle ear inflammation. Recurrent acute otitis media is defined as three acute otitis
media episodes in 6 months, or 4 acute otitis media episodes in a year. There is no definitive
lab test for acute otitis media. Identification of the three criteria is dependent on clinical
observation and use of pneumatic otoscopy.

5. Treatment
e Use of antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin)
e Both oral and topical analgesics are effective in controlling the pain associated with
ear infections

Herbal treatment

Blighia sapida (leaves), Aloe vera (gel) and Ocimum basilicum (leaves)
6. Prevention and control

There are several ways to prevent ear infections.

e Drink a lot (water, broth) to help relieve pain

e Sit, especially when fever is present

e Apply a little heat on the ear can reduce pain. Use a hot water bottle, a towel warmed
(but dry) or a heating pad (low intensity)
Avoid airplanes, scuba diving and swimming head under water
Avoid wetting the ear if the eardrum is perforated
Wear earplugs during swimming and always dry the ears
Exercises to equalize pressure in the ear
Swallowing often simulate a yawn, chew gum
Avoid giving babies a feeding bottle when lying down
Avoid exposure to cigarette smoke

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

48

----- PAGE 50 -----
N° 21: ALLERGIC RHINITIS

1. Description

Rhinitis means "irritation of the nose" and is derived from the word rhino, meaning nose.
Allergic rhinitis which occurs during a specific season is called "seasonal allergic rhinitis" (hay
fever) when caused by pollen (trees, grass, ragweed, etc.). When it occurs throughout the
year, it is called "perennial allergic rhinitis." Rhinosinusitis is the medical term that refers to
inflammation of the nasal lining as well as the tissue lining of the sinuses. This term is
sometime used because the two conditions frequently occur together. Allergic rhinitis can
lead to other diseases such as sinusitis and asthma.

2. Causes

The major risk factors of allergic rhinitis are:
e Hereditary: when both parents have an allergy (no matter which), the risk for the
child to suffer from allergic rhinitis is even higher
e Repeated exposure to airborne allergens (eg, pollen)
e Exposure to cigarette smoke, especially during the first year of life, and other
substances such as fireplace smoke and air pollutants

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms of allergic rhinitis, or hay fever, frequently include:
e Nasal congestion

Clear runny nose

Sneezing

Eye itching, redness, and excess tears in the eyes

Nose itching

Postnasal dripping of clear mucus frequently causes a cough

Loss of the sense of smell and taste

Nose bleeding

Tension in the sinus area

Sore throat, cough

The eye symptoms are referred to as "allergic conjunctivitis" (inflammation of the whites of
the eyes). These allergic symptoms often interfere with one's quality of life and overall health.

4. Investigations
e Identify the offending substances (allergens)-e.g. cats, grass
e Skin testing is often needed to identify exactly the specific substance causing the
allergy
e Blood tests

5. Treatment
e Many patients respond to antihistamine medications
Decongestants
Nasal sprays
Allergy desensitization or immunotherapy
Herbal medicine- e.g. Butterbur
Homeopathy

Herbal treatment

e Desmodium adscendens (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Zingiber officinale
(rhizome) and Allium sativum (bulb)

e Tounblock the nose of a baby or a young child, remove some of the mucus using a
nasal bulb. Then place a drop of warm saline solution in each nostril so that the drop
sinks to the bottom of the nose. Straighten the child as soon as the drop has
penetrated into the nose.

e Exercice

e Psychotherapy

49

----- PAGE 51 -----
6. Prevention and control
e Treating the symptoms of allergic rhinitis as they arise helps to prevent complications
such as otitis media, asthma and chronic sinusitis.
e Avoid smoking and second-hand smoke.
e Reduce exposure to allergens (pollen, mold, dust mites, etc.)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

50

----- PAGE 52 -----
N° 22: SINUSITIS

1. Description

Sinusitis refers to inflammation of the air cavities within the passages of the nose. The
sinuses are bony cavities (in four pairs) located in the facial bones. This inflammation of the
sinus mucosa, also known as rhinosinusitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection
(usually cold). Sinusitis can also be caused allergies and chemical or particulate irritation of
the sinuses. The five most common bacteria causing sinus infections are Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Streptococcus pyogenes.

Sinusitis can be of two types:
e Acute: caused in most cases by a viral infection type cold
e Chronic: it is the result of inadequately treated infectious episodes

Complications of a sinus infection that may develop are meningitis, brain abscess,
osteomyelitis, and orbital cellulitis.

2. Causes

Sinus infections are caused by infections from a pathogenic microorganism (virus, bacterium,
or fungus), which grows within a sinus and causes intermittent blockage of the sinus ostium.
Bacterial infection of the sinuses is suspected when facial pain, pus-like nasal discharge, and
symptoms that persists for longer than a week and are not responding to over-the-counter
nasal medications.

3. Signs and symptoms

The main symptoms are sinus headache, facial tenderness (above the eyebrows, nose,
cheeks, around and behind the eyes), pressure or pain in the sinuses or on one side of the
face, fever, cloudy discolored drainage, and feeling of nasal stuffiness, sore throat, and
cough.

Factors that increase the risk are:
Cold or other respiratory infection
e Humid or polluted environment
e Smoking or exposure to smoke
e Asthma or respiratory allergies

In rare cases, serious complications can occur. These include:
e Eye disease (especially ethmoidites)
e Brain disorders (frontal and sphenoid sinusitis)
a. Meningitis
b. brain abscess
c. cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis
d. osteomyelitis (mainly in children)

4. Investigations

Sinus infection is most often diagnosed based on a history and examination. Because plain
X-ray studies of the sinuses may be misleading and procedures such as CT and MRI scans,
are so expensive and not readily available, most cases of sinus infection are initially
diagnosed and treated based on clinical findings on examination. These physical findings
may include:
e redness and swelling of the nasal passages,
e purulent (pus like) drainage from the nasal passages (the symptom most likely to
Clinically diagnose a sinus infection),
e tenderness to percussion (tapping) over the cheeks or forehead region of the sinuses,
and swelling about the eyes and cheeks

Occasionally, nasal secretions are examined for secreted cells that may help differentiate
between infectious and allergic sinusitis.

51

----- PAGE 53 -----
5. Treatment

Bacterial sinusitis is usually treated with antibiotic therapy

For sinusitis caused by virus infection, no antibiotic treatment is required. Frequently
recommended treatments include pain and fever medications (such as
acetaminophen), decongestants and mucolytics

Herbal treatment

Home remedies for sinus infections include, decongestants, and mucolytics. Nasal
irrigation can be accomplished with a Neti-pot or rinse kit (nasal bidet).

Steam inhalation with or without essential oils (peppermint, eucalyptus)

Inhalation of salt water (saline or home preparation available in pharmacies)
Drinking plenty of fluids (8 to 10 glasses of water or other liquids per day) to avoid
dehydration and evacuate secretions more easily

Ocimum gratisimum, Heliotropium indicum, Cymbopogon citratus and Allium sativum
Others are Gentian, primrose, common sorrel, lemongrass and elderberry, Cape
Geranium, Andrographis, Eucalyptus, Peppermint

6. Prevention and control

Preventive measures include:

Avoid colds and allergies

Avoid smoking or exposure to second hand smoke

Encourage the removal of nasal secretions by:

- Wiping nose, drinking plenty of water, using a humidifier to liquefy secretions
- Nasal irrigation with salt water

Increase water consumption to lighten and evacuate secretions more easily
Avoid exposure to temperature changes, a cold and dry air.

Avoid bending head down, as this can increase the pain

Avoid swimming underwater, or flying during the acute phase

Avoid aircraft or any other activity involving changes in pressure (diving,
mountaineering, ...)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

52

----- PAGE 54 -----
N° 23: BREAST CANCER

1. Description

Breast Cancer is the commonest cancer affecting women. Early detection of this cancer is
possible through monthly breast self examination, which is especially recommended for
women of child-bearing age, and periodic screening through clinical breast examination (3
yearly for women below 40 years and yearly for women above 40years) as well as
mammography every 2years for women 40 years and above. Various modalities are
available for the treatment of breast cancer which depends on the biological characteristics

of the tumour, stage of disease and other patient factors.

2. Causes

Unknown

Associated risk factors

Female sex

Family history of breast cancer
Previous personal history
Oestrogen therapy

3. Signs and symptoms

Lump in the breast

Other changes in breast: change in size and/or shape

Skin changes in breast:

- Peau d’orange

- Skin nodules

- Ulceration

Changes in the nipple and areola:

- Nipple discharge

- Nipple retraction

- Eczema/ulceration of nipple or areola

- Swelling in axilla

- Swelling of upper limb

Metastatic disease:

- Bone pain

- Pathological fractures

- Back pain

- Paraplegia

- Breathlessness from pleural effusion and lung metastasis
- Brain metastasis (Headache, vomiting altered consciousness, localizing signs)
Breast lump:

- Hard

- Edges may be indefinite

- Surface may be rough

- May be tethered to skin or attached to skin and underlying tissues
Skin:

- Peau d’ orange , tethering, nodules or ulceration

- Nipple retraction

- Bloody nipple discharge

- Palpable axillary nodes

- Look for evidence of metastatic disease

4. Investigations

Mammography
Ultrasonography of the breast
Biosy and fine Needle Aspiration for cytology and histology

53

----- PAGE 55 -----
5. Treatment

The goals of treatment are:
e To achieve a cure
e To prevent local and distant metastasis
e To relieve pain in incurable cases
e To prolong survival in metastatic disease

5.1. Orthodox treatment

Treatment plans for breast cancer are developed based on a several factors: the type and
stage of the cancer, the sensitivity of the cancer to certain hormones, and the medical history
of the patient.
e Primary treatment: surgery, either a lumpectomy or mastectomy.
e Adjuvant Therapy Treatment:
a. Biological or targeted therapy
b. Chemotherapy
c. Hormone therapy
d. Radiation, a local adjuvant therapy

5.2. Herbal treatment
e Vernonia amygdalina (leaves), Emilia sonchifolia (leaves), Citrus aurantifolia (leaves),
Momordica charantia (leaves) and Allium sativum (bulb)
e Stress management and relaxation techniques, including meditation and visualization,
can also assist in overcoming the fatigue associated with breast cancer

6. Prevention and control
e No single key to preventing breast cancer
e For the 90% of breast cancer patients who are not genetically predisposed to the
disease, some potential causes have been suggested:
a. Healthy Living
b. Preventative Medication (e.g. tamoxifen)
c. Preventative surgery (women who have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation
may want to consider a preventative mastectomy)

d. Pre-emptive Screening

However, a preventative strategy is difficult to create with any degree of accuracy.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

54

----- PAGE 56 -----
N° 24: PROSTATE CANCER

1. Description

Prostate cancer is a form of cancer that develops in the prostate, a gland in the male
reproductive system. Most prostate cancers are slow growing, although some may be
aggressive.Ninety-five per cent of these tumours are adenocarcinomas. The majority of men
affected are aged between 65 and 85 years. The incidence increases with age. It is
recommended that every male of 40 years and above, should have annual screening by
Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) tests and Digital Rectal Examination (DRE) since early
detection is associated with better prognosis. It is worth noting that not every prostate on
DRE is malignant. Likewise a normal-feeling prostate does not exclude a malignancy. A

prostatic biopy is therefore necessary to establish a diagnosis.

2. Causes

Ageing

Functional testes

Family history

Race (more common in blacks)
High dietary fat intake

3. Symptoms

Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms(LUTS)

e Retention of urine
e Haematuria
e General debility anorexia, weight loss, listlessness
e Bone pain (commonly in the waist or limbs)
e Paralysis in the lower limbs or inability to walk
4. Signs

On DRE clinical signs include:

Hard prostate gland with an irregular surface and edges

Obliterated median sulcus
Adherent rectal mucosa
Advanced or metastatic disease:
Anaemia

Uraemia

Wasting

Bone tenderness

Paraplegia

Pathological fracture

5. Investigations

FBC

Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
Prostate specific antigen (PSA)

Liver functions tests

Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound
Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) of the prostate, if available
Transrectal needle biopsy of the prostate
TRUS — guided or finger-guided

6. Treatment
Treatment objectives are:

To relieve symptoms

To control complications

To achieve cure for early disease

To prevent local progression and metastases

55

----- PAGE 57 -----
Orthodox

The method (or methods) chosen is determined by how advanced the cancer is, whether it
has spread outside the prostate, and the overall health of the patient.
e Surgery
e Radical Prostatectomy (complete removal of the prostate gland) -cancer is confined
to the prostate alone, which can be done multiple ways:
e Open Surgery: a large incision is made in the abdomen or the perineum (the area
between the rectum and the scrotum) to access the prostate.
a. Laparoscopic Surgery: several specialized cameras and tools are used to see
inside the body through small incisions.
b. Robotic-assisted Laparoscopic Surgery: the surgeon controls very precise
robotic arms to perform laparoscopic surgery.
e Radiation Therapy
e Hormone Therapy- a drug (or combination of drugs) that affects androgens in the
body The classes of drugs used in prostate-cancer hormone therapy include:
a. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) analogs, LHRH agonists, and
LHRH antagonists, which prevent the testicles from making testosterone.
b. Antiandrogens, which block the action of androgens in the body.
e Other androgen-suppressing drugs, which prevent the adrenal glands from making
testosterone
Another hormone-therapy option is orchiectomy, the surgical removal of the testicles.
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU)

5.2. Herbal treatment

Bridelia ferruginea (leaves), Momordica charantia (leaves), Trichilia monadelpha (bark) and
Zingiber officinale (rhizome)

6. Prevention and control

e Regular, decaf, half-caf, coffee

e Intake of trans-fatty acids: increase inflammation and insulin resistance, both of which
may play a role in prostate cancer

e Avoid commercially baked doughnuts and cookies, as well as packaged baked goods
containing hydrogenated oil

e Eat more cooked tomato products (lycopene, more potent after they're cooked)

e Regular exercise (playing tennis, running, swimming, or biking, etc.)

e Increase intake of omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA (fish oil)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

56

----- PAGE 58 -----
N° 25: LEUKAEMIA

1. Desription

Leukaemia is the uncontrolled production of white cells at different stages of maturation.
There are two main types of leukaemia depending on the type of white cell affected. These
are lymphoid leukaemia and myeloid leukaemia. Each can further be divided into acute
(where the patient falls suddenly ill) and chronic (where the patient may have been harboring
the disease for months and occasionally years without knowing). Leukaemia may therefore
present as Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML) and chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). All is
commonest in children especially boys, CLL is commonest in the elderly, AML and CML cut
across all age groups and sexes.

2. Causes
e Usually no cause in any particular case
e Viruses e.g. Human T Lymphotrophic Virus Type 1 (HTLV-1) and Epstein Barr Virus
(EBV)
e Chemicals e.g. alkylating agents such as Melphalan
e Radiation

3. Symptoms

Acute leukaemia:

Fever

Easy fatigability

Bruising tendencies

Bone and joint pain especially in children

Chronic leukaemia
e Asymptomatic
Dragging sensation left side of abdomen
Easy satiety
Weight loss
Generalized itch
Lymph nodal swellings

4. Signs

Acute leukaemia
e  Pallor
Fever
Skin and mucosal haemorrhages
Gum hupertrophy (AML subtype 5)
Firm, rubbery, non-tender lymph nodes (lymphoid leukaemia)
Splenomegaly

Chronic leukaemia
e Splenomegaly, often massive in CML
e Generalized lymph node enlargement in CLL

5. Investigations
e FBC and blood film comment
e Chest X-ray
e Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy
e BCR-ABL rearrangement in ALL and CML

57

----- PAGE 59 -----
6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To aim for a cure for ALL in children
e To aim for a cure for good prognostic cases of ALL in adults
e To achieve remission and prolong good quality life in AML
e Tocontrol white cell counts and symptoms and prolong good quality life in CML

The main orthodox treatment approaches are:
= Chemotherapy
= Radiation Therapy
= Biologic Therapy

Herbal treatment
e Curcumin (turmeric), green tea, olive leaf, Ginseng, peels of citrus fruit
e Ganoderma lucidum, Silybum marianum, Solanum sp., Hedyotus diffusa, Graviola
fruit, Vitex negundo
e Watchful waiting or careful observation in CLL
e Good hydration

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

58

----- PAGE 60 -----
N° 26: DIARRHOEA

1. Description

Diarrhoea means passing frequent, loose, watery stools 3 or more times in a day. Diarrhoea
is often accompanied by vomiting. It is very common in children. The commonest cause in
this age group is viral. There is therefore usually no need to prescribe antibiotics. Fluid loss
occurs quickly in children because of their size. If this is not corrected it may result in
dehydration which can be fatal. In children, other diseases like malaria, pneumonia, ear
infections, urinary infections, may cause diarrhoea. Examine the child fully to make sure
there is no obvious cause for the diarrhoea. The presence of a fever usually indicates an
underlying cause. Never take the complaint of diarrhoea lightly. Always ask how many times
that day and the day before the patient has been to the toilet, and the texture of the stools.
To one person who usually passes stool once in three (3) days, a motion every day seems
like diarrhoea, but to another person this is normal. Giving antibiotics may cause or prolong
the diarrhoea except in special circumstances (see below). Malnutrition causes diarrhea,
which in turn also causes malnutrition, setting up a vicious cycle. Never give enemas or
laxatives to patients with diarrhoea.

2. Causes
e Viral e.g. Rotavirus
e Bacterial e.g. Shigella
e Protozoal e.g. Amoabae
e Side effects of some medications e.g. Penicillins

3. Symptoms

e Frequent watery stools
Bloody or mucus in the stool
Presence of fever
Reduced urine output
Associated vomiting

4. Signs
e Dehydration

5. Investigations

e FBC
Blood film for malaria parasite
Stool routine examination
Stool for culture and sensitivity
Blood urea and creatinine

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

e To prevent dehydration: this is very important since so much of the child’s body fluid
is being lost through the stool and vomiting

e To replace lost fluid: as much fluid as goes into the stools should be given to the child
to drink for replacement

e To maintain nutrition: mothers tend not to give a child who has diarrhea anything or
very little to eat, at a time when he needs all the food he can get! Continue to feed as
much as can be tolerated

e To maintain personal hygiene: or else you end up taking the germs from the stools,
back into the mouth, continuing the diarrhea you are trying to stop

e To eliminate infecting organisms where appropriate

59

----- PAGE 61 -----
Herbal treatment

e Ocimum gratissimum (leaves), Psidium guajava (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia
(leaves) or;

e Bridelia ferruginea, Ocimum gratissimum (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia (leaves) or;

e Bridelia ferruginea (leaves), Adansonia digitata (stem bark), Alchornia cordifolia
(leaves)

e Keep surroundings clean

e Improve personal hygiene e.g hand washing after toilet

7. Prevention and control

To avoid developing diarrhea from food poisoning, consider:
" washing the cooking and food preparation areas more frequently
= serving food immediately
= refrigerating leftovers promptly
= thawing food in the refrigerator

Traveler's diarrhea can also be prevented. If you are planning a long vacation to a
developing country, consider:
= asking your doctor if you can begin an antibiotic treatment before you leave. This will
greatly reduce your risk of developing traveler’s diarrhea.
"avoiding tap water, ice cubes, and fresh produce likely washed with tap water. Drink
bottled water and eat cooked food only.

If you are suffering from diarrhea as the result of a viral or bacterial infection, you can take
the following actions to prevent spreading your infection to others:

= Wash your hands more frequently.

= Use soap to wash your hands for 20 seconds.

= Use hand sanitizer when washing your hands is not possible.

8. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://health._yahoo.net/health/diarrhoea

60

----- PAGE 62 -----
N° 27: PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE

1. Description

Peptic ulcer may be duodenal or gastric. Duodenal ulcers are more common and occur more
often in younger adults. Gastric ulcer usually occurs after middle age.

2. Causes
e Excessive secretion of gastric acid
e Inadequate protection of the lining of the stomach and duodenum against digestion by
acid and pepsin
e Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection
e Medicines e.g. non — steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids

3. Symptoms

e Abdominal pain
a. May be a minor discomfort, gnawing, burning, dull ache or very severe pain
b. Typically in the epigastrium or right hypochondrium
c. Occasionally high up behind the sternum or low down around the umbilicus
d. In duodenal ulcer, typically comes on when the patient is hungry and may wake

the patient up in the middle of the night.

e. In gastric ulcer, it is typically worsen by food
f. Is relieved by alkalis and food in duodenal ulcer

e Vomiting may occur in both duodenal and gastric ulcers

4. Signs
e Tenderness in the epigastrium, right hypochondrium or umbilical region during an
attack

5. Investigation
e Haemoglobin
e Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy
a. With biopsy for histology and staining (for H.pylori)
b. With urease test (for H. pylori)
e Barium meal in the absence of endoscopy
e Stool examination to exclude intestinal parasites

Complications of gastric ulcer include perforation, gastric outlet obstruction and haemorrhage
that does not respond to conservative measures.

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To relieve pain and reduce gastric acid secretion
To promote healing of the ulcer
To eradicate H.pylori of the ulcer
To prevent recurrence of the ulcer
To avoid complications

Treatment will depend on the underlying cause of your ulcer. If tests show that you have an
H. pylori infection, a combination of medication will be prescribed:

e antibiotics—medications that help kill infections

e proton pump inhibitors (PPls)—medications that help reduce stomach acid

e over-the-counter PPI (such as Prilosec or Prevacid)

e Acid blockers (like Zantac or Pepcid)

61

----- PAGE 63 -----
Herbal treatment

Aloe vera juice, Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Momordica charantia (leaves) and Ximenia

americana

Avoid smoking and alcohol intake

Avoid foods that aggravate the pain

Allay anxiety and stress

Surgery-indications for surgery:

a. Chronicity-crippling periodic attacks

b. Economic factors which make it difficult for the the patient to persevere with
medical treatment

6. Prevention and control

Certain lifestyle choices and habits can reduce your risk of developing peptic ulcers. These
include:

quitting smoking and other tobacco use

eating a healthy diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains
not drinking more than two alcoholic beverages a day

not mixing alcohol with medication

washing your hands frequently to avoid infections

limiting your use of ibuprofen, aspirin, and naproxen sodium

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/peptic-ulcer

62

----- PAGE 64 -----
N° 28: INSOMNIA

1. Description

Insomnia is the ability to obtain adequate sleep, irrespective of whether the patient has
trouble getting to sleep, suffers frequent nocturnal arousals, or awakens too early. Assssing
a complaint of sleep disorders requires a thorough history and clinical examination and
specific sleep-wake history. Insomnia may suggest an underlying medical, psychological,
psychiatric (especially depression) or environmental problem.

2. Causes
e Medicines e.g. Ephedrine, phenylephrine
Caffeine — containing beverages e.g. coffee,tea
Alcohol
Drugs of abuse e.g. cocaine marijuana, amphetamines
Underlying medical , psychological and environmental factors
Anxiety disorder
Depression

3. Investigation
e FBC
e LETs
e BUE and creatinine
e Sleep study

4. Treatment

When lifestyle changes and behaviour therapies aren't relieving the symptoms of insomnia,
doctors will often turn to medication. Doctors don’t generally recommend relying on
prescription sleeping pills for more than a few weeks, as they can become addictive. Some of
the most prescribed brand name sleep medications include Ambien, Lunesta, Rozerem, and
Sonata.

Herbal treatment
e Lippia multiflora (leaves), Cymbopogon citratus (leaves) and Hibiscus sabdarifa
(calyx)

e Valeriana officinalis

e Herbal teas made from chamomile, hops, passion flower, or St. John’s Wort

e Educate patients to adopt a lifestyle that promotes good sleep

e Have regular exercise

e Avoid strenuous exercise close to bedtime

e Establish good sleep hygiene i.e a routine for ‘winding down’, going to bed and
preparing for sleep

e Avoid alcohol and caffeine — containing beverages close to bedtime

e Ensure a comfortable and quiet environment for sleep

e Relaxation therapy

e Stimulus control treatment of sleep by going to go to bed only when sleepy and to get

out of bed if sleep is interrupted.

5. Prevention and control

= Prevention techniques, such as maintaining a healthy lifestyle, learning how to
manage stress, and cutting out bad habits can have a significant impact on promoting
quality sleep. In addition the following may be helpful:

" Stick to your sleep schedule-when possible, try to go to bed and get up at the same
time every day; try not to take naps during the day, and if a daytime nap is needed,
keep it under 30 minutes in the early afternoon

= Don’t stay in bed when you're not sleeping

= Resist the urge to linger in bed if you wake up feeling rested; ilf you can’t sleep, don’t
lie there staring at the ceiling for hours on end; instead, if it’s been more than 15

63

----- PAGE 65 -----
minutes of sleeplessness, get out of bed and do something relaxing, such as
meditation or reading, until you feel sleepy

Relax

Try taking a warm bath or have your partner give you a massage before going to bed
Create a soothing bedtime ritual such as listening to soft music, doing gentle yoga, or
reading. Acupuncture

Create seclusion

Make your bedroom conducive to sleep

Close the door when you go to sleep and run a fan (if you like) to help eliminate
outside noises. Keep your bedroom cooler at night than in the day, and as dark as
possible.

Exercise for 20-30 minutes every day, five hours or more before bedtime

Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine

Skip late-night snacks and meals

Maintain a healthy diet, and avoid foods that are high in saturated fat, which may
cause heartburn and indigestion

Eliminate pain

Hide the time-tThe less you know what time it is—particularly when you wake in the
middle of night—the better you’re likely to sleep

Know what’s causing your sleepless nights

6. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/insomnia-prevention

64

----- PAGE 66 -----
N° 29: DEPRESSION

1. Description

Depression is a mood disorder. It occurs in all age groups although symptoms may be
different in children. It has a tendency to recur, although some may become bipolar, when
episode of mania may also be observed. Some patients present mainly with bodily
symptoms, sleep disturbances as well as morbid dreams and “worrying excessively”. They
hardly mention a depressive mood unless they are asked specifically, and even then many
deny or trivialize it as a consequence of acknowledged symptoms like headaches or
insomnia. Most cases of suicide or attempted suicide are from depression; one should not
dismiss or take for granted statements made by patients such as ‘I want to die, ‘life is not
wealth living’, ‘| am fed up with life’. All cases of attempted suicide should be referred to a
psychiatrist after initial management of the presenting complication e.g. self inflected
accident or poison. Recurrent depression or unipolar depression is treated differently (with
antidepressants) from bipolar depression, which responds more to mood stabilizers

2. Causes
e Genetic
Familial
Environmental
Psychosocial factors
Endocrine disorders e.g. hypothyroidism, Cushing‘s syndrome

3. Symptoms

The diagnoses criteria for major depression relies on the presence of at least five of the

following symptoms experienced every day for at least two weeks.
e Depressed mood

Loss of interest or pressure

Significant weight loss or gain

Insomnia or sleeping too much

Psychomotor agitation or retardation

Fatigue or loss of energy

Feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt

Impaired thinking or concentration ; indecisiveness

Multiple bodily complaints

Suicidal thoughts/thoughts of death

Hallucinations /delusions of morbid themes in severe cases

In children

e Truancy or refusal to go to school
Poor school performance
Bedwetting in a previously ‘dry’ child
Odd behavior, aggression or defiance
Irritability
Appetite changes
Some of the ‘adult’ symptoms

4. Signs
e Depressed mood
e Evidence of weigh loss or obesity
e Agitation or retardation
e Hallucinations

5. Investigations
e FBC
e BUE and creatinine

65

----- PAGE 67 -----
e FBS
e Thyroid function and cortisol levels if indicated

6. Treatment
e Treatment objectives
e To reduce symptoms
e To prevent disruption to normal life at home, work or school
e To prevent suicide

Herbal treatment
e Cola nitida (cotyledons), Aframomum melegueta (seeds) and Zingiber officinale
(rhizome)
e St. John's Wort, Kava kava

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/articles/depression/depression-facts

66

----- PAGE 68 -----
N° 30: SCHIZOPHRENIA

1. Description

Schizophrenia is probably the most severe and potentially disabling form of mental illness
and occurs in about 1% of the people in every community worldwide. Schizophrenia may
present as an acute or chronic illness. The clinical features include characteristics of
‘positive’ or ‘negative’ symptoms, deterioration in social, work or interpersonal relationships
and continued evidence of disturbed behaviour for at least 6 months. The clinical features
may be numerous and can change over time. Psychosis associated with substance abuse
and mood disorders with psychotic features may mimic schizophrenia.

2. Causes
e Cause is largely unknown
e Possible causes include:
a. Genetics
b. Birth defects
c. Environmental triggers
d. Illicit drugs

3. Symptoms

‘Positive’ symptoms
e Hallucinations
e Delusions
e Incoherent speech or illogicality
e Odd or disorganized behavior
e Disorders of thought possession
‘Negative’ symptoms
e Poverty of speech or of content of speech
Apathy
Reduced social contact or withdrawal
Flattened effects (showing little facial expressive responses)
Delusions may be persecutory (undue suspicion) or totally bizarre like being
controlled or being made to feel emotions or sensations.
e Hallucinations may involve any of the senses but auditory ones are most common;
experienced as voices speaking clearly or in mumbled tones.
e Disorders of thought possession include feeling of the patient’s thoughts being
accessible to others.
e Motor disorders often occur but are not essential for diagnosis.

4. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To abolish symptoms and restore functioning to the maximum level possible
e To reduce the chances of recurrence
e Non-pharmacological treatment

Treatments include electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), sometimes called "shock treatment,"
and, tranquilizing antipsychotic medications, such as the phenothiazines and more recently,
a new generation of medications (known as atypical antipsychotics), which tend to have
fewer side effects than older medications.

Herbal treatment
e Rauwolfia vomitoria (roots), Lippia multiflora (leaves), Hos/undia opposita (leaves),
Zingiber officinale (rhizome) and Xylopia aethiopica (fruits)
e Vitamin D- may play a role in reducing inflammation and boosting immune system
function

67

----- PAGE 69 -----
e Fish Oil- a natural source of omega-3 fatty acid

e Glycine
Diet Management- a healthful diet, characterized by low-fat, high-fiber, whole grains,

e
fresh fruits and vegetables, and fatty fish (a good source of omega-3 fatty acids)

5. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/schizophrenia/alternative-treatments

68

----- PAGE 70 -----
N° 31: ALCOHOLISM

1. Description

Dependence on alcohol and development of related problems is a common and often
unrecognized disorder. Alcoholism is often associated with many physical health problems.
The greatest problem is the recognition and diagnosis of alcoholism since affected
individuals are often in denial of their problem. They under-declare the amount and
frequency of alcohol consumption and usually appear in hospital only with complications. The
coexistence of other psychiatric illnesses like Depression with alcoholism is common.

2. Causes

Genetic, familial and environmental factors are all important.

3. Symptoms

These may be observed by relatives or co-workers
e Recurrent use of alcohol resulting in failure to fulfill major obligations at work, school
or home.
e Recurrent use in situations where it is physically hazardous e.g. driving
Continued use despite having persistent or recurrent social, legal or interpersonal
problems caused by effects of alcohol
Development of tolerance
Withdrawal syndromes
Taking increasingly larger amounts over longer periods than intended
Previous unsuccessful attempts at stopping

4. Signs
e Reddening

Smooth red palms

Painless enlargement of liver

Bruises from minor accidents etc.

Parotid gland enlargement

5. Investigations
e Mean Corpuscular Volume(MCV) is increased in majority of alcoholism patients
e Liver Enzymes(AST, ALT) are often increased
e Serum Gamma Glutamyltransferase (GGT) is increased in majority of alcoholics
e Ultrasound scan of liver

6. Treatment

Allopathic treatment of alcoholism has two parts. The first phase is the treatment of acute
effects of alcoholism, called detoxification. The second phase involves learning how to live
with the disease of alcoholism.

Treatment objectives:
e To treat complications
e To achieve total abstinence from alcohol use

Herbal treatment

e Alternative treatments can be a helpful adjunct for the alcoholic patient once the
medical danger of withdrawal has passed. Because many alcoholics have very
stressful lives (because of, or leading to, the alcoholism), many of the treatments for
alcoholism involve dealing with and relieving stress. These include massage
meditation, and hypnotherapy. Others include acupuncture, biofeedback, behavioral
therapy, motivational enhancement therapy, and aversion therapy

e Use of nutritional supplements, such as vitamins A, B complex, and C; certain fatty
acids; amino acids; zinc; magnesium; and selenium

69

----- PAGE 71 -----
e Supplements that support antioxidant, detoxifying, restorative and corrective
deficiencies

e Herbal treatments include milk thistle (Silyoum marianum), which is thought to protect
the liver against damage. Other herbs are thought to be helpful for the patient
suffering from withdrawal. Some of these include the antidepressive properties of
lavender (Lavandula officinalis), the calming and restorative nerve tonifying effects of
skullcap (Scutellaria_lateriflora), chamomile (Matricaria recutita), and valerian
(Valeriana officinalis), the stimulating and GI effects of peppermint (Mentha piperita),
and the bladder aid, yarrow (Achillea millefolium).

e Cassia occidentalis, Phyllanthus fraternus, Azadiractha indica and Moringa oleifera

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/galecontent/alcoholism/5

70

----- PAGE 72 -----
N° 32: ANXIETY DISORDERS

1. Description

Anxiety is a common symptom that occurs in all psychiatric disorders including depressive
illness and most psychoses. Some patients have a mixture of anxiety and depressive
symptoms, but pure states exist. Due the the similarity of symptoms, it may be difficult to
differentiate an anxiety state from minor depressive illness. Anxiety may also significantly
overshadow many serious illnesses. It may be worthwhile to exclude any underlying physical
diseases especially hyperthyroidism, cardiac disease or hypertension. Although there are
various forms of anxiety disorders (generalized anxiety disorder , panic disorder, phobias,
obsessive compulsive disorder, acute stress disorder, post traumatic stress disorder), the
commonest seen in generalized anxiety disorders are panic disorders.

Generalised Anxiety Disorders

1. Description

In this condition, there is excessive anxiety and worry about events or activities, such as
performance at school or work, occurring on most day for at least 6 months.

2. Causes
e LIFE experience
e Environmental factors
e Personality
e Genetics

3. Symptoms

Excessive anxiety and worry occurring on most days, for at least 6 months
The anxiety or worry is associated with at least 3 of the following
e Muscle tension (often reported as pain in various parts like neck, trunk or headaches )
Crawling and burning sensation around the body
Restlessness or feeling on edge
Being easily fatigued
Difficult concentrating or mind going biank
Irritability
Sleep disturbance(difficulty falling asleep or frequent wakening)
Palpitation

4. Signs
e Restlessness
e Sweating
e Anxious mood
e Tachycardia

5. Investigations

No laboratory tests confirm the diagnosis. However, exclude underlying conditions,
especially hyperthyroidism, phaeochromocytoma, cardiac arrhythmias

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To reduce anxiety
e To attain relief of somatic symptoms
a) Psychotherapy
b) Medication
c) Lifestyle Changes
e getting an adequate amount of sleep (about eight hours a night)
e exercise regularly

71

----- PAGE 73 -----
e devoting time to stress relief
e avoiding unnecessarily stressful situations
e career change, if anxiety is focused around work

Herbal treatment
Gossypium arboreum (leaves), Lippia multiflora (leaves), Hoslundia opposita (leaves)
Eat a Balanced Diet
Drink More Water
Limit Your Caffeine
Get Regular Exercise
Massage Your Muscles
Meditation
Nutritional supplements and herbs include:
. vitamin B12
. fish oil
. chamomile
. Kava root
. inositol
St. John’s Wort

™-7™>oQa008

7. Prevention and control
= Stress relief
= Proper diet
= Keeping a journal- to track moods, stress, and anxiety
= Avoiding unhealthy substances

While tobacco, drugs, and alcohol are often called stress relievers, using them actually
damages the body, making it harder for it to handle stress

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/anxiety-treatments

72

----- PAGE 74 -----
N° 33: BOILS

1. Description

A boil or furuncle is a deep bacterial infection of the hair follicles. A more superficial infection
is termed folliculitis and a group of boils in an area is termed a carbuncle. Patients with
recurrent boils or carbuncles should be screened for diabetes mellitus and/or
immunodeficiency.

2. Causes

Infection of the skin with staphylococcus aureus

3. Symptoms
e Single or multiple swellings on the skin which may discharge pus
e Painful swellings on the skin

4. Signs
e Purulent swellings on the skin in single or multiple areas of skin
e Swellings may be warm and/or tender

5. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To treat infection
e To relieve pain
e To identify and treat any predisposing condition

a) Compresses- boils are usually treated with application of antibiotic creams, following the
application of hot compresses. The compresses help the infection to come to a head and
drain and are an important part of the treatment regime.

b) Carbuncles and furunculosis are usually treated with oral antibiotics as well as antibiotic
creams or ointments

c) Boils or carbuncles that are very large or that do not resolve may be opened with a sterile
needle or surgical knife to allow the pus to drain

d) Resveratrol, which is a phytoalexin, appears to be highly effective in treating boils and
other skin infections in humans caused by S. aureus.

5.1. Herbal treatment

Bidens pilosa (leaves), Rauwolfia vomitora (root) and Alchornea cordifolia (leaves)

6. Prevention and control

To minimize the risk of developing bacterial skin infections the skin should be kept clean; to
avoid spreading the infection, washcloths, towels, and facial cosmetics should not be shared
with others. A healthy diet should be maintained and allergic foods should be eliminated.
This will ensure that the immune system will be supported, and that boils will be prevented.

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/search?q1=boils

73

----- PAGE 75 -----
N° 34: GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE

1. Description

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is caused by backflow of gastric or duodenal
contents or both past the lower oesophageal sphincter into the oesophagus without belching
or vomiting.

The disease is classified into two groups based on endoscopy findings as non-erosive
gastroesophageal disease (non erosive GERD) and erosive gastroesophageal disease (
erosive GERD). Failue to treat may result in oesophagitis, ulceration, strictures and rarely
adenocarcinoma.

2. Causes

Hiatus hernia

Increased intra-abdominal pressure e.g in pregnancy

Obesity

Long term use of nasogastric tube

Agents that decrease lower oesophageal sphincter pressure e.g. alcohol, cigarrettes,
anticholinergics (e.g. Propantheline bromide) , other drugs — Morphine , Diazepam
and Meperidine

Children with chronic neurological disease

3. Symptoms

Heartburn — worsens with vigorous exercise , bending forward , lying; relieved by
antacids and sitting upright

Dyspepsia

Early satiety

Retrosternal and epigastric pain:mimics angina pectoris radiating to neck, jaw and
arm; the pain is worse on bending down e.g. sweeping Pain on swallowing
Nocturnal regurgitation : wakes patients up with coughing , choking and filling of the
mouth with saliva

Nocturnal asthma

In children:

Failure to thrive
Forceful regurgitation which may lead to aspiration pneumonia
Iron deficiency anaemia

4. Signs

Epigastric tenderness occationally

5. Investigations

Barium swallow with fluoroscopy (especially useful in children)
Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (OGD) or upper gastro-intestinal track endoscopy
Abdominal ultrasound (to exclude other diseases)

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

To relieve symptoms
To prevent complications

a) Medication-include everything from antacids to H2 receptor blockers or proton pump
inhibitors

b) Nissen fundoplication-surgical procedure, in which a portion of the stomach is lifted over
the junction between the stomach and esophagus to increase pressure on the lower
esophageal sphincter (LES). This prevents stomach acids from entering the esophagus.
Although highly effective, the Nissen fundoplication may result in increased bloating,
flatulence, and trouble swallowing.

74

----- PAGE 76 -----
6.1. Traditional treatment
e Ficus cordata (stem bark), Spathodea campanulata (stem bark) and Zingiber
Officinalie (rhizome)
Chinese honeysuckle flower
Melatonin
Peppermint
Hynopsis, massage, and relaxation techniques such as guided imagery have been
found to be helpful for some people

7. Prevention and control
e Standard Treatments -some of the best treatments for GERD can be lifestyle changes
such as quitting smoking, losing weight, or eating smaller meals more frequently
e Avoid foods such alcohol, citrus fruits, caffeinated and carbonated beverages, fried or
fatty foods, and spicy foods, including garlic and onions

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/gerd/alternative-treatment

75

----- PAGE 77 -----
N° 35: GINGIVITIS AND STOMATITIS

1. Description

These are inflammatory conditions involving the gums and mucosa of the oral cavity.

2. Causes
e Bacterial, from poor oral hygiene
e Viral e.g. herpes simplex, measels
e Vitamin deficiency
e Chemicals allergic reaction

3. Symptoms

e Sore mouth
Bleeding gums expecially after brushing
Pain while swallowing
Cracks at the corners of the mouth
Poor appitite
Nausea

4. Signs
e Hyperaemic buccal mucosa and gums
e Ulcers may be present

5. Investigations

FBS
Mouth swab

6. Treatment
e Treatment objectives
e To relieve pain and inflammation

To treat gingivitis you must practice proper oral hygiene. You should also cut back on any
smoking and control your diabetes. Other treatments include deep cleaning your teeth,
medications, and surgery.

e Antibiotic mouthwash containing chlorhexidine can be used to disinfect the mouth.

e Time-release antiseptic chips containing chlorhexidine can be inserted into pockets

after root planing.

e Antibiotic microspheres made with minocycline can be inserted in pockets after
scaling and planing.
Oral antibiotics can be used to treat persistent areas of gum inflammation.
Doxycycline, an antibiotic, can help keep enzymes from causing tooth damage.
Surgery
Flap
Bone and tissue grafts

Herbal treatment

Adenia lobata (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia (leaves) and Plumbago zeylanica (leaves)

7. Prevention and control

Gingivitis can be prevented by proper and consistent oral hygiene. Make certain to eat a
balanced diet and visit the dentist regularly. Brush your teeth twice daily with fluoride
toothpaste. Floss your teeth every day.

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/gingivitis

76

----- PAGE 78 -----
N° 36: ORAL THRUSH

1. DESCRIPTION

It mainly affects the very young , the very old or those whose immunity is impaired. It occurs
more frequently in HIV/AIDS patients, the malnourished, diabetics, patients on long term
antibiotics and corticosteroids.

2. CAUSES

Candida albicans

3. SYMPTOMS

White patches in the mouth

Burning sensation in the mouth.
Diffuculties in swallowing

Breast fed babies may refuse to suck

4. SIGNS

White patches in the mouth

5. INVESTIGATIONS

FBC
Fasting blood glucoce
HIV status indicated

6. TREATMENT

Treatment objectives

To eradicate infections
To identify and treat any underlying condition

Treatment for oral thrush varies depending on age and overall health. The purpose of
treatment is to prevent the growth and spread of the fungus.

Treatment for oral thrush may consist of:

clotrimazole lozenge (an antifungal medication that you leave in your mouth until it
dissolves)

nystatin (an antifungal mouthwash that you swish around in your mouth and then
swallow)

fluconazole or itraconazole (oral antifungal medications used for cases that are
resistant to initial treatments or for patients who have HIV/AIDS)

amphotericin B (an oral or intravenous drug used to treat patients with very resistant
infections or whose infection has spread to other parts of the body)

Your at-home regimen for treating oral thrush should include:

brushing with a soft toothbrush to avoid scraping the lesions

replacing your existing toothbrush regularly until the oral thrush clears up

not using mouthwashes or sprays

using a 3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution or saltwater mixture to rinse your mouth
maintaining appropriate blood sugar levels if you have diabetes

eating unsweetened yogurt with Lactobacillus acidophilus or taking acidophilus
capsules to help restore and maintain healthy levels of “good” bacteria

When a breastfeeding infant has oral thrush, both the mother and infant should be treated to
prevent a cycle of reinfection. Treatment in these cases may include:

using an antifungal medication for the baby and an antifungal cream for the mother’s
breasts

rinsing pacifiers, bottle nipples, and all pieces of a breast pump in a half water/half
vinegar solution and allowing the items to air dry

using nursing pads to prevent the fungus from spreading to your clothes

77

----- PAGE 79 -----
Traditional treatment

7. Prevention and control

e Practice good oral hygiene by brushing and flossing your teeth daily. This is
especially important if you have diabetes or wear dentures.

e Rinse out your mouth after using a corticosteroid inhaler.

e Add acidophilus capsules or yogurt with Lactobacillus acidophilus to your diet when
you are taking prescribed antibiotics.

e Promptly treat a vaginal yeast infection, especially if you are pregnant.

e Avoid foods that are high in sugar and/or yeast, since they could encourage the
fungus that causes oral thrush.

8. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/thrush

78

----- PAGE 80 -----
N° 37: MALNUTRITION

1. Description

Food is necessary for proper growth, development of the body and maintenance of health. A
normal and properly balanced diet, consists of food that has sufficient amounts of protein
necessary for growth and maintenance, carbohydrates and fats necessary for energy and
vitamins and minerals for protection against disease. Malnutrition occurs when there is a
deficiency in intake of some or all of the above nutrients. It is most commonly seen in
children less than five years, particularly after weaning. In many cases, the malnourished
child is brought to the health unit because of other complaints such as diarrhoea, vomiting,
fever, worms or cough. In adults, malnutrition frequently occurs in association with chronic
alcoholism. Malnutrition can result in a breakdown of the child’s or adult’s ability to fight
disease and infection. An infection in a malnourished individual may thus become very
severe and result in death. A child suffering from malnutrition may have features of marasms,
kwashiorkor or both [marasmic-kwashiokor]. These children lack both protein and sources of
energy [protein Energy Malnutrition, PEM]. Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) is divided into
three stages using weight/age, weight/height and upper arm circumference. The mild form of
PEM is the commonest type in Ghana.

Mild PEM
e Weihgt for age:<80% but >70%
e Weight for height: 70-80%
e Mid upper Arm circumference: 12.5-13.5cm
e The child is thin with some muscle wasting
e The child plays less because of lack of energy.

Moderate PEM
e Weight for age : <70% but > 60%
e Mid upper Arm circumference: 12.0-12.5cm
e Early signs of Kwashiorkor or marasmus may be present.
e The symptoms and signs are as in mild PEM but more pronounced

Severe PEM
e Weight for age :<60% of expected weight for age
e Weight for height :<70%
e Mid Upper Arm circumference: <12cm.
e Inthe stage there are signs of maramus, kwashiorkor or marasmic-kwashiorkor.

2. Causes

e Inadequacy of quality and/or quantity of food intake

e Social neglect

e Chronic illness and cancers
a. Infections and infestations(children):
b. Measles, pertussis HIV, pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Worm infestations

e Alcoholism (adults)

3. Symptoms

e Weight loss

e Poor weight gain (marasmus)

a. May be noted as drop or flattening in weight on the “Road to Health “ chart

Body swelling (Kwashiorkor)
Lack of energy
Apathy
Disinterest in food

79

----- PAGE 81 -----
4. Signs

Marasmus
e Thin (reduced muscle bulk)
Prominent bones
Hanging skin folds especially over the buttocks
Unusually alert
Looks like an old man

Kwashoirkor
e Thin and wasted arms
Puffy face and legs due to oedema
Brownish or reddish hair
Flaky skin rash especially on the legs
Sores on the oedematous parts of the body in severe cases
Miserable and apathetic appearance
Disinterest in food

5. Investigations
e FBC
Urea and electrolytes
Urine culture and sensitivity
Chest X-ray
HIV testing
Gastric lavage for acid fast bacilli

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To correct the nutrirional deficiency
To prevent reoccurrence
To check and correct complications
Anaemia
To identify and treat underlying infections and infestations
To adequately manage chronic illness

Herbal treatment
e Launea taraxacifolia, Moringa oleifera, Cinnamomun zeylanica, Soya bean or;
e Soya bean, Moringa oleifera, Launea taraxacifolia and Cinnamomun zeylanica

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/malnutrition

80

----- PAGE 82 -----
N° 38: STROKE

1. Description

A Stroke or cerebrovascular accident is a rapidly developing focal (or global), disturbances of
cerebral function lasting 24 hours or longer or leading to death, with no apparent cause other
than a vascular origin. The risk factors for a stroke include hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
cigerette smoking , cardiac arrhythmias , obesity, plasma lipid abnormalities, heart and
peripheral vascular disease and excessive alcohol intake. Stroke are usually sudden in onset
or may show progression over several hours or occasionally days. The site of the brain

lesion causing the stroke usually determines the neurological presentation.

2. Causes

Cerebral infarction form

a. Thrombosis of the cerebral vessel

b. Embolism from a distant site (Atrial fibrillation)
Intracerebral haemorrhage
Subarachnoid haemorrhage

3. Symptoms

4. Signs
e

Weeakness of one side of the boby including face

Inability to rise up from a sitting or lying position

Sudden fall

Loss of speech

Severe headache and /or neck pain (subarachnoid haemorrhage)
Unconciousness in some patients

Seizures

Paralysis of a limb and/or the face

Initial flaccidity, but spasticity and exaggerated reflexes occur later
Loss of one-half of visual field (Hemianopia)

Loss of sensation of one —half of body(hemi-anaesthesia)
Extensor plantar response

Alteration of speech (dysarthria/dyspasia)

Neck stiffness(in subarachnoid haemorrhage)

5. Investigations

FBC

Blood glucose

Serum lipid profile

Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
Uric acid

ECG

CT scan/MRI of the head

Chest X-ray

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

To limit the progression area of brain damage

To protect patients from the dangers of unconsciouness and immobility
To treat the underlying cause if possible

To institute measures to improve functional recovery

To support and rehabilitate patients who survive with residual disability
To prevent recurrence of cerebrovascular lesions

81

----- PAGE 83 -----
Treatment for a stroke should begin as soon as possible. The quicker emergency treatment
begins, the greater the chance of preventing any lasting damage. Treatment depends on the
type of stroke a person is having.

Emergency treatment for ischemic stroke must start within 4.5 hours of the event.
Treatment for an ischemic stroke—the most common kind that involves a blood clot in
the brain—will be to break up the clot that is blocking or disrupting blood flow in the
brain.

One of the most common treatments doctors use during stroke emergencies is simple
aspirin

Other drugs designed to break up clots. These drugs can be injected via via a
catheter—or thin tube—through your arteries. The most common medication used to
treat stroke is known as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and will help break up
clot that has formed in the brain. Other oral drugs that may eventually be used to thin
the blood and reduce risk of future stroke include clopidogrel, stains, and warfarin.

Herbal treatment

Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves), Allium sativum (bulb), Strophanthus hispidus (roots) and
Momordica charantia (leaves)

7. Prevention and control

Preventing a stroke is all about taking care of the heart and blood. This means keeping good
cholesterol high, and bad cholesterol low with diet, exercise, and avoiding some specific bad
habits. Here are some ways to lower the risks for stroke:

Eat a diet rich in fibre, whole grains, fresh fruits, and lots of vegetables

Avoid foods that are processed, high in cholesterol, high in saturated fat, and loaded
with sodium

Exercise-thirty minutes of exercise a day can help

Mind Your Blood Pressure-avoid sodium and get some regular exercise; eat a diet
that is high in fruit, vegetables, and potassium

Don’t Smoke

Limit Alcohol

Control Chronic Conditions-if you suffer from high cholesterol, high blood pressure,
obesity, or diabetes, then the more you actively manage your condition, the better
chance you have of avoiding a stroke.

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/stroke/prevention

82

----- PAGE 84 -----
N° 39: ECZEMA (DERMATITIS)

1. Description

Eczema is an itchy reaction of the skin to a number of factors, either exogenous (e.g. contact
dermatitis ) or endogenous (e.g. seborrhoea and atopy). Papules, blisters (vesicles, pustules
and bullae) and oozing characterise the lesions when acute. There is_ thickening
(lichenification), prominent skin lines and scaling chronic. There are three main types as
follows:

Atopic eczema

This presents as remitting and relapsing itchy conditions of the face, wrists, ankles, cubital
and popliteal fossae. Onset is in childhood often with a familial background of atopy (asthma,
hay fever , eosinophilia and similar skin problem). Spontaneous resolution often occurs by
teenage.

Seborrhoeic eczema and dandruff

This presents as a scaly weeping rash of the scalp, eyebrows, perinasal and periauricular
skins; sometimes it presents as hypopigmented macules. It occurs in infancy, adolescence
or adulthood. It may be associated with dandruff and pityrosporum ovale infection. Extensive
forms are associated with immunosusuppressive states, particularly AIDS.

Contact eczema

It may be an irritant (concentration dependent) or allergic (idiosyncratic) reaction to specific
chemicals such as metals, rubber etc. In constrast to the endogenous types, the skin
reaction is confined to the areas directly in contact with the offending chemical.

2. Causes
e Familial
e Atopy
e Reaction to metals, rubber, chemicals, drugs, foods etc
e Immunosuppression

Several factors can increase the risk of an eczema flare-up. These include fabrics that are
rough to the touch, such as wool as well as harsh soaps, cleansers and detergents, and
even cold weather that can dry out skin.

3. Symptoms
e Scaly weeping rash
e Hypo-pigmented macules
e Itching

4. Signs
e Erythema
Vesicles
Fissures
Scale rash
Lichenification (thickened skin)

5. Investigations

Closed patch testing (may be used for identification of allergens in contact eczema)

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To eliminate symptoms
e To identify and avoid predisposition factors

83

----- PAGE 85 -----
The most effective way to manage eczema symptoms is by taking medications, along with
make some behavioral changes. Eczema drugs fall into several categories: antihistamines,
corticosteroids, antibiotics and immunosuppressants. There are several medications
available that can help control and prevent eczema outbreaks.

Herbal treatment
e Cassia nodosa (leaves), Cassia alata (leaves) and Hos/undia opposita (leaves
e Some natural treatments that may help with the eczema include:
a. Tea
b. Borage Oil
c. Evening Primrose Oil
d. Mind/Body Approaches-techniques that lower stress may reduce the risk of the
eczema (meditation, yoga, progressive muscle relaxation or guided imagery)
. Acupuncture
Aromatherapy helps promote relaxation and reduces stress, which can put you
at greater risk of an eczema occurrence. Put a drop of water infused with
essential oil such as chamomile or lavender onto your pillow at night can help
ease stress and anxiety.

mo

7. Prevention and control

Behavioural changes can have a significant impact in reducing the likelihood of an eczema
flare-up and they don’t require any medication. There are several ways that can help keep
eczema under control or at least reduce the severity of an outbreak:

Avoid Scratching

Try Rubbing Instead

Reduce Stress

Moisturize-Dry skin can trigger an eczema flare up and make the skin condition more
uncomfortable

Get Adequate Sleep

e Avoid Irritants

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/eczema-prevention

84

----- PAGE 86 -----
| N° 40: RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

1. Description

This is a chronic systemic autoimmune inflammatory disease characterised mainly by
symmetrical inflammation of the synovial tissue of joints resulting in destruction of the joints
and peri-articular tissues. It occurs more commonly in young and middle-aged women. The
symptoms fluctuate widely with periods of remission and exacerbation. Other organs such as
the lungs, kidney, eyes and the haematopoietic system may occasionally be affected.
Rheumatoid arthritis should be treated as early as possible with disease modifying anti-
rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) to control symptoms and delay disease progression.

2. Cause

Autoimmune disease

3. Symptoms
e Pain and swelling in small joints of the hands and wrists for several weeks
Morning joint stiffness
Fever
Weight loss, lethargy, depression
Poltmyalgia-systemic illness with muscle pain, minimal joint Involvement and
explosive overnight joint pain

4. Signs

e Sindle-shape fingers, often symmetrical
Limitation of small joint movement
Joint deformities e.g. ulnar deviation at wrists, finger deformities
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Synovitis swelling and tendeness over joints
Anaemia — normocytic normochromic in character
Rheumatoid nodules
Muscle wasting around affected joints if long standing
Dry eyes
Peripheral sensory neuropathy
Depression
Cardiac and pulmonary involvement

5. Investigations
e Rheumatoid
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
FBC
ESR
X-ray of affected joints

5.1. Herbal treatment

Saba camorensis (aerial parts), Cassia sieberiana (stem bark) and Trichilia monadelpha
(stem bark)

6. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/rheumatoid arthritis

85

----- PAGE 87 -----
N° 41: OSTEOARTHRITIS

1. Description

This is a degenerative joint disease that damages the articular cartilage leading to reactive
new bone formation. Weight bearing joints (hips, knees), cervical and lumbar spine and the
metacarpo-phalangeal and distal-interphalangeal joints of the hands are commonly affected.
Osteoarthritis is more common in females than males.

2. Causes
e Ageing
e Trauma
e Obesity

3. Symptoms
e Pain at initiation of exercise(walking)
e Morning stiffness which improve with exercise
e Diminution of joint movement

4. Signs
e Crepitus on moving affected joints
e Heberden ‘s nodes and deformed joints in the hands
e Joint swelling, warmth and effusions (knee especially)
e Osteoarthritis of cervical cancer and lumbar spine may lead to muscle weakness in
hands and legs respectively (myelopathy)

5. Investigations

e FBC

e ESR-mildly elevated

e X-ray of affected joints-narrowing and irregularity of the space
6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To relieve pain
e To prevent and manage deformities
e To educate patient
6.1. Herbal treatment
Entandophragma angolensis (stem bark), Cassia sieberiana (stem bark), Trichilia
monadelpha (stem bark) and Morinda lucida (leaf)
7. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/osteoarthritis

86

----- PAGE 88 -----
No 42: LIVER CANCER

1. Description

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a primary malignancy of the liver cell and must be
differentiated from malignancies elsewhere that metastasize to the liver. HCC occurs more
commonly in men than in women and is often dignosed several years after establisment of
the initial causative condition. The disease has a poor prognosis resulting from early
metastases to the lung, portal vein, per-portal lymph nodes, bone or brain and complications
such as hepatic failure, variceal bleeding or tumour rupture with bleeding into the
peritoneum. The tumour is often resistant to chemotherapy. Current strategies to prevent or
treat hepatitis B and C infections and liver cirrhosis have a potential for reducing the
prevalence of HCC in the long term.

2. Causes
e Alcoholism liver cirrhosis
e Chronic hepatitis B virus infection
e Cronic hepatitis C virus infection
e Chronic exposure to hepatic carcinogens e.g. Aflatoxin
3. Symptoms
e Jaundice
Itching
Weight loss
Haematemesis
Abdominal distension
Right upper abdominal pain

4. Signs
e Jaundice
Cachexia
Hepatomegaly(irregular surface, multiple nodules, may be tender)
Ascites
Bruit over the liver

5. Investigations
e LEFs
e Blood level of alpha — fetoprotein
e Abdominal ultrasound scan
e Chest X-ray

6. Treatment
Treatment objectives:
e To reliave pain
e To relieve discomfort from gross ascites
e To prevent or treat hepatic encephalophy
6.1. Herbal treatment
Morinda lucida (leaves), Tectonia regia (leaves), Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves) and
Catharantus roseus (leaves)
7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/liver cancer

87

----- PAGE 89 -----
List of Contributors

Name

Position and Contact Details

Prof Dr Yaw BIO

Director, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology Hospital, Kumasi-GHANA

(233) 32 20 60 300 / 20 81 53 302

E-mail: bioy97@yahoo.co.uk

Dr Ehoule KROA

Directeur Coordonnateur du Programme National de
Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle; COTE d’IVOIRE
Tél: +225 20 32 47 68/05 68 86 23

Fax: +225 20 33 27 81

Email: ekroa2002@yahoo.fr & pnpmt_ci@yahoo.fr

Dr Kofi Annan

Head of Department, Department of Herbal Medicine,
Faculty of Pharmacy

College of Health Sciences

Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology,
Kumasi-GHANA

E-mail : annan.kofi82@yahoo.com

Dr Bunmi Omoseyindemi

Chairman, Lagos State Traditional Medicine Board, Ministry
of Health, 7 King George V Road, Onikan, Lagos-NIGERIA
Tel: +234 80 23 20 63 03/+234 80 54 25 76 59

Email: bunmiomoseyin@yahoo.com

Dr Roch HOUNGNIHIN

Coordonnateur du Programme National de la Pharmacopée
et de la Médecine Traditionnelles

01 BP 882 Cotonou-BENIN

Tél. +229 21 33 45 83/95 06 13 35

Email : roch_houngnihin2001@yahoo.fr

Rita KUSI-APPIAH

Medical Herbalist

Accra-GHANA

Tel: +233 244 97 70 29

E-mail: naa3calotropis@yahoo.co.uk

Charles KATTY

Chargé de Programme et Coordinateur des recherches au
Centre Expérimental des Médecines Traditionnelles de
Fatick - Sicap Liberté II n°1538 Dakar-SENEGAL

Tel : +221 824 96 48/832 28 50

Cel: +221 581 96 21

E-mail : prometra@prometra.org &

erickg@refer.sn

Ms Diana OPARE

St Luke Natural Health Clinic
Tema-GHANA
E-mail: naa3calotropis@yahoo.co.uk

Mme Agnes I. EHOLY

Secrétaire

c/o Directeur Coordonnateur du Programme National de
Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle, COTE d’IVOIRE
Tél. +225 20 32 47 68 / 07 92 30 52/01 16 29 11

E-mail: imby2003@yahoo.fr

88


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Herbal_Medicine.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of

Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists

3,900 116,000 120M

ailable International authors and editors Downloads

Our authors are among the

154 TOP 1% = 12.2%

Countries delivered to most cited s Contributors from top 500 universities

Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index
in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)

Interested in publishing with us?
Contact book.department@intechopen.com

Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected.
F e information visit www.intechopen.com

ny
re

----- PAGE 2 -----
Chapter 11

Herbal Medicine

Nontokozo Z. Msomi and Mthokozisi B.C. Simelane
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter

http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

Abstract

Herbal medicine has gained cumulative popularity in today’s medical practice. These
treatments are the synthesis of therapeutic experiences of generations of traditional phy-
sicians for over hundreds of years. However, most of these applications are unortho-
dox, with over 80% of the world’s population depending on some form of traditional
medicine. The increase in the use of herbal products is due to their cultural acceptability,
availability, affordability, efficacy and safety claims. This upsurge has led to the improve-
ments in the quality and analysis of herbal products to be made with clinical research
advancements in their safety and efficacy. The World Health Organization has recog-
nized the importance of herbal medicine to the health of many people. Therefore, devel-
oping guidelines to evaluate herbal medicine by using modern control procedures and
applying suitable standards. The current review aims to describe the present state and
the projected future of herbal medicine.

Keywords: herbal medicine, safety and toxicity, regulations

1. Introduction

The practice of herbal medicine is the oldest form of healthcare which has been used for
decades in developing and developed countries. Primitive people have depended on nature
for food, shelter, clothing and medicine to cure ailments. These humans distinguished useful
herbs with beneficial effects from those that were inactive or toxic [1]. According to literature
approximately 50,000 plant species are stated to have medicinal properties [2]. Thus, the basis
of modern medicinal drugs such as aspirin, morphine, digitoxin and quinine were synthe-
sized through scientific validation of herbal medicine [3, 4]. Plant based drugs awareness
advanced gradually and has been passed on, therefore setting a foundation for many tradi-
tional medicine systems around the globe [1].

© 2018 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative
IntechOpen Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,

distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. ca

----- PAGE 3 -----
216 Herbal Medicine

Today herbal medicine is still the primary healthcare system for about 80% of the world’s
population, especially in the developing countries [1, 5, 6]. There has been also a sudden
increase in the utilization of herbs as prescription drugs in developed countries such as France
and Germany [3, 7]. However, there is a concern that not all herbal medicines are safe as
reported [8]. Over the years the use of traditional medicine has provided us with valuable
formulas on the selection, preparation and application of herbal remedies. The same vigor-
ous method clinically and scientifically must be implemented to verify the effectiveness and
safety of curative products, to be viable alternative to western medicine [4].

2. Herbal medicine

The World Health Organization (WHO) defines herbal medicine as a practice which includes
herbs, herbal materials, herbal preparations and finished herbal products, that contain as
active ingredients parts of plants, or other plant materials, or combinations [9]. These herbs
are derived from plant parts such as leaves, stems, flowers, roots, and seeds [10].

Herbal drugs contain active ingredients, plant parts or plant materials in the processed or
crude state with certain excipients, i.e., dilutions, solvents or preservatives [10, 11]. These
active ingredients protect plants from damage and diseases and contribute to the plants
aroma, flavor and color. Scientifically, they are known as phytochemicals which include sev-
eral classes such as saponins, flavonoids, glycosides, tannins, alkaloids and terpenoids [12].
Phytochemicals have been scientifically validated over the years to provide health benefits for
humans [13]. For example herbal remedies used as sedative and stomachic mixtures contain
mainly aromatic plant species which have therapeutic essential oils, possessing antibacterial,
stomach-soothing and antispasmodic properties. Plant species which have a high tannin con-
tent are used in mixtures for diarrhea and stomach ulcers; generally showing antimicrobials,
astringents and anti-inflammatory activities [14, 15]. Bioactive and disease preventing phyto-
chemicals present in medicinal plants are shown in Table 1.

Class Characteristic Use Pharmacological activity Reference
Alkaloids Organic nitrogenous bases, _ Biosynthesis of Anticancer, antimicrobial, [16, 17]
bitter taste, colorless/yellow, pharmaceuticals amoebicidal,
crystalline solids, liquids anti-inflammatory,
Saponins Soap-like forming property, Detergent, wetting and —_—Antifeedant, antifungal, [18]
bitter taste, emulsifying agent antiobesity, antioxidant
Tannins Water-soluble, leather hides, Used for cationic dyes, Antimutagens, [12, 19]
production of ink, anticarcinogens,
antimicrobial,
Flavonoids Free radical scavenger Prevents microbial Anti-inflammatory, [20]

infection,

antimicrobial,
antibacterial, antioxidant

Table 1. Properties of some major constituents of medicinal plants.

----- PAGE 4 -----
Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

3. Historical perspective of herbal medicine

The use of plants as medicines dates 60,000 years ago according to ancient Babylon reports. In
Egypt and China written material on herbal medicine dates approximately 5000 years back,
in Asia Minor and Greece it dates 2500 years ago [21]. There are various herbal medicinal
systems, the practices and philosophy of each are influenced by the region within which it
first evolved [22]. In China, they have their own system known as the Traditional Chinese
medicine which has been used throughout history [23]. The oldest known herbal book in the
world The Devine Farmer's Classic of Herbalism was compiled in China about 2000 years ago,
numerous herbal pharmacopeias and various monographs on specific herbs exist through
the composed information on herbs [3]. Ayurveda, a healthcare system that has been used in
India for over 5000 years, that was founded by ancient Hindu healers and saints. Its materia
medica provides a comprehensive description of over 1500 herbs and 10,000 formulations. The
Indian government has recognized Ayurveda to be a complete healthcare system in compari-
son to western medicine [24]. Kampo medicine, the Japanese herbal medicine dates back over
1500 years with approximately 148 formulations [25].

4. Common herbal medicines

4.1. Echinacea purpurea

Echinacea has an extensive history on the use as medicines, mainly for infections such as septic
wounds and syphilis, also as an anti-toxin for snakebites [26]. The species Echinacea purpurea
from this genus is a well-known medicinal plant used in treating snake bites, toothache, skin dis-
orders, bowel pain, chronic arthritis, seizure and cancer, traditionally [27]. E. purpurea possesses
secondary metabolites including caffeic acid derivatives, alkamides, glycoproteins and polysac-
charides alleged to be biologically and pharmacologically active [26, 27]. Allergic reactions can
occur and are usually mild, but individuals with a history of asthma, atopy, or allergic rhinitis
may experience severe allergic reactions that include dyspnea and anaphylaxis [26, 28]. Other
adverse effects include abdominal pain, urticarial, nausea, erythematous, rash and pruritus [26].

4.2. Garlic

Traditionally, garlic (Allium sativum) has been used to treat colds, chronic bronchitis, coughs,
respiratory catarrh, bronchitic asthma and influenza [26]. Additionally it is used mainly to man-
age hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. It contains alliin, which upon chopping or crushing
is activated by alliinase in the absence of acid or heat [8, 28]. Allicin produces both hydrophilic
(cysteine) and lipophilic (sulfides, ajoene) sulfur compounds which are accountable for phar-
macologic effects. Garlic is administered via oil-filled capsules, condensed dried powder, and
enteric-coated tablets and capsules; it is also aged in aqueous alcohol [28]. Adverse effects of
garlic extract include burning sensation in the gastrointestinal tract, diaphoresis, nausea, and
light headedness. The extract may also cause contact dermatitis and excessive ingestion may
cause morbid spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma [8, 28].

217

----- PAGE 5 -----
218 Herbal Medicine

4.3. Ginkgo

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) and its leaf extracts contain active compounds which have been found
to improve circulation and cognition. The extracts are sold in both solid and liquid forms
and appear to be relatively safe [28]. Medicinal use of ginkgo dates back 2800 BC, the seeds
are used as an expectorant, antitussive and anti-asthmatic, and the leaves aid in asthma and
cardiovascular disorders [26]. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache, restless-
ness, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea and dermal sensitivity. Cross-allergenicity with poison ivy
has been reported. Ginkgo as an inhibitor of platelet-activating factor may alter bleeding times,
therefore it may cause an upsurge of the anticoagulant effect of aspirin and warfarin [28].

4.4. Ginseng

Ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus) is the fourth most extensively used Chinese medicinal
herb, treating a variety of conditions. It is used as a general tonic and is claimed to increase
the body’s resistance against stress and builds up general vitality besides treating diabetes,
depression and hypertension [29]. Products are made from dehydrated roots, such as extracts,
elixirs and tea, also tablets and capsules. Numerous active constituents, ginsenosides, respec-
tively have specific pharmacologic effects that sometimes compete with each other, thus the
whole root is used in preparations [28]. Excessive doses of ginseng have been reported to
cause insomnia, agitation and elevation of blood pressure, mastalgia and vaginal bleeding
have been detected at acclaimed doses [8].

4.5. Kava

Kava (Piper methysticum) is believed to be beneficial for health by soothing nervous illnesses,
inducing sleep and relaxation, reducing weight and counteracting fatigue. It is often used to
treat asthma, urinary infections, fever, headaches, syphilis, rheumatism and gonorrhea, it is
also used as a stomachic and diuretic [26]. Kava is commonly known as an anxiolytic agent.
Reported side effects include dizziness, gastrointestinal discomfort, headaches and localized
numbness after oral ingestion. Long term use at high doses may cause scaly, dry skin and dis-
coloration of nails and the skin, eye redness and photosensitivity. Diplopia and photophobia
may also occur after excessive consumption. Interaction of central nervous system depres-
sants and kava may lead to a comatose state [8, 28].

4.6. St John’s wort

St John’s wort (Hypericum perforation) is specified to possess astringent and sedative prop-
erties. It has been used for neuralgia, excitability, fibrositis, menopausal neurosis, sciatica,
wounds, depression and anxiety. Modern interest is focused on its antidepressant use [26].
St John’s wort possesses active compounds such as hyperforin, hypericin and melatonin. It
is reported to have side effects which include fatigue, constipation, nausea, vomiting, dry
mouth, headaches, dizziness and photosensitivity [8].

----- PAGE 6 -----
Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

4.7. Ma huang

Ma huang (Ephedra sinica) is a medicinal plant traditionally used to treat hay fever, bronchial
asthma, colds, coughs, enuresis, myasthenia gravis, narcolepsy, rheumatism and chronic pos-
tural hypotension. It contains a number of alkaloids including ephedrine and pseudoephed-
rine [26]. Ma huang is not considered as a safe herb, with adverse effects including insomnia,
dizziness, headaches, nervousness, stroke, seizures, hypertension, psychosis, irritability, myo-
cardial infarction, premature ventricular contraction and death [28].

4.8. Valerian

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) is a medicinal plant commonly used as a mild sedative and
anxiolytic. Numerous constituents are found in the root of this plant, valerenic acid (C15
sesquiterpenoid) and valerena-4,7(11)-diene have been suggested to possess the active
ingredients accountable for the sedative effect [30]. Valerian has been reported to cause
excitability, headache, gastrointestinal complaints and ataxia. An oral overdose may result
in abdominal cramps, onset of fatigue, light headedness, chest tightness, and tremors of feet
and hands [28].

5. Why people use herbal medicine?

5.1. Accessibility and affordability

The documentation of medicinal plants of numerous cultures is extensive, these plants have
been used in treating various diseases even without the knowledge of their constituents and
accurate functions [31]. The high practice of herbal medicine is due to cultural acceptability,
as plant remedies have been around for centuries [32]. In countries such as Zambia, Tanzania
and Uganda the ratio of herbal medicine practitioners to the population was found to be
1:200-1:400. However, the ratio of western medicine practitioners is 1:20,000 or less [33]. A
survey conducted in 1991 revealed that traditional practitioners in sub-Saharan Africa out
number western practitioners by 100 to 1 [34]. Herbal medicine has remained affordable in
comparison to high cost western medicine [35]. In over populated countries such as India, the
rural population has almost no access to modern medicine, therefore, they are compelled to
rely on herbal medicine for their basic healthcare needs [36].

5.2. An alternative approach to healthcare

Plants are perceived to be healthier than conventional biosynthetic drugs. Reports on conven-
tional drugs adverse effects has been found to be much higher compared to herbal toxicity
reports [4]. Other reasons for the use of herbal medicine include: (i) several claims on the effi-
cacy and safety of plant medicines [11], (ii) improvements in the quality of herbal medicines
with the development of scientific evaluation [21], (iii) to relieve symptoms related to chronic or

219

----- PAGE 7 -----
220 Herbal Medicine

terminal illnesses [37], such as HIV/AIDS, malaria, diabetes and sickle-cell anemia [38]. A sur-
vey conducted in the USA showed that 78% of patients living with HIV/AIDS use some form
of herbal medicine. In such cases, western medicine is perceived to have failed the public [4].

6. Challenges facing the use of herbal medicine

6.1. Safety and toxicological concerns of herbal medicine

The products of herbal medicine have a long history of being safe [39], however the misuse of
these medicines may have side effects due to toxic constituents [29]. In some countries, toxico-
logical assessment of herbal medicine and associated products are not employed before placing
them in the market [8]. Herbal medicine of a single plant may contain hundreds of constituents
and mixed products may contain numerous times that number. The time required to isolate
every single active ingredient from every herb would be tremendous [22]. Moreover, these coun-
tries lack operative machinery to legalize manufacturing quality standards and practices. Thus
making hazardous herbal products continually available to consumers [8]. A study related on the
use of traditional eye medicine reported that it caused 26% of childhood blindness in Malawi and
Nigeria, and 25% of corneal ulcer in Tanzania [4]. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids have been reported to
be fatal, these are molecules within certain plants causing hepatotoxicity through a veno-occlu-
sion illness [10]. Nausea and probably vomiting can occur with some herbs such as ephedra and
echinacea. Herbs consumed as teas have been reported to cause diarrhea and hematologic, car-
diac and gastrointestinal effects [40]. Herbal products from Asia have been reported to be prob-
lematic since it contains numerous contaminants. A study on the assessment of 260 Asian patent
medications reported that 25% of these products contained high levels of heavy metals and 7%
contained undeclared drugs, decisively and unlawfully added to produce desired effects [41].

6.2. Challenges of quality control

Quality control of herbal drugs and their formulations is of vital importance in order to jus-
tifying their acceptability in modern system of medicine. A major concern facing the herbal
drug market is the unavailability of the source and quality of herbal materials and their for-
mulations [42]. Other factors such as the temperature, use of fresh plants, light exposure,
nutrients, water availability, period and time of harvest, method of harvesting, drying, pack-
ing, storage and transportation of raw herbal material, etc., can critically affect the beneficial
value of medicinal plants and quality. Some plant elements are heat labile and the plants
containing them need to be dried at low temperatures [11].

6.3. Lack of knowledge about herbal medicine within government regulations

Herbal remedies can be sold as supplements, for supporting, maintaining, stimulating and
promoting health in many countries. These supplements require a label that defines the ingre-
dients are intended to affect the functions within humans in line with Act 101 of 1965 and
amendments (2002) [14]. The evidence on the efficacy, safety and quality of such herbal prod-
ucts is unknown, therefore, raising a concern on the safety of these herbal medicines [8].

----- PAGE 8 -----
Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

6.4. Need for scientific and clinical evaluation of herbal medicine

The concern surrounding safety of herbal medicinal products is increasing [8]. In order to allay
these concerns and achieve public reliance on herbal medicine, manufacturers, researchers
and regulatory authorities must follow inclusive clinical trials and vigorous scientific method-
ologies to ensure the quality and safety of herbal products [41]. The safety evaluation of any
herbal drug considers two important factors; the nature and significance of the adversarial
effect. Toxicity screening can disclose some of the risks related to the use of herbal medicine
[43]. In 1991, WHO issued guidelines for the assessment of herbal medicine which include: (i)
Quality assessment: crude plant material; plant preparation; finished product. (ii) Stability:
shelf life. (iii) Safety assessment: documentation of safety based on experience or toxicology
studies. (iv) Assessment of efficacy: documented evidence of traditional use or activity deter-
mination (animals, human) [6]. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the International
Conference on Harmonization (ICH) and the United States Pharmacopeia (USPC, 1994-2001)
follow these guidelines to validate herbal products [1].

7. National policies of herbal medicine

A national policy on herbal medicine may include the following: a defining role of herbal
medicine in the health care system, provision for the necessary regulations and laws, contem-
plation of intellectual property concerns [22]. National policies vary from country to country
regarding herbal medicine. Herbal medicines are classified as either prescription or non-pre-
scription medicines. The Working Party on Natural and Nutritional Supplements was estab-
lished by the Australian Parliament to evaluate the safety, efficacy, quality and labeling of
herbal products (Therapeutic Good Act, 1990). The act states “that traditional claims for herbal
remedies be allowed, providing general advertising requirements are complied with and pro-
viding such claims are justified by literature references” [11]. Herbal medicine in Canada must
meet the terms of the National Health Products Regulations. In accordance to these regula-
tions, a product license is required for all herbal products to be sold in Canada. The recom-
mended use, potency, comprehensive information on the medicinal constituents, source and
nonmedicinal constituents need to be provided in order for a license to be granted. The com-
panies that manufacture, pack, label and import herbal medicine also need a site license [3].

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) of 1994, states that any herb,
natural and botanical concentrate, constituent and metabolite of extract, is categorized as a
dietary supplement. These supplementations do not need any sanction from the FDA. Herbal
medicine which is categorized as dietary supplements under DSHEA, are alleged to be safe
and the FDA does not have the authority to require them to be approved for efficacy and
safety before they enter the market. However, manufacturers of these herbal products are
required to provide purity and identification standards, and confirm that claims made con-
cerning their products are precise [39, 44].

In Chile the Unidad de Medicina Tradicional was established in 1992, with the aim of incor-
porating herbal medicine with established efficacy into health programs (Law No. 19.253,

221

----- PAGE 9 -----
222 Herbal Medicine

October 1993). Directive No. 435/81 defines herbal drugs with therapeutic proposed claims
and/or dosage recommendations as being medications, restricted from being sold in drug-
stores and pharmacies. Registration for marketing authorization is required for herbal prod-
ucts. These products are lawfully distinguished as follows: (1) drugs intended to alleviate,
cure or prevent disease; (2) food products with therapeutic properties and for medicinal use,
and (3) food products with nutritious purposes [11].

In Europe, the European Directive 2004/24/EC released in 2004 by the European Parliament
and by the Council of Europe provides the guidelines for the use of herbal medicines. The
guidelines state that for herbal medicine to be released in the market, it needs authorization
from the national regulatory authorities of each country in Europe and the herbal products
must have a standard level of efficacy and safety. The registration of herbal products from
outside the European Union (EU) require substantial evidence of their medicinal use, at most
a period of 15 years within EU and 15 years elsewhere [3]. In Germany, more than 300 mono-
graphs on medicinal plants have been regulatory evaluated, and in France more than 200
herbs have been recorded as acceptable ingredients of herbal medicine [4].

The widespread use of herbal medicine in Brazil is favored by two present public policies i.e.
the National Policy on Integrative and Complementary Practices in the Public Health System
(PNPIC) and the National Policy on Medicinal Plants and Herbal Medicines (PNPMF),
through the Law 971/2006 and the Declaration 5813/2006, respectively. Currently, 382 herbal
medicines are registered in Brazil, 357 of these are single medicines and the other 25 are com-
posed of more than one medicinal plant [45].

8. The market for herbal medicine in the developed world

Herbal medicine has gained increasing popularity in the last two decades in industrial-
ized countries. The congress of the United States of America (USA) established the Office of
Alternative Medicine in the year 1989 within the National Institute of Health (NIH). This was
formed to interest scientists in the field of medicinal plants [3]. According to the 2007 NIH
survey, 4 out of 10 adults (38.8%) and 1 out of 9 children (11.8%) used some form of herbal
medicine [37]. In USA, presently about 25% of prescription drugs contain at least one plant
derived ingredient [21], the herbal market in this country has doubled from $4 billion since
1996 [6]. In 1989, the European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy was formed with an
aim to advance herbal medicine [3]. The herbal medicine market in European countries has
been growing steadily from $6 billion in 1991 to over $20 billion currently, particularly in
Germany, France and Italy [4, 6]. In Germany, herbal medicine is identified as one of the ele-
ments of naturopathy [46], approximately 600-700 plant derived medicines are accessible and
prescribed by approximately 70% of German physicians [47]. In 2011, 20% of herbal drugs
were sold as prescriptions and 80% over the counter in Germany [46]. In the year 2005, The
National Centre for Complementary and Alternative Medicine at the National Institutes of
Health in the USA spent about US$ 33 million on herbal medicine, the National Canadian
Institutes disbursed approximately US$ 89 million for research in traditional therapies in 2004.
These scientific evaluations have led to an upsurge in the investment of herbal medicine [3].

----- PAGE 10 -----
Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

9. Future prospects of herbal medicine

In the past decade, about 121 pharmaceutical products have been formulated based on herbal
medicine knowledge [42]. According to literature at least 25% of modern medicines are derived
from plants, such as aspirin, picrotoxin and numerous others are synthetic analogues built on
prototype compounds isolated from plants [48]. Because of the increase in the acceptance of
plant derived drugs, the use of plants in medicine as a source of therapeutic agents will expand
rapidly in the future [42]. This has extremely increased international trade of herbal medicine,
attracting a number of pharmaceutical companies, including the multinationals [11]. The inter-
est of WHO by documenting the use of medicinal plants used by ethnic groups, has increased
scientific validation of the use of these plants. This will make people better informed concern-
ing the effectiveness and safety of the treatment [21]. The regulation of herbs has assisted in
improving herbal products, however additional changes need to be applied to advance and
indorse high quality research [10].

10. Conclusion

The use of herbal medicine is not restricted to developing countries. Over the years, there
has been an escalating interest in the use of herbal medicine worldwide. This has greatly
expanded the demand for plant products, since herbal medicine has an advantage of being
inexpensive with minimal side effects compared to synthetic medicines. The growth of the
herbal drug market has attracted pharmaceutical companies which in turn have driven sci-
entific validation and clinical studies on herbal medicines. Thus far, few programs have been
established to study the safety and efficacy of herbal medicines as originally proposed by the
WHO Guidelines for the assessment of herbal medicines. These guidelines have been helpful
in establishing the role of herbal medicine in the health care industry. However, the data to
provide a precise assessment on the safety, quality and efficacy of herbal medicine is inad-
equate generating concerns regarding the use of herbal products.

Author details

Nontokozo Z. Msomi and Mthokozisi B.C. Simelane*
*Address all correspondence to: simelanem2@ukzn.ac.za

Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Pietermaritzburg, South Africa

References

[1] Kunle OF, Egharevba HO, Ahmadu PO. Standardization of herbal medicines —A review.
Journal of Biodiversity and Conservation. 2012;4(3):101-112. DOI: 10.5897/IJBC11.163

223

----- PAGE 11 -----
224 Herbal Medicine

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

Barboza GE, Cantero JJ, Nunez C, Pacciaroni A, Espinar LA. Medicinal plants: A gen-
eral review and a phytochemical and ethnopharmacological screening of the native
Argentine Flora. Kurtziana. 2009;34:7-365. ISSN:1852-5962

Wachtel-Galor S, Benzie IFF. Herbal medicine. In: Benzie I, Wachtel-Galor S, editors.
Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects. 2nd ed. Boca Raton: CRC Press/
Taylor & Francis; 2011. ISBN: 13: 978-1-4398-0713-2

Pal SK, Shukla Y. Herbal medicine: Current status and the future. Asian Pacific Journal
of Cancer Prevention. 2003;4:281-288

Okigbo RN, Anuagasi CL, Amadi JE. Advances in selected medicinal and aromatic
plants indigenous to Africa. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research. 2009;3(2):86-95. ISSN:
1996-0875©2009

Kamboj VP. Herbal medicine. Current Reviews. 2000;78(1):35-39

Edzard E. The efficacy of herbal medicine — An overview. Fundamental & Clinical
Pharmacology. 2005;19:405-409. DOF: 10.1111/j.1472-8206.2005.00335.x

Ekor M. The growing use of herbal medicines: Issues relating to adverse reactions and
challenges in monitoring safety. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2014;4:1-10. DOI: 10.3389/
fphar.2013.00177

Organization WH. General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of
traditional medicine 2000. Geneva: World Health Organization

Bent S. Herbal medicine in the United States: Review of efficacy, safety, and regulation.
Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2008;23(6):854-859. DOI: 10.1007/s11606-008-0632-y

Calixto JB. Efficacy, safety, quality control, marketing and regulatory guidelines for
herbal medicines (phytotherapeutic agents). Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological
Research. 2000;33:179-189. ISSN: 0100-879X

Saxena M, Saxena J, Nema R, Singh D, Gupta A. Phytochemistry of medicinal plants.
Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 2013;1(6):168-182. ISSN: 2278-4136

Hasler CM, Blumberg JB. Symposium on phytochemicals: Biochemistry and physiology.
Journal of Nutrition. 1999;129:756-757. ISSN: 756S-757S

Ndhlala AR, Stafford GI, Finnie JF, Staden JV. Commercial herbal preparations in
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: The urban face of traditional medicine. South African
Journal of Botany. 2011;77:830-843. DOL: 10.1016/j.sajb.2011.09.002

Cano JH, Volpato G. Herbal mixtures in the traditional medicine of Eastern Cuba.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2004;90(2-3):293-316. DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2003.10.012

Harborne JB. Phytochemical Methods a Guide to Modern Techniques of Plant Analysis.
London: Chapman and Hall Ltd; 1973. ISBN: 13: 978-0-412-23050-9

Kauri R, Arora S. Alkaloids-important therapeutic secondary metabolites of plant origin.
Journal of Critical Reviews. 2015;2(3):1-8. ISSN: 2394-5125

----- PAGE 12 -----
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

Guclu-Ustundag O, Mazza G. Saponins: Properties, applications and processing. Critical
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 2007;47:231-258. DOI: 10.1080/10408390600698197
ISSN: 1040-8398

Chung K-T, Wong TY, Wei C-I, Huang Y-W, Lin Y. Tannins and human health: A
review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 1998;38(6):421-464. DOI: 10.
1080/10408699891274273

Kumar S, Pandey AK. Chemistry and biological activities of flavonoids: An overview.
The ScientificWorld Journal. 2013;2013:1-16. DOE 10.1155/2013/162750

Qazi MA, MolviK. Herbal medicine: A comprehensive review. Journal of Pharmaceutical
Research. 2016;8(2):1-5

WHO. National Policy on Traditional Medicine and Regulation of Herbal Medicines.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005

Wnag S, Li Y. Trdaitiional Chinese medicine. In: Devinsky O, Schachter S, Pacia S, edi-
tors. Complementary and Alternative Therapies for Epilepsy. New York: Demos Medical
Publishing; 2005. pp. 177-182. ISBN: 1-888799-89-7

Goyal M, Sasmal D, Nagori BP. Ayurveda the ancient science of healing: An insight. In:
Vallisuta O, Olimat SM, editors. Drug Discovery Research in Pharmacognosy. Croatia:
InTech; 2012. pp. 1-10. ISBN: 978-953-51-0213-7

Watanabe K, Matsuura K, Gao P, Hottenbacher L, Tokunaga H, Nishimura K, et al.
Traditional Japanese Kampo medicine: Clinical research between modernity and tra-
ditional medicine-The state of research and methodological suggestions for the future.
Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2011;2011:1-19. DOI: 10.1093/
ecam/neq067

Barnes J, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal Medicine. 3rd ed. Pharmaceutical Press; 2007.
ISBN: 978 0 85369 623 0

Manayi A, Vazirian M, Saeidnia S. Echinacea purpurea: Pharmacology, phytochemistry and
analysis methods. Pharmacognosy Reviews. 2015;9(17):63-72. DOI: 10.4103/0973-7847.156353

Boullata JI, Nace AM. Safety issues with herbal medicine. Pharmacotherapy. 2000;20(3):
257-269. DOI: 10.1592/phco.20.4.257.34886

George P. Concerns regarding the safety and toxicity of medicinal plants —An overview.
Journal of Applied Pharmaceutical Science. 2011;1(6):40-44. ISSN: 2231-3354

Pyle BW, Tran HT, Pickel B, Haslam TM, Gao Z, MacNevin G, et al. Enzymatic synthesis of
valerena-4,7(11)-diene by aunique sesquiterpene synthase from the Valerian plant (Valeriana
officinalis). The FEBS Journal. 2012;279:3136-3146. DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08692.x

Patel D, Kumar R, Laloo D, Hemalatha S. Natural medicines from plant source used for
therapy of diabetes mellitus: An overview of its pharmacological aspects. Asian Pacific
Journal of Tropical Disease. 2012:239-250. DOI: 10.1016/S2222-1808(12)60054-1

225

----- PAGE 13 -----
226 Herbal Medicine

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

Wassie SM, Aragie LL, Taye BW, Mekonnen LB. Knowledge, attitude, and utilization
of traditional medicine among the communities of Merawi town, Northwest Ethiopia:
A cross-sectional study. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
2015;2015:1-7. DOI: 10.1155/2015/138073

Mhame P. the role of traditional knowledge (TK) in the National Economy: the impor-
tance and scope of TK, particularly traditional medicine in Tanzania. In: UNCTAD Expert
Meeting on Systems and National Experiences for Protecting Traditional Knowledge,
Innovations and Practices, Geneva; October 30-November 1, 2000;2000

WHO. WHO Traditional Medicine Strategy 2002-2005. Geneva: 2002

Maroyi A. Traditional use of medicinal plants in South-Central Zimbabwe: Review and
perspectives. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine. 2013;9(31):1-18. DOI: 10.1186/
1746-4269-9-31

Pandey M, Rastogi S, Rawat A. Indian traditional ayurvedic system of medicine and
nutritional supplementation. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
2013;2013:1-12. DOI: 10.1155/2013/376327

Barnes PM, Bloom B. Complementary and alternative medicine use among adults and
children: United States, 2007. National Health Statistics Reports, 2008 Contract No.: 12

Borokini TI, Omotayo FO. Phytochemical and ethnobotanical study of some selected
medicinal plants from Nigeria. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research. 2010;6(7):1106-1118.
DOT: 10.5897/JMPR09.430

Moreira DL, Teixeira SS, Monteiro MHD, De-Oliveira ACAX, Paumgartten FJR. Tradi-
tional use and safety of herbal medicines. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia. 2014;
24:248-257. DOI: 10.1016/j.bjp.2014.03.006

Cui L, Liuc M, Chang X, Sunb K. The inhibiting effect of the Coptis chinensis polysac-
charide on the type II diabetic mice. Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy. 2016;81:111-119.
DOE: 10.1016/j.biopha.2016.03.038

Rana KK, Rana S. Review on present status and future of herbal medicine. The beats of
natural. Sciences. 2014;1(2):1-8

Verma S, Singh SP. Current and future status of herbal medicines. Veterinary World.
2008;1(11):347-350

Ifeoma O, Oluwakanyinsola S. Screening of herbal medicines for potential toxicities. In:
Gowder S, editor. New Insights into Toxicity and Drug Testing. Croatia: InTech; 2013.
pp. 63-88

Li W. Botanical drugs: A future for herbal medicines. Journal of Contemporary Health
Law & Policy. 2002;19(1):117-149

Carvalho ACB, Ramalho LS, Marques RFO, Perfeito JP. Regulation of herbal medicines in
Brazil. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2014;158:503-506. DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.08.019

----- PAGE 14 -----
[46]

[47]

[48]

Herbal Medicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72816

Joos S, Glassen K, Musselmann B. Herbal medicine in primary healthcare in Germany:
The patient’s perspective. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
2012;2012:1-10. DOI: 10.1155/2012/294638

Das A, Prasad R, Bhatnagar K, Lavekar GS, Verma A. Synergism between medicinal plants
and microbes. In: Chauhan AK, Varma A, editors. Microbes Health and Environment
New Delhi: IK International Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.; 2006. ISBN: 81-88237-79-5

Msomi NZ, Simelane MBC. Olea europaea subsp. africana (Oleaceae). In: El-Shemy HA,
editor. Active Ingredients from Aromatic and Medicinal Plants. Croatia: InTech; 2017.
pp. 159-174

227

----- PAGE 15 -----
IntecnQvpen

IntecnQvpen


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: lecture-1.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
BP 603 T. HERBAL DRUG TECHNOLOGY (Theory)

UNIT - ONE

Prepared by,

Dr. MALAVIKA MR
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR
FACULTY OF PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES,
RAMA UNIVERSITY

KANPUR

UNIT-I 11 Hours

Herbs as raw materials

Definition of herb, herbal medicine, herbal medicinal product, herbal drug preparation
Source of Herbs

Selection, identification and authentication of herbal materials

Processing of herbal raw material

Biodynamic Agriculture

Good agricultural practices in cultivation of medicinal plants including Organic farming.
Pest and Pest management in medicinal plants: Biopesticides/Bioinsecticides.

Indian Systems of Medicine

a) Basic principles involved in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy

b) Preparation and standardization of Ayurvedic formulations viz Aristas and Asawas,

Ghutika,Churna, Lehya and Bhasma.

----- PAGE 2 -----
HERBS AS RAW MATERIALS

HERB

It consists of entire plant or any part of the plant like leaves, flowers, fruits, roots and rhizomes, bark,
tubers, stems and branches

HERBAL DRUG

These consist of plants or any part of plants, usually in unprocessed or crude forms (crude drug)
which have medicinal value.

They include different parts of plant like entire aerial part, flowers, fruits, seeds, bark, leaves, roots
rhizomes etc The constituents and their therapeutic activity may be known or unknown.

HERBAL DRUG PREPARATION

They are processed form of herbs. They are derived from herbal drugs by various techniques like
extraction, fractionalization, purification, concentration, fermentation and may be in the form of
powders, extracts, tinctures, fixed oils, volatile oils, resins, gums, etc.

They contain a mixture of various constituents. However pure isolated compounds do not come under
this category.

HERBAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS (FINISHED HERBAL PRODUCTS)

These are the medicinal products which contain exclusive herbal drugs or herbal drug preparations
which are made from one or more herbs.

It includes various herbal formulations like tablets, syrups, capsules, semisolid dosage forms, etc.
They may contain excipients in addition to active ingredients.
FIXED COMBINATION
It includes herbal medicinal products which contain more than one herbal drug preparations
SOURCE OF HERBS
Herbs or medicinal plants can be obtained from two sources viz:-
a) Wild source b) Cultivated source
a) Wild source

The plants are obtained from the wild source such as forests, plains, river banks, etc, where they are
found in their wild form.

Collection from wild sources is suitable for plants which are abundant in nature and are easily
available.

----- PAGE 3 -----
Obtaining herbs from a wild source is easy, economical, less time consuming, and has a decreased
cost of labour, however it also offers various disadvantages such as the quality of the plants cannot be
predicted due to various environmental changes.

The plants will not be uniform in their growth and yielding characteristics.
Modern scientific techniques cannot be applied to increase the yield as well as quality.

If the plants are obtained continuously from wild sources for prolonged periods it may lead to
depletion of raw materials from the wild.

b) Cultivated source

In recent times, medicinal plants have been systematically cultivated by applying modern scientific
techniques.

Obtaining herbs from cultivated sources offer various advantages which are as follows.
> Quality and purity is ensured.

> Better yield and more profit

> Ensures regular supply of raw material

> Application of modern scientific techniques is possible.

STEPS INVOLVED IN THE SELECTION, IDENTIFICATION, AND PROCESSING OF
HERBAL RAW MATERIALS

Herbs are subjected to various stages starting from their selection, identification, cultivation,
collection, storage and processing until the final product is formed. The detailed steps involved in the
processing of herbal drugs are discussed below.

Steps involved in processing of Herbal Drugs
Selection of Herbs

¥

Identification & Authentication

¥

Cultivation of Herbs

¥

Collection of Herbs

¥

Processing of Herbal Raw Material

----- PAGE 4 -----
a) Selection of herbs

The species or botanical variety selected for cultivation should be the same as specified in the official
Pharmacopoeia or national documents. In case of newly introduced medicinal plants, the variety
selected for cultivation should be identified and documented.

b) Identification and authentication of herbal materials

= Botanical identity

The species, subspecies, genus, variety etc of the plant for cultivation should be verified from a
qualified botanist/ institute and recorded.

= Specimens

In case of a new plant with medicinal properties whose identity is not known, a specimen el the plant
should be submitted to a regional national herbarium for identification and documentation.

= Seeds and other propagation materials

The suppliers of seeds and other propagation materials should specify all the necessary information
relating to the identity, quality as well as their breeding history. The seeds and propagation material
should be free from contamination and diseases in order to promote healthy plant growth

Cultivation of medicinal plants

Cultivation of medicinal plants requires intensive care and management as various factors such as
environment, soil, irrigation pests, etc, play a vital role. These factors vary from one plant to another.
Scientific documented methods should be followed, if no data available traditional methods should be
adopted and a systematic method should be developed through research Good agricultural practices in
cultivation (GACP) and conservation agriculture (CA) which aims to improve, conserve and make
more efficient use of natural resources.

d) Collection of herbs

For the collection of medicinal plants, a proper time should be selected. Herbs are selected for
collection at a stage when they yield the maximum amount of chemical constituents. Skilled labour
should be employed as they are trained to identify and select the herbs at a proper stage. The age of
the plant also plays a vital factor for their selection. Diseased plants should be rejected. Season of
collection should also be given due consideration while selecting the plants for collection.

e) Processing of herbal raw materials

Processing of herbal raw materials involves various stages from which the crude drugs undergo after
harvesting.It can be classified into primary and secondary processing which are further sub
categorized as follows.

PROCESSING OF HERBAL RAW MATERIAL

----- PAGE 5 -----
Primary processing
1. Garbling
2. Washing
3. Parboiling
4. Leaching
5. Drying
Secondary Processing
1. Cutting/sectioning
2. Aging/sweating
3. Baking/roasting
4. Boiling/steaming
5. Stir frying
6. Fumigation
7. Extraction
“+ Primary Processing

It includes simple procedures by which the herbs are prepared like sorting of different parts, garbling,
cleaning, drying, etc. The details of these processes are as follows:

1. Garbling (Sorting)
This process helps in ensuring the purity and cleanliness of the harvested material.

Dirt like soil, dust, impurities like insects, dead tissues and residual non medicinal plants are separated
from the raw material.

The process depends on the part of the plant to be prepared.

The process may involve procedures such as removing dirt and foreign substances, discarding
damaged parts, peeling of barks, sieving, trimming, removal of hairs from roots, removal of seeds
from fruits, stripping of leaves from stems.

This may be done by mechanical means but in some cases it is usually performed manually by hands.
2. Washing

After garbling the herbal raw material should be cleaned well to remove the traces remaining soil, dirt
and other impurities from the surface.

The roots, rhizomes and tubers are washed with clean water.

----- PAGE 6 -----
During the washing process, scraping and brushing may be necessary.
3. Parboiling (Blanching)

After washing, certain herbal raw materials need to undergo a parboiling process in which they are put
in boiling water for a short period.

This may help in improving the storage of the raw material and prevent insect/mould contamination.

It may also facilitate in further processing such as removal of stubborn impurities as well as outer
coats/ covering of raw materials.

4. Leaching

Some impurities can be removed by subjecting the plant material under running water known as
leaching.

However the duration of leaching should be controlled to prevent loss of chemical constituents
present in the drug.

5. Drying

In some cases, the plant material should be thoroughly dried after washing in order to prevent the
deterioration and degradation of active constituents.

They must be dried as soon as possible to remove moisture and reduce the damage due to microbial or
mould infestation.

Drying also prevents the activation of certain enzymes which may otherwise degrade the active
ingredients and also facilitate grinding and milling of the raw material Depending on the drug and
nature of ingredients, different drying methods can be used which are as follows:

= Natural drying
= Sun drying

Most herbal raw material can be dried in open air under direct sunshine provided the climate is
suitable. The duration of the drying process depends on the physical structure of the plant material and
weather conditions.

The plant material should be spread out in thin layers, care should be taken to prevent contamination
by dust impurities.

While drying the plant material should also be protected from insects, birds rodents, pests and other
domestic animals.

Shade drying:
Some medicinal plants cannot be directly exposed to sunlight, hence one to be dried under shade.

This drying process is slow but helps in minimizing loss colour, volatile oils and aromatic
components from being evaporated.

Artificial drying:

----- PAGE 7 -----
Drying by artificial heat is more rapid than open air drying and is necessary in rainy season and
regions where there is high humidity.

The temperature and equipment used for drying depends on the physical and chemical nature of the
drug and its constituents.

Various equipment such as tray dryers, spray dryers, vacuum dryers are used.

Overheating may lead to excessive loss of volatile components as well as decomposition of chemical
constituents.

The temperature should be kept below 60°C wherever possible.

B) SECONDARY PROCESSING

It refers to the steps applied to herbs in addition to primary processing.

The secondary processing differs from one herb to another depending on the nature of active
ingredients as well as therapeutic properties.

Secondary processing includes techniques such as removal of foreign substances, prevention of
microbial/ infestation, enhancing the efficacy of drugs, reducing the toxicity, extraction using suitable
solvents, concentration and drying of extracts.

These are further standardized by different methods
The following processes are carried out in the secondary processing of herbal raw materials.
Cutting Sectioning and Communition

After thoroughly drying, the herbal materials are processed by cutting and sectioning into smaller
sizes which are convenient for storage as well as extraction.

Various sizes can be obtained depending on the part of herb and extraction methods used.
It may be small particles, coarse powder or fine powder.
Aging/ Sweating

Aging refers to storing the raw material for a specified time after harvesting It is generally done under
sun or in shade for up to a year.

During the process of aging excessive water is evaporated and enzymatic reactions may occur to alter
the chemical composition of herbal material.

Example: Cascara bark should be aged for at least one year prior to use in medicinal preparations to
reduce its irritant effects.

Sweating is done by subjecting the herbal materials at a temperature between 45 to 656 with high
humidity for a period ranging from one week to few months.

The herbal materials are stacked between woollen blankets or other kind of cloth. The sweating
process is considered a hydrolytic and oxidative process in which some of the chemical ingredients of
the herbs are hydrolysed or oxidised.

----- PAGE 8 -----
Example: Vanilla beans are subjected to sweating between woollen blankets for about 2 months
during which they lose up to 80% of weight and develop a characteristic desirable colour and odour.

Baking/ Roasting
It is a process of drug heating where the herbal material is heated in ovens.

The temperature of heating and duration of baking/ roasting vary from one herbal material to another
until the drug develops a specific colour.

Example: Nutmeg is roasted till they turn to a yellowish brown colour.
Boiling Steaming

In the boiling process the drug is cooked in water or any other liquid solvent such vinegar, wine, milk
or animal urine.

Example: Acorus calamus rhizome is boiled in cows urine to enhance its anticonvulsant effects.

In the steaming process the herbal material is kept in contact with steam using a steamer resulting in
development of moist texture.

Example: Roots of Polygonum multiforum are steamed in the presence of black bean decoction to
enhance its tonic effects

Stir frying

It is a process in which the herbal materials are put in a pot of frying pan and continuously stirred or
tossed for a specific period under heat until the external colour changes, charred or even carbonized.

To facilitate uniform heating the drug material can be admixed with sand, talc or clay.
Example: Liquorice roots and rhizomes are stir fried with honey.

Fumigation

Sometimes the harvested raw materials are subjected to fumes.

Fumigation with sulphur dioxide is commonly employed for some medicinal herbs for the purpose of
preserving colour, improved appearance, bleaching and preventing the growth of insects and moulds.

Extraction of herbal materials

Extraction is a process of separation in which the chemical constituents present in plants and tissues
are removed by using selective solvents which are called as menstruum.

Herbal extracts include infusions, decoctions, fluid extracts, tinctures and powdered extracts. The
herbal preparation so obtained may be ready for use as a medicinal agent or it may be further
processed to finished products as tablets, capsules and pills.

i. Infusion

It is a liquid preparation obtained by extracting herbal materials with either cold or hot water without
boiling. Other solvents may also be used.

----- PAGE 9 -----
ii. Decoction
It is a liquid preparation obtained by boiling the herbal materials with water.
iii, Fluid extract

It is a liquid preparation obtained by maceration or percolation of herbal materials in alcohol. The
ratio will be one part of liquid containing one part of herbs (1:1).

iv. Tinctures

It is a dilute alcoholic extract of herbal materials typically made up of | part of herbal material with 5
to 10 parts of the solvent

v. Powdered extract

It is a form of herbal preparation which is processed into dried, granulated or powdered materials

BIODYNAMIC AGRICULTURE

Biodynamic agriculture is a form of organic farming which includes various concepts introduced by
Rudolf steiver in 1924.

Bio dynamics is a system of organic agriculture which recognises the biological and chemical values
of soil and treats soil fertility, plant growth and livestock care as ecologically interrelated tasks.

Biodynamic farming is an alternative where the chemical fertilizers are totally replaced by microbial
(biological) nutrients derived from bacteria, algae, fungi and it emphasizes the use of manures and
composts.

Biodynamic farming treats animals, crops and soil as a single system and facilitates the use of
traditional systems and development of new local breeds and varieties.

It uses various herbal and mineral additives in the manufacture of composts and field sprays.
Biodynamic farming also emphasizes on the use of astronomical sowing and moon planting calendar.
Bio dynamic farming promotes composting, green manuring crop rotations, inter cropping, mixed
cropping, etc, as well as employing predators, parasites, which are natural enemies of pests.

----- PAGE 10 -----
PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR GOOD
AGRICULTURE PRACTICE (GAP) OF MEDICINAL PLANTS

The guidelines described for GAP are intended to streamline the cultivation of medicinal plants as per
the well regulated methods and follow a systematic way in the cultivation process as it is important
for the production of good quality plant material.

The various stages of processing which are included in good agricultural practice (GAP) are described
as follows.

1) Seeds and propagation material

= The seeding materials are to be identified botanically, indicating plant variety, cultivar, chemo
type and its origin.

"The material used should be 100% traceable.
= The above same rule applies to vegetative material as well

= The parent material of vegetative part used in organic production should be certified and
authentically organic.

2) Cultivation

= Depending on the method of cultivation conventional or organic growers should be allowed to
follow different standards operating procedures (SOP) for cultivation

= Care should be taken to avoid environmental disturbances

= The principles of good crop husbandry must be followed including appropriate rotation of
crops

3) Soil and fertilization
"Medicinal and aromatic plants should not be grown in soils that are contaminated by sludge

« The soil should also not be contaminated by heavy metals, pesticidal residues and other
unnatural chemicals.

= The use of fertilizers and other chemical products should be as minimum as possible and in
accordance with the demands of the plant.

4) Irrigation

= Irrigation should be minimized as much as possible and only applied as per the needs of the
plant

= Irrigation water should be free from contaminants such as faeces, heavy metals, pesticides,
herbicides and other hazardous substances.

5) Crop maintenance

----- PAGE 11 -----
= Tillage (preparation of land for growing crops) should be adapted to enable good plant growth
and must be carried out whenever required.

= Pesticides and herbicides should be avoided as far as possible.
= The use of pesticides and herbicides has to be documented.
6) Harvesting
= Harvesting should be done when the plants are in their best quality and quantity.

= Harvesting should be done in optimum conditions as wet soil, dew, rain, high humidity can
produce unfavorable effects.

7) Primary processing
= It includes steps such as washing, drying, freezing etc,

= Buildings used for processing should be clean, aerated and provide protection for the
harvested crop from birds, insects, rodents and animals.

= Processing equipment must be cleaned and regularly serviced.

= All the processed material should be inspected and substandard products must be discarded.
8) Packaging

e The product should be packed in clean, dry preferably new sacs, bags or cases

e The label must be clear, permanently fixed and made from non toxic material.

e Reusable packaging materials should be well cleaned and dried before use, care should be
taken that they do not cause contamination.

9) Storage and transport

e Packaged dried materials and essential oils should be stored in a dry, well aerated building in
which temperature fluctuations are controlled and good aeration is provided.

e Fresh products should be stored between 1 to 5°C, while frozen products should be stored
below -18°C or below -20°C for long term storage.

e Essential oils should be stored as per the chemical storage standards.
e During transportation, sufficiently aerated vehicles should be used.
e National regulations on transport have to be followed

10) Staff requirements

Personnel involved in the good agricultural practice (GAP) should receive adequate training and
education related to the nature of the work being carried out.

e The staffs who works with the plant material must have a high degree of personal hygiene.

----- PAGE 12 -----
e Staff with infectious diseases should not be allowed into the rooms in which they can come
into contact with plant material

11) Documentation
e All the propagation material and steps in the production process must be documented.

e All the starting materials, processing steps including location of cultivation have to be
documented

e All agreements between producer and buyer should be fixed in a written form.
12) Quality assurance

= In order to ensure a good quality of the produced crude drug, it is extremely advisable to
educate all personnel dealing with the crop at various stages.

= Consultation and feedback should be taken from buyers of medicinal and aromatic plants
regarding the quality and other properties of plant material and an agreement have to be
made.

PEST AND PEST MANAGEMENT IN MEDICINAL PLANTS

Pest is an undesired animal or plant which causes loss of cultivated plants. The different types of pests
infecting medicinal plants are as follows.

Types of pests
1) WEEDS
2) INSECTS
3) FUNGI/ VIRUSES
4) NON INSECT PESTS
a) Fungi and viruses
Examples: Ascochyta atropae causes necrosis of leaf. Cercospora atropae produces leaf spot disease.
b) Insects

Insects such as flea beetles, flies, moths, cutworms, grasshoppers, spiders, termites, etc, also produce
significant loss of cultivated plants.

c) Weeds

A weed is an undesired plant, it can produce losses more than any other pests or diseases. They cause
depletion and shortage of nutrients, water, light, and space to the cultivated plants. They also increase
the cost of labour and equipment and reduce the quality of cultivated plants.

Examples of weeds are Parthenium, Ragweed, Medican tea, Varnish tree, etc.

----- PAGE 13 -----
E) Non insect pests
They are further sub classified as follows.
e Vertebrates: Animals like monkeys, rats, rabbits, squirrels, birds, pigs etc.
e Invertebrates: Animals like crabs, snails, mites, nematodes, etc.
METHODS OF PEST CONTROL

Different techniques are followed to achieve pest control effectively. These methods are discussed as
follows.

1) Agricultural method
2) Biological method
3) Mechanical method
4) Chemical method
Mechanical method

It includes simple techniques like hand picking, pruming burning, using of pest traps, collection and
destruction of eggs, larvae and insects. Construction of concrete warehouses to protect from rodents
and animals. Rats and mouse traps are also used.

Agricultural method

It includes various methods such as crop rotation, inter cropping, integrated weed management
methods, solarisation etc. Production of pest and insect resistant plants through genetic engineering
technique is another approach.

Biological method

This method involves combating pests with other living organisms such as employment of cats to
combat rats and squirrels, employment of birds to combat insects. Some chemical substances
produced by female insects such as sex attractants, which can be used to lure male insects and prevent
reproduction.

Chemical control

Pests are controlled using chemical pesticides which include insecticides, fungicides, herbicides,
rodenticides. However these chemical substances are highly toxic to human beings. Improper use of
these chemical pesticides may lead to toxic effects on humanand animals. Examples:

o  Rodenticides: Arsenic trioxide
o Insecticides: Malathion, Parathion, Methoxychlor.
o Miticides: Tetradifon, Chlorobenzolate

o Fungicides: Chlorophenols, Quaternary ammonium compounds, etc.

----- PAGE 14 -----
o Herbicides: 24 dichloro phenoxy acetic acid, Calcium arsenate, etc.
BIOPESTICIDES/BIOINSECTICIDES FOR PEST MANAGEMENT

These are pesticides obtained from natural sources like microorganisms, plants, animals, insects and
certain minerals. They offer enormous advantages over chemical pesticides which are as follows.

Advantages of bio pesticides over chemical pesticides
Vv They are non-toxic to plants as well as humans.
Vv They are biodegradable and do not leave any toxic residues.

v They are less expensive and can be grown along with the cultivated medicinal plants. >They
are eco friendly and do not affect soil fertility.

Vv They are safe to handle and use.
TYPES OF BIOPESTICIDES
They can be categorized depending on their source as follows.
> BIOCHEMICAL
> MICROBIAL

> PLANT PESTICIDES

Microbial pesticides:

They consist of microorganisms, microbial pesticides can control different kinds of pest:and are
relatively specific for its target pests. It is reported that some fungi are used to control weeds and
insects.

Biochemical pesticides

These are naturally occurring chemical substances which are obtained from insects and animals which
have the ability to control the pests by non toxic mechanisms. These include substances like insect sex
pheromones.

Plant pesticides

Various plants are reported to possess pesticidal and insecticidal properties. They can be grown along
with cultivated plants to combat insects and can be used in powdered form or the constituents can be
extracted from them and used to spray on the crops.

Example: Neem, Tobacco, Pyrethrum, Sabadilla, Derris, Ryania.

----- PAGE 15 -----
INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE

TRADITIONAL SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE

Traditional system of medicine also known as indigenous/ folk medicine/ alternative medicine
comprises of medical aspects of knowledge, skills, and practices based on different cultures and
different people which are used to treat the diseases. It includes various systems being practiced
throughout the world such as Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homeopathy, Chinese systems etc. These
systems of medicine are based on theories, beliefs and experiences of different practitioners from the
ancient periods.

AYURVEDA SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Ayurveda is one of the oldest system of medicine which came into existence in about 900 BC. The
word "Ayur" means Life and "Veda" means Science. Literally Ayurveda means science of life.
Charaka and Sushruta made significant contributions to Ayurveda. The book "Charak Samhita" was
written by Charaka and he was known as father of Ayurveda.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF AYURVEDA

PRINCIPLES OF AYURVEDA

PANCHAMAHABHUTA TRIDOSHA GUNA-RASA SIDDHANTHA

----- PAGE 16 -----
e PRITHVI e VATA e RASA

e JALA e PITTA e GUNA

e VAYU e KAPHA e VIRYA

e AGNI e VIPAKA

e AKASHA e PRABHAVA

Ayurveda is based on the following principles

a) Panchabhuta Siddhanta

b) Tridosha theory

c) Guna-Rasa-Virya-Vipaka-Prabhava Siddhanta.
Pancha Bhoota Siddhanta

According to this theory, It believes that the whole universe is made up of five basic elements known
as "Mahabhutas" and they are present in the human body. They are Prithvi (Earth) Jala (Water), Vayu
(Air), Agni (Fire), Akasha (Void/Sky). Combinations of these five elements form seven basic tissues
of the body which are referred as "Sapta Dahu" which are as follows:

1. Rasa (Lymph/ Plasma), 2 Rakta (Blood), 3. Mamsa (Flesh), 4. Meda (Fat), 5. Asti(Bones), Moja
(Marrow), 7. Shukra ( Reproductive organs). These Sapta dahu undergo wear and tear to form "Mala"
(Excretory products).

Tridosha theory

According to this theory, the five basic elements (Pancha Mahabhuta) exist in human body in three
different forms, together known as "Tridosha", they are

= Vata (Space + Air).
= Pitta (Fire + Liquid).
= kapha (Liquid + Solid).

These tridoshas when present in balanced form in the body is considered as healthy condition, any
imbalance in tridosha is considered as disease condition. Ayurveda tries to maintain the balance in
these elements.

Vata: It regulates the psychic and nervous system. Imbalance of this leads to disease of ENT heart,
urinary tract, skin, etc.

Pitta: It regulates energy production, digestion, tissue building, etc. Imbalance of this lead to disease
like acidity, indigestion, liver and skin disease.

Kapha: It regulates heat, formation of fluids, mucous, etc. Imbalance of this results in join pain, brain
disease, drowsiness, etc.

Guna-Rasa-Virya-Vipaka-Prabhava Siddhanta

----- PAGE 17 -----
These are considered as five pharmacological principles / properties of "Dravya" (dru substance), they
are Rasa (Taste), Guna (Quality), Virya (Active principle), Vipaka (Digestive products), Prabhava
(Pharmaco therapeutic action).

DIAGNOSIS IN AYURVEDA

Diseases are diagnosed by-

Observation of Doshas (vata, pitta, kapha).
Observation of skin, eyes, hair, nails and tongue.
Recording the pulse.

Investigation of Mala (urine, stools and sweat).

TREATMENT

The different treatments in Ayurveda are as follows

Elimination therapy
Alleviation therapy
Psychic therapy

Surgery therapy

In addition to single drugs, compound formulations are generally used to treat disease in the form of
tablets, pills, powders and syrups. Following are the examples of few Ayurvedic drugs along with
their uses.

List of some Ayurvedic drugs and their uses

Drug Uses

Arjunaristha Heart disease
Khadirarishta Skin disease

Kumaryasava Tonic, liver diseases
Triphala churna General diseases, stomachic

----- PAGE 18 -----
Ashwagandha churna Adaptogenic diseases
Parad bhasma Diarrhoea, dysentery
Chirayanta arka Fever

Kasturi gutika Aphrodisiac

Dashmula quath Ailments of kapha and vata

BRANCHES OF TREATMENT IN AYURVEDA
i. Kayachikitsa (General medicine).

ii. Salya chikitsa (Surgery).

iii. Salakya chikitsa (ENT).

iv. _ Bala chikitsa (Pediatrics)

v. Jara chikitsa Treatment related to genetics).

vi.  Rasayana chikitsa (Treatment with chemicals).
vii. Vajikarana chikitsa (Treatment related to reproductive organs and aphrodisiacs).
viii. | Graham chikitsa (Planetory effects).

ix.  Visha chikitsa (Toxicology).
SIDDHA SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

This system was practised in south India especially Tamil nadu. This system is believed to be older
than Ayurveda and the latter was derived from Siddha system. ““Agastya" believed to be the father of
Siddha medicine and he wrote a book known as Charkku "Agattiya

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SIDDHA SYSTEM

----- PAGE 19 -----
PRINCIPLES OF SIDDHA

TRIGUNA

It is based on three principles vata, pitta and kapha, which are known as "Trigunas".

e Vata: People with predominant vata are characterized by stout, black, cold and inactive
personalities. Increased vata develops flatulence, acidity, obesity, heart attacks, etc.

e Pitta: People with predominant pitta are characterized by lean, whitish complexioned ha
personalities. Increased pitta shows early greying of hair, reddish eyes, burning chest,mental
derangement, anaemia.

e Kapha: People with predominant kapha are characterized by well built, good complexioned well
behaved personalities. Increased kapha leads to jaundice, heart attack, high fever anaemia, etc.

A particular guna in the body increases according to the time.
= Vata is predominant at 6.00am to 10.00am and 6.00pm to 10.00pm.
= Pitta is predominant at 10.00am to 200pm and 10.00pm to 2.00am.
= Kapha is predominant at 2.00pm to 6.00pm and 2.00am to 6.00am.
DIAGNOSIS IN SIDDHA SYSTEM

During the diagnosis the physician studies eight things, they are Nadi (Pulse), Dhwani (Speech),
Twaka (Tongue), Deham (Body), Neeram (Colour), Malam (Faeces), Mutram (Urine) and Vizhi
(Eyes).

Treatment

Siddha physicians give knowledge of one thousand herbs and their effectiveness in specific
composition and formulation. Commonly medicines are prepared freshly for specific diseases.

The formulations are prepared using plants animals, minerals, metals like mercury, gold, silver,
sulphur, zinc, copper, aluminum, borax and arsenic are used in small quantities.

The following formulations are commonly used in Siddha system.

----- PAGE 20 -----
o Kashayam (Decoction).

o Churna (Powder).

o Tailam (Medicated oils).

o Kuligai (Pills & Tablets).

o Chenduram (Metal complexes).

o  Bhasma (Calcinated drugs).

DIET IN SIDDHA

Siddha system also gives importance to "Pathya" (restriction on diet), following are the examples of
restricted and non-restricted diets.

Non restricted foods: wheat, milk, ghee, pulses, tender vegetables, goat meat, sugar, etc.
Restricted foods : chicken, mangoes, coconut, fenugreek, mustard, sesame, almonds, etc.
UNANI SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Unani system originated in Greece. It was started by a Greek philosopher Hippocrates. He was the
first physician to introduce documentation of medical history which gave rise to development of
"Humoral theory". Unani system was later developed by Arabs and became popular as Arab system of
medicine.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF UNANI SYSTEM

PRINCIPLES OF UNANI

PYTHOGORIAN THEORY

HIPPOCRATIC THEORY

----- PAGE 21 -----
—

Unani system considers that the entire universe is made of four basic elements viz:- fire, air, earth,
water. These elements are present in human body that represent various qualities. Unani system is
based on two theories.

> Hippocratic theory of four humors.
> Pythagorean theory of four proximate qualities.
Hippocratic theory of four humours mentions the first products of digestion, they are
e Blood (Dum).
e = Phlegm (Balgham).
e Yellow bile (Safra).
e Black bile (Souda).

Pythogorian theory of four proximate qualities includes hot, cold, moist and dry. These four qualities
are present in the human body in combinations and represent the four basic elements of the universe.
They are.

e Hot & moist (Air).

e Hot & dry (Fire).

e Cold & moist (Water).
e Cold & dry (Earth).

These four qualities are present in different proportions in the body and vary from one person to
another. These 4 qualities represent the nature or temperament/ humor of individual known as
"Mizaj".

Mizaj/ Temperament/ Humors of a person

e = =Mizaj-e-har (Hot).

e = Mizaj e-barid (Cold).
e = Mizaj-e-yabis (Dry).
e = =©Mizaj-e-rath (Moist).

Balance form of these 4 humors is called as healthy condition and imbalance form is known as
pathological condition

DIAGNOSIS

It is done by recording the parameters such as psychology, age, gender, habits, working condition,
history, etc. The following things are analysed during diagnosis

----- PAGE 22 -----
e Pulse reading.
e Examination of sputum, urine, and stools.
e Patient counselling.
TREATMENT IN UNANI SYSTEM
Two things are attempted during the treatment they are:

e To remove the cause of ailment, also known as cleansing or detoxification. It is done by
purging, diuresis, vomiting and bleeding.

e To strengthen the natural defence mechanism and prevention of relapse.
Treatment in Unani system involves various therapies which are as follows:

a. Regimental therapy: It includes emesis, purging, diaphoresis, diuresis, massaging, Turkish
bath, etc

b. Diet therapy: It is done by using a special diet. The quality and quantity of foods is

regulated
c. Pharmacotherapy: It deals with the use of medicine, most commonly natural drugs are
used.
UNANI MEDICINE

The Materia Medica describes drugs obtained from herbs, animals and mineral sources. Herbal drugs
include various parts of plants and their products. Animal drugs include organs, flesh, hair, bones, etc.
Mineral drugs include metals like gold, silver, lead, zinc arsenic, etc. Precious stones like emerald,
sapphire are also used.

HOMEOPATHY SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Homeo means similar and pathos means suffering hence homeopathy means similar suffering. It
means, the cause of the disease itself can be used for its treatment or the substance producing similar
symptoms of disease in healthy individuals can be used to treat that disease. Homeopathy was
introduced by a German physician "Dr. Samue Hahnemann". Basic principle of Homeopathy is
"Similia Similibus Curantur" meaning let like be treated by likes.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF HOMEOPATHY

It is based on seven principles which are as follows

“* PRINCIPLES OF HOMEOPATHY

> INDIVIDUALISATION

----- PAGE 23 -----
> PRINCIPLE OF SIMILIA

> PRINCIPLE OF SIMPLEX

> PRINCIPLE OF MINIMUM DOSE

> LAW OF PROVIDING

> LAW OF DYNAMISATION

> VITAL FORCE
Individualization

This concept maintains that no two individuals in the world are same, hence disease affecting the
individuals and their response to it cannot be similar. The individual response to the same disease
would be different from person to person. Thus medicines used to cure the same disease in different
individuals are different.

Principle of similia

Substances which are the cause of disease or produce similar symptoms in healthy individuals can be
used to cure the disease in patients (Vaccines)

Principle of minimum dose

This rule states that dose of the drug is inversely proportional to its potency (lower the dose, more
potent the drug is).

Law of proving

The testing of drugs is done on healthy volunteers. If the drug produces similar symptoms in a healthy
person as that of the diseased person, the drug is considered as suitable for treating that disease

Examples:

Cinchona (anti malarial drug produced symptoms of malaria in healthy persons, hence it can be used
to treat malaria. ii. Ipecac (antiemetic drug) produced emesis in healthy persons, hence it can be used
to treat vomiting

DIAGNOSIS IN HOMEOPATHY
e Collection of detailed case history and medical history.

e Investigation of symptoms, location, sensation, etc.

----- PAGE 24 -----
e Build up a symptoms picture of the patient.
TREATMENT

Homeopathy system used drugs in the form of mother tincture, small pills and powders. Preparation of
doses involved three processes, they are trituration, succession and serial dilution. Potentiation is a

physical process denoted by 'C. Three scales are used; they are decimal, centesimal and millesimal.

Sources of Homeopathy medicine

Plants: various plants, fungi, etc.

Animals: secretions, saliva, etc. Minerals and chemicals: toxic metals, inorganic salts, etc.
Serum: protoplasm of animals, hormones, etc.

Vaccines bacterial and viral products, etc

Disadvantages of Homeopathy

v Selection of correct drug is difficult.
v It takes long periods of time to cure in chronic cases.

PREPARATION AND STANDARDIZATION OF AYURVEDIC
FORMULATIONS

Ayurvedic formulations can be categorized into four types based on their physical nature of dosage

forms.

1. Solid dosage forms: Eg Vati, Ghutika.

2. Semi Solid dosage forms Eg Leha, Kalka

3. Liquid dosage forms Eg: Aristas. Asavas

4. Powder dosage forms. Eg Bhasmas Churras

ARISTAS AND ASAVAS

They are also known as preparations containing self generated alcohol (alcoholic preparations). They
are prepared by adding powdered drug or its decoction into a solution of sugar or jaggery, It is then
fermented for a specified time during which alcohol is generated which facilitates the extraction of

active principles present in the drugs. The self generated alcohol also acts as a preservative.

Both Aristas and Asavas are self generating alcoholic preparations, but they differ in the methods of
preparation. Aristas are prepared by extracting the powdered drug in the form of decoction and then

added to the solution of sugar or jaggery.

----- PAGE 25 -----
Asavas are prepared by directly adding the powdered drugs into the solution of sugar or jaggery, the

remaining process of preparation remains the same.

Method of preparation of Aristas

The crude drugs are coarsely powdered and decoction (Kashaya) is prepared and filtered. Other
ingredients are mixed with the decoction and these contents are added to a solution sugar or jaggery or

honey. It is then boiled, cooled and transferred to wooden barrels or pot.

The mouth of the container is covered with an earthen lid and the edges are sealed with clay smeared
cloth which is wound in seven consecutive layers. The container is kept in an underground cellar or a
heap of paddy in order to ensure a constant temperature maintained during the process of

fermentation.

After the specified period, the lid is removed and the contents are examined to ensure that the process

of fermentation (Sandhana) has been completed.The fluid is filtered and stored.
Method of preparation of Asavas

The drug is finely powdered and mixed with other ingredients and these contents are added to a
solution of sugar or jaggery or honey, mixed well. It is then boiled, cooled and transferred to wooden
barrels or pots. The mouth of the container is covered with an earthen lid and the edges are sealed
with clay smeared cloth which is wound in seven consecutive layers. The container is kept in an
underground cellar or a heap of paddy in order to ensure a constant temperature is maintained during
the process of fermentation. After the specified period, the lid is removed and the contents are
examined to ensure that the process of fermentation (Sandhana) has been completed. The fluid is
filtered and stored

Standardization parameters for Aristas and Asavas

e  Aristas and Asavas should be clear without any froth or foam at the top.
e It should not become sour upon standing
e It should have a characteristic aromatic and alcoholic odour.
e There should be no effervescence produced.
Examples:
Aristas: Ashokarista, Dasmularista, Ashwagandhaarista

Asavas: Arvindasava, Kumaryasava, Vasakasava.

VATI & GHUTIKA (TABLETS & PILLS)

----- PAGE 26 -----
These are medicines in the form of tablets (vati) and pills (ghutika). They contain single or
combinations of herbal, mineral or animal drugs.

Method of preparation

The drugs are dried and finely powdered, mineral drugs are converted into calcinated products
(bhasmas) or any other form as specified. As per the mentioned formula, the drugs and other
ingredients are mixed together and made into a soft paste with specified liquids. It is then properly
ground and made into vati (tablets) or ghutikas (Pills).

Standardization parameters for Vati & Ghutikas
= Vati & Ghutikas should be stable up to 2 years after preparation.
= If they contain only mineral ingredients, they can be used indefinitely
"They should not lose their original colour, odour, taste and form upon storage.
= If they contain sugar/ salt, they should be protected from moisture.

Eg: Vati: Gandhaka vati, Sankha vati.

Ghutika: Pranda gutika, Lasunadi gutika.

CHURNA
They contain single or combination of drugs along with other ingredients in a powdered form.
Method of preparation

Drugs and other ingredients mentioned in the formula are separately dried, finely powdered and
sieved to get uniform sized particles, they are mixed to get a uniform powder.

Standardization parameters for Churna
= Churnas should be free flowing powder and should not adhere or become moist
= Churnas are able up to one year if they are stored properly
= Finer the powder, better is its potency and therapeutic value.

Eg. Triphala churna, Drakshadi chuma, Sudarshan churna

LEHA AVALEHA

These are semisolid preparations made by boiling the powdered drug/ extract with solution of sugar or
Jaggery

Method of preparation

----- PAGE 27 -----
Sugar / jaggery is dissolved in a liquid, it is boiled and filtered. The powdered drugs extract along
with other ingredients are added with continuous stirring to form a homogenous semisolid mass. If
necessary ghee or oil is also added while the preparation is hot.

Standardization parameters for Leha
= It should neither become hard nor liquify.
= There should be no growth of fungus over it.
= It should not change its colour odour and taste.
= They can be used up to one year it properly stored.

Eg: Draksavaleha, Vasavaleha Bilvadileha

BHASMA

These are the powdered forms of drugs prepared by calcination (heating the solids in air to change is
original form) of metals, minerals or animal products by a special process in closed crucible or in pits
covered with cow dung

Method of preparation
They are prepared in two stages viz:

i. Sodhana: It is a process of purification of metals, minerals by heating them and immersing in
a specific liquid. This is done to remove its toxicity.

ii. Marana: This is the second stage of preparing bhasmas, in which the purified drugs obtained
from shodhana process are ground and mixed with plants/ extracts as specified. After
specified time, small cakes are made and dried in sunlight. The dried cakes are kept in earthen
vessels, sealed with clay smeared cloth and kept in a pit covered with cow dung and the fire is
put on all the sides. After heating for a specified period, the contents are removed and ground
into a fine powder and stored.

Standardization parameters for Bhasmas

= Bhasmas are grey, whitish, yellowish or black coloured powders. They should not change
their colour on storage.

= They are highly stable for long periods and should not lose their potency.

Eg: Suvarna bhasma, Shankha bhasma, Taura bhasma.


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Medical-Herbalism-The-Science-and-Practice-of-Herbal-Medicine-2003.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
MEDICAL
HERBALISM

THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE
OF HERBAL MEDICINE

DAVID HOFFMANN, FNIMH, AHG

author of The Complete Illustrated Holistic Herbal

----- PAGE 2 -----
HOFFMANN:

MEDICAL
ERBALISM

----- PAGE 3 -----
~ & .nS .._.. e

MEDICAL HERBALISM

The Science and Practice
of Herbal Medicine

David Hoffmann, FNIMH, AHG

----- PAGE 4 -----
Healing Arts Press

One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.Inner Traditions.com

Healing Arts Press is a division of Inner Traditions International
Copyright © 2003 David Hoffmann

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or me-
chanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publisher.

Note to the reader: This book is intended as an informational guide. The remedies, approaches, and techniques described herein
are meant to supplement, and not to be a substitute for, professional medical care or treatment. They should not be used to treat a
serious ailment without prior consultation with a qualified health care professional.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hoffmann, David, 1951-
Medical herbalism : the science and practice of herbal medicine / David Hoffmann.
p-; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-978-089281749-8 (hardcover)
1. Herbs—Therapeutic use. 2. Medicinal plants.
[DNLM: 1. Phytotherapy—methods. 2. Holistic Health. 3. Plants,
Medicinal. WB 925 H711m 2003] I. Title.
RM666.H33H6444 2003

615'.321—de22
2003017536

Printed in India

109876

iscilla Baker

4 d layout by Pr
Text design and layout by th Agenda 20

4 i display typefaces
This book was typeset in Janson, wil d Traian as disp!

----- PAGE 5 -----
DEDICATION

For Lois Stopple,
What can I say, after 600 odd pages (odd pages indeed), I’m tongue tied! You have healed me heart and soul, with
the celebration of life and joy that you are. This book may have been written by me, but it was midwifed by you.

Sweet blossom come on under the willow
We can have high times if you'll abide

We can discover the wonders of nature
Rolling in the rushes down by the riverside

She’s got everything delightful
She’s got everything I need
A breeze in the pines in the summer night moonlight
Crazy in the sunlight, yes, indeed
—THE GRATEFUL DEAD (WHO ELSE. . .)

>) e

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My deepest appreciation to Cheri Quincy, DO, for the continuing encouragement and support. Thank you for
your confidence in me, even when J couldn’t even spell the word!

It is with love and gratitude that I acknowledge my friends and colleagues in the North American commu-
nity of herbalists for making this escapee from Thatchers’ Britain so welcome. The ideas in this book have been
gestating over the years in discussions with many, many herbalists. The U.S. herb world is blessed with an at-
mosphere of openness and mutual support that is unique and deeply nurturing. We can thank Rosemary Gladstar
for so very much...

There is so much I could say to each of you, so I’m copping out and simply “naming names.” No special order,
I love you all: Cascade Anderson-Geller, Paul Bergner, Jane Bothwell, Mark Blumenthal, Don Brown, Ryan
Drum, Rosemary Gladstar, Mindy Green, Christopher Hobbs, Tori Hudson, Feather Jones, Gail Julian, Kathi
Keville, Tierona Low Dog, David LaLucerne, Rob McCaleb (and everyone at the Herb Research Foundation),
Anne McIntyre, Terence McKenna, Bill Mitchel, Pam Montgomery, Rob Montgomery, Michael Moore, 7 Song,
Ric Scalzo, Ed Smith, Sara Smith, Paul Stamets, Jill Stansbury, Autumn Summers, Jonathan Treasure, Gail
Ulhrich, Roy Upton, Marty Wall, David Winston, Linda Wolf, Tom Wolf, Matthew Wood, Dusty Yeo.

This book is much better than it deserves to be because of the superlative guidance of herbalist/editor ex-
troadinaire Evelyn Leigh. Thank you for being so knowledgeable, insightful, literate, and understanding of this
aging deadhead. You made the process pleasant, rewarding (or is that rewording?), and even entertaining.

To Jeanie Levitan, the first editor to give me her toothbrush! All authors should hope to be blessed with
guidance from someone with your erudition and warmth. To Jamaica Burns for editorial help above and beyond
the call of duty. Sorry about the obscure Chinese citations.

T want to thank the many groups of students I have had the honor of working with over the years. You all
know who you are. In case you’ve forgotten, you went to one (or more!) of the following institutions: the
California School of Herbal Studies, the Rocky Mountain Center of Botanical Studies, Bastyr University,
National College of Naturopathic Medicine, California Institute of Integral Studies, and the National College
of Phytotherapy.

Sonoma County reference librarians have been a great help during the writing of this book. What would we
do without libraries?

To Sasha Shulgin, Grant Morrison, Hakim Bey, Jerry Garcia, and Ozric Tentacles for the help with sanity
maintenance (and furtherance . . .).

----- PAGE 6 -----
CONTENTS

NM

Introduction

Part One

INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES
AND PRACTICES

Herbs, Holism, and Science
Science and Phytotherapy, 17 * Pharmacognosy and Ways to Assess Herb
Quality, 19 * The Conservation of Medicinal Plants, 26

Classification of Medicinal Plants
The Linnaean System of Classification, 32 * Derivation of Botanical Names, 33

An Introduction to Phytochemistry
Primary and Secondary Plant Metabolites, 37 © Commonly Used ‘Terms and
Concepts, 40

Carbohydrates
Monosaccharides, 42 * Polysaccharides, 43 * Glycoproteins, 47 * Glycosides, 48
* Gums and Mucilages, 50

Lipids
Fatty Acids, $4 * Lipids Containing Glycerol, 58

Terpenes
Monoterpenes, 62 * Iridoids, 66 * Sesquiterpenes, 67 * Sesquiterpene
Lactones, 69 * Diterpenoids, 71 * Saponins, 74 * Triterpenoid Saponins, 79
* Cardenolides and Bufadienolides, 83 * Phytosterols, 83 *
Nortriterpenoids, 84 * Plant Exudates, 85 * Resins, 85 * Oleoresins, 86 *
Balsams, 87 * Gum Resins, 87

Polyphenols
Simple Phenols and Phenolic Acids, 92 * Phenylpropanoids and Cinnamic
Acids, 94 * Coumarins, 95 * Quinones, 96 * Xanthones, 99 * Stilbenoids, 99
* Flavonoids, 100 * Flavones and Flavonols, 101 ¢ Isoflavonoids, 106 ¢
Flavanones, 107 ¢ Dihydrochalcones, 107 * Biflavonoids, 108 * Lignans and
Neolignans, 112 ¢ Tannins, 114

Alkaloids
Pyrrolidine and Piperidine Alkaloids, 122 ¢ Tropane Alkaloids, 122 ¢
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids, 123 ¢ Purine Alkaloids, 124 * Isoquinoline Alkaloids,
125 © Indole Alkaloids, 127 ¢ Ergot Alkaloids, 127 * B-carboline Alkaloids, 128
* Quinoline Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Quinolizidine Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Diterpenoid
Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Steroid Alkaloids, 131 * Miscellaneous Alkaloids, 131

Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics, 135 * Phytoestrogens, 142 ¢ Pharmacokinetics, 144 *
Immunomodulators, 152 ¢ Inflammation and Anti-Inflammatory Agents, 154
* Cancer and Plant Constituents, 159 * Antiviral Agents, 164 ¢ Antioxidants
and Free Radical Scavengers, 165 * Cardiac Glycosides, 168 ¢ Nonsteroidal
Cardioactive Plant Constituents, 169 * Cholesterol and Lipid-Lowering
Activity, 170 * Hypertension and Hypotensive Agents, 171 © Platelet
Function and Cardiovascular Disease, 173 * Herbs and the Liver, 175 *
Hypoglycemic Agents, 178

30

36

41

54

62

90

120

134

----- PAGE 7 -----
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15,

16.

17.

18.

Toxicity, Contraindications, and Safety.
Evaluating Causality in Adverse Events, 187 * Toxicology, 192 * Oxalic Acid,
198 © Terpenes, 199 * Glycosides, 199 * Polyphenolics, 200 * Alkaloids, 202
* Polypeptides, 205 * Lectins, 206 * Photosensitivity, 209

The Formulation and Preparation of Herbal Medicines
Herbal Medicines, 216 * Infusions, 219 * Decoctions, 221 * Tinctures
(Tincturae), 223 ¢ Fluid Extracts (Fluid Extracta), 224 * Syrups, Elixirs, and
Emulsions (Emulsiones), 225 * Juices (Succi), Linctuses (Lincti), Mucilages,
and Oxymels, 226 * Waters (Aqua), 227 * Capsules, Pills, and Tablets, 227 *
Lozenges (Trochisci) and Pastilles (Pastilli), 228 * Baths (Balneotherapy), 228
* Douches and Enemas, 229 * Ointments and Suppositories, 230 *
Liniments, 231 * Gargles (Gargarisma) and Mouthwashes, 231 * Inhalants
(Vapors) and Spray Solutions (Nebulae), 231 * Oils, 232 ¢ Compresses and
Poultices, 232 * Incompatibility , 232

Part Two

TREATMENT APPROACHES
BY BODY SYSTEM

A Model of Holistic Herbal Medicine
Phytotherapeutic Selection Criteria, 237 * Dosage and Formulation Criteria,
252 © Outline of Treatment Chapters, 256

The Digestive System
Flatulence, 262 * Constipation, 263 * Laxatives, 264 *
Diarrhea, 266 * Aphthous Ulcers, 267 * Periodontal Disease, 268 ¢
Esophagitis and Gastroesophageal Reflux, 269 © Gastritis, 271 * Peptic
Ulcers, 272 * Hiatus Hernia, 274 * Functional Dyspepsia or “Indigestion,”
275 © Irritable Bowel Syndrome, 276 * Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 279 *
Ulcerative Colitis, 279 © Diverticulitis, 280 * Jaundice, 283 * Chronic
Hepatitis, 283 * Viral Hepatitis, 285 * Cirrhosis, 286 * Cholecystitis, 287 *
Cholelithiasis, 288 * Hemorrhoids, 289

The Cardiovascular System
Tonics for the Cardiovascular System, 292 * Cholesterol, 300 *
Hypertension, 302 * Arteriosclerosis, 307 ¢ Congestive Heart Failure, 309 ¢
Angina Pectoris, 310 * Peripheral Arterial Occlusive Disease, 311 * Varicose
Veins, 312

The Respiratory System
Coughs, 322 * Acute Bronchitis, 323 * Chronic Bronchitis, 326 * Pertussis,
329 © Asthma, 330 ¢ Emphysema, 334 ¢ The Common Cold, 336 ¢
Influenza, 338 * Hay Fever, 339 © Sinusitis, 340 * Laryngitis, 341 ¢
Tonsillitis, 342

The Nervous System
Managing Stress: An Overview, 349 * Depression, 354 * Insomnia, 355 *
Withdrawal from Benzodiazepines, 361 * Anorexia Nervosa, 363 *
Headache, 364 * Migraine, 367 * Neuritis, 371 * Tinnitus, 372 * Motion
Sickness, 373 * Shingles, 373

The Urinary System
Frequency, 377 * Dysuria, 378 * Hematuria, 378 * Edema, 379 © Cystitis,
379 * Urinary Calculus, 381

The Reproductive System
Emmenagogues, 385 * Amenorrhea, 386 * Dysmenorrhea, 387 *
Premenstrual Syndrome, 388 * Menopause, 391 * Pregnancy, 393 * Herbs to
Avoid During Pregnancy, 394 * Uterine Fibroids, 403 * Endometriosis, 404 *
Fibrocystic Breast Disease , 405 ¢ Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy, 406

186

216

236

258

291

316

344

375

384

----- PAGE 8 -----
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Nave ene

The Musculoskeletal System
External Applications for Musculoskeletal Problems, 416 * Myalgia, 417 *
Osteoarthritis, 418 * Rheumatoid Arthritis, 421 * Osteoporosis, 424 *
Gout, 426 * Bursitis and Tendinitis, 427 ¢ Restless Leg Syndrome, 428

The Skin
Herbs for Topical Application, 431 * Eczema and Dermatitis, 432 *
Psoriasis, 435 ¢ Acne, 438

The Immune System
General Support Protocols, 446 * Detoxification, 446 * Postoperative
Recovery, 448 * General Guidelines for Treating Infection, 451 *
Vaginitis, 452 © Prostatitis, 454 * Boils, 455 * Fungal Skin Infection, 455
Cancer, 456

The Endocrine System
Hypothyroidism, 461 * Hyperthyroidism, 462 * Diabetes Mellitus, 463 ¢
The Adrenal Glands, 465

Phytotherapy and the Elderly
Toning and Nurturing Health in Elders, 468 * Prevention and Treatment of:
Disease in Elders, 469

Phytotherapy and Children
Measles, 474 * Mumps, 474 * Colic, 475 * Constipation, 476 *
Diarrhea, 477 ¢ Indigestion, 477 * Nausea, 478 * Otitis Media, 478 ©
Attention Deficit Disorder, 479 * Diaper Rash, 480 * Cradle Cap, 481 ¢
Impetigo, 481

Herbal Actions

Adaptogen, 483 ¢ Alterative, 484 * Anticatarrhal, 485 * Anti-Inflammatory, 487

* Antimicrobial, 491 * Antirheumatic, 493 * Antispasmodic, 494 *
Astringent, 496 © Bitter, 498 * Cardiac Remedies, 501 ¢ Carminative, $02 *
Cholagogue, 503 ¢ Demulcent, 505 * Diuretic, 506 © Emmenagogue, 509 ¢
Expectorant, 511 * Hepatic, 513 * Hypnotic, $15 * Hypotensive, 516 *
Nervine, $17 ¢ Stimulant, 519

Materia Medica

APPENDICES
Glossary

Selected Examples of Binomial Meanings
Herbs by Latin and Common Names
Pharmacy Terms

Weight and Measure Conversion

Herbal Information Sources

‘Taxonomy Hierarchy

Bibliography
Index

408

430

441

461

467

473

483

522

604
622
626
636
638
639
646

652
655

----- PAGE 9 -----
INTRODUCTION

BD

, | ¥ his is an exciting and very challenging time to be
involved in herbal medicine. There is a growing
openness to the insights of clinical herbalism

from practitioners of other health care modalities, and a

plethora of peer-reviewed work on herbs being published

by the research community. Many new insights have been
put forth, and many traditional ideas are being reassessed
and either rejected or embraced anew.

Above all, this is a time of change for Western
medicine, both holistic and orthodox. While herbs have a
unique and valuable contribution to make, no clear con-
text has yet been defined for Western holistic medicine.
In such a rapidly evolving clinical and research milieu, a
book of this sort can at best serve as a building block, a
step on the road toward a more cohesive vision for the fu-
ture of Western holistic healing.

With this book J have endeavored to lay a foundation
for the skilled use of herbal medicine within a holistic
practice by bringing together the modern scientific
movement with traditional herbal practice. The book is
intended for practitioners and students of medical herbal-
ism, as well as practitioners of other modalities who are
interested in the principles and practice of Western
herbal medicine.

A cursory look at the contents reveals two distinct
sections of the book.

Part 1 surveys the scientific underpinnings of medical
herbalism, the chemistry and pharmacology that may
help clarify the mechanisms of herbal activity and clinical
efficacy. While this information may be unfamiliar and
challenging for many herbalists, I feel it is important for
traditional practitioners to have at least a rudimentary
grasp of this subject as we move into the 21st century.

Part 2 deals with the practical therapeutics of the
major body systems and the pathologies that affect them.
It is based on my own 25 years of clinical experience, the
experience and knowledge accrued by the Eclectic and
Physiomedical physicians of the United States, and the
practices developed by the National Institute of Medical
Herbalists in the United Kingdom.

Despite the seeming dichotomy of these two major
sections of the book, I have attempted throughout to
marry biomedical theory with the clinical experience of
the medical herbalist. As a clinician who began his own

herbal practice in 1978, I have seen that Western herbal
medicine is based upon a body of knowledge and experi-
ence that has as much clinical value as any other field of
medicine. Thus the guidelines for protocol development
given throughout the book are based firmly on this
bedrock of Western herbalism. I have not rejected the
clinical approaches of medical herbalism in favor of peer-
reviewed research. Even acknowledging the wealth of
research occurring, there is not yet enough clinically rel-
evant material to justify changing tried-and-true ap-
proaches, an issue that is explored throughout the book.

The focus of the medicinal plant research commu-
nity, however, is rarely on the protocols used in herbal
medicine, but instead on the plants themselves as sources
of novel (and thus patentable) chemical structures. A dis-
quieting trend in North American herbalism is the ten-
dency to be influenced by the marketplace and herbal
fashion. ] have made a point of avoiding such hype in the
treatment section of the book. The following statement,
made by the 19th-century Eclectic physician John King in
writing about Grindelia squarrosa, is as relevant today as it
was 100 years ago:

The fact is, that many physicians have a great proneness
to run after new remedies, especially when introduced
under some pretentious name, and to place a marvelous
credulity in the statements of interested parties, who are
incapable of determining accurate conclusions as to the
value of a remedy.!

Herbalism is a fundamentally conservative activity, al-
though I must say it is the only aspect of my life where
any trace of conservative tendencies will be found!

OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
PART 1

Chapter 1

Places Western herbalism in a philosophical, therapeutic,
ecological, and multicultural context. This chapter intro-
duces the relationship between science and herbal
medicine, looking at the scientific method and the lan-
guage of research. A discussion of pharmacognosy is fol-
lowed by a review of large-scale screening programs to as-
sess the therapeutic potential of the world’s flora. The

----- PAGE 10 -----
2 @ INTRODUCTION

importance of the conservation of medicinal plants and
the work of organizations such as United Plant Savers is
discussed.

Chapter 2
Explores the diversity of medicinal plants through taxon-
omy and the insights of the Linnaean system of nomen-
clature—actually much more interesting than is often
appreciated!

Chapters 3-8

Plant chemistry is the basis of the therapeutic uses of
herbs. In these chapters, I discuss the nature of primary
and secondary plant metabolites as a foundation for a re-
view of the main categories of constituents considered to
be of therapeutic importance. Each chapter includes an
overview of structure, botanical distribution, and general-
izations about pharmacology, followed by a discussion of
representative molecules described in the herbal litera-
ture. Important groups, such as sesquiterpene lactones,
saponins, and flavonoids, are covered in depth.

Chapter 9

An introduction to the principles of pharmacology rele-
vant to herbal medicine, covering the broad principles of
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Using herbal
examples wherever possible, the chapter explores a range
of pharmacological actions.

Chapter 10

An introduction to the basics of toxicology as they re-
late to issues concerning the safety and toxicity of medic-
inal plants. A discussion of contraindications and
drug—herb interactions is followed by a review of toxic
plant constituents.

Chapter 11

Explores the formulation and preparation of herbal
medicines. The various pharmaceutical forms are dis-
cussed, with examples from official pharmacopoeias as
well as folk medicine.

PART 2
Chapter 12

Presents a model of holistic herbal medicine that is ap-
plied throughout the rest of the book, and describes the
process of developing a protocol that addresses specific
pathologies while supporting the unique individual in-

volved. The criteria for establishing dosage and formula-
tion specifics are given, along with an outline of the struc-
ture of the subsequent treatment chapters.

Chapters 13-24

The therapeutic approach to each body system is ex-
plored in turn, focusing on prevention and wellness but
also addressing a range of conditions that may be ap-
proached herbally. Phytotherapeutic approaches to the
health needs of the young and the elderly are also dis-
cussed. The holistic context is always emphasized. Where
lists or tables are given, the sequence of herbs reflects my
opinion of relative importance.

I must emphasize that the suggested prescriptions are
NOT to be considered “herbal formulae.” The impor-
tance of their inclusion lies in the process of developing a
treatment program that takes advantage of the strengths
of herbalism in addressing individual needs, not simply
pathologies. I have emphasized the application of the
model and identification of any resulting patterns of rela-
tionship between plant and pathology in an attempt to
empower the reader as he or she faces clinical realities.

In practice, however, theory is often secondary to re-
ality. The suggested prescriptions come from personal
observation of many herbally treated cases. Any conclu-
sions or ideas presented come from an interpretation of
such observations and of the healing process in the peo-
ple who have honored me by allowing me to work with
them. In instances where I have no solid foundation in
practice, I have referred to colleagues who do.

Chapter 25

A review of the main herbal actions with an exploration of
the mechanisms underlying their activity (where known).
‘The primary herbal examples are given, along with a dis-
cussion of the other actions of these plants.

Chapter 26

An herbal materia medica, in the traditional sense, cover-
ing 150 of the plants most commonly used in European
and North American phytotherapy. A description of the
structure used throughout these entries is presented at
the beginning of the chapter. The traditional uses of the
plant are covered, along with relevant research data.

Appendices

* Glossary of herbal, medical, and phytochemical terms.

* Meanings of some Latin binomials. Here translations
can be found into English of the meanings of the Latin
or Greek words used in botanical binomials.

----- PAGE 11 -----
* Translation lists of the common names of herbs to their
Latin binomial and, similarly, the Latin binomial to
the common name.

¢ Pharmacy terms. A listing of Latin pharmacy terms and
their shorthand descriptors, which are often encoun-
tered when reading older books on herbal medicine.

* Weight and measure conversion tables.

* Taxonomic classification of medicinal plants.

* Information sources and useful URLs. A brief guide to
finding herbal information using modern biblio-
graphic databases, emphasizing the relevance of
Medline and MeSH terms. (The World Wide Web ad-
dresses given were current as of July 2003.)

* Bibliography. This select bibliography focuses on works

INTRODUCTION @& 3

relevant to the practice of Western herbalism. I have
emphasized the writings of herbal clinicians who not
only present relevant information, but also place it
within the context of real clinical experience.
References are given for phytochemistry, pharmacol-
ogy, and toxicology. The suggested readings at the end
of each chapter are not meant to be a comprehensive
list of resources. Rather, they reflect my opinion of
what is most relevant to the clinical experience.

References
1. Felter and Lloyd, King’s American Dispensatory, vol. 1
and 2, 1892. Reprint. Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

----- PAGE 12 -----


----- PAGE 13 -----
Part One

cM

INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES
AND PRACTICES

----- PAGE 14 -----
HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE

hytotherapy is a thriving medical modality that uses

whole plants to treat whole people, facilitating the

healing process within the framework of holistic
medicine. It is both an art and a science. With its roots in
the past, it is still relevant and meaningful in the present, of-
fering great potential contributions to modern medicine.

Herbalism has a scope of use as wide as any form of
medicine, as herbs may be used for any condition that is
medically treatable. This statement is not meant to imply
that herbs are a panacea for the ills of humanity!
However, the ecological integration of plant activity
with human physiology offers the potential for facilitat-
ing the healing process at any time in any situation.

A new understanding of health is dawning. This new
understanding reflects changes in both attitude and ap-
proach, and is often referred to as holistic medicine. This is
a small part of a profound transformation now taking
place in the way our culture views itself and the issues that
affect it. This has been called a paradigm shift: a change in
the patterns of belief and perception that our culture
holds about itself. Such shifts have happened many times
before. From a historical point of view, the transforma-
tion of society from the medieval worldview to what we
now call the Renaissance is strikingly clear. However, to
the people of the time, the process of change was either
imperceptible or totally confusing, except to those with
the vision of, for example, a Leonardo da Vinci.

The current development of new patterns of expecta-
tion and explanation is, of course, affecting the field of
medicine. Questions are being raised about every aspect
of medicine, from the nature of health and disease to ap-
propriate therapeutic techniques.

How, then, do we define health in the context of this
new paradigm? The World Health Organization (WHO)
provides the clearest definition. Its simplicity only serves
to highlight its profound relevance:

Health is a state of complete physical, emotional, mental
and social well being and not merely the absence of dis-

case or infirmity.

This is a wonderfully precise encapsulation of the
point of view of holistic medicine. The holistic approach
to medicine begins with the assumption that health is a
positive and active state, that it is an inherent characteris-
tic of whole and integrated human beings. From a holis-
tic standpoint, a person is not a patient with a disease syn-
drome, but a whole being. Acknowledgment of this
wholeness means that the therapist must appreciate the
mental, emotional, spiritual, social, and environmental as-
pects of his or her patients’ lives—not just the physical. A
holistic practitioner of any particular therapy has a deep
respect for the individual’s inherent capacity for self-
healing. This facilitates a relationship of active partnership
in the healing process, as opposed to an unequal dynamic
between expert healer and passive recipient.

The concept of relating to the whole person is, of
course, not new. It is an inherent part of the healer’s her-
itage. Beginning with Hippocrates, teachers through the
ages have guided every student doctor, herbalist, and
nurse toward a deeply caring support of the patient.
Today’s emphasis on holistic medicine is an attempt to
correct the tendency in modern medicine to equate
“health care” with the treatment of disease entities.

Holism is not limited to any medical technique or
theory. Rather, it provides a context in which the whole
person is considered—his or her physical as well as men-
tal and emotional health, including quality of life and re-
lationships. A medical doctor may be a holistic practi-
tioner, as can a medical herbalist or an osteopath. A
framework that embraces a whole range of therapeutic
modalities—whether labeled orthodox or alternative—
becomes apparent. These modalities may all be used in a
relevant and coherent way in the treatment of the whole
of a person, not just symptoms or syndromes.

Bearing in mind that this is a time of flux, we can ar-
ticulate some provisional ideas about holistic medicine.
Holistic medicine emphasizes the uniqueness of the indi-
vidual coming to the healer for care. The importance of
tailoring treatment to meet the broad needs of each indi-
vidual is fundamental, as is the need to understand and

----- PAGE 15 -----
treat people in the contexts of their families, communi-
ties, and culture.

Because holistic medicine views health as a positive
state of well-being, not simply the absence of disease, it
emphasizes the promotion of health and the prevention of
disease. It employs therapeutic modalities that mobilize
the individual's innate capacity for self-healing. Holistic
practitioners emphasize the role of the individual in their
own healing process, and much responsibility is handed
back to the patient. While swift and authoritative medical
or surgical intervention may still be necessary on occa-
sion, holism focuses on helping people understand health
in order to help chemselves, stressing education and self-
care over treatment and the resulting dependency.
Holistic practitioners also recognize the social and eco-
nomic conditions that perpetuate il] health, and a commit-
ment to change these factors is as much a part of holistic
medicine as is the emphasis on individual responsibility.

A unique and important characteristic of any holistic
approach is the practice of viewing illness as an opportu-
nity for self-discovery. This has many significant implica-
tions for the caring professions, perhaps best exemplified
by the hospice movement. The holistic approach includes
a concern for the quality of life in each of its stages and a
commitment to improving this quality of life.

The therapeutic importance of the setting within
which health care takes place is also fundamental to holis-
tic practice. Part of the problem with medical care is the
alienation and dehumanization that tends to accompany
institutional and laboratory settings. When the healing
process becomes too far removed from the humanity of
the people involved, nothing is left but chemistry and
surgery. There must be a meeting ot the hearts of doctor
and patient, not just skill and symptoms.

Taken together, all of this clearly shows why holistic
medicine transforms its practitioners as well as its pa-
tients. What, then, is the contribution of medical herbal-
ism within this healing framework and the emerging
holistic paradigm? As a healing technique, medical herbal-
ism is inherently in tune with nature. Because herbalism
works within the context of humanity’s shared ecological
and evolutionary heritage with the plant kingdom, it has
been described as ecological healing.

Another of the enduring strengths of herbalism is
that it has solid foundations in traditional healing, but is
at the same time a part of modern science and medicine.
Paradoxically, herbalism is both a wonderfully simple and
a staggeringly complex therapy. It is as simple as picking
cleavers from the hedgerow or chewing on chickweed
stems, and as complex as the multitude of biochemical in-

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 7

teractions that occur among all of a plant’s chemical con-
stituents and the various aspects of human metabolism
and physiology. The degree and depth of interaction is
breathtaking.

Practitioners of phytotherapy have the unique oppor-
tunity to introduce their patients to their medicine! A
bridge can be built between person and herb, empower-
ing the patient to be present and responsible in the heal-
ing process. A gift to a patient of a packet of herb seeds
encourages a direct experience of the life of the plant.
This experience of herbal vitality can turn an impersonal
medicine into a living entity with which the individual can
develop a deeper rapport. The patient will receive not
only the medicinal benefit of the herb, but also the en-
livening, empowering experience of growing and prepar-
ing his or her own healing medicine.

DEFINING HERBS AND HERBALISM

The word herb implies different things to different peo-
ple, and definitions varying according to area of interest
and personal bias, What, then, is herbalism? Simply
defining herbalism as “the stady of herbs” begs the ques-
tion. This lack of clarity reflects the changing fortunes of
herbalism in English-speaking cultures over the centuries.

At one time, herbalism was an honorable profession
that laid the foundations of modern medicine, botany,
pharmacy, perfumery, and chemistry. As these areas of
study developed and the cultural infatuation with tech-
nology took hold, herbalism was relegated to history
books or the realm of pleasantly quaint country craft.
This left us with a word that has a variety of uses but no
cultural core. As herbalism develops anew, in what has
been called the “herbal renaissance,” it is time for us to
reclaim this little word.

Each usage of the word herb is relevant to a particu-
lar area of study, but this limits the applicability of the
word to herbalism in general. The Complete Oxford
Dictionary contains almost four pages (in very small print)
of words derived from herb and herbalist. The primary
definition of herb reads:

A plant of which the stem does not become woody or
persistent (as in a shrub or tree), but remains more or less
soft and succulent, and dies down to the ground (or en-
tirely) after flowering.

The second definition indicates that the term herb is

... applied to plants of which the leaves or stem and
leaves are used for food or medicine, or in some way for
their scent or flavor.

----- PAGE 16 -----
8 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary provides
the following entry:

herb (urb, hurb) n. 1. A plant whose stem does not pro-
duce woody, persistent tissue and generally dies back at
the end of each growing season. 2. Any of various often
aromatic plants used especially in medicine or as season-
ing. 3. Slang. Marijuana.

Botanists view herbs as nonwoody plants—that is,
plants that do not contain woody lignin fibers. Dorling’s
Medical Dictionary similarly defines an herb as “a plant
whose stems are soft and perishable, and which are sup-
ported chiefly by turgor pressure.” Of course, this then
implies that trees like witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana),
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba), and hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata)
are not herbs. And what about mushrooms?

The science of ecology, or the study of interrelation-
ships among plants, animals, and the environment, uses the
word herb in a very specific way. In descriptions of complex
communities such as forests, herbs are plants that are less
than 12 inches high that complete their life cycles in the
“herb layer.” Again, this suggests that trees and shrubs
like sarsaparilla (Smilax spp.) and cramp bark (Viburnum
opulus) are not herbs.

The culinary arts have explored the use of plants in
many delicious ways, but the understanding of what con-
stitutes an herb is restricted in this field to plants that
smell and taste wonderful. These are plants that are usu-
ally rich in pleasantly aromatic volatile oils, such as basil,
peppermint, and oregano. No chef would think of creat-
ing culinary delights with stinking iris (Iris foetidissima),
skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetida), or goldenseal
(Hydrastis canadensis). This does not mean these plants are
not herbs, but simply that they are not appropriate for
cooking because they do not taste good.

In the various branches of medicine, the word herb
usually implies a plant that is a healing remedy, either in
its crude form or as a source of pharmacologically active
chemicals. This useful but limited interpretation leads
to a situation in which only pharmacologically potent
plants are recognized as herbs and gentle tonic remedies
are ignored.

One general definition often given states that an herb
is “any useful plant.” However, in return, an environmen-
talist might ask, What plant is ot useful? Indeed, it could
be argued that the Pacific poison oak (Toxicodendron di-
versilobum), for example, is exceptionally useful. In
California, it is one of the first plants to establish itself on
disturbed ground after disruption due to human activity.
In a way, we might view this plant as a type of vulnerary

(wound-healing) covering, as it tends to keep humans off
the land on which it grows! Because the wholeness of the
environment is vital for individual human health, all plants
in our environment have a medicinal role to play in plane-
tary terms.

From the perspective of phytotherapy, an herb is any
plant that may be used in the field of health and whole-
ness. Plants may be herbs in the strictly botanical sense,
such as remedies like white horehound (Marrubium vul-
gare). However, they may also be a part of a plant of any
kind, as with the flowers of marigold (Calendula offict-
nalis), the heartwood of the lignum vitae tree (Guaiacum
officinale), the seeds of chasteberry (Vitex agnus-castus), or
the roots of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia).

As a subject, herbalism was once the descriptor for
what is now called botany, again pointing to the impor-
tant past role of herbalism. The Collins Dictionary of the
English Language defines an herbalist as a person who
grows, sells, collects, or specializes in the use of herbs, es-
pecially medicinal herbs. “Herbalist” was once the term
used to describe botanists, although modern botanists
would likely be offended!

Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines
herbalism as the “knowledge of herbs” and an herbalist as
“one who grows, collects, or specializes in the use of
herbs, especially medicinal herbs.” A secondary definition
refers to the herb doctor: “One who practices healing
with herbs. Also called herbalist.”

From a very broad perspective, I define an herb as a
plant in relationship with humanity. Thus, herbalism
becomes the study and exploration of the interactions
between humanity and the plant kimdom (see box on
page 9). Such a point of view highlights the range and
depth of human dependence on plants. This relationship
is at the core of agriculture, forestry, carpentry, construc-
tion, clothing manufacture, medicine, and so on. In fact,
as coal is geologically processed wood, this broad view
includes the petrochemical industry as a subset of mod-
ern herbalism!

THERAPEUTIC ECOLOGY

A common idea among holistically orientated practition-
ers of all modalities is that a human being is a self-healing
individual, and, at best, all a medical practitioner can do is
facilitate this profound inner process. Addressing pathol-
ogy is relatively straightforward, but, as emphasized in the
WHO’ definition, health is much more an active state of
well-being than the absence of disease. Such vitalistic in-
sights do not negate the importance of medicine and the

----- PAGE 17 -----
healing arts, but rather provide a context within which to
view them.

A self-healing individual is enmeshed in a therapeutic
ecology, so called because the various components exist in
relationship to each other and the wider world. The indi-
vidual is the core of this therapeutic ecology, embraced by
four groups or branches of therapies: medicine, body-
work, psychology, and spiritual techniques.

The term medicine is used here to mean anything
that is ingested for healing purposes. Medicinal ap-
proaches include medical herbalism, homeopathy, natur-
opathy, and drug-based orthodox medicine. All have in
common the use of some form of medicine that is taken
into the body to achieve the therapeutic goal. While the
specifics vary, all such medicines can be seen as fruits of
the earth. Whether herbs or synthetic drugs, they share
a common origin in the physical world.

Bodywork includes all approaches that do something
with or to the physical body. It focuses on structural fac-
tors as either causative of or contributing to illness. This
category. includes the manipulative therapies, such as os-
teopathy, chiropractic, and the various forms of massage,
as well as surgery. Personal lifestyle ideally will also con-
tribute exercise, dance, or some other expression of bod-
ily vitality.

Therapies that work with the psyche embrace a whole
array of psychological techniques essential for identify-
ing and treating the emotional and mental factors that
contribute to health and disease. All the branches of psy-
chotherapy are involved here, but especially the more

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE 2. 9

holistically oriented approaches of humanistic and
transpersonal psychology. A conscious and free-flowing
emotional life is fundamental to achieving inner har-
mony. This does not mean that everyone must undergo
in-depth psychotherapy, but that some attention should
be given in a form appropriate for each individual’s emo-
tional needs. Mental factors are critical, as we are what
we think.

Spiritual factors in human healing are increasingly
recognized by Western medicine. Meditative and prayer-
based techniques help the individual align their being
with higher spirit. Others involve interaction with a
practitioner who works with the energy body of the pa-
tient. Some openness to spirituality is vital in healing.
This might take the form of appreciating an uplifting
sunset, feeling touched by poetry or art, believing in an
established religion, or simply experiencing a dogma-
free joy in being alive.

Holism tells us to focus on an individual’s unique sit-
uation, not simply to treat a diagnosed disease syndrome.
In the context of therapeutic ecology, one person diag-
nosed with colitis might recuperate best when treated
with dietary advice, herbs, and osteopathic manipulation,
while another might respond better to drugs, psycho-
analysis, and surgery. Practitioners have firmly held
opinions about the pros and cons of one approach or an-
other, but the patient is always more important than the
doctor’s belief system.

Such therapeutic relationships point to the possibil-
ities for mutual support. Such support may come in the

The Plant Kindom

My use here of kindom, rather than kingdom, is deliberate. On a political level, | see the use of the
word kingdom—as in “plant kingdom’—as yet another example of the dominant culture's linguistic
straitjacket. As | still hold a British passport, | know what a kingdom is like, and | can assure you that
the plants have no imperialist aspirations! If we must use such terms, then why not plant queen-
dom, or, better yet, plant kindom?

| feel strongly that the practice of holistic medicine is a culturally transformative act. One of
the names for an herbalist in ancient Greece was rhizotomoi, because herbalists collected rhizomes.
I've been suggesting to all my herbal friends that we should be called radicles, after the growing tip
of a plant's root. A plant radicle is one of the strongest things in nature. Just think of little shep-
herd’s purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris) cracking through sidewalks!

The depth of this relationship goes far beyond social and economic issues to the actual life-
sustaining mechanisms of planetary ecology. The health and well-being of the biosphere is gov-
erned by the green mantle of the Earth. Humanity’s rapacious exploitation and destruction of the
forests and seas strike at the very core of the planet's life-support mechanisms. It is becoming evi-
dent that in order to survive the multifaceted crisis at hand, humanity must learn some environ-
mental humility, including how to cooperate with nature. Herbalism is a unique and important
expression of this cooperation.

CS SS ee ee eS eae

----- PAGE 18 -----
10 < INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

form of compensation for the weaknesses inherent in a
particular therapy; for example, homeopathic remedies
cannot put a splint on a fractured arm. From a more pos-
itive perspective, cooperation can lead to the develop-
ment of a synergistic support system in which the whole
of any treatment program becomes more than the sum of
its parts. Cooperation among practitioners of different
therapeutic modalities can create a geodesic relationship
of extraordinary potential and strength. In such a sce-
nario, differences lead to a celebration of the richness of
therapeutic diversity and are no longer a cause for acri-
monious debate and conflict.

A key insight for practitioners is to understand the
limits of both their therapies and themselves. We can take
for granted that well-qualified practitioners will be skilled
in their chosen healing art, but true holistic healers will
think beyond their training to focus on the overall needs
of the sick person. This raises some questions about edu-
cational standards that cannot be meaningfully explored
here. However, the point must be made that a medical
doctor who completes a short training in acupuncture
does not suddenly become an acupuncturist, just as a chi-
ropractor who attends a brief workshop on herbs is not
transformed into a medical herbalist overnight.

COMPLEMENTARY, ALTERNATIVE,
OR ORTHODOX?

The terms alternative and orthodox are often applied in at-
tempts to differentiate among various therapeutic modal-
ities. However, given the rapidly changing cultural cli-
mate affecting the healing professions, it is a mistake to
talk of phytotherapy as a form of “alternative” medicine.
Is it an alternative to acupuncture, osteopathy, or psychi-
atry? Of course not. These different therapeutic modali-
ties complement one another, creating a complex of rela-
tionships in which the whole is much more than the sum
of the parts. In light of the unique strengths and weak-
nesses offered by each approach, mutual support and co-
operation is the way toward truly holistic health service.
Within the context of the patient’s needs, all medical
modalities are complementary.

Shared medical endeavors are often frustrated by
communication blocks, some of which stem from differ-
ences in the language used by practitioners of various
modalities. Apparent disparities in vocabulary and jargon
may mask fundamental agreement in ideas and approach.
On the other hand, lack of clarity can obscure important
differences in both guiding principles and techniques. All
too often, dogmatic attachments to words and specific

formulations of belief, opinion, and theory exist. If the
“correct” words or phrases are not used, then the speaker
must be wrong!

Entrenched disagreement between dedicated ortho-
dox and holistic practitioners becomes irrelevant when
seen in the context of therapeutic ecology. Characteristics
of open-mindedness and tolerance should be common to
all involved in health care, whether practitioners, re-
searchers, or patients. Medical modalities with founda-
tions outside of the biomedical model should not be ig-
nored or discounted simply because they exemplify a
different belief system. They should be respected because
they represent an enrichment of possibilities, not scorned
as a challenge to the status quo.

Such mutually supportive endeavors in health care
bear many kinds of fruit, and everyone involved will ben-
efit. Health service administrators will appreciate the eco-
nomic savings gleaned from a reduced dependence upon
costly medical technology. A proportion of procedures
and treatments that currently utilize expensive drugs or
surgery may be replaced by more appropriate techniques
from other healing modalities. For example, run-of-the-
mill gallbladder removal might be avoided through the
skilled use of appropriate herbs.

TYPES OF HERBALISM

Herbalism is common to all peoples and cultures of the
world. The shared experience of alleviating suffering
through the use of plant medicines bridges cultural di-
vides, religious differences, and racial conflicts. A rela-
tionship exists between each culture and its plant envi-
ronment, in which the herbalist plays a pivotal role.
Herbalism is more than knowledge about healing
plants—it encompasses all of the experience and wisdom
born of this relationship between humanity and plants.

As a number of modalities use plants in their healing
work, confusion exists as to their differences. Plant treat-
ments are at the core of many of the diverse medical sys-
tems of the world, including Indian ayurveda, traditional
Chinese medicine, and Islamic unani medicine. Among
Western therapies, homeopathy, aromatherapy, and the
Bach flower remedies also make extensive use of herbs.
Many drugs currently used in orthodox medicine were ei-
ther derived from plant constituents or are actual plant
products.

As affirmed by the WHO, all medicine is modern as
long as it is directed toward the goal of providing health
care. The essential differences among these various sys-
tems of medicine are related to their cultural contexts,

----- PAGE 19 -----
rather than their goals, techniques, or effects. The WHO
recognizes that all traditions have value and that any par-
ticular worldview is limited, as it operates only within the
belief system of one tradition. Thus, the view of reality
from the cloisters of a Western medical school is as lim-
ited and limiting as that from a shaman’s hut in West
Africa. All perspectives have value in any worldwide ap-
proach to enhancing health for all.

HERBALISM AND HOMEOPATHY

Homeopathy is an important system of medicine that uti-
lizes plants in the treatment of disease, though in a way
fundamentally different from that of medical herbalism.
There is a common misconception that these two healing
modalities are the same, because they both employ plants.
Indeed, herbs are used in both approaches, but in radi-
cally divergent ways that reflect differences in philosophy
and therapeutic technique. A holistic perspective can help
establish a complementary relationship between the two,
but only when the strengths and weaknesses of each are
acknowledged and understood. There is not sufficient
space here to give homeopathy the attention it deserves.
Instead, we will simply compare the use of herbs in these
two different approaches.

As with other approaches to holistic medicine, home-
opathy looks at the patient's total picture, body and mind,
within the socia: setting of his or her life. The system
originated in Germany around 1800 with the work of
Samuel Hahnemann. He treated disease with very low
doses of drugs that at higher doses produce symptoms
similar to those of the disease itself. This is the basis of
the homeopathic principle that “like treats like.”

About 60% of homeopathic remedies are botanical in
nature; the rest are minerals, animal products, or nosodes
(highly diluted extracts of diseased tissue). The medicines
are administered in extremely diluted form and are
thought to work by influencing the vital force within the
human body. The more the dose of the remedy is re-
duced, the more its potency is enhanced. This is why the
homeopathic process of dilution is known as potentiation.
The dilation of 1 part of the active remedy in 10 parts of
the solvent (usually water) is known as a potency of 1X. A
1 in 100 dilution is 2X, and so on, up toa dilution of 200X.
A homeopathic mother tincture is similar to an ordinary
herbal tincture.

A problem that impedes mutual understanding be-
tween the two therapies is the application of the “like
treats like” concept. Many of the herbs in the homeo-
pathic materia medica are prescribed in dilution to treat

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE -@ 11

symptom pictures that would supposedly be caused by
a full dose of the herb. This is easy to understand with
very strong or poisonous herbs, such as belladonna and
gelsemium.

However, the medical herbalist has more trouble
with the homeopath’s ideas about many of the remedies
shared by both systems. An example is the homeopathic
remedy pulsatilla, known as pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vul-
garis) to the herbalist. A comparison of the physical symp-
tom picture given for the homeopathic remedy is very
similar to the herbal indications for the plant. The fact
that the herb is used to treat similar conditions in both
approaches would appear to contradict the core idea be-
hind homeopathy.

The value of homeopathy in health care is not in
question here, but its use of plants is in no way “herbal.”
A selection of one or the other therapeutic modality
should be based upon attraction to the philosophical con-
text, recognizing that there is little or no real sharing of
the principles of botanical medicine.

An interesting piece of lexicography becomes rele-
vant here. The word allopathic is increasingly applied to
orthodox medicine, even though the word is not found in
the textbooks used in medical schools. In fact, it is a word
coined by Hahnemann, partially to describe herbalism!
Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines homeopathy
and allopathy thus:

homeopathy \ho-me-o-p'a-thy\, n. [Gr. likeness of con-
dition or feeling; like (fr. same; cf. Same) + to suffer: cf. F.
hom[‘elopathie.] The art of curing, founded on resem-
blances; the theory and its practice that disease is cured
(tuto, cito, et jucunde) by remedies which produce on a
healthy person effects similar to the symptoms of the
complaint under which the patient suffers, the remedies
being usually administered in minute doses. This system
was founded by Dr. Samuel Hahnemann, and is opposed
to allopathy, or heteropathy.

allopathy \al-lo-pa-thy\, n. [Gr. other + suffering, to suf-
fer: cf. G. allopathie, F. allopathie. See Pathos.] That sys-
tem of medical practice which aims to combat disease by
the use of remedies which produce effects different from
those produced by the special disease treated; a term in-
vented by Dr. Samuel Hahnemann to designate the ordi-
nary practice, as opposed to homeopathy.

A brief note on the history of this fascinating profes-
sion: Herbalism has thrived in all cultures of the world
and in all historical periods, even, until the very recent
past, in the industrialized West. The rich and colorful

----- PAGE 20 -----
12. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

history of herbalism is the history of humanity itself. As a
constant and vital thread in human life, it is alive and well.
As a branch of medicine, it has occasionally found itself
on the wrong side of the establishment, but this ebb and
flow of acceptance is just an artifact of changing fashions
and opinions. No attempt will be made to explore the fas-
cinating history of herbalism here, as others have done it
extremely well. The interested reader should consult the
excellent Green Pharmacy, by Barbara Griggs, the best and
most comprehensive history of Western herbalism yet
written.

QUESTIONING AUTHORITY
IN HERBALISM

Herbalism is an aspect of human culture that takes many
forms. While this rich diversity is a gift deserving of cel-
ebration, it can also be a cause of much misunderstanding.
There appears to be an inherent antagonism between
those who see herbalism as an expression of a green flow-
ering in human consciousness and those who view it as a
vehicle for the pharmacology of secondary plant prod-
ucts. Differing worldviews obviously lead to divergent
goals, assumptions, and visions, but, more important, un-
less there is a recognition and acknowledgment of the dif-
ferences among frames of reference, meaningful dialogue
becomes problematic.

For example, consider table 1.1, taken from the
November 15, 1998, edition of the American Medical
Association (AMA) journal Family Practice News, which is
sent regularly to general practitioners. In the journal’s
Clinical Rounds section, this table was presented under
the headline “Herbal Products Being Evaluated Under an
IND Investigation.” (IND stands for Investigational New
Drug Application, a request for authorization from the
Food and Drug Administration to administer an investi-
gational drug or biological product to humans.)

If the AMA considers sharks (an animal), zinc (a
metal), and arginine (an amino acid) to be herbs, there is
a profound educational discrepancy at work here.

It is time for herbalists to lose what might be de-
scribed as our ghetto mentality, a sense of inferiority de-
veloped through years of cultural disdain for and active
suppression of our therapeutic modality. However, this
will also entail abandoning our negative, knee-jerk reac-
tion to the “system,” which often takes the reprehensible
form of an arrogant condemnation of medical doctors and
a delusion of standing on higher moral ground. On the
other hand, those working within the established scien-
tific, medical, and legislative communities must acknowl-

Table 1.1. Herbal Products Being Evaluated Under an
IND Application [November 1998]

HERB INDICATIONS
Antineoplastons Cancer
Arginine Cancer

Chinese herbal HIV-associated chronic synovitis
Plantar warts

Postmenopausal hot flashes
Ginkgo biloba Cognitive impairment
Green tea extract Cancer
Melatonin Chronobiology, reproduction
Ozone therapy Transfusion-related diseases

Saw palmetto Benign prostatic hypertrophy

Shark cartilage Cancer

St. John’s wort Depression

Vitamin D Cancer

Zinc Head and neck cancer

edge the need to apply scientific objectivity in assessing
the existing evidence about herbs. If phytotherapy is illu-
minated with the light of critical evaluation, much of
value will be found.

WHERE IS THE EVIDENCE?

Today, practitioners and consumers alike are being bom-
barded by claims and counterclaims, information and
misinformation about herbs. The confusion is com-
pounded by different, often hidden, agendas. Explanations
for the actions of herbs range from mechanistic science to
channeled guidance, and creative advertising copy further
obscures the facts behind the rhetoric. Where is the road
map when we need it?

The only relevant question is whether any new ther-
apy actually works. What outcome will the patient ob-
serve? Is there evidence of any kind that real people will
experience real improvement? My intention here is not to
imply that herbs don’t work or to deny traditional experi-
ence. Rather, we must attempt to assess the validity of
claims, especially new claims emanating from marketers,
in order to facilitate the healing work that is central to
herbalism. It is time to apply some critical herbal think-

----- PAGE 21 -----
ing to the process of questioning authority—bearing in
mind that questioning is not the same thing as rejecting.

Among those who question almost anything they
hear from medical doctors, the pharmaceutical industry,
or the FDA, some appear willing to unquestioningly em-
brace any new idea or product that magazines advertise.
The existence of this kind of gullibility is lamentable.
Critical thinking and some degree of discrimination are
needed to keep herbalism from drowning in the sea of
misrepresentation, spurious theorizing, and fraudulent
claims that characterize today’s herbal marketplace.
Natural medicine is not simply anything that does not re-

quire a prescription.

Particularly worrisome is the tendency among some
practitioners to embrace marketing trends and fashion-
able theories by rushing to try new protocols. I suggest
this is tantamount to experimenting with patients by
using them to perform field trials of new, unproven, and
nontraditional methods.

Let me make clear that in the material that follows,
I am not attempting to make judgments about right or
wrong or to promote my personal belief system. I am
simply encouraging phytotherapists to inquire about
the evidence behind new therapies and protocols, so
that we can make informed decisions based on some-
thing more substantial than marketing claims. One
must always bear in mind the basic principles of phar-
macology when considering research relevant to plants.
The complex interactions among the numerous con-

stituents in a medicinal herb must be taken seriously on
pharmacokinetic grounds.

Australian phytotherapist Kerry Bone, FNIMH, has
suggested some important guidelines.

Phytotherapists must avoid pseudoscience. If we intend to
incorporate scientific knowledge into our therapies, let it
be good science. Be on your guard for:

* Hypotheses presented as undisputed facts

* Hypotheses which can neither be proved nor dis-
proved, that is, circular arguments

* Conclusions based on insufficient evidence

* Extrapolating from a narrow context of results, e.g.,
from in vitro data to the clinic, without consideration
of factors such as dose, metabolism, absorption and
distribution

* Claiming scientific persecution (this does occur, of
course, but is usually an excuse)

* Developing theories which bear no relationship to
experimental findings!

Herps, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 13

Proanthocyanidins and Pycnogenol
Pycnogenol is a legal trademark that refers to a patented
process for extracting flavonoids and other substances
from pine bark. The product consists of 50% to 65%
proanthocyanidins. Although the proanthocyanidins pre-
sent in Pycnogenol likely have health benefits, not much
published research exists to support their use in specific
conditions. The evidence cited in the marketing of
Pycnogenol is largely extrapolated from more general re-
search on flavonoids and proanthocyanidins.

Is this appropriate? One can expect a wide range of
biological effects from the more than 4,000 individual
flavonoids and 250 proanthocyanidins that have been
identified. The plethora of literature on Pycnogenol cites
a number of medical studies that used this specific source
of proanthocyanidins. However, most of the claims made
for the product itself are extrapolations from research on
the general benefits of proanthocyanidins and flavonoids.
To some extent, the rationale for such extrapolation is
sound, as flavonoids do function as antioxidants.
However, individual flavonoids often display striking dif-
ferences in activity.

For example, pine bark has been called a “super an-
tioxidant” 50 times more powerful than vitamin E, The
basis for this claim is a study that compared the antioxi-
dant properties of various proanthocyanidins. However,
these did not come from pine bark, but from green tea
leaves and persimmons.’ While the marketers claim that
pine bark contains a unique mix of proanthocyanidins, so
do green tea and persimmons. Of the six proanthocyani-
dins analyzed in the study, only one was actually 50 times
more effective than vitamin E, and only in quenching one
type of free radical. Furthermore, proanthocyanidins are
water-soluble and vitamin E is oil-soluble, which invali-
dates the comparison from another angle. The body
needs both water- and fat-soluble antioxidants for effective
antioxidant protection. Also, a diverse intake of antioxi-
dants is far better than intake of only one or two isolated
antioxidants.

An overemphasis on proanthocyanidins increases the
risk that other flavonoids and polyphenols will be under-
emphasized. As discussed in chapters 7 and 9, the
isoflavones genistein and daidzein appear to reduce the
risk of prostate and breast cancers. Ellag:c acid, related
more closely to gallates than to proanthocyanidins, is also
a potent antioxidant and cancer inhibitor. The citrus
flavonoids, hesperidin, quercetin, rutin, and tangeretin,
are abundant and effective. Consider some recent re-
search findings:

----- PAGE 22 -----
14 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

© Hesperidin raises blood levels of high-density lipo-
protein (HDL) and lowers levels of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) and triglycerides. It also possesses
significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties.*

© Quercetin reduces inflammation associated with aller-
gies, can inhibit the growth of head and neck cancers,
and inhibits the activity of reverse transcriptase.*©”

* Tangeretin induces apoptosis (programmed cell death)
in leukemia cells, but does not harm normal cells.®

In one Pycnogenol study, described as an investiga-
tion of the effects of the product on human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV), mice were infected with a retro-
virus known to cause leukemia.’ Pycnogenol improved
immune function in mice with depressed immune func-
tion. Pycnogenol also increased the activity of natural
killer cells, which attack both cancer cells and virus-
infected cells.

However, in this study, the researchers did not use
HIV, but a mouse retrovirus identified as LP-BMS. A study
involving mice and a leukemia virus cannot be accepted as
a model for an HIV study. The commonly accepted ani-
mal subject for HIV experiments is the monkey, and the
commonly accepted viral agent is simian immunodefi-
ciency virus. The antioxidant activity of Pycnogenol and
other types of proanthocyanidins may well have some
value in the treatment of AIDS. However, the insights
garnered from research to date are not specific to
Pycnogenol, but rather demonstrate that free radicals fuel
replication of HIV and antioxidants slow it.!°

Horsetail and Silica

Horsetail (Equisetum arvense) has been used to maintain
the health and vitality of skin, nails, and hair for many
generations in a number of world herbal traditions. The
explanation often given for the effectiveness of this appli-
cation is that the plant contains silica.

This raises a number of questions that I have seen ad-
dressed in very little objective material. There are two
primary issues: bioavailabilty of silica and evidence for a
role played by silicon in the body, I emphasize evidence
here, rather than opinion or theory. I have found numer-
ous statements about a role in joint capsule physiology,
but no references directing me to research to back up this
claim. A review of the MedLine database and the standard
reference books on human physiology produced no liter-
ature identifying a role for silicon in human metabolism.

Even if there is a role for silicon, where is the evi-
dence that horsetail is a source? Silica itself is silicon diox-
ide, one form of which is quartz. Quartz, for all intents

and purposes, is insoluble in water or alcohol—after all, if
it were soluble in water, there would be no sand on the
beaches. Thus, it is appropriate to ask whether there is
any silica in horsetail tea or extract. A further twist in the
convolution of confusion is the way in which horsetail
formulations are sometimes sold as “vegetable silica,” im-
plying that the need for silica is an established fact and
that the traditional use of horsetail is as a source of silica.
Again [ ask, Where is the evidence?

This all becomes rather surreal with the invocation of
a singular process termed “biotransmutation,” whereby
the silicon is supposedly transmuted into calcium in the
body. We are moving into the realm of alchemy here, but
I would have no problem with this if some evidence ex-
isted to support this claim. It strikes me as rather conve-
nient that silicon is the only substance for which I have
ever seen this aspect of human physiology invoked. If our
bodies can biotransform one element into another, why
limit the application of this process to silicon? Why, then,
are there are deficiency problems at all?

Let me reiterate here that I am questioning not the
efficacy of the herb but the explanation of mechanism
given to explain its actions. I have come across a purely
circular argument that comes to the conclusion that be-
cause horsetail works, it must be because it contains silica.

This is based on a simple lack of knowledge of phyto-
chemistry, as a much simpler hypothesis would invoke
flavonoid effects. Such attachment to hypotheses leads to
a dogmatic adherence to belief systems that is detrimen-
tal for all involved.

Why get enmeshed in bizarre intellectual convolu-
tions to attempt justifications for an outdated hypothesis?
It might be worth invoking Occam’s razor here. The

axiom states that

. entities should not be multiplied needlessly, giving
precedence to simplicity, so that of two competing theo-
ries, the simplest explanation is to be preferred.

This is interpreted to mean that the simplest of two
or more theories is preferable, and that any explanation
should first be attempted in terms of what is already
known. In other words, after all possibilities have been
considered, in all likelihood the correct answer to a prob-
\em is the simplest explanation.

Essiac, Safety, and Oxalic Acid

An herbal combination called Essiac has become well
known in the United States. It has gained a reputation as
a risk-free herbal approach to the treatment of cancer and
other chronic conditions. My intention here is not to dis-

----- PAGE 23 -----
parage its potential contribution to the treatment of can-
cer, but to highlight some of the challenges faced in mod-
ern herbal therapeutics by examining a largely overlooked
safety consideration.

There is an important contraindication to the use of
Essiac that is rarely mentioned, even by well-trained
herbalists who should be able to see it. Essiac consists of
a combination of four herbs, burdock root (Arctium
lappa), slippery elm bark (Usmus rubra), sheep sorrel
(Rumex acetosella), and tarkey rhubarb (Rheuz palmatum).
One of these components, sheep sorrel, is a rich source of
oxalic acid. Intake of oxalic acid or its salts increases the
risk of developing kidney stones. In all of the propa-
ganda surrounding Essiac, ] have seen no mention of
this problem.

HERBS AND PHYTOTHERAPY

A distinction must be made between two separate but
overlapping issues: that herbs are relevant medicinal sub-
stances and that phytotherapy is a valid therapeutic
modality whose practitioners have unique skills and clin-
ical experience. The clinical issues faced by a practitioner
are not the same as the quality-control problems that con-
front product manufacturers and marketers. Different
concerns pertinent to each of these two issues will lead to
different but equally relevant insights.

The quality of attention now being given to medici-
nal plants by science and government must be expanded
to include an assessment of the insights and protocols of
the phytotherapist. A personal example may help clarify
this point. At the height of the media frenzy over the “dis-
covery” that St. John’s wort can help alleviate mild de-
pression, I was asked to present a paper on the topic of
“Herbal Alternatives to Prozac.” This quest to identify an
herbal alternative to Prozac is a perfect example of how
the real gifts of herbalism can be deflected by underlying
assumptions. By phrasing the topic in this way, we are
forced to responé to the issue in terms of the efficacy and
pharmacological mechanism of Prozac, rather than by
highlighting the potential contribution of phytotherapy
to the treatment of depression.

It would, in fact, be more appropriate to consider
holistic alternatives to the current vogue for psychophar-
maceutical solutions. The fact that Prozac (fluoxetine) is
an effective serotonin reuptake inhibitor has led to its use
as a pharmacological antidepressant, but its efficacy begs
the fundamental question about the cause of depression.

No herbal serotonin reuptake inhibitors of any con-
sequence have been identified, leading me to conclude

Herss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE .@ 15

that there are no herbal alternatives to Prozac. However,
this does not mean there are no herba{ approaches to
treating depression. My point here is that a competent
herbal practitioner, trained to consider approaches to
maintaining wellness in addition to treating specific
pathologies, will be able to help an individual with de-
pression in a variety of ways. Articulating herbal ap-
proaches to depression in terms of alternatives to specific
drugs allows the drug companies to set the herbal agenda.

HERBAL IMPERIALISM

Attempts to bridge and integrate the various herbal tradi-
tions of the world can be problematic, and always require
a high level of critical thinking. Here are a couple of ex-
amples of what might be termed intellectual imperialism,
an assumption in the Western mind-set that we can spon-
taneously understand the concepts and visions of another
culture.

There is a wealth of knowledge and experience in the
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) community, but not
all herbalists who use these insights have the necessary
training in the principles of TCM. For example, consider
the widely held idea in North American herbalism that,
according to TCM, dang gui (Angelica sinensis) is a
woman’s herb and ginseng (Panax ginseng) is a man’s herb.
This is nonsense! The assumption is a gross simplification
of the TCM concept that dang gui is one of the most
yielding yin tonics and ginseng is the strongest yang
tonic. Yin and yang do not translate simply as “woman
and man.”

In a similar vein, Western herbalists may try to inter-
pret the TCM concept of organs in terms of their under-
standing of anatomical organs, or according to the
Western biomedical model. However, the TCM concept
of organs is energetic and an expression of the TCM
five-element theory. To take a diagnosis of “insufficient
liver chi” to mean that dandelion root (Taraxacum offici-
nale) and milk thistle (Silybum marianum) are indicated
misses the point entirely.

HERBAL MARKETPLACE VERSUS
HERBAL MEDICINE

Another discomforting modern dynamic is that the herbal
tradition suddenly finds itself in an environment appar-
ently created and maintained for the benefit of the “mar-
ketplace.” The importance of critical thinking in the eval-
uation of information about herbs—particularly
information generated by marketers—has never been

----- PAGE 24 -----
16 <+ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

greater. How else can practitioners and consumers make
decisions about protocol development or even which
products to buy?

I would argue that market forces and healing are mu-
tually exclusive. The rapidly growing industry addressing
the material needs of complementary medicine is a man-
ifestation of market forces—it is not a healing modality or
a “holistic” anything. It is merely an expression of the
same rapacious economic forces that treat nature as a re-
source to control and profit from, and will only serve to
obliterate cultural, biological, and herbal diversity.

Embracing economics as the driving force in herbal-
ism leads directly to standardization, not only in product
development, but also in the development of treatment
protocols. Regulators and manufacturers who want to
centralize control and standardize methods ignore indi-
vidual uniqueness, except as a complicating factor.
Practitioner knowledge and wisdom is rarely acknowl-
edged, so regulations, product lines, and research are
predicated on abstract theories and piecemeal informa-
tion. Thus, reductionist, product-based medicine relies
on controlling the patient’s healing process. Surely holis-
tic medicine would reject such an approach as a matter of
principle.

SAFETY, RISK, AND TOXICITY.

Safety and all it entails are major concerns for anyone in-
volved in health care. Any meaningful discussion of safety,
risk, and toxicity must take into account pharmacology,
epidemiology, and statistics, as well as perceptual issues.
Chapter 10 addresses these issues in terms of the herbs
themselves, but here we will focus on the need for critical
thinking in assessing the safety of herbs.

Statements made by “experts” are often unquestion-
ingly accepted as insightful, considered opinion. But who
are the experts in these situations? As an example, con-
sider hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata), an invaluable herb
discussed in chapter 14 of this book. The German
Commission E Monograph cites no warnings, contraindi-
cations, side effects, or drug interactions for hawthorn.!!
Varro ‘Tyler, Ph.D., Professor Emeritus of Pharmacog-
nosy at Purdue University, provides an excellent review of
the published studies on hawthorn in his best-selling
book, The Honest Herbal. However, at the end of his re-
view, he comes to a somewhat tangential conclusion.

Its toxicity is low as well, becoming evident only in large
doses. Until additional research has been carried out,
prospective users of hawthorn for heart and circulation

problems should consider all the consequences. Users of
self-selected medicines almost always do so as a result of
self-diagnosis. This is a very dangerous practice when
such vital systems of the human body as the heart and
blood vessels are involved. For this reason, self-treatment
with hawthorn is neither advocated nor condoned."

Surely this conclusion concerns self-medication, not
any risk posed by hawthorn.

As another example, Dr. Ryan Huxtable, an expert on
the pharmacology of plant toxins, makes a very illuminat-
ing statement in a paper on neurotoxins in herbs.

The modern flora has evolved in the face of continual as-
sault from mammals, which are ultimately dependent on
the plant kingdom."

This comment highlights one of the fundamental
differences among the conceptual frameworks in which
these discussions take place. Some see the natural world
as a Darwinian battleground where natural selection en-
forces the concept of survival of the fittest. This, in turn,
leads to an emphasis on defense as the driving force be-
hind the diversity of secondary metabolites, as in “.
plants and those using them coexist in an uneasy balance
of chemical power.” '* This is the antithesis of the vital-
ist worldview held by most herbalists and naturopaths,
who would rather see the relationship between “plants
and those using them” characterized as coevolutionary
mutualism.

THE HEALING POWER OF NATURE

In light of the issues just discussed, let us look at some of
the principles of naturopathic medicine. The healing
power of nature is the inherent self-organizing and healing
process, present in all living systems, that establishes,
maintains, and restores health. The naturopathic physi-
cian’s role is to facilitate and augment this process by
identifying and removing obstacles to health and recovery
and by supporting the creation of a healthy internal and
external environment.

Identify and Treat the Causes

Illness does not occur without cause.

Underlying causes of illness and disease must be identi-
fied and removed before complete recovery can occur.
Symptoms may be caused by disease, but can also serve as
expressions of the body’s attempt to defend itself, to adapt
and recover, or to heal itself. The naturopathic physician

----- PAGE 25 -----
seeks to treat the causes of disease, rather than merely to
eliminate or suppress symptoms.

Treat the Whole Person

Health and disease result from a complex of physical,
mental, emotional, genetic, environmental, social, and

other factors.

Naturopathic medicine recognizes that the harmonious
functioning of all aspects of the individual is essential to
health.

The multifactorial nature of health and disease requires a
personalized and comprehensive approach to diagnosis
and treatment.

Such principles must be applied in practice and used
as a touchstone for interpreting the plethora of data and
theories we wade through. As powerful and enticing as
pharmacological reductionism is, it might also be seen as
“immunosuppressive” to the vitalist perspective!

A PLEA FOR HERBAL TRADITIONS

The perspectives of holism and wellness now entering the
practice of medicine must be taken seriously, not simply
used as marketing ploys. One of the implications of this
idea is that the holistic treatment of illness must encom-
pass a positive vision of wellness, at the same time ac-
knowledging that wellness is a process, not an endpoint.
A constellation of components contribute to wellness:

Social Physiological/metabolic
Work Genetic

Cultural Intellectual
Environmental Emotional

Behavioral Spiritual

Nutritional

As discussed earlier, each of these components has an
impact on the whole individual, and holistic medicine en-
deavors to address each within a therapeutic ecology. This
leads to some immediate implications for the herbalist.
Holism is a context, not a belief system or a specific phys-
ical form, and as such, herbal products are not and cannot
be holistic in their own right.

The mere use of herbal medicines does not make a
treatment holistic. In fact, using an herbal tincture as a
natural alternative to a prescription medication relegates
the herb to the status of an organic drug delivery system!
What makes herbs part of holistic treatment is the con-
text within which the herbs are prescribed and used.

HeErss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 17

There is at least one clear conclusion that can be
drawn from the concept that holistic medicine treats the
whole person and not the disease. The use of commercial
formulas cannot be holistic, as these formulations do not
recognize the uniqueness of the individuals who will be
taking them. A formula may well be effective in address-
ing symptoms or even facilitating a cure, but that is not
the issue. This point is further reinforced by the belief
that holistic medicine doesn’t merely treat symptoms, but
addresses the underlying cause of disease. However, when
herbs are used as an adjunct to another therapeutic
modality, formulas may be appropriately used as support-
ive agents to treatment protocols that have been devel-
oped from a holistic perspective.

This all leads me to some specific conclusions about
the challenging interface that exists between traditional
herbalism and the plethora of research findings now avail-
able. There is inherent value in traditional herbalism, and
we must not abandon traditional protocols and remedies
because of a lack of modern research. However, as
herbalists, we must familiarize ourselves with the lan-
guage and processes of research so that we can establish
a meaningfully dialogue with the scientific community.
This dialogue must take the form of a two-way exchange,
encompassing not only what we have to share, but also
what we need to learn.

SCIENCE AND PHYTOTHERAPY

Any conceptual framework for phytotherapy must be
broad enough to embrace the whole spectrum of human
knowledge. This is simply an acknowledgment of the fact
that any holistic approach to human health care must be
as expansive as humanity. itself. However, for a moment,
let us limit our perspective to examine some of the ways
in which science can add to the practitioner’s wnderstand-
ing of how herbs work.

Almost all branches of the biological sciences are rel-
evant to the phytotherapist, as is much of chemistry, and
the application of science to herbs is as relevant as it is to
any other Western healing modality.

The Scientific Method

Science is any system of knowledge concerned with the
physical world and its phenomena that entails unbiased ob-
servation and systematic experimentation. I general, a sci-
ence involves a pursuit of knowledge about general truths or
the operation of fundamental laws. The scientific method,
then, is part of the endeavor to construct an accurate,
reliable, consistent, and nonarbitrary representation of

----- PAGE 26 -----
18 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the world. It attempts to minimize the influence of the
bias or prejudice of the experimenter when a hypothesis
or theory is tested.

Hypotheses and Theories

In science, the words hypothesis and theory relate to the
stage of acceptance or knowledge about physical phe-
nomena. A hypothesis is an idea to work from. It forms
the basis of a preliminary explanation or line of reasoning,
and is a limited statement about cause and effect in spe-
cific situations. The word theory refers to an idea that is
widely accepted as a correct explanation. When a hypoth-
esis explains many observations and leads to predictions
that are continually supported by experiments, it may
then be called a scientific theory.

A scientific theory represents a hypothesis (or a
group of related hypotheses) that has been confirmed
through repeated experiments. The steps of the scientific
method may be described as follows.

Observation

Defining the problem or question

Formulating a hypothesis

Testing the hypothesis with a controlled experiment
Observing and recording results

SS Se

Forming conclusions by confirming or modifying
the hypothesis
7, Reporting results

Experimental tests may lead either to the confirma-
tion or the ruling out of the hypothesis. The scientific
method requires that a hypothesis be ruled out or modi-
fied if its predictions are clearly and repeatedly incompat-
ible with the results of experimental tests. Because exper-
imentation is a necessary part of the scientific method, a
theory must be testable, If a theory cannot be tested be-
cause, for example, it has no observable ramifications, it
does not qualify as a scientific theory.

The Language of Research

In the language of research, otherwise familiar words
may take on entirely different and very specific mean-
ings. For example, the use of the words validity and reli-
ability in science can cause confusion if misunderstood.
In everyday language, validity implies legitimacy and re-
liability suggests stability and dependability. In the lan-
guage of research, these terms have a precise meaning. A
study has validity if it measures what it claims to mea-
sure. The reliability of a study is a reflection of the like-
lihood that subsequent experiments will yield the same
results.

A research sample is a small group of people (or ani-
mals, or objects) who are the subject of observation dur-
ing the process of research. Thus, each individual in the
study is called a research subject. The term sample means
exactly what it seems to mean: It is a group taken as a
sample of some larger group. This larger group is called
the research population. Researchers cannot study whole
populations, only samples. To this end, they target a pop-
ulation to study, but select a smaller sample from this tar-
get population to serve as the actual research subjects.

Sampling is the process of selecting a research sam-
ple. The results of a study cannot be generalized beyond
the boundaries of the sample. If women are studied, the
results of the research apply only to women. If men 40 to
60 years of age are studied, the results apply only to men
40 to 60 years of age. For this reason, it is important to
know the makeup of research samples in order to inter-
pret claims based on studies.

In scientific research, a variable is a condition in the
experiment that changes, or varies, while other conditions
remain constant. A dependent variable is usually the focus
in a research study that investigates how variables change
in response to one other.

The herbalist may come across a number of different
types of research studies,

Controlled study. The responses of one group (the exper-
imental group) are compared with a second, untreated
group (the control group).

Placebo-controlled study. Here, an experimental treat-
ment is compared with a placebo, an inert substance
that appears to be identical to the treatment. This rep-
resents an attempt to distinguish between the ‘piacebo
effect—the tendency of people to experience symp-
tomatic improvement even when nothing but a sugar
pill is taken—and the actual effects of treatment. If a
treatment works, the effects it produces should be
more pronounced than those seen in subjects receiving
a placebo.

Blinded studies. If subjects are “blind” to the nature of a
study and do not know whether or not they are receiv-
ing the active medication, the outcome is less likely to
be influenced by their expectations. This is a way to
work around research bias.

Double-blind studies. This means that neither patients
nor researchers know which treatment patients are re-
ceiving. This type of study also helps researchers avoid
special treatment of subjects based on whether they are
receiving the active or the placebo substance, as the re-
searchers do not know which subjects are which, Thus,

----- PAGE 27 -----
there is less chance that the results of these studies will
be influenced in an undesirable manner.

Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-
center trial. This is a clinical study that takes into ac-
count a number of potential bias factors. Randomized
means that the patients are randomly assigned to receive
either the study drug or a placebo. Because the study is
double blind, neither subjects nor researchers know who
is receiving what treatment. Multicenter means the study
was conducted at several different research centers.

PUBLISHED PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC
RESEARCH

The usual avenue for communicating experimental re-
sults is through publication in a peer-reviewed journal.
Peer-reviewed journals publish studies only after a thor-
ough review of those studies by a group of the re-
searcher’s peers, fellow researchers who are able to eval-
uate the merits of the research. However, publication
does not guarantee the quality of a study, and a published
study is not necessarily more reliable or valid than an un-
published one.

Herss, HOuIsM, AND SCIENCE @ 19

A number of different kinds of articles may be found
in peer-reviewed journals. Journal articles are based on a
single investigation and published as a contribution to the
progress of science. Review articles and meta-analyses are
based upon analysis of existing literature on a given topic
and evaluate the research performed to date.

PHARMACOGNOSY AND WAYS TO
ASSESS HERB QUALITY

A number of options are available for the assessment of
herb quality. These range from the plethora of scientific
techniques used in pharmacognosy to the traditional skills
employed by the herbalist.

The term pharmacognosy is derived from two Greek
words, pharmakon (drug) and gnosis (knowledge). The
scope of this field encompasses the study of the physical,
chemical, biochemical, and biological properties of drugs,
drug substances, and potential drug substances of natural
origin, as well as the search for new drugs from natural
sources. At one time, it was necessary for sharmacists to
have extensive knowledge in this area, because many
medicinal products were obtained from plants. However,

abstracts select highlights only.

existing literature on the topic.

used to derive results.

the data.

the paper.

articles is invaluable.

Basic Structure of a Peer-Reviewed Journal Article

Summary or abstract: This includes a concise statement of the goal or hypothesis of the
study, explains how the endeavor was undertaken, highlights results of the study, and pro-
vides a concluding thought that puts it all into perspective. Because they must be concise,

Introduction: The introduction provides background information on the topic as well as the
rationale for undertaking the study. The introduction may also offer an extended review of

Methodology: This section details study design and the data-collection techniques that the
researchers employed, and also describes in detail the analytical and evaluative procedures

Results: This is where findings are presented, along with some analysis and interpretation of

Discussion, comments, or conclusion: Here, the study authors provide a further analysis of
the results, and may compare and contrast their results with the conclusions of other stud-
ies in order to place their results in perspective. This is usually the most speculative part of

References: The list of references gives an indication of how far the authors went in review-
ing published research. An extensive, well-done bibliography that provides access to other

----- PAGE 28 -----
20 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

as the culturally dominant medical modality in the United
States moved away from natural products, most pharmacy
schools dropped their courses in pharmacognosy.

Methods Currently Utilized to Evaluate
Herbs and Extracts

A number of approaches to the evaluation of herb quality
are available, ranging from the use of human senses to the
application of advanced technology.

Organoleptic

Organoleptic analysis represents the simplest and the
most human form of evaluation. Organoleptic means “im-
pression of the organs.” Organoleptic analysis of plant
material involves the use of the senses, including sight,
smell, taste, touch, and occasionally even hearing, to
identify the plant and evaluate its quality. The appearance
of a plant or extract can be so specific that it practically
identifies itself, but identification may be difficult in other
cases—for example, if the herb is in powdered form. If vi-
sual analysis is not enough, perhaps the plant or extract
has a characteristic odor or taste that can assist in identi-
fication or help the herbalist assess freshness or quality.

Microscopic

Microscopic evaluation is valuable in the initial identifica-
tion of herbs. It is also an indispensable technique for
identifying the plant by characteristic tissue features, rec-
ognizing small fragments of crude or powdered herbs, or
detecting adulterants or contaminants, such as insects, an-
imal feces, mold, and fungi. Every plant possesses a char-
acteristic tissue structure, which can be demonstrated
through the study of tissue arrangement, cell walls, and
configuration when samples are properly mounted in
stains, reagents, and media.

Physical

In crude plant evaluation, physical methods are often
used to determine solubility, specific gravity, melting
point, water content, degree of fiber elasticity, and other
physical characteristics.

Chemical

Various chemical analysis methods are used to determine
percentages of active principles, alkaloids, flavonoids, en-
zymes, vitamins, essential oils, fats, carbohydrates, pro-
tein, ash, acid-insoluble ash, or crude fiber present. The
final analytical process relies on more precise assays for
determining quality. Sophisticated techniques, such as gas
chromatography (GC), thin layer chromatography (TLC),

and high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), are
often used to separate out molecules to provide a chemical
“fingerprint” or profile of the constituents contained in
the plant or extract. These techniques are useful in identi-
fying herbs, but also invaluable in standardizing extracts to
chosen active ingredients or marker compounds.

Biological

The plant or extract may be evaluated by various biolog-
ical methods, mostly animal tests, to assess pharmaco-
logical activity, potency, and toxicity.

Official Standards

Official standards usually serve as the reference by which
the authenticity and quality of an herb is established.
These standards can be found in pharmacopoeias and
other official publications. Examples include The United
States Pharmacopoeia (USP), The National Formulary (NF),
The European Pharmacopoeia (EP), The British Pharma-
copoeia (BP), and The British Pharmacopoeial Codex (BPC).
The USP, which is published every five years by the
U.S. Pharmacopoeial Convention, describes and defines
approved therapeutic agents and sets standards for purity
and assays. Agents are included in the USP on the basis of
their therapeutic value. The NF, formerly published by
the American Pharmaceutical Association, contained
standards of purity and methods of assay for some drugs,
as well as formulae and methods of manufacture for a va-
riety of pharmaceutical preparations. Drugs were in-
cluded in the NF on the basis of demand as well as ther-
apeutic value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
recognizes the NF and the USP as official standards, and
the two are now published as a single volume.
The pharmacognosy literature contains precise de-
scriptions of dried plant material that follow an all-purpose
scheme for describing plant parts. The particulars of
these descriptions sometimes differ from purely biologi-
cal descriptions, because in pharmacognosy, one is fre-
quently concerned with dried structures that may have
been subjected to manipulation during preparation for
the market. In addition, certain points important in
pharmacognosy are of little value in descriptions of sys-
tematic biology.

SCREENING PROGRAMS

The pharmaceutical industry and academic institutions
both conduct screening programs to identify plants that
might be worthy of further study. The interdisciplinary
approach taken to obtain an exploitable pure plant con-

----- PAGE 29 -----
Heres, HOvisM, AND SCIENCE @ 21

Official Standards in Practice

Official standards provide qualitative and quantitative measures that must be met in order for
the quality of a medicinal plant or extract to be considered good enough for use.

Sampling. Official standards often specify the best technique for taking a representative sam-
ple of an herb from a large consignment.

Preliminary examination. This involves the use of human senses to assess characteristics such
as general appearance, presence of appropriate plant parts, odor, and taste.

Foreign matter. Because the natural world is not clean and tidy (thankfully!), official standards
state what percentage of foreign matter is allowed in each sample. For example, the hairy
leaves of mullein are allowed to contain more foreign matter than the smooth, shiny leaves of
bearberry.

Microbial contamination. For some herbs, official standards specify the allowable content of
microbes, such as Escherichia coli.

Toxic residues. Residues commonly found in herbs include pesticides and fumigants. In our all-
too-polluted world, it is next to impossible to obtain completely toxin-free herb or food ma-
terials, so standards have been set for “acceptable” levels of such residues.

Moisture content. Measuring the water content of dried herbs gives some indication of the
likelihood of spoilage. This consideration also has economic importance, as it affects the
weight of herbs in commerce. A whole array of methods have been developed to assess mois-
ture content. The most often cited is loss on drying, which measures the amount of weight lost
through water evaporation. More precise techniques involve the separation and measurement
of moisture, as well as chemical, spectroscopic, and electronic methods for measuring mois-
ture content.

Ash values. This is given as a percentage representing the amount of inorganic ash that should
remain after a sample of dried herb is incinerated.

Volatile oil content. This standard states the minimum acceptable standard for the percentage
of volatile oit that should be present in a sample of a given dried herb.

Swelling index. This is the volume in milliliters occupied by 1 gram of herb after it has soaked
in water for four hours.

R, value. This is a measurement of the rate of flow that a compound has in specific chromato-
graphic analysis techniques.

Refractive index and optical rotation. These are measurements of the optical properties of
compounds and liquids.

Quantitative chemical tests. These are analytical methods for measuring specific compounds
or groups of compounds.

stituent involves botany, pharmacognosy, pharmacology, 3. Extraction with suitable solvents
chemistry, and toxicology, as illustrated in the steps out- 4, Preliminary separations
lined here. 5. Biological and pharmacological screening of crude

, . 1 itis 4 BN extracts
1. Selection, collection, botanical identification

: ' 6. Chromatographic separation of pure bioactive con-
2. Preparation of plant material Brap P P

stituents, guided by bioassay

----- PAGE 30 -----
22. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

7. Structure determination
8. Analysis and pharmacological profiling of pure
compounds
9. Toxicological testing
10. Partial or total synthesis
11. Preparation of derivatives for the study of structure-
activity relationships

Selection of Plant Material

The basis upon which plants are selected for study is
often pivotal to the success of screening efforts. Random
collection is one possible method, but better results have
been achieved when selection is based on certain criteria.

¢ Plants used in traditional medicine are more likely to
yield pharmacologically active compounds.

¢ Chemotaxonomic insights are often valuable. For ex-
ample, if researchers are looking for xanthones, they
might best start by investigating families known to
contain this class of phenolics, such as Gentianaceae,
Polygalaceae, and Clusiaceae.

* Field observations are important. If a bush'or a tree
shows no signs of attack by pests or microorganisms,
there is a good chance that insecticidal or antimicro-
bial metabolites are present. Foaming in aqueous plant
extracts may indicate the presence of saponins.

Separation and Identification

To identify constituents, it is necessary to separate frac-
tions of the extract to find out where the biological activ-
ity lies. A range of chromatographic techniques are used
to facilitate this process.!5 Chromatography separates
chemicals by taking advantage of the fact that mixtures of
substances in a moving stream of gas or liquid travel at
different rates through a stationary substance. This sta-
tionary substance is usually a finely divided solid, a sheet
of filter material, or a thin film of a liquid on the surface
ofa solid. Very complex mixtures can be separated by this
method, making chromatography ideal for the separation
of chemicals found in herbs. It is impossible to achieve
complete separation with any single method, so a multi-
step process is often used.

Thin Layer Chromatography

In thin layer chromatography (TLC), an extract made
with an appropriate solvent is dropped onto a strip of fil-
ter paper. After drying, the paper is hung inside an air-
tight chamber with a liquid solvent at the bottom. The
bottom of the strip is in the solvent, and as the solvent
moves up the paper, the different constituents move at

different rates because of differences in their molecular
weight and shape. Compounds moving with the solvent
front have characteristic retention times (R; values) that
facilitate identification of compounds. If the constituents
separated on the paper are colorless, the paper is re-
moved, dried, and treated to make specific chemicals vis-
ible. The main application of TLC is in separating out
samples for further analysis.

Column Chromatography

Column chromatography can improve separation of indi-
vidual components. The technique uses a glass column
packed with a resin that serves as the stationary phase,
through which a solvent, or the mobile phase, passes.
Solutes in the solvent move through the column at differ-
ent rates, thus separating the compounds. If the station-
ary phase is a solid, the system is called adsorption chro-
matography, and if the stationary phase is a liquid, the
system is called partition chromatography.

High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) oper-
ates on a principle similar to that of column chromatog-
raphy, but has advantages of high speed, resolution, sen-
sitivity, and ease of sample recovery. An HPLC detector
is used to monitor the concentration of solutes in the mo-
bile phase after separation. Detectors may measure refrac-
tive index, dielectric constant, molecular and atomic spec-
troscopy, electrochemistry, and electrolytic conductivity.

Gas Chromatography

Gas chromatography (GC) is a powerful analytical tool
for separating and identifying constituents in relatively
pure mixtures. The herbal extract is vaporized by heating
and then moved through the column in a stream of gas—
for example, helium, hydrogen, nitrogen, or argon. The
vapors move at different rates, separating into clear zones
as they move through the column and emerging via some
detector.

Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry

Final identification of a constituent usually depends upon
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). GC-
MS is a selective and sensitive method of analyzing com-
pounds. However, the compounds to be analyzed must
first be thoroughly purified.

Mass spectrometry itself is a powerful analytical tool
that yields structural information about unknown
molecules. GC-MS instruments combine the ability to
separate chemical mixtures (the GC component) with a

----- PAGE 31 -----
very sensitive detector of the molecules’ mass spectrum
(the MS component), The mass spectrum obtained is
compared with those of thousands of compounds in a
database. The ultimate goal is accurate identification of
a compound,

Bioassays

The availability of suitable bioassays, or biological test
methods, is central to any scientific investigation of plants
with biological activities. The majority of pharmaceuti-
cals have a known chemical composition that can be as-
sayed via quantitative analyses. However, herbs cannot be
assayed satisfactorily in this way, and so are tested by bio-
logical methods, These bioassays help investigators deter-
mine potency by observing the reactions of living organ-
isms or tissues.

Investigators employ broad-based screening (screens
that cover a wide area of biological activity) to find out
if the plant has any pharmacological potential. Spe-
cialized screening utilizes one or two sufficiently accu-
rate bioassays to detect a particular property, such as
anti-inflammatory activity. In some cases, adequate in-
formation may be obtained through in vitro studies, but
additional tests may be undertaken in animals.

Primary Screening Bioassays

Brine Shrimp Lethality Test

The brine shrimp (Artemia salina) lethality bioassay is
sensitive to a broad spectrum of bioactivity, providing an
initial screen that can be backed up with more specific
bioassays.

Crown-Gall Tumor Bioassay

This test assesses inhibition of crown-gall tumor on
potato disks, and is fairly accurate in predicting im vivo
antileukemic activity in mice.

Starfish or Sea Urchin Assay

The eggs of the starfish, Asterina pectinifera, have perme-
able cell membranes, so exposure of fertilized eggs to
chemicals will lead to different outcomes. This assay can
help determine which substances should be investigated
as antineoplastic agents.

Bioassays for Antibiotic Activity

A range of simple tests have been developed to screen for
antibiotic activity. These will determine the strength or
activity of an herb or constituent in killing bacteria grown
in a laboratory.

Heras, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE «23

Plant Growth Regulator Activity

Tests for effects on the regulation of growth in plants can
provide insights into immunosuppressant and antifungal
activities of plants and extracts.

Specialized Screening Bioassays

Testing for Hepatoprotective Properties

Two approaches have been developed to screen for activity
relevant to the treatment of liver disease. In the first ap-
proach, investigators induce liver damage in experimental
animals and then estimate the beneficial effects of plant
extracts with liver function tests that measure factors such
as enzyme levels and hexobarbital sleeping times. The
other approach involves removing part of the liver by
biopsy and measuring the rate of regeneration after treat-
ment with a test substance. This test takes advantage of
the regenerative powers of the liver, as the liver has the
ability to recover completely even after surgical resection
of as much as 90% of the organ,

Because liver disease is often induced by drugs, tox-
ins, viral infections, or reactions to immunogenic agents,
appropriate test methods should mimic natural causes.

Chemical: Acetaminophen- or carbon tetrachloride-
induced damage

Immunological: Complement-mediated cytotoxicity in-
duced by immunization with specific antigens

Consider milk thistle (Silybum marianum) and its
complex of flavolignans known as silymar‘n. This herb is
used to treat many types of liver disease, including severe
toxicity related to ingestion of the death cap mushroom
(Amanita phalloides), which has a fatality rate higher than
50%. Treatment with silymarin (or its principal compo-
nent, silibinin) within 48 hours of mushroom ingestion
usually guarantees a satisfactory outcome.'® Milk thistle
and many other plants have demonstrated activity in
screening tests using mice with carbon tetrachloride-
induced hepatotoxicity.

Rapid Screening for Hepatoprotective Effects

For rapid screening, investigators employ an in vitro
method using cultured hepatocytes, a type of liver cell.
First, they isolate liver cells using collageriase, add a hep-
atotoxin, and culture the sample. They then assess liver
function by measuring transaminase activity in the hepa-
tocytes. After this initial screening, animals can be treated
or pretreated with plant extracts, and the results deter-
mined either by assessing liver function (for example, by
measuring enzyme levels) or by evaluating a parameter
that is affected by liver function.

----- PAGE 32 -----
24 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Hexobarbital Sleeping Time
Hexobarbital induces a consistent pattern of sleep in the
unfortunate experimental animals, so any change in sleep
time suggests a disturbance in metabolism of the sedative.
An increase in sleeping time implies a reduction in the
liver’s ability to metabolize hexobarbital. Carbon tetra-
chloride produces such a change, and is known to cause
dose-dependent acute hepatotoxicity. This hepatotoxicity
occurs because cytochrome P4s9 enzymes transform car-
bon tetrachloride into free radicals, inducing lipid perox-
idation and eventual death of the hepatocytes.
Regardless of the hepatoxin employed, this basic test
method may be applied to assess hepatoprotection.!”
When milk thistle is added, the increase in sleeping time
normally produced by carbon tetrachloride is reduced by
up to 60%, suggesting that the herb defends the liver
against the toxin.

Assessment of Liver Enzyme Levels

Blood levels of the enzymes aminotransferase, aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) are useful indicators of liver disease. AST is pre-
sent in the liver, heart, muscle, kidney, and brain, and cat-
alyzes the conversion of aspartate to oxaloacetate and glu-
tamate. Necrosis or membrane damage releases the
enzyme into circulation, so it can be measured without
the need to resort to taking liver samples. Increases in
AST are seen in any condition involving necrosis of hep-
atocytes, myocardial cells, or skeletal muscle cells. High
levels indicate liver damage, including that due to viral
hepatitis and toxicity, as well as cardiac infarction and
muscle injury.

ALT catalyzes the conversion of alanine to pyruvate
and glutamate and is released in a similar manner, but is
more specific to liver function. As with AST, increases in
serum levels of ALT are seen in conditions involving
necrosis of hepatocytes, myocardial cells, erythrocytes, or
skeletal muscle cells, High levels of ALT usually indicate
acute hepatitis or other liver damage.

THE U.S. NATIONAL CANCER
INSTITUTE

Since 1955, the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) has
carried outa search for potential cancer drugs, with a goal
of screening all the flowering plants of the world to iden-
tify antitumor activity! So far, NCI has screened 176,000
extracts from 41,000 plant samples collected from 25
countries. The University of Illinois obtains samples from
Southeast Asia, the Missouri Botanical Garden collects in

Africa, and the New York Botanical Garden gathers
plants from Central and South America. Each center col-
lects 1,200 samples per year, and different plant parts
constitute discrete samples.

Collectors submit detailed documentation for each
sample, including taxonomic details, plant part, date, site
of collection, habitat, and, if possible, medicinal uses and
methods of preparation employed by indigenous peoples.
Researchers determine the structures of extracts that
show significant activity and analyze them for active
chemicals. Chemicals showing sufficient anticancer activ-
ity are advanced to preclinical development.

Currently used test systems are classified as either
cytotoxicity-based bioassays or mechanism-based bio-
assays. Cytotoxicity-based assays may indicate activity in
cancers that proliferate rapidly, such as leukemia, lym-
phoma, and a few rare tumors, but are inadequate indica-
tors of activity in slow-growing solid tumors of humans.
New in vitro screening strategies generally test 80 to 100
human cell lines of major tumors.'®

Mechanism-based assays are designed by analogy
with specific types of molecular responses mediated by
clinically effective antitumor agents. Bioassays have been
developed to recognize compounds that inhibit carcino-
genesis by preventing the formation of carcinogens,
blocking binding of the carcinogen to its target, or pre-
venting tumor development. For example, one assay for
blocking agents examines the effect of compounds on the
detoxifying enzyme glutathione-S-transferase. Another is
a mutation assay known as the Ames test, which assesses
mutagenicity by assessing the effects of substances on the
mutation rate of the bacterium Salmonella typhimurium.

Positive results in mechanism-based assays suggest
potential biological activity, but cannot determine
whether a substance will actually generate a clinical re-
sponse. Thus, final identification of anticancer agents re-
quires subsequent evaluation with advanced testing sys-
tems, followed by clinical trials.

Although many antitumor compounds have been iso-
lated through these screening procedures, few have been
found to be clinically effective against slow-growing solid
tumors. This is a consequence of using rapidly dividing
tumors in the primary screens. The development of
chemotherapy agents that destroy only fast-growing cells
grew directly out of the use of mouse tumor cell lines in
drug-screening assays. Fast-growing mouse tumor lines
provide quick turnaround times and minimize animal
handling costs. The agents most effective against these
cell lines are also most effective against fast-growing
human tumors. However, most solid cancers in humans

----- PAGE 33 -----
Taxonomic Distribution of Higher
Plants Containing Anticancer
Compounds”

Gymnosperm Families
Cephalotaxaceae, Podocarpaceae, and
Taxaceae

Angiosperm Orders and Families
Magnoliales: Annonaceae
Ranunculales: Menispermaceae
Myrtales: Thymelaeaceae
Celastrales: Celestraceae
Euphorbiales: Euphorbiaceae
Sapindales: Rutaceae, Simaroubaceae
Gentianales: Apocynaceae
Liliales: Liliaceae

[eget RD ote seh

grow relatively slowly, and therefore do not respond wel
to these agents.

Antitumor activity is a complex process, and it is well
known that isolated constituents may not elicit the same
clinical response as a preparation of the whole plant. The
total therapeutic activity is often greater than or at least
different from the activities of the individual chemicals. It
is common for a fraction from a plant extract with signif-
icant biological activity to contain no single constituent
that demonstrates the activity observed with the whole
plant.

Few compounds reach clinical trials. A low thera-

peutic index, a poor ratio of maximum tolerated dose to
minimum effective dose, undesirable side effects, or high
toxicity may outweigh beneficial antitumor activity. Of
25,000 screens of both synthetic and natural materials
conducted annually by the NCI, only 8 to 12 compounds
will be selected for preclinical testing, and only 6 to 8 of
these will actually enter clinical trials.?°

THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION AND HERBAL
MEDICINE

‘The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes that
herbalism is common to all cultures of the world and ac-
tively promotes the development of what it calls tradi-
tional medicine. The Traditional Medicine Program was

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 25

established by the WHO in 1977. The WHO Resolution
EB63.R4 of that year expressed the following idea:

... the need for the governments of the countries inter-
ested in the use of traditional medical practice to give
adequate support to engaging traditional medical practi-
tioners in primary health care teams as and when appro-
priate, to the utilization of appropriate technology in these
traditional medical practices and to undertake adequate
measures for effective regulation and control of tradi-
tional medical practices.!

This resolution led to a worldwide effort by the WHO
to enhance traditional medicine. To the WHO, traditional
medicine implies all of the knowledge and practices used in
the prevention, diagnosis, and elimination of physical,
mental, or social imbalance. This knowledge is based on
the experience and observation of generations. It includes
highly developed, complex systems such as ayurveda and
traditional Chinese medicine as well as collections of sim-
ple, local home remedies.

Traditional medicine fits perfectly into the WHO's
wonderfully holistic definition of health as a state of com-
plete physical, emotional, mental, and social well-being,
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. From this
perspective, one can begin to appreciate the potential for
open dialogue and integration between current scientific
approaches to health and the older traditional techniques.
All perspectives have value in any worldwide approach to
health for all. The WHO’ role is not to endorse any and
all forms of traditional medicine, but instead to ensure
that traditional medicine is examined critically and with
an open mind,

In 1994, Resolution WHA47.27 called on the WHO
director general to

. consider the contribution WHO might make to pro-
moting respect for, and maintenance ol, indigenous
knowledge, traditions and remedies, in particular, their
pharmacopoeia.

The WHO Rationale for Promoting
Traditional Medicine

¢ Traditional medicine has intrinsic value, and in recog-
nition of this fact, it should be promoted and its po-
tential developed for the wider use and benefit of
mankind,

* Traditional medicine has certain advantages over im-
ported systems of medicine, because as an integral part
of the people’s culture, it is particularly effective in
solving certain cultural health problems.

----- PAGE 34 -----
26 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Traditional medicine contributes greatly to scientific
medicine, thus justifying its development from the
Western biomedical perspective.

A number of countries are cooperating with WHO
through programs that integrate traditional approaches
with the scientific techniques of modern medicine. One
report from a WHO committee proposes some interest-
ing prerequisites for integration.

* Valid factual data must be provided to overcome the
current lack of information. This data may then be
used to help convince decision makers, health care
professionals, and the general population of the value
of integration.

¢ There must be legal recognition of traditional thera-
pies and practitioners to ensure sociopolitical accept-
ability and access to resources.

* Dialogue among practitioners of different systems
should be established early in any integrative effort.
This should eliminate prejudice and hopefully encour-
age the adoption of more acceptable attitudes.

THE CONSERVATION OF MEDICINAL
PLANTS

The WHO is among a number of international bodies
concerned with the protection of medicinal plants. In
March 1988, the WHO, the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN),
and the World Wildlife Fund (WWE) convened a con-
ference on medicinal plant conservation, which was held
in Chiang Mai, Thailand.??

The stimulus for this conference was the unprece-
dented loss of plant species observed by scientists world-
wide. Between 1600 and 1900, about 75 species of plants
and animals became extinct because of human activity.
During the first 70 years of this century, about the same
number of species became extinct. These numbers, how-
ever, are small when compared to the number of extinc-
tions that were projected to occur during the final 20
years of the last century. Earth is on the verge of experi-
encing an extinction of species unparalleled in human ex-
perience. The IUCN estimated that if present trends
continue, 60,000 higher plant species could become ex-
tinct or near extinct by the middle of the twenty-first cen-
tury. The 60,000 figure accounts for approximately one in
four of all higher plants.

The core Chiang Mai Declaration is extremely sig-
nificant, especially if we remember that this came from
scientists and international bureaucrats.

The 2002 IUCN Red List

of Threatened Species

Biodiversity loss is one of the world’s most pressing
crises, and there is growing global concern about the sta-
tus of the biological resources on which so much of
human life depends. It has been estimated that the cur-
rent species extinction rate is between 1,000 and 10,000
times higher than it would naturally be. Many species are
declining to critical population levels; important habitats
are being destroyed, fragmented, and degraded; and
ecosystems are being destabilized through climate
change, pollution, invasive species, and direct human im-
pact. The IUCN Red List is the world’s most compre-
hensive inventory of the global conservation status of
plants and animals.

The updated 2002 IUCN Red List of Threatened
Species is available as a searchable database at
www.redlist.org. Users can search for species by common
or scientific name to find out about status, distribution,
habitats, threats, and other information that supports the
listing.

There are nine categories of threat in the IUCN Red
List system: extinct, extinct in the wild, critically endan-
gered, endangered, vulnerable, near threatened, least con-
cern, data deficient, and not evaluated. A species is listed
as threatened if it falls in the critically endangered, endan-
gered, or vulnerable category. Classification is accom-
plished through a set of five quantitative criteria that form
the heart of the system. These criteria are based on bio-
logical factors related to extinction risk and include rate of
decline, population size, area of geographic distribution,
and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.

The categories are defined as follows:

© A taxon is “extinct” when there is no reasonable doubt
that the last individual has died.

* A taxon is “extinct in the wild” when it is known to
survive only under cultivation, in captivity, or as a nat-
uralized population (or populations) well outside its
past range.

* A taxon is “critically endangered” when the best avail-
able evidence indicates that it meets any of the criteria
for critically endangered, and is therefore considered
to be facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the
wild.

¢ A taxon is “endangered” when the best available evi-
dence indicates that it meets any of the criteria for en-
dangered, and is therefore considered to be facing a
very high risk of extinction in the wild.

¢ A taxon is “vulnerable” when the best available evi-
dence indicates that it meets any of the criteria for vul-

----- PAGE 35 -----
Heres, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE 2.

Saving Lives by Saving Plants

We, the health professionals and the plant conservation specialists who have come to-
gether for the first time at the WHO/IUCN/WWF International Consultation on
Conservation of Medicinal Plants, held in Chiang Mai, 21-26 March 1988, do hereby reaffirm
our commitment to the collective goal of “Health for All by the Year 2000” through the pri-
mary health care approach and to the principles of conservation and sustainable develop-
ment outlined in the World Conservation Strategy. We:

Recognize that medicinal plants are essential in primary health care, both in self-

medication and in national health services

Are alarmed at the consequences of loss of plant diversity around the world

View with grave concern the fact that many of the plants that provide traditional and

modern drugs are threatened

Draw the attention of the United Nations, its agencies and Member States, other inter-

national agencies and their members and nongovernmental organizations to:

— The vital importance of medicinal plants in health care

— The increasing and unacceptable loss of these medicinal plants due to habitat de-
struction and unsustainable harvesting practices

— The fact that plant resources in one country are often of critical importance to other
countries

— The significant economic value of the medicinal plants used today and the great po-
tential of the plant kingdom to provide new drugs

— The continuing disruption and loss of indigenous cultures, which often hold the key
to finding new medicinal plants that may benefit the global community

— The urgent need for international cooperation and coordination to establish pro-

27

available for future generations

nerable, and is therefore considered to be facing a high
risk of extinction in the wild.

A taxon is “near threatened” when it has been evalu-
ated against the criteria but does not qualify for criti-
cally endangered, endangered, or vulnerable now, but
is close to qualifying or is likely to qualify for threat-
ened status in the near future.

A taxon is categorized as “least concern” when it has
been evaluated against the criteria and does not qualify
for critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable, or
near threatened. Widespread and abundant taxa are in-
cluded in this category.

A taxon is “data deficient” when there is inadequate in-
formation to make a direct or indirect assessment of its
risk of extinction based on its distribution or popula-
tion status.

grams for conservation: of medicinal plants to ensure that adequate quantities are

We, the members of the Chiang Mai International Consultation, hereby call on all peo-
ple to commit themselves to Save the Plants That Save Lives.

The 1997 [UCN Red List of Threatened Plants was
the first such comprehensive listing ever undertaken for
plants on a global scale. Analyses of the data in the*1997
Red List revealed the following unsettling information.

* Of the estimated 270,000 known species of vascular
plants, 33,798 species were considered at risk of ex-
tinction. These plants are found in 369 plant families
scattered throughout 200 countries.

© Of these plants, 91% can be considered to be found
only in a single country (a statistical generalization). A
limited geographic distribution can make a species
much more vulnerable and may reduce options for its
protection.

¢ A great number of species known to have medicinal
value are at risk. For example, 75% of species from the

----- PAGE 36 -----
28 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

yew family, a source of important cancer-fighting
compounds, are threatened. In the willow family,
from which aspirin is derived, 12% of species are
threatened.?3

Many herbalists are profoundly concerned about any
potential impact of their activities on natural communi-
ties. The term “wildcrafting” has been used to describe a
harvest of wild plants that takes into account ecological
balance so that it does not threaten the survival of the
plant species. Keeping in mind ecological principles, a
wildcrafter ideally harvests wild plants in a sustainable
manner, or with the goal of increasing their number and

health.

United Plant Savers

In the United States, a nonprofit organization called
United Plant Savers (UpS) is working to help protect
American medicinal plants.

The organization was formed in a spirit of hope, by
herbalists committed to protecting and replanting threat-
ened species and to raising public awareness of the plight
of wild medicinal plants. Its membership reflects the di-
versity of American herbalism and includes wildcrafters,
seed collectors, manufacturers, growers, botanists, practi-
tioners, medicine-makers, educators, and plant lovers
from all walks of life.

For further information contact United Plant Savers,
PO Box 77, Guysville, OH 45735, (740) 662-0041,
www.unitedplantsavers.org.

United Plant Savers publishes a list of herbs used in
commerce that, because of overharvesting or loss of habi-
tat, or by nature of their innate rareness or sensitivity, are
at risk of a significant decline in numbers within their cur-
rent range. As of December 1998, this list included:

American ginseng (Panax quinquéfolius)
Bethsoot (Trillium spp.)

Black cohosh (Cimifuga racemosa)
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Echinacea (Echinacea spp.)

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)
Helonias root (Chamaelirium luteum)
Kava kava (Piper methysticum)

Lady’s slipper (Cypripedium spp.)
Lomatium (Lomatium dissectum)

Osha (Ligusticum porterti)
Partridgeberry (Mitchella repens)
Peyote (Lophophora williamsii)

Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra)

Sundew (Drosera spp.)

True unicorn (Aletris farinosa)
Venus’s flytrap (Dionaea muscipula)
Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa)

Another list of wild medicinal plants indicates those
in need of attention and further research. United Plant
Savers is watching these herbs and collecting information
on levels of commercial usage while monitoring the via-
bility of these plants within their current range.

Arnica (Arnica spp.)

Butterfly weed (Asclepias tuberosa)
Calamus (Acorus calamus)
Chaparro (Casatela emoryi)
Elephant tree (Bursera microphylla)
Eyebright (Euphrasia spp.)
Gentian (Gentiana spp.)
Goldthread (Coptis spp.)

Lobelia (Lobelia spp.)

Maidenhair fern (Adiantum pendatum)
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum)
Oregon grape (Mahonia spp.)
Pink root (Spigelia marilaandica)
Pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata)
Spikenard (Aralia racemosa)

Stone root (Collinsonia canadensis)
Stream orchid (Epipactis gigantea)
Turkey corn (Dicentra canadensis)
Virginia snakeroot (Aristolochia serpentaria)
White sage (Salvia apiana)

Yerba mansa (Anemopsis californica)
Yerba santa (Eriodictyon californica)

References

1. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

2. Uchida S, et al. Medical Science Research 1987; 15:831-2.

3. Chen H, Tappel AL. Free Radical Biology & Medicine
1994; 16:437-44,

4. Monforte MT, et al. Farmaco 1995 Sept; 50:595-9,

5. Middleton E Jr. International Archives of Allergy and
Immunology 1995; 107:43 5-6.

6. Castillo MH, et al. American Journal of Surgery 1989;
158:351-5.

7. Spedding G, et al. Antiviral Research 1989; 12:99-110.

8. Hirano T, et al. British Journal of Cancer 1995;
72:1380-8.
9. Cheshier JE, et al. Life Sciences 1995 Dec 22; 58:87-96.

----- PAGE 37 -----
. Sappey C, et al. AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses
1994; 10:145 1-61.

. Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs & Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994.

. Tyler V. The Honest Herbal. Binghamton, NY: Haworth

Press, 1993.

. Huxtable R. Neurotoxins in herbs and food plants. In:

Isaacson, Jensen, eds. The Vatlnerable Brain and Environ-

mental Risks. Vol 1. New York: Plenum Press, 1992.

. Ibid.

. Lik Sun S, Wang J, Wang D. Chromatography of

medicinal plants and Chinese traditional medicines.

Biomedical Chromatography 1998 Mar; 12(2):78-85.

. Vogel G, Temme I. Curative antagonism of liver damage
caused by phalloidin with silymarin as a model of anti-
hepatotoxin therapy. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1969,
19:613-5.

. Kiso ¥ et al. Assay method for antihepatotoxic activity
using complement mediated cytotoxicity in primary cul-
ture hepatocytes. Planta Medica 1987, 52(3):2417.

. Shoemaker, et al. Development of human tumor cell line
panels for use in disease oriented drug screening. In:
Hall TC, ed. Prediction of Response to Cancer Therapy.
New York: Alan R. Liss, 1988.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Herss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE <> 29

Barclay AS, Perdue RE. Distribution of anticancer activ-
ity in higher plants. Cancer Chemotherapy Reports. Part 1
1976; 60:1081.

Cragg GM, et al. Drug discovery and development at
the United States National Cancer Institute:
International collaboration in the search for new drugs
from natural sources. Proceedings of the Eighth Asian
Symposium on Medicinal Plants and Spices and other
Natural Products; 1994 Jun 13-16: Melake, Malaysia.
WHO Technical Report. The promotion and development
of traditional medicine 1978; 622.

Akerele O, Heywood V; Synge H. The Conservation of
Medicinal Plants. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1991.

Walter KS, Gillett HJ, eds. 1997 IUCN Red List of
Threatened Plants. Compiled by the World
Conservation Monitoring Centre (UCN. The World
Conservation Union, Gland, Switzerland, 1998.

----- PAGE 38 -----
CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS

edicinal plants can be categorized in a variety
M of ways, reflecting various interests and ful-

filling different purposes. Categorizations
may clarify potentially useful therapeutic relationships,
suggest avenues of research for the pharmacologist (for ex-
ample, in the screening of plants for anticancer activity),
and even provide the environmentalist with data for the
seemingly endless struggle to protect the environment
against the ravages of human activities. Here are some of
the more common methods by which plants may be
classified.

Alphabetical

Plants may be listed alphabetically either by Latin bino-
mial or common name. While this method of classifica-
tion may facilitate access to information, it offers the
practitioner no therapeutic insights.

Taxonomic

Based upon botanical systematics, plants are arranged ac-
cording to botanists’ current opinions as to which class,
order, family, genus, or species they belong.

Morphologic

Here, remedies are grouped according to shared anatom-
ical features: leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, aerial parts,
whole plant, rhizomes, bark, or roots. Such remedies are
known in pharmacognosy as organized drugs because they
are morphologically whole, or actual plant parts.
Unorganized drugs, on the other hand, are plant materials
that have no cellular structure, such as extracts, gums,
resins, oils, fats, and waxes.

Therapeutic
There are a number of different ways to classify plants ac-
cording to their pharmacological effects.

Action-based, Because an action-based arrangement pro-
vides some indication of the effect of a plant on the

30

human body, this method of classification offers valu-
able information to the holistic practitioner.

Body system or organ affinity. This approach highlights
plants appropriate for different parts of the human
body.

Medical system. Herbs have different therapeutic indica-
tions depending upon the system within which the
practitioner is working, whether ayurveda, the
Western biomedical approach, or traditional Chinese
medicine.

Biochemical. This type of classification groups plants ac-
cording to their content of chemical constituents, such
as saponins, alkaloids, or flavones. The many limita-
tions of such an approach stem from the tendency of
some scientists to perceive plants merely as organic
drug sources.

Biogenetic. This approach categorizes plants by genetic
taxonomy and evolutionary relationships among plant
biochemicals. Other than academic, this categorization
is of little value to the phytotherapist.

Geographical. This type of classification is based on eth-
nobotanical uses, or ways in which plants are used by
people in different parts of the world.

PLANT TAXONOMY AND
PHYTOTHERAPY

The scientific name of a plant, or Latin binomial, can be
a great source of information. Scientific names are all too
often overlooked, as many people are intimidated by
Latin. However, if one gains a basic understanding of
how botanical names are derived and what they can tell
us about plants, intimidation can be transformed into
empowerment—or at least simple bewilderment!

There is at least one vitally important reason for
phytotherapists to be concerned with understanding how
plants are named. When using plants in medicine, it is
essential to know exactly which herb is being prescribed.
Botanical names are exact and internationally recognized,

----- PAGE 39 -----
and each Latin binomial refers to one plant and one plant
only. Common names, on the other hand, vary from
place to place, and much confusion can result when sev-
eral plants are called by the same common name.

The coining of botanical names occurs in the field of
taxonomy. This is the branch of science devoted to the ar-
rangement of living organisms into categories based on
natural similarities, such as structure, development, bio-
chemical or physiological function, and evolutionary his-
tory. Theoretically, this field of study helps scientists
identify relationships among different ancient and mod-
ern groups, can indicate the evolutionary pathways along
which present-day organisms may have developed, and
provides a coherent basis for comparing experimental
data about different plants and animals. As many charac-
teristics as possible are incorporated, including the or-
ganism’s anatomy, biochemistry, embryology, molecular
biology, behavior, and distribution.

Traditionally, organisms have been classified into
two kingdoms, plant and animal. Now, for a number of
practical and theoretical reasons, scientists utilize the
five-kingdom system. In this system, organisms are
classified according to whether they are prokaryotic
(single-celled, like bacteria, with no internal membranes
or organelles) or eukaryotic (composed of one or more

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS @ 31

cells containing membrane-bound nuclei and organ-
elles), and whether they obtain food by photosynthesis,
ingestion, or absorption of organic matter from their
surroundings.

Carolus Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist, introduced the
modern system of classification in 1753. The basic unit in
the Linnaean system is the species: a group of organisms
that resemble each other more closely than those of any
other group and are capable of mating with one another
to produce fertile offspring.

Species are arranged into higher groupings that are
progressively more inclusive, Species that are closely re-
lated are grouped together into a genus. Genera with sim-
ilar characteristics and origins are grouped into families.
Families, in turn, are grouped into orders, orders into
classes, and classes into divisions (if plants) or phyla (if an-
imals). Finally, related phyla or divisions are placed to-
gether into kingdoms.

Sometimes it is desirable to make a finer distinction
between two consecutive ranks. In that case, an additional
rank is inserted between the original two, and the prefix
sub- or super- added to one of the main ranks, Between
an order and a family, for example, there may be several
suborders. Each suborder may contain several superfami-
lies, and each superfamily several families.

molds, and mushrooms.

ferns and seed-producing plants.

reptiles, birds, and mammals).

The Five Kingdoms

The Monera. This group includes bacteria and blue-green algae, single-celled or colony-forrning
prokaryotes. If colonial, no specialization or division of labor occurs among the cells. Organisms
are classified by the nature of their cell walls, type of motility, and mode of nutrition.

The Protista. These organisms have eukaryotic cell structures, as do all other living things except
those in the Monera. Two major subgroups are the algae, which photosynthesize, and protozeans,
which live by ingesting or absorbing organic matter.

The Fungi. These multicellular, plantlike organisms live by absorbing nutrients from their surround-
ings. Classified by body structure and type of reproduction, this group includes yeasts, molds, slime

The Plantae. These are many-celled organisms that usually live by photosynthesis. They have leaves
or leaflike structures adapted for photosynthesis, stems or stemlike structures that hold the leaves,
and roots specialized for anchoring the plant in a growth medium and absorbing water. The plants
fall into two groups: bryophytes (liverworts and mosses), which have no tissues for transporting
water and minerals from roots, and the more numerous vascular plants, a group that includes both

The Animalia. These are the organisms we know as animals, including sponges, coelenterates (such
as jellyfish), annelids (earthworms and leeches), mollusks (snails and squid), arthropods (insects,
spiders, and lobsters), echinoderms (starfish and sea urchins), and vertebrates (fish, amphibians,

----- PAGE 40 -----
32 <+ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Refer to appendix 7 for a list highlighting some of the
kingdoms, classes, orders, families, and genera in which
major phytotherapeutic agents are found, with some ex-
amples of important species.

A plant is identified by a Latin binomial, or two-part
name. The first name identifies the genus, which is a group
of species more closely related to one another than to any
other group. The second, or specific epithet, identifies a
particular species within a genus. Binomials are written in
italics. The genus name always begins with a capital letter,
while the species epithet always begins with a small or low-
ercase letter. An example of a generic name is Eupatorium,
which is used for every species of Eupatorium,

Eupatorium cannabinum: hemp agrimony
Eupatorium perfoliatum: boneset
Eupatorium purpureum: gravel root

The specific epithet describes exactly which of all

Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Magnoliophyta (angiosperms)

form the basis of the code.

rules, although there are some exceptions.
Scientific names are given in Latin.

fe

6. With some exceptions, the rules are retroactive.

species we are talking about. For example, Expatorium
cannabinum is the Eupatorium with leaves resembling
those of Cannabis. Eupatorium perfoliatum is the Eupa-
torium with leaves that appear to be perforated by the
stem, and Exupatorium purpureum is the Eupatorium with
purplish flowers. The abbreviations sp. and spp. are used
to denote one specie or several species of a particular
genus, respectively. For example, “Eupatorium spp.” indi-
cates that we are talking about a number of species in the
Eupatorium genus.

Species are sometimes divided into subsets known as
subspecies (abbreviated as ssp.), varieties (abbreviated as
var.), and forms. For example, the name Lavandula angus-
tifolia ssp. angustifolia differentiates this subspecies of
lavender from Lavandula angustifolia ssp. pyrenaica. Some
plants are hybrids of two other plants of the same genus,
which is denoted by an “x” between the genus and species
names, as in Mentha x piperita var. piperita. In these two

The Linnaean System of Classification

As an example of how the system is applied, consider Salvia divinorum, the divine sage.

Class: Magnoliopsida (dicotyledons). Class names end in -opsida.
Subclass: Asteridae. Subclass names end in -idae.
Order: Lamiales. Order names usually end in -ales.
Family: Lamiaceae. Family names usually end in -aceae.

Genus: Salvia, The genus name should be capitalized and either italicized or underlined.
Species: Salvia divinorum Epling et Jativa. The species name is always preceded by its genus
name. Species names begin with a lowercase letter and, like genus names, are italicized or
underlined. For complete accuracy, the binomial is followed by the name of the botanical
authority who first described the species.

The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) governs the naming of plants. The ICBN, in
turn, is regulated by the Nomenclature Section of an International Botanical Congress. The current
botanical code is the Tokyo edition, revised in accordance with decisions made by the XV International
Botanical Congress, held in Yokohama in 1993 and published in 1994.’ A similar code has been devel-
oped for cultivated plants. The International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants is regulated
by the International Commission for the Nomenclature of Cultivated Plants (ICNCP).? Six principles

1. Botanical nomenclature is independent of zoological nomenclature.

2. Names of taxonomic groups are determined through the use of nomenclatural types, or specimens.
3. Nomenclature of taxonomic groups is based on priority of publication.

4, Each taxonomic group can have only one correct name, the earliest that is in accordance with the

----- PAGE 41 -----
examples, the plants are so well known and distinguish-
able by scent and taste that they are usually written sim-
ply as Lavandula angustifolia and Mentha x piperita.

In this book, the full botanical name is usually given
in the text, so that if you need to verify botanical details,
you will be able to look up the correct plant. Otherwise,
please refer to appendix 3 for English common names for
Latin binomials and vice versa.

Plant and family names are occasionally changed to
reflect new discoveries or clarifications. Thus Roman
chamomile, formerly in the genus Anthemis, is now a
member of the genus Chamaemelum. Family names have
changed too, and the major groups Compositae,
Cruciferae, Labiatae, Leguminosae, and Umbelliferae,
among others, have each been renamed after an impor-
tant genus of the family. Thus, the composite family has
become Asteraceae, named after the aster genus, and the
cruciferous or mustard family has been renamed Brassi-
caceae. The two-lipped flowers of the mint family are
now in Lamiaceae, the leguminous plants in Fabaceae,
and the umbelliferous plants in Apiaceae. Plants may be
reclassified into different families, too. For example,
Hypericum has been moved from Hypericaceae to
Clusiaceae.

The botanical authority who named the species is
listed after the species name. The authority is usually ab-
breviated and the correct abbreviation can be found in
any flora, although abbreviations are not universally stan-
dardized. Parentheses have a special meaning in taxon-
omy. For example, the name Vernonia noveboracensis (L.)
Michx. reveals that Andre Michaux transferred to the
genus Vernonia a species originally included in another
genus (Serratula) by Linnaeus. The parentheses indicate a
corrected name. Other conventions include “Britt. et
Rose” or “Britt. & Rose” for N. L. Britton andJ. N. Rose,
indicating that they published the name together. “Muhl.
ex Willd.” indicates that the name is ascribed to G. H. E.
Muhlenberg but was published by K. L. Willdenow.

Although some of these taxonomic details may seem
trivial, actually they are important. Except in the case of
“conserved names” officially designated by the ICBN, the
publication date of a botanical name determines its prior-
ity and hence which of several possible synonyms is most
valid. The ICBN provides rules to govern all possible sit-
uations related to nomenclature, but when one is prepar-
ing a taxonomic monograph, determining the correct
plant name can still require quite extensive historical and
botanical research.

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS - 33

DERIVATION OF BOTANICAL NAMES

Botanical Latin is significantly different from classical
Latin. William Stearn provides a fascinating study of this
subject in his essential text, Botanical Latin (see Suggested
Reading). Stearn has succeeded in making Latin interest-
ing and engaging to this author—no mean feat!

The Latin names used in taxonomy can be grouped
into categories based upon their derivation. A few exam-
ples are given here.

Mythological Names

A variety of names are taken from classical mythology.

Nymphaea: the water lily, from the Latin Nympha, god-
dess of waters, meadows, and forest

Paeonia: from the Greek Paionia, physician ofthe gods

Achillea: from the Greek Achilles, hero of Homer's Iliad,
whose bleeding ankle was treated with yarrow

Geographical or Ecological Names
These may refer to the plant’s habitat or some other geo-
morphologic feature.

montana: growing in mountainous places

riparius: growing by rivers and streams

nivalis: from the Latin nivis, growing in or near snow
hydrocotyle: living in water

Place Names
These are often self-explanatory.

alabamensis: Alabama
californica: California
sinensis: China

Uses or Properties

As many early botanists were also doctors, some names
reflect their knowledge of the therapeutic uses of the
plants, or materia medica.

cardiaca: helps the heart
officinalis: once in the official pharmacopoeia
catharticus: a purgative or cathartic

Classical Names

Apparently every name ofa plant used in classical Greek
has been used in modern nomenclature, and these have
been modified until they form a large number of the
designations in common use. Consider Psyllium from the
Greek word psylla, or flea. Psylla was the Greek name for
psyllium, the seeds of which resemble fleas.

----- PAGE 42 -----
34 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Betonica: from Vettonica, the name of a medicinal plant
from the region of Spain once called Vectones or
Vettones

Anethum: from the Greek anethon, meaning anise or dill

Ligusticum: from the Latin name of a plant growing in
Liguria, Italy

Names Commemorating People

Botanists have been ingenious in their use of binomials to
commemorate people. A botanist might name a plant
after the first botanist to describe the species for which a
genus is named, a respected teacher, or, it seems, just
about anyone else!

Lobelia: named for Matthias de |’Obel, a Flemish botanist
(1538-1616)

Eschscholzia: named after the 19th-century German
botanist Johann Friedrich von Eschscholtz

Larrea: named for Juan Antonio de la Larrea

Historical Names

These are derived from names of historical figures. For
example, Agrimonia eupatoria is named for Eupator, also
known as Mithradates the Great, King of Pontus, north-
ern Anatolia (120-63 8.c.). Eupatoria was a city on the
west coast of the Crimean Peninsula, which legend lo-
cates as the place where Jason and the Argonauts re-
trieved the Golden Fleece.

Asclepias, named for Asklepios, Greek god of medicine
and healing

Artemisia, named for the Greek goddess Artemis, the vir-
gin goddess of the hunt

Narcissus, from the character of the same name in Greek
mythology, who was renowned for his beauty

Anatomical Names

These names highlight visible plant features, as in
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort), which is charac-
terized by small perforations along the leaf edges.
Indications of size are also common. For example,
Plantago major describes the greater plantain.

millefolium: finely cut, from the Latin mille (thousand) and
folium (leaf)

crispus: from the Latin crispus, meaning curled

pendulus: from the Latin pendulus, meaning hanging down

Color Names
A rich vocabulary applies here, as is fitting for the wide
spectrum of color manifested in flowers and leaves.

Whites

niveus: snow white
galacto, lacteus: milk white
albidus: whitish

Blacks

ater, mela, or melano: pure black
niger: black

anthracinus: coal-black

Browns

fuscus, phaeo: brown
‘porphyreus: red-brown
hepaticus: liver-colored

Yellows

aureus, auratus, chryso: golden yellow

Tuteus, xantho: yellow

favus, luteolus, lutescens, flavidus, flavescens: pale yellow

Greens

viridis, chloro: green

glaucus, thalassicus, glaucescens: sea green
flavovirens: yellowish green

Blues

cyaneus, cyano: Prussian blue
caeruleus: blue

azureus: sky blue

Reds

ruber, erythro: red
roseus, rhodo: rosy
‘purpureus: purple

Aroma Names

Some binomials suggest that the plant has a strong odor,
either pleasant or unpleasant. It must be remembered in
these days of fashionable aromatherapy that not all plants
have a sweet bouquet! Disagreeable odors are suggested
by such names as foetidus, as in Symplocarpus foetidus
(skunk cabbage).

odorata: from the Latin odoratus, meaning sweet-smelling
myroxylon: from the Greek myron, meaning sweet-
smelling oil, and xylon, wood

----- PAGE 43 -----
References

1. Greuter W, Barrie FR, Burdet HM, et al., eds.
International code of botanical nomenclature (Tokyo
code). Regnum Vegerabile No. 131. Koeltz Scientific
Books, Konigstein. 1994.

2. Trehane P, Brickell CD, Baum BR, et al., 1995
International. Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants.
Wimborne, UK: Quarterjack Publishing, 1995.

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS = 35

Suggested Reading

Stearn WI. Botanical Latin. Newton-Abbot, UK: David &
Charles, 1992.

Walters DR, Keil DJ. Vascular Plant Taxonomy. Dubuque, Iowa:
Kendall/Hunt, 1996,

----- PAGE 44 -----
he fundamental p
medicine is chemical,

T

can rarely be attributed to

often, effects are due to the va

plant complex interacts with

Consider the example of
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulm
ter 26, it is used as a mild yet|

astringent, and carminative

vant for the treatment of mu
as well as a range of digestiv
dren’s diarrhea. ‘Theory tells

ent” of this herb is a group

lates, found in the aerial part

salicylates play a vital role in

but they are also renowned
dency to cause gastritis (infla
cosa, or the lining of the ston}

If we take the concept o
meadowsweet should be cont
gastric inflammation. Howev
the herb is to mitigate arthriti

by people who already have
lated to use of nonsteroid

(NSAIDs). Clinical observati
both confirm that meadowsw

reducing such gastric inflam:
here? In the absence of detai

on the whole plant, we can only
than those of salicylates also

this herb. Such cases inevita
clude, “The whole is more t!

cal nature of the hum:
follow, I shall discuss the co:
often called the “active ingr.
contend often throughout thi

tisical nature of herbal
is the fundamental physi-
body. In the chapters that
stituents of plants that are
ients.” However, as I will
book, the effects of a plant
single constituent. More
ious ways in which a whole
he human body.

he widely used British herb
‘ia). As is discussed in chap-
ffective anti-inflammatory,
ent. It is specifically rele-
uloskeletal inflammations,
problems, including chil-
s that the “active ingredi-
compounds called salicy-
lof the plant. Undoubtedly,
e activity of meadowsweet,
or their unfortunate ten-
mation of the gastric mu-
ch).

ictive ingredients literally,
uindicated for people with
, the most common use of
pain, and it is usually taken
me degree of gastritis re-
anti-inflammatory drugs
n and historical tradition
et can be very effective in
tion. So what is going on
pharmacological research
surmise that actions other
ntribute to the effects of
blyt{lead the herbalist to con-
han the sum of the parts.”

t

al

36

a “chemical” is something to be avoided, an evil and artificial corruption of
ler, everything tangible is a chemical. All that is good is chemical, just as all that
is natural is chemical, just as all that is artificial.!

The herbal remedies of the world vary in strength
from potentially lethal poisons to gentle tonics that might
be considered to be foods. This variation in the potency
of pharmacological impact is chemically based and has a
profound effect on the therapeutic selection of herbs for
any individual. Herbs may be loosely categorized into the
following broad groups.

Normalizers. These herbs gently nourish the body in
ways that support natural processes of growth,
health, and renewal. They are primarily tonics and
“herbal foods.” Nettles (Urtica dioica), cleavers
(Galinm aparine), and chickweed (Stellaria media) are
good examples.
Effectors. Herbs that have an observable impact upon the
body are used in the treatment of specific illnesses.
Based on their mechanisms of action, the effects of
these herbs may in turn be divided into two groups.
¢ Whole plant actions are the result of some complex of
interactions between the chemistry of the whole
plant and the human body. Examples include echi-
nacea (Echinacea spp.) and meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria).

© Effects of specific active chemical(s) are generally strong
enough to mask any evidence of whole plant effects.
Because of the presence of these intense chemicals,
such herbs are potentially poisonous if taken at the
wrong dose or in the wrong way. The cardioactive
herb foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) and the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum) are good examples.

As demonstrated in part 2 of this book, the herbalist
focuses on the use of mild normalizers and gentle effec-
tors, and uses strong effectors only if absolutely necessary.
In fact, potent effectors are hardly used at all in herbal-
ism. They are, however, the foundation of pharmacolog-
ical medicine.

----- PAGE 45 -----
The activity of most herbs is more complex than a
mere representation of the effects of an “active ingredi-
ent.” Nonetheless, a review of active plant constituents
can be illuminating for the phytotherapist. For example,
as seen in table 3.1, it is often possible to identify major
contributors to the known actions of an herb.

Table 3.1. Herbs and Constituents

CONSTITUENT GROUP HERB EXAMPLES
Carbohydrates
Mycopolysaccharides Shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes)
Inulin Elecampane (Inula helenium)
Mucopolysaccharides Marshmallow root and leaf
(Althaea officinalis}
Glycosides
Cardiac glycosides Lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)

Cyanogenic glycosides Wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina)

Lipids

Fatty acids Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis)
Terpenes

Monoterpenes Peppermint oil (Mentha piperita)

Iridoid Gentian (Gentiana lutea)

Sesquiterpenes Clove (Syzygium aromaticum)

Sesquiterpene lactones Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

Diterpenes Horehound (Marrubium vulgare)
Triterpenes Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa)
Phenolics

Simple phenolics Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria}

Phenylpropanoids Turmeric (Curcuma longa)

Coumarins Angelica (Angelica archangelica)
Naphthoquinones Sundew (Drosera rotundifolia)
Anthraquinones Purging buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica)
Flavonoids Hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata)

\soflavonoids Red clover (Trifolium pratense}

Lignans Milk thistle (Silybum marianum)

Tannins Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria)

AN INTRODUCTION TO PHYTOCHEMISTRY «2 37

CONSTITUENT GROUP HERB EXAMPLES

Alkaloids
Piperidines Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)
Tropanes Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Purines Guarana (Paullinia cupana)
Isoquinolines Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
Indoles Ma huang (Ephedra sinica)
Quinolizidines Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius)

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PLANT
METABOLITES

The chemical constituents found in plants are often clas-
sified as either primary or secondary metabolites. In all
living beings, chemical compounds are synthesized and
broken down via a series of chemical reactions, each me-
diated by an enzyme. This complex of processes is known
as metabolism, which comprises catabolism (breakdown)
and anabolism (synthesis).

All organisms possess similar metabolic pathways for
the synthesis and use of certain essential chemicals: sug-
ars, amino acids, common fatty acids, nucleotides, and the
polymers derived from them (including polysaccharides,
proteins, lipids, RNA, and DNA). This is primary
metabolism, and these compounds, which are essential
for the survival and well-being of the organism, are
primary metabolites. In plants, such compounds are re-
sponsible for the primary life processes of respiration,
photosynthesis, growth, development, and other essential
functions.

Plants also use other metabolic pathways to produce
compounds that often have no readily apparent function.
These are the secondary metabolites, and their pathways
of synthesis and utilization constitute secondary
metabolism. Secondary metabolites are derived from pri-
mary metabolites but have a more limited distribution in
the wonderful diversity of plants, often being restricted to
a particular taxonomic group. These secondary com-
pounds appear to play no direct role in a plant’s primary
metabolism, but apparently have an ecological function.
They may attract pollinators, help the plant adapt to en-
vironmental stressors, or serve as chemical defenses
against microorganisms, insects and other predators, or
even other plants.

The dividing line between primary and secondary

----- PAGE 46 -----
38 «@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

metabolism is not absolute. For example, many steroid
alcohols (sterols) have an essential structural role in or-
ganisms, and must therefore be considered primary
metabolites.’ In addition, these two types of metabolism
are profoundly interconnected. Primary metabolism pro-
vides the small molecules that are employed as starting
materials for all of the important secondary metabolic
pathways.

Secondary metabolites can be broadly divided into
three groups, according to their route of biosynthesis:
terpenes, phenolics, and nitrogen-containing compounds.
Terpenes are lipids synthesized from acetyl coenzyme A
via the mevalonic acid pathway. Phenolic compounds are
aromatic substances formed in various ways via the shi-
kimic or malonic acid pathway. The nitrogen-containing
secondary products, such as alkaloids, are biosynthesized
primarily from amino acids.

A couple of fascinating unanswered questions arise
here. How many secondary plant metabolites are there,
and how many can occur ina single plant? New molecules
are being isolated and characterized at a rate of about
3,000 per year, and the best estimate of the total number
known appears to be 80,000 to 100,000 isolated com-
pounds of determined structure. The Dictionary of Natural
Products, by far the most comprehensive database of natu-
ral products, lists 170,000 compounds, but this covers all
natural sources, including marine and microbial.? How-
ever, the literature is unexpectedly lacking in estimates of
total numbers of constituents in a single plant cell.

The classes of plant constituents discussed in the
chapters that follow are those most strongly implicated in
the activity of medicinal plants. The primary metabolites
are, of course, essential for health, as they form the basis
of the human diet. However, as already noted, there are
times when no clear division exists between primary and
secondary metabolites. This is the case with the funda-
mentally important primary metabolites known as carbo-
hydrates and lipids. These are discussed in this book from
the perspective of herbal pharmacological activity, not
nutrition.

The discussion of other phytochemicals focuses on
the three main groups of secondary metabolites: terpenes,
polyphenols, and alkaloids. These are pivotal to any
chemistry-based understanding of herb activity. Bear in
mind, however, that it is not always possible to identify
the chemical mechanisms that explain the actions of
herbs. This should not be interpreted to mean that the
herbs in question do not work, but rather implies a lack of
research. In turn, lack of research on a plant usually im-
plies that no one has received a research grant!

ORGANIC CHEMISTRY

This book is not intended to provide a foundation in
chemistry. It is assumed that the basics of chemistry and
the conventions of organic chemistry are familiar to the
reader. A brief glossary of relevant terms can be found at
the end of this chapter. However, a few words must be
said about the structures and formulas used in this book.

The molecules discussed in the following pages are or-
ganic. That is, they are compounds that contain carbon and
hydrogen. Compounds that are not organic are called inor-
ganic. Some very simple carbon compounds, particularly
those that do not contain hydrogen (carbon dioxide, chalk,
and other carbonates, for example), are considered inor-
ganic compounds. The term organic does not mean that the
compounds are necessarily made by biological organisms
{although that was once thought to be the case), but indi-
cates that the compounds contain carbon and hydrogen.

Carbon plays a special role in the natural world be-
cause it has a unique ability to form links with itself. A few
other elements can link to themselves, but none as exten-
sively as carbon, and none yields as many stable struc-
tures. It may be helpful to think of the organic com-
pounds found in plants as chains or rings of carbon atoms
that form a carbon frame to which other groups of atoms
are attached. These functional groups are often the chemi-
cally active parts of organic molecules. Their addition to
a carbon frame results in the formation of a new com-
pound with different functions and reactions from that as-
sociated with the bare hydrocarbon. Some principal func-
tional groups are illustrated in table 3.2.

A carbon-carbon double bond is normally a chemi-
cally sensitive part of a molecule, one that is liable to
react. One of the bonds opens, and a group of atoms can
attach to each of the carbon atoms originally joined to-
gether by the bond. A double bond is also responsible for
holding a molecule in a rigid shape. Single bonds act like
hinges, enabling molecules to fold into many different
shapes, but a double bond is rigid and cannot be twisted.
A molecule will probably be more chemically active if it

possesses double carbon-carbon bonds, and the absence
of multiple bonds is a sign that a molecule is flexible.

The variety of structures that carbon can form is due
in part to its ability to form single, double, and triple
bonds with other atoms, including carbon atoms. This
structural fecundity can give rise to very intricate net-
works. However, this also makes it difficult to create two-
dimensional representations of many bond orientations
around carbon atoms. Thus, the structure of secondary
metabolites as depicted on paper should always be taken
with a grain of salt.

----- PAGE 47 -----
Table 3.2. Representative Functional Groups

GROUP STRUCTURE
Hydroxyl/alcohol —on
°
Aldehyde I
aN
fs)
Ketone I
oN
°
Acid/carboxyl Il
~~ ~on
°
Ester I
~~ or
°
i
Amide a ™~
N\
Double bond Nome
Triple bond

The orientation of the bonds around a carbon atom
depends upon the number of bonds present. Thus, in a
three-dimensional representation, the usual four bonds
may be arranged as a tetrahedron, so that all four bonds are
equally spaced about the central carbon atom, separated
by 109.5-degree angles. This means that strings of hy-
drocarbons appear to zigzag, regardless of whether or not
they contain double bonds.

Chemists often represent a molecular structure by a
line formula, which shows only the links and virtually ig-
nores the atoms. As an example, consider benzene. The
benzene molecule is a hexagonal arrangement of six car-
bon atoms and six hydrogen atoms.

AN INTRODUCTION TO PHYTOCHEMISTRY -@ 39

i
HA en ~
i
4 SNF Sa MO
|

Fig. 3.1. Benzene ring Fig. 3.2. Carbon-carbon bonds

in benzene molecule

In the line formula, the hydrogen atoms are ignored,
and only the carbon-carbon bonds are shown.
The related compound toluene is shown as:

H
|
i
Nee —
i | | J
Ne a
H

Fig. 3.3. Toluene Fig. 3.4. Carbon-carbon bonds

of the toluene molecule

with the single spike representing a CH, group.
Atoms other than carbon are always shown explicitly,
as in allicin.

oO

ic)

Fig. 3.5. Allicin

This convention greatly simplifies the depiction of
organic structures. In the following chapters, I have pro-
vided a line formula whenever it seems likely to be useful.
It is sometimes helpful to specify the kinds of atoms that
make up a molecule and the number of atoms of each
type. When such a molecular formula is written, the sym-
bol for each element is followed by a subscript numeral
indicating the number of atoms of that element in the
molecule. Again using allicin as an example, the formula
below shows that the compound consists of six carbon
atoms, ten hydrogen atoms, one oxygen atom, and two

sulfur atoms.
CgHipOS)

----- PAGE 48 -----
40 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

However, one must realize that all of these formulas
represent nothing more than shorthand.

No one knows what atoms or molecules really look
like. This is the realm of quantum mechanics and the un-
certainty principle. The spherical shapes represent an at-
tempt to visualize probability spaces. This is a wonderful
level of reality to contemplate, but it is not herbalism!

COMMONLY USED TERMS AND
CONCEPTS

Here are some terms and concepts that the reader will en-
counter frequently in the phytochemical discussions.

aglycone: A molecule that can exist with or without a
sugar group attached. Without the sugar group, they
are known as aglycones. When they contain a sugar
group, they are known as glycosides.

aromatic ring: A carbon ring structure seen, for example,
in phenolic compounds, alkaloids, and terpenes. It
consists of 6 carbon atoms in a flat, hexagonal pattern.
Different functional groups may be attached to the
ring.

conformation: The three-dimensional arrangement of
the atoms of a molecule.

compound: A chemical composed of more than one type
of atom.

functional group: In organic molecules, these are partic-
ular groups of atoms in which characteristic chemical
reactions take place. Functional groups can be found in
many different kinds of molecules.

glucoside: A glycoside in which the sugar constituent is
glucose.

glycoside: Any compound that contains a carbohydrate
molecule. These can be converted into a sugar and a
nonsugar component (an ag/ycone), and are named
specifically for the sugar contained, as in glucoside
(named for glucose), pentoside (pentose), and fructo-
side (fructose).

hydrolysis: The splitting of a compound into fragments
by the addition of water.

isomers: Two or more compounds with the same molec-
ular composition. The number of possible structural
isomers increases with the size of the molecule.

ligand: An ion, a molecule, or a molecular group that
binds to another chemical entity to form a larger
complex.

optical isomerism: Compounds that have the same
molecular formula but differ in the way they rotate the
plane of polarized light.

oxidation: The process by which oxygen is added or elec-
trons removed from a molecule.

pH: A measure of acidity or alkalinity. Neutral pH is 7,
acidic is less than 7, and alkaline (or basic) is higher
than 7.

phenolic: A molecule containing an aromatic ring bearing
one or more hydroxyl groups.

precipitate: A solid that is separated from a solution.

R: Shorthand that stands for a variable group, meaning
that the group could have any of a number of structures.

reduction: The process by which electrons are added or
oxygen lost.

stereoisomer: Two molecules that contain the same
numbers and kinds of atoms bonded in the same order,
but differ in that certain bonds are oriented differently
in space.

structure-activity relationship: The relationship be-
tween chemical structure and pharmacological activity
for a series of compounds.

References
1. Atkins PW. Molecules. New York: Scientific American
Library, 1987.
2. Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1987.
3. Buckingham J. Dictionary of Natural. Products. London;
New York: Chapman & Hall, 1994.

----- PAGE 49 -----
SM,

CARBOHYDRATES

arbohydrates are primary metabolites universally
( present in living beings on our planet. As the first

product of photosynthesis, carbohydrates are the
starting point for all phytochemicals, and also, by exten-
sion, for all animal biochemicals. More carbohydrates
occur in nature than any other type of natural compound.
The most abundant single organic substance on Earth is
cellulose, a polymer of glucose, which is the main struc-
tural material of plants.

Functions of Carbohydrates

¢ Primary nutritional components for all animals

¢ Nutritional energy sources for metabolism in both
plants and animals

© Sources of carbon in metabolic processes

¢ Forms of energy storage in the body

¢ Sources of flavor and sweetness in food

¢ Primary dietary fiber sources

¢ Important structural elements of cells and tissues (for
example, cellulose in plant cell walls)

* Components of cell-to-cell contact and biological
recognition processes

The name carbohydrate was originally assigned to
compounds believed to be hydrates of carbon, of the gen-
eral formula C,(H,0),. Of course, we now know that
many other molecules are also hydrates of carbon, so the
word has become an interesting reflection on the early
history of biochemistry. The definition of carbohydrate has
been modified and broadened to include polyhydroxy
aldehydes and ketones, alcohols and acids, and simple
derivatives of these compounds, as well as the products
formed by their condensation into oligosaccharides or
polysaccharides. In fact, many compounds of unusual
structure that do not conform to the general formula are
now included in the expanded group of compounds
known as carbohydrates.

The following material focuses upon carbohydrates
that play a role in the therapeutic activity of medicinal

ay

plants. Carbohydrates are also fundamentally important
in human nutrition, but this subject has been adequately
covered in many excellent nutrition textbooks.

CLASSIFICATION OF
CARBOHYDRATES

In biochemistry, sugars and carbohydrates are now com-
monly termed saccbarides. The name is derived from the
Latin word saccharum, meaning “sugar.” Carbohydrates
are usually classified according to size and thus solubility.
For example, a monosaccharide contains one sugar, a dis-
accharide contains two, and a polysaccharide contains
many sugars. In general, the larger the molecule, the less
soluble it is in water. Most carbohydrates in plants are
bound as oligosaccharides or polysaccharides or attached
to a range of different aglycones as glycosides. Much vari-
ation occurs in the way they are linked in plant glycosides,
oligosaccharides, or polysaccharides.

Carbohydrates may be classified according to the
number and relationships of the monosaccharide groups
present.

Monosaccharides have three to nine carbon atoms, al-
though five or six is most common.

Oligosaccharides are molecules formed by the combina-
tion of 10 or fewer monosaccharides. The bond be-
tween them is called a glycosidal bond. Disaccharides, a
subcategory of oligosaccharides, are extremely impor-
tant in nutrition.

Polysaccharides have 10 or more monosaccharide units.
This group can be broken into subcategories of bo-
mopolysaccharides and heteropolysaccharides. Glycosides are
formed via a bond between a sugar (a 1nonosaccharide
or oligosaccharide) and a nonsugar molecule (known as
the aglycone or genin). The numerous glycosides found
in plants are of great importance to herbal medicine
and are discussed later in this chapter.

----- PAGE 50 -----
42

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Major Categories of
Carbohydrates

Monosaccharides

Oligosaccharides
¢ Prebiotics

Disaccharides
« Lactose
« Maltose
« Sucrose

Polysaccharides (glycans)

Homopolysaccharides
* Glucans
e B-p-glucans
« Starches (amylose and amylopectin)
* Glycogen
* Cellulose
« Dextrans
e Fructans
¢ Galacturonans
¢ Inulins

Heteropolysaccharides
e Arabinogalactans
* Glucomannans
* Galactomannans
« Pectins
¢ Xyloglucans
¢ Glycosaminoglycans
¢ Glycoproteins
¢ Mucopolysaccharides

Polysaccharides from fungi
(mycopolysaccharides)

Polysaccharides from algae

Glycosides
« Glucosinolates
© Cyanogenic glycosides
¢ Flavonoid glycosides
e Anthraquinone glycosides
¢ Cardiac glycosides
« Saponin glycosides

MONOSACCHARIDES

Monosaccharides are described by the general formula
C,(H,O ),. Each monosaccharide can exist as more than
one optically active isomer. However, only one form is
normally encountered. Glucose is usually the D-isomer,
rhamnose the L-isomer, and so on. Each sugar can theo-
retically exist in both a pyrano (6-membered) and furano
(5-membered) ring form, although one or the other is
usually favored. Glucose normally takes up the pyrano
configuration, whereas fructose usually occurs in the fu-
rano form.

Fig. 4.1. Pyrano (6-membered) and furano (5-membered)
ring forms of p-glucose

To fully convey the chemistry and hence the bio-
chemical role of monosaccharides would necessitate an
exploration of technicalities that are beyond the scope of
this book. Please refer to Suggested Reading at the end of
this chapter for further reading on this topic.

Principal Plant Monosaccharides

Tetroses (C,H,O,)
These do not occur in free form in plants but play vital
roles in the biosynthesis of polyphenols. Threose and ery-
throse are examples.

Pentoses (C;H,90;)

Ribose is a pentose monosaccharide that is found univer-
sally in nucleic acids. Arabinose and xylose are present in
a range of polysaccharides as well as various glycosides.

HO
HOo—""" OH OH

Fig. 4.2. Xylose C5HioQ,

Hexoses (C,H),0,)

The hexoses glucose and fructose are the free sugars or
monosaccharides that are found most often in plants,
along with the disaccharide sucrose.

----- PAGE 51 -----
HOH

Fig. 4.3. Galactose CgH).O,

Deoxysugars

In deoxysugars, one or two alcohol groups have been lost
via reduction.

2-deoxy-D-ribose (C5H 904)

L-rhamnose (CgH,05)

Amino Sugars

Amino sugars are constituents of many polysaccharides,

glycolipids, and glycoproteins. More than 60 are known.

They contain from three to nine carbon atoms. Five-

carbon pentoses and 6-carbon hexoses are most abundant.
b-glucosamine (Cs5H,;NO;)
D-galactosamine (CsH,;NOs)

Five sugars are commonly found as components of
glycosides and polysaccharides: two are hexoses (glucose
and galactose), two are pentoses (xylose and arabinose),
and one is a methylpentose (rhamnose). Fructose is a
common component of oligosaccharides, such as sucrose,
and of the polysaccharides known as fructans.

OLIGOSACCHARIDES

Oligosaccharides are composed of monosaccharides or
their derivatives linked together via glycosidal bonds. The
plant world contains a wide variety of oligosaccharides.
The term is derived from the Greek word ofigos, meaning
“few”: oligosaccharides contain between two and ten
sugar units. Their various names reflect the number of

Table 4.1. Disaccharides and Trisaccharides

CaRBOHYDRATES @ 43

monosaccharides they contain, as in disaccharide (2 sac-
charides) and trisaccharides (3 saccharides).

CHZOH CHZOH
0. OH
HOG +)
3 OH ‘y)No {OH |
j 2
OH OH
Fig. 4.4. Lactose
Prebiotics

A prebiotic is defined as an indigestible food ingredient
that selectively stimulates the growth or activity of certain
bacteria in the colon. To be effective, prebiotics must es-
cape digestion in the upper gastrointestinal tract and be
used by a limited number of the microorganisms that
make up the colonic microflora. Prebiotics are principally
oligosaccharides that stimulate the growth of
Bifidobacteria, and are referred to as bifidogenic factors.
Prebiotics may have anticarcinogenic, antimicrobial, hy-
polipidemic, and glucose-modulating activities.

POLYSACCHARIDES

Polysaccharides, also known as giycans, are defined as high
molecular-weight polymers created through the conden-
sation of a large number of monosaccharide molecules.
Like oligosaccharides, polysaccharides are built up of
monosaccharide units and their derivatives. They differ
from oligosaccharides in that their molecules contain
from 10 to as many as several thousand units. The most
frequently occurring building block is D-glucose, though
D-mannose, D- and L-galactose, D-xylose, L-arabinose,
uronic acids (D-glucuronic acid, D-galacturonic acid, and

TYPE NAME MONOSACCHARIDE COMPONENTS OCCURRENCE
Disaccharide Sucrose Glucose, fructose Sugarcane, sugar beet
Maltose Glucose, glucose Enzymatic breakdown of starch
Lactose Glucose, galactose Milk
Trisaccharide Gentianose Glucose, glucose, fructose Gentiana spp.
Planteose Glucose, fructose, glucose Psyllium seeds
Raffinose Rhamnose, glucose, fructose Many seeds (eg., cottonseed}

----- PAGE 52 -----
44 «> INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

L-iduronic acid), and amino sugars (D-glucosamine and
D-galactosamine) also occur. Unlike oligosaccharides,
many polysaccharides are insoluble in water.
Polysaccharides fulfill a number of fundamental
functions. They act as structural substances: for example,
cellulose in plants, chitin in insects and crustaceans, and
chondroitin sulfate as a component of mammalian carti-
lage tissue.

They also serve as energy reserves, in the forms of

starch and inulin in plants and glycogen in animals. The

lubricant function of hyaluronic acid and the anticoagu-

lant activity of heparin provide some specific examples.
Polysaccharides can be subdivided according to

structure into homopolysaccharides and hetero-
polysaccharides.
Homopolysaccharides

Homopolysaccharides are composed of building blocks of
a single type of monosaccharide. Depending on the type
of monosaccharide they contain, homopolysaccharides
are given various names, such as glucans, fructans, man-
nans, and xylans.

Glucans

Although glucose is the most important sugar for energy
metabolism in most cells, it is not present to any great ex-
tent in the form of a free monosaccharide. Cells store glu-

cose for future use as polymers, and in this form, glucose
can be stored compactly until needed. The two major
polysaccharides used for energy storage are starch in
plants and glycogen in animals and bacteria.

Starch

Starch is a constituent of some algae and all higher plants.
It occurs both as amylose, an unbranched molecule, and
amylopectin, a branched molecule. Amylose consists
chiefly of linear chains of glucose and is water-soluble.
Amylopectin, also water-soluble, is a highly branched
molecule that is substantially larger than amylose. Starch
molecules contain between 100 and 6,000 units of glucose.

Cellulose

Cellulose is the most abundant organic compound in
plants and the most abundant single polymer in the bio-
sphere. It is also a homopolymer of glucose (a large polymer
that consists entirely of a single monomer, in this case
glucose). However, the glycosidic linkages in cellulose are
in the B-configuration instead of the a-configuration of
starch and glycogen. Cellulose is insoluble in water be-
cause of the high affinity of the polymer chains for one
another. Its individual polymeric chains have molecular
weights of 50,000 or greater. Unlike those of amylose, the
linear chains are very rigid and lie parallel to each other,
stabilized by intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bridges.

Agaricus blazel (himematsutake)
Auricularia auricula (wood ear)
Flammulina velutipes {enoki)
Grifola frondosa (maitake)
Lentinus edodes (shiitake)

Coriolus versicolor (coriolus mushroom)

Please refer to chapter 9 for more information.

Mycopolysaccharides

Mycopolysaccharides and polysaccharide-protein complexes make up the cell walls of various
fungi. Their principal bioactive substances are believed to be the B-p-glucans.* The properties of
the various myco-f-p-glucans depend upon a range of chemical characteristics, such as molecu-
lar weight, branching patterns, solubility in water, and tertiary structure.

Edible Fungi Rich in B-glucans

Medicinal Fungi Rich in B-glucans

The mycopolysaccharides may have anticarcinogenic, immune-modulating, antimicrobial,
anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, hypoglycemic, and an-
ticaries effects.> An important example discussed elsewhere is lentinan, from Lentinus edodes.

Schizophyllum commune and

Sclerotina sclerotiorum (button mushrooms)
Tremella fuciformis (tremella)

Ustilago maydis (huitlacoche)

Wolfporia cocos (poria)

Ganoderma lucidum (reishi)

|

----- PAGE 53 -----
The chains interact in parallel bundles of about 2,000
chains. Each bundle constitutes a single microfibril. Many
microfibrils arranged in parallel bundles constitute a
macrofibril, which can be seen under the light microscope.
In higher plants, cellulose occurs in association with other
polysaccharides, with proteins, and also with lignin.

B-D-glucans

B-D-glucans, usually called B-glucans, comprise a class
of indigestible polysaccharides located primarily in the
cell walls. They are widely distributed in such sources as
oats, barley, yeast, bacteria, algae, and mushrooms. Oat B-
glucan is a soluble, viscous polysaccharide made up of
mixed-linkage units of the sugar D-glucose. The different
linkages break up the uniform structure of the B-glucan
molecule, increasing its solubility and flexibility.

Oat bran contains more than 5.5% B-glucan, and
rolled oats and whole oat flour about 4%. Oat B-glucan
has cholesterol-lowering effects.! It has demonstrated
some immune-enhancing effects and may be helpful for
some people with diabetes.’ Please refer to chapter 9 for
more information on B-glucans.

Dextrans

Dextrans are extracellular polysaccharides formed from
sucrose by certain species of bacteria. They consist of lin-
ear chains of D-glucopyranose units with occasional
branchings. Dextran-forming bacteria occur primarily in
the mouth and are the causative agents of plaque.

Fructans

Fructans are polymers of fructose stored in some plants as
reserve material instead of starch. They have a much
lower molecular weight than starch and are water-soluble.
‘The branched fructans are found mainly in grasses, while
linear fructans (for example, inulin) are particular com-
mon in Asteraceae plants.

Inulins

Inulins are composed mainly of fructose units and typi-
cally have a terminal glucose. The bond between fructose
units in inulins is a B-(2,1) glycosidic linkage. Plant in-
ulins contain 2 to 150 fructose units.

CaRBOHYDRATES .@ 45

OH
“OH

CHOH

CH,OH

Fig. 4.5. Inulin

Inulins are present in onions, leeks, garlic, bananas, as-
paragus, and artichokes, among other vegetables and
fruits. Because of their sweet taste and texture, inulins are
added to various foods in the form of powders produced
by the food chemical industry. They are only slightly di-
gested in the small intestine and fermented by a limited
number of colonic bacteria. The sources of inulins mar-
keted as nutritional supplements and functional foods are
the roots of chicory (Cichorium intybus) and Jerusalem ar-
tichoke (Helianthus tuberosus).

Inulins may have antitumor, antimicrobial, hypolipi-
demic, and hypoglycemic properties. They may also have
antiosteoporotic activity, as they appear te help improve
mineral absorption and balance.®

Herbs Containing Inulins
Arctium lappa (burdock)

Cichorium intybus (chicory)

Cynara scolymus (globe artichoke)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)

Inula belenium (elecampane)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion root)

Heteropolysaccharides

Heteropolysaccharides are composed of building blocks
of two or three different types of monosaccharides, For
the most part, heteropolysaccharides are branched-chain
molecules linked to a protein framework by covalent
bonds.

Branched-chain polysaccharides linked to proteins
give the proteins unique molecular signatures that guide
them to their final destinations and facilitate specific in-
teractions among free proteins or proteins attached to

----- PAGE 54 -----
46 — INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

cells. Cell-wall polysaccharides act as recognition signals,
so the sugar sequence of these heteropolysaccharides is
informational, not unlike that of the nucleic acids in
DNA. Heteropolysaccharides have become the focus of
much scientific interest, as researchers have discovered
that they have immunomodulatory properties.

The myriad plant heteropolysaccharides are classified
according to the structure of the main chain, to which
side chains with one or more carbohydrate units are at-
tached. While the energy-storage polysaccharides and
cellulose are homopolymers composed exclusively of
glucose, a range of monosaccharides are used to build
heteropolysaccharides:

D-mannose

D- and L-galactose
D-xylose

L-arabinose

D-glucuronic acid
L-iduronic acid
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine
N-acetyl-D-galactosamine
N-acetylneuraminic acid

Glycosaminoglycans

In terms of structure, the simplest and best known of the
heteropolysaccharides are the glycosaminoglycans. These
are long, unbranched polysaccharides composed of repeat-
ing disaccharide subunits in which one of the two sugars is
either N-acetylglucosamine or N-acetylgalactosamine.
Glycosaminoglycans are negatively charged. This causes
the polymeric chains to adopt a stretched or extended con-
formation, which increases their spheres of influence and
generates a high viscosity in the surrounding region.

Glycosaminoglycans are usually found in extracellu-
lar spaces, where they produce a viscous matrix that re-
sists compression. This matrix confers many benefits: It
can allow a passageway for cell migration, create lubrica-
tion between joints, and provide rigidity to structures
such as cartilage and the eyeball.

Hyaluronic acid is a heteropolymer of D-glucuronic
acid and N-acetyl-p-glucosamine. It is considerably
larger than most glycosaminoglycans, reaching molecular
weights greater than one million. Hyaluronic acid is
formed by the successive addition of glucuronic acid and
N-acetylglucosamine residues to the ends of a growing
chain. Hyaluronic acid is usually found in a complex with
protein.

Fig. 4.6. Hyaluronic acid

Hyaluronic acid is a universal component of the ex-
tracellular fluid that fills the spaces between the cells of
body tissues. Extracellular fluid is packed with proteins
(collagen) and glycosaminoglycans. This forms a gel-like
matrix in which proteins are embedded and through
which water, oxygen, and solutes have to pass to get to the
cells. Hyaluronic acid is the main component of this ex-
tracellular matrix. Hyaluronic acid solutions have re-
markable viscosity and tensile properties. When no pres-
sure is applied to the solution, it is highly viscous and
rigid. If pressure is applied, the water is squeezed out and
the strands move past one another. Thus, hyaluronic acid
solutions behave as biological shock absorbers in connec-
tive tissue. Hyaluronic acid plays an important role in tis-
sue hydration, lubrication, and cellular function, and is
able to hold more water than any other natural substance.

Arabinogalactans

Arabinogalactans are water-soluble polysaccharides
widely found in plants, fungi, and bacteria. They are com-
posed of D-galactose and L-arabinose residues in the form
of a B-D-(1-3)-galactan main chain with side chains made
up of galactose and arabinose units of various lengths. In
plants, arabinogalactans occur as arabinogalactan pro-
teins. These proteins are proteoglycans involved in plant
growth and development; they may also be involved in
signal transduction in plants.

Dietary arabinogalactans come primarily from car-
rots, radishes, tomatoes, pears, and wheat, among other
plant foods. Gum arabic, a common food additive, is
composed of highly branched arabinogalactan. Arabino-
galactans are also found in medicinal plants, such as
Echinacea spp., and in the medicinal mushroom Gano-
derma lucidum. Arabinogalactans are thought to con-
tribute to the immune-enhancing activities of such herbs.

Larch arabinogalactan is a mixture of several different
arabinogalactans mainly derived from the wood of the
western larch (Larix occidentalis) but also present in other
species of larch. Research suggests that larch arabinogalac-

----- PAGE 55 -----
tan may have immune-enhancing activity; in vitro studies
revealed that it stimulated the activity of human natural
killer cells and enhanced the function of certain other im-
mune-system components. In other laboratory studies, it
inhibited the metastasis of tumor cells to the liver.78

Glucomannans

A glucomannan is a hydrocolloidal polysaccharide com-
posed of D-glucose and D-mannose residues bonded to-
gether in B-1,4 linkages. Approximately 60% of the poly-
saccharide is D-mannose and approximately 40% is
D-glucose.

Dietary glucomannan is a soluble fiber derived from
konjac flour. Konjac flour itself comes from the tubers of
various Amorphophallus species, relatives of the philoden-
dron houseplant. When ingested, glucomannan swells
and causes an increase in stool bulk, making it useful as a
laxative. It may also help control serum glucose and lipid
levels.

Pectins

Pectins are linear polysaccharides containing about 300 to
1,000 monosaccharides, principally D-galacturonic acid.
The D-galacturonic acid residues are linked together by
a-1,4 glycosidic linkages.

Pectins are found in the cell walls of many fruits but
are most concentrated in citrus and apples. As fruit ripens,
an insoluble precursor is converted to soluble pectin and
becomes gelatinous.

Pectin is widely employed in the food industry as a
gelling agent. It is also combined with the clay kaolin for
use in the management of diarrhea. Research suggests
that pectin has cholesterol-lowering and antithrombotic
properties and may help protect against colorectal cancer.

GLYCOPROTEINS

A rapidly advancing area in biochemistry is that con-
cerned with the structure and metabolism of saccharides
that are covalently attached to proteins (as in glycopro-
teins) and lipids (as in glycolipids). The carbohydrates in
these complexes vary in composition, in the way they are
linked, in their branching patterns, and in the type of sug-
ars that terminate each branch.

Glycoproteins are proteins to which carbohydrates
are linked by glycosidic bonds. The carbohydrates vary in
size, from mono- or disaccharides to polysaccharides, and
may be located at various positions on the polypeptide
chain. There is good reason to believe that most proteins
are, in fact, glycoproteins. In other words, there are more

CARBOHYDRATES «> 47

proteins that contain covalently bound carbohydrates
than proteins that are devoid of carbohydrates.

The molecular size of glycoproteins ranges from
15,000 to greater than one million. They differ not only
in the types and relative proportions of sugars they con-
tain, but also in the number of side chains present. Some
glycoproteins are of small molecular size and contain only
one carbohydrate chain per molecule. At the other ex-
treme, we have proteins that contain some 800 saccharide
chains in each molecule, such as sheep submaxillary
mucin. Attachment of sugars to proteins increases the sol-
ubility of proteins.

Glycoproteins cover the linings of the respiratory
and intestinal tracts, are responsible for the viscosity of
saliva and cervical mucus, and lubricate the eyeball in the
eye socket.

Mucopolysaccharides (Proteoglycans)

A group of compounds often classified as glycoproteins
are the mucopolysaccharides, or proteoglycans, of con-
nective tissue, including the chondroitin sulfates, heparin,
and keratan sulfate. To distinguish them from other gly-
coproteins, they are called proteoglycans and their carbo-
hydrate chains glycosaminoglycans.

Mucopolysaccharides differ from typical glycopro-
teins in that they contain long polysaccharide chains
made up of about 100 monosaccharide units. Mucopoly-
saccharides typically consist of a protein core to which
many long-chain linear heteropolysaccharides are cova-
lently linked. These are made up largely of repeating dis-
accharide units. In these disaccharides, one sugar is always
an amino sugar, either glucosamine or galactosamine.

Another constituent common to most mucopolysac-
charides is sulfate groups, linked by ester bonds to the hy-
droxyl groups of their monosaccharide constituents, and
in some cases also by amide linkages to the amino groups
of glucosamine. By virtue of their carboxyl and sulfate
groups, mucopolysaccharides are highly charged anions.

Mucopolysaccharides occur in many animal tissues
and fluids, including connective tissue, which is a partic-
ularly rich source. In skin, bone, cartilage, and ligaments,
mucopolysaccharides join with collagen or elastin fibers
to form the matrix or “ground substance” in which the
connective tissue cells (or fibroblasts) are embedded.

Postulated Functions of Protein-Bound
Carbohydrates
1. Physicochemical properties of glycoproteins
(viscosity)

¢ Activity of cells and tissues

----- PAGE 56 -----
48 << INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

2. Molecule-membrane interactions
¢ Secretion
* Clearance of glycoproteins from plasma
¢ Reaction of cell surface with viruses, blood group
antisera, and lectins
3. Membrane-membrane interactions
¢ Secretion
¢ Differentiation and growth
* Contact inhibition
¢ Adhesion and aggregation of cells
* Segregation of cells within the organism—
for example, the homing of lymphocytes
¢ Gamete recognition

GLYCOSIDES

The multitude of glycosides found in plants are all com-
pounds that contain a sugar unit attached to a noncarbo-
hydrate molecule, which is called the aglycone.

Sugar + Aglycone = Glycoside

On first consideration, this seems straightforward
enough, until one considers the variety of both sugars and
aglycones found in nature. From a biochemical perspec-
tive, saponins, flavones, and cardiac glycosides might all
be grouped together in a single category—a situation
guaranteed to confuse the nonspecialist. The important
point for the practitioner to remember is that glycosides,
because of their sugar component, are more easily ab-
sorbable, and thus the aglycone is more readily bioavail-
able. This increased bioavailability appears to be the rea-
son that so many diverse molecules naturally occur as
glycosides.

A number of ways have been developed to categorize
glycosides, each of which reflects different interests.

Classification of Glycosides

By sugar unit. A glycoside based on glucose is called a
glucoside; rhamnose will produce a rhamnoside, and
so on. In nature, most glycosides are formed from 5-
carbon pentose sugars or 6-carbon hexose sugars. The
sugar may be a mono-, di-, or oligosaccharide.

According to the nature of the aglycone-sugar linkage.
Different chemical bondings are possible in the
aglycone-sugar linkage, each having potentially differ-
ent chemical and physiological effects. The most com-
mon are the O-glycosides, in which an oxygen atom
acts as the link. C-glycosides, with carbon links, play an
important role as anthraquinone laxatives, such as
aloin in aloe. Other linkages include sulfur-based

S-glycosides and nitrogen-based N-glycosides. As with
other carbohydrate-based molecules, the bond might
be either an a- or a B-glycoside; B-glycosides are more
common.

By specific aglycone. This categorization is often the most
useful for the purposes of phytotherapy, as seen in the
following examples.

Simple Phenolic Glycosides: Arbutin and Salicin

Glucose
CH,OH
Glucose,
SS
OH a
Fig. 4.7. Arbutin Fig. 4.8. Salicin

Flavonoid Glycoside: Rutin

O—Glucose-O-Rhamnose

Fig. 4.9. Rutin

Anthraquinone Glycoside: Sennoside A

HO
Oo.

HO 9 OH

Oo
OH
HO
a l
we OH
Le)
fa

HO: re) fe)

HO
Fig. 4.10. Sennoside A

----- PAGE 57 -----
Steroid and Saponin Glycoside: Ginsenosides

CH,OH
HO
OH °
oH 9

Hj

CH3

oH
OH
H3C CH, 9~9°Za5 OH
CH,OH
Hye-FO
oH“
OH

OH
Fig. 4.11. Ginsenoside Re

Many pharmacologically important constituents
occur in plants as glycosides. While modification by the
sugar component is possible, the effect of a glycoside is
mainly determined by the nature of its aglycone. Thus, in
this book, we will consider glycosides in the context of
their aglycones, not as a separate group. However, I will
discuss two unique groups here, namely the cyanogenic
and the isothiocyanate glycosides.

Cyanogenic Glycosides

Bitter almonds (Prunus dulcis var. amara) produce a poi-
son, hydrogen cyanide (HCN), a fact that has been
known since antiquity. Cyanide occurs in the intact nut in
a bound form as a cyanogenic glycoside. The plant re-
leases its characteristic smell of bitter almonds only when
the tissue is damaged, which causes either enzymatic or
nonenzymatic hydrolysis of the glycoside. The immediate
hydrolytic product is a cyanohydrin, which spontaneously
decomposes to HCN and an aldehyde or ketone.

O-Glue

R 8 OH 7
\,7 Giycosidase \ // — Hystoxynittle

lyase ~

- oC as Seon + Ho=n
/ \ _ JN __. spontaneous q Hydrogen
R CaN R c=N Ketone cyanide

Cyanogenic

Cyanohydrin
Glyooside

Fig, 4.12. Cyanogenic glycoside hydrolysis

At least 1,000 species representing 100 families and
500 genera have cyanogenic properties, but the aglycone
has only occasionally been characterized.? Thus, only
about 40 cyanogenic glycosides have been identified.
Cyanogens (substances that can release cyanide) also occur
in the defense secretions of centipedes, millipedes, and
moths.

CARBOHYDRATES 2 49

Amygdalin
Amygdalin was first isolated from bitter almonds, the
seeds of the tree Prunus dulcis var. amara. The sugar moi-
ety in this compound is gentiobiose, typical for many
members of Rosaceae, and trace amounts may be present
in the fleshy parts of fruits, in bark, and in leaves.
Amygdalin is responsible for the bitterness and toxi-
city of the seeds of bitter almond and of apricots. An
amygdalin-containing drug called laetrile has been used
as an anticancer medicine, though its use is now re-
stricted.!°

Prunasin

This compound occurs in the leaves and bark of Prunus
species, as well as some other vascular plants and some
ferns, such as bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum). In
small quantities, prunasin exhibits expectorant, sedative,
and digestive properties. Prunasin is the main active prin-
ciple of wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina), used as an ex-
pectorant, antitussive, and flavoring agent in cough
syrups.

» N,
Se Sy
Sel Lo sucu Se .o—Glu
N
Aniygdalase Prunase Bonzaldehyas
~ ~
water water + Glucose
+ HON

Fig. 4.13. Prunasin metabolism

Glucosinolates

The glucosinolates, also called isothiocyanates, are glyco-
sides that are not toxic per se but release the volatile oils
commonly known as mustard oils upon enzymatic hy-
drolysis. Release occurs when plant tissue is crushed,
through the reaction of the glucosinolate with the enzyme
thioglucosidase, which is always present in plants that
contain glucosinolates. Glucosinolates are B-thioglucoside
N-hydroxysulfates, which are primarily found in crucifer-
ous vegetables, such as cabbage, broccoli, brussels
sprouts, cauliflower, bok choy, and kale.

Chemically, glucosinolates are nitrogen-sulfur com-
pounds with the same basic formula; one sulfur atom is
bonded to glucose as the S-glucoside and the other sulfur
is present as the oxygen-linked sulfate anion. About 80
glucosinolates are known. The majority of glucosinolates
are aliphatic, and the remainder are benzyl or indole
derivatives. The best-known aliphatic derivatives are

----- PAGE 58 -----
5( @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

sinigrin and glucocapparin. A typical benzyl derivative is
sinalbin, and an indole derivative is glucobrassicin.'?

Glucose— S$

Fig. 4.14. Basic structure of a glucosinolate

Glucosinolates are characteristic constituents of the
mustard family, Brassicaceae. They occur, for example, in
cabbage, cauliflower, cress, mustard, rape, and turnip.
These glycosides are also uniformly present in other fam-
ilies in the same order, Capparales, to which Brassicaceae
belongs: Capparidaceae, Moringaceae, Resedaceae, Steg-
nospermataceae, and Tovariaceae. There are several un-
related occurrences, notably in the genera Carica (Cari-
caceae), Limnanthes (Limnanthaceae), and Tropaeolum
(Tropaeolaceae). The seeds of these plants are often a rich
source of glucosinolates, although the compounds are
normally distributed throughout the plant.

The major function of glucosinolates in plants is to
deter predators. However, specialist insects, such as the
white cabbage butterfly, Pieris rapae, become adapted to
their toxic effects and use the presence of inustard oils in
host plants as feeding cues and oviposition guides. Regular
dietary intake of quantities of glucosinolates causes toxic
effects in farm animals, especially damage to the thyroid,
liver, and kidneys. The same effects may occur in humans,
although this has rarely been observed in practice.

Actions of Glucosinolates

When applied topically, mustard oils act as rubefacients,
causing local vasodilation. Thus, mustard poultices are
applied to break up congestion in the lungs and bronchi-
oles, although care must be taken not to irritate the skin.
Taken internally, the compounds serve as effective decon-
gestants for sinus conditions and also stimulate digestion.
Large doses may induce emesis.

As with all sulfur compounds, mustard oils exhibit
some antibiotic effects. Glucosinolates depress thyroid
function in animals; therefore, all plants in the genus
Brassica are potentially goitrogenic. This action may be har-
nessed therapeutically in cases of hyperthyroidism.

Dietary intake of glucosinolates (in the form of broc-
coli, cabbage, cauliflower, or brussels sprouts) may have a
protective effect against colon cancer. Experimental
tumor production is greatly inhibited by pretreatment
with isothiocyanates. The isothiocyanates interfere with
the metabolism of carcinogens by enhancing the activity.
of several cytochrome P45, enzymes involved in the

detoxification processes. They inhibit procarcinogen acti-
vation and induce phase IT enzymes, such as NAD(P)H
quinone reductase and glutathione-S-transferase, which
detoxify the electrophilic metabolites capable of altering
the structure of nucleic acids.

Sinigrin

Sinigrin is common in the Brassicaceae—for example, in
horseradish (Armoracia rusticana), mustard plants (Brassica
nigra, B. hirta, and B. juncea), and cabbage (B. oleracea var.
capitata). Sinigrin and its breakdown product, allyl iso-
thiocyanate, which is formed during hydrolysis, are
volatile, intensely pungent, and responsible for the biting
taste of mustard.!*

o—s—ot poet
Nw fo UN e —

\ ¢. —ou
aN Shine” ~~ "\ A

Glucose—S

Fig. 4.15. Sinigrin and sinalbin

Indole-3-Carbinol

Indole-3-carbinol is a breakdown product of the glucosino-
late glucobrassicin, also known as indole-3-glucosinolate.

°
Roy

o—s—o
i

‘\

N’

\ 4

Glucose-S

f

No
H

Fig. 4.16. Glucobrassicin

While glucosinolates themselves have minimal anti-
cancer activity, indole-3-carbinol may have chemopre-
ventive properties.!> Indole-3-carbinol is produced from
indole-3-glucosinolate via the action of the enzyme my-
rosinase (thioglucoside glucohydrolase). This enzyme is
present in cruciferous vegetables and activated upon the
breakup of the vegetables during cooking or the grinding
action of teeth. Indole-3-carbinol may modulate estrogen
metabolism.'® It may also have antioxidant and anti-
atherogenic activities.

GUMS AND MUCILAGES

Gums, like acacia and tragacanth, and mucilages, such as
those from flaxseed, psyllium seed, and marshmallow
root, are found in many plants. They are usually formed
from the cell wall or deposited on it in layers. They con-
sist of monosaccharides and uronic acid units.

----- PAGE 59 -----
The term mucilage is loosely used, often interchange-
ably with gum. Chemically, mucilage is closely allied with
gums and pectins, but differs in certain physical proper-
ties. While gums swell in water to form sticky, colloidal
dispersions and pectins gelatinize in water, mucilages
form slippery, aqueous colloidal dispersions that are opti-
cally active and can be hydrolyzed and fermented.

Mucilages are not pathological plant products, but
are formed within the plant during normal growth by
mucilage-secreting hairs, sacs, and canals. Gums, on the
other hand, are deposited on the surface of plants as exu-
dates, which are formed as a result of bacterial or fungal
action after mechanical injury.

Mucilage is a naturally occurring organic plant con-
stituent with a molecular weight of 200,000 or greater,
the detailed structure of which is unknown. Mucilages

occur in nearly all classes of plants in various plant parts,
usually in relatively small percentages. They are often as-
sociated with other constituents, such as tannins. The
most common sources are the root, bark, and seed, but
they are also found in the flower, leaf, and cell wall.

Plants Containing Mucilage

Acacia senegal (acacia or gum arabic)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow root and leaf)
Astragalus gummifer (tragacanth)

Chondrus crispus (carrageen)

Cyamopsis tetragonolobus (guar)

Cydonia oblonga (quince seed)

Plantago ovata, P. arenaria (psyllium seeds)
Sterculia urens (sterculia)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey root and leaf)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot leaves)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm bark)

Any biological functions of mucilage within the plant
are unknown, but it is thought that they may aid in water
storage, decrease diffusion in aquatic plants, help in seed
dispersal and germination, and act as membrane thicken-
ers and food reserves.

The chief industrial sources of mucilages are Icelandic
and Irish moss, flax or linseed, locust bean, slippery elm
bark, and quince seed. They are usually extracted with
water or a dilute sodium carbonate solution, purified by
precipitation with alcohol or salt solutions from the aque-
ous solution, and marketed as powders. Mucilages are used
in cosmetics, in medicine as laxatives and diuretics, as
pharmaceutical emulsifying agents, and as materials that
prevent precipitation of colloidal suspension,

Most mucilages are considered to be polysaccharides

CARBOHYDRATES «> 51

that contain the same group of sugars as gums and
pectins; they commonly occur as salts. The cations are
chiefly of calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium.
The most common acids are uronic acids, such as man-
nuronic acid. Hydrolysis of mucilages yields pentoses and
hexoses, the most common being arabinose, galactose,
glucose, mannose, rhamnose, and xylose.

COOH

H OQ. OH
H
OH OH

OH H
H H

Fig. 4.17. d-mannuronic acid

The physical properties of mucilages are more im-
portant than their chemical properties. They are quite in-
digestible; however, even if polysaccharides were broken
down in the digestive tract, the breakdown products, sug-
ars and uronic acids, have little pharmacological effect
and are generally regarded as inert. Whether or not this
is the case in practice is not known.

Mucilage retains a large amount of water and hence
maintains an elevated temperature, which progressively
penetrates tissues. This makes mucilage useful in hot
compresses—for example, linseed compresses. Mucilage
also checks fermentation and bacterial growth, absorbs
toxins, and assists the body in eliminating wastes. Like
other water-soluble fibers, mucilage helps lower choles-
terol, and its hydrophilic properties produce a sensation
of fullness in the stomach without adding calories, mak-
ing it useful for appetite suppression. In addition, a blood
sugar-lowering effect has been observed in both diabetics
and normal subjects.

Mucilage acts primarily as a local demulcent or emol-
lient when it comes in direct contact with mucous mem-
brane surfaces or skin. Here they produce a coating of
“slime” that soothes and protects exposed or irritated sur-
faces of the gastrointestinal tract. They are used exten-
sively in the management of inflammatory digestive dis-
orders, especially when there is ulceration. Their relative
indigestibility and hydrophilic properties have important
influences on bowel behavior.

Laxative: The bulking effect of mucilage stimulates
peristalsis.

Antidiarrheal: Small quantities of mucilage absorb excess
water in the colon.

Gum Arabic
Gum arabic, or acacia gum, is the gum obtained from
Acacia senegal and closely related species. A. senegal is a

----- PAGE 60 -----
52 -& INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

spiny tree up to 6 meters high that grows in the Sudan
and Senegal. Harvesting starts with an incision through
the bark to the cambium layer of the tree. The bark above
and below the cut is removed so that an area of the cam-
bium is laid bare. This injury stimulates the formation of
gum as droplets in the cut, which dry to opaque balls with
a crackled surface. The gum is collected 20 to 30 days
after the incision is made.

Arabic acid, made up of calcium, potassium, and
magnesium salts, is a major constituent of acacia gum.
This acid is a branched-chain polysaccharide, the build-
ing blocks of which are D-galactose, L-arabinose, L-rham-
nose, and D-glucuronic acid.!”

A—G A—G A—G
| | | |
G—S— SF be
Sp p e
fo 4 4
| | |
A A A A

Fig. 4.18. General structure of arabic acid
(A =L-arabinose, R = L-rhamnose, G = p-galactose,
U = p-glucuronic acid)

Gum acacia also contains oxidizing enzymes, such as
peroxidases. For this reason, it should not be mixed with
easily oxidized compounds. In pharmaceutical manufac-
turing, gum acacia is used as an emulsifier, as a con-
stituent of suspensions, and in tablet production.

Tragacanth USP

Tragacanth is the gummy exudate from Astragalus gum-
mifer and other Asiatic species of Astragalus.'® When in-
troduced into water, tragacanth absorbs a certain propor-
tion of that liquid, swells greatly, and forms a soft
adhesive paste, but does not dissolve. If agitated with
water, this paste forms a uniform mixture, but in the
course of one or two days most of the tragacanth sepa-
rates out and is deposited, leaving a portion dissolved in
the supernatant fluid. Several days should be allowed in
order to obtain a uniform mucilage of the maximum gel
strength. Tragacanth is wholly insoluble in alcohol.

Tragacanth powder is often used to stiffen a pill mass
and render it adhesive. In glycerite form, it affords an ex-
cellent pill excipient. Tragacanth is also used as a sus-
pending agent in lotions, mixtures, and various other
preparations and prescriptions. It is used with emulsifying
agents largely to increase consistency and retard cream-
ing. The jellylike product formed when the gum is al-
lowed to swell in water serves as the basis for pharmaceu-
tical jellies, such as ephedrine sulfate jelly.

The constituent tragacanthin yields glucuronic acid
and arabinose when hydrolyzed.

Guar Gum .
Guar gum is obtained from the endosperm of the seed of
Cyamopsis tetragonolobus, a plant cultivated in India,
Pakistan, and the United States. Guar flour, milled from
the seeds, contains about 86% water-soluble mucilage,
which can be extracted by precipitation with ethanol. The
main constituent is a galactomannan (with a molecular
weight of about 220,000), a B-1,4-linked D-mannose lin-
ear polysaccharide with an a-1,6-linked D-galactose
residue attached to every other D-mannose unit.

‘CHjOH CHsOH
oH OL OH OH
on fh,
4 9 4 4
H OH | H |
et pen om cii,0H

Fig. 4.19. Guar gum (partial structure)

Guar gum is used in pharmacy as a disintegrator in
tablets, an emulsifier, and a thickener. It is also employed
as a laxative. Taking guar gum before meals may lower
blood glucose levels for diabetics. It also reduces the
cholesterol level in blood serum, both in healthy people
and in diabetics.'°

Psyllium Seed and Husk
Psyllium seed is the ripe seed obtained from several
Plantago species. The seeds are elliptical and 2 to 3 mm
long, odorless, bland-tasting, and mucilaginous when
chewed. The mucilages and hemicelluloses are located in
the seed coat, or husk, making the husks about five times
more active than the seeds. The mucilaginous husk of
P. ovata separates fairly easily from the rest of the seed, so
this is the species from which psyllium husk is derived.
To prepare psyllium for consumption, the whole
seeds or husks are soaked in water for several hours; they
are then taken with a large amount of liquid. The mu-
cilage retains the moisture during gastrointestinal transit,
promoting the passage of a soft stool after a transit time
of 6 to 12 hours.

Agar

Agar (or agar agar) is a dried, hydrophilic, colloidal sub-
stance obtained from various species of red algae, including
Gelidium amansii, G. cartilagineum, and G. divaricatum. The
main constituents of the product are two polysaccharides:
agarose, a long-chain compound in which about 10% of

----- PAGE 61 -----
CARBOHYDRATES 2 53

the chains are esterified with sulfuric acid; and agaropectin, 9. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
which differs from agarose in that significantly more A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
chains are esterified with sulfuric acid. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Agar is sold commercially in the form of pale yellow 10. Ibid.
strips or pieces or as a yellowish powder. Agar is indi- 11. Ibid.

gestible and passes through the gastrointestinal tract al-
most unchanged. [t undergoes little if any breakdown by
intestinal microorganisms, which may account for its rel-
atively low activity in the bowel. It acts solely through its
ability to absorb water and swell within the intestine.

12. Ibid.

13. Tihornalley PJ. Isothiocyanates: mechanism of cancer
chemopreventive action. Anticancer Drugs 2002;
13(4):331-8.

14. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

References, A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

15. Bradlow HL, Sepkovic DW, Telang NT, et al.
Multifunctional aspects of the action of

1. Behall KM, Scholfield DJ, Hallfrisch J. Effect of
beta-glucan level in oat fiber extracts on blood lipids in

men and women. Journal of the American College of
Nutrition 1997; 16:46-S 1. indole-3-carbinol as an anti-tumor agent. Annals of the

New York Academy of Sciences 1999; 889:204-13.

16. Zeligs MA. Diet and estrogen status: the cruciferous
connection. Journal of Medicinal Food 1998; 1:67-82.

2. Estrada A, Yuri CH, Van Kessel A, et al.
Immunomodulatory activities of oat beta-glucan in vitro
and in vivo, Microbiology and Immunology 1997, 41:99 1-8.

3. Hallfrisch J, Scholfield DJ, Behall KM. Diets containing 17. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;

Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

soluble oat extracts improve glucose and insulin re-
sponses of moderately hypercholesterolemic men and

women. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1995; 18. Thid.
61:379-84. 19. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
4, Manzi P, Pizzoferrato L. Beta-glucans in edible mush- London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.
rooms. Food Chemustry 2000; 68:315-18. 20. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
5. Borchers AT, Stem JS, Hackman RM, et al. Mushrooms, A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
tumors, and immunity. Proceedings af the Society for Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1999; 221:281-93.
6. Roberfroid MB, Delzenne NM. Dietary fructans. Suggested Reading
Annual Review of Nutrition 1998; 18:117-43. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
7. Hauer J, Anderer FA. Mechanism of stimulation of Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.
human natural killer cytotoxicity by arabinogalactan Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition,
from Larix occidentalis. Cancer Immunology, London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.
Immunotherapy 1993; 36:237-4. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
8. Kelly GS. Larch arabinogalactan: clinical relevance of a Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
novel immune-enhancing polysaccharide. Alternative DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Medicine Review: A Journal of Clinical Therapeutic. 1999,
4:96-103.

----- PAGE 62 -----
LIPIDS

molecules found in living systems. Most are insol-

uble in water but soluble in nonpolar solvents, such
as alcohol. (This definition excludes the mineral oils and
other petroleum products obtained from fossil material.)
In a physiological sense, lipids are fundamentally impor-
tant for both humans and plants.

Major classes of lipids include fatty acids, glycerol-
derived lipids (including fats, oils, and phospholipids), the
sphingosine-derived lipids (including ceramides, cereb-
rosides, gangliosides, and sphingomyelins), steroids and
their derivatives, terpenes and their derivatives, certain
aromatic compounds, and long-chain alcohols and waxes.
Often lipids are found conjugated with proteins or carbo-
hydrates, and the resulting substances are known as
Lipoproteins and lipopolysaccharides. The fat-soluble vitamins
can also be classified as lipids. The material in this chap-
ter focuses on representative lipids found in medicinal
plants.

| ipids are a large and diverse class of organic

Important Functions of Lipids
Among many other functions, lipids serve as the basis of
cell membranes and as a form of fuel storage.

Major structural components of all biological membranes
Energy reserves and fuel for cellular activities
Vitamins and hormones (lipids and lipid derivatives)
Protective coatings with important immunological
functions for cells

Waterproof protective coverings in plants and some
animals

Blood-based carriers of fat-soluble vitamins such as A,
D, E, and K

CLASSIFICATION OF LIPIDS

Any classification of lipids, whether by physical proper-
ties, chemistry, biological function, or occurrence, is arbi-
trary. The classification of lipids can be based on their
physical properties, chemical structure, biological func-

54

tion, or occurrence. This makes the choice of classifica~
tion arbitrary; ideally, it can be based on the interests of
the classifier. Structural variations within each class are
due to the different fatty acid residues that may be present.

Simple aliphatic (straight-chained) hydrocarbons act
as structural backbones to which functional groups can be
added to create various types of lipids. Those most often
encountered within the creative cornucopia of plant cells
include:

¢ Halogenated hydrocarbons
* Alcohols

* Sulfides

¢ Esters

° Fatty acids

Large, unsaturated hydrocarbons are common in
plant waxes. As chain Jength and number of unsaturated
bonds increase, the molecule becomes increasingly waxy
and then solid at room temperature. In their functional-
ized forms, these are the lipids we know as fatty acids.

FATTY ACIDS

Fatty acids are Cyg to Coo straight-chain compounds that
have a single carboxyl radical. They play a profound nu-
tritional role, supplying not only lipids to the diet but also
vitamin F, the essential fatty acids used by the body to
build and maintain membrane structures, among other
functions.

The numbering of carbons in fatty acids begins with
the carbon of the carboxyl group. Fatty acids that contain
no carbon-carbon double bonds are termed saturated fatty
acids; those that contain double bonds are unsaturated fatty
acids. The numbers used for fatty acids come from the
number of carbon atoms, followed by the number of sites
of unsaturation. For example, palmitic acid is a 16-carbon
fatty acid with no unsaturation and is designated by 16:0.
The site of unsaturation in a fatty acid is indicated by the
symbol A and the number of the first carbon of the dou-
ble bond. Thus, palmitoleic acid is a 16-carbon fatty acid

----- PAGE 63 -----
Structural Classification of Lipids

Fatty acids
¢ Saturated fatty acids
¢ Unsaturated fatty acids
¢ Branched-chain fatty acids
¢ Hydroxy fatty acids, including
prostaglandins

Lipids containing glycerol

¢ Mono-, di-, and triacylglycerols
(acylglycerols)

¢ Glyceryl ethers (alkoxydiglycerides)

* Glycosylmono- and glycosydiacyl-
glycerols

¢ Phospholipids (phosphatides)

« Plasmalogens (acetal phosphatides)

Lipids containing sphingosine
¢ Sphingomyelins
* Ceramides
¢ Neutral glycosphingolipids
(cerebrosides)
¢ Sialoglycosphingolipids (gangliosides)
« Sulfoglycosphingolipids (sulfatides)

Complex lipids
¢ Lipoproteins and proteolipids
¢ Lipopolysaccharides

Long-chain aliphatic alcohols and waxes

Hydrocarbons such as squalene and
carotene

Sterols and related compounds such as
vitamin D

with one site of unsaturation between carbons 9 and 10,
and is designated by 16:1A9. Saturated fatty acids that
contain fewer than eight carbon atoms are liquid at body
temperature, whereas those containing more than 10 are
solid. The presence of double bonds in fatty acids signif-
icantly lowers the melting point relative to that of satu-
rated fatty acids.

wae
a a

Fig. 5.1. Palmitoleic acid

Lips .2 $5

Most fatty acids come from the diet. However, the
body can make all the various fatty acid structures needed,
with two key exceptions. These are the highly unsatu-
rated fatty acids linoleic acid and linolenic acid, which
contain unsaturation sites beyond carbons 9 and 10.
Because these two fatty acids cannot be synthesized from
precursors in the body, they are known as essential fatty
acids, as they must be provided in the diet. Since plants are
capable of synthesizing linoleic and linolenic acid, hu-
mans can acquire these fats either by consuming a variety
of plants or by eating the meat of animals that have con-
sumed these plant fats.

Classification of Fatty Acids

In saturated fatty acids, all the bonds are filled.
Unsaturated fatty acids contain double bonds, making
such molecules more biochemically active. Cyclic
monobasic fatty acids are less common, but include such
clinically important molecules as chaulmoogric and hyd-
nocarpic acids, which are discussed later in this chapter.

Table 5.1. Saturated Straight-Chain Acids

COMMON NAME SYSTEMIC NAME = STRUCTURAL FORMULA
Butyric n-tetranoic CH3[CH,],COOH
Isovaleric 3-methy-butanoic — [CH,],CHCH,COOH
Caproic n-hexanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Caprylic n-hexanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Capric n-octanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Lauric n-decanoic CH3[CH,];p COOH
Myristic n-tetradecandic CH3[CH,]},COOH
Palmitic n-hexadecanoic CH,[CH}4COOH
Stearic n-octadecanoic CH3[CH,])¢COOH
Arachidic n-eicosanoic CH3[CH)])gCOOH

Occurrence and Distribution

In plants, fatty acids occur mainly in bound form, esteri-
fied to glycerol, as fats or lipids. These lipids comprise up
to 7% of the dry weight of leaves in higher plants, and are
important as membrane constituents in chloroplasts and
mitochondria. Considerable quantities of lipids also occur
in the seeds or fruits of many plants, providing a stored
form of energy to use during germination. Seed oils from

----- PAGE 64 -----
56 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 5.2. Unsaturated Straight-Chain Acids

COMMON NAME NUMBER OF LINSATURATED BONDS STRUCTURAL FORMULA

Palmitoleic 1 CH,[CH;],CH=CH[CH,],COOH

Oleic 1 CH,[CH,],CH=CH[CH,], COOH

Linoleic 2 CHy[CH,],CH=CHCH,CH=CH-[CH,},COOH

Linolenic 3 CH,CH,=CHCH,CH=CHCH,-CH=CH[CH,],COOH

Arachidonic 4 CHy[CH,],CH=CHCH,CH=CHCH,-CH=CHCH,CH=CH[CH,};COOH

plants such as olive, palm, coconut, soy, sunflower, rape,
and peanut are exploited commercially as food fats, for
soap manufacture, and in the paint industry. Plant fats,
unlike animal fats, are rich in unsaturated fatty acids, and
there is now abundant evidence that some of these are es-
sential human dietary requirements.

Certain polyunsaturated fatty acids cannot be synthe-
sized by humans and therefore must be supplied in food.
These are the essential fatty acids, distinguished by dou-
ble bonds beyond the one in the C-9 position (counted
from the carboxyl end). Examples include omega-3 fatty
acids (linoleic acid, linolenic acid, gamolenic acid, and cis-
6, cis-9, and cis-12-octadecatrienoic acids) and the omega-
6 fatty acid gamma linolenic acid.

Gamma-Linolenic Acid

Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) is an unusual constituent of
living matter that is found in very few plants. These in-
clude borage (Borago officinalis), evening primrose
(Oenothera biennis), black currant (Ribes nigrum), and
hemp (Cannabis sativa).!

GLA is an omega-6 (Q-6) polyunsaturated fatty acid
made up of 18 carbon atoms and three double bonds. It is
a precursor in the synthesis of the beneficial series-1
prostaglandins. Through the synthesis of these prosta-
glandins, GLA can play a role in lowering blood pressure,
making platelets less sticky, decreasing inflammation, and
enhancing immune function. It may also help lower
blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels.

CH3—— [CHa]27— CH,

ONO Ott pg gl

Fig. 5.2. Gamma-linolenic acid

Black Currant Seed Oil

Black currant seed oil, from the seeds of: Ribes nigrum,
contains about 15% to 20% GLA, making it a rich source
of omega-6 fatty acids. Black currant seed oil also con-
tains up to 20% of the omega-3 (Q-3) polyunsaturated
fatty acids alpha-linolenic (ALA) and linoleic acids.
Research suggests that black currant oil has antithrom-
botic and anti-inflammatory actions. 73

Borage Oil

Borage oil, from the seeds of Borago officinalis, is a rich
source of GLA. The amount of GLA in borage oil, mea-
sured as the percentage of total fatty acid content, ranges
from about 20% to 27%. Borage oil also contains ap-
proximately 10% alpha-linolenic acid (ALA).*

Evening Primrose Oil

Evening primrose oil, from the seeds of Oenothera biennis,
contains approximately 7% to 14% GLA and about 10%
linolenic acid.’ According to research, evening primrose
oil has demonstrated anti-inflammatory actions in some
cases of rheumatoid arthritis. It may also be indicated in
other inflammatory disorders, such as Sjogren’s syndrome
and ulcerative colitis.° It is approved in the United
Kingdom as a pharmaceutical treaunent for mastalgia and
for atopic dermatitis, particularly to help with itching.’

Alpha-Linolenic Acid

Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is an omega-3 (Q-3) polyun-
saturated fatty acid containing 18 carbon atoms and three
double bonds. ALA is metabolized to eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA), a precursor of the series-3 prostaglandins, the
series-5 leukotrienes, and the series-3 thromboxanes.
These eicosanoids have anti-inflammatory and an-
tiatherogenic properties. ALA metabolites may also in-
hibit the production of the pro-inflammatory eicosanoids,
prostaglandin E, and leukotriene By, as well as the pro-

----- PAGE 65 -----
inflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-a. and
interleukin B1.

The incorporation of ALA and its metabolites into
cell membranes can affect membrane fluidity, which may
play a role in the anti-inflammatory and antiplatelet ac-
tions of ALA. The Mediterranean diet, high in ALA, ap-
pears to lower the risk of coronary artery disease and cer-
tain types of cancer.®

Flaxseed Oil

Flaxseed oil, also known as flax or linseed oil, is made
from the seeds of Linum usitatissimum. Flax is a very rich
source of ALA, containing approximately 40% to 60% of
this essential fatty acid. Linoleic acid and oleic acid are
also present, but in smaller amounts (about 15% each). In
addition, flaxseed oil contains secoisolariciresinol diglyco-
side, a type of phytoestrogen known as a lignan, in varying
amounts. Flaxseed oil may have anti-inflammatory, an-
tithrombotic, and antiproliferative activities.?

Chaulmoogric acid

Chaulmoogric acid, or (S)-13-(cyclopent-2-enyl) tride-
canoic acid, is present in amounts of about 27% as the
glyceride ester in chaulmoogra oil, extracted from seeds
of Hydnocarpus wightiana. The ethyl ester has been used
in the treatment of leprosy.'°

Fig. 5.3. Chaulmoogric acid

Prostaglandins

Prostaglandins can be regarded as derivatives of prosta-
noic acid. Prostanoic acid is not found in living tissue, so
this is simply a chemical distinction. (Refer to chapter 9
for a detailed discussion on prostaglandin synthesis.)

All naturally occurring prostaglandins have a double
bond in the trans configuration between C-13 and C-14.
Additional double bonds in the cis configuration can occur
between C-5 and C-6, as well as between C-17 and C-18.
Depending on the substituents in the ring, prostaglandins
are assigned to series E, F, D, and so on. According to the
number of double bonds in the side chain, they are further
divided into subgroups, such as E,, E,, F;, F,, and so on.

Prostaglandins occur in practically all tissues.
However, they are not stored, but synthesized from the
corresponding polyunsaturated Cy fatty acids only when
needed. Depending on the organ, they show a variety of

LIPIDS 2 57

physiological effects, discussed in detail in chapter 9. For
example, PGE, is a vasodilator and bronchodilator, and
PGF, is a vasoconstrictor and bronchoconstrictor.

Fig. 5.4. Prostaglandin E,

Thromboxanes and prostacyclins are related to the
prostaglandins. Thromboxane B, is the metabolic product
of the unstable thromboxane A), which induces platelet
aggregation. The prostacyclin (also known as prosta-
glandin PGI,) formed in the blood vessel wall, on the
other hand, prevents platelet aggregation.

Hoos.

OH

Fig. 5.5. Prostacyclin

Fig. 5.6. Thromboxane B,

In addition to prostaglandins, the monohydroxy-(e)-
icosatetraenoic acids (HETE) and the leukotrienes are
also derived from arachidonic acid. 5-HETE and
leukotriene B, (LTB,) play a part in the regulation of neu-
trophil and eosinophil function, while the sulfidopeptide
leukotrienes (LTC,, LTD,, LTE, and LTT,) are impor-
tant smooth muscle antispasmodics.

OH
— COOH

Se

Fig. 5.7. 5-hydroxy-(e)-icosatetraenoic acid

----- PAGE 66 -----
58 <- INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

LIPIDS CONTAINING GLYCEROL

These lipids are composed of a glycerol backbone to
which three fatty acids are esterified.

The fats occurring in nature consist almost exclu-
sively of triacylglycerols (neutral fats), along with traces of
mono- and diacylglycerols. The latter two esters, how-
ever, are formed in the intestine during digestion and ab-
sorption of triacylglycerols, and therefore may also be
found among circulating lipids in plasma.

Natural fats may be solid or liquid at room tempera-
ture. At least 5 and up to 12 or more different fatty acids
occur in these fats, which are a mixture of extremely di-
verse triacylglycerols. The fatty acids of most natural fats
consist of mixtures of saturated and unsaturated acids. In
general, the melting point of a fat increases with the pro-
portion of saturated fatty acids it contains.

LONG-CHAIN ALIPHATIC
ALCOHOLS

Aliphatic alcohols occur widely. Several alcohols belong
to aroma compounds that play a role in environmental
and food systems. They are found with normal, branched
(mono- or isoprenoid), saturated or unsaturated chains of
various length and sometimes with secondary or even ter-
tiary alcohol functions.

Waxes

Waxes, strictly speaking, are esters of fatty acids with
aliphatic straight-chain monohydric alcohols, usually
cetyl alcohol and octadecyl alcohol, but frequently also
with higher alcohols, up to C-30. Among the saturated
fatty acids, cerotinic acid occurs most frequently; occa-
sionally, hydroxy acids are also found. In many natural

waxes, the fatty acid and alcohol components have the
same chain length.

The epidermis of animals and plants excretes waxes
as protective films against water loss or wetting. For ex-
ample, the surface waxes of plants in very dry climates
help the plants conserve water. In humid climates, the
surface waxes of fruits and the lanolin found on the skin
and in the hair of most furry animals repel excess mois-
ture. In many zooplankton and other species of marine
animals, waxes serve as energy reserve materials.

Urushiols (Alkylcatechols)

Urushiols have a side chain containing 15 or 17 carbon
atoms; they may be saturated or unsaturated, with one to
three double bonds.!! These compounds, found in the oil
of poison ivy and poison oak, produce contact dermatitis
and are discussed in more detail in chapter 10.

| —
Fig. 5.8. Urushiol III
HYDROCARBONS

Straight-chained, or aliphatic, hydrocarbons resulting
from decarboxylation of fatty acids are present in some
plants. That is, they are thought to be metabolic break-
down products of fatty acids. They may be saturated or
unsaturated, but unlike their fatty acid counterparts, they
usually have an odd number of carbon atoms.
Turpentine is a rich source of saturated hydrocarbons

Acylglycerols

Acylglycerols are formed by esterification of glycerol with one, two, or three fatty acids, yielding a mono-, di-,

or triacylglycerol, respectively.

CH,OCOR CH,OH CH,OCOR' CH,OCOR! CH,OCOR!
| | | lo |
CHOH CHOCOR CHOCOR? CHOH CHOCOR?
| | | | |
CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH CH,OCOR? CH,OCOR?

2-acylglycerol
(B-monoacylglycerol)

T-acylglycerol
{a-monoacylglycerol)

1,2-diacylgycerol
(a, B-diacylglycerol)

1,2,3-triacylglycerol
(triacylglycerol)

1,3-diacylglycerol
(a, a-diacylglycerol)

----- PAGE 67 -----
such as heptane. Turpentine is the volatile fraction distilled
from the oleoresins of various pines, which is then further
processed. Sources include Pinus pinaster and P betero-
phyla. See chapter 6 for a detailed discussion on these
compounds.

ON
Fig. 5.9. Heptane

The primary source of saturated hydrocarbons in liv-
ing plants is the waxy coating on some leaves and fruits. A
common leaf wax constituent is nonacosone, found in the
leaves of brussels sprouts (Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera).

Unsaturated hydrocarbons play a pivotal role in plant
metabolism. Ethylene is an important plant growth hor-
mone, and isoprene is the building block of the whole
gamut of terpenes, discussed in chapter 6.

CH» —=CH, Pe

Fig. 5.10. Ethylene and isoprene

Polyacetylenes
These molecules contain a highly reactive triple bond, as
found in the gas acetylene. They often contain additional
functional groups, but can be conveniently classified here.
Many polyacetylenes are extremely toxic, such as the
compound cicutoxin found in cowbane and water hem-
lock (Cicuta virosa). Others, such as the antifungal com-
pound wyerone found in broad beans (Vicia faba), act as
phytoalexins that protect the plant against fungal
pathogens.

CH===:CH

Fig. 5.11. Acetylene

Sy
LE CHs

AZ

Fig. 5.12.
Cicutoxin

Lipps .2 59

CHa

Fig. 5.13. Wyerone

Alkamides

There are more than 140 closely related alkamides, all of
which have a more or less unsaturated aliphatic acid
residue linked with different amine parts. Apart from a
very few saturated derivatives from Piper amalago, the
alkamides fall into two groups.

Compounds with purely alkene patterns. Purely alkene
alkamides have been isolated from four plant families:
Piperaceae, Aristolochiaceae, Rutaceae, and Asteraceae.

Compounds with alkene and alkyne linkages. Alkyne
alkamides are restricted to the Asteraceae, and most
are found in the Anthemideae and Heliantheae tribes.
Eighty different acetylenic alkamides have been iso-
lated from these tribes. This structural diversity stems
from various combinations of 14 amine and 85 acid
moieties. Such diversity provides valuable chemotaxo-
nomic criteria.

Several alkamides, especially alkene isobutyl amides,
are known for their insecticidal activity as well as for their
pungent taste. They also produce local anesthesia of the
mucous membranes, accompanied by profuse salivation.
Plants that yield these substances have been used medic-
inally since ancient times, especially in cases of
toothache. The position of double bonds and isomerism
both play important roles in the physiological and insec-
ticidal activities of the alkamides. A representative alka-
mide is affinin, which is found in the roots of the Mexican
silagogue Heliopsis /ongipes.'3

Most of the alkamides have been isolated from the
Anthemideae and Heliantheae tribes of the family
Asteraceae. Within these taxa, distribution is mainly con-
fined to a few closely related genera.

ae

Fig. 5.14. Affinin.

----- PAGE 68 -----
60 «2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Halogenated Hydrocarbons

Marine organisms that produce secondary metabolites are
attracting increasing attention as sources of unique
molecules of pharmacological value. One such group is
the halogenated hydrocarbons, which are almost unknown
in land plants. An example is the bromine-containing
spirolaurenone from Laurencia, a genus of red algae.

Br

Fig. 5.15. Spirolaurenone

Alcohol Hydrocarbons

These are hydrocarbons that contain a hydroxyl group as
part of the molecule. If biosynthetically derived from iso-
prene, alcohol hydrocarbons may be considered acyclic
terpenes (for example, geraniol), which are discussed in
chapter 6. A nonterpenoid example is octanol (caprylic al-
cohol). This volatile substance is a component of many
orchid flower scents and is used in perfumery.

Fig. 5.16. Geraniol

Hydrocarbon Sulfides

Hydrocarbon sulfides are relatively uncommon in plants
but of great importance in human diet and health care.
These are odoriferous molecules (perhaps better termed
odious, if one is English!) such as those found in garlic
(Allium sativum) and skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus).

Allicin

The major odor principle of garlic, allicin is produced from
the amino acid alliin by the enzyme alliinase when exposed
to air. In both laboratory and clinical studies, allicin has
demonstrated antidiabetic, antihypertensive, antibiotic,
and hypolipidemie activities. It also enhances fibrinolytic
activity in the blood and inhibits platelet aggregation."

f COOH |

| oe allinase
Ss. CC $.
awa NH, Yan. $ “ NUS,
alin icin
(odorless)

Fig. 5.17. Allicin

Hydrocarbon Esters

These condensation products of hydrocarbon alcohols
and acids tend to have pleasant aromas. This reaction is
fundamental to biochemistry, so a wide variety of esters
exist. See chapter 6 for more information.

References

1. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

2. Deferne JL, Leeds AR. Resting blood pressure and car-
diovascular reactivity to mental arithmetic in mild hy-
pertensive males supplemented with blackcurrant seed
oil. Journal of Human Hypertension 1996, 10:531-7.

3. Watson J, Byars ML, McGill P, Kelman AW. Cytokine
and prostaglandin production by monocytes of volun-
teers and rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with di-
etary supplements of blackcurrant seed oil. British
Journal of Rheumatology 1993; 32:1055~58.

4. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

5. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

6. Belch JJF, Hill A. Evening primrose oil and borage oil in
rheumatologic conditions, The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 2000; 71(suppl):352S—5S.

7. Huang Y-S, Mills DE, eds. Gasma-linolenic Acid:
Metabolism and Its Roles in Nutrition. Champaign, IL:
AOCS Press, 1996.

8. James MJ, Gibson RA, Cleland LG. Dietary polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids and inflammatory mediator production.
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2000;

71 (suppl):343 S488.

9. Prasad K. Dietary flaxseed in prevention of hypercholes-

terolemic atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 1997; 132:69-76.

10. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

11. Ibid.

12. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

13, Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

14. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Suggested Reading

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Lies © 61

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 70 -----
TERPENES

he terpenes, also known as isoprenoids, are the
largest group of secondary plant metabolites.
More than 20,000 structures have been de-
scribed.' The name terpene comes from turpentine, which
in turn comes from the old French ter(e)binth, meaning
“resin.” They are all derived chemically from 5-carbon
isoprene units assembled in different ways.

Terpenes of different sizes and composition are found
throughout all classes of organisms. Larger terpenoid
molecules are essential components of human meta-
bolism and include the adrenal hormones, the membrane
component cholesterol, and the lipid soluble vitamins A,
E, and K. An even greater variety of terpenoid molecules
exist as secondary metabolites in plants and fungi, as well
as some bacteria and insects.

While not essential for viability, terpenes enable
plants to prosper in their specific environments. They
have a variety of natural functions. They may be flavors
or scents or act as growth regulators, defense secretions,
or pollinator attractants. Terpenes appear to have evolved
quite separately within small groups of organisms, and
therefore comprise a great diversity of structures capable
of specific interactions with a range of biological receptors.

Plants with distinctive terpenes provide many of the
compounds used as research leads for pharmaceutical,
agricultural, and other commercial applications.

¢ Paclitaxel (taxol) from yew trees inhibits mammalian
cell division and is used clinically in cancer treatment.

* a-santonin is one of the anthelmintic components of
Artemisia spp.

¢ Artemisinin, from Artemisia annua, is active against
malaria, including strains that have developed resis-
tance to quinine derivatives.

¢ Pyrethrins from Tenacetum cinerariifolium provide
biodegradable insecticides.

* Stevioside, a compound that is hundreds of times
sweeter than sucrose, is a valuable sweetener.

CLASSIFICATION OF TERPENES

The molecules in this diverse group are all biosynthesized
from the 5-carbon precursor isoprene, and so are also
known as isoprenoids. The isoprene units can be assem-
bled and modified in thousands of different ways, allow-
ing plants to produce a seemingly endless number of
chemical variations based on the simple unit. Most are
multicyclic structures that differ from one another not
only in functional groups, but also in their basic carbon
skeletons. This group includes essential oils and resins,
steroids, carotenoids, and rubber.”

Major Groups of Terpenoids

Bee

Fig. 6.1. Isoprene
NAME NUMBER OF CARBONS EXAMPLE
Monoterpenes 10 (2.x 5} Volatile oils
Sesquiterpenes 15 (3x5) Volatile oils
Diterpenes 20 (4x5) Resins
Triterpenes 30 (6x 5} Saponins, sterols, steroids
Tetraterpenoids 40 (8 x 5) Carotenoid pigments
Polyprenes (Nx 5) Rubbers
MONOTERPENES

Monoterpenes, the Cj) representatives of the terpenoid
family, are derived from the union of two isoprene pre-

----- PAGE 71 -----
cursors joined head to tail. Monoterpenes and the related
sesquiterpenes are important components of plant essen-
tial oils, or volatile oils. Monoterpenes tend to occur in
members of certain plant families, such as Lamiaceae,
Pinaceae, Rutaceae, and Apiaceae, from which many eés-
sential oils are commercially produced.’ Some of these
compounds, such as geraniol, are almost ubiquitous and
can be found in small amounts in the volatile secretions of
most plants.

Volatile oils occur in plants that have specialized se-
cretory structures, such as oil cells, glandular hairs, and
resin ducts. In plants, they are believed to help attract pol-
linators to flowers, defend green tissues from predation by
herbivores, and protect against microbial infection.

Monoterpenes are volatile, aromatic, colorless, oily
substances, although a few (such as camphor) are crys-
talline. They are not soluble in water, but some contain
polar groups that facilitate the formation of emulsions in
which the oil disperses in droplets.

Classification of Monoterpenes
Monoterpenes may be classified either by their structures
or according to their functional groups.

Table 6.1. Functional Classification

FUNCTIONAL GROUP EXAMPLE
Unsaturated hydrocarbons Limonene
Alcohols Linalool

Alcohol esters Linalyl acetate

Aldehydes Citronellal

Ketones Carvone

TERPENES .@ 63

Optical isomerism is a common feature of monoter-
penes, and some compounds, such as carvone, can occur
in more than one optically active form. Although any
given plant rich in essential oils may have only a few
major constituents, it may contain up to 50 other
monoterpenes in smaller amounts.

In some plants, there may be considerable chemical
variation within the species; different plant populations
contain different mixtures of monoterpenes. Plants dis-
playing these chemical variations are called chemotypes.
For example, 13 different chemotypes of thyme have been
recognized among populations growing in France.

Hydrocarbons
These are monoterpenes with a purely hydrocarbon-
based functional group.

Limonene

(+)-Limonene is the main constituent of volatile oils from
the fresh peel of Citrus fruits, such as lemon, tangerine,
bitter orange, and sweet orange. It also occurs in neroli
oil (orange flower oil, from Citrus aurantium var. amara)
and in oils of caraway (Carum carvi) and dill (Anethum
graveolens). {-)-Limonene is present in oil of fir, made
from the needles and young twigs of ‘Abies alba, and in
mint oils, from Mentha species.

Limonene has expectorant and sedative activities.
Various essential oils containing limonene are used to fla-
vor foods and beverages. In addition, this molecule has
attracted much research attention as a representative mono-
terpene.* It has demonstrated potential cancer-preventive
properties, antineoplastic activity in both pancreatic and
breast cancer, and clinical application as a solvent of gall-
stones. *%? Pure limonene may be irritating to the skin.®

Structural Classification of Monoterpenes

ACYCLIC MONOCYCLIC

CH, OH,

ieee et
HC ‘OH

Fig. 6.2. Geraniol Fig. 6.3. Limonene

BICYCLIC

CHa
HO, te, P
7 —~/
ro
ae 0
Hye* yc Os

Fig. 6.4. Borneol

IRREGULAR

Fig. 6.5. Pyrethrin

----- PAGE 72 -----
64 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

CH,
HC.
aaa
CH,
> CHy CHs

Fig. 6.8.
a-pinene

Fig. 6.6.
Limonene

Fig. 67.
6-phellandrine

B-phellandrene

6-phellandrene is a very common constituent of essential
oils. One isomeric form occurs in the volatile oils of sev-
eral fir (Abies), spruce (Picea), and pine (Pinus) species,
while another is the main constituent of the essential oil
from the seeds of the water fennel (Oenanthe aquatica).? It
has expectorant properties and is abundant in pharma-
ceutical pine needle oil.

a-pinene

This is an important constituent of many essential oils,
especially oil of turpentine, which is distilled from the
oleoresin of Pinus palustris and other Pinus species. Other
examples include many oils from Pinaceae, Cupressaceae,
Myrtaceae, and Lamiaceae and oils made from the peel of
Citrus species.

Pinene is an irritant that can cause skin eruption,
delirium, ataxia, and kidney damage.! It is used in the
manufacture of camphor, insecticides, perfume bases, and
synthetic pine oil.1!

Alcohols

These are monoterpenes with a hydroxyl group attached.

Borneol

The (+) form of borneol is the main constituent of
Borneo camphor, distilled from Dryobalanops aromatica,
and is also present in oils of spike lavender (Lavandula
latifolia), rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis), and nutmeg
(Myristica fragrans).

Borneol is used mainly for the manufacture of its es-
ters, which are widely used in cosmetics. However, some
free borneol is used in perfumery. It has toxic effects in
the central nervous system of mammals.”

CHs

CHg Sy ~

>

‘OH

Hye CH,

Fig. 6.9. Borneol Fig, 6.10. Geraniol

Geraniol
Geraniol is the main constituent of a number of essential
oils, including palmarosa oil (Cymbopogon martini) and
oils from allied species, such as lemongrass (C. citratus)
and citronella (C. nardus). It is also found in oil or attar of
rose from Rosa centifolia, R. damascena, and other roses.
Geraniol has strong antiseptic activity, which is seven
times stronger than that of phenol. It has a sweet rose
odor, and is used in perfumery and as an insect attractant
in traps.3

Linalool
This is the main constituent of oil of coriander
(Coriandrum sativum). It also occurs in lavender oils (from
the flowering tops of Lavandula spp.), in oil of bergamot
(Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia), orange flowers (C. auran-
tium var. amara), and many other essential oils.

Linalool is antiseptic and fungistatic; it also has seda-
tive properties.'* It is used in perfumery as a substitute for

bergamot and French lavender oils.!°
CHy

CHa HO. CHy OH

CH

Se 2
eA

Fig. 6.11. Linalool

cH; “cH,

Fig. 6.12. Menthol

Menthol

Menthol occurs in both free and ester forms as the main
constituent of peppermint oil, the steam-distilled volatile
oil from Mentha piperita and other Mentha species.

Used as an inhalant, menthol helps to relieve symp-
toms of bronchial and nasal congestion, and acts as a
carminative and gastric sedative when used internally.
Applied topically, it has antipruritic, analgesic, and anti-
septic effects.!° However, it can give rise to rare hyper-
sensitivity reactions, such as contact dermatitis.

Esters

Monoterpene esters have a general formula of R-C-O-R1.
Rand Ri may be the same or different, and may be either
aliphatic (straight-chained) or aromatic (cyclic).

Bornyl Acetate (borneol acetate)
Borny]l acetate occurs in volatile oils from the needles of
many pine and fir species, including Pinus pinaster, P
sylvestris, Abies alba, and A. sibirica, and also certain Lamia-
ceae plants, such as rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) and
thyme (Thymus vulgaris).

Borny! acetate smells like pine needles. Bornyl esters

----- PAGE 73 -----
of acetic, formic, and isovaleric acids occur in the
volatile oil from the rhizome and root of valerian
(Valeriana officinalis).

Pine needle oil has expectorant properties and is used
as a bronchial and nasal inhalant. (+)-Borny] isovalerate is
sedative.!”

CHy
CH

Fig. 6.13. Bornyl acetate

Aldehydes

Aldehydes are compounds that contain the carbonyl
group CO, and in which the carbonyl group is bonded to
at least one hydrogen. The general formula for an alde-
hyde is RCHO, in which R is hydrogen or an alky] or aryl
group. Low-molecular-weight aldehydes, such as form-
aldehyde and acetaldehyde, have sharp, unpleasant odors.
Higher-molecular-weight aldehydes, such as benzalde-
hyde and furfural, have pleasant, often flowery odors and
are found in essential oils.

Cis cH

ow we

Fig. 6.14. Citronellal

°

Citronellal

Citronellal is the main constituent of citronella oil, made

from the fresh leaves of Cymbopogon nardus. It also occurs in

the volatile oils of Excalyptus species, lemon balm (Melissa

officinalis), lemon (Citrus limon), and various other plants.
Oil of lemon balm has antiseptic and sedative proper-

ties. It is used in soap, perfumes, and as an insect repellent. !®

Ketones

Monoterpene ketones are compounds that contain the
carbonyl group CO, and in which this carbonyl group is
bonded only to carbon atoms. The general formula for a
ketone is RCOR’.

Camphor

The (+) form of camphor is found in rectified or Japanese
oil of camphor, made from the camphor tree
(Cinnamomum camphora). The (-) form occurs in feverfew
(Tanacetum parthenium) and various species of Artemisia
and Lavandula.

Camphor is irritating to the skin and has been used as

TERPENES 2 65

a rubefacient. It is initially cooling to the skin and has
mild anesthetic and antipruritic actions. It is used as a
moth repellent and as a preservative in pharmaceuticals

and cosmetics.!9
CHs

cHy CH,

Fig. 6.15. Camphor Fig, 6.16. Carvone
Carvone

Carvone is the main constituent in oil of spearmint
(Mentha spicata), and (+)-carvone is the major constituent
of oils of caraway and dill, from the dried ripe fruits of
Carum carvi and Anethum graveolens, respectively.
Carvone has carminative and antiseptic actions.?° It is
used in the manufacture of liqueurs, for flavoring confec-
tioneries, and in perfumes and soaps.

Phenols

The isoprene units in monoterpene phenols are assem-
bled so that there is a benzene ring in the molecule to
which a hydroxyl group is attached.

CHa CH

‘OH

Hye CH Hac CHy

Fig. 6.17. Carvacrol Fig. 6.18. Thymol

CHs

Hs CH.
BON 5

CH HC CHy

Fig. 6.19. 1,8-cineole Fig. 6.20. Thujone

Carvacrol
This constituent is found in a number of oils from
Lamiaceae plants, including oregano oil, distilled from
the flowering tops of Origanum vulgare, and thyme oil,
from the leaves and tops of Thymus vulgaris.

Carvacrol is strongly antiseptic, demonstrating one and
a half times the activity of phenol. It also shows antifungal

----- PAGE 74 -----
66 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

and anthelmintic properties. It is used commercially in
mouthwashes.?!

Thymol

The best sources of thymol are the essential oils of some
Lamiaceae plants, such as Thymus vulgaris and Monarda
‘punctata. Thymol is antiseptic and antifungal. It is used
to destroy mold, for preserving botanical and biological
specimens, and also in dentistry as an antiseptic.”” It may
irritate gastric mucosa.

1,8-cineole (eucalyptol, cajeputol)

This is the main constituent in oil of eucalyptus
(Eucalyptus globulus and some other Eucalyptus spp.), oil
of cajeput (Melaleuca leucadendron and other Melaleuca
spp.), and many other essential oils. It has anthelmintic,
expectorant, and antiseptic activities, and also shows
cockroach-repellent activity.2%

Thujone (thujan-3-one)

Thujone occurs as a mixture of two stereoisomers that
differ in the stereochemistry of the 4-methyl group. It is
found in many essential oils, such as white cedar oil from
the leaves of Thuja occidentalis, tansy oil from the leaves
and tops of Tznacetum vulgare, and, together with thujyl
alcohol and acetate, in wormwood oil from the aerial
parts of Artemisia absinthium.

Thujone is highly toxic; ingestion may cause convul-
sions.”4 (Please see chapter 10 for more information.)
Wormwood oil has been used as an anthelmintic agent
and cedar leaf oil as a rubefacient.

Tridoids
Tridoids are bitter-tasting monoterpenoid lactones de-
rived from monoterpene precursors. They are found in
about 70 families of flowering plants distributed in 13 or-
ders.’> They are characterized by a cyclopentanodihy-
dropyran ring, shown below with the numbering system
used in iridoid nomenclature.”6

The term iridoid comes from iridodial, a compound
first found in the defense secretions of the fire ant, Irido
myrmex. Similar structures occur in the defense secre-
tions of other ants, stick insects, and beetles.

CHy
CL>
ce)
Hy ‘OH
Fig. 6.21. Fig. 6.22.
Cyclopentanodihydropyran Iridodial

ring

There is no consensus on the classification of iri-
doids, of which more than 1,000 have been identified. In
The Dictionary of Natural Products, three subcategories are
described.?”

Iridoid Glycosides

Iridoid glycosides, or iridoids proper, are lactones, often
with glucose attachment to the hydroxyl group of the
lactone ring. The aglycones are usually highly unstable,
and herbarium specimens containing iridoid glucosides
also often turn dark as they dry.?* A good example of this
group is aucubin (below).

Simple Iridoids

Simple iridoids are volatile aglycones. An example is
nepetalactone, the psychoactive constituent of catnip
(Nepeta cataria), the plant so loved by members of the
cat family.® The valepotriates, such as valtrate from
Valeriana officinalis, also possess this action. These mainly
nonglucosidic iridoids are sedatives.?°

oH cHy

“Sy

fo)

CH,OH 6

CHs 5

glucose

Fig. 6.23. Aucubin Fig. 6.24. Nepetalactone

CH,OAc

SS

isovalerianyl-O
is)

a

O-isovalerianyl

Fig. 6.25. Valtrate

Secoiridoids

Secoiridoids are distinguished by an open $-membered
ring. They are biosynthetic precursors of terpene alka~
loids, and often occur with their related alkaloids.
Gentiopicrin is a good example.?!

HOH HjCay #
° acl
OH

OH
OH

Fig. 6.26. Gentiopicrin

----- PAGE 75 -----
Pharmacological Activity of Iridoids

Plants containing iridoids play a central role in herbalism,
as they are often the basis of what is known as the bitter
‘principle.*? Tridoids are the bitterest of plant compounds,
with a taste perceptible at a dilution as high as 1:50,000.
Bitters are known to stimulate the release of gastrin in the
gastrointestinal tract, leading to an increase in digestive
secretions, including bile. Many are used as bitter tonics,
such as bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata), and others as
anti-inflammatory agents, including eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis).

Tridoids that are found as glycosides, such as fulvo-
plumierin and allamandin, have demonstrated antimicro-
bial or antileukemic activities in laboratory studies.**
Aucubin and various other iridoid glucosides show laxa-
tive and diuretic properties, while the valepotriates are
sedative. In large concentrations and in the presence of
acids, iridoid glycosides are toxic.

Asperuloside

This compound is found in many species of the Rubiaceae
family-—for example, sweet woodruff (Galium odorata) and
cleavers (G. aparine). It has a laxative action.**#

OH

Fig. 6.27. Asperuloside

Aucubin

Common in many families of dicotyledons, aucubin has
laxative and diuretic properties. The aglycone, aucubi-
genin, shows antimicrobial and antitumor activities, but is
toxic to mammals."

Gentiopicrin (gentiopicroside)

This is found in the roots of Gentiana lutea and in other
plants of the Gentianaceae family. It has demonstrated
antimalarial activity.*°

Harpagoside

Found in the roots of devil’s claw (Harpagophytum procum-
bens), in the rhizomes of Chinese figwort (Scrophularia
buergeriana), and in some Lamium species, harpagoside
demonstrates analgesic activity.’ It is also extremely bitter.

TERPENES .@ 67

Fig. 6.28. Harpagoside

ea

OK

Fig. 6.29. Valerenic acid

Valerenic Acid

This compound is well known because of its occurrence
in Valeriana officinalis, in which it contributes to the herb’s
antispasmodic activity.’

9. OCH;

Fig. 6.30. Verbenalin

Verbenalin

Verbenalin is found in Verbena officinalis. Its activity
weakly resembles that of ergot in promoting uterine con-
tractions. It is also a mild parasympathomimetic agent,
gently relaxing the autonomic nervous system.??

SESQUITERPENES

The sesquiterpenes are derived from three isoprene units.
Based on biogenetic origin, there are more than 200 dif-
ferent structural types of sesquiterpenes, and several
thousand such compounds are known.”

Classification of Sesquiterpenoids
These compounds can be conveniently classified into
three main groups according to structure: acyclic (e.g.,

----- PAGE 76 -----
68 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

farnesol), monocyclic (e.g., bisabolol), and bicyclic (e.g.,
caryophylene).

CH CHs CH;

we Se Sy orn

HyC’
Fig. 6.31. Farnesol

Cs
OH CHy

CHy

CHy
Fig. 6.32. Bisabolol

One large group of sesquiterpenes, made up of those with
an additional lactone function, is discussed later in this
chapter under the heading Sesquiterpene Lactones.

In addition to higher plants, sesquiterpenes are well
represented in bryophytes, fungi, microorganisms, and
some marine animals and insects. It appears that this class
of molecules fulfills a number of ecological roles.

* A number of sesquiterpenes are involved in allelopathic
plant-plant interactions. This is a chemical process by
which plants attempt to keep other plants from com-
peting for growing space and resources. Plants that
employ allelopathy include black walnut, Artemisia
species (wormwood and various sagebrushes), sun-
flower, and tree of heaven.

* Sesquiterpenes can act as fungal pheromones, or chemi-
cal attractants. For example, sirenin is involved in the
attraction of gametes in fungi of the genus Al/omyces. In
addition, a number of sesquiterpenes have roles as
pheromones in insects.

¢ Several sesquiterpenoid phytoalexins have been found,
mostly in the Solanaceae family. Phytoalexins are
formed as chemical responses to infection or infesta-
tion in plants.

* Many sesquiterpenes play a defensive role as allomones
in plant-insect and plant-fungal interactions. A/omones
are chemicals produced by one species that act on an-
other species.

B-caryophylene

B-caryophylene occurs as a mixture of a-caryophylene
and isocaryophylene in many essential oils, such as oil of
clove, prepared from the dried flower buds of Syzygium
aromaticum, and oil of copaiba, the oleoresin from species

of Copaifera. a-caryophylene is synonymous with humu-
lene. B-caryophylene is widely used in perfumery.*!

me “4 ( yn

H,C—CH

Hc H;c

Fig. 6.33. Caryophylene Fig. 6.34. Chamazulene

Chamazulene

Chamazulene is a component of the blue oil produced by
steam distillation of chamomile (Matricaria recutita),
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium), and yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). In addition, sesquiterpene lactones found in
these plants are converted to matricin and achillin during
distillation. Chamazulene has anti-inflammatory and anti-
pyretic activities.”

Gossypol

Gossypol occurs in a racemic form in the seeds of cotton
(Gossypium spp.), meaning that it is a mixture of dextroro-
tatory and levorotatory isomers in such proportions that
the mixture has no optical activity.

Gossypol has demonstrated antifungal and antitumor
activities. However, it is toxic to nonruminant mammals,
birds, insect larvae, nematodes, and other animals. In
mammals, it causes loss of body weight, diarrhea, cardiac
irregularity, hemorrhage, edema, and other ill effects.
Because it can block sperm formation, it may act as a male
contraceptive.

Hy

Fig. 6.36. Guaiazulene

Fig. 6.35. Gossypol

Guaiazulene

Guaiazulene is a component of the blue oil produced dur-
ing the steam distillation of chamomile (Matricaria recu-
tita) and guaiac wood (Guaiacum officinale or G. sanctum),
formed from structurally related substances present in
these plants. It has anti-inflammatory activity.

Humulene
This is a constituent of many essential oils, including hops
(Humulus lupulus). Humulene is used in perfumery.**

----- PAGE 77 -----
ee £ -
~\

ad

Fig. 6.37. Humulene

Fig. 6.38. Zingiberene

Zingiberene

Zingiberene occurs in the rhizomes of ginger (Zingiber of-
ficinale) and in the related Curcuma species. Oil of ginger
has a carminative activity. It is used as a flavoring agent.**

SESQUITERPENE LACTONES

Sesquiterpene lactones are a class of natural sesquiter-
penes, distinct from other members of the group because
of the presence of an a-lactone system.

f Sy

Fig. 6.39. Sesquiterpene lactone skeleton

Sesquiterpene lactones are biologically very active.
Some are highly toxic to mammals, and others can cause
allergic contact dermatitis in humans handling the plants
in which they occur. Many have antitumor activity, but
their considerable cytotoxicity has prevented any specific
medicinal application.

At least 3,000 lactones have now been described. The
great majority of these have been obtained from a single
plant family, Asteraceae, in which they are characteristic
constituents. Lactone constituents have been reported
occasionally in plants from 16 other angiosperm families,
most notably Apiaceae.*”

In Asteraceae plants, sesquiterpene lactones are
found mainly in the aerial parts of the plant (the leaves
and flowering heads) in concentrations of about 5% of
the dry weight. Certain species store large amounts of
sesquiterpene lactones in glandular hairs called trichomes.
‘When touched, the glands release the sesquiterpene lac-
tones, which then elicit their various biological or phar-
macological effects.

Sesquiterpene lactones are frequently present in mix-
tures of up to 15 components per plant species. Infra-
specific variations can occur, notably in some Artemisia
and Ambrosia species.

TERPENES .& 69

Classification of Sesquiterpene Lactones

Sesquiterpene lactones are classified into four major
groups.

* Germacranolides, with a 10-membered ring (e.g., ala-
tolide, the largest class)

* Eudesmolides, with two fused 6-membered rings (e.g.,
alantolactone)

© Guaianolides, with a 5-membered ring fused to a 7 and
a methyl substituent at C-4

* Pseudoguaianolides, which have the same characteris-
tics as guaianolides, but with a methyl! substituent at
C-5 (e.g., ambrosin)

fe) °o

Fig. 6.40. Germacranolide Fig. 6.41. Eudesmanolide

°.
» °
3
Fig. 6.42. Guaianolide

Pharmacology and Uses
The antineoplastic activity of sesquiterpene lactones in
the Asteraceae has led to the identification of structure-
activity relationships that show that all cytotoxic, anti-
leukemic, tumor-inhibiting, and immunostimulating
sesquiterpene lactones have an a,B-unsaturated exocyclic
lactone.*#®

Various sesquiterpene lactones exhibit antibacterial,
antifungal, anthelmintic, antihyperlipidemic, and cardio-
vascular properties, and some show anti-inflammatory ac-
tivity.*? Judaicin, found in Artemisia judaica, has demon-
strated potential as a digitalis-like cardioactive agent.

The migraine-preventive activity of feverfew has
been attributed to its content of sesquiterpene lactones, of
which parthenolide is the major component. Parthenolide
comprises 85% of the total sesquiterpenes in feverfew. All
of the feverfew sesquiterpenes that demonstrate anti-
migraine activity are classified as germacranolide-type
sesquiterpenes.

----- PAGE 78 -----
70 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Toxicity

The sesquiterpene lactones are highly irritating to the
nose, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract of sheep and goats.
Plants that contain sesquiterpene lactones kill thousands
of sheep each year in the United States. Among the toxic
sesquiterpene lactones identified are tenulin in Helenium
amarum (bitter sneezeweed) and hymenoxon in
Hymenoxys odorata (bitter ruabberweed). Mammalian toxi-
city has also been attributed to alantolactone from ele-
campane (Inula helenium).°° For more information on the
toxicity of sesquiterpene lactones, see chapter 10.

Ranunculosides

Ranunculosides are sesquiterpene lactone glycosides that,
upon hydrolysis, split up into ranunculin and glucose.
Ranunculin is then converted into an unsaturated lactone,
protoanemonin. Protoanemonin is very unstable, but on
drying it is converted into anemonin, which is further
converted into anemonic acid. Protoanemonin is toxic; its
derivatives are not.*! Ranunculin, protoanemonin, and
anemonin have medicinal properties; anemonic acid does
not. Please refer to chapter 10 for a discussion about the
toxicity of ranunculosides.

Plants Containing Ranunculosides
Christmas rose (Helleborus niger)
Field buttercup (Ranunculus acris)
Globe flower (Trollius europaeus)
Marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)
Pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vulgaris)
Wood anemone (Anemone nemorosa)

Absinthin (absinthiin)
This is the main bitter principle in wormwood, Artemisia
absinthium.

Wormwood is used as an anthelmintic, as a bitter
tonic, and for flavoring vermouth.”

Hye OW
OH chs

Ok, chs

i)

Fig. 6.43. Absinthin

Fig. 6.44. Achillin

Achillin (santolin)
Achillin is found in yarrow (Achillea millefolium and other
Achillea spp.) and in several Artemisia species. It functions

as a plant growth inhibitor. During steam distillation,

achillin is converted into chamazulene, which has anti-

inflammatory properties.**

Hy
Q
Vac
CHs, “CH,

Fig. 6.45. Alantolactone Fig. 6.46. Artemisinin
Alantolactone

Alantolactone occurs in oil of elecampane (Inula helenium)
and other Inula species. Helenin (a mixture of alantolac-
tone and isoalantolactone) has antibacterial and antifun-
gal activities. Although alantolactone causes allergic con-
tact dermatitis in humans, it has been employed as an
expectorant, a cholagogue, and a urinary tract antiseptic.
It has also been used to stimulate intestinal secretion and
as a vermifuge against the liver fluke (Fasciola bepatica).**

Artemisinin (qing hau sau, quinghaosu)

Artemisinin, an antimalarial agent, occurs in Artemisia
annua (ging bau or sweet Annie). It has demonstrated tox-
icity against chloroquine-resistant strains of various
species of mosquito (Plasmodium falciparum, P vivax, and
P ovale) in in vitro and in vivo tests. Artemisinin is used
clinically in China for the treatment of malaria.> It also
has potential as an anticancer agent.

Eupacunin

Eupacunin is found in the stems, leaves, and flowers of
Uncasia cuneifolia and Eupatorium lancifolium. It has
demonstrated cytotoxic and antitumor activities.**

Fig. 6.47. Eupacunin

Tnulicin

Occurring in Inula japonica (Japanese elecampane), in-
ulicin has antiulcer actions as well as capillary-strength-
ening and diuretic properties. Inulicin also stimulates the
activity of the central nervous system and the smooth
muscles of the intestine.5”

----- PAGE 79 -----
Ha

Hac
° CH,

rye —k

°

Fig. 6.48. Inulicin Fig. 6.49. Lactucin
Lactucin

Lactucin occurs in various wild lettuce species, including
Lactuca serriola and L. virosa, and in chicory (Cichorium in-
tybus). It demonstrates cytotoxic and antitumor activi-
ties.°® Lactucin has a sedative action and is a bitter tonic.

Matricin

Matricin is found in chamomile (Matricaria recutita) and
in several Achillea species. It is a precursor of chamazu-
lene, an anti-inflammatory compound formed from ma-
tricin and achillin during steam distillation of the plant
material. ch.

CHs

é chy

a
Fig. 6.50. Matricin Fig. 6.51. Parthenolide
Parthenolide
This compound is found in glands on the leaf surface of
feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium), in several Ambrosia and
Arctotis species, and in other members of the Asteraceae
family.°?

Parthenolide has demonstrated cytotoxic, antitumor,
antibacterial, and antifungal activities. It is a primary ac-
tive principle of feverfew, which is used in the treatment
of migraine.

DITERPENOIDS

The diterpenoids are Cy) molecules derived from four iso-
prene units, but modifications during the later stages of
synthesis produce a wealth of different structures. Diter-
penes share many chemical properties with sesquiterpenes,
but are usually crystalline solids rather than liquids.

Classification of Diterpenes
Diterpenes are classified according to the number of ring
systems present.® In addition, they form either acyclic or

TERPENES -«@ 71
macrocyclic substances. Many diterpenes have additional
ring systems, which occur in side chains, in ester substi-
tutions, or as epoxides. Some have 6-membered rings that
have undergone aromatization, while others have fused 5-

and 7-membered rings.

Acyclic Diterpene

AWA

Fig. 6.52. Phytane

Bicyclic Diterpenes

or et

Fig. 6.53. Labdane Fig. 6.54. Clerodane

Tricyclic Diterpenes

are

Fig. 6.55. Primarane Fig. 6.56. Abiatane

Tetracyclic Diterpenes

Fig. 6.57. Kaurane Fig. 6.58. Gibberellane

Macrocyclic Diterpenes

Fig. 6.59, Cembrane Fig. 6.60. Lathyrane

----- PAGE 80 -----
72. <= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Fig. 6.61. Tigliane Fig. 6.62. Taxane
Occurrence and Distribution

Diterpenes are principally found either in higher plants
or in fungi. Phytol is universal in higher plants, where it
is associated with chlorophyll. Practically all other diter-
penes, however, are of very restricted distribution. They
are rarely found as glycosides, so the triglucoside stevio-
side, from Stevia rebaudiana, is exceptional. This remark-
ably sweet-tasting compound is marketed in Japan as a
sweetening agent.

General Properties of Diterpenes

Like all groups of terpenes, diterpenes have demonstrated
a range of pharmacological properties:°!

¢ Analgesic

* Antibacterial

¢ Antifungal

¢ Anti-inflammatory
¢ Antineoplastic

¢ Antiprotozoal (active against Leishmania)
* Cardiotonic

© Cytotoxic

¢ Enzyme inhibitor
¢ Insecticidal

¢ Skin irritant

¢ Sweetening agents

While few diterpenes are currently used in orthodox
medicine, they may be pivotal to the efficacy of a number
of medicinal plants.

¢ The expectorant properties of Grindelia spp. and hore-
hound (Marrubium vulgare) may be attributed to their
diterpene content.

* A range of cardiovascular activities has been demon-
strated for forskolin from Coleus forskohlii, as discussed
in detail in chapter 9. Diterpenoid quinones from
Salvia miltiorrhiza have also demonstrated cardiovas-
cular activities.

¢ A unique and very active hallucinogen found in the
leaves of Salvia divinorum is a nonnitrogenous diter-
pene, salvinorin A. Since all other molecules that have
this property contain nitrogen, this finding is very
intriguing.

Fig. 6.63. Salvinorin A

A number of diterpenoids are very toxic, especially
the tigliane-type phorbol esters of croton oil and
Euphorbia \atex, which are notable for their irritant and
cocarcinogenic properties. The phorbol esters are being
actively studied for insights that might be gained into the
cancer process.*

Cafestol

This is the main constituent of the nonsaponifiable por-
tion of coffee bean oil, from Coffea spp. Cafestol has anti-
inflammatory properties and induces the activity of the
detoxifying enzyme glutathione-S-transferase.©

OH ck,
OH. LL
Cr,Or ae Chis
CH ° |

‘oH |
—
©.

or
\= Hse” No,

Fig. 6.64. Cafestol Fig. 6.65. Carnosol
Carnosol

Carnosol is found in sage (Salvia officinalis) and in rose-
mary (Rosmarinus officinalis). It was traditionally used as an
aromatic bitter.

Coleonol
Coleonol, from the leaves of Coleus forskoblii, has demon-
strated hypotensive activity.” (See chapter 9 for a detailed

discussion of the cardiovascular properties of Coleus
forskoblii.)

----- PAGE 81 -----
CHy

°,
por
OH
CH. CH.
5 bg
O.
yo
HyC CH; OH ey Rad OH

Fig. 6.66. Coleonol Fig. 6.67. Columbin

HC CH, OH 3
Fig. 6.68. Forskolin

Columbin

This very bitter substance is found in columba root
(Jateorbiza palmata). The roots of 7. palmata are used for
the preparation of a bitter tonic, called Radix Columba in
various European pharmacopoeias.

Forskolin
Found in the roots of Coleus forskoblii, forskolin demon-
strates cardiovascular activity.

Geranylgeraniol
Found in flax or linseed oil (Linum usttatissimum), the
diphosphate of geranylgeraniol is the biogenetic precur-
sor of diterpenes.

cH, Cs CHy Cry

|
ow Sy Ss Sy CH,OF

Fig. 6.69. Geranylgeraniol

Ginkgolide A

Found in the root bark and leaves of Ginkgo biloba,
ginkgolide A and related ginkgolides are bitter substances
with bronchodilating and antiasthmatic properties.”

TERPENES © 73

Fig. 6.70. Ginkgolide A

Grindelic Acid
This labdane skeleton-based diterpene found in Grindelia
spp. may be implicated in the herb’s respiratory properties.

©O,H

Fig. 6.71. Grindelic acid

Fig. 6.72. Marrubiin

Marrubiin

A bitter principle found in horehound (Marrubium vul-
gare), marrubiin is generated from premarrubiin as an ar-
tifact of the extraction process. M. vulgare is used as an
expectorant.’?

Phytol

Phytol occurs in all chlorophyll-containing plants as an
ester of the propionic side chain of chlorophyll. Phytol is
used in the preparation of vitamins E and K.?!

CH, CHy cH Cy

cH AAA, AE Le creoH

‘3

Fig. 6.73. Phytol

Premarrubiin

Premarrubiin, which occurs in horehound (Marrubium
vulgare), is converted into marrubiin during the extrac-
tion process.

CH

Fig. 6.74. Premarrubiin

----- PAGE 82 -----
74 «3. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Stevioside

Found in the leaves of Stevia rebaudiana, stevioside is a
glycoside that is about 300 times sweeter than sucrose.
The aglycone steviol shows a gibberellin-like growth hor-
mone activity.”

Fig, 6.75. Stevioside

Zoapatanol

Zoapatanol is found in the leaves of the Mexican zoapatle
tree (Montanoa tomentosa). The compound possesses anti-
fertility activity, and has been used in Mexico to prepare a
tea to induce menses and labor.”

CHy-OH
CHs Ce
CH

Fig. 6.76. Zoapatanol

SAPONINS

The saponins are a group of plant glycosides in which
water-soluble sugars are attached to either a lipophilic
steroid (Cp) or triterpenoid (C3,).”* This hydrophobic-
hydrophilic asymmetry means that these compounds have
the ability to lower surface tension, and are soaplike.
They form foam in aqueous solutions and cause hemoly-
sis of blood erythrocytes in vitro. The aglycone portion of
the saponin molecule is called the genin or sapogenin.

Classification of Saponins

Depending on the type of genin present, the saponins fall
into three major classes.’

¢ Triterpene glycosides
* Steroid glycosides
* Steroid alkaloid glycosides

The aglycones normally have a hydroxy] group at C-3,
and certain methyl groups are frequently oxidized to

hydroxymethyl, aldehyde, or carboxyl groups. The sugar
component may be linear or branched, and the largest
number of monosaccharides found in any saponin is 11
(in clematoside C, from Clematis manshurica). However,
most saponins have relatively short, unbranched sugar
chains containing two to five monosaccharides. Common
monosaccharides found include D-glucose, D-galactose,
D-glucuronic acid, D-galacturonic acid, L-rhamnose,
L-arabinose, D-xylose, and D-fructose.

The types of saponin glycosides are further classified
as follows.

© Monodesmosidic saponins have a single sugar chain, nor-
mally attached at C-3.

Bidesmosidic saponins have two sugar chains, often with
one attached through an ether linkage at C-3 and an
ester linkage at C-28 (triterpene saponins) or an ether
linkage at C-26 (furostanol saponins).

° Tridesmosidic saponins have three sugar chains and are

seldom found.

A striking feature of saponins is the great difference in
the type of properties displayed by mono- and bidesmo-
sidie saponins. The bidesmosides either lack or show
much less activity than the corresponding mono-
desmosides. However, the surface activities of the saponins
(their ability to lower surface tension) remain unchanged
whether they are bidesmosides or monodesmosides.

Biosynthesis of Saponins
Saponins are built up of six isoprene units and have a
common origin in that they are all derived from squalene.
Other important classes of secondary metabolites, such as
phytosterols, cardenolides, cucurbitacins, quassinoids,
and limonoids, are also derived from squalene.’6
cx cH om
ne Oe ee ae a aie sp

ay, on i

Fig. 6.77. Squalene

Herbs Containing Saponins

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aralia nudicaulis (wild sarsaparilla) ~

A, racemosa (spikenard)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)

Calendula officinalis (calendula or pot marigold)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)

Codonopsis spp. (codonopsis)

----- PAGE 83 -----
Digitalis purpurea (foxglove)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Glycyrrhiza spp. (licorice)

Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng)

P quinquefolius (American ginseng)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Verbascum thapsis (mullein)

Occurrence and Distribution

Saponins are extremely widely distributed in flowering
plants and have been identified in more than 100 fami-
lies.” They are found in many plants that are used as
human food, including soybeans, chickpeas, peanuts,
mung beans, broad beans, kidney beans, lentils, garden
peas, spinach, oats, eggplant, asparagus, fenugreek, garlic,
sugar beets, potatoes, green peppers, tomatoes, onions,
tea, cassava, and yams. They also occur in leguminous
forage species, such as alfalfa.

The actual saponin content of a plant depends on
many factors, including the cultivar, age, physiological
state, and geographical location of the plant. There can
be considerable variation in the composition and quantity
of saponins in plants growing in different places. Saponin
distribution among the organs of a particular plant also
varies considerably, The flowers of Calendula officinalis
contain 3.57% saponins, and the roots 2.55% (dry
weight). Ginsenoside levels in Panax ginseng are lowest in
the leafstalks and stem (0.77%), higher in the main root
(1.3%) and lateral roots (3.5%), and highest in the leaves
(5.2%) and root hairs (6.1%).78

The fact that saponins are localized in organelles that
have a high metabolic turnover rate implies that they are
not simply ballast material, but may be physiologically
significant constituents that play important regulatory
roles in the metabolism and development of the organism.

There is not always a clear explanation for the high
saponin content of some plants, which may consist of up
to 30% saponins. One theory is that they serve as protec-
tion for the plant against fungal attack, as there is often an
increase in saponin content in the part of the plant under
microbial attack.

Researchers have proposed that bidesmosidic sapo-

TERPENES <@ 75

nins, which are soluble in water but frequently lack some
of the other typical properties of saponins, serve a trans-
port function between the organs not at risk (e.g., leaves)
and those parts of the plant (e.g., roots, bark, seeds) under
attack by microorganisms. When plant tissue is damaged,
the enzymes released act on the bidesmosidic saponins.
Once transformed into their monodesmosidic derivatives,
the saponins can provide a defense against microbial in-
vasion at the threatened area. :

General Properties of Saponins

The material that follows on general and more specific
properties of this large group of secondary plant con-
stituents was derived from two primary references:
Saponins, by Hostettmann and Marston, and an extensive
review of saponin research by Lacaille-Dubois and
Wagner.’ Refer to these works for more details.

Saponins have three common properties: bitter taste,
hemolytic activity, and an ability to form stable foams
when shaken in water. This latter surface-acting or “de-
tergent” effect may be a key to their physiological prop-
erties. They are typical glycosides, with the aglycone (the
sapogenin) occurring as a polycyclic ring.

Saponins have demonstrated numerous pharmaco-
logical properties. However, it is important to remember
that the specific actions enumerated below do not occur
in a vacuum, but rather are interrelated at the metabolic
level in both the plant and the person. The list of biolog-
ical activities associated with saponins is also very long.
Some of these characteristics, such as fungicidal and pis-
cicidal effects, have been known for many years, and new
activities are continually being discovered. However, cau-
tion is needed when extrapolating from in vitro or in vivo
studies to human applications.

Pharmacological and Biological Properties
of Saponins

¢ Adaptogenic

¢ Alterative/tonic

¢ Anthelmintic

¢ Antifungal

¢ Anti-inflammatory
Antimicrobial
Antiulcerogenic
Capillary-strengthening
Cholesterol-lowering
Diuretic

Expectorant
Hemolytic
Hepatoprotective

----- PAGE 84 -----
76 @& INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

¢ Hormone-modulating

* Immunomodulating

* Molluscicidal

© Piscicidal

¢ Spermicidal and contraceptive

Pharmacological Properties

Local Effects

The detergent effect is important in understanding the ac-
tions of saponins upon skin and membranes. Many wound-
healing herbs are rich in saponins, including Calendula
officinalis. The expectorant and diuretic properties of
saponin-rich herbs such as Polygala senega and Primula spp.
may be related to the saponins’ irritant effects on mucous
membranes of the respiratory and urinary tracts.

Hemolytic Effects

Saponin aglycones can increase the permeability of mem-
branes. They bring about hemolysis by destroying the
membranes of red blood cells, thus releasing the
hemoglobin. When saponins are taken orally, this effect is
nullified in the stomach before the aglycones enter the
bloodstream. Low concentrations of saponins are capable
of destroying (lysing) erythrocyte membranes, causing a
release of hemoglobin. This phenomenon occurs through
a reduction of surface tension between the aqueous and
lipid phases of the erythrocyte membrane, which causes
emulsion of the lipids and their subsequent departure
from the membrane. Na” and water are able to enter the
cell through the holes in the membranes, while K” exits
the cell. This flux occurs until the membrane ruptures
and hemoglobin is shed into the plasma.

Cholesterol. Metabolism

Saponins reach the human body in relatively large
amounts as a result of the intake of foods rich in these gly-
cosides. The cholesterol-lowering effects of saponins are
well documented but poorly understood. One theory is
that they form insoluble complexes with cholesterol in
the gut, thus limiting assimilation. New research suggests
that they may have an effect (or effects) upon systemic
cholesterol metabolism.

Triterpene glycosides given to hens in their feed ap-
pear to decrease the amount of cholesterol in both blood
and tissues. One possible explanation for this effect is that
the triterpene glycosides form an insoluble complex with
cholesterol in the digestive tract; this complex is subse-
quently eliminated from the body. It is also possible that
the glycosides exert a direct effect on cholesterol
metabolism.

Cardiovascular Activities

Saponins are able both to increase the permeability of cell
plasma membranes and to cause positive inotropic effects
in isolated cardiac muscles. Panaxatriol saponins from
Panax notoginseng have demonstrated antiarrhythmic ac-
tions in rats and rabbits. The antihypertensive activity of
some ginseng saponins is attributed to a vascular relaxant
effect; they appear to block Ca?” channels without affect-
ing voltage-operated Ca?* channels or Ca?” release from
the intracellular store. Crude saponins from Panax noto-
ginseng have also shown vasodilatory effects.

Effects on the Adrenocorticotropic System

Many saponins can induce the release of adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH), but this is not considered to
be a general property of triterpene saponins. The gin-
senoside Rbi both induces corticosterone release and
stimulates ACTH secretion in cultures of pituitary cells.

Anti-Inflammatory Activities

Substances with anti-exudative and anti-edematous prop-
erties form a subgroup of anti-inflammatory agents in
that they influence the earlier stages of inflammation. In
some cases, the anti-inflammatory action of these sub-
stances seems to be independent of the pituitary-adrenal
axis, while in other cases, the drugs appear to exert a di-
rect action on the adrenal cortex (for example, gly-
cyrrhetinic acid).

When given parenterally, the saponin mixture aescin,
from horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), has been
shown to be 600 times more effective than rutin in re-
ducing rat paw edema. No effect was observed, however,
after oral application.

Effects on Capillary Fragility and Venous
Insufficiency

Saponins that decrease capillary fragility also have a ben-
eficial effect on capillary permeability. Weakness of the
blood vessels (especially veins) can lead to several compli-
cations. Enlarged veins can contribute to the develop-
ment of hypertension. Increased blood vessel permeabil-
ity can result in edema or reduced blood flow, increasing
the risk of thrombosis. Related disorders include hemor-
rhoids and varicose veins.

Certain saponin-containing plants, such as horse
chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), have capillary-protective
properties that reduce capillary fragility.

Substances that affect the veins can be divided into
three major categories of activity.

----- PAGE 85 -----
1, Substances that strengthen the veins by either re-
ducing or increasing venous cross-sectional area

2. Diuretic agents

3. Agents that protect against edema, thus decreasing
capillary permeability

Antiulcer Activity

Pharmacologically, the best known saponin-containing
antiulcerogenic herbs is licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), al-
though we now know that active constituents other than
glycyrrhizin also contribute to its antiulcer effects. These
are flavonoids, such as licoflavonol, licoricone, and ku-
matekenin, Flavonoids do not inhibit gastric acid secretion,
but are instead believed to exert their antiulcerogenic ef-
fects by promoting mucus formation, directly activating
gastric membrane protective factors, or stimulating in-
herent protective mechanisms via irritation of the gastric
mucosa.

Immunomodulation

Saponins belong to the classes of substances that have an
effect on the human immune system. (Other important
immunomodulators are lipids, lectins, polysaccharides,
and fungal polysaccharides.) Immunomodulating saponins
enhance both humoral and cellular immune responses; the
immunostimulant effects of saponins used as adjuvant
therapies do not depend solely on an increased uptake of
antigen.

Saponins can form ordered, particulate structures
around 35 mm in diameter (about the size of a virus par-
ticle) with the surface protein from enveloped viruses.
These have been named immunostimulating complexes
(ISCOMs). ISCOM vaccines have been developed against
a number of viruses, including influenza, measles,
Epstein-Barr, and HIV-1.*!

‘TERPENES <. 77

Some of the nonspecific effects of immunostimulant
saponins may occur as a result of their irritant properties.
This so-called induction of paramunity can be provoked
via the oral route or through the mucous membranes of
the respiratory, digestive, and urogenital systems.

Since saponins taken by mouth have low bioavailability,
it is unclear how they work to stimulate the immune system,
whether through enhanced cell proliferation, induction of
helper T cell activity, or B cell activation. One theory sug-
gests that an initial impact on mucosal immune system
components leads to secretion of immune system media-
tors, which then initiate a multitude of cellular events.

Fig. 6.78. Triterpene class

Expectorant and Antitussive Activities
Saponins possess a general and nonspecific ability to pro-
duce local irritation, especially of mucous membranes.
This can take place in the nasal cavity, the throat, the
bronchi, the lungs, and in kidney epithelia.

‘The expectorant activity of saponin-containing herbs
such as Polygala senega, Primula spp., and Glycyrrhiza
glabra is attributed at least in part to local irritation of
mucous membranes, although their mechanism of action
is not clear. The irritation of the throat and respiratory
tract caused by these saponins may increase respiratory
fluid volume by drawing more water into the bronchial

Immunomodulators

The category of agents known as immunomodulators includes immunostimulants, which boost the ac-
tivity of an organism's immune system, and immunosuppressive factors, which block the activity of the
immune system. Immunostimulants are employed during chemotherapy, in the treatment of infec-
tious diseases, and to stimulate the immune response after vaccination. Immunosuppressive agents are
used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and allergies and to help prevent transplant rejections.

Immunomodulators can be further divided into two categories, specific and nonspecific. Specific
immunomodulators are generally used as adjuvant therapy, while nonspecific immunostimulants are
administered on their own in order to elicit a generalized state of resistance to pathogens or tumors.

Immunostimulants work by increasing phagocytosis by granulocytes and macrophages, activating
helper T cells, and stimulating cell division and transformation in lymphocytes. Immunosuppressive
agents activate suppressor cells and have cytotoxic effects on other cells.

----- PAGE 86 -----
78 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

secretions, thus diluting the mucus and reducing its vis-
cosity. Alternatively, the surface activity of the saponins
may render the sputum less viscid, making it more mobile
and easier to eject. Another possibility is that the am-
phiphilic nature of saponins causes them to spread out as
a monomolecular film at the back of the throat and sub-
sequently aid elimination of mucus. Saponins are consid-
ered amphiphilic because one end of the molecule is hy-
drophilic (water foving, or polar) and the other is
hydrophobic (water hating, or nonpolar).

Diuretic Activity

The diuretic action of many saponins can be traced back
to local irritation of kidney epithelia. Plants with diuretic
activity due at least in part to their content of saponins
include Astragalus membranaceus, Herniara glabra, H. bir-
suta, Solidago virgaurea, S. gigantea, S. canadensis, Elymus
repens, Betula pendula, B. pubescens, Equisetum arvense, and
Viola tricolor.

The diuresis caused by some saponin-containing
plants, such as Ononis, Herniara, Betula, and Solidago
species, is relatively mild. In these plants, the effect may
originate from the combined influence of saponins,
flavonoids, and essential oils.

Anthelmintic Activity

Some saponin preparations have a practical use as an-
thelmintics in traditional medicine systems. In fact, a
large number of saponins exhibit anthelmintic activities,
but many find no practical application because of the par-
allel irritation of mucous membranes.

Spermicidal and. Contraceptive Activities

In the ongoing effort to find new sources of contraceptive
agents, numerous medicinal plants have been investigated
for antifertility effects. Saponins have a variety of impor-
tant activities in this area, including spermicidal effects.
The mechanism of action here probably involves a dis-
ruption of the spermatozoid plasma cell membrane, sim-
ilar to the action of the commercially available spermicide
nonoxynol-9.

Other Effects

Saponins may help protect the liver through some impact
upon the Kupffer’s cells, immune system cells found in
the liver. Saponins from Panax ginseng, Bupleurum falcatum,
licorice (Glycyrrbiza spp.), alfalfa (Medicago sativa), and soy
(Glycine max) have all demonstrated this property.”
Saponins appear to have a profound yet little under-
stood stimulating effect upon the reticuloendothelial

system and the white cell macrophages of the mononu-
clear phagocyte system (MPS). In biochemical terms, the
MPS removes a great deal of waste matter from the
blood—in other words, it “cleanses” the blood. This
sounds a bit like classic alterative activity! Some saponin-
containing herbs have also been shown to stimulate the
production of interferon in the body. In addition, exam-
ples of saponins with adaptogenic properties are found in
Eleutherococcus senticosus and Panax species.

Saponins have a reputation for bitterness. For exam-
ple, the seed coat of quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) contains
bitter saponins that must be removed before cooking.
Similarly, partially acetylated soyasaponins are responsi-
ble for the bitter and astringent taste of soybeans (Glycine
max). Saponins also impart a bitter taste to asparagus
(Asparagus officinalis) so that the bottom cut must be dis-
carded during processing. However, there are exceptions.
For example, glycyrrhizin, the principal saponin in
licorice, is about 50 times sweeter than sucrose.

Biological Effects
Molluscicidal Activity

Saponins have a pronounced action against mollusks. The
mechanism of this toxicity is thought to involve the bind-
ing of the saponin to the gill membranes, which causes an
increase in their permeability and a subsequent loss of im-
portant electrolytes. Saponins are also toxic to insects.

The toxicity of saponins to snails has stimulated great
interest in their potential for controlling schistosomiasis,
a tropical parasitic disease affecting approximately 250
million people worldwide. Snails are directly implicated
in the transmission of this disease, as they act as interme-
diate hosts during the life cycle of the parasite.

Plants that contain saponins are among the most
promising for large-scale application against the schisto-
somiasis parasite for a number of reasons.

* High molluscicidal activity

* Low oral toxicity

© Water soluble

Widely distributed in the plant kingdom
Frequently occur in large amounts in plants

Piscicidal Activity

The ability of some plants to act as fish poisons has been
exploited for many hundreds of years. Death of fish re-
sults from damage to the gill capillaries. The gills not
only are respiratory organs, but also play a crucial role in
the regulation of ion balance and osmotic pressure.

----- PAGE 87 -----
Fungicidal Activity

The strongest fungicidal activities have been found in
monodesmosidic saponins, Those with four or more sug-
ars in the chain show the greatest degree of activity;
shorter carbohydrate chains lead to lower water solubility
and weaker antifungal activity. One mechanism proposed
to explain the antifungal activity of saponins suggests that
the saponins form complexes with sterols in the plasma
membrane of the fungi, thus destroying the cellular
semipermeability and leading to death of the cell.
Another theory holds that the saponins themselves are in-
active and comprise only water-soluble transport forms.
The aglycone, or active membranolytic component,
forms only in the presence of cell membrane glycosidases.

Triterpenoid Saponins

Triterpenoid sapogenins have 5-ring structures. Sugars
are commonly attached at the 3-hydroxyl position. They
are frequently present in plants as a complex mixture of
closely related glycosides based on one or more triter-
penoid sapogenins. They are usually found in all parts of
the plant, with some concentration in root, foliage, or
seed. Recently, triterpene saponins have been isolated
from marine organisms.

Table 6.2. Pentacyclic Triterpenoid Saponin Herbs
and Actions

HERB ACTIONS

Aesculus hippocastanum Vascular tonic, anti-inflammatory

(horse chestnut)
Bupleurum falcatum (bupleurum) —_—_Anti-inflammatory, antihepatotoxic

Vulnerary, lymphatic, anti-
inflammatory

Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Glycyrrhiza glabra {licorice) Anti-inflammatory, demulcent,

expectorant, antiulcerogenic
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)} Anti-inflammatory, diaphoretic
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot) Expectorant
Primula spp. (primrose) Vary among species

Quillaja saponaria (quillaja) Emulsifying agent

TERPENES -2 79

General Properties of Triterpenoid
Saponins

Triterpenoid saponins share the general properties of
saponins, with the addition of an ability to form com-
plexes with cholesterol.

° Bitterness

¢ Hemolytic activity

¢ Decrease surface tension (i.e., form stable foams)
¢ Formation of complexes with cholesterol

Triterpene saponins (especially bidesmosides) have
the ability to increase the solubility of water-insoluble
compounds. In addition, the saponins of Bupleurum falca-
tum can be solubilized by ginseng saponins. Saikosaponin A
is normally soluble at 0. 1 mg/ml in water, but when gin-
senoside Ro is added, this increases to 3.4 mg/ml.

Biological and Pharmacological Properties
of Triterpenoid Saponins

Antibacterial Activity
Although strongly antifungal, triterpene saponins have
virtually no antibacterial activity.

Antiviral Activity

Some antiviral activity has been reported in in vitro stud-
ies. However, the therapeutic index is unfortunately low,
limiting the usefulness of triterpene saponins as isolated
constituents in humans.

Cytotoxic. and. Antitumor. Activity

Cytotoxic activity has been documented in vitro for many
triterpenoid saponins, but their high toxicity has inhibited
their use in therapy. It must be remembered that there is a
big difference between whole plant activity and research on
isolated constituents. Please see chapter 9 for a discussion
on the effects of plant constituents on cancer processes.

Aescin

Found in the seed of the horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocas-
tanum), aescin is also the collective name for the complex
mixture of more than 30 different saponins present in
horse chestnut. The main component (shown on page
80) makes up about 20% of the saponin content of the
complex.

Aescin has strong hemolytic activity and shows anti-
inflammatory and anti-exudative actions. It also inhibits
fungal growth and has demonstrated anticancer cancero-
static properties.®

----- PAGE 88 -----
80 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

HO Pea

‘OCOCHy

HO,

Fig. 6.81. Curcurbitacin E

Fig. 6.79. Aescin

Glycyrrhetic Acid

A sapogenin from the dried roots and rhizomes of
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), glycyrrhetic acid has anti-
inflammatory and antiulcerogenic properties. It pos-
sesses mineralocorticoid action, which can result in in-
creased renal sodium resorption, leading to an increase
in blood pressure, hypokalemia, and water retention.®5

OH
om City
Hye bon
Fig. 6.80. Avenacin Hs
Avenacin A-] Hy
Avenacin A-l is found in oats (Avena sativa). It demon- CHs
strates hemolytic activity in animals and strongly inhibits on
pathogenic fungi in plants. ny ‘on,

Fig. 6.82. Glycyrrhetic acid
Cucurbitacin E

The cucurbitacins are triterpenoid saponins predomi- Glycyrrhizin
nantly found in the Curcubitaceae family, but also present
in the Begoniaceae, Brassicaceae, Scrophulariaceae, and
others. They are a group of extremely bitter-tasting, oxy-
genated saponins derived from the cucurbitane skeleton.
They cannot be considered steroidal, since the methyl
from C-10 has moved to C-9. Pharmacological effects of
the cucurbitacins and the plants containing them are very
varied:54

This saponin from the roots and rhizomes of Glyeyrrbiza
glabra induces the activity of interferons. It is intensely
sweet, with a taste about 50 times sweeter than sucrose. It
also has antiulcerogenic and expectorant properties.

¢ Antifertility (in female mice)
¢ Anti-inflammatory

¢ Bitter stimulant

* Cytotoxic, antitumor

¢ Hepatoprotective

¢ Purgative

¢ Stomachic

They may also play other biological roles as plant ol
growth regulators and insect feedants or antifeedants.

Fig. 6.83. Glycyrrhizin

----- PAGE 89 -----
Saikosaponin A
Saikosaponin A occurs in the roots of Bupleurum falcatum
and B. chinense.

The saponin fractions of these herbs demonstrate
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities.°”

Senegin IT

This compound is found in the roots of Polygala senega. A
mixture of senegin JI and related saponins from P. senega
shows anticancer and expectorant activities.*

Steroid Saponins

These saponins are similar to the triterpenoid saponins in
structure, biogenesis, and biological activity, but have
four rings. They also bear structural similarities to the
cardiac glycosides. The first natural source of steroid
saponins was foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), in which digi-
togenin co-occurs with the cardiac glycosides digitalin
and digitoxin.

Fig. 6.84. Steroid structure
and numbering system

Occurrence and. Distribution

Steroid saponins are present in the Agavaceae,
Dioscoreaceae, Liliaceae, and Scrophulariaceae plant
families. They resemble the triterpenoid saponins in the
number and location of their sugar components. The gly-
cosides can be difficult to purify, so sapogenins such as
diosgenin and yamogenin are better known than the cor-
responding saponins. Diosgenin, isolated from Dioscorea
roots, is a starting material for the partial synthesis of sex
hormones used in contraceptive pills, but does not act as a
precursor of “natural progesterone” in the human body—
an important distinction.

Steroid saponins are used as detergents, as foaming
agents in fire extinguishers, and as fish poisons. Their lack
of human toxicity is apparent in the fact that such saponins
occur in a number of food plants, such as asparagus.

TERPENES «> 81

Table 6.3. Industrial Sources of Steroidal Saponins

HERB SOURCE MATERIAL FOR

Agave sisalana (sisal) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Dioscorea spp. (wild yam) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Glycine max (soy) Phytosterols

Ruscus aculeatus (butcher's broom) Cardiovascular, anti-inflammatory,

vasoconstrictor drugs
Smilax spp. {sarsaparilla) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Trigonella foenum-graecum
(fenugreek)

Anti-inflammatory, hypotensive

drugs
Trillium erectum (beth root) Saponins for pharmaceuticals*

Yucca spp. (yucca) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

*Trillium erectum js unfortunately now an endangered species and should not be used.

Table 6.4. Sources of Cardioactive Saponins

HERB ACTIONS

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley) Cardioactive, diuretic

Digitalis spp. (Foxglove) Cardioactive, diuretic

Helleborus niger (hellebore) Cardioactive, diuretic

Nerium oleander {oleander) Cardioactive, diuretic

Strophanthus kombe {strophanthus) — Cardioactive, diuretic

Urginea maritima (squill) Expectorant, cardioactive,

diuretic

General Properties of Steroidal Saponins
Many steroidal saponins share the core properties of the
larger class of saponins:

* Antifertility

* Antihepatotoxic

¢ Ant-inflammatory

* Antimicrobial (fungicidal, antibacterial, antiviral)
* Capillary-strengthening

* Cytotoxic, antitumor

¢ Insecticidal and antifeedant

¢ Molluscicidal

* Piscicidal

© Plant growth inhibitors

----- PAGE 90 -----
82 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Astragaloside III

This compound from the roots of Astragalus mem-
branaceus has been shown to inhibit the formation of lipid
peroxidase induced by intraperitoneal administration of
adriamycin in rats. This suggests antioxidant activity.®

Fig. 6.85. Astragaloside III

Cimicifugoside

Found in some Cimicifuga spp., this has been found to be
a potent and selective inhibitor of nucleoside transport at
the plasma membrane site of mammalian cells in vitro.”

SS
OM
OH ‘OH Aye CHy

Fig. 6.86. Cimicifugoside

Diosgenin

Diosgenin is obtained through acid hydrolysis of many
different saponins (for example, dioscin, deltonin, and
gracillin), from Dioscorea, Costus, Trillium, and Trigonella
species. It is used in the partial synthesis of hormones
having a steroid structure, such as pregnenolone and
progesterone.®!

HO

Fig. 6.87. Diosgenin

chy

G4 og

-2.

OH

Hock on oH

OH

wer? oH

Fig. 6.88. Dioscin

Ginsenoside Re

Ginsenoside Re is found in Panax pseudoginseng and P. gin-
seng. Ginsenoside Re causes analgesic effects in mice at
doses of 10 mg /kg.”

HyS CH)

‘CHZOH
Hy O
OH!

oH ‘OH

Fig. 6.89. Ginsenoside Re

Ginsenoside Rf
This is found in the roots of Korean ginseng (Panax
ginseng).

OH

OH
‘OH

PLEL;
Oy o On CH,OH

H,COH. OH

oH
Ha

Fig. 6.90. Ginsenoside Rf

----- PAGE 91 -----
Ginsenoside Rg
This is another ginsenoside found in the roots of Korean
ginseng (Panax ginseng).

on CHOH

oH,

OH
cH,0H

Fig. 6.91. Ginsenoside Rg

hye Now 0.

Ruscogenin

This compound, found in the rhizomes of butcher’s
broom (Ruscus aculeatus), is used in the treatment of hem-
orrhoids. Ruscosides A and B, partly identified glycosides
of ruscogenin, decrease the cholesterol content of blood,
reduce lipid deposition in the aorta, and lower liver arte-
rial tension. They also show antiarteriosclerotic and hy-
potensive actions.”

CARDENOLIDES AND
BUFADIENOLIDES

The cardenolides and bufadienolides are two related
groups of C,, and C), steroids of triterpenoid origin. The
cardenolides are heart poisons that, when used in small
doses, are extremely valuable clinically for controlling
congestive heart failure.

Cardiac glycosides occur principally in the closely re-
lated families of the Apocynaceae and Asclepiadaceae.™
In the milkweed genus, Asclepias, the compounds are se-
creted in the latex, and virtually every species that has
been examined contains them. Cardiac glycosides are also
found in a number of other dicotyledon families, such as
Brassicaceae, Moraceae, and Scrophulariaceae (notably
Digitalis), and in monocotyledon groups, especially
Liliaceae. Cardenolides are remarkably nontoxic to lepi-
doptera. Some species of danaid butterflies store them in
their bodies and wings to protect themselves from birds,
as the cardenolides have an emetic effect on birds that
prey on these butterflies.

Bufadienolides can be distinguished from cardeno-
lides by the fact that the lactone ring substituting at C-17
in the steroid nucleus is 6-membered, rather than 5-
membered. Bufadienolides were first identified in toad
venom.

‘TERPENES & 83

Convallatoxin

This is the major cardiac glycoside from the flowers and
leaves of lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis). While it is
very toxic to vertebrates, it has been used in minute doses
as a cardiotonic.”§

Digoxin

Digoxin is found in Digitalis lanata and D. orientalis.
While toxic to vertebrates, derivatives of digoxin are used
as cardiotonic agents.

OH

oR’

Fig, 6.92. Digitalin

PHYTOSTEROLS

Phytosterols are characterized by the presence of a hy-
droxyl group attached at C-3 and an extra methyl or ethyl
substituent in the side chain, which is not present in ani-
mal sterols. At one time, all sterols were believed to be
animal products, but an increasing number of such com-
pounds have been detected in plant tissues.

Three phytosterols are ubiquitous in higher plants, as
they are all essential components of plant membranes:
sitosterol, stigmasterol, and campesterol. These occur
both in free form and as 3-glucosides.”” A less common
phytosterol is a-spinasterol, an isomer of stigmasterol
found in spinach.

Occurrence and Distribution

In spite of the structural differences between plant and
animal sterols, certain animal sterols have been found in
plants. Estrone, for example, has been found in trace
amounts in date palm seed (Phoenix dactylifera), while
testosterone is present in the pollen of Scotch pine (Pinus
sylvestris).* A large number of insect molting hormones
have also been found in plants. These are known as ‘phy-
toecdysones, and some 100 structures have been described.
Ecdysone, the molting hormone of many insects, itself
occurs in plants, but many of the other structures, such as
prodecdysone B, are recorded only in the plant kingdom.

----- PAGE 92 -----
84 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Commiphora mukul

Known as guggul in India, the resin contains steroids
(called guggulsterones) that lower blood cholesterol and
triglycerides via stimulation of thyroid function.”

CHy

Cry f

Fig. 6.93. Guggulsterone Z

Androstenedione (androtex)
This phytosterol is found in the pollen of Scotch pine, Pinus
sylvestris. It has demonstrated androgenic activity.!°

Cholesterol

Cholesterol occurs in the pollen of the date palm (Phoenix
dactylifera) and in many marine red algae. It is a common
sterol of animal tissues.

Fig. 6.94. Cholesterol

B-sitosterol

B-sitosterol has a widespread occurrence in higher plants.
Among many others, it is found in wheat germ (Triticum
spp.) and in corn (Zea mays). It is an essential component of
plant cell membranes. B-sitosterol has shown anti-
hyperlipoproteinemic activity.!%!

Hy

Fig. 6.95. B-sitosterol

Stigmasterol

Found in many higher plants, including soybeans (Giycine
max), stigmasterol plays a vital structural role in plant cell
membranes.

Fig. 6.96. Stigmasterol

Fig. 6.97. Withanolide

Withanolide D
Found in the leaves of ashwagandha (Withania som-
nifera), withanolide D has shown antibiotic and antitu-
mor activities!

NORTRITERPENOIDS

Nortriterpenoids are formed from triterpene precursors
through oxidation and degradation, so they contain fewer
than the 30 carbon atoms typically present in triter-
penoids. There are two main groups: the limonoids (C),)
and the quassinoids (Cy) and Cy triterpenoids).

More than 75 quassinoids have been described, all
from the same plant family, Simaroubaceae, to which the
genus Quassia belongs. Limonoids are also found in
Simaroubaceae, but are more abundant in three related
families: Rutaceae, Meliaceae, and Cneoraceae.!%

Limonoids and quassinoids are notable for having
very bitter tastes. Quassinoids have demonstrated antitu-
mor activities in vitro, but none has yet been developed as
an anticancer drug because of the toxicity. Some quassi-
noids show antiamoebic properties, and glaucarubin is
used as a medicinal preparation for this purpose in France.
Limonoids are of interest chiefly because of the need to
counteract the bitter taste they impart to citrus drinks.
However, they also hold commercial promise as the first
members of a new generation of natural insecticides.

Limonin

Limonin is found in navel and Valencia oranges (Citrus
spp.) during ripening. It is used to delay the development
of bitterness in certain citrus fruit juices.!%

cHy ‘CHy

Fig. 6.98. Limonin

Fig. 6.99. Neoquassin

----- PAGE 93 -----
Neoquassin.

This very bitter compound occurs in the wood of Quassia
amara and in various Picrasma species. It may have poten-
tial as a natural insecticide.!% :

TETRATERPENOIDS

This class of molecules with 40 carbon atoms includes
carotenes, xanthophylls, and retinoids. Here we will dis-
cuss the carotenoids.

Carotenoids

Carotenoids, Cyy tetraterpenoids, are lipid-soluble pig-
ments found in all plants. In animals, several carotenoids
(especially B-carotene) are metabolized to vitamin A.
Carotenoids appear to have two principal functions in
plants: They supply accessory pigments during the pro-
cess of photosynthesis and serve as coloring matter for
flowers and fruits. In flowers, they mostly appear as yel-
low colors, as in daffodils, pansies, and marigolds. In
fruits, they may be orange or red (for example, rose hips,
tomatoes, and peppers). Dietary carotenoids also provide
many brilliant animal colors, seen in flamingos, starfish,
lobsters, and sea urchins.

Only a few carotenoids are common in higher
plants.’ Well-known carotenoids are either simple un-
saturated hydrocarbons based on lycopene or oxygenated
derivatives of unsaturated hydrocarbons known as xan-
thophylls. The chemical structure of lycopene consists of
a long chain of eight isoprene units joined head to tail.
This completely conjugated system of alternate double
bonds becomes the chromophore that gives the compound
its color, or the part of the molecule responsible for a
given spectral band. The term arose in the dye industry
and referred originally to the groups in the molecule that
are responsible for a dye’s color.

Capsanthin
Capsanthin occurs in the ripe fruits of sweet red pepper
or paprika (Capsicum annuum) and in some barberries
(Berberis spp.), and in the petals of orange lilies (for exam-
ple, Lilium pumilum) and the anthers of other lilies, such
as the tiger lily (Lilium lancifolium).

Capsanthin is used commercially to provide orange-
red food colorings and as flavoring in sauces, salad dress-
ings, sausages, and other foods.!°”

Carotene
B-carotene occurs in almost all green leaves of higher
plants and in many lower plants, including ferns, mosses,

TERPENES .& 85

and algae, as well as in fungi and some bacteria. It is
widely found in roots, such as carrot (Daucus carota) and
sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), and in the yellow and or-
ange flowers of many plants, including gorse (Ulex spp.).
It also occurs in seeds, such as oats (4vena sativa) and
fruits, including sweet red pepper (Capsicum annuum),
yams (Dioscorea spp.), and rose hips (Rosa spp.).

B-carotene is the most important of the carotenoid
vitamin A precursors. It is used commercially as a yellow
food coloring for fats (for example, margarine) and as a
sunscreen agent to prevent the photosensitivity reaction
of erythropoietic protoporphyria.

CH3 CHs

CHg
CH3._-CH
s AW A A AS ey ee Ve
( oH by, Cha “CH:
CHs % 3

Fig. 6.100. 6-carotene

Lycopene

Lycopene occurs in the ripe fruits of tomatoes (Lyco-
persicon esculentum), Citrus species, persimmon (Diospyros
kaki), dog rose (Rosa canina), and numerous other fruits
and berries. It also occurs in the petals of many orange
flowers (for example, Calendula officinalis), in very large
amounts in the ripe seeds of bitter melon (Momordica cha-
rantia), in rutabagas (Brassica napus), and in red varieties
of carrot (Daucus carota).'%

Dietary intakes of tomatoes and products containing
lycopene are associated with decreased risk of chronic ill-
nesses such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.!°?
Serum and tissue lycopene levels have also been shown to
be inversely related to the risk of lung and prostate can-
cers. Lycopene is a potent antioxidant, which is clearly
one of its major mechanisms of action. As an antioxidant,
lycopene traps singlet oxygen and reduces mutagenesis in
the Ames test.

PLANT EXUDATES

Plant exudates are chemically complex, solid or semisolid
mixtures of vegetable origin, such as balsams, gums, ole-
oresins, and resins. The proportions of their constituents
vary with climate, season of the year, and other factors.

Resins

A resin is a natural or synthetic organic compound con-
sisting of a noncrystalline or viscous liquid substance.
Most natural resins are exuded from trees, especially pines
and firs. Resin forms in response to injury to the bark
from wind, fire, lightning, or other cause. ‘The secretion

----- PAGE 94 -----
86 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

usually loses some of its volatile components through
evaporation, leaving a soft, initially soluble residue that
becomes insoluble as it ages.

Resins are characteristically insoluble in water and
mostly soluble in alcohol; because of their chemical com-
plexity, they often will not crystallize, but instead soften or
melt at moderate heat. They are usually the oxidized ter-
penes of volatile oils, and, because they are insoluble in
water, have little taste. When pure, resins are generally
transparent, but when water is added they become opaque
and lose their hard or brittle qualities. They do not conduct
electricity, but when rubbed do become negatively charged.

As complex mixtures that may include lignans, resin
acids, resin alcohols, resinotannols, esters, and resenes,
resins have an amorphous nature that makes them diffi-
cult to classify. They may occur in mixtures with other
plant constituents, as in gum resins, oleogum resins, and
glycoresins.

One way in which to classify natural resins is to de-
termine whether they are alcohol- or oil-soluble. Among
the alcohol-soluble resins are balsams, long popular as
healing agents; turpentines, used as solvents, and mastic,
dragon’s blood, damar, sandarac, and lac, all used as com-
ponents of'varnishes. The oil-soluble resins include rosin,
derived along with turpentine from the long-leaf pine;
copal, used in varnishes; amber, the hardest natural resin,
which is fabricated into jewelry; and cashew nutshell oil.

In addition, a distinction must be made among natu-
ral resins, prepared resins, and synthetic resins.

A natural resin is one that occurs as a plant exudate.
Mastic, formerly an official medicine in The United
States Pharmacopoeia, is a good example.

A prepared resin can be made by exhausting a drug that
owes its activity to resinous constituents with alcohol—
in other words, by pouring the concentrated alcoholic
percolate into water and collecting, washing, and dry-
ing the precipitate. The resin made from Podophyllum
is an example of this class. A prepared resin may also be
derived from a natural oleoresin by driving off the
volatile oil with heat, as in Rosin NF.

Synthetic resins are polymeric substances that are formed
either by condensation or by the addition of readily
available common chemicals. Phenol and formalde-
hyde serve as examples. These compounds interact
initially to produce hydroxybenzyl alcohols, which
then condense to yield a large series of phenol-
formaldehyde (Bakelite) resins. These and many other
synthetic resins constitute the foundation of the mod-
ern plastics industry.

Table 6.5. Herbs Containing Resins

HERB COMMON USES

Boswellia serrata (frankincense) Perfumery

Ginnamomum camphora (camphor) — Rubefacient

Antimicrobial, vulnerary,
tubefacient

Commiphora motmol (myrrh)

Daemonorops draco {dragon's blood) Antimicrobial

Eriodictyon californicum (yerba santa) Expectorant

Grindelia spp. (grindelia) Relaxing expectorant,

anti-inflammatory

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum) Anti-inflammatory,

diaphoretic
(pomoea purga {jalap) Powerful cathartic
Turnera diffusa var. aphrodisiaca Nervine
(damiana)
Rosin

Rosin, also called colophony, is a type of resin used for
varnish and in manufacturing many products. It becomes
sticky when warm and has a faint pinelike odor. Gum
rosin is the residue produced through distillation of the
oleoresin from pine trees, the volatile component of
which is spirit of turpentine. Wood rosin, obtained by sol-
vent extraction of'stumps, is usually a darker color. Rosin
and its chemical derivatives are used chiefly in the manu-
facture of soaps, varnishes, sealing wax, printing inks,
dryers, size for paper, adhesives, binders, soldering fluxes,
gloss oils for paints, and pitch for casks.

Guaiac

This resin from the wood of Guaiacum officinale or G. sanc-
tum is reported to contain about 70% a- and B-guaiaconic
acids; 11% guaiacic acid, related compounds, and gua-
iaretic acid; and 15% vanillin, guaiac yellow, and guaiac
saponin. It is insoluble in water but freely soluble in alco-
hol, chloroform, ether, creosote, and alkali.

In medicine, it is used as a reagent in tests for occult
(hidden) blood. It is also employed to test for the presence
of oxidizing enzymes or cyanogenetic glycosides in vari-
ous materials.

Oleoresins
Oleoresins are liquid preparations that consist of natural
volatile oils and resins extracted from plants by percola-

----- PAGE 95 -----
tion with a menstruum of acetone, alcohol, or ether. As
with resins, a distinction must be made between natural
and prepared oleoresins.

Natural oleoresins are mixtures of volatile oils and resin,
generally obtained by incising the trunks of trees in
which they occur. Turpentine and copaiba are natural
oleoresins formerly recognized as official preparations
in the National Formulary of the United States.

Prepared oleoresins are concentrated liquid preparations
made by percolating drugs that contain both volatile
oils and resin with an appropriate solvent (acetone,
ether, or alcohol), and concentrating the percolate
until the solvent dissipates.

Balsams

Balsams are aromatic resinous plant exudates that consist
of a resin dispersed in benzoic or cinnamic acid esters.
Balsams are difficult to distinguish from oleoresins, which
are resins dissolved in essential oils, but in general, oleo-
resins are slightly more fluid. Examples include Peru bal-
sam, a true balsam from a tropical tree (Myroxylon balsa-
mum. var. pereirae), which provides a fragrant, thick, deep
brown or black fluid used in perfumery; and Tolu balsam,
an even thicker brown balsam used in cough syrups and
lozenges. The latter, made from Myroxylon balsamum var.
balsamum, becomes solid over time.

Gum Resins

These are natural mixtures of gum and resin, usually ob-
tained as exudations from plants, such as myrrh.

Myrrh

Myrrh is the air-dried oleo-gum resin obtained from
Commiphora molmol and closely related species, trees na-
tive to northeast Africa and Arabia. Myrrh contains 2% to
10% essential oil, 25% to 45% alcohol-soluble resins, and
30% to 60% a water-soluble gum. The essential oil is
thick, with a yellow- to reddish brown color. Myrrh resin
collects in canals in the inner bark of the tree. It is se-
creted through fissures, wounds, or incisions made in the
bark. Ground myrrh quickly loses its essential oil and
cakes easily due to moisture absorption, so it should be
stored in a sealed container.

References
1. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

2. Ibid.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

14.

1s.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

TERPENES 87

. Ibid.
. [No authors listed] d-limonene. [ARC monographs on the

evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans 1999; 73:307-27.

. Crowell PL, Gould MN. Chemoprevention and therapy

of cancer by d-limonene. Critical Reviews in Oncogenesis
1994; 5(L):1-22.

. Crowell PL, Siar Ayoubi A, Burke YD. Antitumorigenic

effects of limonene and perillyl alcohol against pancre-
atic and breast cancer. Advances in Experimental Medicine
and Biology 1996; 401:131-6.

. Igimi H, Tamura R, Toraishi K, et al. Medical dissolu-

tion of gallstones. Clinical experience of d-limonene as a
simple, safe, and effective solvent. Digestive Diseases and
Sciences 1991 Feb; 36(2):200-8.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

bid.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

bid.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Eccles R. Menthol and related cooling compounds. The

Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 1994 Aug;
46(8):618-30.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Goodman LS, Gilman A. The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 7th edition. New York: Macmillan, 1985.
Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Tbid.

Matthijs S, Adriaens PA. Chlorhexidine varnishes: a re-
view. Journal of Clinical Peridontology 2002 Jan; 29(1):1-8.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 96 -----
88

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39,

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45,

<@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bianco A, ‘The chemistry of iridoids. In: Atta-Ur
Rahman HEY, ed. Studies in Natural Products Chemistry,
vol. 7. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1990.

Buckingham J. Dictionary of Natural Products. London,
New York: Chapman & Hall, 1994.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Robles M, Aregullin M, West J, et al. Recent studies on
the zoopharmacognosy, pharmacology and neurotoxicol-
ogy of sesquiterpene lactones. Planta Medica 1995 Jun;
61(3):199-203.

Houghton PJ. Valerian. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1997. .
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Mackenzie MA, et al. The influence of glycyrrhetinic
acid on plasmol cortisol and cortisone levels in healthy
young volunteers. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
and Metabolism 1990; 70:1637-43.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Houghton PJ. Valerian. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1997.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC; Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Coutinho EM. Gossypol: a contraceptive for men.
Contraception 2002 Apr; 65(4):259-63.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

46.
47.

48.

49.

52.

53.
94,
55.

56.

57,
58.
59.
60.

61.

63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

Ibid.

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Robles M, Aregullin M, West J, et al. Recent studies on
the zoopharmacognosy, pharmacology and neurotoxicol-
ogy of sesquiterpene lactones. Planta Medica 1995 Jun,
61(3):199-203.

Hausen BM. Sesquiterpene lactones. In: DeSmet, ed.
Adverse Effects on Herbal Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1992.

. Ibid.
SL.

Lovell CR. Plants and the Skin. Oxford, Boston:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Frederich M, Dogneacute JM, Angenot L, et al. New
trends in anti-malarial agents. Current Medicinal
Chemistry 2002 Aug; 9(15):1435-56.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Hanson JR. Diterpenoids. Natural Product Reports 1998;
1:93-106.

Alcarez MJ, Rios JL. Pharmacology of diterpenoids. In:
Harborne JB, Toma-Barberan FA, eds. Ecological
Chemistry and Biochemistry of Plant Terpenoids. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1991.

. Singh M, Pal M, Sharma RP. Biological activity of the

labdane diterpenes. Planta Medica 1999 Feb; 65(1):2-8.
de Souza NJ, Dohadwalla AN, Reden J. Forskolin:

a labdane diterpenoid with antihypertensive, positive
inotropic, platelet aggregation inhibitory, and adenylate
cyclase activating properties. Medicinal Research Reviews
1983 Apr-Jun; 3(2):201-19.

Evans FJ. Naturally Occurring Phorbol Esters. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1986.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

----- PAGE 97 -----
68.

69.

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

75.

76.
77.
78.
79.
80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.
87.
88.
89.

de Souza NJ, Dohadwalla AN, Reden J. Forskolin:

a labdane diterpenoid with antihypertensive, positive
inotropic, platelet aggregation inhibitory, and adenylate
cyclase activating properties. Medicinal Research Reviews
1983 Apr-Jun; 3(2):201-19.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Tid.

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Hostettmann K, Marston A. Saponins, Cambridge, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Watanabe, et al. Solubilizing of saponins of Bupleuri
radix with ginseng saponins: cooperative effect of
dammarane saponins. Planta Medica 1988; 54:405-9,
Sjolander A, Cox JC, Barr IG. ISCOMs: an adjuvant
with multiple functions. Journal of Leukocyte Biology 1998
Dec; 64(6):7 13-23.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemsical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC; Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Miro M. Cucurbitacins and Their Pharmacological
Effects. Phytotherapy Research 1995; 9:159-68.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993,

Tid.

Tid.

Ibid.

He K, Wang HK. Recent development of chemical
studies on some medicinal plants of Astragalus spp. Yzo
Xue Xue Bao 1988 Nov; 23(11):873-80.

90.

91.

92.

93.
94.
95.
. Ibid.
97.
98.
99.

100.

101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.

108.

109.

TERPENES 89

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Hostettmann K, Marston A. Saponins. Cambridge, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: ‘Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.
Ibid.
Tbid.

Tbid.

Tid.

Satyavati G. Guggulipid: a promising hypolipidaemic
agent from gum guggul (Commiphora wightit). In:
Wagner H, Farnsworth NR, Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol.5. San Diego: Academic Press, 1991.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Duke JA. Promising phytomedicinals. In: Janick J,

Simon JE, eds. Advances in New Crops. Portland, OR:
Timber Press, 1990.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants, London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Heber D, Lu QY Overview of mechanisms of action of
lycopene. Experimental Biology and Medicine (Maywood)
2002 Nov; 227(10):920-3.

Suggested Reading
Bruneton, J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.

London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of

Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 98 -----
POLYPHENOLS

bout 8,000 naturally occurring plant phenolics
A have been identified, and about half of these are

flavonoids. There are many structurally simple
phenols, such as phenolic acids, phenylpropanoids, and
phenolic quinones. Several important groups of plant
polymeric materials are phenolic: the lignins, melanins,
and tannins. Finally, phenolic groups are occasionally
found in alkaloids and terpenoids.!

Phenolics contribute significantly to the color, taste,
and flavor of many herbs, foods, and drinks. Some flavonoids
are valued pharmacologically for their anti-inflammatory
activities (such as quercetin) or antihepatotoxic properties
(for example, silybin).? Certain isoflavonoids, such as
genistein and daidzein, are phytoestrogens, while others
are insecticidal or piscicidal. The anthocyanins have a
clearly defined function in flowers and fruits in attract-
ing pollinators and as seed dispersal agents. Many of
these phenolic molecules are also effective antioxidants
and free radical scavengers, especially the flavonoids.
As discussed later, they are also the basis of most flower
colors.

Table 7.1. Major Classes of Phenolics in Plants

Major Functions of Polyphenols
Polyphenols have in common an aromatic benzene ring

bearing one or more hydroxyl groups.
OH

Fig. 7.1, Phenol

The majority of polyphenols are water-soluble; they
usually occur naturally as glycosides, located within the
plant cell in the central vacuole. Other phenolics are
lipophilic and are present in the cell cytoplasm or at the
surface of plants in waxes and bud exudates.

CLASSIFICATION OF PHENOLICS

Phenolics are classified according to their structure or
biosynthetic origin, but no ideal system is available. Their
great diversity makes simple classification extremely

NUMBER OF BASIC SKELETON CLASS EXAMPLE
C ATOMS

Sy
6 Cs Simple phenolics Arbutin |

Pe

ow

OH

7 CG Phenolic acids Salicylic acid Cl CO
8 Ce, Benzofurans Usnic acid

90

----- PAGE 99 -----
POLYPHENOLS 2 91

NUMBER OF BASIC SKELETON CLASS EXAMPLE
C ATOMS
9 CoG Cinnamic acids Caffeic acid \
ath
Phenylpropenoids Myristicin <

Ory

SS
Coumarins Umbelliferone
HO" o” mre)
10 Ca Naphthoquinones Juglone C1)

ob
Ho. we on
B CoO, Xanthones Mangiferin Pa
ow oH

4 Ce Oty Stilbenoids Resveratrol
Anthraquinones Emodin
15 Co GC Flavonoids Kaempferol
8 (C..G) Lignans Dihydroguaiaretic¢ acid
30 (Co-G-Celo Biflavonoids Ginketin a , :
n (CoG) Lignins

(CCC) Flavolans (condensed tannins)

----- PAGE 100 -----
92 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

problematic. What follows is a system that proves most
relevant to the needs of the herbalist.

SIMPLE PHENOLS AND
PHENOLIC ACIDS

Phenolic acids (Cs-C,) are ubiquitous among plants, but
free phenols (C,) are rare. The pharmacological proper-
ties of these widely found constituents are probably best
demonstrated by the urinary tract antimicrobial arbutin
and the anti-inflammatory salicylates. A property shared
by all phenols is antimicrobial activity. In fact, phenol it-
self was the first antiseptic used in surgery.
Hydroquinone is probably the most widely dis-
tributed of the simple phenols, occurring in a number of
plants as the glucoside arbutin. Simple phenols with side
chains are often skin irritants, such as urushiol IIT from
the poison ivy plant. Urushiol ITT may be classified as a
phenol or a terpene, depending upon the focus of interest.

Table 7.2. Herbal Activities Related to Content of
Simple Phenolics

HERB ACTIVITY

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi(bearberry) Antimicrobial, diuretic

Food, circulatory stimulant,
rubefacient, analgesic

Capsicum spp. (cayenne)

Gynara scolymus (artichoke) Digestive bitter, cholagogue

Dryopteris filix-mas (male fern) Anthelmintic
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) —_Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen) _Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Salix spp. (willow) Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod) Anticatarrhal, diuretic
Vanilla planifolia (vanilla) Food, perfumery

Viburnum prunifolium (black haw) Antispasmodic

Arbutin

Found in the leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry),
Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry), and Origanum majorana
(marjoram), arbutin demonstrates diuretic, antitussive,
and urinary antimicrobial properties. It is easily hy-
drolyzed into hydroquinone and glucose; however, the
gallotannins in simple plant extracts prevent hydrolysis,
preserving the effectiveness of such extracts.

Glucose OH
HO.
Ss
OH
Pe
o
CH OH

Fig. 7.2. Arbutin Fig, 7.3. Gallic acid

Gallic Acid

This phenolic acid is the parent compound of the gal-
lotannins and is relatively widespread. Gallic acid is well
known for astringent properties, but has demonstrated
many other activities in vitro, including antibacterial, an-
tiviral, antifungal, anti-inflammatory, antitumor, anti-
anaphylactic, antimutagenic, choleretic, and bronchodila-
tory actions. It also inhibits insulin degradation and
promotes smooth muscle relaxation.*

Guaiacol

Guaiacol occurs in creosote made from beechwood tar, in
guaiac resin, and in various plant oils and saps—for ex-
ample, celery seed oil (Apium graveolens). Guaiacol is used
as an expectorant in veterinary practice, mostly in the
form of esters. In huinans, it has been applied externally
to treat eczema and other skin diseases.°

Salicin and Salicylates

This widely distributed group of simple phenolics ap-
pear to play a defensive role in plant ecology.® The
type example of the class, salicin, was first identified
in the bark of willow (Salix spp.). This class of simple
phenolics is widely distributed in flowering plant
families, including Salicaceae (Populus spp. and Salix
spp.),, Rosaceae (Filipendula ulmaria), and Capri-
foliaceae (Viburnum prunifolium). Salicin and salicy-
lates have a long history of use in folk medicine for
relief of headaches and musculoskeletal pain.

Properties of Salicin and Salicylates
¢ Analgesic

¢ Antipyretic

¢ Anti-inflammatory

Salicin does not demonstrate the anticlotting
effect. that is seen with aspirin. On the other hand,
aspirin has a well-known tendency to cause gastric
ulceration and hemorrhage, and there is no evidence
that salicin-containing herbs have the same adverse
effects.

----- PAGE 101 -----
Hydroquinone

Upon hydrolysis in the body, arbutin releases a diphenol,
which is immediately oxidized to hydroquinone. For this
release of antiseptic properties, an alkaline environment
in the urine is neecled. It has antibacterial, antitumor, an-
timitotic, and hypertensive actions.’

Salicin

Salicin occurs in the bark of poplar (Populus spp.) and wil-
low (Salix spp.), and in the female flowers of Salix
species. It is also found in the root bark of black haw
(Viburnum prunifolium) and the aerial parts of meadow-
sweet (Filipendula ulmaria). Salicin is used as an analgesic,
anti-inflammatory, and antirheumatic agent.®

OH
CH,OH
C | Glucose.
—
OH
Fig. 7.4. Hydroquinone Fig. 7.5. Salicin

A°-tetrahydrocannabinol

This compound occurs in the resin and the tips of shoots
of Cannabis sativa. This, the active principle of marijuana,
demonstrates anti-inflammatory, antiemetic, and hallu-
cinogenic properties.°

Vanillin

Vanillin is widespread in plants, but is generally found in
small amounts. It is commercially important and is pre-
sent in the pods of the tropical orchid Vanilla planifolia,
where it occurs with its glucoside, vanilloside. Vanillin
also occurs in the sprouts of Asparagus spp. and in the es-
"sential oils of Ruta and Spirea species. It is antifungal.!°

cH,

Ss oH

Hc SENN,
°

Hye! oro

Fig, 7.6. A°-tetrahydrocannabinol Fig. 77. Vanillin

Benzofurans

The benzofuran nucleus (C.-C,), in which a benzene ring
and a furan ring are fused, is present in many secondary
plant metabolites, some of which are classified as
coumarins and flavonoids.

POLYPHENOLS @ 93

Ss

Bi

ro
Fig. 7.8. Benzofuran nucleus

The simple benzofurans, such as usnic acid, have two
benzene rings fused on either side of a central furan ring.
They are characteristically present in lichens. A biologi-
cal property many benzofurans share is antifungal activ-
ity. Antifungal substances may either occur naturally in
the plant or as phytoalexins formed after plants have suf-
fered microbial infection, Other benzofurans are toxic to
insects, fish, cattle, and humans.

Lithospermic Acid

Lithospermic acid is found in the roots of various plants
in the Boraginaceae family, including Lycopus europaeus, L.
virginicus, Lithospermum ruderale, L. officinale, and Sym-
phytum officinale. There have been unconfirmed reports of
contraceptive properties in humans.!!

HO.

HO

oH
Fig. 7.9. Lithospermic acid

Usnic Acid

Usnic acid is found in a number of lichens—for example,
Usnea, Ramatina, Evernia, Parmelia, Lecanora, and Cladonia
species. Usnic acid demonstrates antibacterial activity,
especially against the tuberculosis bacterium, Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis.\?

Fig. 7.10. Usnic acid

----- PAGE 102 -----
94 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

PHENYLPROPANOIDS AND
CINNAMIC ACIDS

Phenylpropanoids (C,-C;) are phenolic compounds that
have an aromatic ring to which a 3-carbon side chain is at-
tached. The most widespread are the hydroxycinnamic
acids, such as p-coumaric acid and caffeic acid. Another
group in this class is made up of the phenylpropenes,
which contribute to the volatile flavors and odors of
plants (for example, anethole). Glycosides of some
phenylpropanoids have been shown to inhibit the en-
zymes cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase, aldose reduc-
tase, and 5-lipoxygenase. The lignins, random polymers
that contribute universally to the structure and rigidity of
plant cell walls, are also phenylpropanoid in origin.

Anethole

Anethole is found in essential oils of plants such as anise
(Pimpinella anisum) and fennel (Foeniculum vulgare).
Anethole demonstrates spasmolytic activity and has been
shown to stimulate hepatic regeneration in rats.¥

CHO: \

Fig. 7.11. Anethole

CHy

f-asarone

Occuring in the essential oil of calamus root (Acorus cala-
mus) and in Piper angustifolium, B-asarone has spasmolytic
properties. However, the compound is carcinogenic in an-
imals, and calamus oil has been banned in the United
States.!4

CHO.
“Ss fi
CH, \__ \
CH;O OCH;

Fig. 7.12. B-asarone Fig. 7.13. Caffeic acid

Caffeic Acid

Caffeic acid has a widespread occurrence in plants and is
found in coffee beans (Coffea arabica) and in the root
bark of Cinchona cuprea, as well as in Conium maculatum,
Digitalis purpurea, Papaver somniferum, Taraxacum offici-
nale, Chamaemelum nobile, ‘Achillea millefolium, and the
resin of various conifers. Caffeic acid has analgesic, anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and an-
tioxidant properties. It also demonstrates antihepatotoxic
and antiulcerogenic activities.!°

p-coumaric Acid
p-coumaric acid has a very widespread occurrence in the
plant world. It shows antifungal and antihepatotoxic ac-
tivities, and some cytotoxicity in vitro.!®

OH

HO
Fig. 7.14. p-coumaric acid

Curcumin

Curcumin is found in the roots of certain tropical spice
plants in the Zingiberaceae family, including turmeric
(Curcuma longa) and the related C. aromatica and C. xan-
thorrbiza, Curcumin and the other curcuminoids have
been found to have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activities and have been entered into Phase I clinical tri-
als by the National Cancer Institute to investigate their
cancer-preventive activities.!”

le OH

H3CO. ee A Pe OCH,

HO’ ‘OH

Fig. 7.15. Curcumin

Myristicin

Myristicin is found in essential oils made from the seeds
of nutmeg (Myristica fragrans), celery (Apium graveolens),
parsley (Petroselinum crispum), and carrot (Daucus carota)
and the bark of cinnamon (Cinnamomum glanduliferum).
In vitro studies have shown that myristicin inhibits
monoamine oxidase and platelet aggregation in rabbit
blood.'® It has psychotropic properties.

5 ZA ene
Ch

OCH;

Fig. 7.16, Myristicin

----- PAGE 103 -----
Coumarins

The 700 or more plant coumarins (C,-C;) are derived
from the parent compound coumarin, which has a charac-
teristic odor of freshly mown hay. The compound occurs
widely in plants, usually in bound form. Coumarin has
been found in 150 plant species in more than 30 families.
The richest sources of coumarin itself are sweet clover or
melilot (Melilotus spp.), tonka bean (Dipteryx odorata), and
sweet woodruff (Galium odoratum).

The name coumarin is derived from the French ver-
nacular name for tonka bean. The word tonka comes from
the language spoken by the indigenous peoples of the for-
mer French West Africa colony, now the independent
Republic of Guinea. Another language of the same region,
Tupi, gave rise to the old genus name, Coumarouna, from
their name for the tonka tree, kumari. This led to the
derivation of the name of tonka’s main constituent,
coumarin,

In almost all cases, with coumarin itself serving as an
exception, coumarins have a hydroxyl group in position 7,
according to the structural substitution system delineated
here.

Fig. 7.17. Coumarin structure

Based upon structural substitutions, there are three
major classes of coumarins:

¢ Simple Aydroxycowmarins, such as umbelliferone and es-
culetin

© Furanocoumarins, typified by angelicin

¢ Pyranocoumarins, such as psoralen

Simple hydroxycoumarins and their glucosides,
prevalent in higher plants, have been identified in about
100 families. The furano- and pyranocoumarins, which
usually occur in a free state in fruits and roots, are mainly
restricted to the Apiaceae and Rutaceae families.

Most simple coumarins are substituted with OH or
OCH; at positions C-6 and C-7. They often occur in gly-
cosidic form; for example, aesculin is the glycoside of aes-
culetin. Furanocoumarins, also called furocoumarins,
have a furan ring at C-6 and C-7 (psoralen) or C-7 and
C-8 (angelicin) of the coumarin ring system; however,
these are not phenolic in structure.

POLYPHENOLS @ 95

Fig. 7.18. Psoralen

Fig. 7.19. Angelicin

The furanocoumarins psoralen and bergapten have
photosensitizing properties that are exploited in treat-
ments for vitiligo and psoriasis in which the patient is
concurrently exposed to solar radiation. This is discussed
in more detail in chapter 10. Such coumarins are found in
Ammi majus, Angelica archangelica, Ruta graveolens, and
Citrus species.

The furanochromone khellin is the active constituent
of khella (Asmi visnaga), an herb used for its antispas-
modic and antiasthmatic properties in North African tra-
ditional medicine. Pyranocoumarins, which contain a
pyran ring fused at C-7 and C-8, are also present in Azmi
visnaga.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), part of the World Health Organization, found
coumarin itself to be noncarcinogenic in humans. For hu-
mans, the most dangerous coumarins are the hepatotoxic
aflatoxins and the substance dicoumarol, a potent antico-
agulant. Please refer to chapter 10 for more information.

Table 7.3. Herb Activities Related to Coumarin
Content

HERB ACTIVITY

Aesculus hippocastanum
{horse chestnut)

Anti-inflarmatory, vascular tonic

Ammi visnaga (khella) Antispasmodic, coronary

vasodilator

Angelica archangelica (angelica) Antispasmodic

Melilotus officinalis (sweet clover) Anti-inflammatory,

anti-edematous, vascular tonic

Bergapten

Bergapten is widespread among plants in the Rutaceae
family, such as bergamot (Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia).
It is also common in Apiaceae plants, including Ligusticum,
Angelica, Ammi, Levisticum, Pimpinella, and Petroselinum.
While less effective than psoralen, bergapten is also used
in the treatment of:vitiligo and psoriasis,

----- PAGE 104 -----
96 << INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

In combination with ultraviolet radiation, bergapten
may cause impairment of DNA synthesis. It is also toxic
to fish, toads, and the snails that carry the Schistosoma par-
asite responsible for the tropical disease schistosomiasis.|°

OCH; og

o CH,OH

Fig. 7.20. Bergapten Fig. 7.21. Cimicifugin
Cimicifugin

Cimicifugin occurs in the roots and rhizomes of
Cimicifuga species, such as C. racemosa, and as a glucoside
in Angelica japonica. The compound demonstrates hypo-
tensive activity in animals; it has been shown to increase
coronary blood flow in isolated guinea pig hearts.2°

Coumarin

One of the most widespread of all coumarins, coumarin is
present in most families of angiosperms. In gymnosperms,
it is found in Pinaceae, and, among ferns, in Polypodi-
aceae. It often occurs in glucosidic form; free coumarin is
released during tissue damage. Coumarin has hemor-
rhagic effects and for this reason is used as a rat poison; it
also causes liver damage in rats and dogs. In addition, it
has piscicidal, antifungal, and antitumor properties.”!

OCH, oO
a
o o CHy
Fig. 7.22. Coumarin Fig. 7.23. Khellin

Khellin

This coumarin, found in the seeds of khella (Ammmi vis-
naga), exhibits antiviral phototoxicity. This is an intrigu-
ing property by which the molecule kills viruses when ac-
tuvated by certain wavelengths of ultraviolet light. Khellin
is a vasodilator and’ phosphodiesterase inhibitor; it has
also demonstrated anthelmintic, antispasmodic, antiarte-
riosclerotic, antiasthmatic, bronchodilatory, antidiabetic,
and antiulcerogenic properties.”

Psoralen

Psoralen, which occurs in the seeds of Psoralea species,
possesses photosensitizing activity. This constituent is an
essential component of PUVA treatment of psoriasis and
vitiligo. In PUVA, a combination treatment used in der-
matology, the patient takes psoralen (P) and then exposes
the skin to long-wave ultraviolet radiation (UVA).
Psoralen is also active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
the pathogen that causes tuberculosis. In the presence of
ultraviolet light, psoralen impairs DNA synthesis.”3

SHs

a~ ‘CH,
SS
o of Sy HO oo 0
Fig. 7.24. Psoralen Fig. 7.25. Umbelliferone

Umbelliferone
Umbelliferone is widespread in the resin of various
Apiaceae plants, including Ferula, Apium, Pimpinella, and
Heracleum species. It has antifungal and antibacterial

properties, It is used in sunscreen lotions and creams be-
cause of its UV-adsorbing properties.”*

QUINONES

Quinones, of which at least 1,200 have been identified,
provide pigments that range in color from yellow to al-
most black, but most are yellow, orange, or red.
Although many quinone-containing plants have been
used as dyes, they actually contribute little to plant color.
They are usually hidden in bark, heartwood, or roots, or
else occur in tissues where their colors are masked by
other pigments.

Among quinones that have been used as dyes, madder
root (Rubia tinctorum) contains anthraquinones that are
the source of the orange-red pigment alizarin, and alka-
net (Alkanna tinctoria) contains the naphthoquinone red
dye alkannin.

Quninones are classified into three groups according
to increasing molecular size: benzoquinones, naphtho-
quinones, and anthraquinones. Many are substituted by
isoprenyl groups and hence are lipophilic. Others are hy-
droxylated, with phenolic properties, and may occur both
in free form and as glycosides. Here are representative
structures with the numbering system used for each type.

----- PAGE 105 -----
CO
t
o
Fig. 7.26. Quinone
structure

Fig. 7.27. Naphthoquinone
structure

9
|

\ f
\ 4

Fig. 7.28. Anthraquinone
structure

Fig. 7.29. Naphthodianthone
structure

Naphthoquinones
Naphthoquinones (C,-C,) are dark yellow pigments with
a range of pharmacological properties. The dye henna is
derived from the plant Lawsonia inermis, which contains
the naphthoquinone lawsone as a glycoside. Other naph-
thoquinones have antimicrobial and antifungal properties,
including juglone from walnut Guglans regia) and butter-
nut (7. cineraria). Juglone is a laxative and vermifuge.
Other naphthoquinones with antimicrobial proper-
ties are plumbagin from sundew (Drosera rotundifolia) and
lapachol from pau d’arco (Tabebuia spp.).

Table 7.4. Herb Activities Related to
Naphthoquinone Content

HERB ACTIVITY

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew) Antispasmodic, antitussive
Juglans regia (walnut) Antiparasitic, astringent

Lawsonia inermis (henna) Dye plant

Juglone

Juglone, found in the stem bark of Fuglans nigra, is the al-
lelopathic agent of the walnut tree, meaning that the tree
releases the chemical into the soil to prevent other plants
from growing too close. Juglone demonstrates activity

POLYPHENOLS ¢. 97

against fungi, mollusks, and herpes simplex virus type 1.”°
It also has sedative properties in fish and mammals.

Fig. 7.30. Juglone Fig. 7.31. Lawsone

Lawsone (henna)
Lawsone occurs in the leaves of Lawsonia inermis, the
henna plant. It is used as a cosmetic and hair dye, and

also as a sunscreen agent because of its UV-adsorption
properties.”¢

Plumbagin

Found in the roots of Plumbago europaea and in various
species of carnivorous plants, including sundew (Drosera
rotundifolia), plumbagin enhances the phagocytotic activ-
ity of human granulocytes in vitro. It is cytotoxic at high
doses and immunostimulating at low doses.’ In addition,
it has molluscicidal properties.

OH io)

Fig. 7.32. Plumbagin

Anthraquinones

Anthraquinones (C,-C,-C,) constitute the largest group
of naphthoquinones, and are often red or purple, rather
than yellow. They are widely distributed in plants, espe-
cially in the families Fabaceae (Senna), Liliaceae (Aloe),
Polygonaceae (Rheum), and Rhamnaceae (Rhamnus). The
anthraquinone class contains many important laxative
compounds, including aloe-emodin and emodin, from
‘Aloe species. Dimeric anthraquinones, also known as an-
thrones, include such compounds as cassiamin C, senno-
side A, and the bianthraquinone hypericin, from St. John’s
wort (Hypericum perforatum).

Among anthraquinone-containing laxatives, the
gentlest-acting compounds belong to the buckthorns
(Rhamnus catharticus and R. frangula) and Chinese
rhubarb (Rheum palmatum). These herbs are aged for at
least one year, during which the more irritant an-
thraquinones are converted to milder compounds. The

----- PAGE 106 -----
98 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

presence of tannins in these plants also tends to moderate
the laxative effect. Aloe and Senna species are the other
commonly used laxative agents in this class. Their onset of
action occurs around eight hours after ingestion.

Senna syrup is commonly prescribed for children and
may be used during pregnancy and lactation for limited
periods of time. Otherwise, anthraquinone-containing
laxatives are contraindicated during pregnancy. Due to
the stimulant effect of these laxatives, they are also con-
traindicated in spastic colon conditions. A slight overdose
can produce griping, which can be counterbalanced with
carminatives, such as peppermint and coriander oils. All
the anthraquinone-containing laxatives can lead to de-
pendency. These important herbs are discussed in more
depth in chapters 10 and 13.

Herbal Laxatives Containing Anthraquinones
Aloe spp. (aloe)

Rhammnus cathartica (purging buckthorn)

R. frangula (buckthorn)

R. purshiana (cascara sagrada)

Rheum spp. (Chinese rhubarb)

Senna alexandrina (senna)

Aloe-emodin

Aloe-emodin is found in the leaves of Aloe, Senna, and
some Rheum species. In addition to its well-known cathar-
tic action, aloe-emodin has demonstrated antileukemic
activities.?8

OH oO OH
ia i oF ye Say
eA
( Ty ca a ‘CH,OH

Fig. 7.33. Aloe-emodin Fig. 7.34. Barbaloin

Barbaloin

This C-glucoside of aloe-emodin occurs in the leaves of
several Aloe species cultivated as medicines, including A.
vera, A. ferox and A. perryi. It is used commercially as a
purgative.?

Emodin

Emodin occurs in Rumex and Rheum species, in the root
30
a.

bark of Rbamnus frangula, and in some lichen gener:

ca Sy
cH SS a OH

°

Fig. 7.35, Emodin Fig. 7.36, Pseudohypericin

Pseudohypericin
Found in Hypericum species, pseudohypericin demon-
strates antiretroviral activity both in vitro and in vivo.?!

Rhein

Rhein is found in all parts of Scrophularia nodosa and in
the roots of Rumex, Rheum, and Senna species. Rhein dis-
plays moderate antifungal activity against dermatophytes.**

OH fe) OH
SS
oe
° °
Fig. 7.37. Rhein
HO
GO
HO i) 9 OH

HO’
CL OH

Fig. 7.38. Sennoside A

Sennoside A

Sennoside A is found in the leaves of Senna, where it is
formed during drying, as well as in the fruit of S. alexan-
drina and in rhizomes of Rheum palmatum. This cathartic
agent is used for the treatment of chronic constipation,
and is found in many stimulating herbal laxatives.

----- PAGE 107 -----
Hypericin

Found in St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) and other
Hypericum species, hypericin shows activity against retro-
viruses in vitro and in vivo.*4 The compound is photosen-
sitizing and may have antidepressant effects in mammals,
although it is unlikely that hypericin is the constituent re-
sponsible for the herb’s mild antidepressant effects.>>

2

oH 9

Ho—1

Sy
—
“SS
a

a
Sy
no
Se

Fig. 7.40. Hyperforin

Hyperforin

This is a derivative of phloroglucinol found in the flowers
and fruits of St. John’s wort (Hypericum ‘perforatum).
Currently, hyperforin is thought to be pivotal to the mild
antidepressant properties of this herb.

XANTHONES

Xanthones are related to flavonoids, as they share precur-
sors, but xanthones have a single carbon bridge (C,-C,-
Co) instead of the 3-carbon bridge of the flavonoids. A bi-
ologically active yet taxonomically restricted group,
xanthones demonstrate a range of effects in living organ-
isms. Compounds such as bellidifolin inhibit monoamine
oxidase activity, while psorospermin exhibits both cyto-
toxic and antitumor properties. Many other xanthones
are recorded as having antimicrobial, insecticidal, anti-
inflammatory, or tuberculostatic effects. They are found
in herbs such as gentian (Gentiana lutea), swertia (Swertia
spp.), and mango (Mangifera indica).

POLYPHENOLS 2 99

Gentisein

Gentisein is found in the roots of Gentiana lutea, and is
considered antibacterial and antitubercular.3¢

Ho. °.
(> ss S
oH
oH °

Fig. 7.41. Gentisein

STILBENOIDS

This group of compounds is based on a structure of two
benzene rings bridged by a chain of two carbons. Limited
in distribution, they are common in the Orchidaceae fam-
ily and also found in liverworts. They are constituents of
the heartwood of both gymnosperm and angiosperm
trees. Stilbenoids have been found in plants in the free
state, as glycosides, and as oligomers. Many are strongly
antifungal and serve as phytoalexins.*”

HO.

\ a” OH
lo \/

Fig. 7.42. Resveratrol

Resveratrol (trans-3,5,4’-trihydroxystilbene)
Found in many plants as a phytoalexin, resveratrol is
abundant in the skins of red grapes (Vitis vinifera). It has
been suggested that resveratrol underlies the phenomenon
known as the “French paradox,” which is discussed in
more detail later in this chapter. Wine is the most notable
dietary source of this compound; a fluid ounce of red wine
contains an average of 160 yg of resveratrol.?®

Physiological concentrations of resveratrol can mod-
ulate multiple molecular pathways thought to be associ-
ated with the development and progression of cardiovas-
cular disease and cancer, including Phase II drug
metabolism, cyclooxygenase, lipid metabolism, nitric
oxide, DNA synthesis, inflammation, cell survival, cell
death, and cell division cycle pathways.”

Research highlights a number of resveratrol effects
relevant to the cardiovascular system:

¢ Antioxidant”

¢ Inhibits peroxidation of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL)

© Reduces platelet aggregation”

----- PAGE 108 -----
100 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Resveratrol has also been shown to function as a can-
cer chemopreventive agent. Such agents reduce the inci-
dence of tumorigenesis by intervening at one or more of
the stages of carcinogenesis.”> In research, resveratrol
demonstrated chemopreventive activity in assays repre-
senting three major stages of carcinogenesis: initiation,
promotion, and progression.**”

Initiation: antioxidant and antimutagenic effects; induced
Phase II drug-metabolism enzymes

Promotion: inhibited cyclooxygenase and hydroperoxidase

Progression: induced human pro-myelocytic leukemia cell
differentiation; inhibited the growth of leukemia cells
in vitro

FLAVONOIDS

The term flavonoid describes all the polyphenolic plant
pigments that have a C,-C,-C, skeleton analogous to that
of the flavones—that is, two substituted benzene rings
connected by a 3-carbon chain. All of the approximately
4,000 flavonoids that have been identified possess this
same basic structural makeup.

Fig. 7.43. Flavonoid core Fig, 7.44. Flavonoid
structure structure

However, as an example of the many subtleties that
can prove so confusing in phytochemistry, flavone, the
parent substance of the flavonoids, occurs naturally but is
not itself a phenolic compound, as it lacks a hydroxyl

group.

Taxonomic Distribution

Molecules in this group are very widely distributed in
higher plants as components of leaves and pigments in
flowers. No flavonoids have been found in algae, but
some are common in Bryophytes. In Pteridophytes, the
Psilotales and Selaginellales are characterized by the pres-
ence of biflavonoids, and Equisetales by proanthocyanins.

Anatomical Distribution of Flavonoids

Flavonoid glycosides are water-soluble and accumulate in
plant cell vacuoles. Depending on the species, they either
concentrate in the leaf epidermis or are dispersed in both
the epidermis and the mesophyll. In flowers, they are

concentrated in epidermal cells. Whenever flavonoids are
present in the leaf cuticle, they are almost always free
aglycones, made even more lipophilic by the partial or
total methylation of their hydroxyl groups.

Plant Pigmentation

Flavonoids are plant pigments, responsible for the color
of flowers, fruits, and sometimes leaves. When not di-
rectly visible, they often act as co-pigments. For example,
colorless flavone and flavonol co-pigments protect plant
tissues and compounds such as anthocyanins against dam-
age from ultraviolet (UV) radiation. In some cases, the
molecule absorbs near-UV radiation, and this color is
perceived only by insects.

Names of many categories of flavonoids have their
roots in Greek or Latin color terms; the word flavone it-
self comes from flavus, the Latin word for “yellow.”
Anthocyanin comes from the Greek anthos (flower) and
kyanos (blue). The word is used broadly, as in “antho-
cyanin pigments,” without regard for whether they are
glycosides (anthocyanins) or aglycones (anthocyanidins).

Anthocyanins generate petal colors; red flower colors
are usually based on cyanidin and blue on delphinidin.
The yellow anthochlor pigments, chalcones and aurones,
are so named because the color of yellow flowers that
contain these pigments changes to red when the flowers
are fumed with ammonia. (Yellow flowers containing only
carotenoids are unchanged after this treatment.)

Chalcones are readily oxidized both in vivo and in
vitro to aurones, and both classes of pigment are often
found together in yellow flowers. The word chalcone is de-
rived from the Greek words chalcos, meaning copper, and
aurone, from the Latin aurum, meaning gold. The obso-
lete name /eucoantbocyanin was once used to denote all
substances that could be converted into anthocyanins
when heated with mineral acid.

While flavonoids are responsible for most plant pig-
ments, pigments may also be provided by members of
some, but not all, families of the Caryophyllidae, in which
betalain alkaloids contribute color. These families include
the Phytolaccaceae, Cactaceae, Chenopodiaceae, and

Amaranthaceae.
0.
I ie
CH.
om Nou

Fig. 7.45. Betadinin

----- PAGE 109 -----
Variations in the structure of anthocyanins generate
the wonderful diversity of hue and tone in the colors of
flowers and fruits. A number of factors are believed to
contribute to this kaleidoscopic abundance of color:

¢ Differences in electron charge

© Number of methoxyl and hydroxyl groups

© Number and type of sugars attached to the aglycone
* Presence of metal ions

* Presence of other pigments

Acertaining the specific effects of anthocyanin struc-
ture on plant color is not straightforward. For example,
when anthocyanins are heated, they may become either
paler in color or riore stable in structure, as heating may
cause them to polymerize. Anthocyanins are generally
colorless in neutralized pH, redder in an acid medium,
and bluer in an alkaline medium and in certain other
circumstances—for example, when they form complexes
with metals.

Classification of Flavonoids

Numerous variations on the basic C,-C,-C, structure
occur in flavonoids, which has led to the development of
various systems for classifying this diverse and abundant
group of secondary metabolites. Unfortunately, these sys-
tems do not always correlate with one another, and unless
this fact is recognized, much confusion may result. Of the
systems described here, that based on degree of oxidation
is the one used throughout this discussion.

The sugar most likely to be present is D-glucose, but
L-rhamnose, D-galactose, L-arabinose, and D-xylose are
also found. This means that for every aglycone, there may
be many different glycosidic combinations. Structural
variability expands further in glycosides formed with a
disaccharide or a trisaccharide, in which a linear or
branched structure may be seen.

Each class of flavonoids contains molecules with dif-
ferent substituents on the structural skeleton that they
have in common. In addition, each flavonoid may be pre-
sent as a glycoside or as a simple aglycone. To facilitate
nomenclature, a numbering system that describes variants
in each class has been developed.

REPRESENTATIVE CLASSES OF
FLAVONOID AGLYCONES

Flavones and Flavonols

In these molecules, which represent about 80% of known
flavonoids, ring A is substituted by two hydroxyl groups
at C-5 and C-7, These groups may be free, etherified, or

POLYPHENOLS 101

inked glycosidally. However, other substitutions are also
possible.

Flavones and flavonols are universally distributed in
plants, but some of the substitution patterns are restricted
to certain families or groups of families—hence their in-
terest to chemotaxonomists. They often occur as pig-
ments associated with anthocyanins in petals and leaves of
higher plants. They are found most frequently in the
form of glycosides, but they may also be present as

Flavonoid Classification Systems

Degree of Saturation

Two major categories encompass flavonoids in
which the central heterocyclic ring is either sat-
urated or unsaturated. Hf saturated, as in fla-
vanols, the molecule will be planar, and thus
non-optically active. Flavonoids with unsatu-
rated rings, such as flavones, are defined by
stereoisomerism.

Biosynthetic Origin

In this classification scheme, one group of
flavonoids includes those that are both inter-
mediate steps in biosynthesis and end products,
such as chalcones and flavanones. The other
flavonoids constitute a second group in that
they are known only as end products. These in-
clude anthocyanins and flavonols.

Molecular Size
This scheme differentiates among monomeric,
dimeric, trimeric, and polmeric flavonoid
structures.

Conjugates

Flavonoids normally exist in conjugate or com-
bined forms, also known as glycosylflavonoids.
These conjugates are commonly glycosides, in
which a bond (-C-O-C-) is formed between a hy-
droxyl of the flavonoid and a sugar. The bond
may be established with any of the hydroxyl
groups on the aglycone, but the groups involved
are generally the hydroxyls in the 7-position of
the flavones and in the 3-position of the
flavonols. The sugar may be a mono-, di-, or
trisaccharide.

----- PAGE 110 -----
102 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 7.5. Flavonoid Categories

CLASS STRUCTURE OF CENTRAL C-3 UNIT EXAMPLE
Catechins (flavan-3-ols a Catechin NP ON Oe
( ) Ne — ot oe
| a Z oa
Dihydrochalcones at Phloretin CL ~
Y
° OW °
we i on
7
Chalcones No an Butein ae ies
| ad
NON ou
Flavanones (dihydroflavones) te Naringenin os oe
ji AN
° I
he 8
oN oe a
Flavones al Apigenin im in| “
ws
— Se Ps ae
Isoflavones aw Genistein Ss os
I & 8 Non
4 aa
ae © ok
Anthocyanidins BE | Pelargonidin os ~
Son s Aon
K
A =
| Nee --
Aurones JL x Sulfuretin a aie
i Ul
i “er ae
Flavanols sn, Taxifolin “ Sy Se
‘c ‘OH A
I “oH
oN pa a
Flavonols | _,, Quercetin .

----- PAGE 111 -----
aglycones on leaf surfaces, in fruits, and in bud exu-
dates. Flavones differ from flavonols in that they lack a
3-hydroxyl substitution, which changes their spectro-
scopic properties. Apigenin and luteolin are the only
common flavones.

Several hundred flavone and flavonol aglycones are
known, but only three are common: kaempferol, quercetin,
and myricetin. Quercetin has the widest distribution in na-
ture of all phenolic compounds, and 135 different glyco-
sides of quercetin have been described. The most common
is quercetin-3-rutinoside, commonly known as rutin,
which is used in the treatment of capillary fragility.

Many different saccharides may serve as the sugars in
flavone and flavonol glycosides. Ten monosaccharides are
known: D-apiose, L-arabinose, L-rhamnose, D-xylose, D-
allose, D-galactose, D-glucose, D-mannose, and D-galac-
turonic and D-glucuronic acids. Disaccharides are associ-
ated with flavones; rutinose is particularly widespread.
Trisaccharides, linear or branched, are also known, and
one branched tetrasaccharide has been identified.

In addition, there are a number of flavones with var-
ious other substituents. Among the flavones with isoprene
substitution, the linkage is generally observed at the C-6
and/or C-8 position of the flavone. About 100 flavone and
flavonol sulfates and some flavone alkaloids have also
been reported.

Oxidation or Substitution

Here the various classes of flavonoids are distin-
guished by the degree of oxidation of the C-3
chain. This is the system used throughout the dis-
cussion of flavonoids in this chapter. The follow-
ing illustrates the hierarchy of flavonoids accord-
ing to increasing degree of oxidation.
catechins—>
dihydrochalcones—>
proanthocyanidins—>
flavanones—>
flavanols—>»
flavones—>
anthocyanidins—»
flavonols

POLYPHENOLS 2 103

Kaempferol (3,5,7,4’-tetrahydroxyflavone)
Kaempferol is very widespread, both free and in glycosides.

OH

Ho. fo)
~

;
[
ia on
16) o

Fig. 7.46. Kaempferol

Consider table 7.6, which lists commonly used plants
that are sources of kaempferol.

Table 7.6. Plant Sources of Kaempferol

PLANT PLANT PART
Allium cepa (onion) Bulb
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow) Leaf
Anethum graveolens (dill) Seed
Calendula officinalis (calendula) Whole plant
Camellia sinensis (tea) Whole plant
Centella asiatica (gotu kola) Whole plant
Equisetum arvense (horsetail) Whole plant
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset) Whole plant
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo) Leaf

Harpagophytum procumbens {devil's claw) Root

Lactuca sativa (lettuce) Whole plant
Matricaria recutita (chamomile) Whole plant
Ocimum basilicum (basil) Leaf
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower) Whole plant
Sambucus nigra (black or European elder) Flower
Silybum marianum (milk thistle) Seed
Thymus vulgaris (thyme) Whole plant

Viola odorata (sweet violet) Whole plant

----- PAGE 112 -----
104 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 7.7. Plant Sources of Quercetin

om PLANT PLANT PART AMOUNT
on!
|
ne wy Oenothera biennis (evening primrose) Leaf 91,000-
\ | 207,000 ppm
— a
. | Podophyllum peltatum (mayapple) esin, sap 50,000 ppm
Fig. 7.47, Quercetin Allium cepa (onion ulb 0-48.10 ppm
Quercetin (3,5,7,3’,4’-pentahydroxyflavone) Camellia sinensis (tea) Leaf 10,000 ppm
This is the flavonoid most commonly found in higher Azadirachta indica (neem) Flower 1,000 ppm
plants, usually in one ofi its many glycosidic forms. ;
However, it may also occur in free form in Asteraceae, Helianthus annuus (sunflower) Flower 100-400 ppm
Passifloraceae, Rhamnaceae, and Solanaceae plants.” Malus domestica (apple) ericarp 58-263 ppm
Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry) Fruit 100-250 ppm
oe |

The Use and Abuse of Quercetin

Quercetin has gained the attention of the supplement industry, and is now widely promoted as a nat-
ural anti-inflammatory and antioxidant magic bullet. This has the effect of confusing both the public
and practitioners as to the difference between whole plant and active’ingredient herbalism. An ac-
knowledgment of the role of an isolated constituent in health maintenance should emphasize the im-
portance of the many herbal and dietary sources of the compound, rather than focus on “natural
magic bullets” available only in dietary supplement form.

Quercetin affects a whole array of enzyme systems. There appears to be a theme of involvement
in inflammatory processes that partially explains the anti-inflammatory action of many quercetin-con-
taining plants.

Enzyme Systems Modified by Quercetin®

Transport ATPases Lipoxygenase

Protein kinases Aldose reductase
Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases Xanthine oxidase
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase Hyaluronidase
Phospholipase A, Histidine decarboxylase
Cyclooxygenase Estrogen synthetase

There are a number of specific indications typically given for quercetin, but they do not always
take into account the richness of the compound's therapeutic possibilities when it is used in the bio-
evolved complex of its herbal sources. Quercetin finds its main use as a safe systemic anti-inflamma-
tory, indicated in most cases of allergy or inflammation-based pathology.’? This application stems
from the impact of quercetin on the biochemical processes that influence these physiological re-
sponses in the body. Such therapeutically valuable responses will, of course, also occur when the
flavonoid is taken in the form of a whole plant preparation.

Growing evidence indicates that quercetin has antiviral activity, both in vivo and in vitro, most
markedly against herpes simplex type 1, parainfluenza type 3, polio virus type 1, and respiratory syn-
cytial virus. It is interesting to note that boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) is both a rich source of
quercetin and a traditional treatment for flu. Quercetin may also play a role in tumor inhibition"
Please see chapter.9 for more details on the anticancer effects of flavonoids.

----- PAGE 113 -----
PLANT PLANT PART AMOUNT
Allium sativum (garlic) Bulb 200 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. capitata Leaf 2-100 ppm
(cabbage)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne) Fruit 63 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. acephala (kale) Leaf 7-50 ppm
Pyrus communis (pear) Pericarp 28 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera Axillary 25 ppm
(brussels sprouts) bud

Brassica oleracea var. gongylodes Shoot 20 ppm
(kohtrabi)

Spinacia oleracea (spinach) Leaf 19 ppm
Isorbamnetin

This flavonol has a very widespread occurrence, both free
and in the form of glycosides.

OCH OH
4 ) cH
Ho 9. Se .
I
Son
o ° 10
Fig. 7.48. lsorhamnetin Fig. 7.49. Rutin

Rutin (quercetin-3-rutinoside)

First isolated from rue (Ruta graveolens), rutin is
widespread in higher plants. It demonstrates many of the
general actions of quercetin and other flavones and
flavonols. (Please see chapter 9 for more information.)
Rutin has anti-inflammatory activity because of an ability
to inhibit the action of the enzyme lipoxygenase. It is
specifically recognized as a free radical scavenger and has
been used clinically against capillary fragility and vari-
cosities. In vitro studies show that it also has antiviral and
antibacterial properties.°?

Table 7.8. Herbs Containing Rutin

HERB PLANT PART

Achillea millefolium (yarrow) Whole plant

Agathosma betulina (buchu) Leaf

POLYPHENOLS -e 105

HERB PLANT PART
Allium cepa (onion) Bulb

A, sativum (garlic) Whole plant
Apium graveolens (celer) Whole plant
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood) Whole plant
Asparagus officinalis (asparagus) Root
Azadirachta indica (neem) Leaf
Calendula officinalis (calendula) Flower
Camellia sinensis (tea) Leaf
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd's purse) Whole plant
Coriandrum sativum (coriander) Fruit
Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) Leaf
Erythroxylum coca (coca) Leaf
Eschscholzia californica (california poppy) Flower
Eupatorium perfoliatum {boneset) lant
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) Plant
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel) Fruit
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort) Plant

llex paraguariensis {mate} Leaf
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort) Whole plant
Matricaria recutita (chamomile) Whole plant
Mentha piperita (peppermint) Whole plant
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower) Whole plant
Pimpinella anisum (anise) Seed

Rheum officinale (chinese rhubarb) Root

Ruta graveolens (rue) Whole plant
Salix alba (white willow) Bark
Sambucus nigra (black elder) Flower, leaf
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod) Leaf
Spinacia oleracea {spinach} Leaf

Viola odorata (sweet violet) Flower

V. tricolor (pansy) Flower

----- PAGE 114 -----
106 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Apigenin

The aglycone of apigenin is occasionally found on leaf
surfaces and on fern fronds. Many glycosides are known.
Research has shown that it has anti-inflammatory, an-
tibacterial, diuretic, and hypotensive properties.

OH

oH

HO. °°.
ms,

c
I
a
OH oO

Fig. 7.51. Luteolin

Fig. 7.50. Apigenin

Luteolin
This aglycone is common, especially in leaf exudates. Lute-
olin often occurs as the 7-glucoside and 7-glucuronide.**

Anthocyanins and Anthochlors

There are two main classes of flavonoid pigments that
provide flower color:

Anthocyanins (red to blue colors)
Anthochlors, including chalcones and aurones (yellow petal
colors)

The most common anthocyanidin (anthocyanin agly-
cone) is cyanidin. The other 15 known anthocyanidins, 6
of which are widely distributed, differ only in the number
and position of methoxyl or hydroxyl groups. The gly-
cosidal anthocyanins are incredibly numerous; cyanidin
alone is found in 76 different glycosidic combinations.**

Anthocyanidin pigments are responsible for the wide
array of pink, scarlet, red, mauve, violet, and blue colors
in flowers, leaves, fruits, fruit juices, and wines. They are
also responsible for the astringent taste of fruit and wines.
Genera that contain yellow anthochlor pigments include
Dianthus, Dahlia, Potentilla, and Antirrhinum.

Cyanidin

Cyanidin is found in glycosidic form in nearly all green
plants. Elderberries and red cabbage, which each contain
many different cyanidin glycosides, are potential sources
of natural red food colorings.*¢

OH

HO,

+
2.
GO Oe on

Sy a

OH
OH

Fig. 7.52. Cyanidin

ISOFLAVONOIDS

The more than 600 isoflavonoids are divided into sub-
classes according to the oxidation level of the central
pyran ring. They differ from other flavonoids in that they
display greater structural diversity and are usually present
in the free state, rather than as glycosides. Isoflavones are
the most abundant subclass; other subclasses include
isoflavanones, pterocarpans, coumestans, isoflavans, rotenoids,
and neoflavonoids.

Isoflavones are isomeric with the more widely occur-
ring flavones. They are more restricted in distribution
than flavones and flavonols, found regularly in only one
subfamily of Fabaceae, the Papilionoideae. Widely occur-
ring isoflavones include daidzein, genistein, formono-
netin, and biochanin A, which are noted for their estro-
genic properties.

OH: 2. HO.
TO
i SS

Fig. 7.53. Daidzein

Fig. 7.54. Genistein

Daidzein

Daidzein is a widely distributed isoflavone that is espe-
cially abundant in the Lamiaceae. As discussed in chapter
9, it is an effective phytoestrogen.

Table 7.9. Plants Containing Daidzein

PLANT PLANT PART
Genista tinctoria {ayers broom) Shoot
Glycine max (soy) Seed
Phaseolus coccineus {scarlet runner bean) Whole plant
Psoralea corylifolia {babchi) Root
Pueraria lobata, P. phaseoloides {kudzu} Root
Trifolium pratense (red clover) Flower

Ulex europaeus (gorse) Aerial parts
Genistein

This isoflavone occurs in clover (Trifolium spp.), soy
(Glycine max), and many other Fabaceae plants, as well as
in the wood of Prunus species.°’

----- PAGE 115 -----
Table 7.10. Herbs Containing Genistein

HERB PLANT PART
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo) Leaf

Gytisus scoparius (Scotch broom) Flower
Genista tinctoria (dyer’s broom) Flower
Glycine max {soy) Seed
Glycyrthiza glabra (licorice) Shoot
Lupinus albus (white lupine) Hypocotyl
Medicago sativa (alfalfa, lucerne) Leaf
Phaseolus coccineus (scarlet runner bean) Whole plant
P. lunatus (butter bean, lima) Leaf

P. vulgaris (kidney bean) Fruit

Pisum sativum (garden pea) Shoot
Prunus cerasus {sour cherry) Fruit
Pueraria lobata (kudzu) Leaf

P. phaseoloides (kudzu) oot
Stellaria media (chickweed) Whole plant
Trifolium pratense (red clover) Leaf

T. repens (white clover) Leaf

Vigna angularis (adzuki bean) Seed

Pterocarpans

Pterocarpans are significantly antifungal and are found in
the heartwood of many legume trees, but are also induced
as phytoalexins in some plants in response to fungal in-
fection. The rotenoids have a common tetracyclic ring
system, as in rotenone, and are distinguished by their in-
secticidal and piscicidal properties.

Rotenone inhibits the electron transport pathway in
mitochondria and is therefore toxic to all forms of life.
However, it can be used safely as a fish poison because the
oral toxicity in humans is very low. Powdered derris root
contains rotenone and is a well-known insecticidal dust.

Rotenone (tubotoxin)
Major sources of rotenone include derris root (Derris el-
liptica) and Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia erythrina). It is also

POLYPHENOLS @ 107

found in the leaves of mullein (Verbascum thapsus).
Rotenone demonstrates insecticidal and antiprotozoal ac-
tivity. It is toxic, with an intraperitoneal LDsy in mice of
2.8 mg/kg. While the toxicity in humans is low, it is more
toxic when inhaled than when ingested.*8

Minor Flavonoids

Harborne and Baxter use the term minor flavonoid to de-
scribe flavonoids that have a limited distribution (as opposed
to the more widespread anthocyanins, flavones, and flavo-
nols) and a central pyran ring at a higher level of oxidation.

* Flavanones

* Dihydrochalcones

* Dihydrotlavonols (flavan-3-ols)
¢ Flavan-3,4-diols

The best-known minor flavonoids are the flavanones
and the flavanon-3-ols or dibydroflavonols.

Flavanones

Two flavanones, naringenin and eriodictyol, are relatively
common. Flavanone glycosides are often notable for their
taste; naringin and eriocitrin contribute to bitterness in
citrus fruits. However, not all flavanones are bitter. Some
are sweet; for example, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, a
compound related to neohesperidin, is used in the food in-
dustry as a nonsugar sweetener.

Naringenin

This compound has a widespread occurrence in plants,
especially in the Asteraceae family (for example, Artemisia
spp.). Naringin, the glycoside of naringenin, is widely dis-
tributed in Rutaceae. Naringenin has antibacterial, anti-
fungal, antihepatotoxic, antioxidant, antispasmodic, and

antiulcerogenic properties.°
on

LO
—~woeee
—

Fig. 7.55. Naringenin

Dibydrochalcones

Flavonoids in this group have an open central ring. They
are structurally related to the flavanones, but are not as
widely distributed.

----- PAGE 116 -----
108 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Phloretin
Phloretin occurs as a glycoside, especially in Rosaceae and
Ericaceae. The compound demonstrates antibacterial and

anti-inflammatory actions.©
‘OH

y

ae

WO oH a
—s

OH o

Fig. 7.56. Phloretin

Dibydroflavonols
Here, the molecule has a closed central ring. These rela-
tively common compounds are also known as flavan-3-ols.
Catechin, a dihydroflavonol, and silybin, a flavo-
lignan from milk thistle (Siybum marianum), are used
therapeutically because of their anti-inflammatory and
antihepatotoxic properties. Many of these structures have
antimicrobial activity, and several are phytoalexins.

(+)-Catechin

Catechin is very widespread, especially in woody plants.
Examples of medicinal plants that contain this dihy-
droflavonol are provided in table 7.11.

Table 7.11. Catechin-Rich Herbs and Actions

HERB ACTION

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony) Bitter, astringent

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) Cardiotonic, hypotensive

Humutus lupulus (hops) Bitter, hypnotic, antispasmodic

Leonurus cardiaca(motherwort) Relaxing nervine, antispasmodic

Quercus alba (white oak) Astringent

Salix alba (white willow) Anti-inflammatory, analgesic

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry) Antihepatotoxic, antioxidant

OH

OH

HO. 2.

a
Sy,

OH

OH

Fig. 7.57. Catechin

Silybin

Silybin occurs in the seeds of milk thistle (Silybum mar-
ianum) as a component of “silymarin,” a complex of
S. marianum flavanolignans that possess antihepatotoxic
activity. Silybin was formerly called silymarin.”!

2. CH,OH
HO. 0. Cl ” ‘OCHy
C) o
‘On ‘On

OH fs]

Fig. 7.58. Silybin

Biflavonoids

Another variant in the flavone series is the biflavonyl.
These dimeric compounds are formed by carbon-carbon
or carbon-oxygen couplings between two flavone units
(usually apigenin). Methyl ethers are common, for exam-
ple, ginkgetin, which occurs in the autumnal leaves of
Ginkgo biloba. Biflavonyls occur almost exclusively in

gymnosperms.
OH

OH fe)

Fig. 7.59. Ginkgetin

Ginkgetin
This dimethyl ether of amentoflavone occurs in autumnal
leaves of Ginkgo biloba.”

PHARMACOLOGY AND
THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL OF
FLAVONOIDS

Flavonoids have become the focus of much attention
within the research community. Both in vitro and in vivo
studies attest to their potential in modern medicine.”
However, this potential simply mirrors the therapeutic
strengths of the whole plants, long recognized in tradi-
tional herbal medicine and its modern manifestation,
phytotherapy.

While new research that points to potential applica-
tions for isolated flavonoids is exciting, it should not de-

----- PAGE 117 -----
flect the attention of the practitioner from the therapeu-
tic cornucopia offered by the plants themselves.
Traditional herbal and naturopathic protocols, often the
cues that inspired the research in the first place, have
great inherent value based on generations of observation
and use. This is a time to affirm their value, not to belit-
tle their lack of statistical validity or bemoan the dearth of
double-blind, placebo-controlled studies. After all, where
is the controlled study that validates Vis Medicatrix
Naturae (the healing power of nature)?

Flavonoids have many properties, but to individually
list the physiological effects of isolated chemicals can ob-
scure the fact that they work in complex, synergistic ways.
It is vital to differentiate between effects of whole plants
and research on specific molecules. In the case of herbs
used in phytotherapy, it is generally inappropriate to
speak of “flavonoid-containing herbs,” because while
flavonoids probably contribute to the activity of drugs,
they only rarely act alone. Essential oils, other phenolic
compounds, minerals, and saponins, to name just a few,
are also essential components of their activity.

From a traditional herbal perspective, many links
can be made between research-based reports of flavonoid
activity and the well-known actions of plants in our mate-
ria medica. The following list highlights some of these
correlations.

Actions of Flavonoids

¢ Antioxidant

© Hypoglycemic

* Stabilize capillary permeability
¢ Anti-inflammatory

¢ Immunomodulatory

* Antihepatotoxic

¢ Antineoplastic

© Hypotensive

¢ Regenerate connective tissue
* Sedative

¢ Regulate cardiac function

© Weakly estrogenic

© Antimicrobial

* Antispasmodic

© Diuretic

¢ Cholagogue

Because these ubiquitous phytochemicals have a gen-
tle impact on a whole range of organs, tissues, and physi-
ological processes, they are sometimes described as biolog-
ical response modifiers. The heart, blood vessels, liver,
immune system, connective tissue, adrenal glands, kid-

POLYPHENOLS ~ 109

neys, musculature, and nervous system may all benefit
from herbs containing these constituents.

The following material focuses largely on research on
specific chemicals. It is important to remember that the
specific effects enumerated below do not occur in isola-
tion, but are interrelated at the metabolic level in both
plants and people. Not all flavonoids or plants that con-
tain them demonstrate all of the properties discussed here
and, similarly, this is far from a complete listing of re-
ported effects.

A comprehensive review by Middleton and Kanda-
swami of the impact of flavonoids on immune system
function and the inflammatory response illuminated a
wide range of effects. Please refer to this review for
complete citations.

¢ Flavonoids have profound effects on immune system
and inflammatory cells.

* Certain flavonoids, depending on structure, can affect
(usually inhibit) secretory processes, mitogenesis, and
cell-cell interactions, including effects on adhesion
molecule expression and function.

¢ The effects of flavonoids on secretory processes sug-
gest that they may influence the function of cytoskele-
tal elements, supporting cellular health and activity
through some positive effect on the microfilaments
that make up the elements of the cytoskeleton.

© Certain flavonoids may affect gene expression and the
activity of cytokines and cytokine receptors.

¢ Flavonoids can stimulate or inhibit protein phosphory-
lation and thereby regulate cell function.

¢ Flavonoids are recognized antioxidants and free radical
scavengers.

© Resting cells are not significantly affected by flavo-
noids, but once activated by a physiological stimulus
may generate a flavonoid-sensitive substance. The in-
teraction of flavonoids with that substance dramati-
cally alters the outcome of the activation process.

Possible Biological Response

Modification Mechanisms

Flavonoids appear to modify the body’s reaction to other
substances, such as allergens, viruses, and carcinogens, as
evidenced by their anti-inflammatory, antiallergenic, an-
tiviral, and anticancer properties. As antioxidants, flavo-
noid molecules are unique in that they are active against a
wide variety of oxidants and free radicals. Among their ef-
fects is an ability to increase vitamin C levels within cells,
decreasing breakage and leakage of small blood vessels,
protecting against free radical damage, and supporting

----- PAGE 118 -----
110 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

joint structures. Many flavonoids modulate prostaglandin
synthesis and are powerful enzyme inhibitors. These
properties have profound physiological implications.

Flavonoids as Enzyme Inhibitors

As a general rule, flavonoids are enzyme inhibitors in
vitro. Several flavonoids (such as cirsiliol and hypolaetin)
are potent inhibitors of 5-lipoxygenase; therefore, they
inhibit the production of the leukotrienes that mediate
inflammation and allergic reactions. In addition, several
flavonoids (luteolin, apigenin, and chrysin) inhibit cy-
clooxygenase and platelet aggregation. These properties,
which have been demonstrated in vitro, may in part ex-
plain the anti-inflammatory and antiallergic properties
commonly attributed to various drugs known to contain
flavonoids.

Absorption of Flavonoids in the
Gastrointestinal Tract

The absorption of flavonoid glycosides is poor, although
trace amounts of intact glycosides can sometimes be de-
tected in bile or urine. Usually, the glycosides are initially
broken down to their aglycones and, subsequently, to ring
fission products. Flavonol aglycones, free flavones, and
flavonols, such as quercetin, tend to be poorly absorbed,
but the more saturated flavonoids, such as flavonones and
flavonols like (+)catechin, are more readily absorbed. The
exposure of gastric mucosa to glycosides may raise levels
of cytoprotective prostaglandins, which may help explain
how glycosides exert their protective effects on gastroin-
testinal mucosa. Flavonoids are metabolized by a variety
of cells, especially liver cells, and since the metabolites are
excreted in urine, there is no accumulation of metabolites
in the body.

forms.

Flavonoids and the French Paradox

Red wine is a rich source of flavonoids, and regular red wine consumption is associated with a de-
creased risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). French epidemiological studies show an association be-
tween increased wine consumption and reduction in death from heart disease. This phenomenon has
come to be known as “the French paradox,” as the French diet is characteristically high in animal fats
and other factors associated with heart disease.*”

Investigators have now concluded that wine and fruit consumption both correlate with reduced
mortality from heart disease.** Several mechanisms have been suggested to explain the protective ef-
fect of wine, of which the best known is the ability of alcohol to alter blood lipid levels by lowering
total cholesterol and raising levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL). However, if the findings con-
cerning fruit are taken into account, other mechanisms must be considered.

Wine is rich in flavonoids. Phenolics are well known for the sensory subtleties they impart to
wine, and for this reason, French researchers have been investigating their chemistry for decades.
Since they are antioxidants, these substances are at the foundation of the long aging process under-
gone by some wines. Wines low in flavonoids, such as white wines, rarely age gracefully.

Might phenolic antioxidants influence the development of atherosclerosis in humans? A study at
the University of California, Davis, showed that they inhibit the oxidation of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) in vitro. If this effect occurs in vivo, it could slow the development of arterial plaque. In addi-
tion, since the aggregation of platelets (thrombosis) is an important factor in precipitating a heart at-
tack, compounds that reduce platelet aggregation could also lower CHD mortality. Wine flavonoids
have been shown to decrease platelet aggregation, apparently by inhibiting oxygenase enzymes.

Wine is not the only dietary source of phenolic compounds. Fresh fruits are a rich source, and fruit
consumption correlates highly with reduced CHD mortality. Tea is another source of phenolics, but
green and black tea have quite different compositions. Green tea contains mainly monomeric cate-
chins—for example, epigallocatechin 3-gallate—while black tea possesses oligomeri¢ and polymeric

The results of a Finnish study on the association between dietary flavonoid intake and subse-
quent CHD mortality suggest that people with very low intakes of flavonoids have higher risks of
heart disease. Taken together, this combination of epidemiological and laboratory research clearly
suggests that flavonoids are beneficial nutrients that can reduce CHD mortality.”

----- PAGE 119 -----
Anti-Inflammatory Actions

Many different mechanisms may contribute to the anti-
inflammatory properties of flavonoids, including effects
on prostaglandin synthesis and arachidonic acid
metabolism, enzyme inhibition, and antioxidant activities.
The effects of flavonoids on collagen and on the function
of immune cells may also play a role.

Effects on Prostaglandin Synthesis

The well-recognized anti-inflammatory actions of many
flavonoids are due in part to their ability to modulate
prostaglandin synthesis. Some flavonoids inhibit prosta-
glandin synthesis, while others stimulate the production
of prostaglandins. Research on flavonoids with the ability
to inhibit prostaglandin synthetase (PGS) has identified
certain common structural features.

However, inhibition of PGS is only a partial answer
as to why flavonoids suppress inflammation. Leuko-
trienes, products of arachidonic acid produced by the 5-
lipoxygenase pathway, are also involved in the inflamma-
tory process, and some flavonoids, such as quercetin, can
inhibit lipoxygenase.

Flavonoids appear to have an important advantage
over nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
that they are largely free of adverse effects. NSATDs
work in part by inhibiting the synthesis of prosta-
glandins, not only those that cause inflammation, but
also the cytoprotective prostaglandins that help prevent
ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Thus, by inhibiting
prostaglandin formation, NSAIDs also cause gastric
ulceration.

Flavonoids do not cause gastric ulceration and, as a
class, are remarkably free of side effects. Why flavonoids
do not damage gastric tissues is not fully understood, but
it may be because their anti-inflammatory actions are
based on several mechanisms rather than on a single
mechanism, like inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.

Effects on Arachidonic Acid Metabolism

Flavonoids, particularly quercetin, are inhibitors of aller-
gic, IgE-mediated release of histamine and other chemi-
cals from mast cells and basophils, via inhibition of
ipoxygenase and other enzymes involved in the meta-
bolism of arachidonic acid in cells. Quercetin exhibits
both allergic-mediator release activity and selective inhi-
bition of the biosynthesis of pro-inflammatory arachi-
donic acid metabolites, which may help explain its antial-
lergic and anti-inflammatory actions.’”! Animal studies
have demonstrated that endogenous prostaglandins are
involved in mucosal injury produced by absolute ethanol

POLYPHENOLS @ 111

and that quercetin has antiulcer and cytoprotective prop-
erties in such situations.’

Antioxidant Effects

Active oxygen species, or free radicals, cause considerable
damage in inflammation. These include hydrogen perox-
ide, hypochlorous acid, hydroxyl radicals, and possibly
other species, such as singlet oxygen and hydroperoxy
radicals. These species are derived from superoxide an-
ions liberated from stimulated phagocytic cells. Many
flavonoids are powerful antioxidants and scavengers of
free radicals. In addition to removing free radicals, they
may also suppress their formation, since many flavonoids
have the ability to bind heavy metal ions that are known
to catalyze the production of free radicals.

Inhibition of Enzymes

One enzyme that is strongly inhibited by flavonoids is
phosphodiesterase, which catalyzes the breakdown of
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Cyclic AMP is
a fundamentally important regulatory molecule in cellular
activity. As discussed in detail in chapter 9, cAMP can
trigger a range of intracellular effects by activating vari-
ous enzymes. High cAMP levels are anti-inflammatory,
since cAMP tends to decrease the secretion from cells of
destructive agents, such as lysosomal enzymes and
prostaglandins. In the presence of inflammation, drugs
that elevate intracellular cAMP levels have some anti-
inflammatory action, which is probably related to the rise
in cAMP. Thus the anti-inflammatory action of flavo-
noids may be due in part to the fact that they inhibit the
breakdown of cAMP.

Effects on Collagen

Many flavonoids have a beneficial effect on collagen,
which is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the
ground substance in connective tissue. Collagen is de-
stroyed during inflammatory processes that occur in
rheumatoid arthritis, gout, and other conditions involv-
ing bones, joints, cartilage, and other connective tissue.
Anthocyanidins and other flavonoids affect collagen
metabolism in many ways:’?

* Cross-link collagen fibers, reinforcing the collagen
matrix of connective tissue (ground substance or
cartilage)

* Prevent free radical damage with potent antioxidant and
free radical scavenging actions

* Inhibit destruction of collagen structures by enzymes
secreted during inflammation

----- PAGE 120 -----
112 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Prevent the release and synthesis of compounds that
promote inflammation, such as histamine

Overall Antioxidant Activities

Flavonoids can inhibit formation of superoxide anions and
the generation of hydroxy] radicals. With the new insights
concerning the role of free radicals in aging, autoimmune
diseases, and many other health issues, the antioxidant
potential of flavonoid-containing herbs suggests exciting
therapeutic possibilities. Perhaps more important, this is
simply the affirmation of traditional herbal practice,
which makes extensive use of many flavonoid-rich herbs.

Flavonoids are potent antioxidants, free radical scav-
engers, metal chelators, and inhibitors of lipid peroxida-
tion. The structural requirements for these functions in-
clude a hydroxyl group in carbon position 3, a double
bond between carbon positions 2 and 3, a carbonyl group
in carbon position 4, and polyhydroxylation of the A and
B aromatic rings.

These structural features prevent the formation of
free radicals and the leukotrienes that promote inflamma-
tion. In a general sense, many polyphenols scavenge reac-
tive chemical radicals formed under various circum-
stances (for example, anoxia, inflammation, and lipidic
autoxidation). Normally, the cascade of reactions involved
in the inflammatory response is interrupted by enzymic
systems, such as superoxide dismutases, catalase, and glu-
tathione peroxidase, which reduce peroxides, and, later
on, hydroperoxides.

Many polyphenols and flavonoids react with free rad-
icals to prevent the degradation caused by the intense ac-
tivity of these pro-oxidants on membrane phospholipids.
It has been hypothesized that the capacity of flavonoids
to modify membrane-dependent processes, such as free-
radical-induced membrane lipid peroxidation, is related
not only to their structural characteristics, but also to their
ability to interact with and penetrate the lipid bilayers.”*

Researchers have begun to elucidate the antioxidant
mechanisms underlying the clinical applications of
oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs) as vascular protective
agents. (For more information on OPCs, see the discus-
sion on Tannins later in this chapter.) Studies have shown
that OPCs inhibit xanthine oxidase (a generator of free
radicals) an
This system governs the release of enzymes that can dam-
age the connective tissue surrounding capillary walls.” In
these studies, OPCs demonstrated a wide range of an-
tioxidant abilities, summarized below.

the activity of the lysosomal enzyme system.

Antioxidant Effects of OPCs

© Trap hydroxyl free radicals

¢ Trap lipid peroxides and the free radicals that initiate
their formation

© Markedly delay the onset of lipid peroxidation

¢ Chelate free iron molecules, preventing iron-induced
lipid peroxidation

¢ Inhibit production of free radicals by inhibiting xan-
thine oxidase

¢ Inhibit the damaging effects of enzymes (e.g.,
hyaluronidase, elastase, collagenase) that can degrade
connective tissue structures

Effects on Immunological Processes

No doubt can remain that flavonoids have profound ef-
fects on the function of immune and inflammatory cells,
as confirmed by a large number and variety of observa-
tions from in vitro and some in vivo studies. That these
ubiquitous dietary chemicals may have significant in vivo
effects on homeostasis within the immune system and on
the behavior of secondary cell systems that comprise the
inflammatory response seems highly likely, but more
work is required to strengthen this hypothesis.

Evidence also indicates that certain flavonoids may
affect gene expression and the elaboration and effects of
cytokines and cytokine receptors. How all of these effects
are mediated is not yet clear, but one important mecha-
nism may be the capacity of flavonoids to stimulate or in-
hibit protein phosphorylation and thereby regulate cell
function.”

LIGNANS AND NEOLIGNANS

These are dimeric compounds in which phenylpropane
(C.-C) units are linked to form three-dimensional net-
works.”” Dimers are molecules formed from two similar
constituents, called monomers. They are chemically re-
lated to the polymeric lignins that make up the plant cell
wall and are found mainly in woody tissues.”

CH,OH

Fig. 7.60. Cinnamate monomer

----- PAGE 121 -----
The Five Structural Classes of Lignans”
* Simple lignans

* Lignanolides with lactone substitution

* Monoepoxylignans

* Diepoxylignans

Cyclolignans

Fig. 7.61. Simple lignan
a"
o

¢ ats

Fig. 7.62. Lignanolide

sB° &.

Fig. 7.64. Diepoxylignan

JU

Fig. 7.65. Cyclolignan

There is also a small group of related neolignans
formed by asymmetrical carbon-carbon links in the side
chains.

Lignans occur widely in the wood of gymnosperm
trees, and they have also been recorded in some 50 an-
giosperm families, where they can be found in both the
wood and the bark. The majority of the more than 200
naturally occurring lignans are found in the free state in
the heartwood of trees. Some have been isolated from
other plant parts, where they may be present as glyco-
sides. In plants, lignans have antibacterial, antifungal, and
antifeedant properties.

Lignans have attracted the attention of the research
community because they have shown antitumor and antivi-
ral activities, among many other actions. Some cyclolignans
and lignolides have cytotoxic and antimitotic properties, al-
though toxicity has limited their therapeutic application.

Flavolignans of milk thistle (Silybum marianum) and
the schisandrins from Schisandra chinensis have valuable
hepatoprotective attributes. Schisandrins reverse destruc-
tion of liver cells by inducing cytochrome P45o activity.®°

POLYPHENOLS 2 113

For more information on the hepatoprotective activity of
milk thistle flavolignans, see chapter 9.

RO

\
RO. ~

OCH; —

CHO | A
ory. oH oe

iN\ P~ |
if Se
ond oH

Fig. 7.66. Schisandrin Fig. 7.67. Dihydroguaiaretic acid

Dihydroguaiaretic acid from chaparral (Larrea spp.) is
a potent antioxidant, and other lignans display allergenic,
cathartic, and cardiovascular effects. Lignans such as en-
terolactone, matairesinol, and enterodiol are excreted in
human urine, and are believed to be formed through bac-
terial degradation of dietary plant lignans in the gut.
These lignans are phytoestrogens that appear to exert
weak effects on estrogen receptors, improving female
menstrual function. The overall cancer risk reduction may
also work through this mechanism. A role for lignans has
also been proposed in colon cancer prevention.*!

,o

; x 40. — Ne,

‘0 2 Zi cH
eee on a“

Fig. 7.68. Fig. 7.69. Fig. 7.70.
Enterolactone Matairesinol Enterodiol

Podophyllotoxin
Podophyllotoxin (podofilox) and its derivatives, etoposide
and teniposide, are all antimitotic glucosides.

OH

OCH,

Fig. 7.71. Podophyllotoxin

Podofilox is an extract of mayapple (Podophyllum wpelta-
tum), which generally acts as a poison to cells undergoing
mitosis. Podofilox itself is not used as a chemotherapy
agent; instead, it is applied as an ingredient in creams for the
treatment for genital warts. Genital warts, which are caused
by the human papillomavirus (HPV), have been associated
with squamous cell carcinomas of the genital organs.

The synthetic analogues etoposide and teniposide

----- PAGE 122 -----
114. = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

block the cell cycle in two specific places: between the last
cell division and the start of DNA replication (the Gl-
phase) and at the beginning of DNA replication (the S-
phase). However, researchers do not yet have a clear un-
derstanding of how the compounds exert this effect.

Silymarin

The seeds of milk thistle (Silybum marianum) contain a
mixture of hepatoprotective flavolignans known collec-
tively as silymarin. Silybin is the major component; other
flavolignans in the mixture include silychristin and taxifo-
line. The pharmacology of hepatoprotection is discussed

in chapter 9.
A 0 -OHOH
OC
“TC ) ASS set ioe
IN a on A od
Le |

9.
|
°

Fig. 7.72. Silybin

HO.

OH °

Fig. 7.73. Silychristin

TANNINS

The word tannin has long been used to describe organic
substances present in water-soluble plant extracts that are
capable of converting animal hide to leather. The appli-
cation of the term to specific groups of structurally char-
acterized chemicals is relatively recent. Tannins are
polyphenolic compounds (C-C3-C,)n that precipitate
proteins and form complexes with polysaccharides, and
are composed of a very diverse group of oligomers and
polymers. There is, however, some degree of confusion
about the terminology, because other phenolics, such as
pyrogallol and resorcinol, also bind and precipitate pro-
teins. In addition, not all polyphenols precipitate proteins
or form complexes with polysaccharides.

A technical definition in current use describes a tan-
nin as any phenolic compound that has a sufficiently high
molecular weight and contains enough hydroxyls and
other suitable groups to form strong complexes with pro-
tein and other macromolecules under the particular envi-
ronmental conditions being studied.

Tannins are widely distributed among plants and are
common in both gymnosperms and angiosperms, al-
though they are more frequently found in dicotyledons
than in monocotyledons. They are sequestered in various
plant tissues so that they do not interfere with normal plant
metabolism. Only after cell breakdown and death do they
exert their metabolic effects.

Occurrence and Functions of Tannins in Plants

Buds: Most common in the outer part of the bud, tannins
are probably present to protect against freezing.

Leaves: Tannins are most common in the upper epidermis;
however, in evergreen plants, they are evenly dis-
tributed in all leaf tissues, protecting against predation
by reducing palatability.

Roots: Most commonly found in the hypodermis, tannins
probably act as chemical barriers to penetration and
colonization by plant pathogens.

Seeds: Located mainly in a layer between the outer in-
tegument and the aleurone layer, tannins may help
maintain dormancy and provide allelopathic and bac-
tericidal protection.

Stems: Tannins are often found in the active growth areas
of trees, such as the secondary phloem and xylem and
the layer between epidermis and cortex, where they
may have a role in growth regulation. They are also
found in the heartwood of conifers and may contribute
to the natural durability of wood by inhibiting micro-
bial activity.

There are two main types of tannin, condensed
(proanthocyanidins) and hydrolyzable tannins. These are
unevenly distributed in plants; the condensed tannins
occur almost universally in ferns and gymnosperms and
are widespread among angiosperms, especially trees and
shrubs. By contrast, hydrolyzable tannins are limited to
dicotyledonous plants. Both types of tannin can occur to-
gether in the same plant.

Hydrolyzable Tannins

Hydrolyzable tannins are soluble in water and alcohol.

There are two types, based on either gallic or epigallic

acids, In the presence of acids or enzymes, proantho-

cyanidins (condensed tannins) do not hydrolyze.
Gallotannins hydrolyze to gallic acid and glucose.

Fig. 7.74. Gallic acid

----- PAGE 123 -----
The phenolic groups in gallotannins are sometimes
dimers or higher oligomers of gallic acid; each single
monomer is called a galloyl. Gallotannins are found in
rhubarb (Rheum spp.), cloves (Syzygium aromaticum),
petals of red roses (Rosa spp.), bearberry (Arctostaphylos
uva-ursi), witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana), sweet chest-
nut (Castanea sativa), and maple (Acer spp.).

Ellagitannins ‘hydrolyze to ellagic acid and glucose.

Fig. 7.75. Ellagic acid

The phenolic groups in ellagitannins consist of hex-
ahydroxydiphenic acid, which spontaneously dehydrates
to ellagic acid. They are found in pomegranate (Punica
granatum), eucalyptus leaves (Eucalyptus spp.), kousso
(Brayera anthelmintica), sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa),
oak bark (Quercus spp.), and agrimony (Agrimonia spp.).
An example is agrimoniin from Agrimonia eupatoria.

Ellagic acid is one of the products of ellagitannin hy-
drolysis, which occurs upon storage, drying, extraction, or
digestion of plants containing ellagitannins. Therefore, el-
lagic acid is taken in by everybody who ingests ellagitannin-
containing plants as foods or drugs, although ellagic acid
itself is not usually present in living plants.

Fig. 7.76. Agrimoniin

Condensed Tannins (Proanthocyanidins)
Condensed tannins, or flavolans, are formed biosyntheti-
cally by the condensation of flavan-3-ols, such as catechin
and epicatechin, into dimers and then higher oligomers.
The name proanthocyanidin is used alternatively for con-
densed tannins because, on treatment with hot acid, some
of the carbon-carbon linking bonds are broken, and an-
thocyanidin monomers may be formed.

POLYPHENOLS -@ 115

When two proanthocyanidin molecules are linked to-
gether, the result is called a dimer; a linkage of three forms
is a trimer and four a tetramer. Collectively, mixtures of
proanthocyanidin dimers, trimers, tetramers, and larger
molecules are known as oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs).

Fruit-bearing plants are high in oligomeric procyani-
dins, and heartwood and bark are rich sources of unusual
proanthocyanidins. OPCs, called “pycnogenols” in the
commercial supplement market, are available in extracts
of grape seeds and the bark of the maritime pine.* It
should be noted that the word pycnogenol is a commercial
term and not an accepted chemical descriptor.

”

‘OH

OH
Fig. 7.77. (-)-Epicatechin

Proanthocyanidins are more widely distributed than
are hydrolyzable tannins. The commonest anthocyani-
dins produced are cyanidin (from procyanidin) and del-
phinidin (from prodelphinidin). Proanthocyanidins may
contain 2 to 50 or more flavonoid units; proanthocyani-
din polymers have complex structures because the
flavonoid units can differ for some substituents and be-
cause the sites for interflavan bonds vary.

Interactions with Other Macromolecules
Tannins have a major impact on animal nutrition because
of their ability to form complexes with numerous types
of molecules.83 These molecules include but are not lim-
ited to:

© Carbohydrates

* Proteins

© Polysaccharides

* Bacterial cell membranes

¢ Enzymes involved in protein and carbohydrate digestion

Carbohydrates

Both starch and cellulose are complexed by tannins.
Tannin-carbohydrate interactions are increased in the
presence of carbohydrates with high molecular weight,
low solubility, and conformational flexibility. These inter-
actions are probably based on hydrophobic and hydrogen
linkages.

----- PAGE 124 -----
116 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Starch-tannin interaction: Starch has the ability to form
hydrophobic cavities that allow inclusion complexes
with tannins and many other lipophilic molecules.
The hydrophobic molecules are, in effect, encapsu-
lated in the cavity formed by the complexes.

Cellulose-tannin interaction: Cellulose has a direct sur-
face interaction with tannins.

Cell-wall carbobydrate-tannin interaction: This associa-
tion is less understood. One explanation is that tannins
associate with plant cell walls in a manner similar to
that of lignin. However, it is also possible that this as-
sociation occurs as an artifact when tannins are isolated
from nonliving cells.

Proteins

The capacity of tannins to bind proteins has been recog-
nized for centuries, as this is the basis of leather tanning.
Tannin-protein interactions are specific and depend on
the structure of both the protein and the tannin. Protein
characteristics that favor strong bonding include large
molecular size, open and flexible structures, and a high
content of proline. Tannin characteristics that favor
strong bonding are high molecular weight and high con-
formational mobility.

Properties of Tannins

One of the most important properties attributed to tan-
nins is astringent action. Astringents cause contraction of
tissue, blanching and wrinkling of mucous membranes,
and diminished exudations. When applied to wounds,
they form a thin protective surface, cutting down on the
secretion of exudates. Precipitation of surface proteins
and/or polysaccharides results in hardening of the epider-
mis, which lessens the absorption of toxins and protects
against irritants. Tannins also display antimicrobial prop-
erties. Many are able to constrict blood vessels, thereby
reducing bleeding.

Applications of Tannins

* Protect inflamed mucous membranes

© Exert a drying effect on mucous membranes, reducing
hypersecretion

* Reduce the inflammation and swelling that accompany
infection

* Prevent bleeding from small wounds

* Reduce uterine bleeding (for example, in menorrhagia)

¢ Relieve symptoms of diarrhea or dysentery through
binding effects in the gut

* Used externally for astringent action in douches,
snuffs, and eyewashes

Biological and Other Activities

of Isolated Tannins

Since tannins are polyphenols, and are fairly large
molecules containing several phenolic hydroxyl groups
located mostly on the molecule surface, phenolic groups
have a strong influence on the properties and biological
activities of tannins. Radical scavenging is an important
activity of tannins. This kind of activity is due to the for-
mation of stable free radicals from the tannin molecules
after hydrogen radicals are donated to radicals formed
from a coexisting compound.

Effects Induced by Binding with Protein

and Other Substances

The binding of tannins with, for example, proteins and
other large molecules or basic compounds is thought to
be key to the various biological activities of tannins. Such
binding plays a role in the antidiarrhetic activity of tan-
nins (one of the most widely exploited effects of tannin-
containing medicinal plants) by protecting digestive or-
gans from injurious attack. It also contributes to the
antihemorrhagic effects of tannin-rich drugs.

Effects on Enaymes

At relatively high concentrations, tannins usually inhibit
the activity of enzymes, but at low concentrations they
often stimulate enzyme activity. The extent of inhibition
and stimulation varies, depending on the enzyme and the
structure and concentration of the tannin. Oligomeric hy-
drolyzable tannins inhibit reverse transcriptase isolated
from RNA tumor virus more potently than do other types
of tannins.®

Inhibition of Mutagenicity and Tumor Formation
Ellagic acid has been found to inhibit the mutagenic and
carcinogenic action of 7B-,8a-dihydroxy-9a, | 0a-epoxy-
7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo[a]pyrene, a potent experimental
carcinogen. The fact that tannins inhibit the mutagenic-
ity of several other carcinogens can be partly attributed to
the binding of tannins with these compounds.

Oral administration of epigallocatechin gallate has
been found to inhibit duodenal cancer induced by N-ethyl-
N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidin, suggesting that oral admin-
istration may be useful for the treatment of duodenal
tumors.*6

Inhibition of Viruses

Although the inhibitory actions of tannins against bacte-
ria and fungi are not strong, researchers have observed re-
markable inhibition of certain viruses by several tannins

----- PAGE 125 -----
and related polyphenols.®’ In studies, tannins inhibited
the replication of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
and herpes simplex viruses (HSV).

Procyanidin B, (catechin-(40-8)-epicatechin)

Procyanidin B, has a widespread occurrence in plants. It
is found, for example, in the leaves of the raspberry (Rubus
idaeus). An infusion of raspberry leaves containing pro-

cyanidin B, and hydrolyzable tannins is used as a gargle
and for treating wounds and ulcers.**
On ie On
HO Ss a ‘CHs
HO. ra ) ) SQ CH,On
Sy a
OH ° OH

Fig. 7.78. Procyanidin B,

References

1.

13.

14.

row OND

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

. Haslam, et al. Traditional herbal medicines—the role of

polyphenols. Planta Medica 1989; 55:1-8.

Dombrowicz, et al. Phenolic acids in leaves of
Asctostaphylos uva ursi L., Vaccinium vitis-idaea L. and
Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie 1991; 46(9): 680-1.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Tbid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Reddy BS. Chemoprevention of colon cancer by minor

dietary constituents and their synthetic analogues.
Preventive Medicine 1996 Jan-Feb; 25(1):48-50.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19,

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31,
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38,

39,

40.

POLYPHENOLS © 117

[No authors listed] Caffeic acid LARC. Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans 1993; 56:115-34.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Kawamori T; Lubet R, Steele VE, et al.
Chemopreventive effect of curcumin, a naturally occur-
ring anti-inflammatory agent, during the promotion/
progression stages of colon cancer. Cancer Research 1999,
59:597-601.

Hallstrom H, Thuvander A. Toxicological evaluation of
myristicin. Nateral Toxins 1997; 5(5):186-92.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1993.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Biouctive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Did.

bid.
bid.

bid.

I
I
I
Ibid.
I
I
I
I

bid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Chanvitayapongs S$, Draczynska-Lusiak B, Sun AY
Amelioration of oxidative stress by antioxidants and

resveratrol in PC), cells. Neuroreport 1997;
8:1499-1502.

Roemer K, Mahyar-Roemer M. The basis for the
chemopreventive action of resveratrol. Drags Today 2002
Aug; 38(8):571-80.

Frankel EN, Waterhouse AL, Kinsella JE. Inhibition of
human LDL oxidation by resveratrol. Lancet 1993;
341:1103-4.

----- PAGE 126 -----
118

41.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

$1.

52.

53.
34.
55.

56.

97,
58.
59.
60.
61.

<= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Belguendouz L, Fremont L, Gozzelino MT. Interaction
of transresveratrol with plasma lipoproteins. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1998, 55:811-16.

Rotondo S. Effect of trans-resveratrol, a natural
polyphenolic compound, on human polymorphonuclear
leukocyte function. British Journal of Pharmacology 1998;
123:1691-9.

Bhat KP, Pezzuto JM. Cancer chemopreventive activity
of resveratrol. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
2002 May; 957:210-29.

. Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, et al. Cancer chemopreven-

tive activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived
from grapes. Science 1997 Jan 10; 275(5297):218-20.
“Tsan MF, White JE, Maheshwari JG, Chikkappa G.
Anti-leukemia effect of resveratrol. Leukemia &
Lymphoma 2002 May, 43(5):983-7.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tid.

Formica JV, Regelson W. Review of the biology of
Quercetin and related bioflavonoids. Food and Chemical
Toxicology 1995 Dec; 33(12):1061-80.

Hertog MG, Hollman PC. Potential health effects of
the dietary flavonol quercetin. European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 1996 Feb; 50(2):63-71.

Chu CK, Cutler HG, Natural Products as Antiviral
Agents. New York: Plenum, 1992.

Boik J. Cancer & Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic
Science and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon
Medical Press, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.

Harborne JB, Williams CA. Anthocyanins and other
flavonoids. Natural Product Reports 2001 Jun;
18(3):310-33.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

Ibid.

Middleton E. The flavonoids as potential therapeutic
agents. In: Kimball SE, ed. Iamunopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1995.

Hertog MG. Epidemiological evidence on potential
health properties of flavonoids. The Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 1996 Mar; 55(1B):385-97.

Middleton E, Kandaswami C. Effects of flavonoids on
immune and inflammatory cell functions. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1992 Mar 17; 43(6):1167-79

Depeint F, Gee JM, Williamson G, Johnson IT.
Evidence for consistent patterns between flavonoid
structures and cellular activities. The Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 2002 Feb; 61(1):97-103.

Adzet T, Camarasa J. Pharmacokinetics of polyphenolic
compounds. In: Craker LF, Simon JE, eds. Herbs, Spices
and Medicinal Plants, vol 3. Phoenix: Oryx Press, 1988.
Bohm M, Rosenkranz S, Laufs U. The “French
Paradox” —effects of alcohol, wine and wine polyphenols
on the heart. Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift 2002
Dec; 127.5 1-52, 2748-56.

de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Paillard F, et al. Mediterranean
diet and tne French paradox: two distinct biogeographic
concepts for one consolidated scientific theory on the
role of nutrition in coronary heart disease. Cardiovascular
Research 2002 Jun; 54(3):503-15.

Knekt, et al. Flavonoid intake and coronary mortality in
Finland: a cohort study [see comments]. British Medical
Journal 1996, 312 (7029):478-81.

Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Hollman PC, et al. Dietary an-
tioxidant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease:
the Zutphen Elderly Study. Lancet 1993 Oct 23;
342(8878):1007-11,

Welton AK, Tobias LD, Fiedler-Nagy C, et al. Effect of
flavonoids on arachidonic acid metabolism. Progress in
Clinical and Biological Research 1986, 213:231-42.
Alarcon de la Lastra C, Martin MJ, Motilva V. Antiulcer
and gastroprotective effects of quercetin: a gross and his-
tologic study. Pharmacology 1994, 48:56-62.

Haslam E, Lilley TH. Interactions of natural phenols
with macromolecules. Progress in Clinical and Biological
Research 1986, 213:53-65.

Saija A, Scalese M, Lanza M, et al. Flavonoids as antiox-
idant agents: importance of their interaction with
biomembranes. Free Radical Biology &* Medicine 1995;
19(4):481-6.

Facino RM, et al. Free radicals scavenging action and
anti-enzyme activities of procyanidines from Vitis

----- PAGE 127 -----
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

vinifera. A mechanism for their capillary protective ac-
tion. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1994; 44:592-601.
Middleton E, Kandaswami C. Effects of flavonoids on
immune and inflammatory cell functions. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1992; 43(6):1167-79.

Ayres DC, Loike JD. Lignans: chemical, biological, and
clinical properties. Cambridge, UK; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ward RS. Lignans, neolignans and related compounds.
Natural Product Reports 1999; 1:75-96.

Ghisalberti EL, Cardiovascular activity of naturally oc-
curring lignans. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1997, 4{2):151-66.
Adlercreutz H, et al. Lignan and isoflavonoid conjugates
in human urine. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1995; 52(1):97-103.

Masquelier J, et al. Flavonoids and pycnogenols.
International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research
1979; 49:307-11.

Haslam E, Lilley TH. Interactions of natural phenols
with macromolecules. Progress in Clinical and Biological
Research 1986; 213:53-65.

85.

86.

87.

88.

POLYPHENOLS © 119

Chung KT, Wong TY, Wei CI, Huang YW, Lin Y.
Tannins and human health: a review. Critical Reviews in
Food Science and Nutrition 1998 Aug; 38(6):42 1-64.
Namba T, Kurokawa M, Kadota S, Shiraki K. Develop-
ment of antiviral therapeutic agents from traditional
medicines. Yakugaku Zasshi 1998 Sept; 118(9):383-400.
Fukuchi K, Sakagami H, Okuda T, et al. Inhibition of
herpes simplex virus infection by tannins and related
compounds. Antiviral Research 1989 Jun-Jul;
11(5-6):285-97,

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Suggested Reading
Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.

London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of

Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 128 -----
ALKALOIDS

Ikaloids are organic compounds with at least one
A nitrogen atom in a heterocyclic ring. Their defi-
nition is problematic, as they do not represent a

homogeneous group of compounds from any standpoint,
whether chemical, biochemical, or physiological. Except
for the fact that they are all nitrogen-containing com-
pounds, no general definition fits all alkaloids. They dis-
play great structural diversity and physiological activity.
More than 10,000 have been identified, and about one new
alkaloid is described in the scientific literature every day.

Despite the difficulty in defining alkaloids, they do
share some physical and chemical properties. They are
usually insoluble or sparingly soluble in water, and their
salts are sparingly soluble. Most alkaloids are crystalline
solids, although a few are amorphous. A few that lack oxy-
gen in their molecules (coniine, nicotine, and sparteine)
are liquids. Most, but not all, are alkaline, owing to the
presence of an amino nitrogen, and many possess physio-
logical activity.

Much has been written about why alkaloids occur in
plants and what functions they may serve.

Postulated Functions of Alkaloids
* Poisonous agents that protect the plant against insects
and herbivores
¢ End products of detoxification reactions that sequester
compounds that might otherwise harm the plant
* Regulatory growth factors
* Reserves of nitrogen or other elements necessary to
the plant

OCCURRENCE AND DISTRIBUTION

Although found in some animals, such as fire ants and
toads, most alkaloids occur in flowering plants, with 40%
of plant families containing at least one alkaloid-bearing
species. Alkaloids accumulate in 19% to 20% of vascular
plants, mostly dicotyledons, but also in the monocot fam-
ilies Liliaceae, Amaryllidaceae, and Poaceae. Their distri-
bution is uneven: They are universal in some families (for

120

example, Papaveraceae), common in others (Amarylli-
daceae and Rutaceae), and rare in others (Apiaceae). They
occur only rarely in gymnosperms, club mosses, and
horsetails, and although uncommon in fungi, there are
exceptional cases, such as the ergot fungus (Claviceps) and
“magic” mushrooms (Psilocybe spp.).!

In general, annual plants contain larger amounts of
alkaloids than do perennials. Trees tend to have small
amounts of alkaloids, usually of simpler structure. The
compounds may be present throughout the plant or re-
stricted to certain tissues, such as root or bark.
Concentration can vary from a small fraction of 0.01% to
as much as 12% of the dry weight of a plant. Any plant
that accumulates more than 0.05% dry weight of alkaloids
is considered an alkaloid-bearing plant.

Alkaloid content can vary among members of a given
plant species, and also changes depending upon where the
plant is growing. Cultivated varieties of wild plants con-
tain different proportions of alkaloids than their wild
counterparts, but the alkaloids found in the parent plant
are usually present in the cultivar. The alkaloid content of
different parts of an individual plant varies also. For ex-
ample, nicotine is produced in the root of the tobacco
plant but accumulates in the leaves, so more alkaloid will
be found in the leaves,

CLASSIFICATION AND
NOMENCLATURE

Classification of alkaloids is usually based on the type of
ring system present (for example, pyrrolidine or piperi-
dine) and on their biosynthetic origin from one or an-
other of the protein amino acids. Some structures fit into
more than one category, making a rigid hierarchical clas-
sification inappropriate. Some groups are defined by their
chemistry, such as the peptide, pyrrolizidine, quino-
lizidine, and tropane classes. Some groups are partly ter-
penoid in origin, and others are defined by their botani-
cal distribution.

Common names for alkaloids, such as nicotine, usually

----- PAGE 129 -----
terminate in -ine. Many of these names are derived from
the plant genus in which the alkaloid occurs, such as at-
ropine from Atropa, or from the plant species, such as co-
caine from Erythroxylum coca. Other alkaloid names are
derived from the name of a plant drug (for example, er-
gotamine from ergot) or from a physiological activity
(emetine, named for its emetic effects). Occasionally a
name is coined to commemorate the person who discov-
ered the compound, such as lobeline, named after the
French botanist LObel. All alkaloids also have scientific
names derived by the systematic nomenclature rules of
organic chemistry.

Table 8.1. Major Classes of Alkaloids

CLASS OF ALKALOID STRUCTURAL TYPE
Pyrrole l \
Pyrrolidine ( )
N
Piperdine 6
m
ropane M4
yrollizidine crs
u
Sy Sy
soquinoline |
wo oN
Sy
4
ndole | pm
B-carboli a
-carboline
Sy, N27 UN
— is
Quinoline [t
GO
Quinolizidine

PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES

Alkaloids pose major cultural issues because of their prop-
erties. This group of constituents provides humanity with

ALKALOIDS 2 121

challenges such as nicotine, heroin, and cocaine, as well as
the profound gift of visionary entheogens, such as psilo-
cybin and mescaline. Some alkaloids are extremely toxic,
such as coniine and strychnine, while others, including at-
ropine, codeine, morphine, and vincristine, are used as
pharmaceuticals.

While not all alkaloids have a major impact on the
functioning of the body, the diverse array of pharmaco-
logical actions demonstrated by various alkaloids includes
analgesia, local anesthesia, cardiac stimulation, respira-
tory stimulation and relaxation, vasoconstriction, muscle
relaxation, and toxicity, as well as antineoplastic, hyper-
tensive, and hypotensive properties.

Morphine and codeine are analgesics and narcotics,
and cocaine is a central nervous system stimulant.
Atropine has mydriatic effects, while physostigmine is
miotic. Ephedrine causes a rise in blood pressure, but
reserpine decreases blood pressure. Some alkaloids are
entheogens, psychoactive plants or chemical substances
taken to facilitate the religious experience—for example,
peyote cactus as used by the Native American Church.

Without claiming to be comprehensive, the follow-
ing table provides examples of the reported effects of var-
ious alkaloids on enzymes. The scientific literature cites ef-
fects on a range of cellular membrane transport processes,
subcellular structures, and nucleic acids, as well as various
components of protein synthesis. Effects on numerous
neuroreceptors have also been reported, including
cholinergic, adrenergic, opiate, and serotonergic recep-
tors. Inhibition or activation of enzymes is also common,
as illustrated in table 8.2.?

Table 8.2. Reported Effects of Alkaloids on Enzymes

ALKALOID ENZYME

Theophylline Alkaline phosphatase

Protoberberines Liver alcohol dehydrogenase

Colchicine Various phosphatases
Mimosine Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes
Quinidine Several glycolytic enzymes
Isoquinolines Tyrosine hydroxylase

d-Tubocurarine Several dehydrogenases

Indolizidines a-mannosidase

Methylated xanthines Xanthine oxidase

----- PAGE 130 -----
122 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

PYRROLIDINE AND PIPERIDINE
ALKALOIDS

The nitrogen atom of a pyrrolidine alkaloid is in a 5-
membered ring and piperine alkaloids have 6-membered
rings. Indolizidine alkaloids, those with a nitrogen atom
shared between a 5- and a 6-membered ring, are also in-

cluded in this category.
Ch OI
Fig. 8.2. Pyrrolidine

N

Fig. 8.1. Piperidine

Piperidine alkaloids are identified by their saturated
heterocyclic ring (the piperidine nucleus). Pyrrolidine al-
kaloids are similar to piperidine alkaloids except that the
heterocyclic-ringed, nitrogen-containing nucleus is un-
saturated. Perhaps the best-known piperidine alkaloids
are the poisons in Conium maculatum, commonly known
as poison hemlock.

Betonicine

Found in Stachys officinalis, S. sylvatica, Marrubium vul-
gare, and ‘Achillea millefolium, betonicine demonstrates
anti-inflammatory activity?

Coniine

Coniine occurs in the leaves and seeds of poison hemlock
(Conium maculatum), and is produced by the carnivorous
pitcher plant (Sarracenia flava) to paralyze insect prey.
This extremely toxic compound, which causes paralysis of
motor nerve endings, occurs in all parts of the plant as a
colorless oil with a mild pepper odor and a burning taste.
It reportedly causes teratogenic effects.*

euncaaene
ho
|

Fig. 8.3. Coniine Fig. 8.4. Lobeline

Lobeline

The alkaloid lobeline, found in Lobelia inflata, L. nicoti-
naefolia, and L. bassleri, is similar to nicotine.’ The race-
mate, known as lobelidine, is an analeptic. Lobelia inflata
contains 14 alkaloids, of which lobeline is the most im-
portant. Lobeline produces pharmacological effects simi-
lar to but weaker than those of nicotine on peripheral cir-
culation, neuromuscular junctions, and the central
nervous system. It stimulates the respiratory center and
induces coughing.

Lobelia inflata is a relaxant and bronchodilator and is
used in phytotherapy to treat asthmatic conditions.
Because lobeline is similar to nicotine, Lobelia has been
added to commercial preparations intended to help with
tobacco withdrawal.

Nicotine

Found in the tobacco plant (Nicotiana tabacum) and other
Nicotiana species, nicotine has tranquilizing properties
and is the addictive component of tobacco. It is also ex-
tremely toxic, causing respiratory paralysis at high doses.
As the major source is Nicotiana tabacum, nicotine and re-
lated structures are referred to as “tobacco alkaloids.”
Anabasine is a tobacco alkaloid in which a pyridine ring is
linked to a piperidine rather than a pyrrolidine nucleus. ®

Nicotine is a ganglion (nicotinic) cholinergic-receptor
agonist with complex pharmacological actions, including
effects mediated by binding to receptors in the autonomic
ganglia, the adrenal medulla, the neuromuscular junction,
and the brain.

Nicotine is lethal to all animal life; it is commonly used
as a horticultural insecticide. The fatal human dose is about
50 mg.’ A small amount of nicotine stimulates breathing,
but a larger amount depresses respiration. Death from
overdose results from respiratory failure. Addiction to to-
bacco smoking (and to nicotine) can be addressed to some
extent by taking the piperidine derivative lobeline.

N
Fig. 8.5. Nicotine Fig. 8.6. Anabasine

TROPANE ALKALOIDS

These condensed derivatives of pyrrolidine-piperidine al-
kaloids include atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine.
Highly toxic, they are found in Solanaceae plants, such as
thornapple and jimsonweed (Datura stramonium), angel's
trumpets (Brugmansia spp.), henbane (Hyoscyamus niger),
belladonna or deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), and
European mandrake (Mandragora officinarum). A promi-
nent feature of the tropane alkaloids is their ability to pro-
duce hallucinations and delirium.

N }-—-OR

Fig. 8.7. Tropane

----- PAGE 131 -----
A second family rich in tropanes is Erythroxylaceae,
which includes coca (Erythroxylum coca), the major source
of cocaine. Tropane alkaloids have a limited occurrence in
at least eight other unrelated plant families: Convol-
vulaceae, Brassicaceae, Dioscoreaceae, Elaeocarpaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Orchidaceae, Proteaceae, and Rhizo-
phoraceae. They occur rarely in algae.®

Atropine and scopolamine compete with acetylcholine
at the postganglionic synapse of the parasympathetic ner-
vous system. Clinically useful properties include antispas-
modic effects, employed principally in the treatment of
spastic colitis, gastroenteritis, and peptic ulcer to relieve
spasms of the bowel. They also have antisecretory effects
and are used to reduce respiratory secretions in patients
undergoing anesthesia, suppress gastric secretions during
peptic ulcer therapy, and decrease nasal and sinus secre-
tions caused by the common cold and allergies. In addition,
their mydriatic (pupil-dilating) effects help prevent adhe-
sions between the iris and lens of the eye in cases of iritis.
Toxicity symptoms that can occur during the therapeutic
use of atropine, scopolamine, or belladonna tincture in-
clude skin rash and flushing, mouth dryness, difficult uri-
nation, eye pain, blurred vision, and light sensitivity.

The name A?ropa alludes to the toxicity of the herb,
it is derived from Atropos, the name of the Greek Fate
who cuts the thread of life. Belladonna comes from the
Tealian bela, meaning beautiful, and donna, meaning lady.
(When placed in the eyes, the juice of the berry causes di-
lation of the pupils, affording a striking appearance.)

/
\
r

Fig. 8.8. Atropine

Atropine
Atropine is a highly toxic compound that occurs in Azropa
belladonna, Datura stramonium, and other Solanaceae plants,
especially in the roots.’ As figure 8.9 shows, atropine is a
structural rearrangement of hyoscyamine.

Atropine demonstrates anticholinergic activity, caus-
ing blurred vision, suppressed salivation, vasodilation, ex-
citement, and delirium. It is used in anesthesia and as an

ALKALOIDS «2 = 123

antidote in cases of poisoning caused by cholinesterase in-
hibitors, such as physostigmine and organophosphate in-
secticides. The lethal dose in humans is 100 mg.

i

OX

OH

i “
Pa
Fig. 8.9. Hyoscyamine Fig. 8.10. Scopalamine
Hyoscyamine
Hyoscyamine is an anticholinergic agent that helps con-
trol gastric secretions, visceral spasms, hypermotility in
spastic colitis, and abdominal cramps. In Parkinson’s dis-
ease, it is used to reduce rigidity and tremors.!°

Scopolamine

Scopolamine, also called hyoscine, occurs along with hyo-
scyamine in members of the Solanaceae family. Scopol-
amine is widely used to help prevent motion sickness.

Cocaine

This alkaloid, obtained from coca (Evythroxylum coca), a
shrub native to the Andean highlands of South America,
exerts a stimulant effect on the central nervous system. Do
not confuse coca with cacao (Theobroma cacao), the plant
from which chocolate is made.

PYRROLIZIDINE ALKALOIDS

The chemical class of pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) con-
tains about 200 structurally related compounds present in
more than 350 species of the plant families Apocynaceae,
Asteraceae, Boraginaceae, Celastraceae, Euphorbiaceae,
Fabaceae, Orchidaceae, Poaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rhico-
phoraceae, Santalaceae, Sapotaceae, and Scrophulariaceae.
Among these are a variety of plants used for medicinal pur-
poses, including Tussilago farfara, Petasites spp., Senecio spp.,
Alkanna tinctoria, Eupatorium spp., and Symphytum spp.''

Chemically, the pyrrolizidines are readily distin-
guished by the presence of a fused two 5-membered ring
system, with a nitrogen in position 4, a hydroxymethyl
group in position 9, and a hydroxy group in position 7.
This structure is called the necine base.

----- PAGE 132 -----
124 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

\/ p

Fig. 8.11. Necine base

PAs have a reputation for toxicity, but not all PAs are
toxic. All toxic PAs contain a double bond between the |
and 2 position, while PAs with saturated necine bases are
nontoxic. PAs are readily oxidized to pyrrolizidine alka-
loid-N-oxides, which can be formed during storage of
PA-containing plants but are also present in fresh plant
material. The N-oxides are much more water-soluble
than the parent PAs and are better extracted from plant
material during the preparation of herbal teas.

Because PAs are often the toxic but not the biologi-
cally active principles of many herbal medicines, methods
have been developed to eliminate PAs from crude plant
extracts. Removal of PAs is accomplished by treating al-
coholic plant extracts with cation-exchange resins.

Medicinal plants that contain only nontoxic saturated
PAs are Arnica montana and Echinacea species. Toxic PAs,
those with an unsaturated necine base, are hepatic and ge-

netic toxins; some are also respiratory toxins. The toxi-
cology of PAs and the plants that contain them are dis-
cussed in greater detail in chapter 10.

Symphytine
Found in comfrey (Symphytum officinale), Russian com-
frey (S. x uplandicum), S. orientale, and the water forget-
me-not (Myosotis scorpioides), symphytine has hepatotoxic
properties. !?

\/ ,

Fig. 8.12. Symphytine

PURINE ALKALOIDS

Purines, which include nucleic acids, are a group of com-
pounds found in both plants and animals. Xanthine, a
purine that occurs as a breakdown product of nucleic acid
metabolism, is itself oxidized in the body to uric acid."

Three important methylxanthines—caffeine, theo-
bromine, and theophylline—all have stimulating effects
on the central nervous system.

Caffeine

Caffeine occurs in a number of botanically unrelated
species, including coffee (Coffea spp.), tea (Camellia sinen-
sis), mate (Ilex paraguariensis), guarana (Paullinia cupana),
and kola (Cola acuminata).

Caffeine is bound to chlorogenic acid in raw coffee
beans. The roasting process liberates the caffeine and
other compounds that contribute to the aroma of coffee.
Caffeine is a diuretic and has stimulant effects on the res-
piratory, cardiovascular, and central nervous systems. It is
incorporated in many proprietary aspirin and ac-
etaminophen preparations to enhance analgesic activity.

OO
CH CHs

Fig. 8.13. Caffeine Fig. 8.14. Theobromine

9

or A N
N \
“

CHy

Fig. 8.15. Theophylline

Theobromine
This alkaloid is found mainly in the cocoa plant
(Theobroma cacao), but also in tea (Camellia sinensis),
guarana (Paullinia cupana), and kola (Cola acuminata).\* It
is a central nervous system and cardiac stimulant, va-
sodilator, and smooth muscle relaxant, and is used mainly
as a diuretic and bronchial muscle relaxant.
Theobromine is isomeric with theophylline; how-
ever, its central nervous system effects are much less po-
tent than those shown by caffeine and theophylline, the
two other alkaloids in this class.

Theophylline

Theophylline is present in small amounts in tea (Camellia
sinensis) and guarana (Paullinia cupana). It is a short-acting
diuretic and a cardiac stimulant that demonstrates only
slight central nervous system stimulation.!§

----- PAGE 133 -----
Structurally, theophylline resembles caffeine; how-
ever, it lacks a methyl group in the 5-carbon ring.
Although it occurs naturally in the tea plant, it is synthe-
sized from caffeine for use in medicine. The effects of
theophylline on the cardiovascular and central nervous
systems are similar to but milder than those of caffeine,
while the diuretic activity is more pronounced.
Theophylline relaxes involuntary muscles, and is em-
ployed mainly as a bronchial smooth muscle relaxant in
the treatment of asthma, emphysema, and chronic bron-
chitis. It is the basis of the drug aminophylline, used as a
diuretic and asthma medicine.

ISOQUINOLINE ALKALOIDS

This is the largest group of alkaloids, derived from the
amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. Isoquinoline al-
kaloids characteristically contain a phenylethylamine
structure in an isoquinoline ring system. They are com-
mon in the Magnoliaceae, Ranunculaceae, Papaveraceae,
Fumariaceae, Cactaceae, Fabaceae, and Rutaceae families.
Many isoquinolines are found in Papaveraceae, especially
in the genera Papaver, Chelidonium, and Sanguinaria.'®

Fig. 8.16. Isoquinoline structure

A subgroup of isoquinolines is made up of the mor-
phinan alkaloids, including morphine, codeine, and
heroin, all of which are derived from opium, the dried
latex of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). Opium
has two primary narcotic properties: hypnotic (inducing
sleep) and analgesic (blunting pain). Initial stimulation by
opium is followed by dream-filled sleep.

Only about 15 minutes are required for a small dose
of morphine hydrochloride to induce sleep and dull pain,
and the effect lasts about six hours. Heroin, a morphine
derivative, has similar properties but is more addictive.
Codeine, the methyl ether of morphine, is approximately
one tenth as strong a narcotic as morphine. Since its ef-
fect on the respiratory center is less potent than that of
morphine, codeine has been used in cough suppression.
In the body, codeine is demethylated to morphine.

ALKALOIDS -@ = 125

Table 8.3. Pharmacological Properties of

Isoquinoline Alkaloids

ACTION EXAMPLE
Analgesic Morphine
Antibacterial Sanguinarine
Antidepressant Glaziovine
Antifungal Latrorrhizine

Anti-inflammatory
Antimalarial
Antimicrobial
Antioxidant
Antiprotozoal
Antispasmnodic
Antitrypanosomal
Antitubercular
Antitumor
Antitussive
Antiviral, cholagogue, expectorant
Enzyme inhibitor
Hernostatic
Hepatoprotective
Hypertensive
Hypotensive
Insecticidal

Muscle relaxant

lematocidal

Oxytocic

Fetidine
Tliacorine
Oxyacanthine
Oxyacanthine
Emetine
Papaverine
Obaberine
Cepharanthine
Berbamine
Codeine
Emetine
Sanguinarine
Hydrastine
Boldine
Mecambrine
Canadine
Annonaine
Isochondrodendrine
Bocconine

a-allocrytopine

Berberine

Berberine is found in 23 genera spanning seven plant
families. The most important berberine-containing
herbal medications are derived from Berberis vulgaris and
Mahonia aquifolium of the Berberidaceae; Hydrastis cana-
densis, Coptis chinensis, C. trifolia, and C. teeta of the Ranun-
culaceae, Sanguinaria canadensis of the Papaveraceae; and

----- PAGE 134 -----
126 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Phellodendron amurensis of the Rutaceae. In some of these
plants, berberine and co-occurring alkaloids have equally
potent physiological effects. For example, in the well-
known herbs Hydrastis canadensis and Sanguinaria canaden-
sis, the pharmacological effects are not caused by berber-
ine alone.

Berberine is found in highest concentration (about
6.1%) in the root bark of Berberis vulgaris, with smaller
amounts in the aboveground stem bark and just 0.4% in
the woody portion of the root. Only traces of berberine
are present in the leaves, and the alkaloid is absent from
the flowers, fruit pulp, and seeds.!’ It is present, however,
in the seeds of some other species in this genus.

Other alkaloids in B. vulgaris include berbamine,
berberrubine, bervulcine, columbarnine, isotetrandine,
jatrorrhizine, oxycanthine, palmatine, and vulcracine.!8 In
addition to berberine, Mahonia aquifolium is reported to
contain the alkaloids aromoline, berbamine, columbar-
nine, corytuberine, isoboldine, isocorydine, isotentran-
dine, jatrorrhizine, magnoflorine, obanegine, oxyberber-
ine, oxycanthine, and palmatine.'®

Berberine has demonstrated amoebicidal, antibacte-
rial, antifungal, antimalarial, antitumor, cytotoxic, and
hepatoprotective actions. It also acts as a bitter and a
cholagogue and inhibits tyramine and elastase. Berberine
has been shown to have antiarrhythmic actions and a neg-
ative inotropic effect that markedly reduces atrial rate. It
is moderately toxic, with a 27.5 mg/kg LDs9 in humans,
and can cause cardiac damage, dyspnea, and hypotension.

HO.

C~ | ‘sS CHAO Noy
‘° a Me
| oN
2 OCH,
Ho yo
Sy |

OCH, on

Fig. 8.17. Berberine Fig. 8.18. Boldine
Boldine

Boldine occurs in the leaves of Pewmus boldus, Sassafras al-
bidum, and in members of the plant families Annonaceae,
Magnoliaceae, Rhamnaceae, and Atherospermataceae.”°
It is choleretic and diuretic.

Cephaeline

After emetine, this is the most important alkaloid in the
roots of Cephaelis ipecacuanha. It has emetic, expectorant,
and antiamoebic activities.”!

HAO.

CH

OSH,

‘OH

Fig. 8.19. Cephaeline

Codeine

Codeine, from the dried latex of the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum), has spasmolytic, narcotic analgesic,
and antitussive properties. It is used in the management
of pain and diarrhea and as a cough suppressant.”?

cH. a

CHO"

Fig. 8.20. Emetine

Emetine

Occurring in all ipecacuanhas, including Cephaelis
ipecacuanha, and C. acuminata, emetine has expectorant,
emetic, antiamoebic, and cytotoxic properties. It also
demonstrates antiviral and anticancer activities, probably
due to its inhibition of DNA and other components of the
transcription process.

Emetine is indicated in chronic bronchitis, but at
higher doses acts as an emetic. Ipecac, extract of C.
ipecacuanha in the form of a tincture or syrup, is typically
used as an emetic to induce vomiting when a toxic sub-
stance has been ingested. Emetine is toxic to Entamoeba
bystolytica, the organism that causes amoebic dysentery,
and emetine hydrochloride is used in medicine as an an-
tiprotozoal agent. ??

Hydrastine

Hydrastine is a major alkaloid of goldenseal (Hydrastis
canadensis). It is hemostatic and antiseptic and has been
used to treat uterine hemorrhage. Hydrastine also

----- PAGE 135 -----
demonstrates emetic, expectorant, and antiamoebic
activities.’+

Morphine

Found in the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), morphine
is a powerful analgesic, antispasmodic, narcotic, sedative,
and antitussive. Prolonged use leads to habituation. The
lethal dose in humans lies between 1 and 10 mg.?°

Fig. 8.21. Sanguinarine

Sanguinarine
This alkaloid is widespread among plants in the families
Papaveraceae (including Papaver somniferum, Sanguinaria
canadensis, and Chelidonium majus) and Fumariaceae (for
example, Fumaria officinalis), Sanguinarine is antibacte-
rial, cytotoxic, and anti-inflammatory. Because it demon-
strates antiplaque activity, it is used in toothpastes and
mouthwashes. It is positively inotropic and inhibits vari-
ous enzymes, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
diamine oxidase, and some aminotransferases.
Sanguinarine is toxic, with an LDgo in mice of 19.4
mg/kg. At high doses taken over a prolonged period of

time, it may cause glaucoma.”

INDOLE ALKALOIDS

Indole alkaloids constitute the second largest group of
alkaloids. They are derived from the amino acid trypto-
phan, which has a basic structure containing a pyrrole
ring fused to a benzene ring. There are a small number
of simple indoles, such as harman, but the majority are
derived from tryptophan and a terpenoid precursor, se-
cologanin.’ Indoles all share a common core structure,
but different metabolic pathways result in different
configurations.

\ N NH,

N
H N

Fig. 8.22. Indole Fig, 8.23. Tryptophan

ALKALOIDS «2 127

glucose

Fig. 8.24. Secologanin

Indole alkaloid structures typically involve multiple
ring systems and are often complex in character. They
form the basis of several pharmaceutical drugs, some po-
tent hallucinogens, and a number of poisonous com-
pounds, such as strychnine. The majority of indole alka-
loids used in medicine and pharmacy are found in
members of the family Apocynaceae (including Rauvolfia,
Vinca, Catharanthus, and Alstonia spp.). Indole alkaloids
are also found in fungi, such as ergot (Claviceps spp.) and
Psilocybe species.

Some indole alkaloids are widely distributed; the har-
man alkaloids have been detected in more than 10 fami-
lies. The Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus)
contains more than 60 indole alkaloids, including vinblas-
tine and vincristine. These compounds are used in
chemotherapy as treatments for Hodgkin’s disease, lym-
phosarcoma, and reticulum cell sarcoma. Important
classes of indole alkaloids include the ergot alkaloids and
B-carbolines.

Ergot Alkaloids

The ergot alkaloids are the basis for lysergic acid as well
as other compounds. Indoles of ergot include er-
gometrine, used to relax the uterine muscle during child-
birth, and ergotamine, which relieves symptoms of mi-
graine. Gelsemine and sempervirine, two indole alkaloids
from the roots of the yellow jasmine (Gelsemium semper-
virens), depress the activity of the central nervous system.

Bufotenine

This is a hallucinogenic alkaloid that occurs in the plants
of the genus Piptadenia, in fungi such as Amanita citrina,
and in secretions from the skin of the toad Bufo vulgaris.?®

HO. {

N

Fig. 8.25. Bufotenine

----- PAGE 136 -----
128 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

D-cathine

p-cathine occurs in khat (Catha edulis), and is derived from
Ephedra spp. as a manufacturing by-product of ephedrine
production. It acts as a central nervous system stimulant,
mild euphoriant, and appetite suppressant.

— NHp

\ fF Non

Fig. 8.26. Cathine

N,N-dimethyltryptamine

Found in the leaves of Prestonia amazonica, the flowers of
the reed Arundo donax, the seeds and leaves of Piptadenia
peregrina, and leaves, stems, and seeds of Mucuna pruriens,
N,N-dimethyltryptamine demonstrates entheogenic ac-
tivity. 2° It also causes hypertension and pupillary dilation.

L-ephedrine

L-ephedrine is found in the leaves and stems of ma huang,
or Ephedra species (E. sinica, E. equisetina, E. gerardiana,
and others), where it occurs with the D-isomer pseu-
doephedrine. It possesses sympathomimetic activity, with
direct and indirect effects on both a- and f-adrenergic
receptors, and produces peripheral vasoconstriction and
elevated blood pressure. It is also a central nervous system
stimulant. L-ephedrine is used as a bronchodilator and
respiratory stimulant in asthma and as a vasoconstrictor
of mucous membranes in rhinitis and sinusitis. Pseudo-
ephedrine is broadly similar in activity.

In Western herbal medicine, Ephedra is considered a
reliable treatment for asthma and allergic conditions. As
it is both a bronchodilator and a nasal decongestant, it is
useful also in bronchitis, emphysema, rhinitis, and influ-
enza. It is contraindicated for patients with hypertension,
angina pectoris, and hyperthyroidism; in those taking
monoamine oxidase inhibitor drugs (MAO inhibitors);
and also during pregnancy.

6-carboline Alkaloids

B-carbolines are a widely distributed class of indole alka-
loids found in 23 angiosperm plant families, 3 fungi genera,
and a variety of animal tissues.2° They are structurally sim-
ilar to and biosynthetically derived from the amino acid
L-tryptophan. Trypophan derivatives are very important in
central nervous system function and include the neuro-
transmitter serotonin, the pineal metabolite melatonin,
the potent hallucinogen dimethyl tryptamine (DMT), and
the monoamine oxidase inhibitors known as B-carbolines.

Fig. 8.27, B-carboline structure

Harmaline

Harmaline occurs in the seeds of Peganum harmala, Banis-
teria caapi, and Passiflora incarnata. It has entheogenic prop-
erties. At one time, it was used to treat Parkinson’s disease?!

Fig. 8.29. Harman

rN
\ 4

‘CHy,

Fig. 8.28. Harmaline

CH,0" 4

Fig. 8.30. Harmine

Harman

Harman occurs in passionflower (Passiflora incarnata). At
low doses, it depresses motor function in animals; it
causes convulsions at high doses.?*

Harmine

Found in Peganum harmala, Banisteria caapi, and passion-
flower (Passiflora incarnata), harmine is a central nervous
system stimulant that is entheogenic at high doses.*?

Indole

Indole occurs in the flowers of Sewromatum guttatum,
Arum maculatum, Dracunculus vulgaris, and Jasminum and
Citrus species. It has an unpleasant fecal odor that helps
attract insect pollinators.

CHO.

Ne
HO.

CH,O NH
2

CH,O H3C7 ‘or
Fig. 8.31. Mescaline Fig. 8.32. Muscarine

Mescaline

Found in the flowering heads of peyote (Lophophora
williamsii) and other cacti, including Trichocereus pachanoi,
mescaline is entheogenic.

----- PAGE 137 -----
Muscarine

This alkaloid occurs in the fly agaric mushroom (Amanita
muscaria) and some species of Inocybe and Clitocybe. Mus-
carine is a cholinergic agent that acts at the muscarinic re-
ceptors. Symptoms of poisoning occur within 30 to 120
minutes of ingestion and can include blurred vision; con-
traction of the pupils; and increased perspiration, saliva-
tion, and lacrimation (discharge of tears). Other symp-
toms of poisoning include bradycardia, hypotension, and
dyspnea. The LD5o in mice is 0.23 mg/kg (IV).3*

Psilocin

Psilocin occurs in the sacred mushroom, teonanacatl
(Psilocybe mexicana), and other blue-staining Psilocybe
species. Psilocin is entheogenic, causing sensations of in-
tellectual and physical relaxation and perceptual distor-
tions of time and space. The alkaloid is readily oxidized to
a blue pigment when the mushroom is bruised.**

CH. Z
a Hyo—C a ‘ “| |
UG OH
N.
Nowy —
N W
H

Fig. 8.33. Psilocin Fig. 8.34. Psilocybin
Psilocybin

Psilocybin is found in the same mushrooms as psilocin. Its
properties are similar to those of psilocin, which is con-
verted into psilocybin through phosphorylation.?*

Reserpine

Present in Rauvolfia senpentina, R. vomitoria, and many
other species and genera of the family Apocynaceae, re-
serpine is used clinically as an antihypertensive agent and
tranquilizer. However, about 15% of people treated with
reserpine for hypertension develop depression.

OCH,

° OCH,

OCH,
OCH,

Fig. 8.35. Reserpine

ALKALOIDS -@ 129

Serotonin

Serotonin is found in bananas (Musa spp.), tomatoes
(Lycopersicon esculentum), and the stinging hairs of the net-
tle (Urtica dioica). It acts as a neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system but does not pass the blood-brain
barrier, so a precursor, 5-hydroxytryptophan, is used
clinically to treat depression.

H,c——C———NH, CH,

\

N
Fig. 8.37. Skatole

Fig. 8.36. Serotonin

Skatole

Skatole is found in ‘Arwm species, in which it contributes
to the unique (vile!) odor of these plants, and in beets
(Beta vulgaris). Skatole is also responsible for the charac-
teristic odor of feces.>”

Vinblastine

This is an important compound found in the leaves of the
Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus). Its antitu-
mor activity has led to widespread clinical use in the treat-
ment of leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease.

Vincristine

Found in the Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus
roseus), vincristine is an antitumor agent used especially
for acute childhood lymphocytic leukemia.

Yohimbine

Yohimbine is a major alkaloid in yohimbe bark (Pau-
sinystalia:yohimbe). Two stereoisomers, a- and B-yohimbine,
occur in the same plant. It is an a-adrenergic blocking
agent, a serotonin antagonist, and a mydriatic.*8

is] OH

Fig. 8.38. Yohimbine

----- PAGE 138 -----
130 «a [NTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

QUINOLINE ALKALOIDS

Quinoline alkaloids are based on a bicyclic system in
which a benzene and a pyridine ring are fused together.
Most of them occur in the plant family Rutaceae, espe-
cially rue (Ruta graveolens), from which 30 quinoline alka-
loids have been isolated. Quinoline alkaloids have also
been identified in members of the Acanthaceae, Malva-
ceae, Saxifragaceae, and Zygophyllaceae families.*? Cin-
chonidine and quinine, quinoline alkaloids from the bark
of the cinchona tree (Cinchona officinalis), are well known
for their antimalarial properties.

Camptothecin

Occurring in the fruits, stem wood, and bark of
Camptotheca acuminata, camptothecin is highly toxic to
both animals and humans. It has antitumor and anti-
leukemic activities and is used in China for the treatment
of various forms of cancer.”

SS x
nd
A \

we. \_/

son X
H,

¥]

fo
\
‘ ‘
°
Fig. 8.39. Camptothecin

Quinine

Quinine is found in the bark of Cinchona officinalis and
other Cinchona species, in which it occurs together with
its stereoisomer, quinidine. Both isomers are antimalari-
als used against Plasmodium flaccarpum, which is usually
drug-resistant.*!

Quinine is a weak cardiac depressant and is occasion-
ally used in clinical practice as an antiarrhythmic agent. It
has abortifacient and spermicidal properties and is used as
a bitter, analgesic, and antipyretic in veterinary practice.”

Quinine is one of the most bitter substances known,
detectable at a molar concentration of 1x!©5. It is used in
food as a bittering agent.

QUINOLIZIDINE ALKALOIDS

Quinolizidine alkaloids are chemically defined by the
presence of a structural unit in which a nitrogen atom oc-
cupies a central position in two fused cyclohexane rings,
as in lupinine. These are also referred to as lupine alka-
loids, as they were first discovered in Lupinus species.®
Important quinolizidine alkaloids include sparteine,
found in Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius) and greater

celandine (Chelidonium majus), and cytisine, from lupine.

Quinolizidine alkaloids occur primarily in Fabaceae.
There are about 170 quinolizidine alkaloids in this family,
and these are readily classified according to the number
of rings present. A typical bicyclic structure is lupinine.
Angustifoline is a good example of a tricyclic structure and
sparteine of a tetracyclic compound.

Structurally related but distinctly different quino-
lizidine alkaloids occur in Lycopodium and are known as ly-
copodium alkaloids.

Although universally present in Lupinus, a genus of
some 200 species, quinolizidine alkaloids are found in
more than 40 related genera of legumes. Consumption of
these plants, particularly their seeds, has been responsible
for much accidental poisoning in sheep, cattle, and hu-
mans. Cytisine and anagyrine are more acutely toxic than
lupinine and sparteine; they harm livestock through ter-
atogenic effects.

(-)-Sparteine

Sparteine is probably the most common alkaloid of this
class, present in many Baptisia, Cytisus, and Lupinus
species. Sparteine is a tetracyclic, oxygen-free alkaloid
that increases or strengthens the heartbeat, causing a
greater flow of blood to the kidneys and resulting in in-
creased urine production. Sparteine has proved valuable
in treating certain cases of cardiac fibrillation. It acts as a
peripheral vasoconstrictor and, because it demonstrates
ergotlike oxytocic effects (inducing contractions of uterine
muscle), it has been used as a substitute for ergot drugs. It
binds strongly to muscarinic receptors and less strongly
to nicotinic receptors.

N.

Fig. 8.40. Sparteine

DITERPENOID ALKALOIDS

These alkaloids, derived from diterpenes, are found
mainly in the Ranunculaceae family, especially in the gen-
era Aconitum and Delphinium. They also occur in other
plants, such as Inula (Asteraceae) and Spiraea (Rosaceae).
Aconitum species are among the most poisonous plants
known, and 2 to $ mg of a pure Aconitum alkaloid extract
can be a fatal dose in humans.

Aconitine
This toxic alkaloid occurs in the roots of Aconitum napel- °
Jus, but all parts of the plant are poisonous due to the

----- PAGE 139 -----
presence of other alkaloids. Aconitine is a potent and
quick-acting poison that slows the heart rate and lowers
blood pressure. Several Aconitum species are used in
China, after processing, for various purposes. Absorption
of aconitine through the skin can be fatal.*°

Ryanodine

Found in Ryania speciosa, ryanodine inhibits the binding of
calcium to muscle protein and retards circulation by vas-
cular constriction.® It is used as an insecticide.

STEROID ALKALOIDS

Steroid alkaloids have been found in approximately 250
species of plants in the Solanaceae and Liliaceae families.
They occur mostly as glycosides that have properties sim-
ilar to those of saponins. Some are very toxic, causing se-
vere, even fatal, gastroenteritis.”

Solanine was the name given to the first alkaloidal gly-
coside found in Solanum. Now solanine is known to con-
sist of six different glycosides; each hydrolyzes to the
sugar peculiar to its particular glycoside and to the agly-
cone solanidine, a steroidal alkaloid.

Steroid alkaloids have a fairly complex nitrogen-
containing nucleus. Two important classes are the
solanum type and the veratrum type.

Solanum-Type Alkaloids
Solanum-type alkaloids are found in plants in the form of
glycosides of steroid alkaloids, known as glycoalkaloids.
They occur primarily in Solanaceae family plants. One
example is solanidine, a steroid alkaloid that is the agly-
cone for two glycoalkaloids, solanine and chaconine,
which can manifest as poisons in potatoes. They have the
same aglycone, solanidine, but the structure of their car-
bohydrate side chains is different. Other plants in the
Solanaceae, including various nightshades and tomatoes,
also contain solanum-type glycoalkaloids.
The production of these alkaloids is favored by the
same conditions that promote the development of
chlorophyll, such as exposure to sunlight. In potatoes,
the concentration of glycoalkaloids is highest in sprouts
and green skins, and in tomatoes, highest in vines and
green fruit. Care should be taken to avoid exposing pota-
toes to sunlight, to prevent the production of the toxic
alkaloids. These alkaloids are not destroyed by cooking
or drying at high temperatures. New potato varieties
may not be introduced unless they contain less than 20
mg/100 g glycoalkaloids.

ALKALOIDS .@ 131

The glycoalkaloids are more poisonous than the agly-
cones. However, glycoalkaloids are poorly absorbed by
the gastrointestinal tract of mammals, and an appreciable
amount of solanum-type glycoalkaloids is hydrolyzed in
the gut of mammals to the less toxic aglycones, which are
then rapidly excreted. In potatoes, solanum-type glycoal-
kaloids cause a bitter taste in concentrations higher than
14 mg/100 g, and a burning sensation in the mouth and
throat in concentrations higher than 20 mg/100 g.

Veratrum-Type Alkaloids

There are more than 50 veratrum alkaloids, such as vera-
tramine, that occur in plants of the Veratrum genus.
These are the alkaloids that make hellebores, such as the
white hellebore Veratrum album), highly toxic.

MISCELLANEOUS ALKALOIDS

These are alkaloids with rare structures that are difficult to
classify elsewhere, including the oxazoles and the
pyrazines (for example, aspergillic acid). In addition, some
14 alkaloids with flavonoid substituents are known—for
example, ficine, found in the wild fig (Ficus pantoniana).*
Some alkaloids in this group are very toxic, such as
taxine A from the yew (Taxus spp.). This is also true of
mycotoxins such as verruculotoxin, which can get into the
human food chain via the peanut. However, several of
these alkaloids have promising anticancer activity, notably
cephalotoxine, cryptopleurine, ermingtonine and taxol.

Fig. 8.41. on

aN

Colchicine

Found in Colchicum autumnale and other Colchicum
species, colchicine is highly toxic, with a lethal dose of
10 mg in humans. It is also irritant, carcinogenic, and ter-
atogenic, but has been used in minute doses to relieve the
pain of acute gout. Plant scientists use it to induce poly-
ploidy in plants. (Plant cells are polyploid if they contain
more than two sets of chromosomes. This is very common
in plants, especially in angiosperms. Between 30% and
70% of today’s angiosperms are thought to be polyploid.

----- PAGE 140 -----
132. «2. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Species of coffee with 22, 44, 66, and 88 chromosomes are
known.)

Harringtonine

Harringtonine occurs in Cephalotaxus harringtonia, C. for-
tunei, and C. hainensis. This alkaloid shows antitumor ac-
tivity and has been used clinically to treat acute myelo-
cytic leukemia. It inhibits the biosynthesis of DNA and
proteins.”

Fig. 8.42. Harringtonine

Taxol

Found in the stem bark of Taxus brevifolia and T. cuspidata,
taxol is also present in trace amounts in other Taxus
species, including T2 baccata. Following much laboratory
and clinical research, taxol (Paclitaxel) was approved by
the FDA for use in a number of protocols investigating
the treatment of metastatic carcinoma of the ovary,
non-small cell lung cancer, and AIDS-related Kaposi’s
sarcoma, as well as adjuvant treatment of node-positive
breast cancer. Taxol is toxic, with an oral LD«o of 9 mg/kg
in dogs.

References

1. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Tid.
Ibid.
Tbid.
Tbid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
. Smith LW, Culvenor CCJ. Plant sources of hepatotoxic

pyrrolizidine alkaloids. fournal of Natural Products 1981,
44:129-52.

p PN AN Rw

- Oo

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29,

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39,
40.
41.
42.

nae ey

. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Etcu P, Goina T: Neue Methoden zur Extrahierung der

Alkaloide aus Berberis vulgaris. Planta Medica 1970;
18:372-75.

Dopke W. Neue Alkaloide aus Berberis vulgaris L. Die
Naturwissenschaften 1963; 50:595.

Gruenwald J, et al. PDR for Herbal Medicines. Monwale,
NJ: Medical Economics Company, 1998.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ghosal $, Singh $, Bhattacharya SK. Alkaloids of

Mucuna pruriens, chemistry and pharmacology. Planta

Medica 1971; 19:279.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of
Hallucinogens. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.
Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993,

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Barnes K, Durrheim D, Blumberg L. Quinine as unoffi-

cial contraceptive—concerns about safety and efficacy.
South African Medical Journal 1998; 88(10):1280, 1282.

----- PAGE 141 -----
-
KR

is

AOS
enn m

IN

49,

. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants, London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

. Ibid.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

ALKALOIDS <> 133

Suggested Reading

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease dr Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of
Hallucinogens. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.

----- PAGE 142 -----
PHARMACOLOGY

harmacology is the branch of science that studies
P therapeutic agents in all of their aspects. Such

agents are usually called drugs. This can cause
some confusion when discussing herbal medicines, as the
general public tends to differentiate between herbs and
drugs, viewing herbs as natural and drugs as synthetic.
However, both herbs and drugs contain chemical com-
pounds that affect the body in various ways, so an under-
standing of pharmacology is relevant to both.

It is worth noting that the word drug is derived from
the middle English drogge, which in turn is thought to
come from the middle Dutch word droge, meaning “dry.”
Thus, our modern word drug refers to the use of dry plants
in medicine. In other words, drug is an herbal word!

The word pharmacology itself is derived from the
Greek words pharmakon (drug) and logos (word). This
branch of science is very extensive and is divided into nu-
merous subspecialties.

Pharmacodynamics is the study of the physiological or
biochemical mechanisms by which drug actions are
produced, which involves identifying effects produced
and the sites and mechanisms of their actions in the
body.

Pharmacokinetics investigates factors that modity the ef-
fects of a drug, such as routes of administration, rates
of absorption, differential distribution, and mecha-
nisms of excretion and detoxification.

Toxicology is the study of effects that are unfavorable to
health.

Pharmacognosy deals with the identification and analysis
of plant and animal tissues from which drugs may be
extracted.

Pharmacy is concerned with the art and science of the
preparation, compounding, and dispensing of drugs.

134

PHARMACOLOGY AND
PHYTOTHERAPY

Pharmacology addresses important questions about
herbal medicines and their therapeutic indications.
Consider the following, which have been grouped into
pharmacological subject categories.

Absorption and Distribution
¢ How do the physicochemical properties of the herb’s
constituents impact the bioavailability of the herb and
thus patient outcomes?

Are the most medically relevant constituents of the

herb water-soluble?

Site of Action

¢ Which organs are impacted by the actions of the herb,
and how?

¢ What mechanism of activity is involved?

¢ Are there specific receptors that mediate this action?

Metabolism and Excretion

¢ What impact does herbal treatment have on hepato-
cyte activity and biotransformation?

¢ Are metabolites of herbal constituents cleared by the
kidneys or in the gastrointestinal tract?

Toxicity and Adverse Effects

¢ How does the therapeutic dose compare with the po-
tentially toxic dose (i.e., what is the therapeutic index)?

¢ Are there reports of resistance or unusual reactions?

¢ What is the treatment for an overdose?

Drug Interactions

* Does the combination of the herb with another thera-
peutic agent cause any synergism, antagonism, or
changes in the effect of the herb or its metabolism?
Will the herb affect the actions or metabolism of the
other therapeutic agent?

Are certain combinations contraindicated?

----- PAGE 143 -----
PHARMACODYNAMICS

Both the therapeutic and toxic effects of a substance occur
as a result of its interactions with molecules in the body.
An important aspect of pharmacology is determining
whether a drug effect is due to a specific structural com-
ponent of the molecule or is a result of a nonspecific drug
action. In most instances, drugs act by associating with
specific molecules in ways that alter their biochemical or
biophysical activity, in which case they are known as
Specific drugs.

Nonspecific Drugs

The activity of nonspecific compounds is often related to
their solubility in lipids, which determines their ability to
interact with and alter cellular membrane function.
Inhalation anesthetics and some disinfectants are exam-
ples of drugs that work through this type of nonspecific
activity.

Table 9.1. Mechanisms of Action for Specific Drugs

PHARMACOLOGY © 135

Characteristics of Nonspecific Drugs

* Do not specifically bind with a particular biological
structure

* Are active only in relatively high doses

* Have similar activities but vastly different chemical
structures

* Show largely similar activity after chemical modification

Specific Drugs

Specific drugs are usually more potent than nonspecific
drugs; their effects are evident at lower drug concentra-
tions. Activity is highly dependent on chemical structure,
including the shape, size, and stereochemical configura-
tion of the molecule, as well as the position of func-
tional groups and charge distribution. Small structural
changes can result in profound changes in pharmacolog-
ical activity.

MECHANISM EXAMPLES

Receptor interaction

Stimulate receptors

Apigenin fron Matricaria recutita is a ligand for certain benzodiazepine receptors that exerts anxiolytic and slight

sedative effects but no anticonvulsant or myorelaxant actions.!
Chrysin confers anxiolytic actions without inducing sedation or muscle relaxation, it may be a partial agonist of
benzodiazepine receptors.’ Chrysin is found in species of Passiflora and Scutellaria.

Block receptors

The furanocoumarin phellopterin, from the roots of Angelica dahurica, strongly inhibits the binding of diazepam to

central nervous system benzodiazepine receptors in vitro?
Some extracts inhibit contraction of the rabbit aorta induced by histamine and serotonin in vitro. Xanthones from
Garcinia mangostana interact with various receptors. c.-mangostin acts as a histamine H, receptor antagonist, and

‘y-mangostin is a 5-HT,, receptor antagonist.‘

Alter cellular transport processes

Block ion channels

Alkaloids from Oregon grape (Mahonia aquifolium), corytuberine, magnoflorine, isothebaine, and isocorydine,

inhibit the influx of calcium into cells of the rat aorta.>

Alter carrier-mediated transport
Thiazides inhibit Na*,Cl’ cotransport.

Interfere with active transport

Loop diuretics inhibit Na*K*,2Cl’ carrier.

Cardiac glycosides inhibit Na‘ K*,ATPase.

Antidepressants inhibit reuptake of monoamines or serotonin.

Change enzyme functions

Inhibit enzymes

Tannins inhibit the activity of protein kinases (PK).° Some hydrolyzable tannins are selective inhibitors of various

protein kinases, such as cAMP-dependent PK and calcium and phospholipid-dependent PK.
Herbal ACE inhibitors inhibit angiotensin-converting enzyme?

Activate enzymes

Forskolin activates adenylate cyclase.

Metal ions, like Mg, Ca, Zn, Cu, and Mn, also activate enzymes,

----- PAGE 144 -----
136 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Characteristics of Specific Drugs

¢ Interact with specific receptors

¢ Open or block ion channels

* Modify transport systems

¢ Inhibit or activate enzymes

¢ Interfere with particular aspects of biosynthesis in
microorganisms

ENZYMES

A range of clinically relevant effects are mediated via
plant constituent interactions with enzymes. The cell is
the site of tremendous metabolic activity, processes that
go on continually in living organisms. These activities in-
clude the buildup of new tissue, replacement of old tissue,
conversion of food to energy, disposal of waste materials,
and reproduction—in short, all of the activities under-
taken by cells to maintain life.

However, all of this takes place in the face of a para-
dox. Biochemical reactions do not occur spontaneously,
but are facilitated by catalysis. Catalysis is the acceleration
of a chemical reaction by some substance that itself un-
dergoes no permanent chemical change. The catalysts of
biochemical reactions are enzymes, which are responsi-
ble for almost all chemical reactions that occur in living
organisms.

Without enzymes, of which nearly 2,000 are known
in humans, these reactions would take place too slowly
for the needs of life processes. Because of their central
role in cellular processes, deficiency, excess, or improper
regulation of enzymes can result in a variety of diseases.
An important aspect of enzyme function is that it can be
regulated.

The Chemical Nature of Enzymes

All known enzymes are proteins. They are high molecu-
lar weight compounds made up principally of chains of
amino acids linked together by peptide bonds, Their
molecular weights range from 10,000 to 2,000,000 and
control the amount of metabolites and the rate at which
they move through metabolic pathways. As biological cat-
alysts, they speed the rate of attainment of chemical equi-
librium by lowering the energy barrier between substrate
and products. In other words, a catalyst will increase the
rate of a reaction, but will not affect the position of the re-
action equilibrium.

Enzymes are unique in that the enhancements they
cause are on an order of magnitude greater than those of
most other catalysts. A typical enzyme will convert about
1,000 molecules of substrate to product in one second.

Some will convert as many as one million. Unlike most
other catalysts, enzymes work at ambient temperature, at-
mospheric pressure, and usually in a narrow, near-neutral
pH-range. However, there are exceptions, such as pepsin,
which operates in the stomach in a pH range of 2.0 to 5.0.

Specificity of Enzymes
One of the unique properties of enzymes is their speci-
ficity. In general, there are four distinct types of specificity.

Absolute specificity: The enzyme will catalyze only one re-
action.

Group specificity: The enzyme will act only on molecules
that have specific functional groups, such as amino,
phosphate, and methyl groups.

Linkage specificity: The enzyme will act on a particular
type of chemical bond regardless of the rest of the
molecular structure.

Stereochemical specificity: The enzyme will act on a partic-
ular steric or optical isomer.

Many enzymes require the presence of other com-
pounds, called cofactors, before they become active. This
entire active complex is known as the holoenzyme and is
made up of an apoenzyme (protein portion) plus the cofic-
tor (a coenzyme, prosthetic group, or metal ion activator).

Apoenzyme + Cofactor = Holoenzyme

Enzyme Terminology

Except for some of the first-studied enzymes, such as
pepsin, rennin, and trypsin, most enzyme names end in
-ase; however, there are many exceptions to this rule.
The International Union of Biochemistry (IUB) created
a systematic naming scheme for enzymes.’ Enzymes are
classified and named according to the type of reaction
catalyzed. The enzyme is assigned a four-number classifi-
cation and a two-part name, or systematic name. A
shorter version, called the recommended name, is sug-
gested for everyday use. There are six major categories of

enzymes.

Oxidoreductases

Oxidoreductases catalyze oxidation reduction reactions be-
tween two substrates through the transfer of electrons.
They are responsible for the production of heat and en-
ergy. Many of these enzymes are present in mitochondria.

* Dehydrogenases catalyze the removal of hydrogen from
a substrate.

© Oxidases activate oxygen so that it will readily combine
with a substrate.

----- PAGE 145 -----
* Catalases catalyze the decomposition of hydrogen per-
oxide to water and oxygen.

* Peroxidases catalyze the decomposition of organic per-
oxides to hydrogen peroxide and water.

Transferases

Transferases catalyze reactions involving the transfer of
groups from one molecule to another. Trivial names for
the transferases often include the prefix trans.

© Transglycosidases catalyze the transfer of monosaccharides.

© Transpbosphorylases and ‘phosphomutases catalyze the
transfer of phosphate groups.

© Transaminases catalyze the transfer of amino groups.

* Transacetylases catalyze the transfer of acetyl groups.

Hydrolases

Hydrolases catalyze reactions in which the cleavage of
bonds is accomplished by the addition of water. They are
named for the substrate upon which they act.

© Carbohydrases catalyze the hydrolysis of carbohydrates
into simple sugars.

¢ Esterases catalyze the hydrolysis of esters into acids and

alcohols.

Proteinases hydrolyze proteins to peptides.

Peptidases hydrolyze polypeptides to amino acids.

© Nucleases catalyze the hydrolysis of nucleic acids.

Lyases

Lyases catalyze the removal of groups by means other
than hydrolysis, usually involving the formation of carbon-
carbon double bonds.

© Fumarases catalyze the change of fumaric acid to L-malic
acid in the Krebs cycle.

© Decarboxylases catalyze the removal of a molecule of
carbon dioxide from a carboxylic group.

© Deaminases catalyze the removal of amino groups from
compounds.

Isomerases

Isomerases catalyze intramolecular rearrangements; that is,
they catalyze the interconversion of optical, geometric, or
structural isomers.

© Epimerases catalyze the inversion of asymmetric carbon
atoms.

¢ = Mutases catalyze the intramolecular transfer of func-
tional groups.

PHARMACOLOGY © 137

Ligases

Ligases catalyze the formation of bonds between two sub-
strate molecules—specifically, through the hydrolysis of
the pyrophosphate bond in adenoside triphosphate
(ATP) or another triphosphate. The energy is always
supplied by ATP hydrolysis. The names of many ligases
include the term synthetase. Several other ligases are
called carboxylases. One of these is fundamental to life
processes.

Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco) is
the plant enzyme that facilitates the formation of or-
ganic carbon from the inorganic carbon dioxide in the
air; rubisco helps generate phosphoglycerates.

ENZYMES AND HERBS

A number of herbal constituents affect metabolic pro-
cesses by modulating the activity of specific enzymes in
various ways, including activating or inhibiting enzyme
functions. Enzyme activation and inhibition both can be
harnessed for specific therapeutic effects.

Forskolin and the Activation of

Adenylate Cyclase

Coleus forskoblii, a plant used in ayurvedic medicine, is the
source of a compound of unique biological importance. A
screening of medicinal plants by the Indian Central Drug
Research Institute revealed the presence of a hypotensive
and spasmolytic component in C. forskoblii, a labdane
diterpene named forskolin.

Forskolin works by activating adenylate cyclase, an
enzyme that raises levels of cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) in cells.? Cyclic AMP is a vital cell-
regulating compound involved in a variety of cellular
functions. Normally, cAMP is formed when a stimulatory
hormone (for example, epinephrine) binds to a receptor
site on the cell membrane and stimulates the activation of
adenylate cyclase. This enzyme is incorporated into all
cellular membranes and only the specificity of receptors
determines which hormone will activate the enzyme in a
particular cell.

Forskolin appears to bypass this need for direct hor-
monal activation of adenylate cyclase via transmembrane
activation. As a result of this transmembrane activation,
intracellular cAMP levels rise.

----- PAGE 146 -----
138 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Physiological and Biochemical Effects of Elevated
Intracellular cAMP

¢ Inhibition of platelet activation and degranulation

* Inhibition of mast cell degranulation and histamine re-
lease

* Increased force of heart muscle contraction

* Relaxation of the arteries and other smooth muscles

* Increased insulin secretion

* Increased thyroid function

* Increased lipolysis

Forskolin possesses additional properties, such as in-
hibition of membrane transport proteins and channel
proteins through a mechanism that does not involve the
production of cAMP. The outcome is again a transmem-
brane signaling that results in activation of other cellular
enzymes. Forskolin also inhibits platelet-activating factor
(PAF) by interfering with PAF binding to receptor sites.
PAF inhibition is discussed later in this chapter.

Thus, the therapeutic potential of C. forskoblii is
great, as there are many conditions in which a decreased
intracellular cAMP level may be a major factor in the de-
velopment of the disease process. These include eczema,
asthma, psoriasis, angina, and hypertension.

Inhibition of Enzymes

Pharmacologically speaking, there are a number of types
of enzyme inhibitors, which are differentiated by the spe-
cific mechanism involved at the molecular level. A com-
plete discussion of different types of enzyme inhibitors,
however, is beyond the scope of this book. Instead, we
shall consider a number of enzyme inhibitory mecha-
nisms that are relevant to modern phytotherapy.

Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors

Agents that inhibit the enzyme cholinesterase have at-
tracted attention as therapeutic agents for the treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease. These agents have effects on the
parasympathetic nervous system, which regulates pro-
cesses responsible for energy assimilation and storage.
They operate when the body is at rest, decreasing heart
activity and relaxing respiratory processes. Among their
many roles, cholinesterase inhibitors facilitate the diges-
tive process, increasing secretory activity and peristalsis
and decreasing sphincter tone.

The most important neurotransmitter in this system
is acetylcholine (ACh). Reduced ACh levels are observed
in various forms of dementia, and therapeutic approaches
have been developed to facilitate cholinergic replace-
ment. ACh is inactive if taken orally as a medicine, so

other methods have been developed to achieve therapeu-
tically meaningful elevations.

Levels of synaptic acetylcholine can be readily in-
creased by using centrally acting inhibitors of acetyl-
cholinesterase (AChE), the enzyme that catabolizes ACh.
Tacrine is currently the only drug approved for
Alzheimer’s disease in the United States. While an effec-
tive AChE inhibitor, it has a number of other sites of ac-
tion and may cause hepatotoxicity.!° Among other AChE
inhibitors under development is the alkaloid huperzine A,
from Huperzia serrata, a club moss used in traditional
Chinese medicine.

Zr
te}

MO

NH,

Fig. 9.1. Huperzine A

The club moss Huperzia serrata is the Chinese folk
medicine ging ceng ta. This herb is found chiefly in south-
ern China, where it grows in moist places in hilly regions.
A decoction of the dried whole plant has been used to
treat trauma, fractures, scalds, hematuria, and infections
of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. The herb is a com-
ponent of a tea administered to elderly patients in China.
Huperzine A and its cogener, huperzine B, were isolated
from the moss, identified, and shown to be potent AChE
inhibitors.!!

5-a-reductase Inhibition

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is believed to be
caused by accumulation of testosterone in the prostate.
However, once in the prostate, testosterone is converted
to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). DHT, a more potent
hormone than testosterone, acts on the prostate gland
and other sexual organs.

DHT is produced from testosterone by the enzyme
S-a-reductase, and is necessary for the normal growth
and development of the prostate. Its presence is also nec-
essary for the pathologic enlargement of the prostate that
occurs in BPH. Thus, one therapeutic approach to treat-
ing this condition is to reduce the formation of DHT by
blocking the enzyme $-ca-reductase. Serenoa repens (saw
palmetto) has this effect, and may also possess receptor
site-binding effects.

----- PAGE 147 -----
RECEPTORS

One way of explaining the action of herbal constituents
on the body is through their specific interactions with re-
ceptors. Such receptor interactions initiate a chain of bio-
chemical events that lead to the observed effects. Cellular
activity is coordinated by the transmission of signals,
chemical or electrical, between cells.

The ability of a cell to respond to an extracellular sig-
nal depends on the presence of specific receptor proteins
on its surface or in the cytoplasm. The receptors bind the
chemical signal, triggering a mechanism that modifies the
behavior of the cell. Cells contain an array of specific re-
ceptors, allowing them to respond to a variety of chemi-
cal signals. The nature of these intracellular events differs
according to the type of receptor. The same molecular
signal may cause different responses in different types of
cell. :

Thus, receptors have a-dual function. They detect a

ligand signal by forming a ligand-receptor complex and
they conduct and translate the signal, leading to the phar-
macological effect.

The Molecular Nature of Receptors

Most receptors are proteins, presumably because their
structures provide both the diversity and the specificity of
shape and electrical charge. They are present in only
small amounts in cells, ranging from about 0.001% of
total soluble protein in aldosterone receptors to 0.1% in
progesterone receptors. The actual quantities vary in re-
sponse to stimuli, and their properties change with phys-
iologic conditions. When a hormone or neurotransmitter
is present in excess, the number of active receptors gen-
erally decreases (a process known as down regulation),
while a deficiency of the chemical messenger causes an in-
crease in the number of active receptors, or wp regulation.

Antagonism and Agonism

An antagonist is a compound that will bind to the receptor
but not activate it. In contrast, an agonist has both an
affinity for the receptor and the ability to trigger the re-
sponse. Antagonists exert their effects by preventing
agonists from binding to and activating receptors. They
are divided into two classes, depending on whether or
not they reversibly compete with agonists for binding to
receptors.

Antagonism can be competitive (reversible), meaning
that the antagonist competes for the receptor and so re-
quires a higher concentration of the agonist in order to
achieve the same effect as would the agonist alone.

PHARMACOLOGY e139

Alternately, antagonism can be noncompetitive (irre-
versible), a situation in which the antagonist’s affinity for
the receptor is so high that for practical purposes the re-
ceptor is unavailable for binding by the agonist.

Receptors and Hormonal Control of Gene
Expression

Receptor sites are complex assemblages of molecules with
subunits that change shape in response to various mes-
sengers, all in a finely tuned way. From one perspective,
their study is revealing a window into how “fearfully and
wonderfully” made we human beings are (Ps. 139:14).

To explore the concept of receptor interactions, we
will discuss hormones and their receptors. Hormones
transmit information from one cell to another to coordi-
nate a whole range of homeostatic adaptations, growth,
development, and reproduction. Hormone receptors are
found throughout the cell, including the outer mem-
brane. When hormones are released into the blood as a
result of some stimulus, they circulate throughout the
body and bind to these receptors.

Once bound, the receptors and their lipid-soluble lig-
ands traverse the membrane and enter the nucleus, where
they directly exert their effects by binding to special en-
hancers (called hormone-responsive elements) and by stimu-
lating the transcription of certain genes.

The mechanism used by hormones to regulate
gene expression has two therapeutically important
consequences.

¢ All of these hormones produce their effects after a
characteristic lag period of three minutes to several
hours—the time required for the synthesis of new
proteins.

¢ Their effects can persist for hours or days after their
concentration has been reduced to zero.

' The interactions of steroid hormones with receptors
starts as the hormones arrive via the blood. Blood trans-
ports steroids either bound to a blood protein or un-
bound, Binding of the steroid to its receptor molecule re-
sults in conformational change, an alteration of the
three-dimensional structure of the receptor from an inac-
tive to an active form.

This activated receptor-steroid complex has an affin-
ity for specific binding sites on DNA, resulting in activa-
tion or transcription of the gene to produce messenger
RNA (mRNA). The mRNA is translated on cytoplasmic
ribosomes to produce the code for protein. Once the
receptor-hormone complex has interacted with a gene,

----- PAGE 148 -----
140 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the protein undergoes reactions that result in the reestab-
lishment of unoccupied receptors and elimination of the
steroid from the cell.

Hormone + Receptor -«—» Hormone-Receptor Complex
Inactive Active

The basic structure of receptor proteins comprises
three domains: one for hormone binding, another for
binding to DNA, and one immunologic domain,
Receptor proteins can adopt various conformational
forms, but when bound to a hormone take on the active
shape. While a receptor that is not attached to a hormone
can bind to DNA, it will not activate transcription unless
the hormone is also bound.

Mechanisms exist to facilitate the transmission of the
chemical signal across the barrier posed by the plasma
membrane. Each mechanism has evolved distinctive re-
ceptor families that transduce many different signals.
These receptors are found on the cell surface and within
the cell, as well as in enzymes and other components that
generate, amplify, coordinate, or terminate post-receptor
signaling by chemical second messengers in the cytoplasm.

There are four basic mechanisms by which signals are
transmitted across membranes:

1, A lipid-soluble molecule crosses the membrane pas-
sively and acts on an intracellular receptor.

2, Intracellular activity is regulated by a molecule that
binds to an extracellular site on a receptor protein
whose structure crosses the membrane (examples
include receptors for insulin, low-density lipopro-
tein, growth hormone, and cytokines).

3. A transmembrane ion channel is induced to open or
close by the binding of a molecule (examples in-
clude receptors for nicotine, GABA, and glycine).

4. A transmembrane receptor protein stimulates a
G protein that in turn generates an intracellular
secondary messenger. This intricate process can
facilitate many interactions with exogenous
molecules.

G Proteins and Second Messengers

Guanine nucleotide binding proteins, or G proteins, are
membrane proteins that link the activation of a mem-
brane receptor to the subsequent activation of its cellular
second messenger. Receptors coupled to G proteins are
structurally related to one another, comprising a family of
serpentine receptors, so called because the receptor
polypeptide chain crosses the plasma membrane seven
times.

Receptors for adrenergic amines, serotonin, acetyl-
choline, many peptide hormones, odors, and visual recep-
tors in the retinal rod and cone cells are all serpentine.
The amino and carboxy] terminals of each of these recep-
tors are located on the extracellular and cytoplasmic sides
of the membrane, respectively.

Within the membrane, a G protein binds to an ex-
ogenous molecule, causing a conformational change and
activating a cascade of reactions that produce various sec-
ond messengers. No matter which pathway is activated,
the result is a change in the functioning of the affected
cell in response to the original message-bearing molecule.

Phytoestrogens and Receptors

As an example of the role of receptor interactions in
herbal activity, consider the phytoestrogens. It has been
estimated that more than 300 species of plants have some
degree of demonstrable estrogen activity.'* The concept
of phytoestrogens originally came from toxicology, but it
has since taken on a more positive aspect, as epidemiology
has uncovered many clues about the role of dietary phy-
toestrogens. See chapter 10 for more information on the
toxicity of phytoestrogens.

Health-Protective Effects of Phytoestrogens

¢ Epidemiological studies reveal low mortality from hor-
mone-dependent cancer in both Japanese women and
men consuming a traditional diet, which may be re-
lated to the high intake of phytoestrogens in soybeans
and other foods.!?

* Dietary intake of soy is associated with a decreased risk
of both hormone-dependent and hormone-independent
cancers, and it has been suggested that genistein, the
predominant isoflavone in soy foods, is responsible for
this effect.!*

* The low mortality from prostate cancer in Japanese
men may be associated with their isoflavone-rich tradi-
tional diet.!°

¢ Consumption of a plant-based diet can prevent the
development and progression of chronic diseases that
are associated with extensive neovascularization.!®

¢ Researchers suggest that human cancer mortality rates
could be markedly reduced by supplementing human
diets with certain soybean products shown to suppress
carcinogenesis in animals.!”

¢ Because many Western diseases are hormone-dependent
cancers, it has been postulated that the typical Western
diet, compared with a vegetarian or semi-vegetarian
diet, may alter hormone production, metabolism, or
action at the cellular level.!®

----- PAGE 149 -----
PHARMACOLOGY .@ = 141

Classification of Hormones

Hormones can be grouped into classes based upon the method by which they are transmitted.

Group 1 Hormones

Lipid-soluble steroidal hormones cross the cell membrane and act upon an intracellular recep-
tor. Steroid hormones exert effects at all levels of biological organization, using similar mecha-
nisms to produce the same general effects (the induction of RNA and protein synthesis). The
major classes of steroid hormones, all derived from cholesterol, are progestins, corticosteroids,
estrogens, and androgens. Several signal molecules are lipid-soluble enough to cross the plasma
membrane and act on intracellular receptors. One of these is a gas, nitric oxide (NO), that acts
by stimulating an intracellular enzyme, guanylyl cyclase, which produces cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP).

Group 2 Hormones

These hormones are water-soluble and thus do not use blood transport proteins. They bind to
cell-surface receptors, which then use secondary messengers to relay their message to the nu-
cleus. This transmembrane signaling system has three components:

¢ The hormone is specifically detected by a cell-surface receptor.

¢ The receptor triggers the activation of a G protein located on the cytoplasmic face of the
plasma membrane, which changes the activity of an effector element, usually an enzyme or
ion channel.

* This element then changes the concentration of the intracellular second messenger.

The type of secondary messenger determines the subclasses of Group 2 hormones.

GROUP 2A HORMONES

The secondary messenger for Group 2A hormones is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
which mediates such hormonal responses as mobilization of stored energy, vasopressin-mediated
conservation of water by the kidneys, Ca?* homeostasis, and rate and contractile force of the
heart muscle. It also regulates the production of adrenal and sex steroids, the relaxation of
smooth muscle, and many other endocrine and neural processes. A stimulator of intracellular
cAMP is forskolin, a diterpene from Coleus forskohlii that acts as an adenylate cyclase activator
to increase intracellular CAMP by stimulating its biosynthesis.”

GROUP 2B HORMONES

The secondary messenger for Group 2B hormones is cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP).
cGMP has signaling roles in only a few types of cells.

GROUP 2C HORMONES

The secondary messengers here are calcium, phosphoinositides, or both, which act through a
transmembrane ion channel that can be induced to open or close by the binding of a ligand.
Some of the hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors that trigger this pathway bind to
receptors linked to G proteins, while others bind to tyrosine kinase receptors.

GROUP 2D HORMONES

The secondary messenger for this group of hormones, including insulin, prolactin, and growth
factor, is unknown,

----- PAGE 150 -----
142 «a INFRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The average sperm count in men has been consis-
tently declining since the Second World War, apparently
because of exposure to xenoestrogenic environmental
pollutants. The environmental science literature actually
talks about the fact that we live in a “sea of estrogens.”
We have to recognize that estrogenic plant effects, even
though they are important and we herbalists have an at-
tachment to them, occur in the context of total exposure
to estrogens.

Type IL Estrogen—Binding Sites and

Estrogen Antagonism

In addition to nuclear-bound estrogen receptor (Type I
sites), a second estrogen-binding site is found in nuclei of
various tissues. These Type II nuclear estradiol—binding
sites are located on the nuclear matrix. One event stimu-

lated by exposure to estrogen is an increase in the num-
ber of Type IT estrogen—binding sites. Nuclear Type I re-
ceptors are occupied by an endogenous ligand that appears
to be an inhibitor of cell proliferation.

PHYTOESTROGENS

A remarkable diversity of naturally occurring and synthetic
compounds mimic the biological effects of B-estradiol,
indicated in the laboratory by their ability to bind to the
nuclear estrogen receptor, activate transcriptional re-
sponse, and promote growth of estrogen-dependent
MCE7 cells in culture.?°

The most important of these appear to be
isoflavones, coumestans, lignans, and phytosterols. In the
diet, the precursors of the biologically active compounds

Estrogen

Phytoestrogens

Xenoestrogens

do plant estrogens.

A Closer Look at “Estrogens”

There is no chemical called “estrogen” Estrogen is a term that describes an effect, nota particular
chemical. We really should talk about estrogens, the spectrum of molecular structures that share
this effect. These are various natural or synthetic substances that possess the biological activity of
estrus-producing hormones. Estrus is the period in a female mammal during which ovulation
occurs and she is receptive to mating. This is an important point, because the periodicity and the
receptive time frame vary from.one mammalian‘species to another. Most of the research on plant
estrogens has utilized rodents, and rats and mice have very different estrous cycles than humans—
starting with the fact that they do not menstruate.

This raises many questions about how to extrapolate data from rat studies to therapeutic ap-
plications in humans. Estrogens are synthesized from androgens, primarily in the ovaries, and, to a
lesser extent, in the adrenal cortex. These hormones can also be produced in the testes of males.
The major estrogen, f-estradiol, is synthesized from testosterone.

A phytoestrogen is a plant constituent that possesses estrogenic activity. However, to say that
something possesses estrogenic activity does not mean that all estrogens have the same degree of
estrogenic activity, nor does it mean they all possess the whole spectrum of effects that human
estrogens have. It is also important to understand that phytoestrogens are not precursors of
human hormones, but instead interact with human estrogen receptors to elicit various responses.

Xenoestrogens are environmental estrogens, usually synthetic pesticides such as DDT and hor-
mones in our diet. One source ts residual hormanes that make their way into dairy products after
having been originally fed to cows. DDT, PCB, and many other synthetic pesticides are estrogens.
In fact, they work in part by disrupting the reproductive cycle of the animal they are designed to
deter. Without making too much of a point of xenoestrogens, it should be noted that quantita-
tively, environmental pollutant estrogens appear to have far more of an effect on humans than

----- PAGE 151 -----
originate in soybean products (which contain mainly
isoflavones but also lignans in smaller amounts) as well as
in whole grain cereals and seeds. The phytoestrogens in
berries and nuts are believed to be mainly lignans.!

Coffee has phytoestrogenic effects, as do beer, bour-
bon, mescaline, and Cannabis. Actually, it is quite amazing
how many substances that cause social issues also have es-
trogenic effects. Coffee extracts, unlike tea and cocoa, ac-
tively compete with estradiol for uterine cytosol binding
sites.”?

Isoflavones

A number of phytoestrogens belong to chemically related
classes of flavonoids, including chalcones, flavanones,
flavones, flavonols, and isoflavones. The most active of
these, the isoflavones, represent a structural variant of the
flavonoid family of plant phenolics and are only found
regularly in one subfamily of the Fabaceae, the
Papilionoideae. They have been recorded occasionally in
a few other families, such as Asteraceae, Iridaceae,
Myristicaceae, and Rosaceae. It is possible that they are
more widespread, but the lack of a satisfactory method of
screening for their presence makes the search difficult.”3

Widely occurring isoflavones include daidzein, genis-
tein, formononetin, and biochanin A. A study of relative
estrogenic activities for some isoflavones identified a
range of potencies. In order of decreasing potency, the
most active was zearalenone, followed by B-zearalenol,
coumestrol, genistein, daidzein, phloretin, formononetin,
and biochanin A. The hormonal activity of these com-
pounds was specific for the estrogen receptor and sensi-
tive to inhibition by 4-hydroxytamoxifen.”*

In laboratory studies, genistein inhibited the prolifer-
ation of human tumor cell lines in vitro, constrained en-
dothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis, and inhib-
ited the proliferation of various other types of tumor
cells.?* *6 It also inhibited the activity of purified topoiso-
merase II in vitro, and the production of reactive oxygen
ions that can lead to tissue damage and DNA modifica-
tion. Additionally, genistein acts as a weak estrogen,
modifies cellular differentiation, modulates cell cycle
events, and may precipitate apoptosis.’”

Lignans

Lignans are dimers that are chemically related to the
lignins of plant cell walls; they are found mainly in woody
tissues. Some have been isolated from other plant parts,
such as roots, leaves, and flowers, and in such cases they
may be found in glycosidic combinations. The active
molecular forms of lignans are produced only after they

PHARMACOLOGY -2 143

are metabolized by the gut flora, pointing yet again to the
fundamental importance of digestive tract health.

The lignan enterolactone is a moderate inhibitor of
human estrogen synthetase. This lignan binds to or near
the active site of the P4so enzyme.”® Research suggests that
the high concentration of lignans seen in vegetarians may
play a protective role against estrogen-dependent cancers
by serving as antipromotional compounds, inhibiting aro-
matase in peripheral or cancer cells, and lowering estro-
gen levels.”

Phytosterols

At one time, sterols were considered to be mainly animal
products, but an increasing number of such compounds
have been detected in plant tissues. Indeed, three phytos-
terols are ubiquitous in higher plants: B-sitosterol, stig-
masterol, and campesterol. Phytosterols are structurally
distinct from animal sterols in that they have an extra
methyl or ethyl! radical in the side chain. An example is
B-sitosterol, a common constituent in flowering plants.

Interactions of Phytoestrogens with
Receptors

Two important interactions are mediated via sex hormone
binding globulin (SHBG) and Type II estrogen binding
sites in the nucleus. Lignans and isoflavones may affect
the uptake and metabolism of sex hormones by helping to
regulate SHBG levels, although phytoestrogens bind only
weakly to SHBG.*° They also compete with estradiol for
binding to unfilled cytoplasmic estrogen receptors or un-
filled nuclear Type II estrogen receptor sites, which may
be the mechanism by which they inhibit cancer cell
growth.*! Bound nuclear receptors are then processed in
a manner that rapidly decreases the total number of cel-
lular estrogen receptors.

Research Conclusions

Not all phytoestrogens are created equal; they display a
range of actions and different potencies. This variability
points out how important it is to fully characterize each
phytoestrogen in terms of its sites of action, balance of
agonistic and antagonistic properties, natural potency,
and short- and long-term effects.** Thus, a plethora of
variables are encountered when drawing conclusions
about phytoestrogens.

Phytosterols, lignans, and isoflavones have all been
shown to possess both estrogenic and antiestrogenic ac-
tivity.3 This apparent contradiction results from the array
of assays used to identify estrogenicity, each of which
evaluates distinct responses in the spectrum of estrogenic

----- PAGE 152 -----
144 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

activities. The reasons behind the differences in activity
can be grouped into three broad categories:

* Variability in potency and activity among different spe-
cific phytoestrogens*#

¢ Variability in response among different test animals
and humans”?

¢ Variability based on dosage, timing, and route of
administration®®

What it comes down to is that no specific generaliza-
tions can actually be made about phytoestrogenic con-
stituents, because each has a different spectrum of effects.
However, consider the following research conclusions.

¢ It is clear that there is a significant number of struc-
turally diverse secondary plant metabolites that con-
tribute to human estrogen exposure, and these phyto-
estrogens have estrogenic effects at dietary levels.*”

¢ Dietary macro- and micronutrients play an important
role in estrogen metabolism.*®

¢ Lignans and isoflavones have been shown to influence
not only sex hormone metabolism and biological
activity, but also intracellular enzymes, protein syn-
thesis, growth factor action, and malignant cell pro-
liferation, differentiation, and angiogenesis, making
them strong candidates as natural cancer-protective
compounds.??

¢ In two thirds of reviewed studies on the effect of phy-
toestrogen-rich soy materials in animal models of can-
cer, the risk of cancer (incidence, latency, or number of
tumors) was significantly reduced.*”

* Greater dietary incorporation of isoflavone-rich foods
may be a safe and effective means of reducing cancer
risk.4!

¢ It has been suggested that some of the 400 plants used
as galactagogues work via phytoestrogenic stimulation
of prolactin production, which then stimulates breast
milk production.*?

Implications for Phytotherapy
With the wealth of new data flowing from the research
community, it is not easy to come to conclusions relevant
to phytotherapy. However, it can be stated with some de-
gree of confidence that phytoestrogens act predominantly
as weak partial agonists in Type I estrogen receptors and
as weak partial antagonists in Type II estrogen receptors.
From this, some broad clinical guidelines can be
deduced.

During the child-bearing years, the impact of phyto-
estrogens will be minimal. This is because of their
relative lack of potency when compared with endoge-
nous estrogens.

During the menopausal and postmenopausal years,
this potency disparity becomes less important because
of changing levels of endogenous hormones, and as
such, phytoestrogens may have much to offer in the
treatment of menopausal discomforts. This observa-
tion underscores the phytotherapist’s experience of tra-
ditional herbal efficacy in such cases.

Epidemiological studies of Japanese women eating a
traditional diet reveal that they have a lower incidence
of osteoporosis. Western research has not yet con-
firmed a link between consumption of dietary phyto-
estrogens and prevention of bone loss, but a prudent
practitioner would do well to consider them in the de-
velopment of treatment programs for women.

The risk of estrogen-sensitive carcinomas may be re-
duced by intake of dietary phytoestrogens. The main
area in which confusion has arisen concerns therapeu-
tic conclusions about the treatment of breast cancer. In
general, estrogens are all potentially carcinogenic.
This is one of the real problems with synthetic hor-
mone replacement therapy. However, some herb books
caution against the use of phytoestrogen-containing
plants because estrogens can stimulate the develop-
ment of tumors in the breast. To the contrary, human
research has made it clear that phytoestrogens act as
weak estrogen antagonists in Type II estrogen recep-
tors in the breast, and so might actually help reduce
the risk of breast cancer related to estrogens.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Pharmacokinetics is the study of factors that modify the ef-
fects of drugs, including:

Administration

Absorption .
Distribution (biotranslocation)
Biotransformation

Elimination from or storage in the body

To illustrate what happens to a therapeutic substance

after it is administered, the following diagram tracks an
essential oils on its journey through the body.

----- PAGE 153 -----
=) massage oils,
lotions, perfumes,

pessaries, .
suppositories skin care products,
baths

PHARMACOLOGY © = 145

vaporized oils,
perfumes, sprays,
inhalations

foods, gargles

t
| oral intake |

anus, vagina | | Hin

TN liver

\ LA a“ \
\ digestive tract “—

~ \ mucous electrochemical
ms S\ _-7 membrane signal
MD N\A i? }
volatile molecule path ——————~ . A ¢
Circulation limbic region
electrochemical signals ------------ - " oe
1 * amygdala
co tex hypothalamus
all organs, joints, systems ;
{ | hypothalamus.
Geomacn )G ene ss) Clu “

Cory Zbl <>

'

Elimination

a. autonomic
| endocrine system neous
system

Fig. 9.2. Pharmacokinetic pathways of volatile oils in the body

Administration and Absorption

Absorption refers to mechanisms by which molecules pass
from the point of entry into the bloodstream. When ad-
ministering any herbal preparation, one must select:

¢ A route of administration
* A dose
¢ A dosage form (liquid, tablet, capsule, or injection)

A constituent’s site of action is often remote from its
point of entry into the body. The best route of adminis-
tration is usually determined by the physical characteris-
tics of the substance, the speed of absorption, and the oc-
casional need to bypass hepatic metabolism. The right
dosage form will ensure herbal efficacy at the site of ac-
tion by providing a pharmacologically effective concen-
tration, and will also maintain the concentration for an
adequate period of time.

Oral Administration

Herbal medicines are commonly taken by mouth. To be
effective, the remedy must be in a form that is soluble and
stable in stomach fluid, able to enter the intestine and
cross the lining of the intestine, and thus able to enter the
bloodstream. Because they are already in solution, herbs
taken in liquid form tend to be absorbed more rapidly
than those given in tablet or capsule form. The rate of ab-
sorption of herbs taken in solid form is limited by the rate
at which the solid dissolves and by the specific chemistry
of constituents.

Oral administration is a convenient route, but the
constituents are subject to extensive biotransformation in
the gastrointestinal wall and liver. Constituents absorbed
from the gastrointestinal tract enter the bloodstream by
going directly to the liver via the portal vein. Once there,
they may be metabolized rapidly, possibly inactivating
constituents before they can reach the intended site of ac-
tion. This first-pass effect is responsible for the fact that
some drugs, such as morphine, are active when injected
but much less active when taken by mouth. Absorption
after oral administration may be slowed by concurrent in-
gestion of food, mucilage-rich herbs, or antacids. Fast ab-
sorption implies rapid onset of effects.

Other Routes of Administration

Routes of administration other than oral may improve the
pharmacological efficacy of the substance at a particular
site or reduce toxicity.

Inhalation

Inhalation delivers large amounts of drug directly to the
lungs, useful in cases of respiratory disease.

Mucous Membranes

Occasionally, drugs are administered through the mucous
membranes of the mouth or nose, from which sites the
drug can be directly absorbed into the bloodstream.
Administration by buccal (through the mouth), sublingual
(under the tongue), nasal, rectal, or transdermal (through

----- PAGE 154 -----
146 2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the skin) routes bypasses the first-pass effect to permit
quick and direct absorption of the drug. Of the routes
just described, sublingual and rectal absorption are the
fastest. Rectal delivery can also allow the administration
of larger quantities of drug. Herbs may be administered
in suppository form; however, absorption is often irregu-
lar, unpredictable, and incomplete.

Topical

Topical administration of drugs is associated with a higher
incidence of hypersensitivity, since the drug is allowed
adequate time to become allergenic either on its own or
in combination with endogenous tissue proteins.
However, this is rarely an issue with herbs, considering
the long and safe use of poultices, fomentations, and
other topical applications.

Drug Distribution

Once absorbed, a drug is distributed throughout the body
by the circulating blood, passing across various barriers to
reach its site of action. At any given time, only a very
small portion of the total amount of a drug in the body is
in contact with its receptors. Most of the administered
drug will be found in areas of the body that are remote
from the site of action.

For example, in the case of a psychoactive drug, most
of the drug circulates outside the brain and therefore does
not contribute directly to its pharmacological effect. This
wide distribution often accounts for drug side effects, or re-
sults that are different from the primary, or therapeutic,
effect for which the drug is taken.

Bioavailability

The percentage of a drug that is absorbed and actually
reaches the systemic circulation is an expression of its
bioavailability. Because drugs are metabolized and elimi-
nated from the body, the level of drug in the body will de-
crease with time after a single dose.

To achieve a more constant serum level, inultiple
doses are given at fixed time intervals. In general, shorter
intervals lead to more constant serum levels. Once in the
bloodstream, the drug must penetrate the cells of the tar-
get organs in order to exert its therapeutic action. Thus
the extent and rate of absorption and penetration depend
on the ability of the drug to pass through lipid-rich cell
membranes—in other words, its lipid solubility.

Transport through a Cell Membrane
Cell and organelle membranes are not passive barriers.
They control the structures and environments of the

compartments they enclose and thus the metabolism of
these compartments. The membrane itself is a metabolic
compartment with unique functions. It is a dynamic
structure that moves, and its components are continually
synthesized and degraded. The plasma membrane consti-
tutes only about 2% to 5% of membranes in the cell; the
rest consist primarily of endoplasmic reticula. The pri-
mary components of membranes are lipids, proteins, and
carbohydrates. Hepatocytes specialized for metabolism
have a higher concentration of membranes. Differences
in composition among membranes reflect differences in
function.

Membrane Lipids

Lipids constitute about half of the weight of membranes;
the other half is primarily proteins. Phospholipids are
abundant, and phosphatidylcholine constitutes roughly
half of the lipids found in membranes. Phosphatidyl-
inositol, important in signal transduction, is present in
smaller amounts. Other membrane lipids include sphin-
gomyelin, glycosphingolipid, and cholesterol.

Membrane Proteins

Proteins associated with membranes are asymmetrical.
They are different on the outside from on the inside, and
are integrated into the membrane in only one orientation
relative to the inside of the cell. These proteins fulfill a
number of vital functions:

* Catalytic enzymes

¢ Receptors for signals such as hormones
¢ Transport systems

¢ Structural components

Membrane Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are bonded to proteins or lipids as glyco-
proteins or glycolipids. Typical sugars present include
glucose, galactose, mannose, fructose, and nitrogenated
sugars, such as N-acetylglucosamine, N-acetyl galactos-
amine, and N-acetylneuraminic acid (sialic acid). Mem-
brane sugars are pivotal in cell interactions as a means of
identification and recognition.*} They are found only on
the outside of the plasma membrane or on the inside of
vesicles.

Membrane Structure

A membrane can be viewed as a lipid bilayer composed of
phospholipid and cholesterol along with various proteins.
Integral proteins are embedded, while peripheral proteins
may be loosely attached to the surface of the membrane.

----- PAGE 155 -----
Membranes separate and maintain the chemical environ-
ments on both sides of the membrane. Proteins and lipids
diffuse in the membrane, but ions are found at different
concentrations on either side of the cell membrane, cre-
ating an ion gradient. Membranes maintain these gradi-
ents by preventing ion diffusion, necessitating active
transport of ions from one side of the plasma membrane
to the other.

Nonpolar molecules are lipophilic (lipid-loving) and
polar molecules are hydrophilic (water-loving). Lipophilic
molecules pass readily through membranes because they
dissolve in the hydrophobic, nonpolar portion of the lipid
bilayer. Although permeable to water, the nonpolar lipid
bilayer of cell membranes is impermeable to many other
polar molecules, necessitating specific transport systems.

Passive Diffusion

Some substances can cross membranes by a process of
passive diffusion, which involves no energy expenditure.
Water and small lipophilic organic compounds can cross in
this way, but charged compounds and large molecules, such
as proteins, cannot. In passive diffusion, the molecule will
only move down the concentration gradient—that is, from
a higher to a lower concentration.

Protein Channels

Protein channels transport specific ions. For example, ion
channels exist for the movement of Na‘, K', and Ca‘*.
The protein forms a gate that opens and closes under
the control of the inembrane potential. lon movement
through channels is always down the concentration
gradient.

Mediated Transport
Transport of molecules across membranes by molecular
carriers is termed mediated transport. These carriers are
variously called porters, porting systems, translocases, trans-
port systems, and pumps.

Membrane Receptors

Cell-cell communication is achieved by chemical messen-
gers that interact with the cell in one of two ways, either by
entering the cell by diffusion through the cell membrane or
by binding to a receptor on the plasma membrane.

Distribution in the Body

After crossing the transport barrier, a molecule remains in
the interstitial spaces between cells, which are filled with
water and loose connective tissue. The molecule can

PHARMACOLOGY .@ = 147

enter the bloodstream directly via blood capillaries or in-
directly via lymphatic capillaries. The amount of the drug
that may be found in various tissues is affected by many
factors.

Solubility of the Drug

The greater the solubility of the drug in a tissue, the
greater will be its concentration.

Size of the Organ
More drug is required to achieve therapeutic relevant
concentrations in larger organs than in smaller organs.

Lymphatic Drainage

Lymphatic capillaries are minute vessels, located in the
interstitial spaces, in which one end is closed and the
other drains into larger lymphatic vessels. The walls of
these capillaries are composed of endothelial tissue with
loose junctions between cells, and as a result are more
porous than blood capillaries. Plasma proteins and excess
fluid in the interstitial spaces enter the lymphatic capillar-
ies, flowing back to the heart via the lymphatic system.

Blood Flow to an Organ

The rate at which drugs move to the various tissues of the
body depends largely on the rate of blood flow. In the
average-size adult, the heart pumps approximately 5 liters
of blood each minute, an amount roughly equal to the
total volume of blood in the circulatory system. Thus, the
entire blood volume circulates in the body about once
every minute. Therefore, once a drug is absorbed into the
bloodstream, it is rapidly distributed throughout the cir-
culatory system.

Protein Binding

Some molecules reversibly bind to proteins present in the
blood plasma. As proteins are too large to cross the capil-
lary wall, such bound chemicals are confined in the blood-
stream and not readily distributed to the tissues. Molecules
bound to plasma proteins have lower concentrations in tis-
sues than do those not bound to plasma proteins.

Anatomic Barriers

Barriers in certain organs limit the distribution of some
molecules. The blood-brain barrier consists of tight capil-
lary walls around which glial cells are wrapped, a situation
unique to the capillaries in the brain. Molecules must dif-
fuse through these two barriers to get from blood to the
nerve cells of the brain.

----- PAGE 156 -----
148 < INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The blood-brain barrier blocks the passage of proteins
and most water-soluble chemicals, but water, most lipid-
soluble molecules, oxygen, and carbon dioxide diffuse
through it readily. It is slightly permeable by electrolytes,
but is poorly permeable by large molecules. The blood-
brain barrier is the reason behind the fact that the ions of
some highly water-soluble metals, such as mercury and
lead, are nontoxic to adult brains. However, because the
blood-brain barrier is less well developed in children,
their brains are more sensitive to the toxicity of lead.

Another barrier is the b/ood-testis barrier, which limits
the passage of large molecules like proteins and polysac-
charides, medium-sized molecules like galactose, and
some water-soluble molecules from the blood into the
seminiferous tubules of the testis. However, water and
very small water-soluble molecules, like urea, can pass
through the barrier.

Placenta membranes are unique. They separate two
distinct human beings with different genetic composi-
tions, physiological responses, and sensitivities to drugs.
The fetus obtains essential nutrients and eliminates
metabolic waste products through the placenta without
help from its own organs, many of which are not yet
functional.

This dependence of the fetus upon the mother, how-
ever, places the fetus at the mercy of the placenta when
foreign substances appear in the mother’s blood. The pla-
cental barrier between mother and fetus is the leakiest
barrier of all and is a very poor block to chemicals. The
placenta is composed of several layers of cells that act as a
barrier to the diffusion of substances between the mater-
nal and fetal circulatory systems. Lipid- and water-soluble
molecules can cross readily, while the transfer of large-
molecular-weight molecules is limited.

Biotransformation

The extent of pharmacological activity of a substance de-
pends on the ability of the body to metabolize the chem-
ical involved. This process is called biotransformation, de-
fined as the structural modification of a chemical by
enzymes in the body. Biotransformation occurs in several

organs, including the kidneys, lungs, skin, intestines, pla-
centa, and, most important, the liver. At the subcellular
level, the enzymes responsible for biotransformation are
located in the endoplasmic reticula, mitochondria, cy-
tosol, lysosomes, or even the nuclear envelope or plasma
membrane.

Chemicals absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract must
pass through the liver, where they may be biotransformed
and eliminated before they get distributed to other parts

of the body. However, biotransformation is not synony-
mous with inactivation. Some drugs must be metabolized
before they become active, whereas others produce a
toxic metabolite, an additional active metabolite, or both.
Intestinal microorganisms in the colon (the gut flora) are
capable of many biotransformation reactions. In addition,
molecules may be metabolized by gastric acid, digestive
enzymes, or enzymes in the wall of the intestine.

Primary Objectives of Biotransformation

* To alter a chemical substance in order to change its bi-
ologic effects

* To transform the chemical into a more polar, and
therefore more water-soluble, species that is more eas-
ily eliminated from the body

These reactions occur in the cytoplasm and endo-
plasmic reticula of all cells, although cells near major
entry points for xenobiotic substances contain larger
quantities of biotransformative enzymes. Biotransfor-
mation pathways may be grouped as either Phase J or
Phase II reactions. In Phase I, the molecule is modified by
the addition of a functional group. This modification al-
lows Phase II, the conjugation or joining of the drug
molecule with one found naturally in the body, to take
place. In most cases, the major end product is a more
water-soluble chemical that is easily excreted.

Phase I Reactions

These are reactions in which a functional chemical group
is attached to the molecule, oxidizing or reducing it to an-
other oxidation state. Such mechanisms are necessary to
increase molecular polarity, which facilitates more effi-
cient urinary excretion because the more lipophilic
molecule can be reabsorbed in the renal tubules.

Oxidation

Oxidation is the addition of oxygen and/or the removal of
hydrogen. Most oxidation steps occur in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Common reactions include:

—CH,—CH,—+ —CH—CH,
OH

Fig. 9.3. Alkyl group into an alcohol

----- PAGE 157 -----
oe)

Fig. 9.4. Aromatic ring into a phenol

oO
|
S—-S
7\ /\

Fig. 9.5. Oxidation at S or N

Reduction

Reduction reactions involve the addition of hydrogen
and/or the removal of oxygen. For example, azo (-N = N-)
or nitro groups (-NO;) are converted to amines (-NH,)
through reduction.

Hydrolysis

Hydrolysis describes an addition of water facilitated by
enzymatic action, which causes the breakdown of a
molecule.

R—O—C=0 —+ ROH + CH,—COOH
CHg

Fig. 9.6, Esters into an alcohol and an acid

R-N—C=0 —+R—NH, + CH,—COOH
CH,

Fig, 9.7. Amides to an amine and an acid

Phase I

Phase II reactions, also known as conjugation reactions, in-
crease the size and weight of a molecule by adding a
chemical group. Several enzyme systems catalyze Phase II
reactions, including:

® Glucuronyl transferase

© Glutathione-S-transferase
* N-acetyltransferase

© Sulfotransferase

Conjugation reactions bind the exogenous chemical
with an endogenous molecule, leading to the formation

PHARMACOLOGY -@ 149

of a final product that is usually more water-soluble and
thus more easily excreted. These reactions involve the
addition of molecules naturally present in the body to the
drug molecule, which may first have undergone a Phase
I reaction.

The Cytochrome P59 Enzyme System
Cytochrome P43) enzymes comprise the most important
enzyme system for drug biotransformation and meta-
bolism. Interactions between a drug and the enzymes that
metabolize it largely determine whether that drug will be
active, ineffective, toxic, or carcinogenic.

Cytochrome Py4s) enzymes catalyze most Phase I
metabolism, which transforms lipophilic molecules to
more polar compounds that can be excreted by the kid-
neys.4 The metabolites are usually less active than the
parent compound, although some drugs must undergo
biotransformation in order to become pharmacologi-
cally active agents. In some cases, the metabolites are
toxic.

The cytochrome P49 system is made up of a family of
very versatile enzymes responsible for catalyzing a range
of different reactions. A single hepatocyte can contain a
variety of cytochrome P49 enzymes. An individual en-
zyme may be capable of metabolizing many different
drugs, but one specific enzyme may be required to me-
tabolize a particular drug.

Reactions Catalyzed hy Cytochrome P45) Enzymes
* Oxidative reactions

Hydrolysis of esters and amides

Reduction reactions

© Conjugation reactions

At least twelve cytochrome Pys9 gene families have
been identified in humans, although three particular fam-
ilies are responsible for the majority of drug biotransfor-
mations. These are the cytochrome P4sq 1, 2, and 3 fami-
lies (CYP,, CYP, and CYP,).% These groupings are
based on amino acid sequence similarities, and can be fur-
ther separated into subfamilies.

Variability in the Cytochrome P45 System

This system can be altered by a number of mechanisms,
and the efficiency of the system varies significantly among
individuals, leading to variability in both the efficacy and
the toxicity of drugs. Induction and inhibition of Py59 en-
zymes are the most common causes of variability.
Induction increases the rate of biotransformation, thus de-
creasing drug concentration and pharmacological effect.

----- PAGE 158 -----
150 <=. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Inhibition of cytochrome P49 enzymes results in an in-
creased concentration of the drug, prolonged pharmaco-
logical effects, and increased incidence of drug-induced
toxicity.

Drugs can bind irreversibly or reversibly with the
heme-binding site of the enzyme and thus inhibit other
drugs from binding. Irreversible (or mechanism-based)
inhibition occurs when drugs are metabolized by the cy-
tochrome P4sp system to active metabolites that bind to
the enzyme and cause irreversible loss of function.’
Activity can be restored only through the synthesis of new
enzymes, which may take several days.

Irreversible inhibitors are bound to enzymes by co-
valent bonds. Reversible inhibitors are bound to enzymes
by weaker, noncovalent forces. Herbs have been shown
to possess both reversible and irreversible enzyme inhi-
bition properties. Extracts of Fraxinus excelsior, Populus
tremula, and Solidago virgaurea in a combination of 1:3:1
(v/v/v) were found to have actions similar to those of a
variety of synthetic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
because they reversibly inhibit dihydrofolate reductase.’

Genetic Polymorphisms

Genetic polymorphisms commonly cause variations in
biotransformation. A polymorphism is the presence within
a population of at least two groups of people with dis-
tinctly different abilities to metabolize drugs.** Individuals
can be characterized as extensive (rapid) or poor (slow)
metabolizers. Poor metabolizers often have an increased
incidence of adverse effects.

Pathology

A disease state may alter metabolism by modifying ab-
sorption, distribution, and/or excretion; altering nutri-
tional states; or changing the rate of blood and oxygen de-
livery to the liver, among other factors. Impaired liver
function decreases biotransformation. Pathologies that
impair liver function include hepatitis, alcoholic liver dis-
ease, biliary cirrhosis, and hepatocarcinoma. Diabetes has
a mixed effect, either increasing or decreasing metabolism
depending on the individual. Infection may also alter bio-
transformation. Phagocytosis, which occurs during bacte-
rial infections, releases a factor that depresses biotrans-
formation in adjacent hepatocytes.*®

Age

Infants do not develop a competent Paso system for more
than two weeks after birth. The elderly have age-related
decreases in liver mass, hepatic enzyme activity, and hep-

atic blood flow. In addition, the overall metabolic capac-
ity of the liver decreases with age, although the consider-
able individual variability in age- and disease-related
changes in organ function makes it difficult to generalize.

Nutrition

A low-protein diet decreases xenobiotic metabolism,
while fasting enhances or inhibits metabolism, depending
on the chemical to be metabolized. Deficiencies of cal-
cium, zinc, iron, and copper reduce metabolism, as do de-
ficiencies of vitamins C, A, and E. Hormone levels also
have an impact. Adrenocorticotropic and growth hor-
mones increase metabolism. Metabolism is enhanced by
thyroxine and decreased by thyroidectomy. Both gluco-
corticoids and anabolic steroids enhance metabolism.

Excretion and the Termination of

Drug Action

Potential damage from a chemical is minimized by excre-
tion, biotransformation, or both. The main routes
through which drugs leave the body are the kidneys, the
lungs, and the bile. Excretion through the lungs occurs
only with highly volatile or gaseous agents, such as gen-
eral anesthetics, and, in small amounts, alcohol and garlic
oils. Drugs that are passed through the bile and into the
intestine are usually reabsorbed into the bloodstream
from the intestine. Thus, the major route of drug elimi-
nation from the body is via kidney excretion of drug
metabolites following liver biodegradation of the drug.

Elimination by the Kidneys and Liver

Urinary excretion, the most common pathway of elimina-
tion, takes place in the glomerulus and the renal tubules
of the kidneys. Blood is filtered through the holes in the
capillary walls. Molecules with a molecular weight lower
than 60,000 end up in the filtrate, while red blood cells,
large proteins, and chemicals bound to plasma proteins
are not filtered.

Chemical exchange also takes place along the renal
tubule. As the filtrate flows down the renal tubule, essen-
tial molecules, such as amino acids and glucose, are reab-
sorbed by active transport in the first portion of the
tubule (the proximal tubule). Chemicals in the filtrate are
also reabsorbed by active transport if they resemble these
essential molecules. Lipid-soluble chemicals are reab-
sorbed in the renal tubule, and so only water-soluble
chemicals are excreted to a significant extent.

Because drugs are small particles, they are filtered
into the kidneys and then reabsorbed into the blood-

----- PAGE 159 -----
stream. As the drug is concentrated inside the nephrons
(a result of water reabsorption), the drugs are reabsorbed
into plasma. Thus, the kidneys alone cannot eliminate
drugs from the body. Some other mechanism must over-
come this process of drug reabsorption. This occurs
through the process of hepatic biotransformation, in
which fat-soluble molecules are converted into water-
soluble metabolites that are poorly reabsorbed once they
are filtered into the renal tubules,

The second major excretory route is via bile, which is
formed in the liver and flows into the intestinal tract. The
liver does not filter chemicals, but secretes them into bile
for eventual elimination in the feces. However, biliary ex-
cretion of a chemical does not necessarily result in its
elimination from the body. Chemicals in the bile may be
reabsorbed by the intestine and in turn reenter the liver
via the portal vein. This cycling of a chemical (the entero-
hepatic cycle) can continue for a long time, keeping the
chemical in the body.

Other Routes of Elimination

Excretion of drugs into sweat, saliva, and tears is small.
Elimination by these routes is dependent mainly upon
diffusion of the nonionized, lipid-soluble form of drugs
through the epithelial cells of the glands; it is also pH de-
pendent. Reabsorption of nonionized drugs from the pri-
mary secretion probably also occurs in the ducts of the
glands, and active secretion of drugs across these ducts
may also occur.

The composition of sweat is similar to that of plasma,
except that sweat does not contain proteins. Sweat is a fil-
trate of plasma containing electrolytes and metabolic
wastes. After secretion, it moves through the sweat ducts,
where salt and water are reabsorbed. Because sweat re-
sembles plasma, water-soluble chemicals, including some
drugs and metal ions, can be found in sweat. However,
sweat is not a major route of excretion.

Drugs excreted in the saliva enter the mouth, where
they are usually swallowed. The concentration of some
drugs in saliva parallels that in plasma. Saliva may there-
fore be a useful biological fluid with which to determine
drug concentrations when it is difficult or inconvenient to
obtain blood. Excretion of drugs into hair and skin is
minimal.

Breast milk is a potential route of excretion, but,
more important, it is a potential means of chemical expo-
sure for breast-fed infants. Most chemicals enter milk by
diffusion, and so only the nonionized, lipid-soluble forms
of organic chemicals are found to any significant extent.
Chemicals with a molecular weight less than 200 that are

PHARMACOLOGY .@ 151

present in plasma unbound to proteins are likely to be
found in milk. Because of the lipid content, highly lipid-
soluble chemicals may concentrate in milk. Therefore,
milk can be a significant route of excretion for highly
lipid-soluble chemicals in lactating women.

Variability in Responses to Drugs

Even healthy people may show large variations in their
abilities to absorb and metabolize drugs, leading to vari-
able outcomes in different individuals. The way a drug af-
fects an individual may be influenced by age, sex, body
weight, temperament, race, the environment, the pres-
ence of the drug or other drugs, and other (often unpre-
dictable) factors, including diurnal cycles, temperature,
pregnancy, menstruation, and disease.

There may be little relation between an individual’s
sensitivity to the desired effects of a drug and sensitivity
to the toxicity of a drug. A combination of substances may
result in synergy, in which the total effect is greater than
the sum of the combination, or antagonism, in which the
total effect is less than the sum of the combined effects.
Other factors include prior hypersensitivity to this or a
related drug and any tolerance developed through prior
exposure to the drug.

Tachypbylaxis

Tachyphylaxis indicates a rapid development of tolerance
to the action of a drug. For example, tyramine produces
its effect undirectly, by causing the release of stored cate-
cholamines that have biologic activity; as soon as endoge-
nous stores of catecholamines are depleted, however, the
drug no longer has an effect.

Drug Disposition Tolerance

Drug disposition tolerance is a tolerance that develops be-
cause of increased metabolism of the drug. This type of
tolerance is characterized by a faster-than-normal drop in
blood levels of the drug after a given dose, indicating a
decreased half-life for blood levels of the drug.

Desensitization

An additional complication is desensitization, a phe-
nomenon in which an initial application of a high con-
centration of an agonist serves to depress the effect of that
agonist upon subsequent administration. The specific
mechanism involved varies with drug and receptor, but
would suggest that the occurrence of some temporary
chemical or conformational change subsequently blocks
receptor response.

----- PAGE 160 -----
152 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Pharmacodynamic Tolerance

Pharmacodynamic tolerance indicates desensitization to a
drug that causes changes in a particular drug-induced
body function. This type of tolerance is characterized by
decreased action or lowered potency of the drug at any
given serum concentration.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS

Pharmacological research into the activity of herbs and
their constituents is taking place all over the world. In
the following sections, we will review research on some
important herbal actions. This is far from a compre-
hensive review of modern herbal research; rather, these
are examples meant to serve as insights into the research
endeavor.

IMMUNOMODULATORS

A wide range of plants and phytochemicals appears to im-
pact the functioning of the immune system. There is still
far too little research in this area to allow broad general-
ization, but this should not be taken to mean that the
herbs themselves lack value as immunomodulatory
agents.

In a comprehensive review, Wagner and Proksch
grouped identified immunostimulant constituents ac-
cording to whether they are high- or low-molecular-
weight compounds.”

Low-Molecular-Weight Compounds

A range of low-molecular-weight plant constituents have
been shown to be immunomodulators. Because of their
diverse chemistry, a similar diversity of mechanisms is
probably involved.

profound effects.

Lack of Evidence or Lack of Research?

All too often, a lack of research is taken to mean that the herb in question lacks activity. This is
self-evidently absurd. The studies undertaken by Asian scientists to investigate the pharmacol-
ogy of their traditional remedies are contributing greatly to the field of immunology. However,
the same attention is rarely given to traditional European or North American herbs. This is be-
cause of a lack of research funding, not because the plants themselves lack inherent value.
Perhaps if nettles (Urtica dioica) were given the same quality of attention garnered by
Astragalus, we might have the immunological “proof” we need to draw conclusions about its

Alkaloids and Other Nitrogen-Containing
Compounds

A number of these compounds demonstrate immuno-
logical activity of some kind. However, the effects de-
scribed by the umbrella term zmunomodulation are gen-
erally subtle, and on the whole, bioactive alkaloids are not
subtle! An example is aristolochic acid from serpentary or
birthwort (Aristolochia clematitis), which shows anti-
inflammatory, antifertilty, and antimicrobial activity, but
can be carcinogenic to mammals.

Terpenes

Important sesquiterpene immunostimulants include hele-
nalin and tenulin, found in species of Helenium, and eupa-
hyssopin from Expatorium hyssopifolium. Many saponins,
especially triterpenes, are considered tmmunoadjuvants
and are used as such in Japan, either in the form of the
plant source or as the extracted chemical.

Phenolics

A number of phenolic molecules demonstrate immuno-
logical effects. The simple phenolic acids are ubiquitous
among flowering plants, fruits, and vegetables. Ferulic
acid, named after asafoetida (Ferula foetida), increases
phagocytosis in mice. Anethol, found in aniseed oil
(Pimpinella anisum), increases the leukocyte count in the
blood; the widely found pseudotannin catechol stimulates
granulocytes. The more complex lignans, with a range of
effects including stimulation of phagocytic activity in
polymorphonuclear granulocytes, cytotoxicity, and induc-
tion of interferon, are also proving to be important.

Flavonoids

The flavonoids, a subgroup of plant phenolics, have been
shown to possess immunomodulatory activity, This may
be due to their antioxidant or free radical-scavenging

----- PAGE 161 -----
properties. In addition, the oligomeric procyanidins pos-
sess immunological activity.

High-Molecular-Weight Compounds
High-molecular-weight lectins (glycoproteins) and poly-
saccharides are important immunomodulators. It has been
suggested that their impact is predicated upon some inter-
action with the membranes of immunocompetent cells.

Lectins

These are sugar-binding, carbohydrate-specific proteins
that agglutinate some cells, such as erythrocytes, and pre-
cipitate some molecules. When originally found in plants,
they were called phytobemagglutinins; however, they have
since been found in bacteria, fungi, invertebrates, and
vertebrates. Some well-known plant toxins are lectins,
such as ricin from castor bean (Ricinus communis).

A range of lectin effects has been demonstrated in the
laboratory, including stimulation of lymphocyte mitosis,
inhibition of protein synthesis in bacteria, and agglutina-
tion of malignant cells by tumor-specific lectins. Lectin-
containing plants familiar to the herbalist are poke
(Phytolacca americana) and mistletoe (Viscum album).
Research shows that the well-known North American an-
timicrobial plant wild indigo (Baptisia tinctoria) contains
active glycoproteins.*!

Polysaccharides

Polysaccharides are often pivotal to the immunomodulat-
ing effects of herbs. Laboratory studies have revealed a
range of impressive results:

¢ General improvement of many immune-response
measures

* T-lymphocyte activation

¢ Antitumor activity

© Increase in certain serum proteins

* Nonspecific activation of the complement system

* Stimulation of interferon production

* Increased phagocytosis

An important group of active polysaccharides is the
mycopolysaccharides found in medicinal fungi. Their
principal bioactive substances are believed to be the B-D-
glucans, usually simply called 6-glucans. These are indi-
gestible polysaccharides found in grains, yeast, bacteria,
algae, and fungi. It is likely that the activities of the my-
copolysaccharides depend on chemical characteristics
such as their molecular weight, branching patterns, solu-
bility in water, and tertiary structure.

Edible mushrooms rich in B-glucans include shiitake

PHARMACOLOGY @ 153

(Lentinus edodes), maitake (Grifola frondosa), himematsu-
take (Agaricus blazei), button mushrooms (Schizophyllum
commune and Sclerotina sclerotiorum), wood ear
(Auricularia auricula), tremella (Iremella fuciformis), poria
(Wolfporia cocos), and enoki (Flammulina velutipes).
Huitlacoche (Ustilago maydis) is another edible fungus
that is also rich in B-glucans. Nonedible mushrooms rich
in B-glucans include reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) and the
coriolus mushroom (Coriolus versicolor).

The most studied mushroom -glucans are lentinan,
from Lentinus edodes; grifolan, from Grifola frondosa;
schizophyllan, from Schizophyllum commune; sclerotan,
from Sclerotinia sclerotiorum; and polysaccharide krestin
and polysaccharide peptide, from Coriolus versicolor‘?
Lentinan and schizophyllan are approved in Japan for the
treatment of cancer.

Based upon in vitro, in vivo, and some human stud-
ies, the mycopolysaccharides appear to have immuno-
modulatory, antitumor, antimicrobial, lipid-lowering, and
glucose-regulating properties. However, after ingestion,
there is virtually no digestion of B-glucans in the small in-
testine, as there are no f-glucosidases among the diges-
tive enzymes. These enzymes are essential for the
metabolism of the B-glucans.

Some digestion of myco-B-glucans may occur in the
small intestine, and some digestion takes place in the
large intestine via the action of bacterial B-glucans.
Some oligosaccharides that are produced via bacterial
6-glucosidases may be absorbed, as may a large percent-
age of the ingested myco-B-glucosidases. However, a
large percentage of ingested myco-f-glucans is excreted
in the feces.

Lentinan is a particularly well-studied 6-glucan that
demonstrates a range of properties, including antitumor
activity. However, lentinan is typically administered par-
enterally and appears to show little antitumor activity
after oral administration. In studies, parenterally admin-
istered lentinan has demonstrated various immuno-
modulatory activities. It stimulated macrophages, mono-
cytes, and neutrophils, as well as natural killer (NK) and
lymphokine-activated killer (LAIS) cells.*? Stimulation of
these cells by lentinan may release a number of different
cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and in-
terleukin 2 a and 6 a UL 2 a and IL 6 a). Lentinan may
also stimulate the production of nitric oxide (NO) in
macrophages. These effects may result in antimicrobial
and antitumor activities. Grifolan, schizophyllan, and
sclerotan have been shown to have similar effects when
used parenterally.

The possible immunomodulatory effects of orally

----- PAGE 162 -----
154 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

administered mushroom f-glucans remain unclear. They
may exert immunological actions by virtue of their interac-
tion with gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). When
activated by contact with mushroom or other B-glucans in
the gut, immune cells associated with GALT may migrate
to other tissues and exert immunomodulatory effects there.
In addition, substances in mushrooms other than B-glucans
may have immunomodulatory activities.** In any case, the
possible antitumor and antimicrobial activities of the
myco-B-glucans are thought to be accounted for, in large
part, by their immunomodulatory properties.’®

The mycopolysaccharides may have anticarcinogenic,
immune-modulating, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory,
cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, hy-
poglycemic, and anticaries effects.** For species-specific
findings, please see the references cited above, but for ex-
amples, consider the herbs listed in table 9.2. Sources are
isted in Wagner and Proksch.*”

Table 9.2. Influence of Polysaccharide Fractions on
Phagocytosis

HERB ENHANCEMENT OF PHAGOCYTOSIS
Arnica montana 44%
Echinacea purpurea 45%

Eleutherococcus senticosus 52%

Eupatorium cannabinum 22%
E. perfoliatum 37%
Matricaria recutita 3%
Serenoa repens 36%
INFLAMMATION AND

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS

Inflammation is the complex response of living, vascular-
ized tissue to injury. Inflammation is a classic “double-
edged sword” that is essential for life and preservation of
function, but also causes significant tissue damage and
loss of function. The inflammatory response is triggered
whenever tissues are injured. The cardinal signs of acute
inflammation are redness (erythema), swelling (edema),
pain, and heat; the word itself is derived from the root in-
flamm, meaning “to set on fire.” Inflammation prevents
the spread of damaging agents to nearby tissues, disposes
of cell debris and pathogens, and initiates the tissue repair

processes. It is nonspecific, occurring in response to many
different causes.

Inflammation is initiated by the release of chemical
mediators into the extracellular fluid. Sources of these
mediators include injured tissue cells, phagocytes, lym-
phocytes, mast cells, and blood proteins, the most impor-
tant of which are histamine, kinins, prostaglandins, com-
plement, and lymphokines. They are all vasodilators, and
as blood flow to the area increases, local blood congestion
occurs, accounting for the redness and heat.

These mediators also increase capillary permeability,
so that an exudate containing proteins, such as clotting
factors and antibodies, seeps from the bloodstream to the
interstitial fluid. This exudate causes local edema, which
in turn presses on adjacent nerve endings, causing pain.
(Other sources of pain include the release of bacterial tox-
ins, lack of nutrition to injured cells, and hypersensitivity.
caused by the release of prostaglandins and kinins.)

Edema dilutes any harmful substances present, in-
creases oxygenation, supplies nutrients necessary for heal-
ing, and facilitates the entry of clotting proteins. These
form a fibrin mesh in the interstitial spaces that isolates
the injured tissue, prevents the spread of harmful agents,
and also forms a matrix for tissue repair.

After the initiation of the inflammatory response,
phagocytic white blood cells, neutrophils, and macro-
phages migrate to the area. If pathogens are present,
complement is activated and lymphocytes and antibodies
invade the injured site, mounting an immune response.
Leukocytosis is a characteristic sign of inflammation.
Leukocytosis-inducing factors released by injured cells
promote a rapid release of neutrophils from bone mar-
row, and the number of neutrophils in the bloodstream
increases four- to fivefold. Neutrophils usually migrate
randomly, but are attracted to inflammatory chemicals,
termed chemotactic agents, at the site of the injury.

The outpouring of fluid from the blood into the in-
jured area slows blood flow in the region, and neutrophils
begin to cling to the inner walls of the capillaries, a phe-
nomenon known as margination or pavementing. Neutro-
phils squeeze through the capillary walls, moving toward
the site of inflammation, and within an hour of initiation
of the inflammatory response, neutrophils are active at the
injury site. Neutrophils are followed by monocytes enter-
ing from the bloodstream. Monocytes are poor phago-
cytes, but within 8 to 12 hours after entering the tissues,
they swell, develop large numbers of lysosomes, and be-
come macrophages. Macrophages, which predominate at
sites of chronic inflammation, facilitate the final disposal
of cell debris as acute inflammation subsides.

----- PAGE 163 -----
A creamy, yellow pus may accumulate in the wound.
This is a mixture of dead or dying neutrophils, dead tis-
sue cells, and living and dead pathogens. If the inflamma-
tory mechanism fails to clear the area of debris, the sac of
pus may be walled off by collagen fibers to form an ab-
scess, Surgical drainage of the abscess may be necessary
before healing can occur.

Mediators of Inflammation

Many symptoms associated with disease are caused not di-
rectly by a pathogen, but rather by the body’s response to
the pathogen or by the release of chemical mediators. This
class of substances encompasses a wide range of com-
pounds, produced by many different tissues, that have pro-
found pharmacological effects in very small quantities.

Vasoactive Amines

Produced by mast cells, basophils, and platelets, vasoac-
tive amines are stored ready for release and act via his-
tamine receptors. Vascular smooth muscle is particularly
responsive in tissues that are subject to allergic responses.
Histamine possesses immediate but transient effects that
promote vasodilation of arterioles and increased perme-
ability of capillaries, thus permitting the formation of
exudate.

There are three major types of vasoactive amines.

¢ H1 increases vascular permeability, contraction of
smooth muscle, pulmonary vasoconstriction, chemoki-
nesis of leukocytes, and prostaglandin production in
the lungs.

¢ H2 promotes gastric and mucous secretions, elevates
cAMP levels, increases chemokinesis of leukocytes,
and activates suppressor T cells.

¢ H3 inhibits the synthesis and release of histamine.

Procyanidins from Hypericum ‘perforatum antagonize
histamine-induced arterial contractions.** Inhibition of
cellular phosphodiesterase might be involved in the un-
derlying mechanism of action. In addition to its role as a
neurotransmitter, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) is
present in platelets and is released after platelet aggrega-
tion. It has inflammatory properties similar to those of
histamine.

Complement and Complement Fragments

The complement system is made up of 20 proteins and
their cleavage products, all of which are found in blood
plasma. (These cleavage products are proteins designated
as C1 through C8 and factors B, D, and P.) They lead to
lysis of microbes, but also play a role in inflammation by

PHARMACOLOGY .@ 155

increasing vascular permeability and vasodilation; en-
hancing leukocyte adhesion, chemotaxis, and activation;
and promoting phagocytosis.

The complement pathway can be activated in two
ways, by either classic or alternate pathways. The classic
pathway is initiated by the binding of an antigen-antibody
complex to the C1 fragment, whereas the alternate path-
way is directly activated by bacterial endotoxins, complex
polysaccharides, or agpregated globulins.

Kinins

Kinins are highly bioactive peptides found in the pancreas
and a variety of other body tissues. (The word kinin
comes from the Greek kallikreas, meaning “pancreas.”)
The two primary groups of kinins, kallidin and brady-
kinin, are derived from precursors called kininogens. They
can cause vasodilation of small arteries, but tend to con-
strict large arteries and most veins regardless of size.
They also increase capillary permeability, edema, and
bronchial and intestinal smooth muscle contractions.
Kinins are powerful pain producers; their release may
have a role in the pathophysiology of migraines.

Arachidonic Acid Metabolites (Eicosanoids)

Because they are derived from the polyunsaturated
eicosanoic (C9) fatty acid known as arachidonic acid,
these compounds—thromboxanes, prostaglandins, epoxy-
genases, leukotrienes, and lipoxins—are collectively
known as ezcosanoids.

The eicosanoids are local mediators of receptor-
dependent events in a range of physiologic processes and
in a diverse group of human pathologies, including
bronchial asthma, inflammation, and coronary disease.
Arachidonic acid is derived from animal fats or through
conversion of linoleic acid from plants. It is bound to cell
membrane phospholipids and released by the action of
cellular phospholipases, which are activated by mechani-
cal, chemical, and physical stimuli.

Platelet-Activating Factors

Platelet-activating factors (PAF) have a remarkably broad
range of effects throughout the body. They are produced
in response to specific stimuli by a variety of cell types, in-
cluding neutrophils, basophils, platelets, and endothelial
cells. Several molecular types of PAF have been identi-
fied. They cause platelet aggregation, release of vasoac-
tive amines (histamine and serotonin), vasoconstriction,
bronchoconstriction, vasodilation (at low concentra-
tions), enhanced venule permeability, increased leuko-
cyte adhesion to endothelia, and leukocyte chemotaxis.

----- PAGE 164 -----
156. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Acyltransferase

cell membrane

Lyso-PAF/
1-0-alkyl-2 acyl-glycero-
phosphocholine
PAF Impacted by |
Acetyhydrolase PAF Phospholipase A,
Inhibitors

PAF Arachidonic acid

Lyso-PAF
PAF |

Acetyltransferase Cyclooxygenase

Prostaglandin |, -«—— Prostacyclin
synthase

a

Thromboxane synthase

“a

6-keto-prostaglandin F,.,

Thromboxane A, Impacted by
| Cyclooxygenase
Y Inhibitors

Thromboxane B,

'

2,3-dinor-thromboxane B,

Prostaglandin H,

fo Phospholipids from -*——— ESSENTIAL FATTY ACIDS IN DIET

15-HPETE ———# 15-HETE

a”

15-lipoxygenase 12-HPETE ———12-HETE

_ T2-lipoxygenase
eo

5S-HPETE ——— 5-HETE

\

5-lipoxygenase

5-lipoxygenase =-———7»

Leukotriene A,

ao

Leukotriene B. Leukotriene C,

Ny

LeukotrieneD,

'

Leukotriene E,

i

Leukotriene F,

Prostaglandin D, Impacted by
Lipoxygenase

Inhibitors
Prostaglandin E,

Prostaglandin F,.,

Fig. 9.8. The inflammation cascade

‘They also stimulate the synthesis of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes.

Oxygen-Derived Free Radicals

Reactive oxygen metabolites are released from neu-
trophils and macrophages after exposure to chemotactic
agents, immune complexes, or a phagocytic challenge.
Their release leads to endothelial cell damage and in-
creased vascular permeability. These reactive oxygen
metabolites are inactivated by serum antioxidants, such as
superoxide dismutase (SOD).

Nitric. Oxide

Nitric oxide (NO) is a soluble free radical gas generated
by nitric oxide synthases. NO relaxes vascular smooth
muscle, leading to vasodilation. Nitric oxide interacts
with superoxide anions to produce potent peroxynitrite
ions that cause oxidative damage. As nitric oxide and per-
oxynitrite are bactericidal, the ability of macrophages to
produce NO is important in their ability to defend against
some infections. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a catechin
contained in green tea, reduces NO production.°*?

Cytokines

Inflammatory responses are coordinated by cytokines de-
rived from various leukocytes and tissue cells. These
polypeptides function as “cellular hormones” or locally
acting cell-to-cell mediators that participate in intricate
networks in order to achieve their effects. Some elicit
early permeability changes in microvasculature, but most
are involved in coordinating the activities of cells essential
to inflammation and repair, including chemoattraction,
activation, secretion, phagocytosis, and proliferative ac-
tions. As examples of the significance of cytokines, con-
sider the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin 1 and
tumor necrosis factor (INF).

Interleukin 1 (0L1)

¢ Activates prostaglandin production in the hypothalamus
* Mediates pain and fever

¢ Potently activates mast cells, I’ cells, and endothelia

¢ Induces hepatic acute phase protein secretion

* Induces endothelial surface adhesion molecules for
leukocytes

Induces chemokines for leukocyte recruitment

----- PAGE 165 -----
PHARMACOLOGY @ 157

* Induces NO generation by macrophages * Stimulates a variety of cells, including endothelial cells
¢ Produces microvascular injury and hypotensive effects | * Induces synthesis of cell adhesion molecules
* Induces creation of gaps between endothelial cells

Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) * Induces synthesis and release of prostacyclin 1, (PGI,)
¢ Exerts effects similar to those of interleukin | and acts and PAF
synergistically with it * Increases thrombogenesis in endothelia

Pathways of Arachidonic Acid Metabolism

Arachidonic acid is metabolized via two metabolic pathways.

Cyclooxygenase Pathway

Cyclooxygenase converts arachidonic acid into prostaglandin intermediates, which in turn lead
to the formation of prostaglandins, prostacyclin, and thromboxanes. Prostaglandins are lipids
first isolated from prostate secretions in seminal fluid. Prostacyclin and thromboxanes are related
substances derived from the same intermediate compound. These compounds are produced by
most tissues of the body, but are found primarily in the brain, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, lung,
pancreas, uterus, and human menstrual blood. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
inhibit all products of the cyclooxygenase pathway. Prostaglandins are divided into groups des-
ignated D,, D2, E,, E,, and so on, on the basis of their ring structures.

« Thromboxane A,: Produced by platelets, thromboxane A; is essential for platelet aggregation
and functions as a vasoconstrictor.

© Prostaglandin D,: This prostaglandin constricts the pulmonary veins but dilates renal vasculature.

© Prostaglandin E,: This is a potent vasodilator that towers blood pressure. It generates fever,
causes pain by sensitizing nerve endings, and exerts cytoprotective effects in the gastric mu-
cosa. It is also a bronchodilator. Prostaglandin E, increases luteal progesterone secretion; it
constricts the muscles of the pregnant uterus, but relaxes the nonpregnant uterus.

* Prostacyclin: This prostaglandin intermediate is released by vascular endothelial cells and
exerts its influence via cAMP. It inhibits platelet aggregation, elicits vasodilation, and antago-
nizes the effects of thromboxane A>.

lsozymes, or isoenzymes, are chemically distinct forms of an enzyme that perform the same
biochemical function. Two isozymes of cyclooxygenase are known,

e COX-1: Constitutive cyclooxygenase is found in a variety of tissues, including the.stomach
mucosa.

* COX-2: Inducible cyclooxygenase is released from inflammatory cells only during the inflam-
matory response. Glucocorticoids block the induction of this enzyme.

Lipoxygenase Pathway
Lipoxygenase metabolizes arachidonic acid into compounds that are the basis of leukotrienes.
Leukotrienes are mediators derived from arachidonic acid through a different pathway than that
used in prostaglandin synthesis. A number of plant anti-inflammatory agents appear to work this
way. They are released primarily by anaphylactic mechanisms from mast cells and other in-
flammatory cells, especially in the lung. Like prostaglandins, leukotrienes are synthesized’ as
needed.

NSAIDs inhibit the cyclooxygenase but not the lipoxygenase pathway. Their use may, there-
fore, lead to increased or preferential synthesis of leukotrienes, which could be the basis for the
condition known as aspirin-induced asthma.

----- PAGE 166 -----
158 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Induces systemic effects of inflammation, such as fever
* Contributes to the hypotension of septic shock

New technology has allowed for detailed studies on
the interactions of herbs with cytokines. In a study inves-
tigating the immunomodulating and antitumor effects of
saponins from Solidago virgaurea, the compounds demon-
strated mitogenic effects on murine spleen and thymus
cells, as well on human mononuclear cells in vitro. Mice
treated with virgaureasaponin E showed phagocytosis of
bone marrow cells and proliferation of spleen and bone
marrow cells. In addition, TNF-a concentration in blood
increased in treated mice, compared with the control
group.

In another in vitro study, levels of IL1 and TNF pro-
duced by cultured rat Kupffer’s cells were increased in the
presence of an extract of Cordyceps sinensis. Poly-
saccharides from Panax notoginseng induced the produc-
tion of a significant amount of TNF-a in cell cultures.
The lectin known as Viscum album agelutinin-I induced
expression of interleukin 1 @, interleukin 1 B, interleukin 6,
TNF-a, interferon-y, granulocyte-monocyte colony
stimulating factor, and interleukin 10 genes.

Cell Adbesion Molecules

A number of membrane glycoproteins promote cell at-
tachment and participate in the inflammatory response.
Lectin cell adhesion molecules, or selectins, are expressed
on the surface of endothelia, leukocytes, and platelets.
They influence leukocyte-endothelial adhesion at sites of
inflammation. Integrins are adhesion molecules involved
in regulation of cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion. They
are transmembrane in structure, thus linking or “inte-
grating” exterior or surface stimuli to the internal cell cy-
toskeleton. Baicalein, a flavonoid from Scutellaria baicalen-
sis, inhibited interleukin 1 B and TNF-a and induced
endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 (ELAM-1) and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ((CAM-1) expressions.®

Interferon

Lacking the cellular machinery to synthesize proteins,
viruses invade cells and take over metabolic processes in
order to reproduce themselves. The infected cells help
protect uninfected cells by secreting small proteins called
interferons. Interferon molecules diffuse to nearby cells,
stimulating synthesis of other proteins that inhibit or in-
terfere with viral replication in those cells. The protec-
tion conferred by interferons is not virus specific, but
rather host specific. Thus, mouse interferons have little
or no antiviral activity in humans.

Interferon is a group of proteins, each of which has
different physiological effects. Lymphocytes secrete in-
terferon-y, but most other leukocytes produce interferon-
a. In addition to being antiviral, all interferons activate
macrophages, and interferon-y mobilizes natural killer
cells.

While macrophages and natural killer cells act di-
rectly against malignant cells, interferons are assumed to
have some anticancer role. In a study, mistletoe extract,
derived from Viscum album grown on pine trees, stimu-
lated peripheral mononuclear cells in blood from healthy
donors. An increase of interferon-y and interleukin 2 was
also observed.

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS

As can be seen from the brief discussion above, the term
inflammation covers a complex series of reparative and
protective responses to tissue injury, whether caused by
infection, autoimmune stimuli, or mechanical injury.
Anti-inflammatory substances must address similar mech-
anisms, but compounds differ in their specific mecha-
nisms of activity because their actions focus upon differ-
ent inflammatory mediators.

Currently used anti-inflammatory agents, such as
NSAIDs, inhibit cyclooxygenase and therefore prosta-
glandin synthesis. These also have antipyretic activity,
since prostaglandins are implicated in the mediation of
fever. Free radical-scavenging agents also play a role in
inflammation, because liberation of such radicals damages
tissue during the inflammatory process. Flavonoids and
other phenolics are thought to act by preventing either
the generation or the action of free radicals. Studies have
shown that quercetin inhibits the action of lipoxygenase
on arachidonic acid, the release of histamine from mast
cells and basophils, and the generation of superoxide
anion.

Phospholipid-Derived Inflammatory
Mediators as Biological Targets

The level of free arachidonic acid at the site of inflamma-
tion is regulated by phospholipases, which hydrolyze
phospholipids, but also by re-esterification catalyzed by
acyl-CoA transferases. The released arachidonic acid may
be metabolized oxidatively by several different enzymatic
routes.

Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthases catalyze the
production of prostaglandin endoperoxides, which can be
converted to prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and prosta-
cyclin. These inflammatory mediators are completely or

----- PAGE 167 -----
partially responsible for increased blood vessel permeabil-
ity, dilation of vessels, chemotaxis of granulocytes, degra-
dation of cartilage, and proliferation of B- and T-lym-
phocytes. Arachidonic acid is further metabolized by
monooxygenases to hydroxy acids and epoxides.

The three main groups of lipoxygenases (15-, 12-,
and 5-lipoxygenases) specifically introduce molecular
oxygen into arachidonic acid and form the hydroperoxy
acids. 5-lipoxygenase also converts 5-hydroperoxy acid to
leukotriene Ay, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of
leukotrienes and lipoxins. The leukotrienes are very po-
tent inducers of granulocyte chemotaxis and are involved
in inflammatory conditions such as asthma.

Upon hydrolysis of membrane-bound phospholipids
by phospholipase A2 (PLA2), lysophospholipids are liber-
ated, forming the precursor to yet another inflammatory
mediator, PAF At the cellular level, PAF causes contrac-
tion of smooth muscle and an increase in vascular perme-
ability and platelet aggregation. It also stimulates exocyto-
sis in both platelets and leukocytes, the secretory process
by which substances contained in vesicles are discharged
from cells by a fusion of the vesicle membrane with the
cell membrane.

Nonsteroidal substances with different biosynthetic
origins have been isolated from plants and shown to
demonstrate inhibitory activity against the target enzymes
cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase. The most potent cy-
clooxygenase inhibitors are found among the flavonoids,
phenolic phenylpropane derivatives, naphthoquinones,
alkylamides, diaryl heptane derivatives, and tannins.

Among several classes of 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, a
number of substances with antioxidant properties have
been described, the most dominant of which are phenolic
substances with catechol structures. Another group con-
sists of arachidonic acid analogs and substances related to
long-chain unsaturated fatty acids.

Many potent natural products belonging to different
subclasses have been shown to affect PAF, including the
neolignan kadsurenone, the diterpene group of ginkgo-
lides, and the sesquiterpene manoalide.”

CANCER AND PLANT
CONSTITUENTS

Cancer is a term applied to malignant diseases that affect
many different parts of the body. These diseases are char-
acterized by a rapid and uncontrolled formation of ab-
normal cells, which may mass together to form a growth
or tumor, or proliferate throughout the body, initiating
abnormal growth at other sites. If the process is not ar-

PHARMACOLOGY ce 159

Natural Products with Influence on
Phospholipid-Derived Mediators

Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
« Flavonoids
« Phenolic phenylpropane derivatives
* Naphthoquinones
« Alkyl amides
¢ ‘Tannins

5-lipoxygenase Inhibitors

* Phenolic structures
* Arachidonic acid analogs
* long-chain unsaturated fatty acids

Dual Inhibitors
* Diary] heptanoids, such as falcarindiol®

PAF ‘Antagonists
¢ Ginkgolides

« Lignans and.neolignans

L

rested, it may progress until it causes the death of the or-
ganism. Cancer is encountered in all higher animals, and
plants also develop growths that resemble cancer.

Carcinogenicity, the process that leads to cancer, is a
complex course of abnormal cell growth and differentia-
tion. At least two stages are recognized: initiation and
promotion. In initiation, a normal cell undergoes irre-
versible changes. During promotion, initiated cells are
stimulated to progress to cancer. Chemicals can act as
both initiators and promoters of cancerous changes.

The initial neoplastic transformation results from the
mutation of the cellular genes that control normal cell
functions. The mutation may lead to abnormal cell
growth, and may cause loss of suppressor genes that usu-
ally restrict abnormal cell growth. Many other factors
may also be involved, including growth factors, immune
suppression, and hormones.

Research is revealing the chemical basis for the repu-
tations of many well-known anticancer remedies and sug-
gesting new possibilities for other plants. The phyto-
chemical examination of plants with a history of
traditional use for cancer often results in the isolation of
principles with antitumor activity. An important survey
lists more than 1,400 genera of plants with a history of use
in cancer treatments,”°"!

----- PAGE 168 -----
160 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

One group of important plant materials used clini-
cally are the alkaloids of Madagascar periwinkle (Catbar-
anthus roseus).”* Research was stimulated by its traditional
use in the treatment of diabetes, but the susceptibility of
the treated test animals to bacterial infection led the re-
searchers to look for possible immunosuppressive effects.
Alkaloids with antileukemic activity were found, and vin-
blastine and vincristine are now used, either alone or in
combination with other therapies, for cancer treatment.
Differences exist among the kinds of tumors that respond
to these alkaloids. Vinblastine is mainly useful in the
treatment of Hodgkin’s disease, a cancer affecting the
lymph glands, spleen, and liver, while vincristine is used
for childhood leukemia.

Cytotoxic agents target cells that are dividing rapidly,
and since cancer cells proliferate faster than most normal
cells, such agents can be toxic to the cancer cells. A wide
variety of phytochemicals are cytotoxic. For example,
many cytotoxic alkaloids have been described, including
aconitine, acronycine, bisindole, camptothecine, colchi-
cine, ellipticine, emetine, maytansine, and pyrrolizidines,
as well as alkaloids from Taxus. Other secondary metabo-
lites demonstrating cytotoxicity include cardenolides,
coumarins, coumarolignans, diterpenes, flavonoids, iri-
doids, lignans, monoterpenes, quinones, sesquiterpenes,
sesquiterpene lactones, and saponins.

The Cell Cycle

‘To appreciate phytochemical-cell interactions, the vari-
ous stages in the life cycle of cells must be taken into ac-
count, including proliferation, differentiation, and cell
death. The cell cycle is an ordered set of events, culmi-
nating in cell growth and division into two daughter cells.
The cell cycle has four phases: G1, S, G2, and M. The S-
stage stands for synthesis. This is the stage in which DNA
replication occurs. The M-stage stands for tosis, and is
when nuclear chromosomes separate and cytoplasmic di-
vision (cytokinesis) occurs.

G] is a time period of quiescence that varies in dura-
tion. During this stage, the cell carries out its normal role
in supporting the life of the organism. If there is a com-
mitment to proliferation, then purines and pyrimidines
(building blocks for DNA synthesis) must be produced.

The cell enters the active reproductive phase of the
cell cycle in the later part of Gl, at which time nu-
cleotides and enzymes are synthesized. In the S-phase,
DNA synthesis occurs, replicating DNA for the new cell.
An enzyme of this system that is particularly vulnerable to
plant chemicals is topoisomerase, which separates the
daughter DNA strands. In the next phase, G2, the cell

prepares other structures needed for mitosis. The M phase
is mitosis itself, in which two daughter cells, which will
subsequently enter the cycle themselves, are produced.

M
(mitosis)

G2
(Gap 2)

Cells that
cease division

S-phase
(ONA
synthesis)

Fig. 9.9. The cell cycle

In a given tissue or tumor, the fraction of cells that
are currently proliferating in the M- or S-phase is called
the growth fraction. The higher the growth fraction, the
faster the tissue is growing. Normal proliferative tissues
have growth fractions of 20% to 30%, whereas the
growth fractions of tumors range from 20% to 70%. The
higher the growth fraction, the more susceptible the
tumor is to chemotherapy. Larger tumors have smaller
growth fractions, one of the reasons they are harder to
combat with chemotherapy.

Cytotoxics target cells with a high growth fraction,
and since cancer cells proliferate faster than most normal
cells, they are the ones most affected. Normal cells with a
high proliferation rate (such as hair follicles, the lining of
the gastrointestinal tract, and bone marrow) suffer the
same consequences, accounting for chemotherapy side ef-
fects such as hair loss, nausea, digestive impairment, im-
munosuppression, and hematologic complications.

Most flavonoids induce G1 arrest in human cancer
cells, and the isoflavone genistein specifically inhibits
their cell cycle at the G2- through M-phases. Apigenin (a
flavone) was found to inhibit the proliferation of B104 rat
neuronal cells by arresting their cell cycle at G2- through
M-phases.”?

Cell cycle-specific agents interrupt the cell cycle
during either the synthesis or the mitosis phase. The
tumor must be growing in order for them to be effective,
as they depend on the presence of cell proliferation to
exert their actions. Thus, S-phase drugs affect DNA syn-
thesis. M-phase drugs affect mitosis or the mitotic spin-
dle, and are used primarily against rapidly proliferating
cancers, such as leukemias, since cells from these cancers
enter the S- or M-phases more frequently than do cells of

----- PAGE 169 -----
slow-growing cancers. (The spindle in a cell is a structure
composed of microtubules along which chromosomes
move during cell division.)

Cell cycle-nonspecific agents interrupt the cell cycle
regardless of which phase the cell is in. They directly
damage DNA and so do not depend on cell proliferation
to exert their effects. Although they can kill any cell, they
still have the greatest effect on proliferating cells, and are
used primarily against slow-growing cancers, such as
most solid tumors.

The Stages of Metastasis

Metastasis is the process by which cancer cells spread to
sites distant from the primary tumor. The process re-
quires that the cancer cells enter the vascular system—in
other words, the lymphatic vessels, veins, and arteries.
Once within the system, the cancer cells are transported
passively to distant sites. In the lymph system, they are
trapped in lymph nodes, which may serve as temporary
barriers. They may enter the blood vessels by extension
from lymph nodes or, more rarely, by passing directly
through the connective tissue sheath surrounding the
lymph nodes. The cancer cells are eventually entrapped
in the smallest branches of blood vessels, the capillaries.
Cancer cells thus trapped are the “seeds” from which
larger colonies of tumor cells grow into secondary sites,
called metastases.

Cell Detachment and Intravasation

Once detached from the primary tumor, cancer cells con-
tact a blood vessel and enzymatically digest the basement
membrane. ‘Tumor cells then slip between vascular en-
dothelial cells to enter the vessel. This process, called
intravasation, is expedited by the weak basement mem-
branes and fragile capillaries that develop during neovas-
cularization. “hus, an intact basement membrane is a
barrier to intravasation.

Detachment may be stimulated by decreased expres-
sion on the cell’s surface membrane of adhesion mole-
cules, which mediate cell-cell and cell-matrix interac-
tions. Examples are cell-surface lectins and lectin-binding
polysaccharides. Polysaccharides may inhibit neoplasia by
directly affecting these adhesion molecules.

Cell Arrest

Cancer cells leave the bloodstream by attaching to a capil-
lary wall, a process known as cell arrest. Cell arrest is pro-
moted by the denuding of the basement membrane, tumor
cell aggregation, platelet aggregation, and thrombus for-
mation, processes that might be impacted with herbs.

PHARMACOLOGY e161

Differentiation

Cancer cells can be thought of as cells that regain the
ability to proliferate. Much work has been done to iden-
tify oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that are
thought to control this abnormal proliferative state. One
approach to therapy has been to try to induce cells to dif
ferentiate into more specialized cells that will therefore
stop proliferating.

CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS

A number of underlying mechanisms have been identified
to explain the activity of chemotherapeutic agents,
whether synthetic or of plant origin.

DNaA- Interactive Agents and
‘Topoisomerase II Inhibitors

These alter DNA structure and interfere with its func-
tions in a number of different ways. One mechanism in-
volves inhibition of the enzyme topoisomerase II. Chromo-
somal DNA exists in a dynamic, three-dimensional
arrangement known as its topologic state. The topo-
isomerases regulate this topologic state, facilitating the
unwinding of the coiled DNA molecules and playing a
critical role in the regulation of DNA replication and
transcription.

Topoisomerase I catalyzes the relaxation of super-
coiled DNA by briefly severing one of the two DNA
strands. Topoisomerase II mediates the passage of one
double-strand DNA segment through another by the for-
mation of a temporary “gate” through both strands of one
segment.

Etoposide and teniposide are semisynthetic lignan
derivatives of podophyllotoxin from the mayapples
Podophyllum hexandrum and P. peltatum, Although not
used clinically, podophyllotoxin is an antimitotic agent
that binds to tubulin. Its derivatives, known as
epipodophyllotoxins, do not affect microtubular assem-
bly at pharmacological concentrations, but act as in-
hibitors of topoisomerase II, stabilizing DNA double-
strand breaks. Cells are prevented from progressing
beyond G2. Etoposide is used in the treatment of small-
cell lung cancer and testicular cancer, and teniposide in
pediatric cancers.

The isoflavone genistein decreases the incidence and
number of tumors in animal models of cancer.” Proposed
mechanisms include inhibition of angiogenesis, interac-
tion with steroid hormone receptors, inhibition of tyrosine
kinase, inhibition of radical oxygen species formation, and
interaction with topoisomerase.’*&’7 Research suggests

----- PAGE 170 -----
162 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

that genistein stabilizes the enzyme-DNA complex in such
a way that both strands are nicked and DNA breaks occur.
This leads to altered gene expression and cell differentia-
tion, with an associated decrease in cell proliferation.”

Microtubules and Tubulin-Interactions
Some molecules damage the cellular machinery neces-
sary for cell division. Tubulin is a protein that polymer-
izes to form microtubules, structural components that
are critical to spindle and aster formation during mitosis,
but that also help maintain cell shape, cellular motility,
attachment, and intracellular transport.”? Inhibition of
tubulin polymerization into microtubules leads to the
disappearance of the spindle.

The target site of action for the vinca alkaloids and
the “taxoids” (natural and synthetic analogs of Taxus alka-
loids) is microtubule formation. The vinca alkaloids vin-
blastine and vincristine, from the Madagascar periwinkle
(Catharanthus roseus), promote microtubule disassembly
by binding to tubulin, stopping mitosis at the
metaphase.*? Taxol (Paclitaxel) is extracted from the bark
of the Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia), as well as the needles
and stems of other yews. The semisynthetic docetaxel is
derived from baccatin III, found in the needles of the
English yew (Iaxus baccata).

Cells treated in vitro with Paclitaxel form disorga-
nized bundles of microtubules in all phases of the cell
cycle. Cells are either arrested in mitosis or in the G- or
S-phase.®! Taxoids are used in ovarian, breast, and non-
small-cell lung cancer, Response rates have varied from
30% to 70%.”

Hormonal Agents

These inhibit the growth of endocrine-responsive neo-
plastic tissues, either directly through specific receptor
interactions or indirectly through modulation of endoge-
nous hormone metabolism. A variety of hormone ago-
nists and antagonists are used to hamper the growth of tu-
mors that have not yet lost their hormone response
mechanisms. Some flavonoids and isoflavonoids re-
versibly inhibit the growth of certain cancer cells that
contain Type II estrogen-binding sites. The affinity of
flavonoids for these binding sites correlates with their
growth-inhibiting activity.

Biological Response Modifiers

Biological response modifiers directly or indirectly utilize
the immune system to counter cancer or minimize the
side effects of many treatments. They represent an at-

tempt to repair, stimulate, or enhance the immune sys-
tem’s natural anticancer function. Theoretically, biologi-
cal response modifiers may offer ways to make cancer
cells more susceptible to destruction by the immune re-
sponse. They may also alter the growth patterns of cancer
cells to promote behavior similar to that of healthy cells,
block or reverse cancer activity, enhance the body’s ability
to repair cells damaged by chemotherapy or radiation, or
prevent metastases.

A variety of biological response modifiers are being
used clinically. Mycopolysaccharides are currently used in
Japan as biological response modifiers in the treatment of
cancer.

Cytokines and Cancer

Cytokines are regulatory proteins that are released by
cells of the immune system to act as intercellular media-
tors of the immune response. They are thus intimately in-
volved in all cancer stages.

Interleukins

Many interleukins, or regulatory cytokines, have been iden-
tified; interleukin 2 has been the most studied in cancer
treatment. It stimulates the growth and activities of im-
mune cells that destroy cancer cells, such as lymphocytes.
In one study, the flavonoid baicalein, from Seutellaria baica-
lensis, inhibited endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-
and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ((CAM-1), the
production of which are induced by IL1f and TNF-o.®*

Tumor Necrosis Factor

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) damages tumor cells and
blood vessels within tumors. Although TNF has antitu-
mor activity in laboratory studies, the dose needed for a
clinical effect is extremely toxic. Taraxacum officinale has
been shown to inhibit the production of TNF-o. from rat

astrocytes.®

Colony-Stimulating Factors

Colony-stimulating factors (CSF) promote bone marrow
cell activity. They have the potential to protect or restore
hematopoietic activity in bone marrow after damage
caused by chemotherapy or radiation. This may stimulate
immune system components and enhance the antitumor
activity of other therapies. CSFs are often used in combi-
nation with high-dose chemotherapy. In a study of the
CSF-inducing activity of Amazonian plants, isoflavone
glycosides from Dalbergia monetaria produced significant
effects.%

----- PAGE 171 -----
Interferons

Interferons have an array of immunomodulating, anti-
neoplastic, and antiviral properties. They are small, solu-
ble proteins generated by cells when infected by RNA- or
DNaA-containing viruses. They may act directly on can-
cer cells by inhibiting their growth or by promoting their
development into cells with more normal behavior. It ap-
pears that some interferons also may stimulate B and T
cells, strengthening the immune system’s overall anti-
cancer function.

The medical use of interferons has been limited by
their associated toxicity. However, another approach in-
volves stimulating the natural cellular sources of interfer-
ons. A number of medicinal plants and constituents have
been shown to stimulate the release of interferons. Garlic
is one such plant, but also one with a role in the treatment
and prevention of cancer that goes far beyond this single
mechanism.®?

Agents That Interfere with Cell Arrest

Treatment of endothelial cells with cytokines induces the
expression of specific leukocyte adhesion molecules on
cell surfaces. A number of flavonoids inhibit cytokine-
induced endothelial cell adhesion protein gene expres-
sion. Since interfering with this process of adhesion may
constitute a therapeutic target, flavonoid-rich plants may
hold promise as cancer treatments.*

Natural Agents That Induce

Differentiation

Some flavonoids can promote the differentiation of un-
differentiated malignant cells into mature phenotypes.
For example, the isoflavone genistein stimulates mouse
erythroleukemia cells to synthesize hemoglobin.*®
Isoflavones have been shown to inhibit proliferation, pro-
mote differentiation, and exert chemopreventive effects.”
Genistein and daidzein are differentiation inducers and
tyrosine protein kinase inhibitors.

Some malignancies may progress because of a block in
differentiation activity; induction of differentiation may be
useful in treating such malignancies. Both plant extracts
and constituents can induce differentiation in human
leukemia, melanoma, colon carcinoma, bladder carci-
noma, and brain cancer, as well as in a variety of mouse
cancer cell lines.°! When these cells are exposed to differ-
entiating agents, they may develop into normal cells, los-
ing the ability to proliferate.

PHARMACOLOGY .2 = 163

Necrosis and Apoptosis

It appears that the primary mechanism by which most
chemotherapeutic agents induce cell death is by causing
damage, especially genetic damage. Death of cancer cells
may occur either as a result of necrosis or of apoptosis.

Necrosis is the process of cell death that occurs in re-
sponse to external events, such as hypoxia (oxygen depri-
vation), chemical exposure, and radiation injury. Cells
swell, become vacuolated, and are finally digested either
by their own enzymes or by the enzymes of neutrophils.
Necrosis generally occurs in contiguous cells and is ac-
companied by an inflammatory response. Many cur-
rently available cancer treatments induce necrosis.

In contrast to necrosis, apoptosis is defined as pro-
grammed cell death, a process that triggers rapid DNA
damage, condensation of chromatin, and fragmentation
of DNA. Apoptosis is an orderly method for removing
old, damaged, or otherwise unwanted cells. The word is
derived from the Greek apo, meaning “apart,” and ptosis,
meaning “fallen.”

In apoptosis, the cell fragments and is phagocytized
by macrophages or neutrophils without causing inflam-
mation, and so adjacent cells are not damaged. Several
chemotherapeutic agents that cause DNA damage also
lead to apoptosis, and it is possible that natural agents
may facilitate this process. Defects in apoptosis may be
implicated in both the initiation and the proliferation of
cancer cells, One possible cause of cancer is that apopto-
sis fails to remove cells with damaged DNA, allowing
them to survive long enough to progress from the initia-
tion stage to the promotion and proliferation stages.”

Plants That Induce Apoptosis

The ability of plants to arrest the proliferation of cancer
cells by influencing apoptosis has been the topic of much
research. Agents that have been found to induce apop-
tosis include extracts of plants like mistletoe (Viscum
album) and Semecarpus anacardium. Isolated compounds
like bryonolic acid, crocin (from saffron), and allicin have
also been found to induce apoptosis and thereby arrest
proliferation. The discovery that Panax ginseng prevents
irradiation-induced apoptosis in hair follicles may have
important therapeutic implications. Soy, garlic, ginger,
green tea, and other herbs suggested by epidemiological
research to reduce the incidence of cancer may do so by
inducing apoptosis.

Apoptosis is a highly conserved mechanism of self-
defense that has also been observed to occur in plants. It

----- PAGE 172 -----
164. = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

is natural to assume that they must contain chemicals
that regulate programmed cell death in their own tissues.
Thus, plants are likely to prove to be important sources
of agents able to modulate programmed cell death in
humans.

Mistletoe and Apoptosis

The European mistletoe (Viscum album), used as adjuvant
cancer therapy, has immunostimulant and cytotoxic ef-
fects. While polysaccharides are immunostimulant,
lectins, such as those in mistletoe, are cytotoxic. Lectins
are proteins that cause agglutination of cells. In vitro
studies show that mistletoe lectins inhibit tumor growth
and cause the DNA in the tumor cells to fragment, as
would be expected in apoptosis. There is evidence that
these lectins cause membrane damage that leads to necro-
sis as well as DNA damage indicative of apoptosis.”

Angiogenesis

A growing tumor induces the development of its own
blood supply, a process called angiogenesis. Angiogenesis
facilitates tumor growth by supplying the tumor with
oxygen and nutrients and providing ready access to the
blood circulation, thus assisting metastasis. This process
is not limited to malignant tumors, as it also occurs in be-
nign tumors, some non-neoplastic diseases, and healthy
tissue during wound healing, ovulation, menstruation,
and pregnancy.

Numerous angiogenic compounds are found
throughout the body, which stimulate angiogenesis only
under specific, but poorly understood, circumstances.
Two ginseng saponins have been shown to possess the
ability to inhibit the metastasis of tumor cells to the lungs.
The researchers hypothesized that the mechanism for this
antimetastatic effect involved antiangiogenic activity as
well as inhibition of adhesion and invasion of tumor
cells.%

Anticarcinogens

A review published in 1992 cites more than 200 studies
that correlate fruit and vegetable intake with protective
effects against various cancers.” Although the vitamins
and minerals in these foods are a factor, nonnutritive
constituents are believed to also play a significant anti-
carcinogenic role.

‘Two mechanisms have been suggested by which such
dietary components may inhibit carcinogenesis: by block-
ing the action of carcinogens or tumor promoters and by
suppressing the evolution of initiated cells.°® Blocking
agents act by at least four mechanisms:

1. Inhibit the metabolism of noncarcinogenic com-
pounds into carcinogenic compounds

2. Induce enzyme systems that detoxify carcinogens

Scavenge free radicals

Prevent tumor promoters from reaching or reacting

with their cellular targets

BY

Brassica and Allium species contain a variety of anti-
carcinogenic substances. Regular consumption of crucif-
erous vegetables (such as cabbage and broccoli) is associ-
ated with reduced rates of colon, lung, and other cancers
in humans. This has led to the hypothesis that cancer may
be a disease of maladaptation to diets that lack a rich va-
riety of these compounds.”

ANTIVIRAL AGENTS

The term antiviral is used in many ways, depending on
what endpoint criteria are used. In theory, an antiviral
compound can work in one of several different manners.
Some exert a direct virucidal effect, inhibiting viral repli-
cation in the infected host. This method of action en-
compasses virucidal agents that kill viruses extracellularly,
as well as the so-called true antivirals that interfere with
specific steps in the viral replication process.

An antiviral compound may also work by interfering
with the virus replication cycle directly, at some stage be-
tween viral adsorption and the emergence of progeny
viruses from the infected cell. Finally, some agents pro-
tect cells from subsequent virus infection through an
interferon-like induction of host antiviral mechanisms.

The effects of a given antiviral compound might be
specific to one virus or have more general activities. No
standard assay for evaluating the antiviral properties of
plants has been developed, and most of the methods in
current use come from chemists, these procedures ‘yield
chemical data without taking bioactivity into account.
Any useful antiviral should be noncytotoxic at effective
concentrations, although cell cultures vary tremendously
in their sensitivities to some compounds, making extrap-
olation difficult.

Plant Extracts with Antiviral Activity

Ethnobotany is bringing many potential antiviral plants
to the attention of the research community. For example,
one study reported on the antiviral activity of 40 different
species used by the Australian Aboriginal people. They
were tested at noncytotoxic concentrations for activity
against human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), Ross River
virus (RRV), and poliovirus type 1. The plants most active

----- PAGE 173 -----
against poliovirus were the aerial parts of Pterocaulon
sphacelatum and the roots of Dianella longifolia. Euphorbia
australis and Scaevola spinescens were the most active
against HCMV. Eremophila latrobei and Pittosporum phylli-
raeoides exhibited activity against RRV.!©°

A range of plant constituents that inhibit different
stages in the replication cycle of viruses has been identi-
fied. A recent review of those that impact replication of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) highlighted the

following constituents. !°!

Table 9.3. Plant Constituents That Inhibit HIV

STEP IN VIRAL REPLICATION CONSTITUENT TYPES

Viral adsorption Chromone alkaloids
Isoquinoline alkaloids
Sulfated polysaccharides
Sulfated polyphenolics
Flavonoids

Coumarins
Phenylpropenoids
Tannins and triterpenes
Lectins

Virus cell fusion

Triterpenes

Reverse transcription Alkaloids
Coumarins
Flavonoids
Phloroglucinols
Lactones
Tannins

lridoids

Triterpenes

Integration Coumarins
Depsidones
O-caffeoyl derivatives

Lignans

Phenolics

PHARMACOLOGY -2 165

STEP IN VIRAL REPLICATION CONSTITUENT TYPES
Proteolytic cleavage Saponins
(protease inhibition)
Xanthones
Coumarins
Glycosylation Indolizidine alkaloids
Piperidines
Pyrrolizidines
Assembly/release Naphthodianthrones
Photosensitizers

Phospholipids

ANTIOXIDANTS AND FREE RADICAL
SCAVENGERS

Although oxygen is essential for life, breathing pure oxy-
gen at atmospheric pressure for longer than 48 hours will
lead to respiratory distress and death. This toxicity is not
caused by oxygen per se, but rather by highly reactive ions
produced from oxygen. Under normal conditions, these
reactive molecules are produced by the body (and indeed
are part of normal metabolism), but their rate of produc-
tion does not exceed the capacity of cells to catabolize
them. When their production exceeds the capacity of the
body’s natural defenses, a variety of diseases can occur,
such as cancer, stroke, and neurodegeneration.

Of course, animals are not the only living beings that
utilize antioxidants. The enzyme ascorbate peroxidase,
for example, prevents oxidative damage in plants, espe-
cially in nitrogen-fixing root nodules, by scavenging cel-
lular hydrogen peroxide. The growing root nodules of al-
falfa (Medicago sativa) contain elevated levels of this
antioxidant, as well as its corresponding mRNA transcript
and substrate. High levels of antioxidants found in these
nodules are indicative of their role in plants and ani-
mals.!°

Thus, the fact that antioxidant compounds can be ex-
pected to be present in plants has led to much research
activity. As an example, a 1995 paper reported on the re-
sults of testing for superoxide anion-scavenging effects in
65 plant extracts. Of these, horse chestnut (Aesculus bip-
‘pocastanum) and witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) were
found to have strong scavenging and protective activities
against cell damage induced by active oxygen, leading the
researchers to propose potential applications for these
plants as antiaging or antiwrinkle treatments for the skin.'

----- PAGE 174 -----
166 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Chemical reactions involving radicals are central to
the maintenance of homeostasis. They play a fundamen-
tal role in physiological processes, such as oxidative trans-
formation reactions mediated by cytochrome P459, enzy-
matic oxidation reactions, oxidative phosphorylation,
smooth muscle tone regulation, and elimination of mi-
croorganisms. However, excessive generation of free rad-
icals can damage tissue, so cells have a range of biochem-
ical defense systems designed to safeguard them against
such damage. When the generation of pro-oxidants over-
whelms the capacity of antioxidant systems, oxidative stress
ensues. This in turn may cause tissue damage and subse-
quent pathophysiological events.

Free Radicals

A free radical is an atom or molecule that contains a sin-
gle unpaired electron. This condition makes the molecule
extremely reactive and causes the formation of molecular
links that normally would not occur.

The term reactive oxygen species (ROS) describes oxy-
gen-centered radicals, such as superoxide (O,) and hy-
droxyl (OH), as well as nonradical species derived from
oxygen, such as hydrogen peroxide (H,0,), singlet oxy-
gen, and hypochlorous acid (HOCI). The concept of
species in chemistry has nothing to do with the biological
use of that term, but refers instead to a chemical entity,
such as a radical, ion, molecule, or atom.

Damage done by free radicals in the body includes
peroxidation of membrane lipids, oxidative damage to nu-
cleic acids and carbohydrates, and oxidation of susceptible
groups in proteins. They also appear to initiate and pro-
mote carcinogenesis. An involvement of ROS in aging
and in many chronic diseases has been proposed.

Causes of Free Radical Production in the Body
* Cellular respiration

* Trace element metabolism

* Radiation

© Pollution

* Cell death and tissue injury

° Toxins

© Xenobiotics (chemical pollutants)
* Immune system activation

¢ Inflammation

© Reperfusion injury

¢ Metabolism

¢ Diet

Lipids

Lipids are hydrophobic compounds, some of which are
integral to the structure of membranes and the regulation
of membrane fluidity. Unsaturated fatty acids are particu-
larly susceptible to attack by hydroxyl free radicals, a pro-
cess that generates the formation of lipid peroxides.
Peroxidation of unsaturated fatty acids alters the structure
of the cell membrane, thereby disturbing normal mem-
brane function.

Protein oxidation enhances the metabolic breakdown
of membranes and has major deleterious effects on nor-
mal function, especially if oxidation occurs at a crucial
area of structure, such as the active site of the enzyme
molecule. Thus, the defense provided by antioxidant sys-
tems is critical to survival.

MECHANISMS OF ANTIOXIDANT
PROTECTION

A number of mechanisms diminish the harmful effects of
oxidants in the cell. These mechanisms are generally suf-
ficient to maintain homeostasis, because free radicals are
fairly easily controlled under normal conditions.
However, when these defense mechanisms are over-
whelmed and the cell enters a state of oxidative stress, a
wide variety of diseases can result. Detoxification of ROS
in the cell is provided by both enzymic and nonenzymic
systems that constitute the antioxidant defense systems. A
third important antioxidant system is the body’s use of
metal chelators to block the formation of free radicals.

Enzymic Systems

Some enzymic systems, such as superoxide dismutase
(SOD) and catalase, act specifically against ROS, while cer-
tain other enzyme systems reduce the sulfur-containing
thiols.

Superoxide dismutase is present in cytosol and mitochondria.

Catalase, a highly reactive enzyme found in peroxisomes,
breaks down hydrogen peroxide to oxygen and water.

Glutathione peroxidase (one of the few enzymes found in
humans that require selenium for its activity) occurs in
the mitochondria and cytosol and reduces organic hy-
droperoxides and hydrogen peroxide.

Sulfhydryl Compounds and Glutathione

Many thiols exist in the body, either in a free state, as free
dimers, or covalently linked to a protein. Thiols, inchud-
ing sulfhydryl compounds and glutathione, are very effi-
cient reducing agents.

----- PAGE 175 -----
Glutathione (g-glutamylcysteinylglycine, or GSH)
is a sulfhydryl antioxidant, antitoxin, and enzyme cofac-
tor found ubiquitously in living systems. Adequate cel-
lular concentrations of glutathione maintain a strong re-
ducing environment. GSH detoxifies hydrogen peroxide
in a reaction catalyzed by glutathione peroxidase and
also participates in the transport of amino acids across
cell membranes.

Nonenzymic Systems

Nonenzymic antioxidants are less specific and may be
water-soluble or lipid-soluble, depending on their sites of
action in the cell membranes. These compounds react
with free radicals without generating further radical pro-
duction, and so scavenge and quench various other radi-
cals in addition to ROS. A variety of such antioxidants
with a range of different structures exist.

Vitamin C

Ascorbic acid, or vitamin C, is an essential compound for
human health and is a universal component of plant cells.
Tt is a reducing agent, involved in hydroxylation reactions
and other redox (oxidation-reduction) reactions, and is
capable of chelating metals. Ascorbic acid protects other
antioxidants, such as vitamin A, vitamin E, and essential
fatty acids, from oxidative damage.

Vitamin C and flavonoids coexist in plants and are
eaten together in the diet. Flavonoids possess antioxidant-
dependent, vitamin C-sparing activities. They are also
known to increase the absorption of vitamin C.

Flavonoids and Polyphenols
Many plant constituents scavenge free radicals.
Polyphenols, especially flavonoids, are very efficient rad-
ical scavengers. As discussed in chapter 7, flavonoids con-
sist of structurally similar compounds that differ only in
the degree of ring substitution, the type of substitution,
and the type and degree of glycosylation.

Phagocytic white blood cells, such as monocytes,
neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages, all generate
ROS. Radical production by phagocytes is an important
part of their bactericidal and antitumor functions, as
phagocytosis is accompanied by an increase in oxygen
consumption (called the respiratory burst) with an atten-
dant production of oxygen ions. These highly reactive
oxygen metabolites promote inflammation, causing tissue
damage. In addition to scavenging radicals, flavonoids can
inhibit the formation of these oxygen ions.

Dietary exposure to flavonoids is significant, The av-

PHARMACOLOGY @ 167

erage diet in the United Kingdom and the United States
may contain up to | gram of mixed flavonoids per day, far
exceeding the content of vitamin E, a monophenolic an-
tioxidant, and of 6-carotene. Chemically, they are typical
phenolics that act as potent metal chelators, free radical
scavengers, and powerful antioxidants.

Antioxidant Functions of Flavonoids
Metal chelators and reducing agents

* Scavengers of ROS

Chain-breaking antioxidants

* Quenchers of singlet oxygen formation

Enzyme Systems Modified by Flavonoids!

Aldose reductase

Aromatase

Cyclooxygenase

Cytochrome Pysq

Dependent mixed-function oxidases

Epoxide hydrolase

Glutathione

Lipoxygenases

Myeloperoxidase

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
oxidase

Nucleotide phosphodiesterases

Ornithine decarboxylase

Phospholipase A)

Phospholipase C

Protein kinase C

Protein tyrosine kinase

Reverse transcriptase

Several adenosine triphospatases (ATPases)

Sialidase

Transferase

Various other kinases

Xanthine oxidase

Some of these enzyme systems are pivotal to im-
mune function, the cell cycle, tumor growth, and cancer
cell metastasis. The antioxidant function and enzyme-
modifying actions of flavonoids may account for many of
their pharmacological activities.

Coenzyme Qi

Coenzyme Qio (also called ubiquinone because it is ubiqui-
tous in-all biological systems) is an essential part of the cel-
lular respiratory chain, the components of which are phys-
ically located in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion.

----- PAGE 176 -----
168 «> INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Vitamin A and Related Compounds

Vitamin A is formed in the intestine from its precursor,
f-carotene. B-carotene and the carotenoids as a whole are
abundant in green plants, carrots, and other orange and
yellow vegetables. Vitamin A and other carotenoids are
effective radical scavengers. The carotenoids lutein and
lycopene are both found in tomatoes, but lycopene also
occurs in the florets of Calendula officinalis.

Vitamin E

Vitamin E is made up of a group of eight naturally occur-
ring compounds called tocopherols. Tocopherols are
highly active free radical scavengers that protect unsatu-
rated membrane lipids from oxidation.

Metal Chelators

The third approach to protecting against oxidative dam-
age is to try to prevent the formation of free radicals in
the first place. Metals such as iron and copper can cause
the formation of free radicals. However, if these metals
are bound, which effectively removes them from solution,
radical formation can be prevented. In the body, iron is
stored as ferritin and is transferred around the body as
transferrin or lactoferrin. Iron is also associated with other
proteins (hemoglobin, myoglobin, ferredoxin) and is al-
ways tightly bound. Copper is transported around the
body as ceruloplasmin.

Exogenous Antioxidants in Food

Free radical production also occurs outside of the body.
Free radicals in food can destroy vitamins, reducing their
nutritional value; damage pigments, causing bleaching;
and change aromas and flavors. The addition of antioxi-
dants to foods to prevent rancidity and prolong shelf life
has long been common practice. A variety of antioxidants
are used in foods, but tertbutylhydroxyanisole (BHA) and
tertbutylhydroxytoluene (BHT) are two of the most

common.

PLANTS AND THE
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

The green world furnishes many important cardiovascu-
lar medicines. A 1998 review describes more than 700
secondary plant metabolites known to exhibit some kind
of cardiovascular activity.!®

The cardiac glycosides digoxin and lanatoside C from
Digitalis and ouabain from Strophanthus have a positive in-
otropic effect on the heart and are the drugs of choice for
congestive heart failure. The anticoagulants dicoumarol

and other coumarin derivatives were developed from
plant sources. The alkaloid ergotamine is a vasoconstric-
tor used in the treatment of severe vascular headache;
alkaloids from Veratrum and Rauvolfia species are anti-
hypertensive; and tannins, which occur in many plant
species, are hemostatic. Quinidine, from Cinchona bark,
was the main antifibrillatory agent in clinical practice
until the advent of modern antiarrhythmic drugs and is
still used today.

A substance may effect the activity of the heart in a
variety of different ways. Table 9.4 correlates some of
these actions with the characteristic actions of plant com-
pounds. Some classes of substances, like cardiac glyco-
sides, sympathomimetics, and beta-blockers, appear sev-
eral times, as they exert several different types of activities
on the heart.

Table 9.4. Cardiovascular Activities of Plant
Compounds

ACTIVITY DEFINITION CONSTITUENT

ositive inotropic Increase contractility Cardiac glycosides
legative inotropic Decrease contractility Beta-blockers
ositive chronotropic Increases cardiac frequency Ephedrine
sympathomimetics)

Negative chronotropic Decrease cardiac frequency Cardiac glycosides
ositive dromotropic _ Increases flow rate Caffeine
sympathomimetics)

legative dromotropic Decrease flow rate Cardiac glycosides

Antiarrhythmic Eliminates cardiac arrhythmias Quinidine
Coronary dilating Dilate coronary arteries Flavonoids,
theophylline

Cardiac Glycosides

Cardiac glycosides improve the efficiency of the heart
muscle without increasing its need for oxygen. This en-
ables the heart to pump adequate amounts of blood
around the body and ensures that no fluid builds up in the
lungs or extremities. That sounds wonderful, as indeed it
is, but there is a drawback. Because the solubility and re-
moval rates of cardiac glycosides tend to be low, the pos-
sibility exists for high levels of glycosides to accrue in the
body. This is the main disadvantage with foxglove
(Digitalis spp.) and explains why it is potentially poisonous

----- PAGE 177 -----
unless used with appropriate skill and knowledge con-
cerning monitoring of blood levels.

Cardiac glycosides appear to be confined to an-
giosperms. Cardenolides are the most common and are
particularly abundant in Apocynaceae and Asclepia-
daceae. The bufanolides occur in some Liliaceae plants,
such as squill (Urginea maritima), and in some
Ranunculaceae.

Table 9.5. Plants Containing Cardiac Glycosides

PLANT FAMILY GENERA

Apocynaceae Acocanthera, Adenium, Apocynum, Carissa,

Cerbera, Nerium, Strophanthus, Thevetia, Urechites

Asclepiadaceae Asclepias, Calotropis, Cryptostegia, Menabea,

Pachycarpus, Periploca, Xysmalobium
Liliaceae Bowiea, Convallaria, Ornithogalum, Rhodia, Urginea

Ranunculaceae Adonis, Helleborus

Moraceae Antiaris, Antiaropsis, Castilla
Brassicaceae Cheiranthus, Erysimum
Sterculiaceae Mansonia

Tiliaceae Corchorus

Celastraceae Euonymus

Fabaceae Coronilla

Scrophulariaceae Digitalis

PHARMACOLOGY © 169

The pharmacological effect of cardiac glycosides is
dependent on both the aglycones and the sugar attach-
ments. The inherent activity resides in the aglycones, but
the sugars render the compounds more soluble and in-
crease the power of fixation of the glycosides to the heart
muscle.

The number of different effects produced by the
Digitalis glycosides complicates our understanding of
their overall action, and their exact mode of action on
myocardial muscle is still under investigation. Digitalis
probably competes with potassium ions for specific re-
ceptor enzyme (ATPase) sites in the cell membranes of
cardiac muscle and is particularly successful during the
depolarization phase of the muscle, when there is an in-
flux of Na ions.

The clinical effect of digitalis glycosides in cases of
congestive heart failure is increased force of myocardial
contraction. Because of their vagus effects, the digitalis
glycosides are also used to control atrial arrhythmias. The
diuretic action of Digitalis arises from the improved cir-
culatory effect.

Nonsteroidal Cardioactive Plant
Constituents
Although orthodox medicine makes much use of cardiac
glycosides of plant origin, the search continues for new
active substances that provide either better therapeutic
indices or different types of activity. In addition to plants
such as hawthorn (Crataegus spp.) and garlic (Allium
sativum), in vitro studies suggest other remedies new to
the West.

The isolation of forskolin from Coleus forskohlii shows
that the plant kingdom continues to offer medicine new

Cardiotonic or Cardioactive?

In a strictly technical sense, the pharmacological term cardiotonic is synonymous with “posi-
tive inotropic.” In pharmacology, the word cardiotonic is used not only to describe agents that
increase contractility, but also to indicate an increase in frequency, an increase in the beat vol-
ume, or a general increase in cardiac performance.

In the phytotherapeutic literature, however, slightly different terminology is used. Here,
cardioactive plants are those that owe their effects on the heart to cardiac glycosides or other
very active substances; they thus possess both the strengths and the drawbacks of these con-
stituents. An example is Digitalis (foxglove). Cardiotonic plants, on the other hand, are those
that have an observable beneficial action on the heart and blood vessels but contain no
cardiac glycosides, such as Crataegus (hawthorn). The mechanisms behind their actions are

obscure and constitute a subject of considerable pharmacological debate.

----- PAGE 178 -----
170 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

and potent cardiac agents. Forskolin is a labdane diter-
penoid with antihypertensive, positive inotropic, an-
tiplatelet, and adenylate cyclase-activating properties. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, the activation of adeny-
late cyclase results in increased levels of intracellular
cyclic AMP (cAMP).

Coleus forskoblii and forskolin lower blood pressure
and improve the contractility of the heart muscle, making
this herb relevant in the treatment of hypertension, con-
gestive heart failure, and angina. These actions are related
to an increase in cAMP levels throughout the cardiovas-
cular system, which results in relaxation of the arteries
and increased force of contraction. The net effect is an
improvement in many cardiovascular functions.

Several studies suggest that forskolin may signifi-
cantly lower blood pressure. In one clinical study involv-
ing seven patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, forskolin
improved Jeft ventricular function, primarily by reducing
pre-load, without raising metabolic costs.!° (Pre-load is
the tension in the heart muscle at the end of the diastolic
phase, just before the contraction.) The study also
showed that forskolin increased the contractile force of
heart muscle. These results indicate that forskolin may
best be used in congestive heart failure in combination
with other cardiotonic botanicals, such as Crataegus.

A number of classes of nonsteroidal substances with
cardiovascular effects have been identified, including
phenylalkylamines, indole derivatives, tetrahydroiso-
quinolines, imidazoles and purines, diterpenes, sesquiter-
penes, flavonoids, and other phenolic compounds. Here
we shall focus briefly on those found in the primary car-
diovascular herbal remedies.

Phenalkylamines

This class of alkaloids was the model for the development
of sympathomimetic drugs. The main representative is
L-ephedrine, first found in ma huang (Ephedra sinica).
Since ephedrine has other, more prominent activities, its
action on the heart is often considered a side effect.
Ephedrine and its relatives have been found in plants in
the families Portulacaceae, Rutaceae, Cactaceae,
Amaryllidaceae, Moraceae, Musaceae, and Rosaceae.
These include numerous food plants, such as citrus fruits,
bananas (Musa spp.), and purslane (Portulaca oleracea).
Synephrine occurs in the fruit of the mandarin orange
(Citrus reticulata). Cathinone, from khat (Catha edulis),
shows strong positive inotropic activity, contributing to
the cardiac stimulant activity of khat leaves.
Phenylethylamines, which constitute a subgroup of
phenylalkylamines, are widely distributed in Cactaceae,

Rosaceae, Rutaceae, and Fabaceae. The prototype of this
group is tyramine, which at high concentrations shows
positive inotropic activity. Strong positive inotropic activ-
ity is also displayed by N-methyltyramine, hordenine, and
p-methoxyl-B-phenethylamine, all of which have been
found in hawthorn flowers. This group is also found in
night-blooming cereus (Selenicereus grandiforus), a favorite
remedy of the early American Eclectic and Physio-
medicalist physicians for cardiac insufficiency and angina
pectoris. The cardiovascular action of Viburnum species
may also be related to the presence of tyramine, which has
been found in VY odoratissimum and V. opulus. Tyramine
and p-methoxyl-6-phenethylamine have also been found
in Viscum album.

Other Nitrogen-Containing Compounds
Methylcanadine from prickly ash (Zanthoxylum spp.) and
sanguinarine from bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis) pos-
sess positive inotropic activity. The lupine alkaloid
sparteine possesses specific antiarrhythmic activity and is
found in Scotch broom (Gytisus scoparius).

Cyclic AMP also possesses inotropic properties and is
widely distributed in the plant kingdom. In view of the
low concentrations of cAMP found so far in plants,
pharmacologists exclude a cardiotonie role for cAMP-
containing plant extracts. Such conclusions might stem
from a too narrow interpretation clouded by a “magic
bullet” perception of biochemistry. From a synergistic
perspective, all the constituents in a plant work together
to produce its healing effects.

Flavonoids and Other Phenolics
Comprehensive investigations and reviews have been
published on the cardioactivity of Crataegus. The main
active principles in this plant are thought to be flavonoids
and procyanidin oligomers. The evidence suggests that
the flavonoids impact the heart via inhibition of cellular
phosphodiesterase and elevation of cellular cAMP con-
centration, as well as by affecting the permeability of cell
organelles to calcium ions. Please see chapter 14 for more
information on this remarkable plant.
Phosphodiesterase-inhibitory action is not limited to
flavonoids. Some lignans are potential phosphodiesterase
inhibitors, and the cardiotonic action of mistletoe (Viscum
album) can probably be attributed to lignan content.

Cholesterol- and Lipid-Lowering Activity

High serum levels of cholesterol and triglycerides (a con-
dition known as hyperlipidemia) are important risk factors
in the development of coronary heart disease (CHD).

----- PAGE 179 -----
Cholesterol is an essential component of cell membranes
and a metabolic intermediate in the synthesis of steroid
hormones and bile salts. Some cholesterol is obtained
from the diet (about 25%) and the rest is manufactured by
the liver. However, elevated levels in serum may be a re-
sult ofthigh dietary intake, a condition known as exogenous
hyperlipidemia, or secondary hyperlipidemia.

Endogenous hyperlipidemia, also called primary or fa-
milial hyperlipidemia, is a disorder of cholesterol
metabolism that may be caused by genetic factors. This is
much less common than exogenous hyperlipidemia.
Diseases such as diabetes mellitus, gout, hypothyroidism,
obstructive jaundice, cirrhosis of the liver, and renal fail-
ure can cause secondary hyperlipidemia.

Fat from the diet is absorbed into the bloodstream
and transported in the form of lipoproteins. These are
classified according to their density, for example, low den-
sity lipoprotein (LDL) or high density lipoprotein
(HDL). Triglycerides are saturated fatty acids that are
found in the bloodstream with normal blood levels be-
tween 10 and 150 milligrams per deciliter. Their levels in
serum used to classify primary hyperlipidemias. Elevated
serum cholesterol ‘per se is not the only indicator of
atherosclerosis. In certain disorders, cholesterol levels
may remain fairly normal while triglyceride levels rise. It
is preferable, therefore, to always measure levels of each
lipoprotein fraction, especially LDL, all of which contain
cholesterol.

The mechanisms of action of drugs used to treat pri-
mary and secondary hyperlipidemia may involve inhibi-
tion of cholesterol synthesis in the liver. Some drugs, such
as bezafibrate, suppress endogenous cholesterol and
triglyceride synthesis and stimulate catabolism via systemic
lipoprotein and hepatic lipases. The omega-3 polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids found in fish and flaxseed oils act by in-
creasing lipoprotein lipase activity as well as by inhibiting
the synthesis of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) in
the liver. VLDL is a lipoprotein that acts as a carrier for
cholesterol and fats in the bloodstream. Elevation of
VLDL in the bloodstream is associated with an increased
risk of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.

Food and medicinal plants are both important in the
dietary control of hyperlipidemia. Garlic (Allium sativum)
is one plant that might be described as both food and
medicine. Another herbal food that lowers serum choles-
terol is fenugreek seed (Trigonella foenum-graecum), which
is used as a condiment. Other naturally occurring hy-
polipidemics include khellin, from Ammi visnaga, and
gugpulsterone, from Commiphora mukul.

Several clinical studies have shown that complex car-

PHARMACOLOGY .& = 171

bohydrates, such as oat bran, guar gum, and carob gum,
also lower serum cholesterol levels; however, these con-
clusions are now being questioned, because diets that
contain these substances are also usually low in fat.
Complex carbohydrates may work by inhibiting fat ab-
sorption rather than through a direct pharmacological ef-
fect. Antioxidants with free radical scavenging ability, such
as flavonoids, have demonstrated cholesterol-lowering
activities in models of experimental hyperlipidemia. The
mechanism of action here is due in part to inhibition of
lipid peroxidation, but other factors that affect cholesterol
control mechanisms may also be involved.

Hypertension and Hypotensive Agents

More than 35 million Americans have Aypertension, or
high blood pressure. For unknown reasons, the occur-
rence of the disorder is twice as high in African Americans
as Caucasians. While hypertension is a common problem
in our culture, it is rare in those that remain relatively un-
touched by the western lifestyle. Lifestyle plays a major
role in causing and perpetuating hypertension. Thus, di-
etary, psychological, and social factors must all be ad-
dressed before any real change can occur.

A distinction must be made between elevated blood
pressure with no obvious medical cause, known as primary
or essential hypertension, and hypertension caused by an
underlying pathology, such as kidney, endocrine, or cere-
bral disease, which is called secondary hypertension. For the
purposes of this discussion, we will focus on essential
hypertension.

Hypertension typically causes no symptoms until
complications arise, in which case symptoms can include
dizziness, flushed face and skin, headache, fatigue, epis-
taxis (nosebleed), and nervousness. These symptoms may
all be caused by other conditions as well, making it diffi-
cult to diagnose hypertension by symptoms alone.

Diagnosis must be based on a finding that both sys-
tolic and diastolic blood pressure are usually (but not al-
ways) higher than normal, and other causes of symptoms
must be excluded. In general, hypertension is indicated by
a blood pressure measurement higher than 140/90 mm
Hg. However, “normal” blood pressure varies among in-
dividuals, and thus normal should always be viewed in
terms of a range, as opposed to a specific measurement.
Observable changes in retinal blood vessels are diagnostic
indicators of the degree of damage caused to the body by
the hypertension.

Screening for antihypertensive effects in traditional
medicines has been performed over many years, and sev-
eral animal models have been utilized.!”

----- PAGE 180 -----
172. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Calcium Channel Blockers

Calcium (Ca) antagonistic drugs are widely used in the
treatment of cardiovascular disorders, such as angina pec-
toris, myocardial infarction, atherosclerosis, and hyper-
tension. Even though currently used calcium channel
blockers have different chemical structures and sites of
action, they all inhibit the transmembrane influx of cal-
cium ions (Ca**) through voltage-dependent Ca channels.
These are transmembrane ion channels whose permeabil-
ity to ions is extremely sensitive to the transmembrane
voltage difference. This action reduces smooth muscle
contractility and vascular resistance, resulting in lowered
blood pressure.

Ca antagonists influence many functions, including
muscle contraction, gland secretion, platelet cell activity,
changes in gene expression, and the release of transmit-
ters. However, their main therapeutic influence is on the
function of the heart and blood circulation. Ca channel
blockers are coronary artery dilators that reduce periph-
eral vascular resistance and hence reduce the cardiac
workload. They inhibit Ca’* influx through voltage-
sensitive Ca?* channels and may therefore slow the early
rise in cytosolic Ca’*. They are energy-sparing drugs that
slow the rate of ATP exhaustion, and may also protect
against lipid peroxidation.

The three main groups of prescription Ca channel
blockers are dihydropyridines, benzodiazepines, and
phenylalkylamines. These include many common com-
pounds used in therapy, such as nifedipine, diltiazem, and
verapamil.

In recent years, various plant constituents have
shown apparent Ca channel-blocking activity in in vitro
screening models.! A recent review of Ca antagonists
isolated from plants suggests that many have activity
comparable to that of compounds currently used in ther-
apy.'°? However, even though ion channel modulators are
important drugs, they appear to constitute a neglected
area as far as natural product screening is concerned.

Table 9.6. Plant Sources of Calcium Channel
Blockers

CONSTITUENT TYPE EXAMPLE
Terpenoids
Monoterpenes Menthol, menthofuran

Sesquiterpene lactones Gossypol, santonin

CONSTITUENT TYPE EXAMPLE
Hydrocarbon derivatives
Garlic compounds Allicin
Phenolic ketones Eugenol, apiol

Coumarins
Hydroxycoumarins Coumarin, umbelliferone

Furanocoumarins Bergapten, psoralen

Pyranocoumarins Visnadin
Chromones Khellin
Naphthoquinones Juglone, plumbagin
Lignans Eudesmin
Alkaloids Sanguinarine
ACE Inhibitors

Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) is
another important option in the control of hypertension.
ACE is a hydrolase enzyme that cleaves biologically inac-
tive angiotensin I to form active angiotensin IT. Angio-
tensin II causes contraction of vascular smooth muscle
and thus raises blood pressure and stimulates aldosterone
release from the adrenal glands. Drugs that inhibit ACE
are used to treat hypertension and congestive heart fail-
ure. The renin-angiotensin system, which consists of
renin, ACE, and angiotensin II, is pivotal to renal and
cardiovascular homeostasis. Renin is an enzyme produced
in the kidney that acts on angiotensinogen to form an-
giotensin I. ACE is believed to be the rate-limiting step in
angiotensin II formation by the renin-angiotensin system.
Two kinds of renin-angiotensin systems exist.

1. A circulating endocrine renin-angiotensin system is
responsible for short-term cardio-renal homeostasis.

2. Local renin-angiotensin systerns are present in
many tissues and exert influences on local functions.
The tonic control of vascular resistance and local
tissue function (e.g., in the kidney) is influenced by
the intrinsic tissue renin-angiotensin system.

An in vitro assay for the detection of ACE inhibitors
in plant extracts has been developed. Researchers have
identified a number of plants that contain such com-
pounds, including Adium ursinum, Amelanchier. ovalis,
Cistus clusii, and Lespedeza capitata.!!° They have also iso-

----- PAGE 181 -----
lated three classes of compounds with potential ACE-
inhibitory activity: flavonoids, procyanidins, and peptides.!!!
However, the presence of a strong ACE inhibitor
does not necessarily imply that a plant is a potent antihy-
pertensive drug. For example, some flavonoids show ac-
tivity in vitro because they generate chelate complexes
within the active center of ACE.'! It is also important to
remember that a negative screen for ACE-inhibitory ac-
tion does not mean that the plant species will not work as
an antihypertensive drug, as compounds that influence
other hypotensive mechanisms could well be present.

Inhibition of cAMP. Phosphodiesterase

Another approach to finding new antihypertensive agents
looks for substances that inhibit levels of intracellular
cAMP. Such compounds mediate cardiac contractility by
increasing the levels of cAMP or by inhibiting its
metabolism. These include B-adrenergic agonists, adeny-
late cyclase activators (such as forskolin from Coleus
forskobli), and phosphodiesterase inhibitors.

When stimulated, the adenylate cyclase enzyme con-
verts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) into cAMP. This sec-
ond messenger initiates a series of phosphorylation reac-
tions by protein kinases, which mediate the influx of
extracellular Ca2* and the release of stored calcium ions
by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. A phosphodiesterase III
enzyme then inactivates cAMP by converting it into the
inert 5’adenosine monophosphate (5’AMP). It is likely
that increases in intracellular CAMP may be the result of
increases in levels of prostacyclin.

A number of lignans inhibit cAMP phosphodi-
esterase activity. In studies of structure-activity relation-
ships, three classes of lignans have received the most at-
tention: dibenzylbutyrolatones, tetrahydrofurans, and
furanofurans. Furanofuran lignans with this activity have
been isolated from olive (Olea spp.), ash (Fraxinus spp.),
and the traditional Chinese tonic herb Excommia ulmoides.

Platelet Function and Cardiovascular
Disease

Platelets (anuclear cells present in large numbers in the
blood) are involved in a range of cardiovascular diseases.
Inactivated platelets do not adhere to one other or to vas-
cular endothelium. However, they adhere to subendothe-
lial surfaces (adhesion) and to each other (aggregation) at
sites of vascular injury. During the process of activation,
platelets secrete various substances, such as adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and thromboxane A), which cause
further aggregation and accelerate the coagulation pro-
cess. Unfortunately, adhesion, aggregation, and secretion,

PHARMACOLOGY .» 173

the primary events in the arrest of bleeding, can also lead
to the deposition of platelet thrombi in blood vessels and
on heart valves.

It is now generally accepted that blood platelets are
involved in the genesis of many cardiovascular diseases,
including stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetic vascular
disorders, and atherosclerosis.

Platelet Aggregation

When platelets interact with certain substances, or when
they adhere to a damaged vessel wall, aggregation may
occur. Initially reversible, aggregation may progress to a
second, irreversible aggregation, during which various ac-
tive substances are released. Platelets may be activated
through exposure to a number of substances, including:

¢ Hormones (such as adrenaline and vasopressin)

* Autacoids, including adenosine diphosphate (ADP)

¢ Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine)

* Eicosanoids

¢ Platelet activating factor (PAF)

* Blood coagulation and complement factors (thrombin
and plasmin)

* Vascular proteins (collagen, elastin, and others)

These stimuli interact with receptor sites on the
platelet and activate intracellular metabolic pathways.
Secondary messenger systems involving cyclases, protein
kinase C, and calcium channels result in liberation of
arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids and ulti-
mately cause platelet aggregation and thrombus forma-
tion. Arachidonic acid metabolism is pivotal in platelet
activation and is an intrinsic part of the inflammatory
response.

Platelet-Activating Factor.

Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a potent lipid pro-
inflammatory mediator with effects in many body sys-
tems; it is of particular importance in the cellular immune
response. PAF, or !-O-alkyl-2-O-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphorylcholine, exists endogenously as a mixture of
molecules that have slight structural variations. In addi-
tion to platelet aggregation, PAF also activates basophils,
endothelial cells, eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages,
mast cells, monocytes, and neutrophils. These cells not
only respond to PAF, but also produce and release it
themselves.

PAF induces a number of responses, including
phagocytosis, exocytosis, superoxide production, chemo-
taxis, aggregation, proliferation, adhesion, eicosanoid
generation, degranulation, and calcium mobilization, as

----- PAGE 182 -----
174 «a2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

well as diverse morphological changes in cells. Thus the
activity of PAF extends well beyond platelet activation
and it is thought to be involved in anaphylactic shock, in-
flammation, hypertension, allergic responses, and respira-
tory and cardiovascular disorders. PAF antagonists dis-
place PAF from its receptor binding site, in most cases
without initiating any response of their own.
Physiologically, local levels of certain cytokines are
major controlling factors in blood platelet hemostasis.
Among other activities, prostacyclin has been shown to be
a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet activation. It
is largely produced as an arachidonate metabolite in en-
dothelial cells and excreted into the blood, where it mod-
ulates platelet reactivity and acts as a vasodilatory agent.
The enzymes, receptors, and various other macro-
molecules involved in this arachidonic acid cascade, as well
as those involved in the recognition and reaction of the
platelet to cytokines, provide potentially important sites
of action for antiplatelet compounds, or PAF antagonists.

Natural Products with Antiplatelet Activity
According to their effects on platelet aggregation, release
reaction, and signal transductions, antiplatelet plant con-
stituents have been tentatively classified into eight
groups:!!3

¢ Platelet-activating factor (PAF) antagonists
* Collagen-receptor antagonists

¢ Thromboxane-receptor antagonists

¢ ADP-receptor agonists

Inhibitors of phosphoinositide breakdown
Inhibitors of thromboxane formation

¢ Agents that increase cyclic nucleotides

¢ Protein kinase C activators

New pharmacological agents derived from medicinal
plant sources may provide leads for the development of
effective new cardiovascular drugs. However, from the
herbal perspective, it might be more useful to consider
the chemical groups involved.

Organosulfur Derivatives

A number of sulfur compounds from plants in the genus
Allium, such as garlic and onion, have antiplatelet activity.
These compounds work by a number of mechanisms, in-
cluding direct inhibition of enzymes in the arachidonic
cascade, inhibition of metabolite uptake by platelets, and
direct inhibition of platelet phospholipase activity.

Antiplatelet Compounds in Allium
Ajoene

Alliin

Allicin

Allylmethyltrisulphide
2-Vinyl-1,3-dithiene
i-Propylmethyldisulphide

Flavonoids

The impact of flavonoid constituents on platelet activity
must be seen in the context of the whole gamut of phar-
macological effects discussed earlier in this chapter and in
chapter 7. They have been shown to affect both aggrega-
tion and adhesion. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase has
also been implicated.

Antiplatelet Flavonoids
Apigenin

Chrysin

Hispidulin

Phloretin

Quercetin

Coumarins

Coumarins inhibit aggregation but are relatively weak.
An example of a coumarin with antiplatelet activity is
disenecioyl-cis-khellactone.

Sesquiterpene Lactones

Parthenolides from feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) in-
hibit both platelet aggregation and the release of sero-
tonin from platelets.

Diterpenes
As discussed earlier, forskolin is a diterpene isolated from
the roots of Coleus forskoblii. It stimulates adenylate cy-
clase activity in many tissues, which appears to be the ac-
tion responsible for its antiplatelet activity.

Ginkgolides
PAF is dramatically inhibited by ginkgolides from Ginkgo
biloba.

PAF and the Respiratory System

The most numerically important disorders of the respira-
tory system, excluding infections, are the allergic condi-
tions asthma and hay fever. In both conditions, IgE anti-
bodies attach to mast cells, and renewed exposure to
antigen causes their degranulation. Also, inflammatory

----- PAGE 183 -----
damage to the endothelium of the airways causes the un-
derlying muscle to become supersensitive to external irri-
tants and inflammatory mediators, including histamine,
leukotrienes, thromboxanes, PAF, and chemotactic
agents.!!4 When this process occurs mainly in the nose,
eyes, and throat, the result is hay fever. Bronchospasm,
mucosal edema, and excessive mucus production lead to
the coughing and wheezing that characterize asthma.

Occasionally, massive release of mediators leads to
anaphylaxis, a life-threatening condition triggered by al-
lergens. Anaphylaxis, which involves severe bron-
chospasm, edema in the nose and throat, and cardiovas-
cular collapse, is treated with intravenous adrenaline,
antihistamines, and corticosteroids.

Mast cell stabilizers play an important role in treat-
ments used in orthodox medicine to prevent anaphylaxis;
the main one is sodium cromoglycate. This drug was de-
veloped from khellin, a chromone from Ami visnaga.
Khellin derivatives relax bronchial smooth muscle, but
cromoglycate also protects the tissue from the effects of
bronchoconstrictors, such as histamine and acetylcholine.
Its mechanism of action is unclear, but it appears to re-
duce the influx of calcium into antigen-sensitized mast
cells, preventing the release of histamine.!!5

In the lung, PAF activates the arachidonic acid cas-
cade with a dose-dependent generation of thromboxane.
Formation of PAF in the lungs may also contribute to his-
tamine release in anaphylaxis.!!6 The most relevant PAF
antagonists at present are of natural origin.

Ginkgolides

These Cz) diterpenes suppress PAF-induced broncho-
constriction and airway hyperreactivity in humans and
animals. They exert a protective effect against antigen-
induced bronchial provocation tests in asthmatic patients.
Ginkgolide B is the most potent member of the
ginkgolide family of PAF antagonists; it inhibits PAF-
induced platelet aggregation, chemotaxis, and adhesion.
It is orally effective against PAF-induced bronchospasm.

Lignans

Kadsurenone, a neolignan found in Piper futukadsura, is a
potent PAF inhibitor, and also inhibits degranulation of
neutrophils while antagonizing other PAF-induced
phenomena. Other lignans of interest as PAF antagonists
include burseran, from Bursera microphylla, and the
nectandrins A and B, from Nectandra rigida.

PHARMACOLOGY .«& = 175

Gliotoxins

These are piperazine alkaloids produced by a wide range
of fungi. Gliotoxin itself is a relatively weak PAF in-
hibitor, but various derivatives have been shown to inhibit
PAF-induced bronchoconstriction in rats.

Forskolin

Asthma is characterized by a relative decrease in CAMP in
the bronchial smooth muscle that causes mast cells to de-
granulate and smooth muscle cells to contract. Excessive
levels of PAF are also present in asthma. Current drug
therapy for asthma is largely designed to increase CAMP
levels through the use of substances that either stimulate
adenylate cyclase (for example, corticosteroids) or inhibit
phosphodiesterase, which breaks down cAMP (for exam-
ple, methyxanthines). Coleus forskohlii may be particularly
useful in asthma, as it increases cellular levels of cAMP,
resulting in relaxation of bronchial muscles and relief of
symptoms.

HERBS AND THE LIVER

Conventional medicine does not provide many remedies
for hepatitis, cirrhosis, biliary tract disorders, or liver
damage by toxins. Patients with liver disorders are usually
given supportive treatment, which may include dietary
change and elimination of toxins (for example, paraceta-
mol, alcohol, or other drugs) as opposed to active therapy.
In both Western and Asian medical systems, herbs have
ong been utilized for liver problems, and pharmacologi-
cal and clinical experiments have proved their efficacy.
Silybum marianum (and its complex of flavolignans,
nown as silymarin) is perhaps the best known of these
herbs.

Hepatoprotection and Phytotherapy
‘The main causes of liver disease are viral infection and
hepatotoxic chemicals such as ethyl alcohol, peroxides
(particularly peroxidized edible oils), toxins in food (espe-
cially aflatoxins), pharmaceuticals, and environmental
pollutants. The liver has the ability to regenerate, but this
innate ability is impaired or stops altogether when the
iver is infected or damaged by alcohol or other drugs.
Hepatotoxin-induced liver lesions may be reversed in
the early stages, but they cannot be healed simply by re-
moval of the toxins after critical periods of exposure. This
highlights the need for effective remedies for liver diseases.
In the face of the toxic challenge presented by mod-
ern life, the green world has help to offer.
A number of herbs long used for liver disorders in

----- PAGE 184 -----
176 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

traditional medicine have revealed their unique potential
to pharmacological investigation. Research on these
plants has resulted in the isolation of a number of anti-
hepatotoxic (or hepatoprotective) constituents. Anti-
hepatotoxic agents appear to work through a combination
of two main mechanisms:

* Alteration of cell membranes, so that only small
amounts of toxins may penetrate into the cell

* Acceleration of protein synthesis, with a subsequent
stimulation of cell regeneration

A number of plants and secondary metabolites have
been shown to possess antihepatotoxic activity. Of these,
Silybum marianum is the best known and studied, but
many others are coming to light.

° Bidens pilosa and B. chilensis, Taiwanese traditional
medicines, are hepatoprotective against various toxins
and have demonstrated potential as broad-spectrum
antihepatotoxic agents.!!”

° Scutellaria rivularis improved pathological hepatic le-

sions caused by a number of liver toxins, and compared
well to the standard antihepatotoxics glycyrrhizin and
silymarin.!!8

¢ Inan in vitro study of immunological liver injury to rat
hepatocytes, all saponins from the roots of Pueraria
Jobata tested demonstrated hepatoprotective action.!!9

Natural compounds that elevate levels of biotransfor-
mation enzymes or reduce levels of activating enzymes
can be considered good candidates for cancer-protective
actions as well as generally beneficial effects for the liver.
The sulfur-containing constituents characteristic of Allium
species have attracted much attention. In one rat study in-
vestigating modulation of hepatic drug-metabolizing en-
zymes, the Allium compounds induced both Phase I and
Phase II enzyme systems.!”° In addition, the alkyl sulfides
demonstrated a possible inhibitory effect on the first step
of carcinogenesis via modulation of enzymes involved in
carcinogen metabolism. In both in vitro and in vivo stud-
ies, zeaxanthin and zeaxanthin dipalmitate were shown to
be the hepatoprotective components of Lycitem chinense.'2!

Functions of the Liver

The liver, the largest solid organ in the body and one of the most complex, has a wide range of

vital functions:

* Metabolizes protein (amino acid degradation, synthesis of clotting factors, urea and plasma

proteins) .
¢ Metabolizes carbohydrates
¢ Stores glycogen

* Metabolizes lipids, including the synthesis of cholesterol and bile acids

Initiates the formation of bile
° Engages in the transport of bilirubin
* Biotransforms waste, toxins, and drugs

« Produces blood-clotting factors.and other blood proteins (including albumin, certain enzyme in-
hibitors, cholesterol and other lipoproteins, transport proteins, transferrin iron, and vitamin By»)

Glucose is combined with phosphate in the liver cells and is either transported to peripheral
tissues for metabolic purposes or stored in the hepatocyte as glycogen. The liver plays a central
role in metabolizing fat by converting stored fatty acids to their energy-releasing form, acetyl-
coenzyme A, when hepatic glucose and glycogen stores are exhausted or unavailable for
metabolic purposes. The liver also synthesizes the cell membrane component phospholipid and
the lipoproteins that carry lipids in the blood. Hepatocytes can convert certain amino acids and
products of glucose metabolism into glucose through gluconeogenesis. Reticulo-endothelial cells
(the Kupffer’s cells) play a role in immunity.

The liver is able to regenerate itself after injury or disease. However, if a disease progresses
beyond the tissue’s capacity to regenerate new cells, the body's entire metabolism will be severely
affected. Any number of disorders ‘can affect the liver and interfere with the blood supply or the

functioning of bile ducts, Kupffer’s cells, and other hepatic cells.

----- PAGE 185 -----
Silybum marianum and Silymarin.
Milk thistle (Silybum marianum) was historically used in
Europe as a liver tonic, and modern phytotherapy indi-
cates its use in a range of liver and gallbladder conditions,
including hepatitis and cirrhosis. A wealth of European
research has produced data showing that milk thistle
seeds can reverse toxic liver damage as well as protect
against damage from hepatotoxins. As American physi-
cians became interested in phytotherapy, this herbal anti-
hepatotoxic gained a solid clinical reputation in the
United States as well.!??
The extraordinary actions of Silybum on the human
liver are dramatically demonstrated by its hepatoprotec-
tive effects against the life-threatening damage caused by
the death cap mushroom, Amanita phalloides, which con-
tains the toxins phalloidin and a-amanitin. This remark-
able herb also has therapeutic effects in liver disease.
Clinical trials have confirmed its ability to reverse many
liver disorders, from acute viral hepatitis to cirrhosis, by
stimulating hepatocytes to replace diseased tissue.

Laboratory Studies
A number of specific phytochemicals in Silybum seed have
been shown to protect liver cells. They are primarily
flavolignans and are grouped together in a complex
known as silymarin. The silymarin complex makes up be-
tween 1.5% and 3% of milk thistle seeds and includes
silybin, silychristin, silydianin, and isosilybin.

In laboratory studies, silymarin has demonstrated a
range of effects:

© Protected against carbon tetrachloride-induced liver
damage in rats!°3

* Reduced prolongation of hexobarbital-induced sleep-
ing time produced by carbon tetrachloride!”*

¢ Prevented inhibition of hepatic metabolism of p-oxy-
phenylpyruvic acid caused by carbon tetrachloride!”

¢ Diminished increases in serum levels of enzymes (in-
cluding glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, glutamic-
pyruvic transaminase, and sorbitol dehydrogenase) raised
by experimental treatment with carbon tetrachloride!?6

© Protected against the development of acute hepatitis
(similar to viral hepatitis in humans) in rats treated
with the liver toxin D-galactosamine!””

* Partially counteracts alcohol damage to the liver; al-
most completely prevents mitochondrial changes
caused by ethanol!?8

* Reduced death rate and prolonged life span in mice
challenged by administration of a-amanitin; antago-
nized the toxicity of phalloidin???

PHARMACOLOGY @ 177

¢ Enhanced RNA synthesis as a result of the stimulation
of DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase Al?

* Increased the activity of both superoxide dismutase
and glutathione peroxidase, which may explain the
protective effect of the herb against free radicals!!

In another mouse study, silymarin also demonstrated
protective effects against UVB radiation—-induced non-
melanoma skin cancer. Silymarin treatment reduced
tumor incidence by 20% to 40% and tumor volume per
mouse by 66% after the tumor-initiation phase of the
study. During UVB-induced tumor promotion, silymarin
treatment reduced tumor incidence from 60% to 100%
and tumor volume per mouse by 90%. In experimental
UVB-induced complete carcinogenesis, silymarin re-
duced tumor incidence from 25% to 100% and tumor
volume per mouse by 97%. Application of silymarin also
resulted in a statistically significant inhibition of UVB-
induced sunburn, apoptotic cell formation, skin edema,
depletion of catalase activity, and induction of COX ac-
tivities. The researchers concluded, “Silymarin can pro-
vide substantial protection against different stages of UVB-
induced carcinogenesis, possibly via its strong antioxidant

properties.”!*

Clinical Studies

Numerous human studies confirm that the effects
demonstrated by Si/ybum and the silymarin complex in
the laboratory are borne out in clinical practice.’> The
MedLine database contains references to 627 papers dis-
cussing silymarin and 41 clinical trials. The material that
follows has been abstracted from an excellent review by
Michael Murray, N.D.134

One study involved 129 patients and a control group
of 56 for a period of about one month. Their conditions
included toxic metabolic liver damage, fatty degeneration
of the liver due to various causes, and chronic hepatitis.
Treatment with milk thistle extract markedly improved
both subjective and objective symptoms of liver and di-
gestive disorders and normalized enzyme activities. The
investigators reported a 50% regression in pathological
symptoms in the group receiving milk thistle treatment,
compared with 25% in controls; enlarged livers also di-
minished substantially in volume in the treated group.
No intolerance, side effects, or allergic reactions were
observed.

In another placebo-controlled study, researchers
compared levels of a number of important markers of
liver function in 28 patients treated with silymarin with
29 patients treated with a placebo. After only five days of
treatment, the silymarin-treated subjects showed greater

----- PAGE 186 -----
178 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

improvements in levels of aspartate transaminase (AST),
alanine transaminase (ALT), and serum bilirubin, and after
three weeks, the number of patients who attained normal
values was also higher in the silymarin-treated group.

Long-term treatment with silymarin of chronic hep-
atopathies caused by psychopharmaceuticals resulted in
significant improvements in liver function parameters
such as AST, ALT, and BSP. (The BSP parameter is a
measurement of the retention of the chemical sulfobro-
mophtalein.) This helps investigators assess the efficiency
of drug clearance by the liver.

In two additional studies involving patients with liver
disease, those treated with silymarin demonstrated marked
improvements in various liver parameters. In the first,
106 patients with liver disease (mostly alcohol-induced)
were selected on the basis of elevated serum transaminase
levels and randomly allocated into active and control
groups. Decreases of serum ALT and AST in the treated
group were statistically significantly higher than those of
the controls.

In the second study, which involved patients with
chronic liver disease, silymarin prevented decreases in
seralbumin beginning at three months and continuing to
the end of the study. Histopathological findings related to
focal necrosis and fibrosis were also much improved.
Overall, silymarin proved beneficial in parameters of
parenchymal disorders, intralobular mesenchymal reac-
tions, and fibrosis.

Diabetic patients with cirrhosis require insulin treat-
ment because of insulin resistance. As chronic alcoholi¢
liver damage is partly caused by peroxidation of hepatic cell
membranes, antioxidants may be useful in treating or pre-
venting such damage. A 1997 study investigated the effects
of long-term treatment with silymarin in diabetic patients
with cirrhosis. The results suggested that treatment with
silymarin may reduce both lipid peroxidation of cell mem-
branes and insulin resistance. In the study, silymarin also
significantly decreased endogenous insulin overproduction
and the need for exogenous insulin administration. 15

Cisplatin is an active cytotoxic agent used in the
treatment of testicular cancer. Its use, however, is associ-
ated with significant side effects, including ototoxicity,
neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity. A clinical study evalu-
ated the effects of the milk thistle compound silibinin in
ameliorating drug-induced alterations in renal glomeru-
lar and tubular function and tubular morphology. Results
showed that silibinin totally or partly ameliorated all of
these effects. Thus, silibinin appears to also function as a
nephroprotectant agent; the researchers suggested that it
may have beneficial effects on the kidney in clinical set-
tings. This exciting data led to a randomized clinical

trial to investigate the protective effects of silibinin
against cisplatin-associated nephrotoxicity in patients
with testicular cancer.'3”

HYPOGLYCEMIC AGENTS

More than 1,123 plant species have been used tradition-
ally or experimentally to treat symptoms of diabetes mel-
litus.® These represent 725 genera in 183 families of
plants. In addition, more than 200 compounds from
plants have been reported to lower blood glucose.!3?
Table 9.7 provides a summary of the chemical classes in
which these compounds can be found.

The diversity represented here suggests that a variety
of mechanisms must be involved in the glucose-lowering
activities of plant compounds. Some of these compounds
may have therapeutic potential, while others produce hy-
poglycemia as a side effect of their toxicity.

Table 9.7. Natural Products with Hypoglycemic
Activity

CHEMICAL CLASS NUMBER ACTIVE
Alkaloids 38
Carbohydrates 66
Coumarins 4
Cyanogenic glycosides I
Flavonoids 7
Glycopeptides 20
Inorganic salts 3
Iridoids 4
Lipids 6
Peptides and amines iL
Phenolics (simple) 4
Phenylpropanoids |
Steroids 7
Stilbenes 1
Sulfur compounds 2
Terpenoids
Vitamins 2
Xanthenes |

----- PAGE 187 -----
There are many plant extracts with proven hypo-
glycemic activity. No isolated compounds from these
plants have yet been developed for clinical use, but all are
used in traditional or complementary medicine to treat
diabetes mellitus. Many of those that are dietary compo-
nents have been tested in human diabetics and found to
be hypoglycemic.

Plant Extracts with Hypoglycemic Activity
‘Allium cepa (onion)

‘A. sativum (garlic)

Momordica charantia (bitter gourd or melon)
Nelumbo nucifera (sacred lotus)

Opuntia ficus-indica (prickly pear)

Panax ginseng (ginseng)

Psidium gujava (guava)

Syzygium cumini (jambul)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Vernonia amygdalina (bitter leaf)

Testing of plants for hypoglycemic properties is
based on inducing diabetes in animals with toxins (such as
alloxan) and evaluating the hypoglycemia or glucose tol-
erance produced by a plant extract compared with that of
a standard, such as tolbutamide. Alloxan causes selective
necrosis of the pancreatic islet 6 cells. The experimental
severity of the disease can be increased or decreased by
varying the dose of alloxan.

Glycans from the mushroom Ganoderma lucidum pro-
duce significant hypoglycemia in alloxan-induced dia-
betes in animals. They appear to operate through a
unique mechanism, probably affecting glycogen or glu-
cose metabolism.'*! Ganoderan B, one of these glycans,
has been shown to elevate plasma insulin levels and in-
crease the activities of hepatic glucokinase, phosphofruc-
tokinase, and glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase. It also
decreases the activities of hepatic glucose-6 phosphatase
and glycogen synthetase and lowers hepatic glycogen
content.

Momordica charantia, commonly known as bitter
gourd, is a traditional remedy of the Pacific and Indian
Ocean islands for diabetes mellitus. A controlled clinical
trial involving 100 people with moderate noninsulin-
dependent diabetes examined the effects of the herb on
fasting and postprandial serum glucose levels. (Post-
prandial levels were measured two hours after oral intake
of 75 gm of glucose.) Drinking the herb in the form of an
aqueous homogenized suspension of pulp led to signifi-
cant reductions in both fasting and postprandial serum
glucose levels. This hypoglycemic action was observed in
86% of subjects. 1?

PHARMACOLOGY @ 179

In another study, polypeptides from bitter gourd
seeds stimulated lipogenesis and inhibited corticotropin-
induced lipolysis in vivo, activities similar to those of in-
sulin. The researchers suggested that the mechanism of
action behind these effects involved interaction of the
peptides with B-adrenergic or corticotropin receptors.!¥3
Inhibition of glucose uptake by intestinal fragments was
also observed in this study, and was attributed to a glyco-
sidic constituent of the fruit extract. This suggests that
constituents of M. charantia have both pancreatic and
extra-pancreatic effects and offer therapeutic potential for
diabetic patients.

Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) has also
been employed traditionally in the treatment of diabetes.
In modern research, six alkaloids from this plant, includ-
ing catharanthine, have demonstrated mild hypoglycemic
activity. !44

The major hypoglycemic principles of onion (4iium
cepa) and garlic (A. sativum) are the sulfur-containing
compounds, allyl propyl disulfide and allicin. They are
thought to work via competitive interaction with insulin,
which also has a disulfide bond.

Coumarin causes profound hypoglycemia in normal
and alloxan-induced diabetic rats, probably because of its
hepatotoxicity. Coumarin is hepatotoxic in rats and dogs,
in which it is metabolized through 3-hydroxycoumarin to
reactive quinone metabolites that bind to microsomal
proteins. In humans, however, coumarin is metabolized
through 7-hydroxycoumarin to a glucuronide conjugate
that is rapidly excreted, and no hepatotoxicity occurs.!

Seeds of a number of species of Fabaceae plants (for
example, Trigonella foenum-graecum, or fenugreek) are tra-
ditional treatments for diabetes. In addition to direct hy-
poglycemic effects, dietary effects are also important. In
clinical studies, people eating a diet high in legumes
showed improvements in many indices of blood glucose
control. Beans are high in complex carbohydrates, which
are more slowly digested than other types of starch.
Noncellulosic types of dietary fiber (such as carob gum,
guar gum, and high-molecular-weight galactomannans
from Ceratonia siliqua and Cyamopsis tetragonolobus) reduce
intestinal absorption of glucose by slowing gastric empty-
ing and by thickening the water layer adjacent to the in-
testinal villi.'*

A variety of glucans and heteroglycans from plants
used in Asian traditional medicine have shown remark-
able hypoglycemic activity when administered intraperi-
toneally to mice.!*” Panaxans A through E, glycans of Panax
ginseng, demonstrate different mechanisms of action de-
spite their similar structures. Panaxans A and B stimulate

----- PAGE 188 -----
180 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

hepatic glucose utilization by increasing the activity of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphorylase-a,
and phosphofructokinase.

Panaxan A decreases the activity of glucose-6-phos-
phatase but does not affect hepatic glycogen content.
Panaxan B has no effect on glucose-6-phosphatase, but
decreases glycogen synthetase activity and hepatic glyco-
gen content.'#8 Panaxan A does not affect plasma insulin
levels or insulin sensitivity, but panaxan B elevates the
plasma insulin level by potentiating insulin secretion
from pancreatic islets. It also enhances insulin sensitiv-
ity by increasing insulin binding to receptors.1?

Ginseng also contains other hypoglycemic con-
stituents with different mechanisms of action. Adenosine,
from a water extract of ginseng rhizomes, was shown to
enhance lipogenesis and the accumulation of cAMP in
adipocytes, which possess specific adenosine receptors.
Some of the panaxosides inhibited adrenocorticotropin-
induced lipolysis and, at the same doses, suppressed
insulin-stimulated lipogenesis, while others stimulated
the release of insulin from cultured islets.!5015!

Intracellular CAMP also acts as a secondary messenger
in the B-cells. Increasing intracellular cAMP concentra-
tion potentiates cholecystokinin and glucose-stimulated
insulin release. As mentioned earlier, forskolin from
Coleus forskoblii is an adenylate cyclase activator that in-
creases intracellular cAMP by stimulating its biosynthe-
sis.52 Theophylline and other methylxanthenes from
Camellia sinensis and papaverine from Papaver somniferum
are phosphodiesterase inhibitors that increase levels of in-
tracellular cAMP by preventing its breakdown.

References

1. Viola H, Wasowski C, Levi de Stein M, et al. Apigenin,
a component of Matricaria recutita flowers, is a central
benzodiazepine receptors-ligand with anxiolytic effects.
Planta Medica 1995; 61(3):213-16.

2. Wolfman C, Viola H, Paladini A, et al. Possible anxi-
olytic effects of chrysin, a central benzodiazepine recep-
tor ligand isolated from Passiflora coerulea.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 1994; 47(1):1-4.

3. Bergendorff O, Nielsen M, et al. Furanocoumarins with
affinity to brain benzodiazepine receptors in vitro.
Phytochemistry 1997, 44(6):1121-24.

4, Furukawa K, Chairungsrilerd N, Ohta T, et al. Novel
types of receptor antagonists from the medicinal plant
Garcinia mangostana. Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi (Japanese
Journal of Pharmacology) 1997; 110(suppl 1):153P-58P.

5. Sotnikova R, Kettmann V, Kostalova D, Taborska E.
Relaxant properties of some aporphine alkaloids from

10.

1k.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Mahonia aquifolium. Methods and Findings in
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology 1998;
19(9):589-97.

. Polya GM, Wang BH, Foo LY. Inhibition of signal-

regulated protein kinases by plant-derived hydrolysable
tannins. Phytochemistry 1995; 38:307-14.

. Hansen, et al. In vitro screening of traditional medicines

for anti-hypertensive effect based on inhibition of the
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1995; 48(1):43-5 1.

. Webb EC. Enzyme Nomenclature 1992: Recommendations

of the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. San Diego: Academic
Press, 1997.

. Seamon KB, Daly JW. Forskolin: a unique diterpene

activator of cyclic AMP-generating systems. Journal of
Cyclic Nucleotide Research 1981; 7(4):201-24.

Freeman SE, Dawson RM. Tacrine: A pharmacological
review. Progress in Neurobiology 1991; 36:257-77.

Jia Sen, et al. Study of the chemistry of huperzine A and
B. Acta Chimica Sinica 1986; 44:1035~104.

Price KR, Fenwick GR. Naturally occurring oestrogens
in foods—a review. Food Additives and Contaminants
1985; 2:73-106.

Adlercreutz H, Honjo H, Higashi A, et al. Urinary
excretion of lignans & isoflavonoid phytoestrogens in
Japanese men & women consuming a traditional
Japanese diet. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
1991 Dee; $4(6):1093-100.

Barnes S, Peterson TG. Biochemical targets of the
isoflavone genistein in tumor cell lines. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995;
208(1):103-8.

Adlercreutz H, Markkanen H, Watanabe S. Plasma con-
centrations of phyto-oestrogens in Japanese men. Lancet
1993 Nov 13; 342(8881):1209-10.

Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, et al. Genistein, a
dietary ingested isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation
and in vitro angiogenesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 125(3 suppl):790S-97S.

Kennedy AR. The evidence for soybean products as can-
cer preventive agents. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar;
125(3 suppl):733S-43S.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar, 125(3 suppl):757S-70S.

. Seamon KB, Padgect W, Daly JW: Forskolin: unique

diterpene activator of adenylate cyclase in membranes

----- PAGE 189 -----
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27

28.

29,

30

31.

32.

33.

34.

and in intact cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 1981, 78(6):3363-7.
Miksicek RJ. Commonly occurring plant flavonoids have
estrogenic activity. Molecular Pharmacology 1993 Jul;
44(1):37-43.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 suppl):757S-708S,

Kitts DD. Studies on the estrogenic activity of a coffee
extract. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health
1987; 20(1-2):37-49.

Miksicek RJ. Estrogenic flavonoids: structural require-
ments for biological activity. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995 Jan; 208(1):44-50.
Miksicek RJ. Interaction of naturally occurring non-
steroidal estrogens with expressed recombinant human
estrogen receptor. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1994 Jun; 49(2-3):153-60.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo
models of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar;
125(3 Suppl):777S-83S.

Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, et al. Genistein, a
dietary ingested isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation
and in vitro angiogenesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 1253 Suppl):790S-97S.

Peterson G. Evaluation of the biochemical targets of
genistein in tumor cells. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 125(3 Suppl):784S-89S.

Adlercreutz H, Bannwart C, Wahala K, et al. Inhibition
of human aromatase by mammalian lignans and
isoflavonoid phytoestrogens. The Journal of Steroid
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1993 Feb; 44(2):147-53.
Ibid.

Adlercreutz H, Mousavi Y, Clark J, et al. Dietary phy-
toestrogens and cancer: in vitro and in vivo studies. The
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1992;
413-8):33 1-7.

Martin PM, Horwitz KB, Ryan DS, McGuire WL.
Phytoestrogen interaction with estrogen receptors in
human breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 1978 Nov;
103(5):1860-7.

Whitten PL, Lewis C, Russell E, Naftolin F. Potential
adverse effects of phytoestrogens. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl.):771S-76S.

Molteni A, Brizio-Molteni L, Persky V. In vitro hor-
monal effects of soybean isoflavones. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl.):751S-56S.

Whitten PL, Russell E, Naftolin F. Influence of phyto-

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42,

43,

44,

45.

46.

47.

PHARMACOLOGY .e 181

estrogen diets on estradiol action in the rat uterus.
Steroids 1994 Jul; 59(7):443-9.

. Whitten PL, Russell E, Naftolin F Effects of a normal,

human-concentration, phytoestrogen diet on rat uterine
growth. Steroids 1992 Mar; 57(3):98-106.

Levy JR, Faber KA, Ayyash L, Hughes CL Jr. The effect
of prenatal exposure to the phytoestrogen genistein on
sexual differentiation in rats. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995 Jan; 208(1):60-6.
Miksicek RJ. Interaction of naturally occurring non-
steroidal estrogens with expressed recombinant human
estrogen receptor. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1994 Jun; 49(2-3):153-60.

Adlercreutz H, Hockerstedt K, Bannwart C, et al. Effect
of dietary components, including lignans and phyto-
estrogens, on enterohepatic circulation and liver
metabolism of estrogens and on sex hormone binding
globulin (SHBG). Journal of Steroid Biochemistry 1987;
27(4-6):1135—44.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125 Suppl):757S-70S.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo
models of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar,
125(3 Suppl):777S-835S.

Molteni A, Brizio-Molteni L, Persky V. In vitro hor-
monal effects of soybean isoflavones. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl):751S-56S.

Bingel AS, Farnsworth N. Higher plants as potential
sources of Galactagogues. In: Economic and Medicinal
Plant Research, vol. 6. San Diego: Academic Press, 1995.
Elliot T. T Cell recognition of glycosylated peptides.
Science and Medicine 1994; 3(3):44-53.

Spatzenegger M, Jaeger W. Clinical importance of hep-
atic cytochrome P4sq in drug metabolism. Drug
Metabolism Reviews 1995; 27:397-417.

Benet LZ, Kroetz DL, Sheiner LB. Biotransformation
of drugs. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LL, Molinoff PB, et
al., eds. Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis
of Therapeutics, 9th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1996.

Murray M. Paso enzymes. Inhibition mechanisms, ge-
netic regulation, and effects of liver disease. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics 1992; 23:132-46,

Strehl E, Schneider W, Elstner EF. Inhibition of dihy-
drofolate reductase activity by alcoholic extracts from
Fraxinus excelsior, Populus tremula and Solidago virgau-
rea, Arzneimittel-Forschung 1995 Feb; 45(2):172-73.

----- PAGE 190 -----
182

48.

49,

50.

51,

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57,

58.

59.

60.

él.

<= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Poulsen HE, Loft S. The impact of genetic polymor-
phisms in risk assessment of drugs. Archives of Toxicology.
Supplement 1994; 16:211-22.

Peterson TC, Renton KW. Depression of cytochrome
P45 dependent drug biotransformation in hepatocytes
after the activation of the RES by dextran sulphate. The
Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
1984; 229:299-304.

Wagner H, Proksch A. Immunostimulatory drugs of
fungi and higher plants. In: Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol. 1. San Diego: Academic Press, 1985.
Beuscher N, Kopanski L. Immunologically active glyco-
proteins of Baptisia tinctoria. Planta Medica 1989 Aug;
55(4):3 58-63.

Manzi P, Pizzoferrato L. Beta glucans in edible mush-
rooms. Food Chemistry 2000; 68:3 15-18.

Ladanyi A, Timar J, Lapis K. Effect of lentinan on
macrophage cytotoxicity against metastatic tumor cells.
Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy 1993; 36:123-26.
Kidd P. The use of mushroom glucans and proteogly-
cans in cancer treatment. Alternative Medicine Review:

A Fournal of Clinical Therapeutic 2000; 5:4-27.

Borchers AT, Stem JS, Hackman RM, et al. Mushrooms,
tumors, and immunity. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1999, 221:281-93.
Wasser SP, Weis AL. Therapeutic effects of substances
occurring in higher Basidiomycetes mushrooms: a mod-
ern perspective. Critical Reviews in Immunology 1999,
19:65-96.

Wagner H, Proksch A. Immunostimulatory drugs of
fungi and higher plants. In: Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol.1. San Diego: Academic Press, 1985.
Melzer R, Fricke U, Holzl J. Vasoactive properties of
procyanidins from Hypericum perforatum L. in isolated
porcine coronary arteries. Arznermittel-Forschung 1991
May; 41(5):481-83.

Chan MM, Fong D, Ho CT, Huang HI. Inhibition of
inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression and en-
zyme activity by epigallocatechin gallate, a natural prod-
uct from green tea. Biochemical Pharmacology 1997 Dec 15;
$4(12):1281-86.

Kumar S, Ziereis K, Wiegrebe W, Muller K. Medicinal
plants from Nepal: evaluation as inhibitors of leuko-
triene biosynthesis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 2000
Jun; 70(3):191-95.

Plohmann B, Bader G, Hiller K, Franz G, Immuno-
modulatory and antitumoral effects of triterpenoid
saponins. Pharmazie 1997 Dec; $2(12):953-57.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

Liu P, Zhu J, Huang Y, Liu C. Influence of Cordyceps
sinensis (Berk.) Sacc. and rat serum containing same
medicine on IL-1, IFN and TNF produced by rat
Kupffer cells. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tia Chib 1996 Jun;
21(6):367-69.

Gao, et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides from
Panax notoginseng. Pharmaceutical Research 1996 Aug;
13(8):1196-200.

Hajto T, Hostanska K, Fischer J, Saller R.
Immunomodulatory effects of Viscum album agglutinin-
I on natural immunity. Anticancer. Drugs 1997 Apr; 8
(Suppl 1):S43-S46.

Kimura Y, Matsushita N, Okuda H. Effects of baicalein
isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis on interleukin 1
beta- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced adhesion
molecule expression in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 Jun;
57(1):63-7.

Stein GM, Berg PA. Mistletoe extract-induced effects on
immunocompetent cells: in vitro studies. Anticancer
Drugs 1997 Apr; 8 (Suppl. 1):S39-S42.

Rolfsen WNA. PAF antagonists from natural products.
Drugs of the Future 1990; 15:597-603.

Zschocke S, Lehner M, Bauer R. 5-Lipoxygenase and
cyclooxygenase inhibitory active constituents from
Qianghuo (Notopterygium incisum). Planta Medica 1997
Jun; 63(3):203~6.

Cassady Douros. Anticancer Agents Based on Natural
Product Models. New York: Academic Press, 1980.
Hartwell JL. Plants used against cancer. A survey. Lioydia
1967; 30:379-436.

Hartwell JL. Plants used against cancer. A survey. Lloydia
1971; 32:204-55.

Taylor WI, Farnsworth NR. The Catharanthus Alkaloids.
London: Marcel Dekker, 1975.

Sato F, Matsukawa Y, Matsumoto K, et al. Apigenin in-
duces morphological differentiation and G2-M arrest in
rat neuronal cells. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 1994, 204: 978-84.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo models
of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995; 125:777S-83S.
Fotis T, Pepper M, et al. Genistein, a dietary ingested
isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation and in vitro angio-
genesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995; 125:790S-97S.
Peterson G. Evaluation of the biochemical targets of
genistein in tumor cells. The Journal of Nutrition 1995;
125:784S-895S.

----- PAGE 191 -----
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Barnes S, Peterson TG. Biochemical targets of the
isoflavone genistein in tumor cell lines. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995;
208:109-15.

Conctantinou A, Huberman E. Genistein as an inducer
of tumor cell differentiation: possible mechanisms of ac-
tion. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and
Medicine 1995; 208:109-15.

Rowinsky EK, Cazenave LA, Donehower RC. Taxol: A
novel investigational antimicrotubule agent. Fournal of
the National Cancer Institute 1990; 82:1247-59.

Salmon SE, Sartorelli AC. Cancer chemotherapy. In:
Katzung BG, ed. Basic and Clinical Pharmacology.
Norwalk, CT: Appleton and Lange, 1989.

Pazdur R, Kudelka AP, et al. The taxoids: paclitaxel
(Taxol®) and docetaxel (Taxotere®). Cancer Treatment
Reviews 1993; 19:35 1-86.

Runowicz CD, Wiernik PH, et al. Taxol in ovarian can-
cer. Cancer (Suppl.) 1993; 71:1591-96.

Ranelletti FO, et al. Growth-inhibitory effect of
quercetin and presence of type-II estrogen-binding sites
in human colon-cancer cell lines and primary colorectal
tumors. International Journal of Cancer 1992; 50:486.
Kimura Y, Matsushita N, Okuda H. Effects of baicalein
isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis on interleukin |
beta- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced adhesion
molecule expression in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 Jun;
57(1):63-67.

Kim, et al. Taraxacum officinale inhibits tumor necrosis
factor-alpha production from rat astrocytes.
Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 2000 Aug; 22(3):519-30.
Kawaguchi, et al. Colony stimulating factor-inducing ac-
tivity of isoflavone C-glucosides from the bark of Dal-
bergia monetaria. Planta Medica 1998 Oct; 64(7):653-5.
Lamm DL, Riggs DR. Enhanced immunocompetence
by garlic: role in bladder cancer and other malignancies.
The Journal of Nutrition 2001 Mar; 131(3 suppl):1067S—70S.
Gerritsen, et al. Flavonoids inhibit cytokine-induced en-
dothelial cell adhesion protein gene expression. American
Journal of Pathology 1995; 147:278-92.

Watanabe T, et al. Inhibitors for protein-tyrosine kinase,
$1638 and genistein, induce differentiation of mouse
erythroleukemia cells in a synergistic manner.
Experimental Cell Research 1989; 183:335.

Waxman §, Structural requirements for differentiation-

induction and growth-inhibition of mouse erythro-
leukemia cells by isoflavones. Anticancer Research 1995;
15:1147-52.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

PHARMACOLOGY © 183

Breitman TR. The role of prostaglandins and other
arachidonic acid metabolites in the differentiation of
HL-60. Prostaglandins in Cancer Research. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1987.

Schwartzman RA, Cidlowski JA. Apoptosis: The bio-
chemistry and molecular biology of permanent cell
death. Endocrine Reviews 1993; 14(2):133-45.

Thatte U, Bagadey S, Dahanukar S. Modulation of pro-
grammed cell death by medicinal plants. Celular and
Molecular Biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France) 2000 Feb;
46(1):199-2 14.

Janssen O, Scheffler A, Kabelitz D. In vitro effects of
mistletoe extracts and mistletoe lectins. Arzneimittel-
Forschung 1993; 43:1221-27.

Bussing A, Suzart K, et al. Induction of apoptosis in
human lymphocytes treated with Viscum album L. is
mediated by the mistletoe lectins. Cancer Letters 1996;
99;59-72,

Mochizuki, et al. Inhibitory effect of tumor metastasis in
mice by saponins, ginsenoside-Rb2, 20(R)- and 20(S)-
ginsenoside-Rg3, of red ginseng. Biological &
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 1995 Sept, 18(9):1197-202.
Block G, Patterson B, Subar A. Fruit, vegetables and
cancer prevention: a review of the epidemiological evi-
dence. Nutrition and Cancer 1992; 18(1):1-29.
Wattenberg LW. Inhibition of carcinogenesis by minor
dietary constituents. Cancer Research (suppl) 1992;
52:2085-91.

Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit and cancer.
Cancer Causes Control 1991; 2(6):427-42.

Semple, et al. Screening of Australian medicinal plants
for antiviral activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1998;
60(2):163-72.

Viietinck, et al. Plant-derived leading compounds for
chemotherapy of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Planta Medica 1998; 64(2):97-109.

Dalton DA, et al. Antioxidant defenses in the peripheral
cell layers of legume root nodules. Plant Physiology 1998
Jan; 116(1):37-43.

Masaki, et al. Active-oxygen scavenging activity of plant
extracts. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin 1995;
18(1):162-6,

Kandaswami C, Middleton E. Free radical scavenging
and antioxidant activity of plant flavonoids. In:
Armstrong D, ed. Free Radicals in Diagnostic Medicine.
‘New York: Plenum Press, 1994.

Ghisalberti, et al. Survey of secondary plant metabolites
with cardiovascular activity. Pharmaceutical Biology 1998,
36(4):237-79.

----- PAGE 192 -----
184

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

118.

119,

120.

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Lindner E, Dohawalla AN, Bhattacharya BK. Positive
inotropic and blood pressure lowering activity of a diter-
pene derivative isolated form coleus forskohli: forskolin.
Arzneimittel-Forschung 1978; 28:284-9.

Villar, et al. Plants with anti-hypertensive action.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57:131-45.

Neuhaus-Carlisle K, Vierling W, Wagner H. Screening
plant extracts and plant constituents for calcium-channel
blocking activity. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1997; 4(1):67-69.
Vuorela, et al. Calcium channel blocking activity:
Screening methods for plant derived compounds.
Phytomed 1997; 4:167-81.

Elbl G, Wagner H. A new method for the in vitro
screening of inhibitors of angiotensin converting
emzyme (ACE), using the chromophore- and
fluorophore-labelled substrate, dansyltriglycine. Planta
Medica 1991; 57:137-41.

. Wagner H. Leading structures of plant origin for drug

development. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1993;
38:105-12.

. Wagner, et al. Evaluation of natural products as in-

hibitors of angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE).
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters 1991, 1:15—18.

. Teng CM, Ko EN. Antiplatelet agents isolated from

medicinal plants. Research Communications in Molecular
Pathology and Pharmacology 1998 Dec; 102(3):211-25.
Barnes PJ, et al. Inflammatory mediators and asthma.
Pharmacological Reviews 1988; 40:49-84.

Gould MK, Raffin TA. Pharmacological management of
acute and chronic bronchial asthma. Advances in Pharma-
cology 1995; 32:169-204,

Summers JB, Albert DH. Platelet activating factor an-
tagonists. Advances in Pharmacology 1995; 32:67-168.
Chin HW, Lin CC, Tang KS. The hepatoprotective ef-
fects of Taiwan folk medicine ham-hong-chho in rats.
The American Journal of Chinese Medicine 1996;
24(3-4):23 1-40.

Lin CC, Shieh DE, Yen MH. Hepatoprotective effect of
the fractions of Ban-zhi-lian on experimental liver in-
juries in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 May;
56(3):193-200.

Arao T, Udayama M, Kinjo J, Nohara T. Preventive ef-
fects of saponins from the Pueraria lobata root on in
vitro immunological liver injury of rat primary hepato-
cyte cultures. Planta Medica 1998 Jun; 64(5):413-16.
Siess MH, Le Bon AM, Canivenc-Lavler MC, Suschetet
M. Modification of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes

121.

122.

123.

131.

132.

133.

134,

135.

136.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

in rats treated with alkyl sulfides. Cancer Letters 1997
Dec 9; 120(2):195-201.

Kim HP, Kim SY, Lee EJ, et al. Zeaxanthin dipalmitate
from Lycium chinense has hepatoprotective activity.
Research Communications in Molecular Pathology and
Pharmacology 1997 Sep; 97(3):301-14.

Flora K, Hahn M, Rosen H, Benner K. Milk thistle (Sily-
bum marianum) for the therapy of liver disease. The
American Journal of Gastroenterology 1998 Feb; 93(2):139-43.
Vogel G, Trost W, Braatz R, et al. Studies on pharmaco-
dynamics, site and mechanism of action of silymarin, the
antihepatotoxic principle from Silyburn marianurn (L.)
Gaert. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1975; 2(5):179-85.
Wagner H. Plant constituents with antihepatotoxic ac-
tivity. In: Beal JL, Reinhard E eds. Natural Products as
Medicinal Agents. Stuttgart: Hippokrates-Verlag, 1981.
Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Valenzuela A, Lagos C, Schmidt K, Videla LA.
Silymarin protection against hepatichpid peroxidation
induced by acute ethanol intoxication in the rat.
Biochemical Pharmacology 1985; 34:2209-12.

Vogel G, Trost W, Braatz R, et al. Studies on pharmaco-
dynamics, site and mechanism of action of silymarin, the
antihepatotoxic principle from Silyburn marianurn (L.)
Gaert. Arzmeimittel-Forschung 1975; 2(5):179-85.
Sonnenbichler J, Goldberg M, Hane L, et al.
Stimulatory effect of silibinin on the DNA synthesis in
partially hepatectornized rat livers: non-response in hep-
atoma and other malignant cell lines. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1986; 35:538-41.

Wellington K, Jarvis B. Silymarin: A review of its clinical
properties in the management of hepatic disorders.
Biodrugs 2001; 15(7):465-89.

Katiyar, et al. Protective effects of silymarin against pho-
tocarcinogenesis in a mouse skin model, Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 1997 Apr 16; 89(8):556-66.
Saller R, Meier R, Brignoli R. The use of silymarin in the
treatment of liver diseases. Drugs 2001; 61(14):2035-63.
Murray Michael. Healing Power of Herbs. Rocklin, CA:
Prima, 1992.

Saller R, Meier R, Brignoli R. The use of silymarin in
the treatment of liver diseases. Drugs 2001;

61(14):203 5-63.

Gaedeke, et al. Cisplatin nephrotoxicity and protection
by silibinin. Nephrology, Dialysis, Transplantation 1996
Jan; 1 1(1):55-62.

----- PAGE 193 -----
137.

138.

139,

140.

141.

142.

143.

144,

145.

146.

Bokemeyer, et al. Silibinin protects against cisplatin-in-
duced nephrotoxicity without compromising cisplatin or
ifosfamide anti-tumour activity. British Journal of Cancer
1996 Dec; 74(12):2036-41.

Neef H, et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of selected
European plants. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1995;
9(1):45.

Perl M. The biochemical basis of the hypoglycemic ef-
fects of some plant extracts. In: Cracker LE, Simon JE,
eds. Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, vol. 3. Phoenix:
Oryx Press, 1988.

Marles RJ, Farnsworth NR. Antidiabetic plants and their
active constituents. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1995; 2:137-89.
Hikino H, et al. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
ganoderan B: a glycan of Ganoderma lucidum fruit bod-
ies. Planta Medica 1989; 55:423-28.

Ahmad N, Hassan MR, Halder H, et al. Effect of
Momordica charantia (Karolla) extracts on fasting and
postprandial serum glucose levels in NIDDM patients.
Bangladesh Medical Research Council Bulletin 1999,
25(1):11-3.

Ng T, et al. Insulin-like molecules in Momordica cha-
rantia seeds. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1986 Jan;
15(1):107-17.

Singh S, Vats P, Suri S, et al. Effect of an antidiabetic ex-
tract of Catharanthus roseus on enzymic activities in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 2001 Aug; 76(3):269-77.

Cohen AJ. Critical review of the toxicology of coumarin
with special reference to interspecies differences in
metabolism and hepatotoxic response and their signifi-
cance to man. Food and Cosmetics Toxicology. 1979 Jun;
17(3):277-89.

Karlstrom B, et al. Effects of leguminous seeds in a mixed
diet in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes
Research 1987; 5(4):199-205.

150.

151.

152.

47.

48.

49.

PHARMACOLOGY & 185

Perl M, Hikino H. Effect of some hypoglycemic glycans
on glucose uptake and glucose metabolism by inverted
intestinal fragments. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989,
3(5):433-35.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activ-
ity 0)
effects on the key enzymes of glucose metabolism in the
liver of mice. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989; 3(1):15-19.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activ-
ity o
Effects on plasma level, secretion, sensitivity and binding
of insulin in mice. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989;
3:20-4.

Waki I, Kyo H, Yasuda M, Kimura M. Effects of a hypo-
glycemic component of Ginseng radix on insulin biosyn-

panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots:

panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots:

thesis in normal and diabetic animals. Journal of
Pharmacobio-dynamics 1982; 5:547-54.

Ng TB, Yeung HW. Hypoglycemic constituents of
Panax ginseng. General Pharmacology 1985; 16:549-52.
Ammon HP, Muller AB. Forskolin: from an ayurvedic
remedy to a modern agent. Planta Medica 1985 Dec;
(6):473-77.

Suggested Reading
Boik J. Cancer & Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science

and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Hardman JG, Limbird LE, eds. Goodman & Gilnan’s the

Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2001.

Mutschler E. Drug Actions: Basic Principles and Therapeutic

Aspects. Stuttgart: Medpharm Scientific; Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1995.

----- PAGE 194 -----
10

NM

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS,
AND SAFETY.

ecent years have seen profound cultural changes
R that are transforming the sociopolitical envi-

ronment within which the practice of herbalism
is flowering. The dominant culture has moved to embrace
herbalism, and it is no longer seen as fringe. Within this
brave new world, the phytotherapy community faces both
wonderful opportunities and profound challenges. One of
the thorniest of these concerns the safety, toxicity, and
contraindications of herbs.

Today, much is being written about herbs and herba
ism that has little to do with plants or patients and every-
thing to do with the belief system and dogma of the
writer. The herbal “true believers” deny any problems
that might exist with herbs because herbs are natural,
while summarily denouncing synthetic drugs. On the
other hand, some supposedly objective scientists can
make even hawthorn sound as dangerous as crack cocaine.
Some critical thinking is needed to traverse this maze of
information and misinformation, evangelism and bigotry.

In general, statements about the toxicity of a plant
may be based on any of a number of factors.

Observation of actual cases. These may be published re-
ports on individual responses to herbs or may come
from published research on therapeutic trials in which
research subjects were either healthy volunteers or un-
dergoing treatment for a health condition.

Extrapolation from chemical effects to whole plant effects.
Knowing the effects of a specific plant constituent pro-
vides little basis for conclusions about effects of the
whole plant. An example here is a contraindication for
salicylate-containing herbs in cases of peptic ulcer
based on the fact that aspirin will aggravate peptic
ulcer. While this may sound appropriate in theory, in
reality the salicylate-rich plant meadowsweet (Fili-
pendula ulmaria) works as an effective anti-inflammatory
and vulnerary in such conditions—and causes none of
the side effects of aspirin.

186

Extrapolation from animal evidence to humans. For ex-
ample, the statement that St. John’s wort (Hypericum
perforatum) causes photosensitivity is based on obser-
vance of phototoxicity reactions in light-colored range
animals that graze on the plant.

Traditional knowledge, or belief based on experience
with extensive use, is another potential source of infor-
mation about risks and contraindications for herbs.
However, this information must also be carefully con-
sidered. For example, feverfew is traditionally used for
the prophylaxis of migraine in the form ofa fresh leaf
chewed daily, which may cause canker sores (aphthous
ulcers). However, this often-repeated risk does not
apply when the leaf is swallowed or when the herb is
taken in tablet and tincture forms, which cause no buc-
cal irritation.

Subjective opinion or belief system. Subjective statements
from those considered experts in the field are often un-
questioningly accepted as insightful, considered opin-
ions. But who are the experts in these situations?

Consider the following quotation from The Honest
Herbal, by Professor Varro Tyler. Charles C. Bennett, vice
president of Public Education for the Arthritis Foun-
dation, has suggested that inquiries concerning yucca be
answered

“... by saying that there is no proper scientific evi-
dence that yucca tablets are helpful in treating
rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis; that they are
probably harmless; and that the real danger would
be in taking yucca tablets instead of following proper
and proven treatment procedures, which could lead
to irreversible joint damage and possible disabili-
ties.” Nothing need be added to this statement.!

I beg to differ. This statement turns the opinion of
Mr. Bennett about treatment advisability into a statement
about a plant. The statement is about patient choice, and

----- PAGE 195 -----
yucca has nothing to do with it. There needs to be a
recognition here of two distinct issues. First, herbs are
medicinal substances. Second, phytotherapy is a valid
therapeutic modality, and the skills and clinical experi-
ence of its practitioners must be recognized.

EVALUATING CAUSALITY IN
ADVERSE EVENTS

Correct identification of the herbs involved in any ad-
verse reaction is critical to the development of reliable
data on herb safety, toxicity, and interactions. Too often,
herbal products have been associated with adverse events
because of mislabeling, which in turn results from either
intentional or accidental substitution of botanical ingredi-
ents. The following quotation from DeSmet and D’Arcy
may prove enlightening.

When such reports of reactions and interactions, as are
available, are carefully analyzed, it becomes obvious that
many of these cases where herbal products have been asso-
ciated with actual human poisoning were not in fact caused
by herbs alleged to be in the product, but resulted from
substitution or contamination of the declared ingredients,
intentionally or by accident, with a more toxic botanical, a
poisonous metal, or a potent non-herbal drug substance.

When evaluating causality of adverse events, a num-
ber of questions must be answered.

* Are the effects consistent with the known pharmacol-
ogy of the substance?

¢ Is there is a reasonable temporal relationship between
the use of the substance and the observed effect?

© Ts there evidence of overdose or misuse of the sub-
stance?

¢ Did the effects disappear when use of the substance
was discontinued?

© Did the effects reappear on rechallenge?

An evaluation of approximately 3,000 adverse drug
reports (ADRs) related to veterinary medicines received
in one year revealed some interesting conclusions:

* Only 1% of reports could definitely be associated with
the product.

* 31% of reports were probably associated with a given
product.

* 45% of reports were possibly associated with a given
product.

© 12% were definitely not related to the product.

* 11% lacked adequate information to evaluate possible
causality.

ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY < 187

In the material that follows, we shall explore the basis
for assessing toxicity. But first I would like to take this op-
portunity to voice some concerns about the use of poten-
tially toxic herbs by the phytotherapeutic community.
The issues are threefold.

My first concern is pharmacological. When dealing
with plants that contain constituents with a potentially
major impact on the human body, the concerns of the tox-
icologist become relevant. It is a challenge to accurately
assess levels of such constituents in whole plants or ex-
tracts without some form of standardization or batch-by-
batch chromatographic analysis. Levels of secondary plant
metabolites can vary with the phase of the moon, diurnal
changes, soil conditions, atmospheric conditions, and hu-
midity, as well as the drying and extracting processes.

This is of no consequence when we are using plants
for gentle effects, such as Urtica dioica, but with a plant
like Atropa belladonna, knowledge and understanding of
such variations is critical to safe prescribing. Similarly, the
use of drop measurements when dosage levels are critical
borders on malpractice. The quantitative measurement
of a drop varies with the diameter of the hole in the
dropper, the roughness of the edge, the viscosity of the
liquid being dispensed, the force of pressure applied to
the bulb, and, finally, elevation above sea level. In other
words, a drop in Boulder, Colorado, will be different in
size from a drop in Santa Cruz, California (and it’s not
just the surf!).

‘Taken together, all of these factors create a huge
potential for variability—enough that I would not
chance using these herbs for the pharmacological effects
of their constituents, as controlling dosage becomes very
challenging.

The second concern is an educational and ethical one.
Teachers may be trained to a sufficient level of compe-
tence to use these tinctures, but to discuss their use with-
out ensuring that students have a similar broad framework
of knowledge raises some worrying questions. We need to
recognize the current state of knowledge and experience
in the general herbal community in the United States. I
am saying nothing about intelligence, commitment, car-
ing, or innate healing compassion, but simply acknowl-
edging the shortcomings of the educational environment
bequeathed to us by the carnage of the Flexner report.

The Flexner report of 1911 is considered by many to
mark the beginning of modern orthodox medical educa-
tion. However, its legacy also serves as a de facto definition
of medicine as a science-based endeavor. Here is not the
place to debate the pros and cons of this report, but sim-
ply to acknowledge that in its wake, herbal medicine,

----- PAGE 196 -----
188 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

among other therapeutic modalities, suffered immensely.
The report led to the closing of the Eclectic medical
schools, and thus the virtual disappearance of academic
centers of herbal excellence.

In short, I fee] that phytotherapists who teach must
recognize the need for comprehensive, basic herbal edu-
cation to provide a framework of understanding within
which herbalists can cope safely with issues like this one.
A little bit of knowledge is a dangerous thing, but it is po-
tentially lethal if the recipient does not know just how lit-
tle it is.

The third concern is more of a philosophical one. We
are blessed with a diversity of therapeutic approaches
within the community of medical herbalists. The practi-
tioner, the educator, and students are all faced with ongo-
ing choices as to the therapeutic context within which
they should use their materia medica. But just because we
have plants with certain effects at our disposal, should we
use them? The application of effectors as strong as Atropa
is very similar in nature and reasoning to an allopathic
approach.

There is nothing wrong with this in itself, but such an
approach must be a conscious choice rather than an intel-
lectual delusion. My reasons for not using herbs that can
be seen simply as drug delivery systems, such as Atropa, is
that we herbalists cannot do it safely, and I see no reason
to use such herbs within the context of a holistic practice.
If powerful chemicals are indicated, then I suggest that
prescription medications are safer. Let me clarify this. I
do not mean that phytotherapists should turn to prescrip-
tion medications. I am simply suggesting we acknowledge
that the unique and wonderful strength of phytotherapy
lies in the use of nurturing, toning, gentle plants.

Is Comfrey Safe?

Herb safety issues are complex, extending far beyond the
realm of the reliable, objective scientific method. The
questions raised and the answers given often need to be
deconstructed in the light, when assessing not only the
toxicological facts, but also the political and sociological
context within which the discussion is occurring.

‘As an example, consider comfrey (Symphytum offici-
nale), an herb with a very long history of traditional use.
Comfrey has been used both internally (as a demulcent)
and externally (as a vulnerary). The herb has become a
topic of considerable debate, as it contains pyrrolizidine
alkaloids (PAs), which have been shown to pose a real risk
of hepatotoxicity.

There can be no question about the concerns posed
by PAs to humans.’ However, it must be remembered that

we cannot demonize a naturally occurring substance sim-
ply because it is inappropriate for human consumption.
PAs play vital roles in the ecology of many butterflies.*
Several species feed on PA-containing plants. The butter-
flies incorporate the PAs into their tissues and thus be-
come unpalatable to predators.’ In the tropical danaid
butterflies, PAs serve as essential precursors to phero-
mones that act as oviposition stimulants for females.®

However, comfrey is not simply a vehicle for the
pharmacological effects of a specific constituent. The
herb’s pharmacological impact is far more complex than
that. The only time an herb can be viewed solely as an
“organic drug delivery system” is when it contains phar-
macologically active levels of potent constituents that over-
ride any potential whole plant effects. The fact that PAs
pose risks cannot be simply used by extension to imply
that comfrey is an unsafe herb. A recent, well-balanced re-
view by Dorena Rode on toxicological findings concern-
ing comfrey sheds considerable light on this subject.’

To address the question of whether or not comfrey is
safe for therapeutic use, a range of issues must be consid-
ered, and not all of these involve toxicology. Webster's
Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines the word safe as
meaning:

Free from harm, injury, or risk; untouched or unthreatened
by danger or injury; unharmed; unhurt; secure; whole; as,
safe from disease; safe from storms; safe from foes.

Unfortunately, there is a common assumption that
might be paraphrased as “Herbs are natural, and there-
fore safe.” This is clearly not the case. Cliffs are natural
and yet people fall off them, water is natural and yet peo-
ple drown, arsenic is natural] and yet it is lethally toxic. To
put this in the crudest terms, we are all going to die, and
that too is natural!

Thus, if “safe” is taken to mean completely risk-free,
then the answer must be no, comfrey is not safe. For ex-
ample, as with all herbs and drugs, there is a small chance
that an allergic response will occur. ‘As is discussed later in
this chapter, it is more meaningful to consider the concepts
of hazard and risk than “safety.” When these concepts are
applied to comfrey, we see that the hazard it poses is its
potential to cause an adverse effect, and the risk it poses
is the statistical probability that the hazard will occur
under specific exposure conditions.

All substances (including herbs) and all activities (in-
cluding taking herbs internally) carry risks. The core
therapeutic issue is whether the benefits outweigh the
dangers. This therapeutic index is discussed in more detail
later in this chapter. However, it should be noted here

----- PAGE 197 -----
that determining a risk-benefit relationship depends on
the informed judgment of the clinician, not an absolute of
pharmacology. Many very risky pharmaceuticals are pre-
scribed because the clinician believes that the benefits
outweigh the risks.®

‘To compound matters, questions of herb safety are
posed in very divergent contexts and lead to similarly di-
vergent answers. The assumptions, expectations, belief
system, knowledge, and experience of both the person
who asks the question and the person who responds will
affect the outcome. A bureaucrat given the responsibility
of regulating the herbal marketplace is not likely to con-
sider the crucial risk-benefit complexities that a phy-
totherapist takes into account when reaching clinical de-
cisions about a unique patient.

When the reports on comfrey toxicity are reviewed,
some interesting points can be made. The following quo-
tation comes from Dorena Rode, author of an insightful
review on comfrey toxicity.

One might expect that new toxicity research or an unac-
ceptable number of adverse reactions prompted these re-

cent actions, but neither is the case.?

The very few specific reports of human toxicity re-
lated to comfrey all come from the period between 1980
and 1990, when a number of cases of veno-occlusive dis-
ease were reported.'° There is no question about the di-
agnoses. However, it is important to note that in these
cases, the connection with comfrey was not considered
in the context of other contributing factors. For exam-
ple, concomitant illness, the use of prescription or over-
the-counter hepatotoxic drugs (like acetaminophen, for
example), and impaired nutritional status clearly in-
crease the likelihood that PA-containing herbs will cause
hepatotoxicity.

With minimal epidemiological data, what insights
can be garnered from the laboratory research into toxic-
ity? As with many statements about herbal toxicity, the
evidence proffered comes primarily from rodent studies
that utilized high levels of purified PAs. No systematic
toxicity testing or clinical trials of comfrey have been per-
formed. Although PA poisoning in humans does occur, it
is most commonly a consequence of consuming plants
other than comfrey.!!

Such reliance on animal experimentation data and
toxicity reports about other plants gives us little insight
into the risks and therapeutic benefits of the human use of
comfrey. Rode enumerates four limitations of the pub-
lished research.

Toxicity, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 189

Not all PAs have similar toxicity. ‘As discussed in chapter
8 and later in this chapter, this group of alkaloids do
not pose a uniform risk. Based on structure-toxicity
studies, it can be concluded that the PAs in comfrey
(such as symphytine, a retronecine monoester) are
less toxic than those present in the plants Senecio,
Crotolaria, and Heliotropium. ‘These have actually
caused human toxicity (for example, senecionine, a
macrocyclic retronecine diester).!?

Not all. animals are susceptible to PA toxicity. As with
most substances, responses to PAs among different
animals vary greatly. Pigs, chickens, and rats are
highly sensitive to poisoning by Senecio, whereas mice
and sheep are resistant. However, and more signifi-
cant, the response of one species to Senecio might not
reflect its susceptibility to other PAs.!3 In addition,
the route of administration can dramatically affect
the toxic response. For example, rabbits are relatively
resistant to chronic feeding of Senecio, but are killed
by a single injection of the purified alkaloids.'*

Although theoretically sensitivity to PAs, pigs
readily accept comfrey as a food and show no ad-
verse effects, even when comfrey represents 40% of
their diet. Rats, however, appear to be very sensitive
to the same PAs. When eating large amounts of
comfrey or injected with comfrey PAs, rats develop
the hepatic lesions indicative of PA poisoning.!5 This
calls into question the validity of using rodent ani-
mal models as indicators of human response to PAs.

Comfrey species vary in PA content. Between 85% and
97% of the PAs in Symphytum officinale, the com-
frey commonly grown in American gardens, are
built around the less toxic retronecine monoester.
However, Russian comfrey (Symphytum x up-
landicum), contains higher levels of the diester,
which is known to have a greater toxicity.!®
Bearing in mind the differences in toxicity among
various PAs, and the variable distribution of PAs in
different comfrey species and varieties, we might
conclude that extrapolations of research results
from one species to another may be unreliable.

Effects of isolated PAs might not be representative of
whole:plant use. As with many herbs, it is problem-
atic to assume that the pharmacology of a specific
constituent can be used to predict the pharmacology
of the whole plant. Veterinary studies have shown that
the formation of toxic PA metabolites is reduced by
concurrent administration of the sulfur-containing
amino acid methionine or cysteine.!’ Similarly,
protein-deficient diets enhance the toxicity of PAs.!8

----- PAGE 198 -----
190 «@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Most toxicity studies used purified PAs, ignoring
the potential protective effects of co-occurring nu-
trients present in the whole plant. This suggests
that studies using purified PAs probably overstate
the health risks associated with comfrey extracts or
the whole plant.

So what can be concluded about the safe use of com-
frey? Again, the clinical concept of comfrey’s therapeutic
index must be invoked. As discussed later in this chapter
under Toxicology, the therapeutic index compares the
therapeutically effective dose to the toxic dose of a sub-
stance. This gives an indication of the relative safety of a
drug or herb by providing a ratio of the dose that pro-
duces toxicity to the dose needed to bring about the de-
sired therapeutic response. According to The Merck
Manual, the term describes “informed clinical judgment,”
but who are the relevant clinicians in the case of comfrey?

All of this might lead one to the conclusion that tox-
icologists’ statements about the safety of comfrey may be
based on inadequate data. Unless benefits are compared
with risks, we have only conjecture. Consider, for exam-
ple, the case of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). NSAIDs include such readily available
medicines as aspirin and ibuprofen, as well as stronger
prescription drugs like Celebrex, Indocin, and Vioxx.
Such medications can play an undeniably beneficial role
in the control of arthritic inflammation, for example. But
are they safe?

More than 30 billion NSAIDs are consumed annually
in the United States. The major effect of all NSAIDs is to
decrease the synthesis of prostaglandins by reversibly in-
hibiting cyclooxygenase, an enzyme that catalyzes the for-
mation of prostaglandins from the precursor arachidonic
acid. Prostaglandins enhance the inflammatory response,
but also renal blood flow and cytoprotection of gastroin-
testinal mucosa. The 1998 report from the American
Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC) docu-
ments 52,751 toxic exposures to ibuprofen alone, of
which 13,519 were treated in health care facilities. Four
deaths were reported. For the same year, the AAPCC also
reports a high rate of complications arising from thera-
peutic use of NSAIDs, specifically, 100,000 toxic expo-
sures resulting in hospitalization and 10,000 resulting in
fatality.!?

In the face of such toxicological data, it may seem
strange that ibuprofen is considered safe enough for non-
prescription use. However, the benefits are believed to
outweigh the risks. Thus, the toxicity data are seen in the
context of the therapeutic benefits. The phytotherapist

would say that the same process must be applied to com-
frey before conclusive statements can be made. Thus, an
assessment of comfrey’s safety must take into account
more than the real and theoretical risks posed by PAs:

¢ How does the toxicity of a whole plant preparation
compare with that of the actual PAs present?

* How does the toxicity of comfrey PAs compare to that
of the well-studied PAs contained in toxic plants from
the genus Senecio?

¢ How does the hazard posed by comfrey PAs relate to
the risk of using comfrey in herbal teas and tinctures?

¢ What real risks are posed and what therapeutic bene-
fits are offered by the use of comfrey?

* How do the benefits compare with the risks?

Unless the knowledge and experience of clinical phy-
totherapists are taken into account, the lack of main-
stream Clinical experience with comfrey might suggest it
offers no therapeutic benefits. However, in this book, the
reader will discover that comfrey is suggested for inclu-
sion in many treatment protocols. For more details on its
safe use, please refer to the comfrey entry in chapter 26
and to specific body system chapters in part 2 of this
book.

Factors to Consider When Assessing

Herb Safety

In general, a number of broad factors must be taken into
account:

¢ Has traditional use of the plant revealed any knowl-
edge of toxicity?

¢ Does the plant contain constituents with established
toxicity?

¢ Are there inherent risks unique to the form in which
the herb is administered? (For example, does topical
use of comfrey pose a different level of risk than inter-
nal use?)

¢ Does objective data for both toxicity and efficacy exist?
Are the research results valid enough to form some
basis for approximate risk assessment?

* How does the science compare with the perceived risk
expressed by the FDA, practitioners of orthodox
medicine, or herbalists?

Based on the context in which the herb is being
prescribed, selected, or purchased, what might be called
iatrogenic risks arise—in other words, inadvertent risks in-
troduced through mistakes, lack of knowledge, or other
such factors, If use of comfrey was suggested by a clini-
cian, did this clinician understand the parameters for safe

----- PAGE 199 -----
Safety Guidelines for
Phytotherapists

How do we create a bridge between the knowl-
edge and experience of a well-trained phyto-
therapist and the unique perspective and lan-
guage of the scientific method? The plethora of
issues concerning safety and toxicity is an area in
which | am trying to find meaningful corollaries,
and, as a simple-minded herbalist, make sense of
all of this. In this time of rapid change, | want to
sound a plea for traditional protocols. Here are
some provisional guidelines.

Don't jump to unwarranted conclusions
about therapeutic indications and contraindica-
tions from research findings if:

° They are derived from animal experiments.
This is partly a moral position, but there are
also profound doubts about the validity of
extrapolations from animal studies to human
research applications. For example, does a
specific animal model actually test what the
interpretation suggests it tests? Much of the
basic research on phytoestrogens uses a labo-
ratory test that assesses estrogen-induced
thickening of the uterine wall in rodents. This
is all well and good, but to use results of such
tests to arrive at human therapeutic proto-
cols is absurd. The mere fact that rodents do
not menstruate calls into question the valid-
ity of such extrapolation. This alone should
inform us that the actual situation is much
more complex than the one the test is de-
signed to investigate.

© The studies utilized isolated constituents, not
whole plants. Even if we don’t invoke the bio-
chemical synergy that may play a role in the
actions of whole plant preparations, the stu-
pendous number of potential interactions
should make us wary of easy conclusions.

© They disagree with established phytothera-
peutic experience and protocols. As our
modality has inherent value (a statement that
is obviously a reflection of my own belief
system, not statistical data), we should not
reject protocols or plants because of lack of
research on their mechanisms of action.

‘ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 2 191

use? At the other end of the spectrum, was the herb self-
selected by a consumer under the influence of commer-
cial hype?

The complex of issues concerning substance interac-
tions must also be assessed. As discussed later in this
chapter, the nature of interactions varies. One must con-
sider the ways in which an herb might interact with pre-
scription or over-the-counter drugs, other herbs, or even
other modalities.

Sociopolitical risks must also be evaluated. From cer-
tain cultural perspectives, the use of herbs by anyone out-
side of a professional elite poses some unique concerns.
The informed use of therapeutic plants empowers people.
However, in this context, any lessening of people’s depen-
dence on the professional elite (or financial indebtedness
to the industrial-medical complex) can be seen as a po-
tential threat to the power structure of the dominant hi-
erarchy. The more people develop their own relationship
with nature, the less power the dominators will have. Just
as attempts are made to discourage people about the
green movement by labeling it “ecoterrorism,” the scare
tactic used against herbs is often the issue of safety.

Of course, determining how to use herbs safely is a
real issue, but it is one that can also be used for political
ends. This does not necessarily imply a conscious politi-
cal effort, but is more often simply the expression of the
belief system in which the person is embedded. “Expert
status” is a mutually supportive addiction that often in-
vokes a reflexive response.

In mainstream culture, herbal expertise is rarely rec-
ognized as existing outside the walls of academia.
However, if becoming an expert involves some form of
culturally recognized academic achievement, how is this
to be obtained in a culture that offers no Ph.D. programs
in herbalism? By this I mean clinical phytotherapy pro-
grams, not ethnobotany. In a cultural milieu in which the
knowledge, skills, and experience of the herbalist are de-
valued or ignored, how can our expertise be recognized?

HERB CONTRAINDICATIONS AND
INTERACTIONS

I have come to the conclusion that is it too soon in the
development of modern phytotherapy to authoritatively
define contraindications. Similarly, the interactions of
herbs and even common foods with the various compo-
nents of orthodox medicine have not been explored in
enough depth or with a large enough patient population
to reach reliable conclusions. Ideas abound, but consen-
sus is rare. Specifics about individual herbs can be found
in chapter 26.

----- PAGE 200 -----
192 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

TYPES OF INTERACTIONS

People are normally exposed to several chemicals at a
time, rather than to one isolated chemical. Medical treat-
ment and environmental factors both generally consist of
multiple exposures at a time. Normally, the toxicity of a
specific drug is determined by the study of animals ex-
posed to only one chemical at a time. Researchers rarely
test mixtures of substances for toxicity, since it is usually
impossible to predict possible combinations of chemicals
hat might be present in multiple-chemical exposures.
All of this makes the process of predicting interac-
tions very challenging. Medicines taken simultaneously
may act independently; however, the presence of one
chemical may drastically affect the body’s response to an-
other chemical. The toxicity of a combination of chemi-
cals may be less or more than might be expected based on
the known effects of individual chemicals.

ar:

It is important to have a conceptual context within
which to place any discussion of herb-drug interactions.
The following categories are based on two sources, the
important work of Brinker and of DeSmet.’??! Inter-
actions may be pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic in
nature, and may not be uniformly negative. However, as
is often the case, the complexities of real life may produce
multiple or mysterious interactions between herbs and
drugs.

Pharmacokinetic Interactions

Pharmacokinetic interactions may take a variety of forms
and cause a range of different effects, some negative and
some, as we shall see, potentially positive.

Interactions Leading to a Decrease in Drug
Bioavailability

An herb may affect drug pharmacokinetics by altering
drug absorption. Examples of herbs that may have such
an effect include those that contain dietary fiber, mu-
cilages, or tannins (for example, marshmallow, psyllium,
and tea). Herbs may also cause changes in the rate of
drug elimination. Examples include all laxative herbs and
caffeine-containing herbs, such as coffee, kola nut, mate,
and guarana.

Interactions Causing an Increase in Drug
Bioavailability

Drug bioavailability may be enhanced by herbs that in-
crease the rate of absorption, such as cayenne and black
pepper, or by those that slow metabolism, such as citrus
and licorice.

Interactions That Protect Against Adverse Effects
Several herbs, such as milk thistle, may afford protection
against the adverse effects of drugs. This is discussed in
greater detail in chapter 9.

Pharmacodynamic Interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions between herbs and ortho-
dox drugs may occur if they work via similar mechanisms.
As the pharmacology of many herbs is still unclear, it
should be assumed that if an herb predictably produces a
certain outcome, there is a chance that interactions will
occur with drugs that produce similar outcomes.

Enbancement of Drug Effects

Drug effects may be enhanced if an herb works by a
mechanism different from that of the drug. For example,
hawthorn may enhance the activity of digoxin, a medica-
tion used to treat arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms).

Additive Effects

An agonistic combination of two or more substances may
result in a cumulative effect that reflects the sum of the
expected individual responses. This is the most common
and most potentially toxic type of drug interaction, and
may occur when the herb and drug have similar mecha-
nisms of activity, such as Ginkgo and PAF inhibitors.

Antagonistic, Effects

Here, an exposure to one medicine may diminish the ef-
fect of the other. This might be a physiological antago-
nism: For example, a severe drop in blood pressure result-
ing from a barbiturate overdose can be reversed by
administration of a vasopressor to increase blood pressure.

TOXICOLOGY

Toxicology is the study of adverse effects of chemical or
physical agents on living organisms. The material that
follows provides a brief overview of the issues to consider
when assessing toxicity and its attendant risks. The terms
toxicant, toxin, and poison are often used interchangeably,
however, there are subtle differences in meaning.

* Toxicants are substances that produce adverse biological
effects of any kind; they may be chemical or physical in
nature.

¢ Toxins are specific proteins produced by living organ-
isms (for example, mushroom and tetanus toxins); most
exhibit immediate effects.

* Poisons are toxicants that cause immediate death or ill-
ness upon exposure to very small amounts.

----- PAGE 201 -----
* A toxic agent is anything that produces an adverse bio-
logical effect; it may be chemical, physical, or biologi-
cal in nature.

Systemic Toxic Effects
Toxicity may effect only one site in the body, or a target
organ, or multiple sites, in which case it is called systemic
toxicity. The timing of onset of symptoms can be impor-
tant. Acute toxicity occurs within hours or days of an ex-
posure. An acute exposure is generally a single dose or a
series of doses received within a 24-hour period.
Subchronic toxicity results from repeated exposure over
the course of several weeks or months. This is the usual
exposure pattern when medicinal plants are implicated.
Chronic toxicity results from cumulative damage to
specific organ systems and may take many months or
years to become recognizable, as is the case with
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Damage due to subclinical expo-
sure may go unnoticed, but with repeated exposure, the
effects slowly build up until they can be detected.

Developmental Toxicity

Toxic effects can impact the fetus, and can result from ex-
posure of either parent before conception or of the
mother and her developing fetus after conception.
Developmental toxicity may manifest in failure to con-
ceive, spontaneous abortion or stillbirth, growth retarda-
tion or delayed growth of specific organs, or teratogenicity
(permanent birth defects).

Genetic Toxicity

Damage to DNA causes altered genetic expression. In this
process, known as mutagenesis, the specific genetic change
constitutes a mutation, and the agent that causes the change
is a mutagen. If the mutation occurs in a germ cell, the ef-
fect may be inherited, in which case it causes no harm to
the exposed person but is passed on to future generations.
If the mutation occurs in a somatic cell, it can cause altered
cell growth or cell death in the exposed person.

Organ-Specific Toxic Effects
The toxicity of a given substance may be confined to a
particular body system or organ.

Blood and Cardiovascular Toxicity

Toxicity to the blood or cardiovascular system is caused by
the direct impact of a toxin on cells in the blood, bone
marrow, or heart. Examples include hypoxia (oxygen defi-
ciency) caused by the binding of carbon monoxide to

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY @ 193

hemoglobin, which prevents the transport of oxygen, and
eukemia caused by benzene damage of bone marrow cells.

Dermal Toxicity

Dermal toxicity may result either from direct contact of a
substance with the skin or from internal distribution of
the substance to the skin. Effects can range from mild ir-
ritation to severe injury or change, such as corrosion, hy-
persensitivity, or skin cancer.

Eye Toxicity

Eye toxicity may be caused by direct contact of a toxin
with the eye or by internal distribution of the toxin to the
eye. Conjunctivitis and corneal erosion may be observed
after exposure to chemicals. Chemicals in the circulatory
system distributed to the eye can result in corneal opacity,
cataracts, and retinal and optic nerve damage.

Hepatotoxicity

The liver is particularly susceptible to toxicity because of
its large blood supply and important role in metabolism,
both of which expose the organ to potentially high doses
of toxic metabolites. Hepatotoxicity can take many forms.

Table 10.1. Types of Hepatotoxicity

EFFECT DEFINITION

Chemical hepatitis Inflammation of the liver

Cirrhosis Chronic fibrosis

Hepatic cancer Cancer of the liver

Hepatic necrosis Death of hepatocytes

Hypersensitivity Immune reaction resulting in hepatic

necrosis
Intrahepatic cholestasis Backup of bile salts into liver cells

Steatosis Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes

Immunotoxicity

Damage to the immune system can take several forms, in-
cluding hypersensitivity, immunodeficiency, and uncon-
trolled cell proliferation.

Nepbrotoxicity

The kidney is highly vulnerable to toxicity, because of
both the great volume of blood that flows through it and
the fact that the kidney filters large quantities of toxins,

----- PAGE 202 -----
194 <3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

which can concentrate in the kidney tubules. Nephro-
toxicity can result in systemic toxicity, leading to de-
creased ability to excrete body wastes, inability to main-
tain body fluids and electrolyte balance, and reduced
synthesis of hormones, such as erythropoietin.

Neurotoxicity
Neurotoxicity involves damage to cells of the central ner-
vous and peripheral nervous systems:

* Neuronopathy (neuron injury)

¢ Axonopathy (axon injury)

* Demyelination (loss of axon insulation)
¢ Interference with neurotransmission

Reproductive Toxicity
Specific reproductive organs and the developing fetus
both represent potential sites of reproductive toxicity:

* Decreased libido or impotence

* Infertility

¢ Interrupted pregnancy (abortion, fetal death, or pre-
mature delivery)

¢ Infant death or childhood morbidity

¢ Altered sex ratio and multiple births

¢ Chromosome abnormalities and birth defects

© Childhood cancer

Respiratory Toxicity

Respiratory toxicity can take the form of pulmonary irri-
tation, asthma, bronchitis, reactive airway disease, em-
physema, allergic alveolitis, fibrotic lung disease, pneu-
moconiosis, or lung cancer.

DOSE

The toxicity of a substance is determined mainly by the
dose at which the effect occurs. Toxicity is therefore not
an independent characteristic of a substance, but a func-
tion of the quantity of the substance absorbed. Whether
or not a toxic effect will appear is determined by the dose.
When evaluating the toxicity of substances, both acute
and chronic data must be taken into account, since short-
term exposure to high concentrations generally causes
symptoms different from those caused by long-term ex-
posure to relatively low concentrations.

A dose is the amount of a substance administered at
one time, but this is not the only parameter that must be
taken into account when characterizing toxicity. Also im-
portant are the number of doses, frequency, and total du-
ration of treatment. The total dose, harmful if received all

at once, may be nontoxic when administered over a pe-
riod of time. For example, 30 mg of strychnine swallowed
all at once could be fatal to an adult, whereas 3 mg of
strychnine swallowed each day for 10 days would not be
fatal. The reason is that the body is often able to repair
damage caused by subtoxic doses if sufficient time passes
before the next dose.

The clinical and toxic effects of a dose are both re-
lated to age and body size, so one way to compare efficacy
and toxicity is to consider the amount of a substance ad-
ministered on the basis of body weight. A common dose
measurement is mg/kg, which stands for milligrams (mg)
of substance per kilogram (kg) of body weight. Some
chemicals are toxic in much smaller amounts, so smaller
fractions of the gram are used, such as a microgram (xg).

Table 10.2. Intensity of Toxic Effects

INTENSITY OF EFFECT ORAL DOSAGE*
Extremely toxic Micrograms

Very toxic Milligrams

Moderately toxic Hundreds of milligrams
Slightly toxic Grams

*Per Kilogram of body weight

Effective dose (ED) is a term used to indicate the effi-
cacy of a substance. Normally, “effective dose” refers to a
beneficial effect, but it can also stand for a harmful effect,
so the specific endpoint must be indicated. Toxic dose (TD)
indicates a dose that can be expected to cause adverse
toxic effects.

Relative effective doses are generally described as
follows.

EDo: _ effective in 0% of the population

ED,y: effective in 10% of the population
EDso: effective in 50% of the population
EDg: effective in 90% of the population

Significance of the LDso

A commonly used dose estimate for acute toxicity is the
LDso, in which LD stands for /ethal dose. This is a statis-
tically derived dose at which 50% of the individuals can
be expected to die after administration of a given sub-
stance. Other dose estimates also may be used, LD rep-
resents the dose at which no individuals are expected to
die. This is just below the threshold for lethality. LDyo

----- PAGE 203 -----
refers to the dose at which 10% of the individuals will
die, and so on.

The LDspo is merely a statistical expression that de-
scribes the lethal effect of a substance on a particular pop-
ulation under certain circumstances, not a fundamental
property of the substance. More specifically, LDso is a
measure of the lethality of a substance under experimen-
tal circumstances. It is used, for example, to compare the
relative toxicity of different substances and to classify sub-
stances according to the potential hazards they pose.

Although determination of the LDs under well-
described circumstances can provide valuable informa-
tion, it concerns only one aspect of overall toxicity,
namely lethality. Of much greater importance are, for ex-
ample, the effects and the rate at which they occur and the
pathological symptoms. Bear in mind also that it is diffi-
cult to extrapolate the LDso of a substance for a particu-
lar population of one animal species to other populations
of that species under slightly different conditions.
Extrapolation to a different species altogether will lead to
extremely uncertain results. In addition, comparison of
LDs9 values determined in various laboratories often
shows that there are large variations in results from differ-
ent laboratories.

Therapeutic Index

The therapeutic index (TI) is used to compare the thera-
peutically effective dose to the toxic dose. The TI is a
statement of the relative safety of a drug, and represents a
ratio of the dose producing toxicity to the dose needed to
bring about the desired therapeutic response.

The usual method of deriving the TI is through the
use of 50% dose-response points. For example, if the
LD5p is 200 mg and the EDsp is 20 mg, the resulting ratio
of 200:20 gives us a TI of 10. A clinician would consider
a drug with a TI of 10 safer than one with a TI of 3. Thus,
the higher the TI, the safer the drug and the larger the
therapeutic window of opportunity. The greatest benefit
of the concept of the TI is that it provides some indica-
tion of the probability that toxic adverse effects will be
encountered.

The use of the EDs, and LDso doses to derive the TI
can be misleading. Another term used to denote the safety
of a drug is the margin of safety (MOS). The MOS is usu-
ally calculated as the ratio of the dose that is just within
the lethal range (LDo,) to the dose that is 99% effective
(EDoo). (MOS = LDo)/EDoo.) A physician must use cau-
tion in prescribing a drug in which the MOS is lower
than |.

To put this important concept into a practical con-

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 195

text, consider this quotation from The Merck Manual,
which uses the phrase “benefit-to-risk ratio” instead of
“therapeutic index.”

In every therapeutic endeavor, risks must be weighed
against benefits for each particular clinical situation and
patient. Drug therapy is justified only if the possible ben-
efits outweigh the possible risks after considering the
qualitative and quantitative impact of the use of a drug
and the likely outcome if drug therapy is withheld. This
decision depends on adequate clinical knowledge of the
patient, knowledge of the disease and its natural history,
and knowledge of the drugs pertinent to the specific situ-
ation. Although the term benefit-to-risk ratio is conve-
nient and often used for individual patients, numerical
predictions of benefit or risk do not exist and the mathe-
matical division (to obtain a ratio) is never performed. The

term is used to describe informed clinical judgment.?*

Dose Response

The dose-response relationship correlates exposures and
the spectrum of induced effects. Generally, the higher the
dose, the more severe the response. Knowledge of the
dose-response relationship is important for a number of
reasons:

* Establishes causality, that the chemical has in fact in-
duced the observed effects

* Establishes the lowest dose at which an induced effect
may occur, or the threshold effect

* Determines the rate at which injury builds up, or the
slope for the dose response

A threshold for toxic effects occurs at the point at
which the body’s ability to detoxify a xenobiotic substance
or repair toxic injury has been exceeded. Most organs
have a reserve capacity, so that some loss of organ func-
tion does not cause a significant decrease in performance.
For example, the development of cirrhosis in the liver
may not result in a clinical effect until more than 50% of
the liver has been replaced by fibrous tissue.

ANIMAL TESTING FOR TOXICITY

I find the degree of animal testing in the world of phar-
macology to be pornographic. However, in the overview
of herbal science that makes up the first part of this book,
it proved essential to refer to animal studies, because at
present, bioscience is largely dependent on this research
method. In any case, here is not the place to enter the
debate about vivisection. The material that follows is

----- PAGE 204 -----
196 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

intended to inform the reader, not serve as advocacy for
animal testing.

Animal tests for toxicity are conducted prior to
human clinical investigations. For pesticides and indus-
trial chemicals, human testing is rarely conducted, so an-
imal test results are used to predict toxicity in humans.
Methods to evaluate toxicity exist for a wide variety of
toxic effects. Some procedures for routine safety testing
have been standardized.

To be standardized, a test procedure must have sci-
entific acceptance as the most meaningful assay for the
toxic effect. Toxicity tests can be very specific for a par-
ticular effect, such as dermal irritation, or may be gen-
eral, such as a test for unknown chronic effects. Species
selection varies with the toxicity test to be performed, as
there is no single species that is appropriate for all tests.
In some cases, it may not be possible to use the most de-
sirable animal for testing because of animal welfare con-
cerns or cost considerations. For example, monkeys and
dogs are restricted to special cases, even though their re-
actions to such testing may most closely represent human
reactions.

Testing should duplicate the potential exposure of
humans as closely as possible. Thus, the route of exposure
should simulate that of human exposure. In addition, the
age of test animals should relate to that of humans likely
to be exposed to the substance. For most routine tests,
both genders are used. Gender differences in toxic re-
sponses are minimal, except for toxic substances with
hormonal properties. Dose levels are normally selected
in order to determine the toxic threshold as well as dose-
response relationship.

Problems with Animal Testing

Apart from the overriding moral and ethical concerns
with animal experimentation, there are a number of sci-
entific concerns.

Inter- and Intraspecies Differences in Sensitivity
There may be considerable differences in sensitivity to a
toxic substance among different species and among indi-
viduals. Mice are more sensitive than rats to the carcino-
genic effects of 1,3-butadiene, a chemical used in the pro-
duction of synthetic rubber and other resins that is one of
the 189 hazardous air pollutants identified in the Clean
Air Act amendments.”3

Butadiene causes cancer through its conversion in the
body to more-toxic metabolites, butadiene monoepoxide
and butadiene diepoxide. Studies on the livers of rats,
mice, and humans indicate that humans and rats metabo-

lize butadiene in a similar manner, and rats are relatively
resistant to the cancer-causing effects of this chemical.
Mice produce significantly more butadiene monoepoxide
than rats, as well as large quantities of butadiene diepox-
ide. This is important, as butadiene diepoxide is about
100 times more damaging to DNA than butadiene mo-
noepoxide. The high levels of these epoxides produced
by mice probably explains why they are so sensitive to
the carcinogenic effects of butadiene.’*

Interspecies Variations in Anatomy and Body Size
Small animals have a relatively large body-surface-to-
body-volume ratio, This means that exposure to a sub-
stance via the skin surface can lead to the absorption of a
relatively large quantity. The ratio also indicates that the
animal’s metabolic rate is relatively high, so it will ingest
more food. If the food happens to be contaminated, a rel-
atively high dose of the substance will be ingested.

Selective Toxicity Due to Physiology

An extreme example of this phenomenon is the difference
between animals and plants. The toxicity of many insec-
ucides is dependent on their effects on the nervous sys-
tem. Plants, therefore, are relatively insensitive to the ef-
fects of insecticides. On the other hand, animals are
relatively insensitive to most herbicides, many of which
affect physiological mechanisms characteristic of plants,
such as photosynthesis.

FACTORS AFFECTING TOXICITY
IN HUMANS

Genetic Differences

Sensitivity may depend on genetic variability in enzyme
activity. Individuals with a glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase deficiency in their red blood cells are hyper-
sensitive to oxidative substances, such as aromatic nitro
substances, chlorates, antimalarial agents, and glycosides
from broad beans.

Age

Babies are more sensitive to the toxic effect of nitrates
than adults. Their sensitivity is ascribed to a transient de-
ficiency in NADH-methemoglobin reductase. Hence, in
this case, babies constitute a high-risk group.

Dietary Habits and Lifestyle
Diet appears to be of great significance in the develop-
ment of cancer. In the body, many carcinogenic sub-

----- PAGE 205 -----
stances are activated to become reactive metabolites
under the influence of biotransformation enzymes.

Internal Absorption versus External
Exposure

Often, the crucial factor is not the amount of a substance
to which an individual is exposed, but its subsequent con-
centration in the body, specifically in the target organ or
organs. This is the concentration to which the individual
is actually exposed internally. If the absorption rate of a
substance exceeds the rate of excretion and biotransfor-
mation, accumulation may take place, and the total
amount of the substance in the body (the body burden)
will increase. Distribution throughout the body will de-
pend on the properties of the substance and tissue. For
example, DDT is found mainly in adipose tissue.

HAZARDS AND RISKS

Hazard refers to the potential toxicity of a substance in an
actual situation; how one deals with the substance in that
particular situation determines the risk. Risk differs from
hazard in that it cannot usually be determined experi-
mentally. It may be inferred from epidemiological data or
it may be predicted from mathematical models, but rarely
can it be measured. Instead, a more qualitative approach
to identifying risk must be adopted. The following terms
are routinely used in risk assessments:

Hazard is the capability of a substance to cause an ad-
verse effect, although the term can also be applied to
physicochemical properties, such as flammability and
explosiveness.

Risk is a statistical term that indicates the probability
that the hazard will occur under specific exposure
conditions.

Risk assessment is the process by which hazard, exposure,
and risk are determined.

Risk management is the process of selecting the most ap-
propriate action based on the results of risk assessment
and social, economic, and political concerns.

There are four basic steps in the risk assessment
process.

Hazard identification: the characterization of the innate
adverse effects or toxicity of an agent

Dose-response assessment: the characterization of the
relationship between doses and incidences of adverse
effects in exposed populations

Exposure assessment: measurement or estimation of the

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 2+ 197

intensity, frequency, and duration of human exposures
to agents

Risk characterization: an estimation of the incidence of
health effects under the various conditions of human
exposure

Hazard Identification

In order to determine whether a substance is toxic when
present in a large enough amount, several types of infor-
mation are used. The most conclusive information comes
from observation of cases in which humans are exposed to
the substance, in either clinical or epidemiological stud-
ies. In the absence of information from human studies, in-
ferences are drawn from animal studies, from in vitro
studies using living cells, or from comparisons to similar
substances that pose known hazards.

As the source of the information moves farther from
actual human studies, the uncertainty becomes greater.
One or more toxic hazards may be identified, but the pri-
mary hazard of concern will be one that can cause a seri-
ous health consequence at a lower dosage than required
by other substances that cause serious toxic effects.

Risk Factors

What factors determine the risk from exposure to a toxic
substance? Not all individuals are subject to the same
health risk. For this reason, the term high-risk group was
coined. The term situational risk refers to the risk inher-
ent in a particular situation in which there is a high
chance of exposure. Quite often, a distinction will be
made between situational risks and increased individual
sensitivity to a certain substance. People who live in the
vicinity of an industry that pollutes the environment have
a greater chance of coming into contact with the emis-
sions of that industry than do others. If the same people
also work in these industries, their risks are even higher.

Some people are at high risk because they have a
greater sensitivity to one or more substances than do oth-
ers in the population. People with chronic nonspecific
lung disease, who have a comparatively high sensitivity to
substances that irritate the airways, provide a good exam-
ple. Small children constitute a high-risk group, not only
because they have a higher inherent sensitivity to some
potential hazards, but also because of their behavior. For
example, they may be exposed to toxic substances present
in the soil, a means of exposure that is far less likely for
adults.

Certain hobbies can increase the risk of exposure to
toxic substances. Pregnant women and their unborn chil-
dren can be considered to be at higher risk from exposure

----- PAGE 206 -----
198 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

to all kinds of substances. The same is true for elderly
people. As age increases, the functional capacity of vari-
ous organs, such as the liver and kidneys, starts to decline.
Changes in metabolic and eliminative functions can cause
significant changes in the toxicity of various substances. In
addition, the reserve capacity of various organs is often
severely reduced in the elderly, which may mean that seem-
ingly small toxic exposures can have severe consequences.

HERB TOXICITY

An excellent review of the adverse effects of herbs by
DeSmet cites a number of causes.’> All concerned with
these issues should refer to this book and its subsequent
volume.

Eight categories of causes are given; these are dis-
cussed in more depth later:

¢ Poisonous plants

¢ Adulteration of commercial products
* Self-collection of medicinal plants

* Microorganisms and microbial toxins
¢ Pesticides and fumigation agents

¢ Radioactivity

¢ Toxic metals

¢ Environmental pollution

THE NATURE OF POISONOUS
PLANTS

Poisonous plants contain physiologically active or toxic
substances in sufficient amounts to cause harmful effects in
animals and humans. The poisonous nature of a plant may
be due to the presence of any of several kinds of substances:

¢ Substances that are themselves toxic

¢ Substances that are in themselves harmless, but which
may decompose to form toxic products either before
or soon after they are eaten, such as the nontoxic glu-
coside amygdalin, produced in the wild cherry, which
hydrolyzes to form hydrogen cyanide

¢ Substances formed by the action of microorganisms on
plants or plant products; for example, under certain
conditions, fungi produce mold in hay or silage that in
turn forms decomposition products, some of which
may be toxic

¢ Substances absorbed directly from the soil and stored
in harmful quantities in the tissues of certain plants, in-
cluding selenium in certain species of locoweeds and
potassium nitrate in oats and amaranth

PLANT TOXINS

Of course, it is plant chemistry that makes certain plants
toxic. Here, I will discuss the toxicity of certain groups of
secondary plant constituents. More information on phy-
tochemistry can be found in chapters relevant to specific
groups of compounds.

Oxalic Acid

Oxalic acid is a dicarboxylic acid. It may occur as an acid
or as salts of the acid, such as calcium oxalate, potassium
oxalate, and sodium oxalate. The leaves, stems, and roots
of many plants contain oxalates, and plants of some
species can accumulate large amounts. Rhubarb leaves
contain up to 1% soluble sodium and potassium oxalates;
these soluble oxalates are readily absorbed from the gas-
trointestinal tract.”

Systemic formation of calcium oxalate may produce
hypocalcemia, while precipitation of insoluble salts in the
renal system can lead to kidney dysfunction and elec-
trolyte imbalance. Other plants that contain high levels of
insoluble calcium oxalates in their leaves include
Dieffenbachia, Philodendron, and sorrel (Rumex spp.).
Insoluble calcium oxalate crystal needles are contained in
raphides, bundles of needlelike crystals in plant cells.

Ingestion of a small amount of plant material with a
high oxalate concentration usually causes only mild irrita-
tion of the mouth and esophageal mucosa. More pro-
nounced gastrointestinal effects may follow ingestion of
large amounts of soluble oxalate. Ingestion of oxalic acid
can lead to extensive renal damage and even death. The
lethal dose of oxalic acid for adults is 15 g to 30 g.
Chronic consumption of oxalates is a risk factor for the
development of certain types of stones (calculi). An esti-
mated 66% of renal calculi and 75% of bladder calculi are
composed of calcium oxalate. However, such stones may
be caused by pathologies unrelated to the consumption of
plants.

Interestingly, research has revealed that certain con-
stituents, such as the triterpene saponin lupeol, have po-
tential value in the prevention and treatment of oxalate-
based stones.?”

Only a few plants contain sufficient amounts of
sodium and potassium oxalate to be considered toxic.
Moreover, ruminants that consume these plants de-
velop increasing levels of tolerance to oxalate. An oxalate-
degrading anaerobic microorganism has been isolated
from pure culture of rumen bacteria. This organism,
Oxalobacter formigens, uses oxalate as a sole energy source
and produces carbon dioxide and formate as end prod-

----- PAGE 207 -----
ucts. This ability is extremely rare among anaerobic bac-
teria, and therefore this organism occupies a unique
niche in the microflora of the rumen. The ability of the
ruminant to adapt to and tolerate a diet high in oxalates
directly depends on the presence of oxalate-degrading
microorganisms.

Terpenes

The terpenes are an enormous family of chemicals that
are reviewed in chapter 6. Some are therapeutically im-
portant, and many appear to have no activity in humans,
but some are toxic. These are briefly discussed here.

Thujone
Thujone is a terpene of widespread occurrence that is
found in many essential oils. It occurs in some evergreens
of the Cupressaceae family, including Thuja occidentalis,
Chamaecyparis thyoides, Juniperus sabina, and several
species of Cupressus. Thujone also is found in Asteraceae
in Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, and Tana-
cetum vulgare, and in Lamiaceae in Salvia officinalis.
Wormwood oil, derived from Artemisia absinthium,
was the principal flavoring of absinthe, and the hallucino-
genic compound in absinthe was thujone. A dose of 30 mg
of thujone per kilogram of body weight can produce con-
vulsions and lesions of the cortex of the brain. The toxic-
ity is cumulative.

Ranunculosides

Ranunculosides are lactone glycosides that on hydrolysis
give ranunculin and glucose, Ranunculin is then con-
verted into protoanemonin. Protoanemonin is toxic; its
derivatives are not. (For a more detailed discussion on the
chemistry of ranunculosides, see chapter 6.)

Anyone collecting or handling plants of the
Ranunculaceae family with bare hands should be careful
not to hold them for long periods of time, as the sap irri-
tates the skin and can cause blistering. The sap of any
plant of this family has a burning taste and may produce
reddening and swelling on contact with the skin. If swal-
lowed in large quantities, the sap can cause gastritis, which
may develop into colic followed by extreme gastroenteri-
tis and diarrhea mixed with blood. Large quantities of mu-
cilage are required for treatment of such a reaction.

Plants Containing Ranunculosides
Christmas rose (Helleborus niger)
Field buttercup (Ranunculus acris)
Globe flower (Troflius europaeus)
Marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)

TOxIcITy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .2 199

Pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vulgaris)
Wood anemone (Anemone nemorosa)

Sesquiterpene Lactones

Sesquiterpene lactones are a class of natural sesquiter-
penoids that are chemically distinct from other members
of the group through the presence of a lactone system.
(For more information on the chemistry of sesquiterpene
lactones, see chapter 6.)

Some lactones formed in plants are very toxic to ani-
mals, while others serve a protective function in removing
harmful breakdown products of metabolism.

Many sesquiterpene lactones have antitumor activity,
but their considerable cytotoxicity has limited their
medicinal application as isolated constituents. They are
biologically active; some are toxic to mammals, while
others are responsible for allergic contact dermatitis in
humans.

Sesquiterpene lactones are highly irritating to the
nose, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract. In addition, the po-
tential for sesquiterpene lactones in species of Asteraceae,
Lauraceae, Magnoliaceae, and Jubulaceae to cause aller-
gic contact dermatitis is well known. More than 80
sesquiterpene lactones possess allergenic properties.

Sensitive people tend to develop cross-reactions to

related molecules when they come in contact with other
species containing sesquiterpene lactones. Anyone who
has acquired a delayed hypersensitivity (for example, con-
tact dermatitis) to sesquiterpene lactone—containing
plants should strictly avoid further contact with any other
species or extracts containing sesquiterpene lactones in
order to avoid new reactions.

Sesquiterpene lactones can induce this delayed type
of hypersensitivity only when applied to the skin. When
taken orally or administered by another route, they usu-
ally produce no allergic effects.

Glycosides

Glycosides hydrolyze to form sugar molecules (glycones)
and various other nonsugar components (aglycones). Any
toxicity caused by glycosides is due to the aglycones, not
the glycones. Toxic glycosides include cyanogenic,
coumarin, cardiac, saponin, protoanemonin, and an-
thraquinone glycosides, as well as glycosinolates, which
produce the volatile oils known as mustard oils.

Gyanogenic Glycosides

Cyanogenic glycosides are found in more than 800 plant
species in 80 families. The hydrolysis of these glycosides
releases the sugar, the aglycone and hydrocyanic acid

----- PAGE 208 -----
200 <= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

(HCN), also known as prussic acid. The most common
plants containing toxic cyanogenic glycosides are in the
Rosaceae and Fabaceae families and in the genus Sorghum
in Poaceae. An exception is cassava (Manihot esculenta)
from Euphorbiaceae, which is used as a food plant in
tropical regions after the toxic hydrocyanic acid is re-
moved. The formation of cyanogenic glycosides in plants
is often a response to damage from drought. See chapter
4 for a detailed discussion on the distribution and chem-
istry of cyanogenic glycosides, including amygdalin, the
cyanogenic glycoside found in bitter almonds (Prunus dul-
cis var. amara).

Ruminant animals are particularly susceptible to hy-
drocyanic acid poisoning because the enzymes of their
bacterial flora contribute to rapid hydrolysis of cyano-
genic glycosides. HCN is rapidly absorbed through the
walls of the rumen into the blood. HCN inhibits enzymes
active in cellular respiration, primarily the terminal en-
zyme in the electron transport chain of the mitochondria,
thereby halting the generation of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) and oxygen utilization. The cells die from lack of
oxygen, even though oxygen is plentiful.

Glucosinolates (Goitrogenic Glycosides)
Glucosinolates are characteristic of plants in the
Brassicaceae, including cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. cap-
itata), field mustard (B. campestris), and rape (B. napus).
They are found also in the closely related families
Capparadaceae, Moringaceae, and Resedaceae, as well as
Caricaceae, Limnanthaceae, and Tropaeolaceae.

More than 100 different glucosinolates are known, all
of which contain a common structure with a variable side
chain R (for example, sinigrin). Their major role in the
plant appears to be defensive. When the plant is attacked
by pests, an enzyme called myrosinase is released, which
hydrolyzes the glucosinolate to release B-D-glucose and
the aglycone. For more information on the chemistry of
glucosinolates, see chapter 4.

When glucosinolate-containing plants are bruised,
the compounds released are hydrolyzed by the enzyme
thioglucosidase, which is always found in such plants. In
all cases, the freed aglycone is unstable and is chemically
restructured to an isothiocyanate. Isothiocyanates have a
pungent odor and taste and are irritating to both the skin
and the mucous membranes that line the gastrointestinal
tract. They may also cause liver and kidney damage.

Isothiocyanates inhibit the uptake of iodine in the
thyroid. However, the small amounts of isothiocyanates
consumed in cabbage and related edible plants are not be-
lieved to cause thyroid problems in humans.

Saponin Glycosides

The pharmacology of the large, complex, and therapeuti-
cally important group of compounds known as saponins,
which usually occur in plants as glycosides, presents some
unique toxicity concerns. Because saponins are character-
istically toxic to cold-blooded animals, plants containing
them have been used as fish poisons around the world.
Sap from crushed plants, agitated in a pond or stream,
stuns fish, which float to the surface. The toxin acts on
the respiratory organs of fish without affecting their edi-
bility. Saponins are comparably nontoxic to warm-
blooded animals. For more information on this varied
group of compounds, please see the discussions in chap-
ters 4 and 6.

Cardiac Glycosides

Although of fundamental importance to medicine, the
cardiac glycosides are exceedingly toxic. Cardiac glyco-
sides may be either bufadienolides or the more abundant
cardenolides, two related groups of steroidal saponins of
triterpenoid origin. The assumed mechanism of action
involves inhibition of Na*, K*-ATPase, resulting in in-
creased intracellular sodium and, subsequently, intracel-
lular calcium, leading to enhanced muscle contraction in
cardiac tissue. For a more detailed discussion of this
group of compounds, see chapter 6.

Among the approximately 400 plants that contain
cardiac glycosides, genera used therapeutically include
Digitalis, Urgenia, Convallaria, Nerium, Strophanthus, and
Asclepias. The entire Digitalis plant is toxic. Symptoms of
poisoning include dizziness, vomiting, irregular heart-
beat, and delirium or hallucinations, Digitonin, a carde-
nolide, is derived from Digitalis purpurea.

Polyphenolics

In general, this very large group of secondary plant con-
stituents has minimal toxicity. However, as might be ex-
pected, there are some important exceptions.

Coumarin Glycosides
Coumarins and their glycosides are widely distributed.
Coumarol (a coumarin glycoside) and the enzyme that
causes its hydrolysis are constituents of sweet clover,
Melilotus species. When cut as hay, sweet clover is easily
contaminated with molds, especially when the foliage is
lush or it is cut or cured when conditions are wet.

Molds such as Penicillium nigricans, P jensi, and
Aspergillus metabolize the coumarin into 4-hydroxy-
coumarin, which reacts with formaldehyde in the spoiled

----- PAGE 209 -----
hay to produce dicoumarol. Dicoumarol is similar in
structure to vitamin K, and when unintentionally eaten it
inhibits vitamin K production. Vitamin K is necessary for
the activation of prothrombin. When tissue is damaged,
thromboplastin is released and converts prothrombin to
thrombin. Thrombin alters the solubility of fibrinogen in
the blood and causes it to clot and seal the damage.
Dicoumarol prevents this process.

Warfarin is a synthetic chemical derived from
coumarol. It is used in rodenticides and acts as a vitamin
K inhibitor to block the blood-clotting process and pro-
voke hemorrhage.

Constituents in the plant may undergo chemical
transformation by contaminating microorganisms. For
example, mold in dried sweet clover (Melilotus officinalis)
can result in serious hemorrhagic activity. It contains
coumarin, 3,4-dihydrocoumarin, O-coumaric acid, O-
hydroxycoumaric acid, and the O-glycoside of O-coumaric
acid (melilotoside). Drying leads to the formation of
the enzymatic glycoside hydrolysis, and the resulting
O-coumaric acid is spontaneously transformed to
coumarin, so the dried herb strongly smells of coumarin
(the characteristic aroma of new-mown hay).”®

Coumarin is devoid of anticoagulant effects in hu-
mans because a structurally essential characteristic for the
anticoagulant potential of coumarin derivatives is ab-
sent.2°30 However, the transformation product dicoumarol
has potent anticoagulant effects.*! While poisoning by
molded sweet clover occurs almost exclusively in cattle,
there was a report of abnormal clotting function and mild
clinical bleeding in a woman who had been drinking large
amounts of a herbal tea prepared from sweet clover and
other coumarin-containing ingredients.*? The chemistry
of coumarins is discussed in more detail in chapter 7.

OH

0 —
B-glucosidase
‘O—Glueore ° °
Melilotoside Coumarin
dole growth

Dicoumarol

Fig. 10.1. Formation of coumarin and dicoumarol

Toxicity, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .& 201

Furocoumarin Glycosides
The furocoumarins are discussed under Photosensitivity,
starting on page 210.

Gossypol

Gossypol is a polyphenol found mainly in the pigment
glands of cotton, Gossypium species. Gossypol may exist
free or bound, but free gossypol is considered the toxic
form. The bound form is nontoxic because it is irre-
versibly bonded to proteins.

Gossypol has potential as a male contraceptive.® Its
antifertility activity came to light in a somewhat cir-
cuitous manner. A group of farmers in rural areas of
China developed fatigue and burning sensations on their
faces, hands, and other exposed parts of the body; epi-
demiologists discovered that they had consumed home-
made cottonseed oil containing gossypol. Many couples
from these areas were found to be infertile. The women
had amenorrhea and the men had low levels or complete
absence of living sperm. It has since been determined that
after three months the use of 50 mg of gossypol a week
results in abrupt decreases in sperm counts, which are
sometimes recoverable* Hyperkalemia due to renal
potassium loss has also been seen with clinical use of

gossypol.*

Anthraquinone Glycosides

Anthraquinone aglycones are stimulant laxatives that act
on the large intestine; they are discussed in more detail in
chapters 7 and 13. At high doses, they are gastrointestinal
irritants, causing symptoms that can include nausea, vom-
iting, bloody diarrhea, dizziness, abdominal pain, and, in
severe cases, kidney damage.

Anthraquinones are found in the bark of cascara
sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana) and other species in the
Rhamnaceae family and in the leaves of Aloe vera (not the
mucilaginous gel). They also occur in the root of Chinese
thubarb (Rheum officinale) but not common rhubarb (R.
rbaponticum), and in the seeds and leaves of senna (Cassia
spp.). Cascara bark from Rhamnus pursbiana is stored for
a year before it is processed. This delay allows for oxida-
tion of the anthrones and dianthrones to anthraquinones,
which tempers their potential griping effects.

Tannins

As discussed in chapter 7, tannins are complex polyphe-
nols that form complexes with proteins, thus inhibiting
enzyme activity. The toxicology of tannins has been ex-
tensively studied because of their potential deleterious ef-
fects on livestock. The primary sites of impact are the

----- PAGE 210 -----
202 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

mouth, where proteins and carbohydrates get exposed to
tannins, and the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. Here,
unbound tannins form complexes with both dietary pro-
teins and metabolic proteins.

The major effect of tannins in the human diet ap-
pears to be a decrease in the efficiency of nutrient assim-
ilation. Certain cancers, such as esophageal cancer, have
been theoretically associated with the consumption of
tannin-rich foods, such as betel nuts and herb teas.
However, other studies, both epidemiological and clini-
cal, indicate that tannin-rich black and green teas have
anticarcinogenic properties. The anticarcinogenic and
antimutagenic potential of tannins may be related to their
antioxidant properties; tannins inhibit the generation of
superoxide radicals. In the laboratory, tannins also inhibit
the growth of many fungi, yeasts, bacteria, and viruses.°°

Alkaloids

The group of compounds known as alkaloids contains
many substances that are potentially toxic to humans, al-
though not all alkaloids are toxic. In general, alkaloids are
not toxic to plant cells, although purified forms can cause
damage when applied to plant tissues, even those of the
plant that produced the alkaloid. Plants may avoid alka-
loid toxicity by accumulating them in certain ways—for
example, in the vacuoles of the cells. Morphine is accu-
mulated in the latex cells that occur throughout the
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). These latex tubes are
lacking in the parts of the pods where the seeds are
formed, however, and thus do not affect the developing
embryos. For a detailed discussion of the chemistry of al-
kaloids, see chapter 8.

Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) have become a major con-
cern in the world of herbal medicine. The issues they
raise encompass chemistry, pharmacokinetics, pharmaco-
dynamics, toxicology, and phytotherapeutic clinical prac-
tice. Some of these are discussed here and in chapter 9. In
addition, the interested reader should consult a major
1995 review of the science of PAs by Roder.>”
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids consist of about 200 struc-
turally related compounds contained in more than 350
species of the families Apocynaceae, Asteraceae,
Boraginaceae, Celastraceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae,
Orchidaceae, Poaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rhicophoraceae,
Santalaceae, Sapotaceae, and Scrophulariaceae. A number
of these plants are used medicinally, including Tussilago
farfara, Petasites species, Senecio species, Alkanna tinctoria,
Eupatorium species, and Symphytum species.®

Their structure is based on two 5-membered rings
with a nitrogen in position 4, a structure called the necine
base. PAs with saturated necine bases are nontoxic. All
toxic PAs, on the other hand, contain a double bond be-
tween the | and 2 positions.

Va ?

CH GH

eo N

Fig. 10.4. A macrolytic retronecine diester

Additional variability in the toxicity of PAs results
from the type of necine structure, which determines the
stability of the pyrrole metabolite and thus the extent of
any damage caused. The least damaging are the
retronecine monoesters (for example, symphytine) and
the most harmful are the macrolytic retronecine diesters
(such as senecionine).

PAs are often the toxic but not the biologically active
principles of many herbal medicines. Methods for the
elimination of PAs from crude plant extracts have been
developed. These methods remove PAs by treating the al-
coholic plant extracts with cation exchange resins.??

Arnica montana and Echinacea species contain non-
toxic PAs with a saturated necine base. Toxic PAs with an
unsaturated necine base, such as those listed below, are
hepatic and genetic toxins, and some are respiratory toxins.

----- PAGE 211 -----
RO H2C—OR

ae
A

Pyrralizidine alkaloid

RO
activation

H,C—OR

ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 203

Liver tissue H,»C—-OR

==" formation af protein aie

—____»
fp wii DNA adducts N Wi

Pyrrole intermediate

Cellular adduct

No \- ification

RO H,G—OR

ae

N-oxide derivative

Glutathione H,0-OR
a
VA
Ven

Glutathione conjugate

Fig. 10.5. Activation and detoxification of pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Plants Containing Toxic PAs

Alkanna tinctoria (alkanet)

Borago officinalis (borage)

Cynoglossum officinale (hound’s tongue)
Eupatorium cannabinum (hemp agrimony)
Heliotropium spp. (e.g., common heliotrope)
Lithospermum officinale (gromwell)
Petasites spp. (e.g., butterbur)

Pulmonaria spp. (e.g., lungwort)

Senecio spp. (e.g., groundsel, ragwort)
Sympbytum spp. (e.g., comfrey)

Tussilago farfara (coltstoot)

PAs are absorbed from the intestine and reach the
liver via the portal vein, where they are metabolized by
esterase enzymes that release the free necine base. These
reactions occur with both saturated and unsaturated PAs
and are not part of the toxic reactions. On the contrary,
they lead to a detoxification of toxic PAs.

Liver enzymes are also able to transform PAs to less
toxic forms by increasing their water solubility. However,
oxidative reactions catalyzed by oxidases lead to pyrrole-
like intermediates, which are the ultimate toxic metabo-
lites of the PAs (figure 10.5). These derivatives generate
linkages (adducts) to proteins, RNA, and DNA. This
mechanism is the basis for the hepatotoxicity of the PAs.
However, detoxification may occur either via oxidation of
the nitrogen or conjugation with glutathione.

There is no doubt that pyrrolizidine alkaloids are

toxic to humans. Many cases have been reported in which
individuals, hundreds of people, or even thousands of
people have been intoxicated by the intake of PAs in the
form of herbal remedies or foods. (For example, the seeds
of Crotalaria species may contaminate grain foods.) In al-
most all cases of severe or fatal intoxication, the patients
developed liver damage with cirrhosis and ascites (accu-
mulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity). This type of
liver damage, called veno-occlusive disease, is the key
syndrome associated with PA intoxication. When defi-
nitely caused by PAs, the condition may be referred to as
seneciosis. The estimated daily intakes of certain PAs leading
to fatal intoxication range from 0.5 mg/kg to 3.3 mg/kg?

The symptoms of liver damage due to PA poisoning
can be differentiated into three clinical stages.

Acute Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: This stage is typically
characterized by severe abdominal pain accompanied
by vomiting and diarrhea. The liver is enlarged, and
ascites is often present. Generalized edema is ob-
served, and the patient may appear jaundiced. In some
cases, the disease progresses dramatically and the pa-
tient dies a few weeks after the first symptoms occur. If
the patient survives, complete remission may be possi-
ble, but the condition may also progress to subacute
and chronic phases.

Subacute Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: This stage is char-
acterized by an enlargement of the liver and sometimes
the spleen. Other clinical symptoms are often absent.

----- PAGE 212 -----
204 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Liver function may be normal, but mild to severe as-
cites may be present. A progressive fibrotic degenera-
tion of the liver is also typical, and the disease often
passes to a chronic stage.

Chronic Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: The key finding here
is cirrhosis of the liver that is different from other
forms of liver cirrhosis in that portal regions are not
involved. As liver failure progresses, the general condi-
tion of the patient continues to deteriorate. Because of
a decrease in serum protein levels, edema occurs, and
the patient may become anorexic. The mortality rate
is usually higher here than for other forms of cir-
rhotic liver disease.

Although the exposure of humans to toxic PAs has
occurred many times in the past, no epidemiological stud-
ies are available to document a possible carcinogenic risk
from these compounds. However, there are also no stud-
ies to demonstrate the absence of such a risk. Because of
the positive results of animal carcinogenicity studies, to-
gether with the in vitro findings about the genotoxicity of
unsaturated PAs, the possibility that PAs have a carcino-
genic effect in humans must be taken into consideration.

There is no absolutely safe dose for genotoxic car-
cinogens. Extrapolations of dose-response curves from
high to low concentrations are of questionable reliability,
and animal experiments may not be applicable to humans.
Nevertheless, such calculations are made to get crude in-
formation about the carcinogenic risk posed by certain
compounds. The German Federal Ministry of Health
recommends an allowable upper limit of toxic PAs in
herbal remedies of 0.1 to 0.2 ppm. The daily intake
should not exceed 30 g (senecionine) or 700 g (symphy-
tine) per day.

Piperidine Alkaloids

The piperidine alkaloid coniine is the most important al-
kaloid in poison hemlock (Conium maculatum). This col-
orless, strongly basic oil has a mild pepper odor and a
burning taste and occurs in all parts of the plant. Four
other piperidine alkaloids are also found in poison hem-
lock. Coniine is lethal to all forms of animal life.

Tropane Alkaloids

Tropane alkaloids are found in many plants in the
Solanaceae family, and include a number of important
molecules, such as atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopo-
lamine. Plants containing these substances include thorn-
apples (Datura spp.), angel’s trumpets (Brugmansia spp.),
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger), belladonna or deadly night-

shade (Atropa belladonna), and European mandrake
(Mandragora officinarum). All of these plants have long
histories of use as hallucinogens and have been connected
with folk medicine and religious rites dating back to 1500
B.C. and Homer’s Odyssey.

Plants containing tropane alkaloids have been used to
treat asthma, chronic bronchitis, pain, and flu symptoms.
Many cultures worldwide add plants with tropane alka-
loids (particularly Datura species) to alcoholic beverages
to increase intoxication. Tropane alkaloids are found in all
parts of the plants, with highest concentrations in roots
and seeds.

Quinolizidine Alkaloids

These alkaloids are commonly present in the Fabaceae,
but they may be found as well in the Berberidaceae,
Chenopodiaceae, and Papaveraceae families. Sparteine,
from Spanish broom (Spartium junceum), increases or
strengthens the heartbeat, causing a greater flow of
blood to the kidneys and increasing urine production.
Sparteine has been used in treating certain cases of car-
diac fibrillation. Cytisine, found in Scotch broom
(Cytisus scoparius), is known to be toxic, and in Great
Britain, Laburnum is considered the second most toxic
plant for animals after the yew, Taxus. Other sources of
these lupine-type alkaloids are lupines (Lupinus) and
wild indigo (Baptisia).

Pyridine Alkaloids

Nicotine is lethal to all forms of animal life. Small
amounts stimulate breathing, but absorption of larger
amounts depresses the respiratory rate. Death from nico-
tine poisoning results from respiratory failure. Humans
are able to smoke tobacco only because the body is capa-
ble of breaking down and eliminating this alkaloid instead
of accumulating it. Nicotine is used as an insecticide in
agriculture and in home gardens.

Indole Alkaloids

Ergot alkaloids are found in the sclerotial bodies produced
by the ergot fungus (Ciaviceps purpurea) and in the seeds of
the morning glory (Ipomoea tricolor). Two indole alkaloids,
gelsemine and sempervirine, that occur particularly in the
roots of yellow jasmine (Gelsemium sempervirens) depress
the central nervous system. The psychoactive alkaloids of
the mescaline and psilocybin groups are considered toxic
by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, but this is
very much a matter of opinion.

----- PAGE 213 -----
Isoquinoline Alkaloids

Isoquinoline alkaloids are found in many plant families,
including the Ranunculaceae, Rubiaceae, Berberidaceae,
Fumariaceae, and Papaveraceae. The Chelidonium,
Papaver, and Sanguinaria genera of the Papaveraceae con-
tain a large number of alkaloids. The largest number of
alkaloids obtained from a single species in this family
comes from Papaver somniferum, the opiam poppy, which
contains the morphinan alkaloids morphine and codeine.
Heroin is synthesized from morphine.

Steroid. Alkaloids
Steroid alkaloids, found in approximately 250 species of
plants in the families Solanaceae and Liliaceae, occur
mostly as glycosides with the properties of saponins. They
are found in the tomato (Lycopersicon) as well as in the
potato and other plants in the genus Solanum. Some are
very toxic, causing severe gastroenteritis that may be fatal.
Species of Solanum contain solanine, which occurs in
highest concentrations in areas that have a high metabolic
rate, such as sprouts, green skin, and stems, and in lowest
concentrations in ripe fruit. Solanine consists of six dif-
ferent glycosides; each hydrolyzes to the sugar peculiar to
its particular glycoside and to the aglycone solanidine, a
steroidal alkaloid.

Diterpenoid. Alkaloids

These alkaloids are some of the most toxic chemicals found
in plants. For example, aconitine, found in monkshood
(Aconitum), has an LDso of 0.12 mg/kg in mice. Another
example is delphinine, from larkspur (Delphinium). In hu-
mans, 2 to 5 mg constitutes a lethal dose.

Polypeptides
These compounds are rarely toxic, although some of the
poisons in the freshwater blue-green algae are polypep-
tides. However, the most notable exceptions are the tox-
ins of the mushrooms in the genus Amanita, which are
also polypeptides.

Amanita Toxins

All of the toxins found in the Amanita mushrooms are
peptides. Amatoxins and phallotoxins are found in A. bis-
porigera, A. ocreata, A. phalloides, A. phalloides var. alba,
A. suballiacea, A. tenuifolia, A. virosa, and some other mush-
rooms. Ibotenic acid is found in A. cothurnata, A. muscaria
var. formosa, A. muscaria var. muscaria, and A. pantherina.
The cap is the deadliest part of these mushrooms.

There are nine amatoxins:

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 205

a-amanitin
f-amanitin
y-amanitin
€-amanitin
Amanin

Amanin amide
Amanullin
Amanullinic acid
Proamanullin

Fig. 10.6. a-amanitin

YA

Amatoxins are responsible for fatal human responses
to Amanita mushrooms. They are taken up by the liver,
where they begin to cause damage. They are then se-
creted by the bile into the blood, where they are taken up
by the liver again in a cycle of damage and excretion. In
the liver, amatoxins inhibit RNA-polymerase IL. The liver
is slowly destroyed and is unable to repair itself due to the
inactivation of the RNA-polymerase. Thus, the liver
slowly dissolves with no hope of repair. However, rapid
treatment with silymarin helps alleviate the toxicity of
amatoxins.

There are seven naturally occurring phallotoxins:

Phallacidin
Phallacin
Phallisacin
Phallisin
Phalloidin
Phalloin
Prophalloin

Phallotoxins destroy liver cells by disturbing the
equilibrium of hepatocyte membrane structure. This ren-
ders the cell susceptible to deformity in the face of
changes in pressure of blood flowing through the liver.
This is followed by loss of potassium ions and cytoplasmic
enzymes, leading in turn to depletion of ATP and glyco-
gen, which causes the final downfall of the liver.

----- PAGE 214 -----
206 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Lectins

Lectins are glycoproteins that cause red blood cells to ag-
glutinate (clump). The terms phytohemagglutinins and
lectins are used interchangeably. Lectin-containing plants
are found in many botanical groups, but most frequently
occur in Fabaceae and Euphorbiaceae.

The interaction of lectins with carbohydrates is very
specific—as specific, in fact, as enzyme-substrate and
antigen-antibody interactions. Lectins may bind with free
sugar or with sugar residues of polysaccharides, glycopro-
teins, or glycolipids, which may be free or bound (as in
cell membranes). The term /ectin refers to the specificity
of this reaction; it is derived from the Latin root /egere,
meaning “to choose.”

Lectins can impair growth, cause diarrhea, and inter-
fere with nutrient absorption. The seeds of precatory
bean (Abrus precatorius) contain the highly toxic glycopro-
tein abrin. Even less toxic lectins can be fatal if ingested
in large amounts, such as concanavalin A from jack bean
(Concanavalia ensiformis).

Ricin, from castor bean (Ricinus communis), is one of
the most toxic natural substances known. It inhibits pro-
tein synthesis by inactivating ribosomes, and is a potent
cytotoxin but a weak hemagglutinin. Castor bean seeds
are poisonous to people, animals, and insects. When
beaded into necklaces, these highly toxic seeds cause skin
irritation at contact points. If the seed is swallowed with-
out chewing, it will most likely pass harmlessly through
the digestive tract if there has been no damage to the seed
coat. However, if it is chewed or broken and then swal-
lowed, the ricin toxin will be absorbed by the intestines.
Children are more sensitive than adults to fluid loss from
vomiting and diarrhea, and can quickly become severely
dehydrated and die.

SKIN REACTIONS CAUSED BY
PLANTS

By far the commonest plant-related problems experi-
enced by people occur through skin contact. Such prob-
lems can take many forms and involve a number of phys-
iological processes, as illustrated in table 10.3.

Contact Urticaria

The term urticaria, also known as hives, describes red-
dening and swelling of the skin. This reaction is short-
lived, causes much itching, and clears without trace. If
urticaria develops within an hour of exposure to an
agent at the site of contact, the condition is called contact
urticaria.

Table 10.3. Types of Skin Reactions to Plants and
Plant Products”

REACTION SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Contact urticaria Immediate reaction (within minutes of
contact)

Itching, erythema, and/or edema

Irritant contact dermatitis Skin dry and possibly itchy, often with
fissures

Usually restricted to areas of skin contact

Typically follows prolonged or extensive
exposure to irritant

Cactus glochids, in particular, may cause an
extensive pruritic eruption simulating

scabies

Phytophotodermatitis Erythematous, streaky eruption that may be
vesicular or bullous, occurring within
2 days of plant contact

Reaction occurs precisely at sites of contact
in sun-exposed areas

Brown hyperpigmentation, which persists
for several weeks or months, is present at
the same site

Common in children

Allergic contact dermatitis Pruritic, often streaky, erythema, sometimes
vesicular

Starts at areas of contact but may spread
outward

Develops, often progressively, within 3 days
of exposure

Recurrent episodes lasting several days each
are typical and are usually followed by
scaling; each episode may be worse than
the last

Minimal, if any, hyperpigmentation

Airborne contact dermatitis typically
affects face, neck, forearms, and hands,
simulating photosensitivity

Contact urticaria may be caused by pharmacological
mechanisms, such as the eruption induced by Urtica
dioica, the stinging nettle, from which the term urticaria
(literally, “nettle rash”) is derived. In immunological ur-
ticaria, a Type I hypersensitivity to a specific component
of the plant develops. Sensitized people develop a re-
sponse within minutes after contact. Repeated exposure
to such stimuli may lead to a persistent eczema-like
condition.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Urticaria Due to Injection of Toxins
Some plants possess sharp hairs on the surface of leaves
and stems that inject a mix of irritant chemicals into the
skin or mucous membranes upon contact. This is thought
to serve as a defense against browsing animals. Some
caterpillars employ a similar strategy to avoid predation. A
brush against the nettle plant shears off a cap from the
hairs, revealing a sharp, beveled, hollow structure that re-
sembles a hypodermic needle. From this structure, an ir-
ritant liquid enters the skin; this liquid contains inflam-
matory mediators such as histamine, acetylcholine, and
5-hydroxytryptamine. These chemicals cause the immedi-
ate reaction, but stinging can continue for more than 12
hours, even after features of urticaria have disappeared.
This suggests the presence of other substances capable of
inducing a secondary release of inflammatory mediators.
The nettle is less likely to cause stinging if squeezed
firmly than if touched gently. Vigorous massage or appli-
cation of cold compresses will often reduce symptoms of
nettle-induced urticaria. However, reactions to some net-
tle plants may be more severe. Urtica gigas has caused
death in horses in New Zealand and U. ferox has caused
death in humans.

Immunological Contact Urticaria

An immediate Type I contact reaction can occur in anyone
who has previously become sensitized to a particular sub-
stance. Molecules of the contact sensitizer penetrate the
epidermis, and then react with specific immunoglobulin E
(IgE) bound to mast cells, leading to release of vasoactive
mediators. Histamine is the major mediator, but prosta-
glandins, kinins, leukotrienes, and others may amplify the
inflammatory response.

Irritant hairs on the surface of some plants enhance
penetration of the antigen. A good example is tumbleweed
(Salsola kali), which possesses sharp bracts that cause an ir-
ritant reaction. Some people become sensitized to the effects
of such plants and subsequently develop contact urticaria.

Irritant Contact Dermatitis
Irritant contact dermatitis describes an inflammatory re-
sponse to physical or chemical injury that is not immuno-
logically mediated. Severity of the response depends on
the barrier function of the skin as well as the potency and
duration of the irritant stimulus. It may be caused by more
than one factor. For example, physical trauma caused by
handling narcissus bulbs may enhance chemical trauma
from oxalate crystals contained in the bulbs.

The severity of such reactions can range from irrita-
tion with erythema and possible fissuring to a severe re-

‘TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .e 207

sponse that renders the individual unable to work. The
eruption affects areas of contact, especially where the
stratum corneum is thinner, such as on the fingertips and
back of the hands, under the free edge of fingernails, and
between the fingers. Skin damage by irritants increases
the individual’s susceptibility to subsequent allergic sen-
sitization.

Mechanical Irritants

Penetration of the skin by hairs, spines, or thorns can
produce a papular irritant eruption. Many plants have
glandular hairs (trichomes) on stems or leaves. Several
members of the Boraginaceae family are covered in such
coarse, stiff hairs, including borage itself (Borago offici-
nalis). Other irritant plants of this family include forget~
me-not (Myosotis spp.), hound’s tongue (Cynoglossum
spp.), comfrey (Symphytum officinale), and lungwort (Pul-
monaria officinalis). American dogwoods (Cornus spp.) have
T-shaped hairs that cause erythema and urtication when
the leaf is rubbed on the skin in the direction of its long
axis. In addition to its obvious spines, the pads and fruit
of the prickly pear (Opuntia ficus-indica), cultivated for its
edible fruit, bear tufts of shorter, hooked hairs called
glochids, which may appear innocuous but can cause me-
chanical injury. These glochids may be transferred to
clothing and to any part of the skin, particularly softer
areas, such as the genitalia and between the fingers.

Table 10.4. Irritant Plants

INJURY EXAMPLE

Mechanical/physical

Blunt trauma Falling branches, nuts
Thorns Rose family (Rosaceae)
Sharp-edged leaves and leaf hooks Holly, Agave, Yucca
Spines and glochids Cacti, especially Opuntia

Stem/leaf hairs Boraginaceae, Asteraceae

Irritant fibers Rose hips, tulip bulbs
Chemical
Stinging hairs Urtica

Irritant sap/latex Euphorbiaceae, Ranunculaceae

Calcium oxalate crystals Bulbs

----- PAGE 216 -----
208 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Chemical Irritants

A number of plants contain chemical irritants that may
exacerbate the mechanical irritation caused by hairs or
spines. A common chemical irritant is crystalline calcium
oxalate, but a wide range of other chemicals dissolved or
suspended in latex or housed in specific organelles may
also cause chemical irritation. Many bulbs and some other
plants, notably Dieffenbachia and rhubarb, contain calcium
oxalate. This water-insoluble salt forms bundles of needle-
like crystals (raphides), which are surrounded by a mu-
cilaginous liquid and held in cells. After contact with
water, the cell ejects the crystals into the skin or mucosa.
These crystals may help the plant maintain ionic equilib-
rium, dispose of waste products, or protect against forag-
ing animals. Some cacti, such as Cephalocereus senilis, con-
tain up to 85% calcium oxalate by dry weight.”

There are many structural types among irritant con-
stituents, including alkaloids, glycosides, proteolytic en-
zymes, saponins, phenolic compounds, and anthra-
quinones. Plants of the Ranunculaceae family, discussed
earlier, contain the chemical irritant protoanemonin.

Allergic Contact Dermatitis

Allergic contact dermatitis is a specific immunological re-
sponse to an external substance. Unlike immunologically
mediated contact urticaria, this is a manifestation of de-
layed immunity. An allergic reaction can occur only in an
individual who is already sensitized to the antigen, and
classically the reaction is restricted to sites of exposure.

Allergic contact dermatitis displays the clinical and
histological features of eczema. The exogenous sub-
stance, or hapten, is typically of low molecular weight,
enabling it to penetrate the epidermis. It binds with
molecules in the skin (for example, keratins) or directly
binds to collagen bundles. The antigenic complex is then
recognized by a specific lymphocyte. These cells migrate
from the skin via lymphatic drainage to lymph nodes,
where they proliferate and differentiate. The resultant
sensitized effector and memory cells are distributed to the
rest of the body through blood vessels.

When next exposed to the allergen, the sensitized in-
dividual develops an eczematous response at the site of
contact. Further stimulation of memory cells occurs,
causing increasingly severe responses on repeated expo-
sure. For some people, frequent reexposure to small doses
of the allergen may induce immunological tolerance, and
it is possible to reduce sensitivity through oral dosing
with the allergen, notably poison ivy.

Poison Ivy and Poison Oak

The Anacardiaceae genus Toxicodendron includes poison
ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac. There are many re-
lated cross-reacting species, as well as several unrelated
genera that cross-react with Toxicodendron species. Such
cross-reactions are due to the presence of similar aller-
genic constituents in the various species of plants.

Table 10.5. Anacardiaceae Family and
Cross-Reacting Plants

GENUS TOXICODENDRON. RELATED AND CROSS-REACTING

CULTIVARS
Poison ivy
T. radicans Cashew (Anacardium occidentale)
T. rydbergaii Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)
Grevillea robusta
Poison oak

T. diversilobum Indian marking nut (Semecarpus

anacardium)

T. toxicarium Japanese lacquer (Rhus verniciflua)

Poison sumac

T. vernix Mango (Mangifera indica)

Entire Toxicodendron genus —_ African poison ivy (Smodingium

argutum)

Contained in the oil of most members of Ana-
cardiaceae is urushiol, an irritant mixture of pentadecyl-
catechols (PDCs). The base molecule of PDC has a com-
pletely saturated side chain at position 3. Unsaturation of
the side chain leads to greater allergenicity. The name
urushiol is derived from the Japanese word for sap, Riterushi.

CH
OH
Ss
2
NS “R

Fig. 10.7. Pentadecylcatechol skeleton

----- PAGE 217 -----
OH

\_ 4

ee ae ie
Fig. 10.8. Urushiol

Members of the Anacardiaceae family contain PDCs
with mixtures of C-15 and C-17 side chains that have 1,
2, 3, or no double bonds. For example, poison ivy con-
tains mainly C-15 side chains; poison oak, C-17; and poi-
son sumac, C-13.

PHOTOSENSITIVITY

Phytophotodermatitis constitutes a specific pattern of pho-
totoxic skin reaction in which delayed erythema, blister-
ing, and hyperpigmentation are the major features.
However, less obvious phototoxic reactions and photoal-
lergy may also occur.

Photosensitization is a process by which a reaction to
normally innocuous radiation is induced by the introduc-
tion of a specific radiation-absorbing component, known
as the photosensitizer. In biological systems, the term pho-
tosensitization is generally understood to describe a pro-
cess by which harmless doses of UVA or visible radiation
are absorbed by a “foreign” molecule present at non-
damaging concentrations. Reactions result from the in-
volvement of cell and tissue constituents in the dissipation
of the absorbed energy.

Psoralens appear to cause photosensitization via UVA
light-induced binding of the psoralen molecule to nu-
clear DNA. This produces bonds, called photo-adducts,
that cross-link with pyrimidine bases in the DNA.

Clinical Features

The characteristic eruption of a phototoxicity reaction is
composed of linear dusky red lesions, often bullous or
vesicular (blisterlike, containing a clear liquid) and asso-
ciated with brown hyperpigmentation. Most such reac-
tions occur in mid- to late summer, when the level of
psoralens are highest in plants and the skin is unpro-
tected by clothing. The eruption may be misdiagnosed as
poison ivy or poison oak dermatitis; however, the photo-
toxic reaction is confined to the sites of contact and sun
exposure. It is painful, but not pruritic, and may be fol-
lowed by hyperpigmentation. In contrast, allergic con-
tact dermatitis is pruritic; the eruption will often con-
tinue to evolve after presentation, and pigmentary
changes are rare.

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY. 209

Table 10.6. Major Patterns of Phototoxicity
Reactions

SKIN REACTIONS PHOTOSENSITIZERS
OR DISEASES
Type
Prickling or burning during exposure Coal tar
Immediate erythema Pitch

Edema/urticaria with higher doses Anthraquinone-based dyes

Sometimes, delayed
erythema/hyperpigmentation

Benoxaprofen
Chlorpromazine
Erythropoietic protoporphyria

Type 2
Exaggerated sunburn Drugs such as chlorpromazine,
chlorthiazides, quinine
Type 3

Late-onset erythema Psoralens (furocoumarins)

Blisters with slightly Phytophotodermatitis

higher doses

Hyperpigmentation only Berloque dermatitis

with low exposures

Type 4

Increased skin fragility; Nalidixic acid

skin blisters with trauma Frusemide
Tetracycline
Naproxen

In Europe, the most common cause of phototoxic re-
actions is brushing against rue. The typical streaklike pat-
tern of the reaction also occurs when application of rue to
the skin as an insect repellent is followed by sun exposure.
It is also seen among individuals who are working with
parsley, parsnip, or celery plants during the summer.

Many molecules naturally present in biological sys-
tems can act as photosensitizers. Well-known examples
include chlorophyll, iron-free porphyrins, and flavins, like
riboflavin. The list of endogenous sensitizers includes
bilirubin, tryptophan, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH), pyridoxine, quinones (present in
respiratory chains), all-trans retinal (the pigment produced
in the retina in response to light), and many proteins

----- PAGE 218 -----
210 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
containing these compounds, including lipofuscin (the

so-called age pigment) and melanin.

Table 10.7. Plant-Derived Substances Causing
Unintentional Color Change to Skin

REACTION EXAMPLE

Essential oils

Red discoloration by terpenes Juniper
Lemon
Lime

Orange

Perfume ingredients

Benzyl alcohol
Benzyl salicylate
Cananga oil

Post-inflammatory depigmentation

Cinnamic alcohol
Geraniol
Hydroxycitronellal
Jasmine absolute
Lavender oil
Methoxycitronellal
Sandalwood oil

Pigmented cosmetic dermatitis Ylang-ylang oil

‘There are also many naturally occurring exogenous
photosensitizers. Plants make photosensitizers, most
likely in order to protect their surfaces against viruses,
bacteria, fungal spores, yeasts, and small arthropods and
their eggs, and probably also against insects. Photo-
sensitizers found in plants include furanocoumarins, pte-
rocarpans, isoquinolines, lignans, sesquiterpenes, hyper-
icins, and curcumins.

Chemistry of the Furocoumarins

A common furocoumarin (or furanocoumarin) is pso-
ralen; the name is derived from the genus Psoralea.
Furocoumarins cause photosensitization and poisoning in
humans and domestic animals but have been used medic-
inally as well. For more than 3,000 years, practitioners of
Eastern medicine have applied poultices of plant juices
containing furocoumarins to the whitened patches of skin
seen in the disorder known as leukoderma or vitiligo.
This condition is an inherited tendency that occurs in
about 2% of the world’s population. Synthetic furo-

coumarins are now used to tan the skin without sun ex-
posure by inducing formation of the black melanin pig-
ments in the cells of the skin.

Five plant families contain most of the furocoumarins:
Apiaceae, Fabaceae, Moraceae, Orchidaceae, and Ruta-
ceae. These compounds are also found in Asteraceae in
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) and in Convolvulaceae in
field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis).

Two forms of furocoumarins occur. Linear furo-
coumarins, known as psoralens, are named for Psoralea
corylifolia.

Sy
SS
x
fo) 0” Soa =

Fig. 10.9. Psoralen Fig. 10.10. Angelicin

Angular furocoumarins, known as angelicins, are re-
lated to the angelicin (isopsoralen) obtained from Angelica
archangelica.

Not all furocoumarins are phototoxic. Their photo-
toxic potential varies with the shape of the molecule, and
linear forms are more potent than angular. The degree and
nature of substituent components of the molecule consti-
tute another variable, which in psoralens decrease the pho-
totoxic potential but in angelicins may increase it. Severe,
acute phytophotodermatitis reactions are associated with
psoralen itself and its derivatives, 8-methoxypsoralen
(such as xanthotoxin from celery), 5-methoxypsoralen
(bergapten), and, possibly, the angelicin pimpinellin.

Bergapten, a component of bergamot oil from Citrus

aurantium ssp. bergamia, is the phototoxic component of

lime peel extract and essential oil. The components of

Ammi majus, used in the treatment of vitiligo, include

both 8- and 5-methoxypsoralen along with imperatorin

(8-isopentenyloxypsoralen).
OCH,

VA | Sy Ss
ry oO

‘oO [o}

OCH,

Fig. 10.11. Xanthotoxin

Fig. 10.12. Bergapten

——s

CH

Fig. 10.13, Pimpinellin

Fig. 10.14. Imperatorin

----- PAGE 219 -----
Levels of furocoumarins increase in response to fun-
gal attack. Fresh celery (Apium graveolens) contains 10 to
100 pg/g wet weight of total psoralens. However, levels
of furocoumarins as high as 320 pg/g have been mea-
sured in specimens infected with fungi. The development
of disease-resistant cultivars of celery has led to an in-
creased natural furocoumarin content in these plants.
Similar increased exposure to phototoxic compounds may
occur with other vegetables, such as parsnips.

As little as 1 pg of 8-methoxypsoralen per square cen-
timeter of skin can produce blistering after exposure to
artificial UVA equivalent to approximately 10 minutes of
exposure to summer sunlight in the United Kingdom. In
one unusual case of phytophotodermatitis, a patient who
ingested large quantities of celery soup before using a
UVA sun bed developed classic symptoms.

HERB TOXICITY UNRELATED TO
CONSTITUENTS

There are situations in which toxicity stemming from
herb use has nothing to do with the herb itself. These
may be related to adulteration, spoiling, or pollution,
which is usually unintentional, but, strange as it sounds,
may also be intentional.

Adulteration of Commercial Products

Herb dealers may deviate from pharmacopoeial specifica-
tions for botanical identity for various reasons.
Occasionally, if an officinal plant species is not available,
it may be replaced by an equivalent related species. For
instance, it has become difficult to obtain real goldenrod
(Solidago virgaurea), but this species can be justifiably sub-
stituted with the related S. gigantea or S. canadensis.

In addition, a deliberate substitution of medicinal
herbs by inferior or cheaper species may also be made.
Some years ago, 4 Belgian consumer organization re-
ported that the maiority of locally purchased peppermint
products did not contain Mentha piperita at all, but rather
the much cheaper species M. crispa. Likewise, most sam-
ples of linden flower did not come from Tilia cordata or
T. platyphyllos but instead from T. argentea.

Careless gathering, storage, or distribution of
medicinal plant material may result in accidental substi-
tution or contamination with another botanical. Inexpert
or negligent herb dealers may fail to recognize such
problems in time.

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY. 211

Self-Collection of Medicinal Plants

People who collect their own herbs must be absolutely
certain of the identity of the plants they are harvesting. A
serious Digitalis poisoning due to accidental substitution
of foxglove for comfrey was reported in Great Britain.
The patient was an elderly man, and he needed intensive
care treatment to recover.

Microorganisms and Microbial Toxins
Commercially produced herbs may be contaminated by
pathogenic microorganisms, like Salmonella, or microbial
toxins, such as bacterial endotoxins. Toxic substances may
also be formed through microbial transformation of
botanical constituents. In short, herbal materials pose the
same microbial health risks as other pharmaceuticals:

¢ Infection by pathogenic microorganisms

* Microbial transformation of botanical constituents
into more toxic compounds

© Production of microbial toxins, such as bacterial endo-
toxins and mycotoxins

No official regulatory guidelines on microbial con-
tamination of herbs exist. However, the requirements for
the microbial purity of nonsterile medicines proposed by
the Committee of Official Laboratories and Control
Services of the Federation Internationale Pharmaceutique
provide the following figures for assessing the microbial
status of dried herbal materials:*

An aerobic bacterial count between 102 and 108 colony-
forming units per gram (CFU/g), mostly >104 CFU/g

* A coliform bacterial count between <102 and 104 CFU/g

¢ A yeast and mold count between 102 and 106 CFU/g

Extraction of herbs with an alcohol-based solution
will reduce the number of microorganisms because of di-
rect contact with the alcohol. Extraction with boiling
water will also have a decontaminating effect.

Keeping heat-extracted herbal teas for longer than 24
hours is not advisable, because spore-forming species are
not effectively eliminated by boiling water.** This is even
more essential when an herbal tea has been prepared by
cold infusion, as cold water has no decontaminating ef-
fect. When there are phytochemical considerations or
other reasons to choose cold over hot extraction, each
dose should be freshly prepared at the time of use. As a
rule of thumb, cold infusions that are more than four
hours old should be discarded.

----- PAGE 220 -----
212 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Mycotoxins

Mycotoxins are toxic metabolites produced by fungi and
molds. Over 300 mycotoxins have been identified, and it
is thought that many more are yet to be discovered.
Known classes of mycotoxins include:

¢ Aflatoxins

© Ochratoxins

* Rubratoxins

° Trichothecenes
* Zearalenone

Mold growth can occur at any time, from herb har-
vest until consumption. Mold spores are everywhere, and
they lay dormant until conditions are right for them to
sporulate and grow. The type and amount of mycotoxin
produced depends on factors such as temperature, pH,
relative humidity, drought stress, and insect or mechani-
cal damage to the herb in which the mold is growing.
Mold growth depends largely on the moisture content of
the dried herb: the more moisture, the more mold, and
the greater the risk of contamination with mycotoxins.

Fig. 10.15. Aflatoxin B1

Table 10.8. Lead and Cadmium in Wild-Grown Herbs*

There is clear evidence from animal studies that afla-
toxins are carcinogenic, producing tumors primarily of the
liver, colon, and kidneys. The primary route of human ex-
posure is ingestion of contaminated food. Americans may
consume up to an estimated 0.15 to 0.50 pg of aflatoxins
daily. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regu-
lates aflatoxins under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, which designates aflatoxins as hazardous
constituents of waste. The EPA's Carcinogen Assessment
Group considers aflatoxins to be potentially carcinogenic.
The Food and Drug Administration has established en-
forcement levels for aflatoxins of 0.5 ppb in milk and 20
ppb in other food products. Aflatoxins can be found in a
wide range of food products due to contamination in the
field, manufacturing process, or storage. Corn, peanuts,
and cottonseed pose the highest risks.

Toxic Metals

There are two major reasons why it has become necessary
to monitor levels of toxic metals in herbs. First, contami-
nation of the general environment with toxic metals has
increased. Second, exotic herbal remedies, particularly
those of Asian origin, have been repeatedly reported to
contain toxic levels of heavy metals or arsenic.

Studies on levels of toxic metals in medicinal herbs
have been conducted in Germany. Considerable variation
was found among levels of pollutants in the same species
collected from different habitats.

The decoction of herbs can affect the metal content.
One study compared lead and cadmium levels in 120 sam-

METAL PLANT HABITAT LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION (MG/KG)
Total Flower Leaf Stem Root
LEAD
Achillea millefolium Median strip 841 4.66 2373 134 4.59
Roadside 237 2.33 8.90 125 416
Hypericum perforatum Median strip 1.97 S77 17.82 2.32 457
Roadside 7 1.85 5.96 1.05 5.06
CADMIUM
Achillea millefolium Median strip 0.34 0B 0.78 0.33 0.44
Roadside 148 0.89 217 1.33 2.57
Hypericum perforatum Median strip 037 0.38 0.54 0.32 0.85
Roadside 5.62 6.97 ~743 374 330

‘Variation in levels of lead and cadmium by plant part and habitat in wild-grown Achillea millefolium and Hypericum perforatum™

----- PAGE 221 -----
ples of 19 herbs and in finished teas prepared from these
samples.” Passage of metals into the tea was higher than
50% in only 12% of the lead assays and 8% of the cad-
mium tests. The majority of the tea samples (67% and
71%, for lead and cadmium, respectively) demonstrated a
relatively low extraction of metals, 25% or less. Individual
extraction values ranged from 0.1% to 87% for lead and
from 1% to 68% for cadmium.

These large variations may well be connected to the
different ways in which the samples were contaminated.
When an herb is contaminated on its surface, it is likely
that a relatively large proportion of the contaminant will
dissolve in the hot water. Little will enter the tea if the
metal ions are bound in the plant cell.

Toxic Metals in Asian Remedies

Reports of unacceptable levels of toxic metals in herbal
remedies regularly appear in the literature. One report
described arsenic poisoning in Singapore, and other re-
ports attribute lead poisoning to the use of an Asian
herbal medicine. Aside from the herbs themselves, poten-
tial sources of contamination include lead-releasing brew-
ing pots, grinding weights, and other metal utensils.*8*9
However, in Asian remedies, the possibility exists that
toxic metals found are not contaminants, as several
Chinese herbal formulas contain arsenic and mercury
salts as intentional ingredients,

Table 10.9. Relative Passage of Heavy Metals into
Medicinal Teas*

CRUDE DRUG RELATIVE PASSAGE
(NUMBER OF SAMPLES) (MEAN VALUES IN %)
LEAD CADMIUM
Aerial parts
Achillea millefolium (5) 15 24
Equisetum arvense {I3) 22 23
Hypericum perforatum (5) 2 9
Thymus vulgaris (6) 9 28
Leaves
Betula alba (9) 16 5
Cassia angustifolia (8) 33 50
Melissa officinalis (1) 15 19
Mentha piperita (8) 20 28

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY -2 213

LEAD CADMIUM

Leaves and flowers

Crataegus (1) 9 8
Flowers

Crataegus (4) 9 6

Malva (4) B B

Matricaria recutita (16) 36 18

Tilia (1) i 9
Fruits

Carvum carvi (4) B 25

Foeniculum (6) 40 16

Pimpinella anisum (0) 29 9

*Relative passage of heavy metals from crude herbal drugs into medicinal teas prepared
by extraction with boiling water.*°

References

1. ‘Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal: A Sensible Guide to the Use
of Herbs and Related Remedies. Binghamton, NY: The
Haworth Press, 1993,

2. DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D’Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

3. Roder E. Medicinal plants in Europe containing
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Pharmazie 1995; 50:83-98.

4, MannJ, Davidson RS, Hobbs JB, et al. Natural Products:
Their Chemistry and Biological Significance. Harlow, UK:
Longman Scientific & Technical; New York: Wiley,
1994.

5. Rothschild M, Edgar JA. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from
Senecio vulgaris sequestered and stored by Danaus plexippus.
Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 1978; 186:347-9.

6. Schneider D, Boppre M, Schneider H, et al. A pheromone
precursor and its uptake in male Danaus butterflies.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 1975; 97:245-56.

7. Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical. Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

8. Beers MH, Berkow R, eds. The Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck
Research Laboratories, 1997.

----- PAGE 222 -----
214

9.

10.

ll.

2;
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19,

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

Stickel F, Seitz HK. The efficacy and safety of comfrey.
Public Health Nutrition 2000; 3:501-8.

Cheeke PR. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In: Natural Toxicants
in Feeds, Forages, and Poisonous Plants, 2nd edition.
Danville, IL: Interstate Publishers, 1998.

Ibid.

Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

Pierson ML, et al. Resistance of the rabbit to dietary
pyrrolizidine (Senecio) alkaloid. Research Communications
in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology 1977; 16:561-4.
Stickel F, Seitz HK. The efficacy and safety of comfrey.
Public Health Nutrition 2000; 3:501-8.

Muetterlein R, Aimold CG. Investigations concerning
the content and the pattern of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in
Symphytum officale L. (comfrey). Pharmazeutische Zeitung
1993; 138:119-25.

Cheeke PR. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In: Natural Toxicants
in Feeds, Forages, and Poisonous Plants, 2nd edition.
Danville, IL: Interstate Publishers 1998.

Schoental, R. Toxicology and carcinogenic action of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Cancer Research 1968, 28:2237-46.
1998 TESS Annual Report. American Journal of
Emergency Medicine 1999; 17(5):435-87.

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions.
Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.
DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D'Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

Beers MH, Berkow R, eds. The Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck
Research Laboratories, 1997.

Himmelstein MW, Turner MJ, Asgharian B, et al.
Comparison of blood concentrations of 1,3-butadiene
and butadiene epoxides in mice and rats exposed to 1,3-
butadiene by inhalation. Carcinogenesis 1994,
15(8):1479-86.

Medinksy MA, et al. In vivo metabolism of butadiene by
mice and rats: A comparison of physiological model pre-
dictions and experimental data. Carcinogenesis 1994;
15¢7):1329-40.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol. 1.
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992.

Woolf A. Oxalates. Clinical Toxicology 1993; 16:1-2.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Sil.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39,

40.

41.

Anand R, et al. Antioxaluric and anticalciuric activity of
lupeol derivatives. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 1995;
27:265-68.

Vulto AG, DeSmet PAGM. Drugs used in non-orthodox
medicine. In: Dukes MNG, ed. Meylers Side Effects of
Drugs, 11th edition. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988.
Ritschel WA, Brady ME, Tan HSI, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of coumarin and its 7-hydroxymetabo-
lites upon intravenous and peroral administration of
coumarin in man. European Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology 1977; 12:457-61.

Reilley ©. Anticoagulant, antithrombotic, and throm-
bolytic drugs. In: Goodman LS, Gilman A, eds. The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 6th edition. New
York: Macmillan 1980.

Cheeke PR, Shull LR. Natural Toxicants in Feeds and
Poisonous Plants. Westport, CT: AVI Pub. Co., 1985.
Hogan RP. Hemorrhagic diathesis caused by drinking an
herbal tea. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association 1983; 249:2679-80.

Hong CY, Huang JJ, Wu O. The inhibitory effect of
gossypol on human sperm motility: relationship with
time, temperature and concentration. Human Toxicology
1989; 8:49-51.

Coutinho EM. Gossypol: a contraceptive for men.
Contraception 2002 Apr; 65(4):259-63.

Wu D. An overview of the clinical pharmacology and
therapeutic potential of gossypol as a male contraceptive
agent and in gynaecological disease. Drugs 1989,
38:333-41.

Chung KT, et al. Tannins and human health: a review.
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 1998 Aug;
38(6):42 1-64.

Roder E. Medicinal plants in Europe containing
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Pharmazie 1995; $0:83-98.
Mauz JC. Vorkommen und Genotoxizitat von
Pyrrolizidinalkaloiden in Petasites hybridus L. und die
Entfernung der Alkaloide aus Arzneipflanzenextrakten.
Dissertation Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule Zurich No.
8246; 1987.

Mattocks AR. Toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Nature
1968; 217:723-28.

Datta DV, Khuroo MS, Mattocks AR, et al. Herbal
medicines and veno-occlusive disease in India.
Postgraduate Medical Fournal 1978, 54:511-15.

Lovell CR. Plants and the Skin. Oxford; Boston:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993.

----- PAGE 223 -----
42.

43.

44,

45,

46.

47.

48.

Cheavin WVS. The crystals and crystoliths found in
plant cells: part 1, Crystals. Microscope 1938; 2:155-58.
Downum KR. Light-activated plant defense. The New
Phytologist 1992; 122:401.

Schilcher H. Ruckstande und Veruntreinigungen bei
Drogen und Drogenzubereitungen. 19. Mitteilung: Zur
Wertbestimmung und Qualitatsprufung von Drogen.
Planta Medica 1982; 44:65-77.

Lenoble M, Fourniat I, Bourlioux P, et al. Controle de la
qualité microbiologique dechantillons de Mentha
piperita de diverses origines geographiques. Annales
Pharmaceutiques Frangaises 1980; 38:333-42.

Schilcher H, Peters H, Wank H. (1986) Pestizide und
Schwermetall in Arzneipflanzen und Arzneipflanzen-
Zubereitungen. Drug Development and Industrial
Pharmacy 1987; 49:203-11.

Ali SL. Bestimmungder Pestiziduckstande und toxischen
Schwermetallspuren in Arzneidrogen und deren
Teeaufgussen. Pharmazeutische Zeitung 1985, 132:633-8.
Chia BL, Leng CK, Hsii FP, et al. Lead poisoning from
contaminated opium. British Medical Journal 1973; 1:354.

‘TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 215

49. Yu ECL, Yeung CY Lead encephalopathy due to herbal
medicine. Chinese Medical Journal 1987; 100:915.

50. Ali SL. Bestimmungder Pestiziduckstande und toxischen
Schwermetallspuren in Arzneidrogen und deren
Teeaufgussen. Pharmazeutische Zeitung 1985; 132:633-8.

Suggested Reading

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions. Sandy,
OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vols. 1-3. New
York: Springer-Verlag 1992-97.

Harborne JB, et al. Dictionary of Plant Toxins. Chichester; New
York: Wiley, 1996.

McGuffin M, et al., eds. Azzerican Herbal Products Associations’
Botanical Safety Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1997,

Mitchell, J. Botanical Dermatology: Plants and Plant Products
Ingurious to the Skin. Vancouver, Canada: Greenglass,
1979.

----- PAGE 224 -----
MN

THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION
OF HERBAL MEDICINES

unique aspect of the art of phytotherapy is that
A& practitioner must know how to choose the

dosage form and the preparation technique most
appropriate for achieving optimum therapeutic benefits
with a particular herb for a particular condition. Over the
centuries, herbal practitioners have developed various
preparation methods appropriate for releasing the healing
properties of different plants. Thus, after having chosen
the most appropriate herbs for the patient, the practi-
tioner must select the best way to prepare them. A num-
ber of methods are available that release the biochemical
constituents needed for healing without insulting the in-
tegrity of the remedy by isolating fractions of the whole
plant.

‘Twenty-first-century herbal medicine making, or
phytopharmacy, is a rich blend of the old and the new. On
one hand, there has been a revival of the traditional skills
with which all herbalists should be familiar. On the other,
the herbal community has embraced technologies devel-
oped by the pharmaceutical industry, which has led to the
use of extraction and formulation methods that are indis-
tinguishable from those of that industry.

In fact, there is a rapidly growing phytopharmaceuti-
cal industry that is often driven more strongly by financial
concerns than by the health of consumers. Phytopharma-
ceutical manufacturers may focus, for example, on unique
methods of extract standardization in efforts to secure
patent protection for their products. However, effective
extraction of the medicinal properties of herbs need not
depend on modern technology. There is a place and a
need for both the traditional and the modern in herbal
medicine. Even as attempts are made to improve modern
phytopharmaceutical methods, it is important to remem-
ber the contributions of the long traditions of herbalism
to herbal medicine making.

If one sees herbal medicine as “people’s medicine,” as
I do, there remains an important place in health care for
what might be called the folk method of preparing herbal

216

remedies. These methods are simple, effective, and em-
powering. The work of a number of today’s herbalists
epitomizes the modern expression of the ancient skills of
the herbal medicine maker, including Rosemary Gladstar,
James Green, Christopher Hobbs, Kathi Keville, and
Mindy Green. Refer to Suggested Reading at the end of
this chapter for the titles of their books.

In addition, I cannot overstate the importance of the
work of pharmacists, both eclectic and orthodox, in the
nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. Much of the
material that follows relies on examples taken from their
writings, published in the standard reference texts of their
day. These are pharmacopoeias and formularies that de-
scribe herbs, drugs, chemicals, and preparation methods
officially recognized for use in medicine.

Pharmacopoeias are issued by officially recognized
authorities to serve as standards for the preparations of
remedies. In many countries of the world, the officially
recognized authority is a governmental body, but the sit-
uation is different in the United States. The United States
Pharmacopoeia (USP) is a nongovernmental organization
that establishes standards for prescription and nonpre-
scription drugs. USP standards are currently published
together with NF standards in a single official reference
volume.

The references J cite most often in the text are indi-
cated by the following acronyms. Please refer to
Suggested Reading for complete publication information
for these volumes.

BHP: The British Herbal Pharmacopoeia

BP: The British Pharmacopoeia

BPC: British Pharmaceutical Codex

NF: The National Formulary (U.S.)

Remington’s: Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences
USD: The Dispensatory of the United States of America
USP: The United States Pharmacopoeia

----- PAGE 225 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES .@ 217

In the material that follows, many of the remedies
used as examples are described in a strange form of Latin
known as pharmaceutical Latin. This pharmaceutical name
is usually derived from the Latin botanical name of the
herb, and consists of a term indicating the part of the
plant that is used followed by the genus name. For exam-
ple, dandelion leaf would be described as “Taraxacum
Folium.” Refer to appendix 4 for abbreviations and trans-
lations of these Latin pharmacy terms.

UNDERSTANDING THE OPTIONS

In addition to knowing how to select the most appropri-
ate herbs, the skilled herbal practitioner must understand
the relevance of the plethora of medicinal choices avail-
able. Therapeutic specifics are discussed in part 2 of this
book, but here are some important preliminary issues that
must be considered when selecting dosage forms and
methods of preparation for herbal remedies.

Route of administration. As discussed in chapter 9,
medicines ingested are distributed throughout the
body in a variety of ways. The practitioner must be
able to determine what route of administration will
provide the most effective delivery of desired herb
constituents, whether oral, rectal, topical, or some
other route. These considerations affect the choice of
dosage form used.

Dosage form. There are many ways to formulate and pre-
pare herbs for delivery into the body, each of which has
its own benefits and drawbacks. Choice of dosage form
must be based on the needs of the patient. Will a tablet
form be as readily bioavailable as a liquid preparation?
Would a suppository be more efficient than an oral
dosage form in delivering medicinal effects to the de-
sired site of action?

Extraction method. The choice of extraction method is
profoundly affected by the chemistry of herb con-
stituents considered responsible for therapeutic effects.
For example, consider Serenoa repens (saw palmetto), an
herb whose “active ingredients” are believed to be
lipids and triterpene saponins. These groups of chem-
icals are minimally soluble in water but readily soluble
in nonpolar solvents, such as alcohol and oils. They are
also readily soluble in carbon dioxide, the basis of the
technology known as supercritical CO, extraction.
These facts lead one to the conclusion that a tea of saw
palmetto berries is not the ideal form for delivery of
desired constituents (not to mention that it would also
taste foul). Alcohol-based extracts are a better choice
in this case, as are other, newer forms of extraction

based on nonpolar solvents. The ultimate decision may
be based on financial rather than therapeutic concerns.

THE BASICS OF PHYTOPHARMACY

No matter what degree of technological sophistication is
applied, there are two basic stages of preparation that
must be taken into account when making an herbal
medicine from a plant, described here. The actual proce-
dures followed in these stages can vary, and special con-
siderations apply to freshly harvested plants and those in-
tended for topical delivery. In the material that follows, I
will focus on different extraction methods and the ways in
which extracts can be best formulated for desired medic-
inal effects.

Comminution

Before it can be used, the herb must be cut down to a
workable size, a process known as comminution. The tra-
ditional tool for this process is the mortar and pestle.
Today, many other devices are available for cutting or
grinding unprocessed materials, such as mechanical mor-
tars, slicing and cutting machinery, and mills of various
types. For the folk herbalist, a coffee grinder provides a
convenient alternative.

On a commercial scale, herbs are ground into pow-
ders with metal disk mills or hammer mills. To acquire a
powder of a specific size, the processor uses sieves with a
specified number of openings per square inch or centime-
ter, Numbers are used to indicate sizes of powders. For in-
stance, a No, 20 powder has been passed through a sieve
that has 20 parallel wires to each linear inch in either di-
rection; such a sieve will have 400 holes per square inch.

Extraction

Extraction is the process by which soluble herb constituents
are separated from inert, fibrous matter. Pharmaceutical
textbooks list the following reasons for extraction:

* To make palatable, concentrated preparations, elimi-
nating the need to use bulky or distasteful drugs

* To remove inert constituents that in some way may in-
terfere with the action of the desired constituent(s)

* To create a product that contains only pharmacologi-
cally active constituents

* To create a product of known strength and activity that
can be reliably reproduced in subsequent batches

The first step is to select a solvent capable of pene-
trating the tissues of the herb and dissolving the con-
stituents. This liquid is called the menstruwm, and the

----- PAGE 226 -----
218 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

inert, fibrous, or other insoluble material that remains
after the menstruum has done its work and been removed
is called the sarc. Water and alcohol are the principle sol-
vents in common use. If the preparation must keep indef-
initely, an alcohol solvent must be used.

The British Pharmacopoeia (BP) recommends four dif-
ferent strengths of alcohol: 45%, 60%, 70%, and 90%.
The strength to be used depends on the chemical nature
of the constituents to be extracted, as well as the physical
density of the plant part being extracted. To ensure steril-
ity, the solvent should contain a minimum of 20% to 25%
alcohol. Other solvents may also be used for extraction,
such as acetic acid, glycerol, ether, and oil.

PRINCIPAL MODES OF EXTRACTION
EMPLOYED IN TRADITIONAL
PHYTOPHARMACY

Well-defined classes of extraction techniques are de-
scribed in the official pharmacopoeias. These may be
used singly or in combination, depending on the desired
outcome.

Maceration and expression
Digestion

Percolation

Infusion

Decoction

mp w re

Maceration

Maceration is the process of softening plant material by
soaking, facilitating the dissolution of the soluble con-
stituents. It plays an important role in many official
preparations, including tinctures, extracts, syrups, wines,
and vinegars. Macerations differ from water-based infu-
sions and decoctions in the following respects:

© The menstruum is usually alcohol.

© The herb remains in contact with the menstruum for a

longer period of time.

¢ The process is conducted at ordinary temperatures.

© After straining, the liquid left in the remaining herbal
material (the marc) is pressed out and mixed with the

strained liquid.

The specified amount of herb, in the specified form
(for example, cut or powdered), is placed with the re-
quired amount of menstruum into a vessel. The vessel is
closed, to prevent the loss of alcohol, and then shaken so
as to turn the contents, preferably on a daily basis. The
shaking disperses the saturated layer of menstruum that
surrounds the herb particles and allows fresh liquid to

come into contact with the herb. Actual maceration time
will depend on the specific herb, but 7 to 14 days is a good
general rule of thumb.

After the prescribed amount of time, the liquid is
drained from the marc. The marc is then pressed to re-
trieve more of the menstruum. The expressed liquid is
mixed with the strained liquid, and the mixture is left to
stand until it is clear, after which it is filtered.

Digestion

Digestion is a form of maceration that involves application
of a gentle heat to the substance being extracted. It is used
in cases in which a moderately elevated temperature will
help increase the solvent powers of the menstruum.
Digestion differs from decoction in that preparations
made through the process of digestion are alcohol based,
rather than water based.

Percolation

Percolation is a process by which a powder contained in a
suitable vessel is deprived of its soluble constituents by
the descent of a solvent through the material. The USP
provides the following directions for percolation.

Percolation, as directed in this Pharmacopoeia, consists in
subjecting a comminuted substance or a mixture of sub-
stances, contained in a vessel called a percolator, to the
solvent action of successive portions of a liquid termed
the menstruum in such a manner that the liquid, as it tra-
verses the powder in its descent to the receiver, shall ex-
tract the soluble constituents, and pass from the percola-
tor free from insoluble matter,

The expression “until the drug is exhausted” and sim-
ilar phrases used in directions for percolations indicate
that the process should be continued to the point at which
the valuable constituents have been as completely ex-
tracted as is possible or practical. The judgment and ex-
perience of the operator determines the point at which
this has occurred.

Infusion

An infusion is a water-based preparation made by steep-
ing leaves, flowers, and other nonwoody plant parts in
either hot or cold water. Obviously, this method of
preparation is appropriate only for herbs with water-
soluble constituents.

Decoction
A decoction is a water-based preparation made by gently
simmering the herb in boiling water. Decoction differs

----- PAGE 227 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 219

from infusion in that it is more appropriate for tougher
plant parts, such as roots, bark, and seeds.

A COMPARISON OF OFFICIAL AND
FOLK METHODS

The official sources mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter provide methods and examples for all of the ex-
traction techniques just discussed. For purposes of com-
parison, here we will look at some examples of officially
sanctioned and modern folk techniques of herb extraction.

WATER-BASED PREPARATIONS

There are two broad ways to prepare water-based ex-
tracts: infusions and decoctions. There are some basic
rules of thumb for choosing which method to use with
what herb, but as with all generalizations, there are many
exceptions.

¢ Infusions are appropriate for nonwoody material such
as leaves, flowers, and some stems, especially herbs
with a high content of volatile oils.

© Decoctions are necessary if the herb contains any hard or
woody material, such as roots, barks, or nuts; the denser
the plant or the individual cell walls, the more energy
is needed to extract the cell content into the water.

Roots rich in volatile oils, such as valerian root, are
an important exception to these general rules. While the
woodiness might suggest that decoction is appropriate,
the therapeutically important volatile oil will evaporate
if the roots are simmered. With roots like this, it is bet-
ter to grind the herb to a fine powder and then make an
infusion.

Water extracts offer the advantage of convenience,
but are limited in that some plant constituents cannot be
extracted in water. Obviously, constituents that are insol-
uble in water will not be present in the resulting tea.

INFUSIONS

Everyone is familiar with infusions. The traditional cup
of herb tea is the archetypal infusion. Of course, herb
tea is not truly tea, as tea is made from the leaves of
Camellia sinensis. However, nobody asks to be served an
herb infusion!

There are many ways to make infusions, and here we
shall compare official and traditional methods. As we shall

see, recipes for infusions given in the USP can differ
greatly from simple herbal infusions made by steeping
herbs in boiling water.

Official Infusions (Infusa)

Remington’s describes infusions in the following way:

These are liquid preparations made by treating herbs with
either hot or cold water. The drug is not subjected to the
boiling process, although it is common to pour boiling
water over it; the mixture is allowed to stand in a closed
vessel until cold. Cold water should be selected as the
menstruum when the drug contains a valuable volatile
principle, when the active agent is injured by heat, or
when the desirable principles are readily soluble in water
of ordinary temperature. The time required to make the
infusion must also be considered, for in warm weather it
is quite possible for an infusion to ferment or decompose
before it is finished. Pure water should be used in making
infusions, and they should not be made in large quantities
unless demanded for immediate use, as, without special
precautions to preserve them, they soon decompose. In
making infusions the drug is usually coarsely commin-
uted, sliced, or bruised.

The USP gives the following general directions for a
macerated infusion:

Infusions must be freshly made from the drugs, and, when
the strength of Infusions is not otherwise directed, they
are to be prepared by the following general formula:

The drug coarsely comminuted, 50 gm
Water, a sufficient quantity to make 1000 ml

Introduce the substance into a suitable vessel provided
with a cover, pour upon it 1000 ml of boiling water, cover
the vessel tightly, and allow it to stand for half an hour.
Then strain with expression, and pass enough water
through the strainer to make the infusion measure 1000
ml. If the activity of the infusion is affected by heat, cold
water only should be used.

In the BP, infusions are defined this way:

Infusions are dilute solutions containing readily soluble
constituents of crude drugs. They are usually prepared by
diluting one volume of a concentrated infusion to ten vol-
umes with water. For dispensing purposes, infusions
should be used within 12 hours of their preparation.

On the following page are some recipes for official infusions.

----- PAGE 228 -----
220 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Infusum Pruni Virginianae BPC 1911
(Infusion of Virginian Prune)
Virginian Prune Bark, in No 20 powder 4g
Glycerin 5 ml
Distilled Water to 100 ml

Moisten the powdered bark with 60 ml of the water, set aside
for 1 hour, pack in a percolator and percolate with more of the
distilled water; collect the percolate in a vessel containing the
glycerin and continue percolation until the product measures
100. Dose: 30-60 ml.

Occasionally, the older official compendia will mix
methods or apply titles that might be misleading. An ex-
ample is the following recipe that first infuses the ingre-
dients in alcohol and then subjects them to a tincturing
process.

Concentrated Compound Gentian Infusion BP 1980

Gentian, cut small and bruised 125 g
Dried Bitter-Orange Peel, cut small 125g
Dried Lemon Peel, cut small 125g
Ethanol (25%} 1200 ml

Macerate the Gentian, the dried bitter Orange peel, and the
dried Lemon peel in a covered vessel for 48 hours with 1000 ml
of the ethanol (25%), press out the liquid. To the pressed marc,
add 200 ml of the ethanol (25%), macerate for 24 hours, press,
and add the liquid to the product of the first pressing, Allow to
stand for not less than 14 days; filter. Dose: 14-4 ml.

Folk Method of Infusion

This is perhaps the simplest method of preparing an herb.
Fresh or dried herbs can be used. However, note that a
larger amount of fresh herb will be needed to compensate
for its higher water content. Therefore, if the instructions
call for 1 part (for example, 1 teaspoon) of dried herb, the
dried herb can be substituted with 3 parts (or 3 teaspoons)
of fresh herb.

A Simple Hot Infusion

Gently warm a china or glass teapot and put in about 1 tea-
spoonful of dried herb or herb mixture for each cup of tea de-
sired. Add 1 cup of boiling water for each teaspoonful of herb in
the pot and put the lid on.

Leave to steep for 10 to 15 minutes. Infusions may be drunk
hot (normally best for a medicinal tea) or cold; they may even
be iced. If desired, sweeten with licorice root, honey, or brown

sugar.

To make larger infusions, use a proportion of 30 g
(1 02) of herb to a half-liter (1 pint) of water. As their shelf
life is not very long, infusions should be prepared when
needed. Herbal tea bags may be made by filling little
muslin bags with herb mixtures, but take care to remem-
ber how many teaspoonfuls you have put into each bag!
These can be used in the same way as ordinary tea bags.

Infusions are appropriate for softer plant tissue such
as leaves, flowers, or green stems, where the desired sub-
stances are easily accessible. If an infusion is to be made
of bark, roots, seeds, or resin, it is best to powder them first
to break down some of the cell walls, which will facilitate
extraction. Seeds—for instance, fennel or aniseed—
should be slightly bruised to release the volatile oils from
the cells. All aromatic herbs should be infused in a pot
with a tight-fitting lid to minimize loss of volatile oils.

Cold Infusions

Some herbs are sensitive to heat, either because they con-
tain highly volatile oils or because their constituents
break down at high temperatures. For these herbs, make
a cold infusion. The proportion of herb to water is the
same, but in this case, the infusion should be left for 6 to
12 hours in a well-sealed earthenware pot. When the liq-
uid is ready, strain and use it.

As an alternative, cold milk can be used as a base for
a cold infusion. Milk contains fats and oils that aid in the
dissolution of oily constituents of plants. Milk infusions
can be used for compresses and poultices, which will add
the soothing action of the milk to that of the herbs. There
is, however, one contraindication for the use of milk in an
infusion. If there is any evidence that an individual might
have a sensitivity or allergy to milk when taken internally,
or if the skin becomes irritated when it is applied exter-
nally, then avoid such infusions.

Medicinal Plants Usually Prepared as Infusions
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Agathosma betulina (buchu)

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Alchemilla arvensis (lady's mantle)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Apium graveolens (celery)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)

A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Avena sativa (oats)

----- PAGE 229 -----
Ballota nigra (black horehound)

Calendula officinalis (calendula, pot marigold)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Carum carvi (caraway)

Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)

Chelone glabra (balmony)

Chondrus crispus (carrageen)

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn)

Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)

Daucus carota (carrot)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Ephedra sinica (ma huang or ephedra)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus, blue gum)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

E. purpureum (gravel root)

Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)

Fumaria officinalis famitory)

Galega officinalis (goat's rue)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Grindelia camporum (grindelia, gum weed)
Hieracium pilosella (mouse-ear hawkweed)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Juniperus communis (juniper)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Lavandula officinalis (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Linum usitatissimum (flax)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Lycopus europaeus (European bugleweed)
Matlua sylvestris (mallow)

Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)

Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)

THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES .@ 221

Peumus boldus (boldo)

Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Plantago major (plantain)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (Pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

R. villosus (blackberry)

Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (black elder)
Scropbularia nodosa (figwort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Senna spp. (senna)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Thuja occidentalis (white cedar)
Thymus spp. (thyme)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Verbena officinalis (European vervain)
Vinca major (periwinkle)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

V. tricolor (heartsease)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

DECOCTIONS

Pharmacopoeias once included extensive entries for de-
coctions. They eventually fell out of favor, as they were
considered inconvenient. In fact, one of the most com-
mon mainstream criticisms of herbal medicine is that it is
inconvenient. To the herbalist, however, therapeutic ben-
efit outweighs convenience! From a different perspective,
it might also be argued that the time and attention re-
quired to make a decoction provides a stress-relieving
therapeutic benefit not offered by any pill.

----- PAGE 230 -----
222 <3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Official Decoctions (Decocta)

Remington’s describes decoctions as liquid preparations
made by boiling vegetable substances with water. A gen-
eral formula for decoctions can be found in the USP.

Decoctions must be freshly made, and when their
strength is not otherwise directed, they are to be prepared
by the following general formula:

The Drug, coarsely comminuted 50g

Water, a sufficient quantity, to make 1000 ml

Place the drug in a suitable vessel provided with a
cover, pour upon it 1000 cc. of cold water, cover and boil
for fifteen minutes. Cool to about 40°C, express, strain
the expressed liquid, and pass enough cold water through
the strainer to make the product measure 1000 cc.

Decoctum Tussilaginis BPC 1911
(Decoction of Coltsfoot)
Coltsfoot Leaves
Distilled Water to

5 parts
100 parts
Add leaves to 120 ml of distilled water, boil for 10 minutes, strain
and make up to required volume, if necessary, by passing water
through the strainer. Dose: 60~120 ml or more.

Decoctum Lappae BPC 1911 (Decoction of Burdock)
Lappa 5.00 g
Distilled Water to 100.00 ml

Add the root to 150 of the distilled water and boil until the vol-
ume of the strained liquid is reduced to 100. Dose: 30-120 ml or
more.

Folk Method of Decocting

Whenever the herbal material is hard and woody, making
a decoction increases the likelihood that the soluble con-
tents of the herb will actually be extracted into the water.
Roots, rhizomes, wood, bark, nuts, and some seeds are
hard and have strong cell walls, so to ensure an effective
transfer of active constituents to the water, more heat is
needed than for infusions.

A Simple Decoction

Put 1 teaspoon of dried herb (or 3 teaspoons of fresh material)
for each cup of water used into a pot or saucepan. Add the ap-
propriate amount of water to the herbs.

Bring to a boil and simmer for the time given for the mix-
ture or specific herb, usually 10 to 15 minutes. If the herb con-
tains volatile oils, put a lid on. Strain the tea while it is still hot.

Dried herbs should be powdered or broken into small
pieces; fresh material should be cut into small pieces.
When making a larger quantity of decoction, use 30 g
(1 02) of dried herb for each half-liter (1 pint) of water.
The container should be glass, ceramic, or earthenware.
If the container is metal, it should be enameled.

When preparing a mixture containing both soft and
woody herbs, it is best to prepare an infusion (for the soft
herbs) and a decoction separately, to ensure that the more
delicate herbs are treated appropriately. The two can then
be mixed together. However, for a woody herb rich in
volatile oils, boiling will cause evaporation of important
volatile constituents. For herbs like this, powder the ma-
terial finely and make an infusion.

Medicinal Plants Usually Prepared as Decoctions
Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)

Betula spp. (birch)

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Chamaelirium luteum (false unicorn root)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Cola vera (kola)

Collinsonia canadensis (collinsonia, stoneroot)
Commiphora molmol. (myrrh)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Echinacea spp. (echinacea, purple coneflower)
Equisetum arvense (horsetail)

Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Gentiana spp. (gentian)

Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Hydrangea arborescens (hydrangea)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Inula helenium (elecampane)

Tris versicolor (blue flag)

Juglans cinerea (butternut)

Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)

Myrica cerifera (bayberry, wax myrtle)
Panax spp. (ginseng)

Piper methysticum (kava)

----- PAGE 231 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 223

Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Populus tremuloides (quaking aspen)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry)

Quercus spp. (oak)

Rheum palmatum (Chinese rhubarb)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Sassafras albidum (sassafras)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)
Veronicastrum virginica (culver’s root)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (vitex, chasteberry)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

ALCOHOL-WATER PREPARATIONS

There are three primary reasons for the widespread use
of water-alcohol extracts, including tinctures. Such
preparations have several advantages over purely water-
based extracts:

1. Most of the constituents present, both water-soluble
and alcohol-soluble, will dissolve in the extract. The
only constituents that will not dissolve are the in-
soluble cellulose of the cell wall and any con-
stituents bound to it.

2. Alcohol is a preservative. Infusions and decoctions
are wonderful growth media for bacteria and molds
and thus have a very short or nonexistent shelf life.
An alcohol content of at least 20% will greatly ex-
tend the shelf life of an extract. :

3. The process used to make tinctures or fluid extracts
will concentrate the medicinal properties in a
smaller volume of liquid.

When tinctures are prepared professionally, accord-
ing to descriptions in a pharmacopoeia, specific water-to-
alcohol proportions are used for each herb. Some recom-
mendations from The British Herbal Pharmacopoeia can be
found in chapter 26. For general use, such attention to de-
tail is not always necessary.

Official Tincture Preparations (Tincturae)
Pharmaceutical tinctures are alcoholic solutions prepared
by maceration, digestion, or percolation. The term tinc-
ture is also occasionally used for preparations based on
glycerin or vinegar. Ethanol offers the advantage of dis-
solving constituents that are insoluble or sparingly solu-
ble in water while helping to preserve them in solution. A
water-alcoho] menstruum can extract a larger proportion
of active principles of most plants than can water alone,
but at the same time contains sufficient alcohol to prevent
decomposition.

The USP describes the following general procedure
for the preparation of tinctures:

The proportion of drugs represented in the different
kinds of tinctures is not uniform but varies according to
the established standards for each. Tinctures of potent
drugs represent the activity of 10 gm. of a drug of mini-
mum U.S.P. strength, in each 100 cc. of tincture. When
drugs having a higher potency than the ininimum are
used in preparing tinctures the finished product is assayed
and adjusted to the uniform U.S.P. strength. This con-
forms in principle to the recommendation of the
International Protocol as adopted at Brussels, and with
international standards. In this group are most of the tinc-
tures which are assayed and adjusted to standards. Most of
the other tinctures represent 20 gm. of the respective
drugs in each 100 cc. of tincture. Compound tinctures are
made according to long established formulas, and the two
official tinctures of fresh drugs are made to represent 50
gm. of the respective drugs in each 100 ce. of tincture.

There are two important variables in tinctures: the
concentration of the herb and the strength of the alcohol.

Concentration of Herb

The amount of herb in a given amount of menstruum de-
fines the concentration of the extract. Most tinctures are
in concentrations of 1:4 or 1:5, but the BP also uses 1:3,
1:8, and 1:10. In the examples just given, the first number
represents the weight of the herb and the second repre-
sents the volume of menstruum, so they express a ratio of
weight to volume (w:v).

There are a number of ways to express concentra-
tions. The expression percent may be used, according to
circumstances, with one of four different meanings. In
order that the meaning attached to the expression in each
instance is clear, the following notations are used.

* Percent w/w (weight to weight): number of grams of
active substance in 100 g of product

----- PAGE 232 -----
224 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

© Percent w/v (weight to volume): number of grams of
active substance in 100 ml of product

¢ Percent v/v (volume to volume): number of milliliters
of active substance in 100 ml of product

* Percent v/w (volume to weight): number of milliliters
of active substance in 100 g of product

Strength of Alcohol

According to the BP, alcohol can be used in concentra-
tions of 45%, 60%, 70%, and 90%. In pharmacy, the ex-
pression “70% ethanol” describes a solution made up of
70 parts of 96.4% ethanol and 30 parts of water. As an ex-
ample, “Tinctura calami 1:5-70% BPC” means that this
tincture of Acorus calamus root was made by macerating
1 part of root (in weight) in 5 parts (by volume) of a 70%
ethanol solution.

The so-called mother tinctures used in homeopathy
as the starting point for potentiation are usually prepared
by bruising the fresh herb, expressing the juice, and
adding 96% alcohol to the juice in an amount equal to
one-third or one-half the volume of the fresh juice.

Folk Method of Tincturing

Alcohol is a better solvent than water for most plant con-
stituents. A mixture of alcohol and water will dissolve
nearly all of the relevant ingredients of an herb and at the
same time act as a preservative. The method given here
for the preparation of tinctures describes a simple and
general approach. For home use, an alcohol of at least
30% concentration (60 proof) will suffice, as this is about
the weakest alcohol-water mixture that still provides a
long-term preservative action. Vodka is usually a good
choice, although other types of alcohol can also be used.

A Simple Tincture

Put 4 ounces of finely chopped or ground dried herb into a con-
tainer that can be tightly closed. (If the herb is fresh, use twice
this amount.) Pour 7 pint of 30% (60 proof) vodka on the herbs
and close the container tightly.

Keep the container in a warm place for two weeks and
shake it well twice daily. After decanting the bulk of the liquid,
pour the residue into a muslin cloth suspended in a strainer over
a bowl. Wring out all the liquid. The residue (the marc) makes
excellent compost. Pour the finished tincture into a dark-colored,
tightly capped bottle.

Tinctures are stronger than infusions or decoctions,
and thus a much smaller dosage is taken. Tinctures may be
used in a variety of ways. They can be taken as is, mixed
with water, or added to a cup of hot water. If added to hot
water, the alcohol will largely evaporate, leaving most of
the extract in the water. However, this may make the
water cloudy, as resins and other constituents not soluble
in water will precipitate.

Drops of tincture can be added to a bath or footbath,
applied in a compress, or mixed with oil or fat to make an
ointment. Suppositories and lozenges can also be made
this way. Because there is no way that quantitative accu-
racy can be maintained when making tinctures by the folk
method, it should be used only for mild herbs for which
dosage is not critical.

FLUID EXTRACTS (FLUID
EXTRACTA)

Another form of alcohol-based medicine is the fluid ex-
tract, also known as a liquid extract. In fluid extracts, which
are more concentrated than tinctures, | part by volume of
the fluid extract is equivalent to 1 part by weight of the
herb. The techniques used to make these preparations are
complex and involve specific skills and equipment.

The USP defines fluid extracts in the following way:

Fluid extracts are liquid preparations of vegetable drugs,
containing alcohol as a solvent or as a preservative, or
both, and so made that each 1 ce. contains the therapeu-
tic constituents of 1 gm. of the standard drug which it
represents.

Fluid extracts are made by percolation, and the men-
struum to be used is specified in official monographs.
They may be standardized if they contain constituents
that can be assayed by modern methods.

Fluid extracts possess a number of advantages.

Stability is ensured by the use of an ethanol menstruum.
Glycerin, which tends to retard precipitation, is used as
part or all of the menstruum of some fluid extracts.

Concentration reduces the volume needed per dose.

Uniformity of dose is made possible by the precise nature
of the concentration; if 1 ml of extract represents 1 g
of crude herb, the dose of the fluid extract is practically
the same as that of the drug.

Here are some official examples of fluid extracts.

----- PAGE 233 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 225

Extractum Anthemidis Liquidum BPC 1934
(Liquid Extract of Chamomile)
Chamomile, in moderately coarse powder
Alcohol (70%) to

1000 g
1000 ml
Exhaust the Chamomile with the alcohol by percolation, reserv-
ing the first 850 ml of percolate. Evaporate the subsequent per-
colate to a soft extract, dissolve it in the reserved portion and
add sufficient of the alcohol to produce the required volume.
Dose: 2-4 ml.

Senna Liquid Extract BP 1980

Senna fruit

Alexandrian or Tinnevelly, crushed 1000 g

Coriander oil é6ml

Ethanol (90%) 250 ml

Purified water, freshly boiled and cooled, a sufficient quantity
Macerate the crushed Senna fruit in 5000 ml of purified water
using 2 further quantities each of 2000 ml of purified water for
each maceration. Lightly press the marc, strain the expressed liq-
uid, mix the strained liquid with the previously decanted liquid,
heat the combined liquids at 80 degrees for 3 minutes in a cov-
ered vessel. Allow to stand for not less than 24 hours, filter.
Evaporate the filtrate to 750 ml under reduced pressure at a
temperature not exceeding 60 degrees. Separately, dissolve the
Coriander oil in the ethanol (90%), add to the evaporated fil-
trate, and add sufficient purified water to produce 1000 ml.
Allow to stand for not less than 24 hours; filter Usual dose
range: 0.5-2 ml.

SYRUPS AND ELIXIRS

Fluid medicines—whether infusions, decoctions, or tinc-
tures—often have an unpleasant taste. Thus, it is some-
times helpful to mask the taste by adding a sweetener.
One method is to use a syrup, which is the traditional way
to make cough mixtures more palatable for children or to
make any herbal preparation more “toothsome,” as
Culpeper would say.

A Simple Syrup Base

Pour 1 pint of boiling water over 2'4 pounds of sugar. Place over
heat and stir until the sugar dissolves and the liquid begins to
boil. Remove from heat immediately.

To give this simple syrup medicinal properties, mix 1 part of
tincture with 3 parts of syrup and store for future use.
To sweeten an infusion or decoction, it is simpler to add the
sugar directly to the liquid. For every 1 pint of liquid, add ¥%
pound of sugar. Heat gently until the sugar is dissolved. This

mixture can be stored for future use in a refrigerator. Since is
not advisable to consume too much sugar, syrups are best used
when making gargles and cough medicines, in which the herbs
tend to be rather unpalatable.

Syrupus Althaeae BPC 1911 (Syrup of Althaea)

Althaea, sliced 4.00 g
Refined sugar 90.00 g
Distilled water 56.00 ml

Macerate the Althaea in the water for 12 hours, then strain, press
and filter. The filtrate should measure 45. To this add the sugar,
dissolve and heat the syrup to boiling. Cool and strain through
flannel. The finished product should measure about 100. Dose:
2-8 ml.

Elixirs (Elixiria)

Elixirs are another type of sweet formulation. They are
defined as clear, flavored, liquid preparation containing
one or more medicaments, and usually a high proportion

of alcohol or sucrose. Here is one example of the 18
elixirs in the BP 1980.

Compound Fig Elixir BP 1980

Fig, cut small 320g
Cascara Elixir 50 ml
Compound Rhubarb tincture 50 ml
Senna Liquid Extract 100 ml
Sucrose 540 g

Water a sufficient quantity

Add the fig to 800 ml of boiling water, heat gently for one hour,
strain, express, wash the pulp with sufficient warm water to pro-
duce 800 ml; evaporate the liquid to half its volume, dissolve the
sucrose in the concentrated liquid, add the compound Rhubarb
tincture, the Senna liquid extract, the Cascara elixir, and sufficient
water to produce 1000 ml; mix.

EMULSIONS (EMULSIONES)

Emulsions are still official for both internal and external
use. They are defined as dispersions of an oily liquid in an
aqueous liquid, either of which may contain dissolved or
suspended solids.

Emulsio Olei Amygdalae BPC 1911
(Almond Oil Emulsion)

12.50 ml

3.208

1000 ml

Almond Oil
Gum Acacia, in powder
Distilled Water to

----- PAGE 234 -----
226 <2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Make a mucilage by triturating the gum acacia in a mortar with
an equal quantity of distilled water, add the Almond oil in a slow
stream, stirring lightly until the mixture appears uniform; then
add gradually the remainder of the water. An alternative method
of making this preparation is to triturate the Almond oil with
gum acacia, add all at once twice as much distilled water as gum
acacia, make a primary emulsion, and add distilled water in small
quantities up to the required volume. Dose: 8-30 ml.

JUICES (SUCCD

Juices are an excellent way of taking medicinal herbs. The
effects can be dramatic and swift. The first green herbs of
spring, such as cleavers (Galium aparine), are most useful
in this form. Juices may be made at home using either a
juicer or a blender.

Succus Taraxaci BPC 1911 (Juice of Dandelion)

Taraxacum juice is prepared by subjecting the bruised fresh root
to pressure, adding to the expressed juice '/3 of its volume of al-
cohol, allowing the mixture to stand for 7 days, and filtering.
This juice is considered by many practitioners to be more effec-
tive than the liquid extract prepared from the dried root. Note:
Liquor Taraxaci is prepared by adding the alcohol to the bruised
fresh root before expression. Dose: 4-8 ml.

LINCTUSES (LINCT]

The BPC 1934 defines this type of liquid preparation as
follows:

Linctuses are liquid preparations of a mucilaginous,
syrupy, or viscous nature containing substances which
possess demulcent, expectorant, or sedative properties.
They are usually administered in small doses and should
be directed to be sipped and swallowed slowly without the
addition of water, so that they may form a temporary pro-
tective or remedial film over the membranes of the throat.

Linctus Ipecacuanhae BPC 1923
(Linctus of Ipecacuanha)

Vinegar of lpecacuanha 25.00 ml
Syrup of Balsam of Tolu 25.00 ml
Glycerin 25.00 ml
Mucilage of Tragacanth to 100.00 ml

Mix the liquids. Dose: 2-4 ml.

MUCILAGES

Mucilages are an interesting type of formulation that can
prove quite tricky to make! The BPC 1911 has this to say
about mucilages:

Mucilages are viscous preparations usually employed as
emulsifying or suspending agents, or as demulcents.
Mucilages which are not in constant demand should be
freshly prepared as required. They deteriorate when kept,
especially in warm weather, unless preservatives are
added, such as solution of formaldehyde or benzoic acid.
Mucilages which have been at 100 degrees for 10 minutes
in small bottles and securely sealed, keep for longer peri-
ods. Such precautions are unnecessary in the case of mu-
cilage of gum acacia or mucilage of Tragacanth if quanti-
ties limited to about a week's supply are stored in bottles
of small size, as completely filled as possible. Mucilage of
gum acacia, when required at short notice, can be rapidly
prepared with hot water; the keeping properties of the
product are inferior to mucilage prepared with cold

water.

Mucilago Acaciae BPC 1911 (Mucilage of Acacia)

Gum acacia, in small pieces or coarse powder 35g
Benzoic acid (to preserve) 02g
Water to 100.00 ml

Wash the acacia quickly in distilled water, macerate with warm
water (plus benzoic acid) until dissolved and make up to volume,
Acacia mucilage can be sterilized by heating at 80°C for one
hour.

OXYMELS

These are formulations containing acetic acid, clear
honey, and enough water to give a solution with a specific
gravity of 1.32, measured with a hydrometer. Usually the
amount of water comes to I part.

Oxymel Marrubii BPC 1911 (Oxymel of Horehound)

Horehound, dried 42.50 g

Acetic acid 6.75 ml
Distilled water, boiling, a sufficient quantity
Clarified honey to 100.00 ml

Digest the horehound with sufficient boiling water to cover it,
in a water bath for one hour; then strain and press, evaporate on
the water bath to 50, cool, when cold add the acetic acid and
filter, make up to the required volume with the honey. Dose:
2-4 ml.

----- PAGE 235 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 2 227

WATERS (AQUA)

‘Waters are traditional preparations that are still widely
used as cosmetics in the form of flower waters. Aromatic
waters are still official, and five are mentioned in the BP

1980.

Aqua Cinnamomi conc. BPC 1911
(Concentrated Cinnamon Water)

Oil of cinnamon 475 ml
Alcohol (90%) 80.00 ml
Distilled water to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the oil in the alcohol. Add the water in small amounts,
shaking after each addition. One part of this solution corre-
sponds to about 40 parts of cinnamon water.

DRY PREPARATIONS

Sometimes it is appropriate to take herbs in a dry form,
and dry preparations offer certain advantages. First, they
enable the patient to take the herb while avoiding the
possibly unpleasant taste. Second, the patient takes the
whole herb, including the fibrous material.

On the other hand, there are a number of drawbacks
to dry preparations. Dry herbs are unprocessed, and thus
the plant constituents are not always readily available for
easy absorption. During infusion, heat and water help to
break down the walls of the plant cells and dissolve the
constituents, which is not always guaranteed during the
digestive process in the stomach and the small intestine.
When the constituents are already dissolved in liquid
form, they are available to exert their actions sooner.

A more subtle drawback lies in the very fact that
when herbs are taken in dry form, the patient does not
taste the herb. For reasons discussed in chapter 13 and
elsewhere, bitter herbs work best when tasted, as their ef-
fectiveness depends on a complex neurological reflex.
When bitters are put into a capsule or a pill, their action
may well be lost or diminished.

After all of these considerations have been taken into
account, there are still a number of ways to use herbs in
dry form. The main concern is ensuring that the herbs are
powdered as finely as possible. This guarantees that the
cell walls are largely broken down, and helps in the diges-
tion and absorption of the herbs. However, the need to
break down the herbs presents yet another drawback, as
techniques used to grind the herbs finely will also gener-
ate much heat through friction, possibly leading to a
change in chemistry.

Capsules

The easiest way to take dry powdered herbs internally is
to use gelatin capsules. (Capsules not made of animal
products are also available.) The size needed depends on
the amount of herb prescribed per dose, the density of the
plant, and the volume of the material. A size 00 capsule
holds about 0.5 gram (!/s ounce) of finely powdered herb.

Filling Capsules
Place the powdered herb ina flat dish and take the halves of the
capsule apart. Move the halves of the capsules through the pow-
der, filling them in the process. Push the halves together.

Pills

There are a number of ways to make pills, depending on
the degree of technical skill you possess. The simplest
way to take an unpleasant remedy is to roll the powder
into a small pill with fresh bread, which works quite ef-
fectively with herbs such as goldenseal and cayenne.

‘Tablets

The tablet is the most commonly used oral dosage form,
but is also often the most complex to make. The process
of making tablets involves compressing the herb, which
results in a reduction in effective surface area. The herb
starts out as a very fine powder, but then is compressed
into a single dosage unit. Certain tablet ingredients are
included to add various physical properties to the thera-
peutic properties of the herb.

Common Tablet. Ingredients

Drug may be poorly soluble, hydrophobic

Lubricant is usually quite hydrophobic

Granulating agents tend to help the ingredients adhere to
one another

Filler may interact with the drug; it should be water-
soluble

Wetting agents help water penetrate into the tablet

Disintegration agents help to break the tablet apart after
ingestion

Coated tablets are used to help mask unpleasant
tastes, protect tablet ingredients during storage, or simply
improve the appearance of the tablet. This barrier must
break down quickly, or it may hinder the drug’s bioavail-
ability. Some tablets are treated with enteric coatings,
meaning that they are coated with a material that will

----- PAGE 236 -----
228 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

dissolve in the intestine but remain intact in the stomach.
Polymeric acid compounds have been used for this pur-
pose with some success.

Lozenges (Trochisci) and Pastilles (Pastilli)
A number of formulations have been developed to pleas-
antly and slowly release medicinal properties in the
mouth. These aromatic, medicinal forms are named after
their shapes. Thus, /ozenge is derived from the French
losange, meaning “rhombic.” Troche, the singular form of
trochisti, from the Greek trochos, means “round.” Pastille is
from one of the French words for “food.”

Trochisci Altheae BPC 1911 (Althaea Lozenges)

Althaea, in powder 6.48 g
Refined sugar, in powder 99.22 g
Gum Acacia, in powder 64.80 g

White of one egg

Orange-flower water a sufficient quantity

Macerate the Althaea in a sufficient quantity of orange-flower
water for 12 hours, strain, add the gurn acacia and sugar, Dissolve
and evaporate to the consistency of honey with constant stirring:
gradually add the white of an egg beaten up with more orange-
flower water. Evaporate with stirring until the paste will not
adhere to the hand, and divide into 100 lozenges.

EXTERNAL REMEDIES

As the body can absorb some components of herbal for-
mulations through the skin, a wide range of methods and
formulations have been developed to take advantage of
this fact. Douches and suppositories, though they might
appear to be internal remedies, have traditionally been
categorized as external remedies.

Here are two time-honored official remedies for ex-
ternal application.

Peruvian Balsam NF-

This balsam is made up of 60% to 64% of a volatile oil
called cinnamein and 20% to 28% of resin. The higher
the volatile oil content, the greater the market price of the
drug. Cinnamein is a mixture of numerous compounds, of
which the following have been identified: the esters ben-
zyl benzoate, benzyl cinnamate, and cinnamyl cinnamate;
the alcohol peruviol as ester; free cinnamic acid; about
0.05% of vanillin; and a trace of coumarin. It may also
contain dihydrobenzoic acid, farnesol, styrol, and a phy-
tosterol. The resin consists of the benzoic and cinnamic

acid esters of the alcohol peruresinotannol, along with
some free cinnamic acid.

Peruvian Balsam is a local irritant. It serves as a valu-
able dressing that promotes the growth of epithelial cells
in the treatment of indolent ulcers, wounds, and certain
skin conditions, including scabies. Ointments that con-
tain both Peruvian Balsam and sulfur present a problem
in compounding, since the resinous part of the balsam
tends to separate. This difficulty may be overcome by
mixing the balsam with an equal amount of castor oil be-
fore incorporating it into the base, or by mixing it with
solid petroxolin.

Friar’s Balsam

Friar’s Balsam has been a classic herbal remedy for more
than 500 years. It is an antiseptic, vulnerary, and stimu-
lating expectorant made from the following blend of
components:

Siam benzoin resin (Styrax tonkinensis): 47%

Storax (Liquidambar orientalis): 17%

Balsam of Tolu (Myroxylon balsamum var. balsamum): 17%
Balsam of Peru (Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae): 9%
Aloe leaf latex (Aloe vera): 4%

Myrrh tears (Commiphora molmol): 4%

Angelica root (Angelica archangelica): 2%

The preparation is used topically as an antiseptic and
to treat minor cuts and abrasions, chapped skin and lips,
cracked nipples, small fissures of the skin and anus, bed-
sores, indolent ulcers, herpes simplex, and gingivitis. It
may also be taken internally or inhaled with steam vapor
as a stimulating expectorant for stubborn coughs and
catarrhs, laryngitis, early stages of acute bronchitis, and
chronic bronchitis. Occasionally, topical use can cause
contact dermatitis.

Baths (Balneotherapy)

The use of hot water for therapeutic purposes is as ancient
as humanity itself. In Europe, it has been called ba/neo-
therapy. The term balneology refers to the study of bathing,
and so balneotherapy is the use of balneology in the treat-
ment of disease. In North America, this is a field of ther-
apeutics utilized by naturopathic physicians, and an excel-
lent modern guide can be found in The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. This technique has many benefits, especially
when a careful selection of herbal additives is made.

Official. Baths

Baths, officially known as balnea, are mentioned in the
pharmacopoeias.

----- PAGE 237 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 229

Balneum Sinapis BPC 1911 (Mustard Bath)
Mustard 0.25 g
Water to 100.00 ml

Rub the mustard to a smooth paste with cold water before
adding it to the remainder of the water previously warmed.

Folk Method
A pleasant way of absorbing herbal compounds through
the skin is by bathing in a full body bath with 1 pint of in-
fusion or decoction added to the water. Alternatively, you
can also take a foot- or hand bath, in which case the
preparation would be used in undiluted form. Any herb
that can be taken internally can also be used in a bath.

Another way to use herbs in baths is to simply place
a handful of herbs in a muslin bag and then suspend it
from the hot-water tap so that the water flows through
the bag. This creates a very fresh infusion.

Bath herbs not only foster relaxation, but also can be
used to give the bath an exquisite fragrance.

Fragrant, Relaxing Bath Herbs
Lavandula officinalis (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Tilia spp. (linden)

For a bath that will bring about a restful and healing
sleep, select an infusion of one of the following to add to
the bathwater. Bear in mind that although valerian is very
effective, it has a strong aroma!

Sedative Bath Herbs
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

For children with sleep problems or babies who are
teething, the gentle herbs listed here might be more ap-
propriate than some of the strong ones mentioned
above.

Bath Herbs for Children and Babies
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

For feverish conditions, or to help improve circula-
tion, stimulating and diaphoretic herbs can be used. Care
should be taken to use very small amounts of the strong
rubefacients, such as cayenne.

Stimulating and Diaphoretic Bath Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

These are just some of the possibilities, Ideas can be
found in books on aromatherapy, a healing system based
on the external application of herbs in the form of essen-
tial oils, Essential oils can also be used in baths; simply
put a few drops of oil into the bathwater. Care must be
taken when using these wonderful oils, as they are very
concentrated, and too much of certain oils may be irritat-
ing to the skin or even toxic. For more information, refer
to Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the Healing Art, by
Kathi Keville and Mindy Green, one of the best books on
this therapeutic modality.

Douches

Another way to use herbs externally is in a douche (the
application of herbs to the vagina). This is particularly in-
dicated for local infections.

Preparing a Douche

Prepare an infusion or decoction to be used for douching. (Be
sure to prepare a fresh tea for each douche.) Allow the tea to
cool to a temperature that will be comfortable for internal
application. Pour the liquid into the container of a douche bag
and insert applicator. Allow the liquid to rinse the inside of the
vagina.

Note that because the liquid will run out of the vagina, it is
easiest to douche while sitting on the toilet. It is not necessary
to actively hold in the liquid. In most conditions for which
douching is indicated, it is advisable to use the tea undiluted,
three times daily, for a number of days, using appropriate herbal
remedies internally at the same time.

If, however, a three- to seven-day course of douching (along
with internal remedies) does not noticeably improve symptoms
of vaginal infection, see a qualified practitioner for a diagnosis.

Enemas

Enemas and douches have both been used as official
preparations. Here is an official formulation for an enema.

----- PAGE 238 -----
230 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Enema Ulmi Fulvae BPC 1911 (Enema of Slippery Elm)

Slippery Elm in fine powder 58

Boiling water to 100 ml
Pour the water onto the powder, mixing thoroughly. 500 ml is
about enough for one enema, The Ulmus fulva powder will al-
most certainly go cloudy. Just prior to the addition of the boil-
ing water, either wet it to a thin paste with cold water or use
a minimum quantity of alcohol as a wetting agent. Allow the
alcohol to evaporate after the boiling water has been added.

Ointments

Ointments, or salves, are semisolid preparations that can
be applied to the skin. Depending on the purpose for which
they are designed, there are innumerable ways to make
ointments. They can vary in texture from very greasy to a
thick paste, depending on what base is used and what
compounds have been mixed together. Any herb can be
used for making ointments, but some that are particularly
valuable in external healing mixtures are listed here.

Herbs for External Use
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Arnica montana (arnica)
Calendula officinalis (calendula, pot marigold)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Plantago spp. (plantain)
Sambucus flowers (elder)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

Modern North American herbalism shows one of its
strengths where the preparation of ointments is con-
cerned. A cornucopia of methods and ingredients exists,
and many herbalists have developed their own unique ap-
proaches. A range of materials can be used to make up the
ointment base, allowing for different consistencies and
different types of extraction. The reader is directed again
to the books written by Rosemary Gladstar, James Green,
and Christopher Hobbs, listed in Suggested Reading.

Suppositories
Suppositories are designed to enable the insertion of
remedies into the orifices of the body. While they can be

shaped for insertion into the nose or ears, they are most
commonly used for rectal or vaginal problems. They act
as carriers for any herb that is appropriate to use in this
context, and there are three general categories of these:

1. Herbs that soothe mucous membranes, reduce in-
flammation, and aid in the healing process, such as
root and leaf of Symphytum officinale, roots of
Althaea officinalis and Hydrastis canadensis, and bark
of Ulmus rubra

2. Astringent herbs that reduce discharge or aid in the
treatment of hemorrhoids, such as Vinca species,
Plantago species, Hamamelis virginiana, and Rumex
crispus

3. Remedies that stimulate intestinal peristalsis and
help overcome chronic constipation—in other
words, laxatives

When using herbs in any of these three categories, it
will often be appropriate to include an antimicrobial herb.
A number of different bases may be used, but keep in
mind that the base must be firm enough to be inserted
into the orifice but must also melt at body temperature
once inserted, to liberate the herbs it contains. The herbs
should be distributed uniformly in the base; this is partic-
ularly important when using a powdered herb.

Official Suppositories
Formulas for suppositories appear in various pharma-
copoeias, including the following example.

Suppositorum Ranunculus Ficaria BPC 1911
(Suppository of Lesser Celandine)
Spermaceti wax lg
Ranunculus ficaria ointment 3g

Made from fresh Ranunculus digested in lard for 24 hours.

Folk Method

A simple method of making suppositories is to mix finely
powdered herbs with a base, preferably cocoa butter.
Mold this mixture into the desired shape, following the
instructions given below. To avoid the introduction of
powdered plant material into the body, however, another
method must be employed: Use gelatin and vegetable
glycerin as a base and add an infusion, a decoction, or a
tincture in the following proportions.

----- PAGE 239 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 2 231

Suppository
Gelatin 10 parts
Water (or infusion, decoction, tincture) 40 parts
Glycerin 15 parts

Soak the gelatin in the liquid and dissolve with the aid of gentle
heating. Add glycerin and heat the whole mixture over a water
bath to evaporate the water. The final consistency will depend
on how much water is removed. If removed completely, a very
firm consistency will be achieved.

Preparing a Mold

Shape a piece of aluminum foil to the desired dimensions. The
best shape is a one-inch-long torpedo. Pour the molten base
into the mold and allow to cool. Store the suppositories in their
molds in the refrigerator.

Liniments

Liniments are preparations specifically formulated for
easy absorption through the skin, as they are intended for
use in massages that stimulate muscles and ligaments.
They must be used only externally, never internally, be-
cause they usually are made with rubbing alcohol. To
carry the herbal components to the muscles and liga-
ments, liniments are usually made of a mixture of the herb
with alcohol or, occasionally, apple cider vinegar. An
herb-infused or essential oil may also be added. Cayenne
is a common liniment ingredient.

Linimentum Arnicae BPC 1911 (Liniment of Arnica)

Hard Soap 20.00 g

Tincture of Arnica 25.00 ml
Camphor 5.00 ml
Alcohol to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the soap in the alcohol and tincture of arnica, on a
water-bath, add the camphor, dissolve, pour into suitable bot-
tles and cool.

Jethro Kloss describes the following liniment in Back
to Eden. It is not an official formulation, but rather an ex-
pression of the folk tradition at its best.

A Jethro Kloss Liniment

Combine:
2 ounces powdered myrrh
J ounce powdered goldenseal
V2 ounce cayenne pepper
1 quart rubbing alcohol (70%)

Mix together and let stand seven days; shake well every day, de-
cant off, and bottle in corked bottles.

Another excellent liniment that simultaneously
warms and relaxes muscles is made with equal parts
Lobelia inflata and Viburnum opulus plus a pinch of
Capsicum annuum. This can be made into a tincture or a
liniment. For more examples, please refer to chapter 19.

Gargles (Gargarisma) and Mouthwashes
Mouthwashes are still official, although only one has sur-
vived to be listed in the current BP. The BP 1980 provides
the following definition:

Mouthwashes are aqueous solution of one or more
medicaments. They are intended, usually after dilution
with warm water, for use in contact with the mucous
membranes of the oral cavity. They may contain suitable
antimicrobial preservatives.

Gargarisma Myrrhea BPC 1911 (Myrrh Gargle)

Tincture of Myrrh 5.00 ml
Clarified Honey 5.00 ml
Acid Infusion of Roses to 100.00 ml

Mix the tincture of Myrrh with the clarified honey and gradually
add the acid infusion of roses.

Inhalants (Vapors) and Spray Solutions
(Nebulae)

These pharmacy forms represented an official use of the
essential oils that have been rediscovered in the practice
of aromatherapy. They facilitate the therapeutic applica-
tion of the oils to the sinuses or pharynx.

Vapor Eucalapti et Mentholis Compositus BPC 1911
(Compound Eucalyptus and Menthol Inhalation)

Oil of Eucalyptus 10.00 ml
Oil of Pine 5.00 ml
Oil of Cassia 5.00 ml
Menthol 5.00 ml
Thymol 1.00 ml
Camphor 2.00 g

Tincture of Benzoin to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the oils and other ingredients in the tincture. This in-
halation is an excellent basis for special medicaments. Thus,
2% of balsam of Peru may be added; 1-2% of phenol; 1-5% of
cocaine; 2% of creosote; 5% of oil of tar; 1% of iodine: 5% of
terebene.

----- PAGE 240 -----
232 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Nebula Benzoini Composita BPC 191]
(Composition Benzoin Inhalation)

Oil of Pine 1.50 ml
Oil of Eucalyptus 3.00 ml
Oil of Cassia 1.50 ml
Menthol 1.00 ml
Glycerin 50.00 ml
Tincture of Benzoin to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the menthol and oils on 40 of the tincture, add the
glycerin and make up to the required volume with tincture of
benzoin. This preparation is suitable for use with a nebulizer.

The traditional herbal equivalents of these vapors
and nebulae can be found in the medicine-making and
aromatherapy books listed in Suggested Reading at the
end of this chapter.

Oils
Many herbs are rich in essential oils. These include aro-
matic herbs like Mentha ‘piperita, in which the oils are
volatile. Other plants contain oils that are not particularly
aromatic, such as Hypericum perforatum. Herbal oils can be
used in two forms, depending on the mode of extraction.

1. Pure essential oils are extracted from the herb
through a complex and careful process of distilla-
tion. These oils are best obtained from specialist
suppliers who distill them for use in aromatherapy,
and thus take care that they are as pure as possible.

2. Herb-infused oils are made through a much simpler
method that resembles the technique used to make
cold infusions. Instead of infusing the herb in water,
put it in oil to obtain a solution of the plant’s essen-
tial oils in the oil base. The best oils to use are veg-
etable oils, such as olive, sunflower, and almond.

A Simple Herbal Oil

Cut the herb finely, place in a clear glass container, and cover it
with oil. Put the container in the sun or leave it ina warm place
for 2 to 3 weeks, shaking the container daily. After that time, fil-
ter the liquid into a dark glass container for storage.

St. John’s Wort Oil

Pick the flowers when they have just opened and crush them in
a teaspoonful of olive oil. Place the flowers in a glass container,
cover them with more oil, mix well, and put the container in the
sun or a warm place for 3 to 6 weeks, at the end of which time
the oil will be bright red.

Press the mixture through a cloth to filter out all the oil and
leave the oil to stand. There will be some water in the liquid,
which will settle on the bottom, so decant the oil from the top.
Store the oil in a well-sealed, dark container.

Compresses
Compresses provide an excellent means of applying a
remedy to the skin.

A Simple Compress

Soak a clean linen or cotton cloth in a hot herbal tea and apply
it to the affected part of the body. Use as hot as can be toler-
ated, Cover the compress with a towel to hold in the heat.

When cool, replace with a fresh compress. For a cold com-
press, use the same method, but simply let the tea cool before
application.

Poultices

This more active method of applying herbs to the outside
of the body uses fresh or dried plant material, rather than
a liquid.

Making a Poultice

Mash or crush fresh plant material and either heat over boiling
water or mix with a small amount of boiling water to make a
paste. If using dried herbs, powder them and mix with hot water
to create a paste. Apply directly to the skin as hot as possible,
holding the compress in place with gauze.

If using stimulating or irritating herbs such as mustard,
apply them between two layers of cloth.

INCOMPATIBILITY

A problem that faces all formulators of medicines is the
possibility that incompatibilities will be encountered.
These fall into three broad categories.

A therapeutic incompatibility is defined as an undesirable
pharmacological interaction between two or more in-
gredients that may potentiate the therapeutic effects of
the ingredients, reduce the effectiveness of one or more
of the ingredients, or cause toxicity in the patient.

Physical incompatibility refers to a physical or chemical in-
teraction between two or more ingredients that leads
to a visibly recognizable change. The latter may occur
in the form of a precipitate, haze, or color change.

----- PAGE 241 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES -e 233

Chemical incompatibility is classified as a reaction in which
an undesirable change occurs but is not visible. Since
there is no visible evidence of deterioration, recogniz-
ing this type of incompatibility requires some skill.

Physical incompatibilities can often be altered or
avoided. A common problem is the generation of insolu-
ble precipitates. For example, alcohol extracts precipitate
dissolved constituents when mixed with water. Such prob-
lems can often be avoided by manipulating the solvent or
by adding a suspending or protective agent. The specific
remedies for such problems will vary according to the
substances involved.

General Methods for Overcoming Physical
Incompatibilities

There are a number of simple methods that can be used
to minimize or prevent physical incompatibilities.

Change the order of mixing. Combining resin-rich tinc-
tures and water commonly causes the resin to precipi-
tate. One possible solution is to add the tincture slowly
to cold water when mixing. However, with very resin-
rich tinctures, such as tincture of myrrh, it is impossi-
ble to avoid some precipitation of resin out of solution.

Change the total volume of the mixture. By simply
adding more solvent, whether water or ethanol, the in-
creased volume will provide more bulk for material to
start in solution, in effect diluting the problematic con-
stituent. The percentage of water or ethanol may be
crucial, but the final outcome depends on the chem-
istry of the constituents in the extract.

Alter the solvents or add protective agents. Water dis-
solves gums, mucilage, and starch, but these are not
miscible in alcohol. Alcohol dissolves most con-
stituents. Often, the presence of alkaloids, glycosides,
volatile oils, resins, or balsams in an herb necessitates
the use of a higher percentage of alcohol in the extract
to ensure that the constituents are extracted and will
not precipitate when water is added. Glycerin can be
added to replace part of the water component to de-
crease the chance of precipitation.

Make an emulsification or suspension with gums or
syrup. For example, with acacia, do not add strong al-
cohol directly or the solution will “congeal.” Instead,
make a dilute mucilage and add alcohol slowly. This
method may be used for resinous tinctures. With tra-
gacanth, add tincture or liquid extract directly to pow-
dered gum. Shake to mix. Water should be added in a
proportion of 1 part of gum to 20 parts of water.

Chemical incompatibilities are more difficult to over-
come, but rarely are an issue in phytotherapy. Chemical
interactions can produce precipitation of insoluble com-
pounds. Alkaloids form salts with metallic ions, and thus,
in theory, many potential incompatibilities are possible.
However, all of these can be overcome by using a solution
made up of 15% to 30% alcohol.

Suggested Reading

Boyle W. Official Herbs: Botanical Substances in the United States
Pharmacopoeia, 1820-1990. East Palestine: Buckeye
Naturopathic Press, 1991.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Bournemouth, UK: British
Herbal Medicine Association, 1983.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1911, London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 1912.

British Pharmacopoeia. London: Constable & Co. Ltd., 1932.

Ellingwood F. American Materia Medica, Therapentics &
Pharmacognosy, 1898, Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic
Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter and Lloyd. King’s American Dispensatory, vol. 1 & 2,
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter HW. The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology &
Therapeutics, 1922. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

Gladstar R. Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with Energy,
Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2001.

Green J. The Herbal Medicine Maker's Handbook: A Home
Manual. Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 2000.

Hobbs C. Handmade Herbal Medicines: Recipes for Potions, Elixirs,
and Salves. Loveland, CO: Interweave Press, 1998.

Keville K, Green M. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the
Healing Art. Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 1995.

Rloss J. Back to Eden, mass market revised edition. Twin Lakes,
WI: Lotus Press, 1989.

List PH, Schmidt PC. Phytopharmaceutical Technology. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1989.

Osol A, ed. Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th edition.
Easton, PA: Mack, 1975.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

The National Formulary VI, 6th edition, Easton, PA: American
Pharmaceutical Assoc., 1935.

United States Pharmacopeia, 11th edition. Easton, PA: The
United States Pharmacopoeial Convention, 1936.

Wood HG, Osol A. The Dispensatory of the United States of
America, 23rd edition. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co.,
1943,

----- PAGE 242 -----


----- PAGE 243 -----
Part Two

MN

TREATMENT APPROACHES
BY BODY SYSTEM

----- PAGE 244 -----
12

rae) 8)

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE

he phytotherapist must have some model to follow
| in formulating a prescription that addresses the
needs of the whole person. The herbal component
of treatment must be used in a context that also takes into
account non-herbal factors, such as diet, lifestyle, and
emotional, mental, and spiritual issues. In addition, all of
this must take place within the framework of a particular
socioeconomic situation and philosophical context. Such
a model enables the practitioner to identify and address a
whole range of factors, from symptoms and pathology to
constitutional differences and whole body toning.

The model we will discuss here is not new, but rather
is a representation of well-established and proven ap-
proaches described in holistic terms. There is little that
can truly be seen as new in a field as ancient as herbalism!
To choose the specific remedies that an individual needs
from the vast range of possibilities nature offers can be a
daunting task. However, it can be simplified if one uses a
set of guidelines.

The material that follows is provided under the as-
sumption that the prescriber has a basic grasp of human
physiology and pathology. The model is based upon a
five-stage process:

. Herbal actions

. System affinity

. Specific remedies for the illness
. Herbal biochemistry

. Intuition

wm Bw hee

Herbal Actions

Herbal actions reflect the ways in which remedies affect
human physiology. Plants have a direct impact on physi-
ological activity, and knowing what body processes are in-
volved in both disease and wellness facilitates selection of
an appropriate action. Obviously, selection of actions
suitable for a specific person will also depend on accurate
diagnosis.

236

System Affinity

Some herbs show an affinity for certain organs, body sys-
tems, or even specific types of tissue. These work as ton-
ics or nutrients for the areas involved. Many herbs can be
used freely and safely as part of one’s lifestyle and need
not be thought of as medicines. They are at their best
when used to nurture health and vitality and thus prevent
the development of health problems. During illness,
herbs with system affinities will enhance the general
health of the particular organ or body system when com-
bined with remedies selected for specific actions. They
are especially useful when a tendency toward a certain ill-
ness has been recognized but no overt pathology is pre-
sent. By using herbs in this way, one may be able to over-
come a weakness that could lead to disease later in life.

Specific Remedies for Ilness

The wealth of herbal knowledge that has been garnered
through the generations includes the use of many plants
that are traditionally specific for the treatment of certain
diseases or symptoms. While holistic healing aims to go
beyond symptomatic therapy, this knowledge deserves
great respect. An understanding of specific remedies for
illness can add much to a prescription based on appropri-
ate actions and system support. However, specifics do not
always exist.

Herbal Biochemistry

As discussed at length earlier in this book, increasing at-
tention is being paid to the biochemistry of active herb
constituents. Research has led to the development of
many lifesaving drugs, but this is a very limited approach
when it comes to using whole plants. In the hands of an
experienced herbalist, knowledge of plant pharmacology
can add to the healing possibilities, but not as much as is
often believed.

----- PAGE 245 -----
Intuition

An intuitive rapport flowers between the experienced
herbalist and the plants in their materia medica. Intuition
has a special role to play in healing, and the unique rela-
tionship between plants and people augments it well.
Such insightful intuition does not always flow freely, but
it should be embraced when it does. Intuitive knowledge
should always be checked against reference materials, if at
all possible. For example, if a practitioner is not clear on
the differences among bearberry, barberry, and bilberry,
unfortunate misunderstandings can result!

PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC SELECTION
CRITERIA

There is nothing inherent in a plant that defines the way
it should be used, and considering the herbal abundance
of our world, some coherent selection criteria are essen-
tial to guide phytotherapists in their healing work.

More than one-half million plants of various types
present themselves as possible healing remedies. The
British medical herbalist routinely uses approximately
250, while in China, the herbal practitioner can choose
from about 2,000 remedies that are readily available in
community pharmacies. These herbalists are obviously
applying some set of guidelines in order to whittle down
500,000 possible plant remedies to a more manageable
figure, but what are they? There are a number of useful
ways to group the relevant criteria, but three categories
are most helpful in Western herbalism:

1. Assessing the impact of herbs upon the body and
mind

2. Applying nontherapeutic criteria, such as aesthetics,
economics, and ecology

3. Using herbs within the context of some kind of
system

Applying these three sets of criteria facilitates the for-
mulation of treatments that are specific to the unique
needs of the individual and at the same time takes into ac-
count environmental and economic considerations.

ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF HERBS
ON THE INDIVIDUAL

The herbal remedies of the world vary greatly in strength,
from gentle tonic or food remedies to those that are po-
tentially lethal if taken at the wrong dosage. The holistic
phytotherapist works with the underlying idea that the

A Moor. OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE v@ 237

body is self-healing and the therapist simply supports this
innate healing process. Thus, the tonic herbs are of
paramount importance, as this is exactly what they do.

A characteristic of tonics is that they are all gentle
remedies that have a mild yet profound effect upon the
body. Of course, not all herbal remedies are tonics, as
many have a powerful and immediate impact upon human
physiology. These must be used with the greatest respect,
and their use is best reserved for illnesses that call for
strong medicine. Identifying the intensity of an herb’s im-
pact upon the body provides a useful selection criterion.
Herbal remedies may be conveniently categorized as ei-
ther normalizers or effectors, but bear in mind that these
groupings are not absolute.

Normalizers

These are remedies that nurture and nourish the body in
a way that supports its own natural processes of growth,
healing, and renewal. These are the tonics, and are often
used in the form of herbal foods. Nettle, cleavers, and
chickweed are excellent examples of these gentle herbs.

Effectors

These are remedies that have an observable impact upon
the body. They provide humanity with herbs to use for
the treatment of the whole range of specific human ill-
nesses. Effectors can in turn be divided into two groups,
depending upon how they work:

Herbs with whole-plant actions. The effects of these herbs
come from the impact of the whole plant on the
human body. As examples, consider the immune sys-
tern booster echinacea and the anti-inflammatory herb
meadowsweet. It might be argued that meadowsweet
works because it contains salicylates. However, as dis-
cussed in chapter 7, other actions are also at play, and
the characteristic gastric inflammation caused by sali-
cylates can even be treated with meadowsweet. This
surely implies that something much broader than sim-
ple drug delivery is going on.

Herbs with specific active chemicals. These herbs exert their
effects because they contain a chemical (or chemicals)
with an impact so strong that whole plant effects are
not usually perceived. Due to the presence of these in-
tense chemicals, such herbs are potentially poisonous
if taken at the wrong dose or in the wrong way. The
cardioactive herb foxglove and the opium poppy serve
as good examples.

----- PAGE 246 -----
238 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Using Tonic Herbs

The value of tonic herbs lies in their normalizing, nur-
turing effects. These invaluable remedies will usually have
some associated action that further indicates how they are
best used. The cardiovascular tonic hawthorn is an excel-
lent example. Hawthorn tones the whole cardiovascular
system, while at the same time specifically dilates blood
vessels and lowers blood pressure.

Whenever possible, the herbalist will focus on the use
of such remedies, and will use stronger effectors only if
absolutely necessary. In fact, chemically based effectors
are used very sparingly in holistic herbalism. They are,
however, the foundation of pharmacological medicine.

Tonics can play a valuable role in keeping individuals
at their personal peak of health and vitality. Tonics may
also be used to ward off specific known health problems
or family weaknesses. There are plant remedies particu-
larly suited for each system of the body, some of which are
tonics. Selecting remedies that act as tonics for specific
body systems allows the herbalist to do some impressive
preventive work. When choosing, be sure to take into ac-
count the broader picture of the herb’s range of actions,
as this breadth of vision is needed to enable coherent
choices.

For the digestive system, no one herb serves as an all-
around tonic, as the system is so varied in form and func-
tion. However, bitters serve as preventive tonics. In ad-
dition, Matricaria recutita and Filipendula ulmaria are so

Table 12.1. Tonics for Specific Body Systems

helpful to the digestive process that they might almost be
considered general tonics here.

NONTHERAPEUTIC SELECTION
CRITERIA

To help further in the process of selecting among herbs
with similar actions, there are a number of nontherapeu-
tic factors to take into account. These are aesthetic, eco-
nomic, and environmental.

Aesthetic Criteria

There is no reason that herbal medicines should always
taste unpleasant. When possible, consider taste, aroma,
and visual appeal. These factors are a matter of personal
taste, but it is fine to select from a list of herbs compiled
by applying both therapeutic criteria and personal aes-
thetic preferences. Bitter herbs constitute the only gen-
eral exception. If bitterness is indicated, then the herbs
must be tasted, or much of their therapeutic potential will
be lost.

An example of a remedy that both works well and
tastes pleasant is a cough preparation, widely used in
France, that is composed of herb flowers that ease the
cough reflex and help remove phlegm from the lungs.
Making an herbal cough mixture that works well is
straightforward enough, but effective combinations are
often composed of acrid- or unpleasant-tasting plants.

BODY SYSTEM HERBS

Cardiovascular Crataegus laevigata, Allium sativum; flavone-rich herbs, such as Ginkgo biloba and Tilia platyphyllos,
help strengthen blood vessels

Respiratory Verbascum thapsus, Inula helenium

Digestive Bitter tonics, such as Gentiana lutea, Agrimonia eupatoria, and Taraxacum officinale root; Matricaria recutita and Filipendula
ulmaria are generally helpful to the digestive process

Liver Bitters, hepatics, and especially Silybum marianum

Urinary Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Zea mays

Reproductive Women: Rubus idaeus, Mitchella repens, and other uterine tonics
Men: Serenoa repens

Nervous Avena sativa, Scutellaria lateriflora, Hypericum perforatum, Verbena officinalis, Artemisia vulgaris; Eleutherococcus senticosus

and Panax ginseng are appropriate for those under stress

Musculoskeletal

Apium graveolens, Menyanthes trifoliata, Urtica dioica

Skin Galium aparine, Trifolium repens, Urtica dioica, and most of the alterative remedies

----- PAGE 247 -----
The same therapeutic results are achieved with the
French flower mixture, but in addition, it has a wonderful
aroma, a delicate taste, and a beautiful color.

Economic Criteria

My opinions are happily out of tune with the globally ra-
pacious capitalism of the dominant culture, but I believe
that herbs (and health care) should be free of charge.
Nature does not impose a financial levy on herbs, as they
grow wild and free. Of course, there are environmental
costs to take into account, but that is another matter.
When the choice arises, use common and inexpensive
herbs. Expensive does not usually equate with quality, but
instead with rarity. Expensive, rare, or imported plants
may not work any more effectively than common and not
very glamorous nettle or cleavers. The fast-developing
herb industry has a financial stake in the promotion of ex-
pensive new “wonder herbs” from exotic parts of the
world.

Environmental Criteria
Understanding that ecological relationships have a bear-
ing on the healing arts can lead to some important broad
implications. While the choice of the most relevant ther-
apy should be based on the needs of the individual,
Donne’s insight that “no man is an island” becomes cru-
cial here. In a world where human impact on the envi-
ronment is becoming life threatening, the broader impli-
cations of health practices must be taken into account.

Consider the Brazilian plant suma (Pfaffia paniculata).
In recent years, it has become popular as an immune sys-
tem stimulant. Quite apart from whether or not it works,
one must consider the basic fact that this vine is collected
from gullies in the Brazilian rain forest that are very sen-
sitive to erosion and disturbance. Isn’t it ironic that
through our attempts to help people live longer and
healthier lives, herbalists may be contributing to rain for-
est destruction, the greenhouse effect, and a potentially
dramatic reduction in the life spans of our children and
grandchildren? When alternatives abound, why use a
remedy that carries such environmental costs?

From a green perspective, talking of chemical drugs

s “unnatural” and herbal remedies as “natural” is prob-

lematic. The interactions that occur among plants and
humanity on the biochemical level show us that chemistry
is also natural. If a chemical exists in the body of the plant,
it must be natural. If it was not natural, it could not exist
without causing major trauma to life on earth. This is, of
course, also the case with technological aberrations such

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE <. 239

as plutonium, but in general, how can we differentiate be-
tween what is and is not natural based simply on how it is
presented to us? The real challenge is learning how to
harness the chemistry of nature safely.

When the ecological effects of drug therapy and
herbal therapy are compared, another vital aspect of the
selection criteria is revealed. An example will clarify this
point. In the treatment of gastric ulceration, a whole
spectrum of options is available. A holistic approach will
not only focus on treating the stomach itself, but also
examine diet, lifestyle, general health, and so on. Treat-
ment may combine dietary changes, relaxation, exercise,
counseling, and other factors with the specific medicines
indicated.

How should these medicines be chosen? Herbal
remedies have much to offer in the treatment of digestive
problems in general and ulceration in particular, and are
arguably more clinically effective than drug therapy.
When we compare the antiulcer drug Tagamet (cimeti-
dine) with the herb A/thaea officinalis (marshmallow root),
we have two medications that produce equivalent symp-
tomatic relief for the patient, but have very different en-
vironmental impacts. (See The Impact of Herbs and
Drugs on the Environment: A Comparison, page 240.)

Chemical drugs used to treat gastric and duodenal ul-
cers lower the production of stomach acid and thereby re-
duce irritation of the stomach’s mucosal lining. Tagamet
is commonly used to inhibit gastric acid and pepsin pro-
duction in the stomach by blocking histamine receptors.
In the 1980s, it was one of the most widely prescribed
drugs in North America.

Herbal remedies may also be selected to soothe the
gastric mucosa, reduce the impact of stomach acid, and
promote the healing of ulceration. Plants that are
demulcent, vulnerary, and antacid are the most relevant
here, and the herbalist might also include nervine herbs
to reduce excessive vagal stimulation. Symphytum offici-
nale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marshmallow root),
Ubnus rubra (slippery elm), Filipendula ulmaria (mead-
owsweet), Matricaria recutita (chamomile), and Calendula
officinalis (calendula) may all have a part in the treat-
ment. When used in the context of the whole picture,
herbal treatments for gastric and duodenal ulcers are ex-
tremely effective.

However, in this case we are concerned more with
environmental impact than with therapeutic factors.
Regardless of the relative therapeutic merits of drugs and
herbs, a clear picture emerges when one compares their
respective ecological costs.

----- PAGE 248 -----
The Impact of Herbs and Drugs on the Environment: A Comparison

Tagamet and the Environment

The drug Tagamet is manufactured in a process that is no-
toriously dirty and produces much waste. This waste must
be disposed of. Even with the best intentions in the world,
there will be an impact on the environment, but with less
than perfect management, there will be a severe impact
that causes both water and air pollution. Pollution of local
rivers can lead to destruction of insect and fish populations
and then, through food webs, birds. If used for irrigation, the
water may have an adverse effect on the soil. The pollutants
dispersed into the air not only will contribute to acid rain,
but will also have a direct impact related to the specific
chemicals present.

In the process of developing the drug and fulfilling gov-
ernment safety standards, many laboratory animals were
slaughtered. The morality of this fundamental part of mod-
ern health care is dubious in the extreme. However, it is cur-
rently a necessary evil when dealing with chemical medicine,
and so must be taken into account when considering the im-
pact of chemical drugs on the environment and living beings.

Industrial production and distribution of the drug is
energy intensive in a way that the resources of the planet
cannot support for much longer. (The profligate use of
nonrenewable energy is, of course, rampant throughout
the whole industrial system, and not specifically the fault
of the manufacturers of Tagamet.) The potential for polit-
ical manipulation also exists, as the need for energy to
manufacture drugs is cited as a justification for the devel-
opment of nuclear power. The contradictions in that juxta-
position would be funny if they were not so frightening.

When using proprietary drugs, the patient and pre-
scriber are at the same time supporting and depending on
the multinational drug companies. The very existence of
these vast international corporations raises political, eco-
nomic, and ethical questions that go beyond the confines of
this brief review. However, the patient becomes an unwitting
financial supporter of these questionable organizations.
Disempowerment becomes a key concept as the individual's
health care needs are relegated to the experts, the physician
to prescribe and the pharmacist to dispense. This is not
meant as a comment on the skill or dedication of these-pro-
fessionals, but as a recognition that patients have relin-
quished personal responsibility by handing it over to experts.

Added together, these issues create a cycle of death,
destruction, and exploitation perpetrated in the name of
personal health. It is worth looking closer to see the hid-
den costs of the little tablet, as the overall cost of treat-
ment goes far beyond the price of the pills. The cost and
impact of this “simple” ulcer treatment includes environ-
mental damage and the support of a system that may well
be at the center of much planetary dis-ease.

Marshmallow and the Environment

The dilemma over therapeutic choice raised by these eco-
logical, economic, and political considerations might seem
daunting. However, if herbal remedies are viewed in a sim-
ilar framework, a very different picture emerges.

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow}, like many other
herbal remedies, is produced by small-scale growers and
distributed through channels that support a diversified
economic system. This system provides a perfect example
of how small can be beautiful. Not only does it provide the
benefits of small-scale economics and ecological viability,
but this also works to produce a medicine that carries the
multiple advantages inherent in herb remedies.

If organic techniques were used to produce the herb,
the soil was nurtured, which Welsh farmers describe as
putting “heart” back into the soil. Soil structure and stabil-
ity are becoming major ecological problems in much of the
world, and organic farming represents a step toward reme-
dying this situation.

In addition, a basic principle in ecology is that the
more diverse a system is, the more stable it will be in the
face of environmental perturbation, and organic tech-
niques increase the diversity of soil populations.
Wildcrafting plants, the practice of collecting wild plants
from their natural environment, highlights the need to pre-
serve habitats as a source of plant and seed. However, it is
even more important to protect the land for the sake of
Earth itself. Herbalism is part of a dawning awareness in hu-
manity that Earth and its inhabitants do not existence
solely for our use.

It is no wonder that the production of herbal
medicines, and in our example marshmallow, involves no
abuse of laboratory animals. The traditional use of marsh-
mallow is ancient, and we can accept the great knowledge
of its healing properties without needing to take the lives
of animals. Little energy is consumed in the production of
this herb, so it is an ideal medicine for a self-sufficient, low-
impact economy. Even if our society does not yet function
this way, we can contribute in the right way by using a sus-
tainably produced remedy to heal any ulcers the current sys-
tem generates.

The comparison between these two therapeutically
equivalent medicines shows that environmental and polit-
ical criteria have much to contribute when it comes to
making choices. Put starkly, the choice is between being
part of a cycle of death and destruction justified by per-
sonal health and being part of a life-affirming cycle that
uses healing herbs for personal health. The very process of
considering these perspectives is part of the healing of
humanity's alienation from our world. As we think, so we
become. What is it to be?

----- PAGE 249 -----
USING HERBS IN THE CONTEXT OF
A THERAPEUTIC SYSTEM

Since the early history of medicine, people have been
striving to make sense of the human body, the ills that as-
sail it, and the healing remedies used to treat it. Many
models or systems of medicine have been developed,
most of which are found now only in texts on the history
of medicine. Ways of using herbs have been repeatedly
organized and reorganized into various systems that re-
flect the prevailing worldview held by people of different
cultures and eras.

Today is no exception, as the herbal renaissance is in
full bloom and the transformation of society still in mid-
process. A number of systems are in current use. Some
depend upon traditional knowledge, while others work
within the framework of an existing philosophical system.
Systems based on the folk traditions of the world vary ac-
cording to the tradition used. Those that work within the
framework of an existing system differ depending on the
philosophy at their core.

Philosophical contexts include the profoundly holis-
tic systems of Asia as well as the Western medical ap-
proach, which is based on what has been called the
biomedical model. This Western model requires that herbs
be used within the framework of a disease-centered ap-
proach to medicine, but nonetheless applies them in a
holistic context.

Traditional Healing Systems

The traditional or folk use of herbal remedies is familiar to
everyone in some form or another. This is the way in which
information about herbs has been passed from generation
to generation, but an unquestioning reliance on empirical
evidence also gives herbalism a bad name among members
of the scientific community. Their loss! Folk wisdom is of
inestimable value and relevance. Generations of accrued
experience and insight are not to be taken lightly.

As an example, consider the fact that these same
folk remedies from around the world often point the
way for pharmacologists searching for new and powerful
medicines. The use of Dioscorea spp. (wild yam) as a source
of hormone precursors and the application of
Catharanthus roseus (Madagascar periwinkle) in anti-
leukemia drugs are two good examples.

The bulk of the world’s health care is still based on the
traditional use of local herbal remedies. The relevance of
this worldwide folk use is recognized by the World Health
Organization and promoted through its Traditional
Medicine Program. Every culture of the world has its own

A MODEL OF HOLisTic HERBAL MEDICINE © 241

herbal tradition, which may be either a thriving aspect of
modern life or a more or less moribund historical memory.

By the early 1970s, the traditional use of plant
medicines appeared to be almost over in Great Britain.
However, with the renewal of interest in herbs that oc-
curred as part of a wider reawakening to the natural
world, it soon became apparent that much of the tradition
was alive and well. Remedies and recipes for herbal teas
had been handed down from generation to generation
and were still remembered. The change in social atmo-
sphere apparently gave people “permission” to recollect
these gems of knowledge.

Wales has a strong modern herbal tradition with
clearly recognizable roots in the flowering of Welsh cul-
ture in the days of the old Princes of Wales (c. 1100). In
rural areas are many people who know one or two herbal
combinations specific for certain conditions. Often en-
countered are various ointments for eczema. These oint-
ments are usually very effective, but the people using
them rarely know why, and they often have no other
herbal information. The recipes can usually be traced
back to the medieval Physicians of Myddfai, doctors at
the court of the Princes, These physicians possessed a
deep and profound knowledge of herbs and the healing
process, well in advance of what was available in England
and the rest of non-Islamic Europe at the time.

The continuity of the tradition is paradoxically re-
ated to attempts to destroy the culture that supported the
physicians. When the English invaded and conquered
Wales, the royal court was destroyed. The knowledge and
wisdom of the Physicians of Myddfai was in part dis-
persed among the people, in what would prove to be a
successful attempt to preserve the traditions. It appears
that certain families were given specific remedies to keep
safe and pass on to future generations. These recipes and
information were never shared with anyone outside the
family, but the medicine was given freely to anyone who
needed it. This wisdom can still be found in the hills and
valleys of Wales.

However, as fundamentally valuable as traditional
folk knowledge is, it has limited application within mod-
ern holistic herbal practice. An application of herbal
remedies that relates specific plants to specific diseases or
symptoms is little more than what we might call “organic
drug therapy.” Simply using remedies for symptomatic
relief ignores all the insights of holistic medicine. Thus,
the ancient folk traditions of the world provide a wonder-
ful foundation upon which today’s medical herbalist may
build the holistic herbalism of the future.

----- PAGE 250 -----
242 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Philosophical Systems

Phytotherapy offers the most value to holistic medicine
when used within the context of a coherent philosophical
system. Such systems work with intellectual, conceptual
models for understanding what a human being is and
what a disease process is. Each system’s concept of health
and human wholeness must be seen as a subset of the
paradigm held by that culture as to the nature of the
world itself. These paradigms are reflected in the holistic
medical systems of China and India as well as in the
reductionist approach taken in the biomedical model of
Western medicine.

Traditional Chinese medicine, ayurveda from the
Vedic tradition of Hindu India, and unani from the world
of Islam represent perhaps the best-known examples of
philosophical systems that are still thriving in the face of
the intellectual imperialism of Western medicine. Other
systems are found in such diverse cultures as Japan and
Ghana and wherever herbal medicine is integrated into
spirituality and transformation, as in anthroposophical
medicine.

The techniques of any medical system are an expres-
sion of its ideas and theories. These, in turn, arise as spe-
cific developments in the philosophy of the culture con-
cerned. Thus, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
represents an application to medicine of a Confucian or
Taoist worldview. Similarly, ayurveda is an expression of
the profound perspectives that come from Hindu experi-
ence and spirituality.

It is important that the context within which any
medical practitioner is working be clearly acknowledged
and expressed. It will color all that occurs, and may either
limit or facilitate the healing work undertaken. Health
care does not happen in a philosophical vacuum, but in-
stead within the context of a worldview and belief system.
If this fact is not articulated overtly, it will be implied by
default. The problem of cultural chauvinism often arises
when comparisons are made between different health
care systems of the world. In the discussion that follows,
I have intended to make no value judgments. This is sim-
ply an exploration of practical considerations for both
practitioners and patients in the Western world.

sorbed through the skin?

Western Folk Traditions and Modern Herbalism

In general, folk traditions of the Western world are vestigial or have only recently been revived by well-
meaning advocates. This makes changing or developing herbal treatments problematic. Unless the herbal-
ist Is part of an active, living tradition, it is unwise to question or change information that was handed
down, as the source of that knowledge no longer exists. An example may clarify this.

When in practice in West Wales, | came across a hill farmer who made an ointment for the treatment
of shingles, a painful and intransigent viral infection of nerve ganglia. On two occasions, | observed that
this ointment cleared trigeminal shingles in three to five days, a feat that allopathic medicine or modern
herbalism would be hard pressed to duplicate. However, the farmer died childless. He never imparted the
secret recipe, especially not to an upstart English herbalist from the town!

All of my attempts to identify the many herbs in the ointment failed, except for one herb out of the
whole combination. This was biting stonecrop (Sedum acre), an herb that is not used therapeutically today
and which the seventeenth-century herbalist Culpeper insisted must not be put in any ointment.
Formulation of the ointment also involved using pig urine as an extraction vehicle.

Apart from practical questions about using pig urine {such as how to collect the urine!), modern
sensibilities and hygienic considerations would probably suggest using water instead. However, from a
therapeutic perspective, the use of pig urine should:not be discarded for hygienic reasons alone. While
studying Siberian shamans in the early 20th century, researchers discovered something interesting. During
visionary rituals involving the psychoactive fly agaric mushroom (Amanita muscaria), the shamans would
drink their own urine. This lengthened and deepened the visionary experience, because the urine con- | -
tained metabolites of the alkaloid muscimole that are also psychoactive. Is it not possible that some
complex interaction between herbs and pig urine produced an antiviral metabolite that could be ab-

While this might sound far-fetched, my observation was that the ointment worked. Unless one knows
why an ingredient is included in a mixture, can it really be taken out without risking loss of the desired
effect? If the recipe is changed in some way, is the formulation still the traditional one?

----- PAGE 251 -----
The ancient medical systems of the world are pro-
foundly holistic in both diagnostic and therapeutic ap-
proaches, a direct result of the expression of their spiritu-
ally whole and integrated cultural worldviews. This is
often what attracts Western herbalists to these systems
but, paradoxically, it also presents the primary stumbling
block. The holistic strengths of such non-reductionist
systems appear to fulfill the deep need felt by Western
practitioners for a meaningful, practical, and relevant
holistic approach.

This confronts the Westerner with some immediate
challenges. In order to harvest the therapeutic benefits in-
herent in these systems, the practitioner should ideally be
at home with the underlying worldview of the culture that
gave birth to the healing system. In TCM, the names of
organs, meridians, and elements may be translated into
English words, but their meaning remains different. This
is due not to mistranslation, but to the fact that they rep-
resent an understanding of the human body that is very
different from the Western concept. In TCM, for exam-
ple, the brain is not perceived as an organ, and the focus
of therapeutic work is on balancing the flow of chi (vital
energy) within the body. Disease is seen as an indicator of
underlying processes, rather than the focus of treatment.
The Western practitioner drawn to TCM or ayurveda
must embrace the implications for personal change and
transformation inherent in that system.

When this occurs, the therapeutic relationship between
patient and practitioner can be truly holistic, because the
therapist is acting from a place of personal integration
and harmony. TCM expresses ways of seeing and experi-
encing the world that are very different from the Western
stance. When TCM techniques and protocols are used
out of context, the transformative possibilities of healing
are severely limited. Such attempts can become the anti-
thesis of holistic medicine.

Recognizing the fundamental role played by cultural
perspectives highlights the need for a Western context for
holistic medicine. On the other hand, acceptance of the
biomedical model as a useful map of the human body does
not mean one must also adopt the analytical and reduc-
tionist approach that characterizes modern Western
medicine. There is a dawning recognition of the possibil-
ities that might arise if the biomedical model is used as the
basis for treating the whole person, not simply the disease.

All of these issues may help to explain the frustration
that plagues Western health care professionals upon ini-
tial exploration of holistic medicine. The definitive text
on Western holistic medicine—a guide for the practi-
tioner that clearly illuminates these new and exciting per-

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE @ 243

spectives—has yet to be written. There is a maelstrom of
activity among holistic practitioners who are exploring and
applying the new ideas, but we are stil] in the early stages.

For some, this is just too confusing; they either aban-
don the endeavor or turn to one of the Asian healing sys-
tems. For others, this is a very exciting time to be in-
volved in medicine. The lack of clarity in the situation is
simply one aspect of the flowering of new ideas. There is
no textbook, because the ideas have not yet reached the
stage at which they can be written in stone. Instead, this
is a time of flux. Many new insights are occurring, and
many old ideas are being reassessed and either discarded
or embraced anew. While no clear holistic context has yet
been defined for Western medicine, many different ap-
proaches have made great strides in that direction.

Herbal medicine has a unique contribution to make
in this time of change. As a healing modality, it is inher-
ently holistic in that its very nature is ecological. The use
of plants links both patient and practitioner to their envi-
ronment in profound ways, facilitating a healing process
that could be seen as therapeutic ecology. The contribu-
tion of herbs is but one part of the mosaic that will be-
come Western holistic healing.

THE ACTIONS OF HERBS

A great deal of pharmaceutical research has gone into an-
alyzing the active constituents of herbs to find out how
and why they work. A much older approach, and one that
is much more immediately useful, is to categorize herbs
through an understanding of what kinds of problems they
can treat.

In some cases, an herb’s action may be due to a spe-
cific chemical present (for example, the antiasthma effects
of ma huang). In others, actions may arise from complex,
synergistic interactions among various plant constituents
(the sedative valerian provides an example). However, it is
best to view actions as attributes of the whole herb; any
understanding of the chemistry should serve simply as an
aid to prescribing. A detailed discussion of herbal actions
can be found in chapter 25.

Adaptogens

Adaptogenic herbs help increase the body’s resistance to
stress. They improve the body’s resilience by enabling it
to physiologically adapt to problems before it reaches the
point of collapse. An inability to cope with external pres-
sures can have many health repercussions. Adaptogens
appear to work by supporting the function of the adrenal
glands.

----- PAGE 252 -----
244 © TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Alteratives

Alteratives are herbs that gradually restore proper func-
tion to the body, increasing health and vitality. Some al-
teratives support waste elimination processes via the
kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin. Others stimulate digestive
function or provide antimicrobial actions, while others
simply work!

Anticatarrbal Herbs
Anticatarrhal herbs help the body eliminate excess mucus,
whether in the sinuses or from other parts of the body.

Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

Herbs with anti-inflammatory properties soothe inflam-
mations or directly reduce the inflammatory response.
For a detailed discussion of the many ways in which herbs
may work as anti-inflammatory agents, see chapter 9.

Antimicrobial Herbs

Antimicrobials help the body destroy or resist pathogenic
microorganisms. They help the body strengthen its own
resistance to infective organisms and throw off the illness.

Antispasmodic Herbs

Antispasmodics ease muscle cramps. They alleviate
muscular tension and, as many are also nervines, can ease
psychological tension as well. Some antispasmodic herbs
reduce muscle spasms throughout the body, and some
work on specific organs, systems, or types of tissue.

Astringents

Astringent herbs have a binding action on mucous mem-
branes, skin, and other tissue, which translates to an abil-
ity to shrink tissues and reduce secretions. Astringent
actions are related to the presence of chemicals called tan-
nins, so named because they are used in tanning leather.
They precipitate protein molecules, reducing irritation
and inflammation and creating a barrier against infection
that is helpful in wounds and burns.

Bitters

Bitter-tasting herbs play a special role in preventive
medicine. The bitter taste triggers a sensory response in
the central nervous system, which sends a message to
the gut. The gut in turn releases digestive hormones
that lead to a range of effects, including stimulation of
appetite and a general stimulation of the flow of diges-
tive juices. Bitters also aid the liver in its detoxification

work, increase bile flow, and stimulate gut self-repair
mechanisms.

Cardiac Remedies

This is a general term for herbs that have beneficial ac-
tions on the heart and circulatory system. Some of the
remedies in this group are powerful cardioactive agents,
such as foxglove, while others are gentler, safer car-
diotonic herbs, such as hawthorn and motherwort.

Carminatives

Plants rich in aromatic volatile oils, or carminatives, pro-
mote appropriate digestive system function, soothing the
gut wall, reducing inflammation, easing griping pains,
and helping the body eliminate gas from the digestive
tract.

Demulcents

Herbs high in mucilage, known as demulcents, soothe
and protect irritated or inflamed tissue. They reduce irri-
tation throughout the length of the bowel, reduce sensi-
tivity to potentially corrosive gastric acids, help prevent
diarrhea, and alleviate the muscle spasms that cause colic.
They also ease coughing by soothing bronchial tension
and relax painful spasms of the bladder.

Diapboretics

Diaphoretics promote perspiration, helping the body to
eliminate wastes through the skin. Some produce ob-
servable sweating, while others enhance normal back-
ground perspiration. They often promote dilation of
surface capillaries, thus helping to improve poor circula-
tion. This action is especially relevant in the treatment
of fever.

Diuretics

Diuretics increase the production and elimination of
urine. In herbal medicine, with its ancient traditions, the
term is often applied in a general way to herbs that have
a beneficial action on the urinary system. They help the
body eliminate waste and support the whole process of
inner cleansing.

Emmenagogues

Emmenagogues stimulate menstrual flow and function.
In most herbals, however, the term is used in a wider
sense to indicate a remedy that normalizes and tones the
female reproductive system.

----- PAGE 253 -----
Expectorants

Strictly speaking, expectorants are herbs that stimulate
the removal of mucus from the lungs, but the term is also
often used to refer to respiratory system tonics. There are
two basic categories of expectorant herbs.

Stimulating expectorants irritate the bronchioles, causing
expulsion of material.

Relaxing expectorants soothe bronchial spasms and loosen
mucous secretions, helping with dry, irritating coughs.

Hepatics

Hepatics support the liver, improving function; in some
cases, they also increase the flow of bile. In a broad holis-
tic sense, hepatic herbs are of great importance because of
the liver’s fundamental role in health.

Hypotensives
These are plant remedies that lower abnormally elevated
blood pressure.

Immunomodulators

These herbs assist with or are capable of modifying or
regulating immune functions.

Laxatives
Laxatives stimulate bowel movements.

Nervines
Nervines act on the nervous system and can be subdivided
into three groups.

Nervine tonics strengthen and restore nervous system
function.
Nervine relaxants ease anxiety and tension by soothing

both body and mind.
Nervine stimulants directly stimulate nerve activity.

Rubefacients

When applied to the skin, rubefacient herbs generate a
localized increase in blood flow. They are often used to
ease the pain and swelling of arthritic joints.

Tonics

Tonics nurture and enliven. Truly gifts of nature to a suf-
fering humanity, these are whole plants that enliven
whole human bodies. To ask how they work is to ask how
life works!

A MopeL oF Houistic HERBAL MEDICINE .@ 245

Vulnerary Herbs
These remedies promote wound healing. While the term
vulnerary is used mainly to describe herbs that heal skin
lesions, the action is just as relevant for internal wounds,
like stomach ulcers.

APPLYING THE MODEL

When selecting herbs for a given patient, many remedies
present themselves as possible candidates. The problem
remains: Which herbs will best address all the needs of a
particular patient? The selection process can be summa-
rized thus:

1. Through some competent diagnostic procedure,
identify what physiological processes to address and
in what way.

2. Select actions appropriate to address the physiolog-
ical and pathophysiological processes identified
through diagnosis.

3. Select relevant herbs based on their range of pri-
mary and secondary actions, thus ensuring the best
fit for the needs of the patient.

The best way to approach the selection process is to
follow a number of steps. This may seem a long and po-
tentially tedious process when first starting out, but it
becomes straightforward with practice.

1. List the signs and symptoms for each problem.

2. Interpret the processes behind the symptoms and
the underlying pathology, and identify appropriate
herbal actions to address them.

3. Using the reference lists in chapter 25, find herbs
that may be helpful, based on their primary and sec-
ondary actions.

4. Identify body systems that would benefit from the
use of tonic herbs and choose relevant tonics.

5. Are there any biochemical considerations? These
might be positive indications for certain plants or
clear contraindications.

6. Integrate the conclusions drawn in the previous
steps and develop a prescription(s).

7. Identify other healing modalities and lifestyle issues
that might support the actions of the herbs.

Identifying Primary and Secondary Actions

Secondary actions are additional actions that accompany
the primary physiological effect of a plant. Problems may
arise, however, when one tries to analyze the whole picture

----- PAGE 254 -----
246 @ TREATWEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

in a purely logical, reductionist manner. Exactly what is
the primary action of a medicinal plant? In some cases
this is obvious (for example, with an herb like senna), but
in other cases, the choice is more a matter of degree. One
individual may say that chamomile is primarily a relaxing
nervine, while another might describe it as a carminative,
anti-inflammatory herb.

When focusing on secondary actions, such decisions
become even more subjective. Certain secondary effects
may hover on a threshold of sorts, in that some people ex-
perience these effects fully and others not at all. This is
largely why phytotherapy is as much an art as a science.
We can learn the details, but it takes years of experience
to become a real herbalist! (The only such people I’ve
ever met were well into their 70s and wouldn’t know a
saponin from a satellite dish, but they were the most in-
credible herbal healers you can imagine.)

Identifying Relevant Tonics for Body
Systems

This is where we can take advantage of the fact that some
herbs show an affinity for certain organs, body systems, or
even specific types of tissue. They work as tonics or nu-
trients for the areas involved and can be used freely.

Identifying Biochemical Considerations
Based on biochemical considerations, one might identify
specific positive indications for certain plants or clear
contraindications for other plants for a particular patient.
This involves some degree of familiarity with phyto-
chemistry and pharmacology. There are limits to how
useful this is, as the effects of most of the herbal materia
medica are not understood—either because biochemical
research is lacking or because the known biochemistry
does not immediately illuminate the mechanism at play.

Identifying Lifestyle Factors to Address
Human health and wholeness can rarely be adequately
addressed by any one therapeutic modality, whether
herbs, prescription drugs, acupuncture, or any other type
of therapy. This book focuses on the herbal contribution
to the therapeutic endeavor, but herbs cannot take the
place of appropriate attention to a wide array of lifestyle
issues.

Nutrition is often pivotal to health, but this does not
mean that the individual should resort to taking dietary
supplements. Instead, examine the person’s normal diet to
determine whether or not changes might be beneficial to
healing. For example, the individual may need to alter the

kinds of foods eaten, how they are cooked, or how they
are eaten, among other factors.

Structural issues must also be recognized and ad-
dressed with an appropriate modality, such as osteopathy
or chiropractic. Herbs cannot replace the therapeutic
value of manipulation if it is indicated. On a less technical
level, an assessment of exercise and movement in general
is always indicated. However, this need not lead to a gym!
A walk in the woods or a jog along a beach will provide
not only exercise, but also the opportunity to be in nature,
which is always healing.

Similarly, psychological issues should be recognized
and addressed. The current vogue for pharmacological
panaceas to address the emotional pain of life is very
shortsighted. In my opinion, such problems require con-
scious and compassionate processing, not magic bullets—
herbal or otherwise.

SELECTING RELEVANT HERBS

To illustrate the process to be followed in applying the
model, we will look at two hypothetical case studies.

Example 1: Cystitis and Irritable Bowel
Syndrome

The first step in applying the model to create a prescrip-
tion for this hypothetical patient is to make a comparison
of primary actions indicated for each component of the
patient’s condition. In this case, we will compare the pri-
mary actions indicated for cystitis with those indicated for
irritable bowel syndrome. As this is a theoretical exercise,
we have no other specific details on this individual's
symptom picture.

Primary Actions Indicated for Cystitis

Antimicrobials appropriate for the urinary tract will help
the immune system control and clear bacterial infec-
tion. Essential oil-rich diuretic plants are indicated be-
cause the oil is excreted via the kidney, thus directing it
to the site of infection in the bladder

Anti-inflammatories soothe the symptom picture of pain
and discomfort.

Astringents will help if there is any hematuria (blood in the
urine).

Diuretics flush the urinary tract. Ideally, antimicrobial di-
uretics will be selected for this patient.

Antispasmodics may be necessary if there is much pain.

----- PAGE 255 -----
A Monel or HOLisTic HERBAL MEDICINE @ 247

Primary Actions Indicated for Irritable Bowel Actions that came up in both lists are especially relevant
Syndrome for this patient, and are anti-inflammatory, astringent, and
Astringents will stop the diarrhea. antispasmodic. Other important actions are antimicrobial, bit-
Bitters often normalize bowel function in such cases. ter, diuretic, carminative, and nervine. This process of com-
Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions. parison gives us a basis for identifying herbs that will effec-
Carminatives help with flatulence or colic. tively deliver the desired primary and secondary actions.
Antispasmodics other than carminatives may be indicated if In the herbal actions tables below, herbs that appear
cramping is severe. in more than one table are underlined to highlight the
Nervines will help ease background stress involvement. correlation. These tables summarize information pro-

vided in greater detail in chapter 25.

Table 12.2. Anti-Inflammatory Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Diuretic

Nervine

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Asclepias tuberosa, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Populus tremuloides, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum
thapsus, Viburnum oputus, V. prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum, Agrimonia eupatoria, Calendula officinalis, Capsella bursa-pastoris,
Geranium maculatum, Hydrastis canadensis, Plantago major, Populus tremuloides, Ranunculus ficaria, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Symphytum officinale, Tilia platyphyllos, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita, Menyanthes trifoliata

Achillea millefolium, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrthiza glabra,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Apium graveolens, Galium aparine, Menyanthes trifoliata, Plantago major,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos, Zea mays

Apium graveolens, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum prunifolium

Table 12.3. Antimicrobial Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Plantago major

Allium sativum, Carum carvi, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta
graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Carum carvi, Plantago major, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Ruta graveolens

----- PAGE 256 -----
248 <2 TREATWIN1I APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

SECONDARY ACTION —_- HERBS

Carminative Artemisia absinthium, Capsicum annuum, Carum carvi, Juniperus communis, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Juniperus communis, Plantago major

Nervine Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis

Table 12.4. Antispasmodic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Diuretic

Nervine

Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Tilia platyphyllos

Carum carvi, Drosera rotundifolia, Humulus lypulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita,
Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Tilia
platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus, V, prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Humutlus luputus, Matricaria recutita

Angelica archangelica, Anethum graveolens, Artemisia vulgaris, Carum carvi, Daucus carota, Foeniculum vulgare, Humulus
lupulus, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha
piperita, M. pulegium, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella
foenum-graecum, Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Zingiber officinale

Angelica archangelica, Daucus carota, Lycopus spp., Petroselinum crispum, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa,
Lavandula officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, Lycopus spp., Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha

piperita, Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana
officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V, prunifolium

Table 12.5. Astringent Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTIONS

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic
Bitter

Diuretic

Nervine

Agrimonia eupatoria, Euphrasia officinalis, Filipendula ulmaria, Geranium maculatum, Plantago major, Polygonum bistortum,
Quercus robur, Solidago virgaurea

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Inula helenium, Quercus robur, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea

Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis
Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Prunus serotina

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Lycopus spp., Plantago major, Solidago virgaurea,
Verbascum thapsus

Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis

----- PAGE 257 -----
A MODEL OF HOListTIC HERBAL MEDICINE @ 249

Table 12.6. Bitter Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Artemisia absinthium, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita
Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, A. vulgaris, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita
Antispasmodic Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita, Ruta graveolens

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis

Carminative Artemisia absinthium, Matricaria recutita

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria

Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita

Table 12.7. Carminative Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION —- HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Artemisia absinthium, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus, Juniperus communis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic Allium sativum, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium, Carum carvi, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris,
Valeriana officinalis

Astringent Carum carvi, Humutus lupulus, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita

Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Humulus lupulus, Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita,

Valeriana officinalis

Table 12.8. Diuretic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Agrimonia eupatoria, Apium graveolens, Eupatorium purpureum, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Juniperus communis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cytisus scoparius, Galium aparine, Lycopus spp.
Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctium lappa

Nervine Apium graveolens, Lycopus spp., Tilia platyphyllos

----- PAGE 258 -----
250 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

It becomes immediately apparent that there are many
remedies with potential in this case. The final remedy se-
lection for an actual patient will involve some research in
primary-source herbals to clarify traditional uses of the
remedies identified in this purely logical manner. Nature
does not always follow human concepts of logic, so the
experience of generations of herbal practitioners must be
taken into account.

In the following example, I am suggesting a prescrip-
tion that is designed for a person experiencing only a
moderate severity of both problems.

Herbs Relevant to Cystitis and Irritable Bowel
Syndrome

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

We have the choice of adjusting the prescription to
emphasize different actions, depending on individual
needs, by increasing the proportions of the most relevant
herbs. This process is discussed in greater detail in the next
section of this chapter, Dosage and Formulation Criteria.

Stronger urinary tract effects can be obtained by in-
creasing the proportion of diuretic antimicrobials in the
We can either
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry) or add another herb,
such as Agathosma betulina (buchu). We may also consider
adding a urinary tract demulcent, such as Zea mays (corn-
silk) or Althaea officinalis (marshmallow leaf).

More focus on the irritable bowel problem will result
from a greater emphasis in the prescription on bitters, as-
tringents, or carminatives. For bitter carminatives, con-
sider Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort), A. absinthium (worm-
wood), or Achillea millefolium (yarrow). For astringents,
consider Geranium maculatum (cranesbill) or Filipendula
ulmaria (meadowsweet).

More attention to anxiety issues may be needed. While
herbs cannot replace relaxation or appropriate lifestyle
changes, stronger nervines will help. Specifics will depend
upon the individual concerned, but Valeriana officinalis (va-
lerian) might be helpful for this hypothetical patient.

Thus, we arrive at a possible prescription for our the-
oretical patient.

mixture. increase the amount of

Prescription for Cystitis and Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Viburnum opulus 2 parts
Agrimonia eupatoria 2 parts
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Humulus tupulus 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

We will also recommend that the patient drink an in-
fusion of Matricaria recutita (chamomile) or Melissa offici-
nalis (lemon balm) often throughout the day. Table 12.9
illustrates the actions supplied by the specific herbs in this
combination.

Table 12.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis and Irritable Bowel Syndrome

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Agrimonia eupatoria, Angelica archangelica,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Humutus lupulus,
Hydrastis canadensis

Astringent Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis,
Viburnum opulus

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Humulus lupulus,

Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory Agrimonia eupatoria, Angelica archangelica,
Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Carminative Angelica archangelica, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis

Antispasmodic Angelica archangelica, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Viburnum opulus

Nervine Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Viburnum opulus

Example 2: A Complex of Conditions

Now we will apply a similar process to a hypothetical pa-
tient with a much more complicated pathological picture.
This patient has uterine fibroids, premenstrual syndrome
(PMS), hypertension, and constipation. The following
table illustrates the primary actions needed in order to ad-
dress each part of the complex.

----- PAGE 259 -----
A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE ¢. 251

Table 12.10. Herbal Actions Needed for Specific Conditions

CONDITION SIGN/SYMPTOM

ACTIONS NEEDED

Uterine fibroids Dysmenorrhea
Menorrhagia (and, possibly, anemia)

Abdominal congestion

Anti-spasmodic, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer
Astringent, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer

Diuretic, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer, lymphatic, circulatory
stimulant, peripheral vasodilator

Premenstrual tension Psychological symptoms (irritability, agitation,

fatigue, depression, anxiety, palpitations)

Neurological symptoms (headache, vertigo)

Nervine relaxant, hormonal normalizer

Nervine relaxant, hormonal normalizer

Edema Diuretic, hormonal normalizer

Skin problems Alterative, hormonal normalizer
Hypertension Often Hypotensive asymptomatic
Constipation Difficult or infrequent passage of feces Laxative

All of the actions mentioned above can be categorized
into two groups, as illustrated in table 12.11. The choice
of herbs from the first group (for symptom relief) depends
upon the individual’s symptom picture, which will also af-
fect the strength of remedies chosen and their proportions
in the final prescription. The herbs in the second group
are, of course, more pivotal to the healing process.

Table 12.11. Actions Indicated for Complex of
Conditions

PRIMARILY SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF

MORE FUNDAMENTAL HEALING
ACTIONS

Antispasmodic Uterine tonic

Astringent Hormonal normalizer
Nervine relaxant Alterative
Diuretic Lymphatic
Hypotensive Circulatory stimulant
Laxative Peripheral vasodilator

Table 12.12. Possible Herb Choices for Hypothetical
Patient

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Viburnum prunifolium

Astringent Vinca major, Geranium maculatum,

Achillea millefolium

Nervine relaxant Scutellaria spp., Tilia platyphyllos,

Leonurus cardiaca

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale, Galium aparine,
Achillea millefolium

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia spp., Achillea millefolium

Laxative Rumex crispus

Uterine tonic Mitchella repens, Caulophylium thalictroides

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus
Lymphatic Galium aparine

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

----- PAGE 260 -----
252 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

The most important contraindication in this case
would be for anthraquinone-containing laxatives, such as
senna. These are too stimulating to the musculature of
the abdomen and would worsen pain related to uterine
cramping. From a review of the conditions present in this
hypothetical person, it should be apparent that tonic sup-
port is needed for the following body systems:

© Reproductive
* Nervous

* Cardiovascular
* Digestive

Thus, by incorporating tonics and effectors, we can
develop two specific formulas for this patient, one to ad-
dress the symptoms and underlying pathologies of uterine
fibroids, hypertension, and constipation and one for
PMS. These prescriptions can be altered in a number of
ways, depending upon the therapeutic interpretation
made by the practitioner.

Hypothetical Prescription for Fibroids,
Hypertension, and Constipation

Vinca major 2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Caulophyllum thalictroides 1 part
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Tilia spp. 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Hypothetical Prescription for PMS
2 parts
1 part

Scutellaria lateriflora
Cimicifuga racemosa

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture as needed for PMS symptoms

Table 12.13. Actions Supplied by Hypothetical
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Uterine tonic Caulophyllum thalictroides,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine astringent Vinca major.

Alterative Galium aparine, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Caulophyllum thalictroides

ACTION HERBS

Cimicifuga racemosa, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Tilia spp., Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic

Lymphatic Galium aparine

Nervine Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia spp.,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Diuretic Galium aparine, Crataegus spp., Tilia spp.

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia spp., Viburnum opulus

The final step in addressing the myriad issues pre-
sented by this patient is to identify other healing modali-
ties and lifestyle changes that will support the healing ac-
tions of the herbs.

DOSAGE AND FORMULATION
CRITERIA

An aspect of phytotherapy that often seems cloaked in
mystery is the process of formulating prescriptions and de-
termining dosages. What guidelines does the practitioner
use in deciding upon dosages or proportions to use when
combining the selected remedies? Here I shall attempt to
give this process some structure. For readers who disagree,
or apply a different sequence of considerations, please re-
member that this is only one phytotherapist’s opinion.

Phytotherapy does not provide the same clear, quan-
titative, and logical criteria for dosage and prescribing
that clinical pharmacology provides. Depending upon the
perspective of the practitioner, this can be viewed either
as a benefit or as a failing, For the student, it is undoubt-
edly problematic, but for the practitioner with some ex-
perience, it becomes evident that this relative looseness
provides valuable flexibility.

As with the selection criteria we use to choose the herbs
in the first place, we must integrate considerations about
the plants themselves with the patient’s therapeutic issues.

Physiological impact of the herb. The strongest effector
herbs should usually be prescribed in smaller amounts,
while gentle normalizers can be prescribed at higher
dosages.

----- PAGE 261 -----
Desired therapeutic effects. This issue is theoretically dif-
ficult to quantify, as desired effects will vary with each
individual and, potentially, even with each consultation.
However, the following points offer a few guidelines.
¢ The dosage of herbs intended to have the greatest
effect can often be increased.

* Tonics and mild normalizing herbs should generally
be used in higher proportions.

© Additive effects, such as the cumulative effect of all
astringent herbs in a prescription, must be taken
into account.

Age or constitution of the patient. The younger or frailer
a patient is, the lower the dosage that should be used.
As discussed in more detail later, this may not be im-
portant if only normalizers are prescribed.

Convenience and simplicity. This can be important for
patients who may have trouble complying with the
prescribed regimen.

As long as potentially toxic herbs are avoided, it is
safe to say that exact dosage is usually not too critical. The
problem is often that too little is prescribed, rather than
too much. From my British perspective, the dosages used
in North America are absurdly low, the reason probably
being (in most cases) expense rather than any therapeutic
criteria. To clarify what I mean here, we can generalize
about dosage by using three roughly defined categories.

Normalizers. These are herbs that can also be considered
foods (such as Urtica dioica and Galium aparine), are
usually used in dosages of 2 to 4 g of herb or 2 to 4 ml
of tincture three times a day, so it is not critical to be
exact.

Stronger herbs. These effectors are given in a dosage
range of 1 to 2 g of herb or 1 to 2 ml of tincture, which
means that one should take some care, but there is no
need to get paranoid. An overdose may confer too
much of the desired action, but no toxicity. Examples
include Chelone glabra and Drosera rotundifolia.

Extremely strong berbs. These are effector herbs that are
used in dosages of less than 1 ml of tincture. This dosage
range must be taken very seriously) This category in-
cludes herbs such as Lobelia inflata and Convallaria ma-
jatis, for which accuracy is essential or the patient will
suffer the consequences. Most of the medicinal plants
that fall into this category are rarely used in modern
phytotherapy, and most are not discussed in a thera-
peutic context in this book.

One of the most common arguments put forth by
pharmacologists against the use of herbal medicines be-
comes relevant here. Pointing to the variable amounts of

A MObEL OF HouisTic HERBAL MEDICINE @ 253

active constituents that occur naturally in plants, the
pharmacologist will say that it is impossible to accurately
prescribe or ensure a standardized dosage protocol. As
phytotherapy is founded upon the use of normalizers or,
at most, effectors that do not contain potent constituents,
this issue is irrelevant. However, it becomes very perti-
nent when discussing potentially toxic plants. The inher-
ent variability in plant constituent levels makes establish-
ing appropriate dosage extremely problematic when using
such strong plants.

The “Part” as a Unit of Measurement
European herbalists use the metric system of measure-
ment, and so milliliters (ml) and grams (g) are the units
used in dispensing herbs. The North American use of
drops or dropperfuls is both confusing and quantitatively
inaccurate. The size of a drop is variable, as it depends on
the size of the hole in the dropper and other factors.

The prescriptions presented in this book have been
developed using the concept of measurement known as
the part. Using parts allows for great flexibility in creating
formulations. One part can represent 1 ml of tincture or
1 g of dried herb. The main drawback to this easy method
is that when mixing different kinds of preparations, one
must still keep specific dosage considerations in mind.
For example, a fluid extract is much more concentrated
than a tincture, so combining tinctures with fluid extracts
will necessitate some math to ensure that appropriate lev-
els of each herb are used. In other words, if the fluid ex-
tract is twice as strong as the tincture, only half as much
should be used.

Two related issues to consider are convenience for the
dispensary and ease of use for the patient. It does not mat-
ter how good a prescription is; it will not work if the pa-
tient does not take it. The following points provide some
guidelines on simplifying the measurement of doses.

A dosage of 5 ml is roughly equivalent to 1 teaspoonful. This
makes a single dose easy to take, and can contribute
greatly to patient compliance.

A dosage of 5 ml taken three times a day amounts to 105 ml a
week. This can usually be rounded down to 100 ml a
week, making calculating and dispensing a simple matter.

There is no need for a 5 ml single dose to consist purely of tinc-
ture. For children, or when using stronger effectors,
the 5 ml dose can be made up partly with water, thus
maintaining the ease of use while still lowering dosage.
The prescription writer or dispenser must perform the
calculation and physical measurements, as the whole
point is to make the patient’s experience as straightfor-
ward as possible.

----- PAGE 262 -----
254 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

In the examples that follow, we will assume that the
herbs are in equivalent forms.

A Prescription for Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

In this particular case, the prescription assumes that
diarrhea is a dominant component of the symptom pic-
ture and thus includes a larger proportion of Myrica cer-
ifera, an effective astringent. If colic pain was a major
issue, then the proportion of antispasmodic and nervine
remedies might be increased.

A Prescription for Osteoarthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1¥2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

This combination includes antirheumatic herbs with
a range of relevant actions, but the emphasis is on the
Menyanthes because it has such a good effect in osteo-
arthritis. Fiipendula serves as a source of salicylates that
does not irritate the stomach, and so is included in a
larger proportion.

A Prescription for Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

The herbs are included in equal proportions here, as
none of the limiting criteria comes into play. There are no
strong effectors and no overriding therapeutic concerns.

A Prescription for Psoriasis with Anxiety and Tension

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

In this case, the nervine component has been in-
creased by replacing the ScuteMaria with Valeriana and
Verbena. The inclusion of Verbena is based upon its com-
bination of relaxing nervine and hepatic actions. On the
other hand, the percentage of Sewtellaria could have been
increased to 2 or 3 parts to achieve a similar increased
nervine effect without the hepatic action.

A Prescription for Unresponsive Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Smilax spp. 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 2 parts
Phytolacca americana 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Because a stronger alterative combination was
needed, the prescription includes the effector Phytolacca
americana. The best way to work out the parts when using
strong effectors is to assign a 1-part proportion to the
strongest herb and increase the proportions of the other
herbs. This prescription, for example, includes | part of
Phytolacca and 2 parts each of the other herbs.

A Prescription for Premenstrual Syndrome

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms

Prescription Il for Premenstrual Syndrome
Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture once a day throughout menstrual cycle

Notice that the dosage instructions for the first for-
mula include the term “as needed.” This is a recognition
of the cyclical nature of the stress response; each person
will find different times of the day more challenging than
others. As this is largely symptomatic medication, the
dosage may be increased until the patient experiences

----- PAGE 263 -----
relief. The dosage regimen may be altered as necessary,
changing the size of the dose and varying the time of day at
which it is taken to suit individual needs. For example, the
patient may take a large dose first thing in the morning or
smaller amounts at frequent intervals throughout the day.

The patient’s experience is the guiding principle
here. Always treat the human being, not the theory be-
hind the disease!

Dosage Considerations for the Elderly

As the body ages, a number of factors alter the way it uti-
lizes substances. This can have a significant impact on de-
termining appropriate dosages for elderly people. In the
context of the selection criteria used throughout this
book, such considerations are rarely an issue. The focus
on tonics and gentle effector herbs allows the phytother-
apist largely to avoid potential toxicity.

In the context of orthodox medicine, however, these
considerations are very important when prescribing drugs
with a narrow therapeutic index. They become even more
significant for people who are frail or malnourished. The
main concern is pharmacokinetic changes that affect how
drugs are excreted from the body. The three primary factors
involved here are normal physiological processes related to
aging, pathophysiological changes, and iatrogenic causes.!

Normal Physiological Changes Related to Aging

Older people are smaller, have a higher percentage of body
fat, and have less body water content.

The rate of absorption in the elderly is reduced, but not the
amount of absorption. The elderly have decreased
stomach acidity and intestinal blood flow. The amount
of time it takes to empty the stomach also slows as a
person ages. These changes decrease the rate, but not
the amount, of absorption. This may delay the onset of
action and peak effect of medications.

Gastric acid secretion is reduced at a rate of about 5% per
decade after age 50.

Renal function declines, This is the most important age-
related pharmacokinetic change. The efficiency of this
vital function declines by approximately 10% per
decade after age 40. A number of factors influence this:
¢ Reduction in glomerular filtration rate in the

nephrons
© Reduction in renal blood flow
© Decrease in active tubular secretion in the nephrons

Hepatic metabolism and clearance of many drugs decline at ap-
proximately 1% per year after age 40. There is a rela-
tive reduction in Phase I metabolism, as compared
with Phase II (see chapter 9 for more information).

A MopEL OF HoLuistic HERBAL MEDICINE «2 255

Pathopbysiological Changes

A number of disease processes can produce changes in
normal functioning that have a direct impact on a whole
range of pharmacokinetic factors. The specifics are com-
plex and vary from disease to disease and drug to drug. In
general, however, the most important are kidney diseases,
liver and gallbladder diseases, and heart disease.

Iatrogenic Causes

Iatrogenic problems are those induced inadvertently by a
physician, surgeon, medical] treatment, or diagnostic pro-
cedure. Many common problems are caused by drug in-
teractions. Other obvious examples are surgery and dial-
ysis. Keep in mind that herbs and herbalists can also be
the cause of such problems. However, if the phytothera-
pist follows the approach presented in this book, the risk
of causing iatrogenic problems is minimal.

Dosage Adjustments for Children

Children have special needs, and special plants address
these needs. As with the elderly, the herbal focus should
be on tonics and gentle effectors. The healing capacity of
children can be quite incredible, but attention must be
paid to proper dosage. Obviously, a lower dosage will be
required for children.

Appropriate dosage for children varies according to
age, and a number of mathematical formulae have been
developed to facilitate this. For our purposes, however, it
will not be necessary to get out the calculator. Dosage
proportionate to age can be adequately approximated
using a method developed many years ago by Dr. Young;
this is illustrated in table 12.14. There are some excep-
tions to this general rule, but they involve medicinal
plants that the FDA has restricted.

Table 12.14. Dosage Adjustments for Children?

AGE PROPORTION OF — EXAMPLES
ADULT DOSE
Adult 1 10g, 2.0 g, 10.0, 1.0 ml
12 years old " 0.5 2,102, 5.08,0.5 ml
8 years old 2s 04g, 0.82, 4.02, 04ml
4 years old A 0.25 g, 0.5, 2.52, 0.25 ml
2 years old Ve 0.125 g, 0.25 g, 1.25 g, 0.125 ml
lyear old Ve 0.0625 g, 0.125 g, 0.625 g, 0.0625 ml

----- PAGE 264 -----
256 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

With the advent of potent modern pharmaceuticals,
dosage measurements became much more critical. A
number of methods have been developed to cope with the
need for such accuracy. The British National Formulary
provides three ways of arriving at an appropriate dosage
for children.

Age-Related Adjustment

This is a more refined version of Dr. Young’s method.

Table 12.15. Dosage Adjustment by Age

AGE IDEAL HEIGHT BODY — PERCENTAGE
BODY (mm/in) — SURFACE OF ADULT
WEIGHT (m’)* — DOSE
{kg/Ib)

Newborn 34/775 500720 0.8 2S

1 month 42/9 550 / 22 0.26 14.5

3 months 56/12 590 / 2B 0.32 18

6 months 77/17 ~~ 610/26 0.40 22

lyear 10/22 760/30 047 25

3 years 4731 940 / 37 0.62 33

7 years B/S 1200 / 47 0.88 50

12 years 37/81 1480 / 58 125 1S

Adult female 56/123 1626 / 64 16 100

Adult male 68/150 1727 7 68 18 100

¥m? (meters squared) is a measurement of body surface area.

Calculation by Body Weight

This method is another way to calculate an appropriate
dose, but bear in mind that young children may require a
higher dose per kilogram of body weight than adults be-
cause of their higher metabolic rates.

Basic Conversion Formula
Patients weight in kg [x] adult dose
70
or
Patient's weight in Ib [x] adult dose

150

Body Surface Measurements

These are a challenge to calculate, but it is amazing what
you can do with a calculator. For the sake of complete-
ness, here is the formula. I am not necessarily recom-

mending that you try to measure the surface area of any
young child of your acquaintance!

Basic Conversion Formula
Surface area of patient (m?) [x] adult dose

1.8

OUTLINE OF TREATMENT
CHAPTERS

The second half of this book delves into herbal ap-
proaches to the plethora of pathologies that practitioners
are called upon to treat. Each of these body system treat-
ment chapters follows the same basic format, which is ex-
plained here. This basic format, along with the information
provided in chapters 25 and 26, gives the practitioner a
structure upon which to build throughout a lifelong ex-
ploration of medical herbalism.
The treatment discussions are organized as follows.

Name of the Pathology or Condition
This will reflect the terminology most commonly used in
Western medicine.

Definition
The medical definitions are taken from either The Merck
Manual or The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary.

Condition Overview

Here I provide a brief description of the condition, in-
cluding relevant information for the herbalist about eti-
ology, signs and symptoms, and prognosis. These brief
introductions in no way intended to replace a comprehen-
sive text on Western medicine that describes the pathol-
ogy and its treatment in Western orthodox medicine.

Treatment of the Condition

This is a discussion of herbal selection issues to consider
in developing a prescription for the condition, with an
emphasis on tonic needs. Harnessing the toning and nur-
turing potential of herbs can be best facilitated by identi-
fying which body systems, organs, or tissues will benefit
most. This ability to tone and nurture is unique and one
of the most important contributions that herbal remedies
make to wellness and healing.

Actions Indicated

This provides a discussion of relevant herbal actions indi-
cated for the processes underlying the disease entity,
along with a rationale for their inclusion.

----- PAGE 265 -----
Specific Remedies

This section identifies plants that have an established tra-
dition of use for the particular condition. I have based
their selection on British usage, but as far as possible, I
have included insights from the American tradition as
well.

Traditional use implies demonstrable efficacy. The
research scientist may consider this “mere” empirical ob-
servation and thus not scientifically valid. To the medical
herbalist, on the other hand, information about tradi-
tional use provides evidence that the herb has valuable ef-
fects. These observations are based upon clinical tests
performed by generations of people in the most challeng-
ing of environments: the sickroom. If certain herbs were
ineffective, these practitioners would have tried some-
thing else, as they had no vested interest in proving a be-
lief system.

However, traditional knowledge does not explain the
effects produced, nor does it indicate the processes that
underlie the plant’s effects or any wider impact upon
human physiology. This is where modern, investigative
science has so much to offer—much more than can be
achieved through scientific attempts to either justify or
debunk the clinical use of herbs.

A Prescription for the Condition

Here I offer a suggested herbal combination that incor-
porates the ideas developed earlier. This is not intended
as a formulaic treatment for the pathology, but rather as
an example of how to build on ideas about relevant ac-
tions, tonics, biochemistry, and specific remedies to arrive
at an appropriate treatment.

It is important to remember that a given prescription
is in no way the “correct” or only solution. In all cases,
many possible herbal choices exist. Part of the skill of the
phytotherapist is the ability to engage in a therapeutic
dance with the complex of variables at play. A useful exer-
cise is to compare treatment approaches suggested by a

A MODEL or HoListic HERBAL MEDICINE <> 257

number of herbal clinicians. When the works of herbalists
within the Western tradition are compared and con-
trasted, it often becomes clear that the differences in
herbs used are only apparent disagreements. Usually, you
will find that the practitioners employed similar thera-
peutic criteria and that the differences simply reflect the
richness of the herbal materia medica. Students (includ-
ing all of us herbalists) should embrace such differences as
an opportunity for developing comprehension and insight.

Actions Supplied by the Prescription

The prescription suggestion is followed by an analysis of
the herbal remedies in terms of their actions. This is in-
tended to clarify why these particular herbs were in-
cluded, and, I hope, to illuminate ways in which the com-
bination may be adjusted or altered. Except for the
specifics discussed above, the herbs selected for inclusion
in the prescriptions are open to challenge. However, the
actions supplied are pivotal to success. By knowing which
herbs supply the necessary actions, the practitioner is able
to select alternative plants that still ensure the appropri-
ate blend of herbal actions for the condition.

Broader Context of Treatment

Phytotherapy cannot be holistic unless it is used within a
relevant broader context appropriate for both the individ-
ual and the condition involved. In this section, I offer sug-
gestions concerning other therapeutic modalities, nutri-
tion, and lifestyle issues to augment the herbal treatment.

References
1. Bennett JC, Plum F, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 20th
edition. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996.
2. Osol A, ed. Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th ed.
Easton, PA: Mack, 1975.
3. British National Formulary. London: Pharmaceutical
Society of Great Britain, 1966.

----- PAGE 266 -----
13

rei 8)

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

erbal medicine is uniquely suited for the treat-
H ment of digestive system illnesses. Throughout

human evolution, our food has been our
medicine, ensuring that the healing properties of the
herbs we consume have a direct effect on the lining of the
alimentary canal. Herbs affect digestive system function
not only through absorption and metabolism of the whole
range of plant chemicals, but also through direct actions
upon the tissue of the gut.

Much of the digestive system illness in our society is
due simply to abuse. Today’s average diet contains a pre-
ponderance of overly processed foods and has a high con-
tent of chemical additives. The gastrointestinal tract is
subject to direct chemical irritation from alcohol, carbon-
ated drinks, and tobacco. In this context, it is easy to see
why herbal remedies can be so helpful in treating the var-
ious inflammations and reactions that plague abusers.
The direct soothing action of demulcents, healing prop-
erties of astringents, and general toning of bitters have
much to offer in reversing such damage.

However, as with all true healing, any potential
“cure” lies beyond the range of medicines, whether herbal
or synthetic. The healing process must incorporate
lifestyle changes to eliminate dietary indiscretions and
chemical abuses as well as reduce stress. Herbal medicine
can bring about dramatic improvements in even profound
digestive system problems, but the potential to maintain
these benefits long term lies in the hands of the person
seeking treatment.

Used within such a broad context, herbal medicine
offers specific remedies for particular pathological syn-
dromes as well as tonics and normalizers that can help
prevent problems from manifesting in the first place. It is
possible to treat these problems within a context of gen-
eral nurturing that speeds improvement and helps
reestablish health and harmony. In the hands of a skilled
phytotherapist, much can be achieved therapeutically.
While the array of factors will be different for each indi-
vidual with, for example, a gastric ulcer, it is possible to
identify some general herbal guidelines.

258

Of all herbal traditions, that of using herbs to aid di-
gestion has remained the most prominent in the mem-
ory of modern Europe. Whether culinary herbs such as
rosemary or medicinal liqueurs like vermouth and
chartreuse, therapeutic remedies are used in large quanti-
ties. The very name vermouth comes from the bitter herb
wormwood. Herbs maintain their foothold in official
pharmacopoeias as major therapeutic agents, in the form
of digestive bitters, carminatives, and laxatives of varying
strengths.

The ideal is to preserve health and maintain wellness,
rather than merely treat illness. Of course, there is much
more to preventive medicine than consuming medicinal
substances, whether medicinal plants or chemical drugs.
We can help put this in perspective by recalling the
World Health Organization (WHO) definition of health:

Health is a state of complete physical, emotional, mental
and social well being and not merely the absence of dis-
ease or infirmity.

This should serve to remind us that any attempt to
promote wellness and prevent the development of disease
must address the whole complex of factors that WHO
identified. While we cannot explore this concept in depth
in this book, it nonetheless can help us to identify a num-
ber of risk factors that can be minimized, as well as posi-
tive factors to be emphasized. As the focus of this book is
on herbs and their safe use, we shall address the non-
herbal issues only in passing. This is not meant to imply
that they are less significant, but is simply a reflection of
space constraints.

HERBS AND GOOD DIET

By far the most important contribution made by plants to
the health of the human digestive system is in the quality
of the foods we eat. Often the only real difference be-
tween a salad vegetable and a medicinal herb is that one
tastes better! The body requires more than 40 nutrients
for energy, growth, and tissue maintenance. All of these

----- PAGE 267 -----
are found in a well-rounded diet, and many of them are
found both in medicinal herbs and in plants eaten as
grains, vegetables, or fruits. Of course, eating a balanced
diet is a major contributing factor to a healthy lifestyle.
Using medicinal herbs does not negate the importance of
eating a high-quality diet.

Water

As the most plentiful component in the body, water is also
crucial to survival. It is the medium for bodily fluids such
as blood and lymph, in which forms it transports nutrients
into cells and carries out waste products and toxins.

Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats—a group of dietary
components known as macronutrients—provide fuel in
the form of calories. Carbohydrates, the body’s main en-
ergy source, can be divided into two types. Simple carbo-
hydrates are sugars; complex carbohydrates include starches,
such as those found in potatoes and bread.

Proteins

Proteins support tissue growth and repair and help pro-
duce antibodies, hormones, and enzymes, which are es-
sential for all chemical reactions in the body. Dietary pro-
tein sources include meat, fish, dairy products, poultry,
dried beans, nuts, and eggs.

Fats
Dietary fat protects internal organs, provides energy, in-
sulates against cold, and helps the body absorb certain vi-
tamins. There are three kinds of fats. Saturated fats are
found in meat, dairy products, and coconut oil. Mono-
unsaturated fats occur in olive, peanut, and canola oils;
polyunsaturated fats are found in corn, cottonseed, saf-
flower, soy, and sunflower oils.

A very important group of polyunsaturated fats are
the essential fatty acids (EFAs) known as arachidonic acid,
linoleic acid, and alpha-linolenic acid. Linoleic and
arachidonic acid are the basis of the omega-6 EFAs, and
alpha-linolenic acid is the basis of the omega-3 EFAs.
They are essential to the human diet because they cannot
be synthesized in the body from other nutrients. Essentia
fatty acids are necessary for the formation of healthy
cell membranes, the proper development and function-
ing of the brain and nervous system, and the production
of the eicosanoids (thromboxanes, leukotrienes, and

prostaglandins).
Linoleic acid is found primarily in seeds, nuts, grains,
and legumes. Alpha-linolenic acid is found in green

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 259

leaves, phytoplankton and algae, and selected seeds, nuts,
and legumes. Arachidonic acid is obtained from meat, and
the important omega-3 EFA eicosapentaenoic acid is
found in fish.

Vitamins and. Minerals

The diet also supplies the important micronutrients
known as vitamins and minerals. They are needed only in
trace amounts, but an absence or deficiency of just one vi-
tamin or mineral can cause major illness.

Dietary Fiber
The body also needs a supply of dietary fiber, the indi-
gestible portion of plant foods. A high-fiber diet reduces
the risks of various gastrointestinal problems and pro-
motes cardiovascular health.

The official dietary guidelines, established jointly by
the U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Health and
Human Services, include seven basic recommendations.

1. Eata variety of foods. This will help ensure that you
get enough calories, protein, and fiber, as well as the
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients you need.

2. Control your weight. Keep within recommended
weight limits for your age, sex, and build. Obesity is
defined as being 20% above normal weight.

3. Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol dict. Ideally, no more
than 30% of daily calories should come from fat,
and no more than 10% should come from saturated
fat. Choose polyunsaturated fats over saturated fats
when possible.

4. Eat plenty of vegetables, fruits, and grains. They are
rich in nutrients, fiber, and complex carbohydrates
but low in fat. More than half of one’s daily calories
should come from carbohydrates, and 80% of these
calories should come from complex carbohydrates.

5. Eat sugar in moderation. Sugar is high in calories
and promotes tooth decay.

6. Use salt in moderation. Too much salt increases the
risk of developing high blood pressure. Prepared
foods are often high in salt or other forms of
sodium.

7. If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation. Alcohol
provides calories but no nutrients, and too much is
harmful.

When one eats a consistently well-balanced diet of
fresh fruits, vegetables, grains, and some animal protein,
nutritional supplementation is unnecessary. Multinutrient
supplements may be of value when eating well poses a
challenge—and can be indispensable during pregnancy

----- PAGE 268 -----
260 <= TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

and times of disease, injury, and extreme stress or physi-
cal exertion.

FIBER

Dietary fiber is largely composed of the cellulose-like
components of plant cell walls. Its composition varies
from plant to plant, but it always comprises a complex of
constituents. This fiber is the part of fruits, vegetables,
and grains that the body cannot digest. Soluble fiber dis-
solves easily in water and takes on a soft, jellylike texture
in the intestines. Insoluble fiber passes almost unchanged
through the intestines.

Both soluble and insoluble fiber helps make stools soft
and easy to pass. Fiber also prevents constipation. As this
natural complexity is missing from supplements, they can-
not replace a diet rich in high-fiber foods. The importance
of dietary fiber in human health is well established.

An abundance of research confirms the association
between fiber and human health. Table 13.1 highlights a
variety of conditions associated with a low-fiber diet.

Table 13.1. Diseases Associated with a
Low-Fiber Diet

TYPE OF DISORDER SPECIFIC CONDITIONS

Metabolic Obesity, gout, diabetes, kidney stones,

gallstones

Cardiovascular Hypertension, cerebrovascular disease,
ischemic heart disease, varicose veins, deep

vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism

Colon Constipation, appendicitis, diverticulosis,
diverticulitis, hemorrhoids, colon cancer,
irritable bowel syndrome, ulcerative colitis,
Crohn's disease

Other Dental caries, autoimmune disorders,

pernicious anemia, multiple sclerosis,
thyrotoxicosis, dermatological conditions

A high-fiber diet is associated with a decreased inci-
dence of most of the degenerative diseases of Western so-
ciety. This is not related simply to fiber content. A high-
fiber diet is generally high in other important nutrients as
well, most of which are also deficient in the typical
Western diet. The best source of dietary fiber is whole
foods, although specific types of fibers have a role in the
treatment of specific diseases. There is no substitute for a

—

Benefits of Dietary Fiber

Shortens intestinal transit time

Delays gastric emptying, resulting in reduced
after-meal elevations of blood sugar

Increases satiety

Stimulates pancreatic secretions
Increases stool weight

Improves solubility of bile

Elevates numbers of beneficial intestinal
microflora

Raises production of short-chain fatty acids

Lowers serum lipid levels

healthy diet—a diet composed of foods in a form as close
to their original as possible. The American Dietetic
Association recommends that 20 to 35 g of fiber be con-
sumed each day. Table 13.2 illustrates the amount of fiber
in many commonly eaten foods.

Table 13.2. Dietary Fiber Content of Selected Foods

FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER

Fruits
Apple {with skin) medium 35
Banana medium 24
Cantaloupe melon 1.0
Cherries, sweet 0 12
Grapefruit Vamedium 16
Orange medium 2.6
Peach (with skin) 19
Pear (with skin) VA large 31
Prunes 3 3.0
Raisins Va cup 3]
Raspberries Va cup 31
Strawberries Tcup 3.0

----- PAGE 269 -----
THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .@ 261

FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER
Vegetables, Raw Rice, Breads, Pasta, and Flour

Bean sprouts Ya cup 15 Bran muffins | muffin 25

Celery, diced Ya cup in} Bread, white \slice 04

Cucumber Ya cup 04 Bread, whole wheat \slice 14

Lettuce 1 cup 09 Crisp bread, rye 2 crackers 20

Mushrooms Ya cup 1S Rice, brown, cooked Ya cup 10

Pepper, green Y” cup 05 Rice, white, cooked Ya cup 0.2

Spinach cup 12 Spaghetti, cooked Y cup u

Tomato medium 15 Spaghetti, whole wheat, cooked = '/2 cup 39
Vegetables, Cooked Breakfast Cereals

Asparagus, cut cup 20 All-Bran VY cup 85

Beans, green cup 32 Bran Chex 2/3 cup 46

Broccoli cup 44 Corn Bran 2/3 cup 54

Brussels sprouts cup 46 Cornflakes 1a cup 03

Cabbage, red cup 28 Grape-Nuts Va cup 14

Carrots lcup 46 Oatmeal 3/4 cup 16

Cauliflower cup 22 Raisin bran-type */s cup 4.0

Corn VY cup 29 Shredded wheat "A cup 26

Kale cup 28 Nuts

Parsnip oe 34 Almonds 10 nuts W

Potato (with skin) 1 medium 25 Filberts 1O nuts 08

Potato (without skin} medium 14 Peanuts 10 nuts 4

Spinach cup 42 From Michael Murray, ND, The Encyclopedia of Nutritional Supplements (Roseville,

Sweet potato medium 34 Calf: Pima Publishing 1996)

Zucchini cup 36

TOBACCO

Legumes In addition to the well-known heart and lung diseases

baked bears cup a8 caused by tobacco, it is also responsible for changes in the

digestive system. Smoking has been shown to impact all
Dried peas, cooked a cup 47 parts of the digestive system and to contribute to such
common problems as heartburn and peptic ulcers.

‘ 1
Kidney beans, cooked “cup 2B Increases in the risk of Crohn’s disease and possibly even
Lima beans, cooked Vr cup 45 gallstones have also been observed. While most of these
effects on the digestive system appear to be reversible,
Lentils, cooked Va cup 37

they send a clear message: ‘Tobacco impairs digestive sys-

Navy beans, cooked Y cup 6.0 tem health.

----- PAGE 270 -----
262 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Heartburn

Heartburn occurs when acidic digestive juices splash from
the stomach into the esophagus, a process known as re-
flux. Normally, a muscular valve at the lower end of the
esophagus keeps the acid solution in the stomach and out
of the esophagus. Smoking weakens this valve, allowing
the contents of the stomach to flow backward into the
esophagus. Smoking also may directly injure the esopha-
gus, making it more prone to corrosive damage from re-
fluxed material.

Peptic Ulcer

A peptic ulcer is an open sore in the lining of the stomach
or the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine. The
exact cause of ulcers is not known. A relationship between
smoking cigarettes and ulcers, especially duodenal ulcers,
does exist. The 1989 Surgeon General’s report stated that
ulcers are more likely to occur, less likely to heal, and more
likely to cause death in smokers than in nonsmokers.

Liver Disease

Among a multitude of other vital functions, the liver pro-
cesses drugs, alcohol, and other toxins to remove them
from the body. Smoking impairs the ability of the liver to
handle these substances. Some research also suggests that
smoking can aggravate the course of liver disease caused
by excessive alcohol intake.

Crohn’s Disease

Crohn’s disease causes inflammation deep in the lining of
the intestine. The disease, which is associated with pain
and diarrhea, usually affects the small intestine, but it can
occur anywhere in the digestive tract. Both current and
former smokers have a higher risk of developing Crohn’s
disease than do nonsmokers. Smoking is associated with
higher rates of relapse, repeat surgeries, and immunosup-
pressive treatments.

DIGESTIVE SYSTEM DISORDERS

A number of overall processes, patterns, and symptoms
are seen in conditions affecting the digestive system. By
knowing herbal approaches to take in addressing general
patterns, the herbalist will go a long way toward under-
standing treatments for specific pathologies. However,
the phytotherapist’s role is not merely to alleviate the dis-
comfort caused by specific symptoms. The focus, as in all
holistic approaches to health, must go beyond the treat-
ment of symptoms.

Table 13.3. Primary Actions for the Digestive System

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis,
Ulmus rubra, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis

Milder bitter Achillea millefolium, Matricaria recutita

Astringent Agrimonia eupatoria, Geranium maculatum,

Filipendula ulmaria, Myrica cerifera

Carminative (aromatics) Foeniculum vulgare, Zingiber officinale,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Matricaria recutita

Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Viburnum opulus, Dioscorea villosa,
carminatives

Antispasmodic

Aperient and laxative Rumex crispus, Senna alexandrina,

Taraxacum officinale

Hepatic and cholagogue Taraxacum officinale, Chelone glabra,

bitters
Nervine Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Artemisia vulgaris
Anthelmintic Artemisia absinthium, Dryopteris filix-mas
Other Actions As needed to ensure good general health
FLATULENCE

Everyone produces gas and eliminates it by burping or
passing it through the rectum. On average, most people
produce 1 to 3 pints of gas a day and pass gas at least 14
times a day. Most people do not realize that passing gas
14 to 23 times a day is normal. Gas is made up primarily
of odorless vapors: carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen, hy-
drogen, and sometimes methane. The unpleasant odor of
flatulence comes from bacteria in the colon that release
small amounts of sulfur-containing gases.

Intestinal gas comes from two main sources: swal-
lowed air and the breakdown of undigested foods by bac-
teria naturally present in the colon. Air swallowing
(aerophagia) is a common cause of gas in the stomach. We
all swallow some air when eating and drinking. However,
eating or drinking rapidly, chewing gum, smoking, or

----- PAGE 271 -----
wearing loose dentures may lead to the intake of more air.
Burping is the usual way air leaves the stomach, but any
remaining gas moves into the small intestine, where it is
partially absorbed. A small amount travels into the large
intestine for release through the rectum.

Certain carbohydrates are not digested and absorbed
in the small intestine because the body lacks enzymes nec-
essary to break them down. This undigested food passes
into the large intestine, where bacteria may break it
down, producing the gases hydrogen, carbon dioxide,
and, in about one third of all people, methane. Research
has not provided any answers as to why some people pro-
duce methane and others do not. In addition, foods that
produce gas in one person may not cause gas in another.

Which Foods Cause Gas?

Fats and protein cause little gas, but foods containing car-
bohydrates may produce gas.

Sugars
The sugars that cause gas include raffinose, lactose, fruc-
tose, and sorbitol.

Raffinose is present in large amounts in beans. Smaller
amounts are found in cabbage, brussels sprouts, broc-
coli, asparagus, certain other vegetables, and whole
grains.

Lactose, the sugar in milk, is found in all milk products, in-
cluding cheese and ice cream, and processed foods,
such as bread, cereal, and salad dressing. Many people
have low levels of the enzyme lactase, which is needed
to digest lactose. As people age, levels of lactase may
decrease.

Fructose is naturally present in onions, artichokes, pears,
and wheat. It is also used as a sweetener in some soft
drinks.

Sorbitol is a sugar found naturally in fruits, including ap-
ples, pears, peaches, and prunes.

Starches

Most starch sources, such as potatoes, corn, noodles, and
wheat, produce gas as they are broken down in the large
intestine. Rice is the only starch that does not cause gas.

Fiber

Soluble fiber dissolves easily in water and takes on a soft,
gel-like texture in the intestines. Found in oat bran,
beans, peas, and most fruits, soluble fiber is not broken
down until it reaches the large intestine, where digestion
causes gas. Insoluble fiber, on the other hand, passes es-

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 263

sentially unchanged through the intestines and produces
little gas. Wheat bran and some vegetables contain insol-
uble fiber.

CONSTIPATION

Infrequent or hard stools, or difficulty passing stools. May
involve pain during the passage of a bowel movement,
the inability to pass a bowel movement after straining or
pushing for more than 10 minutes, or no bowel move-
ments after more than 3 days. (The Merriam-Webster
Medical Dictionary)

Constipation can be defined as difficult or infrequent pas-
sage of feces. It must be seen as a symptom, not a disease
state in its own right. Proper diagnosis is thus vitally im-
portant. Acute constipation constitutes a definite, recog-
nizable change for an individual, and an abrupt change in
bowel habits can indicate the presence of organic disease.
In chronic constipation, however, there is an ongoing
problem with normal bowel movements. In such cases,
the ideal is to normalize and regularize bowel movements
through dietary change.

The most common cause of constipation in Western
cultures is lack of dietary fiber. However, there are some
important but less common causes that the practitioner
should bear in mind. Examples range from irritable bowel
syndrome, diverticular disease, and serious infections (for
example, appendicitis) to painful anal conditions that
make people afraid to open their bowels. The condition
may be congenital, or may be caused by endocrine disor-
ders, nervous system conditions, or diseases of the large
intestine. Other possible causes of chronic constipation
include drugs or toxins that affect bowel motility, long pe-
riods of immobility, stress, and depression. Whenever a
specific cause can be determined, it should be treated.

There are many herbs that can help alleviate the dis-
comfort of constipation. Rather than discuss all of the in-
dividual plant species, we instead can generalize about
appropriate herbal actions. Laxative remedies are obvi-
ously relevant, but others must be considered. For exam-
ple, bitters may be very helpful because they cause a gen-
eral stimulation of the digestive process. When stress or
depression is a factor, consider relaxing nervine, antispas-
modic, and antidepressant herbs.

A number of different types of laxative herbs may be
used. Bulk laxatives are fiber-rich foods and herbs that
offer the only truly safe, long-term treatment possibili-
ties. They act slowly and gently and are best used by grad-
ually increasing the dose taken every morning and

----- PAGE 272 -----
264 2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

evening until a softer, bulkier stool is achieved. Secretory
laxatives promote bowel movement through stimulation
of bile production in the liver. (Hepatic herbs act as se-
cretory laxatives.) Stimulant laxatives are anthraquinone-
containing herbs that stimulate peristaltic movement di-
rectly via an impact on the nerve ganglia of the gut.
Carminatives may be helpful in easing the pain and dis-
comfort that is often associated with constipation.

Laxatives

Laxatives promote defecation, relieving constipation. As
noted, constipation itself is not a disease, but rather a
symptom that may result from any of a broad range of un-
derlying causes. In addition to the possible causes dis-
cussed earlier, constipation may be related to a variety of
subjective factors, such as stress and diet, or from a pa-
tient’s impression of what constitutes “normal” bowel
habits.

Normal size, frequency, and consistency of fecal out-
put are difficult to quantify and are subject both to per-
sonal variation and to sociological patterning, of which
the makers of laxatives take full advantage. There is no
distinct advantage to having frequent bowel movements.
While having a bowel movement once daily may be con-
sidered average, having one several times a day to once
every several days may also be seen as normal. If hepatic
function is normal, fear of “autointoxication” due to re-
tention of colon contents is unfounded.

However, increased hardness of feces and reduced
colonic motility, frequency, and bulk do occur, mainly due
to dehydration of material that remains too long in the
colon before expulsion. Bulk, softness, and hydration of
feces are very dependent on the fiber and water content
of the diet. Thus, sufficient intake of dietary fiber and
water is a mainstay in any regimen for the treatment of
constipation.

Types of Laxatives

The precise mechanisms by which laxatives work remain
uncertain because of the complex factors that affect
colonic function. However, there are three main ways in
which laxatives work.

1. Cause retention of fluid in the contents of the
colon, thereby increasing bulk and softness and fa-
cilitating transit due to their hydrophilic or osmotic
properties.

2. Reduce net absorption of water and salt through both
direct and indirect actions on the colonic mucosa.

3. Increase intestinal motility, decreasing the absorp-
tion of salt and water because of decreased transit

time. Indeed, abnormal colonic motility may be a
contributing factor in constipation.

Bulk-Forming Agents

Bulking and swelling agents are gentle laxatives that sim-
ulate the physiologic effects of a high-fiber diet. Bulk-
forming agents are widely recognized for their value in
the long-term management of irritable bowel disease and
chronic diverticulitis. These agents, which can be utilized
as supplements to dietary fiber, are polysaccharides and
celluloses derived from grains, seed husks, or kelp and in-
clude bran, psyllium, methylcellulose, and carboxy-
methylcellulose.

Bulking agents are normal components of food.
Indigestible carbohydrates, which undergo complete or
partial breakdown by the intestinal flora, physically stim-
ulate activity through their bulking action, speeding the
transit of material through the intestinal tract. Swelling
agents are distinguished by their capacity to form mu-
cilage or gels. Mucilaginous swelling agents are generally
taken in some medicinal form (for example, psyllium
husks) rather than as foods per se. Like bulking agents,
they are composed of indigestible carbohydrates, but they
undergo little or no degradation by intestinal flora. Bulk-
forming laxatives have little effect on transit time through
the small intestine, but they do affect colonic transit time.
The heavier the stool weight, the shorter the colonic
transit time.

These agents also stimulate bowel motility by modi-
fying the intestinal flora. The colon is inhabited by more
than 400 species of bacteria. The precise makeup of this
intestinal flora is determined by the nature of the avail-
able substrate. Fecal bulk provides the bacteria with a
substrate for proliferation, which causes an increase in
bacterial mass and stool weight. Because the bacteria are
specific to particular substrates, a latency period of four to
six weeks is needed in order to establish a more suitable
intestinal flora.

Human digestive enzymes do not affect the cellu-
loses, hemicelluloses, lignins, and pectins contained in
bulk-forming agents, so these pass unchanged through
the small intestine into the colon. There, bacteria break
down all or part of the bulk materials, releasing short-
chain fatty acids, along with methane, carbon dioxide, and
molecular hydrogen. The short-chain fatty acids promote
the absorption of salts and water and provide osmotic
stimuli that encourage motility. Swelling agents also
soften the stool, facilitating passage through the bowel.

Gases generated in the lower bowel may cause bloat-
ing and flatulence, and constipation may initially worsen

----- PAGE 273 -----
when bulking agents are introduced. Generally, this issue
is resolved once a new intestinal flora is established.
Starting treatment with half the normal dosage may be
helpful. It is imperative that bulk-forming agents always
be taken with sufficient quantities of liquid, as esophageal
and intestinal obstruction can occur when fluid intake is
inadequate.

A few other cautions are in order. Intestinal obstruc-
tion and impaction may occur after the administration of
bulk-forming agents, especially for patients with preexist-
ing gastrointestinal disease. People with gastrointestinal
stenosis (narrowing of passages or sphincters), ulcera-
tions, or adhesions should also avoid these agents.

Dietary Fiber

Sources of dietary fiber include whole grains, bran, veg-
etables, and fruits. Plant cell walls consist of varying
quantities of fibrous polysaccharides (mainly cellulose),
matrix polysaccharides (pectins and hemicelluloses),
lignins, cutin, waxes, and some glycoproteins that are re-
sistant to breakdown in the digestive tract. Dietary fiber
acts as a laxative by several mechanisms.

Dietary fiber binds water and ions in the colonic lumen,
thereby softening the feces and increasing their bulk.
However, the water-binding capacity of fiber is insuf-
ficient to combat secretory diarrhea.

Dietary fiber can support the growth of colonic bacteria,
thereby increasing fecal mass.

Some components nay be digested by colonic bacteria to metabo-
lites that contribute to laxative action by adding to the
osmotic activity of the luminal fluid.

Colonic fermentation of water-soluble, non-cellulose polysaccha-
rides (such as pectins and gums) can decrease stool
water, apparently by producing metabolites (such as
short-chain fatty acids) that directly influence colonic
mechanisms of fluid and electrolyte transport.

Foods differ widely both in fiber content and in the
type of fiber they contain. Grains and cereals contain a
preponderance of insoluble, poorly fermentable fibers;
their ingestion shortens intestinal transit time and in-
creases stool bulk. Fruits and vegetables contain more
water-soluble fibers that result in a moist stool, but have
less effect on transit time. Usually, 20 to 60 g of dietary
fiber is a sufficient daily intake.

Psyllium, lignin, and pectin bind bile acids, which re-
duces the rate of their reabsorption by the intestine and
promotes excretion. The consequent enhancement of
hepatic synthesis of bile acids from cholesterol may re-
duce plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 265

cholesterol. Over time, bulk-forming agents can help re-
lieve symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome and divertic-
ular disease.

Osmotic Agents

Osmotic laxatives are chemicals that cause water to be re-
tained in the bowel through osmosis, thus increasing the
water content of the stool. This mechanism underlies the
action of nonabsorbable sugars, such as mannose, and
sugar alcohols, including mannitol and sorbitol.

Anthraquinone Laxatives

Many well-known laxative plants owe their efficacy to the
presence of polyphenolic “anthranoid” compounds.
These anthraquinone laxatives include 1,8-dihydroxyan-
thraquinone and its glycoside derivatives, which are con-
tained in senna, cascara sagrada, and rhubarb, as well as
aloe and other members of the Liliaceae family. Senna is
obtained from the dried leaflets or pods of Senna alexand-
rina and other species. Cascara sagrada (“sacred bark”) is
obtained from the bark of the buckthorn tree, Ramnus
purshiana.

Anthraquinone laxatives exert their effects by damag-
ing epithelial cells, leading to changes in absorption, se-
cretion, and motility. Damaged epithelial cells can be
found as apoptotic bodies in darker pigmented colonic
mucosa, a symptom of the condition called pseudomelanosis
coli, Pseudomelanosis coli is caused by chronic use (in
other words, abuse) of anthraquinone laxatives, and has
recently been associated with an increased risk of col-
orectal carcinoma. In vitro and animal studies show that
anthraquinone laxatives have a potential role in both
initiating and promoting tumorigenesis. Studies in hu-
mans have also suggested that these laxatives have tumor-
promoting properties.!

Although clinical evaluations of the long-term toxic-
ity of anthraquinones have yielded conflicting results,
preparations that contain 1,8-dihydroxyanthraquinone it-
self have been withdrawn from the market, because the
chemical has been associated with hepatic and intestinal
tumors in laboratory animals. Whether the naturally oc-
curring glycosides cause similar problems is not known.

Although the short-term use of these substances is
generally safe, long-term use cannot be recommended.
They may cause an excessive laxative effect, leading to ab-
dominal pain and griping. Chronic use of large doses may
produce nephritis. Anthraquinone-containing herbs are
contraindicated for people with partial or complete bowel
obstruction, as well as for women who are pregnant or
nursing. Interactions with cardiac glycosides and other

----- PAGE 274 -----
266 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

drugs may occur indirectly as a result of electrolyte im-
balances. Most of the metabolites are excreted in the
stool; however, a fraction is absorbed and appears in the
urine, turning the urine a dark yellow or even red. In
nursing mothers, anthraquinone metabolites can give
breast milk a brownish tinge.

Castor Oil

The bean of the castor plant, Ricinus communis, contains
two well-known noxious ingredients: an extremely toxic
protein, ricin, and an oil known as castor oil. Used exter-
nally, castor oil is a bland emollient, but within the small
intestine, the action of pancreatic enzymes releases rici-
noleic acid. Ricinoleic acid and its salts reduce the ab-
sorption of fluid and electrolytes and stimulate intestinal
peristalsis, and hence the movement of feces. Because cas-
tor oil acts in the small intestine, accumulation of fluid
and evacuation take place rapidly and are relatively com-
plete. The cathartic effect is too strong to warrant use of
this agent for common constipation.

Appropriate Use of Laxatives

In otherwise healthy patients, laxatives are of secondary
importance to a fiber-rich diet, adequate fluid intake, ap-
propriate physical activity, and other non-pharmacologi-
cal means of preventing and treating constipation. If such
measures are inadequate, they may be supplemented with
bulk-forming agents, Stimulant laxatives should be used
only in unresponsive cases.

When laxatives are employed in the treatment of
constipation, they should be administered in the lowest
effective dosage as infrequently as possible, and be dis-
continued promptly and completely when no longer
needed. If constipation is drug-induced, lowered dosage
or use of alternative drugs should be attempted before
using laxative medication.

The use of laxatives is no substitute for treatment of
an underlying disease of which constipation is a symptom.
Valid uses of laxative agents include maintaining soft
feces, preventing straining at the stool (especially in the
elderly and patients with cardiac disease or hernia), and
evacuating the bowel prior to diagnostic or surgical pro-
cedures. Laxatives frequently are indicated both before
and after surgery to maintain soft feces for patients with
hemorrhoids and other anorectal disorders.

For these purposes, dietary fiber or bulk-forming
agents are generally satisfactory and preferable. A fiber-
rich diet and related laxative agents also have an established
role in the management of diverticular disease of the colon
and irritable bowel syndrome. In addition to perpetuating

dependence on drugs, the laxative habit may set the stage
for serious gastrointestinal disturbances. Irritable bowel
syndrome and other functional ills have been associated
with the habitual use of stimulant laxatives.

Treatment of Constipation

As with many other functional problems of the digestive
system, many specific herbs have been used to treat con-
stipation by different herbalists in different cultures. As
constipation is a symptom, there are no true specific treat-
ments. Effective, commonly used herbs include Rumex
crispus (yellow dock) and Plantago ovata (psyllium seed).

A Prescription for Constipation

Rumex crispus 2 parts
Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A stronger combination including anthraquinone-
containing herbs, such as senna, may be appropriate in
some cases. However, a dietary approach focusing on the
rational use of fiber is the most effective. I stress the word
rational here, because becoming an oat bran addict is not
far from drug abuse!

DIARRHEA

Frequent, loose, and watery bowel movements. (The
Merck Manual)

As with constipation, diarrhea is an important symptom
that can have many causes. These range from intestinal
infection and food sensitivities to colitis and anxiety,
highlighting again the importance of accurate diagnosis
and the dangers of simply alleviating symptoms without
addressing underlying causes. Diarrhea caused by colitis,
for example, should be treated differently from the trav-
eler’s diarrhea dubbed “Delhi belly” or its New World
relative, “Montezuma’s revenge.”

Technically speaking, the term diarrhea refers to
loose, watery stools that occur more than three times in
one day. This is a common problem that usually lasts a
day or two and goes away on its own without any special
treatment. However, prolonged diarrhea can be a sign of
other problems. It can also cause dehydration, a condition
in which the body lacks adequate fluid to function prop-
erly. Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children
and the elderly, and it must be treated promptly to avoid
serious health problems.

----- PAGE 275 -----
Diarrhea may be a temporary or a chronic problem.
A few of the more common causes of diarrhea are listed
here:

Bacterial infections caused by consumption of contami-
nated food or water; common culprits include Campy-
lobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, and Escherichia coli

Viral infections, including rotavirus, Norwalk virus, cyto-
megalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and viral hepatitis

Food intolerances, such as intolerance of lactose, the sugar
found in milk

Parasites, including Giardia, Entamoeba, and Cryptosporidium

Reactions to medicines, including antibiotics, antihyperten-
sives, and antacids containing magnesium

Intestinal diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease

Functional bowel disorders, for example, irritable bowel syn-
drome, in which the intestines do not work properly

Diarrhea may be accompanied by cramping pain,
bloating, nausea, or an urgent need to use the bathroom.
Fever or bloody stools may also be present. Acute diar-
rhea lasts less than three weeks and is usually related to an
infection. Chronic diarrhea lasts longer than three weeks
and is often related to functional disorders, like irritable
bowel syndrome, or disease, such as inflammatory bowel
disease.

Diarrhea is potentially dangerous in newborns and
infants, as it can lead to dehydration. General signs of de-
hydration include thirst, less frequent urination, dry skin,
fatigue, and light-headedness. Signs in children are dry
mouth and tongue, absence of tears when crying, dry di-
apers for three hours or more, high fever, listlessness or
irritability, skin that does not flatten when pinched and
released, and sunken abdomen, eyes, or cheeks.

The fluid and electrolytes (especially potassium and
sodium).lost during diarrhea must be replaced, as the
body cannot function properly without them. Water is es-
sential to prevent dehydration, but it does not contain
electrolytes. To maintain electrolyte levels, drink chicken
or beef broth, which contains sodium, and fruit bever-
ages, which contain potassium. For children, use a rehy-
dration solution that contains these necessary nutrients.
Such solutions are available without a prescription.

Treatment of Diarrhea

In most cases, replacing lost fluid to prevent dehydration
is the only treatment necessary for diarrhea. Medicines
that stop diarrhea may be helpful in some cases, but they
are not recommended for people with diarrhea caused by
bacteria or parasites, as stopping the diarrhea will trap the
organism in the intestines and prolong the problem.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -& 267

Until diarrhea subsides, avoid milk products and
foods that are greasy, high in fiber, or very sweet, as they
tend to aggravate diarrhea. As the condition improves,
add soft, bland foods, such as bananas, plain rice, boiled
potatoes, toast, crackers, cooked carrots, and baked
chicken with no skin or fat. For children, pediatricians
recommend what is called the BRAT diet, which stands
for bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast.

Specific Remedies

Many astringent herbs have a reputation as a specific for
diarrhea. Whether they are specifics or simply good ex-
amples of herbs with general astringent effects is difficult
to say. Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) may well be the
best gentle overall treatment for diarrhea, as it seems to
tone the lining of the small intestine. It is especially help-
ful for childhood diarrhea. Other excellent remedies are
Agrimonia eupatoria, Alchemilla spp., and Geranium macula-
tum. Stronger astringents, such as Quercus spp. (oak bark),
should be used only as a last resort.

A Prescription for Diarrhea

Agrimonia eupatoria 1 part
Geranium maculatum 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Combine dried herbs and prepare as an infusion; drink regularly
throughout the day until symptoms subside.

APHTHOUS ULCERS

Acute painful ulcers on the movable oral mucosa, occur-
ring singly or in groups. Also called “canker sores.” (The
Merck Manual)

These painful ulcers can appear singly or in clusters al-
most anywhere in the mouth. They are usually between
1 and 15 mm in diameter, have regular borders, and may
be covered in a pseudomembrane. Aphthous ulcers gen-
erally heal within 7 to 21 days, but can be a recurrent
problem for some people, a condition known as recur-
rent aphthous stomatitis, or RAS.

The etiology of this condition is unclear, but it is as-
sociated with lowered immune response, either locally or
as a sign of a systemic problem. Stress is also strongly im-
plicated, as are food sensitivities and nutritional deficien-
cies. A variety of other types of mouth ulcers often occur
in people infected with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), and may be associated with fungal, bacterial, or
viral infections, or with cancer, such as non-Hodgkin’

----- PAGE 276 -----
268 <- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

lymphoma. However, the discussion here focuses only on
aphthous ulcers.

Treatment of Aphthous Ulcers

The herbal treatment guidelines given here for aphthous
ulcers are best seen in the context of the general health of
the mouth, stomach, and digestive tract. A stress compo-
nent indicates the important role played by the nervous
system.

Actions Indicated

Anti-inflammatories play a core role by reducing the local-
ized mucosal reaction.

Antimicrobials inhibit the development of infection or
prevent the spread of bacteria to the rest of the body,
which can occur due to impaired buccal immune
response.

Immune system support is necessary if the ulcers suggest a
systemic problem.

Alteratives will help with any metabolic problems that
might be present.

Demulcents help soothe and relieve symptoms.

Nervines and adaptogens assist the individual in coping
with stress; counseling may also be indicated.

Specific Remedies

A number of specific remedies for aphthous ulcers are
well known. A primary specific is Salvia officinalis var.
rubia or var. purpurea (red sage). This is a variety of ordi-
nary sage that contains a stronger volatile oil. While it is
rarely used in cooking, it makes a perfect herb to use as a
mouthwash for aphthous ulcers and other inflammatory
conditions of the mouth.

A Prescription for Aphthous Ulcers

Mouthwash:
Salvia officinalis var. rubia 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Combine dried herbs and prepare as an infusion, to be
gargled often.

Internal use:
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Calendula officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 3 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 13.4. Actions Supplied by Aphthous Ulcer
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine, Calendula officinalis
Lymphatic Galium aparine, Calendula officinalis

Vulnerary Calendula officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Iron, vitamin C, vitamin B complex, and zinc supple-
ments can be very helpful, in some cases even enough to
clear the problem. Dental attention may be important, as
a tooth abscess or gum disease may be the focus of the un-
derlying problem. Similarly, a history of stomach ulcera-
tion or other gastric problems must be considered. Diet is
critical, as irritants of all kinds must be avoided. These in-
clude physical irritants, such as very hot or coarse foods,
as well as the chemical irritants in acid and very spicy
foods, alcohol, and tobacco.

PERIODONTAL DISEASE

Pyorrhea: Inflammation or degeneration of tissues that
surround and support the teeth. (The Merck Manual)

Gingivitis: Inflammation of the gingivae, characterized by
swelling, redness, change of normal contours, watery ex-
udate, and bleeding. (The Merck Manual)

Pyorrhea, a type of periodontal disease, commonly begins
as gingivitis, but on rare occasions may be the presenting
complaint for more serious systemic diseases, including
diabetes mellitus and leukemia. Ordinarily, the major
causative factor is poor dental hygiene. Gingivitis is com-
mon in puberty and pregnancy, suggesting that hormones
may also play a role.

Treatment of Periodontal Disease

These very localized conditions can have a profound ef-
fect on the health of the whole body. The American
Academy of Periodontology has concluded that peri-
odontal bacteria can enter the bloodstream, travel to
major organs, and begin new infections. Research sug-
gests that this may contribute to the development of heart
disease and stroke, increase a woman’s risk of having a
preterm, low-birth-weight baby, and pose a serious threat

----- PAGE 277 -----
to people whose health is compromised by diabetes, res-
piratory disease, or osteoporosis.’

Thus, tonic support is indicated for the mouth and
gums, as well as the stomach and digestion. Decaying
gum tissue will be swallowed constantly and can lead to
secondary digestive upsets. Pyorrhea must be treated as a
whole body issue that is focused in the mouth.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are essential to reduce populations of: bac-
teria that contribute to the decay process.

Anti-inflammatories reduce any localized mucosal reaction.

Astringents lessen local bleeding and other exudations.

Circulatory stimulants promote the circulation of blood in
the gums, aiding in detoxification.

Immune system support is necessary if gum disease suggests
a systemic problem.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Specific Remedies

Remember that any description of specific remedies for a
particular condition reflects the accrued wisdom and ex-
perience gained through generations of herbal history.
However, these remedies will not replace a balanced pre-
scription that takes into account system support in addi-
tion to all of the herbal actions indicated.

With that in mind, Commiphora molmol (myrth) may
be considered a specific remedy here, as it has powerful
antimicrobial effects against the pathogens that cause
gum disease. In addition, Krameria triandra (rhatany), an
astringent herb from Peru, has proved uniquely effective
for gum disease. Some proprietary herbal toothpastes can
help support treatment by supplying the indicated herbs
in that form,

A Prescription for Pyorrhea

Gum application:

Commiphora molmol 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Krameria triandra 1 part

Combine tinctures and apply to the gums three times a day using
a very fine brush. An infusion of buccal anti-inflammatory herbs,
such as Salvia and Matricaria, may be used as a mouthwash. Do
not swallow.

Internal use:
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum l part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 269

The combination of herbs for internal use supplies
the following actions to support the work of the gum
application.

Table 13.5. Actions Supplied by Internal Pyorrhea
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine,
Zanthoxylum americanum

Lymphatic Echinacea spp., Galium aparine,

Zanthoxylum americanum

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

Broader Context of Treatment
Herbal treatment will not replace necessary dental atten-
tion. Similarly, if pyorrhea suggests deeper systemic prob-
lems, these call for skilled diagnosis. Good personal den-
tal hygiene is essential. Avoid refined carbohydrates in the
diet. Flavonoids, such as quercetin, and procyanidins have
been suggested as supplements.

The following supplements may be relevant adjuncts
for the long-term treatment of periodontal disease.

Vitamin C: 3 to § g/day
Vitamin E: 400 to 800 TU/day
Vitamin A: 20,000 IU/day
Selenium: 400 meg/day

Zinc picolinate: 30 mg/day
Folic acid: 2 mg/day

ESOPHAGITIS AND
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX

Reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus leading to
localized infection. (The Merck Manual)

This relatively common and unpleasant problem affects
the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), the muscular valve
connecting the esophagus with the stomach. The condi-
tion is technically known as gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), a term in which gastroesophageal refers to the
stomach and esophagus and reflux means “to flow back.”
Therefore, gastroesophageal reflux indicates a return of
the stomach’s contents back up into the esophagus. The
result is heartburn or acid indigestion.

Normally, the LES valve opens to allow food to pass

----- PAGE 278 -----
270 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

into the stomach and closes to prevent food and acidic
stomach juices from flowing back into the esophagus.
GERD occurs when the valve is weak or relaxes inappro-
priately, allowing the contents of the stomach to flow up
into the esophagus. The severity of GERD depends on
the degree of LES dysfunction, the type and amount of
fluid brought up from the stomach, and the neutralizing
effect of saliva.

Dietary and lifestyle choices contribute to the devel-
opment of GERD. Certain foods and drinks, including
chocolate, peppermint, fried or fatty foods, coffee, and al-
coholic beverages, may weaken the LES, causing reflux
and heartburn. Cigarette smoking also relaxes the valve.
Other causes are obesity, pregnancy, and a structural
weakness of the diaphragm known as hiatus hernia.

Heartburn is the main symptom, which is experi-
enced as a burning pain that begins behind the breastbone
and moves upward to the neck and throat. The patient
may feel as if food is coming back into the mouth, leaving
an acid or bitter taste. This sensation might last as long as
two hours, and is often worse after eating. Lying down or
bending over can also result in heartburn.

Heartburn pain is sometimes mistaken for the pain
associated with heart disease or a heart attack, but there
are differences. Exercise may aggravate pain resulting
from heart disease, while rest may relieve the pain.
Heartburn pain is less likely to be associated with physi-
cal activity.

Treatment of Gastroesophageal Reflux
Disease

Treatment of GERD aims at decreasing the amount of re-
flux or reducing damage to the lining of the esophagus
from refluxed materials. Lifestyle and dietary changes are
effective for most people. First, however, we shall consider
relevant herbs, and then the broader context of treatment.

Actions Indicated

Demulcents soothe and coat the tissue of the esophagus,
insulating the mucosal lining against acidic gastric
contents.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Vulneraries aid the natural healing of ulcerations and
other lesions.

Astringents lessen local bleeding and other exudatations.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Carminatives may be needed if there is general disruption

* of digestive process.

Caution: Bitters are contraindicated in the initial
stages of treatment, as they stimulate the secretion of
stomach acid as well as peristaltic activity.

Specific Remedies

Any specific remedies indicated for this condition will not
replace a balanced prescription that takes into account all
of the herbal actions indicated and system support.
Demulcent vulnerary herbs have most to offer here.
Otherwise, there are no specifics as such.

A Prescription for GERD
Althaea officinalis 2 parts
Calendula officinalis 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, an
infusion of the anti-inflammatory herb Matricaria, sipped
slowly throughout the day, can be helpful. As an alternative, a
cold infusion of Althaea root can be taken whenever needed.

Table 13.6. Actions Supplied by GERD Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Derulcent Althaea officinalis
Lymphatic Calendula officinalis
Vulnerary Calendula officinalis
Astringent Calendula officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Calendula officinalis

Carminative Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

The following simple advice will reduce much of the
symptomatic discomfort associated with GERD while
treating the underlying problem.

Raise the bead of the bed to reduce heartburn; raising the
head of the bed allows gravity to minimize reflux of
stomach contents into the esophagus.

Avoid stooping and constricting pressure on the abdomen
(such as very tight clothes).

Avoid foods and beverages that weaken the LES, including
chocolate, peppermint, fatty foods, coffee, and alco-
holic beverages. Substances that can irritate a damaged
esophageal lining, such as citrus fruits and juices,
tomato products, and pepper, should also be avoided.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Decrease the size of portions at mealtime. In addition, eating
meals at least two hours before bedtime may lessen re-
flux by allowing stomach acid to subside and the stom-
ach to empty partially.

Lose weight. Being overweight often worsens symptoms;
many overweight people find relief when they lose
weight.

Avoid alcohol, as it increases the production of gastric acid,
contributing to general discomfort.

Stop smoking. Cigarette smoking weakens the LES.

Overadl. Deal with stress, anxiety, and any systemic health
problems.

Antacids neutralize acid in the esophagus and stom-
ach and soothe heartburn. Nonprescription antacids pro-
vide temporary relief. However, their long-term use
should be avoided, as it can lead to diarrhea, altered cal-
cium metabolism, and buildup of magnesium in the body.
Too much magnesium can be a serious problem for pa-
tients with kidney disease.

GASTRITIS

Superficial, mucosal lesions of the stomach that occur
very rapidly in relation to a variety of stresses: (The Merck
Manual)

A whole range of pathologies may underlie this common
complaint. Strictly speaking, the term gastritis means in-
flammation of the gastric mucosa, the tissue that lines the
stomach. A number of medical subdivisions are based
upon the various pathological changes that can occur in
the tissue, but from an herbal perspective, these distinc-
tions are not crucial. The approach described here may be
applied in all cases, unless there is another specific prob-
lem that is more pressing than the gastritis.

Treatment of Gastritis

With gastritis, inflammation is the primary focus when
selecting relevant actions and herbs. There are a number
of herbs that can help reduce inflammation, but these do
not replace any dietary or lifestyle changes that might also
be indicated.

Actions Indicated

Demutcents soothe the lining of the stomach, by either coat-
ing the stomach or exerting anti-inflammatory actions.

Antacids have little more to offer than symptomatic relief.

Anti-inflammatories reduce \ocalized mucosal reactions.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

THe DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .e 271

Vulneraries enhance the stomach’s natural wound-healing
abilities.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Specific Remedies

Vulnerary and demulcent remedies such as Symphytum
root, Althaea root, and Ubmus rubra speed healing by
soothing the tissue. Matricaria recutita is considered a spe-
cific for gastritis in folk treatments from Europe.
Filipendula ulnaria and Mentha ‘piperita act as antacids.
Remember, however, that specifics never replace a bal-
anced prescription that takes into account all ofthe herbal
actions indicated as well as system support.

A Prescription for Gastritis

Althaea officinalis 3 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: Take tincture in divided doses, to 5 ml in total, three
times a day. An infusion of Matricaria or Melissa sipped slowly
throughout the day will also help.

Table 13.7. Actions Supplied by Gastritis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Filipendula ulmaria, Matricaria recutita

Astringent Filipendula ulmaria
Vulnerary Matricaria recutita
Nervine Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Lifestyle is fundamental to both the cause and the treat-
ment of gastritis. It is essential to eliminate food irritants,
including chemicals, extreme temperatures, and fiber.
Acidic foods, alcohol, tobacco, and any other factor that
elicits symptoms must also be avoided. Stress will aggra-
vate or even bring on gastritis. Work conditions, back-
ground anxiety, and related issues must all be taken into
consideration. These lifestyle factors are discussed in
more depth under Peptic Ulcers.

----- PAGE 280 -----
272 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BOpy SYSTEM

PEPTIC ULCERS

A circumscribed ulceration of the mucous membrane
penetrating through the muscularis mucosa and occurring
in areas exposed to acid and pepsin. (The Merck Manual)

Ulcerative conditions of the stomach, duodenum, and eso-
phagus are very common in our society, and nonprescription
medicines for symptom relief are major moneymakers for
the pharmaceutical industry. Gastric ulcers occur along the
lesser curvature of the stomach, while duodenal ulcers are
found in the first few centimeters of the duodenum, or
the first part of the small intestine.

Drug treatment for ulcers aims primarily to reduce
the corrosive impact of stomach acid on the mucosal lin-
ing. This is accomplished with antacid chemicals or other
agents that reduce acid production in the first place, ei-
ther directly or indirectly. A range of plants can help here.
These appear to work in a variety of ways via a multitude
of mechanisms to facilitate a reversal of the condition.

Peptic ulcers result from a breakdown of the lining of
the stomach and duodenum. A number of possible factors
may be implicated, including increased secretion of stom-
ach acid and pepsin and infection with the bacterium
Helicobacter ‘pylori. Duodenal ulcers are more common
than gastric ulcers, which carry a greater risk of malig-
nancy. Ulcers of either type may cause nausea, vomiting,
loss of appetite, weight loss, and a gnawing, burning pain
in the upper abdomen.

It is now believed that most peptic ulcers are caused
by infection with the bacterium Helicobacter ‘pylori.
However, some peptic ulcers are caused by prolonged use
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a
group of pain relievers that includes aspirin, ibuprofen,
and naproxen sodium. NSAIDs cause ulcers by impairing
the stomach’s ability to protect itself from acidic stomach
juices. Normally, the stomach has three defenses against
digestive juices:

1, Mucus coats the stomach lining and shields it from
stomach acid.

2. The chemical bicarbonate, naturally present in the
stomach, neutralizes stomach acid.

3. Blood circulation to the stomach lining aids in cell
renewal and repair.

NSAIDs hinder all of these protective mechanisms.
With the stomach’s defenses down, digestive juices can
damage the sensitive stomach lining and cause ulcers.

Peptic ulcers usually have a chronic, recurrent course
with a variable symptom picture. In fact, only about half

of all ulcer patients present with the characteristic symp-
tom picture. The pain is often described as burning,
gnawing or aching; there may also be a sore, empty feel-
ing or a sensation of hunger. Antacids or milk will relieve
the gastric pain. For duodenal ulcers, the typical pain is
described as hunger pangs; for gastric ulcers, eating may
bring on pain.

Treatment of Ulcers

Through the skilled use of plants with demulcent,
antacid, astringent, and vulnerary actions, it is well within
the bounds of therapeutic possibility to bring about a
rapid and complete healing of any ulceration. Herbs such
as Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis
(marshmallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet),
Calendula officinalis (calendula), Matricaria recutita
(chamomile), and Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) are ex-
amples of remedies that may be used.

Actions Indicated

Demulcents soothe the lining of the stomach, either by coat-
ing the stomach or exerting anti-inflammatory actions.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Antimicrobials are indicated for dealing with H. pylori.
However, these herbs must be active in the stomach in
order for them to be effective.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

Vulneraries speed natural wound healing.

Carminatives will reduce any flatulence in the gastroin-
testinal tract.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Bitters aid the healing process in the latter stages of treat-
ment.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Caution: Emergency hospitalization is essential if the
ulcer perforates or hemorrhages.

Specific Remedies
Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marsh-
mallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet), Calendula of-
ficinalis (calendula), and Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
can all be seen as possible specifics for the treatment of
ulcers, (Please see chapter 10 for a discussion of the con-
troversy surrounding the risks and benefits of Symphytum
officinale.)

Based upon an understanding of their actions, the ra-
tionale for the use of these herbs to treat ulcers is very
predictable. Their content of anti-inflammatory flavo-

----- PAGE 281 -----
noids is thought to be very important to their activity (see
chapter 9). Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice) is an effective rem-
edy now used even in allopathic medicine as a treatment
for ulcers. In addition to these herbs, raw cabbage juice is
an effective traditional treatment. Similarly, demulcent
foods such as plantain banana and even potato can help.

As mentioned, newer research suggests that the bac-
terium Helicobacter pylori is implicated in the development
of many gastric and duodenal ulcers. This may help ex-
plain why Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) can be so ef-
fective against ulcers, even though digestive bitters are
generally contraindicated in this condition due to the fact
that they stimulate gastric secretions. Hydrastis is an ef-
fective antibacterial and may well be active against
Helicobacter pylori.

The successful use of herbs to treat peptic ulceration
falls into two stages. The first step is to reduce inflamma-
tion and initiate healing, and the second is to tone and
complete healing. The first prescription given here fo-
cuses on reducing inflammation and beginning the heal-
ing process.

Prescription | for Peptic Ulcer

Symphytum officinale root 1 part
Althaea officinalis root 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. In addi-
tion, a cold infusion of these herbs (fresh or dried) may be drunk
often to ease symptoms. Matricaria infusion drunk on an empty
stomach will reduce inflammation and help reverse the ulcera-
tive process,

The next prescription focuses on the second step in
the healing process.

Prescription Il for Peptic Ulcer

Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Symphytum officinale 2 parts
Matricaria recutita 2 parts

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day

Caution: If symptoms have not subsided within a week,
seek skilled diagnosis.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM = 273

Table 13.8. Actions Supplied by Peptic Ulcer
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Hydrastis canadensis

Astringent Symphytum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis,
Matricaria recutita

Nervine Matricaria recutita

Carminative Matricaria recutita

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment

Ulcer patients are vulnerable to many consequences of di-
etary abuse, as well as problems related to non-herbal
treatments for peptic ulcer, such as antacids.

Overuse of antacids can lead to impaired absorption of cer-
tain nutrients from the diet.

Overconsumption of milk or antacids can elevate calcium lev-
els in body tissues and urine, which can lead to kidney
stones.

A bland and milky diet may contribute to obesity.

Milk can aggravate dairy sensitivity problems.

Poor appetite associated with ulcers can lead to nutritional
deficiencies.

Dietary factors are fundamentally implicated in both
the cause and the treatment of peptic ulceration. In some
cases, ulceration may be due to a specific food allergy, but
ulcers are always aggravated by sensitivity to irritants. As
with other digestive system conditions, all irritant sub-
stances must be avoided, especially alcohol and tobacco.
Pepper, coffee, and anything that the patient experiences
as a problem should also be eliminated. Avoiding aspirin
and other NSAIDs is essential.

Small meals often are tolerated better than large
meals. Increasing the proportion of fiber in the diet has
been shown to reduce the rate of recurrence of peptic ul-
ceration. However, in the early stages of treatment, the
patient should eat a bland diet to avoid physical irritation.
Rest and reevaluation of lifestyle factors that may be caus-
ing stress are important. The creation of a stress manage-
ment program uniquely suited to the needs of the patient
should be a priority.

----- PAGE 282 -----
274 @ TREATVENI APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

HIATUS HERNIA

Protrusion of the stomach above the diaphragm. (The
Merck Manual)

This unpleasant yet common problem is caused when a
rupture forms in the diaphragm, creating an opening in
which the upper part of the stomach gets pinched (the
herniation). Hiatus hernias can be caused by obesity, preg-
nancy, tight clothing, sudden physical exertion (such as
weight lifting), straining, coughing, or abdominal injury.

Although most hiatus hernias cause no symptoms,
some people experience reflux symptoms. Occasionally,
reflux damages the lining of the esophagus, resulting in
erosions. Postural gastric reflux, which occurs when gravity
forces the stomach into the hernia, is a conumon presenting
sign. This most frequently happens when the patient is
bending over or lying down.

‘Treatment of Hiatus Hernia

The distressing gastric symptoms of this condition may be
treated with herbal remedies, but the herniation itself can
prove to be a therapeutic challenge. In severe cases, surgery.
may be necessary. Proper digestion and elimination are
pivotal to healing, as is nervous system support. Structural
issues are part of the problem, so muscular and skeletal
support must be taken into account. Appropriate manipu-
lative therapy, such as osteopathy, may be indicated.

Actions Indicated
Demutcents soothe the lining of the stomach, by either coat-
ing the mucosa or exerting anti-inflammatory. actions.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Vulneraries speed natural wound healing and may help
strengthen the diaphragm.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

Carminatives will help with any flatulence or colic.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Specific Remedies

Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marsh-
mallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet), Calendula of-
ficinalis (calendula), and Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
can all be seen as possible specifics. Symphytum has an es-
pecially valid role because of its content of allantoin, a
constituent that promotes wound healing. (See chapter 10
for a discussion of the controversy surrounding the bene-
fits and risks of this herb.)

The main treatment goal is to reduce inflammation
and facilitate natural healing through the use of demul-
cent and vulnerary herbs. The focus here is on easing the
symptom picture.

A Prescription for Hiatus Hernia

Symphytum officinale root 1 part
Althaea officinalis root 1 part
Filipendula ulmaria 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. An infu-
sion of these herbs (fresh or dried) may be drunk often to ease
symptoms. Carminative nervines may be added if stress is a major
component. (Valeriana officinalis is a good example. )

Chamomile and the Digestive System

Chamomile tea, perhaps the best-known herbal tisane, is widely employed as a digestive remedy
throughout Europe, and its therapeutic use is well documented. Matricaria recutita is uniquely
suited for digestive problems, combining as.it does carminative, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory,
antiseptic, and mild bitter actions. Analysis of its constituents reveals the presence of a volatile oil
that contains, among other compounds, azulene, chamazulene, and a range of sesquiterpenes.
Other constituents in chamomile provide a”bitter principle, flavones, glycosides, salicylic acid,
coumarin derivatives, and much more. These act together as a biologically evolved whole, each
contributing specific. effects to create a wonderfully rounded digestive remedy.

Through its relaxing, antispasmodic effects on smooth muscles, chamomile soothes colic, gen-
tly sedates the central nervous system, and eases the impact of stress. It exerts anti-inflammatory
effects upon the lining of the gut and provides valuable antimicrobial actions. The herb also in-
creases overall blood flow to the digestive system through local vasodilatory activity. All of these
properties work together to give chamomile an invaluable role in the holistic treatment of many
digestive system diseases, especially those associated with colic spasms. Various other indications

for this wonderful herb are highlighted elsewhere in this book.

----- PAGE 283 -----
Table 13.9. Actions Supplied by Hiatus Hernia
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Filipendula ulmaria

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Astringent Symphytum officinale, Filipendula ulmaria
Carminative Filipendula ulmaria

Nervine Valeriana officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment
Please refer to discussions of gastroesophageal reflux and
peptic ulceration.

FUNCTIONAL DYSPEPSIA

Symptoms referred to the Gl system in which a patholog-
ical condition is not present, is poorly established, or, if
present, does not entirely explain the clinical state. (The
Merck Manual}

Functional dyspepsia, often referred to as “indigestion,” is
a vague and variable problem that is functional in nature
but usually not caused by underlying structural issues.
Belching, distension, and borboryginus (rumbling sound
made by the movement of gas in the,bowels) often occur,
along with abdominal or gastric pain. There is often an
overt psychological component. While nervine remedies
and addressing lifestyle issues may help, it is too easy to
conclude that all indigestion is psychosomatic.

Treatment of Functional Dyspepsia

While herbal treatment centers on ensuring the health
and proper functioning of the digestive system, any
focus of illness in the body must also be supported with
tonics. Dietary factors are often crucial. However, the
symptom picture may be similar to some of the present-
ing signs of cardiac ischemia, peptic ulcer, or cholecysti-
tis. Thus, differential diagnosis is essential. Any case of
“indigestion” that proves intransigent requires skilled
diagnosis.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -2 275

Actions Indicated

The key to correcting such functional problems is to
“tune up” both metabolic and physical aspects of diges-
tion and assimilation, while at the same time easing symp-
tomatic discomfort with appropriate remedies.

Bitter stimulation promotes an integrated and adequate se-
cretory response to food or hunger, as well as increased
muscular tone in peristalsis.

Carminatives ease flatulence, reduce localized inflamma-
tion, decrease muscular spasms that lead to colic, and
act as mild antimicrobial agents.

Antispasmodics may be indicated if carminatives do not
ease abdominal cramping.

Nervines help relieve stress, anxiety, and tension; these are
usually also antispasmodic.

Specific Remedies
Every herbalist in every culture has a favorite remedy for
indigestion. These are often bitter carminatives or nervine
carminatives. European specific remedies include Gentiana
lutea (gentian), Mentha piperita (peppermint), Matricaria
recutita (chamomile), Melissa officinalis (lemon balm),
Humulus lupulus (hops), and Valeriana officinalis (valerian).

Often, the traditional simple (tea made from a single
fresh remedy) is the best treatment. This should be an
herb with a taste and aroma that the patient likes. Ideally,
it should also be a plant he or she could easily cultivate,
thus providing a steady supply of fresh leaf. The whole
spectrum of an herb’s actions will provide the clue as to
which is the best choice for the patient. For example, of
the suggested herbs (Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,
and Melissa officinalis), Matricaria has nervine and mild
bitter properties, while Melissa is also a diaphoretic. The
patient’s signs and symptoms will highlight the appropri-
ate actions needed.

The simple may be augmented with a combination of
bitter and carminative tinctures that aid and support the
general function of the digestive system.

A Prescription for Indigestion

Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Gentiana lutea 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture combination 10 minutes before eating

----- PAGE 284 -----
276 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 13.10. Actions Supplied by Indigestion
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Carminative Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis
Bitter Gentiana lutea, Matricaria recutita

Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Persistent problems call for skilled medical diagnosis.
Because of the functional nature of this problem, just
about anything that supports physiological activity or
helps the person to feel at ease will be indicated. Diet is
fundamental, but the problem can also be structural or
psychological. Because of structural considerations, ma-
nipulative therapies, from chiropractic to rolfing, have
potential value. Counseling for stress-related or deeper
psychological issues may also help.

Indigestion may be disease-related, but for the most
part, it results from eating too much or too quickly, eat-
ing high-fat foods, or eating during stressful situations.
Smoking, alcohol, medications that irritate the stomach
lining, fatigue, and ongoing stress can also aggravate or
cause indigestion.

Avoiding foods and situations that seem to cause in-
digestion is the most successful treatment. Excess stom-
ach acid does not cause or result from indigestion, so
antacids are not an appropriate treatment, although some
people report that they do help. Smokers can help relieve
indigestion by quitting smoking, or at least not smoking
right before eating. Exercising with a full stomach may
also cause indigestion, so scheduling exercise before
meals or at least an hour afterward might help.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE COLON

The colon, which connects the small intestine with the
rectum and anus, is where water and electrolytes are ab-
sorbed from the material that enters from the small intes-
tine. This material remains in the colon until most of the
fluid and salts are absorbed into the body. The stool then
passes through to the left side of the colon, where it is
stored until a bowel movement occurs. The contraction
of intestinal muscles and the movement of its contents are
controlled by nerves, hormones, and electrical activity in

the colon muscle. Movements of the colon propel the
contents slowly back and forth, but mainly toward the
rectum. A few times a day, strong muscle contractions
push fecal material ahead. Some of these strong contrac-
tions result in a bowel movement.

A wide range of plants have a direct impact on both
colon health and pathology. Astringents such as Myrica
cerifera (bayberry), demulcents like Althaea officinalis
(marshmallow) and Plantago major (plantain), and anti-
spasmodics such as Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) can be very
helpful in facilitating the healing of these distressing
problems.

Colitis, or inflammation of the colon, appears to be
caused by a number of different factors. Mucous colitis, also
called irritable or spastic colon, is a functional disturbance

in which the colon secretes an abnormally large amount
of mucus that appears in the stools. The most common
symptom is abdominal cramping accompanied by either
constipation or diarrhea, which sometimes alternate.

Herbs offer exciting therapeutic possibilities in the
treatment of mucous colitis (see Irritable Bowel
Syndrome later in this chapter). Ulcerative colitis is an-
other matter. This is a serious inflammatory disease that
seems to be autoimmune in nature and poses real chal-
lenges to any therapist, whether herbalist or orthodox
practitioner. However, a competent medical herbalist has
much to offer in the treatment of autoimmune condi-
tions. Inflammatory bowel diseases, including ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease, are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.

IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME

Motility disorders involving the small intestine and large
bowel associated with variable degrees of abdominal
pain, constipation or diarrhea, largely as a reaction to
stress in a susceptible individual. (The Merck Manual)

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disorder
characterized by cramping pain, gassiness, bloating, and
changes in bowel habits. Symptoms can include constipa-
tion or diarrhea, or may alternate between constipation
and diarrhea.

A whole panoply of symptoms can occur in IBS.
These include abdominal distress, erratic frequency of
bowel movements, and variability in stool consistency.
Mucus may be present in stools. Often, unpleasant ab-
dominal sensations associated with a range of generalized
symptoms are present. These may vary from bloating and
flatulence to headaches and anxiety.

----- PAGE 285 -----
IBS has very a diverse and sometimes obscure etiol-
ogy. While stress, anxiety, and other psychological issues
are often pivotal, they are but components in a multifac-
torial matrix. Another factor to consider is intolerance to
such common foods as wheat, corn, dairy products, coffee,
tea, and citrus fruit. Similarly, intolerance to the sugar lac-
tose occurs frequently. Excessive bran consumption due to
overeating of “healthy fiber” is another possible cause!
Occasionally, infectious or parasitic organisms are involved
(for example, Giardia, threadworm, Candida, and others).
Drugs, especially antibiotics, may also be implicated.

IBS symptoms generally occur in response to some
kind of trigger, which is often dietary or stress-related.
While emotional conflict and stress do not cause IBS, they
are common triggers for IBS symptoms. Stress also stim-
ulates colonic spasms, although this process is not com-
pletely understood. Stress-reduction training or counsel-
ing and support can help relieve IBS symptoms.

Other factors are also important. In a person with
IBS, the colon is more sensitive than usual and responds
strongly to stimuli that would not bother most people.
Eating causes contractions of the colon. Normally, this
induces the urge to have a bowel movement within 30 to
60 minutes. For a person with IBS, this urge comes
sooner, and is accompanied by cramps and diarrhea. The
intensity is often related to the number of calories and the
amount of fat in the meal. Fat, whether animal or veg-
etable, is a strong stimulus for colonic contractions. Many
foods contain fat, especially meats of all kinds, poultry
skin, whole milk, cream, cheese, butter, vegetable oil,

margarine, shortening, avocados, and whipped toppings.

In some people, specific foods or medicines may act
as triggers. Examples are chocolate, milk products, and
alcohol. Caffeine is also likely to affect people with IBS.
Even eating and distention of the colon due to gas can
cause the colon to overreact. A spasm may also delay pas-
sage of stools, leading to constipation.

‘Two extreme varieties of IBS are commonly seen,
with a spectrum of shades in between. The “spastic
colon” type of IBS is characterized by alternating consti-
pation and diarrhea, associated with and often triggered
by eating. The other extreme takes the form of a painless
and often uncontrollable diarrhea. This type of IBS,
known as mucous colitis, is a functional disturbance in
which the colon secretes abnormally large amounts of
mucus that appears in the stools.

While normal bowel function varies from person to
person, a normal movement can be described as formed
but not hard, free of blood, and painless to pass. Bleeding,

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 2 277

fever, weight loss, and persistent severe pain are not
symptoms of IBS, but may indicate other problems.

Treatment of IBS

Herbs offer a wide range of therapeutic possibilities for
the treatment of this condition, and often have more to
offer than other therapeutic modalities. Herbal support of
the digestive system and elimination is pivotal, as is help
for the nervous system. However, any focus of illness in
the body must also be addressed with tonics.

Actions Indicated

Astringents reverse the diarrhea and reduce any patholog-
ical mucus production.

Bitters promote appropriate digestive secretions, and often
will normalize bowel function on their own.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Carminatives help with any flatulence or colic.

Antispasmodics other than carminatives may be indicated if
cramping is severe.

Vulneraries are indicated if there is any hint of damage to
the lining of the colon.

Nervines help ease background stress.

Aperients may be indicated temporarily if constipation is
present. Do not use strong herbs, however, as there
may be a rapid swing back to diarrhea.

Specific Remedies

As with indigestion, many remedies can help with this
functional problem, but none is a true specific. Matricaria
recutita (chamomile) and Mentha piperita (peppermint) are
examples of the vast range of plants that have a direct im-
pact on IBS. With astringents such as Myrica cerifera (bay-
berry), wound-healing remedies like Symphytum officinale
(comfrey root) and Plantago major (plantain), and colic-
relieving antispasmodics such as Dioscorea villosa (wild
yam), much can be done to facilitate healing.

Orthodox practitioners in the United Kingdom pre-
scribe enteric-coated peppermint oil capsules to alleviate
the symptoms of IBS. In addition, peppermint oil has been
reviewed and approved by the German Commission E for
safe and effective use in treating IBS. As an example of the
intriguing possibilities that suggest themselves when herbs
are incorporated into orthodox medicine, the instillation
of peppermint oil into the colon during colonoscopy or
barium enema has been reported to reduce spasm, lessen-
ing the need for intravenous spasmolytics.*

----- PAGE 286 -----
278 « ‘TREATMENT APPROACHES By Bopy SYSTEM

A Prescription for IBS

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. In addi-
tion, a warm infusion of an appropriate carminative nervine
should be drunk frequently.

Table 13.11. Actions Supplied by IBS Prescription

ACTION HERBS
Astringent Myrica cerifera
Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory — Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita

Carminative Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita, Mentha
piperita

Vulnerary Matricaria recutita

“Nervine Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis

cs ESSEC
Herbs and IBS: A Clinical Study

A paper published in 1998 in the Journal of the American Medical Association details a clinical trial of
traditional Chinese treatments of IBS. This is an excellent example of the use of a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate a traditional herbal protocol. The study assessed the ef-
fectiveness of individualized treatment (a standard component of all good phytotherapeutic practice)

against a placebo.

Participants underwent routine IBS screening by a gastroenterologist. Chinese herbal practition-
ers treated the patients with confirmed diagnoses in traditional settings. Subjects were randomized
into three groups: One group received individualized herbal formulations, another’a standard herbal
IBS formulation, and the third a placebo. The gastroenterologist evaluated the participants again at
8 weeks and at the conclusion of the 16-week treatment period.

Both groups treated with herbs responded significantly better than the placebo group. Another
assessment 14 weeks after completion of treatment showed that patients who received the individu-
alized treatment maintained improvement, while the improvement weakened somewhat in the stan-
dard formula group. It is possible that this is because the individualized treatments were effective in
correcting underlying imbalances, while the standard formula addressed only symptoms.

Broader Context of Treatment

As with indigestion, because of the functional nature of
IBS, just about anything that supports physiological ac-
tivity or helps the individual feel at ease may be indicated.
Diet is fundamental, but identifying problematic foods
can be a real challenge. Structural considerations should
be taken into account, as should stress and psychological
issues.

Keeping a journal to record foods and situations that
trigger symptoms may be the only way to identify dietary
issues for a given individual. If dairy products cause symp-
toms to flare up, for example, the patient should cut down
on these foods, or try eating yogurt instead. (Yogurt con-
tains organisms that supply lactase, the enzyme needed to
digest lactose, the sugar found in milk products.) Large
meals can cause cramping and diarrhea, so symptoms may
be eased if smaller meals are eaten more frequently.
Similarly, eating smaller postions of foods that are low in
fat and high in carbohydrates, such as pasta, rice, whole-
grain breads and cereals, fruits, and vegetables, may be
helpful.

In many cases, dietary fiber may help ease IBS symp-
toms. Whole-grain breads and cereals, beans, fruits, and
vegetables are good sources of fiber. High-fiber diets keep
the colon mildly distended, which may help to prevent
spasms. Some forms of fiber also retain water in the
stools, thereby preventing the development of hard stools
that are difficult to pass. The patient should eat just
enough fiber that bowel movements are painless and eas-

----- PAGE 287 -----
ily passed. A high-fiber diet may initially cause gas and
bloating, but within a few weeks, the body will adjust and
symptoms will subside.

INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) refers to two chronic
intestinal disorders: Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis.
IBD affects 2% to 6% of Americans, or an estimated
300,000 to 500,000 people.

Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are serious in-
flammatory diseases that appear to be autoimmune in
nature and pose real challenges for practitioners of all
modalities. They generally present as a series of attacks of
bloody diarrhea that vary in intensity and duration and al-
ternate with symptom-free periods.

The causes of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
are not known, but a leading theory suggests that some
agent, perhaps a virus or bacterium, alters the body’s im-
mune response, triggering an inflammatory reaction in
the intestinal wall. The onset of both diseases peaks dur-
ing young adulthood. Either disease may cause persistent
abdominal pain, bowel sores, diarrhea, fever, intestinal
bleeding, and weight loss.

The discussion that follows refers specifically to ul-
cerative colitis, but the herbal approach is similar for both
forms of IBD.

ULCERATIVE COLITIS

A chronic, inflammatory, and ulcerative disease that arises
in the colonic mucosa, characterized most often by
bloody diarrhea. (The Merck Manual)

This disorder is a true colitis—in other words, active in-
flammation is a primary aspect of the condition.
Ulcerative colitis usually presents as a series of attacks of
bloody diarrhea varying in intensity and duration. These
will alternate with periods during which the patient expe-
riences no symptoms at all. Ulcerative colitis must be dif-
ferentiated from an infectious cause. A history of recent
travel or extensive antibiotic use may provide a clue.

Caution: Blood in the stools is a sign that must al-
ways be investigated by a skilled diagnostician.

‘Treatment of Ulcerative Colitis

Immune system issues and all they imply are crucial in ul-
cerative colitis (see chapter 21 for more information).
Obviously, the digestive system needs a great deal of sup-
port, as do the other pathways of elimination. Because of

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 279

the toll taken by stress, the nervous system may also need
attention. If liver involvement is suspected, give this vital
organ as much herbal support as possible with hepatic
plants such as Silybum marianum.

Actions Indicated

Astringents may help stem blood loss.

Demuzcents soothe surface irritation.

Vulneraries promote healing of ulcerations in the mucosal
lining.

Anti-inflammatories aid the body in its attempt to control
inappropriate inflammatory reactions.

Carminatives help relieve abdominal discomfort.

Antispasmodics help ease the muscular cramping in the
bowel that causes much of the pain.

Immune system support is essential and must cover the
whole range of issues involved.

Antimicrobials help combat any secondary infection that
might arise.

Elimination support must be given to the other organs of
elimination.

Nervines will help address the psychological components
of the condition.

Specific Remedies

Allium sativum (garlic) has been advanced as a potential
specific here and should be suggested as a dietary supple-
ment. Myrica cerifera (bayberry) is an excellent astringent
for use in this disease, but cannot be considered a specific.
Because of the autoimmune basis of this deep-seated con-
dition, one must be patient when selecting remedies, as
many possible herbs will come to mind.

A Prescription for Ulcerative Colitis

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Symphytum officinale 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Agrimonia eupatoria 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. At least
| clove of raw garlic should be eaten every day, and a warm in-
fusion of an appropriate carminative nervine should be drunk
often.

This prescription supplies the range of actions
needed for the colon-based symptoms, but does not di-
rectly address the autoimmune problem, See chapter 21
for treatment suggestions for immune system problems.
Increasing the proportions of Myrica or Agrimonia will

----- PAGE 288 -----
280 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

provide greater astringency. Alternatively, add Geranium
maculatum to the other remedies. Nervine and demulcent
activity may also need to be increased, but this will vary
from patient to patient.

Table 13.12. Actions Supplied by Ulcerative Colitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Astringent Myrica cerifera, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Symphytum officinale

Demulcent Symphytum officinale

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory  Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita

Carminative Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita
Antispasmodic Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Nutrition becomes a crucial issue in this condition, as
some degree of malnutrition is likely to occur. A number
of factors may contribute to nutritional deficits, each of
which calls for a specific therapeutic response.

Decreased food intake may be related to therapeutic dietary
restrictions or to the pain, diarrhea, nausea, and
anorexia caused by the disease itself.

Malabsorption may be related to decreased absorptive sur-
face due to disease or surgery, bile salt deficiency after
surgery, bacterial flora overgrowth, or drugs, such as
corticosteroids, sulfasalazine, and cholestyramine.

Increased secretion and nutrient loss can be caused by diar-
rhea or by the disease itself.

Increased utilization and nutrient requirements may be due
to inflammation, fever, infection, or increased intesti-
nal cell turnover.

A good multivitamin and mineral supplement will
help replace lost nutrients. In Textbook of Natural Medicine,
Drs. Pizzorno and Murray recommend vitamin supple-
mentation at least five times the U.S. recommended daily
allowance.‘ If there is loss of blood via the gut, zinc, mag-
nesium, and iron supplementation is particularly impor-
tant. If diarrhea is severe, electrolytes must be replaced.

In initial stages of treatment, avoid adding fiber to
the diet, in order to minimize irritation of the inflamed

mucosa. However, as symptoms are brought under con-
trol, a gradual buildup to a high-fiber diet is beneficial.
Lactobacillus-rich yogurt can also be very helpful. In ad-
dition, some people respond well to diets that limit the in-
take of salicylate-containing foods.

DIVERTICULITIS

Inflammation of one or more diverticula, potentially
leading to obstruction or perforation and to abscess and
fistula formation. (The Merck Manual)

A diverticulum is a small, saclike pouch or herniation of
the colonic mucosa that bulges outward through a weak
spot in the colon wall; these are collectively known as di-
verticula, About half of all Americans aged 60 to 80 and al-
most everyone over the age of 80 has diverticulosis, or the
condition characterized by the presence of diverticula.

When diverticula become inflamed, the disorder is
called diverticulitis. This happens in 10% to 25% of peo-
ple with diverticulosis. The characteristic signs and symp-
toms include pain and tenderness associated with consti-
pation that alternates with diarrhea. Fever is often
observed. Differential diagnosis is very important to rule
out carcinoma of the colon.

Diverticulitis is common in industrialized countries
where low-fiber diets are the norm, but rare in countries
where people eat high-fiber diets rich in vegetables. Fiber,
discussed in more detail earlier in this chapter, is the part of
fruits, vegetables, and grains that the body cannot digest.
Soluble fiber dissolves easily in water, becoming soft and
jellylike in the intestines. Insoluble fiber passes almost un-
changed through the intestines. Both kinds of fiber help
prevent constipation and make stools soft and easy to pass.

A low-fiber diet is thought to be the primary cause of
diverticulitis. The history of the condition itself provides
evidence for this theory. Diverticulitis first came to the at-
tention of American physicians in the early 1900s, a time
when processed foods were becoming widely accepted
and incorporated into the diet. Many processed foods are
made from refined, low-fiber flour, which, unlike whole-
wheat flour, contains no bran.

Straining due to constipation increases pressure in
the colon, which causes weak spots to bulge out and be~
come diverticula. Diverticulitis occurs when diverticula
become infected or inflamed. An attack can develop sud-
denly and without warning. The most common symptom
is tenderness around the left side of the lower abdomen.
If infection is the cause, fever, nausea, vomiting, chills,
cramping, and constipation may also be present. The

----- PAGE 289 -----
severity of symptoms depends on the extent of the infec-
tion and complications.

Treatment of Diverticulitis

Problems of this nature in the large bowel will affect
elimination in general, so support for the liver and kid-
neys is essential. In addition, the nervous system may
need help. However, the problem is often associated with
aging and can be linked to a whole range of health issues,
from diseases to drug side effects.

Actions Indicated

Antispasmodics help relieve abdominal pain caused by
cramping around diverticula,

Anti-inflammatories reduce the generalized inflammatory
response within the colon.

Antimicrobials help the body deal with any infection that
might be present.

Carminatives lessen discomfort due to flatulence.

Nervines ease stress, which may be either causal or a result
of the condition.

Specific Remedies

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) is a very useful specific here. It
is a good antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory herb, but
also has a specific impact upon this condition. Care must
be taken not to induce constipation through overuse of
astringent herbs.

A Prescription for Diverticulitis

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Mentha piperita T part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. An infu-
sion of Matricaria or Mentha piperita sipped slowly throughout
the day will help. One clove a day of garlic (Allium sativum)
should be eaten raw as part of the diet, or an equivalent amount
taken in supplement form. The supplement should be a 600 mg
oil “perle” containing 6 mg of allicin.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -@ 281

Table 13.13. Actions Supplied by Diverticulitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Viburnum opulus,

Mentha piperita

Anti-inflammatory — Dioscorea villosa, Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Allium sativum
Carminative Valeriana officinalis, Mentha piperita
Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Mentha piperita

Broader Context of Treatment

Diverticular disease appears to be associated with a low-
fiber diet, and there is little doubt that most patients gain
some relief from symptoms when a high-fiber diet is
adopted. The underlying bowel abnormality will remain,
but it will be much less likely to cause the same degree of
dysfunction. However, when symptoms are acute and se-
vere, a low-fiber diet is initially indicated to ensure that
roughage does not cause physical irritation. This is espe-
cially important when the patient is not accustomed to
high fiber content. As soon as the discomfort is brought
under control, the proportion of fiber can be increased
gradually until the patient is eating a high-fiber diet.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND LIVER DISEASE

Liver disease is particularly well suited for treatment with
herbs. In the unique and often confusing language of tra-
ditional herbalism, much attention is paid to “detoxifying
the liver.” Liver chemistry is extraordinarily complex, and
the role of the liver in human physiology is so fundamen-
tal to life that to researchers, the idea that simple plant
remedies have something to offer might be laughable.
This is unfortunate, because plants such as Taraxacum
officinale (dandelion), Silybum marianum (milk thistle),
Chelone glabra (balmony), and a variety of bitter tonic
herbs provide a robust materia medica.

Treatment with herbs is appropriate for a range of
liver conditions, from disorders requiring only gentle
liver stimulation to profound liver disease. As with most
claims made by the medical herbalist, pharmacological
and clinical research is beginning to provide support for
traditional observations and chemical insights into the
mechanisms involved.

Hepatotoxin-induced liver lesions may be reversed in
the early stages, but they cannot be healed simply by

----- PAGE 290 -----
282 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

removing the toxins. This points to a need for effective
remedies for liver diseases. Research into these plants,
reviewed in chapter 9, has resulted in the isolation of a
number of hepatoprotective “active principles.” Well-
researched herbs for the treatment of liver disorders in-
clude Silybum marianum, Schisandra chinensis, and Glycyr-
rhiza glabra.

Orthodox Western medicine does not offer many
treatments for hepatitis, cirrhosis, toxic liver damage, or
biliary tract disorders. In general, patients with liver disease
are given supportive therapy (dietary change and removal
of toxins) rather than active treatment. However, in world-
wide traditional medicine systems, herbs have long been
utilized for the treatment of liver disease, and a growing
body of scientific evidence bears out traditional uses.

Primary Causes of Liver Disease
Viral infection
Hepatotoxic chemicals, such as:
¢ Ethyl alcohol
¢ Peroxides (particularly peroxidized edible oil)
¢ Toxins in food (especially aflatoxins)
¢ Pharmaceuticals (mainly antibiotics, chemothera-
peutic agents, and CNS-active drugs)
¢ Environmental pollutants (xenobiotics)

Functions of the Liver
The liver is the largest solid organ in the body and has a
wide range of functions:

¢ Metabolizes protein

¢ Metabolizes carbohydrates and stores glycogen

* Metabolizes lipids; synthesizes cholesterol and bile acids
* Initiates bile formation

¢ Biotransforms waste, toxins, and drugs

* Produces blood-clotting factors and other blood proteins
¢ Performs important immune functions

The liver can regenerate itself after injury or disease,
but if pathology progresses beyond the capacity of the tis-
sue to generate new cells, the body’s entire metabolism
will be severely impaired.

Hepatoprotection and Phytotherapy
Pharmacological investigation has resulted in the isola-
tion of a number of antihepatotoxic (or hepatoprotective)
constituents in herbs traditionally used to treat liver dis-
ease. (Please see chapter 9 for details.) The antihepato-
toxic actions of herbs appear to be related to a combina-
tion of two main mechanisms:

Alteration of cell membranes, so that only small amounts of
toxins can penetrate into the cell

Therapeutic Indications for Silybum marianum

Silybum marianum (milk thistle) is the primary remedy utilized to protect the liver and treat a wide

range of liver disorders. Indications include:

* Toxic or metabolic liver disease {including alcohol- and drug-induced forms)

¢ Acute viral hepatitis

¢ Chronic-persistent hepatitis

© Chronic-aggressive hepatitis

¢ Cirrhosis of the liver

¢ Fatty degeneration of the liver

The best results are seen in toxic metabolic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Milk thistle arrests the course of
these diseases and stimulates hepatocyte regeneration. It shortens the course of viral hepatitis, minimizes
post-hepatitis complications, and strengthens the livers defenses against trauma caused by liver surgery.

The earlier treatrnent commences, the better the prognosis, but effective treatment is possible at
virtually every stage of these diseases. Over time, milk thistle may bring about complete restoration of
the liver, with a regeneration of liver cells four times the normal rate.

The liver detoxifies many psychopharmacologic drugs and agents, and the cumulative effect of
drug use on the liver can be devastating. Thus, people who want or need to take such drugs should also
take milk thistle, as it has been shown to prevent the liver damage they cause..

All of this suggests that regular use of milk thistle will provide protection to either the sick or the
healthy liver during the course of daily life. By stabilizing cell membranes and encouraging the regenera-
tion of cells destroyed during the normal detoxification process, milk thistle enables the liver and the body
to better cope with the deleterious effects of daily encounters with air-, water-, and food-borne toxins.

as ia Leh a

----- PAGE 291 -----
Acceleration of protein synthesis, which stimulates cell
regeneration

JAUNDICE

A yellow discoloration of the skin, sclerae and other tissues
due to excess circulating bilirubin. (The Merck Manual)

Jaundice is a symptom, not a disease in its own right.
Careful differential diagnosis is required to elucidate the
cause and thus the core treatment. However, a number of
plants (called cholagogues) can have a direct effect upon the
metabolism and buildup of bilirubin in the body. These
can be used to ease discomfort while other remedies focus
on the underlying cause.

The most common cause of jaundice is cholestasis (ar-
rest or impairment of bile flow), which may itself be
caused by a range of processes. This leads to a backup be-
hind the blockage and thus to the development of jaun-
dice. The cause of the blockage must be sought. Possible
causes include swelling of inflamed tissues and blockage
of ducts by gallstones, cancer, or even parasites.

Treatment of Jaundice

Herbal support of the liver, digestion, and circulation is of
primary importance. However, due to the often unclear
etiology of the disorder and the far-reaching effects of
bilirubin, general toning is also often indicated.

Actions Indicated.

Cholagogues have a direct impact on the secretion and re-
lease of bile.

Hepatics support and improve liver function and
metabolism.
Bitters can serve a tonic function and also often supply
actions similar to those of cholagogues and hepatics.
Eliminative support will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics will support the whole body in its
healing work.

Lymphatics promote tissue drainage.

Antipruritics help ease the often intense itching associated
with jaundice.

Antimicrobials are critical if the jaundice has an infectious
basis, and will help with surface immune support even
if no infection is present.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM - 283

Specific Remedies

In Europe, Taraxacum officinale root (dandelion) and
Verbena officinalis (vervain) have traditionally been consid-
ered specifics. Many of the bitter hepatic and cholagogue
herbs can also be seen as specifics. In addition, because
Silybum marianum (milk thistle) can help regenerate liver
cells, this herb can help ensure that bile buildup does not
cause hepatotoxicity. Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree),
Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone glabra (bal-
mony) should also be considered.

A Prescription for Jaundice

Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 1 part
Silybum marianum 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus J part
Peumus boldus 1 part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture combination three times a day,
building up to 5 ml three times a day. An infusion of Stellaria
media or distilled witch hazel may be applied topically to re-
lieve itching.

Table 13.14. Actions Supplied by Jaundice
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Verbena officinalis,
Silybum marianum, Chionanthus virginicus,
Peumus boldus

Bitter Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Antipruritic Stellaria media

Broader Context of Treatment
This will depend on the nature of the diagnosis.

CHRONIC HEPATITIS

An inflammatory process in the liver characterized by dif-
fuse or patchy hepatocellular necrosis affecting all hepa-
tocytes. (The Merck Manual)

The term hepatitis embraces a number of specific syn-
dromes with a range of causes and prognoses. They all
share a core pathology of an inflammatory response in
liver cells (hepatocytes) that can lead to cellular necrosis.

----- PAGE 292 -----
284 .<- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

An important distinction must be made between
acute and chronic forms of hepatitis. In chronic hepati-
tis, the necrosis and inflammation lasts longer than six
months to a year. Manifestations range from no symp-
toms at all to incapacitation due to liver failure. Such
chronic inflammation may result from a range of causes,
including:

¢ Autoimmune problems

¢ Viral infection

¢ Bacteria or other microorganisms

° Parasitic infestation

* Toxic damage due to alcohol or other drugs (recre-
ational or therapeutic), as well as some plant toxins,
such as pyrrolizidine alkaloids

¢ Preexisting pathology, such as Crohn’s disease

Differential diagnosis is essential in order to distin-
guish among viral hepatitis, chronic nonviral hepatitis,
and alcohol-induced liver disease. However, all forms of
active hepatitis are characterized by malaise, anorexia,
and fatigue. They may all begin with flulike symptoms,
and are often associated with a range of specific signs and
symptoms, from vomiting to jaundice.

Treatment of Hepatitis
The variety of possible etiologies necessitates a range of
herbal responses. All the pathways of elimination will
need support because of the extra load they will be carry-
ing. In addition, the cardiovascular system will benefit
from treatment with tonics, to deal with any complica-
tions related to portal hypertension. Other specifics will
depend on the nature of the cause.

In this section, we shall first look at nonviral forms of
hepatic inflammation, followed by viral hepatitis.

Actions Indicated

Hepatics help support and improve liver function and
metabolism.

Antimicrobial will be critical if the hepatitis has an infec-
tious basis, and will help with surface immune support
even if no infection is present.

Bitters help with whole-system toning.

Cholagogues have a direct impact on the secretion and re-
lease of bile, and thus may be indicated if jaundice is pre-
sent.

Eliminative support will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work.

Lympbatics promote tissue drainage.

Nervines may be needed for symptomatic support.

Specific Remedies

Asa whole constellation of pathologies may have a role in
hepatitis, it is difficult to talk of specific herbs. Because of
its regenerative potential, Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
comes closest to being a textbook specific. The tonic hep-
atics are all relevant, including Taraxacum officinale root
(dandelion), Pesmus boldus (boldo), Chionanthus virginicus
(fringetree), Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone
glabra (balmony).

A Prescription for Hepatitis

Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Silybum marianum 2 parts
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus 1 part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to
5 ml three times a day. Artemisia vulgaris is included as a bitter
nervine, but this herb could be replaced with Verbena officinalis
or another appropriate nervine.

Table 13.15. Actions Supplied by Hepatitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Silybum marianum,
Chionanthus virginicus, Peumus boldus

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Antihepatotoxic Silybum marianum

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Taraxacum officinale,
Peumus boldus

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Broader Context of Treatment
High-dose multivitamin and mineral supplementation is
recommended.’

Magnesium: 200 mg/day
Zinc picolinate: $0 mg/day
Vitamin A: 50,000 TU/day
Vitamin E: 200 TU/day

----- PAGE 293 -----
VIRAL HEPATITIS

Viral hepatitis consists of at least five different diseases
caused by five different viruses: hepatitis A, B, C, D, and
E viruses. All five viruses can lead to acute hepatitis.
Hepatitis B, C, and D may also cause chronic hepatitis.

Hepatitis A

Hepatitis A virus (HAV), also known as infectious hepati-
tis, accounts for 32% of cases of hepatitis in the United
States. HAV is spread by direct contact with an infected
individual’s feces or indirect fecal contamination of food,
water, or food that comes from HAV-infected water
sources. Symptoms of HAV may include fever, malaise,
dark-colored urine, light-colored stool, and jaundice.
Death is rare, but the elderly and people with immune
system problems, such as AIDS, are most at risk of dying
from HAV

Hepatitis B

An estimated 5% of the world’s population is infected
with hepatitis B virus (HBV). In the United States,
300,000 new cases of HBV are reported yearly. Chronic
liver disease develops in 5% to 10% of patients with acute
HBV infection, HBV may be spread by exposure to in-
fected body fluids and blood-clotting products, from a
mother to her infant at birth or soon after, or by unpro-
tected sex with an infected person, HBV may be asymp-
tomatic, but if symptoms occur, they can include abdom-
inal pain, anorexia, jaundice, malaise, nausea, and
vomiting. Fever and joint pain may also develop.

Hepatitis C
Hepatitis C (formerly called non-A, non-B hepatitis) is
the most commonly diagnosed hepatitis. Approximately
3 million people in the United States are chronically in-
fected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). It is primarily spread
by exposure to contaminated blood or needles; however,
the mode of transmission for more than 40% of cases is
unknown. HCV-infected patients rarely clear the virus
from their bodies, and at least 80% of those infected be-
come chronic disease carriers. Symptoms of HCV are
similar to those of other types of hepatitis.

Hepatitis D

Hepatitis D virus (HDV) was first observed in 1977 in pa-
tients infected with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV).
When HDV occurs in a patient who already has chronic
HBY, it is considered a superinfection; when a patient de-
velops acute cases of both HBV and HDV at the same
time, HDV is considered a co-infection. Among individu-

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 2. 285

als with HDV superinfection, 90% develop persistent
HDV infection, which eventually leads to chronic liver
disease. HDV may be spread by exposure to contami-
nated blood products or needles and by unprotected sex
with an infected person.

Hepatitis E

The hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a common cause of acute
hepatitis in underdeveloped areas of the world, and trav-
elers to these regions can acquire this form of hepatitis.
Hepatitis E causes acute hepatitis that usually resolves it-
self. Pregnant women are prone to developing severe
hepatitis due to infection with this virus. Apart from strict
hygienic precautions, there are no known means of pre-
venting or curing hepatitis E.

Treatment of Viral Hepatitis

Batchelder and Hudson have proposed the following
treatment principles for viral hepatitis:®

* Boost immune system function

¢ Prevent necrosis

© Support and encourage liver regeneration

© Promote bile flow, waste elimination, and detoxification
¢ Address addictions (e.g., alcohol)

Actions Indicated

Table 13.16 highlights some herbs to consider, grouped
by the actions they contribute.

Table 13.16. Herbs and Actions Useful in the
Treatment of Viral Hepatitis

ACTION HERBS

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Panax ginseng, Rehmannia glutinosa,
Withania somnifera

Antidepressant Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Verbena officinalis

Anti-inflammatory  Bupleurum falcatum, Matricaria recutita,

Curcuma longa, Glycyrrhiza glabra,

Rehmannia glutinosa

Antioxidant Allium sativum, Curcuma longa, Ginkgo biloba,
Silybum marianum

Antiviral Astragalus membranaceus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,

Hypericum perforatum, Lentinus edodes,
Phyllanthus amarus, Picrorrhiza kurroa,
Thuja occidentalis

----- PAGE 294 -----
286 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Detoxifying Schisandra chinensis, Silybum marianum,
Taraxacum officinale

Antihepatotoxic Curcuma longa, Gynara scolymus,

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Phyllanthus amarus,
Schisandra chinensis, Silybum marianum

Astragalus membranaceus, Echinacea spp.,
Ganoderma lucidum, Picrorrhiza kurroa

Immunostimulant

The use of Hypericum perforatum in this kind of viral
infection is worth exploring. The compounds hypericin
and pseudohypericin are known to disrupt viral replication
by damaging the integrity of the lipid envelope.’ Viruses
consist of nucleic acid enclosed in a protein coat. They
lack metabolic activity and do not possess ribosomes or
most of the enzymes necessary for replication. In addi-
tion, some possess a lipid envelope. Both the lipid and the
protein coats protect the nucleic acid, which may be ei-
ther DNA or RNA, from enzymatic degradation.

The lipid envelope of some virus types is derived
from host cell membranes and modified by insertion of
one or more spikelike glycoproteins. These surface spikes
allow specific interactions with receptors on host cells and
serve ag the major antigens of the virus. Viruses with lipid
envelopes include the herpes simplex viruses, hepatitis B
and C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, or the
AIDS virus), influenza A virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
and others. As all of these viruses have a lipid envelope,
some degree of susceptibility to Hypericum perforatum can
be expected. The disruption caused by hypericin is a light-
mediated process; however; some activity is seen in vivo.

One example of a treatment protocol for acute viral
hepatitis comes from Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy
by Simon Mills and Kerry Bone. Mills and Bone suggest
the following herbal prescription.

Treatment for Acute Hepatitis”

Echinacea angustifolia 35 mt
Hypericum perforatum 25 ml
Silybum marianum 20 ml
Phyllanthus amarus 20 ml
Total 100 ml

Dosage: 5 ml with water four times a day

Mills and Bone also suggest using Picrorrbiza at a
dosage of three 500 mg tablets per day. Note that this
herb can cause gastrointestinal side effects, such as

cramping and diarrhea. In addition, they recommend that
patients drink an infusion made from 4 g Achillea and | g
dried Zingiber three times a day.'!

Additional suggestions from Mills and Bone include
the following:!?

* Diaphoretics are indicated in all acute infections ac-
companied by fever. These include Tilia, Sambucus,
and Achillea, and are best taken as an infusion.

© Diaphoretics are assisted by combination with a diffuse
stimulant, such as Zingiber.

* Antiviral agents, which for hepatitis include Hypericum
‘perforatum, Phyllanthus, and Thuja.

* Immune-enhancing herbs, especially Echinacea and
Picrorrhiza

* Hepatoprotective agents to minimize liver damage
such as Silybum, Bupleurum, Taraxacum, Cynara (globe
artichoke), and Picrorrbiza

CIRRHOSIS

The disorganization of liver architecture by widespread fi-
brosis resulting in nodule formation. (The Merck Manual)

Cirrhosis is the second biggest killer of Americans be-
tween the ages of 45 and 65. Most cirrhosis is secondary
to chronic alcohol abuse. Many Western sufferers are
largely asymptomatic until generalized weakness,
anorexia, weight loss, malaise, and loss of libido set in. In
developing nations, cirrhosis often develops as a compli-
cation of viral hepatitis B.

The condition is characterized by widespread death
of liver cells, accompanied by progressive fibrosis and dis-
tortion of liver architecture. This can be due to many
causes, but in the United States and Europe is most com-
monly related to alcohol abuse.

Treatment of Cirrhosis

Primary herbal treatment is based around antihepatotoxic
agents, especially Silybum marianum (milk thistle).
Although cirrhosis is a progressive disease, the rate of
progression varies and the outlook is related to many fac-
tors. In this context, herbal treatment can make a signifi-
cant, positive contribution.

Actions Indicated
Hepatics support and improve liver function and
metabolism.

Cholagogues have a direct upon the secretion and release of
bile.

----- PAGE 295 -----
Eliminative sapport will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics sapport the whole body in its healing
work,

Bitters help with whole-system toning.

Lymphatics promote systemic tissue drainage.

Nervines will support any psychological work needed in
alcohol withdrawal.

Antimicrobials will be helpful for surface immune support,
even if no infection is present.

Specific Remedies

Because of its regenerative potential, Silybam marianum
(milk thistle) comes closest to being a textbook specific.
This wonderful remedy is essential to any treatment of
cirrhosis. In addition, the tonic hepatic herbs are all rele-
vant, and include Taraxacum officinale (dandelion), Peumus
boldus (boldo), Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree),
Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone glabra (bal-
mony). Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) may be useful, as
is Cynara scolymus (artichoke leaf).

A Prescription for Cirrhosis

Silybum marianum 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 1 part
Chelone glabra 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus T part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to
5 ml three times a day

The alcohol base of tinctures may pose a problem. If
these remedies cannot be obtained in an alcohol-free
glycerite form, the medicine can be put into a small
amount of hot water; the alcohol will evaporate and leave
behind the herbal component. Alternatively, the patient
may take Silybum marianum tablets or capsules, preferably
standardized to 80% silymarin.

Broader Context of Treatment

Strict avoidance of any specific tissue irritants, such as al-
cohol, is essential. If alcohol abuse is a causative factor of
the individual’s cirrhosis, it must be addressed. This will
include dietary advice as well as counseling support to
help with alcohol cessation. In Textbook of Natural
Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and Murray recommend the fol-
lowing supplements:!3

Vitamin A: 25,000 IU/day
Vitamin B complex: 20 times the US RDA

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .<> 287

Vitamin C: 1 g twice a day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/day

Magnesium: 250 mg twice a day
Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Zinc: 30 mg/day

Carnitine: 500 mg twice a day
Glutamine: 1 g/day

Lactobacillus acidophilus: 1 teaspoon/day

CHOLECYSTITIS

Chronic cholecystitis: A pathologic term for a thick-
walled, fibrotic, contracted gallbladder; clinically, it is
used to describe chronic gallbladder disease character-
ized by symptoms that include recurrent biliary colic. (The
Merck Manual)

Acute cholecystitis: Acute inflammation of the gallblad-
der wall, usually as a response to cystic duct obstruction
by a gallstone. (The Merck Manual)

Cholecystitis, or gallbladder inflammation, is character-
ized by severe pain that becomes localized in the upper
right quadrant of the abdomen, radiating to the right
lower shoulder blade. Nausea and vomiting are common
symptoms. Cholecystitis may be associated with gall-
stones, but the stones constitute a separate condition.

‘Treatment of Cholecystitis
Given time, cholecystitis responds well to herbal treat-
ment, but because of the extreme pain, the patient may
not be willing to wait. Diet is of fundamental importance,
as consumption of any fat will precipitate pain.
Orthodox medicine tends to downplay the role of the
gallbladder and bile in digestion. This may be the reason
the gallbladder is so often surgically removed when gall-
stones are present, and why it is said that such people lead
perfectly normal lives thereafter. However, even though
people can tolerate the absence of the gallbladder, a
healthy gallbladder helps ensure efficient digestion,
which directly decreases the risks of developing arte-
riosclerosis, irritable bowel syndrome, hypertension,
heart disease, stroke, and other major diseases.

Actions Indicated

Hepatic tonics support the work of the liver and so will
have a positive metabolic effect.

Anti-inflammatories may help reduce the severity of
swelling.

Antispasmodics help ease colic in the gallbladder or ducts.

Eliminative support must be provided to help the whole

----- PAGE 296 -----
288 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

body deal with the repercussions of digestive distress
and systemic problems.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work,

Nervines help ease the strain from pain and general worry.

Antimicrobials will provide surface immune support even
if no infection is present.

Caution: Bitters and strong cholagogues are contraindi-
cated, because they increase the strength of peristaltic
muscular contractions.

Specific Remedies

The usual hepatic tonics and antilithic (stone-dissolving)
herbs will be useful here, but cannot be considered
specifics per se.

A Prescription for Cholecystitis

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Chionanthus virginicus 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Taraxacum officinale root 1 part
Leptandra virginica 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
a carminative, antispasmodic nervine, such as Matricaria recu-
tita, should be taken regularly throughout the day. In addition,
the patient should take Silybum marianum tablets or capsules
standardized to 80% silymarin. Recommended dosage is 1 cap-
sule containing 140 mg of silymarin three times daily.

This prescription supplies antispasmodic, hepatic,
nervine, and preventive antilithic actions. Many other
herbs could have been used. Consider Chelone glabra, Verbena
officinalis, and Mahonia aquifolium. Vhe Eclectic physicians
would have suggested that small amounts of Hydrastis
canadensis and Lobelia inflata be added to such a mixture.

Table 13.17. Actions Supplied by Cholecystitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Chionanthus virginicus,

Leptandra virginica
Anti-inflammatory — Taraxacum officinale
Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Valeriana officinalis

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Leptandra virginica

Broader Context of Treatment
Diet and stress management are critical. Strong chemical
pain relief may be indicated for severe cases.

CHOLELITHIASIS

Presence of calculi in the gallbladder (cholelithiasis) or
the biliary duct (choledocholithiasis), (The Merck Manual)

Gallstones are pieces of solid material that form in the
gallbladder. They form as hard, crystal-like particles
composed of substances in the bile, primarily cholesterol
and bile pigments. Stones vary in size, from as small as a
grain of sand to as large as a golf ball. The gallbladder
may develop a single, often large, stone or many smaller
ones.

Gallstones appear to be caused by a combination of
factors, including inherited body chemistry, body weight,
gallbladder movement, and diet. An estimated 20 million
Americans have gallstones. The following groups of peo-
ple are those most likely to develop them:

¢ Women between 20 and 60 years of age (twice as likely
as men to develop gallstones)

¢ Both men and women over age 60

¢ Pregnant women or women who have used birth con-
trol pills or estrogen replacement therapy

¢ Native Americans, who have the highest prevalence of
gallstones in the United States (a majority of Native
American men have gallstones by age 60)

¢ Overweight men and women

¢ People who go on “crash” diets or lose a lot of weight
quickly

Treatment of Gallstones

Actions Indicated

Antilithies have a long tradition of use in moving or even
dissolving gallstones and easing pain.

Hepatic tonics support the work of the liver and have a pos-
itive metabolic effect.

Antispasmodics relieve colic in the gallbladder or ducts.

Nervines ease the strain from pain and general worry.

Eliminative support must be provided to help the whole
body deal with the repercussions of digestive distress
and systemic problems.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work,

Antimicrobials will help with surface immune support,
even if no infection is present.

----- PAGE 297 -----
Caution: Bitters and strong cholagogues are contraindi-
cated, because they increase the strength of peristaltic
muscular contractions.

A Prescription for Gallstones

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Chelone glabra 1 part
Leptandra virginica 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
a carminative, antispasmodic, nervine herb should be taken reg-
ularly throughout the day (for example, Matricaria recutita).

Table 13.18. Actions Supplied by Gallstone
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus,
Leptandra virginica

Antilithic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Valeriana officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Diet and stress management are crucial. Strong chemical
pain relief may be indicated in severe cases.

HEMORRHOIDS

A mass of dilated veins in swollen tissue at the margin of
the anus or nearby within the rectum; also called piles.
(The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Symptoms caused by hemorrhoids include bleeding, pro-
trusion of tissue, and pain. Bleeding from the rectum
must never be assumed to be due to hemorrhoids, but re-
quires prompt and correct diagnosis, as it could be a sign
of a serious problem.

Hemorrhoids are caused by increased pressure in the
veins of the anus. The most common cause is straining
during bowel movements. Constipation, prolonged sit-
ting during bowel movements, and anal infection are con-
tributing factors. Internal hemorrhoids occur near the be-
ginning of the anal canal, and external hemorrhoids occur
at the anal opening. Hemorrhoids may protrude outside
the anus. They are very common, especially during preg-
nancy and after childbirth.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM © 289

Treatment of Hemorrhoids

The problem is a combination of both digestive and car-
diovascular system issues. Thus, the treatment should in-
clude both blood vessel tonics and lower bowel support.

Actions Indicated

Vascular tonics will help with the muscular tone and gen-
eral state of well-being of the veins involved.

Astringents will reduce bleeding, if present, and tighten
the tissue locally. However, if they are used internally,
take care to avoid constipation.

Bitters assist digestive and eliminative processes and facil-
itate bowel motions.

Aperients and laxatives ensure easier bowel movements.

Vulneraries speed local healing of inflamed tissues.

Emollients soothe irritated tissue if applied externally.

Anti-inflammatories soothe inflamed tissues.

Specific Remedies

The materia medicas of many cultures contain herbs with
a reputation for effectiveness in the treatment of this
common problem. In Europe, nothing matches the action
of the aptly named pilewort (Ranunculus ficaria)! Apart
from this plant, most astringent or anti-inflammatory
herbs will help if applied topically.

A Prescription for Hemorrhoids

Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part
Taraxacum officinale 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Geranium maculatum 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A topical application is essential to alleviate symp-
toms and speed healing. A number of approaches may be
used to complement the internal treatment.

External Hemorrhoid Treatment
10 ml
80 ml

Tincture of Aesculus hippocastanum
Distilled witch hazel

Apply this combination after every bowel movement and as
needed. Salves containing any of many possible herbs may also
be used. Useful herbs include Calendula officinalis, Hypericum
perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Plantago spp. and Achillea
millefolium.

----- PAGE 298 -----
290 << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 13.19. Actions Supplied by Hemorrhoid
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Vascular tonic Ginkgo biloba, Aesculus hippocastanum

Astringent Geranium maculatum
Bitter Taraxacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis
Aperient Taraxacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment
Avoidance or elimination of constipation is often the key
to alleviating hemorrhoids. Thus, in addition to direct
herbal treatment of the hemorrhoids themselves, the fol-
lowing factors must be addressed.

Is the patient taking drugs that effect bowel motility—for ex-
ample, opiates, iron supplements, some antidepres-
sants, antacids, and laxatives?

Are any digestive conditions present, such as irritable bowel
syndrome, diverticular disease, or food sensitivities?
Does the patient have a sedentary lifestyle, or have there been

long periods of immobility?

Is the patient under stress or suffering from depression?

To ease bowel movements, a diet with medium- to
high-fiber content is necessary. This should be intro-
duced gradually if the patient is accustomed to low-fiber
foods. During the active treatment phase, avoid the sand-
paper effect that roughage can cause!

References

1. van Gorkom et al. Anthranoid laxatives and their poten-
tial carcinogenic effects. Alimentary Pharmacology and
Therapeutics 1999 Apr; 13(4):443-52.

2. Periodontal disease as a potential risk factor for systemic
diseases. Journal of Periodontology 1998; 69:841-50.

3. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

4. Kingham JGC. Commentary: Peppermint oil and colon
spasm. The Lancet 1995 Oct 14; 346:986.

5, Bensoussan A, et al. Treatment of irritable bowel syn-
drome with a Chinese herbal medicine. Journal of the
American Medical Association 1998 Nov 11;
280(18):1585-9.

6. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

7. Ibid.

8. Batchelder HJ, Hudson T. Therapeutic approaches to
viral hepatitis. The Protocol Journal of Botanical Medicine
1995; 1(2):131-74.

9. Tang J, Colacino JM, Larsen SH, et al. Virucidal activity
of hypericin against enveloped and non-enveloped DNA
and RNA viruses. Antiviral Research 1990 Jun;
13(6):313-25.

10. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine, Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

11. Ibid.

12. Ibid.

13. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Suggested Reading

Mills S, Bone K! Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern
Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone,
1999.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 299 -----
14

amos

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

he beauty of a spring meadow in bloom, the pro-

found sense of presence in a grove of redwood

trees—the heart takes flight and the spirit is
healed. However, this is not the only way in which the
magnificent flora with which we share our planet brings
healing to our hearts. A wide variety of herbs offer tangi-
ble, physical nourishment and healing for hearts troubled
by the ills of modern society.

Consider the word cordial, app!
ing herbal drink and the human expression of heartfelt
friendliness. The cordial was a medieval drink based on
borage, an herb with a reputation for warming and glad-
dening the heart. The word derives from the Latin cordialis,
meaning “of or for the heart,” which in turn is based on the
Latin cor, meaning “heart.” The original sense of the word
was medicine, food, or drink that stimulates the heart.

Herbs still maintain a central position in orthodox
treatment protocols for various heart problems. Plants con-
taining cardiac glycosides are used throughout the world to
treat heart failure and certain cases of cardiac arrhythmia. In
conditions like these, herbs can increase the strength and
normalize the rate of the heartbeat. The real value of these
herbs lies in their ability to increase the efficiency of the
heart without increasing the heart muscle’s need for oxygen.

However, the materia medica available to the medical
herbalist embraces many more relevant possibilities than
strong cardioactive remedies. Half of the annual mortal-
ity in America results from heart and blood vessel dis-
eases. Modern cardiology is almost miraculously effective
when it comes to acute emergencies, but what about
maintaining good health and preventing the development
of cardiovascular pathology? Can we do more for our-
selves than simply minimizing risk factors, eating prop-
erly, and exercising appropriately? Emphatically, yes!
Herbal tonics can contribute by offering real possibilities
for the practice of preventive medicine.

Although it is resplendent with wonder drugs, the
materia medica of modern medical science is sorely lack-
ing in preventive medicines. There are also profound
concerns about toxicity related to long-term use of pre-

ied to both the warm-

291

scription medications. Tonics are not mentioned in phar-
macology texts, as the concept is considered illusory.
Overlooking the potential of gentle toning therapies in
favor of intensely active ones can be considered one of the
core problems with orthodox health care. However, this
need not be seen as a clash of mutually exclusive ap-
proaches. There is a place in cardiovascular medicine for
gentle toning, just as there is a place for the often dra-
matically successful techniques of modern cardiology. In
fact, used within a holistic framework, these two extremes
can complement and support each other.

As discussed in chapter 9, an increasing amount of re-
search is investigating the cardiovascular effects of plant
constituents. As fascinating as this is, the benefits of such
research accrue to the pharmaceutical industry, as the in-
formation is rarely about the plant from which the con-
stituent has been extracted. It would prove almost impos-
sible to develop herbal approaches to treatment if natural
product research was the sole source of information. In
the material that follows, the focus is on the traditional
practitioner’s approach, with newer findings referenced
when relevant.

HERBS AND CARDIOVASCULAR
HEALTH

The medical herbalist recognizes a broad range of relevant
herbs for the cardiovascular system. As a group, they are
known as cardiac remedies, a general term for herbs that have
an action on the heart. Some of the remedies in this group
are powerful cardioactive agents, such as Digitalis spp. (fox-
glove) and the somewhat milder Convallaria majalis (lily of
the valley), while others are gentler and safer cardiotonics,
such as Crataegus (hawthorn) and Tilia (linden flower).
Cardioactive herbs owe their effects on the heart to
highly active substances, such as cardiac glycosides, and
thus have both the strengths and the drawbacks of these
powerful constituents. Cardiotonics have a beneficial ac-
tion on the heart and blood vessels, but do not contain
cardiac glycosides. While they do not offer the dramatic,

----- PAGE 300 -----
292 «<- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

rapid, and often life-saving benefits of many of the drugs
used in modern cardiology, cardiotonics confer a definite
advantage in the treatment or prevention of chronic de-
generative conditions. (See chapter 9 for a more detailed
discussion of the differences between cardioactive and
cardiotonic agents, and chapter 10 for information on the
toxicity of cardiac glycosides.)

Blood vessel or vascular. tonics are often rich in con-
stituents called flavonoids. These remarkable herbs in-
clude Crataegus spp., Allium sativum, Tilia platyphyllos, and
Ginkgo biloba.

There are, of course, some limitations to the use of
herbs to treat the heart. Perhaps the most important of
these is not herbal, but human. The problem involves
self-diagnosis, which can be a very hazardous pastime. In
the hands of a competent clinical herbalist, medicinal
plants offer a great deal in the treatment of cardiovascu-
lar conditions, but for the nonprofessional, self-diagnosis
or self-selection of herbs should never replace skilled di-
agnosis or serve as a substitute for appropriate prescrip-
tion medicines. The cardiac glycoside-containing car-
dioactives cannot be used safely without certain requisite
medical skills, and are inappropriate for use in folk
medicine. However, cardiotonic herbs can and should
play a role in holistic programs designed to meet the
unique needs and circumstances of each individual.

Table 14.1. Primary Actions for the Cardiovascular
System

ACTION HERBS

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius,

Lycopus europaeus, Scrophularia nodosa
Circulatory stimulant Capsicum annuum

Peripheral vasodilator Zanthoxylum americanum, Ginkgo biloba

Hypotensive Tilia platyphyllos, Viscum album, Allium sativum
Hypertensive Ostisus scoparius
Diuretic Taraxacum officinale, Achillea millefolium,

cardioactive herbs

Aesculus hippocastanum, Fagopyrum esculentum,
Ginkgo biloba

Vascular tonic

Leonurus cardiaca, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Nervine

Antispasmodic Viburnum opulus, Valeriana officinalis

Tonics for the Cardiovascular System

A number of remarkable cardiovascular tonics are avail-
able to the phytotherapist. Each of the herbal traditions
of the world has its own excellent tonic plants, but here
we will primarily discuss cardiovascular tonics used in
Western therapy.

European Cardiovascular Tonics
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Allium sativum (garlic)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

To this list of irreplaceable European remedies, we
can add others that have entered our materia medica from
other parts of the world.

Cardiovascular Tonics from Other Traditions
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Selenicereus grandiflorus (night-blooming cereus)
Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Commiphora mukul. (guggul)

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) is one of the most use-
ful of the cardiotonic herbs. Simply stated, hawthorn will
help keep the heart healthy, preventing the development
of coronary disease. It may be safely used as part of the
treatment protocols for conditions such as heart failure,
angina pectoris, and hypertension. While hawthorn
berries are the most often used part of this shrub, the
flowers and leaves may also play a role. The constituents
of hawthorn highlight the importance of flavones and
flavonoids in the healing impact of herbs on the cardio-
vascular system.

As hawthorn is one of the more aesthetic herbal
remedies, a very pleasant tea may be made by infusing
1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried herb in a cup of hot water.
This should be drunk regularly. Tincture is a convenient
and effective way of gaining the therapeutic benefits of
this special remedy. For best effects, 30 to 40 drops
should be taken three times daily, then morning and
evening as a long-term maintenance dose. Hawthorn may
be taken over long periods of time, as there is no risk of
toxicity.

Hawthorn need not be used as a medicine; it can be
added to the diet as a food. For an example of how this
heart tonic can be incorporated into the daily diet, try
making a hawthorn conserve.

----- PAGE 301 -----
Hawthorn Berry Conserve

Soak a large handful of dried hawthorn berries in apple juice
(enough to cover plus a few inches) with a cinnamon stick. Leave
overnight in the refrigerator. Remove the cinnamon stick and
blend the berries with a little honey. Keep refrigerated.

Ginkgo biloba, another important heart herb, is sup-
ported by an abundance of research that has revealed
many important therapeutic effects. Ginkgo is recom-
mended both for the prevention and treatment of a
number of heart and blood vessel problems, especially
those due to peripheral circulatory and cerebral vascular
insufficiencies. Research shows that it lowers blood
pressure, dilates peripheral blood vessels, and increases
peripheral blood flow. In studies involving patients with
peripheral arterial insufficiency, Ginkgo significantly im-
proved subjects’ ability to walk without pain, Other ex-
citing applications include the treatment of circulatory
disturbances related to aging and diabetes, as well as the
treatment of depression, tinnitus, Alzheimer’s disease,
and tobacco addiction.

Another traditional European heart tonic is Tilia
platypbyllos (linden). This herb is especially indicated
when anxiety and‘tension are part of the spectrum of fac-
tors impacting the patient, as it is an excellent relaxing
nervine. Two herbs from the ayurvedic tradition are prov-
ing to offer much in the way of tonic support of the car-
diovascular system. Coleus forskoblii (coleus) offers a range
of therapeutic possibilities that make it uniquely relevant
in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as hyper-
tension, congestive heart failure, and angina. Commiphora
mukul (guggul) can be effective in lowering serum lipids.
Both herbs are discussed later in this chapter.

Allium sativum (garlic) has a range of effects upon
cardiovascular health. It helps reduce serum cholesterol
and triglyceride levels while raising levels of high-density
lipoproteins (HDL). It can also act as an effective in-
hibitor of platelet activating factor (PAF). Taken together,
these properties provide a potential means of preventing
atherosclerosis and thrombosis, hypertension, heart at-
tacks, and stroke. Garlic’s antioxidant properties help pre-
vent the peroxidation of fats, yet another contributing
factor in the development of atherosclerosis.

Other Important Cardiovascular Actions

In addition to the heart tonics, a number of other herbal
actions can be helpful. Especially important are the relax-
ing herbs, such as Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort),
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), and Valeriana officinalis

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 293

(valerian). Circulatory stimulants, such as Capsicum annuum
(cayenne), Zingiber officinale (ginger), and Zanthoxylum
americanum (prickly ash), increase blood flow, supporting
oxygenation of tissue and the elimination of waste. This
makes them important in circulatory problems, as well as
in conditions such as rheumatism.

There are some herbs with effects on the cardiovas-
cular system that should be avoided even though they do
not contain cardiac glycosides. Examples are Cytisus sco-
parius (Scotch broom) and Ephedra spp. (ma huang), both
of which stimulate heart activity and raise blood pressure.
They are contraindicated in many conditions and should
not be considered tonics.

LIFESTYLE AND RISK FACTORS

A well-rounded program for strengthening the heart and
cardiovascular system must involve more than herbs. A
major influence on the development of heart disease is
risk factors, or habits or traits that make a person more
likely to develop a disease, whose impact can be mini-
mized, Whole forests have been turned into paper for ar-
ticles about these risk factors, and anyone trying to read
them all and follow the debates that rage invites a hyper-
tensive crisis! However, some general points can be made.

The origins of heart disease are complex and can be
confusing. Some of the risk factors involved are well
known and provide us with clear guidelines for preven-
tion, but simplistic statements about saturated fats, jog-
ging, or new research can be misleading. For example,
one study failed to show any association between heavy
coffee consumption and long-term hypertension. How-
ever, heavy coffee drinkers also tend to be heavy smokers,
which in turn may be associated with lower body weight
and thus a lower blood pressure—but with an increased
risk of heart attack!

Some of the risk factors for heart-related problems
cannot be influenced by preventive strategies, such as ge-
netics and age, but many others can be. Similar risk fac-
tors contribute to the development of many major
pathologies that assail the cardiovascular system, so some
overall preventive strategies can be applied. The major
risk factors for cardiovascular disease that caz be altered
are cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, high choles-
terol, obesity, and physical inactivity. Other risk factors,
such as diabetes, are also potentially controllable.

Even just one risk factor raises an individual’s chances
of developing heart-related problems. The more risk fac-
tors a person has, the more likely he or she is to develop
cardiovascular disease. From the wealth of research

----- PAGE 302 -----
294 @ TREATMFN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Hawthorn: A Classic Cardiotonic

Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.) is the best known of the car-
diotonic herbs, and is possibly the most valuable tonic
remedy for the cardiovascular system found in the plant
kingdom. There are much stronger herbs, such as fox-
glove, but none that provides the nourishing regeneration
that hawthorn does. In addition, this invaluable heart
remedy contains no cardiac glycosides.

The American Eclectic herbalist Ellingwood said of
hawthorn,

... it is superior to any of the well known and tried remedies at
present in use for the treatment of heart disease, because it
seems to cure while other remedies are only palliative at best.

This was written at a time when hawthorn had just been
introduced into North American medicine. It was the new
wonder herb of the day, much like ginkgo or Siberian gin-
seng today!

Hawthorn can be considered a specific remedy for
many cardiovascular diseases. A tonic in the true sense, its
therapeutic benefits are realized only when a whole plant
preparation is used. When the isolated constituents were
tested separately in the laboratory, their individual ef-
fects were insignificant; the whole plant, however, has
unique and valuable properties that have been confirmed
in clinical studies. Herbal synergy again!

Indications for Hawthorn
In 1994, the German Federal Ministry of Health published a
monograph Officially recognizing hawthorn as a heart rem-
edy. The monograph concluded that the herb is positively
inotropic, chronotropic, and dromotropic, and that it im-
proves coronary and myocardial circulation by dilating the
coronary arteries. Perhaps most significant was the finding
that hawthorn has no side effects or contraindications.
According to the ministry, the main clinical applica-
tions for hawthorn are:

* Long-term treatment of loss of cardiac function

* Any condition in which the patient notes subjective feel-
ings of congestion and oppression in the heart region

¢ Mild cardiac arrhythmias

* Conditions of the aging heart that do not warrant the
use of foxglove

In his book Herbal Medicine, German physician
Rudolf Weiss suggests the following indications.!

* Patients with “degeneration of the cardiac muscle or
coronary artery disease”

« Anginal symptoms of coronary artery disease (long-
term treatment)

¢ Hypertension, primarily to improve cardiac function

« Weakness of the myocardium after infectious disease

« Muscular insufficiency in patients taking digitalis
(hawthorn may optimize the effects of digitalis)

¢ Cardiac arrhythmias, mainly extrasystoles and tachy-
cardia

In short, any degenerative condition of the cardio-
vascular system will benefit from the use of hawthorn.
Some specific examples include myocardial problems
(such as mild congestive heart failure), coronary artery
disease, and associated conditions (such as hypertension).
Hawthorn speeds recovery from heart attacks and lowers
blood pressure in essential hypertension. Used in con-
junction with other hypotensive agents, hawthorn will
help keep the heart healthy and prevent the develop-
ment of serious coronary disease. It will also help guard
against heart weakness after infectious disease, such as
pneumonia or diphtheria.

For arteriosclerosis and its complications, hawthorn is
often combined with Tilia platyphyllos (linden flowers) or
Allium sativum (garlic). Viburnum opulus (cramp bark),
Tilia, and Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap) are good com-
plements in cases of hypertension.

in particular. hawthorn is a specific in cases in which no
disease state exists but the patient is experiencing a grad-
ual, age-related loss of cardiac function. Because of its lack
of toxicity, accumulation, and habituation, it may be used
long term, allowing a gradual and safe attainment of thera-
peutic goals, especially. in the elderly.

A theoretical interaction between Crataegus and the
cardiac glycosides should be mentioned. The theory sug-
gests that Crataegus may enhance the activity of car-
dioactive plants (such as Digitalis and Convallaria majalis)
as well as the cardiac glycoside drugs digitoxin and
digoxin.” This could afford the clinician an opportunity to
reduce the dosage of cardiac glycoside—containing sub-
stances while maintaining the desired effect—thus reduc-
ing the potential for toxicity. However, this interaction has
not been confirmed?

Mechanisms of Action

How does this unique herb achieve such remarkable effects?
Research suggests that many of its observable effects can be
explained by its ability to improve coronary circulation. It

----- PAGE 303 -----
PHF CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM we = 295

dilates the coronary arteries, relieving hypoxemia (lack of
oxygen in the blood). It thus reduces the likelihood of
angina attacks and relieves symptoms of angina when they
occur,

The herb also directly affects the cells of the heart
muscle, enhancing both activity and nutrition. It is posi-
tively inotropic. as it gently increases the force of con-
traction of the heart muscle. However, its activity is quite
different from that of the cardiac glycoside—containing
remedies. They impact the contractile fibers, while
hawthorn improves the availability and utilization of
energy. This facilitates a gentle but long-term, sus-
tained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the
myocardium. Hawthorn does not produce rapid results,
but the results are persistent once achieved.

Hawthorn’s cardioprotective activity is generally
attributed to its content of flavonoids, including
flavonoglycosyls, hyperoside, rutin, and oligomeric
proanthocyanidins (OPCs). Numerous flavonoid
molecules have positive effects on the cardiovascular sys-
tem, but the particular combination of flavonoid-based

* constituents in hawthorn appears to be pivotal to its ben-
eficial cardiovascular activity.

Research suggests that OPCs in hawthorn leaves and
flowers scavenge free radicals and inhibit an enzyme
called human neutrophil elastase. This enzyme is released
by white blood cells in greater amounts during hypoxia
(lack of oxygen), and, along with free radicals, may be
partly responsible for the damage to the heart that occurs
under such conditions. Hawthorn extracts improve the en-
ergy dynamics of the heart muscle, exerting a protective
effect on the myocardium. The well-known effects of
OPCs as both free radical scavengers and inhibitors of neu-
trophil elastase may be the basis of this activity.

Not only do flavonoids have potent antioxidant ef-
fects, but research shows that they increase collagen cross-
linking in the tissue of vascular walls, strengthening blood
vessels. In addit on, epidemiological studies have demon-
strated an association between dietary flavonoid intake and
reduced risk of heart disease, heart attacks, and stroke,456
See chapter 9 for more information on the pharmacological
effects of this important group of phytochemicals,

A Look at the Evidence

Because of its positive impact on cardiac function,
hawthorn extract has been extensively studied for its ef-
fects in congestive heart failure. A commonly used classi-
fication of heart failure is that formulated by the New
York Heart Association (NYHA).”

Table 14.2, New York Heart Association
Functional Classification of Heart Failure

CLASSIFICATION DEFINITION

Class | No limitation of physical activity

Class Il . Slight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable
at rest, but ordinary physical activity results in

fatigue, palpitations, dyspnea, or anginal pain

Class III Marked limitation of physical activity. Comfortable
at rest, but less than ordinary physical activity
results in fatigue, palpitations, dyspnea, or anginal

pain

Class IV Unable to carry out any physical activity without

discomfort

A number of placebo-controlled, double-blind clini-
cal trials have demonstrated the value of Crataegus in
NYHA class II cardiac insufficiency.® In fact, a recent re-
view of the pharmacology and therapeutics of Crataegus
concluded, “... it may be useful in the treatment of NYHA
functional class I! CHF.”

In one multicenter, double-blind study, 136 patients
with class Il cardiac insufficiency (according to NYHA cri-
teria) were treated with a hawthorn extract or placebo for
eight weeks. A total of 129 patients finished the trial.
Throughout the eight-week trial, a statistically significant
improvement in cardiac function was noted in the-
hawthorn group. The placebo group, however, progres-
sively deteriorated. The patients’ subjective evaluation of
their main complaints (reduced exercise performance,
shortness of breath, ankle edema, and nocturia) was signif-
icantly improved for subjects receiving hawthorn, com-
pared with placebo subjects. The participants’ quality of
life was alsc improved in the hawthorn group, although
not enough to be statistically significant compared with
placebo.'°

A recent study investigated the efficacy of long-term
therapy with a Crataegus extract (WS 1442) as add-on ther-
apy to preexisting diuretic treatment for patients with a
more advanced stage of heart failure (NYHA class III). The
data from this study confirmed that WS 1442 had a dose-
dependent effect on the exercise capacity of patients
with heart failure and on typical heart failure-related clin-
ical signs and symptoms. The drug was shown to be well
tolerated and safe.”

----- PAGE 304 -----
296 «2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

conducted to date, it can be concluded that the develop-
ment of heart disease is definitely linked with excess di-
etary fat, elevated blood cholesterol levels, high blood
pressure, smoking, obesity, short stature, and physical
inactivity. A number of these major risk factors are dis-
cussed here.

Age and Gender.

The older an individual is, the more likely he or she is to
develop cardiovascular disease. Thus, the risk of heart at-
tack is four times greater for a 50-year-old man than for a
30-year-old man. Cardiovascular problems are unusual in
premenopausal women, but after menopause, the inci-
dence of heart disease in women equals the incidence in
men. Other gender-specific issues are discussed later
under Socioeconomic Factors.

Oral Contraceptives

Oral contraceptives that supply high doses of estrogen in-
crease the risk of vascular and heart disease, especially
among women who smoke. However, the currently pre-
scribed contraceptives are low-dose pills containing 35 meg
or less of estrogen. There is little additional risk of heart
disease for premenopausal women who use such low-dose
formulations. However, taking “the pill” does pose risks.
For women taking any kind of oral contraceptive, certain
guidelines are important.

Stop smoking or consider a different form of birth control.
Smoking boosts the risks of serious cardiovascular
problems related to oral contraceptive use (especially
the risk of blood clots), particularly in women older
than 35.

Use of birth control pills may increase blood pressure. If a pa-
tient is diabetic and taking oral contraceptives, her
blood pressure should be monitored regularly. Oral
contraceptives may not be a safe choice if the woman
has had a heart attack, a stroke, problems with blood
clots, or any other kind of cardiovascular disease.

Heredity

The tendency to develop certain cardiovascular diseases
appears to be partially inherited. A family history of
heart disease should strongly suggest the use of appro-
priate herbal tonics, along with dietary change and stress-
reduction techniques. One inherited problem is known
as familial hyperlipidemia. People with this condition ap-
pear to have a genetic predisposition to elevated blood
lipid levels.

Tobacco

The death rate from heart disease is 300% higher in
smokers than in nonsmokers in North America. Smoking
by women in the United States causes one and one-half
times as many deaths from heart disease as lung cancer. A
smoker is two to six times more likely to suffer a heart at-
tack than a nonsmoker, and the risk increases with the
number of cigarettes smoked each day. Smoking also
heightens the risk of stroke.

Of course, cardiovascular disease is not the only
smoking-related health risk. Cigarette smoking is also
linked with cancers of the mouth, larynx, esophagus, uri-
nary tract, kidney, pancreas, and cervix. Smokers also are

more likely to develop other kinds of lung problems, in-
cluding bronchitis and emphysema. Smoking during
pregnancy is linked to a number of problems, including
bleeding, miscarriage, premature delivery, lower birth
weight, stillbirth, and sudden infant death syndrome, or
“crib death.” Young children who breathe in a parent’s
cigarette smoke have more lung and ear infections. What
more need be said?

Alcohol
Occasional consumption of small amounts of alcohol may
actually benefit the circulatory system, because alcohol
acts as a vasodilator. On the other hand, there is no doubt
that alcohol abuse is a major contributing factor to heart
disease. Several recent studies have reported that moder-
ate drinkers—those who have one or two drinks per day—
are less likely to develop heart disease than people who
don’t drink any alcohol. However, this is mot a recom-
mendation to start using alcohol!
Moderation is the key. More than three drinks a day
can raise blood pressure, and binge drinking can lead to
stroke, People who drink heavily on a regular basis have
higher rates of heart disease than either moderate
drinkers or nondrinkers. The government-produced
“Dietary Guidelines for Americans” recommends that for
overall good health, one should consume no more than
one drink per day. One drink equals 12 ounces of beer, 5
ounces of wine, or 1'/ ounces of 80-proof liquor.

High Blood Pressure

High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a major risk factor
for coronary heart disease (CHD) and the most important
risk factor for stroke and congestive heart failure.
Research indicates that high blood pressure is the cause of
three of every five cases of heart failure in women. High
blood pressure also boosts the likelihood that one will
develop kidney disease or blindness.

----- PAGE 305 -----
Blood pressure is the amount of force exerted by the
blood against the walls of the arteries. Controlling high
blood pressure is especially important for people who
have active heart disease. When blood pressure is low-
ered, the heart does not need to work as hard. For exam-
ple, a person who has experienced a heart attack is less
likely to have another if high blood pressure is controlled.

Diet

The precise role of dietary factors in heart disease is un-
clear, but enough is known to formulate general guide-
lines about a possible preventive diet. These are discussed
later in this chapter under Diet and Nutrition.

Cholesterol Levels

High blood cholesterol is another very important risk fac-
tor for coronary heart disease that may be amenable to
change. Some cholesterol is obtained from the diet (about
25%) and the rest is manufactured by the liver. Elevated
levels in serum may be a result of high dietary intake, a
condition known as exogenous hyperlipidemia, or secondary
hyperlipidemia.

Endogenous hyperlipidemia, also called primary or fa-
milial hyperlipidemia, is a disorder of cholesterol meta-
bolism that may be caused by genetic factors. It is much
less responsive to dietary and lifestyle change than the ex-
ogenous form, and is also much less common. Diseases
such as diabetes mellitus, gout, hypothyroidism, obstruc-
tive jaundice, cirrhosis of the liver, and renal failure can
also cause secondary hyperlipidemia.

Dietary guidelines for lowering cholesterol are pro-
vided later in this chapter under Cholesterol.

Obesity

Obese people are more likely to develop heart-related
problems, even if they have no other risk factors. Excess
body weight is linked with coronary heart disease, stroke,
congestive heart failure, and overall mortality from heart-
related causes. Obesity contributes not only to cardiovas-
cular diseases, but also to the development of other car-
diovascular risk factors, including high blood pressure,
high cholesterol, and diabetes.

Results of the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) of 1999 indicate that an
estimated 61% of American adults are either overweight
or obese, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) of 25
or more.!? BMI, an expression of the ratio of weight to
height, is a mathematical formula that represents weight
levels associated with the lowest overall risk to health. It
is derived by dividing body weight in kilograms by the

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 297

square of the height in meters (wt/(ht)’). Individuals with
a BMI of 25 to 29.9 are considered overweight; individu-
als with a BMI of 30 or more are considered obese.!3

Physical Inactivity

Physical inactivity increases the risk of heart disease. It
both contributes directly to heart-related problems and
increases the chances of developing other risk factors,
such as high blood pressure and diabetes. The Surgeon
General's report and other research conclude that as little
as 30 minutes of moderate activity on most, and prefer-
ably all, days of the week can help protect heart health.
Examples of moderate activity are brisk walking or bicy-
cling, raking leaves, and gardening.

Diabetes

Diabetes is a serious disorder that also raises the risk of
coronary heart disease. The risk of death from heart dis-
ease is about three times higher in people with diabetes.
While there is no cure for diabetes, steps can be taken to
control it. In certain people, being overweight and grow-
ing older are linked with the development of the most
common type of diabetes, non-insulin dependent dia-
betes mellitus (NIDDM). Losing excess weight and
boosting physical activity may help postpone or prevent
the development of this disease. See chapter 22 for more
information on the management of diabetes.

Stress and Personality

Research has revealed an association between a particu-
lar type of personality and the development of heart dis-
ease. According to this model, there are two personality
extremes. Type A behavior. is characterized by a chronic
sense of urgency, possibly repressed aggressiveness, and a
need to strive for achievement. Type A people drive
themselves to meet deadlines, many of which are self-im-
posed, They experience intense feelings of psychological
pressure, related to both time and personal responsibility.
They often try to do two or three things at once, are likely
to react with hostility to obstacles, and seem tempera-
mentally incapable of easing up.

Type B behavior is characterized by the opposite traits.
These people are less preoccupied with achievement, feel
less rushed, and in general are much more easygoing.
They are less prone to anger, impatience, and feelings of
pressure. They are also better at separating work from
play, and they know how to relax.

There is much debate about the value of such per-
sonality typing, but we will not concern ourselves with
these details here. The important thing is the association

----- PAGE 306 -----
298 << TREATMINI APPROACHES BY Bony SYSTEM

of behavior types with disease development. However,
from a holistic standpoint, we also need to bear in mind
that people cannot be simply categorized into two types!
Each person is an individual, and while it may sometimes
be useful to sort people into artificial categories, people
cannot be identified solely in this way.

Socioeconomic Factors

Certain social and economic factors are associated with an
increased risk of heart disease. However, the findings tend
to vary according to the society being studied. Some stud-
ies emphasize high risk in upper socioeconomic groups,
while others emphasize the opposite. Some evidence sug-
gests that class variations disappear when the degree of
physical activity is taken into account. High-risk factors
include social mobility that involves a change of environ-
ment, such as moving or changing jobs.

The relatively low, though increasing, incidence of
heart disease in women appears to be due to psychosocial
as much as biological factors. Men are more likely to
strive for dominance and to use work as a major outlet for
aggression, and so are more exposed to particular stresses
and conflicts. However, such behavior patterns are as
damaging to women as to men.

Life Events

Particularly stressful times in an individual’s life act as
possible danger points for stress-related problems such as
heart disease. When stressful times can be identified, it is
possible to take them into account by planning ahead,
making it possible to manage and lessen the impact of
these stresses on health and well-being. These points of
increased stress, called life events, occur in everyone's life.
They are especially relevant in the development of condi-
tions such as angina and coronary heart disease.

Goals for Decreasing
Cardiovascular Risks
Quit or minimize smoking
Lower and control blood pressure
Reduce total cholesterol
Decrease LDL cholesterol
Increase HDL cholesterol

Lose weight if overweight

Increase aerobic exercise

NUTRITIONAL FACTORS FOR
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH

The basic dietary rules for lowering cholesterol and
maintaining heart health are simple: Avoid saturated fats
and dietary cholesterol. Experts recommend a diet that
derives not more than 30% of daily calories from fat;
some say 20%. Saturated fats from animal products and
tropical oils should be kept to a minimum, so avoid deep-
fried foods and pay attention to nutrition labels on pack-
aged foods, Eat more vegetables, fruits, and grains, which
are cholesterol-free, virtually fat-free, and rich in fiber.
Dietary recommendations are discussed in more detail
later on.

Coenzyme Qio

Coenzyme Qio (CoQio or ubiquinone) is found in small
amounts in a wide variety of foods and is synthesized in all
tissues. Coenzymes are molecular cofactors upon which
enzymes depend for their function. Coenzyme Qo is the
coenzyme for a number of mitochondrial enzymes, as
well as enzymes in other parts of the cell.

Mitochondria are small, subcellular particles that
exist within each cell; here is where the cell’s energy pro-
duction process takes place. Through a series of chemical
reactions along the electron transport chains of the mito-
chondria, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules are
produced. Mitochondrial enzymes are essential for the
production of ATP, and all cellular functions depend
upon ATP. More than 95% of the oxygen we breathe is
used solely for the purpose of making energy through this
process of burning organic substances, ATP molecules in
turn supply energy for the various chemical reactions nec-
essary for life.

CoQio plays a unique role in this electron transport
chain, serving as a mobile messenger link between the
various enzymes in the chain. Each pair of electrons pro-
cessed by the chain must first interact with CoQ, and no
other substance will substitute for CoQ. Other familiar
substances involved in this electron transport chain in-
clude vitamin C, riboflavin (vitamin B,), niacinamide (vi-
tamin B;), and vitamin E.

CoQ jo is naturally present in small amounts in a wide
variety of foods, but is particularly high in organ meats,
such as heart, liver, and kidney, and in beef, soy oil, sar-
dines, mackerel, and peanuts. To put dietary CoQjo intake
into perspective, 1 pound of sardines, 2 pounds of beef, or
2'/ pounds of peanuts provide 30 mg of CoQjo. CoQjq is
also synthesized in all tissues, and in healthy individuals,
normal levels are maintained both by CoQq intake and
by synthesis in the body. It has no known toxicity or side

----- PAGE 307 -----
effects. Although present in food, CoQjo is not consid-
ered a vitamin, because the body is able to produce it
from raw materials contained in food. Nevertheless, the
body often cannot make enough for optimal function, and
therefore CoQ» supplements may be very helpful.

CoQyo is highly concentrated in heart muscle cells, ;

due to the high energy requirements of this type of cell.
Congestive heart failure has been associated with low
blood and tissue levels of CoQ. The severity of heart
failure correlates with the severity of CoQio deficiency.
This CoQip deficiency may well be a primary factor in
some types of heart muscle dysfunction; in others, it may
be a secondary phenomenon.

Whether primary, secondary, or both, deficiency of
CoQ jo appears to be a major treatable factor in the other-
wise inexorable progression of heart failure. The clinical
studies that have examined the treatment of heart disease
with CoQj9 concluded that it significantly improved heart
muscle function while producing no adverse effects or drug
interactions. CoQ has been used successfully for high
blood pressure, congestive heart failure, angina pectoris,
and cardiomyopathy, and to protect the heart from the
damaging effects of the chemotherapy drug Adriamycin.

B Vitamins

Homocysteine is an amino acid found naturally in the
body. High blood levels of homocysteine may increase
the chances of developing heart disease, stroke, and cir-

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 2 299

culation problems. Elevated levels are believed to damage
arteries, predispose the blood to easy clotting, and reduce
the flexibility of blood vessels.

Blood homocysteine levels are influenced by the
amount of three vitamins in the diet: folic acid and vita-
mins B, and Bj. Ingesting less than the recommended
daily amounts of these vitamins may lead to higher ho-
mocysteine levels. Daily amounts recommended by the
FDA are 400 meg of folic acid, 2 mg of By, and 6 meg of
By). Good sources of folic acid include citrus fruits, toma-
toes, vegetables, whole grains, beans, and lentils. Foods
high in B, include meat, poultry, fish, fruits, vegetables,
and grains. Major sources of B,) are meat, poultry, fish,
milk, and other dairy products.

Dietary Suggestions to Reduce Cardiovascular

Risks

Eat more fruits and vegetables.

Eat more whole grains.

Reduce fat intake to 25% to 30% of the diet.

Reduce cholesterol intake to less than 300 mg a day.

Reduce consumption of egg yolks to three to five per week.

Minimize the use of whole milk and its products; use low-
fat or nonfat milk products.

Avoid red meats; eliminate all cured meats and lunchmeats.

Eat more cold-water fish, such as sardines and salmon,

Use fresh, cold-pressed oils, such as olive and flaxseed
oils, to provide essential fatty acids.

General Recommendations for Heart Health

Eat foods that you like that are low in cholesterol and saturated fats. A diet free of animal products
can lower cholesterol levels and blood pressure.

Be sure to consume an adequate amount of fiber. Fiber such as that from oat bran and psyllium
seeds lowers the assimilation of dietary cholesterol.

Minimize salt, avoid stimulants, and drink little or no alcohol.
Don't smoke tobacco.
Drink at least 2 pints of water a day.

Get adequate amounts of enjoyable aerobic exercise—for example, a 30-minute walk, swim, or
bicycle ride several times a week, and daily if possible.

Find a relaxation program that you enjoy, and incorporate it into your daily routine.
Maintain health in general, and especially maintain normal blood pressure.
Relax—watch the grass grow!

Also, as Dr. Andrew Weil puts it, “Open your heart.’ That our hearts get “broken” in the emotional
sense is not a coincidental use of the word. Compassion, caring, and loving respect are all heart tonics.

----- PAGE 308 -----
300 o TREATWEN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Recommended Supplements
In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and Pizzorno
recommend the following supplements:!*

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula

Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 IU/day

Inositol hexaniacinate: 550 mg three times a day with
meals for two weeks, then increase dosage to 1,000 mg
three times a day with meals

Vitamin By: 10 mg/day

Vitamin Bj): 2 mcg/day

Folic acid: 1,000 mcg/day

Coenzyme Qjo: 50 mg two or three times a day

WHAT IS CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE?

Cardiovascular disease is a disorder of the heart and blood
vessels of the body. Blood brings oxygen and nutrients to
the heart. When blood flow to the heart is impaired,
angina results. When the blood flow is critically reduced,
a myocardial infarction (heart attack) may occur. Lack of
blood flow to the brain or, in some cases, bleeding in the
brain can cause a stroke.

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a general term for
disease of the blood vessels of the heart, known as coro-
nary arteries. CHD causes chest pain (angina) and heart
attacks. Other major cardiovascular diseases include hy-
pertension, atherosclerosis, and various types of vascular
insufficiency. A less serious but nonetheless troubling car-
diovascular condition is varicose veins. In this section, we
shall consider a range of such problems in the process of
exploring the contribution herbs can make when used in
the context of holistic medicine.

ELEVATED CHOLESTEROL

The word cholesterol carries very fearful implications for
many executives and hamburger eaters! While elevated
cholesterol is not a disease in its own right, it has been im-
plicated as a major factor in the development of many car-
diovascular diseases, especially arteriosclerosis, a condition
discussed later in this chapter.

However, though cholesterol may contribute to the
development of heart disease, it also has an important role
to play in human health. Cholesterol is found in all cells
of the body, primarily as a structural component of cell
membranes, but it has other vital functions. Stored in the
adrenal glands, testes, and ovaries, it serves as a precursor
molecule for hormones (such as the sex hormones, an-

drogens and estrogens) and adrenal corticoids (including
cortisol, corticosterone, and aldosterone).

In the liver, cholesterol functions as the precursor of
bile acids, which, when secreted into the intestine, aid in
the digestion of food, especially fats. Cholesterol is the
major sterol in the human body and is found throughout
the animal kingdom. While it seldom occurs in signifi-
cant amounts in higher plants, plants do contain the
therapeutically important phytosterols. (See chapter 5
for more information.)

Cholesterol Levels

Blood cholesterol levels begin to increase around age of
20, but rise sharply beginning at around age 40 and con-
tinue to increase until around age 60. The higher the
blood cholesterol level, the higher the risk of heart disease.

In the bloodstream, cholesterol from the diet binds
with protein molecules to form various types of so-called
lipoproteins. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is a dense,
compact microparticle that transports excess cholesterol
to the liver, where it is altered and expelled in the bile.
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is a larger, less dense par-
ticle that tends to remain in the body. Very low-density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) are molecules that transport
triglycerides, chemical compounds that store fatty acids, an
essential source of energy for the body.

Normal blood levels of triglycerides range from 10 to
150 milligrams per deciliter. Elevated serum cholesterol
per se is not the only indicator of atherosclerosis; triglyc-
eride levels are used to classify primary hyperlipidemias.
In certain disorders, cholesterol] levels may remain fairly
normal while triglyceride levels rise. It is preferable,
therefore, always to measure levels of each lipoprotein
fraction, especially LDL, all of which contain cholesterol.

LDL is a form of lipid often called “bad” cholesterol,
because too much LDL in the blood can lead to choles-
terol buildup and blockage in the arteries. HDL is a form
of lipid known as “good” cholesterol, because HDL helps
remove cholesterol from the blood, preventing it from
piling up in the arteries.

Diets rich in saturated fats, cholesterol, and calories
appear to be chiefly responsible for high blood choles-
terol, and therefore are believed to promote atherosclero-
sis. However, the tendency of cholesterol to form plaques
is influenced by the type of lipoproteins that transport it in
the blood. LDL is clearly atherogenic, but HDL appears
to prevent accumulation of cholesterol in the tissues.

A desirable total cholesterol level for adults without
heart disease is lower than 200 mg/dl (or 200 milligrams
per deciliter of blood). A level of 240 mg/dl or higher is
considered high blood cholesterol. But even cholesterol

----- PAGE 309 -----
levels in the “borderline high” category (200 to 239 mg/dl)
increase the risk of heart disease. HDL levels are inter-
preted differently from total cholesterol levels. The lower
the HDL level, the higher the heart disease risk. An HDL
level lower than 35 is a major risk factor for heart disease.
A level of 60 or higher is considered protective.

Table 14.3. Classification of Cholesterol Levels*

PARAMETER DESIRABLE BORDERLINE HIGH

HIGH
Total cholesterol Lower than 200 200-239 240 and higher
LDL Optimal 100 30-159 160 and higher
HDL 60 or higher

*Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2001. National Cholesterol
Education Program. Third report of the expert panel on detection, evaluation, and
treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel ill). NIH
Publication No. 01-3670.

coronary heart disease.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 301

Blood levels of these lipoproteins are partially gov-
erned by dietary factors, especially the type of vegetable
lipids (phytosterols) eaten. Phytosterols are plant com-
pounds, structurally comparable to cholesterol, that effec-
tively block uptake of cholesterol in the liver. This high-
lights the value of plants as both medicine and nutrition for
cardiovascular problems. Plants provide a way to balance
cholesterol absorption in a way that has evolved as our bod-
ies evolved, affecting fat metabolism and blood chemistry
in an inherently integrated manner. Medical research has
revealed a number of common dietary components that ac-
tively lower cholesterol levels in the blood. The processes
involved are complex and not always well understood.

Plants That Lower Blood Cholesterol

Guggulipid, an herbal remedy from southern India, is
gaining a reputation for reducing high blood cholesterol ,
levels. Guggulipid is an extract from the tree Cosmmiphora
mukul, commonly known as guggul. The tree is a close

Garlic: Food and Medicine

The use of garlic is supported by both an ancient history and’a wealth of modern research. More than 3,000 sci-
entific papers cover its chemistry, pharmacology, and clinical uses. The therapeutic uses of garlic are extensive, but
those specific to the cardiovascular system include reducing elevated cholesterol, preventing atherosclerosis and
hypertension, treating poor circulation to the legs, and improving overall blood flow through antiplatelet actions.

One study involved two groups of subjects: one of 20 healthy volunteers and the other of 62 patients with
coronary heart disease and elevated serum cholesterol. Both study groups ate garlic for six months. All involved
experienced beneficial changes, which reached a peak at the end of eight months. The improvement in choles-
terol levels persisted throughout the two months of clinical follow-up. The clinicians concluded that garlic
essential oil possesses a distinct hypolipidemic (fat-reducing) action in both healthy people and patients with

Great attention is being given by Indian research workers to the value of such findings in humans. A number
of clinical comparisons of the influence of garlic have been published. In one example, a group of volunteers con-
sumed a high-fat diet for seven days. On day eight of the study, fasting blood was analyzed for content of choles-
terol and other fats. The subjects then received a high-fat diet supplemented with garlic for seven days; on day
fifteen, fasting blood was analyzed again. Results showed that the fat-rich diet significantly increased cholesterol
levels; compared with a normal diet. However, adding garlic to the high-fat diet significantly reduced serum
cholesterol levels.5 Based on research investigating the effect of raw garlic on normal blood cholesterol levels in
men, indian research scientists advocated its daily use as a means of lowering blood cholesterol.

Garlic also possesses antiplatelet effects, or an ability to inhibit unnecessary clotting within the blood
vessels. It appears to work by reducing the “stickiness” of blood platelets, decreasing platelet aggregation and

lowering actions appear to be unaffected.

inhibiting the release of clotting factors in the bload. The garlic constituent thought to be responsible for
this effect is allicin, a unique thiosulfinate well known for its strong antibiotic and antifungal properties. An
exciting finding indicates that garlic works selectively, inhibiting the synthesis of enzymes involved in plaque
formation while sparing the vascular synthesis of important prostaglandins.'* This finding suggest that garlic
would make a safe and effective antithrombotic agent.

The traditional use of both garlic and onion in the treatment of hypertension is supported by research.”
A recent study revealed that onion oil contains a blood pressure—lowering prostaglandin.” Interestingly,
while garlic's antimicrobial effects are lost during cooking, its blood pressure—normalizing and cholesterol-

----- PAGE 310 -----
302 <=. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

relative of myrrh (Commiphora molmol). Ketonic steroid
compounds present in the extract, known as gugguls-
terones, possess cholesterol- and triglyceride-lowering
actions. Guggul lowers serum triglycerides and choles-
terol as well as LDL and VLDL cholesterols.'? As antiox-
idants, guggulsterones keep LDL cholesterol from oxi-
dizing, an action that protects against atherosclerosis.

Capsicum annuum (cayenne pepper) and other plants
that contain the compound capsaicin may help lower
blood cholesterol levels, as does the widely used spice
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum). Caraway (Carum
carvi) is another aromatic spice with demonstrable
cholesterol-lowering properties. In addition, a whole
range of Asian herbal remedies new to Western medicine
are proving their value in this area, including Phy/anthus
emblica and Ligustrum lucidum.

Allium sativum (garlic) and A. cepa (onion) have an in-
ternational reputation for lowering blood pressure and
generally improving the health of the cardiovascular sys-
tem (see sidebar Garlic: Food and Medicine on page 301).
Other herbs reputed to have cholesterol-lowering prop-
erties are Medicago sativa (alfalfa), Curcuma longa
(turmeric), and Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng).

General Guidelines for Lowering Cholesterol

and LDL

Decrease total fats in diet.

Decrease saturated fats in diet.

Decrease cholesterol in diet.

Increase essential fatty acids (polyunsaturates) in diet.

Use more monounsaturated oils, such as olive and canola.

Increase fiber (for example, by adding psyllium husks or
oat bran to the diet).

Increase complex carbohydrates.

Decrease caffeine and nicotine.

Add supplemental nutrients: vitamins By, B;, C, chromium,
essential fatty acids.

Include garlic in the diet or take as a supplement.

Guidelines for Increasing HDL Cholesterol

Get regular aerobic exercise.

Do not smoke.

Lose weight.

Add supplemental nutrients: essential fatty acids, niacin,
fiber, garlic, L-carnitine.

Dietary Fats

Cholesterol-Rich Foods

Egg yolks Pate
Milk fat Liver
Other organ meats Fatty meats
Palm oil
Saturated Fats

Butter Poultry
Cheese Coconut oil
Milk Avocado
Red meats Margarine

Monounsaturated Fats
Olive oil Peanuts
Olives Cashews
Almonds Walnuts
Pecans Fish

Polyunsaturated Fats

Vegetable oils (sesame, safflower, sunflower,

corn, soybean)

HYPERTENSION

Elevation of systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure, ei-
ther primary or secondary. (The Merck Manual)

More than 35 million Americans have Aypertension, or
high blood pressure. For unknown reasons, the occur-
rence of the disorder is twice as high in African Americans
as Caucasians. While hypertension is a common problem
in our culture, it is rare in those that remain relatively un-
touched by the Western lifestyle. Lifestyle plays a major
role in causing and perpetuating hypertension. Thus, di-
etary, psychological, and social factors must all be ad-
dressed before any real change can occur.

A distinction must be made between elevated blood
pressure with no obvious medical cause, known as pri-
mary or essential hypertension, and hypertension caused by
an underlying pathology, such as kidney, endocrine, or
cerebral disease, which is called secondary hypertension.
For the purposes of this discussion, we will focus on es-
sential hypertension.

Hypertension typically causes no symptoms until
complications arise, in which case symptoms can include

----- PAGE 311 -----
dizziness, flushed face and skin, headache, fatigue, epis-
taxis (nosebleed), and nervousness. These symptoms may
all be caused by other conditions as well, making it diffi-
cult to diagnose hypertension by symptoms alone.

Diagnosis must be based on a finding that both sys-
tolic and diastolic blood pressure are usually (but not al-
ways) higher than normal, and other causes of symptoms
must be excluded. In general, hypertension is indicated by
a blood pressure measurement higher than 140/90 mm
Hg. However, “normal” blood pressure varies among in-
dividuals, and thus normal should always be viewed in
terms of a range, as opposed to a specific measurement.
Observable changes in retinal blood vessels are diagnostic
indicators of the degree of damage caused to the body by
the hypertension.

Blood pressure is the force of the blood pushing
against the walls of the arteries that carry blood through-
out the body. The heart beats at a rate of 60 to 70 times a
minute when at rest. Each time the heart beats, it pumps
blood into the arteries. Blood pressure is highest when the
heart contracts to pump the blood. This is called systolic
pressure, When the heart is at rest, in between beats, blood
pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure.

Blood pressure is always expressed with two numbers
that represent the systolic and diastolic pressures. These
numbers are measurements of millimeters (mm) of mercury
(Hg). The measurement is expressed as a fraction, with the
systolic number on the top and the diastolic number on the
bottom. For example, a blood pressure measurement of
120/80 mm Hg is expressed verbally as “120 over 80.”

Blood pressure equal to or lower than 140/90 mm Hg
is considered normal, and blood pressure lower than
120/80 mm Hg is even better. Blood pressure is consid-
ered high when it stays above 140/90 mm Hg over a pe-
riod of time. It was once thought that low blood pressure
(for example, 105/65 mm Hg in an adult) was unhealthy.
Except in rare cases, this is not true. Table 14.4, from in-
formation provided by the National High Blood Pressure
Education Program, demonstrates how blood pressure
levels are categorized in adults.

Blood pressure fluctuates in response to different ac-
tivities. For example, when one is running, blood pressure
goes up. During sleep, blood pressure goes down. Such
temporary, transient changes in blood pressure are a com-
mon and normal response to the ups and downs of life.
Sustained hypertension, however, is caused by greater pe-
ripheral vascular resistance. This is initiated by increased
arteriolar tone and followed by the damaging structural
changes of arteriosclerosis.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM & 303

Table 14.4. Blood Pressure Levels for Adults?

CATEGORY BLOOD PRESSURE LEVEL (mm Hg)
Systolic Diastolic
Normal 120 80
High normal 330-139 85-89
High blood pressure
Stage | 140-159 90-99
Stage 2 160-179 100-109
Stage 3 180 2110

*People aged 18 and older who are not taking medicine for high blood pressure and not
experiencing a short-term serious illness.

If left untreated, high blood pressure can lead to seri-
ous medical problems, including:

Arteriosclerosis. High blood pressure damages artery
walls, causing them to become thick, stiff, and narrow;
hence, the term “hardening of the arteries.”
Arteriosclerosis speeds the buildup of cholesterol and
fats in the blood vessels, inhibiting blood flow through
the body and increasing risk of heart attack or stroke.

Myocardial infarction. When the arteries that bring
blood to the heart muscle become blocked, the heart
cannot get enough oxygen. Reduced blood flow can
cause chest pain (angina). Eventually, blood flow may
be stopped completely, leading to a myocardial infarc-
tion, or heart attack.

Enlarged heart. High blood pressure makes the heart
work harder. Over time, this causes the heart to
thicken and stretch. Eventually, the heart fails to fune-
tion normally, and fluid backs up into the lungs.

Kidney damage. The kidney acts as a filter that rids the
body of wastes. Over the course of years, high blood
pressure can narrow and thicken the blood vessels of
the kidney so that the kidney is able to filter less fluid,
and waste will build up in the blood. Eventually, the
kidneys may fail altogether.

Stroke. High blood pressure contributes to arteriosclero-
sis, which causes arteries to narrow, so less blood can
get to the brain. If a blood clot blocks one of these nar-
rowed arteries, a stroke may occur. A stroke can also
occur when very high pressure causes a weakened
blood vessel in the brain (called an aneurysm) to break.

----- PAGE 312 -----
304 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Treatment of Hypertension

The cardiovascular system needs herbal tonic support, which
is supplied by the core hypotensive herbs. Other areas that
need attention include the nervous system and, potentially,
the lungs. Beyond this, treatment depends on the individual
case. All treatment for hypertension must take place
within the context of dietary and lifestyle reassessment.

Actions Indicated

Hypotensives are a broad range of remedies with the ob-
served effect of lowering elevated blood pressure. They
appear to work in a variety of ways. (See chapter 9 for
a discussion of possible pharmacological mechanisms.)

Cardiotonics play a fundamental role in strengthening and
toning the whole cardiovascular system when under
such literal pressure. Used correctly, they facilitate
beneficial changes in both the pattern and the volume
of cardiac output.

Peripheral vasodilators lessen resistance within the periph-
eral blood vessels, thus increasing the total volume of
the system and lowering pressure within it.

Diuretics help reduce the buildup of excess fluid in the
body and overcome any decreased renal blood flow
that might accompany the hypertension.

Vascular tonics will help nourish and tone the tissue of the
arteries and veins.

Nervines address the tension and anxiety associated with
any stress component in the patient’s picture.
Hypertension itself causes an increase in tension,
which can also be eased with appropriate nervines.
Most nervines are also antispasmodic.

Antispasmodics help ease peripheral resistance to blood
flow by gently relaxing the muscular coat of the vessels
and the muscles that the vessels pass through.

Circulatory stimulants help increase peripheral circulation.

Specific Remedies
A number of herbs have a reputation as being specific for
hypertension, generally because of their impact on one or
another of the processes involved in the development of
the condition. The most important hypotensive plant
remedy in Western medicine is hawthorn (Crataegus
spp.), probably followed by linden (Tilia spp.). European
mistletoe (Viscum album) and olive leaf (Olea europaea) are
other well-known plants that may be considered specifics.
On the other hand, the multifactorial etiology of hy-
pertension limits the value of the concept of specifics for
this condition. Orthodox medicine has utilized Rawvolfia
serpentina (Indian snakeroot) as a treatment for hyperten-
sion, but there are problematic side effects.

Other plants may come to mind, depending upon the
individual’s specific symptoms. For example, if headaches
are part of the picture, then include Stachys betonica (wood
betony) as part of the prescription. If there are associated
heart palpitations, add Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort). A
stress component would suggest increasing the nervine
content, and possibly adding an adaptogen.

A Prescription for Hypertension

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Table 14.5. Actions Supplied by Hypertension
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos, Achillea
millefolium, Viburnum oputus, Valeriana officinalis

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,

Tilia platyphyllos

Antispasmodic Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus,

Valeriana officinalis

Vascular tonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios,

Achillea millefolium

Nervine relaxant Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus,

Valeriana officinalis

Starting with a basic prescription, it is possible to
fine-tune the individual’s medications to address his or
her unique situation. The possibilities are as endless as
people are diverse. From debility and digestive problems
to bronchitis and premenstrual syndrome, the phytother-
apist can alter a basic formulation to readily embrace the
needs of the whole patient. Note that the choice and exact
proportions of herbs in the prescription will depend on
the relative severity of the associated symptom picture.

----- PAGE 313 -----
A Prescription for Hypertension with a
Major Stress Component

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with
Associated Headache

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Stachys betonica 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Palpitations

Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 7
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Debility

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM - 305

A Prescription for Hypertension with Indigestion

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Matricaria recutita 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Bronchitis

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with
Premenstrual Syndrome

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

A plethora of factors have been identified as important in
the cause and treatment of essential hypertension.
However, it is vital to remember that cause is always mul-
tifactorial, and statements about alcohol or calcium con-
sumption are often too simplistic. While experts disagree
about the connection between tobacco and hypertension,
there is no doubt about the overall impact of smoking
upon the heart, so tobacco should be avoided.

----- PAGE 314 -----
306 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

A well-known link exists between obesity and hyper-
tension, as well as heart attack, diabetes, gallstones, os-
teoarthritis, and kidney disease. Weight reduction is an
essential component of a treatment program for hyper-
tension, and often lowers blood pressure more effectively
than drug treatment.

Drugs represent another factor that must be consid-
ered. A number of medications raise blood pressure as an
unwanted side effect. Check on all prescription drugs that
the patient is using, and note that even over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may cause mild
water retention that can elevate blood pressure. Bear in
mind when taking the case history that oral contracep-
tives have been associated with cardiovascular and pul-
monary adverse effects.

Lifestyle changes are often the key to reversing hy-
pertension. The nature of the individual’s work, relation-
ships, worldview, and self-image may all play a role in the
development of hypertension, creating a challenging job
for the herbalist! Dietary changes, weight reduction, and
tobacco cessation are crucial, but exercise, massage and
other bodywork, relaxation techniques, and meditation
can make important contributions.

Aromatherapy has much to offer when appropriate
essential oils are used in the context of relaxing massage.
Hypotensive oils to consider include lavender, marjoram,
and ylang ylang. If the situation calls for it, relaxing oils
may be also be used; consider chamomile, rose, bergamot,
and neroli.

Key Therapeutic Guidelines for the
Management of Hypertension
Maintain an appropriate body weight, reducing excessive
weight if necessary.
Make healthy lifestyle choices:
Avoid alcohol, caffeine, and tobacco.
Reduce the impact of stress and incorporate stress-
reduction techniques.
Exercise regularly, but in a way that is enjoyable.
Make appropriate dietary changes:
Eat a diet rich in fiber, complex carbohydrates, and
potassium.
Eat garlic and onions.
Reduce or eliminate animal fats and increase intake of
vegetable oils.
Eliminate salt from the diet.
Add appropriate cardiotonic herbs.
Supplement the diet with:
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day
Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 [U/day
Coenzyme Qo: 50 mg two or three times a day
Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

Specific Dietary Guidelines

Salt. Average Western salt intake is about 15 times that
needed by the body. Blood pressure usually falls when
hypertensives cut back on salt and sodium in general.
Some are more affected by sodium than others, but
there is no practical way to predict this. Thus, hyper-
tensives should eat no more than about 6 g of salt a day
(approximately 1 teaspoon, or about 2,400 mg of
sodium). The patient should keep track of aif salt
eaten, including the amount in processed foods.

Potassium. The relative balance between sodium and
potassium is critical to many cardiovascular risk fac-
tors. Potassium levels in the diet should be raised
through consumption of potassium-rich foods, such as
bananas, orange juice, and potatoes. In addition, cer-
tain cooking methods are less likely to wash away this
essential mineral.

Calcium and magnesium. Supplementation with these min-
erals can have a marked hypotensive effect.

Sugar. In some individuals, heavy sugar intake may raise

blood pressure, possibly by causing sodium retention

or by a direct effect on the hormonal stress response

mediated by the adrenal cortex.

Alcohol. There appears to be a link between alcohol and

hypertension, but not a simple one. Statistics show that

people who drink a little tend to have lower blood

pressure than teetotalers or those who drink a lot.

Alcohol withdrawal causes a temporary increase in

blood pressure, followed by a decrease. All in all, it is
safe to say that individuals with a tendency to hyper-
tension should avoid alcohol.

Caffeine. Tea, coffee, and cola drinks will aggravate hy-
pertension because of the stimulating effect of caffeine
and other alkaloids that they contain. This also goes
for the caffeine-containing herbal stimulant products

on the market.

Saturated fats. Apart from the impact upon blood choles-
terol and other lipids, there appears to be an associa-
tion between excess consumption of saturated fats and
hypertension. As with all cardiovascular conditions, in-
creasing the ratio of polyunsaturated fats to saturated
fats will help in the healing process.

Vegetarian diet. A diet free of animal products lowers
blood pressure and is strongly recommended for hy-

pertensive patients. At the very least, people with
hypertension should avoid red meat.

----- PAGE 315 -----
ARTERIOSCLEROSIS

Arteriosclerosis. A generic term for a number of diseases
in which the arterial wall becomes thickened and loses
elasticity. (The Merck Manual)

Atherosclerosis. A form of arteriosclerosis characterized
by patchy subintimal thickening (atheromas) of medium
and large arteries, which can reduce or obstruct blood
flow. (The Merck Manual)

The term arteriosclerosis refers to several diseases involv-
ing arteries of various sizes and different layers of the ar-
terial walls. From Greek words that mean “hardening of
the arteries,” the term originally signified the tendency of
arteries to become hard and brittle through the deposition
of calcium in their walls. However, this is not an impor-
tant characteristic of the most familiar form of arterio-
sclerosis, atherosclerosis. This disease is characterized by
fatty deposits on the intima, or inner lining, of the arteries.

Half the annual mortality in Western society results
from heart and blood vessel diseases, and atherosclerosis,
the most common lethal disease, is the chief cause. This
is due to the impact of the disease upon the brain, heart,
kidneys, and other organs of the body. Although herbs
with antiarteriosclerotic properties exist, herbalism aims
to prevent the disease by addressing causative factors,
which include not only hypertension, but also diabetes
mellitus, smoking, diet, and obesity.

Atherosclerosis is a disease of the arteries character-
ized by fatty deposits on the inner lining. The presence of
these fatty deposits, called arterial plaques, leads to an im-
portant loss of arterial elasticity and a narrowing of the
artery. The constriction of blood flow that results ulti-
mately deprives vital organs of their blood supply. Clots
may lodge in arteries supplying the heart, causing a heart
attack, or the brain, causing stroke. Atherosclerosis may
be manifested fairly rapidly in diseases in which the con-
centration of blood lipids is raised, such as diabetes.

Atherosclerosis is so prevalent in developed countries
that many Americans assume it is a natural consequence of
aging. However, overwhelming evidence links atheroscle-
rosis closely to diet and lifestyle, suggesting that it can be
prevented, slowed, or in some cases even reversed.

Depending on the location and degree of arterial
damage, atherosclerosis can lead to kidney problems,
high blood pressure, stroke, and other life-threatening
conditions, Atherosclerosis tends to target the aorta—the
body’s largest artery, which leads from the heart—as well
as the arteries that lead to the brain, the lower limbs, and
the kidneys. Damage to the arteries that carry blood to
the legs and feet can cause peripheral arterial occlusive

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 307

disease, which makes walking painful. Severely restricted
circulation to the limbs can also cause skin ulcers and
even gangrene (tissue death),

Blockage in the coronary arteries, which feed oxygen-
rich blood directly to the heart muscles, is known as coro-
nary artery disease or coronary heart disease. Such blockage
causes ischemia, a localized oxygen starvation affecting tis-
sue. This disorder and its complications—angina, cardiac
arrhythmias, and heart attack—are the leading causes of
death in the United States and most of Europe.

Atherosclerotic deposits begin as thin, fatty streaks
on an arterial wall. Such streaks may come and go in a
person with a healthy lifestyle. However, if the arteries
are damaged—typically from high blood pressure, stress,
or smoking—the inner surface of the walls can start to de-
teriorate. To compensate, the artery grows new tissue that
may create tiny bumps or scars. Cholesterol, white blood
cells, and other deposits can begin to accumulate within
these bumps, forming plaques that clog the arteries.
Eventually, calcium deposits and scar tissue surround the
soft plaques, making the arteries hard and inelastic.
Atherosclerosis progresses over many years, which per-
haps contributes to the perception that it is an affliction
of aging. However, it appears that arterial deposits can
begin in childhood, with significant plaque formation by
the time a person is 30 years old.

People with high levels of blood cholesterol, espe-
cially LDL, are at risk for developing atherosclerosis.
LDL cholesterol reacts with unstable chemical com-
pounds called free radicals in a process that degrades both
the transport mechanism for moving cholesterol through
the bloodstream and the tissue lining of arterial walls.
Nonetheless, most people with high cholesterol do not
develop and many people with
atherosclerosis have normal cholesterol levels.

A number of biochemical, physiological, and envi-
ronmental risk factors increase the chance that an indi-
vidual will develop atherosclerosis:

atherosclerosis,

Hypertension. High blood pressure is a critical factor in the
atherosclerotic process, which does not normally occur
in low-pressure pulmonary arteries and veins, despite
the fact that they are bathed by the same blood con-
centration of lipids.

Elevated serum lipid levels. The atherogenicity of choles-
terol is influenced by type of lipoprotein. LDL is
clearly atherogenic, but HDL appears to prevent accu-
mulation of cholesterol in the tissues.

Obesity promotes the development of all risk factors.

Cigarette smoking increases the chances of developing this
and many other diseases.

----- PAGE 316 -----
308 — TREATMENT APPROACHES FY Bopy SYSTEM

Diets rich in saturated fats, cholesterol, and calories appear to
be chiefly responsible for high blood cholesterol, and
such diets are therefore believed to promote
atherosclerosis.

Family history of premature atherosclerotic disease ap-
pears to indicate either a propensity to higher levels of
LDL or an increased susceptibility to atherosclerosis
risk factors. Inborn errors in lipid metabolism also in-
crease susceptibility.

Diabetes mellitus may lead to arteriosclerosis.

Gender Between the ages of 35 and 44, the death rate
from coronary heart disease among white men is 6.1
times that for white women. This is thought to be due
to hormonal and socioeconomic influences. Overt
manifestations of arteriosclerosis are rare in either sex
before the age of 40, because a greater than 75% nar-
rowing of the arteries must occur before blood flow is
seriously impeded.

Aging: brings about degenerative arterial changes such as
dilation, tortuousness, thickening, and loss of elasticity.

Physical inactivity increases the chance that complications
will develop, but the disease affects both active and
sedentary individuals.

Personality type, especially type A, appears to predispose
individuals to a range of cardiovascular problems.

Lifestyle factors, including diet and stress level, can
contribute.

Treatment of Atherosclerosis

The cardiovascular system should be the focus of tonic
attention. If any secondary problems have developed in
other organs of the body because of ischemia, these
must be treated. Common sites for such problems are
the kidneys, eyes, and brain. The herbal guidelines
must be utilized within the context of dietary and
lifestyle reassessment.

Actions Indicated

Cardiotonics and vascular. tonics help support the tissue of
the cardiovascular system, possibly maintaining flexi-
bility and tone in affected vessels.

Circulatory stimulants promote the circulation of blood,
and thus oxygen availability, in the face of the in-
creased vascular resistance characteristic of this
condition.

Peripheral vasodilators have an obvious value, because they
have the potential to lessen the impact of vessel blockage.

Hypotensives are indicated to help lower elevated blood
pressure.

Nervines will be indicated if stress is an issue.

Antispasmodics will help relax the muscular coat of the ar-
teries, as well as the muscles that the peripheral vessels
pass through.

A Prescription for Atherosclerosis

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

It is no coincidence that this suggested prescription is
similar to those given for hypertension. There is a strong
correlation between the etiologies of the two conditions,
and thus the specific remedies for treatment are similar.

Table 14.6. Actions Supplied by Atherosclerosis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Cardiotonic and vascular tonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Achillea millefolium, Viburnum opulus,

Ginkgo biloba, Allium sativum

Peripheral vasodilator Ginkgo biloba, Achillea millefolium,

Allium sativum

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios,
Achillea millefolium, Viburnum opulus,
Allium sativum

Nervine Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,

Viburnum opulus, Ginkgo biloba

Broader Context of Treatment
Atherosclerosis develops when known risk factors are
compounded by genetic predisposition, so if one has a
family history of atherosclerosis, the prudent course of
action is to accept what cannot be changed and to change
what can. In addition to the herbal medicines described,
follow the general and nutritional recommendations for
heart health provided earlier in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:

----- PAGE 317 -----
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day

Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 TU/day

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Coenzyme Qjo: $0 mg two or three times a day

Niacin (in the form of inositol hexaniacinate): 500 mg
three times a day with meals for two weeks, then in-
crease dosage to 1,000 mg three times a day with meals

Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE

A common syndrome that may be caused by different eti-
ologies whose clinical manifestations reflect a fundamen-
tal abnormality—a decrease in the myocardial contractile
state such that cardiac output is inadequate for the
body's needs. (The Merck Manual)

Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a-severe condition in
which the heart cannot supply the body with enough
blood because it is functioning inadequately as a pump.
Usually, the loss of pumping ability is a symptom of an
underlying heart problem, such as coronary artery dis-
ease. The term heart failure suggests a sudden and com-
plete cessation of heart activity, but in reality, the condi-
tion generally develops slowly, as the heart gradually loses
its ability to pump efficiently.

Some people may experience no symptoms of conges-
tive heart failure until years after the heart begins its decline.
Most symptoms result from congestion that develops in the
lungs or from backed-up blood in the veins. How critical
the condition is depends on how much pumping capacity
the heart has lost. The severity of the condition will deter-
mine its impact on an individual’s life. Milder heart failure
may have little effect, while severe heart failure can inter-
fere with even simple activities and eventually prove fatal.

Nearly everyone’s heart loses some pumping capacity
with age, but a number of other factors can also lead to a
potentially life-threatening loss of pumping activity. As a
symptom of underlying heart disease, heart failure is
closely associated with the major risk factors already dis-
cussed: smoking, high cholesterol levels, hypertension,
diabetes and abnormal blood sugar levels, and obesity.
Eliminating such risk factors lowers the risk of develop-
ing or aggravating heart disease and heart failure. The
presence of coronary heart disease is among the greatest
risks for heart failure. Muscle damage and scarring caused
by a heart attack greatly increase the risk of heart failure,
as does cardiac arrhythmia, or irregular heartbeat. Any
disorder that causes abnormal swelling or thickening of
the heart also sets the stage for heart failure.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 2 309

A number of symptoms are associated with heart fail-
ure, but none is specific for the condition.

Shortness of breath is often the most prominent symptom.
In heart failure, this may result from a buildup of fluid
in the lungs. Breathing difficulties may occur at rest or
during exercise. In some cases, congestion may be se-
vere enough to prevent or interrupt sleep.

Fatigue or easy tiring is another symptom. As the heart’s
pumping capacity decreases, muscles and other tissues
receive less oxygen and nutrition. Thus, the body can-
not perform as much work, leading to fatigue.

Fluid retention, or edema, may cause swelling of the feet,
ankles, legs, and occasionally the abdomen.

Persistent coughing is another sign, especially coughing that
regularly produces mucus or pink, blood-tinged spu-
tum. Some people develop raspy breathing or wheezing.

Because heart failure generally develops slowly,
these symptoms may not appear until the condition has
progressed over years. The heart hides the underlying
problem by making adjustments that delay the eventual
loss in pumping capacity. The heart compensates in three
ways to cope with the effects of heart failure:

1. Enlargement (dilatation) allows more blood into the
heart.

2, Thickening of muscle fibers (hypertrophy) strength-
ens the heart muscle.

3. More frequent contractions increase circulation.

By making these adjustments, or compensating, the
heart can temporarily make up for losses in pumping abil-
ity, sometimes for years. However, compensation has its
limits. Eventually, the heart cannot offset its lost ability to
pump blood, and the signs of heart failure appear.

Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure
While herbs containing cardiac glycosides are the basis of
a number of important pharmaceutical drugs for conges-
tive heart failure, it would be inappropriate to explore the
use of these cardioactive remedies in a book of this kind.
As dramatically effective as they are, the key to safe and
successful therapeutic application is skilled diagnosis and
interpretation, as well as regular monitoring for levels
of cardiac glycosides in the blood, Without this skill,
these plants are extremely poisonous. However, the non-
cardioactive approach described here will prove effective
for the treatnent of mild heart failure that does not warrant
the use of stronger medications, especially for elderly
patients with chronic CHF.

As mild CHF is usually a result of degenerative

----- PAGE 318 -----
310 a TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

processes, it may be accompanied by any of the plethora
of conditions that manifest in the aging process. Tonic
support of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is
indicated, but beyond that, specifics will depend on the
individual concerned.

Actions Indicated

Cardioactive drugs will often be the core of treatment for
such problems, but are best prescribed by skilled diag-
nosticians who can follow the changes brought about
in the heart and its functioning. Regular monitoring of
cardiac glycosides in the blood is essential.

Cardiotonics will support the action of cardiac glycosides
prescribed. As they theoretically may potentiate the ac-
tivity of cardioactives, blood monitoring is still needed.

Peripheral. vasodilators may be indicated to help with gen-
eral blood circulation.

Hypotensives are often appropriate because of associated
hypertension.

Diuretics ease water-retention problems. Cardioactive di-
uretics are often used in orthodox medicine. Replace-
ment of flushed-out potassium is essential.

Nervines will ease stress, whether causal or a result of the
heart disease.

Specific Remedies
As primary cardioactives are generally out of the range of
what herbalists can use safely, we shall not use Convallaria
or its equivalents in the prescription suggested here. Our
aim is to either strengthen the heart muscle or support
the work of allopathically prescribed cardiac glycosides.
Crataegus, Tilia, and Allium sativum are essential. In
addition, an herb from the ayurvedic tradition is offering
great hope in the treatment of a range of cardiovascular
conditions. Coleus forskoblit and its diterpene constituent
forskolin can lower blood pressure while improving the
contractility of the heart.”*

A Prescription for Mild Congestive Heart Failure

Crataegus spp. 3 parts
Ginkgo biloba T part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leat T part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment
The dietary and lifestyle issues already discussed all apply
for congestive heart failure. Follow the general and nutri-
tional recommendations for heart health provided earlier
in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:”

Magnesium: 200 to 400 mg three times a day
Thiamine: 200 to 250 mg/day

L-carnitine: 300 to 500 mg three times a day
Coenzyme Qi: 150 to 300 mg/day

ANGINA PECTORIS

A clinical syndrome due to myocardial ischemia charac-
terized by precordial discomfort or pressure, typically
precipitated by exertion and relieved by rest or sublingual
nitroglycerin. (The Merck Manual)

Angina pectoris, commonly known as angina, is a recur-
ring pain or discomfort in the chest that indicates that the
heart is not getting enough oxygen. Angina may result
from blockage of the coronary arteries that supply blood
to the heart or occur because the heart is overworked and
thus needs more oxygen than usual.

The main underlying cause of angina is coronary
artery disease, which stems from atherosclerosis of the
coronary arteries. Angina may also be related to other dis-
eases that tax the heart unduly, such as anemia, aortic
valve disease, cardiac arrhythmia, and hyperthyroidism.
Episodes of angina occur when the heart’s need for oxy-
gen exceeds the availability of oxygen from the blood that
nourishes the heart. Physical exertion is the most com-
mon trigger for angina. Other triggers include emotional
stress, extreme cold or heat, heavy meals, alcohol, and
cigarette smoking.

The term angina pectoris literally means “choking sen-
sation in the chest.” It is usually experienced as a crushing
or constricting pain that starts in the center of the chest,
deep behind the breastbone, and may radiate to other
parts of the body. However, the pain of angina may be felt
only in peripheral locations, such as the jaw, abdomen,
and arm. The pain can also be confused with indigestion,
because the tight, burning sensations are similar.

An angina attack is not a heart attack! While the pain
is similar, it does not last as long, usually no more than
five minutes. Angina pain simply indicates that some of
the heart muscle is not getting enough blood temporar-
ily. The pain does not mean that the heart muscle is suf-
fering irreversible, permanent damage. In addition, not

----- PAGE 319 -----
all chest pain comes from the heart, and not all pain re-
lated to the heart is angina. For example, if the pain lasts
for less than 30 seconds, or if it disappears during a deep
breath, after drinking a glass of water, or after changing
position, it almost certainly is not angina and should not
cause concern. However, prolonged pain, unrelieved by
rest or accompanied by other symptoms, may signal a
heart attack.

Treatment of Angina Pectoris

The herbal treatment guidelines given here must be uti-
lized within the broader context of dietary and nutritional
reassessment. The herbal approach to treating angina
pectoris is similar to that for hypertension and arte-
riosclerosis. Please refer to those sections for details.

Specific Remedies

Crataegus can be considered the closest to a specific for
this condition. Crataegus leaves, flowers, and fruits con-
tain a number of biologically active flavonoid substances.
Studies show that Crataegus may inhibit the progression
of atherosclerosis, increase coronary perfusion, and con-
fer mild hypotensive effects. It may also antagonize
atherogenesis and have a positive effect on the contractile
ability of the heart.’*

Salvia miltiorrhiza (dan shen) is used in traditional
Chinese medicine as a circulatory stimulant, sedative, and
cooling agent. It may also be valuable as an antianginal
drug, because it has been shown to dilate coronary arter-
ies in all concentrations. S. miltiorrhiza also appears to
have a protective action against myocardial ischemia.

A Prescription for Angina

Crataegus spp. 3 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Achillea millefolium | part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day. In addition, the patient can take 5 ml of
Crataegus tincture at the first sign of an angina attack. This will
not replace the use of prescription medication.

Broader Context of Treatment
Issues similar to those covered earlier must be addressed—
that is, the whole panoply of dietary and lifestyle factors

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 311

that contribute to an individual’s unique life experience.
In addition to the herbal medicines described, follow the
general and nutritional guidelines for heart health pro-
vided earlier in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:??

Magnesium: 200 to 400 mg three times a day
Coenzyme Qjo: 150 to 300 mg/day
Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

PERIPHERAL ARTERIAL OCCLUSIVE
DISEASE

Occlusion of blood supply to the extremities by
atherosclerotic plaques. (The Merck Manual)

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease, also known as inter-
mittent claudication, is a peripheral vascular disease caused
by narrowing of the arteries in the legs. This restricts the
flow of blood to muscles in the calves, thighs, and but-
tocks. While usually asymptomatic in early stages, the re-
stricted availability of oxygen eventually causes major
problems. The most striking symptoms occur upon exer-
tion, such as walking.

Because of the limited blood supply, the muscles do
not receive the oxygen they need, resulting in the buildup
of lactic acid and other products of enforced anaerobic
metabolism. These metabolites cause pain and cramping
and interfere with the ability to walk. During rest, the
pain and discomfort subside. There is a close association
between the etiology of this condition and that of athero-
sclerosis. Please refer to that discussion for more details.

Treatment of Peripheral Arterial

Occlusive Disease

In addition to the herbal suggestions given here, a com-
plex of lifestyle issues must be addressed. The nutritional
guidelines given throughout this chapter are important.
Some simple behavioral pointers can help encourage
blood flow back into the trunk:

Avoid crossing the legs, but if necessary, cross the legs at the
ankles, not the knees.

Avoid bigh heels, which limit the use of the calf muscles.

Avoid restrictive clothing that limits blood flow in the groin
or calf.

Avoid prolonged sitting or standing.

Take breaks to walk around to help move the blood along.

Rest and elevate the legs.

----- PAGE 320 -----
312 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Actions Indicated

Cardiotonic. The pathology that manifests in the legs sug-
gests that disease processes are almost certainly affect-
ing the whole cardiovascular system.

Peripheral vasodilators facilitate blood flow to the
extremities.

Hypotensives may help, as there is a close connection be-
tween hypertension and the development of this
condition.

Diuretics may be appropriate if edema is present; however,
edema calls for careful examination of the heart. Mild,
positively inotropic remedies, such as Crataegus, may
be adequate.

Vascular tonics are essential to tone and strengthen the
blood vessels.

Nervines may be indicated, depending upon the individ-
ual’s needs.

Antispasmodics may help ease the degree of muscular spasm.

Specific Remedies
Crataegus (hawthorn), Aesculus (horse chestnut), and
Ginkgo may all be considered specifics for this problem.
Aesculus hippocastanum has been the subject of numerous
clinical studies on the treatment of this condition. A
meta-analysis of these studies concluded that the herb was
efficacious and safe.?¢

Ginkgo biloba is useful for treating peripheral vascular
disease, including diabetic retinopathy and intermittent
claudication. Flavonoids in Ginkgo reduce capillary per-
meability and fragility and serve as free radical scav-
engers. Terpene ginkgolides inhibit platelet-activating
factor, decrease vascular resistance, and improve circula-
tory flow without appreciably affecting blood pressure. A
recent meta-analysis of randomized trials of Ginkgo in the
treatment of intermittent claudication demonstrated sig-
nificant positive results.’” Research also supports its use
for treating cerebral insufficiency and secondary effects
on memory and mood, as well as vertigo and tinnitus.

A Prescription for Peripheral Arterial Disease

Crataegus spp. 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

VARICOSE VEINS

Elongated, dilated, tortuous veins whose valves are con-
genitally absent or scant or have become incompetent;
this condition occurs usually in the legs. (The Merck
Manual)

Varicose veins are a common problem that affects be-
tween 10% and 20% of the population. Incidence in-
creases with age, and it is most common in people older
than 50. In addition, varicose veins are four times more
common in women than in men.

The core problem is valve incompetency in the
veins of the legs, which leads to dilation of the veins, loss
of tissue tone, and some degree of reversal of blood flow.
The abnormal swelling of veins in the legs is a symptom
of generally poor blood circulation, accompanied by loss
of elasticity in the walls of the veins and particularly in
their valves. When they are functioning normally, these
valves prevent blood from flowing back away from the
heart. When their efficiency declines, some blood may
stagnate in the veins, which then become swollen and
tortuous (twisted), causing aching and abnormal fatigue
in the legs.

Causative factors for varicose veins fit into two gen-
eral groups.

1, Inadequate support of vein walls.

Heredity. About 40% of cases have a family history
of varicosity.

Obesity. The fatty tissue that builds up in the legs
provides inadequate support and results in loss of
tone.

Aging. The aging process leads to degenerative
changes in supporting connective tissue, which is
compounded by decreased muscular activity.

Posture. Occupations that involve prolonged stand-
ing or sitting increase the chances that this prob-
lem will develop. This is due to a combination of
the pull of gravity and lack of muscular activity in
the thighs.

2. Increased resistance to the free flow of blood back
into the trunk.

Pregnancy. The growing baby may act as an obstacle
to venous return.

Thrombosis. Blockage within the vessels themselves
can cause varicosities.

Tumors. Uterine fibroids or ovarian problems, for
example, can become obstructive.

Fashion. Constriction caused by tight clothing will
weaken tissue.

----- PAGE 321 -----
Treatment of Varicose Veins

The herbal treatment guidelines given here for varicose
veins must be applied in the context of the lifestyle issues
discussed earlier. The focus of tonic support should be the
cardiovascular system, but beyond that, a range of factors
may be addressed, depending upon the individual’s needs.
Consider musculoskeletal and connective tissue tonics if
varicosity is accompanied by rheumatic problems. If the
patient is pregnant, then appropriate uterine tonics are
indicated.

Actions Indicated

Vascular tonics help the tissues regain tone and strength.
Flavonoid-rich herbs are especially useful here, al-
though they do not work quickly.

Circulatory stimulants assist in the process of venous return
to the trunk of the body.

Astringents can support the work of the vascular tonics.
The astringency is best applied externally.

Anti-inflammatories ease localized inflammation and
discomfort.

Emollients and demutcents, used externally, lessen local
discomfort.

Specific Remedies

Flavonoid-rich plants have a major role to play in toning
up the muscle walls of weakened veins. Traditionally, in
Europe, Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut) has been
considered an effective specific. The seeds of this plant
have long been used to treat venous disorders, including
varicose veins. The saponin glycoside aescin inhibits the
activity of lysosomal enzymes thought to contribute to
varicose veins by weakening vessel walls and increasing
permeability.’ The herb has been the subject of numer-
ous clinical studies on the treatment of venous conditions,
and a meta-analysis of some of these studies concluded
that the herb was efficacious and safe.?®

A Prescription for Varicose Veins

Crataegus spp. 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 313

Varicose Veins Lotion for External Use
Hamamelis virginiana (distilled witch hazel) 80 ml

Aesculus hippocastanum tincture 10 ml
Symphytum officinale tincture 10 ml
Total volume: 100 ml

Apply liberally as needed to ease irritation and discomfort. Rose
water or another floral water may be added to make the lotion
more cosmetically pleasing

Table 14.7. Actions Supplied by Varicose Vein
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum, Ginkgo biloba

Crataegus spp., Aesculus hippocastanum,
Achillea millefolium

Vascular tonic

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Hamamelis virginiana
Emollient and demulcent — Symphytum officinale
Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Anti-inflammatory Aesculus hippocastanum

Broader. Context of Treatment

Lifestyle factors are very important in the long-term
treatment of this sometimes intransigent condition. As in
other cardiovascular conditions, diet is important, and
similar guidelines apply. See the general and nutritional
recommendations for heart health given earlier in this
chapter.

The main specific insight is that the patient should
avoid postures or situations that aggravate resistance to
easy venous return from the legs. In addition, anything
that counteracts the effects of gravity will be helpful.
Resting with the legs higher than the head for at least 10
minutes every day will help in the long term and also
decrease any immediate discomfort. This may be
achieved through the inverted postures of yoga, use of a
slant board, or simply by lying on the floor with the legs
and feet supported by a chair. The foot of the bed can be
elevated 6 to 12 inches, thus facilitating drainage at night.

Gentle exercise, such as walking and stretching, is
helpful. However, jogging, skipping, aerobics, and other
exercises involving repeated impact can do more harm
than good. Such exercise can be so uncomfortable for
people with varicose veins that they are unlikely to keep it
up for more than a very short time.

----- PAGE 322 -----
314 =. TREATMHN't APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Aromatherapy can help improve the general tone of
the veins when used in a broad, holistic context. Cypress
oil, for example, has a reputation for strengthening the
veins in the legs. It may be added to a bath oil or blended
in a carrier oil or cream in a 3% dilution and applied very
gently over the affected area. The area above the affected
veins can be massaged. However, the area below the vari-
cosity must never be massaged, as this will increase pres-
sure in the vein.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:°°

Vitamin A: 10,000 IU/day

Vitamin B complex: 10 to 100 mg/day
Vitamin C with bioflavonoids: 1 to 3 g/day
Vitamin E: 200 to 600 TU/day
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day

Zinc: 15 to 30 mg/day

References

1. Weiss RF, Fintelmann V. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart,

New York: Thieme, 2000.

2. McGuffin, et al. Botanical Safety Handbook. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1997.
3. Brown D. Common drugs and their potential inter-
actions with herbs or nutrients. Review of Complementary
and Integrative Medicine 1999, 6(2):124-41.
4. Keli SO, Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Kromhout D.
Dietary flavonoids, antioxidant vitamins, and incidence
of stroke: the Zutphen study. Archives of Internal Medicine
996 Mar 25; 156(6):637-42.
5. Wedworth SM, Lynch S. Dietary flavonoids in
atherosclerosis prevention. Annals of Pharmacotherapy
995 Jun; 29(6):627-8.

6. Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Hollman PC, et al. Dietary
antioxidant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease:
the Zutphen Elderly Study. Lancet 1993 Oct 23;
342(8878):1007-11.

7. Revisions to Classification of Functional Capacity and
Objective Assessment of Patients with Diseases of the Heart.
New York Heart Association (NYHA), 1994.

8. Zapfejun G. Clinical efficacy of crataegus extract WS
1442 in congestive heart failure NYHA class II.
Phytomedicine 2001 Jul; 8(4):262-6.

9. Rigelsky JM, Sweet BV. Hawthorn: pharmacology and
therapeutic uses. American Journal of Health-System
Pharmacy 2002 Mar 1; 59(5):417-22.

10. Weikl A, Assmus KD, Neukum-Schmidt A, et al.
Crataegus Special Extract WS 1442. Assessment of

objective effectiveness in patients with heart failure

LL.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21,

22.

23.

24.

(NYHA ID). Fortschritte der Medizin 1996 Aug 30;
114(24):291-6.

Tauchert M. Efficacy and safety of crataegus extract WS
1442 in comparison with placebo in patients with
chronic stable New York Heart Association class-III
heart failure. American Heart Journal 2002 May,
143(5):910-15.

National Institutes of Health. Clinical Guidelines on the
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and
Obesity in Adults, Bethesda, MD: Department of Health
and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 1998.
Stunkard AJ, Wadden TA, eds. Obesity: Theory and
Therapy, 2nd edition. New York: Raven Press, 1993.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Ernst E, Weihmayr T, Matrai A. Garlic and blood lipids.
British Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed.) 1985 Jul 13;
291(6488):139,

Ali M. Mechanism by which garlic (Allium sativum) in-
hibits cyclooxygenase activity. Effect of raw versus boiled
garlic extract on the synthesis of prostanoids.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 1995
Dec, 53(6):397-400.

Banerjee SK, Maulik SK. Effect of garlic on cardiovascu-
lar disorders: a review. Nutrition Journal 2002 Nov 19;
1(1):4.

Al-Qattan K, Khan I, Alnaqeeb MA, Ali M.
Thromboxane-B2, prostaglandin-E2 and hypertension
in the rat 2-kidney 1-clip model: a possible mechanism
of the garlic-induced hypotension. Prostaglandins,
Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 2001 Jan;
64(1):5-10.

Satyavati G. Guggulipid: a promising hypolipidaemic
agent from gum guggul (Commiphora wightii). In:
Wagner H, Farnsworth NR, eds. Economic and Medicinal
Plant Research, vol. 5. San Diego: Academic Press, 1991.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/nhbpep/nhbp_pd.htm.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Ammon, HPT and Muller AB. Forskolin: from an
ayurvedic remedy to a modern agent. Planta Medica
(1985); 51:473-7,

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Rigelsky JM, Sweet BV. Hawthorn: pharmacology and
therapeutic uses. American Journal of Health-System
Pharmacy 2002 Mar 1, 59(5):417-22.

----- PAGE 323 -----
25.

26.

27.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2002; (1):CD003230.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba extract for the
treatment of intermittent claudication: a meta-analysis
of randomized trials. The American Journal of Medicine
2000 Mar; 108(4):276-81.

28.

30.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 315

Kreysel H, Nissen H, Enghofer E. A possible role of
lyosomal enzymes in the pathogenesis of varicosis and
the reduction in their serum activity by Venostsin®.
VASA. Zeitschrift fur Gefasskrankheiten. Journal for
Vascular Diseases 1983; 12(4):377-82.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2002; (1):CD003230.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 324 -----
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

hen we draw in a breath, we share that air
W == all other human beings and all other life

on our planet. Through respiration, our one-
ness with trees becomes a manifest fact, and our commu-
nion with the oceans has immediate impact. The reality
of the planetary whole reveals itself, with implications for
all human life, through the circulation of the gases and
energy of the atmosphere. This vision underlies holistic
healing as much as it does ecology. The anatomy and
physiology of the respiratory system is a complex and
beautiful embodiment of integration and wholeness.

Every minute, usually unconsciously, we breathe in
and out between 10 and 15 times. We take a breath nearly
25,000 times a day, moving enough air to and fro to blow
up several thousand balloons. This is the way in which the
body extracts the oxygen it needs from the air and dis-
charges waste carbon dioxide from the blood. The almost
10,000 liters of air inhaled each day is mostly oxygen and
nitrogen. It also contains small amounts of other gases,
floating bacteria, viruses, tobacco smoke, car exhaust, and
other pollutants from the atmosphere.

The lungs sit within the thoracic cage, where they
stretch from the trachea (commonly called the windpipe)
to below the heart. They are textured like a finely grained
sponge that can be inflated with air. About 10% of the
lung is solid tissue and the rest is filled with air and blood.
This unique structure facilitates gas exchange, yet is
strong enough to maintain shape and function of the
lungs. The lungs’ main function is to rapidly exchange
oxygen from inhaled air with carbon dioxide from the
blood.

When we breathe, we take in air through the nose
and mouth, which passes down the throat into the tra-
chea. The air enters the lungs, where it is passes into the
bronchi. The two main bronchi extend from the trachea
into each lung, where they divide into smaller bronchi,
and then a great number of smaller bronchioles. The bron-
chioles divide into a network of about 3 million alveolar
ducts containing ¢/veoli, commonly called air sacs.

The respiratory muscles of the thorax control the

316

movement of the air into the lungs. These muscles, col-
lectively called the ventilatory apparatus, include the di-
aphragm and the muscles that move the ribs. Specific
nerve sites located in the brain and the neck, called resp:-
ratory centers, coordinate the performance of the ventila-
tory apparatus. The respiratory centers respond to
changes in oxygen, carbon dioxide, and acid levels in the
blood. Normal concentrations of these chemicals in arte-
rial blood are maintained by changes in the breathing
rate.

Gas exchange between inhaled air and blood takes
place in the alveoli. A very thin membrane separates the
blood from the air in the alveoli and allows oxygen and
nitrogen to diffuse into the blood. This barrier is 50 times
thinner than a sheet of tissue paper, but a large surface
area (80 square meters, or about as large as a tennis court)
is available for gas exchange. In the resting state, it takes
just about a minute for the total blood volume of the body
to pass through the lungs. It takes a red cell a fraction of
a second to pass through the capillary network. Gas ex-
change occurs almost instantaneously during this short
time period.

The blood carries fresh oxygen throughout the body.
When the blood returns to the alveoli, carbon dioxide and
other gases pass from the blood into the alveoli. These
gases leave the body in the exhaled air. In a larger sense,
the ebb and flow of the breath also draws life energy into
the body. Thus, if respiratory disturbances inhibit gas ex-
change, they can lead to a lowering of the body’s vitality,
an increase in metabolic disorders, and degeneration of
tissue.

PREVENTION OF RESPIRATORY
DISEASE

We are not only what we eat, but also what we breathe.
Any problem with breathing will not only affect other or-
gans and systems, but may also cause disease in these sys-
tems. However, as the body is a whole, the reverse is also
true. When the lungs need attention, we must also look at

----- PAGE 325 -----
the circulatory system, so much of what was discussed in
chapter 14 is also relevant to the lungs. We must also con-
sider the condition of the digestive system and especially
the organs of elimination, as the lungs share the job of
eliminating waste with the bowels, kidneys, and skin.

If a problem develops in any of these systems, the
body will compensate by increasing the load on the oth-
ers. Many pathological tissue changes can be prevented if
the environmental milieu of the cells is constantly rich in
oxygen. The amount of oxygen supplied to the tissue by
circulation is largely controlled by respiration.

Based on all of these considerations, it becomes ap-
parent that two of the best preventive measures for the
respiratory system are regular exercise and proper breath-
ing. While breathing is often taken for granted, conscious
and proper breathing is regarded, even in orthodox med-
ical circles, as invaluable. The central role of the breath in
many spiritual practices should perhaps provide an addi-
tional clue.

The best prophylactic is right lifestyle. Diet, exercise,
and quality of life all have a profound influence on the
health of the lungs. To ensure the health of the lungs,
both the inner and outer environments must be in har-
mony. If the air we breathe is polluted, it will disrupt the
ecology of the lungs just as it disrupts the ecology of the
forest. We should avoid air contaminated with chemicals,
particles, gases, and smoke, which brings us to the issue of
tobacco.

Smoking puts a wall of tar and ash between the indi-
vidual and the world and disrupts the ecology of the
lungs. This disruption can lead to an impressive host of

problems, from bronchitis to cancer, not to mention all
the effects of diminished oxygen supply to the rest of the
body. If we are to heal ourselves and our world, quitting
smoking is a good place to start. The benefits of eating a
whole food diet and living in the country pale a bit when
combined with 20 cigarettes a day!

Other specific dangers can also be recognized and
prevented. We can do our best to avoid respiratory infec-
tions, but as this is often socially impossible, we need to
maintain the body’s natural defenses against infection. If
given the chance, the body is capable of great feats of self-
defense, as long as we provide it with a balanced, vitamin-
rich diet and a lifestyle that is as healthy in thought and
feeling as it is in action.

In this context, it is vital to curb the misuse of antibi-
otics. While these drugs save lives when used at the right
time and in the right way, they can also reduce the effec-
tiveness of the body's innate defense systems to impo-
tence. In the long run, they also contribute to the evolu-

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 317

tion of highly resistant bacteria, so that infections are be-
coming increasingly difficult to treat. Over the past 30
years, doctors have observed alarming developments in
this direction. With correct lifestyle and the appropriate
use of herbal remedies, antibiotics can often be avoided.

Air Pollutants

Air quality is the key to preventing much of the disease
associated with both the upper and the lower respiratory
systems. If we could avoid particulate air pollution and
chemical irritants such as sulfur dioxide, many disabling
conditions of the lungs would not develop. ‘Thus, smok-
ing (both active and passive), as well as urban and indus-
trial pollution, is an important issue for the practitioner
and the patient. Anyone concerned about lung health
should become active in Friends of the Earth!

Air pollutants affect the lungs in many ways. While
they may simply cause irritation and discomfort, inhaled
materials can sometimes cause illness or death. The lungs
have a series of built-in mechanical and biological barri-
ers that keep harmful materials from entering the body. In
addition, specific defense mechanisms inactivate some
disease-causing materials. However, normal lung defenses
and barriers in the lungs do not always work as well as
they should.

If polluted air contains an excessive amount of dust,
fumes, smoke, gases, vapors, or mists, there is an in-
creased risk for developing a lung disease. Air pollution
can irritate the eyes, throat, and lungs. Burning eyes,
cough, and chest tightness are common with exposure to
high levels of air pollutants. Exercise may intensify symp-
toms of air pollution exposure simply because it requires
faster, deeper breathing. Children probably feel the ef-
fects of pollution at lower levels than adults do. They also
experience more illness, such as bronchitis and earaches,
in areas of high pollution than in areas with cleaner air.

For most healthy people, the symptoms of air pollu-
tion exposure resolve as soon as air quality improves.
However, certain groups of people are more sensitive to
the effects of air pollution than others, and responses vary
greatly. Some people may notice chest tightness or cough,
while others notice no effects. People with heart disease
(such as angina) or lung disease (such as asthma or em-
physema) may be very sensitive to air pollution and may
have symptoms when others do not. During times of
heavy pollution, their condition may worsen to the point
that they must limit their activities or even seek additional
medical care.

Air pollution is caused by the presence of gases,
droplets, and particles that reduce the quality of the air. In

----- PAGE 326 -----
318 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BopY SYSTEM

the city, air pollution may be caused by industry and con-
struction as well as cars, buses, and airplanes. Air pollu-
tion in the country may be caused by dust from tractors
plowing fields, trucks and cars driving on dirt or gravel
roads, and rock quarries, as well as by smoke from wood
and crop fires. All of these particles may also be sources of
airborne pesticides and herbicides.

Ground-level ozone is a major component of air pol-
lution in most cities. Ground-level ozone is created when

engine and fuel gases that have already been released into
the air interact in the presence of sunlight. Ozone levels
increase in cities when the air is still, the sun is bright, and
the temperature is warm. Ozone irritates the respiratory
tract and eyes, and exposure to high levels results in chest
tightness, coughing, and wheezing. People with respira-
tory and heart problems are at a higher risk.

Ozone has been linked to increased hospital admis-
sions and premature death. It also causes noticeable leaf
damage in many crops, garden plants, and trees. The
WHO recommends limiting exposure to 0.08 ppm to
0.1 ppm on average an hour. (Ground-level ozone should
not be confused with the protective ozone that exists
miles up in the atmosphere, filtering radiation.)

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) checks
and reports on air quality in the United States. Because of
its efforts, the nation’s air quality has greatly improved
over the past 20 years. The EPA measures the level of
pollution in the air over many large cities and a number
of rural areas. The Pollution Standards Index (PSI) is a
scale of air quality ranging from 0 to 500 and is used in
many weather reports. A PSI score higher than 100 indi-
cates unhealthy air conditions.

Smoking and the Health Effects of Tobacco!

Cigarette smoking causes a variety of life-threatening dis-
eases, including lung cancer, emphysema, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, and heart disease. An estimated
400,000 deaths each year are directly caused by cigarette
smoking, This, the single most preventable cause of death,
is responsible for one in six deaths, or more deaths each
year than fires, automobile crashes, alcohol, cocaine,
heroin, AIDS, murders, and suicides combined. Passive
smoking, commonly called secondhand smoke, kills some
50,000 Americans each year, making it the third leading
cause of preventable death. For every eight smokers, one
nonsmoker dies from the effects of secondhand smoke.

Cardiovascular. Diseases

People who smoke a pack of cigarettes a day have more
than twice the risk of heart attack as nonsmokers. Two or

more packs a day increase the risk three times. Smoking
is the principal cause of coronary heart disease, the most
common cause of death in the United States. It is respon-
sible for 21% of fatal heart disease and is an important
cause of stroke, blood vessel disease, and sudden cardiac
death. It also increases the risk of recurrence in people
who have survived a heart attack. Smoking is also the
most powerful risk factor for atherosclerosis of the arter-
ies in the legs.

Cancers

Smoking is responsible for 32% of deaths due to cancer.
Smoking causes cancer of the lung, oral cavity, pharynx,
larynx, esophagus, pancreas, kidney, urinary bladder, and
cervix. In addition, links may exist between smoking and
cancer of the large intestine and some forms of leukemia.
Smoking causes nearly 90% of all lung and throat can-
cers. For many years, lung cancer was the leading cause of
cancer death in men, but now lung cancer has surpassed
breast cancer as the leading cancer killer among women.
The risk of developing cancer increases with amount and
duration of smoking. Alcohol is also a risk factor for some
cancers, and the combination of alcohol and smoking
greatly increases cancer risk.

Respiratory Diseases

The overwhelming importance of smoking as a cause of
chronic obstructive lung disease is well established.
Smoking is responsible for 88% of deaths due to chronic
lung disease, outweighing all other factors that cause
these conditions. Smoking has an adverse effect on the
body’s immune system and other defense mechanisms, in-
creasing the risk of respiratory infections, such as pneu-
monia and influenza. Cigarettes are a factor in up to 90%
of cases of chronic bronchitis in the United States, and in-
crease the risk of developing acute bacterial bronchitis.
Air pollution also contributes to chronic bronchitis, as
does working around dust or chemical fumes.

Gastrointestinal Effects

Smoking decreases the strength of the sphincter muscle
between the throat and stomach, which allows stomach
contents to reflux, or flow backward, into the esophagus.
Tt may also directly injure the esophagus and impair its
ability to resist further damage from refluxed material.
Smoking seems to affect the liver, too, by changing the
way it handles drugs and alcohol. In some people, this
may influence the dose of medication necessary to treat
an illness. Peptic ulcer disease is more likely to occur in
smokers than in nonsmokers, and ulcers heal less readily

----- PAGE 327 -----
and are more likely to recur in smokers. Current and for-
mer smokers have a higher risk of developing Crohn’s dis-
ease than nonsmokers. Among people with this disease,
smoking is associated with a higher rate of relapse, repeat
surgery, and immunosuppressive treatment. In short,
there seems to be enough evidence of harm to the diges-
tive tract to stop smoking solely on this basis.

Effects on Teeth and Gums

Beyond oral cancer, tobacco affects oral health in a num-
ber of other ways. In a recent study of Canadians 50 years
of age and older, smokers were more likely than non-
smokers to have lost all their natural teeth, to have re-
maining teeth with decayed and filled root surfaces, and
to have significant gum disease.

Effects in Pregnancy
Smoking has a direct effect on the growth of the fetus.
The more the mother smokes during pregnancy, the
lower the weight of the newborn infant. Smoking in-
creases the risk that the baby’s weight at birth will be less
than 2,500 grams (5'/ Ibs). Smoking during pregnancy
may also increase the risk of miscarriage. Sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS, or crib death) occurs more fre-
quently in infants of mothers who smoked during preg-
nancy. Smoking also appears to decrease the quantity and
quality of breast milk, and may lead to early weaning.
Women who smoke during pregnancy incur extra
risks to their own health, in addition to that of the fetus.
Abnormalities of the placenta and bleeding during preg-
nancy are increased with smoking, and the more a pregnant
woman smokes, the greater the risks.

Additional Smoking Hazards for Women

The contribution of smoking to the development of can-
cer of the cervix is clear. Natural menopause occurs ear-
lier in smokers than in nonsmokers by one to two years.
This may have unfavorable implications for the develop-
ment of other conditions, such as coronary heart disease
and osteoporosis. Smoking is also associated with an in-
creased risk of menstrual disorders. Cigarettes and oral
contraceptives are a dangerous combination that in-
creases the risk of heart attacks, strokes, and other vascu-
lar complications.

Other Effects of Smoking

There also appears to be an association between smoking
and the development of a number of other conditions:

Osteoporosis, which in turn predisposes a person to bone
fractures

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 319

Decreased bone density of the lumbar spine and hip in
both younger and older people

Cataracts

Graves’ disease, a thyroid disorder

Decline in physical fitness

Reduction in the ability of the blood to carry oxygen

Increase in heart rate and basal metabolic rate

A decrease of blood flow in the small vessels of the skin
that may damage skin components, leading to skin
wrinkling and an appearance of premature aging

The Workplace

Many substances found in the workplace can cause
breathing problems. Poor ventilation, closed-in working
areas, and heat increase the risk.

Dusts from wood, cotton, coal, asbestos, silica, and talc, as
well as from cereal grains, coffee, pesticides, drug or
enzyme powders, metals, and fiberglass can all hurt the
lungs.

Fumes from metals that are heated and cooled quickly re-
sult in the presence of fine, solid particles in the air.
Fumes may be produced in welding, smelting, pottery
making, plastics manufacture, and rubber operations.

Smoke from burning organic materials can contain a vari-
ety of dusts, gases, and vapors, depending on what is
burning. Firefighters are at special risk.

Gases, such as formaldehyde, ammonia, chlorine, sulfur
dioxide, ozone, and nitrogen oxides, are harmful. At
greatest risk are those working around chemical reac-
tions and in jobs involving high heat.

Vapors, such as solvents, usually irritate the nose and
throat first before they affect the lungs.

Mists or. sprays from paints, lacquers, hair spray, pesticides,
cleaning products, acids, oils, and solvents constitute
another source of pollutants,

Such substances can irritate the nose and throat, pro-
ducing coldlike symptoms such as runny nose and
scratchy throat. Viral infections and allergies produce
similar symptoms, but a work-related illness should be
suspected if nose and throat problems occur when at
work, Such exposure can cause bronchitis, asthma, and
emphysema.

HERBS AND THE LOWER
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

The respiratory system is the focus of gas exchange be-
tween the body and the air. The organs of the respiratory
system are the nose, the pharynx, the larynx, the trachea,

----- PAGE 328 -----
320 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

the bronchi and their smaller branches, and the lungs,
which contain the terminal air sacs, or alveoli. Function-
ally, the respiratory system consists of respiratory and
conducting zones. The respiratory zone, the actual site of
gas exchange, is composed of the respiratory bronchioles,
alveolar ducts, and alveoli. The conducting zone, sometimes
called the dead air space, includes all other respiratory
passageways, which serve as fairly rigid conduits to allow
air to reach the gas exchange sites. The conducting zone
organs also purify, humidify, and warm the incoming air.
Thus, when it reaches the lungs, the air contains many
fewer irritants (such as dust and bacteria) than it did when
it entered the system, and it resembles the warm, damp
air of the tropics.

It is convenient and therapeutically relevant to differ-
entiate between the upper and lower respiratory systems.
The lower respiratory system consists of the respiratory
zone, the alveoli, and respiratory bronchioles. The air-
conducting bronchi and trachea are anatomically part of
this system. The upper respiratory system consists of the
conducting zone, made up of the nose, sinuses, pharynx,
and larynx. The system as a whole represents a major in-
terface with the outside world and thus is a focus of much
immune system activity.

Plant remedies for the respiratory system abound in
pharmacopoeias, and most of the herbs still listed as offi-
cial in British and American pharmacopoeias are expecto-
rant, antitussive, or decongestant. However, the focus of
orthodox medicine on effectors has led to a de-emphasis
of tonic remedies. Pulmonary tonics provide the phy-
totherapist with the opportunity to strengthen both tissue
and function, in addition to addressing symptoms of res-
piratory disease.

Expectorant Herbs

Phytotherapy has a great deal to offer for the treatment of
respiratory disease. However, a major obstacle to correct
use lies in the language herbalists use to describe respira-
tory herbs,

Expectorants are herbs that facilitate or accelerate the
removal of bronchial secretions from the bronchi and tra-
chea. However, in practice, this is a term that is often used
somewhat loosely to refer in a general way to remedies
that “do something” for the respiratory system. Chapter
25 provides a detailed discussion of the primary and sec-
ondary actions of expectorants. For the purposes of this
discussion, however, we will focus briefly on two general
categories of expectorant herbs: stimulating and relaxing.

Table 15.1. Actions and Herbs for the Lower
Respiratory System

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Cephaelis ipecacuanha, Inula helenium,
Marrubium vulgare, Sanguinaria canadensis

Relaxing or demulcent
expectorant

Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria islandica,
Grindelia camporum, Lobelia inflata,
Plantago spp., Tussilago farfara

Antispasmodic Drosera rotundifolia, Euphorbia pilulifera,

Lactuca virosa, Papaver spp,, Prunus serotina

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Eucalyptus spp.,

Thymus vulgaris

Immune support Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Tussilago farfara

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Tilia platyphyllos

Nervine Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata

Stimulating Expectorants

Stimulating expectorants act in different ways to produce
similar effects, but it is not always clear how a specific
remedy works. For any given stimulating expectorant, ei-
ther or both of the following mechanisms may be at play.

Irritation of the bronchioles stimulates the expulsion of any
material present. This irritation initiates a reflex re-
sponse that causes the body to cough.

Liquefaction of viscid sputum encourages clearing by cough-
ing, Sputum is moved upward from the lungs by the
fine hairs of the ciliated epithelium that lines the bron-
chiole tubes, and reduced sputum viscosity facilitates
this transport.

Most stimulating expectorants contain alkaloids,
saponins, or volatile oils. However, not all chemicals in
these groups or plants containing these constituents have
expectorant properties. The particular form of stimula-
tion offered by this group of expectorants makes them
relevant for productive coughs, in which sputum should
be removed from the airways.

----- PAGE 329 -----
Relaxing Expectorants

Relaxing expectorants may also act by reflex, but here the
herbs work to soothe bronchial spasm and loosen mucous
secretions. This loosening occurs because relaxing expec-
torants facilitate the production of a less viscous mucous
secretion, which helps lift up stickier material from below.
This makes relaxing expectorants useful for dry, irritating
coughs. You will notice that this action is similar in some
respects to that of demulcents, and both actions owe a lot
to their content of mucilage and occasionally volatile oils.

Tonics for the Lower Respiratory System
Herbs known as pulmonaries, or amphoteric expectorants,
have a beneficial effect upon both lung tissue and func-
tion. Traditional remedies in this category include Inula
helenium, Verbascum thapsus, and Tussilago farfara.
Differential indications for each of these plants can be
found in chapter 26, but we can generalize here that Inula
has stimulant expectorant effects and Verbascum is more of
a relaxing expectorant. Tussilago is the best of the three for
children.

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot) contains potentially liver-
damaging pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs), especially in the
roots. Animal studies that used amounts of coltsfoot hun-
dreds of times higher than those used medicinally showed
that these alkaloids can cause cancer in animals. However,
this is not applicable to the size of the doses of coltsfoot
usually used as medicine.’ There has been a single case re-
port of an infant who developed liver disease and died
after the mother drank tea that supposedly contained
coltsfoot during pregnancy. However, researchers found
that instead of Tussilago, the tea contained the PA-rich
plant Adenostyles alliariae, which has leaves similar in ap-
pearance to those of Tussilago.> To avoid any potential tox-
icity problems, leaf and flower formulations of Tussilago
should not be taken for more than one consecutive
month, and root products should not be used internally.

SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE

Five primary symptoms affect the lower respiratory sys-
tem. While each of these symptoms may be effectively
treated with herbs, they must still be seen as signposts of
underlying pathology.

Dyspnea is breathlessness or shortness of breath, discussed
in more detail under Types of Dyspnea below.
Dyspnea is an important symptom of asthma and many
other conditions.

Cough is defined as a sudden explosive expiratory maneu-
ver that tends to clear material from the airways.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 321

Cough is caused by irritation somewhere within the
respiratory tract, and is discussed in more detail later.

Chest pain is a common presenting symptom and calls for
skilled differential diagnosis. Cardiovascular causes
must be distinguished from the range of pulmonary
problems that might be implicated.

Wheezing describes an awareness of noises associated with
breathing.

Hemoptysis, or coughing up blood, calls for skilled
diagnosis.

Types of Dyspnea
Dyspnea, defined as an unpleasant sensation of difficulty
in breathing, has a range of clinical manifestations.

Physiological Dyspnea

This is the most common type of breathlessness and is as-
sociated with physical exertion and low-oxygen condi-
tions. Ventilation is increased and maintained through an
augmented respiratory stimulus provided by metabolic
and other factors. Dyspnea is common during acute hy-
poxia (lack of oxygen). For example, at high altitudes, in-
creased respiratory stimulus is due in part to the effect of
arterial hypoxia on the carotid bodies. These are receptor
sites in the carotid arteries that monitor the concentration
of gases in the blood.

Pulmonary Dyspnea

The two major causes here are restrictive defects that im-
pair efficient movement of the lungs or chest wall (e.g.,
pulmonary fibrosis) and obstructive defects that increase
resistance of flow in the airways (e.g., asthma).

Cardiac Dyspnea

In the early stages of heart failure, the availability of oxy-
gen to the tissues of the body via the blood fails to keep
pace with increased metabolic needs during exercise.
Respiration is increased because of tissue and cerebral
acidosis, which causes hyperventilation. In later stages,
the lungs become congested and edematous. The capac-
ity of the stiff lungs is reduced and the effort needed to
breathe increased.

Cardiac Asthma

This is a state of acute respiratory insufficiency; it is often
very similar to other types of asthma but originates with
left ventricular failure. Orthopnea, or breathing discom-
fort that occurs while a person is lying flat, is usually
symptomatic of a cardiovascular basis for dyspnea.

----- PAGE 330 -----
322 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Circulatory Dyspnea

This symptom, also known as “air hunger,” is often a
medical emergency that results from a lack of oxygen
after hemorrhage. It may occasionally be associated with
anemia.

Chemical Dyspnea

This is dyspnea related to uremia or diabetic acidosis.

Central Dyspnea

This is a symptom of cerebral lesions that affect lung
function.

Psychogenic Dyspnea
Also known as “hysterical overbreathing,” psychogenic
dyspnea is caused by emotional or psychological factors.

COUGH

A sudden explosive expiratory maneuver that tends to clear
material (sputum) from the airways. (The Merck Manual)

Should one soothe coughs, stimulate coughs, or suppress
coughs? As with all holistic approaches, it is always
preferable to focus on the underlying cause of a cough, as
removing the cause will also alleviate the cough. In the
sections that follow, we will discuss a number of different
approaches and remedies for treating coughs.

Always select the appropriate approach for the indi-
vidual’s unique case. The key to treatment is achieving a
correct balance among the various stimulating, demul-
cent, antimicrobial, and antitussive herbs available. Treat
the person and his or her experience, not just the cough.

Coughing is a reflex response that represents an at-
tempt by the body to clear the airways. Usually, blockages
are caused by mucus secreted by membranes lining the
respiratory tract, These mucous secretions help to protect
the respiratory tract from all kinds of irritants by trapping
and flushing out smoke particles, bacteria, and viruses.
Any cough that lasts more than a few days, does not re-
spond to treatment, or produces blood should be investi-
gated further, as it may be a sign of serious organic disease.

In addition to the considerations just discussed,

cough may be related to gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD). In this condition, acid reflux from the stomach
backs up into the throat, causing either heartburn or
cough. See chapter 13 for more information about the
etiology and treatment of this common condition.

Treatment of Cough
Acute inflammatory conditions of the respiratory system
are primarily treated with mucilage-rich demulcents,
which soothe inflamed tissue, It is difficult to explain the
mechanism at play here, as the mucopolysaccharide
molecules in demulcent herbs do not enter the blood-
stream and thus cannot be directly active in the respira-
tory tissue. Instead, they are catabolized into their various
components by digestive enzymes, and must exert their
effects through mechanisms other than direct contact.
Stimulant, saponin-containing expectorants are best
used for subacute or chronic bronchitis, for which active
expectoration is indicated. However, any irritation in
chronic bronchitis will indicate the need for increased
demulcent action. This facilitates difterentiated stages of
cough therapy that can rapidly ameliorate the symptoms
and shorten the duration of respiratory illness.
Traditional folk wisdom is a rich source of simple yet
effective treatments for coughs. A simple cough remedy
can be made with onion and honey.

A Simple Cough Elixir

Slice a large onion into rings and place them in a deep bowl.
Cover the onion slices with organic honey and let stand
overnight. In the morning, strain off the mixture of honey and
onion juice, which makes a simple cough elixir. (Honey itself,
which is often included in cough mixtures, has antimicrobial and
expectorant properties.) Take a dessert spoon of this mixture
four or five times a day.

A Basic Herbal Cough Tea

Tussilago farfara 2 parts
Althaea officinalis 2 parts
Hyssopus officinalis 2 parts
Glycyrrhiza glabra 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of freshly boiled
water; drink often until symptoms subside.

BRONCHITIS

Bronchitis is either an acute or a chronic inflammation of
the mucous lining of the bronchial tubes, the main air-
ways that carry air from the trachea to the lungs. This in-
flammation may be caused by viral or bacteria infection,
smoking, or inhalation of chemical pollutants or dust.
Types of bacteria that cause acute bronchitis include
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Hemophilus influenzae.

----- PAGE 331 -----
‘When the cells of the bronchial lining tissue are irri-
tated beyond a certain point, cilia that normally trap and
eliminate pollutants stop functioning. The air passages
become clogged by mucus, and irritation increases. In re-
sponse, a heavy secretion of mucus develops, causing the
characteristic cough of bronchitis.

Bronchitis makes breathing difficult and sometimes
even painful. Pain may be related to the swelling of the
mucous membrane in the trachea. Other common signs
of bronchitis are persistent coughing, aching associated
with fever, and mucus secretions. The patient will feel
very fatigued due to the fact that the body is receiving less
oxygen than it needs.

ACUTE BRONCHITIS

Acute inflammation of the tracheobronchial tree, gener-
ally self-limiting and with eventual complete healing and
return of function. (The Merck Manual)

Acute bronchitis usually originates with a viral infection
of the upper respiratory tract, such as a cold or sore
throat, that can become a secondary bacterial infection
and spread to the lungs. Though usually mild, it may be
serious in debilitated people and those with chronic lung
or heart disease.

Acute bacterial bronchitis usually lasts about a week
and is accompanied by a cough that produces thick green
or yellow mucus. Severe cases may also cause general
malaise and chest pain. At first the cough is very dry, but
as the lungs produce additional mucus in response to the
infection, the cough becomes easier and less painful as the
mucus lubricates the bronchi. Acute bronchitis may be
accompanied by fever that lasts a few days, but persistent
fever suggests the development of a pneumonia compli-
cation.

The cough of acute bronchitis may last for several
weeks or even months, a reflection of the amount of time
it takes for the bronchial lining to heal. However, the
cough can also be a sign of other problems. For example,
acute bronchitis can be confused with asthma, and pneu-
monia can also sometimes cause similar symptoms. Acid
that comes up from the stomach and drips into the lungs
during sleep may also cause bronchitis.

Acute bronchitis most commonly develops as a com-
plication of a cold in a healthy person. It may also mani-
fest as a flare-up in a person with chronic bronchitis. The
best defense against acute bronchitis is not to smoke.
Smoking damages the bronchial tree and makes it easier
for viruses to cause infection. Smoking also slows healing,
so it takes longer to get well.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM - 323

Treatment of Acute Bronchitis

Bed rest, drinking plenty of fluids, and staying indoors in
damp, cold weather are essential elements of treatment.
Congestive mucus should be coughed up, so avoid the use
of cough suppressants. The use of soothing, relaxing ex-
pectorants in combination with antimicrobials is often the
key to successful treatment. Particularly important relax-
ing expectorants are Tussilago, Verbascum, Plantago,
Cetraria, Trigonella, Althaea, and Pulmonaria.

The respiratory system will obviously need tonic and
immune system support, especially if acute bronchitis is
an annual event. As noted, the heart and blood vessels will
benefit from tonics, such as Crataegus and Allium sativum,
as there may be a deleterious impact on the tissue and its
functions.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are not crucial if the bronchitis is not a
recurrent problem. However, they are clearly indicated
for immunocompromised people.

Expectorants are indicated; the choice between stimulating
and relaxing expectorants will depend on the individ-
ual’s needs.

Demulcents augment the action of relaxing expectorants, if
necessary.

Antispasmodics can help if coughing is very troublesome.

Antimicrobials are essential to deal with infection and to
help the body defend against the development of sec-
ondary infection.

Anti-inflammatories may be indicated if there is extensive
inflammation, and especially if the larynx or pharynx is
involved.

Anticatarrhals improve the upper respiratory symptom
picture.

Diaphoretics are indicated if the patient has a fever.

Cardiotonic herbs offer support if there is any history or
suspicion of cardiovascular problems.

Specific Remedies

Herbal traditions from around the world offer a wealth of
possible specifics. For example, osha (Ligusticum porteri),
a plant of the American Southwest, is an excellent specific
for cases of tracheobronchitis.

The specifies listed here cover a range of expectorant,
antimicrobial, and antispasmodic actions. Strictly speak-
ing, none of them is guaranteed to work in all cases, as
specifics must be chosen based on the unique needs of an
individual with a particular clinical picture. Please see
chapter 25 for more information on the primary and sec-
ondary actions of these herbs.

----- PAGE 332 -----
324 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Specific Remedies from Europe and North America
Allium sativum (garlic)

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)

Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus Irish moss)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Ligusticum porteri (osha)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Marrubium vulgare (white horehound)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Plantago spp. (plantain)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead) °
Primula veris (cowslip)

Pulmonaria officinalis (langwort)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

The infusion presented here, provided by Dr. Rudolf
Fritz Weiss in Herbal Medicine, supplies the additional
benefit of increased fluid intake.*

A Demulcent Tea for Acute Dry Cough

Verbascum thapsus 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Althaea officinalis 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day

Table 15.2. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Dry Cough

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara

Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,
Althaea officinalis, Pimpinella anisum

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,
Althaea officinalis

Antispasmodic Pimpinella anisum

Antimicrobial Pimpinella anisum

Anti-inflammatory Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,

Althaea officinalis, Pimpinella anisum

Anticatarrhal Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,

Althaea officinalis

Another approach increases the stimulating expecto-
rant component, making it more appropriate for subacute
and chronic bronchitis characterized by excessive sputum
production.

Prescription | to Promote Expectoration

Primula veris 1 part
Thymus vulgaris 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day.

Table 15.3. Actions Supplied by Expectorant
Prescription I

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Tussilago farfara

Relaxing expectorant Tussilago farfara

Stimulating expectorant Primula veris

Demulcent Tussilago farfara
Antispasmodic Primula veris, Thymus vulgaris
Antimicrobial Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Tussilago farfara

Anticatarrhal Tussilago farfara

----- PAGE 333 -----
An alternative yet equivalent approach for acute dry
cough replaces Thymus vulgaris with Pimpinella anisum.
This combination also boosts the stimulating expectorant
action of the prescription by increasing the proportion of
saponin-rich Primula veris.

Prescription II to Promote Expectoration

Primula veris 2 parts
Pimpinella anisum 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day.

A Prescription to Combat Infection in Acute Bronchitis

Inula helenium 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw (one clove a day) or garlic oil taken as a
supplement.

Table 15.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription to
Combat Infection

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara

Relaxing expectorant Tussilago farfara
Stimulating expectorant _—_/nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare
Demulcent Tussilago farfara
Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Hydrastis canadensis
Immune stimulant Echinacea spp.

Anti-inflammatory Hydrastis canadensis, Tussilago farfara

Anticatarrhal Echinacea spp., Hydrastis canadensis,
Tussilago farfara

Bitter stimulant Marrubium vulgare

Remedies for External Use

It is often possible to abort the development of a cold or
even flu with a steam inhalation made from volatile
oil-rich plants. When the problem is already established,
inhalations help loosen the cough and clear the sinuses.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM & 325

Thymus, Eucalyptus, Matricaria, and Origanum are good
choices for steam inhalations. Pure plant essential oils
may also be used. Volatile oil-rich herbs are effective de-
congestants and support the internal treatment by ad-
dressing some associated symptoms.

Steam Inhalation

Matricaria flowers 1 part
Thymus herb 1 part
Origanum herb 1 part

Add 1 tablespoon of dried herb combination to V% liter {1 pint)
of boiling water. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head
to prevent the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl.
Inhale vapors for 5 to 10 minutes.

Aromatherapy for Acute Bronchitis

Aromatherapy treatment aims at combating infection, re-
ducing fever, easing cough, and expelling mucus. In the
first stages of acute bronchitis, when the cough is dry and
painful, steam inhalation with the oils listed here may
provide a great deal of relief.

Bergamot and eucalyptus oils are also effective in
lowering fever, and all of these oils will help to reinforce
the immune response to the infection. Dwarf pine needle
oil (Pinus pumilio) has been the main oil used traditionally,
but with the growing interest in aromatherapy, many
volatile oils are now recognized as valuable remedies for
inhalations. Here are some of the many possibilities.

Essential Oils for Steam Inhalation
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens (Asian mint)
M. piperita (peppermint)

Pinus pumilio (dwarf or white pine)
Santalum album (sandalwood)

Styrax benzoin (benzoin)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens, the source of
“Chinese white flower oil,” is especially rich in menthol.
Menthol is anti-inflammatory, especially for the mucous
membranes of the upper respiratory tract. It stimulates
mucous secretions and exerts antimicrobial and mild
anaesthetic actions. As with many oils, it is best used at
the onset of symptoms.

----- PAGE 334 -----
326 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Essential Oil Inhalation

Place 3 to 5 drops of essential oil in a bowl and add boiling
water. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head to prevent
the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl. Inhale for
5 to 10 minutes, keeping the eyes closed to prevent irritation
from vapor.

Massaging or otherwise applying oils to chest, neck,
or back fosters absorption through the skin, technically
called percutaneous absorption. Be sure to dilute the oil first
in an appropriate carrier oil, such as almond oil. Essential
oils absorbed through the skin are often eliminated from
the body via the lungs, allowing the constituents to come
in contact with the site of lung infection or inflammation.
A good technique is to apply the oil and then place a clean
dry cloth over the area to ensure that oils are absorbed
and do not evaporate.

Post-Bronchitis Recovery

A bout of acute bronchitis is commonly followed by a
period of debility. Appropriate herbs will not only speed
recovery, but will also support the body in its attempt to
revivify and recuperate. Emphasis should be given to res-
piratory tonics, bitter tonics, and support for any body
system or functions indicated for the individual.

Toning remedies to consider include Verbascum thap-
sus and Marrubium vulgare. Marrubium is especially use-
ful, for not only is it an excellent lung remedy, but it also
has valuable bitter properties. If antibiotics have been
used, please follow the guidelines for herbal support pro-
vided in chapter 21.

Broader Context of Treatment

Goals of treatment in the latter stages of acute bronchitis
include clearing mucus from the lungs and preventing the
development of complications, and any of the expectorant
essential oils will be indicated. The cough may persist for
some time after the fever has subsided, but applying such
oils in inhalations, baths, and local massage to chest and
throat will shorten the time needed for full recovery.

Expectorant Essential Oils to Aid in Recovery
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Ocimum basilicum (basil)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)

Santalum album (sandalwood)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

The patient should be kept warm and rested, prefer-
ably in bed. It is important to avoid any factors that can
aggravate the cough, such as smoke and very dry air.
Given this care and treatment, most adults will recover
from an attack of bronchitis fairly quickly and without
complications, but the very elderly or frail, babies and
young children, and people with heart conditions or a his-
tory of lung infections are at much greater risk.

CHRONIC BRONCHITIS

A condition associated with prolonged exposure to non-
specific bronchial irritants and accompanied by mucus
hypersecretion and certain structural changes in the
bronchi. (The Merck Manual)

Chronic bronchitis is a long-term condition unaccompa-
nied by fever. It is characterized by a permanent cough
with sputum that results from continual overproduction
of mucus. Healthy lungs normally produce a small
amount of mucus all the time, which is constantly swept
up the bronchi by the cilia. This imperceptible process
goes on continually, and the mucus produced is swallowed
along with the saliva.

However, when infection, air pollution, smoking, or
other external factors irritate the bronchi, the lungs are
provoked to produce abnormally large amounts of mucus,
which literally swamp the minute cilia. A deep layer of
mucus covers the cilia, so they are no longer able to pro-
pel it out of the bronchi. In effect, this impairs the body’s
ability to expel mucus by coughing.

A series of acute bronchitis attacks, heavy smoking,
or prolonged inhalation of contaminated air may result in
chronic bronchitis. This implies that chronic bronchitis is
preventable, as the primary causal factors are pollutants.
Climate and air pollution are serious factors, especially
when the two combine to produce fog, but the two most
important factors are smoking and bad nutrition.

Because chronic bronchitis can be life threatening,
prompt professional attention is necessary, no matter
what the underlying cause. The condition is characterized
by coughing up mucus nearly every day for months or
years. The condition may be classified into three grades
of severity.

1. Simple chronic bronchitis is mild but persistent with
clear sputum,

2. Mucopurulent bronchitis is a condition in which the
sputum is occasionally or always thick and often yel-
lowish, due to the presence of pus caused by bacte-
rial infection.

----- PAGE 335 -----
3. Obstructive bronchitis occurs when structural damage
has been caused by continual infection, inflamma-
tion, and coughing.

In obstructive bronchitis, the bronchi become nar-
rowed due to thickening and scarring of the membrane
that lines them, The lungs lose some of their elasticity
and breathing becomes more difficult, as a greater effort
is needed to get a sufficient volume of air into the lungs.
Damage also reduces the amount of alveolar tissue, the
very thin membrane through which oxygen passes into
the blood and carbon dioxide and other waste materials
are extracted. Eventually, the heart may become strained
in trying to maintain sufficient circulation within the
lungs.

Treatment of Chronic Bronchitis

The treatment guidelines suggested here must be seen in
the context of minimizing exposure to chemical and par-
ticulate air pollution, whether from tobacco smoke or in-
dustrial sources. Tonic support is vital for this chronic and
debilitating condition. An inherent strength of herbal
medicine reveals itself here, as the phytotherapist may se-
lect plants that not only effectively address the symptom
picture, but also serve as appropriate tonics. The respira-
tory, cardiovascular, and immune systems all deserve spe-
cial focus.

Specific Remedies

Please refer to Specific Remedies provided for acute
bronchitis. In addition, the steam inhalation and aro-
matherapy recommendations given for acute bronchitis
are also relevant to chronic bronchitis.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are essential for supporting respiratory
function and the health and general tone of the lungs.

Simulating expectorants are especially useful in cases char-
acterized by heavy mucus production.

Relaxing expectorants are as not as important in chronic as
acute bronchitis; however, they often serve as good
supportive remedies.

Demutcents will soothe any associated irritation.

Diapboretics are valuable when fever is an issue, but are not
as vital here as in acute bronchitis.

Antispasmodics can help if coughing or breathlessness is
severe.

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of any accompany-
ing infection.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 327

Cardiotonics are essential for supporting cardiac function
in the elderly, patients with cardiovascular weakness,
or those with long-term chronic bronchitis.

Nervine and even adaptogen support may be useful in some
cases.

A Prescription for Chronic Bronchitis with Debility

Inula helenium 1 part
Cetraria islandica 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Add 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture to 1 cup of boiling water
and infuse for 20 minutes. Drink hot three times a day.

This formulation is designed for a patient who is de-
bilitated and weakened by chronic bronchitis. Thus, it
contains a blend of stimulating and relaxing pulmonary
tonics. Cetraria has long been used in the United
Kingdom (the world capital of chronic bronchitis!) as nu-
tritive support in such cases. To this may be added other
herbs appropriate for the individual, such as Crataegus
spp., Eleutherococcus senticosus, and Galium aparine. Please
refer to chapter 26 for more information on these sug-
gested additions.

Table 15.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Debility

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Inula helenium

Relaxing expectorant Cetraria islandica, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Demulcent Cetraria islandica, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Inula helenium

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Cetraria islandica,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Inula helenium

----- PAGE 336 -----
328 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

A Prescription for Chronic Bronchitis with Infection

Inula helenium 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw (one clove a day) or garlic oil taken as a
supplement.

Table 15.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Infection

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant —/nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare

Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus

Bitter Marrubium vulgare

Antispasmodic Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Allium sativum
Immune stimulant Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Echinacea spp.,

Verbascum thapsus, Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum
Cardiotonic Allium sativum

A Prescription for Chronic Recurrent
Bronchitis with Dyspnea

Inula helenium T part
Dyspnea Formula (see page 332) 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw in the diet (one clove a day) or garlic oil
taken as a supplement.

Table 15.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Chronic Bronchitis with Dyspnea
ACTION HERBS
Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant —_nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare

ACTION HERBS

Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus

Antispasmodic Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus,
Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Cardiotonic Allium sativum

Please see Asthma later in this chapter for more de-
tails about the herbs and actions added to address the
dyspnea component in this prescription.

A Prescription for Chronic Recurrent Bronchitis
with Severe Congestion

Inula helenium 1 part
Sanguinaria canadensis 1 part
Marrubium vulgare T part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw in the diet (one clove a day) or garlic oil
taken as a supplement.

Table 15.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Severe Congestion

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Inula helenium,

Marrubium vulgare
Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus
Bitter Marrubium vulgare

Antispasmodic Sanguinaria canadensis, Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Allium sativum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus,
Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Cardiotonic Allium sativum

----- PAGE 337 -----
Broader Context of Treatment

Much of the information provided for acute bronchitis is
relevant to chronic bronchitis as well. Smokers are still
more likely to die from chronic bronchitis than from lung
cancer, and giving up smoking is the first and most im-
portant preventive measure.

The other is improving nutrition, particularly cutting
out or greatly reducing the consumption of foods that en-
courage the production of mucus. For most people, these
are dairy products and refined starches. Dairy products
appear to be the worst culprits, and cutting them right out
of the diet for a time—perhaps for several weeks, or even
several months if the bronchitis is long standing—will
often bring about improvement. After that, dairy may be
cautiously reintroduced, but only in very small amounts.
For some people, it may be necessary to omit them from
the diet permanently. Goat’s milk may prove to promote
less mucus production than cow’s milk.

Starches also provoke: excess mucus production, and
refined starches (including white flour and all products
made from it) are far worse than unrefined grains.
Additives, such as chemical flavorings, colorings, and
preservatives, also often trigger excess mucus production
and should be avoided. The best and simplest rule is to
eat foods in a state as near as possible to that in which
they were grown. Avoid processed, dried, frozen, pack-
aged, and precooked foods, and as often as possible eat
foods raw or very lightly cooked.

Exercise can strengthen the muscles that facilitate
breathing. Patients should exercise at least three times a
week, starting with short sessions of gentle exercise and
gradually building up to longer, more strenuous sessions.
For example, one might begin exercising by walking
slowly for 15 minutes three times a week. Next, increase
the walking speed, at the same time increasing the length
of time spent walking, first to 20 minutes, then to 25, and
then to 30.

A special exercise program, called pulmonary rehabili-
tation, can help improve breathing; this is usually per-
formed with the assistance of a respiratory therapist. A
breathing method called pursed-lip breathing may also
help. Take a deep breath, then breathe out slowly through
the mouth while holding the lips as if about to give a kiss.
Pursed-lip breathing slows the fast breathing that comes
with chronic bronchitis.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 329

PERTUSSIS

An acute, highly communicable bacterial disease, charac-
terized by a paroxysmal or spasmodic cough that usually
ends in a prolonged, high-pitched, crowing inspiration
(the whoop). (The Merck Manual)

Pertussis, commonly known as whooping cough, is caused
by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis. This highly contagious
infection is transmitted when the bacteria are coughed or
sneezed out by an infected person and breathed in by
someone else, especially during the catarrhal and early
paroxysmal stages of the disease. After the third week of
paroxysmal coughing, patients are no longer infectious.
The incubation period averages 7 to 14 days.

B. pertussis invades the respiratory mucosa, causing in-
creased secretion of mucus, which is initially thin. Later,
the mucus becomes viscid and is not easily moved. The
disease lasts about six weeks and has three well-defined
stages.

1. Catarrhal. This stage begins slowly, with sneezing,
free-flowing tears, and other signs typical of the
common cold, Anorexia, listlessness, and a trouble-
some, hacking nocturnal cough develop next; the
cough gradually becomes diurnal.

2. Paroxysmal. Developing after 10 to 14 days, this
stage is characterized by paroxysmal coughing. Five
to 15 rapidly consecutive coughs are followed by the
characteristic whoop, a hurried, deep inspiration.
After a few normal breaths, another paroxysm may
begin. The patient may expel large quantities of
thick, viscid mucus during the paroxysms. Vomiting
after paroxysms is common.

3. Convalescent. This stage usually begins within four
weeks. The frequency of paroxysms decreases, and
the patient begins looking, feeling, and sounding
better.

Treatment of Whooping Cough
Long-term immune system support is essential after such
an infection. In addition, support for the respiratory sys~

_ tem and potentially even the cardiovascular system may

be needed.

Specific Remedies

The European herbal tradition proposes a number of herbs
as possible specifics. However, these are not dramati-
cally effective and do not replace appropriate antibiotic
treatment. Instead, they support antibiotic therapy and the
body’s innate efforts to heal itself. Among these specifics
are many anumicrobial and antispasmodic remedies.

----- PAGE 338 -----
330 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

European Specific Remedies for Pertussis
Drosera rotundifolia (sandew)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Pinguicula vulgaris (butterbur)

Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)

Eryngium planum (sea holly)

A Prescription for Pertussis and Other
Paroxysmal Coughs

Thymus vulgaris 1 part
Drosera rotundifolia 1 part
Prunus serotina 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boiling water
for 20 minutes. This should be drunk hot several times a day. Hot
infusions are valuable in that they replace lost fluids and pro-
mote diaphoresis.

ASTHMA

A reversible obstructive lung disorder characterized by in-
creased responsiveness of the airways. (The Merck Manual)

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways
typified by wheezing, chest tightness, coughing exacerba-
tions, and difficult breathing.’ An estimated 15 million
Americans suffer from asthma, including 4.8 million chil-
dren and adolescents. Asthma can develop at any time, but
is most common in young children. When it starts in child-

hood, asthma usually improves with age. In adult onset
asthma, however, the condition often worsens with age.

A common misconception is that asthma and wheez-
ing are the same thing. Wheezing is a sign of asthma, but
many other conditions can also cause wheezing. This
confusion has led to the replacement of the term asthma
with a more descriptive name, reactive airway disease
(RAD). People with RAD have bronchial passages that
are more sensitive than normal to irritation. This hyper-
sensitivity leads to inflammation in the tiny airways deep
in the lungs. The inflammation in turn fosters the pro-
duction of excess mucus and a tightening of the muscles
that wind around the bronchial tubes. This combination
of swelling, mucus, and tight muscles causes narrowing of
the airways. Wheezing usually results, but a dry cough is
sometimes the only sign.

Most asthma is characterized by one or more of the
following classic symptoms.

Wheezing. This may be either a low or a loud whistie
usually heard on expiration (breathing out).

Coughing. The cough of asthma is either a mild cough or
a persistent hack that often occurs at night. Chest
tightness, experienced as a feeling of bands strapped
around the chest or a burning sensation, is another
characteristic symptom.

Shortness of breath. This may be described as an inability
to catch one’s breath or feeling like trying to breathe
through a straw. Breathing out is especially tough.

Such symptoms generally begin upon exposure to the
individual's special “trigger” that sets off an attack. A se-
quence of events then occurs at the cellular level in the
lungs.

Swelling. The bronchial tubes, often already swollen due
to the chronic nature of asthma, develop the charac-
teristic swelling of inflammation. This inflammation
reduces the amount ofair that can move in and out of
the lungs.

Bronchoconstriction. The muscles around the bronchial
tubes tighten, making breathing difficult.

Clogging. The bronchial tubes begin to produce more
mucus, in turn clogging the airways. However, the
tubes may be swollen and sensitive whether or not the
inflammation is felt.

Asthma Triggers

Asthma attacks can be minimized by avoiding triggering
factors. Several triggers can cause the airways to become
more inflamed, and once exposed to a certain trigger, the
airways may become more sensitive to other triggers.

Allergies

An estimated 75% of childhood asthma is allergy related,
so controlling allergies may be pivotal to reducing the fre-
quency of asthma attacks. If symptoms worsen during
certain seasons, the causative factor is probably an allergy
to plant pollen. When exposed to pollen, the body re-
sponds by creating antibodies that attach themselves to
mast cells in the nose and airways. (Mast cells are immune
system cells that detect foreign substances and initiate
local inflammatory responses against them.) In turn, the
mast cells produce and release a chemical called his-
tamine, which generates the allergic response. While ex-
posure to pollen cannot be avoided entirely, the ravages it
produces in asthmatics can be minimized if some basic
facts are borne in mind.

Not all pollens cause the same symptoms. Tree pollens cause
problems in early spring; grass pollens strike in late
spring and early summer. Weed pollens cause flare-ups
in late summer.

----- PAGE 339 -----
Seasons begin at different times in different bioregions.
Ragweed strikes the hardest during mid-August to late
October on the East Coast and in the Midwest.

Weather and time of day also affect asthma symptoms.

Colds and Other Respiratory Infections

The most common asthma trigger is a simple cold or
other respiratory infection. Colds very quickly cause the
airways to become inflamed in asthmatics, even if cold
symptoms remain mostly in the head.

Ingested Allergens
These may be drugs (e.g., aspirin), foods, food additives,
yeasts, or molds on food.

Gastric Reflux

As much as 30% of all asthma may be caused by gastro-
esophageal reflux, which causes the unpleasant symptom
commonly known as heartburn. Even if other specific
asthma triggers have been identified, try preventing
heartburn for a few weeks to see if this leads to an im-
provement in asthma symptoms. (See chapter 13 for more
information on the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux
disease.)

Exercise

Cold dry air is more aggravating than warm moist air.
Simple measures, such as breathing through a scarf and
taking preventive medicine before exercise, can help to
minimize attacks.

Weather Changes
These include changes in barometric pressure, humidity,
and temperature.

Airborne Irritants

Air pollution, dust, cigarette or wood smoke, chemical va-
pors, irritant gases, and even perfumes can all trigger
asthma attacks.

Physical or Emotional Stress
Minimizing stress, whatever the cause, will help decrease
the chance of triggering an attack.

Hormonal Changes

In some women, hormonal changes can trigger attacks at
certain times in the menstrual cycle.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 331

Childhood-Onset Asthma

Asthma that begins in childhood is closely linked with the
presence of eczema, hay fever, urticaria (hives), and mi-
graine in the patient or in close relatives. People with this
kind of family history are called atopic. If both parents have
a history of atopy, the child has a 50% chance of being af
fected; if only one parent is affected, the chance is 30%;
and if neither parent is affected, the chance is approxi-
mately 12%. The onset of childhood asthma is often pre-
ceded for several months or even years by episodic cough-
ing, which later develops into wheezy bronchitis and then
eventually into asthma. These children often have a his-
tory of slow recovery from upper respiratory tract viral in-
fections as well as a personal or family history of atopy.

Adult-Onset Asthma

Adult-onset asthma is more common in women than in
men. There are two broad types. In the first type, no ob-
vious reasons are apparent for asthma attacks. In the sec-
ond, fairly obvious external trigger factors precipitate at-
tacks. While the sufferer may be able to avoid these
triggers, new allergens will continue to be detected, to be
added to the list of external or environmental causes of
the condition. Thus, a wide range of etiological factors
can be involved in this all too common problem.

The two main types of adult-onset asthma are de-
scribed as follows.

Extrinsic asthma is caused by allergic responses to house
dust, animal fur, or various foods. This type accounts
for 10% to 20% of adult-onset asthma cases.

Intrinsic asthma is caused by genetics, structural problems,
infections, pollutants, and stress—both physiological
and psychological. This accounts for 30% to 50% of
adult-onset asthma.

Symptoms of asthma can differ greatly in frequency
and degree among individuals. Some have occasional,
mild, brief episodes and are otherwise symptom-free.
Others experience mild coughing and wheezing much of
the time, punctuated by severe exacerbations related to
exposure to known allergies, viral infections, exercise, or
nonspecific irritants.

----- PAGE 340 -----
332 o TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Table 15.9. Stages of an Acute Asthma Attack

STAGE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Stage 1: Mild Mild dyspnea, diffuse wheezing,

adequate air exchange

Stage 2: Moderate Respiratory distress at rest, use of

accessory muscles, marked wheezing

Stage 3: Severe Marked respiratory distress, cyanosis,
use of accessory muscles, marked

wheezing or absence of breath sounds

Stage 4: Respiratory failure Severe respiratory distress, lethargy,

confusion, use of accessory muscles

Treatment of Acute Asthma

Phytotherapy has much to offer for the treatment, control,
and even cure of asthmatic problems, but will not replace
emergency allopathic support for stages 3 and 4 of an
acute attack.

Tonic support of the systems most affected by asthma
is often the key to successful treatment. The respiratory
system, of course, is of primary importance. In addition,
attention must be paid to the cardiovascular, nervous, and
digestive systems. The digestive system is implicated be-
cause the dietary sensitivities triggering asthma may also
cause problems in the alimentary canal.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are important for long-term strengthening
of the lungs, but offer little short-term relief for acute
attacks,

Expectorants help prevent buildup of sputum in the
lungs. However, use only relaxing expectorants, as
stimulant expectorants can potentially aggravate
breathing difficulties.

Demutlcents soothe irritation and support the action of re-
laxing expectorants.

Antispasmodics ease spasm responses in the muscles that
facilitate respiration.

Antimicrobials help reduce the potential for secondary in-
fection, which should be avoided at all costs.

Anticatarrbals aid the body in dealing with overproduc-
tion of sputum in lungs or sinuses.

Cardiotonics support the heart in the face of lung conges-
tion or strain.

Nervine support is always appropriate, both because stress
is a potential trigger and because asthma can cause
stress, which in turn can trigger further attacks.

Specific Remedies

Ephedra sinica (ma huang) and other Asian Ephedra species
prove exceptionally useful as bronchodilators. Although
synthetic ephedrine is available, the whole herb is better
tolerated and causes fewer adverse heart effects.

Epbedra stimulates the sympathetic nervous system
and thus relieves the bronchospasm that underlies asthma
and certain other conditions, including emphysema.
Allergic reactions respond well to Ephedra because of its
action on the sympathetic nervous system.

The ayurvedic herb Coleus forskoblii may be useful in
asthma. The constituent forskolin raises cellular levels of
cAMP, which results in relaxation of bronchial muscles
and relief of asthma symptoms. Forskolin also inhibits the
release of histamine and the synthesis of allergic com-
pounds. See chapter 9 for a more detailed discussion of
the possible mechanisms of action of this herb.

Herbs with Antispasmodic and
Bronchodilating Effects

Ammi visnaga (khella)

Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)

Epbedra spp. (ma huang or ephedra)
Euphorbia pilulifera (pill-bearing spurge)
Grindelia camporum (gumweed or grindelia)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry)

As discussed in chapter 9, the role of platelet activat-
ing factor (PAF) in bronchial asthma is receiving in-
creased attention. Ginkgo biloba is an effective and safe in-
hibitor of PAF, making it a potentially useful herb for the
control and treatment of asthma. Donald Brown, N.D.,
one of America’s foremost naturopathic phytotherapists,
advocates the use of ginkgo in the long-term management
of asthma. He reports success in pediatric cases with a
dosage of 80 mg/day for children 6 to 12 years old and 40
mg/day for children younger than 6 years old.”

Dyspnea Formula for Asthma

Grindelia camporum tincture 24 parts
Euphorbia pilulifera tincture 24 parts
Lobelia inflata tincture 12 parts
Prunus serotina tincture 12 parts
Glycyrrhiza glabra tincture 12 parts
Leonurus ¢cardiaca tincture 12 parts
Ephedra sinica tincture 10 parts
Pimpinella anisum essential oil 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of mixture three times a day. If Euphorbia pilulifera
proves difficult to obtain, double the amount of Grindelia to
make up for it.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Table 15.10. Actions Supplied by Dyspnea Formula

ACTION

HERBS

Pulmonary tonic

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent

Antispasmodic

Antimicrobial
Anti-inflammatory
Anticatarrhal
Cardiotonic

Nervine

Lobelia inflata

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Glycyrrhiza glabra

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Pimpinella anisum

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum
Pimpinetla anisum, Ephedra sinica
Leonurus cardiaca

Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca

A Prescription for Childhood Atopic Asthma
Associated with Eczema

Dyspnea Formula (see page 332)

Galium aparine
Trifolium pratense
Urtica dioica

2 parts
1 part
1 part
1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 15.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Atopic Asthma

ACTION

Alterative

Pulmonary tonic

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent

Antispasmodic

Antimicrobial

Anti-inflammatory

HERBS

Galium aparine, Trifolium pratense,
Urtica dioica

Lobelia inflata

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Glycyrrhiza glabra

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Pimpinella anisum

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM & 333

ACTION HERBS

Anticatarrhal Pimpinella anisum, Ephedra sinica
Cardiotonic Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca,

Trifolium pratense

Broader Context of Treatment

Our lungs are connected to our emotions in a very obvi-
ous way—just think about what happens when we laugh or
cry. Ifa person with asthma has difficulty expressing feel-
ings, it is worth exploring why. Bach Flower Remedies can
help here. Deep breathing exercises strengthen our con-
nection to our feelings and, if practiced regularly, will help
in the treatment of asthma. Other regular exercise, such as
walking, swimming, yoga, t’ai chi, and relaxation tech-
niques, can also aid in deepening and relaxing breathing.

Food sensitivities must be identified. It may prove
beneficial to temporarily exclude eggs, wheat, dairy prod-
ucts, and even gluten (found in wheat, oats, barley, and
rye). Lack of breast-feeding sometimes triggers early-
onset asthma. Other sources of concern are alcohol (wine
and beer) and preserved fruit, which often contains sulfur
dioxide. Some asthmatics react to as little as 5 parts of sul-
fur dioxide per million.

The whole thoracic area—back and chest—should be
massaged with appropriate essential oils, with particular
emphasis on strokes that open the chest and shoulders.
The choice of essential oils will depend on many factors,
including whether or not infection is present, if the
asthma is known to have an allergic component, and if
emotional factors are involved. During an actual asth-
matic crisis, inhalation of an antispasmodic oil is the only
practical herbal help. Sniffing directly from the bottle or
applying drops to a tissue is safer than using a steam in-
halation, as the heat will increase inflammation of the
mucous membranes and make the congestion even worse.

Essential Oils Useful in Asthma
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Pinus sylvestris (pine)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and Murray
recommend the following nutritional supplements:*

Vitamin Bg: 25 mg twice a day
Vitamin B,,: 1,000 meg a day

----- PAGE 342 -----
334 o TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Vitamin C: 1 to 2g¢/day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/ day

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg three times a day
Quercetin: 400 mg 20 minutes before meals
Carotene: 25,000 to 50,000 IU/day
Selenium: 250 mcg/day

EMPHYSEMA

Enlargement of the air spaces distal to terminal non-
respiratory bronchioles, accompanied by destructive
changes of the alveolar walls. (The Merck Manual)

Emphysema, which often develops as a long-term com-
plication of chronic bronchitis, is characterized by dam-
age to the elastic walls of the sac-like alveoli in the lungs.
This damage is caused by constant coughing, the body’s
attempt to dislodge the bacteria and mucus blocking the
swollen bronchi. In chronic bronchitis, the constant se-
cretion of viscid mucus paralyzes the cilia that normally
push out particles of dust, soot, and bacteria. Smoking
and, to a lesser degree, alcohol exacerbate this condition.

Treatment of Emphysema
The herbal treatment guidelines given here offer no mir-
acle cures, but if used consistently, they will bring about
an improvement in this condition.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are important for long-term strengthen-
ing of the lungs but offer little short-term relief for
acute attacks.

Expectorants are essential to minimize the buildup of spu-
tum in the lungs. Stimulant expectorants are necessary
here because of the lessening of tone that affects the
walls of the alveoli.

Demulcents soothe irritation and support the work of
expectorants.

Antispasmodics ease spasm responses in the muscles that
facilitate respiration.

Antimicrobials help reduce the potential for secondary
infection, which should be avoided at all costs.

Anticatarrhals aid the body in dealing with overproduction
of sputum in lungs or sinuses.

Cardiotonics support the heart in the face of lung conges-
tion or strain.

Nervine support is always appropriate, as stress will exac-
erbate emphysema.

A Prescription for Emphysema

Dyspnea Formula (see page 332) 1 part
Sanguinaria canadensis 1 part
Inula helenium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 15.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Emphysema

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Lobelia inflata

Stimulating expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Inula helenium,
Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Demulcent Glycyrrhiza glabra

Antispasmodic Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,

Ephedra sinica

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,

Pimpinella anisum

Anti-inflammatory Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Cardiotonic Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca

Broader Context of Treatment

Great care must be taken with general health and well-

being, as any health problem will aggravate emphysema.

Thus, all physical and emotional factors must be addressed.
The nutritional supplements recommended for

asthma are also relevant here.

Vitamin Bg: 25 mg twice a day

Vitamin B,,: 1,000 meg/day

Vitamin C: 1 to 2g/day

Vitamin E: 400 IU/day

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg three times a day
Quercetin: 400 mg 20 minutes before meals
Carotene: 25,000 to 50,000 [U/day
Selenium: 250 mcg/day

----- PAGE 343 -----
THE UPPER RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

The organs of the upper respiratory system include the
nose, the pharynx, and the larynx.

Table 15.13. Actions and Herbs for the Upper
Respiratory System

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Allium spp., Eucalyptus spp., Thymus vulgaris,
Baptisia tinctoria, Commiphora molmol,

Ligusticum porteri

Immune stimulant — Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Solidago virgaurea, Sambucus nigra,
Hyssopus officinalis, Tussilago farfara,

Hydrastis canadensis, volatile oils
Astringents Salvia officinalis, Euphrasia spp.

Diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum, Tilia platyphyllos

Tonic Support for the

Upper Respiratory System

Nature abounds with herbs that have anticatarrhal effects
in the upper respiratory system, but anticatarrhal herbs
do not substitute for the nurturing action of tonics for
this part of the body. From the European perspective,
here are some appropriate tonics that also possess anti-
catarrhal properties.

Upper Respiratory Tract Tonics
Eupbrasia spp. (eyebright)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Herbs and Upper Respiratory Conditions
As with many modern health problems, prevention of
upper respiratory tract disease is largely a matter of avoid-
ing pollutants and minimizing causative dietary factors.
As with the lower respiratory tract, air pollution and
smoking can aggravate or even cause a whole spectrum of
upper respiratory problems.

Many chronic catarrhal states represent the body’s re-
sponse to a diet too rich in mucus-forming foods. A diet

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 2 335

designed to minimize mucus production is essential for
patients with such conditions. However, it is not always
appropriate to try to dry up overproduction of normal se-
cretions with herbs. If the body is using the mucous
membranes of the sinuses as a window for removing waste
through the vehicle of the catarrh, then it is best to sup-
port rather than block this activity.

The herbal approach to problems in this system is
both indirect and direct. The indirect approach sees
upper respiratory disease within the context of the whole
person. Sometimes, the overproduction of mucus is an at-
tempt by the body to discharge waste material that is not
being properly eliminated by the bowels, kidneys, and
skin. In such cases, the herbalist may prescribe bitter ton-
ics to encourage regular bowel movements, diuretic herbs
that encourage kidney elimination of retained fluids and
waste materials, or diaphoretic herbs that stimulate elim-
ination through the skin.

Patterns of Upper Respiratory

Tract Disease

Treatment of many diverse pathologies becomes straight-
forward when one understands certain basic patterns of
disease affecting the upper respiratory system.

Allergic response. The allergen must be identified and, if
possible, removed from the individual’s environment.
This may be easy in the case of a food sensitivity, but
much more problematic if the trigger is a ubiquitous
environmental factor, such as pollen or house dust.
(See Hay Fever for more information.)

Congestion. The production of excessive and thick mucus
in the nose and other respiratory passages is a response
to inflammation of the mucous membranes. This can
be caused by infection, autoimmune problems, or irri-
tants. Blockage of the sinus cavities is very common
and relatively easy to treat with herbs.

Infection. Acute infections of the nose, sinuses, and throat
are all too common! Occasional acute infections can be
treated in a straightforward manner with antimicrobial
and anticatarrhal herbs and essential oils. However, if
there is a pattern of frequent, recurrent infection, at-
tention must be focused on immune system support
and other whole body issues.

Physical blockage. Any obstruction calls for skilled diag-
nostic investigation. Some benign problems, such as
nasal polyps, may be treated with herbs, but differen-
tial diagnosis is vital to rule out more serious problems.

----- PAGE 344 -----
336 <@ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

THE COMMON COLD

An acute, usually afebrile, viral infection of the respiratory
tract, with inflammation in any or all airways, including
the nose, paranasal sinuses, throat, larynx, and often the
trachea and bronchi. (The Merck Manual)

The common cold, also known as acute rhinitis, is a viral
infection of the upper respiratory tract. Many different
strains of virus cause cold symptoms, and these are con-
stantly undergoing mutation. When the mucous mem-
branes of the nose and throat are inflamed by infection,
they are far more vulnerable to attack by bacteria, and this
can easily give rise to secondary infections that are more

. serious than the original cold, such as sinusitis, ear infec-
tions, and bronchitis. Because colds have a viral origin,
antibiotic drugs that destroy bacteria are not helpful in
their treatment.

Treatment of the Common Cold

There is no universally miraculous herbal cold cure.
However, phytotherapy offers more than most modalities
for the treatment and prevention of this all-too-common
problem. With a treatment approach focusing on herbs
that fit the individual’s unique needs and attention to im-
mune support, diet, and lifestyle issues, the common cold
presents no real treatment challenges.

For a short-term, acute infection, there is usually no
need to focus on system support. However, if the individ-
ual has frequent or recurrent colds, the use of tonic reme-
dies will be vital. Immune system support is important,
and attention must often be paid to the impact of stress in
the individual’s life. A tendency for colds to progress to
coughs and bronchitis calls for palmonary tonic support.

As an illustration of how other health issues may be
taken into account when treating the common cold, con-
sider this example. If the patient has a history of heart dis-
ease, cardiotonics may be used as a precautionary mea-
sure. However, Tilia is most appropriate, as it is
diaphoretic in addition to being a heart tonic.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials and immune stimulants help the immune
system combat the viral infection and help prevent sec-
ondary infection.

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort so
characteristic of this problem. However, avoid trying
to dry up mucus overproduction with herbal
decongestants.

Diaphoretics help with feverishness and support the body’s
efforts to cope with elevated body temperature.

Expectorants help combat the development of secondary
problems in the lower respiratory system.

Lympbhatics are indicated if the lymph glands are swollen
or there is a known history of such problems.

Specific Remedies

There are many regional and personal ideas about specific
herbs for the common cold. These are often diaphoretic
herbs.

‘To treat an infection once it has started, address the
specific symptoms while at the same time supporting the
body’s fight against the virus. Aches and pains are com-
mon, and our materia medica offers a number of plants
that will relieve these unpleasant feelings. Perhaps the
best is the diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset),
especially if the patient has a fever. A hot infusion drunk
often can make bearable even the worst cases of flu.
Boneset’s bitter taste is one of its therapeutic assets, but
not one that most people relish! Matricaria, Tilia, and
Mentha piperita tea may have similar effects, and while not
as strong, they do taste much better.

Do not inhibit nasal congestion with anticatarrhal
drugs, as mucus production is part of the body’s normal
response to infection. Herbal anticatarrhals work in a dif-
ferent, safer way than anticatarrhal drugs, Matricaria,
Mentha piperita, or Eupatorium perfoliatum can help relieve
much of the discomfort. Steam inhalations of eucalyptus
and thyme oils will also help reduce the formation of
catarrh.

Specific Remedies for the Common Cold
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium spp. (onion and garlic)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum spp. (cayenne)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Sambucus nigra (black elder)
Tilia platyphylbs (linden)

To support the immune system, use antimicrobial
herbs such as echinacea and goldenseal, as well as ton-
ics, such as cleavers and nettles. These may be combined
in capsules or as tinctures. Hydrastis canadensis will speed
recovery from infection, as will raw garlic or garlic oil
capsules.

----- PAGE 345 -----
Antimicrobial Herbs

Allium spp. (onion and garlic)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

A Prescription for the Common Cold

Sambucus nigra 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Infuse 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boiling
water; this should be drunk hot often until symptoms pass.

Herbal Footbath for Colds

Footbaths are a traditional treatment for colds. Dissolve 1 table-
spoon of mustard powder in 4 pints of hot water. Bathe the feet
for 10 minutes, twice a day.

Chamomile Steam Inhalation

Place a handful of Matricaria flowers in a bowl and pour boiling
water over them. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head
to prevent the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl
for 5 to 10 minutes,

Thymus, Eucalyptus, and Origanum may also be used
in steam inhalations, as in the following example.

Steam Inhalation Combination

Matricaria flowers 1 part
Thymus herb 1 part
Origanum herb 1 part

Add 1 tablespoon of dried herb mixture to 2 liter (1 pint) of boil-
ing water. Follow inhalation instructions given for Chamomile
Steam Inhalation.

Aromatherapy for the Common Cold

A steam inhalation of appropriate essential oils combines
several beneficial effects. It clears congested nasal pas-
sages and soothes inflamed mucous membranes. At the
same time, the essential oil will kill many bacteria. Some
of the oils, especially Eucalyptus and Melaleuca, have an in-
hibitory effect on the cold virus. Use either of these two
oils for inhalations in the earlier part of the day (possibly
alternating with Rosmarinus and Mentha piperita), as they
are mildly stimulating. At night, use inhalations of
Lavandula or add a few drops of oil to a bath. Diffusing oil

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM © 337

in the bedroom is helpful, especially if the patient has a
cough.

Essential Oils for Steam Inhalation
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Melaleuca spp. (tea tree)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens (Asian mint)
M. piperita (peppermint)

Ocimum basilicum (basil)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)

Pinus pumilio (dwarf or white pine)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Santalum album (sandalwood)

Styrax benzoin (benzoin)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Broader Context of Treatment

Many traditional cold remedies are based on culinary in-
gredients, highlighting the fact that there is no real dif-
ference between medicinal and edible plants. Here is an
example of a treatment that capitalizes on the value of
common medicinal foods. Take this combination at the
first sign of a chill or sore throat.

Kitchen Remedy to Ward Off a Cold
1 ounce fresh ginger, sliced
1 stick of cinnamon, broken
1 teaspoon coriander seeds
3 cloves
1 slice of lemon

Decoct ingredients for 15 minutes in 1 pint of water; strain. Drink
a cupful hot every 2 hours. Sweeten with organic honey to taste.

For both the prevention and treatment of colds, in-
clude garlic, onions, watercress, and cayenne in the diet,
and take 1 to 3 g of vitamin C daily. Diet plays a role in
most cases of catarrh. Dairy products and wheat are
known to promote excessive catarrh production for many
people. For anyone who frequently suffers from catarrh,
these foods should be excluded for a period to see if any
improvement occurs. If so, the individual may need to ex-
clude them permanently or include them in very small
amounts only. Other people are sensitive to different
foods, and may have to experiment to find out which
foods trigger symptoms.

----- PAGE 346 -----
338 se. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

INFLUENZA

A specific acute viral disease characterized by fever,
coryza, cough, headache, malaise, and inflamed respira-
tory mucous membranes. (The Merck Manual)

Influenza, commonly called the flu, is a severe form of
viral respiratory tract infection with generalized bodily
symptoms. New mutations of the virus arise all the time,
and, unfortunately, developing immunity against one
strain through previous exposure or immunization does
not protect against other strains. New strains of influenza
can spread extremely rapidly, and worldwide influenza
epidemics are responsible for much ill health and many
deaths.

Severe colds and various unidentified virus infections
are often loosely referred to as flu. Some authorities
would argue that this terminology is incorrect, and that
true influenza is a much more severe infection that ap-
pears in the form of widespread epidemics, often at inter-
vals of approximately 10 years. Influenza was the cause of
major pandemics in the’ 20th century. A pandemic occurs
over a very wide geographic area and affects an excep-
tionally large proportion of the population, while an epi-
demic is ofa much smaller scale and tends to affect a large
number of individuals within a population, community, or
region at the same time.

Consider the mortality associated with some 20th
century influenza pandemics:

Spanish flu (1918-1919): Caused the highest known in-
fluenza-related mortality, with approximately 500,000
deaths in the United States and 20 million worldwide

Asian flu (1957-1958): 70,000 deaths in the United States

Hong Kong flu (1968-1969): 34,000 deaths in the United
States

Typical clinical features of influenza include fever
(100°F to 103°F in adults and even higher in children),
headache, muscle aches, extreme fatigue, and respiratory
symptoms, such as cough, sore throat, and runny or stuffy
nose. Although nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea can some-
times accompany influenza infection, especially in chil-
dren, gastrointestinal symptoms are rarely prominent. The
term stomach flu is actually a misnomer used to describe
gastrointestinal illnesses caused by other microorganisms.

Most people recover completely in one to two weeks,
but some develop serious and potentially life-threatening
medical complications, such as pneumonia. Secondary
bacterial infections are the greatest risk of influenza, and
were responsible for most deaths in past epidemics. The

use of antibiotics has dramatically reduced such deaths,
although the very young and the elderly are still at risk. A
really severe infection of this type may be one of the situ-
ations in which the use of antibiotics is sensible. However,
if antibiotics are necessary, do not stop the herbal treat-
ment; it can only be beneficial and will not conflict with
orthodox drug treatment.

In an average year, influenza is associated with about
20,000 deaths nationwide and many more hospitaliza-
tions. Flu-related complications can occur at any age;
however, the elderly and people with chronic health
problems are much more likely to develop serious com-
plications than younger, healthier people are.

Treatment of Influenza

The herbal treatment guidelines given here to use against
influenza must be placed in the context of'rest and recuper-
ation, discussed later. Also consider any specific points of
weakness in the individual, especially for elderly patients.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials sapport the immune system in combating
viral infection and help prevent the development of
secondary infection.

Diaphoretics help with symptoms of fever and support the
body’s efforts to cope with elevated temperature.

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort so char-
acteristic ofthis problem. However, avoid trying to dry
up mucus overproduction with herbal decongestants.

Diaphoretics help with feverishness and support the body’s
efforts to cope with elevated body temperature.

Expectorants help combat the development of secondary
problems in the lower respiratory system.

Lymphatics are indicated if the lymph glands are swollen
or there is a known history ofsuch problems.

Bitters sapport the body in dealing with the debility that
often follows severe viral infections.

Nervines assist the body in dealing with high fever and as-
sociated distress.

Specific Remedies

As with the common cold, there are no miracle cures
here. However, certain plants can make life much more
bearable during a bout of flu. These are usually di-
aphoretics, and my favorite is Fupatorium perfoliatum
(boneset). This herb gets its name from its traditional use
to ease the pain of what was called “break-bone fever” by
European settlers in North America.

----- PAGE 347 -----
A Prescription for Influenza
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture every 2 hours. In addition, the patient
should drink a strong hot infusion of Eupatorium perfoliatum
every hour. If the symptom picture calls for it, follow recom-

mendations given earlier for the common cold.

Table 15.14. Actions Supplied by Influenza
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Hydrastis canadensis, Echinacea spp.
Diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum

Anticatarrhal Hydrastis canadensis, Echinacea spp.
Lymphatic Echinacea spp.

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis, Eypatorium perfoliatum

Broader Context of Treatment

Treatment will be most effective if initiated at the very
(first sign of infection. A moderately hot bath containing a
few drops of antiviral essential oil will often induce di-
aphoresis, followed by a deep, restful sleep. This may be
enough to avert a full-blown infection, though it is a good
idea to repeat this bath treatment for the next two or
three days. Tea tree oil is particularly effective for this
purpose. However, some people find it to be a mild skin
irritant, and may not be able to tolerate more than 3 or 4
drops in a full bath.

Recovery from influenza is often slow, and the con-
valescing patient may feel very weak and lacking in vital-
ity. Caffeine-containing stimulant herbs should be
avoided, as the lift they confer is only temporary and will
slow down recovery (see chapter 16 for more informa-
tion). As pointed out above, bitter tonics will speed re-
covery through their metabolism-stimulating effects.

Table 15.15. Bitter Tonics for Convalescence

HERB ACTIONS
Eupatorium perfoliatum —_ Bitter, diaphoretic, anticatarrhal
Gentiana spp. Bitter, other general digestive functions

Hydrastis canadensis Bitter, anticatarrhal, general tonic

Marrubium vulgare Bitter, expectorant, anticatarrhal

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM <> 339

In addition, adaptogens are often helpful, and atten-
tion to diet is essential. It may be helpful to use a multi-
vitamin and mineral formulation until appetite and general
vitality return to normal.

HAY FEVER

A symptom complex including hay fever and perennial al-
lergic rhinitis, characterized by seasonal or perennial
sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, pruritus, and often
conjunctivitis and pharyngitis. (The Merck Manual)

Hay fever, or allergic rhinitis, is a form of allergy that af-
fects the lining of the nose and, often, the eyes and throat.
As the name implies, the condition is an allergic response
to the pollen of certain grasses, but the term is also used
to describe similar reactions to a wide range of pollens
and the spores of some fungi.

Treatment of Hay Fever

Hay fever responds well to herbal treatment, but each
person is different, so a number of approaches may have
to be tried until the right one is found. The immune sys-
tem needs support, and stress may also be an issue. Tonic
support should be provided for both the upper and lower
respiratory systems.

Actions Indicated

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort often
characteristic of this problem. Again, avoid trying to
dry up mucus overproduction with herbal deconges-
tants, as this can end up being quite painful.

Expectorants will be needed if wheezing or pulmonary
congestion develops. Relaxing expectorants will usu-
ally be most relevant.

Antispasmodics are essential if there is any marked diffi-
culty with breathing.

Bitters help tone the whole body in the face of the im-
mune systems response.

Anti-inflammatories soothe various symptoms of inflam-
mation as and when they arise.

Astringents often ease the symptom picture, as many anti-
catarrhals are also astringents.

Adaptogens and immune support may help long term. This
overall system support should cover the liver, kidney,
and any other systems that require support. See chap-
ter 21 for more information.

Specific Remedies

Individuals may find that certain herbs suit them well, but
otherwise, there is no particular specific remedy for hay

----- PAGE 348 -----
340 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

fever. The well-known traditional Chinese remedy
Ephedra sinica (ma huang) is a bronchodilator and has
much to offer in the treatment of allergic reactions.
Ayurveda and unani medicine use Ami visnaga, a plant
with a similar biochemical impact that is now being in-
troduced to the Western world.

In addition to these alkaloid-rich plants, certain herbs
might be considered specific for various types and sites of
symptoms that may arise. For example, Euphrasia spp.
ease distress that occurs in the eyes.

A Prescription for Hay Fever

Ephedra sinica 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Euphrasia spp. 1 part
Urtica dioica 2 parts
Solidago virgaurea 2 parts

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Ideally, this treatment
should be started two months before hay fever season is due to
commence. Start with the following dosage regimen.

Pre—Hay Fever Season Dosage Regimen

Weeks 1-2 2.5 ml once a day

Weeks 3-4 5 ml once a day
Weeks 5-6 5 ml twice a day
Weeks 7-8 5 ml three times a day

If this treatment cannot be initiated before the allergy flares up,
then start with a full dose immediately, possibly increasing the
dose to 5 ml four or five times a day (adults only).

Table 15.16. Actions Supplied by Hay Fever
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Ephedra sinica

Anticatarrhal Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea,

Euphrasia spp., Ephedra sinica

Anti-inflammatory — Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea,

Euphrasia spp., Urtica dioica

Antimicrobial Hydrastis canadensis
Astringent Euphrasia spp.
Bitter Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment
Treating the whole person is the trick to successfully ame-
liorating this common problem. In addition to symptoms

of the allergy, focus on general health, stress, and elimina-
tion. Dietary considerations must be based upon avoid-
ance of specific allergens as well as general good nutrition.

Various essential oils can help with symptoms of hay
fever, but the specifics vary from person to person. Oils
recommended by aromatherapists include all of those
listed above for the common cold, with the addition of
blue chamomile, lemon balm, and lavender. If steam in-
halation makes the patient feel even worse, suggest that
the person put some oil on a tissue to sniffi whenever
needed. A massage with any of these oils can also be
helpful.

SINUSITIS

An inflammatory process in the paranasal sinuses due to
viral, bacterial, and fungal infections or allergic reactions.
(The Merck Manual)

The sinuses are four bony cavities positioned behind,
above, and at each side of the nose and open into the nasal
cavity. They act as a sound box to give resonance to the
voice. Sinusitis is an inflammation of these air-containing
cavities.

Like the nasal passages, the sinuses are lined with
mucous membranes that react to infection by producing
mucus. This represents an attempt by the body to inca-
pacitate the infecting bacteria. Because the openings from
the nose into the sinuses are very narrow, they quickly be-
come blocked when the mucous membranes swell during
a cold, hay fever, or catarrh, trapping the infection inside
the sinuses.

Chronic sinusitis may occur if one or more of the
drainage passages from the sinuses to the nose become
blocked. This can cause headaches or a dull pain across
the face and temple and around the eyes. If the maxillary
sinuses above the cheeks are infected, toothache may re-
sult. Once the lining of the sinuses becomes swollen, the
cilia of the nasal cavity no longer operate. The lining of
the sinuses can become permanently thickened, con-
tributing to the retention of phlegm.

Anything that blocks the sinus openings or impedes
the action of the cilia can cause a sinus infection. A
buildup of mucus creates an ideal environment for mi-
croorganisms to thrive.

Common Causes of Sinus Infections
Colds or upper respiratory infections
Hay fever or allergies

Air pollution and cigarette smoke
Nasal or dental procedures

----- PAGE 349 -----
Traveling at high altitudes or swimming under water
Hormone changes that occur with puberty
Pregnancy

Aging

Sinus blockages

Health conditions such as diabetes and AIDS

Treatment of Sinusitis

Success in treating this intransigent condition requires
that herbal protocols be used in the context of dietary
considerations. The mucous membranes, upper and
lower respiratory tracts, immune system, and, possibly,
the digestive system all need attention. Which systems to
focus on will depend on individual indications.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are pivotal in the treatment of this often
entrenched condition. These herbs will help the body
deal with any infection present, but also support the
immune system in resisting the development of sec-
ondary infection.

Anticatarrhals ease the symptomatic discomfort character-
istic of this problem and assist the body in eliminating
buildup in the sinus cavities.

Astringents, often also anticatarrhals, reduce overproduc-
tion of mucus.

Anti-inflammatories are indicated, but most of the
herbs with actions already listed here are also anti-
inflammatory.

Diaphoretics will be indicated if feverishness is part of the
symptom picture.

Analgesics may be necessary for temporary pain relief.

Lymphatics aid the drainage and immune function of this
vital system.

Digestive support is indicated if overproduction of mucus
causes stomach discomfort.

Adaptogens and immune support may help long term.

A Prescription for Sinusitis

Solidago virgaurea 2 parts
Sambucus nigra 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Steam inhalation is an effective technique for treating
upper respiratory catarrh and sinusitis.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 341

Steam Inhalation for Upper Respiratory Tract
Catarrh and Sinusitis

Compound tincture of benzoin 30 ml
Eucalyptus essential oil 2.5 ml
Peppermint essential oil 6 drops
Lavender essential oil 5 drops
Pine essential oil 5 drops

Combine ingredients in a bottle and shake well, Put a teaspoon
of the mixture in a bowl and pour on '4 liter (1 pint) boiled
water. Cover the head and the bowl with a towel or cloth and
inhale. Caution: Keep the eyes closed.

Broader Context of Treatment
Some cases of chronic mucus production are related to
allergy. Sometimes, however, emotional factors like sup-
pressed grief can result in blocked upper respiratory pas-
sages. In these cases, a good cry can help free this blocked
energy and alleviate the problem.

A diet that reduces mucus production is also essential.
In particular, a fruit fast for two or three days can help
clear a system clogged and overburdened by toxic wastes.
Hot lemon drinks reduce mucus production, as do garlic,
onions, and horseradish. Suggest that the patient grate
fresh horseradish root into cider vinegar or lemon juice
and eat a little each day. Mustard and aromatic herbs like
oregano may be added to food, and extra zinc and vitamin
C can help build the body’s resistance to infection.

Certain foods, especially dairy products and wheat,
seem to predispose people toward sinusitis because they
provoke excessive formation of mucus. During an acute
attack of sinusitis, all dairy and wheat-based foods must
be excluded for several days. People who have chronic or
repeated attacks should be advised to exclude these foods
completely for several months, and then reintroduce
them in very small amounts, if at all. Goat’s and sheep’s
milk products are sometimes better tolerated than cow’s
milk. Acupuncture is a very effective therapy for sinusitis
and can be used alongside phytotherapy.

LARYNGITIS

Acute inflammation of the larynx. (The Merck Manual)

Laryngitis is an acute inflammation of the larynx, or voice
box, usually associated with a common cold or overuse of
the voice. It is characterized by swelling, hoarseness, pain,
dryness in the throat, coughing, and inability to speak
above a whisper, if at all. It is usually caused by a bacterial

----- PAGE 350 -----
342. @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

or viral infection, either restricted to the larynx or part of
a more general infection of the upper respiratory tract.
Where no clear-cut cause is found, such as infection or
overuse, skilled diagnosis is required.

Treatment of Laryngitis

The lymphatic system should be the focus of tonic sup-
port, but if there is a pattern of recurrent infection, at-
tention must also be given to strengthening the immune
system.

Actions Indicated

Demutcents will soothe the mucous lining and ease
discomfort.

Anti-inflammatories will reduce the immediate cause of
distress.

Antimicrobials are indicated if there is a causal microor-
ganism involved. However, they are not indicated if in-
flammation is due to some other cause.

Astringents are often effective as a local gargle, especially
if the problem was precipitated by overuse of the vocal
cords.

Bitters have a toning and stimulating effect on the mu-
cosal lining.

Specific Remedies

The various herbal traditions of the world abound with
herbs effective for conditions of the mouth, larynx, and
pharynx. Osha (Ligusticwm porteri) is an excellent specific.
A small piece of the root can be chewed to ameliorate
symptoms and promote the body’s immune response.

In Europe, gargling with astringent herbs is the tra-
ditional approach. They should not be drunk, as they will
probably also promote constipation—an unnecessary and
unfortunate complication.

Astringent Herbs Relevant to Laryngitis
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)

Polygonum bistortum (bistort root)

Potentilla tormentosa (tormentil)

Quercus spp. (oak bark)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)

R. villosus (blackberry leaf)

Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (black elder flower)

A Prescription for Laryngitis

Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Ligusticum porteri 2 parts
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Dosage: up to 1 ml of tincture every hour
A Gargle for Laryngitis
Salvia officinalis var. rubia 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Make a strong infusion with dried herbs. Gargle often until
symptoms subside.

Gargle II for Laryngitis
Malva neglecta or Malva sylvestris

Infuse Malva flowers and leaves in lukewarm water overnight to
ensure optimum extraction of mucilage. Gargle as needed.

Broader Context of Treatment

Follow the dietary advice given earlier for sinusitis. In ad-
dition, aromatherapy provides some oils that ease inflam-
mation quite effectively, including cypress and bergamot
oils. To use as a gargle, put 3 drops of essential oil in
¥%2 cup of warm water. Gargle hourly.

TONSILLITIS

Acute inflammation of the palatine tonsils, usually due to
streptococcal or, less commonly, viral infection. (The
Merck Manual)

Tonsillitis is either an acute or a chronic inflammation of
the tonsils, which are located near the back of the tongue.
The adenoids, lymph glands found behind the nose, are
often simultaneously inflamed. Tonsillitis usually devel-
ops suddenly as a result of a streptococcal infection, but
may also be caused by a viral infection.

The condition is characterized by sore throat, fever,
chills, headache, poor appetite, and weakness. The tonsils
become swollen and red, and streaks of pus are often vis-
ible on their surface. Acute tonsillitis usually clears up in
about a week, but antibiotics are commonly prescribed to
prevent complications such as middle ear and sinus infec-
tions, formation of deep abscesses, spread of infection to
other organs, and chronic tonsillitis. Chronic tonsillitis
is characterized by flare-ups of acute infection. Tonsillitis is
more common in children than in adults.

Tonsils are composed of the same type of tissue that
makes up the lymph nodes, and they are part of the body’s

----- PAGE 351 -----
natural defense system. When the tonsils are infected, the
lymph glands in the neck often simultaneously become
enlarged and tender, signifying the body’s proper reaction
to the challenge of infection.

Treatment of Tonsillitis

The lymphatic system should be the focus of tonic support,
but if there is a pattern of recurrent infection, attention
must also be given to strengthening the immune system.

Actions Indicated

Lymphatics are of primary importance, as this is an infec-
tion of lymphatic tissue.

Antimicrobials help the immune system combat the infec-
tion, whatever the causal pathogen might be, and help
prevent the development of secondary infection

Anticatarrhals are indicated if there is associated sinus
congestion or middle ear involvement.

Diaphoretics help the body cope with any associated fever.

Expectorants are indicated if secondary problems develop
in the lower respiratory system.

Specific Remedies

Lymphatic alteratives usually have local reputations as
specifics for tonsillitis. In the United Kingdom, the most
famous is Galium aparine (cleavers).

A Prescription for Tonsillitis

Galium aparine 2 parts
Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part
Calendula officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Diaphoretics
should be added if fever is an issue.

Broader Context of Treatment

In Herbal Home Health Care, Dr. Christopher recom-
mends the following fomentation.? (A fomentation is the
application of: hot moist substances to the body.)

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 343

Fomentation
Verbascum thapsus
Lobelia inflata

3 parts

1 part

Make a strong infusion of dried herb mixture. Dip a cloth in the
fomentation and wrap around the neck at night, repeating the
procedure each night until the condition clears up.

References

1. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion. www.cde.gow/tobacco/hlthcon.htm

2. Hirono I, Mori H, Culvenor CC. Carcinogenic activity
of coltsfoot, Tussilago farfaral. Gann 1976 Feb;
67(1):125-29.

3. Sper] W, Stuppner H, Gassner I, et al. Reversible hep-
atic veno-occlusive disease in an infant after consump-
tion of pyrrolizidine-containing herbal tea, European
Journal of Pediatrics 1995 Feb; 154(2):112-16.

4. Weiss RE. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart; New York:
Thieme, 2000.

5. Global Initiative for Asthma: Global Strategy for Asthma
Management and Prevention. NHLBI/WHO Workshop
Report, March 1993. Rev edition. Washington, DC:
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute; January 1995. National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute publication NIH 95-3659.

6, Centers for Disease Control]. Asthma mortality and hos-
pitalization among children and young adults—United
States, 1980-1993. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 1996,
45: 350-3.

7. Brown D. Herbal Prescriptions for Better Health. Rocklin,
CA: Prima Publishing, 1996.

8. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

9. Christopher JR. Herbal Home Health Care. Springville,
UT: Christopher Publications, 1976.

----- PAGE 352 -----
16

MN

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

fascinating aspect of herbalism is the way in
A@« plants affect human consciousness. The in-

tegration of all life revealed by the Gaia hypoth-
esis shows us that awareness and expanded consciousness
are part of the greater being we belong to. Words and
names are meaningless when considering such things, but
just as our Earth feeds us, heals our arthritis, and
strengthens the function of our hearts, so it supports and
nurtures our nervous systems.

Herbalism is a cooperative healing venture among
humanity, plants, and the Earth. This experience of whole-
ness is spirit in action, and opens the door for change and
transformation. Nature provides us with herbs that
transform and enlighten as well as plants that heal and
nurture the nerve tissue itself. We will consider the phys-
ical aspect of this healing here, but remember that the
physical action of nervine herbs is but one side of the
whole interface between plant and mind.

From one perspective, herbs are embodiments of en-
ergy and spirit, and from another they are packets of bio-
chemicals. This dichotomy is, in fact, a microcosm of the
relationship between the human brain and the mind! The
complexities of the mind-body interface, so challenging
to doctors concerned with psychosomatic medicine, be-
come an aid to remedy selection for the herbalist.

All of the many her
both somatic symptoms and the mind. A simple example
is Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort), an herb used for treat-
ing anxiety and tension. Motherwort also has a specific
affinity for the heart, easing heart palpitations and the
fear that often accompanies them. This is recognized to
some degree in the species name cardiaca, derived from
the Greek word for heart.

bal nervines have an impact on

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND HERBAL
REMEDIES

In no other system of the body is the connection between
the physical and psychological aspects of our being as ap-
parent as in the nervous system. Clearly, the tissue of the

344

nervous system is part of the physical makeup of the body.
However, just as clearly, all psychological processes are
anchored in the nervous system. Therefore, if there is dis-
ease on the psychological level, it will be reflected on the
physiological level, and vice versa.

Orthodox medicine tends to reduce psychological
problems to purely biochemical mechanisms, and as-
sumes that appropriate drugs will sort out or at least hide
the problem sufficiently to allow life to continue.
Interestingly enough, some premises of complementary
medicine assume or imply the other extreme: namely, that
psychological factors are the cause of all disease.
According to this point of view, treatment of the psyche is
the only appropriate way to approach healing, and will
take care of any physical problem. By bringing these two
reductionist views together, we come closer to a holistic
approach.

A holistic approach to healing acknowledges the in-
terconnectedness of physiological and psychological fac-
tors, and regards the nervous system and its functions as
a vital part of the treatment of the whole being. To be
truly healthy, we must attend to our physical health
through the right diet and lifestyle, but we are also re-
sponsible for taking care of our emotional, mental, and
spiritual life. We should endeavor to live in a fulfilling,
nurturing environment that supports emotional stability.
Our thoughts should be creative, life enhancing, and open
to the influence of intuition and imagination, rather than
conceptually rigid. And we should stay open to the free
flow of the higher energies of our souls, without which
health is impossible.

Herbal medicine can be an ecologically and spiritu-
ally integrative tool, an ideal physical counterpart to ther-
apeutic techniques applied on the psychological level.
Herbs can benefit the nervous system in a number of
ways, in addition to the rather simplistic effects of stimu-
lation and relaxation.

Today, Western herbalism commonly recognizes
three major categories of herbs that act on the nervous
system, collectively called mervines. These are nervine ton-

----- PAGE 353 -----
ics, nervine relaxants, and nervine stimulants. Other impor-
tant categories of nervines include hypnotics, analgesics,
antispasmodics, antidepressants, and adaptogens. For
more information on these actions and the primary and
secondary actions of specific herbs, please see chapters 25
and 26.

Of many potential remedies that could be mentioned,
table 16.1 provides a listing of the best-known nervines in
European phytotherapy.

Table 16.1. Nervine Herbs Recognized in European
Phytotherapy

TYPE OF
NERVINE

HERBS

Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Tonic

Relaxant Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica,
Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum,

Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.

Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Nepeta cataria, Passiflora incarnata,
Piper methysticum, Piscidia erythrina,

Pulsatilla vulgaris, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis, Viscum album

Stimulant Cola vera, Coffea arabica, Ilex paraguayensis,

Paullinia cupana, Rosmarinus officinalis

Hypnotic Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Passiflora incarnata,
Piper methysticum, Piscidia erythrina,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Piper methysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus,

V, prunifolium

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus, Lentinus edodes,
Panax ginseng, P. quinquefolius,

Shisandra chinensis, Withania somnifera

Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Lavandula spp., Turnera diffusa

Analgesic Dioscorea villosa, Eschschalzia californica,
Gelsemium sempervirens, Piscidia erythrina,

Stachys betonica, Valeriana officinalis

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 345

Table 16.2. Nervines and Body System Affinities

SYSTEM HERB TYPE OF NERVINE
Circulatory system Melissa officinalis Relaxing
Cimicifuga racemosa _ Relaxing

Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Viscum album Relaxing
Lavandula spp. Relaxing
Tilia platyphyllos Relaxing
Leonurus cardiaca Relaxing
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing
Respiratory system Grindelia spp. Antispasmodic
Lobelia inflata Antispasmodic

Prunus serotina Antispasmodic
Lactuca virosa Antispasmodic
Digestive system Matricaria recutita Relaxing
Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Foeniculum vulgare Antispasmodic
Humulus lupulus Relaxing
Melissa officinalis Relaxing
Mentha piperita Antispasmodic
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing
Dioscorea villosa Antispasmodic
Reproductive system Viburnum prunifolium — Antispasmodic
Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Pulsatilla vulgaris Relaxing
Scutellaria spp. Relaxing
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing

THE ROLE OF STRESS IN HUMAN
HEALTH

An examination of stress and stress management is funda-
mental to any discussion of nervous system health. This
section provides an overview of the physiology and psy-
chology of stress and the general adaptation syndrome,
focusing on how stress relates to health and illness.

----- PAGE 354 -----
346 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

What Is Stress?

There are several ways to define stress. Here is perhaps the
most encompassing definition: “Stress is the response of
the body to any demand.” Just staying alive creates de-
mands on the body for energy to maintain life energy.
Even while we are asleep, our bodies continue to func-
tion. By this definition, stress is a fundamental part of
being alive and should not be avoided! The trick is to en-
sure that the degree of stress we experience is not over-
whelming, so that life is a joy, not a drag.

From this perspective, energy usage is one character-
istic of stress. Another characteristic is the lack of speci-
ficity of the stress response. Any demands made upon us
in daily life bring about certain reactions in the body.
These same reactions occur under a whole range of dif-
ferent conditions, both physical and emotional—from
perceptions of hot and cold to joy and sorrow. As aware,
feeling people, we generally make a big distinction be-
tween the pain caused by the loss of a loved one and the
pain caused by a rapid change in temperature, but the na-
ture of the demand is unimportant at the biological level.
To the body, it is all the same, because the stress response
is the same. Nerve signals travel from the brain to several
glands, and these react by secreting hormones to cope
with the task ahead. In short, stress is not just worry and
strain. It is a keynote of life, with all its ups and downs. A
new and exciting love can cause us as much stress as a
cranky boss.

Stress as a Response

The most relevant way to interpret stress involves view-
ing it as physiological response to an adverse, or “stress-
ful,” situation. This approach is based on the work of the
physiologist Hans Selye. Selye theorized that the stress
response is a built-in mechanism that comes into play
whenever demands are made on the individual, and is
therefore a defense reaction with a protective and adap-
tive function. In other words, the body mounts a general
physiological reaction to all forms of stress, which is usu-
ally in our own best interests. Selye called this reaction
the general adaptation syndrome (GAS). The theory sug-
gests a three-stage process of response:

1. An alarm reaction

2. A resistance stage, which represents a functional re-
covery of the body to a level superior to the pre-
stress state

3. An exhaustion reaction, in which continuation of
stress results in a depletion and breakdown of the
recovery described in stage 2

The limitation of this inflexible, physiological model
of stress is that it ignores the purely emotional or mental
factors that produce wide variations in the way humans
respond to potentially stressful situations.

Physiological Responses

The regulation of physiological responses to threats or
stressful demands is handled mainly by the adrenal gland.
Immediate response is controlled mainly, though not
completely, by the adrenal gland’s central medulla, while
the surrounding cortex handles long-term stress re-
sponses. The initial response, or the body’s preparation
for what has been called the fight-or-flight reaction, in-
volves a number of steps.

The first is an overall increase in nervous system ac-
tivity. Next, the adrenal medulla releases adrenaline
and/or noradrenaline into the bloodstream. These hor-
mones support the nervous system through metabolic ac-
tivities. The body’s response to these chemicals includes
an increase in heart rate and blood pressure and surface
constriction of blood vessels. Surface constriction of
blood vessels directs the blood away from the skin to the
muscles, providing them with more sugar and oxygen.
This is why we are said to “go white with shock.” The re-
lease of these chemicals also mobilizes the liver’s energy
reserves through the release of stored glucose.

If the stressful situation is very intense or continues
over a period of time, the adrenal cortex becomes in-
creasingly involved in the stress reaction. Adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH), released by the anterior
pituitary gland, largely controls the activity of the cortex.
After information about sustained stress is processed by
the central nervous system, a whole range of bodily re-
sponses occurs. These are the reactions that can adversely
affect the quality of life.

Psychological Responses

In general terms, the psychological reaction to stress
takes the following course:

The initial fight-or-flight reaction is accompanied by
emotions such as anxiety and fear.

Individual coping strategies are activated as we attempt to
find ways to deal with the harmful or unpleasant situa-
tion.

If coping strategies are successful, the fight-or-flight re-
action and the anxiety state subside.

If coping strategies fail and the stress continues, a range
of psychological reactions, including depression and
withdrawal, may occur.

----- PAGE 355 -----
The implication is that the consequences of failing to
cope can be serious. It is therefore important that we de-
velop our own ways of adapting to and successfully deal-
ing with stressful situations.

How Stress Causes Illness

There can be no doubt that there is a definite relationship
between stress and illness. Although the exact nature of
that relationship is not yet understood, a number of ideas
have been suggested. Early theories tried to connect dif-
ferent illnesses with specific types of emotional conflict or
personality and body types. According to these theories,
certain body types and temperaments are more likely to
develop one physical disease under stress than are others.
However, there is little agreement among the experts
about what correlates with what.

Selye had more to say on the subject. He maintained
that the biological reactions accompanying the GAS re-
sult in both short- and long-term adverse physical
changes. He called these changes diseases of adaptation,
since they are the outcome of a system of defense re-
sponses to threatening stimuli. Selye theorized that the
disease process arises as a result of a number of factors:

* The physiological effect of certain hormones from the
adrenal and pituitary glands

¢ The impact of the inflammation process

* A general state of lowered resistance

The actual disease that manifests itself depends on a
range of factors, including genetics, physical weakness,
and even specific learned body responses. The GAS helps
explain the effects of life changes or events on health. Life
changes require adjustments that can produce physiolog-
ical reactions, and sustained and unsuccessful attempts at
coping with life can lower bodily resistance and promote
illness. Thus, the more frequent and severe the life changes
we experience, the more likely we are to become ill.

ANXIETY AS A RESPONSE TO STRESS

Stress affects our lives in many ways, and it is impossible
to talk about all of the ramifications here. However, when
the level of stress progresses beyond healthy stimulation
and begins to adversely affect our health, it usually mani-
fests in some form of anxiety.

Anxiety comprises various combinations of mental
and physical symptoms that occur either in a persistent
state or in the form of short-term panic attacks. Anxiety is
often described in the following terms.

THE Nervous SYSTEM @ 347

¢ An emotional state colored by the experienced quality
of fear

* An unpleasant emotion that may be accompanied by a
feeling of impending doom

* A feeling, directed toward the future, that is associated
with a perceived threat of some kind

* An experience of bodily discomfort and actual bodily
disturbance

In anxiety, there may be no recognizable basis for the
fear or perception of threat, and the emotion provoked
may be completely out of proportion to the actual stimu-
lus. Nevertheless, the symptoms of anxiety are very real.
For some people, anxiety takes the form of recurrent at-
tacks that, although they occur unpredictably, may be-
come associated with specific situations. These attacks
begin with a sudden, intense apprehension, often com-
bined with a feeling of impending doom and sometimes
with feelings of unreality. Any of the somatic (physical)
symptoms described below may occur. An anticipatory
fear of loss of control often develops, so that the person
may become afraid, for example, of being left alone in
public places. The anticipatory fear may itself precipitate
other symptoms, which escalate the attack. A whole range
of reactions can be associated with anxiety.

Table 16.3. Symptoms of Anxiety

SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS
Anxious mood Worrying
Apprehension

Anticipation of the worst

Irritability

Fears The dark
Being left alone
Traffic
Strangers
Large animals

Crowds

Cognitive symptoms Difficulty concentrating

Poor memory

Depressed mood Loss of interest

----- PAGE 356 -----
348 <= TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS. SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS
Depression Diurnal swing Insomnia Difficulty falling asleep

Lack of pleasure in hobbies Unsatisfying sleep

Early awakening Fatigue on waking
General body sensations innitus Night terrors

Hot and cold flushes Broken sleep

Prickling sensations Dreams

lurred vision Nightmares

Feelings of weakness General symptoms Muscular aches and pains
Respiratory symptoms ressure or constriction in chest Muscular twitching

Tightness of breath Muscular stiffness

Feelings of choking Grinding teeth

Sighing Cardiovascular symptoms Tachycardia, palpitations
Genitourinary symptoms Frequent urination Pain in chest

Urinary urgency Feelings of faintness

Suppressed menstrual periods Throbbing of vessels

Excessive menstrual bleeding Skipped heartbeats

Frigidity Gastrointestinal symptoms Difficulty swallowing

Premature ejaculation Indigestion

Impotence Heartburn

Loss of erection Looseness of bowels

Physiological aspects of behavior Tremor of hands Constipation
Strained face Flatulence
Swallowing Belching
Sweating

Sensations of bloating

Furrowed brow Weight loss

Facial pallor Autonomic nervous system symptoms Dry mouth

Eyelid twitching

Pallor
Tension Feelings of tension Giddiness
Inability to relax Flushing
Easily moved to tears Tendency to sweat
Feelings of restlessness Raising of hair
Fatigue Adapted from M. Hamilton, “The Assessment of Anxiety States by Rating,” British

Journal of Medical Psychology 32(1959):50-55.

Startled response

Trembling

----- PAGE 357 -----
MANAGING STRESS: AN OVERVIEW
There is much that can be done to ease the impact of
stress and decrease the weight of the anxiety and tension
we so often carry around with us. However, the very
range of approaches that we have to choose from can it-
self become a source of stress. Where should we turn for
help? Which therapy should we use? These are always
difficult questions, and they are even more difficult to an-
swer when we are not feeling our best.

The different therapies available merely represent
ways to help us find the inherent peace within us. We are
all, in fact, our own healers. The key is an inner attitude
of taking responsibility for the quality of our own lives.
We can seek aid from experts, whether medical doctors,
herbalists, or practitioners of various complementary
modalities, but the responsibility for healing can never be
truly handed to another. Healing comes from within and
is an intrinsic aspect of being alive. While healing is rarely
a conscious act of harnessing inner energy, it is always an
expression of our inner power.

Various tools and techniques can facilitate our heal-
ing; however, these techniques only aid in the healing
process. Each of them embodies a profound truth and a
great gift of healing wisdom, but humanity is very com-
plex, and our ills are a reflection of that complexity. We
need to build bridges between therapies in an effort to
move toward a more holistic approach to health. In this
chapter, the simple model I offer suggests ways in which
we might integrate various approaches to health and
wholeness to make inner peace an active part of our lives.
When people are seen as whole beings, not simply as
bodies with minds on top,” it should comes as no sur-
prise to find a deep association between psychology and
physiology. This association has profound implications
for all health conditions, not just stress and anxiety.

The mere fact that human beings are typically con-
sidered in terms of two separate entities—mind and
body—is a demonstration of the inadequacy of our scien-
tific approach to health. As already discussed, in reality, a

“

human is a single whole being that cannot be separated
into parts like mind and body.

Let us briefly explore the ways in which orthodox
medicine views the relationship between mind and body
in the development of illness. While no all-encompassing
explanation for this relationship has been put forward, the
medical world has considered a number of possible ideas.

Some physical illness may be psychological in origin, That is,
bodily disturbances may be directly caused by psycho-
logical illnesses.

THE Nervous SYSTEM ¢ 349

Physical illness may arise as an indirect consequence of a men-
tal disorder. In other words, the bodily illness results
from behavioral disturbances that are secondary to the
psychological problem.

Physical methods of treating mental illness may cause bodily
disease. Unfortunately, this is all too common with the
wide use of drug therapy today.

The mental disturbance may be a manifestation of a physical
illness, or an adverse effect of its treatment.

A mental or emotional problem may be a purely psychological
response, either to a physical illness or to the psycholog-
ical impact the illness has on the person involved.

This might all sound a bit semantic! These explana-
tions are, however, a way to find patterns of relationship
between mind and body, enabling the orthodox medical
practitioner to decide which drugs to use. They help an-
swer the question of whether the practitioner should
focus on the physical problems or the mental disturbance.

From the point of view of the holistic herbalist, this
is an artificial and unnecessary question. The whole must
be treated as a whole in order to help both body and
mind. Thus, we need not only remedies that are effective
for specific symptoms, but also a management plan to
help the patient cope with stress. This broader view
lessens the impact of stress and creates the space for heal-
ing to take place.

EMOTIONAL AND MENTAL
RESPONSES TO PHYSICAL ILLNESS

Any illness occurs within the context of our whole lives,
and so will affect us psychologically and socially as well as
physically. It may be useful for us to consider ways in
which illness itself produces psychological problems. The
difference between this type of problem and one that
arises in the mind but affects the body is purely a differ-
ence of perspective.

Technically speaking, if orthodox practitioners con-
sider the primary problem to be in the mind, they label it
a psychosomatic problem. If they consider the root of the
problem to be in the body, they label it a somatopsychic
problem. The distinction is subtle, as shown here.

Disease
Psyche

Psyche >
Disease -

(Psychosomatic) ed
(Somatopsychic) ad

Relaxation Techniques

Perhaps the most important and yet the simplest tools
available for lessening the impact of stress are relaxation

----- PAGE 358 -----
350 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

exercises. When someone is tense and has been so for a
while, the worst advice that can be given is, “Relax, take it
easy.” That is guaranteed to make feel anyone feel even
edgier while working at trying to relax! The sad fact is
that few people retain the innate skill of relaxation—a
pity, but there it is. Relaxation is a skill that must be re-
learned and practiced.

Many relaxation techniques exist, some based on
breathing, some on muscle control, some on visualiza-
tion, and some on simply listening to music. Picking the
right one is matter of determining which is most suitable
for the individual concerned.

Herbs and Spiritual Peace

In general, herbalists feel at home with spiritual matters.
Plant remedies are potent medicines for human beings,
but the plants from which they are derived are also vital
for a healthy world in a number of ways. Our natural sur-
roundings are important to us. Why do people fill their
offices with indoor plants? They are, of course, aestheti-
cally pleasing, but I suggest that aesthetic sensibilities are
a part of the way in which spirituality helps us maintain
our sanity. To the medieval monks, it was obvious that
through the simple flowers of the field, God had given
humanity a gift of healing and peace. Today, we are at last
relearning this simple truth.

Gardening, Tree-Hugging, and

Stress Management

If we get a bit creative, it is easy to see that the role of
herbs in holistic healing need not be limited to their in-
gestion. This is a perfect excuse to get into the garden,
walk in the woods, and literally “smell the roses”! If one
takes a very broad view of herbalism, seeing it as an ex-
ploration of humanity’s relationship with the plant world,
some unusual healing possibilities present themselves.

In recent years, researchers from several disciplines
have begun investigating the benefits of contact with
plants, especially trees. In studies of the stress-reducing
effects of nature, people recovered more quickly and
completely from stress when exposed to plant-rich natu-
ral settings, as indicated by lowered blood pressure, heart
rate, muscle tension, and skin conductance. (The measur-
able change in skin conductance of very small electrical
charges is considered one of the best physiological mea-
sures of autonomic nervous system activity and the stress
response.) Direct experience of nature also facilitated psy-
chological recovery, as suggested by reductions in mea-
sures of fear and anger and increases in positive feelings.
Physiological findings indicated that nature settings pro-
duced significant recovery from stress in only four to six
minutes. This rapid recovery highlights the importance
for city dwellers of contact with plants, to help facilitate
recuperation from various stressors, including commut-
ing and work pressures.!

form part of the lawn’s charm.

Herbal Stress Relief: Growing a Chamomile Lawn

Before the Victorians developed the grass lawn (itself a major cause of stress for some people!),
lawns were made up of different varieties of herbs that could cope with being trampled. A
chamomile lawn makes a wonderfully soothing place to rest, and lying upon such a lawn and
breathing in its delightful aroma gently yet profoundly relaxes the body.

Growing a chamomile lawn oneself further reduces stress through the benefits of exercise
and a sense of fulfillment. Specific varieties of chamomile are best for this. Matricaria nobile
‘Treneague’ is an apple-scented, nonflowering variety. This is convenient, as it saves having to re-
move spent flower heads, but ordinary Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile) can be grown
from seed, which is less expensive. Prepare the soil and broadcast the seed. Cover with a thin layer
of soil and keep moist but not wet. When seedlings have at least two sets of leaves, thin them to
about 3 inches apart. Don’t walk on them until they have started to bind together. Remove most
flower heads as they appear, to ensure leaf vigor, but allow occasional flowers to remain, as they

Avoid placing a chamomile lawn where it borders on a grass lawn or wild garden area, as
creeping weeds will soon invade the lawn, and uprooting them will disturb the shallow-rooted
chamomile plants. Surrounding the chamomile lawn with stone, brick, or paving slabs is ideal for
preventing the invasion of unwanted plants as well as the spread of the chamomile.

----- PAGE 359 -----
Another study compared hospital records of gallblad-
der surgery patients who had window views of either a
small stand of trees or a brick wall. Results showed that
those with the view of trees had shorter postoperative
hospital stays, required fewer potent pain drugs, and re-
ceived fewer negative staff evaluations about their condi-
tion than did those with the wall view.’

The Role of Adaptogens

Humanity appears to have created a world of stress, pol-
lution, lack of meaning, and lack of purpose. In the face
of such cultural alienation from nature, the plethora of
diseases assailing the “civilized” world should come as no
surprise. To heal the ills, the causes must be addressed.
Such causes are found not only within the individual, but
also within our culture as a whole.

When a health problem is related to lowered resis-
tance to disease, which in turn is caused by the increased
impact of a hostile environment, the healer must also
“heal” the hostile environment. In other words, even if we
have found a remedy that seems to offer an increased re-
sistance to toxic drugs, it is always preferable to remove
the toxic chemical. This makes economic sense, is the
right stance in Hippocratic terms, and is the right action
in spiritual terms.

When attention is given to providing appropriate
support for the body under stressful conditions, nature
comes to our rescue. Technically, this calls for an increase
in the body’s nonspecific resistance to damaging man-
made factors and related illnesses. A range of appropriate
herbal remedies has come to light. Soviet scientists coined
the term adaptogen to describe herbs that produce this
wonderful increase in resistance and vitality. Some of the
characteristics of adaptogens include:

¢ Nonspecific activity—in other words, an ability to in-
crease the power of the body’s resistance to physical,
chemical, or biological stressors

¢ A normalizing influence independent of the nature of
the pathological state

¢ An innocuous nature that does not influence normal
body functions more than necessary

In these ways, adaptogens reinforce the nonspecific
power of the body’s resistance against stressors, increase
its general capacity to withstand stressful situations, and
hence guard against disease caused by overstressing the
organism. The general aims of treatment with adaptogens
include:

* Reduce stress reactions during the alarm phase of the
stress response

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 351

* Prevent or at least delay the state of exhaustion
¢ Afford a certain level of protection against the effects
of long-term stress

Herbs that can be described as adaptogens include
Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng), P. guinquefolins (American
ginseng), Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng),
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda), Lentinus edodes (shiitake
mushroom), and Shisandra chinensis (schizandra).

HERBAL REMEDIES AND STRESS
MANAGEMENT

Herbs can play a fundamental role in any stress manage-
ment program. When used within the context of a pro-
gram that addresses a range of factors, herbs can facilitate
a dramatic change in the quality of life experienced by
anyone under stress. Holistic medicine reminds us to
focus on an individual’s unique situation, not to simply
treat a diagnosed disease syndrome.

In chapter 1, I discussed the concept of therapeutic
ecology as a model that describes the relationship of herbal
medicine to other healing modalities. A well-balanced
stress management program will address all of the various
elements of healing discussed in that model, including
physical medicine, bodywork, emotional and psychologi-
cal factors, and spiritual aspects. Herbal remedies will ful-
fill only some needs, but they remain vital.

In addition, in the context of this therapeutic ecology,
it is important to remember that the patient is ahways
more important than the doctor’s belief system. In other
words, one person diagnosed with a stress-related problem
might recuperate best when treated with dietary advice,
herbs, and massage, while another may respond better to
tranquilizers and psychoanalysis. The patient’s needs and
belief system must always be taken into account in order
for meaningful change to occur.

In the treatment discussions that follow, we will focus
our attention on the herbal aspects of a holistic approach
to conditions affecting the nervous system, but please do
not forget nutrition, relaxation, psychotherapy, spiritual-
ity, and all of the other factors that the competent practi-
tioner must address.

A convenient way to approach stress-related prob-
lems is based on the intensity of the person’s problem
combined with the duration of the stressful situation, as
seen in the following general list.

* Daily mild stress
* Long-standing severe stress
¢ Short-term severe stress

----- PAGE 360 -----
352 = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Treatment of Mild Daily Stress

Tf periods of stress in a person’s life can be predicted, one
can prepare for them ahead of time and implement
herbal, dietary, and lifestyle measures that will minimize
the impact. Nervine relaxants can be used regularly as
gentle, soothing remedies. For some people, bitter tonics
may also be important because of their metabolic toning
effects.

Specific Remedies
Review the entries for specific relaxing nervines in chap-
ter 25 to clarify their secondary actions and properties.
These remedies can be drunk as teas or cold beverages,

infused in massage oil, or used in relaxing baths or foot-
baths.

Relaxing Nervines

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Avena sativa (oats)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys betonica (wood betony)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A daily supplement of B-complex vitamins and vita-
min C is indicated. The impact of various stressors should
also be ameliorated. This is sometimes impossible, but do
not automatically support the individual in putting up
with something or someone, whatever the justification.
People can change and change their lives. In addition to
relaxation exercises, an honest reevaluation of both
lifestyle and life goals is invaluable.

Treatment of Ongoing Stress

The line between chronic stress and the daily levels of
stress we all put up with is fuzzy. A gentle soul with a less-
than-strong constitution will cross the line into chronic
stress sooner than a stronger person who copes well.
Neither one of these constitutional extremes is better
than the other; they merely reflect the fact that we live in
a world of human diversity.

Focused attention must be given to general health.
The body will often show that it is weakening through
some somatic symptom. This may manifest as a long-
standing complaint that gets worse, an old problem that
reappears, or just an acceleration of the aging process.

Specific Remedies

The remedies suggested for daily stress relief also apply
for chronic stress, but the addition of adaptogens be-
comes pivotal in cases of chronic stress. Important exam-
ples of adaptogens include Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng), Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng), and
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda).

Treatment of Short-Term Extreme Stress
In the lives of most people, there are times when life be-
come overwhelming and the pain of existence crescendos.
Immediate herbal relief may be needed for a whole range
of traumatic situations, from being involved in a car acci-
dent to personal emotional crisis. In these cases, herbs will
take the edge off the trauma, but will rarely remove it.

At extremely difficult times, herbs can be seen only as
an aid—one element of an approach taken to deal with
the issues faced by the individual. The individual may also
need to seek help from the various caring professions, go
on vacation or a retreat, or even check into a hospital.
However, a unique property of herbal nervines is their
ability to address various associated somatic symptoms.
This affords us the opportunity to focus herbal medica-
tion on the unique experience of the patient.

Specific Remedies

Many plants capable of easing intense stress are consid-
ered dangerous in our society, and because they are
legally restricted substances, they will not be discussed
here. However, in addition to the nervine relaxant herbs
already mentioned, consider Passiflora incarnata (passion-
flower), Valeriana officinalis (valerian), Piper methysticum
(kava kava) and Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce).

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reactions
1 part
1 part

Scutellaria lateriflora
Valeriana officinalis

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

Note the dosage of “up to 5 ml of tincture as needed.”
This represents a recognition that the stress response is
cyclical, and different times of the day will be more chal-
lenging for each person. The dosage may be increased
until symptoms are relieved, as this is largely symptomatic
medication. The dosage regimen may also be altered as
necessary, varying time of day and quantity of dose to suit
individual needs. For example, the patient may wish to
take a large dose first thing in the morning, or smaller
amounts at frequent intervals throughout the day.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Table 16.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Stress

THe NERVOUS SYSTEM © 353

Table 16.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Stress with Muscle Tension

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis
Carminative Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reaction with
Indigestion and Palpitations

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

Table 16.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Stress with Indigestion and Palpitations

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora, Avena sativa

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine relaxant

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita
Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis

Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Artemisia vulgaris

Carminative

Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca) supports the relaxing
action of the other nervines, but also has a specific calm-
ing impact upon tachycardia.

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reaction with
Associated Muscle Tension
Scutellaria lateriflora
Piper methysticum

1 part
1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant —Scutellaria lateriflora, Piper methysticum

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Piper methysticum

Muscle-Relaxant Compress

Hot chamomile compresses work well to relax painful, tense
muscles. Prepare a strong infusion, using a full cup of chamomile
flowers and 2 quarts of water. Cover with a lid and allow to
steep for about 10 minutes; strain. Dip a towel into the infusion,
wring it out, and spread it (as hot as is tolerable) on the back,
shoulders, and neck. Soak another towel in the hot infusion,
wring it out, and place it on top of the first towel. Now turn
over both towels so that the fresh, hot compress is again in con-
tact with the patient's skin. Remove the top towel and again
soak it in the infusion. Repeat the procedure 10 to 20 times, until
there is a sense of relaxation and relief of tension.

Broader Context of Treatment

Please refer to chapter 1 for a discussion of the impor-
tance of relaxation and meditation. (For more detailed in-
formation, please see my book Successful Stress Control,
listed as suggested reading in the bibliography.) In addi-
tion, adequate intake of B vitamins is essential.

Nutritional Guidelines

A healthy diet provides optimal amounts of all known nu-
trients and low levels of components that are detrimental
to health. It is rich in whole, unprocessed foods and espe-
cially high in plant foods—fruits, vegetables, grains,
beans, seeds, and nuts. While it is impossible to come up
with a detailed set of guidelines for everyone, consider the
following elements of a healthy diet.

¢ Eat fresh, nutritious foods in season, in a form as close
as possible to the original.

* Enjoy appealing and tasty foods, rotating the foods
eaten for variety.

* Eat moderately and regularly.

* Balance different types of foods to ensure a nutrition-
ally well-rounded diet.

* Eat with your senses, with full attention and with gusto

----- PAGE 362 -----
354 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

* Eat less rather than more.
* Appreciate simple foods.
* Eat vegetables, especially cruciferous vegetables.

DEPRESSION

A disorder marked especially by sadness, inactivity, diffi-
culty with thinking and concentration, a significant in-
crease or decrease in appetite and time spent sleeping,
feelings of dejection and hopelessness, and sometimes
suicidal thoughts or an attempt to commit suicide. (The
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Depression is a state of mind familiar to almost everyone
in one form or another. In ordinary usage, the word refers
to a mood state that in medicine is called dysthymia, in
contrast with the normal state of ewthymia and the oppo-
site state, elation.

In psychiatric usage, disorders of mood are called
affective disorders. Depression is either a disorder in its
own right or can be a symptom of another disorder, either
mental or physical. Normal human responses to some sit-
uations may include transient depression, but in medicine,
these transient states are distinguished from the condition
known as clinical depression.

Major depression occurs in 10% to 20% of the
world’s population in the course of a lifetime. Women are
more often affected than men are, by a 2:1 ratio, and they
seem to be at particular risk just before menstruation or
immediately after childbirth. Relatives of people with
major depression also seem to be at higher risk of devel-
oping depression, and about 2% of the population may
have a chronic disorder known as depressive personality.
I was once asked to speak at a conference on the topic
Herbal Alternatives to Prozac.” I spent most of the talk
challenging the assumptions underlying the title! By
phrasing the topic in this way, we are forced to respond to
the underlying issue in terms of the efficacy of Prozac for
depression, rather than by highlighting the strengths of
phytotherapy when used in a holistic context.

In short, comparing the efficacy of herbs and Prozac
begs the fundamental question about the underlying cause
of depression. When it comes to the clinical use of herbs
in major depressive illness, I want to make it clear that I
do not believe there is an herbal alternative. For the ma-
jority of people with less severe depression, however,
herbal alternatives will be discussed below.

I would also suggest that depression may be a rational

“

and sahe response to our society’ initial manifestation of
21st century culture! As such, is a chemical “smiley face,”

whether synthetic or botanical, an ethical response? We
don’t suppress the inflammatory response simply because
it occurs, so why suppress the emotions that accompany
depression? Depression can represent an opportunity for
self-exploration for the patient, and many lessons may be
learned. Of course, this will entail a great challenge for
both the patient and the practitioner.

Depression is defined by a standard set of symptoms de-
scribed in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM):

* Poor appetite and significant weight loss, or increased
appetite and significant weight gain

¢ Insomnia or increased sleep

¢ Agitation or retardation of movement and thought

* Loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities; decrease
in sexual drive

¢ Fatigue and loss of energy

¢ Feelings of worthlessness, self-reproach, or excessive
or inappropriate guilt

* Diminished ability to
indecisiveness

* Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, or suicide
attempts

think or concentrate;

Not all of these characteristics will occur in each in-
dividual who becomes depressed. For purposes of psychi-
atric treatment, a person is considered to have experi-
enced a major depressive episode if he or she exhibits a
loss of interest or pleasure in all or almost all usual activ-
ities and shows at least four of the above symptoms nearly
every day for a period of at least two weeks.

The term depression is often modified by words that
imply either some specific factor or some chemical mech-
anism as the cause of the state. For example, depression
that is considered a reaction to some loss of or separation
from a valued person or object is called reactive or exoge-
nous depression. In contrast, the usually more severe form
of depression without apparent cause is called endogenous
depression. Melancholia, a term once used to describe all de-
pressive states, is now applied only to these most severe
forms of depression.

Treatment of Depression

In terms of the herbal component of treatment protocols
for depression, the nervous system must be the focus for
toning, but associated symptoms may be a clue that more
deep-seated issues have begun to manifest. Attention to
the liver and the digestive system in general is usually a
good idea.

----- PAGE 363 -----
Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual’s ability to cope and transform what
must be changed.

Nervine relaxants may be indicated in the short term, or if
the depression has an agitated or hyperactive aspect.
These should not be strong herbs, which could trigger
a more entrenched depression.

Nervine stimulants might help, but not predictably. If the
therapist concludes that stimulation is appropriate, it is
better to use bitter metabolic stimulants.

Bitters often bring about dramatic changes in patients’ per-
ceptions of themselves and of their lives. This highlights
the need for a holistic perspective in such conditions.

Antispasmodics will alleviate muscular tension that might
manifest as a bodily expression of psychological depres-
sion. Care should be taken not to use strong relaxants.

Adaptogens support the adrenals in coping with the stress
that the whole body is experiencing.

Hepatics are indicated to support the liver’s detoxification
work, especially if the patient has been using prescrip-
tion psychotropic drugs.

Specific Remedies
As far as this author is concerned, there are no clear-cut
specifics for depression. Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s
wort) has a long tradition of use in Europe, and while it
sometimes achieves remarkable results, it also sometimes
does nothing. This herb requires time to work, and so
must be taken for at least a month. (For more details on
the actions of St. John’s wort, please refer to chapter 26.)
Of numerous clinical trials performed to investigate
the antidepressant effects of St. John’s wort extract, a
double-blind clinical trial conducted in 1993 concluded
that 67% of patients experienced a positive improvement
after four weeks of therapy. The study involved 105 out-
patients with depressions of short duration who received
either 300 mg of St. John’s wort extract three times a day
or placebo three times a day.

A Prescription for Moderate Depression

Hypericum perforatum 2 parts
Avena sativa 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day for at least 1
month

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 355

Table 16.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Depression

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Hypericum perforatum, Avena sativa

Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Avena sativa,

Artemisia vulgaris

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Broader Context of Treatment
The whole gamut of issues touched upon in this chapter
must be addressed. From green salads to relaxation, spinal
adjustments to changing the music one listens to—the
list of factors to consider is endless. Exercise is especially
important.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following nutritional supplements:*

B vitamin complex: 50 times the recommended daily dose
each day

Vitamin C: | g three times daily

Folic acid: 400 mg/day

Vitamin By): 250 mcg/day

Magnesium: 500 mg/day

INSOMNIA

Difficulty in sleeping, or disturbed sleep patterns leaving
the perception of insufficient sleep. (The Merck Manual)

The Encyclopaedia Britannica defines sleep as:

... normal, easily reversible, and spontaneous state of de-
creased and less efficient responsiveness to external stim-
ulation, Sleep is a regularly recurring suspension of con-
sciousness that serves recuperative and adaptive functions.
Sleep usually requires the presence of flaccid or relaxed
skeletal muscles and the absence of the overt, goal-directed
behavior often seen in wakeful organisms. An electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) recording the electrical activity of
the human brain shows a distinctive pattern during sleep.

Let me try to translate. Sleep and rest allow the body
to replenish depleted energy reserves and allow us to
maintain normal physical and mental functioning.
Adequate sleep is essential for good physical and mental
health, as it is necessary for the body’s restorative processes.
These processes occur in harmony with the body’s sleep
cycles, which are dictated by the body’s natural rhythms.

----- PAGE 364 -----
356 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

These natural rhythms, known as diurnal rhythms, are
slightly more than 24 hours in length and are reset each
day by light and other time cues. These rhythms dictate
our need for periodic rest, so sleep is as important to our
biological well-being as are food, water, warmth, and
shelter.

Restful sleep in human beings consists of four pat-
terns of brain activity, known as sleep stages. Stages | and
2 are considered stages of light sleep, and they typically
predominate in the early part of the sleep cycle. Stages 3
and 4 are deeper, more restful sleep periods, and they
tend to dominate in the latter half of the sleep cycle. All
four stages come and go many times during the night.
Transient awakenings usually occur during Stage | sleep.
Most dreaming occurs during Stage 4, which is also
known as REM (rapid eye movement) sleep. If this nor-
mal pattern of alternating stages is disturbed, sleep may
not be fully restorative.

While sleeping approximately eight hours a night is
vital to physical and mental health, dreaming is necessary
for psychological health, Most theories of dream function
state that dreams enable people to master their environ-
ments. In dreams, people integrate new experiences and
solve conflicts from their waking lives. Another function
of both sleep and dreaming is to assist in the processing
and storage of memories.

The amount of sleep needed varies tremendously
among individuals. There is no “normal” amount of
sleep. Different people need different amounts of sleep;
however, the amount of sleep that any one person needs
is amazingly constant. Although one may sleep longer
one night than another, depending on circumstances, the
number of hours slept over a week or a month usually av-
erages out to be very much the same. Fight hours of sleep
a night is the usually cited average, although 7 to 7'/
hours is more accurate for most people. Even that num-
ber is only an average, and has nothing to do with what’s
right or wrong. A good night’s sleep can range from less
than three hours to more than ten.

Causes and Consequences of Insomnia

The National Institutes of Health defines insomnia as “a
disturbance or perceived disturbance of the usual sleep pat-
tern of the individual that has troublesome consequences.”
In other words, insomnia is insufficient, disturbed sleep
that does not fill the restorative function. This means that
the individual does not get enough sleep to meet the needs
of the body or to feel refreshed and energetic upon awak-
ening and throughout the day. It is normal to wake up sev-
eral times each night. Although most people don’t recall

these brief episodes of awakening, insomniacs typically
have trouble either getting to sleep in the first place or
falling back to sleep once they have awakened.

Insomnia usually has a cause, and often has multiple
causes. However, the cause that initiated the problem may
no longer be the one that keeps it from resolving. When
trying to pinpoint the cause of insomnia, consider the fol-
lowing categories.

Medical Illness

Insomnia is especially related to conditions that result in
pain, shortness of breath, cough, urination, nausea, diar-
rhea, or other bothersome symptoms that occur at night,
including:

¢ Arthritis

Muscles aches and pains

Lung disease, including asthma

Heart disease

Diabetes

Overactive thyroid

Headaches

Colitis

Gastroesophageal reflux disease; heartburn

Infections

Hot flashes; menstrual pains

Leg cramps

Restless legs syndrome

Psychological Illness

Any psychiatric or psychological illness can interfere with
sleep. Conditions associated with increased anxiety or
worry often keep people from falling asleep, whereas de-
pressive illnesses often result in early-morning awakening
or trouble remaining asleep.

In addition, many prescription medications for treat-
ing psychiatric illness can compromise sleep. Anti-
depressants, such as Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil, can have
stimulating effects. Tranquilizers such as Valium may at
first help anxious people sleep, but with prolonged use
they can disturb normal sleep activity in the brain. The
same is true for nicotine and alcohol use, which fre-
quently increase during times of psychological stress.

Biological Clock Alterations

All human beings have a biological clock deep within
their brains. They control regular fluctuations in body
functions, such as hormone secretions, temperature regu-
lation, and sleep-wake cycles. The clock controlling
sleep-wake periods typically cycles every 25 hours; inter-

----- PAGE 365 -----
estingly, this cycle is not synchronized with our 24-hour
day. For some people, however, this normal cycle can be-
come abnormally shortened or prolonged. One of the
most common experiences of this kind of disruption is
jet lag.

Medications

Prescription and over-the-counter medicines used to
treat medical or psychiatric problems can also contribute
to insomnia. Examples include:

¢ Alcohol

* Caffeine (found in coffee, tea, cola, NoDoz, and
elsewhere)

¢ Nicotine

¢ Bronchodilators (asthma remedies)

* Beta-blockers (used for high blood pressure, heart dis-
ease, migraines, palpitations)

* Calcium channel blockers (used for high blood pres-
sure, heart disease, migraines, palpitations)

¢ “Non-drowsy” decongestants and cold remedies

¢ Dilantin (diphenylhydantoin)

© Steroids (mainly prednisone and cortisone preparations)

¢ Thyroid hormones

* Psychotropic medications

Many people use caffeine to maintain wakefulness
throughout the day. Excessive use of caffeine on a daily
basis, however, can lead to withdrawal symptoms, includ-
ing headache and sleeplessness at night. If caffeine is in-
gested too close to bedtime, its stimulating properties can
also interfere with sleep. Caffeine is known to cause an
increase in heart palpitations, stomach problems, diar-
rhea, and restless legs syndrome in certain individuals.

Negative Conditioning

Another common cause of insomnia is the way in which
people respond to their inability to sleep. Not sleeping
well can lead to worry, frustration, and depression, which
in turn instigate additional psychological pressure to sleep.
This anxiety further interferes with sleep. A cycle that may
be described as “failure—worry—more failure—more
worry” develops. This pattern becomes self-perpetuating.
Behaviors that maintain the insomnia can aggravate the
problem, as can performance anxiety.

Bad Sleep Habits

Certain behaviors, some of which are conditioned re-
sponses, commonly contribute to long-term insomnia. It
is very important to recognize these causes, since in most
instances they can be reduced or eliminated.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 357

¢ Failing to keep to a regular sleep-wake schedule

* Depriving the body of sleep by staying up late to work
or play on a frequent basis

* ‘Trying to “catch up” on lost sleep during the weekend

© Watching late-night TV

¢ Excessive napping during the day

¢ Thinking of work-related problems while in bed

* Excessive time awareness or frequent clock watching
while in bed

¢ Feeling “too tired” to exercise during the day

¢ Exercising vigorously too close to bedtime

¢ Drinking coffee, tea, or caffeine-containing colas too
close to bedtime

Recent Stressful Events

Another common cause of insomnia, particularly in the
short term, is a stressful event or crisis in a person’s life.
In general, the successful resolution of these problems
usually leads to restoration of normal sleep.

Shift Work
Shift work is a common cause of sleep deprivation.
Working the night shift on a regular basis or working dif-
ferent shifts on a rotating schedule produces challenges
and obstacles to maintaining a normal, healthy sleep-
wake pattern.

Treatment of Insomnia

There are many herbs with a reputation as an effective
sleep remedy, but there are no legal plants that will put a
person out. The key to successful treatment of insomnia
is to find the cause and deal with it. Insomnia can push the
practitioner's diagnostic skills to the limit, making the
free and easy prescribing of benzodiazepine sleep aids at
least understandable!

As discussed, the cause of insomnia may be anything
in the realm of human life, from deep grief to constipa-
tion. Psychological issues often need attention, but so do
health problems that cause pain or discomfort. Dietary
indiscretions must be identified, as must an environmen-
tal factor (for example, freeway noise or a snoring spouse).
In short, treatment should not depend upon substances,
whether herbs or drugs.

Suggestions for Better Sleep

Sleep as much astyou need to feel refreshed and healthy, but no
more. Spending too much time in bed seems to be re-
lated to shallow sleep.

Get up at the same time each day, no matter when you went
to bed. This will help establish a sleep-wake rhythm.

----- PAGE 366 -----
358 +» TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Do some sort of physical activity each day to get rid of tension
and tire your body, but nothing too strenuous just be-
fore bedtime.

Do the same amount of exercise each day, preferably in late
afternoon or early evening.

Make sure the bedroom is dark, cool, and quiet.

Sleep on a quality mattress and foundation.

Do not lie in bed for hours staring at the walls. If you do not
fall asleep after 15 or 20 minutes, it is best to get up
and do something quiet until you become drowsy.

Do not make your bed a-place to watch TV, do paperwork, or
eat.

Consider earplugs or eye masks if you work night shifts or
live in a noisy area.

A light snack may help, but a heavy meal will not.

Unless prescribed, do not nap during the day. For most peo-
ple, this can throw off the sleep schedule by confusing
the body.

Natural sunlight during the day can be belpful for falling and
staying asleep, so get outdoors, even for a brief walk.

Caffeine in the evening disturbs sleep, even if you don’t think
it does!

Alcobol causes fragmented sleep. Although it can be initially
calming, liquor interferes with sleep quality.

Chronic tobacco use disturbs sleep.

Try not to rehash the day’s problems or worry about tomorrow.

When you go to bed, relax your muscles, beginning with your
feet and working your way up to your head.

Actions Indicated.

Hypnotics are herbs with a reputation for easing a person
into sleep. They are usually strong nervine relaxants,
rather than “plant knockout drops”!

Nervine relaxants ease the tensions that often produce
sleeplessness.

Antispasmodics address any somatic muscular tightness
that might be involved.

Nervine tonics are indicated if there is any suspicion that in-
somnia is related to nervous exhaustion (as it often is).
Adaptogens will help in a way similar to nervine tonics, but
should be used only in the morning to help deal with

stress, as they might be too energizing at night.

System Support

Often the key to successful treatments lies in focusing
upon a weakened or impaired body part or function. The
problem must be identified and the appropriate system
tonic, action, or specific herb applied. Hypnotics and
nervines may be used within the context of such treat-
ment. These should be selected according to the role they

play in the system in question, and not simply upon their
strength as hypnotics.

Circulatory system. Appropriate herbs include Leonurus
cardiaca, Tilia platyphyllos, and Melissa officinalis.

Respiratory system. All of the hypnotics can be of value as
antispasmodics in conditions such as asthma, if used at
the right dose. Lactuca virosa eases irritable coughs.

Digestive system. Relaxing nervines and carminatives are
important, including Matricaria recutita, Verbena offici-
nalis, Melissa officinalis, Humutus lupulus, and Valeriana
officinalis. Antispasmodic herbs, such as Humulus lupu-
lus, Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis, and Piscidia
erythrina will help with intestinal colic.

Urinary tract. Hypnotics are important here when used as
muscle relaxants.

Reproductive system. As in the urinary tract, hypnotics may
help here when used as muscle relaxants. Of particu-
lar relevance here are Pulsatilla vulgaris and Piscidia
erythrina.

Musculoskeletal. All hypnotics will aid in reducing muscle
tension and even the pain associated with problems in
this system. They may be used internally or as lotions.
Especially important are Piscidia erythrina and
Valeriana officinalis.

Nervous system. All of the remedies listed here also act on
the nervous system.

Skin. Matricaria recutita and Primula veris (cowslip) are
hypnotics that also help with skin issues, but otherwise,
the value of hypnotics here is to ensure that the body
has a good recuperative rest each night.

Specific Remedies

Selections among the many herbal sleep aids should be
made on the basis of their secondary actions or system
affinities. By choosing herbs that address the specific
health issues compounding the sleep difficulties, better
results are obtained than if one simply chooses a strong
hypnotic. For example, if a patient with insomnia also has
heart palpitations, Leonurus cardiaca would be a good
choice of nervine. This is explored in chapter 25. They
may also be selected on the basis of their strength, bear-
ing in mind the very subjective nature and individual vari-
ability in human response to these herbs. We can very
roughly identify three groupings of hypnotics.

Mild Hypnotics

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Nepeta cataria (catnip)

----- PAGE 367 -----
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Moderate Hypnotics

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Putsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Strong Hypnotics

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)

Piper methysticum (kava kava)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

A Prescription for Insomnia
Passiflora incarnata 1 part

Valeriana officinalis T part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime

Table 16.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Nervine relaxant Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Antispasmodic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Valeriana officinalis

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with
Menopausal Problems

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Leonurus cardiaca 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addition
to appropriate daytime treatments

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 359

Table 16.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Menopausal Problems

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Valeriana officinalis

Emmenagogue Leonurus cardjaca

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with Indigestion

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Melissa officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 7.5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addi-
tion to appropriate daytime treatments. An infusion of
Matricaria, Tilia, or Melissa at night may also be helpful.

Table 16.10. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Indigestion

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Matricaria recutita, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Valeriana officinalis

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Valeriana officinalis

----- PAGE 368 -----
360 <- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with
Hypertension and Headache

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Stachys betonica 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: 75 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addition
to appropriate daytime treatments. (Refer to chapter 14 for more
information on the treatment of hypertension.) An infusion of
Tilia or Matricaria at night may also be helpful.

Table 16.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Hypertension and Headache

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Tilia platyphyllos, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Stachys betonica, Tilia platyphyllos,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus
Antispasmodic Tilia platyphyllos, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus
Analgesic Stachys betonica, Valeriana officinalis
Hypotensive Tilia platyphylios, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with Depression

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: 7.5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addi-
tion to appropriate daytime treatments. Note: Avoid the use of
Humulus lupulus (hops) in depression.

Table 16.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Depression

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Sleep Pillows

Pillows made with herbs, used either singly or in combination,
are a long-standing remedy to facilitate a good night's sleep.
Traditionally used herbs include Matricaria recutita, Nepeta
cataria, Humulus lupulus, Lavandula spp., Melissa officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos, Citrus aurantium var. amara blossoms, and
Galium odoratum.

Make a pillowcase lining out of linen or burlap, leaving it
open at one end, Make up the herb stuffing by mixing dried
herbs in the following proportions:

2 to 3 handfuls each of peppermint, sage, and lemon balm
1 to 2 handfuls of lavender, dill, lemon thyme, tarragon,
woodruff, red bergamot and rosemary

1to 2 tablespoons of valerian

Fill the pillow loosely with the herbs, sew closed, and put inside
a soft, pretty pillowcase before use, Many other herbal combi-
nations are possible. This is an appropriate place to experiment
to find the combination and aroma that suits the individual.

Insomnia and Aromatherapy
Aromatherapy, a healing system based on the external ap-
plication of herbs in the form of essential oils, has much
to offer to those in search of restful sleep. A reliable and
comprehensive guide to the safe use of these wonderful
oils is Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the Healing Art,
by Kathi Keville and Mindy Green, from which much of
the following is taken.

Aromatherapy is increasingly used in hospitals in the
United Kingdom, especially for sleeping difficulties.
Helping an elderly patient achieve a good-quality, re-
freshing night’s sleep is a bigger problem in hospitals than
at home.’ Lavender is the primary essential oil used to in-
duce sleep. Placing a few drops of the oil on the pillow
helps promote peaceful sleep for many patients.

A number of oils may be of service in easing the rav-
ages of insomnia, of which the most relevant are listed

below. It is very important to use essential oils in the cor-

----- PAGE 369 -----
rect way, as some oils are potentially irritating to the skin
if used undiluted or may be toxic if taken internally. Here
are some suggestions on how to use essential oils to treat
insomnia. The dilutions given are for adults.

Massage Oils

Always dilute oils before applying them to the skin. Use a
carrier oil such as sweet almond oil, grapeseed oil, jojoba
oil, or any other pure, unblended vegetable oil. Do not
use baby oil, as this is a mineral oil that, unlike vegetable
oils, will not be absorbed by the skin. Ten to 12 drops per
ounce of carrier oil (a 2% dilution) is usually appropriate.

Baths

Add up to 5 drops of pure essential oi] to a bath of warm
water. Float the oil on the surface and stir with your hand
before relaxing in the bath for 10 to 15 minutes. For a
hand or foot soak, add 2 or 3 drops of essential oil to a
bowl of warm water.

Inhalation

Add 2 drops of essential oil to a bowl of hot water, cover
the head and bow! with a towel to create a tent, and in-
hale the fragrant steam.

Essential Oils Traditionally Used for Insomnia
Bergamot

Blue chamomile
Chamomile (German or Roman)
Cypress

Frankincense
Geranium

Jasmine

Lavender

Lemon balm (Melissa)
Lemon verbena
Linden

Mandarin orange
Marjoram

Neroli

Nuuneg

Patchouli

Petitgrain

Rose

Sandalwood

Ylang ylang

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 361

Relaxing Antidepressant Essential Oil Formula
3 drops lavender oil
3 drops neroli oil
2 drops clary sage oil
2 drops marjoram oil
2 drops ylang ylang oil
1 drop German chamomile oil
Tounce carrier oil

This can be used as either a massage or a bath oil

Fragrant Insomnia Blend (for diffuser)
25 drops lavender oil
10 drops sweet orange oil
8 drops chamomile oil
8 drops marjoram oil
6 drops ylang ylang oil

WITHDRAWAL FROM
BENZODIAZEPINES

All of the commonly prescribed and abused minor tran-
quilizers, such as Valium and Xanax, can be safely re-
placed by herbal remedies when used in a broadly holistic
context. The ease of replacing the drug with herbs high-
lights the need to avoid the development of dependence
on the new herbal medicine.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual's ability to cope with life and transform
what must be changed.

Nervine relaxants will fulfill the tranquilizing role of the
drug in the short term.

Nervine stimulants may be indicated in some cases, due to
the long-term slowing of mind and body that results
from use of these drugs in some people.

Antispasmodics alleviate muscular tension that develops in
response to withdrawal.

Bitters act as safe metabolic stimulants.

Adaptogens will support the adrenals through the stressful
process the body will undergo.

Hepatics may be appropriate to support the detoxification
process.

System Support

Because of the stress component, both the nervous sys-
tem and the adrenals will need aid. Next, focus on any
body system that needs support. Body system weaknesses

----- PAGE 370 -----
362 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

and ailments should be identified through the patient's
medical history, current health, and observation of any
temporary symptoms that might appear during the
withdrawal process.

A successful transition from drugs to herbs is a grad-
ual process. The following steps offer some guidelines for
the practitioner.

1. First two to four days: Maintain regular dose of
drug while adding appropriate herbs. Initially, the
dosage of the herbal tincture combination described
below should be 2.5 ml.

2. Reduce the dose of drug by one sixth while main-
taining or increasing the dosage of herbs up to 5 ml.
Maintain this regimen for four or five days.

3. Reduce the drug by one sixth every four to five days
until drug use is completely discontinued, altering
dosage, frequency, and strength of herbs as needed.

4. Alleviate specific somatic symptoms as indicated.

Specific Remedies
The herbal traditions of the world do not offer any ready-
made specific remedies for benzodiazepine withdrawal, as
these drugs are a relatively new development. However,
there are an abundance of herbs that can make the with-
drawal process relatively straightforward.

A few clear guidelines will assist the practitioner in
the herb selection process.

Determine the strength of nervines required. One or more of
the stronger relaxing nervines is usually indicated, but
always remember that nature provides an abundance of
nervines for a reason. An herb as mild as Tilia may be
ideal for some individuals.

Use appropriate tonics for the nervous system and other
body systems, as indicated. Nervine tonics must always
be the foundation of formulations in such cases.

Identify other actions appropriate for the particular patient.
For example, the liver will usually need support in its
detoxification work.

Choose specifics to alleviate any symptoms that arise in the
withdrawal process.

Primary Relaxing and Tonic Nervines for Withdrawal
Avena sativa (oats)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)

Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Table 16.13. Nervines with Relevant Secondary
Actions in Withdrawal

HERB ACTIONS

Verbena officinalis Hepatic, tonic

Artemisia vulgaris Bitter, antidepressant

Eleutherococcus senticosus  Adaptogen
Hypericum perforatum Antidepressant
Silybum marianum Antihepatotoxic

Table 16.14. Herbs for Various Somatic
Manifestations of Withdrawal

HERB SOMATIC SYMPTOMS

Leonurus cardiaca Tachycardia (palpitations)

Pulsatilla vulgaris Menstrual problems

Lavandula spp. Depression, digestive problems

A Prescription to Help with Benzodiazepine Withdrawal

Avena sativa 2 parts
Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca T part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Broader Context of Treatment

As with all such treatments, many factors must be ad-
dressed when helping a patient with withdrawal. The
specifics will vary according to the preferences of both
practitioner and patient. The same general recommenda-
tions given for managing stress also apply here. In short,
the following considerations will come into play:

¢ General health

¢ Diet and nutrition

* Lifestyle

* Belief systems, assumptions, and expectations
* Relaxation techniques

----- PAGE 371 -----
ANOREXIA NERVOSA

A disorder characterized by a disturbed sense of body
image and marked anxiety about weight gain, manifested
by abnormal patterns of handling food, marked weight
loss, and amenorrhea in women. (The Merck Manual)

Anorexia nervosa is a problem typified by self-starvation.
It occurs most commonly among young women, but is
also observed in older women and men. For unknown
reasons, anorexia nervosa has become more common in
recent years, and the incidence among young women in
the United States may be as high as 1% to 2% (0.1% to
0.2% in males).® The disorder may appear when the indi-
vidual first leaves home, or may develop in connection with
mental depression, peer pressure to lose weight, sexual
temptation, or the discontinuation of oral contraceptives.

At the outset, the patient either stops menstruating or
simply refuses to eat. In the first case, the patient later stops
eating; in the second, her menstrual periods eventually
cease. In either case, she may lose weight to the point of
life-threatening exhaustion. In general, the patient will
sleep poorly but, despite weight loss, will remain physically
active, believing herself to be much fatter than she actually
is. Body temperature may be low. These symptoms suggest
that anorexia nervosa may be associated with a disorder of
the hypothalamus, a region of the brain that regulates men-
struation, eating, body temperature, and sleep.

Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa

The herbal treatment must focus on toning the nervous
system, but in addition, the digestive and reproductive
systems will need aid. Bitters and hepatics are especially
useful in supporting the liver and digestion.

Actions Indicated

Bitters are indicated because they stimulate both appetite
and general metabolism.

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual’s ability to cope with life and transform
what must be changed.

Nervine relaxants will alleviate associated anxiety.

Hepatics will support the detoxification process and gen-
erally benefit the body.

System tonics must be used to support any part of the body
weakened by the condition or history of illness. In
women, anorexia nervosa places the reproductive sys-
tem under much strain.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 363

Digestive support will be indicated if abdominal symptoms
exist. Please refer to the sections on indigestion and irrita-
ble bowel syndrome in chapter 13 for more information.

Immune support may be necessary. Please refer to chapter
21 for more information.

Specific Remedies

Bitters are considered specifics here, but especially
Verbena officinalis (vervain), a relaxing nervine with
marked hepatic properties. Because it is strictly a problem
of modern culture, the herbal traditions provide no infor-
mation about the treatment of anorexia nervosa.

A Prescription for Anorexia Nervosa

Gentiana lutea 1 part
Avena sativa 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 10 to 15 minutes before eating, three
times a day

Table 16.15. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Anorexia Nervosa

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Verbena officinalis
Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Verbena officinalis
Bitter Gentiana lutea

Hepatic Gentiana lutea, Verbena officinalis

Emmenagogues might be indicated if the menstrual
cycle has been disrupted. If sleep difficulties are part of
the picture, please refer to Treatment of Insomnia earlier
in this chapter.

Broader Context of Treatment

As with depression, the whole gamut of issues touched
upon in this chapter must be addressed. As with depres-
sion, herbal therapy (or drug therapy) does not replace
the fundamental need for competent and appropriate
psychotherapy.

----- PAGE 372 -----
364 «a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

HEADACHE

Headache (cephalalgia) is a common symptom, often as-
sociated with disability but rarely life threatening.
Headache may be a primary disorder or a secondary
symptom. (The Merck Manual)

Pain occurring over various parts of the head is one of the
most common health problems affecting humanity.
Several areas of the head can be afflicted, including the
network of nerves that extends over the scalp and certain
nerves in the face, mouth, and throat. Also sensitive to
pain, because they contain delicate nerve fibers, are the
muscles of the head and blood vessels found along the
surface and at the base of the brain. However, the bones
of the skull and the tissues of the brain itself never hurt,
because they lack pain-sensitive nerve fibers.

In general, pain is a complex experience consisting of
a physiological response to a painful stimulus followed by
an emotional response. It is a warning mechanism that
helps to protect us and is primarily associated with injury,
or the threat of injury, to bodily tissues. But headache
pain is different. For most headaches, even when the pain
is severe, no underlying disease exists. Obviously,
headache related to the presence of a brain tumor repre-
sents an exception.

The point at which a stimulus begins to cause pain is
the pain perception threshold. Most studies have found that
this point is relatively similar among.disparate groups of
people. However, the pain tolerance threshold, or the point
at which pain becomes unbearable, varies significantly.
Childhood experiences, cultural attitudes, genetic
makeup, and gender are factors that contribute to the de-
velopment of each individual’s perception of and response
to different types of pain. Although some people may be
able to physiologically withstand pain better than others,
cultural factors rather than heredity usually account for
this ability.

Most headaches are caused by fatigue, emotional
disorders, or allergies. Only about 2% of all headaches result
from the presence of an organic disorder. These include:

* Diseases of the eye, ear, nose, throat, and sinuses
¢ Brain tumor

¢ Hypertension

¢ Aneurysm

Brain tissue itself is insensitive to pain, as is the bony
covering of the cranium. Headache pain results from the
stimulation of such pain-sensitive structures as the mem-
branous linings of the brain (the meninges) and the nerves
of the cranium and upper neck. This stimulation can be
produced by inflammation, dilation of normal or abnor-

mal blood vessels in the head, or muscle spasms in the
neck and head.

Headaches brought on by muscle spasms are classi-
fied as tension headaches. Those caused by dilation of blood
vessels are called vascular headaches. A more specialized
classification, created by the International Headache
Society for research purposes, further divides headaches
into 14 categories.

To help the phytotherapist select appropriate reme-
dies, headaches can be subdivided by cause into the fol-
lowing groupings:

Environmental. Pollutants, body posture, lighting, sound,
and other factors

Stress. Physical, emotional, or mental

Dietary. Possible allergy to certain foods or additives—for
example, xanthine-containing foods

Organic. Diseases such as hypertension and brain tumor

Pain may also be referred to the head, or felt in the
head even though the site of disease is elsewhere.
Referred pain may be caused by eye disorders (such as
glaucoma and refractive errors), infections or tumors of
the nasal sinuses, dental infections, and arthritis of the
neck. In addition, headaches are one of the most common
side effects of prescription and over-the-counter drugs,
making it very difficult to list all potentially problematic
medicines. Please refer to an appropriate reference.

Treatment of Headaches

The herbal treatment guidelines for different types of
headaches must take into account a wide range of causes
and issues. An important one is the abundant diversity of
potential herbs that may be indicated.

Specific Remedies

Many plants might be considered specific headache herbs.
Unfortunately, they do not always work for all people. A
representative listing includes the following commonly
available remedies.

Possible Specifics for Headache
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Origanum marjoram (marjoram)
Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

----- PAGE 373 -----
Ruta graveolens (rue)
Sambucus nigra (elder)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys betonica (wood betony)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

None of these plants is a painkiller in the strict sense;
that is, they do not block the experience of pain. An ex-
ample of a medicinal plant that does is Papaver somniferum
(opium poppy). The most effective plant painkillers are
controlled by law, as they have the potential to lead to de-
pendency and addiction. Because of this, it is often more
effective in practice to use indirect pathways to pain relief.
The herbs listed here appear to work by addressing the
cause of the pain, rather than the experience of pain.
These are anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic herbs

that alleviate the processes underlying most muscle con-
tractions and tension headaches.

Ifa clear-cut underlying pathology exists, that should
be the focus of treatment. If none has been identified,
herbs that will ensure good elimination, support liver
function, and address any specific health needs the patient
might have should be selected.

Common Headache Triggers

Almost all individuals with chronic headache have some
degree of muscle irritation in the upper body—the upper
back, neck, or face. The irritation is most often associated
with chronic but subtle muscle tension. This applies for
both tension and migraine headaches. The type of pain
triggered reflects a variety of factors, including the type of
headache to which the patient is prone. Over time, this
tension may lead to the development of very tender mus-
cles. It can also cause aching with normal movement,
stiffness from being in one position or lying in bed for a
ong time, or even restrictions in the extent to which the
individual can move his or her neck or jaw.

Primary headache triggers include:

Stress. Stress can be a powerful headache trigger, partic-
ularly for chronic tension headaches or migraine. A
major life event such as a divorce or moving causes
stress, but constant daily hassles can have an even
greater effect.

Emotions. Quite ordinary emotions, such as a sense of let-
down and frustration, can serve as headache triggers.
Muscle tension. Muscle irritation can produce local pain,
pain at the site of muscle irritation, or referred pain in
sites distant from the irritated muscle. For example,
muscle irritation at the back of the neck may be felt as
severe pain at the temple on the same side of the head.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM -@ 365

Chronic muscle tension may arise from a variety of
causes—poor posture, repeated muscle strain or
overuse, tightening up under the effects of stress or
headache itself, teeth grinding, and mannerisms such
as frowning.
Change in the weather or season, altitude, or time zone.
Change in sleep patterns or meal times. Too little or too
much sleep can both act as triggers.
Smoking, polluted air, or stuffy rooms. Chronic headache
is one more good reason to quit smoking, Smoking in
general seems to be a negative factor for people with
chronic pain conditions, including headaches.
Nicotine constricts the blood vessels, and inhaled car-
bon monoxide expands them, thus creating a condition
that can trigger migraines and cluster headaches.
Blood clotting. Another cause of headaches is blood clot-
ting, also known as platelet aggregation. Clotting cre-
ates constriction of the arteries, which results in inad-
equate blood supply to the brain. This is followed by
rebound dilation of the blood vessels, leading to
headaches.
Caffeine. Caffeine can cause headaches by increasing the
body’s expectation for it. When blood levels of caffeine
drop, symptoms of withdrawal, including headache,
may set in. That’s why some heavy coffee drinkers ex-
perience “morning headache” until they have that first
cup of coffee. Caffeine headaches are usually experi-
enced as a dull, throbbing pain on both sides of the
head. Once the body rids itself of caffeine, the
headaches disappear on their own. Such headache suf-
ferers, however, are often unaware that their problem
is due to caffeine and will continue to drink coffee, en-
suring that the problem will recur.
Foods, The following foods are known to commonly trig-
ger headaches in sensitive people:
© Red and white wine
© Other alcohol
¢ Refined sugar products—for example, sodas and
candy

* Dried fruit containing sulfates

Artificial additives, colorings, and preservatives, such
as aspartame (NutraSweet)

° Nuts

* Onions

* Herring

¢ Chocolate

¢ Peanut butter

¢ Chicken livers

¢ Sour cream and yogurt primarily, but potentially all

dairy products
Vinegar (except white vinegar)

----- PAGE 374 -----
366 <= TREATiMEN?T APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

¢ Bananas

¢ Anything fermented, pickled, or marinated

¢ Broad, lima, navy, pinto, and garbanzo beans; peas

¢ Foods containing large amounts of monosodium
glutamate (MSG)

* Caffeine

¢ Citrus fruit and juices

¢ Fermented sausage and processed meats such as
bologna, salami, pepperoni, hot dogs, and ham

¢ Ripened cheeses, such as Cheddar, Emmentaler,
Gruyere, Stilton, Brie, and Camembert

Essential. Oils for Headache

Many essential oils can be used to relieve headache.
Particularly effective oils include Lavandula spp.,
Rosmarinus officinalis, and Mentha piperita, which can be
used either separately or in combination. Lavandula may
be rubbed on the temples or made into a cold compress
and applied to the temples, forehead, or back of the neck.
Equal parts of Lavandula and Mentha piperita may be even
more effective, for Lavandula has the ability to enhance
the action of other oils when used in blends. It is also
worth noting that while Lavandula is a sedative, Mentha
piperita is a stimulant, and that many commercial
headache remedies combine a stimulant (usually caffeine)
with one or more analgesics. This is because many
painkilling drugs have a slightly sedative and sometimes

“Natural Aspirin”

even a depressant effect, and the caffeine counteracts
these effects. By combining Lavandula and Mentha
piperita, a similar effect is achieved without the dangers
inherent in synthetic drugs.

If headache is caused by catarrh or sinus infection, in-
halations with Lavandula, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus, or
Eucalyptus will usually be very effective in both relieving
the headache and clearing the congestion that caused it.
All of these oils are antiseptic, and will combat the nasal
infection and provide immediate symptom relief.

Treatment of Tension Headaches

Because of its effectiveness in easing anxiety as a compo-
nent of stress management programs, herbal medicine
has most to contribute to the alleviation of tension
headaches. If a period of stress can be predicted, one can
be prepared ahead of time to implement appropriate
herbs, diet, and lifestyle changes to minimize the impact.
Nervine relaxants like those listed here can be used reg-
ularly as gentle soothing remedies, drunk as hot or cold
infusions, infused in massage oil, or included in relaxing
baths or footbaths.

Supportive Nervines for Tension Headaches
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Avena sativa (oats)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Numerous plants contain natural aspirin-type chemicals called salicylates, and aspirin itself was orig-
inally isolated from plant sources. In fact, the name aspirin comes from Spiraea, the old botanical
genus name for meadowsweet. The word salicylate derives from Salix, the Latin name for willow.

Herbs with significant quantities of salicylates have a marked anti-inflammatory effect, without
the dangers posed by aspirin itself to the stomach. In fact, meadowsweet, rich in salicylates, can be
used to stanch mild stomach hemorrhage, even though synthetic salicylates cause such problems.
Other plants rich in such constituents include Salix spp. (willow), Gaultheria procumbens (winter-
green), Betula spp. (birch), many poplars (such as Populus tremuloides), and Viburnum prunifolium
(black haw). This group of herbs is most useful for inflammations of muscles, bones, and connective
tissue caused by sports injuries and conditions such as osteoarthritis.

The analgesic and fever-lowering actions of these herbs are believed to be due to the ability of
salicylates to interfere with the transmission of signals to parts of the hypothalamus, leading to an
increase in peripheral blood flow and sweating. Salicylates are also believed to suppress the synthe-
sis of inflammatory prostaglandins, influence arachidonic acid metabolism, increase corticoid levels,
and inhibit hyaluronidase, thereby reducing inflammation.

Unlike aspirin, willow preparations do not inhibit cyclooxygenase in thrombocytes or aggrega-
tion of platelets, suggesting different mechanisms of action than those associated with salicylates,
Because of this, Salix and other salicin-containing herbs cannot be used as substitutes for aspirin in
preventive thrombolytic protocols against strokes and heart attacks. a

----- PAGE 375 -----
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Piper methysticum (kava kava)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden blossom)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A daily supplement of B-complex vitamins and vita-
min C is also helpful. Relaxation exercises are invaluable,
and the impact of various stressors should be softened.
Although this may be impossible, the patient should be
encouraged not to simply put up with something or
someone just because it is there! It is possible for people
to change themselves and to change their lives.
Reevaluating choices is always valuable.

A Prescription for Tension-Related Headaches

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Avena sativa 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. If using
dried herbs, infuse 2 teaspoons of the mixture in 1 cup of boil-
ing water. This should be drunk three times a day.

A Prescription for Tension Headache with
Indigestion and Palpitations

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca T part
Matricaria recutita T part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture mixture three times a day. If using dried
herbs, infuse 2 teaspoons of mixture to 1 cup of boiling water.
This should be drunk three times a day.

In their exceptional book Aromatherapy: A Complete
Guide to the Healing Art, highly regarded aromatherapists
Kathi Keville and Mindy Green recommend the follow-
ing essential oil combination.

Essential Oil Formula for Headache Relief
3 drops lavender oil
3 drops neroli oil
2 drops marjoram oil
2 drops ylang ylang oil
1 drop German chamomile oil
1 drop clary sage oil
1 ounce carrier oil

Use as a massage or bath oil to relieve headache.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM ©. 367

Broader Context of Treatment
The guidelines given here apply to the treatment of mi-
graines as well as other types of headaches.

General Dietary Guidelines

¢ Eat smaller and more frequent meals.

* Reduce fat intake.

¢ Reduce caffeine (coffee, tea, cola, chocolate).

* Reduce salt.

¢ Increase consumption of complex carbohydrates, such
as crackers, bread, rice, squash, pasta, corn, potatoes.

¢ Increase potassium intake with foods like milk, pota~
toes, asparagus, celery, apricots, grapes, carrots, broc-
coli, brussels sprouts, cauliflower.

* Increase magnesium intake with foods like dark green
vegetables, legumes, cereal grains, milk.

¢ Limit alcohol intake.

¢ Limit sweets, and don’t feed cravings.

The following supplements may also be helpful.

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg twice daily
Fish oil: 3 to 4 g/day with meals

MIGRAINE

A paroxysmal disorder characterized by recurrent attacks
of headache, with or without associated visual and gas-
trointestinal disturbances. (The Merck Manual)

Orthodox medicine considers the underlying cause of mi-
graine to be unknown. As with most holistically oriented
therapies, excellent results can be achieved with phy-
totherapy by focusing on factors that suggest causal links,
Specific herbal remedies can prove exceptionally success-
ful if used within a context that addresses the whole body
and environment of the patient.

Common migraine may affect as many as 25% of
Americans, and about 8% of all headaches treated by the
average physician are migraines or some variation on mi-
graines.’ Attacks can occur in early childhood, but most
patients first develop symptoms between the ages of 10
and 30. Many migraine patients have a family history of
the problem.

The immediate cause appears to relate to spasms in
the muscular walls of the blood vessels of the brain and
scalp. In approximately 15% of all cases, migraine attacks
are preceded by warning signs known as auras, such as
scintillating visual effects, blind spots, zigzag flashing
lights, numbness in parts of the body, and distorted visual
images. These signs of an imminent attack are probably

----- PAGE 376 -----
368 <<. TREATMF NI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

related to intracerebral vasoconstriction, and the head
pain to dilation of scalp arteries.

One theory that may explain these changes suggests
that the nervous system responds to a trigger by creating
a spasm in the nerve-rich arteries at the base of the brain.
The spasm closes down or constricts several arteries that
supply blood to the brain, including the scalp artery and
the carotid or neck arteries. As these arteries constrict,
the flow of blood to the brain is reduced. At the same
time, blood platelets clump together—a process believed
to release the neurotransmitter serotonin. Serotonin is a
powerful arterial constrictor and further reduces blood
supply to the brain. Reduced blood flow decreases the
brain’s supply of oxygen. Symptoms signaling a headache,
such as distorted vision and speech, may then result.

Reacting to the reduced oxygen supply, certain arter-
ies within the brain open wider to meet the brain’s energy
needs, and this dilation eventually affects the neck and
scalp arteries. The dilation of arteries triggers the release
of pain-producing prostaglandins from various tissues
and blood cells. Also released are chemicals that cause in-
flammation and swelling and substances that increase sen-
sitivity to pain. The circulation of these chemicals and the
dilation of the scalp arteries stimulate the pain-sensitive
nociceptors. The result, according to this theory, is
throbbing pain in the head.

Migraine attacks commonly take one of two forms.
The most common is called migraine without aura (com-
mon migraine), which affects 85% of migraine sufferers.
These are episodes of severe pain that affect one or both
sides of the head. The pain is usually described as throb-
bing, but again, this is not always the case. The signature
of these headaches is that they are usually, but not always,
associated with feeling sick in the stomach or being sensi-
tive to light, sound, or movement of the body.

Typically, the sufferer wishes to lie down in a dark
and quiet room and wait for the storm to pass. Often,
people close to the patient can predict when headache will
occur because of changes in the patient’s behavior, which
may range from depression to exhilaration. If the
headache is not relieved early by sleeping it off, it may
wax and wane for days, accompanied by anorexia and nau-
sea or vomiting, hallmarks of the so-called sick headache.

The second most common type is migraine with aura
(classical migraine), which accounts for most of the re-
maining 15% of sufferers. The aura is a disturbance in the
nervous system that precedes the headache. Typical dis-
turbances involve the vision (bright flashing lights, black
spots, and partial loss of vision) or the body (sensations of
pins and needles moving over one limb or one side).

These disturbances usually last less than one hour for
most sufferers, and almost invariably pass away, leaving
no long-lasting effects.

All such symptoms may clear just before the onset of
pain or merge into it. The pain may be unilateral or gen-
eralized, but tends to follow the same pattern in a partic-
ular person. Attacks may occur daily or only once every
several months. Untreated attacks may last for hours or
days and are often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and
photophobia. The extremities are cold and the patient
will seek seclusion.

Migraine Triggers and Contributing
Factors

It is critical to be aware of triggers and early signs of mi-
graine. These signs may represent the actual onset of the
headache or may be physical events that almost invariably
lead to a headache. Catching the very early signs, espe-
cially before pain becomes severe, can provide important
clues to controlling the migraine. These early signs may
be symptoms of aura, aching muscles, cold hands, a gen-
eral sense of tension, or any number of other indications.

Almost anything in one’s lifestyle or environment can
serve as a trigger for migraine pain. Triggers don’t actu-
ally cause the pain; rather, they activate an already exist-
ing chemical mechanism in the brain. For example, if
drinking red wine is usually followed by a headache
within a few hours, we could call red wine a trigger.

Most migraines are triggered not by one factor, but
instead by an interaction among several factors. In gen-
eral, the more triggers present at any given time, the
more likely that a headache will follow. In one study, mi-
graine patients reported an average of five triggers. This
has important ramifications, as it demands that triggers
be observed systematically over time and that all be con-
sidered.

Factors that increase one’s vulnerability to headache
but do not immediately ead to one are called contribut-
ing or contextual factors. Such factors create a context in
which a migraine is more likely to be set off by triggers.
Some people can develop migraine not only during a pe-
riod of stress but also afterward, when their vascular sys-
tems are still reacting. Migraines that wake up people in
the middle of the night are also believed to result from a
delayed reaction to stress.

Certain foods precipitate migraine attacks in many
people. Reactions may be due to allergies or related to
content of compounds known as vasoactive amines. These
compounds can trigger migraines by causing blood ves-
sels to expand. Many migraine sufferers have been found

----- PAGE 377 -----
to have significantly lowered levels of a platelet enzyme
that normally breaks down these natural dietary compo-
nents. As red wine contains substances that potently in-
hibit this enzyme, it often triggers migraines, especially if
consumed along with foods high in vasoactive amines,
like cheese. Red wine and beer are among the alcoholic
beverages most likely to cause problems. Congeners, the
substances that give alcohol its distinguishing characteris-
tics, may also be a culprit.

The naturally occurring amino acid tyramine, found in
foods such as aged cheeses, Chianti wine, and pickled her-
ring, affects several mechanisms known to be implicated in
migraine. Chocolate may be another trigger. However, it is
not clear if chocolate itself causes migraine or if a sudden
craving for chocolate is a sign of an impending migraine.
Food additives, such as sodium nitrite in hot dogs and lun-
cheon meats and monosodium glutamate in many pro-
cessed foods, may also trigger migraines for some people.

Other possible causes of migraine to consider include
the range listed below. However, these will rarely all play
a role for a given individual.

Foods and food sensitivities. As discussed earlier, foods
containing vasoactive amines are particularly problem-
atic. Triggers include:

* Dairy products, especially cheese

* Chocolate

+ Eggs

© Wheat and wheat products

* Peanuts

© Citrus fruits

* ‘Tomatoes

¢ Red meat

© Shellfish

* Alcohol (especially red wine and spirits)

Stress and fatigue. These factors will undoubtedly com-
pound the problem and may be a clear trigger.

General toxicity. Any tendency to constipation, liver
problems, or general congestion can be a marked trig-
ger in some individuals.

Hormone levels. Occasionally, changes in levels of certain
hormones may trigger an attack, This is usually related
in some way to the menstrual cycle. Drugs that contain
estrogen, such as birth control pills, may also serve as
triggers.

Sensory irritants. These may include glaring or flicker-
ing lights and unusual odors.

Smoking, polluted air, or stuffy rooms, Smoking can cause
headaches, as nicotine constricts the blood vessels

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 369

while inhaled carbon monoxide expands them, thus
creating a condition that can trigger migraines and
cluster headaches.

Structural factors. Cranial and spinal misalignments may
be involved, as may posture, even when not associated
with overt skeletal problems.

Treatment of Migraine

This will depend upon the diagnosis of factors involved in
any specific migraine patient. See also Broader Context of
‘Treatment of headaches, as the recommendations given
there also apply to the treatment of migraine.

Specific Remedies

Tt would be claiming far too much to say that herbal
medicine cures migraine. However, when selected with
care, certain plants have much to offer in the manage-
ment of this distressing problem. By far, the most impor-
tant is a European wayside plant called feverfew (Jana-
cetum parthenium). Feverfew is the only herb used in
European phytotherapy known to be specific for the
treatment of migraine. It is also the best example of a
remedy well known to medical herbalists that has recently
been accepted by allopathic medicine. (See sidebar
Feverfew and Migraines on page 370.)

Feverfew is a long-term treatment, not an immediate
cure for a migraine attack. Clinical experience suggests
that four to six weeks of treatment is usually required be-
fore an initial response will be seen. However, average du-
ration of use will vary among migraine patients. Success
should be measured by decreased frequency, severity, and
duration of migraine attacks, Don’t use feverfew for pa-
tients who are pregnant or breast-feeding.

Some find that regular use of feverfew is enough to
control or even prevent migraines. However, it is best to
ensure that herbal support covers more factors than those
addressed by feverfew. Ginkgo offers some very relevant
properties, mainly related to its ability to tone the blood
vessel walls and reduce the tendency for platelet aggrega-
tion. Ginkgo extract (standardized to 24% ginkgo flavone
glycosides and 6% terpene lactones) at a dose of 120
mg/day in two or three divided doses is recommended.

A Prescription for the Prevention of Migraines
Tanacetum parthenium 125 mg of dried herb taken once
daily
Massage essential oil into temples
at first sign of an attack

Lavandula officinalis

----- PAGE 378 -----
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos part
Stachys betonica T part

<2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Feverfew and Migraines

Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) has been used throughout recorded medical history as a bitter tonic
and remedy for severe headaches. Through wide media coverage, the herb has gained a reputation as a
“cure” for migraine. Clinicians at the London Migraine. Clinic observed that patients reported marked im-
provements in frequency, severity, and duration of migraine when they took the herb. Fortunately, these
doctors had the inquiring and open minds of true scientists and so started their own investigations into
the efficacy of feverfew. Clinical observations were soon being reported in the journals.®

The work of Dr. Peter Hylands and colleagues provides a good example. Seventeen patients who
regularly ate fresh leaves of feverfew daily as prophylaxis against migraine were invited to participate in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the herb. Of these, eight patients received capsules containing
freeze-dried feverfew powder and nine a placebo. Those taking the placebo had a significant increase in
the frequency and severity of headache, nausea, and vomiting during the early months of treatment. The
group taking feverfew, on the other hand, continued to enjoy a reduced frequency of migraine, providing
clear evidence that feverfew can prevent attacks of migraine. This led the researchers to strongly suggest
the use of feverfew for migraine sufferers who have never before treated themselves with this herb, Long-
term users often report beneficial side effects, such as relief from depression, nausea, and arthritic
pain due to inflammation.

These findings would not at all surprise the venerable English herbalists Gerard and Culpeper! It is a
pity that the patients who took placebo in this study had to experience renewed attacks of migraine to
demonstrate something that the patients and herbalists already knew.

Following the clinical-clues, pharmacologists began seeking the active components of the plant. The
herb appears to work at least in part by inhibiting the secretion of granular contents from blood platelets
and neutrophils. This may be relevant to the therapeutic value of feverfew not only in migraine, but also
in other conditions, such as osteoarthritis. The five main compounds identified'as having this activity were
parthenolide, 3-beta-hydroxy-parthenolide, secotanapartholide A, canin, and artecanin, all of which are
sesquiterpene lactones, The researchers believe it is likely that these and other sesquiterpene lactones in-
hibit the release of prostaglandins and histamine during the inflammatory process, thus preventing the
blood vessel spasms in the head that trigger migraine attacks. :

As with all such impressive research findings, do not lose sight of the importance of whole plant activ-
ity. As the dried or fresh leaf of feverfew itself is an excellent formulation, why not just suggest it to patients?

Considerable differences in parthenolide content have been observed in feverfew plants from differ-
ent geographical locations. Similarly, commercial preparations of dried feverfew usually contain varying
amounts of the active principle. For this reason, standardized preparations are often used. A daily dosage of
125 mg of a dried feverfew leaf preparation containing at least 0.2% parthenolide is considered appropriate
for the treatment and prevention of migraines. This is approximately equivalent to 250 mcg/day of
parthenolide.

A Prescription for Migraine Associated with
Stress and Hypertension

her formula.

Scutellaria lateriflora T part

Viburnum opulus 1 part Motherwort, vervain, dandelion root, centaury, wild

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should follow instructions given in Prescription for
Prevention of Migraine.

Many British phytotherapists focus upon supporting
the liver during migraine treatment. As an example, con-
sider the following mixture suggested by Mrs. Nalda
Gosling, FNIMH, one of Britain’s foremost herbal clini-
cians. Note the preponderance of hepatics and bitters in

carrot—each of these mixed together im equal parts and
25 g of this mixture simmered for 15 minutes in 0.5 | of
water. A wineglass of this should be drunk 3 times a day.

----- PAGE 379 -----
A Cooling Compress for Migraine
1 quart ice-cold water
2 drops peppermint essential oil
1 drop ginger essential oil
1 drop marjoram essential oil

Pour the water into a 2-quart glass bowl and add the essential
oils. Soak a clean cloth in the water and apply it to the head,
forehead, or neck at the first sign of a migraine. Do not allow the
compress to come into contact with the eyes. An ice pack ap-
plied over the compress will help keep it from getting warm:

Broader Context of Treatment
Please see Broader Context of Treatment for headache.

NEURITIS

A syndrome of sensory, motor, reflex, and vasomotor
symptoms, singly or in any combination, produced by dis-
ease of a single nerve, two or more nerves in separate
areas, or many nerves simultaneously. (The Merck Manual)

Peripheral nerve problems can be caused by a range of
etiological factors, including physical trauma, collagen
disease (such as rheumatoid arthritis), metabolic disease,
microorganisms, toxic agents, nutritional deficiency, and
malignancy. Traumatic neuritis may be induced by injury,
pressure paralysis, exposure to cold, and even radiation.
Appropriate treatment must be based on accurate diagno-
sis, which is unfortunately often problematic in this com-
plex of conditions.

The therapeutic approach suggested here is a very
basic one, ideal for traumatic neuritis, but may also be of
symptomatic value in any of the conditions just mentioned.

Treatment of Neuritis

In the herbal treatment guidelines given here for neuritis,
the nervous system is the focus for toning, but any associ-
ated symptoms that arise may provide a clue to deeper-
seated issues.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are important to nourish the traumatized
nerve tissue.

Nervine relaxants ease associated pain and anxiety.

Anti-inflammatories reduce the inflammatory response.

Antispasmodics help alleviate any muscular tension devel-
oped in response to the discomfort.

Adaptogens support the body’s efforts to cope with the
stress of the pain and any stress-related causes.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM -@ 371

Specific Remedies
Most of the relaxing nervines have been considered as
specifics by various herbalists.

A Prescription for Neuritis

Internal use:
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Avena sativa 1 part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day.

External use:

Peppermint essential oil (or any menthol-rich mint oil)

Hypericum infused oil

Colloidal oatmeal
These are three approaches to minimizing the discomfort
caused by touch. Gently applying the menthol-rich oil of pep-
permint to sensitive skin will produce a cooling, locally anes-
thetic effect. Applying infused oil of Hypericum will reduce
neurological inflammation, but must be used over a day or so.
Colloidal oatmeal can act as a dry lubricant between the skin
and clothing, thus minimizing irritation.

If the patient is experiencing a great deal of pain, the
internal prescription may be made stronger by adding
analgesic herbs, such as Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sem-
‘pervirens, and possibly even Valeriana officinalis. However,
the major drawback to these analgesics is that they can
caused marked sedation at effective painkilling doses, and
even then they are not necessarily as effective as the pa-
tient would like them to be! It may be appropriate to rec-
ommend prescription analgesics. Bear in mind that most
of these strong drugs are derived from plants—plants that
are now illegal for the herbalist to use.

Table 16.16. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Traumatic Neuritis

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora
Anti-inflammatory Hypericum perforatum
Antispasmodic Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus

----- PAGE 380 -----
372 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Although neuralgia, or nerve pain, is best remedied
by treating the cause, essential oils do alleviate the pain,
especially when used in conjunction with massage.

Essential Oils for Pain
5 drops helichrysum
3 drops chamomile
2 drops marjoram
2 drops lavender
1 ounce carrier oil

Combine ingredients and use for massage.

Broader Context of Treatment

Stress management techniques, accompanied by good
quality nutrition, are essential. Vitamin B complex should
be given as a supplement.

TINNITUS

The perception of sound in the absence of an acoustic
stimulus. (The Merck Manual)

One person out of 10 has some type of hearing impairment
or ear problem, and 85% of these have some associated
tinnitus. While tinnitus is more common among older
people, it can occur at any age, and it may not be possible
to determine the cause in every patient. However, the
most common causes of tinnitus are noise-induced dam-
age and age-related hearing loss.

Because tinnitus is not a disease but a symptom, it
often serves as an important marker for other conditions.
Causes include concussions, cranial and cervical fractures,
whiplash, and temporomandibular joint problems. In
hyperthyroidism, an increased heart rate and consequent
increased blood flow through the ear may cause ringing.
Tinnitus is also a symptom of Méniere’s disease.
Transient tinnitus may follow a cold or influenza, but this
generally subsides two to four months after the infection.

Whatever the underlying cause, tinnitus tends to be
exacerbated by muscle spasms, stress, and tension.
Substances that can accentuate tinnitus through vasocon-
striction include nicotine and caffeine. Some people
under stress will begin to notice ringing in their ears,
often because they clench or grind their teeth. Reducing
stress and relieving temporomandibular joint dysfunction
generally improves tinnitus.

Damage to the fine hair cells of the inner ear may
cause them to remain in a constant state of irritation. As
a result, stimulation of the auditory nerve occurs ran-

domly and spontaneously, instead of as a direct conse-
quence of sound waves transmitted to the inner ear.
These random electrical impulses are interpreted as
noise, usually perceived as high-frequency ringing, be-
cause the hair cells that are most frequently damaged re-
spond in the high-frequency range.

Unfortunately, by the time most people realize that
they’ve suffered noise-induced tinnitus or hearing loss,
hair cell damage in the inner ear is irreversible. The dis-
tress can be minimized with herbs and avoidance of ag-
gravating factors, such as nicotine and caffeine.

Treatment of Tinnitus

The herbal treatment guidelines given here require time
to work.

Specific Remedies

My training in Britain suggested the use of Cizmicifuga
racemosa (black cohosh) and Hydrastis canadensis (gold-
enseal) for tinnitus, without providing any clear reasons.
However, as I worked with patients with noise-induced
tinnitus from industrial South Wales, these herbs proved
gratifyingly helpful. Since then, I have become aware of
research investigating Ginkgo biloba for a range of vascu-
lar disturbances of the inner ear.

Ginkgo may help improve problems of the inner ear
that result from a disturbance in blood supply. Such prob-
lems include tinnitus, vertigo, and some forms of hearing
loss, including deafness due to head injury, sonic damage,
and vascular problems of recent origin. Clinical research
showed that many people with vertigo experienced total
recovery after taking Ginkgo daily for several weeks.
Consider the following example from the Gimkgo research.
The objective of a recent study in 60 patients with
chronic tinnitus was to confirm the efficacy of oral treat-
ment with a special extract of Ginkgo, subsequent to a
10-day treatment in which the Gikgo medication was in-
troduced directly into a vein. The primary outcome mea-
sure was the change in tinnitus volume in the more
severely affected ear during treatment. The researchers
concluded that Ginkgo was effective and safe in alleviating
the symptoms associated with tinnitus.?

However, keep in mind that once hair cells are dam-
aged, no medication will eliminate tinnitus completely.

A Prescription for Tinnitus

Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

----- PAGE 381 -----
Broader Context of Treatment

A number of other issues should be considered in the at-
tempt to alleviate the tinnitus. If stress is an issue, this
must be addressed. This may be done with herbs, relax-
ation techniques, or a whole range of other approaches
discussed in this chapter.

Most patients find that tinnitus is only a mild annoy-
ance or are not aware of it most of the time. However, the
constant noise can be upsetting, and for some may even
lead to depression. If the depression is treated, these pa-
tients sleep better, feel better, and find the tinnitus less
distracting. Hypericum perforatum is the main herb to con-
sider here.

Ear protection is important, especially around poten-
tially harmful noise. If occupational noise is a problem,
the patient should try to reduce the noise level or change
the working environment to avoid exposure. This is not
always easy! Tinnitus can often be masked with back-
ground noise. Background music or “white noise” maybe
sufficient. Patients may find this more tolerable than the
internally generated tinnitus, especially elderly patients
with high-frequency hearing loss.

MOTION SICKNESS

A disorder caused by repetitive angular and linear accel-
eration characterized primarily by nausea and vomiting.
(The Merck Manual)

Motion sickness is a syndrome that affects some people
when traveling in a vehicle, such as an automobile, air-
plane, or ship. Symptoms include dizziness, nausea, vomit-
ing, drowsiness, pallor, and sweating. Why some people ex-
perience motion sickness while others do not is unknown.

The syndrome appears to arise from a disturbance in
the organs of balance found in the inner ear. Psycho-
logical factors may also be involved. In the course of a
long journey, the problem may disappear on its own, and
in general, symptoms of motion sickness quickly resolve
once travel is ended.

Treatment of Motion Sickness

Zingiber officinale (ginger) can usually be relied upon.
Research published in the British medical journal The
Lancet showed it to be more effective than Dramamine in
preventing symptoms of motion sickness. Ginger may be
drunk as a fresh infusion, eaten as candied ginger, or
taken as capsules of the powder. For people who do not
like the taste of ginger, capsules are ideal. The usual
dosage for capsules is 2 to 4.as needed.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM «> 373

The herb Ballota nigra (black horehound) will also
reduce this kind of nausea. One of the more effective al-
lopathic treatments involves a dermal patch of sco-
palamine, a constituent of Atropa belladonna.

A Prescription for Motion Sickness
Ballota nigra
Mentha piperita

1 part

1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 20 minutes before travel. In addition,
the patient should eat a small piece of candied ginger just be-
fore travel and as needed.

SHINGLES

An acute CNS infection involving primarily the dorsal
root ganglia, characterized by vesicular eruption and neu-
ralgic pain in the areas of the skin supplied by peripheral
sensory nerves arising in the affected root ganglia. (The
Merck Manual)

Shingles, or herpes zoster, is a viral infection of sensory
nerve cells caused by the same virus (varicella zoster) that
causes chicken pox. The virus remains latent in the dorsal
root ganglia of the spinal cord after the initial attack of
chicken pox. The disease occurs most frequently in peo-
ple over the age of 50 years. It may be activated through
such factors as trauma to the spinal cord resulting from
surgery and X-ray therapy.

Shingles is characterized by pain along an affected
nerve and its branches and the eruption of blisters over the
skin areas supplied by the nerve. An attack will usually be
preceded by a few days of intense pain in the affected areas.
Next, many extremely painful and itchy blisters develop,
which normal remain for 7 to 14 days. These eventually
form crusty scabs and fall off. After such an outbreak, the
pain may continue even when the blisters have disappeared,
especially in the elderly. This may go on for months and
can be more painful than the original infection.

Treatment of Shingles

The nervous system needs as much help as it can get! As
shingles often occurs in the elderly, almost any system
tonic might be appropriate. Signs and symptoms will
guide the therapist.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics will nourish traumatized nerve tissue.

Nervine relaxants may help ease the associated pain and
will definitely lessen associated anxiety or tension.

----- PAGE 382 -----
374. = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Anti-inflammatories will reduce the inflammatory re-
sponse.

Antispasmodics will alleviate muscular tension developed in
response to pain.

Antimicrobials may help deal with the virus infection, but
it is very intransigent.

Specific Remedies

The European traditions record no specifics for shingles.

A Prescription for Shingles

Avena sativa 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture four times a day. Topical applica-
tion of Mentha piperita oil may reduce the pain through a mild,
local numbing effect. However, this should not be attempted if
the skin is extremely sensitive.

Colloidal oatmeal powder may be dusted on affected skin
to act as a dry lubricant, perhaps reducing pain caused by con-
tact with clothes.

If the patient is experiencing a great deal of pain, the
internal prescription may be made stronger by adding
analgesic herbs, such as Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sem-
pervirens, and possibly even Valeriana officinalis. However,
a major drawback to these analgesics is that they can cause

marked sedation at effective painkilling doses, and even
then they are not necessarily as effective as the patient
would like them to be! It may be appropriate to recom-
mend prescription analgesics. Bear in mind that most of
these strong drugs are derived from plants—plants that
are now illegal for the herbalist to use.

Table 16.17. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Shingles

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum

Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Artemisia vulgaris
Anti-inflammatory — Hypericum perforatum
Antispasmodic Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora
Antimicrobial Hypericum perforatum

Immune support Echinacea spp.

Broader Context of Treatment

Good nutrition and support of general health are crucial.
Pain-relief medication containing acetaminophen (for ex-
ample, Tylenol) may prolong the illness. Pharmacological
research suggests that capsaicin, a constituent of Capsicum
annuum, may be helpful as a pain reliever, and thus cap-
sules oficayenne may be helpful. In addition, the follow-
ing supplements are recommended.

Vitamin B complex: 100 mg three times a day with food
Vitamin C: 2 g twice a day
Lysine: 500 mg twice daily

References
1. Ulrich RS, Simons RE. Recovery from stress during ex-

posure to everyday outdoor environments. In: Wineman
J, Barnes R, Zimring C, eds. The Costs of Not Knowing:
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the
Environmental Design Research Association. Washington,
DC: Environmental Design Research Association, 1986.

2. Ulrich RS. View through a window may influence reco-
ery from surgery. Science 1984; 224:420-21.

3. Harrer G, Sommer H. Treatment of mild/moderate de-
pressions with Hypericum. Phytomedicine 1994, 1:3-8.

4. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

5. Price S, et al. Aromatherapy for Health Professionals,
Edinburgh; New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

6. [Information from the] National Library of Medicine
Web site:
wwwnlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000362.htm

7. Bennett JC, Plum F. Cecil Textbook of Medicine.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996,

8. Johnson ES, Kadam NP, Hylands DM, et al. Efficacy of
feverfew as prophylactic treatment of migraine. British
Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed.). 1985 Aug 31;
291:569-73.

9. Morgenstern C, Biermann E. The efficacy of Ginkgo
special extract EGb 761 in patients with tinnitus.

International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics 2002 May; 40(5):188-97.

Suggested Reading
Hoffmann D. Successful Stress Control: An Herbal Guide to Stress
Relief. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 1991.

----- PAGE 383 -----
THE URINARY SYSTEM

a he importance of the urinary system cannot be
overemphasized. The various physiological func-
tions fulfilled by the kidneys and associated
structures show how fundamental to bodily health and
well-being they are. The maintenance of homeostasis is
pivotal to any experience of wellness. With the variety of
diuretics in our materia medica, the phytotherapist is
uniquely endowed by nature with the means to support
the complex physiology that maintains healthy kidneys
and water balance in the body.

The kidneys are major organs of elimination. They
work in conjunction with the liver, the lungs, the skin,
and the bowels to help ensure a clean internal environ-
ment. The body disposes of excess water, toxic waste
products of metabolism, and inorganic salts in the form of
urine. Because of their excretory function, the kidneys are
also largely responsible for maintaining the water balance
of the body and the pH of the blood. The kidneys also
play important roles in other body activities. For example,
the kidneys release the protein erythropoietin, which
stimulates the bone marrow to increase the formation of
red blood cells. Because they have a role in regulating the
volume of fluid in the body, they also help to control
blood pressure. In addition, some drugs or their metabo-
lites are eliminated through the kidney.

URINE PRODUCTION

The production of urine is a complex and quite wonder-
ful process. It is far from a simple removal of water from
the body. Rather, it is a process of selective filtration that
removes waste and potential toxins from the blood while
retaining essential molecules.

The initial site of urine production is the glomerulus
of the nephrons in the kidneys. Arterial blood pressure
drives a filtrate of plasma across the porous capillary walls
of the glomeruli into the open space around the capillary
tuft, called the Bowman’s space, and is collected in the
Bowman’s capsule. The filtered plasma, now called
glomerular filtrate, is mainly water, but also contains salts,

375

glucose, amino acids, nitrogenous wastes such as urea,
and a small amount of ammonia. Proteins, fats, and cellular
elements (red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets)
are filtered out so that they remain in the general blood cir-
culation. In normal kidneys, 100 to 140 ml of filtrate is
formed each minute, a total of about 170 liters per day.

As the glomerular filtrate passes along the proximal
convoluted tubule, the majority of its water content and
some of its dissolved materials are reabsorbed through the
walls of the tubule into the blood of the surrounding cap-
illaries. This reabsorption process is highly selective.
‘Water, sodium, and chloride ions, most of the bicarbon-
ate, and all of the glucose are reabsorbed into the blood-
stream, while other products, such as urea and ammonia,
remain in the tubule.

During the later stage, most of the remaining filtrate
is further selectively reabsorbed through Henle’s loop and
the distal convoluted tubule, so that only about 1% of the
volume of the original filtrate is finally excreted as urine.
The urine is considerably different in composition from
the original filtrate.

The kidneys excrete 400 to 2,000 ml of urine or more
per day. Excretion varies in volume and composition, de-
pending on the needs of the individual. The kidneys
maintain the internal fluid environment within narrow
limits and are capable of adapting to a wide range of en-
vironmental situations. The cells lining the tubules are
under the influence of regulating factors, such as the hor-
mone aldosterone (from the adrenal gland), antidiuretic
hormone, parathyroid hormone, and atrial natriuretic
factor (from the heart).

The distal tubule regulates the overall acidity of the
urine, and ultimately of the blood, by excretion of hydro-
gen ions. Ammonia combines with hydrogen to form
ammonia ions that are secreted into the urine. Acidity is
decreased by the removal of hydrogen ions.

All the blood glucose will be removed from the urine
unless the blood glucose exceeds normal concentrations
by a considerable amount. Other mechanisms remove
most, if not all, of the other solutes, including sodium.

----- PAGE 384 -----
376 <<. TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Much of the sodium ion in kidney filtrate is wansported
back to the blood, but 3 to 5 grams pass into the urine
each day. As a result, most animals have strict salt re-
quirements and must consume several grams of sodium
chloride daily in order to live.

The retention of sodium is enhanced by the presence
of aldosterone. This hormone is secreted into the blood-
stream when the body’s supply of sodium falls below nor-
mal. When there is an excess of sodium, aldosterone se-
cretion is reduced and more sodium is excreted.

When excessive amounts of fluid are lost from the
body, or the blood pressure falls below normal, the kid-
neys release the enzyme renin into the blood, where it
promotes the formation of angiotensin. Within minutes,
angiotensin causes vasoconstriction, which increases blood
pressure and stimulates the secretion of aldosterone.

MAINTAINING URINARY SYSTEM
HEALTH

There are not as many all-around tonics for the urinary
system as there are for the cardiovascular and nervous
systems. However, each herbal practitioner has favorite
gentle tonics for the urinary system. These vary from bio-
region to bioregion. Tonic remedies to consider for the uri-
nary system include Gali aparine (cleavers), Elymus repens
(couch grass), and Achillea millefolium (yarrow).

In the urinary system, the emphasis is on nourishing
the tissue and helping to support the normal functioning
of the various organs and tissues involved. Thus, stronger
diuretics are not included in the list of possible tonics
given here. The range of remedies available provides
therapeutic options beyond the simple increase in diure-
sis so dramatically produced by Taraxacum officinale (dan-
delion leaf). The French colloquial name for dandelion,
pussé en hit (“wet the bed”), is well deserved.

Attention to a number of straightforward factors will
help maintain urinary tract health and avoid the develop-
ment of illness in the whole system.

Drink adequate amounts of water, about 6 to 8 glasses a day.

Avoid too much protein in the diet, as it will tend to overload
the kidneys. The kidneys deal with much of the nitro-
gen-rich metabolic waste these molecules produce.
Under normal conditions, this is no problem.
However, anyone with kidney problems should be on a
low-protein diet, obtaining protein primarily from
vegetable sources. Good sources of protein include
peas, beans, lentils, mushrooms, and asparagus.

Practice good personal hygiene.

Avoid dietary irritants, especially foods containing oxalic
acid. Do not consume coffee and tea in excess. Plant
essential oils taken internally can damage the delicate
tissue of the nephrons.

Table 17.1. Primary Actions for the Urinary System

ACTION HERB

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium purpureum,

Galium aparine, Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Elymus repens,

Juniperus communis

Antispasmodic Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, Dioscorea villosa, carminatives

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Equisetum arvense,

Cola vera, Cytisus scoparius

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius, Lycopus spp.

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Collinsonia canadensis,
Elymus repens, Zea mays

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Diuretic All herbs listed as such in chapter 25

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,

Tilia platyphyllos

PATTERNS OF ILLNESS IN THE
URINARY SYSTEM

A number of symptoms may accompany problems in this
system. Some of these symptoms are common to many
health problems, but others are unique to the kidney and
bladder.

Common Nonspecific Symptoms

Fever. Fever accompanies many infections and inflamma-
tory conditions of the urinary system, although simple
cystitis often involves no fever at all.

Weight loss. Marked weight loss is always an important
sign, as it may indicate a number of systemic pathologies.

----- PAGE 385 -----
Malaise. A general feeling of ill health is an indicator of
many disease processes.

Symptoms Unique to the Urinary System

Urinary frequency. This symptom describes increased
frequency of urination without an increase in the vol-
ume of urine passed. This indication that the bladder
cannot hold as much fluid as usual may be due to a
range of causes.

Urinary urgency. This, a compelling need to urinate,
often results from the loss of bladder tone that can ac-
company infection and other urinary tract problems.

Urinary tenesmus. Urinary tenesmus is experienced as a
desire to urinate accompanied by an almost constant
painful straining. This can continue until the cause of
the irritation is removed.

Dysuria. Dysuria, or painful urination, commonly indi-
cates possible inflammation in the bladder neck or ure-
thra, often associated with infection. Dysuria with no
infection must be carefully diagnosed.

Nocturia. The need to urinate at night can be produced
by a range of factors, from drinking too much liquid
before going to bed to kidney or liver disease. Such an
array of minor and major causes should highlight the
need for careful diagnosis.

Enuresis. Enuresis is nighttime bed-wetting.

Hesitancy, straining, and dribbling. This group of symp-
toms may indicate that some obstruction is inhibiting
the free flow of urine from the bladder along the ure-
thra. The most common cause is prostate problems in
men.

Incontinence. Voiding of urine with little or no warning
can be due to a range of factors, discussed later in this
chapter.

Changes in appearance of urine. The urine might be
cloudy, change color, or appear milky.

Changes in urine output. Normal urine volumes in adults
range from 700 ml to 2,000 ml a day.

Pain. Pain related to kidney disease is primarily felt in the
side or back, between the ribs and hips. ‘This is caused
by stretching of the capsule that covers the kidney;
there are no sensory nerve endings in the organ itself.
Bladder pain is usually felt above the pubic bones and
referred along the urethra during urination.

Edema. Edema is swelling caused by accumulation of ex-
cess fluid in body tissues and cavities. Also called
dropsy, or, preferably, hydrops, edema is symptomatic
of a wide range of conditions and disorders, including
heart and kidney disease. These disorders must be ad-
dressed, but diuretics can provide relief from edema by

THE URINARY SYSTEM @ 377

stimulating the kidneys to eliminate water from the
body.

Thus, a range of signs and symptoms accompany
health problems in the urinary system. In the discussion
that follows, an herbal approach to these symptoms will
be developed, followed by treatments for a number of
specific pathologies. However, there are some conditions
we shall not discuss. Serious manifestations of kidney dis-
ease, including pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis, go
beyond the range of this book. Phytotherapy can con-
tribute much to the treatment of these conditions, but
success depends upon skilled diagnosis. It is my opinion
that, in this case, “a little bit of knowledge is a dangerous
thing.”

Thus, the focus of our discussion in this chapter will
be the treatment of the more common symptoms listed
above. The phytotherapist will be able to apply these
treatments in a whole range of situations. I must empha-
size again, however, that the ability to ameliorate a symp-
tom is no alternative to treating underlying causes.

FREQUENCY

Increased frequency of urination without an increase in
the volume urine passed. {The Merck Manual)

This common symptom indicates that the bladder cannot
hold as much fluid as usual. A range of processes can
cause this symptom, and these causes must be identified
and treated, if possible. Infection, foreign bodies, stones,
and tumors can all injure the tissue of the bladder wall
and cause inflammation.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobial will help the body rid itself of any
pathogens present, thus reducing inflammation and its
resulting symptoms.

Anti-inflammatory herbs soothe inflamed tissue and thus
reduce the irritation of local muscle spasm.

Diuretics will often help, simply because they usually will
also have either antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory ef-
fects. Diuretics rich in volatile oils, such as Juniperus
communis (juniper berry), may be contraindicated in se-
vere cases, as it can be irritating to the nephrons.

In addition, a number of demulcent diuretic remedies
work well, It is difficult to say whether they act primarily
as anti-inflammatory agents to reduce inflammation or as
demulcents that soothe the surface of the cells. The best
examples here are Zea mays (cornsilk), followed by Elymus

----- PAGE 386 -----
378 <=- TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

repens (couch grass) and Althaea officinalis (marshmallow
leaf).

A Prescription for Urinary Frequency
Associated with Infection
Zea mays 2 parts

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part
Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb mixture in 1 cup of boil-

ing water; drink 1 cup every hour until symptoms subside.

Barley Water

A traditional approach from Britain for soothing the urinary
tract is barley water. This has been used in much the same way
that cranberry juice has in North America. They work in differ-
ent ways but achieve similar results. Barley water may be used in
all cases where frequency, dysuria, or another distressing symp-
tom occurs.

4 oz (100 g) whole barley
1 pint (500 ml) water
/ 02 (15 g) lemon peel (preferably organic)

Boil the barley in a little water; strain. Pour 1 pint (500 ml) of
water over the cleaned barley and add the lemon peel. Simmer
until the barley is soft. Remove from heat and allow to cool
until lukewarm. Strain, add a little honey, and drink several cups
a day.

DYSURIA
Painful urination, (The Merck Manual)

A wide range of conditions can cause dysuria, so having an
approach to easing this important symptom is very useful.
However, successful alleviation will first depend upon ac-
curate diagnosis, followed by appropriate treatment.

Actions Indicated

Anti-inflammatories will usually help ease the pain by re-
ducing inflammation.

Antispasmodics soothe muscle spasms that often accom-
pany such urinary tract problems.

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of any pathogens,
further reducing inflammation and associated
symptoms.

A Prescription for Dysuria

Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of
boiling water; drink 1 cup every hour until the symptoms subside.

HEMATURIA
Blood in the urine. (The Merck Manual)

Hematuria can give the urine a red or brown color. If the
amount of blood is small, it might not be visually appar-
ent, but it can be detected by a number of simple tests.
This symptom may be associated with a wide range of
conditions, some minor and others quite severe.
Competent diagnosis is crucial. The bleeding may occur
at a site of physical trauma, such as where a kidney stone
has cut the tissue, or from a focus of infection.

It is often possible to reduce or stop such bleeding
with herbs, but this will zot necessarily mean the trauma
has been healed. The suggestions given here must be ap-
plied within the context of treatments that address the di-
agnosed cause.

Actions Indicated

Astringents will stanch bleeding. They may not always be
powerful enough—for example, in cases of bleeding
caused by large kidney stones.

Anti-inflammatories will soothe inflamed tissue, thus less-
ening bleeding.

Antimicrobials will help the body rid itself of any
pathogens present, thus reducing inflammation and re-
sultant bleeding.

A number of diuretic plants have an astringent effect.
The most useful are Vinca major (periwinkle), Equisetem
arvense (horsetail), Alchemilla arvensis (lady’s mantle), and
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse).

A Prescription for Hematuria

Vinca major 1 part
Capsella bursa-pastoris 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture to 1 cup of
boiling water; drink 1 cup every 2 hours.

----- PAGE 387 -----
Table 17.2. Actions Supplied by Hematuria
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Capsella bursa-pastoris,
Vinca major

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Zea mays

Demulcent Zea mays

EDEMA

Excessive accumulation of fluid in body tissues and cavi-
ties. (The Merck Manual)

Edema, or fluid retention, is an abnormal accumulation of
fluid in the spaces between the cells of body tissues. This
accumulation may be associated with liver or kidney dis-
turbances, pregnancy, premenstrual syndrome, or heart
failure. Never treat water retention without addressing its
causal factors.

Here we are faced with one of the paradoxical prob-
lems associated with the current use of herbs—that is, that
they work! Too often, herbs are used to address symptoms
while the more fundamental healing work they can facili-
tate is ignored. The value of herbal diuretics in helping rid
the body of excess water is a prime example of this issue. If
the practitioner goes for dandelion leaf whenever edema is
part of a patient’s symptom picture, he or she is probably
missing an opportunity for more profound healing.

Actions Indicated

Diuretics are, of course, the primary herbs to consider.
The broader picture that the patient presents will suggest
the appropriate treatment.

By far the most effective diuretic herb is dandelion
leaf (Taraxacum officinale). The diuretic effect of this herb
is comparable to that of the drug furosemide. In addition
to its efficacy as a diuretic, dandelion leaf provides the
benefit of a rich source of potassium. One of the typical
side effects of increasing diuresis by stimulating kidney
function is a loss of vital potassium from the body. This
can impact a range of body functions, the most critical of
which is electrolyte balance in the heart muscle. If the di-
uretic has been prescribed to treat edema associated with
congestive heart failure, any reduction in the availability
of potassium will aggravate cardiac symptoms.

In dandelion leaf, however, we have one of the best

THE URINARY SYSTEM ec. 379

natural sources of potassium. Dandelion leaf simultane-
ously replaces the potassium that is flushed from the body
via its diuretic action. Thus, this herb provides us with an
ideally balanced diuretic that may be used safely when-
ever this action is needed, including the treatment of
edema related to heart problems.

A Prescription for Edema

Taraxacum officinale leaf

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day or 5 ml of tincture
when needed, but not at night

CYSTITIS

Acute or chronic infection of the urinary bladder. (The
Merck Manual)

Cystitis, or inflammation of the wall and lining of the
urinary bladder, may be due to bacterial infection or to
mechanical abrasion from microcrystals of calcium phos-
phate in urine. Symptoms of cystitis include frequency,
dysuria, cloudy or bloody urine, and pain and tenderness
in the lower abdomen. The urine itself may be cloudy be-
cause it contains pus or blood; it may also have an un-
pleasant smell. These symptoms must be distinguished
from those caused by vaginitis, sexually transmitted dis-
eases, and irritations of the urethra.

Acute urinary tract infections are very common, af-
fecting at least 15% of females at some point in their lives.
Urinary tract infection is about 20 times more common in
women than in men and can occur at any age. Women are
more likely than men to be affected because the urethra is
much shorter in women, allowing infective organisms
easier access to the bladder. Such ascending infections are
usually announced by discomfort at the urethral opening.
As the condition progresses, the irritation travels upward.

These infections are usually caused by the rod-
shaped bacterium called Escherichia coli, commonly known
as E. coli. This is a normal bacterium found in the bowel,
which, after a bowel movement, can be accidentally wiped
onto the urethral opening. Less commonly, infection
from the bloodstream and the kidneys descends into the
bladder. These descending mfections are usually associated
with backache, headache, fatigue, and pain in the abdomen.

Many women have bacteriuria (bacteria in the urine)
and pyuria (pus in the urine) in the absence of symptoms,
while others may have symptoms without clinical signs.
In the past, women who complained of recurrent symp-
toms but had no clinical signs of cystitis were diagnosed

----- PAGE 388 -----
380 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

as having “urethral syndrome.” Urologists now recognize
a general syndrome known as interstitial cystitis, which
comprises a group of urethral/bladder disorders in which
the mucosa of the bladder has become eroded, resulting
in ongoing symptoms in the absence of bacteriuria.

Causes of Cystitis
A variety of factors appear to increase the likelihood that
an individual will develop cystitis.

Female gender. The female urethra is prone to coloniza-
tion by bacteria due to its proximity to the anus, its
short length (about 4 cm), and its termination inside
the labia. Friction during intercourse may cause minor
inflammation of the urethra, predisposing the individ-
ual to infection, or may even move pathogenic organ-
isms into the urethra.

Pregnancy. Pregnant women may be more susceptible to
infection because of hormonal changes that result in
dilation and reduction in tone of the ureters of the kid-
ney. Pressure of the uterus on the bladder and local ve-
nous congestion and pressure may also precipitate cys-
titis in pregnancy.

Diabetes. Diabetics and those who consume large
amounts of sugar are predisposed to cystitis.

Chemical factors. Antibacterial soaps, sprays, douches,
feminine deodorants, and contraceptive jellies and
creams alter the vaginal environment and may cause
irritation that predisposes the tissue to infection.
Barrier contraceptive devices like the diaphragm may
cause mechanical irritation of the urethra. Some
forms of interstitial cystitis may be caused by food
contaminated with pesticides.

Retention of urine. Anatomical deviations that result in
retention of urine, such as a malposition of the uterus,
can potentiate infection.

Oral contraceptives. Oral contraceptives may initiate in-
fection in some individuals.

Antibiotics. Overuse of these potentially lifesaving drugs
will select for resistant bacteria, often leading to cystitis.

Stress. Stress initiates the production of hormones, such
as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), glucocorti-
coids, and aldosterone, all of which reduce circulating
white blood cell counts and increase susceptibility to
infection. Many who experience recurrent infection
can relate stress (chemical, physical, or emotional) to
the onset of symptoms.

Treatment of Cystitis

Cystitis can respond rapidly to appropriate treatment, the
key being the selection of the appropriate antimicrobials.
However, many well-known antimicrobial remedies (such
as Echinacea) do not fulfill the herbalist’s expectations in
cystitis. It is important to use plants that are specifically
active in the urinary tract. Thus, antimicrobials contain-
ing terpene essential oils are indicated. The essential oil is
excreted from the body via the kidney, directing its action
to the site of infection in the bladder.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials help the body control and then clear bacte-
rial infection.

Anti-inflammatories soothe the pain and discomfort, but
avoid overemphasizing them in the prescription. The
symptomatic relief they produce must be applied in the
context of removing the infection that causes the in-
flammation.

Astringents may be indicated if there is any hematuria.

Diuretics help flush the whole of the tract. Of course, it is
best to select diuretics that possess antimicrobial and
anti-inflammatory actions.

Antispasmodics may be necessary if there is much pain.

Specific Remedies
Many plants have a regional reputation for the treatment
of cystitis. Often, the efficacy of these plants varies ac-
cording to whether the plant is fresh or dried, what time
of year it is picked, and other factors. For example, in
Wales, fresh Achillea millefolium (yarrow), preferably har-
vested from séa cliffs, has a dramatic effect even in intran-
sigent cases of cystitis. Unfortunately, tinctures or infusions
made from the same plants after drying do not replicate
the results achieved with fresh plant material. This is
probably due to changes in the amount or relative com-
position of the volatile oils present.

Plants that contain antimicrobial volatile oils have
most to offer. Primary examples are Arctostaphylos uva-urst
(bearberry) and Agathosma betulina (buchu).

A Prescription for Cystitis

Zea mays 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Agathosma betulina ] part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Infusion of Achillea
millefolium (preferably fresh) should be drunk often.

----- PAGE 389 -----
Table 17.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina

A Prescription for Cystitis with Pain and Discomfort

Zea mays 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
Achillea millefolium (preferably fresh) should be drunk often.

Table 17.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis with Pain and Discomfort

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina
Antispasmodic —_Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum prunifolium

Cystitis Infusion

Hot infusions can ease symptoms dramatically. As an example,
here is a combination recommended by British medical herbal-
ist Annie Mcintyre.

Althaea officinalis root 2 parts
Zea mays 2 parts
Elymus repens 2 parts
Equisetum arvensis 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Agathosma betulina T part

Dosage: Add 1 teaspoon of this mixture to 1 cup of boiling water
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. Drink hot four to five times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Cranberry juice (Vaccinium macrocarpon) has a strong tra-
ditional reputation for soothing symptoms of cystitis.

THE URINARY SYSTEM & 381

Now, research shows that cranberry juice actually helps
prevent the adherence of pathogenic bacteria to the lining
of the urinary tract. Certain pathogenic E. coli bacteria at-
tach themselves to the lining of the urinary tract with
structures called fimbriae. Cranberry has been shown to
inhibit the adherence of these fimbriated E. coli to the
mucosa. It now appears that a group of flavonoids in cran-
berry, called proanthocyanidins, are responsible for these
anti-adhesion effects.! Since sugar consumption is a pre-
disposing factor for cystitis, unsweetened cranberry juice
is recommended.

Here is some general advice that should be followed
both during active infection and to prevent recurrent cys-
titis, especially for those prone to these infections.

Avoid using tampons, as they contain additives that can in-
jure the lining of the vagina.

Discontinue use of contraceptive diaphragms, oral contracep-
tives, and other chemicals used in the vaginal area.

Discontinue use of deodorant soaps. These soaps are irritating
to the skin and kill off normal external bacteria, which
are then replaced by more virulent, less easily killed
pathogens.

Increase intake of water to at least 8 to 12 glasses per day. This
helps to flush out bacteria and will often reduce dysuria.

Acidify the urine. Decrease consumption of alkaline foods,
such as dairy products, citrus juices, and sodas.

Eat a light diet consisting of grains, some vegetables, and
specific acidifying juices.

Eliminate bladder irritants such as coffee, black tea, choco-
late, and alcohol.

Discontinue intake of all high-sugar foods, including sweet
vegetables and fruits, sugar, and honey.

In addition, take the following supplements.

Vitamin A: 25,000 IU/day
Vitamin C: 500 mg every 2 hours
Zinc: 30 mg/day

New studies show that ascorbic acid irritates the
bladder, so vitamin C must be obtained in the form of cal-
cium ascorbate, which is relatively buffered. Avoid vita-
mins containing aspartate, as it is a bladder irritant.

URINARY CALCULUS

Small hard masses somewhere in the urinary tract. (The
Merck Manual)

An estimated 3% of all Americans will suffer from kidney
stones at some time in their life, and half of these people
will suffer recurrences over the next ten or more years.

----- PAGE 390 -----
382 2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

While extremely painful, kidney stones rarely cause per-
manent loss of kidney function if properly treated, and are
almost never fatal in the absence of complications.

The most important kidney stones are calcium ox-
alate stones, calcium phosphate stones, and uric acid
stones. The vast majority of stones contain calcium in
some form. Uric acid stones, which account for fewer
than 10% of all stones, are an exception. In most normal
people, urine is supersaturated with calcium oxalate, so all
people can potentially form such stones. Normal urine is
not supersaturated with respect to uric acid, cystine, or
struvite. Conditions that elevate calcium oxalate supersat-
uration raise the risk of calcium oxalate stone formation.

Normal urine contains predictable amounts of cal-
cium, magnesium, uric acid, and other by-products of
metabolism. Normally, these substances are in solution and
pass into the bladder. However, under certain conditions of
high saturation, and in a complex chemical environment
that is not yet completely understood, the chemicals may
crystallize and form a stonelike particle in the kidney.
Once formed, the particle stimulates continued crystal-
ization. If the stone remains in the wide open spaces of
the kidney, no symptoms may occur, although there may
be microscopic signs of blood in the urine. However, once
a piece of the stone breaks off and enters the ureter that
eads to the bladder, prompt spasms occur, leading to the
painful symptoms.

Two main clinical examples are hypercalciuria (ex-
cess calcium in the urine) and hyperoxaluria (excess ox-

alic acid in the urine). Hypercalciuria can be caused by
many conditions, including hyperparathyroidism, renal
tubular acidosis, sarcoidosis, vitamin D intoxication, and
idiopathic factors. Hyperoxaluria may be caused by over-
production of oxalic acid and hereditary disorders of
metabolism, or may be acquired through diet or intesti-
nal disease.

Apart from overexcretion of citrates, supersaturation
can be increased by abnormal interactions between urine
ions. Urine citrate forms a soluble salt with calcium that
normally reduces free calcium ion levels appreciably. Low
urine citrate related to bowel disease, renal tubular acido-
sis, and, perhaps, dietary and hereditary causes can raise
calcium oxalate supersaturation and promote stones.
Normal women excrete more citrate and less calcium
than normal men do, which may help explain why men
are more likely to form stones. Low urine pH due to
hereditary causes or bowel disease promotes uric acid
stones. High pH related to alkali drugs or renal tubular
acidosis increases calcium phosphate supersaturation.

An infection of the urinary tract can cause cellular

debris to act as a focus, or “seed,” on which crystals can
form. Bacterial action makes the urine more alkaline, re-
sulting in deposition of phosphates that form calcium
phosphate stones. Excessive uric acid and increased ex-
cretion of calcium by the kidney, combined with an in-
creased insolubility of calcium in the urine, can also pro-
mote stone formation. Long-term confinement to bed or
even chronic lack of exercise may encourage mobilization
of calcium from the bones into the blood and thus in-
crease calcium levels in the urine. Similarly, steroids can
increase blood and urine calcium levels.

Inherited tendencies and obesity can also predispose
an individual to the development of kidney stones, as can
several other physiological abnormalities. However, in
about 20% of patients, no abnormality can be identified to
explain the tendency to form calculi. Some individuals ab-
sorb excessive amounts of calcium from the intestines,
overwhelming the ability of the kidney to dissolve it.
Others absorb normal amounts of calcium, but the kidney
allows too much to leak into the urine from the blood, and
some produce urine that is too acidic, facilitating crystal-
lization. In certain diseases that cause elevated blood cal-
cium levels, such as hyperparathyroidism and some types of
cancer, kidney stones may occur as a secondary phe-
nomenon serving as the first clue to the underlying disease.

The pain of a kidney stone comes on suddenly.
Classically, there is severe, excruciating pain in the flank
on the side of the stone, coming in waves and radiating
around to the lower abdomen and into the groin, scro-
tum, or vagina, and occasionally into the upper thigh
area. The intensity of pain is as severe as most people ever
experience. The patient often suffers nausea, vomiting,
and profuse sweating, and there may or may not be blood
in the urine. Most stones pass into the bladder, in an
amount of time ranging from minutes to days or even
longer, and the pain is gone. The small, usually brown or
black stone may be identified in the urine, and should be
kept for analysis. If fever is present, it may be due to in-
fection that has formed behind the stone in the stagnant
urine.

Indications for Surgical Treatment

In certain cases, some kind of surgery may be needed to
remove a kidney stone. Surgery may be required if the
stone:

* Does not pass after a reasonable period of time and
causes constant pain

® Ts too large to pass on its own

* Blocks the flow of urine

* Causes ongoing urinary tract infection

----- PAGE 391 -----
¢ Damages the kidney tissue or causes constant bleeding
¢ Has grown larger (as seen in follow up X-ray studies)

Treatment of Urinary Calculus

The herbal treatment guidelines given here can be quite
effective, given time. Careful selection of the appropriate
herbs is critical.

Actions Indicated

Antilithic remedies are the core of any treatment of renal
calculus.

Anti-inflammatories are indicated to lessen the inflamma-
tion caused by the passage of hard material along the
delicate tissue of this system. Such remedies will de-
crease the pain and discomfort to some extent.

Antispasmodics are essential to help reduce muscular spasms
along the urinary tract as peristalsis moves the stone.
Unfortunately, legal plant antspasmodics are not strong
enough to deal with acute problems of this nature.

Demutcents will help, as they usually also act as anti-in-
flammatory agents in this system.

Specific Remedies

Anumber of plants have a long tradition of use as specifics
in Europe. Important examples are Hydrangea arborescens
(hydrangea), Aphanes arvensis (parsley piert), Parietaria dif-
fusa (pellitory-of-the-wall), Efymus repens (couch grass),
Urtica dioica (nettle), and Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod).
To these we can add the North American plants Eupa-
torium purpureum (gravel root), Collinsonia canadensis
(stoneroot) and Zea mays (corn silk).

A Prescription for Kidney Stones

Collinsonia canadensis 1 part
Eupatorium purpureum 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 17.5. Actions Supplied by Kidney Stone
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum
Antispasmodic — Dioscorea villosa, Viburnum prunifolium, Zea mays

THE URINARY SYSTEM © 383

Broader. Context of Treatment

The treatment approach suggested here is not for the
treatment of acute attacks. Rather, it is intended to help
prevent subsequent attacks. Profuse sweating or low fluid
intake can concentrate the urine, causing urinary salts to
solidity and stones to form. The patient should avoid de-
hydration, especially after exercise but even on routine
days, by ingesting copious amounts of fluid. Recommend
that the patient drink 4 to 6 pints of fluid a day and 1 pint
before going to bed—in other words, enough to ensure
that 24-hour urine output is never less than 3 pints.
Ideally, the patient should’ be drinking enough fluid for
routine nighttime awakening to urinate.

When uric acid stones are the problem, the urine will
be acid. To lessen the impact of these stones, the patient
should eat an alkaline diet, including potatoes, vegetables,
and fruits, but not citrus fruits. In addition, the patient
should decrease protein intake, since protein tends to in-
crease levels of uric acid. In particular, the patient should
avoid liver, kidneys, fish roe, and sardines. Alkalinizing
mineral water is a good beverage choice.

For patients with calcium oxalate stones, avoid foods
that contain oxalates, such as spinach, rhubarb, beets, pars-
ley, sorrel, and chocolate. Those who have a tendency to
form oxalate stones often secrete too much calcium in their
urine, which reacts with oxalic acids to form the stones. For
this reason, these patients should be advised to restrict in-
take of dairy products, which are rich in calcium. Mineral
waters rich in magnesium will increase the solubility of cal-
cium. Both vitamin B, and folic acid are thought to restrict
the amount of calcium formed in the body.

Calcium phosphate stones are usually formed in the
presence of urinary infection. The urine is alkaline, so the
patient should eat foods that acidify the urine, such as meat,
fish, and eggs. However, dairy products should be avoided.

References
1. Howell AB, Vorsa N, Der Marderosian A, Foo LY.
Inhibition of the adherence of P-fimbriated Fsherichia
coli to uroepithelial-cell surfaces by proanthocyanidin
extracts from cranberries. The New England Fournal of
Medicme 1998, 339:10854 [letter].

----- PAGE 392 -----
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

t should come as no surprise that nature is rich in
| nes that nurture the reproductive system or in

some way address the process of conception and
birth. However, today the phytotherapist is faced with an
unfortunate 21st century dilemma. Some of the primary
remedies for the female reproductive system, widely used
by the Eclectic, Physiomedicalist, and Thomsonian
herbalists of previous centuries, are now seriously endan-
gered species. Currently, the most problematic of these
plants are:

Chamaelirium luteum (false unicorn root)
Cypripedium spp. (lady’s slipper)
Trillium erectum and T. pendulum (beth root)

The fact that healing plants of this importance have
become endangered to the degree that they have is one of
the signs of the ecological holocaust that humanity has
wrought. Though these plants are still occasionally abun-
dant locally, their ecological range has been dramatically
diminished. I caution against using them unless they are
from cultivated sources, which in the case of Cypripedium
is extremely difficult. Wildcrafting this plant is an ecolog-
ical crime.

REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM HERBS
AND ACTIONS

When considering the reproductive system, it is important
to identify the primary tonic herbs and next determine
other ways in which they impact the system (secondary
actions). From the list of emmenagogues that follows, we
shall select the most valuable tonics and explore their dif-
ferential indications. For more details on the secondary
actions of these herbs, please refer to chapters 25 and 26.

Herbal Emmenagogues

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Gentiana spp. (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)

Emmenagogues Demystified

productive system either directly or indirectly.

The term emmenagogue is commonly applied to plants used to treat a range of female reproduc-
tive conditions. Strictly speaking, however, emmenagogues are remedies that stimulate menstrual
flow and activity. In most modern herbals, the term is used in the wider sense to indicate a remedy
that normalizes and tones the female reproductive system. Such a broad definition is almost mean-
ingless, as it obscures the wealth of diverse actions these herbs offer. The herbs described in most
herbals as emmenagogues actually provide a whole range of distinct actions that benefit the re-

384

----- PAGE 393 -----
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
M. pulegium (pennyroyal)
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinaiis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

S. officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Senecio aureus (life root)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
T, vulgare (tansy)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (inden)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tropaeolum majus (nasturtium)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

For further clarification, the following section dis-
cusses some of the more toning emmenagogues, pre-
sented in terms of their primary effect upon the menstrual
process. Remember that all bitters will have an emmena-
gogue effect in the strict sense of the word—that is, they
will help improve menstrual function and flow. If this is
not evident, please review the information about bitters in
chapter 25.

Uterine Tonics

These plants have a toning, strengthening, nourishing ef-
fect on both the tissue and the function of the female re-
productive system. How and why they exert these effects
is usually unknown, but this should not belittle their re-
markable therapeutic contributions. Determining differ-
ential indications for these plants is one of the most con-
fused areas in modern herbalism. Important examples of
uterine tonics are Angelica sinensis (dong quai), Caulo-
phyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh), Cimicifuga racemosa
(black cohosh), and Mitchella repens (partridgeberry).

Emmenagogues

Among the many plants that can stimulate the menstrual
process, some also have a tonic effect on the whole sys-
tem. Of the emmenagogues listed previously, some work

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM .@ 385

through bitter stimulation and others through localized
irritation. Herbs that also nourish the system to some de-
gree include Achillea millefolium (yarrow), Artemisia vul-
garis (mugwort), and Mitchella repens (partridgeberry).

Hormonal Normalizers

A number of plants have a direct impact upon levels of
hormones in the body. Of course, there are many human
hormones, and only a few impact reproductive function.
Many claims can be made about plants that affect hor-
monal balance, but here we will limit our discussion to
plants that have an observable influence. As little en-
docrinological research has been undertaken on these
herbs, it is impossible to be specific in all cases about how
they work. Thus, the herbalist tends to refer to them in
terms of hormonal modulators or normalizers.

The most important of these plants in European phy-
totherapy is Vitex: agnus-castus (chasteberry). It is fair to
describe this plant as a normalizer, as it will tend to move
the body back to normal function, regardless of which fe-
male hormone is involved and whether the problem is an
excess or a deficiency of hormone. However, how it
achieves this effect is a matter of conjecture. Other uter-
ine tonics and bitters may have a similar effect because of
some of their more generalized toning influences, but
they are not as predictable as Vitex.

Uterine Astringents

An abundance of herbs reduce blood loss from the uterus,
whether due to excessively heavy periods (menorrhagia),
bleeding between periods (metrorrhagia), or organic dis-
ease, such as fibroids. The question of how they work re-
mains unanswered, because no astringent tannin reaches
the uterine tissue from the gut. Some, but not all, of these
plants may influence hormonal processes. Of the many
valuable astringents not on the list of emmenagogues
given earlier, consider Alchemilla vulgaris (lady’s mantle),
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse), Geranium macu-
Jatum (cranesbill), and Vinca major (periwinkle).

Uterine Demulcents

Similar comments can be made about the mechanisms of
action of the important reproductive system demulcent
remedies. There is no way that mucopolysaccharides find
their way to the uterus from the digestive process;
nonetheless, there is no question that these remedies
soothe inflamed tissue. The most toning is Canlophyllum
thalictroides (blue cohosh).

----- PAGE 394 -----
386 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Nervines and Antispasmodics

There are also a number of valuable remedies that impact
the autonomic innervation of this complex system. By
using the appropriate nervine or antispasmodic, much can
be achieved in terms of correcting functional tone. Herbs
in this category include Viburnum opulus (cramp bark),
Ve prunifolium (black haw), Cimicifuga racemosa (black
cohosh), Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort), and Pulsatilla
vulgaris (pasqueflower).

AMENORRHEA

Absence of menstruation, i.e., either lack of menarche or
cessation of menses. (The Merck Manual)

‘To recognize amenorrhea, one must know what constitutes
normal menstruation. The duration of:a menstrual period
is 28 + 3 days for 65% of women, with a range of 18 to 40
days. Once a menstrual pattern has been established, the
variation does not normally exceed five days. The average
duration of flow is 5 + 2 days, with a blood loss averaging
130 ml. Flow is generally heaviest on the second day.
Amenorrhea falls into three broad categories.

Primary Amenorrhea

Women with primary amenorrhea do not begin to men-
struate when expected. Because there is a wide variation
in normal onset of menstruation during puberty, applying
this diagnosis is problematic. In general, however, pri-
mary amenorrhea implies that menstruation has not yet
started by the age of 16 years.

With the safe and effective herbs available to the phy-
totherapist, treatment could begin at the age of 15 if
deemed necessary. However, competent diagnosis is re-
quired, as there are a number of diverse causes to consider,
including imperforate hymen, ovarian dysfunction, and
hormonal imbalance. Obviously, the treatment of primary
amenorrhea will be dictated by the underlying cause.

Secondary Amenorrhea

Secondary amenorrhea indicates cessation of menstrua-
tion after at least one normal period. This is common,
and causes include pregnancy, stress, loss or gain of
weight, menopause, breast-feeding, anemia, excessive ex-
ercise, discontinuation of oral contraceptives, side effects
of some drugs, ovarian cysts, and tumors.

Erratic or Irregular Menstruation
Women with erratic menstruation may have only three or
four periods in a year, or three very close together fol-

lowed by none for a few months. Numerous causes, sim-
ilar to those for secondary amenorrhea, are possible.

Treatment of Amenorrhea

The core herbal treatment guidelines for this condition
must start with tonic support for the reproductive system,
but can take into account many other issues specific to the
woman involved.

Actions Indicated

Emmenagogues are the classic treatment, as they can trig-
ger the menstrual process.

Hormonal normalizers will help the body regulate levels of
various hormones.

Uterine tonics will contribute their nourishing, toning
power.

Other actions will be indicated by the associated symptom
picture or case history. For example, if anxiety and
stress are an issue, consider appropriate nervines. If se-
vere menstrual cramps occur, use antispasmodics.

Specific Remedies

Most of the emmenagogues could be considered specifics.
However, care should be taken with the stronger emme-
nagogues, as they may be too stimulating and cause
cramping. Simple infusions can often solve this problem.
Plants such as Mentha pulegium (pennyroyal), Achillea
millefolium (yarrow), and Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort) can
help initiate flow, but if they are not effective, consider
the following prescription.

A Prescription for Amenorrhea Associated with
Hormonal Imbalance

Caulophyllum thalictroides 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: 2 ml of tincture three times a day until period starts

Table 18.1. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Amenorrhea with Hormonal Imbalance
ACTION HERBS

Artemisia vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Vitex agnus-castus

Emmenagogue

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Caulophylium thalictroides

----- PAGE 395 -----
A Prescription for Amenorrhea Associated with Stress

Cimicifuga racemosa 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day until period starts

Table 18.2. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Amenorrhea with Stress

ACTION HERBS

Emmenagogue Cimicifuga racemosa, Verbena officinalis,

Vitex agnus-castus
Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine relaxant Cimicifuga racemosa, Verbena officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Considerations will depend upon the underlying cause.
Thus, other therapeutic modalities, such as osteopathy
and acupuncture, may be indicated.

DYSMENORRHEA

Cyclic pain associated with menses. (The Merck Manual)

Dysmenorrhea, or painful menstruation, is the most com-
mon of all gynecologic complaints and the leading cause of
absenteeism of women from work, school, and other activ-
ities. In addition to identifiable pathological causes, a num-
ber of constitutional factors may lower the pain threshold
and thus appear to worsen dysmenorrhea. Common factors
include anemia, increase in obesity, chronic illness, over-
work, stress in general, diabetes, and poor nutrition. Two
main forms of dysmenorrhea can be identified.

Primary Dysmenorrbea

Primary dysmenorrhea is dysmenorrhea unrelated to any
definable pelvic lesion. It usually starts with the first ovu-
latory cycles, beginning in most cases before the age of 20
years. Primary dysmenorrhea is associated with nausea in
50% of patients, vomiting in 25% of patients, and in-
creased stool frequency in 35% of patients. The pain is
low and cramping, recurring in waves that probably cor-
relate with uterine contractions. The pain usually begins
a few hours before bleeding commences, comes to a peak
intensity within a few hours, and dissipates within two

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM . 387

days. It generally occurs over the midline of the abdomen,
and is relieved by the onset of good menstrual flow.

Secondary Dysmenorrhea

Secondary dysmenorrhea is related to the presence of pelvic
lesions associated with organic pelvic disease, such as en-
dometriosis, salpingitis (also known as pelvic inflamma-
tory disease, or PID), and postsurgical adhesions. The
contraceptive intrauterine device ([UD) may cause pain
problems.

Secondary dysmenorrhea begins up to a few days be-
fore menstruation and lasts several days after the onset of
flow. Often it is lateralized to one side of the body, and it
does not characteristically peak and diminish as clearly or
quickly as primary dysmenorrhea. In general, the onset of
secondary dysmenorrhea occurs later in life in women
who have not had primary dysmenorrhea. However, it
may also be superimposed onto a preexisting case of pri-
mary dysmenorrhea.

Treatment of Dysmenorrhea

Actions Indicated

Antispasmodies ease the muscle spasms that are the imme-
diate cause of pain.

Nervines will help associated psychological tension or
anxiety.

Diuretic remedies are indicated if dysmenorrhea is of a con-
gestive nature, accompanied by water retention.

Uterine tonics provide the basis for any healing work in
this body system.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated if the diagnosis sug-
gests that hormonal imbalance is making a pivotal
contribution.

Specific Remedies

As there are a number of possible underlying causes for
this all-too-common problem, a number of remedies have
been called specifics. Remedies of value in dysmenorrhea
related to a whole range of different causes are Cimmicifuga
racemosa (black cohosh), Dioscorea villosa (wild yam),
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), Viburnum opulus (cramp
bark), and Y prunifolium (black haw).

A Prescription for Dysmenorrhea

Viburnum prunifolium T part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed

----- PAGE 396 -----
388 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 18.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Dysmenorrhea

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine Viburnum prunifolium, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Cimicifuga racemosa
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

A Prescription for Dysmenorrhea Associated with
Pelvic Lesions

Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Dysmenorrhea with Pelvic Lesions

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Dioscorea villosa,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

The addition of Dioscorea villosa will provide a more
reliable antispasmodic action if a physical problem is pre-
sent. This prescription will support, but xot replace, what-
ever treatment is necessary for the underlying problem.

Broader Context of Treatment

Dietary and supplemental approaches are well known, but
unnecessary if appropriate herbs are used. Psychological
issues can be fundamental here. Low tolerance to the sen-
sation of uterine contraction may be learned behavior.

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME

A condition characterized by nervousness, irritability,
emotional instability, depression and possibly headaches,
edema and mastalgia; it occurs during the 7 to 10 days be-
fore menstruation and disappears a few hours after onset
of menstrual flow. (The Merck Manual)

The name premenstrual syndrome (PMS) describes a broad
range of symptoms that occur cyclically and are severe
enough to disturb a woman's life or cause her to seek help
from a health practitioner. Most women experience some
cyclical bodily changes during the menstrual years, corre-
sponding to a pattern of cycling hormones. Most of these
changes are normal, and many cultures observe and ritu-
alize these subtle shifts in body response and mental and
emotional focus.

Women often express a positive attitude about the
conscious observance of these patterns within their own
bodies. However, when the hormonal and chemical
changes cause debilitating symptoms, they can disrupt the
function of virtually all body systems as well as the indi-
vidual’s emotional life.

PMS is diagnosed on the basis of when symptoms are
present. There is, by definition, a period of time for PMS
sufferers during which symptoms are absent, usually just
after the onset or end of menses. PMS occurs during the
proliferative or luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, when
evels of estrogen and progesterone are relatively high.
Estrogen is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant and
progesterone is a CNS depressant. What is important is
the relationship of estrogen to progesterone during the
luteal phase.

A number of etiological factors have been identified
for primary PMS:

Estrogen excess

Progesterone deficiency

Fluid retention

Hypoglycemia

Decreased production of prostaglandin E,
Increased production of other prostaglandins
Magnesium deficiency

Increased prolactin levels

It is believed that many of the symptoms of PMS re-
late to a shift in the fluid in the water compartments of
the body (intracellular, extracellular, and intravascular),
with increased retention of water and water moving into
the extracellular spaces. This is mediated by increased
levels of ACTH and aldosterone. The cells are more re-
ceptive to insulin in the premenstrual part of the cycle,
which causes relative hypoglycemia and subsequent car-
bohydrate cravings. Magnesium deficiency leads to de-
creased levels of dopamine in the brain, which leads in
turn to an increase in levels of CNS stimulators (nor-
epinephrine and serotonin), Increases in prolactin result
in decreases in progesterone.

----- PAGE 397 -----
Table 18.5. The PMS Symptom Picture

SYMPTOM CATEGORY SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS

Behavioral Personality alterations may occur, in the
form of nervousness, irritability, agitation,
unreasonable temper, fatigue, depression.
Symptoms that suggest clinical depression,
such as anxiety, palpitations, tightening in
the chest, and hyperventilation, are common.
Violent crimes by women and suicide are

often committed in the premenstrual period.

Neurological Headache, vertigo, syncope, paresthesias of
the hands or feet, and aggravation of

seizure disorders have all been recorded.

Respiratory Asthma may be intensified.

Gastrointestinal Changes that may occur include
constipation, increase or decrease in
appetite, and carbohydrate cravings,

particularly for sugar and chocolate.

Miscellaneous Other symptoms include edema, weight
gain, backache, enuresis, oliguria, capillary
fragility, exacerbations of dermatologic

disease, breast changes, and eye complaints.

Four major symptom patterns of PMS have been identified.

PMS-A. Among women with PMS, 80% have symptoms
characteristic of PMS-A. Symptoms are predomi-
nantly anxiety-related, and are associated with ex-
cess estrogen as well as CNS stimulation that results
in feelings of anxiety. High estrogen levels may be
related to a deficiency in progesterone or, in other
words, a high estrogen-to-progesterone ratio. It
may also be related to the body’s inability to break
down estrogen, which may be due to poor liver
function or vitamin B deficiency.

PMS-H. PMS-H affects about 60% of women with PMS.
Here, signs and symptoms are predominantly hy-
perhydration (bloating and edema), increased levels of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and _in-
creased water- and salt-saving activities in the kidneys.

PMS-C. For 40% of women with PMS, the symptom
picture is dominated by carbohydrate cravings due
to increased responsiveness to insulin.

PMS-D. About 5% of PMS sufferers are primarily af-
fected by depression related to excess progesterone,
which causes CNS depression.

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 2 389

‘Treatment of PMS

Note that the herbal treatment guidelines given here con-
sist of two components, a daily prescription for working
on hormonal issues and a combination to address acute
PMS symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Nervines usually alleviate symptoms, but rarely clear the
recurrent pattern.

Antispasmodics ease any accompanying dysmenorrhea.

Diuretics are indicated if water retention is part of the
picture.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated if the diagnosis sug-

gests that hormonal imbalance is making a pivotal con-
tribution to PMS.

Specific Remedies

Different remedies may act as specifics for specific
women, so it is difficult to generalize. From my clinical
experience, I suggest that Seutellaria lateriflora, in the
short term, is as close as possible to a specific for symp-
tomatic relief. Longer-term specifics are likely to be hor-
monally focused remedies, such as Vitex agnus-castus.

A Prescription for Acute PMS Symptoms

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms

The dosage of this symptomatic medication may be
increased until the desired relief is experienced. The reg-
imen may be altered as necessary, varying time of day and
quantity of dose to suit the individual’s needs. For exam-
ple, she may take the entire dose first thing in the morn-
ing or smaller amounts at frequent intervals throughout
the day. The woman’s experience is the guiding principle
here. Always treat the human being, not the theory about
the condition.

A Supportive Prescription to Normalize

Hormone Levels

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5ml of tincture once a day throughout cycle. Use this

prescription in combination with prescription for symptomatic

relief given earlier.

----- PAGE 398 -----
390 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 18.6. Actions Supplied by Two PMS Formulas

ACTION HERBS

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale leaf

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

If water retention is the predominant symptom, then
focus more on diuretics. Palpitations would suggest that
Leonurus cardiaca is relevant. As an example of how this
basic approach can be modified to address specific symp-
toms, consider the following.

A Prescription for PMS Associated with
Transitory Skin Problems

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Pulsatilla vulgaris 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms. Use
in combination with Prescription to Normalize Hormone Levels,
given earlier,

Table 18.7. Actions Supplied by Prescriptions to
Normalize Hormone Levels and for PMS with Skin
Problems

ACTION HERBS

Nervine Scutellaria lateriflora, Pulsatilla vulgaris,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Scutellaria lateriflora, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale leaf, Galium aparine
Alterative Galium aparine, Pulsatilla vulgaris
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Broader Context of Treatment

The holistic practitioner must focus on a whole gamut of
relevant issues. Herbal treatment can be exceptionally ef-
fective, but the individual will also benefit from appropri-
ate stress management techniques and possibly dietary
support. A number of dietary guidelines are relevant:

Limit refined sugar, as it increases excretion of B vitamins,
magnesium, and chromium and contributes to in-
creased insulin secretion.

Limit salt to less than 3 g/day.

Limit consumption of red meat to 3 ounces a day because of
its high sodium and fat content. Some evidence shows
that residual hormones in red meat contribute to fibro-
cystic breast disease and menstrual cramps.

Limit alcohol to 1 ounce per day. Alcohol destroys B vita-
mins, magnesium, and chromium, and can be a potent
depressant for some people.

Limit caffeine, as it intensifies anxiety and contributes to
fibrocystic breast disease.

Limit dairy products. They are high in fat, interfere with
magnesium absorption, and may cause constipation.

Limit fat intake to 30% of total calories.

Limit the consumption of cold foods.

Limit protein intake to 1 g/kg of body weight.

Avoid licorice. Licorice stimulates the production of
aldosterone.

Minimize the consumption of oxalates, including spinach and
beet greens, as they interfere with mineral absorption.

Increase complex carbohydrates to 40% of diet by adding
more whole grains, leafy green vegetables, and
legumes. These foods are high in fiber and B vitamins
and release sugar slowly.

Increase potassium-rich foods, including sunflower seeds,
dates, figs, peaches, bananas, and tomatoes. These may
help prevent water retention.

Increase intake of natural diuretics, which include arti-
chokes, asparagus, parsley, and watercress.

Researcher David Horrobin advocates the use of
gamma linolenic acid (GLA). GLA is found naturally in
human milk, evening primrose oil, and a few other plant
oils. (See chapter 5 for more information.) Other nutri-
ents that encourage the conversion of fatty acids to
prostaglandin E, are magnesium, vitamin By, zinc, niacin,
and vitamin C.

----- PAGE 399 -----
MENOPAUSE

The physiological cessation of menses as a result of de-
creasing ovarian function. (The Merck Manual)

Menopause is one of the major rites of human passage. In
our society, however, far too many women approach
menopause with dread, fearing that they will no longer be
valued as women. This is a time of change in a woman's
role as mother, lover, wife. However, because people have
the unfortunate tendency to use their socially defined
roles to create their self-images, the changes brought by
menopause may be perceived in terms of loss.

On the other hand, menopause may also be viewed
as a great gift in a woman’ life, a liberation and an initi-
ation. It presents an opportunity to reevaluate one’s pur-
pose in life and to change in positive ways. Women who
celebrate menopause see change not as something to
fear, but as an opportunity to embrace what the next
stage of life will bring, to move on to greater fulfillment.
It might even be said that part of the problem with the
male leaders of our world is that they don’t experience
the gift of menopause!

Climacteric and Menopause

Menopause is the cessation of menstruation and the ter-
mination of fertility, which are not the same thing and
may occur at different times. Climacteric is a transition
phase that lasts for 15 to 20 years, during which time
ovarian function and hormone production decline and
the body readapts. Menopause is simply one event within
this process.

Grasping the difference between these two natural
processes is important, as it is the key to successful treat-
ment of problems that might arise as these events unfold.
Neither menopause nor climacteric is a health problem,
but rather a natural part of the process of human life.
Either may be accompanied by problems, and these
should be addressed, but assumptions about our human-
ness and the role of women are as much a problem here
as the biology of the process.

Advancing age brings with it inexorable changes in
ovarian and menstrual function. The average length of a
woman’s monthly cycle gradually shortens from about 28
days at age 20 to a little longer than 26 days at age 40. At
this point, the ovaries begin to lose their ability to pro-
duce mature eggs, as well as estrogen and progesterone.
Thus, there is a sharp drop in fertility for women over the
age of 40. The regular intervals between periods that typ-
ify menstruation for most women become interspersed
with increasing numbers of cycles of shorter and longer

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 391

duration. Finally, the interval between periods lengthens
and menstruation ceases.

For several years before menopause, the decline in
ovarian hormone production brings changes in physiology
that are expressed as a variety of discomforting signs and
symptoms. The years of progressive ovarian failure that
lead up to menopause, a time of great emotional as well as
physical adjustment, are what are referred to as the climac-
teric, or “change of life.” In the United States, the major-
ity of women experience menopause between the ages of
40 and 55, and the average age of menopause is 51 years.

Table 18.8 presents a comparison of menopause and
climacteric, as well as other factors that affect the whole
process.

Table 18.8. Differences between Menopause and
Climacteric

MENOPAUSE CLIMACTERIC
Counterpart of menarche Counterpart of puberty
One biological event A series of changes

Cessation of periods Transition period in which ovarian
function and hormone production

decline
Termination of fertility
Lasts 1 to 7 years Lasts 15 to 20 years

Occurs between ages 48 and 52 Occurs between ages 40 and 60

Physical Changes after Menopause

Some atrophy of vagina, cervix, uterus, and ovaries occurs.

Vaginal wall shortens, thins, and loses muscle tone.

Labia majora become thinner, paler, less elastic.

Supporting structures lose muscle tone (sphincter mus-
cles, bladder, rectum).

Secretion of cervical mucus is reduced.

Breast size, firmness, and shape change.

Body hair thins in most women, but increases in some.

Wrinkling and loss of skin tone occur.

Body fat is redistributed.

Bone mass is lost.

Metabolic rate slows.

Hot Flashes

The most common symptom caused by the menopausal
decline in estrogen secretion is hot flashes, or flushing,
described as feelings of warmth and sweating. About 85%

----- PAGE 400 -----
392 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

of women over the age of 50 are affected. The onset is
sudden, and when associated with palpitations, dizziness,
or faintness, they can be a frightening experience.
Emotional stress, exercise, alcohol, and certain foods can
bring them on for some individuals. Typically, hot flashes
occur several times a day and last a few minutes at a time.
Vitex agnus-castus is an effective remedy for this often dis-
tressing symptom.

Insomnia, Fatigue, and Depression

Menopause is often a time of emotional upheaval.
Depression, insomnia, anxiety, and questions about self-
worth and sexual adequacy may develop, as attention is
drawn to physical ailments and declining health. The
problem may be compounded by fears about what to ex-
pect from menopause. Other contributing factors may be
marital discord and changes in family relationships that
occur as the children mature, become more independent,
and leave home.

Although some women note that their desire for sex-
ual activity wanes after menopause, decreased estrogen
secretion has no direct effect on libido. As long as vaginal
symptoms are effectively treated, there is no reason why
postmenopausal women should not be able to enjoy a sat-
isfying sex life. In general, the emotional symptoms asso-
ciated with menopause are caused by situational factors,
not hormone deficiencies.

Genitourinary Symptoms

A variety of genital and urinary symptoms may develop
during the climacteric. Falling hormone levels cause the
vaginal tissues to shrink and atrophy, and there is a loss of
support related to weakening of the pelvic tissues.
Especially in women who have borne multiple children,
the relaxation of the supporting tissues may be severe
enough to allow the uterus to prolapse (drop down) into
the vagina. With decreased production of natural lubri-
cating substances, the vagina becomes dry and irritated.
Itching and dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse) may
result.

Hypertension ana Atherosclerosis

Heart disease and “hardening of the arteries” are less
prevalent among premenstrual women than they are
among men. However, in the years after menopause,
these differences between the sexes gradually disappear.
Similarly, women who have their ovaries surgically re-
moved prior to natural menopause are known to have a
higher incidence of heart attack and atherosclerosis.

While estrogen deficiency is believed to play a role in the
development of atherosclerotic heart disease, post-
menopausal estrogen replacement therapy has not yet
been proved to be of benefit for this indication.

Osteoporosis
This disorder is characterized by a slow, progressive thin-
ning and loss of calcium content of the bones. Although
the process actually begins in the fourth decade in both
sexes, it is accelerated in women after menopause. Thin,
white, inactive female smokers are predisposed to osteo-
porosis. With time, their bones become brittle and more
susceptible to fractures from seemingly minor injuries.
‘When the disease is advanced, even coughing, sudden
movements, or everyday activities may cause a bone to
break. Wrist and hip fractures and collapse of the spinal
vertebrae are especially common. The latter results in a
loss of height and a forward curvature of the spine.
Estrogen deficiency plays a role in postmenopausal
osteoporosis by diminishing the intestinal absorption of
calcium. In addition, it increases the loss of calcium from
the skeleton. Other hormonal factors are also known to
be important.

Treatment of Menopausal Complaints

As discussed, while menopause and climacteric are not
diseases, a series of specific symptomatic problems may
arise throughout the process. In addition, other health
problems may be compounded. These should be ap-
proached within the context of treating particular symp-
toms while supporting the menopausal changes.

In terms of tonic support, the reproductive, en-
docrine, nervous, and cardiovascular systems should all be
taken into consideration. Of course, there is also a funda-
mental need for uterine tonics.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers will help the body’s endocrine con-
trol mechanisms balance activity in the face of the
menopausal changes.

Uterine tonics help the various organs and tissues involved
move through the changes with minimal trauma.

Nervine relaxants are indicated for the anxiety and tension
that often accompany menopausal changes. Of course,
the nervines will ideally also be tonics.

Antidepressants will be needed if the woman experiences
depression.

Bitters help in a generalized way as stimulants. These may
be taken as part of the diet.

----- PAGE 401 -----
Specific Remedies

In European herbalism, Vitex agnus-castus and Hypericum
perforatum have a reputation for easing the symptomatic
distress that may accompany this natural process. H. per-
foratum may help lessen any depression that might occur.
Leonurus cardiaca can help with the distressing tachycardia
that often accompanies hot flashes.

In North American herbalism, Cimicifuga racemosa
and Senecio aureus seem to play a similar role as potential
specifics. It is worth noting that Lydia Pinkham’s
Compound Elixir, a women’s tonic popular in the 19th
century, originally contained the following herbs:

Aletris farinosa (unicorn root)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Senecio aureus (life root)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek seed)

Today, there is much emphasis on isoflavone-rich
herbs such as Trifolium pratense (red clover) and Glycine
max (soy). Such phytoestrogen-containing herbs may
have much to offer, but their use is not based on long-
standing herbal experience. At best, it is based on theo-
retical considerations; and at worst, on marketing hype.

A Prescription for Easing Menopause Symptoms

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Menopause Symptoms

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine relaxant and tonic Hypericum perforatum

Antidepressant Hypericum perforatum

A Prescription for Menopause Symptoms with
Anxiety and Tachycardia

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM -@ 393

Table 18.10. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Menopause Symptoms with Anxiety and
Tachycardia

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa
Relaxing nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum

Antidepressant Hypericum perforatum

Broader Context of Treatment

A number of excellent books explore holistic approaches
to menopausal problems. Rather than try to duplicate
such work, I suggest you refer to the bibliography for
books I recommend as further reading.

PREGNANCY

Several herbs have been famous throughout history for
preparing mothers for childbirth. Herbs can shorten
labor and decrease the likelihood that complications will
arise during pregnancy and in childbirth. The most
widely used of these in Europe is raspberry leaf (Rubus
idaeus). In a British medical journal, one doctor said of
raspberry leaf tea,

Somewhat shamefacedly I have encouraged expectant
mothers to drink this infusion. In a great many cases labor
has been free and easy from muscular spasm.!

Rubus idaeus leaf has a mildly soothing astringent and
tonic action. The herb helps to quell nausea and is slightly
sedative. Most important, it has a particular affinity for
the uterus, and acts to strengthen the uterine and pelvic
muscles and prevent miscarriage. In the uterus, the action
of raspberry leaves is both relaxant and astringent. The
relaxant properties tend to predominate and bring about
tonic relaxation of the smooth muscle of the uterus, help-
ing to reduce the pain of uterine contractions at labor. In
addition, raspberry leaf tones the mucous membranes
throughout the body, soothes the kidneys and urinary
tract, and helps prevent hemorrhage.

Raspberry leaf has been principally used before deliv-
ery to encourage safe, easy, and speedy childbirth, and
after delivery to improve milk production and speed re-
covery from birth.

----- PAGE 402 -----
394 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySrem

Herbs to Avoid during Pregnancy

A literature search for plants traditionally used around the
world for abortifacient or uterine stimulant actions yields
a long list of plants to avoid. According to authors der
Marderosian and Liberti, in Natural Product Medicine, 565
species from 125 families have such effects.’ These other-
wise extremely useful remedies often share chemistry that
in some way irritates the placenta or causes muscular con-
tractions in the uterus. If we limit ourselves to those
plants most often encountered in Western phytotherapy,
we can identify the following groupings of plants to avoid
in pregnancy.

Bitters

Because bitters stimulate metabolism in general, and
some bitters also act as emmenagogues to stimulate
smooth muscle activity, it should be clear that bitters are
contraindicated during pregnancy. All strong bitters
should be excluded, particularly the following:

Aloe vera (aloe)

Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Chelidonium majus (celandine)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)

T. vulgare (tansy)

Alkaloid-Containing Plants

Alkaloids are a diverse group of secondary plant con-
stituents that have a wide range of pharmacological effects
upon the body. The stronger representatives should be
avoided during pregnancy, including the caffeine-contain-
ing social drugs coffee and tea. Some plants to avoid are:

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)

Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Colchicum autumnale (autumn crocus)
Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Lobelia inflata (\obelia)

Podophyllum peltatum (mayapple)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)

Volatile Oil-Containing Plants

Many essential oils can have a devastating impact on the
placenta and fetus if taken internally during pregnancy.
Pregnant women should avoid taking all volatile oils in-
ternally. However, if used in moderation, the whole plant

from which the oil was distilled will usually be fine.
Important exceptions are:

Funiperus communis (juniper)

Mentha pulegium (pennyroyal)

Myristica officinalis (nutmeg, in large amounts)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Strong Laxatives

The strong herbal laxatives often, but not always, owe
their effects to the presence of anthraquinone con-
stituents that stimulate peristalsis in the bowel. They may
have a similar stimulating impact upon the uterus. Ifa lax-
ative is needed during pregnancy, it should be either a
bulk or a hepatic laxative. However, standardized senna
products designed for use during pregnancy may be safe.
Please refer to chapters 7 and 10 for more information on
anthraquinone-containing laxatives, and 13 for more in-
formation on other types of laxatives.

Aloe vera (aloe)

Fuglans cinerea (butternut)

Rhamnus cathartica (purging buckthorn)
R. frangula (buckthorn)

R. purshiana (cascara sagrada)

Rheum palmatum (Chinese rhubarb)
Senna alexandrina (senna)

Other Herbs to Avoid in Pregnancy

Other plants to be avoided do not fit into convenient cat-
egories; some are listed here, Anthelmintic remedies, for
example, should be avoided because they often stimulate
uterine contractions, as well as containing potentially
toxic constituents. Male fern is an example of an an-
thelmintic remedy for the treatment of worm infestations.

Cinchona spp.(quinine)

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Dryopteris filix-mas (male fern)
Gossypium herbaceum (cotton)
Phytolacca spp. (poke)

Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Vinca spp. (periwinkle)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

Pregnancy Warnings from Botanical Safety
Handbook

The following herbs are listed in the Botanical Safety
Handbook as “not to be used during pregnancy unless oth-
erwise directed by an expert qualified in the appropriate
use of this substance.” Unfortunately, the authors do not

----- PAGE 403 -----
adequately clarify whether inclusion in this safety cate-
gory is based on actual clinical records or on theoretical
extrapolation from in vitro studies on constituents. This
limits the value of an otherwise excellent book.

Achillea milléfolium
Achyranthes bidentata
Acorus calamus

A. gramineus
Adiantum pedatum
Agathosma betulina
A. crenulata

A. serratifolia
Albizia julibrissin
Alkanna tinctoria
Aloe ferox

A, perryi

A. vera
Andrographis paniculata
Angelica archangelica
A. atropurpurea

A, sinensis
Anthriscus ceréfolium
Apium graveolens
Aralia californica

A. nudicaulis

A. racemosa
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Arisaema japonicum
Aristolochia clematitis
A. contorta

A, debilis

A, serpentaria
Arnica spp.
Artemisia abrotanum
absinthium

annua

capillaris
douglasiana
lactiflora

scoparia

vulgaris

Asarum canadense

AS BS Bk a BS BS Bs

A, europaeum

A, heteropides

A, sieboldii
Asclepias asperula
A, tuberosa
Baptisia tinctoria
Berberis vulgaris

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 395

Borago officinalis
Capsella bursa-pastoris
Carthamus tinctorius
Caulophyllum thalictroides
Cephaelis ipecacuanha
Chamaelirium luteum
Chamaemelum nobile
Changium smyrnoides
Chelidonium majus
Cimicifuga racemosa
Cinchona calisaya

C. ledgeriana

C. officinalis

C. pubescens
Cinnamomum camphora
C. cassia

C. verum

Cnicus benedictus
Coffea arabica

Cola acuminata

C. nitida

Commiphora madagascariensis
C. molmol.

C. mukul.

C. myrrha

Coptis chinensis

C. groenlandica
Corydalis yanhusuo
Crocus sativus

Cullen corylifolia
Cupbea balsamona
Curcuma aromatica

C. domestica

C. longa

C. zedoaria

Cyathula officinalis
Cymbopogon citratus
Daucus carota
Dryopteris filix-mas
Ephedra distachya

E. equisetina

E. gerardiana

E. intermedia

E. sinica

Equisetum hyemale
Eschscholzia californica
Eupatorium purpureum
Ferula assaifoetida

E foetida

F. rubricaulis

----- PAGE 404 -----
396 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Forsythia suspensa
Fouquieria splendens
Fritillavia cirrbosa
EF. thunbergii

Fucus vesiculosus
Genista tinctoria
Glycyrrhiza echinata
G. glabra

G. uralensis
Gossypium herbaceum
G. hirsutum
Hedeoma pulegioides
Hepatica nobilis
Hordeum vulgare
Hydrastis canadensis
Hyssopus officinalis
Inula helenium

Iris versicolor

E. virginica
Juniperus communis
J. monosperma

F. osteosperma

F. oxycedrus

j. virginiana
Leonurus cardiaca
L. heterophyllus

L. sibiricus
Leptandra virginica
Levisticum officinale
Ligusticum chuanxiong
L. porteri

Lobelia inflata

L. siphilitica
Lomatium dissectum
Lycium barbarum
L. chinense

Lycopus americanus
L. europaeus

L. virginicus
Magnolia officinalis
Mabonia aquifolium
M. nervosa

M. repens
Marrubium vulgare
Mentha pulegium
Monarda clinopodia
M. didyma

M. fistulosa

M. pectinata

M. punctata

Myristica fragrans
Nardostachys jatamansi
Nasturtium officinale
Nepeta cataria

Paeonia suffruticosa
Panax notoginseng
Petroselinum crispum
Phellodendron amurense
P. chinense

Picrasma excelsa
Pilocarpus jaborandi

P. microphyllus

P. pennatifolius
Pimpinella anisum
Pinellia ternata
Podophyllum hexandrum
P. peltatum

Polygala senega
Portulaca oleracea
Prunus persica

Quassia amara
Rhamnus cathartica

R. frangula

R. purshiana

Rheum officinale

R. palmatum

R. tanguticum

Ricinus communis
Rosmarinus officinalis
Ruta graveolens

Salvia officinalis
Sanguinaria canadensis
Senna alexandrina

S. obtusifolia

S. tora

Symphytum officinale
Tanacetum parthenium
T. vulgare

Thuja occidentalis
Trichosanthes kirilowii
Trifolium pratense
Trigonella foenum-graecum
Trillium erectum
Tussilago farfara
Verbena hastata

V. officinalis

Vetiveria zizanoides
Vitex agnus-castus
Withania somnifera
Zanthoxylum americanum

----- PAGE 405 -----
Z. bungeanum

Z. clava-herculis
Z. schinifolium

Z. simulans
Zingiber officinale
Ziziphus spinosa

THE FIRST TRIMESTER

Counting from the first day of a woman’s last menstrual
period, pregnancy typically lasts 40 weeks and is often re-
ferred to in three parts, called trimesters. The first
trimester lasts until week 12, the second spans week 13 to
the end of week 27, and the third encompasses weeks 28
to 40. These divisions, however, are arbitrary. The first
trimester is a time of profound changes inside the body,
but the experience is very individual. For example, for one
woman, the first trimester may bring increased energy
and a sense of well-being, but another woman might feel
increasingly tired and emotional. Still others don’t notice
many changes until much later in pregnancy.

Although the physical changes of early pregnancy can
be uncomfortable, they almost never endanger either
mother or baby’s health. A number of common symptoms
occur, but not all women will experience them. They in-
clude fatigue, nausea and vomiting, urinary frequency,
breast tenderness, headaches, dizziness, and weight gain.

Threatened Miscarriage

For those who have suffered miscarriages in the past,
herbs may prove effective in preventing repeated miscar-
riages. Herbs can help as long as the fetus is normal and
the mother’s general physical, emotional, and mental
health is good. On the other hand, no herbal remedy will
block appropriate miscarriage. Most cases of miscarriage
are a natural rejection ofa malformed fetus.

When miscarriage occurs more than once in the
same woman, however, it may be related to a problem in
her body, rather than the baby’s. In a case like this, it is es-
pecially important to build up her general health as well
as that of her partner before they attempt to conceive
again. To ensure fewer complications, women should take
at least 6 to 12 months between pregnancies.

When chronic poor health, inadequate diet, or
trauma and stress of any kind has depleted a woman's gen-
eral strength, herbs can provide extra vitality, especially to
the womb, and so help avoid unnecessary miscarriage. If
cramping abdominal pains or bleeding occur, medical
attention is needed immediately.

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM ~ 397

Specific Remedies

A number of plants have a well-deserved reputation for
preventing miscarriage. It may be significant that two of
them are now endangered species; these will not be dis-
cussed. Other important plants are listed here:

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)

Other plants that have been widely used to prevent
miscarriage are Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary), Rubus
idgeus (raspberry leaf), Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn),
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry), Leonurus cardiaca (mother-
wort), Allium sativum (garlic), and Trigonella foenum-
graecum (fenugreek).

A Prescription to Help Prevent Miscarriage
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to 5 ml

three times a day

Table 18.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription to Help
Prevent Miscarriage

ACTION HERB

Uterine tonic Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine relaxant Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Broader Context of Treatment

The woman should eat plenty of foods containing vita-
mins E and C. Asparagus and celery are said to be
strengthening.

Morning Sickness

Morning sickness refers to the nausea and vomiting some
women experience when they become pregnant. It is
caused by the sudden increase in hormone levels during
pregnancy. Although morning sickness is more common
in the morning, it can last all day for some women. It is
very common early in pregnancy, but tends to go away
later, and is almost always gone by the second trimester
(the fourth month). However, there is no set time for it to
stop, because each woman and each pregnancy is different,
Morning sickness is seen in about 50% of pregnancies,
and tends to worsen with each successive pregnancy.

----- PAGE 406 -----
398 «z- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

The exact cause of morning sickness is not known,
but various theories have been proposed. One suggests
that the rapid change in hormone levels in early preg-
nancy and the resultant high levels of progesterone may
stimulate the vomit center in the brain. Progesterone re-
laxes smooth muscle throughout the body, including arte-
rial smooth muscle, and this produces a drop in blood
pressure, which may account for the tiredness and
lethargy associated with the nausea and vomiting.

During the first 12 to 14 weeks of pregnancy, when
most women experience sickness, the hormones are pri-
marily produced in the corpus luteum in the ovaries. After
this time, hormone production shifts to the placenta,
which may help explain why morning sickness stops at
around the same time (12 to 14 weeks). Sickness may also
be related to low blood pressure; high progesterone levels
may interfere with adequate circulation of blood to the
brain, especially upon rising. Getting up slowly will help
to relieve this.

Another theory holds that morning sickness is associ-
ated with low blood sugar, which normally occurs in early
pregnancy. Elevating blood sugar levels by eating small,
frequent meals may help. However, low-sugar foods
should be emphasized, as sugar in the stomach can aggra-
vate nausea.

There are no general rules for treating morning sickness,
as the causes vary from one woman to another. Treatment
should aim at what appears to be the underlying cause.
Antiemetics are important, as they will calm the vomit re-
flex, no matter what the cause of morning sickness. Valuable
antiemetics that are safe to use in early pregnancy are:

Ballota nigra (black horehound)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

In addition, many of the herbs that aid digestion will
help. The carminative, antispasmodic, and relaxing
nervines are especially important:

Cinnamomum aromaticum (cinnamon bark)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel seed)
Humulus lupulus (hops)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Zingiber officinale (gingerroot)

Mucilage-rich demulcents such as Chondrus crispus
(Iceland moss) and Ulmus rubra (slippery elm) help soothe
the whole of the digestive tract. Both of these herbs are
highly nutritious, containing many minerals and trace el-
ements. They are also easily digested, ideal for conditions
associated with weakness of the stomach.

A Prescription for Morning Sickness

Zingiber officinale 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Ballota nigra 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture at night and in the morning, building
up to 5 ml if needed

A Supplemental Infusion for Morning Sickness
Mentha piperita
Matricaria recutita

1 part

1 part

Dosage: Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boil-
ing water. Drink often during the day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Eat numerous small meals throughout the day, rather than
three large meals.

Avoid foods and odors that bring on symptoms.

Eat small starchy snacks, such as crackers, in bed before
arising.

Maintain electrolyte balance if vomiting is severe.

Vitamin By: 100 mg to 300mg/day

Constipation

High levels of progesterone relax the intestinal muscles,
and thus reduce their ability to propel the contents of the
bowel toward the rectum and out of the body. In addition,
as pregnancy progresses, the weight of the baby and pla-
centa increases, and the pressure they exert on the lower
bowel aggravates the tendency to constipation. When the
enlarged uterus impedes circulation to the bowel, the ac-
tion of the intestinal muscles is also restricted. Similarly,
tension and anxiety experienced by the pregnant woman
also impair the action of these muscles. Other factors that
can cause or exacerbate constipation during pregnancy
are consumption of iron supplements and starchy meals
consisting of refined flour products.

As already noted, anthraquinone-containing stimu-
lant laxatives are not safe for use during pregnancy. Aim
for gentle therapy, utilizing the following treatment con-
siderations and the guidelines given in chapter 13.

----- PAGE 407 -----
Increase water intake to 8 glasses per day.

Increase exercise. Walking half a mile a day is an appropri-
ate activity.

Increase intake of fresh fruits and certain dried fruits, such as
prunes, raisins, and figs.

Increase fiber intake.

Use bulk laxatives, such as psyllium seeds. Take 1 table-
spoon three times a day in 1/4 cup of juice.

Varicose Veins

To return blood to the heart, the veins in the legs must
work against gravity. This is accomplished by muscle con-
tractions in the lower legs, which act as pumps. These
muscles are toned, elastic vein walls and tiny one-way
valves in the veins. The valves open as blood flows toward
the heart and close to stop blood from flowing backward.
Varicose veins occur when these valves malfunction, caus-
ing the blood that should be moving toward the heart to
flow backward. Blood pools in the veins, and they enlarge
and become varicose.

The developing fetus may become a source of physi-
cal resistance to the easy return of blood to the trunk,
thus promoting the development of varicose veins. These
may occur early in pregnancy but generally worsen as the
pregnancy advances. Symptoms vary from painless, cos-
metically problematic areas to varicosities causing mild or
severe pain. Sometimes, a varicosity may occur in the
labia majora. For more details on the herbal treatment of
varicosities, please see chapter 14.

Fatigue and Somnolence
Some pregnant women require excessive periods of rest
or sleep during the first trimester. It is normal for sleep
requirements to be as great as 18 hours a day. If the
woman is not working or attending school and does not
have young children, she should sleep whenever possible.
Ingestion of protein may help alleviate this symptom.
Some women become depressed at their inability to
continue the normal pace of daily activity established be-
fore pregnancy. They should be counseled that this symp-
tom usually completely resolves by the fourth month of
gestation. Blood studies should be performed to rule out
anemia. Avoid herbal stimulants, neurological or
metabolic.

Anemia

Prevention of anemia is a most important aspect of ante-
natal care. Hemoglobin, the iron and protein compound
contained in erythrocytes (red blood cells), is responsible
for transporting oxygen from the lungs to all parts of the

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 399

body, including the placenta and fetus. If hemoglobin lev-
els fall, the body’s ability to access oxygen falls accordingly.

During pregnancy, the blood volume increases at a
faster rate than the erythrocytes multiply, so the erythro-
cytes are diluted by extra fluid. Hemoglobin carried by
erythrocytes drops from about 11 g to approximately | g.
Hemoglobin levels less than 1 g constitute anemia.
Symptoms of anemia include lethargy, irritability, and
breathlessness on slight exertion. Anemia commonly oc-
curs during the last two months of pregnancy, when the
baby utilizes a high proportion of the mother’s iron. A
history of menorrhagia also suggests that iron reserves
might be low. Building up iron reserves before pregnancy
starts is beneficial and can help the mother meet the in-
creased iron demand without any problems.

The best approach is to increase dietary intake of
iron-containing foods, as iron supplements may aggravate
constipation. All iron-containing foods are better absorbed
in the presence of an animal protein. Vitamin C also en-
hances iron absorption. Watercress, rose hips, blackberries,
black currants, elderberries, parsley, spinach, dandelion
leaves, and many other plant foods contain both iron and
vitamin C, and natural iron never causes constipation.

Liver is a good source of iron; however, it should
come from organically produced meat only. Because the
liver is the detoxifying organ of mammals, it may contain
chemical residues if factory reared.

Good Sources of Iron

Liver

Eggs from free-range chickens
Dairy products
Watercress

Dried apricots
Whole-wheat bread
Cocoa and carob
Cabbage

Alfalfa

Beets

Cherries

Raisins

Brown rice

Kelp

Wheat germ
Sunflower seeds
Parsley

Chicory

Lentils

Black currants, blackberries, strawberries
Spinach

----- PAGE 408 -----
400 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Leafy herbs that can be added to salads, cooked as
vegetables, and added to soups include:

Crataegus spp. (hawthorn flowers and leaves)
Rumex acetosa (sorrel)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey leaf, in moderation)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Other herbs that contain meaningful levels of iron
when used as an infusion or tincture are:

Arctium lappa (burdock leaf)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)
Gentian lutea (gentian)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Dizziness

Dizziness caused by the ability of progesterone to relax
the blood vessel walls is common in pregnancy. This type
of dizziness, seen most frequently in early pregnancy, is a
form of postural hypotension. However, hypertensive
herbs such as Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom) are too
strong for both mother and fetus. Instead, follow these
recommendations:

* Change positions slowly,

* Eat small meals throughout the day, rather than three
large meals.

* Maintain blood sugar levels.

Heartburn

Heartburn, caused by reflux of gastric contents into the
esophagus, is one of the most common complaints of
pregnancy. Treatment approaches to this condition are
discussed in chapter 13.

The relaxing effects of progesterone also reach the
cardiac sphincter, the valve that guards the entrance to the
stomach at the bottom of the esophagus. As the enlarging
uterus pushes up against the stomach, small amounts of
the stomach’s contents are passed into the lower esopha-
gus. Hydrochloric acid mixed with stomach contents irri-
tates and burns the esophagus, resulting in an inflamma-
tory process. In more extreme cases, parts of the stomach
itself can be pushed up through the diaphragm or into the
esophagus, causing some degree of hiatus hernia.

Bleeding Gums

Bleeding gums are frequently seen in pregnancy. Gingival
hypertrophy, a temporary softening of the gums, is seen
in 40% of pregnancies. This is a response to elevated pro-
gesterone levels in the blood. Follow the topical advice
given for gingivitis in chapter 13 but zor the internal
treatment. Additional suggestions are:

© Brush gums frequently with a soft brush
¢ Vitamin C and bioflavonoids complex: up to 2,000
mg/day

Headache

Headache sometimes occurs in early pregnancy, but is
worse between three and five months. A few cases may re-
sult from eyestrain, as pregnancy may result in a change
in the amount of refractive error in the eyes. Some cases
may be caused by sinusitis, and frontal headaches are seen
with hypertension. Please refer to the section on
headaches in chapter 16.

Hemorrhoids

Hemorrhoids may be exacerbated by or occur for the first
time during pregnancy. The condition is caused by in-
creased pressure and impairment of return of venous fluid
in the veins by the pressure of the enlarging uterus.
Constipation makes the problem worse. Congestion of
liver function caused by intake of junk foods, refined
flour, and alcohol also encourages the problem, as the
hemorrhoidal veins are part of the portal drainage system.
The treatment approach for this common problem of
pregnancy is discussed in chapter 13.

THE SECOND AND THIRD
TRIMESTERS
The second trimester consists of the period from the be-
ginning of the 13th week until the end of the 27th week.
The third trimester of pregnancy begins at the 28th week
and lasts until birth. During the second trimester, the
woman will usually experience decreased nausea and bet-
ter sleep patterns, and have more stamina and energy than
during the first trimester. The second trimester is not al-
ways trouble-free, however, as a whole new set of symp-
toms and sensations commonly arise. These include back
pain, leg cramps, heartburn, skin changes, and constipation.
Before pregnancy, the uterus weighs about 2 ounces
(56 g) and holds a volume of less than half an ounce
(15 ml). At term, in addition to the weight of the baby, it
weighs about 2!/2 pounds (a little more than | kg) and will
have stretched to hold the baby, the placenta, and about

----- PAGE 409 -----
1 quart (approximately | liter) of amniotic fluid. Many of
the physical symptoms of late pregnancy arise from this
increase in uterine size. These may include shortness of
breath, sleeping problems, varicose veins, skin changes,
and hemorrhoids.

Stretch Marks

Stretch marks occur when the skin is stretched beyond its
normal capacity and elasticity. In pregnancy, they are re-
lated to progesterone’s softening effect on connective tis-
sue combined with rapid weight gain. When new, stretch
marks resemble purple strize (streaks), and after a period
of time they resemble silvery scars. Genetic predisposi-
tion is the predominant factor in the development of
stretch marks, The tendency to develop stretch marks can
be lessened by eating appropriately and using remedies to
address collagen problems in the skin.

Vitamins E, C, and B; (pantothenic acid) can help, as
may zinc. These can all be obtained from the diet. In The
Herbal for. Pregnancy and Childbirth, Anne McIntyre rec-
ommends increasing consumption of the following foods:*

Sunflower seeds and oil
Pumpkin seeds
Wheat germ
Onions

Eggs

Lettuce
Cucumbers
Cabbage
Radishes
Horseradish
Rice bran
Asparagus
Parsnips
Brewer's yeast
Whole grains
Fish

Alfalfa
Molasses

Massaging wheat germ or vitamin E oil into the
breasts, abdomen, and thighs daily will reduce the likeli-
hood that marks will develop. Calendula oil mixed with
wheat germ oil is especially helpful.

Backache

Elevated progesterone levels during pregnancy have a
softening effect upon tendons and ligaments throughout
the body, which allows them to expand as necessary to ac-
commodate the growing baby. The spine is particularly

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM - 401

affected, and the relaxation of the ligaments that support
the spine combined with the weight of the growing ab-
domen often cause backache. The backward-leaning pos-
ture adopted by heavily pregnant mothers places added
strain on the lower joints of the spine. Bad posture aggra-
vates backache. Rapid weight gain in pregnancy increases
strain and may exacerbate symptoms of previous damage
to the back.

Yoga exercises may be helpful, and experts recom-
mend certain asanas for pregnancy. Rest is important in
preventing or relieving backache, especially in the last
three months of pregnancy. Deep breathing and relax-
ation exercises can also help. Baths with lavender and
rosemary essential oils and massage of the whole spine
with a mixture of chamomile and geranium essential oils
can be effective as well.

Hypertension

Gestational hypertension is characterized by a steady rise
in blood pressure after the 28th week of gestation. The
general rule for the upper limit of gestational hyperten-
sion is 140/90 mm Hg. Some factors that contribute to
gestational hypertension are:

¢ Emotional and physical stress

© Obesity

© Lack of exercise

© Drugs and stimulants

* Diet (processed and heavily salted carbohydrates with
inadequate protein intake)

Herbal treatment can do much to mitigate this form
of secondary hypertension, but blood pressure must be
monitored closely, as it can rise dangerously fast in some
situations. Please refer to chapter 14 for more informa-
tion on the treatment of hypertension. Other approaches
that may be helpful include:

Exercise. Exercise forces blood through the vasculature. If
it is healthy and flexible, the vasculature will respond
by stretching and relaxing. Brisk walking or swimming
is recommended. Exercise is most effective when a ten-
dency for hypertension is first noted. It is not appro-
priate for very elevated blood pressure.

Practice deep relaxation or. meditation techniques.

Avoid all. stimulants, including caffeine, nicotine, and co-
caine. All are linked to hypertension, restriction of blood
flow to the placenta, and low-birth-weight babies.

Improve diet. Increase consumption of good-quality pro-
tein, vegetables, and fresh fruits.

Increase water intake.

Rest, particularly by lying on the left side.

----- PAGE 410 -----
402 -» TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

THE POSTPARTUM PERIOD

The first six weeks of the postpartum period, or the time
immediately after birth, is referred to as the puerperium.
The first two to three days are spent bonding with the
baby and waiting for the true milk to come in. True milk
usually comes in at about 72 hours after the birth.

Multiparous women, or those who have had a num-
ber of children already, will have significantly more in-
tense “after pains,” or uterine contractions, to facilitate
involution of the uterus to its pre-pregnant state. Early in
the puerperium, there is loss of blood and later on dis-
charge from the vagina. Fever and foul discharge indicate
uterine infection.

Generally, if a woman does not nurse, she will men-
struate six to eight weeks after birth. Nursing women
begin to menstruate again at any time from six weeks after
birth to two years after birth. However, nursing is not an
adequate method of birth control, as most women ovulate
before they menstruate, and a woman can become preg-
nant before her period returns.

After birth, estrogen and progesterone levels de-
crease. Postpartum depression, discussed later in this
chapter, is one result of this hormonal change. Normal
physiologic signs of the postpartum decrease in estrogen
and progesterone include:

¢ Hair loss

¢ Return of acne

* Slowdown in nail growth

* Decrease in libido

¢ Thinning of the vaginal mucosa
¢ Increased intensity of PMS

Postpartum Depression

If the woman is lactating, she will secrete prolactin, which
is actually stimulated by the sensation caused by the nurs-
ing baby. Prolactin is a mild relaxant and depressant. As
prolactin levels rise, the elevated levels of estrogen and
progesterone maintained throughout the pregnancy drop
abruptly. This may lead to postpartum depression. Other
factors that may contribute to such depression include:

¢ Emotional letdown following the excitement and fear
experienced during pregnancy, labor, and delivery

¢ Discomforts of the puerperium

¢ Fatigue due to loss of sleep

* Anxiety over the ability to care for a dependent
newborn

* Isolation

Postpartum depression can be treated with an ap-
proach similar to that taken for PMS in terms of herbs,
diet, supplementation, and exercise. Greater emphasis
can be placed on Artemisia vulgaris and Hypericum perfora-
tum. In addition, it is important to encourage the new
mother to go out and enjoy the company of other adults.

Perineal Tears or Extensive Episiotomy

The perineum (the area of skin between the vagina and

the anus) may be surgically cut (an episiotomy) or may

tear during birth. Usually, these will heal faster if all sig-

nificant tears are stitched. A number of simple procedures

can help alleviate discomfort and speed healing:

Apply ice immediately after the repair is finished to decrease
swelling.

Take sitz baths with infusions of vulnerary herbs.

Apply Aloe vera gel.

Calendula, Symphytum, Hydrastis, and Achillea are all good
choices of herbs for ointments or sitz baths.

Expose the area to sunlight to speed healing.

Decrease activity; severe tears heal faster with bed rest.

‘After Pains or Recurrent Uterine
Contractions

For women who have had more than one child, after
pains increase in strength with each successive pregnancy.
They are helpful in that the contractions are involuting,
or returning, the enlarged uterus to its previous size.
Nursing will bring on or increase the intensity of these
contractions. If necessary, use antispasmodic herbs and
uterine tonics, such as Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh),
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam), Viburnum prunifolium (black
haw), and Viburnum opulus (cramp bark).

Stimulating Lactation
Herbal remedies called galactogogues encourage milk pro-
duction to begin and increase total milk volume.
Important examples are Galega officinalis (goat's rue),
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel seed), and Cnicus benedictus
(blessed thistle).

In addition to use of galactagogues, here are some
other recommendations for increasing milk production:

¢ Drink plenty of fluid.

* Rest; lack of sleep produces milk shortages.

¢ Stimulate the nipples by allowing the baby to suck
often.

Helpful foods include apricots, asparagus, green beans,
carrots, sweet potatoes, parsley, all leafy greens, and
grains.

----- PAGE 411 -----
Stopping Lactation

A number of herbal approaches have been used to reduce
milk flow, thus forcing the child to stop breast-feeding.
There are no good reasons to stop breast-feeding at a cer-
tain time. Cultural ideas about weaning times do not pro-
vide much ofa rationale, especially in light of the fact that
women were discouraged from breast-feeding altogether
not that long ago. Salvia officinalis does reduce milk flow.

Mastitis
Mastitis is inflammation of the mammary gland, usually
caused by infection. Such breast infections are located in
the tissue of the breast; the bacteria usually enter through
cracks in the nipples. The infection then occurs in the
parenchymal (fatty) tissue and causes it to swell. This
swelling compresses on the milk ducts, resulting in pain
and swelling of the infected breast. Such breast infections
usually occur in women who are breast-feeding. The
causative bacterium, Staphylococcus aureus, is commonly
found on normal skin. Breast infections not related to
breast-feeding must be differentiated from a rare form of
breast cancer.

Mastitis usually occurs when the breasts become very
engorged, often as a result of a missed feeding. If a baby
who usually wakes up two or three times at night to nurse
suddenly sleeps through the night, breast engorgement
will occur. Milk that remains in the sacs becomes a breed-
ing ground for bacteria entering through the nipple, and
infection will occur. This is particularly likely if the breast
has been incompletely emptied and a residual amount of
milk remains over time.

In general, the following suggestions will help in the
prevention and treatment of mastitis:

¢ Apply vulnerary and antimicrobial herbs externally,
such as Calendula.

¢ Nurse ina relaxed, unhurried, thorough manner.

* Be sure the nipple area stays clean.

¢ Drink adequate amounts of fluid to flush the system.

¢ Rest.

¢ Maintain an adequate diet, decreasing intake of fatty
and refined foods.

UTERINE FIBROIDS

Benign uterine tumors of smooth muscle origin. (The
Merck Manual)

Fibroid tumors are benign muscle tumors that cause en-
largement and distortion of the uterus in premenopausal

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM e403

women, They may make menstruation painful and heavy,
possibly leading to anemia. Fibroids are the most common
reason for hysterectomy, but unless the fibroids are causing
significant problems, it is best to avoid such a drastic step.
They rarely become malignant. As they depend on the
presence of estrogen for their growth, they will shrink at
menopause. If surgery is necessary, consider the new laser-
based techniques rather than removal of the whole uterus.

Actions Indicated

Uterine tonics support the general health and vitality of the
uterus.

Uterine astringents reduce blood loss.

Alteratives often help in health problems associated with
benign growths. (I would love to know why!)

Antispasmodics will lessen cramping pains.

Lympbatics support the drainage of fluid from the womb.

Immune support may be appropriate. Please refer to
chapter 21.

A Prescription for Uterine Fibroids

Caulophyllum thalictroides 2 parts
Vinca major 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. This formula can
be made stronger by adding more antispasmodic or astringent
remedies.

Table 18.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Uterine Fibroids

ACTION HERBS

Uterine tonic Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine astringent — Vinca major

Alterative Galium aparine, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Caulophyttum thalictroides
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa

Lymphatic Galium aparine

Broader Context of Treatment

Attention to general health and well-being is vital. Focus
on a whole range of issues to ensure that the woman can
be as comfortable with her body and life as possible.

----- PAGE 412 -----
404 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Diet. Recommend a well-balanced and nutritious diet rich
in fresh green vegetables.

Bodywork. Suggest approaches that will engender an expe-
rience of bodily ease and relaxation. This may be aro-
matherapy massage, walks by the ocean, dancing, and
so on.

Peace of mind. Relaxation exercises, meditation, or coun-
seling may be appropriate.

Lifestyle. A reevaluation of work and home environments,
relationships, and personal goals will often clarify areas
for positive growth and transformation.

ENDOMETRIOSIS

The presence of endometrial tissue in abnormal loca-
tions. (The Merck Manual)

Endometriosis is the presence of uterine tissue (en-
dometrium) outside its usual location on the inner lining
of the uterus. Approximately 5% to 20% of women of
childbearing age are affected by this troublesome condi-
tion. In addition, it is discovered during as many as 20%
to 50% of all gynecologic operations. Pain, abnormal
menstrual bleeding, infertility, and prolonged disability
may result.

Endometrial tissue may implant itself on the ovaries,
fallopian tubes, pelvic ligaments, abdominal organs, old
scars, and, in rare cases, the chest, lungs, spinal cord, and
extremities. The site of implantation of the endometrial
tissue will largely control the degree or severity of symp-
toms. Over time, the implants may enlarge, bleed, cause
scarring, and form tough fibrous adhesions between
pelvic and abdominal structures.

A number of predisposing factors have been sug-
gested. Hormonal factors are known to be important.
Implants often regress during pregnancy, and first preg-
nancy at a young age seems to protect against the devel-
opment of endometriosis. In addition, the disease is more
common in women who choose to either postpone or re-
ject childbearing. The average age at diagnosis is 37 years,
and the majority of cases occur in women between the
ages of 25 and 40 years. Endometriosis is rare before the
onset of menstruation and after menopause.

Although the underlying cause is still in question,
there are three major theories about the etiology of en-
dometriosis.

1. The transportation theory holds that endometrial
tissue that originates in the uterus passes in a retro-
grade fashion through the fallopian tubes to implant

on the ovaries, pelvis, and abdomen at the time of
menstruation. Bloodstream and lymph vessel trans-
port may also occur.

2. The second hypothesis suggests that endometriosis
occurs at sites outside the uterus in tissues that have
the potential for developing into uterine glands.

3. The induction theory combines the above two ideas
to suggest that transported endometrial tissue induces
the development of endometriosis through direct
contact with sites on adjacent organs and structures.

Endometriosis is a notoriously difficult condition to
diagnose; the conclusion is often reached only after all
other problems have been excluded. Conclusive diagnosis
often necessitates exploratory laparoscopy. An estimated
25% to 50% of infertile women have endometriosis. It
may be largely asymptomatic, but is also often character-
ized by the following symptoms:

* Dysmenorrhea, especially if this begins after several
years of pain-free menses

* Dyspareunia, or painful sexual intercourse

* Lower abdominal or rectal pain

* Metrorrhagia or menorrhagia

In mild or moderate cases of endometriosis, herbal
medication has much to offer, but in severe cases, surgery
may be indicated.

Treatment of Endometriosis

The herbal treatment of this often intransigent condition
can be quite effective. However, careful selection of herbs
is crucial.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers, such as Vitex, appear to help the
body alter underlying hormonal problems.

Uterine tonics are essential for their tonic actions on en-
dometrial tissue. In theory, this will help wherever
such tissue is.

Antispasmodices ease the muscular, cramping pain that is so
distressing in this condition.

Nervine relaxants help with stress and pain.

Specific Remedies

There are no traditional specifics for endometriosis, but
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) is almost specific for the pain,
although it is not very strong. Vitex agnus-castus may be
considered the most appropriate remedy for the underly-
ing processes involved.

----- PAGE 413 -----
A Prescription for Endometriosis

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.13. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Endometriosis

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Antispasmodic

Scutellaria lateriflora, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Dioscorea villosa

Nervine relaxant

FIBROCYSTIC BREAST DISEASE

A condition in which breast pain, cysts, and noncancerous
lumpiness occur together. (The Merck Manual)

Fibrocystic breast disease, also known as chronic cystic
mastitis, is the most common nonmalignant breast dis-
ease. It is characterized by growth of fibrous tissue that
most frequently appears when a woman is in her 30s or
40s but disappears with menopause. While uncomfort-
able, the condition is not dangerous, and up to 20% of
women develop some degree of fibrocystic breast disease
during their lives. Accurate diagnosis to differentiate from
breast cancer is, of course, essential and potentially life
saving.

Breast cysts are largely influenced by hormonal fluc-
tuations and become larger and more painful just prior to
the onset of menstrual bleeding. The key to successful
treatment lies in normalizing hormonal fluctuations, es-
pecially as the role of estrogen and progesterone in this
condition is not clear.

Fibrocystic breast disease is aggravated by situations
that increase the hormone shifts. The condition usually
improves during pregnancy and breast-feeding and after
menopause, unless hormone replacement therapy is un-
dertaken. Women more likely to develop the condition
include:

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM -@ 405

¢ Teenagers with slow establishment of regular periods
¢ Women who have children late in life

° Obese women

¢ Women on estrogen replacement therapy

¢ Women under stress

Treatment of Fibrocystic Breast Disease
The herbal treatment guidelines given here must be ap-
plied for a couple of months before results can be expected.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers help the body balance hormones
and regularize swings, enabling a move toward com-
plete alleviation of the problem.

Lympbatics assist with drainage and the general vitality of
the lymphatic tissue in the breast.

Antispasmodics may help if there are excessive dragging
pains.

Nervine relaxants are indicated if the problem is associated
with PMS.

Diuretics help if there is associated water retention, but
should not be used alone.

Specific Remedies

No true specifics are known for this condition, but Vitex
is undoubtedly strongly indicated. Evening primrose oil
may also be of great value.

A Prescription for Fibrocystic Breast Disease

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the pa-
tient should take evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis} at a
dosage of five 500 mg capsules a day.

Table 18.14. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Fibrocystic Disease

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Lymphatic Gatium aparine
Diuretic Galium aparine
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora

----- PAGE 414 -----
406 @ TREATMEN] APPROACHES BY BoDy SysEM

Broader Context of Treatment
It has been shown clearly that methylxanthines aggravate
the problem. The most common dietary sources of such
natural products are coffee, tea, chocolate, and soft drinks.
These should be avoided totally. Other research shows
that vitamin E at dosages of 400 to 800 IU daily may help.
It is important to eat no meat, poultry, eggs, or dairy prod-
ucts from animals given hormones to promote growth.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray recommend the following supplements:*

B-complex: 10 times the recommended daily dose
Choline: 500 to 1,000 mg/day

Methionine: 500 to 1,000 mg/day

Vitamin Bg: 25 to 50 mg three times a day

Vitamin C: 500 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 IU/day (d-alpha tocopherol)
Beta-carotene: 50,000 to 300,000 IU/day

Todine: 70 to 90 mcg/kg body weight

Zinc: 15 mg/day

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Lactobacillus acidophilus: \ teaspoon three times a day

THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

Prostate diseases generally fall into three categories: in-
fectious, malignant, and hypertrophic. Infection and ma-
lignancy are discussed in chapter 21. Our discussion here
will focus on benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH).

BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERTROPHY

Benign adenomatous hyperplasia of the periurethral pros-
trate gland commonly seen in men over age 50, causing
variable degrees of bladder outlet obstruction. (The
Merck Manual)

The prostate gland is present in all men from birth, and
assumes importance when fertility is achieved. The
prostate produces the fluid that accompanies the sperm
during ejaculation. Located deep within the pelvis, it sits
on top of the urethra, the tube that connects the penis to
the bladder. As it achieves adult size, the prostate wraps
itself around the urethra, into which its secretions empty.
The gland is normally about the size of a chestnut.
Because of its location, if it becomes inflamed or en-
larged, it may exert pressure on the urethra or block the
outlet to the bladder, thus obstructing the flow of urine.
This can cause interrupted or difficult urination (drib-
bling incontinence) as well as urgent or frequent urina-

tion, especially at night (nocturia). Dysuria (painful or dif-
ficult urination) is another possible symptom. Urine
trapped in the bladder may become infected, causing cys-
titis, and backward pressure can lead to kidney infection.

Congestion and overgrowth of the prostate gland is
virtually universal in men older than 60. Why it happens
is not understood, but theories suggest that it may be
caused by the response of glandular cells in the prostate
to age-related hormonal changes. Levels and composition
of androgen and other hormones in the blood vary with
age. This does not cause problems for all older men, but
the ones who are not so lucky take little consolation in
that fact!

Researchers believe that BPH is caused by accumula-
tion of testosterone in the prostate. However, once in the
prostate, testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). DHT, a hormone more potent than testosterone,
exerts effects on the prostate gland and other sexual or-
gans. It is produced from testosterone by the enzyme 5-a
reductase.

DHT is necessary for the normal growth and devel-
opment of the prostate, but its presence is also necessary
for the pathologic enlargement of the prostate that occurs
in BPH. Thus, one therapeutic approach to treating the
condition is to reduce the formation of DHT by blocking
the enzyme 5-a reductase. Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
has this effect.

As prostate swelling progresses, flow of urine
through the urethra is obstructed, and the bladder grows
thicker and stronger to compensate for the increased re-
sistance it must overcome. Eventually, the bladder is no
longer able to completely overcome such forces. As it be-
comes increasingly difficult for the man to completely
empty the bladder, urine stagnates there. If the obstruc-
tion is severe, pressure may back up urine to the kidneys,
causing damage. When it becomes impossible to empty
the bladder of all its contents, the occasional bacteria pre-
sent in the urinary tract are able to multiply, and urinary
tract infection may occur. This, in turn, may worsen the
swelling already present in the prostate.

The earliest symptoms of BPH are usually urinary hes-
itancy, weakening of the urinary stream, and incomplete
emptying of the bladder with urination. Dribbling of urine
may occur. If infection sets in, burning, blood in the urine,
and fever may occur. In the most severe cases, the man may
experience a total inability to urinate, sometimes with mas~
sive enlargement of the bladder. A small number of en-
larged or inflamed prostates may be cancerous. This fact
underscores the need for a proper medical investigation.

----- PAGE 415 -----
Treatment of Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

A Prescription for Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

(Internal)
Serenoa repens 2 parts
Hydrangea arborescens 2 parts
Smilax spp. 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Infusion for Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

(for Sitz Bath)
Equisetum arvense 1 part
Elymus repens ] part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 oz of the mixture to each 1 pint of boiling water.
Add infusion to sitz bath.

Broader Context of Treatment
If the symptoms are not markedly impairing the patient's
lifestyle, and if recurrent, serious, or resistant infections
or kidney damage is not present, conservative therapy
may be adequate for long periods of time.

Conservative therapy consists of:

© Treatment of any infection (see chapter 21)

* Occasional massage of the gland through rectal exam,
to relieve congestion

¢ Frequent ejaculations on the patient’s part, for the
same purpose as prostatic massage

* Avoidance of drugs that reduce bladder tone,
include antidepressants, certain tranquilizers, and
antihistamines

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM > 407

References.

1, Bamford DS. Raspberry leaf tea: a new aspect to an old
problem. British Journal of Pharmacology 1970 Sep;
40(1):161.

2. Der Marderosian AH, Liberti LE. Natural Product
Medicine. Philadelphia: G. F. Stickley, 1988.

3. McGuffin, Hobbs, Upton, Goldberg, eds. American
Herbal Products Association's Botanical Safety Handbook.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.

4. McIntyre A. The Herbal for Pregnancy and Childbirth.
Shaftesbury, UK: Element Books, 1992.

5. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Suggested Reading

Gladstar R. Herbal Healing for Women. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993.

Green J. Male Herbal: Health Care for Men and Boys. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1991.

Hudson T. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. Los
Angeles: Lowell House; Chicago: Contemporary Books,
1999.

McQuade Crawford A. The Herbal Menopause Book. Freedom,
CA: The Crossing Press, 1996.

Nissim R. Natural Healing in Gynecology. San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 1996.

Weed S. Menopausal Years. Woodstock, NY: Ash Tree, 1992.

----- PAGE 416 -----
THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

ur skeleton, connective tissue, muscles, and
joints give us our form and hold us together, en-
abling us to stand and to move. These struc-
tures are extensively used (and misused) and are the focus
of much physical wear and tear. However, the health of
these structures and the tissues that compose them does
not depend only upon the use to which they are put. It
also depends, to a large extent, on our inner environment:
the state of our metabolism, diet, and lifestyle. Of course,
genetically based weaknesses can play a very important
role in the health of this body system, but if these issues
are recognized, much can be done to minimize problems.
Extensive skeletal misalignment can impair the func-
tion of the neurological system and other organs and dis-
rupt the harmony of the whole body. Osteopathic or chi-
ropractic techniques can be of great value in realigning
the body, as can methods of psychophysical adjustment,
such as rolfing, the Alexander technique, and Feldenkrais.
However, the contribution of systemic, whole-body prob-
lems to the development of musculoskeletal ills cannot be
overemphasized. The health and wholeness of this system
can be maintained only as long as the inner environment
and metabolism of the body remain in harmony. If our
biochemical and metabolic processes are out of tune, the
body will be under much strain to remove waste and tox-
ins. If this condition persists unnoticed for years—as it
often does—toxins can build up in the connective tissue
of the joints. This can sow the seeds for the development
of rheumatism and arthritis, particularly if there is a ge-
netic disposition to such conditions.

HERBS AND THE
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

Among all of the problems that can affect this important
body system, herbal medicine has most to offer in the
treatment of chronic, degenerative ailments. As discussed
in depth later in this chapter, rheumatism is a very general
term used to describe any of various conditions charac-
terized by inflammation or pain in muscles, joints, or con-

nective tissue. Arthritis, on the other hand, specifically de-
scribes inflammation of joints, which may be due to in-
fectious, metabolic, or constitutional causes.

Table 19.1. Primary Actions for the
Musculoskeletal System

ACTION HERBS

Antirheumatic See Antirheumatic Herbs, page 409

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Gaultheria procumbens, Harpagophytum
procumbens, Filipendula ulmaria,
Guaiacum officinale, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Populus tremuloides, Salix spp.,

Tanacetum parthenium

Alteratives Arctium lappa, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.

Cimicifuga racemosa, Valeriana officinalis,
Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic

Circulatory stimulant Capsicum annuum, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale

Rubefacient Capsicum annuum, Brassica spp., Mentha piperita,
Urtica dioica, Zanthoxylum americanum

Analgesic Filipendula ulmaria, Piscidia erythrina, Salix spp.,
Valeriana officinalis

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Eupatorium perfoliatum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Piscidia erythrina,
Valeriana officinalis

Other As needed to ensure good elimination and

general health—e.g,, bitters, hepatics,
expectorants, emmenagogues

----- PAGE 417 -----
In most cases, successful herbal treatment of muscu-
loskeletal illness will be based on supporting the whole
body, because systemic factors so often lay the foundation
for degenerative musculoskeletal conditions. ‘Thus, the
primary actions of the truly healing antirheumatic
herbs can usually be identified as alterative, diuretic, or
some other systemically beneficial action. In general,
anti-inflammatory herbs simply improve the symptom
picture. As desirable as this is for the patient, it does not
usually indicate a beneficial alteration in the disease pro-
cess. Conditions in which active inflammation is worsen-
ing pathological change to bone tissue represent an im-
portant exception to this generalization.

Antirheumatic Actions

A vast array of herbs have a reputation for preventing, re-
lieving, or curing rheumatic problems. The an-
tirheumatic herbs presented here have a variety of differ-
ent primary actions. They should be chosen according to
the needs of the whole body, as this group includes alter-
atives, anti-inflammatory agents, rubefacients, diuretics,

stimulants, and digestive remedies.

Antirheumatic herbs are remedies that have been ob-
served to improve the patient’s experience of rheumatic
problems. However, that is not meant to imply that they
have a specific effect upon disease processes or even upon
the musculoskeletal tissue itself. To say that these herbs
have an observable effect on symptoms is a description of
outcome, rather than of process. As such, the concept has
a limited application, unless the actions at play for each
herb are understood (see table 19.2).

Antirheumatic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Arnica montana (arnica)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Betula spp. (birch)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM 409

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Populus tremuloides (aspen)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Unrtica dioica (nettle)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

The activity of these herbs as antirheumatic agents
can be explained as an expression of a more broadly rele-
vant action, either the plant’s main action or a more holis-
tic synergy of a number of plant actions. For example, al-
teratives can work in a variety of different ways, as can
anti-inflammatory herbs. Of course, the main actions that
contribute to an herb’s antirheumatic activity cannot al-
ways be identified.

Table 19.2. Possible Mechanism of Action of
Antirheumatic Herbs

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Dioscorea villosa,

Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Guaiacum officinale, Harpagophytum
procumbens, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Populus tremuloides, Tanacetum parthenium

Alterative Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium,

Fucus vesiculosus, Guaiacum officinale,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes irifoliata, Phytolacca americana,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 418 -----
410 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E, purpureum, Juniperus communis,

Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

Circulatory stimulant Armoracia rusticana, Brassica spp.,
Capsicum annuum, Myrica cerifera,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa, Viburnum opulus
Other action Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium,

(or basis unclear) A. vulgaris, Caulophyttum thalictroides

Rubefacients

Rubefacients are herbs that, when applied to the skin, stim-
ulate circulation in that area, increasing blood supply and
relieving congestion and inflammation. This action makes
rubefacients particularly useful in liniments for muscular
rheumatism and similar conditions. Rubefacients are for
topical use only. They should be used with care on sensi-
tive skin, and not used at all when the skin is damaged.

Rubefacient Herbs

Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Mentha piperita (peppermint oil)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary oil)
Senecio jacobaea (ragwort)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Diuretics

Diuretics support the work of the kidneys in eliminating
metabolic wastes, toxins, and the products of inflamma-
tion. This action is essential in musculoskeletal condi-
tions, as these waste products and toxins lie at the root of
many problems, including arthritis and rheumatism. If
any kidney problems exist, they must also be treated. For
supporting the vital work of the kidneys, the following
herbs are often considered specific for rheumatism.

Diuretic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

Eupatorium purpureum (gravel root)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Circulatory Stimulants

Another way to cleanse the body of toxins is by stimulating
blood circulation, which increases blood flow to muscles
and joints. To accomplish this without straining the heart,
we can use herbs that stimulate peripheral circulation.

Herbs That Stimulate Peripheral Circulation
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Phytolacca americana (poke root)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Pain Relievers

While the purist never merely treats symptoms, the
healer aims to relieve suffering. Thus, it may be necessary
to use herbs with the intention of lessening the often se-
vere pain of conditions like rheumatism. These, of course,
should be used only as one part of an approach designed
to treat the cause of disease. Anti-inflammatory herbs will
relieve pain to some extent, but the only truly effective
way to alleviate pain is to clear the underlying problem.
Herbs listed here can be used to help relieve pain in the
context of a whole body approach.

Herbal Analgesics

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Digestive System Tonics

The digestive system must be in good working order, as
nutrients must be properly absorbed in order for the mus-
culoskeletal system to operate at its peak. Bitter tonics
may be helpful here.

Useful Bitter Tonic Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

If the patient is troubled by constipation, laxatives
may be indicated, especially those that act by stimulating
the liver.

----- PAGE 419 -----
Hepatic Stimulants

Rheum palmatum (rhubarb root)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion root)

RHEUMATIC DISEASES AND
ARTHRITIS

More than 100 conditions are technically classified as
rheumatic diseases. The conditions that make up this group
of health problems share many common symptoms, in-
cluding pain, stiffness, and swelling of joints and the sup-
porting structures of the body, such as muscles, tendons,
ligaments, and bones. Some of these diseases may also af-
fect other parts of the body.

Although the term arthritis is often used as a general
descriptor for all rheumatic diseases, this is incorrect. The
word arthritis literally means “joint inflammation,” and is
correctly applied to describe the swelling, redness, heat,
and pain caused by tissue injury or joint disease. The
many different types of arthritis comprise just a portion of
the total group of rheumatic diseases.

Some rheumatic diseases are described as connective tis-
sue diseases because they primarily affect the body’s connec-
tive tissues—the supporting framework of the body and its
internal organs. Connective tissue is found everywhere in
the body and includes cartilage, bone, and the binding,
supportive components of the skin. Other rheumatic con-
ditions are classified as autoimmune diseases because they are

associated with a systemic problem in which the immune
system harms the body’s own healthy tissues.

Here we will look briefly at a few examples of some
of the more common rheumatic diseases, Treatment ap-
proaches are detailed later in this chapter.

Osteoarthritis

Also known as degenerative joint disease, osteoarthritis is
the most common type of arthritis, affecting an estimated
20.7 million American adults. Osteoarthritis primarily af-
fects cartilage, the tissue that cushions the ends of bones
in the joints. The condition occurs when cartilage begins
to fray, wear, and decay. In extreme cases, the cartilage
may wear away entirely. Bony spurs (pointy outcroppings
of bone) may form at the edges of a joint. Osteoarthritis
causes joint pain, reduced joint motion, loss of function,

and disability.

Rheumatoid Arthritis

Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the
lining of the joint that results in pain, stiffness, swelling,

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM .@ 411

deformity, and loss of joint function. The inflammation
most often affects joints of the hands and feet and tends
to occur equally on both. sides of the body. This symme-
try helps distinguish rheumatoid arthritis from other
types of arthritis. About 2.1 million Americans are af-
flicted with rheumatoid arthritis.

Although the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis are
caused by inflammation. of the connective tissues, the
cause is not at all clear. A characteristic sign of rheuma-
toid arthritis is chronic inflammation of the synovial
membranes, or inner linings of the joint capsules. The
synovial mass proliferates and destroys cartilage, bone,
and adjacent structures. The widespread inflammation
may also affect other tissues, leading to painful joints, loss
of mobility, and generalized soreness and depression.
Blood tests often reveal the presence of rheumatoid fac-
tors, proteins produced by the immune system in re-
sponse to the rheumatic process.

Fibromyalgia

Fibromyalgia causes pain and stiffness throughout the tis-
sues that support and move the bones and joints. Pain and
localized tender points occur in the muscles and tendons,
particularly those of the neck, spine, shoulders, and hips.
Patients may experience: widespread pain, fatigue, and
sleep disturbances.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Systemic lupus erythematosus (also known as lupus or
SLE) is an autoimmune disease in which the immune sys-
tem harms the body’s tissues. In SLE, this can result in in-
flammation of and damage to joints, skin, kidneys, heart,
lungs, blood vessels, and brain.

Ankylosing Spondylitis

This is a type of arthritis that primarily affects the spine,
but it may also impact the hips, shoulders, and knees. The
tendons and ligaments around the bones and joints in the
spine become inflamed, resulting in pain and stiffness, es-
pecially in the lower back. Ankylosing spondylitis tends to
affect people in late adolescence or early adulthood.

Gout

This form of arthritis is caused by deposits of needlelike
crystals of uric acid in the connective tissue, joint spaces,
or both. Uric acid is a normal breakdown product of
purines, which are present in body tissues and in many
foods. Normally, uric acid passes through the kidney into
urine and is eliminated. Elowever, if the concentration of
uric acid in the blood rises above normal levels, sodium

----- PAGE 420 -----
412 «¢. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

urate crystals may form. These needlelike crystals cause
inflammation, swelling, and pain in the affected joint.
The joint most commonly affected is the big toe.

Psoriatic Arthritis

This form of arthritis affects some patients with psoriasis,
a common scaling skin disorder. Psoriatic arthritis often
affects the joints at the ends of the fingers and is accom-
panied by changes in the fingernails and toenails. In some
people, the spine is also involved.

Bursitis

This condition involves inflammation of the bursae,
small, fluid-filled sacs that serve to reduce friction be-
tween bones and other moving structures in the joints.
The inflammation may result from arthritis in the joint or
from injury to or infection of the bursae. Bursitis pro-
duces pain and tenderness and may limit the movement of
nearby joints.

Tendinitis

This refers to inflammation of tendons (tough cords of
tissue that connect muscle to bone) caused by overuse, in-
jury, or related rheumatic conditions. Tendinitis produces
pain and tenderness and may restrict the movement of
nearby joints.

ARTHRITIS AND PAIN

Pain is the body’s warning system. The International
Association for the Study of Pain defines pai as an un-
pleasant experience associated with actual or potential tis-
sue damage to a person’s body. Specialized cells called
neurons transmit pain signals and are found throughout
the skin and other body tissues. These cells respond to
trauma, such as injury or tissue damage. For example,
when a knife cuts the skin, chemical signals travel from
neurons in the skin through nerves in the spinal cord to
the brain, where they are interpreted as pain.

The pain of arthritis may be acute or chronic. Acute
pain is temporary; it may last a few seconds or longer, but
wanes as healing occurs. Some conditions that cause acute
pain are burns, cuts, and fractures. Chronic pain, such as
that caused by osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis,
ranges from mild to severe and can last a lifetime.

Arthritic pain may be caused by a number of pro-
cesses, including muscle strain, fatigue, and inflammation
of the synovial membranes of the joints, the tendons, or
the ligaments. A combination of these factors contributes
to the intensity of the pain. For reasons that are not

clearly understood, the experience of arthritis pain varies
greatly from person to person. Contributing factors in-
clude swelling within the joint, amount of heat or redness
present, and damage that has occurred within the joint. In
addition, pain levels are affected by different activities.
Some patients note pain in their joints when they first get
out of bed in the morning, while others develop pain after
prolonged use of the joint. Each individual has a different
threshold and tolerance for pain, which is affected by
both physical and emotional factors.

Conventional Arthritis Medications

A number of over-the-counter medications can help re-
lieve acute pain. Because osteoarthritis involves little in-
flammation, pain relievers like acetaminophen may prove
effective. The pain of rheumatoid arthritis is generally
caused by inflammation, and thus may respond better to

aspirin or another nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID), such as ibuprofen.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drags, or NSAIDs, are
the most widely used drugs in the United States. They are
used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation that occur as a
result of acute injuries, rheumatoid arthritis, and os-
teoarthritis. They are not curative, but do help to lessen
pain and inflammation.

Unfortunately, NSAIDs are not without side effects,
and some of these can be life threatening. For example,
gastrointestinal bleeding due to use of NSAIDs kills al-
most 9,000 Americans each year. In addition, all of these
drugs can produce a number of similar mild, temporary
side effects.

Minor Side Effects of NSAIDs

Gastrointestinal: Heartburn, dyspepsia, diarrhea, constipa-
tion, abdominal pain, nausea, stomatitis, decreased
appetite, vomiting

Central nervous system: Headache, insomnia, dizziness,
drowsiness, tinnitus, confusion, unusual weakness

Visual: Loss of visual acuity, blurred or double vision

Skin: Itching, rash, photosensitivity reactions, eruptions,
hives

Cardiovascular: Edema, palpitations, rapid heartbeat

Genitourinary: Burning or painful urination, vaginal
bleeding, blood in urine, cystitis

Unfortunately, these drugs can also produce far more
serious problems. Adverse effects in the kidneys are of
particular concern in the elderly, because kidney function

----- PAGE 421 -----
is often already compromised by aging or complications
of chronic diseases, such as diabetes and hypertension.

Serious Side Effects of NSAIDs

Gastrointestinal: Gastric and/or duodenal ulceration, gastro-
intestinal bleeding (advanced age is a risk factor)

Cardiovascular: Angina, cardiac arrhythmias, exacerbation
of congestive heart failure

Kidney: Interstitial nephritis, acute renal failure, hyper-
kalemia (high serum potassium)

Skin: Exfoliative dermatitis, erythema multiforme, other
unusual skin problems

Blood: Anemia, leukopenia

Liver: Jaundice, hepatitis

If NSAIDs are being used, the patient should follow
a number of simple steps to lessen the impact of side ef-
fects. Take NSAIDs with food, and drink six to eight
glasses of water each day to decrease gastrointestinal side
effects. Also, the patient should not recline within a half
hour of taking NSAIDs. If the person is at risk for ulcer-
ation, he or she should consult with a physician and phar-
macist on a routine basis to decrease the chances of a life-
threatening gastrointestinal ulceration. As serious
ulcerations do not necessarily produce any symptoms, do
not rely upon symptoms to predict ulcer development.

Risk Factors for. Ulceration with NSAIDs
Advanced age

History of peptic ulcer disease or cardiovascular disease
High-dose NSAID use

Long duration of NSAID use

Heavy smoking or drinking

Kidney or liver failure

Use of certain drugs, such as Coumadin and prednisone

A number of powerful prescription drugs may be
used to treat rheumatoid arthritis that does not respond
to treatment with NSAIDs. These include methotrexate,
hydroxychloroquine, penicillamine, and gold injections.
These drugs are thought to influence and correct the im-
mune system abnormalities responsible for diseases like
rheumatoid arthritis. Use of these medications requires
careful monitoring by the physician to minimize the rav-
ages of side effects.

Corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are prescribed
for a number of rheumatic conditions because they de-
crease inflammation and suppress the activity of the im-
mune system. Short-term side effects of corticosteroids
include swelling, increased appetite, weight gain, and
emotional swings. These side effects usually disappear

Tit MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 413

when the drug is discontinued. However, discontinuing
corticosteroids suddenly is dangerous. Side effects that
may occur after long-term use include stretch marks, ex-
cessive hair growth, osteoporosis, high blood pressure,
damage to the arteries, high blood sugar, infections, and
cataracts.

COMPONENTS OF A HOLISTIC
TREATMENT PROGRAM FOR
ARTHRITIS

One of the long-term goals of arthritis treatment is to help
the patient cope with having a chronic, often disabling dis-
ease. The patient may be caught in a self-reinforcing
cycle of pain, depression, and stress. Breaking out of this
cycle is easier if the patient is empowered by taking on a
role as an active participant, along with the health care
professional, in managing the pain.

Some simple methods can alleviate pain for short pe-
riods of time. This temporary relief can make it easier for
people who have arthritis to exercise.

Diet

An important part of any treatment program for arthritis
is a well-balanced diet. Along with exercise, a well-balanced
diet helps control weight and maintains overall good
health. Weight contro} is particularly important here, be-
cause extra weight puts pressure on some joints and can
aggravate arthritis.

One of the proposed causes of rheumatism and
arthritis is accumulation of toxins or waste products in the
affected tissue. A major contributing factor is inappropri-
ate diet—consumption of foods that are either wrong for
the individual’s body or so devitalized and adulterated
that they are detrimental for that reason alone. Dietary
measures are especially essential for people with gout.
These patients should avoid alcohol and foods high in
purines, such as organ meats (liver, kidney), sardines, and
anchovies.

As a general guideline, any foods that cause bodily
reactions should be avoided, as should foods that cause di-
gestive problems or other adverse effects, including sub-
tle allergic reactions. Ideally, one should consume foods
that are fresh and untreated, as opposed to processed
foods full of additives and preservatives.

Dairy products and gluten (mainly from wheat prod-
ucts) often cause either overt allergic reactions or subtle
ones, such as the minor digestive upsets of heartburn
and flatulence. If these foods cause reactions, they should
be avoided. In general, the patient should minimize

----- PAGE 422 -----
414. o TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySTEM

consumption of meat, eggs, and dairy products, as well as
very acidic foods like vinegar and pickles. The patient
should also shun foods rich in oxalic acid, including
rhubarb, gooseberries, black currants, and red currants.
Coffee, black tea, alcohol, sugar, salt, and any food or
beverage made from red grapes should also be avoided.
Instead, the patient should increase consumption of
fruits and vegetables, especially green and root vegeta-
bles. Citrus fruits, which, in spite of their citric acid, ap-
pear to have an alkalinizing effect on the metabolism, are
fine. The patient should drink at least 3 pints (1.5 liters)
of fluid daily to help flush the body. This fluid should
preferably be water with a low mineral content or water
mixed with a little apple cider vinegar or apple juice.
Taking at least 500 mg/day of vitamin C supplement is
recommended. Fish and white meat may be eaten.

Glucosamine Sulfate

Glucosamine sulfate is a nutritional supplement that may
enhance the reconstruction and healing of cartilage.
Glucosamine is an amino sugar, a molecule composed of an
amino acid and a simple sugar. The body uses about 20 dif-
ferent amino sugars as sources of energy or ingredients for
the assembly of tissue components. Amino sugars are the
structural basis of connective tissue and lubricating fluids.
Just as amino acids are the building blocks of proteins,
amino sugars are the building blocks of very large
molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), also known
as mucopolysaccharides. GAGs are large, spongy, water-
holding molecules that form the gel-like matrix of ground
substance, or the “glue” that holds our bodies together.
This substance is found in all connective tissue and mucous
membranes. Glucosamine macromolecules are the basic
substrate of cartilage, ligaments, tendons, and bones.
During normal use, connective tissue is constantly
broken down and either replaced or restructured, creat-
ing a continuous demand for glucosamine. The normal
diet is not a good source of glucosamine, so the body syn-
thesizes it from glucose and the amino acid glutamine.
Normally, the body produces enough glucosamine, but
under some conditions, the production of glucosamine
and its subsequent assembly into larger GAGs may be im-
paired. These conditions include severe stress, surgery,
burns, and major injuries, as well as aging. A lack of gly-
coproteins or other substances based on amino sugars has
been observed in many diseases, including osteoarthritis.
It appears that supplementation with glucosamine
sulfate might stimulate the synthesis of the missing glyco-
proteins. A number of studies have compared glu-
cosamine sulfate with ibuprofen for the treatment of

osteoarthritis.! A recent randomized, double-blind, con-
trolled clinical trial compared the use of glucosamine sul-
fate and ibuprofen in patients diagnosed with temporo-
mandibular joint (TMJ) osteoarthritis. The researchers
concluded that both glucosamine sulfate and ibuprofen
reduced pain levels in these patients. However, glu-
cosamine sulfate had a significantly greater influence in
reducing pain produced during function and pain caused
by daily activities.

Glucosamine sulfate is indicated for joint problems
such as osteoarthritis. Onset of action is seen after two
to eight weeks of treatment, as it works by stimulating
the endogenous synthesis of the missing macro-
molecules. The suggested dose for osteoarthritis is 500
mg three times a day.

In commercial formulations, glucosamine sulfate is
often combined with chondroitin sulfate. However, the
evidence for the actual efficacy of chondroitin sulfate
when taken by mouth is equivocal.

Heat and Cold Therapy

Heat and cold can both be used to reduce the pain and in-
flammation of arthritis. Studies have shown that heat and
cold therapies are equally effective in alleviating pain, al-
though they are usually avoided in acute gout. The deci-
sion to use heat or cold for arthritis pain depends on the
type of arthritis.

Heat therapy increases blood flow, pain tolerance,
and flexibility. Heat therapy can involve treatment with
paraffin wax, microwaves, ultrasound, or moist heat.
Physical therapists are needed to apply paraffin wax, mi-
crowave, or ultrasound therapy, but anyone can apply
heat on his or her own. Applying moist heat, such as a
warm bath or shower, or dry heat, such as a heating pad,
to the painful joint for about 15 minutes often relieves
pain. Deep heat is not recommended for patients with
acutely inflamed joints, but deep heat is often used
around the shoulder in people with osteoarthritis to relax
tight tendons before stretching exercises.

Cold therapy numbs the nerves around the joint, re-
ducing pain, relieving inflammation, and easing muscle
spasms. Cold therapy can involve cold packs, ice massage,
soaking in cold water, or the use of over-the-counter
sprays or ointments that cool the skin and joints.
Wrapping an ice pack (or a bag of frozen vegetables) in a
towel and placing it on the sore area for about 15 minutes
may help to reduce swelling and stop the pain. Cold ther-
apy is often used for acutely inflamed joints; however,
people with Raynaud’s disease should not use this
method.

----- PAGE 423 -----
Weight Reduction
Excess weight puts extra stress on joints, such as the knees
and hips. A recent study found that when obese arthritis
patients lost weight, they experienced significant reduc-
tions in pain and stiffness as well as an improvement in
their quality of life.”

Devices
Splints and braces are commonly used in the treatment of
arthritis pain. These help support weakened joints or
allow them to rest. Some of these devices prevent the joint
from moving; others allow some movement. A splint or
brace should be used only with professional guidance to
ensure that the device fits properly and is worn correctly.
Incorrect use can cause joint damage, stiffness, and pain.
Other kinds of devices may also help ease pain. For
example, using a cane when walking can take weight off
an arthritic joint. A shoe insert may ease pain caused by
arthritis of the foot or knee while walking.

Hydrotherapy, Mobilization Therapy, and
Relaxation Therapy

Hydrotherapy involves exercising or relaxing in warm
water, which helps relax tense muscles and relieve pain.
This type of exercise improves muscle strength and joint
movement.

Mobilization therapies include traction (gentle,
steady pulling), massage, and manipulation (using the
hands to restore normal movement to stiff joints). When
performed by a trained professional, these methods can
help control pain, increase joint motion, and improve
muscle and tendon flexibility. Appropriate massage will in-
crease blood flow and warmth to a stressed area. However,
arthritis-stressed joints are very sensitive, so the therapist
must be familiar with the problems of the disease.

Relaxation therapy helps reduce pain by teaching pa-
tients various ways to release muscle tension throughout
the body. In one method of relaxation therapy, known as
progressive relaxation, the patient tightens one muscle
group at a time, then slowly releases the tension.

Exercise

Exercise can benefit patients with arthritis in many ways.
It lessens joint pain and stiffness and increases flexibility,
muscle strength, and endurance. It also helps with weight
reduction and contributes to an improved sense of well-
being. Exercise plans for patients with arthritis may in-
clude instruction about proper use of joints as well as
ways to conserve energy and eliminate unnecessary mo-
tion. The amount and type of exercise for a given patient

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 415

with arthritis will vary according to which joints are in-
volved, the amount of inflammation, how stable the joints
are, and whether the patient has undergone a joint re-
placement procedure.

In general, three types of exercise are best for people
with arthritis:

Range-of-motion exercises help maintain normal joint
movement, relieve stiffness, and help maintain or in-
crease flexibility.

Strengthening exercises help maintain or increase muscle
strength. Strong muscles support and protect arthritic
joints.

Aerobic or endurance exercises improve cardiovascular fit-
ness and help control weight, which ts critical, as excess
weight puts extra pressure on many joints.

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS FOR
MUSCULOSKELETAL HEALTH

The various forms of arthritis are perhaps the most im-
portant inflammatory conditions that affect humanity,
and throughout the world herbal medicines are used to
treat them. About one in seven Americans exhibits some
form of arthritis, which is usually characterized by in-
flammation in the affected tissue. The typical signs of in-
flammation (warmth, redness, swelling, and pain) are
often present.

In some types of arthritis, inflammation is caused by
autoimmune reactions. Why the body sometimes mounts
an immune system reaction against its own tissue is un-
known. We do know that such autoimmune reactions re-
sult in inflammation when “anti-self” antibodies react
with intact connective tissue and synovial membranes.
Rheumatoid arthritis is a common autoimmune form of
arthritis.

Utilizing a broad holistic approach, herbal medicine
works with the whole body to promote amelioration of
the condition while alleviating pain and discomfort.
Simply using anti-inflammatory and antirheumatic reme-
dies is not enough. Therapy must focus on improving
liver function, circulation, and elimination, as well as the
quality of the patient’s life and experience.

We need not look in. too much depth at the differ-
ences among the various kinds of arthritis. A finely de-
tailed differential diagnosis may not even be necessary for
holistic treatment. It is necessary, however, to recognize
the influence of the patient’s genetic framework and the
contributions of various factors, including lifestyle and
diet, to the development of the condition for the particu-
lar individual. These conditions occur as a result of the

----- PAGE 424 -----
416 <2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

body’s inability to deal with pressures from wrong diet
and lifestyle or other stresses. The aim of treatment is not
to attack the symptoms in an effort to regain vitality, but
rather to help the individual attain a state of health in
which the body will be better able to take care of itself.

Arthritis and Friction
The concept of friction provides us with an important in-
sight as to how to approach these conditions. The joint
changes that occur in arthritis cause bones to rub together
in a manner that causes friction, but often a long history
of friction precedes these physical changes. Friction can
be caused by particular physical activities—for example,
when a farmer develops osteoarthritis in the shoulder on
which he has carried hay bales every morning for years. It
may also be related to muscle tension that binds joints too
tightly together, which is usually due to a history of fric-
tion in life.

The Collins Dictionary defines friction in the following
way:

A resistance encountered when one body moves relative to
another body with which it is in contact... disagreement
or conflict.

When considering the roots of rheumatic and
arthritic problems, this definition seems to cover it all—
whether the “two bodies” involved are bones, people, or
differing emotions and beliefs. Conflicts and the friction
they engender may take many forms, but the experience
is fundamentally an inner one. For some, conflict is a state
of mind, or an attitude with which to relate to the world.
Such conflict really takes place between inner aspects of
the individual, as a manifestation of psychological dishar-
mony. The inner conflict may be externalized as conflict
in relationships or lifestyle, but the roots are often deep in
the psyche.

When trying to create an environment conducive to
healing within the body, as much attention must be paid
to emotional and mental harmony as to diet and herbal
medicine. An outlook on life that is tight, defensive, and
lacking in vulnerability and openness will tend to feed the
rheumatism. On the other hand, initiating an inner pro-
cess of relaxation to reduce emotional friction, allow free
interaction with other people, and open up emotions and
beliefs sets the stage for the miracle of self-healing to
occur, Herbs can facilitate this process.

It is possible to cleanse the whole system and to re-
move the source of the rheumatic or arthritic develop-

ment by using appropriate herbs in combination with
other techniques that support and aid the entire body.
Such treatment takes time, as a degenerative process that
developed over time cannot be reversed in just one
month. However, when the right treatment is initiated,
the practitioner may hear comments like “I already feel
better within myself” long before the actual symptoms of
pain or stiffness are gone.

With rheumatic and arthritic problems, perhaps
more than with any other condition, it is essential to treat
the whole person. Otherwise, improvement will be only
slight or temporary. When one takes the individual’s
unique picture into account, it is possible to open the
gates for a quite miraculous healing to occur. Although a
general need for cleansing will be common to all patients,
each must also be approached as a unique being. Does the
digestive system need any kind of help? Are the kidneys
working well? Is the patient under much stress? Is the en-
docrine system working harmoniously? How is the diet?

EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS FOR
MUSCULOSKELETAL PROBLEMS

External applications of various herbs can help relieve
discomfort. This plethora of prescriptions leans heavily
on the wealth of traditional experience that characterizes
herbalism. They may be used safely in myalgia and os-
teoarthritis, but those containing hot spices (such as
cayenne, mustard, and ginger) should not be used by pa-
tients with rheumatoid arthritis.

These remedies may be antispasmodic, rubefacient,
or anti-inflammatory in nature. There are many possible
external applications of herbs, and the choice will often
depend upon what plants are available and local tradi-
tions. Here is a brief list of external applications used tra-
ditionally for musculoskeletal conditions, taken from
many different sources and organized by primary herbal
component.

Black Mustard (Brassica nigra)

Mustard seeds can be applied externally to ease acute local
pain, sciatica, and gout. Prepare a poultice by mixing powdered
mustard seeds with warm water to form a paste. Spread onto
brown paper and apply to affected area. For rheumatic pain,
mustard oil, a powerful local irritant, may be incorporated into
liniments for application to affected areas. This treatment
should not be used in rheumatoid arthritis.

----- PAGE 425 -----
White Mustard (Brassica alba)

Poultices made with mustard flowers, bread crumbs, and vinegar
are a traditional treatment for rheumatic and sciatic pains. As an
alternative, rnix white rnustard seeds with black mustard seeds.
Although mustard poultices may redden the skin, they are very
stimulating and efficient.

Cayenne (Capsicum annuum)

Cayenne is an important ingredient in this traditional stimulat-
ing application, used to increase local circulation in arthritis and

rheumatism.
Capsicum annuum powder 1 part
Verbascum thapsus leaf 1 part
Ulmus rubra powder 1 part

Apple cider vinegar Enough to dampen the mixture

Mix ingredients to make a poultice. If the cayenne causes too
powerful a burning sensation, cover the skin with vegetable oil
before applying poultice.

Another way to use cayenne is to mix equal parts of
cayenne and glycerin, shake well, and apply to painful joints. As
in the above application, if cayenne causes a burning sensation,
apply vegetable oil first. Cayenne powder or tincture may also
be rubbed on inflamed areas for added relief.

Lavender Essential Oil (Lavandula spp.)

A small amount of essential oil of lavender, added to a fixed oil
(such as almond oil) is a useful anti-inflammatory for the treat-
ment of rheumatic complaints.

Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

For cramps or the relief of rheumatic pain, try this traditional an-
tispasmodic tincture.

Lobelia inflata powder (crushed seed and herb) 1 0z

Symplocarpus foetidus (root and rhizome) loz
Scutellaria lateriflora (herb) loz
Commiphora molmol (gum myrrh) loz
Valeriana officinalis (root) loz

Capsicum annuum (dried fruit) "oz

Infuse herbs for one week in 1 quart of brandy in a closely
corked, wide-necked bottle. Shake well daily. Strain, press out
clear liquid, and rub mixture on affected areas.

Mullein (Verbascum thapsus)

Mullein combines well with Cimicifuga racemosa and Lobelia
inflata in liniments. For swollen joints, and to relieve the aches
and pains of arthritis and rheumatism, rub mullein oil thor-
oughly into skin, or saturate a piece of cotton with the mullein

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM «2 417

oil, apply to skin, and cover with a dry dressing. Prepare mullein
oil by infusing mullein flowers in olive oil.

For the treatment of painful and swollen joints, pour boil-
ing vinegar over a small quantity of mullein, cover, and simmer
slowly for 20 to 30 minutes. Strain; add a small amount of tinc-
tures of cayenne and lobelia. Apply to affected areas.

Sassafras (Sassafras albidum)

Here is a recipe for a traditional North American liniment for
rheumatic problems.

Sassafras albidum tincture loz
Zanthoxylum americanum tincture loz
Capsicum annuum tincture loz
Commiphora molmol tincture loz
Camphor tincture loz
Distilled water 8 oz

Shake ingredients together well and apply to affected parts.

MYALGIA

A group of common nonarticular rheumatic disorders
characterized by achy pain, tenderness, and stiffness of
muscles, areas of tendon insertions, and adjacent soft-
tissue structures. (The Merck Manual)

Myalgia, also generally called rheumatism, is a notori-
ously vague and misused description for aches and pains
in the musculature. Since these symptoms are also com-
mon to the early stages of many infections and a range of
autoimmune conditions, they may cal] for a more detailed
differential diagnosis. A safe rule of thumb is to consider
the problem more deeply if symptoms cannot be eased to
some degree within two weeks,

Treatment of Myalgia

An important aspect of treatment is to support the mus-
culoskeletal system by using appropriate tonics. Beyond
that, many other parts of the body may also be involved,
depending upon the individual.

Sports injuries. If myalgia is the result of long-standing
sports injuries, the addition of antispasmodics can help
loosen the muscles. Connective tissue must also be
strengthened.

Digestive disorders. If the patient has a history of digestive
problems, appropriate digestive tonics are indicated.
Cardiovascular issues. Cardiovascular tonics should be
added if the patient has hypertension or overt heart
disease. The balance “f herbs for active treatment of

----- PAGE 426 -----
418 @ TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

both rheumatism and cardiovascular problems must be
determined by the professional judgment of the
herbalist.

Stress. Long-standing stress can lead to the development
of tension and tightness in the muscles. This, in turn,
may hold the joints too tightly, resulting in friction.
Over the course of years, this can develop into “wear-
and-tear” arthritis (osteoarthritis), but in the short
term will cause pain and stiffness.

Actions Indicated

Antirheumatics help because of their general value for this
body system.

Anti-inflammatories are especially indicated if there is
much sensitivity to touch.

Alteratives are indicated if there is a suspicion of a sys-
temic problem.

Antispasmodics ease any associated muscular tension, often
the core of this problem.

Circulatory stimulants may help by increasing local circula-
tion; however, they are usually best used in the form of
rubefacients.

Rubefacients stimulate circulatory activity, thus increasing
removal of tissue waste and the local supply of oxygen
and nutrients.

Analgesics are of limited, symptomatic value only.

Diuretics appear to be very effective in easing vague
rheumatic aches and pains.

Nervines may be indicated.

Specific Remedies

Most of the salicylate-containing anti-inflammatory
herbs are considered specifics in the various folk tradi-
tions of the world. Especially important are Filipendula ul-
maria (meadowsweet), Gaultheria procumbens (winter-
green), Populus tremuloides (aspen), and Salix spp. (willow
bark). In addition, we can add Angelica archangelica (an-
gelica), Apium graveolens (celery seed), and, in fact, all of
the herbs in the general antirheumatic category. External
applications will often help. These may be rubefacients,
circulatory stimulants, salicin-containing essential oils, or
even antispasmodic herbs. The choice will ultimately de-
pend upon the patient’s response to different remedies.

A Prescription for Myalgia

Salix spp. 2 parts
Angelica archangelica | part
Urtica dioica 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Antispasmodic Rub

Lobelia inflata
Viburnum opulus

1 part
1 part

Rub tincture mixture into painful muscles as needed.

The internal treatment supplies a basic range of anti-
rheumatic herbs that provide salicylate anti-inflammatory
actions, along with support for the digestive process and
more generalized alterative effects. Possible external
treatments are so numerous that the choice is as much a
matter of cultural preference as of therapeutic judgment.

Table 19.3. Actions Supplied by Myalgia
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Salix spp., Viburnum opulus

Antispasrnodic Lobelia inflata, Viburnum opulus
Alterative Urtica dioica

Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Urtica dioica

Broader Context of Treatment

Dietary factors must be considered. Please see sugges-
tions given in the section on osteoarthritis. A careful re-
view of the patient's lifestyle will help clarify issues related
to posture, work conditions, stress, and other factors.
Chiropractic, osteopathy, aromatherapy, massage, and at-
tention to appropriate exercise may all prove useful.

OSTEOARTHRITIS

An arthropathy with altered hyaline cartilage and charac-
terized by loss of articular cartilage and hypertrophy of
bone, producing osteophytes. (The Merck Manual)

Osteoarthritis, also called degenerative joint disease, is
the most common form of arthritis. It affects about one
in six Americans, including 80% of people over the age of
70. By implication, more than 20 million people in the
United States probably have osteoarthritis. The disease
affects both men and women, but is more common in
men before age 45 and more common in women after
age 45,

In a healthy joint, the ends of the bones are encased
in smooth cartilage. They are protected by a joint capsule,
which is lined with a synovial membrane that produces

----- PAGE 427 -----
synovial fluid. The capsule and fluid protect the cartilage,
muscles, and connective tissues. The joint includes the
following components:

Cartilage. This forms a hard but slippery coating on the
end of each bone.

Joint capsule, This tough membrane sac holds all the
bones and other joint parts together.

Synovial fluid. Synovial fluid lubricates the joint and keeps
the cartilage smooth and healthy.

Muscles, ligaments, and tendons. Together, muscles and con-
nective tissues keep the bones stable and allow the joint
to bend and move. Ligaments are tough, cordlike con-
nective tissues that connect one bone to another.
Tendons are tough, fibrous connective tissue cords that
connect muscles to bones.

Osteoarthritis primarily affects the cartilage of the
joints. Healthy cartilage allows the bones to glide
smoothly over one another, and also absorbs energy from
the shock of physical movement, such as walking or
repetitive motions. In osteoarthritis, the surface layer of
this cartilage breaks down and wears away. The bones
under the cartilage are then able to rub together, causing
pain, swelling, and loss of motion. Over time, the joint
may lose its normal shape, and bone spurs may grow on
the edges of the joint. Bits of bone or cartilage can break
off and float inside the joint space, causing still more pain
and damage.

Unlike some other forms of arthritis, osteoarthritis
affects joints only, not internal organs. Rheumatoid
arthritis, for example, impacts other parts of the body in
addition to the joints. Although osteoarthritis can occur
in any joint, it most often affects the ends of the fingers,
thumbs, neck, lower back, knees, and hips.

Body Parts Commonly Affected by Osteoarthritis

Hands. Small, bony knobs (called Heberden’s nodes) ap-
pear on the end joints of the fingers. Similar knobs
may appear on the middle joints of the fingers. The
fingers can become enlarged and gnarled, and may
ache or feel stiff and numb. The base of the thumb
joint is also commonly affected.

Knees. Knees, the body’s primary weight-bearing joints,
are commonly affected by osteoarthritis, becoming
stiff, swollen, and painful.

Hips. Osteoarthritis in the hips can cause pain, stiffness,
and severe disability. The pain may be felt in the hips,
groin, inner thighs, or knees. Osteoarthritis in the hip
can limit the individual’s ability to move and bend,
making daily activities a challenge.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 419

Spine. Osteoarthritis of -he spine can cause stiffness and
pain in the neck or in the lower back. Weakness or
numbness of the arms or legs may also occur.

Treatment of Osteoarthritis

In addition to attention zo musculoskeletal issues, the di-
gestive system needs special care. Beyond that, treatment
will depend upon the individual's specific case. Always re-
member the general principles of good elimination, but
never resort to strenuous “purging and puking.”

Actions Indicated

Antirbeumatics will usually help, but selection must be
based on a sound therapeutic rationale.

Anti-inflammatories are fundamental here, as their use not
only eases the symptom picture but also helps arrest de-
generative changes to bony tissue. Salicylate-based
herbs, such as Filipendula ulmaria, are especially helpful.

Alteratives are the key to any attempt to transform sys-
temic problems (if present). However, if the os-
teoarthritis is associated primarily with physical wear-
and-tear, alteratives are not quite as fundamental. In
cases like this, Menyanthes trifoliata is primarily indi-
cated.

Antispasmodics lessen the impact of physical friction by re-
laxing the muscular envelope around the arthroses.
Cimicifuga racemosa proves effective here.

Circulatory stimulants support the healing process by in-
creasing blood flow through the tissue. The bark and
berries of Zanthoxylum americanum are good choices.

Specific Remedies

Both Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean) and Harpagophytum
procumbens (devil’s claw) could be considered specifics
here. However, because of the multifactorial etiology of
osteoarthritis, it is unlikely that there will be any one spe-
cific remedy.

Urtica dioica (nettle) is a traditional European remedy
that is both taken internally and used externally as a rube-
facient. This external use involves fresh, raw leaf and is
not for the fainthearted! One study, performed in 1999 at
Plymouth Medical School in the United Kingdom, exam-
ined the traditional reputation of nettle sting for relieving
joint pain? The results showed that nettle sting was
markedly effective in relieving pain for many patients.
The authors noted, “No observed side effects were re-
ported, except a transient urticarial rash,” which should
come as no surprise to anyone familiar with this plant!

----- PAGE 428 -----
420 @ TREATMIN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

A Prescription for Osteoarthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, use
external treatments as indicated. If the patient experiences
stomach irritation related to Menyanthes, add Althaea.

Table 19.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription
for Osteoarthritis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Menyanthes trifoliata, Cimicifuga racemosa

Anti-inflammatory
{salicylate

Filipendula ulmaria

Anti-inflammatory
{general)

Angelica archangelica, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine antispasmodic — Cimicifuga racemosa, Apium graveolens

Peripheral vasodilator  Zanthoxylum americanum

Diuretic Apium graveolens, Achillea millefolium
Carminative Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens
Bitter tonic Menyanthes trifoliata, Achillea millefolium

External Treatments for Osteoarthritis

External remedies may be used to ease pain and reduce
inflammation, at the same time helping to eliminate tox-
ins by stimulating circulation to the affected area. While
such treatment will not lead to a fundamental change on
its own, it will contribute to the healing process and ease
discomfort.

A Warming, Stimulating Liniment

A very straightforward liniment can be made by mixing equal
parts of glycerin and tincture of cayenne. Rub this into the af-
fected joints or muscles. Care must be taken not to use the lin-
iment on broken skin or on the sensitive skin of the face, as it
will cause a burning sensation. This is the “heat” that relieves
pain in cold, aching joints and stiff muscles.

St. John’s Wort Oil

If there is pain in the muscle tissue or any nerve pain, St. John’s
wort oil (Hypericum perforatum) can be effective. Make St.
John’s wort oil in late summer by picking fresh blossoms and
putting them into oil:

Fresh, just-opened
Hypericum perforatum flowers 100 g (4 02)

Olive or sunflower oil 1 pint (% liter)

Crush the flowers in a tablespoon of the oil and place in a clear
glass container. Pour the rest of the oil over the flowers and mix
well. Leave the container open in a warm place for three to five
days, then seal the container well and place it in sunshine or an-
other warm place for three to six weeks. Shake daily until the oil
takes on a bright red color. Next, press the mixture through a
cloth and let stand for a day to allow the oil to separate from
the water. Carefully pour off the oil and store in an airtight,
Opaque container. St. John’s wort oil may be rubbed on areas of
rheumatic pain, used for neuralgic or sciatic pains, or applied to
minor burns.

Broader Context of Treatment

Exercise is an essential component of any treatment plan
for osteoarthritis. Appropriate activity improves mood
and outlook, decreases pain, increases flexibility, improves
heart health and blood flow, helps reduce or maintain
weight, and promotes general physical fitness. However,
determining the amount and form of exercise to recom-
mend for a patient with osteoarthritis will depend on
which joints are involved, how stable they are, and
whether the patient has undergone a joint replacement
procedure. The specifics will vary from individual to in-
dividual, so the patient should seek advice from a doctor
or physical therapist.

Strength training. Exercise bands are inexpensive devices
that are useful for resistance training.

Aerobic exercise. This form of activity helps keep the lungs
and circulatory system in shape.

Range of motion exercises. These activities help keep the
joints limber.

Agility activities. These exercises are intended to help the
patient maintain daily living skills.

When exercising and during normal daily activities, it
is important for the patient to stay aware of the need to
rest and protect the joints. The patient must learn to rec-
ognize the body’s signals, and know when to stop or slow
down in order to prevent pain. For some people, relax-

----- PAGE 429 -----
ation, stress reduction, and biofeedback techniques can
help. Others may need to use canes or splints to take pres-
sure off the joints. Splints provide extra support for weak-
ened joints and can help keep the joint in the correct po-
sition. However, splints should be used for limited
periods only, because joints and muscles must be exer-
cised to prevent stiffness and weakness.

Exercise and a healthy diet facilitate weight control,
another essential component of osteoarthritis treatment.
Losing weight reduces stress on weight-bearing joints
and limits further injury.

Nutrition is another very important factor in the suc-
cessful treatment of osteoarthritis. While there is a certain
degree of controversy as to which foods or supplements are
most effective, it is always appropriate to focus on avoiding
foods that definitely aggravate arthritic problems.

For a basic osteoarthritis exclusion diet, the patient
should avoid the following foods and beverages:

Coffee, both regular and decaffeinated

Red meat of any kind

Vinegar and anything based upon vinegar (for example,
pickles), with the possible exception of apple cider
vinegar

Plants in the Solanaceae (nightshade) family, such as
tomatoes, eggplant, peppers, potatoes, and tobacco

High-acid vegetables, such as tomatoes and rhubarb

High-acid berries, such as gooseberries, red currants, and
black currants

Refined white flour products

Artificial additives, flavorings, and preservatives

Processed foods

Red wine, port, and sherry

Carbonated drinks

Shellfish

Any food or beverage that causes specific problems for
the patient

Exclusion diets produce the best results in earlier,
more painful stages of this long-term condition. In long-
standing osteoarthritis, a balance must be struck between
the adoption of good eating habits that will have a posi-
tive psychological impact on the patient and adherence to
a nutritional dogma that may, in the long run, be of ques-
tionable efficacy.

Pain relief is, of course, an ongoing concern in the
management of this chronic condition. As discussed ear-
lier, there are a number of nonpharmaceutical ways to re-
lieve the pain of osteoarthritis. Warm towels, hot packs,
and warm baths represent ways to apply moist heat to the
joint, relieving pain and stiffness. In some cases, a cold

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 421

pack (such as a bag of ice or frozen vegetables wrapped in
a towel) can relieve pain or numb the sore area. Water
therapy in a heated pool may also relieve pain and stiffness.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following supplements:*

Glucosamine sulfate: 1,500 mg/day
Vitamin E: 600 TU/day

Vitamin A: 5,000 TU/day

Vitamin C: 1 to 3g/day

Vitamin Bg: 50 mg/day

Pantothenic acid: 12.5 mg/day
Methionine: 400 mg three times a day
Zinc: 45 mg/day

Copper: | mg/day

Numerous physical aids and supports are available for
patients who have become disabled by this disease. A
wealth of simple inventions, called activities of daily living
(ADL) devices, can help patients manage everyday life
tasks. These range from specially designed kitchen de-
vices (such as cutlery, can openers, and faucet grips) to
brushes with extended handles and adaptations to help
with using the telephone, These devices can enormously
improve the patient’s quality and experience of life. More
information can be obtained from occupational therapists
and other physical therapy specialists. Other sources of
information are the Arthritis Foundation and local agen-
cies dedicated to the concerns of aging.

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

A chronic syndrome characterized by nonspecific, usually
symmetric inflammation of the peripheral joints, poten-
tially resulting in progressive destruction of articular and
periarticular structures; generalized manifestations may
also be present. (The Merck Manual)

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory condition
that involves not only the joints, but other connective tis-
sue as well. About 2.1 million Americans, or 1% of the
adult population of the United States, have rheumatoid
arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis affects all races and ethnic
groups. The disease most often begins in middle age and
occurs with increased frequency in older people, but it
may also affect children and young adults. Like some
other forms of arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis occurs much
more frequently in women than in men. Two to three
times as many women as ren develop the disease.
Rheumatoid arthritis is one of several autoimmune
arthritic diseases. An important laboratory finding in this
condition is the presence of rheumatoid factor (RF), a

----- PAGE 430 -----
422 o TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

special antibody active against the normal antibodies in
the bloodstream. Why RF develops is unknown, but cur-
rent theories point to an exaggerated immune response to
long-term stimulation by infectious agents or foreign
substances. RF itself is not directly responsible for the in-
flammatory process, but functions solely as a marker for
the disease.

The joint destruction that occurs in severe rheuma-
toid arthritis is caused by inflammation of the synovial
membrane, the thin, smooth capsule that lines the joints.
As part of the immune response to the unknown stimulus,
white blood cells and antibodies infiltrate the synovial
membranes, inducing them to proliferate and fold over
on themselves. Persistent or recurrent inflammation re-
sults in permanent damage to the joint cartilage, bones,
ligaments, and tendons. This widespread inflammatory
process may also involve other tissues, including blood
vessels, skin, nerves, muscles, heart, and lungs. The result
is painful joints, loss of mobility, and generalized soreness
and depression.

Several special features distinguish rheumatoid
arthritis from other types of arthritis. For example,
rheumatoid arthritis generally occurs symmetrically. That
is, if one knee or hand is involved, the other will be also.
The disease often affects the wrist joints and the finger
joints closest to the hand. It can also impact other parts of
the body, and may be associated with fatigue, occasional
fever, and a general sense of malaise.

Signs and Symptoms of Rheumatoid Arthritis

Joint pain, aching, and stiffness come on gradually, followed
in a few weeks by joint swelling, redness, and warmth.

Presentation is usually symmetrical. The hands, wrists, shoul-
ders, elbows, feet, ankles and knees on both sides of the
body are typically involved, but the patient may initially
present with inflammation of a single joint.

Symptoms tend to be worst in the morning and diminish as
the day goes on.

Rheumatoid nodules (small, firm lumps beneath the skin)
appear in some patients, especially around the elbows.

Fatigue. The patient often experiences distressing fatigue
in the early afternoon and has difficulty sleeping in
general.

Other organs may be affected. Vasculitis, or inflammation of
the blood vessels, may cause skin rashes, ulcers, and
gangrene. Other manifestations include scarring of the
lungs, inflammation of the membranes surrounding
the heart and lungs, nerve damage, dry eyes and mouth
(Sjogrens syndrome), and enlargement of the spleen

and lymph nodes.

The experience of rheumatoid arthritis varies greatly
from person to person. The condition may last only a few
months and resolve without causing any noticeable dam-
age. It may take the form of mild or moderate disease
with periods of worsened symptoms, called flares, and pe-
riods during which the patient feels better, called remis-
sions. The most severe form of rheumatoid arthritis is ac-
tive most of the time, lasts for many years, and leads to
serious joint damage and disability.

For about 5% to 10% of rheumatoid arthritis pa-
tients, the arthritis is mild or limited to one or two
episodes. Another 25% have an erratic pattern of pro-
longed remissions and periods of relapse. In the majority,
however, the clinical course is progressive with intermit-
tent flare-ups. Most patients continue to function despite
pain and discomfort, but about 10% of rheumatoid
arthritis patients progress to severe permanent joint de-
formity, limitation of movement, or serious disability.

Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis

The herbal treatment guidelines given here ensure that
appropriate tonics are included. Potentially, every sys-
tem and organ of the body may need tonic support in
this autoimmune condition that so severely affects con-
nective tissue. The two primary foci for support are the
musculoskeletal and immune systems. Nervine tonics
are also indicated. If there are problems with the digestive
system, emphasize tonics as well as remedies for specific
symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Because of the nature of the inflammation in rheuma-
toid arthritis, this is where phytosterol-containing anti-
inflammatory herbs, such as Dioscorea villosa (wild
yam) and Bupleurum, come into their own. However,
the salicylate-containing herbs are still helpful.
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) fits perfectly.
Phytosterol- and salicylate-containing herbs comple-
ment one another well.

The complex of potential causes of this autoimmune
condition includes aspects of psychology. Even if a causal
role cannot be proved, there can be no doubt that anxiety
and depression are major aggravating factors for rheuma-
toid arthritis. Nervine relaxants also help as antispasmod-
ics, and nervine tonics will ease the constant stress caused
by the pain and discomfort.

Antirheumatics will help, but their selection must be based
on a rationale that takes into account the individual's
unique issues.

----- PAGE 431 -----
Anti-inflammatories are very important here, as much of
the symptom picture is the direct result of the inflam-
matory process.

Alteratives play a pivotal role in any immune system work.
Menyanthes trifoliata is essential.

Antispasmodics, such as Cimicifuga racemosa, will ease any
associated muscular tension.

Circulatory stimulants are not as crucial in rheumatoid
arthritis as they are in osteoarthritis.

Rubefacients are not as relevant here as in osteoarthritis,
and, in fact, can aggravate symptoms of rheumatoid
arthritis.

Analgesics will ease both the pain and the stress response
to the pain.

Nervines are especially relevant, considering the acknowl-
edged psychosomatic contribution to this problem.
Tonics and antidepressants will support the patient in
coping with this extremely tiring and debilitating con-
dition. Nervine relaxants help as antispasmodics.

Hypnotics will help with sleep in the face of pain.

Specific Remedies

There are no specific remedies for rheumatoid arthritis.
This is to be expected, due to the multifactorial nature of
this immune-mediated condition. However, alterative-
based antirheumatic herbs are of special relevance here,
with an emphasis on the alterative action. These include
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean), Harpagophytum procum-
bens (devil’s claw), and Arctium lappa (burdock). Guaiacum
and Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) are especially useful as
anti-inflammatories. Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew) can
be very helpful for some people.

Beyond this, appropriate treatment and herb selec-
tion are largely a reflection of the diagnostic skill of the
practitioner, Much will depend on the patient’s adoption
of appropriate dietary and lifestyle changes and adherence
to the dosage regimen.

A Prescription for Rheumatoid Arthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1/2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 1/2 parts
Guaiacum officinale 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM & 423

A Prescription for Sleep and Pain Relief

Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Piscidia erythrina 1 part
Passiflora incarnata 1 part

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture one-half hour before retiring

The digestive systerr. must be working well, so treat
any stomach irritation as a priority. These prescriptions
do not take such problems into account. As in os-
teoarthritis, if the patient is experiencing epigastric ten-
derness due to the harshness of Menyanthes or Guaiacum,
add Althaea.

Table 19.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Rheumatoid Arthritis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Menyanthes trifoliata, Guaiacum

officinale, Cimicifuga racemosa

Anti-inflammatory (salicylate) Filipendula ulmaria

Anti-inflammatory (saponin) Guaiacum officinale

Anti-inflammatory (general) Angelica archangelica, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Guaiacum officinale,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine (antispasmodic) Valeriana officinalis, Cimicifuga

racemosa, Apium graveolens

Nervine (tonic and antidepressant) Hypericum perforatum

Diuretic Apium graveolens,
Achillea millefolium
Carminative Angelica archangelica, Valeriana
officinalis, Apium graveolens
Bitter tonic Menyanthes trifoliata,

Achillea millefolium

Broader Context of Treatment

As in osteoarthritis, the patient must strike a good balance
between rest and exercise, resting more when the disease
is active and exercising more when it is not. Rest helps re-
duce active joint inflammation and pain and eases fatigue.
Short rest breaks every now and then are more helpful
than long ones. Exercise maintains healthy and strong
muscles, preserving joint mobility and flexibility. Exercise
can also help with sleep problems, reduce pain, foster a
positive attitude, and facilitate weight loss.

----- PAGE 432 -----
424 <=. TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Rheumatoid arthritis is often as much an emotional
challenge as a physical one. People with this condition
commonly experience fear, anger, and frustration—
emotions that can greatly increase the level of stress al-
ready generated by pain and physical limitation. Although
stress does not appear to cause rheumatoid arthritis, it
makes coping with the disease much more difficult. A
number of techniques can help patients cope with stress.
Regular rest periods can be beneficial, as can relaxation,
distraction, or visualization exercises. See chapter 16 for
more suggestions on managing stress.

The daily living aids mentioned in the discussion on
osteoarthritis can be just as helpful for patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. The general dietary suggestions
given for osteoarthritis are also pertinent here. However,
the nutritional supplement recommendations are differ-
ent. In Téxthook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following supplements:°

DHEA: 50 to 200 mg/day

EPA: 1.8 g/day; or flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day
Pantothenic acid: 500 mg four times a day
Quercetin: 250 mg three times a day, between meals
Vitamin C: 1 to 3 g/day

Vitamin E; 400 IU/day

Copper: 1 mg/day

Manganese: 15 mg/day

Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Zine: 45 mg/day

OSTEOPOROSIS

A generalized, progressive diminution in bone tissue mass
per unit volume, causing skeletal weakness, even though
the ratio of mineral to organic elements is unchanged in
the remaining morphologically normal bone. (The Merck
Manual)

Osteoporosis is a disease that weakens bones to the point
at which they break easily, especially those in the hip,
spine, and wrist. About 25 million Americans have osteo-
porosis, and 80% of these people are women. One of two
women and one in eight men over the age of 50 will at
some point have an osteoporosis-related fracture.
Although the exact cause of osteoporosis is unknown,
the process by which the bone becomes porous is under-
stood. Normally, 6% to 12% of an adult’s total skeleton is
replaced each year. After skeletal mass peaks—usually
around the age of 35—bones begin to lose calcium faster
than they can replace it. For women, the loss of bone den-

sity speeds up during the first three to seven years after
menopause, and then slows down again. This post-
menopausal increase in bone loss is believed to be caused
by the decline in estrogen production.

Certain conditions that impair the body’s ability to ab-
sorb calcium, such as kidney disease, Cushing’s syndrome,
and hyperthyroidism, can also lead to osteoporosis. Other
factors associated with osteoporosis are surgical removal
of part of the stomach or intestine and excessive use of
glucocorticoids, other steroids, or anticonvulsant drugs.
Prolonged immobility due to paralysis or illness can cause
calcium loss, leading to eventual bone loss.

Osteoporosis is preventable. A diet rich in calcium,
vitamin D, and phytoestrogens and a lifestyle that in-
cludes regular exercise are thought to be the best ways to
prevent osteoporosis.

Calcium

Calcium-rich foods, such as dairy products, are the pre-
ferred source of calcium. Calcium-fortified foods and
calcium supplements are other means by which optimal cal-
cium intake can be reached in those who cannot meet this
need by ingesting conventional foods.

Phosphorus-rich foods should be avoided, as they can
promote bone loss. High-phosphorus foods include red
meats, soft drinks, and foods containing phosphate addi-
tives. Overconsumption of alcohol and caffeine is thought
to impair calcium absorption and should be avoided.

Good Food Sources of Calcium

Low-fat dairy products, such as cheese, yogurt, and milk

Canned fish with edible bones, such as salmon and
sardines

Dark green leafy vegetables, such as kale, collards, and
broccoli

Calcium-fortified foods, such as bread made with calcium-
fortified flour and calcium-fortified orange juice

As most women get only one half to one third as
much calcium as they need from the diet, calcium supple-
ments can make up the difference. The chelated forms of
calcium supplements are most effective. These include
calcium citrate and calcium gluconate.

Conclusions of a panel convened by the National
Institutes of Health were published in the December 28,
1994, issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association. The panel’s recommended intake levels, pre-
sented in table 19.6, include both dietary and supplemen-
tal calcium.

----- PAGE 433 -----
Table 19.6. Optimal Calcium Intake®

AGE RECOMMENDED INTAKE
Birth-6 months 400 mg/day

6-12 months 600 mg/day

1-5 years 800 mg/day

6-10 years 800~1,200 mg/day

Tl-24 years 1,200-1,500 mg/day

Women 25-50 years 1,000 mg/day

Pregnant or lactating wornen ,200-1,500 mg/day
Postmenopausal women on ,000 mg/day
estrogen replacement therapy

Postmenopausal women not ,500 mg/day

on estrogen therapy

Men 25-65 years ,000 mg/day
Women and men over 65 500 mg/day

Vitamin D and Magnesium

Adequate vitamin D is essential for optimal calcium ab-
sorption. Even a brief period of sun exposure each day
provides enough vitamin D for most people. Taking vita-
min D supplements (400 to 800 IU/day) may be helpful if
the individual does not live in a sunny climate.
Magnesium is also necessary to help the body absorb cal-
cium. The recommended daily dose of magnesium is 250
to 350 mg.

Exercise

Exercise not only builds bone strength, but it also helps
prevent bone loss. Weight-bearing exercises that put
stress on bones, such as dancing, running, walking, stair
climbing, and aerobics, reduce bone loss and help prevent
osteoporosis. To benefit from the exercise, it must be
done at least three times a week for 30 to 45 minutes.

Phytoestrogens

Plant estrogenic substances, or phytoestrogens, are con-
stituents of many herbs with a historical use for condi-
tions that are now treated with synthetic estrogens. They
may be suitable alternatives to estrogens for the preven-
tion of osteoporosis in menopausal women. Given the
protective benefits of soy isoflavones against breast cancer
alone, the regular consumption of soy foods is encouraged.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 425

Herbal and Nutritional Treatments for
Osteoporosis
Herbal and nutritional treatment cannot eliminate osteo-
porosis, but it can slow the process. The North American
tradition relies on herbs such as Equisetum arvense (horse-
tail), Avena sativa (oat straw), and Urtica dioica (nettles) for
the long-term treatment of osteoporosis. Some believe
that they are effective because they have a high calcium
content. In fact, these herbs do not contain particularly
high levels of calcium, but they are often effective anyway!

Taking into account the physiological processes that
underlie osteoporosis, herbal hormonal normalizers may
be helpful if started early enough. Antirheumatic herbs
can help with pain in the joints and muscles, and anti-
inflammatory herbs will similarly reduce the discomfort

‘

associated with this problem.

A Prescription for Osteoporosis

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Equisetum arvense ] part
Avena sativa | part
Urtica dioica ] part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Broader Context of Treatment
Here are some general preventive guidelines.

Eat foods rich in calcium, such as nonfat milk, low-fat yo-
gurt, broccoli, cauliflower, salmon, tofu, sesame seeds,
almonds, and leafy green vegetables.

Eat foods that contain plant estrogens, especially tofu and
other soy products.

Avoid foods that can interfere with absorption of calcium, such
as red meats, soft drinks, and excessive amounts of al-
cohol and caffeine.

Do weight-bearing exercises for 30 to 45 minutes at least
three times a week.

Do not smoke. Some studies have shown that women who
smoke increase their risk of developing osteoporosis by
50%.

Avoid. antacids containing aluminum, as they can prevent
calcium absorption by binding with phosphorus in the
intestines.

In addition, the following supplements are recom-
mended to help prevent and treat osteoporosis:’

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula
Calcium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day
Vitamin D: 400 TU/day

----- PAGE 434 -----
426 — TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Magnesium: 400 to 800 mg/day
Boron (as sodium tetrahydraborate): 3 to 5 mg/day

GOUT:

A metabolic disease marked by a painful inflammation of
the joints, deposits of urates in and around the joints, and
usually an excessive amount of uric acid in the blood.
(The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Gout is one of the most painful of the rheumatic diseases.
It is caused by deposits of needlelike crystals of uric acid
in the connective tissue, joint spaces, or both. The in-
flammatory process here is initiated by the deposition of
uric acid from the bloodstream in the joint. When these
crystals are ingested by white blood cells, the cells release
enzymes that generate inflammation.

Gout accounts for about 5% of all cases of arthritis.
Pseudogout, also a crystal-induced arthritis, is a condition
with similar symptoms that results from deposits of cal-
cium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals in the joints. It
may also be called calcium pyrophosphate deposition dis-
ease, crystal deposition disease, or chondrocalcinosis.

To understand gout, it is first necessary to have a
basic knowledge of the chemistry of uric acid. This natu-
rally occurring substance is a product of the chemical
breakdown of the purine bases that compose the genetic
material, DNA. As cells die and release DNA from their
chromosomes, purines are converted into uric acid that is
excreted in the urine and, to a lesser extent, through the
intestinal tract. The amount of uric acid dissolved in the
bloodstream is directly related to this delicate balance be-
tween uric acid production and excretion.

Normally, uric acid is dissolved in the blood and
passes through the kidneys into the urine, where it is
eliminated. If the body increases its production of uric
acid or if the kidneys do not eliminate enough uric acid
from the body, uric acid builds up, resulting in a condition
called Ayperuricemia. Hyperuricemia may also occur when
a person eats too many high-purine foods, such as liver,
dried beans and peas, anchovies,
Hyperuricemia by itself is not dangerous, but if hyper-
uricemia leads to the formation of uric acid crystals, gout
may develop. However, only 1 in 20 people with hyper-

and gravies.

uricemia goes on to develop gout.

Acute attacks of gout are caused by the body’s in-
flammatory reaction to the intermittent precipitation of
uric acid crystals into the joints. The excess crystals build
up in the joint spaces, causing inflammation. Deposits of
uric acid, called tophi, can appear as lumps under the skin
around the joints and at the rim of the ear. In addition,

uric acid crystals can collect in the kidneys and cause kid-
ney stones. For many people, gout first affects the joints
of the big toe, a condition called podagra.

Risk Factors for the Development of

Hyperuricemia and Gout

Genetics may play a role in determining a person’s risk,
since 6% to 18% of people with gout have a family his-
tory of the disease.

Obesity increases the risk of developing hyperuricemia and
gout, because excessive food intake increases the body’s
production of uric acid.

Overconsumption of alcohol can lead to hyperuricemia, be-
cause it interferes with the elimination of uric acid
from the body.

Eating too many purine-rich foods can cause or aggravate
gout.

An enzyme defect that interferes with the way the body
breaks down purines causes gout in a smal] number of
people.

Exposure to lead in the environment can cause gout.

Some people are at risk for developing high uric acid
levels because they have coexisting medical conditions or
because they take certain medicines. The following
medicines can lead to hyperuricemia because they reduce
the body’s ability to eliminate uric acid:

* Diuretics

* Salicylates, or medicines made from salicylic acid, such
as aspirin

¢ The vitamin niacin, also called nicotinic acid

* Cyclosporine, a medicine used to control the body’s re-
jection of transplanted organs

¢ Levodopa, a medicine used to treat Parkinson’s
disease

Treatment of Gout

Actions Indicated

Diuretics play a pivotal role in any attempt to go beyond
mere symptom relief, as they can help flush the urates
from the body.

Anti-inflammatories may help, but probably not nearly as
much as the patient would like. Inflammation is an ap-
propriate body response to the presence of crystals.

Specific Remedies

Colchicine, from Colchicum autwmnale (autumn crocus), is
a specific allopathic drug. However, use of the whole
plant is very unsafe, due to its inherent toxicity.

----- PAGE 435 -----
A Prescription for Gout

Eupatorium purpureum 2 parts
Elymus repens 2 parts
Apium graveolens 2 parts
Guaiacum officinale 1 part

Dosage: up to 5ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, a
strong infusion of Urtica dioica should be drunk often.

Broader Context of Treatment
Gout appears to be common among people who eat diets
that include meat and animal fats, but is unusual in peo-
ple who follow vegetarian diets. In addition, rapid weight-
loss diets may increase uric acid levels in the blood.

Here are some recommendations to help predisposed
people avoid gout attacks:

Drink 6 pints of fluid a day. Slightly alkaline, natural
spring-water is recommended. This helps dilute the
urine and promote excretion of uric acid through con-
tinued flushing of the kidneys.

Avoid purine-rich foods, such as anchovies, asparagus, crab,
fish roe, herring, kidney, liver, sweetbreads, meat
gravies and broth, mushrooms, mussels, peas, beans,
and sardines. s

Avoid all alcoholic beverages.

Eat raw fruit, vegetables, grains, seeds, and nuts. Cherries are
especially recommended; the patient should consume
‘2 pound of fresh or canned cherries a day.

Exercise regularly and maintain a healthy body weight. Lose
weight if overweight.

Cherries are particularly effective in lowering uric
acid levels and preventing attacks of gout. Cherries,
hawthorn berries, blueberries, and other dark red-blue
berries are rich sources of constituents called anthocyani-
dins and proanthocyanidins. These compounds give those
fruits their deep red-blue color, and have the ability to
prevent breakdown of collagen in connective tissue.

Anthocyanidins and proanthocyanidins affect colla-
gen metabolism in a number of ways:

¢ Reinforce the collagen matrix of connective tissue
(ground substance, cartilage, tendons, etc.)

¢ Minimize free radical damage through antioxidant
activity

© Inhibit the breakdown of collagen during inflammation

These effects on collagen structures make flavonoids

extremely useful in the treatment of a wide variety of in-

flammatory conditions, including gout and rheumatoid

arthritis.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM .& 427

There are a number of simple ways to reduce pain
and inflammation during an acute gout attack. However,
if the joint is too painful to touch, they can be difficult to
implement. If the pain is not too severe, apply a plastic
bag containing a few ice cubes or a bag of frozen vegeta-
bles to the joint to relieve painful swelling. Wrap the cold
bag in a soft cloth or towel and hold it against the painful
area for up to five minutes at a time, then repeat as
needed. Because even the pressure of a sheet or blanket
can cause pain in a gout-afflicted joint, at bedtime rest the
gouty foot inside a cardboard box or a plastic laundry bas-
ket turned on its side.

BURSITIS AND TENDINITIS

Bursitis: Acute or chronic inflammation of a bursa. (The
Merck Manual)

Tendinitis: Inflammation of a tendon (tendinitis) and the
lining of the tendon sheath (tenosynovitis), usually occur-
ring simultaneously. (The Merck Manual)

A bursa is a pocket of connective tissue adjacent to a joint.
Lined by a smooth inner surface, the bursa facilitates the
gliding movements of muscles and tendons over bony
protuberances. Bursitis is inflammation of a bursa that re-
sults in pain, tenderness, stiffness, and, in some cases,
swelling and redness. The inflammatory process may af-
fect any bursa, but bursitis is most common in the shoul-
der, elbow, hip, and knee.

Bursitis that occurs in the knees is often called
“housemaid’s knee” it is called “tennis elbow” when it af-
fects that joint. The condition may be caused by a hard
knock or accident or by slow, gradual change. When it is
part of the gradual development of rheumatic tendencies,
it should be treated as described in the section on myalgia.
When acute (often due to an accident or injury), the best
treatment is to use a compress or stimulating liniment on
the affected area. (See External Applications for
Musculoskeletal Problems earlier in this chapter.) Both
will help reduce inflammation and ease pain. However, if
the problem continues, an internal treatment program
should be initiated. See treatment recommendations for
myalgia.

Bursitis is associated with strenuous activity, particu-
larly among manual workers and athletes. However, it can
also affect otherwise sedentary people who push their
bodies past reasonable limits. Warming up before strenu-
ous exercise and cooling down afterward is the most ef-
fective way to avoid bursitis and other strains affecting the
bones, muscles, and ligarnents.

----- PAGE 436 -----
428 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Tendinitis is an inflammation in or around a tendon,
the fibrous tissue that connects muscle to bone. Tendons
withstand bending, stretching, and twisting, but can be-
come inflamed because of overuse, disease, or injury.
The pain can be significant, and worsens if continued
use of the joint furthers the damage. Most tendinitis
heals in about two weeks, but chronic tendinitis can take
more than six weeks to resolve, especially if the sufferer
does not give the tendon adequate time to heal before
using it.

Tendons can become inflamed when overstressed by
any activity, but the most common cause by far is repeti-
tive stress—using the same joint for the same stressful
movement again and again. This happens not only in
sports, but also in many types of office work and other
situations.

Treatment of Bursitis and Tendinitis

While the patient may be tempted to “tough out” the
pain, this is not a good idea. Left untreated, chronic bur-
sitis can lead to the formation of calcium deposits in soft
tissues, and may even cause permanent limitation of mo-
tion in the affected joint.

Actions Indicated

Antirheumatics often help; the choice will depend upon
the practitioner's interpretation of the patient’s total
picture.

Anti-inflammatories provide the primary action needed for
symptomatic relief. Salix is an example.

Antispasmodics, such as Viburnum opulus, ease local muscle
tension.

Circulatory stimulants and rubefacients contribute by in-
creasing local blood circulation.

Analgesics may help with pain. However, the legal herbal anal-
gesics can do very little in such cases, so pain relief is best
achieved with anti-inflammatories and antispasmodics.

A Prescription for Bursitis or Tendinitis

Salix spp. 2 parts
Viburnum opulus 2 parts
Apium graveolens 2 parts
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Antispasmodic Rub
Lobelia inflata
Viburnum opulus

1 part
1 part

Rub tincture mixture into painful muscles as needed

Table 19.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Bursitis and Tendinitis

ACTION HERBS
Anti-inflammatory (salicylate) Salix spp.
Anti-inflammatory (general) Apium graveolens

Antispasmodic Lobelia inflata, Viburnum oputus,

Apium graveolens

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

Broader Context of Treatment

Diathermy (deep-heat therapy) can help relieve the dis-
comfort and inflammation of bursitis and tendinitis and
also soothe tense muscles, nerves, and tendons. The goals
of treatment are to restore painless movement to the joint
and to maintain the strength of surrounding muscles
while giving the injured tissues me to heal. Adequate
rest is crucial. Returning too soon to the activity that
caused the injury can lead to chronic tendinitis or torn
tendons. An immediate treatment for tendinitis and bur-
sitis is known by the acronym RICE, which stands for rest,
ice, compression, and elevation.

Rest is mainly a matter of remembering not to use the
joint, especially for the same action by which it was
injured.

Ice can be a bag of frozen vegetables if no ice pack is
handy.

Compression is best provided by wrapping the area snugly,
but not painfully tight, with a sports bandage.

Elevation reduces blood pressure in the injured area.
Elevate the ankle by putting it on a footstool, for ex-
ample, or elevate the elbow onto a table.

RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME

Restless legs syndrome is a puzzling neurological disorder
for which a cure remains elusive. The syndrome is char-
acterized by tingling or crawling sensations deep in the
legs, associated with an overwhelming desire to move the
legs to relieve the discomfort. The symptoms often
worsen at night.

Restless legs syndrome is believed to be a genetic
neurological condition that is activated by a chemical im-
balance in the brain. Research shows that caffeine can ag-
gravate symptoms. The syndrome has also been linked to
iron or folic acid deficiency, especially in people with kid-
ney disease.

----- PAGE 437 -----
Treatment of Restless Legs Syndrome

Herbs with strong relaxing qualities may be effective in
reducing muscle tension and relieving pain. Such herbs
include Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis, Piper
methysticum, and Cimicifuga racemosa. Viburnum opulus
may also help relax muscles.

To help correct nutrient deficiencies that may con-
tribute to symptoms, the patient should take vitamin E, a
multivitamin containing iron, and B complex. These
should be taken in the standard RDA doses. To offset folic
acid deficiency, the patient should take 400 to 1,000
meg/day of this nutrient.

Other recommendations include:

Avoid stimulants, such as caffeine and decongestants.
Avoid stimulating activities up to three hours before bed,
including exercising and consuming a heavy meal.
Keep the bedroom quiet and cool; an overly warm room ap-
pears to aggravate restless legs syndrome.

Practice relaxation techniques, such as yoga, biofeedback,
and meditation, to reduce stress.

Soak the feet in cool water for relief. Never use ice water,
which can cause nerve damage.

Leg Massage

1. Sit on the floor and bend one knee, keeping the foot
flat. Grasp the calf in both hands and use the
thumbs to find the muscle that runs along the out-
side of the shinbone, below the kneecap. Massage
the muscle all the way down to the anklebone.

2. Place both thumbs on the inside of the leg near the
anklebone. Keeping the hands around the calf for
support, massage the inside of the leg vigorously
with both thumbs, moving from the ankle up to the
knee.

3. Finally, use the thumbs and fingers of both hands to
knead the back and sides of the calf muscle. Work
from the knee down to the ankle. When finished
massaging one leg, repeat the entire process on the
other. Alternately massage both legs several times.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 429

References

1. Thie NM, Prasad NG, Major PW. Evaluation of glu-
cosamine sulfate compared to ibuprofen for the treat-
ment of temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis: a ran-
domized double blind controlled 3 month clinical trial.
The Journal of Rheumatology 2001 Jun; 28(6):1347-55.

2. Messier SP, Loeser RF, Mitchell MN, et al. Exercise and
weight loss in obese older adults with knee osteoarthri-
us: a preliminary study. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society 2000 Sep; 48(9):1062-72.

3. Randall, et al. Nettle sting of Urtica dioica for joint
pain—an exploratory study of this complementary
therapy.” Complementary Therapies in Medicine 1999 Sep;
7(3):126-3 1.

4, Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

5. Ibid.

6. NIH Consensus Coriference. Optimal calcium intake.
NIH Consensus Development Panel on Optimal
Calcium Intake. The Journal of the American Medical
Association 1994, 272:1942-48,

7. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999,

Suggested Reading

Hoffmann D. Healthy Bones and Joints: A Natural Approach to
Treating Arthritis, Osteoporosis, Tendinitis, Myalgia,
Bursitis. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2000.

----- PAGE 438 -----
20

MN

THE SKIN

he skin is the body’s largest organ. It consists of a

| thin outer layer called the epidermis and a much

thicker inner layer called the dermis. Beneath the

dermis is a layer of little lobes of fat bound together by

tough fibers that extend down from the dermis. Between

the epidermis and dermis is the basement membrane, to

which both layers are attached. This characteristic layer-

ing of cells, from the live and actively replicating cells of

the stratum germinatum to the dead flakes on the surface,
provides the unique setting for the skin diseases.

The skin fulfills a number of important functions. As
the interface between the body’s internal structures and
the environment, the skin serves as a protective coat for
the body against mechanical injury and attack by bacteria,
fungi, viruses, and parasites. The pigment melanin pro-
tects against ultraviolet radiation. The skin is also a major
organ of elimination through the functions of: sweating
and sloughing off dead skin cells. In addition, a number of
immune responses occur in the skin.

In various ways, the skin also plays a vital role in tem-
perature regulation. Variable amounts of heat are lost
through the skin by transfer from the dermis capillaries to
the cooler epidermal cells. The amounts lost vary accord-
ing to constriction or dilation of the dermal blood cells.
The layer of insulating fat modifies the amount of heat
conducted from the depths of the body. Sweating cools
the epidermis through evaporation.

The skin also serves as a primary sensory organ. The
five sensations that arise from stimulation of skin nerves
are touch, pain, heat, cold, and pressure. Other skin sen-
sations, such as vibration, are composites of these basic
sensations. In hairy skin, the nerve endings are simple,
threadlike, naked terminals. In skin that is not hairy, there
are several types of specialized nerve endings. Although
they look the same, each nerve ending is capable of re-
sponding to only one of the five basic types of sensation.

Finally, the skin is the interface between our con-
sciousness and the world, the vehicle through which we
express, communicate, and perceive. Thus, psychological

430

and spiritual aspects of the individual impact and are im-
pacted by the skin.

This array of functions highlights the complexity of
the relationships among the skin, the internal organs, and
the psychology of the individual. From this awareness
comes an important therapeutic insight: Effective phy-
totherapeutic treatment of skin disease must be mediated
through internal medication, not topical application.
Treatment of skin problems must take into account
the whole panoply of issues involved. Similarly, the widely
held view that many skin problems are caused by “nerves”
is not very helpful. There is a deep and complex relation-
ship between the epidermis and the nervous system.
Developmentally, nerve and skin cells derive from the
same tissue in the human embryo. The close functional

relationship between the skin and the nervous system fa-
cilitates many aspects of homeostasis, such as body tem-
perature control.

In addition, the psychological relationship between
the individual and the skin is deep and complex. An in-
dividual expresses and experiences much of his or her
self-image through the skin. Thus, perception of the
world and communication to the world are also vital
skin functions.

To conclude that there is a simple causal relationship
between the nervous system and skin disorders ignores all
of the insights gained through the holistic perspective.
Anyone with obvious skin problems may well become
stressed, developing psychological coping mechanisms
that appear to be manifestations of nervous system issues.
But which comes first?

HERBS FOR THE TREATMENT OF
SKIN PROBLEMS

Internal treatment of skin problems will often be relevant,
but it may be appropriate to also apply herb externally for
local effects.

----- PAGE 439 -----
Alteratives

As with the musculoskeletal system, the skin is often the
focus for manifestations of systemic illness. For the phy-
totherapist, it should come as no surprise that alterative
herbs are again the cornerstone of any fundamental heal-
ing transformation. The therapist is continually faced
with the challenge of selecting appropriate alteratives for
given individuals, Because of its focus on secondary ac-
tions and system affinities, our herb selection model often
helps, but sometimes it is not the answer.

I have found the following generalization to be help-
ful. Bear in mind that as with all generalizations, there are
many exceptions. However, it is possible to broadly group
alterative herbs according to their botany and their im-
pact on elimination.

Table 20.1. Alteratives Grouped by Plant Part and
Route of Elimination

PLANT PART USED PRIMARY. ELIMINATION HERBAL EXAMPLES
PATHWAY/ACTION
Leaf Kidney/diuretic Galium aparine,
Trifolium pratense,
Urtica dioica
Root, rhizome, wood _Liver/hepatic Arctium lappa,

Mahonia aquifolium,
Rumex crispus

Herbs for Topical Application
Herbs offer a range of actions that directly impact the
skin, and can be applied directly by choosing the most
relevant method. Ste/laria media (chickweed), for example,
is an extremely effective remedy for the relief of itching.
The only itching for which it offers little relief is that due
to jaundice. It is most effective in a nongreasy form, such
as a bath, fomentation, poultice, lotion, or cream.

Herbal actions useful for topical application can be
divided into two broad groups.

1. Actions that exert specific local effects on areas of skin
to which herbs are applied include anti-inflammatory,
antimicrobial, antipruritic, astringent, emollient,
rubefacient, and vulnerary.

2. Actions intended primarily for internal effect but
enter the body via absorption through the skin po-
tentially include all herbal actions. However, alter-
ative actions have been most commonly applied in
this way.

THE SKIN.@ 431

Table 20.2. Herbs and Actions for Topical Use

ACTION HERBS

Antipruritic Calendula officinalis, Hamamelis virginiana,

Hypericum perforatum, Stellaria media

Anti-inflammatory — Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,
Matricaria recutita, Plantago spp.,

various anti-inflammatory essential oils

Emollient Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris,
Symphytum officinale, Ulmus rubra

Astringent Achillea raillefolium, Geranium maculatum,
Hamamelis virginiana

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis

canadensis, strongly antimicrobial essential oils
including Thymus vulgaris, Eucalyptus globulus,
Melaleuca spp.

Herbs for Topical Application: Pharmacy
Considerations

The whole array of topical herbal formulations developed
over the years deserves a special mention. See chapter 11
for more details on these various applications.

Baths

Baths, also known as ba/neotherapy, represent one of the
most pleasant ways to apply medications to the skin! They
are especially useful in treating widespread skin eruptions,
removing crusts and scales, and relieving inflammation and
itching. In short, any remedy added to a bath counts as bal-
neotherapy. Some commonly used bath additions are:

Salts. These range from simple table or Epsom salts to the
therapeutically important salt from the Dead Sea.

Oils. Essential oils can be added to supply a wide range of
properties. In the bath, they act through the skin but
also via the nose. Fixed oils may be added to baths too,
for their lubricating and softening properties.

Herbal extracts. These can be infusions, decoctions, or
tinctures.

Colloidal oatmeal. This remedy can be very antipruritic
and drying for conditions such as weeping eczema and
psoriasis.

Fomentations and Compresses
These methods facilitate the local application of liquid
formulations. They have the advantage of convenience

----- PAGE 440 -----
432 <x TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

and relative cleanliness, as compared with poultices.
Infusions, decoctions, tinctures, and oils can all be applied
in this way.

Poultices

Poultices are similar to fomentations and compresses but
instead incorporate the herb in some solid form, whether
whole leaf, mashed cut herb, or any relevant plant part
applied directly to the skin and held in place with a cloth.

Lotions

Lotions are liquid formulations for carrying the herbs.
The specific effects will depend upon both herbs and ve-
hicle. However, no matter what remedies they contain,
lotions will usually have a cooling effect due to evapora-
tion. They rarely need to be washed off, as part will be ab-
sorbed and the rest will evaporate.

Creams

Creams are suspensions of oil in water, and can be formu-
lated to be either greasy or nongreasy. They are primarily
emollient and protective. An advantage of creams is that
they do not insulate the skin too much and thus will not
cause a
Overheating can aggravate itching in many skin problems.

localized increase in skin temperature.

Ointments (Salves)

An ointment is a semisolid, lipid-based application.
Because fats are used as ointment bases (for example,
cocoa butter and beeswax), they extract plant constituents
well. In addition, the fats soften at skin temperature and
thus make the extracted material available to the skin.
Like creams, ointments and salves are emollient and pro-
tective, but they remain on the skin longer. This tenacity
will confer a local warming effect.

Pastes

A paste, or a mixture of powder in an ointment base, is a
traditional pharmaceutical formulation that is, unfortu-
nately, becoming rare. This is largely a matter of conve-
nience for dispensers, because they can be very time-
consuming to make. Pastes are indicated when the goal is
to keep the effects of the herbs on the surface for ex-
tended periods of tine. Their contents are not absorbed
well, but do impact the skin surface. They are useful in
conditions such as psoriasis, in which they facilitate the
removal of scales.

Powders

These are dry, finely powdered herbs or minerals. Examples
include colloidal oatmeal, Lycopodium powder, cornstarch,
and various clays. Their primary benefit is that they take up
moisture—for example, perspiration or exudates of
eczema. They can also be antipruritic and antimicrobial.

ECZEMA AND DERMATITIS

Superficial inflammation of the skin, characterized by
vesicles (when acute), redness, edema, oozing, crusting,
scaling, and usually itching. (The Merck Manual)

The terms eczema and dermatitis are the cause of much
confusion. In keeping with the broad guidelines given in
The Merck Manual, we shall use these terms synony-
mously to indicate superficial inflammation of the skin.
The dermatologist subdivides dermatitis and eczema into
a range of different disease entities distinguished by loca-
tion and appearance. For the phytotherapist, however, the
most important distinction is between cases with an in-
ternal or endogenous cause and those with a contact or
exogenous cause.

In cases of dermatitis or eczema of exogenous cause,
it is often possible to solve the problem simply by remov-
ing or avoiding the surface irritant, if it can be identified!
Such problems, often called contact dermatitis, are com-
monly caused by:

Industrial solvents

* Dyes

Nickel and other metals

¢ Leather-tanning chemicals
¢ Some soaps

In such cases, eczema is the final result of a complex
series of internal reactions to allergens and irritants. It is
often associated with other allergic diseases, such as hay
fever and asthma, but may also occur alone. The rash of
eczema is very itchy, peeling, thickened, and sometimes
weepy, and is typically seen in the creases of joints and
around the trunk. The rash may fluctuate seasonally and
can even change over the course of the day. Scratching
may lead to bleeding and infection. Blood tests in indi-
viduals with eczema reveal increased levels of cells and
chemicals associated with general allergic reactions.

One variation of eczema occurs on the palms of the
hands and sometimes on the soles of the feet. This type
may be quite frustrating to treat, because the common ex-
posure to moisture, irritants, and injury of these areas

----- PAGE 441 -----
leads to self-perpetuation of the disease. Furthermore,
the thickness of the skin in these regions makes topical
therapy more difficult.

A number of factors can aggravate eczema, although
the specifics vary from person to person. Dietary factors
are particularly important, especially in children. Milk
and milk products are the most common triggers.
Primary aggravating factors for eczema are:

* Stress

Mechanical irritation
° Heat

Dietary factors

‘Treatment of Eczema

Eczema requires the practitioner to be at his or her most
insightful. Ideally, the nature of the underlying cause will
identify what systems call for toning. However, with the
exception of obvious allergies or contact irritants, this can
be problematic for a skin problem like eczema.

The skin obviously needs support, but in addition the
nervous system, digestive system and liver, immune sys-
tem, and others may need attention. In many ways, the
therapeutic conclusion will depend upon the herbalist’s
theoretical interpretation of eczema, rather than the pa-
tient’s case history.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are the classic remedies for the treatment of
eczema. How they work is unclear, but they can often
be dramatically effective.

Antipruritics, remedies that reduce the sensation of itch-
ing, are indicated, not simply to make the patient feel
better, but also to reduce physical trauma caused by
scratching.

Anti-inflammatories applied topically and taken internally
speed the curative work of the alteratives, but do not
replace them.

Lymphatic tonics, which may be considered a type of alter-
ative, are especially helpful for eczema in children.
Nervine relaxants help with the commonly associated prob-
lem of anxiety. They also often ease itching and even in-
flammation in the skin because of their relaxing effect on
the peripheral nerves of the autonomic nervous system.

Diuretics ensure adequate elimination through the kid-
neys. Diuretic alteratives are most relevant.

Hepatics will contribute support for liver function and the
digestive process. Hepatic alteratives are best here.

Viulneraries support the healing of skin lesions when ap-
plied topically, but do not replace appropriate internal
treatment.

THE SKIN @ 433

Astringents, used topically, reduce any weeping or oozing
of fluids.

Emollient herbs are suitable for topical applications where
soothing is needed. The demarcation among emol-
lient, anti-inflammatory, and antipruritic herbs is
rather meaningless here.

Specific Remedies

For internal treatment, the leafy alteratives are often con-
sidered the closest to specifics for this often intransigent
condition. These are also often diuretic and lymphatic
remedies. Herbs in this group include:

Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Trifolium ‘pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

The rooty alteratives tend to be hepatic in nature.
They can often be too strong for eczema, aggravating the
problem instead of healing it. For intransigent cases un-
responsive to the herbs already listed, stronger remedies
are indicated. For eczema, effective examples include:

Arctium lappa (burdock)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)

Relevant herbs for topical use abound. However, al-
ways bear in mind that healing must be based upon inter-
nal medication, not salves. Select remedies according to
the actions most appropriate for the individual's specific
symptoms. The choice often will also depend on factors
such as availability and aesthetics. Examples include:

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Aydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Plantago spp. (plantain)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

A Prescription for Eczema

Galium aparine 1 part
Urtica dioica 1 part
Trifolium pratense 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

----- PAGE 442 -----
434 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES By BODY SYSTEM

Table 20.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Eczema

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Trifolium pratense

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Trifolium pratense
Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine
Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic (mild) Galium aparine, Trifolium pratense

A Prescription for Persistent Eczema Unresponsive
to Mild Alteratives

Galium aparine | part
Arctium lappa 1 part
Scrophularia nodosa 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. Build up the dosage
to 5 ml three times a day. In addition, the patient should drink
an infusion of fresh or dried Urtica dioica two or three times a
day.

Care should be taken initially with Scrophularia nodosa, as
it can produce the opposite of the desired result in some pa-
tients. If there is a flare-up of the skin eruption, cut down on the
Scrophularia and try again. This is not a healing crisis!

Table 20.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Persistent Eczema

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Scrophularia nodosa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica,
Arctium lappa

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Trifolium pratense

Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine

Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Arctium lappa

Hepatic (mild) Galium aparine, Arctium lappa

A Prescription for Atopic Eczema
Associated with Asthma

2 parts

2 parts

1 part (see chapter 15, page 332)

Urtica dioica

Trifolium pratense

Dyspnea Formula
Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The relative
proportion of alterative herbs to Dyspnea Formula will depend
upon the patient's specific needs. In addition, the patient should
drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium aparine two or
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Tf dietary triggers can be identified, it is essential for the
patient to avoid them completely. Often, patients may
find it challenging to adhere to specific food restrictions,
especially young children. The parents who must enforce
the diet will need much support from the therapist (and
maybe some Scutellaria!). Even if no obvious food triggers
exist, it is always worth excluding milk and milk products.
This may be particularly relevant for children who were
not breast-fed or were weaned too soon. Researchers at
the Hospital for Sick Children in London have shown
that children often develop eczema when weaned from
breast milk to cow’s milk or other foods. Goat's milk,
sheep’s milk, and soy milk rarely trigger allergy problems.

Here are some common eczema triggers:

¢ Cow’s milk

° Eggs

¢ Cheese

¢ Fish

* Sugar

¢ Food additives

Supplements suggested for inclusion in a broad
therapeutic approach to the treatment of eczema by
Drs. Pizzorno and Murray in Textbook of Natural
Medicine include:!

Vitamin ‘A: 50,000 TU/day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/day (mixed tocopherols)

Zinc: 50 mg/day as picolinate (decrease dosage as condi-
tion clears)

Quercetin: 200 to 400 mg three times a day (taken 5 min-
utes before meals)

EPA and DHA: 540 mg and 360 mg/day, or flaxseed oil:
10g daily

Evening primrose oil: 3,000 mg/day

----- PAGE 443 -----
Other authorities have recommended supplementa-
tion with vitamin C and vitamin B complex in addition to
the other supplements listed.

PSORIASIS

A chronic and recurrent disease characterized by dry,
well-circumscribed, silvery, scaling papules and plaques of
various sizes. (The Merck Manual)

This is a common skin disease of unknown cause that af-
fects up to 3% of the American population. Onset usually
occurs before age 20, but all age groups may be affected.
The severity of this condition can vary from the presence
of one or two cosmetically annoying lesions to a physi-
cally disabling and disfiguring affliction of the entire body
surface. The condition is not contagious in any way, and
general health usually is not affected. However, it is no
exaggeration to say that in extreme cases, psoriasis be ru-
inous to the individual's physical, emotional, and eco-
nomic well-being. In addition, some cases are associated
with a severe form of arthritis, called psoriatic arthritis,
that affects general health in much the same way as
rheumatoid arthritis does.

Psoriasis usually develops slowly, following a typical
course of remission and recurrence. The characteristic
psoriatic plaques, or lesions, are sharply demarcated, red
and raised, covered with silvery scales, and bleed easily.
These plaques do not usually itch, and will heal without
leaving scar tissue or affecting hair growth. The nails may
become pitted. Some patients have a tendency to develop
psoriasis at the sites of physical trauma or irritation
(called Koebner phenomena).

Common sites for psoriasis are:

¢ Bony protuberances (knees, elbows, sacrum)

* Scalp

¢ External parts of ears

* Nails, eyebrows

¢ Back, buttocks, and, occasionally, generalized on the
trunk

¢ Skin folds, such as the umbilicus

Treatment of Psoriasis

To develop a therapeutic approach to this intransigent
condition, it is important to understand the processes that
underlie the turnover of cells in the skin. In normal skin,
it takes about 28 days for an epidermal cell to go from
creation to shedding or scaling. Psoriatic cells complete
this process in three or four days, or almost nine times

THE SKIN @ 435

faster than usual. However, there appears to be no impair-
ment of the normal reguiatory mechanisms of cell divi-
sion. Thus, the result is often enormous cell buildup, in-
adequate maturation, and finally plaque formation. Much
of psoriasis therapy is directed toward removing these
plaques in a non-traumatic fashion and to easing any at-
tendant discomfort.

The underlying cause of the rapid epithelial cell
turnover characteristic of psoriasis is not known.
Theories abound and vary according to the practitioner’s
particular belief system. Some believe the cause is pri-
marily nutritional. Others invoke stress and psychological
factors, while those with reductionist inclinations put it
down to genetics.

Undoubtedly, the immune system is involved on
some level, leading some authorities to describe psoriasis
as an autoimmune condition. Flare-ups commonly ac-
company infections, especially infections of the upper res-
piratory tract. Environmental factors, such as injury,
stress, and cold climate, are important for some patients.
About one third of patients experience spontaneous re-
mission of disease.

In short, psoriasis represents a classic example of a
condition for which a holistic perspective is essential. In
designing a treatment program, the practitioner must ex-
plore as many aspects of the individual’s life as is feasible.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are important, as they are for all internally gen-
erated skin problems. In practice, the rooty hepatic al-
teratives often are the best choice.

Anti-inflammatories, applied topically and taken internally,
will speed the curative work of the alteratives, but not
replace them. They are most helpful during flare-ups
and exacerbations.

Lymphatic tonics improve the health of the internal
environment,

Nervine relaxants ease the anxiety that often accompanies
psoriasis. They will also soothe skin discomfort, includ-
ing itching and even inflammation, due to their relax-
ing effects on the peripheral nerves of the autonomic
nervous system.

Diuretics ensure adequate elimination via the kidneys.

Hepatics support liver function and the digestive process.

Vulneraries support the healing of skin lesions when ap-
plied topically, but are not as effective here as one
might hope. Remember, there is no wound to heal.

Astringents, used topically, may help in reducing redness,
heat, and itching through local vasoconstrictor effects.

Emollients assist in the process of scale removal.

----- PAGE 444 -----
436 «<<. TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Antipruritics used topically may help, but itching is not a
major factor in psoriasis.

Diaphoretics have been suggested as a means of increasing
circulation in the skin, thus promoting elimination
and, in theory, general skin health.

It is important to be aware that while they may be
helpful, diaphoretics may also aggravate psoriasis in some
people. They may cause local overstimulation, with an
end result of increasing cell replication rates and thus
desquamation. This is not a major contraindication, but
keep it in mind.

Specific Remedies
Many different herbs have been described as specific for
psoriasis, depending upon local botany and cultural pref-
erences. However, there are probably no true specifics.
This is to be expected in light of the multifactorial, sys-
temic nature of psoriasis. Some people respond incredibly
well to one herb, while others show no response at all.
This can prove both challenging and frustrating for the
practitioner, let alone the patient!

The woody, hepatic alteratives are the herbs that
come closest to being specifics for psoriasis. Herbs in this
group include:

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Of course, any of the other alteratives may prove to
be specific for a given individual. Important leafy alter-
atives to consider include:

Galium aparine (cleavers)
Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

Numerous herbs are relevant for topical application.
An important goal is to lift and remove psoriatic scales
while reducing local inflammation. This often means that
the form of the topical application is as important as any
remedies it contains. Choice of topical application will be
governed to some extent by the personal preferences of
the patient, so experimentation may be necessary. Widely
used plants include:

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Plantago spp. (plantain)

Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

A Prescription for Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex Crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

Table 20.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Urtica dioica
Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora
Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine
Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus

A Prescription for Psoriasis with Anxiety and Tension

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient also
should drink an infusion of Matricaria recutita as desired.

Table 20.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis with Anxiety

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus, Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis

----- PAGE 445 -----
THE SKIN @ 437

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Verbena officinalis

A Prescription for Intransigent, Unresponsive Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Smilax spp. 2 parts
Phytolacca americana 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the pa-
tient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

Care must be taken with this combination, and it is
not advisable for children because of the inclusion of
Phytolacca americana (poke root).

Table 20.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Unresponsive Psoriasis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Phytolacca
americana, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.,
Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana,

Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Valeriana officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Smilax spp.

A Prescription for a Patient with Psoriasis
and Hypertension

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Galium aparine 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos ] part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient should
also drink an infusion of Matricaria recutita, Tilia platyphyllos,
or Trifolium pratense as desired. Allium sativum should be
added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1 clove of
fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract three
times a day.

The last prescriptior. is designed for a case in which
hypertension is not the primary concern. Thus, the bulk
of the dose consists of alterative herbs, rather than hy-
potensive remedies.

Table 20.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis with Hypertension

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Phytolacca
americana, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.,
Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana,

Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Arctium lappa,
Crataegus spp., Galium aparine,
Tilia platyphyllos, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Allium sativum, Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

----- PAGE 446 -----
438 << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Broader Context of Treatment
Both practitioner and patient should be aware of the many
non-herbal treatment and coping options for psoriasis.
Psoriasis is a condition in which patient empowerment be-
comes vital. Patients bear the burden of the label “psoria-
sis sufferer,” and so they suffer. They are often told litle
about the range of simple nursing techniques that could
make their negative skin experience easier to live with.
The skin is an interface between the person and his or
her world. It senses and expresses. Psoriasis impacts the
individual’s experience of the world in two broad ways:

The physical distress makes it difficult for the patient to feel
at ease.

The psychological trauma of feeling “disfigured” may lead to
social isolation and depression.

The therapist must be prepared to help and advise in
these areas as well as with the purely herbal issues. Stress
management is critically important, and will ideally be
part of an overall reevaluation by the patient of lifestyle,
personal goals, and life vision.

For most people with psoriasis, exposure to sunlight
helps alleviate and sometimes even clear the condition.
Unfortunately, we have disrupted our environment so
greatly that this can no longer be generally recom-
mended, as UV light entering through the depleted
ozone layer is potentially more damaging than helpful.
However, the Dead Sea may be safer, because it is so far
below sea level. Here occurs a quality of UV light not
found anywhere else on the planet. Because the light
passes through additional layers of air on its way to this
area, more of the harmful spectrum may be filtered out.
The salts of the Dead Sea itself are also beneficial for pso-
riasis. (Of course, none of this takes into account possible
human dangers, such as war!)

Much of the nutritional advice available for psoriasis
is contradictory. In my therapeutic experience, I have
seen success with both a grapefruit fast and a no-citrus
diet! Psoriasis is the epitome of a “holistic” disease, it
being almost impossible to generalize about recommen-
dations. Specifics of diet must be based upon the individ-
ual, not the pathology.

Supplements suggested for inclusion in a broad ther-
apeutic approach to the treatment of psoriasis by Pizzorno
and Murray in Textbook of Natural Medicine are:?

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Vitamin A: 50,000 TU/day (do not use in pregnancy or for
women planning to become pregnant)

Vitamin E: 400 IU/day
Chromium: 400 TU/day
Selenium: 200 meg/day
Zinc: 30 mg/day

ACNE

A common inflammatory pilosebaceous disease charac-
terized by comedones, papules, pustules, inflamed nod-
ules, superficial pus-filled cysts, and, in extreme cases,
canalizing and deep, inflamed, sometimes purulent, sacs.
(The Merck Manual)

Acne is a common, potentially disfiguring skin disease.
Unfortunately, it often affects those in an emotionally
vulnerable stage of life—adolescents. Acne involves the
sebaceous glands in the skin, which secrete lubrication
(sebum) for the hair follicles (pilosebaceous follicles) and
surrounding skin. These are located in greatest concen-
trations on the face, back, shoulders, and chest. Acne is
most common in adolescents, with a peak in the late
teens. Acne may, however, appear for the first time in the
mid-20s or later and can persist into the 40s or 50s.
Acne lesions are commonly of three types:

Blackheads are glands plugged with excessive material that
discolors on exposure to air.

Whiteheads are small collections of pus within glands.

Nodules or. papules are the red and inflamed areas of more
extensive infection.

A complex of causes underlies acne. Unfortunately,
determining underlying causes is rarely as simple as blam-
ing fats, chocolate, and sugar. Important predisposing fac-
tors include:

Genetic predisposition. Statistics suggest that the strongest
single factor in the development of acne is family his-
tory. While the common conclusion is that the disor-
der has a genetic basis, it might be argued that it is re-
lated to generations of inappropriate nutrition,

Hormonal changes in adolescence. Stimulation of the seba-
ceous glands seems to occur with the production of
androgens (the masculinizing hormone found in both
sexes) at puberty. People with acne seem to produce
normal amounts of androgens, but their skin may sim-
ply be unusually sensitive to its effects.

Skin flora. The bacteria normally present on the skin, or
the skin flora, do not cause acne. However, blackheads
and whiteheads are filled with trapped sebum and
bacteria.

----- PAGE 447 -----
Nutrition. Although it is popularly thought that diet is a
major factor in acne, there is no clear scientific evi-
dence to support this. However, the quality of nutri-
tional intake is fundamental to quality of life, so it
makes sense to limit the intake of saturated fats and
sugar, even if they do not cause acne.

One explanation for the physiological processes be-
hind the characteristic skin eruptions of acne suggests this
sequence of events:

Stimulation by androgens (male sex hormones) causes an in-
crease in the amount and thickness of oil secretion, so
more lipid is present in the follicles.

Changes in skin ecology promote bacterial growth, especially
Propionibacterium acnes.

Sebaceous glands become obstructed by comedones (blackheads
and whiteheads).

Any consequent disruption of follicular epithelium allows dis~
charge of pus into the dermis.

Inflammatory reaction develops.

Pathological changes ensue in the following sequence:

papules — pustules — nodules — cysts

Treatment of Acne

The endocrine system must be given tonic support. This
is ideal, but general endocrine toning is not a simple thing.
Toning work can be focused through the use of hepatic al-
teratives. If there has been long-term antibiotic use, the
immune system must be strengthened. See chapter 21 for
more information.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are the core of any treatment. Hepatic alter-
atives are especially helpful.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated because of the andro-
gen involvement. However, impacting these hormones
in an appropriate way is not always a straightforward
matter.

Antimicrobials help the body deal with secondary infec-
tion. They may be used both internally and topically.

Lymphatic tonics support lymphatic drainage from the skin
and underlying tissues.

Hepatics are vital, partly for the generalized benefit im-
parted by their liver-toning effects, but also because
they have a specific role in detoxification.

Diuretics are important in ensuring adequate elimination
through the kidneys.

Anti-inflammatories can be helpful when used topically
within the context of daily hygiene.

THE SKIN @ 439

Astringents, used topically, help in cleansing and avoiding
secondary infection. .

Specific Remedies
‘Traditionally, there are no definite specifics here, other
than hepatic alteratives. However, tea tree oil (Melaleuca
alternifolia) has specifically relevant properties. The pri-
mary constituent of the oil is terpinene-4-ol, which con-
stitutes up to 60% of the oil. Australian standards set a
minimum content of 30% terpinene-4-ol. Tea tree oil and
terpinene-4-ol in particular have been shown to possess
significant antimicrobial properties. Organisms inhibited
include Candida albicans, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus au-
reus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Propionibacterium acnes.
For acne, tea tree oil applied topically in a 5% to 15% di-
lution three or four times daily is recommended.

Keep in mind that there is no specific herb that nor-
malizes levels of androgens. Occasionally, however, Vitex
can have a beneficial effect in adolescent girls.

A Prescription for Acne

Iris versicolor 1 part
Arctium lappa 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient
should also drink an infusion of Urtica dioica two or three times
a day. In addition, apply Calendula officinalis topically as a wash,
in the form of an infusion mixed with distilled Hamamelis vir-
giniana (witch hazel).

Broader Context of Treatment

‘There are a number of non-herbal issues to address, rang-
ing from diet and hygiene to coping with a whole com-
plex of emotions. It is often important to explain the na~
ture of the problem to the patient, as well as the treatment
you propose. Especially for adolescents, there may be a
need to address unspoken feelings, such as fear and guilt.
Be sure the patient understands the following issues:

Acne is not related to sexual activity. Masturbation and sex
are not causes of acne. This antiquated notion harks
back to the 16th century, when excess semen secretion
was believed to aggravate acne. Marriage was pur-
ported to be the cure. It has no scientific validity.

Acne is not caused by dirt and cannot be washed away. It is
related to an imbalance (hormonal or chemical) that
causes the oil in the skin to form blackheads.

----- PAGE 448 -----
440 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Personal hygiene is important, but an obsession with
washing can aggravate the problem. It may be helpful to
review some specifics with the patient:

Keep the hands away from the face, avoiding friction of the
skin,

Do not squeeze pimples or blackheads, as squeezing the skin
makes the acne worse. The blackhead may be pushed
deeper into the skin, possibly causing the follicle to
rupture,

Keep the hair off the face, and wash the hair daily, if needed.

Avoid cosmetics that contain synthetic chemicals.

Ideas about nutrition “dos and don’ts” for acne
abound. Some generalizations are clear, including avoid-
ing refined foods, red meat, and high-fat or carbohydrate-
rich foods. A diet rich in green leafy vegetables and fruit
is indicated.

Textbook of Natural. Medicine recommends the follow-
ing supplements:

Vitamin A: 100,00 [U/day for three months
Vitamin E: 400 TO/day

Vitamin C; 1,000 mg/day

Zinc: 50 mg/day (as picolinate)

Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Brewer's yeast: | tablespoon twice a day

References
1. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999,

2, Ibid.
3. Ibid.

----- PAGE 449 -----
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

n recent years, the immune system has become an in-

creasingly critical area of focus in all branches of

medicine. This is not just because of the acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, but also
because of the statistical explosion in the incidence of a
whole range of autoimmune diseases. To comprehend the
possible contributions that holistic approaches can make
to the treatment of these conditions, it is important to
have a grasp of the biological basis for immunity.

Just as important is an understanding of the role the
immune system plays in human life. The new, but still in-
complete, insights granted us by the field of immunology
illuminate the profound complexity of human biochemi-
cal processes—and the ways in which they interact with
equally complex ecological processes. However, much
more than biochemistry is involved. Herbal medicine is as
limited as orthodox medicine if it is used only to affect
T- and B-lymphocyte function, without the benefit of a
broader holistic context.

Some important insights arise when immune system
function is viewed from an ecological perspective, not
simply a biochemical or medical one, Human immunity is
a vital component of the interface between the individual
and the world. The role of the human immune system is
not simply to resist the dangers present in the environ-
ment. Rather, it is part of the complex and beautiful dance
of elements flowing back and forth between the human
body and the rest of the world. Seen within the context of
ecology, both human and environmental, immunity is
about harmony.

All of this leads us to some concepts and interpretations
that raise exciting possibilities for the practitioner of holis-
tic medicine, whether phytotherapist or medical doctor.

Human immunity is ecology in action. In other words,
there is a multifactorial relationship at play between indi-
viduals and their environment. There is a complex web of
interactions between the inner world of the body and
mind and the outer world of the environment—its peo-
ple, its culture, its food, in fact, everything. The practi-

441

tioner must not only identify and understand both sides
of this relationship, but must also comprehend the nature
of the relationship. This can prove extremely challenging,
as the relationship will be in dynamic flux at all times.

Immunity represents an ecological interface between inner
and outer environments. Such interfaces are critical to the
health and well-being of the Earth itself. Think of the in-
terfaces between desert and savanna, rain forest and
mountains, woodland and grassland, agriculture and
wilderness. These transition zones facilitate the integra-
tion and fine-tuning of biomes and biosphere health. In
human ecology, the immune system is governed by a
complex of processes that allow resistance and embrace at
the same time. To focus on only one side of this profound
interaction is to miss the point and compromise under-
standing of the whole.

Immunity is an expression of homeostasis. Homeostasis is
an umbrella concept that describes the profound physio-
logical processes that maintain a stable internal environ-
ment within a human being. This inner homeostasis can
be seen as a reflection of planetary homeostasis. In fact,
the recognition of these planet-wide processes led James
Lovelock to propose the Gaia hypothesis.

Immunity is an expression of relationship. This is im-
plicit in everything discussed so far, but also carries the
implication that the very nature of relationship plays a role
in immune system well-being. Thus, the practitioner
must explore patients’ relationships with the world on all
levels, from the food they eat, to the people they love (or
hate), to the way they relate to nature.

In short, as with all holistic healing, any approach to
whole body immunity must address the following aspects
of human life:

Bodily health and wholeness. We must ensure that the phys-
ical body has the appropriate nutritional and healing
support to prevent or treat any ills that may affect it.

Emotional well-being. We must ensure that the patient has
a nurturing, feeling experience of life, encompassing
both the joy and the pain of human existence.

----- PAGE 450 -----
442 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BopDy SYSTEM

Mental vision and perspective. We must help create a mind-
set within which the individual can find his or her own
place in the world and make life choices from the cen-
ter of his or her being, not from a victim’s stance.

Spiritual openness and vitality. This will take the shape of
whatever feels appropriate for the individual.

The new field of psychoneuroimmunology is starting
to point us in directions that hold much promise for the
future. The relationship between stress and immune sys-
tem suppression has been well established in both animal
and human research. We now know that in the presence
of stress, a large and complex array of mechanical, chem-
ical, and immune changes take place, as the body attempts
to defend itself or restore homeostasis.

The term psychoneuroimmunology comes from our
growing understanding of these mind-body connections.
Psycho denotes thinking, emotions, and mood states; neuro
implies involvement of the neurological and neuroendo-
crine systems; and immunology refers to cellular structures
and the immune system. An increasing body of evidence
indicates that the nervous system is capable of modulating
the immune response. It appears that the immune system
may be able to communicate with the nervous system
using neuromodulators and neurohormones secreted by
lymphocytes, and receptors for these substances have
been found on human T-lymphocytes. Activation of these
receptors can be stimulatory or inhibitory, depending on
the neuroactive substance involved.

UNDERSTANDING THE HERBAL
POSSIBILITIES

The various phytotherapeutic systems of the world have
much to offer the holistic practitioner working with the
human immune system. However, confusion and misin-
formation abound in this field. Much of the “phytoper-
plexity” comes from ill-informed attempts to blend in-
sights from different traditions without a clear grasp of
the underlying principles.

Attempts at multicultural therapeutics are to be ap-
plauded, but must proceed from a solid understanding of
the systems involved. Without such a foundation, there is
no real therapy, only wishful thinking. The work of
herbalist Michael Tierra provides an excellent example of
what can be achieved. Consider, for example, the com-
monly held belief in the Western herbal community that
Panax ginseng is for men and Angelica sinensis (dong quai)
is for women. This is simply not the case. My minimal
grasp of the profundities of traditional Chinese medicine

tells me that Panax is the strongest yang tonic, while
A. sinensis is the most yielding yin tonic. This leads to en-
tirely different therapeutic implications.

It is also extremely challenging to build bridges be-
tween traditional phytotherapy and the abundance of
scientific data flowing from the field of immunological
research. It is too easy to discard the insights of tradi-
tional approaches in favor of research published in peer-
reviewed journals. This is imprudent, because important
insights may be gained when one takes into account the
herbal wisdom garnered through generations of experi-
ence. By the same token, we must avoid the temptation to
jump to unwarranted conclusions about the results of an-
imal research on isolated constituents, as the implications
for human therapy are not always clear. See chapter 10 for
a more in-depth discussion of this important issue.

On the other hand, there are many ways to use herbs
to enhance the vitality of the immune system. All of the
diverse herbal traditions, with their unique cultural roots
and expressions, have valuable insights into treatments
and specific herbs. This should come as no surprise in
light of the ecological nature of immunity already dis-
cussed. Herbal medicine is ecological medicine; it is
based on an ecological relationship that has evolved
through geological time. By virtue of this special rela-
tionship between plants and people, there are remedies
that directly address the ecological process of human im-
mune responses.

The contribution of phytotherapy to immune system
health provides a good example of the ways in which tra-
ditional knowledge is now being confirmed by modern
pharmacology. In both the laboratory and the clinic, a
growing number of herbal remedies have been shown to
have marked effects upon the immune system. Some
stimulate immune system responses, but most can best be
described as modulators. That is, these remedies facilitate
greater immune system flexibility in the body’s natural re-
sponse to disease. However, rather than focus on particu-
lar plants, we shall look at the whole treatment process.
An overemphasis on specific plant immunostimulants is
little more than “organic drug therapy,” which is not the
goal of the holistic herbalist.

Immunostimulation or Inmunomodulation?
As pharmacologists discover the possibilities offered by
the plant kingdom, they have found it necessary to coin
new words to describe how plants work. In general, these
terms describe normalizing, whole-plant actions—actions
that are not covered by the semantics of reductionist,
active-constituent research.

----- PAGE 451 -----
Immunostimulants or immunopotentiators lead to a
nonspecific stimulation of the immunological defense
system. Nonspecific immunostimulants do not affect im-
mune system memory cells, and because their pharmaco-
logical effects fade relatively quickly, they must be admin-
istered either at intervals gr continuously. The protective
immunity conferred by immunostimulants happens
quickly, and has been termed paramunity.

Immunomodulation and immunoregulation are terms that
have been proposed to denote any. effect on immune sys-
tem responsiveness. For example, herbs may also stimulate
T-suppressor cells and thereby reduce immune resistance.
Tmmunoadjuvants are substances that enhance the produc-
tion of antibodies without acting as antigens themselves.
The effects of adjuvants are often thymus-dependent.
The phytotherapist is actually quite at home with
these somewhat vague concepts. After all, human life is
rarely governed by logic and rational thinking! From the
allopathic perspective, however, the concept of immuno-
stimulation offers a number of therapeutic possibilities.
These hint at the important changes in perspective that
are under way within the field of orthodox medicine.

For example, immunostimulation may prove to offer
an alternative to conventional drug treatment of infections.
This may be especially true for immunocompromised
patients, or those with impaired immune system function.
As immunostimulation is focused on boosting the body’s
own immune mechanisms, it may represent an opportu-
nity to prevent opportunistic infections in high-risk
patients.

In addition, immunomodulators ‘have potential con-
tributions to make to the therapy of malignant diseases. It
is a well-known fact that stimulation of specific compo-
nents of the immune system, such as macrophages and
killer cells, can inhibit tumor growth. Plant-based im-
munostimulators may also contribute to the treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

As discussed in chapter 9, immunological defense is a
complicated interplay of many factors. However, the mul-
tifactorial nature of whole plant pharmacology often con-
founds researchers’ attempts to identify the mechanisms
at work. To simplify matters, it seems clear that no mat-
ter what the primary target of the immunostimulant,
whether T- or B-lymphocytes or the complement system,
an incréase in the activity of macrophages and granulo-
cytes plays a central role in immunomodulation.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 443

A PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC APPROACH
TO THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

It should be apparent by now that the plant kingdom can
have a major impact upon the function of the human im-
mune system—an impact that a competent holistic prac-
titioner can use to advantage. There are many ideas about
how this can be best approached. The ideas and theories
I discuss in the following sections represent an attempt to
bring together the perspectives of the traditional
European approach, insights offered by Asian medicine,
and the contributions of sharmacological research.
Because immunity miust be seen in the context of
homeostatic, whole-system function, we must also em-
phasize general detoxification and elimination. This, in
turn, illuminates some of the primary ways in which herbs
contribute to preventive medicine and wellness. The im-
portant insights of herbalist Christopher Hobbs in this
area are an inspiration to this author and many other
herbalists.
Hobbs identifies three relevant levels of herbal activity:

¢ Deep immune activation
¢ Surface immune activation

* Adaptogenic action or hormonal modulation

Deep Immune Activation
Plants that impact the immune system within the tissue
that mediates its work are generating increasing interest
in the herbal and research communities. These can be
termed deep immune activators. As discussed in chapter 9,
pharmacology points to saponins and complex polysac-
charides as key contributors to the role of plants in this
area, but please remember that herbs act as biological
wholes, not just as vehicles for active ingredients.
Important Asian immunomodulators that have been
incorporated into Western herbal practice include:

Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)
Codonopsis tangshen (codonopsis)
Ganoderma lucidum (reishi mushroom)
Lentinus edodes (shiitake mushroom)
Ligustrum lucidum (privet)

Schisandra chinensis (schizandra)

An abstruse point must be made here. It may appear
that the primary herbs for immunomodulation come from
Asia, usually China. By extension, it may seem that Western
herbalism is at a disadvantage and suffers from a lack of
research on Western plants. However, this is an artifact of
research funding, not an herbal reality. Until very recently,
the preponderance of research on immunomodulating

----- PAGE 452 -----
444 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

plants and their constituents was performed in Asia, pri-
marily in the People’s Republic of China, India, and
Japan. Funding for these studies was driven by a desire to
improve the lot of the people of these countries.
Consequently, and quite appropriately, the research fo~
cused on the plants used medicinally in those nations.

Comparatively little attention has been paid to plant
immunomodulators by American and European re~
searchers. This should not be taken to mean that no
Western plants have such properties, only that the re~
search community lacks the funding needed to investigate
them. If we examine the properties of Western herbs tra-
ditionally used to treat immune system problems, it can
be argued that the traditional alteratives, tonics, and di-
gestive bitters address deep immune issues in a similar
way to better-studied Asian herbs.

Surface Immune Activation

These are the many plants known as antimicrobials, or
“immune system boosters.” The more attention re-
searchers give these plants, the greater the range of mech-
anisms are found to explain their activity. Examples of
these plants are:

Allium sativum (garlic)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Hormonal Modulators

Remedies in this group work though some hormonal
modulation of the immune response. As is discussed in
chapter 22, a number of endocrine functions can be af-
fected by herbs. For example, adaptogens exert their ef-
fects via the adrenal glands and the general adaptation
system (GAS). See chapter 16 for more information on
this important coping mechanism.

Adaptogens that work via the adrenals and the gen-
eral adaptation syndrome include Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng) and Panax spp. (Korean and American
ginseng).

HERBS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

The array of available information on the immune system
and herbal approaches to treatment can be truly daunt-
ing! The therapeutic suggestions that follow are based

upon my training and clinical experience in England and
Wales. I must emphasize this point, as the approach may
seem too simplistic in light of the impressive body of re-
search on specific plants that now exists.

Remember, the approach we are taking here is based
on the needs of human beings, not on the use of specific
plants. Any other approach may lead to an attempt to fit
a patient into the indications for a certain plant, instead of
identifying the needs of the individual and what herbs
might best address them.

Immune System Pathologies
The phytotherapist can choose from among a number of
therapeutic options for treating the immune system. Most
exciting is the ability to generally support the system in
the absence of overt pathology. Nurturing wellness
through preventive medicine becomes a readily achiev-
able goal when we use immunomodulators within the
context of the holistic approach. In addition, a range of
immune system pathologies may be addressed with herbs.
Immune system problems can be grouped into a
number of different categories.

Immunodeficiency Diseases

These pathologies are associated with malfunction of one
or more of the major aspects of the immune response.
This category is usually divided into two subgroups:

Primary immune deficiency disease. This type, which
may be either hereditary or acquired, is disease caused
by immune deficiency.

Secondary immune deficiency disease. In this kind of im-
mune deficiency disorder, the immune deficiency is the
result of another disease or diseases. An extreme exam-
ple is AIDS.

Hypersensitivity Reactions

These are normal immunity processes that become dam-
aging rather than protective. The pathological processes
arise as a result of specific interactions between an antigen
and components of the immune system. Four types are

known.

Type I. Anaphylactic reactions are caused by release of a
pharmacologically active substance, such as _his-
tamine, from IgE-sensitized mast cells and ba-
sophils after contact with specific antigens. Other
examples of Type I hypersensitivity reactions are
atopic diseases, such as hay fever, and allergic asthma.

Type II. In these cytotoxic reactions, binding of antibody
to an antigen on the cell surface produces damage to

----- PAGE 453 -----
that cell through a variety of mechanisms. Examples
are blood transfusion and Rh incompatibility
reactions.

Type IL Immune complex reactions result from deposi-
tion of solubie, circulating antigen-antibody com-
plexes in vessels or tissue. This process seems to be
implicated in autoimmune conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis.

Type IV. In cell-mediated immunity, immune responses
are mediated by T-cells rather than antibodies. An
example is contact sensitivity to poison oak and
poison ivy. Graft rejections may also be Type IV
reactions.

Autoimmune Diseases

Autoimmune diseases are conditions in which lympho-
cytes produce antibodies that attack the body’s own cells
and tissues as if they were foreign substances, thus caus-
ing pathological damage. Any organ or tissue may be in-
volved. Conditions thought to have an autoimmune basis
include rheumatoid arthritis, polyarthritis, chronic active
hepatitis, multiple sclerosis, and psoriasis.

Various theories have been put forth to explain the
etiology of autoimmune disease. Researchers believe that
the embryonic immune system contains lymphocytes that
can produce self-reacting antibodies, but which are some-
how inactivated as the system develops. They suggest that
autoimmune diseases arise through some kind of disrup-
tion of this inactivation mechanism. A process called
immunoregulation has been postulated to explain the
complex homeostatic mechanisms that hold the “auto-
reactive” cells in check.

This invocation of homeostasis has interesting impli-
cations for the holistic practitioner. In fact, the fascinat-
ing complexities of biochemical and cytological im-
munology can be mesmerizing to both theorist and
therapist. Phytotherapists often become infatuated with
the research findings on interactions between plants and
the immune system at the expense of a holistic perspec-
tive that perceives the person as whole, not just a reflec-
tion of blood chemistry. However, these ideas about
homeostatic immunoregulation do point to a possible
bridge between the reductionist science of immunology
and concepts of wholeness, whether whole plant actions
or the whole body perspective of holistic medicine.

Cancer

A direct relationship exists between the immune system
and the development of tumors. This highlights the pos-
sibilities for prevention and treatment that may be

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 445

achieved by working with immunity. The use of herbs in
a broad holistic context can help the body function and
heal. This is discussed in greater detail later.

Transplant Problems
Immune system rejection of transplanted organs presents
a particular problem. Successful transplantation depends
on the similarity between tissues of the body and those of
the transplanted organ, because cytotoxic T-cells will act
vigorously to destroy any foreign tissue in the body.
After surgery, the patient receives immunosuppres-
sive therapy to inhibit the immunological rejection. This
will involve one or more of the following treatments:

* Corticosteroids to suppress inflammation
* Cytotoxic drugs

* Radiation therapy

Anti-lymphocyte globulins

* Cyclosporine

These approaches kill rapidly dividing cells, such as
activated lymphocytes, and have severe side effects.
However, cyclosporine greatly improves survival from
organ transplants. Cyclosporines are a group of cyclic
oligopeptides first discovered in Tolypocladium inflatum, a
white mold from Norway. Interestingly, it has been de-
termined that in its sexual state, T imflatum is actually
Cordyceps subsessilis, an extremely rare fungus that has been
reported only five or six times before.! However, a related
species, C. sinensis, is a well-known remedy in traditional
Chinese medicine. Recent pharmacological research
shows it to have a range of immunological activities.’ In
spite of all this, however, transplant issues are inappropri-
ate for phytotherapeutic treatment.

Where does all of this leave the phytotherapist?
‘What actions or specific herbs are indicated for these
conditions? Western herbalism seems to have got itself
tied in knots around the word immune, and both profes-
sionals and nonprofessionals are showing symptoms of
conceptual overload. Appropriate remedies for immune
system problems must be selected on the basis of individ-
ual need. This can be determined only through careful di-
agnosis, which in turn requires the practitioner to be
knowledgeable about the complexities of the process. The
word immune does not mean Echinacea!

The real question involves knowing when to use im-
munostimulant herbs and, even more important, when
not to. Stimulating immune system activity may be inap-
propriate in some conditions and vital in others. The clas-
sic Eclectic, Physiomedicalist, and European texts on
herbal therapy do not address these considerations. In an

----- PAGE 454 -----
446 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

attempt to clarify the issue for myself, I have established
provisional guidelines for identifying therapeutic situa-
tions in which immunostimulation is indicated and those
for which it may be contraindicated.

In general, it seems safe to say that immunostimulant
plants should be avoided in conditions that involve inap-
propriate activity of some aspect of the immune complex.
In autoimmune conditions, for example, any stimulation
might increase the production or pathological impact of
antibodies. The same may be said for hypersensitivity re-
actions, even though an external antigen may be present.
Transplant rejection issues also fit into this category, but
are rarely encountered by the phytotherapist.

Conditions for which immunostimulants are proba-
bly contraindicated include:

* Autoimmune diseases
¢ Hypersensitivity reactions
¢ Organ transplantation

On the other hand, immunostimulant plants are fun-
damentally important in conditions related to inadequate
or compromised immune system activity. Individuals may
become immunocompromised for a variety of reasons, in-
cluding the presence of pathogenic or parasitic organisms
and inadequate immune responses to cancerous changes
in the body’s own cells.

Conditions for which immunostimulants are proba-
bly indicated include:

* Infections
* Cancer
* Immunodeficiency disease (for example, AIDS)

Note my use of the word probably in the contraindi-
cations and indications just given. The phytotherapist is
completely at home with multifaceted plant effects, as
well as the diversity and mutability of people. It is a
mistake to view a plant simply as an “immunostimulant.”
A remedy that has a specific value in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis may also demonstrate immuno-
stimulant activity in the laboratory. However, a long-
standing use of a plant based on many generations of ex-
perience has more value in practice than theoretical
concerns raised by in vitro or animal studies.

GENERAL SUPPORT PROTOCOLS

A number of general treatment guidelines have particular
relevance in the broader approach taken to the immune
system in this chapter. Of course, these protocols have a
much wider application, and will prove useful for many
patients with conditions discussed elsewhere in the book.
The protocols include detoxification,
medicine, postoperative recovery, and general guidelines
for treating infection.

preventive

DETOXIFICATION

The particular herbal approach to detoxification de-
scribed here is based upon the premise that the human
body is self-healing and homeostatic, and that the thera-
pist must simply support normal processes. The body has
effective and astoundingly complex mechanisms for rid-
ding the body of waste and poisons. The phytotherapist
can aid the process by using basic, simple, and safe herbs.
The important point is to address eliminative processes as
a whole, not just to focus on the colon.

This means that whenever such a program is under-
taken, the phytotherapist must ensure that all organs of
elimination receive support. In addition, it is essential to
provide support for whatever specific area of the body is
under the most toxic pressure—for example, the lungs of
a tobacco smoker or the liver of a person who has alcohol-
related problems.

Details on applying the principles of detoxification
for specific conditions are given in the appropriate sec-
tions, but here is a brief summary:

* Support the whol process of elimination
* Provide specific support for over-taxed organs
* Alleviate symptoms and address any pathology present

Herbal Actions and Elimination

The physiological impact of certain herbal actions makes
them particularly valuable for supporting various path-
ways of elimination in the body.

Note that no particular herbs are specified here. The
skill and insight of the practitioner will determine the
choice of appropriate plants. The actions model pre-
sented in this book provides a relatively straightforward
method for formulating a prescription that will be effec-
tive in prompting appropriate elimination work while ad-
dressing the unique needs of the individual.

----- PAGE 455 -----
Table 21.1. Appropriate Actions to Support Specific
Pathways of Elimination

BODY SYSTEM HERBAL ACTIONS

Digestive system and colon _—_Aperient/laxative

Urinary system and kidneys Diuretic
Liver and blood Hepatic, alterative
Lymphatic system Alterative, lymphatic tonic
Skin Diaphoretic, alterative

Respiratory system Expectorant, pulmonary, anticatarrhal

Whole body onic, bitter, alterative, adaptogen,

antimicrobial

Selection of Herbs with Appropriate Actions
Selection criteria should take into account secondary ac-
tions as well as system affinity, as described in chapter
12. However, when the goal is to stimulate elimination,
the phytotherapist should emphasize gentle remedies.
Overly active plants can cause an intense elimination re-
action. This can be unpleasant and uncomfortable, not
to mention that it is of very questionable therapeutic
benefit.

The phenomenon known as “purging and puking”
does not represent a healing crisis, but rather the worst
aspects of 19th-century medicine. In a similar vein, I can
detect no valid rationale behind wellness programs based
on the fatuous concept of “no pain, no gain.” I would
suggest that we always keep in mind the relevance of the
advice given by Hippocrates: “First do no harm.”

Table 21.2 provides a brief list of herbs that effec-
tively supply the desired actions with only a mild impact
on the body.

Table 21.2. Herbs to Support Eliminative Processes

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Aperient/laxative Rumex crispus, Taraxacum officinale root

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra

Diuretic Galium aparine, Taraxacum officinale leaf

Expectorant, Marrubium vulgare, Verbascum thapsus,

pulmonary tonic Tussilago farfara

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM > 447

ACTION HERBS
Hepatic Taraxacum officinale root, Silybum marianum
Lymphatic tonic Calendula officinalis, Galium aparine,

Trifolium pratense

THE CONTRIBUTION OF HERBS TO
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

Balance and harmony are the keys to successful preven-
tive medicine, bringing us back to the ideas proposed at
the beginning of this chapter. There must be a clear and
free flow of energy throughout the various aspects of the
individual's life. Thus, we must address issues that go be-
yond the transformative effects of herbs upon metabolic
and physiological processes.

Nutrition must support the body’s efforts to build itself in
a way that ensures health and wholeness.

Structural factors must be addressed by a skilled practi-
tioner, if indicated, but also through appropriate exer-
cise, dance, or any other enjoyable expression of
movement.

A conscious and free-flowing emotional life is fundamental to
achieving any inner harmony. This does not mean that
everyone must undergo in-depth psychotherapy, but
that attention be given in an appropriate form to the
individual’s emotional needs.

Mental factors are crucial, as we are what we think! The
Bible says that without vision, people die. Without a
personal vision, life becomes a slow process of degen-
eration and decay. The same can be said about issues
affecting self-image and personal purpose.

Attention to spiritual issues is vital. Openness to spirituality
can take whatever form is meaningful to the individ-
ual—whether an organized religion, appreciation of
nature or art, or a simple joy in being alive.

The plant kingdom offers much to the therapist inter-
ested in preventive medicine. The key is not to focus on
specific plant remedies, but instead to understand the role
of herbal actions in maintaining health and correct physio-
logical activity. Taking ito account the insights about
homeostasis provided by the biomedical model, it should
be clear that the proper use of herbs will support the body’s
own attempts to maintain a stable internal environment.

The phytotherapist should consider a number of ac-
tions and herbal processes when formulating a program
of preventive medicine, A. review of each part of this pro-
cess will demonstrate that each step is mutually support-
ive. Similarly, when applying the concepts of secondary

----- PAGE 456 -----
448 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

actions and system affinities, it becomes apparent that
there is much overlap among herbs used to support the
various aspects of whole body support.

System tonics. System tonics will nourish and tone the
whole system’s form and function without eliciting
specific physiological or biochemical responses.

Bitter tonics. This group of herbs will have a generalized
toning effect in addition to specific properties.

Detoxification. Cleansing and detoxification can be gently
facilitated through herbal support of the body’s elimi-
native functions.

Table 21.3 summarizes traditionally used system ton-
ics in European and North American phytotherapy. Note
that in the case of the digestive system, no one herb serves
as an all-around tonic. In this case, choose appropriate
herbal actions for the digestive system to support the
work of bitters.

Table 21.3. Primary System Tonics in European and
North American Phytotherapy

BODY SYSTEM TONIC HERBS

Cardiovascular Crataegus spp., Allium sativum, Ginkgo biloba

Respiratory Verbascum thapsus, Inula helenium
Digestive Filipendula ulmaria, Gentiana lutea,
Matricaria recutita
Liver Gentiana lutea, Silybum marianum,
Taraxacum officinale root
Urinary Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Zea mays
Reproductive
Women: Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus
Men: Serenoa repens
Nervous Avena sativa, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Hypericum perforatum
Musculoskeletal Apium graveolens, Urtica dioica

Skin Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Trifolium pratense

POSTOPERATIVE RECOVERY

While herbs can in no way replace surgery, they can con-
tribute much to the success of surgical procedures. In the
suggestions given here, we shall assume that the opera-

tion contemplated is appropriate for the patient con-
cerned, which is not always the case! As we are in no way
attempting to achieve the same goals as the surgery, the
first step is to clarify what goals the herbs are intended to
fulfill.

Simply stated, herbs can facilitate and support post-
operative healing. While the specifics will vary from per-
son to person, a few broad generalizations prove useful.
The primary contributions herbalism offers in this area
are gentle, normalizing tonics. These are inherently safe,
nontoxic plants that might even be considered foods. The
use of these herbs should raise no objection with the
physician involved, as they will cause no negative drug
interactions.

The key is to use relevant tonics to support the heal-
ing process in the tissue, organs, or body systems that will
experience the most trauma during the surgery. Herbs
can help with two main aspects of postoperative healing.
First, they will facilitate healing of the actual tissues af-
fected by the surgery, including skin, connective, cardio-
vascular, and nervous system tissues. Second, they will
help support the whole body in the face of the stress it will
experience.

Herbal tonics contribute the following to the postop-
erative recovery process:

¢ Support the immune system

¢ Help the liver and nervous system deal with the effects
of anesthesia .

* Alleviate symptomatic discomfort where possible or
appropriate

* Facilitate optimal scar formation

Support the Specific Focus of Surgery

To support the body system that is the focus of the surgi-
cal procedure, choose relevant tonic remedies according
to their nurturing effects upon specific parts of the body.
For example, Crataegus would be an appropriate choice
for a patient undergoing surgery to correct cardiovascular
problems.

In addition, no matter what the purpose of the oper-
ation, it will involve cutting through layers of skin, vari-
ous membranes of the body, small blood vessels, and pos-
sibly nerves. The body will normally heal such wounds
quite adequately on its own, but the older the person is,
the more help the tissue may require. Staying with gentle
remedies, consider Urtica for skin and membranes,
Crataegus and Ginkgo for blood vessels, and Hypericum for
nerves.

----- PAGE 457 -----
Protect the Whole Body from the

Effects of Excessive Stress

The stress experienced during surgery is not simply stress
associated with worry and anxiety, but also the physiolog-
ical stress of the operation itself. Adaptogens are irre-
placeable here. In short, they help increase the body’s re-
sistance and resilience in the face of stress. They help the
body adapt around the problem and avoid the possibility
of collapse. The most relevant adaptogen is Eleutherococcus
Senticosus.

Support the Immune System

There are many issues to consider before choosing the
appropriate approach. Unless one is sure of the relevance
and safety of immunostimulant herbs for the particular
individual and operation involved, avoid strong im-
munostimulants and instead use a mild alterative, such as
Urtica or Galium.

Protect Against the Effects of Anesthesia

The liver is the primary site for the breakdown and elim-
ination of the metabolic waste products of the anesthesia
used during the operation. Appropriate remedies will
support the liver’s detoxification process, facilitating the
removal of the metabolites from the body and speeding
the return to normal. Silybum is the main herb to con-
sider, as it is best to avoid stronger liver stimulants after
an operation. Very mild bitters will have a safe and gentle
stimulating effect on the nervous system and support the
action of Silybum.

Alleviate Symptomatic Discomfort

Another primary goal is to alleviate discomfort related to
the surgery, whenever and however possible. This will, of
course, vary from operation to operation and person to
person, but much symptomatic postoperative discomfort
can be eased through the use of gentle effector herbs.

Help Facilitate Optimal Scar Formation

In the process of healing the incision, the body forms scar
tissue. The amount of scar tissue that forms can be lim-
ited through the use of a variety of plant medicines with-
out compromising the viability of the wound healing.
Such wound-healing herbs have been traditionally called
vulneraries. Examples are Calendula and Hypericum, which
are both excellent for this purpose when blended with vi-
tamin E oil.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 449

Gallbladder Surgery: An Example

‘What herbs might we use to support postoperative recov-
ery after successful gallbladder removal surgery? Actual
remedies and protocols for treating gallbladder disease
are discussed in chapter ]3, but here is an example of how
we might apply the process just discussed to facilitate re-
covery from this common surgical procedure.

Table 21.4. Actions and Herbs to Facilitate Recovery
from Gallbladder Surgery

DESIRED ACTION PREOPERATIVE POSTOPERATIVE

Operation site tonic Chionanthus virginicus — Chionanthus virginicus

Specific tissue tonic Crataegus, Equisetum — Ginkgo, Calendula

Nervous system Hypericum Hypericum

tissue tonic perforatum perforatum

Adaptogenic support —_Eleutherococcus Eleutherococcus
senticosus senticosus

Urtica dioica or
Galium aparine

Urtica dioica or
Galiura aparine

Immune system tonic

Detoxification support — Silybum marianum Silybum marianum

Symptomatic relief Depends on Depends on
individual’s symptom __individual’s symptom
picture picture

Scar formation Calendula officinalis Calendula officinalis
or Hypericum or Hypericum
perforatum perforatum

Actions Supplied by Pre- and Postoperative Herb

Choices

For the operation site, the yallbladder, any appropriate mild
tonic hepatic or cholagogue will do. An alternative to
Chionanthus virginicus might be Chelone glabra. In this
particular case, care must be taken to avoid herbs that
strongly stimulate the liver’s production of bile.
However, gentle remedies are indicated to help move
bile in the face of stasis.

Specific tissue tonics. In this case, the preoperative goal is to
strengthen skin, connective, and cardiovascular tissues,
while the postoperative goal is to facilitate healing.
Postoperatively, we have replaced Crataegus with
Ginkgo as the cardiovascular tonic because of its ability
to help increase the availability of oxygen to the brain
after anesthesia. Equivetwm was replaced by Calendula

----- PAGE 458 -----
450 @ TREATMENL APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

for the postoperative treatment to prevent possible
constipation.

Nervous system tonic. Hypericum perforatum has a unique
ability to promote the healing of physically damaged
nerves. One of its folk names in Germany translates as
“the comfrey of the nervous system.”

Adaptogenic support. Adaptogens are essential to ease the
body’s stress response. Stress has a major effect upon
physiology and healing time, and adaptogens offer di-
rect support. Adaptogenic herbs are more appropriate
than relaxing nervines for postoperative recovery, as
the patient will already be under the influence of
chemical sedation.

Immune system support. Some variety of help for the im-
mune system can be very important, but it is best to be
safe and use gentle, tried-and-true alteratives.

Detoxification. The liver is the primary site for the break-
down of anesthesia metabolites. The mild bitters will
have a safe, stimulating effect on the nervous system.

Symptomatic relief. A possible issue here might be consti-
pation, which can be initially treated with a mild alter-
ative laxative, such as Rummex crispus. No stimulating
laxatives should be used, as they may cause straining
and damage to the operation scar.

Scar formation. Apply vitamin E oil with a vulnerary, such
as Calendula officinalis or Hypericum ‘perforatum, to the
incision site. Antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory es-
sential oils may also be indicated.

In addition to the herbal suggestions given here, con-
sider the use of homeopathic arnica before the operation.
This preparation may be considered a specific when it
comes to the treatment of bruising. Great attention must
also be paid to diet and support for the patient from fam-
ily and friends.

INFECTION

Infection seems to be a concomitant aspect of living
within the biosphere of planet Earth. Human beings live
in constant contact and ecological dialogue with vast
numbers of bacteria, viruses, and fungi. The immune sys-
tem has evolved in such a way that this interaction causes
a health problem only occasionally. In fact, our well-being
depends on healthy and positive relationships with a
range of organisms that live in and on our body. The bac-
terial flora of the intestines and the microorganisms on
the skin provide good examples.

Infection occurs when the body is exposed to organ-
isms that become a threat to good health. These may be
nonpathogenic under normal circumstances, but can be-

come pathogenic to the individual for any of a variety of
reasons. In any case, the immune system will be involved.
If the individual’s immune response is compromised in
some way, the ecological balance between host and mi-
crobe will be altered, allowing the microbe to thrive.
Either way, herbal treatment must focus on supporting
appropriate immune response.

The herbal traditions of the world abound with
plants that have a reputation for antimicrobial activity.
Keep in mind, however, that they do not always achieve
the desired results. When used correctly, conventional
antibiotic medications can save lives. Largely because of
these drugs, the scourge of epidemic infectious disease
has been eliminated for the most part in the Western
world. This is a truly miraculous achievement.

For severe infection, phytotherapy is not always ade-
quate, especially for people with a weakened immune re-
sponse. Such infections (for example, meningitis) require
antibiotic treatment. As a dedicated herbalist who recog-
nizes the limitations of my chosen therapy, I celebrate the
existence of these medicines. The role of the healer is the al-
leviation of suffering, not the promotion of a belief system.

All of this is not meant to imply that whole plant
medicine has nothing to offer in the treatment of infec-
tion! In fact, herbal treatment has much to contribute.
Various herbal remedies can:

Boost the immune response, helping the body to rid itself of
pathogens by either deep or surface immune system
stimulation.

Exert direct antimicrobial effects against offending organ-
isms. To be effective, the plant constituent must reach
the site of infection, which is not always easy.

Tone and strengthen tissue, organs, or whole systems af-
fected by the infection.

Facilitate recuperation from the infection and also from the
use of antibiotics.

Antimicrobial Plants

The phytopharmacology journals are full of reports of
plants that have apparent antimicrobial effects. The re-
search usually takes the form of screening large numbers
of plants, often a local flora, for an antimicrobial out-
come, rather than an investigation of the specific mech-
anism involved. In light of this vast variety, I find the cur-
rent preoccupation with Echinacea strange, as wonderful
as this plant is. The practitioner should be familiar with
a range of such herbs, their strengths and their limita-
tions. For example, the Eclectics recommended Baptisia
tinctoria (wild indigo) in combination with Echinacea for
acute febrile infections. Please refer to chapters 25 and

----- PAGE 459 -----
26 for more information on the wide variety of herbal
antimicrobials.

General Guidelines for Treating Infection.
Because the body responds with a similar immune system
response no matter what the cause of infection, it is
possible to make some herbal generalizations. The details
will vary somewhat with the nature of the disease, the
needs of the specific individual, and other medications the
patient might be taking. In the guidelines given here, the
herbs mentioned are meant to serve only as suggestions.
Each case must be seen afresh.

Selecting Antimicrobial Herbs
The selection of appropriate antimicrobial herbs should
take into account the following considerations:

Site of infection. For example, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bear-
berry) may be appropriate for a bladder infection,
while Commiphora molmol (myrrh) may be a good
choice for topical application to the skin.

The patient’s age and general state of health. Use gentler
herbs for the young, old, or debilitated. For example,
choose Nepeta cataria (catnip) as a diaphoretic for chil-
dren, reserving Armoracia rusticana (horseradish) for
adults.

Specifics for the particular pathogen. Unfortunately, this is
not always possible.

Selecting Relevant Tonics

The antimicrobial herbs selected should always be used
with appropriate tonic remedies. These may be selected
based on:

The site of infection. For example, Verbascum thapsus may
be the right choice for a lung infection, while Galinm
aparine is more appropriate for lymphatic tissue
infections,

Specific prevention issues for the individual. For example, use
Crataegus if there is any concern about cardiovascular
health, or Ginkgo biloba for an elderly patient.

Broader insights from the medical or family health history.

Symptom Support

Support the body in dealing with any fever that might ac-
company the infection, using diaphoretics when appro-
priate. In addition, if necessary, alleviate any symptomatic
discomfort. Specifics will vary with each infection.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 451

Herbal Support for Antibiotic Therapy
There is no reason why the benefits of phytotherapy
should not be utilized to support a patient under treat-
ment with antibiotics. This assumes, of course, that the
antibiotics have been prescribed for appropriate reasons!
The herbal focus must be on tonics that will help
the body cope with the intense biochemical battle that is
under way. Selection can be based on these criteria:

Site of infection.

The need to support the digestive system and liver, as intesti-
nal side effects are common with antibiotics.

Specific prevention issues for the individual.

Broader insights from the individual’s medical or family
health history.

Immune support may be appropriate, but do not try
to duplicate the work of the antibiotics by overusing an-
timicrobial herbs! If necessary, symptomatic support may
also be appropriate, and will depend on the individual’s
symptom picture.

Recuperation after Antibiotic Therapy

Once a course of antibiotics has been completed, herbs
may be used to speed convalescence. They may also help
the individual avoid any recurrence of the infection and
prevent secondary problems that may result from the
temporarily weakened immune response. The focus here
should be on general nuirition, as well as herbal tonics.

Actions Indicated

Bitters will safely stimulate normal metabolism.

Gentle diuretics and hepatics will support elimination.

Specific tonics will support the tissue affected at the site
of infection and the primary sites of symptomatic
discomfort.

Immune support is important. This may entail both
deep and surface work. Focus on deep immune support if:

© The infection is a chronic or recurrent problem

© The patient is very debilitated after the infection

¢ The patient is elderly

¢ The patient is under much stress of any kind, and thus
at risk of becoming inmunocompromised

MANIFESTATIONS OF INFECTION

Manifestations of infection are very diverse, varying with
the pathogen involved, the site of infection, and the bodily

----- PAGE 460 -----
452 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

response of the person involved. Common signs of infec-
tion include:

¢ Local inflammation at the site of infection

* Systemic signs including malaise, weakness, musculo-
skeletal aches and pains, headache, anorexia, fever,
chills

¢ Increase of leukocytes in the blood and other blood
changes seen in the lab

Infections ofithe Digestive System

Infections of the intestinal tract often manifest with the
predominant symptom of diarrhea. The body’s attempt to
rid the body of the offending pathogen sets into motion
processes that empty material from the gut. Treatment
should incorporate the guidelines given in chapter 13 for
diarrhea, along with appropriate antimicrobial herbs.
Essential oil-containing herbs are especially useful here.
Chronic forms of infection may manifest as some type of
colitis; please refer to chapter 13 for more information on
the management of this condition.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Digestive System
Allium sativum (garlic)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Coriandrum sativum (coriander)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Cardiovascular Infections

Infections affecting the heart and blood vessels can be ex-
tremely dangerous, and herbalism is not the most appro-
priate therapeutic modality.

Respiratory Tract Infections

The respiratory tract is one of the most common sites of
infection in the human body. Fortunately, infections of
the upper and lower respiratory tracts often respond well
to herbal therapy. Please refer to chapter 15 for specific
information on the treatment of bronchitis, sinusitis, and
other infections of this system.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Respiratory Tract

Allium sativum (garlic)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)

Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Echinacea spp. (echinacea)

Eucalyptus spp. (eucalyptus)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Inula helenium (elecampane)

Ligusticum porteri (osha)

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae (balsam of Peru)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Nervous System Infections

Infection of nervous system tissue can be extremely dan-
gerous and difficult to treat. Conditions such as meningi-
tis are best treated with conventional drugs, although
using herbs in a supportive role, as described above, is
fine. See chapter 16 for an herbal approach to the treat-
ment of shingles, an intransigent viral infection of the
nerve ganglia.

VAGINITIS

Inflammation (as from bacterial or fungal infection, aller-
gic reaction, or hormone deficiency) of the vagina that
may be marked by irritation and vaginal discharge. (The
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Symptoms of vaginitis include itching, burning, and a
vaginal discharge that is different from normal secretions.
The discharge may vary in consistency, color, and smell.
The discomfort may be inside the vagina or on the vulva
just outside the vagina. Discomfort during urination or
sexual intercourse may also occur.

The term vaginitis describes a range of disorders that
cause infection or inflammation of the vagina. The disor-
der may result from infection with organisms such as bac-
teria, yeast, and viruses, but may also be caused by irrita-
tion from chemicals in creams, sprays, or clothing. In
some cases, vaginitis is caused by organisms that are
passed between sexual partners.

Some vaginal discharge is quite common and normal
for women of childbearing age. Normally, cervical glands
produce a clear mucus secretion that drains downward,
mixing with bacteria, discarded vaginal cells, and
Bartholin’s gland secretions. These substances may turn
the mucus a whitish color (leukorrhea) and the discharge
turns yellowish when exposed to air.

At certain times of the menstrual cycle, the cervical
glands produce more mucus, depending on the amount of

----- PAGE 461 -----
estrogen produced. This is normal. Sexual excitement and
emotional stress are both associated with a normal vaginal
discharge. This discharge is a clear, mucuslike secretion.
Disease may be indicated if vaginal discharge is abnormal
in color, odor, or consistency, or if the amount of dis-
charge is significantly increased or decreased. When the
abnormal discharge is caused by a sexually transmitted dis-
ease, the sexual partner(s) may require treatment as well.

Good hygiene can help prevent some of the causes of
abnormal discharge, and help treat it if it occurs. A moist
environment encourages the growth of yeast bacteria, so
it is important to keep the area around the vulva dry. The
woman should wear cotton underpants and avoid panty
hose.

Treatment of Vaginitis
The material that follows, from Family Herbal: A Guide
to Living Life with Energy, Health, and Vitality by herbal-
ist Rosemary Gladstar, is an example of American folk
herbalism at its best. Gladstar’s approach epitomizes the
ways in which competent herbalism can address the real
needs of real people in an affordable and accessible way.
Gladstar suggests three components of effective and
safe treatment:

¢ Herbs taken internally, to address the infection

¢ An herbal dusting powder, to help dry excessive
moisture

¢ Dietary measures

In the treatment suggestion given here, Gladstar rec-
ommends the use of capsules, which have a long tradition
in American folk herbalism. The core herbs have been se-
lected for their antibacterial and antifungal properties,
combined with the soothing demulcency of marshmallow
to minimize stomach irritation.

A Prescription for Vaginitis‘
Black walnut hull powder
Chaparral powder
Echinacea root powder
Goldenseal root powder (organically cultivated)
Marshmallow root powder
Pau d’arco powder

Mix equal parts of the powders thoroughly and encapsulate in
size OO capsules. Take 2 capsules three times daily for 5 days,
then take 2 days off. Continue this cycle for 4 weeks, or until
symptoms subside.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 453

Dusting Powder (Yoni Powder)5

1 cup fine white clay

Ya cup cornstarch

2 tablespoons black walnut hull powder

2 tablespoons myrrh powder

1 tablespoon goldenseal root powder (organically cultivated)

A drop or two of tea tree essential oil (optional)
Combine all the ingredients and mix together using a wire whisk.
Spoon some into a jar with a shaker top for easy application.
Store the remainder in a glass jar with a tight-fitting lid.

Broader Context of Treatment

Attention to diet is of paramount importance. Emphasis
should be placed on light, wholesome meals that are heal-
ing to the body and help restore a normal, slightly acidic
pH to the vagina.

Dietary Guidelines for Vaginitis®

* Eat whole grains, such as brown rice, millet, and
buckwheat.

¢ Eat nourishing soups, such as miso, chicken, and veg-
etable broths.

¢ Include steamed vegetables, especially the dark green
leafy types.

¢ Avoid red meat.

¢ Eat plenty of lemons and grapefruit, but avoid sweet
citrus fruits, such as oranges.

* Cranberries and unsweetened cranberry juice are
highly recommended.

¢ Avoid alcohol and sweets during the course of a yeast
infection.

Yogurt and acidophilus help replenish the normal
flora of a healthy vagina and are important elements of a
dietary program to combat a yeast infection. If you have
allergies to dairy foods, goat yogurt and nondairy aci-
dophilus are available. In addition, with each meal drink
1 teaspoon of apple cider vinegar mixed with 1 teaspoon
of honey in 1/4 cup of warm water. This old-fashioned
tonic helps restore the body’s acid-alkaline balance.

GENITOURINARY TRACT
INFECTIONS

A range of antimicrobials are uniquely suited to treating
this part of the body. They are usually herbs rich in es-
sential oils. Please see chapter 18 for details on appropri-
ate herbal treatments and contraindications for these

----- PAGE 462 -----
454 2 TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

herbs. As noted there, great care must be taken in patients
with a history of kidney disease to completely avoid stim-
ulating diuretics, such as Juniperus. In addition, consider
the treatment protocol given for prostatitis, at right.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Genitourinary Tract
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Agathosma betulina (buchu)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Juniperus communis (juniper)

Petroselinum crispum (parsley)

PROSTATITIS
Infection of the prostate gland. (The Merck Manual)

Prostatitis causes a number of troublesome symptoms, in-
cluding aching pain and pressure in the prostate area, dys-
uria (painful urination), nocturia (nighttime urination),
and dribbling. Hematuria (blood in the urine) may be
present. The pain and pressure may make sitting down
uncomfortable. Acute cases may be accompanied by fever.

Treatment of Prostatitis

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials that work well in the urinary system are
fundamental to treatment success.

Prostate tonics are indicated, as for benign prostatic
hyperplasia.

Diuretics will promote voiding of urine. However, they
may be contraindicated if there is marked blockage due
to prostate swelling.

Demulcents that soothe the urinary system (demulcent di-
uretics) can help alleviate some of the symptoms.

Specific Remedies

While not specific per se, useful antimicrobials include
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry), Agathosma betulina
(buchu), and Elymus repens (couch grass). Useful prostatic
tonics include Serenoa repens (saw palmetto) and
Hydrangea arborescens (hydrangea); other herbs that might
fulfill such a role are Turnera diffusa (damiana) and Smilax
spp. (sarsaparilla).

A Prescription for Prostatitis

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part
Agathosma betulina 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Serenoa repens 1 part
Zea mays 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of equal parts of dried Zea
mays and Achillea millefolium throughout the day.

Table 21.5. Actions Supplied by Combination for
Prostatitis

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina,

Echinacea spp., Achillea millefolium

Prostate tonic Serenoa repens

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina,
Zea mays, Achillea millefolium
Demulcent Zea mays

Broader Context of Treatment
In Male Sexual Vitality, Michael Murray, N.D., suggests
addressing the following factors:’

Relax the musculature in the region. This is best achieved
through stress management and relaxation techniques,
but relaxing nervines may also be indicated.

Drink plenty of ‘pure water.

Chew pumpkin seeds (Cucurbita pepo)in amounts up to '/2
cup a day.

Murray also recommends the following supplements:®

Vitamin E: 800 IU/day
Calcium-magnesium combination: 400 to 600 mg/day
Zinc picolinate: 20 to 50 mg/day

SKIN INFECTIONS

In light of the constant exposure of our massive skin sur-
face to injury, bacteria, and various other foreign sub-
stances, it is rather incredible that the skin is not more
frequently afflicted with infections. A number of factors
account for this, including the skin’s keratin layer, the
chemicals in sebum and perspiration, and the internal
defenses present in the bloodstream. Nonetheless, skin

----- PAGE 463 -----
infections do occur, and vary from trivial to life threaten-
ing. Of the many different types of bacterial infection that
can occur, here we shall review a treatment for boils. Please
refer to chapter 24 for a discussion of impetigo in children.

BOILS

Acute, tender, perifollicular inflammatory nodules result-
ing from infection by staphylococci. (The Merck Manual)

Boils, also known as furwncles, are infections that manifest
as localized abscesses starting in the hair follicles. They
emerge as tender, red, pus-filled lumps in the skin that
often come to a “head” and subsequently drain. When
deeper furuncles form and coalesce, the term carbuncle ap-
plies. A carbuncle may drain at several openings in the
same region. The shoulders, face, scalp, buttocks, and
armpits are common sites for carbuncles.

Treatment of Boils

Actions Indicated

Alteratives offer the most benefit in the treatment of boils,
although I am unable to give a satisfactory explanation
of how they work or why!

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of the infection. In
this case, it is difficult to say whether they work
through direct bactericidal effects or indirect stimula-
tion of the immune response.

Lymphatic tonics promote the general drainage of fluid.

Diuretics are especially important in supporting the elim-
inative work of the kidneys.

Hepatics are similarly helpful for the liver.

Vulnerary, anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and astringent
herbs may all be helpful topically.

Specific Remedies

The stronger hepatic alteratives are often considered
specifics. Their strength highlights the need to take care
with dosage. Important examples of hepatic alteratives are
listed here. In addition, Echinacea is strongly indicated.

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)

‘THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 2 455

A Prescription for Boils

Echinacea spp. 3 parts
Galium aparine 2 parts
Rumex crispus 1 part
Phytolacca americana T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of Urtica dioica (preferably
made from fresh herb) twice a day.

Table 21.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for Boils

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,
Phytolacca americana, Urtica dioica

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana

Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Rumex crispus

FUNGAL SKIN INFECTIONS

Superficial infections caused by dermatophytes—fungi
that invade only dead tissues of the skin or its ap-
pendages. (The Merck Manual)

Fungal infections of the skin are very common in people
ofall ages. They are caused by microscopic fungal organ-
isms that normally live on the skin surface without caus-
ing symptoms. Under the right conditions of moisture,
warmth, irritation, or minor skin injury, they begin to
grow more rapidly and invasively, causing a range of
health problems. Certain underlying conditions may in-
crease the likelihood that a fungal infection will occur,
and should be considered when the infection is highly re-
sistant to treatment or follows a recurrent course. They
include some endocrine disorders and immune diseases.

A variety of fungal infections can affect human skin,
especially in tropical environments where the heat and
humidity allow the fungi to thrive. The pathogens most
frequently responsible for fungal infections are known as
dermatophytes.

Common Fungal Skin Infections

Tinea, caused by the fungus Trichophyton, manifests in an
itchy, red, scaly patch that spreads outward as it grows.
Hairs in the area may fall out or break. The skin may

----- PAGE 464 -----
456 @ TREATMINI APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

crack and become secondarily infected with bacteria. The
fungus is spread by hairbrushes, clothes, and other per-
sonal contact.

‘The most common forms of tinea are:

Tinea capitis (ringworm of the scalp or neck)

‘Tinea barbae (ringworm of the beard area)

Tinea corporis (ringworm involving non-hairy parts of
the body, such as the arms, shoulders, and face)

Tinea cruris (“jock itch”)

Tinea pedis (“athlete’s foot”)

‘The discussion below of an herbal treatment for tinea
pedis can be broadly applied to the other foci of fungal
infections.

Treatment of Athlete’s Foot
Athlete’s foot, or tinea pedis, is a fungal infection of the
toes and foot characterized by an itchy, scaly, malodorous
rash between the toes. Cracks, irritation, redness, and
bacterial infection may complicate the picture. Sports en-
thusiasts are not the only ones to suffer from athlete’s
foot. Hot weather and shoes that do not allow the feet to
“breathe” are two predisposing factors. Most susceptible
are people who have previously had the infection, adult
men, people whose feet perspire heavily, and those with a
weakened immune response. Women, children, and peo-
ple who go barefoot do not often contract it. Internal
treatments do little to help, unless the infection is an ex-
pression of an immune system problem.

Fungicidal essential oils and essential oil-rich plants
are the most effective topical treatments. Allium sativum
can be both dramatically effective and extremely odorous!

Effective Antifungal Herbs

Allium sativum (garlic)

Commiphora molmol (myrrh essential oil)
Melaleuca spp. (tea tree oil)

A combination of equal parts lavender and myrrh es-
sential oils is a long-standing treatment for athlete’s foot
among aromatherapists in the United Kingdom. Myrrh is
fungicidal and lavender is anti-inflammatory and vulner-
ary. For the first few days of treatment, dissolve the oils in
rubbing alcohol and apply to skin until the skin no longer
seems moist or weepy. Continue treatment with an oint-
ment or cream containing 3% to 5% essential oil until the
skin is completely clear. If the skin is deeply cracked and
painful, calendula oil can be valuable as well.

In addition, the following hygiene pointers are
important:

Clean thoroughly and repeatedly around toenails and finger-
nails, as the minute fungal mycelium often lodges
under the nails and causes repeated infections.

Keep the feet dry, especially between the toes.

Wear open-toed shoes or sandals when you must wear shoes.
Avoid vinyl uppers and athletic shoes with rubber
soles. Cotton socks are better than synthetic.

Wash the feet and soak them in a vinegar and water solution
(2 to 4 tablespoons of vinegar per pint of water) for 20
minutes three times daily. The use of herbal vinegars
would also be appropriate.

CANCER

A proliferation of cells whose unique trait—loss of nor-
mal controls—results in unregulated growth, lack of dif-
ferentiation, local tissue invasion, and metastasis. (The
Merck Manual}

Herbal remedies have a long and honorable history in the
treatment of cancer, and it may surprise some to learn
that they are still at the core of modern medicine’s re-
sponse to this intransigent disease. For a comprehensive
historical review of plants used in treating cancer, the in-
terested reader is referred to Plants Used Against Cancer: A
Survey, by J. L. Hartwell?

Incredible resources go into cancer research, some of
which are focused on plants. However, the results from all
of this research attention are nowhere near as dramatic as
what might be expected. This should not lead us to the
conclusion that plants have little or no role in the treat-
ment of cancer. Rather, it illuminates the basic failing of
orthodox medicine’s approach to degenerative disease in
general and cancer in particular. For a detailed look at
plants, cancer research, and the limitations of this re-
search approach, please refer to chapter 9.

Cancer is a general term applied to a variety of malig-
nant diseases that affect many different parts of the body.
These diseases are characterized by rapid and uncon-
trolled formation of abnormal cells. These may mass
together to form a growth or tumor, or proliferate
throughout the body, initiating abnormal cell growth at
other sites. If the process is not arrested, it may progress
until it causes the death of the affected individual. Cancer
is encountered in all higher animals, and plants also de-
velop growths that resemble cancer.

‘The search for a chemical anticancer magic bullet or
specific cytotoxic plant is predicated upon a rationale that
might very well be flawed—that is, the idea that specific

----- PAGE 465 -----
constituents represent the basis of a plant’s therapeutic ef-
fect. This is not to deny that Western medicine has gar-
nered a harvest of great benefit for a suffering humanity.
Reductionist pharmacology has furnished medicine with
powerful tools for the treatment of acute, life-threatening
diseases and alleviation of suffering through speedy ame-
lioration of symptoms. However, bear in mind that the
major cause of death in the Western world is now degen-
erative disease, not acute infection. On the one hand, this
change is a reflection of the successes of the allopathic
approach; smallpox has been eradicated, polio no longer
occurs in epidemic proportions, and tuberculosis is no
longer the scourge it once was. On the other hand, these
very successes highlight the inadequacy of the conven-
tional approach to treating degenerative diseases.

Using the unfortunate militaristic imagery made
popular by allopathic advocacy groups, we can say that
acute infection has been “conquered.” However, the vast
sums and resources that have been invested toward con-
quering cancer have not produced the expected results.
While the lobbyists for what has been called the cancer
industry might conclude that more research funds are
needed, holistic practitioners may come to a different
conclusion. In short, the dearth of dramatic break-
throughs in cancer research might suggest that the allo-
pathic context is not the appropriate one within which to
perceive and address the complexity of factors at play in
cancer. Multifactorial interactions are the strong suit of
holistic medicine. This is not meant as a commentary on
the effectiveness of specific holistic techniques, but
merely emphasizes the need for a context that embraces
more than oncogenes, tumor pathology, and carcinogens.

From the perspective of holistic medicine, any ap-
proach to cancer must be more than just an attack on a
tumor. It must take into account the whole of the indi-
vidual’s life. A deep process of healing and reevaluation is
essential. All of the issues raised at the beginning of this
chapter and throughout this book must be addressed.
Herbs demonstrate their relevance and efficacy in cancer
only when used as a component of a treatment program
constructed to address the individual in a holistic way.
Such inclusive holistic approaches are, unfortunately, rare
in the West. Much of so-called holistic cancer therapy is
simply chemotherapy-free therapy.

Atrue holistic approach to cancer will involve the fol-
lowing factors:

A medical approach to destroying the tumor. This may take
the form of improving the body’s own immune response
to destroying cancer cells. Herbal immunostimulants

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 457

have much to offer here. Allopathic approaches may
utilize cytotoxic plants, chemotherapy, surgery, and
radiation.

Therapeutics geared to supporting the whole body. These take
into account the patient’s non-cancer issues, and may
involve the use of tonics and other means of support
for normal body processes, such as elimination and
general homeostatic integration.

Nutritional reevaluation. This may entail identifying foods
that have either an anticancer or a carcinogenic role,
but, more important, should focus on ensuring that the
body receives appropriate nourishment.

Bodywork appropriate for the individual. For example, mas-
sage does not cure cancer, but may play a vital role in
managing stress, making it an integral part of holistic
cancer treatment.

Emotional and mental support. While it may sound simple,
this is a complex and formidable proposition! Stress
management is essential, but so is in-depth counseling
of some kind.

Counseling helps ilhaminate the reactions and coping
mechanisms that come into play in response to cancer.
However, more exciting are the potentially life-transforming
insights that the patient may gain in the process. Within
the context of transpersonal psychotherapy, it is possi-
ble to see illness as a gift that offers many insights and
possibilities for growth and transformation. As a com-
ponent of a broad, holistic treatment approach to can-
cer, the process can facilitate major emotional, mental,
and spiritual healing even in the face of terminal bodily
disease.

Integrating all of these ideas to formulate a holistic
treatment program is challenging. The phytotherapist
has much to offer, but without knowledge, understanding,
and experience in the modalities mentioned above, herbs
are not enough. Herbs can make a major contribution,
but if used in isolation, they are in principle no different
from chemotherapy. They may have more to offer in
terms of general body health, but are less effective cyto-
toxic agents.

The term anticancer herb can foster false hopes. The
National Cancer Institute defines commonly used terms
in the following way:

A cytotoxic agent is toxic to tumors in laboratory cultures.
Antitumor activity occurs if cytotoxicity demonstrated in the
laboratory also occurs in tumor cells in living animals.
Anticancer is a term reserved for materials that are toxic to

tumor cells in clinical trials with humans.

----- PAGE 466 -----
458 «. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

One conclusion that can be drawn from all of this is
that the holistically oriented herbalist tends to minimize
the role of cytotoxic plants when developing an approach
to treating cancer. While they can be life saving, they are
not the core of treatment. There are a number of inher-
ent problems with these plants, but the most important
problem is how to use such potent plants safely.

An argument against the use of herbal medicines be-
comes relevant here. The huge variation in amounts of
constituents in individual plants makes accurate prescrib-
ing or ensuring standardized protocols impossible. As
phytotherapy is founded upon the use of gentle normaliz-
ers, or, at most, effectors that do not contain potent con-
stituents, this issue is irrelevant in most cases. However, it
becomes pertinent when potentially harmful cytotoxic
plants are concerned.

The mere existence of cytotoxic herbs does not mean
that they must be used. Similarly, the herbalist does not
necessarily use the many powerful plant poisons, nar-
cotics, and purgatives that the natural world offers. The
selection of remedies for cancer must be dictated by the
practitioner's interpretation of the individual’s needs,
which in turn is an expression of the therapeutic philoso-
phy within which they work. The holistic practitioner will
consider using such powerful remedies only within the
context of a broad, holistic approach. We must act on
these insights in practice or they become nothing more
than hot air—and there is enough air pollution already!

In light of these dosage issues and the therapeutic
ecology discussed throughout this book, I have concluded
that ifa practitioner decides that direct cytotoxicity is ap-
propriate, chemotherapy may well be safer than cytotoxic
plants. This statement may offend the natural medicine
purist, but the needs of the patient a/ways outweigh philo-
sophical dogma.

A Holistic Approach to the Treatment of
Cancer

So how are herbs most appropriately used in the treat-
ment of cancer? By applying herbs with immunostimu-
lant and immunomodulating properties in a holistic con-
text, the practitioner may develop a protocol that does
not depend on potentially poisonous plants. If we apply
the model developed in this book, some clear guidelines
become apparent.

Herbal Actions
Application of the term anticancer to herbal actions may
be misleading. Appropriate herbal actions for cancer may

include alterative, lymphatic, and tonic. Other actions
will be indicated by the symptom picture and issues
unique to the type of tumor involved. In addition, the
needs of the individual will suggest actions necessary for
system support.

System Tonics

Tonic support for the site of the tumor is essential. Tonics
can also be used to address other factors revealed by a re-
view of the patient’s medical and family history.

System Support

This will take some form of immune system support, with
an emphasis on deep immune stimulation, eliminative
support, and stress management.

Specific Remedies

Many plants around the world have a reputation for anti-
cancer activity. Unfortunately, they do not work as
claimed! Instead, they are largely alterative, lymphatic,
hepatic, or diuretic remedies, and have much to con-
tribute to the holistic approach suggested here. However,
used in isolation, they will not replace such an approach.
Common examples of such remedies from the European
and North American traditions are listed here.

Herbs to Support a Holistic Approach to Cancer
Arctium lappa (burdock)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

‘Why are no prescriptions suggested or treatment
protocols given in this discussion on cancer? I have two
reasons, one theoretical and one personal.

If we can draw any clear conclusion from this theo-
retical discussion, it is that each individual must be treated
as just that—a unique individual—not a tumor site. As the

----- PAGE 467 -----
holistic approach proposes that we avoid cytotoxic reme-
dies, the factors to address within the protocol will be
fundamentally the same as those for immune support in
general, with a possibly greater emphasis on alterative and
lymphatic remedies.

However, the main reason I have not suggested any
prescriptions here is a personal one. My clinical experi-
ence with treating cancer is limited, and so I have con-
cluded that all I can ethically write is the review of theory
presented here. The herbal literature is replete with treat-
ments and cancer cures that have no basis in reality. An
exception to this is Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer, by
Donald Yance. Written by an experienced, knowledge-
able, and realistically compassionate herbalist, the book
bodes well for the future of traditional herbalism in the
United States.

Table 21.7, adapted from Yance’s book, briefly sum-
marizes his three-stage approach to the treatment of cancer.
Please refer to his book for more explanation and details.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM > 459

Table 21.7. Three-Stage Herbal Protocol for Cancer’”®

STAGE OF TREATMENT ACTIONS REQUIRED

Stage 1: Tonic therapy Herbs to strengthen the individual's

constitution and vitality

Tonics, adaptogens, and herbal
immune-enhancers

Stage 2: Liver and lymph
detoxification

Antioxidant, liver-detoxifying,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-angiogenic
herbs; alteratives and lymphatics

Gene-repairing, enzyme-inhibiting,
and cytotoxic herbs

Stage 3: Cytotoxic therapy

Herbs that can alter the action of
hormonal receptor-type cancers

Adapted from Donald Yance, Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. (Los Angeles: Keats
Publishing, 1999).

Isolated Constituents with Promise in Cancer

Two plant constituents that appear to have much to offer as supplementation to an individual-
ized protocol for the treatment of cancer are artemisinin and di-indolymethane. Artemisinin is a
sesquiterpene found in Artemisia annua, a plant known as sweet Annie in North America and qing
hao in China. It was initially introduced into Western medicine as a treatment for malaria.
Extensive clinical trials have demonstrated that artemisinin is effective against Plasmodium falci-
parum, the causative parasitic protozoan that is transmitted to humans via the Anopheles
mosquito. Subsequent research showed activity against strains of Plasmodium that had become
resistant to chloroquine.” In recent years, artemisinin has attracted attention as a potential anti-
cancer drug, and appears to be effective against a wide variety of cancers, especially leukemia
and colon cancer. Intermediate activities were also shown against melanoma, breast, ovarian,
prostate, CNS, and renal cancer.”

Di-indolylmethane is a dimer of indole-3-carbinol, a glucosinolate found in cruciferous veg-
etables. Both of these compounds appear to have potent anticancer properties.® Vegetables that
contain them include brussels sprouts, broccoli, and cabbages. Di-indolylmethane and indole-3-
carbinol stimulate biotransformation in the liver, converting estradiol to nontoxic metabolites."
These glucosinolates are believed to be responsible for the lowered risk of cancer associated with
the consumption of cruciferous vegetables." They appear to be especially protective against
breast and cervical cancer. One reason for this may be an ability to increase the breakdown of es-
trogens."* Estradiol, for example, may have carcinogenic properties when its levels become high,
while the other estrogens have noncarcinogenic or perhaps even anticarcinogenic properties. As
an increasing amount of estrogen-type substances are appearing in the food and water chain
{probably due primarily to the wide use of pesticides and plastics), di-indolylrnethane and indole-
3-carbinol may be viewed as important preventive substances.

----- PAGE 468 -----
460 @ TREATMENI! APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

References

1.

a

10.

ll.

War

=e

www.news.cornell.edu/releases/Sept96/cyclosporine.hrs.
html.

Weng SC, Chou CJ, Lin LC, et al. Immunomodulatory
functions of extracts from the Chinese medicinal fungus
Cordyceps cicadae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 2002
Nov; 83(1-2):79-85.

Gladstar R, Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with
Energy, Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books,
2001.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Murray MT. Male Sexual Vitality. Rocklin, CA: Prima,
1994.

Ibid.

Hartwell JL. Plants Used Against Cancer: A Survey.
Lawrence, KS: Quarterman Publications, 1984.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer Los
Angeles: Keats Publishing, 1999.

Samuelsson, G. Drugs of Natural Origin. Stockholm:
Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.

Efferth, et al. Antimalaria drug is also active against can-
cer. International Journal of Oncology 2001; 18; 767-73.

. Broadbent TA, Broadbent HS. The chemistry and phar-

macology of indole-3-carbinol (indole-3-methanol) and
3-(methoxymethyl)indole [part I]. Current Medicinal
Chemistry 1998; 5:337-52.

. Ibid., 469-91.
. Hecht SS. Chemoprevention of cancer by isothio-

cyanates, modifiers of carcinogen metabolism. Journal of
Nutrition 1999; 129:768S-745 [review].

. Bradlow HL, Sepkovic DW, Telang NT, and Osborne

MP. Multifunctional aspects of the action of indole-3-
carbinol as an antitumor agent. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1999; 889:204-13.

Suggested Reading
Boik J. Cancer and Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science

and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern

Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone,
1999.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. Los Angeles:

Keats Publishing, 1999.

----- PAGE 469 -----
22

fone

THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

he herbal traditions do not provide an abundance
of information about the treatment of endocrine
disorders. This is not surprising, as our under-
standing of the functions of this important body system is
a very recent development. In addition, a comprehensive
review of phytotherapy for the endocrine system has yet
to be written. When used skillfully within the context of
an appropriate holistic approach, herbs can make a major
contribution to treatment of endocrine disorders.
However, the results achieved with herbs may not ade-
quately replace drug treatment.

The endocrine system influences cellular metabolism
by means of hormones. Endocrine glands, also known as
ductless glands, release hormones into the blood or
lymph. Hormones are chemical messengers that are
transported throughout the body. The body’s responses
to the presence of hormones occur after a lag period of
seconds or even days, but once initiated, the responses
tend to be much more prolonged than those induced by
the nervous system.

The endocrine glands include the pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, adrenal, pineal, and thymus glands.
Additionally, several non-endocrine organs contain areas
of endocrine tissue that produce hormones. Such organs
include the pancreas and the gonads. The hypothalamus,
a part of the nervous system, produces and releases hor-
mones, so is considered a neuroendocrine organ.

THE THYROID GLAND

The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ located at
the base of the neck, just above the collarbone. The main
function of this gland is the production of thyroxine, an
iodine-containing hormone. Thyroxine controls the rate
and intensity of most physiologic functions. The regula-
tion of heart rate, sweating, digestive action, body tem-
perature, calorie consumption, and many other activities
depends at least in part on this hormone.

The pituitary gland, located at the base of the front

461

of the brain, controls the thyroid itself. The pituitary re-
leases thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), required by
the thyroid to produce thyroxine. In turn, production of
pituitary TSH depends upon the presence of thyrotropin-
releasing hormone, which comes from the hypothalamus.
Thus, a complex and delicate set of interactions governs
the function of the thyroid, and many physical and emo-
tional factors can also play a role.

HYPOTHYROIDISM

The characteristic clinical response to thyroid hormone
deficiency in the adult. (The Merck Manual)

Hypothyroidism, also known as myxedema, is underactiv-
ity of the thyroid that results in deficiency of thyroid hor-
mone. Although the disorder may be caused by any of a
variety of diseases that a“fect the hypothalamus and pitu-
itary gland, it is primarily related to disorders of the thy-
roid gland itself.

Inadequate secretion of thyroid hormone leads to a
general slowing of all physical and mental processes. The
condition is characterized by an overall depression of
most cellular enzyme systems and oxidative processes. As
the metabolic activity of all cells in the body slows, there
is a reduction in the rate of oxygen consumption, leading
to a decrease in oxidation of nutrients for energy and less
body heat production.

The signs and symptoms, all of which result from this
slowdown of metabolism, range from nonspecific com-
plaints to severe symptoms that may become life threat-
ening if unrecognized and untreated. Fatigue, lack of en-
ergy, cold intolerance, severe constipation, heavy
menstrual periods, and weight gain despite a diminishing
appetite may go unnoticed or be attributed to other con-
ditions, such as stress, depression, and overwork. As
symptoms worsen, they may become more obvious with
time. These can include slowed pulse, muscle aches,
puffiness around the eyes, hair loss, hoarseness, sluggish

----- PAGE 470 -----
462 «@ TREATsiiNT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

reflexes, and cool, dry, coarse skin. Changes in mood and
personality, simulating psychiatric disturbance, may
occur. The thyroid gland may become enlarged, produc-
ing a goiter in the neck. Hypothyroidism is a risk factor
for a range of problems including atherosclerosis, skin
problems, and constipation.

Treatment of Hypothyroidism

Orthodox therapy for hypothyroidism is based upon daily
thyroid hormone replacement therapy. As no herbs ade-
quately fulfill this action, drug therapy will often remain
the basis of treatment, and the role of phytotherapy will
be to help the body deal with the repercussions of the
condition and its treatment. In mild cases, the use of bit-
ters may sometimes be enough, but it will be beneficial in
all cases. Other than bitters, the seaweed Fucus vesiculosus
(bladderwrack) has been traditionally used to treat this
condition. While it has much to offer, it is only truly spe-
cific when the patient has an iodine deficiency.

Herbs can support hormone replacement therapy in
a number of important ways. Hypothyroidism accelerates
the development of atherosclerosis, due to deposition of
mucopolysaccharides in the heart muscle, placing patients
at higher risk of coronary artery disease. This damage
may be lessened through the use of cardiovascular tonics,
such as Crataegus spp., Ginkgo biloba, and Allium sativum.

In addition, herbs can help ease problems related to
functional and structural changes in the skin. While they
may provide only symptomatic relief, this is nonetheless
essential for the patient. Emollients, circulatory stimu-
lants, and other remedies may be valuable here, but the
specifics will depend upon the patient’s experience.
Moisturizing actions are especially important, because the
skin is usually dry and scaly in this condition.

Other symptoms may also be relieved with herbs.
For chronic constipation, hepatic laxatives are the best
choice, as they also support liver function. Examples of
herbs that may be helpful include Rumex crispus (yellow
dock) and Juglans cinerea (butternut). In extreme cases,
anthraquinone-containing herbs, such as Rhamnus purshi-
ana (cascara sagrada) and Senna alexandrina, may be re-
quired. See chapters 10 and 13 for important cautions
about the use of these powerful laxatives.

Nervine tonics and other nervines may be indicated,
but avoid the stronger relaxing remedies, such as Humulus
lupulus (hops) and Valeriana officinalis (valerian). This is
because they may have too sedating an effect on body
function. Antidepressant herbs like Hypericum perforatum
(St. John’s wort) and Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort) can be
helpful.

HYPERTHYROIDISM

A clinical condition encompassing several specific dis-
eases, characterized by hypermetabolism and elevated
serum levels of free thyroid hormones. (The Merck
Manual)

Hyperthyroidism, or overactivity of the thyroid gland,
has a number of possible causes. It may be due to the
presence of a growth or tumor (either benign or malig-
nant) or a self-limited inflammation of the gland, proba-
bly due to viral infection. The most common cause is
Graves’ disease, an autoimmune disorder related to the
production of thyroid antibodies that have a stimulating
effect on the gland. This same process causes the deposi-
tion of a thick substance within the skin, behind the eyes,
and elsewhere.

Clinical manifestations of hyperthyroidism, espe-
cially excessive body heat, increased neuromuscular and
cardiovascular activity, and hyperactivity, are the result of
heightened metabolic rate. Accelerated pulse rate can
range from 90 to 160 beats per minute.

Symptoms of Hyperthyroidism

Nervousness, hyperexcitement, irritability, apprehension,
sleeplessness

Difficulty sitting quietly

Rapid pulse at rest and upon exertion; heart palpitations

Low heat tolerance, profuse perspiration, flushed skin
(e.g., warm, moist hands)

Fine tremor of hands, changes in bowel habits (constipa-
tion or diarrhea)

Increased appetite and progressive weight loss

Muscle fatigue and weakness

Amenorrhea

Bulging eyes (exophthahmos), producing a startled expression

Treatment of Hyperthyroidism

Symptomatic amelioration of this condition is often
straightforward. However, control of the underlying
cause of the symptoms—excessive production of thyroid
hormones—is challenging. Used as symptomatic relief,
however, herbs can support the work of prescription
medications.

Actions Indicated

Relaxing nervines will ease agitation and anxiety. In this
case, specific relaxing nervines are indicated (Lycopus
virginicus or L. europaeus, discussed under Specific
Remedies).

----- PAGE 471 -----
Cardiac tonics are indicated, to help the heart function
healthily in the face of the hormone-stimulated
workload.

Specific Remedies

Traditional herbal treatment for hyperthyroidism pro-
vides us with one of the best examples of a condition for
which a definite specific exists. This is Lycopus virginicus or
L. europaeus, commonly known as bugleweed. The herb is
a useful relaxing nervine, but in addition has a sometimes
dramatic effect in improving the symptom picture associ-
ated with hyperthyroid conditions. I have seen no data on
changes in thyroxine serum levels in patients using
Lycopus, and thus cannot say that the improvement is re-
lated to any direct impact of the herb on hormone levels.
Nonetheless, it does seem to help.

A Prescription for Hyperthyroidism

Lycopus spp. 4 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Scutellaria spp. 2 parts
Crataegus spp. T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated

with Hyperthyroidism
Valeriana officinalis | part
Passiflora incarnata ] part

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture a half hour before retiring

Table 22.1. Actions Supplied by Combination for
Hyperthyroidism

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria spp.

Nervine relaxant Lycopus spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Scutellaria spp.,

Valeriana officinalis, Passiflora incarnata

Cardiovascular tonic Crataegus spp.

DIABETES MELLITUS

A syndrome characterized by hyperglycemia resulting
from absolute or relative impairment in insulin and/or in-
sulin action. (The Merck Manual}

Diabetes mellitus, characterized by glycosuria (glucose in
the urine) and hyperglycemia (elevated blood sugar levels),

‘THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM @ 463

is an unfortunately common, chronic metabolic disorder
involving carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism.
Although the most widely recognized manifestation of
diabetes is hyperglycemia, this is a complex and multi-
faceted disease that potentially affects every organ in
the body.

Regulation of blood sugar, a complex homeostatic
process, is dependent upon the presence of insulin, a hor-
mone produced in specialized cells in the pancreas, called
islets of Langerhans. The insulin is absorbed into the
bloodstream, which carries it to the rest of the body.
Insulin fulfills several important roles:

Mobilizes glucose to leave the blood and enter the cells of
various body organs.

Facilitates other metabolic processes that foster the storage of
energy in fat and other body substances and regulate
the release of these stores into the blood.

Insufficient levels of insulin cause blood glucose lev-
els to rise, especially after a meal. Without insulin, body
organs are unable to extract glucose from the blood and
begin to rely on alternate sources of energy, especially
certain fats. Their metabolites, called ketones, begin to
accumulate in the blood. Metabolic changes in diabetes
alter the way in which the body handles fats, including
cholesterol. This leads to their accumulation in the small
arteries of the body, often those of the eyes, kidneys,
heart, and brain. Thus, people with diabetes have an in-
creased incidence of blindness, kidney failure, heart at-
tack, and stroke.

There are two different forms of diabetes.

Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM)
Insulin-dependent or Type I diabetes is often called juve-
nile onset diabetes, since it usually first presents in child-
hood or young adulthood. The condition is characterized
by a near total lack of insulin production; this is related to
a deficiency in insulin synthesis and secretion from the
islets of Langerhans, clusters of cells found in the pan-
creas. The pathogenesis of the disease may be autoim-
mune in nature or related to infection with coxsackie
virus B4 or mumps virus. Type I diabetes is treated with
insulin and diet; there is no role for oral hypoglycemics.

Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus
(NIDDM)

Non-insulin-dependent or Type II diabetes usually occurs
in elderly or overweight people, and is thus also called
maturity onset diabetes. It is caused by a deficiency in or
diminished effectiveness of insulin, and is much more

----- PAGE 472 -----
464 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

common than Type I. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes
may be secondary to other diseases, such as pancreatitis.
It may also occur as a result of insulin antagonism, such as
that caused by Cushing’s syndrome or steroid therapy.
When NIDDM occurs in young people, a genetic com-
ponent appears to be involved.

Other causes of impaired glucose tolerance include
pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis, a condition resulting from
the presence of excess thyroid hormone, which in turn
may result from either overproduction by the thyroid
gland or loss of storage function and leakage from the
gland. In addition, the gradual development of relative in-
sulin deficiency is part of the normal aging process. In
NIDDM, the aim of treatment is to regularize blood
sugar levels through the use of hypoglycemics, glucosi-
dase inhibitors, sugar-restricted diets, and complex carbo-
hydrate preparations that delay the absorption of glucose
from the gut. People with NIDDM retain the ability to
produce some insulin, but the response to a meal is long
delayed and often inadequate.

Symptoms of either type of diabetes include fatigue,
increased appetite (if enough blood sugar is lost to the
urine), and increased urination, as the sugar causes the
kidney to produce higher volumes to dissolve the excess
load. Because of the accelerated loss of body fluid, the pa-
tient experiences greater thirst. As levels of blood sugar
rise and ketosis occurs, body fluids become acidic. One of
the body’s defenses against acidity is to decrease the
amount of carbon dioxide in the blood, which leads to
an increase in the rate and depth of respiration.
Complications due to arterial blockage are common, in-
cluding vision loss, heart problems, kidney damage, and
peripheral neuropathy. Such problems usually develop
over many years.

Treatment of Diabetes

The plant world offers many hypoglycemic herbs, and
these have much to contribute to a comprehensive man-
agement program for NIDDM. Insulin-dependent dia-
betes will rarely respond well to hypoglycemic agents, as
the islets of Langerhans are largely incapacitated. Herbs
will not replace necessary insulin therapy.

Laboratory screenings similar to those used to iden-
tify cytotoxic plants have demonstrated that plant hypo-
glycemics do exist, and many hundreds have been docu-
mented. Please see chapter 9 for a discussion about this
research.

Hypoglycemic Herbs from the European Tradition
Allium sativum (garlic)

Galega officinalis (goat's rue)

Morus alba (mulberry leaf)

Olea europaea (olive leaf)

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry)

Interestingly, goat’s rue is also an effective galacta-
gogue, hinting at a possible effect on the pituitary or hy-
pothalamus. Remember that gentle endocrine stimulation
is also one of the properties of bitters, and for some peo-
ple these herbs may be dramatically effective in lowering
blood sugar.

On the experimental level, many plants have been
shown to have some degree of hypoglycemic activity, but
their mechanisms of action are not always clear. Here are
some examples cited in Medical Botany, by Lewis and
Elvin-Lewis.!

Plants with Hypoglycemic Activity in Animal
Studies

Anacardium occidentale (cashew)

Apium graveolens (celery)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Avena sativa (oats)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Eupatorium purpureum (gravel root)
Euphorbia pilulifera (pill-bearing spurge)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Lophophora williamsii (peyote)

Panax ginseng (ginseng)

Spinacia oleracea (spinach)

Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)

The challenge for the herbal practitioner is the ap-
propriate application of hypoglycemics. Such remedies
can sometimes have a rapid impact on blood sugar levels,
but this will vary from patient to patient. They can be
used safely only as part of a comprehensive diabetes man-
agement program suitable for the particular individual.
Very close observation of glucose levels in urine and
blood is required. As this is beyond the scope of this dis-
cussion, no protocols for the use of hypoglycemic agents
will be given here.

On the other hand, herbal preventive work to avoid
long-term complications of diabetes may be undertaken
quite safely, even if no attempt is made to alter insulin lev-
els. For the reasons discussed earlier, particular attention

----- PAGE 473 -----
should be given to the cardiovascular system. Heart and
vascular tonics are appropriate for long-term use, espe-
cially Crataegus spp., Ginkgo biloba, and Vaccinium myrtillus.

THE ADRENAL GLANDS

Ideas about remedies for the adrenal glands abound.
Unfortunately, they often reflect a fundamental lack of
knowledge about the physiology and function of this im-
portant part of the endocrine system. The concepts
couched in the vague terms used in much “alternative”
literature are often valid and helpful, but the invocation of
adrenal tonic effects must be based upon an understand-
ing of actual physiology.

One adrenal gland sits astride each kidney, deep in
the back part of the abdomen. Each of these glands has
two parts with markedly different functions: a cortex, or
outer part, and a medulla, or central portion. Therapy in-
tended to affect these glands must be appropriate to the
adrenal function the practitioner wants to address.

The Adrenal Medulla

The adrenal medulla secretes the hormones adrenaline
(epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), which
are responsible for the rapid increases in nervous system
and metabolic activity involved in the general adaptation
system (GAS). Please see chapter 16 for more informa-
tion on this important stress response mechanism and the
contribution herbs can make to support the adrenal
medulla.

Functions of Adrenaline

* Acts on a- and f-receptors

* Increases contractility and excitability of heart muscle,
thus increasing cardiac output

¢ Facilitates blood flow to muscles, brain, and viscera

¢ Enhances blood sugar levels by stimulating conversion
of glycogen to glucose in liver

* Inhibits smooth muscle contractions

Functions of Noradrenaline

* Acts primarily on o-receptors

© Increases peripheral vascular resistance, leading to in-
creased blood pressure

The Adrenal Cortex

The adrenal cortex is responsible for production of glu-
cocorticoids, such as cortisol and hydrocortisone, which
help regulate metabolism, the immune system, certain as-

‘THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM -@ 465

pects of behavior, and many other processes. The cortex
also secretes mineralocorticoids, such as aldosterone and
desoxycorticosterone. Aldosterone is fundamental to the
homeostatic control of sodium and potassium secretion
by the kidney. These hormones are synthesized from
cholesterol.

Functions of Glucocorticoids

¢ Enhance protein catabolism and inhibit protein
synthesis

¢ Antagonize action of insulin

* Increase synthesis of glucose by the liver

¢ Influence body defense mechanism and reactions to
stress

¢ Influence emotions

Functions of Mineralocorticoids

¢ Regulate reabsorption of sodium cations

¢ Regulate excretion of potassium cations by renal
tubules

While the cortex and medulla produce different hor-
mones in response to different stimuli, they share a com-
plex role in certain situations—for example, the stress re-
sponse. The immediate stress response is controlled
mainly, although not completely, by the medulla, while
long-term stress responses are handled by the surround-
ing cortex. Please refer to chapter 16 for a more detailed
discussion of the physio:ogical responses that constitute
this reaction.

Herbs to Support the Adrenal Medulla

Adaptogens constitute the core of herbal support for con-
ditions affecting the adrenal medulla. Saponins, such as
the eleutherosides found in Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng), directly impact this part of the adrenal
gland. Nervine tonic support of some kind is usually indi-
cated as well, Although nervines will not directly affect
the medulla, they will provide general systemic support to
help ease the impact of tension and anxiety. Bitter tonics
can be helpful as well. Examples of useful adaptogens are
Panax spp. (ginseng), Eleutherococcus senticosus, and
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda). Relevant nervine tonics
include Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), Hypericum perfora-
tum (St. John’s wort), and Avena sativa (oats).

Herbs to Support the Adrenal Cortex

Herbal medicines can affect the function of the adrenal
cortex in a variety of ways. Most important are the direct
effects of plants rich in saponins, such as Glycyrrhiza

----- PAGE 474 -----
466 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySTEM

glabra (licorice) and Dioscorea villosa (wild yam).
Adaptogens will help support the cortex in its response to
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).

Gheyrrhiza is in fact proving controversial because of
its effects upon the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone is part of
what has been called the renin-aldosterone-angiotensin
axis, a hormonal homeostatic complex that regulates the
volume of urine passed and electrolyte balance in the
blood. When Glycyrrhiza is eaten or taken in great excess,
its direct impact upon aldosterone can lead to potassium
depletion. This is a very rare occurrence, but it is men-
tioned in pharmacology books as one of the dangers of
herbal medicine. Such effects must be taken seriously,

however, with hypertensive patients. Géycyrrbiza is con-
traindicated for these patients.

On the other hand, case reports from the United
Kingdom indicate that some people with Addison’s dis-
ease benefit greatly from the use of Glycyrrhiza.
Addison’s disease results from damage to the adrenal cor-
tex, which leads to decreased production of adrenocorti-
cal hormones.

References
1. Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis M. Medical Botany. New York:
J. Wiley, 2003.

----- PAGE 475 -----
23

cH

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY

at is aging? To some extent, the answer to
this question is a subjective one, reflecting be-
lief system as much as fact. Here we shall

briefly consider some ideas about the nature of biological
aging. The more extreme proponents of the current im-
mortality movement suggest that aging is simply an arti-
fact of bad nutrition and cramped life vision. Because
these immortality advocates tout certain herbs as part of
the approach to life extension, we will focus some atten-
tion on ideas of aging.
However, I must start by acknowledging my personal
bias on these issues. The very expensive products and ap-
proaches proposed by some prominent exponents of “life
extension” strike me as a clever moneymaking plan based
on some unsavory elitist tendencies. There is a tendency in
these circles to see illness as something the patient creates
or attracts into his or her life. On some level, this may well
be true, as illness can provide one with the profound gift of
a learning opportunity. On the other hand, this insight has
become an unfortunately powerful tool for browbeating
and a source of guilt and judgment for the patient. In my
opinion, this is nothing short of new age fascism.
Appropriate nutrition

can do much to improve qual-
ity of life, health in general, and specific illness. Similarly,
as should be clear at this point in the book, I have a deep
respect for the role of vision and spirituality in human
life. The Bible says, “Without vision, the people die.”
However, it does mot say that with vision, the people will
live forever. The fandamental importance of vision and
spirituality is qualitative, not quantitative. By bringing
these qualities into our lives, we heal and transform our-
selves and the world. Having a longer chronological life
span is not the point.

The material in this chapter is structured differently
from that in the other treatment chapters. We will focus
primarily on a range of issues germane to elder health.
Discussions on most of the specific health conditions that
affect elders can be found in the appropriate body system
chapters by following the cross-references given here.

467

Genetic Theories of Aging

One group of ideas about aging is based upon the plethora
of insights provided by molecular biology about DNA and
RNA function and structure. Theories have been proposed
that suggest that aging is related to problems with stability
of DNA over time, and with the transcription of informa-
tion from the chromosomal DNA to RNA. In fact, there is
a different theory for each phase of the process. For those
who are interested, the most relevant ideas are known as
the error theory, the redundant message theory, the transcrip-
tion theory, and the programmed theory.'

Non-Genetic Theories of Aging

A number of non-DNA-based theories of aging have also
been proposed, and it is here that herbalism may be most
relevant. It should be clear by now to the reader what con-
tribution herbs may make in each of the following areas.

The immunological theory proposes that alterations in the
immune system contribute to the changes associated
with old age. With advancing age, the immune system
is thought to become less efficient. Its capacity to deal
with infection is reduced, and there is a greater likeli-
hood of autoimmune reactions.

The connective tissue theory relates aging to changes in the
collagen, elastin, and ground substance of this ubiqui-
tous tissue. As collagen makes up 25% of body protein,
any changes to this tissue will have marked effects on
overall health.

The free radical theory holds that the changes of aging are
caused by the combination of free radicals with essen-
tial molecules. Free radicals are chemicals whose outer
orbits contain unpaired electrons, making them highly
reactive.

Free radicals are a normal but short-lived aspect of
metabolism. The core problem is peroxidation of fats,
which damages membranes in the body. Even though the
body has a range of mechanisms to cope with it, the
damage caused by free radicals can be extensive. The free

----- PAGE 476 -----
468 =. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

radical theory is the one most often cited by the longevity
movement as a key insight. The question is whether free
radical production is the fundamental cause of aging or
simply an ancillary phenomenon that exacerbates age-
related changes due to some other cause.

Spiritual and Socioeconomic Issues

In addition to biological factors, sociological, economic,
and spiritual issues play a profound role in aging.
Although a detailed discussion of the complex of factors
at play is beyond the scope of this book, a few brief points
must be made.

Age is not a disease. Death is not an evil to be avoided
at all costs. Our culture has developed some distorted
perceptions about old age, seeing it as the undesirable
mirror image of youth. This blinkered perception ignores
the incredible value of wisdom and experience. It denies
our elders a voice and disregards the valuable contribu-
tions they have to offer. Our whole culture suffers as a re-
sult. We are dealing with spiritual issues here. There must
be an affirmation of aging and death, and an acknowledg-
ment of the rites of passage that these life stages represent.

Much of the illness of elders either results from or is
aggravated by socioeconomic factors that are not medical
at all. Issues such as isolation and poverty that manifest in
cardiovascular disease will not be helped by hawthorn. If
our culture is truly going to evolve into a “kinder, gentler”
one, then we must pay attention to these thorny questions.

TONING AND NURTURING
HEALTH IN ELDERS

As with most theories, the truth may well be some com-
bination of all of the ideas just discussed! Where does this
leave the phytotherapist? The first step is to identify any
therapeutic insights that may be gained by differentiating
among alterable and largely unalterable manifestations of
aging. The degree and timing of such changes will vary
from person to person, depending upon genetics,
lifestyle, environmental conditions, and other factors.

Largely Unalterable Manifestations of Aging
Farsightedness

Fibrosis and stiffening of arteries

Graying of hair

High-tone hearing loss

Loss of skin elasticity

Fortunately, some age-related changes can be altered
or avoided through various preventive approaches. In
most cases, the best way to use any applicable remedy is
within a broader treatment context, as indicated in the
relevant body system chapters.

Table 23.1. Possibly Alterable Manifestations of Aging

MANIFESTATION = TREATMENT STRATEGIES
Agility Stretching exercises, appropriate herbs
Arthritis Diet, exercise, weight control, appropriate herbs

Blood pressure Exercise, reduced salt intake, obesity, appropriate

herbs

Cancer Diet, exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance;
herbs

Cognition Practice, appropriate herbs

Heart disease Diet, exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance,

herbs

Heart reserve Aerobic exercise, appropriate herbs

Isolation Practice, socialization
Memory Practice, appropriate herbs
Mobility Stretching exercises, appropriate herbs

Physical fitness Exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance, herbs

Reaction time Exercise, appropriate herbs

A basic premise of my philosophy is that phytother-
apy can go beyond the treatment of illness to nurture
health. This strength of this approach lies in the use of
tonics and gentle effector remedies; stronger effectors are
reserved for use only when absolutely necessary. This is
also the basis of herbal treatment for elders. Thus, every-
thing covered so far in this book has relevance to the
treatment of older individuals.

Perhaps the most outstanding contribution that
herbs can make to the health of elders is through system
tonics. Tonics and gentle normalizer remedies not only
are largely free of side effects, but also offer possibilities—
unmatched by any conventional treatments—for the
maintenance of wellness and the prevention of many
problems associated with aging.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Prescribing Issues Unique to Elders

‘When considering herbal therapy for elders, it is impor-
tant to acknowledge the effects of certain age-related
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes. Safe
drug or herb prescribing for older patients must be based
on an understanding of the alterations in absorption, dis-
tribution, and elimination mechanisms that occur as part
of the aging process. Taking such issues into considera-
tion can prevent many complications.

Although these concerns are not as important for the
phytotherapist as for the physician prescribing conven-
tional drugs, they still exist. A brief review ofsome of the
factors involved for both plant extracts and chemical
drugs is provided here; see chapter 9 for more informa-
tion. Details on calculating dosages for elders are pro-
vided in chapter 12.

Drug Absorption

In order for a substance to enter the bloodstream when
taken by mouth, the absorptive lining of the gastroin-
testinal tract must be healthy. Medicines must remain in
contact with the lining for an adequate amount of time
for absorption to occur. There must also be an adequate
blood flow to and from the site of absorption. Normal
age-related changes impact all of these factors. There is a
reduction in mucosal surface area, a decrease in blood
flow to the intestines, and changes in both the amount
and nature of secretions.

Plasma Binding

Plant constituents are transported via the blood once they
have been absorbed from the intestines. The more com-
plex molecules are often bound with a blood protein, such
as albumin. Such protein-bound drugs can compete for
binding sites, which in turn may have a profound effect
on availability of medications.

Distribution

With advancing age, the proportion of body water and
lean body mass decreases, while body fat increases. This
favors the distribution of fat-soluble over water-soluble
constituents.

Elimination

The effect of a medicine ceases when it is eliminated from
the body or changed into some inactive form. This in-
volves liver metabolism, kidney function, and elimination
at other sites around the body, all factors that become less
efficient with age.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY @ 469

Paradoxical Reactions

The main concern for elders are effects known as para-
doxical reactions. With very elderly people, it is not unusual
for a medicine to have an effect that is opposite of-what is
expected. For example, the tranquilizer Valium (diazepam)
can have a marked stimulating effect in some elders. This
is an unpredictable response, so careful observation ofa
patient's initial response is crucial. It is essential to be aware
of potential paradoxical responses to herbal medications.

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF
DISEASE IN ELDERS

Elders have special needs, and plants can address these
needs. Whenever possible, the focus should be on tonics
and normalizers. Careful attention must be given to the
dosage of stronger effectors, because of the range of phar-
macological issues just discussed. A general rule of thumb
is to use a lower dosage for elders than for younger adults.
Such concerns do not arise if prescriptions emphasize
tonics. See chapter 12 for more information on dosages
for elders.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

A range of cardiovascular tonic remedies are uniquely
suited for treating problems of the heart and blood vessels
in elders. While they do not have the dramatic, rapid, and
often lifesaving effects of many currently available drugs,
they confer a definite advantage for the phytotherapist
addressing the chronic degenerative conditions often
found in this age group.

Each cardiovascular tonic has a distinct area of appli-
cation. Considering the prevalence of water retention
(edema) related to the aging heart, diuretics can be espe-
cially valuable.

Appropriate Cardiovascular Tonics for Elders
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Taraxacum officinale (dancelion leaf)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

----- PAGE 478 -----
470 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

In addition to these gentle tonics, suggested treat-
ments outlined in chapter 14 are relevant here. The
treatment outlines given for arteriosclerosis, mild conges-
tive heart failure, angina pectoris, hypertension, and pe-
ripheral vascular disease are all relevant for elders.

An important exception may be the use of Cytisus sco-
‘parius (Scotch broom) in the treatment of hypotension. It
may prove too strong for some elderly people, and so
should be avoided. In addition, please refer to chapters 9
and 14 for discussions on the difference between car-
dioactive and cardiotonic remedies and the conditions for
which these herbs are appropriate.

More than with any other age group, it is essential to
avoid the inappropriate use of cardiac glycoside-containing
herbs in elders. Because of the pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic changes discussed earlier, it is all too easy
to build up toxic levels of these chemicals in the body. If
this kind of support for heart function is needed, it is safest
to use the glycosides in a standardized form to ensure that
dosage is correct. This is almost impossible with Digitalis
(foxglove), which highlights the value of pharmaceutical
preparations of digitalis glycosides. These are obtainable
only as prescription drugs. In short, this is a clear example
of when to avoid herbal forms of strong effectors.

Fortunately, such potent treatment is not always nec-
essary. Perhaps more important, it is not the only option.
As highlighted in chapter 14, Crataegus spp. (hawthorn) is
the best-known and possibly the most valuable tonic rem-
edy for the cardiovascular system found in the plant king-
dom. Crataegus facilitates a gentle but long-term, sus-
tained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the
myocardium. The herb is of particular value for cases in
which there is no overt disease, but the patient is experi-
encing a loss of function due to advancing age. Crataegus
helps to maintain the heart in a healthy condition, mini-
mizing the risk of the development of coronary disease.
See chapter 14 for specific indications.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

A lifetime of exposure to air pollution and cigarette smoke
(whether one’s own or secondhand) will damage even the
strongest lungs. The suggested treatment outlines given in
chapter 15 for acute and chronic bronchitis, asthma, and
emphysema are all relevant for elder patients.

A variety of remedies are appropriate for respiratory
problems in elders, each with a distinct area of application.

Appropriate Respiratory Remedies for Elders
Allium sativum (garlic)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Verbascum thapsus (muilein)

A number of stronger effectors may be found useful
in more intransigent conditions, such as emphysema.
However, these should be reserved for cases in which the
gentler herbs have not produced the desired results.

Stronger Effectors for Respiratory Problems in Elders
Grindelia camporum (gumweed)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

A variety of remedies are appropriate for neurological
problems in elders, each with a particular area of applica-
tion. Treatments for nervous system problems outlined in
chapter 16 are relevant here. Particularly pertinent to el-
ders are the discussions of stress management, depression,
and insomnia, as well as the treatment approaches to pe-
ripheral neuropathy and shingles.

Nervine Tonics

Avena sativa (oats)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Nervine Relaxants

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Hypnotics

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

----- PAGE 479 -----
Antidepressants

Avena sativa (oats)

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort )
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A caution must be voiced about the use of Valeriana
with elders. A very small number of people experience a
paradoxical reaction to this remedy. Instead of a relaxing
or hypnotic effect, these people have the opposite physi-
ological response—that is, a caffeinelike stimulation. This
is more of a possibility with the elderly. If this happens,
Valeriana should be avoided in the future. If a paradoxical
reaction does occur, Scutellaria will ease the unpleasant
symptoms quite effectively. Note that Humulus lupulus
was not included in the list of relevant hypnotics. This is
because it has a tendency to induce depression if used
consistently.

An herb of particular relevance to the elderly is Ginkgo
biloba. While it has a popular reputation as a “memory”
herb, it should be considered a cardiovascular remedy.
Ginkgo leaf extract has been shown to influence arteries,
veins, capillaries, blood components (erythrocytes,
platelets), arterial blood flow, capillary perfusion, and ve-
nous return. Due in part to its potent antioxidant proper-
ties, its ability to enhance peripheral and cerebral circula-
tion, and its inhibitory effects on platelet activating factor,
ginkgo’s primary application lies in the treatment of cere-
brovascular dysfunction and peripheral vascular disorders.

Overall, studies confirm the efficacy of ginkgo extract
for treating disturbances of cerebrovascular function, es-
pecially in elderly patients.? Well-designed studies have
demonstrated therapeutic efficacy for mild to moderate
forms of degenerative dementia. In Europe, ginkgo ex-
tract is administered clinically at a total daily dosage of
120 to 240 mg of standardized extract containing at least
24% ginkgo flavone glycoside and 6% terpene lactones
(ginkgolides and bilobalide) for at least eight weeks. The
German Commission E recommends administration for a
period of not less than eight weeks for the treatment of
chronic conditions.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

Please see chapter 13 for treatment approaches to a num-
ber of specific pathologies that commonly affect the el-
derly. These include esophagitis and gastroesophageal
reflux, gastritis, peptic ulceration, hiatus hernia, indiges-
tion, irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, diarrhea,
diverticulitis, and gallbladder disease. Of course, close at-

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY -@ 471

tention must be paid to nutrition and any prescription
medications the patient is taking. The advice given under
Broader Context of Treatment for each of these condi-
tions is relevant to elders as well.

An abundance of herbal remedies are appropriate for
the treatment of digestive problems in elders. Some of the
many possibilities are listed here. The choice will depend
in part on the herbs’ secondary actions.

Herbs Appropriate for Digestive Problems in Elders
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elra)

In addition to ameliorating underlying digestive tract
disease, herbs have much to offer for general symptomatic
relief of digestive upsets. With safe, normalizing herbal
remedies, it is possible to avoid side effects and minimize
paradoxical reactions or synergistic drug interactions.
This is especially the case when digestive symptoms are
related to side effects of essential allopathic medications.

THE URINARY SYSTEM

‘Treatments outlined in chapter 17 are relevant here. In ad-
dition to general approaches to the safe herbal treatment of
water retention, the chapter provides treatment sugges-
tions for conditions such as cystitis and urinary calculus.

Of all the diuretics and other urinary system herbs,
the following are especially appropriate for urinary prob-
lems in elders. Their relevance reflects a combination of
safety, efficacy, and appropriate secondary actions.

Appropriate Urinary Tract Remedies for Elders
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry)

----- PAGE 480 -----
472 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

Chapter 18 includes treatment discussions for post-
menopausal problems and benign prostate hypertrophy.

Reproductive System Tonics for Elders
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Y. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

The plethora of musculoskeletal problems so common to
elders represents an area of health care that is particularly
well suited to herbal treatment. Consult the treatments
outlined in chapter 19 for myalgia, rheumatism, os-
teoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoporosis. Of
particular importance are the suggested guidelines con-
cerning nutrition and lifestyle.

Once again, the phytotherapist can call upon the gift of
toning herbs for the treatment of these problems. There is
usually no need to resort to intense treatments for muscu-
loskeletal problems in elders, as the milder antirheumatic
herbs are often effective, given time. This is not meant to
imply that these herbs can completely alleviate the damage
of osteoarthritis in someone who has had the condition for
years. However, the patient will feel better, perhaps better
than he or she has in years, within the limitations of any
structural damage that may have occurred with time.

In addition, make it a priority to address any digestive
symptoms present in older patients with rheumatic con-
ditions. Any such symptoms are an indication that the
processes of digestion, assimilation, and elimination are
not functioning at optimal levels. This can be related to
either functional or organic problems, but the body’s nu-
tritional status will suffer no matter what the cause, which
in turn may aggravate arthritic conditions.

Of the many herbs that may prove useful for treating
this body system, consider the following as possible tonics.

Musculoskeletal Tonics for Elders
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Betula spp. (birch)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Salix spp. (willow bark)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

A number of stronger effectors may be useful for
more unresponsive cases of arthritis, but these should be
reserved for patients for whom gentler herbs have not
produced the desired results.

Stronger Musculoskeletal Effectors
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

THE SKIN

Treatments outlined in chapter 20 are relevant here. Skin
problems are often a lifelong challenge, and may be slow
to respond to treatment in the elderly. However, the sug-
gestions for topical symptom relief can be very beneficial.
The topical anti-inflammatory activity of Calendula offici-
nalis and of Hypericum perforatum are particularly valuable.

As with all of the body systems, a range of remedies
are appropriate for skin problems in elders. Again, the em-
phasis should be on gentle alteratives and tonics, with
extra focus on general liver, digestive, and kidney function.
Many essential oils are also helpful when applied topically.

Herbs for Skin Conditions in Elders
Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Galum aparine (cleavers)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Plantago major (plantain)

Stellaria media (chickweed)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

References
1. Bennett JC, Plum F, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 20th
edition. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996.
2. McKenna DJ, Jones K, Hughes K. Efficacy, safety, and
use of Ginkgo biloba in clinical and preclinical applica-
tions, Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine 2001
Sep-Oct; 7(5):70-86, 88-90.

Suggested Reading
Hoffmann D. An Elder’s Herbal. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press, 1993.

----- PAGE 481 -----
24

fans 0)

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN

ith its focus on preventive medicine, holistic
W. approaches to health can be most helpful for

many common childhood problems. Con-
ditions brought under control during childhood can often
be avoided entirely during adult life. Examples are asthma
and eczema, both of which can start at a very early age
and become an ongoing theme throughout a person’ life.
If treated successfully with herbs during childhood, the
condition rarely continues into adulthood.

The healing capacity of children can be quite incred-
ible. Not to be overlooked when treating childhood ail-
ments is the relevance of tender loving care. Children re-
spond to love and caring in wonderful ways. So do adults,
if they give themselves the chance!

A number of useful books have been written about
herbs for children. I highly recommend those listed in
Suggested Reading for this chapter. In different but com-
plementary ways, these books are all sources of therapeu-
tic and practical insights that go beyond the experience of
this author. After all, Mother knows best!

This chapter is structured differently from the spe-
cific treatment chapters. Here we will discuss a variety of
issues specific to children’s health, including some dis-
eases and conditions that primarily affect children.
Treatment approaches for conditions that commonly af-
fect children as well as adults can be found by following
cross-references to the appropriate body system chapters,

PRESCRIBING ISSUES UNIQUE TO
CHILDREN

Normal physiology in children is different from that of
adults. Similarly, children respond to medications differ-
ently, which is a reflection of pharmacokinetic issues.! For
example, in infants, delayed gastrointestinal transit time
affects drug absorption and lower levels of enzymes impact
drug metabolism. These differences are most significant in
infants, but can be an issue up to the age of six years.
While such considerations are crucial when it comes to

473

prescription medications, in phytotherapy they can be
largely avoided through an emphasis on herbal tonics.

Care must be taken with dosage for children. Because
of their smaller body size, children obviously require
lower dosages than adults do, but there is no clear-cut
guideline for herbal formulations. Chapter 12 provides
various pharmaceutical methods of deriving dosages for
children based on age or body size.

Noncompliance with therapy is widespread among
children. Among pediatric patients, an estimated 34% to
82% have been reported to be noncompliant with drug
therapy regimens.’ Thus, palatability is a critical factor
with children, as it impacts whether or not the child will
take the herbs. The taste and smell of herbal remedies can
play a vital role in enhancing compliance. This is an area
in which the creativity of the herbal medicine-maker can
make all the difference. For example, can the child take a
tablet or capsule instead?

In dispensing herbal medicines for children, it is im-
portant to educate both parents and child. The more the
parents understand the disease, the treatment, and how to
administer the medicine, the more likely the child is to
take the remedy. It is often important to find out who is
administering the medicines and where. The dosage reg-
imen may have to be adjusted so that medications are al-
ways given at home, as opposed to at school or some
other location that is not conducive to compliance.

CHILDHOOD DISEASES

The so-called childhood diseases are viral syndromes
most often seen in children who lack immunity until they
have recovered from the disease. The disease rarely re-
curs. While these diseases are usually not serious, they
can cause severe fever and discomfort, and occasionally
lead to serious complications. In adults, the same diseases
can have different and much more severe manifestations.
Some of the most common are outlined here.

----- PAGE 482 -----
474 = TREATMENL APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

MEASLES

A highly contagious acute disease characterized by fever,
cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, eruptions (Koplik’s spots) on
the buccal and labial mucosa, and a spreading mucopapu-
lar cutaneous rash. (The Merck Manual)

Measles, or rubeola, is a viral infection that can be spread
by physical contact or through the air via respiratory
droplets. One bout usually confers immunity for life, but a
few children get measles twice. The incubation period is
between 7 and 14 days. The disease is most communicable
two to four days before and up to five days after the rash
appears.

Measles is characterized by fever, red eyes with light
sensitivity, runny nose, dry and sometimes severe cough,
and white spots (Koplik’s spots) on the inside of the
cheeks. These are seen two days before the red rash ap-
pears, which first develops near the scalp and later spreads
to the upper body. After three to four days, the rash takes
on a brownish, bronzy appearance, and peeling may
occur. Symptoms may be severe, and children with
measles are pretty sick and miserable. The rash lasts
about seven days, but the child usually begins to feel bet-
ter by the fourth day.

Treatment of Measles

The herbal contribution to the treatment of measles is
based on alleviation of symptomatic distress. The primary
areas to address are fever, itching, eye sensitivity, and
coughing. Convalescent recovery will be facilitated by
good nutrition and, possibly, the use of bitter tonics such
as Gentiana lutea (gentian) and, if the cough is persistent,
Marrubium vulgare (horehound).

Actions Indicated

Diaphoretics help ease fever; diaphoretic teas such as
Nepeta cataria, Achillea millefolium, and Tilia spp. are es-
pecially appropriate.

Antipruritics will help relieve itching. Stellaria media is
particularly effective.

Demutcent expectoranis help with both the cough and the
sore throat. Herbs to consider include Tissilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, and Glycyrrhiza glabra. If a stronger
remedy is indicated, use Marrubium vulgare.

To relieve itching, choose an aesthetic, pleasant ap-
proach if possible. Dabbing distilled Hamamelis virginiana
(witch hazel) on itchy skin will usually provide immediate
but very temporarily relief.

Eyestrain due to photosensitivity is common, so the
child should rest in a darkened room. A wash made of

eyebright (Euphrasia spp.) or a chamomile compress
(Matricaria recutita) will ease the discomfort, but not re-
place the need for reduced light. Here are refreshingly
clear instructions for making an eyebright eyewash from
Natural Child Care, by Maribeth Riggs.

Eyebright Eyewash’

Infuse '/2 oz. of dried eyebright in 1 cup of water. It is especially
important to strain well to ensure that no particles remain in the
infusion. When comfortably warm for the eyes, it is ready to use.
This herbal wash is to be used only once.

MUMPS

An acute contagious, generalized viral disease, usually
causing painful enlargement of the salivary glands, most
commonly the parotids. (The Merck Manual)

Mumps is a virus infection of the parotid glands, two of
the six salivary glands located just below and in front of
the ears. This contagious condition, spread by respiratory
droplets, is seen commonly between the ages of 2 and 12
years. It has an incubation period of 14 to 24 days. It can
occur in adults who did not experience the disease in
childhood. The condition is much more serious in adults
and can lead to sterility in men.

The common symptom picture includes fever,
swelling of the parotid glands, achiness, and restlessness.
The swelling of the parotids can be very alarming and
change the patient's appearance quite dramatically. The
jaw may become stiff because of glandular swelling. The
testicles are involved in up to one fifth of males, especially
older patients. Mild meningitis marked by headache or
stiff neck is, unfortunately, not rare. Any development of
a painfully stiff neck or severe headache calls for immedi-
ate professional help.

Treatment of Mumps

In addition to the herbal treatment suggested here, symp-
toms may be relieved by intermittently applying ice or
heat to the affected neck area. Acetaminophen may also
be appropriate for pain relief, do not give aspirin to chil-
dren with a viral illness because of the risk of Reye’s syn-
drome. Warm salt-water gargles, soft foods, and extra flu-
ids may also help relieve symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are the key to successfully clearing the
infection.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Lymphatic alteratives are crucial to help drain the affected
glands.

Hepatics will help if there is associated constipation. These
should be very mild.

Anti-inflammatories and demulcents may be helpful in alle-
viating pain and discomfort in the throat.

Specific Remedies

No specifics in the strict sense are used in Western herbal-
ism, but lymphatic herbs might be seen as specifics.
However, lymphatics for children must be chosen very care-
fully. Phytolacca is an excellent remedy here, but great care
must be taken with dosage in young children. Phytolacca can
be a powerful emetic and purgative in higher doses.

A Prescription for Mumps

Galium aparine 4 parts
Echinacea spp. 4 parts
Urtica dioica 3 parts
Phytolacca americana T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
child should drink an infusion of equal parts Nepeta cataria and
Trifolium pratense often.

Table 24.1. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Mumps

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Lymphatic Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Phytolacca americana

Alterative Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Urtica dioica,
Phytolacca americana

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

Many of the treatments outlined in chapter 13 are rele-
vant here. Most common in children are indigestion,
constipation, and diarrhea. Many gentle effector herbs
are appropriate for treating children’s digestive problems.
Carminatives are especially important, because the volatile
oils they contain are often gently anti-inflammatory and
antispasmodic. Thus, they can be rapidly effective at eas-
ing colic and cramping pain.

Herbs for Digestive Problems in Children
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN 475

Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

COLIC

A symptom complex of early infancy that is characterized
by paroxysms of crying, apparent abdominal pain, and ir-
ritability. (The Merck Manual)

Colic refers to painful contractions of the gastrointestinal
tract. About 10% to 15% of normal, healthy babies have
colic. In true, severe colic, the baby will be difficult to
console, expressing discomfort with high-pitched crying
and drawing up the feet into the belly. If the baby has
been crying for two hours without interruption, seek pro-
fessional help in order to rule out other sources of pain,
such as ear infection and intestinal obstruction.

Infantile colic usually starts at one month of age and
resolves by four months. The causes are not well under-
stood, but the condition tends to occur in babies with a
sensitive or vigorous temperament and a below-average
need for sleep. Ideas about causes include overly rapid
feeding, overeating, swallowing excessive air, lack of
burping, emotional tension between parent and child, and
improper feeding technique (that is, incorrect position-
ing). The physiological mechanism behind colic is
thought to be excessive fermentation and gas production
in the intestines, and may even be related to foods eaten
by the nursing mother.

The parents of colicky babies will often be under
great stress. The infant may be stimulated into fussy be-
havior by parental stress, creating a cycle of positive feed-
back. Parents will frequently experience feelings of frus-
tration, anger, despair, and helplessness, and it may be
appropriate to treat the parents for stress-related prob-
lems (see chapter 16 for suggestions).

Treatment of Colic

A range of herbs may help the baby directly, but they will
not replace the suggestions given below. Mild, carmina-
tive, relaxing nervines are often helpful and may be made
into pleasant-tasting teas or infusions to be added to a

----- PAGE 484 -----
476 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

bath. Such preparations can incorporate any of the herbs
listed here. Selection will be based on taste or relevant
secondary actions. For example, Trifolium pratense also has
much to offer in the treatment of childhood eczema.

Soothing Herbs for Colicky Babies
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

The following illustrates some non-herbal issues to
consider when treating infantile colic.

Change the nursing mother’s diet. Common gas-producing
foods eaten by nursing mothers include dairy products,
garlic, vegetables in the cabbage family, orange juice,
very spicy foods, caffeine-containing foods (such as
chocolate, coffee, and tea), and anything in particular
that produces gas for the mother.

Recommend soothing herb teas for the mother. Relaxing
nervines may help, especially those containing carmi-
native volatile oils. Examples include Matricaria recu-
tita, Melissa officinalis, Tilia spp., and Trifolium pratense.

Use rhythmic motions. Rhythmic movements help ease
both abdominal discomfort and emotional distress for
the infant. Examples include gentle rocking, car rides,
walking with the baby in a front pack, baby swings, and
setting the baby in an infant seat on top of a clothes
dryer.

Encourage sucking. Some babies will not suck during colic
attacks, and it is not a good idea to continually feed a
colicky infant. However, the infant may be encouraged
to suck his or her own hand or fingers, or a teething
object.

Apply heat. Lay the baby over a warm hot-water bottle
wrapped in a towel; while the baby is in a flexed posi-
tion rhythmically pat its back. Give the baby a warm
bath.

Alter feeding position. Try feeding the baby in a sitting po-
sition to help prevent ingestion of air. Burp the baby
often during feeding.

Change the formula or the type of water used to make it, if
the baby is bottle-fed.

Give acidophilus. This is not usually needed for breast-fed
babies; however, some babies greatly benefit from the
addition of acidophilus to the diet. This can be mixed

with water and fed by bottle or eyedropper. Never give
honey to babies less than one year of age, as it has been as-
sociated with infantile botulism.

CONSTIPATION
Although constipation is rarely seen in breast-fed babies,
it is not abnormal for breast-fed babies to have bowel
movements as infrequently as one in seven days. Treat a
breast-fed infant for constipation only if the child appears
to be in pain and cries during the bowel movement.
Indications for the treatment of constipation in bottle-
fed babies and young children include:

Painful passage of stools, Pain during bowel movements is
abnormal, and in some cases trauma to the anal canal
can lead to anal fissure. Bright red blood around the
anus or on toilet paper suggests the presence of an anal
fissure.

Inability to pass stools. Treatment is indicated for children
who feel the need to have a bowel movement and are
unable to do so. The exception is infants younger than
one year of age, who may grunt, push, strain, and be-
come flushed in the face during bowel movements.
This is normal behavior, as long as the episode is not
accompanied by pain.

Infrequent bowel movements, occurring less often than once
in four days for young children, generally indicate that
treatment is needed.

If bowel movements are accompanied by much pain,
abdominal bloating, or crying, it is important to seek
skilled diagnosis to rule out conditions such as
Hirschsprung’s disease, impaction, and other potential se-
rious disorders. It is inappropriate to use laxative remedies
with children unless absolutely necessary, as children’s
constipation almost always responds to dietary change.

Treatment of Children’s Constipation
If the suggestions given here are not adequate, see chap-
ter 13 for suggestions on using gentle, bulking laxative
remedies. The strong, stimulant anthraquinone laxatives
should be avoided with children.

The National Institute of Child Health and
Development provides the following guidelines for treat-
ing constipated infants and children.*

Infants less than 2 months old should be examined by a
physician.

Infants 2 to 4 months old may be given | ounce of fruit juice
(grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) per month of age
twice a day.

----- PAGE 485 -----
Infants older than 4 months who have begun solid foods
may be given high-fiber baby foods (e.g., peas, beans,
apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach)
twice a day.

Children older than J year will benefit from the same di-
etary changes as adults (i.e., more fruits, vegetables,
and whole-grain foods high in fiber). In addition, in-
crease intake of fruit juices such as apple, pear, cherry,
grape, and prune.

For older children, try these suggestions:

Increase intake of water.

Increase consumption of fruits and vegetables, particularly raw
foods with peels, such as figs, pears, apricots, legumes,
celery, cucumber, lettuce, and apples. Raisins may also
be beneficial.

Increase fiber intake with whole-grain cereals or bran
muffins.

Reduce intake of constipating foods, such as dairy products,
white rice, bananas, cooked carrots, and white flour.
Use psyllium seed preparations in children older than 2 years

of age.

Give flavored cod-liver oil.

DIARRHEA

The number and consistency of normal stools varies
greatly among infants and children. Loose stools are nor-
mal in breast-fed infants. If the baby is vomiting and hav-
ing frequent watery stools, however, there is a danger of
dehydration and loss of electrolyte balance. If a child has
nausea or vomiting, the liquids should be given in small
amounts but very frequently, often every 15 minutes.

Seek medical attention immediately if there is blood
in the stool, abdominal pain causing crying for more than
two hours, or signs of dehydration, such as lack of turgor,
depression of the anterior fontanel, and dry mucous
membranes.

Infection with the bacteria Shigella, Salmonella, and
Campylobacter often results in blood-flecked diarrhea.
Children on antibiotics may experience diarrhea, but this
is less likely if they eat yogurt with active live cultures
while taking antibiotics. However, the most common
cause of children’s diarrhea is mild viral infection.

Treatment of Children’s Diarrhea

A number of the astringent herbs are particularly suitable
for children. One of the most useful is Filipendula ulmaria
(meadowsweet). In addition, try the following remedies.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN <>» 477

Herbs Useful for Children’s Diarrhea
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Plantago major (plantain)

Potentilla erecta (tormentil)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

INDIGESTION

Indigestion is very common in children, but is rarely a se-
rious health problem. It may be triggered by eating too
fast, overeating, eating particular foods, or drinking car-
bonated drinks. In addition to the information given for
functional dyspepsia in chapter 13, the overriding issue
that must be taken into account for children is taste! If
they do not like the medicine, they will not take it, and
medicinal plants work orly if they are actually taken.

Treatment of Indigestion in Children
The key to success here is selecting appropriate carmina-
tive remedies that will also be palatable to the child.
Carminatives will ease the movement of food or gas
through the intestinal tract. Carminative oils stimulate in-
testinal peristalsis, the wavelike contractions that move
food through the intestine and promote the expulsion of
gas from the gastrointestinal tract.

The following formula from Maribeth Riggs is a
good example of what can be concocted to treat children’s
indigestion when taste is taken into account.

An Indigestion Tea for Children®
1 tablespoon fennel seed
1 tablespoon dried sweet orange peel
2 cups water
Honey to taste

Decoct the fennel seed and orange peel in water. Use a covered
pot. Bring to a boil and gently simmer for 20 minutes. Strain out
the herbs and discard them. Any unused portion of the tea can
be kept in a refrigerator and reheated for further use. Discard any
remaining tea after 2 days.

Serve the tea as warm as is comfortable for the child.
Sweeten it with honey to taste. Give the child 2 cup of tea
every 2 hours whenever she experiences stomach pain from gas.

----- PAGE 486 -----
478 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

NAUSEA

Nausea, the sensation of feeling sick in the stomach with-
out actually vomiting, is a common symptom in children.
The cause must always be ascertained to ensure that no
serious health problem is developing. There is a wide
range of possible causes, including infection, food sensi-
tivities, and emotional overexcitement.

Treatment of Nausea

Relief is usually easy to achieve with carminatives, as long
as the child’s tastes are taken into account. Nausea in chil-
dren responds readily to a tea of peppermint, and even to
sucking on a peppermint candy. Peppermint often pre-
vents vomiting, although not in cases of food poisoning or
when the stomach really needs to be evacuated. Ginger
can be helpful, especially when the nausea is related to
motion sickness. Ginger ale and candied ginger are two
good ways to give a child ginger, and both are easy to
carry. Sliced, crystallized ginger is sold in the Chinese
food section of many grocery stores.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

Many effective and safe herbal approaches to respiratory
problems in children are recognized worldwide. Whether
an acute infection, such as bronchitis, influenza, the com-
mon cold, or sinusitis, or an immune system issue, such as
asthma or hay fever, treatment with herbs can be benefi-
cial. Herbal therapy makes a particularly valuable contri-
bution in the treatment of a form of atopic asthma closely
associated with eczema. Please see chapter 15 for more
details on the treatment of this and many other respira-
tory conditions.

Remedies Appropriate for Children’s Respiratory
Problems

Allium sativum (garlic)

Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Plyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Here is a prescription from Maribeth Riggs for licorice
lollipops. These make a particularly tasty and effective
treatment for hoarseness and sore throats of any cause.

Licorice Lollipops®

1 five-inch-long piece licorice root

2 tablespoons honey

| cup water
Place the licorice root, honey, and water in a covered pot; bring
to a boil and simmer for 5 minutes. (Omit the honey if you use
Chinese licorice.) Strain out the herb and set it aside to cool.
eep the licorice tea to drink, or discard if you wish. When the
softened licorice roat is cool enough to hold comfortably in the
hand, give it to the child to suck on. Keep the dried licorice root
in a labeled jar with a tight-fitting lid, away from children.
Discard any unused root after 6 months.

Application: Give a child with a hoarse throat softened

icorice root once each day in the morning or afternoon to suck

on for as long as he or she wishes. Remember that licorice root
is slightly stimulating and a mild laxative, so it should be eaten
only in the morning or early afternoon. The hoarse throat usu-
ally disappears after 2 days.

OTITIS MEDIA

A bacterial or viral infection in the middle ear, usually sec-
ondary to an upper respiratory infection. (The Merck
Manual)

Otitis media, or middle ear infection, is one of the most
common early childhood diseases and is often the result
of problems with the eustachian tubes in the ears.
Normally, the eustachian tube is closed and flat, prevent-
ing organisms from entering the middle ear from the pha-
ryngeal cavity. The tube opens to allow drainage of secre-
tions produced by the middle ear mucosa and to equalize
pressure between the middle ear and the outside environ-
ment. If drainage is impaired, normal secretions are re-
tained. This causes any air in the tube to be reabsorbed
and produces negative pressure within the middle ear. If
the tube opens, this negative pressure will draw bacteria
into the middle ear, where they quickly proliferate.

As purulent fluid accumulates in the middle ear, in-
creasing discomfort results. Infants will become irritable
and indicate discomfort by holding or pulling their ears
or rolling their heads from side to side. Young children
will complain of pain, to put it mildly! Otitis media may
be accompanied by fever of up to 104°F.

In serious otitis media, the child may not even appear
ill. There may be a feeling of fullness in the ear and a pop-
ping sensation during swallowing. The child will be less
responsive and may have some painless hearing loss.

----- PAGE 487 -----
Inflammation of the tympanic membrane alone is not di-
agnostic of middle ear infection. Just like a child’s cheeks,
the tympanic membrane may become flushed with in-
creased crying, allergy, or mild physical irritation.

Treatment of Otitis Media

Unfortunately, many pediatricians prescribe antibiotics
on the basis of a slightly red tympanic membrane. Not
uncommonly, children receive numerous courses of med-
ication. It is more difficult to treat children after long-
term medication has failed to ameliorate the condition.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are, of course, the key to successfully clear-
ing the infection.

Anti-inflammatories may be helpful, but work best when
applied topically.

Alteratives and lymphatic tonics can prove most effective in
treating intransigent problems.

A Prescription for Otitis Media

Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Warm mullein
flower oil introduced into the ear can serve as an effective anti-
inflammatory.

Broader Context of Treatment

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and Pizzorno
recommend the following supplements.” Note that the
dosage given varies with the age of the patient (see table
12.15 for dosage adjustment by age).

Beta-carotene: age 12, 20,000 [U/day (200,000 [U/day
maximum)

Vitamin C: age 12, 500 mg/day

Zinc picolinate: age 12, 2.5 mg/day (15 mg/day maximum)

Bioflavonoids: age 12, 50 mg/day (250 mg/day maximum)

Evening primrose oil: age 12, 1 capsule/day

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Treatinents outlined in chapter 16 are relevant for chil-
dren, as long as remedies are selected carefully. The core
selection issue is the need to avoid stronger relaxing
nervines. For children, a mild nervine chosen from one of
the lists provided here is usually more than adequate.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN @ 479

Herbs such as Tilia and Trifolium added to a bath as an in-
fusion will have a calming effect and will prove useful be-
fore bedtime. Trifolium is especially relevant for problems
compounded by irritating skin conditions.

Nervine Tonics for Children
Avena sativa (oats)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Nervine Relaxants for Children
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Leontrus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Hypnotics for Children

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER

A neurobiological condition characterized by develop-
mentally inappropriate levels of attention, concentration,
activity, distractibility, and impulsivity. (The Merriam-
Webster Medical Dictionary)

Hyperactivity or attention deficit disorder (ADD) is a
thorny issue that raises a plethora of questions. There is
no doubt that extreme hyperactivity occurs and can be re-
lated to dietary factors. ADD is the most commonly diag-
nosed behavioral disorder of childhood, affecting an esti-
mated 3% to 5% of school-aged children. The incidence
of ADD has been increasing over the last 15 years, possi-
bly related to either better diagnosis or over-diagnosis.
The disorder is 3 to 10 times more common in male than
female children.

However, there seems to be an unfortunate trend to
label children “hyperactive” simply because the teacher or
parents do not have the time or patience for very active,
perceptive, inquisitive, or creative children. The Merck
Manual points out that “claims that a child is hyperactive
often reflect the tolerance level of the annoyed person.”
Since when has not fitting in to the normal mold become
a disease? The use of psychopharmaceuticals to control
hyperactive children sounds a little bit like the Soviet

----- PAGE 488 -----
480 <3 TREATMEN' APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

psychiatrists’ solution of prescribing major tranquilizers
to dissidents, Rather than sedating our children so they
can deal with their world, why not change the nature of
school so it is more challenging and exciting?

When the child is experiencing a real problem, how-
ever, herbs may offer some help, provided that two par-
ticular areas are in some way addressed.

Psychological factors. Such factors can be of paramount im-
portance, but these are not herbal issues.

Food irritants. ‘There is increasing evidence that chemical
irritants may play a role in hyperactivity. These may be
pollutants (such as heavy metals) or artificial food ad-
ditives (such as colorings and flavors).

Herbs can contribute in two areas: by calming the
nervous system and by helping the liver detoxify any of-
fending substances. Ireatment suggestions for stress-re-
lated issues can be found in chapter 16. See chapter 21 for
guidelines on detoxification. Other herbs to consider in
support ofa broad treatment plan that also addresses di-
etary and psychological issues are listed here. Keep in
mind that the phytotherapist can also help with parental
stress and exhaustion!

Supportive Herbs for Hyperactive Children
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Silybum marianum (milk thistle)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

THE SKIN

There are a number of remedies appropriate for skin
problems in children. Each has a distinct area of applica-
tion, and some are for external use only. Please refer to
chapter 20 for herbal approaches to common childhood
problems such as psoriasis and eczema. Treatments for di-
aper rash, cradle cap, and impetigo are discussed here.
‘The treatment outlined in chapter 15 for atopic asthma
and eczema is also relevant.

The herbs listed here for skin problems in children
can often be used both internally and topically. Many es-
sential oils can also be helpful as topical applications. For
details, please refer to specific plant entries in chapter 26,

Herbs for Children’s Skin Problems
Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Plantago major (plantain)

Stellaria media (chickweed)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

DIAPER RASH

An irritation of the skin caused by dampness, the interac-
tion of urine (and ammonia from the urine), and feces. A
rash is any skin swelling (bumps) or blotches on a baby
(can be red, skin-colored, or slightly lighter or darker than
skin color). (The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Diaper rash is caused by a skin reaction to irritating dia-
pers and prolonged contact with stool, urine, perspira-
tion, soaps, detergents, or creams. ‘Typically, the rash af-
fects the groin area around the genitals and buttocks. It is
red and scaly with tiny bumps, blisters, or cracks. When
areas outside the diaper region are affected, it is impor-
tant to rule out yeast infections, eczema, psoriasis, and
other problems. Fever, pus, and digestive symptoms are
not caused by simple diaper rash, and should prompt an
evaluation for other problems.

Riggs suggests a well-formulated ointment for the
treatment of this common condition:

Diaper Rash Ointment®

This ointment is made from ingredients that will help keep the
surface of an infant's skin dry, nourish the skin, and fight bacteria.
Comfrey root, chickweed, and marshmallow root all have one
thing in common: They contain large amounts of calcium, which
can help stimulate tissue growth. Comfrey root, in particular, is
noted for its healing powers, sporting common folk names like
knitbone and bruisewort, These three herbs combined with gold-
enseal powder, which serves as a topical antiseptic, are an excel-
lent combination for combating diaper rash. Beeswax and sweet
almond oil both have skin-nourishing and soothing qualities. This
ointment is also good for mild abrasions, sunburns, and hives.

1 tablespoon chickweed

1 tablespoon marshmallow root

1 tablespoon comfrey root

Va teaspoon goldenseal root powder

1 cup sweet almond oil

Vs cup beeswax

Combine the chickweed, marshmallow root, comfrey root, and
goldenseal root powder in a cast-iron frying pan with the sweet
almond oil. Gently fry the mixture for 5 to 10 minutes. Be care-
ful not to let the herbs burn. When the mixture is hot, add the
beeswax and melt it down. When the beeswax is completely
melted, strain the mixture through a cheesecloth into a small,

----- PAGE 489 -----
labeled jar with a tight-fitting lid. Refrigerate the ointment until
it solidifies. The final ointment is an opaque tan color and smells
of beeswax and comfrey root. Keep the ointment in a conve-
nient place near the infant's changing table, away from heat.
Discard any used portion after 2 months.

Application: Apply the ointment by gently rubbing it on the
diaper area each time the diaper is changed. This ointment is
very soothing to a rashy infant. Three or four applications are
usually enough to get rid of diaper rash. If the infant's diaper
rash does not respond to this treatment, or if it keeps reappear-
ing, investigate factors such as the proper disinfection of dia-
pers, changes in diet, and other skin disorders.

Broader Context of Treatment

Herbs will not usually be enough to clear diaper rash, un-
less used in the context of appropriate attention to the fol-
lowing issues.

Change wet diapers promptly and frequently. Switch the type
of diaper used, either from disposable to cloth or vice
versa.

Use a protective ointment (beeswax, zinc oxide, calendula,
or Diaper Rash Ointment, page 480).

Avoid or reduce the use of occlusive rubber pants over the diaper

Allow baby to go without a diaper, and let air and sun dry the
area.

Do not use talcum powder or cornstarch. If you must powder,
use a clay product.

CRADLE CAP

An inflammatory scaling disease of the scalp, face, and
occasionally other areas of the body. (The Merck Manual)

When this rash occurs on the scalp alone, it is known as
cradle cap. When it extends to the face, it is termed sebor-
rheic dermatitis, because it occurs where the greatest num-
ber of oil-producing sebaceous glands are located.
Seborrheic dermatitis is a noninfectious form of eczema
that is very common in infants, usually beginning in the
first weeks of life and slowly disappearing over a period of
weeks or months. Unlike atopic or contact eczema, it is
rarely uncomfortable or itchy. The cause is unknown.
Cradle cap and other forms of seborrheic dermatitis are
not infections, signs of allergy, or related to poor hygiene.

Treatment of Cradle Cap
Calendula officinalis (calendula) and Plantago major (plan-
tain) are appropriate to soothe heat, soreness, and associ-

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN & 481

ated dry skin. The form of topical application may be cru-
cial for most effective symptom relief, and it may be nec-
essary to experiment to see which best suits the baby.
Both of these herbs may be used in the form of ointment,
cream, lotion, or wash. Oily preparations will help to
loosen scales, but might cause discomfort and heat
through an insulating effect.

A mucilaginous wash made from a strong decoction
of Symphytum officinale (comfrey root) will soothe, mois-
turize, and serve as an effective vulnerary. Follow the
wash with an ointment made from calendula, elder flower,
or plantain.

Broader Context of Treatment

The scalp should be gently washed with a mild baby
shampoo, which, along with soft brushing, will help remove
the scales. Stronger medicated shampoos (anti-seborrhea
shampoos containing sulfur and 2% salicylic acid) may
loosen the scales more quickly, but can be irritating.
Applying baby oil is neither helpful nor necessary, as it al-
lows scales to build up cn the scalp. Occasionally, a sec-
ondary yeast infection may occur on the affected skin,
most likely in the crease areas rather than on the scalp.
The area will become extremely red and itchy.

IMPETIGO

A superficial vesiculopustular skin infection. (The Merck
Manual)

Impetigo is an infection of the skin usually caused by a
streptococcal bacterium, and occasionally by Staphylo-
coccus aureus. The face is most commonly affected, but
other exposed areas can be involved as well. Typically, im-
petigo is restricted to children and is highly contagious.
The characteristic appearance is one of multiple tiny pus-
filled blisters that break readily, leading to a larger, more
widespread eruption forming the characteristic honey-
colored crusts. Itching is common, and scratching may
spread the infection.

Treatment of Impetigo

Internal support of general health, elimination, and im-
mune response is not always necessary, but is indicated if
the child is generally prone to illness.

Actions Indicated for Topical Medication

Antimicrobials are, of course, the key to clearing the infec-
tion, but work best when applied topically.

----- PAGE 490 -----
482 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Vulneraries may be helpful after the infection has cleared,
to prevent discoloration or scarring of the skin.

Antipruritics may, in theory, be useful. However, because
of the pathogen present on the skin, itching may not
stop until the infection is cleared.

Anti-inflammatories may be helpful, but the same com-
ments made for antipruritics are also relevant here.

Actions Indicated for Internal Treatment

Alteratives, antimicrobials, lymphatic tonics, diuretics, and
hepatics may all be appropriate, for reasons similar to
those discussed in chapter 20 for eczema. They will zot
replace topical treatments.

Nervines may be indicated if the child is experiencing dis-
tress. However, it is often the parents who benefit most
from nervines!

Specific Remedies
I am not aware of any specifics for impetigo, but the
stronger antimicrobial herbs will help. Topical applica-
tions of Commiphora molmol (myrrh), Hydrastis canadensis
(goldenseal), and Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree oil) have
all proved useful. Ellingwood refers to successful use of
Echinacea, both internally and externally.

A Topical Prescription for Impetigo
Commiphora molmol
Hydrastis canadensis

1 part

1 part

Gently apply this tincture combination to the affected areas, as
described below.

Broader Context of Treatment

While effective, the application of tinctures high in alco-
hol may be too intense for the child. They may be added
to a base ointment or lotion. An ointment may also be
made directly from dried herbs. Apply topically, following
the guidelines given here. Be careful when touching le-
sions and applying herbs, as the infection can spread
through contact.

Remove the crusts gently with a warm wet washcloth, as the
bacteria live underneath the crusts and will continue to
multiply until the crusts are removed.

Apply the tincture or oimtment.

Remove crusts and apply ointment several times a day. If the
lesions become too large and are not controlled, the
child may develop systemic complications.

Because of the highly contagious nature of impetigo,
the child should be kept out of school for at least two days
after the initiation of treatment. Towels, sheets, and
clothing contaminated with drainage should be washed
with chlorine bleach. Jt may be necessary to seek medical
assistance under certain circumstances to avoid systemic
complications. If the child has a sore throat or fever, if the
impetigo is in an inaccessible area (such as the ear canal or
nostril), or if significant improvement is not seen after
two to three days of treatment, consult a doctor.

References

1. Kanneh A. Paediatric pharmacological principles: an up-
date. Part 2. Pharmacokinetics: absorption and distribu-
tion. Pediatric Nursing 2002 Nov; 14(9):39-43.

2. Matsui DM. Drug compliance in pediatrics. Pediatric
Clinics of North America 1997; 44:1-13.

3. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

4. Article on the National Library of Medicine Web site:
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/.

5. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

6. Ibid.

7, Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

8. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

Suggested Reading

Bove M. An Encyclopedia of Natural Healing for Children and
Infants. Chicago: Keats, 2001.

Gladstar R. Rosemary Gladstar’s Herbal Remedies for Children’s
Health. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 1999.

McIntyre, A. The Complete Woman’s Herbal: A Manual of
Healing Herbs and Nutrition for Personal Well-being and
Family Care. New York: EL. Holt, 1995.

Riggs, M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony Books,
1989.

----- PAGE 491 -----
25

MN

HERBAL ACTIONS

he therapeutic section of this book emphasizes

traditional herbal medicine. Thus, this chapter

presents a more traditional perspective on herbal
actions, as opposed to results of scientific research on
herbs or constituents. The actions listed here reflect tra-
ditional observations of outcome. The material may or
may not be in line with current scientific thinking, al-
though scientific research bears out many of these tradi-
tional actions. The core issue is that in clinical practice,
the medical herbalist will find these actions relevant and
useful in the real world with real patients.

ADAPTOGEN

Soviet scientists coined the term adaptogen in 1964 to de-
scribe herbs that produce an increase in bodily resistance
and vitality, helping the body adapt to and defend against
the effects of environmental stress, Adaptogens increase
the body’s nonspecific resistance to damaging man-made
factors and illnesses. According to a more recent defini-
tion, adaptogens must:!

Show a nonspecific activity—that is, increase the body's abil-
ity to resist physical, chemical, or biological noxious
agents.

Have a normalizing fluence independent of the nature of
the pathological state.

Be innocuous and not influence normal body functions
more than required.

This implies that adaptogens reinforce the nonspe-
cific power of the body’s resistance against stressors. They
increase its general capacity to withstand stressful situa-
tions, and hence guard against disease caused by over-
stress. The general aims of treatment with adaptogens are
to reduce stress reactions during the alarm phase of the
stress response and to prevent or at least delay the state of
exhaustion, and thus provide a certain level of protection
against long-term stress. See chapter 16 for more infor-
mation on the stress response and the general adaptation
syndrome.

483

Adaptogens appear to moderate the stress response in
the following ways:

Enable a more vapid but less exaggerated response. Blood glu-
cose rises more rapid.y after the onset of stress, but
does not rise as high.

Allow a more sustained peak. Blood glucose is elevated (and
therefore available for cell function) for a longer pe-
riod of time.

Foster a more gradual decline. There is a less precipitous
drop in blood glucose.

Thus, adaptogens do not block the stress response,
but instead smooth out the associated highs and lows.
This conserves energy in the alarm phase for use in the
resistance phase. These effects may be related to adapto-
gens’ effects on glucose metabolism:

¢ Stimulate the liver to convert glycogen to glucose,
leading to increased blood glucose levels

¢ Enhance entry of glucose into cells

¢ Enhance utilization of glucose within cells

The specific mechanism of adaptogenic activity has
not yet been elucidated, but some generalizations can be
made. Pretreatment with adaptogens appears to alter en-
docrine functions of the pituitary-adrenal gland axis.
Regular pretreatment with adaptogens causes a normal-
ization of stress hormone levels and a generally decreased
predisposition to stress. Other body systems also respond
to the direct or indirect regulatory influences of adapto-
gens. For example, adaptogens have been shown to influ-
ence the pituitary gonadal system, to confer immunos-
timulatory actions, and to activate cognitive functions. To
date, it is still unknown which cellular mechanisms are
addressed during these processes.

A number of herbs can be described as adaptogens,
based upon both clinical and in vitro research. It is worth
noting that most of these plants are used primarily in
Asian countries. This does not mean that adaptogens are
found only in Asia, but rather that only Asian scientists
have gotten research grarits to study them!

----- PAGE 492 -----
484 «2 TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Adaptogenic Herbs

Acanthopanax sessiliflorum (wu jia pi)
Albizzia julibrissin (silk tree)

Aralia elata (Japanese angelica tree)
A. manshurica (Manchurian aralia)
Aralia schmidtii (Sakhalin spikenard)
Cicer arietinum (chickpea)

Codonoposis pilosula (dang shen)
Echinopanax elatus (Asian devil’s club)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Eucommia ulmoides (hardy rubber tree)
Ganoderma lucidum (reishi mushroom)
Hoppea dichotoma

Leuzea carthamotdes (maral root)
Ocimum sanctum (boly basil)

Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng)

P quinquéfolius (American ginseng)
Rhodiola rosea (roseroot stonecrop)
Schisandra chinensis (schizandra)
Tinospora cordifolia (guduchi)

Trichopus zeylanicus (arogyappacha)
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda)

ALTERATIVE

Alteratives are herbs that gradually restore proper func-
tion to the body and increase overall health and vitality.
This sounds very unclear, and, indeed, their mode of ac-
tion on the body is not understood. However, their value
in holistic health care cannot be denied.

In broad terms, alteratives seem to alter the body’s
metabolic processes to improve tissues’ ability to deal
with a range of body functions, from nutrition to elimi-
nation, Many of the herbs with this action help the body
eliminate waste through the kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin.
Some work by stimulating digestive function and some
are immunomodulators. Others simply work! Folk heal-
ing traditions sometimes invoke the concept of “blood
cleansing,” which, while hinting at much, actually says
very little. If the blood truly needed cleansing, a major
medical emergency would be afoot.

Immunological research on certain secondary plant
products, especially saponins, has led to some interesting
suggestions for the basis of alterative action, explored in
more detail in chapter 6. Remember, however, that the
specifics of plant activity are the result of the way the
whole plant works upon the human body, not simply the
effects of “active ingredients.”

Alteratives can be used safely as supportive therapy in
many diverse conditions, and should be considered first

for cases of chronic inflammatory and degenerative dis-
eases. These include skin diseases, various types of arthri-
tis, and a wide range of autoimmune problems.

Primary Alterative Herbs
Allium sativum (garlic)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Body System Affinities

Certain alteratives are particularly well suited to specific
body systems or parts. Other remedies may also have al-
terative actions, as has already been pointed out, but here
we shall limit ourselves to the alteratives most often indi-
cated for each body system. See specific body system
chapters for more information on how each alterative
should best be used.

Cardiovascular. In general, alterative activity is not
specifically indicated for this system. However, by na-
ture, alteratives will aid circulation by helping the
whole body work at its peak. Alteratives to support the
lymphatic aspects of circulation include Galium
aparine, Phytolacca americana, and Echinacea spp.
Scrophularia nodosa, useful in chronic eczema, also has
positive inotropic actions. The hypocholesteremic and
hypotensive actions of Allium sativum are well known.

Respiratory. The main alteratives that also possess bene-
ficial properties for the lungs and respiratory system as
a whole are Allium sativum, Hydrastis canadensis, San-
guinaria canadensis, Baptisia tinctoria, and Echinacea spp.

----- PAGE 493 -----
Digestive. All of the alteratives that work on the liver,
pancreas, and other digestive system organs are of
great importance in herbal medicine. Examples in-
clude Adium sativum, Arctium lappa, Chionanthus vir-
ginicus, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., and Urtica dioica.

Urinary. Some of the herbs described as diuretics could
be characterized as urinary system alteratives. These
include Galium aparine and Urtica dioica.

Reproductive. Here, the general alteratives are always of
value, but specifics include Cimicifuga racemosa and
Hydrastis canadensis.

Musculoskeletal. Many alteratives are important here,
including Cimicifuga racemosa, Menyanthes trifoliata,
and Arctium lappa.

Nervous. By helping the body to be healthy and whole,
all alteratives aid the strained nervous system.
However, Pulsatilla vulgaris and Trifolium pratense are
especially helpful as alteratives with nervine actions.

Skin. The list of alteratives for the skin could include all
of the herbs listed here, plus many more. This is the
system for which alteratives are most often used. It is
important to remember that in holistic herbalism, aid-
ing and supporting the whole body in its return to
health is always more important than applying specific
remedies. Alteratives often used for the skin are
Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium, Fumaria officinalis,
Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Scrophularia nodosa,
Smilax spp., Rumex crispus, and Trifolium pratense.

Table 25.1. Alteratives and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Phytolacca americana,
Urtica dioica

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine, Guaiacum officinale, Hydrastis
canadensis, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Smilax spp.

Antimicrobial Agathosma betulina, Allium sativum, Baptisia
tinctoria, Echinacea spp., Hydrastis canadensis,
Larrea tridentata, Phytolacca americana, Pulsatilla

vulgaris, Sanguinaria canadensis

Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Pulsatilla
vulgaris, Sanguinaria canadensis, Trifolium pratense

Antispasmodic

Astringent Hydrastis canadensis, Urtica dioica

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 485

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Bitter Arctium lappa, Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes
trifoliata

Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Guaiacum officinale, Stillingia
sylvatica, Smilax spp.

Diuretic Agathosma betulina, Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

Emmenagogue —Cimicifuga racemosa

Expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Trifolium pratense,
Verbascum thapsus

Hepatic Allium sativum, Arctium lappa, Chionanthus
virginicus, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Phytolacca emericana, Rumex crispus

Hypotensive Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica

Nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Trifolium
pratense

Vulnerary Galium aparine, Hydrastis.canadensis

Table 25.2. Relative Strengths of Alterative Herbs

STRENGTH —_HERBS

Mild Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Chionanthus virginicus,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Echinacea spp., Mahonia aquifolium,
Menyanthes trifoliata, Pulsatilla vulgaris

Strong Arctium lappa, Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine,
Guaiacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis, Rumex crispus,
Scrophularia nodosa, Smilax spp., Trifolium pratense,

Urtica dioica

Very strong Iris versicolor, Larrea tridentata,
(use with care) Phytolacca americana, Sassafras albidum,
Sanguinaria canadensis, Stillingia sylvatica

ANTICATARRHAL

Anticatarrhal herbs help the body remove excess mucus,
whether in the sinuses or in other parts of the body. They
are used mainly for ear, ‘nose, and throat infections, but
also have an essential role to play in many broader-based
treatment approaches.

----- PAGE 494 -----
486 <2 TREATMENT APPROACHES By BODY SYSTEM

Mucus is an essential body product. However, in re-
sponse to infection or some other problem, the body may
produce excess quantities in its attempt to remove the
problematic organism or wastes. Some anticatarrhal
remedies work by producing a less viscous mucus secre-
tion that is easier for the body to remove. Others reduce
mucus secretion directly. This is not as desirable as it
sounds, as it may cause a buildup of: waste that cannot be
cleared from the sinuses. While the specific mode of ac-
tion of anticatarrhal herbs remains uncertain, undeniable
clinical experience tells us that they work!

The following constituents have been suggested as
being pivotal to the action of anticatarrhal herbs.

Tannins have an astringent action and are common to
many herbs in this group.

Volatile oil-rich plants can have anticatarrhal effects, in
part due to their antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
actions.

Flavones and flavonoids, inclading commonly found com-
pounds like quercetin, apparently contribute to the
total effect.

Important Anticatarrhal Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Salvia officinalis (sage)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Body System Affinities
Each system of the body has plants that are particularly
suited to it, some of which are anticatarrhals. Here we

shall see which remedies act as primary anticatarrhals for
each of the following body systems.

Cardiovascular. Anticatarrhal action is not directly rele-
vant to the cardiovascular system. However, it could be
said that anticatarrhal remedies help the system by
contributing to general detoxification and elimination.
Such herbs include Capsicum annuum, Allium sativum,
and Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. All of the herbs listed as primary anti-
catarrhals have a beneficial effect on both the upper
and lower respiratory systems.

Digestive. Anticatarrhals that have bitter, demulcent,
carminative, hepatic, or astringent properties make
useful therapeutic contributions to digestive problems.
Important examples are Allium sativum, Althaea offici-
nalis, Capsicum annuum, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus
crispus, Eupatorium perfoliatum, Geranium maculatum,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,
and Thymus vulgaris,

Urinary. In addition to their anticatarrhal properties,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi and Solidago virgaurea are im-
portant herbs for the urinary system.

Reproductive. While the herbs listed below may all play
a role in the holistic treatment of-an individual with re-
productive system issues, none of them is a primary
remedy for male or female problems. Achillea mille-
folium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Geranium maculatum,
and Hydrastis canadensis would be the first supportive
remedies to consider.

Musculoskeletal. Again, none of these plants is a pri-
mary remedy for the musculoskeletal system.

Nervous. Similarly, none of these plants is a primary
remedy for the nervous system.

Skin. Anticatarrhals may be indirectly indicated for the
treatment of a range of skin problems because they
support the body’s cleansing processes. Consider
Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,
Hydrastis canadensis, and Sambucus nigra.

Table 25.3. Anticatarrhal Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory  Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,

Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea

----- PAGE 495 -----
HERBAL ACTIONS . 487

SECONDARY
ACTION

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypotensive

Laxative

Nervine

HERBS

Achillea mitlefolium, Allium sativum,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Baptisia tinctoria,
Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp., lnula helenium,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,

Solidago virgaurea, Thymus vulgaris

Allium sativum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,
Hydrastis canadensis, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Capsicum annuum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Thymus vulgaris

Althaea officinalis, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Inula helenium, Mentha piperita, Sambucus nigra,
Solidago virgaurea

Achillea millefolium, Althaea officinalis,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Sambucus nigra,
Solidago virgaurea, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica,

Chondrus crispus, Hyssopus officinalis,

Sambucus nigra, Thymus vulgaris, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Allium sativum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Sambucus nigra

Hyssopus officinalis

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Tonic Achillea millefolium, Capsicum annuum,

Echinacea spp., Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Vulnerary Althaea officinalis, Geranium maculatum,

Sambucus nigra, Verbascum thapsus

Strengths of anticatarrhal herbs are relative, because
their efficacy depends upon the nature of the cause, rather
than on their potency as anticatarrhals. For example, bet-
ter results may be achieved with Echinacea than with
Solidago if infection is the cause.

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY

Herbs that help the body combat inflammation are
known as anti-inflammatory remedies. Orthodox medicine
places much emphasis on chemicals that work to reduce
symptoms of inflammation and ease suffering. However,
symptom alleviation is not the best way to use herbal anti-
inflammatories. They are safe to use for the relief of pain
and discomfort, but offer most when used in combination
with other remedies to address the underlying problem.

In keeping with the theme of this chapter, the group-
ings given here reflect traditional observations of out-
come. For a pharmacological review of anti-inflammatory
natural products, please refer to chapter 9. As discussed
there, secondary metabolites produce anti-inflammatory
actions by interacting with the inflammatory cascade in a
number of different ways. While these insights are inter-
esting, using them to reach coherent clinical conclusions
is challenging, as are all extrapolations from constituent
studies to whole-plant phytotherapy.

Inflammation is a normal body response to infection
and other problems. Through localized biochemical and
tissue changes, the inflammatory reaction often brings
about the changes necessary to heal the focus of disease
and restore health. Unless this response is life threaten-
ing, it is a mistake to inhibit it. For example, simply sup-
pressing symptoms of inflammation in the stomach to re-
lieve discomfort will not alter the underlying causes of the
symptoms, and possibly could lead to the development of
a stomach ulcer.

We have become conditioned to see inflammation as
something to suppress and smother, rather than to work
with and support. Herbal remedies offer us the possibility

----- PAGE 496 -----
488 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

to work with body processes, but as in all health matters,
there is a balance to achieve. Here, we need to know when
to work with inflammation and when to suppress it.

Types of Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

Attempts to classify anti-inflammatory herbs by relative
strength are not very helpful. It is far more useful in the
therapeutic sense to group them in terms of the body sys-
tem or tissue for which they are most appropriate or by
their pharmacological mode of action.

Treating inflammation with herbs is usually ap-
proached in terms of what tissue or organ is the focus of
inflammation. Based upon the different ways herbal anti-
inflammatories are thought to work, there are four groups
of anti-inflammatory herbs. I cannot overemphasize that
the action of a whole plant is always more than the action
of any specific constituent chemical. Keeping this holistic
perspective in mind, let us look at the following groups of
anti-inflammatory remedies:

Salicylate-Containing Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

A large range of plants contain salts of salicylic acid, the
molecule from which aspirin was developed. Such plants
are most useful for musculoskeletal inflammations, such
as arthritis. Herbs containing significant quantities of sal-
icylic acid have a marked anti-inflammatory effect, with-
out posing the dangers to the stomach that aspirin does.
In fact, Filipendula ulmaria, rich in salicylates, can even be
used to stanch mild stomach hemorrhage. Other plants
rich in such constituents include Salix spp., Gaultheria
procumbens, Betula spp., many poplars, and Viburnum
prunifolium.

Plants Containing Steroid Precursors

Steroids were first isolated from plant material, and some
herbs contain molecules that may be metabolized by the
body into inflammation-fighting steroidal molecules.
Such plants will help reduce some kinds of inflammation,
especially inflammation of autoimmune origin. Examples
are Glycyrrhiza glabra and Dioscorea villosa, which contains
diosgenin.

Essential Oil-Rich Plants

Many aromatic herbs high in essential oils have anti-
inflammatory actions. One of the best of these remedies
is Matricaria recutita, which is rich in terpenes, such as
bisabolol and chamazulene. These herbs are especially
useful for digestive system inflammations when taken by
mouth, for respiratory problems when inhaled in some
form, and for skin inflammations when used topically.

Calendula officinalis and Hypericum perforatum are other
well-known plants containing oils that soothe and reduce
inflammation.

Resin-Containing Plants

A number of resin-containing plants reduce inflammation
in some areas of the body, but often cause inflammation
in the stomach. This limits their usefulness, but they are
irreplaceable for some arthritic conditions. Examples are
Menyanthes trifoliata, Harpagophytum ‘procumbens, and
Guaiacum officinale.

Other Types of Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

As is common with herbal remedies, no clear-cut chemical
basis can be identified to explain the anti-inflammatory ac-
tions of some plants. This in no way negates their value,
because there is more to health and well-being than phar-
maceutical chemistry. It might also mean that no one has
yet gotten a grant to study that plant!

One of the many remedies in this group we can men-
tion is Cimicifuga racemosa. Demulcent herbs often have
an apparently anti-inflammatory effect, but this is related
to their ability to soothe inflamed surfaces, not to reduc-
tions in the cellular inflammatory response.

Major Anti-Inflammatory Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Alchemilla arvensis (lady’s mantle)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)

Betula spp. (birch)

Borago officinalis (borage)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

----- PAGE 497 -----
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Matva sylvestris (mallow)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Plantago major (plantain)

Populus tremuloides (quaking aspen)
Salix spp. (willow)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)

Tilia platypbyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Body System Affinities

For each system of the body, there’are plants that are par-
ticularly well suited that also act as anti-inflammatory
remedies. This allows the herbalist to nurture the health
and vitality of a body system while at the same time less-
ening any inflammation.

Circulatory. A number of herbs may be used to reduce
inflammations in blood vessels, including Tilia platy-
phyllos, Crataegus spp., Aesculus bippocastanum, and
Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. As it is a common site for inflammatory
conditions, it should come as no surprise that a whole
range of anti-inflammatories work well in either the
upper or the lower respiratory system. For the lower
respiratory system, consider Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria
islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hyssopus
officinalis, Tussilago farfara, and Verbascum thapsus. For
the upper respiratory system, consider Sambucus nigra
and Solidago virgaurea.

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 489

Digestive. As herbal remedies go directly to the digestive

system, they are particularly useful in inflammatory
conditions that affect it, from stomach ulcers to colitis
and hemorrhoids. Such herbs include Matricaria recu-
tita, Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hydrastis
canadensis, Calendula, and Mentha piperita. Demulcent
remedies rich in mucilage, such as Althaea officinalis,
can have the localized effect of reducing inflammation
through contact soothing.

Urinary. A number of herbs soothe the tissue of the uri-

nary tract directly as their anti-inflammatory con-
stituents pass through the kidneys and bladder. Plants
that soothe the tissue and fight infection will also have
an anti-inflammatory action. Specific urinary tract
anti-inflammatory remedies include Solidago virgaurea
and Zea mays.

Reproductive. Many tonics and other specific repro-

ductive remedies will often have anti-inflammatory
actions—for example, Alchemilla arvensis and Caulo-
phyllum thalictroides.

Musculoskeletal. For hardworking and abused muscles

and bones, salicylate-containing remedies come into
their own. Swlix spp., Filipendula ulmaria, Populus
tremuloides, and Betula spp. are excellent. Others to con-
sider are Menyanthes trifoliata, Harpagophytum procum-
bens, Cimicifuga racertosa, Tanacetum parthenium, and
Dioscorea villosa. Arthritic conditions respond well to
herbal therapy, but as always, herbs work best when
used as part of a holistic approach to treating the per-
son, not simply the disease.

Nervous. While the nervous system often feels as if it

needs anti-inflammatories, the best remedies for the
“inflamed state of mind” are the relaxing nervines. The
only direct anti-inflammatory for nervous system tis-
sue is Hypericum perforatum, which helps speed the re-
covery of damaged nerves. However, many nervines
can play a supportive role, including Avena sativa and
Valeriana officinalis.

Skin. Numerous remedies reduce inflammation on the

skin. A selection of these gifts of the natural world in-
cludes Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,
Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis canadensis, Arnica mon-
tana, Stellaria media, and Plantago major.

----- PAGE 498 -----
490 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 25.4. Anti-Inflammatory Herbs and
Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus, Geranium maculatum, Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Populus

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Cholagogue

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emnmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Laxative

Nervine

Tonic

Vulnerary

* tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Asclepias tuberosa, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha
piperita, Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum, Alchemilla arvensis, Calendula officinalis, Capsella bursa-pastoris, Filioendula ulmaria,
Geranium maculatum, Hamamelis virginiana, Hydrastis canadensis, Plantago major, Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Symphytum officinale, Tilia platyphyllos, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita, Menyanthes trifoliata

Achillea millefolium, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Filipendula ulmaria, Foeniculum vulgare,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Calendula officinalis, Dioscorea villosa, Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes trifoliata

Althaea officinalis, Cetraria istandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Malva sylvestris, Stellaria media, Symphytum officinale,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Ulmus rubra, Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica, Asclepias tuberosa, Guaiacum officinale, Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Apium graveolens, Crataegus spp., Galium aparine, Menyanthes trifoliata, Plantago major,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos, Zea mays

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Salvia officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Althaea officinalis, Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrthiza glabra, Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Plantago major, Sambucus nigra, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare, Glyeyrrhiza glabra, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Menyanthes trifoliata, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Hydrastis canadensis, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Apium graveolens, Borago officinalis, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Cimicifuga racemosa, Crataegus spp., Filipendula ulmaria, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum,
Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Althaea officinalis, Calendula officinalis, Filipendula ulmaria, Hamamelis virginiana,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Matricaria recutita, Plantago major, Stellaria media, Symphytum
officinale

----- PAGE 499 -----
ANTIMICROBIAL

Antimicrobial herbs help the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms in some way. The action cov-
ers the whole gamut of microorganisms, including bacte-
ria, fungi, and viruses. However, it would be inappropri-
ate to talk about these plants as being “antibiotic,” as this
term literally means “anti-life.” There are times when an-
tibiotic drugs are essential and life saving, but not as often
as they are actually used. At times, supportive and pre-
ventive remedies allow the body to bypass the need for
chemical intervention. But when an emergency arises, let
us be thankful for the existence of antibiotics.

When using herbal remedies, we have the opportu-
nity to help the body strengthen its own resistance to
pathogens and throw off the illness. Some plant remedies
contain chemicals that are antiseptic or act as specific poi-
sons to certain organisms. In general, however, we are
talking about plants that support the immune process,
augmenting the integrity of the individual’s own defense
system.

How Antimicrobial Herbs Work

It would be a mistake to attempt an overarching general-
ization about mechanisms of action for herbal antimicro-
bials. The use of the term antimicrobial is a description of
expected outcome, rather than a description of process.
Antimicrobial effects may be related to direct interactions
with pathogens or mediated via the herb’s interaction
with the immune response. These herbs may also work
through indirect actions by stimulating immune re-
sponses. As examples of the diversity of mechanisms in-
volved, consider the following:

Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) contains an oil, rich in ter-
pinene-4-ol, that directly interferes with a pathogen’s
metabolism, thus killing it? Other herbs rich in
volatile oils also work directly to kill microorganisms.
Examples include Allium sativum, Thymus vulgaris, and
Eucalyptus spp.

Echinacea directly stimulates the body’s own immune re-
sponse and thus is often an effective antimicrobial agent.

Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry juice) blocks the adhe-
sion of uropathogenic E. coli to the walls of the bladder,
thus offering a useful treatment for cystitis.

Important Herbal Antimicrobials
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Allium sativum (garlic)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 491

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)
Coriandrum sativum (coriander)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eucalyptus spp. (eucalyptus)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Juniperus communis (juniper)
Ligusticum porteri (osha)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae (balsam of Peru)
Olea europaea (olive)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)
Plantago major (plantain)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Body System Affinities

By the nature of infection and the body’s immune re-
sponse to it, a general systemic treatment is always ap-
propriate, even if given in conjunction with specific local
remedies. Ways in these remedies can be used are dis-
cussed in specific body system chapters.

Cardiovascular. Among antimicrobial herbs, Allium
sativum and Achillea millefolium have a reputation as
tonics for this system. Allium sativum is especially ap-
propriate because of its broad value for the cardiovas-
cular system in general.

Respiratory. In addition to Echinacea spp., Baptisia tincto-
ria, and Commiphora molmol, we can add Pimpinella
anisum, Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae, Syzygium
aromaticum, Inula helenium, Ligusticum porteri, and
Thymus vulgaris, which also possess different varieties
of expectorant effects.

Digestive. Many volatile oil-containing herbs and some
digestive bitters have an antimicrobial effect in the in-
testines. Some to consider are Echinacea spp., Allium
sativum, Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Commiphora molmol, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canaden-
sis, and Salvia officinalis.

----- PAGE 500 -----
492 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES By BoDy SYSTEM

Urinary. Effective remedies are Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Juniperus communis, Eucalyptus spp., and Achillea mille-
folium. Be aware that if there is any suggestion of kid-
ney disease, some of the urinary antimicrobial reme-
dies can be too strong.

Reproductive. Here, useful herbs include Echinacea spp.,
Allium sativum, Artemisia abrotanum, and Tropaeolum
majus, as well as urinary antimicrobials.

Musculoskeletal. Echinacea spp. and Baptisia tinctoria
provide a good basis for treatment.

Nervous. Hypericum perforatum or Phytolacca americana,
in combination with nervines and other antimicrobial
herbs, will help with the intransigent infections that
can affect the nervous system.

Skin. Many antimicrobial herbs can be used on the skin.
A wash of Thymus vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Origanum majorana, or Allium sativum can be most ef-
fective. Commiphora molmol is one of the strongest ex-
ternal remedies.

Table 25.5. Antimicrobial Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Inula helenium

Anticatarrhal Allium sativum, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,

Baptisia tinctoria, Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp.,
Eucalyptus spp., Hydrastis canadensis,

Inula helenium, Mentha piperita,

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae, Salvia officinalis,

Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Plantago major

Allium sativum, Carum carvi,

Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol, Plantago major,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,

Thymus vulgaris

Bitter Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,

Ruta graveolens

SECONDARY
ACTION

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypotensive

Laxative

Nervine

Tonic

Vulnerary

HERBS

Artemisia absinthium, Capsicum annuum,
Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol,
Coriandrum sativum, Juniperus communis,
Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Syzygium aromaticum, Thymus vulgaris

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Plantago major

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,
Baptisia tinctoria, Capsicum annuum, Inula helenium,
Mentha piperita, Origanum majorana

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Eucalyptus spp., Juniperus communis, Plantago major

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,

A. absinthium, Calendula officinalis,

Carum carvi, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Origanum majorana, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol, Eucalyptus spp.,
fnula helenium, Ligusticum porteri,

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,

Origanum majorana, Pimpinella anisum,

Plantago major, Ruta graveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Allium sativum, Artemisia abrotanum,
Calendula officinalis, Gentiana lutea,
Hyadrastis canadensis, Inula helenium, Ruta graveolens

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum, Olea europaea

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Ruta graveolens

Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Rosmarinus officinalis

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp., Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum,
Inula helenium, Ruta graveolens

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis,
Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hypericum perforatum, Plantago major

----- PAGE 501 -----
Table 25.6. Relative Strengths of Antimicrobial
Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Calendula officinalis, Carum carvi, Coriandrum sativum,
Gentiana lutea, Olea europaea, Origanum majorana,
Pimpinella anisum, Plantago major, Syzygium aromaticum

Moderate Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Capsicum annuum, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita ,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis

Allium sativum, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Baptisia tinctoria,
Commiphora molmol, Echinacea spp., Eucalyptus spp.,
Hydrastis canadensis, Inula helenium, Juniperus communis,
Ligusticum porteri, Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,
Thymus vulgaris, Usnea spp.

Strong

ANTIRHEUMATIC

‘These are remedies that improve quality of life for pa-
tients with rheumatic problems. This is not meant to sug-
gest that they have a specific effect upon the disease or
even necessarily upon the musculoskeletal tissue itself.
The term antirheumatic is a description of an expected
outcome, rather than an implied mechanism. As such, it is
very limited in its applicability.

The activity of these herbs can be explained as an ex-
pression of a more broadly relevant action. This may be
the herb’s primary action or a more holistic synergy of the
plant’s actions. For example, the alteratives may work in a
number of different ways in rheumatic conditions, as can
anti-inflammatory herbs. Of course, it is not always pos-
sible to identify the mechanism of action.

Important Antirheumatic Herbs
Achillea milléfolium (yarrow)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Arnica montana (arnica)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Betula spp. (birch)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Caulophyllum thahetroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 493

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

E. purpureum (gravel root)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (janiper)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Populus tremuloides (aspen)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
Zanthoxylum americanum: (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Table 25.7. Possible Mechanism of Action of
Antirheumatic Herbs

ACTION HERBS.

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Dioscorea villosa,

Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Guaiacum officinale,

Harpagophytum procumbens,

Menyanthes trifoliata, Populus tremuloides,
Tanacetum parthenium

Alterative Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium,

Fucus vesiculosus, Guaiacum officinale,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes trifoliata, Phytolacca americana,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E. purpureum, Juniperus communis,

Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

----- PAGE 502 -----
494 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Circulatory stimulant Armoracia rusticana, Brassica spp.,
Capsicum annuum, Myrica cerifera,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa, Viburnum opulus

Other action
(or basis unclear)

Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium,
A, vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides

Table 25.8. Relative Strengths of
Antirheumatic Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Caulophyllum thalictroides, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
£, purpureum, Fucus vesiculosus, Mahonia aquifolium,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Rumex crispus,
Taraxacum officinale

Moderate Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Arctium lappa,
Armoracia rusticana, Betula spp., Brassica spp.,

Capsicum annuum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Myrica cerifera, Petroselinum crispum,

Populus tremuloides, Salix spp., Smilax spp., Urtica dioica,
Viburnum opulus, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale

Strong Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor, Juniperus communis,

Phytolacca americana, Tanacetum parthenium

ANTISPASMODIC

Antispasmodic herbs prevent or ease spasms or cramps in
the muscles. They thus reduce muscular tension in the
body, and, as many antispasmodics are also nervines, they
will sometimes ease psychological tension as well. The
term antispasmodic is synonymous with spasmolytic.

How Antispasmodics Work

Some antispasmodics work in a general way to reduce
muscle spasms throughout the body, and others specifi-
cally work on certain organs or systems. Antispasmodics
relax the autonomic nervous system, but not necessarily
the central nervous system. For this reason, they facilitate

physical relaxation of muscles without necessarily causing
a sedative effect. When needed in the intestinal tract, as
in colic, carminative herbs will usually suffice as antispas-
modics. The relaxing expectorants have a localized anti-
spasmodic effect in the respiratory system, but may also
have a broader effect upon the body. ”

General Antispasmodic Herbs
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Carum carvi (caraway)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Daucus carota (wild carrot)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Ghyyrrhiza glabra (licorice)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lobelia inflata (\obelia)

Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Piper methysticum (kava kava)
Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)

----- PAGE 503 -----
Turnera diffusa (damiana)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Leonurus cardiaca, Viburnum opulus,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Melissa officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
and Valeriana officinalis are important here.

Respiratory. A range of antispasmodics are useful in the
respiratory system, including Lactuca virosa, Prunus
serotina, Lobelia inflata, Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia
pilulifera, and Pimpinella anisum.

Digestive. All of the carminative herbs tend to act as an-
tispasmodics in the gut, and hepatics can have such an
action for gallbladder conditions. Specific herbs to
consider are Matricaria recutita, Viburnum opulus, Vi
prunifolium, Valeriana officinalis, Humulus lupulus,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris,
Anethum graveolens, Foeniculum vulgare, and Dioscorea
villosa.

Urinary. Think of Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium, and
Daucus carota.

Reproductive. Here, Viburnum opulus and V. prunifolium
come into their own. The nervine antispasmodics,
such as Valeriana officinalis and Scutellaria lateriflora, are
also helpful.

Musculoskeletal. Primary muscle relaxant remedies in-
clude Piper methysticum, Viburnum opulus, Ve pruni-
folium, Valeriana officinalis, and Scutellaria lateriflora.
Externally, Lobelia inflata can be helpful.

Nervous. See Nervine for more information.

Skin. Antispasmodics are not directly relevant here.

Table 25.9. Antispasmodic Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Trifolium pratense
Analgesic Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,

Eschscholzia californica, Hypericum perforatum,
Lactuca virosa, Mentha piperita,

Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina,

Valeriana officinalis

HERBAL ACTIONS . 495

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,

Nepeta cataria, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos,

Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zingiber officinale

Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita,

Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,

Tilia platyphyllos, Tussilago farfara

Carum carvi, Drosera rotundifolia, Humulus
lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella
anisum, Piper methysticum, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Glechoma hederacea, Humulus lupulus, Hypericum
perforatum, Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Salvia
officinalis, Rosmarinus officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica,
Artemisia vulgaris, Carum carvi, Daucus carota,
Elettaria cardamomum, Foeniculum vulgare,
Humulus lupulus, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca,

Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, M. pulegium, Nepeta cataria,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Salvia officinalis var. rubia, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis,
Zingiber officinale

Drosera rotundifolia, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Trigonelle foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Angelica archangelica, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita, Nepeta
cataria, Rosmarinus officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Tilia platyphylios, Verbena
officinalis, Zingiber officinale

----- PAGE 504 -----
496 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM -

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypnotic

Hypotensive

Nervine relaxant

Tonic

Vulnerary

Angelica archangelica, Daucus carota, Lycopus spp.,
Nepeta cataria, Petroselinum crispum,

Piper methysticum, Sambucus nigra,

Tilia platyphyllos, Turnera diffusa, Tussilago farfara

Artemisia vulgaris, Marrubium vulgare, Carum carvi,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Mentha pulegium

Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi, Daucus carota,
Drosera rotundifolia, Foeniculum vulgare,
Glyeyrrhiza glabra, Lycopus spp. Nepeta cataria,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Thymus vulgaris,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Verbena officinalis

Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Matricaria recutita,
Passiflora incarnata, Piper methysticum,
Piscidia erythrina, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica,
Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa, Lavandula spp.,
Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, Lycopus spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, Nepeta cataria,

Passiflora incarnata, Piper methysticum,

Piscidia erythrina, Prunus serotina,

Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus,

V. prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Tumera diffusa, Tussilago farfara,

Verbena officinalis

Nepeta cataria, Hypericum perforatum,
Matricaria recutita, Sambucus nigra,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus

Table 25.10. Relative Strengths of
Antispasmodic Herbs

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi,
Daucus carota, Elettaria cardamomum,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Mentha piperita,
M. pulegium, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus

Moderate Apium graveolens, Artemisia vulgaris,

Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Nepeta cataria, Tilia platyphyllos, Trifolium pratense,

Turnera diffusa, Tussilago farfara, Zingiber officinale

Strong Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,

Drosera rotundifolia, Eschscholzia californica,

Humultus lupulus, Lactuca virosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Lobelia inflata, Lycopus europaeus, Piper methysticum,
Piscidia erythrina, Prunus serotina, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Symplocarpus foetidus,

Thymus vulgaris, Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

ASTRINGENT

If you have ever had a cup of ordinary tea, you have ex-
perienced astringency. The tightening of the tissue of the
mouth demonstrates the astringent action of the tea
plant, Camellia sinensis. Astringents are sometimes called
styptics when applied externally to stop bleeding, or anti-
hemorrhagics when used for internal bleeding.

How Astringents Work

Astringent action is due to a diverse group of complex
chemicals, called tannins or gallotannins, that have cer-
tain chemical and physical properties in common. All
members of this group have phenolic characteristics, are
soluble in water, and have molecular weights ranging
from 500 to 3,000, There are two groups: derivatives of
flavonols called condensed tannins and the more important
hydrolyzable tannins. See chapter 7 for more details on the
chemistry of tannins.

The name tannin comes from the use of these con-
stituents in the tanning industry. They have the effect of
precipitating, or denaturing, protein molecules. They also
precipitate starch, gelatin, alkaloids, and salts of heavy
metals. One of the few incompatibilities found when mak-

----- PAGE 505 -----
ing herbal medicines is that astringent, tannin-rich reme-
dies will create precipitates with herbs high in alkaloids.

This alteration of protein is how animal skin is
turned into leather. In other words, astringents produce a
kind of temporary leather coat on the surface of tissue.
Because of this activity, tannins have a number of thera-
peutic benefits:

Reduce irritation on the surface of tissues through a sort of
numbing action.

Reduce surface inflammation.

Create a barrier against infection, which is of great help for
wounds and burns.

Astringents have a role in a wide range of problems in
many parts of the body, but are of great importance in
wound healing and conditions affecting the digestive sys-
tem. In the gut, they reduce inflammation, improve
symptoms of diarrhea, and are widely used in various dis-
eases of digestion. However, long-term use as medicine or
too much tea in the diet can be deleterious to health, as
this will eventually inhibit proper food absorption across
the gut wall.

Herbal Astringents

Acacia catechu (black catechu)
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Camellia sinensis (tea)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Equisetum arvense (horsetail)
Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Myrica cerifera (bayberry)

Plantago major (plantain)
Polygonum bistorta (bistort)

Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Quercus spp. (oak)

Rheum palmatum (rhubarb)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

R. villosus (blackberry)

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 497

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Vinca major (periwinkle)

Body System Affinities

As with other actions, certain astringents are particularly
suited to specific body systems. Here we shall see which
remedies act as astringents for each system.

Cardiovascular. Astringents are rarely needed internally
for this system, although they are used externally for
bruises that can be seen under the skin. However, cer-
tain cardiovascular remedies are also astringents, in-
cluding Achillea millefolium, Aesculus bippocastanum, and
Cytisus scoparius.

Respiratory. The anticatarrhal remedies often also have
astringent properties. Achillea millefolium, Capsella
bursa-pastoris, Hydrastis canadensis, Euphrasia spp., and
Plantago major are examples.

Digestive. Of many possibilities, here are a few examples
of astringents for this system: Quercus spp., Acacia cate-
chu, Polygonum bistorta, Potentilla erecta, Hamamelis vir-
giniana, Geranium maculatum, Symphytum officinale,
Filipendula ulmaria, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis
canadensis, Capsella bursa-pastoris, and Salvia officinalis.

Urinary. Many of the astringents already mentioned are
useful here, but some specifics are Equisetum arvense,
Achillea millefolium, and Elymus repens.

Reproductive. Here we can mention Geranium macula-
tum, Vinca major, Alchemilla arvensis, and Hydrastis
canadensis,

Musculoskeletal. Astringency is not often directly rele-
vant in this system.

Nervous. Astringency is also not often directly relevant
here.

Skin. Of the many external astringents, or styptics, some
examples are Achillea millefolium, Arnica montana,
Capsella bursa-pastoris, Equisetum arvense, Hamamelis
virginiana, Plantago major, Quercus spp., and just about
all of the other astringents mentioned above.

----- PAGE 506 -----
498 <@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 25.11. Astringent Herbs and Secondary Actions

Table 25.12. Relative Strengths of Astringent Herbs

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,
Glechoma hederacea, Inula helenium,
Polygonum bistorta, Salvia officinalis,

Solidago virgaurea, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory — Euphrasia spp., Filipendula ulmaria,
Geranium maculatum, Hamamelis virginiana,
Plantago major, Polygonum bistorta, Quercus spp.,

Solidago virgaurea

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Acacia catechy, Inula helenium, Quercus spp.,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea

Antispasmodic Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Bitter Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Prunus serotina

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Plantago major,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Inula helenium,
Myrica cerifera, Solidago virgaurea

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cola acuminata,
Glechoma hederacea, Lycopus spp.,
Plantago major, Solidago virgaurea,
Verbascum thapsus

Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Rubus idaeus

Expectorant Glechoma hederacea, Inula helenium,
Plantago major, Prunus serotina,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Hepatic Agrimonia eupatoria

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium

Nervine Cola acuminata, Prunus serotina,
Rosmarinus officinalis

Tonic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Rubus idaeus, Verbascum thapsus

Vulnerary Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Geranium maculatum, Symphytum officinale

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild or gentle Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Lycopus spp., Plantago major,
Pulmonaria officinalis, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Moderate Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum,
Capsella bursa-pastoris, Euphrasia spp.,
Filipendula ulmaria, Geranium maculatum,
Glechoma hederacea, Hieracium pilosella,

Inula helenium, Potentilla erecta, Prunus serotina,

Ranunculus ficaria, Rheum palmatum

Strong Acacia catechu, Agrimonia eupatoria, Cola acuminata,
Hamamelis virginiana, Myrica cerifera,
Polygonum bistorta, Quercus spp., Rubus villosus,

Vinca major

BITTER

‘The bitters are of major importance to the digestive sys-
tem and to the rest of the body. Quite simply, these are
remedies that have a bitter taste. Their broad effects on
tone and function offer an opportunity to treat the body
as a whole. These herbs can range from mildly bitter
remedies, like Achillea millefolium and Taraxacum officinale
leaf, to profoundly distasteful herbs, such as Ruta grave-
olens and Artemisia absinthium. It is, of course, the taste of
rue and wormwood that has made their names symbolic
in our language of extreme distress or woe. I don’t think
they taste quite that bad!

Bitters have a major role in holistic herbal treatment
and especially preventive herbal medicine. Because of
their wide effect on the body’s physiology, they help enor-
mously in treating the body as an integrated whole.

How Bitters Work

The constituents that contribute bitterness to an herb are
usually described as bitter principles. A range of molecular
structures share the bitter property; that is, they trigger a
response in the bitter receptors of the back of the tongue.
Examples of such constituents are monoterpenes, iri-
doids, sesquiterpenes, and alkaloids.

‘Taste is a phenomenon of chemoreception, limited to
the damp area inside the mouth. About 9,000 chemore-
ceptors, called taste buds, occur on the tongue in groups
of 50 to 100 specialized cells. They are found largely on
the perimeter of the tongue in adults, but cover the whole

----- PAGE 507 -----
tongue in children. Different regions of the tongue respond
to the four basic tastes: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter.

Molecules that evoke taste are described as sapid,
which comes from the Latin sapere, meaning “to taste.”
Sapidity depends upon solubility in water, which allows a
molecule to penetrate the taste buds. The sensation of
taste occurs when part of a molecule fits into a taste re-
ceptor in a specific taste bud. Less is known about the
receptors for bitterness than for those for the other tastes.

Absinthin, found in plants of the genus Artemisia,
such as A. absinthium, is so bitter it can be tasted at dilu-
tions of 1:30,000! Great diversity and complexity is found
among these bitter principles, but it appears that they all
work in a similar way by triggering a sensory response in
the mouth. The sensation of bitterness, and no doubt
many other taste subtleties, is directed by the nerves to
the central nervous system. From there, a message goes to
the gut, giving rise to the release of the digestive hormone
gastrin. This in turn leads to a whole range of effects, all
of value to the digestive process and general bodily
health. Among the many actions of bitters, they:

Stimulate appetite. This helps in convalescence and condi-
tions associated with reduced appetite, including de-
pression. Of course, stimulation of appetite is not al-
ways desirable!

Stimulate release of digestive juices from the pancreas, duode-
num, and liver. This will help in a wide range of prob-
lems related to inefficient or allergy-impaired digestion.

Aid the liver in detoxification work and increase the flow of
bile. The possibilities here are great, as many health
problems have their roots in an overworked liver. This
is the apparent value of bitters taken after meals, such
as coffee and liqueurs like Chartreuse.

Help regulate secretion of pancreatic hormones that regulate
blood sugar, insulin, and glucagon. This means that di-
abetics should use caution when taking bitters for any
reason, as they may upset blood sugar balance.
However, in the hands of a skilled practitioner, these
remedies may have some relevance in the treatment of
late-onset diabetes.

Help the gut wall repair damage by stimulating self-repair
mechanisms.

Other effects occur in a much broader way, support-
ing the healthy activity of the heart and circulation in
general. Herbalists have long known about the subtle psy-
chological effects of bitter remedies. They may even have
antidepressant actions in some cases, especially after viral

Hersat ACTIONS 2 499

infection. Bitters such as Artemisia vulgaris and Gentiana
lutea have a generally tonic effect on consciousness.

The therapeutic ramifications of all of these actions
are many. The tonic effects of these remedies go beyond
specific digestive hormone activity. As digestion and as-
similation of food is basic to health, bitter stimulation can
often fundamentally ameliorate an underlying pathology
that has nothing to do with the digestive process. In gen-
eral, these benefits will not occur unless the bitter herb is
tasted, so they should nox be given in a capsule intended
to help the patient avoid the unpleasant taste.

In practice, there appears to be much overlap between
bitter and tonic remedies. The mechanism of action of
bitters is not always clear, but it is evident that these
herbs act to promote health and increase self-healing and
resistance—yet another wonderful gift of nature.

Contraindications for Bitters

These mirror the genera] indications for bitters. For ex-
ample, in situations for which exocrine gland stimulation
is inappropriate, bitters would also be contraindicated, as
they may cause inappropriate peristaltic stimulation. Do
not use bitters in the following conditions:

Pregnancy

Kidney stones

Gallbladder disease
Dysmenorrhea
Gastroesophageal reflux clisease
Hiatus hernia -

Gastritis

Peptic ulcer

Herbal Bitters

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Berberis vulgaris (bearberry)
Centaurium erythraea (centaury)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Menyanthes irifoliata (bogbean)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Tanacetum vulgare (tansy)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)

----- PAGE 508 -----
500 =- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SysTEM

Body System Affinities

Bitters range from mild herbs, including Matricaria recu-
tita and Achillea millefolium, to quite intense remedies,
such as Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea, and Ruta
graveolens. Not only do we have a choice of intensity of
bitterness, but we also can select bitters based on associ-
ated actions and system affinities. By nature of their bit-
terness, these herbs are widely applicable in a tonic sense.
A fair sprinkling of bitter herbs can still be found in offi-
cial pharmacopoeias.

Cardiovascular. Anything that helps digestion and eases
flatulence will take pressure off the heart. Relaxing bit-
ters, such as Humulus lupulus and Valeriana officinalis,
may have a specific role in this system.

Respiratory. Certain bitters have expectorant actions,
and in the case of Marrubium vulgare, we have an ex-
cellent remedy for all chest problems combined with
the value of a potent bitter.

Digestive. A wide range of plants can be named here.
The following list takes into account the liver and pan-
creas as organs of the digestive system: Artemisia vul-
garis, A. absinthium, Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium ery-
thraea, Chelidonium majus, Chelone glabra, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Humulus lupulus, Ruta grave-
olens, and Peumus boldus.

Urinary. The bitter action is not directly relevant to this
system.

Reproductive. Many bitter herbs have the ability to ini-
tiate delayed menstrual periods. They may, however,
cause some cramping, and must not be used during
pregnancy. The following are the most relevant:
Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Ruta
graveolens, and, to a lesser degree because of its mild-
ness, Achillea millefolium.

Musculoskeletal. Anything that helps with digestion and
assimilation of food will benefit the musculoskeletal
system. A bitter that is particularly valuable for this sys-
tem is Menyanthes trifoliata.

Nervous. By stimulating healthy body processes, bitters
support the nervous system in cases of depression and
general nervous debility. Any bitter can work, but
those most often used ate Gentiana lutea, Artemisia vul-
garis, and A. absinthium.

Skin. Bitters herbs may benefit the skin through an
alterative-like cleansing action.

Table 25.13. Bitter Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Centaurium erythraea,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Marrubium vulgare

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita,
Menyanthes trifoliata

Antimicrobial ‘Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Hydrastis canadensis,

Matricaria recutita

Antispasmodic Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita,

Ruta graveolens
Astringent Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis
Carminative Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, Centaurium
erythraea, Matricaria recutita, Tanacetum vulgare
Cholagogue Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Tanacetum vulgare
Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum
Diuretic Achillea millefolium
Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Ruta
graveolens, Tanacetum vulgare
Expectorant Marrubium vulgare
Hepatic Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Berberis vulgaris,
Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis
canadensis, Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum vulgare
Laxative Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Eupatorium
perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis
Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea,
Matricaria recutita
Tonic Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
A. vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Hydrastis
canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens
Vulnerary Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis,

Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita

----- PAGE 509 -----
Table 25.14. Relative Strengths of Bitter Herbs

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum, A. vulgaris,
Matricaria recutita, Taraxacum officinale

Strong Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium
erythraea, Eupatorium perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

CARDIAC REMEDIES

This is a general category for herbal remedies that have
some kind of action on the heart. Some of the remedies in
this group are powerful cardioactive agents, such as
Digitalis (foxglove), while others are gentler and safer car-
diotonics, like Crataegus (hawthorn) and Tilia (linden). As
discussed in chapter 9, care must be taken with these
terms, as they have different meanings in orthodox and
herbal medicine.

Cardiotonic

These are plants that have an observably beneficial action
on the heart and blood vessels but do not contain cardiac
glycosides. How they work is either completely obscure
or an area of pharmacological debate, but flavones appear
to be major contributors to their beneficial actions.
Examples of traditionally used cardiotonic herbs in
Western herbalism are Crataegus, Tilia platyphyllos, Allium
sativum, and Leonurus cardiaca. The cliterpene forskolin is
the positively inotropic constituent of Coleus forskoblii, a
cardiotonic herb from India that is gaining increased at-
tention. For more details on the pharmacology of some of
these plants, please refer to the discussion in chapter 9.

Cardioactive

These plants owe their effects on the heart to their content
of cardiac glycosides, and thus have both the benefits and the
drawbacks of these constituents. The main danger is that
glycosides will accumulate in the body, as their elimination
rates tend to be low. Clinically trained phytotherapists pre-
fer to use Convallaria majalis over Digitalis, as there is less
chance that such problems will develop. However, without
appropriate training as to the safe use of Convallaria, phy-
totherapists should avoid the use of this herb too.

Primary Cardiovascular Remedies
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 501

Allium sativum (garlic)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Cytisus scoparius (broom)

Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Urginea maritima (squill)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

As cardiac remedies are very specific to the cardiovascular
system, they are not usually directly relevant to condi-
tions involving other body systems, although they do con-
tribute greatly to general health when indicated.
However, many cardiac tonics have other actions, and
these are the properties that we will explore here.

Cardiovascular. Primarily cardioactive remedies include
Convallaria majalis and Digitalis lanata. Other plants
that mimic this cardioactive effect but do not contain
cardiac glycosides include Cytisus scoparius, Urginea
maritima, Scropbularia nodosa, and Lycopus spp. All must
be used with caution in order to avoid toxicity prob-
lems in heart patients. The primary cardiotonic herbs
to consider will be Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos, and
possibly Coleus forskoblii. Remedies that specifically
benefit blood vessels include Crataegus spp., Tilia platy-
phyllos, Aesculus hippocastanum, Allium sativum, Ginkgo
biloba, and Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. Any problem with the activity of the heart
might have an effect on lung congestion due to a
backup of blood waiting to be pumped. Thus, cardiac
tonics may benefit the lungs by helping the heart.
Allium sativum is renowned for its antimicrobial and
generally beneficial action on the lungs.

Digestive. A number of cardiac remedies support the
function of this system, including Rosmarinus offici-
nalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Leonurus cardiaca, Achillea mille-
folium, Angelica archangelica, Allium sativum, and
Melissa officinalis.

Urinary. Most of the herbs that have a direct impact on
the heart’s action also increase the amount of blood
that passes through the kidneys, and so act as diuretics.

----- PAGE 510 -----
502 = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Achillea millefolium is used in urinary problems, as is
Cytisus scoparius. Any cardioactive properties must be
taken into account, especially with Gytisus scoparius.

Reproductive. The cardiac tonics are not directly in-
volved in the function of this system. Achillea mille-
folium may play a role as a gentle emmenagogue.

Musculoskeletal. Herbs that act as circulatory stimu-
lants are important here because they increase periph-
eral blood flow. This can reduce swelling and ease stiff-
ness. Such herbs include Capsicum annuum, Zingiber
officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum, Brassica spp., and
Armoracia rusticana.

Nervous. Leonurus cardiaca, Tilia platypbyllos, Melissa offic-
inalis, and Rosmarinus officinalis all have a relaxing effect
on the nervous system. As we shall see, many nervines
help the circulatory system by relaxing the mind and
body as a whole.

Skin. The only directly applicable remedy here is
Scropbularia nodosa. However, when a skin problem is
related to varicosity. in veins, cardiac tonics are very
important. Herbs that can help include Crataegus spp.,
Aesculus hippocastanum, Achillea millefolium, and Tilia

platypbyllos.

CARMINATIVE

Carminatives ease discomfort caused by flatulence. The
term carminative describes an expected outcome, rather
than a specific mechanism of action. However, to a large
extent, the mode of action of carminative herbs appears to
be related to the complex of volatile oils they contain.
These terpene oils have local anti-inflammatory and anti-
spasmodic effects upon the mucous lining and the muscle
coats of the alimentary canal. An example is farnesene, a
constituent of many complex plant volatile oils with
carminative actions, such as Matricaria recutita. Volatile
oils and their activities are discussed in more depth in
chapter 6.

Origanum compactum is a species of oregano used as
an antispasmodic remedy for the gastrointestinal tract, es-
pecially in Morocco.‘ Belgian researchers have found that
the infusion of flowers and leaves inhibits contractions
triggered in guinea pig ileum by acetylcholine, histamine,
serotonin, nicotine, 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazine io-
dide, and even electrical stimulation. The main active
components in the essential oil were identified as thymol
and carvacrol. This example may help explain the well-
known actions of all of the carminative remedies.

Herbal Carminatives

Allium sativum (garlic)

Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Cinnamomum spp. (cinnamon)
Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gaultberia procumbens (wintergreen)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Thymus spp. (thyme)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

By the nature of their actions, carminatives work on the
gut, and thus may have more generalized effects on other
body systems. As carminative actions are due largely to
volatile oil content, some of these oils have quite specific
effects on other parts of the body.

Cardiovascular. Carminatives may ease apparent cardiac
symptoms by eliminating the pressure of flatulence
and digestive pain. While most of the carminatives
have no action on this system at all, volatile oils of the
following herbs do have cardiovascular effects: Allium
sativum, Capsicum annuum, Leonurus cardiaca, Matri-
caria recutita, Melissa officinalis, and Zingiber officinale.

Respiratory. Many carminative herbs support this system
through antispasmodic, antimicrobial, or anticatarrhal
actions. These include Avium sativum, Angelica
archangelica, Brassica spp., Eucalyptus spp., Mentha
piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, and Thymus
vulgaris.

Digestive. As carminatives act specifically on the diges-
tive tract, the list of herbs appropriate for this system
is extremely long. All of the herbs listed as carmina-
tives may be relevant.

----- PAGE 511 -----
Urinary. Because of their volatile oil content, some
carminatives act as diuretics and rnay even irritate the
kidneys. Prime examples are Juniperus communis and
Eucalyptus spp.

Reproductive. Again, some volatile oils have effects
upon the female reproductive system. A problematic
example is Mentha pulegium, a plant whose oil can
prove damaging to the reproductive system. However,
as will be discussed in chapter 26, the whole herb does
not pose the same dangers as the essential oil.

Musculoskeletal. Apium graveolens is a carminative that is
also a specific anti-inflammatory for this system. Others
include Angelica archangelica and Gaultheria procumbens.

Nervous, Many volatile oil-containing remedies will
soothe the nervous system. These include Valeriana of-
ficinalis, Matricaria recutita, Humulus lupulus, and
Melissa officinalis.

Skin. Carminatives may be relevant to the skin in that
they support digestion and metabolism in general. In
some cases, a carminative herb will be good for the
skin because the plant or its oils also have other ef-
fects. An example is the antimicrobial Thymus vulgaris,
which can be useful when applied topically for its anti-
septic properties.

Table 25.15. Carminative Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum

Allium sativum, Eucalyptus spp., Matricaria recutita,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Anticatarrhal

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Artemisia
absinthium, Gaultheria procumbens, Matricaria
recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita

Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium,

Eucalyptus spp., Humulus lupulus, Juniperus
communis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antimicrobial

Allium sativum, Anethum graveolens,

Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium,

Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis,

Antispasmodic

Thymus vulgaris, Valeriana officinalis

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 503

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Astringent Carum carvi, Cinnamomum spp., Gaultheria
procumbens, Humulus luputus, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris
Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita
Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Angelica archangelica, Melissa
officinalis, Mentha piperita, M. pulegium,
Zingiber officinale
Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Brassica spp. Gaultheria procumbens,
Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum
Emmenagogue Carum carvi, Gaultheria procumbens, Leonurus
cardiaca, Mentha pulegium, Petroselinum crispum
Expectorant Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp.,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Thymus vulgaris
Galactagogue Anethum graveolens, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp.,

Gaultheria procumbens

Allium sativum, Melissa officinalis,
Valeriana officinalis

Hypotensive

Nervine Apium graveolens, Humutus lupulus, Leonurus
cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Mentha piperita, Valeriana officinalis

Rubefacient Allium sativum, Brassica spp., Eucalyptus spp.,
Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum

Tonic Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium,
Matricaria recutita

Vulnerary Matricaria recutita

CHOLAGOGUE

Cholagogues have the specific effect of stimulating the
flow of bile from the liver. Orthodox pharmacology dif-
ferentiates between direct cholagogues, which actually in-
crease the amount of secreted bile, and indirect chola-
gogues, which simply increase the amount of bile being
released by the gallbladder. This distinction is not very
important in herbal practice, especially as we are not
going to use purified ox bile (a cholagogue used in sup-
plements that was official in the eleventh U.S. National
Formulary).

----- PAGE 512 -----
504 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

By nature of the action, cholagogues are quite spe-
cific in that they act on the liver. In general, however,
they function as body tonics. The secretion of bile is of
great help to the whole digestive and assimilative pro-
cess. After all, “we are what we digest” just much as “we
are what we eat.” The role of bile is partially to facilitate
fat digestion, but also to act as a natural laxative and thus
cleanse the system. Without exploring the vast complex-
ities of liver function, it is worth noting that bile forma-
tion and flow are fundamental to it all. Thus, the value of
these herbs goes far beyond the simple release of bile.
They help ensure a strong and healthy liver and so en-
liven the whole being. Most bitters and hepatics are also
cholagogues.

Indications for Cholagogues

Long-term maintenance of dyskinesia of the bile duct, to stim-
ulate normal contractions to deliver bile to the small
intestine.

Disorders caused by insufficient or congested bile, such as in-
tractable biliary constipation, jaundice, and mild
hepatitis.

Symptoms of indigestion, to aid in the digestion of fat-soluble
substances.

To support the liver’s detoxification work.

Contraindications for Cholagogues

Painful gallstones. Increased contractile activity could fur-
ther constrict the bile duct, leading to incredibly in-
tense pain.

Acute bilious colic.

Obstructive jaundice, for the same reasons as painful gall-
stones.

Acute cholecystitis, unless gallstones have been ruled out.
Cholecystitis can be caused by infection, but the cause
must be determined before a cholagogue is used.

Acute viral hepatitis.

Extremely toxic liver disorders. A cholagogue may be too
stressful for a liver that is severely damaged; but this
must be weighed against the potential benefit to be
derived.

Herbal Cholagogues

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Chelidonium magus (celandine)
Chelone glabra (balmony)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cynara scolymus (artichoke)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Eupatorium perfolatum (boneset)
Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Fuglans cinerea (butternut)
Leptandra virginica (black root)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Taraxacum officinale root (dandelion)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. The value of cholagogues in this system
comes through general improvement of body function.
However, only when a cholagogue has additional diuretic
actions can any direct claims be made for this system.

Respiratory. Certain cholagogues are also antimicrobial
and anticatarrhal and in this way benefit the whole
system. Some are also mucous membrane tonics, in-
cluding Expatorium ‘perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, and Baptisia
uinctoria.

Digestive. Here we have a long list that includes Cynara
scolymus, Melissa officinalis, Berberis vulgaris, Leptandra
virginica, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus, Juglans cinerea,
Taraxacum officinale root, Chionanthus virginicus bark,
Gentiana lutea, Chelidonium majus, Euonymus atropur-
pureus, and Dioscorea villosa.

Urinary. Cholagogues confer only indirect benefits to
this system. However, Taraxacum officinale root is par-
tially diuretic in action, although weaker than the
leaves. Expatorium perfoliatum can be an effective di-
uretic in feverish conditions.

Reproductive. Cholagogue remedies such as Hydrastis
canadensis and Berberis vulgaris have a marked action on
the inuscles of the uterus, as they are strong bitters.
Rosmarinus officinalis has a tonic and emmenagogue ac-
tion, while most bitters stimulate the womb or men-
strual activity.

Musculoskeletal. Cholagogues help in this system by
generally supporting the body’s metabolic activity,

Nervous. Because they help with assimilation, chola-
gogues have an enlivening “side effect” in the nervous
system. These remedies may actively ease debility and
depression. Rosmarinus officinalis is a nervine.

----- PAGE 513 -----
Skin. Taken internally, cholagogues often aid in cleansing
the body and so may help clear skin problems.
Examples are Iris versicolor, Taraxacum officinale,
Fumaria officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Mabonia aqui-
folium, and Rumex crispus. Hydrastis canadensis may also
be of use externally.

Table 25.16. Cholagogues and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Baptisia tinctoria, Chionanthus virginicus,

Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus

Anticatarrhal Baptisia tinctoria, Eupatorium perfoliatum,

Hydrastis canadensis

Anti-inflammatory Berberis vulgaris, Dioscoree villosa,
Fumaria officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis,
Iris versicolor, Rosmarinus officinalis

Antimicrobial Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris,
Chelidonium majus, Hydrastis canadensis,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Salvia officinalis

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Leptandra virginica,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Astringent Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Bitter Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelone glabra,
Cynara scolymus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Juglans cinerea,
Mahonia aquifolium, Peumus boldus,

Taraxacum officinale root

Diaphoretic Berberis vulgaris, Dioscorea villosa,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Rosmarinus officinalis

Diuretic Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,

Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus

Emmenagogue Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelone glabra,
Cynara scolymus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis cenadensis, Juglans cinerea,
Mahonia aquifolium, Peumus boldus,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Taraxacum officinale root

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 505

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Laxative All cholagogues to some degree, especially
Juglans cinerea, Taraxacum officinale root,
Rumex crispus

Nervine Rosmarinus officinalis

Tonic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus,
Rumex crispus, Taraxacum officinale root

Vulnerary Hydrastis canadensis

Table 25.17. Relative Strengths of Cholagogues

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus, Gynara scolymus,
Dioscorea villosa, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Leptandra virginica, Peumus boldus,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Rumex crispus, Salvia officinalis,
Taraxacum officinale root

Strong Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelidonium majus,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,

Juglans cinerea, Mahonia aquifolium

DEMULCENT

Demulcent herbs are rich in mucilage and can soothe and
protect irritated or inflamed internal tissue. When used
topically on the skin, demulcents are called emollients.

As with many other herbal actions, pharmacology
does not provide an adequate explanation for how demul-
cents work. They are rich in carbohydrate mucilage made
up of complex polysaccharide molecules. Thus, they be-
come slimy and gummy when they come in contact with
water. This physical property has a clear and direct action
on the lining of the intestines, where it soothes and re-
duces irritation by direct contact.

However, some demulcents have similar actions far
from the site of their absorption into the body—for ex-
ample, the urinary tract or lungs. Clearly, these remedies
do not work through a direct action, because the mucilage
breaks down into its constituent parts as it is absorbed,
and thus cannot soothe by direct contact with the target
tissue. However, there is no doubt that some herbs do act

----- PAGE 514 -----
506 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

as demulcents to the urinary tract or lungs—it is simply
unclear how they do so.

In general, all mucilage-containing demulcents have
the following general properties:

Reduce irritation down the whole length of the bowel.

Lessen the sensitivity of the digestive system to gastric acids
and to digestive bitters.

Help prevent diarrhea.

Reduce digestive muscle spasms that cause colic.

Ease coughing by soothing bronchial tension.

Relax painful. spasms in the bladder and urinary system, and
sometimes even in the uterus.

Herbal Demulcents

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Avena sativa (oat) :
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Elymus repens (couch grass)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)
Linum usitatissimum (flax)
Malva sylvestris (mallow)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Tilia platypbyllos and Aesculus hippocas-
tanum have a soothing action on blood vessels.

Respiratory. Many plants soothe inflammation in the
chest, throat and sinuses, including Inula helenium,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago far-
fara, Solidago virgaurea, Althaea officinalis root,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, and Pulmonaria officinalis.

Digestive. Numerous plants can be used here, especially
Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica,
Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Linum usitatissi-
mum, and Ulmus rubra. These remedies can be applied
freely whenever a soothing demulcent is indicated.

Urinary. Excellent kidney and bladder demulcents are
Elymus repens and Petroselinum crispum.

Reproductive. There are many tonic and anti-inflamma-
tory remedies for this system, but no real demulcents.

Musculoskeletal. Vulneraries and anti-inflammatories
have a more direct value in this system than demul-
cents as such. The undeniable value of Sywephytum of-
ficinale here is related to its vulnerary properties.

Nervous. Demulcents are of direct value in this system
only when applied to the skin, as in shingles. However,
skin tonics may be thought of as “surrogate” demul-
cents, especially Avena sativa.

Skin. The emollient herbs are all demulcent, including
Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis, Plantago major,
Stellaria media, Ulmus rubra, and Linum usitatissimum.

Table 25.18. Demulcent Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory Althaea officinalis, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Malva sylvestris, Symphytum officinale,
Tussilago farfara, Ulmus rubra, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Elymus repens
Antispasmodic Tussilago farfara, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Malva sylvestris,
Verbascum thapsus
Astringent Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris,
Symphytum officinale, Tussilago farfara, Ulmus rubra
Diaphoretic Verbascum thapsus
Diuretic Althaea officinalis, Elymus repens, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays
Expectorant Chondtus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Malva sylvestris, Symphytum officinale,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus
Laxative Glycyrrhiza glabra, Linum usitatissimum
Tonic Glycyrrhiza glabra, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays
Vulnerary Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Symphytum
officinale, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus
DIURETIC

Diuretics are agents that help the body rid itself of excess
fluids by increasing the kidneys’ rate of urine production.
The accumulation of excess fluids in tissues, known as
edema, is symptomatic of a wide range of heart, kidney,
liver, and other disorders. The underlying causes of such
disorders must be addressed, but diuretics may help when
used in conjunction with other herbs.

----- PAGE 515 -----
Many diuretics alter the excretion of electrolytes by
the kidneys. An electrolyte is a chemical that, when dis-
solved in a suitable solvent, forms a medium that conducts
an electric current. Electrolytes, including sodium and
potassium salts, are involved in many body processes,
such as the regulation of blood pressure, nerve impulse
transmission, and muscle contraction.

Strictly speaking, a diuretic is a remedy that increases
the secretion and elimination of urine from the body. In
the ancient traditions of herbal medicine, the term diuretic
tends to be applied more broadly to herbs that have some
sort of beneficial action on the urinary system. Thus, the
term may be used zo describe not only true diuretics, but
also urinary demulcents and anti-inflammatory remedies.
Needless to say, this can lead to confusion when selecting
remedies for a particular individual. In general, diuretics
have a vital role to play in any holistic treatment of illness,
as they help the body eliminate waste and support the
whole process of inner cleansing. Many diaphoretic herbs
act as diuretics when taken cold.

There are number of ways to categorize diuretics, but
first, an important distinction must be made between two

broad groups of plant diuretics:

¢ Plants that act as diuretics by increasing kidney blood
flow

© Plants that reduce water reabsorption in the nephrons
of the kidney

The first group of herbs includes not only diuretics
like Cytisus scoparius, but also all cardioactive and circula-
tory stimulant herbs. These increase blood flow to the
kidney through effects on the heart or other parts of the
body. Because more blood passes through the kidney,
more urine is produced. Caffeine-containing herbs, such
as tea and coffee, also have this effect.

The second group may work via many different
means, but as is often the case with medicinal plants, a
dearth of research in this area limits the value of taking an
overtly pharmacological perspective.

Types of Diuretics

As mentioned, in addition to herbs that have a straight-
forward diuretic impact, other so-called diuretics benefit
the urinary system through very different actions. We can
reduce inflammation through the use of urinary demul-
cents and anti-inflammatories and treat infection directly
with antimicrobial diuretics. Similarly, if urinary tract prob-
lems are associated with stone formation, plants known as
antilithics can help. These are discussed in chapter 17.

HERBAL ACTIONS -e 507

True Herbal Diuretics

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Agathosma betulina (buchu)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Collinsonia canadensis (stoneroot)
Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)
Cucurbita pepo (pumpkin)

Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)
Daucus carota (wild carrot)
Equisetum arvense (horsetail)
Eryngium maritimum (sea holly)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)
Galium aparine (cleavers)

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Parietaria judaica (pellitory of the wall)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Zea mays (corn silk)

Table 25.19. Types of Diuretics

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Eupatorium purpureum, Galium aparine, Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Agathosma betulina, Juniperus communis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Equisetum arvense,
Cytisus scoparius, Cola acuminata

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Collinsonia canadensis,

Zea mays

----- PAGE 516 -----
508 «<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. As already noted, cardioactive remedies
have a diuretic effect because they increase blood flow
through the kidneys. All diuretics that help remove
water from the body can be of benefit for the cardiovas-
cular system, including Convallaria majalis, OCytisus sco-
parius, Taraxacum officinale, and Achillea millefolium. Care
should be taken to ensure that the right herb is used for
the specific condition. For example, Cytisus scoparius
should not be used in people with high blood pressure.

Respiratory. If chest congestion is related to heart prob-
lems, most of the diuretics will be of value. Remedies
with an affinity for this system include Eupatorium per-
foliatum, Galium aparine, Sambucus nigra, Achillea mille-
sfolium, and Eucalyptus spp.

Digestive. Some laxative herbs also act as diuretics. Here
we can mention Agrimonia eupatoria, Iris versicolor,
Peumus boldus, Apium graveolens, Taraxacum officinale,
and Petroselinum crispum.

Urinary. All of the remedies listed here are applicable to
this system.

Reproductive. Antiseptic diuretics often have similar ef-
fects in the reproductive system. Of special relevance is
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. Serenoa repens is a mild diuretic.

Musculoskeletal. Because of their cleansing actions,
many diuretics help with problems of muscles and
bones. Eupatorium perfoliatum, Apium graveolens,
Achillea millefolium, and Eupatorium purpureum are a
few examples.

Nervous. Lycopus spp. is the only true diuretic that bene-
fits the nervous system directly. However, if there is
much tension, a relaxing nervine may allow the passage
of more urine.

Skin. All of the diuretics can potentially help the skin
through inner cleansing actions. Especially important
are Galum aparine, Elymus repens, and Taraxacum officinale.

Table 25.20. Diuretics and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor
Anticatarrhal Eupatorium perfoliatum, Sambucus nigra

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Eupatorium purpureum,
Galium aparine, Iris versicolor

Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Elymus repens,

Antimicrobial

Juniperus communis, Serenoa repens

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cola acuminata,
Cytisus scoparius, Galium aparine, Lycopus spp.

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius, Lycopus spp.

Demulcent Alchemilla vulgaris, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Collinsonia canadensis, Elymus repens,
Parietaria diffusa, Zea mays

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Petroselinum crispum

Expectorant Petroselinum crispum, Sambucus nigra

Hepatic Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,
Tilia platyphyllos

Laxative Iris versicolor, Eupatorium perfoliatum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Cola acuminata, Lycopus spp.,
Tilia platyphylios

Tonic Agathosma betulina, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Galium aparine,
Taraxacum officinale \eaf

Table 25.21. Relative Strengths of Herbal Diuretics

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Arctium lappa, Crataegus spp., Iris versicolor,
Peumus boldus, Serenoa repens, Tilia platyphyllos

Moderate — Agrimonia eupatoria, Cola acuminata,

Collinsonia canadensis, Convallaria majalis,

Cucurbita pepo, Lycopus spp., Sambucus nigra, Zea mays
Strong Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina, Alchemilla

vulgaris , Apium graveolens, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Cytisus scoparius, Daucus carota, Elymus repens, Galium
aparine, Eryngium maritimum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E, purpureum, Juniperus communis, Parietaria diffusa,
Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

----- PAGE 517 -----
EMMENAGOGUE

The term emmenagogue is widely used to describe plants
that are used to treat conditions of the female reproduc-
tive system. It has come to imply, almost by default, any
remedy with some kind of effect on the function or tissue
of the reproductive system. Strictly speaking, however,
emmenagogues are remedies that stimulate menstrual
flow and activity.

Herbal Emmenagogues

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A, absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)

T. vulgare (tansy)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tropaeolum majus (nasturtium)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Today, most herbals use the term emmenagogue
broadly, to denote remedies that tone and normalize the

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 509

function of the female reproductive system. Such a loose
definition has little meaning, as it obscures the specific
benefits these herbs offer. Emmenagogues provide a
whole range of distinct actions with either direct or indi-
rect benefits for the reproductive system. To clarify this
situation, the next section groups some of the more ton-
ing “emmenagogues” in terms of their main impact on
the menstrual process. Remember that all bitters have an
emmenagogue effect in the strict sense of the word.

Uterine Tonics

These are plants that have a toning, strengthening, nour-
ishing effect upon both the tissue and the function of the
female reproductive system. We do not have a good un-
derstanding of how and why they work, but this should
not belittle their remarkable therapeutic value.
Determining differential indications for these herbs is
one of the most confused areas in modern herbalism.

Uterine Tonic Herbs

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Mitchella repens (partridge berry)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry lee f)

Herbs That Stimulate Menstruation

Of the many plants that s:imulate the menstrual process,
some also have a tonic effect. Simply triggering menstru-
ation implies nothing more than that. Of the emmena-
gogues listed here, some work through bitter stimulation
and others through localized irritation. These herbs will
also nourish the system to some degree.

True Emmenagogues
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Hormonal Normalizers

Many claims might be made about plants that affect hor-
monal balance, but we will limit our discussion here to
those that have an observable influence. Little endocrino-
logical research has been undertaken on these herbs, so it
is impossible to be specific about their actions. Thus, the
herbalist usually talks in terms of hormonal modulator or
hormonal normalizers.

The most important of these herbs in the European
tradition is Vitex agnus-castus. It is appropriate to describe
this plant as a normalizer, as it seems to bring the body
back to normal function no matter which female sex

----- PAGE 518 -----
510 @ TREATWENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

hormone is deficient or in excess. The uterine tonics and
bitters may have some similar effects because of their
general toning abilities, but none is as dependable as Vitex
agnus-castus.

Hormonal Normalizing Herbs
Bitter tonics

Uterine tonics

Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine Astringents

A number of herbs can reduce blood loss from the uterus,
whether related to menorrhagia (excessive menstrual
bleeding), metrorrhagia (bleeding between periods), or
organic disease, such as fibroids. How these herbs work is
an important but unanswered question. No astringent
tannin can reach uterine tissue from the gut. It is possible
that some, but not all, of these herbs have some kind of
hormonal effect. Of the many valuable remedies listed as
astringents earlier in this chapter, the most toning for the
uterus is Achillea millefolium.

Important Uterine Astringents
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Alchemilla arvense (\ady’s mantle)
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)

Vinca major (periwinkle)

Uterine Demulcents

Just as with uterine astringents, it is unclear how uterine
demulcents reach the uterus, There is no way that mu-
copolysaccharides can find their way to the uterus from
the digestive system; nonetheless, there is no question
that these remedies soothe inflamed tissue in the uterus.
The most important of these herbs is Caulophyllum
thalictroides.

Nervines and Antispasmodics

There are a number of valuable remedies that impact the
complex autonomic innervation of the reproductive sys-
tem. The appropriate nervine or antispasmodic remedy
can go a long way toward correcting functional tone.

Uterine Nervines and Antispasmodic Herbs
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Y. prunifolium (black haw)

Table 25.22. Emmenagogues and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Tanacetum parthenium, Thymus vulgaris

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Matricaria recutita, Rosmarinus
officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Tanacetum vulgare,

Thymus vulgaris, Tropaeolum majus

Antispasmodic Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana

officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,

Hydrastis canadensis, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos,
Viburnum opulus

Astringent

Carminative Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium,

A. vulgaris, Gentiana lutea, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Petroselinum crispum, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Tanacetum
parthenium, T, vulgare, Thymus vulgaris,
Tropaeolum majus, Valeriana officinalis,

Zingiber officinale

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,

A, absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita,

Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum parthenium,

T. vulgare, Tropaeolum majus

Bitter

Demulcent Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Hyssopus officinalis,
Mentha piperita, M. pulegium, Tilia platyphylios,
Zingiber officinale

Diaphoretic

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Mitchella repens,

Petroselinum crispum, Tilia platyphyllos

----- PAGE 519 -----
SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Expectorant Hyssopus officinalis, Marrubium vulgare, Petroselinum

crispum, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Calendula officinalis, Gentiana {utea,
Ruta graveolens, Verbena officinalis

Hepatic

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Lavandula spp.,

Valeriana officinalis

Laxative Hydrastis canadensis

Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus
officinalis, Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus
officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis,

Verbena officinalis

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,

A. vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tropaeolum majus,
Verbena officinalis, Vitex agnus-castus

Tonic

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis,

Vulnerary

Matricaria recutita

Table 25.23. Relative Strengths of True
Emmenagogues

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Petroselinum crispum, Pulsatilla
vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Thymus
vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus,
V, prunifolium

Moderate Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Mentha pulegium, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Senecio aureus, Vitex agnus-castus

Strong Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Gentiana

lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Marsdenia
condurango, Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum parthenium,
T. vulgare, Tropaeolum majus, Zingiber officinale

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 511

EXPECTORANT

These are herbs that facilitate or accelerate the removal of
bronchial secretions from the bronchi and trachea.
However, this is another carelessly used term that in prac-
tice often simply means a remedy that “does something”
for the respiratory system. To further elucidate the activ-
ity and the therapeutic indications of the various remedies
known as expectorants, we may categorize them as follows.

Table 25.24. Expectorant Subcategories

TYPE OF EXPECTORANT = PROPOSED MECHANISM OF ACTION
Stimulating Alkaloid-containing
Saponin-containing
Volatile oil-containing
Relaxing Demiulcent

Anti-inflammatory (often also antimicrobial)
Antispasmodic (alkaloid-containing)
Volatile oil-containing

Stimulating Expectorants

Stimulating expectorants act in different ways to produce
the same effect. It is not always clear how specific reme-
dies work, but current thinking suggests the following
processes:

Irvitate the bronchioles to stimulate expulsion of any mate-
rial present.

Liquefy viscid sputum so that it can be cleared by coughing.
The sputum is moved upward by the fine hairs of the
ciliated epithelium lining the bronchiole tubes.
Reducing viscosity facilitates this transport.

Most stimulating expectorants contain alkaloids,
saponins, or volatile oils. However, not all chemicals in
these groups or plants that contain these constituents
have this activity.

Alkaloid-Based Action

The major component of Cephaelis ipecacuanha is an alka-
loid called emetine. It is emetic, induces nausea, and in-
creases gastric secretions. ‘This stimulation has a reflex ef-
fect on the bronchial mucosa via the gastrobronchial
vagus reflex, again leading to an increase in secretion.
Some other expectorants also work in this way and so can
cause vomiting in high doses.

Spices promote expectoration by stimulating secre-
tory activicy in the salivary and gastric glands. Examples
include anise, caraway, and. fenugreek. This action results

----- PAGE 520 -----
512 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

in increased production and reduced viscosity of
bronchial secretions, which facilitate expectoration. This
helps explain why spicy foods are beneficial in easing
chronic bronchitis, while bland foods tend to encourage
the condition.

Saponin-Based Action

The root of Primula veris, an expectorant commonly used
in Europe, contains 5% to 10% saponin glycosides and
0.25% volatile oil. The plant is indicated for all forms of
chronic bronchitis, especially simple coughs that persist
for a long time with inadequate expectoration. The action
of the saponins here is not clearly understood. It may be
based on reflex mechanisms induced through gastric stim-
ulation, which is mediated via the vagus nerve. This effect
is much less marked than that of the alkaloid-containing
Cephaelis ipecacuanha.

Stimulating Expectorant Herbs
Bellis perennis (English daisy)
Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Hieracium pilosella (mouse ear)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Myroxylon balsamum var. balsamum (Tolu balsam)
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Populus candicans (balm of Gilead)
Primula veris (cowslip)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Urginea maritima (squill)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

Relaxing Expectorants

The relaxing expectorants seem also to act by reflex, but
here the reflex action works to soothe bronchial spasm
and loosen mucus secretions. These remedies help to pro-
duce a thinner mucus that is easier to expel, allowing the
more viscous mucus to move and thus be eliminated. This
makes relaxing expectorants useful for dry, irritating
coughs. This action is similar in some respects to that of
demulcents, and both actions owe much to their content
of mucilage and, occasionally, volatile oils.

Relaxing Expectorant Herbs
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Grindelia camporum (gumweed)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Pulmonaria officinalis (lungwort)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Amphoteric Remedies

A third group of expectorants is especially valuable in any
broader treatment for the lungs. These may work either
as relaxing or as stimulating expectorants. They have
been called amphoteric remedies, after a phenomenon in
chemistry in which the same molecule can act as either an
acid or an alkali.

Amphoteric Expectorant Herbs
Allium sativum (garlic)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. A congestive problem in the lungs can
eventually have a deleterious effect upon the heart, so,
by stretching a point somewhat, we could say that res-
piratory remedies may help the heart.

Respiratory. Obviously, all of the expectorants are rele-
vant here.

Digestive. All of the stimulating expectorants may act as
emetics if taken in too high a dose (for example,
Cephaelis ipecacuanha), while the relaxing expectorants
may be either demulcents (Symphytum officinale) or
carmunatives (Pimpinella anisum).

Urinary. Some expectorants also soothe the urinary
system—for example, cornsilk (Zea mays). Expectorants
aid the excretion of waste through the lungs, and may
also have some effect upon other eliminative functions.

Reproductive. Expectorant herbs that are also antispas-
modic will help with menstrual cramps (for example,
Lobelia inflata), although the alkaloid-rich or saponin-
containing emetics should be avoided during pregnancy.
Hydrastis canadensis, which can work as an expectorant
while toning the mucous membranes of the respiratory
system, may also be of value in the reproductive tract.

----- PAGE 521 -----
Musculoskeletal. Stimulating expectorants can be used
in liniments that increase circulation to the muscles
and thus ease aches and pains. Examples include
Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae and Thymus vulgaris.
Lobelia inflata is a good muscle relaxant.

Nervous. Primula veris, Verbena officinalis, Thymus vul-
garis, and Hyssopus officinalis can all have relaxing
nervine actions.

Skin. By supporting respiration and thus the whole of a
person’s health, these remedies may help the skin in a
broad holistic way. Expectorants that may be used in-
ternally or externally for the skin include Populus can-
dicans, Symphytum officinale, Sambucus nigra, Inula hele-
nium, Allium sativum, and Hydrastis canadensis.

Table 25.25. Expectorant Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Sanguinaria canadensis, Thuja occidentalis,
Verbascum thapsus

Anticatarrhal Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus

crispus, Hyssopus officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Thymus
vulgaris, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory Althaea officinalis, Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria
islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus officinalis, Sambucus
nigra, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp., Inula
helenium, Ligusticum porteri, Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum, Origanum majorana, Pimpinella
anisum, Plantago major, Populus candicans, Ruta

&raveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic Allium sativum, Angelica archangelica, Asclepias
tuberosa, Carum carvi, Daucus carota, Drosera
rotundifolia, Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Grindelia camporum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia
inflata, Lycopus spp., Marrubium vulgare, Nepeta
cataria, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Prunus serotina, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella
foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Astringent Glechoma hederacea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Inula helenium, Plantago major, Prunus serotina,
Symphytum officinale, Thuja occidentalis,

Thymus vulgaris, Verbascum thapsus

HERBAL ACTIONS e513

SECONDARY HERBS.

ACTION

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare,
Prunus serotina

Carminative Asclepias tuberosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Pimpinella anisum, Thymus vulgaris

Demulcent Cetraria islendica, Chondrus crispus,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Symphytum officinale root,
Tussilago ferfara, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Asclepias tuberosa,
Hyssopus officinalis, inula helenium, Polygala senega,
Sambucus nigra flower, Symplocarpus foetidus

Diuretic Glechoma hederacea, Solidago virgaurea,
Tussilago farfara

Emmenagogue Hyssopus officinalis, Marrubium vulgare,
Petroselinum crispum, Thymus vulgaris,
Trigonella foenum-graecum

Nervine Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Verbena officinalis

Vulnerary Marrubium vulgare, Populus candicans,
Symphytum officinale root, Verbascum thapsus

HEPATIC

Hepatics are herbal remedies that aid the work of the liver
in a range of ways. Traditionally, they were considered to
tone, strengthen, and, in some cases, increase the flow of
bile. In a broad holistic approach to health, hepatics are of
great importance because of the fundamental role the
liver plays in the working of the body.

There is no single or simple answer as to how hepat-
ics work. Bitters and cholagogues all act as hepatics, but
so do a whole array of other remedies that do not have
those specific actions. Hepatics are the epitome of the
herbal remedy that does wonders for the body without a
clearly defined mechanism of action. The lack of bio-
chemical knowledge about the way in which they work
does not keep them from working.

For a more detailed look at the phytotherapeutic ap-
proach to liver disease, please see chapter 13. The funda-
mentally important antihepatotoxic action of some hep-
atic remedies, including Silybum marianum, is discussed in
chapter 9.

----- PAGE 522 -----
514 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Hepatic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Aloe vera (aloe)

Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Centaurium erythraea (centaury)
Chelone glabra (balmony)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Curcuma longa (turmeric)

Cynara scolymus (artichoke)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Fumaria officinalis (fumitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (e\ecampane)

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Leptandra virginica (black root)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Rhamnus cathartica (buckthorn)

R. ‘purshiana (cascara sagrada)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. The value of hepatics in this system
comes through general improvement of body func-
tioning. Only when a hepatic also has diuretic action
can any direct claims be made.

Respiratory. Certain hepatics are also antimicrobial and
anticatarrhal, which will benefit the respiratory system.
Also, mucous membrane tonics help here, including
herbs such as Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis
canadensis, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, and
Baptisia tinctoria.

Digestive. Here we have a long list, which includes Agri-
monia eupatoria, Chelone glabra, Berberis vulgaris,

Leptandra virginica, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus, Fuglans
cinerea, Taraxacum officinale root, Chionanthus virginicus
bark, Gentiana lutea, Euonymus atropurpureus, and
Dioscorea villosa.

Urinary. Hepatics confer only an indirect benefit to this
system. However, Taraxacum officinale root is partially
diuretic in action, although weaker than the leaves.
Eupatorium ‘perfoliatum can be a marked diuretic in
feverish conditions.

Reproductive. Hepatic plants such as Hydrastis canaden-
sis and Berberis vulgaris have a pronounced action on
the muscles of the uterus. Rosmarinus officinalis is a
tonic and emmenagogue, and most bitters will also
stimulate the uterus or menstrual activity.

Musculoskeletal. Hepatics help in this system by gener-
ally supporting the body’s metabolic activity.

Nervous, Because hepatics support metabolism in gen-
eral, they also have an enlivening “side effect” in the
nervous system. They are appropriate for use in the
treatment of debility and depression.

Skin. Taken internally, hepatic remedies often aid in
cleansing and so clear skin problems. Examples are Iris
versicolor, Taraxacum officinale, Fumaria officinalis,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mahonia aquifolium, and Rumex
crispus. Hydrastis canadensis may also be helpful in cer-
tain conditions when used externally.

Table 25.26. Hepatic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Agrimonia eupatoria, Chionanthus virginicus,
Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus,
Taraxacum officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum

Anticatarrhal Baptisia tinctoria, Hydrastis canadensis,

Mahonia aquifolium

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Artemisia absinthium,
Dioscorea villosa, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes trifoliata

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Baptisia tinctoria,
Berberis vulgaris, Inula helenium

anispasmodic —_-Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare,
Hyssopus officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Leptandra virginica, Melissa officinalis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Berberis vulgaris, Galium aparine, Hydrastis canadensis

----- PAGE 523 -----
HERBAL ACTIONS @ 515

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Artemisia absinthium, Berberis
vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes trifoliata

Carminative Apium graveolens, Armoracia rusticana, Artemisia
absinthium, Foeniculum vulgare, Hyssopus officinalis,

Melissa officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis
vulgaris, Hyssopus officinalis, Inula helenium,
Leptandra virginica, Melissa officinalis,

Zanthoxylum americanum

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Armoracia
rusticana, Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus
atropurpureus, Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine,
Iris versicolor, Menyanthes trifoliata, Peumus boldus

Diuretic

Emmenagogue Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris,

Leonurus cardiaca

Expectorant Foeniculum vulgare. Hysscpus officinalis,

Inula helenium

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium

Laxative Armoracia rusticana, Chelone glabra,
Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus,

Taraxacum officinale

Nervine Apium graveolens, Hyssopus officinalis,

Leonurus cardiaca, Melissa officinalis

Tonic Agrimonia eupatoria, Chelone glabra,
Chionanthus virginicus, Galium aparine,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mahonia aquifolium,
Taraxacum officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum

Vulnerary Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis

Table 25.27. Relative Strengths of Hepatics
STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens, Baptisia tinctoria,
Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare, Fumaria officinalis,
Galium aparine, Hyssopus officinalis, Inula helenium,
Leonurus cardiaca, Melissa officinalis,
Zanthoxylum americanum

STRENGTH HERBS

Moderate — Agrimonia eupatoria, Armoracia rusticana.

Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris,

Centaurium erythraea, Chelone glabra,

Chionanthus virginicus, Cynara scolymus,

Eyonymus atropurpureus, Gentiana lutea,

Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Leptandra virginica,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Peumus boldus, Rhamnus purshiana, Rumex crispus,

Silybum marianum, Taraxacum officinale

HYPNOTIC

Hypnotics are nervine remedies that help induce a deep
and healing state of sleep. These herbs vary from mild,
volatile oil-containing herbs that ease psychological ten-
sions and have gentle muscle relaxant properties to pow-
erful remedies containing strong alkaloids that work di-
rectly on the central nervous system to induce sleep.

Hypnotic herbs should always be used within the
context of a holistic approach to sleep problems—that is,
one that embraces relaxation techniques, nutrition, and
lifestyle in general. For a detailed approach to the thera-
peutic use of these herbs, please see chapter 16.

Hypnotic Herbs

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys officinalis (wood betony)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Body System Affinities
It is safe to say that all of the hypnotic remedies can help
the whole body in that sleep is so vital to overall health.

Cardiovascular. Here we can mention Leonurus cardiaca,
Tilia platypbyllos, and Melissa officinalis, Notice that
these herbs are all in the “milder” category. Viscum
album can help but must be used with care.

----- PAGE 524 -----
516 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

Respiratory. All of the hypnotics can help as antispas-
modics in conditions such as asthma if used at the right
dosage. Lactuca virosa eases irritable coughs.

Digestive. The relaxing nervines and carminatives are
important, of which we can mention Matricaria recu-
tita, Verbena officinalis, Melissa officinalis, Humulus
lupulus, and Valeriana officinalis. Antispasmodics will
help with intestinal colic—for example, Humulus
lupulus, Piscidia erythrina, Passiflora incarnata, and
Valeriana officinalis,

Urinary. Hypnotics are important here when used as
muscle relaxants.

Reproductive. The same comment made for the urinary
system holds true here.

Musculoskeletal. All hypnotics help reduce muscle ten-
sion and even the pain associated with problems in this
system. They may be used internally or as lotions.
Especially important are Piscidia erythrina and
Valeriana officinalis.

Nervous. All these remedies work on the nervous system.

Skin. The value of hypnotics here is to ensure that the
body has a good, recuperative rest each night.

Table 25.28. Relative Strengths of Hypnotic Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Artemisia vulgaris, Stachys officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Tilia platyphyllos

Moderate Eschscholzia californica, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Verbena officinalis

Strong Humulus luputlus, Lactuca virosa, Piscidia erythrina,
Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

HYPOTENSIVE

Hypotensive remedies reduce elevated blood pressure,
tending to normalize both systolic and diastolic pressure.
A number of different mechanisms may be involved; these
are explored in more depth in chapter 9. Please see chap-
ter 14 for details on the therapeutic uses of these herbs.

Hypotensive Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Allium cepa (onion)

A, sativum (garlic)

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Fagopyrum esculentum (buckwheat)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Urtica dioica (nettles)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Vi prunifolium (black haw)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

Table 25.29, Hypotensive Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus

Alterative Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica
Anticatarrhal Allium cepa, A, sativum,

Trigonella foenum-graecum

Anti-inflammatory Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Valeriana officinalis
Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum, A. cepa

Antispasmodic Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Astringent Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Urtica dioica, Valeriana officinalis,
Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium
Bitter Achillea millefolium
Cardiotonic Allium sativum, Crataegus spp., Leonurus cardiaca
Carminative Petroselinum crispum, Valeriana officinalis
Cholagogue Allium sativum, Verbena officinalis
Demulcent Trigonella foenum-graecum
Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Allium cepa, A. sativum,
Tilia platyphyllos, Verbena officinalis
Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Petroselinum crispum,

Tilia platyphyllos, Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 525 -----
SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Emmenagogue Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Petroselinum crispum

Expectorant Allium cepa, A. sativum, Petroselinum crispum,
Trigonella foenum-graecura

Galactagogue Trigonella foenum-graecurn

Hepatic Allium cepa, Verbena officinalis

Laxative Verbena officinalis

Nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Passiflora incarnata, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Tilia platyphylios, Valeriana officinalis,
Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium,
Viscum album

Vulnerary Allium cepa, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Table 25.30. Relative Strengths of Hypotensive
Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Allium cepa, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica, Verbena officinalis

Moderate — Achillea millefolium, Eleutherocaccus senticosus,
Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Petroselinum crispum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum prunifolium

Allium sativum, Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Viburnum opulus,
Viscum album

Strong

NERVINE

A nervine is a plant remedy with sorne kind of beneficial
effect upon the nervous system. This makes the word
nervine another catchall term, and in order to study them
properly, it is helpful to sort them into a number of cate-
gories. It may be superfluous to point this out, but any
successful herbal treatment of nervous system problems
must involve the whole body, heart and mind, not simply
the signs of agitation and worry. Of course, herbs can re-
duce agitation greatly, but the whole system must be
strengthened in the face of the storm!

HERBAL ACTIONS .@ 517

Table 25.31. Primary Nervine Categories

NERVINE ACTION — HERBAL EXAMPLES

Tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Relaxant Piper metiysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis

Stimulant Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis, Cola acuminata,
Paullinia cupana

Hypnotic Humulus lupulus, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Piper metitysticum, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus
Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum
Adaptogen Panax spp., Eleutherococcus senticosus
Analgesic Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sempervirens

Nervine Tonics

Perhaps the most important contribution herbs can make
to the whole field of neurology lies in their ability to
strengthen and nourish the nervous system. In cases of
shock, stress, and nervous debility, nervine tonics
strengthen and restore tissues directly. They can con-
tribute to the healing of damaged nervous tissue, whether
due to a pathological prccess or to physical trauma. This
invaluable group of tonic remedies is best exemplified by
Avena sativa, which has no additional relaxing or stimu-
lating effects. Nervine tonics that also have a relaxing effect
are Scutellaria lateriflora and Hypericum perforatum.

Nervine Relaxants
This group of nervines are most important in times of
stress and confusion, as they can alleviate many of the ac-
companying symptoms. “They should always be used in a
broad holistic way, not simply to tranquilize. Too much
tranquilizing, even with herbal medication, can in time
deplete and weigh heavily on the whole nervous system.

As illustrated in table 25.32, many nervine relaxants
can be selected on the basis of their secondary actions to
treat additional problems. This is one of the great bene-
fits of using herbal remedies to help with stress and anxi-
ety problems. The physical symptoms that can so often
accompany the dis-ease of anxiety may be treated with
herbs that work on the anxiety itself.

In addition to herbs that work directly on the nervous

----- PAGE 526 -----
518 :<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

system, antispasmodic herbs—those that affect the pe-
ripheral nerves and the muscle tissue—may have an indi-
rect relaxing action on the whole system. Putting the
physical body at ease promotes ease in the psyche. Many
nervine relaxants have this antispasmodic action. Also see
Hypnotics, which at lower dosages also have a relaxing
action on the mind and body.

Nervine Relaxants

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Ballota nigra (black horehound)
Borago officinalis (borage)
Chamaemelum nobile (Roman chamomile)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humuilus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Piper methysticum (kava)

Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Stachys betonica (wood betony)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Turnera diffusa (damiana)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

VY. prunifolium (black haw)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Melissa officinalis, Tila platyphyllos, and
Leonurus cardiaca are all mild sedatives that are helpful
to the cardiovascular system. However, most remedies
that lessen overactivity of the nervous system will also
aid the heart and have a positive impact on circulatory
conditions, such as high blood pressure.

Respiratory. Most sedatives will help with problems ac-
companied by chest tension, such as asthma, but
specifically, we can mention Cimicifuga racemosa,
Lactuca virosa, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, and

Lycopus spp.

Digestive. All of the antispasmodic remedies may be of
value here in easing spasms or colic. However, seda-
tives that actively aid digestion include mild herbs such
as Melissa officinalis, Matricaria recutita, and Lavandula
spp., plus the stronger herbs Humulus lupulus and
Valeriana officinalis.

Urinary. Serenva repens is a gentle sedative that also works
on the urinary system.

Reproductive. Cimicifuga racemosa, Caulophyllum thalic-
troides, Viburnum spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Serenoa repens,
and Lactuca virosa all have an affinity for this system.

Musculoskeletal. All sedative remedies will help ease
muscular tension and pain in this complex system.
Remedies to bear in mind are Cimicifuga racemosa, Fucus
vesiculosus, Viburnum prunifolium, and Dioscorea villosa.

Nervous. All of the nervine remedies are relevant here.

Skin. All nervines may help the skin in an indirect way,
but the following have a good reputation for skin con-
ditions: Trifolium pratense, Hypericum perforatum, and
Cimicifuga racemosa.

Table 25.32. Nervine Relaxants and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Trifolium pratense
Analgesic Hypericum perforatum, Lactuca virosa, Matricaria

recutita, Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina

Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Matricaria recutita,

Tilia platyphyllos

Anti-inflammatory Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos

Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita,
Phytolacca americana

Antimicrobial

Cimicifuga racemosa, Humulus lupulus,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp. Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Passiflora incarnata, Phytolacca americana,

Piper methysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Antispasmodic

Ballota nigra, Humulus lupulus,
Hypericum perforatum, Tilia platyphyltos,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Astringent

----- PAGE 527 -----
SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Humutus luputus,
Matricaria recutita

Carminative Artemisia vulgaris, Humulus luputus,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Valeriana officinalis

Diaphoretic Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos, Verbena officinalis

Diuretic Tilia platyphyllos

Ermmenagogue Artemisia vulgaris, Ballota nigra,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca

Expectorant Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia inflata,
Marrubium vulgare

Hepatic Verbena officinalis

Hypnotic Eschscholzia californica, Humutus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Matricaria recutita,
Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Hypotensive Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Vulnerary Borago officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,

Matricaria recutita

Table 25.33. Relative Strengths of Relaxing Nervines

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Ballota nigra, Betonica officinalis, Borago officinalis,
Chamaemelum nobile, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Trifolium pratense, Melissa officinalis,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Moderate Artemisia vulgaris, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Hypericum perforatum, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata,
Matricaria recutita, Pulsatilla vulgaris,

Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos, Turnera diffusa,

Verbena officinalis

Strong Eschscholzia californica, Humulus luputlus, Lactuca virosa,

Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erytirina, Valeriana officinalis

HErsal ACTIONS @ 519

Nervine Stimulants
Direct stimulation of nervous tissue is not often needed in
our hyperactive modern lives. In most cases, it is more ap-
propriate to stimulate the body’s innate vitality with the
help of nervine or bitter tonics. These herbs work to aug-
ment bodily harmony, and thus have a much deeper and
longer-lasting effect than nervine stimulants. In the 19th
century, herbalists placed much more emphasis upon stim-
ulant herbs. It is, perhaps, a sign of our times that the
world now supplies us with more than enough stimulation.

When direct nervire stimulation is indicated, the
best herb to use is Cola acuminata, although Paullinia cu-
pana, Coffea arabica, ex paraguayensis, and Camellia sinen-
sis may also be used. One problem with these commonly
used stimulants is their side effects; they are themselves
implicated in the development of certain minor psycho-
logical problems, such as anxiety and tension.

Some of the volatile oil-rich herbs are also valuable
stimulants. Some of the best and most common are
Rosmarinus officinalis and Mentha piperita.

STIMULANT

The very word stimulant has different connotations, de-
pending upon one’s assumptions. In herbal medicine, the
term is used to describe an action that quickens and en-
livens the physiological activity of the body. All physio-
logical process can be stimulated to some degree.
Consider stimulant laxatives, circulatory stimulants, and
bitters, which often act as stimulants.

On the other hand, stimulating physiological pro-
cesses is not necessarily appropriate. The individual’s
needs and his or her unicue state of health must be taken
into account. Debility may be related not only to too lit-
tle activity in the body, but also to too much. This is a
problem of differential diagnosis that calls for skill,
knowledge, and a certain amount of intuition.

Tn some cases, specific stimulant effects are related to
the presence of alkaloids in the plant. Caffeine, perhaps
the best known and most widely used of these alkaloids, is
present in such herbs as Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis,
Ilex paraguayensis, and Cola acuminata, as well as in choco-
late (Theobroma cacao). The coca tree (Erythroxylum coca),
the source of the drug cocaine, contains other stimulating
alkaloids. Whenever stimulants of this nature are used,

they should be combined with nervine tonics or relaxants
to balance out any overst)mulation.

----- PAGE 528 -----
520 «<<. TREATMEN?E APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Herbal Stimulants

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)

Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Chelidonium majus (celandine)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Fucus vesiculosus (kelp)

Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Juniperus communis (juniper)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)

Panax spp. (ginseng)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Rhamnus cathartica (buckthorn)

R. pursbiana (cascara sagrada)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Senna alexandrina (senna)
Tanacetum vulgare (tansy)

Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

Digestive. As already discussed, bitters may be consid-
ered stimulants. Note Chelone glabra, Myrica cerifera,
Carum carvi, Elettaria cardamomum, Cinnamomum spp.,
Taraxacum officinale root, Alpina galanga, Allium
sativum, Gentiana lutea, Armoracia rusticana, Brassica
spp., Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta grave-
olens, and Artemisia absinthium.

Urinary. Relevant stimulants with diuretic properties in-
clude Eucalyptus spp., Eupatorium purpureum, Juniperus
communis, and Achillea millefolium.

Reproductive. Stimulants for this system usually act as
emmenagogues, and so should not be used during
pregnancy. Important examples include Mentha
pulegium, Ruta graveolens, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Artemisia abrotanum, Tanacetum vulgare, and Artemisia
absinthium.

Musculoskeletal. The vital role of both Zingiber officinale
and Capsicum annuum are reinforced here as stimulants
of peripheral circulation. We can add Brassica spp. and
Armoracia rusticana, In general, rubefacient remedies
are stimulants.

Nervous. Nervous system stimulants include Cola acumi-
nata, Paullinia cupana, Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis,
and Hex paraguayensis.

Skin. Rubefacients are stimulants, promoting local circu-
lation to the area of skin where they are applied.
Vulneraries stimulate healing, but are not stimulants as
such,

Table 25.34. Stimulant Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION

Anti-inflammatory Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,
Artemisia abrotanum, Capsicum annuum,
Inula helenium, Mentha piperita,

Cardiovascular. Stimulant actions must be used with
care in people with cardiovascular problems, but if ap-
plied with knowledge, appropriate stimulation can
often aid and support an ailing heart. Myrica cerifera,
Panax spp., Zanthoxylum americanum, Rosmarinus offic-
inalis, Ruta graveolens, Artemisia absinthium, and
Achillea millefolium may be helpful here.

Respiratory. The diaphoretic chest remedies can be con-
sidered stimulant in action. Specifics include Angelica
archangelica, Eucalyptus spp., Allium sativum, Armoracia
rusticana, Brassica spp., Glechoma hederacea, Mentha
piperita, Salvia officinalis, Marrubium vulgare, and
Achillea millefolium.

Rosmarinus officinalis, Sanguinaria canadensis

Astringent Marrubium vulgare, Carum carvi

Bitter Artemisia abrotanum, A, absinthium, A. vulgaris,

Gentiana lutea, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

Carminative Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium,

Capsicum annuum, Carum carvi,

Flettaria cardamomum, Foeniculum vulgare,
Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Tanacetum vulgare, Zingiber officinale

----- PAGE 529 -----
SECONDARY
ACTION

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic
Hypotensive

Vulnerary

HERBS

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Angelica archangelica, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E. purpureum, Mentha piperita, Polygala senega,
Tanacetum vulgare, Zingiber officinale

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica,
Brassica spp., Daucus carota, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
£ purpureum

Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Carum carvi, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica,
Carum carvi, Foeniculum vulgare, Inula helenium,
Marrubium vulgare, Polygala senega,

Sanguinaria canadensis

Artemisia abrotanum, A. vulgaris, Gentiana lutea
Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Achillea millefolium, Capsicum annuum

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 521

References

1. Wagner H, Norr H, Winterhoff H. Plant adaptogens.
Phytomedicine 1994, 1:63-76.

2. Carson CF, Riley TV. The antimicrobial activity of tea

tree oil. The Medical Journal of Australia 1994, 160:236.

3. Howell AB, Vorsa N, Der Maderosian A, Foo LY.
Inhibition of the adherence of P-fimbriated Esherichia
coli to uroepithelial-vell surfaces by proanthocyanidin ex-
tracts from cranberries. The New England Journal of
Medicine 1998; 339:10854 [letter].

----- PAGE 530 -----
n understanding of the herbal materia medica is
A basis of herbal medicine. As pointed out in

chapter 1, the list of herbs that could potentially
be included here is many thousands long! However, the
materia medica that follows reflects my experience and
training, and so emphasizes the European and North
American herbs most often encountered in Western
herbal medicine. The fact that most of the herbs used in
ayurveda or traditional Chinese medicine are not in-
cluded is in no way a rejection of their value, but simply a
reflection of my focus on Western herbalism.

MATERIA MEDICA OUTLINE

Each materia medica entry follows the same general for-
mat, explained here.

Latin binomial
Common name
Taxonomic family

Other Names or Related Species: Many herbs have nu-
merous regional names. Alternative common names com-
monly used in North American herbalism are included
under this heading. If there are nomenclature issues, such
as recent binomial changes, they are also noted here.
Other species commonly used medicinally are listed as
Related Species.

Part Used: This entry lists the part or parts of the herb
used medicinally.

Constituents: The lists provided here represent a com-
pilation of relevant phytochemical research on the par-
ticular remedy. This is not a comprehensive constituent
listing, as each plant contains many hundreds of thou-
sands of distinct chemicals, both organic and inorganic.
Thus, I have listed only the most relevant chemicals, and
did not include the ubiquitous primary constituents found
in all plants.

The information provided here reflects current phar-
macological thinking about which chemicals are the pri-

26

SN

MATERIA MEDICA

522

mary contributors to the plant’s actions. It is important to
remember, however, that fashions and insights come in
and out of favor in science as much as in any other area of
human endeavor. For more details on a constituent or
group of constituents, please refer to the chapters on phy-
tochemistry in part 1 of this book.

A wealth of scientific information about the whole
range of different plant components is available.
However, this does not necessarily tell us much about the
value and benefits of the herb when used in healing. The
activity of the whole plant is always more than the sum of
its parts, just as a human being is more than the sum of his
or her biochemistry. Knowing the chemistry of sesquiter-
penes is not the same as knowing chamomile.

Actions: This section provides an overview of the phiysi-
ological actions demonstrated by the herb, which are ex-
plored in depth in chapter 25 (Herbal Actions). Knowing
an herb’s actions is the key to using it holistically and ef-
fectively. The approach followed here is based on the
practice of medical herbalism developed during the 19th
and 20th centuries in North America and the United
Kingdom.

Indications: Here I provide a brief overview of the clini-
cal indications for the herb. As there is so much variabil-
ity among both people and plants (the gift of diversity!),
the indications provided in herbals are rarely all encom-
passing. Thus, the indications listed reflect my particular
training and experience.

In addition, I have included quotations from some
invaluable but difficult-to-find texts from the 19th-century
Eclectic and Physiomedicalist traditions. These sources
of therapeutic information are based upon years of clini-
cal experience. Much of the technical language and writ-
ing style reflects the time periods in which these physi-
cians were practicing, so it probably sounds strange to
modern ears. I have not changed their words or gram-
mar, although I could not resist occasional comments.
Their Victorian terminology and spelling have been left
untouched.

----- PAGE 531 -----
Texts cited include:

Priest and Priest: {rom Priest and Priest, Herbal
Medications. London: L. N. Fowler and Co. Ltd.,
1982.

Ellingwood: from Ellingwood, Finley. American Materia
Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy. 1898.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

Felter: from Felter, Harvey W. The Eclectic Materia
Medica, Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 1922.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

King’s: from Felter, Harvey W, and Lloyd, John Uri.
King’s American Dispensatory vols. 1 and 2, 1892.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

Safety Considerations: If there are any concerns about

the safe use of the herb, the issues are discussed under this
heading, including side effects, contraindications, and

drug interactions.

Preparations and Dosage: This section lists dosage
ranges for various herbal preparations, taken from a
number of sources. I have provided details of concentra-
tion (weight/volume ratios, expressed as “w/v”) and alco-
hol percentages for tinctures and liquid extracts. For ex-
ample, a tincture containing 1 part herb to 5 parts solvent
in a menstruum composed of 45% alcohol is denoted as
“1:5 in 45%.” More information on. these calculations
may be found in chapter 11.

References: Whenever possible, at the end of the entry I have
provided a reference to a more technical monograph that cov-

ers pharmacology, clinical trials, and regulatory status for that

herb.

Key to Dosage Sources

Unless otherwise indicated in the text, the sources
listed here are the pharmacopoeias from which |
took the official medicine-making standards cited
in Preparations and Dosage. They are abbreviated in
the text according to the following key:

BPC: British Pharmacopoeia Codex, 4th ed. (1898)
BHP: British Herbal Pharmacopoeia (1990)

BHC: British Herbal Compendium (1992)

Comm. E: German Commission E Monographs
(1998)

USP: United States Pharmacopoeia, 9th ed. (1916)

son ans

Materia MEDICA 523

Achillea millefolium L.
Yarrow
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: 0.3% to 1.4% volatile oil (a- and B-pinene,
borneol, bornyl acetate, camphor, a-caryophyllene, 1,8 ci-
neole); sesquiterpene lactones (achillicin, achillin, achilli-
folin, millifin, millifolide); 3% to 4% tannins; flavonoids
(apigenin, luteolin, isorhamnetin, rutin); alkaloids (be-
tonicine, stachydrine, achiceine, moschatine, trigonelline,
and others); phenolic acids (caffeic, salicylic); coumarins!

Actions: Diaphoretic, hypotensive, astringent, anti-
inflammatory, antispasmedic, diuretic, antimicrobial, bit-
ter, hepatic

Indications: Achillea is an important diaphoretic herb
and is a standard remedy for helping the body deal with
fever. It stimulates digestion and tones blood vessels. As a
urinary tract antiseptic, it is indicated in infections such
as cystitis, for which it is most effective if used fresh.
Achillea is considered a specific in thrombotic conditions
associated with hypertension, and is thought to lower
blood pressure through dilation of peripheral vessels.
Researchers believe that its anti-inflammatory and anti-
spasmodic actions are related to its content of flavonoids.”
Used externally, Achillea aids in wound healing, Ant-
microbial activity against a range of bacteria has been re-
ported for water and ether extracts of the plant.’

Priest and Priest described Achillea as a

. . mild, slow and stimulating diaphoretic: indicated for
the first stage of acute febrile reactions. For atonic and re-
laxed tissues where there is free discharge or passive hem-
orrhage of bright red blood. Cold preparations stimulate
the appetite and tone the digestive organs.

Priest and Priest gave the following specific indica-
tions: acute stage of colds, influenza, and respiratory catar-
rhs; chronic diarrhea and dysentery; epistaxis, intestinal
hemorrhage, and bleeding hemorrhoids; uterine hemor-
rhage, profuse protracted menstruation, and leukorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Hypersensitivity to yarrow and
other plants in the Asteraceae family has been reported.
Some authorities caution against using Achillea during
pregnancy.* No restrictions during lactation are suggested.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
(1:5 in 25%) three times a day. To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk hot
three times a day. When the patient is feverish, it should
be drunk hourly.

----- PAGE 532 -----
524 =. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Dosage recommended by the BHC is 2 to 4 g of
dried herb, 2 to 4 ml of tincture, 1 to 2 ml fluid extract
(1:1 in 25%), or 3 to 5 ml pressed juice from fresh herb
three times a day. Commission E recommends 4.5 g dried
herb, 3 teaspoons pressed juice, or 3 g fresh flowers daily.

Yarrow, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

Aesculus hippocastanum L.
Horse Chestnut
Hippocastanaceae

Other Names: Do not confuse this plant with its North
American relative Aescalus glabra, commonly known as
buckeye.

Parts Used: Seeds, pericarp

Constituents: 3% to 6% triterpene saponin glycosides, a
complex mixture known as aescin (escin); 0.2% to 0.3%
flavonoids; coumarin derivatives (esculetin and esculin);
condensed tannins; sterols (including stigmasterol, o-
spinasterol, and f-sitosterol); fatty acids (such as
linolenic, palmitic, and stearic acids)’

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory, venous tonic

Indications: Aesculus has unique actions on the vessels of
the circulatory system. The herb appears to increase the
elasticity and tone of the veins while decreasing vein per-
meability. It may be used internally in the treatment of
phlebitis, vein inflammation, varicosities, and hemor-
rhoids. Externally, it may be used as a lotion for the same
conditions, as well as for leg ulcers.

Aescin has antiexudative actions and a tightening ef-
fect on the vasculature. Aesculus extract may reduce the
activity of lysosomal enzymes, which is increased in
chronic pathological conditions of the veins and inhibits
the breakdown of mucopolysaccharides in the capillary
walls. A reduction in the activity of these enzymes has the
effect of decreasing vascular permeability, leading to im-
provement in symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency
(including sensations of tiredness, heaviness, pruritus,
pain, and swelling in the legs).®

A study of 22 patients with venous insufficiency
showed that 1,200 mg of Aesculus extract (standardized to
50 mg aescin per capsule) lowered capillary filtration by
22% in 3 hours.’ A review of 13 clinical studies reported
that horse chestnut was superior to placebo in improving
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency. The pooled
results showed that horse chestnut reduced edema, pain,
fatigue, tenseness, and in some cases, pruritus in the legs.

Safety Considerations: The seed contains coumarin
derivatives that may theoretically interact with anticoag-
ulant medications.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried fruit
and leave to infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or used as a lotion.

Commercial extracts are usually standardized to 16%
triterpene glycosides, calculated as aescin. Recommended
doses are the equivalent of 50 mg aescin two or three
times a day (300 to 900 mg of a 16% extract). Com-
mission FE. recommends a total daily dose of 100 mg
aescin, corresponding to 250 to 312.5 mg extract in
delayed-release form.

Horsechestnut seed, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Agathosma betulina Berg.) Bartl. and Wendl.
Buchu
Rutaceae

Other Names: Until recently, the binomial was
Barosma betulina.

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Volatile oils, 1.0% to 3.5% (limonene,
menthone, pulegone); flavonoids (rutin, diosmetin, dios-
min, hesperidin, quercetin, and derivatives); miscella-
neous; vitamins of the B group, tannins, mucilage®
Actions: Diuretic, urinary antiseptic

Indications: Buchu is useful in infections of the genitouri-
nary system, such as cystitis, urethritis, and prostatitis. Its
healing and soothing properties indicate its use in combi-
nation with other relevant remedies for many conditions
affecting this system. It is especially useful when dysuria is
part of the symptom picture. However, the volatile oil con-
tent may make it too irritating for people with a history of
kidney disease.

Safety Considerations: Remedies high in antimicrobial
oils may be contraindicated in people with kidney disease.
The volatile oil of buchu contains diosmin and pulegone,
which can cause irritation. However, there have been no
reports of adverse effects.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoonfuls of dried
herb and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 1 to 2 g in infusion of dried
herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.5 to 1.5 ml fluid
extract (1:1 in 90%) three times daily.

Buchu, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

----- PAGE 533 -----
Agrimonia eupatoria L.
Agrimony
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Tannins (3% to 21%); coumarins;
flavonoids (glycosides of luteolin, apigenin, and
quercetin); polysaccharides; glycosidal bitters!

Actions: Astringent, tonic, bitter, diuretic, vulnerary, an-
tispasmodic, diaphoretic, carminative, hepatic, chola-
gogue

Indications: The combination of astringency and bitter
tonic properties in agrimony makes this herb a valuable
remedy. This is especially true when astringent activity is
needed in the digestive system, as agrimony also con-
tributes a tonic action through bitter stimulation of di-
gestive and liver secretions. Agrimony may be used to
treat indigestion, and is a specific for childhood diarrhea.
It is the herb of choice in early-stage appendicitis, and its
properties give it a role in the treatment of mucous coli-
tis. It may also be helpful for urinary incontinence and
cystitis. Agrimony has a long tradition of use as a spring
tonic. As a gargle, it helps relieve sore throats and laryn-
gitis. Used in ointment form, it aids in the healing of
wounds and bruises.

In one study, agrimony infusion was used successfully
to treat cutaneous porphyria in a group of 20 patients.1!
Results demonstrated improvements in skin eruptions as
well as decreases in serum iron concentrations and uri-
nary porphyrins. Activity against Staphylococcus aureus and
a-hemolytic streptococci has been reported.”

In another study, a preparation containing agrimony
was used to treat 35 patients suffering from chronic gas-
troduodenitis.3 After 25 days of therapy, 75% of the pa-
tients were free of pain, 95% from dyspeptic symptoms,
and 76% from palpitation pains. Gastroscopy indicated
that previous erosions and hemorrhagic mucous changes
had healed. No side effects or signs of toxicity were
observed.

Priest and Priest described agrimony as a

... gently stimulating toni¢ with a gastro-intestinal em-
phasis that is suitable for both infants and the elderly. It
influences mucous membranes, promotes assimilation
and restores debilitated conditions.

They provided the following specific indications:
genera} alimentary weakness, hepatic weakness, enuresis,
diarrhea, leukorrhea, rheumatism, and arthritis.

MATERIA MEDICA @ 525

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E states that the average daily dosage is 3
g of herb or equivalent preparation. Ellingwood recom-
mended { dram of pulverized leaves as decoction or 0.25 to
1 dram of tincture. Dosage given in the United States
Dispensatory (23rd ed.) is 1 dram (4 g) or more.

Agrimony, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Alchemilla vulgaris L.
Lady’s Mantle
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering shoots

Constituents: Tannins, consisting mainly of glycosides
of ellagic acid; salicylic acid (trace amounts)'*

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, emme-
nagogue, vulnerary

Indications: This and other species of A/chemilla have been
widely used in folk medicine throughout Europe. Lady’s
mantle helps reduce pains associated with menstrual peri-
ods and ameliorates excessive bleeding. It also has a role to
play in easing symptoms of menopause. As an emmena-
gogue, it can stimulate proper menstrual flow. However, in
the often apparently paradoxical way of herbal remedies,
the herb is also a useful uterine astringent, helpful in both
menorrhagia and metrorrhagia. Its astringency makes it
beneficial in the treatment of diarrhea, as a mouthwash for
sores and ulcers, and as a gargle for laryngitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. For use in diarrhea, or as a mouthwash or lo-
tion, make a stronger infusion by boiling the herb for a
few minutes to extract all the tannin.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried
herb or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Lady’s Mantle, The Complete German Commission E Monographs

----- PAGE 534 -----
526 se. TREATWENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Allium sativum L.
Garlic
Liliaceae

Part Used: Bulb

Constituents: Organosulfur compounds (alliin, con-
verted to allicin in the presence of the enzyme allinase),
miscellaneous: enzymes including allinase, B vitamins,
minerals, flavonoids!*

Actions: Antimicrobial, diaphoretic, hypocholesteremic,
cholagogue, hypotensive, antispasmodic

Indications: Used daily, garlic aids and supports the body
in ways that no other herb can match. It is an effective an-
timicrobial, acting on bacteria, viruses, and parasites of
the alimentary tract. The volatile oil is largely excreted
via the lungs, making garlic useful in infections of the res-
piratory system, such as chronic bronchitis, respiratory
catarrh, recurrent colds, and influenza. It may also be
helpful in the treatment of whooping cough and as part of
a broader approach to bronchial asthma. In general, garlic
may be used as preventive medicine against most infec-
tious conditions, digestive as well as respiratory. In the
digestive tract, garlic is thought to support the develop-
ment of the natural bacterial flora while killing pathogenic
organisms.

Garlic has a range of effects upon cardiovascular
health, It reduces serum cholesterol and triglyceride lev-
els while raising levels of high-density lipoproteins
(HDL). It can also act as an effective inhibitor of platelet-
activating factor (PAF), Garlic’s antioxidant properties
help prevent the peroxidation of fats, yet another con-
tributing factor in the development of atherosclerosis.
Taken together, these properties provide a potential way
to prevent atherosclerosis, thrombosis, hypertension,
heart attack, and stroke.

According to epidemiological evidence, garlic may
have cancer-preventive properties, especially against can-
cers of the gastrointestinal tract. It has been used exter-
nally for the treatment of the fungal infection ringworm
and as a suppository against pinworm (Enterobius vermic-
udaris). Immune potentiation and hypoglycemic actions in
humans have also been reported.

Safety Considerations: At high doses, garlic may irritate
the intestinal mucosa, causing nausea, diarrhea, vomiting,
and burning of the mouth. However, in humans, daily ad-
ministration of high doses of garlic essential oil (approxi-
mately 120 mg, equivalent to 60 g/day fresh garlic) over a
period of 3 months did not cause any adverse effects.'¢
Contact dermatitis from occupational exposure has been
reported.

Therapeutic doses (not dietary) of garlic may poten-
tiate the activity of anticoagulant medications and the an-
tithrombotic actions of anti-inflammatory medications,
such as aspirin. Caution is advised both before and after
surgical procedures.!7!8

Preparations and Dosage: A clove should be eaten daily
for prophylaxis. During acute infections, 1 clove three
times a day is indicated. Alternatively, use garlic oil cap-
sules at a dosage of 1 capsule a day as a prophylactic or
1 capsule three times a day for infection. Recommended
dosage of standardized garlic powder (6 mg allicin yield)
is 600 to 900 mg/day. Enteric-coated garlic supplements
can help control after-odor on breath and skin.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 4 g fresh
garlic or equivalent preparations.

Koch HP, Lawson D, eds. Garlic: The Science and Therapeutic
Application of Allium sativum L, and Related Species. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins Publishing Co., 1996.

Althaea officinalis L.
Marshmallow
Malvaceae

Parts Used: Root, leaf

Constituents: Root: Mucilage (18% to 35%, consisting of
a number of polysaccharides); miscellaneous: about 35%
pectin, 1% to 2% asparagine, tannins

Leaf: Mucilage (including a low-molecular-weight D-
glucan); flavonoids (such as kaempferol, quercetin, and
diosmetin glucosides); scopoletin (a coumarin); polyphe-
nolic acids (including syringic, caffeic, salicylic, vanillic,
p-coumaric)!?

Actions: Demulcent, emollient, diuretic, anti-inflamma-
tory, expectorant

Indications: Because of the abundance of mucilage it
contains, marshmallow is an excellent demulcent that is
indicated whenever such an action is needed. Marsh-
mallow root has been used primarily in the digestive
system, and leaf in the urinary system and lungs. All in-
flammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract will
benefit from the application of marshmallow root, in-
cluding inflammations of the mouth, gastritis, peptic
ulceration, and colitis. Leaf helps in cystitis, urethritis,
and urinary gravel, as well as bronchitis, respiratory
catarrh, and irritating coughs.

Externally, the herb is often used as an ingredient in
drawing ointments for abscesses and boils and as an emol-
lient for varicose veins and ulcers. The mucilage has
demonstrated hypoglycemic activity in nondiabetic
mice.*? Antimicrobial activity against Pseudomonas aerugi-

----- PAGE 535 -----
nosa, Proteus vulgaris, and Staphylococcus aureus has been
documented.?!
Priest and Priest considered marshmallow a

. .. soothing demulcent indicated for inflamed and irri-
tated states of mucous membranes. Particularly suitable
for the elderly with chronic inflammatory conditions af-
fecting the gastrointestinal system or genitourinary tract.

They gave the following specific indications: acute
respiratory disease, gastroenteritis, peptic ulcer, cystitis,
urethritis, inflammation of the mouth and throat, in-
flamed hemorrhoids and wounds, burns and scalds, bed-
sores, abscesses, boils, and skin ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Marshmallow may delay absorp-
tion of other drugs taken at the same time.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). A cold infusion of marsh-
mallow root may be made by infusing overnight 2 to 4 g
of root in 1 cup of cold water.

Dosage recommended by the BHC is 2 to 5 gas dried
herb or cold infusion or 5 to 15 ml tincture. The BPC
(1949) suggests a dosage of 2 to 10 ml of syrup.
Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 g root or
5g leaf.

Marshmallow leaf and Marshmallow root, in Herbal Medicine,
Expanded Commission E Monographs

Anethum graveolens L.
Dill

Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (mainly carvone, with dihydro-
carvone, limonene, a- and f-phellandrene, eugenol,
anethole, myristicin, carveole, x-pinene); flavonoids
(kaempferol); coumarins (such as scopoletin, esculetin,
bergapten, umbelliferone); xanthone derivatives, such as
dillanoside; miscellaneous: triterpenes, phenolic acids,
protein, fixed oil??

Actions: Carminative, aromatic, antispasmodic, anti-
inflammatory, galactagogue

Indications: Dill is an excellent remedy for flatulence
and associated colic. This is the herb of choice for chil-
dren’s colic. It also stimulates milk flow in nursing moth-
ers. Chewing the seeds helps clear bad breath.

Safety Considerations: Contact with juice from the
fresh plant may cause photodermatitis.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour

Materia MEDICA 527

1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of gently
crushed seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 to
15 minutes. For the treatment of flatulence, take a cup of
this infusion before meals.

According to Commission E, average daily dosage is
3 g of seed or equivalent preparations, or 0.1 to 0.3 ml es-
sential oil. Dosage from the United States Dispensatory
(23rd ed., 1948) is 15 grains to 1 dram (1 to 4 g) seed. The
BPC recommends 15 to 30 ml of dill water (hydrosol) or
0.3 to 0.2 ml of essential oil. The BHP recommends | to
2 g dried herb or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract. Dosage listed in
the BHC is 2 to 6 g of dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5
in 25%), or 2 to 6 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Dill seed, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Angelica archangelica L.
Angelica

Apiaceae

Other Name: European angelica

Parts Used: Root and leaf (medicinal); stem and seed
(confectionery)

Constituents: Volatile oils (0.3% to 1.0%, highest in
seeds): a@- and £-phellandrene, a-pinene, a-thujene,
limonene, B-caryophyllene, linalool, borneol, acetalde-
hyde; macrocyclic lactones; phthalates (hexamethyl-
phthalate); furanocoumarin glycosides (angelicin, umbelli-
ferone, psoralen, bergapten, imperatoren); miscellaneous:
sugars, plant acids, flavonoids, and sterols”?

Actions: Astringent, tonic, diuretic, vulnerary, chola-
gogue, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Angelica is a useful expectorant for coughs,
bronchitis, and pleurisy, especially when accompanied by
fever, colds, or influenza, Angelica leaf may be used as a
compress to treat inflammations of the chest. The con-
tent of carminative essential oil explains its use easing in-
testinal colic and flatulence. As a digestive agent, angelica «
stimulates appetite and may be helpful in anorexia ner-
vosa. It has also been shown to help ease rheumatic in-
flammations. In cystitis, it acts as a urinary antiseptic. The
furanocoumarin constituent bergapten has been used in
the PUVA treatment of psoriasis. (PUVA is an acronym
describing oral administration of psoralen and subsequent
exposure to long-wavelength ultraviolet light.)

Angelica is a common flavoring for liqueurs, such as
Chartreuse and Benedictine, and is an ingredient of gin
and vermouth. The leaves may be used as a garnish or in
salads, and the candied stalks in cakes and pudding.

Safety Considerations: Because of its furanocoumarin

----- PAGE 536 -----
$28 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bony SysTEM

constituents, angelica may provoke photosensitivity re-
actions. During treatment with angelica, patients should
avoid prolonged sunbathing and exposure to strong UV
radiation.

In addition, some authorities state that because of the
coumarin constituents, high doses of angelica may inter-
fere with anticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make a decoction, place
1 teaspoon of cut root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 2 minutes. Remove from heat and let
stand for 15 minutes. Decoction dosage is 1 cup three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2.5 g dried herb, 2 to 5 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 5 ml liquid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times daily. Commission E recommends a
daily dose of 4.5 g dried herb, 1.5 ml tincture (1:5), or 1.5
to 3.0 ml fluid extract (1:1). The total daily essential oil
dosage is in the range of 10 to 20 drops.

Angelica root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Apium graveolens L.
Celery Seed
Apiaceae

Part Used: Dried ripe seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (2% to 3%): limonene (60%),
selenine (10% to 15%), a-eudesmol and f-eudesmol,
santalol; phthalides (3-n-butylphthalide, ligustilide,
sedanolide, and sedanenolide),; furanocoumarins (api-
gravin, bergapten, celerin, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin,
umbelliferone, 8-hydroxy-5-methoxypsoralen); flavonoids
{apiin, apigenin, isoquercitrin, and others)**

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, diuretic,
carminative, antispasmodic, nervine

Indications: Celery seed finds its main use in the treat-
ment of rheumatism, arthritis, and gout. It is especially
useful in rheumatoid arthritis associated with mental de-
pression. Its value in rheumatic conditions is related pri-
marily to its diuretic action. Celery seed is also used as a
urinary antiseptic, largely because of its content of apiol, a
volatile oil constituent.

In mice, phthalide constituents showed sedative and
antispasmodic activities.?> Celery seed oil has been re-
ported to be active against Bacillus subtilis, Vibrio cholerae,
Staphylococcus aureus, S. albus, Shigella dysenteriae, Coryne-
bacterium diphtheriae, Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus faecalis,
S. pyogenes, Pacillus pumilus, and Pseudomonas solanacearum.*6

No activity against Escherichia colt, Sarcina lutea, or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa was observed.

Safety Considerations: While no problems have been
documented for celery seed, photosensitivity reactions re-
sulting from external contact with celery stems have been
reported.?’ This has been attributed to their content of
furanocoumarins, which are known photosensitizing
agents.”

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of freshly
crushed seeds; infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15
minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage from the BHC is 0.5 to 3 g dried seed (or in-
fusion), 2 to 8 ml tincture (1:5 in 90%), or 0.5 to 2 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 90%) three times a day.

Apii fructus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Arctium lappa L.
Burdock
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome, leaf

Constituents: Lignans (arctigenin, arctiin, and matai-
resinol); polyacetylenes; carbohydrates: inulin (45% to
50%), mucilage, pectin, sugars; miscellaneous: organic
acids, fatty acids, and phenolic acids’?

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, bitter

Indications: Burdock is a valuable remedy for the treat-
ment of skin conditions that result in dry and scaly
patches. It may be most effective for psoriasis if used over
a long period of time. It has value when used as part of a
wider treatment program for rheumatic complaints, espe-
cially when associated with psoriasis.

Part of burdock’s action is related to bitter stimula-
tion of digestive juice secretion, especially bile secretion.
Thus, it helps with digestion and appetite, and has been
used in anorexia nervosa and similar conditions. It has
also been used to support kidney function and to treat
cystitis. In general, burdock will move the body to a state
of integration and health, improving indicators of sys-
temic imbalance, such as skin problems and dandruff
Externally, burdock may be applied as a compress or
poultice to speed healing of wounds and ulcers. Eczema
and psoriasis may also be treated this way, but it is impor-
tant to remember that such skin problems can be healed
only from within, with the help of internal remedies.

Animal studies using roots and leaves of burdock
plants that had not yet flowered demonstrated diuretic,

----- PAGE 537 -----
hypoglycemic, and antifurunculous properties.*° The an-
timicrobial activity documented for burdock has been at-
tributed to its polyacetylene constituents, although only
traces of these compounds are found in dried commercial
herb.3! Other studies have suggested that burdock may af-
ford protection against mutagenicity.??> Burdock has
also shown antitumor activity.** In zn animal study, the
addition of dietary fiber (5%) from burdock roots to the
diet of rats provided protection against toxicity from var-
ious artificial food colorings.>*
Priest and Priest considered burdock a

. .. general alterative: influences skin, kidneys, mucous
and serous membranes, to remove accumulated waste
products. It is specific for eruptions on the head, face and
neck, and for acute irritable and inflammatory conditions.

They gave the following specific indications: eczema,
psoriasis, dermatitis; boils, carbuncles, sties, sores,
rheumatism, gout, and sciatica.

Safety Considerations: Potentially, burdock may cause
allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of root into 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 2 to 6 g of dried root by de-
coction, 8 to 12 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 2 to 6 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Burdock root, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) K. Spreng.
Bearberry
Ericaceae

Other Names: Uva-ursi, kinnikinnick
Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Hydroquinones (arbutin, methylarbutin);
iridoids (monotropein); flavonoids (quercitrin, iso-
quercitrin, myricacitrin, and others); miscellaneous: tan-
nins; volatile oil; ursolic, malic and gallic acids*®

Actions: Diuretic, astringent, antimicrobial, demulcent

Indications: Bearberry has a specific antiseptic and as-
tringent effect on the membranes of the urinary system.
It generally soothes, tones, and strengthens these tissues.
It is specifically used for conditions in which there is
gravel or ulceration in the kidney or bladder. It may be

Materia Merpica @ 529

applied in the treatment of acute urinary tract infections,
such as pyelitis and cystitis, or used as part of a holistic ap-
proach to chronic kidney problems. It has proved effec-
tive for some cases of bed-wetting. As a douche, it may be
helpful in the treatment of vaginal ulceration and infec-
tion.

Ellingwood provided the following specific indica-
tions for bearberry:

Its direct influence is upon relaxed conditions of the blad-
der walls, to which it imparts tone and induces normal
contraction. It restrains excessive mucous discharges.

He recommended the herb for ulceration of the blad-
der, cystitis, pyelitis, pyelonephritis, and gonorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Urinary acidifiers inhibit the
conversion of arbutin to active hydroquinone, rendering
bearberry less effective.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried
leaves; infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends 10 to 12 g (equivalent to
400 to 840 mg of arbutin) in 150 ml water as infusion or
cold macerate. Dosage from BHC is 1.5 to 2.5 g dried leaf
infusion or cold aqueous extract, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in
25%), or 1.5 to 2.5 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Bearberry, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Arnica montana L.
Arnica
Asteraceae

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (arnifolin, arnicol-
ides, helenalin); flavonoicls (such as eupafolin, patuletin,
and spinacetin); volatile oil, containing thymol and vari-
ous ethers of thymol; miscellaneous: phenolic acids,
coumarins, resins, bitters (arnicin), tannins, carotenes*”

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vulnerary

Indications: This herb should not be taken internally, as
it is potentially toxic. However, arnica provides us with
one of the best external remedies for local healing, and
may be considered a specific when it comes to the treat-
ment of bruises and sprains. The homeopathic preparation
is entirely safe to take internally, especially when used ac-
cording to homeopathic directions. The herb itself, used
externally, will help relieve pain and inflammation of
phlebitis, rheumatism, and similar conditions. In fact, it

----- PAGE 538 -----
530 <=. TREATWENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

may be used on the skin in all cases of pain or inflamma-
tion, as long as the skin is not broken.

Arnica has been shown to be an immunostimulant, as
both the sesquiterpene lactone helenalin and the polysac-
charide fraction stimulate phagocytosis. Sesquiterpene
lactones are known to have anti-inflammatory activity,
and their biological effects appear to be mediated through
immunological processes. The fact that helenalin is an
anti-inflammatory sesquiterpene lactone might help ac-
count for the value of arnica for pain and inflammation.

Safety Considerations: Due to the toxicity of the
sesquiterpene lactones it contains, oral use of arnica must
be avoided altogether. Topical applications of arnica may
cause an allergy in the form of painful, itchy, inflamma-
tory changes to the skin in some people.

Preparations and Dosage: For topical use, a simple folk
tincture will suffice. Pour !/2 liter (1 pint) of 70% alcohol
over 50 g (2 ounces) of freshly picked flowers in a clear
glass container. Seal and let stand for at least a week in the
sun or a warm place. Filter and store in a sealed container;
keep out of direct sunlight. Use as needed.

Arnica flowers, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Artemisia absinthium L.
Wormwood
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil, including a- and B-thujone
(35%); sesquiterpene lactones (absinthin, artemetin,
matricin, isoabsinthin, artemolin); acetylenes, flavonoids;
phenolic acids; lignans (diayangambin and epiyangambin)°*
Actions: Bitter, carminative, antimicrobial, anthelmintic,
antidepressant

Indications: Traditionally, wormwood has been used in a
wide range of conditions, from indigestion to depression,
many of which have been validated by scientific analysis.
The herb is primarily used as a bitter to stimulate and in-
vigorate the whole digestive process. It is helpful in indi-
gestion, especially when due to a deficient quantity or
quality of gastric juices. As the name implies, wormwood
is a powerful remedy against worm infestations, espe-
cially roundworm and pinworm. The herb may also be
used to help the body deal with fever and infections. It
has a long history of use as an antidepressant.

Safety Considerations: Adverse effects are likely only
with overdose, and are due primarily to the effects of thu-
jone, which is toxic. Taken in high doses, wormwood

preparations may cause intoxication with vomiting, severe
diarrhea, retention of urine, stupor, and convulsions.
Aqueous extracts contain relatively little thujone.
Wormwood is contraindicated for patients with stomach
hyperacidity and intestinal ulcers. Avoid during pregnancy.

Concerns about the safety of wormwood are related
largely to the presence of the monoterpene constituent
thujone in the essential oil (see chapter 6 for more infor-
mation). Concerns about the toxicity of wormwood
essential oil are well founded; however, the amount of es-
sential oil in the dried herb is low, minimizing danger.

Thujone is also a component of certain other essen-
tial oils, including white cedar oil (from the leaves of
Thuja occidentalis) and tansy oil (from the leaves and tops
of Tanacetum vulgare). It is also found in the leaves of the
culinary sage (Salvia officinalis) and of rosemary
(Rosmarinus officinalis). For purposes of comparison, the
thujone content of selected plants is listed here.

Salvia officinalis (sage leaf): 1,453 to 12,636 ppm

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood leaf): 3,500 ppm

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary plant): 84 to 399 ppm

Antifertility studies were conducted in rats using dry
extract of wormwood (probably containing some essential
oil). Oral administration of this extract at a dosage of 200
mg/kg for 7 days caused a significant anti-implantation
effect.*? Daily oral administration of thujone to rats at 10
mg/kg produced convulsions on day 38 of the study (after
intake of a total of 380 mg of thujone) in 5% of the rats.
The oral LDs9 of mixed a- and B-thujones has been de-
termined to be 192 mg/kg in rats, 230 mg/kg in mice, and
395 mg/kg in guinea pigs; however, a-thujone is more
toxic than B-thujone.*? Overdose of wormwood in humans
may cause major CNS disturbances, including convul-
sions and paralysis leading to unconsciousness and death.
Very high doses of wormwood tincture have been re-
ported to induce abortion.

Dilute aqueous extracts of dried wormwood contain
only trace amounts of essential oil. T:hujone-free worm-
wood extracts can be prepared with extraction procedures
using either water, 30% ethanol, or supercritical carbon
dioxide extraction technology.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:1 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried
herb; infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. To avoid the extremely bitter taste
when using wormwood as an anthelmintic, powdered
wormwood tnay be taken in pill form to eliminate worms.

Commission E lists a daily dosage of 2 to 3 g of herb
as a water infusion. BPC recommends 3 to 10 ml of tinc-

----- PAGE 539 -----
ture daily. Dosage from the BHP is | to 2 g of dried herb
or | to 2 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Artemisiae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Artemisia vulgaris L.
Mugwort

Asteraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, root

Constituents: Volatile oil (linalool, 1,8-cineole, B-thujone,
borneol, a- and B-pinene); sesquiterpene lactones (vul-
garin); flavonoids; coumarin derivatives; triterpenes*!

Actions: Bitter tonic, stimulant, nervine tonic, emmena-
gogue

Indications: As a bitter, mugwort may be used whenever
digestive stimulation is indicated. However, the herb sup-
ports digestion not only through bitter stimulation, but
also through carminative actions conferred by the volatile
oils it contains. In addition, it has a mild nervine action,
which also appears to be related to volatile oil content,
that may help ease depression and tension. Thus, it is es-
sential that the volatile oil is not lost in preparation.
Mugwort may also be used as an emmenagogue to pro-
mote normal menstrual flow.

Safety Considerations: Mugwort is potentially allergenic
to people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes in a covered container.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage from the BHP is 0.5 to 2 g of dried herb or
0.5 to 2 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Mugwort, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Asclepias tuberosa L.
Pleurisy Root
Asclepiadaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Cardenolides (including asclepiadin);
flavonoids (rutin, kaempferol, quercetin, and isorham-
netin); miscellaneous: friedalin, a- and B-amyrin, lupeol,
viburnitol, choline sugars®

Actions: Diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Pleurisy root is effective against respiratory
infections, reducing inflammation and promoting expec-

MaTERIA MEDICA @ 531

toration. It can be used in the treatment of bronchitis, in-
fluenza, and other respiratory conditions. The fact that it
also has diaphoretic and antispasmodic powers explains
why it is so highly valued for treating pleurisy and pneu-
monia. In the laboratory, low doses of extracts of Asclepias
species stimulated uterine contractions and exhibited es-
trogenic effects.”

Priest and Priest gave the following specific indica-
tions: catarrhal complaints from cold and damp, hard dry
cough, bronchitis, pleurisy, peritonitis, pneumonia, in-
fluenza, intercostal rheumatism, and other intercostal dis-
eases. According to King’s:

It was one of the most common medicines employed by
the Eclectic fathers. The drug has fallen into unmerited
neglect, and could profitably be employed at the present
day for purposes for which much more powerful, and
sometimes dangerous, drugs are used. It has an extensive
range of usefulness, being possessed of diaphoretic, di-
uretic, laxative, tonic, cartninative, expectorant, and prob-
ably anti-spasmodic properties.

Pleurisy root is one of the best diaphoretics of the
Eclectic materia medica. lt is not stimulating, and may be
used to promote diaphoresis, no matter how high the de-
gree of fever. Pleurisy roat has a deservedly good reputa~
tion in respiratory diseases. It acts upon the mucous
membrane of the pulmonary tract, augmenting the secre-

tions and favoring easy expectoration. . . . As its popular
name indicates, pleurisy root is of much value in treating
pleurisy. Not only is its action on serous membranes
marked, but itis very effectual in imtercostal neuralgia and
rheumatism, as well as in pericardial pains.

In pneumonia, as well as in bronchitis, it is best
adapted to the acute stage, where the lesion seems to be
extensive, taking in a large area of lung parenchyma and
mucous tissues. In the convalescing stage of pneumonia,
and other respiratory lesions, when suppression of the ex-
pectoration and dyspnoea threaten, small doses at fre-
quent intervals will correct the trouble. It, as well as
Eupbrasia and Matricaria, is among our best drugs for
snuffles, or acute nasal cararrh of infants.

It is an excellent remedy for ordinary colds. It is, in
fact one of our best drugs for catarrhal conditions,
whether of the pulmonary or gastrointestinal tract, espe-
cially when produced by recent colds. Stomach troubles,
particularly those of children, are often markedly bene-
fited by small doses.

Safety Considerations: Asclepias increases the risk of car-
diac glycoside toxicity if taken with drugs or herbs that
contain such constituents.

----- PAGE 540 -----
532 © TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over '/2 to 1 teaspoon of the herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Pleurisy root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.) Bunge
Astragalus
Fabaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponin glycosides (astraga-
losides I-VII); flavonoid glycosides and aglycones; high-
molecular-weight polysaccharides*

Action: Immunomodulator

Indications:. Astragalus has been used since ancient times
in traditional Chinese medicine. When research illumi-
nated its effects upon the immune system, it was adopted
as an important remedy in the West. Studies indicate that
the polysaccharides in astragalus intensify phagocytosis in
reticuloendothelial systems, stimulate pituitary-adrenal
cortical activity, and restore depleted red blood cell for-
mation in bone marrow. Astragalus is also one of the
herbs known to stimulate the body’s natural production of
interferon.

Astragalus has been used in combination with drug
therapies to reduce their toxicity and ameliorate side ef-
fects. The herb has been employed to treat chronic
leukopenia (low white blood cell count) related to treat-
ment with steroids, anticancer drugs, and other thera-
pies.“ In an in vitro study, researchers were able to use a
lower dose of interleukin 2 (IL 2), a common cancer
treatment, by combining the drug with astragalus. High
doses of IL 2 are associated with significant side effects.”
The addition of astragalus potentiated IL 2 activity ten-
fold, thus potentially facilitating a lower dose of IL 2 for
the same therapeutic outcome. In a laboratory study, as-
tragalus prevented liver damage induced by the common
anticancer drug stilbenemide.*®

Astragalus appears to strengthen both nonspecific and
specific immunity. ‘The conclusion drawn by most Western
herbalists is that astragalus is an ideal remedy for anyone
who might be immunocompromised. It strengthens many
functions of the immune system, helps protect the liver
from damage, and may have valuable anticancer effects.

Safety Considerations: Astragalus potentiates the effects
of interleukin 2 and acyclovir, but may be incompatible

with immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., cyclosporine, aza-
thioprine, and methotrexate).’?

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 to 4 teaspoons of root into 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. In traditional Chinese medicine,
pieces of root are boiled in soups and removed prior to
serving.

Astragalus, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Avena sativa L.
Oats
Poaceae

Other name: Oatstraw
Parts Used: Seed, whole plant

Constituents: Proteins (prolamines known as avenins);
C-glycosyl flavones; avenacosides (spirostanol glycosides);
fixed oil; vitamin E; starch*®

Actions: Nervine tonic, antidepressant, nutritive, demul-
cent, vulnerary

Indications: Oats is one of the best remedies for “feeding”
the nervous system, especially when the patient is under
stress. It is considered a specific in cases of nervous de-
bility and exhaustion associated with depression. Oats may
be used in combination with most of the other nervines,
both relaxant and stimulant, to strengthen the whole ner-
vous system. It is also used to treat general debility.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 3 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an oatstraw infu-
sion, pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of
dried straw and leave to infuse 10 to 15 minutes, This
should be drunk three times a day.

A soothing bath for use in treating neuralgia and irri-
tated skin conditions can be made by boiling 1 pound of
shredded oatstraw in 2 quarts of water for one-half hour,
Strain the liquid and add to the bath. Alternately, put
cooked rolled oats into a muslin bag and soak it in the
bathwater.

Dosage recommended by the BHP is 1 to 5 ml tinc-
ture (1:5 in 45%) or 0.6 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%)
three times daily. Commission E suggests using 100 g
dried herb for one full bath.

Avenae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 541 -----
Ballota nigra L.
Black Horehound

Lamiaceae

Constituents: Diterpenes (marrubiin, ballonigrin, bal-
lotinone)>!

Actions: Antiemetic, nervine, astringent, emmenagogue,
expectorant

Indications: Black horehound—not to be confused with
white horehound (Marrubium vulgare)—is an excellent
remedy for calming nausea and vomiting when the cause
lies within the nervous system, rather than in the stom-
ach. It may be safely used for motion sickness, for exam-
ple, in which nausea is triggered through the inner ear
and the central nervous system. This herb is also of value
in treating nausea and vomiting caused by pregnancy or
nervousness. Black horehound has a reputation as a nor-
malizer of menstrual function and as a mild expectorant.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day, or as needed.

Horehound, Black, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Baptisia tinctoria (L.) Venten.
Wild Indigo

Fabaceae
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Isoflavones (genistein, biochanin A);
flavonoids; alkaloids (such as cytisine); coumarins;
polysaccharides”?

Actions: Antimicrobial, anticatarrhal

Indications: Wild indigo is especially valuable for the
treatment of infections and catarrh of the ear, nose, and
throat. It may be used for laryngitis, tonsillitis, pharyngi-
tis, and catarrhal infections of the nose and sinuses. Taken
both internally and as a mouthwash, it heals mouth ulcers
and gingivitis and helps control pyorrhea. Systemically, it
may be useful in the treatment of enlarged and inflamed
lymph glands (lymphadenitis) and to reduce fevers. A
douche of wild indigo decoction will improve leukorrhea.

Ellingwood had much to say about this neglected
remedy:

Materia MEDICA <. 533

The agent has been widely used for many years by our
practitioners in the treatment of typhoid conditions, and
has established its position as an important remedy. In
scarlet fever, with its specific indications, it is a useful
remedy. Large doses are not necessary, but it should be
employed early and the use persisted in. In the treatment
of low fevers this agent is said to exercise marked sedative
power over the fever.

It is advised in all diseases of the glandular system,
and in hepatic derangements especially, with symptoms of
the character. In the various forms of stomatitis, putrid
sore throat and scarlatiiaa; in inflammation of the bow-
els, where there is a tendency to typhoid conditions, es-
pecially ulcerative inflammation of any of the internal
organs; in dyspepsia, with great irritability and offensive
decomposition of food; in scrofula and in cutaneous in-
fections, the agent should be long continued. In the long
protracted and sluggish forms of fevers, with great de-
pression of the vital forces; in ulceration of the nipples or
mammary glands, or cf the cervix uteri, it is spoken
highly of.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | ml three
times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put !/2 to
1 teaspoon of dried root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Berberis vulgaris L.
Barberry
Berberidaceae

Part Used: Bark of root or stem

Constituents: [soquinoline alkaloids (berberine, berba-
mine); miscellaneous: chelidonic acid, resin, tannins*?

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, antiemetic, bitter, laxative

Indications: Barberry is a traditional remedy for correct-
ing liver function and promoting the flow of bile. It is in-
dicated when gallstones or gallbladder inflammation is
present and when jaundice occurs due to a congested state
of the liver. As a bitter tonic with mild laxative effects, it
helps strengthen and cleanse the system in weak or debil-
itated people. Barberry has the interesting ability to re-
duce the size of an enlarged spleen. It has antimalarial ac-
tions and is effective against infections caused by the
protozoan Leishmania spp.
Priest and Priest described barberry as follows:

----- PAGE 542 -----
534 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

... stimulating tonic hepatic: influences the mucosa gen-
erally, removing mucoid accumulations and controlling
excess secretion. Improves appetite, digestion and assimi-
lation. Indicated for “gouty” constitutions.

They provided the following specific indications: bil-
iary catarrh with constipation and jaundice, gastritis, bil-
iousness, debility during convalescence, ulcerative stom-
atitis, and eczema of the hands.

Safety Considerations: Avoid during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of herb into | cup of cold water and bring to
a boil. Simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BPC suggests a dosage of 1 to 3.5 ml fluid ex-
tract three times a day. Recommended dosage from the
BHP is 1 to 2 g of dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:10 in
60%), or 2 to 3 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
a day.

Barberry, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Betula alba L.
Birch
Betulaceae

Parts Used: Young leaf, twig

Constituents: Flavonoids (mainly hyperoside, with lute-
olin and quercetin glycosides)**

Actions: Diuretic, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, tonic

Indications: Birch leaf is an effective remedy for cystitis
and other infections of the urinary system and helps elim-
inate excess water from the body. Perhaps because of this
cleansing, diuretic activity, the plant has been used to
treat gout, rheumatism, and mild arthritic pain. Birch
bark helps ease muscle pain if applied externally, with the
fresh, wet, internal side of the bark placed against the
skin.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried leaf
and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E suggests a dosage of 2 to 3 g dried
herb several times a day.

Betulae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Brassica nigra (L.) W.D,J. Koch
Black Mustard
Brassicaceae

Other Names and Related Species: Formerly Sinapsis
nigra. White mustard (Brassica alba Rabenh., non L., syn.
Sinapsis alba L.) may be used interchangeably.

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Glucosinolates (black mustard contains
sinigrin, white mustard sinalbin); miscellaneous: sinapine,
sinapic acid, fixed oil, protein, mucilage*®

Actions: Rubefacient, irritant, stimulant, diuretic, emetic

Indications: This well-known spice finds its main use in
medicine as a stimulating external application. The rube-
facient action causes mild irritation to the skin, which
stimulates the circulation in that area and relieves muscu-
lar and skeletal pain. This also gives it a role in the treat-
ment of chilblains. Because of its stimulating, diaphoretic
action, mustard can be applied in the same ways that
cayenne and ginger are. For feverishness, colds, and in-
fluenza, mustard seed may be taken as a tea or ground and
sprinkled into a bath. An infusion or poultice of mustard
is useful in the treatment of bronchitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported. May cause skin irritation when
applied externally, especially in fair-skinned people.

Preparations and Dosage: Mustard is most commonly
used as a poultice, which can be made by mixing 100 g (4
oz) of freshly ground mustard seeds with enough warm
water (at about 45°C or 110°F) to form a thick paste.
Spread this mixture onto a piece of cloth the size of the
body area to be covered. To prevent the paste from stick-
ing to the skin, first lay a piece of dampened gauze on the
skin. Apply the cloth spread with mustard and remove
after 1 minute. The skin may be reddened by this treat-
ment, but may be soothed by the application of olive oil
afterward.

To make an infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over
1 teaspoon of mustard flour (powder) and infuse for $
minutes. This may be drunk three times a day. For a foot-
bath, make an infusion using | tablespoon of bruised
seeds to | liter (2 pints) of boiling water.

Calendula officinalis L.
Calendula
Asteraceae

Other Names: Marigold, pot marigold
Parts Used: Petals, flower head

----- PAGE 543 -----
Constituents: Triterpenes (calendulosides A-D); flavo-
noids (including narcissin, rutin); volatile oil; chlorogenic
acid®®

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic, lymphatic,
astringent, vulnerary, emmenagogue, cholagogue, anti-

fungal

Indications: Calendula may be used safely whenever
there is inflammation on the skin, whether due to infec-
tion or physical damage. It may be zpplied for any exter-
nal bleeding or wound, bruising, or strains. The herb is
also of benefit for slow-healing wounds and skin ulcers,
and ideal for first-aid treatment of minor burns and
scalds. Calendula may be applied locally as a lotion, poul-
tice, or compress, depending on which is most appropri-
ate, Calendula has long been used throughout Europe for
wound healing and treatment of both skin and gastric ul-
cers. Its healing power appears to be based at least in part
on its terpene content.
When taken internally, calendula has anti-inflammatory
actions in the digestive system, and thus may be used in
the treatment of gastric and duodenal ulcers. As a chola-
gogue, it helps relieve gallbladder problems and many of
the vague digestive complaints known as “indigestion.”
Calendula demonstrates marked antifungal activity
and may be used both internally and externally to combat
fungal infections. As an emmenagogue, it has a reputation
for helping with delayed menstruation and easing painful
periods, In general, it is considered a normalizer of the
menstrual process.
In the laboratory, calendula has demonstrated anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, and antiviral activities.*” A
combination of allantoin and calendula extract applied to
surgically induced skin wounds in rats was reported to
stimulate physiological regeneration and granulation.
Allantoin alone exerted a much weaker action.*®

Safety Considerations: Calendula is a possible allergen
for those with known sensitivity to members of the
Asteraceae family.

Calendula was shown to be noritoxic when adminis-
tered chronically to mice in the form of aqueous extract.*?
No symptoms of toxicity were observed after administra-
tion of a calendula flower extract at a dosage of 0.15 g/kg
to hamsters older than 18 months and rats older than 21
months.°

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of flowers and

MATERIA MEDICA @ 535

infuse for 10 to 1S minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. Calendula may be applied externally as a lotion
or ointment for cuts, bruises, diaper rash, sore nipples,
burns, and scalds.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is 1 to 4 g dried
herb, 0.3 to 1.2 ml tincture, or 0.5 to 1 ml liquid extract
three times daily. Commission E suggests 1 to 2 g dried
herb per cup of water (150 ml) or 2 to 4 ml tincture daily,

Calendula flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medikus
Shepherd’s Purse
Brassicaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (luteolin-7-rutinoside, quercetin-
3-rutinoside); plant acids (fumaric and bursic acids)*!

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Shepherd’s purse may be used whenever a
gentle diuretic is indicated—for instance, to alleviate
water retention due to kidney problems. As an astringent,
the herb proves effective in the treatment of diarrhea,
wounds, nosebleeds, and other conditions. It traditionally
was used to stimulate the menstrual process, but is also of
value in reducing excess menstrual flow.

Ellingwood recommended shepherd’s purse for
hematuria, passive hemorrhage, chronic menorrhagia, in-
testinal hemorrhage, gastric hemorrhage, atonic dyspep-
sia, diarrhea, and dysentery, and externally for bruised or
strained muscles, bleeding piles, and rheumatic joints.

Safety Considerations: Because of its oxalic acid con-
tent, patients with kidney stones should avoid shepherd’s
purse.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. For menstrual condi-
tions, a cup should be drunk every 2 to 3 hours just before
and during the period. Otherwise, it should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHP is | to 4 g dried herb or 1
to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.
Commission E recommends 10 to 15 g of herb or equiv-
alent preparations daily.

Shepherd’s Purse, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 544 -----
536 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Capsicum annuum L.
Cayenne
Solanaceae

Part Used: Fruit

Constituents: Capsaicinoids (up to 1.5%): capsaicin, di-
hydrocapsaicin, others; carotenoids (capsanthin, capsoru-
bin, carotene); steroidal saponins, known as capsicidins, in
seed and root®

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, anticatarrhal, sialagogue,
rubefacient, antimicrobial

Indications: Cayenne is the most useful of the systemic
stimulants. It stimulates blood flow, strengthening the
heart, arteries, capillaries, and nerves. A general tonic, it is
especially useful for toning both the circulatory and diges-
tive systems. Cayenne may be helpful in cases of flatulent
dyspepsia and colic. It may also be used in conditions
marked by insufficient peripheral circulation leading to
cold hands and feet and, possibly, chilblains. It is also valu-
able for debility and for warding off colds.

Externally, cayenne is applied as a rubefacient for
problems such as lumbago and rheumatic pains. As an
ointment, it can help with unbroken chilblains, as long as
it is used in moderation. As a gargle for laryngitis, it com-
bines well with myrrh. This combination also makes a
good antiseptic wash.

Research has shown that capsaicin blocks the trans-
mission of pain and itching by nerve fibers in the skin.
Capsaicin applied in the form of a topical cream helps re-
lieve pain by depleting local supplies of a neurotransmitter
called substance P, which transmits pain and itching sig-
nals from the nerves in the skin to the spinal cord. A link
exists between many painful disorders and unusually high
levels of substance P in nerve fibers. Unlike other local
anesthetics, cayenne does not block impulses to all of the
nerve fibers, only type C fibers, which are strictly related to
pain. Thus, it does not interfere with perception of touch,
temperature, and pressure.

In numerous clinical studies, a topical cream con-
taining 0.025% or 0.075% capsaicin has proved helpful
in treating painful and itchy skin disorders, including
psoriasis, shingles, diabetic neuropathy, and postmastec-
tomy pain. Capsaicin cream may also be effective in
relieving the severe, stabbing pain associated with
trigeminal neuralgia, a disorder that affects the largest
nerve in the face. Improvement was generally apparent
after several days of applying the cream three times daily.
Capsaicin cream also shows promise in reducing the pain
of arthritis.®

King’s described cayenne thus:

Capsicum is a pure, energetic, permanent stimulant, pro-
ducing in large doses vomiting, purging, pains in the
stomach and bowels, heat and inflammation of the stom-
ach, giddiness, a species of intoxication and an enfeebled
condition of the nervous power. The infusion is much
used in colds, catarrh, hoarseness, etc. In atonic dyspepsia
and catarrhal gastritis it stimulates the nerves of the stom-
ach, promotes the secretion of the digestive juices, and as-
sists peristaltic motion .. . Capsicum meets the debility of
young and old, but is particularly useful in the elderly,
when the body-heat is low, vitality depressed and reaction
sluggish. Tired, painful muscles, stiffened joints and re-
laxation of any part are common conditions in the elderly
that are, in a measure, rectified by Capsicum. Flatulence
in dyspeptic states may be dispelled by capsicum.
Externally, the infusion and tincture have been found
valuable as a stimulating gargle in the ulcerated throat of
scarlatina. If used early in tonsillitis, with relaxation, it
may abort the trouble, but if it does not, its use should be
discontinued until the active inflammation has subsided.
Hoarseness, from atony of the vocal cords, is relieved by
it, and it is a remedy for relaxed uvula. It enters into var-
ious tinctures and liniments. The concentrated tincture of
capsicum has been highly recommended in the treatment
of chilblains and toothache. In the former, a piece of
sponge of flannel must be saturated with it, and rubbed
well over the seat of the chilblain, until a strong tingling
and electrical feeling is produced. This application should
be continued daily, until che disease is removed; relief will
be experienced on the very first application and fre-
quently there will be a total removal of the disease after

the second or third application. This, however, will de-
pend upon the severity of the case.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.25 to
1 ml three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over !/2 to 1 teaspoon of
cayenne and infuse for 10 minutes. Mix a tablespoon of
this infusion with hot water and drink when needed.

Dosage recommended in the BPC is 0.06 g of dried
herb or 0.3 to 0.9 ml tincture three times daily. The BHP
recommends 30 to 120 mg of dried herb or 0.3 to 1 ml of
tincture three times daily.

Cayenne pepper, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E.
Monographs

----- PAGE 545 -----
Carum carvi L.
Caraway
Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil, consisting of carvone (40% to
60%) and limonene, with other constituents; flavonoids
(mainly quercetin derivatives); miscellaneous: polysaccha-
ride, protein, fixed oil, calcium oxalate®

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, expectorant, em-
menagogue, galactagogue, astringent, antimicrobial

Indications: Caraway is used as a calming herb to ease
flatulent dyspepsia and intestinal colic, especially in chil-
dren. It also helps stimulate appetite. Its astringency
makes it useful in the treatment of diarrhea and, when ap-
plied as a gargle, in laryngitis. It may be employed for
bronchitis and bronchial asthma, and its antispasmodic
actions help relieve menstrual pains. Caraway has been
used to increase milk flow in nursing mothers.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of freshly crushed
seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 min-
utes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Carvi fructus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Centaurium erythraea Rain.
Centaury
Gentianaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Secoiridoids: gentiopicroside (gentio-
picrin), swertiamarin; alkaloids (gentianine, gentianidine,
gentioflavine); xanthone derivatives; phenolic acids;
triterpenes (B-sitosterol, campesterol, brassicasterol, stig-
masterol, a- and B-amyrin, erythrodiol)””

Actions; Bitter, hepatic

Indications: Centaury may be used whenever a digestive
and gastric stimulant is needed. It is indicated primarily
for appetite loss (anorexia) associated with liver weakness.
Centaury is helpful in dyspepsia and any other condition
involving sluggish digestion.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour

Materia Mepica ©. 537

1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for § to 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup one half hour be-
fore meals.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 6 g dried herb or equivalent preparations, or 1 to 2 ml
extract daily.

Centaurii herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Cepbaelis ipecacuanba (Brot.) A. Rich.
Ipecacuanha
Rubiaceae

Other Name: Ipecac
Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (2% to 3%): mainly
emetine, cephaeline, psychotrine; tannins: ipecacuanhin
and ipecacuanhic acid®

Actions; Expectorant, emetic, sialagogue, antiprotozoal

Indications: Ipecac is used mainly as an expectorant for
conditions such as bronchitis and whooping cough. At
higher doses, it is a powerful emetic, and as such is used
to treat poisoning. Care must be taken when using this
herb. After administration of an effective emetic dose, the
patient should drink large amounts of water. In the same
way that ipecac promotes expectoration through stimula-
tion and subsequent elimination of mucus, it fosters the
production of saliva. It has been found effective against
amoebic dysentery.

Safety Considerations: Because it is an emetic, ipecac
will prevent the absorption of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Ipecac is a very powerful
herb, so only a small amount should be used. Use 0.01 to
0.25 g of herb for an infusion. Pour { cup of boiling water
over a pea-sized amount of herb and infuse for 5 minutes.
This may be drunk three times a day.

Ipecacuanhae radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Cetraria islandica
Iceland Moss
Parmeliaceae

Part Used: Whole plant (a lichen)

Constituents: Lichen acids (fumarprotocetraric, proto-
cetrari¢, cetraric, usnic); polysaccharides (about 50%):
mainly lichenin and isolichenin; miscellaneous: furan
derivatives, fatty acid, lactones, terpenes

Actions: Demulcent, anti-inflammatory, antiemetic, ex-
peéctorant

----- PAGE 546 -----
538 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Indications: As a soothing demulcent with a high mu-
cilage content, Iceland moss is valuable in gastritis, vom-
iting, and dyspepsia. It is also often used in respiratory
catarrh and bronchitis to soothe mucous membranes. Its
nourishing qualities give it a role in the treatment of
cachexia, a state of malnourishment and debility.

King’s described Iceland moss as

.,. demulcent, tonic and nutritious. Excessive doses may
induce nausea and looseness of the bowels, while ordinary
doses improve the appetite, digestion and general nutri-
tion. Constipation is not produced by it, and the circula-
tion is unaffected. Its nutritive qualities are undoubtedly
due to its starch. The bitterness of cetrarin may be de-
tected in the nursing mother’s milk. Used as a demulcent
in chronic catarrhs, chronic dysentery and diarrhea, and
as a tonic in dyspepsia, convalescence and exhausting dis-
eases. Boiled with milk, it forms an excellent nutritive and
tonic in phthisis and general debility. It relieves the cough
of chronic bronchitis.

Safety Considerations: Because of its high mucilage
content, Iceland moss may impair absorption of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of shredded moss in 1 cup of cold water. Boil
for 3 minutes and let stand for 10 minutes. A cup should
be drunk morning and evening.

Commission E recommends 4 to 6 g of herb or
equivalent preparations daily.

Iceland moss, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Chelone ‘glabra L.
Balmony
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Very little research has been conducted on
this plant. Only resins and bitters have been reported.
Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, bitter, antiemetic, stimu-
lant, laxative

Indications: Balmony is an excellent agent for liver prob-
lems and acts as a tonic for the whole digestive system.
The herb stimulates the secretion of digestive juices, and
in this way produces its laxative actions. Balmony is used
to treat gallstones, inflammation of the gallbladder, and
jaundice. It is considered a specific for gallstones that lead
to congestive jaundice. The herb stimulates appetite;
eases colic, dyspepsia, and biliousness; and is beneficial in

debility. Externally, it has been used to treat inflamed
breasts, painful ulcers, and piles.
Priest and Priest said that balmony is a

. .. mild relaxing hepatic influencing the mucous mem-
branes, stimulating appetite and toning the stomach, It is
suitable for children and the elderly. Indicated for gas-
trointestinal disturbances after prolonged illness.

They gave the following specific indications: atonic
conditions, malaise and debility, dyspepsia, malabsorp-
tion, roundworms and threadworms, colitis from hepatic
dysfunction, and chronic jaundice.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Chionanthus virginicus L.
Fringetree
Oleaceae

Part Used: Bark
Constituents: Phyllyrin (a lignin glycoside); chionanthin”°

Actions: Hepatic, cholagogue, alterative, diuretic, tonic,
antiemetic, laxative

Indications: This valuable herb may be safely used for
many liver problems, especially when jaundice is part of
the picture. It is a specific for the treatment of gallbladder
inflammation and a valuable component of treatment for
gallstones. Fringetree aids the liver in general, and as such
is often used as a tonic as part of a wider treatment to sup-
port the whole body. Because it stimulates the release of
bile, it also acts as a gentle and effective laxative.
Ellingwood considered fringetree specific for

... the liver. It isa remedy for hepatic engorgement; jaun-
dice more or less pronounced; pain over the region of the
gall-bladder; pain in the epigastrium; pain radiating from
the navel over the abdomen; soreness in the region of the
liver, extending to the umbilicus; enlargement of the of
the liver, determined by percussion; nausea; occasional
vomiting; constipation with dry feces, temperature
slightly above normal; skin usually yellow.

In addition, he recommended it for acute congestion
of the liver, catarrh of the common bile duct, acute jaun-
dice, jaundice of childhood, bilious headaches, malarial

----- PAGE 547 -----
conditions, diabetes mellitus, sugar in the urine, and ty-
phoid fever.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Chondrus crispus (L.) Stackh.
Trish Moss
Gigartinacea

Part Used: Dried thallus (Note: This is a seaweed, not a
moss.)

Constituents: Polysaccharides; the extract, also known as
carrageenan, consists of sulfated, straight-chain galactans.
(There are a variety of grades of carrageenan of different
molecular weights, including a food grade with a molecu-
lar weight of about 100,000 to 500,000.)’!

Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: With modern attention on dramatically ef-
fective “miracle drugs,” it is refreshing to remember the
nourishing and strengthening food medicines, such as
Trish moss. The safety of this seaweed allows it to make
some unique contributions to health care. Its main tradi-
tional use was for respiratory illness, where it often
served as the core of prescriptions used to treat irritating
coughs, bronchitis, and many other lung problems.

Trish moss may be freely used in digestive conditions
for which a demulcent is indicated, such as gastritis and
ulceration of the stomach and duodenum. Its soothing ac-
tivity makes it helpful for inflammations of the urinary

system, and it was once used extensively in the same way
cornsilk is used today. It has also been used as a food as
part of maintenance diets for people with diabetes.
However, in the past, its primary role was in speeding re-
cuperation from debilitating illness, which once received
a greater focus of attention than it does today. Herbs such
as Irish moss and other tonic, nutritive remedies have
much to offer in facilitating proper recovery of health
after major disease.
King’s suggested the use of Irish moss as

...a demulcent in chronic affections of the air passages,
chronic diarrhea and dysentery, scrofula, rickets, enlarged
mesenteric glands, irritation of the bladder and kidneys,
etc. As a culinary article, it may be employed in the prepa-
ration of jellies, white soup, blanc mange, etc.

Mareria MEDICA ¢ 539

Safety Considerations: Irish moss may impair absorp-
tion of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: To use fresh, wash the sea-
weed well, add 1 cup to 3 cups of milk or water, and fla-
vor to taste. Simmer slowly until most of the seaweed has
dissolved. Remove any undissolved fragments and pour it
into a mold to set.

The dried seaweed is best made into a decoction.
Steep 1 oz of dried Irish moss in cold water for 15 min-
utes, boil for 10 to 15 minutes in 3 pints of water (or
milk), and strain. It may be combined with licorice,
lemon, ginger, or cinnamon and sweetened to taste.

Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt.
Black Cohosh
Ranunculaceae

Parts Used: Dried root and rhizome (not fresh)
Constituents: Triterpene glycosides (actein, cimicifugo-
side, cimifugine, racemoside, cimiracemosides); isoferulic
acid; salicylic acid; miscellaneous: volatile oil, tannins”?

Actions: Emmenagogue, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory,
antirheumatic, alterative, nervine, hypotensive

Indications: Black cohosh is a valuable relaxant and nor-
malizer of the female reproductive system. It may be used
to good effect to treat painful or delayed menstruation,
and relieves cramping pain in the womb and cramping as-
sociated with ovulation. Modern interest in this herb has
focused on its gynecological uses. While it is of un-
doubted value in this area, its contribution to the treat-
ment of arthritic disorders should not be overlooked. It is
very effective against rheumatic pain, including that of
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and muscle problems,
and is helpful for neurological pain, including sciatica and
neuralgia. As a relaxing riervine, it may be used in many
situations where such an agent is needed. It has also been
found beneficial for tinnitus.

Black cohosh helps to ease the physical and mental
changes associated with perimenopause and menopause,
as well as hormonal deficits resulting from ovariectomy or
hysterectomy in younger women. Clinical studies support
the primary application of black cohosh for the treatment
of menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, headache,
vertigo, heart palpitations, ringing in the ears, and a range
of associated psychological symptoms, including irritabil-
ity, sleep disturbances, and depressive moods. Black co-
hosh extract has also been used successfully in women
younger than 40 years for treatment of hormonal deficits
resulting from ovariectomy or hysterectomy. At least 8
weeks of treatment are required to alleviate symptoms. A

----- PAGE 548 -----
540 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

review of clinical studies showed that trials have ranged in
length from 8 weeks to as long as 6 months.”

Because of the wealth of accrued experience presented
in King’s American Dispensatory, I have included a passage
from its extensive monograph on black cohosh:

This is a very active, powerful, and useful remedy, and ap-
pears to fulfil a great number of indications. It possesses an
undoubted influence over the nervous system. In small
doses the appetite and digestion are improved, and larger
amounts augment the secretions of the gastrointestinal
tract. The heart-beat is slowed and given increased power
by it, while arterial tension is elevated.

Upon the reproductive organs it exerts a specific in-
fluence, promoting the menstrual discharge, and by its
power of increasing contractility of the unstriped fibres of

the uterus, it acts as an efficient parturient. ... Few of our

remedies have acquired as great a reputation in the treat-
ment of rheumatism and neuralgia. Indeed, few cases of
rheumatism, or conditions depending upon a rheumatic
basis, will present, which will not be influenced for the
better by Crmicifuga.

Muscular pain of a rheumatoid character, when not
amounting to a true rheumatic attack, and other rheuma-
toid pains when acute and not of spinal origin such as gas-
tralgia, enteralgia, tenesmic vesical pains, pleurodynia,
pain in the mediastina orbits or ears, are relieved by
Cimicifuga.

By its special affinity for the female reproductive or-
gans, it is an efficient agent for the restoration of suppressed
menses, In dysmenorrhoea it is surpassed by no other
drug, being of greatest utility in irritative and congestive
conditions of the uterus and appendages, characterized by
tensive, dragging pains, resembling the pains of rheuma~
tism. If the patient be despondent and chilly, combine
Cimicifuga with Pulsatilla, especially in anemic subjects. . . .

Cimicifuga has proved a better agent in obstetrical
practice than ergot. It produces natural intermittent uter-

ine contractions, whereas ergot produces constant con-
tractions, thereby endangering the life of the child, or

rupture of the uterus. Where the pains are inefficient, fee-
ble, or irregular, Cimicifuga will stimulate to normal ac-
tion. Tt is an excellent “partus praeparator” if given for
several weeks before confinement. It is a diagnostic agent
to differentiate between spurious and true labor pains, the
latter being increased, while the former are dissipated
under its use. It is the best and safest agent known for the
relief of after-pains, and is effectual in allaying the general
excitement of the nervous system after labor.
Preparations of Cimicifuga, to be of any medicinal value,
must be prepared from recently dried roots.

Safety Considerations: When used at the recommended
dosage, no adverse effects are to be expected. The herb
should not be used during pregnancy, except to assist

birth.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of water over !/2 to | teaspoon of dried root, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BPC is 1.8 to 3.6 ml tincture
(1:10 in 60%) or 0.3 to 1.8 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 90%).
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 40% to 60%
ethanol extract corresponding to 40 mg of drug. The
USP recommends | g dried herb or | ml liquid extract.

Black Cohosh, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Cola acuminata Schumann
Cola
Sterculiaceae

Other Names: Cola vera; kola
Part Used: Seed kernel (the kernel freed from the testa)

Constituents: Caffeine, with traces of theobromine; tan-
nins and other phenolics; miscellaneous: phlobaphene (an
anthocyanin pigment known as kola red), betaine”*

Actions: Central nervous system stimulant, antidepres-
sant, astringent, diuretic

Indications: Cola has a marked stimulating effect on
human consciousness. It can be used whenever there is a
need for direct stimulation, which is less often than some
may believe! If the health and function of the nervous sys-
tem is improved, it will usually not need such stimulation.
In the short term, however, cola may be used in nervous
debility, states of atony, and weakness.

Cola can be viewed as specific in cases of depression
associated with weakness and debility, and may act as a
specific in nervous diarrhea, It will help in general de-
pression and, in some people, may even give rise to eu-
phoric states. It may also be beneficial for some types of
migraine. Because of its stimulant properties, it can be a
valuable part of treatment for anorexia.

Safety Considerations: Because it contains caffeine, cola
may cause all of the reactions and potential drug interac-
tions associated with this constituent. In addition, it may
cause cumulative caffeine effects when used in combina-
tion with coffee, black or green tea, guarana, or mate.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of powdered cola nuts in a cup of water,

----- PAGE 549 -----
bring to a boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk when needed.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 1 to 3 g pow-
dered cotyledons, i to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.6
to 1.2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 60%) three times a day.
Commission E lists a daily dosage of 2 to 6 g dried herb,
10 to 30 g tincture, or 2.5 to 7.5 g fluid extract.

Cola nut, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Collinsonia canadensis L.
Stoneroot
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Essential oil; tannins; saponins; alkaloids;
resins; organic acid’
Actions: Antilithic, diuretic, diaphoretic
Indications: As its name suggests, stoneroot finds its
main use in the treatment and prevention of stone and
gravel in the urinary system and gallbladder. It may be
used as a prophylactic, but is also an excellent remedy
when the body needs assistance in. passing stones or
gravel. It is a strong diuretic.

In his extensive monograph, Ellingwood gave the fol-
lowing indications for stoneroot:

Hemorrhoids, catarrhal gastritis, pain in the rectum,
heart tonic, rheumatic inflammation, laryngitis, pharyn-
gitis, clergyman’s sore throat, dysentery, ulcers, fistula, in-
flammation of the middle ear, acute cystitis, vaginismus.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried root in | cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 4 ¢ dried herb, 2 to 8 ml
tineture (1:5 in 40%), or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Stone Root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Commiphora molmol (Nees) Engl.
Myrrh
Burseraceae

Part Used: Gum resin

MATERIA MEDICA -@ 541

Constituents: Volatile oil (1.5% to 17%); gum (up to
60%); resins (up to 40%, average 20%); sterols”

Actions: Antimicrobial, astringent, carminative, anti-
catarrhal, expectorant, vulnerary

Indications: Myrrh is an effective antimicrobial agent
that has been shown to work in two complementary ways.
Its primary action is to stimulate the production of white
blood corpuscles, which have antipathogenic actions.
Secondarily, it has a direct antimicrobial effect.

Myrrh may be used in a wide range of conditions ap-
propriate for treatment with an antimicrobial agent. It
finds specific use in the treatment of infections of the
mouth, such as mouth ulcers, gingivitis, and pyorrhea, as
well as catarrhal problerns, such as pharyngitis and si-
nusitis. Myrrh is often employed as part of an approach
to the treatment of the common cold, and may be of
benefit for laryngitis and respiratory complaints.
Systemically, it is useful in the treatment of boils and
similar conditions, glandular fever, and brucellosis.
Applied externally, it is healing and antiseptic for wounds
and abrasions.

Anti-inflammatory and antipyretic actions have been
documented in mice.”” Hypoglycemic activity in both nor-
mal and diabetic rats has been reported.”® The proposed
mode of action involved a decrease in gluconeogenesis and
an increase in peripheral utilization of glucose in diabetic
rats.

Safety Considerations: Use of undiluted tincture of
myrrh in the mouth may give rise to a transient burning
sensation and irritation of the palate. Theoretically,
myrrh may interfere with existing antidiabetic therapy,
as hypoglycemic properties have been documented.

Preparations and Dosage: The resin dissolves much
more easily in alcohol than in water, so tincture is pre-
ferred and is easily obtainable. Dosage is 1 to 4 ml three
times a day (1:1 in 90%). As the resin is difficult to dis-
solve in water, it should be powdered well for an infusion.
Pour | cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of
myrrh powder and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This
should be drunk three times a day.

For external use, Commission E recommends dab-
bing the skin two to three times daily with undiluted tinc-
ture. As a rinse or gargle, add 5 to 10 drops of tincture to
a glass of water. Dental powders should contain 10%
powdered resin.

Myrrh, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

----- PAGE 550 -----
542 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC.
Hawthorn

Rosaceae

Parts Used: Traditionally, berry; modern products often
use flower and leaf

Constituents: Flavonoids (leaf and flower, up to 1.78%):
vitexin, quercetin, hyperoside, rutin; oligomeric pro-
cyanidins (leaf and flower, 1.0% to 2.4%); triterpene acids
(leaf and flower, up to 0.6%): ursolic, oleanolic, cratae-
golic acids; phenolic acids (caffeic, chlorogenic, and re-
lated phenolcarboxylic acids)””

Actions: Cardiotonic, diuretic, astringent, hypotensive

Indications: A tonic in the true sense, Crataegus can be
considered a specific remedy for most cardiovascular dis-
ease. A whole plant preparation should be used, as the in-
dividual effects of isolated constituents proved insignifi-
cant when tested in the laboratory. The whole plant, on
the other hand, has unique and valuable properties. After
a four-year study commissioned by the German Federal
Ministry of Health, Crataegus gained recognition as a
heart remedy in Europe. Please see chapter 14 for a more
detailed discussion of these research results and the pos-
sible mechanisms of action of this important herb.

Hawthorn’s primary attribute appears to be an ability
to improve coronary circulation. It dilates the coronary
arteries, relieving cardiac hypoxemia. Consequently, it re-
duces the likelihood of angina attacks and relieves symp-
toms of angina when they occur. The herb thus directly af-
fects the cells of the cardiac muscle, enhancing both
activity and nutrition.

Crataegus is also positively inotropic; that is, it in-
creases the contractility of cardiac muscle. However, it is
quite different in activity from the cardiac glycoside-con-
taining remedies. They impact the contractile fibers,
while Crataegus assists with the availability and utilization
of energy, facilitating a gentle but sustained reversal of
degenerative, age-related changes.

Used in conjunction with other cardiac herbs,
Crataegus helps keep the heart in healthy condition, min-

“ imizing the risk of the development of coronary disease.
It is indicated for cardiovascular degenerative disease,
coronary artery disease, and associated conditions, in-
cluding angina pectoris, mild congestive heart failure, es-
sential hypertension, and recovery after myocardial in-
farction. It is especially beneficial for loss of function due
to old age that has not yet resulted in overt pathology. It
causes no toxicity, accumulation, or habituation, and is
safe for long-term use in the elderly.

Safety Considerations: Hawthorn enhances the activity
of cardioactive drugs, such as Digitalis spp., Convallaria
majalis, strophanthin, and the cardiac glycosides digitoxin
and digoxin. However, because of its coronary vasodilat-
ing and antiarrhythmic effects, it also potentially reduces
the toxicity of these cardiac glycosides by reducing the
dosage needed to achieve the desired effect.

Hawthorn procyanidins have reportedly potentiated
coronary artery dilation caused by theophylline, caffeine,
papaverine, sodium nitrate, adenosine, and epinephrine.
However, the European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy (ESCOP) monograph does not list any in-
teractions, so some authorities apparently do not consider
these interactions significant.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 ml
three times daily, then 2.5 ml morning and evening as a
maintenance dose (1:5 in 40%). For the treatment of
acute or severe conditions, use up to 5 ml three times a
day. In the elderly, treatment should be continued over
many months. To make an infusion, infuse 2 teaspoons of
dried herb in 1 cup of boiling water; this should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage suggested in the BHP is 0.3 to 1 g dried herb,
1 to 2 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times a day. Commission E recom-
mends 160 to 900 mg water-ethanol extract (correspond-
ing to 30 to 168.7 mg procyanidins, calculated as epicate-
chin, and 3.5 to 19.8 mg flavonoids, calculated as
hyperoside).

Hawthorn, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Daucus carota L.
Wild Carrot
Apiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts, seed

Constituents: Flavonoids; daucine (an alkaloid); volatile
oil; petroselinic acid; tannins®?

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic, carminative, antispasmodic,
antirheumatic

Indications: The volatile oil present in wild carrot is an
active urinary antiseptic, which helps explain its applica-
tion in such conditions as cystitis and prostatitis. It has
been considered a specific for the treatment of kidney
stones. For the treatment of gout and rheumatism, it is
used as a diuretic in combination with other remedies.
The seeds may be used as a settling carminative agent for
the relief of flatulence and colic.

----- PAGE 551 -----
Safety Considerations: Juice of the fresh plant may
cause photosensitivity.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion of
aerial parts, pour | cup of boiling water over | teaspoon
of dried herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day. To prepare an infusion of
seeds, use '/3 to | teaspoon per cup of water. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Wild Carrot, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Dioscorea villosa L.
Wild Yam
Dioscoreaceae

Parts Used: Dried underground parts

Constituents: Steroidal saponins, based on diosgenin:
dioscin, dioscorin, and others*!

Actions: Antispasmodic, anti-irflammatory, anti-

rheumatic, hepatic, cholagogue, diaphoretic

Indications: This valuable herb was at one time the sole
source of the chemicals used as raw material for the man-
ufacture of contraceptive hormones. However, this
should not be taken to mean that the herb is a source of
so-called natural progesterone. The human body is inca-
pable of converting the sapogenins to sex hormones.

In herbal medicine, wild yam is a remedy that can be
used to relieve intestinal colic, soothe diverticulitis, ease
dysmenorrhea, and relieve ovarian and uterine pains.
It is of great use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthri-
tis, especially the acute phase, in which there is intense
inflammation.

Priest and Priest described wild yam and its indica-
tions in the following way:

. .. autonomic nerve relaxant, especially for gastrointesti-
nal conditions, vegetative neuroses and hyperaesthesiae.
Rheumatic syndromes arising trom hepatic and intestinal
dysfunction.

They offered the following specific indications: bil-
ious colic, flatulence, gastrointestinal irritation, neuralgic
conditions, dysmenorrhea, uterine pains, nervousness,
restlessness, and pains of pregnancy.

Ellingwood considered it specific for

... sudden spasmodic griping pain in the stomach and
bowels. It is specific in bilious colic, in the pain of the
passing of gallstones, in mild cases, anc! is valuable in spas-

modie colic of any kind.

MaTERIA MEDICA €: 543

In addition, Ellingwood recommended it for neuralgic
dysmenorrhea, ovarian neuralgia, and cramplike pains.
King’s provides the following monograph:

It is a specific in bilious colic, having proved almost in-
variably successful in doses of '/2 pint of the decoction, re~
peated every half hour or hour. No other medicine is re-
quired, as it gives prompt and permanent relief in the
most severe cases. In fact: it is not only of value in bilious
colic, but in all forms of colic and other painful abdomi-

nal neuroses and all forms of gastro-intestinal irritation. If
it does not relieve in one hour, the medicine should be
discontinued. It has allayed the pain incident to the pas-

sage of biliary calculi when given with full doses of
gelsemium.

It will likewise allay nausea, also spasms of the bow-
els and combined with equal parts of Cornus sericea in de-
coction, is eminently beneficial in the nausea and vomit-
ing of pregnancy. This root appears to exert an action
especially upon enfeebled and irritable mucous tissues

that become painful from spasmodic contractions of their
muscular fibers; hence its value in bilious colic, in painful
dysenteric tenesmus, in dysmenorrhoea (the result of
spasmodic irritation of the mucous membrane), of the
cervix utert and in spasmodic irritations of the gastric mu-
cous membrane attended with pain, nausea and vomiting.
It is reputed useful in indigestion with hepatic derange-
ment, in chronic hepatic congestion and in the chronic
gastritis of drunkards. Ic is also useful in after-pains.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb, 2 to 10 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) three times daily.

Drosera rotundifolia L.

Sundew

Droseraceae

Parts Used: Whole plant

Constituents: Naphthoquinones, including plumbagin;
flavonoids (kaempferol, myricetin, quercetin, hypero-
side); miscellaneous: carotenoids, plant acids, resin, tan-
nins, ascorbic acid*?

Actions: Antispasmodic, antitussive, expectorant

----- PAGE 552 -----
544 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Indications: Sundew may be used to great benefit in
bronchitis and whooping cough. The presence of
plumbagin helps to explain its actions here, as the con-
stituent has been shown to be active against Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus, and Pneumococcus bacteria. Sundew is also
effective against infections in other parts of the respira-
tory tract, and its relaxing effect upon involuntary mus-
cles makes it useful in relieving asthma. In addition to
pulmonary conditions, sundew has a long history of use
for treating stomach ulcers.

Drosera prevents acetylcholine- or histamine-induced
bronchospasm and has antitussive properties. These anti-
spasmodic actions have been attributed to its naphtho-
quinone constituents. Antimicrobial properties have been
documented for the naphthoquinones. In vivo, plumba-
gin demonstrated a broad spectrum of activity against
various gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, in-
fluenza viruses, pathogenic fungi, and parasitic proto-
zoans. Successful treatment of Microsporum infections in
guinea pigs by local applications of 0.25% to 0.5% solu-
tions of plumbagin (in 40% alcohol) or 1% emulsions has
been reported. However, plumbagin was ineffective
against Lamblia muris and tuberculosis infection when
administered orally to mice for 5 days.®

Safety Considerations: No side effects or toxicity has
been documented. Plumbagin has a LDsg of 15 mg/kg
body weight (i.p.) in mice.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is ] to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. Commission E recommends a dosage of 3 g
herb daily.

Droserae longifoliae herba, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Echinacea spp.
Echinacea
Asteraceae

Other Name: Purple coneflower. The main Echinacea
species available in commerce are E. purpurea, E. angusti-
folia, and E. pallida.

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Caffeic acid esters (0.6% to 2.1%) includ-
ing echinacoside (in £. angustifolia but not E. purpurea)
and cichoric acid (E. purpurea only); alkylamides, mostly
unsaturated isobutyl amides (including dodeca-2,4,8,10-
tetraenoic acid); polysaccharides (including echinacin B);
polyacetylenes; essential oil®

Actions: Antimicrobial, immunomodulator, anti-
inflammatory, anticatarrhal, vulnerary, alterative

Indications: Echinacea is one of the primary remedies
for helping the body rid itself of microbial infections. It is
often effective against both bacterial and viral attacks. It
may be used for conditions such as boils, septicemia, and
similar infections, and, in conjunction with other herbs, it
may be used for any infection anywhere in the body. For
example, in combination with yarrow or bearberry, it is
effective against cystitis.

Echinacea is especially useful for infections of the
upper respiratory tract, including laryngitis, tonsillitis,
the common cold, and other catarrhal conditions of the
nose and sinus. In general, it may be used widely and
safely. Tincture or decoction of echinacea may be used as
a mouthwash for gingivitis or pyorrhea. The herb may be
applied externally as a lotion to treat septic sores and cuts.

Much research has focused upon this plant, providing
important insights into its activity and potential uses.
Constituents from the roots have demonstrated mild ac-
tivity against Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus. The
caffeic acid derivative echinacoside was the most active;
about 6 mg were reported to be equivalent to 1 unit of
penicillin.2° Treatment with tincture reduced both the
rate of growth and the rate of reproduction of Trichomonas
vaginalis, and was deemed effective in halting recurrence
of Candida albicans infection.**

In other studies, echinacea appeared to prevent infec-
tion and repair tissue damaged by infection, partially by
inhibiting the activity of the enzyme hyaluronidase.®” The
hyaluronidase system is a primary defense mechanism in
which connective “ground substance,” composed largely
of hyaluronic acid, acts as a barrier against pathogenic
organisms. Some pathogens activate an enzyme,
hyaluronidase, which destroys the integrity of the ground
substance. The barrier then becomes leaky, allowing
pathogens to invade, attach themselves to exposed cells,
penetrate the membranes, and kill the cells. The result is an
inflammatory infection.

Echinacea inhibits the action of hyaluronidase by
bonding with it in some way, causing a temporary in-
crease in the integrity of the barrier and impairing the
ability of pathogens to stimulate the destruction of the
ground substance. A range of constituents mediates this
process, especially a complex polysaccharide called echi-
nacin B. This anti-hyaluronidase action also supports the
regeneration of connective tissue destroyed during infec-
tion and the elimination of pathogenic organisms that
create infection.

Purified polysaccharides from echinacea strongly ac-

----- PAGE 553 -----
tivate the body’s macrophage-mediated defense system.
Macrophages initiate the destruction of pathogens and
cancer cells. Echinacea activates macrophages on its
own, independent of any effect on T cells. A tumor-
inhibiting principle—an oncolytic lipid-soluble hydro-
carbon from the essential oil—has also been identified.
The echinacoside glycosides appeat to be the primary
“antibiotics” in echinacea, but they probably function
synergistically with many other active substances present
in the plant. The polysaccharides possess the best immune-
stimulating properties and are also antiviral. Other con-
stituents have been shown to possess good antitumor,
bacteriostatic, and anesthetic properties.

Clinical data support the use of echinacea in a vari-
ety of situations.® It is indicated primarily for the pre-
vention and treatment of acute infections, particularly
colds, influenza, and other acute upper respiratory tract
infections, in which it reduces both the duration and
severity of symptoms. This all points to a conclusion that
echinacea’s actions are related on some level to immune
system function, as it helps the body deal with infections
and stimulates immune response. The herb activates the
macrophages that destroy cancer cells and pathogens and
increases phagocytosis by raising levels of white blood
cells, such as neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, and B-
lymphocytes. It also affects propericin levels, suggesting
activation of the complement system.

Safety Considerations: Echinacea rnay cause allergic re-
actions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae fam-
ily. Theoretically, it may interfere with immunosuppres-
sant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Echinacea is often inappropri-
ately used as “daily immune support.” It is more appro-
priately used to treat active infection or at the first sign of
an acute infection.

Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in
40%). To make a decoction, put 1 to 2 teaspoons of root
in 1 cup of water and bring slowly to a boil. Let simmer
for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times
a day.

The BHC recommends 1 g dried root, 2 to § ml tinc-
ture (1:5 in 45%), or 0.5 to 1 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) of Echinacea angustifolia three times daily.
Commission E suggests E. pallida tincture (1:5 in 50%,
from dry extract) corresponding to 900 mg herb or 6 to
9 ml expressed juice of E. purpurea daily.

Echinacea, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

MATERIA MEDICA <> 545

Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. and
Maxim.) Maxim.

Siberian Ginseng

Araliaceae

Other Names: Acanthopanax senticosus; eleuthero
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Eleutherosides A-E; glycosides of a range
of aglycones, including sterols, lignans, and phenolics;
polysaccharides®!

Action: Adaptogen

Indications: Siberian ginseng is one of the primary adap-
togens in use today. As discussed in more detail in chap-
ter 25, an adaptogen is « substance that acts to enhance
the body’s nonspecific resistance to various internal and
external stressors. Because of this nonspecific action,
Siberian ginseng can be recommended as a general tonic
with a very wide range of clinical indications.

Siberian ginseng improves the body’s resistance to
environmental stressors and enhances physical and men-
tal performance. It stimulates many aspects of the im-
mune response, is antihepatotoxic, and increases resis-
tance to oxygen deprivation of the heart.” The herb is
especially useful for conditions influenced by the stress
response, including angina, hypertension, hypotension,
various types of neuroses, chronic bronchitis, and cancer.
It is beneficial against the effects of prolonged stress or
overwork such as exhaustion, irritability, insomnia, and
mild depression.

Siberian ginseng may also be employed to support re-

covery from acute or chronic diseases, trauma, surgery,
and other stressful events, and can help counter the de-
bilitating effects of treatrnents such as chemotherapy and
radiation. It may be taken on a long-term basis to mini-
mize the incidence of acute infections and to generally
improve well-being.
Safety Considerations: Siberian ginseng may interfere
with cardiac medications (including hypo- and hyperten-
sive drugs) and hypoglycemic agents. It may also enhance
some drug effects, In a clinical study, the herb appeared to
increase the efficacy of the antibiotics monomycin and
kanamycin, used to treat Shigella dysentery and Proteus
enterocolitis.

Preparations and Dosage: Based upon clinical studies,
standard tincture dosage is 50 to 100 drops three times a
day. An equivalent dosage for a solid extract concentrated
at a ratio of 20:1 would be 100 to 200 mg. The recom-
mended regimen is usually for a 6-week course of treat-
ment followed by a 2-week break.

----- PAGE 554 -----
546 2 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 2 to 3 g dried
root and rhizome or equivalent preparations three times
daily. Commission E suggests 2 to 3 g of root daily.

Siberian Ginseng, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Elymus repens (L.) Beauvois
Couch Grass
Poaceae

Other Name: Formerly Agropyron repens
Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Carbohydrates (10%): triticin, inositol,
mannitol, and mucilage; volatile oil (0.05%), mainly
agropyrene; flavonoids (tricin)

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent, antimicrobial

Indications: Couch grass may be used in urinary tract in-
fections such as cystitis, urethritis, and prostatitis. Its
demulcent properties soothe irritation and inflammation.
The herb is of value in the treatment of benign prostatic
hypertrophy (BPH, or enlarged prostate), and may also
be used for kidney stones and gravel. As a tonic diuretic,
couch grass has been used in combination with other
herbs for rheumatism. Research has demonstrated broad
antibiotic activity for the terpene constituent agropyrene
and its oxidation product.

Safety Considerations: There is a theoretical risk of
potassium depletion when couch grass is used in combi-
nation with potassium-depleting diuretics.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of cut rhizome in | cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage recommendations from the BHP are 4 to 8 g
dried herb, 5 to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 40%), or 4 to 8 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day. The BPC lists
a fluid extract dosage of 3.5 ml to 20 ml three times a day.
Commission E recommends 6 to 9 g dried herb daily.

Couch Grass, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Ephedra sinica Stapf
Ephedra
Ephedraceae

Other Name: Ma huang
Part Used: Stem

Constituents: Alkaloids (L-ephedrine, with D-ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, norephedrine, N-methylephedrine,

benzylmethylamine); flavonoid glycosides; glycans;
proanthocyanidins”>

Actions: Vasodilator, hypertensive, circulatory stimulant,
antiallergic

Indications: Ephedra has been used in China for at least
5,000 years to treat a range of health problems. This an-
cient medicinal plant was also mentioned in the Hindu
Vedas. With the discovery of the alkaloids in ephedra, this
time-honored, traditional herbal wisdom was verified,
providing modern medicine with important healing tools.

Ephedra contains a range of therapeutically active al-
kaloids, which sometimes amount to up to 2% of the dried
herb. Various Asian Ephedra species provide the source
material for the widely used alkaloids ephedrine and pseu-
doephedrine, mainly E. sinica and E. equisetina from China
and E. gerardiana from India. The alkaloids present in
ephedra have apparently opposite effects on the body.
The whole plant, as used in traditional herbal medicine,
has an overall beneficial, balancing action.

A brief review of the pharmacology of these alkaloids
may prove illuminating. Ephedrine was the first ephedra
alkaloid to find wide use in Western medicine, being
hailed as a “cure for asthma” because of its ability to relax
airways in the lungs. Unfortunately, as is often the way
with miracle cures, it soon became clear that this isolated
ephedra constituent had unacceptable side effects that
dramatically limited its use. The adverse effects were re-
lated to the way in which ephedrine stimulates the auto-
nomic nervous system, which has the effect of elevating
blood pressure, among others. Studies on the whole
plant, however, demonstrated only a slight blood pressure
elevation. This led researchers to the discovery that pseu-
doephedrine, another ephedra alkaloid, slightly reduces
heart rate and lowers blood pressure, thus avoiding the
side effects of ephedrine.®

Pseudoephedrine is also an effective bronchodilator,
equivalent in strength to ephedrine. However, it has the
advantage of causing less stimulation of the nervous sys-
tem, and thus less vasoconstriction, tachycardia, and
other cardiovascular symptoms. Clinical studies have
shown that pseudoephedrine has insignificant side effects.
The efficacy and safety of pseudoephedrine are recog-
nized by the Food and Drug Administration, which ap-
proved it as an over-the-counter nasal decongestant.

All of these findings confirm the traditional applica-
tions of Ephedra sinica as an etfective treatment for nasal
congestion and sinus pressure, whether due to the com-
mon cold, allergies, or sinusitis. The herb is used with
great success in the treatment of asthma, bronchial
asthma, bronchitis, and associated conditions, because of

----- PAGE 555 -----
its power to relieve spasms in the brenchial tubes. It eases
allergic reactions, giving it a role in the treatment of hay
fever and other allergies. It may also be employed to treat
low blood pressure and circulatory insufficiency.

Safety Considerations: Combined with cardiac glyco-
sides or halothane, ephedra can produce cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Guanethidine enhances the sympathomimetic ef-
fect of ephedra. Combining ephedra with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors can significantly increase the sympath-
omimetic action of the alkaloid ephedrine in the herb,
possibly causing fatal hypertension. Used in combination
with secale alkaloid derivatives (e.g., ergotamine) or oxy-
tocin can produce hypertension.°78

Ephedra is contraindicated for people with certain
health problems. It should not be used in the presence of
cardiovascular conditions, thyroid disease, or diabetes, or
by men experiencing difficulty urinating due to prostate
enlargement.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:4 in 45%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a single daily dose cor-
responding to 15 to 30 mg total alkaloid.

Ephedra, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Equisetum arvense L.
Horsetail
Equisetaceae

Part Used: Dried stem

Constituents: Alkaloids (including nicotine, palustrine,
and palustrinine); flavonoids (such as isoquercitrin and
equicetrin); sterols (including cholesterol, isofucosterol,
campesterol); silicic acid; miscellaneous: a saponin (equi-
sitonin), dimethylsulphone, thiaminase, aconitic acid”?

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, vulnerary

Indications: Horsetail is an excellent astringent for the
genitourinary system, reducing hemorrhage. While it acts
as a mild diuretic, its toning and astringent actions make
it invaluable in the treatment of incontinence and bed-
wetting in children. It is considered a specific for cases of
inflammation or benign enlargement of the prostate
gland. Applied externally, it is a vulnerary that helps heal
skin wounds. In some cases, it has been found to ease the
pain of rheumatism and stimulate the healing of
chilblains.

Materia MEDICA = 547

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried plant and
infuse for 15 to 20 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Horsetail may be used to make a bath to help with
rheumatic pain and chilblains. Steep 100 g (3'/2 ounces) of
herb in hot water for | hour and add to the bath.

The BHC recommends | to 4 g dried herb, 2 to 6 ml
tincture (1:5 in 25%), or | to 4 ml fluid extract three times
a day. Commission E suggests 6 g of herb or equivalent
preparations daily.

Horsetail, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Eschscholzia californica Cham.
California Poppy
Papaveraceae

Parts Used: Dried aeria} parts
Constituents: Alkaloids; flavone glycosides!
Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, anodyne

Indications: California poppy has been used as a sedative
and hypnotic for children, especially in cases of overex-
citement and sleeplessness. It can be used wherever an an-
tispasmodic remedy is indicated—for example, for colic
pain. It may also be useful to treat gallbladder colic.

Safety Considerations: California poppy has additive ef-
fects when used with other sedatives.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture (1:5 in 25%) dosage
is 1 to 4 ml at night for sleeplessness in children. For an-
tispasmodic indications, «ase 0.5 to 2 ml three times daily.
To make an infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 1
to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and infuse for 10 minutes. A
cup drunk at night will promote restful sleep.

Eucalyptus globulus Labill.
Eucalyptus
Myrtaceae

Other Name: Blue gum

Parts Used: Leaf, essential oil distilled from leaf
Constituents: Volatile oil (0.5% to 3.5%): 1,8-cineole
(= eucalyptol, 70% to 85%); a-pinene, p-pinene, d-
limonene, a@-phellandrene; polyphenolic acids (caffeic,
ferulic, gallic, protocatechuic, and others); flavonoids (in-
cluding eucalyptin, hyperosides, rutin)'®!

----- PAGE 556 -----
548 «2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

Actions: Antimicrobial, antispasmodic, expectorant,
stimulant, febrifuge

Indications: Eucalyptus leaf is used topically as an anti-
microbial and internally as a decongestant and expecto-
rant. The essential oil is used in aromatherapy.

King’s American Dispensatory described the way this
plant was used by the Eclectic physicians. Here are some
relevant excerpts:

Eucalyptus globulus has for a long time been known as a
remedy for intermittent fever among the natives of the
countries of its origin. Aside from its alleged utility in in-
termittents, this agent has had other virtues attributed to
it, as follows: The leaves and their preparations have been
successfully used as a tonic and gently stimulating stom-
achic, in atonic dyspepsia, and in catarrh of the stomach
and typhoid fever; also advised in mucous catarrhal affec-
tions generally, in pseudo-membranous laryngitis, in
asthma, with profuse secretion, and in chronic bronchitis,
with or without emphysema, and in whooping-cough; it
has likewise proved efficient in chronic catarrh of the
bladder, where the urine is high-colored, contains an ab-
normal amount of mucus, or, perhaps, some purulent
matter, and micturation is attended with much pain.
More recently it has been recommended as a diuretic in
the treatment of dropsy. Both the leaves and the oil are
excitants and deodorizers, and, as such, have been suc-
cessfully employed as local applications in bronchial af-
fections with fetid expectoration, in ozena, in fetid or pro-
fuse mucous discharges, in vaginal leucorrhoea, offensive
lochial discharges, gonorrhoeal discharges, indolent, fetid
wounds or ulcers, cancerous ulcerations, in septicemia,
and in gangrene. The leaves may, in some cases, be ap-
plied alone, directly to the part, in form of cataplasm; or
they may be combined with other articles to form a poul-

tice. The oil may be applied of full strength, or diluted
with some other agent. In throat and pulmonary mal-
adies, a tincture diluted, or a medicated water, may be in-
haled in the form of spray; if the oil be employed, it may
be dropped on some cotton placed in a small tube, from
which the vapor may be inhaled. As a deodorizer, the tinc-
ture or the oil may be sprinkled or sprayed upon the of-
fensive body, or the atmosphere of an apartment may be
frequently sprayed with the same. Externally applied, the
oil gives relief in some forms of neuralgic and rheumatic
pains. The leaves of Eucalyptus, made up into cigars or
cigarettes, and smoked, have been advised to afford relief
in bronchial catarrh, asthma, and other affections of the
respiratory organs. .. . Excalyptus honey, gathered by bees
from Eucalyptus flowers, is quite active, and has been rec-

ommended for parasitic and putrescent conditions, gon-
orrhoea, fevers, and catarrhal diseases.

A plant preparation containing a mixture of various
herbal tinctures, including eucalyptus, has been used suc-
cessfully to treat chronic suppurative otitis. The efficacy
of the preparation was attributed to the antibacterial and
anti-inflammatory actions of the herbs.!”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 25%). Make an infusion with 1 to 2
teaspoons of the leaves to 1 cup of boiling water. Infuse in
a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of 4 to 6 g
leaf or 3 to 9 g tincture.

Eucalyptus leaf and oil, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded
Commission E Monographs

Euonymus atropurpureus Jacq.
Wahoo
Celastraceae

Other Name: Spindle tree
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Cardenolides based on digitoxigenin; al-
kaloids, such as asparagine and atropurpurine; sterols (eu-
onysterol, atropurpurol, homoeuonysterol)'™

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, laxative, diuretic, circula-
tory stimulant

Indications: Wahoo is one of the primary liver herbs. It
alleviates congestion in the liver, facilitating the free flow
of bile and thus supporting the digestive process. It may
be used to treat jaundice and gallbladder problems, such
as inflammation and pain or congestion due to stones. It
will relieve constipation due to liver or gallbladder prob-
lems. Because of its normalizing action upon the liver, it
may be beneficial for a range of skin problems in which
the liver may play a role.
Ellingwood considered wahoo specific for

.». indigestion with biliousness, constipation, chronic in-
termittents with cachexia, pulmonary phthisis with night
sweats and great weakness; dropsical affections following
acute disease; in convalescence from severe intermittent
fever; enlargement of the liver; chronic bronchitis.

In addition, he recommended it for malarial cachexia,
as a nutritive tonic, as a hepatic stimulant, and for chronic
pulmonary complaints.

----- PAGE 557 -----
Safety Considerations: Wahoo is contraindicated for
people taking cardiac glycosides or other cardioactive
agents.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of water over 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of herb, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC lists a dosage of 0.3 to 1 g dried bark, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 0.6 to 2.6 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%),
or 0.3 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times a day.

Euonymus Bark, in British Herbal. Compendium, vol. 1

Eupatorium perfoliatum L.
Boneset
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (eupafolin, euper-
folitin, eufoliatin, eufoliatorin, euperfolide, eucannabino-
lide, and helenalin); immunostimulatory polysaccharides;
flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol, hyperoside, astragalin,
rutin, eupatorin, and others); miscellaneous: diterpenes
(dendroidinic acid, hebenolide); sterols; volatile oil!"

Actions: Diaphoretic, bitter, laxative, tonic, antispas-
modic, carminative, astringent

Indications: Boneset is one of the best remedies for the
relief of symptoms that accompany influenza. It will
speedily relieve aches and pains and help the body deal
with any fever present. Boneset may also be used to help
clear the upper respiratory tract of mucus congestion. Its
mild aperient activity eases constipation. Overall, it is a
safe choice for any fever and for use as a general cleansing
agent. It may also provide symptomatic relief as part of
treatment for muscular rheumatism.

High dilutions of various sesquiterpene lactones iso-
lated from E. perfoliatum demonstrated immunostimulant
activity.!°5 In addition, polysaccharide fractions from E.
perfoliatum showed immumostimulaat actions in granulo-
cyte, macrophage, and carbon clearance tests!

King’s American Dispensatory included an extensive
monograph on boneset, an excerpt of which is included
here:

As a tonic, it is useful in remittent, intermittent, and ty-
phoid fevers, dyspepsia, and general debility. In intermit-
tent fever, a strong infusion, as hot as can be comfortably
swallowed, is administered for the purpose of vomiting
freely. This is also attended with profuse diaphoresis, and
sooner or later by an evacuation of the bowels. During the

MaTeRIA MEDICA @ 549

intermission, the cold infusion or extract is given every
hour as a tonic and antiperiodic. The chill and succeeding
fever is slight, the skin dry, and not, as a rule, followed by
perspiration; there are pains in the bones, praecordial op-
pression, and great thirst. If, however, the case is one in
which the fever lasts all day, a slight sweating may follow
at night. Another indication in ague is vomiting, espe-
cially of much bile. Eupatorium given as above, or some-
times in small doses, may relieve headache of intermittent
character when the intermissions are irregular. In epi-
demic influenza the warm infusion is valuable as an
emetic and diaphoretic, likewise in febrile diseases,
catarrh, colds, with hoarseness and pleuritic pains, and
wherever such effects are indicated. In influenza it re-
lieves the pain in the limbs and back. Its popular name
“boneset” is derived from its well-known property of re-

lieving the deep seated pains in the limbs which accom-
pany this disorder, and colds and rheumatism. Often this
pain is periosteal, and if neuralgic in character, or due to
a febrile condition, Eupatorium will relieve it. But it is not
a remedy for periosteal pain due to inflammation or to or-
ganic changes in the periosteum. On the other hand,
when given until the patient sweats, and then continued
in 5-drop doses of specific eupatorium it has relieved the
severe nocturnal muscular and “bone pains” of syphilis. It
is a remedy for the cough of the aged, that cough in which
there is an abundance of secretion, but lack of power to
expectorate. The cough of measles, common colds, of
asthma, and hoarseness are also relieved by it. Unless
given in excess it acts as a good tonic to the gastric func-
tions, increasing the appetite and power of digestion.

Safety Considerations: Boneset may cause allergic reac-
tions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk as
hot as possible. For fevers or flu, it should be drunk every
half hour; otherwise, drink three times a day.

Boneset, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals
Eupatorium purpureum L.

Gravel Root
Asteraceae

Other Name: Also commonly known as Joe pye. Do not
confuse with boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum).

Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Volatile oil, of unknown composition;
flavonoids (including euparin); resin!”

----- PAGE 558 -----
550 <= TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic, antirheumatic

Indications: Gravel root is used primarily to treat kidney
stones or gravel. It may also be of benefit in urinary tract
infections, such as cystitis or urethritis, and can also play
a useful role in a systemic treatment of rheumatism and
gout.

Ellingwood considered it to have the following
indications:

Irritation of the bladder in women from displacement and
chronic inflammation of the uterus; and suppression of
urine, partial or complete, during or after pregnancy,

He recommended it for dropsy, strangury, gravel,
hematuria, diseases of the kidney and bladder due to an ex-
cess of uric acid, chronic endometriosis, leukorrhea,
chronic uterine disease, threatened abortion, ovarian and
uterine atony, dysmenorrhea, dysuria, constant desire to
urinate, intermittent fever, and severe bone pains.

Safety Considerations: Gravel root may cause allergic
reaction in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put 1 tea-
spoon of herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil, and sim-
mer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Gravel Root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Eupbrasia officinalis L.
Eyebright
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides, including aucubin
(0.5%); tannins (about 12%, both condensed and hy-
drolyzable gallic acid types); phenolic acids (including
caffeic and ferulic); volatile oil (about 0.2%); flavonoids!

Actions: Anticatarrhal, astringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Eyebright is an excellent remedy for
mucous membrane problems. Its combination of anti-
inflammatory and astringent properties makes it relevant
for many conditions. Used internally, eyebright is a pow-
erful anticatarrhal, and thus may be used to treat nasal
catarrh, sinusitis, and other congestive states. However,
the herb is best known for its use in eye conditions, in-
cluding acute or chronic inflammations, stinging and
weeping eyes, and oversensitivity to light. It may be ap-
plied as a compress in conjunction with internal use for
conjunctivitis and blepharitis.

Priest and Priest described it as a

... mild stimulating astringent. Vaso-constrictor to vessels
of nasal and conjunctival membranes, Specific for conges-
tive conditions of the eyes with profuse lachrymation.

‘They gave these specific indications: catarrhal ble-
pharitis, rhinitis, sinusitis, conjunctivitis, hay fever, acute
coryza, irritable sneezing, and lachrymation.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 5 to 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

For a compress, place 1 teaspoon of 1 dried herb in
1/ liter (1 pint) of water. Boil for 10 minutes and let cool
slightly. Moisten a cloth in the nkewarm liquid, wring
out slightly, and place over the eyes. Leave the compress
in place for 15 minutes. Repeat several times a day.

Eyebright, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Filipendula ulmaria (..) Maxim.
Meadowsweet
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil; salicylaldehyde (up to 70%),
ethylsalicylate, methylsalicylate, phenolic glycosides (spi-
raein, monotropin, gaultherin); flavonoids (flavonols,
flavones, flavanones, and chalcone derivatives); polyphe-
nolics and other tannins, mainly hydrolyzable (1% in al-
cohol extract, 12.5% in aqueous extract); miscellaneous:
phenylcarboxylic acids, coumarin, vitamin C!”

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, carminative,
antacid, antiemetic, astringent

Indications: Meadowsweet is one of the best digestive
remedies available. As such, it will be indicated in many
conditions, if they are approached holistically. The herb
protects and soothes the mucous membranes of the di-
gestive tract, reducing excess acidity and easing nausea. It
is used in the treatment of heartburn, hyperacidity, gas-
tritis, and peptic ulceration, Its gentle astringency is espe-
cially helpful in children’s diarrhea. The presence of as-
pirin-like chemicals (alicylates) explains meadowsweet’s
ability to reduce fever and relieve the pain of rheumatism
in muscles and joints.

Safety Considerations: Meadowsweet should be avoided
by people with salicylate sensitivity.

----- PAGE 559 -----
Preparations and Dosage: ‘Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day or as needed.
The BHC recommends 2 to 6 g dried herb, 2 to 4 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 6 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times daily. Commission E suggests 2.5 to 3.5 g
flower or 4 to 5 g herb or equivalent preparations daily.

Meadowsweet, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Foeniculum vulgare Mill.
Fennel

Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (8%): anethole (60% to 80%),
fenchone (10% to 30%); flavonoids (mainly rutin,
quercetin, and kaempferol glycosides); coumarins (ber-
gapten, imperatorin, xanthotoxin, and marmesin); miscel-

laneous: sterols, fixed oils, sugars!!®

Actions: Carminative, aromatic, antispasmodic, anti-in-
flammatory, galactagogue, hepatic

Indications: Fennel is an excellent stomach and intestinal
remedy that relieves flatulence and colic while stimulating
digestion and appetite. It is similar to aniseed in its calm-
ing effect in bronchitis and other coughs, and is a good
choice for flavoring cough remedies. Fennel may increase
milk flow in nursing mothers. Used externally, the essen-
tial oil eases muscular and rheumatic pains. Fennel infu-
sion may be used as a compress to treat conjunctivitis and
blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids).

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of slightly crushed
seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day. To ease flatulence,
take a cup '/2 hour before meals.

Recommended dosage from the BHP is 0.3 to 0.6 g
herb or 0.8 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 70%) three times
daily. The USP suggests 1 g herb, 15 ml fennel water (hy-
drosol), or 0.2 ml essential oil. Fhe BPC suggests a three
times daily dose of 25 to 30 ml fennel water or 0.3 ml oil three
times daily. Daily dosage recommended by Commission E
is § to 7 g herb, 10 to 20 g syrup or honey, 5 to 7.5 ml
compound fennel tincture, or equivalent preparations.

Fennel fruit, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Materia MEDICA <> 551

Fucus vesiculosus L.
Kelp
Fucaceae

Other Name: Bladderwrack
Part Used: Whole plant (a seaweed)

Constituents: Phenolic compounds (phloroglucinol,
fucols); mucopolysaccharides (algin); sulphuryl-, sulpho-
nyl-, and phosphonyl-glycosyl ester diglycerides; polar
lipids; trace metals (particularly iodine)!!!
Actions: Antihypothyroid, antirheumatic

Indications: Bladderwrack has proved useful in the treat-
ment of underactive thyroid and goiter. By regulating
thyroid function, the seaweed helps bring about improve-
ment in all related symptoms. For cases in which obesity
is associated with thyroid trouble, this herb may aid in
weight loss. It has a reputation for helping to relieve
symptoms of rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis, when
both taken internally and applied externally to inflamed
joints.

Safety Considerations: Kelp’s iodine content may cause
hyper- or hypothyroidism, and it may interfere with ex-
isting treatment for abnormal thyroid function.!!? In gen-
eral, brown seaweeds are known to concentrate various
heavy metals and other toxic elements. Elevated urinary
arsenic concentrations have been traced to ingestion of
kelp tablets. Prolonged ingestion of kelp may reduce gas-
trointestinal iron absorption (due to the binding proper-
ties of fucoidan), resulting in a slow reduction in
hemoglobin, packed cell volume, and serum iron concen-
trations. Prolonged ingestion may also affect absorption
of sodium and potassium ions (alginic acid) and cause
diarrhea.!3

Preparations and Dosage: Kelp may be taken in tablet
form as a dietary supplement or as an infusion. For an in-
fusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons
of dried herb and steep for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends 0.8 to 2 g dried thallus, 2 to
6 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 0.5 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1
in 25%) three times daily.

Fucus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Fumaria officinalis DC.
Fumitory

Fumariaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids!'*

----- PAGE 560 -----
552 @ TREATMEN1] APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, laxative, alterative, hepatic

Indications: Fumitory has a long history of use for the
treatment of skin problems, such as eczema and acne. Its
action is probably related to general cleansing mediated
via the kidneys and liver. Fumitory may also be used as an
eyewash to soothe conjunctivitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This may be drunk freely,
but for skin problems, it should be drunk at least three
times a day.

The BHC lists a dosage of 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to
4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.
Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 g dried
herb.

Fumariae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Galega officinalis L.
Goat’s Rue
Fabaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Amines (galegine, 4-hydroxygalegine,
peganine); flavonoids; saponins!!>

Actions: Hypoglycemic, galactagogue, diuretic, diaphoretic
Indications: Goat’s rue is one of many herbal remedies
with the ability to reduce blood sugar levels. It is thus po-
tentially indicated in diabetes mellitus. It cannot replace
insulin therapy, however, and should be used only under
professional supervision.

Goat's rue is also an effective galactagogue. It stimu-
lates both the production and flow of breast milk, and has
been shown to increase milk output by up to 50% in some
cases. It may also stimulate the development of the mam-
mary glands.

Safety Considerations: Goat's rue may potentiate the
action of hypoglycemic drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk twice
a day.

Galegae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Galium aparine L.
Cleavers
Rubiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Plant acids (caffeic, p-coumaric, gallic,
p-hydroxybenzoic, salicylic, citric); coumarins; iridoids
(asperuloside, rubichloric acid); tannins!!®

Actions: Diuretic, alterative, anti-inflammatory, tonic,
astringent

Indications: Cleavers is a very valuable plant, being per-
haps the best tonic available for the lymphatic system.
As a lymphatic tonic with alterative and diuretic actions,
it may be used safely for a wide range of problems in-
volving the lymphatic system. These include swollen
glands (lymphadenitis) anywhere in the body, especially
tonsillitis and adenoid trouble.

Cleavers is helpful in skin conditions, especially the
dry types, such as psoriasis. It makes a useful contribution
to the treatment of cystitis and other urinary tract condi-
tions associated with pain, and may be combined with uri-
nary demulcents for this. There is a long tradition of
using cleavers to treat ulcers and tumors. Cleavers also
makes an excellent vegetable.

Priest and Priest described cleavers as a

. soothing, relaxing and diffusive diuretic: increases
aqueous excretion, corrects inability to pass normal
catabolic wastes and relieves irritation. Preferred diuretic
for exanthemas.

They gave these specific indications: dropsy, renal
obstructions, bladder stone, gravel, calculi, scalding mic-
turation, dysuria, irritable bladder, cystitis, enuresis in
children, eczema, and psoriasis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparation and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. A pleasant and effective way of using
fresh cleavers is to juice or simply puree in a blender. The
resulting deep green liquid must be used right away or it
will ferment. However, it may be frozen immediately for
future use. An ice cube-sized piece makes an ideal dose.

Dosage listed in the BHC is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or
2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Clivers, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals

----- PAGE 561 -----
Gentiana lutea L.
Gentian
Gentianaceae

Parts Used: Dried rhizome and roct

Constituents: Iridoids: marogentin, gentiopicroside
(= gentiopicrin), swertiamarin; xanthones (gentisein, gen-
tisin, isogentisin); alkaloids: mainly gentianine (0.6% to
0.8%) and gentialutine; phenolic acids (including gen-
tisic, caffeic, protocatechuic, syringic, sinapic acids); mis-
cellaneous: sugars (such as gentianose and gentiobiose),
traces of volatile oil!!7

Actions: Bitter, sialagogue, hepatic, cholagogue, antimi-
crobial, anthelmintic, emmenagogue
Indications: Gentian is an excellent bitter that, like all
bitters, stimulates the appetite and digestion via general
stimulation of digestive juices. Thus, it promotes the pro-
duction of saliva, gastric juices, and bile. Because of this
stimulation, it has a generally fortitying effect. It also ac-
celerates the emptying of the stomach. It is indicated for
most cases involving lack of appetite and digestive slug-
gishness, as well as dyspepsia and flatulence.

Priest and Priest considered it an

... intense, bitter, stimulating tonic: influences digestive
organs, mucous membranes and the portal circulation.
Indicated for atonic and sub-acid states: slowly promotes
peristalsis and facilitates assimilation.

They offered the following specific indications: lan-
guid conditions and general debility, anorexia, alimentary
insufficiency; portal congestion, biliousness, and jaundice.

Safety Considerations: In predisposed persons, gentian
may cause headaches. Gentian is contraindicated during
pregnancy and for those with gastric or duodenal ulcers.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%), 15 to 30 minutes before
meals, or any time acute stomach pains are associated
with a feeling of fullness. To make a decoction, put '/2
teaspoon of shredded root in 1 cup of water and boil for
5 minutes. This should be drunk warm about 15 to 30
minutes before meals, or according to the guidelines
given for tincture.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 2 to 4 ¢
root, | to 3 ml tincture, or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract. The USP
(23th ed., 1943) suggests 1 to 2 g as decoction three times
daily; the BHP recommends 0.6 to 2 g by infusion or de-
coction or | to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times daily.

Gentian root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E.
Monographs

MATERIA MEDICA & 553

Geranium maculatum L.
Cranesbill
Geraniaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Tannins, including gallic acid (levels are
highest just before flowering)!!§

Actions: Astringent, antihemorrhagic, anti-inflammatory,
vulnerary

Indications: American cranesbill is an effective astringent
used for diarrhea, dysentery, and hemorrhoids. When
duodenal or gastric ulceration is associated with bleeding,
this remedy may be used in combination with other rele-
vant herbs. Cranesbill will help when blood is lost in the
feces, although careful diagnosis is vital. It is also indicated
for the treatment of menorrhagia (excessive blood loss
during menstruation) or metrorrhagia (uterine hemor-
rhage). As a douche, it may be used to treat leukorrhea.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, put | to
2 teaspoons of rhizome in | cup of cold water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 2 g by decoction, 2 to
4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 45%) three times a day.

Ginkgo biloba L.

Ginkgo

Ginkgoaceae

Parts Used: Leaf; seed kernel is used extensively in tradi-
tional Chinese medicine

Constituents: Diterpene lactones (ginkgolides A, B, C,
and J); sesquiterpene lactone (bilobalide); flavonol glyco-
sides (mainly flavone glycosides, including ginkgetin,
quercetin, and kaempferol derivatives)!!°

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vasodilator, relaxant, diges-
tive bitter, uterine stimulant

Indications: The modern use of ginkgo is not derived
from traditional Chinese medicine, although ginkgo fruit
has a long history of use in that system. Extracts of Ginkgo
biloba leaf were introduced into Western medical practice
in 1965 in Germany. Most pharmacologic studies on
ginkgo leaf for the treatment of peripheral vascular dis-
ease and cerebral insufficiency have utilized the propri-
etary extract EGb 761 and, more recently, L] 1370, not the
crude leaf or simple extracts.!?°

----- PAGE 562 -----
554 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Ginkgo’s primary actions are to increase blood sup-
ply, antagonize platelet activating factor (PAF), and pro-
tect and enhance brain function (an action known as cere-
broprotection). Its ability to improve circulation and thus
blood supply appears to be due to both its vasodilating
properties and its ability to reduce total blood viscosity.

Various mechanisms may underlie the vasodilating
activity—for example, effects on prostaglandin meta-
bolism that increase the synthesis of the vasodilator
prostacyclin. Ginkgo’s antioxidant, radical-scavenging
properties may also play a role. Its ability to lower patho-
logically elevated total blood viscosity seems to be due to
its PAF antagonism, which results in a reduction in
erythrocyte aggregation.

The ginkgolides and bilobalide appear to be respon-
sible for the herb’s cerebroprotective properties.!?!
Among other factors, researchers have studied ginkgo’s
ability to increase tolerance to hypoxia, protect against is-
chemia, improve energy metabolism, and reduce edema
in order to demonstrate the protective actions of ginkgo
extracts on experimentally damaged brain.

Other ginkgo actions are based on its radical-
scavenging effects and PAF antagonism. The constituents
of ginkgo extract with PAF-antagonistic activity are the
ginkgolides. In particular, ginkgolide B has been found to
be a very active PAF antagonist. As discussed elsewhere,
PAF binding to PAF receptors on target cells leads to the
release of mediators and to various physiologic reactions,
such as vasodilation and platelet aggregation. These ac-
tions are responsible for asthma, inflammation, and ana-
phylaxis. PAF antagonists block the PAF receptors of tar-
get cells. This inhibition of platelet aggregation appears
to be one of the most relevant actions associated with
ginkgo use.

Ginkgo’s main clinical indication is for the treatment
of cerebral insufficiency, a common problem in the el-
derly.'?? Among the symptoms typical of cerebral insuffi-
ciency are difficulties with concentration and memory,
absentmindedness, confusion, lack of energy, tiredness,
decreased physical performance, depressed mood, and
anxiety. Headache, vertigo, and tinnitus are other com-
mon complaints. These symptoms are associated with
impaired cerebral circulation, and are sometimes thought
to be early indications of dementia, either the degenera-
tive or the multiple infarct type. However, in some cases,
no explanation for the symptoms can be found.

Many experimental and clinical studies support the
efficacy of ginkgo extract in the treatment of peripheral
blood flow disorders. Vertigo, hearing disorders, and tin-
nitus have many and varied causes, but are often associ-
ated with insufficient perfusion of the brain or inner ear.

Vertigo is regarded as one of the pathologic conditions
that respond best to ginkgo extract. Ginkgo can also
contribute, as part of a broader treatment, to the control
of peripheral arterial occlusive disease (intermittent
claudication).

Safety Considerations: Ginkgo may have an additive
effect when used with other antiplatelet agents. One pa-
tient taking 40 mg of a 50:1 concentrated extract twice
daily in combination with long-term aspirin therapy ex-
perienced bleeding from the iris.!23 However, it is im-
portant to note that ginkgo has demonstrated a very low
incidence of side effects and a relative lack of reported
drug interactions, evidenced by the fact that many el-
derly patients taking ginkgo are taking multiple other
medications simultaneously.

Ginkgo may potentiate the effects of papaverine used
to treat male impotence.!?* Raw ginkgo fruits are report-
edly toxic. Ginkgo extracts, however, are derived from the
leaves.

Preparations and Dosage: Dosage of standardized ex-
tract is 120 to 240 mg/day in divided doses, 50:1 stan-
dardized leaf extract containing 22% to 27% ginkgo
flavone glycosides and 5% to 7% terpene lactones
(ginkgolides ‘A, B, C, and bilobalides). For optimal results,
4 to 8 weeks of daily use are required.

Commission E recommends 120 to 240 mg dry ex-
tract in two or three doses to treat disturbances of perfor-
mance related to organic brain syndromes. For other car-
diovascular indications, it recommends 120 to 160 mg in
two or three doses.

Ginkgo, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Glycyrrhiza glabra L.
Licorice
Fabaceae

Part Used: Dried root

Constituents: Oleanane triterpenes (glycyrrhizin, gly-
acid, and _ phytosterols);  flavanones;
isoflavonoids, chalcones; polysaccharides (mainly glu-
cans); volatile oil (containing fenchone, linalool, furfuryl
alcohol, benzaldehyde); miscellaneous: starch, sugars,
amino acid!?5

cyrrhetinic

Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, an-
tihepatotoxic, antispasmodic, mild laxative

Indications: Licorice is a traditional herbal remedy with
an ancient history and worldwide usage. Modern research
has demonstrated that the herb has effects upon the en-
docrine system and the liver, among other organs. The
triterpenes of Glycyrrhiza are metabolized in the body to

----- PAGE 563 -----
molecules with a structure similar to that of the adrenal
cortex hormones. This may be the basis of the herb’s anti-
inflammatory action.

As an antihepatotoxic, licorice can be effective in the
treatment of chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, for which it
is widely used in Japan. Much of the liver-oriented re-
search has focused upon the triterpene glycyrrhizin.
Studies show that this constituent inhibits hepatocyte in-
jury caused by carbon tetrachloride, benzene hexachlo-
ride, and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB).'?¢ It inhibits
the growth of several DNA and RNA viruses and irre-
versibly inactivates herpes simplex virus particles.'?”

Licorice has a wide range of applications for
bronchial problems, including catarrh, bronchitis, and
coughs in general. The herb is used :n orthodox medicine
as a treatment for peptic ulcers, and is similarly used in
herbal medicine for gastritis and ulcers. It may also be ef-
fective in relieving abdominal colic.

King’s described it thus:

Liquorice root is emollient, demulcent and nutritive. It
acts upon mucous surfaces, lessening irritation and is con-
sequently useful in coughs, catarrhs, irritation of the uri-
nary organs and pain of the intestines in diarrhoea. It is
commonly administered in decoction, sometimes alone,
at other times with the addition of other agents and which
is the preferable mode of using it. As a general rule, the
acrid principle should be removed previous to forming a
decoction. When boiled for some time the water becomes
impregnated with its acrid resin; hence, in preparing a de-
coction for the purpose of sweetening diet drinks or cov-
ering the taste of nauseous drugs, it should not be boiled
over 5 minutes. The efficiency of the root in old bronchial
affections may be due to this acrid resin. The powdered
root is also employed to give the proper solidity to pills
and to prevent their adhesion; the extract for imparting
the proper viscidity to them. The extract, in the form of
lozenge, held in the mouth until it has dissolved, is a very

popular and efficient remedy in coughs and pectoral af-
fections. The bitterness of quinine, quassia, aloes and the
acrid taste of senega, guaiacum are masked by Liquorice.

Safety Considerations: Side effects are minimal if daily
intake is less than 10 mg of glycyrrhizin. Chronic use may
cause hypokalemia, headache, spastic numbness, hyper-
tension, weak limbs, dizziness, and edema. Glycyrrhizin
and glycyrrhetinic acid have antidiuretic, mineralocorti-
coid-type actions, but these constituents are removed
from most commercial extracts. The resulting extracts are
denoted as “deglycyrrhizinated.”

Prolonged use in conjunction with thiazide and loop

MATERIA MEDICA @ 555

diuretics and cardiac glycosides is contraindicated, and
licorice should not be administered in combination with
spironolactone or amiloride.'?8 This herb is not recom-
mended for patients taking cardiac glycosides, hypoten-
sive agents, corticoids, diuretic drugs, or monoamine ox-
idase inhibitors.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 3 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1/2 to 1 teaspoon of root in 1 cup of-water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 1§ minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 5 to 15 g root, equivalent to 200 to 600 mg of gly-
cyrrhizin. Dosage according to the BHP is 1 to 5 g (by in-
fusion or decoction) or 2 to 5 ml liquid extract three times
a day.

Licorice, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Grindelia squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal
Gumweed
Asteraceae

Related Species: Grindelia camporum
Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Diterpenes (grindelic acid and others);
flavonoids (including acacetin, kumatakenin, quercetin);

resins!”

Actions: Antispasmodic, expectorant, hypotensive

Indications: Gumweed acts to relax smooth muscles and
heart muscles. This helps to explain its use in the treat-
ment of asthmatic and bronchial conditions, especially
when these are associated with rapid heartbeat and ner-
vous response. The herb may be used for asthma, bron-
chitis, whooping cough, and upper respiratory catarrh.
Because of its relaxing effect on the heart and pulse rate,
it may reduce blood pressure. Externally, it can be applied
in a lotion to treat poison ivy dermatitis.

King’s discussed in detail the indications for two

species:

The grindelias leave in the mouth a bitter, acrid sensation,
which persists for some time and is accompanied or fol-
lowed by an increased flow of saliva. On account of their
irritant effects upon the kidneys, they act as diuretics. The
brain and cord are first stimulated by them, followed by
motor impairment of the lower extremities and a desire to
sleep. The number of respirations are reduced by them.
Grindelia robusta has been found especially efficient in
asthma giving prompt relief. Occasionally, however, as is,
indeed, the case with all the therapeutical agents, it has

----- PAGE 564 -----
556 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

failed but the circumstances attending these failures have
not yet been determined. It has likewise been found effi-
cient in bronchial affections, in pertussis, and in some
renal maladies. Prof, Scudder was partial to this remedy as
a local application in chronic diseases of the skin with fee-
ble circulation, particularly old chronic and indolent ul-
cers. Grindelia squarrosa has been highly eulogized as an
efficient remedy in intermittent fever and in other malar-
ial affections, also to remove the splenic enlargement
which frequently follows those disorders. Why two plants
so closely allied as the G. robusta and the G. squarrosa, and
possessing nearly identical constituents, should give such
discordant therapeutical results, is certainly enigmatical.
The fact is, that many physicians have a great proneness
to run after new remedies, especially when introduced
under some pretentious name, and to place a marvelous
credulity in the statements of interested parties, who are
incapable of determining accurate conclusions as to the
value of a remedy. [Author’s note: This is as relevant
today as it was 100 years ago!] As a local application, the
fluid extract is stated to be of value in the painful
eczematous inflammation and vesicular eruption resulting
from contact with the poison vine or the poison oak.

Safety Considerations: Gumweed may theoretically
cause allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 0.3 to 1 g resin or 1 to 4 ml
tincture (1:5 in 90%) up to three times daily. According to
Commission E, total daily dosage is 4 to 6 g of drug or
equivalent preparations or 1.5 to 3 ml tincture (1:10 or
1:5, 60% to 80%).

Gumweed herb, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Guaiacum officinale L.

Guaiacum

Zygophyllaceae

Other Name: Guaiac

Part Used: Heartwood

Constituents: Lignans (furoguaiacidin,
furoguaiacin, furoguaiaoxidin); resins (15% to 20%), in-
cluding guaiaretic, hydroguaiaretic, guaiacic, and a- and
B-guaiaconic acids; miscellaneous: vanillin, terpenoids
(including guaiagutin, guaiasaponin)!?°

guaiacin,

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, laxative, di-
aphoretic, diuretic

Indications: Guaiacum is a specific for rheumatic com-
plaints. It is especially useful in cases involving much in-
flammation and pain, and is thus valuable for chronic
rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis. It helps in the
treatment of gout and may be used to prevent recurrence
of this disease.

Safety Considerations: Due to the high content of
resins in this valuable herb, care must be taken with pa-
tients with gastritis or peptic ulceration, who may be
more likely to experience stomach upset.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 90%). Commission E recom-
mends 4.5 g of herb or equivalent preparations daily.

Guaiac wood, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Hamamelis virginiana L.
Witch Hazel
Hamamelidaceae

Parts Used: Twig, leaf

Constituents: Tannins (hamamelitannins); flavonoids
(quercetin, kaempferol, astragalin, myricitrin); volatile
oil; saponins; resin?!

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: This herb can be found in most households
in the form of distilled witch hazel. It is one of the easiest-
to-use astringents for external use. As with all astringents,
witch hazel may be applied in all cases of bleeding, inter-
nal and external. It is especially valuable for easing symp-
toms of hemorrhoids, and has a well-deserved reputation
for the treatment of bruises, inflamed swellings, and vari-
cose veins. Witch hazel helps control diarrhea and is use-
ful in dysentery.
Ellingwood considered it specific for

. .. soreness of muscles, muscular aching, a bruised sensa-
tion, soreness from violent muscular exertion, soreness
from bruises and strains, soreness and muscular aching
from cold and exposure, relaxed mucous membranes,
dark blue membranes from venous stasis, veins dilated,
relaxed, enlarged, and full varicoses.

In addition, he recommended it for sore throat, ton-
sillitis, diphtheria, acute catarrh, diarrhea, hemorrhoids,
prolapse of the bowel, leukorrhea, and sore breasts.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

----- PAGE 565 -----
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and infuse
for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times a
day. Witch hazel can be made into an excellent ointment
and many other topical formulations.

Witchhazel, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Harpagophytum ‘procumbens IDC. ex Meisn.
Devil’s Claw
Pedaliaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides (harpagide, harpago-
side, procumbide); flavonoids (kaempferol and luteolin
glycosides); phenolic acids (chlorogenic and cinnamic
acid); a quinone (harpagoquinone); miscellaneous:
triterpenes, oleanolic and ursolic acid derivatives, esters,
sugars!*?

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic, anodyne,
hepatic

Indications: This valuable plant has proved effective in
some cases of arthritis. This appears to be due to the pres-
ence of a glycoside called harpagoside, which reduces in-
flammation in the joints. Unfortunately, devil’s claw is
not always effective, but it is well worth considering for
arthritis associated with inflammation and pain. The
plant also helps with liver and gallbladder complaints.

Safety Considerations: No drug interactions have been
reported. Pharmacological research suggests a potential
protective action against arrhythmia, which has led to the
speculation that it may interact with antiarrhythmic
agents.!33

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, put '/2 to
1 teaspoon of rhizome into | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. The regimen should be continued for
at least 1 month.

Commission E recommends 1.5 g daily for loss of ap-
petite, otherwise 4.5 g daily.

Devil’s claw, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Humulus lupulus L.

Hops

Cannabaceae

Part Used: Inflorescence (strobile)

Constituents: Volatile oil (humulene, B-caryophyllene,
myrcene, farnesene); flavonoids (mainly glycosides of

MATERIA MEDICA = 557

kaempferol and quercetin); oleoresin (3% to 12%): humu-
lone, lupulene; estrogenic substances of undetermined
structure; miscellaneous: tannins, lipids, xanthohumol (a
chalcone)!4

Actions: Sedative, hypnotic, antimicrobial, antispas-
modic, astringent

Indications: Hops has a marked relaxing effect upon the
central nervous system, and is used extensively for the
treatment of insomnia. It eases tension and anxiety, and is
appropriate for cases in which tension leads to restlessness,
headache, and indigestion. As it is also astringent, it may be
valuable for conditions such as mucous colitis. However,
patients experiencing significant depression should avoid
hops, as it may accentuate this mood state. Externally, its
antiseptic action is applied to treat skin ulcers.

Clinical studies generally refer to hops given in com-
bination with one or more additional herbs. Hops in
combination with valerian has been reported to improve
sleep disturbances.'*° A combination of hops, chicory, and
peppermint was shown to relieve pain in patients with
chronic cholecystitis (calculous and non-calculous).!%6

Ellingwood considered hops specific for “marked cases
of nerve irritation and wakefulness where anxiety and
worry are the cause.” He recommended it for hysteria, in-
somnia, acute local inflammations, facial neuralgia, delir-
ium tremens, and excessive sexual excitement.

Safety Considerations: Do not use hops in patients
with marked depression, as the sedative effect may ac-
centuate symptoms. The sedative action may also poten-
tiate the effects of alcohol or of existing sedative therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. A cup
should be drunk at night to induce sleep. This dose may
be strengthened if needed.

The BHC suggests 0.5 to 1 g dried strobiles, 1 to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.5 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) three times daily and before going to bed.
According to Commission E, dosage is 0.5 g dried herb as
a single dose.

Hops, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

Hydrangea arborescens L.
Hydrangea
Hydrangeaceae

Parts Used: Dried root and rhizome

Constituents: Flavonoids (kaempferol and quercetin),
coumarin (hydrangin); saponin; volatile oil!3”

----- PAGE 566 -----
558 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic
Indications: Hydrangea’s primary use is for the treat-
ment of inflamed or enlarged prostate. It may also be ef-
fective against urinary stones and gravel associated with
infections, such as cystitis.

Ellingwood gave the following specific symptomatol-
ogy for this underutilized remedy:

... frequent urination with heat, burning, accompanied
with quick, sharp, acute pains in the urethra; partial sup-
pression of urine with general irritation and aching or
pain in the back, pain from the passage of renal sand, are
direct indications for this agent. I am convinced after a
lifetime of experience that it is more universally a sedative
to pain and distress in kidneys and urinary bladder than
any other one remedy.

Ellingwood also recommended hydrangea for acute
nephritis, urinary gravel, backache due to urinary tract
problems, and urinary irritation.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Hydrangea, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for. Health-Care
Professionals

Hydrastis canadensis L.
Goldenseal
Ranunculaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (2.5% to 6.0%):
hydrastine (1.5% to 4.0%), berberine (0.5% to6.0%); fatty
acids; resin, phenylpropanoids (meconin, chlorogenic
acid); phytosterins; a small amount of volatile oil!38

Actions: Bitter, hepatic, alterative, anticatarrhal, anti-
microbial, anti-inflammatory, laxative, emmenagogue,
oxytocic
Indications: Goldenseal is one of our most useful reme-
dies, and owes much of its value to its tonic effects on
mucous membranes. This probably accounts for its effec-
tiveness in digestive problems, from peptic ulcers to colitis.
The alkaloids it contains stimulate bile production and se-
cretion, and this bitter stimulant activity makes it useful
for loss of appetite.

Goldenseal is effective in catarrhal conditions, espe-

cially sinus disorders. The herb’s pharmacological activ-
ity, including its antimicrobial properties, is usually at-
tributed to the isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, primar-
ily hydrastine and berberine. Berberine has
immunostimulant, antispasmodic, sedative, hypotensive,
uterotonic, cholerectic, and carminative actions. It also
has marked antimicrobial activity, and while not in the
same league as pharmaceutical antibiotics, it has a broad
spectrum of antibiotic activity. Activity has been demon-
strated against a number of bacteria, protozoans, and
fungi in vitro.13°

Traditionally, Hydrastis canadensis was used during
labor to help contractions, but for this very reason, it
should not be taken during pregnancy. Applied externally,
it can help with eczema, ringworm, itching, earache, and
conjunctivitis.

Ellingwood recommended it for numerous conditions:

. .. functional disorders of the stomach, catarrhal gastri-
tis, atonic dyspepsia, chronic constipation, hepatic con-
gestion, chronic alcoholism, hepatic congestion, general
debility, protracted fevers, cerebral engorgements, pros-
trating night sweats, menorrhagia or metrorrhagia due to
uterine subinvolution, postpartum haemorrhage, tumors,
catarrhal conditions, aphthous ulcers, indolent ulcers,
nasal catarrh, diphtheria, tonsillitis, inflammation of the
eyes, leucorrhoea, anal fissure, eczema, gall stones, chole-
cystitis, congestive jaundice, goitre, non-malignant mam-
mary tumors.

Safety Considerations: Goldenseal is contraindicated
for individuals with elevated blood pressure. Prolonged
use of goldenseal may decrease vitamin B absorption.
Like all berberine-containing plants and strong bitters,
Hydrastis is not recommended for use during pregnancy.
Uterine stimulant properties have been reported for
berberine, canadine, hydrastine, and hydrastinine.!°
Goldenseal should not be taken during lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour 1 cup
of boiling water over 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of powdered root
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. Decoct unpowdered root in the usual
way, by simmering.

Dosage from the BPC is 2 to 4 ml tincture or 0.3 to
0.9 ml liquid extract three times a day. Dosage provided
in the BHC is 0.5 to 1 g dried rhizome and root, 4 to 10
ml tincture (1:10 in 60%), or 0.3 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1
in 60%) three times daily.
Berberis bark and Hydrastis root, in Principles and Practice of
Phytotherapy

----- PAGE 567 -----
Hypericum perforatum L.
St. John’s Wort
Clusiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil (caryophyllene, methyl-2-oc-
tane, m-nonane, ”-octanal, n-decanal, a- and B-pinene);
naphthodianthones (hypericin, pseudohypericin); phloro-
glucinols (hyperforin); catechins; proanthocyanidins;
flavonoids (hyperoside, rutin)!*!

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, astringent, vulnerary, ner-
vine, antimicrobial

Indications: Taken internally, St. John’s wort has sedative
and pain-relieving effects, giving it a place in the treat-
ment of neuralgia, anxiety, tension, and similar problems.
It is considered especially appropriate for use when
menopausal changes trigger irritability and anxiety. St.
John’s wort is increasingly recommended to treat depres-
sion, an indication that is supported by numerous clinica
trials in both Europe and the United States.!4? However,
in my opinion these claims are overblown.

St. John’s wort is helpful for neuralgic pain and wil
ease fibrositis, sciatica, and rheumatic pain. Externally, it
is a valuable healing and anti-inflammatory remedy.
Applied in lotion form, it speeds the healing of wounds
and bruises, varicose veins, and mild burns. An infused oi
is especially useful for the healing of sunburn.

‘The mechanism of action for the purported antide-
pressant activity of Hypericum ‘perforatum is not under-
stood. One study tested the herb in several biochemica
models relevant to the mechanism of action of antide-
pressant drugs—for example, monoamine oxidase (MIAO)
inhibition. Jt was found to have weak MAO-A and MAO-
B inhibition activity in vitro, but the study authors con-
cluded that MAO inhibition does not explain the herb’s
antidepressant activity.“ While hypericin is considered
an MAO inhibitor, newer studies indicate that the con-
stituent hyperforin is also active. Thus, based on cur-
rently available information, the whole extract must be
considered the “active ingredient,” as the single con-
stituents responsible for this activity remain unknown.
Consequently, dosage should be based on the quantity of
total extract, not on hypericin content.

Priest and Priest described St. John’s wort as a

. . sedative nervine for muscular twitching and chor-
eiform movements—especially indicated for nerve in-
juries to the extremities and teeth/gums. Promotes elimi-

nation of catabolic waste products.

They provided the following specific indications:

MATERIA MEDICA 2+ 559

painful injuries to sacral spine and coccyx, traumatic
shock, hemorrhoids with pain and bleeding, facial neural-
gia after dental extractions and toothache, neurasthenia,
chorea, and depression.

Safety Considerations: No adverse reactions have been
confirmed at dose levels up to 1 mg of total hypericin,!##
Photosensitization at high doses has been reported during
experimental antiviral treatment with synthetic hypericin
(35 mg intravenously) in HIV-positive patients.!#5 While
a few instances of photosensitization have been docu-
mented, this appears to be very rare. A recent study uti-
lizing human keratinocyte cell cultures demonstrated that
usual therapeutic doses of Hypericum extracts are about 30
to 50 times below the phototoxic level."

‘There have been reports of elevated serotonin levels
in patients taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(e.g., sertraline) in combination with St. John’s wort.!4”
Evidence suggests that St. John’s wort affects the hepatic
cytochrome P4;9 system, increasing the activity of its most
abundant isozyme, CYP A. Thus, theoretically, the herb
could reduce the activity of simultaneously administered
drugs that are known substrates for this isozyme, including
nonsedating antihistamines, oral contraceptives, certain
antiretroviral agents, antiepileptic medications, calcium
channel-blockers, cyclosporine, some chemotherapeutic
drugs, macrolide antibiotics, and selected antifungals.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). ‘To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. See chapter 11 or 19 for instructions on
making St. John’s wort—infused oil for external application.

Based on clinical studies, dosage of standardized ex-
tract is 300 mg three times a day of extract standardized
to 3% to 5% hyperforin. Dosage recommended in the
BHP is 2 to4 g dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:10 in 45%),
or 2 to 4-ml (1:1 in 25%) three times a day, Commission E
suggest 2 to 4 g of herb or 0.2 to 1 mg total hypericin in
other forms of application.

St John’s wort, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Hyssopus officinalis V..
Hyssop

Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Diterpenes (marrubiin); triterpenoid
saponins (oleanolic and ursolic acids); volatile oil (camphor,
pinocaphone, thujone, and many others); flavonoids

----- PAGE 568 -----
560 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

(including diosmin and hesperidin); miscellaneous: hys-
sopin (a glucoside), tannins (5% to 8%), resin!*8

Actions: Antispasmodic, expectorant, diaphoretic,
nervine, anti-inflammatory, carminative

Indications: Hyssop has an interesting range of uses,
largely attributed to the antispasmodic action of its
volatile oil. The herb is used for coughs, bronchitis, and
chronic catarrh. Its diaphoretic properties explain its use
for the common cold. As a nervine, it may be taken for
anxiety states and petit mal seizures.

King’s Dispensatory considered hyssop a

.. stimulant, aromatic, carminative and tonic. Principally
used in quinsy and other sore throats, as a gargle, com-
bined with sage and alum, in infusion sweetened with
honey. Also recommended in asthma, coughs, and other
affections of the chest, as an expectorant. The leaves ap-
plied to bruises, speedily relieve the pain, and disperse
every spot or mark from the affected parts.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over I to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Hyssop, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Inula helenium L.
Elecampane
Asteraceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones, including alanto-
lactone (= helenalin), isoalantolactone; polysaccharides,
mainly inulin (up to 44%); miscellaneous: sterols, resin!”

Actions: Expectorant, antitussive, diaphoretic, hepatic,
antimicrobial

Indications: Elecampane is a specific for irritating
bronchial coughs, especially in children. It may be used
whenever copious catarrh is present—for example, in
bronchitis or emphysema. It can be helpful in asthma and
bronchial asthma, and has been applied for the treatment
of tuberculosis.

This remedy provides a good illustration of the com-
plex and integrated ways in which herbs work. The mu-
cilage has a relaxing effect, while the essential oils bring
about stimulation, so the herb both soothes irritation and
promotes expectoration. These actions are combined with

an overall antibacterial effect. Its bitter principle stimulates
digestion and appetite.
Priest and Priest considered elecampane a

. . gently stimulating tonic expectorant for chronic
catarrhal conditions: warming, strengthening and cleans-
ing to pulmonary inucous membranes. Indicated for
chronic pectoral states with excessive catarrhal expectora-
tion and/or a tubercular diathesis.

They suggested it for the following specific indica-
tions: bronchial and gastric catarrh, chronic bronchitis,
tuberculosis, pneumoconiosis, silicosis, pertussis, emphy-
sematous conditions, and chronic cough in the elderly.

Safety Considerations: Elecampane may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of cold water over | teaspoon of shredded root. Let
stand for 8 to 10 hours. Heat and take very hot three
times a day.

Helenii rhizoma, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Tris versicolor L.
Blue Flag
Tridaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Volatile oil, containing furfural; iridin
(also known as irisin, a glycoside); acids (including sali-
cylic and isophthalic); miscellaneous: a monocyclic C3;

triterpenoid, gum, resin, sterols!*°

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, alterative, laxative, di-
uretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Blue flag is used in the treatment of skin dis-
eases, and apparently works in this area through effects on
the liver, the main detoxifying organ of the body. It is
valuable as part of a wider treatment for eczema and
psoriasis.

Priest and Priest described blue flag as a

. . . positive alterative for chronic, torpid conditions: in-
fluences glandular system, lymphatics, liver and gall
ducts, and intestinal glands. Specific for hepatic conges-
tion due to venous or lymphatic stasis.

They recommended it for chronic hepatitis,
rheumatic conditions, toxic sciatica, scrophulous skin
conditions, eczema, psoriasis, herpes, enlarged thyroid
gland, and uterine fibroids.

----- PAGE 569 -----
Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | ml three
times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put | tea-
spoon of dried herb into | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 0.6 to 2 g dried rhi-
zome (or by decoction), 3 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%),
or 0.6 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times daily.

Blue Flag, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Juniperus communis L.
Juniper

Cupressaceae

Part Used: Dried fruit (berry)

Constituents: Volatile oil (0.2% to 3.42%): myrcene,
sabinene, a- and §-pinene, 4-cineole, camphene, limo-
nene; condensed tannins; diterpenes; flavonoids (amento-
flavone, quercetin, isoquercitrin, apigenin); miscellaneous:
sugars, resin, vitamin Clo!

Actions: Diuretic, antimicrobial, carminative, anti-
rheumatic

Indications: The actions documented for juniper are pri-
marily associated with its volatile oil components. Juniper
berries make an excellent antiseptic for urinary tract con-
ditions such as cystitis. Their essential oil is quite stimu-
lating to the kidney nephrons, however, so people with
kidney disease should avoid this herb.

Juniper’s bitter action aids digestion and eases flatu-
lent colic. The herb is taken internally for rheumatism
and arthritis, and, used externally, helps relieve pain in the
joints or muscles. In the laboratory, a juniper extract
demonstrated potent inhibition of herpes simplex virus
type I in human cell culture.!5?

Safety Considerations: With prolonged use or over-
dose, juniper may cause renal damage, evidenced by renal
pain with an increased urge to urinate, pain during urina-
tion, and hematuria and albuminuria (the presence of
blood and protein, respectively, in the urine). People with
kidney disease should not take juniper berries. They
should also be avoided in pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of lightly crushed
berries and infuse in a covered container for 20 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Materia MEDICA <> 561

Commission E recommends a total daily dosage of
2 g to a maximum of 10 g of dried juniper fruit, corre-
sponding to 20 to 100 mg of essential oil.

Juniper berry, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Lactuca virosa L.
Wild Lettuce
Asteraceae

Part Used: Dried leaf

Constituents: Lactucin (a sesquiterpene lactone);
flavonoids (mainly based on quercetin); coumarins (ci-
choriin and aesculin); N-methyl-B-phenethylamine!?

Actions: Nervine, anodyne, hypnotic, antispasmodic

Indications: The latex of wild lettuce was at one time
sold as “lettuce opium,” or “lactucarium,” as it was called
in the official pharmacopoeias of the day. Wild lettuce is
a valuable remedy for insomnia and restlessness. As an an-
tispasmodic, it can be applied as part of a holistic treat-
ment for whooping cough and dry irritated coughs in
general. It relieves colic pains in the intestines and uterus,
and so may be used in dysmenorrhea. It also eases mus-
cular pains related to rheumatism. The herb has been
used as an anaphrodisiac.

Safety Considerations: Wild lettuce may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family,

Preparations and Dosaye: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 0.5 to 4 g dried
herb or 0.5 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
daily. The USP gives a dosage of 2 ml lactucarium tinc-
ture three times a day.

Wild Lettuce, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Lavandula angustifolia Miller
Lavender
Lamiaceae

Part Used: Flower

Constituents: Volatile oil (linalyl acetate, linalol, lavan-
dulyl acetate, borneol, limonene, caryophyllene);
coumarins (umbelliferone, herniarin, coumarin); miscel-
laneous: triterpenes (e.g., ursolic acid), flavonoids (e.g.,
luteolin)!

----- PAGE 570 -----
562 — TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, relaxing nervine,
antidepressant, rubefacient, emmenagogue, hypotensive

Indications: This beautiful herb has many uses, culinary,
cosmetic, and medicinal. It can help relieve headaches,
particularly when they are stress-related. Lavender may
be quite effective in clearing depression, especially if
used in conjunction with other remedies, and can also be
used to promote natural sleep. As a gentle, strengthening
nervous system tonic, it may be used to treat states of
nervous debility and exhaustion, The essential oil may be
applied externally as a stimulating liniment to help ease
aches and pains of rheumatism. The general safety and
efficacy of the essential of lavender make it widely appli-
cable in topical formulations.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion to take
internally, pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of
dried herb and infuse in a covered container for 10 min-
utes. This can be drunk three times a day. Lavender es-
sential oil should not be taken internally, but can be in-
haled, rubbed on the skin, or added to baths.

Commission E recommends | to 2 teaspoons of herb
per cup of water or | to 4 drops (approximately 20 to
80 mg) of lavender essential oil.

Lavender flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Leonurus cardiaca L.
Motherwort
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (leonuride and others); labdane
diterpenes (including leocardin); flavonoids (apigenin,
kaempferol, and quercetin glucosides); caffeic acid; alka-
loids (0.35%): tachydrine, betonicine, turicin, leonurine;
tannins (2% to 8%); volatile oil (0.05%)!55

Actions: Nervine, emmenagogue, antispasmodic, hep-
atic, cardiotonic, hypotensive

Indications: The binomial of this plant illustrates the
range of uses to which it has been put. “Motherwort” in-
dicates its relevance for menstrual and uterine conditions,
while “cardiaca” suggests that it is beneficial in cardiovas-
cular and circulatory system treatments.

The herb is valuable for stimulating delayed or sup-
pressed menstruation, especially when anxiety or tension
is involved, and may be used to ease false labor pains. It is
a useful relaxing tonic for menopausal changes.

Motherwort is also an excellent heart tonic, strengthen-
ing without straining. It is considered a specific for tachy-
cardia (heart palpitations), especially when brought on by
anxiety or other such causes. It may be used in all heart
conditions associated with anxiety and tension.

Motherwort has demonstrated cardioactivity in vitro.
An alcoholic extract was found to have a direct inhibitory
effect on myocardial cells: It exerted an antagonistic ac-
tion against calcium chloride and stimulated both a- and
B-adrenoceptors.!%

According to Priest and Priest, motherwort is

. .. diffuse, stimulating and relaxing, an antispasmodic
nervine: indicated for reflex conditions affecting cardiac
function, and as a simple cardiac tonic. It also influences
pre-menstrual nerve tension and muscular rigidity.

They provided the following specific indications:
anemic nervousness and insomnia, palpitations, cardiac
weakness after infections, neurosis, hyperthyroid cardiac
reactions, premenstrual syndrome, congestive amenor-
rhea, and dysmenorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Excessive use of motherwort
may interfere with other cardiovascular treatments.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1 cup
of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 2 to 4 g dried herb,
4to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times daily. Commission E recom-
mends 4.5 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Motherwort herb, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Leptandra virginica (L.) Nutt.
Black Root
Scrophulariaceae

Other Name: Veronicastrum virginicum (L.) Farw.
Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Volatile oil (cinnamic acid, methoxycin-
namic acid, dimethoxycinnamic acid); saponins; mannitol;
dextrose; tannins!5”

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, laxative, diaphoretic, anti-
spasmodic

Indications: Black root is used to relieve liver congestion

and to treat inflamed gallbladder (cholecystitis). Black
root is also appropriate for use in jaundice caused by liver

----- PAGE 571 -----
congestion; in fact, it will help whenever there is any sign
of liver dysfunction. For example, because chronic consti-
pation is often related to liver problems, this herb is an
ideal remedy for that condition.

Priest and Priest described black root as a

... mild relaxing hepatic for torpid and congestive condi-
tions, influencing the liver assisting the secretion of bile.
It also cleanses the alimentary tract of viscid mucus and
stimulates peristalsis.

They provided the following specific indications:
hepatitis, cholecystitis, chronic hepatic torpor, non-
obstructive jaundice, to clear the bowels in febrile states,
hemorrhoids, and skin eruptions.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of cold water, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 minutes. Take 1 cup three
times a day.

Lobelia inflata L.
Lobelia
Campanulaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Piperidine alkaloids (0.48%): lobeline, lo-
belanidine, lobelanine; chelidonic acid; miscellaneous:
resins, gums, fats!?®

Actions: Antiasthmatic, antispasrnodic, expectorant,
emetic, nervine

Indications: Lobelia has a general depressant action on
the central and autonomic nervous systems and on neu-
romuscular activity. It may be used for many conditions in
combination with other herbs, to further their effective-
ness when relaxation is needed. Its primary specific use is
for bronchial asthma and bronchitis.

Much of the pharmacological activity of lobelia is at-
tributed to its alkaloid constituents, principally lobeline.
Analysis of its action reveals apparently paradoxical ef-
fects. Lobeline has peripheral and central effects similar
to those of nicotine, but is less potent. Hence, lobeline
initially causes CNS stimulation, followed by respiratory
depression.

Ellingwood considered lobelia specific for

. . Irritable, spasmodic and oppressed breathing, and in
respiratory problems from exalted nerve force and nerve
irritation. It is contra-indicated in general relaxation and

Materia MEDICA @ 563

in dyspnoea from enlarged or fatty heart, or from hy-
dropericardium, or enfeebled heart, with valvular incom-
petence. It is specific in threatened spasm with exalted
nerve action—a high degree of nerve tension with great
restlessness and excitability, flushed face and contracted
pupils. It is a prompt emetic in full doses.

The high regard that the Eclectics had for Lobelia is
reflected in Elingwood’s recommendation for the follow-
ing pathologies: spasmodic asthma, whooping cough,
spasmodic croup, membranous croup, infantile convul-
sions, puerperal eclampsia, epilepsy, tetanus, hysterical
paroxysms, hysterical convulsions, rigid os uteri, diph-
theria, tonsillitis, and pneumonia.

Safety Considerations: The side effects of lobeline and
lobelia are similar to these of nicotine and tobacco, and
include nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, coughing,
tremors, and dizziness. Symptoms of overdose include
profuse diaphoresis, tachycardia, convulsions, hypother-
mia, hypotension, and coma. Lobelia should not be used
during pregnancy or lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1
ml three times a day (1:5 in 40%), To make an infusion,
pour 1 cup of boiling water over '/1 teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHC is 50 to 200 mg dried herb
or 0.4 to 1.6 ml tincture (1:8 in 60%) up to three times
daily.

Lobelia, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals. For more information on the Eclectic physicians’
use of this important plant, see pages 235-242 of Ellingwood’s
American Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy and
pages 1199-1205 of Kings American Dispensatory.

Lycopus virginicus L..
Bugleweed
Lamiaceae

Other Names: Sweet ougle, water bugle, gypsywort.
Related species include L.. europaeus and L. americanus,

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Phenolic acid derivatives (caffeic, ros-
marinic, chlorogenic, aad ellagic acids); pimaric acid
methyl ester!*?

Actions: Diuretic, peripheral vasoconstrictor, astringent,
nervine, antitussive

Indications: Bugleweed is a specific for overactive thy-
roid, especially when symptoms include shortness of
breath, palpitations, and shaking. It may also be safely

----- PAGE 572 -----
564 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

used in cases of heart palpitations of nervous origin.
Bugleweed will support a weak heart associated with an
accumulation of water in the body. As a sedative cough
reliever, it helps ease irritating coughs, especially those of
nervous origin.

Ellingwood described the specific symptomatology of
bugleweed thus:

In diseases of the heart, either functional or organic,
marked by irritability and irregularity of the organ, dysp-
noea, feeling of oppression in the cardiac region, its ad-
ministration is followed by gratifying results.
Hypertrophy and dilatation have been known to undergo

marked diminution in consequence of its administration.
As for its therapeutic uses, he said:

It possesses tonic, sedative, astringent and narcotic prop-
erties and has been successfully used in incipient phthisis,
hemoptysis, etc. It acts like digitalis in reducing the ve-
locity of the pulse, but has no cumulative effects. In peri-
carditis and endocarditis its sedative action lessens the
frequency of the pulse, irritability and its attendant in-
flammation, in a manner equaled by no other remedy.
Exopthalmic goiter. In diseases of the respiratory appara-
tus lycopus has been found to be very useful. Hemoptysis,
associated with rapid and tumultuous heart’s action, yields
readily to its influence, as does hemorrhage from any
part.

Safety Considerations: Bugleweed may interfere with
the action of thyroid hormones because it blocks conver-
sion of thyroxin to T3 in the liver. In vitro, it has also
been shown to interfere with thyroxin production by in-
hibiting thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 1 to 2 g

dried herb for infusion or extract equivalent to 20 mg of
herb.

Bugleweed, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Mabonia aquifolium (Pursh) Nutt.
Oregon Grape
Berberidaceae

Other Names: Mountain grape, holly mahonia.
Formerly Berberis aquifolium.

Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Alkaloids of the isoquinoline type (berber-
ine, berbamine, hydrastine, oxycanthine)'®

Actions: Alterative, cholagogue, laxative, antiemetic, an-
ticatarrhal, tonic

Indications: Oregon grape finds its main use for the
treatment of chronic and scaly skin conditions, such as
psoriasis and eczema. As skin problems of this nature gen-
erally have systemic causes, the tonic activity of Oregon
grape on the liver and gallbladder may explain its effec-
tiveness. It may be helpful for stomach and gallbladder
conditions, especially when there is associated nausea and
vomiting. As a laxative, it may be safely used to treat
chronic constipation.
Ellingwood considered Oregon grape specific for:

...$caly, pustular and other skin disease due to the disor-
dered conditions of the blood. It is the most reliable al-
terative when the influences of the dyscrasia is apparent in
the skin. It is given freely during the treatment of skin
diseases where an alterative is considered an essential part
of the treatment.

In addition, he recommended it for pimples, rough-
ness, eczema capitis, eczema genitalis, pruritis, scaly
eczema, psoriasis, pityriasis, chronic dermatosis, glandu-
lar indurations, ulcerations, and syphilis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

The BHP recommends 1 to 2 g dried herb or 1 to 2
ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Marrubium vulgare L.
Horehound
Lamiaceae

Other Name: White horehound
Parts Used: Dried leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Diterpene lactones: marrubiin (0.3% to
1.0%), with premarrubiin; diterpene alcohols (marruciol,
marrubenol, sclareol, peregrinin, dihydroperegrinin);
volatile oil (containing -pinene, sabinene, limonene,
camphene, p-cymol, o-terpinolene); flavonoids (apigenin,
luteolin, quercetin, and their glycosides); alkaloids (traces
of the pyrrolidine betonicine and its isomer turicine);
miscellaneous: choline, alkanes, phytosterols, tannins!®!

----- PAGE 573 -----
Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, bitter, vulnerary,
emmenagogue
Indications: Horehound is a valuable plant for the treat-
ment of bronchitis, especially when the patient has a non-
productive cough. It relaxes the smooth muscles of the
bronchus while promoting mucus production and thus
expectoration. It is beneficial in the treatment of whoop-
ing cough. Its bitter action stimulates the flow and secre-
tion of bile from the gallbladder, aiding digestion.
‘Horehound is also used externally to promote wound
healing.

King’s described this valuable remedy in the following
terms:

Horehound is a stimulant tonic, expectorant, and di-
uretic. Its stimulant action apon the laryngeal and
bronchial mucous membranes is pronounced and it, un-
doubtedly, also influences the respiratory function. It is
used in the form of a syrup, in coughs, colds, chronic
catarrh, asthma and all pulmonary affections. The warm
infusion will produce diaphoresis, and sometimes diure-
sis, and has been used with benefit in jaundice, asthma,
hoarseness, and amenorrhoea; the cold infusion is an ex-
cellent tonic in some forms of dyspepsia, acts as a vermifuge.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over !/2 to | teaspoon of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of 4.5 g
dried herb or 2 to 6 tablespoons pressed juice.

Horehound herb, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Marsdenia reichenbachii Triana
Condurango

Asclepiadaceae

Other Name: Marsdenia condwrango Reichb. F.
Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Glycosides (based on condurangogenins,
known as condurangoglycosides); miscellaneous: essential
oil, phytosterols, sugars, starch, fat!

Actions: Bitter, emmenagogue

Indications: Condurango is a bitter that may be used to
treat a whole range of digestive and stomach problems. It
is best known for its ability to stimulate appetite, an ac-

Materia Mepica 565

tion common to all bitters. However, in addition, this
herb relaxes the nerves of the stomach, making it useful
for settling indigestion associated with nervous tension

and anxiety.
Ellingwood had this to say about condurango:

The influence of the agent is exercised directly upon the

stomach as a tonic and corrective of perverted action. It

is of service in gastric ulcer and in the early stages of can-

cer of the stomach, for which it was originally lauded as

a cure. It is depended upon by some enthusiastic users to

retard progress of some cases of this disease and to re-

lieve distress and urgent symptoms when fully developed.
Tt cannot be curative. It will be found of service, proba-
bly, in catarrhal gastritis with extreme atonicity and
threatened ulceration. In these cases its virtues as a tonic
and restorative will find exercise to the full extent of their
influence. It deserves thorough investigation and faithful
trial. It may be given in the form of a warm decoction
with excellent advantage. A wine of Condurango is pre-
pared which has good influence upon the stomach. Half
an ounce may be taken with the meals.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over I to 2 teaspoons of powdered
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 2 to 4 g
dried bark, 2 to § ml tincture, or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract.

Condurango cortex, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Matricaria recutita L.
German Chamomile
Asteraceae

Other Names: Do nox confuse with Chamaemelum nobile
(= Anthemis nobilis), commonly known as Roman
chamomile.

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Sesquiterpenes (chamazulene, a-bisabolol,
bisabolol oxide); sesquiterpene lactones (matricin, matri-
carin); flavonoid glycosides (6% to 8%): apigenin, lute-
olin, quercetin, isorhamnetm!®

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, carminative, anti-
inflammatory, antimicrobial, bitter, vulnerary

Indications: A comprchensive list of medicinal uses
for chamomile would be very long. Included would be

----- PAGE 574 -----
566 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Reena menopausal depression, loss of ap-
: ; » gastric ulcers, diarrhea, colic, aches and
Pains of flu, migraine, neuralgia, teething, vertigo, mo-
tion sickness, conjunctivitis, inflamed skin, urticaria, and
many others! This may seem too good to be true, but it
simply reflects the wide range of chamomile’ actions in
the body.

Chamomile, probably the most widely used relaxing
nervine herb in the Western world, is safe for use in all
types of anxiety and stress-related disorders. It relaxes and
tones the nervous system, and is especially valuable when
anxiety and tension produce digestive symptoms, such as
82s, colic pains, and even ulcers. This ability to ease phys-
ical symptoms as well as underlying psychological tension
is one of the great benefits of herbal remedies in stress
and anxiety. Chamomile makes a wonderful late-night tea
to ensure restful sleep. It is helpful for anxious children or
teething infants when added to bathwater.

As an antispasmodic herb, chamomile works on pe-
ripheral nerves and muscles, and thus indirectly relaxes
the whole body. When the physical body is at ease, the
mind and heart follow. The herb prevents and eases mus-
cle cramps, whether in the legs or in the abdomen. When
added to a bath after a hard day, chamomile infusion or
essential oil relaxes the body and eases the cares and
weight of a troubled heart and mind.

Because chamomile is rich in essential oil, it acts on
the digestive system, promoting proper function. This
usually involves soothing the walls of the intestines, eas-
ing griping pains, and facilitating the elimination of gas.
A cup of hot chamomile tea is a simple, effective way to
relieve indigestion. It calms inflammations, such as gastri-
tis, and helps prevent ulcers.

Used internally, it is an effective anti-inflammatory
remedy for the digestive and respiratory system; it has a
similar action on the skin when applied externally. A
steam inhalation of chamomile essential oil puts its valu-
able constituents in contact with inflamed mucous mem-
branes in the sinuses and lungs. Chamomile is also a mild
antimicrobial that helps the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms. As an anticatarrhal, it assists
in the elimination of excess mucus buildup in the sinus
area. It may be used to treat head colds and allergies, such
as hay fever.

Safety Considerations: Chamomile may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family. However, such reactions are extremely rare.

Preparations and Dosage: Chamomile may be used in
any of the ways plants are prepared as medicines. It may

be used fresh or dried in infusions, and tincture is an ex-
cellent dosage form to ensure that all constituents are ex-
tracted and available. Chamomile essential oil is valued in
aromatherapy.

For an infusion, infuse 2 to 3 teaspoons of herb in I
cup of boiling water for 10 minutes in a covered con-
tainer. This should be drunk three or four times a day
Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in
40%).

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 3 g
herb as an infusion and 3% to 10% infusion for poultice.
The BHC suggests 2 to 4 g herb as infusion, 3 to 10 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (L:l in
45%) three times a day.

Chamomile, German, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Melaleuca alternifolia L.
Tea Tree
Myrtaceae

Other Name: Ti tree
Part Used: Essential oil

Constituents: Volatile oil, containing a range of terpenes

and sesquiterpenes'®

Action: Antimicrobial

Indications: Tea tree essential oi] is an important an-
tibacterial and antifungal agent. While it is undoubtedly
useful, it seems to have attracted the modern equivalent
of the old purveyors of “snake oil.” Some of the claims
made have a kernel of truth to them; however, many are
exaggerated for promotional reasons.

A list of conditions for which Melaleuca oil has been
suggested includes sinusitis, the common cold, sinus
blockage, laryngitis, coughs, aphthous ulcers, boils,
cuts, bites, sunburn, miliaria, parasites, head lice, her-
pes infection, impetigo, psoriasis, infected seborrheic
dermatitis, tinea infection (including ringworm of the
scalp and athlete’s foot), fungal infections of the nails,
thrush, and trichomonal vaginitis. All of the fungal or
parasitic problems should respond well to treatment
with tea tree oil.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tea tree essential oil 1s for
external use, and people with sensitive skin should dilute
it first with a fixed carrier oil, such as almond oil.
Currently, a wide range of products containing tea tree oil
are available, including toothpaste, soap, and shampoo.

----- PAGE 575 -----
Melissa officinalis L.
Lemon Balm
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried or fresh aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil (0.1% to 0.2%): neral and
geranial, caryophyllene oxide, and a whole range of ter-
penes; flavonoids in low concentrations (luteolin-7-
glucoside and rhamnazin); polyphenolics (including pro-
tocatechuic acid, caffeic acid, rosmarinic acid, and tannins);
triterpenic acids, such as ursolic and pomolic acids!

Actions: Carminative, nervine, antispasmodic, antide-
pressant, diaphoretic, antimicrobial, hepatic

Indications: Lemon balm, an excellent carminative herb,
relieves spasms in the digestive tract and is useful in flat-
ulent dyspepsia. Because of its mild antidepressant prop-
erties, it is primarily indicated when dyspepsia is associ-
ated with anxiety or depression, as the gently sedative oils
relieve tension and stress reactions. The volatile oil ap-
pears to act on the interface between the digestive tract
and the nervous system. The herb has been described by
some herbalists as a trophorestorative for the nervous sys-
tem, similar in some ways to oats.

Lemon balm is appropriate for neuralgia, anxiety-in-
duced palpitations, insomnia, and migraine associated
with tension. Lemon balm has a tonic effect on the heart
and circulatory system and causes mild vasodilation of pe-
ripheral vessels, thus lowering blood pressure. It may be
used for feverish conditions, such as influenza.

Hot-water extracts have antiviral properties, possibly
due in part to the presence of rosmarinic acid and other
polyphenolics. A lotion-based extract may be applied to
herpes simplex skin lesions, the antiviral activity having
been confirmed in both laboratory and clinical trials.

Lemon balm’s hormone-regulating effects have
also been well documented in the laboratory. Freeze-
dried aqueous extracts have been shown to inhibit
many of the effects of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) on the thyroid gland. In laboratory studies, it
interfered with the binding of TSH to plasma mem-
branes and inhibited the enzyme iodothyronine de-
iodinase in vitro. It also inhibits the receptor-binding
and other biological activity of immunoglobulins in the
blood of patients with Graves’ disease, a condition that
causes hyperthyroidism.

Safety Considerations: Lemon balm may interfere with
the action of thyroid hormones.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1

MATERIA MEDICA -@ 567

cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
or 4 to 6 g of fresh herb and infuse in a covered container
for 10 to 15 minutes. A cup of this tea should be taken
morning and evening or when needed.

Commission E recommends 1.5 to 4.5 g dried herb as
an infusion, taken several times a day. Dosage listed in the
BHC is 2 to 4 g as infusion, 2 to 6 ml tincture (1:5 in
45%), or 2 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 45%).

Melissae folium, in Herba! Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Mentha pulegium L.
Pennyroyal
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial pares

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 2%): pulegone, iso-
pulegone, menthol, isomenthone, limonene, piperitone;
miscellaneous: bitters, tannins!®

Actions: Carminative, diaphoretic, stimulant, emmenagogue

Indications: With its richly aromatic volatile oil, penny-
royal is helpful for flatulence and related abdominal colic.
It relieves spasmodic pain and eases anxiety. However, its
main application is as an emmenagogue, used to stimulate
the menstrual process and to strengthen uterine contrac-
tions. Pennyroyal essential oil is toxic and should be
avoided completely.

Safety Considerations: Human fatalities related to in-
gestion of pennyroyal essential oil as an abortifacient have
been reported. The dose required for an abortifacient ef-
fect is close to the toxic dose, and fatalities have been re-
lated to both nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity. Doses of
1 ounce have proved fatal.!67

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three umes a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is | to 4 ¢ dried
herb or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 45%).

Pennyroyal, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Mentha x piperita L.
Peppermint
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Phenolic acids (caffeic, chlorogenic, and
rosmarinic acid); essential oil (up to 1.5%), the major

----- PAGE 576 -----
568 <= TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

components of which are menthol, menthone, and men-
thyl acetate; flavonoids (glycosides of apigenin, dios-
metin, and luteolin); tannins!®

Actions: Carminative, anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic,
aromatic, diaphoretic, antiemetic, nervine, antimicrobial,
analgesic

Indications: Peppermint is an excellent carminative with
relaxing effects on the muscles of the digestive system. It
combats flatulence, flatulent dyspepsia, intestinal colic,
and associated conditions, and stimulates the flow of bile
and digestive juices, The volatile oil acts as a mild anaes-
thetic to the stomach wall, allaying feelings of nausea and
the desire to vomit. It also help relieve the nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy and of motion sickness.

Peppermint can play a role in the treatment of ulcer-
ative conditions of the bowels. It is a traditional treatment
for fevers, colds, and influenza. As an inhalant, pepper-
mint provides temporary relief of nasal catarrh. It may
help with headaches associated with indigestion, and its
nervine actions ease anxiety and tension. Used for dys-
menorrhea, it relieves pain and eases associated tension.
Externally, peppermint is applied to soothe itching and
inflammation of the skin.

Ellingwood considered peppermint specific for

. .. flatulent colic, gastrodynia, nausea, vomiting, spas-
modic pain in the bowels, hiccough, palpitation from indi-
gestion, griping, irritability of the stomach, diarrhoea with
abdominal pain, nervous headache, painful gonorrhoea.

In addition, he recommended it for fevers associated
with nausea and vomiting, local pain relief in rheumatism
(essential oil), symptomatic relief of asthma and chronic
bronchitis, toothache, acute indigestion, and pruritis ani.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over a heaping teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes.
This may be drunk as often as desired.

According to Commission E, daily dosage is 3 to 6 g
herb, 5 to 15 g tincture, or equivalent preparations. For
essential oil, it suggests a daily dosage internally of 6 to 12
drops, or 3 to 4 drops in hot water as an inhalation. For
irritable colon, it recommends a single dose of 0.2 ml, or
an average daily dose of 0.6 ml essential oil in enteric-
coated capsules. (Enteric-coated capsules are designed to
dissolve after they pass the stomach, thus facilitating ac-
tivity in the intestines.) The BHC suggests 2 to 3 g herb

by infusion or 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times
a day.

Menthae piperitae folium, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Bogbean
Menyanthaceae

Other Name: Buckbean
Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Anthraquinones (including emodin, aloe-
emodin, chrysophanol, and rhein glycosides); flavonoid
glycosides (hyperin, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin, trifolio-
side); alkaloids (gentianin and gentianidine); coumarins
(scopoletin); iridoids!?

Actions: Bitter, diuretic, cholagogue, antirheumatic

Indications: Bogbean is a most useful herb for rheuma-
tism, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis. However,
because of its stimulating effects in the digestive system,
it should not be used for rheumatism accompanied by col-
itis or diarrhea. It acts as an aperient by stimulating the
walls of the colon, and markedly promotes secretion of
digestive juices and bile flow. It is thus useful for debili-
tated states related to sluggish digestion, indigestion, and
disorders of the liver and gallbladder.

Safety Considerations: Excessive doses of bogbean may
irritate the gastrointestinal tract, causing diarrhea, grip-
ing pains, nausea, and vomiting.'”°
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 0.5 to 2 g dried leaf,
4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract
(i:1 in 25%) three times daily. Commission E recom-
mends a daily dosage of 1.5 to 3 g dried herb.

Menyanthidis folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Mitchella repens L.
Partridgeberry
Rubiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Largely unknown; unspecified alkaloids,
saponins, glycosides, tannins, and mucilages have been
reported!”!

----- PAGE 577 -----
Actions: Parturient, emmenagozue, diuretic, tonic,
astringent

Indications: Partridgeberry is among the best remedies
for preparing the uterus and whole body for childbirth. It
should be taken for some weeks before the child is due to
help ensure a safe and wonderful birth for both mother
and baby. Partridgeberry may also help relieve the pain of
dysmenorrhea. As an astringent, it has been used to treat
colitis, especially if there is much mucus.
According to King’s,

Partridge berry is parturient, diuretic, and astringent.
Used in dropsy, suppression of urine and diarrhoea, in de-
coction. It seems to have an especial affinity for the
uterus, exerting a powerful tonic and alterative influence
upon this organ, and has hence been found highly bene-
ficial in many uterine derangements, as in amenorrhoea,
some forms of dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, chronic
congestion of the uterus, enfeebled uterine nervous sys-
tem, etc. Dose of a strong decoction, from 2 to 4 fluid
ounces, 2 or 3 times a day. The berries are a popular rem-
edy for diarrhoea and dysuria. Used as follows, partridge
berry is highly recommended as a cure for sore nipples:
Take 2 ounces of the herb, fresh if possible, and make a
strong decoction with a pint of water, then strain, and add

as much good cream as there is liquid of the decoction.
Boil the whole down to the consistence of a soft salve, and
when cool, anoint the nipple with it every time the child
is removed from the breast.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to 4
ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Myrica cerifera L.
Bayberry
Myricaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Triterpenes (including taraxerol, taraxe-
rone, and myricadiol); flavonoids (such as myricitrin);
tannins (bark 3.9%, total aqueous extract 34.82%); mis-
cellaneous: phenols, resins, gums'??

Actions: Astringent, circulatory stimulant, diaphoretic

MaTERIA MEDICA @ 569

Indications: As a circulatory stimulant, bayberry may
have a role in holistic approaches to many conditions.
Because of its specific actions, it is a valuable astringent
for diarrhea and dysentery. Bayberry is also indicated for
mucous colitis. Applied as a gargle, it soothes sore throats,
and when used as a douche, it helps with leukorrhea. It
may also be used for the treatment of colds.
Ellingwood described bayberry as a

. .. Stimulating astringent indicated where ever there is
excessive mucous discharge. For atonic or persistent diar-
rhoea and locally for bleeding gums.

In addition, he recommended it for dysentery, stom-
atitis, nasal catarrh, measles and scarlet fever, convulsions,
and jaundice.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of herb into a cup of cold water and bring to a
boil. Let sit for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Bayberry, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Nepeta cataria L.
Catnip
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil (carvacrol, citronellal, nerol,
geraniol, pulegone, thymol, nepetalic acid); iridoids (in-
cluding epideoxyloganic acid and 7-deoxyloganic acid);
tannins!

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, ner-
vine, astringent

Indications: Catnip is a traditional cold and flu remedy.
It is a valuable diaphoretic helpful in any feverish condi-
tion, especially acute bronchitis. As a carminative with an-
tispasmodic properties, catnip eases stomach upset, dys-
pepsia, flatulence, and colic. It is a perfect remedy for the
treatment of diarrhea in children. Its nervine sedative ac-
tion adds to its generally relaxing properties.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and

----- PAGE 578 -----
570 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This
should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 3 to
6 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 2 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 25%).

Panax ginseng L.

Korean Ginseng

Araliaceae

Other Species: American ginseng is Panax quinguefolius,
also known as Canadian ginseng.

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpene glycosides, called ginsenosides
or panaxosides, of which 13 have been isolated (e.g., des-
ignated ginsenosides Ra, Rb, Rgl, Rg2, and others); gly-
cans (panaxans A-E); volatile oil!”4

Actions: Adaptogen, tonic, stimulant, hypoglycemic
Indications: Ginseng has an ancient history, and much
folklore has accumulated about its actions and uses. The
genus name, Panax, is derived from the Latin panacea,
meaning “cure all.” Unfortunately, many of the claims
made for ginseng are exaggerated, but it is clear that this
is an important remedy.

Ginseng is an adaptogen, a substance that acts to en-
hance nonspecific resistance to various external and inter-
nal stressors. Thus, it has a wide range of possible thera-
peutic uses. Its best therapeutic application is for weak or
elderly people, for whom the adaptogenic and stimulating
properties can be profoundly useful. It should not be used
indiscriminately, as its stimulating properties are con-
traindicated in some pathologies. For example, Chinese
herbalists caution against the use of ginseng in acute in-
flammatory diseases and bronchitis. The ginseng used by
the 19th-century Eclectic physicians was P. quinguefolius.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Ginseng root is often
chewed, or a decoction may be made as follows: Put '/2
teaspoon of powdered root in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 minutes. Drink three times
a day. The tincture dose is 1 to 2 ml three times a day (1:5
in 60%).

A common daily dosage used in clinical trials is 200
mg of a 5:1 standardized extract. Commission E. recom-
mends a daily dose of 1 to 2 g of root or equivalent
preparations.

Ginseng, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Parietaria diffusa L.
Pellitory ofithe Wall
Urticaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (glycosides of quercetin,
kaempferol, and isorhamnetin); glucoproteins; bitter
principle; tannins!”

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent

Indications: Pellitory of the wall may be used to treat any
inflammation of the urinary tract, especially when a
soothing action is needed. It is beneficial for cystitis and
pyelitis, and acts a good general diuretic when used to re-
lieve water retention related to kidney problems. It has an
especially valuable role to play in the treatment of kidney
stones or gravel.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Passiflora incarnata L.
Passionflower
Passifloraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, whole plant

Constituents: Alkaloids (harmine, harman, harmol,
harmaline, harmalol, passaflorine); flavonoids (apigenin,
homoorientin, isovitexin, kaempferol, luteolin, orientin,
quercetin, rutin, saponaretin, saponarin, vitexen)!76

Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, anodyne,
hypotensive

Indications: Passiflora is used for its sedative and sooth-
ing properties and to lower blood pressure, prevent
tachycardia, and relieve insomnia. It has a depressant ef-
fect on the central nervous system and acts as a hypoten-
sive. The pharmacological actions of many of the
flavonoids, such as apigenin, are well known, and include
antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory effects. The alka-
loids and flavonoids in passionflower have shown sedative
activity in animals.

Passionflower is the herb of choice for intransigent
insomnia. It eases the transition into restful sleep without
causing any next-day hangover. It may be used whenever
an antispasmodic is indicated (for example, for
Parkinson’s disease, seizures, or hysteria). It can be effec-

----- PAGE 579 -----
tive for nerve pain, such as neuralgia, and the viral infec-
tion of nerves called shingles. Passionflower may also be
helpful for asthma associated with spasmodic activity and
states of tension.

Safety Considerations: Passionflower will potentiate the
effects of sedative drugs. Theoretically, it is contra-
indicated for people taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml,
taken once in the evening for sleeplessness or twice a day
for other conditions (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb
and infuse for 15 minutes. As with tincture, drink a cup in
the evening for sleeplessness or 1 cup twice a day for
other indications.

The BHP lists a dosage of 0.25 to 1 g dried herb, 0.5
to 2 ml tincture (1:8 in 45%), or 0.5 to 1 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times a day. Dosage recommended in
the BHC is 0.5 to 2 g dried herb or 0.5 to 2 ml fluid ex-
tract (1:1 in 25%) up to four times daily.

Passionflower herb, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex

A. W. Hill

Parsley

Apiaceae

Parts Used: Taproot, leaf, seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (containing apiole, myristicin,
B-phellandrene, and others); coumarins; flavonoids;
phthalides; vitamins!7’

Actions: Diuretic, emmenagogue, carminative, antispas-
modic, expectorant, hypotensive

Indications: Fresh parsley, so widely used in cooking, is a
rich source of vitamin C. Medicinally, the herb has three
main areas of usage. First, it is an effective diuretic that
helps the body eliminate excess water, and may be used
whenever such an action is desired. (Remember, however,
that the cause of the problem must also be sought and
treated.) It is also an emmenagogue, used to stimulate the
menstrual process. Thus, medicinal use of parsley during
pregnancy is not advisable, as it may cause excessive stim-
ulation of the womb. Finally, it has value as a carminative
to ease flatulence and accompanying colic pains.

Safety Considerations: Parsley can cause allergic reac-
tions. The essential oil is a photosensitizer. Do not use
the essential oil or extracts in medicinal doses during
pregnancy.

MareRIA MEDICA -e» 571

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of leaf or root
and infuse in a covered container for 5 to 10 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to
4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times daily. Com-
mission E suggests a daily dose of 6 g herb or equivalent
preparations.

Parsley herb and root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission
E Monographs

Peumus boldus Molina
Boldo
Monimiaceae

Part Used: Dried leaf

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (up to 0.7%): bol-
dine, isoboldine, and isocorydine; volatile oil (2.5%):
p-cymene, 1,8-cineole, ascaridole, linalool; flavonoid gly-
cosides, based on isorhainnetin!”®

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, diuretic

Indications: Boldo is a specific for gallbladder problems,
such as stones and inflammations. It is also used when
there is visceral pain related to other problems in the liver
or gallbladder. Boldo, in combination with cascara,
rhubarb, and gentian, is effective against a variety of
symptoms, including loss of appetite, digestive difficul-
ties, constipation, flatulence, and itching.!”? Boldo also
has mild urinary demulcent and antiseptic properties, and
so may be useful in cystitis.

Safety Considerations: Because of the volatile oil con-
tent, excessive doses of boldo may cause renal irritation.
Thus, it should be avoided by individuals with existing
kidney disease. Ascaridole is toxic, and use of boldo es-
sential oil is not recommended.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Average daily dose recommended by Commission E
is 3 g of herb or equivalent preparations. The BHP sug-
gests 0.6 to 2 g dried herk or 0.6 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 45%) three times a day.

Bolco leaf. in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 580 -----
572 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Phytolacca americana L.
Poke
Phytolaccaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponins (phytolaccosides
A-E, based on the aglycones phytolaccagenin and phyto-
laccic acid); lectins (a mixture known as “pokeweed mito-
gen,” consisting of a series of glycoproteins)!®°

Actions: Antirheumatic, stimulant, anticatarrhal, purga-
tive, emetic

Indications: Poke root is a strong but valuable herb. It
helps eliminate catarrh and supports cleansing of the lym-
phatic glands, and may be seen primarily as a remedy for
infections of the upper respiratory tract. It may be used to
treat catarrh, tonsillitis, laryngitis, swollen glands, and
mumps.

Lymphatic problems elsewhere in the body may also
benefit from the use of poke, especially mastitis, for which
it can be taken internally and applied as a poultice. The herb
may also have value in rheumatism, particularly long-
standing disorders. Used externally as a lotion or oint-
ment, it may be used to rid the skin of scabies and other
pests. Care must be taken with this herb, as it is powerfully
emetic and purgative in large doses.

Priest and Priest described poke as a

... stimulating and relaxing alterative: promotes the re-
moval of catabolic wastes and the products of fatty de-
generation. Specific for skeletal congestions, and for
serous and glandular tissues.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
rheumatism and arthritis, neuralgia and lumbago, tonsil-
litis and parotitis, mastitis, ovaritis, orchitis, enlarged thy-
roid, and enlarged lymph nodes.

Safety Considerations: In large doses, poke is a power-
ful emetic and purgative.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.25 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 45%). For a decoction, only a
small amount of this herb should be used. Put '/a tea-
spoon of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and sim-
mer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Poke root, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Pimpinella anisum L.
Anise

Apiaceae

Other Name: Aniseed
Part Used: Dried seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 4%), consisting of
largely trans-anethole (70% to 90%), also dianethole and
photoanethole; coumarins (such as bergapten, umbelli-
ferone, scopoletin); flavonoids (rutin, isovitexin, quer-
cetin, luteolin, apigenin glycosides); phenylpropanoids;
miscellaneous: lipids, fatty acids, sterols, proteins,
carbohydrates!®!

Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, carminative, an-
timicrobial, aromatic, galactagogue

Indications: The internal use of anise (also known as
aniseed) to ease griping, intestinal colic, and flatulence is
based upon its volatile oil content. The oil also has ex-
pectorant and antispasmodic actions that underlie the
use of the herb in bronchitis, for tracheitis when there is
persistent irritable coughing, and for whooping cough.
‘Used externally, aniseed oil helps control lice, and the oil
may be applied in an ointment base for the treatment of
scabies.

Studies have demonstrated that aniseed increases
mucociliary transport, which supports its use as an expec-
torant. The herb has mild estrogenic effects thought to be
due to the presence of dianethole and photoanethole, ex-
plaining its use in folk medicine to increase milk secre-
tion, facilitate birth, and, allegedly, increase libido.

Safety Considerations: Anise may be allergenic and
photosensitizing. [t may interfere with the activity of an-
ticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%), To make an infusion, the
seeds should be gently crushed just before use to release the
volatile oils. Pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 tea-
spoons of the seeds and infuse in a covered container for 5
to 10 minutes. Take | cup three times daily. The tea should
be drunk slowly before meals to treat flatulence. One drop
of the essential oil may be taken internally by mixing it into
1 teaspoon of honey.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 3 g
dried fruit or 0.3 g essential oil.

Anis [ractus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 581 -----
Piper methysticum Forst. f.
Kava Kava
Piperaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Kavalactones (3.5% to 15% of the root by
dried weight): methysticin, dihydromethysticin, kavain,
dihydrokavain; chalcones (flavokavains A~C)!®*

Actions: Relaxing nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, local
anesthetic, antifungal

Indications: Kava is a safe treatment for anxiety, with the
added benefit that it does not dampen alertness when
given at normal therapeutic doses. The antianxiety effects
of kava compare favorably to those of prescription medi-
cations often used to treat anxiety disorders, such as ben-
zodiazepines, without the side effects commonly seen with
these drugs.!®} Kava does not impair reaction time and ap-
pears to improve concentration.

In one double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 29
subjects were treated for 4 weeks with 100 mg kava ex-
tract (standardized to 70% kavalactones) three times
daily. The kava group experienced significant decreases in
symptoms of anxiety (measured on tae Hamilton Anxiety
Scale) compared with the placebo group.!* Another study
showed that kava was effective in relieving anxiety associ-
ated with menopause.

Kava possesses mild antidepressant properties, mak-
ing it suitable for the treatment of anxiety associated with
minor forms of depression. Because it is an effective mus-
cle relaxant, it is appropriate for conditions associated
with skeletal muscle spasm and tension (for example,
headaches due to neck tension). It is also a relevant hyp-
notic in cases of mild insomnia. It has local anesthetic ac-
tions on mucous membranes, so it is helpful for control of
pain related to oral conditions. The constituent kavain
has demonstrated significant analgesic effects in animal
studies, apparently via non-opiate pathways.'® Subeu-
taneous injections provided anesthesia for several hours
to several days.

Safety Considerations: A side effect of heavy kava con-
sumption is “kava dermopathy,” an ichthyosiform skin
rash characterized by noninflammatory dryness and scal-
ing of the skin. This is typically seen only in heavy, long-
term consumers of a traditional kava beverage popular in
Polynesia. However, the rash has also been observed in
people taking doses of 300 to 800 mg daily of the isolated
lactone dihydromethysticin.!® This skin reaction is re-
versible upon discontinuation of kava treatment.

Kava may potentiate the effects of substances that act

MATERIA MEDICA @ 573

on the central nervous system, such as alcohol, barbitu-
rates, and psychopharmaceutical agents. An apparently
antagonistic action or incompatibility reaction may occur:
In one case, 150 mg kava extract taken twice daily reduced
the efficacy of levodopa used in the treatment of
Parkinson’s disease.!8’

A small number of reports of hepatotoxicity related
to kava use have appeared. The evidence to confirm a role
for kava in such liver toxicity is extremely equivocal, but
has led to restrictions on availability in some countries.

Preparations and Dosage: Recommended dosage for
kava depends upon the concentration of kavalactones.
The important measure is the amount of kavalactones the
preparation is standardized to contain. Commission E
recommends preparations equivalent to 60 to 120 mg
kavalactones taken three times a day.

Kava, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Piscidia erythrina L.
Jamaica Dogwood
Fabaceae

Part Used: Stem

Constituents: Isoflavones (lisetin, jamaicin, ichthyone);
rotenoids (rotenone, milletone, isomilletone); organic
acids, including piscidic acid; B-sitosterol; tannins!*

Actions: Nervine, anodyne, antispasmodic

Indications: Jamaica dogwood is a powerful sedative, used
in its West Indian homeland as a fish poison. While the
herb is not poisonous to humans, it is important not to ex-
ceed the recommended dosage level. This is a powerful
remedy for the treatmerst of painful conditions, such as
neuralgia and migraine. One of its primary applications is
related to nervous tension or pain. It can also be used to
relieve ovarian and uterine pain.

Safety Considerations: Use Jamaica dogwood with great
care. The herb may potentiate sedative effects of con-
comitant therapies. It should not be used during preg-
nancy and lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 m}
of the tincture as needed (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoc-
tion, put | teaspoon of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk as needed.

The BHC recommends 2 to 4 g of dried root bark, §
to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 8 ml of liquid ex-
tract (1:1 in 60%) three times daily.

Jamaica Dogwood, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

----- PAGE 582 -----
574 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Plantago major L.
Plantain
Plantaginaceae

Related Species: Ribwort plantain (Plantago lanceolata)
Parts Used: Leaf, aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (aucubin, catalpol); flavonoids
(apigenin, luteolin, scutellarin, baicalein, nepetin, hispi-
dulin, plantagoside); tannins; oleanolic acid; plant acids!®®
Actions: Vulnerary, expectorant, demulcent, anti-
inflammatory, astringent, diuretic, antimicrobial

Indications: Both greater plantain (Plantago major) and
its close relative ribwort plantain (P. lanceolata) have
valuable healing properties. Plantain acts as a gentle ex-
pectorant while soothing inflamed and sore membranes,
making it ideal for coughs and mild bronchitis. Its as-
tringency is helpful in diarrhea, hemorrhoids, and cysti-
tis accompanied by bleeding. Plantain is one of Western
herbalism’s primary topical healing agents, used as a lo-
tion, ointment, compress, or poultice for cuts and
bruises. It may be applied topically for hemorrhoids and
skin ulcerations.
Ellingwood described plantain thus:

The remedy is of value in the internal treatment of all dis-
eases of the blood. Scrofula, syphilis, specific or non-spe-
cific glandular disease and mercurial poisoning. It is used in
ulcerations ofthe mucous membrane, due to depraved con-
ditions, It may be given in diarrhoea, dysentery, the diar-
rhoea of consumption, cholera infantum, and where there
are longstanding hemorrhoids. It is also given in female
disorders, attended with fluent discharges and in hema-
turia, also in dysuria and some forms of passive hemor-
rhage. It would thus seem to possess marked astringent
properties, as well as those of an alterative character.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 3 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three times a
day. An ointment may be made for treatment of hemor-
rhoids and cuts.

Commission E recommends 3 to 6 g of herb or
equivalent preparations daily.

Plantain, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Polygala senega L.
Seneca Snakeroot
Polygalaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponins, based on the
aglycones senegenin, polygalacic acid, and sene-
genic acid; phenolic acids (p-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic,
p-methoxycinnamic); polygalitol, a sorbito] derivative;
methyl salicylate; sterols; fats!”

Actions: Expectorant, diaphoretic, sialagogue, emetic

Indications: Seneca snakeroot has strong expectorant ef-
fects that can be employed to treat bronchial asthma, es-
pecially in cases marked by difficulty with expectoration.
It has a general ability to stimulate secretions, including
saliva. It may be used as a mouthwash and gargle in the
treatment of pharyngitis and laryngitis. If too much is
taken, the herb may irritate the lining ofthe gut and cause
vomiting.

A quote from Ellingwood is highly suggestive of the
therapeutic possibilities this herb offers:

The agent is indicated in typhoid pneumonitis, capillary
bronchitis, in aged and debilitated subjects, chronic bron-
chitis with profuse secretion, in the declining stages of
pneumonitis, bronchitis and croup, when the inflamma-
tory condition has passed off, chronic bronchitis with
pain and soreness in the chest and asthma. The agent is in
use in the treatment of dropsy from obstruction and glan-
dular enlargement, also in rheumatism, syphilis, squa-
mous skin diseases and in amenorrhoea. In inflammation
of the eyelids and iritis it is beneficial. Snake Root has
been employed as a stimulating expectorant in chronic
bronchitis, in aged and debilitated subjects, where a stim-
ulating medicine is demanded and in the later stages of
pneumonia and catarrhal inflammation. In these cases,
given in small doses, it improves secretion, removes ab-
normal deposits and restores the strength. It is an ener-
getic stimulant to the mucous membranes of the air pas-
sages; and, when given before the inflammation has
subsided, aggravates the cough and does harm.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of boiling water over !/2 teaspoon of dried root and
simmer for 5 to 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup three times a
day.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 1.5 to

----- PAGE 583 -----
3 g of root, 1.5 to 3 ml of fluid extract, or 2.5 to 7.5 ml of
the tincture.

Polygalae radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Populus candicans L.
Balm of Gilead
Salicaceae

Part Used: Unopened buds

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, populin,
chrysin); volatile oil (a-caryophyllene, cineole, arcurcum-
ene, bisabolene, farnesene, and others); alkanes; resins;
phenolic acids; tannins!?!

Actions: Stimulating expectorant, antimicrobial, vul-
nerary

Indications: Balm of Gilead soothes, disinfects, and as-
tringes mucous membranes, making it an excellent rem-
edy for sore throats, coughs, and laryngitis. In fact, it is
considered a specific for laryngitis accompanied by loss of
voice. It may also be used to treat chronic bronchitis.
Applied externally, it may help ease the inflammation of
rheumatism or arthritis, and may also be of benefit in dry
and scaly skin conditions, such as psoriasis and dry eczema.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
of the tincture three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an
infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of
buds and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or more often until effective (if
the patient can deal with the taste!). The herb is usually
used in the form of a syrup to improve palatability.

The BHC recommends 1.5 to 3 g root, 3 to 5 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45% ethanol), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times daily.

Poplar, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Populus tremuloides Michx.
Quaking Aspen

Salicaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, populin);
tannins!%2

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, astringent, antiseptic, ano-
dyne, cholagogue, bitter tonic

Indications: Quaking aspen is a relevant anti-inflammatory
for arthritis and rheumatism accompanied by pain and

MATERIA MEDICA <> 575

swelling. Its use in this indication is quite similar to that
of willow, and it is most effective when used as part of a
broad therapeutic approach, not as the sole treatment. It
is very effective for flare-ups of rheumatoid arthritis. As a
cholagogue, it helps stimulate digestion, especially stom-
ach and liver function, particularly when loss of appetite
is part of the picture. It may also be appropriate for fever-
ish colds and other infections, such as cystitis. As an as-
tringent, it may help in the treatment of diarrhea.

Priest and Priest described quaking aspen as a

. . . bitter tonic for all general uses, especially for post~
febrile debility. Stimulates appetite and aids digestion.
Suitable for the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: dyspep-
sia, flatulence, diarrhea, and dysentery.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. To stimulate appetite, drink 30
minutes before meals.

Prunus serotina Ehrh.
Wild Cherry
Rosaceae

Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Cyanogenetic glycoside (prunasin); ben-
zaldehyde; eudesmic acid; p-coumaric acid; scopoletin;
tannins; sugars!?

Actions: Antitussive, expectorant, astringent, nervine,
antispasmodic

Indications: Because of its powerful sedative effect on
the cough reflex, wild cherry bark finds its main use in
the treatment of irritating coughs. Thus, it has a role in
the treatment of bronchitis and whooping cough. It is
appropriate for use in combination with other herbs to
control asthma. (Remember, however, that inhibiting a
cough is not the same as healing the infection, which will
still need treatment.) In addition to this use for coughs,
wild cherry may be used as a bitter to improve sluggish
digestion. A cold infusion, applied as a wash, may be
helpful for eye inflammations.

Here is an excerpt from a lengthy monograph in
King’s on wild cherry:

Wild Cherry has a tonic and stimulating influence on the

digestive apparatus, and a simultaneous sedative action on

----- PAGE 584 -----
576 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

the nervous system and circulation. It is, therefore, valu-
able in all those cases where it is desirable to give tone and
strength to the system, without, at the same time, causing
too great an action of the heart and blood vessels, as, dur-
ing convalescence from pleurisy, pneumonia, acute hep-
atitis, and other inflammatory and febrile diseases. Its
chief property is its power of relieving irritation of the
mucous surfaces, making it an admirable remedy in many
gastro-intestinal, pulmonic, and urinary troubles. It is best
adapted to chronic troubles. Externally, it has been found
useful, in decoction, as a wash to ill conditioned ulcers and
acute ophthalmia.

Safety Considerations: Theoretically, large doses of
wild cherry bark are toxic.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried bark and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Pulsatilla vulgaris L.
Pasqueflower
Ranunculaceae

Other Names: Pulsatilla, wind flower
Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones; protoanemonin
(= ranunculin), anemonin (oxidation product of pro-
toanemonin);, triterpenoid saponins (hederagenin);
flavonoids (delphinidin and pelargonidin glycosides);
anemone camphor; tannins; volatile oil!*

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, antibacterial

Indications: Pasqueflower is a relaxing nervine especially
useful for problems combining spasm in the reproductive
system with overall nervous tension. It may be safely used
to relieve dysmenorrhea, ovarian pain, and painful condi-
tions of the testes. It may help alleviate tension reactions
and headaches associated with such reactions, and is ap-
propriate for insomnia and general nervous overactivity.
Pasqueflower’s antibacterial actions give this herb a
role in treating skin infections, especially boils. It is simi-
larly useful in the treatment of respiratory infections and
asthma. An infused oil or tincture will ease earache.
Uterine antispasmodic activity has been documented
for Pulsatilla in laboratory studies.'% In another study, the
constituents protoanemonin and anemonin (produced
when protoanemonin oxidizes) showed sedative and an-

tipyretic properties in rodents.!%

This remedy was far more widely used in the 19th
century than it is today. The following passage comes
from the extensive monograph on Pulsatilla in King’s:

Pulsatilla forms an important remedy with the Eclectic
physicians as well as with homeopaths, who make exten-
sive use of it. According to Dr. Scudder, its most impor-
tant use is to allay irritation of the nervous system in per-
sons of feeble health, thus giving sleep and rest,
preventing unnecessary expenditure of nerve force, and,
by this means, facilitating the action of tonics and restora-
tives. It is a remedy of wide applicability, but more partic-
ularly for those conditions in which the mind is a promi-
nent factor. A gloomy mentality, a state of nerve
depression and unrest, a disposition to brood over real or
imagined trouble, a tendency to look on the dark side of
life, sadness, mild restlessness, and a state of mental un-
rest generally denominated in broad terms “nervousness,”
are factors in the condition of the patient requiring
Pulsatilla. The whole condition is one of nervous depres-
sion, the nutrition of the nerve centers are at fault.
Pulsatilla may be given to produce sleep, when there is
great exhaustion. If the insomnia is due to nervous ex-
haustion it is a prompt remedy to give rest, after which
sleep obtains. Where sleep is disturbed by unpleasant
dreams, and the patient awakens sad and languid,
Pulsatilla should be given.

In dysmenorrhoea, not due to mechanical causes,
and with the above-named nervous symptoms, no remedy
is more effective. Pulsatilla frequently proves a good rem-
edy in ovaritis and ovaralgia with tensive, tearing pain. It
is frequently a remedy for pain, when dependent on or as-
sociated with debility, and sometimes when due to acute
inflammation. It frequently proves a useful remedy in
headache of various types. It relieves the frontal headache
from nasal catarrh, nervous headache.

Safety Considerations: Fresh Pulsatilla is poisonous and

should not be ingested. External contact with the fresh
plant should also be avoided. The toxic principle, pro-
toanemonin, rapidly degrades to the nontoxic anemonin
during drying. Avoid use of Pudsatilla during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over !/2 to 1 teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or as needed. Liquid extract
dosage is 0.12 to 0.3 ml (1:1 in 25%).

Pulsatilla, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

----- PAGE 585 -----
Quercus alba L.
Oak
Fagaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Tannins (15% to 20%): phlobatannin,
ellagitannins, and gallic acid!”

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic

Indications: Oak bark may be used wherever an effective
astringent is needed—for example, for diarrhea or dysen-
tery. However, because of its high content of astringent
tannins, it may be too strong in some situations. The de-
coction is appropriate for use as a gargle for tonsillitis,
pharyngitis, and laryngitis. It may also be applied as an
enema to treat hemorrhoids and as a douche for leukor-
rhea. However, it is primarily indicated for acute diarrhea,
for which it should be taken in small, frequent doses.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug inter-
actions have been reported. However, do not use for
constipation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). ‘Io make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of bark in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This can be drunk
three times a day.

Oak bark, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Rheum palmatum L.
Chinese Rhubarb
Polygonaceae

Other Names: An interchangeable species is Rbewm offic-
inale Baillon. Do not confuse with garden rhubarb.

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Anthraquinones (chrysophanol, emodin,
aloe-emodin, rhein, sennosides A-E, others); tannins; stil-
bene derivatives; volatile oil; rutin; fatty acids; calcium
oxalate!

Actions: Bitter, laxative, astringent

Indications: Rhubarb root has a ourgative action that
makes it very effective in the treatment of constipation.
However, this purgative effect is followed by an astrin-
gent effect. This means that the herb has a truly cleansing
action upon the gut, as it first removes debris and then as-
tringes the system with antiseptic properties.

According to Priest and Priest, rhubarb root is a

... mild stimulating tonic to alimentary mucous mem-

Materia MEDICA @ 577

brane, liver and gall ducts—removes viscid mucus. Small
doses—tonic hepatic. Large doses—cathartic.

They gave the following specific indications: diarrhea
and dysentery, and functional dyspepsia.

Safety Considerations: Rhubarb root may cause an in-
crease in the effectiveness and toxic effects of cardiac gly-
cosides and an effect on the action of antiarrhythmic drugs,
because it enhances loss of potassium. Potassium deficiency
can be increased by simultaneous use of thiazide diuretics,
corticoadrenal steroids, or licorice root. Because it de-
creases intestinal transit time, rhubarb root may reduce the
absorption time of orally administered drugs.' Note:
Rhubarb root may color the urine yellow or red.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
morning and evening. “fo make a decoction, put '/2 to 1
teaspoon of the root in |. cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer gently for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
morning and evening.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage contain-
ing 20 to 30 mg of hydroxyanthracene derivatives (calcu-
lated as rhein). Individual dosage is the smallest dosage
necessary to maintain a soft stool.

Rhei radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rosmarinus officinalis L.
Rosemary
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, twig

Constituents: Volatile oil (borneol, camphene, camphor,
cineole, limonene, linaiool); flavonoids (apigenin, dios-
metin, diosmin, luteolin and derivatives); rosmarinic acid
and other phenolic acids; diterpenes (carnosol, carnosolic
acid, and rosmariquinone); rosmaricine; triterpenes (ur-
solic acid, oleanolic acid?

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, antidepressant,
rubefacient, antimicrobial, emmenagogue

Indications: Rosemary is a circulatory and nervine stim-
ulant. It has a toning and calming effect on digestion, es-
pecially when stomach upset is accompanied by psycho-
logical tension. Thus, conditions appropriate for
treatment with rosemary include flatulent dyspepsia with
headache or depression associated with debility. Applied
externally, it helps ease muscular pain, sciatica, and nev-
ralgia. It also acts as a stimulant to both hair follicles and
circulation in the scalp, and thus may be useful for treat-
ing premature baldness. Rosemary essential oil is most ef-
fective for this purpose.

----- PAGE 586 -----
578 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Priest and Priest considered rosemary a

... diffuse stimulant and relaxing tonic with special in-
fluence upon stomach and cerebrum. It soothes the ner-
vous system and is tonic to the vaso-motor function and
peripheral circulation. It is a suitable tonic for the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: atonic
conditions of the stomach, gastric headache, adolescent
hypotonia, asthenia with pallid complexion, and circula-
tory weakness following stress or illness.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a total daily dosage of 4
to 6 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Rosemary leaf, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Rubus idaeus L.
Red Raspberry
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, fruit

Constituents: Flavonoids (mainly glycosides of
kaempferol and quercetin), tannins, fruit sugar; volatile
oil; pectin; citric acid; malic acid?!

Actions: Astringent, tonic, parturient

Indications: Raspberry leaf has a long tradition of use in
pregnancy to strengthen and tone the tissue of the uterus.
Used for this purpose, it purportedly strengthens contrac-
tions and checks hemorrhage during labor. As an astrin-
gent, it has therapeutic applications for a wide range of
conditions, including diarrhea and leukorrhea. It also
helps ease mouth problems, such as aphthous ulcers,
bleeding gums, and inflammations, and, used as a gargle,
is effective for sore throats.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This may be drunk freely.

The USP recommends a daily dosage of 4 to 8 g
dried herb or 4 to 8 ml fluid extract.

Rubi fructicosi folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rubus villosus L.
Blackberry
Rosaceae

Part Used: Bark of root and rhizome

Constituents: Tannins (20%): gallic acid; saponins (in-
cluding villosin)’0

Action: Astringent

Indications: Blackberry is an excellent, safe, and gentle
astringent remedy that can be used in all situations that
call for this action. It is appropriate for diarrhea, dysen-
tery, and other problems associated with “loose bowels.”
It was traditionally used in Britain as an external wash to
treat burns and a whole range of skin eruptions. It will
stanch bleeding and is helpful for leukorrhea.
Ellingwood considered blackberry specific for “diarrheas
of infancy.”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 g of dried herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup three times a
day.

Commission E recommends 4.5 g of dried herb daily.

Rubi idaei folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rumex crispus L.
Yellow Dock
Polygonaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Anthraquinone glycosides (about 3% to
4%, including nepodin, physcion, and emodin); miscella-
neous: tannins and oxalates?®

Actions: Alterative, laxative, hepatic, cholagogue, tonic

Indications: Yellow dock is used extensively in the treat-
ment of chronic skin complaints, such as psoriasis. While
anthraquinones usually have a strong cathartic action on
the bowel, in this herb they act mildly, possibly tempered
by the tannin content. Because yellow dock works in a
broader manner than herbs that simply stimulate gut ac-
tion, it isa valuable remedy for constipation. Yellow dock
promotes the flow of bile and has the somewhat obscure
action of “blood cleansing.” Its influence on the gall-
bladder gives it a role in the treatment of jaundice due to
congestion.

----- PAGE 587 -----
Priest and Priest considered yellow dock a “general
tonic alterative with special influence upon skin erup-
tions.” They gave the following specific indications:
simple deficiency anemia, eczema, psoriasis, urticaria,
prurigo (a chronic skin condition characterized by per-
sistent, intensely itchy papules), and itching hemor-
rhoids.

Safety Considerations: Fresh yellow dock root may
cause vomiting. Yellow dock may potentiate the activity of
stimulant laxatives.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 ¢ dried herb, | to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Yellow Dock, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Ruta graveolens L.
Rue
Rutaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil: 2-undecanone (50% to 90%)
and others; flavonoids (including quercetin and rutin);
coumarins (bergapten, isoimperatorin, psoralen, scopo-
fetin, and umbelliferone); alkaloids (arborinine, graveo-
line); lignans (in the root): savinin and helioxanthin?°+

Actions: Antispasmodic, emmenagogue, antitussive, an-
timicrobial, bitter, abortifacient

Indications: Rue is an herb with an ancient history. The
genus name, Ruta, comes from the Greek work reno,
meaning “to set free,” an expression of its reputation for
freeing people from disease. Its main modern application
is to regulate the menstrual cycle and bring on suppressed
menses.

Its other main area of use is related to the plant’s an-
tispasmodic action. Rue relaxes smooth muscles, espe-
cially in the digestive system, where it eases griping and
bowel tension. Its ability to ease spasm gives it a role in
the treatment of spasmodic coughs. It also increases pe-
ripheral circulation and lowers elevated blood pressure.
Chewing the fresh leaf relieves tension headaches, eases
palpitations, and alleviates other anxiety problems.

Materia MEDIca @ 979

Safety Considerations: Rue essential oil is a dangerously
powerful abortifacient. Therefore, the herb should be
avoided during pregnancy and the essential oil avoided at
all times.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 1§ minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times
a day (1:5 in 40%).

The BHP recommends 0.5 tol g of dried herb or 0.5
to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Rue, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Salix alba L.
White Willow

Salicaceae
Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, salicylic acid);
miscellaneous: tannins, catechin, p-coumaric acid,

flavonoids?
Actions: Analgesic, anti-inflammatory, tonic

Indications: Willow is an ancient remedy that has been
used in various forms to treat rheumatism and gout,
fevers, and aches and pains of all kinds. It is generally con-
sidered to be the natural form and original source of the
modern aspirin.

Safety Considerations: Willow bark has a theoretical
potential to cause interactions of the type seen with sali-
cylates, although no cases have been reported in the sci-
entific literature. The ESCOP monograph notes no in-
teractions with willow, and states that irreversible
inhibition of platelet aggregation by aspirin cannot be
induced by the structurally different salicin present in
willow.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 3 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried bark in 1 cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends | to 2 g dried bark, 5 to 8 ml
tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25% ethanol) three times a day. Commission E advises an
average daily dosage corresponding to 60 to 120 mg total
salicin.

Salicis cortex, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 588 -----
580 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Salvia officinalis var. rubia L.
Red Sage
Lamiaceae

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Volatile oil (a- and $-thujone, cineole,
borneol, camphor, others); diterpene bitters: picrosalvin
(carnosol), carnosolic acid, and others; flavonoids (salvi-
genin, genkwanin, 6-methoxygenkwanin, hispidulin, lu-
teolin A); phenolic acids (rosmarinic, caffeic, labiatic);

salviatannin (a condensed catechin)*%

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, antimicrobial, as-
tringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Because of the soothing action of its volatile
oils upon the mucous membranes, red sage is the classic
remedy for inflammations of the mouth, throat, and ton-
sils. It may be used internally and as a mouthwash to treat
gingivitis, glossitis, and stomatitis, and is effective as a
gargle for aphthous ulcers. As a gargle, it also aids in the
treatment of laryngitis, pharyngitis, and tonsillitis. Used
as a compress, red sage promotes wound healing.

Taken internally, red sage is a valuable carminative
that may used to good effect in dyspepsia. It decreases
sweating, and may also be used to lessen the production
of breast milk. Red sage stimulates the muscles of the
uterus and so should be avoided during pregnancy.

Safety Considerations: Adverse reactions are likely only
with overdoses (more than 15 g sage leaf per dose) or pro-
longed use of red sage. The toxic constituent of the es-
sential oil, thujone, causes symptoms such as tachycardia,
hot flashes, convulsions, and dizziness. Avoid during
pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of leaf and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. To make a mouthwash, place 2
teaspoons of leaf in '/2 liter (1 pint) of water, bring to a
boil, and let stand, covered, for 15 minutes. Gargle deeply
with the hot infusion several times a day.

Gommission E recommends a daily dose of 4 to 6 g
dried herb, 2.5 to 7.5 g tincture, or 1.5 to 3 g fluid extract.
For gargles or rinses, it suggests 2.5 g of dried herb or 2
to 3 drops of essential oil in 100 ml of water. The BHP
recommends | to 4 g dried herb as an infusion or 1 to 4 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times daily.

Salviae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Sambucus nigra L.
Black Elder
Caprifoliaceae

Parts Used: Flower, berry, leaf

Constituents: Flower: Triterpenes (ursolic acid, oleanolic
acid, a- and B-amyrin, sterols); fixed oils (free fatty acids,
mainly linoleic, linolenic, and palmitic acids); miscella-
neous: phenolic acids (e.g., chlorogenic acid); pectin;
sugars. Leaf: Triterpenes (similar to those found in flow-
ers); cyanogenetic glycosides, including sambunigrin;
flavonoids (kaempferol, quercetin, and many quercetin
glycosides, including hyperoside, isoquercitrin, and
rutin); miscellaneous: fatty acids, alkanes, tannins?©?

Actions: Leaf: Purgative, expectorant, diuretic, di-
aphoretic (internal); emollient, vulnerary (external).
Flower: Diaphoretic, anticatarrhal, antispasmodic. Berry:
Diaphoretic, diuretic, laxative, antirheumatic

Indications: The elder tree is a medicine chest in its own
right. The leaf is used topically for bruises, sprains,
wounds, and chilblains, and some reports hold that elder
leaf may be effective as an ointment for tumors. Elder
flower is ideal for the treatment of colds and influenza,
and a standardized black elderberry extract has demon-
strated antiviral properties. This extract was effective in
vitro against 10 strains of influenza virus. It also reduced
the duration of flu symptoms to 3 to 4 days in a double-
blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study.

Elder flower is indicated for any catarrhal inflamma-
tion ofthe upper respiratory tract, such as hay fever or si-
nusitis. Catarrhal deafness responds well to elder flower.
Elder berry has properties similar to those of the flower,
with the addition of effectiveness in rheumatism.

Sambucus also increases cytokine production. The
herb appears to strengthen cell membranes to prevent
virus penetration, possibly by inhibiting the viral enzyme
that weakens the membrane.?% An infusion made from
elder flower, St. John’s wort herb (Hypericum perforatum),
and soapwort root (Saponaria officinalis) exhibited antiviral
activity against influenza types A and B both in vivo and
in vitro, and against herpes simplex type I in vitro.2”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Elder flower tincture dosage
is 2 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an in-
fusion, pour 1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of
dried or fresh blossoms and infuse for 10 minutes. Drink
hot three times a day. To make a juice, boil fresh berries
in water for 2 to 3 minutes, then express the juice. To pre-

----- PAGE 589 -----
serve, add 1 part honey to 10 parts juice and bring to a
boil. Take 1 glass diluted with hot water twice a day.

To make an ointment, heat 3 parts fresh elder leaf
with 6 parts melted Vaseline until the leaves are crisp.
Strain and store.

The BHP recommends 3 to 5 g dried flowers, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 10 to 25 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%),
or 3 to 5 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Sambuci flos and Sambuci fructus, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Sanguinaria canadensis L.
Bloodroot
Papaveraceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (3% to 7%), mainly
sanguinarine???

Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, emetic, cathartic,
nervine, cardioactive, topical irritant:

Indications: Bloodroot finds its main use in the treat-
ment of bronchitis. While its stimulating properties are
apparent in its emetic and expectorant effects, the herb
also demonstrates a relaxing action en the bronchial mus-
cles. Thus, bloodroot’s most important contribution by
far is its effectiveness against chroric congestive condi-
tions of the lungs, including bronchitis, emphysema, and
bronchiectasis. It also has a role in the treatment of
asthma, croup, and laryngitis.

Bloodroot acts as a stimulant in cases of deficient pe-
ripheral circulation, It may be used as a snuff to treat nasal
polyps. Activities documented for bloodroot are usually
attributable to its isoquinoline alkaloid constituents—in
particular, sanguinarine. In the recent past, interest fo-
cused on the use of sanguinarine in dental hygiene prod-
ucts, and many studies investigated the efficacy of blood-
root extracts for oral hygiene. Oral rinses and toothpastes
containing bloodroot extracts were reported to signifi-
cantly reduce plaque and improve gingival and bleeding in-
dices. No alteration of the oral microbial flora or develop-
ment of resistant microbial strains has been observed with
bloodroot extracts.?!!

Ellingwood considered bloodroot specific for

... harsh, dry cough with relaxed tissues of the pharynx,
larynx and bronchi, with a sense of constriction and con-
stant irritation and uneasiness or tickling of the throat.

In addition, he recommended it for congestion of the
lungs, bronchial coughs, strident laryngitis, membranous

MareriA MEDICA <> 581

croup, otitis media (external), indolent ulcerative condi-
tions, nasal catarrh, anal fissure, epithelioma, and lupus.

Safety Considerations: Although there are no published
reports of human toxicity caused by bloodroot, at high
doses the herb may cause nausea, vomiting, a sensation of
burning in all contacted mucous membranes, bradycardia,
and hypotension. Animal studies have indicated that
bloodroot is nontoxic Curing pregnancy. However, be-
cause of the potency of :ts pharmacologically active con-
stituents, use of bloodroot during pregnancy and lactation
is best avoided.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of rhizome in 1 cup of cold water, bring to a
boil, and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Bloodroot, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Scrophularia nodosa Juss.
Figwort
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (aucubin, harpagide, acetyl
harpagide, 6-a-rhamnopyranosyleatalpol); flavonoids
(diosmin, iosmetin, acecetin rhamnoside, hesperidin),
phenolic acids (ferulic, isoferulic, p-coumaric, caffeic,
vanillic, chlorogenic acids)?”

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, laxative, cardiac stimulant

Indications: Figwort is most widely used for the treat-
ment of skin problems. As an alterative, it acts in a broad
way to improve body function and bring about a state of
inner cleanliness. It may be used for eczema, psoriasis, or
any skin condition characterized by itching and irritation.
Part of its cleansing action is related to its purgative and
diuretic actions, and it may be used as a mild laxative in
constipation. Because it is a heart stimulant, figwort
should be avoided in people with tachycardia (abnormally
rapid heartbeat).
Priest and Priest described figwort as a

... gently stimulating and relaxing alterative with lower
abdominal and pelvic emphasis. Deobstruent to enlarged
and engorged lymph glaads.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic

skin disease, eczema and psoriasis, mammary tumors and
nodosities, hemorrhoids.

----- PAGE 590 -----
$82 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Safety Considerations: Figwort may potentiate the ef-
fects of cardiac glycosides.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried leaf
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Figwort, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Scutellaria lateriflora L.
Skullcap

Lamiaceae
Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (baicalein, baicalin, scutellarein,
and wogonin); iridoids (including catalpol); volatile oil;

tannins?3

Actions: Nervine tonic, antispasmodic, hypotensive

Indications: Skullcap is perhaps the most relevant
nervine available to us in the Western materia medica. It
effectively soothes nervous tension while renewing and
revivifying the central nervous system. It has a long his-
tory of traditional use for the control and treatment of
petit mal seizures. Skullcap may be used to treat any con-
dition associated with exhaustion or depressed states, and
can be used with complete safety to ease premenstrual
tension. A recent clinical trial demonstrated that the
herb is an effective anxiolytic, with a proposed mecha-
nism involving flavonoid interactions with the GABA,
receptor.?44
Priest and Priest considered skullcap a

... diffusive, stimulating and relaxing nervine-cerebral
vasodilator and trophorestorative. Indicated for nervous
irritation of the cerebro-spinal nervous system.

They gave the following specific indications: func-
tional nervous exhaustion, post-febrile nervous weakness,
chorea, hysteria, agitation, epileptiform convulsions, in-
somnia, nightmares, and restless sleep.

Ellingwood considered skullcap specific for

. . two distinct lines of specific phenomena. Firstly irri-
tability of the nervous system with restlessness and ner-
vous excitability; inability to sleep without pain; general ir-
ritability with insomnia from local causes. The second is
where there is nervous disorder, characterized by irregular
muscular action, twitching, tremors and restlessness, with
or without incoordination. Its soothing influence contin-
ues for a protracted period, after the agent is discontinued.

In addition, he recommended it for delirium tremens
and nervous excitability.

Safety Considerations: Reports of hepatotoxicity at-
tributed to skullcap were later determined to be related to
adulteration with germander. Skullcap can potentiate the
effects of sedative medications.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drank
three times a day or as needed.

The BHP recommends | to 2 g dried herb, 1 to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Skullcap, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Senna alexandrina Mill.
Senna
Fabaceae

Other Names: A number of closely related species and
regional sources have given rise to a range of names, in-
cluding Alexandrian senna, Kartoum senna, Tinnevelly
senna, and Indian senna.

Parts Used: Dried fruit pod, leaf

Constituents: Anthraquinone glycosides (leaf: senno-
sides A-D; fruit: sennosides A and B and a closely related
glycoside, sennoside Al); naphthalene glycosides (tinnev-
ellin glycoside and 6-hydroxymusizin glycoside); miscel-
laneous: mucilage, flavonoids, volatile oil, sugars, resins?!

Action: Cathartic

Indications: Senna is a powerful cathartic used in the
treatment of constipation that works via stimulation of in-
testinal peristalsis. However, it is vital to remember that
constipation is a symptom and that the cause must always
be sought and treated. Ellingwood recommended senna for
the treatment of temporary constipation.

Safety Considerations: Senna may reduce absorption of
oral drugs by decreasing bowel transit time. Overuse or
misuse can cause potassium loss leading to increased tox-
icity of cardiac glycosides. Senna aggravates loss of potas-
sium associated with diuretic use.

As an anthraquinone-containing cathartic, senna is
contraindicated in chronic constipation because it can
lead to dependency and other problems (see chapter 13
for more information). There are many contraindications
based upon senna’s power to stimulate peristalsis.

----- PAGE 591 -----
Contraindications include any intestinal obstruction,
stomach inflammation due to griping, and intestinal in-
flammatory disease, such as appendicitis, colitis, irritable
bowel syndrome, ulcerative colitis, and Crohn’s disease.
Senna is also contraindicated in cases of abdominal pain
of unknown origin, anal prolapse, and hemorrhoids.

Ideally, senna should not be used during pregnancy
or lactation or in children younger than 12 years of age.
However, orthodox physicians still routinely prescribe
standardized senna preparations for use during preg-
nancy. To avoid the development of impaired peristalsis
due to intestinal smooth muscle damage, do not use for
more than 10 days.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion, steep
dried pods or leaves in warm water for 6 to 12 hours.
Drink in the morning and at night. Use 3 to 6 Alexan-
drian senna pods or 4 to 12 Tinnevelly senna pods per cup
of water.

The BHP recommends 0.5 to 2 ml fluid extract twice
daily.
Sennae folium, Sennae fructus acutifoliae, and Sennae fructus
angustifoliae, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Serenoa repens (Bartr.) Small
Saw Palmetto
Arecaceae

Part Used: Fruit (berry)

Constituents: Essential oil; fixed oil: 25% fatty acids
(caproic, lauric, palmitic) and 75% neutral fats; sterols;
polysaccharides*!®

Actions: Diuretic, urinary antiseptic, endocrine agent

Indications: Saw palmetto tones and strengthens the
male reproductive system, and is specific for the treat-
ment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Its primary
modern application is to relieve symptoms associated
with this common condition, especially difficulties with
urination.

BPH is thought to be caused by accumulation of
testosterone in the prostate. Once in the prostate, testos-
terone is converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
Researchers believe that DHT is the compound responsi-
ble for the multiplication of prostate cells that results in
prostate enlargement. Saw palmetto appears to inhibit
DHT by blocking the activity of the enzyme 5-c-reductase.
The herb not only inhibits the formation of DHT, but
also inhibits DHT binding at cellular receptor binding
sites.?!7 Numerous studies show that saw palmetto extract
is effective for nearly 90% of patients with BPH. The fat-

Materia MEDICA 2 583

soluble (lipophilic) fraction of the herb, which contains
fatty acids and sterols, is considered the active component
for prostate conditions.?!®

The Eclectic use of this herb went far beyond treat-
ment of BPH. Consider the following from Ellingwood:

The direct influence of this agent is exerted upon the en-
tire reproductive apparatus, especially upon the prostate
gland of the male. It is demanded in enlarged prostate,
with throbbing, aching. dull pain, discharge of prostatic
fluid, at times discharge of mucus, also of a yellowish, wa-
tery fluid, with weakered sexual power, orchalgia, epi-
didymitis and orchitis, when associated with enlarged
prostate. In women, ovarian enlargement, with tender-
ness and dull aching pains, weakened sexual activity, and
small undeveloped mammary glands, are much benefited
by its continued use. It increases the size and secreting
power of the mammary glands where they are abnormally
small and inactive. It improves the tone and overcomes ir-
ritability of the ovaries, relieving dysmenorrhoea when
due to atonicity. To this agent is ascribed considerable

power in reducing the size of hypertrophied prostate in
older men and in quickly relieving cystic and other disor-
ders incident to this condition. It relieves irritation of the
bladder to a satisfactory extent, correcting the irritable
character of the urine, increases the muscular power of
the patient to expel the urine and produces a sense of re-
lief, that is in every way gratifying and satisfactory. . . .
An exceedingly important use for this remedy that I
have not been able to find in the books, is its use for steril-
ity. In simple cases where there is no organic lesion on the
part of the patient, this agent has an excellent reputation
for restoring the ovarian action properly and assisting in

putting the patient into an excellent condition. In its in-
fluence upon the nasal and bronchial mucous membranes
this agent has been given with excellent advantage in the
treatment of acute catarrh, chronic bronchial coughs of
all characters, including whooping cough, laryngitis and
the cough of phthisis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
2 to 4 teaspoon of berries in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 5 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 0.5 to 1 g dried herb or 0.6 to
1.5 ml fluid extract three times daily (1:1 in 60%).
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 1 to 2 g berries

----- PAGE 592 -----
584 «& TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

or 320 mg of lipophilic ingredients extracted with
lipophilic solvents (this contains approximately 85% to
95% fatty acids).

Saw palmetto, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn.
Milk Thistle

Asteraceae
Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Flavolignans (1.5% to 3.0%): The mixture
known as silymarin is composed mainly of silybin, silydi-
anin, and silychristin; fixed oil (30% oleic acid, 6%
palmitic acid); sterols (cholesterol, campesterol, stigmas-
terol, and sitosterol); mucilage?!”

Actions: Hepatic, galactagogue, demulcent, cholagogue,
antihepatotoxic

Indications: Milk thistle’s traditional reputation as a liver
tonic is now supported by research showing that its con-
stituents protect liver cells from chemical damage.
Historically, milk thistle was used in Europe as a liver
tonic, and in modern phytotherapy, the herb is indicated
for a whole range of liver and gallbladder conditions, in-
cluding hepatitis and cirrhosis. It is effective in increasing
the secretion and flow of bile from the liver and gallblad-
der, and may also have value in the treatment of chronic
uterine problems. As the name implies, milk thistle pro-
motes milk secretion and is perfectly safe for use by
breast-feeding mothers.

Well-designed clinical research thoroughly supports
the efficacy of milk thistle seed extract in protecting and
treating the liver. Studies confirm that the herb can re-
store liver function impaired by disease, such as viral
hepatitis, or by exposure to toxins, including ethanol,
mushroom toxins, solvents, acetaminophen, and psy-
chotropic medications??? Research has shown that a
number of chemical components have a protective effect
on liver cells. They are all flavones and flavolignans, the
best studied of which is a complex of the flavolignans
known as silymarin. Silymarin has been shown to reverse
the effects of highly toxic alkaloids, such as phalloidine
and a-amanitine from the avenging angel mushroom
(Amanita phalloides), and to protect liver cells from their
damaging impact.

Research has provided many insights into the
metabolic basis of milk thistle’s activity. It has also shed
considerable light on the pharmacodynamics, sites of ac-
tivity, and mechanisms of action of silymarin. For exam-
ple, in a clinical study involving 15 patients taking hepa-

totoxic psychotropic medications, a twice-daily 400 mg
dose of a concentrated milk thistle seed extract protected
the liver from the adverse effects of simultaneously ad-
ministered drugs.”*! In a case study, milk thistle extract
reduced the hepatotoxic effects of phenytoin.222 More in-
formation on the pharmacology and therapeutic indica-
tions for this important herb may be found in chapters 9,
13, and 26.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: For daily use as a liver pro-
tectant, dosage is 175 mg a day of 30:1 seed extract stan-
dardized to 80% silymarin. For therapeutic and restora-
tive effects, up to 600 mg/day of extract standardized to
80% silymarin may be used.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 12 to 15 g seed or formulations equivalent to 200 to
400 mg of silymarin (calculated as silibinin).

St. Mary’s thistle, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Smilax spp.
Sarsaparilla
Liliaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Saponins, based on the aglycones sarsa-
pogenin and smilagenin; f-sitosterol, stigmasterol, and
their glucosides’”?

Actions: Alterative, antirheumatic, diaphoretic, diuretic

Indications: Sarsaparilla is a widely applicable alterative.
It may be used to support proper functioning of the whole
body as well as to correct diffuse systemic problems, such
as skin and rheumatic conditions. It is particularly useful
for scaling skin conditions, like psoriasis, especially when
accompanied by irritation. Sarsaparilla should be consid-
ered as part of a wider treatment for chronic rheumatism,
and is especially helpful for rheumatoid arthritis.

Ellingwood recommended it for scrofula, secondary
syphilis, cutaneous disease, and rheumatic and gouty con-
ditions.

Safety Considerations: Sarsaparilla may increase ab-
sorption of digitalis glycosides.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, place
2 to 4 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 4 g dried herb or 8 to

----- PAGE 593 -----
papule: Small, superficial bump or spot on the skin, often part
of rash.

parahormone: Chemical control agent that can be synthesized
by more than one cell type.

parasite: An organism that lives in or on another living organ-
ism while contributing nothing to its host’s welfare, often
causing irritation or interfering with function.

parasiticide: Prevents and destroys parasites such as fleas and
lice.

parathyroid hormone (PTH): Hormone that promotes vita-
min D synthesis and elevates blood calcium.

paregoric: Camphorated tincture of opium used to relieve diar-
rhea, formerly used as a painkiller.

parenchyma: Soft tissue forming the chief substance of leaves
and roots, fruit pulp, and the center of stems.

paroxysm: Sudden, violent spasm or convulsion; abrupt wors-
ening of a symptom.

parturient: Aiding childbirth.

passive immunity: Short-term resistance to a disease from the
injection of another's antibodies.

pathogen: Any agent, particularly a microorganism, that causes
disease.

pathogenesis: The process by which a disease originates and
develops, particularly the cellular and physiologic processes.

pathogenic: Causing or producing disease.

pectin: A white, colloidal carbohydrate, found in certain ripe
fruits, that has thickening properties.

pedicel: Stalk of a single flower, fruit, or leaf.

peduncle: Stalk supporting flower or flower cluster of an an-
giosperm or bearing the fruiting body of a fungus.

pepsin: Stomach enzyme that degrades proteins.

peptic: Applied to gastric secretions and areas affected by them.

peptic ulcer: Breach in lining of the digestive tract due to excess
acid, occurring in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum.

peptide: Compound of two or more amino acids.

perennial: Plant that lives more than two years, especially a
herbaceous plant that produces flowers from the same root
structure several years in a row.

perfoliate: A leaf that appears to be perforated by the stem.

perfusion: Passage of fluid through tissue, especially blood
through the lungs.

peripheral resistance: Opposition to flow of blood in vessels.

peristalsis: Successive muscular contractions of the intestines,
which move food through the gastrointestinal tract.

peristaltic waves: Successive contractions of tubular wall.

pessary: Vaginal appliance or medicated suppository.

petal: One of the circle of flower parts inside the sepals.

petiole: The stalk of a leaf.

pH: A scale from 0 to 14 used in measuring the acidity or alka-
linity of solutions. Pure water, at pH 7.0, is considered neu-
tral. Acidity increases as the numbers decrease. Alkalinity
increases as the numbers increase.

pharmaceutical: A drug or medication manufactured and sold
by a pharmacy.

pharmacokinetic trial: A trial that studies how the drug is ab-
sorbed by the body. People in one of these trials often have
blood tests every few minutes or hours.

pharmacology: Medical science of drugs, which deals with their
actions, properties, and characteristics.

GLossary @ 617

pharmacopoeia: An official publication of drugs, in common
use Ina given country.

pharmacy: Preparation and dispensing of drugs; place where
this is done.

phase J study: The first step in human testing of a drug.
Designed to evaluate toxicity at different dose levels and
takes place with a small number of participants.

phase II study: FDA drug-testing phase for effectiveness in
humans. The stage at which drug effectiveness is estab-
lished. Proceeds only if Phase I studies show toxicity to
be within acceptable levels. Usually involves 50 to 300
volunteers.

phase III study: FDA drug-testing phase for extensive clinical
trials in humans. Expansion of phase IL study to 300 to
3,000 volunteers. Designed to back up information gath-
ered in Phase J and IT testing.

phenol: Natural or synthetic aromatic compound containing a
hydroxide (-OH) ring.

pheromone: Behavior- or development-mediating chemical
that transmits information between individuals of the same
species.

phlebitis: Inflammation of a vein wall, especially in legs as a
complication of varicose veins, causing extreme tenderness.

phlegm: See sputum.

phospholipid: Lipid compound containing a water-soluble
phosphate group.

phosphorylation: The process of adding phosphate molecular
groups to a compound.

photosynthesis: Production of organic substances from carbon
dioxide and water in green-plant cells, which chemically
transform the energy of sunlight.

physiological: Describes the natural biological processes of a
living organism,

physiology: The study of the functioning of the body, including
the physical and chernical processes of its cells, tissues, or-
gans, and systems.

phytoestrogen: A plant compound that exerts estrogen-like
effects.

phytohormone: A plant substance that mimics the action of
human hormones.

phytotherapy: The treatment of disease by plants; herbal
medicine.

piles: See hemorrhoid.

pill: Small ball or tablet of medicine to be swallowed whole; oral
contraceptive.

pinnate: A leaf composed of more than three leaflets arranged
in two rows along a common stalk.

pituitary gland: A pea-sized structure that secretes many im-
portant hormones, located behind the hypothalamus.

placebo: (Latin: “1 will satisfy.”) A medicine or preparation with
no inherent pharmacologic activity.

plaque: Sticky, colorless mixture of saliva, bacteria, and carbo-
hydrates on the surface of teeth that causes tartar and
caries.

plasma: Fluid portion of blood and lymph.

plaster: Pasty medicinal dressing applied to a body part on a
cloth as a curative counterirritant.

pleurisy: Inflammation of the pleura that cover the lungs, usu-
ally due to pneumonia or other lung disease, causing painful
breathing.

----- PAGE 594 -----
618 @ GLOSSARY

pneumoconiosis: Black lung.

pneumonia: Inflammation or infection of the lungs in which
sacs fill with pus, causing coughing and chest pain.

pneumonitis: Inflammation of the lungs.

pneumothorax: Collapsed lung.

pod: Vessel enclosing one or more seeds.

poliomyelitis: Infectious viral disease of the central nervous
system, formerly epidemic, causing stiffness and paralysis
of muscles, especially respiratory system muscles.

pollen: Fine, dustlike grains containing male sexual cells, pro-
duced in anthers or similar structures of seed plants.

polyarthritis: Inflammation of several joints at the same time.

polymer: Natural or synthetic macromolecules formed by the
repetition of an identical small molecule.

polymerase: An enzyme that forms long-chain polymers from
simple molecular components, DNA polymerase, for ex-
ample, forms DNA strands from nucleosides.

polyp: Benign growth on mucous membranes especially in the
nose, ear, or stomach,

polypeptide: Protein, polymer of amino acid subunits.

polysaccharide: A molecule composed of many sugar
molecules linked together.

pomade: A prepared perfume material obtained by the en-
fleurage process.

PPM: Parts per million.

poultice: The therapeutic application of a soft moist mass (such
as fresh herbs) to the skin, to encourage local circulation
and to relieve pain.

prednisone: Synthetic steroid, administered orally, used to treat
leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease.

press: Device for drying and flattening botanical specimens.

progesterone: Hormone that prepares the uterus to receive
and develop a fertilized egg.

prognosis: Assessment of the future course and outcome of a
patient’s disease.

prophylactic: Preventive of disease or infection.

proptosis: Forward displacement of an organ, especially the
eyeball.

prostaglandin: Hormonelike compound manufactured from
essential fatty acids.

prostatitis: Inflammation of the prostate gland due to bacterial
infection, sometimes causing urinary obstruction.

prostration: Total exhaustion.

protease: Protein-splitting enzyme.

protein: Any of a large class of organic nitrogenous substances
containing amino acids.

proteinuria: Presence of protein in the urine above normal limits.

protocol: The outline or plan for use of an experimental proce-
dure or experimental treatment.

protozoa: A group of one-celled animals, a few of which cause
human disease.

pruritis: Itching.

psoriasis: Condition characterized by chronic, itchy, scaly, sil-
very patches of skin, especially on elbows, forearms, knees,
and scalp, of unknown cause but sometimes due to anxiety.

psychomotor: Relating to disorders of muscular activity af-
fected by cerebral disturbances.

pulmonary embolism: Obstruction by a blood clot in an artery
that conveys blood from heart to lungs.

purgative: Laxative or cathartic medication.

purpura: Skin rash due to bleeding into the skin from defective
capillaries or blood platelet deficiency.

pustule: Small, pus-containing blister.

putrescence: Foul smell caused by decomposition of tissue.

pyorrhea: Periodontal disease.

pyrexia: See fever.

pyrosis: See heartburn.

quinine: Alkaloid drug used to treat malaria.
quinsy: Pus-discharging inflammation of the tonsils.

raceme: Diversely branching flowers.

radiation therapy: Treatment using X-rays, cobalt-60, radium,
neutrons, or other types of cell-destroying radiation.

radiosensitizer: Drug being studied to try to boost the effect of
radiation therapy.

rale: See crepitation.

randomized clinical trial: A study in which patients with simi-
lar traits, such as extent of disease, are chosen or selected by
chance to be placed in separate groups that are comparing
different treatments.

Raynaud’s disease: Disorder, especially in women, in which
spasms of arteries to extremities cause fingertips and toes to
turn pale, blue, and numb.

rays (ray flowers): The straplike, often sterile flowers, com-
monly called petals, surrounding the flower head of a plant
in the Composite family.

receptacle: Upper part of the stem from which the floral parts
arise.

receptor: A small, chemically defined area (of a cell) that initi-
ates a biological response upon uniting with chemically
complementary areas of natural or foreign molecules.

rectification: The process of redistillation applied to essential
oils to rid them of certain constituents.

referred pain: Pain felt in an unexpected part of the body sep-
arate from its source.

reflex: Automatic, involuntary activity caused by simple nervous
circuits.

refrigerant: Cooling; reduces fever.

regression: The state of growing smaller or disappearing; used
to describe the shrinkage or disappearance of a cancer.

regurgitation: Vomiting.

rejection: [mmune reaction to a transplanted organ.

REM sleep: Rapid eye movement sleep.

remission: The decrease or disappearance of evidence of a dis-
ease; also, the period during which this occurs.

renal calculus: Kidney stone.

renal colic: Severe pain in the kidney.

renin: A protease enzyme released by the kidney that cleaves
angiotensinogen to angiotensin I.

resectable: Capable of being removed by surgery.

resin: A natural or prepared product, either solid or semisolid in
nature. Natural resins are exudations from trees, such as
mastic; prepared resins are oleoresins from which the es-
sential oil has been removed.

resinoid: A perfumery material prepared from natural resinous
matter, such as balsam and gum resin.

----- PAGE 595 -----
resolvent: An agent that disperses swelling or affects absorption
of a new growth.

respiration: Exchange of gases between body tissues and the
surrounding environment.

respiratory arrest: Cessation of breathing.

restorative: An agent that helps strengthen and revive the body
systems.

reticulosis: Abnormal malignant overgrowth of cells of lym-
phatic glands or the immune systein.

retrovirus: A type of virus whose genetic material consists of
RNA rather than the usual DNA.

rheum: Watery discharge from mucous membranes of the
mouth, eyes, or nose.

rheumatism: Any disorder causing aches and pains in muscles
or joints.

rheumatoid arthritis; Common form of arthritis that affects
extremities, digits, and hips.

rhinitis: Inflammation of the nasal mucosa (mucous membranes
in the nasal cavities).

rhizome: Creeping horizontal stem lyiug at or just beneath the
soil surface that bears leaves at its tip and roots from its
underside.

rickettsiae: Group of parasitic organisms similar to bacteria
that infest the body through ticks or mites.

ringworm: Highly contagious fungal infection of the skin, es-
pecially the scalp and feet or under a beard.

risk: The likelihood that harm will result from exposure to a
hazard.

risk assessment: The process for evaluating the probability
of harm resulting from a given exposure to a hazardous
substance. The three steps of a risk assessment are haz-
ard identification; dose-response assessment; and risk
characterization.

risk/benefit ratio: The relation between the risks and benefits
of a given treatment or procedure.

risk management: The regulatory decision-making process,
which may take into account not only the risk assessment in-
formation, but also nonscience factors such as cost, Compet-
ing public needs, technical feasibility, and societal values.

root: The underground part of a plant that functions in absorp-
tion, aeration, and food storage and as a support system.

rosacea: Chronic acne characterized by red, pustular lesions
about the nose, cheeks, and forehead.

rosette: Leaves that are closely arranged in a spiral.

rubefacient: Generating a localized increase in blood flow
when applied to the skin, helping healing, cleansing, and
nourishment. Often used to ease the pain and swelling of
arthritic joints.

saccharide; A sugar molecule.

saliva: Watery, slightly acidic secretion of salivary glands that
moistens food and initiates its breakdown.

salt: The chemical combination of an acid and a base yielding a
salt plus water.

salve: A medicinal ointment used to soothe or heal skin irrita-
tions, burns, or wounds; ointment; unguent.

saponin: A glycoside that forms a soaplike lather when shaken
in water. There are two broad groups: the steroidal
saponins, which seem to mimic the precursors of female sex

GLossarY @ 619

hormones, and the tri-terpenoid saponins, which mimic the
adrenal hormone ACTH.

saprophyte: A free-living organism that lives on dead or putre-
fying tissues.

sarcolemma: The cell membrane of a muscle cell. Like the cell
membrane of nerves, the sarcolemma is able to conduct ac-
tion potentials.

sarcoma: A tumor of connective tissue.

scab: A hard crust of blood, serum, or pus over a healing wound.

scabies: A skin infection from an infestation of mites that causes
severe itching, especially around the groin and nipples and
between fingers.

scar: Mark left on skin by a healing wound where connective
tissues replace damaged tissues; cicatrix.

schistosomiasis: An intestinal disease in the tropics, due to in-
festation of blood flukes, that causes anemia, diarrhea,
dysentery, and cirrhosis; snail fever.

sciatica: Condition marked by pain down the back of the thigh,
due to disintegration of an intervertebral disk, accompa-
nied by numbness and a stiff back.

sclerosis: Hardening of tissue due to inflammation.

scopolamine: A belladonna derivative.

scurvy: Vitamin C deficiency from absence of fresh fruit and
vegetables in the diet that causes swollen, bleeding gums,
subcutaneous bleeding, and death when prolonged,

seborrhea: Excessive secretion by sebaceous glands in the face,
especially at puberty; see a/so seborrheic dermatitis.

seborrheic dermatitis: Skin eruption due to an excess secretion
of sebum, common on the face at puberty.

secretion: Synthesis and release of a substance by a cell or an
organ.

sedative: An agent that reduces functional activity; calming.

seed: Fertilized plant ovule containing the embryo, capable of
germinating to produce a new plant.

seizure: Sudden attack of disease or condition.

senescence: Bodily degeneration after maturity.

sepal: Leaflike, usually green, outer circle of the calyx.

septic: Affected with putrefactive destruction by disease-carrying
bacteria or their toxins.

septicemia: Tissue destruction by disease-causing bacteria or
toxins absorbed from the bloodstream; blood poisoning.

serum: Liquid portion of the blood.

sessile: Lacking a stalk.

shingles: See Herpes zoster.

sialogogue: An agent that stimulates the secretion of saliva.

side effect: A secondary and usually adverse effect, as from a
drug or other treatment.

silique: A term applied to the peculiar seedpod structure of
plants in the Mustard family.

soporific: A substance that induces sleep.

spadix: A thick, fleshy flower spike usually enveloped by a
spathe.

spasm: Sustained involuntary muscular contraction.

spasmolytic: See antispasmodic.

spastic colon: Irritable bowel syndrome.

spasticity: Resistance to passive movement of a limb; lack of
motor coordination.

spathe: A modified, leaflike structure surrounding a spadix.

----- PAGE 596 -----
62( =. GLOSSARY

species: Basic unit of biological classification ranking below
genus, including similar organisms capable of interbreeding.

spike: An inflorescence in which flowers bloom along the entire
length of a single stalk.

splanchnic: Pertaining to the internal organs.

splenic: Relating to the spleen, the largest endocrine gland.

spondylosis: Degeneration of intervertebral disks in the back-
bone, causing pain and restricting movement.

sputum: Mucus coughed up from the respiratory tract; phlegm.

staging: Method used to establish the extent of a patient’s disease.

stamen: The pollen-bearing anther with attached filaments.

standard treatment: A treatment or other intervention cur-
rently being used and considered to be of proven effective-
ness on the basis of past studies.

stenosis: Abnormal narrowing of a blood vessel or heart valve.

steroid: Any of the large family of chemical compounds in-
cluding hormones produced by the adrenal glands,
ovaries, and testes; medication used for immunosuppres-
sion and hormone replacement.

STD: A sexually transmitted disease; see a/so venereal disease.

stimulant: An agent that quickens the physiological functions
of the body.

stipule: An appendage resembling a small leaf at the base of
leaves of certain plants.

stitch: Sudden, sharp pain, usually in muscle between ribs.

stolon: A stem that takes root at intervals along the ground,
forming new plants.

stomachic: Digestive aid and tonic; improving the appetite.

stridor: Loud, harsh breathing noise due to partial obstruction
of the trachea or larynx.

stroke: Sudden weakness or paralysis, often on one side of the
body, due to interruption of blood flow to the brain caused
by thrombosis, embolus, or hemorrhage; apoplexy; cere-
brovascular accident.

sty: Acute bacterial infection of a gland at the base of an eyelash.

styptic: An astringent agent that stops or reduces external
bleeding.

subclinical: Designating suspected disease or injury that is not
developed enough to produce definite signs and symptoms.

subcutaneous: Giving a drug by injecting it under the skin.

submucosa: The tissue just below the mucous membrane.

succulent: Plant with thick, fleshy tissues that stores starch.

sudorific: An agent that causes sweating.

suppressor T cell: A lymphocyte controlled by the thymus
gland, which suppresses the immune response.

suppuration: Formation and discharge of pus.

surfactant: A compound that reduces the surface tension in
water, between water and another liquid, or between a liq-
uid and a solid.

sympatholytic: A drug that affects the sympathetic nervous
system.

symptom: Characteristic indication of disease or disorder.

synapse: Junction between two excitable cells.

syncope: Fainting.

syndrome: Set of signs and symptoms indicative of a particular
disease or condition.

synergy: The summing of the simultaneous effects of two or
more drugs such that the combined effect is greater than
the effect of either of the drugs when they are given alone.

systemic: Affecting the entire body, not just one part.

systole: Contraction of heart muscle.

systolic: The first number in a blood pressure reading; the pres-
sure in the arteries during the contraction phase of the
heartbeat.

T cell: A white blood cell that plays an important part in the im-
mune system. There are three types of T cells, each of
which has different subsets.

T-helper cell: A subset of T cells. Physicians regularly measure
T-helper cell counts in HIV-positive people. The normal
range for T-helper cells is 480-1,800, but may vary.

T-killer cell (cytoxic T cell): A white blood cell that kills for-
eign organisms after being activated by T-helper cells.

T-suppressor cell: A type of white blood cell that helps control
the body’s response to an infection.

tablet: A small disk, made from compressed powders of one or
more drugs, that is swallowed whole.

tachycardia: Abnormally increased heartbeat and pulse rate.

tannin: A compound that reacts with protein to produce a
leatherlike coating on animal tissue (as in the process of
tanning). It promotes healing and numbing (to reduce irri-
tation), reduces inflammation, and halts infection.

taproot: Deep main root from which lateral roots develop.

taxonomy: System of classifying organisms into natural related
groups based on shared features or traits.

tendril: Threadlike, often spiral part of climbing plant that
clings to or coils around objects.

teratogen: Substance that can cause birth defects.

testosterone: The principal male sex hormone produced by the
testes, used in replacement therapy and as an anabolic
steroid.

tetany: Spasm and twitching of the muscles of the face, hands,
and feet.

thallus: Nonvascular plant body without clear differentiation
into stems, leaves, or roots.

therapeutic: Pertaining to treatment.

therapeutic index: A number, LD50/ED50, which is a measure
of the approximate “safety factor” for a drug; a drug with a
high index can presumably be administered with greater
safety than one with a low index. The therapeutic index is
ordinarily calculated from data obtained from experiments
with animals.

thromboembolism: Condition in which a blood clot forms at one
point in circulation, dislodges, and moves to another point.

thrombogenic: Causing thrombosis or coagulation of the
blood.

thrombosis: Formation of a thrombus or blood clot.

thrush: Whitish spots and ulcers in the mouth due to a parasite,
especially in children; candidiasis.

thyroid hormone (TH): Thyroxine.

tincture: An herbal remedy or perfumery material prepared in
an alcohol base.

tinea: Athlete’s foot.

tinnitus: Ringing in the ears,

tissue: Group of similar cells that perform a particular function.

tonic: Nurturing and enlivening.

tonsillitis: Inflammation of the tonsils due to bacterial or viral
infection, causing sore throat and fever.

----- PAGE 597 -----
topical: Applied directly to skin surface, not taken internally.

torpor: Sluggishness; unresponsiveness to stimuli.

toxemia: Accumulation of toxins in the blood.

toxic: Poisonous.

toxin: Poisonous substance.

transaminase: An enzyme measurement that indicates the
health of the liver.

transgenic: Pertaining to the insertion by biotechnical means
of a foreign gene or genes into the genetic makeup of an
organism.

trifoliate: A plant having three distinct leaflets.

triglyceride: Neutral fat lipid molecule composed of glycerol
and three fatty acids.

troche: Small, medicinal lozenge that soothes the mouth and
throat.

tuber: Fat underground stem from which some plants grow,
similar to but shorter and thicker than a rhizome.

tumescence: Swelling, especially due to the accumulation of
blood or other fluid in tissue.

tumor: Abnormal growth of tissue in or on a body part.

tumor necrosis factor (TNF): A protein produced by
macrophages. By itself, TNF destroys cancer cells. TNF
can cause fever, chills, fatigue, headache, and inflammation.

tussis: See cough.

ulcer: Open, inflamed, nonhealing sore in skin or a mucous
membrane, especially in the lining of the alimentary canal.

ultrasound: A test in which sound waves are used to examine a
fetus or view the internal organs.

umbel: Umbrella-like; a flower in which the petioles all arise
from the top of the stem.

unguent: Substance used to soothe and heal skin; ointment;
salve.

urea: Nitrogenous waste product of kidneys.

uremia: The retention of urine by the body and the presence of
high levels of urine components in the blood.

urethritis: Inflammation of the urethra, especially among
males, due to bacterial or viral infection or obstruction.

urinalysis: The analysis of urine.

uterine: Pertaining to the uterus.

vagal: Pertaining to the vagus nerve, which supplies sensory
connections to the ear, tongue, and pharynx.

vaginitis: Irritation of the vagina, due to inflammation or infec-
tion, causing burning pain and discharge.

vapors: Mentholated salve applied to chest and nose to relieve
congestion.

varicella; Chicken pox.

varicose vein: Distended, sometimes painful vein in the leg,
rectum, or scrotum due to obstruction of blood flow.

Guossary 621

vascular plant: Any plant, such as an angiosperm, gymnosperm,
and fern, in which the xylem and phloem conduct water
and organic nutrients.

vasculitis: Inflammation of a blood vessel.

vasoconstriction: The constriction of blood vessels.

vasoconstrictor: An agent that causes narrowing of blood
vessels.

vasodilator: An agent that dilates the blood vessels.

vector: Any agent, such as insect or tick, that transmits parasitic
microorganisms and infectious diseases from host to host.

venereal disease (VD): Any infectious disease transmitted by
sexual contact, now usually called sexually transmitted dis-
ease; social disease.

ventricle: One of two lower chambers of the heart.

vermicide: A chemical agent that kills parasitic worms in the in-
testine.

vermifuge: A chemical agent used to expel parasites from the
intestine; anthelmintic.

verruca: See Wart.

vertigo: Feeling that one’s surroundings are in motion, espe-
cially spinning, due to disease of the inner ear or the
vestibular nerve.

vesicant: Causing blistering to the skin; a counterirritant.

vesicle: A small blister or sac containing fluid.

vinca alkaloid: A pharmacologically active substance (e.g., vin-
blastine or vincristine) obtained from the genus Vinca,
which includes the periwinkles.

viral load: The amount of measurable virus in the blood.

virulent: Disease-producing.

vitamin: An essential compound necessary to act as a catalyst in
normal processes of the body.

volatile: Unstable, evaporates easily; see also essential oil and
volatile oil.

volatile oil: A complex compound that is a chemical mixture of
hydrocarbons and alcohols in a plant.

voucher specimen: An identifiable piece of plant lodged as a spec-
imen at an official herbarium. This is incorporated as a per-
manent archival specimen for future reference and research.
Archival herbaria aim for their specimens to last 400 years.

vulnerary: A remedy that promotes wound healing, especially
for skin lesions and stomach ulcers.

wart: Small, hard, benign growth in skin, caused by a virus.

welt: Raised ridge on the skin caused by a slash or a blow.

wheal: Temporary, itching, red, or pale raised area of skin due
to abrasion or allergy.

whorl: A circle of leaves around a node.

xanthoma: Skin condition characterized by raised patches.
xerostomia: Diminished secretion of saliva that causes an
abnormally dry mouth, especially as a drug reaction.

----- PAGE 598 -----
absinthium
Achillea

Aconitum

Acorus
aculeatus
Aesculus
agnus-castus
Agrimonia

Agropyron
alba
Alchemilla
Allium
Aloe
alternifolia
Althaea
amara
Anemone

Anethum
Angelica
anisum

Apium

arborescens
archangelica

Arctium
Arctostaphylos
Aristolochia
Artemisia
arvense
arvensis
Asclepias
Asparagus
Astragalus

Atropa

aureus

Appendix 2

SN.

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF
BINOMIAL MEANINGS

Gr. name of a plant in Xenophon

Gr. Achilles, hero of Homer’s iad who is
said to have discovered the virtues of a
certain plant

Gr. akoniton, a kind of poisonous plant,
monk’s hood

Gr. the sweet flag found in Dioscorides
thorny, prickly

L. name for a kind of oak

Gr. pure, innocent

L. agrestis, pertaining to land, rural; L.
monas, solitary

Gr. agros, a field; L. pyr, wheat

L. white

from the Arabic for alchemy

named after Charles Allioni, Italian botanist
Gr. name for the plant

alternate leaves

Gr. althaino, to heal

bitter-tasting

daughter of the wind, from Gr. anemos,
the wind

Gr. anethon, anise, dill

Gr. angelikos, angelic, heavenly, divine
Gr. anison, anise, dill

Celtic apon, water: because of a plant’s
habitation

treelike; woody

said to have been revealed by the
Archangel Gabriel

L. arctus, narrow, straight

Gr. bear and bunch of grapes

Gr. best, birth

name, in Dioscorides, or a plant called
after Artemis (Diana)

L. arvensis, of or belonging to a field
growing on arable land

Gr. Asklepias, named for Asklepios, god
of medicine and healing

from the ancient Persian name for the
plant

Gr. astragalos, name of a kind of legumi-
nous plant.

Gr. Atropos, one of the three goddesses
of fate, the unbending one

gold, bright yellow

Avena

Ballota
Baptisia
Barosma
basilicus
belladonna
Bellis
benedictus
Berberis
Betonica

Betula
Borago

Brassica
Brugmansia

bursa-pastoris

calamus

Camellia
Calendula
campestris

Cannabis
Capsella
Capsicum
cardamomum
Carum

Cascara
Castanea
cataria

Caulophylum
Centaurea

Centella

Cephaelis

cevifera
622

L. avena, an old name for oats

Gr. ballote, a name for black horehound
to dip under water, dye

Gr. baros, weight, heaviness

Gr. basilikos, royal, kingly

beautiful lady

L. bellus, neat, charming, handsome

L. bene, well, agreeable

L. berberis, the barberry

Vettonica, the name in Pliny ofa medicinal
plant growing in the region of Spain
called Vectones or Vettones

L. betula, the birch

L. burra, a shaggy garment, referring to
the rough foliage

L. brassica, cabbage

named after Sebald Justin Brugmans
(1706-1763)

L. bursa, a pouch, purse made of skin;
L. pastoris, shepherd

L. calamus, a reed

named after George Josef Kamel
(1661-1819)

L. Kalendae, the first day of the month in
the Roman calendar; monthly blooming
L. campus, a plain; relating to a plain,
growing in a field

L. cannabis, hemp

L. capsa, box, from the form of the fruits
L. capsula, boxed

L. cardinis, pertaining to a hinge

Gr. Karon, name for caraway in
Dioscorides

Sp. cascara, bark

Gr. Kastanus, chestnut tree

L. catarius, of cats; old name of a plant at-
tractive to cats

Gr. kaulos, the stem of a plant, a cabbage
stalk

called after Chiron the Centaur, who had
wide knowledge of herbs

Gr. kenteo, to prick

Gr. Kephalotos, with a head

L. cera, wax, or L. cereus, a wax candle

----- PAGE 599 -----
Cetraria
Chelidonium
Chamealirium
Chamaemelum

Chelone
Chionanthus
Chondus
Chrysanthemum
Cimicifuga
cinerea

Cnicus

Coleus
Commiphora
communis
Conium

Convallaria

cordata
Coriandrum
Crataegus
crispus
Curcuma
Cypripedium

Datura
diffusa, -us, -um
Digitalis

dioica
Dioscorea

distichon
Drosera

Dryopteris

Elattaria
Echinacea
Ephedra
Equisetum
erythraea
Eschscholzia
Eucalyptus
Eugenia
Eupatorium

Euphorbia

Euphrasia

L. cetra, a sort of leather shield

Gr. chelidon, a swallow

L. chamaeleon, ground-lion

Gr. chamaimelon, name, in Dioscorides, of
a plant that smelled of apples

Gr. chelone, a tortoise

Gr. chion, snow, white as snow

Gr. chone, funnel, tube

Gr. chrysos, gold, flower

Gr. cimicinus, smelling like or of bugs

L. cinereus, ash-colored

Gr. knekos, a thistlelike plant used for

dyeing
Gr. koleus, a sheach
Gr. kommti, gam

L. communis, common, general

Gr. koneion, L. conium, names for this
plant

L. conulus, a cone; L. vallaris, of or be-
longing to a wall or rampart

L. cordis, the heart

ancient name for coriander

Gr. Krataigos, name of a tree in
Theophrastus

L. erispus, curled, curly, with wavy margins
Arabic kirkum, turmeric

Gr. Kypridios, belonging to Aphrodite

from Indian vernacular name

loosely spreading, spread, scatter
translation of German name Fingerhut,
thimble

Gr. di, two

named after the
Dioscorides

Gr. distoichos, in two rows

Gr. droseros, dewy, referring to the clear,
dewlike drops on the leaf glands

Gr. Dryope, daughter of Dryops and a
playmate of the wood nymphs

Greek herbalist

L. elatus, elevating

Gr. echinos, a hedgehog

Gr. ephedra, sitting upon a seat

L. equinus, horse; L. seta, bristle, hair

Gr. erythros, red, reddish

called after Johann Friedrich Eschscholtz
(1793-1831)

Gr. eu, good, well, true, nice; Gr. kalyptos,
covered, hidden

named in honor of Prince Eugene of
Savoy (1663-1735)

called after Eupator, a surname of
Mithridates, king of Pontus

called by King Juba II of Mauretania after
his physician in ordinary, Euphorbus

Gr, euphrasia, del.ght, mirth

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS . 623

felix-mas

ficaria
Filipendula
foetidus
Fragaria
fragrans
fulvus

Fumaria

Galega

Galium

Gaultheria
Gelsemium
Gentiana
Geranium

Ginkgo
glaucus

Glechoma
globulus
Gheyrvhiza
gracilis
graveolens
Grindelia

Guaiacum

Hamamelis
Harpagophytum
Hedeoma
Hedera
hederacea
hipposcastanum

hirtus
Hordeum
horridus
hortensis
Humulus

Hydrangea
Hydrastis

Hypericum
Hyssopus

idaeus
Inula
tris

Jasminum

L. felicis, fruitful, productive; L. mas, a
male

L. ficus, a fig tree

L. filum, a thread; L. pendulus, hanging

. L. feetidus, stinking

L. fragum, a strawberry plant

L. fragrans, scented, sweet-smelling

L. fulvus, reddish yellow, tawny, gold-
colored

L. fumus, smoke

Gr. galaktos, milky

name, in Dioscorides, of G. verwam, used
to curdle milk for making cheese

Gr. gaulos, a pail, a round-bottomed vessel
It. gelsomino, jessamine

called after Gentius, an Illyrian king

Gr. Geranos, a kind of bird called the
crane, from the beaklike fruit

Jap. ginkyo, vernacular name of the
maiden-hair fern tree

Gr. glaukos, silvery, gleaming, covered
with a bloom like a plum

Gr. glechon, pennyroyal

L. globulus, a globe, ball, round as a ball
Gr. glykys, sweet, pleasant

L. gracilis, slender

L. graveolens, with a strong scent

called after David Hieronymus Grindel
(1776-1836)

‘West Indian name for Lignum-vitae

Gr. hama, all together, at the same time
Gr. hapagos, robbing, rapacious

Gr. hedys, sweet, scent

L. hedera, ivy

Celtic hederaceus, of ivy, ivy green

Gr. hippos, horse, and Gr. kastanus, chest-
nut, meaning chestnut unfit for food

L. hirtus, hairy

L. hordeum, barley

L. horridus, bristly, prickly

L. bortensis, cultivated in gardens
latinized form of a Teutonic word for
hops

Gr. hydro, water; Gr. angos, jar

Gr. hydor, water; Gr. drao, to act; an agent,
performer

Gr. byperikon, St. John’s wort

Gr. hyssopos, an aromatic plant

Gr. idios, distinct

L. inflatus, inflated, swollen

L. name of elecampane

Gr. iridos, rainbow—name of a kind of lily

latinized form of the Persian name
Yasmin

----- PAGE 600 -----
624 @ SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS

Juglans
Lactuca

Lappa
Larrea
Lavandula
Leonurus
Ligusticum
Ligustrum

Linum
Lobelia

longus
Lophophora

lucidus
Jupulus
luteum

Lycopus

maculatus
majalis

major
Malva

marianum

Marrubium
Matricaria
media
Medicago

Melaleuca

melano-
Melissa
Mentha
Menyanthes
millefolium
minimum
minor
montana

multi-, multus
muralis
TAUSCOSUS
Myrica

Myristica
myrtillus

Myrosylon

Jupiter’s nut, L. Jovis glans

L. Jactuca, lettuce; L. lac, milk, from the
white juice

L. lappa, a bur

named for Juan Antonio de la Larrea

L. lavo, to wash

L. leontus, lion

name of a plant growing in Liguria
name, in Virgil, of a plant with white
flowers

L. dinum, flax, thread, rope

called after Matthias de l’Obel, Flemish
botanist (1538-1616)

L. longus, tall, long

Gr. lophos, a crest; Gr. phoreo, to bear

L. lucidus, shining

L. lupus, a wolf

L. /uteus, golden yellow

Gr. lykos, a wolf

L. macula, spotted, speckled

used in botany to signify flowering during
May

L. major, greater

Gr. malasso, to soften

said to refer to Mary. According to leg-
ends, the white marks on the leaves of
Silybum marianum represent drops of
milk spilled when feeding the infant Jesus
during the flight to Egypt

Gr. maron, a bitter herb

L. matricis, womb

L. medius, middle, intermediate

classical name derived from the place-
name Media

Gr. melas, melaina, or malania, black,
blackness, clothed in black

Gr. melas, black

Gr. melissa, honeybee, nymph who kept bees
Gr. mintha, mint

Gr. menyo, to disclose

L. mille, thousand; L. folium, leaf

L. minimus, least, smallest, very small

L. minor, smaller

L. montanus, growing in mountainous
places

L. multus, many

L. murus, a wall; of, growing on, walls

L. muscus, moss; mosslike

Gr. myrike, ancient name of the tamarisk
Gr. myro, to flow, as it grows on banks of
running streams

Gr. myristikos, fit for anointing

Gr. Myrtilos, son of Mercury, charioteer
of Oenomaus

Gr. myron, sweet smelling oil; Gr. xylon,
wood

napellus
Nasturtium

neglectus

Nepeta

niger, -gra, -grum
nitens

nivalis

nobilis

nodosum

nudi-, nudus
Nymphaea

occidentalis
odorata
officinale, -lis

Olea
Oxalis

Paeonia
palmatum

paluster
Panax

Papaver
Parthenium
Passiflora
pellucidus
peltatum
pendulus
perennis

perforatum
Petroselinum

Peumus
Phytolacca
Piscidia
Plantago
Polygala
Populus

Potentilla
pratense

Primula
Prunella
Psychotria

Psyllium

L. napus, a kind of turnip

L. nasus, nose; L. tortus, twisting away or
torment

L. neglectus, neglected, overlooked

L. nepa, a scorpion

L. nigra, black

L. nitens, shining

L. nivis, growing in or near snow

L. nobilis, famous, noted, celebrated

L. nodus, knotty, referring to tubers or
swollen nodes

L. nudus, naked

L. Nympha, goddess of waters, meadows,
and forest

L. occidentalis, Western.

L. odoratus, sweet-smelling

L. officinalis, kept at the druggist’s shop,
(.e., used medicinally).

L. olea, olive

Gr. oxys, sharp, acid

Gr. Paionia, physician of the gods

L. palmatus, marked like the palm of the
hand

L. palustre, marsh; growing in swampy
places

L. panacaea, an herb that was supposed to
heal all diseases

L. papa, pap, thick milk

Gr. parthenos, virgin

L. passio, a passion, also a suffering

L. pellucido, transparent

L. pellatus, armed with a shield

L. pendulus, hanging down

throughout the year, through the year

L. perforatus, perforated

L. petronius, of or belonging to a moun-
tain, rock

latinized Chilean name

Gr. phyton, tree, plant

L. piscis, fish; L. caedere, to kill

L. planta, sole of the foot

L. polys, many or much; L. gala, milk

L. populus, a great number; the poplar
tree, so called from the number and con-
tinual motion of its leaves

L. potens, powerful

L. pratensis, pertaining to or growing in a
meadow

L. primus, the first

from the German word for croup

name derived from the Greek psy-
chotrophon meaning to grow in a cold
place

Gr. psylla, flea; Greek name of Plantago
psyllium. The seeds of this species resem-
ble fleas

----- PAGE 601 -----
‘pubescens

Pulmonaria
pulsatilla

purpurea

Quercus
THCEMMOSA

Ranunculus
recutita
repens
Rheum
riparius
Rosemarinus
rotundifolia
Rubus
Rumex
rupestris
Ruscus

Salix
Salvia

Sambucus
Sanguinaria
sativa
Sanguinaria
Schizandra

Scrophularia
Scutellaria
Senecio

serrulata
silvaticus

Silybuem

Smilax
Solidago
spicata
squalidus
Stachys
Stellaria
sylvatica
Symphytum

Symplocarpus
Syzygium

L. pubescens, hairs of puberty; covered
with soft hairs

L. pulmonarius, beneficial to the lungs

L. pulsata, beaten, driven about, from the
beating of the flowers by the wind
applied to various shades of purple

L. quercus, an oak

L. racemulus, the stalk of a cluster, a bunch
of berries

L. rana, a frog

L. recutitus, having a fresh or new skin
L. repo, creeping

Gr. rha, rhubarb

growing by rivers and streams

L. rorulentus, full of dew

L. rotundus, round

L. rubeo, to be red

Latin name for sorrel

L. rupis, rock, growing on rocks

L. ruscarius, of or for a butcher's broom

L. salicis, the willow

name of a plant in Pliny, perhaps from
L. salvus, safe, sound; L. salus, health
Latin name for the elder tree

L. sanguis, blood

sown, planted, cultivated

L. sanguis, blood

Gr. schizo, to divide; Gr. anthos, male
from Gr. serophula—i.e., tubercular glands
of the neck
L. scutella, salver. dish, referring to the
pouch on the calyx

L. senex, old man, because of the conspic-
uous white pappus

saw-shaped, serrated

L. silva, woodland, growing in woods

L. silybum, a kind of thistle with edible
stem

Gr. smilakos, the yew; also a bindweed

L. solidago, to put together or make whole
L. somnus, sleep; sleep-inducing, soporific
L. spica, a point

rough, unkempt, neglected, squalid

L. stachys, an ear of grain, spike

L. stella, star

L. sylvaticus, growing among trees

Gr. symphyton, name of a kind of plant
with healing properties; comfrey

Gr. symploke, a twisting together

Gr. syzygos, joined

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS .e 625

Tanacetum
Taraxacum

thalictroides
Thuja

Thymus
Tika
tinctoria

tremulus

Trichocereus
Trifolium
Trigonella
Trillium

Tropacolum
tuberosa
Tussilago

ulmaria

Ulmus
Urtica

uva-ursi

Vaccinium
Valeriana

Verbascum
Verbena
versicolor
veris
Viburnum
villosus
Vinca
Viola
virgaurea
virosa

Viscum
Vitex
Vitis
vulgare

xanth (o)-

Zanthoxylum
Zea

Zingiber

medieval L. tanazita derived from the Gr.
athanasia, immortality

medieval Latin, ultimately from Persian,
bitter potherb

Gr. thaliktron, meadow rue

Gr. thya, an African tree with fragrant,
durable wood

Gr. thymos, to perfume or to sacrifice

L. tilia, the linden tree

L. tinctorius, of or belonging to dyeing;
bloodthirsty

Gr. tremo, shivering, trembling, quake,
quiver

Gr. thrix, hair, plus Cereus; hairy cactus
L. tria, thrice; L. folium, leaf

Gr. trigonos, triangular, three-cornered

L. trillium, an herb with leaves in whorls
of three

L. tropaeum, trophy

L. tuberosus, full of humps

L. russis, cough

medieval name for the goats-beard, a
plant with elmlike leaves

L. wlmus, the elm

the Latin name for nettles from L. ure, to
burn

L, uva, grape; L. ursi, bear

classical Latin name of the plant
medieval name, perhaps from L. valeo, be
well or strong

classical Latin name of the plant

L. verbenae, sacred boughs

changing color

of the spring

L. viburnum, the wayfaring tree

L. villosus, hairy, shaggy, rough

L. vinea, the periwinkle

L. viola, the violet

L. virga, rod; L. aureus, golden

L. virsosus, muddy, covered with slime,
poison, fetid

L. visewm, birdlime, made from the
berries of mistletoe

L. viticis, the chaste tree

classical Latin name of the grapevine
general, common, usual

Gr. xanthos, yellow

Gr. xanthos, yellow, Gr. xylon, wood
classical Greek name of another cereal
plant

Gr. zingiber, ginger

----- PAGE 602 -----
Appendix 3

HN

HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

HERBS BY LATIN NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME Arachis hypogaea Peanut
Aralia nudicaulis False sarsaparilla

Abelmoschus moschatus Muskseed A, racemosa American spikenard
Abies balsamea Balsam fir A. spinosa Angelica tree
Abrus precatorius Jequerity Arctium lappa Burdock
Acacia nilotica Acacia bark Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Bearberry, kinnikinnick
A, catechu Black catechu Aristolochia serpentaria Virginia snakeroot
A, senega Gum arabic Aristolochia spp. Birthwort
Acer rubrum Red maple Armoracia rusticana Horseradish
Achillea milléfolium Yarrow Arnica montana Arnica
A. ptarmica Sneezeweed Artemisia abrotanum Southernwood
Aconitum napellus Aconite, monkshood A, absinthium Wormwood
Acorus calamus Sweet flag, calamus A, annua Sweet Annie
Adiantum capillus-veneris Maidenhair fern A. dracunculus Tarragon
Adonis vernalis False hellebore A. vulgaris Mugwort
Aegopodium podagraria Ground elder, bishop’s Arum maculatum Cuckoo pint

goutweed Asarum canadense Wild ginger
Aesculus bippocastanum Horse chestnut Asclepias syriaca Milkweed
Agathosma betulina Buchu A. tuberosa Pleurisy root
Agrimonia eupatoria Agrimony Asparagus officinalis Asparagus
Ailanthus altissima Tree of heaven Astragalus gummifer Tragacanth
Ajuga chamaepitys Ground pine A, membranaceus Astragalus
A, veptans Common bugle Atropa belladonna Belladonna
Alchemilla vulgaris Lady’s mantle Avena sativa Oats, oatstraw
Aletris farinosa True unicorn root Azadiracta indica Neem
Alkanna tinctoria Alkanet
Allium cepa Onion Ballota nigra Black horehound
A, sativum Garlic Baptisia tinctoria Wild indigo
Alnus glutinosa Black alder Bellis perennis English daisy
Aloe spp. Aloe Berberis vulgaris Barberry
Aloysia triphylla Lemon verbena Betula lenta Sweet birch
Alpinia officanarum Galangal Betula spp. Birch
Alstonia scholaris Alstonia Bidens tripartita Burr marigold
Althaea officinalis Marshmallow Bixa orellana Annatto
Amaranthus hypochondriacus — Amaranth Borago officinalis Borage
Anacardium occidentale Cashew Boswellia carteri Frankincense
Anagallis arvensis Scarlet pimpernel Brassica nigra Black mustard
Anemopsis californica Yerba mansa Bryonia alba White bryony
Anethum graveolens Dill Buxus sempervirens Boxwood
Angelica archangelica Angelica
A, sinensis Dong quai Calamintha ascendens Calamint
Antennaria dioica Life everlasting, pussytoes Calendula officinalis Calendula, marigold
Anthemis cotula Mayweed Camellia sinensis Tea
Anthoxanthum odoratum Sweet vernalgrass Cannabis sativa Marijuana
Apium graveolens Celery seed Capsella bursa-pastoris Shepherd’s purse
Apocynum androsaemifolium Bitter root, spreading dogbane Capsicum annuwn Cayenne
A. cannabinum Indian hemp Carica papaya Papaya

626

----- PAGE 603 -----
Heres By LATIN AND COMMON NAMES .& 527

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Carthamus tinctorius Safflower Crocus sativus Saffron

Carum carvi Caraway Croton eluteria Cascarilla
Castanea sativa Chestnut C. tighium Croton
Catharanthus roseus Madagascar periwinkle Cucurbita pepo Pumpkin
Caulophyllum thalictroides Blue cohosh Cuminum cyminum Cumin
Ceanothus americanus Red root Curcuma longa Turmeric
Celastrus scandens Bittersweet, American C. zedoaria Zedoary
Centaurea cyanus Cornflower Cuscuta epithymum Dodder

C. nigra Black knapweed Cydonia oblonga Quince
Centaurium erythraea Centaury Cymbopogon citratus Lemongrass
Centella astatica Gotu kola Cynara scolymus Artichoke
Cephaelis ipecacuanha Ipecacuanha Cynoglossum officinale Houndstongue
Ceratonia siliqua Carob Cypripedium calceolus Lady’s slipper
Cetraria islandica Iceland moss Cytisus scoparius Scotch broom
Chamaelirium luteum False unicorn root

Chamaemelum nobilis Roman chamomile Daemonorops draco Dragon's blood

Chelidonium majus
Chelone glabra
Chenopodium ambrosioides
Chimaphila umbellata
Chionanthus virginicus
Chondrus crispus

Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium

Cichorium intybus
Cimicifuga racemosa
Cinchona spp.
Cinnamomum aromaticum
C. camphora

C. verum

Citrullus colocynthis
Citrus aurantifolia
C. a. var, amara

C. sinensis

C. limon

Cladonia pyxidata
Claviceps purpurea
Cnicus benedictus
Cochlearia officinalis
Codonopsis tangshen
Coffea arabica

Cola acuminata

C. vera

Colchicum autumnale
Coleus forskoblii

Collinsonia canadensis

Commiphora molmol, C. myrrha

C. mukul

Contum maculatum
Consolida regalis
Convallaria majalis
Convolvulus scammonia
Conyza canadensis
Copaifera officinalis
Copernicia prunifera
Coptis trifolia
Corallorhiza odontorbiza
Coriandrum sativum
Cornus florida
Crataegus laevigata

C. monogyna

Celandine
Balmony
Wormseed
Pipsissewa
Fringetree
Trish moss
Pyrethrum
Chicory
Black cchosh
Quinine
Cassia
Camphor
Cinnamon
Colocynth
Lime

Bitter orange
Sweet orange
Lemon
Cupmoss
Ergot
Blessed thistle
Scurvygrass
Codonopsis
Coffee

Kola, cola
Kola, cola
Colchicum, autumn crocus
Coleus
Stoneroot
Myrrh
Guggul
Hemlock, poison hemlock
Larkspur
Lily ofthe valley
Scammeny
Fleabane
Copaiba
Carnauka
Goldthread
Coral root
Coriander
Dogwood
Hawthorn
Hawthorn

Daphne mezereum
Datura stramonium
Daucus carota
Delphinium staphisagria
Dicentra canadensis
Digitalis spp.
Dioscorea villosa
Diospyros virginiana
Dipteryx odorata
Dorema ammoniacum
Drimys winteri
Drosera rotundifolia
Dryopteris filix-mas

Echallium elaterium
Echinacea spp.

Echium vulgare
Elettaria cardamomum
Eleutherococcus senticosus
Elymus repens

Embelia ribes

Ephedra sinica

Epigaea repens
Equisetum arvense
Eriodictyon californicum
Eryngium maritimum
Erythronium americanum
Erythroxylum coca
Eschscholzia californica
Eucalyptus spp.
Euonymus atropurpureus
Eupatorium cannabinum
E. perfoliatum

E. purpureum
Euphorbia ipecacuanhae
E. pilulifera

Euphrasia officinalis

Fagopyrum esculentum
Fagus sylvatica

Ferula assa-foetida

E gummosa

Ficus carica
Filipendula ulmaria

Mezereon

Thorn apple, jimsonweed
Carrot

Stavesacre

Turkey corn
Foxglove

Wild yam

American persimmon
Tonka bean
Ammoniakum
Winter's bark
Sundew

Male fern

Wild cucumber

Echinacea, purple coneflower

Bugloss

Cardamom

Siberian ginseng
Couch grass
Embelia

Ma huang, ephedra
Arbutus

Horsetail

Yerba santa

Sea holly

Adder’s tongue, American
Coca

California poppy
Eucalyptus

Wahoo, spindle tree
Hemp agrimony
Boneset

Gravel root, Joe pye
American ipecac
Pill-bearing spurge
Eyebright

Buckwheat
Beech
Asafetida
Galbanum
Fig
Meadowsweet

----- PAGE 604 -----
628 < HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Foeniculum vulgare Fennel I. germanica Orris
Fragaria vesca Strawberry 1. pseudacorus Yellow flag
Fraxinus excelsior Ash I. versicolor Blue flag
F ornus Manna
Fucus vesiculosus Bladderwrack Jasminum grandiflorum Jasmine
Fumaria officinalis Fumitory Jateorhiza columba Columbo
Juglans cinerea Butternut
Galega officinalis Goat’s rue JF. nigra Black walnut
Galipea officinalis Angostura Fi regia English walnut
Galium aparine Cleavers Juniperus communis Juniper
G. odoratum Sweet woodruff F. oxycedrus Cade juniper
G. verum Lady’s bedstraw F. sabina Savin
Ganoderma lucidum Reishi F. virginiana Eastern red cedar
Garcinia cambogia Garcinia
Garrya fremontii Feverbrush Kalmia latifolia Mountain laurel
Gaultheria procumbens Wintergreen Krameria triandra Rhatany
Gelidium amansii Agar
Gelsemium sempervirens Yellow jasmine Lactuca virosa Wild lettuce
Genista tinctoria Dyer’s greenweed Lamium album Dead nettle
Gentiana lutea Gentian Larix decidua Larch
Geranium maculatum Cranesbill L. laricina Tamarack
Geum urbanum Avens Larrea tridentata Chaparral
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Laurus nobilis Laurel
Glechoma hederacea Ground ivy Lavandula spp. Lavender
Glycine max Soy Lawsonia inermis Henna
Ghyeyrrhiza glabra Licorice Ledum groenlandicum Labrador tea
Gnaphalium uliginosum Cudweed Lentinus edodes Shiitake
Gossypium hirsutum Cotton root Leonurus cardiaca Motherwort
Grindelia camporum Gumweed, grindelia Leptandra virginica Black root
G. squarrosa Gumweed, grindelia Ligusticum porteri Osha
Guaiacum officinale Guaiacum Ligustrum spp. Privet
Lilium candidum Madonna lily
Hamamelis virginiana Witch hazel Linum catharticum Fairy flax
Harpagophytum procumbens Devil’s claw L. usitatissimum Flax
Hedeoma pulegioides American pennyroyal Liguidambar orientalis Storax
Hedera helix Ivy Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Helianthus annuus Sunflower Liriosma ovata Muira puama
Helichrysum angustifolium Eternal flower Lobelia mflata Lobelia
Helleborus niger Black hellebore Lomatium dissectum Lomatium
Herniaria glabra Rupturewort Lonicera spp. Honeysuckle
Heuchera americana Alumroot Lophophora williamsii Peyote
Hevea spp. Rubber Lycopodium clavatum Club moss
Hieracium pilosella Mouse ear Lycopus americanus Bugleweed
Hordeum vulgare Barley L. europaeus Bugleweed
Humulus lupulus Hops L, virginicus Bugleweed
Hydnocarpus kurzi Chaulmoogra Lythrum salicaria Purple loosestrife
Hydrangea arborescens Hydrangea
Hydrastis canadensis Goldenseal Magnolia officinalis Magnolia
Hyoseyamus niger Henbane Mahonia aquifolium Oregon grape, mountain grape
Hypericum perforatum St. John’s wort Malva sylvestris Mallow
Hyssopus officinalis Hyssop Manihot esculenta Tapioca
Maranta arundinacea Arrowroot
Tex aquifolium Holly Marrubium vulgare Horehound
I. paraguariensis Paraguay tea, maté Marsdenia condurango Condurango
Ilhcium verum Star anise M. reichenbachii Condurango
Impatiens capensis Jewelweed Matricaria recutita German chamomile
Inula helenium Elecampane Medicago sativa Alfalfa, lucerne
Ipomoea orizabensis Mexican scammony root Melaleuca alternifolia Tea tree
I purga Jalap M. quinquenervia Cajeput
Iris foetidissima Stinking iris Melissa officinalis Lemon balm

----- PAGE 605 -----
HErgs BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .@

529

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Mentha aquatica Water mint P. methysticum Kava kava

M. piperita Pepperm:nt P nigrum Black pepper

M. pulegium Pennyroyal Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood
M. spicata Spearmint Pistacia lentiscus Mastic
Menyanthes trifoliata Bogbean Plantago lanceolata Ribwort plantain
Mitchella repens Partridgeberry P major Plantain
Monarda punctata Horsemint P. ovata Psyllium

Morus alba Mulberry Podophyllum peltatum Mayapple

Myrica cerifera Bayberry Pogostemon cablin Patchouli

M. gale Sweetgale Polemonium caeruleum Jacob’s ladder
Myristica fragrans Nutmeg P. reptans Abscess root
Myroxylon balsamum Balsam of Tolu Polygala senega Seneca snakeroot

var. balsamum
M. balsamum

var. pereirae
Myrrhis odorata
Myrtus communis

Nepeta cataria
Nicotiana tabacum
Nymphaea odorata

Ocimum. basilicum
Ocnothera biennis

Olea europaea

Ononsis spinosa
Ophioglossum vulgatum
Origanum majorana
O. vulgare

Oryza sativa

Oxalis acetosella

Packera aurea
Paconia officinalis
Palaquium gutta
Panax ginseng

P quinquefolius
Papaver rhoeas
Papaver somniferum
Parietaria officinalis
Passiflora incarnata
Paullinia cupana
Pausinystalia yohimbe
Petasites hybridus
Petroselinum crispum
Peumus boldus
Phoenix dactylifera
Phyllanthus emblica
Physalis alkekengi
Physostigma venenosum
Phytolacca americana
Picrorhiza kurrooa
Pilocarpus microphyllus
P jaborandi

Pimenta dioica
Pimpinella anisum

P saxifraga

Pinus strobus

Piper betle

P cubeba

Balsam of Peru

Sweet cicely
Myrtle

Catnip
Tobacco
White water lily

Basil

Evening primrose
Olive

Restharrow

Southern adder’s-tongue

Marjoram
Oregano
Rice

Wood sorrel

Life root

Peony
Gutta-percha
Ginseng, Korean
Ginseng, American
Field poppy
Opium poppy
Pellitory of the wall
Passionflower
Guarana
Yohimbe
Butterbur
Parsley

Boldo

Date palra

Amla

Winter cherry
Calabar bean
Poke

Kutki

Jaborandi
Jaborandi
Allspice

Anise, aniseed
Burnet saxifrage
White pine

Betel

Cubeb

Polygonatum biflorum
P. multiflorum
Polygonum bistorta
P. bydropiper
P multiflorum
Polypodium virginianum
Populus alba
P. balsamifera

var. balsamifera
P. gileadensis
P. tremuloides
Potentilla anserina
P. erecta
Primula veris
P. vulgaris
Prunella vulgaris
Prunus armeniaca
P africana
P cerasus
P. domestica
P. dulcis var. amara
P. laurocerasus
P. persica
P. serotina
Pueraria montana var. lobata
Pulmonaria officinalis
Pulsatilla vulgaris
Punica granatum

Quassia amara
Quercus alba

Q. robur

Quillaja saponaria

Ranunculus ficaria
Rauvolfia serpentina
Rebmannia glutinosa
Rhamnus cathartica
R. frangula

R. purshiana

Rheum officinale

R. palmatum

Rhus aromatica

R. glabra

Ribes nigrum
Ricinus communis
Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum
Rosa canina

Solomon’s seal
Solomon’s seal
Bistort
Smartweed
Fo-ti
Polypody root
White poplar
Balm of Gilead

Balm of Gilead
Quaking aspen
Silverweed
Tormentil
Cowslip
Primrose
Self-heal
Apricot
Pygeum

Sour cherry
Plum

Almond
Cherry laurel
Peach

Wild cherry
Kudzu
Lungwort
Pasqueflower
Pomegranate

Quassia
White oak
Oak

Soap bark

Lesser celandine
Rauwolfia
Rehmannia
Purging buckthorn
Alder buckthorn
Cascara sagrada
Chinese rhubarb
Chinese rhubarb
Sweet sumac
Smooth sumac
Black currant
Castor bean
Watercress

Dog rose

----- PAGE 606 -----
630 @ HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
R. damascena Damask rose Tabebuia avellanedae Pau d’arco
Rosmarinus officinalis Rosemary Tamarindus indica Tamarind
Rubia cordifolia Indian madder Tanacetum parthenium Feverfew
R. tinctorum Madder T. vulgare Tansy
Rubus idaeus Raspberry Taraxacum officinale Dandelion
R. villosus Blackberry Taxus baccata English yew
Rumex acetosa Sorrel T. brevifolia Pacific yew
R. acetosella Sheep sorrel Teucrium chamaedrys Germander
R. crispus Yellow dock Theobroma cacao Cocoa
Ruscus aculeatus Butcher’s broom Thuja occidentalis Thuja, arborvitae
Ruta graveolens Rue Thymus vulgaris Thyme
Tilia cordata Litleleaf linden
Sabatia angularis American centaury T. europaea Linden
Saccharum officinarum Sugarcane T. platyphyllos Linden
Salix alba White willow Trifolium pratense Red clover
S. cinerea Willow Trigonella foenum-graecum Fenugreek
Salvia miltiorrhiza Dan shen Trillium erectum Beth root, trillium
S. officinalis Sage, garden sage Triosteum perfoliatum Feverwort
S. officinalis var. rubia Red sage Triticum aestivum Wheat
S. sclarea Clary sage Tropacolum majus Nasturtium
Sambucus ebulus Dwarf elder Turnera di Damiana
S. nigra European elder Tussilago farfara Coltsfoot
Sanguinaria canadensis Bloodroot
Sanguisorba officinalis Burnet Ulmus glabra Elm
Sanicula europaea Sanicle U. rubra Slippery elm
Santalum album Sandalwood Uncaria tomentosa Cat’s claw
Saponaria officinalis Soapwort Urginea maritima Squill
Sarracenia purpurea Pitcher plant Urtica dioica Nettle
Sassafras albidum Sassafras Usnea spp. Usnea
Satureja hortensis Summer savory Ustilago maydis Corn smut
S. montana Winter savory
Schisandra chinensis Schizandra Vaccinium macrocarpon Cranberry
Scrophularia nodosa Figwort V. myrtillus Bilberry
Scutellaria lateriflora Skullcap Valeriana officinalis Valerian
Selenicereus grandiflorus Night-blooming cereus Vanilla planifolia Vanilla
Sempervivum tectorum Houseleek Veratrum album White hellebore
Senecio jacobaea Ragwort V. viride White hellebore
Senna alexandrina Senna Verbascum thapsus Mullein
Serenoa repens Saw palmetto Verbena officinalis Vervain
Sesamum orientale Sesame Veronica beccabunga Brooklime
Silybum marianum Milk thistle V. officinalis Speedwell
Sinapsis alba White mustard Vetiveria zizanivides Vetiver
Sisymbrium officinale Hedge mustard Viburnum opulus Cramp bark
Smilax spp. Sarsaparilla V. prunifolium Black haw
Solanum dulcamara Bittersweet Vinca major Periwinkle
Solidago virgaurea Goldenrod V. minor Periwinkle
Sorbus aucuparia Mountain ash Viola odorata Sweet violet
Spigelia marilandica Pink root V. tricolor Heartsease
Stachys betonica Wood betony Viscum album Mistletoe
S. officinalis Wood betony Vitex agnus-castus Chaste tree, vitex
S. palustris Woundwort Vitis vinifera Grape
Stellaria media Chickweed
Stillingia sylvatica Queen’s delight Withania somnifera Ashwaganda
Strychnos nux-vomica Nux vomica, strychnine tree
Styrax benzoin Benzoin Xanthorhiza apiifolia Yellow root
Symphytum officinale Comfrey
Symplocarpus foetidus Skunk cabbage Zanthoxylum americanum Prickly ash
Syzygium aromaticum Clove Zea mays Cornsilk
S. cumini Jambul Zingiber officinale Ginger
Ziziphus jujuba Jujube

----- PAGE 607 -----
HERBS LISTED BY COMMON NAME

COMMON NAME

LATIN BINOMIAL

Abscess root
Acacia bark
Aconite
Adder’s tongue, American
Adder’s tongue, southern
Agar
Agrimony
Alder, black
Alder buckthorn
Alfafa

Alkanet
Allspice
Almond

Aloe

Alstonia
Alumroot
Amaranth
Amla
Ammoniakum
Angelica
Angelica tree
Angostura
Anise, aniseed
Annatto
Apricot
Arborvitae
Arbutus
Arnica
Arrowroot
Artichoke
Asafetida

Ash
Ashwaganda
Asparagus
Astragalus
Autumn crocus
Avens

Balm of Gilead

Balm of Gilead
Balmony
Balsam of Peru

Balsam of Tolu

Barberry
Barley
Basil
Bayberry
Bearberry
Beech
Belladonna
Benzoin
Betel
Beth root
Bilberry
Birch

Polemonium reptans
Acacia nilotica

Aconitum napellus
Erythronium americanum
Ophioglossum vulgatum
Gelidium amansii
Agrimonia eupatoria
Alnus glutinosa
Rhamnus frangula
Medicago sativa
Alkanna tinctoria
Pimenta dioica

Prunus dulcis var. amara
Aloe spp.

Alstonia scholaris
Heuchera americana
Amaranthus hypochondriacus
Phyllanthus emblica
Dorema ammoniacum
Angelica archangelica
Aralia spinosa

Galipea officinalis
Pimpinelli anisum

Bixa orelluna

Prunus armeniaca

Thuja occidentalis
Epigaea repens

Arnica montana
Maranta arundinacea
Cynara scolymus

Ferula assa-foetida
Fraxinus excelsior
Withania somnifera
Asparagus officinalis
Astragalus membranaceus
Colchicum autumnale
Geum urbanum

Populus balsamifera
var. balsamifera
Populus gileadensis
Chelone glabra
Myroxylon balkamum
var. pervirae
Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum
Berberis vulgaris
Hordeum vulgare
Ocimum basilicum
Myrica cerifera
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Fagus sylvatica
Atropa belladonna
Styrax benzoin
Piper betle
Trillium erectum
Vaccinium myrtillus
Betula spp.

Hergs sy LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .& $31

COMMON NAME

LATIN BINOMIAL

Birch, sweet
Birthwort
Bishop’s goutweed
Bistort

Bitter orange
Bitter root
Bittersweet
Bittersweet, American
ackberry

ack catechu
ack cohosh
ack currant
lack haw

ack hellebore
ack horehound
ack root

ack walnut
ladderwrack
essed thistle
loodroot

tue cohosh
Blue flag
Bogbean
Boldo

Boneset
Borage
Boxwood
Brooklime
Broom

Buchu
Buckwheat
Bugle
Bugleweed

BwmWmamwnwnwwsnnnrnwew

Bugloss
Burdock

Burnet

Burnet saxifrage
Burr marigold
Butcher’s broom
Butterbur
Butternut

Cade juniper
Cajeput
Calabar bean
Calamint
Calendula
California poppy
Camphor
Caraway
Cardamon
Carnauba
Carrot

Cascara sagrada
Cascarilla
Cashew

Cassia

Castor bean
Cat’s claw

B. lenta

Aristolochia spp.
Aegopodium podagraria
Polygonum bistorta
Citrus aurantium var. amara
Apocynum androsaemifolium
Solanum dukamara
Celastrus scandens
‘Rubus villosus

Acacia catechu
Cimicifuga racemosa
Ribes nigrum

Viburnum prunifolium
Helleborus niger

Ballota nigra

Leptandra virginica
Juglans nigra

Fucus vesiculosus

Cnicus benedictus
Sanguinaria canadensis
Caulophyllum thalictroides
Iris versicolor
Menyanthes trifoliata
Peumus boldus
Eupatorium perfoliatum
Borago officinalis

Buxus sempervirens
Veronica beccabunga
Cytisus scoparius
Agathosma betulina
Fagopyrum esculentum
Ajuga reptans

Lycopus virginicus, L. americanus,

L. europaeus
Echium vulgare
Arctium lappa
Sanguisorba officinalis
Pimpinella saxifraga
Bidens tripartita
Ruscus aculeatus
Petasites hybridus
Juglans cinerea

Juniperus oxycedrus
Melaleuca quinguenervia
Physostigma venenosum
Calamintha ascendens
Calendula officinalis
Eschscholzia californica
Cinnamomum campbora
Carum carvi

Elettaria cardamomum
Copernicia prunifera
Daucus carota

Rhamnus purshiana
Croton eluteria
Anacardium occidentale
Cinnamomum aromaticum
Ricinus communis
Uncaria tomentosa

----- PAGE 608 -----
632 @ Herss py LATIN AND COMMON NaMES

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL

Catnip Nepeta cataria Dodder Cuscuta epithymum

Cayenne Capsicum annuum Dogbane, spreading Apocynum androsaemifolium
Cedar, Eastern red Juniperus virginiana Dog rose Rosa canina

Celandine Chelidonium majus Dogwood Cornus florida

Celery seed Apium graveolens Dong quai Angelica sinensis

Centaury Centaurium erythraea Dragon’s blood Daemonorops draco
Chamomile, German Matricaria recutita Dyer’s greenweed Genista tinctoria

Chamomile, Roman Chamaemelum nobilis Echinacea Echinacea angustifolia, E.. pallida

Chaparral
Chaste tree
Chaulmoogra
Cherry laurel
Cherry, sour
Chestnut
Chickweed
Chicory
Cinchona
Cinnamon
Clary sage
Cleavers
Clove

Club moss
Coca

Cocoa
Codonopsis
Coffee
Colchicum
Coleus
Colocynth
Coltsfoot
Columbo
Comfrey
Condurango
Copaiba
Coral root
Coriander
Cornflower
Cornsilk
Corn smut
Cotton root
Couch grass
Cowslip
Cramp bark
Cranberry
Cranesbill
Croton
Cubeb
Cuckoo pint
Cudweed
Cumin
Cupmoss

Daisy, English
Damiana

Dan shen
Dandelion
Date palm
Dead nettle
Devil’s claw

Dill

Larrea tridentata
Vitex agnus-castus
Hydnocarpus kurzi
Prunus laurocerasus

P cerasus

Castanea sativa
Stellaria media
Cichorium intybus
Cinchona spp.
Cinnamomum verum
Salvia sclarea

Galium aparine
Syzygium aromaticum
Lycopodium clavatum
Erythroxylum coca
Theobroma cacao
Codonopsis tangshen
Coffea arabica
Colchicum autumnale
Coleus forskoblii
Citrullus colocynthis
Tussilago farfara
Jateorhiza columba
Symphytum officinale
Marsdenia condurango
Copaifera officinalis
Corallorhiza odontorbiza
Coriandrum sativum
Centaurea cyanus

Zea mays

Ustilago maydis
Gossypium hirsutum
Elymus repens
Primula veris
Viburnum opulus
Vaccinium macrocarpon
Geranium maculatum
Croton tiglium

Piper cubeba

Arum maculatum
Gnaphalium uliginosum
Cuminum cyminum
Cladonia pyxidata

Bellis ‘perennis

Turnera diffusa

Salvia miltiorrhiza
Taraxacum officinale
Phoenix dactylifera

Lamium album
Harpagophytum procumbens
Anethum graveolens

Eastern red cedar
Elder

Elder, dwarf
Elecampane

Elm

Embelia

Ergot

Eternal flower
Eucalyptus
Evening primrose
Eyebright

Fairy flax

False hellebore
False sarsaparilla
False unicorn root
Fennel
Fenugreek
Feverbrush
Feverfew
Feverwort

Fig

Figwort
Flaxseed
Fleabane

Fo-ti

Foxglove
Frankincense
Fringetree
Fumitory

Galangal
Galbanum
Garcinia

Garlic

Gentian
Germander
Ginger

Ginkgo
Ginseng, American
Ginseng, Korean
Goat’s rue
Goldenrod
Goldenseal
Goldthread
Gotu kola
Grape

Gravel root
Ground elder
Ground ivy
Ground pine

E. purpurea
Juniperus virginiana
Sambucus nigra
S. ebulus
Inula helenium
Ulmus glabra
Embelia ribes
Claviceps purpurea
Helichrysum angustifolium
Eucalyptus spp.
Ocnothera biennis
Euphrasia officinalis

Linum catharticum
Adonis vernalis

Aralia nudicaulis
Chamaelirium luteum
Foeniculum vulgare
Trigonella foenum-graecum
Garrya fremontii
Tanacetum parthenium
Triosteum perfoliatum
Ficus carica
Scrophularia nodosa
Linum usitatissimum
Conyza canadensis
Polygonum multiflorum
Digitalis spp.

Boswellia carteri
Chionanthus virginicus
Fumaria officinalis

Alpinia officanarum
Ferula gummosa
Garcinia cambogia
Allium sativum
Gentiana lutea
Teucrium chamaedrys
Zingiber officinale
Ginkgo biloba

Panax quinquefolius

P. ginseng

Galega officinalis
Solidago virgaurea
Hydrastis canadensis
Coptis trifolia

Centella asiatica

Vitis vinifera
Eupatorium purpureum
Aegopodium podagraria
Glechoma hederacea
Ajuga chamaepitys

----- PAGE 609 -----
15 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 20% alcohol and 10% glycerin)
three times a day.

Sarsaparilla, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Solidago virgaurea L.
Goldenrod
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Saponins (based on polygalic acid); clero-
dane diterpenes (including solidagolactones I-VII and
elongatolides C and E); phenolic glycosides; flavonoids
(such as rutin and quercetin); miscellaneous: acetylenes,
polysaccharides, tannins’’*

Actions: Anticatarrhal, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial,
astringent, diaphoretic, carminative, diuretic

Indications: Goldenrod is perhaps the first plant to con-
sider for upper respiratory catarrh, whether acute or
chronic. The plant may also be used in combination with
other herbs to treat influenza. Its carminative properties
point to a role in the treatment of flatulent dyspepsia. As
an anti-inflammatory urinary tract antiseptic, goldenrod
may be helpful in cystitis, urethritis, and similar condi-
tions affecting this system. As a gargle, goldenrod can be
effective for laryngitis and pharyngitis. It may be applied
externally to promote the healing of wounds.

Safety Considerations: Goldenrod may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 to
12 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Goldenrod, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Stachys betonica L.
Wood Betony

Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Alkaloids (stachydrine and betonicine);

miscellaneous: betaine, choline, tannins?’

Actions: Nervine, bitter

MarerlA Mepica e 385

Indications: Betony gently tones and strengthens the
nervous system while also soothing nervous tension. It is
helpful for nervous debility associated with anxiety and
tension. It eases headaches and neuralgia of nervous ori-
gin, especially when caused by hypertension.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Stellaria media (L.) Villars
Chickweed
Caryophyllaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Saponin glycosides; coumarins and hy-
droxycoumarins; flavonoids; carboxylic acids; triter-
penoids; vitamin C (about 150 to 350 mg per 100 g)??6

Actions: Antirheumatic, vulnerary, emollient

Indications: Chickweed is commonly used as an external
remedy for cuts, wounds, and, especially, itching and irri-
tation. It may be used with benefit to treat eczema or pso-
riasis associated with this sort of irritation. Chickweed has
a reputation as a remedy for rheumatism when used in-
ternally.

King’s provided the following uses:

Chickweed appears to be a cooling demulcent. I have seen
the fresh leaves bruised and applied as a poultice to indo-
lent, intractable ulcers of the leg, of many years standing,
with the most decided and immediately beneficial results;
to be changed 2 or 3 times a day. In acute ophthalmia, the
bruised leaves will likewise be found a valuable applica-
tion. An ointment, made by bruising fresh leaves in fresh
lard, may be used in many forms of cutaneous disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Chickweed should be used
fresh or in the form of a water extract. To make an infu-
sion, pour | cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried
herb and infuse for 5 minutes. This may be drunk three
times a day.

To make a “green drink” of fresh chickweed, place a
handful of fresh plant in the blender with some pineapple
juice; blend and strain. To ease itching, a strong infusion
of fresh plant is a useful addition to bathwater.

----- PAGE 610 -----
58¢€ << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

Symphytum officinale L.
Comfrey
Boraginaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome, leaf

Constituents: Allantoin; pyrrolizidine alkaloids, includ-
ing echimidine, symphytine, lycopsamine, symlandine
(found in the fresh young leaves and in the root but, ac-
cording to two separate investigations, not in the dried
herb); phenolic acids (rosmarinic, chlorogenic, caffeic,
and lithospermic); mucilage (about 29%), composed of a
polysaccharide containing glucose and fructose; miscella-
neous: choline, asparagine, volatile oil, tannins, steroidal
saponins, triterpenes”2”

Actions: Vulnerary, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, as-
tringent, expectorant

Indications: The impressive wound-healing properties
of comfrey are due at least in part to the presence of al-
lantoin. This chemical stimulates cell proliferation and
thus supports wound healing, both internally and exter-
nally. Because it also contains a good deal of demulcent
mucilage, comfrey root is a powerful healing agent for
gastric and duodenal ulcers, hiatus hernia, and ulcerative
colitis. Its astringency makes it valuable in the treatment
of hemorrhages, wherever they occur. The root or herb
may be used to good effect in bronchitis and irritable
cough to soothe and reduce irritation while promoting
expectoration.

Used externally, comfrey leaf speeds wound healing
and fosters proper scar formation. Care should be taken
with very deep wounds, however, as external application
of comfrey can cause tissue to form over the wound be-
fore it is healed deeper down, which can lead to abscess.
Used as a compress or poultice, the herb may be used to
treat any external ulcers, wounds, and fractures; it is an
excellent treatment for chronic varicose ulcers. It has a re-
puted anticancer action in European folk herbalism.

Safety Considerations: Long-term studies with rats
have demonstrated that the pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs)
in comfrey are hepatotoxic, carcinogenic, and mutagenic.
Two of the PAs in comfrey have proved to be mutagenic
in somatic Drosophila cells at a concentration of 5x10°M.
This herb must therefore be recognized as a potentially
genotoxic carcinogen in man. However, the risk of ge-
netic damage from these pyrrolizidine alkaloids appears
to be low. An average cup of fresh comfrey leaf tea may
contain up to §.3 mg alkaloid. To minimize potential risk,
lengthy internal use is to be discouraged. Only slight ab-
sorption occurs with external application. For a more de-

tailed discussion of the toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
please refer to chapter 10.

After external application to rats of an alcoholic ex-
tract (corresponding to a dose of 194 mg/kg of alkaloid N-
oxide mixture), 0.1% to 0.4% alkaloid was excreted in the
urine, mainly as N-oxide. Oral administration of the same
extract for the same length of time led to a 20 to 50 times
greater excretion of alkaloid in the urine.

Comfrey is banned in Australia and its use restricted
in New Zealand. In the United Kingdom, oral medicinal
preparations containing comfrey have been withdrawn
from the market.

Preparations and Dosage: Root tincture dosage is 2 to
4 ml three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction
of the root, put | to 3 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of
water, bring to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day. A cold infusion
may be made by pouring 1 cup of cold water over 2 tea-
spoons of root; leave to stand for 6 to 8 hours. Thus, a
nighttime dose may be prepared in advance in the morn-
ing and a dose for mornings set up at night.

For leaf ointments and other preparations for exter-
nal application (containing 5% to 20% dried herb),
Commission E recommends that the daily applied dosage
not exceed 100 mcg of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-
unsaturated necine structure, including their N-oxides.
Similarly, for root ointments and other preparations for
external use (containing 5% to 20% dried herb), the daily
applied dosage should not exceed 100 meg of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necine struc-
ture, including their N-oxides.

Symphyti radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Salisb. ex Nutt.
Skunk Cabbage
Araceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Essential oil; 5-hydroxytryptamine;

resins?”8

Actions: Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, expectorant

Indications: Skunk cabbage may be used for any spas-
modic condition of the lungs. It relaxes and eases irritable
coughs, and may be helpful for asthma, bronchitis, and
whooping cough. As a diaphoretic, it supports the body
during fever.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

----- PAGE 611 -----
Preparations and Dosage: Traditionally, skunk cabbage
has been used as a preparation made by mixing 1 part
powdered root to 8 parts honey. Dosage is '/2 to 1 tea-
spoon of this mixture three times a day. An infusion (for
leaf) or decoction (for root) may be made with '/2 tea-
spoon of herb per cup of water. Tincture dosage is '/2 to
1 ml three times a day (1:5 in 60%).

Skunk Cabbage, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz-Bip.
Feverfew
Asteraceae

Other Name: Until recently, the binomial was Chrysan~-
themum parthenium.

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (parthenolide, ar-
ticanin, santamarin),; onoterpenes and sesquiterpenes
(thujone, sabinene, camphor, 1,8-cineole, umbellulone);
flavonoids (apigenin, diosmetin, quercetin, jaceidin,
jaceosidin)*??

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vasodilator, emmenagogue,
bitter

Indications: Feverfew has regained its deserved reputa-
tion as a primary remedy for treating and preventing mi-
graine headaches, particularly those eased by the applica-
tion of warmth to the head. Feverfew may be valuable for
arthritis in the painfully active inflammatory stage. The
herb may also help alleviate dizziness and tinnitus, espe-
cially if used in conjunction with other remedies, and re-
lieve painful periods and sluggish menstrual flow.

Feverfew is the only herb used in European phy-
totherapy that is known to be specific for the treatment of
migraine. It is also the best example of a remedy well
known to medical herbalists that has recently been ac-
cepted by orthodox medicine. For more information on
clinical research on feverfew and migraine, please see
chapter 16.

Feverfew’s spectrum of pharmacological actions ap-
pears to be related to its influences on arachidonic acid
metabolism and platelet functions.

¢ Inhibits histamine secretion

* Inhibits aggregation, granular secretion, and arachi-
donate-mediated responses

¢ Exerts cytotoxic action

¢ Inhibits 5-hydroxytryptamine-mediated contractile
responses

¢ Inhibits vascular smooth muscle contractility

MATERIA MEDICA @ 587

Safety Considerations: Feverfew may cause allergic re-
sponse in people sensitive to members of the Asteraceae
family. The fresh leaves may cause mouth ulcers in sus-
ceptible people. Feverfew should not be used during
pregnancy because of its stimulant action on the uterus.
Although no drug interactions have been documented, it
is possible that feverfew may interfere with aspirin and
other anticoagulant medications because of its mecha-
nism of action,

Preparations and Dosage: The preferred dosage is the
equivalent of 1 fresh leaf one to three times a day. While
fresh leaf is preferable, tincture or tablets are adequate.
Of these formulations, freeze-dried leaf preparations (50
to 100 mg/day) are best.

For migraine prophylaxis, recommended dosage is 25
to 125 mg a day of a standardized leaf and flower extract
containing a minimum of 0.2% parthenolide. Higher
doses (up to 2 g/day) may be required for acute treatment
of migraine or for inflammatory conditions.

Feverfew, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Taraxacum officinale Weber ex Wigg.
Dandelion
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Root, leaf

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (taraxacoside, oth-
ers); diterpenes, including taraxacin; triterpenes (taraxas-
terol, arnidiol, faradiol, B-amyrin); sterols (stigmasterol, B-
sitosterol); carotenoids, such as lutein and violaxanthin;
xanthophylls; flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin); polysaccha-
rides (glucans, mannans, inulin); potassium (up to 4.5% in
aerial parts)*3°

Actions: Diuretic, hepatic, cholagogue, antirheumatic,
laxative, tonic, bitter

Indications: Dandelion leaf is a powerful diuretic, with
an action comparable to that of the drug furosemide. The
usual effect of a drug that stimulates kidney function is
loss of vital potassium from the body, which can aggravate
any cardiovascular problem that may be present.
Dandelion leaf, however, is not only an effective diuretic,
but also one of the best natural sources of potassium. It is
thus an ideally balanced remedy that may be used safely
whenever diuretic action is needed, even for water reten-
tion related to heart problems. Overall, this herb is a most
valuable general tonic and perhaps the best widely appli-
cable diuretic and liver tonic.

In one study investigating the effects of oral adminis-
tration of dandelion extracts in rats and mice, leaf extracts

----- PAGE 612 -----
58£ @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

produced greater diuresis than root extracts, and a dose of
50 ml/kg body weight (equivalent to 2 g dried herb) pro-
duced an effect comparable to that of furosemide given at
a dosage of 80 mg/kg.?3!

As a hepatic and cholagogue, dandelion root may be
helpful for inflammation and congestion of the liver and
gallbladder. It is specific for cases of congestive jaun-
dice.?3? In addition, it can be very effective as part of a
wider treatment for muscular rheumatism.

Ellingwood recommended dandelion root for chronic
jaundice, autointoxication, rheumatism, blood disorders,
chronic skin eruptions, chronic gastritis, and aphthous
ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Dandelion may theoretically
cause allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family. There have been rare reports of con-
tact dermatitis in people coming in frequent contact with
the latex found in the stem.’#?

Preparations and Dosage: Root tincture dosage is 2.5 to
5 ml three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a root de-
coction, put 2 to 3 teaspoons of root into | cup of water,
bring to a boil, and gently simmer for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.
Leaf tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml three times a day
(1:5 in 40%). To make a leaf infusion, pour 1 cup of boil-
ing water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried leaf and infuse for
0 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.
The leaf may also be eaten raw in salads.

The BHP recommends 3 to 5 g dried leaf or 5 to 10 ml
tincture three times a day, or 5 to 10 ml juice from fresh
leaf twice daily. Its suggested dosage for root is 0.5 to 2 g
dried root or 4 to 8 ml tincture three times daily.
Commission E recommends 4 to 10 g of dried leaf or 4 to
10 ml fluid extract of leaf daily, or 3 to 4 g cut or pow-
dered root per cup by decoction.

Taraxaci radix cum herba, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopbarmaceuticals

Thuja occidentalis L.

Thuja

Cupressaceae

Other Names: Arborvitae, white cedar, Western hemlock
Part Used: Young twig

Constituents: Volatile oil (1%), including thujone,
flavonoid glycosides; mucilage; tannins”*

Actions: Expectorant, antimicrobial, diuretic, astrin-
gent, alterative

Indications: Thuja’s main action is related to its content

of stimulating and alterative volatile oil. In bronchial
catarrh, thuja promotes expectoration and provides sys-
temic stimulation that is especially beneficial when heart
weakness is also part of the picture. However, thuja
should be avoided in cases in which cough is due to over-
stimulation (for example, dry, irritable coughs).

Thuja has a specific reflex action on the uterus and
may help with delayed menstruation. Because of this
property, however, the herb is best avoided during preg-
nancy. Thuja may also be used for ordinary incontinence
due to loss of muscle tone. It has a role to play in the
treatment of psoriasis and rheumatism when used inter-
nally. Externally, it may be effective against warts, and
demonstrates a marked antifungal activity against ring-
worm and thrush.

Ellingwood described thuja thus:

It has been used extensively by ail physicians in the treat-
ment of cancer. It is claimed to exercise an abortive influ-
ence over incipient cancer and to retard the progress of
more advanced cases. In extreme cases it will remove the
fetor, retard the growth and materially prolong the life of
the patient. It should be given internally and the dosage
increased to the extreme limit. It should be also kept in
contact with the parts externally or injected into the
structures. Epithelioma, condylomata and all simple can-
cerous growths should be treated with it.

Thuja is directly indicated in improving conditions
of the blood. Again, it acts directly upon abnormal
growths, such as peculiar conditions of the cell structure
of the skin and other external structure. It is thus indi-
cated in all abnormal growths of the skin or mucous
membranes. It exercises a specific influence upon
catarrhal discharges, correcting the glandular faults that
are to blame for such a condition wherever they may be.
Ivis specific to urinary irritation in aged people especially;
also in childhood. It strengthens the sphincter of the
bladder.

As an external application Thuja produces at first a
sensation of smarting or tingling when applied to open
sores or wounds and it is usually best to dilute it with one,
two or four parts of water, or to combine the non-alco-
holic extract with an ointment base in the above propor-
tion. This constitutes an excellent mildly antiseptic and
actively stimulating dressing to indolent, phagedenic or
gangrenous ulcers. It is of much service in bed sores and
in other open ulcers dependent upon local or general
nerve exhaustion. In chronic skin diseases of either a non-
specific or specific character, it is a useful remedy. It is a
useful agent in the treatment of post-nasal catarrh and
nasal polypi. A small dose internally 4 or 5 times daily,

----- PAGE 613 -----
with the application of fluid hydrastis in a spray, will
quickly retard or remove such abnormal growths.

Safety Considerations: Due to its content of thujone,
large doses of thuja may be toxic; please see chapter 10 for
more information. Use in combination with other thu-
jone-containing herbs will cause an additive effect. Avoid
during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Thymus vulgaris L.
Thyme
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil of highly variable composi-
tion, mainly thymol, with lesser amounts of carvacrol,
flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin, thymonin, naringenin,
others); miscellaneous: labiatic acid, caffeic acid, tannins*5

Actions: Carminative, antimicrobial, antispasmodic, ex-
pectorant, astringent, anthelmintic

Indications: High in volatile oil, thyme makes a good
carminative for use in dyspepsia and sluggish digestion.
This oil is also strongly antiseptic, explaining many of
thyme’s other uses. It may be applied externally as a lotion
for infected wounds and internally for respiratory and di-
gestive infections. Used as a gargle for laryngitis and ton-
sillitis, it eases sore throats and soothes irritable coughs.
It is an excellent cough remedy, producing expectoration
and reducing spasm. It may be effective in the treatment
of bronchitis, whooping cough, and asthma. As a gentle
astringent, it may be helpful for childhood diarrhea and
bed-wetting.
King’s described it thus:

Thyme is tonic, carminative, emmenagogue and antispas-
modic. The cold infusion is useful in dyspepsia, with weak
and irritable stomach and as a stimulating tonic in conva-
lescence from exhausting diseases. The warm infusion is
beneficial in hysteria, dysmenorrhoea, flatulence, colic,
headache, and to promote perspiration. Occasionally the
leaves have been used externally, in fomentation. The oil
is valuable as a local application to neuralgic and
rheumatic pains; and, internally, to fulfil any of the indi-
cations for which the plant is used. Dose of the infusion,
from | to 3 fluid ounces.

MATERIA MEDICA 2 589

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends | to 2 g herb per 1 cup
of tea as needed or | to 2 g fluid extract one to three times
daily.

Thyme, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Tilia platypbyllos Scop.
Linden
Tiliaceae

Other Name: Lime blossom
Part Used: Dried flower

Constituents: Volatile oil (up to about 0.1%), containing
farnesol; flavonoids (kaempferol, hesperidin, quercetin,
astralagin, tiliroside, others); miscellaneous: mucilage (in
the bract), phenolic acids, tannins?

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, hypotensive, di-
aphoretic, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, astringent

Indications: Linden is a relaxing European remedy for
use in nervous tension. It is a valuable cardiotonic with a
reputation for preventing the development of arterioscle-
rosis and hypertension. It is considered a specific for high
blood pressure associated with arteriosclerosis and ner-
vous tension. Its relaxing action, combined with a general
tonic effect upon the circulatory system, gives linden a
role in the treatment of some types of migraine. Its blend
of diaphoretic and relaxant actions explains its value for
feverish colds and flu.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of blossoms and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. For a diaphoretic effect in fever,
use 2 to 3 teaspoons of blossoms per cup of water.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried inflorescence,
5 to 15 ml expressed juice, 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in
25%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
daily. Commission E suggests 2 to 4 g of herb or equiva-
lent preparations daily.

Linden flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 614 -----
59 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Trifolium pratense L.
Red Clover
Fabaceae

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Isoflavones (biochanin A, daidzein, for-
mononetin, genistein, pratensein, trifoside); other flavo-
noids, including pectolinarin and kaempferol; volatile oil
(containing furfural); clovamides (L-dopa-caffeic acid
conjugates); coumarins (coumestrol, medicagol, cou-
marin); miscellaneous: a galactomannan, resins, minerals,
vitamins, phytoalexins’?”

Actions: Alterative, expectorant, antispasmodic

Indications: Red clover is a useful remedy for children
with skin problems. It may be used with complete safety
for any case of childhood eczema, and can be effective for
other chronic skin conditions as well, such as psoriasis.
While it is very appropriate for children, it may also be of
value for adults.

Red clover’s expectorant and antispasmodic actions
give this remedy a role in the treatment of coughs and
bronchitis, especially whooping cough. As an alterative, it
is indicated as part of a holistic approach for a wide range
of problems. There is some evidence to suggest that it has
an antineoplastic action in animals.

Priest and Priest described red clover as a

... mild, stimulating and relaxing alterative with a special
affinity for the throat and salivary glands. Especially indi-
cated for debilitated children with chronic bronchial or
throat conditions.

They gave the following specific indications: salivary
gland congestion, spasmodic or croupy coughs, pertussis;
pharyngeal inflammation; and chronic skin eruptions.

Safety Considerations: Red clover may potentiate the
effects of anticoagulant drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

The BHP recommends 4 g dried herb or 1 to 2 ml of
tincture (1:10 in 45%) three times a day.

Red Clover, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Tussilago farfara L.
Coltsfoot
Asteraceae

Other Names: Coughwort, horsehoof, foal’s foot
Parts Used: Dried flower, leaf

Constituents: Flavonoids (rutin, hyperoside, iso-
quercetin); mucilage, consisting of polysaccharides based
on glucose, galactose, fructose, arabinose, xylose; inulin;
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, including senkirkine and tussi-
lagine; tannins??®

Actions: Expectorant, antitussive, antispasmodic, demul-
cent, anticatarrhal, diuretic

Indications: Coltsfoot combines a soothing expectorant
effect with an antispasmodic action. The leaves contain
useful levels of zinc, a mineral shown to have marked
anti-inflammatory actions. Coltsfoot may be helpful for
chronic or acute bronchitis, irritating coughs, whooping
cough, and asthma. Its soothing expectorant action gives
ita role in most respiratory conditions, including emphy-
sema. As a mild diuretic, it has been used to treat cystitis.
The fresh bruised leaves can be applied externally to
boils, abscesses, and suppurating ulcers.
Priest and Priest described coltsfoot as a

. .. diffusive expectorant, sedative and demulcent: suitable
for debilitated and chronic conditions, especially where
there is a tubercular diathesis.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
pulmonary conditions, chronic emphysema and silicosis,
pertussis, and asthma.

Safety Considerations: Several pyrrolizidine alkaloids
are known to have hepatotoxic, genotoxic, or carcino-
genic effects; however, there is no danger of acute poi-
soning when the herb is used as prescribed, particularly as
the concentration of these alkaloids in a tea is very low.
Nevertheless, do not use coltsfoot for a prolonged period
of time. (For a more detailed discussion of the toxicity of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, please refer to chapter 10.)

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried
flower or leaf and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day, as hot as possible.

According to Commission E, the daily dosage of
coltsfoot should not exceed 100 meg pyrrolizidine alka-
loids with 1,2-unsaturated necine structures. Do not use for
longer than 4 to 6 weeks per year.

Farfarae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 615 -----
Ulmus rubra Mubl.
Slippery Elm
Ulmaceae

Part Used: Inner bark

Constituents: Mucilage, composed of galactose, 3-
methyl galactose, rhamnose, and galacturonic acid

residues?3?

Actions: Demulcent, emollient, nutrient, astringent,
anti-inflammatory

Indications: Slippery elm is a soothing, nutritive demul-
cent that is perfectly suited for treating sensitive or in-
flamed mucous membrane linings in the digestive system.
The herb may be used in gastritis, gastric or duodenal
ulcer, enteritis, colitis, and similar conditions. Used to
treat diarrhea, it simultaneously soothes and astringes the
tissues of the intestinal lining.

Slippery elm makes an excellent food to be eaten dur-
ing convalescence, as it is mild and easily assimilated. It
makes an excellent poultice for external use in cases of
boils, abscesses, and ulcers.

Priest and Priest considered slippery elm

... the best demulcent for internal and external use. It lu-
bricates and soothes alimentary mucosa, relieves intesti-

nal irritation, and quietens the nervous system.

They gave the following specific indications: acute
gastritis and duodenal ulcer, diarrhea, dysentery, enteritis,
inflammation of the mouth and throat, vaginitis, burns,
scalds, and abrasions, hemorrhoids and anal fissure, vari-
cose ulcer, abscesses, boils, carbuncles, inflamed wounds,
and skin ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Slippery elm may slow the ab-
sorption of orally administered drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: To make a decoction, use 1
part powdered root to 8 parts water. First add a small
amount of powder to a little water and stir to facilitate
mixing. Bring to a boil and simmer gently for 10 to 15
minutes. Dosage is !/2 cup three times a day. For a poul-
tice, mix coarse powdered root with enough boiling water
to make a paste.

The BHC recommends 5 to 20 ml powdered bark in
hot water three times daily (1:10).

Slippery Elm, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Mareria MEDICA @ 591

Urtica dioica L.
Nettle
Urticaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts, root

Constituents: Chlorophyll (high yields); indoles, such as
histamine and serotonin; acetylcholine; flavonol glyco-
sides (isorhamnetin, kaempferol, quercetin); miscella-
neous: vitamin C and other vitamins, protein, dietary
fiber?*°

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, tonic, hypotensive

Indications: Nettle is one of the most widely applicable
plants in the materia medica. The herb strengthens and
supports the whole body. Throughout Europe, nettle is
used as a spring tonic and general detoxifying remedy. It
may be very helpful internally and topically for myalgia
and osteoarthritis.”4!

Topical use of nettle leaf involves actively stinging the
skin around the affected joint. The inflammation, and
thus the pain and stiffness, will subside for 4 to 8 days fol-
lowing the application. Such “self-flagellation” may seem
too heroic for the 21st century, but it works!

Nettle is a specific for childhood eczema and bene-
ficial for all varieties of this condition, especially nervous
eczema. It can be helpful as a component of treatment
for eczema in adults. Used internally as an astringent,
nettle will relieve symptoms of hemorrhage anywhere in
the body (for example, uterine hemorrhage).

Research has shown that nettle contains both hypo-
glycemic and hyperglycemic constituents. The hypo-
glycemic component, termed urticin, has been reported
to lower blood sugar concentrations in hyperglycemic
rabbits.’” Nettle root has been used with success to treat
the early stages of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
Studies show that it improves urine flow, reduces urinary
frequency and nocturia, and decreases the volume of

residual urine.”43

Safety Considerations: Fresh nettle causes urticaria if
applied topically! Internal use may theoretically decrease
the efficacy of anticoagulant drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. :

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g of dried herb or 2 to
6 ml tincture three times a day (1:5 in 45%). The BHC
recommends 5 to 10 ml of fresh juice three times daily.
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 8 to 12 g of herb

----- PAGE 616 -----
$9: TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

(or equivalent preparations) and 4 to 6 g of root (or equiv-
alent preparations).

Nettle, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Valeriana officinalis L.
Valerian
Valerianaceae

Parts Used: Rhizome, stolon, root

Constituents: Essential oil (mainly composed of
sesquiterpenes, such as bornyl acetate, B-caryophyllene,
valerone, and valerenic acid); bicyclic iridoids known as
valepotriates (including valtrate, isovaltrate, acetoxy-
valerenic acid, isovaleroxy-hydoxydidrovaltrate); baldri-
nals, found only in dried herb or extracts, are degradation
products of the valepotriates?**

Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, carminative,
hypotensive, emmenagogue

Indications: Valerian has a wide range of specific uses.
However, its main indications are anxiety, nervous sleep-
lessness, and bodily symptoms of tension, such as muscle
cramping and indigestion. In short, this herb may be
safely used for any situation in which tension and anxiety
cause problems, either psychological or physical. It is a
valuable muscle relaxant, effective for muscle spasms,
uterine cramps, and intestinal colic. For some people, it
may serve as a mild pain reliever. A useful herbal sleep aid,
valerian helps promote normal sleep, as it is not powerful
enough to suppress necessary REM phases.

Valerian’s sedative and antispasmodic actions can be
partially attributed to its content of valepotriates, and, to a
lesser extent, to the sesquiterpene constituents of the
volatile oil. Various species of Valeriana are used worldwide
as relaxing remedies for hypertension and stress-related
heart conditions.

Safety Considerations: No drug interactions have been
reported by Commission E or ESCOP. Valerian may po-
tentiate the effects of sedatives. A characteristic paradox-
ical reaction oceurs in a few people, producing an un-
pleasant stimulation response.

Preparations and Dosage: To be effective, valerian must
be used at a sufficiently high dosage. The tincture (1:5 in
60%) is the most widely used preparation and is always
useful, as long as 2.5 to 5 ml (1/2 to 1 teaspoon) is given as
a single dose. Up to 10 ml may be given at one time.

To make an infusion, use 2 teaspoons of dried herb
per cup of boiling water; prepare in a closed vessel to en-
sure no loss of volatile oils. A cold infusion may be made

by pouring 1 cup of cold water over 2 teaspoons of root;
leave to stand for 8 to 10 hours. In this way, a nighttime
dose may be prepared in advance in the morning and a
dose for morning set up at night.

The BHP recommends 4 to 8 ml of the tincture three
times a day (1:8 in 60%). Commission E suggests 2 to 3 g
of dried root per cup of water, taken one to several times
a day.

Valerian, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Verbascum thapsus L.
Mullein
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried leaf, flower

Constituents: Flavonoids (such as verbascoside and her-
peridin); mucilage; saponins; tannins; volatile oil?
Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, an-
tispasmodic, vulnerary

Indications: Mullein is a very beneficial respiratory rem-
edy, useful for most conditions and ideal for toning the
mucous membranes of this vital system. The herb reduces
inflammation while stimulating fluid production, thus fa-
cilitating expectoration. It is considered a specific for
bronchitis characterized by a hard cough with soreness.
Its anti-inflammatory and demulcent properties indicate
its use for inflammation of the trachea and associated
conditions. For external use, an extract made by infusing
mullein flowers in olive oil is excellent for soothing and
healing any inflamed surface and for easing ear problems.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried leaf or
flower and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 4 to 8 g dried herb or 4 to 8 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Mullein Flower, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Verbena officinalis L.
Vervain
Verbenaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (verbenin, verbenalin, bastato-
side); miscellaneous: essential oil, mucilage**

----- PAGE 617 -----
Actions: Nervine tonic, sedative, antispasmodic, diaph-
oretic, hypotensive, galactagogue, hepatic

Indications: Vervain is a gentle anxiolytic. It is helpful for
easing depression and melancholia, especially after debil-
itating illness, such as influenza. Vervain may be benefi-
cial in seizure and hysteria. As a diaphoretic, it can be
used in the early stages of fevers. As a hepatic remedy, it
is appropriate for jaundice and inflammations of the gall-
bladder. It may be used as a mouthwash to treat caries and
gum disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage given in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 2 to
4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%), or 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5
in 45%).

Verbenae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Viburnum opulus L.
Cramp Bark
Caprifoliaceae

Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Hydroquinones (arbutin, methylarbutin,
traces of free hydroquinone); coumarins (such as scopo-
letin and scopoline); tannins (mainly catechins)?4”

Actions: Antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory, nervine, hy-
potensive, astringent, emmenagogue

Indications: As implied by the name, cramp bark has a
richly deserved reputation for relaxing muscular tension
and spasm. It has two primary areas of use: cramps of the
voluntary muscles and uterine muscle problems. Cramp
bark relaxes the uterus and thus relieves painful menstrual
cramps (dysmenorrhea). In a similar way, it may be used
to protect against threatened miscarriage. Its astringent
action gives it a role in the treatment of excessive men-
strual blood loss and, especially, irregular bleeding during
menopause
Priest and Priest described cramp bark as a

. relaxing and stimulating nervine, cerebrospinal
vaso-stimulant. Restores sympathetic/parasympathetic
balance—has a specific action to relieve voluntary and in-
voluntary muscular spasms.

They gave the following specific indications: colicky

MaTERIA MEDICA «<3 5393

pains and spasms of tubular organs, gastrointestinal and
genitourinary use with Dioscorea villosa, and atonic condi-
tions of pelvic organs where menses is scanty or delayed.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of dried herb into 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk hot three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 5 to
10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times a day.

Viburnum prunifolium L.
Black Haw
Caprifoliaceae

Part Used: Dried bark of stems or trunk

Constituents: Coumarins (including scopoletin, aes-
culetin); phenolic acids (including chlorogenic acid,
salicin); biflavones (amentoflavone); triterpenes (a- and
B-amyrin, oleanolic and ursolic acids)’ ,

Actions: Antispasmodic, nervine, hypotensive, astringent

Indications: Uses for black haw are similar to those for
cramp bark, to which it is closely related, Black haw is a
powerful uterine relaxant. It is helpful in the treatment of
dysmenorrhea and false labor pains as well as for prevent-
ing threatened miscarriage. Its relaxant and sedative ac-
tions explain its ability to lower blood pressure associated
with hypertension, which it accomplishes by relaxing pe-
ripheral blood vessels. Black haw’s antispasmodic proper-
ties make it appropriate for the treatment of asthma.
King’s described black haw in the tollowing way:

That it has a decided affinity for the female reproductive
organs is well established. Its principal use at the present
day is in disorders of the female organs of reproduction.
As a uterine tonic it is unquestionably of great utility. In
the hyperasthetic, or irritable condition of the uterus in-
cident to highly nervous women, or as the result of over-
work, it will be found an admirable agent. In dysmenor-
rhoea, with deficient menses, uterine colic, and in those
cases where there are severe lumbar and bearing-down
pains, it will prove an efficient drug. It is specifically indi-
cated in cramp-like menstrual pains, pains decidedly ex-
pulsive and intermittent in character and in the various
painful contractions of the pelvic muscles, so common to
disorders of women. Uterine congestion and chronic
uterine inflammation are often greatly relieved by Black

Haw. It acts promptly in spasmodic dysmenorrhoea,

----- PAGE 618 -----
594 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

especially with excessive flow. It is a good remedy for
uterine haemorrhage attending the menopause. In amen-
orrhoea in pale, bloodless subjects, the menses are re-
stored by it. Cramps of limbs attending pregnancy yield
to both black haw and cramp bark. It is considered almost
specific for cramp in the legs, not dependent on preg-
nancy, especially when occurring at night. The condition
for which black haw is most valued is that of threatened
abortion. It is the most prompt drug in the materia med-
ica to check abortion, provided the membranes have not
ruptured. In all cases of habitual abortion it should be
given in small doses for a considerable length of time. By
its quieting effects upon the irritable womb, women who

have previously been unable to go to full term have been
aided by this drug to pass through the pregnancy without

mishaps which would otherwise have proven disastrous to
both child and mother. Viburnum opulus resembles this
agent very closely in its effects, and may be used in the
above-named conditions, for which the black haw is useful.
Specific Indications and Uses—Uterine irritability

and hyperasthesia; threatened abortion; uterine colic;
dysmenorrhoea with deficient menses; severe lumbar and
bearing-down pains; cramp-like, expulsive menstrual
pain; intermittent, painful contractions of the pelvic tis-
sues; after-pains and false pains of pregnancy; obstinate
hiccough.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put 2
teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2.5 to 5 g of dried herb or 5
to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 70%).

Viburni prunifolii cortex, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Vinca minor. L.
Periwinkle
Apocynaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Indole alkaloids; tannins”*?

Action: Astringent

Indications: Periwinkle is an all-around astringent that
may be used internally or externally. Its main application is
excessive menstrual flow, either during the period itself

(menorrhagia) or between periods (metrorrhagia). As with
other remedies that affect the uterus, it may be used to ad-
dress similar processes in the urinary system. Thus, it may
be valuable in the treatment of hematuria (blood in the
urine). In addition, periwinkle helps with digestive prob-
lems, such as colitis and diarrhea, in which it will reduce
loss of fluid or blood while toning membranes. It may also
be effective in cases of nosebleed, bleeding gums, mouth
ulcers, and sore throat. It has a questionable reputation for
aiding in the treatment of diabetes.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Periwinkle, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Viola odorata L.
Sweet Violet
Violaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flower

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (including gaultherin,
salicylic acid methyl ester); saponins (myrosin, violin);
flavonoids (rutin, violarutin); miscellaneous: odoratine
(an alkaloid), mucilage?*®

Actions: Expectorant, alterative, anti-inflammatory,
diuretic

Indications: Sweet violet has a long history of use as a
cough remedy, especially for bronchitis, and may be of
benefit in upper respiratory catarrh. With the combina-
tion of actions this herb offers, it may also help in skin
conditions (such as eczema), in urinary tract infections,
and as part of a long-term approach to rheumatism. Sweet
violet has a reputation as an “anticancer herb”; while the
concept is inappropriate, as an alterative the herb defi-
nitely has a role to play in holistic approaches to the
treatment of cancer.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of herb and infuse
in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

----- PAGE 619 -----
Viola tricolor L.
Heartsease
Violaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (including violanthin, rutin,
violaquercitrin); methylsalicylate; miscellaneous: mu-
cilage, gums, resin, saponins?5!

Actions: Expectorant, diuretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Traditionally used for bronchitis and
rheumatism, heartsease is also an especially valued rem-
edy for skin diseases. Used both internally and topically,
it is helpful for eczema, psoriasis, acne, and, topically, in
babies, for cradle cap. The herb is also employed to treat
frequent and painful urination associated with conditions
such as cystitis.

Both the salicylates and the rutin contained in heart-
sease are anti-inflammatory. This action helps explain the
traditional use of the herb for arthritis. The saponins ac-
count for its expectorant action, while the mucilage it
contains soothes the chest. Heartsease is used to treat a
range of respiratory disorders, including bronchitis and
whooping cough. Due to the high concentration of rutin
in the flowers, this herb may be employed to prevent
bruising and broken capillaries and to check buildup of
fluid in the tissues (edema). It can be helpful in the treat-
ment or prevention of atherosclerosis, and thus may help
reduce blood pressure. Heartsease is mildly laxative.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission EF. recommends 1.5 g dried herb per cup
of water as tea three times a day.

Violae tricoloris herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Vitex agnus-castus L.

Vitex

Verbenaceae

Other Names: Chaste tree, chasteberry, monk’s pepper
Part Used: Fruit (berry)

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides (aucubin and agnuside);
labdane diterpenes (otundifuran, vitexilactone); flavo-
noids (casticin, vitexin, isovitexin, kaempferol); essential

MATERIA MEDICA @ 595

oil (0.4% to 0.7%), with bornyl acetate, 1,8-cineole,
limonene, and a-and B-pinene?*?

Actions: Hormonal normalizer, uterine tonic, galactagogue

Indications: Vitex has the effect of stimulating and nor-
malizing pituitary gland function, especially as it relates
to relative progesterone levels. Vitex may be called an am-
photeric remedy, as it can produce apparently opposite ef-
fects, although in truth it is simply normalizing.

The term amphoteric comes from chemistry, in which
it is used to indicate the ability of a chemical to react as
either an acid or an alkali. The word itself is derived from
Greek roots meaning “partly one and partly the other.” In
the context of herbal actions, amphoteric implies that ap-
parently opposite effects may be observed, but the overall
result is a normalizing effect. For instance, vitex has a rep-
utation for being both an aphrodisiac and an anaphro-
disiac! In effect, the herb will generally facilitate the most
appropriate action required to normalize function, no
matter what aspect of function is out of balance.

The most important therapeutic application for vitex
comes from its ability to normalize the activity of female
sex hormones. It is thus indicated for dysmenorrhea, pre-
menstrual syndrome (PMS), and other disorders related
to hormone function. It is especially beneficial during
menopause. Similarly, it may help the body regain a nat-
ural balance after discontinuation of oral contraceptives.

The precise mechanisms of action of vitex and its ac-
tive constituents have not been established. Laboratory
research suggests that the herb acts on the anterior pitu-
itary gland via a dopaminergic mechanism.2*> This leads
to a reduction in release of the hormone prolactin, which
in turn enhances corpus luteum development and corrects
any relative progesterone deficiency. It is important to
note that the effect of vitex on progesterone levels is indi-
rect, as it works through the complexities of endocrine
homeostasis rather than by directly stimulating proges-
terone release. However, the herb is thought to act on the
pituitary-hypothalamic axis, rather than directly on the
ovaries.

Vitex not only eases symptoms of PMS, but also, over
time, may actually cure the disorder, PMS has been linked
to abnormally high levels of estrogen, and vitex has
proved especially helpful for cases in which symptoms
tend to disappear when menstruation begins. Positive re-
sults may be perceived as early as the second menstrual
cycle, but permanent improvement may take up to one
year or longer.

Vitex is also effective for irregular menstruation,
especially when related to endometriosis. In addition,

----- PAGE 620 -----
S9€ @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

because progesterone production declines at menopause,
vitex may reduce some of the undesirable symptoms asso-
ciated with “the change.” Several studies indicate that
vitex can help control acne in teenagers, both young
women and men. The herb is also useful for stabilizing
the menstrual cycle after withdrawal from progesterone-
containing birth control pills. It may help with fibroid
cysts that occur in smooth muscle tissue or in subserous
areas, but is less likely to help with submucous cysts.

For women who are trying to get pregnant, vitex may
effectively regulate the ovulatory cycle. Clinical research
shows that vitex may start correcting imbalances after
about 10 days, but for full benefit, it should be taken for
three cycles or longer. Studies have documented that vitex
has a galactagogue action, but chemical analysis of the
breast milk revealed no changes in composition.?** This
may seem surprising, as the proposed mechanism of ac-
tion of vitex involves a reduction of prolactin release.
However, it is simply a good example of how the actual
activity of a plant is more complex than what is demon-
strated in specific laboratory tests.

Safety Considerations: Commission E lists no drug in-
teractions for vitex. However, there is a theoretical possi-
bility that the herb may interact with dopamine antago-
nists and dopamine-receptor-blocking agents.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of berries and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of aqueous-
alcoholic extracts corresponding to 30 to 40 mg of the
herb. Alternatively, it recommends 175 mg/day of a 20:1
standardized fruit extract containing 0.5% agnuside.
According to Commission E, health benefits are seen
after 3 to 6 weeks of use; most women continue treatment
for 3 to 6 months.

Chaste tree, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Zanthoxylum americanum Mill.
Prickly Ash

Rutaceae

Parts Used: Bark, berry

Constituents: Alkaloids, coumarins, resin, tannins,
volatile oil?®>

Actions: Stimulant (circulatory), tonic, alterative, carmi-
native, diaphoretic, antirheumatic, hepatic

Indications: Prickly ash may be used in similar ways to

cayenne, although its action is slower. It is appropriate for
many chronic problems, such as rheumatism and skin dis-
eases, and its stimulating actions upon the lymphatic sys-
tem, circulation, and mucous membranes give it a role in
the holistic treatment of many specific conditions.

Any sign of poor circulation calls for prickly ash, in-
cluding chilblains, leg cramps, varicose veins, and varicose
ulcers. Externally, it may be applied as a stimulating lini-
ment for rheumatism and fibrositis.

Priest and Priest described prickly ash as a

... positive diffusive stimulant—induces free arterial/
capillary circulation, restores vascular tone. It is a general
stimulant for relaxed and feeble conditions and atonic di-
gestive states. An excellent tonic and alterative for conva-
lescence and the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
rheumatic conditions, neurasthenia and poor circulation,
gastric distension, eructations and flatulence, and loss of
sensitivity in injured nerves.

Safety Considerations: Theoretically, prickly ash is con-
traindicated for patients on anticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 1 to 2 g dried bark or 2 to 5 ml
tincture three times a day (1:5 in 45%).

Prickly Ash, Northern, and Prickly Ash, Southern, in Herbal
Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals

Zea mays L.
Cornsilk
Poaceae

Part Used: Stigma from female flower (fine soft threads
4 to 8 inches long)

Constituents: Saponins; allantoin; sterols (especially
B-sitosterol and stigmasterol); hordenine (an alkaloid);
miscellaneous: vitamins C and K, cryptoxanthin, antho-
cyanins, plant acids**¢

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, tonic

Indications: As a soothing diuretic, cornsilk is beneficial
for any irritation of the urinary system. It is used for renal
problems in children and, combined with other herbs, as
a urinary demulcent for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis, and
similar conditions.

Ellingwood recommended cornsilk for catarrhal cysti-

----- PAGE 621 -----
tis, lithiasis (stones), bladder irritation, gonorrhea, all
catarrhal conditions of the urinary passages, and dropsy
(edema) due to heart disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 2 to 4 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 2 to 8 g dried
herb, 5 to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 4 to 8 ml fluid
extract (1:1 in 25%) three times daily.

Corn Silk, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Zingiber officinale Roscoe
Ginger

Zingiberaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 3%, occasionally more),
primarily containing the sesquiterpenes zingiberene and
B-bisabolene; oleoresin (4% to 10%), containing gin-
gerols, gingerdiols, gingerdiones, dihydrogingerdiones,
shogaols; lipids (6% to 8%)?”

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic, rubefa-
cient, diaphoretic, emmenagogue

Indications: The best-known therapeutic application
of this spice is as a treatment for motion sickness, a use
well documented in the research literature. Ginger also
effectively stimulates peripheral circulation, making it ef-
fective for bad circulation, chilblains, and cramps. In
feverish conditions, ginger acts as a useful diaphoretic,
promoting perspiration. As a gargle, it helps relieve sore
throats. Externally, it is the base of many treatments for
fibrositis and muscle sprains.

Ginger has been used around the world as an aro-
matic carminative and pungent appetite stimulant. In
India and other countries with hot and humid climates,
ginger is eaten daily and is a well-known remedy for di-
gestive problems. It is popular not only for its flavor, but
also because its antioxidant and antimicrobial properties
help to preserve food, an essential action in such climates.

Research has documented a wide range of activities
for ginger. Clinical studies have shown that the herb is ef-
fective as a prophylactic against seasickness.?5859 Animal
studies have suggested that it has hypoglycemic, hypoten-
sive, hypertensive, antihypercholesterolemic, cholagogic,

MATERIA MEDICA 597

and stomachic properties.” Human pharmacological
studies have shown that ginger causes a reduction in plate-
let aggregation.’6! Ginger demonstrates anti-inflammatory
effects in rheumatoid arthritis due to a dual inhibition of
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase.’® It has also shown an
ability to inhibit the actions of prostaglandins.”®

Safety Considerations: Ginger may influence bleeding
times and immunological parameters because it inhibits
thromboxane synthase and acts as a prostacyclin agonist.
However, a clinical study demonstrated no differences in
bleeding times between treatment and placebo groups.?**
Large doses (12 to 14 g) may enhance the effects of anti-
coagulant drugs. According to Commission E, ginger
should not be used to alleviate the morning sickness of
pregnancy.’® However, there is a well-established tradi-
tion of such use. Traditional Chinese medicine tells us
not to use more than 2 g of dried ginger daily during
pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dose is 1.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%).To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of fresh root and
infuse for 5 minutes. Drink whenever needed. Fluid ex-
tract dosage is 0.25 to | ml three times a day (1:1 in 40%).

Ginger, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

References
1, Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th edition, revised by Williamson EM and
Evans FJ. Essex, UK: C. W. Daniel Co., 1988.
2. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Paris: Lavoisier Publishing, 1995.
3. Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994.
4, Newall C, Anderson L, Phillipson J. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals. London: The
Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
5. Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Austin, TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.
6. Ibid.
7. Bisler H, Pfeifer R, Kluken N, Pauschinger P. Effects of
horse-chestnut seed extract on transcapillary filtration in

chronic venous insufficiency. Deutsche Medizinische
Wachenschrift 1986; 111(35):1321-9.

8. Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Archives of Dermatology
1998; 134: 1356-60.

9. Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

----- PAGE 622 -----
598

10.
11,

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24,
25.

26.

27.

<@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Thid.

Patrascu V, et al. Rezultate terapeutice favorabile in por-
firia cutanata cu Agrimonia eupatoria. Dermato-venerolo-
gia 1984; 29:153-7.

Petkov V. Bulgarian traditional medicine: A source of
ideas for phytopharmacological investigations. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1986; 15:12 1-32.

Chakarski I, et al. Clinical study of a herb combination
consisting of Agrimonia eupatoria, Hypericum perfora-
tum, Plantago major, Mentha piperita, Matricaria
chamomila for the treatment of patients with chronic
gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10:78-84.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bordia A, Joshi HK, Sanadhya YK, Bhy N. Effect of es-
sential oil of garlic on serum fibrinolytic activity in pa-
tients with coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis 1978;
28:155-9.

German K, Kumar U, Blackford HN. Garlic and the
risk of TURP bleeding. British Journal of Urology 1995;
76:518.

Burnham BE. Garlic as a possible risk of postoperative
bleeding. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 1995; 95(1):
213.

Wren RC. Potters New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Tomodo M, et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of twenty
plant mucilages and three modified products. Planta
Medica 1987; 53:812.

Recio MC, et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants
employed in the Spanish Mediterranean area, part II.
Phytotherapy Research 1989; 3:77-80.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Gijbels MJM, et al. Phthalides in roots of Apium grave-

olens, A. graveolens var. rapaceum, Bifora testiculata,
and Petroselinum crispum var. tuberosum. Fitoterapia
1985; 56:17-23.

Kar A, Jain SR. Investigations on the antibacterial activ-
ity of some Indian indigenous aromatic plants. Flavour
Industry 1971 Feb.

Berkley SF, et al. Dermatitis in grocery workers associ-
ated with high natural concentrations of furano-
coumarins in celery. Annals of Internal Medicine 1986;
105:351-5.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35,

36.

37.
38.
39,

40.

41.

42.
43.

45.

46.

Chaudhary SK, et al. Increased furocoumarin content of
celery during storage. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 1985; 33:1153-7.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

. Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic

action. Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug. Research 1979;
17:139-96,

Schulte KE, et al. Polyacetylenes in burdock root.
Arzneimittel-Forschung 1967; 17:829-33.

Morita K, et al. Chemical nature of a desmutagenic fac-
tor from burdock (A. Lappa L.). Agricultural and
Biological Chemistry 1985; 49:925-32.

Morita K, et al. Desmutagenic factor isolated from bur-
dock (Arctium lappa L.). Mutation Research 1984;
129:25-31,

Dombradi CA, Foldeak S. Anti-tumor activity of A.
lappa ext. Tumori 1966; 52:173-5.

Tsujita J, et al. Comparison of protective activity of di-
etary fiber against the toxicities of various food colors in
rats. Nutrition Reports International 1979; 20:635—42.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Rao VSN, Menezes Ams, Gadelha MGT. Antifertility
screening of some indigenous plants of Brasil. Fitoterapia
1988; 59:17-20.

Pinto-Scognamiglio W. Connaissances actuelles sur l’ac-
tivité pharmacodynamique de la thuyone, aromitisant
naturel d’un emploi etendu. Bollettino Chimico
Parmaceutico 1967; 106:292-300,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Costello CH, Butler CL. The estrogenic and uterine-
stimulating activity of Asclepius tuberosa. Journal of
American Pharmaceutical Association Science Education
1949; 39:233-7.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

[No authors listed] Astragalus membranaceus.
Monograph. Alternative Medicine Review 2003 Feb,
8(1):72-7.

Chang HM, But PPH. Pharmacology and Applications of
Chinese Materia Medica, vol. 2. Hong Kong: World
Scientific, 1987.

----- PAGE 623 -----
47

48.

49.

50.
$1.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61,

62.
63.

64.

65.

Chu, et al. Fractioned extract of Astragalus membrana-
ceous, a Chinese medicinal herb, potentiates LAK cell
cytotoxicity generated by a low dose of recombinant in-
terleukin-2. Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Immunology
1988; 26:183-7,

Zhang, et al. Hepatoprotective effects of Astragalus root.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1990; 30:149-54.

DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D’Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Boucard-Maitre Y, et al. Cytotoxic and antiturnoral ac-
tivity of Calendula officinalis extracts. Pharmazie 1988;
43:220.

Kioucek-Popova E, et al. Influence of the physiological
regeneration and epithelization using fractions isolated
from Calendula officinalis. Acta Physiologica et
Pharmacologica Bulgarica 1982; 8:63-7.

Manolov P, Boyadzhiev Tsv, Nokolov P. Antitumorigenic
effect of preparations of Calendula officinalis on
Crocker sarcoma 180. Eksperimentalna Meditsin
Morfalogiia 1964; 3:41-5

Avramova S, Portarska F, Apostolova B, et al. Marigold
(of Calendula officinalis L.) Source of new products for
the cosmetic industry. Medical Biology Information 1988;
4:28-32.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bernstein JE, Parish LC, Rapaport M, et al. Effects of

topically applied capsaicin on moderate and severe psori-
asis vulgaris. Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology 1986; 15:504—7.

Scheffler NM, Sheitel PL, Lipton MN. Treatment of
painful diabetic neuropathy with capsaicin 0.075 per-
cent. Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association
1991; 81(6):288-93.

Partsch G, Matucci-Cerinic M. Effect of capsaicin on
the release of substance P from rheumatoid arthritis and

66.

67.
68.
69.
70.
71,
72.
73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

78,

79.

80.

81.

82.
83,

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

MATERIA MEDICA @ 599

osteoarthritis synoviocytes in vitro. Annals of the
Rheumatic Diseases 1990; 49(8):65-73.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Liske E. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga
racemosa for gynecological disorders. Advances in
Therapy 1998; 15:45-53.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tariq M, et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of
Commiphora molmol. Agents and Actions 1986; 17:381-2.
Al-Awadi FM, et al. On the mechanism of the hypogly-
caemic effect of a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985;
28:432-4.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Vichkanova SA, et al. Chemotherapeutic properties of
plumbagin. In: Aizenman BE, Fitontsidy Mater
Soveshch, eds. Kiev: Naukova Dumka, 6th edition,
1969, 1972; 183-5.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Austin, TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.

Stoll A, Renz J, Brack A. Helvetica Chimica Acta 1950;
33:1877-93.

Samochowiec E, Urbanska L, Manka W, et al.
Wiadomosci Parazytologiczne 1979; 25:77-81.

Facino RM, Carini M, Aldini G, et al. Echinacoside and
caffeoyl conjugates protect collagen from free
radicalinduced degradation: potential use of Echinacea
extracts in the prevention of skin photodamage. Planta
Medica 1995; 61(6):510-4.

Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea species as potential im-
munostimulatory drugs. In: Farnsworth NR, et al., eds.
Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, vol. 5. London:
Academic Press, 1991.

----- PAGE 624 -----
60C

89

90.

91.
92.

93.

94.

95.
96.

97.

98.

99.

100.
101.
102.

103.

104,
103.

106.

107.

108.
109.
110.
111.
112.

<@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

. Melchart D, Linde K, Worku E, et al.
Immunomodulation with Echinacea—a systematic re-
view of controlled clinical trials. Phytomedicine 1994;
1:245-54.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
McCaleb R, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of
Popular Herbs. Roseville, CA: Prima Health, 1999.

Fugh-Berman A. Herb-drug interactions. Lancet 2000;
335:134-8.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 13th ed. London: Baillere
Tindall, 1989.

European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.
ESCOP Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs.
Exeter, UK: ESCOP, 1997, 1999.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.
Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Shaparenko, et al. On use of medicinal plants for treat-

ment of patients with chronic suppurative otitis. Zhurnal

ushnykh, nosovykh i gorlovykh boleznei (fournal of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngologie) 1979; 39:48-51,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Wagner H. Immunostimulants from Medicinal Plants.
In: Chang HM, et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research. Singapore: World Scientific, 1985;
159-70.

Wagner H, et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides
(heteroglycans) of higher plants. Arzneimittel-Forschung
1985; 35:1069.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

DeSmet PAGM, et al. Kelp in herbal medicines: hyper-

113.

114.

115.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

124.

125.
126.

127.

128.

129,

21.

22.

23,

30.
131,
132.
33.

34,

35.

thyroidism. Nedertands Tidschrift voor Geneeskunde 1990,
134:1058-9.

Norman JA, et al. Human intake of arsenic and iodine
from seaweed-based food supplements and health foods
available in the UK. Food Additives and Contaminants
1987; 5:103-9.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Kriegistein J. Neuroprotective properties of Ginkgo
biloba constituents. Zeit, Phytother 1994; 15:92-6.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Ginkgo biloba. Lancet 1992;
1136-9.

Ibid. Ginkgo biloba for cerebral insufficiency. British
Fournal of Clinical Pharmacology 1992; 34:352-8.

Rosenblatt M, Mindel J. Spontaneous hyphema associ-
ated with ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extract. The New
England Journal of Medicine 1997; 336(15):1108.

Sikora R, Sohn M, Deutz FJ, et al. Ginkgo biloba ex-
tract in the therapy of erectile dysfunction. The Journal
of Urology 1989; 141:188A.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Paolini M, Pozzetti L, Sapone A, Cantelli-Forti G.
Effect of licorice and glycyrrhizin on murine liver CYP-
dependent monooxygenases. Life Sciences 1998;

62(6):57 1-82.

Pompei R, Flore O, Marccialis MA, et al. Glycyrrhizic
acid inhibits virus growth and inactivates virus particles.
Nature 1979 Oct 25; 281(5733):689-90.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Tid.
Tbid.

European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.
ESCOP Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs.
Exeter, UK: ESCOP, 1997, 1999.

Wren RC. Porter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Wohlfart R, et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of

----- PAGE 625 -----
136,

137.

138.
139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.
149.
150.

151.
152.

153.

154.

hops. Communication: Pharmacology of 2-methyl-3-
butea-2-ol. Planta Medica 1983; 48:120-3.

Chakarski I, et al. Clinical study of a herb combination
consisting of Humulus lupulus, Cichorium intybus,
Mentha piperita in patients with chronic calculous and
non-calculous cholecystitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982,
10:65-9.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Hydrastis canadensis, Berberis
vulgaris, Berberis aquifolium and other berberine-
containing plants. In: Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Seattle: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985.

Mills S, Bone K. Princtples and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Harrer G, Schulz V. On the clinical investigation of the
antidepressant effectiveness of Hypericum.
Nervenheilkunde 1993 Oct; 12:271-3.

Muller WE, Rolli M, Schafer C, Hafner U. Effects of
hypericum extract (LI 160) in biochemical models of an-
tidepressant activity. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30(suppl):102-7.

Siegers CP, Biel S, Wilhem KP. Zur Frage der
Phototoxiztat von Hypericum. Nervenbeilkunde 1993;
12:320-2.

James JS. Hypericin. AIDS Treatment News 1992 Feb;
146:14.

Siegers CP, Biel S, Wilhelm KP. Nervenheilkunde 1993;
12:320-2.

Roby CA, Anderson GD, Kantor Ga, et al. St. John’s
wort: Effect on CYP3A4 activity. Clinical Pharmacology
and Therapeutics 2000; 67:451-7.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Markkanen T, et al. Antiherpetic agent from juniper tree
Juniperus communis), its purification, identification,
and testing in primary human amnion cell cultures.
Drugs under Experimental and Clinical Research 1981;
7:691-7,

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

155.
156.

157.

158.
159.
160.
161.
162.
163.
164.

165.
166.
167.

168.
169.

170.

171.

172.
173.
174.
175.
176.
177.
178.
179.

180.

181,

182.
183.

MaTeRIA MEDICA .@ 601

Ibid.

Kong YC, et al. Isolation of the uterotonic principle
from Leonurus sibirica, the Chinese motherwort.
American Journal of Chinese Medicine 1976, 4:373-82.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Sullivan JB, et al. Pennyroyal oil poisoning and hepato-
toxicity. The Journal of the American Medical Association
1979; 1242:2873.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Todd RG, ed. Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 25th
ed. London: Pharmaceutical Press, 1967.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Borgia M, et al. Pharmacological activity of an herb ex-

tract: A controlled clinical study. Current Therapeutic
Research 198 1; 29; 525-36,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Kinzler E, Kromer J, Lehmann E. Effect of a special
kava extract in patients with anxiety-, tension-, and exci-
tation states of non-psychotic genesis. Double-blind

study with placebos over 4 weeks. Arzneimittel-Forschung
1991; 41:584-8,

----- PAGE 626 -----
602

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
194.
195.

196.

197.

198.
199.

200.

201.
202.
203.
204.
205.
206.
207.
208.

209.

< TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Volz HP, Kieser M. Kava-kava extract WS 1490 versus
placebo in anxiety disorders, a randomized placebo-con-
trolled 25-week outpatient trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30:1-5.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. The antinocioceptive ac-
tions of kava components in mice. Clinical and
Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 1990,
17:495-507.

Keller F Klohs MW. A review of the chemistry and
pharmacology of the constituents of Piper methysticum.
Lhoydia 1963; 26:1-15.

Schelosky L, Raffauf C, Jendroska K, et al. Kava and
dopamine antagonism. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1995; 58(5):639-40.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Pilcher JM, et al. The action of “female remedies” on

intact uteri of animals. Surgery, Gynecology, & Obstetrics
1918; 18:97-9,

Martin ML, et al. Pharmacological effects of lactones
isolated from Pulsatilla alpina subsp. apiffolia. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1988; 24:185-91.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Vivian B, Tal H, Inna K. The effect of Sambucol, a black
elderberry-based, natural product, on the production of
human cytokines: I. Inflammatory cytokines. Exropean
Cytokine Network 2001 Apr; 12(2):290.

Serkedjieva J, et al. Antiviral activity of the infusion

210.

211.

212.

219.
220.

221.

222.

223.

224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.
231.

(SHS174) from flowers of Sambucus nigra L., aerial
parts of Hypericum perforatum L., and roots of
Saponaria officinalis L. against influenza and herpes sim-
plex viruses. Phytotherapy Research 1990; 4:97.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Godowski KC. Antimicrobial action of sanguinarine.
The Journal of Clinical Dentistry 1989; 1:96-101.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

- Ibid.

Wolfson P, Hoffmann DL. An investigation into the ef-
ficacy of Scutellaria lateriflora in healthy volunteers.
Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine 2003
Mar-Apr; 9(2):74-8.

. Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and

Preparations, 8th ed.

. Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
. Rhodes L, Prinika RL, Berman C, et al. Comparison of

finasteride (Proscar), a 5a-reductase inhibitor, and vari-
ous commercial plant extracts in vitro and in vivo Sa-
reductase inhibition. The Prostate 1993; 22:43-51.
Caaroj C, Raynaud JP, Koch G, et al. Comparison of
phytotherapy (Permixon) with finasteride in the treat-
ment of benign prostate hyperplasia: a randomized in-
ternational study of 1,098 patients. The Prostate 1996;
29:23140.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.

McCaleb R, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of
Popular Herbs. Roseville, CA: Prima Health, 1999.
Palasciano G, Portincasa P, Palmieri V, et al. The effect
of silymarin on plasma levels of malon-dialdehyde in pa-
tients receiving long-term treatment with psychotropic
drugs. Current Therapeutic Research 1994; 55:537-45.

Fintelmann V. Toxic metabolic liver damage and its
treatment. Zeitschrift fur Phytotherapie 1986; (3):65-73.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Racz-Kotilla, et al. The action of Taraxacum officinale
extracts on the body weight and diuresis of laboratory
animals. Planta Medica 1974; 26:212-7.

----- PAGE 627 -----
232.

233.
234.

235.
236.
237.
238.
239.
240.
241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.
247,
248.
249.

250.

Vogel G. Natural substances with effects on the liver. In:

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant
Drugs with Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutic
Activity. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Chrubasik, et al. Evidence for antirheumatic effective-
ness of Herba Urtica dioicae in acute arthritis: a pilot
study. Phytomedicine 1997; 4(2):105-8.

Oliver-Bever B, Zahland GR. Plants with oral hypogly-
caemic activity. Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug Research
1979; 17:139-96,

Sokeland J, Albrecht J. A combination of Sabal and
Urtica extract vs. finasteride in BPH. Urologie A 1997;
36(4):327-33.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

251.
252.
253.

254,

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

264.
265.
266.

Materia MEDICA 2 503

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Amann W. Amenorrhoe. Gfinstige wirkung von Agnus
castus (Agnolyt®) auf amenorrhoea. Z Allg Med 1982;
58:228-31.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Grontved A, et al. Ginger root against seasickness. A
controlled trial on the open sea. Acta Oto-laryngologica
1988; 105:45-9.

Mowrey DB, Clayson DE. Motion sickness, ginger, and
psychophysics. Lancet 1982 Mar 20; 1(8273):655-7.
Newall, C, Anderson L, Phillipson J. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals.

Srivastava KC. Effect of onion and ginger consumption
on platelet thromboxane production in humans.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 1989,
35;183-5.

Srivastava K, et al. Ginger and rheumatic disorders.
Medical Hypotheses 1989; 29:25-8.

Lumb AB. Effect of ginger on human platelet function.
Thrombosis and Haemostasis 1994; 71:110-1,

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide io Herbs.
Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia
Medica. Seattle: Eastland Press, 1986.

----- PAGE 628 -----
Appendix |

Fan

GLOSSARY

abortifacient: Induces abortion or miscarriage.

abscess: A localized collection of pus and liquefied tissue in a
cavity.

absolute: A highly concentrated viscous, semisolid, or solid per-
fume material, usually obtained by alcohol extraction from
the concrete.

acetylcholine: A neurotransmitter. Its effects include cardiac
inhibition and increase in blood vessel diameter.

achlorhydria: Absence of hydrochloric acid in the stomach.

acid: A compound producing hydrogen ions in aqueous solu-
tion. Acidic refers to a pH below 7.0.

acidosis: Abnormal state of reduced alkalinity of blood and
tissues.

acrid: Leaving a burning sensation in the mouth.

ACTH: See adrenocorticotropic hormone.

acupressure: Manual application of pressure at points where
acupuncture needles would be inserted.

acupuncture: Chinese practice that involves insertion of nee-
dles into body at specific points along meridians to treat
disease and reduce pain.

acute: Designating disease with rapid onset, severe symptoms,
and brief duration; opposite of chronic.

acute abdomen: Emergency condition caused by damage to
one or more abdominal organs that results in intense pain
and shock.

adaptogen: An herb that increases resistance and resilience to
stress, enabling the body to avoid reaching collapse because
it can adapt around the problem.

adenoma: An ordinarily benign (nonmalignant) tumor of skin
tissue.

Addison’s disease: Condition marked by weakness, low blood
pressure, and dark pigmentation due to inadequate hor-
mone secretion by adrenal glands.

adenitis: Regional inflammation of gland or lymph node.

adenocarcinoma: Malignant epithelial tumor in glandular
pattern.

ADH: See antidiuretic hormone.

adhesion: Union by fibrous connective tissue of two normally
separate parts.

adipose: Fat in connective tissue.

adjuvant: Any substance that enhances the immune-stimulating
properties of an antigen or the pharmacological effect of a
drug.

adjuvant chemotherapy: One or more anticancer drugs used in
combination with surgery or radiation therapy as part of
the treatment of cancer. Adjuvant usually means “in addi-
tion to” initial treatment.

604

administration: This term refers to how a drug is taken.

adrenaline: Hormone secreted by the adrenal gland, which
produces the “fight-or-flight” response. Also called
epinephrine.

adrenergic: Compound that acts like e
epinephrine.

adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): Polypeptide secreted
by anterior pituitary that stimulates the adrenal cortex to
secrete cortisol.

adverse drug reaction (ADR): Defined by the WHO as “any
response to a drug which is noxious and unintended, and
which occurs at doses used in man for prophylaxis, diagno-
sis, or therapy.”

aerophagy: Swallowing of air.

aflatoxin: A toxic chemical produced by the Aspergillus flavus
and A. parasiticus molds.

agar: Polysaccharide derived from seaweed, used as culture
medium for microorganisms; gelatinous natural laxative.

agglutinin: Substance, especially antibody, that causes bacteria,
blood cells, and antigens to clump.

agonist: A drug that both binds to receptors and has an intrin-
sic effect.

agranulocytosis: Acute illness caused by chemicals or drug re-
action in which certain white blood cells disappear, causing
rapid, massive infection.

ague: Malaria; general malaise marked by fever.

AIDS: Acquired immune deficiency syndrome; severe weaken-
ing or destruction of body’s immune system by human im-
munodeficiency virus.

AIDS-related complex arc: Chronic enlargement of lymph
nodes and persistent fever caused by AIDS virus.

albumin: Most abundant protein found in blood plasma.

albuminuria: Presence of the protein albumin in urine.

aldosterone: A hormone secreted by the zona glomerulosa of
the adrenal gland, which causes the retention of sodium
and the secretion of potassium.

alga: Unicellular organism distinguished from plants by having
no true root stem.

alkaline phosphatase: A blood enzyme measurement that indi-
cates the health of the liver.

alkaline: Solution having a pH above 7.0.

alkaloids: A large, varied group of nitrogen-containing com-
pounds found in plants. Often alkaline, they react with
acids to form soluble salts, many of which are physiologi-
cally active.

alkalosis: Abnormal state of increased alkalinity of blood and
tissues.

pinephrine or nor-

----- PAGE 629 -----
allelochemicals: Chemicals involved in interspecific
communication.

allelopathy: Chemical interaction between species at all levels
of complexity, from microorganisms to higher plants, inex-
tricably interwoven into ecological phenomena.

allergen: Any substance that comes into contact with body tis-
sue (by skin absorption, ingestion, or inhalation) and causes
a specific reaction within the bloodstream.

allergy: Hypersensitivity to a particular substance or antigen,
such as pollen, fur, feathers, mold, dust, drugs, dyes, cos-
metics, or food, causing characteristic symptoms when en-
countered, ingested, or inhaled.

alliaceous: Garlic- or onionlike.

allogenic transplant: Transfer of bone marrow from one per-
son to another.

alopecia: Absence of hair from an area where it normally grows,
especially progressive hair loss in men; baldness.

alterative: Herbs that gradually restore proper functioning of the
body, increasing health and vitality. Some alteratives support
natural waste elimination via the kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin.
Others stimulate digestive function or are antimicrobial.

Alzheimer’s disease: Progressive dementia and brain degeneration.

amebiasis: Infection with or disease caused by an amoeba.

amebic dysentery: Severe dysentery caused by protozoan
amoebas.

amenorrhea: Absence or cessation of menstruation due to a
congenital defect, hormonal deficiency, hypothalamus dis-
order, or emotional problem.

amino acid: Any of 25 organic acids containing an amino group
that link into polypeptide chains to form proteins.

amoebicidal: A substance with the power to destroy amoebas.

amphoteric: Having the ability to act as either an acid or a base.

amylase: Enzyme that breaks down starch into disaccharides.

anabolism: Constructive metabolism in which food is changed
into living tissue.

analgesic: A substance that reduces the sensation of pain.

analog (analogue): A chemical compound with a structure sim-
ilar to that of another but differing from it in respect to a
certain component; it may have a similar or opposite action
metabolically.

anaphrodisiac: Reduces sexual desire.

anaphylaxis: Acute, allergic reaction to a substance to which a
person has been previously sensitized, resulting in faintness,
palpitations, loss of color, difficulty in breathing, and shock.

androgen: Any substance that produces masculinization, such
as testosterone.

anemia: Reduced hemoglobin in blood, causing fatigue, breath-
lessness, and pallor.

anesthetic: Agent that diminishes or abolishes sensation and
can produce unconsciousness.

aneurysm: Balloonlike swelling of an arterial wall.

angina: Feeling of suffocation; chest pain.

angina pectoris: A suffocating pain (angina) of the chest (pec-
toris). Angina is a result of the oxygen demands of the heart
not being met.

angiosperm: Flowering plant.

angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE): ACE converts an-
giotensin I to a biologically active form, angiotensin II.
ACE inhibitors are used to combat hypertension.

GLossary @ 605

annual: Plant with life cycle of one year or season.

anodyne: Substance that soothes or relieves pain.

anodynia: Absence of pain.

anorexia: Loss of appetite.

anorexia nervosa: Extreme loss of appetite, especially in ado-
lescent females, causing severe weight loss and starvation.

anoxia: Condition in which body tissues receive inadequate
oxygen.

anorexiant: A drug or substance that leads to anorexia or di-
minished appetite; appetite suppressant.

antacid: A substance that neutralizes acid.

antagonism: The joint effect of two or more drugs such that
the combined effect is less than the sum of the effects pro-
duced by each agent separately. The agonist is the agent
producing the effect that is diminished by the administra-
tion of the antagonist.

antagonist: A drug that impedes the action of another chemical
substance in the body.

anthelmintic: A vermifuge, destroying or expelling intestinal
worms.

anther: Part of the stamen that produces and releases pollen.

anthocyanidin: A particular class of flavonoids that gives plants,
fruits, and flowers colors ranging from red to blue.

anthraquinone: Glycoside compound that produces dyes and
purgatives.

antianemic: An agent that combats anemia.

antiarthritic: An agent that combats arthritis.

antibacterial: A substance that stops or checks the growth of
bacteria.

antibiotic: A drug that kills microorganisms.

antibody: Protein manufactured by lymphocytes that reacts
with a specific antigen to fight invasion as the principal
component of immunity.

anticatarrhal: Anticatarrhals help the body remove excess
mucus, whether in the sinus area or in other parts of the
body.

anticoagulant: Agent that prevents blood from clotting.

anticonvulsant: Helps arrest or prevent convulsions.

antidepressant: Helps alleviate depression.

antidiarrheal: Efficacious against diarrhea.

antidiuretic hormone: ADH; peptide hormone synthesized in
the hypothalamus and released from the posterior pituitary,
causing retention of more water in body.

antidote: A substance that counteracts the effects of a poison.

antiemetic: An agent that reduces the incidence and severity of
nausea or vomiting.

antifungal: A substance that inhibits the growth or multiplica-
tion of fungi.

antigen: Any substance or microorganism that, when intro-
duced into the body, causes the formation of antibodies
against it.

antihemorrhagic: An agent that prevents or combats hemor-
rhage or bleeding.

antihepatotoxic; Protects liver cells from chemical damage.

antihistamine: A chemical that blocks action of histamine.

antihypertensive: Blood pressure-lowering effect.

anti-inflammatory: Soothes inflammations or reduces the in-
flammation of the tissue directly.

----- PAGE 630 -----
60€ @ GLOSSARY

antilithic: Prevents the formation of a calculus or stone.

antimicrobial: Antimicrobials help the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms. They help the body strengthen
its own resistance to infective organisms and throw off the
illness.

antineuralgic: Relieves or reduces nerve pain.

antioxidant: A compound that prevents free radical or oxidative
damage.

antiphlogistic: Checks or counteracts inflammation.

antipruritic: Relieves sensation of itching or prevents its
occurrence,

antiputrescent: An agent that prevents and combats decay or
putrefaction.

antipyretic: Reduces fever; see also febrifuge.

antiretroviral: A substance that stops or suppresses the activity
of a retrovirus such as HIV.

antirheumatic: Helps prevent and relieve rheumatism.

antisclerotic: Helps prevent the hardening of tissue.

antiscorbutic: A remedy for scurvy.

antiseborrheic: Helps control the production of sebum, the
oily secretion from sweat glands.

antiseptic: Destroys and prevents the development of microbes.

antispasmodic: Substance that relieves smooth muscle spasms.

antitoxic: An antidote or treatment that counteracts the effects
of poison.

antitumor: A substance that prevents or is effective against
tumors.

antitussive: Substance that reduces coughing, especially one
that affects activity in the brain’s cough center and de-
presses’ respiration.

antiviral: Substance that inhibits the growth of a virus.

anxiety: An unpleasant emotional state ranging from mild un-
ease to intense fear.

aperient: A mild laxative.

aperitif: Stimulant of the appetite.

aphonia: Loss of voice.

aphrodisiac: Increases or stimulates sexual desire.

apnea: Temporary cessation of breathing.

apoplexy: Sudden loss of consciousness, a stroke, or sudden se-
vere hemorrhage.

appendicitis: Acute inflammation of vermiform appendix.

application: Medication, remedy, or antiseptic placed externally
on body part, as in a compress.

arbovirus: RNA-containing virus that can cause disease when
transmitted from animals to humans by insects.

ARC: AIDS-related complex.

aril: The husk or membrane covering the seed of a plant.

aromatherapy: The therapeutic use of essential oils.

aromatic: A substance with a strong aroma or smell.

arrhythmia: Irregularity or deviation from normal rhythm or
force of heartbeat.

arteriole: Microscopic blood vessel that connects the smallest
arteries with the capillary beds. Arterioles together with
the smaller atteries make up the resistance vessels.

arteriosclerosis: Deposit of cholesterol on artery walls; hard-
ening of the arteries.

artery: A blood vessel that carries oxygen-rich blood away from
the heart.

arthritis: Inflammation of joints.

asbestosis: A lung disease caused by inhalation of asbestos
fibers, sometimes leading to lung cancer.

asepsis: Complete absence of disease-causing bacteria, viruses,
fungi, and microorganisms.

aspergillosis: A disease caused by a fungus. It can cause le-
sions of the skin, ear, orbit, nasal sinuses, lungs, and some-
times the bones, meninges, heart, kidneys, or spleen.
Symptoms include fever, chills, difficulty breathing, and
coughing up blood. If the infection reaches the brain, it
may cause dementia.

assay: A test.

asthenia: See debility.

asthma: Paroxysmal attacks of bronchial spasms that cause dif-
ficulty in breathing, often hereditary; bronchial asthma.

astigmatism: Distortion of visual images due to failure of the
retina to focus light.

asymptomatic: Showing no evidence of a disease.

asystole: Absence of contraction (systole). Asystole is when the
heart has stopped beating.

ataxia: Shaky movements and unsteady gait when brain fails to
regulate posture or direction of limb movements.

atherogenic: Having the capacity to start or accelerate the pro-
cess of atherogenesis or the formation of lipid deposits in
the arteries.

atheroma: Degeneration of artery walls due to fatty plaques and
scar tissue; common form of arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis.

atherosclerosis: A process in which fatty substances (choles-
terol and triglycerides) are deposited in the walls of
medium to large arteries, eventually leading to blockage of
the artery.

atony: Lessening or lack of muscular tone or tension.

atopy: A predisposition to various allergic conditions including
eczema and asthma.

atrial fibrillation: Rapid irregular twitchings of the wall of an
atrium (chamber) of the heart.

atrium: One of the upper chambers of the heart. Blood return-
ing to the heart is stored in the atria before being ejected
into the ventricles.

arthralgia: Severe joint pain.

atrophy: Wasting away of normally developed organ or tissue
due to degeneration of cells.

attrition: Normal wearing away of surface of teeth.

autoimmune: Designating a disorder of the body's defense
mechanism in which antibodies are produced against the
body’s own tissue, treating it as a foreign substance.

autoimmune disease: Disorder that permits destruction of tis-
sue by the body’s own antibodies.

autologous: Derived from the same individual or organism.

autonomic: Occurring involuntarily, controlled by the auto-
nomic nervous system.

axil: Upper angle between a stem and leaf or bract.

axillary: In the armpit area.

axon: The long, filamentous part of a neuron (nerve cell) that
carries nerve impulses away from the cell.

ayurveda: A highly developed system of therapeutics devel-
oped in the Hindu and Buddhist cultures of the Indian
subcontinent.

----- PAGE 631 -----
B lymphocyte (B cell): One of the immune system cell types;
B cells fight infection primarily by making antibodies.
bacteremia: Presence of bacteria in blood, indicating infection.
bactericidal: An agent that destroys bacteria (a type of microbe

or organism).

bacteriostat: Substance that retards growth of bacteria.

balm: Fragrant ointment or aromatic oil with medicinal value.

balsam: A resinous semisolid mass or viscous liquid exuded from
a plant. A “true” balsam is characterized by its high content
of benzoic acid, benzoates, cinnamic acid, or cinnamates.

baroreceptor: Neural receptor sensitive to pressure and rate of
change in pressure; stretch receptor; found in the aortic
arch and carotid sinuses.

basal metabolic rate: The rate of metabolism when the body is
at rest.

basal cell carcinoma: Common, usually curable, slow-growing
malignant tumor on the skin.

basal rosette: Leaves radiating directly from the crown of the
root.

baseline: The first or starting measurement in a study. New
measurements of blood values are compared to this starting
value.

basophil: A type of white blood cell that is involved in allergic
reactions.

bed-wetting: See enuresis.

Bell’s palsy: Paralysis of muscles on one side of the face and the
inability to close eye, sometimes with loss of taste and ex-
cess sensitivity to noise.

benign: Consisting of a localized mass of nonmalignant special-
ized cells within connective tissue that do not invade and
destroy tissue or spread throughout body.

berry: Small, fleshy fruit or dry seed or kernel of various plants.

beta-blocker: Drug that decreases heart activity by affecting re-
ceptors of the sympathetic nervous system,

beta cells: The cells in the pancreas, which manufacture insulin.

biennial: Plant with two-year life cycle in which the vegetative
first-year growth is followed by fruiting and dying during
second year.

bile: Greenish liver secretion that is stored in the gallbladder
until released to emulsify fats in the small intestine.

bile salts: Steroid molecules in bile that promote solubilization
and digestion of fats.

bilirubin: The breakdown product of the hemoglobin molecule
of red blood cells.

bilirubinemia: Excess bile pigment in blood that causes jaundice.

binomial: Standard scientific name for an organism in Latin.

bioavailability: The amount of drug that is available to the
target tissue after administration; this may not be 100%
due to degradation or alteration before reaching the tar-
get tissue.

biopsy: A diagnostic test in which tissue or cells are removed
from the body for examination under a microscope.

biopharmaceutics: The science and study of the ways in which the
pharmaceutical formulation of administered agents can influ-
ence their pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic behavior.

biotransformation: Chemical alteration of an agent that occurs
by virtue of the sojourn of the agent in a biological system.
Pharmacodynamics involves the chemical effects of a drug
on the body; biotransformation involves the chemical effect

Gossary 607

of the body ona drug. “Biotransformation” and “detoxica-
tion” are not synonyms: The product of a biotransforma-
tion may be more, not less, biologically active, or potent,
than the starting material.

biotranslocation: The movement of chemicals through biolog-
ical organisms.

bitters: Herbs with a bitter taste.

blade: Broad, expanded part of a leaf

bleeding time: The time required for the cessation of bleeding
from a small skin puncture as a result of platelet disinte-
gration and blood vessel constriction. Ranges from 1 to 4
minutes.

blennorrhagia: Heavy discharge of mucus, especially from the
urethra.

blepharitis: Inflammation, scaling, and crusting of eyelids.

blister: External swelling that contains watery fluid and blood
or pus, caused by friction.

blocking antibody: Antibody whose production is induced by
cancer cells or tissue transplants and that blocks the killing
of those cells by cytotoxic T cells.

blood count: Measurement of the number of red cells, white
cells, and platelets in a sample of blood.

blood pressure: The force exerted by blood as it is pumped by
the heart and presses against and attempts to stretch blood
vessels.

blood poisoning: Prolonged invasion of the bloodstream by
pathogenic bacteria due to infectious disease or skin le-
sions; bacteremia; septicemia; toxemia.

blood-brain barrier: Group of anatomical barriers and trans-
port systems that tightly control types of substances enter-
ing the extracellular space of the brain.

boil: Tender, inflamed, pustulant area of skin, usually due to
staphylococcus infection; furuncle.

bolus: Single, large mass of a substance.

bone marrow: The inner core of bone that produces blood
cells.

botany: Branch of biology dealing with life, structure, growth,
and classification of plants.

bract: Leaflike structure growing below or encircling a flower
cluster or flower.

bradycardia: Slowing of the heart rate to under 50 beats per
minute.

bradykinin: Peptide vasodilator that increases capillary perme-
ability and probably stimulates pain receptors.

bromeliad: Member of the Pineapple family of plants, usually epi-
phytic, with stiff, leathery leaves and spikes of bright flowers.

bronchial asthma: See asthma.

bronchitis: Inflammation of the walls of the bronchi in the lungs
due to virus or bacteria, causing coughing and production of
sputum.

bronchodilator: Substance that relaxes bronchial muscle to
open air passages to the lungs.

bronchospasm: Muscular contraction that narrows the bronchi
and causes difficulty especially in exhalation.

bruit: Any abnormal sound or murmur heard with a stethoscope.

bryophyte: Any member of the division of nonvascular plants,
including mosses and liverworts.

bubo: Swollen and inflamed lymph node in armpit or groin.

bulb: Dormant underground bud stage of some plants.

----- PAGE 632 -----
6C8 <= GLOSSARY

bulimia: Psychogenic syndrome of overeating followed by
vomiting.

bunion: Swelling of the joint between the big toe and the first
metatarsal.

bursa: A sac or pouch that contains a special fluid that lubricates
joints.

bursitis: Inflammation of a bursa.

cachexia: Weight loss, weakness, and debility associated with
chronic disease.

calcinosis: Abnormal deposit of calcium salts in tissue.

calcitonin: Peptide hormone secreted by the thyroid that reduces
excess of calcium in the blood by depositing it in bone.

calculus: Pebblelike mass, such as gallstone or kidney stone,
formed within the body; hard tartar layer formed on teeth

ry plaque.

callus: Hard thickening of an area of skin undergoing rubbing,

on hands or feet; mass of tissue forming around fractured

bone ends.

calorie: A unit of heat. A nutritional calorie is the amount of

heat necessary to raise 1 kg of water one degree C.

calyx: The sepals or outer layer of floral leaves.

cambium: Layer of formative cells beneath the bark of a tree.

cancer: General term for more than 100 diseases characterized

by abnormal and uncontrolled growth of cells.

cancrum: Ulceration of the lip or mouth; canker.

candidiasis: Yeastlike fungus infection in the mouth and moist
areas of the body; see aso thrush.

canker: See cancrum.

capsule: A dry fruit, opening when ripe, composed of more
than one carpel.

carbohydrate: Sugars and starches.

carbuncle: Staphylococcus infection of the skin that causes
boils with multiple drainage channels.

carcinogen: Any agent or substance capable of causing cancer.

carcinogenesis: The development of cancer caused by the ac-
tions of certain chemicals, viruses, and unknown factors on
primarily normal cells.

carcinoma: Cancer in epithelium lining skin or internal organs.

cardiac output: Volume of blood pumped by either ventricle
per minute,

cardiac remedy: An herbal remedy that has a beneficial action
on the heart. Some of the remedies in this group are pow-
erful cardioactive agents such as foxglove; others are gentler,
safer herbs such as hawthorn and motherwort.

cardiac arrest: Abrupt cessation of heartbeat, causing loss of
pulse, consciousness, and breathing.

cardiac stenosis: Abnormal narrowing of a heart valve.

cardiomyopathy: Chronic viral, congenital, or other disorder
that affects heart muscle and causes heart failure, arrhyth-
mias, or embolisms.

cardiopulmonary: Pertaining to the heart and lungs.

cardiotonic: A compound that tones and strengthens the heart.

carditis: Inflammation of the heart.

caries: Decay of bone tissue, especially tooth; cavity.

carminative: Plants rich in aromatic volatile oils that stimulate
the digestive system to work properly and with ease, sooth-
ing the gut wall, reducing any inflammation, easing griping
pains, and helping the removal of gas from the digestive tract.

carotene: Fat-soluble plant pigments. Some carotenes can be
converted into vitamin A by the body.

cartilage: A type of connective tissue that acts as a shock ab-
sorber at joint interfaces.

carpal tunnel syndrome: Compression of the median nerve
entering the palm of the hand that causes pain and numb-
ing in the middle and index fingers.

castor oil: Unpleasant-tasting, irritant laxative or cathartic.

catalyst: A chemical that increases the rate of a chemical reac-
tion without itself being consumed.

cataract: Opacity of eye lens that causes blurred vision, espe-
cially in the elderly.

catarrh: Excessive secretion of thick phlegm or mucus by the
mucous membrane of the nose.

catecholamines: The chemically similar neurotransmitters
dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine.

cathartic: A substance that stimulates the movement of the
bowels, more powerful than a laxative.

catheter: A device that allows drugs to be given on an ongoing
basis.

ceiling: The maximum biological effect that can be induced in
a tissue by a given drug, regardless of how large a dose is
administered.

cell-mediated immunity: Specific immune response mediated
by cytotoxic T lymphocytes.

cephalalgia: See headache.

cephalic: Remedy for disorders of the head; referring or di-
rected toward the head.

cerebral hemorrhage: Bleeding from the cerebral artery into
brain tissue.

cerebral; Pertaining to the largest part of the brain, the cerebrum.

chelating agent: An organic compound capable of binding
metals.

chemoreceptor: A molecular structure on the surface of a cell
that is sensitive to chemical substances, such as epinephrine,
released by nerve cells.

chemotaxis: Movement or response of cells to chemicals.

chemotherapy: Drug treatment of parasitic or neoplastic dis-
ease in which the drug has a selective effect on the invading
cells or organisms.

chemotype: The same botanical species occurring in other
forms due to different conditions of growth, such as cli-
mate, soil, and altitude.

Cheyne-Stokes respiration: Cyclical slowing of breathing to
cessation, then speeding up to peak.

chilblain: Red, round, itchy swelling of skin on fingers or toes
due to exposure to cold.

chiropractic: Treatment method using manipulation of the
muscular and skeletal systems, especially the spine.

chlamydia: Sexually transmitted, viruslike microorganism caus-
ing conjunctivitis, urethritis, and cervicitis.

chlorophyll: Pigment in chloroplast, needed for photosynthesis.

chloroplast: Membrane-bound organelle that is the site of pho-
tosynthesis.

cholagogue: A compound that stimulates the contraction of the
gallbladder.

cholecystitis: Inflammation of the gallbladder.

cholecystokinetic: Agent that stimulates the contraction of the
gallbladder.

----- PAGE 633 -----
cholecystokinin (CCK): A peptide hormone secreted by the
small intestine.

cholelithiasis: Presence of gallstones.

choleretic: Aids excretion of bile by the liver, so there is a
greater flow of bile.

cholestasis: The stagnation of bile within the liver.

cholesterol: Steroid molecule that is a precursor of steroid hor-
mones and bile salts, a component of plasma membranes,
and present in fat and blood.

cholinergic: Pertaining to the parasympathetic portion of the
autonomic nervous system and the release of acetylcholine
as a transmitter substance.

chorionic: Referring to the chorion or membrane enclosing the
fetus.

chromatography: Separation of chemical compounds.

chronic: Long term or frequently recurring.

chronic fatigue syndrome: Persistent, extreme exhaustion and
weakness due to unknown causes.

chronotropic effect: An effect that changes the heart rate (ie.,
the time between P-waves).

chyme: Solution of partially digested food in the lumen of the
stomach and intestines.

cicatrisant: An agent that promotes healing by the formation of
scar tissue.

cicatrix: See scar.

cirrhosis: Progressive liver condition from various causes.

claudication: Cramping pain from inadequate blood supply to
muscle.

climacteric: Physical and emotional changes as sexual maturity
gives way to cessation of reproductive function in females
and testosterone decrease in males.

clot: Soft, thickened lump formed in liquid, especially blood.

clinical therapeutic index: An index of relative safety or rela-
tive effectiveness that cannot be defined explicitly and
uniquely, although it is presumed that the same quantifiable
and precise criteria of efficacy and safety will be used in
comparing drugs of similar kinds.

clinical trial: The systematic investigation of the effects of ma-
terials or methods, according to a formal study plan and
generally in a human population with a particular disease or
class of diseases.

club moss: Any of various small, non-seed-bearing vascular
plants with conelike, spore-bearing structures on top of
stems.

clubbing: Thickening of tissue at the base of a fingernail or toe-
nail, especially enlargement of a fingertip.

CNS: Central nervous system.

coccus: Spherical bacterium.

coenzyme: Nonprotein organic molecule that temporarily joins
with an enzyme during reaction, is not consumed in reac-
tion, and can be reused until degraded; cofactor.

cold sore: Small swelling or eruption of skin around lips that
dries to leave a crusty patch; fever blister.

colic: Pain due to contraction of the involuntary muscles of the
abdominal organs.

colitis: Any inflammation of the colon, causing diarrhea and
lower abdominal pain.

collagen: Extremely strong fibrous protein that functions as
a structural element in connective tissue, tendons, and
ligaments.

Glossary 2 609

collagen disease: A disease characterized by changes in the
makeup of connective tissue: lupus, rheumatic fever,
rheumatoid arthritis, and scleroderma.

colloid: An extremely fine particle suspended in a surrounding
medium.

collyrium: Medicated solution used to bathe eyes.

coma: Prolonged state of deep unconsciousness from which pa-
tient cannot be roused.

comedo: Blackhead.

comparison trial: A trial in which experimental drugs are tested
against each other or against an approved drug.

complement: Set of enzymes in the bloodstream that work with
antibodies to attack foreign cells and bacteria.

complete blood count (CBC): Series of tests including cell
counts, hematocrit, hemoglobin, and cell volume mea-
surement.

compliance: The extent to which a patient agrees to and fol-
lows a prescribed treatment regimen.

compress: Moistened pad of folded cloth, often medicated, ap-
plied with heat, cold, or pressure to soothe a body part.

concrete: A concentrated, waxy, solid or semisolid perfume ma-
terial prepared from previously live plant matter, usually
using a hydrocarbon type of solvent.

cone: Reproductive structure of certain nonflowering plants
with overlapping scales or bracts containing pollen, ovules,
or spores.

congestion: Accumulation of blood within an organ; clogging
of the upper respiratory system with mucus.

congestive heart failure: Inability of the heart to adequately
supply blood to body tissue, often due to weakening of car-
diac muscle, causing body swelling and shortness of
breath.

conifer: Cone-bearing gymnosperm, usually with narrow,
needlelike or small, scalelike leaves.

conjunctivitis: Inflammation of mucous membrane covering
front of eye, often with discharge of pus; pinkeye.

connective tissue: The type of tissue that performs the func-
tion of providing support, structure, and cellular cement to
the body.

constipation: Infrequent, difficult, often painful bowel move-
ments with hard feces; irregularity.

contagious: A disease that can be transferred from one person
to another by direct contact.

contraceptive: Medication or device to prevent conception.

continuous infusion: Uninterrupted introduction of fluid
other than blood into a vein.

contractility: Refers to the strength of heart muscle contrac-
tion. This is controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
The sympathetic nervous system increases and the para-
sympathetic nervous system decreases the strength of a
contraction.

controlled trial: Trial in which one group gets the experimen-
tal drug and another group gets either a placebo or an ap-
proved drug therapy.

contusion: Surface injury in which skin is not broken; bruise.

convulsion: Involuntary muscle contraction that causes con-
torted movements of body and limbs.

corm: Underground stem base that acts as a reproductive
structure.

corn: Area of hard or thickened skin on or between the toes.

----- PAGE 634 -----
61€ <= GLOSSARY

corolla: The petals of a flower considered as a whole.

coronary: Of or pertaining to arteries of the heart.

coronary heart disease: Serious condition affecting the coro-
nary arteries.

coronary insufficiency: The right and left coronary arteries
supply blood to the heart. Flow is considered insufficient if
it cannot meet the needs of the heart.

corpus luteum: The remains of the egg follicle after ovulation.

cortical: Involving external layers of brain.

corticosteroid drugs: A group of drugs similar to natural corti-
costeroid hormones that are used predominantly in the treat-
ment of inflammation and to suppress the immune system.

corticosteroid hormones: A group of hormones produced by
the adrenal glands that control the body’s use of nutrients
and the excretion of salts and water in the urine.

cortisol: A steroid hormone secreted by the adrenal cortex that
regulates organic metabolism by converting fats and pro-
teins to glucose.

corymb: Flat-topped or convex cluster of flowers in which the
outer flowers open first.

cotyledon: First or second leaf of a seedling.

cough: Violent exhalation of irritant particles or congestive
mucus from the respiratory system; tussis.

counterirritant: An application to the skin that relieves deep-
seated pain, usually applied in the form of heat; see also
rubefacient.

cramp: Prolonged painful contraction or spasm of muscle.

creatinine: A protein found in muscles and blood and excreted
by the kidneys in the urine. The level of creatinine in the
blood and urine provides a measure of kidney function.

crepitation: Soft crackling sound heard in the lungs through a
stethoscope; rale.

crepitus: Crackling sound made by grating of bone on bone or
on cartilage, especially in an arthritic joint.

CRH: Corticotropin-releasing hormone.

crick: Painful muscle spasm or cramp in neck or upper back.

crossover experiment: Each subject receives the test prepara-
tion at least once, and every test preparation is administered
to every subject. At successive experimental sessions each
preparation is “crossed over” from one subject to another.

Cushing’s disease: Syndrome due to excess corticosteroid hor-
mone, causing weight gain, excess body hair, and high
blood pressure.

cutaneous: Pertaining to the skin.

cuticle: Waxy layer on the outer surface of plants.

cyanosis: Bluish discoloration of skin and mucous membranes
due to inadequate oxygenation.

cycad: Any of the order of gymnosperms intermediate between
ferns and palms, often with a thick, columnar trunk
crowned by large, tough, pinnate leaves.

cyme: Inflorescence in which the primary axis bears a single
central or terminal flower that blooms first.

cyst: An abnormal lump or swelling, filled with fluid or semi-
solid material, in any body organ or tissue.

cytokine: Protein produced by white blood cells that acts as a
chemical messenger between cells. CD8 (T-suppressor) cells
release a cytokine that appears to block HIV replication in in-
fected cells, at least until the advanced stage of HIV disease.

cytokinin: Plant hormone that promotes cell division.

cytomegalovirus: A virus in the herpes family that causes en-
largement of epithelial cells and mononucleosis-like disease.

cytotoxic: Toxic to all cells.

cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL): A lymphocyte that is able to
kill foreign cells that have been marked for destruction by
the immune system.

cytotoxin: Substance that has a toxic effect on certain cells, used
against some tumors.

debility: Weakness, lack of tone.

deciduous: Any plant that sheds all its leaves once each year.

decoction: An herbal preparation in which the plant material
(usually hard or woody) is boiled in water and reduced to
make a concentrated extract.

decongestant: Substance used to reduce nasal mucus produc-
tion and swelling.

deficiency disease: Any disease, such as beriberi, caused by nu-
tritional deficiency.

dehiscence: Splitting open of a wound.

dehydration: Deficiency or loss of water in body tissues marked
by thirst, nausea, and exhaustion.

delirium: Acute mental disorder due to organic brain disease,
causing hallucinations, disorientation, and extreme excitation.

dementia: Senility; loss of mental function.

demineralization: Loss of minerals from the bone.

demulcent: An herb rich in mucilage that soothes and protects
irritated or inflamed tissue.

deodorant: Corrects, masks, or removes unpleasant odors.

dependence: A somatic state that develops after chronic ad-
ministration of certain drugs; this state is characterized by
the necessity to continue administration of the drug in
order to avoid the appearance of uncomfortable or danger-
ous (withdrawal) symptoms.

depressant: Drug that lowers nervous or functional activity;
sedative.

depurative: Helps combat impurity in the blood and organs.

dermal: Pertaining to the skin.

dermatitis: Skin inflammation.

detumescence: Reduction or subsidence of swelling.

diabetes: Diabetes mellitus.

dialysis: A technique using sophisticated machinery to remove
waste products from the blood and excess fluid from the
body in the treatment of kidney failure.

diaphoretic: Promotes perspiration, enabling the skin to elimi-
nate waste from the body, thus helping the body ensure a
clean and harmonious inner environment.

diarrhea: Frequent bowel evacuation, especially of soft or liquid
feces.

diastole: Period of the cardiac cycle in which ventricles are not
contracting.

diastolic pressure: Minimum blood pressure during cardiac
cycle.

dicot: See dicotyledon.

dicotyledon: Angiosperm having two seed leaves or cotyledons;
dicot.

digestion: Process of breaking down large particles and high-
molecular-weight substances into small molecules.

digestive: Substance that promotes or aids the digestion of
food.

----- PAGE 635 -----
diphtheria: Acute, highly contagious bacterial infection of the
throat that can cause death from respiratory obstruction or
carditis.

disinfectant: Cleansing agent that destroys bacteria and other
microorganisms, used on surfaces and surgical tools.

disintegration time: The time required for a tablet to break up
into granules of specified size (or smaller), under carefully
specified test conditions.

dissolution time: The time required for a given amount (or
fraction) of drug to be released into solution from a solid
dosage form.

diuretic: Increases the production and elimination of urine.

diverticulum: Saclike out-pouching of the wall of the colon.

diverticulitis: Colonic diverticulosis with inflammation.

diverticulosis: Condition characterized by the existence of di-
verticular sacs at weak points in the walls of the alimentary
tract, especially the intestine.

dizziness: Feeling off balance, unstable, confused, as though
whirling in place.

dopamine: A catecholamine neurotransmitter, precursor of
epinephrine and norepinephrine.

dorsal: Pertaining to the back.

dormancy: Period of time in which growth ceases.

dosage form: The physical state in which a drug is dispensed
for use.

dose: The quantity of drug, or dosage form, administered to a
subject at a given time.

double-blind study: A way of controlling against experimental
bias by ensuring that neither the researcher nor the subject
knows when an active agent or a placebo is being used.

douche: Introduction of water and/or a cleansing agent into
the vagina with the aid of a bag with tubing and a nozzle
attached.

dressing: Protective or healing material applied externally to a
wound or a diseased body part.

dromo: Refers to speed.

dromotropic effect: A change in the amount of time it takes
the heart to complete one beat.

dropsy: Excess of fluid in the tissues.

drug: Substance that affects the structure or functional pro-
cesses of an organism, especially to prevent or treat diseases
ot relieve symptoms.

drupe: A fleshy fruit, with one or more seeds, each surrounded
by a stony layer.

dysentery: Infection of the intestinal tract that causes severe di-
arrhea mixed with blood and mucus.

dysfunction: Abnormal function.

dysmenorrhea: Painful, difficult menstruation.

dyspepsia: Digestive disorder with abdominal pain and gas after
eating, sometimes with nausea and vomiting; indigestion.

dysplasia: Any abnormality of growth.

dyspnea: Labored or difficult breathing; breathlessness.

dystrophy: Organ or muscle disorder caused by insufficient
nourishment or a hereditary disorder.

ecchymosis: Bluish black mark on skin from release of blood
into tissues, usually due to injury; black-and-blue mark.
eclampsia: Convuisions, especially due to toxemia during

pregnancy.

GLOSSARY @ 611

ectopic pregnancy: State in which a fertilized egg implants at a
site other than the uterus.

edema: Excessive accumulation of fluid in tissues; dropsy.

ED50: Median effective dose.

electrocardiogram (ECG): Machine that measures and
records the activity of the heart.

electroencephalogram (EEG): Machine that measures and
records brain waves.

electrolyte: Substance that ionizes in solution and conducts
electric current.

electuary: Medication mixed with honey.

elimination diet: A diet that eliminates allergic foods.

elimination half-life: The time it takes for the body to elimi-
nate or break down half of a dose of a pharmacologic agent.

elixir: Substance that contains alcohol or glycerin, used as solu-
tion for bitter or nauseating drugs.

elliptical: Shaped like an ellipse, or regular curve.

embolism: Obstruction of an artery by a lodged blood clot, fat,
ait, or foreign body carried by circulating blood.

embolus: Mass of matter that obstructs blood flow.

emesis: Vomiting; vomited matter,

emetic: Substance that induces vomiting.

emmenagogue: Stimulates menstrual flow and activity.

emollient: Soothes and softens external tissue.

empyema: Accumulation of pus in a body cavity, especially the
pleural cavity.

emulsification: Maintenance of lipid droplets in solution.

emulsify: The dispersement of large globules into smaller, uni-
formly distributed particles.

endemic: Disease that is constantly present in a particular re-
gion but generally under control.

endocarditis: Inflammation and damage to the heart cavity lin-
ing due to bacterial infection or rheumatic fever.

endocrine gland: Ductless organ that synthesizes hormones
and releases them directly into the bloodstream.

endocrine system: All ductless glands in the body.

endocrinology: Study of the endocrine glands and hormones.

endometrium: The mucous membrane lining the uterus.

endometriosis: A condition in which tissue similar to that
normally lining the uterus is found outside of the uterus,
usually the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and other pelvic
structures.

endorphin: Neurotransmitter that exhibits painkilling activity.

enervation: Weakness, lack of energy.

engorgement: Congestion of a part of tissues, or fullness (as in
the breasts).

enteric-coated: A way of coating a tablet or capsule to ensure
that it does not dissolve in the stomach and so can reach the
intestinal tract.

enuresis: Involuntary urination, especially at night, usually
functional in nature; bed-wetting.

enzyme: Complex protein that is produced by living cells and
catalyzes specific biochemical reactions.

eosinophil: A type of white blood cell, called a granulocyte, that
can digest microorganisms.

epidemiology: Study of causes and control of epidemics.

epilepsy: One of various brain disorders that cause recurrent,
sudden convulsive attacks.

----- PAGE 636 -----
612 @ GLOSSARY

epinephrine: Hormone released by the adrenal medulla that ele-
vates blood sugar and initiates the fight-or-flight response;
adrenaline.

epiphyte: Nonparasitic plant growing upon another plant for
support.

epistaxis: Bleeding from the nose.

erysipelas: A skin infection from streptococcus bacteria that
causes inflammation, swelling, and fever.

erythema: A superficial redness of the skin due to excess of
blood.

erythrocyte: A red blood cell whose primary function is to
carry oxygen to cells.

erythropoiesis: Formation of erythrocytes.

erythropoietin: Hormone secreted mainly by the kidneys that
stimulates erythrocyte production.

essential fatty acid (EFA): A fatty acid that the body cannot
manufacture, e.g. linoleic and linolenic acids.

essential oil: A volatile oil obtained from the leaves, stem,
flower, or other part of plants, usually carrying the odor
characteristic of the plant.

estrogen: Any of several steroid hormones produced chiefly by
the ovaries and responsible for promoting estrus and the
development and maintenance of female secondary sex
characteristics.

etiology: Science of causes and origins of diseases.

evergreen: Plant that maintains functional green foliage
throughout year.

excretion: The elimination of waste products from a cell, tissue,
or the entire body.

exfoliant: A product or ingredient whose purpose is to remove
unwanted tissue or waste products from the skin and other
body surfaces.

exfoliate: To shed cells from the epithelium layer of the skin or
mucosa.

exocrine gland: A gland that secretes through a duct.

exophthalmic goiter: Enlargement of the thyroid gland ac-
companied by protrusion of the eyeballs from their orbits.

expectorant: Soothes bronchial spasm and loosens mucous se-
cretions, helping dry, irritating coughs.

extracellular: The space outside the cell, composed of fluid.

exudate: Escaping fluid or semifluid material that oozes from a
space that may contain serum, pus, and cellular debris.

eyewash: Medicinal solution that soothes eyes.

fatty acid: Organic compound whose carbon chain ends in a
carboxyl group.

febrifuge: Substance that relieves or reduces fever.

feces: Digestive waste products.

feedback inhibition: Mechanism that maintains constant secre-
tion of a product by exerting inhibitory control.

fern: Nonflowering, vascular plant having roots, stems, and
fronds and reproducing by spores instead of seeds.

fever: Rise in body temperature above normal 98.6 degrees.

fibrillation: Rapid, uncontrolled irregular twitching of heart
muscle.

fibroblastic: Pertaining to fibroblasts, or connective tissue
cells.

fibrocystic changes: Formation of benign cysts of various sizes
in the breast.

fibrosis: Thickening and scarring of connective tissue due to in-
jury or inflammation.

first-degree burn: Reddening of the outer layer of skin.

first pass effect: The biotransformation and/or excretion of a
drug by hepatic, including biliary, mechanisms following
absorption of the drug from the gastrointestinal tract, be-
fore the drug gains access to the systemic circulation.

fissure: Crack in membrane lining.

fistula: Abnormal passage that leads from an abscess or cavity
to the skin or to another abscess or cavity, caused by dis-
ease or injury.

fixative: A material that slows down the rate of evaporation of
the more volatile components in a perfume composition.

fixed oil: A name given to vegetable oils obtained from plants
that, in contradistinction to essential oils, are fatty, dense,
and nonvolatile, such as olive and sweet almond oils.

flatulence: Expulsion of intestinal gas through mouth by belch-
ing or through anus by passing flatus.

flatus: Intestinal gas.

flavonoid: Plant pigment that exerts a wide variety of physio-
logical effects in the human body.

floret: Small flower; one of a number of individual flowers
comprising the head of a composite plant.

flowering plant: Any angiosperm that produces flowers, fruit,
and seeds in an enclosed ovary.

foliage: Leaves of plant or tree.

follicle: Saclike structure that forms inside an ovary when an
egg is produced.

free radical: Highly reactive molecule that can bind to and de-
stroy cellular compounds,

frond: Fern or palm foliage.

fructose: Yellowish to white, crystalline, water-soluble sugar
found in many fruits.

fruit: Mature ovary of a flowering plant, sometimes edible.

functional cyst: A benign cyst that forms on an ovary and usu-
ally resolves on its own without treatment.

fungicidal: Prevents and combats fungal infection.

fungus: Unicellular or filamentous organism, formerly classi-
fied with plants.

furuncle: Boil.

galactagogue: Increases secretion of milk.

gallstone: Hard mass of bile pigments, cholesterol, and calcium
salts in the gallbladder.

gamma globulin: The part of blood serum that contains anti-
bodies, used in temporary prevention of infectious diseases.

gargle: Antiseptic, often medicated, liquid used to rinse mouth
and throat; mouthwash.

gastrin: Digestive system hormone that stimulates hydrochloric
acid release by stomach and secretion of digestive enzyme
by pancreas.

genus: Category of closely related species ranking below family
and above species.

germicidal: Destroys germs or microorganisms such as bacteria.

germinate: Sprout and start to grow from spore or seed.

gingivitis: Inflammation of gums, sometimes with bleeding.

glaucous: Covered with a fine white, often waxy film that rubs
off.

glioma: Cancer of nerve tissue.

----- PAGE 637 -----
glomerular filtration rate (GFR): Milliliters of plasma per
minute filtered through the kidney.

glomerulonephritis: Potentially fatal streptococcal infection of
the kidney.

glucagon: Pancreatic hormone that increases blood glucose
levels.

glucocorticoid: Adrenal cortex hormone that affects salt and
water metabolism and stimulates conversion of noncarbo-
hydrates to carbohydrates.

glucose: A monosaccharide that is found in the blood and is one
of the body’s primary energy sources.

glutamic acid: An amino acid that may be a brain neurotrans-
mitter.

gluten: One of the proteins in wheat and certain other grains
that gives dough its tough, elastic character.

glycerin: See glycerol.

glycerol: Syrupy liquid prepared by hydrolysis of fats and oils
for use as a skin lotion.

glycogen: White polysaccharide sugar, derived from glucose, that
is the principal form in which carbohydrate is stored in tissue.

glycoprotein: Carbohydrate-protein complex.

glycoside: Plant chemical that consists of molecules made up of
two sections, one of which is a sugar.

glytosuria: Excretion of excess sugar in urine, as in diabetes.

goblet cell: A goblet-shaped cell that secretes mucus.

goiter: Swollen neck due to an enlarged thyroid gland.

gonadotropin: A hormone that promotes gonad (sex gland)
growth and function.

granulocyte: A cell type of the immune system filled with gran-
ules of toxic chemicals that enable it to digest micro-
organisms. Basophils, neutrophils, and eosonophils are ex-
amples of granulocytes.

granuloma: Nodule of connective tissue and capillaries associ-
ated with tuberculosis, syphilis, or nonorganic foreign
bodies.

ground substance: The thick, gel-like material in which the
cells, fibers, and blood capillaries of cartilage, bone, and
connective tissue are embedded.

gum: A class of carbohydrates that swell in the presence of
water and increase the thickness of water-based products.

gymnosperm: Member of the division of seed plants having
ovules on open scales, especially cones.

half-life: The time required for the decay of half a sample of a
radioactive substance; may also apply to pharinacologic
agents.

hallucinogenic: Causes visions or delusions.

hay fever: Common, usually seasonal allergy to plant pollen
that causes sneezing, runny nose, and watery eyes.

HDL: High-density lipoprotein.

headache: Pain within the skull, commonly due to stress or fa-
tigue; cephalalgia.

heart failure: Inadequate pumping of the heart ventricles due
to coronary thrombosis, hypertension, or arrhythmia; con-
gestive heart failure.

heart murmur: Blowing or swishing noise produced by blood
passing through a defective heart valve.

heartburn: Pain rising from abdomen to throat, often accom-
panied by bitter fluid in the mouth; pyrosis.

heartwood: The central portion of a tree trunk.

Giossary @. 613

helper T cell: White blood cell that helps in the immune re-
sponse.

hematocrit: The percentage of packed red blood cells in a given
volume of blood. Normal ranges: women 37-43%, men
43-49%,

hematuria: Blood in the urine.

hemorrhage: Outflow of blood from a ruptured blood vessel,
especially internal bleeding.

hemorrhoid: An enlarged vein in the anus wall, especially due
to prolonged constipation or diarrhea, characterized by fis-
sure, painful swelling, and bleeding; piles.

hemostatic: A substance that checks bleeding.

heparin: Natural anticoagulant produced by liver cells as a
polysaccharide.

hepatic: Pertaining to the liver.

hepatitis: Inflammation of the liver, due to a virus transmitted
by food or drink (infectious hepatitis), blood on a needle, or
transfusion (serum hepatitis), causing fever and jaundice.

hepatomegaly: Enlargement of the liver.

herbaceous: Nonwoody.

hernia: Protrusion of tissue or an organ outside the cavity it
normally occupies, especially in the lower abdomen, due to
physical strain or coughing.

herniated disk: Slipped disk.

Herpes: Herpes simplex; small viral blisters on the skin.

Herpes simplex: Virus in the herpes family; non-venereal blis-
ters on mucous membranes that can cause conjunctivitis,
vaginal inflammation, or cold sores; herpes.

Herpes zoster: Virus in the herpes family characterized by
vesicles, often with severe pain along distribution of nerve;
shingles.

hiccup: Characteristic sound made by abrupt involuntary low-
ering of the diaphragm and closing of the upper end of the
trachea.

high-density lipoprotein (HDL): Lipid-protein aggregate
with a low proportion of lipid or cholesterol that removes
cholesterol from arteries.

histamine: Amine derived from the amino acid histidine that is
released in allergic reaction, causing dilation of the blood
vessels.

HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus.

homeostasis: Maintenance of constant internal environment.

hormone: A secretion of an endocrine gland that controls and
regulates functions in other parts of the body.

humoral: Immunity defense against disease by antibodies in
body fluids.

hybrid: A plant originating by fertilization of one species or
subspecies by another.

hydrocarbon: Compound containing only hydrogen and carbon.

hydrocele: Accumulation of watery fluid, especially about the
testis.

hydrochloric acid: Acid secreted by stomach during digestion.

hyperglycemia: High blood sugar level.

hypergonadotropic: Increased production of gonad-stimulat-
ing hormone from the anterior pituitary gland.

hyperlipidemic: Elevation of cholesterol and triglycerides in
the blood.

hyperpigmentation: Abnormally increased pigmentation.

hypersecretion: Excessive secretion.

hypersensitivity: Allergic reaction.

----- PAGE 638 -----
614 @ GLOSSARY

hypertension: High blood pressure.

hypertensive: A substance that causes a rise in blood pressure.

hyperthermia: Exceptionally high body temperature of 105 de-
grees F or above; fever induced as treatment.

hyperthyroidism: Overactivity of the thyroid gland that causes
rapid heartbeat, sweating, tremors, weight loss, and anxiety.

hypertrophy: Increase in size of tissue or organ due to enlarge-
ment of cells.

hyperventilation: Abnormally rapid breathing that lowers car-
bon dioxide concentration in the blood.

hypnotic: A drug that produces a state clinically identical to
sleep by means of action in the central nervous system.

hypochlorhydria: Insufficient gastric acid output.

hypochondria: Obsession with real and imagined physical
ailments.

hypoglycemia: Low blood sugar.

hypoglycemic: Plant remedy that lowers abnormally elevated
blood sugar.

hypogonadism: Below normal gonad (sex gland) function.

hypokalemia: Low potassium levels in the blood.

hypotension: Low blood pressure.

hypotensive: Plant remedy that lowers abnormally elevated
blood pressure.

hypothalamus: An area of the forebrain that regulates pituitary
gland secretion, among many other functions.

hypothyroidism: Subnormal thyroid gland activity that can
lead to cretinism if present at birth.

hypoxia: An inadequate supply of oxygen.

iatrogenic: Meaning literally “physician produced,” the term
can be applied to any medical condition, disease, or other
adverse occurrence that results from medical treatment.

idiopathic: Of unknown cause.

Ig: See immunoglobulin.

immune response: Body's defense reaction through dual
modes of antibody and cellular response.

immunity: Ability of the body to recognize and neutralize for-
eign matter, either natural or acquired.

immunoglobulin (Ig): Any of five classes of antibodies: Igg,
Igm, Iga, and Igf.

immunodeficiency: A condition resulting from a defective im-
mune system.

immunomodulator: Substance hoped to strengthen the im-
mune system and help the body fight off opportunistic in-
fections or other diseases. Not necessarily used to stimulate
the immune system.

immunostimulant: A plant that stimulates some aspect of im-
mune system functioning.

impairment: Damage to or weakening of body part or function.

in vitro: Latin for “in glass.” An artificial environment created
outside a living organism, used to study a disease or process.

in vivo: Latin for “in life.” Study conducted within a living
organism—e.g., animal or human study,

inborn immunity: Congenital resistance to a specific disease.

incidence: The number of new cases of a disease that occur dur-
ing a given period (usually years) in a defined population.

inclusion/exclusion criteria: The medical or other reasons
why a person may or may not be allowed to enter a clinical
trial.

incontinence: Involuntary passage or leakage of urine.

incubation period: Time between entry of disease organisms
into the body and onset of disease symptoms.

infarction: Death of tissue due to oxygen deprivation.

infestation: Attack on body by parasitic microorganism.

inflorescence: Flowering structure above the last stem leaves
(including bracts and flowers).

infusion: An herbal remedy prepared by steeping the plant ma-
terial in water.

inorganic: In chemistry, the term refers to compounds that do
not contain carbon.

inotropic effect: Jno- is a prefix that refers to muscle. Inotropic
effects are ones that change the strength of contraction of
the heart muscle.

insomnia: Inability to fall asleep or to remain asleep.

insulin: Pancreatic hormone that regulates blood sugar level.

interferon: Substance produced by infected cells that inhibits
specific viral growth.

interleukin: A natural blood substance that helps immune sys-
tem cells to communicate.

intestinal malabsorption: A condition in which the nutrients
found in food are not absorbed by the body.

intrinsic activity: The property of a drug that determines
the amount of biological effect produced per unit of drug-
receptor complex formed.

investigational new drug (IND): A drug allowed by the FDA
to be used in clinical trials but not approved for commer-
cial marketing.

irreversible: Impossible to halt or reverse by treatment.

irritable bowel syndrome: Recurrent chronic abdominal pain
with constipation and/or diatrhea caused by abnormal con-
tractions of colon muscles; spastic colon.

irritant: A substance that produces redness, itching, swelling, or
blisters on the skin.

ischemia: Reduced blood supply to an organ or tissue.

jaundice: A condition caused by elevation of bilirubin in the
body and characterized by yellowing of the skin.

keratin: An insoluble protein found in hair, skin, and nails.

kidney stone: Hard, pebblelike mass in kidney that causes pain
and blood in urine; nephrolithiasis; renal calculus.

killer T cells: A class of immune system cells that function to
kill cancer- and virus-infected cells; see aso natural killer cells.

kinin: Vasodilatory polypeptide.

laceration: Tear in flesh, especially with irregular edges.

lactase: An enzyme that breaks down lactose into the monosac-
charides glucose and galactose.

lactose: One of the sugars present in milk. It is a disaccharide.

lanceolate: Lance-shaped, oval, and pointed at both ends (usu-
ally a leaf shape).

laparoscopy: A surgical procedure in which a slender, light-
transmitting telescope is used to view the pelvic organs.

larvicidal: An agent that prevents and kills larvae.

laryngitis: Inflammation of the larynx and vocal cords.

latency: The period when an organism is in the body but is not
producing any ill effects.

laxative: Stimulating bowel movements.

----- PAGE 639 -----
LDL: See low-density lipoprotein.

lecithin: Phospholipid in nerve tissue and blood.

legume: A fruit consisting of one carpel, opening on one side,
such as a pea.

lenticel: Spongy area of bark on a woody plant that allows ex-
change of gases between the stem and the atmosphere.

lesion: Any localized, abnormal change in tissue formation.

lethargy: A feeling of tiredness, drowsiness, or lack of energy.

leukocyte: White biood cell.

leucocytosis: An increase in the number of white blood cells
above the normal limit.

leucoplakia: A precancerous lesion usually seen in the mouth
that is characterized by a white patch.

leukemia: Overproduction of abnormal white blood cells by
bone marrow and other blood-forming organs.

leukocytosis: Abnormal level in number of white blood cells,
usually due to infection.

leukopenia: Reduction in number of white blood cells to below
normal level.

leukotriene: Inflammatory compound produced when oxygen
interacts with polyunsaturated fatty acids.

lichen: Fungus in symbiotic union with an alga.

lignin: Organic substance that serves as a binder for cellulose
fibers in wood.

ligulet: A narrow projection from the top of a leaf sheath in
grasses.

lipase: A fat-splitting enzyme.

lipid: A fat, phospholipid, steroid, or prostaglandin.

lipolytic: Causing lipolysis, the chemical disintegration or split-
ting of fats.

lipoprotein: A molecule combining protein and lipid.

lipotropic: Promoting the flow of lipids to and from the liver.

liverwort: Any of various small, flat bryophytes, usually on logs,
rocks, or soil in moist areas.

lotion: An emollient emulsion, usually of the water-in-oil type.

low-density lipoprotein (LDL): Protein-lipid aggregate that is
a major cholesterol carrier in plasma.

lubricant: A greasy substance applied to reduce friction on a
body surface.

lumen: Cavity within a tubular structure.

lumpectomy: Surgery to remove only the abnormal breast.

lycopod: See club moss.

lymph: Colorless fluid derived from blood and carried in special
ducts of lymphatic vessels.

lymphadenopathy: Swollen, firm, and possibly tender lymph
glands.

lymphatic: Pertaining to the lymph system.

lymphocyte: A type of white blood cell found primarily in
lymph nodes.

lymphoid tissue: Connective tissue containing lymphocytes.

lymphoma: A malignant tumor of lymph nodes that is not
Hodgkin’s disease.

macerate: Soak until soft.

macrophage: A large immune system cell that roams through
the blood looking for foreign matter.

macule: Discoloration or thickening of skin in contrast to the
surrounding area.

malabsorption: Impaired absorption of nutrients.

GLossaRY -@ 615

malaise: General sense of being unwell, often accompanied by
physical discomfort and weakness.

malignant: A term used to describe a condition that tends to
worsen and eventually causes death.

malnutrition: Insufficient food consumption to satisfy bodily
needs over a prolonged period.

mammogram: An X-ray of the breast.

manipulation: As a therapy, the skillful use of the hands to
move a part of the body or a specific joint or muscle.

mast cell: A cell found in many tissues of the body that con-
tributes greatly to allergic and inflammatory processes by
secreting histamine and other inflammatory chemicals.

mastectomy: Surgical removal of the breast.

mastitis: Inflammation of breasts due to bacterial infection.

measles: Highly infectious viral epidemic disease, mainly in
children, that causes high fever and elevated pink rash;
rubeola.

melanoma: Malignant tumor of melanin-forming cells.

memory cells: T cells that have been exposed to specific anti-
gens and are able thereafter to proliferate upon repeat ex-
posure to the same antigens.

menstruation: The discharge of blood and tissue from the
uterus that occurs when an egg is not fertilized.

metabolic rate: Level of energy expenditure.

metabolism: A collective term for all the chemical processes
that take place in the body.

metabolite: A product of a chemical reaction.

metastasis: Spread of a malignant tumor far from its site of ori-
gin, usually through the vascular system.

microflora: The microbial inhabitants of a particular region—
e.g., the colon.

microorganism: Any living organism too small to be viewed by
the unaided eye, including bacteria, viruses, protists, and
some algae and fungi.

migraine: Recurrent, intense headache, often accompanied by
blurred vision and vomiting, caused by contraction and di-
lation of arteries in the brain.

mineralocorticoid steroid: A salt-retaining hormone of the
adrenal cortex.

miscible: The ability of a gas or liquid to mix uniformly with
another gas or liquid.

mitogenic: An agent that effects cell division.

mold: Multicellular filamentous fungus.

mole: Flat or raised area of brown pigment in the skin.

monoclonal: Genetically engineered antibodies specific for one
particular antigen,

monocotyledon: An angiosperm having only one seed leaf;
cotyledon.

monosaccharide: A simple one-unit sugar such as fructose or
glucose.

moss: Any of various small bryophytes without true stems re-
producing by spores and growing in velvety clusters in
moist areas on rocks, trees, and the ground.

motor: Designating muscular activity stimulated by impulses
from the central nervous system.

mouthwash: Gargle.

moxa: A dried herb (usually mugwort) burnt on or above the
skin to stimulate an acupuncture point or to serve as a
counterirritant.

----- PAGE 640 -----
61€ @ GLOSSARY

mucilage: A substance containing gelatinous constituents that
are demulcent.

mucin: A protein that forms mucus when mixed with water.

mucolytic: Dissolving or breaking down mucus.

mucosa: See mucous membrane.

mucous membrane: Mucus-secreting membrane lining body
cavities and canals connecting with external air.

mucus: Viscid watery lubricating solution secreted by mucous
membranes.

muscle relaxer: Depressant or tranquilizer that acts to relieve
tension in muscles.

mutagen: External agent that increases mutation rate in cells.

myalgia: Pain in one or more muscles.

mycelium: Mass of threadlike tubes forming the vegetative
parts of a fungus.

mycorrhiza: Close symbiosis between the mycelia of certain
fungi and the root cells of some vascular plants.

mycosis: Fungus infection.

mycotoxin: Toxin from yeasts and fungi.

myelin sheath: A white fatty substance that surrounds nerve
cells and aids in nerve impulse transmission.

myeloma: Malignancy of bone marrow.

myelosuppression: The suppression of bone marrow activity,
which can cause anemia.

narcotic: A substance that induces sleep; intoxicating or poi-
sonous in large doses.

natural immunity: Inborn lack of susceptibility to a specific
disease.

natural killer cells (NK cells): Large immune system cells that
attack and destroy infected and cancer-causing cells.

naturopathy; Treatment of disease that employs no surgery or
synthetic drugs.

nausea: Feeling that one is about to vomit.

necrosis: Death of cells in an organ or tissue.

nectary: Organ of a plant that secretes nectar.

neoplasia: Tumor formation, characterized by a progressive,
abnormal replication of cells.

neoplasm: New tumor caused by uncontrolled reproduction of
abnormal cells.

nephritis: Inflammation of the kidney; Bright’s disease.

nephrotoxic: Poisonous to the kidneys.

nervine: Relaxants that ease anxiety and tension by soothing
both body and mind.

neuralgia: A stabbing pain along a nerve pathway.

neurasthenia: Nervous exhaustion.

neuritis: Inflammation of nerves; neuropathy.

neuron: Functional unit of a nerve, including cell body, axon,
and dendrites.

neuropathy: Any abnormal, degenerative or inflammatory state
of the peripheral nervous system.

neurotransmitter: A substance that modifies or transmits nerve
impulses.

neutropenia: A low number of neutrophils in the blood.

nitric oxide (NO): A potent vasodilator released by endothelial
cells to signal smooth muscle cells to relax.

NK cells: See Natural killer cells,

nocturia: The disturbance of a person’s sleep at night by the
need to pags urine.

nonvascular: Plant bryophyte nut dry, single-seeded fruit of
various trees and shrubs consisting of kernel enclosed in
hard or tough shell.

obovate: Refers to leaf shape; oval, but broader toward the apex.

occlusion: Closing or obstruction of a hollow organ or body part.

oedema: See edema.

oestrogen: See estrogen.

off label: A drug prescribed for conditions other than those in-
dicated on the label.

ointment: Substance used to soothe or heal skin; salve; unguent.

oleo gum resin: A natural exudation from trees and plants that
consists mainly of essential oil, gum, and resin.

oleoresin: A natural resinous exudation from plants; an aro-
matic liquid preparation extracted from botanical matter
using solvents.

olfaction: The sense of smell.

open trial: A drug trial is “open” when doctors and participants
know which drug is being administered. See a/so double-
blind study.

opiate: Derivative of opium that depresses the central nervous
system, relieves pain, and induces sleep.

opportunistic: Designating disease or infection occurring only
under certain conditions, as when the immune system is
impaired.

organ: Collection of tissues joined in a structural unit to serve a
common function.

organic disorder: Disorder associated with physiological
changes in the structure of an organ or tissue.

organic: In the chemical sense, refers to all compounds con-
taining carbon.

osteoarthritis: Joint cartilage disease that causes pain and im-
paired joint function and occurs in later life, due to overuse
of a joint or as a complication of rheumatoid arthritis.

osteopathy: Treatment of disease by manipulation and massage
of the musculoskeletal system.

osteoporosis: Loss of bony matrix that causes brittle bones due
to injury, infection, or old age.

OTC (over the counter): Medication available without a doc-
tor’s prescription.

ovate: Egg-shaped.

ovulation: The release of an egg from one of the ovaries.

oxytocic: An agent that stimulates labor contractions.

pack: Folded, moistened, often medicated pad of cotton or
cloth applied to the body or inserted into a cavity.

palisade cell: Chloroplast-containing cell just below the surface
ofa leaf.

palliative: Medicine that relieves symptoms but does not cure
disease.

palmate: With three or more leaflets, nerves, or lobes radiating
from a central point.

palpitation: Abnormally rapid or violent heartbeat, especially
due to fear, exertion, neurosis, or arrhythmia.

panacea: A cure-all.

pandemic: Epidemic disease that spreads to different countries
over a large region.

panicle: Loose, diversely branching flower clusters.

pappus: The calyx in a composite flower having feathery hairs,
scales, or bristles.

----- PAGE 641 -----
Herps BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .@ 633

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Guaiacum Guaiacum officinale Lemon Citrus limon
Guarana Paullinia cupana Lemon balm Melissa officinalis
Guggul Commiphora mukul Lemongrass Cymbopogon citratus
Gum arabic Acacia senegal Lemon verbena Aloysia triphylla
Gumweed Grindelia camporum, G. squarrosa Lesser celandine Ranunculus ficaria
Gutta-percha Palaquium gutta Licorice Glycyrrhiza glabra
Life everlasting Antennaria dioica
Hawthorn Crataegus laevigata, C. monogyna Life root Packera aurea
Heartsease Viola tricolor Lily ofthe valley Convallaria majalis
Hedge mustard Sisymbrium officinale Lime Citrus aurantifolia
Hemlock, poison Conium maculatum Linden Tika cordata, T. europaea,
Hemp agrimony Eupatorium cannabinum T. platyphyllos
Hemp, Indian Apocynum cannabinum Lobelia Lobelia inflata
Henbane Hyoscyamus niger Lomatium Lomatium dissectum
Henna Lawsonia inermis Loosestrife, purple Lythrum salicaria
Holly Tex aquifolium Lucerne Medicago sativa
Honeysuckle Lonicera spp. Lungwort Pulmonaria officinalis
Hops Humulus lupulus
Horehound Marrubium vulgare Ma huang Ephedra sinica
Horse chestnut Aesculus bippocastanum Madagascar periwinkle Catharanthus roseus
Horsemint Monarda punctata Madonna lily Lilium candidum
Horseradish Armoracia rusticana Magnolia Magnolia officinalis
Horsetail Equisetum arvense Maidenhair fern Adiantum capillus-veneris
Houndstongue Cynoglossum officinale Male fern Dryopteris filix-mas
Houseleek. Sempervivum tectorum Mallow Malva sylvestris
Hydrangea Hydrangea arborescens Mandrake, American Podophyllum peltatum
Hyssop Hyssopus officinalis Manna Fraxinus ornus
Marigold Calendula officinalis
celand moss Cetraria islandica Marijuana Cannabis sativa
pecac, American Euphorbia ipecacuanha Marjoram Origanum majorana
Ipecacuanha Cephaelis ipecacuanha Marshmallow Althaea officinalis
rish moss Chondrus crispus Mastic Pistacia lentiscus
ly Hedera helix Maté Tlex paraguariensis
Mayapple Podophyllum peltatum
Jaborandi Pilocarpus jaborandi Mayweed Anthemis cotula
Jacob’s ladder Polemonium caeruleum Meadowsweet Filipendula ulmaria
Jalap Ipomoea purga Mexican scammony root Ipomoea orizabensis
Jamaica dogwood Piscidia erythrina Mezereon Daphne mezereum
Jambul Syzygium cumini Milk thistle Silybum marianum
Jasmine Jasminum grandiflorum Milkweed Asclepias syriaca
Jequerity Abrus precatorius Mistletoe Viscum album
Jewelweed Impatiens capensis Monkshood Aconitum napellus
Jimsonweed Datura stramonium Motherwort Leonurus cardiaca
Joe pye Eupatorium purpureum Mountain ash Sorbus aucuparia
Jujube Ziziphus juyuba Mountain grape Mabonia aquifolium
Juniper Juniperus communis Mouse ear Hieracium pilosella
Mugwort Artemisia vulgaris
Kava kava Piper methysticum Muira puama Liriosma ovata
Kinnikinnick Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Mulberry Morus alba
Knapweed, black Centaurea nigra Mullein Verbascum thapsus
Kola Cola vera Muskseed Abelmoschus moschatus

Kudzu

Labrador tea
Lady’s bedstraw
Lady’s mantle
Lady’s slipper
Larkspur
Laurel
Lavender

Pueraria montana vat. lobata

Ledum groenlandicum
Galium verum
Alchemilla vulgaris
Cypripedium calceolus
Consolida regalis
Laurus nobilis
Lavandula spp.

Mustard, black
Mustard, white
Myrrh

Myrtle
Nasturtium

Neem

Nettle

Brassica nigra

Sinapsis alba

Commiphora molnol,
C. myrrha

Myrtus communis

Tropaeolum majus
Azadiracta indica
Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 642 -----
634 <@ HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Night-blooming cereus Selenicereus grandiflorus Quaking aspen Populus tremuloides
Nutmeg Myristica fragrans Quassia Quassia amara
Nux vomica Strychnos nux-vomica Queen’s delight Stillingia sylvatica
Quince Cydonia oblonga
Oak Quercus robur, Q. alba Quinine Cinchona spp.
Oats, oatstraw Avena sativa
Olive Olea europaea Ragwort Senecio jacobaea
Onion Allium cepa Raspberry Rubus idaeus
Opium poppy Papaver somniferum Red clover Trifolium pratense
Orange, bitter Citrus aurantium vat. amara Red maple Acer rubrum
Orange, sweet Citrus sinensis Red poppy Papaver rhoeas
Oregano Origanum vulgare Red root Ceanothus americanus
Oregon grape Mahonia aquifolium Rehmannia Rebmannia glutinosa
Orris Iris germanica Reishi Ganoderma lucidum
Osha Ligusticum porteri Restharrow Ononsis spinosa
Rhatany Krameria triandra
Pacific yew Taxus brevifolia Rhubarb, Chinese Rheum officinale, R. palmatuin
Papaya Carica papaya Rice Oryza sativa
Paraguay tea Ilex paraguariensis Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis
Parsley Petroselinum crispum Rubber Hevea spp.
Partridgeberry Mitchella repens Rue Ruta graveolens
Pasqueflower Pulsatilla vulgaris Rupturewort Herniaria glabra
Passionflower Passiflora incarnata
Patchouli Pogostemon cablin Safflower Carthamus tinctorius
Pau d’arco Tabebuia avellanedae Saffron Crocus sativus
Peach Prunus persica Sage, garden Salvia officinalis
Peanut Arachis hypogaea Sage, red Salvia officinalis var. rubia
Pellitory of the wall Parietaria officinalis Sandalwood Santalum album
Pennyroyal Mentha pulegium Sanicle Sanicula europaea
Pennyroyal, American Hedeoma pulegioides Sarsaparilla Smilax spp. 7
Peony Paeonia officinalis Sassafras Sassafras albidum
Pepper, black Piper nigrum Savin Juniperus sabina

Peppermint
Periwinkle

* Persimmon, American
Peru balsam

Peyote
Pill-bearing spurge
Pink root
Pitcher plant
Plantain

Pleurisy root
Plum

Poison hemlock
Poke

Polypody root
Pomegranate
Poplar, white
Prickly ash
Primrose
Psyllium
Pumpkin
Purging buckthorn
Purple loosestrife
Pussytoes
Pygeum
Pyrethrum

Mentha x piperita
Vinca major, V. minor
Diospyros virginiana
Myroxylon balsamum
var. pereirae
Lophophora williamsii
Euphorbia pilulifera
Spigelia marilandica
Sarracenia purpurea
Plantago major
Asclepias tuberosa
Prunus domestica
Conium maculatum
Phytolacca americana
Polypodium virginianum
Punica granatum
Populus alba
Zanthoxylum americanum
Primula vulgaris
Plantago ovata
Cucurbita pepo
Rhamnus cathartica
Lythrum salicaria
Antennaria dioica
Prunus africana
Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium

Savory, summer
Savory, winter
Saw palmetto
Scammony
Scarlet pimpernel
Schizandra
Scurvygrass

Sea holly
Self-heal

Senna

Sesame

Sheep sorrel
Shepherd’s purse
Shiitake
Siberian ginseng
Silverweed
Skullcap

Skunk cabbage
Slippery elm
Smartweed
Smooth sumac
Snakeroot, Seneca
Sneezeweed
Soap bark
Soapwort
Solomon’s seal

Satureja hortensis
Satureja montana
Serenoa repens
Convolvulus scammonia
Anagallis arvensis
Schisandra chinensis
Cochlearia officinalis
Eryngium maritimum
Prunella vulgaris
Senna alexandrina
Sesamum orientale
Rumex acetosella
Capsella bursa-pastoris
Lentinus edodes
Eleutherococeus senticosus
Potentilla anserina
Scutellaria lateriflora
Symplocarpus foetidus
Ubnus rubra
Polygonum hydropiper
Rhus glabra
Polygala senega
Achillea ptarmica
Quillaja saponaria
Saponaria officinalis
Polygonatum biflorum,
P. multiflorum

----- PAGE 643 -----
Heras By LATIN AND COMMON NaMES «> = 635

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Sorrel Rumex acetosa Usnea Usnea spp.
Southernwood Artemisia abrotanum

Soy Glycine max Valerian Valeriana officinalis
Spearmint Mentha spicata Vanilla Vanilla planifolia
Speedwell Veronica officinalis Vervain Verbena officinalis
Spikenard, American Aralia racemosa Vetiver Vetiveria zizantoides
Squill Urginea maritima Virginia snakeroot Aristolochia serpentaria
St. John’s wort Hypericum perforatum Vitex Vites agnus-castus
Star anise Iicium verum

Stavesacre Delphinium staphisagria Wahoo Euonymus atropurpureus
Stinking iris Tris foetidissima Walnut, English Juglans regia
Stoneroot Collinsonia canadensis Watercress Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum
Storax Liquidambar orientalis Water mint Mentha aquatica
Strawberry Fragaria vesca Wheat Triticum aestivum
Strychnine tree Strychnos nux-vomica White bryony Bryonia alba
Sugarcane Saccharum officinarum White hellebore Veratrum album
Sundew Drosera rotundifolia White water lily Nymphaea odorata
Sunflower Helianthus annuus Wild cherry Prunus serotina

Sweet annie Artemisia annua Wild cucumber Ecballium elaterium
Sweet cicely Myrrhis odorata Wild ginger Asarum canadense
Sweet flag Acorus calamus Wild indigo Baptisia tinctoria
Sweetgale Mpyrica gale Wild lettuce Lactuca virosa

Sweet sumac
Sweet vernalgrass
Sweet violet

Tamarack
Tamarin¢e
Tansy
Tapioca
Tarragon
Tea

Tea tree
Thorn apple
Thuja
Thyme
Tobacco
Tolu balsam

Tonka bean
Tragacanth

Tree of heaven
True unicorn root
Tuliptree

Turkey corn
Turmeric

Rhus aromatica
Anthoxanthum odoratum
Viola odorata

Larix laricina
Tamarindus indica
Tanacetum vulgare
Manihot esculenta
Artemisia dracunculus
Camellia sinensis
Melaleuca alternifolia
Datura stramonium
Thuja occidentalis
Thymus vulgaris
Nicotiana tabacum
Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum
Dipteryx odorata
Astragalus gummifer
Ailanthus altissima
Aletris farinosa
Liviodendron tulipifera
Dicentra canadensis
Curcuma longa

Wild yam
Willow
Wintergreen
Witch hazel
Wood betony
Woodruff, sweet
Wood sorrel
‘Wormseed
Wormwood
Woundwort

Yarrow

Yellow dock
Yellow flag
Yellow jasmine
Yellow root
Yerba mansa
Yerba santa
Yew, English
Yew, Pacific
Yohimbe

Zedoary

Dioscorea villosa

Salix alba, S. cinereas
Gaultheria procumbens
Hamamelis virginiana
Stachys betonica, S. officinalis
Galium odoratum

Oxalis acetosella
Chenopodium ambrosioides
Artemisia absinthium
Stachys palustris

Achillea milléfolium
Rumex crispus

Tris pseudacorus
Gelsemium sempervirens
Xanthorhiza apiifolia
Anemopsis californica
Ertodictyon californicum
Taxus baccata

Taxus brevifolia
Pausinystalia yohimbe

Curcuma zedoaria

----- PAGE 644 -----
Appendix 4

oa

PHARMACY TERMS

LATIN TERM COMMON TRANSLATION LATIN TERM
ABBREVIATION
ad ad to, up to
ad libitum ad lib. at pleasure emulsum
adde add add (thou) et
agita agit shake, stir ex modo
alternis boris alt. h. every other hour ‘prescripto
ana a.a, or aa ofeach
ante a. before fac, fiat, fiant
ante cibum a.c. before food, before meals
ante meridien am. morning flos
aqua aq. water folium
aqua ad aq. ad. water up to
aqua dist. aq. dest; distilled water
auris aur.; a ear granum
auris dexter ad. right ear guttae
auris laevus a.l. left ear
auris sinister as. left ear bora
auris utro au. each ear bora somni
auristillae aurist eardrops
a.tc. around the clock
injectio
bis b. twice
bis in die bid. twice a day
brachium brach. the arm laevus
linimentum
capsula caps a capsule liquor
chartulae charts powders
cibus cib.; c. food
collunarium collun a nose wash minimum
collutorium collut. a mouthwash misce
collyrium collyr. an eyewash
compositus comp. compound
congius cong.; C. gallon
cum core. with
cum cibus c.c. with food; with meals
nocte
dentur d. give (thou); let be given naristillae
dentur tales doses d.t.d. give of such doses nebule
dexter d. right non repetatur
diebus alternis dieb. alt. every other day
dilutus dil. dilute, diluted octarius
disp. dispense oculentum
div. divide oculus
DW distilled water oculus dexter
oculus laevus
oculus sinister

636

COMMON TRANSLATION
ABBREVIATION
elix. elixir
emuls. emulsion
et and
e.m.p. as directed, in the manner
prescribed

fi; ft. let it be made; make
fi; fl. fluid

flower
fol. leaf.
g; G.; gm. gram
gr. grain
git. a drop
h at the hour of
hs. at bedtime
im. intramuscular
inj. injection
iv. IV intravenous
L left
lin. liniment
liq. a solution
lot. lotion
min; Mx minum
m.;M mix
meg microgram
mEq. milliequivalent
mg milligram
ml milliliter
n. at night
narist. nasal drops
neb. a spray
non.rep. do not repeat
oO. pint
occulent. eye ointment
0. eye
o.d. right eye
ol. left eye
o.s. left eye

----- PAGE 645 -----
LATIN TERM COMMON TRANSLATION
ABBREVIATION

oculus utro ou. both eyes, each eye

omni mane om. every morning

‘parti affectae p.a.a. to be applied to affected
applicandus part

‘per os p-o. by mouth

‘post cibum p.c. after meals

pr per rectum

pro re nata p.rn. as needed

pulvis pulv. powder

quater in die quid. four times a day

quaque q- each, every

quaque die qd. every day

quaque hora q-h. every hour

quantum qs. a sufficient quantity
sufficiat

quantum q.s. ad a sufficient quantity to make
sufficiat ad

radix rad. root

LATIN TERM

secundum artem

Semen
semis
signa
Sine

Si opus sit

statim
Suppositorum
syrupus
tabella

ter in die

trochiscus
tussis

ungentum
ut dictum

COMMON
ABBREVIATION

S.a.

PHARMACY TERMS «>

TRANSLATION

according to the art

S.C.; subc; subq subcutaneously

semen
ss

Sig.

s

8.0.5.
sol.
stat.
supp.
syr.

tab.
tbsp.
tid.
tinc.; tr.
troche
tuss.

ung.
ut dict.; u.d.

seed

one half
write, label
without

if necessary
solution
immediately
suppository
syrup

tablet
tablespoonful
three times a day
tincture

lozenge

a cough

an ointment
as directed

637

----- PAGE 646 -----
Appendix 5

MN

WEIGHT AND MEASURE CONVERSIONS

MINIMS MILLILITERS FLUID DRAMS MILLILITERS FLUID OUNCES MILLILITERS
1 0.06 1 37 1 2957
2 on 2 339 2 5957
5 031 3 1109 5 14787
10 0.62 4 1479 7 20701
5 092 5 18.48 0 295.23
20 1B 6 2218 2 354.88
30 185 7 25.88 4 414.02
40 246 8 (Ifl. oz) 2957 6 (pt) 4B
50 3.08 32 (I qt) 946.33
60 (Ifl. dr) 370 28 (1 gal) 378532

Apothecaries— Metric Weight Conversion

GRAINS GRAMS DRAMS GRAMS OUNCES GRAMS
~ 0.032 1 3,888 ] 31103
1 0.065 2 17% 2 62.207
Wa 0.097 (01) 3 11.664 3 93310
2 012 4 15,552 4 124414
5 030 5 19.440 5 155.517
10 0.65 6 3328 6 186.621
5 100 7 71216 7 274
20 130 8 (loz) 31103 8 248.828
30 2.00 9 279931
10 311.035
R 33.242

638

----- PAGE 647 -----
Appendix 6

SN

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

here is a great need for herbalists to be well informed

about the diversity of information and approaches

within their field of interest. For the purpose of this
appendix, I have grouped a wide range of activities under the
category “Herbalist,” even though the members of these vari-
ous groups may not agree with me. There are forms of phy-
totherapy that embrace both the folk healers and those using a
developed medical system. There are herbal approaches based
within the Western biomedical model, as well as Oriental prac-
tices, such as traditional Chinese medicine and ayurveda.
Pharmacognosists, phytopharmacologists, and ethnobotanists
also fit within the herbal categorization, as do those involved in
the various aspects of the herbal products industry.

Herbal information germane to the various subgroupings
within the herbal field exists but is often unknown to those in
different segments of this wide-ranging field. There is a great
need to expand the usual sources of information and build
bridges between these enclaves of interest. Unfortunately,
there are many issues of mutual comprehension, as language
often blocks communication in medicine. Nuances of vocabu-
lary disparities can mask fundamental agreements of ideas and
approach. Likewise, lack of clarity often obscures important
differences in both principle and technique. Within the field,
there is often a dogmatic attachment to words and specific for-
mulations of belief, opinion, and theory, It is important that
modalities that have their foundations outside the biomedical
model not be ignored or discounted because they exemplify a
different belief system, as they represent an enrichment of pos-
sibilities, not a challenge to the status quo.

‘The material that follows focuses on the information re-
sources that relate to Western herbalism. I hope that herbalists
familiar with the other cultural forms of herbalism, such as
ayurveda and TCM, will create similar guides in the future.

LIBRARIES

Libraries are an astonishing resource as long as the herbalist
knows how to use them and—sometimes more important—how
to relate to librarians! A range of specialized libraries are de-
scribed by subject area in directories such as:

639

Subject Collections, Lee Ash, R.R. Bowker Co., Sth. ed., 1978.
Directory of Special Libraries and Information Centers, Gale
Research Co.

Of all the specialized libraries, the Lloyd Library is of
paramount interest.

Lloyd Library, 917 Plum Street, Cincinnati, OH 45202,
(513) 721-3707, wwwlloydlibrary.org

The Lloyd Library has one of the finest collections of the liter-
ature of botany and pharmacy in the United States, specializing
in plant chemistry, pharmacognosy, medicinal plants, and Eclec-
tic medicine. It houses the accumulated libraries of all the
Eclectic medical schools, as well as a vast collection of Eclectic
case history files. This cornucopia of Eclectic knowledge is a
unique and irreplaceable resource. To quote Michael Moore, di-
rector of the Southwest School of Botanical Medicine, the library
contains “the writings of a discipline of medicine that survived
for a century that was famous (or infamous) for its vast plant ma-
teria medica that treated the patient and NOT the pathology, a
sophisticated model of vitalist healing every bit as usable as tra-
ditional Chinese medicine and ayurvedic medicine.”

The library boasts one of the world’s largest and most com-
plete collections of pharmacopoeias, formularies, and dispen-
satories. The periodicals collection includes many rare journals
hard to obtain elsewhere, and often in complete, unbroken sets.
The library also supports the scientific research of natural prod-
ucts through joint publication of the Journal of Natural Products
(Lloydia) with the American Society of Pharmacognosy. Much
information from the library is distributed by mail or provided
over the phone.

The Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress
Classification Systems

Both the Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress classification
systems facilitate access to the wealth of books published in the
English language that are relevant to the multidisciplinary in-
terests of phytotherapy.

The Dewey Decimal System
The Dewey Decimal System of Classification, used in most
local and school libraries, has the advantage of a limited number

----- PAGE 648 -----
640 @ HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

of general categories and short call numbers. The system is
based on ten classes of subject (000-999), which are then further
subdivided. Below are examples of the listings found under the
categories Herb, Botanical Science, and Medical Sciences.

Herb
Herb gardens 635.7
agriculture 635.7
commercial processing 663.96
Herb teas 641.357
cooking with 641.657
home preparation 641.877
Herbaceous flowering plants $82.13
Herbaceous plants 582.12
Herbaceous shrubs $82.14
Herbaceous vines $82.14
Herbals
Pharmacognosy 615.321
Herbariums $80.742

$80 Botanical Science

581.6 Economic botany
581.61 Beneficial plants
581.63 Edible and medicinal plants
581.64 Plants of industrial & technological value
581.65 Deleterious plants
581.67 Allergenic plants
581.69 Poisonous plants
610 Medical Sciences
615.1 Drugs (materia medica)
615.11 | Pharmacopoeias
615.12 Dispensatories
615.13 Formularies
615.3 Organic drugs
615.32 Drugs of plant origin
615.321 Pharmacognosy
615.53 General therapeutic systems, including Eclectic,
botanic medicine, and ayurveda
615.535 Naturopathy
615.8 Specific therapies and kinds of therapies
615.88 Empirical and historical remedies
615.882 Folk medicine

615.886 Patent medicines

The Library of Congress (LC) classification

The Library of Congress, or LC, classification consists of sepa-
rate, mutually exclusive, special classifications. The arrange-
ment roughly follows groupings of social sciences, humanities,
and natural and physical sciences. It divides the references into
20 large classes and an additional class for general works. Each

main class has a synopsis that also serves as a guide. Resulting
order is from the general to the specific, from the theoretical to
the practical. Listed below are the letters and titles of the main
classes.

A—General Works

B—Philosophy. Psychology. Religion
C—Auxiliary Sciences of History
D—History: General and Old World
E—History: America

F—History: America
G—Geography. Anthropology. Recreation
H—Social Sciences

J—Political Science

K—Law

L—Education

M—Music and Books on Music
N—Fine Arts

P—Language and Literature
Q—Science

R—Medicine

S—Agriculture

T—Technology

U—Military Science

V—Naval Science

Z—Library Science

In place of standard subdivisions, each class may incorpo-
rate divisions for literary form and geography. Terminology may
be explicit, exact, scientific, or popular, depending on the situa-
tion. Subdivisions in the LC system are arranged roughly on a
historical basis, and the notation is mixed, combining capital let-
ters and numerals. More combinations, and thus greater speci-
ficity, is possible, yet excessively long notations do not occur. As
examples, consider some herbally relevant subcategories in
Science and in Medicine:

Class Q SCIENCE

QD 1-999 Chemistry

QH 1-705.5 Biology (General)

Qk 1-989 Botany

QP 1-981 Physiology

Class R MEDICINE

RM 1-950 Therapeutics. Pharmacology

RS 1441 Pharmacy and Materia Medica

RV. 1-431 Botanic, Thomsonian, and Eclectic medicine
RX 1-681 Homeopathy

RZ 201-999 — Other systems of medicine

Subject headings used by the LC system under which in-
formation concerning medicinal plants and their therapeutic ap-
plication in medicine may be found include:

----- PAGE 649 -----
Materia Medica RS 153-441
Medicinal Plants QK 99, RS 164
Herbal Teas RM 666
Herbs—Therapeutic Use RA 1250
Pharmacognosy RS 160-167
Economic Botany QH 705-705.5

National Library of Medicine (NML) Classification
The National Library of Medicine classification covers the field
of medicine and related sciences. It is a system of mixed nota-
tion patterned after the Library of Congress (LC) classification
where alphabetical letters that denote broad subject categories
are further subdivided by numbers. The NLM classification uti-
lizes schedules QS-QZ and W-WZ, permanently excluded
from the LC classification. An outline of the National Library
of Medicine classification can be found on the Web at:
wwwef.nlm.nih.gov/class/OutlineofNLMClassificationSchedule.
hunl.

The Index to the NLM classification consists primarily of
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), a set of terms or subject
headings that are arranged in both an alphabetic and a hierar-
chical structure to permit searching at various levels of speci-
ficity from narrower to broader. There are almost 19,000 main
headings in MeSH and nearly 800 specialized descriptors, called
Qualifiers.

Index entries are updated annually to reflect additions and
changes to the vocabulary. A few of the significant herbal head-
ings are as follows:

Dispensatories, formularies, etc. QV 740
Drugs, Chinese Herbal QV 766
Ethnobotany GN 476.73
Ethnopharmacology QV 752
Herbal medicine WB 925
Materia medica QV 760
Medicine, Chinese Traditional WB 50
Medicine, Herbal WB 925
Medicine, Traditional WB 50
Pharmacognosy QV 752
Pharmacopoeias QV 738
Phytotherapy WB 925
Plant Extracts QV 766
Plant Preparations QV 766-770
Plants, Edible QK 98.5
Plants, Medicinal QV 766-770

The MeSH thesaurus is used for indexing articles for the
MEDLINE database. Each reference is associated with a set of
MeSH terms that describe the content of the item. Similarly, a
retrieval query is formed using MeSH terms to find items on a
desired topic.

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES .@ 641

A number of terms directly relevant to herbal medicine are
found in the MeSH thesaurus. The following are the most use-
ful, with the number of citations found (June 2003):

Drugs, Chinese Herbal 8,554
Medicine, Herbal 3,820
Phytotherapy 7,516
Plant Extracts 39,068
Plants, Medicinal 35,774

However, there is an undefined amount of overlap. The sum
of all the citations from the above list is 94,732. If a Boolean
search is done using all the search terms but excluding duplicates,
a total of 68,202 is found. This represents a truly impressive body
of knowledge. A further search done to ascertain how many of
these citations were human studies found 26,558 papers.

It is interesting to note the exponential increase in citations
listed for these herbal MeSH terms over the time frame covered
in the yearly database.

Year 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2003

Number 6,804 12,896 17501 23,510 31,798 42,649 58,698 68,202

of citations
70000
40000

a)

2

on)

¢ 50000 +

y

es

a

5 40000 5

F

¢ 30000 4

ec

v

2

*% 20000 7

[

GO 10000 -

a a el
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Year

As impressive as the MeSH thesaurus is, it has some limita-
tions when approached herbally. For the phytotherapist it is
often non-MeSH words that are used for finding a particular
reference. However, because only a few genus names are as-
signed as MeSH terms, any herb discussed in a research paper
can be accessed via its genus name.

----- PAGE 650 -----
642 <= HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

PEER-REVIEW JOURNALS AND
PROFESSIONAL NEWSLETTERS

A number of peer-review journals specialize in either phy-
totherapy itself or studies of medicinal plants. The primary ones
published in English are:
Alternative and Complementary Therapies
www.liebertpub.com/
Alternative Medicine Review
www.thorne.com/alternative/alter_main.html
Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine
www.alternative-therapies.com/at/login/index.jsp
American Journal of Botany
www.amjbot.org/
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
www.ajcn.org/

Economic Botany
www.econbot.org/
European Phytojournal
www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/phytojournal/index.htm
Fitoterapia
www.elsevier.nl/locate/fitote
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine
www.liebertpub.com/ACM/default] asp
Journal of Ethnopharmacology
http://sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03788742
Journal of Natural Products (Lloydia)
http://pubs.acs.org/journals/jnprdf/index.html
Journal of Naturopathic Medicine
www.healthy.net/library/journals/naturopathic/
Pharmaceutical Biology (fournal of Pharmacognosy)
www.szp.swets.nl/szp/frameset.htm?url=% 2Fszp%2Fjourn
als%2Fpb.htm
Natural Product Reports
www.rsc.org/is/journals/current/npr/nprpub.htm
Phytochemistry
www.elsevier.com:80/inca/publications/store/2/7/3/
Phytomedicine
www.urbanfischer.de/journals/frame_template.htm?/jour-
nals/phytomed/phytmed.htm
Phytotherapy Research
www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/095 1-41 8X/
Planta Medica
www.thieme.de/plantamedica/
Professional bodies and phytotherapy associations often pub-
lish excellent, highly relevant, although not peer-reviewed, jour-
nals and newsletters. Ones of note published in English include:

American Herb Association Quarterly
www.ahaherb.com/

Australian Journal of Medical Herbalism
www.nhaa.org.au/journal.htm!

The British Journal of Phytotherapy
(no Web address available)

HerbalGram
www.herbalgram.org/herbalgram/

Medical Herbalism
www.medherb.com

Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients
www.tldp.com/

OUT-OF-PRINT BOOKS

As many of the primary source books are out of print, it is nec-
essary to use the services of book-search specialists. Most book-
stores can do a nationwide search but it is often more effective
to go directly to the specialized search agency. The Antiquarian
Booksellers Association of America publishes the Bookmman’s
Weekly, the leading guide to services and books offered. There
are a few antiquarian-book dealers that specialize in herbals and
Eclectic material. One of these is Herbalist & Alchemist Books,
run by one of America’s foremost phytotherapists, David
Winston. It publishes a twice-yearly catalog of books and jour-
nals relating to herbalism, Eclectic medicine, economic botany,
pre-1920 pharmacy, ethnobotany, and natural products chemistry.

Herbalist & Alchemist Books, PO Box 553, Broadway, NJ 08808,
(908) 689-9020.

ONLINE DATABASES

Before personal computers, creating bibliographies and finding
reference material relevant to phytotherapy meant spending
many hours in the library working through volumes of printed
indexes and card catalogs, writing down each citation, finding
the document, and then photocopying it. Online database re-
trieval now allows the herbal researcher access to millions of
articles at the touch of a keyboard. Two databases of primary
importance to herbalism are NAPRALERT and MEDLINE,
although other useful sites are included as well.

AGRICOLA (Agriculture Online Access)
www.nalusda.gov/general_info/agricola/agricola.html

A bibliographic database containing selective worldwide cover-
age of agriculture and related fields from 1970 to the present.
AGRICOLA is the locator and bibliographic access and control
system of the National Agricultural Library collections and also
includes records from other cooperating institutions. Records
contain bibliographic information, geographic terms, GenBank
Numbers, chemical names, and CAS Registry Numbers.
Abstracts are available for some records.

BIOSIS

www.biosis.org.
A bibliographic database covering worldwide literature on all
biological and biomedical topics. The database includes the
printed Biological Abstracts (1969-present); Biological
Abstracts/RRM (Reports, Review, Meetings), 1980-present;
and the BioResearch Index (1969-79). Records contain bibli-

----- PAGE 651 -----
ographic data, keywords, and Biosystematic and Concept Codes.
CAS Registry Numbers and chemical names are present for
substances appearing in the title and keyword fields.

Chemical Abstracts
www.cas.org

The premier indexing source for chemical, biochemical, and
chemical engineering literature, covering over 12,000 journals
and conferences, as well as technical reports, dissertations,
books, and patents. There are two parts: weekly abstracts issues
arranged by topics and cumulative semiannual indexes using
chemical name, formula, subject, and author.

Medicinal Plants of Native America Database (MPNADB)
herb.umd.umich.edu/

The Medicinal Plants of Native America Database, based on the

book of the same name, contains data on the medicinal uses of

2,147 species by 123 different Native American peoples. The

database was created by Dr. Daniel E. Moerman, and the site is

a resource of the National Agricultural Library.

NAPRALERT (Natural Products Alert)
www.cas.org/ONLINE/DBSS/napralertss.htm]

The largest and most comprehensive computerized database cov-
ering medicinal plants is NAPRALERT, established by Professor
Norman Farnsworth and colleagues at the University of Illinois at
Chicago. NAPRALERT also covers the world’s literature on the
chemistry and pharmacology of secondary metabolites derived
from natural sources. From this, a wide range of printouts can be
prepared providing, for example, ethnomedical, pharmacological,
and phytochemical profiles for any given plant, animal, or
microbe. The database is maintained by the Program for
Collaborative Research in the Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago. Combined, the
articles contain information on more than 87,000 chemicals and
more than 38,000 plant and animal species and include more than
426,000 records on biological activity associated with those
species. For subscription information, call (312) 996-2246.

Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases
www.ars-grin.gov/duke/

Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases is a directory to
various USDA plant databases. The site consists of four major
areas: the Phytochemco Database, related browsable databases
(listed below), documents, and additional resources. The
Phytochemco Database can be searched in a variety of ways. For
example, a search can list reported constituents of a specific
plant, identify constituents within a specific activity, list all
plants known to contain a specific chemical, and identify chem-
icals with a specific lethal dose value. Ethnobotany searches give
ethnobotanical uses for a plant or plants with a particular eth-
nobotanical use. All the database references will yield reference
citations. Other related databases accessible through the Phyto-

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES .e- 643

chemical and Ethnobotanical Databases are Ecosys (ecological
ranges), Ethnobot DB (worldwide plant uses), Foodplant DB
(Native American food plants), MPNADB (medicinal plants of
Native America), and Phytochem DB (plant chemicals).

The National Library of Medicine
www.nlm.nih.gov

The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is the world’s largest
medical library. The library collects materials in all areas of
biomedicine and health care, as well as works on biomedical as-
pects of technology, the humanities, and the physical, life, and
social sciences. For over 100 years, the library has published the
Index Medicus, a monthly subject/author guide to articles in
3,400 journals. This information (and much more) is now avail-
able in the database MEDLINE, the major online component
of PubMed (see below), freely accessible via the World Wide
Web. A number of additional databases provided by the NLM,
including one covering clinical trials, are listed here below.

MEDLINE (Medical Literature, Analysis, and Retrieval
System Online)
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi

MEDLINE is the NLM'’s premier bibliographic database, con-
taining citations and author abstracts from more than 4,600
biomedical journals published in the United States and 70 other
countries. It lists over 12 million citations dating back to the
mid-1960s. Coverage is worldwide, but most records are from
English-language sources or have English abstracts. Citations
prior to the mid-1960s can be found in NLM’s OLDMED-
LINE database. Almost 2,000 completed references are added
daily. MEDLINE is available on the Internet through the
PubMed URL and can be searched free of charge. No registra-
tion is required.

PubMed
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fegi

Provides free access to MEDLINE and more, including selected
life sciences journals not in MEDLINE. PubMed was developed
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
at the NLM. Entrez is the text-based search and retrieval system
used at NCBI for all major databases including PubMed,
Nucleotide, Protein Sequences, Protein Structures, Complete
Genomes, and Taxonomy. LinkOut provides access to full-text
articles at journal Web sites and other related Web resources.

ClinicalTrials

www.clinicaltrials.gov/
This Web site of the NLM provides current information for pa-
tients and the general public about clinical research studies.

DIRLINE
dirline.nlm.nih.gow/
The NLM’s directory of health organizations. An online database

----- PAGE 652 -----
644 @ HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

containing location and information about other resources con-
cerned with health and biomedicine, including organizations,

research resources, projects, and databases.

ADDITIONAL SITES
Herbalists
The Southwest School of Botanical Medicine/ Michael
Moore

www.swsbm.com/HOMEPAGE/HomePage.html
A cornucopia of herbal wisdom and information. Michael Moore
is to be commended for making his wealth of phytotherapeutic ex-
perience and insights so readily available. His site also houses on-
line versions of many Eclectic and Thomsonian texts, which are
essential reading for any medical herbalist. A brief overview of the
site’s sections will illustrate its importance:

Medicinal Plant Photographs by genus
Texts and Manuals by Michael Moore
Eclectic Medicine, Materia Medica and Pharmacy—classic
texts, including:
American Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy
www.swsbm.com/Ellingwoods/Ellingwoods.html
The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology and Therapeutics
www,.swsbm.com/FelterMM/Felters.html
Eclectic and Pharmaceutical Journals—classic texts
Herbology and Herb Growing—classic texts
Thomsonian Medicine—classic texts

Ethnobotany and Traditional Plant Uses—classic texts
Medicinal Plants: Research, Resources, FAQs, Regional
Plant Checklists

Henriette’s Herbal Homepage
ibiblio.org/herbmed/index-htm!

Another treasure trove of relevant material, offered by Henriette

Kress, an herbalist in Finland.

Howie Brounstein’s Homepage
www.teleport.com/~howieb/howie.html

Jonathan Treasure’s Herbal Bookworm
www.herbological.com

Medical Herbalism/Paul Bergner

www.medherb.com

Robyn Klein’s Recommended Reading

www.rrreading.com

Rosemary Gladstar’s Sagemountain

www.sagemountain.com

Christopher Hobbs Virtual Herbal
www.christopherhobbs.com

Directories/Links/Databases
Library of Congress World Wide Web

marvel.loc.gov/

WWW Virtual Library
vlib.org/

Internet Directory for Botany: economic botany,
ethnobotany
www.botany.net/IDB/subject/botecon.html
Open Directory: Science, Biology, Botany, Ethnobotany
dmoz.org/Science/Biology/Botany/Ethnobotany/

Excite Directory: Science, Biology, Botany, Ethnobotany
www.excite.co.uk/directory/Science/Biology/Botany/
Ethnobotany

Open Directory: Health, Alternative, Herbs
dmoz.org/Health/Alternative/Herbs/

Excite Directory: Health, Alternative, Herb
www.excite.co.uk/directory/Health/Alternative/Herbs
Omni
omni.ac.uk/browse/mesh/detail/G002 5 125L0025125.html

Food & Drug Administration (FDA)
www.fda.gov/fdahomepage.html

Martindale’s Bio & Medical Databases
www.sci.lib.uci.edu/~martindale/RefDatabaseBio. html

NIH Office of Dietary Supplements
dietary-supplements.info.nih.gow/

NIH Web Search
search.info.nih.gov/

Phytonet
www.exeter.ac.uk/phytonet/welcome.html

Phytopharmacognosy

www.mdx.ac.uk/www/pharm/

Materia Medicas
A Modern Herbal (Mrs. Grieve)
www.botanical.com/botanical/mgmh/mgmh.html

HealthWorld Online

www.healthy.net/

HerbMed
www.herbmed.org/

King’s American Dispensatory
www.ibiblio.org/herbmed/eclectic/kings/intro.htm]

----- PAGE 653 -----
The Raintree Tropical Plant Database
www.rain-tree.com/plants.htm

The TCM Herbal Database
www.rmhiherbal.org/ai/pharintro.html

Associations
American Association of Naturopathic Physicians
www.naturopathic.org/

American Association of Oriental Medicine
www.aaom.org/

American Botanical Council
www.herbalgram.org/

American Herb Product Association
www.ahpa.org/

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia
www.herbal-ahp.org/

American Herbalists Guild
www.americanherbalistsguild.com/

British Herbal Medical Association
www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/bhma.html

European Scientific Co-operative on Phytotherapy
(ESCOP)

www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/escop.html
Gesellschaft fiir Phytotherapie e.V.
www.phytotherapy.org/
Herb Research Foundation

www.herbs.org/

National Centre for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine
alumed.od.nih.gov/

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES 645

National Herbalists Association of Australia
www.nhaa.org.au/

National Institute of Medical Herbalists

www.nimh.org.uk/

New Zealand Association of Medical Herbalists
nzamh.org.nz/

The European Herbal Practitioners Association
www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~ehpa

The Ontario Herbalists Association

www.herbalists.on.ca/

United Plant Savers
www.plantsavers.org/

Phytochemicals
Phytochemistry Tutorials

www. friedli.com/herbs/phytochem/phyto_tutorial.html

The Phytochemistry of Herbs

www.herbalchem.net/

Chemfinder

chemfinder.cambridgesoft.com/

Taxomony
Integrated Taxonomic Information System

www.itis.usda.gov/index. html

Missouri Botanical Garden
www.mobot.org/

PLANTS Database (USDA)

plants.usda.gov/

GRIN Taxonomy
www.ars-grin.gov/npgs/tax/

----- PAGE 654 -----
Appendix 7

Kingdom Plantae
Division Phaeophycophyta (brown algae: 1,500 species)
Class Phaeophyceae
Order Fucales
Family Fucaceae
Genus Fucus vesiculosus—bladderwrack
Division Rhodophycota (red algae: 4,000 species)
Class Rhodophyceae
Order Gigartinales
Family Gigartinaceae
Genus/Species Chondrus crispus
Division Bryophyta (mosses)
Subdivision Musci
Class Sphagnopsida
Subclass Sphagnidae
Order Sphagnales
Family Sphagnaceae
Genus Sphagnum L. (336 spp.)
Division Equisetophyta
Class Equisetopsida
Order Equisetales (1 family)
Family Equisetaceae (1 genus)
Genus Equisetum (32 spp.)
Species E. arvense L.—horsetail
Division Lycopodiophyta
Class Lycopsida
Order Lycopodiales
Family Lycopodiaceae (4-14 genera, 350-400 spp.)
Genus Lycopodium (200 spp.)
Species L. clavatum L.—club moss
Division Pteridophyta
Class Filicopsida
Order Polypodiales (28 families)
Family Dryopteridaceae (60-78 genera, 3,000-3,500 spp.)
Genus Dryopteris (150 spp.)
Species Dryopteris filix-mas L.—male fern
Division Ginkgophyta
Class Ginkgoopsida
Order Ginkgoales (1 family)
Family Ginkgoaceae (1 genus)
Genus Ginkgo (1 sp.)
Species Ginkgo biloba L.—ginkgo
Division Coniferophyta (gymnosperms)
Class Pinopsida
Order Taxales
Family Taxaceae (5 genera, 17-20 spp.)
Genus Taxus (8 spp.)
Species Taxus brevifolia Nutt—Pacific yew

rane

TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

646

Order Pinales (4 families)
Family Pinaceae (9-12 genera, 210 spp.)
Genus Abies (50 spp.)
Species Abies balsamea—balsam fir
Family Cupressaceae (28 genera, 120 spp.)
Genus Juniperus (60 spp.)
Species Juniperus communis L.—common juniper
Genus Thuja (5 spp.)
Species Thuja occidentalis L.—arborvitae
Division Gnetophyta
Class Gnetopsida (3 orders)
Order Ephedrales (1 family)
Family Ephedraceae (1 genus, 40 spp.)
Genus Ephedra (40 spp.)
Species Ephedra sinica Stapf—ma huang
Division Magnoliophyta (angiosperms, flowering plants)
(250,000 spp.)
Class Magnoliopsida
Subclass Magnoliidae (8 orders)
Order Magnoliales (10 families)
Family Magnoliaceae (7-12 genera, 220 spp.)
Genus Magnolia (180 spp.)
Species Magnolia x soulangiana Soul.-Bod.—
Chinese magnolia, Hou Pu
Family Myristicaceae (18 genera, 300 spp.)
Genus Myristica (120 spp.)
Species Myristica:fragrans Houtt—nutmeg
Order Laurales (8 families)
Family Monimiaceae (30 genera)
Genus Peumus (1 sp.)
Species Peumus boldus Molina—boldo
Family Lauraceae (30-50 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Cinnamomum (200 spp.)
Species Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Pres|—
camphor
Genus Laurus (2 spp.)
Species Laurus nobilis L—sweet bay
Genus Sassafras (3 spp.)
Species Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees—sassatras
Order Piperales (3 families)
Family Piperaceae (10 genera, 1,400-2,000 spp.)
Genus Piper (1,000 spp.)
Species Piper betel L._-betel pepper
Species Piper cubeba L. f—cubeb
Species Piper methysticum G. Forst—kava kava
Species Piper nigrum L.—black pepper

----- PAGE 655 -----
Order Aristolochiales (3 families)
Family Aristolochiaceae (8-10 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Aristolochia L. (500 spp.)
Species Aristolochia reticulata Jacq.—birthwort
Order Illiciales (2 families)
Family Schisandraceae (2 genera, 47 spp.)
Genus Schisandra (25 spp.)
Species Schisandra chinensis—schizandra
Order Papaverales (9 families)
Family Papaveraceae (26 genera, 300 spp.)
Genus Papaver (100 spp.)
Species Papaver somniferum L.—opium poppy
Genus Chelidonium (2 spp.)
Species Chelidonium majus L.—celandine
Genus Sanguinaria (1 sp.)
Species Sanguinaria canadensis L—bloodroot
Genus Eschscholzia (10 spp.)
Species Eschscholzia californica Cham.---
California poppy
Family Fumariaceae (£6 genera, 55 spp.)
Genus Fumaria (425 spp.)
Species Fumaria officinalis L.—fumitory
Order Ranunculales (8 families)
Family Ranunculaceae (50-52 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Aconitum (100 spp.)
Species Aconitum napellus L.—aconite, monkshood
Genus Pulsatilla (7 spp.)
Species Pulsatilla vulgaris (L.) P. Mill—pasqueflower
Genus Cimicifuga (15 spp.)
Species Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt.—black
cohosh
Genus Coptis (10 spp.)
Species Coptis trifolia (L.) Salisb—goldthread
Genus Ranunculus (400 spp.)
Species Ranunculus ficaria L.—lesser celandine
Genus Hydrastis (2 spp.)
Species Hydrastis canadensis L.—goldenseal
Family Berberidaceae (16-18 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Berberis (450 spp.)
Species Berberis vulgaris L.—barberry
Genus Mahonia (12 spp.)
Species Mahonia aquifolium (Pursh) Nutt—Oregon
grape
Genus Caulophyllum (2 spp.)
Species Caulophylum thalictroides (L..) Michx.—
blue cohosh
Genus Podophyllum L. (2 spp.)
Species Podophyllum peltatum L.—mayapple
Subclass Rosidae (18 orders)
Order Rosales (24 families)
Family Hydrangeaceae (17 genera, 170 spp.)
Genus Hydrangea (23 spp.)
Species Hydrangea arborescens L.—wild hydrangea
Family Rosaceae (100 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Agrimonia (15 spp.)
Species Agrimonia eupatoria L._—agrimony
Genus Crataegus (200 spp.)
Species Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC.—smooth
hawthorn
Genus Filipendula (10 spp.)
Species Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim.—
meadowsweet

"TAXONOMY HIERARCHY @ 647

Genus Prunus (430 spp.)
Species Prunus serotina Ehrh.—black cherry
Genus Rubus L. (250 spp.)
Species Rubus idaeus L.—common red raspberry
Order Fabales (19 families)
Family Fabaceae (590-800 genera, 14,000-20,000 spp.)
Genus Astragalus (1000 spp.)
Species Astragalus membranaceus—astragalus
Genus Baptisia (30-35 spp.)
Species Baptisia tinctoria (L.) Venten.—wild indigo
Genus Cyamopsis (3 spp.)
Species Cyamopsis tetragonoloba (L.) Taubert—guar
Genus Galega (6-8 spp.)
Species Galega officinalis L—goat’s rue
Genus Glycine (4 spp.)
Species Glycine max (L.) Merr.—soybean
Genus Medicago (100 spp.)
Species Medicago sativa L.—alfalfa
Genus Melilotus (25 spp.)
Species Melilotus officinalis (L.) Lam.—sweet
clover
Genus Myroxylon (2 spp.)
Species Myroxylon balsamum (L.) Harms—
balsam of Tolu
Genus Trifolium (300 spp.)
Species Trifolium pratense L.—red clover
Genus Trigonella (100 spp.)
Species Trigonella foenum-graecum L.—fenugreek
Genus Acacia (750-800 spp.)
Species Acacia catechu (L. f.) Willd.—black catechu
Order Myrtales (14 families)
Family Myrtaceae (140 genera, 3,000 spp.)
Genus Eucalyptus (600 spp.)
Species Eucalyptus globulus Labill—eucalyptus
Genus Pimenta (4 spp.)
Species Pimenta dioica (L.) Merr.—allspice
Genus Syzygium (400-500 spp.)
Species Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Skeels—clove
Family Onagraceae (16-17 genera, 645 spp.)
Genus Oenothera (80 spp.)
Species Ocenothera biennis L.—evening primrose
Order Santalales (10 families)
Family Viscaceae (8 genera, 350 spp.)
Genus Viscum (60-70 spp.)
Species Viscum album L.—European mistletoe
Order Celastrales (13 families)
Family Celastraceae (50-85 genera, 800 spp.)
Genus Euonymmus (176 spp.)
Species Exonymus atropurpurea Jacq.—wahoo
Genus Catha (1 sp.)
Species Catha edulis (Vahl) Forssk. ex Endl.—khat
Family Aquifoliaceae (4 genera, 200-400 spp.)
Genus Tex (399 spp.)
Species Lex aquifolium L.—English holly
Species Mex paraguariensis St.-Hil.—mate
Order Euphorbiales (4 families)
Family Euphorbiaceae (310-320 genera, 7,500 spp.)
Genus Euphorbia (2,000 spp.)
Species Euphorbia pilulifera Engelm.—pill-bearing
spurge
Genus Ricinus (1 sp.)
Species Ricinus communis L.—castor bean

----- PAGE 656 -----
648 @ TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

Order Rhamunales (3 families)
Family Rhamnaceae (50-55 genera, 900 spp.)
Genus Ceanothus (55 spp.)
Species Ceanothus americanus L—red root
Genus Rhamnus (110 spp.)
Species Rhamnus cathartica L_—buckthorn
Genus Ziziphus (100 spp.)
Species Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Karst—jujube
Order Linales (5 familes)
Family Erythroxylaceae (4 genera, 200 spp.)
Genus Erythroxylum (7 spp.)
Species Erythroxylum coca Lam.—coca
Family Linaceae (19 genera, 290 spp.)
Genus Linum (230 spp.)
Species Linum usitatissimum L.—flax
Order Polygalales (7 families)
Family Polygalaceae (12-19 genera, 750 spp.)
Genus Polygala (600 spp.)
Species Polygala senega L.—Seneca snakeroot
Family Krameriaceae (1 genus)
Genus Krameria (17 spp.)
Species Krameria triandra L.—rhatany
Order Sapindales (15 families)
Family Sapindaceae (134-140 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Paullinia L. (180 spp.)
Species Paullinia cupana L. Kunth—guarana
Family Hippocastanaceae (2 genera, 16 spp.)
Genus Aesculus L. (13 spp.)
Species Aesculus hippocastanum L.—horse chestnut
Family Burseraceae (16-20 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Boswellia (24 spp.)
Species Boswellia sacra Flueck.—frankincense
Genus Commiphora (185 spp.)
Species Commiphora molmol Jacq.—myrrh
Family Anacardiaceae (60-70 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Rhus L. (250 spp.)
Species Rhus aromatica Ait—fragrant sumac
Family Rutaceae (150-158 genera, 900-1,500 spp.)
Genus Agathosma (134 spp.)
Species Agathosma betulina (Bergius) Pill—buchu
Genus Citrus (16 spp.)
Species Citrus limetta Risso—bitter orange
Genus Pilocarpus (22 spp.)
Species Pilocarpus jaborandi Holmes—jaborandi
Genus Ruta (40 spp.)
Species Ruta graveolens L.—rue
Genus Zanthoxylum (30 spp.)
Species Zanthoxylum americanum Mill.—prickly ash
Family Zygophyllaceae (25 genera, 240 spp.)
Genus Guaiacum (6 spp.)
Species Guaiacum sanctum L.—lignum-vitae
Genus Larrea 3-4 spp.)
Species Larrea tridentata (Sesse & Moc. ex DC.)
Cov.—chaparral
Order Geraniales (6 families)
Family Geraniaceae (11 genera, 750 spp.)
Genus Geranium (400 spp.)
Species Geranium maculatum L.—American cranesbill

Order Apiales (7 families)
Family Araliaceae (47-70 genera, 700 spp.)
Genus Panax (8 spp.)
Species Panax ginseng C. Mey—Korean ginseng
Species Panax quinquefolius L—American ginseng
Genus Eleutherococcus (50 spp.)
Species Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. et Maxim.}—
Siberian ginseng
Genus Aralia L. (25 spp.)
Species Aralia racemosa L.—American spikenard
Genus Hedera (15 spp.)
Species Hedera helix L.—English ivy
Family Apiaceae (Umbelliferae) (428 genera, 3,000 spp.)
Genus Ammi L. (10 spp.)
Species Ammi visnaga L. Lam.—khella
Genus Anethum (2 spp.)
Species Anethum graveolens L.—dill
Genus Angelica (80 spp.)
Species Angelica archangelica L.—angelica
Species Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels—dong quai
Genus Apium (1 sp.)
Species Apium graveolens L.—celery
Genus Bupleurum (100 spp.)
Species Bupleurum falcatum L.—bupleuram
Genus Carum (30 spp.)
Species Carum carvi L.—caraway
Genus Centella (100 spp.)
Species Centella asiatica (L.) Urban—gotu cola
Genus Conium (4 spp.)
Species Conitum maculatum L.—poison hemlock
Genus Daucus (60 spp.)
Species Daucus carota L.—wild carrot
Genus Ferula (100+ spp.)
Species Ferula assa-foetida L.—asafetida
Species Ferula gummosa Boiss —galbanum
Genus Foeniculum (5 spp.)
Species Foenienlum vulgare Mill—fennel
Genus Lomatium (70 spp.)
Species Lomatium dissectum (Nutt.) Mathias &
Constance—lomatium
Genus Petroselinum (5 spp.)
Species Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex
A.W. Hill—parsley
Genus Pimpinella (150 spp.)
Species Pimpinella anisum L.—aniseed
Subclass Asteridae (11 orders)
Order Asterales (1 family)
Family Asteraceae (Compositae) (1,300-1,540 genera,
20,000-23,000 spp.)
Genus Achillea (200 spp.)
Species Achillea millefolium L.—yarrow
Genus Arctium (5 spp.)
Species Arctium lappa L.—burdock
Genus Arnica (32 spp.)
Species Arnica montana L.—arnica
Genus Artemisia (400 spp.)
Species Artemisia absinthium L.—wormwood
Species Artemisia annua L.—sweet annie
Species Artemisia dracunculus L.—tarragon
Genus Culendula (30 spp.)
Species Calendula officinalis L.—marigold

----- PAGE 657 -----
Genus Cnicus (1 sp.)
Species Cnicus benedictus L.—blessed thistle
Genus Cynara (11 spp.)
Species Cynara scolymus L.—globe artichoke
Genus Echmacea (3 spp.)
Species Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench—purple
coneflower
Genus Eupatorium (1,200 spp.)
Species Eupatorium perfoliatum L.—boneset
Species Expatorium purpureum L.—ijoe pye weed
Genus Grindelia (50-60 spp.)
Species Grindelia camporum Greene—asthma weed
Genus [rula (200 spp.)
Species Inula belenium L.—elecampane
Genus Lactuca (100 spp.)
Species Lactuca virosa L.—wild lettuce
Genus Matricaria (40 spp.)
Species Matricaria recutita L—German chamomile
Genus Silybum (2 spp.)
Species Silybum marianum L. Gaertn.—milk thistle
Genus Tanacetum (60 spp.)
Species Tanacetum parthenium 1. Schultz-Bip.—
feverfew
Species Tanacetum vulgare L.—tansy
Genus Taraxacum (60 spp.)
Species Teraxacum officinale G.H. Weber ex
Wigg.—dandelion
Genus Tussilago (1 sp.)
Species Tussilago farfara L.—coltsfoot
Order Campanulales (7 families)
Family Campanulaceae (70-84 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Lobelia L. (300 spp.)
Species Lobelia inflata L.—Indian tobacco
Order Dipsacales (4 families)
Family Caprifoliaceae (13-15 genera, 450 spp.)
Genus Lonicera (200 spp.)
Species Lonicera caprifolium L.—honeysuckle
Genus Sambucus (40 spp.)
Species Sambucus nigra L—European elder
Genus Viburnum (200 spp.)
Species Viburnum opulus L.—cramp bark
Species Viburnum prunifolium L.—blackhaw
Family Valerianaceae (13 genera, 360 spp.)
Genus Valeriana (200 spp.)
Species Valeriana officinalis L.—valerian
Order Gentianales (7 families)
Family Loganiaceae (20 genera, 500 spp.)
Genus Gelsemium (2 spp.)
Species Gelsemium sempervirens (L.) St.-Hil.—
yellow jasmine
Family Gentianaceae (75-76 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Gentiana (400 spp.)
Species Gentiana lutea L.—yellow gentian
Family Apocynaceae (168-200 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Strophanthus (40 spp.)
Species Strophanthus kombe Oliver—strophanthus
Genus Rauvolfia (100 spp.)
Species Ratvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex Kurz—
snakeroot
Genus Vinca (5 spp.)
Species Vinca major L.—periwinkle

‘TAXONOMY HIERARCHY .@ 649

Family Asclepiadaceae (315 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Asclepias (120 spp.)
Species Asclepias tuberosa L—pleurisy root
Order Lamiales (4 families)
Family Boraginaceae (110-131 genera, 2,400 spp.)
Genus Borago (3 spp.)
Species Borago officinalis L—borage
Genus Pulmonaria (10 spp.)
Species Pulmonaria officinalis L._—lungwort
Genus Symphytum (25 spp.)
Species Symphytum officinale L—common comfrey
Family Verbenaceae (86-100 genera, 2,600 spp.)
Genus Verbena (250 spp.)
Species Verbena officinalis L._—vervain
Genus Vitex (270 spp.)
Species Vitex agnus-castus L.—chasteberry
Family Lamiaceae (Labiatae) (200-212 genera,
3,200 spp.)
Genus Collinsonia (5 spp.)
Species Collinsoma canadensis L.—stoneroot
Genus Lavandula (28 spp.)
Species Lavandula angustifolia Mill—English
lavender
Genus Leonurus (14 spp.)
Species Leonurus cardiaca L._—motherwort
Genus Lycopus (4 spp.)
Species Lycopus virginicus L._—bugleweed
Genus Marrubium (40 spp.)
Species Marrubium vulgare L.—horehound
Genus Mentha (25 spp.)
Species Mentha x piperita L.—peppermint
Species Mentha pulegium L.—pennyroyal
Species Mentha spicata L.—spearmint
Genus Nepeta (250 spp.)
Species Nepeta cataria L.—camnip
Genus Prunella (7 spp.)
Species Prunella vulgaris L.—self-heal
Genus Rosmarinus (3 spp.)
Species Rosmarinus officinalis L._—rosemary
Genus Scutellaria (300 spp.)
Species Scutellaria lateriflora L.—blue skullcap
Genus Thymus (300 spp.)
Species Thymus vulgaris L—garden thyme
Order Plantaginales (1 family)
Family Plantaginaceae (3 genera, 250 spp.)
Genus Plantago (200+ spp.)
Species Plantago major L.—broadleaf plantain
Species Plantago ovata L.—psyllium seed
Order Rubiales (2 families)
Family Rubiaceae (450-606 genera, 6,500 spp.)
Genus Cephaelis (100 spp.)
Species Cephaelis ipecacuanha (Brot.) Tassac—ipecac
Genus Cinchona (40 spp.)
Species Cinchona officinalis L.—quinine
Genus Coffea (40 spp.)
Species Coffea arabica L.—Arabian coffee
Genus Galiwm (400 spp.)
Species Galinm aparine L.—cleavers
Genus Mitchella (2 spp.)
Species Mitchella repens L.—partridgeberry

----- PAGE 658 -----
650 @ TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

Order Scrophulariales (13 families)
Family Oleaceae (24-30 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Chionanthus (3-4 spp.)
Species Chionanthus virginicus L.—fringetree
Genus Ligustrum (50 spp.)
Species Ligustrum lucidum Ait. f—tee privet
Family Scrophulariaceae (190-275 genera, 4,000 spp.)
Genus Bacopa (60 spp.)
Species Bacopa monnicri (L.) Pennell—water hyssop
Genus Chelone (5-6 spp.)
Species Chelone glabra L.—balmony
Genus Scrophularia (300 spp.)
Species Scrophularia nodosa L.—figwort
Genus Verbascum (306 spp.)
Species Verbascum thapsus L—mullein
Genus Digitalis (30 spp.)
Species Digitalis purpurea L._—foxglove
Order Solanales (8 families)
Family Menyanthaceae (5 genera, 33 spp.)
Genus Menyanthes (1 sp.)
Species Menyanthes trifoliata L.—buckbean, bogbean
Family Solanaceae (85-96 genera, 2,800 spp.)
Genus Atropa (4 spp.)
Species Atropa belladonna L.—belladonna
Genus Capsicum (50 spp.)
Species Capsicum annuum L.—cayenne pepper
Genus Datura (10 spp.)
Species Datura stramonium L.—jimsonweed
Genus Hyoseyamus (20 spp.)
Species Hyoscyamus niger L.—black henbane
Genus Nicotiana (66 spp.)
Species Nicotiana tabacum L.—tobacco
Genus Solanum (1,700 spp.)
Species Solanum dulcamara L.—bittersweet
Genus Withania (10 spp.)
Species Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal—withania
Subclass Caryophyllidae
Order Caryophyllales (13 families)
Family Cactaceae (50-150 genera, 1,500-2,000 spp.)
Genus Lophophora (30 spp.)
Species Lophophora williamsii (Lem. ex Salm-Dyck)
Coult.—peyote
Genus Selenicereus (25 spp.)
Species Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose—
night-blooming cereus
Family Caryophyllaceae (66-75 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Saponaria (30 spp.)
Species Saponaria officinalis L_—soapwort
Genus Stellaria (120 spp.)
Species Stellaria media (L.) Vill—chickweed
Family Chenopodiaceae (100-113 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Chenopodium (150 spp.)
Species Chenopodium ambrosioides L.—wormseed
Genus Spinacia (3-4 spp.)
Species Spinacia oleracea L.—spinach
Family Phytolaccaceae (15-19 genera, 125 spp.)
Genus Phytolacca L. (35 spp.)
Species Phytolacca americana L.—pokeweed
Order Polygonales (1 family)
Family Polygonaceae (30-49 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Polygonum (150 spp.)
Species Polygonum bistorta L.—bistort

Genus Rheum (50 spp.)
Species Rheum officinale Baill.—rhubarb
Species Rheum palmatum L.—Chinese rhubarb
Genus Rumex (180 spp.)
Species Rumex acetosella L.—sheep sorrel
Species Rumex crispus L.—yellow dock
Subclass Dilleniidae (13 orders)
Order Capparales (5 families)
Family Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) (350-381 genera,
3,000 spp.)
Genus Armoracia (3 spp.)
Species Armoracia rusticana PG. Gaertn., B. Mey.
& Scherb.—horseradish
Genus Capsella (5 spp.)
Species Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik—
shepherd’s purse
Order Ebenales (5 families)
Family Styracaceae (10-1 | genera, 150 spp.)
Genus Styrax (100 spp.)
Species Styrax benzoin Dryand.—styrax
Order Ericales (8 families)
Family Ericaceae (116-125 genera, 3,500 spp.)
Genus Arctostaphylos (71 spp.)
Species Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng.—
bearberry
Genus Gaultheria (210 spp.)
Species Gaultheria procumbens L.—wintergreen
Order Malvales (5 families)
Family Malvaceae (100-119 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Althaea (12 spp.)
Species Althaea officinalis L_—marshmallow
Family Tiliaceae (50-53 genera, 450 spp.)
Genus Tilia (50 spp.)
Species Tilia x europaea L—European linden
Family Sterculiaceae (65-67 genera, 10,900 spp.)
Genus Cog (110-125 spp.)
Species Cola nitida (Vent.) A. Chev.—kola
Genus Theobroma (30 spp.)
Species Theobroma cacao L.—cacao
Order Nepenthales (2 families)
Family Droseraceae (4 genera, 103 spp.)
Genus Drosera (100 spp.)
Species Drosera rotundifolia L._—round-leaf sundew
Order Primulales (3 families)
Family Primulaceae (23-30 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Primula (500 spp.)
Species Primula veris L._—cowslip
Order Salicales (1 family)
Family Salicaceae (2 genera, 350 spp.)
Genus Populus (35 spp.)
Species Populus tremuloides Michx.—quaking aspen
Genus Salix (300 spp.)
Species Salix alba L._—white willow
Order Theales (18 families)
Family Clusiaceae (47-50 genera, 1,200 spp.)
Genus Garcinia (200 spp.)
Species Garcinia indica (Thouars) Choisy—garcinia
Genus Hypericum (400 spp.)
Species Hypericum perforatum L.—St. John’s wort
Family Theaceae (40 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Camellia (82 spp.)
Species Camellia sinensis L.O. Kuntze—tea

----- PAGE 659 -----
Order Violales (24 families)
Family Violaceae (16-20 genera, 800 spp.)
Genus Viola (500 spp.)
Species Viola odorata L—sweet violet
Species Viola tricolor L.—heartsease
Family Turneraceae (8-10 genera, 100 spp.)
Genus Tirnera (60 spp.)
Species Turnera diffusa Willd. ex J.A. Schultes—
damiana
Family Passifloraceae (16-17 genera, 650 spp.)
Genus Passiflora (400-500 spp.)
Species Passiflora incarnata L.—passionflower
Subclass Hamamelidae
Order Hamamelidales (5 families)
Family Hamamelidaceae (26-29 genera, 100 spp.)
Genus Hamamelis (6 spp.)
Species Hamamelis virginiana L.—witch hazel
Order Fagales (3 families)
Family Betulaceae (6 genera, 120-170 spp.)
Genus Betula (60 spp)
Species Betula pendula Roth—white birch
Family Fagaceae (7 genera, 800-1,000 spp.)
Genus Castanea (12 spp.)
Species Castanea sativa Mill—sweet chestnut
Genus Quercus (450 spp.)
Species Quercus alba L.—white oak
Order Juglandales (1 family)
Family Juglandaceae (8 genera, 60 spp.)
Genus Juglans (20 spp.)
Species Fuglans cinerea L.—butternut
Order Myricales (1 family)
Family Myricaceae (3 genera, 60 spp.)
Genus Myrica (50 spp.)
Species Myrica cerifera L.—bayberry
Order Urticales (6 families)
Family Ulmaceae (15 genera, 150 spp.)
Genus Ulmus (45 spp.)
Species Ulmus rubra Muhl.—slippery elm
Family Cannabaceae (2 genera, 5 spp.)
Genus Cannabis (3 spp.)
Species Cannabis sativa L.—marijuana
Genus Humulus (2 spp.)
Species Humutus hupulus L—hops
Family Urticaceae (45-48 genera, 700-1,000 spp.)
Genus Parietaria (2 spp.)
Species Parietaria officinalis L_—pellitory
Genus Urtica (50 spp.)
Species Urtica dioica L.—stinging nettle
Class Liliopsida—monocotyledons
Subclass Arecidae (6 families)
Order Arales (3 families)
Family Acoraceae (105-110 genera, 1,800-2,450 spp.)
Genus Acorus (2 spp.)
Species Acorus calamus L.—calamus, sweet flag

‘TAXONOMY HIERARCHY & 651

Order Arecales (1 family)
Family Arecaceae (Palmae) (200-202 genera, 2,700-
3,000 spp.)
Genus Areca (50 spp.)
Species Areca catechu L.—betel palm
Genus Serenoa (1 sp.)
Species Serenoa repens (Bartr.) Small—saw palmetto
Subclass Commelinidae
Order Cyperales (2 families)
Family Poaceae (Gramineae) (651-657 genera, 10,000 spp.)
Genus Avena (50 spp.)
Species Avena sativa L. oats
Genus Zea (1 sp.)
Species Zea mays L.—cornsilk
Subclass Liliidae
Order Liliales (15 families)
Family Liliaceae (270 genera, 4,000 spp.)
Genus Aletris (10 spp.)
Species Aletris farinosa L._—false unicorn root
Genus Allium (450 spp.)
Species Allium cepa L.—garden onion
Species Allium sativum L.—cultivated garlic
Genus Colchicum (65 spp.)
Species Colchicum autumnale L.—autumn crocus
Genus Convallaria (1 sp.)
Species Convallaria majalis L.—lily of the valley
Genus Trillium (30 spp.)
Species Trillium erectum L,—beth root, trillium
Family Dioscoreaceae (5-9 genera, 620 spp.)
Genus Dioscorea (600 spp.)
Species Dioscorea villosa L.—wild yam
Family Iridaceae (60-88 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Iris (300 spp.)
Species Iris versicolor L_—blue tlag
Subclass Zingiberidae
Order Zingiberales (8 families)
Family Zingiberaceae (45-50 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Curcuma (5 spp.)
Species Curcuma longa L.—turmeric
Genus Zingiber (90 spp.)
Species Zingiber officinale Roscoe—ginger

Sources
Greuter, et al., eds. Laternational Code of Botanical Nomenclature

(Tokyo Code). Regnum Vegetabile No. 131. Konigstein,
Germany: Koeltz Scientific Books, 1994.

Stearn, WT: Botanical Latin. Newton-Abbot, UK: David &

Charles, 1992.

Trehane, et al. International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated

Plants. Wimborne, UK: Quarterjack Publishing, 1995.

----- PAGE 660 -----
BIBLIOGRAPHY

BD

History

Griggs B. Green Pharmacy: The History and Evolution of Western
Herbal Medicine. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 1997.

Haller JS. Medical Protestants: The Eclectics in American Medicine.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1994.

Wood M. The Magic Staff! The Vitalist Tradition in Western
Medicine. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1992.

Eclectic Textbooks

Ellingwood F. American Materia Medica, Therapeutics & Pharma-
cognosy. 1898. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Pub-
lications, 1983.

Felter and Lloyd. King’s American Dispensatory, vols. | and 2, 1892.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter, HW. The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology &
Therapeutics. 1922. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

Modern Herbals

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1994,

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs. Austin,
TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.

Foster S, Hobbs C..A Field Guide to Western Medicinal Plants and
Herbs. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 2002.

Grieve M. A Modern Herbal, vols. I and II, New York: Dover
Publications, 1971.

Hobbs C. Medicinal Mushrooms: An Exploration of Tradition,
Healing, and Culture. Summertown, TN: Botanica Press, 2003.

Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis M. Medical Botany. New York: J. Wiley,
2003.

McCaleb RS, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of Popular
Herbs, Roseville, CA: Prima Publishing, 2000.

Moore M. Medicinal Plants of the Desert and Canyon West. Santa
Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1989.

. Medicinal Plants of the Mountain West, Santa Fe: Museum

of New Mexico Press, 2003.

. Medicinal Plants of the Pacific West. Santa Fe: Red Crane
Books, 1993.

Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals. London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 1996.

Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal: A Sensible Guide to the Use of Herbs
and Related Remedies. New York: Haworth Herbal Press,
2002.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia af Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed. Essex, UK: C. W. Daniel Co., 1988.

652

Modern Herbal Medicine Making

Green J. The Herbal Medicine Maker’s Handbook: A Home Manual.
Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 2000.

Hobbs C. Handmade Herbal Medicines: Recipes for Potions, Elixirs,
and Salves. Loveland, CO: Interweave Press, 1998.

Phytotherapy

Bove M. An Encyclopedia of Natural Healing for Children and
Infants. Chicago: Keats, 2001.

Brown D. Herbal Prescriptions for Better Health. Rocklin, CA:
Prima Publishing, 1996.

Gladstar R. Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with Energy,
Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2001.

. Herbal Healing for Women. New York: Simon &

Schuster, 1993.

. Rosemary Gladstar’s Herbal Remedies for Children’s Health.
Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 1999,

Green J. Male Herbal: Health Care for Men & Boys. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1991.

Hobbs C. Natural Therapy for Your Liver: Herbs and Other
Natural Remedies for a Healthy Liver. New York: Avery,
2002.

Hoffmann D. The Complete Wustrated Holistic Herbal: A Safe and
Practical Guide to Making and Using Herbal Remedies.
London: Thorsons, 2001.

. An Elder’s Herbal. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press,
1993.

—.. Holistic Herbal. London: Thorsons, 2002.

——. The Information Sourcebook of Herbal Medicine. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1994.

. Successful Stress Control. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press, 1991.

Hudson T. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. Los Angeles:
Lowell House; Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1999.

Keville K, Green M. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the
Healing Art. Freedom, CA: Grossing Press, 1995.

Kuhn MA, Winston D. Herbal Therapy and Supplements: A
Scientific and Traditional Approach, Philadelphia: Lippincott,
2000.

McIntyre A. The Complete Woman's Herbal: A Manual of Healing
Herbs and Nutrition for Personal Well-Being and Family Care.
New York: H. Holt, 1995.

McKenna DJ. Botanical Medicines: The Desk Reference for Major
Herbal Supplements. New York: Haworth Herbal Press, 2002.

McQuade Crawford A. The Herbal Menopause Book. Freedom,
CA: The Crossing Press, 1996.

Mills $, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern
Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 661 -----
Moore M. Herbs for the Urinary Tract. New Canaan, CT: Keats
Publishing, 1998.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Weiss RE. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart; New York: Thieme, 2000.

Winston D. Saw Palmetto for Men and Women. Pownal, VT:
Storey Books, 1999.

Wood, M. The Book of Herbal Wasdom: Using Plants as Medicine.
Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1997.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. Los Angeles:
Keats Publishing, 1999.

Pharmacognosy
Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th ed. London:
Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Phytochemistry

Cody V, Middleton E, Harborne JB: Plant Flavonoids in Biology
and Medicine. New York: Liss, 1986.

Colegate S, Molyneux R. Bioactive Natural Products: Detection,
Isolation and Structural Determination. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1993.

Glasby JS. Encyclopaedia of the Terpenoids. New York: Wiley,
1982.

. Eneyclopedia of the Alkaloids. New York: Plenum
Publishing, 1983.

Harborne JB. Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry. London, San
Diego: Academic Press, 1988.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington, DC:
Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Harborne JB, Mabry TJ, Mabry H. The Flavonoids. London:
Chapman & Fall, 1982.

Mann J, Davidson RS, Hobbs JB, et al. Natural Products: Their
Chemistry and Biological Significance. New York: Wiley, 1994.

Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1987.

Roberts ME, Wink M. Alkaloids: Biochemistry, Ecology, and
Medicinal Applications. New York: Plenum Press, 1998.
Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of

Hallucinogens, Springfield, TL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.

Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant Drug Analysis: A Thin Layer

Chromatography Atlas. Berlin, New York: Springer, 1996.

Phytopharmacology

Boik J. Cancer and Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science
and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Der Marderosian A, Liberti L. Natural Product Medicine: A
Scientific Guide to Foods, Drugs, Cosmetics. Philadelphia: G. F.
Stickley, 1988.

Chu CK, Cutler HG. Natural Products as Antiviral Agents. New
York: Plenum Press, 1992.

BIBLIOGRAPHY .@ 653

Hartwell JL. Plants Used Against Cancer: A Survey. Lawrence,
KS: Quarterman Publications, 1984.

Hudson JB. Antiviral Compounds from Plants. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1990.

Mou-Tuan Huang, et al. Food Phytochemicals for Cancer
Prevention, vols. 1 and 2. Washington, DC: American
Chemical Society, 1994.

Williamson EM, Okpako DT, Evans FJ. Selection, Preparation,
and Pharmacological Evaluation of Plant Material. Chichester;
New York: J. Wiley, 1996.

Pharmacopoeias

Blumenthal M, et al. The Complete German Commission E
Monographs: Therapeutic Guide to Herbal Medicines. Austin,
TX: American Botanical Council; Boston: Integrative
Medicine Communications, 1998.

Boyle, W. Official Herbs: Botanical Substances in the United States
Pharmacopoeias, 1820-1990. East Palestine, Ohio: Buckeye
Naturopathic Press, 1991.

Bradley, Peter. British Herbal Compendium. Bournemouth, UK:
British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Bournemouth, UK: British Herbal
Medicine Association, 1983.

British Pharmaceutical Codex. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1911.

British Pharmacopoeia. London: Gonstable & Co. Ltd., 1932.

United States Pharmacopeia, 11th ed. Easton, PA: The United
States Pharmacopoeial Convention, 1936.

Wood HC, Osol A. The Dispensatory of the United States of
America, 23rd ed. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1943,

Phytopharmacy

List PH, Schmidt PC. Phytopharmaceutical Technology. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1989.

Osol A, ed. Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th ed. Easton,
PA: Mack, 1975.

Wijesekera, ed. The Medicinal Plant Industry. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1991.

Toxicology

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions. Sandy,
OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drug, vols. 1-3. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1992-97,

Harborne JB, et al. Dictionary of Plant Toxins. Chichester; New
York: J. Wiley, 1996.

McGuffin M, et al. American Herbal Products Association’s Botanical
Safety Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.

Ethnobotany

Akerele O, Heywood V, Synge H. Conservation of Medicinal
Plants. New York; Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Akerele O, Kawaguchi Y, eds. Natural Resources and Human
Health—Plants of Medicinal and Nutritional Value:
Proceedings of the 1st WHO Symposium on Plants and Health
for All. Amsterdam; New York: Elsevier, 1992.

----- PAGE 662 -----
654 @ BIBLIOGRAPHY

Balick MJ, Cox PA. Plants, People, and Culture: The Science of
Ethnobotany. New York: Scientific American Library, 1996.

Balick MJ, Elisabetsky E, Laird SA. Medicinal Resources of the
Tropical, Forest: Biodiversity and Its Importance to Human
Health, New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Cotton CM. Ethnobotany: Principles and Applications. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

Jones Ti With Bitter Herbs They Shall Eat It: The Origins of
Human Diet and Medicine. Tucson: University of Arizona
Press, 1996.

Martin GJ. Ethnobotany: A Methods Manual. New York:
Chapman & Hall, 1995.

Schultes R, Raffauf R. The Healing Forest: Medicinal and Toxic
Plants of the Northwest Amazonia. Portland, OR: Dios-
corides Press, 1990.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A, Ratsch C. Plants of the Gods: Their
Sacred, Healing, and Hallucinogenic Powers. Rochester, VT:
Healing Arts Press, 2001.

Schultes RE, von Reis S. Ethnobotany: Evolution of a Discipline.
Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press, 1995.

Walter KS, Gillett HJ, eds. [UCN Red List of Threatened Plants.
Gland, Switzerland; Cambridge, UK: International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, 1998.

----- PAGE 663 -----
Numbers in bold indicate a
Materia Medica entry.

Abies alba, 63-64

abrasions, 541

abrin, 206

Abrus precatorius, 206

abscesses, 526, 591

absorption, 145

absinthiin, 70

absinthin, 70

Acacia catechu, 497

acacia gum, 51

Acacia senegal, 51

Acanthopanax senticosus, 545

Acanthopanax sessiliflorum, 484

ACE Inhibitors, 172-173

acetylcholine (ACh), 138

acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 138

acetylene, 59

Achillea millefolium, 33, 395, 454,
486, 488, 491, 493, 497, 499,
501, 507, 509, 514, 516, 520,
523-524

achillin, 68, 70

Achyranthes bidentata, 395

acne, 438, 552, 595

Acocanthera, 169

aconitine, 130

Aconitum napellus, 130

Acorus calamus, 94,395

Acorus gramineus, 395

actions, 483-521

acute bronchitis,323-326

acute myelocytic leukemia, 132

acylglycerols, 58

adaptogen, 242, 345, 351,
483-484, 545

Addison's disease, 466

Adenium, 169

adenoids, 552

Adenostyles alliariae, 321

adenylate cyclase, 137

adhesion molecule-1 (CAM-1), 158

Adiantum pedatum, 28, 395

administration, 145, 217

Adonis, 169

ADP-receptor agonists, 174

adrenal cortex, 465

renal medulla, 465

adrenaline, 465

adrenocorticotropic hormone

(ACTH), 76, 346, 465

adsorption chromatography, 22

adulteration, 211

adverse drug reports (ADRs), 187

adzuki bean, 107

aescin, 79

Aesculus glabra, 524

ry

INDEX

Aesculus hippocastanum, 488, 497,
501, 524

affective disorders, 354

affinin, 59

aflatoxins, 212

after pains, 402

agar, 52

Agaricus blazei, 44, 153

agaropectin, 53

agarose, 52

Agathosma betulina, 395, 454, 507,
524

Agathosma crenulata, 395

Agathosma serratifolia, 395

Agave sisalana, 81

aglycone, 41, 48

agonist, 139

AGRICOLA (Agriculture Online
Access), 642

Agrimonia eupatoria, 497, 507,
514, 525

agrimoniin, 114

agrimony. See Agrimonia eupatoria

Agropyron repens, 546

air hunger, 322

air swallowing, 262

ajoene, 174

alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 24

alanine transaminase (ALT), 178

alantolactone, 70

alarm reaction, 346

Albizzia julibrissin, 395, 484

Alchemilla arvensis, 488

Alchemilla vulgaris, 525

alcohol-water preparations, 223

aldehyde, 39

aldosterone, 375, 465

Aletris farinosa, 393

Alexandrian senna, 582

alfalfa, 78, 165, 302

alizarin, 96

alkaloids, 120-133, 152

alkamides, 59

alkanet, 96

Alkanna tinctoria, 96, 203, 395

alkannin, 96

alkyl sulfides, 176

alkylcatechols, 58

allamandin, 67

allantoin, 586

allelopathic, 68

allergies, 546

allicin, 39, 60, 174

alliin, 60, 174

alliinase, 60

Allium cepa, 516

Allium sativum, 293, 445, 456,
462, 464, 484, 486, 491, 501,
502, 512, 516, 520, $26

Allium ursinum, 172

allocrytopine, 125

allomones, 68

Allomyces, 68

allopathy, 11

alloxan, 179

Aloe ferox, 98, 395

Aloe perryi, 98, 395

Aloe vera, 98, 394, 514

aloe. See Aloe vera

aloe-emodin, 98

alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), 56

Alstonia spp., 127

alterative, 243, 431, 484-485

Althaea officinalis, 51, 240, 486,
488, 506, 512, 526

alveoli, 316

Amanita citrina, 127

Amanita muscaria, 129, 242

Amanita phalloides, 23, 177, 205, 584

Amanita toxins, 205

amanitin, 205

amatoxins, 205

Ambrosia spp., 70

ambrosin, 70

Amelanchier ovalis, 172

amenorrhea, 386

American cranesbill, 553

American dogwoods, 207

American ginseng, 28

Ames test, 24

amino sugars, 43

aminotransferase, 24

Ammi vimmaga, 96, 171, 340

amoebic dysentery, 537

Amorphophallus spp., 47

amygdalin, 50

anabasine, 122

Anacardium occidentale, 208, 464

analgesic, 345, 410, 517

anaphylactic reaction, 446

anatomic barriers, 147

androgens, 141, 439

Andrographis paniculata, 395

androstenedione, 84

androtex, 84

Anemone nemorosa, 70, 199

anemonin, 70

Anemopsis californica, 28

anesthesia, 447

anethol, 152

anethole, 94

Anethum graveolens, 34, 63, 488,
494, 502, 527

aneurysm, 304

Angelica archangelica, 395, 488,
493, 494, 502, 520, 527

Angelica dahurica, 135

Angelica japonica, 96

Angelica sinensis, 15, 395, 442

angelica. See Angelica archangelica

655

angelicin, 96, 210

angel's trumpets, 122

angina pectoris, 310, $42, 945

angiogenesis, 164

angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE), 172

angiotensin, 172

animal testing, 195

aniseed. See Piszpinella anisum

ankylosing spondylitis, 411

annonaine, 125

Anopheles, 459

anorexia nervosa, 363, 527, 540

antacids, 273

antagonist, 139

anthelmintic, 78

anthochlor, 100, 106

anthocyanidin, 106

anthraquinone, 48, 97, 201

Anthriscus cerefolium, 395

Antiaris, 169

Antiaropsis, 169

antibiotic therapy, recuperation
after, 451

anticarcinogens, 164

anticatarrhal, 243, 485-487

antidepressant, 345

antidiuretic hormone, 375

antiexudative actions, 524

antifungal herbs, 456

antihepatotoxic, 175

anti-inflammatory, 158-159, 243,
247, 487-490

antimicrobial, 243, 247, 450,
489-493

antioxidants, 165-168

antirheumatic, 409, 493-494

Antirrbinum spp., 106

antispasmodic, 243, 248, 345,
386, 494-496

antitumor activity, 457

antiviral agents, 164-165

anxiety, 347-348, 557-568, 572,
582, 585, $92

Aphanes arvensis, 383

aphthous ulcers, 267-268, 578, 580

apigenin, 106

Apium graveolens, 395, 464, 488,
493, 494, 502, 507, 514, 528

Apocynum, 169

apoenzyme, 136

apoptosis, 163

appetite, 537, 558, 560, 566, 571

arabic acid, 52

arabinogalactans, 46

arabinose, 42

arachidic acid, 95

arachidonic acid metabolites, 155,
174

Araha californica, 395

----- PAGE 664 -----
656 @ INDEX

Aralia elata, 484

Arvalia manshurica, 484

Aralia nudicaulis, 74, 395

Aralia racemosa, 28, 74, 395

Aralia schmidtit, 484

arbor vitae, 588

arbutin, 48, 92

Arctium lappa, 423, 433, 458,
464, 484, 493, 507, 528

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, 395, 454,
486, 491, 493, 497, 507, 529

Aretotis, 71

arecoline, 122

Arisaema japonicum, 395

Aristolochia clematitis, 152, 395

Aristolochia contorta, 395

Aristolochia debilis, 395

Aristolochia serpentaria, 28, 395

Armoracia lapathifolia, 514

Armoracia rusticana, 50, 493, 520

Arnica montana, 395, 493, 529

arnica. See Arnica montana

aromatherapy, 10, 306

aromoline, 126

artecanin, 370

Artemia salina, 23

Artemisia abrotanum, 394, 491,
499, 509, 520

Artemisia absinthium, 394, 452,
491, 493, 499, 502, 509, 514,
520, $30

Artemisia annua, 62, 70, 395, 459

Artemisia capillaris, 395

Artemisia douglasiana, 395

Artemisia judaica, 70

Artemisia lactiflora, 395

Artemisia scoparia, 395

Artemisia vulgaris, 395, 462, 493,
494, 499, 509, 515, 517, 520,
531

artemisinin, 62, 70, 459

arterial plaques, 307

arteriosclerosis, 303, 307-309, 589

arthritis, 411-418, 528, $36, 557,
561, 575, 587, 588, 595

Arum maculatum, 128

Arundo donax, 128

asafoetida, 152

B-asarone, 94

Alsarum canadense, 395

Asarum europaeum, 395

Asarum heteropides, 395

Asarum sieboldii, 395

ascaridole, 571

Aselepias asperula, 395

Asclepias spp., 34, 169

Asclepias tuberosa, 395, 488, 512, 531

ascorbic acid, 167

ash values, 21

Asian mint, 325

Asparagus officinalis, 78, 105

"asparagus, 78, 105

aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
24

aspartate transaminase (AST), 178

aspergillic acid, 131

asperuloside, 66, 67

Asterina pectinifera, 23

asthma, 330-334, 546, 554, 555,
560, 363, 374, 575, 586, 589,
390, 593

astragaloside III, 82

Astragalus gumimifer, 52

Astragalus membranaceus, 443, 532

astragalus. See Astragalus mem-
branaceus.

astringent, 243, 248, 496-498

atherosclerosis, 307

athlete’s foot, 456, 566

atopic dermatitis, 56

atrial natriuretic factor, 375

Atropa belladonna, 122, 373

atropine, 123

attar of rose, 64

attention deficit disorder, 479

aucubigenin, 67

aucubin, 66, 67

Auricularia auricula, 44, 153

aurones, 100, 106

autoimmune arthritic diseases, 421

autoimmune diseases, 446

autumn crocus, 394, 426

Avena sativa, 464-465, 506, 532

avenacin, 80

ayurveda, 10, 242

Azadirachta indica, \05

B vitamins, 299

B.R.AT. diet, 267

babchi, 106

baccatin JJ, 162

Bach flower remedies, 10, 333

bacteriuria, 379

baicalein, 158

Ballota nigra, 373 517, 533

balm of gilead. See Populus candicans

balmony. See Chelone glabra

balneotherapy, 431

balsam of peru, 228

balsam of tolu, 228

balsams, 87

bananas, 170

Banisteriopsis caapi, 128

Baptisia tinetoria, 153, 395, 445, 452,
484, 486, 491, 504, 914, 533

barbaloin, 98

barberry. See Berberis vulgaris

barley water, 378

Barosma betulina, 524

baths (balneotherapy), 228, 431

bayberry. See Myrica cerifera

bearberry. See Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

bed-wetting, 529, 547, 589

belladonna, 122

bellidifolin, 99

Bellis perennis, $12

benefit-to-risk ratio, 195

benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH),
138, 583, 591, 406-407, 546

benzaldehyde, 65

benzodiazepines, 172, 361

benzofurans, 93

benzoquinones, 96

benzyl alcohol, 210

benzyl salicylate, 210

berbamine, 125

berberine, 125

Berberis aquifolium, 564

Berberis vulgaris, 394, 499, 504,
514, 534

berberrubine, 126

bergamot, 95° 325

bergaprten, 95, 210

bervulcine, 126

betadinin, 100

betel nuts, 202

Beth root, 28, 81, 384

Betonica spp., 34

betonicine, 122

Betula alba, 534

Betula pendula, 78

Betula spp., 366, 488, 493

bezafibrate, 171

Bidens chilensi, 176

Bidens pilosa, 176

bidesmosidic saponins, 74

Bifidobacteria, 43

biflavonoids, 108

binomial, Latin, 32

bioassays, 23

bioavailability, 146

biochanin A, 106, 143

biological response modifiers,

109, 162

biomedical model, 241

BIOSIS, 642

biotransformation, 148

biotransmutation, 14

birch. See Berula alba

birthwort, 152

biting stonecrop, 242

bitter almonds, 50

bitter melon, 85

bitter principle, 67

bitter rubberweed, 70

bitter sneezeweed, 70

bitter, 243, 410, 498-501

black cohosh. See Cimicifuga

racemosa

black currant seed oil, 56

black haw. See Viburnum pruni-

folium

black horehound. See Ballota nigra

black mustard. See Brassica nigra

black root. See Leptandra virginica

black walnut, 68

blackberry. See Rubus villosa

blackhead, 438

bladderwrack. See Fucus vesiculosus

blepharitis, $50-551

blood-brain barrier, 147

bloodroot. See Sanguinaria
canadensis

ue flag. See Iris versicolor

ue gum, 547

bocconine, 125

body mass index (BMI), 297

body system affinities, 485

bogbean. See Menyanthes trifoliata

boils, 455, 526, 541, 544, 576, 591

boldine, 126

boldo. See Peumus boldus

boneset. See Eupatorium perfoliatum

Borago officinalis, 56, 395, 488, 517

Bordetella pertussi, 329

borneo camphor, 64

borneol, 64

bornyl acetate, 64

Boswellia serrata, 86

Bowiea, 169

bowman’s capsule, 375

bracken fern, 50

bradykinin, 155

Brassica hirta, 50

Brassica juncea, 30

Brassica nigra, 50, 416, 534

‘@ oleracea var. capitata, 50, 200

ict campestris, 200

jc napus, 201

Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera, 39

Brassica spp.. $20, 493

Brayera anthehnintica, \\4

breast milk, 151, 402-403, 552

brine shrimp lethality test, 23

omen

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia
(BHP), 216

British Pharmacopoeia (BP), 20

British Pharmacopoeial Codex
(BPC), 20

broad bean, 59

bronchi, 316

bronchiectasis, 581

bronchioles, 316

bronchitic asthma, 526

bronchius, 321, 526, 527, 534-539,
544, 546, 551, 555, 560,
563-569, 572-575, $81-595

bronchodilating effects, 332

brucellosis, 541

Brugmansia spp., 122

bruises, 529, 535, 556, 559, 580

bryonolic acid, 163

bryophytes, 31

buchu. See Agathosma betulina

buckbean, 568

buckeye, 524

buckthorn, 97, 394

bufadienolides, 83

bufanolides, 169

Bufo vulgaris, 127

bufotenine, 127

Bugleweed. See Lycopus virginicus

Bupleurum chinense, 81

Bupleurum falcatum, 78, 81

burdock. See Arctium lappa

burns, 535, 959

Bursera microphylla, 28, 175

burseran, 175

bursitis, 412, 427

butcher’s broom, 81, 83

butterbur, 330

butternut, 394

button mushrooms, 44

butyric acid, 55

cabbage white butterfly, 50

cabbage, 50

cacao, 123

cadmium, 213

cafestol, 72

caffeic acid, 94

caffeine, 124

cajeputol, 66

calamus root, 94

calcium channel blockers, 172

Calendula officinalis, 433, 445, 458,
488, 491, 509, 534

calendula. See Calendula officinalis

California poppy. See Eschscholzia
californica

Calotropis, 169

Caltha palustris, 70, 199

Camellia sinensis, 124, 497, 317

campesterol, 143

camphor, 65, 86

Camptotheca acuminata, \30

camptothecin, 130

canadine, 125

cananga oil, 210

cancer, 159-164, 446, 456-460

Candida albicans, 544

canin, 370

Cannabis sativa, 56, 93

capillary fragility, 76

capric acid, 55

caproic acid, 55

caprylic acid, 55

caprylic alcohol, 60

capsanthin, 85

----- PAGE 665 -----
Capsella bursa-pastoris, 395, 488,
497, 535

Capsicum annuum, 302, 417, 452,
464, 486, 491, 493, 501, 520, 536

capsules, 227

caraway. See Carum carvi

carbohydrases, 137

carbohydrates, 41-53, 114

[beta]-carboline alkaloids, 128

carbon tetrachloride, 24

carbuncle, 455

carcinogenicity, 159

cardenolides, 83, 169

cardiac asthma, 321

cardiac glycosides, 168, 200

cardiac remedies, 243, 291, 501-502

cardioactive, 169, 291

cardiotonic, 169, 291

cardiovascular system, 168-174,
291-315

Carica, 50

Carissa, 169

carminative, 243, 249, 502-503

carnosol, 72

carob gum, 179

carotene, 85

carotenoids, 85, 168

carrageen, 51

Carthamus tinetorms, 395

cartilage, 419

Carum carvi, 63, 452, 491, 494,
502, 520, 537

carvacrol, 65

carvone, 65

f-caryophyllene, 68

Casatela emoryi, 28

Cascara sagrada, 201, 265, 394, 514

cashew, 208

cassava, 200

Castilla, 169

castor bean, 153, 206

castor oil, 266

catalase, 166, 137

catalysis, 136

catarrh, 533, 538, 555, 560, 568, 572

catarrhal deafness, 580

catechin, 108

Catha edulis, 128, 170

Catharanthus roseus, 127, 160, 179,
241

cathine, 128

cathinone, 170

catnip. See Nepeta cataria

Caulophyllum thalictroides, 395,
488, 493, 509, 516

causality, 195

cayenne. See Capsicum annuum

celandine, 394

celery seed. See Apium graveolens

cell adhesion molecules, 158

cell arrest, 161, 163

cell cycle, 160

cell membrane, 146

cellulose, 44

cembrane, 71

Centaurium erythraea, 499, 514, $37

centaury. See Centaurium erythraea

centipedes, 50

cephaeline, 126

Cephaelis acuminata, 126

Cephaelis ipecacuanha, 394, 512,
520, 537

Cephatocereus senilis, 208

Cephalotaxus harringtonia, C. for-
tunei, and C. hamensis, 132

cephalotoxine, 131

cepharanthine, 125

Ceratonia siliqua, 179

Cerbera, 169

cerebral insufficiency, 554

cerebroprotection, 554

cerotinic acid, 58

ceruloplasmin, 168

Cetraria islandica, 486, 488, 506,
512, 537

cetyl alcohol, 58

chaconine, 131

chalcones, 100, 106

Chamaecyparis thyoides, 199

Chamaelirium luteum, 28, 384

Chamaemelum nobile, 274, 350,

395, 517

chamazulene, 68

chamomile lawn, 350

chamomile. See Chamaemelum

nobile

Changium smyrnoides, 395

haparral, 113

haparro, 28

hasteberry, 595

haulmoogra oil, 57

haulmoogric acid, 57

Cheiranthus, 169

Chelidonium majus, 394, 504, 520

Chelone glabra, 504, 514, $38

Chemical Abstracts, 643

chemotaxonomy, 22

chemotherapeutic agents,

161-164

chemotypes, 63

Chenopodium quinoa, 78

cherries, 427

chest pain, 321

Chiang Mai Declaration, 26

chicken pox, 373

chickweed. See Stellaria media

chicory, 45, 71

chilblains, 534, 536, 547, 580,

596, 598

children, 473-482

Chimapbila umbellata, 28

Chinese figwort, 67

Chinese rhubarb, 394

Chinese white flower oil, 325

Chionanthus virginicus, 484, 504,
514, 538

chitin, 44

cholagogue, 283, 503-505

cholecystitis, 287-288, 563

cholestasis, 283

cholesterol, 84, 170-171, 300-302

chondrocalcinosis, 426

chondroitin sulfate, 44, 414

Chondrus crispus, 51, 486, 488,

506, 512, $39

christmas rose, 70

chromatography, 22

chromophore, 85

chronic bronchitis, 326-329, 526,

545

chronic catarrh, 554, 560

Chrysanthemum parthennum, 587

chrysin, 135

Cicer arietinum, 484

Cichorium intybus, 45,71

Creuta virosa, 59

cicutoxin, 59

Cimmicifuga racemosa, 395, 464,
484, 488, 493, 494, 509, 516,
517, 539

e090

°

cimicifugin, 96

cimicifugoside, 82

Cinchona calisaya, 395

Cinchona cuprea, 94

Cinchona ledgeriana, 395

Cinchona officinalis, 130, 395

Cinchona pubescens, 395

1,8-cineole, 66

cinnamate monomer, 112

cinnamic acids, 94

cinnamic alcohol, 210

Cinnamomum camphora, 65, 86, 395

Cinnamomum cassia, 395

Cinnamomum glanduliferum, 94

Cinnamomum spp., 502

Cinnamonnim verum, 395

cinnamon, 94

circulatory stimulants, 410

cirrhosis, 193, 286-287, 554

cisplatin, 178

Cistus clusii, 172

citronella, 64

citronellal, 65

Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia,
64, 95, 325

Citrus aurantium var. amara, 63-64

Citrus nardus, 64

Citrus reticulata, 170

Cladonia spp., 93

Claviceps purpurea, 120, 204

cleavers. See Galium aparine

Clematis manshurica, 74

clematoside C, 74

clerodane, 71

climacteric, 390

Clitocybe, 129

cloves, 114

Cnicus benedictus, 395

coca, 123

cocaine, 123

cocoa plant, 124

codeine, 126

Codonoposts pilosula, 484

Codonopsis spp., 74

Codonopsis tangshen, 443

coenzyme Qjy, 167, 298

Coffea arabica, 72, 94, 124, 395,
317

coffee bean oil, 72

coffee, 124

Cola acuminata, 395, 507, 540

Cola nitida, 395

Cola vera, 497, 517, 520

cola, See Cola acuminata

colchicine, 131, 426

Colchicum autumnale, 131, 394,
426

coleonol, 72

Coleus forskoblit, 137, 170, 293,
332, 501

Cohc, 475-476, 527, 536-538,
542, 543, 551, 555, 561,
566-569

colitis, 59, 276, 525, 526, 558,
569, 594

collagen-receptor antagonists, 174

Collinsonia canadensis, 507, 541

colloidal oatmeal, 371, 373

colon, 276

colony-stimulating factors (CSF),
162

colophony, 86

coltsfoot. See Tussilago farfara

columba root, 73

columbarnine, 126

INDEX @ 657

columbin, 73

column chromatography, 22

comedone, 439

comfrey. See Symphytum officinale

comminution, 217

Commiphora madagascariensis, 395

Commiphora molmol, 395, 445,
452, 456, 491, $41

Commiphora mukul, 84,171, 293,
395

common cold, 227, 336

complement, 155

compound, 40

compresses, 232, 431

Concanavalia ensiformis, 206

concanavalin A, 206

condensed tannins, 114

conducting zone, 320

condurango. See Marsdenia
reichenbachii

conformational change, 40, 140

congestive heart failure (CHF),
309, 542

coniine, 122

Conium maculatum, 94, 122

conjunctivitis, 550, $52, 558, 566

connective tissue diseases, 411

conserved names, 33

constipation, 263-266, 476-477,
549, 563, 564, 571, 577, 578,
581, 582

contact dermatitis, 432

contact urticaria, 206

contraindications, 186, 191~192

convalescence, bitter tonics for, 339

Convallaria majalis, 81, 169, 394,
501, 507

convallatoxin, 83

Convolvulus arvensis, 210

Copaifera, 68

co-pigments, 100

Coptis chinensis, 125, 395

Coptis grovnlandica, 395

Coptis spp., 28

Coptis teeta, 125

Coptis trifolia, 125

Corchorus, 169

cordial, 291

Cordyceps sinensis, 158, 446

Cordyceps subsessilis, 446

Coriandrum sativum, 64, 452, 491

coriolus mushroom, 44, 153

Coriolus versicolor, 44, 153

cornsilk. See Zea mays

Cornus spp., 207

coronary artery disease, 307, 542

coronary heart disease (CHD),
300, 307

Coronilla, 169

corticosteroids, 141

Corydalis yanhusuo, 395

corytuberine, 126, 135

Costus spp., 82

cotton, 68, 394

couch grass. See Elymus repens

cough, 321, 526, 539, 551, 555,
560, 565, 574, 586, 589-590

coughwort, 590

coumarin, 96, 179

coumarins, 95, 174, 200

coumestans, 106, 143

coumestrol, 143

COX-1, 157

COX-2, 157

Cradle Cap, 481

----- PAGE 666 -----
658 @ INDEX

cramp bark. See Viburnum opulus

cramping, 592, 598

cranberry juice, 381

cranesbili. See Geranium maculatum

Crataegus laevigata, 16, 292, 462,
488, 501, 507, 516, $42

creams, 432 .

crocin, 163

Crocus sativus, 395

crohn’s disease, 262, 279

Crotolaria, 189

croton oil, 72

crown-gall tumor bioassay, 23

cruciferous vegetables, 50, 164, 459

cryptopleurine, 131

Cryptostegia, 169

cucurbitacins, 80

Cullen corylifolia, 395

Cuphea balsamona, 395

Curcuma aromatica, 94, 395

Curcuma domestica, 395

Curcuma longa, 94, 302, 395, 514

Curcuma xanthorrhiza, 94

Curcuma zedoaria, 395

curcumin, 94

Curcurbita pepo, 507

curcurbitacin E, 80

cutaneous porphyria, 525

Gyamopsis tetragonolobus, 52, 179

cyanidin, 106, 114

cyanogenic glycosides, 50, 199

cyanohydrin, 50

Cyathula officinalis, 395

cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP), 111, 137, 138, 141, 170

cyclic guanosine monophosphate
(cGMP), 141

cyclolignan, 113

cyclooxygenase inhibitors, 159

cyclooxygenase pathway, 157

cyclopentanodihydropyran, 66

cyclosporine, 446

Cydonia oblonga, 51

Cymbopogon citratus, 64, 395

Cymbopogon martini, 64

Cynara scolymus, 45, 504, 514

Cynoglossum officinale, 203

CYP Ag, 559

Cypripedium spp., 28, 384

cystitis, 246, 379-381, 524-529,
542, 546, 550, 552, 561, 570,
585, 590, 595

Cytisus scoparius, 170, 394, 501,
507

cytochrome Paso enzymes, 50, 149

cytokines, 156, 162-163

cytokinesis, 160

cytosol binding sites, 143

cytotoxic agent, 160, 457

cytotoxic alkaloids, 160

cytotoxicity-based bioassays, 24

Daemonorops draco, 86

Dahlia spp., 106

daidzein, 106, 143

Dalbergia monetaria, 162
damiana, 86

dan shen, 311, 484

danaid butterflies, 188
dandelion. See Taraxacum officinale
date palm, 83

Datura stramonium, 122

Daucus carota, 395, 494, 507, 542
dead sea, 438

deadly nightshade, 122

leaminases, 137
death cap mushroom, 23, 177
debility, 532, 539
lecarboxylases, 137
lecoctions, 221
leep immune activation, 443
legenerative joint disease, 411
lehydration, 266
jehydrogenases, 136
delphinidin, 114
delphinine, 205
Delphinium, 130
delronin, 82
lemulcent, 243, 505-506
Demyelination, 194
leoxy-D-ribose, 43
deoxysugars, 43
lepression, 354-355, 530-532,
540, 545, 559, 562, 567, 572,
577, 582, 592
depsidones, 165
dermatitis, 432
allergic contact, 206
dermatophytes, 455
Derris elliptica, 107
derris root, 107
desensitization, 151
desoxycorticosterone, 465
detoxification, 446
devil’s claw. See Harpagophytum
procumben
Dewey Decimal system, 639-640
dextrans, 45
D-galactosamine, 43
D-glucosamine, 43
diabetes mellitus, 463, 536, 539, 552
diabetic acidosis, 322
diabetic neuropathy, 536
Dianella longifolia, 165
Dianthus spp., 106
diaper rash, 480
diaphoretic, 243
diarrhea, 266-267, 477, 525, 535,
537, 550, 553, 556, 566, 569,
574-578, 589, 594
diaryl heptanoids, 159
diathermy (deep-heat therapy), 428
dibenzylbutyrolatones, 173
dicarboxylic acid, 198
Dicentra canadensis, 28
dicoumarol, 201
Dieffenbachia spp., 198
diepoxylignan, 113
dietary fats, 302
dietary fiber, 259, 265
differentiation, 161, 163
digestive system, 258-290
digitalin, 83
Digitalis lanata, 83
Digitalis orientalis, 83
Digitalis purpurea, 36
digoxin, 83, 168
dihydrochalcones, 107
dihydroflavonols, 108
dihydroguaiaretic acid, 113
dihydropyridines, 172
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 138,
407
di-indolymethane, 459
dill. See Anethum graveolens
dimethyl tryptamine (DMT), 128
Dionaea muscipula, 28
dioscin, 82
Dioscorea villosa, 281, 423, 466,
488, 493, 494, 504, 514, 543

diosgenin, 82

Diospyros kaki, 85

Dipteryx odorata, 95

disaccharide, 41, 43

iterpenes, 174

iterpenoid alkaloids, 130-131, 205

iterpenoids, 72

Diuretic, 243, 249, 410, 506-508

iverticulitis, 280-281, 543

Divisions, 31

d-mannuronic acid, 51

DNA-interactive agents, 161

locetaxel, 162

dong qui, 15

dosage form, 217

lose, 194-195, 252

dose-response assessment, 197

double-blind studies, 18

douches, 229

lown regulation, 139

Dracunculus vulgaris, 128

dragon’s blood, 86

drawing ointments, 526

droge, 134

drop, 253

Drosera rotundifolia, 494, 512, 543

drug absorption, 469

drug distribution, 146, 151, 469

rug, 134

dry preparations, 227

Dryobalanops aromatica, 64

Dryopteris filix-mas, 92, 394-395

dual inhibitors, 159

duodenal ulcers, 272, 535, 553

dwarf pine needle oil, 325

dyer’s broom, 106

dysentery, 553

dysmenorrhea, 386-388, 539, 543,
561, 568, 569, 576, 593, 595

dyspepsia, 536-538, 553, 566,
568, 589

dyspnea, 321

dysuria, 378

earache, 576

ecdysone, 83

Echinacea purpurea, 544

Echinacea angustifolia, 544

Echinacea pallida, 544

Echinacea spp., 36, 445, 452, 484,
486, 491, 544

echinacea. See Echinacea spp.

Echinopanax elatus, 484

eczema, 432, 528, 552, 558, 560,
564, 575, 581, 590, 591, 594

edema, 154, 309, 379

effective dose (ED), 194

effectors, 36, 237

eicosanoids, 56, 155, 259

eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 56

elder. See Sambucus nigra

elderly, 467-472

elecampane. See Inula helenium

Elephant tree, 28

Elettaria cardamomum, 494, 502,
520

Eleuthero. See Eleutherococcus
Senticosus

Eleutherococcus senticosus, 465, 516,
545

elimination, 150-151, 469

elixirs (elixiria), 225

ellagic acid, 114

ellagitannins, 114

Elymus repens, 454, 506, 546

emetine, 126

emmenagogue, 243, 384, 509-511

emodin, 98

emphysema, 334, 560, 581, 590

emulsions (emulsiones), 225

endocrine system, 461-466

endometriosis, 387, 404-405

endometrium, 404

endoplasmic reticula, 148

endothelial leukocyte adhesion
molecule-1 (ELAM-1), 158

enemas, 229

English yew, 162

enoki, 44, 153

Entamoeba hystolytica, 126

enteric coatings, 227, 277

Enterobius vermiculari, 526

enterodiol, 113

enterohepatic cycle, 150

enterolactone, 113, 143

entheogen, 121

enuresis, 377

enzymes, 136-139

Ephedra distachya, 395

Ephedra equisetina, 128, 395

Ephedra gerardiana, 128, 395

Ephedra intermedia, 395

Ephedra sinica,128, 332, 340, 395,
546

Ephedra. See Ephedra sinica

ephedrine, 546

epicatechin, 114

epimerases, 137

epinephrine, 465

Epipactis gigantea, 28

episiotomy, 402

epistaxis, 302, 523, 594

epoxygenases, 155

epoxylignan, 113

Epstein-Barr virus, 286

Equisetum arvense, 14,497, 507, 547

Equisetum hyemale, 395

E. equisetina, 546

Eremophila latrobei, 165

ergot alkaloids, 127

ergot fungus, 120

eriocitrin, 107

eriodictyol, 107

Eriodictyon californicum, 28, 86

Eryngium maritimum, 507

Eryngium planum, 330

Erysimum, 169

erythema, 154

erythropoietic protoporphyria, 85

Erythroxylum coca, 123

Escherichia coli, 379

Eschscholzia californica, 34, 395,
494, 515, 517, 547

esophagitis, 269-271

essential fatty acids (EFAs), 55, 259

essential hypertension, 542

essiac, 14

esterases, 137

estrogen receptors, 142

estrogens, 141, 142

ethylene, 59

etoposide, 113, 161

eucalyptol, 66

Eucalyptus globulus, 66, 502, 547

eucalyptus. See Eucalyptus globulus

Excommia ulmoides, 173, 484

eudesmanolides, 70

eukaryote, 31

Euonymus atropurpureus, 169, 504,
514, 548

----- PAGE 667 -----
eupacunin, 70

eupahyssopin, 192

Eupatorium cannabinum, 203

Eupatorium hyssopifolinm, 152

Eupatorium lancifolium, 70

Eupatorium perfoliatum, 336, 486,
493, 499, 504, 507. 520, 549

Eupatorium purpureum, 395, 464,
493, 507, 520, 549

Euphorbia australis, 165

Euphorbia pilulifera, 332, 464

Euphrasia officinalis, 67, 550

Eupbrasia spp., 486, 497

European angelica, 527

European mandrake, 122

European mistletoe, 164

European pharmacopoeia (EP), 20

evening primrose, 56

Evernia spp., 93

exclusion diet, 421

excretion, 150

exhaustion reaction, 346

exocytosis, 159

exophthalmos, 462

expectorant essential oils, 326

expectorant, 244, 320, 511-513

external remedies, 228, 416

extraction, 217

eyebright. See Euphrasia officinalis

Fagopyrum esculentum, 516

falearindiol, 159

false unicorn root, 384

Families, 31

Fasciola hepatica, 70

fatty acids, 54-57

fecal bulk, 265

fennel. See Foeniculum vulgare

fenugreek, 51, 302

ferredoxin, 168

ferritin, 168

Feruta assa-foetida, 152, 395

Ferula rubricaulis, 395

Ferula spp., 96

ferulic acid, 152

fetidine, 125

fever, 523, 527, 531-534, 549, 550,
567, 568, $75, 579, $93, 598

feverfew. See Tanacetum parthenium

fiber elasticity, 20

fiber, 260-261

fibrocystic breast disease, 405-406

fibroid cysts, 595

fibromyalgia, 411

fibrositis, 559

ficine, 131

Ficus pantoniana, 131

field buttercup, 70

fight-or-flight, 346

figwort. See Serophularia nodosa

Filipendula ulmaria, 36, 186, 488,
493, 497, 550

fimbriae, 381

fire ant, 66

first-pass effect, 145

Flammutlina velutipes, 44, 153

flatulence, 262-263, 527, $42,
$51, 553, $68-571, 585

flavan-3,4-diols, 107

flavan-3-ols, 108

flavanones, 107

flavolignans, 108, 584

flavones, 101

flavonoids, 100-112, 152, 167,
170, 174

flavonols, 101

flavus, 100

flaxseed oil, 57

Flexner report, 187

fluid extracts (fluid extracta), 224

fly agaric mushroom, 129, 242

foal’s foot, 590

Foeniculum vulgare, 488, 494, 502,
514, $20, 551

foinentations, 431

food intolerances, 267

food sensitivities, 333

forget-me-not, 124

formononetin, 106, 143

formulation criteria, 252

forskolin, 73, 137, 170, 175

Forsythia suspensa, 396

Fougquieria splendens, 396

foxglove, 36

frankincense, 86

Fraxinus excelsior, 150

free radicals, 166

French paradox, 99

frequency, 377-378

friar’s balsam, 228

fringetree. See Chionanthus virginicus

Fritillaria cirrbosa, 396

Fritillaria thunbergii, 396

fructans, 45

fructose, 263

Fucus vesiculosus, 396, 462, 493,
520, 551

fulvoplumierin, 67

fumarases, 137

Fumaria officinalis, 127, 433, 484,
504, 514, 551

fumitory. See Fumaria officinalis

functional dyspepsia, 275-276

fungal infections, 455, 535, 566

Fungi, 31

fungicide, 79

furanocoumarins, 95, 210

furanofurans, 173

furfural, 65

furocoumarins, 95, 201

furosemide, 587

jaundice, 387

furuncles, 455

G protein, 140

galactogogues, 402

galactomannans, 179

galactose, 43

Galega officinalis, 464, 552

Galium aparine, 36, 67, 433, 458,
484, 488, 507, 514, 552

Galium odorata, 67, 95

gallbladder inflammation, 533, 538

gallbladder surgery, 447

gallic acid, 92, 114

gallotannins, 114

gallstones, 533, 538, 571

gamma linolenic acid (GLA), 56,
390

ganoderan B, 179

Ganoderma lucidum, 44, 46, 153,
443

Garcinia mangostana, 135

gargles (gargarisma), 231

garlic. See Allium sativum

gas chromatography (GC), 22

gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS), 22

gastric and duodenal ulcers, 272,
535, 566, 586, 591

gastritis, 271, 526, 538, 539, 550,
555, 591

gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), 269-271, 322

Gaultheria procumbens, 366, 488,
493, 502

Gelidium amansii, 52

gelserine, 127, 204

Gelsemium sempervirens, 204, 371,
517

general adaptation syndrome
(GAS), 346, 465

genin, 41

Genista tinctoria, 106, 396

genistein, 106, 143

genital warts, 113

gentian. See Gentiana lutea

Gentiana lutea, 452, 491, 499, 504,
509, 514, 520, 553

gentianose, 43

gentiopicrin, 66, 67

gentiopicroside, 67

gentisein, 99

Genus, 31

geraniol, 210, 641

Geranium maculatum, 486, 488,
497, 553

geranylgeraniol, 73

germacranolides, 70

German chamomile, See
Matricaria recutita

gestational hypertension, 400

gibberellane, 71

ginger. See Zingiber officinale

gingivitis, 268, 533, 541, 544, 580

ginkgetin, 108

Ginkgo biloba, 293, 462, 471, S01, 553

Ginkgo. See Ginkgo biloba

ginkgolide A, 73, 175

ginseng. See Panax ginseng

ginsenoside Re, 49

ginsenoside Re, 82

ginsenoside Rf, 82

ginsenoside Rg, 83

glandular fever, 541

laziovine, 125

iotoxins, 175

lobe artichoke, 45

Jobe flower, 70

Jochids, 206

lossitis, 580

glucans, 45, 153

Jucobrassicin, 50

ucocapparin, $0

lucomannans, 47

lucosamine sulfate, 414

lucosinolates, 50, 200, 459

lucuronyl transferase, 149

lutathione peroxidase, 166

Jurathione, 166

lurathione-s-transferase, 149

lycans, 44

Glycine max, 78

lycoalkaloids, 131

lycolipids, 43, 47

glycoproteins, 43, 47

glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 46,

47, 414

glycosides, 41, 48, 199

glycosphingolipid, 146

glycosuria, 463

glycyrrhetinic acid, 80

Glyorrhiza echinata, 396

Glycyrrhiza glabra, 396, 466, 488,
494, 506, 512, 554

9a_99 99 99 0G 96 99 99 OG G9 OGG 09 OG 99 09 09

0909

INDEX 659

Ghorrhiza uralensis, 396

glycyrrhizin, 80

goat's milk, 329

goat's rue, See Galega officinalis

goiter, 551

goitrogenic glycosides, 200

goldenrod. See Solidago virgaurea

goldenseal. See Hydrastis canadensis

goldthread, 28

gorse, 85

Gossypium herbaceum, 394

Gossypium hirsutum, 68, 201, 396

gossypol, 68, 201

gout, 411, 426, 528, 534, 542,
550, 556, 579

gracillin, 82

grapes, 99

gravel root. See Eupatorium
purpureum

Graves’ disease, 462

Grevillea robusta, 208

Grifola frondosa, 44, 153

grifolan, 153

Grindelia camporum, 512, 555

Grindelia squarrosa, 555

grindelic acid, 73

ground substance, 47

guaiac. See Guaiacum officinale

guaiacol, 92

guaiaconic acid, 86

Guaiacum officinale, 68, 86, 423,
484, 489, 493, 556

guaianolides, 70

guaiazulene, 68

guar gum, 52, 179

guarana, 124

guava, 179

guggul, 84, 293, 301

guggulsterone Z, 84, 171

gum arabic, 51

gum resins, 87

gums, 50

gumweed. See Grindelia squarrosa

gut-associated lymphoid tissue
(GALT), 154

gypsywort, 563

Hamamelis virginiana, 489, 497, 556

Hamilton Anxiety Scale, 572

harmaline, 128

harman, 128

Harpagophytum procumbens, 67,
419, 423, 489, 493, 557

harpagoside, 67

harringtonine, 132

awthorn. See Crataegus laevigata

hay fever, 339-340, 580

hazard, 197

head lice, 566

eadache, 364-367, 539, 557, 562,
568, 572, 576, 577, $79, 585

healing crisis, 447

eart failure, 309

heart palpitations, 562

heartburn, 550

heartsease. See Viola tricolor

heberden’s nodes, 419

Hedeoma pulegioides, 396

helenalin, 152

elenin, 70

Helenium amarum, 70

Helianthus tuberosus, 45

Helicobacter pylori, 272

Heliopsis longipes, 59

Heliotropium spp., 203

----- PAGE 668 -----
660 @ INDEX

Heliotropium, 189

hellebore, 81

Helleborus niger, 70, 81, 169, 199

helonias root, 28

hematuria, 378-379, 594

Hemophilus influenzae, 322

hemoptysis, 321

hemorrhoids, 289-290, 524, 553,
556, 574, 577

hemp, 56

henbane, 122

henna, 97

hepatic cancer, 193

hepatic, 244, 513-515

Hepatica nobilis, 396

hepatitis A, 285

hepatitis B, 285

hepatitis C, 285

hepatitis D, 285

hepatitis, chronic, 283-284

hepatoprotection, 175, 282

hepatoprotective properties, test-
ing for, 23

hepatotoxicity, 193

heptane, 59

Heracleum spp., 96

herb quality, 19

herb toxicity, 198-213

herb, definition of, 7

herbal marketplace, 15

herbal traditions, 17

Herbalist & Alchemist Books, 642

Herniara glabra, 78

Herniara hirsuta, 78

Herpes progenitalis, 566

Herpes simplex, 116, 555, 566,
567, 580

Herpes zoster, 373

hesperidin, 14

heteropolysaccharide, 41, 45

hexahydroxydiphenic acid, 114

hexobarbital sleeping time, 24

hexoses, 42

hiatus hernia, 274, 586

Hieracium pilosella, 512

high-density lipoprotein (HDL),
300

high-fiber diet, 260

high-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC), 22

himematsutake, 44, 153

Hirschsprung’s disease, 476

histamine, 155

Hodgkin's disease, 127

herbal medicine, a model of
236-256

holistic medicine, 6

holly mahonia, 564

holoenzyme, 136

homocysteine, 299

homopolymer, 44

homopolysaccharide, 41, 44

Hoppea dichotoma, 484

hops. See Hummulus lupulus

hordenine, 170

Hordeum vulgare, 396

horehound. See Marrubium vulgare

hormonal! modulators, 445

hormonal normalizers, 385, 509

hormone-responsive elements, 139

hormones, classification of, 141

horse chestnut. See Aesculus hip-
pocastanum

horsehoof, 590

horseradish, 50

horsetail. See Equisetum arvense

hot flash, 390, 539

huitlacoche, 44, 153

human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV), 164

human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), 116, 165

human papilloma virus (HPV), 113

humulene, 68

Humuulus lupulus, 462, 494, 502,

515, 517, 557

Huperzia serrata, 138

huperzine A, 138

hyaluronic acid, 46

Hydnocarpus wightiana, 57

Hydrangea arborescens, 383, 557

hydrangea. See Hydrangea arborescens

hydrastine, 126

Hydrastis canadensis, 464, 394, 452,

458, 484, 486, 489, 491, 499,

504, 509, 512, 514, 558

rydrogen cyanide, 50

hydrogen peroxide, 166

hydrolases, 137

hydrolysis, 40

hydrolyzable tannins, 114

hydroquinone, 93

hydroxychloroquine, 413

hydroxycitronellal, 210

4-hydroxycoumarin, 200

hydroxycoumarins, 95

4-hydroxytamoxifen, 143

5-hydroxytryptamine, 155

hymenoxon, 70

Hymenoxys odorata, 70

hyoscyamine, 123

Hyoscyamus niger, 122

hypercalciuria, 382

hyperforin, 99

hyperglycemia, 463

ypericin, 99

Hypericum perforatum, 286, 462,
465, 489, 491, 494, 517, 559

hyperlipidemia, 170, 296

ryperoxaluria, 382

hyperpigmentation, 209

hypersensitivity reactions, 193, 445

hypertension, 171, 302-306, 523,
545, 585, 589, 593

yperthyroidism, 462

hyperuricemia, 426

hypnotic, 345, 515-516

hypocalcemia, 198

hypochlorous acid (HOC), 166

hypoglycemic agents, 178-180

hypoglycemics, 464

hypokalemia, 555

hypotensive agents, 171-173, 244

hypotensive, 516-517

ypothyroidism, 461

hypoxia, 554

hyssop. See Hyssopus officinalis

Hyssopus officinalis, 396, 486, 489,
494, 509, 512, 514, 517, 559

iceland moss. See Cetraria islandica
Hex paraguariensis, 124

immune system, 441-460
immunoadjuvants, 152, 443
immunocompromise, 446
immunodeficiency diseases, 445
immunomodulation, 442
immunomodulators, 77, 152, 244
immunopotentiators, 442
immunoregulation, 443, 446

immunostimulants, 77, 442

immunostimulating complexes
(ISCOMs), 77

imperatorin, 210

impetigo, 481-482, 566

impotence, 554

incompatibility, 232

incontinence, 377, 547

Index Medicus, 643

indigestion, 275, 477, 525, 530,

557, 592

indole alkaloids, 127-130, 204

indole, 127-128

indole-3-carbinol, 50, 459

indole-3-glucosinolate, 50

inducible cyclooxygenase, 157

infection, 450-455, 530, 544

inflammation, 154-159

inflammatory bowel disease

(IBD), 279

influenza, 338-343, 526, 527,
531, 534, 944, 549, 567, 568,
569, 580, 585, 589, 592

infusa, 219-220

inhalants (vapors), 231

Inocybe, 129

insomnia, 355-361, 547, 557, 561,
562, 565. 567, 570, 572, 576,
592

Insulin-Dependent Diabetes
Mellitus (DDM), 463

integrins, 158

intellectual imperialism, 15

interferon, 158, 163, 532

interleukin 1 (IL1), 156

interleukins, 153, 162

intermittent claudication, 311

International Code of Botanical
Nomenclature (CBN), 32

intestinal flora, 265

intrahepatic cholestasis, 193

intrauterine device UD), 387

Inula helenium, 45,70, 396, 452, 486,
491, 497, 512, 514, 520, 560

Inula japonica, 70

inulicin, 70

inulin, 45

Investigational New Drug
Application (IND), 12

ipecacuanha. See Cephaelis
ipecacuanha

Ipomoea batatas, 85

Ipomoea purga, 86

Ipomoea tricolor, 204

Trido myrmex, 66

iridodial, 66

iridoids, 66-67

Tris versicolor, 396, 455, 458, 484,
493, 504, 507, 514, 560

Iris virginica, 396

irish moss. See Chondrus crispus

iron, sources of, 399

irritable bowel syndrome, 246,
276-279

isoalantolactone, 70

isoboldine, 126

isobutyl amides, 59

isochondrodendrine, 125

isocorydine, 126, 135

isoenzymes, 157

isoflavanones, 106

isoflavans, 106

isoflavones, 143

isoflavonoids, 106

isomerases, 137

isomers, 40
isoprene, 59, 62
isoprenoids, 62
isoquinoline alkaloids, 125-127,
205
isorhamnetin, 105
isotentrandine, 126
isotetrandine, 126
isothebaine, 135
isothiocyanate, 50, 200
isovaleric acid, 55

jack bean, 206

jalap, 86

Jamaica dogwood. See Piscidia
erythrina

jambul, 179

japanese elecampane, 70

Japanese oil of camphor, 65

Jasmine absolute, 210

Jasminum spp., 128

Jateorhiza palnata, 73

Jatrorrhizine, 126

jaundice, 283, 533, 538, 548, 563,
578, 587

Jerusalem artichoke, 45

jimson weed, 122

Joe pye, 549

joint capsule, 419

judaicin, 70

Fuglans cinerea, 394, 462, 504

Juglans nigra, 97

juglone, 97

Juices (succi), 226

juniper. See Juniperus communis

luniperus communis, 396, 454, 491,

493, 502, 507, 520, 561

Juniperus monosperma, 396

Juniperus osteosperma, 396

Juniperus oxycedrus, 396

Juniperus sabina

Juniperus virginiana, 396

kadsurenone, 159, 175

kaempferol, 103

kallidin, 155

kanamycin, 545

Kartoum senna, 582

kaurane, 71

kava dermopathy, 572

kava kava, See Piper methysticum

kavalactones, 572

kelp. See Fucus vesiculosus

khar, 128, 170

khella, 96

khellin, 171, 175

kidney stones, 382, 542, 546, 550,
570

Kingdoms, 31

kininogens, 155

kinins, 155

kinnikinnick, 529

koebner phenomena, 435

kola. See Cola acuminata

konjac flour, 47

Koplik’s spots, 474

kousso, 114

Krameria triandra, 269

kudzu, 106

kumatekenin, 77

labdane, 71

lack of appetite, 553
lactoferrin, 168
lactose, 43, 263

----- PAGE 669 -----
Lactuca serriola, 71

Lactuca virosa, 71, 494, 515, $17, 561

lactucarium, 561

lactucin, 71

lady’s mantle. See Akcbemulla vulgaris

lady's slipper, 28, 384

laetrile, 50

Lamium spp., 67

lanatoside C, 168

lapachol, 97

laparoscopy, 404

larch arabinogalactan, 46

Larix occidentalis, 46

Larrea spp., 34, 113

Larrea tridentata, 436, 455, 458,
484

laryngitis, 341-342, 536, 541,
544, 569, $72, 574, $75, $77,
580, 585, 589

athyrane, 71

atrorrhizine, 125

Laurencia spp., 60

lauric acid, $5

Lavandula angustifolia, 489, 494,

509, 517, 561

Lavandula latifolia, 64

lavender essential oil, 210, 417

lavender. See Lavandula angustifolia

lawsone, 97

Lawsonia inermis, 97

laxative, 244, 263

lead, 213

Lecanora spp., 93

lectins, 153, 164, 206

leg cramps, 596

leg ulcers, 524

Leishmania spp., 533

lemon Balm. See Melissa officinalis

lemongrass, 64

lentinan, 153

Lentinus edodes, 44, 443, 153

Leonurus cardiaca, 344, 396, 494,
501, 502, 509, 514-517, 562

Leonurus heterophyllus, 396

Leonurus sibiricus, 396

L-ephedrine, 128, 170

lepidoptera, 83

leprosy, 57

Leptandra virginica, 396, $04, 514,
562

Lespedeza capitata, 172

lethal dose (LD), 194

lettuce opium, 561

leucoanthocyanin, 100

leukopenia, $32

leukorrhea, 533, 553, 569

leukotriene B, (LTB,), 57

leukotrienes, 155

Leuzea carthamoides, 484

Levisticum officinale, 396

libraries, 639

Library of Congress (LC),
640-641

lice, 572

licoflavonol, 77

licorice. See Glycyrrhiza glabra

licoricone, 77

L-iduronic acid, 46

life events, 298

ligand, 40

ligand-receptor complex, 139

ligases, 137

lignanolide, 113

lignans, 112-114, 143, 175

Ligusticum chuanxiong, 396

Ligusticum porteri, 28, 34, 324,
342, 396, 452, 491

Ligustrum lucidum, 302, 443

Lilium lancifolium, 85

Lilium pumilum, 85

ily-of-the-valley, 81, 394

lime blossom, 589

Limnanthes, 50

jimonene, 63

jimonin, 84

imonoids, 84

jinalool, 64

linctuses (lincti), 226

linden. See Tilia platyphyllos

iniments, 231

Linnaean system of classification,
32

jinoleic, 56

inolenic, 56

inseed oil, 57

Linum usitatissimum, 57,73, 506

ipid peroxide, 166

ipids, 54-61, 166

ipopolysaccharides, 54

ipoprotein, $4

ipoxins, 155

5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, 159

jipoxygenase pathway, 157

Liquidambar orientalis, 228

ithospermic acid, 93

Lithospermum: officinale, 93, 203

liver enzyme levels, 24

liver fluke, 70

liver, 175-178

liverworts, 31

Lloyd Library, 639

Lobelia inflata, 122, 394, 396, 417,
494, 512, 517, 563

Lobelia nicotinaefolia and L. bass-
teri, 122

Lobelia sipbilitica, 396

lobelia. See Lobelia inflata

lobeline, 122, 563

Lomatium dissectum, 28, 396

Lophophora williamsti, 28, 128, 464

lotions, 432

low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 300

low-fiber diet, 280

lozenges (trochisci), 228

lumbago, 536

lupeol, 198

upine alkaloids, 130

Lupinus spp., 130

lutein, 168

luteolin, 106

lyases, 137

Lycium barbarum, 396

Lycium chinense, 176, 396

lycopene, 85, 168

Lycopersicon esculentum, 85, 129, 205

lycopodium alkaloids, 130

Lycopodium powder, 432

Lycopodium spp., 130

Lycopus americanus, 396, $63

Lycopus europaeus, 396, 463, 494,
497, 501, 563

Lycopus virginicus, 396, 463, 563

lymphadenitis, $33, 552

lymphatic drainage, 147

lymphokine-activated killer
(LAK), 153

lymphosarcoma, 127

lysergic acid, 127

Ma huang, See Ephedra sinica

maceration, 218

macrocyclic retronecine diester,
189, 202

Madagascar periwinkle, 127, 160,
241

madder root, 96

magnoflorine, 126, 135

Magnolia officinalis, 396

Mahonia aquifolium, 396, 433,
484, 493, 504, 514, 564

Mabonia nervosa, 396

Mahonia repens, 396

Maidenhair fern, 28

maitake, 44, 153

malabsorption, 280

malaria, 459

male fern, 92, 394

maltose, 43

Matva sylvestris, 489, 506

mandarin orange, 170

Mandragora officinarum, 122

Mangifera indica, 208

mango, 99

mangostin, 135

Manihot esculenta, 200

manoalide, 159

Mansonia, 169

marc, 218

margin of safety (MOS), 195

marrubiin, 73

Marrubium vulgare, 396, 499, 509,
512, 520, 564

Marsdenia condurango, 520, 565

Marsdenia reichenbachii, 565

marsh marigold, 70, 199

marshmallow. See Althaea officinalis

mastalgia, 56

mastic, 86

mastitis, 403

matairesinol, 113

mate, 124

Matricaria recutita, 274 489, 494a,
499, 502, 509, 515, 517, 565

matricin, 68, 71

mayapple, 28, 113, 161, 394

meadowsweet. See Filipendula
ulmaria

measles, 474

mecambrine, 125

mediators of inflammation, 155-158

Medicago sativa, 78, 165, 302

Medical Subject Headings, 641

medicinal fungi, 193

Medicinal Plants of Native
America Database, 643

mediterranean diet, 57

MEDLINE, 6%3

Melaleuca alternifolia, 439, 566

Melaleuca leucadendron and other
Melaleuca spp., 66

melancholia, 354

melilot, 95

melilotoside, 201

Melilotus spp., 95

Melissa officinalis, 494, 501, 502,
504, 514, 517, 567

melting point, 20

membrane structure, 146

Menabea, 169

meniere’s disease, 372

meninges, 364

meningitis, 474

menopausal depression, 566

menopause, 390-393, 539, 559, $95

menorrhagia, 525, 553, 594

INDEX .@ 661

menstruation, irregular, 386

menstruum, 217

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens, 325

Mentha crispa, 211

Mentha piperita, 486, 489, 491,
494, 502, 509, 520, 568

Mentha pulegium, 394, 494, 502,
509, 568

Mentha spicata, 65

menthofuran, 172

menthol, 64

Menyanthes trifoliata, 67, 419, 423,
484, 489, 493, 514, 568

mescaline, 128

MeSH terms, 641

metastasis, 16]

methoxycitronellal, 210

methylcanadine, 170

metrorrhagia, $25, $53, 594

microbial contamination, 21

microbial toxins, 211

microfibril, 45

microtubules, 162

migraine, 367-371, 540, $66, $72,
589

milk thistle. See Silybum marianum

millipedes, 50

mineralocorticoids, 465

minor flavonoids, 107

miscellaneous alkaloids, 131

Mitchella repens, 509, 568

mitosis, 160

moisture content, 21

molds, 31

molluscicide, 78

Momordica charantia, 85a, 179

Monarda clinopodia, 396

Monarda didyma, 396

Monarda fistulosa, 396

Monarda pectinata, 396

Monarda punctata, 66, 396

Monera, 31

monk's pepper, 595

monoamine oxidase (MAO)
inhibition, 559

monodesmosidic saponins, 74

monoepoxylignans, 113

monohydroxy-(e)-icosatetraenoic
acids (HETE), 57

monomycin, 545

monosaccharide, 41, 42, 63-66

Montanoa tomentosa, 74

morning glory, 204

morning sickness, 397

morphine, 127

Morus alba, 464

mosses, 31

mother tincture, 1]

motherwort. See Leonurus cardiaca

moths, 50

motion sickness, 123, 373, $33,
566, 568, 598

mountain grape, 564

mouth ulcers, 533, 541

mouthwashes, 23]

M-phase drugs, 160

mucilages, 50-51, 226

mucopolysaccharides, 47

mucous colitis, 277

Mucuna pruriens, 128

mucus production, 341

mugwort. See Artemisia vulgaris

mullein. See Verbascum: thapsus

mumps, 474-475, 572

Musa spp., 129, 170

----- PAGE 670 -----
662 = INDEX

muscarine, 129

muscle-relaxant compress, 353

musculoskeletal system, 408-429

mutagen, 193

mutagenesis, 193

mutases, 137

myalgia, 417, 591

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 93, 96

mycopolysaccharides, 44, 153, 162

mycotoxins, 131, 212

myocardial infarction, 303, 542

Myosotis scorpioides, 124

Myrica cerifera, 493, 497, 520, 569

myristic acid, 55

Myristica fragrans, 64, 94, 396

Myristica officinalis, 394

myristicin, 94

myrosinase, 50, 200

Myroxylon balsamum var. balsa-
mum, 87, 512

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,
87, 228, 452, 491

myrrh. See Commiphora molmol

myxedema, 461

N,N-dimethyltryptamine, 128

N-acetylgalactosamine, 46, 146

N-acetylglucosamine, 46, 146

N-acetylneuraminic acid, 46, 146

N-acetyltransferase, 149

N-methyltyramine, 170

naphthoquinones, 97

NAPRALERT, 643

Narcissus spp., 34

Nardostachys jatamansi, 396

naringenin, 107

naringin, 107

nasal catarrh, 546, 550

Nasturtium officinale, 396

National Cancer Institute (NCI),
24

National Formulary (NF), 20

National Library of Medicine
(NLM), 641, 643

Native American Church, 121

natural aspirin, 366

natural progesterone, 543

natural resin, 86

naturopathic medicine, principles
of, 16

nausea, 478, 533, 550

necine base, 124, 202

necrosis, 163

Nectandra rigida, 175

nectandrins, 175

neem, 105

Nelumbo nucifera, 179

neoflavonoids, 106

neohesperidin, 107

neolignans, 112

neoquassin, 85

Nepeta cataria, 66, 396, 494, 569

nepetalactone, 66

Nerium oleander, 81, 169

nervine, 244, 345, 917-519

nervous system, 344-374

nettle. See Urtica dioica

neuralgia, 539, 559, 566, 567, 570,
572, 585

neuritis, 371-37

neuroendocrine, 461

neurological pain, 539

Nicotiana tabacum, 122

nicotine, 122

nifedipine, 172

night blooming cereus, 170

nitric oxide (NO), 141, 153, 196

nocturia, 377

nodule, 433

nonacosone, 59

noncompliance, 473

non-insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus (NIDDM), 463

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), 111, 190,
272, 412

nonsteroidal cardioactive con-
stituents, 169

normalizers, 36, 237

nortriterpenoids, 84

nosebleed, 303, 535

nosodes, 11

nucleases, 137

nutmeg, 64, 94, 394

NYHA class II cardiac insuffi-
ciency, 295

Nympbaea spp., 33

oak. See Quercus rubra
oats. See Avena sativa
obaberine, 125
obanegine, 126
obstructive bronchitis, 327
ochratoxins, 212
Ocimum. sanctum, 484
octadecyl alcohol, 58
octanol, 60
Ocnanthe aquatica, 64
Oenothera biennis, 56
Official Formulae
Aqua Cinnamomi conc. BPC
1911 (Concentrated
Cinnamon Water), 227
Balneum Sinapis BPC 1911
(Mustard Bath), 229
Compound Fig Elixir BP 1980,
225
Concentrated Compound
Gentian Infusion BP 1980, 220
Decoctum Lappae BPC 1911
(Decoction of Burdock), 222
Decoctum Tussilaginis BPC
1911 (Decoction of
Coltsfoot), 222
Emulsio Olei Amygdalae BPC
1911 (Almond Oil Emulsion),
225
Enema Ulmi Fulvae BPC 1911
(Enema of Slippery Elm), 230
Extractum Anthemidis
Liquidum BPC 1934 (Liquid
Extract of Chamomile), 225
Gargarisma Myrrhea BPC 1911
(Myrrh Gargle), 231
Infusum Pruni Virginianae BPC
1911 (Infusion of Virginian
Prune), 220
Linctus Ipecacuanhae BPC 1923
(Linctus of [pecacuanha), 226
Linimentum Arnicae BPC 1911
(Liniment of Arnica), 231
Mucilago Acaciae BPC 1911
(Mucilage of Acacia), 226
Nebula Benzoini Composita
BPC 1911 (Composition
Benzoin Inhalation), 232
Oxymel Marrubii BPC 1911
(Oxymel of Horehound), 226
Senna Liquid Extract BP 1980,
225

Syrupus Althaeae BPC 1911
(Syrup of Althaea), 225
Succus Taraxaci BPC 1911
Juice of Dandelion), 226
Trochisci Altheae BPC 1911
(Althaea Lozenges), 228
Vapor Eucalapti et Mentholis
Compositus BPC 1911
(Compound Eucalyptus and
menthol inhalation), 231

official standards, 20

oil of bergamot, 64

oil of cajeput, 66

oil of copaiba, 68

oil of coriander, 64

oil of eucalyptus, 66

oil of spearmint, 65

ointments, 230, 432

Olea europaea, 464, 491

oleander, 81

oleoresins, 86

oligomeric proanthocyanidins
(OPCs), 112, 295

oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs),
114

oligosaccharide, 41, 43

omega-3 EFAs, 36, 171, 259

omega-6 EFAs, 56, 259

onjunctivitis, 551

online databases, 642

Ononis, 78

opium poppy, 36, 365

optical isomerism, 40, 63

Opuntia ficus-indica, 179, 207

orange flowers, 64

orange lily, 85

oregano oil, 65

Oregon grape. See Mahonia
aquifolium

organized drugs, 30

organoleptic evaluation, 20

organosulphur derivatives, 174

Origanum majorana, 491

Origanum vulgare, 65

Ornithogalum, 169

orthopnea, 322

osha, 28, 324, 342

osmotic agents, 265

osteoarthritis, 418-422, 539, 568,
591

osteoporosis, 392, 424-425

Otitis Media, 478-479

ouabain, 168

ovarian pain, 343

overactive thyroid, 563

oviposition stimulant, 188

oxalic acid, 14, 198

Oxalobacter formigens, 198

oxazoles, 131

oxidases, 136

oxidation, 40

oxidative stress, 166

oxidoreductases, 136

oxyacanthine, 125

oxyberberine, 126

oxymels, 226

Pachycarpus, 169

paclitaxel, 62, 132

Paeonia spp., 33

Paeonia suffruticosa, 396

pain perception, 364

pain relievers, 410

palmarosa oil, 64

palmatine, 126

palmitic acid, 55

palmitoleic, 56

palpitations, 563

Panax ginseng, 15, 442, 464, 570

Panax notoginseng, 76, 158, 396

Panax quinguefolius, 28, 570

Panax spp., 465, 520

panaxans, 180

panaxatriol saponins, 76

Papaver somniferum, 36, 365

papaverine, 554

papule, 438

paradoxical reactions, 469

paramunity, 442

parathyroid hormone, 375

Parietaria diffusa, 383, 570

Parietaria judaica, 507

Parkinson’s disease, 123, 570

Parmelia spp., 93

parsley. See Petroselinum crispum

parthenolide, 71, 370

partition chromatography, 22

partridgeberry. See Mitchella repen

pasqueflower. See Pulsatilla
vulgaris

Passiflora incarnata, 494, 515-517,
570

passionflower. See Passiflora
incarnata

pastes, 432

pastilles (pastilli), 228

pau d’arco, 97

Paullinia cupana, 124, 517

Pausinystalia yohimbe, 129

p-coumaric acid, 94

pectins, 47

peer review journals, 19, 642

Peganum harmala, 128

pellitory of the wall. See Parietaria
diffusa

pelvic inflammatory disease
(PID), 387

penicillamine, 413

pennyroyal. See Mentha pulegium

pentadecylcatechols (PDCs), 208

pentoses, 42

Peppermint. See Mentha x piperita

peptic ulcers, 272-273, 526, 550,

555, 558

peptidases, 137

percolation, 218

percutaneous absorption, 326

perimenopause, 539

perineal tears, 402

periodontal disease, 268-269

peripheral arterial occlusive

disease, 311, 554

Periploca, 169

periwinkle. See Vinca minor

peroxidases, 137

persimmon, 13, 85

pertussis, 329— 330

Peru balsam, 87, 228

Petasites spp., 123

petite mal, 560, 582

Petroselinum crispum, 396, 454, 493,
494, 502, 507, 509, 516, 571

Peumus boldus, 504, 507, 914, 571

peyote cactus, 28, 121, 128

Pfaffia paniculata, 239

pH, 40

phalloidine, 584

phallotoxins, 205

pharmaceutical Latin, 217

pharmacodynamics, 134-144, 152,
192

----- PAGE 671 -----
pharmacognosy, 19, 134

pharmacokinetics, 134, 144-152,
192

pharmacology, 134-185

pharmacy, 134

pharyngitis, 541, 574, 577, 580, 585

phase I, 148

phase I, 50, 149

Phaseolus coccineus, 106

§-phellandrine, 64

Phellodendron amurense, 126, 396

Phellodendron chinense, 396

phellopterin, 135

phenalkylamines, 170

phenol, 90

phenolic acids, 92

phenolics, 40, 152

phenylalkylamines, 170, 172

phenylpropanoids, 94

pheromones, 68

Philodendron spp., 198

phlebitis, 524, 530

phloretin, 108, 143

Phoenix dactylifera, 83

phorbol ester, 72

phosphatidylcholine, 146

phosphatidylinositol, 146

phosphodiesterase inhibitors, 170

phospholipids, 146

phosphomutases, 137

photodermatitis, 527

photosensitivity, 95, 209, 528, 559,
571

Phyla, 31

Phyllanthus emblica, 302

Physicians of Myddfai, 241

phytane, 71

phytoalexins, 68

Phytochemical and Ethno-
botanical Databases, 643

phytoecdysones, 83

phytoestrogen, 140-144, 425

phytohemagglutinins, 153, 206

phytol, 73

Phytolacca americana, 153, 394, 455,
458, 484, 493, 509, 515, 572

phytophotodermatitis, 209

phytosterols, 83, 143

Picea, 64

Picrasma excelsa, 85, 396

Picrorrhiza kurroa, 285-286

Pieris rapae, 50

pill-bearing spurge, 332

pills, 227

Pilocarpus jaborandi, 396

Pilocarpus microphyllus, 396

Pilocarpus pennatifolius, 396

pilosebaceous follicles, 438

Pimpinella anisum, 396, 452, 491,
494, 502, 512, $72

pimpinellin, 210

pine bark, 13

pine needle oil, 64

Pinellia ternata, 396

a-pinene, 64

Pinguicula vulgaris, 330

Pink root, 28

Pinus heterophylla, 59

Pinus palustris, 64

Pinus pinaster, 59, 64

Pinus pumilio, 325

Pinus sylvestris, 64, 83

pinworm, 526, 530

Piper amalago, 59

Piper angustifolium, 94

Piper futukadsura, 175

Piper methysticum, 494, 517, 573

piperidine alkaloids, 122, 204

piperidine, 122

pipsissewa, 28

Piptadenia peregrina, 128

Piptadenia spp., 127

piscicide, 78

Piscidia erytbrina, 371, 494, 515,
517, 872

pitcher plant, 122

Pittosporum phylliraeoides, 165

placebo-controlled study, 18

plant exudates, 85

plant pigmentation, 100

Plantae, 31

Plantago lanceolata, 574

Plantago major, 433, 489, 491, 497,
573

Plantago ovata, 52

plantain. See Plantago major

planteose, 43

plasma binding, 469

Plasmodium falciparum, 130, 459

Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax,
and P. ovale, 70

platelet function, 173

platelet-activating factor (PAF)
antagonists, 174

platelet-activating factor (PAF),
195, 173, 554

pleurisy root. See Asclepias tuberosa

pleurisy, 527, 931

plumbagin, 97

Plumbago europaea, 97

p-methoxy!-8-phenethylamine, 170

PMS-A, 389

PMS-C, 389

PMS-D, 389

PMS-H, 389

pneumonia, 931

podagra, 426

podofilox, 113

podophyllotoxin, 113, 161

Podophyllum hexandrum, 161, 396

Podophyllum peltatum, 28, 113, 161,
394

poison hemlock, 122

poison ivy dermatitis, $55

poison ivy, 58, 208, 555

poison oak, 8, 58, 208

poisonous plants, 198

poke. See Phytolacca americana

poliovirus type 1, 164

pollution standards index (PSD), 318

polyacetylenes, 59

Polygala senega, 74, 396, 512, 520,
574

Polygonum bistorta, 497

polymorphism, 150

polypeptides, 205

polyphenols, 90-119, 167

polysaccharide, 41, 44, 153

pomegranate, 114

Populus balsamifera var. balsam-
ifera, 433, 452

Populus candicans, 512, 575

Populus tremuloides, 150, 366, 489,
493, 575

poria, 44, 153

Portulaca oleracea, 170, 396

post-bronchitis recovery, 326

postmastectomy pain, 536

postoperative recovery, 447

postpartum depression, 402

postpartum, 402-403
pot marigold, 534
Potentilla spp., 106
poultice, 232, 432
powders, 432
prebiotic, 43
precatory bean, 206
pregnancy, 393-403
premarrubiin, 73
premenstrual syndrome, 388-390,
582, 595
prepared resin, 86
Prescriptions
acne, 439
acute bronchitis, 325
amenorrhea, 386, 387
angina pectoris, 311
anorexia nervosa, 363
antispasmodic rub, 418, 428
aphthous ulcers, 267
asthma associated with eczema,
333
asthma, 332
atherosclerosis, 308
barley water, 378
benign prostatic hypertrophy,
407
benzodiazepine withdrawal, 362
boils, 455
chamomile steam inhalation, 337
cholecystitis, 288
chronic bronchitis with debility,
327
chronic bronchitis wich infection,
328
chronic recurrent bronchitis
with dyspnea, 328
chronic recurrent bronchitis
with severe congestion, 328
cirrhosis, 287
common cold, 337
congestive heart failure, 310
constipation, 266
cough, a basic tea, 322
cough, 2 simple elixir, 322
cough, acute dry, 324
cystitis and irritable bowel syn-
drome, 250
cystitis infusion, 381
cystitis with pain and discomfort,

cystitis, 380

depression, 355

diaper rash ointment, 480

diarrhea, 267

diverticulitis, 281

dysmenorrhea associated with
pelvic lesions, 388

dysmenorrhea, 387

dyspnea, 332

dysuria, 378

eczema associated with asthma,
434

eczema, 433, 434

edema, 379

emphysema, 334

endometriosis, 404

essential oil inhalation, 326

expectoration, to promote, 324,
325

eyebright eyewash, 474

fibrocystic breast disease, 405

footbath, 337

gallstones, 289

gastritis, 271

INDEX .@ 663

GERD, 270

gout, 426

hay fever, 340

headache relief, 367

hematuria, 378

hemorrhoids, 289

hepatitis, 284

hiatus hernia, 274

hormone levels, a supportive
prescription to normalize, 389

hypertension with associated
headache, 305

hypertension with bronchitis, 306

hypertension with debility, 305

hypertension with indigestion, 305

hypertension with palpitations,

305

hypertension with premenstrual

syndrome, 306

hypertension with stress, 305

hypertension, 304

hyperthyroidism, 463

impetigo, 482

indigestion, 275

indigestion, tea for children, 477

influenza, 339

insomnia associated with de-
pression, 360

insomnia associated with hyper-
tension and headache, 360

insomnia associated with hyper-
thyroidism, 463

insomnia associated with indi-
gestion, 359

insomnia associated with
menopausal problems, 359

insomnia blend, 361

insomnia, 359

irritable bowel syndrome, 254,
278

jaundice, 283

kidney stones, 383

laryngitis, 342

licorice Jollipops, 478

liniment, stimulating, 420

menopause symptoms, 393

migraine associated with stress
and hypertension, 370

migraine, 370

migraine, a cooling compress
for, 371

miscarriage, 397

morning sickness, 373, 398

mumps, 475

muscle-relaxant compress, 353

myalgia, 418

neuritis, 371

osteoarthritis, 254, 420

osteoporosis, 425

otitis media, 479

peptic ulcer, 273

peripheral arterial disease, 312

pertussis and other paroxysmal
coughs, 330

PMS, 254, 340, 389

prostatius, 454

psoriasis and hypertension, 437

psoriasis, 254

psoriasis, unresponsive, 254,
437

pyorrhea, 269

relaxing antidepressant essential
oil, 361

rheumatoid arthritis, 423

shingles, 373

----- PAGE 672 -----
664 @ INDEX

sinusitis, 341
sleep and pain relief, 423
sleep pillow, 360
St. John’s wort oil, 420
steam inhalation, 325, 337, 341
stress associated muscle tension,
353
stress with indigestion and pal-
pitations, 353
stress, 352
tendinitis or bursitis, 428
tension headaches, 367
tinnitus, 372
tonsilitis, 343
ulcerative colitis, 279
urinary frequency associated
with infection, 378
uterine fibroids, 403
varicose vein lotion, 313
varicose veins, 313
Prestonia amazonica, 128
prickly ash. See Zenthoxylum
americanum
prickly pear, 179, 207
primarane, 71
primary metabolites, 37
primary screening bioassays, 23
Primula spp., 76
Primula veris, 512
proanthocyanidins, 13, 114
procyanidin, 114
prodecdysone B, 83
prodelphinidin, 114
progestins, 141
prokaryote, 31
prolactin, 141, 595
propionibacterium acne, 439
1-propylmethyldisulphide, 174
prostacyclin, $7, 157
prostaglandins, 97, 155
prostatitis, 454, 524, $42, 546, 596
protease inhibition, 165
protein kinase C activators, 174
proteinases, 137
proteins, 115
proteoglycans, 46-47
proteolytic cleavage, 165
Proteus vulgaris, 527, 545
Protista, 31
protoanemonin, 70, 199
prunasin, 50
Prunus dulcis var. amara, 50
Prunus persica, 396
Prunus serotina, 50, 494, 497, 512,
$75
pseudoephedrine, 546
pseudogout, 426
pseudoguaianolides, 70
pseudohypericin, 98
Pseudomelanosis coli, 265
Pseudomonas aeruginos, 526
Psidium gujava, 179
Psilocybe mexicana, 129
Psilocybe spp., 120
psilocybin, 129
Psoralea corylifolia, 106
Psoralea spp., 96
psoralen, 96, 209-210
psoriasis, 254
psoriatic arthritis, 412, 435
Psorospermin, 99
psychoneuroimmunology, 441
psyllium seed, 52
Psyllium spp., 33
Preridium aquilinum, 50

pterocarpans, 107, 210

Prerocaulon sphacelatum, 165

PubMed, 643

Pueraria lobata, 106, 176

Pulmonaria officinalis, 512

pulmonaries, 321

Pulsatilla vulgaris, 455, 484, 509,
517, 576

pulsatilla. See Pudsatilla vulgaris

Punica granatum, 114

purging buckthorn, 394

purine alkaloids, 124-125

purine-rich foods, 426

purines, 160

purslane, 170

PUVA, 96, 527

pycnogenols, 13, 114

pyelitis, 529, 570

pyorrhea, 268, 533, 541, 544

pyranocoumarins, 95

pyrazines, 131

pyrethrins, 62

pyridine alkaloids, 204

pyrimidines, 160

pyrrolidine alkaloids, 122

pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs), 123-
124, 188, 202-203, 321, 586

pyuria, 379

quaking aspen. See Populus tremu-
loides

Quassia amara, 85, 396

quassinoids, 84

queen's delight, 394

quercetin, 14, 104-105

Quercus rubra, 577

Quercus spp., 497

Quillaja saponaria, 79

quillaja, 79

quince, $1

quinine, 130

quinoa, 78

quinoline alkaloids, 130

uinolizidine alkaloids, 130-131,
204

uinones, 96

RLCE,, 428

radicles, 9

raffinose, 43, 263

Ramalina spp., 93

ranunculin, 70, 199

ranunculosiues, 70, 199

Ranunculus acris, 70, 199

raphides, 198

raspberry leaf, 393

Rauvolfia serpentina, 129, 304

Rauvolfia vomitoria, 129

reactive airway disease (RAD), 330

reactive oxygen species (ROS), 166

receptors, 139-140

recurrent aphthous stomatitis
(RAS), 267

red algae, 51

red clover. See Trifolium pratense

Red List of Threatened Plants, 27

red raspberry. See Rubus idaeus

red sage. See Salvia officinalis var.
rubia

5-a-reductase, 407, 583

$-a-reductasé Inhibition, 138

reishi, 44, 153

relaxation techniques, 349-350

REM (rapid eye movement), 356

renin-angiotensin system, 172

reproductive system, 384-407

reserpine, 129

resins, 85

resistance stage, 346

respiratory catarrh, 526

respiratory centers, 316

respiratory system, 316-343

restless legs syndrome, 428

resveratrol, 99

reticulum cell sarcoma, 127

retinoids, 85

retronecine monoester, 189, 202

reverse transcriptase, 115

Reye’s syndrome, 474

Ry value., 21, 22

Rhamnus cathartica, 97, 394

Rhammnus frangula, 97, 394

Rbhamnus purshiana, 201, 265, 394,
462, 514, 520

thatany, 269

rhein, 98

Rheum officinale, 396, 577

Rheum pabnatum, 394, 497, 577

Rheum tanguticum, 396

rheumatism, 411, 417, 534, 542,

550, 551, 556, 562, 572, 575,

579, 580, 587, 594, 595-596

rheumatoid arthritis, 421, 539,

543, 556, 568, 575, 584

rheumatoid factor (RF), 421

rheumatoid nodules, 422

rhizotomoi, 9

Rhodiola rosea, 169, 484

rhubarb. See Rheum palmatum

Rhus verniciflua, 208

Ribes nigrum, 56

ribose, 42

ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase,
137

ribwort plantain, 574

Ricin, 206

Ricinus communis, 153, 206, 266, 396

ringworm, 456, 526, 558, 566, 588

risk factors, 197, 293-298

risk, 16, 197

Roman chamomile, 350

Rosa centifolia, 64

Rosa damascena, 64

rosemary. See Rosmarinus officinalis

rosin, 86

Rosmarinus officinalis, 396, 452,
491, 493, 494, 497, 501, 504,
509, 520, 577

Ross river virus (RRV), 164

rotenoids, 107

rotenone, 107

roundworm, 530

rubefacient, 244, 410

rubeola, 474

Rubia tinctorum, 96

rubisco, 137

rubratoxins, 212

Rubus idaeus, 393, 497, 509, 578

Rubus villosus, 497

tue. See Ruta graveolens

Rumex crispus, 433, 458, 462, 484,
493, 504, 514, 578

ruscogenin, 83

ruscoside, $3

Ruscus aculeatus, 81, 83

Russian comfrey, 124

Ruta graveolens, 394, 491, 499,
$09, 520, 579

rutabagas, 85

rutin, 48, 105

Ryania speciosa, 130
ryanodine, 130

saccharide, 41

sacred lotus, 179

safety guidelines, 190

safety, 16, 186

saffron, 163

sagebrushes, 68

saikosaponin A, 81

salicin, 48, 92-93

salicylates, 36, 92, 366

Salix alba, 579

Salix spp., 489, 493

Salmonella typhimurium, 24

salpingitis, 387

salt, 306

salves, 432

Salvia apiana, 28

Salvia divinorum, 72

Salvia miltiorrbiza, 72, 311

Salvia officinalis var. rubia, 396,
486, 489, 491, 494, 497, 502,
504, 509, 580

salvinorin A, 72

Sambucus nigra, 486, 489, 494,
507, 512, 580

sandalwood oil, 210, 325

Sanguinaria canadensis, 170, 394,
458, 484, 512, 520, 581

sanguinarine, 127, 170

Santalum album, 325

santolin, 70

a-santonin, 62

sapogenin, 74

Saponaria officinalis, 580

saponin glycosides, 49, 200

saponins, 74-83

Sarracenia flava, 122

sarsaparilla. See Srzilax spp.

sassafras, 417

Sassafras albidum, 417

saturated fatty acids, 54

Sauromatum guttatum, 128

saw palmetto, See Serenoa repens

scabies, 572

Scaevola spinescens, 165

scarlet runner bean, 106

Schisandra chinensis, 113, 443, 484

schisandrin, 113

Schistosoma, 96

schistosomiasis, 96

schizandra. See Schisandra chinensis

schizophyllan, 153

Schizophyllum commune, 44, 153

sciatica, 539, 559

scientific method, 17

sclerotan, 153

Sclerotina sclerotiorium, 44, 153

scopalamine, 123, 373

Scotch broom, 394

Scotch pine, 83

screening programs, 20

Scrophularia buergeriana, 67

Scrophularia nodosa, 433, 458, 484,
$01, 581

Scutellaria baicalensis, 158

Scutellaria lateriflora, 465, 494,
515-517, 582

Scutellaria rivularis, 176

sea holly, 330

sea urchin assay, 23

sebaceous glands, 438

seborrheic dermatitis, 481

secoiridoids, 66

----- PAGE 673 -----
secologanin, 127

secondary messenger, 140

secondary metabolites, 37

secotanapartholide a, 370

Sedum acre, 242

selection criteria, 237~240

Selenicereus grandiforus, 170

Semecarpus anacardium, 163, 208

sempervirine, 127, 204

Seneca snakeroot See Polygala senega

Senecio spp., 123, 189

senecionine, 189, 202

senegin II, 81

Senna alexandrina, 394, 462, 520,
582

Senna obtusifolia, 396

Senna tora, 396

senna. See Senna alexandrina

sennoside A, 48, 98

septicemia, 544

Serenoa repens, 507, $83

serotonin, 129, 155

serpentine receptors, 140

Serratula spp., 33

sertraline, 559

serum bilirubin, 178

sesquiterpene immunostimulants,
152

sesquiterpene lactones, 70, 174,
199, 370

sesquiterpenes, 67

sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG), 143

shepherd’s purse. See Capsella
bursa-pastoris

shift work, 357

Shigella, 545

shiitake, 44, 153

shingles, 373, 536, 571

sialic acid, 146

siam benzoin resin, 228

siberian ginseng. See
Eleutherococcus senticosus

side effects, 146

silicon, 14

silk tree, 484

silybin, 108, 114

Silybum marianum, 177, 282, 514,
584

silychristin, 114

silymarin, 108, 177, 584

B-sitosterol, 84, 143

syrup, 225

sinalbin, 50

Sinapsis nigra, 534

sinigrin, 90

sinusitis, 340-341, 541, 546, 550,
558, 580

sisal, 81

Sjogren’s syndrome, 56, 422

skatole, 129

skin conductance, 350

skin, 430-440

Skulleap. See Scutellaria lateriflora

skunk cabbage. See Symplocarpus
foetidus

sleep pillows, 360

slime molds, 31

slippery elm. See Ubnus rubra

Smilax spp., 433, 484, 493, 584

soapwort roor, 580

solanidine, 205

solanine, 131, 205

solanum-type alkaloids, 131

Solidago canadensis, 78, 211

Solidago gigantea, 78, 211

Solidago virgaurea, 78, 150, 486,
489, 497, 585

solubility, 20

sorbitol, 263

Sorghum, 200

southernwood, 394

soy, 78

sparteine, 130, 170

Spartium junceum, 204

spastic colon, 277

Species, 31

specific gravity, 20

specific remedies, 383

sperm count, 142

spermicide, 78

sphingomyelin, 146

Spigelia marilaandica, 28

spike lavender, 64

spikenard, 28, 74

Spinacia oleracea, 464

spindle tree. See Euonymus
atropurpureus

spindle, 160

Spiraea, 130

spirolaurenone, 60

spironolactone amiloride, 555

sprains, 530

spray solutions (nebulae), 231

sputum, 320

squalene, 74

squill, 81, 169

St. John’s wort oil, 420

St. John’s wort. See Hypericum

ratum

St. Mary’s thistle, 984

Stachys betonica, 517, 585

Stachys officinalis, 122, 515

Stachys sylvatica, 122

Staphylococcus aureus, $27

starch, 44

starfish, 23

stearic acid, 55

steatosis, 193

Stellaria media, 36, 431, 433, 489,
585

Sterculia urens, 51

sterculia, 51

stereoisomer, 40

steroid alkaloids, 74, 131, 205

steroid glycosides, 49, 74

steroid saponins, 81

Stevia rebaudiana, 74

stevioside, 62, 74

stigmasterol, 84, 143

stilbenoids, 99

Stillingia sylvatica, 394, 458, 484

stimulant 345, 519-521

stomatitis, 580

stoneroot See Collinsonia canadensis

storax, 228

stream orchid, 28

Streptococcus pneumoniae, 322

stress, 345-354, 483, 532, 545,
562, 570

stressors, 545

stretch marks, 400

striae, 400

stroke, 303

Strophanthus kombe, 81, 169

structure-activity relationship, 40

Styrax tonkinensis, 228

subspecies, 32

substance P, 536

sucrose, 43

sulfhydryl compounds, 166

sulfotransferase, 149

suma, 239

sunburn, 559

sundew. See Drosera rotundifolia

sunflower, 68

supercritical CO, extraction, 217

superoxide dismutase (SOD), 156,
166

suppotories, 230

surface immune activation, 444

sweet annie, 70

sweet bugle, 563

sweet potato, 85

sweet violet. See Viola odorata

sweet woodruff, 67, 95

swelling index, 21

Swertia spp., 99

swollen glands, 552

symphytine, 124

Symphytum officinale, 188, 396,
489, 497, 506, 512, 586

Symphytum x uplandicum, 124

S. orientale, 124

Symplocarpus foetidus, 34, 60, 494,
512, 586

synephrine, 170

synovial fluid, 419

syrups and elixirs, 225

systemic lupus erythematosus, 411

Syaygium aromaticum, 68, 114,
452, 491

Syaygium cumini, 179

Tabebuia spp., 97

tablets, 227

tachycardia, 562

tachyphylaxis, 151

tacrine, 138

Tanacetum cinerariifolium, 62

Tanacetum parihenium, 369-370,
396, 423, 493-494, 509, 587

Tanacetum vulgare, 66, 396, 499,
509, 520, 530

tangeretin, 14

tannins, 114-117, 201

tansy oil, 66, 530

tansy, 394

Taraxacum officinale, 45, 464, 493,
499, 504, 507, 514, 587

taxane, 72

taxifoline, 113

taxine A, 131

taxoids, 162

taxol, 62, 132

Taxus baccata, 132, 162

Taxus brevifolia, 132

Taxus spp., 131

tea tree. See Melaleuca alternifolia

teething, 566

temporomandibular joint, 372

tendinitis, 412, 427

teniposide, 113, 161

tenulin, 70, 152

teonanacatl, 129

teratogenicity, 193

terebinth, 62

terpenes, 62-89, 152, 199

terpinene-4-ol, 439

tertbutylhydroxyanisole (BEA),
168

tertbutylhydroxytoluene (BHT),
168

A®-tetrahydrocannabinol, 93

tetrahydrofurans, 173

INDEX wa 665

tetraterpenoids, 85

tetroses, 42

Theobroma cacao, 123-134

theobromine, 124

theophylline, 124

therapeutic index (TI), 195

therapeutic systems, 241

Thevetia, 169

thin layer chromatography
(TLQ), 22

thioglucosidase, 50, 200

thiols, 166

threatened miscarriage, 397, 593

threshold effect, 195

thrombosis, 523

thromboxane-receptor antago-

nists, 174

thromboxanes, 155

thrush, 588

Thuja occidentalis, 66, 394, 436,

445, 458, 512, 530, 588

thuja. See Thuja occidentalis

thujone, 66, 199, 530

thujyl alcohol, 66

thyme. See Thymus vulgaris

thymol, 66

Thymus vulgaris, 452, 486, 491,

494, 502, 509, 512, 589

thyroid gland, 461

ti tree. See Melaleuca alternifolia

tiger lily, 85

tigliane, 72

Tilia argentea, 211

Tilia platyphyllos, 293, 489, 494,
501, 507, $09, 515-517, $89

tinctures (tincturae), 223

Tinea barbae, 456

Tinea capitis, 456

Tinea corporis, 456

Tinea cruris, 456

Tinea pedis, 456

Tinnevelly senna, 582

tinnitus, 372-373, 539, 554, 587

Tinospora cordifolia, 484

tliacorine, 125

toad venom, 83

tobacco, 122, 261, 318, 963

tocopherols, 168

tolbutamide, 179

tolu balsam, 87

Tolypocladium inflatum, 446

tonic, 244

tonka bean, 95

tonsillitis, 342-343, 533, 544,
552, 572, 577, 580, $89

tophi, 426

topoisomerase II inhibitors, 161

topoisomerase II, 143

topologic state, 161

toxic dose (TD), 194

toxicity, 16, 186, 192

Texicodendron diversilobum, 8

Toxicodendron radicans, 208

Toxicodendron rydbergdii, 208

Toxicodendron diversilobum, 208

Toxicodendron toxicarium, 208

‘Toxicodendron vernix, 208

toxicology, 192-198

trachea, 316

tracheitis, 572

tracheobronchitis, 324

traditional Chinese medicine, 10,
242

traditional healing systems, 241

Traditional Medicine Program, 25

----- PAGE 674 -----
666 @ INDEX

tragacanth, 52

transacetylases, 137

transaminases, 137

transcription, 139

transferases, 137

transferrin, 168

transglycosidases, 137

translocases, 147

transmembrane ion channel,
140-141

transphosphorylases, 137

tree of heaven, 68

tree-hugging, 350

Tremella fuciformis, 44, 153

tremella, 44

triacylglycerols, 58

Trichocereus pachanoi, 128

trichomes, 70

trichomonal vaginitis, 544, 566

Trichomonas vaginalis, 544

Trichophyton, 455

Trichopus zeylanicus, 484

Trichosanthes kirilowii, 396

trichothecenes, 212

tridesmosidic saponins, 74

Trifolium pratense, 396, 433, 458,
484, 494, 517, 590

trigeminal neuralgia, 536

Trigonella foenum-graecum, 51, 302,
396, 464, 489, 494, 509, 516

Trillium erectum, 28, 81, 384
Trillium pendulum, 384

trimester, first, 397

trimester, second, 400

trimester, third, 400

trisaccharide, 43

triterpene glycosides, 74

triterpenoid saponins, 79

Trollius europaeus, 70, 199

Tropacolum majus, 50, 509

tropane alkaloids, 122-123, 204

tropane, 123

tryptophan, 127

tuberculosis bacterium, 93

tuberculosis, 560

tubotoxin, 107

tubulin-interactions, 162

tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
153, 157, 162

turkey corn, 28

turmeric, 94, 302

Turnera diffusa vax. apbrodisiaca,
86, 494, 517

turpentine, 58

Tussilago farfara, 51, 396, 486,
489, 494, 506, 512, 590

tyramine, 170

tyrosine kinase receptors, 141

ubiquinone, 167

ulcerative colitis, 56, 279-280, 586
Ulex spp., 85

Ubmus rubra, 51, 506, 591
umbelliferone, 96

unani medicine, 10, 242

Uncasia cuneifolia, 70

United Plant Savers, 28

United States Pharmacopoeia
(USP), 20

unorganized drugs, 30

unsaturated fatty acids, 54

upper respiratory system,
335-343, 555

Urechites, 169

uremia, 322

urethral syndrome, 380

urethritis, 524, 526 546, 550, 585,
596

Urginea maritima, 81, 169, 501,
S12

uric acid, 426

urinary calculus, 381-383, 526

urinary incontinence, 525

urinary system, 375- 383

uronic acid, 50

uroshiol JIT, 58

Urtica dioica, 36, 419, 433, 458,
484, 493, 516, 591

Urtica ferox, 206

Unrtica gigas, 206

urticaria, 206, 566

urushiol, 58, 208

Usnea spp., 93, 445, 452, 491

usnic acid, 93

Ustilago maydis, 44, 153

uterine astringents, 385, 510

uterine demulcents, 385, 510

uterine fibroids, 403

uterine tonics, 385, 509

uva-ursi. See Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

Vaccinium macrocarpon, 381

Vaccinium myrtillus, 464

vaginitis, 452

Valencia oranges, 84

valepotriates, 66

valerenic acid, 67

valerian. See Valeriana officinalis

Valeriana officinalis, 462, 494, 502,
509, 515-517, 592

validity, 18

valtrate, 66

Vanilla planifolia, 93

vanillin, 93

varicella zoster, 373

varicose ulcers, 586, 596

varicose veins, 312, 526, 556, 559,
596

varieties, 32

vascular permeability, 524

vascular plants, 31

vascular tonics, 292

vasculitis, 422

vasoactive amines, 155, 378

Vedic tradition, 242

veno-occlusive syndrome, 203

venous insufficiency, 76, 524

venus’ fly trap, 28

verapamil, 172

veratramine, 131

veratrum-type alkaloids, 131

Verbascum thapsus, 417, 489, 494,
497 506, 512, 592

Verbena hastata, 396

Verbena officinalis, 396, 494, 509,
512, 515-517, 592

verbenalin, 67

Vernonia amygdalina, 179

Vernonia noveboracensis, 33

Veronicastrum virginicum, 562

verruculotoxin, 131

vertigo, 539, 554, 566

vervain. See Verbena officinalis

very low density lipoprotein
(VLDL), 171, 300

Vetiveria zizanoides, 396

Viburnum odoratissimum, 170

Viburnum opulus, 489, 493, 494,
509, 516, 517, 593

Viburnum prunifolium, 489, 494,
509, 516, 517, 593

Vicia faba, 59

Vigna angularis, 107

vinblastine, 129

vinca alkaloids, 162

Vinca major, 497

Vinca minor, 594

vincristine, 129

Viola odorata, 458, 512, 594

Viola tricolor, 433, 595

viral hepatitis, 285-286, 584

viral replication, 165

Virginia snakeroot, 28

Viscum album, 153, 164, 394, 458,
516

visnadin, 172

vitamin A, 168

vitamin C, 167

vitamin D, 425

vitamin E, 168

vitamin F, 54

Vitex agnus-castus, 396, 509, 595

vitex. See Vitex agnus-castus

vitiligo, 95

Vins vinifera, 99

vomiting, 533, 538

vulcracine, 126

vulnerary, 244

wahoo. See Euonymus atropurpureus

Wales, 241

warfarin, 201

warts, 588

water bugle, 563

water fennel, 64

water hemlock, 59

water-based preparations, 219

waters (aqua), 227

waxes, 58

wellness, 17

western hemlock, 588

western larch, 46

wheezing, 321

white cedar oil, 66, 530

white cedar, 588

white hellebore, 131
Veratrum album, 131

white horehound, 564

white mustard, 416, 534

white sage, 28

white willow. See Salix alba

whitehead, 438

whooping cough, 329, 526, 537,
544, 555, 561, 565, 572, 575,
586, 589, 590

wild carrot. See Daucus carota

wild cherry. See Prunus serotina

wild fig, 131

wild indigo. See Baptisia tinctoria

wild lettuce. See Lactuca virosa

wild sarsaparilla, 74

wild yam. See Dioscorea villosa

wind flower, 576

wintergreen, 366

witch hazel. See Hamamelis vir-
giniana

Withania somnifera, 396, 465

withenolide, 84

Wolfporia cocos, 44, 153

wood anemone, 70

wood betony. See Stachys betonica

wood ear, 44, 153

World Health Organization
(WHO), 6, 25
World Health Organization
definition of health, 258

wormwood oil, 199

wormwood. See Artemisia
absinthium

wound healing, 586

wounds, $41

wyerone, 59

xanthones, 99
xanthophylls, 85
xanthotoxin, 210
xenoestrogens, 142
xylose, 42
Xysmalobium, 169

yarrow. See Achillea milléfolinm
yeasts, 31

yellow dock. See Rumex crispus
yerba mansa, 28

yerba santa, 28, 86
ylang-ylang oil, 210

yohimbe bark, 129
yohimbine, 129

yoni powder, 453

Yucca spp., 81

Zanthoxylum americanum, 396,
493, 501, 514, 520, 596

Zanthoxylum bungeanum, 397

Zanthoxylum clava-herculis, 397

Zanthoxylum schinifolium, 397

Zanthoxylum simulans, 397

Zea mays, 489, 506, 507, 596

B-zearalenol, 143

zearalenone, 143, 212

Zingiber officinale, 373, 397 493,
494, 501, 502, 509, 520, 597

zingiberene, 69

Ziziphus spinosa, 397

zoapatanol, 74

zoapatle tree, 74

----- PAGE 675 -----



==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: Pdr_for_Herbal_Medicines.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
SCIENTIFIC EDITORS
Joerg Gruenwald, PhD
Thomas Brendler, BA
Christof Jaenicke, MD

PHARMACEUTICAL DIRECTOR
Mukesh Mehta, RPh

CHIEF EDITOR
Thomas Fleming, RPh

ASSISTANT EDITORS
Maria Deutsch, MS, RPh, CDE
Lori Murray

Christine Wyble, PharmD

ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Mohammed Hamid, MS, RPh
Joseph Nathan, RPh

Kavitha Pareddy, MS, RPh
Joyce Case Potter

Kathleen Rodgers, RPh

PRODUCTION MANAGER
Lydia F. Biagioli

PDR

for Herbal
Medicines"

DATA MANAGER

Jeffrey D. Schaefer

INDEX EDITOR

Johanna M. Mazur

SENIOR PRODUCTION COORDINATOR
Amy B. Brooks

ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING DESIGNER
Livio Udina

PRODUCTION EDITOR

Donna Tapellini

PRODUCTION COORDINATOR
Arlene M. Phayre

DATABASE MANAGER

Thomas Dougherty

DESIGN DIRECTOR

Robert Hartman

PUBLISHING STAFF

Senior Vice President, Directory Services:
Paul Walsh

Director of Product Management:

Mark A. Friedman

Product Manager: Bill Shaughnessy

Senior Business Manager: Mark S. Ritchin
Financial Analyst: Wayne M. Soltis
Director of Sales: Dikran N. Barsamian
National Sales Manager, Medical Economics
Trade Sales: Bill Gaffney

Director of Direct Marketing: Michael Bennett
Direct Mail Manager: Lorraine M. Loening
Senior Marketing Analyst: Dina A. Maeder
New Business Development Manager:
Jeffrey D. Dubin

Editor, Directory Services: David W. Sifton
Assistant Editor: Gwynned L. Kelly
Director of Production: Carrie Williams
Manager of Production: Kimberly H. Vivas
Index Editor: Robert N. Woerner

Senior Digital Imaging Coordinator:

Shawn W. Cahill

Digital Imaging Coordinator:
FrankJ.McElroy.in

Fulfillment Managers:

Stephanie DeNardi, Louis Bolcik

Copyright © 2000 and published by Medical Economics Company, Inc. at Montvale, NJ 07645-1742. Ail rights reserved. None of the content of this

publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, resold, redistributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the publisher. PHYSICIANS' DESK REFERENCE®, PDR®, PDR For
Ophthalmology®, Pocket PDR®, and The PDR® Family Guide to Prescription Drugs® are registered trademarks used herein under license. PDR For
Nonprescription.Drugs and Dietary Supplements™, PDRCompanion Guide™, PDR for Herbal Medicines™, PDR® Medical Dictionary™, PDR® Nurse's
Drug Handbook™, PDR® Nurse's Dictionary™, The PDR® Family Guide Encyclopedia of Medical Care™, The PDR® Family Guide to Natural Medicines and
Healing Therapies™, The PDR®Family Guide to Common Ailments™, The PDR®Family Guide to Over-the-Counter Drugs™, and PDR®Electronic

Library™ are trademarks used herein under license.

OFFICERS OF MEDICAL ECONOMICS COMPANY:
President and Chief Executive Officer: Curtis B. Allen; Vice President, New Media: L. Suzanne BeDell; Vice President, Corporate Human Resources:

Pamela M. Bilash; Vice President and Chief Information Officer: Steven M. Bressler, Chief Financial Officer: Christopher Caridi; Vice President and
Controller: Barry Gray; Vice President, New Business Planning: Linda G. Hope; Vice President, Finance: Donna Santarpia; Senior Vice President, Directory
Services: Paul Walsh; Senior Vice President, Operations: John R. Ware; Senior Vice President, Internet Strategies: Raymond Zoeller

ISBN: 1-56363-361-2

----- PAGE 2 -----
Contents

FOr@WOIG....... 2... ccc ccc cece eee e ee eee etn e eden tent eee e teense eet eteteteteretererereed

Alphabetical Index. .

Lists all scientific, common, and brand names found in the herbal monographs.

Therapeutic Category Index
Groups herbs by therapeutic or medicinal category. Listings are alphabetical by category and accepted
common name. Herbs deemed effective by Commission E are flagged for quick recognition.

Indications Index 1-81

Lists herbs by their primary indications. Entries are alphabetical by indication and accepted common
name. Herbs deemed effective by Commission E are specially flagged.

Homeopathic Indications Index 1-131

Catalogs herbal applications in homeopathy. Entries are alphabetical by indication and scientific name.

Asian Indications Index 1-141

Groups herbs by their therapeutic uses in Chinese and Indian medicine.
Listings are alphabetical by indication and accepted common name.

Side Effects Index 1-161

Groups herbs by the adverse reactions with which they have been associated.
Listings are alphabetical by reaction and accepted common name.

Drug/Herb Interactions Guide. ............. 00.0... cc cece cee cence eee e eet eceee teen taeeeeeeee teas
Lists problem combinations alphabetically by the name of the drug and the name of the interacting herb,

and provides a brief description of each combination's potential effect.

Safety Guide. .... 0.0.0 nnn Ee nnn Ene ene Eee cnn E Eee edn Eee bane
Lists herbs that must be avoided while pregnant or nursing, and herbs that should be used only under
professional supervision. Includes all scientific, common, and brand names.

Manufacturers Index...............0 0... c cece ne eee eter terete eres
Provides contact information for each supplier whose products appear in the monographs.

Herb Identification Guide. .......00.0.. 2 ed
Permits rapid, positive identification of unknown botanicals.
Includes nearly 400 full-color photos.

Product Identification Guide................ 0. eee nent ternary
Present photos of a representative group of popular commercial formulations.

Herbal Monographs. ..................0c ccc ce cece eect ence cnet eee tense tent teeeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeeenae

Profiles of 700 medicinal herbs, including trade names, description, actions, indications, contraindications,
precautions, adverse effects, overdosage, dosage, and literature citations.
Organized alphabetically by accepted common name, and cross-referenced by scientific name.

CC] Co X-S—T- | a
A key to the specialized botanical nomenclature and other unfamiliar terminology employed in the herbal monographs.

Poison Control Centers...................ccc cc cee cece cece ence eee e ee ceteete ee taseeeeeeeertnnead

----- PAGE 3 -----
Foreword

With 150,000 copies of its first edition in print, PDR
for Herbal Medicines has almost instantly become one
of the nation's leading pharmacological references.
The reasons for its phenomenal reception are evident.
Hundreds of herbal remedies now fill the shelves in
virtually every supermarket and pharmacy, and the
popularity of self-medication with "natural" supple-
ments continues to rise, making the benefits—and
risks—of these preparations an ever more compelling
concern.

Now, to better address the host of questions that still
surround most herbal remedies. Physicians’ Desk
Reference® is proud to present this completely revised
and updated second edition of PDR for Herbal
Medicines. Significantly enhanced and expanded, this
new edition extends both the range and depth of the
original volume. Among the many improvements
you'll find:

¢ Broader Coverage: With some 100 new entries,
the book now covers a total of 700 botanicals, includ-
ing a wide selection of popular Chinese herbs.

¢ More Research Data: Hundreds of entries have
been augmented with additional information on safety
and efficacy.

¢ Additional Adverse Effects: The entries include
new information on drug/herb interactions. The Side
Effects and Interactions indices have been enriched
and expanded

e Available Formulations: Whenever applicable,
the herbal monographs now list the names and suppli-
ers of popular commercial preparations.

¢ New Indices: The index section has been enhanced
with four additional indices:

— Homeopathic Indications Index

— Asian Indications Index

— Safety Guide

— Manufacturers Index

¢ Better Organization: In this edition, remedies
appear under their more familiar common name,
instead of their botanical designation. All monographs
are cross-referenced by scientific name.

One important aspect of the first edition does, howev-
er, remain constant. Because it is still extremely hard
to come by reliable information on the swarm of
unregulated "dietary supplements" in today's market-
place, this new edition continues to provide you with
the closest available analog to FDA-approved label-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ing—the findings of the German Regulatory
Authority's herbal watchdog agency, commonly called
"Commission E." This agency has conducted an
intensive assessment of the peer-reviewed literature on
some 300 common botanicals, weighing the quality of
the clinical evidence and identifying the uses for
which the herb can reasonably be considered effective.
Its conclusions represent the best expert consensus on
medicinal herbs currently available.

For the herbs not considered by Commission E, PDR
for Herbal Medicines provides the results of an
exhaustive literature review conducted by the respect-
ed PhytoPharm U.S. Institute of Phytopharmaceuticals
under the direction of noted botanist, Dr. Joerg
Gruenwald. These additional monographs, now some
400 in number, provide a detailed introduction to an
array of exotic botanicals that you'll be hard pressed
to find in any other source.

To make the information in the monographs as useful
and accessible as possible, PDR® has echoed the struc-
ture of standard U.S. product labeling. Each mono-
graph contains up to ten standard sections, covering
considerations ranging from description to dosage.
Here's a closer look at what you will find:

¢ Title: Each monograph begins with the herb's
generally accepted common name, followed by its
scientific name. In addition, all monographs are cross-
referenced by their botanical designation.

¢ Trade Names: Listed here are common commer-
cial preparations of the herb.

¢ Description: This section provides a detailed
botanical overview of the herb, including information
on its medicinal parts; flower and fruit; leaves, stem,
and root; unique characteristics, habitat, production,
related plants, and additional common names and syn-
onyms.

¢ Actions and Pharmacology: Here you'll find data
on the active compounds or heterogeneous mixtures
found in the plant, followed by a summary of the
herb's clinical effects. If various parts of the plant
possess different pharmacological activity, the parts
are discussed individually, here and throughout the
remainder of the monograph.

----- PAGE 4 -----
FOREWORD

¢ Indications and Usage: Information on the uses
of the herb is listed under five categories, as applica-
ble:

— Approved by Commission E

— Unproven Uses

— Chinese Medicine

— Indian Medicine

— Homeopathic

Approved uses are presented in list fashion. Other
uses are described with provisos as necessary regard-
ing route and form of administration.

¢ Contraindications: Although most natural reme-
dies can be used under all medical circumstances, a
few pharmacologically potent herbs must be avoided
in the presence of certain medical conditions. If any
such contraindications exist, they are summarized
here.

¢ Precautions and Adverse Reactions: Found in
this section are any cautions or special considerations
regarding safe use of the herb, including any restric-
tions on use in pregnancy or childhood. Although
most herbal remedies are notably free of known side
effects, any reported in the available literature are
noted here.

¢ Overdosage: As we all know, "natural" is not syn-
onymous with "benign," and an overdose of many
"healing" herbs can have serious—even fatal—conse-
quences. Whenever adverse effects of overdose have
been found in the literature, they are reported here,
along with the appropriate medical interventions to be
undertaken when an overdose occurs.

¢ Dosage: Listed here are common modes of admin-
istration, forms and strengths of available commercial
preparations, methods for preparing the natural herb,
and representative dosage recommendations drawn
from the literature. Note, however, that dosage recom-
mendations can be used only as a general guide. The
potency of individual preparations and extracts is sub-
ject to substantial variation, so the manufacturer's
directions should be consulted whenever available.

¢ Literature: This section provides you with a
unique bibliography of the technical literature.
Because German researchers have been particularly
active in the herbal arena, you will find an unusual
number of German-language citations. However,
work in the English literature is included as well.

v

To assist you in quickly locating the information you
require, the monographs have been indexed by name,
therapeutic category, general indications, homeopathic
indications, Asian indications, and side effects. To aid
you in evaluating potential risk, a drug/herb interac-
tion guide and a safety guide are also included. An
index of manufacturers completes the set. Here's an
overview of what each index provides: .

¢ Alphabetical Index: This index includes all scien-
tific, common, and brand names found in the herbal
monographs, together with appropriate page numbers.

¢ Therapeutic Category Index: This index lists the
monographs and their page numbers, alphabetically by
accepted common name, under appropriate therapeutic
category headings. Herbs deemed effective by
Commission E are flagged with a (*) symbol at their
left. To facilitate comparison with prescription and
nonprescription drugs, PDR's standard therapeutic cat-
egories are used throughout.

¢ Indications Index: This index lists herbs and their
page numbers, alphabetically by accepted common
name, under their various indications. Herbs deemed
effective for the indication by Commission E are
flagged with a (*) symbol at their left. To help you
quickly identify conventional alternatives, the indica-
tion headings match those found in PDR's Indications
Index, which appears in the PDR Companion Guide™
and the PDR Electronic Library ™ CD-ROM.

¢ Homeopathic Indications Index: Included in this
index are only the uses found in homeopathy. Herbs,
which homeopaths typically prescribe by scientific
name, are listed here in the same manner, followed by
their accepted common name in parentheses. As in
the main indications index, headings are chosen to
match those in the PDR Companion Guide.

¢ Asian Indications Index: Entries in this index are
limited to uses found in Chinese and Indian medicine.
(Chinese entries are signified with a "C;" Indian
entries with an "I.") Herbs are listed by accepted com-
mon name. Once again, indication headings employ
the nomenclature used in the PDR Companion Guide.

¢ Side Effects Index: In this index, you'll find a list
of all herbs associated with a given adverse reaction.
Herbs are listed alphabetically by accepted common
name, with the scientific name and page number

----- PAGE 5 -----
VI

appended. Nomenclature employed in the side effect
headings matches that used in PDR's Side Effects
Index, another feature of the PDR Companion Guide
and the PDR Electronic Library CD-ROM.

¢ Drug/Herb Interactions Guide: In this convenient
reference, each potential interaction is listed under
both the name of the drug and the name of the interact-
ing herb. A brief description of the interaction's effect
follows each item.

¢ Safety Guide: This section lists botanicals in three
precautionary categories:

— Not for use during pregnancy

— Not for use while nursing

— For use only under supervision

Here, the scientific, common, and brand names of all
herbs in each category are listed alphabetically, togeth-
er with the appropriate page number for further infor-
mation.

¢ Manufacturers Index: This index provides you
with contact information for each supplier whose prod-
ucts appear in the herbal monographs. The names of
the products, together with the page number of the
monograph in which they appear, are included in each
manufacturer's entry.

Following the indices, just as in PDR itself, you'll find
an extensive full-color identification section. The first
part of the section—the Herb Identification Guide—
encompasses nearly 400 of the most widely used
herbs. The second part—the Product Identification
Guide—includes photos of some of the more popular
commercial formulations. Together, these guides pro-
vide you with a truly unique reference unmatched in
any other printed resource. We've also included a
brief glossary of the unfamiliar terms found in the
monographs.

PDR for Herbal Medicines is the product of one of the
most thorough and inclusive examinations of the
herbal literature ever undertaken. Nevertheless, it's
important to remember that it merely summarizes and
synthesizes key data from the underlying research
reports, and of necessity includes neither every pub-
lished report nor every recorded fact.

As in all scientific investigation, conclusions regarding
the effectiveness of the herbs discussed in this com-
pendium are based on the preponderance of current

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

evidence and cannot be considered firm or final. The
publisher does not warrant that any herb will unfail-
ingly and uniformly exhibit the properties ascribed to
it by Germany's Commission E or any other scientific
authority.

In the United States, herbal products are marketed
under the provisions of the Dietary Supplement and
Health Education Act of 1994, which prohibits their
sale for the diagnosis, treatment, cure, or prevention of
any disease. Enumeration of specific commercial
preparations within an herbal monograph should not
be construed as a claim or warranty of their efficacy
for any purpose, by either the manufacturer or the pub-
lisher. Furthermore, it should be understood that, just
as omission of a product does not signify rejection,
inclusion of a product does not imply endorsement,
and that the publisher is not advocating the use of any
product or substance described herein.

Please remember, too, that dosing of herbal prepara-
tions is highly dependent on a variety of factors, such
as cultivation and harvesting conditions, the specific
parts of the plant to be processed, the extraction meth-
ods employed, and the dosage form chosen by the
manufacturer. Since there are no official standards
governing the production of herbal medicines in the
United States, and the potency and the purity of herbal
products are subject to substantial variation, dosage
ranges set forth in the herbal monographs must be
employed only as general guidelines.

In addition, the publisher does not guarantee that
every possible hazard, adverse effect, contraindication,
precaution, or consequence of overdose is included in
the summaries presented here. The publisher has per-
formed no independent verification of the data report-
ed herein, and expressly disclaims responsibility for
any error, whether inherent in the underlying literature
or resulting from erroneous translation, transcription,

or typography.

When patients approach you—as they surely will—for
advice on the latest herbal "discovery" to hit the night-
ly news, we hope that PDR for Herbal Medicines will
provide you with all the facts you need to offer sound,
rational guidance firmly grounded in fact. Certainly
such counseling is the aim of every dedicated health
care professional. And at PDR, we fully share that
goal.

----- PAGE 6 -----
Alphabetical Index

1-1

Listed here are all scientific, common, and brand names to be found in the herbal monographs.

Generally accepted common names that serve as monograph titles appear in bold type. Scientific

names are shown in italic type. Brand names are followed by the supplier's name in parentheses.

Ifan entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant or product in the

Identification Guide, the second to the herbal monograph.

A

Aaron's Rod

(Sempervivum tectorum) .
Aaron's Rod

(Solidago canadensis).
Aaron's Rod

(Solidago virgaurea).
Aaron's Rod

(Verbascum densiflorum)

Abelmoschus moschatus. . . .

Abelmosk. . .
Abies alba
Abrus precatorius.

ABSCESS ROOT
(Polemonium reptans).

Absinthe
Abyssinian Tea.

ACACIA

(Acacia arabica)
Acacia,
Acacia arabica. .
Acacia Bark.
Acacia catechu
Acacia Senegal...........
Acalypha indica
Acer rubrum
Achillea millefolium. .
Achillea ptarmica
Achweed.
Aconite.......
Aconite Bean.
Aconitum napellus. .

0-14, 411
. 145

0-11, 289

0-18, 832

833
. 833
. 802
. 43s

. 0-3, 3

0-2*, 829
447

0-21, 838

. G26, 833

700
0-13, 361
0-18,321
376

. G18, 321

Acorus calamus. G-7, 138
Acrid Crowfoot 133
Acrid Lettuce 433

Actaea spicata ..... vo... $0
Activated Ginkgo Tablets

(Aim for Herbs) 342
Activin Capsules

(Advanced Nutritional) 362
Adam's Apple. G-16, 476
Adam's Flannel G-18, 532
ADAM'S NEEDLE

(Yucca filamentosa)........... 4
Adder's Eyes, . 0-22, 668
Adder's Mouth, : 180
Adder's Root..... . 46
Adderwort. . 0-8, 82
Adiantum capillus-veneris. . 491
ADONIS

(Adonis vernalis). . . 0-3, 3
Adonis vernalis. . c-3, 3
ADRUE

(Cyperus articulatus). . c-3, 6
Adulsa, . G-17, 492
Aegle marmelos, .. . a ... 88
Aegopodium podagraria ... .0-13, 361
Aesculus hippocastanum ... G-14, 403
Aethusa cynapium 0-12, 316
Aframomum melegueta G-13, 362
African Pepper. 0-8, ies
AFRICAN POTATO

(Hypoxis rooperi) 7

AGA

(Amanita muscaria) G-3,8
AGAR

(Gelidium amansii). 9
Agar-Agar....... bee
Aged Garlic Extract, Kyolic

Hi-Po Formula Capsules

(Wakunaga). 327
Agrimonia eupatoria. G-3, 10
AGRIMONY

(Agrimonia eupatoria) G-3, 10
Agropyron repens. G-23, 771
Agrostemma githago. . 1... 222
Ague Grass. 11
Ague Tree. G-21, 662
Ague-Root ... . wee eee dl
Agueweed 0-6, 113
Ailanthus altissima 710
Ailanto 770
Airelle G-3, 7s
Ajuga chamaepitys. . . . G-13, 373
Ajuga reptans. G4, 12s
Akebia. 189
Akebia quinata. . 189
Alant (Inula britannica). : 119
Alant (Inula helenium). G-10,266
Alcanna, :G-14, 391
Alcea rosea . G-14, 398
Alchemilla vulgaris. G-13, 436
Alchornea floribunda 424
Alcohol Free Black Walnut

Green Hulls Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer) 134

----- PAGE 7 -----
1-2 /ALCOHOL FREE CHASTE TREE BERRY LIQUID

Alcohol Free Chaste Tree

Berry Liquid

(Nature's Answer) 176
Alcohol Free Dandelion Root

Liquid (Nature's Answer) ... .245

Alcohol Free Ginger Root
Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer) 339
Alcohol Free Gotu Kola Herb

Liquid (Nature's Answer) .... 359
Alcohol Free Horsetail Liquid

(Nature's Answer), . . . 409
Alcohol Free Kava Kava

Liquid (Nature's Answer) ... .443

Alcohol Free Milk Thistle
Seed Liquid

(Nature's Answer) 516
Alcohol Free Mullein Leaves

Liquid (Nature's Answer) 532
Alcohol Free Nettles Leaf

Liquid (Nature's Answer) 729
Alcohol Free Passionflower

Liquid (Nature's Answer) 573

Alcohol Free Red Raspberry
Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer) 630
Alcohol Free Sage Liquid
(Nature's Answer) 655

Alcohol Free White Willow
Bark Liquid

(Nature's Answer) 807
Alcohol Free Yarrow Flowers
Liquid (Nature's Answer) ... .833

Alcohol Free Yellowdock
Root Liquid
(Nature's Answer). 835

Alder Buckthorn. . ¢-12,317
Alder Dogwood. . . ... G-12,317
Alehoof 372
Alerce. 660
Aletris farinosa. 11
Alexandrian Senna G22, 684
ALFALFA

(Medicago sativa) G3, 12
Alfalfa Capsules

(Nature's Way)............ 12
Alfalfa Concentrate Tablets

(Freeda). 12

Alfalfa Fortified Tablets
(Mason Vitamins), . . . oe. 12

Alfalfa Herbs Tablets

(Nature Made). 12
Alfalfa Leaf Capsules
(Frontier, Nature's Herbs). . 12

Alfalfa Liquid

(McZand, Nature's Answer) .. .12
Alfalfa Natural Tablets

(Nature's Bounty). 12
Alfalfa Tablets (Apothecary,

Basic Vitamins, Major,

Mason Vitamins,

National Vitamin,

Nature's Resource,

Rexall Consumer). 12
Alfalfa Whole Juice

Concentrate Liquid

(Futurebiotics). 12
Alfamin Tablets (Key Co.). .. 12
ALISMA

(Alisma plantago-

aquatica) .. G-3, 13
Alisma plantago-aquatica ....G-3, 13
ALKANET

(Alkanna tinctoria) G-3, 13
Alkanet Root G-3, 13
Alkanna tinctoria.......... 5 G-3, 13

Ail-Heal
{Valeriana officinalis) .. . G-25, 783
All-Heal (Viscum album) . . .0-11, 291

Allium cepa. . G-19, 557
Allium sativum G-12, 327
Allium schoenoprasum. G-8, 188
Allium ursinum............... 66
Allseed Nine-Joints. G-IS, 448
Allspice........ vee e ee 590
ALMOND

(Prunus dulcis) 15
Alnus glutinosa. G-S, 89
ALOE

(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera). . G-3, ie

Aloe 99 Gel (Lee). le

Aloe barbadensis. G-3, ie
Aloe capensis. G-3, ie
Aloe ferox. ie
Aloe vera. . . G-3, 16
Aloe Vera Capsules (ADH,

Herbal Harvest, National

Vitamin, Nature's Bounty,

Nature's Way)............ ie

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Aloe Vera Concentrate 5000
Capsules (Mason Vitamins) ....16
Aloe Vera Mild Stimulant
Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 16
Aloe Vera Super-Strength

Liquid

(Pharmaceutical Labs). 16
Aloe-Root. Seen 11
Aloysia triphylla Lae 463
ALPINE CRANBERRY

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) .... G-3, 20
ALPINE RAGWORT

(Senecio nemorensis) 21
Alpine Strawberry. G-23, 735
Alpinia officinarum 467
Alstonia Bark. . . . oe... 305
Alstonia constricta,.... . . 305
ALTERIS

(Aletris farinosa) 11
Alterra Extended-Release

Tablets (Upsher-Smith). 719
Althaea officinalis. 505
Althea, Lie bic e eee  . 505
Althea Rose G-14, 398
Alumsroot................,.. 233
Alvita Astragalus Root

Tea Bags (Alvita Tea) 54
Amanita muscaria G-3,8
Amantilla . . G-25, 783
AMARANTH

(Amaranthus

hypochondriacus). . . G-3, 22
Amaranthus

hypochondriacus. G-3, 22
AMARGO

(Quassia amara) G-3, 23
Amber. G-23, 719
Ambretta, . . . ween 533
Ambrette Seed ! 533
Ambroise. . G-26, 826
AMERICAN ADDER'S TONGUE

(Erythronium americanum)... .24
AMERICAN BITTERSWEET

(Celastrus scandens), ....... . 24

----- PAGE 8 -----
1-4/ASS'S FOOT

ASS'S Foot . G-9, 209
Asthma Weed. G-ies 479
Astragali 54
ASTRAGALUS

(Astragalus species) 54
Astragalus Capsules

(Natrol, Solaray). 54
Astragalus gummifer. 767
Astragalus Liquid

(Nature's Answer). . 54
Astragalus Root Capsules

(Nature's Way). 54
Astragalus Root Liquid

(McZand). 54
Astragalus species. 54
Astragalus Vegicaps (Solgar) ... .54
Athyrium filix-femina. . G-15,454
Atractylodes japonica, . 430
Atractylodes lancea 706
Atropa belladonna G-4, 69
August Flower. 379
Australian Febrifuge. 305
Australian Fever Bush 305
Australian Pepper Tree 139
Australian Quinine. . 305
Autumn Crocus. G-9, 206
Ava.. : G-15, 443
Ava Pepper. G-15, 443
Avena sativa. G-IS,551
Avens Root . G-4, 71
Averrhoa carambola 148
AVOCADO

(Persea americana). . 57
Ayahuasca, : 833
Ayegreen. G-14,411
Ayron G-14, 411
Azedarach. G-18, 539

B

Babul Bark . 3
Backache Root . G-17, 503
Badiana. G-23, 725
BAEL

(Aegle marmelos). 58
Bahama Cascarilla ise
Bahia Powder. . 352
Bai-Zi-Ren, seo
BALLOON-FLOWER

(Platycodon grandiflorum) 58

Ballota nigra.
Balm. .
Balm of Gilead Fir.

BALMONY
(Chelone glabra).

Balsam Fir.
Balsam of Peru
Balsam of Tolu.
Balsam Styracis.
Balsam Tree.
Balsam-Weed.

BAMBOO
(Arundinaria japonica)

Banana
Banana Tree.
Band Man's Plaything

BANEBERRY
(Actaea spicata)

Banisteriopsis caapi.
Bantu Tulip.
Baptisia tinctoria
Barbary.

BARBERRY
(Berberis vulgaris)

Barber's Brush
Bardana,

BARLEY
(Hordeum distichon)

Barley Grain Capsules
(ADH)

Barosma_betulina.

Barweed.

Basam, . : :

Basics Stinging Nettles
Capsules (Natrol).

BASIL
(Ocimum basilicum)

Basil Thyme.

Bastard Cinnamon

Bastard Jasmine.

Bastard Saffron .....

Batchelor's Buttons
(Centaurea cyanus)

Batchelor's Buttons
(Ranunculus acris).

Bay.

Bay Laurel

Bay Tree. .

G-S, 98

. G-16, 461

714

G-4,59

. 714
G-24, 764
G-24, 764
G-23, 734
G-24, 764

436

...G-4, 60

597
2. 597
G-26, 833

60
833

G-26, 812

. 487

. GA, 61

G-24,757
G-7, 128

G-4, 63

63
691
193

. G-22, 672

729

G-4, 64

138
182
487
652

G-9, 225

.., 133
G-15, 459
G-15, 459
G-15, 459

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Bayberry (Myrica cerifera) .G-22, 705
Bayberry (Myrica gale) .. . .G-24, 745
Bayberry Bark Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). ..... 705
Bayberry Bark Liquid Fluid

Extract (Nature's Answer) ... .705
Bayberry Root Capsules

(Nature's Way), : : 705
Bean Herb. G-23, 739
BEAN POD

(Phaseolus vulgaris) G-4, 65
Bean Trifoil. . bee, 452
Bearberry. G-25, 779
Bearbind............... G-13, 367
Beard Moss. 7718
Bearded Darnel . . G-24, 756
Bear's Foot

(Alchemilla_ vulgaris) G-15, 456
Bear's Foot

(Helleborus viridis) . . 368
BEAR'S GARLIC

(Allium ursinum). . . 66
Bear's Grape. G-20, 602
Bear's Paw Root G-17, 493
Bear's Weed....... 84i
Bearsgrape. G-25, 779
Beaver Poison G-13, 386
Beaver Tree. 490
Beccabunga : . G-6, 121
Bedstraw. 193
Bee Balm.... . 562
Bee Nettle G-25, soe
Beechdrops. 109
Beeflower. . . . . G-25, 792
Beefsteak Plant 583
Bees' Nest G-25, 809
BEET

(Beta vulgaris). . G-4, 67
Beg Kei, . . . ... 34
Beggar's Blanket G-IS, 532
Beggar's Buttons, . G-7, 128
Beggarweed

(Cuscuta epithymum). G-10, 254
Beggarweed

(Polygonum aviculare) . G-15, 448
Beggary. G-12, 322
BEHEN

(Moringa oleifera). . . . . 67
Bei Qi... bees 12. 4
Bel Pee OS

----- PAGE 9 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

American Cotton Plant 228

American Ginseng. 346

American Ginseng Capsules
(Nature's Resource) 346

American Ginseng Root
Capsules (Frontier,
Nature's Herbs). 346

American Greek Valerian ..c-3, 3
AMERICAN HELLEBORE

(Veratrum viride)... . a)
American Ipecacuanha, . .. 421
AMERICAN IVY

(Parthenocissus

quinquefolia) G3, 26

AMERICAN LIVERLEAF
(Hepatica nobilis) 26

American Nightshade G-20, 602
AMERICAN PAWPAW

(Asimina triloba), . . . .. 27
American Saffron, . . . we. 652
American Sloe. . G-5, 96
American Spinach G-20, 602
American Valerian, . . . .. S41
AMERICAN WHITE POND LILY

(Nymphaea odorata) G-3, 28
American Woodbine G-3,26

American Wormgrass 594
American Wormseed. G-26, 828

American Wormwood Grass ....831
Ammi Visnaga... . .. G-5, SI
AMMONIAC GUM

(Dorema ammoniacum)....... : 29
Amomum aromaticum......... 4 540
Anacardium occidentale ....G-7, 157
Anacyclus Pyrethrum..........4 577
Anagallis arvensis. .G-22, 668
Anamirta cocculus. 312
Ananas comosus. 593
Anchusa.......... G-3, 13
Andira araroba........ 352
ANEMARRHENA

(Anemarrhena

asphodeloides). 31
Anemarrhena asphodeloides. . . . 31
Anemone nemorosa 824
Anethum graveolens,..... | G-IO, 252
ANGELICA

(Angelica archangelica) . . . G-3, 32

Angelica archangelica . G3, 32
Angelica Root Liquid Fluid

Extract (Nature's Answer)... . 32
Angel's Wort. G-3, 32
ANGOSTURA

(Galipea officinalis) 34
ANISE

(Pimpinella anisum) G-3,35
Aniseed Stars. .. G23, 725
Annual Wormwood Grass. . . 831
Antelaea azadirachta..... | G-18, 539
Antennaria dioica. . . G-8, 162

Anthoxanthum odoratum . .. G-24, 749

Anthyllis vulneraria. G-9, 214
Aphanes arvensis,............ 570
Apium graveolens., . . . G-8, 172
Apocynum cannabinum........ AI8
APPLE TREE

(Malus domestica) G-4, 37
Aquilegia vulgaris. G-9, 211
Arabian Coffee. G-9, 202
Arabian Tea................4 A47
Arabica Coffee. G-9, 202
Arachis. 575
Arachis hypogaea. a .. S75
Aralia racemosa. . G-23, 711
Araroba..................... 352
Arartree. 0.0.0.0... ... 660
Arberry. G-25, 779
Arborvitae. G-24, 759
Archangel . G25, 806
Arctium lappa. G-7, 128
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi .. . G25, 779
Areca catechu. . G-4, 38
ARECA NUT

(Areca catechu), . . .. G-4, 38
ARENARIA RUBRA

(Spergularia rubra).......... 39
Arisaema atrorubens..........4 A26
Aristolochia clematitis G-S, SO
ARJUN TREE

(Terminalia arjuna) 39
Armoracia rusticana...... | G14, 408
Armstrong . G-15, 448
ARNICA

(Arnica montana) 4l
Arnica Flowers Al
Arnica montana. 4l

ASS EAR/I-3

Arnica Root 41
ARRACH

(Chenopodium vulvaria)...... 43
Arrow Poison. A50
Arrow Wood G-12, 317
ARROWROOT

(Maranta arundinacea). ...... A3
Arruda Brava. . G-IS, 425
Arruda Do Mato. G-IS, 425
Arryan. 178
Arsesmart. 699
Artemisia absinthium..... | G-26, 829
Artemisia cina. 827
Artemisia dracunculus.... | G-12, 320
Artemisia vulgaris. G-i8, 530
Arthritica 231
ARTICHOKE

(Cynara scolymus) .. G-4,44
ARUM

(Arum maculatum)..........05 A6
Arum maculatum 46
Arundinaria japonica G-4, eo
Arusa. G-17, 492
ASA FOETIDA

(Ferula foetida) 47
Asarabacca 48
ASARUM

(Asarum europaeum) 48
Asarum europaeum ... 4 AB
Asclepias incarnata .. . G-23, 743
Asclepias tuberosa G-20, 598
ASH

(Fraxinus excelsior) . G4, 50
Ash {Picrasma excelsa) . 622
Ash {Sorbus domestica) . .704
Ash (Sorbus torminalis) . 814
Ashweed G-13, 361
ASIATIC DOGWOOD

(Cornus officinalis) 51
Asimina triloba .... .27
ASPARAGUS.

(Asparagus officinalis) ....G-4, 52
Asparagus officinalis. G-4, 52
Aspidium. . G-17, 493
Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco. ..........5 623
Ass Ear. G-9, 212

----- PAGE 10 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

BELLADONNA

(Atropa belladonna)... . . | G-4, 69
Belladonna Scopola . an 671
Bellis perennis. : G-26, 8H
Ben Nut Tree. 67
Bengal Quince. 58
Beniseed. bees 688
Benjamin Tree 73
BENNET'S ROOT

(Geum — urbanum) G-4, 71
BENZOIN

(Styrax benzoin). 73
Berberis vulgaris. G-4, 61
Berberry. G-4, 61
Bergamot. . : 562
Bergenia crassifolia.......... 4 268
Besom...... ..... G22, 672
Beta vulgaris. . . . .. G-4, 67
Betel .... G-4, 74
BETEL NUT

(Piper betle) G-4, 74
Betel Nut.......... G-4, 38
BETH ROOT

(Trillium erectum)....... ! G-4, 74
Betonica officinalis... .... | G-26, 825
Betony. ... G-26, 825
Bettie Grass,.... . 11
Betula species. G-S, 78
Bhang . G-17,500
Bidens tripartita. G-7, 131
Bigarade Orange. G-3,86
BILBERRY

(Vaccinium  myrtillus) G-5, 75

Bilberry Capsules (Bergen

Brunswig, Cardinal, Major,

Mason Vitamins,

Naturalife, Nature's

Bounty, Perrigo, Rexall

Consumer, Sundown,

Zenith Goldline). . . Le 75
Bilberry Extract Capsules

(ADH, Futurebiotics,

Humco, Nature's Way), .. 75
Bilberry Herb Capsules

(Natrol)... . . ... 75
Bilberry Leaf Capsules

(Frontier) 75

Bilberry Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 75 1

Bilberry Tablets

(Yerba Prima). 715
Bio-EFA Black Currant

Capsules

(Health from the Sun). 94
Bioflax Capsules (Bio-Tech) .... 313
BioGinkgo Extra Strength

Tablets (Pharmanex), G-29, 342
BioGinkgo Tablets

(Pharmanex). . 342
BIRCH

(Betula species) G-5, 78
Bird Bread 215
Bird Pepper. G-a, 165
Birdlime G-11, 291
Bird's Eye Maple. . G-21, 635
Bird's Foot G-11, 304
Bird's Neat............. G-25, 809
Birds' Nest G-25, 809
Bird's Tongue

(Fraxinus excelsior). .... | G-4, 50
Bird's Tongue

(Polygonum aviculare) . . .G-15, 448
Birdweed G-IS, 448
Birthroot G-4, 74
BIRTHWORT

(Aristolochia clematitis) ...G-5, SO
Biscuits. . G-8, 192
Bishop's Elder. G-13, 361
BISHOP'S WEED

(Ammi_ Visnaga) G-5, 81
Bishopsweed. G-13, 361

Bishopswort
(Aegopodium podagraria) G-13, 361
Bishopswort

(Betonica officinalis). . . . | G-26, 825
Bissy Nut 205
BISTORT

(Persicaria bistorta). .... § G-S, 82
BITTER APPLE

(Citrullus colocynthis). G-S, 83
Bitter Ash (Picrasma excelsa)  .. 622
Bitter Ash (Quassia amara) .G-3, 23
Bitter Bark. G-7, 153
BITTER CANDYTUFT

(Iberis amara). . . .., &4
Bitter Clover. G-8, 174
Bitter Cucumber G-S, 83
Bitter Damson 695

BLACK HAW/1-5

Bitter Fennel G-H, 302
Bitter Grass. . . . 11
Bitter Herb

(Centaurium erythraea) .. .G-8, 174
Bitter Herb

(Chelone glabra). G-4, 59
BITTER MILKWORT

(Polygala amara) 85
BITTER ORANGE

(Citrus aurantium)....... | G-5, 86
Bitter Redberry. G-IO, 256
Bitter Root. 836
Bitter Wood . G-3, 23
Bitterbloom G-8, 174
Bitterroot. 418
Bittersweet, . G-S, 88
BITTERSWEET NIGHTSHADE

(Solanum dulcamara) G-S, 88
Bitterwood 622
Bitterwort .. . 836
Bizzom.... G-22, 672
BLACK ALDER

(Alnus glutinosa)........ | G-S, 89
Black Alder G-12, 317
BLACK BRYONY

(Tamus communis)... .... 5 G-S, 90
BLACK CATNIP

(Phyllanthus amarus)........ § 91
Black Cherry. . . . . sio
Black Choke. 810
BLACK COHOSH

(Cimicifitga racemosa) ....G-S, 92

Black Cohosh Capsules
(Frontier, Herbal Harvest,
Natrol, Nature's Way,

Rexall Consumer). . . 92
Black Cohosh Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs), 92
BLACK CURRANT

(Ribes nigrum) .. G-S, 94
Black Currant Capsules

(Health from the Sun)... 94
Black Currant Oil Capsules

(Neurovites) 94
Black Elder. . G-II, 287
BLACK HAW

(Viburnum prunifolium) . ..G-S, 96

----- PAGE 11 -----
1-6/BLACK HELLEBORE

BLACK HELLEBORE

(Helleborus niger) G-5,97
BLACK HOREHOUND

(Ballota nigra). G-5, 98
BLACK MULBERRY

(Morus nigra)... ... 99
BLACK MUSTARD

(Brassica nigra) G-5, 100
Black Myrobalan.............? 772
BLACK NIGHTSHADE

(Solanum nigrum) G-6, 101
BLACK PEPPER

(Piper nigrum). G-6, 103
Black Poplar. ...........: G-20, 607
BLACK ROOT

(Leptandra virginica)... . . 104
Black Root. . .. G-9,212
Black Sampson............... 26i
Black Snake Root G-5,92
Black Tea...............4 G-13, 369
Black Walnut.............0.- 134
Black Walnut Hulls Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs,

Nature's Way)... .. 0... .0005 134
Black Walnut Liquid

(McZand).... 0.0.0.0. ce eee 134
Black Wattle. . . . 3
Black Whortles. G-5, 75
Black Willow............/ G-25, 807
Black-Berried Alder. . . G-H, 287
BLACKBERRY

(Rubus fruticosus) G-6, 104
Blackcurrant Seed Oil

Capsules (Natrol)............: 94
Blackeye Root............4 G-S, 90
Black-Root .. ll
Black-Tang 22... 0... eee ee 106
Blackthorn ............4 22,697
Blackwort...............4 G-9, 212
Bladder Fucus...............4 ioe
Bladderpod..............4 G-16, 479
BLADDERWORT

(Utricularia vulgaris) G46, 105
BLADDERWRACK

(Fucus vesiculosus)... ...... 106

Bladderwrack Fluid Extract
(Nature's Answer) .........- 106
Blanket Herb............: G-18, 532

Blanket-Leaf............./ G-18, 532
Blatterdock..............4 G-19, 585
Blazing Star

(Aletris farinosa). . Le 11
Blazing Star

(Veratrum luteum). : 301
Bleaberry. G-5, 75
Bleeding Heart

(Cypripedium calceolus). . . . . 541
Bleeding Heart

(Dicentra cucullaria)........ 775
Blessed Herb. . . G-4, 71

BLESSED THISTLE
(Cnicus _ benedictus) G6.

Blessed Thistle Capsules
(Frontier, Nature's Herbs,
Nature's Way)... ... cece 107

Blessed Thistle Low Alcohol

Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer)........... 107
Blind Nettle ............) G25, soe
Blindweed...............4 G-22, 690
Blisterweed..........2..0.000.. 133
Bloo bee 259
Blood Hilder................% 259
Blood Plantago..............5 612
Blood Vine..............4 G-26, 818
BLOODROOT

(Sanguinaria canadensis). 108
Bloodroot ... .. G-8, 192
Bloodwood.................-5 480
BloodwOlt ..............4 G-26, 833
Blooming Sally (Epilobium

angustifolium).......... 5 G-26, 818
Blooming Sally

(Lythrum salicaria)... . | G-20, 620
Blowball. G-9, 245
Blue Balm ................. 562
Blue Bells................-4 G-3,3
Blue Cap...............) G-9, 225
Blue Centaury...........) G-9, 225
BLUE COHOSH

(Caulophyllum

thalictroides). 109
Blue Cohosh Liquid

(McZand).... 0... eee eee 109
Blue Cohosh Root Liquid

(Nature's Answer)........... 109
Blue Curls..........22..5 G-22, 681
Blue Flag...............4 G-19, 56i

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ue Gum

ue Nightshade.

ueberry.

uebonnet,
luebottle.
uebow.

BOG BEAN
(Menyanthes trifoliata)

BOG BILBERRY
(Vaccinium uliginosum)

Bog Myrtle
yMenyanthes _ trifoliata)
Bog Myrtle (Myrica gale)
Bog Rhubarb. .

BOLDO
(Peumus boldus).

Boldu
Boldus.

Bolivian Coca..........

BONESET
(Eupatorium perfoliatum)

Boneset

Boor Tree...........-05

BORAGE
(Borago officinalis).

Borage Oil Capsules

(ADH, Sundown)......

Borago officinalis.

Boswellia carteri....... .
Bottle-Brush ..........
Bouncing Bess.........
Bouncing Bet..........
Bountry...............
Bovisand Soldier.......

Bovista.
Bowman's Root

(Gillenia trifoliata). . .. .

Bowman's Root

(Leptandra virginica). . .
Box Thorn ...........
Box Tree.............
Boxberry............04

ue Ginseng ..........
ue Mallow...........

B
B
B
B
Blue Pimpernel. ........
Blue Rocket............
B
B
B
B
B

. G-18,521

ueberry Root.........

_. Gell, 287
.. G21, 639

G-H, 283

. G-14, 395

G-5, 88
G22, 678

G-5, 75

..G-6, 110
_ G24, 745

G19, 585

_. G9, 585

. G-6, 112

G-6, 112
G-6, 112

G-6, 113
G-9, 212

. G-II, 287

_. G4, 409
_. G-2i, 639

G22, 701

* sis

----- PAGE 12 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

BOXWOOD
(Buxus sempervirens)

BoXWOod

Brake Root

Bramble.

Branching Phytolacca
Brandy Mint
Brassica napus.
Brassica nigra.
Brassica oleracea.
Brassica rapa.
Brazil Powder.

Brazilian Cocoa

BRAZILIAN PEPPER TREE
(Schinus  terebinthifolius).

Brazilian Peppertree

Breeam.

BREWER'S YEAST

(Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

Brideweed
Bridewort
Brier Hip
Brier Rose

BRITISH ELECAMPANE

(Inula britannica)...... .

British Myrrh .
British Tobacco

BROAD BEAN
(Vicia faba)

Broad-Leafed-Laurel
Broad-Leaved-Garlic.
Brook Bean

BROOKLIME
(Veronica beccabunga) ...

Broom

BROOM CORN

Broomtops
Browme.

BROWN KELP

(Macrocystis pyrifera). . . .
Brownwort
Bruisewort

(Bellis perennis)
Bruisewort

(Saponaria officinalis) .. .
Bruisewort

(Symphytum officinale) ...

(Sorghum vulgare)... ... .

....G-6, 116

G-10, 256
G-IS, 454
G-6, 104
G-20, 602
G-19, sso
G-19, 554
G-5, 100
G-7, 134
816

352

376

117

139
G-22, 672

118
840
G-I7, 511

G-10, 254
G-10, 254

G22, 701

G-9, 212

Brum G-22, 672
Brunfelsia hopeana........... ¢ 494
Brushes and Combs. G-24, 757
Bryonia alba G-25, 800
Bryonia cretica. 632
Buchu 691
Buck Bean G-6, 110
Buckeye G-14, 403
Buckhorn, G-11, 278
Buckles 231
BUCKTHORN

(Rhamnus catharticus) . G6, 123
Buckthorn Bark G-12, 317
BUCKWHEAT

(Fagopyrum esculentum) G-6, 124
BudwOOd G-10, 256
Buffalo Herb G-3, 12
Bugbane (Actaea spicata) 60
Bugbane

(Cimicifuga racemosa) G5, 92
Bugbane (Veratrum viride)... . . : 25
BUGLE

(Ajuga reptans). G6, 125
BUGLEWEED

(Lycopus_ virginicus). G-6, 126
Bugloss G-6, 114
Bugula G-6, 125
Bugwort G-5, 92
BULBOUS BUTTERCUP

(Ranunculus bulbosus). .. .. . - 128
Bullock's Eye G-14, 411
Bull's Eyes G-17, 503
Bullsfoot G-9, 209
Bupleurum Chinese............ 187
Burage G-6, 114
BURDOCK

(Arctium lappa) G-7, 128
Burdock Root Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) . 128
Burdock Root Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer). 128
Burnet Saxifrage G-19, 591
BURNING BUSH

(Dictamnus albus)... . . . | G-7, 130
Burning Bush G-25, 791
BURR MARIGOLD

(Bidens tripartita) ....... G-7, 131
Burr Seed. G-7, 128

CALAMINT/I-7

Burrage. G-6, 114
Burren Myrtle G-5, 75
Burrwort 133
Bush Tree. G-6, 116
BUTCHER'S BROOM

(Ruscus aculeatus). ..... § G-7, 132
Butcher's Broom Capsules

(ADH). 132

Butcher's Broom Root
Capsules (Frontier, Nature's

Herbs, Nature's Way). 132
Butter and Eggs 840
Butter Daisy. 563
Butter Rose. 231
Butter Winter. 595
Butterbur

(Petasites hybridus). ... . | G-19, 585
Butterbur

(Tussilago farfara). . . 2. . | G-9, 209
BUTTERCUP

(Ranunculus acris)..........- 133
Butter-Dock. G-19, 585
Buttered Haycocks 840
Butterfly Dock G-19, 585
Butterfly Weed G-20, 598
BUTTERNUT

(Juglans cinerea)............ 134
Button Snakeroot G-17, 503
Buttonhole. 38i
Buttons.................4 G-24, 754
Buxus sempervirens... .... | G4, lie

c
CABBAGE

(Brassica oleracea). .... | G-7, 134
Cabbage Rose 644
Cabbage Tablets (Freeda). 134
Cacao. G-8, 199
Caesalpinia bonducella....... : 253
Caffea. G-9, 202
Caffeine-Free Ginger Root

Tea Bags (Alvita Tea) 339
CAJUPUT

(Melaleuca leucadendra) .G-7, 136
CALABAR BEAN

(Physostigma yenenosum). 137
CALAMINT

(Calamintha nepeta)......... 138

----- PAGE 13 -----
I-8/CALAMINTHA NEPETA.

Calamintha — nepeta 138
CALAMUS

(Acorus calamus), . G-7, 138
Calcutta Lucerne. Le .. 376
Calendula . G-17,497
Calendula Gel (Boiron) . . 497
Calendula Lotion (Boiron) 497
Calendula officinalis... .. . | G-17, 497
Calendula Ointment (Boiron) .. 497
Calico Bush. . G-18, 528
Califlora Calendula Gel

(Boericke & Tafel), 497
California Buckthorn G-7, 153
CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE

(Schinus molle).... 139
CALIFORNIA POPPY

(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Calluna vulgaris G-13, 383
CALOTROPIS

(Calotropis procera)... ..... 141
Calotropis gigantea,.......... 338
Calotropis procera... .......04% 141
Caltha palustris. 0-17, 503
Calumba 208
Calves' Snout..............., 840
Calystegia sepium. G-13, 367
Camboge 0-12, 325
Camellia sinensis... . G-13, 369
Cammock G-23, 713
Camolea............... G-17,515
CAMPHOR TREE

(Cinnamomum

camphora). 0-7, 143
Cana Fistula 0-13, 354

Canada Balsam 714

Canada Pitch. G-19, 594
Canada Root. . G-20,598
Canada Tea 820
CANADIAN FLEABANE

(Erigeron canadensis) .... 0-7, 144
CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD

(Solidago canadensis) 145
Canadian Hemp. . A18
Canadian Poplar. G-20, 607
Canarium species. . . . 184
Cancer-Root 0-20, 602
Canchalagua . G-8, 174

Candleberry. G-22, 705
Candlewick Plant . G-18, 532
CANELLA

(Canella winterana)......... 147
Canella Alba. 147
Canella_ winterana. 147
CANE-REED

(Costus speciosa)... .......-.. 146
Cang-Zhu 706
Cankerroot. 358
Cankerwort

(Senecio jacobaea). ... . | G-20, 629
Cankerwort

(Taraxacum officinale) . G-9, 245
Cannabis G-17, 500
Cannabis sativa G-17, 500
Canton Cassia 182
Capdockin. . G-19, 585
CAPE ALOE

(Aloe ferox) 16
Cape Gooseberry. G-26,819
Cape Gum an 378
Capon's Tail. . . G25, 783
Capsella bursa-pastoris . G22, 690
Capsicum. . G-8, ies
Capsicum annuum 6-8, 165
CARAMBOLA

(Averrhoa carambola). ...... - 148
CARAWAY

(Carum carvi) G-7, 148
Card Thistle. G-24, 757
CARDAMOM

(Elettaria cardamomum) . . G-7, 149
Cardin. o-e, 107
Carex arenaria. 336
Carica papaya. G-19, 565
Carlina acaulis. 151
CARLINE THISTLE

(Carlina acaulis). 2... 0.0.2. - 151
CAROB

(Ceratonia _ siliqua) G-7, 151
Carpenter's Herb

(Ajuga reptans) G-6, 125
Carpenter's Herb

(Prunella vulgaris)... . | G-22, 681
Carpenter's Square. G-11, 311
Carpenter's Weed

(Achillea millefolium) . G-26, 833

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Carpenter's Weed

(Prunella vulgaris)... . . 5 G-22, 681
CARRAGEEN

(Chondrus crispus). 6... 0 a 152
Carragennan. . . . . . 152
Carrahan, an 152
Carrot. G-25, 809
Carthamus tinctorius... 1.0.4... 5 652
Cartkins Willow. G-25, 807

Carum carvi. G-7, 148
CASCARA SAGRADA
(Rhamnus purshiana) .G-7, 153

Cascara Sagrada Bark
Capsules (Frontier). . . 153
Cascara Sagrada Bark Mild
Stimulant Laxative
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .... 153
Cascara Sagrada Capsules
(Herbal Harvest, Humco,
Nature's Way), 53
Cascara Sagrada Natural
Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Resource), 53
CASCARILLA

(Croton eluteria). ........... 156
Case-Weed. . . . 0-22, 690
CASHEW

(Anacardium occidentale) . 0-7, 157
CASSIA

(Cassia angustifolia)... 1... | 684
Cassia 182
Cassia angustifolia. ......... 5 684
Cassia Aromaticum 182
Cassia Bark 182
Cassia fistula, . 0-13, 354
Cassia Lignea vee... 182
Cassia senna. . G-22, 684

Castanea sativa. . : 708

Castor Bean
CASTOR OIL PLANT

(Ricinus communis). 0-7, iss
Catalonia Jasmine. . 0-15,432
Catarrh Root 467
Catchfly. 418
Catchweed .. rn 62)
CATECHU

(Acacia catechu) 163
Catha edulis. A47

----- PAGE 14 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX
Catmint G-8, 164
Catnep. 0-8, 164
CATNIP

(Nepeta cataria) G-8, 164
Catnip Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way) ....... 164
Catnip Herb Liquid Fluid

Extract (Nature's Answer) 164
Catnip Leaf Capsules

(Frontier). . a a . 164
Catnip Liquid

(Nature's Answer). . 164
Catrup.. 6... eee G-8, 164
CAT'S CLAW

(Urticaria fomentosa) 160
Cat's Claw Bark Capsules

(Naturalife) ieo
Cat's Claw Bark Liquid

(Nature's Answer). ieo
Cat's Claw Caplets

(Nature's Resource), . ... deo

Cat's Claw Capsules (ADH,
Bergen Brunswig, Humco,
Irwin, Mason Vitamins,
McZand, National Vitamin,
Nature's Bounty, Nature's
Herbs, Nature's Way,

Rexall Consumer) ......... ieo
Cat's Claw Inner Bark

Capsules (Frontier). . ers (0)
Cat's Claw Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs),.......... ieo
CAT'S FOOT

(Antennaria dioica). .... | G8, 162
Cat's Nettle. Lee ..,. ALO
Catsfoot .................... 372
Cat's-Paw. 372
Catswort .. . . . .. G-8, 164
Caulophyllum thalictroides. ... . 109
CAYENNE

(Capsicum annuum) G-8, 16S

Cayenne 30,000 Heat Units
Capsules (Frontier) ..... 165
Cayenne Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Herbal Harvest,
Mason Vitamins,
McKesson, McZand,
Nature's Bounty, Nature's
Resource, Perrigo) 165

Cayenne Herbal Capsules

(Apothecary) .......... 165
Cayenne Pepper Capsules

(Humco, Major) 165
Cayenne Peppers Capsules

(ADH)............... .. 165

Cayenne Power Herb
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. .. 165

Ceanothus americanus........ 4 541
CEDAR

(Cedrus libani) 169
Cedrus libani .. . 169
CELANDINE

(Chelidonium majus). . G-8, 169
Celastrus scandens. 24
CELERY

(Apium graveolens)..... 5 G-8, 172
Celery Liquid Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer). 172
Celery Seed Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 172
Celery Seed Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 172
Celery-Leaved Crowfoot .. G20, 601
Cemphire G-7, 143
Centaurea. G-9, 22s
Centaurea cyanus, . G-9, 225
Centaurium erythraea..... | G8, 174
CENTAURY

(Centaurium erythraea) .. 0-8, 174
Centaury Gentian G-8, 174
Centella asiatica.........: G-13, 359
Centinode. 0-«, 448
Centory. G-8, 174
Centranthus ruber........: G21, 639
Centrum Echinacea Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... G31, 261
Centrum Garlic Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... | G31, 327
Centrum Ginkgo Biloba

Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... | G31, 342
Centrum Ginseng Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... | G31, 346
Centrum Saw Palmetto

Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... | G-31, 664
Centrum St. John's Wort

Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... G31, 719

CHICKWEED/I-9

Cephaelis ipecacuanha........ A423
Ceratonia siliqua G-7, 151
Certified Organic Nettle Leaf
Capsules (Frontier) 729
Certified Organic Red
Raspberry Leaf Capsules

(Frontier)... ... vee. , 630
Cetraria Loe see... AIS
Cetraria islandica............ 4 AI5
Ceylon Cinnamom. G-S, 190
Chai Hu............... 187
Chamaemelum nobile..... | G-10, 270
Chamomile..............4 G12, 331

Chamomile Flowers Capsules
(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) .. . .331
Chamomile Liquid (McZand) ... 331

Chamomilla.............4 G-12, 331
Chantal Aloe Vera Cream

(National Vitamin) .......... je
Chard. Lo G-4, 67
Charity.................4 G-15, 427

CHASTE TREE
(Vitex agnus-castus)

G-8, 176
Chasteberry Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs),.......... 176
CHAULMOOGRA

(Hydnocarpus species). ...... 177
Cheat... 2... ....0 000.020 e! G24, 756
Chebulic Myrobalan 772
Checkerberry................ 820
Cheese Rennet............ o-is, 455
Cheese Renning .........4 G-15, 455
Cheeseflower............: G-i4, 395
Cheiranthus cheiri........! G25, 792
CHEKEN

(Eugenia chequen)........... 178
Chelidonium majus. G-8, 169
Chelone................. G-4, 59
Chelone glabra G-4,59

Chenopodium ambrosioides .0-26, 828
Chenopodium vulvaria......... A3
Cheque Tree..............000. 704

CHERRY LAUREL
(Prunus laurocerasus) ....G-8, 179

Cherry-Bay. . G-8, 179
Chestnut. . _ . 708
Chicken Toe 220
CHICKWEED

(Stellaria media). ........... 180

----- PAGE 15 -----
I-10/CHICK WEED CAPSULES

Chickweed Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) iso
Chickweed Herb Capsules

(Frontier)... . iso
Chickweed Herb Liquid

(Nature's Answer), . . . -iso
CHICORY

(Cichorium intybus) G-8, 181
Chilli Pepper. G-8, 165
Chimaphila umbellata......... 595
Chimney-Sweeps. . G-11,278
Chin Cups, . 238
China Orange. G-24, 747
China Root

{Alpinia ojficinarum)........ ¢ 467
China Root

(Dioscorea villosa)... .. § G-26, 817
Chinese Arborvitae. . . 560
Chinese Bell-Flower. 58
Chinese Cabbage. . . .. 816
CHINESE CINNAMON

(Cinnamomum aromaticum) .. . 182
Chinese Ginger . 467
Chinese Ginseng 2... 346
Chinese Green Tea Tea Bags

(Alvita Tea)... ............ 369
Chinese Matrimony Vine 486
Chinese Mock-Barberry. 669
CHINESE MOTHERWORT

(Leonurus japonicus). ........- 183
CHINESE OLIVE

(Canarium species). ......... 184
Chinese Red Panax Capsules

(Nature's Resource). 346
Chinese Red Panax Ginseng

Capsules (Nature Made)... . 346
Chinese Red Panax Ginseng

Tablets (Nature Made). 346
CHINESE RHUBARB

(Rheum palmatum). G-8, 185
Chinese Sumach 770
Chinese Tea G-13, 369
CHINESE THOROUGHWAX

(Bupleurum Chinese)... 1... - 187
Chinese Tian Shan Garlic

Tablets (Nature's Herbs). 327
Chinese Wolfberry. 486
Chinwood. G-26, 84i
Chionanthus, G-12, 321

Chionanthus virginicus. .. . | G-12, 321
Chirata 187
Chirayta. 187
CHIRETTA

(Swertia  chirata) 187
Chittem Bark ... G-7, 153
Chive G-8, 188
CHIVES.

(Allium schoenoprasum) . . G-8, 188
Chocolate Root G-25, 794
Chocolate Tree G-8, 199
CHOCOLATE VINE

(Akebia quinata). . . 89
Choke Cherry... . .., 810
Chondrodendron tomentosum  . . . 566
Chondrus. 52
Chondrus_ crispus. 52
Chongras,.... ..... G-20, 602
Chop Nut... . . . 137
Christe Herbe...... . G-5,97
Christmas Rose. G-5, 97
Christmas-Berry Tree. 17
Christ's Ladder. .. G-8, 174
Christ's Spear. . Le 269
Christ's Thorn. G-14, 397
Chrysanthemum

cinerariifolium 621
Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum. Lae .... 563
Chrysatobine 352
Church Broom G-24, 757
Church Steeples. G-3, 10
Churastaff. 840
Cichorium_intybus. G-8, 181
Cicuta virosa. G-11, 297
Cimicifuga. G-5, 92
Cimicifuga racemosa. G-5, 92
Cinchona, . G-20, 626
Cinchona pubescens... ... | G-20, 626
Cineraria Maritima . . .. 25a
Cinnamomum aromaticum. . . . . 182
Cinnamomum camphora .... G-7, 143
Cinnamomum verum G-8, 190
CINNAMON

(Cinnamomum verum) G-8, 190

Cinnamon Bark Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer) 190
Cinnamon Sedge G-7, 138
Cinnamon Wood. G-21, 662

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CINQUEFOIL

(Potentilla erecta). G-8, 192
Cinquefoil

{Potentilla anserind). . . . | G-20, 610
Cinquefoil

(Potentilla reptans). .... | G-11, 289
Citronella G-16, 465
Citrullus colocynthis. G-5, 83
Citrus aurantifolia... 0.1... | G-16, 476
Citrus aurantium G-5, 86
Citrus Dulcis G-24, 747
Citrus limon. : : : 460
Citrus sinensis. G-24, 747
City Avens G-4,71
Cive Garlic. . G-8, 188
QveS. G8, 188
Civeti cc. ceed G-8, 188
Cladonia pyxidata. . . 238
Clu\>iceps purpurea........... 280
CLEAVERS

(Galium aparine). 193
Cleavers, Alcohol-Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer), . : 193
Cleaverwort 193
CLEMATIS

(Clematis recta). . G-8, 194
Clematis recta. G-8, 194
Clematis vitalba. G-25, 769

Clivers... re bs)
Clot-Bur (Arctium lappa) . .. G-7, 128
Clot-Bur

(Verbascum  densiflorum) G-i8, 532
CLOVE

(Syzygium aromaticum) . .. G-8, 195
Clove Garlic ............4 G-12, 327
Clove Pepper... . an . 590
Clown's Lungwort G-18, 532
Clown's Mustard. 84
CLUB MOSS

(Lycopodium clavatum) *, 196
Clusterbean. 376
Cnicus_ benedictus. G-6, 107
Coachweed ‘.. 193
Coakum. . G-20, 602
COCA

(Erythroxylum coca)... . 2... 197
Cocaine 197
Cocash Weed 354
Cocculus Indicus. . . 312

----- PAGE 16 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Cochlearia officinalis... . . | 0-22, 679
Cochlospermum gossypium. 229
COCILLANA TREE

(Guraea_ rusbyi) 198
Cockle 222
Cockle Buttons G-7, 128
Cocklebur

(Agrimonia eupatoria). . . . | G-3, 10
Cocklebur {Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Cockoo Flower. 657
Cockspur Rye. 280
Cockup Hat 729
Cocky Baby. 46
COCOA

(Theobroma cacao) G-8, 199
COCONUT PALM.

(Cocos nucifera) G-9, 201
Cocos nucifera G-9, 201
CoCOWOIt G-22, 690
Coffea arabica G-9, 202
COFFEE

(Coffea arabica). G-9, 202
Cokan G-20, 602
COLA

(Cola acuminata) 205
Cola acuminata 205
Cola Nut 205
Cola Seeds 205
COLCHICUM

(Colchicum autumnale) .. .G-9, 206
Colchicum autumnale. .... | G-9, 206
Cole G-19, 554
Colewort

(Brassica oleracea)... .. | G-7, 134

Colewort (Geum urbanum) . .G-4, 71
Colic Root

(Alpinia officinarum)....... . + 467
Colic Root.

(Dioscorea_ villosa). G-26,817
Colic Root

(Liatris spicata) G-17, 503
Colic-Root 11
Collinsonia canadensis. . . . G-23, 733
Colocynth Pulp. G-5, 83
COLOMBO

(Jateorhiza _palmata) 208
COLTS FOOT

(Tussilago farfara)...... | G-9, 209 I

Coltsfoot 48
Coltstail . G-7, 144
COLUMBINE

(Aquilegia vulgaris)... . . | G-9, 211
Colza G-19, 554
Combretum 559
Combretum micranthum 559
COMFREY

(Symphytum officinale) .. .G-9, 212
Commiphora molmol. G-1S, 534
Common Agrimony. G-3, 10
Common Alder. G-5, 89
Common Ash. G-4, 50
Common Bean. G-4, 65
COMMON KIDNEY VETCH

(Anthyllis vulneraria) . G-9, 214
Common Larch G-IS, 457
Common Matrimony Vine 487
Common Polypody. G-15, 454
Common Sandspurry. 39
Common Shrubby Everlasting . . . 417
Common Silver Fir. 802
COMMON STONECROP

(Sedum acre) 215
Compass Plant G-21, 645
Compass Weed. G-21, 646
Compass-Weed. G-21, 645
CONDURANGO

(Marsdenia condurango). 216
Coneflower . ., 261
CONGOROSA

(Maytenus ilicifolia) 218
Conium maculatum rt G-13, 386
Consound. G-9, 212
Consumptive's Weed. 84i
CONTRAYERVA

(Dorstenia_contrayerva). 218
Convallaria G-ie, 475
Convallaria majalis... 2... § G-ie, 475
Convall-Lily. G-16, 475
COOLWORT

(Tiarella cordifolia)... . . § G-9, 219
Coon Root 108
COPAIBA BALSAM.

(Copaifera langsdorffi). .. . . . : 220
Copaifera langsdorffi......... 220
Copaiva. 220

COTTON TREE/1-11

Copalm. G-23, 734
Copperose. 223
Coptide 358
CoptlS 358
Coptis Groenlandica 358
Coptis trifolia. 358
Coqueret. G-26, 819
CORAL ROOT

(Corallorhiza odontorhiza) . 220
Corallorhiza odontorhiza..... . : 220
CORIANDER

(Coriandrum sativum) .... G-9, 221
Coriandrum sativum... .. . | G-9, 221
CORN COCKLE

(Agrostemma githago)...... - 222
Corn Horsetail. G-14, 409
CORN POPPY

(Papaver rhoeas). 223
Corn Rose. 223
CORN SILK

(Zea mays) 224
Cornel G-10, 256
Cornelian Tree. G-10, 256
CORNFLOWER

(Centaurea cyanus). .... § G-9, 225
Cornus florida G-10, 256

Cornus officinalis... 2.2.0.0... 51

Corona Solis G-23, 741
CORYDALIS

(Corydalis cava) 226
Corydalis. 775
Corydalis cava. 226
Corynanthe pachyceras. ..... . + A12
Cossoo. 450
COSTUS

(Saussurea costus).......... 227
Costus speciosa. 146
COTTON

(Gossypium hirsutum)... .... 228
Cotton Dawes. 236
Cotton Root.............5 G-16, 468
Cotton Seed 228
Cotton Shell 229
COTTON TREE

(Cochlospermum

gossypium) 229

----- PAGE 17 -----
1-12/COTTON WEED

Cotton Weed. 236
Couch Grass. G-25, 771
Coughroot G-4, 74
Coughweed 354
Coughwort G-9, 209
Couhage 230
Cow Cabbage G-3, 28
Cow Grass. G-15, 44a
Cowbane. G-11, 297
Cowberry. G-3, 20
COWHAGE

(Mucuna pruriens).......... 230
Cowitch 230
COWSLIP

(Primula _ veris) 231
Cowslip G-17, 503
Crab's Eyes. 435
Cramp Bark G-5, 96
Crampweed. G-20, 610
CRANESBILL

(Geranium maculatum) 233
Crataegus laevigata... ... | G-10, 271
Crawley. 220
Crawley Root 220
Crawlgrass G-IS, 448
Creeper. G-3, 26
Creeping Charlies 372
Creeping Jenny. G-17, 520
Creeping Joan. G-17, 520
Creeping Tom 215
Crest Marine. 658
Crewel 231
Crithum maritimum........... | 658
Crocus sativus. G-21, 653
Crosswort. Ge, 113
Croton eluteria ise
CROTON SEEDS

(Croton tiglium) 234
Croton tiglium. 234
Crow Corn . 11
Crow Soap G-22, 701
Crowberry. G-20, 602
Crowfoot

(Anemone nemorosa). .... . . + 824
Crowfoot

(Geranium maculatum). .... . 233
Crowfoot

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . . . - 128
Crown Flower. 338

Crude Chrysarobin 352

CUBEB
(Piper cubeba)

Cuca.

Cuckoo Bread.
Cuckoo Buds.
Cuckoo Pint.
Cuckowes Meat
Cucurbita pepo.
Cuddy's Lungs

CUDWEED
(Gnaphalium uliginosum).

Cudweed
Cullay.
Culveris Root
Culverwort

CUMIN

(Cuminum — cyminum)

Cuminum cyminum

CUP PLANT

(Silphium _ perfoliatum)

CUPMOSS
(Cladonia pyxidata)

Cup-Puppy.

Cupressus sempervirens

Curcu Caps Capsules
(Health from the Sun).

CURCUMA
(Curcuma xanthorrhizia)

Curcuma domestica... ... .

Curcuma xanthorrhizia
Curcuma zedoaria
Curdwort

Cure All

Cure-Ail

Curled Dock.

Curled Mint

Cursed Crowfoot
Cuscuta epithymum.
Cusparia Bark

Custard Apple.

Cutch (Acacia catechu)
Cutch (Agropyron repens)
Cutweed

Cyamopsis tetragonoloba. . .

Cyani
Cyani-Flowers.

CYCLAMEN

(Cyclamen —_ europaeum)

235

197

827

128

46

827

G-20, 618
G-18, 532

236

G-8, 162
G-20, 624

104
G-9,211

G-9, 237

G-9, 237

G-9, 238

- 238

223

_G-9, 241

132

34

240

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cyclamen europaeum......... 240
Cydonia oblongata... .... 2... | 625
Cymbopogon citratus. ... . § G-ie, 465
Cynanchum vincetoxicum. . . . . 335
Cynara scolymus. G-4, 44
Cynoglossum officinale... 2... . : 410
Cyperus articulatus. G-3,6
CYPRESS

(Cupressus sempervirens) . G-9, 241
Cypress Powder. 46
CYPRESS SPURGE

(Euphorbia cyparissias) . G-9, 242
Cypripedium calceolus........ : 541
Cytisus laburnum. 452
Cytisus scoparius. G-22, 672

D

Daemonorops draco........... 257
DAFFODIL

(Narcissus pseudonarcissus) . . . 243
Dage of Jerusalem G-16, 485
Daggers. G-19, 56i
Da-Huang G-8, 185
Daisy. G-24, 754
Dalmatian“Insect Flowers 621
Dalmatian Pellitory. 621
DAMIANA

(Turnera diffusa)... ........% 244
Damiana Leaf Capsules

(Frontier) 244
Damiana Leaf Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer) 244
Damiana Leaves Capsules

(ADH, Nature's Herbs). 244
DANDELION

(Taraxacum officinale)... G-9, 245
Dandelion Capsules

(Nature's Way), 245
Dandelion Liquid (McZand) .... 245
Dandelion Root Capsules

(ADH, Frontier, Herbal

Harvest, Nature's Bounty) ... .245
Danewort 259
Dan-Shen. 636
Daphne

(Daphne mezereum). .... | G-17, 515
Daphne (Laurus nobilis) .. .G-IS, 459
Daphne mezereum G-17, 515

----- PAGE 18 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX
Darkmous. 716
Darri 121
DATE PALM

(Phoenix dactylifera). .. . § G-IO, 246
Datura G-IS, 436
Datura stramonium G-IS, 436
Daucus carota. G-25, 809
Da-Zao. 439
Dead Men's Bells G-IO, 248
Dead Men's Fingers. 79s
Dead Nettle G-25, 806
Dead Tongue 795
Deadly Nightshade G-4, 69
Deaf Nettle. G-25, 806
Deer Balls. 618
Deerberry. 820
Delicate Bess G-21, 639
Delphinium consolida.... . | G-15, 458
Delphinium staphisagria........ 726
Demerara Pinkroot 831
Deodorized Garlic Tablets

(Nature's Bounty). 327
Dergmuse. 716
Desert Herb. G-16, 488
Devil Tree. 305
Devil's Apple G-15, 436
Devil's Bit {Aletris farinosa) ... 11
Devil's Bit

(Alstonia constricta). ....... 305
Devil's Bit

(Scabiosa succisa)...... | G20, 612
Devil's Bite

{Liatris spicata) G-17, 503
Devil's Bite

{Veratrum viride)... 2.0.0.0... 25
Devil's Bones. G-26,817
Devil's Cherries G-4, 69
DEVIL'S CLAW

(Harpagophytum

procumbens) 247
Devil's Claw Capsules

(ADH). 247
Devil's Claw Root Tuber

Capsules (Frontier). 247

Devil's Claw Secondary Root
Capsules (Nature's Herbs,

Nature's Way). 247
Devil's Dung. 47
Devil's Eye G-14, 389
Devil's Fuge G-11, 291

'

s Guts. G-IO, 254

Devil's Head 840
Devil's Herb G-4, 69
Devil's Nettle. G-26, 833
Devil's Plaything G-26, 833
Devil's Ribbon 840
Devil's Root G-19, 588
Devil's Trumpet G-15, 436
Devil's Turnip

{Bryonia alba) G-25, 800
Devil's Turnip

{Bryonia cretica)...........5 632
Devil's Vine G-13, 367
Dew Plant 740
Dewberry. G-6, 104
Dicentra cucullaria,..........- 715
Dictamnus albus. G-7, 130
Didin. G-18, 534
Didthin G-18, 534
DIGITALIS

{Digitalis purpurea). .G-10, 248
DIGITALIS LANATA

(Digitalis lanata)...........: 250
Digitalis lanata 250
Digitalis purpurea. G-10, 248
Di-Gu-Pi 486
Di-Huang 640
DILL

(Anethum graveolens) . . G-10, 252
Dilly. G-IO, 252
Dionaea muscipula,..........2 786
Dioscorea_ villosa. G-26,817
Dipsacus silvestris... 2... . | G-24, 757
Diptam G-7, 130
Dipteryx odorata 767
Dita Bark 305
Dittany. G-7, 130
Divale G-4, 69
DIVI-DIVI

(Caesalpinia bonducella). . . . 253
DODDER

(Cuscuta epithymum). .. . | G-IO, 254
Dodder of Thyme G-10, 254
Dog Cloves. G-22, 701
Dog Parsley. G-12, 316
Dog Poison G-12, 316
DOG ROSE

(Rosa canina). G-10, 254
Dog Rowan Tree G-S, 96
Dog Standard. G-20, 629

DUN DAISY /I-13
Dog Wood..............) G-12, 317
Dogbane. 418
Dog-Berry. G-10, 254
Dog-Bur. 410
Doggies 840
Dog-Grass. G-25, 771
Dog's Arrach 43
Dog's Finger. G-IO, 248
Dog's Tongue 410
Dog's Tooth Violet 24
Dog-Tree. G-10, 256
DOGWOOD
(Cornus florida). G-10, 256
DogWOOd 428
Dogwood Bark. G-7, 153
Dolloff G-17, 511
Donnhove. G-9, 209
Doorweed. ss G-15, 448
Dorema ammoniacum 29
Dorstenia contrayerva,....... 218

Dr. Masquelier's Authentic
OPC's Tablets (Naturalife) ... .362

Draconis Resina 257
Dracontium 696
Dracorubin 257
Dragon Flower. G-19, 561
Dragon Root 46
Dragon-Bushes 840
DRAGON'S BLOOD

(Daemonorops draco)... .... ! 257
Dragon's Blood G-14, 393
Dragonwort G-5, 82
Drake G-24, 756
Drimys winteri. 820
Dropberry. G-22, 703
Dropsy Plant G-ie, 461
Drosera ramentacea........... 740
Drumstick Tree 67
Drunken Sailor. G-21, 639
Dryas octopetala. 526
Dryopteris filix-mas......: G-17, 493
Duck's Foot G-17, 510
DUCKWEED

(Lemna minor). G-IO, 258
Dudgeon. G-6, lie
Duffle G-IS,532
Dulcamara. G-S, 88
Dumb Nettle G-25, soe
Dumpling Cactus G-19, 588
Dun Daisy. 563

----- PAGE 19 -----
I-14/DURFA GRASS

Durfa Grass.
Durri

DUSTY MILLER
(Senecio bicolor)

Dutch Myrtle

Dutch Rushes.
Dutchman's Breeches.
Dwale

Dwarf Bay.

Dwarf Carline.

DWARF ELDER
(Sambucus ebulus)

Dwarf Flax.
Dwarf-Pine
Dwayberry.
Dyeberry.

DYER'S BROOM
(Genista tinctoria)

Dyer's Bugloss.
Dyer's Greenwood.
Dyer's Madder.
Dyer's Saffron.
Dyer's Weed.
Dyer's Whin.
Dysentery Bark.
Dysentery Weed. . .

Eagle Vine.

Early Fumitory.

Earth Gall

Earth Smoke.
Earthbank

East India Catarrh Root.
East India Root :
East Indian Almond.
Easter Rower.

Easter Giant

Easter Mangiant.
Echinacea.

ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA
(Echinacea angustifolia)

Echinacea angustifolia

G25, 771
121
258
G24, 745
G-i4, 409
7715
G-4, 69
c-17, 515
151
259
526
c-22, 674
G-4, 69
G-5, 75
G-10, 260
... 0-3, 13
. G-10, 260
. G-ie, 490
652
G-10, 260
G-10, 260
695
236
216
226
25
G-12,322
G-8, 192
. 467
...., 467
G-7, 157
572
o-s, 82
G-5, 82
261
261
261

Echinacea Angustifolia Herb

Capsules (Frontier).

261

Echinacea Capsules (ADH,
Bergen Brunswig, Cardinal,
Celestial Seasonings,
Contract Pharmacal, Herbal
Harvest, Humco, Irwin,
Mason Vitamins,
McKesson, National
Vitamin, Nature Made,
Nature's Bounty, Perrigo,
Rexall Consumer, Rexall
Managed Care, Sundown,

Zenith Goldline) ........ 261
Echinacea Liquid (McZand,
Pharmaceutical Labs) .. 261

ECHINACEA PALLIDA
(Echinacea pallida) 261

Echinacea pallida .. . 261

ECHINACEA PURPUREA
(Echinacea purpurea) G-10, 261

Echinacea purpurea. G-10, 261
Echinacea purpurea Root
Capsules (Frontier). 261

Echinacea Root Capsules

(Key Co., Major) . 261
Echinacea Root Herbal

Capsules (Apothecary) 261
Echinacea Standardized

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer). 261
Eggs and Bacon 840
Eggs and Collops. 840
Eglantine Gall. G-10, 254
Egyptian Alcee. 533
Egyptian Privet G-14, 391
Egyptian Thorn 378
Elder. . wove ees G-H, 287
Elder Flowers Capsules

(Frontier). 287

Elderberry Flowers & Berries
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .287
Elderberry Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 287
ELECAMPANE

(Inula helenium). G-10, 266
Elemi 184
ELEPHANT-EARS

(Bergenia crassifolia)... .... 268
Elettaria cardamomum G-7, 149
Eleuthero Ginseng Root

Capsules (Frontier) 346

PDR FOR HERBAL

Eleutherococcus senticosus,

Elfdock
ElfwOrt
Ellanwood.
Ellhorn.

ELM BARK
(Ulmus minor). .

ElTOOt

Elytrigig Repens
Emetic Herb.
Emetic Weed.
Enchanter's Plant
Enebro. .

ENGLISH ADDER'S TONGUE

(Ophioglossum vulgatum)

ENGLISH CHAMOMILE

(Chamaemelum nobile) .

English Cowslip.

English Greek Valerian . ..

ENGLISH HAWTHORN

(Crataegus laevigata) ..

ENGLISH HORSEMINT
(Mentha longifolia)

ENGLISH IVY
(Hedera helix). .

ENGLISH LAVENDER

(Lavandula angustifolia) .

English Mandrake
(Bryonia alba). .
English Mandrake
(Bryonia cretica).
English Masterwort. .
English Oak

ENGLISH PLANTAIN

(Plantago lanceolata) . ..

English Sarsaparilla
English Watercress.
Ephedra.

Ephedra sinica.
Ephedrine. a
Epigae repens.........

Epilobium angustifolium ...

Epright Sumach, .
Equisetum arvense. .

ERGOT
(Claviceps purpurea)

Eriffe.
Erigeron canadensis.

MEDICINES

. . 693
G-10, 266
O-10, 266

. 0-11, 287

G-II, 287

_ 6-10, 269

G-13, 361
G-25, 771

. G-16,479

. O-ie, 479
G-25, 788
. G-15, 440

. 269

. 0-10, 270

231
G-15, 427

. 0-10, 271

0-10, 275
0-10, 275
G-10, 277

G-25, soo

632
0-13, 36i
0-18, 549

0-11, 278
. G-8, 192
384

o-ie, 488
o-ie, 488
O-ie, 488
768

0-26, 818
..., 600
0-14, 409

280

193
0-7, 144

----- PAGE 20 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX
Eringo. G-11, 282
Eriodictyon. 84i
Eriodictyon californicum. ..... | 841
Eryngium campestre. G-H, 282
ERYNGO

(Eryngium campestre) G-11, 282
Eryngo-Leaved Liverwort 415
Erysimum. 384
Erysimum diffusum... 2... 0... 365
Erythronium 24
Erythronium americanum 24
Erythroxylum coca... .......+- 197
Eschscholtzia californica ...G-7, 140
Estragon. G-12, 320
Eternal Flower. A417
EUCALYPTUS

(Eucalyptus — globulus) G-11, 283
Eucalyptus globulus G-11, 283
Eugenia chequen 178
Eugenia — unifloria 742
Euonymus —_ atropurpurea G-25, 791
Eupatorium cannabinum G-13, 388
Eupatorium _ perfoliatum G-6, 113
Euphorbia cyparissias - G-9, 242
Euphorbia _resinifera. 716
Euphrasia 300
Euphrasia_ officinalis. 300
European Angelica G-3, 32
European Ash G-4, 50
European Aspen. 0-20, 607
European Avens G-4, 71
European Barberry. G-4, ei
European Bitter Polygala 88
European Cranberry. o-s, 96
EUROPEAN ELDER

(Sambucus nigra). o-ii, 287

EUROPEAN FIVE-FINGER GRASS

(Potentilla reptans). .G-11, 289
EUROPEAN GOLDEN ROD

(Solidago virgaurea). . . . .G-11,289
European Larch o-is, 457
EUROPEAN MISTLETOE

(Viscum album) G-11, 291
EUROPEAN PEONY

(Paeonia _ officinalis) G-11, 295
EUROPEAN SANICLE

(Sanicula europaea) 296

European Senega Snakeroot 85

European Vervain G-25, 788
EUROPEAN WATER HEMLOCK

(Cicuta — virosa) G-11, 297
European Wild Pansy. 382
EuroQuality Juniper Berries

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .440
EuroQuality Red Clover

Blossoms Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 633
EVENING PRIMROSE

(Oenothera _ biennis) G-11, 298

Evening Primrose Capsules
(Major) 298
Evening Primrose Oil
Capsules (ADH, Bergen
Brunswig, Mason Vitamins,
National Vitamin, Natrol,

Nature's Bounty), 298
Evergreen Snakeroot 85
Everlasting 236
Everlasting Friendship. 193
Eve's CupS G-20, 596
Ewe Daisy. G-8, 192
Ex-Lax Maximum Strength

(Novartis Consumer). 684
Eye Balm G-13, 355
Eye Root G-13, 355
EYEBRIGHT

(Euphrasia _ officinalis) 300
Eyebright

(Centaurium erythraea) . . . G-8, 174
Eyebright (Lobelia inflata) .G-i6, 479
Eyebright Capsules (Herbal

Harvest, Major, Nature's

Bounty, Nature's Herbs,

Nature's Resource) 300
Eyebright Herb Capsules

(Frontier). 300
Fagopyrum esculentum o-6, 124
Fairy Bells 827
Fairy Caps

(Digitalis purpurea). 0-10, 248
Fairy Caps (Primula veris) 231
Fairy Fingers. G-10, 248

Fairy Flax. 526

Fairy Gloves G-I0, 248
Fairy Thimbles G-I0, 248
Fairy-Wand 301

FEVERFEW/1-15

Fake Saffron 652
False Bittersweet 24
False Box. G-IO, 256
False Cinnamon 182
False Coltsfoot 48
False Grapes. G-3, 26
False Hellebore. G-3,5
False Jacob's Ladder G-3,3
False Jasmin. 838
False Pepper. 139
FALSE SCHISANDRA

(Kadsura japonica) 301
FALSE UNICORN ROOT

(Veratrum luteum) 301
Featherfew. 0-11, 30e
Featherfoil G-11, 30e
Felon Herb. G-IS, 530
Felonwood G-5, 88
Felonwort G-5, 88
Feltwort G-IS, 532
Fenkel G-11, 302
FENNEL

(Foeniculum vulgare) . G-ll, 302
Fennel Seed Capsules

(Nature's Way) 302
Fennel Seed Liquid

(Nature's Answer). 302
FENUGREEK

(Trigonella  foenum-

graecum). G-11, 304
Fenugreek Capsules

(Nature's Way). 304
Fenugreek Seed Capsules

(Frontier), 304
Fern 0-17, 493
Ferula. 0-23, 738
Ferula foetida. 47
Ferula gummosa. 323
Ferula sumbul. G-23, 738
Fetid Nightshade G-14, 389
FEVER BARK

(Alstonia constricta). ....... 305
Fever Plant, 0-11, 298
Fever Root 220
Fever Tree 0-11, 283
Fever Twig G-5, 88
FEVERFEW

(Tanacetum parthenium) G-1l, 306

----- PAGE 21 -----
1-16 /FEVERFEW CAPSULES

Feverfew Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Mason Vitamins,
McZand, Nature's Bounty,
Perrigo, Rexall Consumer) .... 306

Feverfew Extract Capsules

(Herbal Harvest, Humco). .. . 306
Feverfew Leaf Capsules

(Naturalife).............0.. 306
Feverfew Traditional Herb

Capsules

(Nature's Resource)......... 306
Fevergrass...............4 G-16, 465
Feverwort

(Centaurium erythraea) .. .G-8, 174
Feverwort
(Eupatorium perfoliatum) G6, 113

Ficus carica...........-.-5 G-11, 310
Field Balm G-8, 164
Field Horsetail. G-14, 409
Field Lady's Mantle .........: 570
Field Mustard................4 816

.G-20, 618

Field Pumpkin. . .

FIELD SCABIOUS

(Knautia arvensis). .... . G-11,310
Fieldhove...............4 G-9, 209
FIGS

(Ficus carica)..........5 G-11, 310
FIGWORT

(Scrophularia nodosa) ... G-11, 311
Figwort...... 2.0.0.0... 00.005 466
Filipendula ulmaria...... | G-17, sn
Filwort..........2.0.004 G-8, 174
Finger Flower...........4 G-IO, 248
Fir Trees... eee eee eel 714
Fireweed...............04 G-26, SIS
FISH BERRY

(Anamirta cocculus),.. 1... 312
Fish Mint G-23, 709
Fish Poison Tree.............. A28
Five Fingers . G-11, 289
Five Leaves..............4 G-3, 26
Five-Finger Blossom : G-11, 289
Five-Finger Fern............. 4 A91
Five-Fingered Root........... 5 795
Five-Leaflet.................. 189
Flag Lily. bee e ee. G19, 565
Flaggon...............-.4 G-19, 561
Flake Manna............ | G-17, 496
Flannelflower............) G-IS, 532

Flapperdock ........... 5 G-19, 585

FLAX

(Linum _ usitatissimum) G-12, 313
Flax Weed. .............5 G-21, 650
Flaxseed. ...............) G-12, 313
Flaxseed Oil Capsules

(Advanced Nutritional, Rx

Vitamins)..............0.. 313
Flaxweed.................-.-5 840
Flea Wort

(Erigeron canadensis) . G-7, 144
Flea Wort (Plantago afra) . G-20, 616
Fleaseed..........00e00- G-20, 616
Flesh and Blood G-8, 192
Fliggers.................4 G-19, 561
Florentine Orri . .. G19, 561
Florida Holly...........000005 117
Flower Velure. . G-9, 209
Flowering Ash. . G-17, 496
Flowering Sally..........) G-20, 620
Flowering Wintergreen......... 4 85
Fluellin.. 2.2... 002. 840
Fluffweed...............4 G-IS, 532
Flux Root ..........00.04 G-20, 598
Fly Agaric. . G-3,8
Fly-Catcher..............4 G-20, 596
Fly-Trap

(Apocynum cannabinum). . . . A418
Fly-Trap

(Sarracenia purpurea) .. . G-20, 596
Foal's-Foot..............4 G-9, 209
Foalswort...............4 G-9, 209
Foam Flower............! G-9, 219
Foeniculum vulgare... . . | G-11, 302
Folks' Glove...........! G-IO, 248
Food of the Gods.............5 AT
FOOL'S PARSLEY

(Aethusa cynapium). .... | G-12, 316
Fool's-Cicely............5 G-12, 316
FORGET-ME-NOT

(Myosotis arvensis) G-12, 316
Foxglove ...............4 G-10, 248
FOX'S Clote. G-7, 128
Fragaria vesca..........5 G-23, 735
FRANGULA

(Rhamnus frangula). . . . «| G-12, 317
Frangula Bark .......... § G-12, 317
FRANKINCENSE

(Boswellia carteri).......... 319
Fraxinella..............4 G-7, 130

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Fraxinus_ excelsior. G-4, 50
Fraxinus ornus.......... | G-17, 496
French Lilac ............ 4 G-13, 353
FRENCH TARRAGON

(Artemisia dracunculus) G-12, 320
Friar's Cap............-.4 G-IS, 521
Friar's Cowl. ...............04 46
FRINGETREE

(Chionanthus  virginicus) G-12, 321
Frogsfoot.... 0.0.00. 0 cee eee ee 128
Frogwort.................---- 128
Frost Plant .............4 G-12, 321
Frostweed...............) G-12, 321
FROSTWORT

(Helianthemum

canadense). . 2... ee G-12, 321
Fucus vesiculosus... .......... 106
Fuller's Herb............4 G-22, 701
Fumaria_ officinali. . G-12, 322
FUMITORY

(Fumaria officinalis). . . . | G-12, 322
Fumus...............2..4 G-12, 322
Furze... ......00.. G-10, 260
Fusanum,...............) G-25, 791
Fusoria.................4 G-25, 791

G

Gadrose........ 0. cee eee’ .G-25, 791
Gaglee... 0... eed 46
Gagroot............+2..44 G-ie, 479
Galanga ..................0.05 467
Galangal. ...... ose A67
Galanthus nivalis.............7 700
GALBANUM

(Ferula gummosa)........... 323
Galega officinalis. . . . . G-13, 353
Galeopsis segetum........ J G-13, 389
Galipea officinalis... .......... 34
Galium aparine. . Le
Galium odoratum........ | G-24, 751
Galium verum..... 0.0...) G-15, 455
Gallinaccia Oak ............. 550
Gallwort.. 0... cc eed 840
GAMBIR

(Uncaria species) .......... 324
Gambodia ..............4 G-12, 325

----- PAGE 22 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

GINKGO BILOBA EXTRACT TABLETS /I-17

GAMBOGE Pharmacy, Freeda, Mason Gill-Go-over-the-Ground 372
(Garcinia hanburyi) - G-12, 325 Vitamins, Medicine Gill-to-by-the-Hedge. .. 372
Ganja, . oe G-17, 500 Shoppe, National Vitamin, Gillyflower. G25, 792

Garbato Tambor Hausca _ 160 Naturalife, Nature's Gin-Action Tablets

Garcinia_hanburyi. G-12, 325 Bounty, Perrigo, Republic, (Action Labs) 346

: Zenith Goldline) 327
Garden Angelica .. G-3, 32 Ginepro G15, 440
Garden Artichoke oe. Garlicin Tablets : P >
(Nature's Way) 327 | Gingelly 688

GARDEN CRESS Garlic-X Tablets GINGER
(Lepidium sativum) G-12, 326 (Mason Vitamins) 327 (Zingiber officinale). . G12, 339

Garden Mint = G-23,709 | Garlin Tablets (Major) 327 | Ginger Capsules (Mason

Garden Nightshade G-6, 101 | Garlique Enteric Coated Vitamins, Sundown). . 339

Garden Violet G-24, 750 Tablets (Sunsource), 327 | Ginger Kid Liquid

Garden-Poppy. G-20, 609 | Garlique Tablets (Sunsource) _, .327 (Nature's Answer) 3390

Gargaut _ - 467 | Gas Plant G7 130 | Ginger Liquid (McZand) 339

ie wes Gatten 6251791 | Ginger Power Capsules
(Action Labs) » 327) Gatter 0. G-25,791 (Nature's Herbs). _ 339

GARLIC Gaultheria procumbens -820 Ginger Root Capsules
(Allium sativum) .. G-12,327 | Gay-Feather ...... G-17, 503 (Bergen Brunswig, Frontier,

Garlic Capsules (Bio-Tech, Gelidium amansii ae - 9 Herbal Harvest, Mason
Cardinal, Frontier, Key Gelsemin. 838 Vitamins, Nature's Bounty,

Co., Major, Mason Gelsemium sempervirens 838 Nature's Resource, Nature's
Vitamins, National Genista_tinctoria G-10, 260 Way, Perrigo, Rexall
Vitamin) ++++327 | Gentian (836 Consumer). . nn 339

Garlic Enteric Coated Tablets Gentian Root . 836 | Ginger Root Oil (Aura Cacia) . . 339
(Perrigo, Rexall Consumer) ---327 | Gentiana lutea .s36 | Ginkai Tablets (Lichtwer) . G-29, 342

Garlic Oil 1000 Capsules Geranium .233. | GinkAlert Tablets
(Republic) 77 Geranium_maculatum 233 (Mason Vitamins) 342

Garlic Oil Capsules sania ag _G-t4 393 Ginko
(Advanced Nutritional, . .

Apothecary, Basic GERMAN CHAMOMILE (Ginkgo biloba) G-12, 342
Vitamins, Bergen (Matricaria recutita) . G-12 331 Ginkgo biloba, .. G2, 342
Brunswig, Family . Ginkgo Biloba Capsules

GERMAN IPECAC .
Pharmacy, Health Products, (Cynanchum _ vincetoxicum) 335 (ADH, Bergen Brunswig,
Mason Vitamins, Medicine Cardinal, Celestial
Shoppe, Nature Made, GERMAN SARSAPARILLA Seasonings, Major, Mason
Nature's Bounty, Perrigo) 327 (Carex arenaria) 336 Vitamins, Naturalife,

Garlic Oil Natural Capsules GERMANDER Nature's Resource, Rexall
(Cardinal, Rexall (Teucrium chamaedrys) — G-12, 337 Consumer, Rexall Managed
Consumer) 327 | Geum G4. 71 Care, Sundown, Zenith

Garlic Power Tablets Geum_rivale G-25, 794 Goldline) .. * 342
(Nature's Herbs) +327 |G, | G47 Ginkgo Biloba Extract

Garlic Sage C26, 826 | Gharghar 660 (Natrol) 342

Garlic Tablets (ADH, Giant Kelp 12 Ginkgo Biloba Extract
American Pharmaceutical, Capsules (Humco, Mason
Apothecary, Basic GIANT MILKWEED Vitamins, National
Vitamins, Bergen (Calotropis gigantea) 338 Vitamin, Neurovites), . . 342
Brunswig, Celestial Giant Swallow Root 338 Ginkgo Biloba Extract
Seasonings, Contract Gillenia 421 Tablets (Herbal Harvest,
Pharmacal, Family Gillenia_trifoliata_........ 421 Nature's Bounty). 342

----- PAGE 23 -----
1-18/GINKGO BILOBA LIQUID

Ginkgo Biloba Liquid
(Pharmaceutical Labs), . . 342
Ginkgo Biloba Plus Capsules
(Apothecary). . . 342
Ginkgo Biloba Premium
Extract Capsules
(Futurebiotics). 342
Ginkgo Biloba Premium

Extract Tablets

(Futurebiotics). . Le 342
Ginkgo Biloba Standardized

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer). c-30, 342

Ginkgo Biloba Tablets
(Major, Natrol, Nature

Made, Reese) 342
Ginkgo Capsules (McZand). 342
Ginkgo Leaf Capsules

(Frontier). 342
Ginkgo Liquid (McZand). 342
Ginkgo Smart Capsules

(Irwin) 342
Ginkgo Tablets (Mericon) 342
Ginkgo-Go Tablets

(Wakunaga), Lae 342
Ginkgold Tablets

(Nature's Way). oe. 342
Ginkoba Tablets

(Pharmaton), Le G-29, 342
Ginsai Capsules (Lichtwer) . . . 346
Ginsana Capsules

(Pharmaton). G-29, 346
Ginsana Chewable Tablets

(Pharmaton). G-29, 346
GINSENG

(Panax ginseng). : : 346
Ginseng American Capsules

(ADH)... . .. 346
Ginseng American Liquid

(McZand) 346

Ginseng Capsules (American
Pharmacal, Basic Vitamins,
Bergen Brunswig, Contract
Pharmacal, Major,

McKesson, Naturalife,
Perrigo). bees 346

Ginseng Chinese Capsules
(ADH) 346

Ginseng Chinese Liquid
(McZand).

Ginseng Complex Capsules
(Herbal Harvest, Nature's
Bounty, Rexall Consumer)

Ginseng Complex Korean

Capsules (Mason Vitamins) ..

Ginseng Concentrate Capsules
(McKesson).

Ginseng Energy Capsules
(Celestial Seasonings).

Ginseng Korean Capsules
(Advanced Nutritional,
Health Products, Major,
Mason Vitamins, National
Vitamin, Nature's Bounty,
Zenith Goldline).

Ginseng Korean Standardized
Capsules
(Rexall Consumer).

Ginseng Korean Tablets
(Mason Vitamins).

Ginseng Liquid
(Pharmaceutical Labs).

Ginseng Manchurian Capsules
(Nature's Bounty). .

Ginseng Natural Tablets

(Bergen Brunswig).......

Ginseng Power Max 4X
Capsules (Action Labs). .

Ginseng Power Max 4X
Liquid (Action Labs)

Ginseng Root Korean White
Capsules
(Bergen Brunswig).

Ginseng Root Siberian
Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Nature's
Resource).

Ginseng Root Tablets
(Rexall Consumer),

Ginseng Siberian Capsules
(Apothecary, Cardinal,
Major, Mason Vitamins,
Rexall Consumer)

Ginseng Siberian Liquid
(McZand)..........

Ginseng Siberian Tablets
(Nature's Bounty).

. 346

-346

- 346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

346

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ginseng Up Capsules
(Nature's Bounty).

Ginseng Vitamin Capsules

(Family Pharmacy).

Giroflier

Gladdon.

Gladyne

Glechoma_ hederacea
Globe Amaranth.
Globe Artichoke
Globe Crowfoot

GLOBE FLOWER

(Trollius europaeus).

Globe Ranunculus.
Globe Trollius
Gloves of Our Lady.
Glycine soja
Glycyrrhiza glabra.
Gnaphalium uliginosum

GOA POWDER
(Andira araroba).

Goat's Arrach
Goat's Leaf.
Goat's Pod

GOAT'S RUE
(Galega officinalis)

Goatweed

346

.., 346
G-25, 792

_ G-7, 138

G-19, 56i
372
133
G-4, 44
G-12, 351

G-12, 351

G-12, 351
G-12, 351

. G-I0, 248

G-22, 707
G-ie, 469
236

352

43
: 399
G-8, 165

G-13, 353

(Aegopodium podagrarid) .G-13, 361

Goatweed

(Hypericum perforatum)

God's-Hair.

Gold Chain

Gold Cup.
Goldbloom
Goldcup.

Golden Chain
Golden Daisy.
Golden Groundsel.
Golden Moss.

GOLDEN RAGWORT
(Senecio aureus). .

Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea)
Golden Rod

Golden Seal Capsules
(National Vitamin).
Go
(Nature's Herbs). .

(Verbascum  densiflorum)

G-23, 719
38i

215

_. 133
G-17, 497
128

452

563

354

215

354

G-11, 289
G-18, 532

355

en Seal Power Capsules

355

----- PAGE 24 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Golden Seal Root Capsules
(Bergen Brunswig, Herbal
Harvest, Major, McKesson,
Nature's Bounty, Nature's
Herbs, Nature's Way,

Zenith Goldline)........... 355
Golden Senecio.............. 354
GOLDEN SHOWER TREE

(Cassia fistula).........! G-13, 354
GOLDENSEAL

(Hydrastis canadensis) . G13, 355
Goldenseal. .................. 563
Goldenseal Capsules

(ADH, Mason Vitamins). . . . 355
Goldenseal Leaf Capsules

(Frontier).................... 355

Goldenseal Liquid (McZand) .. 355
Goldenseal Plus Capsules

(Key Co.).. 0.2.0.0... eee eee 355
Goldenseal Root Alcohol

Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... 355

Goldenseal Root Capsules
(Apothecary, Frontier,
Humco, Mason Vitamins,
Nature Made, Nature's
Resource, Perrigo, Rexall

Consumer, Sundown)....... 355
Goldilocks................005 AIT
Golds..............000004 G7, 497
GOLDTHREAD

(Coptis trifolia)............. 358
Goldy Star...............4 G-4, 71
Goonteh....................4 435
Goose Grass,..........--..004 193
Goose Tansy.......... G-20, 610
Goosebill............ 0.000000 193
Goosefoot..............-..00-4 43
Goosegrass (Galium aparine) .. 193
Goosegrass

(Potentilla anserina). ... : G20, 610
Goosewort. G20, 610
Go-Qi-Zi. . 6... A87
Gosling Weed................ 193
Gossypium herbaceum G-16, 468
Gossypium hirsutum..........: 228
GOTU KOLA

(Centella asiatica) G-13, 359

Gotu Kola Capsules (ADH,
Bergen Brunswig, Frontier,
Major, Mason Vitamins,
Nature's Resource, Rexall
Consumer, Sundown,

Zenith Goldline). ........... 359
Gotu Kola Herb Capsules

(McKesson),...........000- 359
Gotu Kola Herb Liquid

(Nature's Way)............ 359
Gotu Kola Liquid (McZand) .... 359
Gout Herb..............4 G-13, 361
Goutberry. G-6, 104
GOUTWEED

(Aegopodium podagraria) .G-13, 361

GoUtwolt G-13, 361
Gran... eel G18, 551
Grains of Paradise........ J G-8, 165

GRAINS-OF-PARADISE
(Aframomum melegueta) . G-13, 362

Granadilla G-19473

GRAPE

(Vitis vinifera) G-13, 362

Grape Seed Capsules

(Bergen Brunswig)......... 362
Grape Seed Extract Capsules

(Major, Rexall Consumer,

Sundown)................. 362
Grapeholly. G-18, 527
Grapeseed Extract Capsules

(Nature's Bounty).......... 362
Grapple Plant................4 247
Grass. G-17, 500
Grass Myrtle............) G-7, 138
Gratiola. . . ..... G3, 385
Gratiola officinalis....... | G-13, 385
Gravel Plant.................. 768
Gray Beard Tree. G-12, 321
Gray Nicker.................4 253

GRAY WALLFLOWER
(Erysimum diffusum) 365

GREAT BURNET
(Sanguisorba officinalis) . G-13, 366

Great Burr..............4 G-7, 128
Great Morel..............: G-4, 69
Great Ox-Eye................4 563
Great Raifort........... 5 G-14, 408
Greater Ammi............! G-5, SI

GROUND LILY /I-19

GREATER BINDWEED

(Calystegia sepium)..... | G-13, 367
Grecian Laurel...........: G-15, 459
Greek Hay Seed......... G-11, 304
Greek Nuts... ........0000.00004 15
GREEK SAGE

(Salvia triloba)............. 367
Green Bean. . G-4, 65
Green Broom............4 G-10, 260
Green Endive...............44 A53
Green Ginger............: G-26, 829
GREEN HELLEBORE

(Helleborus viridis)... ....... 368
Green Mint..............4 G-23, 709
Green Ozier.............4 G-IO, 256
Green Sauce...........0.00004 827
GREEN TEA

(Camellia sinensis)... .. | G-13, 369

Green Tea Capsules
(Bergen Brunswig, Natrol) ....369
Green Tea Extract Capsules

(Celestial Seasonings), ...... 369
Green Tea Leaf, Alcohol

Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer)........... 369
Green Tea Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs),.......... 369

Green Tea Power, Caffeine-
Free Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 369
Green Tea Tablets

(Futurebiotics)............ 369
Greenweed..............: G-IO, 260
Grenadier. G-20, 605
Grindelia..........0....0.00. 379
Grindelia species.............. 379
Grip Grass................0.. 193
Groats. . G18, 551
Ground Apple. G-10, 270
Ground Berry. ...............5 820
Ground Elder. G-13, 361
Ground Furze. G-23, 713
Ground Glutton.............. 374
Ground Holly................: 595
GROUND IVY

(Glechoma hederacea)...... . 372
Ground Laurel................. 768
Ground Lemon...........: G-17, 510
Ground Lily..............: G-4, 74

----- PAGE 25 -----
1-20 /GROUND PINE

GROUND PINE

(Ajuga chamaepitys). . . . | G-13, 373
Ground Raspberry........ | G-13, 355
Ground Thistle ............... 151
Groundbread................... 240
Groundnuts.............+..4-¢ 575
GROUNDSEL

(Senecio vulgaris)... ....... 374
Grundy Swallow

{Senecio aureus)........... 354
Grundy Swallow

{Senecio vulgaris). .......... 374
G-Sana Capsules

(Mason Vitamins)........... 346
GUAIAC

(Guaiacum officinale)... . 0... 375
Guaiacum................0.. 375
Guaiacum officinale... 2.2.0.0... 375
GUAR GUM

(Cyamopsis tetragonoloba) .... 376
Guar Gum Powder (Freeda) 376
GUARANA

(Paullinia — cupana) 376
Guarana Bread..............-. 376
Guarana Capsules

(Mason Vitamins, Natrol)... . 376
Guarana Seed Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... 376

Guarana Tablets (Apothecary,
National Vitamin,

Sundown).................. 376
Guelder Rose.............4 G-5, 96
Guggal Gum............:

Guggal Resin.
Guggul Resin Capsules

(Frontier)... ................! 534
Guinea Comm ...........0.000. 121
Guinea Grains...........! G-13, 362
Guinea Rush..............4 G-3, 6
Guinea Sorrel ........... 5 G-14, 394
Gum Acacia................. 378
GUM ARABIC

(Acabia Senegal)........... 378
Gum Asafoetida ..........0.0..4 AT
Gum Bush.................4 84i
Gum Camphor. G-7, 143
Gum Dragon................! 167
Gum Euphorbium...........! Tie

Gum Ivy......... . G-I0, 275

Gum Plant... .. . G-9,212
Gum Senegal................. 378
Gum Tree

{Eucalyptus globulus) . Gl, 283
Gum Tree

{Liquidambar orientalis) G23, 734
Gummigutta............4 G-12, 325
GUMWEED

(Grindelia species). ........ 379
Gunga... . 435
Guraea rusbyi. 198
Guru Nut........2.......20.1 205
Gutta Cambodia..........4 G-12, 325
Gutta Gamba...........4 G-12, 325
Gypsy Flower.............004 A10
Gypsywort G-6, 126

H

H. Lignum..................5 480
Hackmatack.............4 G-24, 759
Haematoxyion campechianum .. . 480
Hagenia abyssinica... .......4 4 A450
Hag's Taper.............) G-18, 532
Hair of Venus..............05 A91
Hairy Mint.
Hallelujah ............2..--.-4
Hallfoot.
Hamamelis..............4 G-26, 821
Hamamelis virginiana... . . | G-26, 821
Hamburg Parsley......... 4 G-19, 567
Handflower..............) G-25, 792
Happy Major. . G-7, 128
Hardback................4 G-23, 733
Hardhack................) G-23, 733
Hardhay..........0.0000) G-23, 719
Hardock . : : : G-7, 128
Hareburr. an . G-7, 128
Hare's Beard...........4 G-18, 532
HARONGA

(Haronga

madagascariensis). ......... 380
Haronga madagascariensis. . . 380
Harpagophytum procumbens .... 247
Hart's Tree..............: G-24, 744
Hart's Truffle................4 618
Hartshorn...............4 G-6, 123
HARTSTONGUE

(Scolopendrium vulgare)... . . 38i
Haw......... bee GIO, 271
Hawthorn ..............: G-IO, 271

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hawthorn Berries Capsules
(Nature's Resource,

Nature's Way)............. 2 271
Hawthorn Berries Liquid

(Nature's Way)............. 271
Hawthorn Berry Capsules

(Mason Vitamins)..........4 271

Hawthorn Capsules (McZand) ... 271
Hawthorn Extract Capsules

Hawthorn Flowers Leaves &
Berries Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) .......... 2 271
Hawthorn Liquid (McZand)... . : 271
Hawthorn Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). ..........2 271

Hawthorn Tablets (Naturalife) ...271
Hawthorne Berries Capsules
(Frontier, Herbal Harvest,
Nature's Bounty, Sundown) .. .271
Hawthorne Capsules (ADH) ... 271

Hazelwort. :
Headache...................
Headsman.
Headwark...................
Heal-All

{Collinsonia canadensis) . .G-23, 733
Heal-All

{Prunella vulgaris). G-22, 68:
Heal-All

{Scrophularia nodosa) ... G-11, 311
Healing Herb............ G-9, 212
Heart of the Earth G-22, 681
HeartCare Hawthorn Extract

Tablets (Nature's Way),..... 271
HEARTSEASE

(Viola tricolor)... .......... 382
HEATHER

(Calluna vulgaris) G-13, 383
Hedera helix............5 G-I0, 275
Hedge Convolvulus....... | G-13, 367
Hedge Fumitory. . . G-12, 322
Hedge Lily..............) G-13, 367
HEDGE MUSTARD

(Sisymbrium officinale)... ... : 384
Hedge-Burs............-+00005 193

----- PAGE 26 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Hedgeheriff................00- 193
HEDGE-HYSSOP

(Gratiola officinalis), . . . § G-13, 385
Hedgemaids................. 372
Hedge-Taper.............: G-IS, 532
Helianthemum canadense G-12, 321
Helianthus annuus... ..... & G-23, 741
Helichrysum arenarium....... & A17
Heliotrope..............04 -28, 783
Helleborus niger... 1.0.0... 4 G5, 97
Helleborus viridis. : 368
Hellweed................) G-IO, 254
Helmet Flower...........4 .G-22, 678
Helonias Root............... 301
HEMLOCK

(Conium maculatum). .. . | G-13, 386
Hemlock Bark...........) G-19, 594
Hemlock Gum...........) G-19, 594
Hemlock Spruce.............7 714
HEMP AGRIMONY

(Eupatorium

cannabinum).... 2.2.2... 5 G-13, 388
HEMPNETTLE

(Galeopsis segetum). .G-13, 389
Hen Bell................) G-14, 389
HENBANE

(Hyoscyamus niger)... .. | G-14, 389
Hendibeh........ . G-8, ISI
HENNA

(Lawsonia _ inermis) G-14, 391
Henne.............00005 G-14, 391
Hens and Chickens....... ‘ G-14, 411
Hep Tree...............4 G-10, 254
Hepatica nobilis... ...........: 26
Heracleum sphondylium . G-14, 396

Herb Bennet
(Conium maculatum). .. . | G-13, 386
Herb Bennet

(Geum urbanum). G-4, 71
Herb Christopher. eo
Herb Gerard.............) G-13, 361
Herb Louisa................0¢ 463
Herb Margaret................ 563
Herb of the Cross......... G-25, 788
HERB PARIS

(Paris quadrifolia)...... | G-14, 392
Herb Peterpaigle 231

HORSE CHESTNUT POWER CAPSULES /I-21

HERB ROBERT

(Geranium robertianum) G14, 393
Herb Trinity..................4 26
Herb Twopence.......... | G-17, 520
Herbal Eyebright Capsules

(Nature's Way),.........2.0% 300
Herbal Sure Aloe Vera

Softgels (Nature's Bounty) 16
Herbal Sure Chinese Red

Ginseng Capsules

(Nature's Bounty),......... 346
Herbal Sure Extracts

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) ~. . .75
Herbal Sure Feverfew

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . . 306
Herbal Sure Ginger Root

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .339
Herbal Sure Goldenseal Root

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .355
Herbal Sure Korean Ginseng

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .346
Herbal Sure Maximum

Strength Ginkgo Biloba

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .342
Herbal Sure Saw Palmetto

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .664
Herbal Sure Valerian Root

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .783

Herb-of-Grace
(Ruta graveolens)...... | G-21, 648

Herb-of-Grace

(Verbena _ officinalis). G25, 788
Herbygrass G-21, 648
Hercules Woundwort. . G-22, 681
Herniaria glabra. . . G-2l,eso
Herniary................: G-21, eso
HIBISCUS

(Hibiscus sabdariffa). . G-14, 394
Hibiscus sabdariffaa.. 2... | G-14, 394
High Alicin Garlic Tablets

(Futurebiotics),............ 327
High Balm..................4 562
High Cranberry........... 4 G-S, 96
HIGH MALLOW

(Malva sylvestris). . 2... | G-14, 395
High Potency Garlic Oil

Capsules (Nature Made)... . 327
Highwaythorn G-6, 123
Hillberry....................4 820
Hind Heal. . G26, 826

Hindheal................4 G-24, 754 I

Meee eee eed G-10, 254
bee e eee eed G-10, 254
. G22, 680
peed G-22, 68:
Med G-17, 510
G-14, 389
Lee ed G-10, 254
HOGWEED
(Heracleum sphondylium) .G-14, 396
Hogweed. . ... G-5, 448
Holigold................4 G-17, 497
Holligold............0.005 G-17, 497
HOLLY
(Ilex aquifolium)... .... 5 G-14, 397
Holly Bay..............-22--5 490
Holly Thistle. . .... G-6, 107
HOLLYHOCK
(Alcea rosea)... .....445 G-14, 398
Holly-Leaved Berberis.... | G-IS,527
Holm........2......2..-4 G-14, 397
Holme Chase............4 G-14, 397
Holy Herb..................4 84i
Holy Rope.............04 .G-13, 388
Holy Tree
(Antelaea azadirachta) . G-18, 539

Holy Tree (Ilex aquifolium) G-14, 397

Honey Plant ............4 G-16, 461
Honeybloom.................5 A18
HONEYSUCKLE

(Lonicera_ caprifolium) 399
Hoodwort................ G-22, 678
Hop Fruit...............: G-10, 254
HOPS

(Humulus lupulus). .. 0. . S G-14, 400
Hordeum distichon. G-4, 63
HOREHOUND

(Marrubium vulgare)... . 5 G-14, 401
Horehound. . G-S, 98
Hornseed es ... 280
Horse Blobs. .G-17, 503
HORSE CHESTNUT

(Aesculus

hippocastanum)........ | G-14, 403
Horse Chestnut Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .403

----- PAGE 27 -----
1-22/HORSE CHESTNUT STANDARDIZED CAPSULES

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer).
Horse Daisy. . .
Horse Gowan

Horse Tongue

Horse Willow.
Horsebane

(Oenanthe aquatica). . .
Horsebane

(Oenanthe crocata).
Horse-Elder.
Horse-Fly Weed
Horse-Foot
Horseheal.
Horsehoof .

HORSEMINT

(Monarda _ punctata)

HORSERADISH

(Armoracia _ rusticana)

HORSETAIL

(Equisetum arvense). . . .

Horsetail Grass. . .
Horsetail Grass Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Way).
Horsetail Liquid (McZand),

Horsetail Rush. .
Horseweed

(Collinsonia canadensis) .

Horseweed
(Erigeron canadensis)

HOUND'S TONGUE
(Cynoglossum officinale).

Houndsbane.

HOUSELEEK
(Sempervivum tectorum)
Huang-Qi
Huckleberry. .
Hulm .. :
Hulver Bush
Hulver Tree.
Hummingbird Tree.
Humulus lupulus.
Hundred-Leaved Rose.
Hungarian Pepper.
Huntsman's Cup.
Hurtleberry.
Hurts. .

Hurtsickle
Husked Nut

Horse Chestnut Standardized

403
563
563
381

_ G-14,409

.G-25, 796

oo. 795
G-I0, 266
G-26, 812
G-9, 209
G-10, 266

. G-9, 209

407

G-14, 408

G14, 409
G-14, 409
409
409
G-14, 409

G23, 733

_G7, 144

A10

_ G14, 401

G4, 411

.. 54

_ GS, 75
G-14, 397
G-i4, 397

_ G4, 397

_ G-4, 59
G-14, 400
. 644
G-8, 165
G-20, 596

G-5, 75

G-8, 75

G-9, 225
708

Hwanggi 54
HWEMA BARK

(Corynanthe _ pachyceras) 412
Hydnocarpus 177
Hydnocarpus species. 177
HYDRANGEA

(Hydrangea arborescens) G-14, 413
Hydrangea arborescens . G14, 413
Hydrastis canadensis. . . . . G-13, 355
Hydrocotyle. G-13, 359
Hyoscyamus_ niger. G-14, 389
Hypericalm Capsules

(Enzymatic Therapy). . 719
Hypericum perforatum, .G-23, 719

Hypericum Perforatum (auro
cultum) 1/24 Injection

(Weleda). . . . . .. 719
Hypoxis rooperi. 7
HYSSOP

(Hyssopus_ officinalis) . G5, 414
Hyssop Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way) ........... 414
Hyssopus officinalis... 1. . | G-15, 414
Iberis amara 84
Ice Vine .... 566
Iceland Lichen 415
ICELAND MOSS

(Cetraria islandica)......... ¢ A415
IGNATIUS BEANS

(Strychnos_ ignatii) ~- 416
Ilex aquifolium. . G-14, 397
Ilex paraguariensis, .... . . G-17,508
Illicium verum G-23, 725
Imlee. . . we. 753
IMMORTELLE

(Helichrysum arenarium). . . . AIT
Impatiens biflora 436
India Root....... .... 467
India Senna . . G-22, 684
Indian Apple G-17,510
Indian Arrowroot G-25, 791
Indian Balm... G-4, 74
Indian Balmony. Le . 187
Indian Bark. 490
Indian Chocolate. G-25, 794
Indian Corn... . a 224

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Indian Cress

(Nasturtium officinale) . 798
ndian Cress

(Tropaeolum majus). . . G-18,537
Indian Dye G-13, 355
ndian Gentian. 187
ndian Gum (Acacia arabica) 3
ndian Gum

(Silphium perfoliatum) .G-9, 238
Indian Hemp G-17, 500
Indian Hippo. 421
ndian Horseradish ... . 2... 67
Indian Laburnum. . G-13, 354
Indian Liquorice 435
ndian Nard .... an 433
INDIAN NETTLE

(Acalypha indica). . . 419
ndian Paint

(Hydrastis canadensis) G-13, 355
ndian Paint

(Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . 108
ndian Pennywort G-13, 359
INDIAN PHYSIC

(Gillenia trifoliata). .... 0.00: A21
Indian Pink 594
Indian Plant

(Hydrastis canadensis) G-13, 355
Indian Plant

(Sanguinaria canadensis), . . . 108
Indian Plantago. 612
Indian Poke... . . . 25
Indian Root. G-23, 711
Indian Sage. G-e, 113
Indian Shamrock G-4, 74
Indian Spikenard Lae 433
INDIAN SQUILL

(Urginea indica). 421
Indian Tobacco. G-16, 479
INDIAN-HEMP

(Apocynum cannabinum). . . . 418
Indian-Hemp. 418
Inkberry. G-20, 602
Intoxicating Pepper. G-15, 443 <
Inula_britannica 119
Inula helenium G-10, 266
IPECAC

(Cephaelis ipecacuanha). .... A23
Ipecacuanha 423
Ipecacuanha Rio....... . 423

----- PAGE 28 -----
L>

*

ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Ipomoea....................! 514
Ipomoea hederacea...........4 523
Ipomoea orizabensis. 514
Ipomoea purga...........5 G-15, 427
IPORURU

(Alchornea floribunda)... . . . : 424
TiS... G-19, 561
Iris Speci€S. 6. ev G-19, 561
Irish Moss...........2....-.- 152
Trish Tops...........00004 G-22, 672
Ispaghula ...................4 612
Italian Fitch ............4 G-13, 353
Italian Jasmine...........4 G-15, 432
Italian Limetta..........) G-16, 476
Itchweed..........2....2.....4 25
Ivy. G-3, 26
Ivy-Leafed Cyclamen..........: 240
JABORANDI

(Pilocarpus

microphyllus)..........4 G-15, 425
Jach-of-the-Buttery........... 215
JACK-1N-THE-PULPIT

(Arisaema atrorubens), .... . | A26
Jack-Jump-About......... | G-13, 361
JACOB'S LADDER

(Polemonium caeruleum) G-15, 427
Jacob's Ladder. G-ie, 475
Jacob's Staff...... G-18, 532
Jacob's Sword. G-19, 561
JALAP

(Ipomoea purga). G-15, 427
Jalap {Ipomoea orizabensis)  ....514
Jalap

{Phytolacca americana) . .G-20, 602
JAMAICA DOGWOOD

(Piscidia piscipula)......... ¢ A428
Jamaica Mignonette. G-14, 391
Jamaica Pepper............... 590
Jamaica Sorrel. : : G-14, 394
JAMBOLAN

(Syzygium cumini)... ....... ¢ A429
Jambul......................¢ A29
Jamestown Weed. : G-15, 436
Jamguarandi_ . . : ... G-IS, 425

JAPANESE ATRACTYLODES

(Atractylodes japonica) 430
Japanese Belladonna ......... 4 67i
Japanese Bell-Flower.......... 58
Japanese Isinglass..............4 9
JAPANESE MINT

(Mentha arvensis

piperascens)..........0.-045 431
JASMINE

(Jasminum officinale) . G5, 432
Jasminum officinale... .. . | G-15, 432
JATAMANSI

(Nardostachys jatamansi). A33
Jateorhiza palmata........... 208
Jaundice Berry. G-4, 61
Jaundice Root...........4 G-13, 355
Java Pepper... ... cee eee 235
Java Plum... ee. ees A29
JAVA TEA

(Orthosiphon _ spicatus) 434
JEQUIRITY

(Abrus precatorius) . . 435
Jersey Tea... .... eee eee ee 541
Jesuit's Bark... ........) G-20, 626
Jesuit's Tea (Chenopodium

ambrosioides). ... 0.2... 5 G-26, 828
Jesuit's Tea

(Ilex paraguariensis). .G-17, 508
JEWEL WEED

(Impatiens _ biflora) 436
Jew's Myrtle ...........4 G-7, 132
Jew's-Harp Plant.......... 4! G-4, 74
Jie-Geng.....................: 58
JIMSON WEED

(Datura stramonium). . . . | G-15, 436
Johnny-Jump-Up............. 382
Jointed-Podded Charlock .. G-26, 814
JOJOBA

(Simmondsia chine sis) . . . G-15, 438
Jordan Almond................ 15
Juarandi,...............04 G-15, 425
Juglans cinerea)... .......--.. 134
Juglans regia. ...........5 G-25, 793
JUJUBE

(Zyzyphus jujube)........... 4 439
Jungle Weed................: 559

KEIRI /1-23

JUNIPER

(Juniperus communis) . G-15, 440
Juniper Berry............: G-15, 440
Juniper Berry Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... ¢ A440
Juniper Berry Oil

(Aura Cacia)..............0¢ 440
Juniperus communis... ... § G-15, 440
Juniperus sabina......... 5 G-21, 663
Juno's Tears.............4 G-25, 788
Jupiter's Bean... ........4 G-14, 389
Jupiter's Beard...........4 G-14, 411
Jupiter's Eye... ......005 G-14, 411
Jupiter's Nut...............- 708
Justicia adhatoda........ | G-17, 492

K

Kadsura Fruit................ 301
Kadsura japonica............ 301
Kalmia latifolia... 2.2... 5 G-IS, 528
KAMALA

(Mallotus  philippinensis). 442
Kameela ................-..4 A442
Kameela ...................4 A42
Kava Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way)............4 443
KAVA KAVA

(Piper methysticum). G-15, 443

Kava Kava Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Celestial
Seasonings, Humco, Mason
Vitamins, McZand,
Nature's Resource, Rexall
Consumer, Rexall Managed

Care, Sundown)............¢ 443
Kava Kava Extract Liquid

(Rainbow Light)........... 443
Kava Kava Liquid (McZand) . .. 443
Kava Kava Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs), .......... + 443
Kava Kava Premium Extract

Capsules (Futurebiotics). .... : 443
Kava Kava Root Capsules

(Frontier, Major, Naturalife,

Nature's Herbs, Nature's

Way)............22 222 eee 443
Kavatrol Capsules (Natrol) G-29, 443
Kawa... ... 0. cee el G-15, 443
Kecksies................-/ G-13, 386
Keiri .................-4 G-25, 792

----- PAGE 29 -----
1-24 /KELP

KELP

(Laminaria hyperborea). .. . . # A446

Kelp Tablets (Major, Mason

Vitamins, National Vitamin) .122
Kelpware 106
Kelp-Ware 106
Kernelwort G-11, 311
KeX. G-13, 386
Key Flower. 231
Key of Heaven 231
Kharbagehindi 589
KHAT

(Catha edulis) 447
Khella G-5, SI
Khella Fruits G-5, SI
Kid Chamomile Liquid

(Nature's Answer) 331
Kidney Bean G-4, 65
Kidney Vetch G-9, 214
Kidney wort 26
Kif G-17, 500
Kingcups. G-17, 503
Kings and Queens 46
King's Clover. G-24, 744
King's Crown G-S, 96
King's Cup. 128
King's Cure 595
King's Cureall

(Chimaphila umbellata). . . 3595
King's Cureall

{Oenothera biennis). .... | G-11, 298
Kinnikinnick G-25, 779
Kira Tablets (Lichtwer)___G-29, 719
Kiwach 230
Klamath Weed. G-23, 719
Knautia arvensis. G-11, 310
Knee Holly. G-7, 132
Kneeholm. G-7, 132
Knight's Spur G-IS, 458
Knitback. G-9, 212
Knitborie. G-9, 212
Knob Grass. G-23, 733
Knob Root G-23, 733
Knobweed. G-23, 733
Knotgrass. G-15,448
Knotty Brake. G-17, 493
KNOTWEED

(Polygonum aviculare) G15, 448
Kola Tree. 205
Kombe 736

KOMBE SEED

(Strophanthus hispidus). . . . A50
Konsyl Easy Mix (Konsyl) 612
Konsyl for Kids (Konsyl) 612
Konsyl Powder Sugar Free

(Konsyl) 612
Kooso. 450
Korean Ginseng 346
Korean Ginseng Capsules

(Herbal Harvest). 346
Korean Ginseng Extract

Capsules (Humco) 346
Korean Ginseng Root

Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) 346
Korean White Ginseng

Capsules (Humco). 346
Kosso. 450
KOUSSO

(Hagenia abyssinica)... ..... § 450
Krameria Root 64i
Krameria_triandra 641
Kwai Garlic Tablets

(Lichtwer) G29, 327
Kyolic Aged Garlic Extract

Tablets (Wakunaga) G-30, 327
LABRADOR TEA

(Ledum latifolium) ......... 451
LABURNUM

(Cytisus laburnum) 452
Lactuca virosa.. |... eee 453
LACTUCARIUM

(Lactuca virosa). 453
Ladder-to-Heaven G-ie, 475
Ladies Fingers G-9, 214
Ladies' Glove. G-IO, 248
Ladies Seal G-25, 800
Lady Bleeding G-3, 22
LADY FERN

(Athyrium filix-femina) G-15, 454
Lady of the Meadow G-17, 511
LADY'S BEDSTRAW

(Galium verum) G-15, 455
LADY'S MANTLE

(Alchemilla_ vulgaris). . . . G-15, 456
Lady's Nightcap. G-13, 367

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Lady's Purse.
Lady's Seals
Lady's Slipper.
Ladysmock
Lamb Mint
(Mentha piperita)
Lamb Mint
(Mentha spicata)
Lambkill

Lamb's Quarters
Lamb's Toes
Lamb's Tongue

Laminaria

Lamium album
Lancea

Land Whin.
Langwort

Lappa

LARCH
(Larix decidua)

Large Fennel

Large-Leaved Germander ..

Larix decidua
Lark Heel
Lark's Claw.
Lark's Toe

LARKSPUR
(Delphinium consolida)

Larkspur Lion's Mouth
Latherwort

LAUREL
(Laurus nobilis)

Laurel

Laurel Camphor.
Laurus nobilis.
Lavandula angustifolia.
Lavender

LAVENDER COTTON
(Santolina
chamaecyparissias).

Lavose

Lawsonia inermis.
Leather Bergenia
Ledum_ latifolium.

Lemna minor.

LEMON
(Citrus limon)

Laminaria hyperborea. . . .

G-22, 690
G-22,703
541

46

G-15, 457

G-11,302
G-26, 826
G-15, 457
G-IS, 458
G-15, 458
G-15, 458

G5, 458

840
G22, 701

G-15, 459

G-IS, 528
G-7, 143
G-15, 459

G-10, 277

G-10, 277

.G-ie, 460

G-ie, 482
G-14, 391
268
451
G-I0, 258

460

----- PAGE 30 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

LEMON BALM

(Melissa officinalis), .... § G-16, 461
LEMON VERBENA

(Aloysia triphylla). . 2... 0... + 463
Lemon Walnut................ 134
LEMONGRASS.

(Cymbopogon citratus) .G-16, 465
Lemon-Scented Verbena ...... | 463
LEMON-WOOD

(Schisandra sphenanthera) .... 464
Lemonwood.................4 669
Lent Lily...........00200.0..2% 243
Lentisk.................4 G-17, sos
Leontopodium...........: G-15, 456
Leonurus cardiaca,...... | G-18, 524
Leonurus japonicus. . : : 183
Leopard's Bane............-..4 Al
Leopard's Foot.......... 4 G-17, 503
Lepidium sativum. ....... | G-12, 326
Leptandra virginica... ........- 104

LESSER CELANDINE

(Ranunculus ficaria). . 2... 2. . : 466
Lesser Dodder...........4 G-10, 254
LESSER GALANGAL

(Alpinia officinarum).... 2... : 467
Lesser Hemlock G-12, 316
Lettuce Opium. ..............5 A53
Levant... 0.00.0... 0... eed 827
LEVANT COTTON

(Gossypium herbaceum) G-ie, 468
Levant Nut.................. 312
Levant Salep................4 657
Levisticum officinale, . G-ie, 482
Liatris spicata. : . . G-17, 503
Lichwort.................... 578
LICORICE

(Glycyrrhiza glabra). . . . G-ie, 469
Licorice Capsules

(Mason Vitamins)........... A469
Licorice Liquid (McZand)..... A469
Licorice Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 5 469
Licorice Root Capsules

(Frontier, Major, Nature's

Bounty, Nature's Way,

Sundown).................5 469
Life Everlasting ......... ! G-8, 162

Life of Man.............4 G-23, 711

LYNAE GINSE-COOL CHEWABLE TABLETS /1-25

Life Root (Senecio aureus). . . . 354
Life Root

{Senecio nemorensis)......... : 21
Lignum Vitae ............... 375
Lilium candidum.............5 804
Lilium martagon,..........404 506
Lily Constancy.......... 4 G-16, 475
LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY

(Convallaria — majalis) G-16, 475
UME

(Citrus aurantifolia). G-16,476
Lime... 0.0... ee eee ed G-16,477
Limette.................4 G-16, 476
Limon... eee 460
Linaria vulgaris... 2... 840
LINDEN

(Tilia species) G-16, 477
Ling ..... 02.2.2 eee G-13, 383
Linn Flowers............4 G-16, 477
Linseed ................4 G-12, 313
Lint Bells... ............5 G-12, 313
Linum catharticum,..........: 526
Linum usitatissimum. .. . G-12, 313
Linum-20 Capsules (Key Co.)  .. 313
Lion's Ear..............4 G-18, 524
Lion's Foot..............4 G-IS, 456
Lion's Mouth. G-10, 248
Lion's Tail. . G-18,524
Lion's Tooth ...........4 G-9, 245
Liquid Amber...........: .G-23, 734
Liquidambar orientalis. G-23, 734
Liriodendron tulipifera,.... 2... 774
Lithospermum erytrorhizon. . . . 619
Little Dragon. G-12, 320
Little Pollom.................4 SS
Liveforever.
Liver Lily.
Liverleaf....
Liverweed...............000008
Liverwort

(Agrimonia eupatoria). .G-3,10
Liverwort (Hepatica nobilis). . . . 26
Lizzy-Run-up-the-Hedge. ..... . 372
Lobaria pulmonaria.......... ¢ A84
LOBELIA

(Lobelia inflata). ....... | G-16, 479
Lobelia inflata...........5 G-16, 479
Locust Bean.............4 G-7, 151
Locust Pods.............4 G-7, 151

LOGWOOD

(Haematoxylon

campechianum)... 0.0.0... 4 480
Lolium temulentum....... | G-24, 756
Long Purples............: .G-20, 620
Long-Bladder Kelp, ........... 122
Lonicera caprifolium.. 0.2.0... ¢ 399

LOOSESTRIFE

(Lysimachia_ vulgaris) . .G-16, 481
Loosestrife...........0004 G-20, 620
Lophophora_williamsii. G-19, 588
Lords and Ladies.)............ 4 46
LOTUS

(Nelumbo nucifera)... .. § G-16, 481
Lousewort..... eee eee 726
LOVAGE

(Levisticum officinale) «G-16, 482
Love Apple...........044 G-24, 766
Love in Winter............... 595
Love Leaves. : G-7, 128
Love-Lies-Bleeding . . G-3, 22
Lovely Bleeding .........: G-3, 22
Love-Man.................... 193
Low Balm..................: 562
Lucerne...........-......) G-3, 12
LUFFA

(Luffa aegyptica)....... 5 G-16, 483
Luff a aegyptica..........G-16, 483
LUNGMOSS

(Lobaria pulmonaria). ..... . ¢ A484
LUNGWORT

(Pulmonaria officinalis) .G-16, 485
Lungwort...................4 A484
Lupinus luteus......0........5 839
Lurk-in-the-Ditch ............4 579
Lustwort... 0.2.0.0... 00. 740
Lycium barbarum............ ¢ A87
LYCIUM BARK

(Lycium chinense).......... ¢ A86
LYCIUM BERRIES

(Lycium barbarum)..... 0... ¢ A87
Lycium chinense... 0... 00..005 A86
Lycoperdon species...........5 618
Lycopersicon esculentum G-24, 766
Lycopodium clavatum.......... 196
Lycopus virginicus,...... | G-6, 126
Lynae Ginse-Cool Chewable

Tablets (Boscogen)......... 346

----- PAGE 31 -----
1-26/LYSIMACHIA NUMMULARIA

Lysimachia nummularia . G-17, 520
Lysimachia_ vulgaris. G-16,481
Lythrum G-20, 620
Lythrum salicaria G-20, 620
M

Mace G-18, 545
Mackerel Mint G-23, 709
Macochihua 424
Macrocystis pyrifera. 122
Mad-Apple G-15, 436
MADDER

(Rubia _ tinctorum) G-16, 490
Madder Whole Root Liquid

(Herb Pharm). 490
Mad-Dog Weed (Alisma

plantago-aquatica) G-3, 13
Mad-Dog Weed

{Scutellaria lateriflora) . . G-22, 678
Madonna Lily. 804
Madweed. G-22, 678
MAGNOLIA

(Magnolia glauca) 490
Magnolia glauca. 490
Mahonia aquifolium G-18,527
MA-HUANG

(Ephedra _sinica) G-ie, 488
Maiden Fern 491
MAIDENHAIR

(Adiantum capillus-veneris) 491
Maidenhair-Tree. G-12, 342
Maid's Hair G-IS, 455
Maize 224
MALABAR NUT

(Justicia adhatoda) G-17, 492
Malan, 424
MALE FERN

(Dryopteris _filix-mas) .. . .G-17, 493
Male Shield Fern G-17, 493
Mallaguetta Pepper. G-13, 362
Mallards. 505
Mallotus philippinensis. 442
Mallow.................4 G-14,395
Malus domestica. G-4, 37
Malva Flowers G-14, 398
Matva sylvestris. G-14, 39s

Mamaeire G-19, 565

MANACA

(Brunfelsia hopeana). 494
Manchurian Ginseng Capsules

(Nature's Bounty). 346
Manchurian Ginseng Tablets

(Nature's Bounty). 346
Mandragora G-17, 495
Mandragora_officinarum G-17, 495
MANDRAKE

(Mandragora

officinarum). G-17, 495
Mandrake. G-17, 510
MANNA

(Fraxinus ornus). G-17, 496
Manna Ash. G-17, 496
Mapato. 641
Maranta 43
Maranta arundinacea 43
Marcory. 729
Marginal Fern. G-17, 493
Marguerite. 563
Marian Thistle G-17, 516
MARIGOLD

(Calendula officinalis) . G17, 497
Marigold of Peru G-23, 741
MARIJUANA

(Cannabis sativa) G-17, 500
Marrubium G-14, 401
Marrubium vulgare G-14, 401
Marsdenia_ condurango. 216
MARSH BLAZING STAR

(Liatris spicata) G-17, 503
Marsh Clover. G-e, 110
MARSH MARIGOLD

(Caltha palustris). G-17, 503
Marsh Mint G-26, 813
Marsh Penny. G-13, 359
Marsh Stachys 832
Marsh Tea 451
MARSHMALLOW

(Althaea officinalis) 505
Marshmallow Root Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) . 505
Marshmallow Root Liquid

(Nature's Answer). 505
MARTAGON

(Lilium martagon) 506

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Mary Bud

Mary Gowles.
Marybud

Maryland Pink
Master of the Wood

MASTERWORT

(Peucedanum_ ostruthium).
Masterwort.

MASTIC TREE
(Pistacia_ lentiscus)

MATE

(Ilex paraguariensis).

MATICO
(Piper elongatum)

Matricaria_ recutita.

Matto Grosso

Maudlin Daisy.

Maudlinwort

Mauls

Mawseed
May................000.
May Bells

May Lily.

May Rose

MAYAPPLE
(Podophyllum_ peltatum)

Mayflower.
Maypop
Maytenus
Meadow Anemone.
Meadow Cabbage
Lily.
Queen
Routs
Runagates

ilicifolia.

Meadow
Meadow
Meadow
Meadow
Meadow Saffran.
Meadow Saffron.
Meadowbloom
{Ranunculus acris)
Meadowbloom
(Ranunculus bulbosus).

MEADOWSWEET
(Filipendula_ ulmaria)

Meadow-Wort.

Meadsweet

Mealberry.

Medicago sativa

Mega Primrose Oil Capsule
(Twinlab).

G-17, 497
G-17, 497
G-17, 497

594
G-24, 751

507
G-14, 396

G-17, 508

G-17, 508

509

G-12, 331

423

563

563

G-14, 395

G-20, 609
G-10, 271
G-16, 475
G-16,475
G-5, 96

G-17, 510

231
G-19, 573
218
572
696
804
G-17,511
G-17, 503
G-17,520
G-9, 206
G-9, 206

133

128

. GAT, 511

G-7, S11
G-7, 511
G-25, 779
G-3, 12
Ss
298

----- PAGE 32 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Mehndi .. . G-i4, 391
Melaleuca _ alternifolia 757
Melaleuca leucadendra, . . G-7, 136
Melaleucea viridiflora........ ! 542
Melampode G-5,97
Melegueta Pepper. . . . G-13, 362
Melilot G-24, 744
Melilotus officinalis. G-24, 744
Melissa... . .. G-16, 46
Melissa Lemon Balm Herb

Capsules (Nature's Way). A6
Melissa officinalis. G-16, 46
Melon Tree............. G-19, 565
Membranous Milk Vetch 54
Mendee. G-14, 39
Mengkudu G-18, 544
Mentha aquatica. G-26, 813
Mentha arvensis piperascens .... 43
Mentha longifolia G-10, 275
Mentha piperita. G-19, 580
Mentha pulegium. . . 579
Mentha spicata. . . G-23, 709
Menyanthes trifoliata ..... G-6, 110
Mercurialis annua. : . G-17, 513
MERCURY HERB

(Mercurialis annua). G-17, 513
Mescal Buttons. G-19, 588
Metamucil

(Procter & Gamble). G-30, 612
Mexican Jalap. fice eee ee S14
MEXICAN SCAMMONY ROOT

(Ipomoea orizabensis). . .. 514
Mexican Tea G-26, 828

Mexican Wild Yam Capsules
(Nature's Herbs), . . 817

Mexican Wild Yam Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) . .. .817
Mexico See G-7, ISS
MEZEREON

(Daphne mezereum). G-17, 515
Middle Comfrey. G-6, 125
Middle Confound. . Ge, 125
Midsummer Daisy. G-I1, 306
Mignonette Tree. a G-14, 391
Milfoil G-26, 833
Milk Ipecac

(Apocynum cannabinum) . 418
Milk Ipecac

(Trillium erectum). G-4, 74

MILK THISTLE

(Silybum_ marianum). G-17, 516

Milk Thistle Capsules

(Major, Mason Vitamins,

McZand, Naturalife,

Nature's Bounty, Perrigo) ....Sie
Milk Thistle Complex

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer). G-30, 516
Milk Thistle Extract Capsules

(Humco),.... . . . 516
Milk Thistle Extract Liquid

(Rainbow Light). sie
Milk Thistle Liquid

(McZand). sie
Milk Thistle Phytosome

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .516
Milk Thistle Plus Tablets

(Rainbow Light). sie

Milk Thistle Power Capsules
(Nature's Herbs, Nature's

Resource), sie
Milk Thistle SuperComplex

Tablets (Rainbow Light). . . Sie
Milk Willow-Herb. . G-20, 620
Milkweed. . . . A418
Milkwort . . 683
Mill Mountain

(Calamintha_ nepetd) 138
Mill Mountain

(Linum catharticum). 526
Mistletoe. . G-11,291
Mitrewort G-9, 219
Moccasin Flower. 541
Monarda didyma 562
Monarda Lutea 407
Monarda punctata 407
MONEYWORT

(Lysimachia nummularia) G-17, 520
Monkey Flower

(Cypripedium calceolus) 541
Monkey Flower

(Linaria_ vulgaris) . 840
Monkey Nuts. . S75
MONKSHOOD

(Aconitum napellus). G-i8, 521
Mood Support Capsules

(Natrol)... . . . 719
Moon Daisy. .. 563
Moon Flower. 563
Moon Penny. . . . ... 563

MOUNTAIN TOBACCO /I-27

Moonflower. G-6, 110
Moor Grass, G-20, 610
Morinda citrifolia G-18,544
Moringa oleifera. 67
MORNING GLORY

(Ipomoea hederacea).... . 523
Mortification Root. . . 505
Morus nigra. Loe tiie 99
Mosquito Plant . . 579
Mother of Rye Lee 280
Mother of Thyme... . G-26, SIS
Mother's Heart. G-22, 690
MOTHERWORT

(Leonurus cardiaca). G-18,524
MOUNTAIN ASH BERRY

(Sorbus aucuparia) G-18, 525
MOUNTAIN AVENS

(Dryas octopetala) 526
Mountain Balm

(Calamintha_nepetd). 138
Mountain Balm

(Eriodictyon californicum) .... 84i
Mountain Balm

(Monarda didyma) 562
Mountain Box . .. G-25, 779
Mountain Cranberry. G-25, 779
Mountain Damson...........4 695
Mountain Everlasting G-8, 162
MOUNTAIN FLAX

(Linum catharticum). 526
Mountain Flax. 683
MOUNTAIN GRAPE

(Mahonia aquifolium) .G-18, 527
Mountain Grape. G-4, ei
Mountain Ivy. . . G-18, 528
MOUNTAIN LAUREL

(Kalmia latifolia) G-18, 528
Mountain Mint

(Calamintha_nepetd). . 138
Mountain Mint

(Monarda didyma) .. . 562
Mountain Mint

(Origanum vulgare). G-19, 559

Mountain Pink 768

Mountain Radish G-14, 408
Mountain Strawberry. . . G-23, 735
Mountain Tea... . . . 820
Mountain Tobacco. . .... Al

----- PAGE 33 -----
1-28 /MOUNTAIN-SWEET

Mountain-Sweet 541
MOUSE EAR

(Pilosella officinarum). .... . 529
Mouse Ear. be 236
Mousebane. G-IS, 52
Mousetail 215
Mouth Root 358
Mouth-Smart G-6, 121
Movana Tablets

(Pharmaton). G-30, 719
Mu Tong 189
Mucuna pruriens. 230
Mudar Bark. . . . . 141
Mudar Yercum. be 141
Muguet G-16,475
MUGWORT

(Artemisia vulgaris)... .. | G-i8, 530
Mugwort......... G-12, 320
MUIRA-PUAMA

(Ptychopetalwn olacoides) 531
MULLEIN

(Verbascum — densiflorum) .G-IS, 532
Mullein Leaf Liquid

(Frontier). . . 532
Mullein Leaves Liquid

(Nature's Way). 532
Musa paradisiaca. .. SOT
Musk Root G-23, 738
MUSKMALLOW

(Abelmoschus moschatus). . . . 533
Muskseed. . . . . 533
Musquash Root G-13, 386
Mustard. G-25, sos
Mutton Chops. 193
Mu-Xiang 227
Mygrafew Tablets

(Nature's Way). 306
Myosotis arvensis. G-12, 316
Myrica. G-22, 705
Myrica cerifera. . . . G-22, 705
Myrica gale. G-24, 745
Myristica fragrans ........ G-IS, 545
Myrobalan 772
Myroxylon balsamum, . .. . | G-24, 764
MYRRH

(Commiphora molmol) . .G-IS, 534

Myrrh Commiphora Oil
(Aura Cacia) 534

Myrrh Gum Liquid

(Nature's Answer), . . : 534
Myrrhis odorata. G-24, 743
MYRTLE

(Myrtus — communis) G-18, 536
Myrtle Flag . G-7, 138
Myrtle Flower. G-19, 561
Myrtle Sedge. G-7, 13s
Myrtus Chekan 178
Myrtus communis, . G-18, 536
Mystyldene. G-H, 291

N
Naked Ladies,........... G-9, 206
Narcissus pseudonarcissus. . . . . 243
Nard. 433
Nardostachys jatamansi. ... 2. . 5 433
Narrow-Leaved Echinacea 433
NASTURTIUM

(Tropaeolum — majus) G-18, 537
Nasturtium officinale 798
Natural Ginkgo Biloba

Tablets (Nature's Bounty) ... .342
Natural Honey & Calendula

Moisturizer for Extra Dry

Skin (Kiss My Face). 497
Nature's Root Nighttime

Tablets (Nature's Way). 783
Naughty Man's Cherries . G-4, 69
Navy Bean. G-4, 65
Neckweed. G-6, 121
NEEM

(Antelaea azadirachta) -G-IS, 539
Neem Capsules

(Nature's Way). . . . 539
Nelumbo_ nucifera. G-16, 481
NEPALESE CARDAMOM

(Amomum aromaticum). ..... } 540
Nepeta cataria. G-S, 164
Nerium oleander, : G-19, 555
Neroli G-5, 86
NERVE ROOT

(Cypripedium calceolus). . . . . 541
Netchweed. . pee AB
Nettle G-23, 729
Nettle Capsules (McZand). 729
Nettle Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way). : : 729

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Nettle Leaf Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) ... .729
Nettle Liquid (McZand) 729
Nettle Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 729
New Energy Capsules

(Advanced Nutritional), 313

NEW JERSEY TEA

(Ceanothus americanus). . . . . 541
Niando. . . . Loe 424
NIAULI

(Melaleucea viridiflora). . . . . 542
Nichol Seeds. 253
Nicotiana tabacum G-24, 762

Niggerhead 261

Night Willow-Herb, G-11, 298
NIGHT-BLOOMING CEREUS

(Selenicereus grandiflorus) . . . .543
Nightshade

(Datura stramonium). .. . | G-15, 436
Nightshade

(Solanum dulcamara) G-5,88
Nightshade

(Trillium erectum) G-4, 74
Nikkar Nuts. ..... . 253
Nim G-IS, 539
Nine Hooks. . G-15, 456
Ninety-Knot. . G-15, 448
Noah's Ark Lae ... S41
Noble Laurel. G-15, 459
NONI

(Morinda citrifolia). ... . § G-IS, 544
NORTHERN PRICKLY ASH

(Zanthoxylum americanum) .. . 545
Norway Pine. Le 714
Norway Spruce. . : : 714
Nose Bleed. . G-26, 833
NUTMEG

(Myristica fragrans). G-IS, 545
NuVeg Black Cohosh Root

Capsules (Nature's Herbs). . 92
NuVeg Eyebright Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) Lae 300

NuVeg Feverfew Leaf

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ....306
NuVeg Ginkgo Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .... 342

----- PAGE 34 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

NuVeg Red Clover
Combination Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 633
NuVeg Valerian Root

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .... 783
NUX VOMICA

(Strychnos nux vomica) G-18, 547
Nymphaea odorata G-3, 28
OAK

(Quercus robur). G-18, 549
Oak Fern G-IS, 454
OAK GALL

(Quercus infectoria)........! 550
Oak Lungs... . . .. 484
Oat Bran Chewable Tablet:

(National Vitamin). 551

Oat Bran Tablets (Major,
Mason Vitamins, Nature's

Bounty). 551
Oatmeal.................4 G-18, 551
OATS

(Avena sativa) G-IS, 531
Oatstraw Capsules (McZand) ...551
Oatstraw Liquid (McZand) 551
Ocimum basilicum. . G-4, 64
Oderwort G-S, 82
Odorless Garlic Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 327
Oenanthe aquatica G-25, 796
Oenanthe crocata. 795
Oenothera_biennis. 0-11, 298
Ofbit G-20, 612
Oil Nut..................00.. 134

Oil of Evening Primrose
Capsules (Health Products) ... 298

Oil Plant G-7, 158
OILSEED RAPE

(Brassica napus). G-19, 554
Oilseed Turnip sie
Okra. bees 533
Old Maids' Pink. G-22,701
Old Man's Beard

(Chionanthus virginicus) G12, 321

Old Man's Beard

(Usnea species). . . . . . 778
Old Man's Night Cap. G-13, 367
Old Man's Pepper. G-26, 833

Old Man's Root G-23, 711
Olea europaea. . . G-19, 556
OLEANDER

(Nerium oleander)...... § G-19, 555
Olibanum... . . . ... 319
OLIVE

(Olea europaea) G-19, 556
Olive Leaf Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). . . . . 556
Olivier. G-19, 556
One Berry. G-14, 392

One-A-Day Cholesterol
Health Tablets (Bayer) .. G-29, 327
One-A-Day Cold Season
Tablets (Bayer).
One-A-Day Garlic Capsules

G29, 261

(Bayer), . G-29, 327
One-A-Day Memory &

Concentration Tablets

(Bayer). G-29, 342

One-A-Day Menopause

Health Tablets (Bayer) .. .G-29, 92
One-A-Day Prostate Health

Capsules (Bayer). G-29, 664
One-A-Day Tension & Mood

Tablets (Bayer). G-29, 719
ONION

(Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Ononis_ spinosa. G-23, 713
Onopordum acanthium, .G-22, 678
Ophioglossum vulgatum.. 2... 269
OPIUM ANTIDOTE

(Combretum micranthum). . . . 559
Opium Poppy. . G-20, 609
Opobalsam. G-24, 764
Opossum Tree. G-23, 734

Oraches. . . . 43

Orange (Citrus aurantium) . .
Orange (Citrus sinensis) . . . G-24, 747
Orange Milkweed G-20, 598
Orange Root G-13, 355
Orange Swallow-Wort. . G-20, 598
Orchid. 657
Orchis species. 657
Ordeal Bean................, 137
OREGANO

(Origanum vulgare)... . | G-19, 559
Oregon Barberry...... G-IS,527

PALI-MARA /I-29

Oregon Grape

(Berberis vulgaris) G-4, 61
Oregon Grape

(Mahonia aquifolium) . G-18, 527
Oregon Grape Liquid

(Herb Pharm). 527
Oregon Grape Root Liquid

(Nature's Answer), : .. 527
ORIENTAL ARBORVITAE

(Thuja orientalis)... ........: 560
Oriental Ginseng 346
Oriental Sesame 688
Origano. . . G-19, 559
Origanum majorana...... | G-24, 746
Origanum vulgare. G-19, 559
Original Primrose for

Women Capsules

(Naturalife) ... . Lae 298
ORRIS

(Iris species) . G-19, 56i
Orthosiphon spicatus......... 5 A434
Oryza _ sativa. G-21, 643
Osier. G-IO, 256
Osterick. G-S, 82
OSWEGO TEA

(Monarda didyma).......... 562
Our Lady's Flannel G-18, 532
Our Lady's Keys. 231
Our Lady's Mint G-23, 709
Our Lady's Tears G-IS,475
Owler. : : : G-5, 89
Oxadoddy. . . . . 104
Oxalis acetosella. . ... 827
Ox-Eye............ G-3,5
OX-EYE DAISY

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum). 563

P

P. Vulgaris. . J... G-19,585

Pacific Kelp Tablets (Freeda) ... 122

Paddock-Pipes .. . G-14,409
Paeonia officinalis ........ G-11, 295
PAGODA TREE

(Sophora japonica), ........ 564
Pale Coneflower .. . . 261
Pale Gentian 836
Pale Mara... ..., 305
Pali-Mara, . . 305

----- PAGE 35 -----
1-30 /PALMA CHRISTI

Palma Christi G-7, 158
Palmers Aloe Vera Formula

Cream (E.T. Browne) 16
Palsy Root G-17, 503
Palsywort 231
Panama Bark. G-20, 624
Panax ginseng. 346
Panax Ginseng Capsules

(Celestial Seasonings). . 346
Papaver rhoeas. 223
Papaver somniferum...... & G-20, 609
PapaW. G-19, 565
PAPAYA

(Carica papaya). G-19, 565
Papaya Chewable Tablets

(Health Products, Marlex) ....565
Papaya Coated Tablets

(Marlex). 565
Papaya Digestive Enzyme

Tablet (Apothecary). . 565

Papaya Enzyme Double

Strength Tablet

(Rexall Consumer). 565
Papaya Enzyme Tablet

(National Vitamin, Rexall

Consumer) 565
Papaya Enzyme with Papain

Tablet (Mason Vitamins). 565
Papaya Tablets

(Freeda, Major, Rugby). 565
Paperbark Tree. G-7, 136
Papoose Root 109
Paprika G-8, ies
Paraguay Tea G-17,508
Paraguaya, 160
PAREIRA

(Chondrodendron

tomentosum). : 566
Parietaria officinalis... .......: 578
Paris quadrifolia . G-14, 392
Pariswort G-4, 74
PARSLEY

(Petroselinum crispum) . . G-19, 567
Parsley Breakstone. . 570
Parsley Fern G-24, 754

Parsley Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way). 567
Parsley Leaf Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 567

Parsley Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer). 567
Parsley Piercestone. 570
PARSLEY PIERT

(Aphanes arvensis)... ......: 570
PARSNIP

(Pastinaca sativa). G-19, 571
Parson and Clerk 46
Parthenocissus quinquefolia G-3, 26
Partridge Berry. 820
PASQUE FLOWER

(Pulsatilla pratensis)... 0... 4 572
Pasque Flower. 824
Passe Flower............... 572
Passerina 180
Passiflora incarnata...... § G-19, 573
PASSION FLOWER

(Passiflora incarnata) . . . G-19, 573
Passion Flower Capsules

(Frontier) 573
Passion Vine. . . G-19, 573
Password 231
Pastinaca sativa. G-19, 571
PATCHOULI

(Pogostemon cablin). . . G19, 575

atchouly. G-19, 575
Patience Dock. . . G-5, 82
Pattens and Clogs. a 840

aucon. 108

aullinia ... . . 376
Paullinia cupana. 376
Pausinystalia yohimbe........ 4 843

auson. : : : : 108
Pea Tree. 452

eachwood 480
Peagles 231
PEANUT

(Arachis hypogaea). ......... 575
PEAR

(Pyrus communis)... 0.0... S577
Pearl Barley. G-4, 63
Pedlar's Basket. 840
Peggie. . Lee 231
PELLITORY

(Anacyclus Pyrethrum). . .. . - S577
Pellitory of Spain. . . . S77
PELLITORY-OF-THE-WALL

(Parietaria officinalis)... .. . 578

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Pellote G-19, 588
PENNYROYAL

(Mentha pulegium)......... 579
Pennywort . . . . 840
Peony. : 0-11, 295
Pepper Bark (Drimys winteri) . . . 820

epper Bark

(Piper nigrum). G-6, 103

epper-and-Salt G-22, 690
PEPPERMINT

(Mentha piperita) G-19, 580

erdiem Fiber Therapy

(Novartis Consumer). . G-29, 612

erdiem Overnight Relief

(Novartis Consumer). G-29, 684

ereira Brava... . wi 566
PERILLA

(Perilla fructescens)........ 4 583
Perilla fructescens............4 583
PERIWINKLE

(Vinca minor). 584
Persea americana,............% 57
Persely. G-19, 567

ersian Berries. G-12, 317
Persicaria bistorta, . . G-s, 82
Persicaria hydropiper......... 4 699

ersonata G-7, 128

eru-Apple G-IS, 436
Peruvian Balsam .. G-24, 764

eruvian Bark fae . G-20, 626

eruvian Coca. 197

eruvian Mastix Tree. 139

eruvian Pepper Tree 139
PETASITES

(Petasites hybridus). .. . . | G-19, 585
Petasites hybridus. G-19, 585
Peter's Cress. ess
Petersylinge G-19, 567
Petroselinum crispum. .... § .G-19, 567
Pettigree. G-7, 132
Petty Morel . G-6, 101
Petty Morell G-23, 711
Petty Mugget. . G-IS, 455
Petty Mulleins ........... 231
Petty Whin G-23, 713
Peucedanum ostruthium...... . : 507
Peumus boldus. G-6, 112
Pewterwort. : : : G-14, 409

----- PAGE 36 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

PEYOTE

(Lophophora williamsii) . .G-19, 588
Phaseolus vulgaris. G-4, 65
Pheasant's Eye G-3,5
Philanthropium G-7, 128
Philanthropos G-3, 10
Philtron G-25, 809
Phoenix dactylifera....... | G-IO, 246
Phragmites communis......... | 639
Phyllanthus amarus. 91
Physalis alkekengi G-26, 819
Physic Reot...............0/ 104
Physostigma venenosum....... - 137
Phyto Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 469
Phytolacca americana. G20, 602
Phytolacca Berry. G-20, 602
Phytolacca Root G-20, 602
Picea species 714
iickaway Anise. 790
3ick-Pocket G-22, 690
°icrasma excelsa 622
MCRORHIZA

(Picrorhiza — kurroa) 589
°icrorhiza kurroa 589
‘ierce-Stone 658
‘igeon Berry. G-20, 602
‘igeon's Grass. G-25, 788
‘igeonweed. G-25, 788
‘ig-Rush G-15, 448
‘igweed

(Aegopodium podagraria) G-13, 361
‘igweed

(Polygonum aviculare) . G-15, 448
igwood. G-25, 791
ilewort (Amaranthus
hypochondriacus) G-3, 22
ilewort

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . 2... 128
ilewort (Ranunculus ficaria) . .. 466
iliolerial . 579
ilocarpus microphyllus . . . G-15, 425
ilosella officinarum..........: 529
ilot Plant G-9, 238
[lot Weed G-21, 646
menta. 590
Imenta racemosa 590
MENTO

(Pimenta racemosa) 590
mpernell G-19,591 I

PIMPINELLA

(Pimpinella major)... .

Pimpinella anisum.
Pimpinella major.
Pin Heads.
Pinang

Pine Oils.

PINEAPPLE

(Ananas — comosus)

Piney
Pink Peppercorns . .

PINK ROOT

(Spigelia marilandica). .

Pink Root
Pinto Bean

PINUS BARK

(Tsuga canadensis)... . .

Pinus species
Piper.

Piper betle

Piper cubeba
Piper elongatum
Piper methysticum.
Piper nigrum
Pipperidge

PIPSISSEWA

(Chimaphila umbellata).

Piscidia piscipula.......

Pistacia lentiscus

PITCHER PLANT

(Sarracenia purpurea) .. .

Pix Liquida
Plantago afra

Plantago lanceolata... . .

Plantago ovata

PLANTAIN

(Musa paradisiaca). ... .

Plantain (Plantago afra) .. .

Plantain
(Plantago lanceolata)
Platycladus Orientalis.

Platycodon grandiflorum. . .

PLEURISY ROOT
(Asclepias tuberosa).

PLUMBAGO
(Plumbago —_zeylanica)

Plumbago zeylanica

. G19, 591

G-3, 35
G-19, 591
G-12, 331
G-4, 38

G-22, 674

831
G-4, 65

G19, 594

G-22, 674
G-6, 103
G-4, 74
235
509
G-15, 443
G-6, 103
G-4, 6

595

G20, 596

G-22, 674
G-20, eie

_ G-ll, 278

612

_ Gl, 278

560

.G-20, 598

599
599

POOLROOT/I-31

Plumrocks.

Pocan.

ockwood
Podophyllum peltatum.
oet's Jasmine
Pogostemon cablin
ohl.

oison Ash

oison Black Cherry.
oison Flag

POISON IVY
(Rhus toxicodendron). . .

oison Lettuce
Poison Nut
Poison Oak
Poison Parsley.
Poison Root
Poison Snakeweed
Poison Tobacco.
Poison Vine.
oisonberry.

POISONOUS BUTTERCUP
(Ranunculus sceleratus)
oisonous Gum-Thistle

POKE
(Phytolacca americana)

e Berry.
e Root
eweed

ar Plant

fe)
fe)
fe)
fe)

(Rosmarinus officinalis)
Polar Plant

(Silphium laciniatum)
Polar Plant

(Silphium perfoliatum)

Polecatweed
Polemonium caeruleum
Polemonium reptans

POLEY

(Teucrium polium)..... .

Polygala amara
Polygala senega
Polygonatum multiflorum

POMEGRANATE

(Punica granatum).... .

PONTIAN RHODODENDRON
(Rhododendron ponticum)

PoolrOOt

231
G-20, 602
375
GAT, 510
G-15, 432
G-19, 575
494

G-12, 321
G-4, 69
G-19, 56i

G20, 601
716

G20, 602

G-20, 602
G-20, 602
G-20, 602

G21, 645

. G21, 646

_G-9, 238

696

_ GS, 427

G-3,3

85
683
G22, 703

Polygonum aviculare... . . § G-IS, 448

. G20, 605

- 606
296

----- PAGE 37 -----
1-32 /POOR MAN'S PARMACETTIE

Poor Man's Parmacettie ... G-22, 690
Poor Man's Treacle G-12, 327
Poor Man's Weatherglass . G-22, 668
POPLAR

(Populus species) G-20, 607
POPPYSEED

(Papaver _ somniferum) G-20, 609
Populus species. G-20, 607
Portland Arrowroot 46
Pot... eee G-17, 500
Pot Barley. . Le : G-4, 63
POTENTILLA

(Potentilla anserina) G-20, 610
Potentilla anserina....... | G-20, 610
Potentilla erecta G-8, 192
Potentilla_reptans. G-11, 289
Poverty Weed. Le ... 563
Power Herb Korean Ginseng

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .346
Prairie Dock . G-9, 238
Prairie Grub. . ..., 790
Prayer Beads 435
Premium Blend Korean

Ginseng Capsules

(Futurebiotics). 346
Premium Blend Saw Palmetto

Capsules (Futurebiotics). . 664
Premium Cayenne Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). . Lae 165
Premium Fenugreek Seed

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .304
Premium Feverfew Leaf

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .306
PREMORSE

(Scabiosa succisa)...... § G-20, 612
Premorse Scaboius. G-20, 612
Pretty Betsy. . ... G-21, 639
Prick Madam. . Lae .. 215
Prickly Ash. eee 545
Prickly Ash Autumn-

Harvested Liquid

(Health from the Sun). . 545
Prickly Box ,....... bee 487
Prickly Lettuce 453
Prickwood. G-25, 791
Prideweed. G-7, 144
Priest's Crown . G-9, 245
Primrose ............. 231

Primrose Oil Capsules
(Green Turtle Bay)... . 298

Primula veris, Le 2. 231
Prince's Feather G-3, 22
Prince's Feathers... . G-20, 610
Prince's Pine, an . 595
Proactive Saw Palmetto

Capsules (Nature's Way). 664
Promensil Tablets

(Novogen). G-29, 633
Prunella vulgaris. G-22, 681
Prunus dulcis... .............. 15
Prunus laurocerasus. G-8,179
Prunus serotina. 810
Prunus spinosa G-22, 697
Psyllion. G-20, 616
Psyllios, G-20, 616
PSYLLIUM

(Plantago ovata). 612

Psyllium Husk Bulk-Forming
Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Way). Le 612
Psyllium Husk Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 612
Psyllium Husks Capsules

(Yerba Prima) ..... 612

PSYLLIUM SEED
(Plantago afra). G-20, 616
Psyllium Seed Bulk-Forming

Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Way). 612
Ptelea trifoliata .. . 790
Pterocarpus santalinus........ | 635
Ptychopetalum olacoides. ..... ! 531
Public House Plant A8
Pudding Grass. 579
Pudding Pipe Tree G-13, 354
PUFF BALL

(Lycoperdon species). ....... | 618
Pukeweed. G-16,479
Pulegium 579
Pulmonaria_ officinalis, .G-16, 485
Pulsatilla. . 2... 572
Pulsatilla pratensis... ........! 572
Pumilio Pine G-22, 674
PUMPKIN

(Cucurbita pepo). G-20, 618
Punica granatum. G-20, 605
Purging Cassia G-13, 354
Purging Flax. . . a 526
Purple Clover. G-21, 633
Purple Coneflower. . . . 261

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PURPLE GROMWELL

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon). 619
PURPLE LOOSESTRIFE

(Lythrum salicaria)... . . | G-20, 620
Purple Medic G-3, 12
Purple Medick...........: G-3, 12
Purple Medicle. G-3, 12
Purple Mulberry. 99
Purple Side-Saddle Flower G-20, 596
Purple Turk's Cap Lily. soe
Purple Willow-Herb. . G-20, 620
Purshiana Bark. . G-7, 153
Pussywillow. G-25, 807
Putcha-Pat. . . G-19, 575
Pyrethre 577
PYRETHRUM

(Chrysanthemum

cinerariifolium) 621
Pyrethrum. 577
Pyrola rotundifolia... 0.00.00. | 647
Pyrus communis. 577

Q

Quack Grass. G-25, 771

Quaker..... Loe Loe 46
. . G-22, 678

Quaker Bonnet. .
Quaker Button's G-18, 547
Quaking Aspen G-20, 607

Quanterra Emotional Balance

(Warner-Lambert). G-30, 719
Quanterra Mental Sharpness

Tablets

(Warner-Lambert). G-30, 342
Quanterra Prostate

(Warner-Lambert). G-30, 664
Quanterra Sleep

(Warner-Lambert). G-30, 461
Quanterra Stomach Comfort

(Warner-Lambert). G-30, 339
QUASSIA

(Picrasma excelsa)......... 5 622
Quassia G-3, 23
Quassia amara. G-3, 23
Quassia Wood G-3, 23
QUEBRACHO

(Aspidosperma quebracho-

bianco). 623
Queen Ann's-Lace. G-25, 809

----- PAGE 38 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX
Queen of the Meadow. G-17, 511
Queen's Delight........ 729
Quercus infectoria...... 0.0.06 s 550
Quercus Marina..... . 106
Quercus robur. . . G-18, 549
Quickgrass. G-25, 771
Quick-in-the-Hand. . . . 436
Quillai. . G-20, 624
QUILLAJA

(Quillaja saponaria). . . . | G-20, 624
Quillaja Bark G-20, 624
Quillaja saponaria....... § G-20, 624
QUINCE

(Cydonia oblongata) . 625
QUININE

(Cinchona pubescens) G-20, 626
Quinsy Berries G-5, 94
Quitch Grass. G-25, 771
Rabbits, Lene 840
Raccoon Berry. .G-17, 510
RADISH

(Raphanus sativus)... . . | G-20, 628
Rag Paper..............4 G-IS, 532
Ragged Cup. G-9, 238
Ragweed... ... G-20, 629
RAGWORT

(Senecio jacobaea). . . . .G-20, 629
Ragwort ... . fee .. 354
Rainbow Weed. G-20, 620
Ramp. Loe . . ., 46
Ramsons. . . . 66
Ramsted. . . . . 840
Ramsthorn G-6, 123
Ranunculus acris. 133
Ranunculus bulbosus..........- 128
Ranunculus ficaria....... 00.45 466
Ranunculus sceleratus. . . . G-20, eoi
Rape. G-19, 554
Rape Seed G-19, 554
Raphanus raphanistrum . G26, 814
Raphanus sativus. G-20, 628
RASPBERRY

(Rubus idaeus) G-21, 630
Rati... . . . 435
Rattle Pouches. G-22, 690

Rattle Snake Weed . 261

Rattlebush G-26, 812
Rattleroot.......... G-S, 92
Rattlesnake Root

(Polygala senega)..........5 683
Rattlesnake Root

(Trillium erectum). G-4, 74
Rattlesnake Violet 24
Rattleweed G-S, 92
RAUWOLFIA

(Rauwolfia serpentina). ..... | 631
Rauwolfia serpentina........ 63i
Ray-Grass. G-24, 756
Red Bay. 490
Red Bilberry. G-3, 20
RED BRYONY

(Bryonia cretica)...........5 632
Red Chickweed. G-22, 668
RED CLOVER

(Trifolium pratense). .G-21, 633

Red Clover Blossom
Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . .633
Red Clover Herb Capsules

(Frontier)... . . 633
Red Clover Herbal Capsules

(Apothecary), . . . . . 633
Red Clover Liquid (McZand) . .. 633
Red Cockscomb G-3, 22
Red Cole. . G-14, 408
Red Couchgrass 336
RED CURRANT

(Ribes rubrum). . . G-21, 634
Red Elder. . . G-S, 96
Red Elm. . . .. 697
Red Ginseng 636
Red Gum

(Eucalyptus globulus) . .G-1l, 283
Red Gum

(Liquidambar orientalis) G23, 734
Red Legs. G-S, 82
RED MAPLE

(Acer rubrum). G-21, 635
Red Morocco. G-3,5
Red Pepper. . G-8, ies
Red Pimpernel .. . G-22, 668
Red Poppy......... . 223
Red Raspberry. . G-21, eso
Red Raspberry Leaves

Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Way). 630

RHODODENDRON PONTICUM / 1-33

Red Raspberry Leaves
Glycerine Extract Liquid

(Nature's Way). 630
Red Raspberry Liquid

(McZand). an . . 630
Red Robin G-15, 448
Red Root

(Ceanothus americanus)... . . ! 541
Red Root

(Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . 108
Red Rot . . . . ... 740
RED SANDALWOOD

(Pterocarpus santalinus), ... . § 635
Red Sanderswood. .. 635
Red Saunders. 635
Red Sedge. 336
Red Sorrel G-14, 394
Red Thyme Oil (Aura Cacia) .. .76i
Red Weed... . G-20, 602
Red Wine Extract Capsules

(Sundown), Le : . 362
Redberry Leaves. . G-25, 779
Red-Ink Plant G-20, 602
RED-ROOTED SAGE

(Salvia miltiorrhiza). .. 1... . | 636
Red-Rooted Salvia 636
RED-SPUR VALERIAN

(Centranthus ruber)... .. | G-21, 639
Reed... .. 639
REED HERB

(Phragmites communis). . . . . 639
REHMANNIA

(Rehmannia glutinosa). ..... J 640
Rehmannia glutinosa.......... 5 640
Remifemin Tablets

(PhytoPharmica) G-30, 92
Reseda G-14, 391
Rest-Harrow. . G-23, 713
Rhamnus_catharticus. G-6, 123
Rhamnus frangula G-12, 317
Rhamnus purshiana. . G-7, 153
Rhatania. 64i
RHATANY

(Krameria triandra). .. 2... | 641
Rheum palmatum. . . . G-8, 185
Rheumatism Root . G-26, S817
Rheumatism Weed 595
Rhododendron ferrugineum. . . . eso
Rhododendron ponticum, ...... J eoe

----- PAGE 39 -----
1-34/RHUBARB

Rhubarb................! G-8, ISS
Rhus aromatica,.............- 748
Rhus toxicodendron...........4 600
Ribes nigrum G-S, 94
Ribes rubrum... eS G-21, 634
Ribgrass............00..5 G-11, 278
Ribwort..............00-) G-11, 278
RICE

(Oryza — sativa) G-21, 643
Richleaf.................4 G-23, 733
Richweed

(Cimicifuga racemosa) .G-5, 92
Richweed

(Collinsonia canadensis) G-23, 733
Ricinus communis. .: G-7, 158
Ringworm Powder............. 352
Ripplegrass..............4 G-11, 278
Robbia .................5 G-16, 490
Robin-Run-in-the-Grass........ 193
Robin-Run-in-the-Hedge ...... 372
Rock Brake. G-IS, 454
Rock Fern. ..................4 A91
Rock of Polypody........ 4 G-15, 454
Rock Parsley. ... G-19,567
Rock-Rose.............-4 G-12, 321

Rockwrack..................
Roman Chamomile. .
Roman Laurel ..........

Roman Pellitory..............:
Rosa canina.

ROSE

(Rosa _ centifolia) 644
Rose Apple...............0004 A429
Rose Bay Willow Herb ... G-26, 818
Rose Elder...............4 G-5, 96
Rose Hip G-I0, 254
Rose Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia)... .... | G-IS, 528
Rose Laurel.

(Nerium oleander)...... | G-19, 555
Rose Mallow. G-14, 398
Rose Pink ..............4 G8, 174
Rose Willow G-IO, 256
Rose-a-Rubie..............4 G-3,5
Rosebay....................5 eso
Rose-Colored Silkweed ... G-23, 743
Roselle G-14, 394
ROSEMARY

(Rosmarinus officinalis) G21, 645

Rosemary Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer)..........4 645
Rosenoble...............4 G-11, 311
Rosin Weed..........0.00005 379
ROSINWEED

(Silphium _ laciniatum) G-21, 646
Rosinweed. G-9, 238
Rosmarinus officinalis. .G-21, 645
Rottlera Tinctoria...........5 A42

ROUND-LEAFED WINTERGREEN

(Pyrola rotundifolia) .... 647
Round-Leaved Hepatica........ 26
Rowan Tree.............) G-18, 525

Royal Brittany Evening
Primrose Oil Capsules

(Nature's Bounty)........... 298
Royal Jasmine. .......... 4 G-15, 432
Rubia tinctorum..........4 G-16, 490
Rubus fruticosus. . G-6, 104
Rubus idaeus............5 G-21, 630
Rubywood..............2.0004 635
Rudbeckia ...... 00.0.0... .000. 261
Ruddes... 2... ...00.00..4 G-17, 497
RUE

(Ruta graveolens), .... . | G-21, 648
Rum Cherry.................5 810
Rumex acetosa...............7 705
Rumex aquaticus.............! 795
Rumex crispus......0.-....0005 835
Run-by-the-Ground ..........4 579
Running Jenny........... 4 G-17, 520
RUPTUREWORT

(Herniaria glabra)... ... | .G-21, eso
Ruscus aculeatus......... 5 G-7, 132
Russian Belladonna .......... 4 671
RUST-RED RHODODENDRON

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum),.. 6.0.0.0. 650
Ruta graveolens, . : . G-21, 648
Rutland Beauty. G-i3, 367
Sabal...... G-21, 664
Sabline Rouge................ 39
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. . . . . dA18
Sacred Bark,............4 G-7, 153
Sacred Herb.................5 841
Sacred Mushroom........ | G-19, 588

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SAFFLOWER

(Carthamus tinctorius). . . .. . J 652
SAFFRON

(Crocus sativus). ....... | G-21, 653
Sagackhomi.............! G25, 779
SAGE

(Salvia officinalis)... .... | G-21, 655
Sage of Bethlehem ...... J G-23, 709
Sagrada Bark G-7, 153
Sahlep................0.2220.0) 657
SALEP

(Orchis species). ...........4 657
Salicaire 2.2... G-20, 620
Salicin Willow. G-25, 807
Salix species... ..........4 G-25, 807
Sallow Thorn...........4
SaloOp............
Salsify.

Salt-Rheum Weed
Salvia miltiorrhiza............ 4

Salvia officinalis... 0.0... 4 G-21, 655
Salvia triloba... 2.2.00. 367
Sambucus ebulus.........00..0.4 259
Sambucus nigra,......... 4 G-11, 287
SAMPHIRE

(Crithum maritimum), ...... 4 658
Sampier............00.000000 658
Sampson Root...............: 261
Sand Plantain. aan . 612
Sand Sedge.................. 336
SANDALWOOD

(Santalum album)... ...... 5 659
SANDARAC

(Tetraclinis articulata). . ... . § eeo
Sandarac Gum Tree.......... J 660
Sandberry. G-25, 779
Sanderswood,...............4 659
Sandwort.......... 0.0.0.0 cee 39
Sanguinaria................... 108
Sanguinaria canadensis... 1... . 108
Sanguinary

(Achillea millefolium) -G-26, 833
Sanguinary

(Capsella bursa-pastoris) _G-22, 690
Sanguis Draconis.............. 257
Sanguisorba officinalis G-13, 366
Sanicle................0... 296
Sanicula europaea............% 296
Santalum album..............5 659

----- PAGE 40 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Santolina

chamaecyparissias. ..... | G-i6, 460
Santonica.................., 827
Saponaria officinalis... ... § G-22, 701
Sappan 635
Sardian Nut an 708
Sarracenia purpurea... ... § G-20, 596
SARSAPARILLA

(Smilax species) G-21, 661
Sarsaparilla Capsules (ADH) ... . 661
Sarsaparilla Root Capsules

(Apothecary, Frontier) . 66i
SASSAFRAS

(Sassafras albidum). .... § G-21, 662
Sassafras albidum. G-21, 662
Sassafrax. . G-21, 662
Satan's Apple G-17, 495
Satin Flower. iso
Satureja_hortensis. G-23, 739
Satyrion. 657
Saussurea Costus. 227
Saussurea_ costus. 227
Savin. G-21, 663
SAVIN TOPS

(Juniperus sabina). ..... | G-21, 663
Savine G-21, 663
Savory. G-23, 739
SAW PALMETTO

(Serenoa repens) G-21, 664
Saw Palmetto Berries

Capsules (Frontier,

Futurebiotics, Nature's

Herbs, Nature's Way). 664
Saw Palmetto Berries Liquid

(Nature's Answer). 664

Saw Palmetto Capsules
(ADH, Bergen Brunswig,
Cardinal, Celestial
Seasonings, Herbal Harvest,
Major, Mason Vitamins,
McZand, National Vitamin,
Natrol, Naturalife, Nature's
Bounty, Nature's Resource,
PD-Rx, Rexall Consumer,

Zenith Goldline), . . . . 664
Saw Palmetto Extract
Capsules (Humco). 664

Saw Palmetto Liquid
(McZand) 664

Saw Palmetto Power
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .664
Saw Palmetto Standardized

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer). G-30, 664
Saxifrage. G-19, 591
Saxifrax. G-21, 662
Scabiosa succisa G-20, 612
Scabish G-H, 298
Scabwort G-10, 266
Scaldweed G-10, 254
Scaly Dragon's Claw. 220
Scarlet Berry. G-S, 88
Scarlet Monarda. 562
SCARLET PIMPERNEL

(Anagallis arvensis). . . . . G-22, 668
Schinus molle. 139
Schinus terebinthifolius... 0... 117
SCHISANDRA

(Schisandra chinensis)... . . . 669
Schisandra chinensis.......... | 669
Schisandra sphenanthera. .... . § 464
Schloss Tea : : : 505
Scilla... . cc. eee eee G-23, 717
Scoke G-20, 602
Scolopendrium vulgare... 0... 38i
Scoparium. G-22, 672
Scopola 671i
SCOPOLIA

(Scopolia carniolica).... 1... | 67i
Scopolia carniolica...........4 671
Scotch Barley. . G-4,63
SCOTCH BROOM

(Cytisus scoparius). ... . | G-22, 672
Scotch Fir G-22, 674
SCOTCH PINE

(Pinus species) G-22, 674
Scotch Quelch G-25,771
SCOTCH THISTLE

(Onopordum acanthium) G22, 678
Scouring Rush G-14, 409
Scratweed. 193
Scrofula Plant, . G-H,311
Scrophularia nodosa... ... | G-11, 311
Scrubby Grass G-22, 679
Scubby Trefoil. Lee 790
SCULLCAP

(Scutellaria lateriflora) G22, 678

SENOKOT GRANULES /1-35

SCURVY GRASS

(Cochlearia officinalis) . . .G-22, 679
Scutellaria lateriflora.... . § G-22, 678
SEA BUCKTHORN

(Hippophae rhamnoides)  .G-22, 680
Sea Fennel . be 658
Sea Holly. G-H, 282
Sea Holme . G-II, 282
Sea Hulver. . G-II, 282
Sea Kelp.... . ... 122
Sea Parsley. G-16, 482
Sea Sedge. 336
Sea Wormwood . . 827
Sealroot G-22, 703
Sealwort . G-22, 703
Seawrack 106
Sedum acre. be 215
Segg .. . G-19, 561
Selenicereus grandiflorus. .... . : 543
SELF-HEAL

(Prunella vulgaris)... . . § .G-22, 681
Self-Heal 296
Sempervivum tectorum. .. . § G-14, 411
SENBURI

(Swertia japonica). .........45 682
Seneca 683
SENECA SNAKEROOT

(Polygala senega)..........5 683
Senecio aureus. .. : . 354
Senecio bicolor. 258
Senecio jacobaea G-20, 629
Senecio nemorensis............ 21
Senecio vulgaris. 374
Senega 683
Senega Snakeroot. 683
Seneka 683
Sengreen. G-14,411
Senior Ginkgo Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ....342
SENNA

(Cassia senna). . G-22, 684
Senna Extract Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 684
Senna Leaf Capsules

(Frontier) 684
Senokot Childrens' Syrup

(Purdue Frederick). G-30, 684
Senokot Granules

(Purdue Frederick). . . G-30, 684

----- PAGE 41 -----
1-36 /SENOKOT TABLETS

Senokot Tablets

(Purdue Frederick)...... J G-30, 684
Senokot X (Purdue Frederick) . . 684
Senokot Xtra

(Purdue Frederick)..........4 684
Septfoil G-8, 192
Serenoa repens..........4 G-21, 664
Serpentaria.............4 G-17, 520
Serpent's Tongue

(Erythronium americanum). 24
Serpent's Tongue

(Ophioglossum vulgatum). . . . 269
Serpyllum...............4 G-26, 815
Service Treen... 22.0... eee 704
SESAME

(Sesamum orientale)... ..... 4 688
Sesamum orientale... ........4 688
Setewale...............4 G-25, 783
SetWall ......00...0.0..5 G-25, 783
Seven Barks.............4 G-14, 413
Shamrock.............-.....4 827
Shan-Zhu-Yu................. 51
Shave Grass.............4 G-14, 409
Shavetail Grass... G-14, 409
Sheep Laurel ...........: G-18, 528
Sheep Sorrel, Whole

Flowering Plant Liquid

(Herb Pharm)..............- 705
Sheep-Lice.............02000¢ A10
SheggS.. 0.0.0.0... dl G-19, 561
Shellflower. G-4, 59
Shepherd's Barometer... . | G-22, 668
Shepherd's Club.........: G-18, 532
Shepherd's Heart........ 4 G-22, 690
Shepherd's Knapperty. . G-S, 192
Shepherd's Knot G-8, 192
Shepherd's Needle....... J G-24, 743
SHEPHERD'S PURSE

(Capsella bursa-pastoris) .G-22, 690
Shepherd's Scrip.........: G-22, 690
Shepherd's Sprout.......) G-22, 690
Shepherd's Staffi........: G-18, 532
Shepherd's Thyme........ ¢ G-26, 815
SHORT BUCHU

(Barosma _ betulina) 691
SIAM BENZOIN

(Styrax _ tonkinesis) 692

SIBERIAN GINSENG
(Eleutherococcus
SCNtICOSUS), We ee dl 693

Siberian Ginseng Capsules

(Nature's Way) ........... 346
Siberian Ginseng Power Herb

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .346
Siberian Ginseng Root

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .346
Siberian Ginseng Tablets

(Herbal Harvest),.......... 346
Siberian Tea)... 2. ..0.2..000.. 268
Sicklewort (Ajuga reptans) . G-6, 125
Sicklewort

(Prunella vulgaris)... .. 5 G-22, 681
Side-Saddle Plant........ 4 G-20, 596
Silky Cornel ............: G-10, 256
Silphium laciniatum..... . | G-21, 646
Silphium perfoliatum. . G-9,238
Silver Bells. G-5, 96
Silver Leafi.... eee eee 729
Silverweed

(Impatiens biflora).......... ¢ 436
Silverwee

(Potentilla anserina). . . . G20, 610
Silverweed Herb.............4 526
Silybum marianum........ § G-17, 516
Silymarin Capsules (Twinlab) .. . 516
Silymarin Milk Thistle

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) .. 516

SIMARUBA

(Simaruba — amara) 695
Simaruba amara............-45 695
Simmondsia chines IS... G-15, 438
Simpler's Joy............4 G-25, 788
Simson ..............0.00..
Sinapis alba.
Singer's Plant............... 384
Sisymbrium officinale. ......... 384
Sium sisarum............4 G-22, 696
Skewerwood............./ G25, 791
SKIRRET

(Sium — sisarum) G-22, 696
Skoke ...... ec. eee eed G-20, 602
Skullcap Herb Capsules

(Frontier)... 0.00... c0 eee eed 678
SKUNK CABBAGE

(Symplocarpus foetidus). . . . . 696
Skunkweed............00.0004 696
Slave Wood.............2...4 695
Slipper Root :.541
Slipperweed...............004 A436

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SLIPPERY ELM

(Ulmus rubra)... ee 697
Slippery Elm Bark Capsules

(Frontier)... ... 0.000.000 ed 697
Slippery Root......... G-9, 212
SLOE

(Prunus spinosa). ...... 5 G-22, 697
Slough-Heal.............4 G-22, 681
Small Hemlock ......... 4 G-12, 316
Smallage. : G-8,172
Smallpox Plant..........4 G-20, 596
Smallwort..................05 A466
SMARTWEED

(Persicaria hydropiper). . . . . 699
Smell Fox........0.2.00000004 824
Smilax species... .. 1.4.0.5 G-21, 661
Smooth Lawsonia. . . G-14, 391

Smooth Strophanthus.........? 736

(Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . 108
Snakebite (Trillium erectum) .G-4, 74
Snakehead ... G-4, 59
Snakeroot...............-....05 A8
Snakeweed, G-5, 82
Snap Bean G-4, 65
Snapdragon..................5 840
Snapping Hazel..........4 G-26, 821
SNEEZEWORT

(Achillea ptarmica).........° 700
Snow Rose... ..... 0.0. c eee eed eso
Snowball Tree. G-S, 96
SNOWDROP

(Galanthus nivalis)... ......° 700
Snowdrop Tree.......... 4 G-12, 321
Snowflower.............04 G-12, 321
Soap Bark...............4 G-20, 624
Soap Root. ... G22, 701
Soap Tree........22...0.) G-20, 624
Soapwood...............-/ G-22, 701
SOAPWORT

(Saponaria officinalis) . . .G-22, 701
Solanum dulcamara. G-5, 88
Solanum nigrum. G-6, 101
Soldiers.................4 G-20, 620
Soldier's Herb...........4 G-11, 278

----- PAGE 42 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Soldier's Woundwort..... | G-26, 833
Solidago canadensis. . : . 145
Solidago virgaurea. 0-11, 289
SOLOMON'S SEAL

(Polygonatum

multiflorum)...........5 G-22, 703
Solsequia. » ove ee G17, 503
Somali Tea.................4 A47
Sophora japonica,..........4. 564
SORB APPLE

(Sorbus domestica) 704
Sorb Apple............04 G-18, 525
Sorbus aucuparia........ 4 G-18,525
Sorbus domestica.............. 704
Sorbus torminalis............5 814
Sorghum. ...........2...0.00. 121
Sorghum vulgare... ........... 121
SORREL

(Rumex acetosa)............! 705
Sour Trefoih................04 827
South Indian Squill .......... 4 A21
SOUTHERN BAYBERRY

(Myrica cerifera)....... 5 G-22, 705
SOUTHERN TSANGSHU

(Atractylodes lancea). 706
Southernwood Root........... isi
Sow Berry. . bee G-4, 61
Sowbread... 0.0.0.0... 0c eee 240
SOYBEAN

(Glycine soja)... .....4.4 G-22, 707
Spanish Bugloss. . . G-3, 13
Spanish Camomile............4 577
Spanish Chestnut.......... G-14, 403
Spanish Saffron.......... G-21, 653
SPANISH-CHESTNUT

(Castanea sativa) 708
Sparrow Grass. G-4, 52
Sparrow Tongue.........4 G-15, 448
SPEARMINT

(Mentha spicata). ...... 5 G-23, 709
Speckled Jewels..............: 436
SPEEDWELL

(Veronica officinalis) G-23, 710
Speedwell G-6, 121
Spergularia rubra.............-. 39
Spiceberry............000000048 820

Spigelia anthelmia. . ... 831

ST. JOHN'S WORT PREFERRED CAPSULES

Spigelia marilandica. 594
Spignet ................) G-23, 711
Spiked... 2... ..0.200005 G-20, 620
Spiked Loosestrife....... 4 G-20, 620
SPIKENARD

(Aralia racemosa). G-23, 711
Spikenard 433
SPINACH

(Spinacia oleracea) G-23, 712
Spinacia oleracea........ 5 G-23, 712
Spindle Tree.............: G-25, 791
SPINY REST HARROW

(Ononis spinosa). ...... 5 G-23, 713
Spire Mint.............) G-23, 709
Spireaea Ulmaria......... | G-17, 511

Spoonwood

(Kalmia latifolia) G-18,528
Spoonwood

(Mallotus philippinensis) 442
Spoonwort..............4 G-22, 679
Spotted Alder............4 G-26, 821
Spotted Corobane........ | G-13, 386
Spotted Cranesbill ............ 233
Spotted Crowbane........ | G-13, 386
Spotted Geranium............. 233
Spotted Hemlock. . . .G-13, 386
Spotted Monarda............4 A07
Spotted Parsley..........4 G-13, 386
Spotted Thistle ........ G-6, 107
Spotted Touch-Me-Not........ ¥ 436
SPRUCE

(Picea species).............2 714
Spruce Fir...................! 714
SPURGE

(Euphorbia _resinifera) 716
Spurge Flax.............: G-17, 515
Spurge Laurel ..........: G-17, 515
Spurge Olive ...........5 G-17, 515
Spurred Rye.............00005 280
Squaw Balm.................4 579
Squaw Root..............4 G-S, 92
Squaw Weed

(Senecio aureus)... . 0.4.04 354
Squaw Weed

(Senecio nemorensis). 21
Squawmint Tickweed.........4 579
Squawroot...... 0. cee eee eee 109

1-37

SQUILL

(Urginea maritima) G-23, 717
Squinancy Berries. G-5, 94
Squirrel Corn

(Corydalis cava)... ........ 4 226
Squirrel Corn

(Dicentra cucullaria) 715
St. Anthony's Turnip.......... 128
St. Barbara's Hedge Mustard . . .384
St. Benedict Thistle G-6, 107
St. James' Weed ........ 4 G-22, 690
St. James Wort..........4 G-20, 629
St. James's Tea..........2..5 451
St. John's Bread. G-7, 151
St. John's Herb.......... 5 G-13, 388
St. John's Plant ......... 4 G-18, 530
St. John's Power 0.3%

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... .719
St. John's Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)............ 719
St. John's Power Time

Release Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)...........- 719
ST. JOHN'S WORT

(Hypericum perforatum) G-23, 719
St. John's Wort Capsules

(Bergen Brunswig,

Breckenridge, Celestial

Seasonings, Futurebiotics,

Herbal Harvest, Key Co.,

Mason Vitamins,

Naturalife, Nature's

Resource, Nature's Way,

PNC, Rexall Managed

Care, Sundown, Zenith

Goldline). .................2 719
St. John's Wort Capsules

(Rexall Consumer)...... 4 G-30, 719
St. John's Wort Extract

Capsules

(Humco, National Vitamin) ... 719
St. John's Wort Herb

Capsules (Frontier). ......... 719
St. John's Wort Herb Liquid
(Nature's Way)............- 719

St. John's Wort Liquid

(Nature's Answer,

Pharmaceutical Labs, PNC) ... 719
St. John's Wort Preferred

Capsules (Reese)...........? 719

----- PAGE 43 -----
1-38 /ST. JOHN'S WORT TABLETS

St. John's Wort Tablets
(Contract Pharmacal,
Natrol, Nature Made, PD-

Rx, Vitaline), .. a Le. 719
St. John's Wort Transdermal

Patch (Zayco), Lee 719
St. Josephwort G-4, 64
St. Mary's Seal . G22, 703
Stachys palustris. 832
Staff Vine. .. G-5, 88
Stagbush. G-5,96
Staggerweed

{Delphinium consolida) . . G-15, 458
Staggerweed

{Dicentra cucullaria)......... 715
Staggerwort ... G20, 629
Stags Horn. 196
Stammerwort. G-20, 629
Standardized Bilberry Extract

Capsules

(Nature's Resource) ......... 75

Standardized Cat's Claw

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). 160
Standardized Chamomile

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). Leen 331
Standardized Feverfew

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). . . . 306
Standardized Garlic Capsules
(Nature's Resource) 327

Standardized Ginseng, Korean

White Capsules

(Nature's Resource)......... 346
Standardized Green Tea

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). 369
Standardized Hawthorn

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way) ........ 271
Standardized Horsechestnut

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way),.... 403
Standardized Licorice

Capsules

(Nature's Resource). 469

Standardized Saw Palmetto
ExtractCap Capsules
(Nature's Way). . . 664
Standardized Siberian
Ginseng Root Capsules
(Nature's Way)............. 346

Standardized Uva Ursi
Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). 7719
Standardized Valerian

Capsules

(Nature's Resource). 783

Standardized White Willow
Bark Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way)... . ... 807
STAR ANISE

(Illicium verum). G-23, 725
Star Grass. 11
Star of the Earth. G-4, 71
Starbloom,..... wee 594
Starchwort, . . a a . 46
Starweed 180
Starwort (Aletris farinosa)...... . 11
Starwort {Stellaria media) iso
Starwort {Veratrum luteum) 301
Staunchweed. .. G-26, 833
Staunchwort, G-9, 214
Stave Wood. 695
STAVESACRE

(Delphinium staphisagria) 726
Stayplough G-23, 713
Stellaria. . G-15, 456
Stellaria media iso
Stemless Carlina Root... .. 151
Sterretjie. 7
STEVIA

(Stevia rebaudiana) 727
Stevia rebaudiana 727
Stick-a-Back. . . 193
Sticklewort. G-3, 10
Stickwort

(Agrimonia eupatoria) G-3, 10
Stickwort (Oxalis acetosella) .... 827

Stigmata Maydis. 224
STILLINGIA

(Stillingia_ sylvatica) 729
Stillingia sylvatica .. . 729

STINGING NETTLE

(Urtica dioica) G-23, 729
Stingless Nettle G-25, 806
Stinking Arrach....... 0... A3
Stinking Goosefoot .... 0 .....# A3
Stinking Motherwort ...  ..... ¥ 43
Stinking Nanny. G-20, 629
Stinking Nightshade... . . G-14, 389

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Stinking Prairie Bush 790
Stinking Tommy. G-23, 713
Stinkweed. G-IS, 436
Stinkwort. G-IS, 436
Stitchwort. iso
Stockholm Tar. G-22, 674
STONE ROOT

(Collinsonia canadensis) . G-23, 733
STORAX

(Liquidambar orientalis) . G23, 734
Storkbill G-14, 393
Storksbill 2 ....0..........,, 233
Stramonium. . G-IS, 436
Strangle Tare. . G-IO, 254
Straw. G-IS, 551
STRAWBERRY

(Fragaria vesca) G-23, 735
Strawberry Tomato. G-26, 819
String Bean G-4, 65
String of Sovereigns. G-17, 520
Stringy Bark Tree. . G-IL, 283
Striped Alder. G-26, 821
Strong-Scented Lettuce. 453
STROPHANTHUS

(Strophanthus kombe)....... 736
Strophanthus. 736
STROPHANTHUS GRATUS

(Strophanthus gratus).......: 736
Strophanthus gratus........... 736
Strophanthus hispidus......... : 450.
Strophanthus kombe........../ 736
Strychnos ignatii. 416
Strychnos nux vomica..... ‘ G-18, 547
Stubwort. 827
Styrax benzoin.......... .. 73
Styrax paralleloneurum,...... ! 738
Styrax tonkinesis. 692
Succory. . G-8, 181
Sugar Maple G-21, 635
Sugar Pods. . G-7, 151
Sumaruba. 695
SUMATRA BENZOIN

(Styrax paralleloneurum). .. . - 738
SUMBUL

(Ferula sumbul). . . G23, 738
SUMMER SAVORY

(Satureja hortensis)..... | G-23, 739
Sun Drop. . .. G-IT, 298

----- PAGE 44 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Sun Rose. G-12, 321
Sundance Aloe Vera Gel
(Lee). 16
SUNDEW
(Drosera ramentacea)........ 740
SUNFLOWER
(Helianthus — annuus) G-23, 741
Sunkfield c-11, 289
Super Bilberry Plus Tablets
(Action Labs)... . 75
Super Ginkgo Biloba Plus
Tablets (Action Labs). 342
Super Milk Thistle Plus
Tablets (Action Labs) Sle
Super Saw Palmetto Plus
Tablets (Action Labs). . 664
Super St. John's Wort Plus
Tablets (Action Labs). ... 719
Super Yohimbe-Plus Tablets
(Irwin). . : : . 843
Superior Chinese Astragalu
Capsules (Nature's Herbs). 54
Surelle...... . . 827
SURINAM CHERRY
(Eugenia unifloria. ..... 0... 742
Suterberry. . . 545
Swallow Wort 338
Swallow-Wort G-20, 598
Swamp Cedar. G-24, 759
Swamp Dogwood
(Cornus florida) G-10, 256
Swamp Dogwood
(Ptelea trifoliata)...........-° 790
Swamp Laurel 490
Swamp Maple G-21, 635
SWAMP MILKWEED
(Asclepias incarnata) « G-23, 743
Swamp Sassafras. an . 490
Swamp Silkweed . G-23, 743
"Swamp Tea Tree G-7, 136
Sweating Plant G-6, 113
Sweatroot G-3,3
Sweet Almond... . 15
Sweet Bark. . ise

Sweet Bay (Laurus nobilis) G-15, 459
Sweet Bay (Magnolia glauca) . . 490

Sweet Betty. . G-22, 701
Sweet Bracken. G-24, 743
Sweet Brake. G-17, 493
Sweet Brier G-IO, 254

Sweet Broom
Sweet Bugle
Sweet Cane.
Sweet Chervil.
Sweet Chestnut

SWEET CICELY
(Myrrhis odorata)

SWEET CLOVER
(Melilotus officinalis)

Sweet Dock.
Sweet Elm
Sweet Fennel
Sweet Flag

SWEET GALE
(Myrica gale)

Sweet Grass.
Sweet Gum
Sweet Herb.
Sweet Lucerne.

SWEET MARJORAM

(Origanum majorana) .

Sweet Mary.
Sweet Myrtle

SWEET ORANGE
(Citrus sinensis).

Sweet Pepper. . .
Sweet Root
(Acorus calamus)
Sweet Root
(Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Sweet Rush.
Sweet Sedge.
Sweet Slumber.

SWEET SUMACH
(Rhus aromatica). . .
Sweet Vernal

SWEET VERNAL GRASS
(Anthoxanthum
odoratum)

SWEET VIOLET
(Viola odorata).

Sweet Weed
Sweet Wood Bark

SWEET WOODRUFF
(Galium odoratum). .

Sweet-Cus. tee

Sweet-Fern.

G-7, 132
G-6, 126
G-7, 138
G-24,743
708

G-24, 743

_ G24, 744

G-S, 82

697
G-11, 302
G-7, 138

G-24, 745

G-7, 138
G-23, 734

27
G-24, 744

G-24, 746

G-16, 46i
G-7, 138

G24, 747
G-8, 165
G-7, 138
G-ie, 469
G-7, 138

G-7, 138
ios

748
G-3,5
G-24, 749
G-24, 750

so*

ise

G-24, 751

.. G-24,743

G-24,743

TEA PLANT/1-39

Sweethearts 193
Sweet-Humlock G-24, 743
Sweetleaf 727
Sweets. : G-24, 743
Sweet-Scented Cactus ......., 543
Sweet-Smelling Trefoil G-13, 388
Swertia chirata. 187
Swertia japonica. 682
Swine Snout G-9, 245
Swinebread 240
Swine's Grass G-15, 448
Swiss Mountain Pine G-22, 674
Swiss Pine 802
Swynel Grass. G-15, 448
Symphytum officinale. G-9, 212
Symplocarpus foetidus. ....... J 696
Synkfoyle. . G-11, 289
Syzygium aromaticum. G-8, 195
Syzygium cumini. . . : : .. 429
T

Tag Alder. G-5, 89
Tailed Cubebs 235
Tailed Pepper... . .. 235
Tall Speedwell 104
Tall Veronica.......... 104
Tallow Shrub. . G-22, 705
TAMARIND

(Tamarindus indica). ........ 753
Tamarindus indica...........! 753
Tamus. G-25, 800
Tamus communis. G-5, 90
Tanacetum parthenium G-11, 306
Tanacetum vulgare. G-24, 754
Tanner's Bark G-18, 549
TANSY

(Tanacetum vulgare). G-24, 754
Tar Weed. 379
Taraxacum officinale, . . . . § G-9, 245
Tare. : : G-24, 756
Target-Leaved Hibiscus, 533
Tarragon. G-12, 320
Tarweed 841
TAUMELLOOLCH

(Lolium temulentum) G-24, 756
Taxus baccata G-26, 841
Tea... G-13, 369
Tea Plant A487

----- PAGE 45 -----
1-40/TEA TREE

TEA TREE

(Melaleuca alternifolia) 757
Tea Tree. A87
Teaberry. 820
Teasel G-6, 113
TEAZLE

(Dipsacus silvestris) G-24, 757
Tegreen Capsules

(Pharmanex), . bee 369
Temu Lawak G-9, 239
Terminalia arjuna........... 39
Terminalia chebula............ 772
Tetraclinis articulata.........! 660
Tetterberry. G-25, soo
Tetterwort

(Chelidonium majus). G-8, 169
Tetterwort

(Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . 108
Teucrium chamaedrys..... | GY, 337
Teucrium polium......... . 603
Teucrium scordium............ 797
Teucrium scorodonia..... | G-26, 826
Tewon Lawa. . ..... G-9, 239
Thalictroc,....... ... 384
The Roman Plant G-24, 743
Theobroma cacao. G8, 199
Thick-Leaved Pennywort .. G-13, 359
Thimbleberry....... G-6, 104
Thisilyn Standardized Milk

Thistle Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). 516
Thormantle. G-8, 192
Thorn-Apple. CMS, 436
Thorny Burr. G-7, 128
Thoroughwort G-6, 113
Thor's Beard G-14, 411
Thousand Weed. ... G-26, 833
Three-Leafed Hop Tree. : . 790
Three-Leaved. G-4, 74
Three-Leaved Grass... . . 827
Three-Lobed Sage. 367
Throat Root. . G-25, 794
Throatwort.... , .. G-11311
Throw-Wort G-IS, 524
THUJA

(Thuja occidentalis). .... | G-2A, 759
Thuja occidentalis. G-24, 759

Thuja orientalis. 560
Thunder Plant. G-14, 411

THYME

(Thymus vulgaris) G-24, 761
Thyme Herb Liquid

(Nature's Answer)... . 761
Thyme Leaf & Flower Liquid

(Herb Pharm)... .... . 761
Thymus serpyllum. G-26, 815
Thymus vulgaris. G-24, 761
Tiarella cordifolia G-9, 219
Tickleweed. 25
Tiglum .................,.. 234
Tiglium Seeds,......... .. 234
Tilia species. . G-16, 477

Time Release Bilberry Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) 75
Time Release Ginkgo Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) . . . .342
Time Release Hawthorn

Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs), . . a 271
Time Release Korean

Ginseng Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). cove, 346
Time Release Milk Thistle

Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) .......... 516

Tinnevelly Senna G-22, 684
Tipton Weed G-23, 719
Toadpipe

(Equisetum arvense). .. . | G-14, 409
Toadpipe (Linaria vulgaris)... . | 840
Toadroot. 60
TOBACCO

(Nicotiana tabacum)... . G2A, 762
Tobacco Wood. . G-26, 821
Tobasco Pepper. G-8, ies
Tolu. G-24, 764
TOLU BALSAM

(Myroxylon balsamum) . . .G-2A, 764
Tom Rong . G-12, 325
TOMATO

(Lycopersicon

esculentum) G-24, 766
Tongue-Grass. iso
TONKA BEANS

(Dipteryx odorata)........... 767
Tonquin Bean. 767
Toothache Tree. 545
Torch Weed. . G-IS, 532

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Torches. G-IS, 532
Tormentil Root. . G-8, 192
Tormentilla. G-8, 192
Toron, vice eee 160
Total Gar Capsules

(Mason Vitamins).......... 327
Toywort G-22, 690
Trackleberry. . . . G-5, 75
TRAGACANTH

(Astragalus gummifer)....... - 767
Tragacanth 54
TRAILING ARBUTUS

(Epigae repens). . vee. 168
Trailing Tansy. G-20, 610
TRAVELLER'S JOY

(Clematis vitalba)...... | G25, 769
Tree Moss...................778
TREE OF HEAVEN

(Ailanthus altissima)........ 770
Tree of Life. . G24, 759
Trefoil (Hepatica nobilis) 26
Trefoil

(Menyanthes trifoliata) ...c-6, 110

Trefoil (Trifolium pratense) G21, 633
Trembling Poplar. G-20, 607
Trifolium pratense. G-21, 633
Trigonella foenum-graecum .G-11, 304

Trillium erectum. . G-4, 74
TRITICUM

(Agropyron repens). .... | G25, 771
Triticum aestivum 799
Trollius europaeus....... | G-12, 351
Tropaeolum majus. G-IS, 537
TROPICAL ALMOND

(Terminalia chebula)......... 772
True Angostura.............. 34
True Ivy. G-IO, 275
Tru& Laurel G-15, 459
True Unicorn Root........... J1
True Unicorn Star-Grass 11
Tsuga canadensis. . . G19, 594
Tuber Root. G-20, 598
TULIP TREE

(Liriodendron tulipifera)..... - 774
Tun-Hoof 372
Turkey Claw,..........,.... 220
TURKEY CORN

(Dicentra cucullaria)......../ 775

----- PAGE 46 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Turkey Corn. 226
Turkish Sage 367
Turk's Cap. 506
TURMERIC

(Curcuma domestica) 775
Turmeric. G-26, 846
Turmeric Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way) 846
Turmeric Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 846
Turmeric Root G-i3, 355
Turmeric Whole Rhizome

Liquid

(Health from the Sun) 846
Turnera diffusa 244
Turnhoof 372
Turnip Greens. 816
Turnip Rope 816
Turpentine Weed. G-9, 238
Turtle Head. G-4, 59
Turtlebloom. G-4, 59
Tussilago farfara G9, 209
Twitch-Grass. G25, 771
Twopenny Grass G-17, 520

U

Ulmus minor. G-10, 269
Ulmus rubra 697
Umbellate Wintergreen. 595
Umbrella Leaves. G-19, 585
Una de Gato. ieo
Uncaria species 324
Unicaria tomentosa...........4 ieo
Upright Virgin's Bower ....G-8, 19<
Upstart. G-9, 206
Urginea indica. 421
Urginea maritima G-23, 717
Urtica dioica G23, 729
USNEA

(Usnea species) 778
Usnea species 728
Utricularia vulgaris G-e, 105
Uva Ursi Leaf Capsules

(ADH, Frontier, Nature's

Herbs). 7719
Uva Ursi Leaves Capsules

(Nature's Way), 7719
UVA-URSI

(Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) G-25, 779

UZARA
(Xysmalobium undulatum) 782

Vaccinium myrtillus G-5, 75
Vaccinium uliginosum G-6, 111
Vaccinium vitis-idaea G-3, 20
VALERIAN

(Valeriana officinalis) G-25, 783
Valerian Capsules (Mason

Vitamins, Nature's

Resource), 783
Valerian Liquid (McZand). 783
Valerian Power Time Release

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) 783
Valerian Root Alcohol Free

Liquid (Nature's Answer) 783

Valerian Root Capsules

(ADH, Bergen Brunswig,

Cardinal, Frontier, Herbal

Harvest, Humco, Major,

McKesson, National

Vitamin, Nature's Bounty,

Nature's Herbs, Nature's

Way, Perrigo, Rexall

Consumer, Sundown,

Zenith Goldline) 783
Valerian Root Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .783
Valerian Root Standardized

Capsules

(Rexall Consumer) 783
Valerian Root Tablets

(Apothecary, Mason

Vitamins) 783
Valeriana officinalis...... | G25, 783
Vandal Root. G25, 783
Vapor G-12, 322
Vegetable Antimony G-6, 113
Vegetable Mercury 494
Vegetable Sulfur 196
Vegetable Tallow G-22, 705
Velvet Dock G-IO, 266
Velvet Flower. G-3, 22

Velvet Leaf see

Velvet Plant. G-IS, 532
Venastat Capsules

(Pharmaton) G-30, 403
Venus' Basin. G24, 757
VENUS FLYTRAP

(Dionaea_ muscipula) 786

WALLPEPPER’/I-41

Venus Hair. 491
Venus Shoe 541
Veratrum album. G25, 803
Veratrum luteum 301
Veratrum viride. 25
Verbascum densiflorum .., G-18, 532
Verbena officinalis....... | G25, 788
Vernis de Japon. 710
Veronica beccabunga G-6, 121
Veronica officinalis. G-23, 710
Verrucaria. G-17, 503
VERVAIN

(Verbena officinalis)... . § G25, 788
Viburnum prunifolium. G5, 96
Vicia faba. 120
Vinca minor. 584
Vine of the Souls. 833
Viola odorata G-24, 750
Viola tricolor. 382
Violet Bloom. G-5, 88
Virginia Creeper G-3, 26

Virginia Water Horehound . . G6, 126
Virginian Poke G-20, 602
Virginian Prune. 8io

Virgin's Glove. G-IO, 248
VIROLA

(Virola theiodora)..........! 789
Virola theiodora 789
Viscum album G-11, 291
Vitex agnus-castus G-8, 176

Vitex Capsules
(Naturalife, Nature's Way) . .. . 176

Vitis vinifera. G-13, 362
Vomitroot. G-ie, 479
Vomitwort. G-16, 479
Ww

WAFER ASH

(Ptelea trifoliata)...........: 790
WAHOO

(Euonymus atropurpurea) G25, 791
Wake Robin 46
Wake-Robin. * .G-4,74
Walewort 259
Wall Ginger 215
WALLFLOWER

(Cheiranthus cheiri). .. . : G-25, 792
Wallflower. A18
Wallpepper. 215

----- PAGE 47 -----
1-42 /WALLSTOCK-GILLOFER

Wallstock-Gillofer. G-25, 792
Wallwort . G-9,212
WALNUT

(Juglans regia) G-28, 793
Walpole Tea 541
Wandering Jenny. G-17, 520
Wandering Tailor . G-17, 520
Warnera . : Loe .. G-13,355
Wartwort . . . . ... 236
Water Agrimony. G-7, 131
WATER AVENS

(Geum rivale) G-25, 794
Water Blobs G-17, 503
Water Bugle G-6, 126
Water Cabbage. G-3, 28
Water Chisch G-25, 794
WATER DOCK

(Rumex aquaticus)........... 7195
Water Dragon. G-17, 503
WATER DROPWORT

(Oenanthe  crocata) 795
Water Dropwort G-25, 796
Water Elder. G-5, 96
WATER FENNEL

(Oenanthe aquatica)... . | G-25, 796
Water Flag G-19, sei
Water Flower G-25, 794
WATER GERMANDER

(Teucrium scordium). ........ 797
Water Hemlock. . G-13, 386
Water Lily... . . G-3, 28
Water Lovage .. 195
Water Maudlin G-13, 388
Water Mint............. G-26, 813
Water Nymph .. : G-3, 28
Water Parsley. G-13, 386
Water Pepper... 2... 699
Water Pimpernel G-6, 121
Water Pink 768
Water Plantain. G-3, 13
Water Purslane. G-6, 121
Water Shamrock G-6, 110
WATERCRESS.

(Nasturtium officinale)... 1. . ! 798
Watercress Capsules

(National Vitamin). . . . 798
Water-Cup. G-20, 596

Wattle Bark. Lene 3

Wax Bean,
Wax Cluster.
Wax Dolls
Waxberry.
Waxwork.
Way Bennet
Waythorn
Weed. .
Weeping Ash
Weeping Pepper Tree
Weyl Ash

WHEAT

(Triticum aestivum)... . .

Wheat Bran.
Wheat Germ Oil
Whig Plant.
White Archangel
White Ash
White Bay. .

WHITE BRYONY
(Bryonia alba)

White Bryony.
White Candytuft
White Cedar.
White Cinnamon...
White Daisy.

WHITE FIR

(Abies alba)

White Flag Root an
White Fringe... 2.2...
White Gum

WHITE HELLEBORE
(Veratrum album).

White Horehound .
White Laurel

WHITE LILY

White Mulberry.
White Murda

WHITE MUSTARD

(Sinapis alba)

WHITE NETTLE
(Lamium album)

White Poplar.
White Root
White Rot

White Saunders. . .
White Tea Tree

(Lilium candidum)..... .

G-4, 65
820
G-12, 322

. G-22, 705

24
G-4,71
G-6, 123
G-17, 500
G-4, 50

139
G-13, 36i

G-25, 800

632

84

G-24, 759
147

563

802
G-19, 561
G-12, 321
G-23, 734

G-25, 805

G-25, 806

G-20, 607
G-20, 598
G-13, 359

. 659
G-7, 136

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

White Thyme Oil

(Aura Cacia). . . ... 761
White Walnut . .. 134
White Weed . . . . 563

WHITE WILLOW

(Salix species). G-25, 807

White Willow Bark Capsules

(ADH, Apothecary,

Frontier, Nature's Way). 807
White Wood

(Canella winter ANA) oaressvvee 147
White Wood

(Melaleuca leucadendra) .G-7, 136
Whitethorn. ... foe G-IO, 271
Whitsun Bosses G-5, 96
Whitsun Rose... ... G-5,96
Whorlywort. 104
Whortleberry

(Vaccinium myrtillus). G-5, 75
Whortleberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) .G-3, 20
Wild Agrimony. G-20, 610
Wild American Scullcap

Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way). 678
Wild Balsam. . . . 436
Wild Bergamont 407
WILD CARROT

(Daucus carota) G-25, 809
Wild Celandine. . . 436
Wild Chamomile Oil

(Aura Cacia) . . 331
WILD CHERRY

(Prunus serotina)........... 3 810
Wild Cinnamon. . . 147
Wild Clover. G-21, 633
Wild Cotton 4is
Wild Countryside Black

Cohosh Root Capsules

(Nature's Herbs), . . 92
Wild Countryside Chickweed

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. .. 180

Wild Countryside Damiana

Leaves Capsules
(Nature's Herbs) 244
Wild Countryside Dandelion

Root Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) . .. 245
Wild Countryside Gotu Kola
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .359

----- PAGE 48 -----
ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Wild Countryside Licorice
Root Capsules
(Nature's Herbs), ..........: 469

Wild Countryside Myrrh

Gum Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)...........: 534

Wild Countryside Red

Raspberry Leaf Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) ..........4 630
Wild Countryside Scullcap
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .. . .678

Wild Countryside Springtime
Horsetail Capsules

ature's Herbs),..........5 409
Wild Countryside White

Willow Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) ..........4 807
Wild Countryside Yellow

Dock Root Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) ..........4 835
Wild Cranesbill.............4 233
Wild Crane's-Bill... 2... | G-14, 393
Wild Curcuma..........: G-13, 355
WILD DAISY

(Bellis perennis) G-26,811
Wild Endive.............: G-9, 245
Wild Fennel G-11, 302
Wild Ginger..................: A8
Wild Guelder Rose........ | G-S, 96
Wild Hops. G-25, 800
Wild Ice Leafi..........: G-IS, 532
WILD INDIGO

(Baptisia tinctoria), .... § G-26, 812
Wild Indigo Fresh Root

Liquid

(Health from the Sun)...... |! 812
Wild Indigo Root, Alcohol

Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... 4 812
Wild Iris. G-19, 561
Wild Laburnum G-24, 744
Wild Lady's Slipper........... 436
Wild Lemon G-17,510
Wild Lettuce...............: A53
Wild Liquorice

(Abrus precatorius)... 0... ¢ A35
Wild Liquorice

{Ononis spinosa). ...... § G-23, 713
Wild Marjoram. G-19, 559
WILD MINT

(Mentha aquatica) G-26, 813

Wild Nard. ..........0.00.0.05 A8
Wild Nep...............5 G-25, 800
Wild Oats Liquid

(Action Labs)..............4 551
Wild Oats Tablets

(Action Labs)..............4 551
Wild Pansy.............-..-. 382
Wild Pepper.............4 G-17, 515
Wild Plum. .............: G-22, 697
WILD RADISH

(Raphanus raphanistrum) G26, 814
Wild Radish................. 365
Wild Rosemary............... 451
Wild Rye G-4, 71
WILD SERVICE TREE

(Sorbus _ torminalis) 814
Wild Snowball ..............: 541
Wild Sorvice................4 814
Wild Strawberry.........: G-23, 735
Wild Succory. G-8, 174
Wild Sunflower..........: G-10, 266
Wild Sweet William ..... J G-22, 701
WILD THYME

(Thymus serpyllum). ... . § G-26, 815
Wild Tobacco...........4 G-ie, 479
WILD TURNIP.

(Brassica rapa) 816
Wild Vine...............4 G-25, soo
Wild Woodbine........... 5 G-3, 26
Wild Woodvine...........: G3, 26
WILD YAM

(Dioscorea _ villosa) G-26, 817
Wild Yam Capsules

(Bio-Tech).................4 817
Wild Yam Extract Liquid

(Nature's Way)............5 817
Wild Yam Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... 4 817
Wild Yam Root & Rhizome

Extract Liquid (Frontier)... | 817
Wild Yam Root Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Way)... . si7
Willow. G-25, 807
WILLOW HERB

(Epilobium

angustifolium).......... | G-26, 818
Willow Sage. ...........5 G20, 620

WOOD SAGE/1-43

Wind Flower

(Anemone nemorosa)........ 3 824
Wind Flower

(Pulsatilla pratensis)... 2... . 572
Wind Root.............! G-20, 59s
Wineberry. G-5, 75
Wingseed..........-........7 790

WINTER CHERRY
(Physalis alkekengi). . . . | G-26, 819

Winter Fern... 2.2.2.2...
Winter Marjoram......... J
Winter Pink... 2... 0.20.02!

Wintera...........
Wintera Aromatica.
Winterbloom.............4 G-26, 821
WINTERGREEN

(Gaultheria procumbens). . . . 820
Wintergreen ...............04 647
Winterlien..............4 G-12, 313
WINTER'S BARK

(Drimys winteri)........... 4 820
Winter's Cinnamon........... | 820
Wintersweet.............4 G-19, 559
Winterweed.................. 180
Witch Grass.............4 G25, 771
WITCH HAZEL

(Hamamelis virginiana) . G-26, 821
Witch Hazel Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer)..........5 821
Witch Meal.................. 196
Witchen G-IS, 525
Witches' Brier. G-10, 254
Witches' Gloves. G-IO, 248
Witches' Pouches G-22, 690
Withe Withy. G-25, 807
Wolfs Claw.................- 196
Wolfsbane

(Aconitum napellus).... . | G-IS, 521
Wolfsbane (Arnica montana)... . : Al
WOOD ANEMONE

(Anemone nemorosa)........ 4 824
WOOD BETONY

(Betonica officinalis)... . § G-26, 825
Wood Betony Herb Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... 4 825
WOOD SAGE

(Teucrium scorodonia) . G-26, 826

----- PAGE 49 -----
1-44/WOOD SORREL

WOOD SORREL

(Oxalis acetosella) .........5 827
YAGE
Wood Sour. 827
Wood Spider 247 (Banisteriopsis caapi)....... 3 833
Wood Strawberry. G-23, 738 Yan-Hu-Suo, see 226
Wood Vine G-25, 800 YARROW
Wood Waxen G-10, 260 (Achillea millefolium) .. . G-26, 833
Woodbind ...... G-10, 275 i
Wontbin Yarrow Extract Liquid
vou’ (Nature's Way)... ........ 833
(Gelsemium sempervirens) 838
Woodbine Yarrow Flowers Capsules
(Lonicera caprifolium) 399 (Frontier, Nature's Herbs) ... .833
. rs Yaw Root 729
Woodruff G-24, 751 Yel A G-4.71
Woodwrad G-24,751 Vallon ba Or 183
ellow Bar -
Wood G-5, 88 ;
Wocde Climb C326 Yellow Bugle G13, 373
Weel timber Gas a3 Yellow Catechu 324
oollen. =
° Yellow Chaste Weed. . . AIT
Woolly Thistle, . G-22,678 56 OW Eaaste mee
Woolmat 410 Yellow Cleavers. G-15, 455
oolma'
Wormegrass. 594. YELLOW DOCK
WORMSEED (Rumex crispus) . 835
(Artemisia cina) 827 Yellow Dock Root Capsules
WORMSEED OIL (Frontier, Nature's Way) 835
(Chenopodium ve ow oe oie aes
ambrosioides) G-26, 828 emow Salta, “—
WoRMWOOD YELLOW GENTIAN
.. cone (Gentiana lutea). 836
(Artemisia absinthium) . G-26, 829
Yel Gi an 109
Wormwood _ G-IS, 530 ehow SNinseng, ’
Yellow Iris. G-19, 56i
WORMWOOD GRASS Yellow Jasmine. 838
(Spigelia anthelmia)........ 3 831
YELLOW JESSAMINE
stale nat is) 832 (Gelsemium sempervirens) .... 838
tachys palustris)... ....... 8
YELLOW LUPIN
Woundwort (Lupi luteus) 839
upinus luteus,
(Anthyllis vulneraria) .G-9, 214 P
Woundwort Yellow Pheasant's Eye. G-3,5
(Prunella vulgaris)... . . | G-22, 68i Yellow Poplar 714
Woundwort Yellow Puccoon G-13, 355
(Solidago canadensis)... ..... 145 Yellow Rod vee , 840
Woundwort Yellow Root........ G-13, 355
(Solidago virgaurea). . . . | G-11, 289 Yellow Saunders 659
Wu-Wei-Zi 669 Yellow Snakeleaf. 24
Wymote. 505 Yellow Snowdrop. .. 24
Yellow Starwort. G-10, 266
Yellow Sweet Clover. G-24, 744
Xie-Jie 257 YELLOW TOADFLAX
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant (Linaria vulgaris)... 0... 44S 840
Liquid (Purdue Frederick) . 684 Yellow Willowherb. G-ie, 481
Xuan-Fu-Hua 119 Yellow Wood 545
Xysmalobium undulatum. 782 I Yellowroot 358

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Yellows

(Cypripedium calceolus). ... . 541
Yellows (Ranunculus acris). .. . - 133
Yellowweed 133
Yerba Mate. G-17, 508
YERBA SANTA

(Eriodictyon  californicum) .... 841
Yerba Santa Resin-Rich Leaf

Liquid (Herb Pharm), oe. 841
YEW

(Taxus baccata). G-26, 841
Ying Zicao 619
Yocon Tablets (Glenwood) 843
YOHIMBE BARK

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). . . . . 843

Yohimbe Capsules
(Mason Vitamins). . . . 843

Yohimbe Power Max 1500

for Women Tablets

(Action Labs). 843
Yohimbe Power Max 1500

Tablets (Action Labs). 843
Yohimbe Power Max 2000

Capsules (Action Labs). 843
Yohimbe Power Max 2000

Liquid (Action Labs)... . . 843
Yohimbe Super Potent

Tablets (Mason Vitamins) .... 843
Yohimbie Bark Tablets

(Nature's Bounty). 843
Yohimbized 1000 Liquid

(Action Labs). 843
Youthwort . . . ... 740
Yucca, . . . . . 24
Yucca filamentosa..............4
Yuma. G-26, 817

z

Zaffer. 652
Zanthoxylum americanum. . . . . 545
Zanzibar Pepper. G-8, 165
Zea mays...... Le .., 224
ZEDOARY

(Curcuma zedoaria). . . G-26, 846
Ze-Xie. we... G-3, 13
Zhi Mu 31
Zingiber officinale... 1... . | G-12, 339
Zostrix Cream (Bioglan). 165
Zyzyphus jujube. Le 439

----- PAGE 50 -----
Therapeutic Category Index

Entries in this index are organized by prescribing category, enabling you to quickly identify

botanicals with similar properties. Within each category, herbs are listed alphabetically by their

accepted common name, with the scientific name shown in parentheses. Botanicals deemed

effective by the German Regulatory Authority's "Commission E" are marked with a (*) symbol at

their left. If an entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant in the

Herb Identification Guide, the second to the herbal monograph. The index lists herbs by general

category only. To locate botanicals considered appropriate for a specific indication, please consult

the Indications Index.

ACNE PREPARATIONS
+ Bittersweet Nightshade
(Solanum dulcamara) ...G-S, 88
¢ Brewer's Yeast
{Saccharomyces
cerevisiae)... .... .... lis
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus),.....,..... G-11,283
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . .. .382
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia). .... 0.0.00. 000 757

ADJUNCT ANTINEOPLASTIC THERAPY
Cat's Claw (Urticaria

tomentosda).........0+20+004 ieo
¢ European Mistletoe (Viscum
album).............4 G-11, 291
Green Tea (Camellia
SiNENSIS). oo G-13, 369
Marijuana (Cannabis
SAUVA). ove eel G-17, 500

ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Congorosa (Maytenus
ilicifolia). 6.00. 218
AMEBICIDES
Henna (Lawsonia
inermis). ....0.0.05004 G14, 391

ANALGESIC AGENTS
Aga (Amanita muscaria) .. .G-3, 8
Alteris (Aletris farinosa) 11

Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) . G-4, SO
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). . : . G4, 61
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna). . . G-4, 69
Beth Root (Trillium

erectum). . . Lee . G-4, 74
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis) G-5,90
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). G-5, 92
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Haw (Viburnum

prunifolium). . G-S, 96
Black Pepper (Piper

nigrum). G-6, 103
Blue Cohosh

(Caulophyllum

thalictroides),..... 0.0.0.4. 109
Borage (Borago

officinalis). .. G-6, 114
Bugleweed (Lycopus

virginicus). G4, 126
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus), . . . 128

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

Buttercup (Ranunculus

ACTIS)D 133
Cajuput (Melaleuca

leucadendra). G-7, 136
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Catechu (Acacia catechu).... . 163
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165

Chaste Tree (Vitex

agnus-castus). G-8, 176
Clematis (Clematis recta) .G-8, 194
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum) G-8, 195
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) G9, 212
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum). . ™.G-9, 221
Corn Poppy (Papaver

ThOCAS). od 223
Cowhage (Mucuna

Pruriens). 2.0 0c 230
Cowslip (Primula veris)..... 231
Cumin (Cuminum

cyminum). G-9, 237
Devil's Claw

(Harpagophytum

procumbens)... 0... ..00045 247

----- PAGE 51 -----
1-46/ANALGESIC AGENTS

Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea). G-IO, 248
Dogwood (Cornus

florida)... 0... 0. G-10, 256
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) . 261

English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) G-1O, 270
English Horsemint (Mentha

longifolia). G-IO, 275
English Ivy (Hedera

helix)... 00.00.00 ed G-10, 275
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus)..........045 G-11, 283
European Five-Finger Grass

(Potentilla reptans) . Gl, 289

European Water Hemlock

(Cicuta virosa). G-11, 297
False Unicorn Root

(Veratrum luteum)... .... 301
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium). G-11, 306
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis) G-12, 322
Garlic (Allium sativum) G-12, 327
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). 335
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea). 372
Groundsel (Senecio

vulgaris) 374
Hemlock (Conium

maculatum). G-13, 386
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

NIZEM). vo eee .G-14, 389
Herb Paris (Paris

quadrifolia). G-14, 392
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 401
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum) G-14, 403
Horsemint (Monarda

punctata) 407
Horseradish (Armoracia

rusticana). . G-14, 408
Hound's Tongue

(Cynoglossum officinale) 410
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum)...... G-14, 411

Iporuru § (Alchornea

floribunda). 424
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens). A31
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris) G-15, 456
Larch (Larix decidua) . . . G-15, 457
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis) G-i6, 461
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum). G-16, 468
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris).. 2.2.0... . 491
Male Fern (Dryopteris

filix-mas). G-17, 493
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa). G-17, 500
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata). G-17, 503
Martagon (Lilium

martagon) . 506
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum). G-17, 515
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus) G-18,521
Muskmallow  (Abelmoschus

moschatus) .. 533
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) . 543
Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). . . G19, 559
Parsnip (Pastinaca

sativa). G-19, 571
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla
pratensis). 572
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum) 577
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita). ccc. eevee! G-19, 580
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). . . G-19, 585
Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Potentilla (Potentilla

anserind). G-20, 610
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon

species). . . 618
Quince (Cydonia

oblongata). . 625
Ragwort (Senecio

jacobaea). G-20, 629 I

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Reed Herb (Phragmites

communis). 639
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra)..............5 G-21, 650
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum). 650
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) . . . G-22, 668
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). G-22, 672

* Scotch Pine (Pinus

species). . G-22, 674
Shepherd's Purse (Capsella

bursa-pastoris) G-22, 690
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica). . 700
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). . G-23, 710

» Spruce (Picea species) 714
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719
Stavesacre (Delphinium

staphisagria). 726
Sweet Vernal Grass

(Anthoxanthum

odoratum). G-24, 749
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata) G-24, 750
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare). G-24, 754
Taumelloolch (Lolium

temulentum) G-24, 756
Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis)... 2.2... G-24, 759
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima). 770
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25, 771
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). 775
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis). G-25, 783
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis). G-25, 788
Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale). 798
White Fir (Abies alba) 802
White Willow (Salix

species). G-25, 807

----- PAGE 52 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctorid)............4 G26, 812
Wild Mint {Mentha

aquaticd)............4 G-26, 813
Wild Thyme {Thymus

serpyllum).........4.4 G-26, 815
Wild Yam {Dioscorea

Villosa). . 2. 0 ee G-26, 817
Winter's Bark {Drimys

WinteTi). . 6. 820
Wintergreen {Gaultheria

procumbens)... .......0.044 820
Wood Anemone {Anemone

nemorosd).........++-+..4 824
Wormwood {Artemisia

absinthium). .........! G-26, 829
Yellow Jessamine

{Gelsemium

sempervirens)... 0... eS 838

ANORECTAL PREPARATIONS

Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus) G-5, 75
¢ Butcher's Broom {Ruscus
aculeatus). G-7, 132

* Poplar {Populus species) G20, 607
* Psyllium {Plantago ovata) .... 612
* Sweet Clover {Melilotus
officinalis)... 0.6.0.0: G24, 744
* Tolu Balsam {Myroxylon
balsamum).........004: G2A, 764
* Witch Hazel {Hamamelis
virginiana)...........4 G-26, 821

ANTACID PREPARATIONS
Barberry {Berberis

vulgaris) G4, 61
Congorosa {Maytenus
ilicifolia). 6. vee 218

European Five-Finger Grass
{Potentilla reptans) .. . G-11, 289
Lovage {Levisticum

officinale). ..........5 G-16, 482
Salep {Orchis species)... ... | 657
Wood Betony {Betonica

Officinalis)...........5 G26, 825
Yellow Jessamine

{Gelsemium

sempervirens). 6.0.0.0 .0.08 838

ANTHELMINTICS
Amargo {Quassia amara) . .G-3, 23
Balmony {Chelone glabra) G-4, 59
Behen {Moringa oleifera)..... : 67

Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger). .... 5 G5, 97
Black Horehound {Ballota

nigra). G-5,98
Blue Cohosh

{Caulophyllum

thalictroides)...........4.. 109
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus) G-7, 130

Butternut {Juglans cinerea) .. . 134
Calotropis {Calotropis

PVOCEVA). 6 eee 141
Canadian Fleabane

{Erigeron canadensis) . . G-7, 144
Castor Oil Plant {Ricinus

communis). G-7, 158
Centaury {Centaurium

erythraea). G-8, 174
Chives {Allium

schoenoprasum) G-8, 188
Cinnamon {Cinnamomum

verum) G-8, 190
Cor Cockle {Agrostemma

Bithago). 6. eee 222
Cowhage {Mucuna

PIUTICNS). We 230
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus). 6. ee G-11, 283
European Water Hemlock

{Cicuta virosa)....... 4 G-11, 297
Feverfew {Tanacetum

parthenium)..........5 G-11, 306
Green Hellebore

{Helleborus viridis) ..... . 368
Groundsel {Senecio

wulgaris)... 0.0. eee 374
Indian Nettle {Acalypha

INdiCA). . 6 ee 419
Kamala {Mallotus

philippinensis). ...........5 A42
Kousso {Hagenia

abyssinica)... 6... ee 450
Larkspur {Delphinium

consolida)...........5 G-15, 458

Lavender Cotton {Santolina
chamaecyparissias) ... G-iec, 460
Male Fern {Dryopteris

filix-mas). 0.00.0 e ee! G-17, 493
Marigold {Calendula

Officinalis). 6.6... 040! G-17, 497
Morning Glory {Ipomoea

hederaced)............044% 523

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ANTIANXIETY AGENTS/I-47

Mugwort {Artemisia

vulgaris)... 0.06.04. 04 G-IS, 530
Myrtle {Myrtus

communis)...........4 G-18, 536
Neem /{Antelaea

azadirachta).........! G-IS, 539

Papaya {Carica papaya) . G-19, 565
Pineapple {Ananas

COMOSUS). 0.0. ee 593
Pink Root {Spigelia

marilandica). .......0..404: 594
Pomegranate {Punica

granatum)..........45 G20, 605
Pumpkin {Cucurbita

Pepo).. 6. eee eee eee dl G-20, 618
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622

Rue {Ruta graveolens) .. G21, 648
Sweet Gale {Myrica

gale)... oe ee G-24, 745
Tansy {Tanacetum

vulgare)... cee ceed G-24, 754
Tree of Heaven {Ailanthus

altissima). 0... cee 770
Turmeric {Curcuma

domestica)... 2.0.0.0. 00008 775

Walnut {Juglans regia) .. G25, 793
Water Germander

{Teucrium scordium),..... / 797
Wild Carrot {Daucus
Carotd). 6 eee G25, 809

Wormseed {Artemisia cina) . . 827
Wormseed Oil

{Chenopodium

ambrosioides)........5 G-26, 828
Wormwood {Artemisia

absinthium)..........: G-26, 829
Wormwood Grass {Spigelia

anthelmia). 6.0.0... ee 831
Yellow Lupin {Lupinus

UlteUS). od 839

Yew {Taxus baccata) ... G-26, 841

ANTIANXIETY AGENTS

¢ Adonis {Adonis vernalis) .. G-3, 5
Aga {Amanita muscaria) .. G-3, 8
Anemarrhena {Anemarrhena

asphodeloides)............ 31
Bitter Orange {Citrus

aurantium). .... . G-5, 86
Black Horehound /Ballota

nigra). G-S, 98

* Bugle weed {Lycopus
G-6, 126

virginicus).

----- PAGE 53 -----
1-48 /ANTIANXIETY AGENTS

California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia

californica). G-7, 140
* Camphor Tree

(Cinnamomum

camphora)...... . G-7, 143
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) . .G-8, 164
Celery (Apium

graveolens). G-8, 172
Columbine (Aquilegia

vulgaris) G-9, 211
Corydalis (Corydalis cava) .. . 226
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Cyclamen (Cyclamen

europaeum). 240
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270

+ English Lavender

(Lavandula

angustifolia) G-10, 277
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album). . G-11, 291
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342

Ginseng (Panax ginseng) . 346
Greek Sage (Salvia triloba) . . . 367

Heather (Calluna

Vulgaris) G-13, 383
Herb Paris (Paris

quadrifolia). G-14,392

+ Hops (Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Jamaica Dogwood (Piscidia

piscipula). . Loe . A28
Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). 429

+ Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum). G-15, 443
» Lemon Balm (Melissa
officinalis). G-ie, 461
» Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) G-ie, 475
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa). G-17, 500
* Motherwort (Leonurus
cardiaca) ,. G-18, 524
Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris) G-i8, 530
Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). Lae . .. S41
Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus) 543

Nux Vomica (Strychnos
G-18, 547
G-18,551

nux vomica)
Oats (Avena sativa)
Passion Flower (Passiflora

incarnata). . G-19, 573
* Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentina) : : 631
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
Sculleap (Scutellaria
lateriflora) G-22, 678
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis) G-23, 710
* Squill (Urginea
maritima). G-23, 717
* St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum) G-23, 719
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca) G-23, 735
Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata). . : : G-24, 750
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum) G-24, 751
* Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis). G-25, 783
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotina) 8io
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis) G-26, 825
ANTIARRHYTHMICS
* Adonis (Adonis vernalis) .  G-3, 5
Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga) G-S, si
Bitter Candytuft (Iberis
amara). 84
+ Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora) G-7, 143
Digitalis Lanata (Digitalis
Janata) 250
English Hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata) G-10, 271
» Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) G-ie, 475
Motherwort (Leonurus
cardiaca). . : . G-18,524
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentina). 631

Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
+ Squill (Urginea
maritima). G-23,717
ANTICONVULSANTS.
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Burning Bush (Dictamnus
albus). G-7, 130
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera). : : : . 141
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album). . G-11,291

European Peony (Paconia

officinalis). G-11, 295
Fool's Parsley (Aethusa

cynapium) G-12, 316
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea). 338
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) G-13, 359
Groundsel (Senecio

vulgaris)... . . eee 374
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) G-ie, 475
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa). G-17, 500
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris). G-18,530
Scullcap (Scutellaria

lateriflora). G-22, 678
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima) 770
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783
Yew (Taxus baccata) . G-26, 841

ANTIDEPRESSANTS

Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica). G-7, 140
Corydalis (Corydalis cava) .. . 226
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis). G-ie, 46i
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris). . G-18,530
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomica). G-IS,547
Passion Flower (Passiflora

incarnata). . G-19, 573
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) . G22, 668

----- PAGE 54 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

* St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana). G-24, 746

ANTIDIABETIC AGENTS

Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) G-3, 12
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis) Le 21
Bean Pod (Phaseolus

vulgaris) G-4, 65
Behen (Moringa oleifera). 67
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). G-5, 75
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarits). . . an 91
Centaury (Centaurium

erythraea) G-8, 174
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao). . . G-8, 199
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). . G-9, 245
Divi-Divi (Caesalpinia

bonducella). 253
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus) G-11, 283
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) .. G-11, 289
Garlic (Allium sativum) G-12, 327

German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria) 336
Goat's Rue (Galega

officinalis). G-13, 353
Greek Sage (Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba) 376
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). an 9 29
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) -G-18, 525
Noni (Mdrinda citrifolia) .G-18, 544
Oats (Avena sativa). . G-18,551
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Plantain (Musa

paradisiacd) 597
Poley (Teucrium polium). . . . 603
Reed Herb (Phragmites

communis). . : : 639
Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) .... 727
Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica). G-23, 729

Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25, 771
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus
torminalis) 814
ANTIDIARRHEALS
Acacia (Acacia arabica). 3
+ Agrimony (Agrimonia
eupatoria) G-3, 10
Alkanet (Alkanna
tinctoria) G-3, 13
Amaranth (Amaranthus
hypochondriacus). . . .. . § G-3, 22

American White Pond Lily

(Nymphaea odorata) G-3, 28
Angostura (Galipea
officinalis). 34
Apple Tree (Malus
domestica) G-4, 37
Arrowroot (Maranta
arundinacea) . . .. 4B
Bael (Aegle marmelos)....... ! 58
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris). G-4, 61
Barley (Hordeum
distichori). G-4, 63
Behen (Moringa oleifera).... . | 67
Bennet's Root (Geum
urbanum) G-4,71
+ Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus). G-5, 75
Bistort (Persicaria
bistorta). G-5, 82
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus
amarus). Le Le 91
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). G-5, 94
* Blackberry (Rubus
fruticosus). G-6, 104
Bog Bilberry (Vaccinium
uliginosum). G-6, 111
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera). . : : 141
Canadian Fleabane
(Erigeron canadensis) . .G-7, 144
Carob (Ceratonia
siliqua) G-7, ISI
Carrageen (Chondrus
crispus). Le . 152
Cascarilla (Croton eluteria) .. . 156
Cat's Claw (Unicaria
tomentosa). 160
Catechu (Acacia catechu). 163

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ANTIDIARRHEALS / 1-49

Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Cheken (Eugenia chequen) .. . 178
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum) G-8, 190

» Cinquefoil (Potentilla

erecta). G-8, 192
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao). G-8, 199

» Coffee (Coffea arabica) ..G-9, 202

Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) G-9, 212
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum) G-9, 221
Cranesbill (Geranium

maculatum). 233
Cumin (Cuminum

cyminum). G-9, 237
Cypress Spurge (Euphorbia

cyparissias). G-9, 242
Dogwood (Cornus

florida). . . G-10, 256
Dragon's Blood

(Daemonorops draco). . . . . 257

Elephant-Ears (Bergenia
crassifolia). . . 2. 268

Elm Bark (Ulmus minor) G-10, 269

European Five-Einger Grass

(Potentilla rep tans) . . . G-II, 289
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album.) G-II, 291
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica). 301
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta). 305
Fool's Parsley (Aethusa

cynapium). . . G-12, 316
Gambir (Uncaria species)? . .. .324
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) G-13, 359
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis). . G-13, 366
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis). G-13, 369
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea). 372
Gum Arabic (Acacia

Senegal) 378

----- PAGE 55 -----
1-50 / ANTIDIARRHEALS

Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum)......... 5 G-14, 393
Hogweed (Heracleum
sphondylium). 2... 0066 G-14, 396
Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare)... 0. ee ed G-14, 401
Hound's Tongue
(Cynoglossum_ officinale)... .410
Houseleek (Sempervivum
tectorum)............4 G-14, 411
Jaborandi (Pilocarpus
microphyllus). .. 2... . 5 G-15, 425
+ Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). . . . . A29
* Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla
vulgaris)... 0. eee G-15, 456
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum),.........4 G-16, 468
Logwood (Haematoxylon
campechianum). 480
Loosestrife | (Lysimachia
vulgaris)... 2... eee d G-16, 481
Lotus (Nelumbo
nucifera). 6... vee dl G-16, 481
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis). 505
Matico (Piper elongatum)  .... 509
Moneywort (Lysimachia
nummularia). . 2... 0... | G-17, 520
Mountain Avens (Dryas
octopetala). 526
Muira-Puama
(Ptychopetalum
olacoides). . . . . 53
Myrtle (Myrtus
communis)............5 G-IS, 53s
Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). 54
» Oak (Quercus robur) ... G-18, 549
Oats (Avena sativa)... .. § G-18, 55
Pagoda Tree (Sophora
japonica). 564
Pinus Bark (Tsuga
canadensis). .........5 G-19, 594
Plantain (Musa
paradisiaca) 597
Pomegranate (Punica
granatum)...........4 G20, 605
Potentilla (Potentilla
anserina)............5 G20, 610
Psyllium (Plantago ovata) .. 612

+ Psyllium Seed (Plantago

OPO). vee eed G-20, 616
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria). ........+.4) .G-20, 620
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . . . 622
Quince (Cydonia
oblongata). 625
Rhatany (Krameria
triandra) 64:
Rice (Oryza sativa)... .. | G-21, 643
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Sage (Salvia officinalis) G21, 655
Salep (Orchis species). 657
Sandarac (Tetraclinis
articulata). 660
Self-Heal (Prunella
vulgaris)... 0.0.0.1 G-22, 681
Simaruba (Simaruba
amara). 695
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . . . G-22, 697
Smartweed  (Persicaria
hydropiper) 699
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica). 700
Southern Tsangshu
(Atractylodes lanced). ..... : 706
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea
sativa). 708
Strawberry (Fragaria
VESCO). oe ee G-23, 735
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus
altissima). Lae 770
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica). 775
¢ Uzara (Xysmalobium
undulatum). 782
Water Avens (Geum
rivale)........2+-+..4 G-25, 794
Water Germander
(Teucrium scordium)....... 197
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotind)..........0.2.005 sio
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis)............4 G-26, 811
Wild Mint (Mentha
aquatica)... 1.1.1.4. G-26, 813
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana). ..........5 G-26, 821
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis)... ........5 G-26, 825
Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium).......... 5 G-26, 833

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ANTIEMETICS

Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) .G-3, 6
Almond (Prunus dulcis) . AS
American Pawpaw

(Asimina triloba).......... 27
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). 2.0... G-5, 75
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger) : G-5,97
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra). . G-5, 98
British Elecampane (Inula

britannica). . . . 119
California Peppertree

(Schinus_ molle) 139
Carob (Ceratonia

siliqua). G-7, 151
Cascarilla (Croton eluteria) .. . 156
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Cola (Cola acuminata). ...... 205

Common Kidney Vetch
(Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214

Gambir (Uncaria species) 324
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis
gigantea). fae 338
* Ginger (Zingiber

officinale). 6... ee es G-12, 339
Green Hellebore

(Helleborus viridis)... 2... 368
Green Tea (Camellia

SINENSIS), Lee ed G-13, 369
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi). 433
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis)... ........4 G-ie, 461
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum).......... 5 G-16, 468
Marijuana (Cannabis

Sativa)... 0.0.2. G-17, 500
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris). ...........5 G-18, 530
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita).............5 G-19, sso
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica). 700
Sweet Vernal Grass

(Anthoxanthum

odoratum) ..........5 G-24, 749
White Hellebore (Veratrum

album)... ..........-4 G-25, 803

----- PAGE 56 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

ANTIFLATULENTS
Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) G-3, 6

Alteris (Aletris farinosa) . 11
Angelica {Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
Basil {Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64

Bear's Garlic {Allium

ursinum). 66

Caraway {Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Curcuma {Curcuma

xanthorrhizia) . G-9,239

English Horsemint {Mentha

longifolia). . . . G-IO, 275
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare)... 0... . G-II, 302
Galbanum {Ferula

gummosa). sie... . 323
German Sarsaparilla {Carex

arenaria). . .. 336
Horehound = {Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 401
Horsemint {Monarda

punctata) 407
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). . . 431
Jatamansi  {Nardostachys

jatamansi). Le . 433
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis). G-ie, 461
Lovage {Levisticum

officinale). G-ie, 482
Masterwort {Peucedanum

ostruthium). 507
Motherwort {Leonurus

cardiaca). G-i8, 524
Oswego Tea {Monarda

didyma) Le Le . 562
Quinine {Cinchona

pubescens). . . : G-20, 626
Salep {Orchis species, 657
Sloe {Prunus spinosa) . .. G-22, 697
Sneezewort {Achillea

ptarmica). : : 700
Spearmint {Mentha

spicata). . .G-23, 709
Turmeric {Curcuma

domestica). . .. : 775
White Nettle {Lamium

album). G-25, 806

Wormwood {Artemisia
absinthium) G-26, 829
Yellow Gentian {Gentiana
lutea). : : : .. 836
ANTIFUNGALS
Cornflower {Centaurea
cyanus). G-9, 225
Mountain Laurel {Kalmia
latifolia) G-18, 528
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS
Hwema Bark {Corynanthe
pachyceras). 412
ANTMNFECTIVES
Bistort {Persicaria
bistorta). G-5, 82
Black Mustard {Brassica
nigra) G-5, 100
Brazilian Pepper Tree
{Schinus terebinthifolius) . . 117
Burning Bush {Dictamnus
albus). G-7, 130
Butternut {Juglans cinerea) . . . 134
Calotropis {Calotropis
procera)... .. Loe 4
Catechu {Acacia catechu). 163
Clematis {Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Cocoa {Theobroma
cacao)... ........... G-8,199
Coconut Palm {Cocos
nucifera). . G9, 20
* Colchicum {Colchicum
autumnale). G-9, 206
Dog Rose {Rosa canina) G-10, 254

English Ivy {Hedera

helix). . G-I0, 27S
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus) G-11, 283
Fumitory {Fumaria

officinalis). G-12, 322

German Sarsaparilla {Carex

arenaria), . . . : . . 336
Goa Powder {Andira

araroba). 352
Gotu Kola {Centella

asiaticad)........ G-13, 359
Greek Sage {Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Guaiac {Guaiacum

officinale). 375
Heartsease {Viola tricolor) . . . .382
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

{Arisaema _atrorubens) 426

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ANTLINFLAMMATORY AGENTS/1-51

Jequirity {Abrus

precatorius) 435
Lily-of-the-Valley

{Convallaria majalis) . G-ie, 475
Marsh Blazing Star {Liatris

spicata). . G-17, 503
Mountain Laurel /{Kalmia

latifolia) G-IS, 528
New Jersey Tea

{Ceanothus americanus) .... 541
Oak Gall {Quercus

infectoria). . . . . 550
Oats {Avena sativa). G-IS,551
Oregano {Origanum

vulgare). G-19, 559
Pasque Flower {Pulsatilla

pratensis). an 572
Peppermint {Mentha

piperita) G-19, 580
Picrorhiza {Picrorhiza

kurroa). 589
Pitcher Plant {Sarracenia

purpurea). G-20, 596
Purple Gromwell

{Lithospermum

erytrorhizon) 619
Red Bryony {Bryonia

cretica). : : : 632
Sandalwood {Santalum

album). 659
Sassafras {Sassafras

albidum). G-21, 662
Sorrel {Rumex acetosa). : 705
Spruce {Picea species) . 714
Tea Tree {Melaleuca

alternifolia). 757
Thuja {Thuja

occidentalis). . G-24,759
Thyme {Thymus

vulgaris) G-24, 761
Tree of Heaven {Ailanthus

altissima). . 6. 770
Turmeric {Curcuma

domestica). : : : 775
Virola {Virola theiodora). 789
White Bryony {Bryonia

alba) G-25, 800
Yellow Dock {Rumex

CrispUS) 835

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS, SKIN AND
MUCOUS MEMBRANE
+ Agrimony {Agrimonia

eupatoria) G-3, 10

----- PAGE 57 -----
1-52/ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS
¢ Arnica (Arnica montana) Ai
* Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae)... 2.0.00... ee eee 118
+ English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata). .........5 G-II, 278
+ Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum), ... . | G-11, 304
* Flax (Linum
usitatissimum). ....... | G-12, 313
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) G-12, 331
* Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .. . .382
+ Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). 429
* Oak (Quercus robur) . G-IS, 549
* Oats (Avena sativa)... . | G-IS, 551
* St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum)..........5 G-23, 719
+ Walnut (Juglans regia) . . G-25, 793
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS,
SYSTEMIC
Abscess Root (Polemonium
reptans). .. .. G-3, 3
Barley (Hordeum
distichon). G-4, 63
California Peppertree
(Schinus molle) 139
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox) 16
German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
(Arisaema atrorubens). ... . : A426
Jacob's Ladder
(Polemonium
caeruleum)..........5 G-15, 427
Quince (Cydonia
oblongata)... 2... ........5 625

Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, 655
Strawberry (Fragaria

vesca) G-23, 735
ANTILIPEMIC AGENTS
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus) . 2. < G-5, 75
Cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum) . . : 228
Evening Primrose
(Oenothera biennis) .. . G-11, 298
* Garlic (Allium sativum) . . G-12, 327
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis
tetragonoloba)........... 376

Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) .. . 575
Perilla (Perilla fructescens) .. . 583
* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) 612
* Soybean (Glycine soja) . . G-22, 707
Strophanthus — (Strophanthus
kombe) 736
Strophanthus Gratus
(Strophanthus gratus). .... 736
Surinam Cherry (Eugenia
unifloria) 742
ANTIMALARIAL AGENTS
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris). G-4, 61
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus
amarus),....... Lae 91
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum). G-8, 165
Croton Seeds (Croton
tiglium) 234
Fever Bark (Alstonia
constricta). . . 305
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe
pachyceras) A412
Marijuana (Cannabis
SUVA). . ee ee dl G-17, 500
Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum)...........4 G-17, 516
Neem (Antelaea
azadirachta).........4 G-IS, 539
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622
Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens)... ........5 G-20, 626
Simaruba (Simaruba
amara). 695
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus
altissima).. 2. 0... e ee ee 770
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron
tulipiferd), 6. 774
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria)............5 G-26, 812
ANTIPANIC AGENTS +
Gotu Kola (Centella
asiaticd). ............4 G-13, 359
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus) G-5, 75
ANTIPRURITICS
Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus). G-7, 132
Evening Primrose
(Oenothera biennis) . . . G-11, 298

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis)... .........4 G-11, 310
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum)............5 G-14, 411
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) . . . G-22, 668
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). ..........4 G-23, 710
Sweet Gale (Myrica

gale)... 0. eed G-24, 745
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... 2.2.0.4... G-25, 788
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) .... 799

ANTIPSORIATIC AGENTS
Black Nightshade (Solanum

nigrum). G-6, 101
Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus

Speci€S). 6. oe ee 177
Goa Powder (Andira

araroba). 352
Hogweed (Heracleum

sphondylium)......... 5 G-14, 396
Mountain Grape (Mahonia

aquifolium). ... 6.4... 4 G-IS, 527
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia)... 66... ed G-18, 528
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense)... .........5 G-21, 633
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species)... ..........4 G-21, 661
Sunflower (Helianthus

ANnuuS). 2... eee G-23, 741
Teazle (Dipsacus

Silvestris). .......+.004 G-24, 757

ANTIRHEUMATIC AGENTS
Alpine Cranberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . .G-3, 20
American Bittersweet

(Celastrus scandens)... .... ! 24

* Arnica (Arnica montana) 41
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G-4, 61
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Behen (Moringa oleifera). .... | 67

¢ Birch (Betula species). G-5, 78
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis). G-5, 90
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). . : : G-5, 94
Black Mustard (Brassica

nigra). G-5, 100

----- PAGE 58 -----
TH

Borage (Borago
officinalis). .

Boxwood (Buxus
sempervirens).

Brazilian Pepper Tree
(Schinus  terebinthifolius)

Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus).

Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus).

Buttercup (Ranunculus
acris). :

Cajuput (Melaleuca
leucadendrd).

Calamus (Acorus
calamus).

California Peppertree
(Schinus molle).

Calotropis (Calotropis
procera). .

Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora)

Canella (Canella
winterana).

Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum).

Celery (Apium
graveolens)

Chickweed (Stellaria
media).

Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum

aromaticum).

Chinese Olive (Canarium

species).

ERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

G6, 114
G-6, 116
117

28

G-7, 130
33

G-7, 136
G-7, 138
39

41

G-7, 143
47

G-8, 165
G-8, 172
iso

182

184

Clematis (Clematis recta) G-8, 194

Comfrey  (Symphytum
officinale).

Cowhage (Mucuna
pruriens)

Cumin (Cuminum
cyminum)

Devil's Claw
(Harpagophytum
procumbens)

Dog Rose (Rosa canina)

Duckweed (Lemna
minor).

Dwarf Elder (Sambucus
ebulus).

G9, 2

12

230

G9, 237

247
G-10, 254

G-10, 258

259

Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia). 268
English Ivy (Hedera
helix). . G-10, 275
» Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus), . . G-11, 283
European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . G-ll, 289
+ European Mistletoe (Viscum
album). G-11, 291
European Peony (Paconia
officinalis). . G-11, 295
Fever Bark (Alstonia
constricta). 305
Feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium) G-11, 306
Frankincense (Boswellia
carteri). 319
Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis). G-12, 322
German Sarsaparilla (Carex
arenaria). 336
Gotu Kola (Centella
asiatica) G-13, 359
Goutweed (Aegopodium
podagraria). G-13, 361
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea). 372
Ground Pine (Ajuga
chamaepitys). G-13, 373
* Guaiac (Guaiacum
officinale) 375
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris) G-13, 383
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum). G-13, 386
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum). G-i4, 403
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana). G-14, 408
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). G-14, 409
Indian-Hemp  (Apocynum
cannabinum). A418
Iporuru (Alchornea
floribunda). 424
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
(Arisaema _atrorubens). 426
Jalap (Ipomoea purga) G-15, 427
Java Tea (Orthosiphon
spicatus). : 434
* Larch (Larix decidua) G-15, 457

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ANTIRHEUMATIC AGENTS/1-53

Laurel (Laurus nobilis) . . G-15, 459
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria) 466
Male Fern (Dryopteris

filix-mas). G-17, 493
Manaca_ (Brunfelsia

hopeana). 494
Marijuana (Cannabis
Sativa)... ee G-17, 500
Meadowsweet = (Filipendula

ulmaria) G-17, 51
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum). G-17, 515
Monkshood = (Aconitum

napellus) G-18, 52
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-18, 525
Mullein (Verbascum

densiflorum) G-18, 532
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum). 545
Oats (A vena _ sativa).....G-1S,551
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). 2... G19, 559
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum). 577
Poison Ivy (Rhus

toxicodendron). £00
Poke (Phytolacca

americana). G-20, 602
ontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron ponticum) - 606
oplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Ragwort (Senecio

jacobaea). G-20, 629
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). 63:
Red Bryony (Bryonia

cretica) 632
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis). G-21, 645
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra). G-21, 650
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum) 650
Sandarac (Tetraclinis

articulata). . 660

----- PAGE 59 -----
1-54/ANTIRHEUMATIC AGENTS

Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species)... ..........4 G-21, 661
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum)............5 G-21, 662
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius)...........5 G-22, 672

* Scotch Pine (Pinus

speci€S). .... 0. eee dl .G-22, 674
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis). ..........4 G-22, 679
Sesame (Sesamum

orientale)... 6... ee ed 688
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulinad). . 6.0... ee ed 691
Smartweed  (Persicaria

hydropiper). 60. oe ee 699
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica).. 2.0.0.0... 000...! 700
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis)... ........54 G-22, 701
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lancea). ..... 706
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis)... . 0.2... G-23, 710
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosd)...........4 G-23, 711
Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis

SPINOSA). oe ee ee | G-23, 713

* Spruce (Picea species). ..... - 714

Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica).

Strawberry (Fragaria

V@SCO).. 2. eee ee G23, 735
Sunflower (Helianthus

ANNUUS), 2 G-23, 741
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata)... 6... eee ed G-24, 750
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare)... ed G-24, 754
Teazle (Dipsacus

RY7AY AY hy a G-24, 757
Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis)... ...... 5 G-24, 759
Tomato (Lycopersicon

esculentum). .........5 G-24, 766
Triticum (Agropyron

repens)... 2.2.2.2... G25, 771
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... ........4 G-25, 788
Wafer Ash (Ptelea

trifoliata).. 2.6... ee ee 790

Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale)... 2.0.2.0 2..24.° 798
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba)... 2.000... 000d G-25, 800
White Fir (Abies alba. ..... | 802
White Mustard (Sinapis

alba). voce -25, 805
White Willow (Salix

SPECIES). vi vee ee dl G-25, 807
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis)...............5 814
Wild Thyme (Thymus

serpyllum)...........5 G-26, 815
Wild Yam (Dioscorea

villosa).......0....004 G-26, 817
Winter Cherry (Physalis

alkekengi)...........5 G26, 819
Wintergreen (Gaultheria

procumbens). ............4 820

ANTISEBORRHEIC AGENTS

Behen (Moringa oleifera). 67
Birch (Betula species). G-5, 78
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .... 382
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis). ........0.245 G-14, 391
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum)........64.4) G-17, 515
Mountain Grape (Mahonia

aquifolium)... 2.2.0... 5 G-i8, 527
Oats (Avena sativa)... . & G-IS, 551
Peanut (A rachis hypogaea) . . . 575
Quillaja (Quillaja

saponaria)...........4 .G-20, 624
Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica)... 2... ee ed 6-23, 729

ANTISPASMODICS

American Hellebore

(Veratrum viride). . . . 25
Angelica (Angelica

archangelica), .. 20... G-3, 32
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris)... . G-4, 61
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna). G-4, 69
Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga) G-5, 81
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra). G-5,98
Boldo (Peumus boldus) . .G-6, 112
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Calotropis (Calotropis

PYOCETO). vc eee 141
Caraway (Carum carvi) G-7, i48
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis). 2... 0 eee 151
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Celandine (Chelidonium

majus). G-8, 169
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare)... 2.2... 22S G-11, 302
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis). ..........4 G-12, 322
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) . . .G-12, 331
Hemlock (Conium

maculatum)..........5 G-13, 386
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

NIZE). Cove eee’ G-14, 389
Hogweed (Heracleum

sphondylium)......... 5 G-14, 396
Jambolan (Syzygium

CUMINI), Ce 429
Linden (Tilia species) . G16, 477
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)... ........4 G-17, 497
Marijuana (Cannabis

SUVA). Cie eee dl G-17, 500
Muskmallow  (Abelmoschus

moschatus). 0.00. ce ee ee 533
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum)... 1.0.0.4. 4 563
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita)... 0.2... eee! G-19, 580
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens)... 2.0.2.0... G20, 626
Scopolia (Scopolia

carniolica)......0........4 67i
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697

Sumbul (Ferula sumbul) . .G-23, 738
Taumelloolch (Lolium

temulentum).......... | G-24, 756
Thyme (Thymus

vulgaris)... 0.0.2... G24, 761
Woundwort (Stachys

palustris)... 0 ee 832
Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium). 2... 0... G-26, 833

----- PAGE 60 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

ANTITHYROID AGENTS

Motherwort {Leonurus

cardiaca). . . G-i8, 524

ANTITUBERCULOSIS AGENTS

Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G-4, 61
Chickweed (Stellaria

media). . . . an . iso
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia). . . 268
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) . . G-11, 289

German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria) 336
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 401
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense) G-14, 409
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare). G-15,448
Myrtle (Myrtus

communis). . G-18, 536
Spruce (Picea species). 714
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia). . G-26, 826

ANTIVIRALS

Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa). ieo
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia) G-IS, 528
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) .. . G-22, 668
Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis). G-24, 759

APPETITE STIMULANTS
Alteris (Aletris farinosa) 11
Angelica (Angelica

G-3, 32
+ Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
Artichoke (Cynara

archangelica)

scolymus). G-4, 44
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris). GA, ei
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
* Bitter Orange (Citrus
aurantium). . G-5, 86
* Blessed Thistle (Cnicus
benedict us). G-6, 107
* Bog r>c." (Menyanthes
trifoliata) G-6, 110

+ Brewer's Yeast
(Sacch a romyces
cerevisiae). 18

California Peppertree
(Schinus molle). . . 39
Cardamom  (Elettaria

cardamomum). . . G-7, 149
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum). G-8, 165
Celery (Apium
graveolens) G-8, 172
* Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea). G-8, 174
* Chicory! (Cichorium
intybus). . G-8, 181
* Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum
aromaticum). 182
Chiretta (Swertia chirata). 187
* Cinnamon (Cinnamomum
verum). G-8, 190
* Condurango (Marsdenia
condurango) 216
* Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum) . G-9,221
* Curcuma (Curcuma
xanthorrhizia). G-9, 239
* Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale). . . G-9, 245
* Devil's Claw
(Harpagophytum
procumbens). 247
Dogwood (Cornus
florida). G-10, 256
+ English Lavender
(Lavandula
angustifolia) Loe G-10, 277
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). . . G-11, 283
+ Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum). : . G-11,304
French Tarragon (Artemisia
dracunculus) . . . G-12, 320
* Ginger (Zingiber
officinale). G-12, 339
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) 346
Hibiscus (Hibiscus
sabdariffa) G-14, 394
Hops (Humulus lupulus) G-14, 400
* Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare). G-14,401

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA /1-55

Iceland Moss (Cetraria

islandica). AIS
* Juniper (Juniperus
communis). G-15, 440
Larkspur (Delphinium
consolida)....... G-15, 458
* Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum). . . 467
Muira-Puama
(Ptychopetalum
olacoides). . Le 531
Muskmallow  (Abelmoschus
moschatus). 533
Nux Vomica (Strychnos
nux vomica) G-18, 547
* Onion (Allium cepa) . G-19, 557
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). . . G-19, 585
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . 622
* Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens). . G-20, 626
Radish (Raphanus
SUtivUS). . G-20, 628
* Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis) G-21, 645
* Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G-21, 655
Senburi (Swertia japonica) . 682
Skirret (Sium sisarum) . G22, 696
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica), ... 700
Spinach (Spinacia
oleracea). G-23, 712
¢ Star Anise (Illicium
verum). G-23, 725
* Sweet Orange (Citrus
sinensis)... ........ G-24, 747
Tansy (Tanacetum
vulgare). G-24, 754
Watercress (Nasturtium
officinale) 798
* Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829
* Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). G-26, 833
* Yellow Gentian (Gentiana
lutea). . 836
APPETITE SUPPRESSANTS
Cola (Cola acuminata). 205
Dwarf Elder (Sambucus
ebulus) . 259

BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA (BPH)
THERAPY

African Potato (Hypoxis
rooperi) 7

----- PAGE 61 -----
1-56 /BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA

European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) . . .0-11, 289
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris)... 1.0... G-13, 383
* Pumpkin (Cucurbita
PCPO) cre een G-20, 618
* Saw Palmetto (Serenoa
TEPENS). . 2. ee G-21, 664
* Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica)... ee eee dl G-23, 729
BOWEL EVACUANTS
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;
Aloe capensis; Aloe
vera). G-3, 16
Amargo (Quassia amara) . G-3, 23
Baneberry (Actaea spicata) ... 60
Buckthorn (Rhamnus
catharticus). G6, 123
Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus
purshiana). G-7, 153
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus
communis). . G-7, 158
Chinese Rhubarb (Rheum
palmatum). G-8, 185
Croton Seeds (Croton
tiglium) . . wie. . 234
Dyer's Broom (Genista
tinctorid)............4 G-10, 260
Frangula (Rhamnus
frangula). 2.0.02 eS G-12, 317
Lycium Berries (Lycium
barbarum). . .... 487
Mexican Scammony Root
(Ipomoea orizabensis). . . . . 514
Mountain Flax (Linum
catharticum). . . : . 526
Safflower (Carthamus
tinctorius) 652
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) .. . G-22, 697
BURN PREPARATIONS
English Ivy (Hederg
helix)... ed G-10, 275
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). . 2... eee G-14, 409
Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae
rhamnoides), ........ | G-22, 680
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia) 757

CALCIUM OXALATE STONE PREVENTION
Alpine Cranberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . .G-3, 20

Arenaria Rubra

(Spergularia rubra). . 39
« Asparagus (Asparagus
officinalis). G-4, 52
* Bean Pod (Phaseolus
vulgaris) G-4, 65
* Birch (Betula species) G-5, 78
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). : G-5, 94
* Canadian Golden Rod
(Solidago canadensis). . . . . 145
Celery (Apium
graveolens). G-8, 172
Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea). G-8, 174
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193
Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
Dyer's Broom (Genista
tinctoria)............5 G-10, 260
Eryngo (Eryngium
campestré). 6... ee | G-11, 282
¢ European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . . G-11, 289
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea) 372
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum)......... | G-14, 393
* Horsetail (Equisetum
AIVENS€). oe vee ee G-14, 409
Hydrangea (Hydrangea
arborescens),. 2.0.1.4! G-14, 413
* Java Tea (Orthosiphon
spicatus). 434
+ Lovage (Levisticum
officinale)... 1.2.2... G-16, 482
Madder (Rubia
tinctorum)...........4 G-16, 490
» Parsley (Petroselinum
crispum). 2.2.2... 0 005 G-19, 567
Parsley Piert (Aphanes
arvensis) 570
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). 000 G-19, 585
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major)... 0.2.2 ee G-19, 591
Pontian Rhododendron
(Rhododendron ponticum) . .. 606
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius),..........4 G22, 672
Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis
spinosa)... .....2...-4 G-23, 713

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

* Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica). . vee’ .G-23, 729
Stone Root (Collinsonia

canadensis). ......... 5 G-23, 733
Strawberry (Fragaria

VeSCa).. 2. G-23, 735
Wood Betony (Betonica

Officinalis).........005 G-26, 825

CARDIOVASCULAR AGENTS
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis). 21
Arnica (Arnica montana)... .. ¢ 41
As arum (Asa rum

europaeum). 48
Astragalus (Astragalus

species) 54
Bear's Garlic (Allium

ursinum). 66
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga) G-5, si
Bitter Candytuft (Iberis

amara). 84
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus). 91
Bladderwrack (Fucus

vesiculosus), . . : : . . 106
Brown Kelp (Macrocystis

pyrifera). Lee 122
Buckwheat (Fagopyrum

esculentum). G-6, 124
Calamus (Acorus

calamus) G-7, 138

* Camphor Tree

(Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). =...G-8, 165
Celandine (Chelidonium

majus) G-8, 169
Centaury (Centaurium

erythraea). G-8, 174
Cheken (Eugenia chequen) .. . 178
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

acre). 215
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum). G-9, 221
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea) .............4 G-10, 248

+ English Hawthorn

(Crataegus laevigata.* . G-IO, 271

----- PAGE 62 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

English Lavender

(Lavandula

angustifolia) G-I0, 277
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album). Le . 0-11,291
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis). . . G-12, 322

* Garlic (Allium sativum) . . G-12, 327
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica). G-13, 359
Hibiscus (Hibiscus
sabdariffa) G-14, 394
Indian Squill (Urginea
indica), ........ 0.0... 421
Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens) 431
Kombe Seed (Strophanthus
hispidus). 450
Lactucarium (Lactuca
virosa). : : 453
* Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
Lemon Balm (Melissa
officinalis) G-16, 461
+ Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Lycium Bark (Lycium
chinense). 486
Ma-Huang (Ephedra
sinica) G-16, 488
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa) G-17, 500
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus) G-18, 521
Motherwort (Leonurus
cardiaca) G-18,524
Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus). 543
Northern Prickly Ash
(Zanthoxylum
americanum). : 545
Nux Vomica (Strychnos
nux vomica). G-18, 547
Oats (Avena sativa) G-i8, 551
Oleander (Nerium
oleander) G-19, 555
Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557

Pontian Rhododendron
(Rhododendron ponticum) . .. eoe
Raspberry (Rubus

idaeus). . . G-21, 630

Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). 631
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis). G-21, 645
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum). . Ls eso
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius) 652
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). G-22, 672
Scotch Pine (Pinus

species) G-22, 674
Scotch Thistle (Onopordum
acanthium). G-22, 678
Squill (Urginea

maritima). G-23, 717
Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) . 727
Strophanthus — (Strophanthus
kombe). 736
Strophanthus Gratus

(Strophanthus_ gratus). 736
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum). G-24,751

Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima),.......... 770
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis) . G-25, 783
Wallflower (Cheiranthus

cheiri) G-25,792
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis

virginiana) G-26, 821
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia) G-26, 826

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
STIMULANTS

Areca Nut (Areca

catechu). G4, 38
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Contrayerva (Dorstenia

contrayerva),.. 2.1.0... 218
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera

langsdorfff. 0 220
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta). . 305
Feverfew  (Tanacetum

parthenium). . G-11, 306
Grains-of-Paradise

(Aframomum

melegueta). G-13, 362

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

COUGH & COLD PRODUCTS /I-57

Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis) G-13, 369
Guarana (Paullinia cupana) . . . 376
Gum Arabic (Acacia

senegal). . : . 378
Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinica) G-i6, 488
Milk Thistle (Silybum

marianum). G-17, 516

CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Snowdrop (Galanthus
nivalis). . 700

COGNITIVE ENHANCING AGENTS
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342

COLD & COUGH PRODUCTS WITH
ANALGESICS

Basil (Ocimum basilicum)  G-4, 64

CONTRACEPTIVES
(See under Oral contraceptives)
COUGH & COLD PRODUCTS
+ Angelica (Angelica
archangelica). . G-3, 32
+ Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35

+ Arnica (Arnica montana). . . 41
Arum (Arum maculatum) 46
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94

Black Hellebore

(Helleborus_ niger). G-5, 97
+ Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae), . . . . A118
* Camphor Tree

(Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis). 151
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) .. G-8, 164
Cherry Laurel (Prunus

laurocerasus). G-8, 179
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum). G-8, 195
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara). ... G-9,209
Coral Root (Corallorhiza

odontorhiza). 220
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum) G-9, 221
Cypress (Cupressus

sempervirens). G-9, 241

----- PAGE 63 -----
1-58/COUGH & COLD PRODUCTS

Daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus). .. 2... . 243
Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-10, 254
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
+ Echinacea Pallida
(Echinacea pallida)... .... : 261
* Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) G10, 261
+ English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata). G-11, 278
* European Elder (Sambucus
nigra) G-11, 287
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Hibiscus (Hibiscus
sabdariffd) G-14, 394

Hwema Bark (Corynanthe

pachyceras) A412

* Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica) 415

* Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens), . . . . A31
+ Larch (Larix decidua) . . . .G-15, 457
Lemon (Citrus limon) 460

Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum) 467
Linden (Jilia species) . . . G-16, 477

Luff a (Luffa aegyptica) . . G-16, 483
* Meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria) G-17, 511
New Jersey Tea

(Ceanothus americanus) .... 541

¢ Oak (Quercus robur) ... G-IS, 549
* Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium). 579
* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita). G-19, 580
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major) G-19,591
¢ Radish (Raphanus
SativUS). G-20, 628
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species) G-22, 674
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . .. G22, 697
Southern Bayberry (Myrica
cerifera) G-22, 705
Spikenard (Aralia
racemosa) G-23, 711
+ Spruce (Picea species). 714

Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana). G-24, 746
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata) G-24, 750
Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum) G-24, 764
Tomato (Lycopersicon

esculentum). G-24, 766
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25, 771
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 7715
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis). G-25, 788

* White Mustard (Sinapis

alba) G-25, 805
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812

DECONGESTANTS & COMBINATIONS

Scotch Pine (Pinus

species) G-22, 674

DECONGESTANTS, EXPECTORANTS &

COMBINATIONS

Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata) G-24, 743

DENTAL PREPARATIONS

Acacia (Acacia arabica). 3
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis) 21
Behen (Moringa oleifera). ... . | 67
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria

canadensis) ios
Brooklime (Veronica

beccabunga). G-6, 121
Calamus (Aco>us

calamus) G-7, 138
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera) 141
Catechu (Acacia catechu) 163
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum) G-8, 195
Coconut Palm (Cocos

nucifera) G-9, 201
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale). G-9,212
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

G-11, 283

globulus)
European Five-Finger Grass
(Potentilla reptans) . G11, 289

Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

giganted)................4 338
Green Tea (Camellia
sinensis) G-13, 369
Groundsel (Senecio
vulgaris) 374
Henbane (Hyoscyamus
niger) G-14, 389
Lesser Celandine
(Ranunculus ficaria)......: 466
Lycium Bark (Lycium
chinense) 486
Male Fern (Dryopteris
(filix-mas). G-17, 493
Mastic Tree (Pistacia
lentiscus) G-17, 508
Mezereon (Daphne
mezereum). G-17, 515
Oak Gall (Quercus
infectoria) 550
Pellitory (Anacyclus
Pyrethrum) 577
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria). G-20, 620
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G-21, 655
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis) G-22, 679
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica). 700
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia) 757
Water Dock (Rumex
aquaticus). 795
Winter's Bark (Drimys
winteri) 820
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella). 827
DEODORANTS
Thyme (Thymus
vulgaris) G-24, 761
DEPIGMENTING AGENTS
Wild Carrot (Daucus
carota) G-25, 809
DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS
Arrowroot (Maranta
arundinacea). 43

----- PAGE 64 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube) 439

DIGESTIVE AIDS
Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) G-3, 6

Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;
Aloe capensis; Aloe
vera). . . G-3, 16
Alteris (Aletris farinosa) . 11
American Ivy
(Parthenocissus
quinquefolia). G-3, 26
+ Angelica (Angelica
arckangelica) G-3, 32
Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
Apple Tree (Malus
domestica) G-4, 37
Arrowroot (Maranta
arundinacea). 43
Artichoke (Cynara
scolymus). G-4, 44
Asa Foetida (Ferula
foetida) 47
Balmony (Chelone glabra) G-4, 59
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris). G-4, 61
Barley (Hordeum
distichon). G4, 63
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Bear's Garlic (Allium
ursinum). 66
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Bennet's Root (Geum
urbanum) G4, 71
Bistort (Persicaria
bistorta). G-3, 82
* Bitter Orange (Citrus
aurantium). . G-5, 86
Black Pepper (Piper
nigrum). : : G-6, 103
Bladderwrack (Fucus
vesiculosus), . . . . . 06
* Blessed Thistle (Cnicus
benedictus) G-6, 107
* Bog Bean (Menyanthes
trifoliata). G-6, 110

* Boldo (Peumus boldus) . . . G6, 112
+ Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) Le . 118
Broom Corn (Sorghum

vulgare)... 2... ee 12D
G-6, 125

Bugle (Ajuga reptans)

Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus).

Calamus (Acorus
calamus). . .
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera)

Caraway (Carum carvi)
* Cardamom (Elettaria
cardamomum).
Carline Thistle (Carlina
acaulis)
Carob (Ceratonia
siliqua).
Cascarilla (Croton eluteria)
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum).

Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea). .
Cheken (Eugenia chequen)
* Chicory (Cichorium
intybus)
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum
aromaticum).
Chiretta (Swertia chirata)

Cinnamon  (Cinnamomum

verum).
Colombo (Jateorhiza
palmata)
* Condurango (Marsdenia
condurango)
Congorosa (Maytenus
ilicifolia)
Coolwort
cordifolia)

* Coriander

(Tiarella

(Coriandrum
sativum)

Corn Cockle (Agrostemma
githago)

Cup Plant (Silphium
perfoliatum)

* Curcuma (Curcuma

xanthorrhizia)

Cyclamen (Cyclamen
europaeum)

* Dandelion
officinale).

* Devil's Claw

(Harpagophytum

(Taraxacum

procumbens). .
Dill (Anethum

graveolens). . .

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

G-7, 130

G-7, 138

141

_.G-7, 148

G-7, 149

151

G-7, 151
. 156

G-8, 165

G-8, 174
_ 178

G-8, i8i

182

187

G-8, 190

208

216

218

G-9, 219

G-9,221

222

G-9, 238

G-9, 239

240

G-9, 245

247

G-10, 252

DIGESTIVE AIDS /I-59

Dragon's Blood

(Daemonorops draco). 257
Dyer's Broom (Genista

tinctoria) G-I0, 260
Elecampane (Inula

helenium) G-10, 266

Elm Bark (Ulmus minor) G-IO, 269
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) — G-10, 270
English Horsemint (Mentha

longifolia). G-IO, 275
English Lavender

(Lavandula

angustifolia) G-10, 277
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). G-11, 283
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare). G-11, 302
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium). : . . G-11, 306
Frostwort (Helianthemum

canadense). .... G-12, 321
Galbanum = (Ferula

gummosa). . 323
Gamboge (Garcinia

hanburyi). G-12, 325
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). 335
Germander (Teucrium

chamaedrys). G-12, 337
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea). . 338
Ginger (Zingiber

officinale) G-12, 339
Goldthread (Coptis trifolia) .. 358
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis). .. . G-13, 369
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba) 376
Haronga (Haronga

madagascariensis) 380
Hartstongue — (Scolopendrium

vulgare) 381
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

niger) G-14, 389
Hogweed  (Heracleum

sphondylium). . G-14, 396
Holly (Ilex aquifolium) G-14, 397
Honeysuckle (Lonicera

caprifolium). . . 399

----- PAGE 65 -----
1-60 /DIGESTIVE AIDS

* Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare)... 0... eee G-14, 401
Horsemint (Monarda
punctata).. 6... 407
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticand),..........) G-14, 408
* Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica)............204.4 A15
¢ Immortelle (Helichrysum
arenarium), 6... ee A17
Indian Nettle (Acalypha
indica)... 0... 0.0 eee A19
Indian Physic (Gillenia
trifoliata), 6... A21
Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). ......02000 00002 A429
Jatamansi (Nardostachys
Jatamansi). 2... ee 433
Jewel Weed (Impatiens
biflora). 2... ee 436
Lavender Cotton (Santolina
chamaecyparissias) . G-16, 460
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphylla). 6. 463
+ Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
Officinarum). ...........444 467
Lotus (Nelumbo
nucifera). G-ie, 48i
Lovage (Levisticum
officinale). G-ie, 482
Magnolia (Magnolia
glauca). 6... 490
Masterwort (Peucedanum
ostruthium). 6.0.0.0 507
¢ Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum). G-17, sie

Myrrh (Commiphora
molmol). G-18, 534
Noni (Morinda citrifolia) G-18, 544
Nutmeg (Myristica
fragrans) . .. G-18,545
* Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 5S7
Opium Antidote
(Combretum micranthum) . .. sso

Oregano (Origanum

vulgare) G-19, 589
Oswego Tea (Monarda
didyma)......0...0.02.... . 562

Papaya (Carica papaya) . G-19, ses
Parsley (Petroselinum

crispum). G-19, 567

Parsnip (Pastinaca

sativa) G-19, 571
Pear (Pyrus communis). ..... S577
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum)...............4 577
Pennyroyal (Mentha

pulegium), 6... ee ee 579
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita).............) G-19, 580
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

MQjOr). oo vee ee dl G-19, 591
Pineapple (Ananas

COMOSUS). 6 ee ee 593
Pinus Bark (Tsuga

canadensis). .........4 G-19, 594
Pitcher Plant (Sarracenia

Purpurea)... G-20, 596
Plantain (Musa

paradisiacd), .. 6... eee 597
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) -622
Quince (Cydonia

oblongata)... 0.0 ee ee dl 625
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens). ..........4 G20, 626
Radish (Raphanus

SatiVUS). 0. ee ed G-20, 628
Reed Herb (Phragmites

communis)... 0.0 ee ee dl 639
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis)... ........4 G-21, 645
Rosinweed  (Silphium

laciniatum). .........5 G-21, 646
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648

Saffron (Crocus sativus) . G-21, 653

Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G-21, ess
Salep (Orchis species)... ... J 657
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis) G-22, 679
Senburi (Swertia japonica) + 682
Skirret (Sium sisarum) .. .G-22, 696
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
Spearmint (Mentha

spicata). G-23, 709
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719
Star Anise (Illicium

VErUM), ©. ee ee G-23, 725
Stillingia (Stillingia

sylvatica)... 22.0 ee ee! 729
Stone Root (Collinsonia

canadensis)... 2.1.0.4 5 G-23, 733

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Swamp Milkweed

(Asclepias incarnata) . . G-23, 743
Sweet Gale (Myrica
501 (re, G-24, 745
* Sweet Orange (Citrus
SINENSIS). vo. eve ee ed .G-24, 747
Thyme (Thymus
vulgaris). 6... eee eed G-24, 761
Tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum). ......... G-24, 766
Turkey Corn (Dicentra
cucullarid). 60. 775
¢ Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica)... ee 175
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis)... 0 .....404 G-25, 788
Wahoo (Euonymus
atropurpured). .. 1... G-25, 791
Water Avens (Geum
Tivalé), 6... ce ee dl G-25, 794
Water Fennel (Oenanthe
aquatica)... 1... 1... ed .G-25, 796
Watercress (Nasturtium
officinale)... 0.2.2... ee 798
* White Nettle (Lamium
album)... ...000.0-205 G-25, 806
Wild Carrot (Daucus
carota)... 2... ee .G-25, 809
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotina)................4 810
Wild Thyme (Thymus
serpyllum)...........4 -26, SIS
Wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens). ............5 820
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella). . 0.6... ee 827
* Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium), 2.0.0.4 65 G-26, 829
¢ Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). G-26, 833
* Yellow Gentian (Gentiana
lutea)... 00. ee 836
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria
vulgaris)... .............4 840
Zedoary (Curcuma
zedoaria)............4 G-26, 846
DIGESTIVE ENZYMES
¢ Haronga (Haronga
madagascariensis). ....... 380
Papaya (Carica papaya) G-19, 565
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus).... 2.0.2... G-19, 585

----- PAGE 66 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Pineapple (Ananas

comosus) 593

DIURETIC AGENTS
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) G-3, 12

Angelica (Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) . .G-4, 50
Asparagus (Asparagus

officinalis). .. G-4, 52
Astragalus (Astragalus

species). 54
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
Bean Pod (Phaseolus

vulgaris). G-4, 65
Buckthorn (Rhamnus

catharticus) G-6, 123
Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) . .G-7, 144
Cat's Foot (Antennaria

dioica) . G-S, 162
Celery (Apium

graveolens). . G-8, 172
Cheken (Eugenia chequen) .178
Cleavers (Galium aparine) ... 193

Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera

langsdorffi) . .. 220
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). G-9, 245

Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-IO, 254
Elecampane (Inula

helenium) G-10, 266
Garden Cress (Lepidium

sativum) G-12, 326
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). : : . 335
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria). . . 336
Goat's Rue (Galega

officinalis) G-13, 353
Hempnettle (Galeopsis

segetum). G-13, 389
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffa) G-14, 394

Holly (Ilex aquifolium) . . G-14, 397

Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense). . G-14, 409

Immortelle (Helichrysum

arenarium), . . : .. AIT
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum) 418
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). 429
Juniper (Juniperus

communis). G-IS, 440
Knotweed (Polygonum

axiculare). G-15, 448
Lady's Bedstraw (Galium

verum). G-15, 455
Larkspur (Delphinium

consolida) G-15, 458
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Linden (Tilia species) .. . .G-16, 477
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis). . G-17, 497
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata). G-17, 503
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris). G-17, 503
Martagon (Lilium

martagon). 506
Mate (Ilex

paraguariensis). G-17, 508
Meadowsweet = (Filipendula

ulmaria) . G-17, 511
Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

annua). ... G-17, 513

Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus) 543

Olive (Olea europaea) .. G-19, 556
Parsley  (Petroselinum

crispum). . : . G-19, 567
Parsley PierP (Aphanes

arvensis). . oe... 570
Pear (Pyrus communis)... .. . : 577
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

major). G-19, 591
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). 63:
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species) G-21, eei
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis) G-22, 679
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulina) 691

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION THERAPY /I-61

Sloe (Prunus spinosa) .. . G-22, 697
Strawberry (Fragaria

vesca) G-23, 735
Sweet Clover (Melilotus

officinalis). . G24, 744
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana) G-24, 746
Sweet Woodruff (Galium

odoratum) G-24, 751
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare). . G24, 754
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) . . . 775
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis) G-25, 788
Wahoo (Euonymus

atropurpurea) G-25, 791
Water Fennel (Oenanthe

aquatica). Lae G-25, 796
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba). . G-25, 800
Winter Cherry (Physalis

alkekengi). . G-26, 819

EMOLLIENTS & MOISTURIZERS
Avocado (Persea

americana). . . . . S57
Jojoba (Simmondsia

chinesis) G-15, 438
Mountain Grape (Mahonia

aquifolium). G-IS,527

ENURESIS MANAGEMENT

California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica). G-7, 140
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182

False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica) 301
* Pumpkin (Cucurbita

pepo). . . \. . G-20, 618

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION THERAPY
Asiatic Dogwood (Cornus
officinalis) \ 51
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum
aromaticum). 182
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346

Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla
pratensis) : : 572

----- PAGE 67 -----
1-62/ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION THERAPY

Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe) 843
EXPECTORANTS
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum). 29
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ... G-4, 74
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria
canadensis). 108
Chinese Olive (Canarium
speciéS). 6... 184
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus). G-9, 225
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Ginger (Zingiber
officinale). G-12, 339
Hibiscus (Hibiscus
sabdariffa) G-14, 394
Hound's Tongue
(Cynoglossum officinale) . . . .410
Ipecac (Cephaelis
ipecacuanha). 2... 423
Linden (Tilia species) .. . G-16, 477
Malabar Nut (Justicia
adhatoda). G-17, 492
Moneywort (Lysimachia
nummutlaria) . G-17, 520
Myrrh (Commiphora
molmoll). G-18, 534
Oregano (Origanum
vulgare). . G19, 559
Safflower (Carthamus
tinctorius). 652
Seneca Snakeroot (Polygala
senega) 683
Soapwort (Saponaria
officinalis). G-22, 701
Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata). G-24, 750
Water Fennel (Oenanthe
aquatica). . G-25, 796
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis). G-26, 811
Wild Thyme (Thymus
serpyllum) G-26, SIS
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis) G-26, 825
FEVER REDUCERS
+ Angelica (Angelica
archangelica). . G-3, 32
* Arnica (Arnica montana) Al
+ Echinacea Pallida
(Echinacea pallida) 261

+ Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea)
English Plantain (Plantago

. G-10, 261

lanceolata). . . G-11, 278
+ European Elder (Sambucus

nigra). G-11, 287
+ German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) . . G-12, 331

Hwema Bark (Corynanthe

pachyceras). . .. Al2
+ Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens) 431
* Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
* Meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria). G-17, 511
* Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
+ Peppermint (Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species) G-22, 674
* Spruce (Picea species). . 714
GASTRITIS AIDS
Cat's Claw (Unicaria
tomentosa). 160
GASTROINTESTINAL AGENTS
Acacia (Acacia arabica). 3
Adam's Needle (Yucca
filamentosa) 4
Adonis (Adonis vernalis) G-3, 5
American Liverleaf
(Hepatica nobilis). 26

Artichoke (Cynara

Anise (Pimpinella anisum) .G-3, 35

scolymus). G4, 44
Asa Foetida (Ferula

foetida). . . AT
Baneberry (Actaea spicata ... 60
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G-4, 61
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna) G-4, 69
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ....G-4, 74
Beth Root (Trillium

erectum). G-4, 74
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). G-5, 75
Birthwort (Aristolochia

clematitis). G-S, SO
Bitter Apple (Citrullus

colocynthis). G-5,83

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL ME

DICINES

Black Alder (Alnus

glutinosa) G-5, 89
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis). G-5, 90
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Nightshade (Solanum

nigrum). G-6, 10
Black Pepper (Piper

nigrum). G-6, 103
Black Root (Leptandra

virginica). 04
Blessed Thistle (Cnicus

benedictus). G-6, 107
Bog Bilberry (Vaccinium

uliginosum). . G-6, 11
Boldo (Peumus boldus) .. G-6, 112
Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Burr Marigold (Bidens

tripartita) G-7, 13
Butcher's Broom (Ruscus

aculeatus) G-7, 132
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) .134
Cabbage (Brassica

oleracea). G-7, 134
Calamus (Acorus

calamus) G-7, 138
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle) 39
Canella (Canella

winterana). 47
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox). 16
Caraway (Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148
Cardamom (Elettaria

cardamomum) G-7, 149
Cashew (Anacardium

occidentale) G-7, 157
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). G-7, 158
Cat's Foot (Antennaria

dioica) . Ga, 162
Catechu (Acacia catechu). . 163
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) ..G-S, 164
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). : : G-8, 165
Celandine (Chelidonium

majUS). G-8, 169
Celery (Apium

graveolens) G-8, 172
Chickweed (Stellaria

media) 80

----- PAGE 68 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Chicory {Cichorium
intybus). G-8, ISI

Chinese Olive {Canarium
speciés)......... . 184

Cinquefoil (Potentill
erecta)

Colombo {Jateorhiza
palmata). . sone

Comfrey {Symphytum
officinale)

Common Kidney Vetch
f{Anthyllis vulneraria) . . G-9, 214

Common Stonecrop {Sedum

G-8, 192
208

0-9, 212

acre), . Lees . 215
Condurango {Marsdenia

condurango). . 216
Congorosa {Maytenus

ilicifolia) 218
Cornflower {Centaurea

cyanus) G-9, 225
Cranesbill {Geranium

maculatum). . 233
Croton Seeds {Croton

tiglium).... . : 234
Cubeb {Piper cubeba). 235
Curcuma {Curcuma

xanthorrhizia). G-9, 239

¢ Dandelion {Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
* Devil's Claw

{Harpagophytum

procumbens). 247
Digitalis {Digitalis

purpurea). G-10, 248
Dill {Anethum

graveolens),......... G-10, 252
Elecampane {Inula

helenium) G-10, 266
Elephant-Ears {Bergenia

crassifolia) 268
English Ivy {Hedera

helix). G-10, 275
English Lavender

{Lavandula

angustifolia) ,....... G-10,277
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus). . G-11, 283

European Golden Rod
{Solidago virgaurea) .. .G-11, 289
European Peony {Paeonia
officinalis). . . G-II, 295

Field Scabious {Knautia

arvensis) G-11, 310
Flax {Linum

usitatissimum). ... G2, 313
Fool's Parsley {Aethusa

cynapium). . . G-12, 316
Fringetree {Chionanthus

virginicus) G-12, 321

¢ Fumitory {Fumaria
officinalis) G-12, 322

Gambir {Uncaria species) ... 324
German Chamomile

{Matricaria recutita) .. G-12, 331
German Sarsaparilla {Carex

arenaria). 336
Germander {Teucrium

chamaedrys) G-12, 337
Goutweed {Aegopodium

podagraria). G-13, 361
Great Burnet {Sanguisorba

officinalis) G-13, 366

Greater Bindweed
{Calystegia sepium) ... G-13, 367
Ground Ivy {Glechoma

hederacea) 372
Groundsel {Senecio
vulgaris). 374
¢ Haronga {Haronga
madagascariensis)......... 380
Heather {Calluna
vulgaris) G-13, 383

Hedge Mustard
{Sisymbrium officinale). . . . 384
Hedge-Hyssop {Gratiola

officinalis) . . G13, 385
Hemp Agrimony

{Eupatorium

cannabinum) G-13, 388

* Henbane {Hyoscyamus

niger). G-14, 389
Henna {Lawsonia

inermis). . G-14, 391
Herb Robert {Geranium

robertianum). . G-14, 393
High Mallow {Malva

sylvestris). . . G14, 395
Hogweed {Heracleum

sphondylium). . .. G-14, 396

Hollyhock {Alcea rosea) . G-14, 398
* Horehound {Marrubium

vulgare). . . G-14, 401

¢ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

GASTROINTESTINAL AGENTS/1-63

Horse Chestnut {Aesculus

hippocastanum) G-14, 403
Horseradish {Armoracia

rusticana) G-14, 408
Horsetail {Equisetum

arvense). G-14, 409
Hyssop {Hyssopus

officinalis). . . . G-15, 414
Immortelle {Helichrysum

arenarium) AI7
Indian Physic {Gillenia

trifoliata). 421
Ipecac {Cephaelis

ipecacuanha), . . 423
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

{Arisaema atrorubens)..... : A26

Jalap {Ipomoea purga) .. G-5, 427
Jambolan {Syzygium

cumini). 0.00000 ee A29
Japanese Atractylodes

{Atractylodes japonica)... . : 430
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). .... s 431
Khat {Catha edulis) 447
Lady Fern {Athyrium

filix-femina). G-15, 454
Lady's Mantle {Alchemilla

vulgaris). G-15, 456
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis) G-16, 461
Lemon Verbena {Aloysia

triphylla)... 0.0... . 463
Lemongrass {Cymbopogo

citratus) G-ie, 465
Lesser Galangal {Alpinia

officinarum). . 467
Licorice {Glycyrrhiza

glabra) c-ie, 469
Linden {Tilia species) ... G-ie, 477
Lungwort {Pulmonaria

officinalis) G-16, 485
Mandrake {Mandragora

officinarum). G-17, 495
Marigold {Calendula

officinalis) G-17, 497
Marijuana {Cannabis

Sativa). ....... ... G17, 500
Marshmallow /Althaea

officinalis). : 505
Masterwort {Peucedanum

ostruthium). . 507

----- PAGE 69 -----
1-64/GASTROINTESTINAL AGENTS

Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

ANNU). 6. ee d G-17, 513
* Milk Thistle /Silybum

marianum)..... 000.06! G-17, 516
Mountain Flax {Linum

catharticum).............: 526
Mugwort {Artemisia

vulgaris). cc ees G-18, 530
Nux Vomica {Strychnos

mix vomicd),........5 G-IS, 547
Oak {Quercus robur) ... G-18, 549
Oats {Avena sativa)..... | G-18, 551
Opium Antidote

{Combretum micranthum) . . . 559

apaya {Carica papaya) . G-19, 565

arsley {Petroselinum

CrISPUM). Woe G-19, 567
Parsnip {Pastinaca

Sativa)... 0... 0.222. G-19, 571

asque Flower {Pulsatilla

pratensis)... .............! 572

assion Flower {Passiflora

incarnata). 6.6... G-19, 573
Pennyroyal {Mentha

pulegium).........-.-.0.4: 579

* Peppermint {Mentha

piperita), .. 0... eee | G-19, sso
Petasites {Petasites

hybridus). 6... oe G-19, 585
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurrod).. 0... eee 589
Poke {Phytolacca

americana). .........4 .G-20, 602
Poley {Teucrium polium). . . . 603
Pomegranate {Punica

granatum). 6... ee eS G-20, 605
Poplar {Populus species) G-20, 607
Poppyseed {Papaver

somniferum)... 2.0... ! G-20, 609
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) .. :. 612
Purple Loosestrife {Lythrum

salicaria) 0... eae ed .G-20, 620
Raspberry {Rubus

idaeus)..............5 .G-21, 630
Red Bryony {Bryonia

cretica) \.... ee 632
Red Sandalwood

{Pterocarpus santalinus) .... 635
Rice {Oryza sativa). .... | G21, 643
Rosemary {Rosmarinus

officinalis). ..........5 G-21, 645
Sage {Salvia officinalis) . G21, 655

Scarlet Pimpernel

{Anagallis arvensis) . . . G-22, 668
* Scopolia {Scopolia

carniolica). 2.0.2.0... ee! 671
Scotch Broom {Cytisus

scoparius).. 2... ..-.045 .G-22, 672
Self-Heal {Prunella

vulgaris)... .........5 G-22, 681
Simaruba {Simaruba

AMATO). ied 695
Slippery Elm {Ulmus

TUDTA). oo dl 697
Smartweed {Persicaria

hydropiper), 6... 0. ee dl 699
Solomon's Seal

{Polygonatum

multiflorum).... 2.2... 5 G-22, 703
Sorb Apple {Sorbus

domestica)... ............? 704
Speedwell {Veronica

officinalis)... .......4 G-23, 710
Spinach {Spinacia

oleracea). ...........4 G-23, 712
Stillingia /Stillingia

sylvatica). 2. ee 729
Strawberry {Fragaria

VESCO).. 2. eee G-23, 735

Summer Savory {Satureja

hortensis).
Sweet Marjoram {Origanum

majorand).... 1... ee | G-24, 746
Tamarind {Tamarindus

indica)... 0.2... 02.2000 00002 753
Tea Tree {Melaleuca

alternifolia)... 0. ...0..404% 757
Tolu Balsam {Myroxylon

balsamum) G-24, 764
' Turmeric {Curcuma

domestica). ..............° 775
Vervain {Verbena

officinalis) G-25, 788
Wafer Ash {Ptelea

trifoliata). 6.0. 790

Walnut {Juglans regia) . . G-25, 793
Water Germander

{Teucrium scordium) ..... ! 797
White Bryony {Bryonia

alba). . . ... G-25, 800
White Nettle {Lamium

album). G-25, 806
Wild Daisy {Bellis

perennis)............5 G-26, 811

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wild Radish {Raphanus

raphanistrum)........ 4 G-26, 814
Wild Yam {Dioscorea

villosa)... oe dl G-26, 817
Willow Herb /{Epilobium

angustifolium). ....... 4 G-26, 818
Winter's Bark {Drimys

WINTETI). We 820
Witch Hazel {Hamamelis

virginiand)...........) G-26, 821
Woundwort {Stachys

palustris)... 0. 832

* Yarrow {Achillea

millefolium),.........4 G-26, 833
Yellow Jessamine

{Gelsemium

sempervirens)... .........4 838
Yellow Toadflax {Linaria

vulgaris)... ee ee 840

GASTROINTESTINAL STIMULANTS

Strawberry {Fragaria

VESCO).. 2. eee G-23, 735

GOUT PREPARATIONS
Alpine Cranberry

{Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . .G-3, 20
Ash {Fraxinus excelsior) .G-4, 50
Barberry {Berberis

vulgaris). G-4, 61
Bilberry {Vaccinium

myrtillus) G-5, 75
Birch {Betula species) G-5, 78
Bitter Orange {Citrus

aurantium). .... G-5, 86
Black Bryony {Tamus

communis). G-S, 90
Black Currant {Ribes

nigrum). . ... G-5, 94
Black Horehound {Ballota

nigra). . G-5, 98
Brazilian Pepper Tree

{Schinus terebinthifolius) . . 117
Bulbous Buttercup

{Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . 128
Burr Marigold {Bidens

tripartita). G-7, 131
Calotropis {Calotropis

PYOCEIA), 6 ee ee 141
Celandine {Chelidonium

majUS). G-8, 169
Celery {Apium

graveolens).. 6... ....4 G-8, 172
Cheken {Eugenia chequen) .. .178

----- PAGE 70 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Chickweed  (Stellaria

Colchicum (Colchicum

autumnale), . 2... 0.0. G-9, 206
Cowslip (Primula veris). .... 231
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). G-9, 245
Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-IO, 254
Dyer's Broom (Genista

tinctoria)............4 G-IO, 260
English Ivy (Hedera

helix)... 000 eS G-10, 275
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) G-11, 289

European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... .....2.00--4 G-11, 291
European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis)... . 2.2... G-11, 295
German Sarsaparilla (Carex
arenarid). 2... 0.0. ee 336
Germander (Teucrium
chamaedrys). .. 6.0... 5 G-12, 337
Goutweed (Aegopodium
podagraria). . . : G-13, 361
Ground Pine (Ajuga
chamaepitys). . G-13, 373
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris). G-13, 383
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana). G-14, 408
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). G-14, 409
Java Tea (Orthosiphon
SpicatuS). 0 A434
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa). G-17, 500
Meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria) G-17, 511
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus). G-18, 521
Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-IS, 525
Oats (Avena sativa) G-is, 551
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium)................4 579
Pontian Rhododendron
(Rhododendron ponticum) 606
Rupturewort (Herniaria
glabra). G-21, 650
Rust-Red Rhododendron
(Rhododendron
ferrugineum). . 0.0.0 .020.04 650

Sandarac  (Tetraclinis

articulata). 6... ee 660
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius)...........5 G-22, 672
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis). .. 6... 00! .G-22, 679
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulind). 6... ee dl 691
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis)... ......0.4! G-23, 710
Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis
spinosa)... ...........5 G-23, 713
Spurge (Euphorbia

resiniferd). .. 2... 0..02 0000) 716
Strawberry (Fragaria

VESCO). ee G-23, 735
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis
odorata).............5 G-24, 743
Triticum (Agropyron

Tepens).. 20... eee ed .G-25, 771
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... ........5 G-25, 788
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus
torminalis)............2..5 814
Winter Cherry (Physalis
alkekengi)...........4 G-26, 819
Wood Anemone (Anemone
NEMOTOSA). . oe eee 824
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis). . 6... es G-26, 825
Woundwort (Stachys

palustris) re 832

HAIR GROWTH STIMULANTS

Arnica (Arnica montana). .... § Al
Birch (Betula species)... . | G-5, 78
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis)... .......4.4 G-5,90
Burr Marigold (Bidens

tripartita), ©... ee G-7, 131
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvens@). . 00. ee G-14, 409
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). .. 0... 0... 4 A91

HEMOSTATICS

Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis).............--. 21
Catechu (Acacia catechu). . . . 163
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia). 2... 0 ee 268
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea) . 280
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). 0... ee eS G-11, 283

¢ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

INFECTION PROPHYLAXIS AGENTS/1-65

European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... ............4 G-11, 291
Forget-Me-Not (Myosotis
arvensis). 6... eel G-12, 316
Golden Ragwort (Senecio
QUICUS). Le 354
Groundsel (Senecio
vulgaris)... 0.02 eee 374
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvensé).............5 G-14, 409
Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare). 2... 2... | G-15, 448
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum).......... 5 G-16, 468
Logwood  (Haematoxylon
campechianum). ... 0.0.2... 4 480
Loosestrife | (Lysimachia
vulgaris)... eee | G-16, 481
Matico (Piper elongatum) . 509
New Jersey Tea
(Ceanothus americanus) .... 541
Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus)...........4.5 543
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon
species)... 1.0. ...0.0.22.04 618
Sage (Salvia officinalis) G21, ess
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius). G-22, 672
Self-Heal (Prunella
vulgaris). . G-22, 68i
¢ Shepherd's Purse (Capsella
bursa-pastoris). G-22, 690
Sweet Sumach (Rhus
aromatica). 2.0. ee 748
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum) G-24, 756
Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). G-26, 833
INFECTION PROPHYLAXIS AGENTS
¢ Arnica (Arnica montana)... . . ¥ 41
* Cajuput (Melaleuca
leucadendra).........5 G-7, 136
¢ Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale)... 2.2.0.2... G-9, 245
¢ Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) G-IO, 261
¢ German Chamomile
(Matricaria_recutita) G-12, 331
« Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens), .. . 431
¢ Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-IS, 457

----- PAGE 71 -----
1-66/INFECTION PROPHYLAXIS AGENTS

* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita).............5 G-19, SSO
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species).............4 G22, 674
* Siberian Ginseng
(Eleutherococcus
senticosuS). 0.0.0.2 0 222s ed 693
* Spruce (Picea species). ...... 714

INOTROPIC AGENTS
* Adonis (Adonis vernalis)
Digitalis Lanata (Digitalis
anata)... 0. 250
Gray Wallflower

G-3, 5

(Erysimum diffusum) 365
Snowdrop (Galanthus
nivalis)... 0. oe ee 700
IODINE PRODUCTS
Bladderwrack (Fucus
vesiculosus)... .......20204- 106
Kelp (Laminaria
hyperborea).............. 4 446

KERATOLYTICS
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327

LAXATIVES
Agar (Gelidium amansii) 9
* Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;
Aloe capensis; Aloe
vera)... ..........22..4 G3, 16
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) G-4, SO
Bael (Aegle marmelos). 58
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris)... ..........5 G-4, 61
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Bitter Apple (Citrullus
colocynthis)... 0.2.0... | G-5, 83
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus
amarus)..................4 91
Black Hellebore
(Helleborus niger) G-5,97
Black Mulberry (Morus
nigra)... 0.0.0... eee ee 99
Black Root (Leptandra
virginica)... ......0..00.-- 104
Brooklime (Veronica
beccabunga)......... | Ge, 121
¢ Buckthorn (Rhamnus
catharticus). . .
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) 134
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox),..... . 16
» Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus
purshiana).... 2.0... . | G-7, 153

Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis) G-7, 158
Celery (Apium
graveolens)..........5 G-8, 172
Chicory (Cichorium
intybus). G-8, ISI
* Chinese Rhubarb (Rheum
palmatum). G-8, 185
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera
langsdorffi). 2... 220
Cornflower (Centaurea
cy anus). G-9, 225
Cotton Tree
(Cochlospermum
gossypium)...........-..4 229
English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
Figs (Ficus carica)..... | G-11, 310
¢ Flax (Linum
usitatissimum)........ | G-12, 313
* Frangula (Rhamnus
frangula).. 2... ee! G-12, 317
Gamboge (Garcinia
hanburyi)............4 G-12, 325
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum)... 0.2.0. .2005 G-12, 326
Greater Bindweed
(Calystegia sepium) . G-13, 367
Green Hellebore
(Helleborus_ viridis) 368
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) ....382
Hibiscus (Hibiscus
sabdariffa),..........:! G-14, 394
Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare)... ...........4 G-14, 401
Indian Nettle (Acalypha
indica)... 20. ..00........5 419
Jalap (Ipomoea purga) .. G-IS, 427
Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini)... 0.02. oe 429
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphylla)... 2.2 ee 463
* Manna (Fraxinus ornus) . .G-17, 496
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa). G-17, 500
Marsh Marigold (Caltha
palustris). 2... 2... ee G-17, 503
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis)... 2. ..........4 505
Mercury Herb (Mercurialis
LL G17, 513

¢ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Morning Glory (/pomoea

hederacea).. 0... ......0.0.04 523
Oats (Avena sativa)... .. | G-IS, 551
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) 575
Pear (Pyrus communis). 577
Picrorhiza  (Picrorhiza

kurrod).. 2... 000 ee 589
Pitcher Plant (Sarracenia

purpurea). ...........5 G-20, 596

* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) ... . 612

* Psyllium Seed (Plantago

Purple Gromwell

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon).............5 619
Sesame (Sesamum

orientate)... .............) 688
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . . . G-22, 697
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica)................- 700
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuus).............5 G-23, 741
Tamarind  (Tamarindus

indica)... ...............° 753
Tragacanth (Astragalus

gummifer), 2.0.0... 0 00. eS 767
Triticum (Agropyron

repens) G-25, 771
Wahoo (Euonymus

atropurpurea) G-25, 791
Wallflower (Cheiranthus

cheiri).. 2.2... eee! G-25, 792
Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus),.. 2.2. ..0....... 795
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) . 799
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba) G-25, 800

LEPROSTATICS

Calotropis (Calotropis

procera)... 0.0.0.0... 20.00% 141
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus

species)... 0.2.0.0... 0. 177
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum)............./5 G-9, 221
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea)................ 338
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe

pachyceras).... 0.2.0.0... A12
Lily-of-the- Valley

(Convallaria majalis) G-16, 475
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). ......0.....02... 775

----- PAGE 72 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

LIVER PRODUCTS
Adam's Needle (Yucca

filamentosa).
American Bittersweet
(Celastrus scandens) .... 24

American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis) 26
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum). 29
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) .G-3, 35
+ Artichoke (Cynara
scolymus). . G-4, 44
Asurum (Asarum
eiiropaeum). 48
Astragalus (Astragalus
species). 54

Balmony (Chelone glabra) G-4, 59
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). . G-4, 61
Beet (Beta vulgaris) G-4, 67
* Belladonna (Atropa
belladonna). . . G-4, 69
Bitter Apple (Citrullus
colocynthis)...........5 G-5, 83
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Root (Leptandra
virginica) 104
Brooklime (Veronica
beccabunga). G-6, 121
Burning Bush (Dictamnus
albus) G-7, 130
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia
californica). . . G-7, 140
* Celandine (Chelidonium
majus). G-8, 169
Chicory (Cichorium
intybus) . G-8, ISI
Cocoa (Theobroma
cacao). . G-8, 199
Columbine (Aquilegia
vulgaris). G-9,211
Corn Silk (Zea mays). 224
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus). G-9, 225
Curecuma (Curcuma
xanthorrhizia) G-9, 239
* Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
* Devil's Claw
(Ha rpagophytum
procumbens). . . 247

Dodder (Cuscuta
epithymum). . G-10, 254
Elecampane (Inula
helenium) G-10, 266
English Ivy (Hedera
helix), 6. ee G-10, 275
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). 2.00... eS G-11, 283
European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) GH, 289
Fringetree = (Chionanthus
virginicus). G-12, 321
¢ Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis) G-12, 322
German Sarsaparilla (Carex
arenaria). 336
Haronga (Haronga
madagascariensis). . 2... . 380
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris) G-13, 383
Hedge-Hyssop (Gratiola
officinalis) G-13,385
Hemp Agrimony
(Eupatorium
cannabinum). G-13, 388
Henbane  (Hyoscyamus
niger). 6.2.2... 02 eee G-14, 389
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum). G-14, 393
Holly (Ilex aquifolium) . . G-14, 397
Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare). G-14, 401
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana). . . G-14, 408
¢ Hyssop (Hyssopus
officinalis). . G-15, 414
» Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). . . . . A431
Jatamansi (Nardostachys
Jatamansi). 433
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube). A39
Lavender Cotton (Santolina
chamaecyparissias) G-ie, 460
Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum). 467
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza
glabra). .. G-ie, 469
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-ie, 477
Marsh Marigold (Caltha
palustris). G-17, 503
Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum). G-17, 516

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

LOCAL ANESTHETICS /1-67

Opium Antidote

(Combretum micranthum) 559
Parsley (Petroselinum
crispum). G-19, 567
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium) 579
* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita).............4 G-19, 580
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). G-19, 585
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza
kurroa). 589
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . 622
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentina). Lee 631
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) . . . G-22, 668
* Scopolia (Scopolia
carniolica). . . . 67i
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius). G-22, 672
Soybean (Glycine soja) . . G-22, 707
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis). . G-23, 710
Stillingia (Stillingia
sylvatica). 729
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca) G-23, 735
Tamarind (Tamarindus
indica) 753
* Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica). 775
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
Wallflower (Cheiranthus
cheiri) . _ G-25, 792
White Bryony (Bryonia
17) G-25, 800
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis) .. . G-26,811
Wood Sage (Teucrium
scorodonia), . . : G-26, 826
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella). 827
* Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829
* Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium) G-26, 833
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
Coca (Erythroxylum coca) 197

----- PAGE 73 -----
1-68/MENOPAUSAL PREPARATIONS

MENOPAUSAL PREPARATIONS
* Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). G-5, 92
* Chaste Tree (Vitex
agnus-castus). G-8, 176
MIGRAINE PREPARATIONS
Asarum = (Asarum
europaeum). 48
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) ..G-S, 164
Cola (Cola acuminata). 205
Cyclamen (Cyclamen
europaeum).......-...004. 240
Dusty Miller (Senecio
bicolor)... ee 258

European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis). ..........5 G-II, 295
European Water Hemlock

(Cicuta virosa)....... 5 G-11, 297
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium)..........5 G-11, 306
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis). .........-..4 G-13, 369
Herb Paris (Paris

quadrifolia). 6... G-14, 392
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis)... ........5 G-16, 461
Marijuana (Cannabis

Sativa)... 22.2.2. 22-' G-17, 500
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomicd)......... 5 .G-18, 547
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis)... ...0..00.004. 572
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). 2... 000 eS G-19, 585
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum). . 0... 0d eso
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

mqjorand)...........5 .G-24, 746
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata).............4 G-24, 750
Tansy (Tahacetum

vulgare). 6... eee ee G-24, 754
Traveller's Joy (Clematis

vitalba\.. 2... 2... S G-25, 769

MOUTH & THROAT PRODUCTS
Acacia (Acacia arabica) 3
+ Agrimony (Agrimonia

eupatorid)............4 G-3, 10
Amaranth (Amaranthus

hypochondriacus). G-3, 22

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

American Pawpaw
(Asimina_triloba) 27

American White Pond Lily
(Nymphaea odorata) .... G-3, 28

Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35

Arnica (Arnica montana)... . . . 41
Arum (Arum maculatum). 46
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). G-5, 75
Bistort (Persicaria

bistorta). G-5, 82
Bitter Orange (Citrus

aurantium). G-5, 86
Black Alder (Alnus

glutinosa). . . . . G-5, 89
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum) G-5, 94
Blackberry (Rubus

fruticosus). G-6, 104
Borage (Borago

officinalis) G-6, 114
Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces

cerevisidé)...........-00-- 118
Bugle (Ajuga reptans) .G-6, 125
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) . .G-7, 144
Canella (Canella

WINLEYANA). oe 147
Caraway (Carum carvi) G-7, 148
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acdulis), 66. ee 151
Catechu (Acacia catechu). ... . 163
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). . . G-8, 165
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum).... 2.0.0.2... 182
Cinquefoil (Potentilla

erecta)... 2.00.20. 2 2S G-8, 192
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum)......... | G-8, 195

Coconut Palm (Cocos

nucifera)... 2.2.2.0... G9, 201
Coffee (Cqffea arabica) . . G-9, 202
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara).. 2.6... eS G-9, 209
Comfrey (Symphytum
officinale) G-9, 212

Common Kidney Vetch

(Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Common Stonecrop (Sedum

ACT). cee 215
Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum). G-9, 221
Cudweed (Gnaphalium
uliginosum)...........-.. 236
* Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) . .G-10, 26i
English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270

English Plantain (Plantago

lanceolata)... .......5 G-11, 278
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). 2.0... 2.2.2.5 G-11, 283
European Elder (Sambucus
NIA). vee eed G-11, 287
European Five-Finger Grass
(Potentilla reptans) .. . .G-11, 289
European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . . .G-11, 289
Feverfew  (Tanacetum
parthenium)..........4 G-11, 306
Field Scabious (Knautia
arvensis)... .........5 G-11, 310
Figwort (Scrophularia
nodosa)... eee ee el G-11, 311
Gambir (Uncaria species) 324
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria_recutita) . G12, 331
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . 382
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum).........4 G-14, 393
* High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris)... 0.0... aed G-14, 395
Houseleek (Sempervivum
tectorum)............5 G-14, 411
* Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica).........0 0000204 A15
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
(Arisaema atrorubens). 426
* Jambolan (Syzygium
CUMIN). Cee 429
* Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). 431
* Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare).. 2.2... 0.2 S G-15, 448
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla
vulgaris)... 0... ee G-15, 456
+ Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
+ Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum)... 2.00.2... 467

----- PAGE 74 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Marigold {Calendula

officinalis)... 2. ....0..4 G-17, 497
Marshmallow {Althaea

officinalis). 505
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol). o.oo ee G-18, 534
Oak (Quercus robur) . G-IS, 549
Onion (Allium cepa)... : G-19, 557

eppermint (Mentha

piperita).......-.0..45 G-19, sao
erilla (Perilla fructescens) . 583

impinella (Pimpinella

MJOr). vee ee ed G-19, 591

inus Bark (Tsuga

canadensis)... ........ 54 G-19, 594

omegranate (Punica

granatum)...........4 G-20, 605
otentilla (Potentilla

anserind)............4 G20, 610
Radish (Raphanus

SativUS).. 6.2.02... ee G-20, 628
Raspberry (Rubus

idaeus)..............5 G-21, 630
Rhatany (Krameria

triandra) 641
Rose (Rosa centifolia) . 644
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G-21, 655
Scotch Pine (Pinus

species)... ..........4 G22, 674
Self-Heal (Prunella

vulgaris). os. ceed G-22, 681
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) .. . G-22, 697
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea

sativa). 708
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). 2... 0. ...005 G-23, 710
Spruce (Picea species). 714
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata)... 06. G-24, 743
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata)... ...........5 G-24, 750
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia) 757
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). 775
Usnea (Usnea species). 7B
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... 2.2.0.4... G-25, 788
Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus). 795

* White Nettle (Lamium

album)... 2... eS G-25, 806
Wild Carrot (Daucus
carota)... ee eee G-25, 809
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctorid)............5 G-26, 812
Willow Herb (Epilobium
angustifolium). ....... 5 G-26, 818
Wood Sage (Teucrium
scorodonia)..........4 G-26, 826
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella). . 827
Yew (Taxus baccata) . G-26, 84i
MUSCLE RELAXANTS
* Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) G-8, 165
NARCOTIC ANTITUSSIVES
Poppyseed (Papaver
somniferum), ........4 G-20, 609
NARCOTICS
Poppyseed (Papaver
somniferum)... 2.0... | G-20, 609

NON-NARCOTIC ANTITUSSIVES
Almond (Prunus dulcis). ee)
Anise (Pimpinella anisum) .G-3, 35

* Arnica (Arnica montana). 41
Asarum (Asarum
europaeum). . . . . .. 48
Bamboo = (Arundinaria
Japonica). G-4, 60
Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga). G-5, 81
Bitter Milkwort (Polygala
amara) fee 85
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). . G-5, 94
Black Horehound (Ballota
nigra) G-5, 98
Borage (Borago
officinalis). . . G-6,114
* Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae)... 6.2.2... .008. lis
British Elecampane (Inula
britannica). . 2.2... 0 ee 119
Broad Bean (Vicia faba). 120
Calotropis (Calotropis
PYOCEVA). ee 141
* Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora). G-7, 143

Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

NON-NARCOTIC ANTITUSSIVES /1-69

Carob (Ceratonia

siliqua). e-7, 151
Cherry Laurel (Prunus
laurocerasus) G-8, 179
Cocillana Tree (Guraea
rusbyi). . be 198
* Colt's Foot (Tussilago
farfara) G-9, 209
Common Kidney Vetch
(Anthyllis vulneraria) . .G-9, 214

Common Stonecrop (Sedum

acre). 215
Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum). G-9, 221
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma
githago). . : 222
Corn Poppy (Papaver
rhoeas). 223
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus). . G-9, 225
* Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Cupmoss (Cladonia
pyxidata). . 238
Cypress (Cupressus
sempervirens). G-9,241
Daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus). 243
Date Palm (Phoenix
dactylifera)..........4 G-IO, 246
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) . 261
* Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) . G-IO, 261
Elecampane (Inula
helenium)...........05 G-10, 266
+ English Ivy (Hedera
helix). oe eee ed G-I0, 275
+ English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata)... ....... 5 G-11, 278
Eryngo (Eryngium
campestre)...........) G-11, 282
¢ Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). . G-11, 283
* European Elder (Sambucus
nigra)... ... | \, G-11, 287
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album)... 2... ee G-11, 291
European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis). . G-11,295
* European Sanicle (Sanicula
europaea). . 296

----- PAGE 75 -----
1-70/NON-NARCOTIC ANTITUSSIVES

False Schisandra (Kadsura

Japonica). 301
* Fennel (Foeniculum
vulgare). G-II, 302
Field Scabious (Knautia
arvensis) : .. 0-11,310
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum) G-12, 326
Garlic (Allium sativum) . .G-12, 327
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea) 372
* Gumweed (Grindelia
species) 379
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . 382
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum). . . : G-13, 386
* Hempnettle (Galeopsis
segetum), . . : G-13, 389
+ High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris). . . : G-14, 395
Holly (Ilex aquifolium) .. G-14, 397

Horehound (Marrubium
vulgare). .. . G14, 401
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum). G-14, 403
* Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana) G-14, 408
Hound's Tongue
(Cynoglossum _ officinale) 410
* Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandicd). A15S
* Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). A31
Jimson Weed (Datura
stramonium). . . . G-IS, 436
* Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare). . G-IS, 448
Lactucarium (Lactuca
virosa). Loe .. . 453
* Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum)..............4 467
¢ Licorice (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) G-16, 469
¢ Linden (Tilia species) .. . .G-ie, 477
Lungmoss_ (Lobaria
pulmonaria). . : A84
Lycium Bark (Lycium
chinense). A86

+ Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinica) .. . G-16, 488
Maidenhair (Adiantum
capillus-veneris). .. 0... . 491
Mandrake (Mandragora
officinarum) G-17, 495
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis). G-17, 497
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa) G-17, 500
* Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis) . 505
* Meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria) G-17, 511
Mouse Ear (Pilosella
officinarum). 529
* Mullein (Verbascum
densiflorum) G-18, 532
Myrtle (Myrtus
communis). . G-18, 536
¢ Nasturtium (Tropaeolum
majus). : G-18, 537
* Niauli (Melaleucea
viridiflord) 542
* Oak (Quercus robur) . G-18, 549
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18,551
* Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Oregano (Origanum
vulgare). G-19, 559
Ox-Eye Daisy
(Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum). 563
* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita). G-19, 580
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). . G-19, 585
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza
kurroa) 589
» Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major) G-19, 591
Pleurisy Root (Asclepias
tuberosa). G-20, 598
Premorse (Scabiosa
succisa). : . G-20, 612
Quillaja (Quillaja
saponaria). G-20, 624
Quince (Cydonia
oblongata). 625
Radish (Raphanus
Sativus).............4 G-20, 628
Ragwort (Senecio
jacobaea). G-20, 629

¢ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense) G-21, 633
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius) 652
Scotch Pine (Pinus

species). . . G-22, 674
Seneca Snakeroot (Polygala

senega) 683
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis) . G-22, 701
Southern Bay berry (Myrica

cerifera). . . G-22, 705
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea

sativa). 708
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosa). G-23, 711
Spruce (Picea species). 714
Star Anise (Illicium

verum). G-23, 725
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis) G-23, 734
Sundew (Drosera

ramentacea) 740
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana) G-24, 746
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata). G-24, 750

Thyme (Thymus vulgaris) G-24, 76i
Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum). . G-24, 764
Tonka Beans (Dipteryx

odorata) 767
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25,771
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis) G-25, 788
Water Fennel (Oenanthe

aquatica). . G-25, 796
Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale). 798
White Mustard (Sinapis

alba)... 2.0... ee G-25, 805
White Nettle (Lamium

album)... 0.0. ee G-25, 806
Wild Cherry (Prunus

serotina). 810
Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis). . G-26,811
Wild Thyme (Thymus

serpyllum). G-26, SIS

Wood Anemone (Anemone

nemorosa). 824

----- PAGE 76 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis). ..........4 G-26, 825

OPHTHALMIC CONDITIONS
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;

Aloe capensis; Aloe

vera). G-3, 16
Asarum (Asarum

europaeum). 48
Calabar Bean (Physostigma

venenosum)........4.0000. 137
Chickweed (Stellaria

- media)... . iso
Coca (Erythroxylum coca) .... 197
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) Lee 218
Dusty Miller (Senecio

bicolor). 258
Eyebright (Euphrasia

officinalis). 300
Jaborandi (Pilocarpus

microphyllus)........ 5 G-15, 425
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria_majalis) G16, 475
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)... 0.2... 005 G-17, 497
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

mix vomica).........) G-IS, 547
Oats (Avena sativa)..... § G-IS, 551
Red Maple (Acer

rubrum)... .........-4 G-21, 635
Spurge (Euphorbia

resinifera).........+2004-° 716
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). ........++-+.4% 775

ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). . G-7, 158
Jequirity (Abrus

precatorius)............0.5 435
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum)..........4 G-ie, 468
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648

OTIC PREPARATIONS

Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). . G-7, 158
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica)... 0.0.2... eee A19

OXYTOCIC AGENTS
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis). . . 21
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger). G-5, 97
Blue Cohosh

(Caulophyllum

thalictroides).. 0... ee 109
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum) 182
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta). 305
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum).... 1.0.4.4! G-16, 468
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) . .G-16, 475
Pomegranate (Punica

granatum).. 26... ee ee! G-20, 605
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius). : . 652
Scotch Broom (Cy t is us

scoparius)...........4 G-22, 672
Simaruba (Simaruba

amara). . . Le .. , 695
Yew (Taxus baccata) . G-26, 841

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME AGENTS
* Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). . . G5, 92
* Bugle weed (Lye opus

virginicus). G-6, 126
* Chaste Tree (Vitex

agnus-castus) G-8, 176

* Shepherd's Purse (Capsella
bursa-pastoris). ...... $ G-22, 690

PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS
Peyote (Lophophora
williamsii). 2... 00... | G-19, 588
Yage (Banisteriopsis caapi) . . . 833

RENAL STONE PREVENTION
(See under Calcium oxalate
stone prevention)

RESPIRATORY AGENTS
Alteris (Aletris farinosa). . . . . Al
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum). 29
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) . G-3, 35
* Arnica (Arnica montana) . . . Al

Asarum (Asarum
europaeum).........2...4.4 48

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

RESPIRATORY AGENTS/I-71

Astragalus (Astragalus

SPCCIES). vee es 54
Bamboo = (Arundinaria

Japonica). G-4, 60
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G4, 61
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna). . . . .. G-4, 69
Benzoin (Styrax benzoin)..... | 73
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ....G-4, 74
Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga). G-S, SI
Bitter Milkwort (Polygala

amara). 85
Black Mulberry (Morus

nigra)... . . 99
Black Mustard (Brassica

nigra). G-5, 100
Black Pepper (Piper

nigrum). . . G-6, 103
Borage (Borago

officinalis). G-6, 114
Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces

cerevisiae)... 2.0... eee 118
Brooklime (Veronica

beccabunga). G-6, 121
Buttercup (Ranunculus

acris). : : : 133
Calamint (Calamintha

nepeta).. 0.0... 0 eee eee 138
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle). . 6.0 139
Calotropis (Calotropis

PYOCETA). ee 141
Camphor Tree

(Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) . .G-7, 144
Carrageen (Chondrus

crispuS). 2.0 152
Cedar (Cedrus libani)...... . iss
Celandine (Chelidonium

mOJUS). ... . . G8, 169
Cocillana Tree (Guraea

Tusbyi). 06. 198
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara) G-9, 209
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) G-9, 212

----- PAGE 77 -----
1-72/RESPIRATORY AGENTS

Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia). 6... 218
Corn Poppy {Papaver
rhoeds)......00. 0.00.4 eee 223
Cowslip {Primula veris). .... . 231
Cupmoss {Cladonia

pyxidata). 2.6... eee 238
Cypress {Cupressus

sempervirens) G-9, 241
Cypress Spurge {Euphorbia
cyparissias) G-9, 242
Daffodil {Narcissus
pseudonarcissus). ........ % 243

Duckweed (Lemna
minor). ..........++-4 G-10, 258

Echinacea Angustifolia

{Echinacea angustifolia) . 261
Echinacea Purpurea

{Echinacea purpurea) G-10, 261
Elecampane {Inula

helenium)............5 G-10, 266
English Ivy {Hedera

helix)... 20. eS G-10, 275
English Plantain {Plantago

lanceolata)... 2.1.2... G-11, 278
Eryngo {Eryngium

campestre)...........4 G-11, 282
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus)............5 G-11, 283
European Elder {Sambucus

nigra) G-11, 287
European Golden Rod

{Solidago virgaurea) . Gl, 289
European Mistletoe {Viscum

album). G-11, 291
European Peony {Paeonia

officinalis) G-11, 295
European Sanicle {Sanicula

europaea)... ..........4.. 296
False Schisandra {Kadsura
japonica)... .........00-- 301
Fennel = {Foeniculum

vulgare) G-11, 302
Fenugreek {Trigonella
foenum-graecum). . . . G1, 304
Forget-Me-Not {Myosotis
arvensis). G-12, 3ie
Gambir {Uncaria species) .. . 324
Garlic {Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
German Chamomile

{Matricaria recutita) . G-12, 331

Gotu Kola {Centella

asiatica). G-13, 359
Ground Ivy {Glechoma
hederacea)............... 372
Guaiac {Guaiacum
Officinale)...........044. 375
* Gum weed (Grindelia
Speci€S). 2. eee eee 379
Heartsease {Viola tricolor) . 382
Heather {Calluna
vulgaris)... .........5 G-13, 383
Hedge Mustard
{Sisymbrium officinale). 384
Hemlock {Conium
maculatum),......... 5 G-13, 386
* Hempnettle {Galeopsis
segetum)............4 G-13, 389
Henbane /{Hyoscyamus
niger)...............4 G-14, 389
* High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris). 2... 0S G-14, 395
Hollyhock {Alcea rosea) . G-14, 398
Horehound § {Marrubium
vulgare). G-14, 401
¢ Horseradish {Armoracia
rusticana). G-14, 408
Hyssop {Hyssopus
officinalis) G-15, 414
* Iceland Moss {Cetraria
islandica)................4 A15
Indian Nettle {Acalypha
indica)... 2.0 .0...0000.205 A19
Indian Squill {Urginea
indica). 2... ..00..0000.2-5 A21
Indian-Hemp ({Apocynum
cannabinum)..... 0.0.00... A18
Ipecac {Cephaelis
ipecacuanha)............. 4 A423

Iporuru {Alchornea

floribunda). . .
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

fAris'aema atrorubens). ... . + A26
Jambolan {Syzygium

cumini)... 0.000 ee 429

¢ Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). A31
Jimson Weed {Datura
stramonium) G-IS, 436
» Knotweed {Polygonum
aviculare) G-IS, 448
Labrador Tea {Ledum
latifolium).. 0.0.00 0-0.0.0005 451

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Lactucarium ({Lactuca

VITOSA). - 0 A453
Lady Fern {Athyrium
filix-femina)..........! G-15, 454
Larch {Larix decidua) ... .G-15, 457
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis)... ........5 G-16, 461
Lesser Galangal {Alpinia

Officinarum)... 2.0.2.0... 467
Licorice {Glycyrrhiza

glabra)... .....0.....5 G-16, 469
Linden {Tilia species) . . . G-16, 477
Lobelia (Lobelia inflata) G-16, 479
Luffa {Luffa aegyptica) . . G-ie, 483
Lungmoss {Lobaria

pulmonaria)... 0.2.0... eS 484
Lungwort {Pulmonaria

officinalis)... ........5 G-ie, 485
Ma-Huang {Ephedra

sinica)............-.24 G-16, 488
Maidenhair {Adiantum

capillus-veneris). .. 0... 1... ¢ A91
Mandrake {Mandragora

officinarum)...... 0... 4 G-17, 495
Marijuana {Cannabis

Sativa)... .......22.-5 G-17, 500
Marshmallow {Althaea

officinalis)... ............5 505
Meadowsweet {Filipendula

ulmaria) G-17, 511
Mouse Ear {Pilosella

officinarum)..............4 529
Mullein {Verbascum

densiflorum).... 2... . | G-18, 532
Myrtle {Myrtus

communis) G-IS,536
Nasturtium {Tropaeolum

majus)..............) G-IS, 537
Niauli {Melaleucea

viridiflora). 2... .........4 542
Night-Blooming Cereus

{Selenicereus

grandiflorus)............-: 543
Nux Vomica {Strychnos

nux vomica)......... 5 G-IS, 547
Oak {Quercus robur) . G-IS, 549
Oats {Avena sativa) G-18,551
Onion {Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Oregano {Origanum

vulgare)... 2.0.0. ..0..4 G-19, 559
Orris {Iris species)... . . | G-19, 561

----- PAGE 78 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Ox-Eye Daisy
{Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum). 563
* Peppermint {Mentha
piperita) G-19, SSO
etasites {Petasites
hybridus) G-19, 585
icrorhiza {Picrorhiza
kurroa) 589
+ Pimpinella {Pimpinella
major). G-19, 591
ineapple {Ananas
comosus). 593
leurisy Root {Asclepias
tuherosa). . G-20, 598
Poppy seed {Papaver
somniferum) G-20, 609
Quebracho {Aspidosperma
quebracho-bianco). .. 2.2... | 623
Quillaja {Quillaja
saponaria). . G-20, 624
+ Radish {Raphanus
Sativiis). . : G-20, 628
Raspberry {Rubus
idaeus). an G-21, 630
Red Bryony {Bryonia
cretica) 632
Red Clover {Trifolium
pratense). G-21, 633
Rupturewort {Herniaria
glabra). . G-21, 650
Scotch Broom {Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
* Scotch Pine {Pinus
species). G-22, 674

*Seneca Snakeroot {Polygala
senega)... 0... 6... 683
Siam Benzoin {Styrax
tonkinesis) 692
Skunk Cabbage

{Symplocarpusfoetidus) 696
Sloe {Prunus spinosa) . . . G-22, 697
Soapwort {Saponaria

officinalis). G-22, 701
Solomon's Seal

{Polygonatum

multiflorum) G-22, 703
Sorrel {Rumex acetosa). . 705
Spanish-Chestnut {Castanea

sativa). : : . 708
Speedwell {Veronica

officinalis) G-23, 710

Spikenard {Aralia
racemosa). G-23, 711
+ Spruce {Picea species) 714
* Star Anise {Illicium
verum). : G-23, 725
Storax  {Liquidambar
orientalis) G-23, 734
Sumatra Benzoin {Styrax
paralleloneurum).........! 738

Sumbul {Ferula sumbul) . G-23, 738
Sundew {Drosera

ramentacea) 740
Sweet Cicely {Myrrhis

odorata) G-24, 743
Sweet Violet {Viola

odorata) G-24, 750
Tea Tree {Melaleuca

alternifolia) 757
Thuja {Thuja

occidentalis) G-24, 759

* Thyme {Thymus vulgaris) G-24, 761

* Tolu Balsam {Myroxylon
balsamum). G-24, 764
Tree of Heaven {Ailanthus
altissima). 770
Turmeric {Curcuma
domestica) : : . 775
Vervain {Verbena
officinalis). ... . G-25, 788
Water Fennel {Oenanthe
aquatica). G-25, 796
Water Germander
{Teucrium scordium). ..... ! 797
* Watercress {Nasturtium
officinale). Lee 798
White Bryony {Bryonia
alba). . : .. . G-25, 800
White Fir {Abies alba) 802
* White Nettle {ZLamium
album) G-25, 806
Wild Cherry {Prunus
serotina). 810
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis). G-26, 8ii
Wild Service Tree {Sorbus
torminalis) 814
» Wild Thyme {Thymus
serpyllum). G-26, 815
Wintergreen {Gaultheria
procumbens). 820

Witch Hazel

virginiana).

{Hamamelis
G-26, 821

Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

SEDATIVES & HYPNOTICS /I-73

Wood Anemone {Anemone

nemorosa). 824
Wood Betony {Betonica
officinalis). G-26, 825
Wood Sage {Teucrium
scorodonia). G-26, 826
Yellow Dock {Rumex
CrispUS) 835
Yerba Santa {Eriodictyon
californicum). . . . . 841
REVITALIZING AGENTS
* Cola {Cola acuminata) 235
* Mate {Ilex
paraguariensis). G-17, 508
+ Siberian Ginseng
{Eleutherococcus
senticosus). 693

SALIVA PRODUCTS
Betel Nut {Piper betle) ....G-4, 74

Moneywort {Lysimachia

nummularia). G-17, 520
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622

SCABICIDES & PEDICULICIDES

Black Pepper {Piper

nigrum). G-6, 103
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus) G-7, 130
Celandine {Chelidonium

majlis) G-8, 169
Field Scabious {Knautia

arvensis). G-11, 310
Fish Berry {Anamirta

cocculus). 312
Henna {Lawsonia

inermis). G-14, 391
Pellitory {Anacyclus

Pyrethrum). . . S77
Picrorhiza {Picrorhiza

kurroa),... . . 2... 589
Poisonous Buttercup

{Ranunculus

sceleratus) G-20, eoi
Pyrethrum = {Chrysanthemum

cinerariifolium) <..........4 621
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622

SEDATIVES & HYPNOTICS

Bitter Orange {Citrus

aurantium). G-5, 86
Black Horehound {Ballota

nigra) G-5,98

----- PAGE 79 -----
1-74/SEDATIVES & HYPNOTICS

Borage (Borago

officinalis). G-6, 114

+ Bugle weed (Lye opus

virginicus) G-6, 126
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica)... 0.2... G-7, 140
Corn Poppy (Papaver

rhoeas). . . . 223
English Hawthorn

(Crataegus laevigata) G10, 271

+ English Lavender

(Lavandula

angustifolia) G-10, 277
False Schisandra (Kadsura
japonica)... . Le . 301
Feverfew  (Tanacetum

parthenium). G-11, 306
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) 346
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris) G-13, 383

» Hops (Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Jamaica Dogwood (Piscidia

piscipula) 428
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi). 433

» Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum). G-15, 443
Larkspur (Delphinium

consolida). . . . G-15, 458
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis). G-16,46i
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia

triphylla)... ... 463
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-IS, 477
Male Fern (Dryopteris

filix-mas). G-17, 433
Marijuana (Cannabis

Sativa)... ee G-17, 500
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris) G-18, 530
Nerve Root (Cypripedium

calceolus). . 2... 541
Oats (Avena sativa)... . | G-IS, 551
Passion Flower (Passiflora

incarnata). . . . G-19, 573
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). . . . G-19, 585
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). .: 631

Red-Spur Valerian

(Centranthus ruber) .. . G-21, 639
Sweet Vernal Grass
(Anthoxanthum
odoratum). .. G-24, 749
Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata) Le G-24, 750
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum) G-24, 751
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum). G-24, 756
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron
tulipifera) 714
* Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis). G-25, 783
Wood Betony (Betonica
Officinalis) G-26, 825
SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS
Pareira | (Chondrodendron
tomentosum). . . : . . 566

SKIN & MUCOUS MEMBRANE AGENTS
+ Agrimony  (Agrimonia

eupatoria) G-3, 10
Alkanet (Alkanna
tinctoria). G-3, 13
Almond (Prunus dulcis). . . AS
American Adder's Tongue
(Erythronium
americanum), . . . .. 24
American White Pond Lily
(Nymphaea odorata) ....G-3, 28
* Arnica (Arnica montana) Al
Bear's Garlic (Allium
ursinum). . . . . 66
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus). G-S,75
Birch (Betula species) G-5,78
+ Bittersweet Nightshade
(Solanum dulcamara) . .G-5, 88
Black Bryony (Tamus
communis). G-S, 90
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum) G-S, 94
Black Nightshade (Solanum
nigrum). . G-6, 101
B ladderwort (Utricu laria
vulgaris). G-6, 105
Brazilian Pepper Tree
(Schinus terebinthifolius) . . .117
+ Brewer's Yeast
(Sacch a romyces
cerevisiae). 118

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Broad Bean (Vicia faba). 120
Bulbous Buttercup
(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . 128

Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). . . ... G-7, 130
Buttercup (Ranunculus

acris). 33
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) .. . 134
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis) Le Le 51
Cashew  (Anacardium

occidentals) G-7, 157
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). . G-7, 158
Catechu (Acacia catechu) . 63
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus

species). 77
Chickweed (Stellaria

media). 80
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193

Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

acre). Lae 215
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia). . . . . . 218
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma

githago). 222
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Cypress Spurge (Euphorbia

cyparissias), ..... G-9, 242
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). G-9, 245
Devil's Claw

(Harpagophytum

procumbens)... .......... 247
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea). G-10, 248
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 26
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia) 268
English Adder's Tongue

(Ophioglossum vulgatum) . . . 269
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). G-10, 27s
English Plantain (Plantago

lanceolata). G-11, 278
Eryngo (Eryngium

campestre) G-11, 282

----- PAGE 80 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). 2... ee G-11, 283
European Elder (Sambucus

nigra). 6... eee ee G-11, 287
European Peony (Paeonia

officinalis). ..........4 G-11, 295
European Water Hemlock

(Cicuta virosa)....... 5 G-11, 297

Evening Primrose

(Oenothera_biennis) G-11, 298
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis)... .........5 G-11, 310
Flax (Linum

usitatissimum). ....... 4 G-12, 313
Frostwort (Helianthemum

canadense)..........4 G-12, 321
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis)... 1.0.2... G-12, 322

* German Chamomile
(Matricaria_recutita) G12, 331

German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenarid). 6.0 336
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis). G-13, 366
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea)............-.. 372
Guaiac (Guaiacum
Officinale)... 2... 0. eee 375
» Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .... 382
Henna _ (Lawsonia
inermis). 0. ..0..000404 G-14, 391
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum). G-14, 403
Indian Nettle (Acalypha
indica). 2... ..00..0000.245 A19
» Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini)... 0... ..000...222+-4 A429
Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare). G-15, 448
Labrador Tea (Ledum
latifolium), 6... 451
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla
vulgaris). G-15, 456
Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
Laurel (Laurus nobilis) . . G-15, 459
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphylla). 2. 463
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis) G-17, 497
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis)... 2... .0.0...0..: 505

Martagon (Lilium

martagon) 506
Mezereon (Daphne
mezereum)...........5 G-17, 515
Moneywort (Lysimachia
nummularia). ........ | G-17, 520
Monkshood = (Aconitum
napellus)... 2.0.04 G-18, 521
* Oak (Quercus robur) ... G-18, 549
» Oats (Avena sativa). .... | G-18, 551
Oleander (Nerium
oleander)............5 G-19, 555
Onion (Allium cepci). .. . § G-19, 557
Ox-Eye Daisy
(Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum)...........4 563
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla
pratensis). 6... ce 572
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) . . . 575
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium).............2-.5 579
Pimento (Pimenta
racemosa)............++..4 590
Poisonous Buttercup
(Ranunculus
sceleratus)...........5 G20, 601
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon
SPCCIES). vee c eee eee eed 618
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria)... 0.1.4...) .G-20, 620
Red Clover (Trifolium
pratense). : : G-21, 633
Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis)... ........5 G-21, 645
Rue (Ruta graveolens) G21, 648
Sarsaparilla (Smilax
species). an G-21, 661
Sassafras (Sassafras
albidum). . G-21, 662
Soapwort (Saponaria
officinalis). G-22, 701
Solomon's Seal
(Polygonatum
multiflorum). G-22, 703
Southern Bayberry (Myrica
cerifera) G-22, 705
Spikenard (Aralia
racemosa). G-23, 711
Spurge (Euphorbia
resiniferd). 6.0.0.0. ee 716
¢ St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum).......... 5 G-23, 719

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

SUNBURN PREPARATIONS / 1-75

Stillingia (Stillingia
Sylvaticd). 6.0 ee 729
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca)... 0.0.22 -2-2 2S G-23, 735
Sunflower (Helianthus
annuus)... 0 .222-22...4 G-23, 741
Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata)... .....+.+..5 G-24, 750
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia)... 20... 00000! 757
Thuja (Thuja
occidentalis)... ...... 5 G-24, 759
Thyme (Thymus
Vulgaris). 2... 0... eS G-24, 761
Triticum (Agropyron
repens). ......22..0005 G-25, 771
Turkey Corn (Dicentra
cucullarid). 6... ve 775
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica)... 6.0 ve ee 775
* Walnut (Juglans regia) . . G-25, 793
White Lily (Lilium
candidum)..............-5 804
¢ White Nettle (Lamium
album). 6.0 ee ee G-25, 806
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria). : G-26, 812
Wild Radish (Raphanus
raphanistrum) G-26,814
Winter's Bark (Drimys
winteri)................-5 820
* Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana) G-26, 821
Yellow Dock (Rumex
CrispUS). 20 ee 835
Yellow Lupin (Lupinus
luteUS). 60 ee 839
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria
vulgaris)... 2... ..-20..-24.5 840
SMOKING CESSATION AIDS
Lobelia (Lobelia inflata) G-16, 479
Tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum). G-24, 762
SMOOTH MUSCLE RELAXANTS
Celandine (Chelidonium
majus). 2.0... 0.0-0..5 G-8, 169
STIMULANT LAXATIVES
* Senna (Cassia senna) . G22, 684

SUNBURN PREPARATIONS
Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae
rhamnoides), ........ G-22, 680

----- PAGE 81 -----
1-76 /TEETHING REMEDIES

TEETHING REMEDIES
Male Fern {Dryopteris

filix-mas). G-17, 493

TREMOR PREPARATIONS
Cowslip {Primula veris). 231

URINARY ANTI-INFECTIVES
+ Angelica {Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
+ Asparagus {Asparagus

officinalis) GA, 52
* Bean Pod {Phaseolus

vulgaris) G-4, 65

Birch {Bet it la  species)....G-5,78
Canadian Fleabane

{Erigeron canadensis) . . G-7, 144
Canadian Golden Rod

{Solidago canadensis). . . . . 145
Chocolate Vine {Akebia

quinata)....... 189
Copaiba Balsam {Copaifera

langsdorffi) 220
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale). . G-9, 245

Echinacea Purpurea

{Echinacea purpurea) G10, 261
* European Golden Rod
{Solidago virgaurea) .. G-11, 289
* Horseradish {Armoracia
rusticana). G-14, 408
* Horsetail {Equisetum
arvense) G-14, 409
Iporuru {Alchornea
floribunda). 424
¢ Java Tea {Orthosiphon
spicatus) .. .. 434
Juniper {Juniperus
communis). . G-15, 440
* Lovage ({Levisticum
officinale). G-16, 482
Matico {Piper elongatum) .... 509
+ Nasturtium {T7ropaeolum
majas). G-18, 537
+ Parsley {Petroselinum
crispum). G-19, 567
Pipsissewa {Chimaphila
umbellata) Lee 595
» Sandalwood {Santalum
album). 659
Short Buchu {Barosma
betulina). . Lee 691
* Spiny Rest Harrow {Ononis
spinosa). G-23, 713

* Stinging Nettle {Urtica

dioica) G-23, 729
* Triticum {Agropyron

repens). . . G-25,771
* Uva-Ursi {Arctostaphylos

uva-ursi) G-25, 779
URINARY TRACT AGENTS

Alisma (Alisma
plantago-aquatica) G-3, 13

Arenaria Rubra
{Spergularia rubra). . .. 39
. G4, 50

Ash (Fraxinus excelsior)

Barberry ({Berberis

vulgaris). . G4, 61
Bean Pod {Phaseolus

vulgaris). G4, 65
Bilberry {Vaccinium

myrtillus). G-5, 75
Birch (Betula species). G-5, 78
Black Currant {Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger). G-5, 97
Bladderwort {Utricularia

vulgaris). G-6, 105
Bog Bilberry {Vaccinium

uliginosum) G6, 111
Borage {Borago

officinalis) G-6, 114
British Elecampane {Inula

britannica) 19
Broad Bean {Vicia faba) 120
Brooklime {Veronica

beccabungd). G-6, 121
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus). . : .. G-7, 130
Burr Marigold {Bidens

tripartita). . : : G-7, 131
California Peppertree

{Schinus molle) 39
California Poppy

{Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Cleavers {Galium aparine) .... 193
Club Moss {Lycopodium

clavatum). 96
Cocoa {Theobroma

cacao). : .. G-8, 199
Coolwort {Tiarella

cordifolia) G-9, 219
Coriander {Coriandrum

sativum). . G-9, 221

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Corn Silk {Zea mays) 224
Cubeb {Piper cubeba) . 235
Dodder {Cuscuta

epithymum). . G-10, 254
Dog Rose {Rosa canina)  G-10, 254
Eryngo {Eryngium

campestre) G-11, 282
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus). G-11,283
Field Scabious {Knautia

arvensis) G-11, 310
Flax {Linum

usitatissimum). G-12, 313
Fumitory {Fumaria

officinalis). G-12, 322
German Ipecac

{Cynanchum

vincetoxicum),..........., 335
Gout weed {Aegopodium

podagraria) G-13, 361
Greater Bindweed

{Calystegia sepium) ... G-13, 367
Hartstongue {Scolopendrium

vulgare)... ... : .. 381
Heather {Calluna

vulgaris) G-13, 383
Herb Robert {Geranium

robertianum). . G-14, 393
High. Mallow {Malva

sylvestris). G-14, 395
Horsetail {Equisetum

arvense). G-14, 409
Hydrangea {Hydrangea

arborescens). G-14, 413
Jatamansi = {Nardostachys
jatamansi) Le Le 433
Juniper {Juniperus

communis). G-15, 440

Lactucarium ({Lactuca
virosa). 453
Levant Cotton {Gossypium

herbaceum) G-16, 468
Lily-of-the-Valley

{Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Lungwort {Pulmonaria

officinalis) G-16, 485
Madder {Rubia

tinctorum). G-ie, 490
Marsh Blazing Star {Liatris

spicata) G-17, 503
Marshmallow {Althaea

officinalis) sos

----- PAGE 82 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

annua). Lae G-17, 513
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-IS, 525
Myrtle (Myrtus

communis). Le G-18, 536
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543
Oats (Avena sativa) G-IS,551
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). G-19, 559
Parsley  (Petroselinum

crispum). G-19, 567
arsley Piert (Aphanes

arvensis). 570
Parsnip (Pastinaca

sativa) G-19, 571
asque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis). : 572
ellitory-of-the-Wall

(Parietaria officinalis) 578
ennyroyal (Mentha

pulegium). . 579
etasites (Petasites

hybridus). .. . G-19, 585
impinella (Pimpinella

major). G-19, 591
itcher Plant (Sarracenia
purpurea). : .. . G-20, 596
oplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
oppyseed (Papaver

somniferum) G-20, 609
Pumpkin (Cucurbita

pepo). G-20, 618
urple Gromwell

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon). . . 619
Ragwort (Senecio

Jacobaea). . . G-20, 629
Round-Leafed Wintergreen

(Pyrola rotundifolia) 647
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra). fee G-21, eso
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species). . . G21, 661
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum) G-21, 662
Saw Palmetto (Serenoa

repens). G-21, 664
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) .. . G-22, 668

Scopolia (Scopolia

carniolica) . 67i
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulina). 69i
Smartweed  (Persicaria

hydropiper). 699
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica) 700
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis) G-23, 710
Squill (Urginea

maritima) G-23, 717

* Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica). . . : ... G-23, 729
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata). G-24, 743
Sweet Sumach (Rhus

aromatica). 748
Sweet Vernal Grass

(Anthoxanthum

odoratum). . . G-24,749
Trailing Arbutus (Epigae

repens). : 768
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25, 771
Turkey Corn (Dicentra

cucullaria) 7715
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 775
Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis). . . .. G-26,811
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis) 814
Wild Thyme (Thymus

serpyllum). G-26, 815
Willow Herb (Epilobium

angustifolium) G-26, 818
Winter Cherry (Physalis

alkekengi) G-26,819
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis). G-26, 825
Yellow Lupin (Lupinus

luteUS). 839
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria

vulgaris). 840

VAGINAL PREPARATIONS

Acacia (Acacia arabica). 3
Alteris (Aletris farinosa) Al
American White Pond Lily

(Nymphaea odorata) . G-3, 28
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium) G-11, 306

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY PRODUCTS

1-77

Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . 382
Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). . 541
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria) G-26, 812
VASOPROTECTIVE AGENTS
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus). G-5, 75
VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY PRODUCTS
Arnica (Arnica montana) 4l
Beth Root (Trillium
erectum). G-4, 74
Borage (Borago
officinalis) G-6, 114
Buckwheat (Fagopyrum
esculentum). G-6, 124
* Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus). G-7, 132
Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora). G-7, 143
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum). G-8, 165
Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
+ English Lavender
(Lavandula
angustifolia) G-10, 277
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album) G-11, 291
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) G-12, 342
Gotu Kola (Centella
asiatica). G-13, 359
Grape (Vitis vinifera)... G-13, 362
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis). . . G-13, 366
* Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum). G-14, 403
Hyssop (Hyssopus
officinalis). . G-15, 414
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphytla). . 463
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis) . ., . G-17,497
Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris). G-18, 530
Periwinkle (Vinca minor). 584
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major). . G-19, 591
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria). G-20, 620

----- PAGE 83 -----
1-78/VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY PRODUCTS

Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis) G-21, 645
* Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea
sativa). 708
* Sweet Clover (Melilotus
officinalis) G-24, 744
White Hellebore (Veratrum
album)... 0. cee ee G-25, 803
VERTIGO AGENTS
Asiatic Dogwood (Cornus
officinalis). Le 51
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . 67
Cowslip (Primula veris). . 231
Daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus). 243
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album). oo. ee G-11, 291
Fish Berry (Anamirta
cocculus), . . : : 312
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342
Herb Paris (Paris
quadrifolia). . G-14, 392
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum
majorana). G-24, 746
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum). . G-24, 756
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris) Lae 832
VITAMIN C & COMBINATIONS
Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-10, 254
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum) : : .. G-12, 326
Globe Flower (Trollius
europaeus). G-12, 351
Lemon (Citrus limon) 460
Lesser Celandine
(Ranunculus ficaria). . . 1. . 466
Lime (Citrus
aurantifolia) . G-ie, 476
Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-is, 525
Samphire (Crithum
maritimum). ... . : 658
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis). . . G-22, 679
VITAMIN E
Cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum)... . cee 228

WART PREPARATIONS
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . 67
+ Bittersweet Nightshade

(Solanum dulcamara) . . .G-5, 88
Broad Bean (Vicia faba) 120
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera).............. 141
Cashew (Anacardium

occidentale) G-7, 157
Celandine (Chelidonium

majlis). G-8, 169
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

acre). 215
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327

Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea) : : : 338
+ Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .... 382
Houseleek (Sempervivum
tectorum) G-14, 411
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum
cannabinum). : : : 418
* Mayapple (Podophyllum
peltatum). . G-17, 510
* Oats (Avena sativa) . G-18, 551
Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Savin Tops (Juniperus
sabina). . G-21, 663
Spurge (Euphorbia
resinifera). . . . 716
Sundew (Drosera
ramentacea). : : . 740
WOUND CARE PRODUCTS
Alkanet (Alkanna
tinctoria). G-3, 13
American White Pond Lily
(Nymphaea odorata) .... G-3, 28
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum). 29
* Arnica (Arnica montana) 41
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
Behen (Moringa oleifera).... . 5 67
Beth Root (Trillium
erectum). G4, 74
Birthwort (Aristolochia
clematitis). G-5, SO
Bistort (Persicaria
bistorta) G-5, 82
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). . G-5, 94
Black Nightshade (Solanum
nigrum). G-6, 101

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Bladderwort (Utricularia

vulgaris). G-6, 105
Brazilian Pepper Tree

(Schinus terebinthifolius) . IT
Broad Bean (Vicia faba). 120
Bugle (Ajuga reptans) ...G-6, 125
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130

* Cajuput (Melaleuca

leucadendra). G-7, 136
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera) . Le 141
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis). 151
Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa). 60
Catechu (Acacia catechu). 63
Chickweed (Stellaria

media). . . . . 180
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum). G-8, 190

Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Coconut Palm (Cocos

nucifera) G-9,201
Coffee (Coffea arabica) . . G-9, 202
Cola (Cola acuminata)... ... : 205

* Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) . G-9,212
Common Kidney Vetch

(Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

acre). 215
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea). G-10, 248
Dogwood (Cornus

florida). G-10, 256
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
Echinacea Purpurea

(Echinacea purpurea) . G-1O, 261

Elm Bark (Ulmus minor) G-10, 269
English Adder's Tongue

(Ophioglossum vulgatum) . . . 269
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). G-I0, 275
English Plantain (Plantago

lanceolata). G-11,278
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus) 2... 0.200.005 G-11, 283
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) . . .G-11, 289

----- PAGE 84 -----
THERAPEUTIC CATEGORY INDEX

Fenugreek (Trigonella

foenum-graecum). . . . G11, 304
Feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium).......... 5 G-11, 306
Galbanum (Ferula

gummosa). 0.0 ee 323

+ German Chamomile

(Matricaria_recutita) . G72, 331
Goldenseal (Hydrastis

canadensis)... ....... 5 G-13, 355
Gout weed (Aegopodium
podagraria)..........4 G-13, 36i
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis)... 1.0.0... G-13, 366
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederaced)............+-. 372
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris)... ..........4 G-13, 383
High Mallow (Malva

sylvestris). 2... ..2.005 G-14, 395
Horehound = (Marrubium

vulgare)... 0.22. .20-- 5 G-14, 401

* Horsetail (Equisetum

arvensé)........2....5 G-14, 409
Hound's Tongue

(Cynoglossum officinale) 410
Houseleek (Sempervivum
tectorum)............5 G-14, 411
Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica)................4 A15
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica)... ......000.000..0..5 A19
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini)... 00.0 ee A429
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube). 439
Lady's Bedstraw (Galium

verum). G-IS, 455
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria)  ....... 466
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
Loosestrife (Lysimachia

vulgaris)... .........5 G-ie, 481
Lungwort = (Pulmonaria

officinalis)... ........5 G-ie, 485

* Denotes recommendation by

Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)... ........4 G-17, 497
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris)... 2.0. eee! G-17, 503
Marshmallow (Althaea

Officinalis)..........++...5 505
Matico (Piper elongatum) . 509
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus)...........45 G-IS, 521
Mouse Ear (Pilosella

officinarum)... 2.0 ...2.-.04% 529
Mullein = (Verbascum

densiflorum)......... 5 G-IS, 532
Onion (Allium cepa)... . | G-19, 557
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum)...........: 563
Petasites (Petasites

hybrid hy G-19, 585
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

major)... 2.2.2... .4445 G-19, 591
Pineapple (Ananas

comosuS).. 2... ..002200004 593
Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens)...........: G20, 626
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis)... ........4 G-21, 645
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) . G22, 668
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae

rhamnoides) G-22, 680
Shepherd's Purse (Capsella

bursa-pastoris). G-22, 690

Slippery Elm (U/mus

Smartweed (Persicaria

hydropiper)... 2... 0.02... | 699
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis) G-23, 710
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719

Commission £.

WOUND CARE PRODUCTS /1-79

Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis), ..........4 G-23, 734
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuus)... 2.20. ee! G-23, 741
Sweet Clover (Melilotus

officinalis)... ........) G-24, 744
Teazle (Dipsacus

silvestris)... .........05 G-24, 757
Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum)...........5 G-24, 764
Traveller's Joy (Clematis

vitalba)... 1... 0-20.45 G-25, 769
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica)... .........2.2! 775
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... 5.0.0... G-25, 788
Virola (Virola theiodora). 789
Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus),............4.. 795
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium)...... | 797
White Fir (Abies alba)... ... $ 802
White Lily (Lilium

candidum)...............48 804
Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis)............: G26, 811
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria)............4 G-26, 812
Willow Herb (Epilobium

angustifolium)........ | G-26, SIS
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis

virginiana)... .........5 G-26, 821
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia).......... 54 G-26, 826
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis

acetosella)...........0.+45 827
Wormwood (Artemisia

absinthium) G-26,829
Woundwort (Stachys

palustris)... 2... 832
Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium). G-26, 833
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria

vulgaris)... .............3 840

----- PAGE 85 -----


----- PAGE 86 -----
Indications

Index

1-81

Entries in this index are organized by specific indication, enabling you to quickly review the

botanical alternatives for a particular diagnosis. For ease of comparison with prescription and

over-the-counter medications, the index employs the same nomenclature found in the Indications

Index of the PDR Companion Guide™. Under each heading, herbs are listed alphabetically by

accepted common name, with the scientific name shown in parentheses. Botanicals deemed

effective by the German Regulatory Authority's "Commission E" are marked with a (*) symbol at

their left. Ifan entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant in the

Herb Identification Guide, the second to the herbal monograph. For more information on both

proven and traditional remedies, be sure to check the appropriate underlying monograph.

ABDOMINAL CRAMPS
{See under Cramps, abdominal,
symptomatic relief of)

ABDOMINAL DISTRESS, SYMPTOMATIC.
RELIEF OF

English Lavender

{Lavandula
angustifolia) . G-10, 277
Lady's Mantle {Alchemilla
vulgaris) G-15, 456
ABORTION

{See under Pregnancy,
termination of)

ABRASIONS, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
{See under Pain, topical
relief of)

ABSCESS, CUTANEOUS
{See also under Infections,
skin and skin structure)
German Chamomile
{Matricaria recutita) .. G-12, 331

ACHES, MUSCULAR
{See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

ACID INDIGESTION
{See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

ACNE VULGARIS
+ Brewer's Yeast
{Saccharomyces
cerevisiae). ........,..... 118

ACNE, UNSPECIFIED
* Bittersweet Nightshade

{Solanum dulcamara) ...G-5, 88
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus) G-11, 283
German Chamomile

{Matricaria recutita) . . .G-12, 331
Heartsease {Viola tricolor) .... 382
Tea Tree {Melaleuca

alternifolia) 757

AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION DISORDERS
{See under Bronchial asthma;
Emphysema)

ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE
Cayenne {Capsicum

annuum) G-8, ies
Congorosa {Maytenus
ilicifolia). 218

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ALLERGIES, UNSPECIFIED
Feverfew {Tanacetum

parthenium). . . G-11, 306
ALOPECIA AREATA
Birch {Betula species)... . G-5,78
Burr Marigold {Bidens
tripartita). . G7, 131
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE
{See under Dementia,
Alzheimer's type)
AMENORRHEA
Alteris {Aletris farinosa). .... - 11
Burning Bush {Dictamnus
albus), . G-7, 130
Chinese Cinnamon
{Cinnamomum
aromaticum), .... . . 182
European Mistletoe {Viscum
album) G-11, 291
German Sarsaparilla {Carex
arenaria) 336
Levant Cotton {Gossypium
herbaceum). G-ie, 468
Turmeric {Curcuma
domestica) 775

----- PAGE 87 -----
1-82/AMENORRHEA, SECONDARY

AMENORRHEA, SECONDARY
(See also under Menstrual
disorders)
Yew {Taxus baccata) ... G-26, 841

ANEMIA ASSOCIATED WITH PREGNANCY
Brown Kelp (Macrocystis
pyrifera). 122
ANEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Congorosa {Maytenus

ilicifolia). .. . Le 218
Nux Vomica (Strychnos
mix vomica). G-18, 547
Ragwort (Senecio
jacobaea). G-20, 629
Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium) G-26, 829
ANESTHESIA, LOCAL
Coca (Erythroxylum coca) .... 197
ANGINA

(See under Angina pectoris)

ANGINA PECTORIS
Arnica (Arnica montana) 41
Asarum (Asarum

europaeum). . . .. AB
Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga) G-S, SI
Calamus (Acorus

calamus). G-7, 138
Celandine (Chelidonium

majus) G-8, 169
Marijuana {Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543
Onion {Allium cepa). G-19, 557

ANTISEPTIC

Perilla  (Perilla fructescens) . 583
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa) | 622

Wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens) 820
ANXIETY AND TENSION DUE TO
MENOPAUSE
{See under Menopause,
management of the
manifestations of)

ANXIETY DISORDERS, MANAGEMENT OF

* Adonis (Adonis vernalis) .. G-3, 5
Anemarrhena (Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) 31

Bitter Orange (Citrus

aurantium).

.. G-5, 86

Black Horehound {Ballota

nigra).
+ Bugle weed {Lye opus
virginicus).
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia

californica)

Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum

camphora).........

Catnip (Nepeta cataria)

Celery (Apium
graveolens)

Columbine (Aquilegia
vulgaris).

Corydalis (Corydalis cava)
Cowslip (Primula veris).

Cyclamen (Cyclamen
europaeum). . :
English Chamomile

G-5, 98

G-6, 126

G-7, 140

G-7, 143

..G-8, 164

G-8, 172
G9, 211
. 226
. 231

. 240

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270

English Lavender

(Lavandula
angustifolia) G-10, 277
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album) G-11,291
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346
Greek Sage (Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris). . G-13, 383
Herb Paris {Paris
quadrifolia) G-14, 392
* Hops {Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Jamaica Dogwood {Piscidia
piscipula),... 0... ee ee 428
Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). : 429
* Kava Kava (Piper
methysticum). G-IS, 443
+ Lemon Balm {Melissa
officinalis) G-16, 461
* Lily-of-the- Valley
(Convallaria majalis) G-16, 475
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa) G-17, 500
» Motherwort (Leonurus
cardiaca). G-IS, 524
Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris). . G-IS, 530

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). 541
Night-Blooming Cereus

{Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543
Nux Vomica (Strychnos
mix vomica) Le G-18,547
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18,551
* Passion Flower (Passiflora
incarnata). G-19, 573
* Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentina), . . : .. 631
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
Sculleap (Scutellaria
lateriflora). G-22, 678
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis) G-23, 710
+ Squill (Urginea
maritima). : : G-23, 717
* St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum). Le G-23, 719
Strawberry {Fragaria
vesca) G-23, 735
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum). G-24, 751
* Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis)... . G-25, 783
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) .. . G-25, 788
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotina) 810
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis). G-26, 825
APHRODISIAC
Saw Palmetto (Serenoa
repens). G-21, 664

APHTHOUS ULCERS
(See under Stomatitis, recurrent
aphthous, symptomatic
relief of)

APPENDICITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Licorice {Glycyrrhiza
glabra) G-16, 469

APPETITE, STIMULATION OF
Alteris {Aletris farinosa). . 11
+ Angelica (Angelica
archangelica). G-3, 32
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35

----- PAGE 88 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Artichoke (Cynara

scolymus) G-4, 44
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris) G-4, 61
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
+ Bitter Orange (Citrus
aurantium). G-5, 86
* Blessed Thistle (Cnicus
benedictus) G-6, 107
* Bog Bean (Menyanthes
trifoliata). G-6, no
« Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae). us
California Peppertree
(Schinus molle) 139
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum). G-8, 165
Celery (Apium
graveolens) G-8, 172
* Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea) G-8, 174
* Chicory (Cichorium
intybus). G-8, 181
* Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum
aromaticum) 182
Chiretta (Swertia chirata). 87

Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum). G-8, 190
* Condurango (Marsdenia
condurango) 2ie
* Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum). G-9,221
* Curcuma (Curcuma
xanthorrhizia) G-9, 239
* Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
* Devil's Claw
(Harpagophytum
procumbens) 247
Dogwood (Cornus
florida) G-10, 256
+ English Lavender
(Lavandula
angustifolia) G-10, 277
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus) 6-11, 283
¢ Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum). ... . | G-11, 304
French Tarragon (Artemisia
dracunculus) G-12, 320

Ginger (Zingiber

officinale) G-12, 339
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) 346
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffa) G-14, 394
Hops (Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare) G-14, 401
Iceland Moss (Cetraria

islandica). 415
Juniper (Juniperus

communis). G-15, 440
Larkspur (Delphinium

consolida) G-15, 458
Lesser Galangal (Alpinia

officinarum). 467
Muira-Puama

(Ptychopetalum

olacoides). 531
Muskmallow  (Abelmoschus

moschatus). 533
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomica). G-18, 547
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus) G-19, 585
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . 622
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens). G-20, 626
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis) G-21, 645
Sage (Salvia officinalis) G-21, 655
Senburi (Swertia japonica) + 682
Skirret (Sium sisarum) G-22, 696
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica) 700
Spinach (Spinacia

oleracea) G-23, 712
Star Anise (Illicium

verum) G-23, 725
Sweet Orange (Citrus

sinensis) G-24, 747
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare) G-24, 754
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 775
Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale) 798
Wormwood (Artemisia

absinthium) G-26, 829
Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium) G-26, 833

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ARTERIOSCLEROSIS PROPHYLAXIS /1-83

* Yellow Gentian (Gentiana

lutea) 836
APPETITE, SUPPRESSION OF
(See also under Obesity,
exogenous)
Cola (Cola acuminata)... .. . 205
Dwarf Elder (Sambucus
ebulus). 259
APPREHENSION
(See under Anxiety disorders,
management of)
ARRHYTHMIAS
* Adonis (Adonis vernalis) G-3, 5
Belladonna (Atropa
belladonna). G-4, 69
Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga) G-5, SI
Bitter Candytuft (beris
amara). 84
+ Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora) G-7, 143
English Hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata) . .G-10, 271
* Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) G-16, 475
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentina). 631
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius). G-22, 672
* Squill (Urginea
maritima). G-23, 717
ARTERIOSCLEROSIS
Arnica (Arnica montana)... . . : Al
Bear's Garlic (Allium
ursinum). 66
Bladderwrack (Fucus
vesiculosus) 106
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album) G-11,291
* Garlic (Allium sativum) . . G-12, 327
Lactucarium (Lactuca
virosd). 453
* Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Strophanthus — (Strophanthus
kombe). 736
Strophanthus Gratus
(Strophanthus gratus). 736
ARTERIOSCLEROSIS PROPHYLAXIS
Buckwheat (Fagopyrum
esculentum). G-6, 124

----- PAGE 89 -----
1-84 /ARTERIOSCLEROSIS PROPHYLAXIS

Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album). G-11, 291
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius). 00. 552

ARTHRALGIA, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

ARTHRITIS
(See under Arthritis, unspecified;
Rheumatoid arthritis)

ARTHRITIS, RHEUMATOID
(See under Rheumatoid arthritis)

ARTHRITIS, UNSPECIFIED

Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) G4, 50
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G4, 61
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). 6. 6 G45, 75
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). ......0..0....5 G5, 94

Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-10, 254
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium),........45 G-11, 306
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis)... .......4 G-12, 322
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea)...............- 372
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)....... | G-14, 403
Iporuru§ (Alchornea

floribunda)... ......0.0... 4 A424
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus). . : : G-18, 521
Pontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron _ponticum) . 606
Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica). G-23, 729
Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis). G-24, 759
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... 6.2.0... G-25, 788
Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale)... .....0..0.4.: 798

ASCARIASIS

Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra), . G-5, 98

Onion (Allium cepa). ... | G-19, 557
ASCITES
Chocolate Vine (Akebia
quinata).. 2.0... ee 189

ASTHMA, BRONCHIAL
(See under Bronchial asthma)

ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis). ..........) G-12, 322

AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
DISTURBANCES

Jimson Weed (Datura

stramonium). .... 6.4.4 G-15, 436
BACKACHE
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum)..........4 G-13, 386

BACKACHE, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)
BACTERIURIA ASSOCIATED WITH

CYSTITIS, ELIMINATION OR
SUPPRESSION OF

(See under Infections, urinary
tract)

BACTERIURIA ASSOCIATED WITH
POLYNEPHRITIS, ELIMINATION OR
SUPPRESSION OF

(See under Infections, urinary
tract)

BEDSORES
(See under Ulcers, decubitus,
adjunctive therapy in)

BELL'S PALSY
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus). . G-IS,521

BERIBERI
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500

BILIARY CALCULI, CHEMICAL
DISSOLUTION OF
American Liverleaf
(Hepatica nobilis). 26
Artichoke (Cynara
SCOIVMUS). . eee ee ed G-4, 44
Celery (Apium
graveolens)..........4 G-8, 172
Fringetree — (Chionanthus
virginicus) ........445 G-12, 321

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). . 6... G-22, 672
Wafer Ash (Ptelea
trifoliata).. 2.0... ee eee 790
BITE WOUNDS
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . . 67

Matico /Piper elongatum)

(Picrorhiza

Picrorhiza

kurroa)
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa)

BITES, INSECT
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia)
Purple Gromwell

. 261

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon).........-00.45 619
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia). 6.0... ee 157

BITES, POISONOUS
Plantain (Musa
paradisiaca).............4 597

BITTER TASTE
Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon
californicum).............4 841
BLEEDING ASSOCIATED WITH TOOTH
EXTRACTION
(See also under Bleeding,
gingival)
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio
nemorensis)..............-.- 21

BLEEDING IN THE LUNGS
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album) G-11, 291
Horsetail
arvense). .

(Equisetum
G-14, 409

BLEEDING, GASTROINTESTINAL
Black Alder (Alnus
glutinosa)............5 G-S, 89

BLEEDING, GINGIVAL
Brooklime (Veronica
beccabunga).........: G-6, 121
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). G-11, 283
Groundsel (Senecio
vulgaris). 6.0. i ee 374
Lesser Celandine
(Ranunculus ficaria). 466
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
G-20, 620

. G21, 655

salicaria).
Sage (Salvia officinalis)

----- PAGE 90 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Scotch Broom (Cytisus

SCOpahus). G-22, 672
BLEEDING, RECTAL
Willow Herb (Epilobium
angustifolium) G-26, 818
BLOOD PRESSURE PROBLEMS
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . . 67
English Hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata) G-IO, 271

European Mistletoe (Viscum

album) G-11, 291
¢ Larch {Larix decidua) . . G-15, 457
* Rosemary {Rosmarinus
officinalis) G-21, 645
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species) G-22, 674
BLOOD PURIFYING
Birch (Betula species). . . . G-5, 78
Borage (Borago
officinalis). G-6, 114

Burdock (Arctium lappa) G-7, 128
Celery (Apium

graveolens) G-8, 172
Common Kidney Vetch

(Anthyllis vulneraria). G-9, 214
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium). G-11, 306
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis) G-12, 322
Noni (Morinda citrifolia) G-18, 544
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra). G-21, 650
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum). G-21, 662
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis). G-22, 679
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). G-23, 710
Stillingia (Stillingia

sylvatica) 729
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata). G-24, 743

Walnut (Juglans regia) .. G-25, 793
Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus), . . . . . . 795
Yellow Dock (Rumex
Crispus). . . 835

BOILS, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
(See under Furunculosis,
symptomatic relief of)

BOWEL DISEASE, INFLAMMATORY
Barley (Hordeum

distichon). G-4, 63
BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
Croton Seeds (Croton
tiglium) . . .., 234

BOWEL, EVACUATION OF
Amargo (Quassia amara) . .G-3, 23
Baneberry (Actaea spicata) 60
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). G-7, 158
Dyer's Broom (Genista
tinctoria) . G-10, 260

Lycium Berries (Lycium
barbarum). 487
Mexican Scammony Root

(Ipomoea _orizabensis). 514
Mountain Flax (Linum
catharticum). 526
Safflower (Carthamus
tinctorius). Lae ... 652
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
BOWEL, IRRITABLE, SYNDROME

Asa Foetida (Ferula

foetida). 47
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita). G-19, sso
Psyllium (Plantago ovata) .... 612
Psyllium Seed (Plantago

afra) G-20, 6ie

BREAST CANCER
(See under Carcinoma, breast)

BREAST CARCINOMA
(See under Carcinoma, breast)

BRONCHIAL ASTHMA
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum). 29
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna). . . G-4, 69
Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga) G-5, 81
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera). .. ... 141
Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa), . . : : . . 160
Celandine (Chelidonium

majus). . G-8, 169
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara) . G-9,209

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

BRONCHIAL ASTHMA/1-85

Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) . . 218
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Daffodil (Narcissus

pseudonarcissus). 243
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). G-11, 283

European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . G-l1l, 289
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album). G-11, 291
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica). .. : 301
Gambir (Uncaria species)  .... 324
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica). G-13, 359
Hemlock (Conium

maculatum). G-13, 386
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

niger), : G-14, 389
Indian Squill (Urginea

indica). 421
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum). . Le 418
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

(Arisaema _atrorubens). : A426

Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini). . . : : : 429
Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum). G-15, 443
Khat (Catha edulis). 447
Lactucarium (Lactuca

virosa). 453
Lungmoss_ (Lobaria

pulmonaria). 484
Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinicd), ... 00... ee G-16, 488
Mandrake (Mandragora

officinarum). . G-17, 495
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) ... S. G-17, 500
Mouse Ear (Pilosella

officinarum) 529
Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum). 563
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). G-19, 585
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa). 589

----- PAGE 91 -----
1-86 /BRONCHIAL ASTHMA

Pineapple (Ananas

comosuS).. 0.2.0.0. 0020S 593
Skunk Cabbage

(Symplocarpus foetidus) vee. 696
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosa)...........4 G-23, 711
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata)... 66. eee | G-24, 743
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata), 6... ee es G-24, 750
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima)... 2.0.2.0. 002..2 770
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... ........5 G-25, 788
Water Fennel (Oenanthe

aquatica)... .........5 G-25, 796
Wintergreen (Gaultheria

procumbens). ............4 820
Wood Anemone (Anemone

NCMOFOSA). 20. ee 824
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis)... 6.6.20! G26, 825
Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon

californicum). ... 00. 841

BRONCHIAL CONGESTION
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum). . 0.0.0.0. ee 29
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ....G-4, 74
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria

canadensis)... ....-.....2.% 108
Chinese Olive (Canarium

Speci€S). 6... ee 184
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Cowslip (Primula veris)..... : 231
Ginger (Zingiber

officinale)... 6... es G-12, 339
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffa)...........5 G-14, 394
Hound's Tongue

(Cynoglossum _ officinale) 410
Ipecac (Cephaelis

ipecacuanha).............4 A23
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
Malabar Nut (Justicia

adhatoda) G-17, 492
Moneywort (Lysimachia

nummutlaria). G-17, 520
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmoll). G-18, 534
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare)... 2.2.2... 26S G-19, 559

Safflower (Carthamus

tinctoriuS). 2... ed 652
Seneca Snakeroot (Polygala

senega).....-......--0055 683
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis)... 2.2.2.0... G22, 701
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata). ............5 G-24, 743
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata)... ...........5 G-24, 750
Water Fennel (Oenanthe

aquatica). ...........4 G-25, 796
Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis).... 0... ee ad G26, 811
Wild Thyme (Thymus

serpyllum)...........5 G-26, 815
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis)... ........4 G-26, 825

BRONCHITIS, ACUTE
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35

¢ Arnica (Arnica montana), .... 41
Asarum (Asarum
europaeum)... 2.2.2.2... .005 A8
Bitter Milkwort (Polygala
AMATO). oe 85
Buttercup (Ranunculus
ACTIS). Fo ee 133
+ Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora)...........5 G-7, 143
Canadian Fleabane
(Erigeron canadensis) G-7, 144
Carrageen (Chondrus
crispus). 0.0 ee 152
¢ Colt's Foot (Tussilago
farfara). 6.0.0... eS G-9, 209
» Cowslip (Primula veris). .... : 231
Cupmoss (Cladonia
pyxidata). 6.6. 238
Cypress (Cupressus
sempervirens)... ..... 5 G-9, 241
¢ Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) G-10, 261
Elecampane (Inula
helenium). G-10, 266
' English Ivy (Hedera
helix). G-10, 275
English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata)... ....... G-11, 278
Eryngo (Eryngium
campestré). . 6... eee | G-11, 282

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). G-11, 283
European Elder (Sambucus

nigra). G-II, 287

European Sanicle (Sanicula

europaea)... .....-2..02005 296
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare)... .....---..5 G-n, 302
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederaced). 6... ce 372
Gum weed (Grindelia

SPeci€S). vee ee ee 379
Hemlock (Conium

maculatum).......... | G-13, 386
Hempnettle (Galeopsis

segetum). . 6. seer veel G-13, 389
High Mallow (Malva

sylvestris). 2... eS G-14, 395
Horseradish (Armoracia

rusticand),..........4 G-14, 408
Iceland Moss (Cetraria

islandicd). 6... eee ee A15
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica)... 06. A19
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) 431
Knot weed (Polygonum

aviculare). G-15, 448
Lactucarium (Lactuca

virosa).. 2.0.02 ee 453
Larch (Larix decidua) .. . .G-15, 457
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra). G-16, 469
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinica).............. G-16, 488
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). A491
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Marshmallow (Althaea

officinalis)... 0.00... ..00 0 50s
Meadowsweet (Filipendula

ulmaria) G-17, 511
Mountain Grape (Mahonia

aquifolium). G-18, 527
Mouse Ear (Pilosella

Officinarum), 6.0 ee 529
Mullein (Verbascum

densiflorum)......... | G-18, 532

----- PAGE 92 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Myrtle {Myrtus
communis). G-IS, 536
+ Nasturtium  {Tropaeolum
majUS). G-18, $37
* Niauli (Melaleucea
viridiflora). 5... ee 542
* Oak {Quercus robur) . G-IS, 549
* Onion {Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Oregano {Origanum
vulgare). 2... G19, 559
* Peppermint {Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
* Pimpinella {Pimpinella
major). G-19, 591
* Radish {Raphanus
SOtivUS). . G-20, 628
* Scotch Pine {Pinus
species). G-22, 674
* Seneca Snakeroot {Polygala
senega). Lee . 683
Skunk Cabbage
{Symplocarpus foetidus) -... 696
* Soapwort {Saponaria
officinalis). G-22, 701
Spanish-Chestnut {Castanea
sativa). 708
¢ Spruce {Picea species). 714
¢ Star Anise {Zllicium
verum). : G-23, 725
Storax {Liquidambar
orientalis) G-23, 734
* Sundew {Drosera
ramentacea). . 740
Sweet Violet {Viola
odorata) . 6-24, 730
Thuja {Thuja
occidentalis) G-24, 759

¢ Thyme {Thymus vulgaris) .G-24, 76i

* Tolu Balsam {Myroxylon
balsamum). G-24, 764
Turmeric {Curcuma
domestica). 775
* Watercress {Nasturtium
officinale). . 798
* White Mustard /Sinapis
alba) G-25, 805
* White Nettle {Lamium
album). . G-25, 806
Wild Cherry {Prunus
serotina). ... . sio
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis) G-26, 8ii

* Wild Thyme {Thymus

serpyllum). . G-26, sis

BRONCHITIS, CHRONIC
Alteris {Aletris farinosa). .... . 11
Ammoniac Gum {Dorema

ammoniacum). 29
Asarum {Asarum

europaeum), . . Le 48
Cocillana Tree {Guraea

rusbyi). 198

Hedge Mustard

{Sisymbrium officinale). 384
Horehound = {Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 40
Indian Squill {Urginea

indica)... . an 42
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

{Arisaema atrorubens). ... . : 426
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis) G-16, 46
Lungmoss {Lobaria

pulmonaria). Lae . . 484
Quillaja {Quillaja

Saponaria). . G-20, 624
Sweet Violet {Viola

odorata) G-24, 750
Wood Sage {Teucrium

scorodonia). G-26, 826

BRONCHITIS, NOT ACUTE OR CHRONIC
Black Cohosh {Cimicifuga

racemosa). G-5,92
St. John's Wort

{Hypericum

perforatum) .G-23, 719

BRONCHOSPASM, REVERSIBLE
{See under Bronchial asthma)

BRONCHOSPASTIC DISORDERS,

POSSIBLY EFFECTIVE IN
Poppyseed {Papaver

somniferum) G-20, 609
BRUCELLOSIS
* Colchicum {Colchicum
autumnale) . G9, 206
BRUISES
Black Bryony {Tamus
communis). G-5, 90
Cajuput {Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136
Comfrey = {Symphytum
officinale) G-9, 212

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

CARCINOMA, RECTAL/I-87

German Ipecac

{Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). 335
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus

hippocastanum). G-14, 403
Onion {Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Solomon's Seal

{Polygonatum

multiflorum) G-22, 703
Turmeric {Curcuma

domestica) 775

BRUISES, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
{See under Pain, topical
relief of)

BURNS, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
{See under Pain, topical
relief of)

BURNS, SUPERFICIAL
Tea Tree {Melaleuca
alternifolia) . . . 757

CALCULOSIS
{See under Renal calculi)

CALLUSES
{See under Hyperkeratosis skin
disorders)

CANDIDIASIS, VAGINAL

Cornflower {Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225

CANKER SORES
{See under Stomatitis, recurrent
aphthous, symptomatic
relief of)

CARBUNCLES
{See under Furunculosis,

symptomatic relief of)

CARCINOMA, BREAST
Green Tea {Camellia
sinensis). G-13, 369
Reed Herb {Phragmites

communis). 639

CARCINOMA, PANCREAS
Green Tea {Camellia

sinensis)... G-13, 369

CARCINOMA, RECTAL
Green Tea {Camellia

sinensis). G-13, 369

----- PAGE 93 -----
1-88/CARCINOMA, STOMACH

CARCINOMA, STOMACH

Celandine (Chelidonium
majus) G-8, 169
Condurango (Marsdenia
condurango)............% 216

CARCINOMA, TONGUE, PALLIATIVE
TREATMENT IN

Carline Thistle (Carlina
acaulis) 151

CARCINOMA, UNSPECIFIED

Butternut (Juglans cinerea) .. . 134
Calotropis (Calotropis

PYOCETA). oe ee 141
Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa)... 6... eee ee 160
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens). ........4.4 G-20, 626
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) . . . .G-22, 668

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
(See under Arrhythmias)

CARDIAC FAILURE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

CARDIAC OUTPUT, LOW

Adonis (Adonis vernalis) G-3, 5
Arnica (Arnica montana) 41
Belladonna (Atropa
belladonna)...........5 G-4, 69
Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga)..............5 G5, 81
Bitter Candytuft (Iberis
amara)...................48 84
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum). . G-8, 165
Cowslip (Primula veris). ... . : 231
Digitalis (Digitalis
purpurea). . G-10, 248
¢ English Hawthorn
*" (Crataegus laevigata) . G-10,271
Gray Wallflower
(Erysimum diffusum). ... . . 365
Indian Squill (Urginea
indica)... 6 ee A421
» Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius). G-22, 672
» Squill (Urginea
maritima). 6. ee ee G23, 717

Strophanthus (Strophanthus

kombe). 2... ee 736
Wallflower (Cheiranthus

Cheivi). oo ee G-25, 792

CARDIAC STIMULANT
Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinicd). 2.0... eee eS G-16, 488
Scotch Thistle (Onopordum
acanthium),.........4 G-22, 678

CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens). . . . . 431
Kombe Seed (Strophanthus

hispidus). 6.0. A450
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus). 0.2.0.0. eee 543
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

mix vomica)......... 5 G-18, 547
Oats (Avena sativa). .... § -18,551
Oleander (Nerium

oleander)............4 G-19, 555
Raspberry (Rubus

idaeus)..............5 G-21, 630
Strophanthus Gratus

(Strophanthus gratus). . . . . 736

CELLULITIS

Linden (Tilia species) G-16, 477

CEREBROVASCULAR INSUFFICIENCY

Periwinkle (Vinca minor). . . . 584

CHEST PAIN, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum). ............5 G-9, 221

CHOLECYSTITIS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Celandine (Chelidonium

Immortelle (Helichrysum

arenarium). . 0.000.020.0045 AIT

CHOLECYSTOPATHY

Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis).. 2.0.2 0 ee 151
Opium Antidote

(Combretum micranthum) . . . 559

CHOLELITHIASIS

Celandine (Chelidonium

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CHOLERA
Fool's Parsley (Aethusa
cynapium). ... G-12, 316
Marijuana {Cannabis
SAVE). oe ee ed G-17, 500
CHOLESTASIA
Blessed Thistle (Cnicus
benedictus). . G-6,107
Elecampane (Inula
helenium)...........05 G-10, 266
Greater Bindweed
(Calystegia sepium) .. . .G-13, 367

CHOLESTEROL LEVELS, ELEVATED
(See under Hypercholesterolemia,
primary, adjunct to diet)

CHOREA, PROPHYLAXIS OF
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... 0.00.04 d G-11, 291
Sculleap (Scutellaria
lateriflora)... 2.2.2... G-22, 678

CIRCULATORY DISORDERS
Camphor Tree

(Cinnamomum

camphora)......0...445 G-7, 143
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). oo G-8, 165

+ English Lavender

(Lavandula

angustifolia)... 2... 2. | G-10, 277
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... 2... ee G-11, 291
Grape (Vitis vinifera) . G-13, 362
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffd). 6... eee eS G-14, 394
Hyssop (Hyssopus

officinalis). ..........4 G-IS, 414
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)... ........4 G-17, 497
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris)... 2.2.0.2...) G-18,530
Periwinkle (Vinca minor)... . ! 584
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis)... . . G-21, 645

+ Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). G-22, 672
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea

Sativa)... ee eee 708
Sweet Woodruff (Galium

odoratum)...........5 G-24, 751

----- PAGE 94 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

CLAUDICATION, INTERMITTENT
* Ginkgo {Ginkgo bilobd) . G-12, 342
COLD, COMMON, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
+ Angelica {Angelica

archangelica). . G-3, 32
+ Anise {Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35

+ Arnica {Arnica montana) . . Al
Arum {Arum maculatum) 46
Basil {Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Behen {Moringa oleifera) 67
Black Currant {Ribes

nigrum). : G-5, 94
Black Hellebore
{Helleborus niger) G-S, 97

Carline Thistle {Carlina
acaulis). 151

Catnip {Nepeta cataria) ..G-8, 164
Cherry Laurel {Prunus

laurocerasus). G-8, 179
Coconut Palm {Cocos

nucifera). . . G-9, 201
Colt's Foot {Tussilago

farfara). G-9, 209
Coral Root {Corallorhiza
odontorhiza). . . 220
Cypress {Cupressus

sempervirens). . G-9,241
Daffodil {Narcissus
pseudonarcissus) 243

Dog Rose {Rosa canina) G-IO, 254
Echinacea Angustifolia
{Echinacea angustifolia)
» Echinacea Pallida
{Echinacea pallida). . . 261
+ Echinacea Purpurea

..261

{Echinacea purpurea) . G-IO, 26i
» English Plantain {Plantago

lanceolata). . 0-11, 278
» European Elder {Sambucus

nigra). G-11, 287
German Chamomile

{Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Greek Sage {Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Hibiscus {Hibiscus

sabdariffa) G-14,394
Hwema Bark {Corynanthe

pachyceras). 412
Iporuru {Alchornea

floribunda). . .. A24
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). 431 I

Larch {Larix decidua) . . . G-15, 457
Lemon {Citrus limon). 460
Linden {Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
Luff a {Luffa aegyptica) . . G-16, 483

+ Meadowsweet /Filipendula
ulmaria). G-17, 511
New Jersey Tea
{Ceanothus americanus) . 541
* Onion {Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Pennyroyal {Mentha
pulegium). . . .. 579
+ Peppermint {Mentha
piperita) G-19, sso
Pimpinella {Pimpinella
mdjor). 6. ee G-19, 591
* Scotch Pine {Pinus
species). G-22, 674
Sloe {Prunus spinosa) . . . G-22, 697
Southern Bayberry {Myrica
cerifera). . G-22, 705
+ Spruce {Picea species). 714
Sweet Marjoram {Origanum
majorana) G-24, 746
Sweet Violet {Viola
odorata) G-24, 750
Tomato {Lycopersicon
esculentum). G-24, 766
Turmeric {Curcuma
domestica). 775
Vervain {Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
* White Mustard {Sinapis
alba)... ... 0.02... G-25, 805
Wild Indigo /{Baptisia
tinctoria) G-26, 812
COLIC, BILIARY, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Belladonna {Atropa
belladonna). G-4, 69
Birthwort {Aristolochia
clematitis) G-5, SO
Croton Seeds {Croton
tiglium) 234
English Ivy {Hedera
helix). G-10, 275
Immortelle {Helichrysum
arenarium). : : . AIT
Milk Thistle {Silybum
marianum). G-17, 516
Onion {Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Poppyseed {Papaver
somniferum). ... . G-20, 609

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

COLITIS, MUCOUS /I-89

Scopolia {Scopolia

carniolica) Lae 671
St. John's Wort

{Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719
Wild Yam {Dioscorea

Villosa). G-26, 817

COLIC, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Behen {Moringa oleifera). 67
Birthwort {Aristolochia

clematitis) G-5, SO
Black Currant {Ribes

nigrum) G-5, 94
Catnip {Nepeta cataria) . .G-8, 164
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Eryngo {Eryngium

campestre) G-11, 282
German Sarsaparilla {Carex

arenaria) 336
Groundsel {Senecio

vulgaris) 374
Heather {Calluna

vulgaris) G-13, 383
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

{Arisaema _atrorubens). : A26
Jalap {Ipomoea purga) .. G-IS, 427
Mandrake {Mandragora

officinarum). G-17, 495
Petasites Petasites

hybridus) G-19, 585
Poppyseed {Papaver

somniferum). . G-20, 609
Turmeric § {Curcuma

domestica). : : .. 775
Zedoary {Curcuma

zedoaria). G-26, 846

COLITIS

Burr Marigold {Bidens

tripartita). . G-7, 131
Carob {Geratonia

siliqua) G-7, 151
Catechu {Acacia catechu). 163
Jalap {Ipomoea purga) .. G-IS, 427
Tea Tree {Melaleuca

alternifolia). . . . . 757
Witch Hazel {Hamamelis

virginiana). . G-26, 821

COLITIS, MUCOUS

{See under Bowel, irritable,
syndrome)

----- PAGE 95 -----
1-90/COLON, IRRITABLE

COLON, IRRITABLE
(See under Bowel, irritable,
syndrome)

COLON, SPASTIC
(See under Bowel, irritable,

syndrome)
CONCENTRATION AND MEMORY

DEFICITS AS A RESULT OF PERIPHERAL
ARTERIAL OCCLUSIVE DISEASE

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342

CONDYLOMATA ACUMINATA
Mayapple (Podophyllum

peltatum). G-17, 510

CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE,
ADJUNCT IN
(See also under Edema,
adjunctive therapy in)
Astragalus (Astragalus

species) 54

CONJUNCTIVITIS, UNSPECIFIED
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle) 139
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Eyebright (Euphrasia

officinalis). . 300

Jequirity (Abrus
precatorius) : : A435
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis) G-17, 497

CONNECTIVE TISSUE DEFICIENCIES

Oats (Avena sativa) G-IS, 551

CONSTIPATION
Agar (Gelidium amansii) a 9
* Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;

Aloe capensis; Aloe

vera). Le G-3, 16
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) . .G-4, 50
Bael (Aegle marmelos)....... : 58
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris)... . ... G-4, 61
Behen (Moringa oleifera). .... J 67
Bitter Apple (Citrullus

colocynthis). . . . 2... G-5, 83
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus). Lae .. OL
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus_ niger) G-5, 97

Black Mulberry (Morus

nigra). 99
Black Root (Leptandra
virginica). . . . . 104

Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces

cerevisiae). 118
Brooklime (Veronica
beccabunga). G-6, 121

* Buckthorn (Rhamnus

catharticus). G-6, 123
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) .. 134
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox). 16

+ Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus

purshiana). G-7, 153
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). G-7, ISS
Chicory (Cichorium

intybus). G-8, 181

* Chinese Rhubarb (Rheum

palmatum). G-8, 185
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera

langsdorffi). . 220
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Cotton Tree

(Cochlospermum

gossypium). 229
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270
Figs (Ficus carica) G-11, 310

» Flax (Linum
usitatissimum). : G-12, 313
» Frangula (Rhamnus
frangula). G-12, 317
Gamboge (Garcinia

hanburyi). : ... G-12, 325
Garden Cress (Lepidium

sativum). . .. G-12, 326
Greater Bindweed

(Calystegia sepium) ... G-13, 367
Green Hellebore

(Helleborus viridis). ...... 368
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .... 382
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffa) G-14, 394
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 401
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica). .. .. 419
Jalap (Ipomoea purga) . G-15, 427

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). 429
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia

triphylla)... 2.0.0... 463
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) G-16, 469

* Manna (Fraxinus ornus) G17, 496

Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris). G-17, 503
Marshmallow (Althaea

officinalis) 505
Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

annua). G-17, 513
Morning Glory ([pomoea

hederacea). 523
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18, 551
Pear (Pyrus communis)... ... : 577
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa) 589
Pitcher Plant (Sarracenia

purpurea) : G-20, 596
* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) ....612
* Psyllium Seed (Plantago
afra) G-20, 616
Purple Gromwell
(Lithospermum
erytrorhizon). . . 619
* Senna (Cassia senna) . G22, 684
Sesame (Sesamum
orientate). Lee . 688
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica). 700
Sunflower (Helianthus
annuus). G-23, 741
Tragacanth (Astragalus
gummifer). . . . 767
Triticum (Agropyron
repens) G-25, 771
Wahoo (Euonymus
atropurpurea). cG-25, 791
Wallflower (Cheiranthus
cheiri). . G-25, 792
Water Dock (Rumex
aquaticus) Lo... 795
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) .... 799
White Bryony (Bryonia
alba) G-25, 800

CONTRACEPTION
(See under Pregnancy,
prevention of)

----- PAGE 96 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

CONTRACEPTIVE, MALE

Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum). G-16, 468
CONTUSION
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis). G-25, 788

CONVULSIVE EPISODES, CONTROL OF

European Mistletoe (Viscum
album). G-11, 291
Fool's Parsley (Aethusa
cynapium) G-12, 316
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis
gigantea). 338
CORNS
(See under Hyperkeratosis skin
disorders)
CORYZA, ACUTE
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)
COUGH, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Almond (Prunus dulcis). 15
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
* Arnica (Arnica montana) Al
Asarum (Asarum
europaeum). 48
Bamboo (Arundinaria
Japonica). G-4, 60
Bitter Milkwort (Polygala
amara). 85
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum). G-5,94
Borage  (Borago
officinalis). G-6, 114
British Elecampane (Inula
britannica) 119
Broad Bean (Vicia faba) 120
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera) 141
+ Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora) G-7, 143
Carob (Ceratonia
siliqua). G-7, 151
Cherry Laurel (Prunus
laurocerasus). G-8, 179
Cocillana Tree (Guraea
rusbyi). 198
» Colt's Foot (Tussilago
Jarfara) G-9, 209

Common Kidney Vetch

(Anthyllis vulneraria) . . G-9,
Common Stonecrop (Sedum
acre).
Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum). G-9,
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma
githago)
Corn Poppy (Papaver
rhoeas).
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus). G-9,
* Cowslip (Primula veris)
Cupmoss (Cladonia
pyxidata).
Cypress (Cupressus
sempervirens) G-9,
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia)
+ Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) G-10,
+ English Ivy (Hedera
helix) G-10,
+ English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata) G-11,
Eryngo = (Eryngium
campestre) G-11,
+ Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). G-11,
+ European Elder (Sambucus
nigra) G-11,
+ European Sanicle (Sanicula
europaea).
Eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis).
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica).
+ Fennel (Foeniculum
vulgare). e-fi,
Field Scabious (Knautia
arvensis). G-11,
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum) G-12,
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria_  recutita) G-12,
Greek Sage (Salvia triloba)
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea).
+ Gumweed (Grindelia
species).
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum). G-13,

* Denotes recommendation by

214

215

221

222

223

225
231

238

241

. 261

261

278

278

282

283

287

296

300

301

302

310

326

331

. 367

372

379

386

Commission E.

COUGH, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF/I-91

Hempnettle (Galeopsis

segetum). G-13, 389
High Mallow (Malva

sylvestris) G-14, 395
Holly {Ilex aquifolium) G-14, 397
Horse Chestnut (d4esculus

hippocastanum) G-14. 403
Horseradish (Armoracia

rusticana). G-14, 408
Hound's Tongue

{Cynoglossum officinale) 410
Iceland Moss (Cetraria

islandica). 415
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum). 418
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). A31
Jimson Weed {Datura

stramonium). G-15, 436
Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare). G-15, 448
Larch (Larix decidua) G-IS, 457
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) G-16, 469
Linden (Tilia species) G-16, 477
Lungmoss = (Lobaria

pulmonaria). 484
Lycium Bark (Lycium

chinense). 486
Ma-Huang — (Ephedra

sinica) G-16, 488
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). . .. 0... 1. 491
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis). G-17, 497
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17,500
Marshmallow  _ (Althaea

officinalis). SOs
Meadowsweet (Filipendula

ulmaria). G-17, 511
Mouse Ear _ (Pilosella

officinarum). 529
Mullein (Verbascum

densiflorum) G-i8, 532
Nasturtium (Tropaeolum

majus). G-IS, 537
Niauli (Melaleucea

viridiflora). 542
Oak (Quercus robur) . .G-IS, 549

----- PAGE 97 -----
1-92/COUGH, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Oats (Avena sativa). .... J G-18, 551
Onion (Allium cepa)... . G-19, 557
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). ............5 G-19, 559

Ox-Eye Daisy
(Ch rysan themum

leucanthemum) 563
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita). 60 ea G-19, 580
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). 6. 0 ed G-19, 585
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa) 589
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

major). . G-19,591
Pleurisy Root (Asclepias

tuberosd),. 1... 044445 G20, 598
Poppyseed (Papaver

somniferum). 2.0.0... 5 G-20, 609
Premorse (Scabiosa

succiSd)... 1... eee dl G20, 612
Quillaja (Quillaja

saponaria)...........5 G-20, 624
Quince (Cydonia

oblongata) 625
Radish (Raphanus

SativUS). 200 G-20, 628
Ragwort (Senecio

jJacobaea)............5 G-20, 629
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense). ...........5 G-21, 633
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius) 652
Scotch Pine (Pinus

speci€S).. 2... 2.0. G22, 674
Seneca Snakeroot (Polygala

senega). 683
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis). ..........5 .G-22, 701
Southern Bayberry (Myrica

cerifera)...........-5 G-22, 705
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosa). ..........5 G-23, 711
Spruce (Picea species) ...... 714
Star Anise (Illicium

verum) wee eee G23, 725
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis)... 0. 0.0. es G23, 734
Sundew (Drosera

ramentaced).............- 740
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana)...........5 .G-24, 746

Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata)... ..........5 G-24, 750

* Thyme (Thymus vulgaris) G-24, 761
* Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum)...........5 G24, 764
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis)... 2.2.0.4... G25, 788
Water Fennel (Oenanthe
aquatica)... .........5 G-25, 796
* Watercress (Nasturtium
Officinale), .. oe ee ee 798
* White Mustard (Sinapis
alba)... eee G-25, 805
* White Nettle (Lamium
album). 6... ee G-25, 806
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotina). 810
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis).... 0... ee ad .G-26, 811
* Wild Thyme (Thymus
serpyllum)...........4 G-26, 815
Wood Betony (Betonica
Officinalis),..........4 G-26, 825

COUGH, WHOOPING
(See under Pertussis)

CRADLE CAP
(See under Dermatitis, seborrheic)

CRAMPS, ABDOMINAL, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Adonis (Adonis vernalis)
Barberry (Berberis

G-3, 5

vulgaris). G-4, 61

Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga)

Caraway (Carum carvi)

(Chelidonium

. G-8, 169

G-5, SI
..G-7, 148
Celandine

majliS).
Chicory (Cichorium

G-8, ISI
(Abelmoschus

intybus).
Muskmallow
moschatus). 533
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita).............4 G-19, 580
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum
majorana),.......00e dl .G-24, 746
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris).

Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium). .........4 G-26, 833

832

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CRAMPS, LEG
(See under Leg muscle cramps)
CRAMPS, TETANIC AND EPILEPTIC

Hemlock (Conium
maculatum).......... 4 G-13, 386

CUTS, MINOR, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

CYSTITIS
African Potato (Hypoxis
rooperi). . Lae . 7
Arenaria Rubra
(Spergularia rubra) 39
Field Scabious (Knautia
arvensis)... .........4 G-11, 310
Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis)... 2... ....05 G-12, 322
Kava Kava (Piper
methysticum)........ 4 G-15, 443
Niauli (Melaleucea
viridiflora).

Night-Blooming Cereus

542

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus). . . 543
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica)... ............2 775

DANDRUFF
(See under Dermatitis, seborrheic)

DEBILITY
Lycium Berries (Lycium
barbarum). 6.0 A87

DEHYDRATION, TREATMENT OF
Asarum (Asarum

europaeum). . . . 48
Borage (Borago

officinalis). G-6, 114
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiaticd), .. 1.2... G-13, 359
Onion (Allium cepa)... . | G-19, 557

DEMENTIA, ALZHEIMER'S TYPE
(See also under Organic brain
dysfunction, symptomatic

relief of)
Snowdrop (Galanthus

nivalis) 700
DENTAL CARIES, PROPHYLAXIS
Green Tea (Camellia
sinensis)... 0... eee’ G-13, 369

----- PAGE 98 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

DENTAL PLAQUE, PREVENTION OF
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria

canadensis). . 108

DEPRESSION, RELIEF OF SYMPTOMS

Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia
californica) G-7, 140
Corydalis {Corydalis cava) . 226
Khat {Catha edulis) 447
Lemon Balm {Melissa
officinalis) G-16, 461
Mug wort (Artemisia
vulgaris). G-18, 530
Nux Vomica (Strychnos
nux vomica) G-i8, 547
Passion Flower (Passiflora
incarnata). G-19, 573
Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) .. . G-22, 668
« St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum). G-23, 719
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum
majorana). . G-24, 746
DERMATITIS, ECZEMATOID
* Bittersweet Nightshade
(Solanum dulcamara) .. .G-5, 88
Evening Primrose
(Oenothera biennis) . . . G-11, 298
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis). G-17, 497
DERMATITIS, SEBORRHEIC
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . 67
Birch (Betula species) G-5, 78
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . . . .382
Henna (Lawsonia
inermis). . G-14, 391
Mezereon (Daphne
mezereum). G-17, 515
Mountain Grape (Mahonia
aquifolium) G-i8, 527
Oats (Avena sativa) G-i8, 551
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) . 575
Quillaja (Quillaja
saponaria). G-20, 624
Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica). G-23, 729
DERMATITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus) G-5, 75

DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF/I-93

Carline Thistle (Carlina
acaulis). 151
Licorice
glabra)
Winter's Bark (Drimys

winteri)

(Glycyrrhiza
G-16, 469

820
DERMATOSES, CORTICOSTEROID-
RESPONSIVE
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

DIABETES MELLITUS
(See under Hyperglycemia,
control of, adjunct to diet)

DIAPHORETIC
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum). 29

DIARRHEA

Arrowroot (Maranta

arundinacea). . . . . 43
Carob (Ceratonia

siliqua). G-7, 151
Elm Bark (Ulmus minor) G-10, 269
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica). G-13, 359
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis). G-13, 366
Gum Arabic (Acacia

Senegal) 378
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare). G-14, 401
Loosestrife (Lysimachia

vulgaris). . .... G-ie, 48i
Mountain Avens (Dryas

octopetala) ...........4% 526
Muira-Puama

(Ptychopetalum

olacoides). Lae . 531
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum

salicaria) G-20, 620
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lancea). 706
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea

sativa). 708
Surinam Cherry (Eugenia

unifloria) . 742
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium). 797
Wild Mint (Mentha

aquatica). . G-26, 813

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

DIARRHEA, BLOODY, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Cumin (Cuminum

cyminum) . G-9, 237

DIARRHEA, CHRONIC

American White Pond Lily

(Nymphaea odorata) ....G-3, 28
Dogwood (Cornus
florida)

Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

G-10, 256

altissima). 770

DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Acacia (Acacia arabica). ...3
Agrimony (Agrimonia

eupatoria). . G-3, 10
Alkanet (Alkanna

tinctoria). G-3, 13
Amaranth (Amaranthus

hypochondriacus). G-3, 22
Angostura (Galipea

officinalis). 34
Apple Tree (Malus

domestica). G-4, 37
Bael (Aegle marmelos)....... 58
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) a .. G-4, ei
Barley (Hordeum

distichon). G-4, 63
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Bennet's Root (Geum

urbanum). G-4, 71
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus) .. G-5, 75
Bistort (Persicaria

bistorta) . G-5S, 82
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus). 91
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-S, 94
Blackberry (Rubus

fruticosus) Le G-6, 104
Bog Bilberry (Vaccinium

uliginosum) G-e, 111
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) . G-7, 144
Carrageen (Chondrus

crispus) . 152
Cascarilla (Croton eluteria) . 156
Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa). jeo
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). . G-8, 165

----- PAGE 99 -----
1-94/DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Cheken (Eugenia chequen) . 178
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum). G-8, 190
Cinquefoil  (Potentilla

erecta). G-8, 192
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao). . G-8, 199
Coffee (Coffea arabica) ..G-9, 202
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) G-9, 212
Cranesbill (Geranium

maculatum). 233
Dragon's Blood

(Daemonorops draco) 257
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia) 268
European Five-Finger Grass

(Potentilla reptans) . Gl, 289
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album) . G-11, 291
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica). .. : 301
Fool's Parsley (Aethusa

cynapium), 0... 0.0. G-12, 316
Gambir (Uncaria species) . 324
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis). G-13,369
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea). 372
Herb Robert (Geranium

robertianum). G-14, 393
Hogweed (Heracleum

sphondylium). G-14, 396
Hound's Tongue

(Cynoglossum _ officinale) 410
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum). G-14, 411
Jaborandi (Pilocarpus

microphyllus). . G-15, 425
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). 429
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris) G-15, 456
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum) G-16, 468
Logwood (Haematoxylon

campechianum) 480
Lotus (Nelumbo

nucifera). G-16, 481
Marshmallow (Althaea

officinalis). . . 505
Matico (Piper elongatum) . 509

Moneywort (Lysimachia
nummularia). G-17, 520
Myrtle (Myrtus
communis) G-18, 536
Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). : 541
* Oak (Quercus robur) .G-18, 549
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18,551
inus Bark (Tsuga
canadensis). G-19, 594
Plantain (Musa
paradisiaca). . . . 597
omegranate (Punica
granatum). G-20, 605
* Potentilla (Potentilla
anserina) G-20, 610
* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) .. 612
* Psyllium Seed (Plantago
afra) G-20, 616
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . 622
Quince (Cydonia
oblongata) 625
Rhatany (Krameria
triandra). Lee 641
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G-21, 648
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G-21, ess
Salep (Orchis species). 657
Sandarac (Tetraclinis
articulata). 660
Self-Heal (Prunella
vulgaris) G-22, 681
Simaruba (Simaruba
amara). wee. 695
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . . . .G-22, 697
Smartweed  (Persicaria
hydropiper). 699
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica). 700
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca). G-23, 735
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica) 775
Uzara = (Xvsmalobium
undulatum) 782
Water Avens (Geum
rivale). : G-25, 794
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotina), . 810
Wild Daisy (Bellis
perennis). G-26, 811
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana). G-26, 821

* Denotes recommendation by Commission £.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis) G-26, 825
Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). .. 2... G-26, 833

DIET, SUPPLEMENTATION OF

Wheat (Triticum aestivum) . 799

DIGESTIVE DISORDERS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) G-3, 6
Aloe (Aloe  barbadensis;

Aloe capensis; Aloe

vera). G-3, 16
Alteris (Aletris farinosa). 11
American Ivy

(Parthenocissus

quinquefolia). G-3, 26

+ Angelica (Angelica
archangelica). G-3, 32

+ Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
Apple Tree (Maius

domestica). . »G-4,37
Artichoke (Cynara

scolymus) G-4, 44
Asa Foetida (Ferula

foetida) AT

Balmony (Chelone glabra) G-4, 59
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris)... 2... ee G-4, 61
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Behen (Moringa oleifera). 67
Bennet's Root (Geum

urbanum) . G-4, 71
Bistort (Persicaria

bistorta). G-S, 82
Bitter Candytuft (Iberis

amara). 84

* Bitter Orange (Citrus
aurantium). G-5, 86
Bladderwrack (Fucus
vesiculosus) 106
* Blessed Thistle (Cnicus

benedictus) G-6, 107
* Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata). G-6, 110
* Boldo (Peumus boldus) .. G-6, 112
* Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces

cerevisiae) lis
Broom Corn (Sorghum

vulgare). 121
Bugle (Ajuga reptans) ...G-6, 125

----- PAGE 100 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Calamint {Calamintha

nepeta) 38
Calamus {Acorus

calamus). G-7, 138
Calotropis {Calotropis

procera) 41
Caraway {Carum carvi) G-7, 148
Cardamom /{Elettaria

cardamomum). G-7, 149
Carline Thistle {Carlina

acaulis) 51
Carob {Ceratonia

siliqua) G-7, 151
Cascarilla {Croton eluteria) . 156
Cayenne {Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Centaury {Centaurium

erythraea) G-8, 174
Cheken {Eugenia chequen) . 178
Chicory {Cichorium

intybus) G-8, ISI
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Chiretta {Swertia chirata) 187
Cinnamon {Cinnamomum

verum). G-8, 190
Colombo {Jateorhiza

palmata). 208
Condurango {Marsdenia

condurango). 216
Congorosa {Maytenus

ilicifolia) 218
Coolwort {Tiarella

cordifolia) G-9,219
Coriander {Coriandrum

sativum). G-9,221
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma

githago) 222
Cup Plant {Silphium

perfoliatum) G-9, 238
Curcuma {Curcuma

xanthorrhizia) G-9, 239
Cyclamen {Cyclamen

europaeum). 240
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale) G-9, 245
Devil's Claw

{Harpagophytum

procumbens). 247

Dill {Anethum

graveolens) G-10, 252
Dragon's Blood

{Daemonorops draco)... . . 257
Dyer's Broom {Genista

tinctoria) G-10, 260
Elecampane {Inula

helenium) G-10, 266
Elm Bark {Ulmus minor) G-10, 269
English Chamomile

{Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
English Horsemint {Mentha

longifolia) G-10, 275
English Lavender

{Lavandula

angustifolia) G-10, 277
Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus

globulus) G-11, 283
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare). G-11, 302
Feverfew {Tanacetum

parthenium) G-11, 306
Frostwort {Helianthemum

canadense) G-12, 321
Galbanum (Ferula

gummosa) 323
Gamboge {Garcinia

hanburyi). G-12, 325
Garlic {Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
German Ipecac

{Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). 335
Germander {Teucrium

chamaedrys). G-12, 337
Giant Milkweed {Calotropis

gigantea). 338
Ginger {Zingiber

officinale) G-12, 339
Goldthread {Coptis trifolia) .. 358
Greek Sage {Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Green Tea {Camellia

sinensis). G-13, 369
Guar Gum {Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba) 376
Haronga {Haronga

madagascariensis)... . 2... 380
Hartstongue —{Scolopendrium

vulgare). 381
Henbane {Hyoscyamus

niger) G-14, 389
Hogweed {Heracleum

sphondylium). G-14, 396

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

DIGESTIVE DISORDERS /I-95

Holly {Ilex aquifolium) .. G-14, 397
Honeysuckle {Lonicera

caprifolium). 399
Horehound = {Marrubium

vulgare). G-14,401
Horsemint {Monarda

punctata). 407
Horseradish {Armoracia

rusticana). G-14, 408
Iceland Moss {Cetraria

islandica) 415
Immortelle {Helichrysum

arenarium). AI7
Indian Nettle {Acalypha

indica) 419
Indian Physic {Gillenia

trifoliata) 421
Jambolan {Syzygium

cumini). 429
Jatamansi {Nardostachys

jatamansi) 433
Jewel Weed {Impatiens

biflora). 436
Juniper {Juniperus

communis) G-15, 440
Lavender Cotton {Santolina

chamaecyparissias) . G-16, 460

Lemon Verbena {Aloysia

triphylla). 463
Lesser Galangal {Alpinia

officinarum). 467
Lotus {Nelumbo

nucifera) G-16,481
Lovage {Levisticum

officinale). G-ie, 482
Magnolia {Magnolia

glauca) 490
Masterwort {Peucedanum

ostruthium). 507
Milk Thistle {Silybum

marianum). G-17, 516
Mountain Avens {Dryas

octopetala) 526
Mountain Grape {Mahonia

aquifolium). G-IS,527
Myrrh {Commiphora

molmol) G-IS, 534
Noni {Morinda citrifolia) .G-IS, 544
Onion {Allium cepa) G-19, 557
Opium Antidote

{Combretum micranthum) 559

----- PAGE 101 -----
1-96/DIGESTIVE DISORDERS

Oregano (Origanum
vulgare). ie ed G-19, 559
Oswego Tea (Monarda
didymd). oo. ee 562
arsley (Petroselinum
crispum)........2..-.5 G-19, 567
Parsnip (Pastinaca
Sativa)... 2... eee eS G-19, 571
ear (Pyrus communis)... .. . S577
ellitory (Anacyclus
Pyrethrum). 2... ..0..02.....4 577
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium). . 2.0.0.0... 00008 579
* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita)... 0.6.6. G-19, 580
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
mdjor).........22...4 G-19, 591
Pineapple (Ananas
comosus).. 0... 0.200 .00005 593
Pinus Bark (Tsuga
canadensis)... ........ 5 G-19, 594
Pitcher Plant (Sarracenia
PUIPUTEA). . vee | G-20, 596
Plantain (Musa
paradisiaca).............! 597
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622
Quince (Cydonia
oblongata)... ..........--4 625
* Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens)... 0.0... .045 G20, 626
* Radish (Raphanus
Sativus).............5 G-20, 628
Reed Herb (Phragmites
communis). ..............4 639
*Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis). G-21, 645
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Saffron (Crocus sativus) . G-21, 653
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . G21, 655
Salep (Orchis species)....... 5 657
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis). ..... 00... G-22, 679
Senburi (Swertia japonica) .... 682
Skirret (Sium sisarum) .. G-22, 696
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . .. G-22, 697
Spearmint (Mentha
spicata) G-23, 709
St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum). G-23, 719

Star Anise (Illicium

VETUM). oo eee dl G-23, 725
Stillingia (Stillingia
sylvatica)... ee 729

Swamp Milkweed
(Asclepias incarnata) . . .G-23, 743
Sweet Gale (Myrica

gale)... 6... eee G-24, 745
* Sweet Orange (Citrus
sinensis). .........2..4 .G-24, 747
Thyme (Thymus
vulgaris)... 22... .2.45 G-24, 761
Tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum). .........4 G-24, 766
Turkey Corn (Dicentra
cucullaria)... 2.2... 2. ee 775
¢ Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica). 6... ee eee 775
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis)... 2... ....05 G-25, 788
Wahoo (Euonymus
atropurpurea)........ | .G-25, 791
Water Avens (Geum
rivale).. 2.0... 22 eed G-25, 794
Water Fennel (Oenanthe
aquatica). . G-25, 796
Watercress (Nasturtium
officinale)... .....-.4.24-7 798
Wild Carrot (Daucus
carota). . : : G-25, 809
Wild Cherry (Prunus
serotind)................4 810
Wild Thyme (Thymus
serpyilum). . : .. G-26,815
Wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens).............5 820
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella), .. 6... ee 827
» Wormwood (4rtemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829
" Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). G-26, 833
Yellow Gentian (Gentiana
Tuted). oo 836
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria
vulgaris)... 20... .2020.005 840
Zedoary (Curcuma
zedoaria)............5 G-26, 846
DIGESTIVE INSUFFICIENCIES,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Papaya (Carica papaya) . G-19, 565

¢ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DROPSY
(See under Edema, idiopathic)

DYSENTERY
Brooklime (Veronica
beccabunga).........! G-6, 121
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera)... 2.0.0.2... 2 eee 141

Canadian Fleabane
(Erigeron canadensis) . .G-7, 144

Catechu (Acacia catechu). ... . 163
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

giganted).... 0... ce eee ee 338
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis)... ........4 G-13, 366
Jalap (Ipomoea purga) G-15, 427
Jambolan (Syzygium

CUMIN). Ce A429
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum)..........4 G-16, 468
Loosestrife (Lysimachia

vulgaris)............4 G-16, 481
Matico (Piper elongatum) .... 509
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurrod). 60. 589
Pomegranate (Punica

granatum)...........: .G-20, 605
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . . . 622
Simaruba (Simaruba

AMATO) oo ed 695
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima). 2.0.00. 22.0 770
Uzara = (Xysmalobium

undulatum).... 0.0.0.0... 782

DYSMENORRHEA, UNSPECIFIED,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Alteris (Aletris farinosa). . .. . Al
Beth Root (Trillium

erectum)..............5 G-4,74
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). ......0544.5 G-5, 92
Black Haw (Viburnum

prunifolium).... 20... 0. | G-5,96
False Unicorn Root

(Veratrum luteum)... ..... 301
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium). . . : G-11, 306
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum)............ 335
Groundsel (Senecio

vulgaris). 6.0. 374

----- PAGE 102 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Horehound  (Marrubium

wulgare). 6. eed G-14, 401
Horsemint (Monarda

Punctdtd). 6. ee A07
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris). 6. eee | G-15, 456
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum)..........4 G-16, 468
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). .. 0... ¢ A91
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis). ..........4 G-17, 497
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata)... .....2....4 G-17, 503
Martagon (Lilium

martagon), 2... ve ee 506
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus),. 0. ...0..00.5 543
Oregano (Origanum

wulgare). . 6. eee dl G-19, 559
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita). 6... ee G-19, 580
Potentilla (Potentilla

anserind)... 1.1.2.2... G-20, 610
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon

SPCCICS). vee eee ee eed 618
Ragwort (Senecio

Jacobaed),........4005 G-20, 629
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissimd). 6... ee 770
Wild Mint (Mentha

aquaticd)............4 G-26, 813
Wild Yam (Dioscorea

Villosd). . 60. eed G-26, 817
Wintergreen (Gaultheria

procumbens)... 0.00.00 eed 820

DYSPEPSIA

(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

DYSTONIA
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia
californica), . 6.6... 4.5 G-7, 140

DYSURIA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Arenaria Rubra

(Spergularia rubra), . . 39
Gotu Kola (Centella
asiaticad)... 2... ee G-13, 359

EAR, INFLAMMATION, MIDDLE
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ....G-4, 74

Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis)... 0... es G-7, 158
Garlic (Allium sativum) . .G-12, 327
ECZEMA, ATOPIC
Teazle (Dipsacus
silvestris). ...........4 G-24, 757

ECZEMA, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

EDEMA, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN

Horsetail (Equisetum
arvensé).............4 G-14, 409

Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius)...........4 G-22, 672

EDEMA, IDIOPATHIC

Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67

Black Catnip (Phyllanthus
AMATUS). eee 91

Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) ..G-7, 144
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma

githago), 6. ee ee 222
Dog Rose (Rosa canind) G-IO, 254
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). .........4. 335
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria)................. 336
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum). G-14, 403
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum). ....0..0.0.0.00045 A18

Japanese Atractylodes
(Atractylodes japonica). . . . 430
Lily-of-the- Valley
(Convallaria majalis)
Lycium Berries (Lycium
barbarum).... 0.000000 000405 A87
Night-Blooming Cereus

G-IS, 475

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus).. 2... ....0-.: 543
Pineapple (Ananas

comosus)............-...-4 593
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . . . 622
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentinad). .....0....00004 631
Spurge (Euphorbia

resiniferd), 6.0.60. 716
Stone Root (Collinsonia

canadensis)... ......45 G-23, 733

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

EPILEPSY /1-97

Surinam Cherry (Eugenia

uniflorid). 6... ee 742
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica)... 6. ee eee 175
EMPHYSEMA
Marijuana (Cannabis
Sativa)... 2... 0.22 G-17, 500
ENTERITIS
Flax (Linum
usitatissimum). .. 0.2... | G-12, 313
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis)... ........4 G-13, 366
High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris). 5.0... 0.-. 5 G-14, 395
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza
kurrod). 2.0 ee ee 589
Rhatany (Krameria
triandra), . 6. ed 641
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, 655
Simaruba (Simaruba
amard). 2... ee 695
Summer Savory (Satureja
hortensis).. 6... eee! G-23, 739
ENTEROCOLITIS, CHRONIC
Colombo (Jateorhiza
palmata).. 20.00.0200. 005 208
ENURESIS
Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum
aromaticum), 2... 182
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica)... ee 301
St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum). G-23, 719

ENURESIS, NOCTURNAL, PRIMARY
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica). .........4 G-7, 140
Saw Palmetto (Serenoa

TEPens). 0. eee dl G-21, 664

EPILEPSY

Behen (Moringa oleifera). ... . J 67
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). 6.0 ee G-7, 130
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera)... 6. ee 141

European Mistletoe (Viscum
album). G-11, 291

----- PAGE 103 -----
1-98/EPILEPSY

European Peony (Paconia

officinalis). 0-11, 295
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) G-13, 359
Groundsel (Senecio

vulgaris) 374
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) G-16, 475
Marijuana {Cannabis

Sativa)... G-17, 500
Mugwort {Artemisia

vulgaris) G-18, 530
Sculleap {Scutellaria

lateriflora) G-22, 678
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima). 770
Valerian {Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783
Yew {Taxus baccata) ... G-26, 841

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Asiatic Dogwood {Cornus
officinalis). . . 51
Chinese Cinnamon
{Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis). . . 572

EXHAUSTION
Celery (Apium

graveolens). G-8,, 172
Chinese Cinnamon ae

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia). 218
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) . G-13, 359
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). . 429
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe) . 843

EYE, INFLAMMATION OF
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
(Arisaema atrorubens). 426
FATIGUE, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Arnica (Arnica montana). . Al
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica). G-7, 140
Cola (Cola acuminata). .... . 205

Dogwood (Cornus

florida) G-IO, 256
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346
Marijuana (Cannabis

Sativa). . G-17, 500
Mate (Ilex

paraguariensis) G-17, 508
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris) G-18, 530
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18, 551
Siberian Ginseng

(Eleutherococcus

senticosus) 693
Spinach (Spinacia

oleracea) G-23, 712
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis). G-25, 783
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis). G-25, 788

FEVER ASSOCIATED WITH COMMON
COLD

+ Angelica (Angelica
archangelica). G-3, 32
+ Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
* Arnica (Arnica montana). 41
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris). . . G-4,61
Calamint (Calamintha
nepeta). 138
Carline Thistle (Carlina
acaulis). 151
+ Echinacea Pallida
(Echinacea pallida). 261
+ Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) G-10, 261

English Plantain (Plantago

lanceolata). G-11, 278
+ European Elder (Sambucus
nigra). . . G-11, 287
* German Chamomile
(Matricaria_recutita) G-12, 331
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . 382
+ Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). . . 431
¢ Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-IS, 457
Linden (Tilia species) .G-16, 477
* Ma-Huang (Ephedra
sinica). G-16, 488
* Meadowsweet  (Filipendula
ulmaria) G-17, 511
* Onion (Allium cepa) G-19, 557

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL

MEDICINES

* Peppermint (Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
Premorse (Scabiosa
succisa) G-20, 612
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species). G-22, 674
* Spruce (Picea species) 714
FEVER, REDUCTION OF
Abscess Root (Polemonium
reptans) G-3,3
Adonis (Adonis vernalis) G-3, 5
Aga (Amanita muscaria) G-3, 8
Angostura (Galipea
officinalis). 34
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) . G-4, 50
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67

Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus). 91
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). G-5, 92
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera) 141
Canella (Canella

winterana) . 147
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). G-8, 165
Centaury  (Centaurium

erythraea). . G-8, 174
Cheken (Eugenia chequen) . 178
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum). G-9, 221
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225
Divi-Divi (Caesalpinia

bonducella). 253
Dogwood (Cornus

florida) G-IO, 256
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia) 268
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus) G-11, 283
European Five-Finger Grass

(Potentilla reptans) . Gl, 289
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta). 305
Germander (Teucrium

chamaedrys). G-12, 337
Greater Bindweed

(Calystegia sepium) .. . .G-13, 367

----- PAGE 104 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Hemp Agrimony
(Eupatorium
cannabinum)......... 4 G-13, 388
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe

pachyceras) 412
Jacob's Ladder

(Polemonium

caeruleum).......... 5 G-15, 427
Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum).......... 4 G-16, 468
Marigold {Calendula

officinalis)... 0. ...00045 G-17, 497
Monkshood = (Aconitum

napellus)...........45 G-18, 521

Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-18, 525
Neem (Antelaea

azadirachta).........5 G-IS, 539

Noni (Morinda citrifolia) G-IS, 544
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum). 545
Parsnip (Pastinaca

Sativa)... ............4 G-19, 571
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa) 589
Pineapple (Ananas

comosus). 593
Poley (Teucrium polium). . . . 603
Purple Gromwell

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon) 619
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa)  ... 622
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). 631i
Red Currant (Ribes

rubrum). .......0.0.2..5 G-21, 634
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Sandarac (Tetraclinis

articulata)... 2.2.0.0. 02000 4 eo
Scullcap (Scutellaria

lateriflora)... 2... 2... S G-22, 678
Simaruba (Simaruba

amara). > 695
Surinam Cherry (Eugenia

unifloria) 742
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata)... ..........5 G-24, 750
Tamarind (Tamarindus

indica). 753

Tulip Tree (Liriodendron

tulipifera) 714
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 775
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium)...... | 797
White Willow (Salix

species)... .......2-.5 G-25, 807
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria)............4 G26, 812
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis) 814
Wormwood (Artemisia

absinthium).......... 5 G-26, 829
Woundwort (Stachys

palustris). 832

FISSURE, ANAL

Buckthorn (Rhamnus

catharticus) G46, 123
Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus
purshiana) G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb (Rheum
palmatum) G-8, 185
European Peony (Paeon ia

officinalis)... 2.2.0... G-11, 295
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis)... .........4 G-11, 310
Frangula (Rhamnus

frangula).. 2.2.2... G-12, 317
Manna (Fraxinus ornus) G17, 496

FLATULENCE, RELIEF OF
Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) G-3, 6

Alteris (Aletris farinosa). 11
Angelica (Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Bear's Garlic (Allium

ursinum) 66
Caraway (Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum). 182
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) 218
English Horsemint (Mentha

longifolia)... 2.2.0... G-10, 275
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare)... ....--...4 G-11, 302
Galbanum (Ferula

gummosa) 323
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) G-12, 331

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

FLUID RETENTION/I-99

German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria). 336
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare)... ......2....4 G-14, 401
Horsemint (Monarda

punctata). 407
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens), . . . . A31
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

Jatamansi) 433
Lovage  (Levisticum

officinale)... ........5 G-16, 482
Masterwort (Peucedanum

ostruthium) 507
Oswego Tea (Monarda

didyma) 562
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens). ..........4 G-20, 626
Salep (Orchis species). . . . 657
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica) 700
Spearmint (Mentha

spicata). ............5 G-23, 709
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 775
White Nettle (Lamium

album)... ...........5 G-25, 806
Yellow Gentian (Gentiana

lutea) 836

FLUID RETENTION

Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) G-3, 12
Angelica (Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) ..G-4, SO
Asparagus (Asparagus

officinalis) G4, 52
Astragalus (Astragalus

species) 54
Basil (Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
Bean Pod (Phaseolus

vulgaris). G-4, 65
Buckthorn (Rhamnus

catharticus) G-6, 123
Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Cat's Foot (Antennaria

dioica). G-8, 162
Celery (Apium

graveolens) G-8,172
Cheken (Eugenia chequen) .. 178
Cleavers (Galium aparine)  ... 193

Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194

----- PAGE 105 -----
1-100 /FLUID RETENTION

Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera

langsdorffi). 2... 220
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus). 6... ee ee ee G-9, 225

Dog Rose (Rosa canina) .G-10, 254
Elecampane (Inula

helenium)............4 G-10, 266
Garden Cress (Lepidium

sativum)... 0.22. .002.5 G-12, 326
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum).........-.. 335
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenarid). 0... 000.00 .0404% 336
Goat's Rue (Galega

officinalis)... 10... 00S G-13, 353
Hempnettle (Galeopsis

segetum). . 6. seer val G-13, 389
Hibiscus (Hibiscus

sabdariffa). 6.0... eS G-14, 394
Holly (Ilex aquifolium) .. G-14, 397
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense).............4 G-14, 409
Immortelle (Helichrysum

arenarium). ..........0005 AI7
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum)..... 2.0.2... . 5 A18
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini)... 2.0 00002002...05 429
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare).........-.. 5 G-IS, 448
Lady's Bedstraw (Galium

verum). G-IS, 455

Larkspur (Delphinium

consolida) 6-15, 458
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-ie, 477
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis). . . G-17, 497
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata). . . G-17, 503
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris). G-17, 503
Martagon (Lilium

martagon). .. 0... eee 506
Mate (Ilex

paraguariensis). . G-17, 508
Meadowsweet (Filipendula

ulmaria). . G-17, 511
Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

annua). G-17, 513
Olive (Olea europaea) . . G-19, 556

Parsley (Petroselinum
CTISPUM). vod .G-19, 567
Parsley Piert (Aphanes

ATVENSIS). oe 570
Pear (Pyrus communis)... ... : 577
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

mdjor)...........2.-5 G-19, 591
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species)... ..........4 G21, 661
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis). ..........5 G-22, 679
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulind). 6... ee dl 691
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . . . G-22, 697
Strawberry (Fragaria

VeSCO). 2... eee G-23, 735
Sweet Clover (Melilotus

officinalis)... ........4 G-24, 744
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana)...........5 G-24, 746
Wahoo (Euonymus

atropurpuread). ... 6... G25, 791
Water Fennel (Oenanthe

aquatica). 6... ve ee ee G-25, 796
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba). G-25,800
Winter Cherry (Physalis

alkekengi)...........4 G-26, 819

FROSTBITE, POSSIBLY EFFECTIVE IN
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). ............: G-8, 165
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense),. 0.6... ce eee G-14, 409
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis). G-17,497
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria).......0..0.... 550
Oats (Avena sativa), .... | G-IS, 551
Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607

Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum). . G-24, 764

FUNGAL INFECTIONS, SKIN
(See under Infections, mycotic,
cutaneous)

FURUNCULOSIS
American White Pond Lily
(Nymphaea odorata) ....G-3, 28
Arnica (Arnica montana)... .. | Al
¢ Bittersweet Nightshade

(Solanum dulcamara) G-5, 88

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

¢ Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces

cerevisidé), 6.06. ee el us
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus
communis). 6... 0.600 G-7, 158
Digitalis (Digitalis

Purpured)... ce... veel G-10, 248
Dogwood (Cornus

florida)... es G-10, 256
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis)... 0.2... 005 G-13, 366
Larch (Larix decidua) . . . G-15, 457
Marshmallow (Althaea

Officinalis), 6.0. 505
Onion (Allium cepa)... . § G-19, 557
Solomon's Seal

(Polygonatum

multiflorum) G-22, 703
White Lily (Lilium

candidum). .. 0.0.00. 000.008 804
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria). G-26, 812

FURUNCULOSIS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum)..... 2.0.0... 29
Behen (Moringa oleifera). ... . | 67
GALLSTONES

(See under Biliary calculi,
chemical dissolution of)
GASTRIC ULCERS, ACTIVE, BENIGN,
SHORT-TERM TREATMENT OF

Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus)......0.......4 G-5, 75
GASTRITIS

Asa Foetida (Ferula

foetida).. 2... 0 0 ee Ss AT
Barley (Hordeum

distichon)...........4.4 G-4, 63
Cabbage (Brassica

oleracea)... .........4 G-7, 134
Calamus (Acorus

calamus),. 0.000.000 4 G-7, 138
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle).... 2.0.0... - 139

Cat's Claw (Unicaria
tomentosa)... ...........-. 160

----- PAGE 106 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Colombo {Jateorhiza
palmata). oc. 208
Comfrey {Symphytum
officinale)... .........5 G-9, 212
Flax {Linum
usitatissimum). ....... | G-12, 313
German Chamomile
{Matricaria recutita) .. G-12, 331
Ground Ivy {Glechoma
hederacea)............+.- 372
Khat {Catha edulis). ........ ¢ A47
* Licorice {Glycyrrhiza
glabra)... i.e G-i6, 469
Marshmallow {Althaea
Officinalis). . 2... 0... eee 505
Mountain Grape {Mahonia
aquifolium).......... 4 G-IS, 527
Quince {Cydonia
oblongata)...............5 625
Strawberry {Fragaria
VESCO)L eed G-23, 735
Sweet Marjoram ({Origanum
major ANA)... 220... G-24, 746
White Nettle {Lamium
album)... ee G-25, 806
GASTRITIS, HEMORRHAGIC
Horsetail {Equisetum
arvensé).........2...45 G-14, 409
GASTROENTERITIS
Cinquefoil {Potentilla
erecta)... 6. G-8, 192
Fool's Parsley {Aethusa
cynapium) G-12, 316
Self-Heal {Prunella
vulgaris) . G-22, 681

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS

Behen {Moringa oleifera). 67
Betel Nut {Piper betle) ....G4, 74
Bilberry {Vaccinium

myrtillus).. 2.20 000.005 G-5, 75
Black Nightshade {Solanum

nigrum)... 00.0.0. eee G4, 101
Black Pepper {Piper

nigrum)... ..........5 G4, 103
Bog Bilberry {Vaccinium

uliginosum).......... 4 G-6, 111

Boldo {Peumus boldus) G-6, 112
Burdock {Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Butternut {Juglans cinerea) ... 134
Canella {Canella
winterand)........2...000- 147

GASTROINTESTINAL HYPERMOTILITY /I-101

Cashew {Anacardium

occidentale). .........4 G-7, 157
Castor Oil Plant {Ricinus

communis). ..........4 G-7, 158
Cat's Foot {Antennaria

dioica) G-8, 162
Cayenne {Capsicum

ANNUUM). 6 ed G-8, 165
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum), 6... 0 ee 182
Chinese Olive {Canarium

Speci€S). 6... ve ee 184
Columbine {Aquilegia

vulgaris) G-9, 211
Congorosa {Maytenus

ilicifolia). . 2... ee 218
Cubeb {Piper cubeba)....... ¢ 235
Elecampane {Jnula

helenium)............:! G-10, 266
Elephant-Ears {Bergenia

crassifolia). 6.00 268
Gambir {Uncaria species) ... .324
Germander {Teucrium

chamaedrys)... 0.0... | G-12, 337
Goutweed ({Aegopodium

podagraria)..........5 G-13, 361
Heather {Calluna

vulgaris)... 2.2.0.0. 5 G-13, 383
Hogweed {Heracleum

sphondylium). G-14, 396

Hollyhock {Alcea rosea) . G-14, 398
Hyssop {Hyssopus

officinalis) . G-15, 414
Jambolan {Syzygium
cumini). 2... A429

Japanese Atractylodes
{A tract}'lodes
Japanese Mint {Mentha

Japonica), ....430

arvensis piperascens). . . . . A31
Lady Fern {Athyrium

filix-femina). .........: G-15, 454
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis) G-ie, 461
Linden {Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
Lungwort {Pulmonaria

officinalis). G-16, 485
Marijuana {Cannabis

Sativa)... 2.2... .G-17, 500
Masterwort {Peucedanum
ostruthium).. 2... 0.0-.0.005 507

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

Mercury Herb {Mercurialis

annua)... .....02.2005 G-17, 513
Mug wort {Artemisia

vulgaris)............4 G-18, 530
Oats {Avena sativa)... . | G-18, 551
Parsley {Petroselinum

CrISPUM). vee eS G-19, 567
Parsnip {Pastinaca

SAUVA). oe ee G-19, 571
Pasque Flower {Pulsatilla

pratensis). 6.0. ee 572
Peppermint {Mentha

piperita). .......0..205 G-19, 580
Petasites /Petasites

hybridus),.. 0.1.1.2... G-19, 585
Picrorhiza {Picrorhiza

kurrod). oe 589
Poley {Teucrium polium). . . . 603
Raspberry {Rubus

idaeus)..............5 G-21, 630
Red Bryony {Bryonia

CVOtICA). ve dl 632
Red Sandalwood

{Pterocarpus santalinus) .... 635
Rice {Oryza sativa)... .. § G-21, 643
Sorb Apple {Sorbus

domestica)... .........2..! 704
Speedwell {Veronica

officinalis)... ........5 G-23, 710
Spinach {Spinacia

oleracea)............5 G-23, 712
Sweet Marjoram {Origanum

majorana)...........: G-24, 746
Wafer Ash {Ptelea

trifoliata).. 2.2.20. oe 790

Walnut {Juglans regia) .. .G-25, 793
White Bryony {Bryonia

alba) G-25, 800
White Nettle {Lamium

album). G-25, 806
Wild Daisy {Bellis

perennis). G-26, 811
Wild Radish {Raphanus

raphanistrum). G-26,814
Willow Herb /{Epilobium

angustifolium). ... 1.0... 5 G-26, 818
Yellow Jessamine

{Gelsemium

sempervirens)... .........45 838

GASTROINTESTINAL HYPERMOTILITY,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Henbane /{Hyoscyamus
niger).............-.4 G-14, 389

----- PAGE 107 -----
1-102/GENITAL WARTS

GENITAL WARTS
(See under Condylomata
acuminata)

GIBRALTAR FEVER
(See under Brucellosis)

GINGIVITIS
Acacia (Acacia arabica) 3
Behen (Moringa oleifera). ... . | 67
Calamus (Acorus
calamus) G-7, 138
Catechu (Acacia catechu) 163
Comfrey (Symphytum
officinale). G-9, 212
European Five-Finger Grass
(Potentilla reptans) . G-ll, 289
German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . G12, 331
Mastic Tree (Pistacia
lentiscus) G-17, sos
Oak Gall (Quercus
infectoria) 550
Rhatany (Krameria
triandra) 641
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis). G-22, 679
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia) 757
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis
acetosella) 827
GLANDS, SWOLLEN
Colt's Foot (Tussilago
farfara) G-9, 209
GLANDULAR PROBLEMS
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193
GLANDULAR STIMULATION
Celery (Apium
graveolens). G-8, 172

GLAUCOMA, UNSPECIFIED
Calabar Bean (Physostigma

venenosum) 137
Jaborandi (Pilocarpus

microphyllus) G-IS, 425
Snowdrop (Galanthus

nivalis). 700

GONORRHEA

Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) ... .261
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus) 2... 2... G-11, 283

Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum) G-15, 443
Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata) G-17, 503
New Jersey Tea

[Ceanothus americanus) ... .541
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) .. . 622
Sandalwood (Santalum

album) 659
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima) 770

GOUT, MANAGEMENT OF SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

Alpine Cranberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . ,G-3, 20
Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) ..G-4, 50
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) GA, 61
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus) G-5, 75
Birch (Betula species) G-5, 78
Bitter Orange (Citrus

aurantium). G-5, 86
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis). G-5, 90
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra)... 2.002.020.0204 G-5, 98
Brazilian Pepper Tree

(Schinus terebinthifolius) . . 117
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . 128
Burr Marigold (Bidens

tripartita) G-7, 131
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera). 141
Celandine (Chelidonium

m@jus). 2... eS G-8, 169
Celery (Apium

graveolens). G-8, 172
Cheken (Eugenia chequen)  ...178

Chickweed (Stellaria

media) iso
Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Colchicum (Colchicum

autumnale). G-9, 206
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) G-9, 245
Dog Rose (Rosa canina)  G-10, 254

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Dyer's Broom (Genista

tinctoria) G-10, 260
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). 0 G-10, 275
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) . . .G-11, 289

European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... 0.0. 000.0.0...5 G-11, 291
European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis) G-11, 295

German Sarsaparilla (Carex
arenaria) 336
Germander (Teucrium

chamaedrys) G-12, 337
Goutweed (Aegopodium
podagraria) G-13, 361
Ground Pine (Ajuga

chamaepitys). G-13, 373
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris) G-13, 383
Horseradish (Armoracia

rusticana). G-14, 408
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense) G-14, 409
Java Tea (Orthosiphon

spicatus) 434
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Meadowsweet (Filipendula

ulmaria). G-17, 511
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus). G-i8, 521
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) « G-18, 525
Oats (Avena sativa) G-18, 551
Pennyroyal (Mentha

pulegium) 579
Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca). 597
Pontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron ponticum) . .. 606
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra) G-21, eso
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum) 650

Sandarac (Tetraclinis
articulata). 660
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis) G-22, 679

----- PAGE 108 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Short Buchu {Barosma

betulina) 691
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis). G-23, 710
Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis
spinosa). G-23, 713
Spurge (Euphorbia
resinifera) 716
St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum). G-23, 719
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca) G-23, 735
Surinam Cherry (Eugenia
unifloria). 742
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis
odorata). G-24, 743
Triticum (Agropyron
repens) G-25, 771
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus
torminalis) 814
Winter Cherry (Physalis
alkekengi) G-26, 819
Wood Anemone (Anemone
nemorosa). 824
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis) G-26, 825
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris). 832
GROWTH, IN CHILDREN,
STIMULATION OF
Spinach (Spinacia
oleracea) G-23, 712
GUM DISEASE
Comfrey (Symphytum
officinale) G-9, 212
GUMS, SORE
(See under Pain, dental)
GYNECOLOGICAL DISORDERS
Birth wort (Aristolochia
clematitis). G-5, so
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) ..G-8, 164
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea) . .. 280
Feverfew (Tanacetum
parthenium) G-11, 300
Ground Pine (Ajuga
chamaepitys) G-13, 373
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa) G-17, 500

Self-Heal (Prunella

vulgaris) G-22, 681
White Lily (Lilium

candidum) 804
Wood Anemone (Anemone

nemorosa). 824

HAIR LOSS

Arnica (Arnica montana) 41
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis) G-5, 90
Horsetail (Equisetum

an'ense) G-14, 409
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). . 0.2... 4 491

HALITOSIS, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum) G-9,221

HALLUCINOGENS
Iporuru  (Alchornea
floribunda) 424
Peyote (Lophophora

williamsii) G-19, 588

HANSEN'S DISEASE
(See under Leprosy)

HAY FEVER
(See under Pollinosis)

HEADACHE
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia
californica) G-7, 140
Clematis (Clematis recta) .G-8, 194

Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum). G-9,221
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Cumin (Cuminum

cyminum). G-9, 237
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea) G-10, 248
Dogwood (Cornus

florida) G-10, 256
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia)... 261
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-1O, 270

English Horsemint (Mentha

longifolia) G-10, 275
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) G-12, 342
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens). . . . . A31

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

HEADACHE, MIGRAINE /1-1 03

Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum). G-ie, 468
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum). G-17,515
Muskmallow  (Abelmoschus

moschatus). 533
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). G-19, 585
Ragwort (Senecio

jacobaea). G-20, 629
Shepherd's Purse (Capsella

bursa-pastoris) G-22, 690

Spurge (Euphorbia
resinifera) 716
Sweet Vernal Grass

(Anthoxanthum

odoratum) G-24, 749
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata). G-24, 750
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). 7715
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783
White Willow (Salix

species) G-25, 807
Yellow Jessamine

(Gelsemium

sempervirens). 838

HEADACHE, MIGRAINE

Asarum (Asarum

europaeum) 48
Catnip (Nepeta cataria) . .G-8, 164
Cola (Cola acuminata). ..... : 205
European Peony (Paconia

officinalis) G-11, 295
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium) G-11, 306
Lemon Balm (Melissa

officinalis). G-ie, 461
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomica) G-18, 547
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis) 572
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus) G-19, 585
Rust-Red Rhododendron

(Rhododendron

ferrugineum) 650

----- PAGE 109 -----
1-104/HEADACHE, MIGRAINE

Sweet Marjoram (Origanum

majorana). G-24, 746
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata). G-24, 750
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare) G24, 754
Traveller's Joy (Clematis

vitalba. oo ee G-25, 769

HEADACHE, TENSION
(See under Pain, unspecified)

HEADACHE, VASCULAR
(See under Headache, migraine)

HEART FAILURE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

HEART FAILURE, CONGESTIVE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

HEARTBURN
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

HELMINTHIASIS
Amargo (Quassia amara) . G-3, 23

Behen (Moringa oleifera)..... | 67
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger)... . . G-5,97
Blue Cohosh

(Caulophyllum

thalictroides). 109

Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus) G-7, 130
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) .. . 134
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera). a a .., 141
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis) ..G-7, 144
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus

communis). . G-7, 158
Centaury (Centaurium

“erythraea). G8, 174
Chives (Allium

schoenoprasum) G8, 188
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum). . G8, 190
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma

githago), .. a 222
Cowhage (Mucuna

pruriens) 230
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

G-11, 283

globulus). 6...

European Water Hemlock

(Cicuta virosa) G-11, 297
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium) G-11, 306
Green Hellebore

(Helleborus viridis)........ 368
Groundsel (Senecio

vulgaris). beeen. 374
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica). A19
Larkspur (Delphinium

consolida), . . G-15, 458

Lavender Cotton (Santolina
chamaecyparissias) ... G-16, 460
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis), . . G-17, 497
Morning Glory (Ipomoea

hederacea). 523
Mugwort (Artemisia

vulgaris) G-18, 530
Myrtle (Myrtus

communis). G-18, 536
Neem (Antelaea

azadirachta). . G-18, 539
Pineapple (Ananas

comosus) 593
Pink Root (Spigelia

marilandica). ............ 594
Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca) 597
Pumpkin (Cucurbita

PEO) eee . G-20, 618
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . . . 622
Rue (Ruta graveolens) .. G21, 648
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum). G-23, 719
Sweet Gale (Myrica

gale). ed G-24, 745
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare). G-24, 754
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 775
Walnut (Juglans regia) . . G-25, 793
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium)...... - 797
Wild Carrot (Daucus

carota) G-25, 809
Wormseed Oil

(Chenopodium

ambrosioides) G-26, 828

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wormwood (Artemisia

absinthium). G-26, 829
Wormwood Grass (Spigelia
anthelmia) 831
Yellow Lupin (Lupinus
luteUS). 839
HEMATEMESIS
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana), . . .. G-26, 82i
HEMATURIA
Burr Marigold (Bidens
tripartita) G-7, 131
HEMOPHILIA, UNSPECIFIED
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
HEMOPTYSIS
Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus) 543
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana) G-26, 821
HEMORRHAGE, NASAL
Forget-Me-Not (Myosotis
arvensis) G-12, 316
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense) G-14, 409
Loosestrife (Lysimachia
vulgaris) G-16, 481
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon
species) 618

« Shepherd's Purse (Capsella

bursa-pastoris). . G-22, 690
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum). G-24, 756

HEMORRHAGE, POSTPARTUM
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea) . . . 280
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius)...........) G-22, 672
HEMORRHAGE, UNSPECIFIED
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio
nemorensis)........ Le. 21
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album)... G-11, 291
Golden Ragwort (Senecio
aureus). . . Lee 354
Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare) G-15, 448
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum). . G-ie, 468

----- PAGE 110 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Logwood (Haematoxylon
campechianum). 480

Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543
Self-Heal (Prunella
vulgaris) G-22, 68
HEMORRHOIDS
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox) 16
Chicory (Cichorium
intybus). G-8, 18
Cranesbill (Geranium
maculatum). 233
German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) . . G-12, 33
* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) .... 612
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum) G-24, 75
HEMORRHOIDS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Acacia (Acacia arabica). 3
Beth Root (Trillium
erectum). G-4, 74
Black Nightshade (Solanum
nigrum) G-6, 101
Buckthorn (Rhamnus
catharticus). G-e, 123
¢ Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus) G-7, 132
Butternut (Juglans cinerea) ... 134
Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus
purshiana) 6-7, 153
Chickweed (Stellaria
media) iso
Chinese Rhubarb (Rheum
palmatum). G-8, 185
Common Stonecrop (Sedum
acre). 215
Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis). G-11, 295
Frangula (Rhamnus
frangula). G-12, 317
Gout weed (Aegopodium
podagraria) G-13, 361
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis). G-13, 366
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum) G-14, 403
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphylla) 463

Passion Flower (Passiflora

incarnata). G-19, 573
Pomegranate (Punica
granatum) G-20, 605

* Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum

salicaria) G-20, 620
Smartweed (Persicaria
hydropiper) 699
Solomon's Seal
(Polygonatum
multiflorum) G-22, 703
* Sweet Clover (Melilotus
officinalis) G-24, 744
* Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon
balsamum). G-24, 764
Water Germander
(Teucrium scordium). 797
* Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana) G-26, 821
Yarrow (Achillea
millefolium) G-26, 833
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria
vulgaris) 840
HEMOSTASIS, AN AID IN
Catechu (Acacia catechu) 163
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia
crassifolia) 268
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). G-14, 409
Matico (Piper elongatum) .... 509
New Jersey Tea
(Ceanothus americanus) .... 541

HEPATIC CIRRHOSIS
Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum). G-17, sie

HEPATITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) G-ie, 469
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa). 589
Rue (Ruta graveolens) .. G-21, 648

HERNIA, TESTICULAR
Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum
aromaticum) 182

HERPES GENITALIS
Goldenseal (Hydrastis
canadensis). G-13, 355

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA /T-105

Mountain Laurel (Kalmia
latifolia) G-18, 528

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS INFECTIONS
Thuja (Thuja
occidentalis). G-24, 759
HERPETIC MANIFESTATIONS, ORAL,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
(See under Herpes simplex
virus infections)

HICCUP
Calamint (Calamintha
nepeta). 138
HOARSENESS,
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) G-8, 165
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus) G-11, 283
Eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis). 300
Scotch Pine (Pinus
species) G-22, 674

HODGKIN'S DISEASE
Venus Flytrap (Dionaea
muscipula) 786
HYPERACIDITY, GASTRIC, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) G-4, 61
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) 218
European Five-Finger Grass

(Potentilla reptans) ... G-11, 289
Lovage (Levisticum

officinale) G-ie, 482
Salep (Orchis species) 657
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis) G-26, 825

Yellow Jessamine
(Gelsemium

sempervirens) 838
HYPERACTIVITY
Evening Primrose
(Oenothera biennis) ... G-11, 298

HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
Cotton (Gossypium

hirsutum). 228
* Garlic (Allium sativum) . . G-12, 327
Perilla (Perilla fructescens) .. . 583

----- PAGE 111 -----
1-106 /HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, PRIMARY

HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, PRIMARY,
ADJUNCT TO DIET

Evening Primrose

(Oenothera biennis) . . . 0-11, 298
Garlic (Allium sativum) G-12, 327
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) .. . 575

* Psyllium (Plantago ovata) ... . 612
* Soybean (Glycine soja) . . G22, 707

HYPERGLYCEMIA, CONTROL OF,
ADJUNCT TO DIET

Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) . G-3, 12
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis). . 0.0. eee 21
Bean Pod (Phaseolus

vulgaris). G-4, 65
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). 6 0 G-5, 75
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

AMATUS), Le ee 91
Centaury (Centaurium

erythraea). . : G-8, 174
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao)... ........-42) G-8, 199
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale)... 2... 0... G-9, 245
Divi-Divi (Caesalpinia

bonducella). 6... 253
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus).. 2... 00 eS G-11, 283
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) G-1l, 289
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327

German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria)...............-. 336
Goat's Rue (Galega

officinalis) G-13, 353
Greek Sage (Salvia triloba) . . . 367
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba). : . . «376
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini). 2.00000 ee 429
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) . G18, 52s
Noni (Morinda citrifolia) .G-18, 544
Oats (Avena sativa). G-IS,551
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca).............4 597
Poley (Teucrium polium). . . . 603
Reed Herb (Phragmites

communis)... ...0...22....4 639
Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) .... 727

Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica)... .......-24.4 G-23, 729
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). G-25, 771
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis), . 0.000.000 ws 814

HYPERHIDROSIS
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna)... ........! G-4, 69
Japanese Atractylodes

(Atractylodes japonica). . . . 430
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare).. 6... es G-15, 448

* Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, 655

+ Walnut (Juglans regia) . . G25, 793

HYPERKERATOSIS SKIN DISORDERS

Garlic (Allium sativum) G-12, 327
HYPERLIPEMIA
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus), 60.0 ee G5, 75

HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis
tetragonoloba)........... 376

HYPERTENSION

Alpine Ragwort (Senecio
nemorensis), . 0... 00 e eee ee 21
Bear's Garlic (Allium

ursinum). . 0... 66
Brown Kelp (Macrocystis

pyrifera). 6. ee 122
Celandine (Chelidonium

majUS). G-8, 169
Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea)...........5 G-8, 174

Cheken (Eugenia chequen) . .. 178
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

CTE). ee 215
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea). G-10, 248
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album). 6.0. ee G-11, 291

* Garlic (Allium sativum) . . .G-12, 327
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica). 6.6... ee ee G-13, 359
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe
pachyceras).............55 A12
Lemon Balm (Melissa
officinalis). G-ie, 461
Lycium Bark (Lycium
chinense)... 0... A86
¢ Onion (Allium cepa)... . | G-19, 557

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca).............! 597
Pontian Rhododendron
(Rhododendron ponticum) . . . 606
* Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentind),.. 2.0.0... 0e ed 631
Rust-Red Rhododendron
(Rhododendron
ferrugineum). .. 6... ee | 650
* Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scopariuS),.........24 G22, 672
Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) .... 727
Strophanthus = (Strophanthus
kombe). 2.0 ee 736
Strophanthus Gratus
(Strophanthus gratus). . . . . .736
Surinam Cherry (Eugenia
unifloria). 6... 742
Wood Sage (Teucrium
scorodonia)..........4 G-26, 826

HYPERTENSION, ESSENTIAL
(See under Hypertension)

HYPERTENSIVE CRISES
(See under Hypertension)

HYPERTHYROIDISM
Bladderwrack (Fucus

vesiculosus). 2.00 ee 106
HYPERTONIA
Bishop's Weed (Ammi
Visnaga). G-5, 81
Olive (Olea europaea) . . .G-19, 556
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
Serpentind). . 6.0.0... 0 00d 63i
HYPNOTIC

(See under Sleep, induction of)

HYPOCHONDRIA
Black Horehound (Ballota
Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris).

HYPOGLYCEMIA
Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis). .
HYPOTENSION
* Camphor Tree
(Cinnamomum
camphora)...........5 G-7, 143
Northern Prickly Ash
(Zanthoxylum
americanum)... 0.0.0 ee 545

G-12, 322

----- PAGE 112 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

HYSTERIA, ACUTE
Black Horehound /(Ballota

nigra). G-5, 98
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus) G-7, 130
Calotropis {Calotropis

procera)..............24. 141

English Chamomile
{Chamaemelum nobile) G-1O, 270
European Mistletoe {Viscum

album) G-11, 29
Gotu Kola {Centella

asiatica). G-13, 359
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis) G-16, 46
Marijuana {Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Nerve Root {Cypripedium

calceolus) 54
Scullcap {Scutellaria

lateriflora). G-22, 678
Sweet Violet {Viola

odoratd) G-24, 750
Valerian {Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783

ICHTHYOSIS, UNSPECIFIED
Burdock {Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128

Peanut {Arachis hypogaea) . 575

IMMUNODEFICIENCY, UNSPECIFIED
{See under Infection,
tendency to)

IMPETIGO CONTAGIOSA
Burning Bush {Dictamnus
albus) G-7, 130
Heartsease {Viola tricolor) .... 382

Oats {Avena sativa) G-IS, 551

IMPOTENCE, MALE
{See under Erectile dysfunction)

INDIGESTION
{See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

INFECTION, TENDENCY TO
* Arnica {Arnica montana). 41
Barberry ({Berberis

vulgaris) GA, 61
Birthwort {Aristolochia
clematitis) G-5, SO
* Cajuput {Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136

* Echinacea Purpurea

{Echinacea purpurea) . .G-10, 261
Garden Cress {Lepidium
sativum) G-12, 326
* German Chamomile
{Matricaria recutita) .. G-12, 331
* Japanese Mint {Mentha
an'ensis piperascens). . . . . 431
¢ Larch {Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
Lemon {Citrus limon). 460
Lime {Citrus
aurantifolia). G-16,476
Luffa {Luffa aegyptica) .. G-16, 483
* Onion {Allium cepa) G-19, 557
* Peppermint {Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species) G-22, 674
* Siberian Ginseng
{Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 693
+ Spruce {Picea species). 714
INFECTION, VIRAL
Cat's Claw {Unicaria
tomentosa) 160

INFECTIONS, GENITOURINARY TRACT

Matico {Piper elongatum) . 509
INFECTIONS, INTESTINAL
Cocoa {Theobroma
cacao) G-8, 199
INFECTIONS, MYCOTIC, CUTANEOUS
Tea Tree {Melaleuca
alternifolia) 757
INFECTIONS, NON-SPECIFIC
Butternut {Juglans cinerea) .. . 134
Fumitory {Fumaria
officinalis) G-12, 322
Picrorhiza {Picrorhiza
kurroa) 589
Red Bryony {Bryonia
cretica) 632
Sorrel {Rumex acetosa). 705
White Bryony {Bryonia
alba) G-25, 800
Yellow Dock {Rumex
Crispus) 835

INFECTIONS, PREVENTION OF
Dog Rose {Rosa canina) G-IO, 254
Sea Buckthorn {Hippophae

rhamnoides) G-22, 680

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

INFECTIONS, TAPEWORM /T-107

INFECTIONS, RESPIRATORY TRACT,
TREATMENT ADJUNCT

Echinacea Purpurea

{Echinacea purpurea) G-10, 26i

INFECTIONS, RESPIRATORY TRACT,
UNSPECIFIED

Astragalus {Astragalus
species) 54
Echinacea Angustifolia
{Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
Iporuru {Alchornea
floribunda) 424
Peppermint {Mentha
piperita). G-19, 580
Thuja {Thuja
occidentalis) G-24, 759
Turmeric {Curcuma
domestica). 775
INFECTIONS, SKIN AND SKIN
STRUCTURE
Coconut Palm {Cocos
nucifera) G-9,201
Goa Powder {Andira
araroba). 352
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
{Arisaema atrorubens). ... . + A26
Oak Gall {Quercus
infectoria) 550
Pasque Flower {Pulsatilla
pratensis). 572
Tea Tree {Melaleuca
alternifolia) 757
Thuja {Thuja
occidentalis). G-24, 759
Virola {Virola theiodora). . . . | 789
INFECTIONS, SMALLPOX
Pitcher Plant {Sarracenia
purpurea). G-20, 596
Purple Gromwell
{Lithospermum
erytrorhizon). 619
INFECTIONS, SOFT TISSUES
{See under Infections, skin and
skin structure)
INFECTIONS, TAPEWORM
Kamala {Mallotus
Philippinensis). 442
Kousso {Hagenia
abyssinica). 450
Male Fern {Dryopteris
filix-mas) G-17, 493

----- PAGE 113 -----
1-108/INFECTIONS, TAPEWORM

Pomegranate (Punica

granatum)...........4 G-20, 605
Pumpkin (Cucurbita

PEPO). 6 eee .. G-20,618
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus

altissima). 770

Yew (Taxus baccata) . G-26, 841

INFECTIONS, UPPER RESPIRATORY
TRACT

Bistort (Persicaria
bistorta). G-5, 82
Catechu (Acacia catechu). ... . 163
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria)............) G-26, 812

INFECTIONS, URINARY TRACT
Angelica (Angelica

archangelica). . G-3, 32
+ Asparagus (Asparagus
officinalis) G-4, 52
* Bean Pod (Phaseolus
vulgaris) G-4, 65
* Birch (Betula species) G-S, 78
Canadian Fleabane
(Erigeron canadensis) . . G-7, 144
* Canadian Golden Rod
(Solidago canadensis). . . . . 145
Chocolate Vine (Akebia
qQuindtd). . 6 eee 189
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera
langsdorffi) tee eee 220
* Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale). G-9, 245
* Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) . G-10, 261
* European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) .. G-11, 289
* Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana)...........4 G-14, 408
* Horsetail (Equisetum
ATVENSE). . 6 ee G-14, 409
Iporuru (Alchornea
floribunda). 6... A424
¢ Java Tea (Orthosiphon
spicatus).. 2.0.0... ee ee 434
+ Lovage (Levisticum
officinale)... ........4 G-ie, 482
* Nasturtium (Tropaeolum
MQJUS). ee eS G-18, 537
¢ Parsley (Petroselinum
CrISPUM). Woe ee dl G-19, 567
* Sandalwood (Santalum
album). .......02..004...4 659

Short Buchu (Barosma

betulind). 6... 691
¢ Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis

spinosa)... .....2....05 G-23, 713
* Stinging Nettle (Urtica

di0icd), 6. eee | G-23, 729
* Triticum (Agropyron

TEPENS). oo ee eee | G-25, 771
* Uva-Ursi (Arctostaphylos

uva-ursi). 6. ee G25, 779

INFECTIONS, VENEREAL
(See under Gonorrhea)

INFLAMMATION, ANORECTAL
Oak (Quercus robur)
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum) 563

. G18, 549

INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS,
UNSPECIFIED

Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza
kurroa) 589

INFLUENZA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . 128
Cinnamon (Cinnamomum

verum). .. G-8, 190
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara) G-9, 209

Dog Rose (Rosa canina) G-10, 254
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270

Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus)....... G-11,283
European Elder (Sambucus

NIGFA). 2 eed G-11,287
Horseradish (Armoracia

rusticand),..........4 G-14, 4os
Oats (Avena sativa)..... | G-IS, 551
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens)... 0.0.0.4. G20, 626
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctorid)............4 G-26, 812

INSECT BITES, PAIN DUE TO
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

INSOMNIA
(See under Sleep, induction of)

INTERMITTENT CLAUDICATION
(See under Claudication,
intermittent)

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INTERTRIGO

(See under Skin, inflammatory

conditions)

IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME

(See under Bowel, irritable,

syndrome)

ITCHING, SKIN

(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

ITCHING, SUNBURN

(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

JAUNDICE

American Liverleaf
(Hepatica nobilis)... ...... 26
Asarum (Asarum

europaeum), . . . . A8
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) G-4, 61
Columbine (Aquilegia

vulgaris). G-9, 211
Holly (Ilex aquifolium) .. G-14, 397
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare)... ei eee G-14, 401
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) : : : : 433
Lavender Cotton (Santolina

chamaecyparissias) .. . .G-16, 460
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris)... 6.2.2.2... G-17, 503
Milk Thistle (Silybum

marianum)...........5 G-17,516
Parsley (Petroselinum

crispum)... 0.2. .2..242.45 G-19, 367
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius)...........5 G-22, 672
Strawberry (Fragaria

VESCO). vce eed G-23, 735

JOINTS, SWOLLEN

Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum). 29
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

NiCd). ve A19
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria). . . . . . 466

KERATOSIS PALMARIS

(See under Hyperkeratosis skin
disorders)

----- PAGE 114 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

KERATOSIS PILARIS
(See under Hyperkeratosis skin
disorders)

KERATOSIS PLANTARIS
(See under Hyperkeratosis skin
disorders)

LABOR, STIMULATION OF
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis). 21
Blue Cohosh
(Caulophyllum
thalictroides). 109
Fever Bark (Alstonia
constricta). 305
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) G-22, 672
LACK OF STAMINA
Coffee (Coffea arabica) . . G-9, 202
* Cola (Cola acuminata). 205
* Ginseng (Panax ginseng). 346
* Mate (Ilex
paraguariensis). G-17, 508
+ Siberian Ginseng
(Eleutherococcus
senticosus) 693
Southern Tsangshu
(Atractylodes lancea)......° 106
LACTATION, STIMULATION OF
Caraway (Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148

European Elder (Sambucus
nigra)... 0... ee G-11, 287
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum). G-16, 468
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza
glabra)... ........0.-45 G-16, 469
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
LARYNGOTRACHEITIS
European Elder (Sambucus
nigra). G-11, 287
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, 655
LEG MUSCLE CRAMPS
Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus) G-7, 132
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum) G-14, 403
Sweet Clover (Melilotus
officinalis) G-24, 744

LEPROSY
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera) 141
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus
species) 177
Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum) G-9, 221
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis
gigantea). 338
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe
pachyceras) 412
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Convallaria majalis) G-16, 475
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica) 775
LEUKEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Reed Herb (Phragmites
communis). 639
LEUKORRHEA
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus
altissima). 770
White Nettle (Lamium
album)... ...........4 G-25, 806
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria) G-26, 812
LICE, BODY

(See under Pediculosis, human)

LICE, HEAD
(See under Pediculosis, human)

LICE, PUBIC
(See under Pediculosis, human)

LITHURSIS

Cleavers (Galium aparine) . 193

LIVER AND GALLBLADDER COMPLAINTS
Adam's Needle (Yucca

filamentosa) 4
+ Artichoke (Cynara
scolymus) G-4, 44
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris) G-4, ei
+ Belladonna (Atropa
belladonna) G-4, 69
Bitter Apple (Citrullus
colocynthis) G-S, 83
Black Root (Leptandra
virginica) 104
» Celandine (Chelidonium
majus). G-8, 169
Cornflower (Centaurea
cyanus) G-9, 225

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

LIVER DISORDERS /I-109

* Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) G-9, 245
Elecampane (Inula
helenium) G-10, 266
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus)... 0.2.0... 4 G-11, 283
Fringetree (Chionanthus
virginicus) G-12, 321
* Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis). G-12, 322
Heather (Calluna
vulgaris). G-13, 383
Hemp Agrimony
(Eupatorium
cannabinum). G-13, 388
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum) G-14, 393
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana) G-14, 408
+ Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). .. . 431
Linden (Tilia species) ... G-16, 477
* Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum) G-17, 516
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium). 579
+ Peppermint (Mentha
piperita).. 2.2... 22.0. G-19, 580
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). G-19, 585
* Scopolia (Scopolia
carniolica). 671
Stillingia (Stillingia
sylvatica). 729
Tamarind (Tamarindus
indica) 753
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
* Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium) G-26, 829
* Yarrow (Achillea
' — millefolium) G-26, 833
LIVER DISORDERS
American Bittersweet
(Celastrus scandens) 24
American Liverleaf
(Hepatica nobilis) 26
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum). 29
Asarum (Asarum
europaeum) A8

----- PAGE 115 -----
1-1 10 /LIVER DISORDERS.

Astragalus (Astragalus

species) 54
Balmony (Chelone glabra) .G-4, 59
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) G4, 61
Beet (Beta vulgaris) G4, 67
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Brooklime (Veronica

beccabunga) G-6, 121
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao). G8, 199
Corn Silk (Zea mays) 224
Dodder (Cuscuta

epithymum) G-10, 254
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). 0 G-10, 275

European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) .. G-11, 289
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenaria) 336
Hedge-Hyssop (Gratiola

officinalis) G-13, 385
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) 433
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube). . . . : 439
Marsh Marigold (Caltha

palustris) G-17, 503
Milk Thistle (Silybum

marianum) G-17, 516

Opium Antidote

(Combretum micranthum) .. 559
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) ...622
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina) 631
Red Bryony (Bryonia

cretica) 632
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) ... G-22, 668
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Soybean (Glycine soja) . . G-22, 707
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis) G-23, 710
Strawberry (Fragaria

vesca) G-23, 735
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba) G-25, 800

Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis) G-26, 811
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia) G-26, 826
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis

acetosella). 827
Wormwood (Artemisia

absinthium). G-26, 829

LUMPS IN THE BREAST

Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193

LYMPH NODES, INFLAMMATION OF
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812
LYMPHEDEMA
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum) 29

Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
Figwort (Scrophularia

nodosa). G-11, 311
Sweet Clover (Melilotus
officinalis) G24, 744

LYMPHOMAS, HODGKIN'S
(See under Hodgkin's disease)

LYMPHOMAS, NON-HODGKIN'S
Venus Flytrap (Dionaea
muscipula) 786
LYMPHOSARCOMA
(See under Lymphomas,
non-Hodgkin's)
MALARIA
(See under P. falciparum
infections)
MALARIA, TREATMENT OR
PROPHYLAXIS OF
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris) G-4, 61
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus) 91
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum) G-8, 165
Croton Seeds (Croton

tiglium) 234
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Milk Thistle (Silybum

marianum) G-17, sie

Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . .. 622
Simaruba (Simaruba
amara) 695

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tree of Heaven {Ailanthus

altissima) 7710
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron

tulipifera) 714
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812

MASTODYNIA

Bugle weed (Lye opus

virginicus) G-6, 126

Chaste Tree (Vitex

agnus-castus) G-8, 176

MEASLES
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). 6... . . G-11, 283

MENINGITIS
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . . 128
MENOPAUSE, CLIMACTERIC
COMPLAINTS
* Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa) G-5,92
* Chaste Tree (Vitex

agnus-castus) G-8, 176

MENOPAUSE, MANAGEMENT OF THE
MANIFESTATIONS OF

Borage (Borago

officinalis) G-6, 114
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum) 182
Golden Ragwort (Senecio

aureus) 354
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis) G-13, 366
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris) G-IS, 456
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783

MENORRHAGIA

Arnica (Arnica montana)... .. Al
* Beth Root (Trillium

erectum) G-4, 74
Burning Bush Oictamnus

albus) G-7, 130

Ergot (Claviceps purpurea) .. . 280
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis) G-13, 366
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense) G-14, 409

----- PAGE 116 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum) G-16, 468
Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris). 491
Nerve Root (Cypripedium

calceolus). 541
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius) G-22, 672
Shepherd's Purse (Capsella

bursa-pastoris). G-22, 690
Sweet Sumach (Rhus

aromatica). 748

MENSTRUAL BLOOD, HEAVY LOSS OF,

IDIOPATHIC
Loosestrife (Lysimachia

vulgaris). G-16,481

MENSTRUAL CRAMPS
(See under Pain, menstrual)

MENSTRUAL DISORDERS
American Bittersweet
(Celastrus scandens). 24
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum). eee. 29
Arrach (Chenopodium

vulvaria) 43
Asarum (Asarum

europaeum). . . . 48
Beth Root (Trillium

erectum). G-4, 74
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger) G-5, 97
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). . . G-7, 130
Caraway (Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148
Cat's Claw (Unicaria

tomentosa). . . loo
Chaste Tree (Vitex

agnus-castus) G-8, 176
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus) G-9, 225
Cranesbill (Geranium

maculatum). 233
Cumin (Cuminum

cyminum). G-9, 237
Cyclamen (Cyclamen

europaeum). 240
Dusty Miller (Senecio

bicolor). 258
Elecampane (Inula

helenium) G-IO, 266
English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270

European Peony (Paeonia

officinalis) G-11, 295
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum). G-14, 403
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum). G-16, 468
Lovage (Levisticum
officinale). . . . G-ie, 482
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis). . . . . G-17, 497
Marsh Marigold (Caltha
palustris). . : . G-17, 503
Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum). . G-17, 516
Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia) . G-i8, 525
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Parsley (Petroselinum
crispum). G-19, 567
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza
kurroa) 589
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria) G-20, 620
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . 622
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Smartweed (Persicaria
hydropiper). 699
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum). . G-24, 751
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron
tulipifera) 774
Turkey Corn (Dicentra
cucullaria). . . . . 775
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis). G-25, 788
Wallflower (Cheiranthus
cheiri). . G-25, 792
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus
torminalis). 814
Willow Herb (Epilobium
angustifolium) G-26, SIS
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis
virginiana) G-26, 821
Wood Anemone (Anemone
nemorosa) 824
Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris). 832
MENSTRUAL SYNDROME, PRE-,
MANAGEMENT OF
* Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga
racemosa). G-5, 92

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

MOOD SWINGS /I-111

+ Bugleweed (Lycopus

virginicus). G-6, 126
¢ Chaste Tree (Vitex
agnus-castus) G-8, 176
Evening Primrose
{Oenothera biennis) ... G-II, 298

Lavender Cotton (Santolina

chamaecyparissias) ... G-16, 460
Oswego Tea (Monarda
didyma) 562
* Potentilla (Potentilla
anserina). . G-20, 610
* Shepherd's Purse (Capsella
bursa-pastoris), . G-22, 690
Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis). G-25, 783
METABOLIC DISORDERS
Red Bryony (Bryonia
cretica). 632
White Bryony (Bryonia
alba) G-25, 800
METEORISM
Caraway (Carum carvi) ..G-7, 148
Curcuma (Curcuma
xanthorrhizia) G-9,239
English Lavender
(Lavandula
angustifolia). G-IO, 277
Lemon Balm (Melissa
officinalis) G-ie, 46i
Masterwort (Peucedanum
ostruthium). . . 507
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G-22, 697
Tansy (Tanacetum
vulgare). G-24, 754
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica) 775
Wormwood (Artemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829

MICTURATION PROBLEMS

ACCOMPANYING PROSTATE ADENOMA

Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Pumpkin (Cucurbita

pepo). G-20, 618
Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica) G-23, 729

MIGRAINE HEADACHE
(See under Headache, migraine)

MOOD SWINGS
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140

----- PAGE 117 -----
I-112/MORNING SICKNESS

MORNING SICKNESS

Cola {Cola acuminata)... .. . 205
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
MOTION SICKNESS
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) G-8, 165
+ Ginger (Zingiber
officinale) G-12, 339
MOUTH AND THROAT DISORDERS
American White Pond Lily
(Nymphaea odorata) ....G-3, 28
Borage (Borago
officinalis) G-6, 114
Canella (Canella
winterana) 147
Catechu (Acacia catechu) 163
Common Kidney Vetch
(Anthyllis_ vulneraria) . G-9, 214
Cudweed  (Gnaphalium
uliginosum) 236
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum). G-14, 393
High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris) G-14, 395
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis). 505
Perilla (Perilla fructescens) . . . 583
Pinus Bark (Tsuga
canadensis) G-19, 594
Raspberry (Rubus
idaeus) G-21, 630
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis). G-25, 788
MUSCLE SPASM
(See under Spasticity, muscle,
symptomatic alleviation of)
MUSCLE TENSION
Cajuput (Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136
* Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) G-S, 165
MUSCLES, SKELETAL, RELAXATION,
PREOPERATIVE
Pareira (Chondrodendron
tomentosum). 566
MYALGIA

(See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

MYALGIA, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

MYCOBACTERIUM LEPRAE INFECTIONS
(See under Leprosy)

MYOCARDITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Arnica (Arnica montana)... . . : Al

NARCOTIC ADDICTION, DETOXIFICATION
TREATMENT OF

Oats (Avena sativa) G-18, 551

NASAL CONGESTION, SYMPTOMATIC.
RELIEF OF

Scotch Pine (Pinus

species). G-22, 674

NAUSEA
(See also under Motion sickness)
Adrue (Cyperus articulatus) G-3, 6
Almond (Prunus dulcis) 15
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger) G-5, 97
Black Horehound (Ballota
nigra) G-5, 98
California Peppertree
(Schinus_ molle). 139
Gambir (Uncaria species)  .... 324
Green Hellebore
(Helleborus viridis)... 2... 368
Jatamansi (Nardostachys
jatamansi) 433
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum) G-16, 468
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita) G-19, 580
Sneezewort (Achillea
ptarmica) 700
Sweet Vernal Grass
(Anthoxanthum
odoratum) G-24, 749
NECK STIFFNESS
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum) G-13, 386
NERVE DAMAGE
Corydalis (Corydalis cava) .. . 226
NERVE INFLAMMATION
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum). G-ie, 468
Rupturewort (Herniaria
glabra). G-21, 650

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
NEURALGIA
(See under Pain, neurogenic)

NEURALGIA, TRIGEMINAL
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus) .G-18, 521
Thuja (Thuja
occidentalis) G-24, 759

NEURITIS, PERIPHERAL, ACUTE
(See under Pain, neurogenic)

NEUROPATHY
California Poppy
(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140

NIGHT SWEATS
Asiatic Dogwood (Cornus
officinalis) 51
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica). 301

NIGHT VISION ENHANCER
Bilberry
myrtillus).

(Vaccinium

G-5, 75
NUTRIENTS, DEFICIENCY OF
(Maranta

arundinacea). 43
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube). . . . 439

Arrowroot

NUTRIENTS, DEFICIENCY OF,
STRESS-INDUCED

(See under Nutrients,
deficiency of)
NUTRIENTS, DEFICIENCY OF,
SURGERY-INDUCED
(See under Nutrients,
deficiency of)

NYSTAGMUS.
Fish Berry (Anamirta
cocculus) 312

OBESITY, EXOGENOUS
Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum). G-IS, 443

OPHTHALMIA

Asarum (Asarum

europaeum). 48
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle) 139
Cape Aloe (Aloe ferox). 16
Chickweed (Stellaria

media). iso
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus). G-9, 225

----- PAGE 118 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis) 300

OPHTHALMIC DISORDERS
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) .. Lee 218
Eyebright (Euphrasia

officinalis) 300
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomica).........: G-18, 547
Oats (Avena sativa)..... | G-18, 551
Red Maple (Acer

rubrum). .........++.4 G21, 635
Spurge (Euphorbia

resiniferd)............ Tie
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). Lee ... 77s

ORAL AND PHARYNGEAL DISORDERS
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum) . G-9, 221
ORCHITIS.
Wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens) 820

ORGANIC BRAIN DYSFUNCTION,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

(See also under Dementia,
Alzheimer's type)
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12,342

OXYTOXIC
Levant Cotton (Gossypium
herbaceum)..... 2... «! G-ie, 468

P. FALCIPARUM INFECTIONS
Hwema Bark (Corynanthe
pachyceras)... 2... e eee! A12
PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH ARTHRITIS,
TOPICAL
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH SPORTS
INJURIES

(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

PAIN, ABDOMINAL
(See also under Cramps, -
abdominal, symptomatic

relief of)
Marijuana (Cannabis

SatiVA). 6. eed G-17,500
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) 715

Wood Anemone (Anemone

NEMOVOSA) ov eevee eee 824
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris). 0.0.0. c eed 832
PAIN, BREAST

Evening Primrose
(Oenothera biennis) . . . G-11, 298

PAIN, CANCER
Marijuana (Cannabis

SAV)... eee G17, 500
PAIN, DENTAL
* Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum). . G-8, 195
PAIN, EAR

English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

INdiCA). 0. ee A19
Lemon Balm (Melissa

Officinalis)... 6... 0.004: G-ie, 461
Male Fern (Dryopteris

filix-mas). oo el G-17, 493
Rue (Ruta graveolens) . . .G21, 648

PAIN, JOINT

Ammoniac Gum (Dorema

ammoniacum) 29
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurroa) 589

Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) . . 0-22, 668

PAIN, LEO
Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea
SAUVA). eee 708

PAIN, LUMBAR
Asiatic Dogwood (Cornus

officinalis), . . a . . S51
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G4, 61
Behen (Moringa oleifera)..... : 67
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa)' . 6-5, 92
Cajuput (Melaleuca

leucadendra) G-7, 136
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum) G-8, 165
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus).. 6... eee G-16, 465

‘Denotes recommendation by Commission E,

PAIN, NEUROGENIC /I-113

PAIN, MENSTRUAL
Blue Cohosh
(Caulophyllum
thalictroides),............ 109
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327

PAIN, MUSCULAR, TEMPORARY

RELIEF OF
Belladonna (Atropa
belladonna). wo... G-4, 69
Black Bryony (Tamus
communis). : G-5, 90
* Cajuput (Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136
Cowhage (Mucuna
PIUTICNS). 60. ee 230
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Horseradish (Armoracia
rusticand)........0.05 G-14, 408
Iporuru (Alchornea
floribunda)... 6. oe ee 424
Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). .... s 431
Male Fern (Dryopteris
filix-mas). ,. GAT, 493
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus)............4 G-IS, 521
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita)............04 G-19, 580
Rust-Red Rhododendron
(Rhododendron
ferrugineum). . : : £80
Scotch Pine (Pinus
Speci€S)........202-0/ G22, 674
Spruce (Picea species)......: 714
St. John's Wort
(Hypericum
perforatum)..........5 G23, 719
PAIN, NEUROGENIC
Black Pepper (Piper
nigrum) .. G-6, 103

Bulbous Buttercup
(Ranunculus bulbosus) . .. 128
Buttercup (Ranunculus

ACTIS). eee 133
¢ Cajuput (Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136
Cowslip (Primula veris)..... : 231
English Ivy (Hedera
helix). 00. eee od G-10, 275
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus)............5 G-11, 283

----- PAGE 119 -----
1-114/PAIN, NEUROGENIC

European Peony (Paeonia

officinalis). .. 0-11, 29s
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). . 346
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum). G-13, 386
Herb Paris (Paris
quadrifolia) G-14, 392
Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens), . . . . A311
Larch (Larix decidua) ... G-IS, 457
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon
citratus) . G-ie, 465
Male Fern (Dryopteris
filix-mas). G-17, 493
Marijuana (Cannabis
sativa)... . G-17, 500
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus). G-IS, 521
Niauli (Melaleucea
viridiflora) 542
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla
pratensis). 572
Peppermint (Mentha
piperita) G-19, sso
Rust-Red Rhododendron
(Rhododendron
ferrugineum) . . 650
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
species). . G-22, 674
Snowdrop (Galanthus
nivalis)... .. . Lae .. 700
* Spruce (Picea species). . 714
Stavesacre (Delphinium
staphisagria) .. 726
Tansy (Tanacetum
vulgare). . . G-24, 784
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum). G-24, 756
Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis). . G-25, 783
+ White Fir (Abies alba) . 802
Wintergreen (Gaultheria
procumbens). . . 820
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis). . G-26, 825
Yellow Jessamine
(Gelsemium
sempervirens). : : : 838
PAIN, SPASMODIC
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus) G-19, 585

PAIN, STOMACH
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia)... .261
Taumelloolch (Lolium

temulentum). G-24, 756
Winter's Bark (Drimys
winteri) 820
PAIN, TEETHING
(See under Pain, dental)
PAIN, TOOTH
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera). bee 141
Catechu (Acacia catechu) 163
English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270

European Five-Finger Grass
(Potentilla reptans) . Gil, 289
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea). 338
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

niger) G-14, 389
Lycium Bark (Lycium

chinense). 486
Male Fern (Dryopteris

(filix-mas) G-17, 493
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum) . G-17, sis
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum) 577
Rue (Ruta graveolens) G21, 648
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica). 2... 700
Winter's Bark (Drimys

winteri). 820

PAIN, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum) G-5,94
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale). G-9,212
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 26i
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum). .G-14, 411
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557
Poplar (Populus species) .G-20, 607
Quince (Cydonia

oblongata) 62s
Reed Herb (Phragmites

communis). . . . . 639
White Fir (Abies alba) 802

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812
Wild Thyme (Thymus
serpyllum) G-26, 815
Wormwood _ (4rtemisia
absinthium). G-26, 829
PAIN, UNSPECIFIED
Borage (Borago
officinalis) G-6, 114
Corn Poppy (Papaver
rhoeas). . . . .. 223
Devil's Claw
(Harpagophytum
procumbens). 247
English Horsemint (Mentha
longifolia). G-10, 275
Hound's Tongue
(Cynoglossum officinale) . . . . 410
* Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). . . . . A31
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus). G-IS, 521
Parsnip (Pastinaca
sativa) . G-19, 571
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus) G-19, 585
Poplar (Populus species) G-20, 607
Poppyseed (Papaver
somniferum) G-20, 609
Vervain (Verbena
officinalis) G-25, 788
* White Willow (Salix
species). G-25, 807
PAIN, URINARY TRACT
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). . G-19, 585
Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) . .G-22, 668
PALPITATIONS
Herb Paris (Paris
quadrifolia). ..... G-14, 392

PANCREAS, DISSEMINATED
ADENOCARCINOMA

(See under Carcinoma, pancreas)

PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY
Haronga (Haronga

madagascariensis)... ... . . 380
Papaya (Carica papaya) G-19, 565
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). . G-19, 585

----- PAGE 120 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Pineapple (Ananas
comosus) ..... 593

PARALYSIS, UNSPECIFIED
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Digitalis (Digitalis
purpurea)... 0.6... 600! G-10, 248
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum
majorand)...........4 G-24, 746

PEDICULOSIS CAPITIS INFESTATION
Pyrethrum (Chrysanthemum
cinerariifolium).........., 621
PEDICULOSIS, HUMAN
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum)... 0.00.0 e ces 577
Pyrethrum (Chrysanthemum

cinerariifolium). 621
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . . . 622

PERICARDITIS, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus)............4 G-IS, 521
PERTUSSIS

Bishop's Weed (Ammi

Visnaga)..............4 G-5, 81
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). .......0.....5 G45, 94
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra). G-5, 98
Cherry Laurel (Prunus

laurocerasus)........ | 6-8, 179
Cowslip (Primula veris)..... : 231
Cupmoss (Cladonia

pyxidata). 6... ee 238
Daffodil (Narcissus

pseudonarcissus) 243
Elecampane (Inula

helenium) G-10,266
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus) . -G-11, 283
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album)... G-11,291
European Peony (Paeonia

officinalis). . G-11, 295

Heartsease (Viola tricolor) ....382
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare)...........005 G-14, 401
Jimson Weed (Datura

stramonium).........! G-15, 436
Lactucarium (Lactuca

VIFOSA). oe ee’ 453
Lycium Bark (Lycium

chinense). 0.0.0.0 A86

Maidenhair (Adiantum

capillus-veneris) 491
Mandrake (Mandragora

officinarum)..........4 G-17, 495
Marijuana (Cannabis

SatiVd). . oe eee G-17, 500
Mouse Ear (Pilosella

officinarum). 6.0.60... 529
Myrtle (Myrtus

communis). ..........4 G-IS, 536
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). 2. G-19, 585
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense). ........4.0) G21, 633
Thyme (Thymus

vulgaris)... 6... eee GA, 761
Tonka Beans (Dipteryx

OdOratd). oo. 767
Vervain (Verbena

Officinalis).....0....45 G25, 788
Wild Cherry (Prunus

Serotind). .. 0.00. ee ee eee 810
Wood Anemone (Anemone

NEMOVOSA). . 6. eee 824

PHARYNGITIS, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Arum (Arum maculatum). . . 46
Bitter Orange (Citrus

aurantium)............4 G-5, 86
Black Alder (Alnus

glutinosa)............5 G-5, 89
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa)............: G-5, 92
Canadian Fleabane

(Erigeron canadensis). ..G-7, 144
Catechu (Acacia catechu) ...... 163
Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum). ............4 G-8, ies
Chicory (Cichorium

intybus)............05 G-8, ISI
Coconut Palm (Cocos

nucifera)............4 G-9, 201
Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara). ©. ©... a+ G-9, 209
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale)... 6.0.0.6 4 6-9, 212
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis) G-11, 310

Heartsease (Viola tricolor) ....382

Pomegranate (Punica

granatum)...........5 G20, 605
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .e-21, 655

*Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

POISONING /I-115

Spanish-Chestnut (Castanea

sativa)
Sweet Cicely (Myrrhis

odorata)... 0.020.420 GA, 743
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia). .........0.44 757
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis). ........4.: G25, 788
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctorid)............4 G-26, 812
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia)..........4 G-26, 826

PHLEBITIS
Arnica (Arnica montana). . . Al
Borage (Borago
officinalis) .
English Ivy (Hedera
helix)
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis)...........4 G-13, 366
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)....... | G-14, 403
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis). ..........5 G7, 497

G-6, 114

G-10, 275

PHOTODERMATOSIS
Wild Carrot (Daucus

carota) G-25, 809

PILES
(See under Hemorrhoids)

PLASMODIUM INFECTION
(See under P. falciparum
infections)

PLEURITIS
Comfrey (Symphytum
officinale) .........005 G-9, 212

PMS
(See under Menstrual syndrome,
pre-, management of)

PNEUMONIA
' Asarum (Asarum
europaeum)..... 6.0.2.0. A8
Black Mustard (Brassica
nigra).
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia
crassifolia). 2.0.0... 00.8 268

POISONING
Calabar Bean (Physostigma
venenosum). .. 2.0.60... ee 137
Ipecac (Cephaelis
ipecacuanhd)...........045 423

G-5, 100

----- PAGE 121 -----
1-116/POISONING

Milk Thistle {Silybum
marianum). . G-17, 516
POISONING, ALCOHOL
Aga {Amanita muscaria) .. G-3, 8
POISONING, STRYCHNINE

Marijuana {Cannabis
SAUIVA). voce el G-17, SOO

POISONING, UNSPECIFIED
Jatamansi {Nardostachys

jatamansi) . : : 433
POLLINOSIS
Mandrake {Mandragora
officinarum). . . . G-17, 495

POSTNASAL DRIP
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)

PREGNANCY, COMPLAINTS OF
Devil's Claw

{Harpagophytum

procumbens) ......... 247
False Unicorn Root

{Veratrum luteum) .. . 301

PREGNANCY, PREVENTION OF
Burning Bush {Dictamnus
albus) G-7, 130
Castor Oil Plant {Ricinus
communis).
Cat's Claw (Unicaria
tomentosd)...........+++04 ieo
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
{Arisaema atrorubens)..... A26
Jequirity {Abrus
precatorius)
Rue (Ruta graveolens)
Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) .

G-7, 158

PREGNANCY, TERMINATION OF
Asarum (Asarwn
europaeum). 20.20.00. 606 5 A8
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger). . 0-5, 97
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum).............. 182
Pomegranate (Punica

granatum)...........: G20, 605
Rue (Ruta graveolens) G21, 648
Safflower (Carthamus

tinctorius)... 0.00.0 e ee 652
Simaruba (Simaruba

amara) 695

Yew (Taxus baccata) . .. G-26, 841

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME
(See under Menstrual syndrome,
pre-, management of)

PROCTITIS
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis). ..........) G-17, 497
PROMOTE THE NATURAL IMMUNE
SYSTEM OF THE BODY
Astragalus (Astragalus

species) Lee ... 54
Cat's Claw (Unicaria
tomentosd).. 0... 0c. eee 160

PROSTATE DISORDERS
Eryngo (Eryngium
campestre)..........04 G-11, 282
Pumpkin (Cucurbita

PEP) eS G-20, 618
Round-Leafed Wintergreen

(Pyrola rotundifolia). ..... | 647
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulinad).. 2.0... eed 691
Willow Herb (Epilobium

angustifolium)........! G26, sis

PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA, BENIGN,
SYMPTOMATIC TREATMENT

African Potato (Hypoxis

rooperi) 7
European Golden Rod

(Solidago virgaurea) . . G-11, 289
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris)... 2... ae! G-13, 383

¢ Pumpkin (Cucurbita

pepo) G-20, 618
* Saw Palmetto (Serenoa
TEPENS). . 2 ee el G-21, 664
* Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica) itis . G-23, 729
PRURITUS, ANAL
Field Scabious (Knautia
ATVENSIS) voce eee eee e ee G-11, 310
PRURITUS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus) G-7, 132

Evening Primrose

(Oenothera biennis) ... G-11, 298
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum)............45 G-14,411
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) .. . G-22, 668

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Speedwell (Veronica

Officinalis)... 6.6... .005 G-23, 710
Sweet Gale (Myrica

gale)... 6... ee G-24, 745
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis). ..........5 G25, 788
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) .. . .799

PSORIASIS

Black Nightshade (Solanum

nigrum) G-6, 101

Burdock (Arctium lappa) .G-7, 128
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus

SPCCICS). vee eee 177
Goa Powder (Andira

ararobd). vi. 352
Hogweed (Heracleum

sphondylium).........5 G-14, 396
Mountain Grape (Mahonia

aquifolium). .........5 G-i8, 527
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia)... 06. e ees G-18, 528
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense). ..........04 G21, 633
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

Speci€S).. cs. ceed G21, eei
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuuS)........4.4.+4 G23, 741

PULMONARY EMPHYSEMA
(See under Emphysema)

RASH, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

RENAL CALCULI
Alpine Cranberry
(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . .G-3, 20
Arenaria Rubra

(Spergularia rubra)... ..... 39
+ Asparagus (Asparagus
officinalis). G-4, 52
¢ Bean Pod (Phaseolus
vulgaris) .G-4, 65
¢ Birch (Betula species) .... G-5, 78
Black Currant (Ribes
NIQTUM) ——eseeeseeeeee 0-5, 94
* Canadian Golden Rod
(Solidago canadensis)... .. . 145
Celery {Apium
graveolens) G-8, 172
Centaury (Centaurium
erythraea). . G-8, 174

Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193

----- PAGE 122 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Dyer's Broom (Genista

tinctoria) G-I0, 260
Eryngo (Eryngium
campestre). . 0-11, 282
+ European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . . .0-11, 289
Ground Ivy (Glechoma
hederacea). 372
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum). G-14, 393
* Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). G-14, 409
Hydrangea (Hydrangea
arborescens) G-14, 413
* Java Tea (Orthosiphon
spicatus). 434
+ Lovage (Levisticum
officinale) G-16, 482
Madder (Rubia
tinctorum) G-ie, 490
* Parsley (Petroselinum
crispum). G-19, 567
Parsley Piert (Aphanes
arvensis). 570
+ Petasites (Petasites
hybridus). G-19, 585
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major). G-19, 591
Pontian Rhododendron
(Rhododendron ponticum) ... 60e
Rust-Red Rhododendron
(Rhododendron
ferrugineum). eso
Scotch Broom (Cytisus
scoparius) 0-22, 672
¢ Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis
spinosa). G-23, 713
* Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica)....... . .G-23, 729
Stone Root (Collinsonia
canadensis) G-23, 733
Strawberry (Fragaria
vesca),_.. . G-23, 735
¢ Triticum (Agropyron
repens) ... G-25, 771
Wood Betony (Betonica
officinalis) G-26, 825

RESPIRATORY TRACT DISORDERS
Anise (Pimpinella anisum) .0-3, 35
Barberry (Berberis
vulgaris) G-4, 61
Benzoin (Styrax benzoin) . 73

Bitter Milkwort (Polygala

amara)......... 85
Black Mulberry (Morus

nigra). 99
Black Mustard (Brassica

nigra) G-5, 100
Borage (Borago

officinalis). Lae G-6, 114
Brooklime (Veronica

beccabunga). G-6, 121
Calamint (Calamintha

nepeta). 38
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle) 39
Cedar (Cedrus libani). 169
Corn Poppy (Papaver

rhoeas)..... ..., 223
Cowslip (Primula veris) 231
Cypress Spurge (Euphorbia

cyparissias) G-9, 242
Daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus). .. 2.1... 243
Duckweed (Lemna

minor). G-IO, 258
Eryngo (Eryngium

campestre). G-11, 282
European Elder (Sambucus

nigra) G-11, 287
European Peony (Paeonia
officinalis). G-11,295
European Sanicle (Sanicula

europaea). 296
Fenugreek = (Trigonella
foenum-graecum). ... . | G-11,304
Forget-Me-Not (Myosotis

arvensis) G-12, 316
Guaiac (Guaiacum

officinale) 375
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) .... 382
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris) .6-13, 383

Hollyhock (Alcea rosea) . .0-14, 398
Hyssop (Hyssopus

officinalis) .G-IS, 414
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) —.....5 431
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare) .G-IS, 448
Lady Fern (Athyrium

(filix-femina). G-15, 454
Lungwort = (Pulmonaria

officinalis) o-ie, 485

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

RESPIRATORY TRACT DISORDERS /1-117

Mullein (Verbascum

densiflorum). . G-18,532
Nux Vomica (Strychnos

nux vomica) G-IS, 547
Oats (Avena sativa). . . G-IS,551
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). G-19, 559
Orris (Iris species). G-19, sei
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum) ..........3 563
Peppermint (Mentha

piperita)....... G-19, 580
Pimpinella (Pimpinella

major). G-19, 591
Pleurisy Root (Asclepias

tuberosa). G-20, 598
Quebracho — (Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco)........ 4 623
Raspberry (Rubus

idaeus). G-21, 630
Red Bryony (Bryonia

cretica). : : : 632
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense). G-21, 633
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). G-22, 672
Siam Benzoin (Styrax

tonkinesis). 692
Sloe (Prunus spinosa) -G-22,697
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis). G-22, 701
Solomon's Seal

(Polygonatum

multiflorum) —... 6.6... G-22, 703
Sorrel (Rumex acetosa) ...705
Speedwell {Veronica

officinalis). G-23, 710
Sumatra Benzoin (Styrax

paralleloneurum). ........° 738
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia) 2... 757
Thyme (Thymus

vulgaris). G-24, 76i
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis)... . 0-25, 788
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium). ..... : 797
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba) . .. G-25, 800
White Fir (Abies alba). 802

----- PAGE 123 -----
1-118/RESPIRATORY TRACT DISORDERS

Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis)...........-4 G-26, 811
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis)...............5 814
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis)... .........5 G-26, 825
Yellow Dock (Rumex

CrispUS). ...00000002222..058 835

RETINOPATHY, DIABETIC
Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus).. 2... S G-5,75

RHEUMATIC DISORDERS, UNSPECIFIED
Alpine Cranberry

{Vaccinium vitis-idaea) . .G-3, 20
American Bittersweet
{Celastrus scandens)... 2... : 24
+ Arnica {Arnica montand). ... . . 41
Barberry {Berberis
vulgaris) G-4, ei
Basil {Ocimum basilicum) G-4, 64
Behen {Moringa oleifera) 67
¢ Birch {Betula species). G-5,78
Black Bryony {Tamus
communis). G-5, 90
Black Currant {Ribes
nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Mustard {Brassica
nigra). G-5, 100
Borage {Borago
officinalis)... 0.2...) G-6, 114
Boxwood {Buxus
sempervirens)... ..... | G-6, 116
Brazilian Pepper Tree
{Schinus terebinthifolius) _ 117
Bulbous Buttercup
{Ranunculus bulbosus). 128
Burning Bush {Dictamnus
albus)... 0.0.02 G-7, 130
Buttercup {Ranunculus
ACIS). . ee 133
+ Cajuput {Melaleuca
leucadendra) G-7, 136
Calamus {Acorus
calamus). G-7, 138
California Peppertree
{Schinus molle)............ 139
Calotropis {Calotropis
procera)... .. 06 eee eee 141
* Camphor Tree
{Cinnamomum
camphora) G-7, 143

Canella {Canella
winterand).........20..00- 147
* Cayenne {Capsicum
annuum). G-8, 165
Celery {Apium
graveolens) G-8, 172
Chickweed {Stellaria
media)... 0.0.0. ee iso
Chinese Cinnamon
{Cinnamomum
aromaticum). ..........-4. 182
Chinese Olive {Canarium
Speci€S). 2... ee 184
Clematis {Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Comfrey {Symphytum
officinale). G-9, 212
Cowhage {Mucuna
pruriens). 2... ee 230
Cumin {Cuminum
cyminum). .G-9, 237
Dandelion {Taraxacum
officinale). G-9, 245
* Devil's Claw
{Harp agophy turn
procumbens)... .......+2.44 247
Dog Rose {Rosa canina) .G-10, 254
Duckweed {Lemna
minor)... 0.0.20 eee eS G-10, 258
Dwarf Elder {Sambucus
ebulus). 2.00. ee 259
Elephant-Ears {Bergenia
crassifolia)... 0... 0. ee 268
¢ Eucalyptus {Eucalyptus
globulus)............5 G-11, 283
European Golden Rod
{Solidago virgaurea) .G-11, 289

* European Mistletoe {Viscum

album) G-11, 291
European Peony {Paeonia

officinalis) G-11, 295
Fever Bark {Alstonia

CONSTYICtA) — ke eee eee eee 305
Feverfew {Tanacetum

parthenium)......... . G-11, 306
Fumitory {Fumaria

officinalis) G-12,322
German Sarsaparilla {Carex

arenaria)..............-% 336
Gotu Kola {Centella

asiatica). . 2. ee G-13, 359
Goutweed  ({Aegopodium
podagraria)..........5 G-13, 361

«Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ground Ivy {Glechoma

hederacea)..........-.--5 372
Ground Pine {Ajuga
chamaepitys). .. 2.1... | G-13, 373
* Guaiac {Guaiacum
officinale)... 2... eee 375
Heather {Calluna
vulgaris)... 0... 02 eS G-13, 383
Hemlock {Conium
maculatum).......... 4 G-13, 386
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus
hippocastanum)....... § G-14, 403
Horseradish {Armoracia
rusticand)...........4 G-14, 408
Horsetail {Equisetum
arvense). ............4 G-14, 409
Indian-Hemp {Apocynum
cannabinum)... 0.2.0.0 022! 418
Iporuru {Alchornea
floribunda)... 2.0... 0 eS A424
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
{Arisaema atrorubens). ... . : 426
Jalap {Ipomoea purga) .. G-IS, 427
Java Tea {Orthosiphon
spicatus). 6... 0.2.0.0. eS A434
Kava Kava {Piper
methysticum)......... 4 G-IS, 443
* Larch {Larix decidua) ... G-15, 457
Laurel {Laurus nobilis) . . G-15, 459
Lemongrass {Cymbopogon
citratus). 0.0... 0 ee! G-ie, 465
Male Fern {Dryopteris
filix-mas), 220 0S G-17, 493
Manaca {Brunfelsia
hopeana)................5 494
Marijuana {Cannabis
sativa). .............4 G-17, 500
Meadowsweet {Filipendula
ulmaria). G-17,511
Mezereon {Daphne
mezereum). .. 2... . G-17, 515
AMonkshood (Aconitum
napellus) G-i8, 521
Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia) ... .0-i 8, 525
Mullein (Verbascum
densiflorum)......... | G-IS, 532
Niauli (Melaleucea
viridiflora).. 2... ..0.0.--. 542
Night-Blooming Cereus
(Selenicereus
grandiflorus). . 0.2.0. 543

----- PAGE 124 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) . 545
Oats (Avena sativa). . G-is, 551
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare). G-19, 559
Pellitory (Anacyclus

Pyrethrum) 577
Poke (Phytolacca

americana). G-20, 602

Pontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron ponticum) . . . 606
Poplar (Populus species) G20, 607
Ragwort (Senecio

jacobaea) G-20, 629
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina). 631
Red Bryony (Bryonia

cretica)...............,. 632

* Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis). G-21, 645
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra). . G21, eso
Sandarac (Tetraclinis

articulata),.............. 660
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species). .. G21, 661
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum). . a . G-21, 662
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

SCOparius). 0.0 G-22, 672

* Scotch Pine (Pinus

species). . . G22, 674
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia

officinalis). . 0-22, 679
Sesame (Sesamum

orientate) 688
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulina) .. 691
Smartweed (Persicaria

hydropiper). ,. 699.-
Sneezewort (Achillea

ptarmica), . . a .... 700
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis). . . G22, 701
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lanced)...... ! 706
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). G-23, 710
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosa) G-23, 711

Spiny Rest Harrow (Ononis

spinosa) G-23, 713
Spruce (Picea species). . 714
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) . G-23, 719

* Stinging Nettle (Urtica

dioica)... 0... 1. we G-23, 729
Strawberry (Fragaria

vesca). tees... G23, 735
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuus)... .. : G23, 741
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata), . . G-24, 750
Tansy (Tanacetum

vulgare) G-24, 754
Teazle (Dipsacus

silvestris) G24, 757
Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis). G-24, 759
Triticum (Agropyron

repens), . . G25, 771
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis) G-25, 788
Wafer Ash (Ptelea

trifoliata) 790
Watercress (Nasturtium

officinale), .............. 798
White Bryony (Bryonia

alba) G-25, 800
White Fir (Abies alba). 802
White Hellebore (Veratrum

album) G-25,803
White Mustard (Sinapis

alba) .... .G-25,805
White Willow (Salix

species) G-25,807
Wild Service Tree (Sorbus

torminalis). Lee ... 814
Wild Thyme (Thymus

serpyllum). G-26, SIS
Wild Yam (Dioscorea

Villosa)_. i... G-26, 817
Winter Cherry (Physalis

alkekengi) *..: . G-26, 819
Wintergreen (Gaultheria

procumbens) 820

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis) 6-23, 710
RHINITIS, VASOMOTOR
Asarum (Asarum
europaeum) A8

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

SCIATICA, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF/I-119

RINGWORM INFECTIONS OF THE SCALP
(See under Tinea capitis
infections)

RUBEFACIENT
Laurel (Laurus nobilis) . . G-15, 459
Pimento (Pimenta
racemosa)... . . a .. 590

SAUVATION, INCREASE SECRETION OF
Betel Nut (Piper betle) ....G-4, 74
Moneywort (Lysimachia

nummularia) G-17, 520
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa) . .. 622

SARCOPTES SCABIEI INFESTATIONS

Black Pepper (Piper
nigrum).

Burning Bush (Dictamnus
albus)

Celandine (Chelidonium
majus) G-8, 169

Field Scabious (Knautia
arvensis). .

Fish Berry (Anamirta
cocculus). 312

Henna (Lawsonia

G-6, 103

G-7, 130

G-11, 310

inermis) G-14, 391
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

kurrod).. 0... 0... 589
Poisonous Buttercup

(Ranunculus

sceleratus). . . G20, eoi
Pyrethrum (Chrysanthemum

cinerariifolium). .........45 621

SCABIES
(See under Sarcoptes scabiei
infestations)

SCAR TISSUE
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

niger). G-14, 389

SCARLATINA
« American Pawpaw
(Asimina triloba)........... 27
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). 6.0...
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria)

. G-11, 283

G-26, 812
SCARLET FEVER
(See under Scarlatina)

SCIATICA, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum)............ .29

----- PAGE 125 -----
1-120/SCIATICA, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF

Cajuput (Melaleuca

leucadendra) . G-7, 136
Garlic (Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Hemlock (Conium

maculatum). ... G-13, 386
Male Fern (Dryopteris

filix-mas). . 2. G17, 493
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius). .. G22, 672
Wintergreen (Gaultheria

procumbens). . . Lae 820

SCROFULOSIS
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). 20 eS G-10, 275
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare) G-19, 559

SCURVY
Behen (Moringa oleifera). . 67
Canella (Canella

winterand)....... . 147
Columbine (Aquilegia

vulgaris)..........., G9, 211
Globe Rower (Trollius

europaeus) . G-12, 351
Lemon (Citrus limon) .... 460
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria) 466
Lime (Citrus

aurantifolia) G-ie, 476
Loosestrife (Lysimachia

vulgaris) G-ie, 481
Pinus Bark (Tsuga

canadensis). . G-19, 594
Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca) 597
Samphire (Crithum

maritimum). ... 658
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis

acetosella). 827
Yellow Dock (Rumex

CrispUS). 6 we eee 835

SEDATION
(See also under Sleep,
induction of)
Bitter Orange (Citrus

aurantium). G-5, 86
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa) G-s, 92
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra). G5, 98 I

Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium) G-11, 306
Linden (Tilia species) .. . .G-ie, 477
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina),..........,., 631
Wood Betony (Betonica

officinalis) G-26, 825

SEDATION, DAYTIME

Jamaica Dogwood (Piscidia
piscipula). Lee .., 428

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION

Birthwort (Aristolochia

clematitis) G-5,SO
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum), ............5 G-8, 165

Damiana (Turnera diffusa) ....244
TIporuru (Alchornea

floribunda) 424
Khat (Catha edulis)... ..... 447
Matico (Piper elongatum) ....509
Muira-Puama

(Ptychopetalum

olacoides) 531
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis) 572
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe) .. . .843

SHORTNESS OF BREATH

European Elder (Sambucus

nigra). 6... ee G-11, 287
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) 543

SINUSITIS, TREATMENT OF

Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). 6... 0. ee G-11, 283

Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) .. .G-16,483
Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, 655
Sorrel (Rumex acetosa) 705
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia). ....... 157
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia). G-26, 826
Yellow Dock (Rumex

CrispUS). ve ee 835

SKIN ABSCESSES

(See under Infections, skin and
skin structure)

SKIN CARE

Almond (Prunus dulcis) 15

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Avocado (Persea

americana). 57
Jojoba (Simmondsia
chinesis) G-IS, 438

Peanut (Arachis hypogaea) .. .575

SKIN DISORDERS

Alkanet (Alkanna

tinctoria). G-3, 13
Bear's Garlic (Allium

ursinum). 66
Birch (Betula species) G-5,78
Black Bryony (Tamus

communis). . . G-5,90
Buttercup (Ranunculus

acris)........... 133

Butternut (Juglans cinerea) ... 134
Chickweed (Stellaria

media).................. 480
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193
Clematis (Clematis recta) .G-8, 194
Corn Cockle (Agrostemma

githago). . . 222
Cypress Spurge (Euphorbia

cyparissias) G-9, 242
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). G-9, 245
Devil's Claw

(Harpagophytum

procumbens) 247
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia), . . . Lo, 268
Eryngo (Eryngium

campestre). .. .. G-11, 282
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). 6. ee G-11, 283
European Peony (Paeonia

officinalis). -G-11, 295
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis) G-11, 310
Fumitory (Fumaria

officinalis) ... . G-12, 322
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenarid) ...... 0 eee e eee 336

Greek Sage (Salvia triloba) .. .367
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea). 372
Guaiac (Guaiacum

officinale) 375
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis) G-14, 391
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica) A19

----- PAGE 126 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare). G-15, 448
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

Vulgaris) G-15¢ 456
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia

triphylla). a a .. 463
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum) G-17, 515
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus) G-18, 521
Oats (Avena sativa) G-IS, 551
Oleander (Nerium

oleander) G-19, 555
Pennyroyal (Mentha

pulegium) 579
Puff Ball (Lycoperdon

species) - 618
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum) G-21, 662
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis) G22, 701
Solomon's Seal

(Polygonatum

multiflorum). G-22, 703
Southern Bayberry (Myrica

cerifera). G-22, 705
Spikenard (Aralia

racemosa) G23, 711
Stillingia (Stillingia

sylvatica)... ...0.00.0.0..: 729
Strawberry (Fragaria

vesca) 6-23, 735
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuus). : . G-23, 74l
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata). : . G24, 730
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia). 757
Triticum (Agropyron

repens). . ....... G25, 771
Turkey Corn (Dicentra

cucullaria)...............: 773
Virola (Virola theiodora). . 789
White Lily (Lilium

candidum) 804
Wild Radish (Raphanus

raphanistrum) G-26, 814
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis

virginiana) G-26, 821
Yellow Dock (Rumex

Crispus). 833

SKIN, INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS/I-1 21

Yellow Toadflax (Linaria
vulgaris) 840
SKIN LACERATIONS, INFECTED
(See under Infections, skin and
skin structure)

SKIN PIGMENTATION
Wild Carrot (Daucus

carota). G-25, 809
SKIN ULCERS

American Adder's Tongue

(Erythronium

americanum).............. 24
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus) . G-5, 75
Black Nightshade (Solanum

nigrum). G-6, 101
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera) 141
Cashew (Anacardium

occidentale) G-7, 157

Catechu (Acacia catechu).... . 163
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193
Clematis (Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) 218
Digitalis (Digitalis
purpurea). G-10, 248

Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) .... 261
English Adder's Tongue
(Ophioglossum vulgatum)  ... 269
English Ivy (Hedera

helix) .G-10, 273
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis) G-11, 310
Frostwort (Helianthemum

canadense) .G-12, 321
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea) 372
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis). . . G14, 391
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris) vavesesenee G-15, 436
Martagon (Lilium

martagon). . . a Soe
Ox-Eye Daisy

(Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum) 563
Petasites (Petasites

hybridus). G-19, 585

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

Southern Bayberry (Myrica

cerifera) G-22, 705
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis), .... G-23, 734
Tea Tree (Melaleuca

alternifolia). . . ween. IST
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812
Yellow Lupin (Lupinus

luteUS).................. 839

SKIN, BACTERIAL SUPERINFECTIONS
Purple Gromwell
(Lithospermum
erytrorhizon)............. 619

SKIN, DRY, MOISTURIZATION OF
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis) G-17, 497
Mountain Grape (Mahonia
aquifolium). G-i8, 527

SKIN, INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS
¢ Agrimony (Agrimonia

eupatoria). G-3, 10
« Arnica (Arnica montana). 41
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67
Black Nightshade (Solanum
nigrum). G-6, 101
Bladderwort (Utricularia
vulgaris). G-6, 105
+ Brewer's Yeast
(Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) 118
Broad Bean (Vicia faba) 120
Burning Bush (Dictamnus
albus). G-7, 130
Castor Oil Plant (Ricinus
communis). G7, 158

Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus
species) 177
Chickweed (Stellaria

media)... .. . 2....— .. .180
Common Stonecrop (Sedum

ACTE) eee c ccc ccc eee eee 213
Congorosa (Maytenus

ilicifolia) esses 218
Cornflower (Centaurea

cyanus) G-9, 225
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale). . . G-9, 243
English Ivy (Hedera

helix). G-10, 273

----- PAGE 127 -----
1-

122/SKIN,

English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata)... ....... 0-11, 278
European Elder (Sambucus
nigrd)...............45 G-11, 287
European Water Hemlock
(Cicuta virosa)....... 5 G-11, 297
Evening Primrose

(Oenothera_ biennis) . Gl, 298
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum). . . 2. | G-11, 304
Field Scabious (Knautia

arvensis)... .........5 G-11, 310
Flax (Linum

usitatissimum). ....... | G-12, 313
German Chamomile

(Matricaria_ recutita) . G12, 331
Heartsease (Viola tricolor) . 382
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis)............-4 G-14, 391
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)....... | G-14, 403
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica)... 00. ee A19
Jambolan (Syzygium

cumini)... 22... 429
Labrador Tea (Ledum

latifolium)... 0... 0.200444 5 451
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla

vulgaris)... 2.2... ..-45 G-15, 456
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)... ........! G-17, 497
Marshmallow (Althaea

officinalis). ©... 2.0.00 oe! 505
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum)...........: G-17,515
Moneywort (Lysimachia

nummutlaria). G-17, 520
Monkshood (Aconitum

napellus). G-18, 521
Oak (Quercus robur) G-IS,549
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) ............... 550
Oats (Avena sativa) ..... G-1s, 551
Pasque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis)... ..............! 572
Peanut (Arachis hypogaea)"... 575
Purple Loosestrife (Lyihrum

salicaria)... .........5 G-20, 620
Red Clover (Trifolium

pratense) G-21, 633
Rosemary (Rosmarinus

officinalis)... 6.2.2... G-21, 645

INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS

Rue (Ruta graveolens) . G21, 648
Soapwort (Saponaria

officinalis)... .........) G-22, 701
Spurge (Euphorbia

resiniferd).............4.. 716

* St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum)..........: G-23, 719
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica). ..............? 175

Walnut (Juglans regia) . . .G-25, 793
White Lily (LiHum

candidum)...............4 804
* White Nettle (Lamium

album)... 02.0. 0.20005 G-25, 806
* Witch Hazel (Hamamelis

virginiana)... .........4 G-26, 821

SKIN, IRRITATION, MINOR, PAIN
ASSOCIATED WITH

(See under Pain, topical
relief of)
SKIN, RADIATION DAMAGE,
TREATMENT OF
Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae
rhamnoides)... ...... | G-22, 680

SLEEP DISORDERS
Corn Poppy (Papaver
rhoeds)........--+++++++.4 223
English Hawthorn

(Crataegus laevigata) . G-IO, 271
Male Fern (Dryopteris
filix-mas). 20 oS G-17, 493

SLEEP, INDUCTION OF
(See also under Sedation)
American Hellebore

(Weratrum viride). ......... 25
Bitter Orange (Citrus
aurantium)............5 G-5, 86
Borage (Borago
officinalis). ..........5 Ge, 114
¢ Bugleweed (Lycopus
virginicus)...........: G-e, 126
Burning Bush (Dictamnus
albus)... .........../ G-7, 130
Corn Poppy (Papaver
rhoeas)..........00..0244+-% 223
¢ English Lavender
(Lavandula
angustifolia)... 2.2... | G-IO, 277
False Schisandra (Kadsura
japonica)... .....0.0004.. 301

Ginseng (Panax ginseng). . . .

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Heather (Calluna
vulgaris)... 2... 0 ee G-13, 383
* Hops (Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Jatamansi (Nardostachys
jJatamansi). 6... ee A433
+ Kava Kava (Piper
methysticum)......... 5 G-15, 443
Larkspur (Delphinium
consolida)...........! G-15, 458
* Lemon Balm (Melissa
officinalis)... ........5 G-ie, 461
Lemon Verbena (Aloysia
triphylla)... ee A463
Marijuana (Cannabis
Sativa)... .......22.-5 G-17, 500
Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris)... 2.2.04... G-IS, 530
Nerve Root (Cypripedium
calceolus). 2... 2 ee 541
Oats (Avena sativa)... .. | G-IS, 551
* Passion Flower (Passiflora
incarnata)...........5 G-10, 573
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus).. 2... 00 0S G-19, 585
* Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia
serpentind)..............4 631

Red-Spur Valerian

(Centranthus ruber) .. . G-21, 639
Sweet Vernal Grass

(Anthoxanthum

odoratum)...........4 G-24, 749
Sweet Violet (Viola

odorata).............5 G-24, 750
Sweet Woodruff (Galium

odoratum). G-24, 751
Taumelloolch (Lolium

temulentum).......... | G-24, 756
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron

tulipifera).. 6.00... ee 774

¢ Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis)... ........5 G25, 783

SMOKING CESSATION, TEMPORARY
AID TO

Tobacco (Nicotiana

tabacum) G-24, 762
SNAKEBITE
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera) .141
Contrayerva (Dorstenia
contrayerva).............% 218

Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia)

----- PAGE 128 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum) 335
Muskmallow (Abelmoschus

moschatus) 533
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentina) 631
Scotch Broom (Cytisus

scoparius)...........! G22, 672

SOUR STOMACH
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

SPASM, ALIMENTARY CANAL
Carline Thistle (Carlina

acaulis) 151
Hemlock (Conium
maculatum)..........! G-13, 386

SPASM, GASTRIC
Angelica (Angelica

archangelica) G-3, 32
Belladonna (Atropa

belladonna) G-4, 69
Black Horehound (Ballota

nigra) G-s, 98
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus)... G-7, 130

English Chamomile
(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare). .......2...-5 G-11, 302
Fumitory (Fumaria
officinalis)... .........) 0-12,322

German Chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) .. 0-12, 331
Henbane (Hyoscyamus

niger). ..........-.--5 G-i4, 389
Scopolia (Scopolia
carniolicd)..........0+.004 671

Sloe (Prunus spinosa) ... G22, 697
Taumelloolch (Lolium

temulentum)..........5 GA, 756
Thyme (Thymus

vulgaris)............4 G-2A, 761
Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium) ...... . . 0-26,833

SPASMS, UNSPECIFIED
Alpine Ragwort (Senecio

nemorensis) 21
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) c-8, 165

Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini) 429
Linden (Tilia species) .. . G-ie, 477
Marigold (Calendula
officinalis)...........5 G17, 497
Sumbul (Ferula sumbul) . G23, 738
Wood Sage (Teucrium
scorodonia)..........4 G-26, 826
SPASTICITY, MUSCLE, SYMPTOMATIC
ALLEVIATION OF
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga

racemosa). G-5,92
Hogweed (Heracleum
sphondylium)........: G-14, 396
Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens)...........5 G-20, 626
SPERMATORRHEA
False Schisandra (Kadsura
Japonica) 301

SPLEEN, DISORDERS OF
Ammoniac Gum (Dorema
ammoniacum) 29
Behen (Moringa oleifera) 67

SPRAINS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

STERILITY
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus
amarus) 91
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) ..... 346

STIMULANT

Areca Nut (Areca

catechu) G4, 38
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
Contrayerva (Dorstenia

contrayerva) 218
Copaiba Balsam (Copaifera

langsdorffi) 220
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta) 305
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium) ...... . . G-11,30*
Grains-of-Paradise .

(Aframomum

melegueta)...........5 G-13, 362
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis)...........-.4 G-13, 369
Guarana (Paullinia cupana) ... 376
Gum Arabic (Acacia

Senegal) 378

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

STOMATITIS/1-123

Ma-Huang (Ephedra

Sinica)... 6.2... 2 0222! G-ie, 488
Milk Thistle (Silvbum
marianum).........4.! G17, 516

STOMACH, DISSEMINATED
ADENOCARCINOMA

(See under Carcinoma, stomach)

STOMACH, SOUR
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

STOMACH, UPSET
(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

STOMATITIS
Acacia (Acacia arabica) 3
+ Agrimony (Agrimonia
eupatoria) G-3, 10
Amaranth (Amaranthus
hypochondriacus) G-3, 22
American Pawpaw
(Asimina triloba)..........4 27
* Anise (Pimpinella anisum) G-3, 35
« Amica (Arnica montana) 41
¢ Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus). G-S, 75
Black Currant (Ribes
nigrum) G-S, 94
* Blackberry (Rubus
fruticosus) " G-6, 104
Bugle (Ajuga reptans) ... 0-e, 12s
Catechu (Acacia catechu) .. .. 163
* Cinquefoil (Poientilla
erecta) G-8, 192
* Clove (Syzygium
aromaticum) G-8, 195

Coffee (Coffea arabica) ..G-9, 202
* Colt's Foot (Tussilago

farfara) G-9, 209
¢ Echinacea Purpurea

(Echinacea purpurea) . G-10, 261

English Chamomile

(Chamaemelum nobile) .G-10, 270

¢ English Plantain (Plantago

lanceolata)......... 5 G-11, 278
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus). 2... 0. G-11, 283

European Five-Finger Grass
(Potentilla reptans) ... G-11, 289

----- PAGE 129 -----
1-1 24/STOMATITIS

European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) G11, 289
Gambir (Uncaria species) .. . .324
* German Chamomile

(Matricaria_recutita) G-12, 331
Herb Robert (Geranium
robertianum)......... 4 G-14, 393
* High Mallow (Malva
sylvestris). 2... | G-14, 395
Houseleek  (Sempervivum
tectorum)............5 G-14, 411
* Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica).........02.00004 Als
Jack-in-the-Pulpit
(Arisaema atrorubens). . .. . : A26
* Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini)... 00 ee 429
* Japanese Mint (Mentha
arvensis piperascens). . . . . 431
+ Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare).. 2.2.2.0... 4 G-15, 448
Lady's Mantle (Alchemilla
vulgaris)... 0.2. ..-0-45 G-is, 456
* Larch (Larix decidua) .. . .G-IS, 457
* Lesser Galangal (Alpinia
officinarum). 1. . 467
* Marigold (Calendula
officinalis) G-17, 497
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis)... 2.0. .0.00.005 Sos
* Myrrh (Commiphora
molmoJ).. 2.2.2... - 0! G-IS8, 534
* Oak (Quercus robur) . G-i8, 549
* Onion (Allium cepa). G-19,557
¢ Peppermint (Mentha
piperita). G-19, sso
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major) .G-19, S91
¢ Potentilla (Potentilla
anserind) ............ G20, eio
+ Rhatany (Krameria
triandra). =... ©. 1. wee O41
* Rose (Rosa centifolia) "644
Rue (Ruta graveolens) .. .G-21, 648
+ Sage (Salvia officinalis) . .G-21, ess
* Scotch Pine (Pinus
Species). G-22, 674
Self-Heal (Prunella
vulgaris) G-22, 68i
* Sloe (Prunus spinosa) . G22, 697
Speedwell (Veronica
officinalis) G-23, 710

¢ Spruce (Picea species) ...... 714
Sweet Violet (Viola
odorata) G-24, 750
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia)... 2.0.0 .00.2.: 757
Turmeric (Curcuma
domestica)... ............. 775
* Usnea (Usnea species) ..... - 778
* White Nettle (Lamium
album)... ...........5 G25, 806
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctorid)............4 Q26, 812
Willow Herb (Epilobium
angustifolium). . 6.0... G-26, 818

STOMATITIS, RECURRENT APHTHOUS,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Common Stonecrop (Sedum

Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus)...............! 195

STRANGURIA
Purple Gromwell
(Lithospermum
erytrorhizon).............4

STREP THROAT
(See under Streptococci species
upper respiratory tract
infections)
STREPTOCOCCI SPECIES UPPER
RESPIRATORY TRACT INFECTIONS

Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale)... 2.2... 0.0 G-9, 212

Thuja (Thuja

occidentalis). G-24, 759

STREPTOCOCCUS TONSILLITIS
(See under Streptococci species
upper respiratory tract
infections)

STROKE, ISCHEMIC

Cayenne (Capsicum

annuum).............5 G8, i

Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria_ majalis) G-ie, 47s
STYES
Eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis)... 0... ......... 300

SUNBURN, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
(See under Pain, topical
relief of)

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SWELLING AND FRACTURES
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera)... 0... cee ee 141
German Ipecac
(Cynanchum
vincetoxicum),..........- 335
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)....... § G-14, 403
Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense).............4 G-14, 409

SWOLLEN ANKLES
Lady's Bedstraw (Galium
verum)..............4 G-IS, 455

SYNCOPE
Ignatius Beans (Strychnos
ignatii). Aie
Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis)... ........5 G-25, 783

SYPHILIS
(See under T. pallidum infections)

T. PALLIDUM INFECTIONS
Brazilian Pepper Tree

(Schinus terebinthifolius) . . 17
Calotropis (Calotropis
procera). ................. 141

Clematis (Clematis recta) .G-8, 194
Giant Milkweed (Calotropis

gigantea)... .............. 338
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica). G-13, 389
Guaiac (Guaiacum

officinale)... 6.0... .0 208. 37s
Indian-Hemp (Apocynum

cannabinum)...... 0.2.2... 4 418
Kava Kava (Piper

methysticum) G-IS, 443
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia) G-18, 528
New Jersey Tea

(Ceanothus americanus) .  .541
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum) ; .. G21, 662

TACHYCARDIA, UNSPECIFIED
Black Catnip (Phyllanthus

amarus)..................: 91
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus
altissima)........0.0..02..7 770

TAPEWORM INFECTIONS
(See under Infections, tapeworm)

----- PAGE 130 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

TEETHING
Male Fern (Dryopteris
SiliX-MAS). ve 0-17, 493

TETANUS
Marijuana (Cannabis
Sativa)............2-5 G17, 500

THROAT, SORE
(See under Pharyngitis,
symptomatic relief of)

THROMBOPHLEBITIS.
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)....... G-14, 403
Sweet Clover (Melilotus
officinalis)...........! G24, 744

THYROID DYSFUNCTION
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) .G-3, 12
Kelp (Laminaria
hyperborea)............+.4 446

TINEA CAPITIS INFECTIONS
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia) G-i8, 528
TINNITUS
Calamint (Calamintha
nepeta)..............5 3... 138
¢ Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . .G-12,342

TOBACCO WITHDRAWAL, SYMPTOMATIC.
RELIEF OF

Oats (Avena sativa)... .. | G-18,551
TONSILLITIS
Figwort (Scrophularia
nodosa). 0-11,311
Tea Tree (Melaleuca
alternifolia)..............: 757
Wild Carrot (Daucus
carota) G-25,809
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria) G-26,812
Yew (Taxus baccata) ... .0-26,841
TOOTH DECAY
Coconut Palm (Cocos
nuciferd)............5 G-9, 201
TRACHEITIS
Seneca Snakeroot (Polygala
senega)
TRAUMA, BLUNT
¢ Arnica (Arnica montana)..... . 41
* Comfrey (Symphytum
Officinale)...........5 G-9, 212

¢ St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum)..........5 G23, 719
* Sweet Clover (Melilotus

Officinalis)...........5 G-24, 744

TREMOR, KINETIC
Corydalis (Corydalis cava) ...226
Cowslip (Primula veris)..... : 231

TREPONEMA PALLIDUM
(See under T. pallidum infections)

TUBERCULOSIS, PULMONARY
European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . . G-11, 289
German Sarsaparilla (Carex

arenarid). . 6... ee eee 336
Horehound (Marrubium

wulgare).. 2.2.0. .020- G-14, 401
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare)...........4 G-15, 448
Myrtle (Myrtus

communis)........... 5 G-IS, 536

TUBERCULOSIS, TREATMENT ADJUNCT
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris)... 0.2... .200/ G-4, 61
Chickweed (Stellaria

media). 6.0.00. eel iso
Chicory (Cichorium

intybus).............) G-8, IST
Elephant-Ears (Bergenia

crassifolia). 2.0.0... 00.05 268
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense).............4 G-14, 409
Spruce (Picea species) ....... 714
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia). G-26, 826

TUMOR THERAPY ADJUVANT
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis;
Aloe capensis; Aloe
vera) «............-+.-4 G-3, 16
Brazilian Pepper Tree
(Schinus terebinthifolius) ... 117
Canadian Fleabane
(Erigeron canadensis) ..G-7, 144
* European Mistletoe (Viscum
album)... ............4 G-11, 291

TUMOR, MALIGNANT
Honeysuckle (Lonicera

caprifolium)............... 399
Venus Flytrap (Dionaea
muscipula).............-.! 786

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

ULCERS, LEG/I-125

TUMORS, BENIGN EPITHELIAL
(See under Warts, common,
removal of)

TYPHUS FEVER
Wild Indigo (Baptisia
tinctoria)............5 G-26, 812
ULCERS, DECUBITUS, ADJUNCTIVE
THERAPY IN

Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon
balsamum)........-.. 5 GA, 764

ULCERS, DUODENAL
Cabbage (Brassica

oleracea) G-7, 134
Calamus (Acorus

calamus) G-7, 138
Cranesbill (Geranium

maculatum)...........-.- 233
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea)............! G-IO, 248
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra)... 22... ee G-i6, 469

ULCERS, GASTRIC

Cabbage (Brassica

oleracea) G-7, 134
Calamus (Acorus

calamus). G-7, 138
Comfrey (Symphytum

officinale) G-9, 212
Common Kidney Vetch

(Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214
Digitalis (Digitalis

purpurea)...........! G-10, 248
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis)............ 4 G-14, 391
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra)..............5 G-ie, 469
Mandrake (Mandragora

officinarum)..........! G17, 495
Marigold (Calendula

officinalis)...........5 G-17,497
Papaya (Carica papaya) . G-19, 565
Slippery Elm (U/mus

TUDIA). 00 ed 697

ULCERS, LEG
Linden (Tilia species) . .. .G-ie, 477
Marigold (Calendula

Officinalis)...........5 G-17, 497
Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens)...........5 G20, 626

----- PAGE 131 -----
1-126/URETHRITIS

URETHRITIS
Levant Cotton (Gossypium

herbaceum). G-ie, 468

URINARY BLADDER WITH RETENTION,
NEUROGENIC ATONY OF
Snowdrop (Galanthus
nivalis). 700
URINARY FREQUENCY, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Brooklime (Veronica

beccabunga). G-6, 121
Pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium). : an 579

* Pumpkin (Cucurbita
pepo)... : . . G-20, 618
* Saw Palmetto (Serenoa

repens). G-21, 664
Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) .. . G-22, 668
* Stinging Nettle (Urtica
dioica) G-23, 729
URINARY INCONTINENCE
Sweet Sumach (Rhus
aromatica) 748

URINARY RETENTION, UNSPECIFIED

Birch (Betula species) G-5, 78
Black Currant (Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle). . . : 139
Eryngo (Eryngium

campestre). G-11, 282
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis). G-13, 366
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra). . G-16,469

URINARY TRACT DISORDERS

Alisma (Alisma

plantago-aquatica) G-3, 13

Ash (Fraxinus excelsior) .. G-4, SO
Barberry (Berberis

vulgaris). G-4, ei
Bean Pod (Phaseolus

vulgaris). G-4, es
Bilberry (Vaccinium

myrtillus). 2.G-5,73
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger). G-S, 97
Bladderwort (Utricularia

vulgaris). G-6, 10s

Bog Bilberry (Vaccinium

uliginosum). . G-6, 111
Borage (Borago
officinalis) .G-6, 114

British Elecampane (Inula

britannica), . . . . . . 119
Broad Bean (Vicia faba) 120
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus). G-7, 130
California Poppy

(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Cleavers (Galium aparine) .... 193

Club Moss (Lycopodium
clavatum) 196
Cocoa (Theobroma

cacao). G-8, 199
Coolwort (Tiarella

cordifolia). G-9, 219
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum). . : G-9, 221
Corn Silk (Zea mays). . . 224
Cubeb (Piper cubeba) 238
Dodder (Cuscuta

epithymum). G-IO, 254
Dog Rose (Rosa canind) G-IO, 254
Eryngo (Eryngium

campestre) G-11, 282
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus

globulus). G-11, 283
Flax (Linum

usitatissimum). . G-12, 313
German Ipecac

(Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). 335
Goutweed (Aegopodium

podagraria). .... 1 G-13, 301
Greater Bindweed

(Calystegia sepium) G-13, 367

Hartstongue — (Scolopendrium

vulgare) .: : : 381
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris). G-13,383
Herb Robert (Geranium

robertianum) ......... G-14, 393
High Mallow (Malva

sylvestris). G-14, 39s
Horsetail (Equisetum

arvense). Le G-14, 409
Hydrangea (Hydrangea

arborescens). . G-14,413 I

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Jatamansi (Nardostachys

Jatamansi). 433
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) G-16,469
Lungwort (Pulmonaria

officinalis) G-16, 485
Madder (Rubia

tinctorum) G-ie, 490
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) G-17, 500
Marsh Blazing Star (Liatris

spicata) G-17, 503
Marshmallow (Althaea

officinalis). 505
Mercury Herb (Mercurialis

annua). : : .. G-17, 513
Mountain Ash Berry

(Sorbus aucuparia) ... G-IS, 525
Myrtle (Myrtw

communis). G-18, 536
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus

grandiflorus) . . . 543
Oats (Avena sativa). G-18,551
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare) an G-19, 559

arsley (Petroselinum

crispum). G-19, 567

arsley Piert (Aphanes

arvensis). . . Le .. 570

arsnip (Pastinaca

sativa) . G-I0,571

asque Flower (Pulsatilla

pratensis). 572
Pellitory-of-the-Wall
‘ (Parietaria officinalis), . . . 578

impinella (Pimpinella

major) G-19, 591

itcher Plant (Sarracenia

purpurea)... .........4 G-20, 595

oppyseed (Papaver

somniferum). G-20, eoo
Ragwort (Senecio

jacobaea) G-20, 629
Round-Leafed Wintergreen

(Pyrola rotundifolia)... .. . J 647
Rupturewort (Herniaria

glabra) G-21, 650
Sarsaparilla (Smilax

species) G-21, eei
Sassafras (Sassafras

albidum). . . . G-21, 662

----- PAGE 132 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX

Scopolia (Scopolia

carniolicd). 6... ce ee dl 671
Short Buchu (Barosma

betulina).. 2.2.0.2 ee 69i
Smartweed (Persicaria

hydropiper). 6.00 ee 699
Sneezewort {Achillea

Ptarmicd). 6. ee 700
Speedwell {Veronica

officinalis)... 2.0.5...) G-23, 710
Squill {Urginea

maritima). ...........4 G-23,717
Sweet Cicely {Myrrhis

odorata). .........+.-5 G-24, 743
Sweet Sumach {Rhus

aromatica).......00..0.44- 748
Sweet Vernal Grass

{Anthoxanthum

odoratum)...........5 G-24, 749
Trailing Arbutus {Epigae

TEPCNS). ec eee eee 768
Triticum {Agropyron

repens). ...........445 G-25, 77i
Turkey Corn {Dicentra

cucullarid). 6. oe ee 775
Wild Daisy {Bellis

perennis). 0... cured G-26, SIT
Wild Service Tree {Sorbus

torminalis), 6.00... ee 814
Wild Thyme {Thymus

serpyllum). ... 0.0.0! G-26, SIS
Winter Cherry {Physalis

alkekengi). .........04 G-26, 819
Wood Betony {Betonica

officinalis) wee ee G-26, 825
Yellow Lupin {Lupinus

luteUS). 0. 2 839
Yellow Toadflax {Linaria

vulgaris)... 0.0... 840

URINARY TRACT PAIN, RELIEF OF
{See under Pain, urinary tract)

UTERINE ATONY, POSTPARTUM

Ergot {Claviceps purpurea) 280

UTERINE BLEEDING
Canadian Fleabane
{Erigeron canadensis) .. 0-7, 144

UTERINE SPASTICITY
Valerian {Valeriana
officinalis). ..........4 G-25, 783

VAGINAL ITCHING
Heartsease {Viola tricolor) .... 382

Nerve Root {Cypripedium
calceolus).........2.....4 541

VAGINAL PROLAPSE
Alteris {Aletris farinosa). .. .. - 11

VAGINAL SECRETIONS
Acacia {Acacia arabica). . . 3
Feverfew {Tanacetum

parthenium). G-H, 306

VENEREAL DISEASE
Clematis {Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
German Sarsaparilla {Carex
arenarid). 6... 0.200. 0005. 336

VENOUS CONDITIONS
Beth Root {Trillium

erectuM). 6. vee eee | GA, 74
Buckwheat {Fagopyrum

esculent'im). . .. G-6, 124

* Butcher's Broom {Ruscus

aculeatus) G-7, 132
Clematis {Clematis recta) . G-8, 194
Garlic {Allium sativum) . G-12, 327
Grape {Vitis vinifera) ... G-13, 362

Great Burnet /{Sanguisorba

officinalis)... ........4 G-13, 366
+ Horse Chestnut {Aesculus
hippocastanum)....... | G-14, 403
Lemon Verbena {Aloysia
triphylla)... 2... 2... 463
Marigold {Calendula
officinalis)... ........4 G-17, 497
Pimpinella {Pimpinella
major) G-19,591
Purple Loosestrife {Lythrum
salicaria). . G-20, 620
* Sweet Clover {Melilotus
officinalis). G-24, 744
¢ Witch Hazel {Hamamelis
virginiana) G-26, 821
VENOUS INSUFFICIENCY
Butcher's Broom (Ruscus
aculeatus),..........5 G-7, 132
Gotu Kola (Centella
asiatica) G-13, 359
Grape (Vitis vinifera)... .G-13, 362
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)....... | G-14, 403
Sweet Clover {Melilotus
officinalis). ..........4 G-24, 744
Sweet Woodruff (Galium
odoratum)...........5 G-24, 751

* Denotes recommendation by Commission £.

VOMITING/I-127

VENOUS STASIS
Buckwheat

esculentum).

(Fagopyrum
G-6, 124

VERRUCAS VULGARIS INFECTION
(See under Warts, common,
removal of)

VERTIGO
Asiatic Dogwood (Cornus
Officinalis). 6... 0 51
Behen (Moringa oleifera). 67
Cowslip (Primula veris).... . : 231
European Mistletoe (Viscum
album)... 6. G-11, 291
Fish Berry (Anamirta
cocculus), 6. oe ee 312
* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . G-12, 342
Herb Paris (Paris
quadrifolia). 6.0... ee G-14, 392
Sweet Marjoram (Origanum
majorana)...........4 G-24, 746
Taumelloolch (Lolium
temulentum).......... 4 G-24, 756
Woundwort (Stachys
palustris)... 0.0.0.0 2 2. 832
VISUAL DISTURBANCES
Dusty Miller (Senecio
Dicolor). eee 258
VITAMIN C, DEFICIENCY OF
Dog Rose (Rosa canina) .G-10,254
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum) .. G-12, 326
Lemon (Citrus limon) ....___ 460
Lime (Citrus
aurantifolia) G-16,476
Mountain Ash Berry
(Sorbus aucuparia)  ... .G-is, 525
Scurvy Grass (Cochlearia
officinalis). G-22, 679
P Wild Service Tree (Sorbus
torminalis)...............5 814
VITAMIN E, DEFICIENCY OF
Cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum)... 2. .....0..0...4 228
VOMITING
(See also under Motion sickness)
Almond (Prunus dulcis). . 2... . 15
American Pawpaw
(Asimina triloba),. 2... 00. 27

----- PAGE 133 -----
1-128/VOMITING

Black Horehound {Ballota

nigra). G-5, 98
British Elecampane {Inula

britannica). 60. 119
California Peppertree

(Schinus molle).. 0... eee 139
Carob {Ceratonia

siliqua). G-7, 151
Cascarilla {Croton eluteria) .. . 156
Common Kidney Vetch

{Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214
Giant Milkweed {Calotropis

giganted)................ 338
Green Tea {Camellia

sinensis). .........2..5 G-13, 369
Lemon Balm {Melissa

officinalis)... ......... 5 G-16, 461
Marijuana {Cannabis

SAtiVA). Loe ee ee G-17, 500
Mugwort {Artemisia

vulgaris)... eee ee dl G-i8, 530
Peppermint {Mentha

piperita). 66... 02.0.4. G-19, 580
Sneezewort {Achillea

ptarmica)...........2....! 700
White Hellebore {Veratrum

album). .......0...2.-4 G-25, 803

VOMITING, INDUCTION OF

Asarum {Asarum

europdeuM). 6. ee ee A8
Baneberry {Actaea spicata) ... .60
Black Bryony {Tamus

communis)... .........: G5, 90
Cocillana Tree {Guraea

rusbyi). 0.00000. ee 198
European Peony (Paconia

officinalis). 0-11, 295
German Ipecac

{Cynanchum

vincetoxicum). .. 0... 000s 335
Hedge-Hyssop (Gratiola

officinalis) ........... G-13, 385
Indian Physic {Gillenia

trifoliata). . .. 2... 2... . . Ald
Ipecac {Cephaelis

ipecacuanha).............5 A23
Mountain Flax {Linum

catharticum). ......0..0..04% 526
Picrorhiza {Picrorhiza

Kurrod). 00. ee 589
Poke {Phytolacca

americana)... 1.2.0.0. ! .G-20, 602

White Bryony {Bryonia
alba)... 0. eee G25, 800

VULVOVAGINAL CANDIDIASIS
{See under Candidiasis, vaginal)

WARTS
Behen {Moringa oleifera) 67
+ Bittersweet Nightshade
{Solanum dulcamara) ...G-5, 88
Broad Bean {Vicia faba). . . . 120
Calotropis {Calotropis
procera)... 6.00... eee eee 141
Cashew {Anacardium
occidentale). G-7, 157
Celandine {Chelidonium
majUS). G-8, 169
Common Stonecrop {Sedum
ACTC) eee 215
Garlic {Allium sativum) . G-12, 327

Giant Milkweed {Calotropis

giganted). . 6... ee ee 338
Houseleek {Sempervivum
tectorum)............4 G-14, 411
Indian-Hemp {Apocynum
cannabinum), .. 0. ee A18
* Mayapple {Podophyllum
peltatum)............4 G-17, 510
+ Oats {Avena sativa. .... | G-18, 551
Onion {Allium cepa)... . | G-19, 557
Spurge {Euphorbia
resiniferd), 6.0... cee eee Tie

Sundew {Drosera
ramentaced), ... 6... e eae 740

WARTS, COMMON, REMOVAL OF

Savin Tops {Juniperus
sabind). . 6. ee dl G-21, 663

WARTS, GENITAL

{See under Condylomata
acuminata)

WEIGHT, REDUCTION OF

Brown Kelp {Macrocystis
pyrifera). 00 122
Pineapple {Ananas
comosus)................4 593

WHEEZING, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

{See under Bronchial asthma)

WHOOPING COUGH

{See under Pertussis)

WITHDRAWAL, NARCOTIC, ADJUNCTIVE
THERAPY IN

Barberry {Berberis

vulgaris) G-4, 61

+ Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

WOUND CARE, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN

Alkanet {Alkanna

tinctoria). G-3, 13
American White Pond Lily

{Nymphaea odorata) ....G-3, 28
Ammoniac Gum {Dorema

ammoniacum), .. 1.1... 29
Basil {Ocimum basilicum) .G-4, 64
Behen {Moringa oleifera). .. 67
Beth Root {Trillium

erectum). G-4, 74
Birthwort {Aristolochia

clematitis). G-5, SO
Bistort {Persicaria

bistorta) . G-5, 82
Black Currant {Ribes

nigrum). G-5, 94
Black Nightshade {Solanum

nigrum). G-6, 101
Bladderwort {Utricularia

vulgaris)... ....+.-2.4 G-6, 105
Brazilian Pepper Tree

{Schinus terebinthifolius) . . 17
Broad Bean {Vicia faba). . . . 120
Bugle {Ajuga reptans) ...G-6, 125
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

Albus). oe G-7, 130
Cajuput {Melaleuca

leucadendra)......... 5 G-7, 136
Carline Thistle {Carlina

acaulis). 2... 02 ee 151
Cascara Sagrada {Rhamnus

purshiana)...........5 G-7, 153
Cat's Claw {Unicaria

tomentosa)...... ieo
Catechu {Acacia catechu). ... . 163
Chickweed {Stellaria

Media)... 6. ve ee ee iso
Cinnamon {Cinnamomum

VErumM). 60. eee dl G-8, 190

Clematis {Clematis recta) .G-8, 194
Coconut Palm {Cocos

nucifera), 6.0.0... 4 4 | G-9, 201
Coffee {Coffea arabica) .. G-9, 202
Cola {Cola acuminata). ..... : 205

Common Kidney Vetch

{Anthyllis vulneraria) ..G-9, 214
Common Stonecrop {Sedum

3 215
Digitalis {Digitalis

purpurea)............5 G-IO, 248

----- PAGE 134 -----
INDICATIONS INDEX
Dogwood (Cornus
florida) G-10, 256
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea angustifolia) 261

Echinacea Purpurea

(Echinacea purpurea) . G-IO, 261
Elm Bark (Ulmus minor) G-IO, 269
English Ivy (Hedera

helix)... 0.000 eee G-10,275
English Plantain (Plantago
lanceolata). . . G-II, 278
Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus
globulus)............5 G-11,283
European Golden Rod
(Solidago virgaurea) . . G-11, 289
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum)..... | G-II, 304
Feverfew (Tanacetum

parthenium). G-II, 306
Galbanum (Ferula
gummosa),... . wee 323

German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) .. G-12, 331
Goldenseal (Hydrastis

canadensis). ... G3, 355
Goutweed (Aegopodium

podagraria) G-13, 361
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis) G-i3, 366
Ground Ivy (Glechoma

hederacea)....... 372
Heather (Calluna

vulgaris)... ......... G-13,383
High Mallow (Malva

sylvestris). : G-14, 395
Horehound (Marrubium

vulgare) G-i4, 401

* Horsetail (Equisetum
arvense). G-14, 409

Hound's Tongue
(Cynoglossum officinale) ....410
Houseleek (Sempervivum

tectorum). G-14, 411
Iceland Moss (Cetraria
islandica). . . Loe .., AIS

WOUND CARE, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN/I-129

Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica)... .....00.0.0..0.04 A419
Jambolan (Syzygium
cumini).................. 429
Jujube (Zyzyphus jujube). . . . : 439
Lady's Bedstraw (Galium
verum). .G-15, 455
Lesser Celandine
(Ranunculus ficaria). ..... + 466
Loosestrife (Lysimachia
vulgaris). G-16, 481
Lungwort (Pulmonaria
officinalis) G-ie, 485
* Marigold (Calendula
officinalis) G-17, 497
Marsh Marigold (Caltha
palustris) G-17, 503
Marshmallow (Althaea
officinalis)... ............. 505
Monkshood (Aconitum
napellus). G-18, 521
Mouse Ear (Pilosella
Officinarum). . . a .. 529
Mullein (Verbascum
densiflorum) G-18, 532
Onion (Allium cepa). . G-19, 557
Ox-Eye Daisy
(Chrysanthemum
leucanthemum),.... . . 563
Petasites (Petasites
hybridus)............5 G-19, 585
Pimpinella (Pimpinella
major). G-19, 591
* Pineapple (Ananas
comosus) 1... 593
* Poplar (Populus species) .G-20, 607
Quinine (Cinchona
pubescens). : G-20, 626
Rosemary (Rosmarinus
officinalis) . G-2i, 645

Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) ... G22, 668
Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae
rhamnoides) G22, 680
* Shepherd's Purse (Capsella
bursa-pastoris) _....... G22, 690

* Denotes recommendation by Commission E.

Slippery Elm (U/mus

rubra)....... viene. 697
Speedwell (Veronica

officinalis). G-23, 710
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum

perforatum) G-23, 719
Sunflower (Helianthus

annuus). G-23, 741
Teazle (Dipsacus

silvestris). ...... G24, 757
Tolu Balsam (Myroxylon

balsamum) G-24, 764
Traveller's Joy (Clematis

vitalba).. 6.0.0.0. 0S G-25, 769
Vervain (Verbena

officinalis) . « G25, 788
Virola (Virola theiodora). ... - 789
Water Dock (Rumex

aquaticus). 795
Water Germander

(Teucrium scordium)......- 797
White Fir (Abies alba). . 802
White Lily (Lilium

candidum),............. . 804
Wild Daisy (Bellis

perennis) G-26, 811
Wild Indigo (Baptisia

tinctoria) G-26, 812
Willow Herb (Epilobium

angustifolium). G-26, 818
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis

virginiana) G-26, 821
Wood Sage (Teucrium

scorodonia) G-26, 826
Wood Sorrel (Oxalis

acetosella) 827
Wormwood {Artemisia

absinthium) G-26, 829
Woundwort (Stachys

palustris). 832
Yarrow (Achillea

millefolium) G-26, 833
Yellow Toadflax (Linaria

vulgaris)... 0 eee e eee 840

----- PAGE 135 -----


----- PAGE 136 -----
1-131

Homeopathic Indications Index

Entries in this index are organized by specific indication, enabling you to quickly review the

botanicals used by homeopaths for a particular diagnosis. For ease of comparison with

prescription and over-the-counter medications, the index employs the same nomenclature found in

the Indications Index of the PDR Companion Guide™. Under each heading, herbs are listed

alphabetically by scientific name, with the accepted common name shown in parentheses. If an

entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant in the Herb

Identification Guide, the second to the herbal monograph. For more information on any of these

botanicals, be sure to check the appropriate underlying monograph.

ABDOMINAL CRAMPS
{See under Cramps, abdominal,
symptomatic relief of)

ABRASIONS, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
{See under Pain, topical relief of)

ACHES, MUSCULAR
{See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION DISORDERS
{See under Bronchial asthma)

AMENORRHEA, SECONDARY
{See under Menstrual disorders)

ANEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Lycoperdon species
(Puff Ball)... 2... eee 618

ANGINA
{See under Angina pectoris)

ANGINA PECTORIS
Nicotiana tabacum

(TobaCCO). ........-02 4 0-24, 762
Spigelia anthelmia
(Wormwood Grass)......... 5 $31

ANXIETY AND TENSION DUE TO
MENOPAUSE

{See under Menopause, management
of the manifestations of)

ANXIETY DISORDERS, MANAGEMENT OF
Aconitum napellus
(Monkshood),.........5 G-IS, 521
Amanita muscaria (Aga). G-3,8
Anamirta_ cocculus
(Fish Berry) 312
Aquilegia vulgaris

(Columbine) G-9, 211
Artemisia absinthium

(Wormwood)..........: G-26, 829
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre) 726
Ferula sumbul (Sumbul)  .. G-23, 738
Humulus lupulus (Hops) .. .G-i4, 400
Leonurus japonicus

(Chinese Motherwort)........ 183
Myristica fragrans

(Nutmeg)..............4 G-IS, 545
Origanum majorana

(Sweet Marjoram)...... J G-24, 746

Papaver rhoeas (Corn Poppy) .. 223
Paris quadrifolia

(Herb Paris) .......... G14, 392
Passiflora incarnata

(Passion Flower)....... | G19, 373
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy) 00
Spigelia marilandica

(Pink Root) 594

Strophanthus gratus

(Strophanthus Gratus). 736
Strophanthus hispidus

(Kombe Seed). 450
Strychnos ignatii

(ignatius Beans) 416
Strychnos mix vomica

(Nux Vomica).........: G-18, 547

Vitex agnus-castus

(Chaste Tree). G-8, 176

APPETITE, SUPPRESSION OF
{See under Obesity, exogenous)

APPREHENSION
{See under Anxiety disorders,
management of)

ARRHYTHMIAS
Iberis amara

(Bitter Candytuft). 84
Viscum album

(European Mistletoe)... . | 0-11, 291

ARTHRALGIA, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
{See under Pain, topical relief of)

ASTHMA, BRONCHIAL
{See under Bronchial asthma)

BACKACHE, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF
{See under Pain, topical relief of)

----- PAGE 137 -----
1-132/BACTERIURIA ASSOCIATED WITH

BACTERIURIA ASSOCIATED WITH
CYSTITIS, ELIMINATION OR
SUPPRESSION OF

(See under Infections, urinary tract)
BACTERIURIA ASSOCIATED WITH

POLYNEPHRITIS, ELIMINATION OR
SUPPRESSION OF

(See under Infections, urinary tract)
BILIARY CALCULI, CHEMICAL
DISSOLUTION OF

Chelidonium majus

(Celandine) G-8, 169

BLOOD PRESSURE PROBLEMS
Cephaelis ipecacuanha

(Ipecac). 423
Crataegus laevigata

(English Hawthorn). G-IO, 271
Viscum album

(European Mistletoe), G-H, 291
BLOOD PURIFYING
Lycopodium clavatum

(Club Moss) 196
BRONCHIAL ASTHMA
Aralia racemosa

(Spikenard). G-23, 711
Aspidosperma quebracho-

bianco (Quebracho) . . 623
Betonica officinalis

(Wood Betony). . G-26, 825

Cephaelis ipecacuanha
(Ipecac). 423
Hypericum perforatum

(St John's Wort). G-23, 719
Lobelia inflata (Lobelia) .. G-ie, 479
BRONCHIAL CONGESTION
Inula helenium

(Elecampane). . .G-10, 266

BRONCHITIS, ACUTE
Cephaelis ipecacuanha
(Ipecac). 423
Cetraria islandica
(Iceland Moss)
Dorema ammoniacum
(Ammoniac Gum),......... .29
Myroxylon balsamum
(Tolu Balsam).

.G-24, 764

BRONCHOSPASM, REVERSIBLE
(See under Bronchial asthma)

BRUISES
Bellis perennis

(Wild Daisy). G-26, 811

CYSTITIS
Ruta graveolens (Rue), . G21, 648
Verbena officinalis

(Vervain). G-28S, 788

BRUISES, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

BULIMIA NERVOSA
Corydalis cava (Corydalis). . 226

BURNS, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

CALCULOSIS
(See under Renal calculi)

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
(See under Arrhythmias)

CARDIAC OUTPUT, LOW
Asparagus officinalis
(Asparagus).
Iberis amara
(Bitter Candytuft). 84
Strophanthus gratus
(Strophanthus Gratus) 736

G-4, 52

CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
Adonis vernalis (Adonis)
Apocynum cannabinum

(Indian-Hemp). a ... 4is
Camellia sinensis

. G-3,5

(Green Tea) G-13, 369
Crataegus laevigata

(English Hawthorn)... . G-10,271
Digitalis purpurea

(Digitalis) G-IO, 248
Kalmia latifolia

(Mountain Laurel) G-IS, 528
Leonurus cardiaca

(Motherwort) ........... o-is, 524
Prunus spinosa (Sloe) G-22, 697
Spigelia anthelmia

(Wormwood Grass) ........ 83i
Strophanthus hispidus

(Kombe" Seed), . . a .. 450
CATHARTIC
Quassia amara (Amargo) ...G-3, 23

CEREBROVASCULAR INSUFFICIENCY
Conium maculatum

(Hemlock). G-13, 386
Hypericum perforatum

(St. John's Wort) G-23, 719
CHEILITIS, ACTINIC
Marsdenia condurango

(Condurango), . . . ..,. 216

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CHOLECYSTITIS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane) G-7, 144
CIRCULATORY DISORDERS
Claviceps purpurea (Ergot) 280

COLD, COMMON, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Aralia racemosa

(Spikenard). G-23, 711
Lemna minor (Duckweed) . .G-I0, 258
Mentha piperita

(Peppermint) .. G-19, sso
Mercurialis annua
(Mercury Herb). G17, 513

COLIC, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Allium cepa (Onion). G-19, 557
Gratiola officinalis
(Hedge-Hyssop) G-13, 385

CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE,
ADJUNCT IN

(See under Edema, adjunctive
therapy in)

CONJUNCTIVITIS, UNSPECIFIED

Ilex aquifolium (Holly)... . G-14,397
CONSTIPATION
Achillea millefolium

(Yarrow). . G-26, 833
Collinsonia canadensis

(Stone Root). . . G-23, 733

CONVULSIVE EPISODES, CONTROL OF
Achillea millefolium
(Yarrow)
Artemisia cina (Wormseed) .
Artemisia vulgaris
(Mugwort), . .
Oenanthe crocata
(Water Dropwort) ......... 795
Passiflpra incarnata
(Passion Flower).
Verbena officinalis
(Vervain).

wi. .G-26, 833
827

G-IS, 530

.. G19, 573

G-25, 788

CORYZA, ACUTE
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)

COUGH, CHRONIC
Inula helenium

(Elecampane). G-IO, 266

----- PAGE 138 -----
HOMEOPATHIC INDICATIONS INDEX

COUGH, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Achillea millefolium

(Yarrow)..............4 0-26, 833
Linum catharticum

(Mountain Flax)............. 526
Prunus laurocerasus

(Cherry Laurel)... ..... 4 G-8, 179

COUGH, WHOOPING
{See under Pertussis)

CRADLE CAP
{See under Dermatitis, seborrheic)

CRAMPS, ABDOMINAL, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Armoracia rusticana

(Horseradish)..........: G-14, 408
Artemisia absinthium

(Wormwood).......... 4 G-26, 829
CRETINISM

{See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

CUTS, MINOR, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
{See under Pain, topical relief of)

DANDRUFF
{See under Dermatitis, seborrheic)

DEBILITY
Betonica officinalis
(Wood Betony)........ ! G-26, 825
Cinchona pubescens
(Quinine)..............4 G-20,626
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre),..............- 726
Panax ginseng (Ginseng). ..... 346

DELIRIUM
Pastinaca sativa (Parsnip) . .0-i», 571

DEPRESSION, RELIEF OF SYMPTOMS
Camellia sinensis

(Green Tea)........... 4 0-13, 369
Conium maculatum

(Hemlock)..............4 0-13,386
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre)............- 726
Hypericum perforatum

(St. John's Wort) 0-23, Ji»
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............: 572
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy)..........-....5 e00
Strychnos ignatii

(Ignatius Beans) .... 5. 416

Thuja occidentalis (Thuja) . .G-24, 759

DERMATITIS, SEBORRHEIC
Buxus sempervirens

(BoXWOOd) G4, 116
Daphne mezereum
(Mezereon)............/ G17, 515

DERMATOSES, CORTICOSTEROID-
RESPONSIVE

{See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Aethusa cynapium

(Fool's Parsley)........! G-12, 316
Alchemilla vulgaris

(Lady's Mantle)........ 4 G-15, 456
Apocynum cannabinum

(Indian-Hemp).............4 A18
Asarum europaeum (Asarum) ... .48
Cinchona pubescens

(Quinine). .............! G20, 626
Corydalis cava (Corydalis)... . : 226

Euphorbia cyparissias

(Cypress Spurge) G-9, 242
Ferula foetida (Asa Foetida). . . . : AT
Glechoma hederacea

(Ground Ivy).............. 372
Helleborus niger

(Black Hellebore)....... | Ga, 97
Helleborus viridis

(Green Hellebore)......... . 368

Ipomoea purga (Jalap). . . . | G-IS, 427
Leptandra virginica

(Black Root) ... . . .. ... .104
Linum catharticum
(Mountain Flax)............! 526

Nicotiana tabacum
(TobaCCO) ...'_. . . . | .G-24,762
Nymphaea odorata (American

White Pond Lily)........ { 0-3, 28
Rheum palmatum

(Chinese Rhubarb). ... . . : 0-s, iss
Ricinus communis

(Castor Oil Plant)... .. : G-7, isa
Sanguisorba officinalis

(Great Burnet).........! G-13,366
Sanicula europaea

(European Sanicle)......... 296
Veratrum album

(White Hellebore)...... : G-25,803

DIGESTIVE DISORDERS, SYMPTOMATIC.
RELIEF OF

Agrostemma_ githago
(Corn Cockle)

DYSPEPSIA/1-1 33

Allium sativum (Garlic) .. . G-12, 327
Allium ursinum

(Bear's Garlic). .............4 66
Capsicum annuum
(Cayenne) G-8, ies

Chelone glabra (Balmony) . . G-4, 59
Cornus florida (Dogwood) G-IO, 256
Gentiana lutea

(Yellow Gentian)........... 836
Hydrastis canadensis

(Goldenseal)...........: G-13, 355
Ilex paraguariensis (Mate) G-17, sos
Iris species (Orris)....... | G19, sei
Juniperus communis

(Juniper)..............4 G-15, 440
Knautia arvensis

(Field Scabious)........ 4 G-II, 310
Lycopersicon esculentum

(Tomato). .............4 G-24, 766

Matricaria recutita

(German Chamomile) ... G12, 331
Myristica fragrans

(Nutmeg),............-4 G-IS, 545
Picrasma excelsa (Quassia).... | 622

Raphanus sativus (Radish) . G20, 628
Rhamnus catharticus

(Buckthorn)............: Ge, 123
Rhamnus purshiana

(Cascara Sagrada)... ... | G-7, 153
Silphium laciniatum

(Rosinweed)...........4 G21, 646
Tamarindus indica

(Yamarind)................. 753
Taxus baccata (Yew). .... : G-26, 84i
DROPSY

{See under Edema, idiopathic)

DYSENTERY
Sophora japonica

(Pagoda Tree) ........... 564

DYSMENORRHEA, UNSPECIFIED,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Anamirta cocculus
(Fish Berry) .

Aquilegia vulgaris
(Columbine)

Cicuta virosa (European
Water Hemlock)

312
....G-9, 211

.G-II, 297

DYSPEPSIA
{See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

----- PAGE 139 -----
1-134/EAR, INFLAMMATION, MIDDLE

EAR, INFLAMMATION, MIDDLE

Capsicum annuum
(Cayenne).............4 G-8, 165

ECZEMA, UNSPECIFIED

(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

EDEMA, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN

Apocynum cannabinum
(Indian-Hemp).............4 418

EDEMA, IDIOPATHIC
Linum catharticum
(Mountain Flax)............: 526
ENCEPHALITIS, VIRAL
Helleborus niger

(Black Hellebore) G-5, 97
EPILEPSY
Oenanthe crocata

(Water Dropwort) 795
EXHAUSTION
Asarum europaeum (Asarum) ... .48
Avena sativa (Oats)...... J G-IS, 551
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre),............../ 726
Piper methysticum

(Kava Kava)........... G-IS, 443
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy).............004 600

FATIGUE, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre)............0..0. 726
FEVER, REDUCTION OF
Amanita muscaria (Aga)... . § G-3,8
Artemisia cina (Wormseed). . . . | 827
Asimina_triloba

(American Pawpaw)......... - 27
Cinchona pubescens

(Quinine). G-20,626
Cornus florida (Dogwood) .G-10, 256
Eupatorium perfoliatum

(Boneset) '_. 1... c-e, 113
Phytolacca americana

(Poke). G-20, 602
Pimpinella major

(Pimpinella). G-19,591
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy)...............4 00

Solanum dulcamara

(Bittersweet Nightshade) ... G-S, 88
Strychnos nux vomica
(Nux Vomica). G-IS, 547

FLATULENCE, RELIEF OF

Ferula foetida (Asa Foetida). . . . : AT

Leonurus cardiaca
(Motherwort)..........: G-IS, 524

FROSTBITE, POSSIBLY EFFECTIVE IN
Calendula officinalis
(Marigold).............4 G-17, 497

FURUNCULOSIS
Corydalis cava (Corydalis)... . : 226

GALACTORRHEA
Piper nigrum
(Black Pepper).........! G-6, 103

GALLSTONES
{See under Biliary calculi, chemical
dissolution of)

GASTRITIS
Agrostemma githago
(Corn Cockle). ............- 222
Artemisia absinthium
(Wormwood)..........4 G-26, 829
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre),............0.. 726
Erigeron canadensis
(Canadian Fleabane)... . ‘ G-7, 144

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Aethusa cynapium

(Fool's Parsley). . .. G-12,316
Aletris farinosa (Alteris)....... . 11
Aloe ferox (Cape Aloe)......... 16
Atropa belladonna

(Belladonna)............: G-4, 69
Brassica nigra

(Black Mustard). ....... ! G-5, 100
Camellia sinensis

(Green Tea) G-13, 369

Cephaelis ipecacuanha
(Ipecac)..................04 423

Chamaemelum nobile

(English Chamomile) ... G-10,270
Cochlearia officinalis
(Scurvy Grass). . G22, 679

Colchicum autumnale

(Colchicum)........... 4 G-9, 206
Ferula foetida (Asa Foetida). .. . : AT
Geranium maculatum

(Cranesbill)................. 233
Marsdenia_ condurango

(Condurango)............... 216
Piper methysticum

(Kava Kava)...........4 G-15, 443

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Punica granatum

(Pomegranate) .. . . . G-20, eos
Quassia amara (Amargo) ...G-3, 23
Rhamnus frangula

(Frangula).............4 G-12, 317
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy)........-..00004 600
Rosmarinus officinalis

(Rosemary)............4 G21, 645
Sinapis alba

(White Mustard)........ 4 G25, 805

Solanum dulcamara

(Bittersweet Nightshade) . . . G-5, 88
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica).........4 G-IS, 547
Thuja occidentalis (Thuja) . G-24, 759
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT, SMOOTH
MUSCLE SPASM
(See under Spasm, smooth muscle)
GENITOURINARY TRACT, SMOOTH
MUSCLE SPASM
(See under Spasm, smooth muscle)

GLANDS, SWOLLEN
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre),............... 726
GLANDULAR PROBLEMS
Conium maculatum
(Hemlock). ............4 G-13, 386
Phytolacca americana

(Poke).

GOITER
Fucus vesiculosus

(Bladderwrack).............. 106

GONORRHEA
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre),............... 726
GOUT, MANAGEMENT OF SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS
Berberis vulgaris (Barberry) .G-4, 61
Colchicum autumnale
(Colchicum)........... 4 G-9, 206
Juniperus sabina
(Savin Tops).
Ranunculus bulbosus
(Bulbous Buttercup)........- 128

GYNECOLOGICAL DISORDERS
Centella asiatica

G-21, 663

(Gotu Kola). G-13, 359
HAIR LOSS
Buxus sempervirens

(Boxwood) G-6, lie

----- PAGE 140 -----
HOMEOPATHIC INDICATIONS INDEX

Delphinium _ staphisagria

(Stavesacre) ... 726

HAY FEVER
(See under Pollinosis)

HEADACHE
Anamirta — cocculus

(Fish Berry), 312
Camellia _ sinensis

(Green Tea)...........4 G-13, 369
Delphinium _ staphisagria

(Stavesacre). 726
Fagopyrum — esculentum

(Buckwheat), G-6, 124
Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgo) .. . G-12, 342
Iris species (Orris)....... 4 G-19, 56i
Paris quadrifolia

(Herb Paris). .........4 G-14, 392
Paullinia cupana (Guarana). 376
Primula veris (Cowslip). 231
Prunus spinosa (Sloe). . . . .G-22, 697
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower). : : 572
Spigelia anthelmia

(Wormwood Grass). Le . 831
Strychnos) mix vomica

(Nux Vomica).........: G-IS, 547
HEADACHE, MIGRAINE
Cicuta virosa (European

Water Hemlock). G-H, 297
Cyclamen — europaeum

(Cyclamen) 240
Digitalis purpurea

(Digitalis). ...........04 0-io, 248
Paris quadrifolia

(Herb Paris)...........: G-14, 392
Senecio bicolor

(Dusty Miller). 258

HEADACHE, TENSION
(See under Pain, unspecified)

HEADACHE, VASCULAR
(See under Headache, migraine)

HELMINTHIASIS

Artemisia cina (Wormseed). 827
Artemisia vulgaris
(MugWOrt).........2.-.5 G-18, 530
Chelone glabra (Balmony) . .G-4, 59
Cicuta virosa (European
Water Hemlock),.......4 G-II, 297

Linum — catharticum
(Mountain Flax) 526

Quassia amara (Amargo) ...G-3, 23
Spigelia anthelmia

(Wormwood Grass) 83i

HEMORRHAGE, UNSPECIFIED
Achillea

(Yarrow). G-26, 833
Claviceps purpurea (Ergot) . . . 280

millefolium

HEMORRHOIDAL PAIN
(See under Pain, anorectal)

HEMORRHOIDS
Aesculus —_ hippocastanum

(Horse Chestnut). ...... J G-14, 403
Aloe ferox (Cape Aloe) ie
Collinsonia canadensis

(Stone Root) ..........4 G-23, 733
Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane). G-7, 144
Glechoma _ hederacea

(Ground Ivy). 372
Hamamelis virginiana

(Witch Hazel)..........5 G-26, 821
Linum — catharticum

(Mountain Flax) 526
Paeonia _ officinalis

(European Peony)...... ! G-11, 295
Strychnos  nux vomica

(Nux Vomica)......... 4 G-18, 547

HEMOSTASIS, AN AID IN
Geranium — maculatum

(Cranesbill). .. . . . . 233
Vinca minor (Periwinkle)

HEPATITIS, UNSPECIFIED

Erigeron canadensis
(Canadian Fleabane)

Leptandra virginica

(Black Root) . .. 104

HERPES ZOSTER INFECTIONS
Daphne mezereum
(Mezereon)............4 G-17, 515
Kalmia _ latifolia
(Mountain Laurel)...... J G-IS,528

HYPERHIDROSIS.

Salvia officinalis (Sage) ... .G-21, 655

HYPERTHYROIDISM

Hedera helix (English Ivy)

Leonurus — cardiaca
(Motherwort)..........4 G-18, 524

virginicus

.G-10, 275

Lycopus

(Bugleweed). G-6, 126

INFECTIONS, URINARY TRACT/1-133

HYPNOTIC
(See under Sleep, induction of)

HYPOTENSION

Nicotiana tabacum
(TobaCCO).......2.200 4 .G-24, 762
Veratrum album
(White Hellebore)..... J G-25, 803

HYPOTHYROIDISM, ORDINARY

(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

HYPOTHYROIDISM, PRIMARY
(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental

therapy in)
HYPOTHYROIDISM, REPLACEMENT OR
SUPPLEMENTAL THERAPY IN
Brassica _ oleracea

(Cabbage). .. G-7, 134

HYPOTHYROIDISM, SECONDARY

(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

HYPOTHYROIDISM, TERTIARY

(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

HYSTERIA, ACUTE
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre), 726

IMMUNODEFICIENCY, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Infection, tendency to)

INDIGESTION
(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

INFECTION, TENDENCY TO
Scrophularia nodosa
(Figwort), 0... 2. ee al G-11,311

INFECTIONS, NON-SPECIFIC
Baptisia — tinctoria
(Wild Indigo). ........ 4 0-26,812
Datura stramonium an
(Jimson Weed).........4 G-IS, 436
Veratrum album

(White Hellebore)...... | G-25, 803

INFECTIONS, URINARY TRACT
Agropyron — repens

(Triticum)... .G-25, 771

----- PAGE 141 -----
1-136/INFECTIONS, URINARY TRACT
Anagallis arvensis
(Scarlet Pimpernel)... .. | G-22, 668

INFECTIONS, VENEREAL
(See under Gonorrhea)

INFLUENZA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Eupatorium _ perfoliatum

(Boneset). G-6, 113
Lycopersicon esculentum

(Tomato)............004 G-24, 766
Ranunculus bulbosus

(Bulbous Buttercup)... . 128
Ranunculus sceleratus

(Poisonous Buttercup) ... G20, 601

INSECT BITES, PAIN DUE TO
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

INSOMNIA
(See under Sleep, induction of)

INTERTRIGO
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

ITCHING, SKIN
(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

ITCHING, SUNBURN
(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

JOINTS, SWOLLEN
Atropa — belladonna

(Belladonna) G-4, 69

LACTATION, STIMULATION OF
Vitex agnus-castus

(Chaste Tree). . G-8, 176

LACTOSE INTOLERANCE
Aethusa cynapium

(Fool's Parsley)... G-12,31e
LARYNGOTRACHEITIS
Lactuca virosa (Lactucarium) ... 453

LEUKORRHEA
Alchemilla vulgaris .,
(Lady's Mantle)........! G-IS, 45s
Delphinium _ staphisagria
(Stavesacre),.........000 eae 726
LIPS, DRY
(See under Cheilitis, actinic)

LIVER AND GALLBLADDER COMPLAINTS
Berberis vulgaris (Barberry) .G-4, ei
Leptandra _ virginica

(Black Root) ...........24 104

Lycopodium — clavatum

(Club MOSS) 196
Mahonia — aquifolium

(Mountain Grape)...... J G-18, 527
LIVER DISORDERS
Chelidonium —majus

(Celandine). G-8, 169
Chelone glabra (Balmony) . .G-4, 59
Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane), G-7, 144
Fagopyrum — esculentum

(Buckwheat). G-6, 124
Fumaria _ officinalis

(Fumitory).............4 G-12, 322
Lactuca virosa (Lactucarium) .. . 453
Picrasma excelsa (Quassia). 622
Solidago virgaurea

(European Golden Rod) . G-11, 289
Strychnos  nux vomica

(Nux Vomica).........: G-IS, S47
LYMPHEDEMA
Scrophularia nodosa

(Figwort),........00..045 G-11, 311
MASTITIS
Chimaphila — umbellata

(Pipsissewa). 595
Oenanthe aquatica

(Water Fennel)......... 4 G-25, 796
MEASLES
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower). 572
MENINGITIS
Atropa _ belladonna

(Belladonna) . y.--G-4, 69
Ranunculus — bulbosus

(Bulbous Buttercup). . . .. 128
Solanum nigrum

(Black Nightshade), . G-e, 101

MENOPAUSE, MANAGEMENT OF THE
MANIFESTATIONS OF
Aristolochia _ clematitis

(Birthwort) G-S, SO

MENORRHAGIA
Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane). G-7, 144

MENSTRUAL DISORDERS
Caulophyllum __ thalictroides

(Blue Cohosh).............- 109
Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Gossypium — herbaceum

(Levant Cotton)........ 4 G-16, 468
Hydrastis canadensis

(Goldenseal)...........4 G-13, 355
Lycopodium — clavatum

(Club MOSS). 196
Melissa _ officinalis

(Lemon Balm)......... 4 G-ie, 461
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower). 572
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy). . Le £00
Senecio _ bicolor

(Dusty Miller). an 258

MENSTRUAL SYNDROME, PRE-,
MANAGEMENT OF

Cyclamen — europaeum
(Cyclamen). 240

MIGRAINE HEADACHE
(See under Headache, migraine)

MOOD SWINGS
Lycopodium — clavatum
(Club MOSS). 196

MORNING SICKNESS
Gossypium — herbaceum

(Levant Cotton), ....... 4 G-ie, 468

MUMPS
Pulsatilla
(Pasque Flower) : .., 572

pratensis

MUSCLE SPASM
(See under Spasticity, muscle,
symptomatic alleviation of)

MUSCLE TENSION

Abelmoschus — moschatus
(Muskmallow). 533
MYALGIA

(See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

MYALGIA, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

MYXEDEMA

(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

MYXEDEMA COMA/PRECOMA

(See under Hypothyroidism,
replacement or supplemental
therapy in)

----- PAGE 142 -----
4*

HOMEOPATHIC INDICATIONS INDEX

NEURALGIA
(See under Pain, neurogenic)

NEURALGIA, TRIGEMINAL
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre) 726

NEURITIS, PERIPHERAL, ACUTE
(See under Pain, neurogenic)

OBESITY, EXOGENOUS
Calotropis gigantea

(Giant Milkweed), Lo... 338
Calotropis procera

(Calotropis), . . Lee . 141
Fucus vesiculosus

(Bladderwrack), ............ oe
OPHTHALMIA
Corydalis cava (Corydalis). 226
Datura stramonium

(Jimson Weed). G-15, 436
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy). 00
OPHTHALMIC DISORDERS
Armoracia rusticana

(Horseradish), . . G-14, 408
Cochlearia officinalis

(Scurvy Grass) G-22, 679
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre) ...........,.. 726
Dryopteris filix-mas

(Male Fern). . . G-17, 493
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Rower). . a . 572
Senecio bicolor

(Dusty Miller). . . _ 258
ORCHITIS
Rhododendron ferrugineum

(Rust-Red Rhododendron). eso

PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH ARTHRITIS,
TOPICAL

(See under Pain, topical relief of)
PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH SPORTS
INJURIES

(See under Pain, topical relief of)

PAIN, ABDOMINAL
(See under Cramps, abdominal,
symptomatic relief of)

PAIN, ANAL
(See under Pain, anorectal)

PAIN, ANORECTAL
Krameria triandra (Rhatany) .... 64i

Sedum acre
(Common Stonecrop) 215

PAIN, HEMORRHOIDAL
(See under Pain, anorectal)

PAIN, JOINT

Amanita muscaria (Aga)

Ricinus communis
(Castor Oil Plant). . .

G-3,8

G-7,1SS

PAIN, LUMBAR
Aesculus hippocastanum

(Horse Chestnut) G-14, 403
Pimpinella anisum (Anise) . G-3, 35
Pimpinella major

(Pimpinella) G-19, 591
PAIN, MUSCULAR, TEMPORARY
RELIEF OF
Bellis perennis

(Wild Daisy) G-26, SI 1
PAIN, NEUROGENIC
Aconitum napellus

(Monkshood) G-18, 521
Amanita muscaria (Aga) G-3,8
Cinchona pubescens

(Quinine). G-20, 626

Coffea arabica (Coffee) ....G-9, 202
Kalmia latifolia

(Mountain Laurel). G-18, 528
Paris quadrifolia

(Herb Paris). . G-14, 392
Ranunculus bulbosus

(Bulbous Buttercup)... .... . 128
Rhododendron ferrugineum

(Rust-Red Rhododendron) .. .. eso
Spigelia anthelmia

(Wormwood Grass),........ 83i
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica), . G-18, 547
Veratrum album

(White Hellebore). . . G25, 803
PAIN, TOOTH
Cheiranthus cheiri

(Wallflower). G-25, 792
PAIN, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
Ruta graveolens (Rue). . . . G-21, 648
PAIN, UNSPECIFIED
Allium cepa (Onion). . G-19, 557
Matricaria recutita

(German Chamomile) ... G-12, 331
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica) G-18, 547

PROSTATITIS /1-137

PALPITATIONS
Paris quadrifolia

(Herb Paris), G-14, 392
PARALYSIS, UNSPECIFIED
Anamirta_ cocculus

(Fish Berry) .............. 312
Claviceps purpurea (Ergot)... 280
Conium maculatum

(Hemlock), . G-13, 386
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica) G-18, 547

PERITONITIS.
Bryonia cretica (Red Bryony) . . . 632

PERTUSSIS
Cephaelis ipecacuanha

(Ipecac) ... A423
Prunus laurocerasus

(Cherry Laurel), G-8, 179

PILES
(See under Hemorrhoids)

PMS
(See under Menstrual syndrome,
pre-, management of)

POISONING, ALCOHOL

Amanita muscaria (Aga). 6-3, 8

POISONING, UNSPECIFIED
Cinchona pubescens

(Quinine).

POLLINOSIS

G-20, 626

Aralia racemosa
(Spikenard)
Justicia adhatoda
(Malabar Nut).

G-23,711

G-17, 492

POSTNASAL DRIP
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME

(See under Menstrual syndrome,
pre-, management of)

PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA, BENIGN,

SYMPTOMATIC TREATMENT

Chondrodendron tomentosum

(Pareira)............,...... 566
PROSTATITIS.
Chimaphila umbellata
(Pipsissewa)........,....... 595

----- PAGE 143 -----
1-138/PRURITUS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF

PRURITUS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
Anacardium occidentale

(Cashew) G-7, 157
Centella asiatica

(Gotu Kola)...........4 G-13, 359
Fagopyrum esculentum

(Buckwheat) G-6, 124
Fumaria officinalis

(Fumitory).............! G-12, 322
Pinus species

(Scotch Pine). ......... G22, 674
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy).............0-4 600
Smilax species

(Sarsaparilla),..........4 G21, 661

RASH, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

RENAL CALCULI
Asparagus officinalis

(Asparagus) G-4, 52
Berberis vulgaris (Barberry) G-4, 61
Capsella bursa-pastoris

(Shepherd's Purse)... ... | G22, 690
Galium aparine (Cleavers)... . . 193

RENAL IMPAIRMENT
Apocynum cannabinum
(Indian-Hemp).............5 A18
Solidago virgaurea
(European Golden Rod) . G11, 289

RESPIRATORY TRACT DISORDERS
Allium sativum (Garlic) ... G-12, 327

Armoracia rusticana

(Horseradish).......... ‘ G-i4, 408
Aspidosperma quebracho-

bianco (Quebracho)......... 4 623
Atropa belladonna

(Belladonna)............ 4 GA, 69
Brassica nigra

(Black Mustard)........ ‘ G-5, 100

Bryonia cretica (Red Bryony) ... 632
Chelidonium majus

(Celandine)............ 4 G-S, 169
Cinchona pubescens

(Quinine). G-20, 626
Corydalis cava (Corydalis), . . . 226
Eupatorium cannabinum

(Hemp Agrimony)...... : G-13, 388

Euphorbia cyparissias
(Cypress Spurge) G-S, 242
Euphorbia resinifera (Spurge) ... 71 e

Hedera helix (English Ivy) GO, 27s

Iris species (Orris)....... ‘ G19, sei
Justicia adhatoda

(Malabar Nut)......... 4 G-17, 492
Knautia arvensis

(Field Scabious)........ 4 G-11, 310
Lycopodium clavatum

(Club MOSS).............00. 196
Marrubium vulgare

(Horehound)...........! G-14, 401

Matricaria recutita
(German Chamomile) ... G-12, 331
Oenanthe aquatica

(Water Fennel).........: G25, 796
Phytolacca americana

(Poke)...............-4 G20, 602
Pinus species

(Scotch Pine)..........! G22, 674
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............. 572
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy)..........-...-5 00
Sambucus nigra

(European Elder). ...... | G-11, 287
Sinapis alba

(White Mustard)........ / G25, 805

Solanum dulcamara
(Bittersweet Nightshade) .. . G-5, 88
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica) G-IS, 547
Teucrium scorodonia

(Wood Sage) G-26, 826
Viola odorata

(Sweet Violet) G-24, ro

RHEUMATIC DISORDERS, UNSPECIFIED
Actaea spicata (Baneberry). ... . eo
Allium sativum (Garlic) ... .G-12, 327
Apium graveolens (Celery) .G-8, 172
Bellis perennis

(Wild Daisy) .0-26,811
Berberis vulgaris (Barberry) .0-4> ei
Bryonia cretica (Red Bryony) ... 632
Caulophyllum thalictroides

(Blue Cohosh) «+. Io»
Chelidonium majus

(Celandine). ....... ...G-8, 169
Colchicum autumnale
(Colchicum),.......... 4 G-9, 20*

Corydalis cava (Corydalis) . ...226
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre)................ 726

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Filipendula ulmaria

(Meadowsweet)........ ‘ G7, 511
Harpagophytum procumbens
(Devil's Claw)............. 2A7

Hedera helix (English Ivy) G-IO, 275
Juniperus sabina

(Savin Tops)...........4 G21, 663
Kalmia latifolia

(Mountain Laurel)... ... | G-IS, 528
Linum catharticum

(Mountain Flax)............4 526
Lycopersicon esculentum

(Tomato). .............! G24, 766
Mercurialis annua

(Mercury Herb)........ | G17, 513
Panax ginseng (Ginseng). .... . 346
Phytolacca americana

(Poke). ............-.-4 G20, 602
Pinus species

(Scotch Pine)..........4 G22, 674
Polygonum aviculare

(Knotweed)............4 G-IS, 448
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............ 572
Ranunculus bulbosus

(Bulbous Buttercup)......... 128

Ranunculus sceleratus
(Poisonous Buttercup) . .. G20, 601
Rhamnus purshiana
(Cascara Sagrada)
Rhododendron ferrugineum
(Rust-Red Rhododendron) ....eso
Rhus toxicodendron

G-7, 153

(Poison Ivy)...............5 00
Ruta graveolens (Rue)... . G21, 648
Smilax species

(Sarsaparilla) G-21, eei

Solanum dulcamara

(Bittersweet Nightshade) ... G-5, 88
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica) G-IS, 547
Thuja occidentalis (Thuja) . G-24, 759
Viola odorata

(Sweet Violet) G-24, 750
Viscum album
(European Mistletoe) .... . G-11, 291

SARCOPTES SCABIEI INFESTATIONS
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre)...............- 726
SCABIES
(See under Sarcoptes scabiei
infestations) N

----- PAGE 144 -----
HOMEOPATHIC INDICATIONS INDEX

SCARLATINA
Asimina triloba
(American Pawpaw).......... 27

SCARLET FEVER
(See under Scarlatina)

SCROFULOSIS
Delphinium staphisagria

(Stavesacre).............00/ 726
SEBORRHEA
Delphinium staphisagria
(Stavesacre).............0.7 726
SEDATION

(See under Sleep, induction of)

SEPTICEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Baptisia tinctoria
(Wild Indigo)..........! G-26, S12
SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
Origanum majorana

(Sweet Marjoram)...... | G-24, 746
Origanum vulgare
(Oregano)............./ G-19, 559

Vitex agnus-castus

(Chaste Tree). G-8, 176

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION, FEMALE
Apium graveolens (Celery) .G-8, 172
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............: 572

SHINGLES
(See under Herpes zoster infections)

SINU-BRONCHITIS
Hydrastis canadensis
(Goldenseal). ..........: c-13,35s

SKIN DISORDERS
Anagallis arvensis

(Scarlet Pimpernel) ...... G-22, 668
Atropa belladonna

(Belladonna)............: G-4, 69
Bellis perennis

(Wild Daisy) ........ ____G-26,811

Berberis vulgaris (Barberry) . G4, 61
Caltha palustris
(Marsh Marigold) ...... -G-I 7,503
Centella asiatica
(Gotu Kola)
Cinchona pubescens
(Quinine). ...........004 G20, 626
Daphne mezereum

(Mezereon)............: G-17,515

+ G13, 359

Euphorbia cyparissias

(Cypress Spurge)....... 4 G-9, 242
Fagopyrum esculentum

(Buckwheat)...........4 G-6, 124
Lycoperdon species

(Puff Ball)... .......00..004 618
Lycopodium clavatum

(Club MOSS)............0008 196
Mahonia aquifolium

(Mountain Grape)...... J G-IS, 527
Marsdenia condurango

(Condurango)............... 216
Primula veris (Cowslip)......: 231
Ranunculus bulbosus

(Bulbous Buttercup)......... 128

Ranunculus sceleratus

(Poisonous Buttercup) .. . G20, 601
Raphanus sativus (Radish) . G20, 628
Rhus toxicodendron

(Poison Ivy)..............-4 00
Smilax species

(Sarsaparilla)............ G21, 661
Taxus baccata (Yew)..... 4 G-26, 841

Thuja occidentalis (Thuja) . G-24, 759

SKIN ULCERS

Clematis recta (Clematis) ..G-8, 194

SKIN, DRY, MOISTURIZATION OF
Mahonia aquifolium
(Mountain Grape)...... 4 G-18, 527

SKIN, INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS
Anacardium occidentale

(Cashew)..............) G-7, 157
Cicuta virosa (European

Water Hemlock)........ J 0-11,297
Daphne mezereum

(Mezereon)............4 G-17, 515

Euphorbia resinifera (Spurge) ... 716
Fumaria officinalis

(Fumitory).............: G-12, 322
Pinus species
(Scotch Pine) .......... G-22,674

Solanum dulcamara

(Bittersweet Nightshade)—0-5, 88
Vinca minor (Periwinkle). ..... ; 584
Viola tricolor (Heartsease) ...... 382
SKIN, IRRITATION, MINOR, PAIN
ASSOCIATED WITH
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

SLEEP DISORDERS
Avena sativa (Oats)...... | G-18, 551

T. PALLIDUM INFECTIONS /I-139

SLEEP, INDUCTION OF

Coffea arabica (Coffee) ... G-9, 202
Eschscholtzia californica
(California Poppy). G-7, 140

Humulus lupulus (Hops) .. G-14, 400
Ipomoea purga (Jalap).... | G-IS, 427
Passiflora incarnata

(Passion Flower). ...... . G-19, 573
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............: 572
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica).........: G-18, 547

SMOKING CESSATION, TEMPORARY
AID TO

Lobelia inflata (Lobelia) .. G16, 479

SPASM, SMOOTH MUSCLE
Petasites hybridus
(Petasites).............4 G19, 585

SPASMS, UNSPECIFIED
Strychnos ignatii

(Ignatius Beans)............4 die
SPASTICITY, MUSCLE, SYMPTOMATIC
ALLEVIATION OF
Claviceps purpurea (Ergot), ... : 280

SPLEEN, DISORDERS OF
Ceanothus americanus
(New Jersey Tea)..........:! 541

SPRAINS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

STIMULANT
Veratrum album
(White Hellebore)...... | G-25,803

STOMACH, UPSET
(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

STOMATITIS
Asimina triloba

(American Pawpaw). ....... 27
Capsicum annuum

(Cayenne), ............4 G-8, ies
Galium aparine (Cleavers)... . . 193

SUNBURN, PAIN ASSOCIATED WITH
(See under Pain, topical relief of)

SYPHILIS
(See under T. pallidum infections)

T. PALLIDUM INFECTIONS
Stillingia sylvatica (Stillingia) . . . 729

----- PAGE 145 -----
1-140/TEETHING

TEETHING
Matricaria _ recutita

(German Chamomile) ... G-12, 331
Rheum — palmatum

(Chinese Rhubarb)...... | G-8, ISS
THYROID DYSFUNCTION
Iris species (Orris)....... | G-19, 561
TONSILLITIS
Atropa belladonna

(Belladonna). Le . G-4, 69
Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgo) ... G-12, 342
Scrophularia nodosa

(Figwort). G-11, 311
TRACHEITIS
Lactuca virosa (Lactucarium) . . .453

TREPONEMA PALLIDUM
(See under T. pallidum infections)

ULCERS, GASTRIC
Inula helenium
(Elecampane)..........4 G-I0, 266

URINARY TRACT DISORDERS
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
(Uva-Ursi). 6... 2.0.0.0. G-25, 779
Capsicum — annuum
(Cayenne).
Chimaphila — umbellata
(Pipsissewa)...............4 595
Chondrodendron
(Pareira)....... ee eee 566
Colchicum — autumnale
(Colchicum)........... 4 G-9, 206

staphisagria

G-8, 165

tomentosum

Delphinium
(Stavesacre). . .

Erigeron canadensis

(Canadian Fleabane). .. . | G-7, 144
Geum urbanum

(Bennet's Root). ........4 G-4, 71
Gratiola _ officinalis

(Hedge-Hyssop)........ 5 G-13, 385
Helleborus _ niger

(Black Hellebore),..... J G-S, 97
Juniperus — communis

(Juniper). G-15, 440
Juniperus sabina

(Savin Tops)...........: G-21, 663

Lactuca virosa (Lactucarium) .. .453
Myroxylon — balsamum

(Tolu Balsam),........! G-24, 764
Nasturtium _ officinale

(Watercress)... . 0.2.0. eee 798
Petroselinum — crispum

(Parsley)..............) G-19, 567
Piper cubeba (Cubeb),....... 4 235
Piper —methysticum

(Kava Kava)...........) G-15, 443
Pulsatilla pratensis

(Pasque Flower)............: 572
Rhus — aromatica

(Sweet Sumach)............. 748
Santalum album

(Sandalwood)..............4 659
Serenoa repens

(Saw Palmetto).........4 G-21, 664
Smilax species

(Sarsaparilla)...........4 G-21, 66
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica).........4 G-18, 547
Viola tricolor (Heartsease). ... . 382

UTERINE BLEEDING

Capsella _ bursa-pastoris

(Shepherd's Purse) G-22, 690
Gossypium — herbaceum

(Levant Cotton)........: G-16, 468
Juniperus sabina

(Savin Tops)...........: G-21, 663
Sanguisorba officinalis

(Great Burnet), G-13,366
UTERINE PROLAPSE
Aletris farinosa (Alteris) ....... ll
UTERINE SPASTICITY
Claviceps purpurea (Ergot). . . . 280

Matricaria — recutita

(German Chamomile) .. . .G-12, 331

VARICOSE VEINS
(See under Veins, varicose,
obliteration of)

VEINS, VARICOSE, OBLITERATION OF
Achillea
(Yarrow)

millefolium
G-26, 833

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hamamelis _ virginiana

(Witch Hazel)..........4 G-26, 821
Lycopodium — clavatum

(Club MOSS)...........00005 196
Persicaria _ hydropiper

(Smartweed)..............-.4 699
Ruta graveolens (Rue)... . § G-21, 648
Sanguisorba officinalis

(Great Burnet),........ 4 G-13, 366
VERTIGO
Anamirta — cocculus

(Fish Berry)...........-085 312
Paris — quadrifolia

(Herb Paris)...........: G-14, 392
Strychnos nux vomica

(Nux Vomica).........4 G-18, 547
Viscum album

(European Mistletoe)... . G-11, 291
VOMITING
Aethusa — cynapium

(Fool's Parsley), . G-12, 316
Apocynum — cannabinum

(Indian-Hemp).............: A18
Aquilegia vulgaris

(Columbine). . .. G-9, 211
Asimina _ triloba

(American Pawpaw)......... 4 27
Nicotiana tabacum

(TobaCCO).............4 G-24, 762
WARTS
Anagallis arvensis

(Scarlet Pimpernel). . G-22, 668
Juniperus sabina

(Savin Tops)...........4 G-21, 663

WHEEZING, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
(See under Bronchial asthma)

WHOOPING COUGH
(See under Pertussis)

WOUND CARE, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN

Aristolochia clematitis
(Birthwort).............4 G-5, SO
Calendula officinalis
(Marigold). . . G-17, 497
Clematis recta (Clematis) .. G-8, 194

----- PAGE 146 -----
1-141

Asian Indications Index

Entries in this index are organized by specific indication, enabling you to quickly review the

botanicals used in Asian medicine for a particular diagnosis. For ease of comparison with

prescription and over-the-counter medications, the index employs the same nomenclature found in

the Indications Index of the PDR Companion Guide™. Under each heading, herbs are listed

alphabetically by accepted common name, with the scientific name shown in parentheses. An "I"

in parentheses indicates Indian usage; a "C" denotes Chinese medical applications. If an entry

lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant in the Herb Identification

Guide, the second to the herbal monograph. For more information on any of these botanicals,

be sure to check the appropriate underlying monograph.

ABORTION
{See under Pregnancy,
termination of)

ACHES, MUSCULAR
{See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

ACID INDIGESTION
{See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

ACNE, UNSPECIFIED
Duckweed
{Lemna minor) (C).... - G-10, 258

AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION DISORDERS
{See under Bronchial asthma)

ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE
Betel Nut {Piper betle) (1) ..G-4, 74
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) .. 0-8, 165

ALCOHOL INTOXICATION,

MANAGEMENT OF

Coffee {Coffea arabica) (1) .G-9, 202
Quinine {Cinchona

pubescens) (C)........4! G20, 626
Tamarind {Tamarindus
indica) (I)... . 0... eee eee! 753

AMENORRHEA
Aloe {Aloe barbadensis; Aloe
capensis; Aloe vera) (1) ...G-3, ie
Astragalus
{Astragalus species) (C), 2. 4
Bog Bean {Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). . . G-6, 110
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus) (1). G-7, 130
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (C). 182
Chinese Rhubarb

{Rheum palmatum) (C) ...G-8, 185
Henna

{Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. .0-14, 391
Myrrh {Commiphora

molmol) (C) .........4% -G-18, $34
Red-Rooted Sage {Salvia

miltiorrhiza) (C)..........-5 636
Safflower

{Carthamus tinctorius) (C)  ... 652
Saffron
{Crocus sativus) (C).... | G-21, 653

AMENORRHEA, SECONDARY
{See under Menstrual disorders)

AMNESIA
Lemon-Wood {Schisandra
sphenanthera) (C).......... 4 464

ANEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Arjun Tree

{Terminalia arjuna) (I)....... 39
Cassia

{Cassia angustifolia) (J)... .. | 684
Chocolate Vine

{Akebia quinata) (C) .
Fennel

{Foeniculum vulgare) (1) G-11,302
Henna

{Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. .0-14, 391
Lycium Berries

.{Lycium barbarum) (1,C). ... : A87
Nux Vomica {Strychnos nux

vomica) (I)... G-18,547
Plumbago {Plumbago

zeylanica) (C)t......2+02005 599

Senna {Cassia senna) (1) .. G-22,684

ANGINA
{See under Angina pectoris)

ANGINA PECTORIS
Ginkgo

{Ginkgo biloba) (C) .... 0-12, 342

() denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 147 -----
1-142/ANGINA PECTORIS

Red-Rooted Sage
{Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C).... . 5 636

ANOREXIA NERVOSA
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, 165
ANXIETY AND TENSION DUE TO
MENOPAUSE
{See under Menopause,

management of the

manifestations of)

ANXIETY DISORDERS, MANAGEMENT OF
Marijuana

{Cannabis sativa) (1,C) . . G-17, 500
Schisandra

{Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669
Soybean {Glycine soja) (C) G22, 707

APPETITE, STIMULATION OF
Basil

{Ocimum basilicum) (1) ...G-4, 64
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) (C) ....G-5, 86
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, 165
Clove {Syzygium

aromaticum) (I). G-8, 195
Coriander {Coriandrum

sativum) (C). G-9, 221
Costus {Saussurea

costus) (C).. ice eee 227
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare) (I).........-.-! Gl, 302
Fenugreek {Trigonella

foenum-graecum) (1) G-11, 304
Ginger

{Zingiber officinale) (1) . G-12, 339
Golden Shower Tree

{Cassia fistula) (1). G-13, 354
Green Tea {Camellia

sinensis) (1). G-13, 369

D

Guar Gum {Cyamopsis
tetragonoloba) (I).........- 376
Japanese Atractylodes
f{Atractylodes japonica) (C) ... 430
Nux Vomica {Strychnos nux

vomica) (1) G-18,547
Siberian Ginseng

{Eleutherococcus

senticosus) (C).............! 693
Tomato {Lycopersicon

esculentum) (I).........5 G74, 766

Tropical Almond

{Terminalia chebula) ().....- 772
Zedoary

{Curcuma zedoaria) (1) . G-26, 846

APPREHENSION
{See under Anxiety disorders,
management of)

ARTHRITIS
{See under Arthritis, unspecified;
Rheumatoid arthritis)

ARTHRITIS, RHEUMATOID
{See under Rheumatoid arthritis)

ARTHRITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (1)
Castor Oil Plant

{Ricinus communis) (1) ... G-7, 158
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, 165
Garlic {Allium sativum) (1) .G-12, 327
Red-Rooted Sage

{Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C)..... 4 636
Safflower

{Carthamus tinctorius) (1) .... 652

G-6, 103

ASCITES
Bitter Apple

{Citrullus colocynthis) (1) ..G-5, 83
Black Catnip

{Phyllanthus amarus) (1)... .. § 91
Celandine

{Chelidonium majus) (C) . G-8, 169
Giant Milkweed

{Calotropis gigantea) (1) ..... 338
Lycium Berries
{Lycium barbarum) (1). ..... : 487

ASTHMA, BRONCHIAL
{See under Bronchial asthma)

BELL'S PALSY
Castor Oil Plant

{Ricinus communis) (C) ..G-7, 158
Garlic {Allium sativum) (1) .G-12, 327
Star Anise

{Illicium verum) (I)... .. G23, 725

BERIBERI
Walnut {Juglans regia) (C) G-25, 793

BITE WOUNDS
Bistort
{Persicaria bistorta) (C) . . G-5, 82

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Calotropis

{Calotropis procerd) (I)... .. - 141
Cane-Reed

(Costus speciosa) (Ih... 11... 146
Cotton {Gossypium

hirsutum) ())........2-.-2--- 228
Great Burnet {Sanguisorba

officinalis) (C).........! G-13, 366
Scarlet Pimpernel (Anagallis

arvensis) (C)..........! G22, 668
Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium

ambrosioides) (C)...... 4 G-26, 828

BITES, POISONOUS
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga
racemosd) (C).
Rauwolfia {Rauwolfia
serpentina) (l).............! 63i
Red Sandalwood
{Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) ... 635

G-5,92

BITTER TASTE
Chinese Thoroughwax

{Bupleurum Chinese) (C).... . 187
BLEEDING ASSOCIATED WITH TOOTH
EXTRACTION
{See under Bleeding, gingival)

BLEEDING, GINGIVAL
Henbane
{Hyoscyamus niger) (I) . . G14, 389

BLEEDING, POSTPARTUM
Cane-Reed

{Costus speciosa) (I)......... 146
BLEEDING, VAGINAL, ASSOCIATED WITH
PREGNANCY
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album) (C). G-11, 291

BOILS, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
{See under Furunculosis,
symptomatic relief of)

BREAST CANCER
{See under Carcinoma, breast)

BREAST CARCINOMA
{See under Carcinoma, breast)

BRONCHIAL ASTHMA

Arjun Tree

{Terminalia arjuna) ()....... 39
Asa Foetida

{Ferula foetida) (I)..........: AT

Bamboo {Arundinaria
Japonica) (C). G-4, 60
Betel Nut {Piper betle) (I) ..G-4, 74

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 148 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

Black Nightshade
(Solanum nigrum) (1) ... .G-6, 101
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (1). G-6, 103
Cabbage (Brassica
oleracea) (I) G-7, 134

Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum

camphora) (1). G-7, 143
Costus
(Saussurea costus) (LC). ....: 227

Garden Cress

(Lepidium sativum) (1) . . .G-12, 326
Ginkgo

(Ginkgo biloba) (C)... . G-12, 342
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (I,C) G14, 389
Indian Squill

(Urginea indica) ()........ ¢ A21
Jequirity
(Abrus precatorius) ()...... ¢ 435

Jimson Weed
(Datura stramonium) (C) G-IS, 436
Ma-Huang (Ephedra

sinica) (C)..... eee eee G-16, 488
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I). ...........: 545
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (I)... .......46! G-i8, 547
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (J). .... | 644
Walnut (Juglans regia) (C) G-25, 793
Zedoary

(Curcuma zedoaria) (1) . G-26, 846

BRONCHIAL CONGESTION
Balloon-Flower (Platycodon

grandiflorum) (C)...........: 58
BRONCHITIS, ACUTE
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (1) ..-.... 39
Arrowroot

(Maranta arundinacea) (I)... . + A3

Betel Nut (Piper betle) (1)
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....G6, 101
Coconut Palm

(Cocos nucifera) (1)... . : G9, 201
Date Palm

(Phoenix dactylifera) (1) . .G-10, 246
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare) (I)........ 0.00! G-11, 302
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum) (I).

cd, 74

G-11, 304

COLD, COMMON, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF/I-143

Garlic (Allium sativum) (I) G-12, 327
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G-14, 391
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica) (I).... 6.0. eee ees 419
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (I)... . | 431
Jequirity

(Abrus precatorius) (C)..... ¢ 435
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus) (I)... . 0.2.2! G-16, 465
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) (I). ...........: G-16, 469

Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (1) G16, 483
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (I). , G18, 547
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) (I). ........ 0. ered 550
Papaya

(Carica papaya) (I)... .. 4 G-19, 565
Plantain

(Musa paradisiaca) (1)... ... : 597
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (J)... .. | 644
Saffron

(Crocus sativus) (I)... .. G21, 653
Zedoary

(Curcuma zedoaria) (1) . G-26, 846

BRONCHITIS, CHRONIC
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (C) ...G4, 101
Indian Squill

(Urginea indica) ()........ ¢ 421
Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (C) G-ie, 483

BRONCHOSPASM, REVERSIBLE
(See under Bronchial asthma)

CALCINOSIS
(See under Renal calculi)

CARBUNCLES
(See under Furunculosis,
symptomatic relief of)

CARCINOMA, BREAST
Reed Herb
(Phragmites communis) (C) . .. 639

CARCINOMA, LUNG, SMALL CELL
Astragalus
(Astragalus species) (C)......: 54

CARCINOMA, STOMACH
Celandine
(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169

CARDIAC FAILURE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
Arjun Tree
(Terminalia arjuna) (D....... 39

CHEILITIS, ACTINIC
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) (1). G-4, 38

CHEST PAIN, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Benzoin (Styrax benzoin) (C) ... .73
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C).... - 187
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (C)......... 234
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1) . . G-13, 369
Safflower

(Carthamus tinctorius) (1) .... 652
Sandalwood

(Santalum album) (C).......4 659
Siam Benzoin (Styrax

tonkinesis) (C)..........+444 692
Sumatra Benzoin (Styrax

paralleloneurum) (C).......° 738
CHOLERA
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, ies
Costus

(Saussurea costus) (I,C)..... : 227
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus) (1). G-ie, 465
Lotus (Nelumbo

nucifera) (1) G-16, 481
Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (I). .G-18, 545
CIRRHOSIS, LIVER
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (1) .......+ 39
Jasmine (Jasminum

officinale) (C)........ 4 G-15, 432

COLD, COMMON, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

(See also under Influenza

syndrome, symptomatic

relief of)
Bitter Orange

(Citrus aurantium) (C) ... .G-5, 86
Ginger

(Zingiber officinale) (C) . .G-12, 339

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 149 -----
1-144/COLD, COMMON, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Oregano

(Origanum vulgare) (C) . G-19, 559
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... 583
COLIC, BILIARY, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) ... 635

COLIC, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Aloe {Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) (I) ...0-3, 16
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum) (I). G-8, 195
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) )..........5 G-9, 245
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I). .........++¢ 545
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica) (1)... . : 715
Walnut (Juglans regia) (1) G25, 793
COUTTS
Fenugreek (Trigonella

foenum-graecum) (I). G-11, 304

COLONOPATHY
Rice (Oryza sativa) (I)... . | G21, 643
CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE,
ADJUNCT IN
(See also under Edema,

adjunctive therapy in)
Astragalus

(Astragalus species) (C)...... : 54

CONJUNCTIVITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Catechu (Acacia catechu) (1) ... 163
Hibiscus

(Hibiscus sabdariffa) (C) .G-14, 394
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica) (1)... . - 715

CONSTIPATION
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) (1) ...G-3, 16
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) ()......! G-4, 38
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) ()..........5 47
Asparagus (Asparagus

officinalis) (C)..........5 G-4, 52
Cassia (Cassia

angustifolia) (I). ...........4 684

Castor Oil Plant
(Ricinus communis) (C) ..

Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (I)... . : 228
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (1,C).......: 234

Garlic (Allium sativum) (1) .G-12, 327
Golden Shower Tree (Cassia

fistula) (D.... 0. eee eed G-13, 354
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis
tetragonoloba) (1).......... 376
Indian Nettle (Acalypha

indica) (D... eee eee A19
Kamala (Mallotus

philippinensis) (D..........: A42
Morning Glory

(Ipomoea hederacea) (1,C) .. . .523
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (l).........+064 G-18, 547
Peanut (Arachis

hypogaea) (I... 6. eee eed 575
Pineapple

(Ananas comosus) (1). ......: 593

Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (I) ... 612
Purple Gromwell

(Lithospermum

erytrorhizon) (C)...........4 619
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Senna (Cassia senna) (I) .. G-22, 684
Spurge

(Euphorbia resinifera) (1) .... 716
Tamarind

(Tamarindus indica) (J)... . . - 753
Turmeric
(Curcuma domestica) (1)... . ” 715

Walnut (Juglans regia) (C) G-25, 793
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) (1) .. 799

CONSTIPATION, HYPERTONIC SPHINCTER
Chinese Rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum) (C) ...G8, 185

CONTRACEPTION
(See under Pregnancy,
prevention of)

CONVULSIVE EPISODES, CONTROL OF
Chocolate Vine

(Akebia quinata) (C)......... 189
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (I).........: 234
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (C) . .G-14, 389
Pellitory

(Anacyclus Pyrethrum) (1) ....577

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CORYZA, ACUTE
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)

COUGH, CHRONIC
Poppyseed (Papaver

somniferum) (C)....... 5 G20, 609
Storax (Liquidambar
orientalis) (J)..........5 G23, 734

COUGH, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Anemarrhena (Anemarrhena

asphodeloides) (C).......... 31
Arrowroot

(Maranta arundinacea) (I). 43
Asparagus (Asparagus

officinalis) (C)..........5 G-4, 52

Bamboo (Arundinaria

Japonica) (C). . . G-4, 60
Beet (Beta vulgaris) (I)... . | G-4, 67
Betel Nut (Piper betle) (I) . .G-4, 74

Bitter Orange

(Citrus aurantium) (C) ....G-S, 86
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....G-6, 101
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (I)... ... : G-6, 103
Cabbage

(Brassica oleracea) (1) . . . G-7, 134
Cane-Reed

(Costus speciosa) (I). ........ 146
Chocolate Vine

(Akebia quinata) (C).........- 189
Coconut Palm

(Cocos nucifera) (1)... . | G-9, 201
Coriander

(Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Costus

(Saussurea costus) (1,C)..... 227
Cotton (Gossypium

hirsutum) (DI... . 00.000 228
Cotton Tree (Cochlospermum

gossypium) (1)... .......020% 229
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare) (I)............! G-H, 302

Fenugreek (Trigonella

foenum-graecum) (I).
Flax

(Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313
Giant Milkweed

(Calotropis gigantea) (1). . . . 338
Ground Ivy

(Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372

G-11, 304

(D) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 150 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

Henna (Lawsonia

inermis) (D.......++.445 G-14, 391
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (I)... . # A31
Jequirity

(Abrus precatorius) (I)... ... 435
Jimson Weed (Datura

stramonium) (C).......: G5, 436

Lemon-Wood (Schisandra
sphenanthera) (C).
Licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra) (C) 0-16, 469
Luff a (Luffa aegyptica) (C) G-16, 483

464

Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... ¢ 486
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (C).... . A87
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica) (C).... G-16, 488
Marijuana (Cannabis

sativa) (LC)... .....004 G-17, 500
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (1) 545
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (I). .... : 550
Papaya

(Carica papaya) (I)..... 4 G-19, 565
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... : 583
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) (1) G20, 609
Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (1) ... 612
Radish

(Raphanus sativus) (C) .. G-20, 628
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (I)... .. 4 644
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C)——669
White Mustard

(Sinapis alba) (C)...... J 0-25,80s
Wild Thyme

(Thymus serpyllum) (C) . G-26, SIS

COUGH, WHOOPING
(See under Pertussis)

CROUP
Indian Nettle
(Acalypha indica) (I)... .... | AI9

CYSTITIS
Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (1) ..... 228

DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF/I-145

DEAFNESS
Chinese Thoroughwax
(Bupleurum Chinese) (C)..... 187

DEBILITY
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (I)... . : 431
Rice (Oryza sativa) (C) ... G21, 643

DEHYDRATION, TREATMENT OF
Anemarrhena (Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) (C) 31
Gotu Kola
(Centella asiatica) (1) ... G13, 359

DELIRIUM
Chinese Rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum) (C) . .. G-8, 185

DERMATITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Celandine
(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169
DERMATOSES, CORTICOSTEROID-
RESPONSIVE
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

DIABETES MELLITUS
(See under Hyperglycemia,
control of, adjunct to diet)

DIARRHEA, CHRONIC
Pomegranate

(Punica granatum) (C) .. G20, 605
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) (1) G20, 609
Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (1) ... 612
Salep (Orchis species) (1) 657
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (C). .. . : 772
DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Acacia (Acacia arabica) (1) 3
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) (C). G-4, 38
Arrowroot

(Maranta arundinacea) (1)... . : A3
Bael (Aegle marmelos) (1). 58
Black Catnip

(Phyllanthus amarus) ()..... | 91

Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (C) G-6, 103
Carambola
(Averrhoa carambola) (1)... . - 148 I

Cayenne
(Capsicum annuum) (1)

Chicory (Cichorium
intybus) (1)

Chinese Cinnamon
(Cinnamomum

.. G8, ies

G-8, 181

aromaticum) (I1,C). 182
Chinese Rhubarb

(Rheum palmatum) (C) .. .G-8, 185
Coffee (Coffea arabica) (1) . G-9, 202
Cotton Tree (Cochlospermum

gossypium) (1)
Cumin

(Cuminum cyminum) (1) . .G-9, 237
Fennel (Foeniculum

vulgare) (C).........--5 G-11, 302
Fever Bark (Alstonia

constricta) (1,C)
Flax

(Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (C) .. G13, 359
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1,C) G-13, 369
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (C) . .G-14, 389
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G-14, 391
Japanese Atractylodes

(Atractylodes japonica) (C) . . . 430
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (1,C)
Lotus

(Nelumbo nucifera) (1) .. .G-16, 48i
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa) (1,C) . . G-17, 500
Nepalese Cardamom

(Amomum aromaticum) (C) ...540
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (\)..........+.: 545
Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (C) . G-18, 545
Oak Gall

229

305

. Bi

(Quercus infectoria) (I)... .. § 550
Pomegranate
(Punica granatum) (1). . G20, 605

Poppyseed (Papaver

somniferum) (C).......4 G-20, 609
Radish (Raphanus
sativus) (C)............4 G20, 628

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 151 -----
1-146/DIARRHEA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF

Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) . . . 635
Rice {Oryza sativa) (1,C) .. G21, 643
Smartweed

{Persicaria hydropiper) (C) . . . 699
Sumbul

{Ferula sumbul) (D..... | G23, 738
Tree of Heaven

{Ailanthus altissima) (C)... . - 710
Wild Thyme

{Thymus serpyllum) (C) . .G-26, SIs

DIGESTIVE DISORDERS, SYMPTOMATIC.
RELIEF OF

Areca Nut

{Areca catechu) (C). G-4, 38
Arrowroot

{Maranta arundinacea) (I). 43
Bael {Aegle marmelos) (I). 58

Betel Nut {Piper betle) (I) ..G-4, 74
Birthwort {Aristolochia

clematitis) (C). G-5, SO
Black Nightshade {Solanum

nigrum) (I) G-6, 101
Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (1). G-6, 108

Calamus

{Acorus calamus) (1,C) ...G-7, 138
Castor Oil Plant

{Ricinus communis) (1) ... G-7, 158
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) .. G-S, 165
Chicory {Cichorium

intybus) (I)........++--4 G-8, ISI
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (I,C)........... 182

Coriander {Coriandrum

sativum) (C) G-9, 221
Croton Seeds {Croton
tiglium) (Dh... eee eee 234

Ginger

{Zingiber officinale) (I) . G-12, 339
Ginseng {Panax ginseng) (C) . .. 346
Guar Gum {Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba) (I)........... 376
Indian Squill

{Urginea indica) (I)........ 4 A
Jambolan {Syzygium

cumini) (I)... 0... eee 429

Japanese Mint {Mentha
arvensis piperascens) (I,C) . .. 431
Lemon {Citrus limon) (I)...... # 460

Morning Glory

{Ipomoea hederacea) (1,C) .. . 523
Neem {Antelaea

azadirachta) (I)........: G-IS, 539
Nepalese Cardamom

{Amomum aromaticum) (C) . . .540
Northern Prickly Ash

{Zanthoxylum

americanum) (D............: 545
Nutmeg

{Myristica fragrans) (C) . .G-1s, 545
Oak Gall

{Quercus infectoria) (I)... .. ! 550
Onion {Allium cepa) (1) ... G19, 557
Pineapple

{Ananas comosus) (I. ...... 593
Radish

{Raphanus sativus) (1) .. G20, 628
Senburi

{Swertia japonic a) (C).....682
Smartweed

{Persicaria hydropiper) (C) . . .699
Star Anise {Illicium

verum) (I)........+-.--! G23, 725
Tomato {Lycopersicon

esculentum) (D........-! GA, 766
Turmeric

{Curcuma domestica) (LC) . .. 775

DISLOCATED JOINTS
Peanut
fArachis hypogaea) (I)...... : 575

DROPSY
{See under Edema, idiopathic)

DYSENTERY
Arjun Tree

{Terminalia arjuna) (1) ........ 39
Arrowroot

{Maranta arundinacea) (1). ... : 43
Black Catnip

{Phyllanthus amarus) (1)... . . ‘ 91
Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (I)... .. . Ge, 103
Coriander

{Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Cotton {Gossypium

hirsutum) (I). .............-2 228
Cotton Tree {Cochlospermum

gossypium) (I)...........4-- 229
Fennel

{Foeniculum vulgare) (1) .0-11, 302
Figs {Ficus carica) (C) ... G-11, 310

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Gotu Kola {Centella

asiatica) (C)...........5 G-13, 359
Great Burnet {Sanguisorba

officinalis) (C).........5 G-13, 366
Ground Ivy

{Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) (C) . .G-14, 389
Henna

{Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G14, 391
Jasmine {Jasminum

officinale) (C).........5 G-15, 432
Knotweed {Polygonum

aviculare) (C).........4 G-15, 448
Oak Gall {Quercus

infectoria) (LC)..........0... 550
Oregano

{Origanum vulgare) (C) . .G-19, 559
Oriental Arborvitae

{Thuja orientalis) (C)....... ! 560
Picrorhiza

{Picrorhiza kurroa) (C)..... ! 589
Pomegranate

{Punica granatum) (1,C) . G20, 605

Poppyseed {Papaver

somniferum) (1,C)...... 4 G20, 609
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (I) ... 612
Smartweed

{Persicaria hydropiper) (C) . . .699
Star Anise

{Illicium verum) (I)... .. | G-23, 725
Tree of Heaven

f{Ailanthus altissima) (C). ... - 710
Tropical Almond

{Terminalia chebula) (C) ..... 772

Walnut {Juglans regia) (1) .G25, 793
DYSMENORRHEA, UNSPECIFIED,
SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) (1) . . G-14, 389
Henna

{Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G-14, 391
Jasmine

{Jasminum officinale) (1) .G-1s, 432
Sumbul

{Ferula sumbul) ()).....: G23, 738
Tree of Heaven

fAilanthus altissima) (C).... ° 770
DYSPEPSIA

{See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

(@ denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 152 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

DYSPNEA
Bog Bean (Menyanth.es

trifoliata) (C).. 0... 6... G-6, 110
Ginger (Zingiber

officinale) (C).........4 G-12, 339
Jimson Weed (Datura

stramonium) (C)....... 4 G-15, 436
Lemon-Wood (Schisandra

sphenanthera) (C)..........4 464
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669

DYSTOCIA
Saffron
(Crocus sativus) (C).... G21, 653

DYSURIA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....G6, 101
Coconut Palm

(Cocos nucifera) (1).
Coriander

(Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Duckweed

(Lemna minor) (C)..... | G-10, 258
Grape (Vitis vinifera) (J) .. G-13, 362
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G-14, 391
Jambolan

G-9, 201

(Syzygium cumini) (I)... .... 5 A29
Plantain
(Musa paradisiaca) (1). ..... : 597

Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (1) ... 612
Rauwolfia
(Rauwolfia serpentina) (1) ....63i

ECZEMA, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

EDEMA, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) (C)..... | G-4, 38
Celandine -

(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (C)........- 234
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica) (C)
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) (C) . G22, 668

EDEMA, IDIOPATHIC
Alisma (Alisma plantago-

aquatica) (C). . G-3, 13

Bog Bean (Menyanthes
trifoliata) (C). 6.6... 066s Ge, 110
Cayenne (Capsicum
annuum) (1).
Chinese Rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum) (C) . . .G-8, 185
Coriander
(Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Duckweed

G8, 165

(Lemna minor) (C)..... | G-10, 258
Indian Squill
(Urginea indica) (I)........ 5 421

Japanese Atractylodes
(Atractylodes japonica) (C) .. . 430
Morning Glory

(Ipomoea hederacea) (C).... : 523
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lanced) (C).... 706
Vervain

(Verbena officinalis) (C) .G25, 788
ENTERITIS

Figs (Ficus carica) (C) ... G1, 310
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lanced) (C).... : 706

ENURESIS
Schisandra
(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669

EPILEPSY
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (I). ......... 5 AT
Bistort

(Persicaria bistorta) (C) .. 0-s, 82
Calotropis

(Calotropis procera) (I) ...... 141
Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (1)... . - 228
Duckweed “

(Lemna minor) (C) G-10, 258

Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) I)... G-13, 359
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) (I)... 6. es A33
Picrorhiza (Picrorhiza

Kurroa) (C). 0... 0.00. 589
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis) (C).........: G23, 734

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Asiatic Dogwood

(Cornus officinalis) (C) 51

FEVER, REDUCTION OF/I-147

Betel Nut {Piper betle) (I) ..G-4, 74
Fenugreek {Trigonella

foenum-graecum) (C) ....G-11, 304
Nutmeg {Myristica

fragrans) (1)... ........ -G-IS, 545
Siberian Ginseng

{Eleutherococcus

senticosus) (C)... 00.220 eel 693

Walnut {Juglans regia) (C) G-25, 793

ERYSIPELAS
Black Nightshade

{Solanum nigrum) (C) ...Ge, 101
Duckweed

{Lemna minor) (C)..... ‘ G-IO, 258
Ground Ivy

{Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (1) ... 612

EXHAUSTION
Arjun Tree {Terminalia

arjuna) (I... ee ee eee 39
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (C)..... 0... 182
Japanese Atractylodes

{Atractylodes japonica) (C) ... 430
Lotus {Nelumbo

nucifera) (I)..........04 G-ie, 48:

EYE SIGHT IMPAIRMENT
Lycium Berries
{Lycium barbarum) (C)..... : A487

EYES, WATERY
{See under Lacrimation,
symptomatic relief of)

FATIGUE, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1) .. .G-13, sea
Salep (Orchis species) (I)... .. : 557
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C)____669

FEVER, REDUCTION OF
Anemarrhena (Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) (C).......... 31
Basil
(Ocimum basilicum) (1) ...G-4, 64
Behen (Moringa oleifera) (1) ....67
Bistort

(Persicaria bistorta) (C)_ . .0-5, 82
Black Catnip
(Phyllanthus amarus) (1)... .. | 91

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 153 -----
1-148/FEVER, REDUCTION OF

Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (1). G-6, 103
Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). G-6, HO
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus) (C) G-7, 130
Calotropis

{Calotropis procera) (I)... .. - 141
Cane-Reed

{Costus speciosa) (1). 146
Carambola

(Averrhoa carambola) (I). 148
Cassia

(Cassia angustifolia) (1) . . 684
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum) (1). .G-8, ies
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C). . . . .187
Coffee (Coffea arabica) (1) .G-9, 202
Cotton (Gossypium

hirsutum) (I)... 202. ee 228
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum) (I)... .G-11, 304
Garlic (Allium sativum) (1)  G-12, 327
Golden Shower Tree

(Cassia fistula) (J)... ... S G-13, 354
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1) . G-13, 369
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) . G14, 391
Jambolan

(Syzygium cumini) (JD... 2... ¢ A429
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus) (JD. ... 6. 0 G-ie, 465
Lotus (Nelumbo

nucifera) (I). G-ie, 481
Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (I) .G-16, 483
Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... § A86
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica) (C). . . . G-16,488
Neem (Antelaea

azadirachta) (I). ....... 5 6-18,539
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I)...........-. 545
Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (1) G-18,. 545
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (C).........004 G-IS,547
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) (1)..............4 550

Oregano

(Origanum vulgare) (C) . G-19, 559
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C). ... . : 583
Picrorhiza

(Picrorhiza kurroa) (C)..... ! 589
Pineapple

(Ananas comosus) (1)... ... - 593
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens) (I,C)........: G20, 626
Rauwolfia (Rauwolfia

serpentinad) (Ih... see eee ed 631
Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (I) . . . 635
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (I)... . 4 644
Saffron

(Crocus sativus) (I... .. J G-21, 653
Sandalwood

(Santalum album) (I)... 1... | 659
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis) (I. .........4 G-23, 734
Tamarind (Tamarindus

indica) (Di... cee ee 153
Zedoary

(Curcuma zedoaria) (1) . G-26, 846
FLATULENCE, RELIEF OF
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (J). ......... 4 AT
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....G-6, 101
Black Pepper (Piper

nigrum) (I... 0.2.0.0 G4, 103
Cardamom = (Elettaria

cardamomum) (C)...... ! G-7, 149
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species) (1) .... 177
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum) (I)........ | G-8, 195
Costus (Saussurea

costus) (C). 0. oc 227
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) (IJ... . 1.0... G-9, 245
Golden Shower Tree (Cassia

fistula) (DI. .. 2 ee G-13, 354
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) (I)... 2.0.0 433
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus) (I). G-16, 465
Morning Glory (Ipomoea

hederacea) (I).......-.....: 523

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I)... .........5 545
Radish

(Raphanus sativus) (1) G-20, 628
Star Anise (Illicium

verum) (I).........22..5 G-23, 725
Tomato (Lycopersicon

esculentum) (I). ........4 G-24, 766
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (I)... .. ! 772
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica) (1)... . 775
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) (I). . 799
Wild Thyme

(Thymus serpyllum) (C) . .G-26, 815

FLU SYMPTOMS
(See under Influenza syndrome,
symptomatic relief of)

FURUNCULOSIS
Bistort

(Persicaria bistorta) (C) ..G-5, 82
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (C) ...G-6, 101
Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C)... 2... G-6, 110
Burdock (Arctium

lappa) (C)..........2.05 G-7, 128
Castor Oil Plant

(Ricinus communis) (C) ..G-7, 158
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species) (C) ....177
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (C)........: 23*
Ground Ivy

(Glechoma_ hederacea) (C) .... 372
Hibiscus

(Hibiscus sabdariffa) (C) .G-14, 394
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra) (C)  .G-ie, 469
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol) (C). G-18, 534
Plumbago (Plumbago

zeylanica) (C).........2.0004 599
Red-Rooted Sage

(Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C)..... J 636
Vervain

(Verbena officinalis) (C) .G-25, 788
White Nettle

(Lamium album) (C)... . | .G-25, 806

() denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 154 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

FURUNCULOSIS, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Calotropis
(Calotropis procera) (I). ....- 141

GASTRITIS
Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (C). G-6, 103
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (1) ... 612
Tropical Almond

{Terminalia chebula) (I). .... - 772

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Black Catnip

{Phyllanthus amarus) (I). . 91
Bog Bean {Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). . G-6, 110
Cabbage {Brassica

oleracea) (I). G-7, 134
Cardamom {Elettaria

cardamomum) (C). G-7, 149
Clove {Syzygium

aromaticum) (1) G-s, 195
Costus {Saussurea

COStUS) (1,C), 227
Date Palm {Phoenix

dactylifera) (D... 6.0.00: G-IO, 246
Jatamansi {Nardostachys

Jatamansi) (I)... ......0.0204 433
Lemongrass {Cymbopogon

citratus) (ID..... 0... G-ie, 46S
Oak Gall {Quercus

infectoria) ()...... 000. e eed 550
Pomegranate

{Punica granatum) (1) G20, eos
Poppyseed {Papaver

somniferum) (C). G-20,609

Southern Tsangshu

{Atractylodes lancea) (C)....° 706
Tropical Almond

{Terminalia chebula) (1,C) ....772
Turmeric

{Curcuma domestica) (C)....° 775
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT, SMOOTH
MUSCLE SPASM
{See under Spasm, smooth

muscle)
GENITOURINARY TRACT, SMOOTH
MUSCLE SPASM
{See under Spasm, smooth

muscle)

GINGIVITIS
Acacia {Acacia arabicd) (Il) . ... 3

Basil

{Ocimum basilicum) (C) .. . G-4, 64
Tropical Almond

{Terminalia chebula) ()..... - 772

GONORRHEA
Cotton

{Gossypium hirsutum) (1). 22s
Cowhage

{Mucuna pruriens) (1) 230
Flax

{Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313
Grape {Vitis vinifera) (I) . . G-13, 362
Knotweed {Polygonum

aviculare) (C).........4 G15, 448
Oak Gall {Quercus
infectoria) (Do... sce eee ees 550

Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (1) . .612
Sandalwood

{Santalum album) (1). 659
GOUT, MANAGEMENT OF SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS
Bog Bean {Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). . . G-6, 110
Cabbage {Brassica

oleracea) (I) G-7, 134
Calotropis

{Calotropis procera) (I)...... 141
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, 165
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale) (D..........! G-9, 245
Golden Shower Tree {Cassia

fistula) (1). G-13,354
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (1) ...612

HAIR LOSS
Cashew {Anacardium

occidentale) (I)... .....! G-7, 157
Oriental Arborvitae

{Thuja orientalis) (C). 560
HALITOSIS
Clove (Syzygium

aromaticum) (1) ... >... . G-8,195
HALITOSIS, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN
Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum verum) (1) .G-8, 190
Dill

(Anethum graveolens) (1) G-10, 252

HANSEN'S DISEASE
(See under Leprosy)

HEART FAILURE /I-149

HEADACHE
Adrue

(Cyperus articulatus) (C) ...G-3, 6
Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). G-6, 110
Chicory (Cichorium

intybus) (I)... G-8, 181
Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (0). . 228
Date Palm

(Phoenix dactylifera) (1) . .G-10, 246
Grape (Vitis vinifera) (1) . . G13, 362
Henna (Lawsonia

inermis) (I... . 1.2 eee ee G-14, 391
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (1,C) .. 431
Jasmine (Jasminum

officinale) (I). .........4 G-15, 432
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) (I)... 0. eee 433
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) (I)... .......0-4 G-ie, 469
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I)......0.0..04 545
Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (1) . .G-1s, 545
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C). 583
Radish

(Raphanus sativus) (1) . . G20, 628
Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) ... 635
Saffron

(Crocus sativus) (I). .... | G21, 653

HEADACHE, MIGRAINE
Coffee (Coffea arabicd) (1) .G-9, 202
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1,C) .G-13, 369

HEADACHE, TENSION
(See under Pain, unspecified) .

HEADACHE, VASCULAR
(See under Headache, migraine)

HEARING, IMPAIRMENT
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (C)..... 4 487.
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640

HEART FAILURE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

(I) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 155 -----
1-150/HEART FAILURE, CONGESTIVE

HEART FAILURE, CONGESTIVE
(See under Congestive heart
failure, adjunct in)

HEARTBURN
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

HEAT STROKE
Sandalwood

(Santalum album) (1). ...... 659
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica) (C)....: 715

HELMINTHIASIS
Agrimony
(Agrimonia eupatoria) (C) .G-3, 10
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe
capensis; Aloe vera) (1) ...G-3, 16
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (C) 47
Calamus

(Acorus calamus) (I). G-7, i138
Calotropis

(Calotropis procera) (I)... ... 141
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (I,C).... 234

Dill
(Anethum graveolens) (1) G-10, 252
Giant Milkweed

(Calotropis gigantea) (1). . . . 338
Indian Squill (Urginea

indica) (1). 421
Kamala (Mallotus

philippinensis) (1) 442

Knotweed (Polygonum
aviculare) (C) -h_ .1 .. .CMS, 448
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon
citratus) (I) ...
Lotus (Nelumbo
nucifera) (I)
Morning Glory
(Ipomoea hederacea) (1,C) ....»23
Neem (Antelaea

G-ie, 465

-G-16, 481

azadirachta) (1). . . 0-18,539
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (1). 545
Onion (Allium cepd) (C) .. G-19,557
Papaya

(Carica papaya) (1) ....'. .G-19, sea
Plantain

(Musa paradisiaca) (1)...... : 597

Plumbago

(Plumbago zeylanica) (C) ....599
Pomegranate

(Punica granatum) (C) . . G20, 605
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (1)... .. : 772
Turmeric
(Curcuma domestica) (I)... . ° 715

Walnut (Juglans regia) (1) G-25, 793

HEMATEMESIS
Adrue

(Cyperus articulatus) (C) .. G3, 6
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (1) . . G14, 389

Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... § A86
Pineapple

(Ananas comosus) (l)....... 4 593

Red Sandalwood
(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) . . . 635

HEMATURIA
Chocolate Vine

(Akebia quinata) (C)........ 189
Cleavers

(Galium aparine) (C).......- 193

Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (1) G-16, 483
Oriental Arborvitae
(Thuja orientalis) (C).......: 560

HEMOPTYSIS
Asparagus (Asparagus

officinalis) (C). . G-4, 52
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) (C) .. .346
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba

officinalis) (C). G-13, 366
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (I) ..... 550
Oriental Arborvitae

(Thuja orientalis) (C) ...... . .560
Pineapple

(Ananas comosus) (I)....... : 593
Turmeric ? /

(Curcuma domestica) (C) .... .775

HEMORRHAGE, NASAL
Coriander

(Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Gotu Kola (Centella

asiatica) (C). G-13, 359
Great Burnet (Sanguisorba
officinalis) (C) G-13, 366

Henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger) (1) .. G-14, 389

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES.

Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... § A86
Oriental Arborvitae

(Thuja orientalis) (C)....... 4 560
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Turmeric
{Curcuma domestica) (C).... ! 715

HEMORRHOIDS
Acacia (Acacia arabicd) (I). 3
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (1).
Cabbage

(Brassica oleracea) (1) ...G-7, 134
Carambola

(Averrhoa carambola) (I)... . . 148
Coriander (Coriandrum

G-6, 103

sativum) (1,C). . . G-9, 221
Garden Cress (Lepidium
sativum) (I). G-12, 326

Grape (Vitis vinifera) (I) .. G-13, 362
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (I)... .. . 487
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (I,C) ....550
Oleander

(Nerium oleander) (1) ... G-19, 555

Papaya

(Carica papaya) (1). . G-19, 565
Picrorhiza

(Picrorhiza kurroa) (C)..... : 589

Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (I) ...612
Tamarind

(Tamarindus indica) (1). .... ? 753
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (D)..... : 772

HEMOSTASIS, AN AID IN
Agrimony

(Agrimonia eupatoria) (C) .G-3, 10
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) ().......- 39
Basil

(Ocimum basilicum) (C) ...G4, 64

HEPATITIS, CHRONIC
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) (C) ...... G4, 38

HEPATITIS, UNSPECIFIED
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (C) ...G-6, 101
Jasmine (Jasminum

officinale) (C). G-15, 432

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 156 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

Jequirity (Abrus

precatorius) (C). : .. 435
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669
HERNIA, UNSPECIFIED
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare) (C). G-11, 302
Fenugreek {Trigonella
foenum-graecum) (C) . G-ll, 304
Tobacco

(Nicotiana tabacum) (1) . G-24, 762
HERPES ZOSTER INFECTIONS
Hibiscus

(Hibiscus sabdariffa) (C) G-14, 394
HICCUP
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) .... G-6, 101
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (I)... ... G-6, 103
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (I)... 2. ? 772

HYPERACIDITY, GASTRIC, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Lemon (Citrus limon) (1)... . 460

HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
Alisma (Alisma_plantago-

aquatica) (C). . G-3, 13
HYPERGLYCEMIA, CONTROL OF,
ADJUNCT TO DIET
Alisma (Alisma_plantago-

aquatica) (C). G-3, 13
Anemarrhena (Anemarrhena

asphodeloides) (C). 31
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (1) 39
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus .

species) (1). 177
Divi-Divi (Caesalpinia

bonduceila) (1). 253
Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C).. 1... § A86
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (C) . 1... § A87
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (I). .. G-IS,547
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) (1). . . Le 550
Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) .. . 635

Rehmannia

(Rehmannia_ glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Rice (Oryza sativa) (C) ... .G-21, 643
Salep (Orchis species) (1). . . 657
HYPERHIDROSIS
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (1). 39
Asiatic Dogwood

(Cornus officinalis) (C). 51
Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C). . A86
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (1,C) .... 550
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia_ glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (1)... . . 644

Soybean (Glycine soja) (C) G-22, 707

HYPERTENSION
Alisma (Alisma_plantago-

aquatica) (C). G-3, 13
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (1), 2... 39
Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... § A86
Rauwolfia

(Rauwolfia serpentina) (I) .... 631
Sumbul

(Ferula sumbul) (1). G-23, 738

HYPERTENSION, ESSENTIAL

(See. under Hypertension)
HYPERTENSIVE CRISES

(See under Hypertension)
HYPNOTIC

(See under Sleep, induction of)

HYPOSALIVATION

Lemon-Wood  (Schisandra

sphenanthera) (C). 464
HYSTERIA, ACUTE
Calotropis

(Calotropis procera) (1)... ... 141
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (1) ... .G-13, 359

IMMUNODEFICIENCY, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Infection, tendency to)

IMPETIGO CONTAGIOSA
Burning Bush

(Dictamnus albus) (C) ...G-7, 130
Oak Gall
(Quercus infectoria) (1)... . 550

ITCHING, SUNBURN /I-151

IMPOTENCE, MALE
(See under Erectile dysfunction)

INDIGESTION
(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

INFECTION, TENDENCY TO
Rehmannia
(Rehmannia_ glutinosa) (C) .... 640

INFECTIONS, FUNGAL, UNSPECIFIED
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) (C) G-3, 16
Calamus

(Acorus calamus) (C) ....G-7, 138
Onion (Allium cepa) (C) .. .G-19, 557

INFECTIONS, NON-SPECIFIC
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) (1) G-3, 16
Beet (Beta vulgaris) (1). G-4, 67
Onion (Allium cepa) (C) .. G-19, 557
INFECTIONS, SMALLPOX
Behen (Moringa oleifera) (I)... .67
INFECTIONS, VENEREAL
(See under Gonorrhea)
INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS,
UNSPECIFIED
Divi-Divi (Caesalpinia

bonduceila) (1). 253
Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus) (C) . G-18, 521

INFLUENZA SYNDROME, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF

Jequirity
(Abrus precatorius) (1)... . . ¢ A35

INFLUENZA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Tomato (Lycopersicon

esculentum) (1), . . G-24, 766

INSOMNIA
(See under Sleep, induction of)

INTERTRIGO
(See under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

ITCHING, SKIN
(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

ITCHING, SUNBURN
(See under Pruritus, topical
relief of)

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 157 -----
1-152/JAUNDICE

JAUNDICE
Black Catnip

(Phyllanthus amarus) (1)... . | 91
Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). . G-6, HO
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus) (C) G-7, 130
Cassia

(Cassia angustifolia) (D). .... | 684
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C). . . . 187
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) (1). G-9, 245
Golden Shower Tree (Cassia

fistula) (Do... eee G-13, 354
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (C) .. G-13, 359
Ground Ivy

(Glechoma hederacea) (C) .... 372
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare) (CC)... 2... eS G-15, 448
Oregano (Origanum

vulgare) (C)... 2... eed G-19, 559
Picrorhiza

(Picrorhiza kurroa) (C)..... 3 589
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (I)... . . ! 772
LABOR AND DELIVERY, ROUTINE
MANAGEMENT OF
Burning Bush

(Dictamnus albus) (1) .... G-7, 130
Chinese Motherwort

(Leonurus japonicus) (C). . .. - 183
Fish Berry

(Anamirta cocculus) (JD... . . : 312

LACRIMATION, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (C)....... 487
LACTATION, STIMULATION OF
Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (I)... . 228
Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) (C).........5 G-9, 245
European Mistletoe (Viscum

album) (CQ)... ee | G-11, 291
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis

tetragonoloba) (I).......... 376
LACTOSE INTOLERANCE
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis) (C).........5 G-23, 734

LARYNGOTRACHEITIS

Catechu (Acacia catechu) (I) .. . 163
Chocolate Vine

(Akebia quinata) (C)........ 189
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (C). . . . .772
LEPROSY
Betel Nut (Piper betle) (I) ..G-4, 74
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (I) ....G-6, 101
Calotropis (Calotropis

procera) (l)...............7 141
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus

species) (I,C)... 0. eee eee 177
Cumin

(Cuminum cyminum) (1) . . G-9, 237
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (1) . G-13, 359
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) .. G-14, 391
Jasmine (Jasminum

officinale) (I). ........-4 G-15, 432
Kamala (Mallotus

philippinensis) (I)... ....... ¢ A42
Lemongrass (Cymbopogon

citratus) (1). . .G-16, 465
Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (I)  G-ie, 483
Neem (Antelaea

azadirachta) (I)........ 5 G-is, 539
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I)... eee ee 545
Storax (Ligquidambar

orientalis) (I)..........: G-23, 734

LEUKEMIA, UNSPECIFIED
Reed Herb
(Phragmites communis) (C) . . . 639

LEUKORRHEA
Adrue

(Cyperuj articulatus) (C) . . .G-3, 6
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (J)... .... 39
Jambolan

(Syzygium cumini) (JD... .... ¢ A29
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (1,C) .... 550
Tree of Heaven

(Ailanthus altissima) (C). . . . .770
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (C). . . . ! 772

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LICE, BODY
(See under Pediculosis, human)

LICE, HEAD
(See under Pediculosis, human)

LICE, PUBIC
(See under Pediculosis, human)

LIPS, DRY
(See under Cheilitis, actinic)

LIVER AND GALLBLADDER COMPLAINTS

Dandelion (Taraxacum

officinale) (1), G-9, 245
LIVER DISORDERS
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) (JD... .... 39
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (I)... ....... 5 AT
Asiatic Dogwood

(Cornus officinalis) (C)...... 51
Carambola

(Averrhoa carambola) (J)... . - 148
Cassia

(Cassia angustifolia) (I)... . . J 684
Corn Silk (Zea mays) (C)..... : 224
Garden Cress

(Lepidium sativum) (J) .. G-12, 326
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (©)... . . # A87
Red-Rooted Sage

(Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C).... . § 636
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640

Senna (Cassia senna) (I) . . G22, 684
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (J)... . . ” 772
Turmeric
(Curcuma domestica) (C). . .. ” 175

MALARIA, CHRONIC
Vervain

(Verbena officinalis) (CQ) G-25, 788
MALARIA, TREATMENT OR
PROPHYLAXIS OF
Basil

(Ocimum basilicum) ()_ ... G-4, 64
Birth wort (Aristolochia

clematitis) (C) G-5, so
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C). ... . 187
Fever Bark

(Alstonia constricta) (1,C)  .... 305

(D) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 158 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

Lycium Bark
(Lycium chinense) (C)...... : 486
Neem (Antelaea

azadirachta) (I). G-18, 539
Nepalese Cardamom
(Amomum aromaticum) (C) .. .540

Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (1) . G-1S, 545
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (I). G-18, 547
Onion (Allium cepa) (I) ... G-19, 557
Quinine (Cinchona

pubescens) (1,C) G-20, 626

MASTITIS

Dandelion (Taraxacum
officinale) (C).

MASTODYNIA

Adrue
(Cyperus articulatus) (C) ...G-3, 6

G-9, 245

MEASLES
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga
racemosa) (C)
Coriander (Coriandrum
sativum) (C).
Duckweed (Lemna
minor) (C)

G-S, 92
G9, 221

G-10, 258

MENINGITIS
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (1) . . G-14, 389
MENOPAUSE, MANAGEMENT OF THE
MANIFESTATIONS OF
Jatamansi (Nardostachys

jatamansi) (1) 433
MENORRHAGIA
Oak Gall

(Quercus infectoria) (D)..... : 550
Saffron

(Crocus sativus) (C).... $ G21, 653

Wheat (Triticum aestivum) (1) .. 799

MENSTRUAL CRAMPS
(See under Pain, menstrual)

MENSTRUAL DISORDERS
Adrue

(Cyperus articulatus) (C) .. G-3, 6
Basil

(Ocimum basilicum) (1) . -
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus) (C) G-8, 169
Chinese Motherwort

G-4, 64

(Leonurus japonicus) (C) .... 183

False Schisandra

(Kadsura japonica) (C)..... . 301
Ground Ivy

(Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372
Indian Squill

(Urginea indica) (1) 421
Lycium Berries

(Lycium barbarum) (I)... .. . 487
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol) (1) G-18, 534
Pineapple (Ananas

comosus) (1) 593
Red-Rooted Sage

(Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C)..... | 636
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) (1)
Spurge

(Euphorbia resinifera) (1) ....716
Vervain (Verbena

. G22, 668

officinalis) (C) G25, 788
Willow Herb (Epilobium
angustifolium) (C) G-26, 818

Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium
ambrosioides) (C). G-26, 828

MIGRAINE HEADACHE
(See under Headache, migraine)

MOUTH, DRY
(See under Hyposalivation)

MYALGIA
(See under Pain, muscular,
temporary relief of)

MYCOBACTERIUM LEPRAE INFECTIONS
(See under Leprosy)

MYOCARDITIS, VIRAL
Astragalus
(Astragalus species) (C)......: 54

NAUSEA
Cardamom (Elettaria

cardamomum) (C). G-7, 149
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C)... . - 187
Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum verum) (1) .G-8, 190
Ginger

(Zingiber officinale) (C) . .G-12, 339
Green Tea
(Camellia sinensis) (C) . . G-13, 369

OPHTHALMIC DISORDERS/I-153

Japanese Atractylodes

(Atractylodes japonica) (C) .. .430
Radish

(Raphanus sativus) (1) . . G20, 628

NEPHROPATHY
Psyllium (Plantago ovata) (I) ...612

NEURALGIA
[See under Pain, neurogenic)

NEURITIS, PERIPHERAL, ACUTE
(See under Pain, neurogenic)

NEUROPATHY
Tropical Almond
(Terminalia chebula) (I). 772

NIGHT BLINDNESS
Guar Gum (Cyamopsis
tetragonoloba) (1) 376

NIGHT SWEATS
Lemon-Wood (Schisandra

sphenanthera) (C) 464
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) (C) 772
Wheat

(Triticum aestivum) (C)..... : 799

NOCTURIA, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Lemon-Wood (Schisandra
sphenanthera) (C) 464

OLIGURIA
Areca Nut

(Areca catechu) (C). G-4, 38

OPHTHALMIA
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169
Fennel

(Foeniculum vulgare) (1) G-11, 302
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) (1) G20, 609

OPHTHALMIC DISORDERS
Black Catnip
(Phyllanthus amarus) (1). 91
Black Nightshade
(Solanum nigrum) (1)
Chinese Motherwort
(Leonurus japonicus) (C).... . 183
Clove (Syzygium

..G-6, 101

aromaticum) (1) G-8, 195
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) (1) G-ie, 469

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 159 -----
1-154/OPHTHALMIC DISORDERS

Northern Prickly Ash

{Zanthoxylum

americanum) (DI... . ee ee 545
Oleander

{Nerium oleander) (1) G19, 555
Red Sandalwood

{Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) . . . 635
ORCHITIS
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) (I) . . G-14, 389
PAIN, ABDOMINAL
Fennel {Foeniculum

vulgare) (C).. 2... .200- d G-II, 302
Fenugreek {Trigonella
foenum-graecum) (C) . G-ll, 304
Ground Ivy

{Glechoma hederacea) (C) .... 372
Jasmine {Jasminum

officinale) (C).... 0.2.44! G-15, 432
Lesser Galangal {Alpinia

officinarum) (C)..........2-4 A67
Radish

{Raphanus sativus) (C) . . G-20, 628
PAIN, BONE
False Schisandra

{Kadsura japonica) (C). . . . . 301
Ma-Huang

{Ephedra sinica) (C).... J G-16, 488
PAIN, EAR
Basil

{Ocimum basilicum) (Il)... G-4, 64
Black Nightshade

{Solanum nigrum) (1) . G-6, 101
Bog Bean {Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C). G-6, 110
Indian Nettle {Acalypha

indica) (D.. 6... eee A19
Tobacco

{Nicotiana tabacum) (1) G24, 762
PAIN, EPIGASTRIC
Adrue

{Cyperus articulatus) (C) ...G-3, 6
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) (C) G-S, 86
Sandalwood

{Santalum album) (C)....... J 659
PAIN, JOINT
Asiatic Dogwood

{Cornus officinalis) (C)...... 51

Birthwort {Aristolochia

clematitis) (C). G-5,SO
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (C)... 2... eee 182
Divi-Divi {Caesalpinia

bonducella) (I)... . 2... eee 253
Duckweed

{Lemna minor) (C)..... J G-10, 258
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album) (C).... | G-11, 291
Henbane {Hyoscyamus

niger) (C).............5 G-14, 389
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (I)... . A431
Plumbago

{Plumbago zeylanica) (C) ... 599
Red-Rooted Sage

{Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C)..... J 636
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) (C) . G22, 668

Soybean {Glycine soja) (C) G22, 707

PAIN, LUMBAR
Asiatic Dogwood

{Cornus officinalis) (C)...... 51
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album) (C)... . § G-11, 291
Nux Vomica {Strychnos nux

vomica) (Ih... see ee eee G-18, 547

Walnut {Juglans regia) (C) G-25, 793
White Nettle
{Lamium album) (CC)... . | .G-25, 806

PAIN, MENSTRUAL
False Schisandra

{Kadsura japonica) (C)..... 301
Red-Rooted Sage
{Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C).... | 636

PAIN, MUSCULAR, TEMPORARY
RELIEF OF

Camphor Tree {Cinnamomum

camphora) (1). G-7, 143
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album) (C). .. . | G-11, 291
PAIN, NEUROGENIC
Peanut

{Arachis hypogaea) (I)... .. - 575
Quinine

{Cinchona pubescens) (1) G-20, 626
Radish

{Raphanus sativus) (1) . G20, 628

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PAIN, RENAL

Siberian Ginseng

{Eleutherococcus

senticosus) (C).............4 693
PAIN, STOMACH
Benzoin {Styrax benzoin) (C) ... .73
Croton Seeds

{Croton tiglium) (C)....... 234
False Schisandra

{Kadsura japonica) (C)..... . 301
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) (C) . G-14, 389
Jasmine

{Jasminum officinale) (1) G-15, 432
Siam Benzoin {Styrax

tonkinesis) (C)...... eee dl 692
Sumatra Benzoin {Styrax

paralleloneurum) (C).......- 738
PAIN, TOOTH
Betel Nut {Piper betle) (I) ..G-4, 74
Calamus

{Acorus calamus) (1). G-7, 138
Catechu {Acacia catechu) (1) -163
Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum verum) (1) .G-8, 190
Clove {Syzygium

aromaticum) (1). G-8, 195
Henbane {Hyoscyamus

niger) (I)...........-..4 G-14,389
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (1,C) .. .431
Jasmine

{Jasminum officinale) (1) .G-15, 432
Lycium Berries {Lycium

barbarum) (I... 6. A87
Northern Prickly Ash

{Zanthoxylum

americanum) (I)............ 545
Pellitory

{Anacyclus Pyrethrum) (1) .... 577
Red Sandalwood

{Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) .. . 635
Tobacco

{Nicotiana tabacum) (1) . .G-24, 762
Wild Thyme

{Thymus serpyllum) (C) . .G-26, SIS
PAIN, UNSPECIFIED
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) (I) . . G-14, 389
Lycium Bark

{Lycium chinense) (C)...... ¢ A86

(I) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 160 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus) (C) . G-is, 521
Nux Vomica (Strychnos mix

vomica) (C) . G-IS, 547
Onion (Allium cepa) (I) ... G-19, 557
Southern Tsangshu

(Atractylodes lanced) (C).... ! 706
Wild Thyme

(Thymus serpyllum) (C) . G-26, 815

PARALYSIS, UNSPECIFIED
Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (C) G-16, 483
Northern Prickly Ash

(Zanthoxylum

americanum) (1). 545
Nux Vomica (Strychnos mix

vomica) (I)...... G-18, 547
Salep (Orchis species) (I). . . 657
PEDICULOSIS, HUMAN
Fish Berry

(Anamirta cocculus) (I... . . 312
PERTUSSIS
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (I). . . AT

PHARYNGITIS, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
Balloon-Flower (Platycodon
grandiflorum) (C). 58
Burdock
(Arctium lappa) (C)
Castor Oil Plant
(Ricinus communis) (C) ..G-7, ISS
Chinese Motherwort

G-7, 128

(Leonurus japonicus) (C).... - 183
Cotton Tree (Cochlospermum

gossypium) (1)... vee, 229
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) (C) 234
Ginger

(Zingiber officinale) (1) . G-12, 339
Licorice (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) (1,C). 6-16, 469
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (C) G-18, 547
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) (I). 550
Plantain

(Musa paradisiaca) (I)......: 597
Saffron

(Crocus sativus) (1). G-21, 653
Tamarind

(Tamarindus indica) (V)..... - 753

Tropical Almond
(Terminalia chebula) (1). .... - 772

PILES
(See under Hemorrhoids)

PNEUMONIA
Rice (Oryza sativa) (I). G-21, 643
Sumbul

(Ferula sumbul) (1). . G23, 738
POISONING, FISH
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... : 583

Scarlet Pimpernel
(Anagallis arvensis) (C) . G22, 668

POISONING, UNSPECIFIED

Cassia

(Cassia angustifolia) (I)... .. | 684
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra) (C) G-i6, 469
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... : 583

Senna (Cassia senna) (1) . . G-22, 684
POLYDIPSIA, TEMPORARY,
MANAGEMENT OF
Carambola

(Averrhoa carambola) (1)... . . 148
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) (C) .. .346
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) (1) .. G-13, 369
Plantain

(Musa paradisiaca) (I). ..... 597

POSTNASAL DRIP
(See under Cold, common,
symptomatic relief of)

POSTPARTUM, COMPLICATIONS OF
Red-Rooted Sage
(Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C)..... | 636

PREGNANCY, PREVENTION OF
Costus (Saussurea costus) (1) ...227
Kamala (Mallotus

philippinensis) (I)... ....... 442

PREGNANCY, TERMINATION OF
Cotton

(Gossypium hirsutum) (1) ....'. 228
Cumin

(Cuminum cyminum) (I) .. G-9, 237
Garden Cress

(Lepidium sativum) (1) . . G-12, 326
Spurge

(Euphorbia resinifera) (1) .... 716

RECTAL PROLAPSE /I-155

PRURITUS, TOPICAL RELIEF OF
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species) (I) .... 177
Golden Shower Tree

(Cassia fistula) (I).
Jasmine

(Jasminum officinale) (1) .G-15, 432
Knotweed (Polygonum

aviculare) (C)
Plantain (Musa

paradisiaca) (1). 597
Storax (Liguidambar

oriemalis) (1)
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) (1) 7715
Wheat (Triticum aestivum) (1) . .799
Wild Thyme

(Thymus serpyllum) (C) . G26, 815
PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS, MANAGEMENT
OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF
(See also under Psychotic

disorders, management of the

manifestations in severely ill)
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (1) ... .G-13, 359

G-13, 354

G-15, 448

GB, 734

PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS, MANAGEMENT
OF THE MANIFESTATIONS IN
SEVERELY ILL

Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (C) . G4, 389
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) . . G-14, 391

PULPITIS.
Lycium Bark
(Lycium chinense) (C)...... | 486

RASH, UNSPECIFIED
(See'under Skin, inflammatory
conditions)

RECTAL PROLAPSE
Bitter Orange

(Citrus aurantium) (C) ....G-S, 86
Coriander (Coriandrum

sativum) (C). . G-9, 221
Oak Gall (Quercus
infectoria) (C)............04 550

Pomegranate

(Punica granatum) (C) .. G-20, 60s
Poppyseed (Papaver

somniferum) (IC). . G-20, 609
Tropical Almond (Terminalia

chebula) (C)..... . .., 72

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 161 -----
1-156 /RENAL CALCULI

RENAL CALCULI
Chocolate Vine

(Akebia quinata) (C)......... 189
Cumin

{Cuminum cyminum) (I) . . G-9, 237
Gotu Kola {Centella

asiatica) (C).........004 G-13, 359
Kamala {Mallotus
philippinensis) J)... . 20.0005 A42

RENAL IMPAIRMENT
Asiatic Dogwood

{Cornus officinalis) (C)......: 51
Basil {Ocimum

basilicum) (C).. 2.60.00 5 5 G-4, 64
Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (C)............ 182
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale) (1). G-9, 245
Date Palm {Phoenix

dactylifera) (Ih... 0. G-10, 246

Fennel
{Foeniculum vulgare) (1) G-11, 302
Southern Tsangshu
{Atractylodes lancea) (C).... : 706
RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS, UPPER,
RELIEF OF
{See under Influenza syndrome,
symptomatic relief of)

RESPIRATORY TRACT DISORDERS
Balloon-Flower {Platycodon

grandiflorum) (C)...........4 58
Dill

{Anethum graveolens) (1) G-10, 252
Flax

{Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313
Onion {Allium cepa) (1) ... G-19, 557

RHEUMATIC DISORDERS, UNSPECIFIED
Basil

{Ocimum basilicum) (1) ... G-4, 64
Behen {Moringa oleifera) (I)... .67
Betel Nut {Piper betle) (I) . G-4, 74
Black Cohosh {Cimicifuga

racemosa) (C)..........: G-5, 92
Black Nightshade {Solanum
nigrum) (I)............: Ge, 101

Burning Bush

{Dictamnus albus) (C) ...G-7, 130
Calotropis {Calotropis

procera) (D.... 0... ee eee 141

Chinese Cinnamon

{Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (C).........00. 182
Frankincense

{Boswellia carteri) (I)....... 319
Gotu Kola

{Centella asiatica) (1) ... G13, 359
Henna

{Lawsonia inermis) (1) . . G14, 391

Indian Squill

{Urginea indica) (l)........ 4 A
Jimson Weed

{Datura stramonium) (C) G-15, 436
Lycium Bark

{Lycium chinense) (1,C)..... 486
Plumbago

{Plumbago zeylanica) (C) ... .599
Rehmannia {Rehmannia

glutinosa) (C)............00) 640
Siberian Ginseng

{Eleutherococcus

senticosus) (C).......02.0204 693

Walnut {Juglans regia) (1) .G25, 793
White Mustard /Sinapis

alba) (Ch... eee eed G25, 805
Wormseed Oil {Chenopodium
ambrosioides) (C)...... 5 G26, 828
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Star Anise
{Illicium verum) (I)... .. | G23, 725
RHINITIS
Tobacco

{Nicotiana tabacum) (1) . G24, 762

SARCOPTES SCABIEI INFESTATIONS
Black Catnip

{Phyllanthus amarus) (Q)..... | 91
Bog Bean {Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C)..........5 G-6, 110
Burning Bush {Dictamnus

albus) (C)..........0..5 G7, 130
Carambola

fAverrhoa carambola) (1)... . - 148
Chaulmoogra

{Hydnocarpus species) (C) .... 177
Gotu Kola

{Centella asiatica) (C) .. G-13, 359
Grape {Vitis vinifera) (1) .. G-13, 362
Ground Ivy

{Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372
Lycium Berries

{Lycium barbarum) ()..... . : A487

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Morning Glory

{Ipomoea hederacea) (1)... . : 523
Oleander

{Nerium oleander) (1) ... G19, 555
Plantain

{Musa paradisiaca) (I)... ... ! 597
Plumbago

{Plumbago zeylanica) (C) ....599
Safflower

{Carthamus tinctorius) (1) .... 652
Smartweed

{Persicaria hydropiper) (C) . . . 699

SCABIES
{See under Sarcoptes scabiei
infestations)

SCARLATINA
Anemarrhena {Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) (C).........45 31

SCARLET FEVER
{See under Scarlatina)

SCHIZOPHRENIA

{See under Psychotic disorders,
management of the
manifestations of)

SCIATICA, TEMPORARY RELIEF OF
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) (1) ..G-8, 165
Quinine

{Cinchona pubescens) (1) .G-20, 626
SCROFULOSIS
Bistort

{Persicaria bistorta) (C) ..G-5, 82
Coriander

{Coriandrum sativum) (1) . G-9, 121
Ground Ivy

{Glechoma hederacea) (C) ....372

SCURVY
Garden Cress
{Lepidium sativum) (1) .. G-12, 326

SEDATION
{See under Sleep, induction of)

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION
Acacia {Acacia arabica) (I). .... - 3
Behen {Moringa oleifera) (I) ....67
Cotton

{Gossypium hirsutum) (D)... . : 228
Walnut {Juglans regia) (I) G-25, 793

SHINGLES
{See under Herpes zoster infections)

(I) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 162 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

SHORTNESS OF BREATH

Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... 583
SINUSITIS, TREATMENT OF
Perilla

(Perilla fructescens) (C)..... ! 583

SKIN DISORDERS
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) (1) .. c-3, 16
Arjun Tree

(Terminalia arjuna) ()....... 39
Basil

(Ocimum basilicum) (1) ...G-4, 64
Birthwort (Aristolochia

clematitis) (C). G-5, SO
Black Nightshade (Solanum

nigrum) (I)......... G-6, 101
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (I)... . G-6, 103
Burdock

(Arctium lappa) (C), . G-7, 128
Calotropis

(Calotropis procera) (I)... .. . 141
Cane-Reed

(Costus speciosa) (I)......... 146

Catechu (Acacia catechu) (C) .. . 163
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species) (I) .... 177
Costus

(Saussurea costus) (I,C)..... - 227
Flax

(Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313
Giant Milkweed

(Calotropis gigantea) (1). . . . 338
Golden Shower Tree

(Cassia fistula) (1),
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) ()____G-13, 359
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) . . G-14,391
Hibiscus

(Hibiscus sabdariffa) (C) G-14, 394
Indian Squill (Urginea

indica) (I)... . 0.00600 e eee 421
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis piperascens) (1,C) .. .431
Knotweed (Polygonum

G-13, 354

aviculare) (C).. 6... ae G-is, 448
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol) (I). ......0000 04 G-18, 534
Nux Vomica (Strychnos nux

vomica) (I. .........+.4 G-18, 547

St. John's Wort (Hypericum
perforatum) (C)........5 G23, 719

SKIN ULCERS
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1,C) ..G-6, 101
Burdock

(Arctium lappa) (C) G-7, 128
Calotropis
(Calotropis procera) (I... .. - 141

Castor Oil Plant
(Ricinus communis) (C) ..G-7, 158
Indian Nettle

(Acalypha indica) (I)... .... ¢ A19
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol) (I)... ... eee eee! G-18, 534
Turmeric (Curcuma

domestica) (L)..... 02.00.0005 715
SKIN, INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS
Burning Bush

(Dictamnus albus) (C) ...G-7, 130
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species) (1) .... 177
Chicory

(Cichorium intybus) (1) ... G8, 181
Hibiscus

(Hibiscus sabdariffa) (C) G-14, 394
Jambolan

(Syzygium cumini) (I)... 2... 429
Lycium Bark

(Lycium chinense) (C)...... ¢ 486
Oak Gall (Quercus

infectoria) (I)... .. 0c eee 550
Purple Gromwell

(Lithospermum

erytryrhizon) (C).........0.4 619
Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium

ambrosioides) (C)...... | G-26, 828

SLEEP DISORDERS
Siberian Ginseng
(Eleutherococcus
senticosus) (CC)... ee eee eed 693

SLEEP, INDUCTION OF
Bog Bean (Menyanthes

trifoliata) (C) G-6, 110
Burning Bush (Dictamnus

albus) (C) G7, 130
Lemon-Wood (Schisandra

sphenanthera) (C)..........4 464
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa) (1,C) . . G-17, 500

STOMATITIS /1-157

Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (1) . G-18, 545
Rehmannia

(Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669
Senburi

(Swertia japonica) (C)..... | 682

SOUR STOMACH
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

SPASM, GASTRIC
Basil
(Ocimum basilicum) (C) . . .G-4, 64

SPASM, SMOOTH MUSCLE
Star Anise
(Illicium verum) (I)... .. | G23, 725

SPERMATORRHEA
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger) (I) . . G-14, 389
Schisandra

(Schisandra chinensis) (C) .... 669

SPLEEN, DISORDERS OF
Asa Foetida

(Ferula foetida) (I). .........5 47
Cassia

(Cassia angustifolia) (I)... .. J 684
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra) (C) .G-16, 469
Luffa (Luffa aegyptica) (C) .G-16, 483
Red-Rooted Sage

(Salvia miltiorrhiza) (C).... . | 638
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula) ()..... : 772
STERILITY
Cowhage

(Mucuna pruriens) (I). ...... - 230

STOMACH, DISSEMINATED
ADENOCARCINOMA

(See under Carcinoma, stomach)

STOMACH, SOUR
(See under Hyperacidity, gastric,
symptomatic relief of)

STOMACH, UPSET
(See under Digestive disorders,
symptomatic relief of)

STOMATITIS
Catechu
(Acacia catechu) (I,C)......- 163

(@ denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 163 -----
1-158/STOMATITIS

Myrrh {Commiphora

molmof) (De... 2. eee ed G-IS, 534
Oak Gall {Quercus

infectoria) (LC)...........0: 550
Tamarind

{Tamarindus indica) (1) . . 7153
STRANGURIA
Anemarrhena {Anemarrhena

asphodeloides) (C) .... 31

STREPTOCOCCI GROUP A BETA-
HEMOLYTIC INFECTIONS

{See under Erysipelas) >

STROKE, ISCHEMIC

Benzoin {Styrax benzoin) (C) 73
Siam Benzoin {Styrax
tonkinesis) (C) . Lee 692
Sumatra Benzoin {Styrax
paralleloneurum) (C) .... 738

SWELLING AND FRACTURES
Black Nightshade

{Solanum nigrum) (1,C) ..G-6, 101
Chinese Motherwort
{Leonurus japonicus) (C).... . 183

SYNCOPE
Benzoin {Styrax benzoin) (C) ... .73
Betel Nut {Piper betle) (1) ..G-4, 74
Siam Benzoin {Styrax

tonkinesis) (C)........000005 692
Storax {Liquidambar

orientalis) (C).........5 G23, 734
Sumatra Benzoin {Styrax
paralleloneurum) (C)....... 738
SYPHILIS

{See under T. pallidum infections)

T. PALLIDUM INFECTIONS
Dill

fAnethum graveolens) (1) G-10, 252
Gotu Kola

{Centella asiatica) (1) . .. G-13, 359

TETANUS
Bistort

{Persicaria bistortd) (C) ..G-5, 82
Marijuana

{Cannabis sativa) (1,C) .. G-17, 500

THROAT, SORE
{See under Pharyngitis,
symptomatic relief of)

TINNITUS
Ginkgo

{Ginkgo biloba) (C).... | G-12, 342
Lycium Berries

{Lycium barbarum) (C)..... : A87
Rehmannia

{Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) ....640

TONSILLITIS
Balloon-Flower {Platycodon
grandiflorum) (C)...........4 58
Oak Gall {Quercus
infectoria) (D........ eee eee 550
St. John's Wort {Hypericum
perforatum) (C)........5 G23, 719

TREPONEMA PALLIDUM
{See under T. pallidum infections)

TUBERCULOSIS, TREATMENT ADJUNCT

Anemarrhena {Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) (C)..........% 31
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale) (I). G-9, 245
Zedoary {Curcuma
zedoaria) (1)...........5 G26, 846

TUMOR THERAPY ADJUNTIVE
Reed Herb
{Phragmites communis) (C) . . . 639

TYPHUS FEVER

Anemarrhena {Anemarrhena
asphodeloides) (C).......... 31

Senna {Cassia senna) (I) . . G22, 684

ULCERS, DUODENAL
Psyllium {Plantago ovata) (I) ... 612

ULCERS, GASTRIC
Licorice
{Glycyrrhiza glabra) (1) . G-ie, 469

URETHRITIS
Flax
{Linum usitatissimum) (1) G-12, 313

URETHRORRHEA
Arjun Tree

{Terminalia arjuna) (1) 39
Black Pepper

{Piper nigrum) (1) ....  G-6, 103
URINARY FREQUENCY, SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF OF
Rehmannia

{Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

URINARY RETENTION, UNSPECIFIED

Siberian Ginseng
{Eleutherococcus
senticosus) (C).............4 693

URINARY TRACT DISORDERS

Black Catnip

{Phyllanthus amarus) (1)... .. 91
Cardamom {Elettaria

cardamomum) (1). G-7, 149
Chinese Motherwort

{Leonurus japonicus) (C)... - 183
Chocolate Vine

{Akebia quinata) (C)......... 189
Cleavers

{Galium aparine) (C)........ 193
Coriander

{Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Dandelion {Taraxacum

officinale) (C). . G-9, 245
Lycium Berries {Lycium

barbarum) (CC)... eee 487
Papaya

{Carica papaya) (I). .... J G-19, 565
Plantain

{Musa paradisiaca) (I)....... 597
Radish

{Raphanus sativus) (1) .. G20, 628

UTERINE BLEEDING
Burning Bush
{Dictamnus albus) (C) ...G-7, 130

UTERINE PROLAPSE
Bitter Orange
{Citrus aurantium) (C) ....6-5, 86

VENEREAL DISEASE
Cotton Tree {Cochlospermum
gossypium) (I... ee eee eee 229

VERTIGO
Coriander

{Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Croton Seeds

{Croton tiglium) ().........: 234
Lycium Berries

{Lycium barbarum) (C).... . 4 A487
Rehmannia

{Rehmannia glutinosa) (C) .... 640

VISUAL DISTURBANCES
Nutmeg
{Myristica fragrans) (1) . G-IS, 545

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 164 -----
ASIAN INDICATIONS INDEX

VOMITING
Bitter Orange

(Citrus aurantium) (C) ...
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....
Black Pepper

(Piper nigrum) (C).
Carambola (Averrhoa

carambola) (l)........0.000 148
Cardamom (Elettaria

.G-5, 86
G-6, 101

. G-6, 103

cardamomum) (C). . . G-7, 149
Chicory (Cichorium

intybus) (I).
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum

aromaticum) (I)... 6.6... eee 182
Chinese Thoroughwax

(Bupleurum Chinese) (C)..... 187
Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum verum) (1) .G-8, 190
Coriander

(Coriandrum sativum) (1) .G-9, 221
Fennel (Foeniculum

G-8, IST

vulgare) (I,C)..........! G-11, 302
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum) (I)... . | G-11, 304
Ginger

(Zingiber officinale) (C) . G12, 339
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) (C) ... 346
Gotu Kola

(Centella asiatica) (C) . . .G-13, 359
Grape (Vitis vinifera) (1) . . G-13, 362
Japanese Atractylodes

(Atractylodes japonica) (C) . .. 430
Japanese Mint (Mentha

arvensis p'perascens) (LC)... 431

WOUND CARE, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN /I-159

Lotus

(Nelumbo nucifera) (1) . . G16, 48i
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa) (I,C) . . G-17, 500
Nepalese Cardamom

(Amomum aromaticum) (C) .. .540
Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans) (C) . G-18, 545
Oregano

(Origanum vulgare) (C) . G-A9, 559
Pomegranate

(Punica granatum) (1)
Red Sandalwood

(Pterocarpus santalinus) (1) ... 635
Saffron

.. G20, 605

(Crocus sativus) (I). .... | G-2i, 653
Sandalwood

(Santalum album) (C). 659
Smartweed

(Persicaria hydropiper) (C) .. . 699
Tamarind

(Tamarindus indica) (I). 753
White Mustard

(Sinapis alba) (C)...... 5 G25, sos
Wild Thyme

(Thymus serpyllum) (C)_ . .G-26, 815

WARTS
Calotropis

(Calotropis procera) (I)... .. - 141
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus) (C) .G-8, 169

WHEEZING, SYMPTOMATIC RELIEF OF
(See under Bronchial asthma)

WHOOPING COUGH
(See under Pertussis)

WOUND CARE, ADJUNCTIVE THERAPY IN
Black Catnip

(Phyllanthus amarus) (1). 91
Black Nightshade

(Solanum nigrum) (1) ....G-6, 101
Catechu (Acacia catechu) (C) .. . 163
Costus

(Saussurea costus) (1,C). 227
Date Palm

(Phoenix dactylifera) (1) . .G-10, 246
Henna

(Lawsonia inermis) (1) . . G14, 391
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra) (1) . G16, 469
Myrrh (Commiphora

molmol) (LC). .......045 G-18, 534
Oak Gall (Quercus
infectoria) (C)... 1.0... eee 550

Onion (Allium cepa) (1) ... G19, 557
Rauwolfia

(Rauwolfia serpentina) (1) .... 631
Rose (Rosa centifolia) (I)... .. | 644
Safflower

(Carthamus tinctorius) (C) .. . 652
Smartweed

(Persicaria hydropiper) (C) .. .699
Storax (Liquidambar

orientalis) (I).........44 G23, 734
Tropical Almond (Terminalia

chebula) (I). ........0220058 772
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica) (1). 775

White Nettle
(Lamium album) (C).... 5 G-25, 806
Zedoary
(Curcuma zedoaria) (1)

. G26, 846

(1) denotes use in Indian medicine. (C) denotes use in Chinese medicine.

----- PAGE 165 -----


----- PAGE 166 -----
Side Effects Index

1-161

Presented here is an alphabetical list of every side effect cited in the herbal monographs. Under

each heading, herbs associated with the reaction are listed alphabetically by accepted common

name, with the scientific name shown in parentheses. For ease of comparison with prescription

and over-the-counter medications, the index employs the same nomenclature found in the Side

Effects Index of the PDR Companion Guide™. Ifan entry lists two page numbers, the first refers
to a photograph of the plant in the Herb Identification Guide, the second to the herbal

monograph.

ABDOMINAL DISCOMFORT
(See under Distress, abdominal;
Distress, gastrointestinal)

ABDOMINAL DISTENTION

Sunflower

(Helianthus annum)... . § G23, 741
ABDOMINAL PAIN/CRAMPS
Aga (Amanita muscaria), . . . G-3,8
Aloe (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera). . G-3, IS
Gamboge

(Garcinia hanburyi)..... G-12, 325
Jalap (Ipomoea purga)... . : G-15, 427
Morning Glory

(Ipomoea hederacea)........: 523
Orris (Iris species). ...... 5 G-19, 561
Wormwood

(Artemisia absinthium) .. .G-26, 829

ACCOMMODATION, IMPAIRED
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus niger)..... 5 G-14, 389
Kava Kava

(Piper methysticum)..... | G-IS, 443
Scopolia (Scopolia carniolica) .. 6Ti

ALBUMINURIA
Aloe
(Aloe barbadensis', Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) G-3, 16

ALKALOSIS, METABOLIC
Licorice
(Glycyrrhiza glabra)... . G-16, 469

ALLERGIC REACTIONS
Blessed Thistle

(Cnicus benedictus)
Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) . .. 118
Castor Oil Plant

(Ricinus communis) G-7, 158
Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) . . G-8, 199
Echinacea Angustifolia

G6, 107

(Echinacea angustifolia)... .. | 261
Echinacea Pallida
(Echinacea pallida).........: 261

Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) ... G-1O, 26i
European Mistletoe

(Viscum album). . 0-11, 291
Fennel

(Foeniculum vulgare)... G-11, 302
Garlic (Allium sativum)... G-12, 327
Kava Kava

(Piper methysticum)..... | G-15, 443

Kelp (Laminaria hyperborea) ... 446
Lemongrass

(Cymbopogon citratus) .. G-ie, 465
Papaya (Carica papaya) . . . G-19, 565
Poplar (Populus species) . . G20, 607
Psyllium (Plantago ovata)..... | 612

Psyllium Seed

(Plantago afra)........ 5 G20, eie
Rhatany (Krameria triandra) .... AL
Stinging Nettle

(Urtica dioica).........4 G23, 729
Tolu Balsam

(Myroxylon balsamum) .. G24, 764
Tragacanth

(Astragalus gummifer).......: 767
Valerian

(Valeriana officinalis) . .. G25, 783
Wintergreen

(Gaultheria procumbens)... . 3 820

ALLERGIC SENSITIZATION
Brazilian Pepper Tree

(Schinus terebinthifolius). .. . . 117
Fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum)....... | G-11, 304
Yarrow

(Achillea millefolium) ... .G-26, 833

ALLERGY
(See under Allergic reactions)

ALVEOBRONCHIOLITIS
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum). G-8, i6S
ANAPHYLACTIC REACTIONS
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita).... | G-12, 331

----- PAGE 167 -----
1-162 /ANAPHYLAXIS

ANAPHYLAXIS
Cayenne
{Capsicum annuum)
Echinacea Angustifolia
{Echinacea angustifolia)... .. . 261

G-8, 16

ANEMIA, HEMOLYTIC
Trailing Arbutus
{Epigae repens)............. 768

ANEMIA, MICROCYTIC
Green Tea
{Camellia sinensis)... .. | G-13, 369

ANGINA
Ergot {Claviceps purpurea)... . : 280
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album)........ 5 G-IL, 291

ANGIOEDEMA
{See under Edema, angioneurotic)

ANOREXIA
Coca {Erythroxylum coca)... .. . 197
Coffee {Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Digitalis

{Digitalis purpurea)... . | G-10, 248
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis)... . 5 G-13, 369

Mate {Ilex paraguariensis) .G-17, 508
Squill {Urginea maritima) . G23, 717
Swamp Milkweed

{Asclepias incarnata) ... G23, 743

ANURIA
Broad Bean {Vicia faba)....... 120

ANXIETY
Yohimbe Bark
{Pausinystalia yohimbe) . . 843

APATHY
Marijuana

{Cannabis sativa) G-17, 500

APHTHOUS STOMATITIS
{See under Stomatitis, ulcerative)

APPETITE, DECREASED
Coffee {Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis)... . | G-13, 369
Khat {Catha edulis)..........: 447
Mate {Ilex paraguariensis) G17, sos

APPETITE, LOSS OF
{See also under Anorexia)
Digitalis Lanata {Digitalis

landtd). 00. e ee 250

Indian Squill {Urginea

indica). 421
Pleurisy Root {Asclepias

tuberosa)..............4 G20, 598
ARRHYTHMIAS
Aloe

{Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) G-3, 16
Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger) G-5,97
Buckthorn

{Rhamnus catharticus) ...G-6, 123
Cascara Sagrada

{Rhamnus purshiana) ....G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb

{Rheum palmatum) G-8, 185
Frangula

{Rhamnus frangula). .... | G-12, 317

Lily-of-the-Valley
{Convallaria majalis) ... G-16, 475

Ma-Huang

{Ephedra sinica)....... 5 G-16, 488
Strophanthus

{Strophanthus Kombe)....... : 736
ASPHYXIA

Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger) G-5,97
Cyclamen

{Cyclamen europaeum)...... : 240
Pink Root

{Spigelia marilandica)....... ! 594
ASTHENIA

Kousso {Hagenia abyssinica) . . . 450
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia). ...... 5 G-IS, 528
Poppyseed

{Papaver somniferum) . . . G-20, 609

ASTHMA, ALLERGIC

Psyllium {Plantago ovata)... .. | 612
Psyllium Seed
{Plantago afra)........: G20, 616

ASTHMA, WORSENING OF
Japanese Mint {Mentha
arvensis piperascens)....... $ 431

ASTHMATIC EPISODES
Black Mustard
{Brassica nigra) . . G-5, 100

Senna {Cassia senna) G-22, 684
BELCHING
Asa Foetida {Ferula foetida) - AT

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

BLEEDING, NASAL
{See under Epistaxis)

BLEEDING, VAGINAL

Ginseng {Panax ginseng)...... 346
BLISTERING
American Liverleaf

{Hepatica nobilis)........... 4 26
Arnica {Arnica montana) Al
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) G-5, 86
Black Mustard

{Brassica nigra) G-5, 100
Bulbous Buttercup

{Ranunculus bulbosus)...... 128
Buttercup {Ranunculus acris) .. . 133
Cashew

{Anacardium occidentale) . G-7, 157
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum). G-8, 165

Clematis {Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Cypress Spurge

{Euphorbia cyparissias) . . G-9, 242
Globe Flower

{Trollius europaeus)... . : G-12, 351
Marsh Marigold

{Caltha palustris). ......: G-17, 503
Mezereon

{Daphne mezereum).... . : G-17, 515
Pasque Flower

{Pulsatilla pratensis)........ : 572

Poisonous Buttercup
{Ranunculus sceleratus) . G20, 601

Savin Tops

{Juniperus sabina)...... ! G21, 663
Traveller's Joy

{Clematis vitalba)...... : G25, 769
White Bryony

{Bryonia alba). G-25, 800
Wood Anemone

{Anemone nemorosa)........ 5 824

BLOOD GLUCOSE, REDUCTION
{See under Hypoglycemia)

BLOOD PRESSURE, ELEVATION
{See under Hypertension)

BLOOD PRESSURE, REDUCTION
{See under Hypotension)

BONE DENSITY, CHANGES
Buckthorn
{Rhamnus catharticus) . .. G6, 123

----- PAGE 168 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) .... G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb

(Rheum palmatum). . G8, 185
Frangula

(Rhamnus frangula). .... § G-12, 317
BONE DISORDERS
Aloe

(Aloe barbadensis: Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera). G-3, 16

BOWEL MOVEMENTS, PAINFUL
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)............4 234
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
BRADYCARDIA
Areca Nut (Areca catechu) G-4, 38
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea). . . . 280

Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425
Pontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron ponticum) .... 606

BREATH, SHORTNESS OF
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger) . G-s, 97

BREATHING, DIFFICULT
(See under Dyspnea)

BREATHING, LABORED
(See under Dyspnea)
BRONCHITIS

Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa). . G-17, soo
BRONCHOSPASM
Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425

BRONCHOSPASM, EXACERBATION OF
Scotch Pine (Pinus species) .G-22, 674

Spruce (Picea species)........° 714
BURNING

Cowhage (Mucuna pruriens) .... 230
CACHEXIA

Trailing Arbutus
(Epigae repens)............: 768

CARCINOGENIC
Alkanet (Alkanna tinctoria) ..G-3, 13
Alpine Ragwort

(Senecio nemorensis)......... 21

Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) .... G-7, 153
Coca (Erythroxylum coca)... .. . 197
Colt's Foot

(Tussilago farfara) G-9, 209
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) .. .G-9, 212
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
Dusty Miller

(Senecio bicolor). ........... 258
Forget-Me-Not

(Myosotis arvensis)... . . .G-12,316
Golden Ragwort

(Senecio aureus)... .....045 354
Groundsel (Senecio vulgaris) .... 374
Hemp Agrimony (Eupatorium

cannabinum)...........5 G-13, 388
Madder (Rubia tinctorum) G-16, 490
Petasites

(Petasites hybridus). ... . | G-19, 585
Ragwort

(Senecio jacobaea). . ... | G20, 629
Sassafras

(Sassafras albidum)..... | G-21, 662
Senna (Cassia senna). G-22, 684
CARCINOMA, HEPATOCELLULAR
Borage (Borago officinalis) . G-e, 114
CARDIAC ABNORMALITIES
American Hellebore

(Veratrum viride)... ........4. 25
Valerian

(Valeriana officinalis) . G25, 783

CARDIAC ARREST
Jaborandi
(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425

CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
(See under Arrhythmias)

CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS
(See under Arrhythmias)

CARDIAC RHYTHMS, DISTURBANCES
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242

CENTRAL/PERIPHERAL NERVOUS
SYSTEM DISORDERS

Daffodil (Narcissus
pseudonarcissus),........... 243

Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium
ambrosioides),......... 5! G-26, 828

COLIC /I-163

Wormwood

(Artemisia absinthium) . G26, 829
CHEST TIGHTNESS
Hydrangea

(Hydrangea arborescens) .G-14, 413
CHILLS
European Mistletoe

(Viscum album)... . 2... 5 G-11, 291
Venus Flytrap

(Dionaea muscipula)........ 786
CHOLERA
Buckthorn

(Rhamnus catharticus) ... G6, 123
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) .... G-7, 153
CIRCULATORY COLLAPSE
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum)..... | G-17, 515
Venus Flytrap

(Dionaea muscipula).......... 786
CIRCULATORY DAMAGE
Venus Flytrap

(Dionaea muscipula)........ 786
CNS STIMULATION
Khat (Catha edulis)... .......: A47
COAGULATION INTERFERENCE
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum). G-8, 165
COLIC
American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis)... ....... 4 26
Bitter Apple

(Citrullus colocynthis). . . . | G-5, 83
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus). ..... - 128
Buttercup (Ranunculus acris) ... 133
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) ....G-7, 153
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)... .. | G-8, 165
Clematis (Clematis recta) .. G-8, 194
Globe Flower

(Trollius europaeus) G-12, 351
Guaiae (Guaiacum officinale) . .. 37s

Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus microphyllus) .6-15, 425
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria). ... 2... ¢ 466
Mexican Scammony Root

(Ipomoea orizabensis). ...... : 514

----- PAGE 169 -----
I-164/COLIC

Pasque Flower
(Pulsatilla pratensis)... . 2... : 572
Poisonous Buttercup

(Ranunculus sceleratus) G20, 601
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis) . . . 700
Traveller's Joy

(Clematis vitalba)...... 5 G-25, 769
Wood Anemone

(Anemone nemorosa)........ 3 824
COLIC, BILIARY
Artichoke

(Cynara scolymus) G-4, 44
Cardamom

(Elettaria cardamomum) . . G-7, 149
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum). G-8, 165
Curcuma

(Curcuma xanthorrhizia) . G-9, 239
COLLAPSE
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium) 234
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) . G-9, 242
Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus_ microphyllus) G-15, 425

COLOR PERCEPTION, DISTURBED
Lily-of-the- Valley

(Convallaria_ majalis) . G-16, 475
Strophanthus
(Strophanthus Kombe).......° 736

CONGESTION, NASAL
(See under Nasal congestion)

CONJUNCTIVITIS
Cypress Spurge
(Euphorbia cyparissias)
Goa Powder
(Andira_araroba). 352
Psyllium (Plantago ovata)
Psyllium Seed
(Plantago afra) G-20, 616

. G9, 242

CONJUNCTIVITIS, ALLERGIC
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita). . . G12, 331

CONSCIOUSNESS, DISORDERS OF
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum). G-14, 403

CONSCIOUSNESS, LOSS OF
Poison Ivy
(Rhus toxicodendron). ...... | 600

CONSTIPATION

Acacia (Acacia arabica) 3
Agrimony

(Agrimonia eupatoria) G-3, 10
Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) . . G-8, 199
Goldenseal

(Hydrastis canadensis) . G-13, 355
Khat (Catha edulis) 447
Mountain Avens

(Dryas octopetala)..........: 526
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) . . . .G-20, 609
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum perforatum) .G23, 719
Tropical Almond

(Terminalia chebula)........ 7172
CONSTRICTION, PUPILLARY
(See under Miosis)
CONSTRICTION, PUPILS
(See under Miosis)
CONVULSIONS
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida) 47

Jaborandi
(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425

COORDINATION DIFFICULTY
(See under Coordination, impaired)

COORDINATION, DISTURBED
(See under Coordination, impaired)

COORDINATION, IMPAIRED
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia). G-18, 528
CORNEAL DEFECTS
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
COUGH
Black Mustard

(Brassica nigra). G-S, 100
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)... .. | G-8, 165
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species)... ... . 177
CRAMPING
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) G-12, 342

CRAMPING, ABDOMINAL
(See under Abdominal pain/cramps)

CRAMPING, MUSCULAR
Aga (Amanita muscaria). G-3, 8

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CRAMPS, ABDOMINAL
(See under Abdominal pain/cramps)

DELIRIUM
Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143
Goldenseal (Hydrastis

canadensis) G-13,355
Jimson Weed

(Datura stramonium). .. . 5 G-15, 436
DEPENDENCE, DRUG
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra _sinica) G-16, 488
DEPENDENCE, PHYSICAL
Coffee (Cojfea arabica) .G-9, 202
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G17, sos

DEPENDENCE, PSYCHIC
(See under Dependence,
psychological)

DEPENDENCE , PSYCHOLOGICAL

Coffee (Coffea arabica) .... G-9, 202
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G17, sos
DEPRESSION
Rauwolfia

(Rauwolfia serpentina). ..... J 63i
DEPRESSION, MOOD
(See under Depression)
DERMATITIS
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)... .. | G8, 165
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) .G-12, 339
Squill (Urginea maritima) -G-23, 717

DERMATITIS, ALLERGIC CONTACT
Black Mustard

(Brassica nigra) G-5, 100
German Chamomile

(Matricaria recutita) G-12, 331
Parsley

(Petroselinum crispum) G-19, 567
Rosemary

(Rosmarinus officinalis) G21, 645
DERMATITIS, CONTACT
Boxwood

(Buxus sempervirens) G-6, 116
Cajuput

(Melaleuca leucadendra) G-7, 136
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi). . . 2. - 220
Feverfew

(Tanacetum parthenium) G-11, 306

----- PAGE 170 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Nutmeg

(Myristica fragrans). . G-IS, 545

DERMATOSIS
Bitter Orange
(Citrus aurantium)....... | G-5, 86

DIAPHORESIS
Boneset

(Eupatorium perfoliatum) G-6, 113
Jaborandi (Pilocarpus

microphyllus). 00.0.2. ee G-15, 425
Quebracho (Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco). .........5 623
DIARRHEA
American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis)...........% 26
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida),... : 47
Asarum (Asarum europaeum) ... 48
Bael (Aegle marmelos).........: 58
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger). ...... 5 G-5, 97
Boneset

(Eupatorium perfoliatum) . G-6, 113
Broad Bean (Vicia faba)....... 120
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus)...... - 128
Buttercup (Ranunculus acris) ... 133
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)..... 5 G-8, 165

Clematis (Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Coffee (Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Colchicum

(Colchicum autumnale) .. . G-9, 206
Cyclamen

(Cyclamen europaeum).......: 240
Daffodil

(Narcissus pseudonarcissus) . . . 243
Digitalis

(Digitalis purpurea)
Digitalis Lanata

(Digitalis lanata)........... 4 250
Eucalyptus

(Eucalyptus globulus) ... .0-11, 283
Globe Flower

G-10, 248

(Trollius europaeus) G-12, 351
Green Tea
(Camellia sinensis). G-13, 369

Guaiac (Guaiacum officinale) .. . 375
Guar Gum

(Cyamopsis tetragonoloba) .... 376
Gumweed (Grindelia species) . . .379

Herb Paris

(Paris quadrifolia)...... | G-14, 392
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)........ | G-14, 403
Indian Squill (Urginea

indica) 421

Kousso (Hagenia abyssinica) .. . 450
Labrador Tea

(Ledum latifolium) 451
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria) .... 466
Male Fern

(Dryopteris filix-mas) ... G17, 493
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G17, 508
Mercury Herb

(Mercurialis annua)... .. | G-7, 513
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum)..... § G-17, 515
Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus) G-18, 521
Mountain Flax

(Linum catharticum)........: 526
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia)... .....: G-18, 528

Myrtle (Myrtus communis) . .G-1s, 536
Niauli

(Melaleucea viridiflora)..... : 542
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus grandiflorus) ....543
Pasque Flower

(Pulsatilla pratensis)........: 572
Pineapple (Ananas comosus) ....593
Pleurisy Root

(Asclepias tuberosa)
Poisonous Buttercup

(Ranunculus sceleratus) . G-20, 601
Senna (Cassia senna) G-22, 684
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis) ...700
Soybean (Glycine soja) ... G-22, 707
Squill (Urginea maritima) . G-23, 717
Stillingia (Stillingia sylvatica) ...729
Swamp Milkweed

G-20, 598

(Asclepias incarnata) . .. G23, 743
Traveller's Joy

(Clematis vitalba) G-25, 769
Tree of Heaven

(Ailanthus altissima)........° 770
Wood Anemone

(Anemone nemorosa). ... . 824
DIARRHEA, BLOODY
Arum (Arum maculatum) 46

DISTRESS, GASTROINTESTINAL /I-165

Bitter Apple

(Citrullus colocynthis) ... .G-5, 83
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) . G7, 153
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus) .. . . G-8, 169
Orris (Iris species) . G-19, 561
DIPLOPIA
Yellow Jessamine

(Gelsemium sempennrens) .... 838
DIPSESIS
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)........ 4 G14, 403
Mezereon (Daphne

MeZereuM). .. 6. eee ee! G-17, 515
DISCOMFORT, GENERAL
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida).... + 47

DISTENTION, ABDOMINAL
(See under Abdominal distention)

DISTRESS, ABDOMINAL
Garlic (Allium sativum) ... G-12, 327

DISTRESS, EPIGASTRIC
Colombo
(Jateorhiza palmata)........: 208

DISTRESS, GASTRIC
(See under Distress, gastrointestinal)

DISTRESS, GASTROINTESTINAL
American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis). .......... 5 26
Bilberry
(Vaccinium myrtillus). .. . 5 G5, 75

Black Cohosh

(Cimicifuga racemosa) ....G45, 92
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus)..... . - 128
Buttercup (Ranunculus acris) ... 133
Cane-Reed (Costus speciosa) ... 146

Cinquefoil

(Potentilla erecta)...... 5 G-8, 192
cClematis (Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi).......: 220
Cranesbill

(Geranium maculatum)....... ¢ 233
Curcuma

(Curcuma xanthorrhizia) .G-9, 239
Dandelion

(Taraxacum officinale) . .. G-9, 245
Digitalis

(Digitalis purpurea)

----- PAGE 171 -----
1-166 /DISTRESS, GASTROINTESTINAL

Elephant-Ears

{Bergenia crassifolia)... ... . 268
False Unicorn Root

{Veratrum luteum).......... 301
Garden Cress

{Lepidium sativum)... .. | G-12, 326
Ginkgo {Ginkgo biloba) . . . G-12, 342
Globe Flower

{Trollius europaeus). G-12, 351
Goldenseal

{Hydrastis canadensis) G-13, 355
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis). . . . . G-13,369
Gumweed ({Grindelia species) .. . 379
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus

hippocastanum)........ | G-14, 403
Indian Nettle {Acalypha

indica)... ..........22222--4 A19
Indian Squill

{Urginea indica)... .........5 421
Jack-in-the-Pulpit {Arisaema

atrorubens),........00....244 426
Japanese Mint {Mentha

arvensis piperascens). ..... . $ 431
Mate {Jlex paraguariensis) G-17, 508
Oak {Quercus robur)..... | G-18, 549
Peppermint

{Mentha piperita)....... | G-19, 580
Periwinkle {Vinca minor)... ... 584
Pineapple {Ananas comosus) ....593

Pleurisy Root
{Asclepias tuberosa). . . . | G-20,598
Poisonous Buttercup

{Ranunculus sceleratus) . G-20, 601
Pomegranate
{Punica granatum) G-20, 605

Red Bryony {Bryonia cretica) ... 632
Sandalwood

{Santalum album). ......... 5 659
Scurvy Grass

{Cochlearia officinalis) . . G-22, 679
Soapwort -

{Saponaria officinalis) .. . G-22, 701
Squill {Urginea maritima) . G-23, 717
St. John's Wort

{Hypericum perforatum) G23, 719
Stinging Nettle

{Urtica dioica)... ....... | G-23, 729
Swamp Milkweed

fAsclepias incarnata) .. . G-23, 743

Trailing Arbutus
{Epigae repens)............. 168

Traveller's Joy

{Clematis vitalba). .... . | G-25, 769
Watercress

{Nasturtium officinale). ..... ° 7198
Wild Radish

{Raphanus raphanistrum) G-26, 814
Wood Anemone

{Anemone nemorosa)........ 3 824

DISTRESS, PRECORDIAL
{See under Distress, epigastric)

DISTRESS, STOMACH
{See under Distress, gastrointestinal)

DISTRESS, UPPER Gl
{See under Distress, epigastric)

DISTURBANCES, GASTROINTESTINAL
{See under Distress, gastrointestinal)

DIURESIS, POTENTIATION OF
Bitter Apple

{Citrullus colocynthis) G-5, 83
DIZZINESS
Aga {Amanita muscaria) G-3,8
Black Cohosh

{Cimicifuga racemosa) ....G-5, 92
Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger)... 1... | G-5, 97
Coffee {Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Croton Seeds

{Croton tiglium)............! 234

Cypress Spurge
{Euphorbia cyparissias) . .G-9, 242
Hydrangea

{Hydrangea arborescens) G-14, 413
Mate {Ilex paraguariensis) _G-17, 508
Mezereon

{Daphne mezereum) G-17, sis
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia)... .... 5 G-18, 528
Poppyseed

{Papaver somniferum) . . . G-20, 609
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa). ... § 622
Tree of Heaven

f{Ailanthus altissima).... 2... ! 770
Wormwood

{Artemisia absinthium) . . G-26, 829
DROWSINESS
California Poppy

{Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
Jimson Weed {Datura

stramonium)...........5 G-15, 436

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Quebracho {Aspidosperma
quebracho-bianco)..........4 623
Yage {Banisteriopsis caapi). . . . 3 833

DRUG IDIOSYNCRASIES
{See under Allergic reactions)

DRY MOUTH
{See under Xerostomia)

DYSPEPSIA
Witch Hazel

{Hamamelis virginiana) . G-26, 821
DYSPHORIA
Coffee {Coffea arabica) .... G-9, 202
Cola {Cola acuminata)... ......: 205
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis). . . . . .G-13, 369
Jimson Weed

{Datura stramonium). .. . | G-15, 436
Ma-Huang

{Ephedra sinica)....... § G-ie, 488
Mate {Ilex paraguariensis) .G-17, 508
St. John's Wort

{Hypericum perforatum) . .G-23, 719
Valerian

{Valeriana officinalis) . G25, 783
DYSPNEA
Chaulmoogra

{Hydnocarpus species)... 2... 177
Jaborandi

{Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425
EARS, RINGING
{See under Tinnitus)
ECZEMA
Camphor Tree {Cinnamomum

camphora).........-2..5 G-7, 143
Garlic {Allium sativum) ... .G-12, 327
Onion {Allium cepa). ..... | G-19, 557
Quinine

{Cinchona pubescens) . G20, 626
Stavesacre

{Delphinium staphisagria)  .... 726
ECZEMATOUS REACTIONS
{See under Eczema)
EDEMA
Aloe

{Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera) G-3, 16
Buckthorn

{Rhamnus catharticus) ...G-6, 123

----- PAGE 172 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Cascara Sagrada
(Rhamnus purshiana) ....G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb

(Rheum palmatum). G-8, ISS
Frangula

(Rhamnus frangula)..... | G-12, 317
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra)... . : G-16, 469
EDEMA, ANGIONEUROTIC
Stinging Nettle

(Urtica dioica).........5 G23, 729
EDEMA, LOCAL
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea)... . : 280

EDEMA, NON-SPECIFIC
(See under Edema)

EDEMA, SKIN
(See under Edema, angioneurotic)

ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES
(See under Electrolyte imbalance)

ELECTROLYTE IMBALANCE
Aloe
(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe
capensis; Aloe vera)
Cascara Sagrada
(Rhamnus purshiana) ....G-7, 153

G-3, 16

ELECTROLYTES, LOSS OF
Aloe
(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe
capensis; Aloe vera).

G-3, 16

EMBRYOTOXICITY
Coca (Erythroxylum coca)... .. . 197

EMESIS
(See under Vomiting)

EPIDERMAL SHEDDING
Mezereon
(Daphne mezereum). ... | G17, sis

EPIGASTRIC PAIN
(See under Distress, epigastric)

EPILEPTIFORM MOVEMENTS,

UNSPECIFIED
Wormseed (Artemisia cina). . . . 827
EPISTAXIS

Ginseng (Panax ginseng)...... 346

ERECTION DISTURBANCES, UNSPECIFIED
(See under Impotence)

ERUPTIONS, ECZEMATOID
(See under Eczema)

ERYTHEMA
Bitter Orange
(Citrus aurantium)
Cashew
(Anacardium occidentale) . G-7, 157
Mandrake (Mandragora
officinarum). ..........5 G-17, 495
Poison Ivy (Rhus
toxicodendron).............4 600

G-S, 86

ESTROGEN, DECREASE
Cat's Claw
(Unicaria tomentosa). ...... | ieo

EUPHORIA
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa).......! G-17, 500
Yage (Banisteriopsis caapi).... | 833

EXANTHEMA
Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ... | is
Cashew

(Anacardium occidentale) . G-7, 157
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). ... . 3 843,

EXCITABILITY
Goldenseal

(Hydrastis canadensis) . . G-13, 3ss
Malabar Nut

(Justicia adhatoda).... . : G17, 492
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe)..... | 843
EXHAUSTION

Jimson Weed
(Datura stramonium).... | G-IS, 436

EYE MOVEMENTS, ABNORMAL
Yellow Jessamine
(Gelsemium sempervirens)

- 838

EYELID SWELLING
Cypress Spurge
(Euphorbia cyparissias) .. G-9, 242

EYELIDS, HEAVY
Yellow Jessamine
(Gelsemium sempervirens) .... 838

EYES, DILATATION OF PUPIL
(See under Mydriasis)

EYES, IRRITATION OF
Black Mustard

(Brassica nigra). G-S, 100

FLUID RETENTION /I-167

FACE, REDDENING OF
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)........ 4 G-14, 403

FACIAL SWELLING
Pagoda Tree

(Sophora japonica), ........ 4 564
FASCICULATIONS
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) . . . .G-20, 609
Wormseed (Artemisia cina). .. . 827
FATIGUE
Kava Kava

(Piper methysticum). .... : G-15, 443
Rauwolfia

(Rauwolfia serpentina)...... 4 631

St. John's Wort
(Hypericum perforatum) . G-23, 719

FERTILITY DISORDERS, MALE
Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) . . .228

FEVER
Broad Bean (Vicia faba)....... 120
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia). .... : 261
Echinacea Pallida

(Echinacea pallida).........: 261

Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) .. . G-10, 261
European Mistletoe

(Viscum album)........ 5 G11, 291
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia). ......: G-IS, 528
Poison Ivy

(Rhus toxicodendron)....... 5 00
Venus Flytrap

(Dionaea muscipula)......... 786
FINGER CLUBBING
Senna (Cassia senna)..... : G22, 684
FLATULENCE
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida) ..... 47
Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) . . 118

Guar Gum
(Cyamopsis tetragonoloba) ....376

Manna (Fraxinus ornus) .. G-17, 496
Sunflower
(Helianthus annuus)... . | G23, 741

FLUID RETENTION
(See under Edema)

----- PAGE 173 -----
1-168/FLUSHING, CUTANEOUS

FLUSHING, CUTANEOUS
Periwinkle (Vinca minor)... .. . 584

FRETFULNESS
(See under Anxiety)

GASTRIC DISCOMFORT
(See under Distress, gastrointestinal)

GASTRIC DISORDER
(See under Distress, gastrointestinal)

GASTRITIS
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)... . . § G-8, 165
Kousso (Hagenia abyssinica) .. . 450
Mountain Flax

(Linum catharticum)........ : 526
GASTROENTERITIS
Asarum (Asarum europaeum) ... .48
Birthwort

(Aristolochia clematitis) ...G-5, SO
Guaiac (Guaiacum officinale) . . . 375
Jalap (Ipomoea purga). .. . § G-IS, 427
Labrador Tea

(Ledum latifolium).......... + 451
Scarlet Pimpernel

(Anagallis arvensis) G-22, 668
Wormseed (Artemisia cina). . . . | 827

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Indian-Hemp

(Apocynum cannabinum). . . . A\8
Kava Kava

(Piper methysticum) G-15, 443
Labrador Tea

(Ledum latifolium).......... + A451
Nasturtium

(Tropaeolum majus). G-18,537
Onion (Allium cepa). G-19, 557

Pasque Flower
(Pulsatilla pratensis)... . 2... 572
Seneca Snakeroot

(Polygala senega).......... | 683
Solomon's Seal (Polygonatum

multiflorum)... 0.0.2.0... | G-22, 703
Valerian (Valeriana

officinalis) G-25, 783

GASTROINTESTINAL REACTIONS
(See under Gastrointestinal
disorders)

GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS
(See under Gastrointestinal
disorders)

GASTROINTESTINAL UPSET
(See under Gastrointestinal
disorders)

GENITAL FUNCTION DISTURBANCES

Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa)... .... § G-17, 500
GENITAL SWELLING
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida) 47
GIDDINESS

(See under Dizziness)

GINGIVITIS
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum) G-8, 165
GLOSSONCUS
Arum (Arum maculatum)...... . : 46
GROIN PAIN
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi). .. 2. : 220
HAIR DISCOLORATION
Trailing Arbutus

(Epigae repens)............7 768
HALLUCINATIONS
Coca (Erythroxylum coca)... .. - 197
Goldenseal

(Hydrastis canadensis) G-13, 355
Jimson Weed

(Datura stramonium). .. . | G-15, 436
Peyote

(Lophophora_williamsii) G-19, 588
Yage (Banisteriopsis caapi). .. . ! 833
HALLUCINATIONS, AUDITORY
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa) G-17, 500
Peyote

(Lophophora_ williamsii) .G-19, 588
HALLUCINATIONS, VISUAL
Marijuana

(Cannabis sativa). G-17, 500
Peyote ,

(Lophophora_williamsii) G-19, 588
HEADACHE
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida). .. . : A7
Black Cohosh

(Cimicifuga racemosa) .... G-S, 92
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species)... .. . - 177
Coffee (Coffea arabica) . G-9, 202
Digitalis

(Digitalis purpurea). G-10, 248

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Digitalis Lanata

(Digitalis lanata)............ 250
European Mistletoe

(Viscum album)... ..... | G-11, 291
Ginseng (Panax ginseng)... .. . 346
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis). . . . . -G-13, 369
Herb Paris

(Paris quadrifolia). ..... 5 G-14, 392
Indian Squill

(Urginea indica)... .........5 421
Kousso (Hagenia abyssinica) .. . 450

Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) .. . ,G-16, 475
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica)....... | G-16, 488
Male Fern

(Dryopteris _filix-mas) .. . .G-17, 493
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G17, 508
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum)..... § G-17, 515
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia). G-18, $28
Pleurisy Root

(Asclepias tuberosa) G-20, S98
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) ... G-20, 609
Quassia (Picrasma excelsa). . . . § 622
Quebracho (Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco).......... 5 623
Squill (Urginea maritima) . G-23, 717
St. John's Wort

(Hypericum perforatum) G-23, 719
Strophanthus

(Strophanthus Kombe).......” 736
Swamp Milkweed

(Asclepias incarnata) G-23, 743
Sweet Clover

(Melilotus officinalis) ... G-24, 744
Sweet Woodruff

(Galium odoratum) G-24, 751
Tree of Heaven

(Ailanthus altissima).... 2...” 770
Valerian

(WValeriana officinalis) .. . G-25, 783
Wormwood

(Artemisia absinthium) .. G-26, 829

HEADACHE, MIGRAINE
Plantain (Musa paradisiaca) .... 597

HEARING, IMPAIRED
Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium
ambrosioides)..........5 G-26, 828

----- PAGE 174 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

HEAT INTOLERANCE
Mandrake (Mandragora

officinarum) G-17, 495

HEMATURIA

Aloe
(Aloe
capensis; Aloe vera).

barbadensis; Aloe
G3, 16
Celandine
(Chelidonium majus) G-8, 169
Sandalwood

(Santalum album). ......... 5 659

HEMIPARESIS
Asarum (Asarum europaeum) ... .48

HEMOGLOBINURIA
Broad Bean (Vicia faba)... 2... 120

HEMOLYSIS
Broad Bean (Vicia faba)... ... . 120

HEMOLYTIC ICTERUS
(See under Jaundice)

HEPATIC ADENOMA
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale)... G9, 212

HEPATIC FUNCTION TESTS, IMPAIRED
(See under Liver function, impaired)

HEPATOTOXICITY
Alkanet (Alkanna finctoria) . . G-3, 13
Alpine Cranberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) .... G-3, 20
Alpine Ragwort

(Senecio nemorensis)......... ! 21
Borage (Borago officinalis) .G-e, 114
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum)... .. | G-8, 165
Colt's Foot

(Tussilago farfara). ..... | G-9, 209
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) . ., G-9, 212

Dusty Miller

(Senecio bicolor)... ........ 258
Forgbt-Me-Not

(Myosotis arvensis)... . .
Germander

(Teucrium chamaedrys) . . .G-12, 337
Golden Ragwort

G-12, 316

(Senecio aureus)... ........ 354
Groundsel (Senecio vulgaris) ....374
Hemp Agrimony (Eupatorium

cannabinum)...........4 G-13, 388

Mercury Herb (Mercurialis
ANNUG). We dl G-17, 513

Pennyroyal

(Mentha pulegium).........% 579
Petasites

(Petasites hybridus), ... . | G-19, 585
Ragwort

(Senecio jacobaea). ... . | G-20, 629
Sweet Clover

(Melilotus officinalis) . G24, 744
Sweet Woodruff

(Galium odoratum). ... . | G-24, 751
Tonka Beans

(Dipteryx odorata). .........° 767
Trailing Arbutus

(Epigae repens)............° 768
Uva-Ursi

(Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) | G-25, 779
Witch Hazel

(Hamamelis virginiana) . G-26, 821
HIVES
(See under Urticaria)
HYPERACIDITY
Coffee (Coffea arabica) . G-9, 202
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis). . . . . G-13, 369
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G-17, 508
HYPERALDOSTERONISM
Buckthorn

(Rhamnus catharticus) G-6, 123
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) .... G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb

(Rheum palmatum), . . . . | G-8, 185
Frangula

(Rhamnus frangula). G-12, 317
HYPERDIPSIA
(See under Dipsesis)
HYPEREXCITABILITY
Cola (Cola acuminata)... ..... 205
HYPERGLYCEMIA.
Khat (Catha edulis). ........: 447
HYPERPYREXIA

(See under Fever)

HYPERSALIVATION
(See under Sialism)
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS,
GENERAL
Aloe

(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera)... .. | G-3, 16

HYPOTENSION /1-1 69
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum) G-8, 165
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia)... .. : 261

Ginger (Zingiber officinale) .G-12, 339
HYPERTENSION
Broad Bean (Vicia faba)... ... . 120
Licorice

(Glycyrrhiza glabra). . . . .G-16, 469
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica)....... 5 G-ie, 488
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). . . . . 843
HYPERTENSION, PORTAL
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) . G-9, 212
HYPERTHERMIA
Khat (Catha edulis)... 2.2.0... 447
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) . G20, 609
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Bladderwrack

(Fucus vesiculosus)... .......- 106

HYPERTHYROIDISM, EXACERBATION OF
Kelp (Laminaria hyperborea) .. . 446

HYPERTONIA
Khat (Catha edulis)... ....... ¢ 447

HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA
Sunflower
(Helianthus annuus). . . . § G-23, 741

HYPOGLYCEMIA
Guar Gum

(Cyamopsis  tetragonoloba) .... 376

HYPOKALEMIA
Aloe

(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera)... .. | G-3, 16
Buckthorn

(Rhamnus catharticus)
Cascara Sagrada

. G-6, 123
(Rhamnus purshiana) . G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb
(Rheum palmatum).
Frangula
(Rhamnus frangula). . .. . | G-12, 317
Senna (Cassia senna). .... | G-22, 684

G-8, ISS

HYPOTENSION
Black Cohosh

(Cimicifuga racemosa) .G-5, 92

----- PAGE 175 -----
1-170 /HYPOTENSION

Jaborandi
(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-1S, 425
Pontian Rhododendron

(Rhododendron ponticum) .... 606
HYPOTHERMIA
Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus). ... . § G-18,521
ICTERUS

(See under Jaundice)

IMMUNOSUPPRESSION

Coca (Erythroxylum coca)... .. - 197
IMPOTENCE
Rauwolfia

(Rauwolfia serpentina). .... . 4 631
INDIGESTION
Acacia (Acacia arabica) 3
Agrimony

(Agrimonia_ eupatoria) G-3, 10
Rhatany (Krameria triandra)  ... 6A1

INFECTION, SKIN AND SOFT TISSUE
White Bryony
(Bryonia alba)... ...... 5 G-25, soo

INFLAMMATION, ORAL
(See under Stomatitis)

INSOMNIA
Coffee (Coffea arabica) .... G-9, 202
Cola (Cola acuminata)........ 3 205
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi). .. . . . : 220
Ginseng (Panax ginseng). ..... 346
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis). . . . . G-13,369
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica)....... | G-16, 488
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G17, 508
Valerian

(Valeriana officinalis) . G25, 783
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). . . . . 843

INTOXICATION, STATE OF
Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum

camphora).............5 G-7, 143
Labrador Tea (Ledum

latifolium). 00.0000 451
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia)... .... | G-IS, 528
IRRITABILITY

Coffee (Coffea arabica) G-9, 202

Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis)... . .
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica)....... 5 G-16, 488
Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) .G-17, sos

.G-13, 369

IRRITATION
Club Moss

(Lycopodium clavatum)...... . 196
Short Buchu

(Barosma betulina)..... 1... 4 691

IRRITATION, LOCAL
Lesser Celandine
(Ranunculus ficaria). .. 2... . 466

IRRITATION, SKIN
(See under Irritation, local)

ITCHING
(See under Pruritus)

JAUNDICE
Germander

(Teucrium chamaedrys) . . .G-12, 337

JAUNDICE, CHOLESTATIC
Bishop's Weed

(Ammi_ Visnaga). G-5, 81

KIDNEY DAMAGE
Birth wort

(Aristolochia clematitis) G-5, so
Cayenne

(Capsicum annuum). G-8, 165
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species). ..... . 177
Comfrey

(Symphytum_ officinale)
Mercury Herb

(Mercurialis annua)... . . | G-17, 513
Scotch Pine (Pinus species) G-22, 674
Tolu Balsam

(Myroxylon  balsamum)

_..G-9, 212

G24, 764

KIDNEY DISORDERS, EXACERBATION OF
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus
hippocastanum)........ | G-14, 403

KIDNEY IRRITATION
Bitter Apple

(Citrullus colocynthis). G-S, 83
Buckthorn

(Rhamnus catharticus) .. .G-6, 123
Cane-Reed (Costus speciosa) .. .146
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana)  .... G-7, 153

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cypress
(Cupressus sempervirens)
Wormseed (Artemisia cina). ... 3 827

LARYNGITIS
Marijuana
(Cannabis sativa)... .... | G-17, 500

LARYNGOSPASM
Chaulmoogra
(Hydnocarpus species). ...... 177

LEGS, WEAKNESS
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea). . . . 280

LESIONS, GASTROINTESTINAL
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) . . . G-9, 212

LESIONS, HEPATIC
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) .. . G-9, 212

LIPS, SWELLING
Asa Foetida (Ferula foetida). . . . : AT

LIVER DAMAGE
(See under Hepatotoxicity)

LIVER FUNCTION, CHANGES
Tonka Beans
(Dipteryx odorata)..........° 167

LIVER FUNCTION, IMPAIRED
Comfrey

(Symphytum officinale) ...G-9, 212

MALIGNANCY

Aloe
(Aloe barbadensis;
capensis; Aloe vera).

Aloe
G-3, 16

MANIC BEHAVIOR
Jimson Weed

(Datura stramonium). ... | G-15, 436
Sweet Gale (Myrica gale) . G-24, 745

MASTALGIA
(See under Mastodynia)

MASTODYNIA
Ginseng (Panax ginseng)... ... 346

MENSTRUAL IRREGULARITIES
Beth Root

(Trillium erectum) G-4,74

MENTAL DEPRESSION
(See under Depression)

MICTURITION DISTURBANCES
Henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger)... . . | G-14, 389

----- PAGE 176 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Mandrake (Mandragora

Officinarum). ..........4 G-17, 495
Scopolia (Scopolia carniolica) . OT
MIGRAINE, AGGRAVATED
Brewer's Yeast

{Saccharomyces cerevisiae) . 118
Cocoa {Theobroma cacao) . . G-8, 199
MIOSIS
Herb Paris

{Paris quadrifolia). ..... 5 G-14, 392
MOTOR SKILLS, IMPAIRMENT
Aga {Amanita muscaria). G-3,8
Rauwolfia

{Rauwolfia serpentina). ..... J 63i
MOUTH SENSATIONS, UNPLEASANT
Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger) G-5, 97
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia)... .... 5 G-IS, 528
MOUTH, BURNING
Celandine

{Chelidonium majus). G-8, 169

Croton Seeds
{Croton tiglium)............5 234
Cypress Spurge

{Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
Night-Blooming Cereus

{Selenicereus grandiflorus) . . . 543
MOUTH, DRY
{See under Xerostomia)
MUCOUS MEMBRANE IRRITANT
Arum {4rum maculatum)....... : 46
Hedge-Hyssop

{Gratiola officinalis). G-13, 385
Horseradish

fArmoracia rusticana) ... G-14, 408
Marsh Marigold

{Caltha palustris) G-17, 503
Poke

{Phytolacca americana) G-20, 602

Spurge {Euphorbia resinifera) ... 716
Traveller's Joy
{Clematis vitalba)...... | G-25, 769

MUCOUS MEMBRANE, IRRITATION OF
American Liverleaf
{Hepatica nobilis)... 0.0.00... 26
Bitter Apple
{Citrullus_colocynthis)
Bulbous Buttercup
{Ranunculus bulbosus). .. .. . - 128

G-5, 83

Buttercup {Ranunculus acris) 133
Clematis {Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Elecampane

{Inula helenium)........ | G-10, 266
Globe Flower

{Trollius europaeus). . . . § G-12, 351
Green Hellebore

{Helleborus viridis)... .. 1... 368
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus

hippocastanum)........ 5 G-14, 403
Orris {Iris species)... 1... | G-19, 56i
Poisonous Buttercup

{Ranunculus sceleratus) G20, 601
White Bryony

{Bryonia alba)... 2.2... . | G-25, 800
MUSCLE CRAMP
{See under Cramping, muscular)
MUSCLE PITCHING
{See under Fasciculations)
MUSCLE WEAKNESS
{See under Myasthenia)
MUTAGENICITY
Basil {Ocimum basilicum) ...G-4, 64
Comfrey

{Symphytum officinale) . G-9, 212
Madder {Rubia tinctorum) . G-ie, 490
MYALGIA
Chaulmoogra

{Hydnocarpus species)... .. . 177
Ergot {Claviceps purpurea). 280
MYASTHENIA
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia) G-18, 528
MYDRIASIS
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger) G-14, 389
Mandrake {Mandragora

officinarum)...........5 G-17, 495
Valerian {Valeriana

officinalis)... ......0...05 G-25, 783
NASAL CONGESTION
Rauwolfia

{Rauwolfia serpentina). ..... | 631
NAUSEA
Alpine Cranberry

{Vaccinium vitis-idaea) .G-3, 20
American Pawpaw

{Asimina triloba).. 2... 00002: 27

'

NAUSEA /I-171

Angostura

{Galipea officinalis)... ...... 34
Beth Root

{Trillium erectum) G-4, 74
Black Hellebore

{Helleborus niger) G-5,97
Broad Bean {Vicia faba). ...... 120
Butcher's Broom

{Ruscus aculeatus). G-7, 132
Cane-Reed {Costus speciosa) . 146
Celandine

{Chelidonium majus). G-8, 169
Colchicum

{Colchicum autumnale) . . . G-9, 206
Cranesbill

{Geranium maculatum)...... : 233
Cyclamen

{Cyclamen europaeum)...... : 240
Echinacea Angustifolia

{Echinacea angustifolia). . . . . 26:

Echinacea Pallida
{Echinacea pallida)... ...... 3 261
Echinacea Purpurea

{Echinacea purpurea) .. . .G-10, 26i
Elephant-Ears

{Bergenia crassifolia)... ... . : 268
Ergot {Claviceps purpurea). 280
Eucalyptus

{Eucalyptus globulus) . Gl, 283
Guar Gum

{Cyamopsis _ tetragonoloba) . 376
Herb Paris

{Paris quadrifolia)...... | G-14, 392
Indian-Hemp

{Apocynum cannabinum). A18
Ipecac

{Cephaelis ipecacuanha). .... A23
Jaborandi

{Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-IS, 425
Jalap {Ipomoea purga). . . . § G-15, 427
Kousso {Hagenia abyssinica) » 450
Lily-of-the-Valley

{Convallaria majalis) G-ie, 475
Ma-Huang

{Ephedra sinica)....... | G-ie, 488
Male Fern

{Dryopteris _ filix-mas) . G-l7, 493
Manna {Fraxinus ornus) . G17, 496
Monkshood

{Aconitum napellus). ... . | G-i8, 521
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia)... .... | G-IS, 528

----- PAGE 177 -----
1-172 /NAUSEA

Myrtle {Myrtus communis) . G8, 536
Niauli

{Melaleucea viridiflora). .... : 542
Night-Blooming Cereus

{Selenicereus grandiflorus) .... 543
Sandalwood

{Santalum album) 659
Sarsaparilla

{Smilax species)........4 G21, 661
Stavesacre

{Delphinium staphisagria) .... 726
Strophanthus

{Strophanthus Kombe) 736

Trailing Arbutus
{Epigae repens)............. 768
Tree of Heaven
{Ailanthus altissima).
Uva-Ursi
{Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) G25, 779
Yohimbe Bark
{Pausinystalia yohimbe)..... 3 843

710

NECROSIS, CUTANEOUS
Black Mustard

{Brassica nigra). G-5, 100
Mezereon

{Daphne mezereum)..... | G-17, 515
Savin Tops

{Juniperus sabina)......: G21, 663
White Bryony

{Bryonia alba).........: G-25, soo
NECROSIS, SKIN
Arnica {Arnica montana).......: Al
European Mistletoe

{Visewn album). ....... 4 G-11, 291
NEPHRITIS
Scarlet Pimpernel

{Anagallis arvensis). .... | G22, 668
NEPHROPATHY
Aloe

{Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera). . G-3, ie
Buckthorn

{Rhamnus catharticus) . .. G6, 123
Cascara Sagrada

{Rhamnus purshiana) ....G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb

{Rheum palmatum). G-8, 185

Frangula
{Rhamnus frangula)..... G-12, 317 I

NERVE DAMAGE
White Mustard

{Sinapis alba) G-25, 805
NERVOUSNESS
Ginseng {Panax ginseng). ..... 346
NEUROTOXICITY
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum) G-8, 165
NUMBNESS, FINGERS
Ergot {Claviceps purpurea). . . . 280
OBSTIPATION
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis). .... 5 G-13, 369
Henbane

{Hyoscyamus niger)... .. 4 G-14, 389
Mandrake {Mandragora

Oofficinarum)... 1.6.6.0! G-17, 495
Scopolia {Scopolia carniolica) . . 671
OLIGURIA
Broad Bean {Vicia faba)... ... . 120
ORTHOSTATIC CIRCULATORY
DISORDERS
European Mistletoe

{Viscum album). ....... 5 G-11, 291

OVERSTIMULATION
Cocoa {Theobroma cacao) . . G-8, 199

PAIN, ABDOMINAL
{See under Abdominal pain/cramps)

PAIN, EPIGASTRIC
{See under Distress, epigastric)

PAIN, LIMB
Black Cohosh
{Cimicifuga racemosa) ....G-5, 92

PAIN, MUSCLE
{See under Myalgia)

PAIN, STOMACH
{See under Stomachache)

PAIN, UTERINE
Quassia {Picrasma excelsa).... | 622
PALPITATIONS
Coffee {Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Green Tea

{Camellia sinensis). .... | G-13, 369
Mate {Ilex paraguariensis) G-17, 508
PANCREATIC DISEASE, UNSPECIFIED

Comfrey
{Symphytum officinale) .. .G-9, 212

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PANIC
Yohimbe Bark

{Pausinystalia yohimbe).... . 3 843
PARALYSIS.
Areca Nut {Areca catechu) . G4, 38
Chaulmoogra

{Hydnocarpus species)....... 177
Labrador Tea

{Ledum latifolium)..........: 451
Mercury Herb {Mercurialis

ANNU). 6.0. ee ed G17, 513
Wormseed Oil {Chenopodium

ambrosioides)..........! G-26, 828
PARALYSIS, SPINAL CORD
Pink Root

{Spigelia marilandica).......: 594
PARESTHESIA
Mountain Laurel

{Kalmia latifolia)....... | G-18, 528

PERCEPTION OF TIME AND SPACE,
ALTERATIONS IN

Marijuana
{Cannabis sativa).......| G-17, 500

PERSPIRATION
{See under Diaphoresis)

PHOTODERMATOSIS
Angelica

{Angelica archangelica) . . .G-3, 32
Dill {Anethum graveolens) . G-10, 252
Parsley

{Petroselinum crispum) . . G-19, 567
Rue {Ruta graveolens).... | G-21, 648
PHOTOSENSITIVITY
Parsnip {Pastinaca sativa) . G-19, 571
Pimpinella

{Pimpinella major)... .. : G-19, 591
Rue {Ruta graveolens).... | G-21, 648
St. John's Wort

{Hypericum perforatum) . .G-23, 719
PHOTOTOXICITY
Bishop's Weed

fAmmi Visnaga) G-5, SI
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) . G-5, 86
Burning Bush

{Dictamnus albus) G-7, 130
Celery {Apium graveolens) G-8, 172
Contrayerva {Dorstenia

COntrayervVa). 6... ee eee 218

----- PAGE 178 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Haronga (Haronga
madagascariensis), ......... 380
Hogweed
(Heracleum sphondylium) G-14, 396
Lovage

{Levisticum officinale) . . . .G-16, 482
Masterwort
(Peucedanum ostruthium) . 507

Parsnip (Pastinaca sativa) . G9, 571
Tolu Balsam

(Myroxylon balsamwn) .. G24, 764
Wafer Ash (Ptelea trifoliata) ... 790

PIGMENTATION
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) G-5, 86

PLATELET, DECREASE

{See under Thrombocytopenia)

POISONOUS
Asarum {Asarum europaeum) ... 48
Bitter Apple

{Citrullus colocynthis). G-S, 83
European Water Hemlock

{Cicuta virosa).........5 G-11, 297
Fool's Parsley {Aethusa

cynapium).. 6.0... ee eS G-12, 316
Rust-Red Rhododendron

{Rhododendron

ferrugineum). 0... eee ed 650

Tansy {Tanacetum vulgare) G2A, 754
Taumelloolch

{Lolium temulentum). ... : G24, 756
Tobacco

{Nicotiana tabacum)... . : GA, 762
Wormwood Grass

{Spigelia anthelmia)........ 831

POTASSIUM LOSS
{See under Hypokalemia)

PRURITUS
Arnica {Arnica montand)....... Al
Brewer's Yeast

{Saccharomyces cerevisiae) .. . 118

Cowhage {Mucuna pruriens) ....230
Cypress Spurge
{Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242

Ergot {Claviceps purpurea). 280
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus
hippocastanum)........5 G-14, 403

Night-Blooming Cereus

{Selenicereus grandiflorus) .... 543
Poppyseed

{Papaver somniferum) . . . G20, 609

Quinine

{Cinchona pubescens) . . . G20, 626
Sandalwood

{Santalum album).......... 659
Stavesacre

{Delphinium staphisagria) .... 726

PSEUDOALDOSTERONISM
Licorice
{Glycyrrhiza glabra)... . | G-16, 469

PSYCHIATRIC DISTURBANCES
Coca {Erythroxylum coca). .. 197

PSYCHIC DEPENDENCE
{See under Dependence,
psychological)

PULMONARY HYPERPLASIA
Comfrey

{Symphytum officinale) ...G-9, 212

PULSE CHANGES

Squill {Urginea maritima) . G23, 717

PULSE, FAST

Cocoa {Theobroma cacao) . . G-8, 199

PULSE, IRREGULAR
Indian Squill
{Urginea indica),..........5 421

PUPIL ENLARGEMENT
Cypress Spurge

{Euphorbia cyparissias) . .
Horse Chestnut {Aesculus

hippocastanum)........5 G-14, 403
Kava Kava {Piper

methysticum). 0... a G-15, 443

PURPURA
Tolu Balsam
{Myroxylon balsamum) . . G24, 764

PUSTULES, UNSPECIFIED
Bitter Orange

{Citrus aurantium) G-S, 86
Goa Powder

fAndira ararobd)........... 352
PYREXIA
{See under Fever)
RASH
Arnica {Arnica montand)....... : Al
Asarum {Asarum europaeum) ... 48
Chaste Tree

{Vitex agnus-castus) G-8, 176
Guaiac {Guaiacum officinale) . . . 37s

SENSITIVITY REACTIONS /I-173

Poppyseed

{Papaver somniferum) . . . G20, 609
White Bryony

{Bryonia alba).........5 G25, 800

RASH, PUSTULAR
Black Bryony

{Tamus communis) G-5,90

REFLEXES, ABNORMAL
Areca Nut {Areca catechu) . .G-4, 38

RENAL FAILURE
Cat's Claw
{Unicaria tomentosa)....... 4 ieo

RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION
Astragalus

{Astragalus species) 54
RESPIRATORY DISORDERS, UNSPECIFIED
Camphor Tree {Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143

RESTLESSNESS
{See under Dysphoria)

RHINITIS
Psyllium {Plantago ovata)..... | 612

RHINOCONJUNCTIVITIS
Cayenne

{Capsicum annuum)
Senna {Cassia senna)..... 4 G22, 684
SALIVATION
{See under Sialism)

SALIVATION, INCREASE

{See under Sialism)

SEDATION
Henbane
{Hyoscyamus niger)... .. | G14, 389
SEIZURES
{See under Convulsions)

SEIZURES, EXACERBATION OF
Evening Primrose
{Oenothera biennis)..... 5 G-11, 298

SENSATION, ABNORMAL
{See under Paresthesia)

SENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Boneset

{Eupatorium perfoliatum) . G-6, 113
Cornflower

{Centaurea cyanus). G-9, 225
Gotu Kola
{Centella asiatica)...... | G-13, 359

----- PAGE 179 -----
1-174/SENSITIVITY REACTIONS

Hemp Agrimony (Eupatorium

cannabinum)...........! G-13, 388
Iceland Moss (Cetraria

islandica).........00.00.005 A15
Ipecac

{Cephaelis ipecacuanha). .... § A23

SERUM ELECTROLYTE CHANGES
{See under Electrolyte imbalance)

SERUM POTASSIUM, REDUCTION
(See under Hypokalemia)

SERUM TRIGLYCERIDE, ELEVATION
(See under Hypertriglyceridemia)

SHAKING
(See under Tremors)

SHIVERING
(See under Tremors)

SIALISM
Areca Nut (Areca catechu) . .G-4, 38
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger). G-5,97
Daffodil

(Narcissus pseudonarcissus) . . . 243
Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus_ microphyllus) G-i5, 425
Kousso (Hagenia abyssinica) .. . 450
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum),.... § G-17,515
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia)... ee ed G-18, 528
Quebracho (Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco).......... 4 623
Stavesacre

(Delphinium _ staphisagria) .... 726
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). . . . . 843
SIALORRHEA

(See under Sialism)

SIALOSIS
(See under Sialism)

SKIN ERUPTIONS
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus grandiflorus) . . . .543'
SKIN REACTIONS
Arnica (Arnica montana)... ... . + Ai
Artichoke

(Cynara scolymus). G4, 44

Blessed Thistle
(Cnicus benedictus) G-6, 107

Boneset

(Eupatorium petfoliatum) .G-6, 113
Burdock (Arctium lappa) ...G-7, 128
Castor Oil Plant

(Ricinus communis). G-7, 158
Chicory

(Cichorium intybus). G-8, 181
Chinese Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum aromaticum) . . . 182
Cinnamon

(Cinnamomum verum) .... G-8, 190
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)............ 234
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) . G-9, 242
Elecampane

(Inula helenium)........ | G-IO, 266
English Ivy (Hedera helix) G-IO, 275
Feverfew

(Tanacetum parthenium) . .G-11, 306
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) . .. G-12, 342

Hemp Agrimony (Eupatorium

cannabinum)...........4 G-i3, 388
Hops (Humulus lupulus) . G-14, 400
Hydrangea

(Hydrangea arborescens) _.G-14, 413
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria). . 2... . S A466
Nerve Root

(Cypripedium calceolus). .. . . 541
Pipsissewa

(Chimaphila umbellata). . . . . 595
Poplar (Populus species) . G20, 607
Savin Tops

(Juniperus sabina)...... | G-21, 663
Stavesacre

(Delphinium _ staphisagria) .... 726
Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare) .G-24, 754
SKIN, BURNING OF
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)............: 234
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) . . G-9, 242
SKIN, ERUPTIONS OF
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)............% 234
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria). . 5... 0. 466
SKIN, IRRITATION OF
American Hellebore

(Veratrum viride)... .......4 25

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis)... 0.1.2.2... 26
Artichoke

(Cynara_scolymus). G-4, 44
Birch (Betula species) G-5, 78
Black Bryony

(Tamus communis). G-5, 90
Bulbous Buttercup

(Ranunculus bulbosus). . . . . . 128
Buttercup (Ranunculus acris) .. . 133
Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum

camphora).............4 G-7, 143
Cashew  (Anacardium

occidentale) Le G-7, 157
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species). ..... . 177
Chinese Olive

(Canarium species). ...... . 184
Clematis (Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Clove

(Syzygium aromaticum) ...G-8, 195
Cowhage (Mucuna pruriens) . . . .230

Croton Seeds
(Croton tiglium)............: 234
Globe Flower

(Trollius europaeus). G-12, 351
Goa Powder

(Andira araroba)........... 352
Indian Squill

(Urginea indica)... ........ 5 A21
Jack-in-the-Pulpit

(Arisaema atrorubens). . .. . . + A26
Marsh Marigold

(Caltha palustris). ...... 5 G-17, 503
Mayapple

(Podophyllum peltatum) . .G-17, 510
Mugwort

(Artemisia vulgaris)... .. § G-IS, 530
Nasturtium

(Tropaeolum majus) . . .G-18, 537
Orris (Iris species) . . G-19, sei

Pasque Flower
(Pulsatilla pratensis). ....... ¢ 572
Poisonous Buttercup

(Ranunculus sceleratus) G20, eoi
Savin Tops
(Juniperus sabina). ..... | G-21, 663

Scotch Pine (Pinus species) G-22, 674
Soapwort

(Saponaria officinalis) . . . G-22, 701
Spikenard
(Aralia racemosa). ..... | G-23, 711

----- PAGE 180 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Spurge (Euphorbia resinifera) . . . 716
Squill (Urginea maritima) G23, 717
Stillingia (Stillingia sylvatica) . . . 729
Traveller's Joy

(Clematis vitalba). ..... | G25, 769
White Bryony

(Bryonia alba)... 2... . | G-25, 800
White Mustard

(Sinapis alba)... 0... 0S G25, 805
SKIN, REDDENING
Henbane

(Hyoscyamus _ niger) G-14, 389
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum) G-17, 515
Stavesacre

(Delphinium staphisagria) 726
SKIN, YELLOWING
Kava Kava

(Piper methysticum),.... | G-15, 443

SLEEP DISTURBANCES

Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) G-8, 199

SLEEPINESS
(See under Drowsiness)

SLEEPLESSNESS
(See under Insomnia)

SNEEZING
Black Mustard

(Brassica _ nigra). G-5, 100

SOMNOLENCE
(See under Drowsiness)

SPASM, GASTROINTESTINAL

Birthwort

(Aristolochia __clematitis) ...G-5, 80
Buckthorn

{Rhamnus catharticus) .. . G-6, 123
Cascara Sagrada

(Rhamnus purshiana) ..G-7, 153
Chinese Rhubarb '

(Rheum palmatum) ..... G-8, 185
Digitalis Lanata

(Digitalis lanata)...... 250
Frangula

(Rhamnus frangula) G-12, 317
Senna (Cassia senna) G-22, 684
SPASM, GENERALIZED
Areca Nut (Areca catechu) . .G4, 38
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger) G-5,97

Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum
camphora).............5 G-7, 143

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) .. . G-12, 342
Labrador Tea

(Ledum latifolium).......... ¢ 451
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum)..... | G-17,515
Mountain Laurel (Kalmia

latifolia)... .......00.04 G-IS, 528
Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium

ambrosioides)..........5 G-26, 828
SPASM, TONIC-CLONIC
Hyssop

(Hyssopus _ officinalis) G-15, 414
SPEECH, COMPULSIVE
Jimson Weed

(Datura stramonium) G-15, 436
STOMACH COMPLAINTS
Brazilian Pepper Tree

(Schinus terebinthifolius). . . . ANT
Butcher's Broom

(Ruscus aculeatus). ..... § G-7, 132
Chives

(Allium schoenoprasum) . . G-8, 188
Coffee (Coffea arabica) .... G-9, 202
Cola (Cola acuminata). ........ 205
European Five-Finger Grass

(Potentilla reptans). .... § G-11, 289
Henna (Lawsonia inermis) G14, 391
Potentilla

(Potentilla anserina), . . . | G-20, eio
Sarsaparilla

(Smilax species) G-21, 661
Saw Palmetto

(Serenoa repens). G-21, 664
Turmeric

(Curcuma domestica)... 2... ? 775
White Willow

(Salix species)... ...... G-25, 807
STOMACHACHE
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi). .. .. . 220
Cyclamen

(Cyclamen europaeum)...... : 240
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum). ... . § G-17, 515
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia)... 2... | G-IS, 528
Soybean (Glycine soja) G22, 707

TACHYARRHYTHMIA /1-175

STOMATITIS
Mezereon
(Daphne mezereum)..... | G-17, 515
STOMATITIS, ULCERATIVE
Tolu Balsam

(Myroxyion balsamum) . G24, 764
STOOL URGENCY
Stavesacre

(Delphinium _ staphisagria) 1... 726

STUFFINESS, NASAL
(See under Nasal congestion)

STUPOR
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus).
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)............% 234
Cypress Spurge

(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis)
Mezereon (Daphne

mezereum).........+.+-4 G-17, 515
Quebracho

quebracho-bianco).......... 4 623
Strophanthus

(Strophanthus Kombe)....... : 736
Sweet Clover

(Melilotus officinalis) .. . ‘G-24, 744
Sweet Woodruff

(Galium odoratum). .... | G-24, 7Si
Wormseed (Artemisia cina). . . . $ 827

. . G16, 475

(Aspidosperma

SWEAT GLAND DISORDER
Scopolia (Scopolia carniolica) .. 67i

SWEAT, COLD
Mountain Laurel
(Kalmia latifolia)... 1... | G-IS, 528

SWEATING
(See under Diaphoresis)

SWEATING, DECREASED
Henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger)... . . | G-14, 389

SWELLING, UNSPECIFIED
Bitter Orange

(Citrus aurantium) G-3, 86
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum). ... . § G-17, 515

TACHYARRHYTHMIA
Henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger)... . . | G-14, 389

----- PAGE 181 -----
1-176 /TACHYCARDIA

TACHYCARDIA
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea)... . « 280
Ma-Huang
(Ephedra sinica).
Mandrake (Mandragora
officinarum)...... .
Mezereon {Daphne
mezereum).
Yohimbe Bark
(Pausinystalia yohimbe). .... | 843,

G-16, 488
G-17, 495

G-17, 515

TACHYPHYLAXIS
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica). G-16, 488

TEMPERATURE ELEVATION
(See under Hyperthermia)

TERATOGENICITY
Jalap (Ipomoea purga) . .
Morning Glory

(Ipomoea hederacea) . . 523

G-15, 427

THIRST
(See under Dipsesis)

THROAT IRRITATION

Black Hellebore
(Helleborus niger).

Stavesacre
(Delphinium staphisagria) .... 726

G5, 97

THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Quinine
(Cinchona pubescens) .. . G20, 626

THROMBOPENIA
(See under Thrombocytopenia)

THYROID GLAND ENLARGEMENT
Bugleweed

(Lycopus virginicus) . . . G6, 126

TINGLING
Monkshood
(Aconitum napellus)..... : G-i8, 521

TINGLING, FINGERS
Monkshood
(Aconitum napellus)..... : G-is, 521

TINGLING, LIMBS
Tree of Heaven
(Ailanthus altissima)........: 770

TINGLING, MOUTH
Monkshood
(Aconitum napellus). .... : G-i8, 521

TINGLING, TOES
Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus) G-18, 521

TINNITUS
Wormseed Oil (Chenopodium
G26, 828

ambrosioides)

TIREDNESS
(See under Fatigue)

TISSUE DAMAGE
Aloe
(Aloe barbadensis; Aloe

capensis; Aloe vera). G-3, 16

TONGUE, BURNING
Asarum (Asarum europaeum) ... 48

TONGUE, SWELLING
(See under Glossoncus)

TOXICITY, UNSPECIFIED
American Hellebore

(Veratrum viride) eee 25
Bitter Candytuft

(Iberis amara) 84
Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) . . . 228
Fool's Parsley

(Aethusa cynapium)..... | G-12, 316
Nux Vomica

(Strychnos nux vomica) . G-18, 547
Taumelloolch

(Lolium temulentum). ... | G74, 756
Tulip Tree
(Liriodendron tulipifera)..... ! 714

White Hellebore
(Veratrum album)
Yew (Taxus baccata).

G-25, 803
. G-26, 841

TREMBLING
(See under Tremors)

TREMORS
Areca Nut (Areca catechu) ..G-4, 38
Copaiba Balsam

(Copaifera langsdorffi)......: 220
Poppyseed

(Papaver somniferum) . . . G20, 609
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). ... . 3 843

TREMULOUSNESS
(See under Tremors)

TRIGLYCERIDES, INCREASE
(See under Hypertriglyceridemia)

TUMORS, MALIGNANT
Areca Nut (Areca catechu) . G-4, 38

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ULCERS, CUTANEOUS
Black Mustard

(Brassica nigra). . G-5, 100
Cayenne
(Capsicum annuum) G-8, 165

ULCERS, GASTRIC
Ginger (Zingiber officinale) .G-12, 339

UNCONSCIOUSNESS
(See under Consciousness, loss of)

URINARY DISTURBANCES
Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria). ... 2... 466
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica). G-16, 488
Pasque Flower

(Pulsatilla pratensis)........ 572

URINARY FREQUENCY

(See under Micturition disturbances)
URINARY TRACT DISORDER,
UNSPECIFIED

Lesser Celandine

(Ranunculus ficaria)........! A466

URINARY TRACT IRRITATION
American Liverleaf

(Hepatica nobilis)........... 26
Bulbous Buttercup
(Ranunculus bulbosus)...... . 128

Buttercup (Ranunculus acris) ... 133
Clematis (Clematis recta) ..G-8, 194
Globe Flower

(Trollius europaeus)
Pasque Flower

(Pulsatilla pratensis).........: 572
Poisonous Buttercup

(Ranunculus sceleratus) . G-20, 601
Sarsaparilla

G-12, 351

(Smilax species) G-21, 661
Traveller's Joy

(Clematis vitalba). . . . G25, 769
Wood Anemone

(Anemone nemorosa)........ | 824

URINARY URGENCY
Stavesacre
(Delphinium staphisagria) ....726

URINE, PRESENCE OF RBC'S
(See under Hematuria)

URTICARIA
American Pawpaw
(Asimina triloba)............% 27

----- PAGE 182 -----
SIDE EFFECTS INDEX

Brewer's Yeast

(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ... 118
Psyllium (Plantago ovata)..... | 612
Psyllium Seed

(Plantago afra)........ 5 G20, 616
Tolu Balsam

(Myroxylon balsamum) .. G-24, 764
VERTIGO
Broad Bean (Vicia faba). ...... 120
Green Tea (Camellia

sinensis)... 0... eee’ G13, 369
Quebracho (Aspidosperma

quebracho-bianco)..........4 623
VESTIBULAR DISTURBANCES
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). .... | 843

VISION ABNORMALITIES
(See under Visual disturbances)

VISION, CHANGES
(See under Visual disturbances)

VISION, DOUBLE
(See under Diplopia)

VISION, TEMPORARY LOSS OF
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia) G-IS, 528
VISUAL DISTURBANCES
Chaulmoogra

(Hydnocarpus species). ...... 177
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus

hippocastanum)........: G-14, 403
Wormseed (Artemisia cina)... . | 827
VOMITING
Aga (Amanita muscaria). ... | G3, 8
Alpine Cranberry

(Vaccinium vitis-idaea) .... G-3, 20
Angostura

(Galipea officinalis). ........ 34
Birthwort

(Aristolochia clematitis) ... G-5, SO
Bitter Apple

(Citrullus colocynthis). . . . | G-5, 83
Black Cohosh

(Cimicifuga racemosa) .... G-S, 92
Black Hellebore

(Helleborus niger)....... 5 G-5,97
Black Root
(Leptandra virginica)........ 104

Brazilian Pepper Tree
(Schinus terebinthifolius). . .. . 117 I

Broad Bean (Vicia faba)... .... 120
Celandine

(Chelidonium majus). G-8, 169
Cinquefoil

(Potentilla erecta) G-8, 192
Coffee (Coffea arabica) ....G-9, 202
Colchicum

(Colchicum autumnale) . . . G-9, 206
Colombo

(Jateorhiza palmata)........: 208
Cranesbill

(Geranium maculatum)...... : 233
Croton Seeds

(Croton tiglium)..........4.: 234
Cyclamen

(Cyclamen europaeum)....... 240

Cypress Spurge
(Euphorbia cyparissias) ..G-9, 242
Daffodil

(Narcissus pseudonarcissus) . . . 243

Digitalis

(Digitalis purpurea)... . | G-10, 248
Echinacea Angustifolia

(Echinacea angustifolia)... .. 261
Echinacea Pallida

(Echinacea pallida).........: 261

Echinacea Purpurea
(Echinacea purpurea) ... G-10, 261
Elephant-Ears

(Bergenia crassifolia). ......: 268
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea). ... : 280
Eucalyptus

(Eucalyptus globulus) . .. G-11, 283
Frangula

(Rhamnus frangula).... . § G-12, 317
Gamboge

(Garcinia hanburyi).... . § G-12, 325
Ginseng (Panax ginseng)...... : 346
Green Tea

(Camellia sinensis) G-13, 369
Herb Paris

(Paris quadrifolia)...... | G14, 392
Horse Chestnut (Aesculus <

hippocastanum)........ | G-14, 403
Indian Squill (Urginea

INdICA). Lo Ar
Indian-Hemp

(Apocynum cannabinum). .. . | A18
Ipecac

(Cephaelis ipecacuanha)..... : A23

WATER RETENTION/I1-1 77

Jaborandi

(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425
Labrador Tea

(Ledum latifolium)..........: A451
Lily-of-the-Valley

(Convallaria majalis) ... G-16, 475
Ma-Huang

(Ephedra sinica)....... | G-16, 488
Male Fern

(Dryopteris filix-mas) ... G-7, 493

Mate (Ilex paraguariensis) G-17, sos
Mezereon

(Daphne mezereum)..... | G-17, 515
Monkshood

(Aconitum napellus)..... | G-18, 521
Mountain Flax

(Linum catharticum)........ ! 526
Mountain Laurel

(Kalmia latifolia).......5 G-IS, 52s

Myrtle (Myrtus communis) . G-1S, 536
Niauli

(Melaleucea viridiflora)..... : 542
Night-Blooming Cereus

(Selenicereus grandiflorus) .. . 543

Orris (Iris species)....... 5 G-19, sei.
Pleurisy Root
(Asclepias tuberosa). ... | G20, 598

Simaruba (Simaruba amara)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis) ...700
Squill (Urginea maritima) . G-23, 717
Stillingia (Stillingia sylvatica) .. .729
Strophanthus

(Strophanthus Kombe).......° 736
Swamp Milkweed

(Asclepias incarnata) .. . 6-23, 743
Trailing Arbutus

(Epigae repens)............% 768
Uva-Ursi

(Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) .G-25, 779
Wormwood

(Artemisia absinthium) . G-26, 829
Yellow Dock

(Rumex crispus). 0.0.0 600 0008 835
Yellow Jessamine

(Gelsemium sempervirens) ....838
Yohimbe Bark

(Pausinystalia yohimbe). ... . 843

VOMITING, BLOODY
Arum (Arum maculatum)....... ¢ 46

WATER RETENTION
(See under Edema)

----- PAGE 183 -----
PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

1-178 /WEAKNESS
WEAKNESS European Mistletoe Mandrake (Mandragora
(See under Asthenia) (Viscum album) G-11, 291 officinarum) G-17, 495
WHEALS XEROSTOMIA
Black Bryony Henbane Yellow Jessamine
G-S, 90 (Hyoscyamus_ niger) G-14, 389 (Gelsemium sempervirens) .... 838

(Tamus communis)

----- PAGE 184 -----
Drug/Herb Interactions Guide

This section catalogs potentially adverse drug/herb combinations by both the generic name of

the drug or drug category and the accepted common name of the herb.

Under each bold-face

drug entry you'll find a list of the herbs with which the agent may interact. Likewise, under a

bold-face herb entry you'll find a list of potentially interactive drugs. A description of the

interaction's effect follows each

item in the list. Further information on each drug can be found

in Physicians' Desk Reference®. Information on each herb appears in the Herbal Monographs

section of this book.

ADONIS
Calcium

(Increases action of Adonis)
Digoxin

(Increases action of Adonis)
Glucocorticoids

(Increases action of Adonis)
Laxatives

(Increases action of Adonis)
Quinidine

(Increases action of Adonis)
Saluretics

(Increases action of Adonis)

ADONIS VERNAL/S
{See under Adonis)

AESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM
{See under Horse Chestnut)

ALCOHOL
German Chamomile
(May increase sedative effect)
Rauwolfia
(Increases impairment of motor
skills)
Valerian
(Additive depressive effects with
Valerian)
White Willow
(Enhances toxicity of salicylates)

ALKALINE DRUGS
Green Tea
(Decreased absorption of alkaline
drugs due to tannin component in
tea)
Oak
(Absorption of alkaline drugs may
be reduced or inhibited)

ALKALOIDS

Oak
(Absorption of alkaloids may be
reduced or inhibited)

ALOE
Antiarrhythmics
(Aloe-induced hypokalemia may
affect cardiac rhythm)
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increases effect of cardiac
glycosides)
Corticosteroids
(Increased potassium loss)
Licorice
(Increased potassium loss)
Thiazide Diuretics
(Increased potassium loss)

ALOE BARBADENSIS
{See under Aloe)

ALOE CAPENSIS
{See under Aloe)

ALOE VERA
{See under Aloe)

ALPHA ADRENERGIC BLOCKERS

Saw Palmetto
(Saw Palmetto has an additive
alpha adrenergic blocking effect
when given in combination with
alpha blockers)

ALPINE CRANBERRY
Medication and Food that Increase
Uric Acid Levels
(Decreases effect of Alpine
Cranberry)

AMANTADINE HYDROCHLORIDE
Belladonna
(Increases anticholinergic effect of
herb)
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)
Scopolia
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)

ANDROGENS
Saw Palmetto
(Saw Palmetto antagonizes the
effect of androgens)

ANTIARRHYTHMICS
Aloe
(Aloe-induced hypokalemia may
affect cardiac rhythm)

----- PAGE 185 -----
1-180 /ANTIARRHYTHMICS

Buckthorn
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Cascara Sagrada
(Potentiates arrhythmias with
prolonged use of Cascara)
Licorice
(Licorice-induced hypokalemia
increases risk of arrhythmias)
Senna
(Senna-induced hypokalemia may
increase risk of arrythmia)

ANTICHOLINERGICS

Jimson Weed
(Co-administration of Jimson
Weed with other anticholinergic
drugs may increase the frequency
and/or severity of anticholinergic
side effects such as dry mouth,
constipation, drowsiness, and
others)

ANTICOAGULANT DRUGS, UNSPECIFIED
Arnica
(Coumarin component in Arnica
may increase anticoagulant effect)
Astragalus
(Astragalus may potentiate
anticoagulant effects)
Horse Chestnut
(Horse Chestnut has a coumarin
componant and may interact with
warfarin, salicylates and other
drugs with anticoagulant
properties)

ANTICONVULSANTS
Evening Primrose
(Evening Primrose oil may lower
seizure threshold and decrease
effectiveness of anticonvulsant
medications)

ANTIHISTAMINES
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS,
UNSPECIFIED
Yohimbe Bark
(May need to adjust
antihypertensive medications due
to hypertensive effect of
Yohimbe)

ANTIPLATELET DRUGS
White Willow
(Additive effect with salicylates)

ANTITHROMBOLYTIC DRUGS
Ginkgo
(Increases effect of
antithrombolytic drugs)

ARCTOSTAPHYLOS —_UVA-URSI
(See under Uva-Ursi)

ARNICA
Anticoagulant drugs, unspecified
(Coumarin component in Arnica
may increase anticoagulant effect)
Warfarin Sodium
(Additive anticoagulant effect)

ARNICA MONTANA
(See under Arnica)

ARTEMISIA — ABSINTHIUM
(See under Wormwood)

ASPIRIN
Cayenne
(Decreased bioavailability of
aspirin)
Feverfew
(Increased antithrombotic effect)

ASTRAGALUS

Anticoagulant drugs, unspecified
(Astragalus may potentiate
anticoagulant effects)

Immunosuppressants
(Decreased effectiveness of
immunosuppressive effect due to
immunostimulant effect of
Astragalus)

ASTRAGALUS SPECIES
(See under Astragalus)

ATROPA BELLADONNA
(See under Belladonna)

BARBITURATES
Rauwolfia

(Synergistic effect)
White Willow

(Enhances toxicity of salicylates)

BELLADONNA

Amantadine Hydrochloride
(Increases anticholinergic effect of
herb)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Quinidine
(Increases anticholinergic effect of
herb)

Tricyclic Antidepressants
(Increases anticholinergic effect of
herb)

BENZODIAZEPINES
German Chamomile
(May increase sedative effect)

BILBERRY

Salicylates
(Increases prothrombin time;
caution should be observed when
used concurrently)

Warfarin Sodium
(Increases prothrombin time;
caution should be observed when
used concurrently)

BLADDERWRACK
Hypoglycemic Drugs
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)

BREWER'S YEAST
MAO Inhibitors
(Increase in blood pressure)

BUCKTHORN
Antiarrhythmics
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Corticosteroids
(Increases hypokalemic effects)
Digoxin
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)
Licorice Root
(Increases hypokalemic effects)
Thiazide Diuretics
(Increases hypokalemic effects)

BUGLEWEED
Diagnostic Procedures Using
Radioactive Isotopes
(Herb interferes with these
isotopes)
Thyroid Preparations
(Effect not specified)

----- PAGE 186 -----
DRUG/HERB INTERACTIONS GUIDE

CALCIUM
Adonis
(Increases action of Adonis)
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)
Squill
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

CALCIUM SALTS

Kombe Seed
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)

Oleander
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

Strophanthus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

Strophanthus Gratus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

CAMELLIA SINENSIS
(See under Green Tea)

CAPSICUM ANNUUM
(See under Cayenne)

CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
White Willow
(Potentiates action of salicylates)

CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES
Aloe
(Increases effect of cardiac
glycosides)
Buckthorn
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Cascara Sagrada
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Chinese Rhubarb
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Frangula
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Guarana
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)

Ma-Huang
(Disturbance of heart rhythm)

CARDIOACTIVE STEROIDS
Castor Oil Plant
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)

CARICA PAPAYA
(See under Papaya)

CASCARA SAGRADA
Antiarrhythmics
(Potentiates arrhythmias with
prolonged use of Cascara)
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Corticosteroids
(Increases hypokalemic effect)
Digoxin
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)
Indomethacin
(Decreases therapeutic effect of
Cascara)
Thiazide Diuretics
(Increases hypokalemic effect)

CASSIA SENNA
(See under Senna)

CASTOR OIL PLANT
Cardioactive Steroids
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)

CAYENNE
Aspirin
(Decreased bioavailability of
aspirin)
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
STIMULANTS
Ma-Huang
(Ma-Huang has an additive effect
on the CNS when combined with
CNS stimulants)

CHASTE TREE
Dopamine Antagonists
(Decreased dopaminergic effect of
herb)

CHINESE RHUBARB
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)

DIGITALIS /I-181

Digoxin
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

CINCHONA PUBESCENS
(See under Quinine)

COFFEA ARABICA
(See under Coffee)

COFFEE
Drugs, unspecified
(Herb can hinder (or decrease)
resorption of other drugs)

CONVALLARIA — MAJALIS
(See under Lily-of-the-Valley)

CORTICOSTEROIDS
Aloe
(Increased potassium loss)
Buckthorn
(Increases hypokalemic effects)
Cascara Sagrada
(Increases hypokalemic effect)
Echinacea Angustifolia
(Echinacea may potentially
interfere with the anti-cancer
chemotherapeutic effect of
corticosteroids)

CYCLOSPORINE
St. John's Wort
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower cyclosporine serum levels)

CYTISUS SCOPARIUS
(See under Scotch Broom)

DATURA STRAMONIUM
(See under Jimson Weed)
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES USING
RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPES
Bugleweed
(Herb interferes with these
isotopes)

DIGITALIS
Methylxanthines
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

----- PAGE 187 -----
1-182/DIGITALIS

Quinidine
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

Sympathomimetic Agents
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

DIGITALIS GLYCOSIDE PREPARATIONS

Licorice
(Licorice-induced hypokalemia
increases risk of digitalis toxicity)

Rauwolfia
(Severe bradycardia when used in
combination with digitalis
glycosides)

Senna
(Senna-induced hypokalemia may
increase toxicity of digitalis
preparations)

DIGITALIS LANATA
Methylxanthines
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Quinidine
(Risk of'cardiac arrhythmias)
Sympathomimetic Agents
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)

DIGITALIS PURPUREA
(See under Digitalis)

DIGOXIN

Adonis
(Increases action of Adonis)

Buckthorn
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

Cascara Sagrada
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin.
toxicity)

Chinese Rhubarb
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

Frangula
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

Guarana
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)

Squill
(Squill potentiates the positive
inotropic and negative chronopic
effects of digoxin)

St. John's Wort
(Co-administration of the herb
with digoxin has resulted in a
significant decrease in the digoxin
area under the curve)

Uzara
(Herb contains cardiac glycosides
and may have additive effect
when taken with digoxin, possibly
increasing digoxin toxicity)

DIOSCOREA VILLOSA

(See under Wild Yam)

DIURETICS
Kombe Seed
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
DOPAMINE ANTAGONISTS
Chaste Tree
(Decreased dopaminergic effect of
herb)

DRUGS THAT CAUSE
THROMBOCYTOPENIA

Quinine
(Herb increases risk of
thrombocytopenia)

DRUGS, UNSPECIFIED
Coffee
(Herb can hinder (or decrease)
resorption of other drugs)
Flax
(Absorption of other drugs may
be delayed when taken
simultaneously)
Niauli
(Co-administration may result in
decreased effect of drugs that
undergo liver metabolism)
Psyllium
(Absorption of other drugs may
be decreased if taken
simultaneously with herb)
Psyllium Seed
(Absorption of other drugs may
be decreased if taken
simultaneously with herb)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA
Corticosteroids
(Echinacea may potentially
interfere with the anti-cancer
chemotherapeutic effect of
corticosteroids)
Immunosuppressants
(The immune-stimulating effect of
Echinacea may interfere with
drugs that have
immunosuppressant effects)

EPHEDRA SINICA
(See under Ma-Huang)

ESTROGEN
Senna
(Senna decreases estrogen levels
when taken with estrogen
supplements)
Wild Yam
(Additive effect)

ETHANOL
Yohimbe Bark
(Increased anxiogenic effects)

EVENING PRIMROSE
Anticonvulsants
(Evening Primrose oil may lower
seizure threshold and decrease
effectiveness of anticonvulsant
medications)

FENUGREEK
Hypoglycemic Drugs
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)

FEVERFEW
Aspirin

(Increased antithrombotic effect)
Warfarin Sodium

(Increased antithrombotic effect)

FLAX
Drugs, unspecified
(Absorption of other drugs may
be delayed when taken
simultaneously)

FRANGULA
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)

----- PAGE 188 -----
DRUG/HERB INTERACTIONS GUIDE

Digoxin
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

FUCUS VESICULOSUS
(See under Bladderwrack)

GALEGA OFFICINALIS
(See under Goat's Rue)

GERMAN CHAMOMILE
Alcohol
(May increase sedative effect)
Benzodiazepines
(May increase sedative effect)
Warfarin Sodium
(Hydroxycoumarin component in
Chamomile may elevate
prothrombin times)

GINKGO
Antithrombolytic Drugs
(Increases effect of
antithrombolytic drugs)

GINKGO BILOBA
(See under Ginkgo)

GINSENG
Hypoglycemic Drugs

(Increases hypoglycemic effect)
Loop Diuretics

(Increases diuretic resistance)
MAO Inhibitors

(Combination increases chance for

headache, tremors, mania)

GLUCOCORTICOIDS
Adonis
(Increases action of Adonis)
Kombe Seed
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
Licorice
(Licorice potentiates effect of
glucocorticoids)
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)
Oleander
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)
Squill
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

Strophanthus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

Strophanthus Gratus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

GLYCYRRHIZA GLABRA
(See under Licorice)

GOAT'S RUE
Hypoglycemic Drugs
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)

GREEN TEA
Alkaline Drugs
(Decreased absorption of alkaline
drugs due to tannin component in
tea)

GUANETHIDINE
Ma-Huang
(Increased sympathomimetic
effects)

GUARANA
Cardiac Glycosides
(Increased effect due to potassium
loss with chronic use of herb)
Digoxin
(Herb may cause hypokalemia,
which may increase digoxin
toxicity)

HALOPERIDOL
Milk Thistle
(Silymarin in combination with
haloperidol causes a decrease in
lipid peroxidation)

HALOTHANE
Ma-Huang
(Disturbance of heart rhythm)

HENBANE
Amantadine Hydrochloride

(Increased anticholinergic action)
Antihistamines

(Increased anticholinergic action)
Phenothiazines

(Increased anticholinergic action)
Procainamide

(Increased anticholinergic action)

INDIAN SQUILL /I-183

Quinidine
(Increased anticholinergic action)
Tricyclic Antidepressants
(Increased anticholinergic action)

HORSE CHESTNUT

Anticoagulant drugs, unspecified
(Horse Chestnut has a coumarin
componant and may interact with
warfarin, salicylates and other
drugs with anticoagulant
properties)

HYOSCYAMUS NIGER
(See under Henbane)

HYPERICUM PERFORA TUM
(See under St. John's Wort)

HYPNOTICS
Valerian
(Additive effect when taken with
Valerian)

HYPOGLYCEMIC DRUGS
Bladderwrack
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)
Fenugreek
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)
Ginseng
(Increases hypoglycemic effect)
Goat's Rue
(Herb may have an additive
hypoglycemic effect when taken
with other hypoglycemic drugs)

IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

Astragalus
(Decreased effectiveness of
immunosuppressive effect due to
immunostimulant effect of
Astragalus)

Echinacea Angustifolia
(The immune-stimulating effect of
Echinacea may interfere with
drugs that have
immunosuppressant effects)

INDIAN SQUILL
Methylxanthines
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)

----- PAGE 189 -----
1-184/INDIAN SQUILL

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)

Quinidine
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)

Sympathomimetic Agents
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)

INDINAVIR SULFATE

St. John's Wort
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower indinavir serum levels)

INDOMETHACIN

Cascara Sagrada
(Decreases therapeutic effect of
Cascara)

Senna
(Decreased therapeutic effect of
Senna)

Wild Yam
(Wild Yam may decrease the anti-
inflammatory effect of
indomethacin)

INSULIN
Psyllium
(Effect unspecified; insulin dose
should be decreased)

JIMSON WEED

Anticholinergics
(Co-administration of Jimson
Weed with other anticholinergic
drugs may increase the frequency
and/or severity of anticholinergic
side effects such as dry mouth,
constipation, drowsiness, and
others)

KOMBE SEED
Calcium Salts
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
Diuretics
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
Glucocorticoids
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)

Laxatives
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)

Quinidine
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)

LAXATIVES
Adonis
(Increases action of Adonis)
Kombe Seed
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)
Oleander
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)
Squill
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)
Strophanthus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Strophanthus Gratus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

LEVODOPA
Rauwolfia
(Decreased effect; increases in
extra-pyramidal symptoms)

LICORICE
Aloe
(Increased potassium loss)
Antiarrhythmics
(Licorice-induced hypokalemia
increases risk of arrhythmias)
Digitalis Glycoside Preparations
(Licorice-induced hypokalemia
increases risk of digitalis toxicity)
Glucocorticoids
(Licorice potentiates effect of
glucocorticoids)
Loop Diuretics
(Additive effect of hypokalemia)
Thiazide Diuretics
(Additive effect of hypokalemia)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LICORICE ROOT
Buckthorn
(Increases hypokalemic effects)

LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY

Calcium
(Increases the effect of Lily-o:

the-Valley)

Digoxin

(Increases the effect of Lily-o:

the-Valley)

Glucocorticoids

(Increases the effect of Lily-o:

the-Valley)

Laxatives

(Increases the effect of Lily-o:

the-Valley)

Quinidine
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)

Saluretics
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)

LINUM — USITATISSIMUM
(See under Flax)

LOOP DIURETICS
Ginseng
(Increases diuretic resistance)
Licorice
(Additive effect of hypokalemia)
Uva-Ursi
(The sodium-sparing effect of
Uva-Ursi may antagonize the
diuretic effect of the loop
diuretics)
LYCOPUS VIRGINICUS
(See under Bugleweed)

MA-HUANG
Cardiac Glycosides
(Disturbance of heart rhythm)
Central Nervous System Stimulants
(Ma-Huang has an additive effect
on the CNS when combined with
CNS stimulants)
Guanethidine
(Increased sympathomimetic
effects)
Halothane
(Disturbance of heart rhythm)
MAO Inhibitors
(Increases sympathomimetic
effects of ephedrine)

----- PAGE 190 -----
DRUG/HERB INTERACTIONS GUIDE

Oxytocin
(Development of high blood
pressure)

MAO INHIBITORS
Brewer's Yeast
(Increase in blood pressure)
Ginseng
(Combination increases chance for
headache, tremors, mania)
Ma-Huang
(Increases sympathomimetic
effects of ephedrine)
Scotch Broom
(Increased risk of hypertensive
crisis)
MATRICARIA RECUTITA
(See under German Chamomile)
MEDICATION AND FOOD THAT INCREASE
URIC ACID LEVELS
Alpine Cranberry
(Decreases effect of Alpine
Cranberry)
Uva-Ursi
(Decreases effect of herb)

MELALEUCEA _ VIRIDIFLORA
(See under Niauli)

METHYLXANTHINES
Digitalis
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
Digitalis Lanata
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Indian Squill
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)
Squill
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

MILK THISTLE
Haloperidol
(Silymarin in combination with
haloperidol causes a decrease in
lipid peroxidation)
Phenothiazines
(Silymarin in combination with
phenothiazines causes a decrease
in lipid peroxidation)
Phentolamine Mesylate
(Silymarin antagonizes the effect
of phentolamine)

Yohimbine Hydrochloride
(Silymarin antagonizes the effect
of yohimbine)

MORPHINE SULFATE
Yohimbe Bark
(Potentiates effects of morphine)

NALTREXONE HYDROCHLORIDE
Yohimbe Bark
(Potentiates Yohimbe side effects)

NERIUM OLEANDER
(See under Oleander)

NEUROLEPTICS
Rauwolfia
(Synergistic effect)

NIAULI

Drugs, unspecified
(Co-administration may result in
decreased effect of drugs that
undergo liver metabolism)

NIFEDIPINE
Senna
(nhibits activity of Senna via
calcium channel blockade)
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
DRUGS
Uva-Ursi
(Uva-Ursi may potentiate the
gastrointestinal irritation caused by
NSAIDs)
White Willow
(Use with caution; effect not
specified)

OTC STIMULANTS
Yohimbe Bark
(Potentiates hypertensive effect)

OAK
Alkaline Drugs
(Absorption of alkaline drugs may
be reduced or inhibited)
Alkaloids
(Absorption of alkaloids may be
reduced or inhibited)

OENOTHERA BIENNIS
(See under Evening Primrose)

OLEANDER
Calcium Salts
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

PHENTOLAMINE MESYLATE/I-1 85

Glucocorticoids
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

Laxatives
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

Quinidine
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

Saluretics
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)

ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES
St. John's Wort
(Breakthrough bleeding has been
reported with concomitant use of
the herb with oral contraceptives)

OXYTOCIN
Ma-Huang
(Development of high blood
pressure)

PANAX GINSENG
(See under Ginseng)

PAPAYA
Warfarin Sodium
(Increased INR levels)

PAULLINIA CUPANA
(See under Guarana)

PAUSINYSTALIA YOHIMBE
(See under Yohimbe Bark)

PHENOTHIAZINES
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)
Milk Thistle
(Silymarin in combination with
phenothiazines causes a decrease
in lipid peroxidation)
Wormwood
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

PHENTOLAMINE MESYLATE
Milk Thistle
(Silymarin antagonizes the effect
of phentolamine)

----- PAGE 191 -----
1-186 /PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS

PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS
Digitalis
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
Digitalis Lanata
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Indian Squill
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)
Squill
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

PHOTOSENSITIZING AGENTS
St. John's Wort
(An additive photosensitizing
effect is expected when the herb
is used with photosensitizing
drugs such as tetracyclines,
sulfonamides, and thiazides)

PLANTAGO AFRA
(See under Psyllium Seed)

PLANTAGO OVATA
(See under Psyllium)

PROCAINAMIDE
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)

PSYLLIUM
Drugs, unspecified
(Absorption of other drugs may
be decreased if taken
simultaneously with herb)
Insulin
(Effect unspecified; insulin dose
should be decreased)

PSYLLIUM SEED
Drugs, unspecified
(Absorption of other drugs may
be decreased if taken
simultaneously with herb)

QUERCUS ROBUR
(See under Oak)

QUINIDINE
Adonis

(Increases action of Adonis)
Belladonna

(Increases anticholinergic effect of

herb)

Digitalis
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
Digitalis Lanata
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)
Indian Squill
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)
Kombe Seed
(Increases effects and side effects
of herb)
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)
Oleander
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)
Scopolia
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)
Squill
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias; increases
effectiveness and side effects of
herb)
Strophanthus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Strophanthus Gratus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

QUININE

Drugs that Cause Thrombocytopenia
(Herb increases risk of
thrombocytopenia)

RAUWOLFIA

Alcohol
(Increases impairment of motor
skills)

Barbiturates
(Synergistic effect)

Digitalis Glycoside Preparations
(Severe bradycardia when used in
combination with digitalis
glycosides)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Levodopa
(Decreased effect; increases in
extra-pyramidal symptoms)
Neuroleptics
(Synergistic effect)
Sympathomimetic Agents
(Increases blood pressure)

RAUWOLFIA SERPENTINA
(See under Rauwolfia)

RESERPINE

St. John's Wort
(Hypericum antagonizes the effect
of reserpine)

RHAMNUS —CATHARTICUS
(See under Buckthorn)

RHAMNUS FRANGULA
(See under Frangula)

RHAMNUS PURSHIANA
(See under Cascara Sagrada)

RHEUM PALMA TUM
(See under Chinese Rhubarb)

RICINUS COMMUNIS
(See under Castor Oil Plant)

SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAE
(See under Brewer's Yeast)

SALICYLATES
Bilberry
(Increases prothrombin time;
caution should be observed when
used concurrently)
White Willow
(Use with caution; effect not
specified)

SALIX SPECIES
(See under White Willow)

SALURETICS
Adonis
(Increases action of Adonis)
Lily-of-the-Valley
(Increases the effect of Lily-of-
the-Valley)
Oleander
(Increased efficacy and side
effects when given simultaneously
with herb)
Squill
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

----- PAGE 192 -----
DRUG/HERB INTERACTIONS GUIDE

Strophanthus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

Strophanthus Gratus
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

SAW PALMETTO

Alpha Adrenergic Blockers
(Saw Palmetto has an additive
alpha adrenergic blocking effect
when given in combination with
alpha blockers)

Androgens
(Saw Palmetto antagonizes the
effect of androgens)

SCOPOLIA
Amantadine Hydrochloride
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)
Quinidine
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)
Tricyclic Antidepressants
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)

SCOPOLIA CARNIOLICA
(See under Scopolia)

SCOTCH BROOM
MAO Inhibitors
(Increased risk of hypertensive
crisis)
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS
St. John's Wort
(Concomitant use with the herb
will result in an additive serotonin
effect and possible toxicity)

SENNA
Antiarrhythmics
(Senna-induced hypokalemia may
increase risk of arrythmia)
Digitalis Glycoside Preparations.
(Senna-induced hypokalemia may
increase toxicity of digitalis
preparations)
Estrogen
(Senna decreases estrogen levels
when taken with estrogen
supplements)

Indomethacin
(Decreased therapeutic effect of
Senna)

Nifedipine
(Inhibits activity of Senna via
calcium channel blockade)

SERENOA REPENS
(See under Saw Palmetto)

SIL YBUM MARIANUM
(See under Milk Thistle)

SQUILL

Calcium
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

Digoxin
(Squill potentiates the positive
inotropic and negative chronopic
effects of digoxin)

Glucocorticoids
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

Laxatives
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

Methylxanthines
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

Quinidine
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias; increases
effectiveness and side effects of
herb)

Saluretics
(Increases effectiveness and side
effects of herb)

Sympathomimetic Agents
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)

ST. JOHN'S WORT
Cyclosporine
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower cyclosporine serum levels)
Digoxin
(Co-administration of the herb
with digoxin has resulted in a
significant decrease in the digoxin
area under the curve)

STROPHANTHUS /1-187

Indinavir Sulfate
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower indinavir serum levels)
Oral Contraceptives
(Breakthrough bleeding has been
reported with concomitant use of
the herb with oral contraceptives)
Photosensitizing Agents
(An additive photosensitizing
effect is expected when the herb
is used with photosensitizing
drugs such as tetracyclines,
sulfonamides, and thiazides)
Reserpine
(Hypericum antagonizes the effect
of reserpine)
Selective Serotonin Reuptake
Inhibitors
(Concomitant use with the herb
will result in an additive serotonin
effect and possible toxicity)
Sympathomimetic Agents
(St. John's Wort may have MAO
inhibitor properties and caution
should be used with
sympathomimetic agents)
Theophylline
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower theophylline serum levels)

STROPHANTHUS
Calcium Salts
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Glucocorticoids
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Laxatives
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Quinidine
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Saluretics «
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

----- PAGE 193 -----
1-188/STROPHANTHUS GRATUS

STROPHANTHUS GRATUS
Calcium Salts
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Glucocorticoids
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Laxatives
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Quinidine
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)
Saluretics
(Simultaneous administration with
herb enhance both effects and side
effects)

STROPHANTHUS KOMBE
(See under Strophanthus)

STROPHANTHUS GRATUS
(See under Strophanthus Gratus)

STROPHANTHUS —HISPIDUS
(See under Kombe Seed)

SYMPATHOMIMETIC AGENTS
Digitalis
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
Digitalis Lanata
(Risk of cardiac arrhythmias)
Indian Squill
(Can increase the risk of cardie
arrhythmias when given
simultaneously with this herb)
Rauwolfia
(Increases blood pressure)
Squill
(Increases risk of cardiac
arrhythmias)
St. John's Wort
(St. John's Wort may have MAO
inhibitor properties and caution
should be used with

sympathomimetic agents)
0

TANACETUM —PARTHENIUM
(See under Feverfew)

THEOPHYLLINE

St. John's Wort
(The herb induces the cytochrome
P450 enzyme system and will
lower theophylline serum levels)

THIAZIDE DIURETICS
Aloe

(Increased potassium loss)
Buckthorn

(Increases hypokalemic effects)
Cascara Sagrada

(Increases hypokalemic effect)
Licorice

(Additive effect of hypokalemia)
Uva-Ursi

(The sodium-sparing effect of

Uva-Ursi may antagonize the

diuretic effect of thiazide

diuretics)

THYROID PREPARATIONS
Bugleweed
(Effect not specified)

TRAZODONE HYDROCHLORIDE
Wormwood
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Belladonna
(Increases anticholinergic effect of
herb)
Henbane
(Increased anticholinergic action)
Scopolia
(Increased effect when given
simultaneously with herb)
Wormwood
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

TRIGONELLA  FOENUM-GRAECUM
(See under Fenugreek)

URGINEA INDICA
(See under Indian Squill)

URGINEA MARITIMA

I (See under Squill)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

URINARY TRACT ACIDIFIERS
Uva-Ursi
(Drugs or foods that acidify the
urine will decrease the
antibacterial effect of Uva-Ursi)

UVA-URSI
Loop Diuretics
(The sodium-sparing effect of
Uva-Ursi may antagonize the
diuretic effect of the loop
diuretics)
Medication and Food that Increase
Uric Acid Levels
(Decreases effect of herb)
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory
Drugs
(Uva-Ursi may potentiate the
gastrointestinal irritation caused by
NSAIDs)
Thiazide Diuretics
(The sodium-sparing effect of
Uva-Ursi may antagonize the
diuretic effect of thiazide
diuretics)
Urinary Tract Acidifiers
(Drugs or foods that acidify the
urine will decrease the
antibacterial effect of Uva-Ursi)

UZARA
Digoxin
(Herb contains cardiac glycosides
and may have additive effect
when taken with digoxin, possibly
increasing digoxin toxicity)

VACCINIUM MYRTILLUS
(See under Bilberry)

VACCINIUM _ VITIS-IDAEA
(See under Alpine Cranberry)

VALERIAN
Alcohol «
(Additive depressive effects with
Valerian)
Hypnotics
(Additive effect when taken with
Valerian)

VALERIANA OFFICINALIS
(See under Valerian)

VITEX AGNUS-CASTUS

I (See under Chaste Tree)

----- PAGE 194 -----
DRUG/HERB INTERACTIONS GUIDE

WARFARIN SODIUM
Arnica
(Additive anticoagulant effect)
Bilberry
(Increases prothrombin time;
caution should be observed when
used concurrently)
Feverfew
(Increased antithrombotic effect)
German Chamomile
(Hydroxycoumarin component in
Chamomile may elevate
prothrombin times)
Papaya
(Increased INR levels)

WHITE WILLOW
Alcohol

(Enhances toxicity of salicylates)
Antiplatelet Drugs

(Additive effect with salicylates)
Barbiturates

(Enhances toxicity of salicylates)
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors

(Potentiates action of salicylates)

Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory
Drugs
(Use with caution; effect not
specified)
Salicylates
(Use with caution; effect not
specified)

WILD YAM
Estrogen
(Additive effect)
Indomethacin
(Wild Yam may decrease the anti-
inflammatory effect of
indomethacin)

WORMWOOD

Phenothiazines
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

Trazodone Hydrochloride
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

YOHIMBINE HYDROCHLORIDE /I-189

Tricyclic Antidepressants
(Wormwood preparations should
not be administered with drugs
known to lower the seizure
threshold)

XYSMALOBIUM — UNDULATUM
{See under Uzara)

YOHIMBE BARK
Antihypertensive agents, unspecified
(May need to adjust
antihypertensive medications due
to hypertensive effect of
Yohimbe)
Ethanol
(Increased anxiogenic effects)
Morphine Sulfate
(Potentiates effects of morphine)
Naltrexone Hydrochloride
(Potentiates Yohimbe side effects)
OTC stimulants
(Potentiates hypertensive effect)
YOHIMBINE HYDROCHLORIDE
Milk Thistle
(Silymarin antagonizes the effect
of yohimbine)

----- PAGE 195 -----


----- PAGE 196 -----
Safety Guide

This guide lists botanicals in three precautionary categories:

* Not for use during pregnancy

* Not for use while nursing

* For use only under supervision
All common, scientific, and brand names of each potentially harmful botanical are listed
alphabetically. Generally accepted common names that serve as monograph titles appear in bold
type. Scientific names are shown in italic type. Brand names are followed by the supplier's name
in parentheses. If an entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the plant or
product in the Identification Guide, the second to the herbal monograph. For additional

information on potential adverse effects, be sure to check the appropriate underlying monograph.

Not for use during pregnancy

Absinthe. . . Lae G-26, 829 ALOE AMERICAN LIVERLEAF
Achillea millefolium. . G-26, 833 (Aloe barbadensis; Aloe (Hepatica nobilis) 26
Adiantum capillus-veneris. . . . . 491 capensis; Aloe vera). G-3, ie .
Akebia 189 American Saffron. 652
wo - - - Aloe 99 Gel (Lee). ie
Akebia quinata, . : : ., 189 . AMMONIAC GUM
. Aloe barbadensis. G-3, 16
Alant.................. Geo, 266 Aloe capensis. G-3, ie (Dor iaci 29
Alcohol Free Chaste Tree Aloe fi P _ ie orema ammoniacum)
Berry Liquid “le erox Gai, Anchusa G-3, 13
1 oe vera. we we . . “SD,
ae’ Awe) ue 176 Aloe Vera Capsules (ADH, ANGELICA
co! ° ree ava ava Herbal Harvest, National (Angelica archangelica) ...G-3, 32
Liquid (Nature's Answer) ++ 443 Vitamin, Nature's Bounty, Angelica archangelica, .. . . G-3,32
Alcohol Free Sage Liquid Nature's Way) ie Angelica Root Liquid Fluid
aneeres Anewen rH -. 655 Aloe Vera Concentrate 5000 Extract (Nature's Answer)... . 32
conor ree Farrow Mowers Capsules (Mason Vitamins) ....16 Angel's Wort G-3, 32
Liquid (Nature's Answer) .... 833 . :
Aloe Vera Mild Stimulant ANISE
Alder Buckthorn ....... . G-12,317 : oo. .
Laxative Capsules (Pimpinella anisum) ..... .G-3, 35
Alder Dogwood... . G-12,317 (Nature's Herbs) 16
Alexandrian Senna... . G-22, 684 Aloe Vera Super-Strength Apium graveolens. G-8, 172
(Alkanna tinctoria) G-3, 13 (Pharmaceutical Labs) ....... 16 Aralia racemosa G23,711
Alkanet Root G-3, 13 AMARGO Arberry.... a G-25, 779

Alkanna tinctoria,......... G-3,13 (Quassia amara) G-3, 23 Arborvitae.......... G-24, 759

----- PAGE 197 -----
1-192/ARCTOSTAPHYLOS UVA-URSI

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi . G25, 779
Arisaema atrorubens..........: A26
Aristolochia clematitis. G-5,SO
Arrow Wood,...........4 G-12, 317
Arruda Brava............) G-IS, 425
Arruda Do Mato.......... G-15, 425
Artemisia absinthium. ... . | G-26, 829
Artemisia vulgaris........ 4 G-18,530
ASA FOETIDA

(Ferula  foetida) 47
Asarabacca. 48
ASARUM

(Asarum — europaeum) 48
Asarum europaeum, . . : .. 48
Asclepias tuberosa,...... | G20, 598
Ashe. eee eel 622
Ass Ear. G-9, 212
ASS'S Foot G-9, 209
Asthma Weed...........4 G-16, 479
AV@ ooo e eee eee ed G-15, 443
Ava Pepper. ..........0004 G-15, 443
Band Man's Plaything... J G-26, 833
Baptisia tinctoria.........! G-26, 812
Barbary...............22..--5 A87
BARBERRY

(Berberis vulgaris). G-4, 61
BARLEY

(Hordeum distichon). G-4, 63
Barley Grain Capsules

(ADH) 63
BASIL

(Ocimum basilicum). G-4, 64
Bastard Cinnamon............. 182
Bastard Jasmine.
Bastard Saffron..............4 652
Bearberry...............4 G-25, 779
Bearsgrape. : . .G-25, 779
Bee Balm ..................: 562
Beechdrops ................-. 109
Beefsteak Plant..............: 583
Bees' Nest............... G-25, 809
BEHEN

(Moringa _ oleifera) .67
Ben Nut Tree.................4 67
Berberis vulgaris.
Berberry.
Bergamot............

Bergenia crass

BETH ROOT

(Trillium erectum). G-4, 74
Bird's Foot.............4 G-11, 304
Bird's Neat..............4 G-25, 809
Birds' Nest..............4 G25, 809
Birthroot. Lane G-4, 74
BIRTHWORT

(Aristolochia clematitis) G-5, 80
Bissy Nut... ... eee eee 205
Bitter Ash (Picrasma excelsa) . . 622
Bitter Ash (Quassia amara) .G-3, 23
Bitter Bark . . . . . G-7, 153
Bitter Wood. G-3, 23
Bitterwood.... beet eee dl 622
Black Alder.............4 G-12,317
BLACK COHOSH

(Cimicifuga racemosa) ....G-5, 92
Black Cohosh Capsules

(Frontier, Herbal Harvest,

Natrol, Nature's Way,

Rexall Consumer). . Le 92
Black Cohosh Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs)... . | 92
Black Root G-9, 212
Black Snake Root G-5,92
Black-Tang .............0--05 106
Blackwort G-9, 212
Bladder Fucus................ 106
Bladderpod..............4 G-16, 479
BLADDERWRACK

(Fucus vesiculosus)... .......- 106
Bladderwrack Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer)........... 106

BLESSED THISTLE
(Cnicus benedictus). . . . .

G-6, 107

Blessed Thistle Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs,

Nature's Way).............- 107
Blessed Thistle Low Alcohol

Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer)........... 107
Blindweed...............4 G-22, 690
BLOODROOT

(Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . 108
BloodwOlt .. . G-26, 833

Blue Balm.................3 562

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

BLUE COHOSH
(Caulophyllum
thalictroides). 2.6... 0c ee 109

Blue Cohosh Liquid

(McZand).........
Blue Cohosh Root Liquid

(Nature's Answer). .........- 109
Blue Flag. ... G19, 561
Blue Ginseng ..............5. 109
Blueberry Root... .........005 109
Boneset .: .: G-9,212
BORAGE

(Borago officinalis) G-6, 114
Borage Oil Capsules

(ADH, Sundown)...........- 114
Borago officinalis. G-6, 114
Box Thorn... 2... 0220000000 S A87
British Tobacco. . . . G-9,209
Bruisewort G-9, 212
BUCKTHORN

(Rhamnus_ catharticus) . G-6, 123
Buckthorn Bark..........! G-12, 317
Bugbane. G-5, 92
Bugloss. G-6, 114
Bugwort. sone G-5, 92
Bullsfoot...............4 G-9, 209
Bupleurum Chinese...........- 187
Burage. . . G-6, 114
Burrage. G-6, 114
Butterbur. G-9, 209
Butterfly Weed..........: G-20, 598
Buttons... ..........000-4 G-24, 754
Caffea.. oe ee ee G-9, 202
California Buckthorn G-7, 153
CALIFORNIA POPPY

(Eschscholtzia

californica) G-7, 140
CAMPHOR TREE

(Cinnamomum

camphora). G-7, 143
Cana Fistula.............4 G-13, 354
Canada Root............4 G-20, 598
Cankerroot..................4 358
Canton Cassia............0... 182
CAPE ALOE

(Aloe ferox).. 0... ee ee 16
Capsella bursa-pastoris . G22, 690
Cardin G-6, 107
Carpenter's Weed........ | G-26, 833

----- PAGE 198 -----
SAFETY GUIDE

Carrot..................4 G-25, 809

Carthamus tinctorius.......... 5 652

CASCARA SAGRADA

(Rhamnus — purshiana) G-7, 153

Cascara Sagrada Bark

Capsules (Frontier).......... 153
Cascara Sagrada Bark Mild

Stimulant Laxative

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... 153
Cascara Sagrada Capsules

(Herbal Harvest, Humco,

Nature's Way).............. 153
Cascara Sagrada Natural

Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Resource).........- 153
Case-Weed..............4 G-22, 690
Cassia... 2... ee ee 182
Cassia Aromaticum............ 182
Cassia Bark... .......2.0..0.. 182
Cassia fistula... 2... eS G-13, 354
Cassia Lignea...............- 182
Cassia senna.........-..5 G-22, 684
Castor Bean G-7, 158
CASTOR OIL PLANT

(Ricinus communis) G-7, 158
Catmint G-8, 164
Catnep. G-8, 164
CATNIP

(Nepeta  cataria) G-8, 164
Catnip Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way) ......... 164
Catnip Herb Liquid Fluid

Extract (Nature's Answer) 164
Catnip Leaf Capsules

(Frontier), .................- 164
Catnip Liquid

(Nature's Answer),.......... 164
Catnip..................5 G-8, 164
CatSWOlt...............4 G-8, 164
Caulophyllum thalictroides. . . . 109
CELANDINE

(Chelidonium majus) G-8, 169
CELERY

(Apium graveolens) . G-8, 172

Celery Liquid Fluid Extract
(Nature's Answer)...........- 172
Celery Seed Capsules
(Nature's Herbs) ........... 172

Celery Seed Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 172
Cemphire G-7, 143
Cephaelis ipecacuanha........ : A23
Ceylon Cinnamom G-8, 190
Chai Hu.........2-.......00-. 187
Chamaemelum nobile. .. . . | G-10, 270
Chantal Aloe Vera Cream

(National Vitamin). .......... 4 ie

CHASTE TREE

(Vitex agnus-castus) G-8, 176
Chasteberry Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)... ......... 176
Chelidonium majus....... | G-8, 169
CHINESE CINNAMON

(Cinnamomum aromaticum) . . . 182
Chinese Matrimony Vine 486
CHINESE MOTHERWORT

(Leonurus japonicus)... ...... 183
CHINESE RHUBARB

(Rheum palmatum). . . .G-8, 185
CHINESE THOROUGHWAX

(Bupleurum Chinese)... ..... - 187
Chinese Wolfberry...........: A86
Chittem Bark............4 G-7, 153
CHOCOLATE VINE

(Akebia — quinata) 189
Cimicifuga. G-S, 92
Cimicifuga racemosa. G-5, 92
Cinchona................! G-20, 626
Cinchona pubescens. G-20, 626
Cinnamomum aromaticum, .... . 182

Cinnamomum camphor a....

Cinnamomum verum,..... §

CINNAMON

(Cinnamomum — verum) G-8, 190

Cinnamon Bark Fluid Extract

(Nature's Answer)........... 190
Citronella .............: G-ie, 465
Cnicus benedictus........ | G-6, 107
COCILLANA TREE

(Guraea_ rusbyi) 198
CoCOWOrt... 22... 2.2 eS G-22, 690
Coffea arabica ..........4 G-9, 202
COFFEE

(Coffea arabica) G-9, 202

DYER'S BROOM /1-1 93

COLA

(Cola acuminata)... ........4 205
Cola acuminata.............. 205
Cola Nut..........0..0......4 205
Cola Seeds... ....2..00.0.0.. 205
COLT'S FOOT

(Tussilago farfara) G-9, 209
Coltsfoot.....................¢ 48
COMFREY

(Symphytum officinale) ...G-9, 212
Commiphora molmol...... § G-i8, 534
Common Matrimony Vine... . + 487
Compass Plant..........: G-21, 645
Compass-Weed...........: G-21, 645
CONGOROSA

(Maytenus ilicifolia)........ ! 218
Consound G-9, 212
Coon Root.............2..-.. 108
Coptide.................--2-4 358
Coptis... 2.0.22... eee eee 358
Coptis Groenlandica......... 358
Coptis trifolia...........2.04. 358
Cotton Root G-16, 468
CoUghrOOt................) G-4, 74
Coughwort G-9,209
Crocus sativus...........5 G-21, 653
Curcuma domestica,..........° 775
Curcuma zedoaria........ | G-26, 846
Cutweed .......0.0.......... 106
Cymbopogon citratus. .... | G-ie, 465
Daggers.................4 G-19, sei
Da-Huang...............: G-S, 185
Daisy...................4 G-24, 754
Daucus carota...........: G-25, 809
Desert Herb.............5 G-ie, 488
Devil's Dung ................4 AT
Devil's Nettle ...........! G-26, 833
Devil's Plaything ........ | G-26, 833
Didin G-IS,534
Didthin G-IS,534
Di-Gu-Pi.... 2.2... 02002 486
Dog Wood..............5 G-12, 317
Dogwood Bark...........: G-7, 153
Donnhove...............: G-9, 209
Dorema ammoniacum.......... ‘ 29
Dragon Flower........... 4 G-19, sei
Drumstick Tree... 1.2... .....024 67
Duck's Foot.............4 G-17, 510
DYER'S BROOM

(Genista tinctoria)...... | G-10, 260

----- PAGE 199 -----
1-194/DYER'S BUGLOSS

Dyer's Bugloss. 2... G-3,13
Dyer's Greenwood....... § G-IO, 260
Dyer's Saffron..............4 652
Dyer's Weed............. G-IO, 260
Dyer's Whin............: G-10, 260
ELECAMPANE

(Inula _ helenium) G-10, 266
ELEPHANT-EARS

(Bergenia crassifolia). ...... % 268
Elfdock.................5 G-10, 266
ElfwOlt
Emetic Herb.............4 G-16, 479
Emetic Weed............ 4 G-16, 479
Enchanter's Plant..... .G-25, 788

Enebro................--) G-15, 440

ENGLISH CHAMOMILE

(Chamaemelum nobile) G-10, 270
Ephedra.................4 G-ie, 488
Ephedra sinica...........5 G-ie, 488
Ephedrine...............4 G-ie, 488
Eschscholtzia californica ...G-7, 140
European Angelica,....... | G-3, 32
European Barberry........ | G-4, 61
European Vervain........ | G25, 788

EuroQuality Juniper Berries
Capsules (Nature's Herbs) . .. .440
EuroQuality Red Clover
Blossoms Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 4 633
Ex-Lax Maximum Strength

(Novartis Consumer)........ 4 684
Eye Balm Le G-13, 355
Eye Root............. G-13, 355
Eyebright G-ie, 479
Fairy-Wand.................. 301
Fake Saffron... .............4 652
False Cinnamon............. -.. 182
False Coltsfoot................5 A8
FALSE UNICORN ROOT

(Veratrum luteum)... ....... 301
Featherfew. G-11,30e
Featherfoil. G-11, soe
Felon Herb..............: G-IS, 530
FENUGREEK

(Trigonella foenum-

graecum)..............4 G-11, 304

Fenugreek Capsules
(Nature's Way)............ 304

Fenugreek Seed Capsules

(Frontier)... ...............4 304
Ferula foetida,.. 0.0.0. ees AT
FEVERFEW

(Tanacetum parthenium) G-11, 306

Feverfew Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Mason Vitamins,
McZand, Nature's Bounty,

Perrigo, Rexall Consumer) . . 306
Feverfew Extract Capsules

(Herbal Harvest, Humco).... : 306
Feverfew Leaf Capsules

(Naturalife). 2.2.0... ....00. 306
Feverfew Traditional Herb

Capsules

(Nature's Resource)......... 306
Fevergrass, G-16, 465
Field Balm G-8, 164
Fieldhove. cece. G-9, 209
Five-Finger Fern... .......... 4 A91
Five-Leaflet..........00..-000- 189
Flag Lily........0....0.05 G-19, 56i
Flaggon .............+0-4 G-19, 561
Fliggers.................4 G-19, 56i
Florentine Orris.......... G-19, 56i
Flower Velure............4 G-9, 209
Flux Root...............4 G-20, 598
Foal's-Foot..............4 G-9, 209
Foalswort...............4 G-9, 209
Food of the Gods.............5 AT
FRANGULA

(Rhamnus frangula). . . . . | G-12, 317
Frangula Bark . . G-12, 317
Fucus.................-2.-..2 106
Fucus vesiculosus............ 4 ioe
Furze G-IO, 260
Gagroot G-ie, 479
Garden Angelica.......... 4 G-3, 32
Genista tinctoria. G-10, 260
Ginepro. G-IS, 440
Gladyne. G-19, sei
Glycyrrhiza glabra... .... § G-ie, 469
Golden Seal Capsules

(National Vitamin).......... 355
Golden Seal Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 355

Golden Seal Root Capsules
(Bergen Brunswig, Herbal
Harvest, Major, McKesson,
Nature's Bounty, Nature's
Herbs, Nature's Way,
Zenith Goldline)........... 355

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

GOLDEN SHOWER TREE

(Cassia (fistula).........! G-13, 354
GOLDENSEAL

(Hydrastis canadensis) G-13, 355
Goldenseal Capsules

(ADH, Mason Vitamins). . . . 355
Goldenseal Leaf Capsules

(Frontier)..............22.- 355

Goldenseal Liquid (McZand) .... 355
Goldenseal Plus Capsules

(Key Co)... 2... ee eee eee 355
Goldenseal Root Alcohol

Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer)........... 355

Goldenseal Root Capsules
(Apothecary, Frontier,
Humco, Mason Vitamins,
ature Made, Nature's
Resource, Perrigo, Rexall

Consumer, Sundown)........ 355
GOLDTHREAD

(Coptis trifolia). 6.6... ee 358
Go-Qi-Zi, ves A87
Gossypium herbaceum. . . . | G-16, 468
Grapeholly..............4 G-IS, 527
Greek Hay Seed ........4 G-11, 304
Green Broom....... .G-IO, 260
Green Ginger............4 G-26, 829
Greenweed...............: G-10, 260
Ground Apple G-10, 270
Ground Lemon. G-17, 510
Ground Lily.............. 5 G-4, 74
Ground Raspberry. . . G-13, 355
Guggal Gum. Lee G-IS,534
Guggal Resin........... G-IS,534
Guggul Resin Capsules

(Frontier)... ...............: 534
Gum Asafoetida................ AT
Gum Camphor........... | G-7, 143
Gum Plant..............4 G-9, 212
Guraea rusbyi.. 2.0.0. 198
Guru Nut...........022..0..: 205
Hackmatack G-24, 759
Hair of Venus............... 4 A91
Hallfoot.................5 G-9, 209
Hamburg Parsley. : G-19, 567
Hartshorn................ G-e, 123
Hazelwort..................--5 A8
Healing Herb. . . : . . G-9,212
Helonias Root............... 301

----- PAGE 200 -----
SAFETY GUIDE

Hepatica nobilis.........0..4. 26
Herb of the Cross........: G25, 788
Herb Trinity................0. 26
Herbal Sure Aloe Vera

Softgels (Nature's Bounty)... .. 16

Herbal Sure Feverfew
Capsules (Nature's Bounty) .. 306
Herbal Sure Goldenseal Root
Capsules (Nature's Bounty) . . 355
Herb-of-Grace

(Ruta graveolens)...... 5 c-21, 648
Herb-of-Grace

{Verbena officinalis)... . | G25, 788
Herbygrass..............! G21, 648
High Balm..................! 562
Highwaythorn. . G-6, 123
Hindheal................5 G2A, 754
Hog Apple..............4 G-17, 510
Holly Thistle. G-6, 107
Holly-Leaved Berberis. .. . | G-18, 527
Hordeum distichon. . G-4, 63
HOREHOUND

(Marrubium vulgare)... . 5 G-14, 401
Horse-Elder.............5 G-IO, 266
Horse-Fly Weed......... 4 G-26, 812
Horse-Foot..............-! G-9, 209
Horseheal...............4 G-IO, 266
Horsehoof...............4 G-9, 209
HORSEMINT

(Monarda punctata) 407
Houndsbane.............: G-14, 401
Hydrastis canadensis. .... | G-13, 355
HYSSOP

(Hyssopus officinalis) G-15, 414
Hyssop Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way). . » 9-414

Hyssopus officinalis... ... | G-15,414

India Senna. G-22,684
Indian Apple G-17,510
Indian Balm............... G-4, 74
Indian Cress................./ 798
Indian Dye wee. G-13,355
Indian Horseradish............ | 67
Indian Laburnum......... : G-13,354
Indian Nard.................: A33

Indian Paint

(Hydrastis canadensis) . . G-13, 355
Indian Paint

(Sanguinaria canadensis)... . . 108

Indian Plant
(Hydrastis canadensis) .. G-13, 355
Indian Plant

(Sanguinaria canadensis)... . . 108
Indian Root.............! G23, 711
Indian Shamrock. G-4, 74
Indian Spikenard.............. A433
Indian Tobacco..........4 G-16, 479
Intoxicating Pepper....... | G-IS, 443
Inula helenium........... G-10, 266
IPECAC

(Cephaelis ipecacuanha)..... : A23
Ipecacuanha................04 423
Ipecacuanha Rio............. 4 A423
Ipomoea hederacea...........: 523

JABORANDI
(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425

JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT

(Arisaema atrorubens) 426
Jacob's Sword...........4 G19, 561
JALAP

(Ipomoea purga).......5 G-15, 427
Jamguarandi.............) G15, 425
JATAMANSI

(Nardostachys jatamansi). .. . 433
Jaundice Berry............: G-4, ei
Jaundice Root. G-13, 355
Jesuit's Bark G-20, 626
Jew's-Harp Plant.......... 4 G-4, 74
Juarandi G-15,425
JUNIPER

(Juniperus communis) .. . .G-15, 440
Juniper Berry. G-IS, 440
Juniper Berry Liquid

(Nature's Answer).......... + 440
Juniper Berry Oil

(Aura Cacia)...............4 A440
Juniperus communis...... | G-IS, 440
Juno's Tears.............: G25, 788
Kava Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way)............4 A43,
KAVA KAVA

(Piper methysticum) G-15, 443

LICORICE ROOT CAPSULES /I-1 95

Kava Kava Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Celestial
Seasonings, Humco, Mason
Vitamins, McZand,
Nature's Resource, Rexall
Consumer, Rexall Managed

Care, Sundown)............. A43,
Kava Kava Extract Liquid
(Rainbow Light)............4 A43,

Kava Kava Liquid (McZand) .. . 443
Kava Kava Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs),..........4 443
Kava Kava Premium Extract
Capsules (Futurebiotics), .... 443

Kava Kava Root Capsules
(Frontier, Major, Naturalife,
Nature's Herbs, Nature's

Way)... see ccc cece eee eee’ 443
Kavatrol Capsules (Natrol) G29, 443
Kawa... ... eee eee ed G-IS, 443
Kelpware..............2.-0004 ioe
Kelp-Ware.............2..204 ioe
Kidney WOT. eee 26
Kinnikinnick............. 4 G25, 779
Knitback. G-9, 212
Knitbone. 6-9, 212
Kola Tree... 6... eee 205
Lady's Purse............4 G22, 690
Lamb's Quarters. G-4, 74

Laurel Camphor. G-7, 143
Lavose..... 0. eee eed G-16, 482
Leather Bergenia............. 268
LEMONGRASS

(Cymbopogon citratus) .. G-ie, 4es
Leonurus cardiaca. ... G-IS, 524
Leonurus japonicus............ 183

LEVANT COTTON
(Gossypium herbaceum) . .G-1s, 468

Levisticum officinale... ... | G-ie, 482

LICORICE
(Glycyrrhiza glabra)... . : G-16, 469

Licorice Capsules

(Mason Vitamins).......... 469
Licorice Liquid (McZand). .. .. : 469
Licorice Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 4 469

Licorice Root Capsules
(Frontier, Major, Nature's
Bounty, Nature's Way,
Sundown)...............+04 469

----- PAGE 201 -----
1-196 /LIFE OF MAN

Life of Man.............: G-23, 711
Lion's Earn.............4 c-is, 524
Lion's Tail. G-IS, 524
Liver Lily. . .. G19, 561
Liverleafi... 2... 26
Liverweed..............0.0000. 26
Liverwort.................. 26
LOBELIA

(Lobelia inflata)... ..... 5 G-ie, 479
Lobelia inflataa..........5 G-i6, 479
LOVAGE

(Levisticum officinale) .. . G-16, 482
Low Balm... .. 562
Lurk-in-the-Ditch.............. 579
Lycium barbarum......0..004 4 A87
LYCIUM BARK

(Lycium chinense).......... ¢ A86
LYCIUM BERRIES

(Lycium barbarum)......... ¢ A87
Lycium chinense.......0.04+0 4 A86
Mace......... G-IS, 545
Mahonia aquifolium... .. | G-18, 527
MA-HUANG

(Ephedra sinica)....... | G-ie, 488
Maiden Fern................5 491
MAIDENHAIR

(Adiantum capillus-veneris) .. . 491
Mandrake...............4 G-17, 510
Marrubium..............) G-14, 401
Marrubium vulgare... .... | G-14, 401
Matto Grosso................: A23
MAYAPPLE

(Podophyllum_ peltatum) .G-17, 510
Maytenus ilicifolia.........0.. 5 218
Mealberry...............4 G-25, 779
Mentha pulegium. .579
Mexico Seed. .... G-7, 158
Midsummer Daisy........ | G-11, 306
Milfoil»... 2.0.0.4) G-26, 833
Milk Ipecac. G-4, 74
Milkwort.... 2.00... eed 683
Monarda didyma.............: 562
Monarda Lutea...............4 407
Monarda punctata,... 0... 0S A407
Moringa oleifera..............4 67
MORNING GLORY

(Ipomoea _ hederacea) 523

Mosquito Plant 579

Mother's Heart...........4 G-22, 690
MOTHERWORT

(Leonurus cardiaca). .G-i8, 524
Mountain Balm .............4 562
Mountain Box...........) G-25, 779
Mountain Cranberry...... § G-25, 779
Mountain Flax...............4 683
MOUNTAIN GRAPE

(Mahonia aquifolium) ... G-IS, 527
Mountain Grape . . G-4, 61
Mountain Mint...............4 562
Mouth Root................. 358
Mu Tong.................... 189
MUGWORT

(Artemisia vulgaris)... .. | G-18, 530
Mygrafew Tablets

(Nature's Way),..........- 306
Myristica fragrans........ § G-18, 545
MYRRH

(Commiphora molmol) G-is, 534
Myrrh Commiphora Oil

(Aura Cacia). ..............: 534
Myrrh Gum Liquid

(Nature's Answer)........... 534
Myrtle Flower...........4 G-19, sei
Nard... 2... eee A33
Nardostachys jatamansi. .. . . . . § 433
Narrow-Leaved Echinacea... . + 433
Nasturtium officinale... . 1.2... 798
Nepeta cataria..... G-8, 164
Nightshade. bee G-4, 74
NORTHERN PRICKLY ASH

(Zanthoxylum americanum). .. 545
Nose Bleed............... G-26, 833
NUTMEG

(Myristica fragrans). G-18,545
NuVeg Black Cohosh Root

Capsules (Nature's Herbs)... . ! 92
NuVeg Feverfew Leaf

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ....306
NuVeg Red Clover

Combination Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)...........4 633
Ocimum basilicum G-4, 64
Oil Plant . G-7, 158
Old Man's Pepper........ 4 G-26, 833
Old Man's Root.......... .G-23, 711

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

One-A-Day Menopause

Health Tablets (Bayer) .. . G-29, 92
Orange Milkweed ....... G-20, 598
Orange Root.............) G-13, 355
Orange Swallow-Wort.... | G-20, 598
Oregon Barberry......... | G-18, 527
Oregon Grape

(Berberis vulgaris). G-4, 61
Oregon Grape

(Mahonia aquifolium) ... G-IS, 527
Oregon Grape Liquid

(Herb Pharm)............... 527
Oregon Grape Root Liquid

(Nature's Answer)..........: 527
ORRIS

(Iris species)... 0... eed G-19, 561
OSWEGO TEA

(Monarda didyma)..........: 562
Palma Christi G-7, ISS
Palmers Aloe Vera Formula

Cream (E.T. Browne), .. de
Papoose Root...............- 109
Pariswort. . ... G-4, 74
PARSLEY

(Petroselinum crispum) . . G-19, 567
Parsley Fern............. G-24, 754
Parsley Herb Capsules

(Nature's Way)...........0% 567
Parsley Leaf Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)...........4 567
Parsley Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer)........... 567
Paucon....... 2... eee 108
Pauson..... 0.0... 0. ee eee 108
Pearl Barley. G-4, 63
PENNYROYAL

(Mentha pulegium).........: 579
Pepper-and-Salt..........: G-22, 690
Perdiem Overnight Relief

(Novartis Consumer)... . ¢ G-29, 684
PERILLA

(Perilla fructescens). ....... 583
Perilla fructescens... 0... 00.0% 583
Persely..............0004 G-19, 567
Persian Berries........... 4 G-12,317
Peruvian Bark...........4 G-20, 626
Petersylinge.............4 G-19,567
Petroselinum crispum..... § G-19, 567
Petty Morell ............) G-23, 711

----- PAGE 202 -----
ff-

SAFETY GUIDE
Philtron. G-25, 809
Phyto Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 469
Pick-Pocket G-22, 690
Picrasma excelsa 622
Pigeon's Grass. G-25, 788
Pigeonweed. G-25, 788
Piliolerial 579
Pilocarpus microphyllus . . . G-15, 425
Pimpinella anisum G-3,35
Piper methysticum G-15, 443
Pipperidge. G-4, 61
PLEURISY ROOT

(Asclepias tuberosa).... 5 G20, 598
Podophyllum peltatum. .. . | G-17, 510
Poison Flag G-19, 561
Polar Plant. . . G-21, 645
Polygala senega 683
Poor Man's Parmacettie .. . G-22, 690
Pot Barley...............! G-4, 63

Premium Fenugreek Seed

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ... 304
Premium Feverfew Leaf

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) ....306
Prickly Ash. 545
Prickly Ash Autumn-

Harvested Liquid

(Health from the Sun) ..... | 545

Prickly Box. A87
Promensil Tablets

(Novogen), . G29, 633
Public House Plant........... 48
Pudding Grass. 579
Pudding Pipe Tree. . G13, 354
Pukeweed.............. G-ie, 479
Pulegium. 579
Purging Cassia....... G-13, 354
Purple Clover. G-21, 633
Purshiana Bark. G-7, 153
QUASSIA

(Picrasma. excelsa) 622
Quassia. G-3, 23
Quassia amara G-3, 23
Quassia Wood. G-3, 23
Queen Ann's-Lace. . G-25, 809
Quercus Marina. . 106
QUININE

(Cinchona pubescens) G-20, 626
Raccoon Berry. G-17, 510
Ramsthorn. G-6, 123

Rattle Pouches ________.G-22, 690
Rattlebush we. G-26, 812
Rattleroot G-5, 92.

Rattlesnake Root

(Polygala senega) ... 683
Rattlesnake Root

(Trillium erectum) ... ....G-4,74
Rattleweed .. G-5, 92
RED CLOVER

(Trifolium pratense) + G-21, 633
Red Clover Blossom

Capsules (Nature's Bounty) 633
Red Clover Herb Capsules

(Frontier). a . a 633
Red Clover Herbal Capsules

(Apothecary), .... . 633
Red Clover Liquid (McZand) ... 633
Red Root, .., 108
Redberry Leaves. G-25, 779
Remifemin Tablets

(PhytoPharmica), . G30, 92
Rhamnus catharticus. G4, 123
Rhamnus frangula. G-12, 317
Rhamnus purshiana G-7, 153
Rheum palmatum G-8, 185
Rhubarb. . G-8, 185
Richweed. . G-5, 92
Ricinus communis. G-7, 158
Rock Fern. 491
Rock Parsley. G-19, 567
Rockwrack. 106
Roman Chamomile. ... G-IO,270
ROSEMARY

(Rosmarinus officinalis) G21, 645
Rosemary Leaf Liquid

(Nature's Answer) . OAS
Rosmarinus officinalis... . § G21, 645
Round-Leaved Hepatica. 26
RUE

(Ruta graveolens)...... G21, 648
Run-by-the-Ground, 2... S79
Ruta graveolens. G-21, 648
Sacred Bark G-7, 153
SAFFLOWER

(Carthamus tinctorius)..... . | 652
SAFFRON

(Crocus sativus) G-21, 653
Sagackhomi. . G-25, 779

SNAKE LILY/I-197

SAGE

(Salvia officinalis)... ... : G21, 655
Sagrada Bark G-7, 153
Salsify. G-9, 212
Salvia officinalis G-21, 655
Sandberry. G-25, 779
Sanguinaria. 108
Sanguinaria canadensis....... . 108
Sanguinary

(Achillea millefolium) . . . .G-26, 833
Sanguinary

(Capsella bursa-pastoris) G22, 690
Scabwort. . . G10, 266
Scarlet Monarda, 562
Scotch Barley. . G-4, 63
Sea Parsley. G-16, 482
Seawrack. . 106
Sega... ed G-19, 561
Seneca...................00-4 683
SENECA SNAKEROOT

(Polygala senega)..........) 683
Senega, . 683
Senega Snakeroot. 683
Seneka. 683
SENNA

(Cassia senna)... .. G-22, 684
Senna Extract Capsules

(Nature's Herbs) 684
Senna Leaf Capsules

(Frontier)... . Lee 684
Senokot Childrens' Syrup

(Purdue Frederick) G-30, 684
Senokot Granules

(Purdue Frederick). G-30, 684
Senokot Tablets

(Purdue Frederick), G-30, 684

Senokot X (Purdue Frederick) .. 684
Senokot Xtra

(Purdue Frederick), . 684
SheggS, . . .. G-19, 561
Shepherd's Heart. . 0-22, 690
SHEPHERD'S PURSE

(Capsella bursa-pastoris) G-22, 690
Shepherd's Scrip... ... ,. .G-22, 690
Shepherd's Sprout. G-22, 690
Siberian Tea 268
Simpler's Joy. G-25, 788
Slippery Root G-9, 212
Smallage G-8, 172
Snake Lily. G-19, sei

----- PAGE 203 -----
I-198/SNAKE ROOT

Snake Root. .
Snakebite

(Sanguinaria canadensis).

683

ios

Snakebite (Trillium erectum) . G-4, 74

Snakeroot

Soldier's Woundwort
Sow Berry.

Spanish Bugloss
Spanish Saffron.
Spignet.

SPIKENARD

(Aralia racemosd). .. . .

Spikenard .. .

Spotted Monarda

Spotted Thistle.

Squaw Balm

Squaw Root

Squawmint Tickweed

Squawroot. :

St. Benedict Thistle.

St. James' Weed.

St. John's Plant

St. Josephwort

Standardized Feverfew
Extract Capsules
(Nature's Way).

Standardized Licorice
Capsules
(Nature's Resource).
Standardized Uva Ursi

Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way),
Starwort
Staunchwee

Sundance Aloe Vera Gel

(Lee),
Suterberry.
Swallow-Wort
Swamp Cedar.
Sweet Root.
Sweet Slumber.
Symphytum officinale.
Tanacetum parthenium.

Tanacetum vulgare.

TANSY

(Tanacetum vulgare). .

Tea Plant

Tea Tree...

Tetterwort
(Chelidonium majus)

48

G-26, 833
G-4, 61
G-3, 13

G-21, 653

G-23, 711

579

579

. 109
G-6, 107
G-22, 690
G-IS, 530
G-4, 64

306

469

. 779
301

G-26, 833

16

545

G-20, 598
G-24, 759
G-16, 469
108

G-9, 212
0-11, 306
G-24, 754

G24, 754

487
487

G-8, 169

Tetterwort

{Sanguinaria canadensis). . . . ios
Thousand Weed. . . G-26, 833
Three-Leaved. . G-4,74
Throw-Wort. G-18, 524
THUJA

(Thuja occidentalis)... . . | G-24, 759
Thuja occidentalis. G-24, 759
Tinnevelly Senna. G-22, 684
Toothache Tree. 545
Toywort. . G-22, 690
Tree of Life . . G-24, 759
Trefoil (Hepatica nobilis)... 1... Y 26
Trefoil (Trifolium pratense) G-21, 633
Trifolium pratense. . G-21, 633
Trigonella foenum-graecum _G-11, 304
Trillium erectum. G4, 74
Tuber Root. G-20, 598
TURMERIC

(Curcuma domestica). ....... 7715
Turmeric. ...... G-26, 846
Turmeric Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way). 846
Turmeric Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 846
Turmeric Root... .. G-13, 355
Turmeric Whole Rhizome

Liquid

(Health from the Sun). 846
Tussilago farfara G-9, 209
Uva Ursi Leaf Capsules

(ADH, Frontier, Nature's

Herbs), ......... 779
Uva Ursi Leaves Capsules

(Nature's Way). 779
UVA-URSI

(Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) — G-25, 779
Velvet Dock. . G-10, 266
Venus Hair 491
Veratrum luteum. 301
Verbena officinalis... 2... | G-25, 788
VERVAIN

(Verbena officinalis). .G-25, 788
Vitex agnus-castus. G-8, 176
Vitex Capsules

(Naturalife, Nature's Way) .. .176
Vomitroot. G-16,479
Vomitwort . . G-16,479
Wake-Robin G-4, 74
Wallwort. . G-9,212

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Warnera. G-13, 355
Water Flag G-19, 56i
WATERCRESS

(Nasturtium officinale)... 2... ! 798
Watercress Capsules

(National Vitamin). . 798
Waythorn G-6, 123
Whig Plant. . . G-10, 270
White Cedar. G-24, 759
White Flag Root G-19, 56i
White Horehound. G-14, 401
White Root......... G-20, 598
Wild Bergamont 407
WILD CARROT

(Daucus carota). . G-25, 809
Wild Clover. . G-21, 633

Wild Countryside Black

Cohosh Root Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 2. 92
Wild Countryside Licorice

Root Capsules
(Nature's Herbs). . 469
Wild Countryside Myrrh

Gum Capsules

(Nature's Herbs). 534
Wild Curcuma G-13, 355
Wild Ginger. 48
WILD INDIGO

(Baptisia tinctoria), .... § G-26, 812
Wild Indigo Fresh Root

Liquid

(Health from the Sun) 812
Wild Indigo Root, Alcohol

Free Liquid

(Nature's Answer), . 812
Wild Iris G-19, 561
Wild Lemon. G-17, 510
Wild Nard... . Lae . 48
Wild Sunflower G-IO, 266
Wild Tobacco. G-16,479
Wind Root G-20, 598
Witches' Pouches. G-22, 690
Wood Waxen. . G-10, 260
WORMWOOD

(Artemisia absinthium) . .G-26, 829
Wormwood. G-18, 530
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant

Liquid (Purdue Frederick) .... 684

----- PAGE 204 -----
SAFETY GUIDE

YARROW

(Achillea millefolium) . G-26, 833
Yarrow Extract Liquid

(Nature's Way)............5 833
Yarrow Flowers Capsules

(Frontier, Nature's Herbs) .. . .833

Not for use while nursing

Aged Garlic Extract, Kyolic
Hi-Po Formula Capsules

(Wakunaga)................. 327
Alcohol Free Kava Kava

Liquid (Nature's Answer) ... .443
Alder Buckthorn......... 4 G-12, 317
Alder Dogwood..........: G-12, 317
Alexandrian Senna...... J G22, 684
ALKANET

(Alkanna_tinctoria) G-3, 13
Alkanet Root G-3, 13
Alkanna_tinctoria G-3, 13
Allium sativum... ........5 G-12, 327
Anchusa. . G-3, 13
Arrow Wood............/: G-12, 317
Ass Ear. G-9, 212
AV& ell G-15, 443
Ava Pepper.............) G-15, 443
BASIL

(Ocimum basilicum). G-4, 64
Bergenia crassifolia 268
Bitter Bark.............. 4 G-7, 153
Black Alder.............4 G-12, 317
BLACK COHOSH

(Cimicifuga racemosa) G-5, 92
Black Cohosh Capsules

(Frontier, Herbal Harvest,

Natrol, Nature's Way,

Rexall Consumer)...........:! 92
Black Cohosh Power

Capsules (Nature's Herbs)... § 92
Black Root..............4 G-9, 212
Black Snake Root......... | G-5, 92
Blackwort...............-4 G-9, 212
Boneset.............-..-4 G-9, 212
Bruisewort..............) G-9, 212
BUCKTHORN

(Rhamnus _ catharticus) G-6, 123

Yellow Bark. . . . G-7, 153
Yellow Flag............04 G-19, sei
Yellow Ginseng .............. 109
Yellow Iri G-19, 561
Yellow Le . G-13, 355
Yellow Root.............) G-13, 355
Yellow Starwort........: G-10, 266
Buckthorn Bark..........) G-12, 317
Bugbane. G-5, 92
Bugwort cece eee. G5, 92
California Buckthorn ..... G-7, 153
Cana Fistula............) G-13, 354
CASCARA SAGRADA

(Rhamnus _ purshiana) G-7, 153

Cascara Sagrada Bark

Capsules (Frontier),......... 153
Cascara Sagrada Bark Mild

Stimulant Laxative

Capsules (Nature's Herbs) .... 153
Cascara Sagrada Capsules

(Herbal Harvest, Humco,

Nature's Way).............- 153
Cascara Sagrada Natural

Laxative Capsules

(Nature's Resource). ........ 153
Cassia fistula. ..........! G-13, 354
Cassia senna, .........4.) G-22, 684
Centrum Garlic Capsules

(Whitehall-Robins)...... ‘ G-31, 327
CHINESE RHUBARB

(Rheum — palmatum) G-8, 185
Chinese Tian Shan Garlic

Tablets (Nature's Herbs) .... .327
Chittem Bark ...........5 G-7, 153
Cimicifuga,..............4 G-5, 92
Cimicifuga racemosa G-5, 92
Clove Garlic. G-12, 327
Cockup Hat.................- 729
COMFREY

(Symphytum officinale) . .. G-9, 212
Consound. G-9, 212
Da-Huang . G-8, ISS
Deodorized Garlic Tablets

(Nature's Bounty),......... 327
Dog Wood,.............5 G-12, 317

GARLIC POWER TABLETS /I-1 99

Yellow Wood................: 545
Yellowroot ................. 358
Zaffer,.. 0. eee eee dl 652
Zanthoxylum americanum 545
ZEDOARY

(Curcuma zedoaria). G-26, 846
Dogwood Bark. . . .. G-7, 153
Dyer's Bugloss........... 4 G-3, 13
ELEPHANT-EARS

(Bergenia crassifolia) . 268
Ex-Lax Maximum Strength

(Novartis Consumer)........ | 684
FRANGULA

(Rhamnus frangula) G-12, 317
Frangula Bark. .......... J G-12, 317
Garl-Action Tablets

(Action Labs).............. 327
GARLIC

(Allium sativum). ....... 5 G-12, 327
Garlic Capsules (Bio-Tech,

Cardinal, Frontier, Key

Co., Major, Mason

Vitamins, National

Vitamin). ..............00- 327

Garlic Enteric Coated Tablets
(Perrigo, Rexall Consumer) ...327

Garlic Oil 1000 Capsules
(Republic)................. 327

Garlic Oil Capsules
(Advanced Nutritional,
Apothecary, Basic
Vitamins, Bergen
Brunswig, Family
Pharmacy, Health Products,
Mason Vitamins, Medicine
Shoppe, Nature Made,
Nature's Bounty, Perrigo) ... .327

Garlic Oil Natural Capsules
(Cardinal, Rexall
Consumer). .........-2-...-- 327
Garlic Power Tablets
(Nature's Herbs),........... 327

----- PAGE 205 -----
1-200 /GARLIC TABLETS

Garlic Tablets (ADH,
American Pharmaceutical,
Apothecary, Basic
Vitamins, Bergen
Brunswig, Celestial
Seasonings, Contract
Pharmacal, Family
Pharmacy, Freeda, Mason
Vitamins, Medicine
Shoppe, National Vitamin,
Naturalife, Nature's
Bounty, Perrigo, Republic,

Zenith Goldline). .......... 327
Garlicin Tablets

(Nature's Way),........... 327
Garlic-X Tablets

(Mason Vitamins).......... 327
Garlin Tablets (Major)........ 327
Garlique Enteric Coated

Tablets (Sunsource)......... 327

Garlique Tablets (Sunsource) .. .327

GOLDEN SHOWER TREE

(Cassia fistula)... 2.6... 5 G-13, 354
Gum Plant. G-9, 212
Hartshorn. ...... G-6, 123
Healing Herb G-9, 212
High Alicin Garlic Tablets

(Futurebiotics),............. 327
High Potency Garlic Oil

Capsules (Nature Made)... .. 327
Highwaythorn.........../ G-6, 123
India Senna,............: G22, 684
Indian Laburnum......... | G-13, 354
Intoxicating Pepper....... : G-15, 443
Kava Extract Capsules

(Nature's Way)............. 443
KAVA KAVA

(Piper methysticum)..... | G-15, 443

Kava Kava Capsules (Bergen
Brunswig, Celestial
Seasonings, Humco, Mason
Vitamins, McZand,
Nature's Resource, Rexall
Consumer, Rexall Managed
Care, Sundown)............ 4 A43
Kava Kava Extract Liquid
(Rainbow Light)............. 443

Kava Kava Liquid (McZand) .. . 443
Kava Kava Power Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)............ A443
Kava Kava Premium Extract
Capsules (Futurebiotics),.... 443

Kava Kava Root Capsules
(Frontier, Major, Naturalife,
Nature's Herbs, Nature's

Way)... cece cece eee’ 443
Kavatrol Capsules (Natrol) G29, 443
Kawa... ee cee ee eee G-15, 443
Knitback. . G-9, 212
Knitbone. G-9, 212
Kwai Garlic Tablets

(Lichtwer).............4 G29, 327
Kyolic Aged Garlic Extract

Tablets (Wakunaga)..... | G30, 327
Leather Bergenia............4 268
Marcory..... 0.0.0.0 0 eee eee 729
NuVeg Black Cohosh Root

Capsules (Nature's Herbs)... . 5 92

Ocimum basilicum G-4, 64
Odorless Garlic Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 327
One-A-Day Cholesterol

Health Tablets (Bayer) .. G29, 327

One-A-Day Garlic Capsules

One-A-Day Menopause
Health Tablets (Bayer) .. . G29, 92
Perdiem Overnight Relief

(Novartis Consumer)... . | G29, 684
Persian Berries........... 4 G12, 317
Piper methysticum........ | G-15, 443
Poor Man's Treacle... ... | G-12, 327
Pudding Pipe Tree........ G13, 354
Purging Cassia...........: G-13, 354
Purshiana Bark.......... | G-7, 153
Queen's Delight............../ 729
Ramsthora..............4 Ge, 123
Rattleroot................4 G-5, 92
Rattleweed...............: G-5, 92
Remifemin Tablets

(PhytoPharmica)........ | G30, 92
Rhamnus catharticus. G6, 123
Rhamnus frangula........ | G-12, 317

G-7, 153

Rhamnus purshiana.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Rheum palmatum. G-8, ISS
Rhubarb. G-8, iss
Richweed G-5, 92
Sacred Bark. G-7, 153
Sagrada Bark G-7, 153
Salsify. G-9, 212
SENNA

(Cassia senna).........4 G22, 684
Senna Extract Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)........... 4 684
Senna Leaf Capsules

(Frontier) 2.0... 2... eee ed 684
Senokot Childrens' Syrup

(Purdue Frederick)... ... G-30, 684
Senokot Granules

(Purdue Frederick). ..... G30, 684
Senokot Tablets

(Purdue Frederick)... .. | G30, 684

Senokot X (Purdue Frederick) . . 684
Senokot Xtra

(Purdue Frederick).......... 4 684
Siberian Tea... 2... 0... ee 268
Silver Leafi. so... eee eee 729
Slippery Root . G-9, 212
Spanish Bugloss. G-3, 13
Squaw Root. G-S, 92
St. Josephwort G-4, 64

Standardized Garlic Capsules

(Nature's Resource)......... 327
STILLING1A

(Stillingia sylvatica)... 1.6... 729
Stillingia sylvatica............. 729
Symphytum officinale. G-9, 212
Tinnevelly Senna......... G22, 684
Total Gar Capsules

(Mason Vitamins).......... 327
Wallwort G-9, 212
Waythom .......,....... Ge, 123

Wild Countryside Black

Cohosh Root Capsules

(Nature's Herbs)............: 92
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant

Liquid (Purdue Frederick) .... 684
Yaw Root..................4- 729
Yellow Bark G-7, 153

----- PAGE 206 -----
SAFETY GUIDE

For use only under supervision

Aconite. . G-IS,521
Aconitum napellus. G-18, 521
ALMOND

(Prunus dulcis). 15
AMERICAN HELLEBORE

(Veratrum viride). ..........0.. 2s
American Nightshade G-20, 602
American Spinach. G-20, 602
Apocynum cannabinum. A418
Aristolochia clematitis. . . G-5,SO
Arruda Brava. . . . G-15, 425
Arruda Do Mato......... G-15,425
Atropa belladonna. . G-4, 69
Basam G-22, 672
Bear's Grape. : : G-20, 602
BELLADONNA

(Atropa belladonna). . . G-4, 69
Belladonna Scopola. 2... O7i
Besom G-22, 672
BiRTHWORT

(Aristolochia clematitis) . G-S, SO
Bitterroot, . . 418
Bizzom. G-22, 672
Blue Rocket G-IS, 521
BOXWOOD

(Buxus sempervirens) . G-6, lie
Branching Phytolacca. G-20, 602
Breeam G-22, 672
Broom, . G-22,672
Broomtops. G-22, 672
Browme. G-22, 672
Brum G-22, 672
Bugbane. 25
Burning Bush. G-25, 791
Bush Tree. .: G-e, ne
Buxus sempervirens... .... | G-6, lie
Canadian Hemp. 418
Cancer-Root G-20, 602
Catchfly, .. . . ..., 418
Chongras. G-20, 602
Coakum. G-20, 602
Cokan... G-20,602
Convallaria G-16, 475
Convallaria majalis....... | G-16, 475
Convall-Lily. G-ie, 475
Crowberry. G-20, 602

Cytisus scoparius.
Dead Men's Bells
Deadly Nightshade
Devil's Bite
Devil's Cherries.
Devil's Herb

DIGITALIS
(Digitalis purpurea).

Digitalis purpurea.
Dipteryx odorata.
Divale.

Dogbane.

Dog's Finger.
Duck's Foot.
Dudgeon,

Dwale.
Dwayberry.
Earth Gall.
Euonymus atropurpurea
Fairy Caps.

Fairy Fingers
Fairy Gloves
Fairy Thimbles
Finger Flower.
Fly-Trap.

Folks' Glove
Foxglove.

Friar's Cap. .

Fusanum,
Fusoria.
Gadrose
Gatten.
Gatter.

GERMANDER

(Teucrium chamaedrys) . .

Gloves of Our Lady.
Great Morel
Greek Nuts.
Ground Lemon.
Hog Apple.
Honeybloom.
Indian Apple ......
Indian Arrowroot
Indian Poke.

INDIAN-HEMP.

(Apocynum cannabinum).

G-22, 672
G-10, 248
_ G-4, 69
25

_ G-4, 69
G-4, 69

G10, 248

G-10, 248

_.. 767

G-4, 69
A18

_ G-10, 248

G-17, 510
_ G-6, 116
G-4, 69
G-4, 69

25

. G25, 791

G-10, 248
G-I0, 248
G-I0,248
G-I0, 248
G-I0,248

4is

G-10, 248

G-10, 248
G-IS,521

G25, 791

G25, 791

G25, 791

G25, 791

G-25, 791

G-12, 337

G-10, 248

G-4, 69
15

G-17, 510

. G17, 510

418
G-17, 510
G-25, 791

25

A18

PIGWOOD/I-201

Indian-Hemp. 418
Inkberry. G-20, 602
Irish Tops............... G-22, 672
Itchweed . . . 25
JABORANDI

(Pilocarpus microphyllus) G-15, 425
Jacob's Ladder. G-16,475
Jalap. G-20, 602
Jamguarandi, . G-15, 425
Japanese Belladonna 67i
Jordan Almond. . a ae)
Juarandi. G-15, 425
Ladder-to-Heaven, G-16,475
Ladies' Glove G-10, 248
Lily Constancy. G-16, 475
LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY

(Convallaria majalis) . G-16, 475
Lion's Mouth G-10, 248
Mace. G-18, 545
Mandragora G-17, 495
Mandragora_ ojficinarum G-17, 495
MANDRAKE

(Mandragora

ojficinarum) G-17, 495
Mandrake. G-17, 510
May Bells. G-IS,475
May Lily. G-16,475
MAYAPPLE

(Podophyllum peltatum) G-17, 510
Milk Ipecac. 418
Milkweed. . . 418
MONKSHOOD

(Aconitum napellus), .... | G-IS, 521
Mousebane. . G-IS,521
Muguet. . G-IS,475
Myristica fragrans. . . G-18,545
Naughty Man's Cherries ... .G-4, 69
NUTMEG

(Myristica fragrans). G-18,545
Our Lady's Tears G-ie, 475
Phytolacca americana, . G20, 602
Phytolacca Berry. . G-20, 602
Phytolacca Root G-20, 602
Pigeon Berry, G-20, 602
Pigwood G-25, 791

----- PAGE 207 -----
1-202/PILOCARPUS MICROPHYLLUS

Pilocarpus microphyllus .. . G-15, 425
Pocan.................04 G-20, 602
Podophyllum peltatum. G-17, 5io
Poison Black Cherry. G-4, 69
POKE

(Phytolacca americana) G20, 602
Poke Berry. . . . G20, 602
Poke Root.............../ G20, 602
Pokeweed...............: G-20, 602
Prickwood.............../ G-25, 791
Prunus dulcis. 15
Raccoon Berry...........: G-17, 510
Red Weed...............! G-20, 602
Red-Ink Plant............4 G-20, 602

Satan's Apple............: G-17, 495
Scoke...................) G-20, 602
Scoparium...............4 G-22, 672
Scopola .............2...--.) 67i
SCOPOLIA
(Scopolia carniolicd)........ 5 671
Scopolia carniolica...........4 671
SCOTCH BROOM
(Cytisus scoparius). ... . § G-22, 672
Skewerwood............4 G-25, 791
G-20, 602
Spindle Tree.............: G-25, 791
Sweet Almond 15
Teucrium chamaedrys..... | G-12, 337

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tickleweed ................... 25
TONKA BEANS

(Dipteryx odorata)..........° 767
Tonquin Bean............../ 767
Veratrum viride............--- 25
Virginian Poke...........: G-20, 602
Virgin's Glove...........: G-10, 248
WAHOO

(Euonymus atropurpurea) G-25, 791
Wallflower..................4 A18
Wild Cotton... ...............: 418
Wild Lemon.............: G-17, 510
Witches' Gloves.........: G-10, 248
Wolfsbane...............4 G-18, 521

----- PAGE 208 -----
Manufacturers

Index

1-203

This index provides you with contact — information for each supplier whose products appear in the
herbal — monographs. The names of the products follow the company’s contact __ information. If an
entry lists two page numbers, the first refers to a photograph of the product in the Identification
Guide, the second to the herbal monograph in which the product appears.
ACTION LABS, INC. Direct Inquiries to: Herbal Products Available:
280 Adams Boulevard Oe (S14) 268-2988 Activin Capsules............. 362
Farmingdale, NY 11735 ; ; Flaxseed Oil Capsules........ 313
Direct Inquiries to: Herbal Products Available: Garlic Oil Capsules... ....... 327
(800) 932-2953 Aloe Vera Capsules 16 Gins K Capsul 46
FAX: (516) 694-6493 Barley Grain Capsules. 63 ee een es 3
y psules.. 26. - +. 4 New Energy Capsules... ..... 313
Herbal Products Available: Bilberry Extract Capsules 75 AIM FOR HERBS
Garl-Action Tablets........... 327. Borage Oil Capsules. .......... 114 "16 Kingston Street
Gin-Action Tablets........... 346 Butcher's Broom Capsules... . . 132 Somerville, MA 02144
Ginseng Power Max 4X Cat's Claw Capsules........... 160 Direct Inquiries to:
Cc 1 346 Cayenne Peppers Capsules. 165 (888) 752-1352
apsules. 2-2... 22 eee rr: ce anes www.aimforherbs.com
Ginseng Power Max 4X Damiana Leaves Capsules... . : 244 Herbal Products Available:
Liquid ................... 346 Dandelion Root Capsules... ... : 245 Activated Ginkgo Tablets... . . 342
Super Bilberry Plus Tablets... . / 75 Devil's Claw Capsules........: 247
. . Echi c 1 261 ALVITA TEA COMPANY
Super Ginkgo Biloba Plus Echinacea Capsules...........: i 600 East Quality Drive
Tablets..........-.-200000 342 Evening Primrose Oil American Fork, UT 84003-3302
Super Milk Thistle Plus Capsules... ......2..-...-.. 298 Roo) asa to:
Tablets..............-2.-.. 516 Garlic Tablets ee 327 FAX: (801) 763-0789
Super Saw Palmetto Plus Ginkgo Biloba Capsules... ... 342 www.alvita.ccom
Ginseng American Capsules .... 346 Herbal Products Available:
Ginseng Chinese Capsules... . . 346 Alvita Astragalus Root
Goldenseal Capsules.......... 355 Tea Bags............2...00-5 54
Wild Oats Liquid ...........4 551 Gotu Kola Capsules .......... 359  Caffeine-Free Ginger Root
Wild Oats Tablets............: ssi Hawthorne Capsules.......... 271 Tea Bags.........--.......4 339
Yohimbe Power Max 1500 Sarsaparilla Capsules... ..... | 661 Chinese Green Tea Tea Bags 369
for Women Tablets ........ | 843 Saw Palmetto Capsules... .. . | 664 AMERICAN PHARMACAL, INC.
Yohimbe Power Max 1500 Uva Ursi Leaf Capsules... .... ! 779 1201 Douglas Avenue
Tablets....................4 843. Valerian Root Capsules........ 783 pases City. KS pees
Yohimbe Power Max 2000 White Willow Bark Capsules ...SOT (800) 34041905 °
Capsules.........0....2.004 843 FAX: (210) 349-9043
: ADVANCED NUTRITIONAL i :
Yohimbe Power Max 2000 TECHNOLOGY, INC. Herbal Products Available:
Liquid... 2... 843 6988 Sierra Court Ginseng Capsules ........... 346
Yohimbized 1000 Liquid ..... 4 843 Dublin, CA 94568 AMERICAN PHARMACEUTICAL CO.

ADH HEALTH PRODUCTS INC.
215 North Route 303
Congers, NY 10920-1726

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 624-6543
(925) 828-2128
FAX: (925) 828-6848

12 Dwight Place
Fairfield, NJ 07004
Direct Inquiries to:
(973) 515-1000

----- PAGE 209 -----
1-204 /AMERICAN PHARMACEUTICAL CO.

FAX: (973) 515-9766
Herbal Products Available:
Garlic Tablets... ... 2.2.0.2... 327

APOTHECARY PRODUCTS
11531 Rupp Drive
Bumsville, MN 55337
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 328-2742

FAX: (800) 328-1584

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets... ............. 12
Cayenne Herbal Capsules... ... 165
Echinacea Root Herbal

Capsules..........02..0....4 261
Garlic Oil Capsules). ........ 327
Garlic Tablets... ... 2.2.0.2... 327
Ginkgo Biloba Plus Capsules . . . 342
Ginseng Siberian Capsules... . « 346
Goldenseal Root Capsules... .. 355
Guarana Tablets.............. 376
Papaya Digestive Enzyme

Tablet ........0......0...:! 565
Red Clover Herbal Capsules ... 633
Sarsaparilla Root Capsules... . J 66i
Valerian Root Tablets.........! 783

White Willow Bark Capsules . .. 807

AURA CACIA
101 Arbuckle Road
Weaverville, CA 96093

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 437-3301

FAX: (800) 717-4375
www.auracacia.com

Herbal Products Available:

Ginger Root Oi ............ 339
Juniper Berry Oil... ........: 440
Myrrh Commiphora Oil....... - 534
Red Thyme Oil .............- 761
White Thyme Oil ...........7 76i
Wild Chamomile Oil ........ 331

BASIC VITAMINS

P.O. Box 412

Vandalia, OH 45377

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 782-2742

FAX: (937) 898-0500

www. basicvitamins.com
Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets. sees .. 12
Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327
Garlic Tablets. .............. 327
Ginseng Capsules............ 346
BAYER CORP., CONSUMER

CARE DIVISION

36 Columbia Road

P.O. Box 1910

Morristown, NJ 07962-1910

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 348-2240

Herbal Products Available:
One-A-Day Cholesterol

Health Tablets.........) G-29, 327
One-A-Day Cold Season

Tablets. .............0.) G29, 26i
One-A-Day Garlic

Capsules..............4 G-29, 327
One-A-Day Memory &

Concentration Tablets ... G29, 342
One-A-Day Menopause

Health Tablets. ........) G29, 92
One-A-Day Prostate Health

Capsules... ........0004 G-29, 664

One-A-Day Tension & Mood
Tablets, .. G-29, 719

BERGEN BRUNSWIG DRUG COMPANY
4000 Metropolitan Drive

Orange, CA 92868

Direct Inquiries to:

(714) 385-4000

FAX: (714) 385-8830

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules............./ 75
Cat's Claw Capsules........... 160
Cayenne Capsules............. 165
Echinacea Capsules............ 261
Evening Primrose Oil

Capsules... .... 00.0 e eee 298
Feverfew Capsules............ 306

Garlic Oil Capsules. .
Garlic Tablets... ..........-.

Ginger Root Capsules......... 339
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules....... 342
Ginseng Capsules............4 346
Ginseng Natural Tablets. . . . .. 346
Ginseng Root Korean White
Capsules..................% 346
Ginseng Root Siberian
Capsules................... 346
Golden Seal Root Capsules... . 355
Gotu Kola Capsules.......... 359
Grape Seed Capsules..... . 362
Green Tea Capsules........... 369
Kava Kava Capsules.......... : 443
Saw Palmetto Capsules... .... | 664
St. John's Wort Capsules...... 719
Valerian Root Capsules....... / 783

BIOGLAN PHARMA, INC.
900 West Valley Road
Suite 400

Wayne, PA 19087
Direct Inquiries to:
(610) 225-0200

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

FAX: (610) 225-0160

Herbal Products Available:

Zostrix Cream,...........0005 165
BIO-TECH PHARMACAL, INC.

P.O. Box 1992
Fayetteville, AR 72702

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 345-1199
FAX: (501) 443-5643

Herbal Products Available:

Bioflax Capsules............. 313
Garlic Capsules.............. 327
Wild Yam Capsules..........4 817

BOERICKE & TAFEL
2381 Circadian Way
Santa Rosa, CA 95407

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 876-9505

(707) 571-8202

FAX: (707) 571-8237

Herbal Products Available:

Califlora Calendula Gel... ... : A97

BOIRON USA
6 Campus Boulevard
Newtown Square, PA 19073

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 264-7661
FAX: (610) 325-7480

Herbal Products Available:

Calendula Gel... 2.2.0.0... A97
Calendula Lotion ............4 A97
Calendula Ointment ......... A97

BOSCOGEN INC.

11 Morgan

Irvine, CA 92618

Direct Inquiries to:

(949) 380-4317

FAX: (949) 583-2016
www.boscogen.com

Herbal Products Available:

Lynae Ginse-Cool Chewable
Tablets 2... 0... ee ae 346

BRECKENRIDGE
PHARMACEUTICAL, INC.

P.O. Box 206

Boca Raton, FL 33429

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 367-3395

(561) 367-8512

FAX: (561) 367-8107

Herbal Products Available:

St. John's Wort Capsules... ....” 719

E.T. BROWNE DRUG COMPANY
140 Sylvan Avenue

P.O. Box 1613

Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632

Direct Inquiries to:
(201) 947-3050
FAX: (201) 947-9276

----- PAGE 210 -----
MANUFACTURERS INDEX

Herbal Products Available:
Palmers Aloe Vera Formula

Cream... a a is
CARDINAL HEALTH, INC.

5555 Glendon Court

Dublin, OH 43016

Direct Inquiries to:

(614) 757-5000

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules |... rsrrr 0c: 75
Echinacea Capsules... tet 261
327

Garlic Capsules ...... 77-7.
Garlic Oil Natural Capsules .... 327

Ginkgo Biloba Capsules........ 342
Ginseng Siberian Capsules. . . . 346
Saw Palmetto Capsules....... J 664
Valerian Root Capsules......./ 783

CELESTIAL SEASONINGS, INC.
4600 Sleepytime Drive
Boulder, CO 80301-3292
Direct Inquiries to:

(303) 530-5300

FAX: (303) 581-1294
www.celestialseasonings.com
Herbal Products Available:

Echinacea Capsules........... 4 261
Garlic Tablets............... 327
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules....... 342
Ginseng Energy Capsules... . . 346
Green Tea Extract Capsules .... 369
Kava Kava Capsules.......... 4 443
Panax Ginseng Capsules...... 346
Saw Palmetto Capsules... .... J 664
St. John's Wort Capsules...... / 719

CONTRACT PHARMACAL
CORPORATION

160 Commerce Drive
Hauppauge, NY 11788

Direct Inquiries to:

(631) 2314610

FAX: (631) 2314156

Herbal Products Available:

Echinacea Capsules.........../ 261
Garlic Tablets............... 327
Ginseng Capsules............ 346
St. John's Wort Tablets......./ 719

ENZYMATIC THERAPY

825 Challenger Drive

Green Bay, WI 54311

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 783-2286

E-mail: etmail@enzy.com
www.enzy.com

Herbal Products Available:

Hypericalm Capsules.......... 719
FAMILY PHARMACY

P.O. Box 1027
Southeastern, PA 19398-1027

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 333-7347
FAX: (610) 695-8604

Herbal Products Available:

Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327
Garlic Tablets... .......0.0. 327
Ginseng Vitamin Capsules... .. . 346

FREEDA VITAMINS, INC.
36 E. 41st Street
New York, NY 10017

Direct Inquiries to:
800) 777-3737

212) 685-4980
FAX: (212) 685-7297

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Concentrate Tablets. 12
Cabbage Tablets.............. 134
Garlic Tablets. .............. 327
Guar Gum Powder........... 376
Pacific Kelp Tablets .......... 122
Papaya Tablets................ 565
FRONTIER

P.O. Box 299

Norway, IA 52318

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 786-1388
FAX: (800) 717-4372

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Leaf Capsules. ......... 12
American Ginseng Root

Capsules.... 0.0.0.0... 000. 346
Bilberry Leaf Capsules........./ 75
Black Cohosh Capsules........ | 92
Black Walnut Hulls Capsules ... 134
Blessed Thistle Capsules....... 107
Burdock Root Capsules........ 128
Butcher's Broom Root

Capsules... 2.0... .....000008 132
Cascara Sagrada Bark

Capsules... 0.2.0. .....000008 153
Catnip Leaf Capsules.......... 164
Cat's Claw Inner Bark

Capsules.............0.0004 ieo
Cayenne 30,000 Heat Units

Capsules.............0.0004 i65
Certified Organic Nettle Leaf

Capsules.............00.002 729
Certified Organic Red

Raspberry Leaf Capsules... . J 630
Chamomile Flowers Capsules .. . 331
Chickweed Herb Capsules... .. iso
Damiana Leaf Capsules... .... J 244
Dandelion Root Capsules....... 245
Devil's Claw Root Tuber

Capsules... 2.0.0.0... 000004 247

FUTUREBIOTICS /1-205

Echinacea Angustifolia Herb

Capsules..............00.

Echinacea purpurea Root

Capsules.............0004
Elder Flowers Capsules... ...

Eleuthero Ginseng Root

Capsules......... 00.0000.
Eyebright Herb Capsules... . .
Fenugreek Seed Capsules... ..
Garlic Capsules.............
Ginger Root Capsules........
Ginkgo Leaf Capsules.......
Goldenseal Leaf Capsules. . . .
Goldenseal Root Capsules. . . .
Gotu Kola Capsules.........
Guggul Resin Capsules......

Hawthorne Berries Capsules

Horsetail Grass Capsules... . .
Kava Kava Root Capsules. . . .

Korean Ginseng Root

Licorice Root Capsules... .. .
Marshmallow Root Capsules ....
Mullein Leaf Liquid .......
Nettle Leaf Capsules........
Passion Flower Capsules. ... .
Red Clover Herb Capsules. . .

Red Raspberry Leaves

Capsules............0004
Sarsaparilla Root Capsules. . .

Saw Palmetto Berries

Capsules...........00004
Senna Leaf Capsules........
Skullcap Herb Capsules... ...
Slippery Elm Bark Capsules ....

St. John's Wort Herb

Capsules... ........0.000.
Uva Ursi Leaf Capsules... ..
Valerian Root Capsules... .. .

White Willow Bark Capsules
Wild Yam Root & Rhizome

Extract Liquid ..........
Wild Yam Root Capsules... .
Yarrow Flowers Capsules. . . .
Yellow Dock Root Capsules ....

FUTUREBIOTICS
145 Ricefield Lane
Hauppauge, NY 11788

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 367-5433
www.futurebiotics.com

. 327

339

----- PAGE 211 -----
1-206 /FUTUREBIOTICS

Herbal Products Available:
Alfalfa Whole Juice

Concentrate Liquid. 12
Bilberry Extract Capsules... ... ! 75
Ginkgo Biloba Premium

Extract Capsules. .......... 342
Ginkgo Biloba Premium

Extract Tablets. ............ 342
Green Tea Tablets............ 369
High Alicin Garlic Tablets. . . . 327
Kava Kava Premium Extract

Capsules..............02..4 443
Premium Blend Korean

Ginseng Capsules..........% 346
Premium Blend Saw Palmetto

Capsules...........002.0..04 664
Saw Palmetto Berries

Capsules... 2.0.2... 022.00004 664
St. John's Wort Capsules... ... / 719
GLENWOOD

82 North Summit Street
Tenafly, NJ 07670

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 664-1449
(732) 981-9780
FAX: (732) 981-9790

Herbal Products Available:
Yocon Tablets.............0.5 843

THE GREEN TURTLE BAY
VITAMIN CO., INC.

56 High Street

P.O. Box 642

Summit, NJ 07902

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 887-8535

(908) 277-2240

FAX: (908) 273-9116

E-mail: mail@energywave.com
www.energywave.com

Herbal Products Available:

Primrose Oil Capsules .... 298

HEALTH FROM THE SUN
P.O. Box 179
Newport Beach, NH 03773

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 447-2249
FAX: (603) 763-9159
www.hfts.com

Herbal Products Available:
Bio-EFA Black Currant

Capsules _ 94
Black Currant Capsules .... . 94
Curcu Caps Capsules : 132
Prickly Ash Autumn-

Harvested Liquid : -545

Turmeric Whole Rhizome
Liquid 846

Wild Indigo Fresh Root
Liquid 812

HEALTH PRODUCTS CORPORATION/
HEALTH BRAND

Health Vitamin Company, Inc.

1060 Nepperhan Avenue

Yonkers, NY 10703-1432

Direct Inquiries to:
(914) 423-2900
FAX: (914) 963-6001

Herbal Products Available:

Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327

Ginseng Korean Capsules... .. « 346

Oil of Evening Primrose
Capsules..............22-2.4 298

Papaya Chewable Tablets... .. 565

HERB PHARM

P.O. Box 116

Williams, OR 97544

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 599-2392

(541) 846-6262

FAX: (800) 545-7392

E-mail: Herbpharm@aol.com
www.herb-pharm.com

Herbal Products Available:

Madder Whole Root Liquid .... 490
Oregon Grape Liquid ......... 527
Sheep Sorrel, Whole

Flowering Plant Liquid....... 705

Thyme Leaf & Flower Liquid . . 761
Yerba Santa Resin-Rich Leaf

HERBAL HARVEST

90 Orville Drive

Bohemia, NY 11716

Direct Inquiries to:

(631) 567-9500

FAX: (631) 244-2136

Herbal Products Available:

Aloe Vera Capsules............ 16
Black Cohosh Capsules........ | 92
Cascara Sagrada Capsules. ... . - 153
Cayenne Capsules. 165
Dandelion Root Capsules...... | 245
Echinacea Capsules...........: 261i
Eyebright Capsules. . : : 300
Feverfew Extract Capsules 306
Ginger Root Capsules......... 339
Ginkgo Biloba Extract
Tablets...........22..2....5 342
Ginseng Complex Capsules... . . 346
Golden Seal Root Capsules... . 355
Hawthorne Berries Capsules .... 271
Korean Ginseng Capsules... . . 346
Saw Palmetto Capsules... .... | 664
Siberian Ginseng Tablets)... .. . 346

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

St. John's Wort Capsules... .. 719
Valerian Root Capsules....... ° 783
HUMCO

7400 Alumax Drive
Texarkana, TX 75501
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 662-3435

FAX: (903) 831-7736

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Extract Capsules... ...- 75
Cascara Sagrada Capsules)... . - 153
Cat's Claw Capsules .......... 160
Cayenne Pepper Capsules,.... . 165
Echinacea Capsules........... 261
Feverfew Extract Capsules. . . . 306
Ginkgo Biloba Extract

Capsules... .... 0. eee eee eee 342
Goldenseal Root Capsules... . . 355
Hawthorn Extract Capsules... . 271
Kava Kava Capsules........... 443
Korean Ginseng Extract

Capsules..............004. 346
Korean White Ginseng

Capsules... .......-..0200. 346

Milk Thistle Extract Capsules .. 516
Saw Palmetto Extract

Capsules... ..........2....4 664
St. John's Wort Extract

Capsules... ..... 0c eee eee 719
Valerian Root Capsules.......° 783

IRWIN NATURALS
10549 West Jefferson Boulevard
Culver City, CA 90232

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 841-8448
FAX: (310) 202-9454

Herbal Products Available:

Cat's Claw Capsules.......... 1 ieo
Echinacea Capsules........... 4 261
Ginkgo Smart Capsules....... 342

Super Yohimbe-Plus Tablets ....843

THE KEY COMPANY
1313 W. Essex Ave.

P.O. Box 220370

St. Louis, MO 63122
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 325-9592

(314) 965-6699

FAX: (314) 965-7629

Herbal Products Available:

Alfamin Tablets...............- 12
Echinacea Root Capsules...... J 261
Garlic Capsules.............. 327
Goldenseal Plus Capsules... . . 355
Linum-20 Capsules........... 313
St. John's Wort Capsules...... ! 719

----- PAGE 212 -----
A

WA

If South E

MANUFACTURERS INDEX

KISS MY FACE
P.O. Box 224
Gardiner, NY 12525
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 262-KISS
(914) 255-0884
FAX: (914) 2554312
www.kissmyface.com
Herbal Products Available:

Natural Honey & Calendula
Moisturizer for Extra Dry
Skin

KONSYL PHARMACEUTICALS
4200 South Hulen

Fort Worth, TX 76109

Direct Inquiries to:

800) 356-6795

817) 763-8011

FAX: (817) 731-9389
www.konsyl.com

Herbal Products Available:
Konsyl Easy Mix

Konsyl for Kids. .............4 612
Konsyl Powder Sugar Free

LEE PHARMACEUTICALS

1434 Santa Anita Avenue

P.O. Box 3836

Monte, CA 91733-3312

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 950-5337

FAX: (626) 442-6994

Herbal Products Available:

Aloe 99 Gel ie

Sundance Aloe Vera Gel ...... ie

A497

LICHTWER PHARMA U.S., INC.

Foster Plaza 9

750 Holiday Drive

Pittsburgh, PA 15220

Direct Inquiries to:

(412) 928-9334

FAX: (412) 928-9655

Herbal Products Available:

Ginkai Tablets...........) 0-29, 342
Ginsai Capsules.............. 346
Kira Tablets.............4 G29, 719
Kwai Garlic Tablets...... ‘ G29, 327
MAJOR PHARMACEUTICALS

31778 Enterprise Drive

Livonia, MI 48150

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 875-0123
FAX: (734) 762-9730

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets 12
Bilberry Capsules. a L273
Cayenne Pepper Capsules.
Echinacea Root Capsules.
Evening Primrose Capsules.
Eyebright Capsules.

Garlic Capsules.

Garlin Tablets.

Ginkgo Biloba Capsules.
Ginkgo Biloba Tablets
Ginseng Capsules.

Ginseng Korean Capsules.
Ginseng Siberian Capsules.
Golden Seal Root Capsules.
Gotu Kola Capsules.

Grape Seed Extract Capsules
Kava Kava Root Capsules. .
Kelp Tablets.

Licorice Root Capsules.
Milk Thistle Capsules.
Oat Bran Tablets.
Papaya Tablets,

Saw Palmetto Capsules... . .
Valerian Root Capsules.

MARLEX PHARMACEUTICALS, INC.
50 McCullough Drive

Southgate Center

New Castle, DE 19720

Direct Inquiries to:
(302) 328-3355
FAX: (302) 328-6968

Herbal Products Available:
Papaya Chewable Tablets.
Papaya Coated Tablets.

MASON VITAMINS, INC.
5105 N.W. 159th Street
Miami Lakes, FL 33014

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 327-6005

FAX: (800) 328-3944
Wwww.masonvitamins.com

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Fortified Tablets.

Alfalfa Tablets.

Aloe Vera Concentrate 5000
Capsules.

Bilberry Capsules.

Cat's Claw Capsules.

Cayenne Capsules.

Echinacea Capsules

Evening Primrose Oil
Capsules.

Feverfew Capsules.

Garlic Capsules.

Garlic Oil Capsules.

Garlic Tablets.

Garlic-X Tablets...

Ginger Capsules.

Ginger Root Capsules.

GinkAlert Tablets.

Ginkgo Biloba Capsules.

327
342
342
346
346
346

355

359

.. 362
. 443

122
469
516
551
565
664
783

. 565

565

12
12
ie
75

. leo

163
261

MCZAND HERBAL, INC. /I-207

Ginkgo Biloba Extract

Capsules, . . a . . 342
Ginseng Complex Korean

Capsules. : 346
Ginseng Korean Capsules... . . 346
Ginseng Korean Tablets,...... 346
Ginseng Siberian Capsules. . 346
Goldenseal Capsules. 355
Goldenseal Root Capsules. 355
Gotu Kola Capsules. 359
G-Sana Capsules. 346
Guarana Capsules 122
Hawthorn Berry Capsules. 271
Kava Kava Capsules. 443
Kelp Tablets. 122
Licorice Capsules. 469
Milk Thistle Capsules. 516
Oat Bran Tablets. 551
Papaya Enzyme with Papain

Tablet Le 565
Saw Palmetto Capsules. 664
St. John's Wort Capsules. . . . 719
Total Gar Capsules 327
Valerian Capsules. 783
Valerian Root Tablets 783
Yohimbe Capsules. 843
Yohimbe Super Potent

Tablets. 843
McKESSON DRUG COMPANY
One Post Street
San Francisco, CA 94104-5296
Direct Inquiries to:
(415) 983-8300
FAX: (415) 983-7160
Herbal Products Available:
Cayenne Capsules. 165
Echinacea Capsules 261
Ginseng Capsules 346
Ginseng Concentrate Capsules .. 346
Golden Seal Root Capsules. 355
Gotu Kola Herb Capsules. 359
Valerian Root Capsules 783
McZAND HERBAL, INC.
P.O. Box 5312
Santa Monica, CA 90409
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 800-0405
FAX: (310) 822-1050
Herbal Products Available:
Alfalfa Liquid. 12
Astragalus Root Liquid 54
Black Walnut Liquid . 134
Blue Cohosh Liquid. . 109
Cat's Claw Capsules. . . 160

----- PAGE 213 -----
1-208 /MCZAND HERBAL, INC.

Cayenne Capsules............- 165
Chamomile Liquid ........... 331
Dandelion Liquid............. 245
Echinacea Liquid ............4 261
Feverfew Capsules............ 306
Ginger Liquid .............. 339
Ginkgo Capsules.............. 342
Ginkgo Liquid .............. 342
Ginseng American Liquid... . . 346
Ginseng Chinese Liquid). ..... 346
Ginseng Siberian Liquid ..... 346
Goldenseal Liquid............ 355
Gotu Kola Liquid ........... 359
Hawthorn Capsules............ 271
Hawthorn Liquid.............. 271
Horsetail Liquid .............: 409
Kava Kava Capsules.......... : 443
Kava Kava Liquid. ............ 443
Licorice Liquid .............4¢ A469
Milk Thistle Capsules..........: 516
Milk Thistle Liquid .........: 516
Nettle Capsules... ...........7 729
Nettle Liquid. ..............! 729
Oatstraw Capsules............ 551
Oatstraw Liquid..............: 551
Red Clover Liquid..........: 633
Red Raspberry Liquid ....... 4 630
Saw Palmetto Capsules... .... J 664
Saw Palmetto Liquid ........ 4 664
Valerian Liquid .............! 783

THE MEDICINE SHOPPE
1100 North Lindbergh
St. Louis, MO 63132

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 325-1397

(314) 993-6000

FAX: (314) 872-5500

Herbal Products Available:

Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327
Garlic Tablets... ............ 327

MERICON INDUSTRIES, INC.
8819 N. Pioneer Road
Peoria, IL 61615-1561
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 242-6464

FAX: (309) 693-2158
E-mail: monocal@aol.com

Herbal Products Available:
Ginkgo Tablets 342

NATIONAL VITAMIN COMPANY, INC.
2075 West Scranton Avenue
Porterville, CA 93257-8358

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 538-5828
FAX: (209) 781-8878

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets... ............. 12
Aloe Vera Capsules............ 16
Cat's Claw Capsules.......... 4 ieo
Chantal Aloe Vera Cream. ..... . 16
Echinacea Capsules........... 261
Evening Primrose Oil

Capsules................... 298
Garlic Capsules.............. 327
Garlic Tablets. .............. 327
Ginkgo Biloba Extract

Capsules................... 342
Ginseng Korean Capsules... . . 346
Golden Seal Capsules......... 355
Guarana Tablets..............4 376
Kelp Tablets.................. 122
Oat Bran Chewable Tablets... ; 551
Papaya Enzyme Tablet ....... 565
Saw Palmetto Capsules....... J 664
St. John's Wort Extract

Capsules................... 719
Valerian Root Capsules... ..... 783
Watercress Capsules........... 798
NATROL

21411 Prairie Street
Chatsworth, CA 91311

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 326-1520
www.natrol.com

Herbal Products Available:

Astragalus Capsules...........: 54
Basics Stinging Nettles

Capsules..................2 729
Bilberry Herb Capsules........7 75
Black Cohosh Capsules........ 5 92
Blackcurrant Seed Oil

Capsules...................: 94
Evening Primrose Oil

Capsules... ............0.. 298
Ginkgo Biloba Extract ....... 342
Ginkgo Biloba Tablets. ....... 342
Green Tea Capsules........... 369
Guarana Capsules............. 376
Kavatrol Capsules........ ¢ G-29, 443
Mood Support Capsules........ 719
Saw Palmetto Capsules)... ... | 664
St. John's Wort Tablets... .... 7 719

NATURALIFE CORPORATION
10 Mountain Springs Parkway
Springville, UT 84663

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 531-3233

FAX: (800) 489-3302

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules............./ 75

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cat's Claw Bark Capsules... .. - 160
Dr. Masquelier's Authentic

OPC's Tablets............. 362
Feverfew Leaf Capsules........ 306
Garlic Tablets... ..........2.. 327
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules........ 342
Ginseng Capsules............ 346
Hawthorn Tablets............ 4 271
Kava Kava Root Capsules... .. : 443
Milk Thistle Capsules......... : 516
Original Primrose for

Women Capsules............ 298
Saw Palmetto Capsules... ... J 664
St. John's Wort Capsules... ...! 719
Vitex Capsules... ............- 176

NATURE MADE
1150 Aviation Place
San Fernando, CA 91340

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 276-2878
www.naturemade.com

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Herbs Tablets. .......... 12
Chinese Red Panax Ginseng

Capsules...........2.0..0.. 346
Chinese Red Panax Ginseng

Tablets... 0.2 ..0.......02.. 346
Echinacea Capsules........... 261
Garlic Oil Capsules... ....... 327
Ginkgo Biloba Tablets... ..... 342
Goldenseal Root Capsules... .. 355
High Potency Garlic Oil

Capsules.......2.....000.. 327
St. John's Wort Tablets... ... 719

NATURE'S ANSWER
320 Oser Avenue
Hauppauge, NY 11788

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 439-2324

(516) 231-7492

FAX: (516) 951-2499
www.naturesanswer.com

Herbal Products Available:

Alcohol Free Black Walnut

Green Hulls Fluid Extract .... 134
Alcohol Free Chaste Tree

Berry Liquid................ 176
Alcohol Free Dandelion Root

Liquid... 0... 2. eee 245
Alcohol Free Ginger Root

Fluid Extract... ......0.. 339
Alcohol Free Gotu Kola Herb

Liquid 359
Alcohol Free Horsetail Liquid . . 409

----- PAGE 214 -----
MANUFACTURERS INDEX

Alcohol Free Kava Kava

Liquid . Lee 443
Alcohol Free Milk Thistle

Seed Liquid..............4 516
Alcohol Free Mullein Leaves

Liqui 532
Alcohol Free Nettles Leaf

Liqui . . 729
Alcohol Free Passionflower

Liquid... 2.22.22... 2 eee 573
Alcohol Free Red Raspberry

Leaf Liquid ...............4 630
Alcohol Free Sage Liquid .... J 655
Alcohol Free White Willow

Bark Liquid..............4 807
Alcohol Free Yarrow Flowers

Liquids... ee 33
Alcohol Free Yellowdock

Root Liquid ..............4 835
Alfalfa Liquid)... ............. 12
Angelica Root Liquid Fluid

Extract.

Astragalus Liquid.
Bayberry Bark Liquid Fluid

Extract... ....2..2.-2.--.-.7 705
Bladderwrack Fluid Extract . . . .106
Blessed Thistle Low Alcohol

Fluid Extract... ........-- 107
Blue Cohosh Root Liquid .... - 109

Burdock Root Fluid Extract
Catnip Herb Liquid Fluid
Extract 0... ee eee
Catnip Liquid ................
Cat's Claw Bark Liquid ...... J i
Celery Liquid Fluid Extract . .
Chickweed Herb Liquid ...... J i
Cinnamon Bark Fluid Extract ... 190
Cleavers, Alcohol-Free Liquid . . 193

Damiana Leaf Fluid Extract . 244
Fennel Seed Liquid........... 302
Ginger Kid Liquid .......... 339
Goldenseal Root Alcohol

Free Liquid.............0. 355
Green Tea Leaf, Alcohol

Free Liquid.............0, 369
Guarana Seed Liquid ........ 376
Juniper Berry Liquid ......... 440
Kid Chamomile Liquid ....... 331
Marshmallow Root Liquid... . 505
Myrrh Gum Liquid...........: 534
Oregon Grape Root Liquid... : 527

Parsley Leaf Liquid.......... 4 567 I

NATURE'S HERBS /I-209

Rosemary Leaf Liquid........ 4 645 Herbal Sure Goldenseal Root
Saw Palmetto Berries Liquid - 664 Capsules... ........0.002000.- 355
St. John's Wort Liquid...... 7 719 Herbal Sure Korean Ginseng
Thyme Herb Liquid .........°7 76i Capsules............--00.. 346
Valerian Root Alcohol Free Herbal Sure Maximum
Liquid... 2... eee eee ee 783 Strength Ginkgo Biloba
Wild Indigo Root, Alcohol Capsules..........2.00..0.. 342
Free Liquid...............4 812 Herbal Sure Saw Palmetto
Wild Yam Liquid ...........4 817 Capsules..............-.--4 664
Witch Hazel Leaf Liquid...... § 821 Herbal Sure Valerian Root
Wood Betony Herb Liquid... § 825 Capsules..........2........ 783
: Licorice Root Capsules... .... : 469
ores BOUNTY, INC. Manchurian Ginseng Capsules 346
Bohemia. NY 11716 Manchurian Ginseng Tablets 346
Direct Inquiries to: Milk Thistle Capsules.......... 516
(631) 567-9500 Natural Ginkgo Biloba
FAX: (631) 244-2136 Tablets,......
Herbal Products Available: Oat Bran Tablets.............¢
Alfalfa Natural Tablets.......... 12 Red Clover Blossom
Aloe Vera Capsules............ 16 Capsules...........0...2.-4 633
Bilberry Capsules... ........0.: 75 Royal Brittany Evening
Cat's Claw Capsules........... 160 Primrose Oil Capsules... ... { 298
Cayenne Capsules............. 165 Saw Palmetto Capsules....... | 664
Dandelion Root Capsules...... J 245 Silymarin Milk Thistle
Deodorized Garlic Tablets... .. 327 Capsules....... 0.200.000 eee 516
Echinacea Capsules...........4 261 Valerian Root Capsules... ..... 783
Evening Primrose Oil Yohimbie Bark Tablets... .... | 843
Capsules... ........2....... 298
Eyebright Capsules ........... 300 MA ae Parkwsy
Feverfew Capsules........... 306 Hauppauge, NY 11788
Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327 Direct Inquiries to:
Garlic Tablets. .............. 327 (516) 467-3140
Ginger Root Capsules.......... 339 | www.naturesherbs.com
Ginkgo Biloba Extract Herbal Products Available:
Tablets... 0.2... 0. eee 342 Alfalfa Leaf Capsules..... 2.2... 12
Ginseng Complex Capsules. . . . 346 Aloe Vera Mild Stimulant
Ginseng Korean Capsules. .... . 346 Laxative Capsules............ 16
Ginseng Manchurian Capsules 346 American Ginseng Root
Ginseng Siberian Tablets... ... { 346 Capsules... 0... 0. eee eee 346
Ginseng Up Capsules.......... 346 Bayberry Bark Capsules.......- 705
Golden Seal Root Capsules... . 355 Bilberry Power Capsules........ 75
Grapeseed Extract Capsules... . 362 Black Cohosh Power
Hawthorne Berries Capsules .... 271 Capsules...................5 92
Herbal Sure Aloe Vera Black Walnut Hulls Capsules ... 134
Softgels. 0.2... 2... 16 Blessed Thistle Capsules... ... . 107
Herbal Sure Chinese Red Burdock Root Capsules)... .... 128
Ginseng Capsules.......... 346 Butcher's Broom Root
Herbal Sure Extracts Capsules... 0.0... cee eee 132
Capsules... 2.0.0... eee eee 75 Cascara Sagrada Bark Mild
Herbal Sure Feverfew Stimulant Laxative
Capsules... .. 02... 30e Capsules... . 0... eee eee 153
Herbal Sure Ginger Root Cat's Claw Capsules........... 160
Capsules... . 0.2... 0.0000 005 339 I Cat's Claw Power Capsules ... . 160

----- PAGE 215 -----
1-210/NATURE'S HERBS

Cayenne Power Herb

Capsules... ...........00005 165
Celery Seed Capsules.......... 172
Celery Seed Power Capsules ... 172
Chamomile Flowers Capsules ... 331
Chasteberry Power Capsules ... . 176
Chickweed Capsules........... -iso
Chinese Tian Shan Garlic

Tablets. 327
Damiana Leaves Capsules... . . 244
Devil's Claw Secondary Root

Capsules... 02.2... 000000004 247
Elderberry Flowers & Berries

Capsules... ... 22... 2.00000 287
Elderberry Power Capsules. . . . 287
EuroQuality Juniper Berries

Capsules............0..0004 A440
EuroQuality Red Clover

Blossoms Capsules......... 4 633
Eyebright Capsules........... 4 300
Garlic Power Tablets......... 327
Ginger Power Capsules....... 339
Golden Seal Power Capsules .. . 355
Golden Seal Root Capsules... . . 355
Green Tea Power Capsules... . 369
Green Tea Power, Caffeine-

Free Capsules............... 369
Hawthorn Flowers Leaves &

Berries Capsules........... 271
Hawthorn Power Capsules... .. : 271
Horse Chestnut Power

Capsules........0......00004 403
Kava Kava Power Capsules .... 443
Kava Kava Root Capsules... .. . A43
Korean Ginseng Root

Capsules......... 0.0... 0000. 346
Licorice Power Capsules...... ¥ 469

Marshmallow Root Capsules .... 505
Mexican Wild Yam Capsules .. . 817
Mexican Wild Yam Power

Capsules...... 0.0... 00000004 817
Milk Thistle Phytosome

Capsules.............0.0005 sie
Milk Thistle Power Capsules ... 516
Nettle Leaf Capsules........./ 729
Nettle Power Capsules......... 729
NuVeg Black Cohosh Root

Capsules...............0.0.05 92
NuVeg Eyebright Capsules. . . . 300

NuVeg Feverfew Leaf
Capsules...............0004 306

NuVeg Ginkgo Power

Capsules... 0.2... 0. cee eee 342
NuVeg Red Clover

Combination Capsules....... | 633
NuVeg Valerian Root

Capsules... 0.2... ....0 0000 783
Odorless Garlic Capsules. ..... 327
Olive Leaf Power Capsules... . : 556
Parsley Leaf Capsules........ 567
Phyto Power Capsules......... 469
Power Herb Korean Ginseng

Capsules............2--2..- 346
Premium Cayenne Capsules 165
Premium Fenugreek Seed

Capsules... ..........000005 304
Premium Feverfew Leaf

Capsules... 0.2... ...- 000000 306
Psyllium Husk Capsules....... | 612
Saw Palmetto Berries

Capsules... 0... eee eed 664
Saw Palmetto Power

Capsules... ...........00004 664
Senior Ginkgo Power

Capsules... ... 0.0.00... eee 342
Senna Extract Capsules....... | 684
Siberian Ginseng Power Herb

Capsules... 1... 00... eee 346
Siberian Ginseng Root

Capsules... 0.0... eee 346
St. John's Power 0.3%

Capsules. ...... 00.0000 0000- 719
St. John's Power Capsules... . ! 719
St. John's Power Time

Release Capsules............ 719
Superior Chinese Astragalus

Capsules... 02.2... ee 54
Time Release Bilberry Power

Capsules... 0.0.0... eee eee 75
Time Release Ginkgo Power

Capsules... 0... eee ee 342
Time Release Hawthorn

Power Capsules............. 271
Time Release Korean

Ginseng Power Capsules. . . . 346
Time Release Milk Thistle

Power Capsules............. 516
Turmeric Power Capsules... .. | 846
Uva Ursi Leaf Capsules... .... / 779
Valerian Power Time Release

Capsules... .... 0... cee ee 783
Valerian Root Capsules....... / 783

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Valerian Root Power

Capsules... 0... 0.0... eee 783
Wild Countryside Black

Cohosh Root Capsules....... | 92
Wild Countryside Chickweed

Capsules............--2....4 iso
Wild Countryside Damiana

Leaves Capsules............. 244
Wild Countryside Dandelion

Root Capsules...........0.4 245
Wild Countryside Gotu Kola

Capsules... 00... 0.00.00 00. 359
Wild Countryside Licorice

Root Capsules.............4 469
Wild Countryside Myrrh

Gum Capsules.............4 534
Wild Countryside Red

Raspberry Leaf Capsules... . J 630
Wild Countryside Scullcap

Capsules...............0.04 678
Wild Countryside Springtime

Horsetail Capsules.......... 4 409
Wild Countryside White

Willow Capsules...........4 807
Wild Countryside Yellow

Dock Root Capsules........ 4 835
Yarrow Flowers Capsules... ... . 33

NATURE'S RESOURCE
1150 Aviation Place
San Fernanado, CA 91340

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 314-4372
Www.naturesresource.com

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets. ...........0000. 12
American Ginseng Capsules .... 346
Cascara Sagrada Natural

Laxative Capsules........... 153
Cat's Claw Caplets...........4 iso
Cayenne Capsules............. 165
Chinese Red Panax Capsules . .. 346
Eyebright Capsules........... 300
Feverfew Traditional Herb

Capsules... 1.2... ee eee 306
Ginger Root Capsules......... 339
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules....... 342
Ginseng Root Siberian

Capsules...............00. 346
Goldenseal Root Capsules..... « 355
Gotu Kola Capsules.......... 359
Hawthorn Berries Capsules... . . 271
Kava Kava Capsules.......... 4 443

Milk Thistle Power Capsules . . .516

----- PAGE 216 -----
MANUFACTURERS INDEX

Saw Palmetto Capsules, . .
St. John's Wort Capsules... ...” 719
Standardized Bilberry Extract

Capsules Lae tie. 78
Standardized Garlic Capsules .327
Standardized Ginseng, Korean

White Capsules. ........... 346
Standardized Licorice

Capsules.............0....04 469
Standardized Valerian

Capsules..................7 783
Valerian Capsules............7 783

NATURE'S WAY
10 Mountain Springs Parkway
Springville, UT 84663

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 962-8873
FAX: (801) 489-1700

www.naturesway.com
Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Capsules... .........00.. 12
Aloe Vera Capsules. . : .. 16
Astragalus Root Capsules. ..... 54
Bayberry Root Capsules....... 705
Bilberry Extract Capsules... ... 7 75
Black Cohosh Capsules........! 92
Black Walnut Hulls Capsules . . 134
Blessed Thistle Capsules... ... - 107
Butcher's Broom Root

Capsules............2...... 132
Cascara Sagrada Capsules... .. | 153
Catnip Herb Capsules.......... 164
Cat's Claw Capsules........... 160
Dandelion Capsules............ 245
Devil's Claw Secondary Root

Capsules................... 247
Fennel Seed Capsules......... 302
Fenugreek Capsules.......... 304
Garlicin Tablets.............. 327
Ginger Root Capsules......... : 339
Ginkgold Tablets............. 342
Golden Seal Root Capsules. . . . 355
Gotu Kola Herb Liquid ...... « 359
Hawthorn Berries Capsules. . . . 271
Hawthorn Berries Liquid’... .. : 271
HeartCare Hawthorn Extract

Tablet. ... 0... eee eed 271
Herbal Eyebright Capsules. . . . 300
Horsetail Grass Capsules... ... : A09
Hyssop Herb Capsules........ : 414
Kava Extract Capsules........ 4 A443
Kava Kava Root Capsules... . . 443

Licorice Root Capsules... .... | 469

Melissa Lemon Balm Herb

Capsules... .. cee ee ee 461
Mullein Leaves Liquid ........ 532
Mygrafew Tablets............ 306
Nature's Root Nighttime

Tablet. 2.2... 0... eee 783
Neem Capsules.............. 539
Nettle Herb Capsules ........7 729
Parsley Herb Capsules........: 567
Proactive Saw Palmetto

Capsules... ....2....2.....) 664
Psyllium Husk Bulk-Forming

Laxative Capsules.......... 612
Psyllium Seed Bulk-Forming

Laxative Capsules..........4 612
Red Raspberry Leaves

Capsules... .. 0.0.0.0 ee eee d 630
Red Raspberry Leaves

Glycerine Extract Liquid .. . J 630
Saw Palmetto Berries

Capsules... .. 02... ee eed 664
Siberian Ginseng Capsules. . . . 346
St. John's Wort Capsules... ...? 719
St. John's Wort Herb Liquid ...719
Standardized Cat's Claw

Extract Capsules... 2.2.2.2... ieo
Standardized Chamomile

Extract Capsules........... 331
Standardized Feverfew

Extract Capsules............ 306
Standardized Green Tea

Extract Capsules... 2.2.2.2... 369
Standardized Hawthorn

Extract Capsules...........% 271
Standardized Horsechestnut

Extract Capsules...........5 403
Standardized Saw Palmetto

ExtractCap Capsules........ | 664
Standardized Siberian

Ginseng Root Capsules...... 346
Standardized Uva Ursi

Extract Capsules...........- 779
Standardized White Willow

Bark Extract Capsules... ... | 807
Thisilyn Standardized Milk

Thistle Extract Capsules... .. § sie
Turmeric Extract Capsules... .. | 846
Uva Ursi Leaves Capsules... .. ! 779
Valerian Root Capsules.......- 783
Vitex Capsules... .........00. 176
White Willow Bark Capsules .. . 807

PERRIGO/I-211

Wild American Scullcap

Herb Capsules.............4 678
Wild Yam Extract Liquid .. Si7
Wild Yam Root Capsules... .. | 817
Yarrow Extract Liquid......... : 33
Yellow Dock Root Capsules ... 835
NEUROVITES
P.O. Box 180

Rockaway Beach, OR 97136

Direct Inquiries to:
(503) 228-4119
FAX: (503) 228-4119

Herbal Products Available:

Black Currant Oil Capsules..... | 94
Ginkgo Biloba Extract
Capsules... .. 0. ee ee ee 342

NOVARTIS CONSUMER HEALTH, INC.
560 Morris Avenue

Summit, NJ 07901-1312

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 452-0051
FAX: (800) 635-2801

Herbal Products Available:

Ex-Lax Maximum Strength ... | 684
Perdiem Fiber Therapy... . § G-29, 612
Perdiem Overnight Relief . G29, 684
NOVOGEN, INC.

1 Landmark Square, 2nd Floor
Stamford, CT 06901-2628
Direct Inquiries to:

(888) NOVOGEN

E-mail: info@novogen.com
Wwww.novogen.com

Herbal Products Available:

Promensil Tablets........ G29, 633

PD-RX PHARMACEUTICALS INC.
727 North Ann Arbor Avenue
Oklahoma City, OK 73127
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 299-7379

FAX: (405) 942-5471

Herbal Products Available:

Saw Palmetto Capsules. 664
St. John's Wort Tablets....... ! 719
PERRIGO

117 Water Street
Allegan, MI 49010
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 827-2296
FAX: (616) 673-9122

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules.............¢ 78
Cayenne Capsules............4 ies
Echinacea Capsules............ 261
Feverfew Capsules........... 306
Garlic Enteric Coated Tablets . . . 327
Garlic Oil Capsules.......... 327
Garlic Tablets. .............04 327

----- PAGE 217 -----
1-212/PERRIGO

Ginger Root Capsules......... 339
Ginseng Capsules.
Goldenseal Root Capsules... .. 355
Milk Thistle Capsules......... 4 516
Valerian Root Capsules.

PHARMACEUTICAL
LABORATORIES, INC.

1170 Corporate Drive W.

Suite 102

Arlington, TX 76006-6813
Direct Inquiries to:

(817) 633-1461

FAX: (817) 633-8146

Herbal Products Available:

Aloe Vera Super-Strength

Ginkgo Biloba Liquid ......... 342
Ginseng Liquid .............. 346
St. John's Wort Liquid... ...? 719

PHARMANEX, INC.
625 Cochran Street
Simi Valley, CA 93065-1939

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 999-6229
FAX: (805) 582-9301

Herbal Products Available:
BioGinkgo Extra Strength
Tablets. . G-29, 342

BioGinkgo Tablets............ 342

PHARMATON NATURAL HEALTH
PRODUCTS

900 Ridgebury Road

P.O. Box 368

Ridgefield, CT 06877

Direct Inquiries to:
(203) 798-4157
FAX: (203) 798-5771

Herbal Products Available:

Ginkoba Tablets......... 4 G-29, 342
Ginsana Capsules,....... 4 G29, 346
Ginsana Chewable Tablets . G29, 346
Movana Tablets..........: G-30, 719
Venastat Capsules........: G-30, 403

PHYTOPHARMICA

825 Challenger Drive

Green Bay, WI 54311

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 553-2370 (Doctors and
Pharmacists)

(800) 644-0799 (Consumers)

Herbal Products Available:

Remifemin Tablets. ...... J G-30, 92

PNC, PHARMACISTS' NUTRITION
CENTER

9775 SW Commerce Circle

Suite C4

Wilsonville, OR 97070-9602

Direct Inquiries to:

(877) 376-6762

(503) 682-1415

FAX: (503) 682-0845

E-mail: pne@nfformulas.com

Herbal Products Available:

St. John's Wort Capsules... ..! 719

St. John's Wort Liquid... ...! 719

PROCTER & GAMBLE

P.O. Box 5516

Cincinnati, OH 45201

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 358-8707

(513) 558-4422

Herbal Products Available:

Metamucil...............: G-30, 612

THE PURDUE FREDERICK COMPANY
100 Connecticut Avenue

Norwalk, CT 06850-3590

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 877-5666

FAX: (800) 877-3210

Herbal Products Available:

Senokot Childrens' Syrup . G-30, 684
Senokot Granules........ J G-30, 684
Senokot Tablets.......... 4 G-30, 684
Senokot X..................4 684
Senokot Xtra... .. 2.0.0.0... 684
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant

Liquid... ..... 0. eed 684

RAINBOW LIGHT NUTRITIONAL
SYSTEMS

125 McPherson Street

Santa Cruz, CA 95060

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 635-1233

(831) 429-9089

FAX: (831) 429-0189

Herbal Products Available:

Kava Kava Extract Liquid... . : 443
Milk Thistle Extract Liquid... . | sie
Milk Thistle Plus Tablets... . . 5 sie
Milk Thistle SuperComplex

Tablets... ....2...2....-.05 sie

REESE PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY
10617 Frank Ave.

P.O. Box 1957

Cleveland, OH 44106

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 321-7178

FAX: (216) 231-6444

E-mail: reese@apk.net

w ww .reesechemical. com

Herbal Products Available:

Ginkgo Biloba Tablets........ 342
St. John's Wort Preferred
Capsules..................7 719

REPUBLIC DRUG COMPANY, INC.
175 Great Arrow
Buffalo, NY 14207

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 828-7444
FAX: (716) 874-6060

Herbal Products Available:

Garlic Oil 1000 Capsules... .. . 327
Garlic Tablets ............... 327

REXALL CONSUMER PRODUCTS
Div. of Rexall Sundown, Inc.
6111 Broken Sound Parkway, NW
Boca Raton, FL 33487-3693

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 255-7399

FAX: (561) 995-6881
www.rexallsundown.com

Herbal Products Available:

Alfalfa Tablets. ................ 12
Bilberry Capsules............./ 75
Black Cohosh Capsules........: 92
Cat's Claw Capsules, . 160
Echinacea Capsules............ 261
Echinacea Standardized

Capsules... ..............1 261
Feverfew Capsules........... 306
Garlic Enteric Coated Tablets .. .327
Garlic Oil Natural Capsules ... 327
Ginger Root Capsules... wes 339
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules....... 342
Ginkgo Biloba Standardized

Capsules..............4 G-30, 342
Ginseng Complex Capsules, .. . 346
Ginseng Korean Standardized

Capsules...............0.. 346
Ginseng Root Tablets. ........ 346
Ginseng Siberian Capsules. . . . 346
Goldenseal Root Capsules... . . 3ss
Gotu Kola Capsules.......... : 359

Grape Seed Extract Capsules ... 362
Horse Chestnut Standardized

Capsules..................5 A403
Kava Kava Capsules.......... / 443
Milk Thistle Complex

Capsules. G-30, sie
Papaya Enzyme Double

Strength Tablet.............5 ses
Papaya Enzyme Tablet........ : ses
Saw Palmetto Capsules....... J 664
Saw Palmetto Standardized

Capsules..............4 G30, 664
St. John's Wort Capsules .. G30, 719
Valerian Root Capsules....... / 783
Valerian Root Standardized

Capsules. ... 0.0.0.0 783

----- PAGE 218 -----
MANUFACTURERS INDEX

REXALL MANAGED CARE
Div. of Rexall Sundown, Inc.
6111 Broken Sound Parkway
Boca Raton, FL 33487
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 700-0065

FAX: (561) 995-0191

¢4fcHerbal Products Available:

"

m
m

Echinacea Capsules............ 261
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules........ 342
Kava Kava Capsules........... 443
St. John's Wort Capsules... ... 719

RUGBY LABORATORIES, INC.
2725 Northwoods Parkway
Norcross, GA 30071-1533
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 645-2158

FAX: (770) 840-9040

Herbal Products Available:

RX VITAMINS, INC.

200 Myrtle Boulevard
Larchmont, NY 10538-2002
Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 792-2222

FAX: (914) 337-4006

Herbal Products Available:

» Flaxseed Oil Capsules.

SOLARAY

Division of Nutraceutical
Corporation

1400 Kearns Blvd.

Park City, UT 84060

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 669-8877

FAX: (800) 767-8514

www.nutraceutical.com

Herbal Products Available:

Astragalus Capsules. 54

SOLGAR VITAMIN AND HERB
COMPANY, INC.

500 Willow Tree Road

Leonia, NJ 07605

Direct Inquiries to:

(201) 944-2311

FAX: (201) 944-7351
www.solgar.com

Herbal Products Available:

Astragalus Vegicaps. . . 54

SUNDOWN VITAMINS, INC.

Div. of Rexall Sundown, Inc.
6111 Broken Sound Parkway, NW
Boca Raton, FL 33487

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 327-0908

FAX: (561) 995-4891
www.rexallsundown.com

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules. Le . 75

Ginger Capsules.............. 339
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules....... 342
Goldenseal Root Capsules, .... 355
Gotu Kola Capsules.......... 359
Grape Seed Extract Capsules 362
Guarana Tablets. ............. 376
Hawthorne Berries Capsules 271
Kava Kava Capsules.......... ¢ 443
Licorice Root Capsules... .... § 469
Red Wine Extract Capsules... . 362
St. John's Wort Capsules... ... 7 719
Valerian Root Capsules....... 7 783
SUNSOURCE INTERNATIONAL, INC.
RR 3 Box 690K
Kula, HI 96790-9766
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 446-7262
FAX: (808) 879-6895
Herbal Products Available:
Garlique Enteric Coated

Tablets... 2.0... ee eee 327
Garlique Tablets............. 327
TWINLAB
150 Motor Parkway
Hauppauge, NY 11788
Direct Inquiries to:
(516) 467-3140
www.twinlab.com
Herbal Products Available:
Mega Primrose Oil Capsules .... 298
Silymarin Capsules. 516

UPSHER-SMITH LABORATORIES, INC.
14905 23rd Avenue North
Minneapolis, MN 55447

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 328-3344

FAX: (612) 476-4026

Herbal Products Available:
Alterra Extended-Release

Tablets... 0... 0. eee ee eee 719

VITALINE CORPORATION

385 Williamson Way

Ashland, OR 97520

Direct Inquiries to:

(800) 648-4755

(541) 482-9231

FAX: (541) 482-9112

Herbal Products Available:

St. John's Wort Tablets ......7 719

WAKUNAGA CONSUMER PRODUCTS
Div. of Wakanuga
Pharmaceutical
23501 Madero
Mission Viejo, CA 92691
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 527-5200
FAX: (949) 458-2764
E-mail: kyolic.com

YERBA PRIMA /I-213

Herbal Products Available:
Aged Garlic Extract, Kyolic

Kyolic Aged Garlic Extract

Tablets. G-30, 327

WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER
HEALTH PRODUCTS

201 Tabor Road

Morris Plains, NJ 07950

Direct Inquiries to:
(973) 540-2000
(973) 540-4655

Herbal Products Available:
Quanterra Emotional
Balance...........-..-4 G-30, 719
Quanterra Mental Sharpness
Tablets......... - G30, 342
Quanterra Prostate........ | G-30, 664
Quanterra Sleep..........4 G-30, 46i
Quanterra Stomach
Comfort...............) G-30, 339

WELEDA, INC.

175 North Rt. 9W
P.O. Box 249
Congers, NY 10920

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 241-1030

(914) 268-8572
FAX: (914) 268-8574

Herbal Products Available:
Hypericum Perforatum (auro
cultum) 1/24 Injection,

WHITEHALL-ROBINS HEALTHCARE
5 Giralda Farms
Madison, NJ 07940-0871
Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 322-3129
Herbal Products Available:
Centrum Echinacea
Capsules..............4 G-31, 261
Centrum Garlic Capsules .. G-31, 327
Centrum Ginkgo Biloba
Capsules............004 G-31, 342
Centrum Ginseng Capsules G-31, 346
Centrum Saw Palmetto
Capsules .............4 G-31, 664
Centrum St. John's Wort

Capsules G-31, 719

YERBA PRIMA
740 Jefferson Avenue
Ashland, OR 97520-3743

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 488-4339
FAX: (541) 488-2443

----- PAGE 219 -----
I-214/YERBA PRIMA

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Tablets...............7 75
Psyllium Husks Capsules...... | 612
ZAYCO, INC.

4275 Executive Square

Suite 800

La Jolla. CA 92037

Direct Inquiries to:
(888) 776-6005
FAX: (760) 770-2612

Herbal Products Available:
St. John's Wort Transdermal
Patch

ZENITH GOLDLINE
PHARMACEUTICALS
4400 Biscayne Boulevard
Miami, FL 33137

Direct Inquiries to:
(800) 327-4114
FAX: (954) 575-4319

719

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Herbal Products Available:

Bilberry Capsules.............7 75
Echinacea Capsules............ 261
Garlic Tablets... ............ 327
Ginkgo Biloba Capsules. Le 342
Ginseng Korean Capsules... . . 346
Golden Seal Root Capsules, . . . 355
Gotu Kola Capsules........... 359
Saw Palmetto Capsules....... J 664
St. John's Wort Capsules... .... 719
Valerian Root Capsules........ 783

----- PAGE 220 -----
Herb Identification Guide

In this full-color photo section, you'll find hundreds of
pictures of herbs and leading commercial preparations.

The first part of the section is an Herb Identification
Guide with photos of over 380 common medicinal
plants. Each herb is labeled with its generally accepted
common name immediately above the photo, and its
scientific name immediately below. The pictures are
arranged alphabetically by common name.

Following these photos is a Product Identification
Guide in which you'll find a representative selection of
popular commercial formulations. The pictures on
these pages are arranged alphabetically by manufactur-
er and product name.

Please note that the plants are not reproduced in actual
size, and that the scale of the photos varies. For the
average dimensions of the plant and its component
structures, please check the Description section of the
corresponding herbal monograph.

----- PAGE 221 -----


----- PAGE 222 -----
AGRIMONY

ABSCESS ROOT |

Agrinenia supatoria

ALFALFA

ARame plantago-equatica

AMARARTH

ALAKANET

Mow species

ALPINE CRANBERRY

Vecciniom vitisttaga

Amarenthus species

| ANGELICA

HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-3

AMERICAN IV¥

Parthonocisees quingvetolla

H AMERICAN WHITE POND LILY

Nymphoos odorata i

Plrepinalis anison

----- PAGE 223 -----
G-4/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
APPLE TREE

Malus domestica

ARECA NUT

Areca catechu

ARTICHOKE

Fraxines excetslor

ASPARAGUS

Asparagus officinalis

BALMONY : BASIL

BARLEY

Hordeum species

Chelone glabra

BAMBOO

Bevtoris valgaris

Ocimum basilicum

BEAN POD

Beta vulgaris

BELLADONNA

Atropa belladonna

|| BENNET'S ROOT

Geum urbanum

BETEL NUT

Piper betle

Trillium erectum

----- PAGE 224 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-5

Bi eusck aver

?

BILBERRY | BISTORT

Alnus Guilnoss VUINEM prenifeBum
SC
! i fa , re

Botuls species Citrellus calocynthis ] Tanes commanis

| BIRTHWORT BITTER ORANGE ;

Aristolochia chematitis Citrus serentium Cimloifaga racemosa

BISHOP'S WEED BITTERSWEET NIGHTSHADE

----- PAGE 225 -----
G-6/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
BLACK NIGHTSHADE BLESSED THISTLE BONESET BUCKTHORN

Solanum nigrum Cnicus benedictus Eupatorium perfoliatum Rhamnus catharticus

BLACK PEPPER BOG BEAN BORAGE BUCKWHEAT

Piper nigrum Menyanthes trifoliata Borago officinalis Fagopyrum esculentum

BLACKBERRY BOG BILBERRY BOXWOOD BUGLE

Rubus fruticosus Vaccinium uliginosum Buxus sempervirens Ajuga reptans

BLADDERWORT BOLDO BROOKLIME BUGLEWEED

Lycopus virginicus

Utricularia vulgaris Peumus boldus Veronica beccabunga

----- PAGE 226 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-7

| a Cc |

Asctium lappe

BURNING BUSH

frigeros canadensis

CARAWAY CASHEW

Dictamaus aug

BURR MARIGOLD |
Fr

Bideus tripartite ! Acorun catanras Carum cary! Anecerdium occidentale

BUTCHER'S BROOM | CALIFORNIA POPPY i CARDAMOM CASTOR OIL PLANT

----- PAGE 227 -----
G-8/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CATHIP

CELERY : CHICORY

CINQUEFOIL

Nepeta cataria : Aplum gravaolana Cichorlum intybus | Potentilla erecta

A cc

Anteenarla divica Centewium arythrees

a

Capsicum annuum Vitex agnus-castus Allium schoenoprasum Syzygium aromaticum

CELANDINE CHERRY LAUREL CINNAMON COCOA

Chelidonium majus Prunus laurocerasus Cinnamomum verum Theobroma cacao

----- PAGE 228 -----
Cecos nucifera

Coffea arabica

Colchicum avtarmale

Tusslilage farfara

Aqpuilegia velgaris

Symphytum officinale

AathyUle vulnecacia

; COLT'S FOOT : COOLWORT

Tiaretle cordifotia

a,

Cortandrum sativum

Centaurea cyanoe

COLCHICUM COMMON KIDNEY VECH Me cuMN

Cuming cyminum

CUP PLANT

CORNFLOWER CYPRESS

HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-9

a | CT

Carcuma xenthorrhizla

Cuprascas semparvirens

; CYPRESS SPURGE

DANDELION

_ _Silphtum perfollatum

Taraxacum officinale

----- PAGE 229 -----
G-10/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

: Phoanlx dactyHfera

: DIGITALIS

Dighalls pepures i

DILE

Anethem gravectens

DODDER

DATE PALM BE 00 rose

Rasa canna

DOCWOOD

fornes fonda

cs

ECHINACEA PURPUREA

Echieaces purpurea

ELECAMPANE

Inula helanian

Chamaomenm nablle

' i .
; Crataoges lavvigata

ENGLISH HORSEMINT

Month tongifolla

Hedera helix

Lavandula angustifolia

----- PAGE 230 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-11

ENGLISH PLANTAIN _MBFUROPEAN FIVE-FINCER GRASS EUROPEAN WATER HEMLOCK HW FEVERFEW

xyngiam campestre Sotdage virkamen

| EUCALYPTUS EUROPEAN MISTLETOE

Encalyptes @etulue Ficus carica

[sveopan eae Pcvoer |

Sambucus nigra

----- PAGE 231 -----
G-12/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

FLAX | FRENCH TARRAGON

GAMBOCE GERMANDER

Linure usitetissimum Artoriaia dracunculus @arcinia hanburyl Tevcrlums chameodrys

FOOL'S PARSLEY FRINGETREE CARDEN CRESS a

Aathusa cynapium : Chiosanttus virginicas Lepedium sativum Zingibar officinale !

FORCET-ME-NOT FROSTWORT GARLIC He HNO

Myosotls arvensis Hellantharmum canadeese | Alllum sativure Ginkgo biloba

CERMAN CHAMOMILE CLOBE FLOWER

Rhanmens frangela Fumeria officinalis Matricaria recutita . : __Fralllus suropasus

----- PAGE 232 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-13

GOAT'S RUE GOUTWEED GREATER BINDWEED HEDGE-HYSSOP

Galega officinalis Aegopodium podagraria Calystegia sepium Gratiola officinalis

GOLDEN SHOWER TREE GRAINS OF PARADISE GREEN TEA HEMLOCK

Cassia fistula Aframomum melegueta Camellia sinensis Conium maculatum

GOLDENSEAL ee GROUND PINE HEMP AGRIMGNY

Hydrastis canadanels : Vitis vinifera : Ajuga chamacpitys Eupatesium cannabheum

HEATHER | HEMPNETTLE :

| GOTU K | GREAT BURNET

Centella asiatica ! Sanguisorba officinalis ‘ Calluna vulgaris

----- PAGE 233 -----
G-14/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

yoo

Lewsonla inornis Maiva sylvestris ‘ Muneukes Fupulus Equisetum arvanes

HERB PARIS Le HOREHOUND HOUSELEEK

Paris quadrifolia Heracieum sphondylium Marrubium vulgare Sempervivum tectorum

HERB ROBERT HOELY HORSE CHESTNUT HYDRANGEA

Geranium robertianum Ilex aquifolium Aesculus hippocastanum Hydrangea arborescens

----- PAGE 234 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-1!

JASMINE | KAVA KAVA Bs MANTLE

i

Hyszeopua officinalis Jasminum officiaale Piper mathysticum Alcharnitis vulgaris

JABORANDI JIMSON WEED KNOTWEED LARCH

Pilecespus microphyilos : Datura stramonien Polygonam avicutere Lasix decidax

| JACOB'S LADDER ‘ JOJOBA LADY FERN LARKSPUR

Polemonian caerwieam Siamondsia chinesls Athyrium fidy-Formins

Laurus nobills

Ipomone pare u: Juniperus communis Qalium verum

----- PAGE 235 -----
G-16/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

| i | ee

Santolina chemaecyparitsias Glycyrrhiza glabra Lobelia inflata Luffa segypiica

LHON ALM Cs Cc

Melissa officimalls Cenvallaria majails Lysimachia vulgaris . Pubmonaria efficmets

SC | a TT

I Cymbopegoen citrates Citrus aurantifatta Nelumbe eucifera

CT vee

Qoesynium herhacoure Tile spactas Lavisticam officinate i Ephedra sinice

----- PAGE 236 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-17

| MALABAR NUT MARIGOLD | MASTIC TREE MERCURY HERB

dusticla adhatods Calendula officinalis Pistacis lentiscas Marcunalls annus !

Cannabis sativa Ilex paraguariensls Daphne mezecoam

Mandragera officinarum Liateis sploata Podoptyllurm: pettatem ‘ Sitybure paarlanem !

f MANNA Pasa Marrcgco | MEADGWSWEET MGNEVWORT

: Fraxiwis ornus Caltha palustris ! Fillpendata ulmaria Lysimachia nemmularia

----- PAGE 237 -----
G-18/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

MONKSHOD

i MOTHERWORT

Aconitum sapellus

Leonurus cardisoa

Mahonia aquitodiura

Kaimla latifolia

Artomisé vulgerip

Commiphora molmol

Mortada citrifoths

MOUNTAIN LAUREL MYRTLE NUTMEG

Myrisiics tragrans

Avena sativa

MUGWORT RASTURTIUM | AUX YOMICA i

----- PAGE 238 -----
OREGANO

OILSEED RAPE

Brassica napus Origanum vulgare

OLEANDER LEAF, ORRIS

Nerkem oteander iris specias

Pe PAPA |

Clee enropasn Carica papaya

Petrosalinum crispure

PARSNIP

Pastinaca sativa

Bip assion FLOWER

vi

ay. 3

| NON | PARSLEY | PEPPERMINT

HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-19

PETASITES

Petasites hybridus

PEYOTE

Fireminetia major

PINUS BARK

Tsuge fanadensls _.

----- PAGE 239 -----
G-20/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
PITCHER PLANT POMEGRANATE PREMORSE QUILLAJA

Sarracenia purpurea Punica granatum Scabiosa succisa Quillaja saponaria

PLEURISY ROOT POPLAR PSYLLIUM SEED QUININE

Asclepias tuberosa Populus species Plantago afra Cinchona pubescens

q_roisoncus eurrencum Tf roprvseco | PuwPHIN ais

Ranuncults sceleratus

Phyteiacca americana _. | _ Potantilla anserine Senecio jacobues

----- PAGE 240 -----
Rides refrum

RASPBERRY RED-SPUR VALERIAN

Centranthus rabar

RED CLOVER RICE

Oryza sativa

Rosmarines officinalis

Sliphium tlaciniatum

Rute graveciens

HKemlaria glabee

RED CURRANT ROSEMARY SAFFRON SAVIN TOPS :

Crecus setivus

a st PRLET

Salvia officinalis

HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-21

SARSAPARILLA

Sellax species

SSSR

Juniperus tabian

Sarenos repeas

----- PAGE 241 -----
G-22/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SCARLET PIMPERNEL

SCULLCAP SENNA

Anagallis arvensis Scutellaria lateriflora Cassia senna

SCOTCH BROOM SCURVY GRASS SHEPHERD'S PURSE

Cytisus scoparius Cochlearia officinalis Capsella bursa-pastoris

SCOTCH PINE SEA BUCKTHORN SKIRRET

Sium sisarum

SLOE

Pinus species Hippophae rhamnoides

covmsne JP siract|

ma

aes:

| SOYREAN

Prunus spinosa |:

SOAPWORT

Saponaria officinalis

SOLOMON'S SEAL

Polygonatum multiflorum

SOUTHERN BAYBERRY

Myrica cerifera

Glycine soja

__ Prmnelin vulgaris

----- PAGE 242 -----
HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-23

SPEARMINT | Blseiny rest narrow STINGING NETTLE SUMBUL

Mentha spicata Ononis spinosa Urtica dioica Ferula sumbul

SPEEDWELL SQUILL STONE ROOT SUMMER SAVORY

Saturoje hortensla

Verestoa ofGiciaetis Urgines maritima

SPIKENARD SST. JOHN'S worT | SUNFLOWER

! STAR ANISE

Ascisplos mcarasio

Spinacia oleracea Iiclum yerunm

----- PAGE 243 -----
G-24/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SWEET CICELY : SWEET ORANGE TANSY

Citrus einewsis

SWEET VERNAL GRASS

| Myrrhis edorate

SWEET CLOVER

| Anthoxanthum odoratum

Viola odecata

SWEET WOODRUFF

Myrice gate

| SWEET VIOLET |

Tanaceotum vulgare

TAUMELLOOLCH

Lolium tematenture

THYME

Teymus vulgaris

TOBACCO

Nicotiana tabecum

TOLU BALSAM

----- PAGE 244 -----
| TRAVELLER'S JOY

Clematis vitalba

Arctostaphylos uva-urst

VALERIAN

Verbena officinalls

Euonymus atvoparpurea

| WALLFLOWER

Cheisanthes eheirt

WALNUT

Valprana officinalls

HERB IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-25

Goum rivals

TRITICU Ee | WATER FENNEL WHITE NETTLE

Deeanthe aquatica

WHITE BRYGHY

Bryonla alba

WHITE HELLEBORE

| VERVAIN, =F WATER AVENS | WHITE MUSTARD |
! :

SInapts alba

H Lanium album i

|

Sallx epacies

j WILD CARROT

----- PAGE 245 -----
G-26/PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

WILD DAISY ' WILD THYME | WITCH HAZEL

Menthe aquatica

___ Raphanus raphanistrum 1

Epiteflum eagustifallum

WILD RADISH ‘ WINTER CHERRY

Hamametn vieginiana

WOOD BETONY

Hatonica officinalls

WOGD SAGE

Taucsiam scorodonla

WORMSEED O1L

~ >.

Chenopadium ambrosividgs

Artemiela absiathium

Pune

Corcuma zedoaria

----- PAGE 246 -----
Product Identification Guide

Shown here are selected herbal preparations and their
Wf packaging. The photos are arranged alphabetically by

manufacturer and brand name. The company's name
appears above the product; its brand name below.

----- PAGE 247 -----


----- PAGE 248 -----
BAYER CORPORATION

Specialized Nutritional Supplements

Tension & Mood
Memory & Concentration.
Cold Season, Cholesterol Health
Prostate Health, Menopause Health

One-A-Day*

BAYER CORPORATION
CONSUMER CARE DIVISION

-FEE L your.

BEST:

ONEADAY

"-BSofleels GMTIML

One-A-Day®
Garlic Softgels

LICHTWER PHARMA

LICHTWER PHARMA,

Clinically Proven Ib Improve
MemorvAnd Concentration’

Ginkar

3n>c..J3>

50 mg Ginkgo Biloba
Clinically Proven to Improve
Memory and Concentration

kaP

LICHTWER PHARMA,

Clinically Proven
wMbeicum Formula VS?

St. John’s Won!

Kira

Standardized St. John's Wort Extract

To Maintain a Healthy Emotional Balance and
Weil-Being
Kira®

LICHTWER PHARMA

Clinically Proven To
Lower Cholesterol*
infiff 7E_*"

Guaranteed Odor Free *

wal

‘Standardized and Tested
QA Concentrated
y\) Garlic Tablets

Dietary Supplement

Concentrated Garlic Tablets
Clinically Proven to Lower Cholesterol

Kwai*

NATROL

Standardized Potency Kava Extract

Kavatrol™

PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/G-29

NOVARTIS

NOVARTIS CONSUMER HEALTH, INC.

Ferien

100% Natural Vegetable Laxative
250 gm and 400 gm

Perdiem"
Overnight Relief

NOVARTIS CONSUMER HEALTH. INC.

100% Natural
Daily Fiber Source
available in 250 gm

Perdiem® Fiber Therapy

NOVOGEN

promensil”

midlife as nature intended

promensil
Lae pe ra er

30 Tablets

Natural plant estrogens for women experiencing

normal midlife changes.

Promensil™

TO DOUBLE-CHECK
SAFETY:

Take a quick glance at the
Safety Guide, which lists
herbs to be avoided while
pregnant and nursing, and

those to be used only under

supervision.

PHARMANEX, INC.

PHARMANEX, INC.

BioGinkgo

Qt
Strength
—w
hel Sony

——s
—

60 mg
Extra Strength Ginkgo biloba
Available in 60 et

BioGinkgo 27/7®

PHARMATON

PHARMATON

40 mg

Ginkoba™

PHARMATON

«. Ginsana ++

100 mg
Capsules

Ginsana*

PHARMATON

Ginsana'

50 mg
Chewy Squares

Ginsana®

----- PAGE 249 -----
30PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Snirly & Xntliotn:

300 mg
Dietary Supplement for Mood Support

Movana™
PHARMATON

VENASTAI

LEG HEALTH DIETARY SUPPLEMENT

MSima-un Hip. P,te*l Alam UJ Svellmt
muy

Dietary Supplement for Leg Health

Venastat™

PHYTOPHARMICA

PHYTOPHARMICA

=o

Hh MENOPAUSE

SPtyFWI'=*

60 and 120 tablets
Natural support for menopause
Also available in Remifemin™ Plus,
with St. John's Wort.

Remifemin’

PROCTER & GAMBLE

PROCTER A GAMBLE

Available in 48, 72, 114 and 180 dose canis-
ters and cartons of 30
one-dose packets.
Also available in sugar free
Cinnamon Spice and Apple Crisp Wafers avail-
able in 12-dose cartons.

Metamu

PURDUE FREDERICK

THE PURDUE FREDERICK COMPANY

CK AKA
cmt gy me

ie rs rn

ia opie

tate

tom.

ad
‘Comey

. ane
=

‘Ounces (74 mL)

Natural Vegetable Laxative
Children's Syrup

8
Senokot
THE PURDUE FREDERICK COMPANY

Senokot

Senokot

Senolibt

Natural Vegetable Laxative
Available in Tablets, Granules,
and Syrup:

Senokot*

REXALL SUNDOWN

REXALL SUNDOWN

“WIAISUPPLIKE™

Ginkgo Biloba

REXALL SUNDOWN

Milk Thistle

REXALL SUNDOWN WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER HEALTHCARE

Qpanterria

John"™

Quanterra™
Mental Sharpness

WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER HEALTHCARE

St. John's Wort

REXALL SUNDOWN

Quanterra

Saw Palmetto

WAKUNAGA

WAKUNAGA CONSUMER PRODUCTS

Quanterra™ Prostate
WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER HEALTHCARE

Aged Garlic Extract”

Kyolic* Quanterra™ Sleep

WARNER-LABMERT WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER HEALTHCARE

WARNER-LAMBERT CONSUMER HEALTHCARE

Quanterra™
Stomach Comfort

Quanterra™
Emotional Balance

----- PAGE 250 -----
WHITEHALL-ROBINS

WHITEHALL-ROBINS

S' CUIIITIWI If

SIRBALSJ

belps support
funtion and the bos
tral iN

<84T

9$ 1
Qnilriiiii 1
OTtBALS

blood preset

Certonn" 3
“RBALSI

fowegBCSS-.:-—.a
Echinacea, Garlic,

Ginkgo Biloba, Ginseng,
Saw Palmetto, St. John’s Wort

Centrum® Herbals

PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE/

----- PAGE 251 -----


----- PAGE 252 -----
Herbal Monographs

This section contains comprehensive profiles of some
700 medicinal herbs, including the findings of the
German Regulatory Authority's herbal watchdog agen-
cy, commonly called "Commission E." This agency
has conducted an intensive assessment of the peer-
reviewed literature on some 300 common botanicals,
weighing the quality of the clinical evidence and identi-
fying the uses for which the herb can reasonably be
considered effective. Its conclusions represent the best
expert consensus on medicinal herbs currently to be
found.

For those herbs not considered by Commission E,
Physicians' Desk Reference has augmented this section
with the results of an exhaustive literature review con-
ducted by the respected PhytoPharm U.S. Institute of
Phytopharmaceuticals under the direction of noted
botanist, Dr. Joerg Gruenwald. These monographs,

" some 400 in number, provide a detailed introduction to
an array of exotic botanicals that you'll be hard pressed
to find in any other source.

To make the information in the monographs as useful
and accessible as possible, PDR has echoed the struc-
ture of standard U.S. product labeling. Each mono-
graph contains up to ten standard sections, covering
considerations ranging from description to dosage.
Specifically, here's what you will find:

¢ Title: Each monograph begins with the herb's gener-
ally accepted common name, followed by its scientific
name. In addition, all monographs* are cross-refer-
enced by their botanical designation.

¢ Trade Names: Listed here are common commercial
preparations of the herb.

¢ Description: This section provides a detailed botan-
ical overview of the herb, including information on its
medicinal parts; flower and fruit; leaves, stem, and
root; unique characteristics, habitat, production, related
plants, and additional common names and synonyms.

¢ Actions and Pharmacology: Here you'll find data
on the active compounds or heterogeneous mixtures
found in the plant, followed by a summary of the herb's
clinical effects. If various parts of the plant possess
different pharmacological activity, the parts are dis-
cussed individually, here and throughout the remainder
of the monograph.

¢ Indications and Usage: Information on the uses of
the herb is listed under five categories, as applicable:
— Approved by Commission E

— Unproven Uses

— Chinese Medicine

— Indian Medicine

— Homeopathic

----- PAGE 253 -----
Approved uses are presented in list fashion. Other uses
are described with provisos as necessary regarding
route and form of administration.

¢ Contraindications: Although most natural reme-
dies can be used under all medical circumstances, a few
pharmacologically potent herbs must be avoided in the
presence of certain medical conditions. If any such
contraindications exist, they are summarized here.

¢ Precautions and Adverse Reactions: Found in
this section are any cautions or special considerations
regarding safe use of the herb, including any restric-
tions on use in pregnancy or childhood. Although most
herbal remedies are notably free of known side effects,
any reported in the available literature are noted here.

¢ Overdosage: As we all know, "natural" is not syn-
onymous with "benign," and an overdose of many
"healing" herbs can have serious—even fatal—conse-
quences. Whenever adverse effects of overdose have
been found in the literature, they are reported here,
along with the appropriate medical interventions to be
undertaken when an overdose occurs.

¢ Dosage: Listed here are common modes of admin-
istration, forms and strengths of available commercial
preparations, methods for preparing the natural herb,
and representative dosage recommendations drawn
from the literature. Note, however, that dosage recom-
mendations can be used only as a general guide. The
potency of individual preparations and extracts is sub-
ject to substantial variation, so the manufacturer's
directions should be consulted whenever available.

¢ Literature: This section provides you with a unique
bibliography of the technical literature. Because
German researchers have been particularly active in the
herbal arena, you will find an unusual number of
German-language citations. However, work in the
English literature is included as well.

PDR for Herbal Medicines is the product of one of the
most thorough and inclusive examinations of the herbal
literature ever undertaken. Nevertheless, it's important
to remember that it merely summarizes and synthesizes
key data from the underlying research reports, and of
necessity includes neither every published report nor
every recorded fact.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

As in all scientific investigation, conclusions regarding
the effectiveness of the herbs discussed in this com-
pendium are based on the preponderance of current evi-
dence and cannot be considered firm or final. The pub-
lisher does not warrant that any herb will unfailingly
and uniformly exhibit the properties ascribed to it by
Germany's Commission E or any other scientific
authority.

In the United States, herbal products are marketed
under the provisions of the Dietary Supplement and
Health Education Act of 1994, which prohibits their
sale for the diagnosis, treatment, cure, or prevention of
any disease. Enumeration of specific commercial
preparations within an herbal monograph should not be
construed as a claim or warranty of their efficacy for
any purpose, by either the manufacturer or the publish-
er. Furthermore, it should be understood that, just as
omission of a product does not signify rejection, inclu-
sion of a product does not imply endorsement, and that
the publisher is not advocating the use of any product
or substance described herein.

Please remember, too, that dosing of herbal prepara-
tions is highly dependent on a variety of factors, such
as cultivation and harvesting conditions, the specific
parts of the plant to be processed, the extraction meth-
ods employed, and the dosage form chosen by the man-
ufacturer. Since there are no official standards govern-
ing the production of herbal medicines in the United
States, and the potency and the purity of herbal prod-
ucts are subject to substantial variation, dosage ranges
set forth in the herbal monographs must be employed
only as general guidelines.

In addition, the publisher does not guarantee that every
possible hazard, adverse effect, contraindication, pre-
caution, or consequence of overdose is included in the
summaries presented here. The publisher has per-
formed no independent verification of the data reported
herein, and expressly disclaims responsibility for any
error, whether inherent in the underlying literature or
resulting from erroneous translation, transcription, or

typography.

----- PAGE 254 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Abelmoschus moschatus

See Muskmallow

Abies alba

See White Fir

Abrus precatorius

See  Jequirity

Abscess Root

Polemonium rep tans

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fruit: The hanging blue flowers are in loose

“ terminal, glandular-haired panicles.

gL

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to about 25 cm. It
has creeping roots and a thin rhizome, which produces
numerous stems and numerous pale, thin, glabrous and
brittle roots. The glabrous stems are heavily branched and
bear alternate or opposite, pinnatifid leaves with 6 or 7 pairs
of leaflets.

Habitat: The plant is found in the U.S.

Production: Abscess Root is the rhizome of Polemonium
reptans.

Not to be Confised With: The plant is known as False
Jacob's Ladder because it has an astringent action similar to
true Jacob's Ladder.

Other Names: American Greek Valerian, Blue Bells, False
Jacob's Ladder, Sweatroot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins

EFFECTS
Abscess root has astringent, diaphoretic and expectorant

effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for febrile and inflammato-

ty disorders.

ACACIA/3

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: It is ground as a drug for infusion.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Acacia

Acacia arabica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark, the gum
and the fruit of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow and sweetly
scented. Two to 6 inflorescence peduncles with capitula-like
inflorescences grow from the axils of the upper leaflets. The
flowers have short calyces with numerous overlapping
sepals. The completely fused petals are almost twice as large
as the sepals. The fruit is a 12 to 16 cm long and 1.5 cm wide
pod. The pod is straight or lightly curved, flat to convex, and
pinched in to create segments. It is matte-black to dark-red.
The seeds are 7 x 6 mm and the same color as the pod.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Acacia arabica is a 6 m high tree
with a compact, round to flat crown. Older branches are bare,
younger ones measuring 15 to 20 mm in diameter are
covered in hairy down. The bark is black and fissured; the
coloring in the fissure changes to red-brown. There are
stipule thorns at the nodes. The leaflets of the double-pinnate
leaves are in 3 to 12 pairs on the bare to downy petiole,
which is covered with glands The leaflets are oblong, blunt,
and bare or thinly ciliate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Nile area, Ethiopia,
East Africa, Angola, Mozambique, South Africa, Arabia,
Iran, Afghanistan and India.

Production: The bark is collected from plants that are at least
7 years old and then left to mature for a year.

Not to be Confused With: The bark of the Australian species
Acacia decurrens, which is commercially available under the

same name.
Other Names: Acacia Bark, Babul Bark, Wattle Bark, Indian
Gum, Black Wattle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins

----- PAGE 255 -----
4 /ACACIA

EFFECTS
The drug has an astringent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a decoction for gum
disease and inflammations of the mucous membrane of the
mouth and throat (rarely used today).

Indian Medicine: Acacia is used as a decoction in the
treatment of diarrhea and vaginal secretions, and as an
enema for hemorrhoids.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Large doses taken internally can lead to indigestion and
constipation.

LITERATURE
Berger F, Handbuch der Drogenkunde, W Maudrich Verlag
Wien 1964.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Trease GE, Evans WC (Eds.), Pharmacognosy, 12th Ed.,
Bailliere Tindall 1983.

Acacia arabica

See Acacia

Acacia catechu

See Catechu

Acacia Senegal
See Gum Arabic

Acalypha indica

See Indian Nettle

Acer rubrum
See Red Maple

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Achillea millefolium

See Yarrow

Achillea ptarmica

See Sneezewort

Aconitum napellus
See Monkshood

Acorus calamus

See Calamus

Actaea spicata

See Baneberry

Adam's Needle

Yucca _filamentosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and the
roots of non-flowering plants.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are ivory-colored and located
in nodding, many-blossomed terminal panicles. The perigone
is simple, campanulate, tinged greenish on the outside, with
6 tepals. The flower has 6 stamens, and the stigma is 3-
sectioned.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 120 to 240 cm in height.
The leaves are in a basal rosette. They are sword-shaped and
erect with a recurved tip. They are short-thorned, broadly
grooved and. covered on the margin with long, twisted,
whitish or yellowish threads.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the southern United
States and is cultivated mainly as an ornamental plant in
Europe.

Production: Adam's Needle leaves are the leaves of Yucca
filamentosa.

----- PAGE 256 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins (from the roots; the saponins from the
leaves remain uninvestigated): protoyuccoside C, yuccoside
B, yuccoside E, yuccoside C, aglycones including sarsapoge-
nin, tigogenin

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The plant is used for liver and gallbladder

disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Intake can lead to stomach complaints because of
the saponin content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Adam's Needle is available in

ground form and in extracts.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Adiantum capillus-veneris
See Maidenhair

Adonis

Adonis vemalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is derived from the
aerial parts of the herb, which are collected during the

flowering season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The erect, solitary, terminal flower is 4 to
7 cm in diameter and the 5 broad-ovate, downy sepals are
half as long as the petals. The 10 to 20 petals are narrow,
wedge-shaped, simple or finely serrated at the tip. They are
20 to 40 mm long and lemon-yellow, splayed, glossy,
reddish on the outside or greenish-tinged. There are numer-
ous stamens and carpels. The small fruit forms a globose
capitulum. The fruit is tomentose, wrinkled, laterally veined
and keeled widi a sideways-facing, hook-shaped beak. The
fruit are arranged on the spindle-shaped, oblong receptacle.

ADONIS/S5

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 10 to 40 cm high with a
sturdy, black-brown rhizome. The stem is erect, undivided,
covered with scales at the base, vertically grooved and
succulent. There are few branches. The leaves have many
slits and a curved, glabrous or sparsely haired tip. The
middle leaves are half-clasping.

Characteristics: Adonis is a poisonous plant.

Habitat: This Siberian/east European plant is found in the
north as far as the central Urals and southwest Sweden. In
central Europe, it is limited to the basins of the Weichsel and
the Oder as far as the Main and Rhine.

Production: The drug is gathered in forests and should be
dried quickly.

Not to be Confused With: Other Adonis species may be
added to Adonidis herba.

Other Names: False Hellebore, Yellow Pheasant's Eye, Ox-
eye, Sweet Vernal, Pheasant's Eye, Red Morocco, Rose-a-
Rubie

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid gylcosides (cardenolids): including
adonitoxin, k-strophanthoside, k-strophanthoside-{3 and
cymarin

Flavonoids: including vitexin and luteolin

EFFECTS
Adonis has a positive inotropic effect. Animal tests demon-
strated a tonic effect on the veins. The adonitoxin component
is slightly more toxic than coumarin.

The drug is insufficiently documented.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Arrhythmia
« Nervous heart complaints

Unproven Uses : The drug is used for mild impairment of
heart functions (NYHA I and ID), especially when accompa-
nied by nervous symptoms. °

In Russian folk medicine, the drug is used for dehydration,
cramps, fever and menstrual disorders, but efficacy is

unproven.

Homeopathic Uses: Preparations of Adonis vemalis are used
for cardiac insufficiency.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Adonis is contraindicated in conjunction with digitalis
glycoside therapy and also in potassium deficiency.

----- PAGE 257 -----
6 /ADONIS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Despite the strong efficacy of the drug's cardioac-
tive steroid gylcosides in parenteral application, serious
poisoning in the course of per oral administration is hardly to

be expected due to the low resorption rate.

Drug Interactions: Enhancement of efficacy, and thus also of
side effects, with simultaneous administration of quinidine,
digoxin, calcium, saluretics, laxatives and extended therapy

with glucocorticoids.

OVERDOSAGE
For possible
poisonings see Digitalis folium.

symptoms of overdose and treatment of

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb and preparations
thereof for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 0.5 gm of
standardized Adonis powder. The maximum single dose is
10 gm; maximum daily dose is 3.0 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: From D2: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5
to 10 globules, 1 to 3 times daily; Injection solution: 1 ml
once a week sc. From D4: Injection solution: 1 ml twice

weekly sc.

Storage: Adonis herb and powder should be stored carefully.
Adonis powder should be stored away from light in tightly
sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Brevoort P, Der Heilpflanzenmarkt der USA - Ein Uberblick.

In: ZPT 18(3): 155-162. 1997.

ESCOP-Monographs. In: ESCOP-Monographs Fascicule I and
II. 1996.

Hiller KO, Rahlfs V, Therapeutische Aquivalenz eines
hochdosierten Phytopharmakons mit Amytriptylin bei angstlich-
depressiven Versimmungen - Reanalyse einer randomisierten
Studie unter besonderer Beachtung biometrischer und klinischer
Aspekte. In: Forsch.

Karrer W, (1950) Helv Chim Acta.33:433.

Lee MK, et al., Antihepatotoxic activity of Icariin, a major
constituent of Epimedium koreanum. In: PM 61(6):523-526.
1995.

Loew, Buch. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N: Phytopharmaka IT:
Forschung und klinische Anwendung, Steinkopff Verlag,
Darmstadt, 1996.

Loew DA, Loew AD, Pharmakokinetik von herzglykosidhaltigen
Pflanzenextrakten. In: ZPT 15(4): 197-202. 1994.

Loew D, Phytotherapie bei Herzinsuffizienz. In: ZPT 18(2):92-
96. 1997.

Martinez-Vazquez M, Ramirez Apan TO, Hidemi Aguilar M,
Bye R, Analgesic and antipyretic activities of an aqueous

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

extract and of the flavone Linarin of Buddleia cordata. In: PM
62:137-140. 1996.

Reinhard KH, Uncaria tomentosa (WILLD.) DC. - Cat's claw,
Una de gato oder Katzenkralle Protrait einer Arzneipflanze. In:
ZPT 18(2): 112-121. 1997.

Sandberg F, Thorsen R, (1962) Lloydia 25(3):201.

Schulz V, Hubner WD, Ploch M, Klinische Studien mit
Psycho-Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT 18(3): 141-154. 1997.

Winkler C and Wichtel M, (1985) Pharm Acta Helv 60(9/10):
234.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Adonis vernalis
See Adonis

Adrue

Cyperus articulatus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Adrue root is used in the West Indies for its

anti-emetic properties.

----- PAGE 258 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The tubers are blackish and ,top-shaped,
with bristly remains of former leaves. The plant is sometimes
connected in twos or threes by narrow underground stems.
The transverse section is pale, showing a central column
with darker vascular bundles. -

Characteristics: Adrue has an aromatic odor and a bitter
taste, reminiscent of Lavender.

Habitat: Turkey, region of the river Nile, Jamaica.

Production: Adrue root is the root of Cyperus articulatus.
The roots are collected in the autumn, scalded or steamed,
and then dried in the sun.

Other Names: Guinea Rush

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: containing above all sesquiterpene hydrocarbons
and sesqiterpene alcohols, including cyperenone

EFFECTS
Adrue has anti-emetic, carminative and sedative properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the root are used for

digestive disorders, nausea and flatulence.

Chinese Medicine: Used for pre- and post-natal headaches,
epigastric pain, vomiting with bleeding, hematuria, leucor-
rhea, menstrual irregularities, tension and pain in the breasts
and amenorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available as a liquid extract for

internal use.
Daily Dosage: 6 to 9 gm of drug

Storage: Should be stored in a cool and dry place, protected
from insects.

LITERATURE

Bum EN et al., Extracts from rhizomes of Cyperus articulatus
displace 3H CGP39653 and 3H glycine binding from cortical
membranes and selectively inhibit NMDA receptor-mediated
neurotransmission. J Ethnopharmacol, 54:103-11, 1996 Nov

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Mongelli E, Desmarchelier C, Coussio J, Ciccia G,
Antimicrobial activity and interaction with DNA of medicinal

AFRICAN POTATO/7

plants from the Peruvian Amazon region. Rev Argent
Microbiol, 27:199-203. 1995 Oct-Dec

Pinder AR, (1976) Tetrahedron 23:2172.

Aegle marmelos
See Bael

Aegopodium podagraria

See Goutweed

Aesculus hippocastanum

See Horse Chestnut

Aethusa cynapium
See Fool's Parsley

Aframomum melegueta

See Grains-oj‘-Paradise

African Potato

Hypoxis rooperi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the plant's rhizome
tuber.

Flower and Fruit: Four to 10 flowers are arranged in
racemes on a long peduncle; the pedicles are 12 to 2.5 cm
long. The 6 tepals are approximately 18 mm long, elongate,
free and yellow. There are 6 stamens, and the ovary is
inferior, 3-chambered, top-shaped and thickly pubescent.
The fruit is a densely pubescent capsule approximately 12
mm long and split in the middle. The seeds are black and
warty.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial
with 12 to 18 leaves that are 30 to 60 cm long, 2.4 to 4 cm
wide, lanceolate, acuminate, firm with a ciliate margin and
short hairs underneath. The leaves grow from a globose

----- PAGE 259 -----
8/AFRICAN POTATO

shoot, which has a diameter of 5 to 8 cm and is crowned with
a ring of bristle-like hairs.

Habitat: Hypoxis rooperi is indigenous to South Africa.

Production: Bantu tulip is the fresh or dried rhizome tuber of
Hypoxis rooperi. The plant is collected in the wild, cut and
then dried in the sun.

Other Names: Bantu Tulip, Sterretjie

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Lignans (3.5 to 4.5%): particularly hypoxoside (norlignan
glucoside)

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol (ca. 0.2%), beta-
sitosterol glucoside

Polysaccharides: starch

EFFECTS

The phytosterols, which have not as yet been more closely
identified (beta-sitosterol is possibly the chief active ingredi-
ent), are said to have anti-exudative effects in animal
experiments. The positive effect of the drug on benign
prostate hyperplasia (reduction of the residual urine volume,
increase of the uroflow, improvement of subjectively experi-
enced complaints) is explained by the phytosterols' inhibi-
tion of local prostaglandin synthase.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Used internally for micturition complaints
resulting from benign prostate hyperplasia, cystitis (South
Africa/decoction) and lung disease (Botswana). It is used
externally as a vulnerary (Africa). Efficacy for these
indications has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug preparations
for internal and external use.

How Supplied: Commercially produced capsules.

LITERATURE
Brauer H, Schomann C, Tolerance of beta-sitosterin from
Hypoxis rooperi in patients with limited liver function. Results
of a controlled double-blind study, Fortschr Med, 96:833-4,
1978 Apr 20.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Aga
Amanita muscaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The fungus is used to prepare homeopathic
dilutions.

Flower and Fruit: Aga belongs to the group of lamella fungi,
genus Amanita. The hymenium in the inside of the fruiting
body is exposed by unfolding the cap on the underside.

Characteristics: The poisonous fungus has a basidia which is
dirty white, as are the cuffs and underside of the cap. The
mushroom's cap is orange at first, then strong red with a few
dirty white to yellow spots.

Habitat: Aga grows in the Northern Hemisphere as far north
as the tundra and thrives in sandy, acid soils.

Production: Aga is the above-ground part of Amanita
muscaria.

Other Names: Fly Agaric

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Ibotenic acid (0.17% to 1%)

Muscimol
Muscarine (traces)
Muscazone

Betalains (skin pigment): muscaflavin, muscaaurins and
muscapurpurins

Amavandin (compound containing vanadium)

EFFECTS

The drug, containing ibotenic acid, has a psychotropic and
hallucinogenic effect and is toxic in higher doses. The
decarboxylation product muscimol is similar in structure to
the neurotransmitter GAB A and attaches itself to the latter's
receptor complex as a selective and direct antagonist. The
drug is initially stimulating then paralyzing in its effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: The fungus is used to treat neuralgias,
fever, anxiety, alcohol poisoning and joint pains.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is highly toxic. Signs of poisoning include
dizziness, vomiting, abdominal pain, movement disorders,
muscle cramps and psychic stimulation, followed by deep
sleep.

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of more than 10 g of the fresh mushroom can lead
to coordination disorders, confusion, illusions and manic

----- PAGE 260 -----
>

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

attacks. Higher dosages (over, 100 g of fresh mushrooms)
lead to unconsciousness, asphyxiation, coma and death.

The treatment of poisoning includes emptying the gastroin-
testinal tract and the use of sedatives. In case of shock, a
plasma volume expander should be used. Artificial respira-
tion should be administered for respiratory arrest.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In homeopathy, dilutions of the

mother tincture are used.

LITERATURE
Hastings MH, et al.. Brain Res 360:248. 1985.

Hatfield GM, Brady LR, JNP 38:36, 1975.

Marmo E, Med Res Rev 8:441. 1988.

Schwarz B, Ein Mannlein steht im Walde. In: PZ 139(13): 1040.
1994.

Further information in:

Benjamin DR, Mushroom poisoning in infants and children: the
Amanita pantherina/muscaria group. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol,
256:13-22, 1992

Bresinsky A. Bresl H, Giftpilze. Ein Handbuch fur Apotheker,
Arzte und Biologen, Wiss. Verlagsges. mbH. Stuttgart 1885.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Agar
Gelidium amansii

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
seaweed's gelatinous extract known as Agar or Agar-Agar.

Flower and Fruit: This perennial seaweed grows up to 1 m
long. The thallus sprouts from a permanent base every year
and is heavily branched. It is cylindrical or flattened,
pinnately subdivided and tough. The brownish-white, trans-
lucent thallus has prickly appendages on the branchings. The
fruit is spherical.

Characteristics: Agar is colorless and tasteless. It is capable
of absorbing up to 200 times its volume of water to form a

jelly.

AGAR/9

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Pacific coasts of
Japan and China, Sri Lanka and also the South African

coasts.

Production: Agar, or Agar-Agar, is the purified and bleached
gel derived from algae mucilage of the Rhodophyceae
Gelidium amansii (Lamour), which has been dried and cut
into thread-like strips. An aqueous extract is obtained from
the algae through autoclaving (pressure-cooking), using
over-heated steam. It is then chilled in ice cells and cooled
into ice-blocks, which are crushed and thawed. Water
separates from the gel during the thawing process. The gel
mass is dried using warm air.

Other Names: Agar-Agar, Japanese Isinglass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Heteropolysaccharides: made up of D-galactose- and 3,6-
anhydro-L-galactose- components, partially bearing sulfate
or pyruvic acid residues, low-sulfate fraction designated
agarose

EFFECTS
The drug has a laxative effect due to its ability, similar to
that of cellulose, to absorb and retain large quantities of
water and swell in the intestine. The mucilaginous sub-
stances cause an increase in the bulk of the content of the
intestine that stimulates the intestinal muscles, thereby aiding
peristalsis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a mild laxative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally.

Daily Dosage: Laxative: Take 1 to 2 teaspoons of the
powder, always with some liquid, fruit orjam before meals,
1 to 3 times daily. Never take dry!

Storage: Dried Agar can be kept tightly sealed for up to 5
years without being opened and tested.

LITERATURE
Ataki C, Chem Soc Japan 29:543. 1956.

Franz G (Hrsg.), Polysaccharide. Springer Verlag Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York 1991.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Murano E et al., Pyruvate-rich agarose from the red alga
Gracilaria dura. In: PM 58(Suppl. 7)

----- PAGE 261 -----
10/AGAR

Schmid OJ, Marina (Hamburg) 1:54. 1959.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Vessal M. Mehrani HA. Omrani GH, Effects of an aqueous
extract of Physalis alkekengi fruit on estrus cycle, reproduction
and uterine craetive kinase BB-isoenzyme in rats. In: ETH
34(1):69-78. 1991.

Agrimonia eupatoria

See Agrimony

Agrimony

Agrimonia eupatoria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The drug consists of the flowering plant,
which is cut a few fingers width above the ground and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow, arranged along
small, spike-like racemes. They have an epicalyx and 5
sepals, 5 ovate petals. 5 to 20 stamens and 2 ovaries. The
calyx is rough-haired with deep furrows. The fruit is
obconical and thorny (burdocks).

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is fifty to 100 cm high,
with a villous, erect stem. The leaves are alternate and
irregularly pinnate. The leaflets are deeply serrate and downy

beneath.

Characteristics: Agrimony has a slight pleasant fragrance
and a tangy, bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to middle and northern
Europe, temperate Asia and North America.

Production: Agrimony herb consists of the dried, above-
ground parts of Agrimonia eupatoria and/or Agrimonia
procera gathered just before or during flowering, as well as
its preparations in effective dosage.

Other Names: Stickwort, Cocklebur, Liverwort, Common
Agrimony, Philanthropos, Church Steeples, Sticklewort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Catechin tannins
EFFECTS

Agrimony is an astringent.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Diarrhea
* Inflammation of the skin
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Agrimony is used internally for mild,
nonspecific, acute diarrhea, cholestasis, inflammation of oral
and pharyngeal mucosa, inflammation of kidney and bladder,
diabetes and childhood bedwetting; externally for poorly
healing wounds, chronic pharyngitis, psoriasis, seborrhoeic
eczema as well in hip-baths for lower abdominal conditions.

Chinese Medicine: Agrimony is used as a hemostyptic. It is
also used for certain forms of cancer and as an anthelmintic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Because of the constituent tannins, the intake of
larger quantities could lead to digestive complaints and

constipation.

DOSAGE

Daily Dosage: Internally, the average daily dose is 3 to 6 gm
of herb or equivalent preparations. Externally, a poultice
prepared from a decoction (10%) several times a day is

applied.

LITERATURE
Bilai AR. et al., A flavonol glycoside from Agrimonia
eupatoria. In: PH 32:1078. 1993.

Chon SC, et al., (1987) Med Pharmacol Exp 16(5):407-413.
Drozd GA, et al., (1983) Khim Prir Soed 1:106.

Patrascu V, et al., (1984) Ser. Dermato-Venerol 29(2): 153-157.
Peter-Horvath M, et al., (1964) Rev Med 10(2):190-193.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Agropyron repens

See Triticum

----- PAGE 262 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Agrostemma githago
See Corn Cockle

Ailanthus altissima

See Tree of Heaven

Ajuga chamaepitys

See Ground Pine

Ajuga reptans

See Bugle

Akebia quinata

%>* See Chocolate Vine (Mu-Tong)

Alcea rosea
See Hollyhock

Alchemilla vulgaris
See Lady's Mantle

Alchornea floribunda

See Iporuru

Aletris

Aletris farinosa

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried Aletris

farinosa rhizome with roots. Fresh underground parts dug up
after flowering are also used.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has numerous white, tubular-
oblong, campanulate flowers. The flowers, with a few small

ALETRIS/11

bracts, are in terminal, spike-like racemes on stalks that
reach up to 1 m. The perianth is tubular, covered in scales
and shrinks when ripe. Later, the perianth springs open in a
beak shape. The fruit is an ovoid capsule containing many
oblong ribbed seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are erect-oblong,
lanceolate and 2 to 20 cm long. The rhizome is brownish-
gray, flattened and has a diameter of up to 1 cm, but usually
measures less. The upper part is covered in leaf bases and
stem scars. The fracture is floury and white.

Characteristics: The plant has a sweet taste, becoming bitter
and soapy. The odor is mild.

Habitat: The plant is found in the northeast U.S., south to
Gulf of Mexico, southern Canada.

Production: Aletris root is the rhizome of Aletris farinosa. It
is gathered in the wild and air-dried in the shade.

Other Names: Star Grass, Colic-Root, Starwort, Blazing
Star, Ague-Root, Aloe-Root, Ague Grass, Black-Root, Bitter
Grass, Crow Corn, Bettie Grass, Devil's Bit, True Unicorn
Star-Grass, True Unicorn Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Volatile oil
Resins
Bitter principles
Starch

EFFECTS
The active agents increase motility and act as a tonic. There
may be an estrogenic principle but a possible estrogenic
effect has not been sufficiently researched.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In the U.S., the plant is used for gynecologi-
cal disorders or "female complaints," in particular dysme-
norrhea, amenorrhea and complaints associated with
prolapses vaginae.

Preparations of Aletris are also used for loss of appetite,
venous dyspepsia, flatulence and nervous digestive com-
plaints. In Argentina, it is used to treat chronic bronchitis.

Homeopathic Uses: Prolapsed uterus, gastrointestinal

complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

----- PAGE 263 -----
12/ALETRIS

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available in the forms of powdered
root, liquid extract and infusions for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, 1.5 gm of the drug is
added to 100 ml of water. A fluid extract (1:1) is produced
with ethanol water (45%).

Daily Dosage: Approximately 6 gm. The recommended
single dose is 0.3 to 0.6 gm to be taken 3 times daily.
Infusion: 1.5 gm of the drug to 100 ml water. Fluid extract
(1:1), produced with ethanol water (45%).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules; Injection solution: 1 ml once a week sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Costello CH, Lynn EV, (1950) J Am Pharm Ass 39:117.
Marker RE et al., (1940) J Chem Soc 60:2620.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homeopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York.

Aletris farinosa
See Aletris

Alfalfa

Medicago sativa

TRADE NAMES
Alfalfa, Alfalfa Concentrate, Alfalfa Fortified, Alfalfa Natu-
ral, Alfalfa Organics, Alfalfa Whole Juice Concentrate

Alfamin

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the whole flower-

ing plant or the germinating seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The clover-like flowers can be yellow to
violet-blue. They are 9 to 10 mm long and appear in oblong,
many-blossomed racemes. The fruit is a spiralled pod with 2
or 3 twists; the center is hollow and not thorny.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The annual, succulent plant grows
from 45 to 100 cm high. The stems are erect, smooth and

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

sharply angled. The leaves are trifoliate, petiolate, and
alternate. The leaflets are thorny-tipped, dentate toward the
front, obovate, and villous beneath. The stipules are ovate,
lanceolate, slightly dentate and acuminate.

Characteristics: The taste is unpleasantly salty, bitter and
dry.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region

and has been widely cultivated elsewhere for centuries.

Other Names: Lucerne, Purple Medick, Purple Medicle,
Buffalo Herb, Purple Medic

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: IN THE FOLIAGE

Carotinoids: including among others, lutein

Triterpene saponins: sojasapogenols A-E aglycones medica-
genic acid, hederagenin

Isoflavonoids: including among others, formononetin glyco-
sides, genistein, daidzein

Coumestans: coumestrol, 3'-methoxy coumestrol, lucernol,
sativol, trifoliol

Triterpenes: including among others, stigmasterol, spin-
asterol

Cyanogenic glycosides: (corresponding to less than 80 mg
HCN/100 g)

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS
L-canavaine

Betaine: stachydrine, homostachydrine

Trigonelline

Fatty oil

EFFECTS

The saponin contents act on the cardiovascular, nervous, and
digestive systems.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses.'In folk medicine, the drug is used in the
treatment of diabetes and malfunctioning of the thyroid

gland.
Alfalfa has isolated use as a diuretic and aromatic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

LITERATURE

Berrang B, (1974) Phytochemistry 13:2253.

Gestetner B, (1974) Phytochemistry 10:2221.

Keeler RF, (1975) Lloydia 38:56.

----- PAGE 264 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Larher F et al., (1983) Plant Sci Lett 29(2/3):315.

Malinow MR et al., (1977) Steroids 29:105.

Morton JF, (1975) Morris Arbor Bull 26:24.

Nowacki E et al., (1976) Biochem. Physiol Pflanz. 169:183.

W Tapper BA et al., (1975) J Sci Food Agric 26:277.

Wt

Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Alisma_plantago-aquatica

See Alisma (Ze-Xie)

Alisma (Ze-Xie)
Alisma plantago-aquatica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The peduncle is triangular. There are
long-pedicled, white or reddish flowers in leafless, loose
panicles. There are 3 sepals, 3 petals and 3 stamens in the
flower. The fruit is small and obtuse and is formed by 15 to
30 ovaries.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The water leaves are ribbon-like.
There are long-stemmed, swimming leaves. The aerial leaves
are basal, long-stemmed, cordate or oblong-ovate, and
spoon-like.

Characteristics: The rootstock of Alisma has a bitter taste; it
is poisonous when fresh.

Habitat: The plant is distributed widely throughout Europe,
northern Asia and North America.

Other Names: Mad-Dog Weed, Water Plantain, Ze-Xie

we

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Triterpenes: including alisol-A, alisol-B, alisol-C and their
monoacetates

Sesquiterpenes (guaian type): alismol, alismol oxide
Flavone sulfate
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid sulfate

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Alisma is used for diseases of the bladder

and urinary tract.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used to lower blood sugar,
blood pressure and cholesterol levels; it is also used as a
diuretic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with die proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as an extract
for oral use. The root is also used in homeopathy.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Murata T et al., (1968) Tetrahedron Letteers 103:849.

Murata T et al., Chem Pharm Bull 18:1369. 1970.

Oshima Y et al., PH 22:183. 1983.

Alkanet

Alkanna_tinctoria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root of the plant
(the dried roots and rhizomes).

Flower and Fruit: The calyx is 4 to 5 mm in the flower, 5 to
6 mm in the fruit and eglandular. The corolla is blue and
glabrous outside. The funnel is as long as or slightly longer
than the calyx. The limb is 6 to 7 mm in diameter. There are
5 stamens, and the anthers are fused with the corolla tube.
The nutlets are 2 mm in diameter, irregularly reticulate and
tuberculate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Alkanet is a short-bristled, perennial
half-rosette shrub. The stems are 10 to 20 cm, procumbent or

----- PAGE 265 -----
14/ALKANET

ascending and glandular. The basal leaves are 6 to 15 cm by
0.7 to 15 cm, linear-lanceolate; the lower ones are cauline,
oblong-linear and cordate at base. The bracts are slightly
longer than calyx and oblong-lanceolate. The neck of the
root is covered with the remains of leaves and the stems. The
root is spindle-shaped, curved, up to 25 cm long and 1.5 cm
thick, with purplish root bark.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southeastern Europe and
some parts of Turkey and Hungary. It is cultivated in other
parts of Europe, Britain and northern Africa.

Production: Alkanna rhizomes are the dried roots and
thizomes of Alkanna tinctoria Tausch.

Other Names: Anchusa, Dyer's Bugloss, Spanish Bugloss,
Alkanet Root, Alkanna

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Naphthazarine derivatives: including the ester of the (-)-
alkannin (stained red)

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Tannins

EFFECTS
Antimicrobial action: In the agar diffusion test, Alkanet root
extracts and Alkannin esters impaired the growth of Staphy-
lococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis, however
Alkannin worked only against Candida albicans.

Healing action for wounds: In a double-blind study, 72
patients suffering from ulcers of the leg (Ulcus cruris) caused
by varicose veins, were treated with Histoplastin Red® over
a period of three years. After 5 to 6 weeks of daily
administration, 80% of the patients' ulcers had healed or
were considerably reduced in size.

The results are difficult to assess, as details concerning the
patients, the treatment pattern and control groups are
unavailable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Used by the ancient Greeks to heal wounds;

also for skin diseases and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Hepatotoxicity and carcinogenity are expected, due to the
pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necic parent
substances in its makeup. Alkanna should not be taken
internally for this reason and is recommended for external

use only.
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Seldom used as a drug. Internal
administration is not recommended, due to the drugs toxic

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

characteristics and its uncertain efficacy." Alkannin and
extracts of the root are used externally in pharmacy.

Preparations: Extractum alcannae: almost black, green
glistening mass (no extraction information).

Histoplastin Red® Ointment: The ointment approved in
Greece, contains 76.5 gm loosely defined ethereal oily
Alkanet root extract with lipophil ointment base (beeswax,
mastic rubber and olive oil q.s. ad 100 gm).

Daily Dosage: Maximum 0.1 meg pyrrolizidine alkaloids
with 12 unsaturated necin framework and their N-oxides.

LITERATURE
Majlathova L, (1971) Nahrung 15:505.

Papageorgiou VP, (1980) Planta Med 38(3): 193-203.
Papageorgiou VP, PM 31:390-394. 1977.

Papageorgiou VP, Digenis GA, PM 39:81-84. 1980.
Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Roder E, et al., PH 23:2125-2126. 1984.
Wiedenfield H et al.. (1985) Arch Pharm 318(4):294.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart.

Alkanna tinctoria
See Alkanet

Allium cepa

See Onion

Allium sativum

See Garlic

Allium

See Chives

schoenoprasum

----- PAGE 266 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Allium ursinum

See Bear's Garlic

Almond

Prunus species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are very short-petioled in
pairs and appear before the leaves. The petals are 19 to 20
mm long, pale pink to whitish with dark veins. The fruit is
oblong-ovoid, compressed. 3.5 to 4.6 cm long by 2.5 to 3 cm
wide, gray-green, velvet-downy and pubescent. The nut shell
is yellow, hard, compressed, broad- and sharp-edged, punc-
tate externally with irregular grooves, smooth and glossy
inside and thick- or thin-skinned. The seed is cinnamon
brown, flattened, and 2 cm long by 12 to 15 cm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is of medium height,
seldom reaching 12 m. It is a tree or shrub with mildly red-

tinged branches, thorny in its wild form but not in the
cultivated form. The leaves have a 12 to 15 cm long,
glandular petiole and glabrous, oblong-lanceolate-acuminate
or serrate, tough, glossy, dark green blades.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to Western Asia and is
extensively cultivated in many regions.

Production: Bitter almonds are the fruits of Prunus dulcis
var. amara (also of Prunus armeniaca).

Sweet almonds are the fruits of Prunus amygdalus var.
dulcis.

Other Names: Greek Nuts, Jordan Almond, Bitter Almond,
and Sweet Almond

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BITTER ALMONDS

Cyanogenic glycosides, amygdalin, 0.2 to 8.5% (correspond-
ing to 12 to 500 mg prussic acid per 100 gm)

Fatty oil (non-dehydrating, 38 to 60%): chief fatty acids
oleic acid (77%) and linoleic acid (17 to 20%)

Mucilages (3 to 3%): arabinogalactans
Proteic substances (25 to 35%)

EFFECTS: BITTER ALMONDS
There is no reliable information available.

COMPOUNDS: SWEET ALMONDS
Fatty oil (non-dehydrating, 43 to 57%): chief fatty acids
oleic acid (77%) and linoleic acid (17 to 20%)

ALMOND/15

Mucilages (3 to 4%): arabinogalactans
Proteic substances (20 to 25%)

EFFECTS: SWEET ALMONDS
Sweet Almonds have a demulcent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BITTER ALMONDS

Unproven Uses: Bitter Almonds were used in the past as a
remedy for coughs, vomiting and nausea in the form of bitter
almond water.

SWEET ALMONDS
Unproven Uses: Sweet Almonds are used topically in skin

care and liniments.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BITTER ALMONDS

To be used only under the supervision of an expert qualified
in the appropriate use of this substance.

SWEET ALMONDS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
topical dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
BITTER ALMONDS

10 bitter almonds are said to be fatal for a child, 60 for an
adult (a fatal dosage would presumably be already reached at
a lower level, given disadvantageous conditions - higher
cyanide level in the almonds, intensive chewing). Recom-
mended antidotes include injection of solutions of dicobalt-
EDTA or thiosulfates or else application of methemoglobin-
forming substances, such as amyl nitrite. At the same time,
vomiting should be induced or the stomach emptied.

Circulation support measures and/or artificial respiration
may be required.
DOSAGE

BITTER ALMONDS
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete and no longer

used.

SWEET ALMONDS
Mode of Administration: Sweet Almonds fatty oil is used as
an ointment base and in the production of natural cosmetics.

LITERATURE
BITTER ALMONDS
Fincke H, Z Untersuch Lebensm 52:423. 1926.

Le Quesne PW et al., JNP 48:496. 1985.

Opdyke DLF, (1976) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 14.

Salvo F et al., Riv Ital Sostanze Grasse 57:24. 1980.
Saura-Calixto F et al., Fette, Seifen, Anstrichm 87:4. 1985.

----- PAGE 267 -----
16 /ALMOND

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

SWEET ALMONDS

Fincke H, Z Untersuch Lebensm 52:423. 1926.

Le Quesne PW et al., JNP 48:496. 1985.

Opdyke DLJ, (1976) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 14.
Rosenthaler L, Ber Pharm Ges 30:13. 1920.

Salvo F et al., Riv Ital Sostanze Grasse 57:24. 1980.
Saura-Calixto F et al., Fette. Seifen, Anstrichm 87:4. 1985.
Sommer W, Dissertation Albrechts-Universitat Kiel. 1984.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Alnus glutinosa
See Black Alder

Aloe

Aloe barbadensis/capensis/vera

TRADE NAMES
Aloe Vera (available from numerous manufacturers), Herbal
Sure Aloe Vera, Aloe Vera Mild Stimulant Laxative, Aloe
99 Gel, Sundance Aloe Vera Gel, Chantal Aloe Vera Cream,
Palmers Aloe Vera Formula Cream, Aloe Vera Super
Strength, Herbal Sure Aloe Vera

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is dried
juice of the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is forked once or twice
and is 60 to 90 cm high. The raceme is dense, cylindrical and
narrows toward the top. The terminal raceme is up to 40 cm
high while the lower ones are somewhat shorter. The bracts
are almost white, and the flowers are yellow, orange or red,
and are 3 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The lily-like succulent-leafed rosette
shrub either does not have a stem or has a 25 cm stem. The
stem has about 25 leaves in an upright dense rosette. The
lanceolate leaf is thick and fleshy, 40 to 50 cm long and 6 to
7 cm wide at the base. The upper surface is concave, gray-
green, often with a reddish tinge, which sometimes appears
in patches in the young plants. The leaf margin has a pale
pink edge and 2 mm long pale teeth.

Habitat: Aloe is thought to have originated in the Sudan and
the Arabian Peninsula. Today the species is cultivated and
found in the wild in northern Africa, the Near East, Asia, and
in the southern Mediterranean region. The plant is cultivated
in subtropical regions of the United States and Mexico, and
on the Dutch Antilles, as well as coastal regions of

Venezuela.

Production: Curacao Aloe consists of the dried latex of the
leaves of Aloe barbadensis (syn. Aloe vera), as well as its
preparations. Aloe is harvested from August until October.
The juice is dried using various methods.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion sometimes arises with
Agave americana, known as American Aloe, which is not a
true Aloe.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ALOE BARBADENSIS
Anthracene derivatives: _ particularly
syls, including aloin A, aloin B, 7-hydroxyaloins A and B,
aloe-emodin, and

anthrone-10-C-glyco-
and 1,8-dihydroxy ions, including
6'cinnamic acid esters of these compounds

2-alkylchromones: including aloe resins B, C and D

Flavonoids

COMPOUNDS: ALOE CAPENSIS

Anthracene derivatives: particularly an throne- 10-C-glyco-
syls, including aloin A, aloin B, 5-hydroxyaloin, and 1,8-
dihydroxy anthraquinones, including aloe-emodin, and
mixed anthrone-C- and O-glycosides, including aloinosides

A and B

2-alkylchromones: including aloe resins A, B, C and D

Flavonoids

----- PAGE 268 -----
4

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
Laxative Effects

Aloe anthranoids such as 1,8-dihydroxy-anthracene deriva-
tives exert a laxative effect. The laxative action is due to
anti-absorption osmotic properties. The compounds induce
active secretion of electrolytes and water in the lumen of the
bowel. Absorption of electrolytes and water from the colon
is inhibited resulting in a volume increase. The volume
increase of the bowel content leads to an increase in pressure
and stimulates intestinal peristalsis. There is some evidence
that endogenous nitric oxide modulates the diarrhea effect of
aloe. Studies demonstrate a laxative effect 9 hours after
ingestion (Izzo, 1999).

Antibacterial/Antiviral Effects

Aloe-emodin exerts dose-dependent growth inhibition of H.
pylori through inhibition of arylamine N-acetyltransferase
(NAT) activity (Wang. 1998). Aloe-emodin has shown
antibacterial effects on four strains of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (Hatano, 1999). Aloe emodin inacti-
vates enveloped viruses and is directly viracidal to herpes
simplex virus type 1 and type 2, varicella-zoster virus,
pseiidorabies virus, and influenza virus (Sydiskis. 1991).

Antineoplastic Effects

Emodin suppresses tyrosine kinase activity of HER-2/neu-
encoded pl&85neu receptor tyrosine kinase resulting in
antineoplastic effects. This is beneficial in controlling HER-
2/neu overexpressing cancer cells (Zhang, 1998).

Effects of topical Aloe plants

Aloe vera depresses action potential generation and conduc-
tion at neuromuscular junction processes which result in
analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects (Friedman, 1999).
Ultraviolet radiation (UV) suppresses delayed type hypersen-
sitivity (DTH) by altering the function of immune cells in the
skin and causing the release of immunoregulatory cytokines.
Extracts of crude Aloe barbadensis gel inhibits this photo-
suppression by preventing suppression of DTH responses
and reducing the amount of keratinocyte derived immuno-
suppressive cytokines (IL-2) (Byeon, 1998; Strickland,
1999), Aloe vera gel contains small molecular modulators
that prevent UVB-induced immune suppression in the skin.
The immunomodulators restore the UVB-induced damages
on epidermal Langerham cells (Lee, 1999).

Aloe vera increases collagen content of the granulation tissue
and its degree of crosslinking to contribute to wound healing
(Chithra, 1998). Aloe vera acts as a modulatory system
toward wounds with anti-inflammatory effects (Davis,
1991). The use of Aloe vera has been associated with a delay
in wound healing compared to standard treatment (Schmidt,

ALOE/17

1991). Aloe vera gel exerts anti-inflammatory activity
through its inhibitory action on the arachidonic acid pathway
via cyclooxygenase (Vazquez, 1996). Due to its anti-throm-
boxane effects, Aloe vera decreases the morbidity of
progressive dermal ischemia in frostbite (Heggers, 1987).
Aloe vera contains a carboxypeptidase that inactivates
bradykinin, salicylates, and a substance that inhibits throm-
boxane formation (Fujita, 1976; Klein, 1988).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Psoriasis

A double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted to
evaluate the clinical efficacy and tolerability of topical Aloe
vera extract 0.5% (in hydrophilic base) in patients with
psoriasis vulgaris. There were 60 patients with slight to
moderate chronic plaque-type psoriasis determined by the
Psoriasis Area and Severity Score (PASI). The extract was
applied topically three times daily for 5 consecutive days per
week with a maximum of 4 weeks active treatment. The
study period was for 16 weeks with monthly check-ups for a
period of 12 months. Aloe vera extract cream had a
significantly higher cure rate and clearing of psoriatic
plaques compared to placebo. The PASI score was also
decreased in the Aloe treatment group compared to placebo.
The Aloe-treatment group had no adverse drug related
symptoms and the drug was well tolerated (Syed, 1996).

Radiation-Induced Skin Toxicity

A phase III, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evalu-
ated Aloe vera gel for use as a prophylactic agent for
radiation-induced skin toxicity. A total of 194 women
receiving breast or chest wall irradiation were included in the
study. Skin dermatitis was scored weekly during the trial by
patients and by health care providers. Aloe vera gel did not
protect against radiation therapy-induced dermatitis (Wil-
liams, 1996).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ALOE BARBADENSIS AND CAPENSIS
Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

ALOE BARBADENSIS
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for evacuation relief in the
presence of anal fissures after recto-anal operations. In
European folk medicine the drug is employed for its ability
to influence digestion.

Chinese Medicine: The most common use in Chinese
medicine is for treatment of fungal diseases.

Indian Medicine: Uses in Indian medicine include stomach
tumors, constipation, colic, skin diseases, amenorrhea, worm
infestation, and infections.

----- PAGE 269 -----
18 /ALOE

ALOE CAPENSIS
Unproven Uses: Aloe capensis has been used as a stool
softener in the presence of anal fissures, hemorrhoids, and
after recto-anal operations. The fresh juice is used for eye
inflammations and for syphillis in South Africa.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for gastrointestinal
disorders, hemorrhoids, and constipation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Aloe is contraindicated in cases of intestinal obstruction,
acutely inflamed intestinal diseases (e.g., Crohn's disease,
ulcerative colitis), appendicitis and abdominal pain of

unknown origin.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: If cramping of the gastrointestinal tract after single
dosing occurs, the dosage should be reduced. Spasmodic
gastrointestinal complaints are a side effect to the drug's
purgative effect. Heart arrhythmias, nephropathies, edema
and accelerated bone deterioration may occur in rare cases.
Prolonged use of Aloe may lead to pigmentation in the
intestinal mucosa (pseudomelanosis coli), a harmless side
effect, which usually reverses upon discontinuation of the
drug. Long-term use can also lead to albuminuria and
hematuria.

Hypersensitivity: Hypersensitivity, manifested by general-
ized nummular eczematous and papular dermatitis, have
been reported after long-term use of oral and topical Aloe
preparations (Morrow, 1980).

Loss of Electrolytes: Long-term use can cause loss of
electrolytes, in particular potassium. The loss of potassium
can result in hyperaldosteronism, inhibition of intestinal
motility and enhancement of the effect of cardioactive

medications.

Malignancy: Prolonged use of anthracene drugs increases the
relative risk of colon carcinoma (Siegers, 1993). Recent
studies fail to demonstrate a connection between the
administration of anthracene drugs and frequency of carcino-
mas in the colon (Schorkhuber, 1998). Low molecular
weight compounds found in Aloe vera gel are cytotoxic
(Avila, 1997). The component 1,8-dihydroxyanthraquinone
inhibits the catalytic activity of topoisomerase II resulting in
genotoxicity and mutagenicity (Mueller, 1999).

Tissue Damage: Chronic treatment with high doses of Aloe
reduces vasoactive intestinal peptide and somatostatin levels,
which may damage enteric nervous tissue (Tzavella, 1995).

Drug Interactions:

Cardiac glycosides and antiarrhythmic drug—Chronic use of
Aloe can lead to potassium loss, which can increase the
actions of cardiac glycosides and antiarrhythmic drugs.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Thiazide diuretics, loop diuretics, licorice and cortico-
steroids—There is an increase in the possibility of potassium
deficiency when Aloe is used along with these agents.

Pregnancy. Aloe should not be used during pregnancy.

Pediatric Use: Aloe should not be prescribed to children
under 12 years of age.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Due to the side effects of the drug,
it is rarely used and is not recommended. Aloe powder,
aqueous- and aqueous-alcoholic extracts in powdered or
liquid form are available for oral use.

How Supplied:
Capsule—250 mg, 470 mg

Cream
Gel—99%, 72%

Softgel—1000 mg
Preparation: A stabilized aloe extract is prepared with hot
water. The extract will have a content of 19% to 21% aloin.

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dosage is 20 to 30
mg hydroxyanthracene derivatives/day, calculated as anhy-
drous aloin. The recommended single dosage is 0.05 g aloe
powder from Aloe barbadensis or 0.05 to 0.2 g aloe powder
of Aloe capensis in the evening. Aloe capensis can be given
as a single dose of 0.1 g in the evening.

Homeopathic Dosage: For Aloe capensis, administer 5
drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules, or parenterally 1-2 ml three
times daily (HAB1).

Note: The smallest dosage needed to maintain a soft stool
should be used. Stimulating laxatives must not be used over
an extended period of time (1 to 2 weeks) without medical

advice.

Storage: Aloe should be protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Aloe und Aloine - Aktuelles iiber weltweit
verwendete Arzneistoffe. In: DAZ 135(39):3644-3645. 1995.
Avila H, Rivero J, Herrera F, Fraile G, Cytotoxicity of a low
molecular weight fraction from Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis
Miller) gel. Toxicon 1997 Sep;35(9): 1423-30.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.

Byeon SW, Pelley RP, Ullrich SE et al., Aloe barbadensis
extracts reduce the production of interleukin-10 after exposure
to ultraviolet radiation. J Invest Dermatol 1998 May; 110(5):
811-7.

Che QM, Akao T, Hattori M, Kobashi K, Namba T,
Metabolism of barbaloin by intestinal bacteria. 2. Isolation of

----- PAGE 270 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

human intestinal bacterium capable of tranforming barbaloin to
Aloe-emodin anthrone. In: PM 57:15. 1991.

Chithra P, Sajithlal GB, Chandrakasan G, Influence of Aloe
vera on collagen turnover in healing of dermal wounds in rats.
Indian J Exp Biol 1998 Sep;36(9):896-901.

& Davis RH, Parker WL, Samson RT, Murdoch DP, Isolation of

A

W

4p

a stimulatory system in an Aloe extract. J Am Podiatr Med
Assoc 1991 Sep;81(9):473-8.
Friedman RN, Si K, Initial characterization of the effects of
Aloe vera at a crayfish neuromuscul junction. Phytother Res
1999 Nov;13(7):580-583.
Fujita K, Ito S, Teradaira R, Beppu H, Properties of a
carboxypeptidase from aloe. Biochem Pharmacol 1979 Apr
1;28(7):1261.
Hatano T, Uebayashi H, Ito H et al-, Phenolic constituents of
Cassia seeds and antibacterial effect of some naphthalenes and
anthraquinones on methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 1999 Aug;47(8): 1121-7.
Heggers JP, Robson MC, Manavalen K et al.. Experimental and
clinical observations on frostbite. Ann Emerg Med 1987
Sep; 16(9): 1056-62.
Hutter JA et al.. Anti-inflammatory C-glucosyl chromone from
Aloe barbadensis. In: JNP 59(5):541-543. 1996.

Izzo AA, Sautebin L, Borrelli F et al.. The role of nitric oxide
in aloe-induced diarrhoea in the rat. Eur J Pharmacol 1999 Feb
26;368(1):43-8.

Klein AD, Penneys NS, Aloe vera. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988
Apr; 18(4 Pt 1):714-20.

Klimpel BE et al., Anthranoidhaltige Laxantien - ein Risiko fur
die Entwicklung von Tumoren der ableitenden Harnwege. In:
PUZ 26(1 ):33, Jahrestagung der DPhG, Berlin, 1996. 1997.

Koch A, Investigations on the laxative action of aloin in the
human colon. In: PM 59(7)89. 1993.

Koch A, Metabolisierung von Aloin. Korrelation zwischen In-
vitro- und in-vivo-Versuchen. In: DAZ 135(13): 1150-1152.
1995.

Lee CK, Han SS, Shin YK et al.. Prevention of ultraviolet
radiation-induced suppression of contact hypersensitivity by
Aloe vera gel components. Int J Immunopharmacol 1999
May;21(5):303-10.

Morrow D, Rapaport M, Strick R. Hypersensitivity to aloe.
Arch Dermatol 1980 Sep; 116(9): 1064-5.

Mueller S, Stopper H. Characterization of the genotoxicity of
anthraquinones in mammalian cells. Biochim Biophys Acta
1999 Aug 5;1428(2-3):406-14.

Park MK et al., Neoaloesin A: A new C-glucofuranosyl
chromone from Aloe barbadensis. In: PM 62(4):363-365. 1996.
Schmidt JM, Greenspoon JS, Aloe vera dermal wound gel is
associated with a delay in wound healing. Obstet Gynecol 1991
Jul;78(1): 115-7.

Shida T et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(3):273.

ALOE/19

Sigers C, von Hertzberg-Lottin E, Otte M, Schneider B.
Anthranoid laxative abuse—a risk for colorectal cancer? Gut
1993 Aug;34(8): 1099-101.

Schorkhuber M, Richter M, Dutter A, et al. Effect of
anthraquinone-laxatives on the proliferation and urokinase
secretion of normal, premalignant and malignant colonic
epithelial cells. Eur J Cancer 1998 Jun;34(7): 1091-8.

Strickland FM, Darvill A, Albersheim P et al., Inhibition of
UV-induced immune suppression and interleukin-10 production
by plant oligosaccharides and polysaccharides. Photochem
Photobiol 1999 Feb;69(2): 141-7.

Sydiskis RJ, Owen DG, Lohr JL et al., Inactivation of
enveloped viruses by anthraquinones extracted from plants.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991 Dec;35(12):2463-6.

Syed TA, Ahmad SA, Holt AH et al., Management of psoriasis
with Aloe vera extract in a hydrophilic cream: a placebo-
controlled, double-blind study. Trop Med Int Health 1996
Aug;1(4):505-9.

Tzavella K, Riepl RL, Klauser AG et al., Decreased substance
P levels in rectal biopsies from patients with slow transit
constipation. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1996 Dec;8(12):1207-
1211.

Tzeng SH, Ko WC, Ko FN, Teng CM, Inhibition of platelet
aggregation by some flavonoids. In: Thromobosis Res 64:91.
1991.

Vazquez B, Avila G, Segura D, Escalante B, Anti-inflammatory
activity of extracts from Aloe vera gel. J Ethnopharmacol 1996
Dec;55(1):69-75.

Wang HH, Chung JG, Ho CC, Wu LT, Chang SH. Aloe-
emodin effects on arylamine N-acetyltransferase activity in the
acterium Helicobacter pylori. Planta Med 1998 Mar;64(2):176-
178.

Westendorf J, Phytotherapie: Anthranoide in Arzneipflanzen. In:
DAZ 133(25):2345. 1993.

Williams MS, Burk M, Loprinzi CL et al., Phase III double-
lind evaluation of an aloe vera gel as a prophylactic agent for
radiation-induced skin toxicity, nt J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1996 Sep 1;36(2):345-9.

Yoig A, Egusa T, Arase M, Tanabe M, Tsujitt, Isolation and
characterization of the glycoprotein fraction with proliferation-
promotory activity on human and hamster cells in vitro. In: PM
63:18-21. 1997.

Zhang L, Tizard IR, Activation of a mouse macrophage cell
ine by acemannan: the major carbohydrate fraction from Aloe
vera gel. Immunopharmacology 1996 Nov;35(2): 119-28.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen BM, Allergiepflanzen - Pflanzenallergene, Ecomed
Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1988.

----- PAGE 271 -----
20 /ALOE

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Aloe barbadensis/capensis/

vera
See Aloe

Aloysia triphylla

See Lemon Verbena

Alpine Cranberry

Vaccinium  vitis-ideae

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves

and the ripe dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The white to reddish-tinged flowers are in
clusters of various sizes. The 10 stamens are pubescent at the
base and the anthers are two-tipped and have no appendage.
The white berries initially turn scarlet and contain numerous
rust-brown seeds that are 1.5 to 2 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a low shrub up to 30 cm
high with scaly underground runners. The shoots sprout from
the axillary buds of the runners. The sprouts are downy when
young and later become glabrous. The leaves are alternate,
short-petioled, obovate and coriaceous. The upper surface is
dark green and the under surface pale green and covered in
glandular hairs.

Habitat: The plant is common in the Northern Hemisphere.

Production: Cranberry leaves are die foliage leaves of
Vaccinium vitis-ideae. Collection takes place in uncultivated

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

regions (Scandinavia, England). The leaves are dried in the
open air.

Other Names: Cowberry, Red Bilberry, Whortleberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY *
COMPOUNDS

Hydroquinone glycosides: arbutin (3-5%), pyroside (6'-ace-
tyl-arbutin), hydroquinone — gentiobioside, 2-O-caffeoyl
arbutin

Tannins (10-20%): chiefly condensed tannins, proantho-
cyainidine

Flavonoids: including among others, avicularin, hyperoside,
quercitrin, isoquercitrin

Triterpenes: including among others, beta-amyrin, oleanolic
acid, ursolic acid

EFFECTS
The drug is antiviral and a urine disinfectant due to the
tannin fraction. It also raises cyclooxigenase activity through

the flavonol glycosides.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Alpine Cranberry is used to treat urinary
tract irritation, gout, rheumatism, and calculus (stone com-
plaints). It is also considered a substitute for Bearberry

leaves.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy, nursing, and in
children under 12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No healtii hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Individuals
widi gastric sensitivity may experience queasiness and
vomiting following intake of preparations made from the
drug with high tannin content. Liver damage is conceivable
with administration of the drug over extended periods,
particularly with children, due to the possible hepatotoxicity
of the hydroquinones released.

Because the urine-disinfecting effect of the hydroquinonesr
released in the urinary tract only occurs in an alkali
environment, the simultaneous administration of medication
and food that increases uric acid concentration in the bladder
should be avoided.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available as whole, cut, and

powdered drug.

Daily Dose: The internal dose is 2 gm as a single dose; as a
decoction, the concentration is 2 gm per cup.

----- PAGE 272 -----
4|

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Storage: Store the drug in a tightly sealed container and
protect it from light.

LITERATURE
Friedrich H, Naturwissenschaften 48:304. 1961.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Sticher O et al., PM 35:253. 1979.
Thieme H et al., PA 24:236. 1969.
Thieme H, Winkler HJ, PA 21:182. 1966.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Thompson RS et al.. J Chem Soc Perkin Tarns 1:1387. 1972.

Alpine Ragwort

Senecio nemorensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flower heads are in a
dense, usually heavily blossomed corymb. The involucre
bracts are grass- or olive-green and often tinged greenish-
black at the tips. The florets are yellow. The fruit is 4 mm
long, long-stemmed and glabrous. During flowering, the
pappus is only as long as the disc florets. By the time the
fruit ripens, the pappus is 3 times as long as the fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This geophytic perennial has runners
that are fleshy, 20 cm long and 5 cm thick. The stem is erect,
40 to 140 cm high with rounded ribs. The stem is green or, in
particularly sunny locations, reddish-brown. The stem is
glabrous to sparsely pubescent or short-downy. The foliage
leaves are lanceolate-ovate, oblong-elliptic to oblong-lanceo-
late, acute or acuminate and serrate to double-serrate-dentate.
The upper cauline leaves are usually petiolate, almost
glabrous above to sparsely pubescent. The lower surface of
the leaf is sparsely or moderately scattered and appressed
pubescent.

Habitat: The plant grows in many regions of southern and
western Europe and is cultivated in some eastern European

countries.

Other Names: Squaw Weed, Life Root

ALPINE RAGWORT /21

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (0.01-0.1%): including among others,
senecionine, fuchsisencionine. 7-angeloylretronecin, bul-
garsenine, nemorensin, platyphyllin, sarracin

Sesquiterpenes of the eremophilane-type: including among
others, nemosenine A-D

Flavonoids: including among others, rutin, quercitrin
Hydroxycoumarins: including among odiers, esculetin
Volatile oil (0.1%)

EFFECTS

The drug is hemostyptic and hypoglycemic. The pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids are hepatotoxic and carcinogenic.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses of Life Root have
included diabetes mellitus, hemorrhage, high blood pressure,
spasms and as a uterine stimulant. The drug is also used in
bleeding as a result of tooth extraction.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Life Root should not be taken internally. Hepatotoxicity and
carcinogenicity are possible due to the presence of pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necic parent substances.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internal use is not recommended.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include drops.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour boiling water over 1
teaspoonful (approximately 1 g) of finely cut drug, steep for
5 to 10 minutes, then strain.

Daily Dosage: A cup of the tea may be taken several times a
day. (See precautions and adverse reactions).

LITERATURE
Gottlieb R et al., DAZ 130:285. 1990.
Roder E et al., PH 16:1462. 1977.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Wiedenfeld H et al., Arch Pharm 315:165. 1982.
Wiedenfeld H et al., Arch Pharm 318:294. 1985.
Wiedenfeld H et al., PH 18:1083. 1979.
Wiedenfeld H et al., PM 41:124. 1981.
Wiedenfeld H et al., PM 46:426. 1986.
Wiedenfeld H et al., Sci Pharm 57:97. 1989.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6

----- PAGE 273 -----
*
22/ALPINE RAGWO"RT
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.
Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Alpinia officinarum

See Lesser Galangal

Alstonia constricta
Bark

See Fever

Althaea_ officinalis

See Marshmallow

Amanita muscaria
See Aga

Amaranth

Amaranthus hypochondriacus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The entire plant is used medicinally

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is bifurcated, solitary
and oblong-spicate in dense spike-like terminal clusters with
very short internodes, often composed of twigs. In some
species they are all in the leaf axils. The plant is monoecious,
dioecious or mixed. Bracteoles are 4 to 6 mm, ovate, with a
mucro that is about twice as long as the perianth. The
perianth segments are narrowly ovate, usually acute and
about as long as the fruit. The segments are dry-skinned,
whitish- or reddish-green to red. The ovary is ovate. The
fruit is one-seeded, ovate, dry-skinned, and forms a trans-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

versely dehiscing capsule. Seeds are lentil-shaped, erect,
circular, smooth and usually black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a tall, glabrous annual,
occasionally perennial, and grows up to 2 m tall. It is erect,
glabrous or sparsely pubescent above. The leaves are
rhomboid-ovate and alternate, with occasionally undulating
or ruffled margins.

Habitat: Amaranth is common in temperate and warm

climates.

Production: Amaranth is the complete plant in flower of
Amaranthus hypochondriacus.

Other Names: Lady Bleeding, Lovely Bleeding, Love-Lies-
Bleeding, Red Cockscomb, Velvet Flower, Pilewort,
Prince's Feather

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Betacyans
Protoalkaloids

EFFECTS
The drug is said to have an astringent effect (possibly due to
the saponins, betacyans and protoalkaloids). There are no
studies available on efficacy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Amaranth has been used for diarrhea,
ulcers, and inflammation of the mouth and throat.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Amaranth is administered orally as

a liquid extract.
LITERATURE

Martindale. The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 27th Ed. Pub. The
Pharmaceutical Press (1977) UK.

Amaranthus hypochondriacus

See Amaranth

----- PAGE 274 -----
afte

(p

fr

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Amargo
Quassia amara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the wood of the trunk

and branches.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small and pale yellowish
green. The sepals are round to ovate, fused at the base and
imbricate. There are 5 petals, 10 stamens and 5 carpels. The
style is fused from bottom to top. The fruit is a pea-sized
drupe, which ripens from December to January. They are
black, glossy, solitary, clavate and have a thin skin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 15 to 30 m high tree
with a diameter of 1 m. The bark is smooth and grayish. The
alternate leaves are odd pinnate. The leaflets are opposite,
oblong, acuminate and uneven at the base.

Habitat: The plant grows in Jamaica

Production: Quassia Wood is the wood of Quassia amara or
Picrasma excelsa.

Not to be Confused With: The wood of Rhus metopium

Other Names: Bitter Wood, Jamaica Quassia, Surinam

Quassia, Japanese Quassia, Bitter Ash

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpenes: decanor-triterpenes (picrasan derivatives, quas-
sinoids, simaroubolides) chief components quassin (nigaki-
lactone D, 0.1 to 0.2%), isoquassin (picrasmine), neoquassin
and 18-hydroxyquassin

Indole alkaloids of:

-beta-carboline type, including 1|-vinyl-4,8-dimethoxy-beta-
carboline

-canthinone type, including 2-methoxy-6-one, 3-methylcan-
thine-5,6-dione

EFFECTS
The amaroid drug (quassinoids) stimulates secretion of

gastric juices, increases appetite and aids digestion. It may
also have a choleretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: Quassia amara is used for gallbladder
complaints, as bitter tonic, purgative and as anthelmintic (for
ascarid and threadworms).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindicated in pregnancy.

AMARGO/23

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Internal administration can be followed
occasionally by dizziness and headache, as well as by uterine
pain.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.
OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage could lead to mucous membrane irritation,

followed by vomiting. Use over prolonged periods of time
may lead to weakened vision and total blindness.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Quassia Wood is used in homeo-
pathic dilutions and in commercial pharmaceutical prepara-
tions.

Daily Dosage: 500 mg

Storage: Quassia should be protected from light and kept
dry.

LITERATURE

Barbetti P et ah, Quassinoids from Quassia amara. In: PH
32:1007. 1993.

Bray DH et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1 (1):22.
Geissmann T, (1964) Ann Rev Pharmacol 4:305.

Kupchan SM, Streelman DR, (1976) J Org Chem 41:3481.
Mure T et al., (1973) Tetrahedron 29:1515.

Murae T et al., (1975) Chem Pharm Bull 23 (9):2191.

Nyar VCO et al., 2-Methoxycanthin-6-on: a new alkaloid from
the stem wood of Quassia amara. In: PM 59(3):259. 1992.

Njar VCO et al., Antifertility activity of Quassia amara:
Quassin inhibits the steroidgenesis in rat Leydig cells in vitro.
In: PM 61(2):180-182. 1995.

Ohmoto T, Koike K. (1983) Chem Pharm Bull 31:3198.
Polonsky J, (1973) Fortschr. Chem Org Naturst 30. 101.
Wagner H et al., (1979) Planta Med 36:113.

Wagner H et al., (1980) Planta Med 38:204.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969 (unter Pirola rotundifolia).

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 275 -----
24/AMARGO

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrdgen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

American Adder's Tongue

Erythronium americanum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and

tubers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are terminal, large, hanging,
lily-like and are 2.5 cm in diameter. The bracts of the
involucre are sharply revolute, bright yellow and often tinged
purple and sprinkled at the base. There are 6 stamens. The
fruit is a fusiform nodule about 2 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from a small, ovate
fern-colored corm to between 2 and 2.5 cm long. It is
perennial with a bulbous light brown root. The stem is thin
and about 25 cm high. There are only 2 leaves which are
lanceolate, and pale green. They have purplish or brownish
spots, are about 6 cm long by 2 to 3 cm wide, minutely
wrinkled and with parallel veins. The petioles are 5 to 7.5 cm

long.

Characteristics: The fresh leaves have emollient and anti-
scrofulous properties when applied as a poultice.

Habitat: The plant grows in the eastern U.S. as far south as
Florida and as far north and west as Ontario and Arkansas.

Production: American Adder's Tongue leaves are the fresh
leaves of Erythronium americanum.

Other Names: Dog's Tooth Violet, Erythronium, Lamb's
Tongue, Rattlesnake Violet, Serpent's Tongue, Snake Leaf,
Yellow Snakeleaf, Yellow Snowdrop

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alpha-methylene-gamma-butyrolactones: tuliposides

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
When used internally, the drug is emetic. Externally it is an

emollient.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The plant is used externally for ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The plant has a strongly sensitizing effect.
reactions occur with tulip, fritallaria, lily, alstroemeria and
Bomarea species. Nothing is known regarding health hazards
or side effects in connection with the administration of the

Reciprocal

drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Fresh leaves are applied topically
as a poultice or administered internally as an infusion.

LITERATURE

Cavallito CJ, Haskell TR (1946) J Am Chem Soc 66:2332.
Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

American Bittersweet
Celastrus scandens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root and the

bark of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The twining shrub is up to 8 m tall. The
leaves are 5 to 12.5 cm long, ovate to ovate-lanceolate and
serrate. There are numerous very small greenish flowers on

terminal racemes 10 cm long. The orange-yellow seed

capsules are 1 cm in diameter.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America.

Production: American Bittersweet root and bark are the root
and bark of Celastrus scandens.

Other Names: Waxwork, False Bittersweet

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Tannins

Celastrol (yellow quinoide  nortriterpene)
EFFECTS

American Bittersweet has diuretic and diaphoretic effects.

----- PAGE 276 -----
0>

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug has been used for rheumatism,
menstrual disorders and liver disorders, but is rarely used

today.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

American Hellebore

Veratrum viride

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome
and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The terminal inflorescence is a panicle
made up of spike-like racemes. The flowers are short-
pedicled and often unisexual. The perigone has 6 tepals and
is almost free. The anther is reniform. The fruit is capsule-
like with numerous seeds and dividing membranes. The
seeds are flattened, light-brown and winged all around. The
embryo is small and set in the tip of the fusiform endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The species are perennial herbs with
strong leafy stems. The leaves are spiralled, broadly elliptical
to linear-lanceolate, heavily ribbed and drawn together in a
broad sheath. The leaves of Veratrum viride are oval to
linear.

Characteristics: Characteristics of the species Veratrum
viride is very similar to Veratrum album.

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to the swamps and moist
ground from Canada to Georgia and westward to Minnesota.

Production: American Hellebore root is the rhizome of
Veratrum viride.

Not to be Confused With: The rhizome from Symplocarpus
foetidus is thicker than that of Veratrum viride and more
porous.

Other Names: Bugbane, Devil's Bite, Earth Gall, Indian
Poke, Itchweed, Tickleweed

AMERICAN HELLEBORE /25

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid alkaloids {!%): including among others, some of the
solanidane-type, isorubijervine, rubijervine- C-nor-D-homo-
sterane-type: including among others, protoverine, protover-
atrine A and B. In contrast with Veratrum album, the less
toxic alkaloids of the solanidane-type are here in the
majority.

EFFECTS
The herb reduces blood pressure and slows down the pulse
due to the alkaloid germitrin. When used externally, it is
hyperemic, hyperalgic, and locally anaesthetic. The drug is
extremely toxic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is obsolete due to the high risk of
side effects. Historically, American Hellebore was used
internally to treat pneumonia, peritonitis, epilepsy, pain.
asthma, colds, cholera, croup, consumption, dyspepsia, fever.
hypertension, herpes, gout, headache, inflammation, neural-
gia, whooping cough, puerperal fever, scarlet fever, sciatica.
rheumatism, shingles, toothache, scrofulous, tumors, and
typhus. It was used externally for throat infections and
tonsillitis (as a gargle solution), neuralgia, and skin
irritations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is severely toxic and has numerous severe side
effects, even in therapeutic dosages. It is no longer adminis-
tered in allopathic medicine. The alkaloids are severely
mucous membrane-irritating, and because they inhibit inacti-
vation of the sodium ion channels after resorption, the
alkaloids have a paralyzing effect on numerous excitable
cells, in particular those governing cardiac activity.

OVERDOSAGE

The first symptoms of poisoning are sneezing, lacrimation,
salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, burning sensation in the
mouth and pharyngeal space, and inability to swallow; then,
following resorption: paresthesia, vertigo, possible blindness,
paralysis of the limbs; also mild convulsions, lowering of
cardiac frequency, cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension.
Death occurs either through systolic cardiac arrest or through
asphyxiation. The alkaloids can also be absorbed through
uninjured skin.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulphate), installation of
activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis (appropriate body
position, quiet, warmth), the therapy for poisoning consists
of treating spasms with diazepam or certain barbiturates
(i.v.), bradycardia with atropine and hypotension wim
peripherally active circulatory medications. Electrolyte sub-

----- PAGE 277 -----
26 /AMERICAN HELLEBORE

stitution may be necessary and possible cases of acidosis
should be treated with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Intuba-
tion and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb can be found in whole and

powdered forms.
Daily Dose: The daily dose is 100 mg.

Storage: The drug should be clearly labeled as "poisonous"
and stored in a safe place.

LITERATURE
-Brossi, B, In: Brossi A, Cordell GA (Eds), The Alkaloids. Vol.
41. Academic Press, 1250 Sixth Avenue, San Diego, CA
92101. 1992.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Kupchan, S M et al., (1961) Lloydia 24(1): 17.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifie,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

American Ivy

Parthenocissus — quinquefolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark, the

branch tips, the fresh leaves, the berries and the resin.
°

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are fairly small and
appear in yellowish-green racemes. They produce dark-
purple, pea-sized berries; the seeds are cordate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: American Ivy is a high-climbing
shrub with dark green branches, which sometimes develop
adventitious roots. The flowering branches turn into regular,
double-rowed creepers, which diminish toward the top. The
leaves are long-petioled and divided into 5 elliptical, ovate or
obovate, roughly serrate or dentate leaflets. The leaflets have
broad, suddenly acuminate and usually somewhat rounded-
off teeth. The upper surface is dark green, and the
undersurface is whitish-green and matte.

Habitat: Parthenocissus quinquefolia originated in North
America and is cultivated worldwide.

Production: American Ivy bark is the bark of the trunk and
branches of Parthenocissus quinquefolia.

Other Names: American Woodbine, Creeper, False Grapes,
Five Leaves, Ivy, Virginia Creeper, Wild Woodbine, Wild
Woodvine, Woody Climber

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Up to 2% oxalic acid is contained in the berries, however
there is no information available on the constituents of the
rind.

EFFECTS
The plant is diaphoretic, astringent and tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: American Ivy is used for digestive
disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The berries are considered poisonous, however no health
hazards or side effects are known in conjunction with the
proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Older scientific literature describes the death of a child
following intake of the berries (Lewin, 1992).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is ground for use as an

infusion.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

American Liverleaf

Hepatica nobilis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The drug is the herb, without roots,
harvested at flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering stems are axillary, numer-
ous, pubescent and erect. They are usually reddish and have
3 entire-margined, ovate, unpetiolate, calyx-like bracts, up to
1 cm long, directly under the upright flower. The 6 to 8
bracts are sky blue, paler on the outside, occasionally pink or
white, narrow-ovate, entire-margined and dropping. There
are no nectaries. The stamens are almost white with red

----- PAGE 278 -----
At

K*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

connective. The stigma is head-like. The fruit is oblong with
a short beak fitted into the semi-globular receptacle.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb is a7 to 15 cm high, hardy
perennial with a short, fibrous, dark brown rhizome. The
numerous leaves are basal, long-petioled, coriaceous, green
above and usually more or less violet beneath. They are
cordate and 3-lobed at the base, deeply indented, broadly
ovate, with blunt to acute lobes. The young leaves, including
the stems, are densely covered in silky white hairs. The
leaves later become glabrous and appear after flowering.
Liverwort is a protected species in Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and
Hungary.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe
except the Atlantic regions, Denmark and northwest Germa-
ny. It is also indigenous to Korea, Japan and temperate North
America.

Production: American Liverleaf consists of the fresh or dried
above-ground parts of Hepatica nobilis. The herb is harvest-
ed when in bloom and air-dried in the shade. The roots must
be left in the ground because they are a protected species.

Other Names: Herb Trinity, Kidneywort, Liverleaf, Liver-
weed, Round-Leaved Hepatica, Trefoil

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-fonning agents (0.07% in the freshly har-
vested plant, based on weight): presumably, the glycoside
ranunculin changes enzymatically when the plant is cut into
small pieces (and probably also during dehydration) into the
pungent, volatile protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to
anemonine. Once dried, the plant is not capable of protoane-
monine formation.

Flavonoids: including isoquercitrin, astragalin, querci-

meritrin
Saponins

EFFECTS
The main active agents are lactone-forming glycosides,
flavo-glycosides and anthocyane. The fresh plant contains
protoanemonine, which causes skin irritation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of American Liverleaf herb are

used for liver ailments, liver diseases of all origins, jaundice,
gallstones and gravel.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

AMERICAN PAWPAW / 27

Extended skin contact with the freshly harvested, bruised
plant can lead to blister formation and cauterizations mat are
difficult to heal due to the resulting protoanemonine, which
is severely irritating to the skin and mucous membranes. If
taken internally, severe irritation to the gastrointestinal tract,
combined with colic and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the
urinary drainage passages, are possible.

Symptomatic treatment for external contact consists of
mucilaginosa, following irrigation with diluted potassium
permanganate solution. In case of internal contact, adminis-
tration of activated charcoal should follow gastric lavage.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug can be taken internally or
used externally as a rinse.

Preparation: To make a rinse, a cataplasm can be made of
the squeezed fresh plant; alcohol can be used if necessary. A
liniment can be made with added fats, oils or alcohol.

Daily Dosage: When used internally, a single dose consists
of 2 to 4 gm as an infusion, or 2 to 3 cups from a 3 to 6%
infusion. The daily dosage is 4 teaspoonfuls, or 3.8 gm drug.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachveriag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

American Pawpaw
Asimina_triloba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds, bark and
leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The axillary flowers are dull purple and
solitary. They are about 3.5 cm wide. The petals are round,
ovate and marbled. The outer ones are almost circular and 3
to 4 times as long as the sepals. The fruit is yellowish,
oblong-ovoid. The fleshy pods are about 7.5 by 2.5 cm and
contain 3 flat, brown seeds. The seeds are slightly polished
with darker brown lines on the surface. They are oblong-
oval, with a grayish hilum at one end. The taste and smell are
resinous.

----- PAGE 279 -----
28/AMERICAN PAWPAW

Leaves, Stem and Root: The American Pawpaw grows up to
6 m in height. The young shoots and leaves are covered in
rust-colored down and later become glabrous. The leaves are
thin (20-25 cm long and 7 cm wide), smooth, entire, ovate
and acuminate. The plant's leaves and flowers appear

simultaneously.

Characteristics: The fruit has an unpleasant smell when
unripe, but when it ripens after a frost, it smells, faintly of
custard. This characteristic gives rise to one of its common
names—Custard Apple.

Habitat: The plant is found in the west, south and central
U.S., also India and parts of Asia and Africa.

Production: American Pawpaw seeds are the seeds of

Asimina triloba.
Other Names: Custard Apple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Benzyl isoquinoline alkaloids: including anolobine

Polyketides: including asimicine

Fatty oil

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, American Pawpaw is
used in the treatment of scarlet fever, fevers and vomiting, as
well as for mouth and throat inflammation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug has a nauseant effect. Allergic individuals may be

susceptible to severe urticaria.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The mother tincture

homeopathic dilutions.

is used in

LITERATURE
He K, Shi G, Zhao GX, Zeng L, Ye Q, Schwedler JT, Wood

KV, McLaughlin JL, Three new adjacent bis-tetrahydrofuran
acetogenins with four hydroxyl groups from Asimina triloba. J
Nat-Prod, 59:1029-34, 1996.

He K, Zhao GX, Shi G, Zeng L, Chao JF, McLaughlin JL,
Additional bioactive annonaceous acetogenins from Asimina
triloba (Annonaceae). Bioorg Med Chem, 5:501-6, 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ratnayake S, Rupprecht JK, Potter WM, McLaughlin JL,
Evaluation of various parts of the paw paw tree Asimina triloba
(Annonaceae) as commercial sources of the pesticidal
annonaceous acetogenins. J Econ Entomol, 55:2353-6, 1992.

Woo MH, Cho KY, Zhang Y, Zeng L, Gu ZM, McLaughlin
JL, Asimilobin and cis- and trans-murisolinones novel bioactive
Annonaceous acetogenins from the seeds of Asimina triloba. J
Nat Prod, 4:1533-42, 1995.

Zhao G, Hui Y, Rupprecht JK, McLaughlin JL, Wood KV,
Additional bioactive compounds and trilobacin a novel highly
cytotoxic acetogenin from the bark of Asimina triloba. J Nat
Prod, 55:347-56, 1992.

Zhao GX, Chao JF, Zeng L, McLaughlin JL, (24-cis)-
asimicinone and (24-trans)-asimicinone: two novel bioactive
ketolactone acetogenins from Asimina triloba (Annonaceae). Nat
Toxins, 4:128-34, 1996.

Zhao GX, Chao JF, Zeng L, Rieser MJ, McLaughlin JL, The
absolute configuration of adjacent bis-THF acetogenins and
asiminocin a novel highly potent asimicin isomer from Asimina
triloba. Bioorg Med Chem, 4:25-32, 1996.

American White Pond Lily

Nymphaea odorata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the cut and dried
rhizome, the fresh rhizome and the rhizome with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The androgynous flowers are solitary, 7 to
15 cm across and radial-symmetrical. They grow from the
rhizome and extend above the water by means of a long
stem. The 4 sepals are almost free, oblong-ovate, pale green
on the outside and greenish-white on the inside. The pure
white 23 to 32 petals are free, elliptical-lanceolate, narrower
than the sepals and arranged on the axis like a screw. The
numerous carpels are sunk into the beaker-shaped axis in a
ring and are partially fused with it. The fruit is a berry-like
capsule, which ripens under water. The seeds are small,
ovate, approximately 2.5 mm long, smooth and have an aril.
The flowers open as the sun rises, close a few hours later
(before the intense midday heat) and remain closed until the
next morning. The size of the plant varies according to depth

of water.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The fragrant water lily is an aquatic
plant with a strong horizontal rhizome, which grows under
water. The leaves are swimming, alternate, long-petioled and
have 4 air channels in the petiole. The lamina is oval-
orbicular, large (15-30 cm long) and has a wedge-shaped
deep indentation at the base. It is entire-margined, coria-
ceous, green above and purple-brown beneath. The petiole is

----- PAGE 280 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

greenish and is usifally purple-tinged. The stipules are
triangular to reniform.

Characteristics: The flowers have a sweet fragrance.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the eastern part of North
America. It is found as far south as Mexico, El Salvador and
the West Indies, and has been naturalized in parts of western
Europe.

Production: American White Pond Lily root is the rhizome
of Nymphaea odorata and other varieties. The drug is
derived from the cut and dried rhizome and, in powdered
form, is yellowish to gray-brown.

Other Names: Water Cabbage, Cow Cabbage, Water Lily,
Water Nymph

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins (gallotannins, ellagitannins)

Only a very small amount of research work has been carried
out on the drug, but American White Pond Lily root is
known to contain large amounts of gallic and ellagic tannins.

EFFECTS
The astringent and antiseptic effects of the American White
Pond Lily can be attributed to the high tannin content. Only
limited amounts of research have been carried out on the
drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Chronic diarrhea is a common internal
application. Externally, the plant has been used in the
treatment of vaginal conditions and as a gargle in the
treatment of diseases of the mouth and throat. Traditional
folk medicine uses also included dysentery, gonorrhea and
leukorrhea, and the leaves and roots were applied as a mash
poultice for boils, tumors, scrofulous sores and inflamed
skin.

Homeopathic Uses: Morning diarrhea is one use in

homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

No poisonings have yet been observed among humans but
animal experiments have been performed with fatal results.
Even though very high dosages were used with the animals,
these results should be taken as a warning to exercise care.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a decoction or liquid extract
used for washes, poultices and gargles or taken internally.

AMMONIAC GUM 29

Preparation: The fluid extract is produced by percolation:
1:1 using ethanol 25%.

Daily Dosage: Internally: in a single dose of | to 2 g drug as
an infusion; 1 to 4 ml of liquid extract.

Homeopathic Dosages: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic):
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-5.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Odinstsova NV, (1960) Farmakol i Toxicol 23:132.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Su KL et al., (1983) Lloydia 36:72 and 80.

Ammi Visnaga

See Bishop's Weed

Ammoniac Gum

Dorema ammoniacum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is a resin
exuded from the flowers and stems.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is an umbel which
grows from the axils of the upper leaves. Because of the very
short flower stems, the individual inflorescences appear very
globular. The flower structures are in fives, the flowers radial
and small, the calyx teeth indistinct, the petals white with
revolute tips. There are 5 stamens. The ovary is inferior, 2-
chambered, densely haired, witfi a conical style cushion with
2 styles. The fruit is double achene.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows up
to 2.5 m high. The leaves are arranged in spirals, with clearly
developed sheaths, and the lamina is often only rudimentary.
The stem is hollow, gnarled, blue-striped, and up to 5 cm
thick. The taproot is tuberous.

Habitat: The plant is found growing in areas from Iran to
southern Siberia.

----- PAGE 281 -----
30 /AMMONIAC GUM

Production: Ammoniac gum is the naturally-exuding gum
resin latex of Dorema ammoniacum hardened in the air and

collected in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion may occur with North
African and Cyrenian ammoniac.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Resin (60 to 709c): chief component ammoresinol

Water-soluble polysaccharides (10 to 20%)

Volatile oil (0.1 to 0.3%): chief components linalool, linalyl
acetate, citronellyl acetate

EFFECTS
The drug is credited with being mildly diuretic, sudorific,
spasmolytic, expectorate and menstruation-promoting in its
effect, although research data regarding these effects is not
available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Uses dating back to ancient times include
ingestion for its expectorant effect in chronic bronchitis,
especially in the elderly. Because of the resin's purported
diuretic, antispasmodic and stimulant properties, it was often
employed internally as a diaphoretic and emmenagogue as
well as externally as a plaster for swellings of the joints and
indolent tumors. In the late 19th century, it was used as an
expectorant for chronic catarrh and externally in plasters to
relieve hyperadenosis and in compresses for abscesses. More
recently, internal folk medicine uses include chronic bron-
chitis, asthma, sciatica and joint pain as well as conditions of
the liver and spleen. Among external uses are treatment of
wounds and abscesses as well as lymph node swelling.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include bronchitis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated during pregnancy due to the
existence of indications of a menstruation-inducing effect.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

According to older sources, repeated visual disorders and
glaucoma-like states appeared following ingestion of the
drug, however no health hazards have been verified in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations for internal and
external use

Preparation:

Ammoniacum depuratum — 1000 parts coarse ammoniac

powder are heated with 1500 parts ethanol 60% in a steam
bath while being constantly stirred until an emulsion is

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

fogned. It is then pressed through linen and evaporated until
a few drops can be worked in the hand without becoming

sticky.

Combination — Ammoniac emulsion: toluene: distilled

water; 1:2:30
Daily Dosage: 0.3 to 1 g drug

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once a
day (HAB1); special doses for children

Storage: The drug should be stored over chalk in a container
that protects it from light.

LITERATURE

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds) Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeb nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Amomum aromaticum

See Nepalese Cardamom

Anacardium occidentale

See Cashew

Anacyclus Pyrethrum

See Pellitory

Anagallis arvensis

See Scarlet Pimpernel

Anamirta cocculus
See Fish Berry

Ananas comosus
See Pineapple

----- PAGE 282 -----
“if

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Andira araroba
See Goa Powder

Anemarrhena asphodeloides
See Anemarrhena (Zhi-Mu)

Anemarrhena (Zhi-Mu)

Anemarrhena asphodeloides

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the

rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is spike-like, and the
flowers are clustered and radial. The perianth structures are
in sixes. The tepals are free and all the same. There are 3
stamens and a 3-carpeled, fused ovary, with 1 to 3 seeds in
each chamber. The fruit is a globose capsule, which opens on
3 sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Anemarrhena asphodeloides is a
herbaceous perennial, and extends up to 60 cm high. The
leaves are grass-like and clustered at the base.

Habitat: The plant is native to northern China, Korea and
Japan.

Production: Zhi-Mu is the dried rhizome of Anemarrhena
asphodeloides. It is best harvested in the third year of
cultivation in spring or autumn. The rhizome is then air-
dried.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins (6%): aglycones sarsapogenin, markogenin,
neogitonin, particularly sarsapogenin-3-timobioside and mar-
kogenin-3-timobioside

Water-soluble polysaccharides: anemarans A to D
Lignans: hinoki resinol, among others
Xanthones: mangiferin (1.3%)

EFFECTS
A variety of experiments have been able to demonstrate
antipyretic and cortisone-like effects for the drug with its
steroid saponin content. In addition, inhibitions of platelet
aggregation, of Na, K-ATP-ase and of DNA-polymerase
were observed. The timosaponin A-III isolated from the drug
reduced the serum levels of a 1-fetoprotein in animal
experiments.

ANEMARRHENA (ZHI-MU)/31

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Zhi-Mu is used for agitation (in Oriental

medicine).

Chinese Medicine: In China, Zhi-Mu is used for febrile
conditions and inflammation, diabetes, dry cough, "bone
fever" and general dehydration, painful stool or strangury. It
is also as a decoction for typhus, scarlet fever and
tuberculosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
The ingestion of large dosages of the drug may lead to
gastroenteritis, intestinal colic and diarrhea, due to the
saponin content. The drug is not to be administered in the
presence of diarrhea.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug preparations
for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 6 to 12 gm of drug often used with other
herbs in teas.

Storage: Should be stored in a dry and well-aired place.

LITERATURE
Dong JX, Han GY, A new active steroidal saponin from
Anemarthena asphodeloides. Planta Med, 57:460-2, 1991 Oct.

Dong JX, Han GY, Studies on the active constituents of
Anemarthena asphodeloides bunge. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao,
27:26-32, 1992.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Li PM, Zhong JL, Chen RQ, Zhang XK, Ho KL, Chiu JF,
Huang DP, Zhi-mu saponin inhibits alpha-fetoprotein gene
expression in developing rat liver. Int J Biochem, 21:15-22,
1989.

Liu JQ, Wu DW, 32 cases of postoperative osteogenic sarcoma
treated by chemotherapy combined with Chinese medicinal
herbs. Planta Med, 21: 1997.

Ma B, Wang B, Dong J, Yan X, Zhang H, Tu A, New
spirostanol glycosides from Anemarrhena asphodeloides. Letter
Planta Med, 63:376-9, 1997 Aug.

Miura T, Kako M, Ishihara E, Usami M, Yano H, Tanigawa K,
Sudo K, Seino Y, Antidiabetic effect of seishin-kanro-to in KK-
Ay mice. Planta Med, 21:320-2, 1997 Aug.

Nakashima N, Kimura I, Kimura M, Matsuura H, Isolation of
pseudoprototimosaponin AIII fiom rhizomes of Anemarrhena

asphodeloides and its hypoglycemic activity in streptozotocin-
induced diabetic mice. J Nat Prod, 57:Kimura I, Matsuura H.

----- PAGE 283 -----
32/ANEMARRHENA (ZHI-MU)

Takahashi M, Konno C, Hikino H, Isolation and hypoglycemic
activity of anemarans A, B, C and D, glycans of Anemarrhena
asphodeloides rhizomes. Planta Med, 57:100-2, 1985 Apr.

Anemone nemorosa

See Wood Anemone

Anethum graveolens
See Dill

Angelica
Angelica archangelica

TRADE NAMES
Nature's Answer Angelica Root Liquid

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seed, whole

herb and root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are greenish-white to
yellowish and are arranged in 20 to 40 rayed compact
umbels without an involucre. The tiny epicalyx has numer-
ous sepals with minute tips. The petals have an indented,
indistinguishable tip. The elliptic fruit is 7 mm long by 4 mm
wide and winged. The outer fruit membrane separates from
the inner one.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 50 to 250 cm tall. The
rhizome is short, strong, fleshy and has long fibrous roots.
The stem is erect, often as thick as an arm at the base. It is
round, finely grooved, hollow and tinged reddish below. The
leaves are very large, 60 to 90 cm and tri-pinnate with a
hollow petiole. Leaflets are ovate and unevenly serrate. The
leaf sheaths are large and swollen.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong tangy odor. The taste
is sweetish to burning tangy.

Habitat: Angelica is thought by some botanists to be
indigenous to Syria, Holland or Poland. Today it is found
growing in the wild on the coasts of the North and Baltic
Seas as far north as Lapland. It is a protected species in
Iceland, and is cultivated in other regions. Other species are
found in America (A. atropurpurea), in Europe (A. sylves-
tris) and in China/Asia (A. sinensis).

Production: Angelica seed consists of the fruit of Angelica
archangelica, which is harvested from July onward. After

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

drying in the air or in ovens, the umbels are threshed to
separate the seeds. Angelica herb consists of the above-
ground parts of Angelica archangelica. Angelica root is the
dried root and rhizome of Angelica archangelica.

Other Names: European Angelica, Garden Angelica, Angel's
Wort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ANGELICA FRUIT

Volatile oil: constituents include hexylmethyl phthalate,
alpha-pinene, beta-phellandrene, borneol, camphene, beta-
bisabolene, beta-caryophyllene, macrocyclic lactones (odor-
determining) such as 15-oxypentadecenlactone

Furanocoumarins: including angelicin, bergaptene, impera-
torin, oxypeucedanin, xantholtoxin

Fatty oil
Phytosterols: including beta-sitosterol, sigmasterol

EFFECTS: ANGELICA FRUIT.

The furanocoumarins in the fruit are cytostatic and phototox-
ic. The spasmolytic, gastric juice-stimulating and cholagogic
effect of the herb could be explained by the aromatic-
amaroid structure.

COMPOUNDS: ANGELICA LEAVES

Volatile Oil (0.015 to 0.1%): chief constituents myrcene (17
to 29%), p-cymene, limonene, cis-and trans-ocimene, alpha-
phellandrene, beta-phellandrene, alpha-pinene

Furanocoumarins: including angelicin, bergaptene, impera-
torin, isoimperatorin, oxypeucedanin, archangelicin

EFFECTS: ANGELICA LEAVES
The essential oils and furanocoumarins from the leaves have
a strong irritant effect on the skin and mucous membranes
(angelica dermatitis). The spasmolytic, gastric juice-stimulat-
ing and cholagogic effect of the herb could be explained by
the aromatic-amaroid structure.

COMPOUNDS: ANGELICA ROOT

Volatile oil: chief components are alpha- and beta-phellan-
drenes, alpha-pinenes, macrocyclic lactones, including pen-
ta- and heptadecanolide

Furanocoumarins: including bergaptene, xanthotoxin, sco-
poletin, umbelliferone

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid
Flavonoids

EFFECTS: ANGELICA ROOT
The root acts as an antispasmodic, cholagogue and stimulato-
ry for secretion of gastric juices.

----- PAGE 284 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ANGELICA FRUIT
Approved by Commission E:

« Fevers and colds

¢ Infections of the urinary tract
« Dyspeptic complaints

* Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Preparations of angelica seed are used
internally for conditions of the kidneys and efferent urinary
tract, the intestinal tract and the respiratory tract, as well as
for rheumatic and neuralgic complaints. Preparations are also
used as a diaphoretic and have been used in the past for
malaria. Externally, an ointment from the seeds is used for
body lice.

ANGELICA LEAVES
Unproven Uses: Preparations from the leaves have been used

as a diuretic and diaphoretic.

ANGELICA ROOT

Approved by Commission E:
* Dyspeptic complaints

« Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, preparations of the root
are used as a mild rubefacient, for coughs, bronchitis,
menstruation complaints, loss of appetite, dyspeptic com-
plaints with mild gastrointestinal cramps, liver and biliary
duct conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
ANGELICA FRUIT AND HERB

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Photodermatosis is possible following
contact with the plant juice.

Pregnancy: Preparations are not to be used during

pregnancy.

ANGELICA ROOT

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The furocoumarins contained in angelica root
sensitize the skin to light and can lead to inflammation of the
skin in combination with UV rays. It is therefore advisable to
avoid sunbathing and intensive UV radiation for the duration
of treatment with Angelica or its preparations.

DOSAGE
ANGELICA ROOT

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb and other oral
galenic preparations for internal use.

How Supplied:
Fluid Extract — 1:1

ANGELICA/33
Oil
Tincture — 1:5
Preparation: There is no information on preparation in the
literature.

Daily Dosage: 4.5 gm of drug, 0.5 to 3.0 gm of liquid extract
(1:1); 1.5 gm of tincture (1:5); 10 to 20 drops of essential oil.

LITERATURE
ANGELICA FRUIT AND HERB

Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.

Ashraf M et al., (1980) Pak J Sci Ind Res 23 (I-2):73.

Chang, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Escher S, Keller U et al., (1979) Helv Chim Acta 62 (7):2061.

Glowniak K et al., Localisation and seasonal changes of
psoralen in Angelica fruits. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th
Ann Congress of GA, 76. 1996.

Lemmich J et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 23 (2):553-555.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, 1980.

Opdyke DLJ, (1975) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 13, Suppl 713.
Sethi OP, Shah AK, (1979) Ind J Pharm Sci 42 (6): Cll.

Shimizu M, Matsuzawa T, Suzuki S, Yoshizaki M, Morita N,
Evaluation of Angelicae radix (Touki) by inhibitory effect on
platelet aggregation. In: Chem Pharm Bull 39:2046. 1991.

Taskinen J, (1975) Acta Chem Scan 29 (5):637 et (7) 757.
Tastrup O et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22 (9):2035.

Zotikov YM et al., (1978) Rastit Resur 14 (4):579.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

ANGELICA ROOT
Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.

Ashraf M et al., (1980) Pak J Sci Ind Res 23 (1-2):73.

Chang, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co., Singapore 1985.

Chalchat JC, Garry RPh, J Essent Oil Res 5:447. 1993.
Escher S, Keller U et al., (1979) Helv Chim Acta 62 (7):2061.

Glowniak K et al., Localisation and seasonal changes of
psoralen in Angelica fruits. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th
Ann Congress of GA, 76. 1996.

----- PAGE 285 -----
34/ANGELICA

Harkar S, Razdan TK, Waight ES, Steroids, chromoines and
coumarins from Angelica officinalis. In: PH 23:419-426. 1983.

Harmala P, Kaltia S, Vuorela H, PM 58:287. 1992.
Lemmich J et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 23 (2):553-555.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New

York, 1980.
Nykanen I et al., Essent Oil Res 3:229. 1991.

Opdyke DLJ, (1975) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 13, Suppl 713.
Sethi OP, Shah AK, (1979) Ind J Pharm Sci 42 (6):C11.

Shimizu M, Matsuzawa T, Suzuki S, Yoshizaki M, Morita N.
Evaluation of Angelicae radix (Touki) by inhibitory effect on
platelet aggregation. In: Chem Pharm Bull 39:2046. 1991.

Sun H, Jakupovic J, PA 41:888. 1986.

Taskinen J, (1975) Acta Chem Scan 29 (5):637 et (7) 757.
Tastrup O et al.. (1983) Phytochemistry 22 (9):2035.
Zotikov YM et al., (1978) Rastit Resur 14 (4):579.
Further information in:

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen. Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Oims Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Angelica archangelica

See Angelica

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Angostura

Galipea officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark of the

tree.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal, peduncled
and closed racemes. The fruit is a 5-valved capsule, of which
2 or 3 are often sterile. There are 2 round, black seeds in
each capsule and usually only one seed is fertile.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Galipea officinalis is a small 4 to 5
m high tree, which is 7.5 to 12.5 cm in diameter and has a
straight trunk and irregular branches. The bark is smooth and
gray. It is slightly curved or quilled. The outer layer is
sometimes soft and spongy; the inner surface is yellowish-
gray. The transverse section is dark brown. The bright green
leaves are smooth, glossy, alternate and petiolate. They
sometimes have white spots. The 3 leaflets are oblong,

pointed and 4 cm long.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong scent, which
initially resembles that of tobacco. The taste is bitter.

Habitat: Angostura is indigenous to Venezuela and tropical
regions of South America.

Production: Angostura is the whole or ground bark of

Galipea officinalis.
Other Names: Cusparia Bark, True Angostura

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: chief constitents galipol, (-)- cadinene, galipene

Quinolin alkaloids: including cusparine including galipine,
galipoline, quinaldine, cuspareine, galipoidine, 1-methyl-2-

quinolone

Angustorine (bitter iridoid glycoside)

EFFECTS
Angostura stimulates gastric juices and acts as a tonic. In
larger doses, the drug also has an emetic and strong laxative

effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine indications include diarrhea;

it is also used as a febrifuge.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The administration of larger doses can lead to

nausea and vomiting.

----- PAGE 286 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Brieskorn CH, Beck V, (1971) Phytochemistry 10:3205.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Anise
Pimpinella anisum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil

from the ripe fruit and the dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are medium-sized
umbels with about 7 to 15 scattered pubescent rays. There is
usually no involucre, but sometimes there is a single bract.
There are barely any sepals. The petals are white, about 15
mm long, and have a ciliate margin. They have small bristles
on the outside and a long indented tip. The fruit is downy,
ovate to oblong and flattened at the sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual herb about 0.5
m high; it is downy all over. The root is thin and fusiform,
and the stem is erect, round, grooved and branched above.
The lower leaves are petiolate, orbicular-reniform, entire and
coarsely dentate to lobed. The. middle leaves are orbicular
and 3-lobed, or 3-segmented with ovate or obovate seg-
ments. The upper leaves are short-petioled to sessile with
narrow sheaths; they are pinnatisect with narrow tips.

Characteristics: The taste is sweet and the odor

characteristic.

Habitat: The origin of the plant is unknown but it probably
came from the Near East. Today, it is cultivated mainly in
southern Europe, Turkey, central Asia, India, China, Japan,
Central and South America.

Production: Anise consists of the dried fruits of Pimpinella
anisum.

ANISE/35

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (2 to 6%): chief constituent trans-anethole
(94%), including as well chavicol methyl ether (estragole,
2%), anis aldehyde (1.4%)

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid (0.1%),
other caffeoyl quinic acids

Flavonoids: including apigenin-7-O-glucoside, isoorientin,
isovitexin, luteolin-7-O-glucoside

Fatty oil (30%)
Proteic substances (20%)

EFFECTS
The drug is said to have an expectorant, mildly spasmolytic
and antibacterial effect based on the essential oil. The data is
empirical and there are no recent studies available.

Aniseed oil (main constituent trans-anethol) has an antibacte-
rial, antiviral, insect repellent effect and in animal experi-
ments it has been shown to be expectorant, spasmolytic and
estrogenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

* Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
« Dyspeptic complaints

* Loss of appetite

The drug is used internally for dyspeptic complaints. It is
used both internally and externally for catarrhs of the

respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Anise is used internally
for whooping cough, flatulence, colic-like pain, as a diges-
tive, for menstruation disturbances, liver disease and
tuberculosis.

Homeopathic Uses: Pimpinella anisum is used for shoulder
pain and lumbago.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Anise is contraindicated in patients allergic to anise and

anethole.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Sensitization has been observed very rarely.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted drug for infu-
sions and other galenic preparations for internal use or for

----- PAGE 287 -----
36 /ANISE

inhalation. The purpose of an external application of an
Anise preparation is the inhalation of essential oil.

Daily Dosage: Internal average daily dose is 3 g drug
(depending on the preparation).

Tea — Drink 1 cup mornings and/or evenings (expectorant);
1 dessertspoon per day (gastrointestinal complaints); infants
1 teaspoon (added to the bottle).

Infusion — single dose: 0.5 to 1 g before meals.
External application — inhalation of the essential oil.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Albert Puleo M, (1980) J Ethnopharmacol 2(4):337.

Czygan FC, Anis (Anisi fructus DAB 10) - Pimpinella anisum.
In: ZPT 13(3): 101. 1992.

Drinkwater NR, Miller EC. Miller JA, Pilot HC, (1976)
Hepatocarcinogenicity of estragole and I'-hydroxyestragole in
the mouse and mutagenicity of l-acetoxystragole in bacteria. J
Natl Cane Inst 57:1323-1331.

Gershbein LL, (1977) Food Cosmet Toxicol 15(3): 173.

Kartnig T et ah, (1975) Planta Med 27:1.

Kubeczka KH et al., (1976) Z Naturforsch 31b:283.
Kubeczka KH, Formacek V, New Constituents from the

Essential Oils of Pimpinella. In: Brunke EJ (Ed.) Progress in
Essential Oil Research, Walter de Gruyter & Co, Berlin 1986.

1986.
Kunzemann J, Herrmann K, (1977) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch

164:194.

Mueller-Limmroth W, Froenlich HH, (1980) Fortschr Med 98

(3):95.

Nofal MA, (1981) Ain Chams Univ Fac Agric Res Bull 1602:
1-10.

Reichling J, Merkel B, Elicitor-Induced Formation of Coumarin
Derivatives of Pimpinella anisum. In: PM 59(2).T87. 1993.

Truhaut R, LeBourhis B, Attia M, Glomot R, Newman J,
Caldwell J, (1989) Chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity study of
trans-anethole in rats. Food chem Tox 27:11-20.

urther information in:

F
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

ausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

i

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New

York, 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Antelaea azadirachta

See Neem

Antennaria dioica
See Cat's Foot

Anthoxanthum odoratum

See Sweet Vernal Grass

Anthyllis vulneraria
See Common Kidney Vetch

Aphanes arvensis
See Parsley Piert

Apium graveolens

| See Celery

----- PAGE 288 -----
JP

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Apocynum cannabinum
See Indian Hemp

Apple Tree

Malus domestica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh false fruit,
the dried fruit peels, and the inflorescences with their leaves

and solid peduncles.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are umbelled racemes with
only a few blossoms. The petals are obovate, up to 2.5 cm
long, stemmed, white, pink, or pink on the outside and white
on the inside. The carpels are fused with the false fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 6 to 10m high tree or
shrub. Boughs and branches are initially villous-haired, later
becoming glabrous. The leaves are alternate, ovate, usually
shortly acuminate and finely crenate-serrate.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated in the temperate regions of
the Northern Hemisphere, and occasionally grows wild.

Production: Medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations of
apples come in liquid and dried pectin forms. The source
material is the apple residue with 10% to 20% pectin in the
dried mass. The residue is extracted at pH 1.5 to 3 and 60° to
100° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRUIT PULP

Fruit acids: the chief acid is malic acid (0.2 to 1.5%); in
unripe apples quinic acid; including as well citric acid,
succinic acid, lactic acid

Caffeic acid derivatives: including 5-caffeoyl quinic acid

Aromatic substances: in particular 2-trans-hexenal, 3-cis-
hexenal, 2-trans-hexenol, 3-cis-hexenol, beta-damascenone,
ethyl butyrate, methyl butyric acid hexylester; in some
strains, | -methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)benzole

Pectins
Tannins
Vitamins: in particular ascorbic acid (3 to 30 mg/100 gm)

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS
Cyanogenic glycoside: amygdalin (0.5 to 1.5%, correspond-
ing to 30 to 90 mg HCN/100 gm)

Fatty oil

ARALIA RACEMOSA/37

I EFFECTS
Pectin is a swelling agent. Apple pectins have a mild binding
effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Finely ground fruit or preparations that
contain liquid or dry pectin are used for milder forms of
dyspepsia, diarrhea and digestive complaints, especially in
children.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The fruit is available for oral use in
the grated or chopped form. The skin peel can be used in
teas. Medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations of apples
come in liquid and dried pectin forms.

LITERATURE
Belitz HD, Grosch W, Lehrbuch der Lebensmittelchemie, 4.
Aufl., Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1992.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Aquilegia vulgaris

See Columbine

Arachis hypogaea

See Peanut

Aralia racemosa
See Spikenard

----- PAGE 289 -----
38 /ARCTIUM LAPPA

Arctium lappa

See Burdock

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
See Uva-Ursi

Areca catechu
See Areca Nut

Areca Nut

Areca catechu

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the nut.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is an erect palm growing up to
30 m high. The trunk has a girth of about 50 cm. The
numerous feathery leaflets are 30 to 60 cm long, confluent
and glabrous. The flowers are on branching spadix. The male
flowers are numerous and above, the female solitary and
below. The ovoid drupe has a fibrous layer under the yellow
shell and one-seeded stone. The seeds are conical or nearly
spherical and about 2.5 cm in diameter. They are very hard,
and contain a deep brown testa showing fawn marbling.

Characteristics: The taste is slightly acrid and astringent,
and the odor faint.

Habitat: The plant is found in the East Indies, cultivated in
parts of Asia and eastern Africa.

Production: Areca or Betel Nuts are the fresh seeds of Areca
catechu.

Not to be Confused With: Piper Betel, also called Betel, the
leaf of which is chewed.

Other Names: Betel Nut, Pinang

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Pyridine alkaloids: arecoline, guvacoline (ester alkaloids), as
well as arecaidine, guvacine

Tannins: catechin type

EFFECTS
The drug acts on the parasympathetic nervous system with
an effect that is more muscarinic than nicotinic. It stimulates
secretion in the salivary, bronchial and intestinal glands and

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

causes tremors and bradycardia. Chewing mouthfuls of betel
leads to a saponification of the ester alkaloids and the
resulting arecaidine produces euphoria. The drug also causes
cramps in the muscles of intestinal parasites and stimulates
the vagus nerve. Central nervous system stimulation has
been observed in mice.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Betel Nut is no longer frequently prescribed
in human medicine. However, the nuts are chewed as a
recreational drug by an estimated 450 million people because
of their intoxicating qualities. Fresh slices of the seed are
part of the "betel titbit" used in eastern Asia. (Arecoline is
converted in the central nervous system to the stimulant
arecaidine through chewing.) That practice is being discour-
aged because of its link with some forms of oral cancer. In
veterinary medicine, the drug is used as a vermifuge for tape
worms in cattle and dogs, as well as for intestinal colic in
horses.

Chinese Medicine: Uses in Chinese medicine include chronic
hepatitis, edema, oliguria, diarrhea and digestive problems.

Indian Medicine: The juice of young seeds is used as a
laxative in Indian medicine. A decoction of the root is used

for cracked lips.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Due to its arecoline content, the drug appears parasympa-
thomimetic. It leads to increased salivation, in high doses to
bradycardia, tremor, reflex excitability, spasms and eventual
paralysis. Long-term use of the drug as a stimulant can result
in malignant tumors of the oral cavity through formation of
nitrosamines. When the nuts are chewed, the mouth and lips
are stained red, as are the feces.

OVERDOSAGE

The toxic dose for humans is 8 to 10 g of the drug. Atropine
is given as the antidote. Chewing the "nut" leads to a
saponification of the ester alkaloids. The resulting arecaidine

produces euphoria.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In the past, Areca Nut was used in
chewing balm for gum disease and as a vermifuge. Today, it
is only used as a vermifuge in veterinary medicine for house
pets. Therapeutic use is insignificant.

Storage: Must be stored separately, protected from light and
in well-sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Aue W, Pharm Zentralhalle 136:728. 1967.

Hirono I, J Environ Sci Health C3(2):145. 1985.
Huang JL, McLeish MJ, J Chromatogr 475:447. 1989.
Juptner H, (1968) Z Tropenmed Parasit 19:254.

----- PAGE 290 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Lewin L, Ober Areca catechu, Chavica Betle und das
Betelkauen. In: Monographic Stuttgart, F. Enke, 1889.

Schneider E, PUZ 15:161. 1986.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfiinder HJ. Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergittungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Arenaria Rubra

Spergularia rubra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The bracts of the inflorescence are almost
as large as the leaves. The sepals and petals are 3 to 4 mm.
The petals are usually pink, sometimes white. There are 5 to
10 stamens. The capsule is 4 to 5 mm and about equal in size
to the sepals. The seeds are 0.45 to 0.55 mm, unwinged, dark
brown, subtrigonal and more or less flattened.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is annual to perennial with
a slender to somewhat woody taproot, which is smooth and
somewhat sticky. From beneath, it produces numerous, 5 to
22 cm long, diffuse, decumbent or procumbent stems. The
leaves are narrow, linear and have very short, lanceolate,
acute, silver, scarious stipules.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe, Russia, Australia,
North America and Asia.

Production: Arenaria Rubra is the aerial part of Spergularia

rubra.

Other Names: Common Sandspurry, Sabline Rouge,

Sandwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins

Resins

ARJUN TREE/39

EFFECTS
The herb has diuretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Arenaria Rubra is used for conditions of the
urinary tract, such as cystitis, dysuria and urinary calculus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used internally as a

liquid extract.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Arisaema atrorubens
See Jack-in-the-Pulpit

Aristolochia clematitis

See Birthwort

Arjun Tree

Terminalia arjuna

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the tree are the bark

and fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in upright,
apical panicles. The upper flowers of the panicles are usually
only male. The flowers are small and fused; their structures
are in fours or fives. The sepals are almost glabrous; the
calyx tube has 4 to 5 short, triangular lobes. The petals are
inconspicuous. There are 10 stamens and inferior, single-
chambered, brownish or reddish pubescent ovary. The style
is long and projects above the bud. The fruit is an over 2-cm
long, glabrous, ovoid 4- to 5-sided drupe with 5 thick,
narrow wings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Arjun tree grows up to 30 m high.
The leaves are opposite, 12 to 30 cm long and coriaceous
with approximately 6-mm long petioles, which have 2 glands
at the upper end. The lamina is elongate-elliptical, blunt or

----- PAGE 291 -----
40/ARJUN TREE

with a short tip. The base is narrow or cordate and has a
finely crenate margin. The trunk is grooved with a thick
bark.

Habitat: India

Production: Arjun Tree bark is the dried trunk bark of
Terminalia arjuna. It is collected in wild areas.

Other Names: White Murda

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins:  gallotannins, ellagitannins

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol
Triterpenes: arjunolic acid and its glucosides, oleanolic acid
Flavonoids: including arjunolon, baicalein

EFFECTS

Clinical experiments with the bark powder have demon-
strated efficacy against congestive cardiac insufficiency and
hypertonia. Various extracts caused lowered blood pressure,
bradycardia and positively inotropic effects in animal
experiments. Spasmolytic and hemostyptic qualities have
also been described. The substance is said to be sedative and
potentiates the activity of barbiturates.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Indian Medicine: Arjun tree is used for fractures, ulcers,
discharge of the urethra, leucorrhea, diabetes, anemia,
cardiopathy, hyperhydrosis, asthma, bronchitis, states of
exhaustion, tumors, dysentery, internal and external hemor-
rhaging, liver cirrhosis and high blood pressure.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Powdered drug and liquid prepara-

tions for internal use.

Preparation: The following basic forms are used in Indian
medicine in many compound preparations.

Arjunatvagadi — An aqueous decoction.

Pardhadyaristam — An aqueous decoction with grapes and

final fermentation.

Arjunaghrtam — A paste of the powdered drug with purified
butter, heated and filtered.

Arjunatvak — The powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: Since the Indian medicine is dosed according
to the individual patient, there is no exact information

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

available. There was, however, one study carried out with a
daily dose of 3.88 gm powdered drug.

LITERATURE

Bharani A, Ganguly A, Bhargava KD, Salutary effect of
Terminalia Arjuna in patients with severe refractory heart
failure. Int J Cardiol, 49:191-9, 1995 May.

Chauhan S, Agarwal S, Mathur R, Vasal assault due to
Terminalia arjuna W. & A. bark in albino rats. Andrologia,
53:491-4, 1990 Sep-Oct.

Dwivedi S, Jauhari R, Beneficial effects of Terminalia arjuna in
coronary artery disease. Indian Heart J, 49:507-10, 1997 Sep-
Oct.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kandil FE, Nassar MI, A tannin anti-cancer promoter from
Terminalia arjuna. Phytcchemistry, 53:1567-8, 1998 Apr.

Kaur S, Grover IS, Kumar S, Antimutagenic potential of ellagic
acid isolated from Terminalia arjuna. Indian J Exp Biol,
53:478-82, 1997 May.

Pettit GR, Hoard MS, Doubek DL. Schmidt JM, Pettit RK,
Tackett LP, Chapuis JC, Antineoplastic agents 338. The cancer
cell growth inhibitory. Constituents of Terminalia arjuna
(Combretaceae). J Ethnopharmacol, 53:57-63, 1996 Aug.

Pettit GR, Hoard MS, Doubek DL, Schmidt JM, Pettit RK,
Tackett LP, Chapuis JC, Hypocholesterolaemic effects of
Terminalia arjuna tree bark. J Ethnopharmacol, 53:165-9, 1997
Feb.

ettit GR, Hoard MS, Doubek DL, Schmidt JM, Pettit RK,
Tackett LP, Chapuis JC, On the ethnomedical significance of
die Arjun tree, Terminalia arjuna (Roxb.) Wight & Arnot. J
Ethnopharmacol, 53:173-90, 1987 Jul.

Seth SD, Maulik M, Katiyar CK, Maulik SK, Role of Lipistat
in protection against isoproterenol induced myocardial necrosis
in rats: a biochemical and histopathological study. Indian J
hysiol Pharmacol, 42:104-6, 1998 Jan.

Singh N, Kapur KK, Singh SP, Shanker K, Sinha JN, Kohli
RP, Mechanism of cardiovascular action of Terminalia arjuna.
Planta Med, 53:102-4, 1982 Jun.

Srivastava N, Prakash D, Behl HM, Biochemical contents, their
variation and changes in free amino acids during seed
germination in Terminalia arjuna. Int J Food Sci Nutt, 53:215-
9, 1997 May.

Armoracia rusticana

See Horseradish

----- PAGE 292 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Arnica montana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of Arnica are the
ethereal oil of the flowers, the dried flowers, the leaves
collected before flowering and dried, the roots, and the dried
rhizome and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The terminal composite flower is found in
the leaf axils of the upper pair of leaves. They have a
diameter of 6 to 8 cm, are usually egg yolk-yellow to orange-
yellow, but occasionally light yellow. The receptacle and
epicalyx are hairy. The 10 to 20 female ray flowers are
lingui-form. In addition, there are about 100 disc flowers,
which are tubular. The 5-ribbed fruit is black-brown and has
a bristly tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Arnica is a herbaceous plant
growing 20 to 50 cm high. The brownish rhizome is 0.5 cm
thick by 10 cm long, usually unbranched, 3-sectioned and
sympodial. The rhizome may also be 3-headed with many
yellow-brown secondary roots. Leaves are in basal rosettes.
They are in 2 to 3 crossed opposite pairs and are obovate and
entire-margined with 5 protruding vertical ribs. The glandu-
lar-haired stem has 2 to 6 smaller leaves, which are ovate to
lanceolate, entire-margined or somewhat dentate.

Characteristics: The flower heads are aromatic; the taste is
bitter and irritating.

Habitat: Arnica is found in Europe from Scandinavia to
southern Europe. It is also found in southern Russia and
central Asia.

Production: Arnica flower consists of the fresh or dried
inflorescence of Arnica montana or Arnica chamissonis. The
flower should be dried quickly at 45° to 50°C.

Not to be Confused With: Other yellow-flowering Asteracea.

Other Names: Arnica Flowers, Arnica Root, Leopard's
Bane, Mountain Tobacco, Wolfsbane

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpene lactones of the pseudo-guaianolid-type: par-
ticularly esters of the helenalin- and 11,13-dihydrohelenalins
with short-chained fatty acids such as acetic acid, isobutyric
acid, 2- methyl-butyric acid, methylacrylic acid, isovaleric
acid or tiglic acid

Volatile oil: with thymol, thymol esters, free fatty acids
Polyynes: including tri-dec-l-en-penta-3,5,7,9 11-in

Hydroxycumarines

ARNICA/41

Cajfeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid, 1,5-
dicaffeoyl quinic acid

Flavonoids: numerous flavone and flavonol glycosides and
their aglycones

EFFECTS
Arnica preparations have an antiphlogistic, analgesic and
antiseptic effect when applied topically, due to the sesquiter-
pene lactone componant. The flavonoid bonds, essential oils
and polyynes may also be involved. In cases of inflamma-
tion, Arnica preparations also show analgesic and antiseptic
activity. The sesquiterpenes (helenalin) in the drug have an
antimicrobial effect in vitro and an antiphlogistic effect in
animal tests. A respiratory-analeptic, uterine tonic and
cardiovascular effect (increase of contraction amplitude with
simultaneous increase in frequency, i.e. positive inotropic
effect) was demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Fever and colds

¢ Inflammation of the skin

* Cough/bronchitis

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
« Rheumatism

* Common cold

¢ Blunt injuries

* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: External folk medicine uses include conse-
quences of injury such as traumatic edema, hematoma,
contusions, as well as rheumatic muscle and joint problems.
Other applications are inflammation of the oral and throat
region, furunculosis, inflammation caused by insect bites and
phlebitis. In Russian folk medicine, the drug is used to treat
uterine hemorrhaging. Furthermore, the drug is used for
myocarditis, arteriosclerosis, angina pectoris, exhaustion,
cardiac insufficiency, sprains, contusions and for hair loss
due to psychological causes. While some uses are plausible,
most are unproven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: The risks connected with the external, appropriate
administration of therapeutic dosages of the drug are
minimal. Frequent administration, in particular of the undi-
luted tincture, as well as with contacts with the plant, can
nevertheless lead to sensitization.

Allergy-related skin rashes with itching, blister formation,
ulcers and superficial necroses can result from repeated
contact with, among odier things, cosmetics containing
Arnica flowers or other composites (for example tansy,
chrysanthemums, sunflowers). External application of very

----- PAGE 293 -----
42/ARNICA

high concentrations can also result in primary blister

formation and necroses.

Drug Interactions: The coumarin componant may theoreti-
cally interact with warfarin, resulting in an additive antico-

agulant effect.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdoses taken internally can lead to poisonings, character-
ized by severe mucous membrane irritation (vomiting,
diarrhea, mucous membrane hemorrhage) and a brief stimu-
lation of cardiac activity followed by cardiac muscle palsy.
For mat reason, internal administration of the drug is

strongly discouraged.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Arnica is used in the form of the
whole herb, cut herb or herb powder for infusions, extracts,
and tinctures; gel, oil and poultice for external application.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations

include gels, ointments, tinctures, oils and plasters.

Preparation: Arnica tincture (3x to 1Ox dilutions with water)
is used to prepare a poultice. A tincture is prepared using 1
part Arnica flowers and 10 parts ethanol 70% v/v (according
to DAB 10). Arnica oil is an extract of 1 part herb and 5
parts slightly warmed fatty oil. Ointments are made up with
up to 15% Arnica oil or with 10 to 25% tinctures in a neutral
ointment base. Mouthwashes are prepared as a tincture in
10x dilution.

Daily Dose: Tincture for cataplasm: tincture in 3x to 1Ox

dilution. For mouth rinses: tincture in 10x dilution. Oint-
ments should contain a maximum of 15% Arnica oil.

Storage: When stored, die drug should be tightly sealed and
protected from light.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Arnikabliiten nur aufterlich. In: DAZ 131(38):1949.

1991.

Beekman AC et al., Structure-cytotoxicity relationship of some
helenanolide-type sesquiterpene lactones. In: JNP 60(3):252-257.
1997.

Brandt L, (1967) Scand J Haematol Suppl 2.

Brock FE, Arnica montana bei Venenleiden. In: ZPT 12(5): 141.
1992.

Hall, TH et al., (1979) J Pharm Sci 68:537.
Halub M et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14:1659.

Hormann HP, Kortin HC, (1995) Allergic acute contact
dermatitis due to Arnica tincture self-medication. Phytomedicine

4:315-317.
Kaziro, GSN et al., (1984) Br. J Oral Maxillofacial Surg 22:42.

Merfort I, (1984) Planta Med 50 (1):107.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Merfort I, (1985) Planta Med 51 (2): 136.

Schmidt Th J et al., Sesquiterpen lactones and inositol esters
from Arnica angustifolia. In: PM 61(6):544-550. 1995.

Thesen R, Phytotherapeutika - nicht immer harmlos. In: ZPT
9(49): 105. 1988.

Weil D, Reuter HD, EinfluP von Arnika-Extrakt und Helenalin
auf die Funktion menschlicher Blutplattchen. In: ZPT 9(1):26.
1988.

Willuhn G et al., (1984) Planta Med 50 (1):35.

Willuhn G, Leven W, Luley C, Arnikabliiten DAB 10.
Untersuchung zur qualitativen und quantitativen Variabilitat des
Sesquiterepnelactongehaltes der offizinellen Arzneidroge. In:
DAZ 134(42):4077. 1994.

Willuhn G, Leven W, Qualitat von Arnikazubereitungen. In:
DAZ 135(21): 1939-1942. 1995.

Woerdenbag HJ et al., Cytotoxicity of flavonoids and
sesquiterpene lactones from Arnica species. In: PM 59(7)81.
1993.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Lyss G, Schmidt TJ, Merfort I, Pahl HL, Helenalin an anti-
inflammatory sesquiterpene lactone from Arnica selectively
inhibits transcription factor NF-kappaB. Biol Chem, 378:951-61,
1997.
Lyss G, Schmidt TJ, Merfort I, Pahl HL, Immunologic studies
of plant combination preparations. In-vitro and in-vivo studies
on the stimulation of phagocytosis. Arzneimittelforschung,
378:1072-6, 1991.
Lyss G, Schmidt TJ, Merfort I, Pahl HL, Postpartum
omeopadiic Arnica montana: a potency-finding pilot study. Br
J Clin Pract, 378:951-61, 1997.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

uhlmann J, Zenk MH, Wagner H, Immunologically active
polysaccharides of Arnica montana cell cultures.
Phytochemistry, 111:1141-5, 1991.

Rom L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

™

<fh

----- PAGE 294 -----
“Hf

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Schroeder H, Loesche W, Strobach H, Leven W, Willuhn G,
Till U, Schroer K, Helenalin and 11 alpha 13-dihydrohelenalin
two constituents from Amica montana L. inhibit human platelet
function via thiol-dependent pathways. Thromb Res, 57:839-45,
1990.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Veriag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Veriag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Veriag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Tveiten D, Bruseth S, Borchgrevink CF, L hne K Effect of
Arnica D 30 during hard physical exertion. A double-blind
randomized trial during the Oslo Marathon 1990. Tidsskr Nor
Laegeforen, 111:3630-1, Dec 10, 1991.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Veriag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Arnica montana

See Arnica

Arrach

Chenopodium vulvaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole fresh, flowering plant has

medicinal properties.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, yellow-green and
inconspicuous. They grow in clusters in leafless, compact
spikes at the tip of the stem. The fruit is enclosed by the
involucre. The seeds are black and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 15 to 40 cm high. The
stems are branched from low down. The leaves are broad,
rhomboid, entire-margined and petiolate. The whole plant is
floury-dusty.

Characteristics: Arrach has a distinctive unpleasant smell of
musty herring brine.

Habitat: Europe, northern Africa and the Caucacus

Production: Arrach is the complete flowering plant of
Chenopodium vulvaria.

ARROWROOT/43

Other Names: Stinking Arrach, Stinking Goosefoot, Dog's
Arrach, Goat's Arrach, Goosefoot, Stinking Motherwort,
Netchweed, Oraches

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mono-, di- and trimethylamine :
to their volatility

only in the fresh plant due

Betaine
Tannins

EFFECTS
No substantiated information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Arrach is used internally and externally to
relieve cramps and as an emmenagogue.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The offensive smell often precludes continued use.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Arrach is used externally and as an

extract.

LITERATURE
Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Arrowroot

Maranta arundinacea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the starch from the
rhizome tubers and the dried rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in pairs, 3.5 cm long and
pedicled. They have 3 green, lanceolate sepals and a white,
tubular-fused corolla with 1 hanging and two erect tips. The
stamens are in 2 circles; the first consists of 2 petal-like
staminoids, the second of 1 hood-like. There is 1 thickened
stamen partly developed like a petal. The ovary is inferior
and 3-sectioned. Only 1 carpel is developed. The fruit is 1-
valved and has 1 seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial,
1 to 2 m high with thin, reed-like, branched and cane-like
stems. The rhizome produces, along with the usual root, a
sturdy, fusiform, swollen, up to 8 cm thick and 35 cm long
tuber. The tuber is thickly covered with whitish, scaly
stipules. The leaves are obovate, light green, lightly pubes-

----- PAGE 295 -----
44/ARROWROOT

cent and short-petioled. They have long sheaths and up to 13
cm long and 6 cm ovate-lanceolate leaf blades.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Central America and is
found today in all tropical regions around the world.

Production: Arrowroot is the rhizome of Maranta arundina-
cea. The drug itself is a white powder extracted from the
rhizome. The rhizome is washed, peeled and macerated, and
the starch is then extracted, using water in a process of
elutriation. The resulting starch mass is purified by repeated
sieving and dried in the sun.

Not to be Confused With: Cheaper starches, such as potato,
maize, wheat, or rice starch. These are often used as
substitutes.

Other Names: Maranta

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Starch (25-27%, with respect to the fresh bulbs): as
Marantae amylum, maranta starch, medicinal arrowroot

Other constituent elements are not known.

EFFECTS
Animal tests: In rats that received a Marantae-rich diet, a
reduction in the increase of the cholesterin levels in the aorta
and heart muscle was reported. The effect was put down to
an increased elimination of bile acids.

In humans, the drug is a demulcent and soothing agent.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Arrowroot is used as a nutritive (nutritional
food stuff) for infants and convalescents, a dietary aid in
gastrointestinal disorders, and also for diarrhea, especially in
pediatrics. In folk medicine, it is used in acute diarrhea.

Indian Medicine: Arrowroot is used in dysentery, diarrhea,
dyspepsia, bronchitis, coughs and as a particularly nourish-
ing food for children, the chronically ill and convalescents.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
witfi the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The powder is boiled with water.

Storage: Arrowroot should be stored in tightly sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Artemisia absinthium

See Wormwood

Artemisia cina

See Wormseed

Artemisia dracunculus

See French Tarragon

Artemisia vulgaris
See Mugwort

Artichoke

Cynara scolymus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried whole or
cut basal leaves and the dried or fresh herb from the

artichoke.

Flower and Fruit: Globose, thorny capitual of lingual florets
grows at the end of the stem. The epicalyx is ovate to
globose. The bracts are fleshy and taper into a flattened
greenish or purple tip. The petals are blue, lilac or white. The
fruit is a pubescent achaene 4 to 5 mm in diameter and 7 to 8
mm long. It is flecked brown and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cynara scolymus is a perennial plant
with a short rhizome and a strong, erect, glabrous stalk. The
stalk is up to 2 m high, thickly covered in lanceolate, prickly
pinnate to double pinnate leaves. The upper surface is bare
and light green; the lower surface is gray and tomentose.

Habitat: The plant is found in the Mediterranean region, the
Canary Islands and South America. It is cultivated
elsewhere.

Production: Artichoke root is the dried root of Cynara
scolymus. Artichoke leaf consists of the fresh or dried basal
leaves of Cynara scolymus. Artichoke is cultivated and dried
with extreme care.

Other Names: Garden Artichoke, Globe Artichoke

----- PAGE 296 -----
4£

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ARTICHOKE LEAF
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid, neochlorogenic
acid, cryptochlorogenic acid, cynarin

Flavonoids (0.5%): in particular rutin

Sesquiterpene lactones (0 to 4%): cynaropicrin, dehydrocy-
naropicrin, grossheimin, cynaratriol

COMPOUNDS: ARTICHOKE ROOT
Caffeic acid derivatives, including chlorogenic acid sesqui-
terpene lactones, are not contained in the rhizome.

EFFECTS: ARTICHOKE LEAF AND ROOT

The main active principles are sesquiterpenes (amaroids),
hydroxy cinnamic acid and flavonoids. The drug has a
cholagogic, hepatotoxic and lipid-reducing effect. A choler-
etic effect has been observed in rats (effect of the cinnamic
acid). The cholesterol levels were reduced in the rats; a
hepatostimulating and bitter effect on the gastrointestinal
tract has also been documented.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ARTICHOKE LEAF

Approved by Commission E:

+ Liver and gallbladder complaints
* Loss of appetite

ARTICHOKE LEAF AND ROOT
Unproven Uses: Artichoke is used for dyspeptic problems
and also for prophylactic treatment against the return of

gallstones.

In folk medicine, Artichoke is also used for digestion

complaints and as a tonic in convalescence.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
ARTICHOKE LEAF AND ROOT
Because of the stimulating effect of the drug upon the biliary
tract, it should not be administered if there is a bile duct
blockage. Colic can occur where the patient suffers from

gallstones.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

ARTICHOKE LEAF AND ROOT

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
plant possesses a medium potential for sensitization through
skin contact. Allergic reactions occur in particular when
there is frequent on-the-job contact with artichokes. There
are cross-reactions with other composites (including chrys-
anthemes, arnica Pyrethrum).

ARTICHOKE/45

DOSAGE

ARTICHOKE LEAF

Mode of Administration: Dried, comminuted drug, pressed
juice of fresh plant and other galenical preparations for

internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 6 gm of drug;
single dose is 500 mg of dry extract.

Storage: Artichoke should be protected from light and
insects in well-sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Adzet T, Puigmacia M, J Chromatogr 348:447-453. 1985.

Brand N, Cynara scolymus L. - Die Artischocke. In: ZPT
11 (5); 169. 1990.

Fintelmann V, Antidyspetische und
Artischockenblatterextrakt. In: ZPT
Zeitschrift fur AUgem Med. 1996.
Fintelmann V, Menken HG, Artischockenblatterextrakt Aktuelle
Erkenntnis zur Wirkung als Lipidsenker und Antidyspeptikum.
In: DAZ 136(17): 1405-1414. 1996.

Hinou J, Harvala C, Philianos S, Polyphenols substances of
Cynara scolymus L. leaves. Ann Pharm Fr, 47:95-8, 1989

ipidsenkende Wirkung von
7(5) Beilage ZFA.

Khalkova Zh, Vangelova K, Zaikov Kh, An experimental study
of the effect of an artichoke preparation on the activity of the
sympathetic-adrenal system in carbon disulfide exposure. Probl
Khig, 53:162-71. 1995

Kirchhoff R. Beckers CH, Kirchhoff GM, Trinczek-Gartner H,
Petrowicz O, Reimann HJ (1994) Increase in choleresis by
means of artichoke extract. Phytomedicine 1:107-115.

Maros T, Seres-Sturm L, Racz G, Rettegi C, Kovacs VV, Hints
M, Quantitative analysis of cynarin in the leaves of the
artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) Farm Zh, 18:56-9, 1965
Meding B, Allergic contact dermatitis from artichoke Cynara
scolymus. Contact Dermatitis, 18:314, 1983 Jul

Reuter HD, Pflanzliche Gallentherapeutika (Teil I) und (Teil II).
In: ZPT 16(1): 13-20, 77-89. 1995.

Schilcher H, Pharmazeutische Aspekte pflanzlicher Gallenther-
apeutika. In: ZPT 16(4):211-222. 1995.

Schmidt M, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Gallenwegstherapeutika.
In: DAZ 135(8):680-682. 1995.

Sokolova VE, Liubartseva LA, Vasilchenkoo EA, Effect of
artichoke (Synara scolymus) on some aspects of nitrogen
metabolism in animals. Farmakol Toksikol, 53:340-3, 1970
May-Jun
Wasielewski S, Artischockenblatterextrakt: Prevention der
Arteriosklerose?. In: DAZ 137(24):2065-2067. 1997.

Further information in:

Adzet T, Camarasa J, Laguna JC, Hepatoprotective activity of
polyphenol* compounds from Cynara scolymus against CC14
epatocytes. J Nat Prod, 50:612-7, 1987

toxicity in isolated rat
Jul-Aug

----- PAGE 297 -----
46 /ARTICHOKE

Gebhardt R, Antioxidative and protective properties of extracts
from leaves of the artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) against
hydroperoxide-induced oxidative stress in cultured rat
hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol, 144:279-86, 1997 Jun

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed Verlags-
gesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Khalkova Zh. Vangelova K, Zaikov Kh, Inefficiency of cynarin
as therapeutic regimen in familial type II hyperlipoproteinaemia.
Atherosclerosis. 53:249-53, 1977 Feb

Khalkova Zh, Vangelova K, Zaikov Kh, Traditional medicine in
health care. J Ethnopharmacol, 53:19-22, 1995

Maros T, Seres-Sturm L, Racz G, Rettegi C, Kovacs VV, Hints
M. Effect of Cynara scolymus-extracts on the regeneration of
rat liver. Arzneimittelforschung, 18:884-6, 1968 Jul

Maros T, Seres-Sturm L, Racz G, Rettegi C, Kovacs VV, Hints
M, On the determination of o-dihydrophenols of caffeic acid
type present in artichoke leaves (Cynara scolymus L.) Ann
Pharm Fr, 18:419-27, 1965 Jun

Ruppelt BM. Pereira EF, Goncalves LC, Pereira NA,
Pharmacological screening of plants recommended by folk
medicine as anti-snake venom. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory

activities. Mem inst uswaiao cruz, DJ:ZU‘O, iyyi

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
flanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Arum

Arum  maculatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are pale yellowish-green.
They are surrounded by a bulbous spath and therefore are not
visible. A violet or brown-red spadix emerges from the bract
with 2 circles of bristles underneath. Under the bristles are
the male flowers, and under these are the female flowers.
The spath doubles the length of the spadix. The whole

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

structure forms a typical insect trap. The fruit is a scarlet

erry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Arum maculatum is a 30 to 60 cm
spit- to arrow-shaped plant. It is long-stemmed, glossy, often
rown-speckled and basal. The petiole is spread to a sheath
at the base. The root-stock is tuberous, ovoid and floury-
fleshy, varying in size between that of a hazelnut and a
pigeon's egg.

Characteristics: Arum maculatum bears attractive scarlet
erries that yield an acrid juice that is poisonous and can be
fatal if ingested by small children.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to parts of Europe, to
Britain and the U.S.

Production: Arum root is the fresh rhizome of Arum
maculatum collected before removing the leaves.

Other Names: Adder's Root, Bobbins, Cocky Baby, Cuckoo
Pint, Cypress Powder, Dragon Root, Friar's Cowl, Gaglee,
Kings and Queens, Ladysmock, Lords and Ladies, Parson
and Clerk, Portland Arrowroot, Quaker, Ramp, Wake Robin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilages: glucomannane

Starch
Lectins

EFFECTS
The glucomannans, bassorin and starch contained in the drug
have a strong irritant and swelling effect on the mucous
membranes. The diaphoretic and expectorant effect attrib-
uted to the drug may be due to the strong actions of these
constituents.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Arum is used for colds and inflammation of

the throat.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The intake of plant parts leads to severe mucous membrane
irritations (swelling of the tongue, bloody vomiting, bloody
diarrhea), presumably due to lesions of the membrane from
the very sharp-edged oxalate needles and the introduction of
impurities into the wounds. Decoctions of the roots in
therapeutic dosages can be taken without risk. Caution is
advised even though the level of cyanogenic glycosides is
too low to be able to bring about signs of poisoning and
other soluble poisonous substances have not been shown to

be present.

DOSAGE
No dosage information is available.

----- PAGE 298 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Akhtardziev K et aL, (1984) Farmatsiya 34(3):1.

Koch H, Steinegger E, Components of Arum maculatum L.
(woven arrowroot). In: Pharm Acta Helv 54(2):33-36. 1979.

Mladenov IV, (1982) C R Acad Bulg Sci 35(8): 116.

Mladenov I, Bulanov I, Stamenova M, Ribarova F, The
composition and structure of isolectihs from Arum maculatum.
Eksp Med Morfol, 29:36-9, 1990.

Moore THS, Vet Rec 89:569. 1971.

Nahrstedt A, Triglochinin in Arum maculatum. In: PH
14(12): 1870-1871. 1975.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Pub; HMSO
(1984) UK.

Proliac A, Chaboud A, Raynaud J, Isolement et identification
de trois C- glycosylflavonews dans les tiges feuillees d'Arum
dracunculus. In: PA:47:646-647. 1992.

Further information in:

Allen AK, Purification and characterization of an N-
acetyllactosamine-specific lectin ftom tubers of Arum
maculatum. Biochim Biophys Acta, 317 ( Pt 1):129-32. 1995.

Bulanov I, Mladenov I, Boianovska V, Gateva I, Stanislavov R,
The effect of lectins on human spermatozoa in the capillary
sperm penetration test. Eksp Med Morfol, 317 ( Pt 1):42-5,
1990.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Jaspersen-Schib R, Theus L, Guirguis-Oeschger M, Gossweiler
B, Meier-Abt PJ, Serious plant poisonings in Switzerland 1966-
1994. Case analysis from the Swiss Toxicology Information
Center. Schweiz Med Wochenschr, 60:1085-98, 19%.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdirck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food (Ed) Poisonous
Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and Man,
HMSO, UK 1984

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Arum maculatum

See Arum

ASA FOETIDA/47

Arundinaria japonica

See Bamboo

Asa Foetida

Ferula foetida

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the oily gum-resin
extracted from the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers appear after 5 years in yellow
umbels on a 10 cm thick naked stem. They are numerous,
pale greenish-yellow to white. The fruit is ovate, flat, thin,
flaky, reddish-brown with distinct oil marks.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous monoe-
cious perennial, 1.5 to 2 m high with a large, fleshy rhizome,
which is 14 cm thick at the crown. The leaves are large,
bipinnate, and radical.

Characteristics: The fruit has milky juice and a strong smell.
Habitat: Afghanistan and eastern Iran.
Production: Asa foetida is the gum resin of Ferula foetida.

Other Names: Devil's Dung, Food of the Gods, Gum
Asafoetida

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil:
disulphide

chief constituent is sec-propenyl-isobutyl

Gum resin: consisting mainly of ferulic acid esters, farnesi-
ferol A, B, C and bassorin-like mucilage

Sesquiterpenoide coumarins: including asafoetida

EFFECTS
Asa foetida has a mild intestinal disinfectant effect; its

sedative effect is uncertain. In animal experiments it has
antitumoural and mild mutagenic effect on Salmonella

typhimurium.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for chronic gastritis,
dyspepsia and irritable colon.

Chinese Medicine: In China, the drug is used for infestation
with intestinal parasites.

Indian Medicine: In India, Asa foetida is used to treat
asthma, whooping cough, flatulence, constipation, diseases
of die liver and spleen and for epilepsy.

----- PAGE 299 -----
48 /ASA FOETIDA

Homeopathic Uses: Ferula foetida is used for low acid levels
in the stomach, stomach pressure, flatulence and loose stools.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The intake of larger dosages can lead to
swelling of the lips, digestive complaints (belching, flatu-
lence, diarrhea), discomfort and headache. Convulsions are
possible in susceptible individuals. Swelling of the genital
organs has been observed following external administration
on the abdomen.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as an extract.

Preparation: Gum-resin is obtained by incising the roots,
which contain a fetid juice. This solidifies to a brown resin,
sometimes with a pinkish tint, in sticky lumps. The final
product has a pungent, acrid, persistent, alliaceous odor.

Daily Dosage: Tincture: 20 drops as a single dose.
Homeopathic Dosage: D3 and D4 dilutions.

LITERATURE
Buddrus J et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(4):869.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Naimie H et al., (1972) Collect Czee Chem Commun 37:1166.
Rajanikanth B et al., (1984) Phytochemistry 23(4):899.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Konr.ann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Asarum
Asarum europaeum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The primary medicinal part is the root of
the plant. However, the leaves have been used to a lesser

extent.

Flower and Fruit: The end of the stem forms a short-
pedicled, slightly hanging flower. The perigone forms a
campanulate tube with a 3 to 4 lobed margin. It is brownish
on the outside, dark and purple on the inside. There are 2
groups of 6 stamens on the ovaries, which are fused with the

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

tube and are flattened above. The style is thick, short and not
hollow; the stigma is 6-rayed. The fruit is a many-seeded,
indehiscent capsule divided into many chambers by false
membranes. In each capsule there are numerous boat-shaped

seeds with a spongy appendage.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Asarum europaeum is a shaggy-
haired perennial growing 4 to 10 cm high. It has a thin,
creeping rhizome that is branched and usually has 3 to 4
scale-like, brownish-green stipules. It has an ascending
short-scaled stem, with the terminal flower at the tip. There
are 2 to 4 long-petioled, almost opposite, broad, reniform
leaves. They are entire-margined, coriaceous, dark-green
glossy above, pale and matte beneath, deeply reticulate and
evergreen.

Characteristics: The rhizome has a pepper-like smell; the
leaves and flowers have an unpleasant camphor smell.
Asarum europaeum is a protected species.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the northern parts of
southern Europe, central and east-central Europe as far as the
Crimea and eastward into western Siberia as well as an
enclave in the Atai. Asarum is cultivated in the U.S.

Production: Asarum root is the root of Asarum europaeum,
which is gathered in August and air-dried in the shade.
Asarum is primarily collected in the wild, but is cultivated in
the U.S.

Not to be Confused With: Can be confused with other
valerian types and with Arnica montana, Genum urbanum,
Valeriana officinalis and Viola ordorata. The mistaken
powder can be identified by the presence of fibers, stone
cells, oxalate filament agglomerations and the absence of
starch.

Other Names: Asarabacca, Coltsfoot, False Coltsfoot, Fole's
Foot, Hazelwort, Public House Plant, Snakeroot, Wild
Ginger, Wild Nard

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: composition depends upon breed but possible
constituents include asarone trans-isoasarone, trans-isoeuge-
nol methyl ether, trans-isoelemicin or eudesmol, possibly in
addition to sesquiterpene hydrocarbons, -alcohols, -furans,-
carbonyl compounds

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid, isochlo-
rogenic acid
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
Asarum acts as an expectorant, bronchial spasmolytic,
superficial relaxant and local anesthetic. Studies of the
plant's emetic action exist for Asari root and herb. However,

----- PAGE 300 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

self-experiment with 100 gm trans-isoasaron taken orally
caused severe vomiting.

The surface-tension-reducing effect of trans-isoasaron and
trans-isomethyleugenol was studied in vitro, using stalagmo-
metry. Both substances showed a concentration-dependent
surface activity, which surpassed the effect of the control
substance tyloxapol in a normal treatment concentration.

In studies of Asarum's spasmolytic effect, bronchial spasms
induced in a guinea pig by histamine were inhibited in vivo
by trans-isoasaron, depending on the dose. The survival rate
was determined subsequent to the addition of a histamine-
containing aerosol 30 minutes after trans-isoasarin had been
administered. The control substance here was clemizole
hydrochloride, which has a similarly inhibiting effect.

The action of trans-isoasaron and of isomethyleugenol as a
local anesthetic was tested on 10 volunteer subjects, in order
to compare it with benzocaine (anesthetic index AI = 1). The
results showed a dose-related action for both drugs, with the
following anesthetic indexes of AI = 0.72 for trans-isoasarin
and AI = 0.47 for trans-isomethyleugenol.

The only available studies of Asarum's antibacterial effect
are those carried out on Asari root and herb. A double-blind
clinical trial with a placebo as alternative was carried out on
30 patients with acute bronchitis, 30 with chronic bronchitis
and an additional 30 with bronchial asthma. Eighty percent
of the patients wim acute bronchitis, 58% of the patients with
chronic bronchitis and 68% of the patients with bronchial
asthma were cured or showed improvement in both their
subjective and objective states. The contrast with the placebo
groups was significant. The treatment consisted of a daily
dose of 3 x 2 tablets, purified dry (GB) or powdered (US)
extract (30 mg phenylpropanol derivatives) taken over an
average of 7 days. However, to obtain conclusive results,
further trials are needed over a longer period and with more
patients. The drug's efficacy was also tested in a multicentric
field trial, a clinically controlled study and an open bicentric
study. However, the results are only useful to a small extent,
as there is an absence of details about placebo groups, trial
parameters, and statistical analysis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The purified dry extract of Asarum europae-
um rootstock is used for inflammatory conditions of the
lower respiratory system (acute and chronic bronchitis), for
various causes of bronchial spasms and for bronchial asthma.
Asari root and Asari root with herb are used for similar
indications in folk medicine. In the past, the drugs were used
as emetics. Some other uses are as antitussives (cough
remedies), sneezing-powder for chronic rhinitis, for inflam-
mation of the eye, for pneumonia, angina pectoris, mi-
graines, liver disease and jaundice, for dehydration, as an

ASARUM/49

emmenagogue (menstrual stimulant) and for artificial abor-
tion. The dried, powdered leaves have been used as an
ingredient of some snuffs, helping to expel mucus from the
respiratory passages.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include diarrhea,
irritation of mucous membranes and exhaustion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Older scientific literature contains reports of signs of
poisoning including burning of the tongue, gastroenteritis,
diarrhea, erysipeloid skin rashes and hemiparesis. An ex-
tremely susceptible mouse strain developed hepatoma after
exposure to asarone. Administration of the drug is not
advised.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Asarum is not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Asarum is taken as a sneezing-
powder, or orally as a purified dry extract in the form of
coated tablets and pills. It is obsolete as a drug.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations
include coated tablets and confectionery tea mixtures.

Preparation: The air-dried rootstock is extracted with an
organic solvent, which can be mixed with water. The liquid
extract is separated from the solvent by means of vacuum
distillation. The watery portion remaining is diluted with an
equal amount of distilled water, and further extraction takes
place. Then the organic liquid extract is mixed with a
suitable excipient according to the desired percentage of
trans-isoasaron. Afterward, the extract is dried and rubbed.
Trans-isoasaron can also be produced from asarylaldehyde
by means of Perkin's cinnamic synthesis. As sneezing-
powder, the average content of the drug is 20%.

Daily Dosage: The average daily oral dose of the dry extract
for adults and children aged 13 and over is 30 mg, which
corresponds to 30 mg phenylpropane derivatives and should
be spread over 2 to 3 doses per day. Children aged 2 and
over can take an extract corresponding to 5 mg phenylpropa-
nol derivatives 3 times daily. The average single dose of the
drug is 0.1 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc; ointments 1 to 2 times daily; DI and D2 should
not be taken for longer than | month (HAB1).

Storage: Coated tablets and pills that contain the purified dry
extract or the tincture from the rhizome can be stored for a
period of 28 days in conditions of high temperature,
humidity and light. Under preferred storage conditions (i.e.

----- PAGE 301 -----
50/ASARUM

brown glass, away from light), they can be stored for up to 2
years, after which period stability should be checked.

LITERATURE
Doskotch RW, Vanevenhoven PW, (1967) Lloydia 30:141.
Gracza L, (1987) Pharmazie 42 (2): 141.

Gracza L, In vitro studies on the expectorant effect of the
phenylpropane derivatives from hazlewort. 12. The active agents
in Asarum europaeum. In: PM 42(2):155. 1981.

Gracza L, Phytobiological (phytophamacological) studies on
phenylpropane derivatives from Asarum europaeum L. 10.
Actice principles of Asarum europaeum L. In: Arzneim Forsch
30(5):767-771. 1980.
Gracza L, Uber die Wirkstoffe von Asarum europaeum. 16.
Mitt., Die Iokalanasthetische Wirkung der Phenylprpanderivate.
In: PM 48(3): 153-157. 1983.

Mose JR., Lukas G, (1961) Arzneim Forsch 11:33.
Rosch A, (1984) Z Phytother 5(6):964.

Trennheuser L, Dissertation Saarbriicken. 1961.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde. 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

3

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Asarum europaeum

See Asarum

Asclepias inearnata
See Swamp Milkweed

Asclepias tuberosa
See Pleurisy Root

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ash

Fraxinus excelsior

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the fresh bark, the branch bark, and the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in richly blossomed
panicles, the terminal ones appearing on the new flowering
branches. They are usually androgynous, occasionally male,
polygamous or dioecious. They have no calyx or corolla. The
anthers of the male flowers are dark purple and are on short
filaments. The female flowers consist of 1 inferior ovary
with a 2-lobed stigma and 2 split staminoids. The fruit is a
narrow lanceolate to oblong-obovate nutlet hanging on a thin
stem. The fruit is 25 to 50 mm long and 7 to 10 mm wide,
glossy brown, l-seeded with a veined winged border.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The ash is an impressive 15 to 30 m
tall tree with a gray-brown, smooth, later fissured and
wrinkled bark and large, black-brown, pubescent buds. The
leaves are entire-margined, opposite and odd pinnate. There
are 9 to 15 leaflets. The leaflets are sessile, usually 5 to 11
cm long by 1 to 3 cm wide, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, long
acuminate, finely and sharply serrate. They are glabrous
above, rich green, loosely tomentose or almost glabrous, and
greenish brown beneath.

Habitat: The plant is distributed in most parts of Europe
except the northern, southern and eastern edges.

Production: Ash bark consists of the bark of young branches
of Fraxinus excelsior. Ash leaf consists of the leaf of
Fraxinus excelsior. The leaves are harvested in spring and
air-dried.

Not to be Confused With: It may be confused with Ailanthus
glandulosa.

Other Names: Bird's Tongue, European Ash, Common Ash,
Weeping Ash

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ASH LEAF.
Flavonoids: including rutin (0.1-0.9%)

Tannins

Mucilages (10-20%)

Mannitol (16-28%)

Triterpenes, phytosterols

Iridoide including syringoxide, deoxy-

syringoxidin

monoterpenes:

----- PAGE 302 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

COMPOUNDS: ASH BARK
Hydroxycoumarins: aesculin, fraxin, aesculetin, fraxetin,
fraxidin, isofraxidin, fraxinol, scopoletine

Tannins

‘Iridoide monoterpenes: including 10-hydroxyligstroside

EFFECTS: ASH BARK

The main active principle is coumarin. Preparations of fresh
ash bark showed an analgesic, anti-oxidative, and antiphlo-
gistic action. Cyclo AMP phosphodiesterase is inhibited and
an anti-oxidative (radical trapping action) effect was proven
for scopoletine, isofraxin and fraxin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

ASH LEAF

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Ash leaf are used for
arthritis, gout, bladder complaints, as well as a laxative and
diuretic. In folk medicine Ash leaf is used internally for
fever, rheumatism, gout, edema, stones, constipation, stom-
ach symptoms and worm infestation; and externally for
lower leg ulcers and wounds.

ASH BARK
“ Unproven Uses: Preparations of Ash bark are used for fever

“ and as a tonic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
applications has not been documented, therapeutic applica-
tion cannot be recommended. The efficacy of Ash in fixed
be verified specifically for each

combinations must

preparation.
Storage: Should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Carnat A, Lamaison JL, Dubnand F, Plant Med Phytother

24:145-151. 1990.
Genius OB, DAZ 120:1505-1506. 1980.
Jensen SR, Nielsen BJ, PH 15:221-223. 1976.
Marekov N et al., Khira Ind 58:132-135. 1986.

£ Tissut M, Ravane P, PH 19:2077-2081. 1980.
Yamagami I, Suzuki Y, Koichiro I, Pharmacological studies on
the components of Fraxinus japonica. In: Nippon Yakurigaku
Zasshi 64(6):714-729 (jap.). 1968.
Further information in:
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

ASIATIC DOGWOOD /51

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and their Effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, HMSO UK
1984.

Asiatic Dogwood

Cornus officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the tree is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The umbels contain 20 to 30 flowers
surrounded by 4 yellow-green, 6 to 8 mm long, elliptical-
acuminate bracts. The flower structures are in fours and the
diameter of the flower is 4 to 5 mm including the disc. The
calyx is fused and has 4 tips. There are 4 free petals, 4
stamens and a 2-chambered ovary, with 1 ovule per chamber.
The drupe is elongate- elliptical, approximately 15 mm long
and red with an elongate, 2-chambered stone kernel.

Leaves and Branches: Cornus officinalis is shrub or tree, that
grows up to 4 m high. The leaves are opposite, simple and 4
to 10 cm long. The petiole is 6 to 10 cm long. The lamina is
ovate-elliptical or ovate, long acuminate, rounded at the
base, yellow-brown and pubescent beneath. The branches are
smooth, bluish-green and the bark peels off.

Habitat: China, Japan

Production: Cornus fruit is the dried fruit pulp of Cornus
officinalis. Fruits are harvested in the late autumn or the
beginning of winter. They are scalded with boiling water or
gently heated. Cleaning of the raw drug follows kernel
extraction and drying.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids: iridoid glycosides, including loganin, cornuside,
sweroside, morronoside

Tannins: gallotannins, including cornusiens-A to -G, tellima-
grandin I and II, camptothins-A and -B

Triterpenes: including oleanolic acid, ursolic acid
Anthocyans

EFFECTS

The drug has an astringent effect due to its tannin content. It
has exhibited diuretic, blood pressure-lowering and leukocy-
topoiesis-promoting effects in clinical tests.

----- PAGE 303 -----
52/ASIATIC DOGWOOD

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug has been used for
impotency, loss of semen, lumbago-sciatica syndrome, night
sweats and vertigo.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Asiatic Dogwood is used for
liver and renal disorders, tinnitus, hyperhidrosis, impotency
and low back and knee pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb preparations and liquid

preparations for internal use

Preparation: The fruit is boiled or steamed with wine until
all the liquid has been drawn out.

Daily Dosage: 5 to 12 gm of drug.
Chinese Medicine Dosage: 3 to 9 gm of drug daily.

Storage: The herb should be protected from insects and
stored in dry place.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed) Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Jeng H, Wu CM, Su SJ, Chang WC A substance isolated from
Comus officinalis enhances the motility of human sperm. Am J
Chin Med, 25:301-6, 1997.

Jeng H, Wu CM, Su SJ, Chang WC Observations on the
biological characteristics of Corus officinalis Chung Yao Tung
Pao, 25:8-11, Jul, 1985.

Asimina triloba

See American Pawpaw

Asparagus
Asparagus officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
herb and the rhizome with roots.

Flower and Fruit: Thin pedicles measuring from 2 to 20 mm
long, grow | to 3 flowers from the nodes. The plants are
usually dioecious. The perigone of the male flowers is about
5 mm long, funnel-shaped and whitish to greenish-yellow.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

The perigone is longer than the cauline leaves and has
oblanceolate sections that are twice as long as the perigone
tube. The stamens are oblong and almost as long the
filaments. The perigone of the female flowers is much
smaller. The fruit is a pea-sized, brick-red round berry that is
up to 8 mm thick. The seeds are black with wrinkly stripes
and are 3 to 4 mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Asparagus officinalis is a perennial
with a short, woody rootstock. In the wild, the plant typically
reaches heights of 30 to 100 cm, but cultivated plants may
grow to 150 cm. The stem is erect, glabrous and smooth,
later inclined with numerous erect to leaning branches. The
scale sections at the base have short spurs. The round,
needle-like phylloclades are in clusters of 4 to 15 that are 5
to 25 cm long and about 0.5 cm thick. The root-stock is short
and thick. It produces a few ascending shoots that are as
thick as a finger, fleshy, white, and red or blue-reddish
tinged. (This is the edible asparagus.) The female plants are
often slimmer than the male, which are shorter and stockier.

Characteristics: The fruit is considered to be poisonous, but
that has not been substantiated.

Habitat: The plant grows in central and southern Europe, the
Middle East, western Siberia and northern Africa. It is

cultivated in many places.

Production: Asparagus herb consists of the above-ground
parts of Asparagus officinalis. Asparagus root consists of the
rhizome with roots of Asparagus officinalis, which are dug
up and air-dried in autumn, and also the fresh underground
shoots.

Not to be Confused With: This variety is sometimes confused
with other types of asparagus cultivated in the Mediterranean
region.

Other Names: Sparrow Grass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: ASPARAGUS HERB

Flavonoids: including rutin, hyperoside, isoquercitrin
Steroid saponins

EFFECTS: ASPARAGUS HERB

Animal experiments indicate the herb has a mild diuretic
action.

COMPOUNDS: ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT

Steroid saponins: including asparagosides A, B, D, F, G, H,
I, the bitter steroid saponins, aspartic saponin I

Amino acids: among them sulphur-containing aspartic acid,
the esters 3-mercapto- butyric acid, 3-methylthio-isobutyric
acid, diisobutyric acid disulphide

Fructans: asparagose, asparagosine

----- PAGE 304 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS: ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT

Animal tests indicate that the root has a diuretic effect. The
main active principles are flavonol glycoside and furostanol
and spirostanol glycosides, mainly derivatives of sarsapoge-
nin. The distinctive odor of the urine after an individual has

i* eaten asparagus is said to be caused by methylmercaptan.

JA

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ASPARAGUS HERB

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Asparagus are used as a
diuretic, although the effectiveness for the claimed applica-
tion has not been sufficiently documented.

ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: Traditional uses of the root include applica-
tion for non-specific inflammatory diseases of the efferent
urinary tract and for prevention of kidney and bladder stones
(irrigation therapy). Among other folk medicine uses are
dropsy, rheumatic conditions, liver disease, bronchial asthma
and gout. These applications have not been proven.

Chinese Medicine: The root is used to treat irritable cough,
coughing with blood, dry mouth and throat, and constipation.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include kidney
stones and cardiac insufficiency.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT

Because of the irritating effect of saponin, the drug should
not be administered in die presence of kidney diseases. In the
case of reduced cardiac and/or kidney function, irrigation
therapy should not be attempted.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

ASPARAGUS HERB

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The plant has a low sensitization potential through

a skin contact. The berries are considered poisonous, although
~ there is no proof of this.

ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. When used in irrigation therapy, ensure ample fluid
intake. There is a low sensitization potential, particularly
among workers in canning factories who can become prone
to asparagus scabies.

ASPARAGUS/53

DOSAGE
ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT

Mode of Administration: The cut rhizome is used for teas, as
well as other galenic preparations for internal use. When
used in flushing-out therapy, ensure ample fluid intake.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations of
Asparagus root are available in tablet form.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 45 to 80 g. A typical
single dose is 800 mg of the drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily, or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE
ASPARAGUS HERB

Goryanu GM et al., (1976) Khim Prir Soed 3: 400 et 6: 762.
Kawano K et al., (1975) Agric Biol Chem 39: 1999.

Shiomi N et al., (1976) Agric Biol Chem 40: 567.

Tagasuki M et al., (1975) Chem Letters 1: 43.

Woeldecke M, Hermann K, (1974) Z Lebensm Forsch Unters
25: 459.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Rodi L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

ASPARAGUS RHIZOME AND ROOT
Goryanu GM et al., (1976) Khim Prir Soed 3: 400 et 6: 762.

Kawano K et al., Agric Biol Chem (Tokyo) 41:1. 1977.
Lazurevskii GV et al., Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR
231:1479. 1976.

Pant G et al., PH 27:3324. 1988.

Shao Y et al., Steroidal saponins fiom Asparagus officinalis and
their cytotoxic activity. In: PM 63(3):258-262. 1997.

Shiomi N et al., (1976) Agric Biol Chem 40: 567.
Tagasuki M et al., (1975) Chem Letters 1: 43.

----- PAGE 305 -----
54/ASPARAGUS

Woeldecke M, Hermann K, (1974) Z Lebensm Untersuch
Forsch 25: 459

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Asparagus officinalis

See Asparagus

Aspidosperma quebracho-

bianco
See Quebracho

Astragalus gummifer

See Tragacanth

Astragalus (Huang-Q1)
Astragalus species

TRADE NAMES
Astragalus (available from numerous manufacturers), Astra-
galus Root, Superior Chinese Astragalus, Astragalus Vegi-
caps, Astragalus Extract, Alvita Astragalus Root

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The primary medicinal parts of the herb are

the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flower racemes are apical, and most
are axillary. The inflorescenses have! many small, blue,
purple or blue-purple flowers. Two to three days following
bloom, pods will develop in a square shape of a cross section
with two chambers. There are 10 dark brown seeds in each
chamber. The seeds are 6 to 13 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and has
several stems 1.5 to 2.0 m in height. The stems are covered
with pinnate leaves with T-shaped soft hairs. The primary
root is thick, long and contains many lateral roots. There is a
secondary root beginning 20 to 30 feet below the soil
surface.

Characteristics: The plant is cold tolerant and also able to
grow in high temperatures.

Habitat: Astragalus australis is an endemic plant of the
Olympic Mountains, Washington. Other species are grown in
northern and southern parts of China, Japan, and Korea.

Other Names: Beg Kei, Bei Qi, Hwanggi, Membranous Milk
Vetch, Astragali, Tragacanth

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene glycosides: brachyosides A, B, and C, and
cyclocephaloside II, astrachrysoside A

Saponins: astragalosides I, II, and IV, isoastragaloside I, 3-0-
beta-D-xylopyranosyl-cycloastragenol, cyclocanthoside E,
soyasaponin I and cycloastragenol

Tragacanth (from the sap)
Sterols: daucosterol and beta-sitosterol

Fatty acids: including heptenoic acid, tetradecanoic acid,
pentadecanoic acid, hexadecanoic acid, octadecenoic acid,
octadecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid, linolenic acid,
eicosanoic acid, eicosenoic acid and docosanoic acid

Isoflavonoid compounds: astrasieversianin XV (ID, 7,2'-
dihydroxy-3',4'-dimethoxy-isoflavane-7-0-beta-D-glucoside
(IID)

Amino acids: gamma-L-glutamyl-Se-methyl-seleno-L-cyste-
ine, Se-methylseleno-L-cysteine

Polysaccharides

EFFECTS

Antiviral—Astragalus membranaceus inhibits the replication
of coxsackie B-3 virus (CB3V)-RNA, a virus that causes

myocarditis in animal models (Peng, 1995). The herb
demonstrated significantly higher survival rates and lower

----- PAGE 306 -----
A’,

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

abnormal action potential in animal models infected with
CB3V, suggesting its possible use for prevention and
treatment of acute myocarditis involving CB3V (Rui, 1994).

Antioxidant—Astragalus membranaceus inhibits lipid perox-
idation in rat heart mitochondria (Hong, 1994).

Cardiovascular Effects—Astragalus membranaceus __ in-
creases cardiac output in patients with angina pectoris (Lei,
1994). Astragaloside IV improves left ventricular end-dia-
stolic volume, left ventricular end-systolic volume and slows
heart rate in heart failure. The compound also alleviates
chest distress and dyspnea associated with heart failure (Luo,
1995). The herb has therapeutic effects on sodium and water
retention in aortocaval fistula-induced heart failure, improv-
ing cardiac and renal functions in heart failure. The
mechanism is partly through correction of abnormal mRNA
expressions of hypothalmic arginine vasopresin system and
aquaporin-2, and amelioration of blunted renal response to

atrial natriuretic peptide (Ma, 1998).

Fibrinolytic—Astragaloside IV increases the fibrinolytic
potential of endothelial ells by upregulating the expression of
tissue-type plasminogen activator and by downregulating the
expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (Zhang,
1997).

Gastrointestinal Effects—The herb strengthens the move-
ment and muscle tonus in the intestine, especially the
jejunum, to increase movements in the digestive tract, as
evidenced by positive effects on the cycle duration of
interdigestive myoelectric complex (Lei, 1994).

Hepatoprotective—An ethanol extract of the root of Astraga-
lus membranaceus alleviated liver injury through a reduction
of elevated SGPT levels and subacute toxicity. The herb also
decreased loss of righting reflex and protected hepatic cells
from pathological changes (Zhang, 1990).

Immuno-modulating—The herb stimulates macrophages,
promotes antibody formation, and increases T lymphocyte
proliferation. F3, an immuno-regulatory component of the
herb reverses macrophage suppression induced by urological
tumors (Rittenhouse, 1991). Astragalus membranaceus ex-
tracts enhance the antibody response to a T-dependent
antigen associated with an increase of Th cell activity in

£ normal and immunodepressed animal models (Zhao, 1990).

A fractionated extract of Astragalus membranaceus potenti-
ates lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell cytotoxicity
generated by low-dose recombinant interleukin-2 (rIL-2).
This immune response occurs through a 10-fold potentiation
of rIL-2 activity manifested by tumor cell killing activity
resulting from LAK cell generation (Chu, 1990).

Memory Improvement—Aqueous extracts of Astragalus
demonstrated improvement of anisodine-induced impairment

ASTRAGALUS (HUANG-QI) /55

on memory acquisition as well as the alcohol-elicited deficit
of memory retrieval (a reduction in errors and prolonged
latent period) (Hong, 1994).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Immune-stimulating

The effect of pure Astragalus preparation (PAP) in treating
115 patients with leukopenia was determined after 8 weeks
of therapy. Group I was treated by a concentrated PAP (10
ml, equivalent to 15 grams of Astragalus), and group II was
treated with a different concentrated PAP (10 ml, equivalent
to 5 grams of Astragalus). Both treatment groups received a
dose of 10 ml twice daily. The effectiveness was statistically
different between the groups with 82.76% and 47.37% in
Group I and II, respectively. The total effective rate was
65.22%. The average WBC count of group I was significant-
ly higher than that of group II with a significant rise of the
WBC counts in both groups after treatment (Weng XS,
1995).

Cardiovascular Effects

The effect of Astragalus membranaceus on left ventricular
function and oxygen free radicals was evaluated in 43
cardiac patients. All patients in the treatment group had
experienced their myocardial infarction within the past 36
hours. The herb demonstrated a strengthening of left
ventricular function and an effect of anti-oxygen free
radicals for a cardiotonic action. The herb decreased the ratio
of pre- ejection period/left ventricular ejection time, in-
creased the superoxide dismutase activity of red blood cells
and reduced lipid peroxidation content (Chen, 1995).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb has been used for respiratory
infections, immune depression, cancer, heart failure, viral
infections, liver disease and kidney disease. Astragalus has
also been used as a diuretic.

Chinese Medicine: The herb has been used alone and in
combination for liver fibrosis, acute viral myocarditis, heart
failure, small cell lung cancer, amenorrhea, and antiviral.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Caution should be taken with patients receiving
immunosuppressive therapy, such as transplant patients, or
patients with autoimmune diseases. Extracts of Astragalus
lusitanicus in animal models resulted in toxic excitatory
cardiac effects and respiratory depression, involving skeletal
muscle and neurological systems (Abdennebi, 1998).

Neurological Dysfunction: Due to the selenium content in
Astragalus, toxic doses may result in neurological dysfunc-
tion leading to paralysis (Panter, 1996).

----- PAGE 307 -----
56/ASTRAGALUS (HUANG-QI)

Drug Interactions:

Cyclophosphamide—Although enhancement of the antibody
response through an increase of Th cell activity was seen in
cyclophosphamide immunosuppressed animal models, an-
other study demonstrated the herb does not prevent cy-
clophosphamide-induced myelosuppression. Astragalus
membranaceus given concomitantly with cyclophosphamide
showed no difference in terms of nadir count, time to nadir
and time to recovery for both the ANC and the platelet

counts (Khoo, 1995; Zhao, 1990).

Anticoagulants/Antiplatelets/Antithrombotic | Agents—Due
to the increased fibrinolysis effect of astragaloside IV,
concomitant use with anticoagulants, antiplatelets or anti-
thrombotic agents may potentiate the risk of bleeding

(Zhang, 1997).

DOSAGE

How Supplied:

Capsule—200 mg, 250 mg, 400 mg, 450 mg, 470 mg, 500
mg, 520 mg

Liquid
Tea Bag

Daily Dosage: The dried root is administered as 2-6 grams
daily, and the fluid extract as 4 to 12 milliliters daily (Bone,
1997). The powdered root capsule (250 mg-500 mg) has
been administered as two capsules three times daily (Foster,

1998).

LITERATURE

Abdennebi EH, el Ouazzani N, Lamnaouer D., Clinical and
analytical studies of sheep dosed with various preparations of
Astragalus lusitanicus. Vet Hum Toxicol 1998 Dec;40(6):327-
31.

Barneby, R. 1964. Atlas of North American astragalus part II.
Mem. New York Bot. Gard. Vol. 13.

Bedir D; Calis I; Aquino R et al. Secondary metabolites from
the roots of Astragalus trojanus. J Nat Prod 1999
Apr;62(4):563-8.

Bedir E; Calis I; Aquino R et al. Cycloartane triterpene
glycosides from the roots of Astragalus brachypterus and
Astragalus microcephalus. J Nat Prod 1998 Dec;61(12):1469-72.

Bone K: Clinical Applications of Ayurvedic and Chinese Herbs:
Monographs for the Western Herbal Practitioner. Phytotherapy
Press, Queensland, Australia 1997.

Chen LX; Liao JZ; Guo WQ. Effects of Astragalus
membranaceus on left ventricular function and oxygen free
radical in acute myocardial infarction patients and mechanism
of its cardiotonic action. Chung Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho
Tsa Chih 1995 Mar;15(3):141-3.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Chen M; Liu F. Chemical constituents of the seed oil of
Astragalus complanatus R. Brown. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa
ih 1990 Apr;15(4):225-6, 255.

Cc

Chu D; Sun Y; Lin J et al. F3, a fractionated extract of
Astragalus membranaceus, potentiates lymphokine-activated
killer cell cytotoxicity generated by low-dose recombinant
interleukin-2. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1990

Jan; 10(1):34-6, 5.
Chu DT; Lin JR; Wong W. The in vitro potentiation of LAK
cell cytotoxicity in cancer and aids patients induced by F3—a
fractionated extract of Astragalus membranaceus. Chung Hua
Chung Liu Tsa Chih 1994 May; 16(3): 167-71.

Foster S. Astragalus: A superior herb. Herbs for Health 1998;
Sept/Oct:40-41.

Guo XW; Zhang XX; Zhang ZM; Li FD. Characterization of
astragalus sinicus rhizobia by restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis of chromosomal and nodulation genes
regions. Curr Microbiol 1999 Dec;39(6):358-0364.

Hirotani M; Zhou Y; Rui H; Furuya T. Cycloartane triterpene
glycosides from the hairy root cultures of Astragalus
membranaceus. Phytochemistry 1994 Nov;37(5): 1403-7.

Hong CY; Lo YC; Tan FC et al. Astragalus membranaceus and
olygonum multiflorum protect rat heart mitochondria against
lipid peroxidation. Am J Chin Med 1994;22(1):63-70.

Hong GX; Qin WC; Huang LS. Memory-improving effect of
aqueous extract of Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.) Bge.
Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih 1994 Nov;19(1 1):687-8, 704.

Kaye TN. From flowering to dispersal: reproductive ecology of
an endemic plant, Astragalus australis var. olympicus
(Fabaceae). Am J Bot 1999 Sep;86(9): 1248.

Khoo KS; Ang PT. Extract of astragalus membranaceus and
igustrum lucidum does not prevent cyclophosphamide-induced
myelosuppression. Singapore Med J 1995 Aug;36(4):387-90.

Lei ZY; Qin H; Liao JZ. Action of Astragalus membranaceus
on left ventricular function of angina pectoris. Chung Kuo
Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1994 Apr; 14(4): 199-202, 195.

Li SQ; Yuan RX; Gao H. Clinical observation on the treatment
of ischemic heart disease with Astragalus membranaceus. Chung
Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1995 Feb;15(2):77-80.

Luo HM; Dai RH; Li Y. Nuclear cardiology study on effective
ingredients of Astragalus membranaceus in treating heart failure.
Chung Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1995

Dec; 15(12):707-9.

Ma J; Peng A; Lin S. Mechanisms of the therapeutic effect of
astragalus membranaceus on sodium and water retention in
experimental heart failure. Chin Med J (Engl) 1998

Jan;1 11(1): 17-23.

Nigam SN; McConnell WB. Seleno amino compounds from
Astragalus bisculcatus. Isolation and identification of gamma-L-
glutamyl-Se-methyl-seleno-L-cysteine and Se-methylseleno-L-
cysteine. Biochim Biophys Acta 1969 Nov 18;192(2):185-90.

----- PAGE 308 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Panter KE, Hartley WJ, James LF, et al. Comparative toxicity
of selenium from seleno-DL-methionine, sodium selenate, and
Astragalus bisulcatus in pigs. Fundam Appl Toxicol 1996
Aug;32(2):217-23.

Peng T; Yang Y; Riesemann H; Kandolf R. The inhibitory
effect of astragalus membranaceus on coxsackie B-3 virus RNA
replication. Chin Med Sci J 1995 Sep; 10(3): 146-50.

Rittenhouse JR; Lui PD; Lau BH. Chinese medicinal herbs
reverse macrophage suppression induced by urological tumors. J
Urol 1991 Aug;146(2):486-90.

Rui T; Yang YZ; Zhou TS. Effect of Astragalus membranaceus
on electrophysiological activities of acute experimental
Coxsackie B3 viral myocarditis in mice. Chung Kuo Chung Hsi
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1994 May;14(5):292-4, 26.

Wang HK; He K; Xu HxX, et al. The structure of astrachrysosid
A and the study of 2D-NMR on astrasieversianin XV and 7,2'-
dihydroxy-3\4'-dimethoxy-isoflavane-7-0- beta-D-glycoside. Yao
Hsueh Hsueh Pao 1990;25(6):445-50.

Weng XS. Treatment of leucopenia with pure Astragalus

reparation—an analysis of 115 leucopenic cases. Chung Kuo
Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 1995 Aug;15(8):462-4.

“* Zhang WJ; Wojta J; Binder BR. Regulation of the fibrinolytic

*

i

tential of cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells:
astragaloside IV downregulates plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
and upregulates tissue-type plasminogen activator expression. J
Vase Res 1997 Jul-Aug;34(4):273-80.

Zhang ZL; Wen QZ; Liu CX. Hepatoprotective effects of
astragalus root. J Ethnopharmacol 1990 Sep;30(2): 145-9.

Zhao KS; Mancini C; Doria G. Enhancement of the immune
response in mice by Astragalus membranaceus extracts.
Immunopharmacology 1990 Nov-Dec;20(3):225-33.

Zheng Z; Liu D; Song C et al. Studies on chemical constituents
and immunological function activity of hairy root of Astragalus
membranaceus. Chin J Biotechnol 1998;14(2):93-7.

Astragalus species
See Astragalus (Huang-Qi)

Athyrium. filix-femin

See Lady Fern

Atractylodes japonica

See Japanese Atractylodes

AVOCADO/57

Atractylodes lancea

See Southern Tsangshu
(Cang-Zhu)

Atropa belladonna

See Belladonna

Avena sativa
See Oats

Averrhoa carambola

See Carambola

Avocado

Persea americana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
die fresh leaves, the whole fruit including the seed and the

oil extracted from the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in compact or loose
racemes. They are 5 to 8.2 mm long and greenish. The inner
and outer perianth circles are 4 to 6 mm long and elliptical to
oval-elliptical. The anthers are 3.5 mm long, and the
filaments are 2.3 mm. The ovary is oval or pear-shaped and
downy. It develops into a drupe, which is green and fleshy
and up to 18 cm long. The drupe is smooth with thick oily
flesh and a very large seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The avocado is a tree up to 40 m in
height and with a trunk 60 cm in diameter. The leaves are 6
to 30 cm long and 3.5 to 19 cm wide. They are narrow to
broadly elliptical. The leaf surface is sticky, while the lower
surface is downy.

Habitat: The plant originated in central and southern South
America and is cultivated in all tropical and subtropical

regions today.

Production: Avocado oil comes from the fruit of Persea
americana. Avocado oil is recovered from the pericarp of

Persea americana and refined if necessary.

----- PAGE 309 -----
58/AVOCADO

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Fatty oil: chief fatty acids oleic acid, palmitic acid, linoleic
acid, palmitoleic acid (tocopherols, vitamin E)

EFFECTS
Avocado oil is an emollient, which improves rough ichtyotic

skin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Avocado is a main ingredient in so-called natural cosmetics.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an active or inactive ingredient
in various preparations (bath oils, ointments, etc.).

Storage: Oils from different batches should not be mixed.
The drug should be stored in a sealed container away from
light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Albert K, Pharm Ztg 131:2279. 1986.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Heller H, Asche W, Seifen Oele Fette Wachse 111:164. 1985.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Bael

Aegle marmelos

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the unripe fruit, the
root, the leaves and the branches.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has greenish-white flowers. The
yellow fruit is globular or ovoid, with a hard shell. The fruit
is divided internally like an orange. The flesh is reddish, with
numerous seeds covered in a layer of latex.

Characteristics: The taste is mucilaginous and slightly sour.

Habitat: This plant is native to India but has spread over
wide areas of southeast Asia.

Other Names: Bel, Bengal Quince

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins

Saccharides

Starch

Fatty oil
Furocoumarins
Furoquinolin alkaloids

EFFECTS
Bael has a digestive and an astringent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: Bael is used, especially in Indian medicine,
for constipation and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Digestive complaints and constipation are possible with the
intake of large quantities, due to the constituent tannins.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available as a liquid extract for

internal use.

LITERATURE
Oliver-Bever B (Ed., 1986), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West

Africa, Cambridge University Press UK.
Sharma BR and Sharma P, (1981) Planta Med 43:102.

Schimmer O, Furochinolinalkaloide als biologisch aktive
Naturstoffe. In: ZPT 12(5): 151. 1991.

Balloon-Flower (Jie-Geng)

Platycodon grandiflorum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

main and secondary roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are at the tip of the leading
shoot. The flower structures are in fives and are fused. The
calyx tube is appressed to the ovary; the corolla is 5-lobed,
blue, occasionally white with a diameter of approximately 5
cm. The 5 stamens are free and the ovary inferior with
numerous ovules. The fruit is an obovoid, multi-chambered,
dehiscent capsule. The seeds are ovoid, light to dark brown,
smooth, 1.7 to 2.2 mm long, | to 12 mm wide and flattened.

----- PAGE 310 -----
<JL

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial
growing to 90 cm high. The leaves are almost sessile with a
simple lamina, bluish-green above and gray-green beneath,
irregularly crenate-serrate and entire at the base. The plant
has a hardy (approximately 3 cm thick) taproot and hardy
secondary roots.

Habitat: Balloon-Flower is indigenous to China, Japan,
Korea and Siberia.

Production: The plant is collected in the wild and air-dried.
Balloon-Flower root is the dried main and secondary root of
Platycodon grandiflorum.

Other Names: Chinese Bell-Flower, Japanese Bell-Flower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins (1.7%): including platycodin, platyco-
doside C, aglycone platycodigenin, including glycosides of
polygalic acid, platycogenic acids A to C

Volatile oil (0.2 to 0.3%)

Steroids: sterols, including delta7-stigmasterol, alpha-

spinasterol

BPPHCTS

The saponin fraction contained in the drug has inhibiting
effects upon gastric secretion and exhibits both ulcer-protec-
tive and ulcer-healing effects. In addition, a mild antibacteri-
al effect was able to be demonstrated. The plant is said to
have a sedative effective on the respiratory organs and to
encourage expectoration. The antitussive, anti-inflammatory
and sedative effects require further clinical testing for
verification.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Jie-Geng is mainly used as an expecto-
rant for bronchitis, sore throat, tonsillitis and other condi-
tions of the respiratory tract. Efficacy as an expectorant is
plausible due to the saponin content; efficacy for the other
indications has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE

W Mode of Administration: Preparations of whole, cut and

powdered drug are for internal use.

Preparation: Liquid extract: root powder 1:1 25% ethanol
Daily Dosage:

Powder — 6 g daily; 0.5 g as a single dose

Decoction — 1 g daily; 0.2 g as a single dose

Storage: Store tightly sealed and protected from light.

BALMONY/59

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kim KS, Ezaki O, Ikemoto S, Itakura H, Effects of Platycodon
grandiflorum feeding on serum and liver lipid concentrations in
rats with diet-induced hyperlipidemia. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol
(Tokyo), 41:485-91, 1995 Aug.

Kim KS, Ezaki O, Ikemoto S, Itakura H, Effects of Platycodon
grandiflorum feeding on serum and liver lipid concentrations in
rats with diet-induced hyperlipidemia. Yakugaku Zasshi, 41:485-
91, 1995 Aug.

Kim KS, Ezaki O, Ikemoto S, Itakura H Rat plasma
corticosterone secretion-inducing activities of total saponin and
prosapogenin methyl esters from the roots of Platycodon
grandiflorum A. DC. Yakugaku Zasshi, 41:1191-4, 1995 Aug.

Ballota nigra

See Black Horehound

Balmony

Chelone glabra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh herb picked

during the flowering season

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a short terminal spike
of bilabiate white, purple, cream or pink flowers. The lower
lip is awned in the tube and the cordate anthers are downy.
The seeds are round and bitter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is small and erect, and
may reach up to 60 cm in height. It is a perennial herb with
angular, smooth stems and a horizontally spreading root
system. The leaves are opposite, oblong-lanceolate, on short
petioles.

Characteristics: The leaves have a tea-like smell and an
extremely bitter taste.

Habitat: Northeastern U.S. and Canada

Production: Balmony is the above-ground part of Chelone
glabra.

Other Names: Turtlebloom, Turtle Head, Chelone, Shell-
flower, Salt-Rheum Weed, Bitter Herb, Hummingbird Tree,
Snakehead

----- PAGE 311 -----
60/BALMONY

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes: catalpol

Resin: (bitter-tasting)

EFFECTS
No information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: Chelone glabra is used in the treatment
of liver disorders, digestive disorders and worm infestation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is available in homeopath-

ic dilutions.

LITERATURE
Belofsky G et al,, PH 28:1601. 1989.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Bamboo

Arundinaria japonica
DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the young shoots of
the plant.

Flower and Fruit: Greenish-yellow, round culms exceeding
3 m in height are surrounded at the culm nodes by dry leaf
sheaths, which do not fall off. The upper surface of the
leaves are shiny and dark green; the underside is matte and
gray-green. The leaf margins are sharply serrated.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the tropics, southern
subtropics and Asia.

Production: Bamboo sprouts are the young shoots of
Arundinaria japonica.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Soluble mono-, oligo-, and polysaccharides

Silicic acid: to some extent water-soluble

EFFECTS
No information is available.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Bamboo is seldom used for medicinal purposes in Western
medicine.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for asthma, coughs and
disorders of the gallbladder.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The juice from the young shoots is
hardened as bamboo sugar and used internally.

LITERATURE
No literature is available.

Baneberry
Actaea spicata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are in ovate racemes.
They have 4 to 6 bracts, white stamens and 1 ovary. The fruit
is a black, many-seeded berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows 30 to 60 cm tall. It
is large, long-petioled, trifoliate and pinnate. The leaflets are
pinnatisect and serrate. The stem is erect and glabrous.

Characteristics: Baneberry is poisonous, as are several other
plants with similar qualities.

Habitat: The plant grows in most of Europe and in moderate
and arctic regions of Asia.

Production: Baneberry or Herb Christopher root is the root
of Actaea spicata.

Not to be Confused With: Helleborus niger is occasionally
used as a substitute by mistake.

Other Names: Bugbane, Herb Christopher, Toadroot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids: magnoflorine, corytuberine
Triterpene glycosides: including actein
Trans-aconitic acid

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains alkaloids (magnoflorine) and
saponins, was shown to inhibit growth of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. An antirheumatic effect is being investigated.

----- PAGE 312 -----
w/

Jfr

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Baneberry is used as an emetic and

purgative.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used in homeopathy for
rheumatic conditions, especially those of the smaller joints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In homeopathy, Baneberry is
available as dilutions of the mother tincture.

LITERATURE
Fardella G, Corsano St, Preliminary study on actein
biosynthesis. In: Ann Chim(Rom)63:333-337. 1973.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. I-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nikonow GK, Syrkina SA, Chemische Untersuchungen der
aktiven Prinzipien von Actaea spicata L. In: Pharm Zentralhalle
103(8):601. 1964.

Banisteriopsis caapi
See Yage

Baptisia tinctoria
See Wild Indigo

Barberry

Berberis vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit and the root

bark.

BARBERRY/61

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 5 to 7 cm long in yellow,
dense, hanging clusters. The 6 sepals are yellow and the 6
petals have orange-colored honey glands at the base. The 6
stamens burst open at the side. The ovary is superior with a
flat stigma. The edible fruit is a bright scarlet, oblong-
cylindrical berry, 10 to 12 mm long and 6 mm thick. The
exocarp is membranous-coriaceous. There are usually 2
seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Barberry is a deciduous, heavily
branched, thorny bush up to 2 m high. The thorny branches
are angular, deeply grooved, initially brownish yellow, later
more white-gray. The thorns are | to 2 cm long and stick out
horizontally. The leaves are in bunches and are obovate to
elliptoid, 2 to 4 cm long and narrow. They are dark green
and reticulate, the margin is dentate.

Characteristics: The flowers have a repulsive smell; the
stamens lie on the carpels at the slightest touch. The flesh of
the fruit is juicy and sour.

Habitat: Europe, northern Africa, parts of America an
central Asia.

Production: Barberries are the ripe fruit of Berberis vulgaris.
Barberry root bark or berberis bark is the dried root bark of
Berberis vulgaris. Berberis aqui folium is a closely-relate
American variety that is often used in commercially avail-
able Oregon Grape products.

Not to be Confused With: There is a possiblity of confusion
with the fruits of other berberidis types. The commercia
drug often consists of admixtures; between 15% and 50% of
branch and trunk bark.

Other Names: Berberry, Pipperidge, Jaundice Berry, Sow
Berry, Mountain Grape, Oregon Grape

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BARBERRY FRUIT
Isoquinoline alkaloids (at the most, traces)

Anthocyans
Chlorogenic acid
Malic acid, acetic acid

EFFECTS: BARBERRY ROOT BARK

Source of vitamin C. In various metabolic processes, vitamin
C increases immune system activity, stimulates iron absorp-
tion, and prevents scurvy. There is a mild diuretic effect due
to the acid content.

COMPOUNDS: BARBERRY ROOT BARK

Isoquinoline alkaloids: in particular berberine, berbamine,
oxyacanthin, further to include columbamine, palmatine,
jatrorrhizine, magnoflorine.

----- PAGE 313 -----
62/BARBERRY

EFFECTS: BARBERRY ROOT BARK
Cardiovascular effect: Fractions from the
which contain 80% berberine and other alkaloids, have been
shown to reduce the blood pressure of cats for several hours.
With varying doses, both positive and negative inotropic
effects on the cats' hearts were recorded.

root extracts,

Cholagogue effect: A homeopathic mother tincture increased
the bile flow in guinea pigs by an average of 20%. An extract
with 80% berberine and additional alkaloids stimulated the
bile excretion of rats by 72%.

Antipyretic effect: Aqueous tinctures have an anti-febrile

effect on a feverish rabbit.

effect

of intestinal peristalsis

Antibiotic
Stimulation

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

BARBERRY FRUIT

Unproven uses: Decoction or alcoholic extract for lung,
spleen and liver diseases. Jam or wine made from the fresh
berries can relieve constipation and stimulate the appetite.
Alcoholic extracts have been used for heartburn and stomach
cramps. Extracts have also been used for susceptibility to
infection, feverish colds, and diseases of the urinary tract.
Used in the pharmaceutical industry as a syrup for masking

flavor.

BARBERRY ROOT BARK

Unproven uses: Barberry has been used for opium or
morphine withdrawal. In folk medicine, the bark is used for
liver malfunctions, gallbladder disease, jaundice, splenopa-
thy, indigestion, diarrhea, tuberculosis, piles, renal disease,
urinary tract disorders, gout, rheumatism, arthritis, lumbago,
malaria, and leishmaniasis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

BARBERRY FRUIT AND ROOT BARK

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

BARBERRY ROOT BARK

Dosages over 4 mg will bring about light stupor, nosebleeds,
vomiting, diarrhea and kidney irritation. The treatment for
poisonings is to be carried out symptomatically.

DOSAGE

BARBERRY FRUIT
Mode of Administration: Barberry is used internally in tea

mixtures and combination preparations.

Preparation: To prepare a tea infusion, pour approximately
150 ml of hot water into 1 to 2 teaspoons of whole or
squashed Barberries and strain after 10 to 15 minutes.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES.

BARBERRY ROOT BARK
How — Supplied:
Liquid—1:1, 1:5

Tea

Preparation: A tincture 1:10 is prepared according to the
German Pharmacopeia 10th ed.

To extract the pure alkaloids from berberis roots, use 0.3%
sulphuric acid mixed with 10% sodium chloride. The
precipitated berberine hydrochloride is washed with mildly
hydrochloric water and dried. It is then dissolved in water
(pH 8) and filtered. The filtrate is heated to 70° C and set to
pH 2.0 using hydrochloric acid. The precipitate of pure
berberine hydrochloride is then washed and dried.

Daily Dosage: The dosage of the infusion is 2 g in 250 ml
water, to be sipped. The tincture dosage is 20 to 40 drops

daily.
LITERATURE
Andronescu E et al., (1973) Clujul. Med 46: 627.

Chen MQ et al., (1965) Acta Pharm Sinica 12 (3): 185.

Cordell GA, Farnsworth NR, (1977) Lloydia 40: 1.
Ikram M, (1975) Planta Med 28: 253.

Lahiri SC et al., (1958) Ann Biochem Exp Med India 18: 95.
Liu CX et al., (1979) Chinese Traditional and Herbal Drugs

Communications 9: 36.

Naidovich LP et al., (1976) Farmatsiya 24: 33.

Subbaiah TV, Amin AH, (1967) Nature 215: 527.
Ubebaba K et al., (1984) Jpn J Pharmacol 36 (Suppl): 352.
Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A): 1.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 314 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Barley
Hordeum distichon

TRADE NAMES
Barley (available from numerous manufacturers and as
combination product), Barley Grain

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the polished grain
without the husk.

Flower and Fruit: The spike is 7 to 15 cm long. The long
form is nodding and the shorter one erect and compressed at
the side that does not bear spikelets. The spike spindle is
tough and loosens the spikelets when ripe. The lateral
spikelets are unbearded, male or sexless. The middle spikelet
is seed-bearing with a beard up to 15 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual that grows 60
to 130 cm high. It has a long hollow stalk and lanceolate
leaves. The leaflets are very wide, long and glabrous.

Habitat: Barley is cultivated worldwide.

Production: Barley seeds are the seeds of Hordeum

distichon.
Other Names: Pearl Barley, Pot Barley, Scotch Barley

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Polysaccharides: starch (50%), fructans

Mono- and oligosaccharides: saccharose, raffinose, glucodi-
fructose, glucose, fructose

Proteins (10%): including, among others, prolamines: hor-
dein- glutelins: hordenine (not to be confused with the amine
of the same name, see below)- albumins and globulins
Prolamines: hordein

Glutelins: hordenine (not to be confused with the amine of
the same name, see below)

Albumins and globulins

Fatty oil (2%): chief fatty acids linoleic and oleic acid
Vitamins: Vitamin E, nicotinic acid, pantothenic acid,

vitamins B6, B2, folic acid

Hydroxycoumarins (only in the stalks): including, among
others, umbelliferone, scopoletin, nermann, aesculetin (in
the sprouts)

Amines: tyramine, hordenine (dimethyltyramine), gramine
also with certain strains (dimethy- laminomethylindol)

EFFECTS
Barley is soothing on the alimentary tract.

BAROSMA SPECIES / 63

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Barley has been used for convalescents and
in the treatment of diarrhea, gastritis and inflammatory
bowel conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Barley is used as a malt extract, in

preparations and in combinations.
How Supplied:
Capsules - 450 mg

LITERATURE
Bergantino E, Sandon'a D, Cugini D, Bassi R, The photosystem
II subunit CP29 can be phosphorylated in both C3 and C4
plants as suggested by sequence analysis. Plant Mol Biol,
36:11-22, 1998 Jan

Davies TG, Theodoulou FL, Hallahan DL, Forde BG, Cloning
and characterisation of a novel P-glycoprotein homologue fiom
barley. Gene, 199:195-202, 1997 Oct 15

Dhar ML et al., (1968) Indian J Exp Biol 6:232.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Labbe M, (1936) J Canad Med Assoc 34:141.

Oliver-Bever B O1x1), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, London 1986

Pajuelo P, Pajuelo E, Forde BG, Marquez AJ, Regulation of the
expression of ferredoxin-glutamate synthase in barley. Planta,
203:517-25, 1997 Dec

Rudi H et al., A (His)6-tagged recombinant barley endosperm
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase expressed in the baculovirus-
insect cell system is insensitive to allosteric regulation by 3-
phosphoglycerate and inorganic phosphate. FEBS Lett, 419,
1997

Schuurink RC, Shartzer SF, Fath A, Jones RL, Characterization

of a calmodulin-binding transporter from the plasma membrane
of barley aleurone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 95:1944-9, 1998

Feb 17

Barosma species
See Short Buchu

----- PAGE 315 -----
64/BASIL

Basil

Ocimum basilicum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh or dried herb as well as the oil extracted from the dried

aerial parts.

Flower and Fruit: The white, labiate flowers are in 6-
blossomed, pedicled, almost sessile axillary false whorls.
The calyx is bilabiate, and the corolla is 4-lobed. The lower
lip is simple; the 4 stamens lie on it.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 20 to 40 cm
high. The stem is erect, branched from the base up and
downy. The leaves are ovate or oblong. They are long-
petioled, acuminate, irregularly dentate or entire-margined.

Characteristics: Basil has a characteristic odor and sharp
taste.

Habitat: The plant probably originated in India, Afghanistan,
Pakistan and northern India, and now is cultivated
worldwide.

Production: Basil herb consists of the dried, above-ground
parts of Ocimum basilicum. Oil of basil is the essential oil
extracted from the dried aerial parts of Ocimum basilicum by
steam distillation.

Other Names: St. Josephwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BASIL HERB

Volatile oil: chief constituents are chavicol methyl ether
(estragole), linalool and eugenol

Caffeic acid derivatives
Flavonoids

EFFECTS: BASIL HERB
In vitro, Basil is antimicrobial.

COMPOUNDS: BASIL OIL
Chief constituents: estragole (chavicol methyl ether), lina-

lool, eugenol

EFFECTS: BASILOIL
In vitro, the oil demonstrates an antimicrobial effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BASIL HERB

Unproven Uses: Preparations of basil are used for supportive
therapy for feelings of fullness and flatulence, for the
stimulation of appetite and digestion, and as a diuretic.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Chinese Medicine: Basil herb is used for disturbances of
renal function, gum ulcers and as a hemostyptic both before
and after birth.

Indian Medicine: Among uses in Indian medicine are
earaches, rheumatoid arthritis, anorexia, itching and skin
diseases, amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea, malaria and other
febrile illnesses.

BASIL OIL
Unproven Uses: Among traditional uses for the oil are
wounds, rheumatic complaints, colds and chills, contusions,
joint pains and depression.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

BASIL HERB

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: The herb contains about 0.5% essential oil with
up to 85% estragole. Because of the high estragole content in
the essential oil, the herb should not be taken during
pregnancy.

BASIL OIL
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. However, pending final determination
of the drug's carcinogenic potential, one should completely
forgo administration of the drug.

Pregnancy: Because a mutagenic effect in vitro and a
carcinogenic effect in animal experiments have been demon-
strated for estragole, oil of basil should not be administered

during pregnancy or while nursing.

Pediatric Use: Basil oil should not be given to infants or
small children.

DOSAGE
Until the final determination of die drug's carcinogenic
potential, one should completely forgo its administration.

LITERATURE
Balambal R et alls, (1985) J Assoc Phys (India) 33(8):507.

Czygan FCh, Balsilikum - Ocimum basilicum L. Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. In: ZPT 18(1):58-66. 1997.

Jain ML, Jain SR, (1972) Planta Med 22:66.

Lemberkovics E et al., Formation of essential oil and phenolic
compounds during the vegetation period in Ocimum basilicum.
In: PM 59(7)00. 1993.

Miller EC et al., (1983) Cancer Res 43:1124.

Opdyke DLJ, (1973) Food Cosmet Toxicol 11:867.

----- PAGE 316 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wagner H, Norr H, Winterhoff H, Drogen mit
"Adaptogenwirkung" zur Starkung der Widerstandskrafte. In:
ZPT 13(2):42. 1992.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Simon JE, Chadwick AF. Craker LE (Eds.), Herbs. An Indexed
Bibliography 1971-80. Archon Books, USA 1984.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4.' Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Bean Pod

Phaseolus vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, dried pods

and the beans.

Flower and Fruit: The white, pink and lilac flowers are in
lightly blossomed, peduncled racemes, which are shorter
than their leaves. The calyx is bilabiate. The carina, stamens
and style are twisted in a spiral. The fruit is a straight,
smooth, hanging pod with a number of reniform seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The annual plant grows from 30 to
60 cm high. It is heavily branched but not twining. The
leaves are trifoliate, die leaflets are broad ovate and
acuminate. The terminal leaflet is rhomboid.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to America and is cultivated
worldwide today.

Production: The seed-free pods of Phaseolus vulgaris are
collected during the harvest season.

Other Names: Common Bean, Green Bean, Kidney Bean,
Navy Bean, Pinto Bean, Snap Bean, String Bean, Wax Bean

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Lectins: complex
glycoproteins)

termed phytomitogen (tetrameric

Saponins
L-pipecolic acid

Flavonoids

BEAN POD/65

EFFECTS
A weak diuretic action has been demonstrated in animal and

human experiments. Chromium salts present in the Bean Pod
may produce an antidiabetic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: Bean Pod is used as a supportive treatment
for inability to urinate. In folk medicine, it is used as a
diuretic and antidiabetic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages, in the form of heated infusions.

OVERDOSAGE
Poisonings following the intake of large quantities of fresh
green bean husks (or of raw green beans) are not to be
entirely ruled out, due to the lectins content, which varies
greatly among the individual species. Symptoms include
vomiting, diarrhea and gastroenteritis. The lectins are
destroyed in the process of cooking.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted herb for decoc-
tions and other galenic preparations for internal use. The
drug is a component of various kidney and bladder teas and
of standardized preparations of natural diuretics and
antidiabetics.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over
2.5 gm drug and strain after 10 to 15 minutes while still
covered (1 teaspoonful = 1.5 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dosage is 5 to 15 gm
of herb.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Eds.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Pusztai A et al., Recent advances in the study of the nutrtional
toxicity of kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) lectins in rat. In:
Toxicon 20(1): R195. 1982.

Rom L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 317 -----
66 /BEAN POD

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Ed.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

Bear's Garlic

Allium ursinwn

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The fresh herb and fresh bulb are the

medicinal parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The sheath of the terminal inflorescence is
made up of 3 ovate-lanceolate, acute, early-falling leaves,
which are almost as long as the peduncle. The inflorescence
is a loose, flat, 2.5 to 6 cm wide cyme with 6 to 20 florets.
The florets are erect, outward-inclined, pointed or blunt.
They are pure white and have 6 star-shaped, splayed petals.
Six stamens are wedge-shaped, only fused at the base and
only half as long as the involucre. One superior ovary is
formed out of 3 carpels and 3 deep grooves. The 3-valved
capsule contains black, angular seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant's compact stem is upright,
10 to 50 cm high, double-edged, half-cylindrical or triangu-
lar-to-round in shape. The leaf blade is flat, narrow-ellipti-
cal-lanceolate to narrow-ovate and acute. It is 6 to 20 cm
long and thin, with a base that is rounded to cordate and
narrows suddenly to a 5 to 20 cm long petiole. The leafs
dark-green underside is covered with irregular horizontal
veins that face upward, leaving the paler upper surface
facing toward the ground. The bulb is almost cylindrical, 2 to
6 cm long, about 1 cm wide and surrounded by transparent

or white skins.

Characteristics: Bear's garlic forms many onions and has a

distinctive leek odor.

Habitat: Bear's Garlic is indigenous to almost all of Europe
and Turkey, but not in the Hungarian plain and the evergreen
Mediterranean region. It is also found in the Caucasus and
Siberia as far as Kamtschatka.

Production: Bear's garlic is fresh or dried herb of Allium

ursinum.

Not to be Confused With: One case was reported of

confusion with Colchicum leaves.

Other Names: Ramsons, Broad-Leaved Garlic

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alliins (alkyleysteine sulphoxides): in particular methyl alliin
(methyl-L-(+)-cysteine sulphoxide) and allylalliin (allyl-L-
(+)-cysteine sulphoxide) and presumably their gamma-gluta-
myl conjugates, that readily transform into the so-called
alliaceous oils, for example into dimethyl-disulphide-mono-
S-oxide, allicin (diallyl-disulphide-mono-S-oxide) and allyl-
methyl-disulphide mono-S-oxide and the corresponding
dialkyldi- or oligosulphides

EFFECTS
The diverse sulphur bonds are said to be lipid-reducing, anti-
oxidative, aggregation inhibiting and ACE inhibiting.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for gastrointesti-
nal complaints, fermentative dyspepsia, flatulence, high
blood pressure and arteriosclerosis; externally for chronic

rashes.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include digestive

disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as well

as externally.

Preparation: Extract of Bear's Garlic.

Daily Dosage: Due to low concentration of the active
substance, the drug must be administered in higher doses

than Allium sativum.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes for acute conditions, and 1 to 3 times daily
for chronic; parenterally: 1 to 2 ml daily sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Landshuter J et al., Comparative biochemical studies on a
purified C-S-lyase preparation from wild garlic. In: PM 58(7)66.
1992.

Sendl A, Barlauch: Alternative zu Knoblauch. In: Naturw.
Rdsch 7/94. 1994.

Sendl A, Phytotherapie: Barlauch und Knoblauch im Vergleich.
In: DAZ 133(5):392. 1993.

Veit M, Barlauch (Allium ursinum) als Ersatz fur Knoblauch
(Allium sativum). In: ZPT 13(6):201. 1993.

Wagner H, Ebl G, Lotter H, Guinea M, Evaluation of natural
products as inhibitors of angiotensin I-converting enzyme
(ACE). In: Pharm Pharmacol Letters 1(1): 15-18. 1991.

----- PAGE 318 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wagner H, Send! A, Barlauch und Knoblauch. In: DAZ
130(33): 1809. 1990.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg,). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

A

Beet

Beta vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The root is the medicinal part.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers bloom in clusters of 2 to 4 in
panicle-like leafy inflorescences.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The beet is a 0.5 to 15 m perennial
with a swollen, edible tuber that is red or white. The large,
upright leaves have long stalks and grow in rosettes that arise
basally from the top of the tuber. They are deep green and
tinged with red.

Habitat: The Beet is indigenous to the coastal regions of
Europe, North Africa, and Asia from Turkey to India. Red
Beets, Sugar Beets and the white variety are all widely
cultivated.

Other Names: Chard

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Saccharose (up. to 27% in the pressed sugar beet)

Other oligosaccharides: refined sugar, ketose
Polysaccharides: including galactans, arabans, pectin

Fruit acids: including L(-)-malic acid, D(+)-tartaric acid,
oxaluric acid, adipic acid, citric acid, glycolic acid, glutaric
acid

Amino acids: including asparagine, glutamine
Betaine (trimethylglycine)

Triterpene saponins

BEHEN/67

EFFECTS
Beet is said to have antihepatotoxic effects; in animal tests,
the drug effectively keeps fat from depositing in the liver.
This is probably due to the herb's concentration of betaine,
which is a methyl group donor in the liver's transmethylation

process.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Beet is used as supportive therapy in
diseases of the liver and fatty liver.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for coughs and infections.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Taking very large quantities could lead to hypocalcemia and
kidney damage because of the drug's oxaluric acid content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Beet is available as a granular
powder in standardized form.

Daily Dosage: For the first 14 days, take 10 gm of drug after
meals throughout the course of the day. For long-term
treatment, the dose is 5 gm per day for at least 3 months.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Behen

Moringa oleifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves, bark, nuts and root, which have had numerous uses in
traditional medicine.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a leaf-axillary
panicle. The flowers are zygomorphic with their structures in
fives and a bowel-shaped receptacle. The sepals are linear-
lanceolate, irregular and revolute. The petals are spatulate,
veined, irregular and white or yellow. There are 5 stamens,
and a superior ovary developing from 3 fused carpels. The
firuit is a hanging capsule opening on 3 sides, up to 12 m
long and triangular with 9 ribs. The seeds are triangular, light
brown to black, with 3 thin, whitish wings, approximately
the size of a hazelnut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves of the tree are alternate,
30 to 60 cm long, and incompletely triple-pinnate. The

----- PAGE 319 -----
68/BEHEN

leaflets are 12 to 20 mm long and elliptical. The branches are
slim.

Characteristics: The flowers are extremely fragrant, and the
leaves, root and fruit taste like horseradish.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to India.

Production: Behen root is the fresh or dried root of Moringa
oleifera. Behen nuts are the ripe unpeeled seeds of Moringa
oleifera.

Other Names: Ben Nut Tree, Drumstick Tree, Indian

Horseradish

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BEHEN ROOT

Glucosinolates: 4-(alpha-L-rhamnosyloxy)benzyl glucosino-
late (ca. 1%), yielding 4-(alpha-L-rhamnosyloxy)benzyl
isothiocyanate following enzymatic segregation with myrosi-
nase, glucotropaeolin (ca. 0.05%), yielding benzyl
isothiocyanate

EFFECTS: BEHEN ROOT

The root is antimicrobial in effect, due to the mustard oils it
contains. Applied as a cataplasm, it triggers local hyperemias
due to the irritating effect of the isothiocyanates. Dried
extracts of the root are abortive and contraceptive in their
effect.

COMPOUNDS: BEHEN SEEDS
Glucosinolates (up to 9% in the defatted seeds): 4-(alpha-L-
rhamnosyloxy)benzyl glucosinolate, yielding 4-(alpha-L-
rhamnosyloxy)benzyl isothiocyanate following enzymatic
segregation with myrosinase

Phenol carboxylic acids: \ -beta-D-glucosyI-2,6-dimethyl
benzoate

Fatty oil (20 to 50%): chief fatty acids oleic acid (60 to
70%), palmitic acid (3 to 12%), stearic acid (3 to 12%),
including as well behenic acid, eicosanoic acid, lignoceric
acid

EFFECTS: BEHEN SEEDS
The seeds are antimicrobial in effect, due to the mustard oils

they contain.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BEHEN ROOT

Unproven Uses: The root has been used internally in folk
medicine for gastrointestinal complaints, epilepsy, paralyses,
cardiac and blood pressure disturbances, fever (particularly
intermittent), scurvy, dizziness and colds. External indica-
tions include gingivitis, worm diseases, snake bites, ab-
scesses, inflammation, rheumatism and poorly healing
wounds. Root paste has been used to treat worms, rheuma-
tism and headaches.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Indian Medicine: Indications have included smallpox and
rheumatism. Efficacy for rheumatism seems plausible be-
cause of the stimulating effect of the isothiocyanates.
Efficacy for the other indications has not yet been proven.

BEHEN SEEDS

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine indications for internal use
are constipation, warts and worms (Central America); for
diarrhea (Chad); for splenomegaly, colic, dyspepsia, fever,
inflammation of the skin, edema, diabetes, abdominal
tumors, paralyses and lumbago (Saudi Arabia). The seeds are
used externally for dandruff in Nigeria.

Indian Medicine: Behen seeds are used for fever and as an
aphrodisiac. Efficacy for these indications has not yet been

proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BEHEN ROOT

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The inges-
tion of larger quantities can lead to nausea, dizziness and
vomiting.

BEHEN SEEDS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

The single peroral administration of a dosage of 5 g of the
drug/kg body weight to a mouse led to hyperkeratosis in the
stomach and to liver cell steatosis. Administration of 22 to
50 mg/kg body weight, parenterally, of the glucosinolate
mentioned above proved to be fatal for mice.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
BEHEN ROOT

Behen preparations are contraindicated during pregnancy
because of their possible abortive effect.

DOSAGE
BEHEN ROOT

Mode of Administration: Preparations of the whole and
powdered root are administered internally and externally.

BEHEN SEEDS
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the seed are used

internally and externally.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G OEd), Hagers .
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 320 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Belladonna

Atropa belladonna

DESCRIPTION

AP Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and

roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary and hanging. The
calyx is fused at the base, has 5 divisions and is spread like a
star when the fruit ripens. The violet corolla is a campanulate
tube, 2.5 to 3.5 cm long, dirty yellow on the inside with
crimson veins. There are 5 stamens and | style with a 2-
lobed stigma. The ovary is superior. The fruit is a cherry-
sized globose berry. The fruit is initially green, then becomes
black and glossy with numerous black, ovoid seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Atropa belladonna is a perennial,

herbacious plant 1 to 2 m high with a many-headed

cylindrical rhizome. The woody stem is erect, branched,

bluntly angular and hairy. The leaves are ovately pointed,

entire-margined, downy and up to 15 cm long. The lower

leaves are alternate. Near the inflorescence the leaves are in
pairs of 1 large and 1 small.

Characteristics: Belladonna has a strong narcotic smell, a
sharp and bitter taste, and is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is found throughout western, central and
southern Europe, in the Balkans, southeast Asia, Iran,
northern Africa, Denmark, Sweden and Ireland. It is
cultivated in other countries, particularly England, France
and the U.S.

Production: Belladonna leaf consists of the dried leaves, or
the dried leaves together with the flowering branch tips, of
Atropa belladonna. The leaves are collected in the wild from
May to July. They are dried at a temperature not exceeding
60°C. Belladonna root consists of the dried roots and
rhizomes of Atropa belladonna. The roots of 2- to 4-year-old
plants are dug up in mid-October to mid-November or
shortly before the start of the flowering season. They are
cleaned and dried at a maximum temperature of 50°C.

Not to be Confused With: Belladonna leaf should not be
confused with Ailanthus altissimus, Phytolacca americana or
Scopolia carniolica. Belladonna root should not be confused
with Atropa acuminata. It is sometimes adulterated with
Phytolacca americana and Scopolia cariolica.

Other Names: Deadly Nightshade, Devil's Cherries, Devil's
Herb, Divale, Dwale, Dwayberry, Great Morel, Naughty
Man's Cherries, Poison Black Cherry

BELLADONNA/69

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BELLADONNA LEAF

Tropan alkaloids: chief alkaloid (-)-hyoscyamine, which
during drying transforms to some extent into atropine, as
well as apoatropine, scopolamine and tropine

Flavonoids
Hydroxycoumarins: including scopoline, scopoletine
Tannins

COMPOUNDS: BELLADONNA ROOT

Tropan alkaloids: chief alkaloid (-)-hyoscyamine, in drying
transformed to some extent during dehydration into atropine
as well as apoatropine, 3alpha-phenylacetoxytropane, tro-
pine, cuskhygrine, scopolamine, pseudotropine

EFFECTS: BELLADONNA LEAF AND ROOT

The tropane alkaloids in the drug (atropine, scopolamine,
tropine etc.) are responsible for the anti-cholinergic-para-
sympatholytic, spasmolytic, positive, dromotropic and chro-
notropic effect. Atropa belladonna preparations act as a
parasympatholytic or anticholinergic via a competitive
antagonism of the neuromuscular transmitter acetylcholine.
This antagonism concerns mainly the muscarine-like effect
of acetylcholine and less the nicotine-like effects on the
ganglions and the neuromuscular end plate. Atropa belladon-
na preparations release peripheral effects targeted on the
vegetative nervous system and the smooth muscle system, as
well as the central nervous system. Because of the parasym-
patholytic properties, the drug can cause relaxation of organs
with smooth muscles and relieve spastic conditions, especial-
ly in the gastrointestinal tract and bile ducts. Additionally,
Belladonna use may result in muscular tremor or rigidity due
to effects on the central nervous system. Atropa belladonna
preparations have a positive dromotropic as well as a
positive chronotropic effect on the heart. The drug has
always been important in folk medicine for its hallucinogen-
ic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BELLADONNA LEAF
Approved by Commission E:

* Liver and gall bladder complaints

Unproven Uses: Belladonna leaf is used for spasms and
colic-like pain in the gastrointestinal tract and bile ducts.
External uses include gout and ulcers. In folk medicine, the
drug is contained in medicinal plasters and is applied for
neuro-vegetative disorders, hyperkinesis, hyperhidrosis and
bronchial asthma.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include meningitis as
well as inflammations (accompanied by fever) of the tonsils,

----- PAGE 321 -----
70 /BELLADONNA

respiratory organs, the urogenital tract, the skin, the joints
and the gastrointestinal tract.

BELLADONNA ROOT
Approved by Commission E:
¢ Liver and gall bladder complaints

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for arrhythmia, cardiac
insufficiency NYHA I and II, nervous heart complaints, and
colic-like pains in the gastrointestinal tract and bile ducts. In
folk medicine, a drug from the leaves is preferred for pain in
the gastrointestinal area, for asthma, bronchitis and muscular
pain. (Also see Belladonna leaf.)

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BELLADONNA LEAF AND ROOT

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The following could occur as side effects, particularly with
overdoses: erubescence, dryness of the mouth, mydriasis,
and tachycardiac arrhythmias. These are early signs of
atropine poisoning. Other side effects may include hypocyc-
loses, heat accumulation through reduction of perspiration,
micturation difficulties and obstipation. Because of potential
ramifications, Belladonna should be used only under the
supervision of an expert familiar with the appropriate use of
this substance.

Pediatric Use: The fatal dose in children is considerably less
than that of adults.

Drug Interactions: Tricyclic antidepressants, amantadine and
quinidine will increase the anticholinergic effect.

OVERDOSAGE

BELLADONNA LEAF AND ROOT

High dosages lead to central excitation that may produce
restlessness, compulsion to talk, hallucinations, delirium and
manic attacks, followed by exhaustion and sleep. The fatal
dose depends on me atropine content; asphyxiation can occur
with 100 mg atropine, which corresponds to 5 to 50 g of
Belladonna. Treatment of poisonings consists of gastric
lavage, application of wet cloths to reduce body temperature
(avoid antipyretics), oxygen respiration for breathing dis-
tress, intubation, parenteral physostigmine salts as an anti-
dote, diazepam for spasm and chlorpromazine for serious
excitation. (Also see side effects listed under PRECAU-
TIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS, which may be early
signs of poisoning.)

DOSAGE
BELLADONNA LEAF

Mode of Administration: The comminuted drug is used for
decoctions and dried extracts, and the powdered drug is used
internally for galenic preparations. Due to the toxicity, the
drug must be handled with care.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include coated and uncoated tablets, drops, tea, juice,
syrup, ampules, capsules, suppositories, plaster and ophthal-
mic drops.

Daily Dosage: When using Belladonna powder (belladonnae
pulvis normatus-total alkaloid content 0.28% to 0.32%
German pharmacopoeia 10), the average single dose is 0.05
to 0.10 g. The maximum single dose is 0.20 g, which is
equivalent to 0.60 mg total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscya-
mine. The maximum daily dosage is 0.60 g, which is
equivalent to 18 mg total alkaloids, calculated as

hyoscyamine.

For Belladonna extract, the average single dose is 0.01 g.
The maximum single dose is 0.05 g, which is equivalent to
0.73 mg total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine. The
maximum daily dosage is 0.150 g, which is equivalent to 2.2
mg total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine.

Storage: Belladonna leaves and various leaf preparations
have specific storage requirements. Store leaves and powders
tightly sealed and protected from light. Extracts require
protection from moisture and light as well as a temperature
of approximately 30°C. Store tinctures tightly sealed without
exposure to direct sunlight or extreme heat to attain a shelf
life of approximately 3.5 years.

BELLADONNA ROOT
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted drug for infu-
sions and dried extracts and as a powdered drug for other
galenic preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 0.3 g, which is
equivalent to 1.5 mg total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscya-
mine. Single doses range from 0.05 g to a maximum of 0.1 g.

For Belladonna extract, the total alkaloids range from 13%
to 1.45% (German pharmacopoeia 10). Single doses of the
extract range from 0.01 g to 0.05 g. The maximum daily
dosage is 0.15 g, which is equivalent to 2.2 mg total
alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine.

For Belladonna tincture, a single dose of 0.5 to 2 ml is given
3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily or | ml injection solution twice
weekly sc. From D3: one suppository 2 to 3 times daily;
ointments | to 2 times daily (HAB1).

Storage: Belladonna root should be stored for a maximum of
3 years in well-sealed containers protected from light and
insects.

----- PAGE 322 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE

BELLADONNA LEAF AND ROOT
Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT

15(3): 137. 1994.

Hartmann Th et al., Reinvestigation of the alkaloid composition

tf€ of Atropa belladonna plants, roots cultures, and cell suspension.

n: PM 53:390-395. 1986.
Phillipson JD et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14: 999-1003.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

w  Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,

"

Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

f Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

BELLADONNA ROOT. ..
Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT

15(3): 137. 1994.
Hartmann Th et al., Reinvestigation of the alkaloid composition
of Atropa belladonna plants, roots cultures, and cell suspension.
In: PM 53:390-395. 1986.

Phillipson JD et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14: 999.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

'

BENNET'S ROOT/71

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Rotl
4. Aufl.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopamika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

York 1995.

Bellis perennis

See Wild Daisy

Bennet's Root

Geum urbanum

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried flowering herb, the dried or fresh underground parts
and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a loose panicled,
umbelled cyme with a few terminal and erect flowers. The
pedicles are short-haired. The sepals are 3 to 8 cm long with
long tips, pubescent on the outside and glabrous on the
inside, except for a tomentose border. The epicalyx bracts
are half as long as the sepals, pubescent on both sides and
narrowly lanceolate. The yellow petals are 3 to 7 mm long,
slightly stemmed, and drop easily. The style is jointed and
the stigma flat The small fruits have no stems and are

pubescent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a semi-rosette shrub
with a primary root mat dies off early and is replaced by
adventitious roots. The rhizome is simple, thick, cylindrical
and crooked. The stem is erect, soft-haired, 15 to 70 cm
high; it sprouts from the basal rosette. The basal leaves are
rosette-like and pinnate. The cauline leaves are trifoliate to
tri-pinnate and the stipules are small, fused wim the stem in

----- PAGE 323 -----
4

72/BENNET'S ROOT

the lower part, and ovate-lanceolate roughly dentate to
pinnatesect.

Characteristics: The plant's root has a clove-like scent.

Habitat: Bennet's Root is found in central and southern
Europe, central Asia and North America.

Production: Bennet's Root herb is the aerial part of Geum
urbanum. Bennet's Root (root) is the root of Geum urbanum,
which is usually harvested in May and then air-dried or dried
artificially at a maximum of 35° C.

Other Names: Avens Root, Colewort, Herb Bennet, City
Avens, Wild Rye, Way Bennet, Goldy Star, Geum, European
Avens, Blessed Herb, Star of the Earth, Yellow Avens

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BENNET'S ROOT HERB

Tannins: gallo tannins, ellagitannins, including sanguiin H-6,
casuarictin, pendunculagin, potentillin, tellimagrandin I

EFFECTS: BENNET'S ROOT HERB
The drug has an astringent effect.

COMPOUNDS: BENNET'S ROOT (ROOT)
In the freshly harvested rhizome:

Tannins

Gein (eugenol-vicianose): transformed through drying or
size reduction into eugenol

In the dried rhizome and the roots:

Volatile oil (traces): chief components - eugenol, additional-
ly cis- and trans-myrtanal, cis- and trans-myrtanol

EFFECTS: BENNET'S ROOT (ROOT)
The drug has an astringent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BENNET'S ROOT HERB

Unproven Uses: Although rarely used today, folk medicine
indications have included use of the drug for digestive
complaints and diarrhea, febrile illnesses, and for muscle and
nerve pain. Use as a bath additive for hemorrhoids seems
plausible due the astringent content.

BENNET'S ROOT (ROOT)

Unproven Uses: Internal folk medicine applications include
use for digestive problems such as loss of appetite and
diarrhea. The root of Bennet's Root has been used externally
as a gargle for gum and mucous membrane inflammations
and as a bath additive or poultice for frost bite, hemorrhoids
and skin diseases. Efficacy appears plausible due to the
astringent properties of the tannins.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic applications include use
for inflammations of the bladder and urinary tract.

j

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
BENNET'S ROOT HERB

The herb is rarely used medicinally today. It is found in
some pharmaceutical preparations.

BENNET'S ROOT (ROOT)
Mode of Administration: Infusions are drunk or applied as an
external wash or poultice.

Preparation: To prepare an internal infusion, boil 1/2 to 1
teaspoon coarsely powdered drug in water for 10 minutes
and filter. Prepare an external infusion by adding | teaspoon
coarsely powdered drug to cold water, bringing it briefly to
the boil, leaving it to steep for 10 minutes and then straining.

Daily Dosage: Infusion (internal): 1 cup lukewarm several
times a day. Infusion (external): Use several times a day for
washes or poultices.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

LITERATURE
BENNET'S ROOT HERB

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Psenak M et al., (1970) Planta Med 19(2): 154.

Vollmann C, Schultze W, Nelkenwurz. In: DAZ 135(14): 1238-
1248. 1995.

Vollmann C, Untersuchung der Nelkenwurz. In: DAZ
131(40):2081. 1991.

BENNET'S ROOT (ROOT)

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994, ©

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PsenaTc M et al., (1970) Planta Med 19(2):154.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Vollmann C, Schultze W, Nelkenwurz. In: DAZ 135(14): 1238-
1248. 1995.

Vollmann C, Untersuchung der Nelkenwurz. In: DAZ
131(40):2081. 1991.

----- PAGE 324 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Benzoin
Styrax benzoin

DESCRIPTION

“| Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the

balsamic resin obtained from the mechanically damaged
trunk.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal or axillary
panicled racemes. The flowers are fused and their structures
are in fives. The calyx is campanulate, weakly 5 toothed,
densely silky tomentose and red-brown on the inside. The
corolla is 6 to 11 mm long with 5 tips, brown-red, silky
tomentose on the outside and at the margin. There are 8 to 10
stamens fused below to a tube and a I-chambered ovary
above and 2- to 3-chambered ovary below. The fruit is nut-
like, appressed pubescent with a diameter of up to 3 cm. The
seeds are light brown with 6 longitudinal stripes and are up
to 2 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Styrax benzoin is an evergreen tree,
which grows up to 30 m high. The leaves are alternate and
the petioles are rust brown-downy pubescent. They are
approximately 1 cm long. The lamina is 8 to 13 cm long, 2.5
to 5 cm wide, ovate or elongate with a rounded base and
irregularly curved-dentate margin. The lamina is covered
with white and brown star hairs beneath. The bark is wine-
red and the wood is white.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong fragrance.
Habitat: The plant is native to western Java and Sumatra.

Production: Sumatra benzoin (Gum benzoin) is the balsamic
resin from the damaged trunk of Styrax benzoin and Styrax
paralleloneurum. The optimal age of trees to be harvested is
7 years. The tree is cut, causing it to exude resin to heal the
cuts. The resin is then collected in a vessel and left to melt to
a homogenous mass in the sun.

Other Names: Benjamin Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Ester mixture (70 to 80%): composed of coniferyl benzoate
and cinnamyl benzoate, as well as cinnamyl cinnamoate
(styracin), propyl cinnamoate

Phenylacrylic acids: cinnamic acid (10%)
Benzoic acid (to 30%)
Resins

EFFECTS
The expectorant effect with which the drug is credited could
not be proven experimentally (it possibly originated in

BETA VULGARIS /73

connection with an "aroma,therapy," due to its vanilla
content).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Benzoin is "used for respiratory catarrh.

Chinese Medicine: In China, benzoin is used for stroke,
syncopes, post partal syncope due to heavy loss of blood,
and for chest and stomach pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb preparations are for

internal use.

Storage: Benzoin should be tightly sealed and stored below
25°C.

LITERATURE
Bacchi EM, Sertie JA, Villa N. Katz H, delta7-stigrnasteryl-3
betaD-glucoside from Styrax officinalis. Part II. Planta Med,
61:221-2, 1976 Nov.

Bacchi EM, Sertie JA, Villa N. Katz H, Preliminary
investigations on the herba of Styrax officinalis. I. Planta Med,
61:290-3, 1973 Nov.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

James WD, White SW, Yanklowitz B, Allergic contact
dermatitis to compound tincture of benzoin. J Am Acad
Dermatol 11:847-50, 1984 Nov.

Berberis vulgaris
See Barberry

Bergenia crassifolia
See Elephant-Ears

Beta vulgaris

See Beet

----- PAGE 325 -----
74/BETEL NUT

Betel Nut

Piper betle

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The main medicinal parts are the dried

leaves; the roots and the fruit are also used.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are compact, hanging,
cylindrical and 3.5 to 5 cm long spikes of yellow-green
flowers. There are 2 stamens in the male flowers. The female
stamens have an ovary, which is pubescent at the top and has
3 to 5 stigmas. The fruit is globular, fleshy and about 6 mm
in diameter. The fruit is yellow and becomes red when ripe.
The seeds are also globular.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a dioecious or
monoecious woody climber that can grow to 15 m. It has
numerous small and short adventitious roots. The stem is
thickened at the nodes, and the younger parts are glabrous.
The leaves have a 2.5 to 5 cm long petiole, are broadly
cordate, 5 to 18 cm long and half as wide. The leaves are
glabrous, light green and glossy on both surfaces with 5 to 7
radiating ribs.

Habitat: Piper betle is found in tropical southern Asia and
has been introduced to east Africa, Madagascar and the West
Indies.

Production: Betel Nut leaves are the leaves of Piper betle.
When the leaves are green, they are gathered, pressed and
dried.

Other Names: Betel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.8-1.8%): chief components- chavibetol (betel
phenol), eugenol, additionally allylpyrocatechol (hydroxy-
chavicol), allylpyrocatechol-mono and -diacetate, anethole,
chavibetolacetate, chavicol, methyl eugenol, safrol

Neolignans: including crotepoxide, piperbetol, piperol,

among others

v

EFFECTS
The essential oils are antimicrobial and immune-modulating.

The Betel leaf is centrally sedating.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Betel Nut is used for
coughs, as an expectorant for stomach ailments, diphtheria
and inflammation of the middle ear.

Indian Medicine: In India, Betel Nut is used to treat asthma,
bronchitis, coughs, dyspepsia, rheumatism, leprosy, severe
thirst, alcoholism, syncopes, toothache and impotency.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Today, the drug is obsolete.

LITERATURE

Das PC, Sarkar AK, (1979) Acta Physiol Pol. 30(3):389.
Rawat AKS et al., Ind Perf 31:146-149. 1987.

Sharma ML et al. Ind Perf 26:134-137. 1982.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Beth Root

Trillium erectum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the rhizome and

the dried root and the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has solitary, terminal, hanging
flowers. The 3 green, persistent sepals and the 3 large, white
to red or yellow, wilting sepals are characteristic.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, smooth herb
with an erect stem, which grows from 25 to 40 cm high. It
bears 3 whorled, terminal leaves under the flower, which are
broad, rhomboid and lightly curled. The rhizome is matte
brown, subcorneal, more or less compressed, 3 to 5 cm long
and 2 to 3 cm in diameter. It is often ringed with oblique
lines and with numerous wrinkled root fibres on the upper
surface.

Characteristics: The taste is sweetish then acrid and the odor
is characteristic.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the central and western
US.

Production: Beth Root Stock is the rhizome of Trillium
erectum, Trillium pendulum and other varieties.

Other Names: Birthroot, Indian Shamrock, Lamb's Quarters,
Wake-Robin, Indian Balm, Ground Lily, Coughroot, Jew's-
Harp Plant, Milk Ipecac, Pariswort, Rattlesnake Root,
Snakebite, Three-Leaved, Nightshade

----- PAGE 326 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins: including among others, trillin (disogenin
monoglucoside), trillarin (disogenin diglucoside), aglycones
including cryptogenic chlorogenin, nologenin

Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug has astringent and expectorant properties. It can
severely irritate the area to which it has been applied; the
uritation can cause vomiting.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, Beth Root is used internally for
long and heavy menstruation and externally, it is used for
ulcers, hematoma, and hemorrhoidal

varicose veins,

bleeding.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. In higher dosages, the drug is said to be nauseant,
and to have the effect of promoting labor and menstruation.

Pregnancy: In high dosages, the drug promotes labor;
therefore, it should not be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The ground drug and liquid extract

are used for infusions and poultices.

Daily Dosage: The usual dose is 2 to 4 gm dissolved in
liquid as an infusion.

LITERATURE
Fukuda N et al., (1981) Chem Pharm Bull 29 (2):325.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nakano K et al., (1982) J Chem Soc Chem Commun. 789.
Nakano K et al., (1982) Yakugaku Zasshi 102(11):1031.
Nakano K et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22 (5):1249.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wolters B, Zierpflanzen aus Nordamerika. In: DAZ
137(26):2253-2261. 1997.

BILBERRY / 75

Betonica_ officinalis
See Wood Betony

Betula species

See Birch

Bidens tripartita

See Burr Marigold

Bilberry
Vaccinium  myrtillus

TRADE NAMES
Bilberry, Bilberry Extract, Bilberry Herb (available from
numerous manufacturers,) Time Release Bilberry Power,
Standardized Bilberry Extract, Super Bilberry Plus, Bilberry
Power, Bilberry Leaf

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the ripe, dried fruit and the ripe fresh fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are axillary and solitary.
They are 4 to 7 mm long, short-pedicled, greenish and tinged
with pale pink. The calyx is fused to the ovary, persistent and
indistinctly 5-lobed. The corolla is globular-jug-shaped and
has 5 tips. There are 8 to 10 stamens, which are enclosed and
shorter than the styles. They have glabrous filaments that
widen toward the base and 2 horn-like yellow-brown anthers,
whose spurred appendage is erect. The fruit is a globular,
blue-black, frosted, many-seeded berry with purple pulp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a deciduous, dwarf
shrub with sharp-edged, green branches 15 to 50 cm high.
The leaves are alternate, ovate or oblong-ovate, acuminate
and finely serrate.

Habitat: The plant is common to central and northern
Europe, Asia and North America.

Production: The leaves and fruit of Bilberry are collected in
the wild from July to August and dried in the shade.

Not to be Confused With: Myrtilli folium should not be
confused with the fruits of Vaccinium uliginosum.

Other Names: Whortleberry, Blueberry, Burren myrtle,
Dyeberry, Huckleberry, Hurtleberry, Wineberry, Black
Whortles, Hurts, Bleaberry, Airelle, Trackleberry

----- PAGE 327 -----
76 /BILBERRY

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BILBERRY LEAF

Catechin tannins (I to 7%): including oligomeric proantho-
cyandins

Flavonoids: including among others, avicularin, hyperoside,
isoquercitrin, quercitrin, meratine, astragaline

Iridoide monoterpenes: asperuloside, monotropein
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid

Phenolic acids: including among others, salicylic acid,
gentisic acid

Quinolizidine alkaloids: myrtine, epimyrtine (hybrids of
Vaccinium myrtillus x V. vitis-idaea contain arbutin [hydro-
quine glucosides]).

EFFECTS: BILBERRY LEAF
The drug is astringent and useful for treating diarrhea due to
the catechin tannin content. The drug is antiviral and, in
animal experiments, lipid-lowering.

It is thought that the chromium content of the drug is
responsible for a possible antidiabetic effect.

COMPOUNDS: BILBERRY FRUIT
Fruit acids: including among others, quinic acid (3-5%),
malic acid, citric acid

Tannins (5-12%): chiefly catechin tannins, including oligo-
meric procyanidins

Anthocyanoides (0.1% -0.5%): chief components delphini-
dine-3-O-arabinoside, delphinidine-3-O-galactoside, delphi-
nidine-3-O-glucoside, cyanidin, petunidin, —_ peonidin,
malvidin

Flavonoids: including among others, hyperoside, isoquercit-
rin, quercitrin, astragaline

Iridoids: including asperuloside, onotropein (only in the
unripe fruits)

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid
Pectins

EFFECTS: BILBERRY FRUIT -
The drug is an astringent and has anti-diarrheal action due to
the catechin tannin content which is also responsible for the
wound healing effect.

Limited data show that the bilberry anthranocyoside is anti-
exudative, vessel-protective, inhibits platelet aggregation in
human blood and has an anti-ulcer effect.

Several animal studies have demonstrated that anthocyano-
sides have a collagen stabilizing effect, and provide protec-
tion againts ischemia reperfusion injury (Bertuglia, 1995.)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Increased synthesis of connective tissue is one of the
contributing factors that may lead to blindness caused by
diabetic retinopathy. Anthocyanides have been shown to
slow the synthesis of polymeric collagen in diabetic patients
(Boniface, 1996.)

CLINICAL STUDIES
One case study involving 20 patients with diabetic retinopa-
thy that were treated with 400 mg of Bilberry extract twice
daily demonstrated increased conjunctival capillary resis-
tance in the subjects that were evaluated. The authors of the
study concluded that Bilberry provides protection against
hemorrhage of the retina (Sevin, 1996.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BILBERRY LEAF

Unproven Uses: Bilberry has been used in Diabetes Mellitus
(for prevention and treatment); complaints of the gastrointes-
tinal tract, kidney and urinary tract, arthritis, gout and
dermatitis. External uses include inflammation of the oral
mucosa, eye inflammation, burns and skin diseases.

BILBERRY FRUIT
« Diarrhea
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Internally, Bilberry is used for nonspecific, acute diarrhea
(particularly in light cases of enteritis). Externally the berry
is used for mild inflammation of the mucous membranes of
mouth and throat.

Unproven Uses: Well constructed clinical studies in humans
that give conclusive support for use of Bilberry in the
treatment of diabetic retinopathy or as a treatment for
inproving night vision are not available. There is moderate
support in animal model trials that support the vasoprotective
and anti-edema properties of Bilberry. The literature also
demonstrates efficacy in animal models for the treatment of
diabetes, hyperlipidemia and gastric ulcers. Folk medicine
uses include internal use for vomiting, bleeding and hemor-
roids and external use for poorly healing skin ulcers and
wound healing.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BILBERRY LEAF

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Digestive complaints due to the high
tannin content are possible.

Drug Interactions: Bilberry has a platelet aggregation
inhibiting effect. There is a possiblility that the herb can
interact with other platelet aggregation inhibitors such as
aspirin and anticoagulants like warfarin.

----- PAGE 328 -----
m*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

BILBERRY FRUIT
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

BILBERRY LEAF

The signs of poisoning observed in animal experiments
(including cachexia, anemia, icterus) appeared only in
conjunction with the chronic administration of high dosages

and are presumably effects of the tannins.

DOSAGE

BILBERRY LEAF

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
1 g finely cut drug (1 teaspoonful = approximately 0.6g) and
strain after 10 to 15 minutes. Not to be taken over a long

duration.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage of tea is 1 cup 2 to 3 times
daily. For an infusion, a single dose is equal to 1 g per cup.

BILBERRY FRUIT
Mode of Administration: Tablets, capsules, macerated drug
for infusions for internal use and local application.

How — Supplied:
Most commercially available capsules and tablets are stand-
ardized at 25 to 36% anthocyanoside content.

Capsule — 40 mg, 60 mg, 80 mg, 125 mg, 160 mg, 310 mg,
400 mg, 500 mg, 1000 mg

Tablet — 40 mg

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 5 to 10 g mashed
drug in cold water, bring to a simmer for 10 minutes, then
strain (1 teaspoonful = 4 g drug). A 10% decoction is
prepared for external use.

Daily Dose: 20 to 60 g of unprocessed fruit for internal use.
Externally use a 10% infusion. For commercially available
tablets and capsules that are standardized to 36% anthocya-
nosides, the recommended dose is 60 to 160 mg three times

daily.

LITERATURE

BILBERRY LEAF

Bertuglia S, Malandrino S.Colantuoni A Effect of Vaccinium
myrtillus anthocyanosides on ischaemia reperfusion injury in
hamster cheek pouch microcirculation. Pharmacol Res, 84:183-7,
Mar-Apr, 1995.

Bettini V et al., (1984) Fitoterapia 55(6):323.
Bettini V et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 56(1):3.

Bomser J et al., In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts
from Vaccinium species. In: PM 62(3):212-216. 1996.

BILBERRY/77

Bosio E et al., Ginkgo biloba L. and Vaccinium myrtillus L.
extracts prevent photo-induced oxidation of low density
lipoproteins. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44m Ann Congress of
GA, 24. 1996.

Cignarella A, Bertozzi D, Pinna C, Puglisi L, Hypolipidemic
activity of Vaccinium myrtillus leaves on an model of
genetically hyperlipidemic rat. In: PM 58(Suppl. 7):A581. 1992.

Colantuoni A, Bertuglia S, Magistretti MJ, Donato L Effects of
Vaccinium Myrtillus anthocyanosides on arterial vasomotion.
Arzneimittelforschung, 84:905-9, Sep, 1991.

Dombrowicz E, Zadernowski R, Swiatek L Phenolic acids in
leaves of Arctostaphylos uva ursi L. Vaccinium vitis idaea L.

and Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie, 84:680-1, Sep, 1991.

Frohne D, Vaccinium myrtillus L.- Die Heidelbeere. In: ZPT
11(6):209-211. 1999,

Kyerematen G, Sandberg F, (1986) Acta Pharm Suec. 23:101.
Sticher O et al., (1979) Planta Med 35:253.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

BILBERRY FRUIT

Bertuglia S, et al. Effect of Vacciniu myrtillus anthocyanosides
on ischaema reperfusion injury in hamster cheek pouch
microcirculation. Pharmaol Res:31; 183-187. 1995.

Bettini V et al., (1984) Fitoterapia 55(6):323.

Bettini V et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 56(1 ):3.

Bomser J et al., In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts
from Vaccinium species. In: PM 62(3):212-216. 1996.
Boniface R & Robert AM: Influence of anthocyanosides on
human connective tissue metabolism. Klin Monatsbl
Augenheilkd 209(6):368-372. 1996.

Bosio E et al., Ginkgo biloba L. and Vaccinium myrtillus L.
extracts prevent photo-induced oxidation of low density
lipoproteins. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of
GA, 24. 1996.

Cignarella A, Bertozzi D, Pinna C, Puglisi L, Hypolipidemic
activity of Vaccinium myrtillus leaves on an model of
genetically hyperlipidemic rat. In: PM 58(Suppl. 7):A581. 1992.
Frohne D, Vaccinium myrtillus L.- Die Heidelbeere. In: ZPT
11(6):209-211. 1999.

Kyerematen G, Sandberg F, (1986) Acta Pharm Suec 23:101.

----- PAGE 329 -----
78/BILBERRY

Sevin R, Cuendent JF. Effects d'unne association
d'anthocyanosides de myrtille et de beta-carotene sur la
resistance capillaire des diabetiques. Ophthalmologica: 152:109-
117. 1966.

Sticher O et al., (1979) Planta Med 35:253.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Birch

Betula species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark, leaves

and buds.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers of Betula pendula are
sessile and oblong-cylindrical 6 to 10 cm long. The female
catkins are petioled, cylindrical and 2 to 4 cm long by 8 to 10
mm thick when fully grown. They are densely flowered, first
yellow-green, later light green. The fruit scales are brownish
and pubescent or glabrous. The middle lobes are small,
short-triangular and shorter than the broad, always revolute
side lobes. The fruit wings are half-oval and 2 to 3 times as
broad as the fruit.

The male catkins of Betula pubescens are sessile and oblong-
cylindrical. They are initially upright, later hanging, 2.5 to 4
cm long and 6 to 10 mm thick, greenish to light brown. The
middle lobes of the fruit scales protrude clearly, are usually
linguiform-elogated and generally longer than the usually
sharp-cornered, clearly evolute side lobes. The fruit scales
are about as broad as the fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Betula pendula is a tree that grows
up to 30 cm high, with a snow white bark that usually peels
off in horizontal strips or changes into a black, stony, hard
bark. Young branches are glabrous and thickly covered in
warty resin glands. The petioled leaves are dark green above,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

a lighter gray-green below. They have serrate margins and
particularly tightly packed veins. The lamina are about 3 to 7
cm long by 2 to 5 cm wide, rhomboid-triangular, acuminate,
glabrous, densely covered in glands, and have a doubly
serrate margin. They are dark green and glabrous above and
a lighter green below; they are initially downy and later
pubescent in the vein axils.

Habitat: Betula pendula and Betula pubescens are indige-
nous to Europe from the northern Mediterranean regions to
Siberia and to temperate regions of Asia.

Production: Birch leaf consists of the fresh or dried leaf of
Betula pendula (syn. Betula verrucosa), Betula pubescens, or
of both species. The leaves are collected in the wild during
the spring and dried at room temperature in the shade. Birch
tar (Betulae oleum empyreumaticum retificatum) is a clear,
dark brown oil obtained from Betula pendula or Betula
pubescens through a distillation process.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: BIRCH LEAF

Triterpene alcohol ester with saponin-like effect: betula-
triterpene saponins

Flavonoids: quercetin, myricetin

digalactosides

including hyperoside,

Proanthocyan idins
Volatile oil: including sesquiterpene oxide

Monoterpene glucosides: including betula alboside A and B,
roseoside

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid
Ascorbic acid
3,4'-dihydroxy propiophenone-3-beta-D-glucoside

EFFECTS: BIRCH LEAF

Birch leaves have a mild saluretic effect and are antipyretic.
In animal tests, they have been shown to increase the amount
of urine.

COMPOUNDS: BIRCH TAR

Phenols (6%): including among others guaiacol, cresole,
catechol, pyrogallol, 5-propyl-pyrogallol dimethyl ether and
5-methyl-pyrogallol dimethyl ether

EFFECTS: BIRCH TAR

The aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons in birch tar are
irritating to die skin and have an antiparasitic effect. Its use
for diverse skin conditions and for parasitic infestation such
as scabies seems plausible.

----- PAGE 330 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BIRCH LEAVES
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones
+ Rheumatism

Unproven Uses: The leaves are used in flushing-out therapy
for bacterial and inflammatory diseases of the urinary tract
and for kidney gravel. They are also used in adjunct therapy
for rheumatic ailments, for increasing amount of urine. In
folk medicine, the leaves are used as a blood purifier, and for
gout and rheumatism. Externally, the leaves are used for hair
loss and dandruff.

BIRCH TAR

Unproven Uses: External birch tar uses include parasitic
infestation of the skin with subsequent hair loss, rheumatism
and gout (ointment); dry eczema and dermatoses (liquid
preparations), psoriasis and other chronic skin diseases.
Birch tar is a constituent of "Unguentum contra scabiem"
that is used for the treatment of scabies.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

BIRCH LEAF
The drug should not be used for edema when there is

reduced cardiac or kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

BIRCH LEAF

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

BIRCH TAR

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Birch tar
can cause irritations on sensitive skin. Administration of the
drug is not advisable, due to the possible presence of
cancerogenic hydrocarbons.

DOSAGE
BIRCH LEAF

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb or dry extracts
are used for teas; other galenic preparations and freshly
pressed plant juices can also be used internally.

Preparation: Tea is prepared by pouring 150 ml hot water
over 1 to 2 dessertspoons of drug and then straining the
leaves out after 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 2 to 3 g drug
several times a day with a caution to ensure ample intake of
fluid (minimum 2 liters per day). A fresh cup of tea is taken
between meals 3 to 4 times a day

BIRCH 179

Storage: Birch leaf should be stored in sealed containers
protected from light and moisture.

BIRCH TAR
Mode of Administration: Birch Tar is used in combination
preparations as external ointments and liniments.

Storage: Birch tar should be stored in tightly sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
BIRCH LEAF

Anonym, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie. In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Bufe A, Spangfort MD, Kahlert H, Schlaak M, Becker WM,
The major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 shows ribonuclease
activity. Planta, 175:413-5, 1996.

Cadot P, LeJoly M, Van Hoeyveld EM, Stevens EA, Influence
of the pH of the extraction medium on the composition of
birch (Betula verrucosa) pollen extracts. Allergy, 108:431-7,
1995 May.
Carat A, Lacouture I, Fraisse D, Lamaison JL, Standardization
of the birch leaf. Ann Pharm Fr, 175:231-5, 1996.

Cirla AM, Sforza N, Rofli GP, Alessandrini A, Stanizzi R,
Dorigo N, Sala E, Delia Torre F, Preseasonal intranasal
immunotherapy in birch-alder allergic rhinitis. A double-blind
study. Allergy, 175:299-305, 1996 May.

Czygan FC, Betula pendula - Die Birke. Z Phytother 10(1989):
135-139.

Davidov MI, Goriunov VG, Kubarikov PG, Phytoperfusion of
the bladder after adenomectomy. Urol Nefrol (Mosk), 175:19-
20, 1995 Sep-Oct.

Fountain DW, Berggren B, Nilsson S, Einarsson R, Expression
of birch pollen-specific IgE-binding activity in seeds and other
plant parts of birch trees (Betula verrucosa Ehrh.). Int Arch
Allergy Immunol, 98:370-6, 1992.

Hasler A et al., High-performance liquid chromatographic
determination of five widespread flavonoid aglycones. J.
Chromatogr. 508, 1(1990): 236-40.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Horhammer L, Wagner H, Luck R, Arch Pharm 290:338-341.
1957.

Karatodorof K, Kalarova R, (1977) Izn Durzh Inst Kontrol Lek
Sredstva 10:103-9.

Keinanen M, Comparison of methods for extraction of
flavonoids fiom birch leaves carried out using high-performance
liquid chromatography. J. Agric. Food Chem. 41, 11(1993):
1986-90.

Kiiskinen M, Korhonen M, Kangasjaervi J, Immunological
study of the HLA class II antigen associated wira birch pollen
allergy. Nippon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho, 35:541-50, 1992 Apr.

----- PAGE 331 -----
80/BIRCH

Lee MW et al., Phenolic compounds of the leaves of Betula.
Arch. Pharmaceutical. Res. 15, 3(1992): 211-14.

Olsen OT et al., A double-blind randomized study investigating
the efficacy and specificity of immunotherapy witii Artemisia
vulgaris or Phleum pratense/betula verrucosa. Allergol
Immunopathol (Madr), 23:73-8, 1995 Mar-Apr.

Ossipov V et al., HPLC isolation and identification of
flavonoids from white birch. Biochem Syst. Ecol. 23, 3(1995):
213-22.

Pietta PG et al., HPLC determination of the flavonoid
glycosides from Betulae folium. Chromatographia, 28, 5-
6(1989); 311-12.

Pisha E et al., Discovery of betulinic acid as a selective
inhibitor of human melanoma mat functions by induction of
apoptosis. In: Nature Medicine 1:1046-1051. 1995.

Ramirez J, Carpizo JA, Ipsen H, Carreira J, Lombardero M,
Quantification in mass units of Bet v 1 the main allergen of
Betula verrucosa pollen by a monoclonal antibody based-
ELISA. Clin Exp Allergy, 27:926-31, 1997 Aug.

Rickling B, Glombitza KW, Saponins in the leaves of birch?
Hemolytic dammarane triterpenoids esters of Betula pendula.
Janta Med 59 (1993), 77.
Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
rostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.

Schilcher H, Rau H, Nachweis der aquaretischen Wirkung von
Birkenblatter- und Goldrutenauszugen im Tierversuch. Urologe
B 28(1988): 274-280.

Sokeland J, Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1):8.
1989.

Spangfort MD, Ipsen H, Sparholt SH, Aasmul-Olsen S, Osmark
, Poulsen FM, Larsen M, M rtz E, Roepstorff P, Larsen JN,
Characterisation of recombinant isoforms of birch pollen
allergen Bet v 1. Adv Exp Med Biol, 175:251-4, 1996.

Tschesche R, Ciper F, Breitmeier E, Chem Ber 110:3111-3117.
977.

Valenta R, Duchene M, Ebner C, Valent P, Sillaber C, Deviller
P, Ferreira F, TeJkl M, Edelmann H, Kraft D, et al., Profilins
constitute a novel family of functional plant pan-allergens. J
Exp Med, 175:377-85, 1992 Feb 1.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

BIRCH TAR
Kreitmair H, PA 8:534-536. 1953.

Nowak GA, Am Perf Cosmet 81:37-39. 1966.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Birthwort

Aristolochia clematitis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial portion
(when in blossom) and the root.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has dirty yellow flowers,
usually in axillary groups of 7. The perigone forms a straight
tube, which is bulbous beneath and has a linguiform, oblong-
ovate, obtuse border. There are 6 stamens, the style is
upward growing, and the stigma is 6-lobed. The flower
briefly traps the insects that pollinate it. The fruit is a
globose, pear-shaped capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to a height of 30 to
100 cm. The stem is erect, simple, grooved and glabrous.
The leaves are alternate, long-petioled, cordate-reniform,
yellow-green with prominent ribs.

Characteristics: The plant has a fruit-like fragrance and is

poisonous.

Habitat: Indigenous to Mediterranean regions, Asia Minor
and the Caucasus, but is also found in numerous other

regions.

Production: Birthwort is the aerial part of Aristolochia

clematitis.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Aristolochic acids {10-nitro-phenanthrene-l-acids): in par-
ticular aristolochic acids I and II

Isoquinoline alkaloids: including magnoflorin, corytuberin

----- PAGE 332 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Volatile oil (0.03 to 0.2%): chief constituents alpha-pinene,
alpha-terpineol

EFFECTS
The aristolochic acids have a phagocytosis- and metabolism-
activating effect. They are also thought to improve the
production of lymphokinins. Activation of phagocytes has
been demonstrated in animal tests in rabbits and guinea pigs,
along with an increase in serum bactericides and stimulation
of pMysine. In addition, in animal tests, immune resistance to
Herpes simplex viruses of the eye was proven. In the ring
test, stimulation and formation of granulation tissue was
demonstrated in rats. In mice, there was a clear increase in
the survival rate in cases of general infection. No significant
results were recorded in cases where infections had no or
only a low leucocytic immune reaction. The drug's pure
aristolochic acid acts similarly to colchicine; it is nephrotox-
ic, carcinogenic and mutagenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Birthwort is used to stimulate the immune
system and in the treatment of allergically caused gastroin-
testinal and gallbladder colic. The plant is used in a wide
variety of ways in the folk medicine of nearly all European

countries.

Chinese Medicine: Uses in Chinese medicine include joint
pain, stomachache, malaria and abscesses.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic indications include gyne-
cological disorders and climacteric symptoms, as well as the
treatment of wounds and ulcers. It is also used as a treatment
after major surgery and in ear-nose-throat treatments.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Birthwort is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Birthwort is highly toxic. The intake of acutely
toxic doses leads to vomiting, gastroenteritis, spasms, severe
kidney damage and eventually to death by kidney failure.
The chronic intake of low dosages among both humans and
laboratory animals led to the development of tumors.
Because of the genotoxic and carcinogenic effects of the
aristolochic acids, the drug is not to be administered even in
small dosages.

Pregnancy: Birthwort is not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Birthwort is used as a tincture in an
ethanol solution. No further information is available.

How Supplied: Birthwort is available in homeopathic dilu-
tions of DI.

LITERATURE
Che CT et al., (1984) J Nat Prod 47(2):331.

BISHOP'S WEED/81

Fanselow G, Der Einflu(3 von Pflanzenextrakten (Echinacea
purpurea, Aristolochia clematitis) und homoopathischen
Medikamenten auf die Phagocytoseleistung humaner
Granulocyten in vitro. In: Dissertation Berlin. 1981.

Henrickson CU, (1970) Z Immunitats Forsch 5:425.

Mengs U, Klein M, Genotoxic Effects of Aristolochic Acid in
the Mouse Micronucleus Test. In: PM 52(6):502. 1988.

Mix DB et al., (1982) J Nat Prod 45(6):657.

Siess M, Seybold G, Untersuchungen iiber die Wirkung von
Pulsatilla pratensis, Cimicifuga racemosa und Aristolochia
clematis auf den Ostrus infantiler und kastrierter weifier Mause.
In: Arzneim Forsch 10:514. 1960.

Strauch R, Hiller K, (1974) Pharmazie 29(10/11):656.

Tympner KD, (1981) Z Angew Phytother 5:181.

Further information in:

Chan H, But P (Eds.), Pharmacology and Applications of
Chinese Materia Medica, Vol. 1, Ed. World Scientific Singapore
1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Bishop's Weed

Ammi Visnaga

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The rays are slender and patent in the
flower, becoming erect, thickened and indurate in the fruit.
The bracts are | to 2-pinnatisect, equaling or exceeding the
rays, and the bracteoles are subulate. The pedicles are erect,
stout and rigid in the fruit. The fruit is 2 to 2.5 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Bishop's Weed is a robust annual or
biennial that grows up to 100 cm tall. The lower leaves are

----- PAGE 333 -----
82/BISHOP'S WEED

pinnate, the others are 2 to 3 pinnate. All of the leaves have
narrow linear or filform lobes.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Mediterranean region, and is
cultivated in the U.S., Mexico, Chile and Argentina.

Production: Bishop's Weed fruit consists of the dried, ripe
fruits of Ammi Visnaga.

Other Names: Khella, Khella Fruits, Greater Ammi

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Furochromones: particularly khellin, visnagin, khellol and

khellol glucoside
Pyranocoumarins: particularly visnadin and samidin

Flavonoids: including quercetin and isohamnetin and their 3-

sulfates
Volatile oil
Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The drug intensifies coronary and myocardial circulation,
acting as a mild positive ionotrope. It has an antispasmodic
effect on smooth muscles.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Bishop's Weed has been used for angina
pectoris, cardiac insufficiency, paroxysmal tachycardia, extra
systoles, hypertonia, asthma, whooping cough and cramp-
like complaints of the abdomen.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Infrequently, a cholestatic jaundice (reversible) is observed
following administration of the drug. The drug also pos-

sesses a phototoxic effect.

OVERDOSAGE

Long-term use or overdose of the
queasiness, dizziness, loss of appetite, headache or sleep
disorders. Very high dosages, corresponding to over 100 mg
khellin, may cause elevated levels (reversible) of liver

enzymes in blood plasma.

drug can lead to

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Duarte J et al., Effects of visnadine on rat vascular smooth
muscle. In: PM 63(3):233-236. 1997.

Greinwald R, Stobernack HP, Ammi Visnaga - Das
Bischhofskraut. In: ZPT 11(2):65. 1990.

Le Quesne PW et al., INP 48:496. 1985.
Martelli P et al., J Chromatogr 301:297. 1984.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Trunzler G, Phytotherapeutische Moglichkeiten bei Herz- und
arteriellen Gefa(3erkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(5): 147. 1989.

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M: Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Bistort

Persicaria bistorta

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and the
rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering stem terminates in a
compact, cylindrical, false spike of flesh-colored flowers
without a terminal bud. The pedicle is winged. The flowers
consist of 5 sepals, 8 stamens and an ovary with 2 to 3 styles.
The flowers are in pairs, one of which is complete, the other
only having a rudimentary ovary. Only the latter ripens. The
complete flowers can be cross-pollinated by insects. The
fruit is a three-seeded achene. The ripe seeds are small,

brown and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, 30 cm to 1
m high herb on a thick, somewhat flattened and twisted S-
shaped rhizome. The radical, oval leaves grow out of the
rhizome to form basal rosette leaves with cordate bases,
which are blue-green above and somewhat undulate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, North America
and Asia.

Production: Bistort root and rhizome is the subterranean part
of Persicaria bistorta. The root-stocks of the older plants are
harvested, cleaned and freed from green parts and rootlets.
The stronger parts are then cut up, and this material is dried
in the sun.

----- PAGE 334 -----
“fe

si/t

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Adderwort, Dragonwort, Easter Giant. Easter
Mangiant, Oderwort, Osterick, Patience Dock, Red Legs,
Snakeweed, Sweet Dock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins (15-36%): chiefly catechin tannins, small quantity

of gallo tannins
Starch (in the root 30%)

EFFECTS
The active agents are the galenic tannin substance, starch,

catechin and silicic acid. Higher concentrations of the root
cause an increase in the formation of mucous. It is also an
astringent.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used in the treatment of
digestive disorders, particularly diarrhea and for internal
bleeding. Externally, it is used as a gargle for mouth and
throat infections and as an ointment for wounds.

Chinese Medicine: Preparations from the rhizome are used
for epilepsy, fever, tetanus, carbuncles, snake and mosquito
bites, scrofulous and cramps in the hands and feet.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internally as a powdered drug for

infusion, or externally as an extract or ointment.

Preparation:

Infusion (internal) — Macerate 50 g drug in 1 1 water for 6
hours, percolate and sweeten as required (Penso, 1987).

Infusion (external) — Boil 60 g drug with 1 1 water for 15
minutes, percolate and cool (Penso, 1987).

Liquid extract — drug 1:1 in 25% ethanol (BHP83).
Tincture — drug 1:5 in 25% ethanol (BHP83).

Daily Dosage:

f§K Internal Dosage

Powder—in the form of 0.25 g gelatine capsules, 2 to 4
capsules every 3 hours.

Decoction—1 to 2 g for each decoction, 3 times a day.
Infusion—200 ml every 3 hours.
Liquid extract—1 to 2 ml 3 times daily.

Tincture—1 to 3 ml 3 times daily.

BITTER APPLE/83

External Dosage

Decoction—poultice applied every 2 hours.
LITERATURE

Gonnet JF, (1981) Biochem Syst Ecol 9(4):299.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Penso G, Medico Farmaceutica, Milano, 1987.

Rao PRSP, Rao EV, (1977) Curr. Sci 48(18):640.

Bitter Apple

Citrullus colocynthis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
pulp.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow and appear singly
in the leaf axils. The fruit is about the size of an apple. It is
yellow, smooth, dry and very bitter. When ripe, the fruit
contains white spongy flesh within the coriaceous peel, with
numerous ovate, white or brownish seeds. The seeds are 0.75
cm long and 0.5 cm wide, ovate, compressed, without an
edge, oily and somewhat shiny.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Bitter Apple is an annual similar to a
watermelon plant. The stems are leafy and rough-haired. The
leaves are alternate on long petioles. They are triangular,
divided, variously indented, obtuse and pubescent. The upper
surface is delicate green, the lower surface rough and pale.

Characteristics: Bitter Apple (the drug) is highly poisonous.

Habitat: Bitter Apple is indigenous to Turkey and southern
Mediterranean countries. It is also found in Sri Lanka, Egypt,
Syria and the Arabian Gulf.

Production: Bitter Apples are the ripe fruits of Citrullus
colocynthis that have been removed from the harder outer

layer.

Other Names: Colocynth Pulp, Bitter Cucumber

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cucurbitacins: including cucurbitacin E-, J-, L-glucosides
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid
Fatty oil (in the seeds)

EFFECTS
Bitter Apple irritates the intestinal mucous membrane,
increasing liquid production.

----- PAGE 335 -----
84/BITTER APPLE

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Bitter Apple are used as a
drastic purgative in fixed combinations in the treatment of
acute and chronic constipation with various causes. It is also
used in pregnancy and in the treatment of liver and
gallbladder disorders.

Indian Medicine: Acitis and elephantiasis are among the
conditions treated with Bitter Apple in Indian medicine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is severely poisonous. It has a strongly irritating
(and painful) effect on mucous membranes due to its
cucurbitacin glycoside content, out of which cucurbitacins
are released in watery environments.

OVERDOSAGE
Vomiting, bloody diarrhea, colic, and kidney irritation
follow the intake of toxic dosages (0.6 to 1 g), and then
increased diuresis that progresses to anuria. Lethal dosages
(starting at 2 g) lead to convulsions, paralysis and, if
untreated, to death through circulatory collapse. The treat-
ment for poisonings should proceed symptomatically follow-
ing gastric lavage. Administration in allopathic dosages is no
longer defensible.

LITERATURE
Habs M et al., (1984) J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 108(1):154.

Konopa J et al., In: Advances in Antimicrobial and
Antineoplastic Chemotherapy, Vol. 2, Ed. M. Semonsky,
Avicenna Press Prague 1972.

Lavie D et al., (1964) Phytochemistry 3:52.
Rawson MD, (1966) Lancet 1:1121.
Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytophannaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Bitter Candytuft

Iberis amara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds and
the whole flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The stemmed flowers are arranged in
racemes; there are 4 orbicular, diagonally splayed sepals
approximately 2 mm long with white or reddish membranous
margins and 4 obovate-elongate white petals, the outer ones
approximately 6 mm, the inner ones 3 mm long. The plant
has 2 short and 4 long stamens and a superior 4-carpled
ovary; the carpels are fused. The fruit is a small pod, 4 to 5
mm long, almost circular with wide-winged fruit sides and a
tough margin. Each of the 2 chambers has only 1 seed. The
seeds are semi-ovoid, 2.5 to 3 mm long, flat and approxi-
mately 1 mm thick. They are usually narrow-winged at the
margin, brown and smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an herb, occasionally
biennial, up to 40 cm high. The leaves are elongate-
cuneiform and obtuse. The lower leaves are often spatulate
and narrow toward the petiole. The upper leaves are sessile,
usually with 2 to 4 blunt teeth at wide intervals and a ciliate
margin. The stem is upright with splayed branches and
downy-haired at the edges.

Habitat: The plant is found in most parts of western, central
and southern Europe, in the Caucasus, and also in Algeria.

Production: Bitter Candytuft seeds are the ripe seeds of
Iberis amara, which are collected in the wild and cultivated.
Bitter Candytuft herb is the fresh, whole flowering plant of
cultivated Iberis amara.

Other Names: Clown's Mustard, White Candytuft

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS

Cucurbitacins (0.2 to 0.4%): particularly cucurbitacins
E and I

Glucosinolates (1%): glucoiberin, glucocheiroline, glucoi-
berviridine

Fatty oil (12%): chief fatty acids are behenic acid (45%),
oleic acid (20%), palmitic acid (10%) and linolenic acid

(10%)

EFFECTS: BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS

The cucurbitacins contained in the seeds are toxic, cytotoxic
and generally irritating to die small and large intestines.
Furthermore, the seeds exhibit a mildly antimicrobial and
fungistatic effect.

----- PAGE 336 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

COMPOUNDS: BITTER CANDYTUFT HERB
Cucurbitacins: particularly cucurbitacins E and I

Flavonoids: including —_ kempferol-3-0-arabinosido-7-0-
rhamnoside, kempferol-7-O-rhamnoside, quercetin-3-O-glu-
cosido-7-O-rhamnoside (high concentration in the flowers)

EFFECTS: BITTER CANDYTUFT HERB

The chief active ingredients of the fresh plant are cucurbita-
cins. A significant anti-edematous effect was exhibited in
animal experiments. Its nature as a bitter substance makes its
administration both as a choleretic and for stimulating the
secretion of gastric juices appear plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses for the drug have

included problems with cardiac arrhythmia and
insufficiency.
Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include cardiac

arrhythmia and insufficiency.

BITTER CANDYTUFT HERB
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine usage includes digestion

problems.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS

The drug is toxic, due to its cucurbitacin content. Symptoms
of poisoning could include vomiting, diarrhea, colic and
kidney irritation. Cases of poisonings, however, have not
been documented.

BITTER CANDYTUFT HERB

No risks are known in connection with the administration of
homeopathic dosages of the drug. The drug is mildly toxic
due to its (low) level of cucurbitacins. Symptoms of
poisoning could include vomiting, diarrhea, colic and kidney
irritation. Cases of poisonings have, however, never been
documented.

OVERDOSAGE

BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS

In case vomiting has not already occurred, gastric lavage
should be induced using burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution and sodium sulfate.

Following gastrointestinal emptying and installation of
activated charcoal, begin therapy for poisoning. Diazepam
(i.v.) for muscle spasm may be necessary, along with
electrolyte substitution and treatment for possible cases of
acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In the event of
shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused. Moni-
toring of kidney function is imperative. Intubation and
oxygen respiration also may be necessary.

BITTER MILKWORT / 85

DOSAGE
BITTER CANDYTUFT SEEDS
How Supplied: Commercially prepared pharmaceutical com-

pounds only.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 ml sc: 3 times daily (acute); 1 ml sc once a
day (chronic) (HAB1).

BETTER CANDYTUFT HERB
How Supplied: Only available in commercial pharmaceutical

compound preparations.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-

1994,

Kowalewski Z, Wierzbicka K, Flavonoid compounds in the
blossoms of Iberis amara, L Planta Med, 20:328-39. 1971 Dec.

Uhlenbruck G, Dahr W, Studies on lectins with a broad
agglutination spectrum. XII. N-acetyl-D-galactosamine specific
lectins fiom the seeds of Soja hispida, Bauhinia purpurea. Iberis
amara, Moluccella laevis and Vicia graminea. Vox Sang,
21:338-51, 1971 Oct.

Bitter Milkwort

Polygala amara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering plant

with root.

Flower and Fruit: The blue or occasionally white or pink
flowers are in many-blossomed racemes. Of the 5 sepals, the
2 lateral ones are large, petal-like, patent and 3-veined. The
other 3 are smaller; die middle vein is green. The 3 petals are
fused together with die stamens. These form 2 clusters in 2
green pockets on the larger, lower petal. The 2 upper petals
form a kind of upper lip. The ovary is superior and bilocular
witfi a spoon-like style. The fruit is an obcordate capsule,
compressed at die sides and enclosed in the sepals.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 5 to 15 cm
high. The stems are branched at the base, decumbent or
ascending. The basal leaves form a rosette, while the cauline
leaves are alternate, oblong-cuneate or obovate-lanceolate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe.

Production: Bitter Milkwort herb, including its roots, is die
complete plant of Polygala amara.

----- PAGE 337 -----
86 /BITTER MILKWORT

Other Names: European Bitter Polygala, European Senega
Snakeroot, Evergreen Snakeroot, Flowering Wintergreen,
Little Pollom

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins (1-2%)

Bitter principles: polygalin (polygamarin)

Phenol glycosides: monotropitoside (methyl salicylic acid-
primveroside)

Polygalite (acerite, 1.5-anhydrosorbite)

EFFECTS
The drug is mildly expectorant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Bitter Milkwort is used for conditions of the

respiratory tract, cough and bronchitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: The drug is contained in tea for the treatment

of bronchitis.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Bitter Orange

Citrus aurantiwn

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried

fruit peel, the flowers, the seeds and the extracted essential
oil.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged singly or in
clusters in the axils, and are very fragrant. The calyx is cup-
shaped, and the 5 thick fleshy petals are an intense white and
revolute. The fruit is about 7.5 cm in diameter (similar in
size to a cherry), subglobose, slightly flattened at both ends,
10- to 12-locular. The peel is thick, rough and orange when
ripe. The fruit pulp is acidic. The core is hollow when ripe.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: Bitter Orange is an evergreen tree
with a rounded crown and smooth grayish-brown bark. The
branches are angular when young, becoming terete and
glabrous soon after, with a few stout but flexible axillary
spines. The alternate leaves are 7.5 to 10 cm, broadly
elliptoid, subacute at the apex, cuneate or rounded below.
The upper surface is a shiny dark green and the underside
paler. Petioles are broadly winged, tapering to a wingless
base.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to tropical Asia but is
widely cultivated in other regions today, such as the
Mediterranean.

Production: Bitter Orange flower consists of the dried
flowers of Citrus aurantium. The oil is obtained by steam
distillation of the fresh, fully opened flowers. Bitter Orange
peel consists of the dried outer peel of ripe fruits of Citrus
aurantium separated from the white pulp layer.

Other Names: Orange, Neroli, Bigarade Orange

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BITTER ORANGE FLOWER AND FLOWER OIL
Volatile oil: chief constituents linalool, linalyl acetate, alpha-
pinenes, limonene, nerol

Methyl anthranilate
Limonoids: (triterpenoide bitter principles)
Flavonoids

EFFECTS: BITTER ORANGE FLOWER AND FLOWER OIL

No substantiated information available. Efficacy of the use
of an extraction of the blossoms as a neurostimulant is not
confirmed.

COMPOUNDS: BITTER ORANGE PEEL

Volatile oil: chief constituents (+) -limonene, nerol, geraniol,
linalool, linalyl-, neryl-, geranyl- and citronellyl acetate,
typical constituent methyl anthranilate

Flavonoids: among them the bitter compounds neohesperi-
din dyhydrochalcone and naringin as well as the lipophilic
compounds sinensetin, nobiletin, tangeretin

Furocoumarins

EFFECTS: BITTER ORANGE PEEL
Bitter Orange has a mild spasmolytic effect on the gastroin-
testinal tract and increases gastric juice secretion.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BITTER ORANGE FLOWER AND FLOWER OIL

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Bitter Orange flower and
flower oil are used as a preventive measure for gastric and
nervous complaints, gout, sore throat, as a sedative, for

----- PAGE 338 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

nervous tension and sleeplessness. Fold medicine uses

include chronic bronchitis.

Chinese Medicine: Uses in Chinese medicine include pain in
the epigastrum, vomiting and anorexia. -

BITTER ORANGE PEEL

Approved hy Commission E:

* Loss of appetite
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include loss of appetite

and dyspeptic symptoms.

Chinese Medicine: Bitter Orange peel is used for coughs,
colds, anorexia, to reduce apathy and for uterine and anal

prolapse.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

BITTER ORANGE FLOWER AND FLOWER OIL

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

BITTER ORANGE PEEL
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. An elevation of UV-sensitivity is possible with
light-skinned individuals due to the phototoxic effect of the
furocoumarins. Frequent contact with the drug or with the
volatile oil (such as the exposure experienced by workers in
the liquor industry) can cause a sensitization that results in
listers, pustules, dermatoses leading to

erythema, swelling,
scab formation and pigment spots.

DOSAGE

BITTER ORANGE PEEL

Mode of Administration: Cut and coarsely powdered drug for
teas, other bitter-tasting galenic preparations for oral

application.

How Supplied:' Commercial pharmaceutical preparations

include drops, tonics and tea mixtures.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, add 1 tsp of drug to 150 ml of
hot water, let stand for 10 minutes, then strain.

Daily Dosage:

Drug: 4 to 6 g

Extract: 1 to 2 g

Tea: 1 cup 1 hour before meals

Tincture (according to DAB 7): 2 to 3 g

LITERATURE
BITTER ORANGE FLOWER AND OIL
Slater CA, (1961) J Sci Agric Food 12:732.

BITTER ORANGE/87

Stanley WL, Jurd L, (1971) J Agric Food Chem 19:1106.
Tatum JH, Berry RE, (1977) Phytochemistry 16:109.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New

York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

BITTER ORANGE PEEL
Clavarano I, Essenze Deriv. Agrum 36:5. 1966.

Horowitz RM, Gentili B, Tetrahedron 19:773. 1963.
Slater CA, (1961) J Sci Agric Food 12:732.

Stanley WL, Jurd L, (1971) J Agric Food Chem 19:1106.
Tatum JH, Berry RE, (1977) Phytochemistry 16, 109.

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 339 -----
88/BITTERSWEET NIGHTSHADE

Bittersweet Nightshade

Solanum dulcamara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the stem of the plant

Flower and Fruit: The violet flowers are arranged in 10 to
20 blossomed, long-peduncled and hanging, panicle-like
forms. The calyx is fused, 5-tipped and does not drop. The
corolla has a very short tube and 5 long tips, which become
revolute when mature. At the base of each tip, there are 2
green spots surrounded by white. There are 5 stamens with
golden yellow anthers, which lean toward each other, and 1
superior ovary. The fruit is an oblong, scarlet and many-
seeded berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a subshrub from 30 to
150 cm in height with a creeping, branched rhizome. The
stem is twining or creeping, woody below, angular and
usually glabrous. The leaves are petiolate, the upper and
lower ones are usually cordate and acute. The middle leaves
are usually pinnatesect with | pair of lateral segments and a
large terminal segment.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe, northern Africa,
eastern and western Asia, and North America.

Production: Bittersweet Nightshade consists of the dried, 2-
to 3-year-old stems of Solanum dulcamara harvested in
spring prior to leafing, or late autumn after the leaves have

dropped.

Other Names: Bittersweet, Dulcamara, Felonwort, Felon-
wood, Scarlet Berry, Violet Bloom, Blue Nightshade, Fever
Twig, Nightshade, Woody, Staff Vine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid alkaloid glycosides: (0.07 to 0.4%) the alkaloid

spectrum varies widely with the variety

Tomatidenol variety—alpha-solamarine, beta-solamarine
Soladulcidine variety—soladulcidinetetraoside
Solasodine variety—solasonine, solamargine

Steroid saponins

Mixed varieties also occur.

EFFECTS
The main active principles are the steroid alkaloid glycosides
whose resorption is probably promoted by the saponins.
They stimulate phagocytosis, are hemolytic, cytotoxic,
antiviral, anticholinergic and have local anaesthetic

properties.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Solasodin has a cortisone-like effect. A desensitizing and
cardiotonic effect has been observed in clinical trials with
patients suffering from rheumatic polyarthritis.

Its use as an expectorant may be due to the saponin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Eczema
¢ Furuncles
« Acne

* Warts

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Bittersweet Nightshade is
used internally for nose bleeds, rheumatic conditions, asthma
and bronchitis, and to stimulate the immune system;
externally for herpes, eczema, abscesses and contusions.

Homeopathic Uses: Solanum dulcamara is used for inflam-
mation of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, the joints
and skin, and for febrile infections. Efficacy has not been
proven.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Bittersweet Nightshade is contraindicated in pregnancy and
nursing mothers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Toxic effects should not be seen in dosages under approxi-
mately 25 gm due to the low alkaloid content of the stem.

OVERDOSAGE

Poisonings among children are known through the unripe
berries. More than 10 berries cause nausea, vomiting, dilated
pupils and diarrhea. Lethal dosage is estimated to be 200
berries.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb is used in teas
and other galenic preparations for internal use. The drug is
also used externally in compresses and rinses.

Preparation: A decoction is prepared by adding | to 2 g of
drug to 250 ml water.

Daily Dosage: The average daily internal dose is 1 to 3 gm
of the drug. Externally, the herb is used as infusions or
decoctions that have strengths equivalent to | to 2 gm of the
drug per 250 ml of water.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml, sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

----- PAGE 340 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Frohne D, (1992) Solanum dulcamara L. - Der Bittersujie
Nachtschatten. Portrait einer Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 14:

337-342.
Holzer I, (1992) Dulcamara-Extrakt bei Neurodermitis und

w_ chronischem Ekzem. Ergebnisse einer klinischen Priifung. Jatros

tr

Ay,

Dermatologie 6: 32-36.
JNP 56(3):430-431. 1993.
Kupchan SM et al., (1965) Science 150:1827.

Ronsch H, Schreiber K, Stubbe H. Naturwissenschaften 55:182.
1968.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A):1.
Willuhn G, Kothe U, (1983) Arch Pharm 316(8):678-687.

Willuhn G, Phytopharmaka in der Dermatologie. In: ZPT
16(6):325-342. 1995.

Wolters B, Antibiotische Wirkung von Solanum dulcamara. In:
Naturwissenschaften 51:111. 1964.

Wolters B, Der Anteil der Steroidsaponine an der antibiotischen
Wirkung von Solanum dulcamara. In: PM 13:2. 1965.

Wolters B, (1965) Planta Med 13:189.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homdopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

BLACK ALDER/89

Black Alder

Alnus glutinosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
bark and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: Black Alder is monoecious. Male flowers
are arranged in stemmed catkins. Female flowers form ovoid
fruit, which turns woody and remains on the tree the whole
year.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plants grow as a shrub or tree
extending up to 25 m high. Black Alder has gray branches
and orange-colored wood. The obovate leaves have double-
serrate margins; the young leaves are very sticky.

Habitat: Black Alder originated in the damp regions of
Europe, Asia and North America. The plant now grows in
much of the Northern Hemisphere.

Production: Black (English) Alder bark is the bark and
branch rind of Alnus glutinosa. It is gathered from the shrubs
or trees growing wild.

Other Names: Common Alder, Owler, Tag Alder

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins

Flavonoids: in particular hypericin

Steroids: beta-sitosterol

Triterpenes: especially alpha-amyrenone, lupenone, taraxer-
ol, glutenone

EFFECTS
The decoction is a tonic and has astringent and hemostatic
properties, which may be due to the tannins (20%), flavone

glycosides and triterpenes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Black Alder is used as a decoction for
gargles in the treatment of streptococcal sore throat and
pharyngitis, and for intestinal bleeding. The bark is consid-
ered to be effective for intermittent fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in, conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Leaves and bark are prepared as
infusions and decoctions for internal and local use. Mention
is made of an ophthalmic powder.

----- PAGE 341 -----
90/BLACK ALDER

Preparations: The bark is prepared as a decoction.

LITERATURE
Freudenberg K, Weinges K, (1967) Tetrahedron Letters 17: 19.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Auff, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hoppe, HA (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W.
de Gmuyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Black Bryony

Tamus communis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small greenish-white and
in loose clusters. They consist of 6 petals and are found on
various plants in fertile and infertile form. The fertile flowers

develop into crimson berries.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Tamus communis is a glabrous
climber. The stem dies back in winter but the root is
perennial. The leaves are cordate, smooth, acute and glossy.
The root is almost cylindrical with a diameter of 2 to 3 cm.
The root is 6 to 8 cm long and has scattered, thin root fibers.
Externally, the root is blackish-brown. Internally, it is
whitish and produces a slimy paste when it is peeled.

Characteristics: The taste of the root is acrid and the odor is
slightly earthy.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to parts of Europe.
Production: Black Bryony root is the root of Tamus
communis. Ths roots are gathered at the end of the
vegetation period. They are dug up and the bark is peeled off
and cut into slices or pieces. During this procedure, gloves
should be worn to protect the hands, as the fresh roots cause
serious reddening of the skin.

Other Names: Blackeye Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Histamine-oxalate: in the form of skin- and mucous mem-

brane-irritating needles
Mucilages (2.5-5%)
Volatile oil (1%)
Phenanthrene derivatives

Steroid saponins, aglycone diosgenin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
Black Bryony stimulates die external nerve ends. A sub-

stance similar to histamine increases blood circulation in
areas of the skin to which it is applied.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The plant is used for agitation and redness
of the skin, bruises, strains, torn muscles, gout and other
rheumatic disorders. Black Bryony is also used for irritation
of the intestine mucous membrane and as an emetic. It is also
used as a tonic for hair loss, as it improves blood circulation

to the scalp.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Skin contact with the fresh plant leads to the formation of
rashes, swelling, pustules and wheals, due to the skin- and
mucous membrane-irritating oxalate needles and histamine.
Internal administration triggers signs of severe irritation in
the mouth, pharyngeal space and _ gastrointestinal tract,
combined with vomiting and intense diarrhea. Extracts from
the plant are toxicologically harmless. Skin lesions are
treated with cortisone foam and sterile coverings; tetanus
prophylaxis might be required. If taken by mouth, following
gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium permanga-
nate solution and administration of activated charcoal, treat
spasms with diazepam (iv.) and colic with atropine.
Monitoring of kidney function is essential. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The ground root is applied external-

ly as a lotion.

LITERATURE
Aquino R et al., (1985) J Nat Prod 48(3):502.

Aquino R et al., (1985) J Nat Prod 48(5):811.

Barbakadze V, Usov Al, Isolation and characterisation of
glucans from roots of Tamus communis L. In: PM 62,
Abstracts of die 44th Ann Congress of GA, 127. 1996.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apodieker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Treland CR et al., (1981) Phytochemistry 20:1569.

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 342 -----
jf

‘ir

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Black Catnip

Phyllanthus amarus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole, dried herb is the medicinal part.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are axillary. The male flower
has 5, 0.5 mm long, acute, pale-green sepals with a white
margin. There are 3 stamens with the filaments forming a 0.2
mm high column. The female flowers have an apically
thickened pedicle and 5 ovate-elongate, up to | mm long,
yellowish-green sepals. The ovary is 0.3 mm in diameter and
3-chambered. The fruit is ochre to olive with 3 pressed lobes,
2 mm in diameter and 1 mm long.

Leaves and Stem: Black catnip is a monoecious, occasionally
dioecious, upright or ascending herb, which grows up to 60
cm high, or occasionally higher. The bracts and stipules are
linear-lanceolate, 1 mm long, cream with a brownish middle
rib. The stem is round, greenish or reddish, glabrous and
woody at the base.

Habitat: Africa, Asia and America.

Production: Black catnip herb is the aerial part of Phyllan-
thus amarus. The harvested herb is dried.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with Phyllanthus
urinaria, P, niruri, P. debilis and P. fraternus.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins: gallotannins, including amarine, phyllanthusin D,
geraniine, corilagin, elaecarpusin

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercetin-3-O-glucoside

Lignans: phyllantin (0.8%, extremely bitter), hypo-

phyllanthin

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains tannins and lignans, is antiviral and

antimicrobial in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for fever (Cuba, Nigeria),
for malaria (Cuba, Bahamas), diarrhea, tachycardia and
female sterility (Congo), constipation with spasms and colic,
as a diuretic (Nigeria) and for diabetes (Dominican
Republic).

Indian Medicine: Black catnip is used for stomach condi-
tions, ascites, jaundice, diarrhea, dysentery, intermittent
fever, conditions of the urogenital tract, eye disease, scabies,
ulcers and wounds.

BLACK CATNIP/91

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS "
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal and external use.

Whole herb preparations for

Preparation: Decoction: 10 plants to I-liter water
Daily Dosage: No exact doses are known.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K. Reichling J, Rimpler G.
Schneider G (Eds). Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Blumberg BS, Millman I, Venkateswaran PS, Thyagarajan SP,
Hepatitis B virus and hepatocellular carcinoma - treatment of
HBV carriers with Phyllanthus amarus. Cancer Detect Prev,
14:195-201, 1989.

Blumberg BS, Millman I, Venkateswaran PS, Thyagarajan SP,
Hepatitis B virus and primary hepatocellular carcinoma:
treatment of HBV carriers with Phyllanthus amarus. Vaccine, 8
Suppl: 86-92, 1990 Mar.

Lee CD, Ott M, Thyagarajan SP, Shafritz DA, Burk RD, Gupta
S, Phyllanthus amarus down-regulates hepatitis B virus mRNA
transcription and replication. Eur J Clin Invest, 26:1069-76,
1996 Dec.

Leelarasamee A, Trakulsomboon S, Maunwongyathi P,
Somanabandhu A, Pidetcha P, Matrakool B, Lebnak T,
Ridthimat W, Chandanayingyong D, Failure of Phyllanthus
amatus to eradicate hepatitis B surface antigen from
symptomless carriers. Lancet, 2:1600-1, 1990 Jun 30.

Niu JZ, Wang YY, Qiao M, Gowans E, Edwards P,
Thyagarajan SP, Gust I, Locamini S, Effect of Phyllanthus
amarus on duck hepatitis B virus replication in vivo. J Med
Virol, 32:212-8, 1990 Dec.

Ott M, Thyagarajan SP, Gupta S, Phyllanthus amarus
suppresses hepatitis B virus by interrupting interactions between
HBV enhancer I and cellular transcription factors. Eur J Clin
Invest, 27:908-15, 1997 Nov.

Srividya N, Periwal S, Diuretic, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic
effect of Phyllanthus amarus. Indian J Exp Biol, 74:861-4, 1995
Nov.

Thamlikitkul V, Wasuwat S, Kanchanapee P, Efficacy of
Phyllanthus amarus for eradication of hepatitis B virus in
chronic carriers. J Med Assoc Thai, 74:381-5, 1991 Sep.
hyagarajan SP, Jayaram S, Valliammai T, Madanagopalan N,
Pal VG, Jayaraman K, Phyllanthus amarus and hepatitis B.
Lancet, 2:949-50, 1990 Oct 13.

hyagarajan SP, Subramanian S, Thirunalasundari T,
Venkateswaran PS, Blumberg BS, Beneficial effects of
Phyllanthus amarus for chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol, 2:405-6,
1991 May.

----- PAGE 343 -----
92/BLACK CATNIP

Thyagarajan SP, Subramanian S, Thirunalasundari T,
Venkateswaran PS, Blumberg BS, Effect of Phyllanthus amarus
on chronic carriers of hepatitis B virus. Lancet, 2:764-6, 1988
Oct 1.

Thyagarajan SP, Subramanian S, Thirunalasundari T,
Venkateswaran PS, Blumberg BS, In vitro effect of Phyllanthus
amarus on hepatitis B virus. Indian J Med Res, 2:71-3, 1991
Mar.

Black Cohosh

Cimicifuga racemosa

TRADE NAMES
Black Cohosh (available from a number of manufacturers)
and sometimes sold as Black Cohosh Root, Black Cohosh
Power, Wild Countryside Black Cohosh, NuVeg Black
Cohosh Root, Remifemin

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh and dried

root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a long-peduncled,
drooping raceme, 30 to 90 cm long with white flowers.
There are 3 to 8 petals without nectaries, and the sepals
enclose the flower bud.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows | to 1.5 m high. It is
leafy, with a sturdy, blackish rhizome, which is cylindrical,
tough and knotty. The straight, strong, dark brownish roots
sprout from the underground rhizome and are roughly
quadrangular and grooved. The transverse root section shows
wedge-shaped bundles of white wood. The rhizome section
shows a large black medulla surrounded by a ring of paler,
woodier wedges. The leaves are double-pinnate, smooth and
crenate-serrate.

Habitat: Black Cohosh is native to Canada and the U.S.; it is
cultivated in Europe.

Production: The medicinally used part of die plant consists
of the dried rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa with attached
roots.

Other Names: Black Snake Root, Rattleroot, Rattleweed,
Squaw Root, Bugbane, Bugwort, Cimicifuga, Richweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Triterpenes : triterpene glycoside, including actein, 27-deox-
yactein, cimifugoside

Quinolizidine alkaloids: cytisine, methyl cytisine

Phenylpropane derivatives: including isoferulic acid

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS

The active ingredients in the root are the triterpine glycosides
such as cimifugaside, 27-deoxyactein and the actein. The
increase in luteinizing hormone (LH) that occurs as estrogen
levels decrease is implicated as the cause of menopausal
symptoms. Compounds of the rootstock of Cimicifuga
racemosa bind to the estrogen receptor where it selectively
suppresses LH secretion with no effect on FSH. The result is
an estrogenic effect, which will decrease climacteric symp-
toms such as hot flashes, diaphoresis and psychological
disturbances (Duker, 1991; Lehmann-Wilenbrock, 1988).

There have been conflicting reports stating Cimicifuga
racemosa has no estrogen-like action (Einer-Jensen, 1996;
Liske, 1998). The herb did not appear to have an effect on
levels of LH, FSH, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG),
prolactin and estradiol in a study that concluded the
therapeutic effects seen are not attributable to estrogenic or
other endocrine-system effects (Liske, 1998).

The improvement in premenstrual symptoms, dysmenorrhea
and menopause may be due to the relaxing of uterine tissue
(Tyler, 1997).

CLINICAL TRIALS

A placebo-control, open study was conducted to determine
the effects of commercially available Cimicifuga racemosa
extract (Remifemin) on LH and FSH secretion in 110
menopausal women. After 2 months of therapy with 8 mg
daily of the drug, FSH levels in the Remifemin treatment
group and placebo group were similar. LH secretion was
significantly reduced in the Remifemin treatment group,
which points to the estrogenic effect of Cimicifuga racemosa
preparations (Duker, 1991).

Sixty hysterectomized patients, under 40 years of age, with
at least one intact ovary were involved in a study to
determine the effect of Cimicifuga racemosa extract (Rem-
ifemen 8 mg), estriol (1 mg), conjugated estrogens (1.25 mg)
and an estrogen-gestagen product on menopausal symptoms.
The evaluation of menopausal symptoms was determined by
the Kupperman-Index. The study also included evaluation of
the trophic disorders of the genitals, including FSH and LH
serum concentration measurement. There was a significant
decrease in menopausal symptoms determined by the Kup-
perman-Index in all treatment groups. There was a moderate
decline in the serum gonadotropin concentration in each
group, with no significant therapeutic difference between the
groups. Cimicifuga racemosa was as effective as the estrogen
products in decreasing menopausal symptoms in young
patients who have undergone a hysterectomy (Lehmann-
Willenbrock, 1988).

In an open study including 50 patients with menopausal
complaints, the effect of Cimicifuga racemosa extract

----- PAGE 344 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

(Remifemen) 40 drops twice daily was determined after a
duration of 3 months. The participants had either refused
hormone treatment or had conditions where hormone treat-
ment was contraindicated. The efficacy of the herb was
measured according to the Kupperman-Index, Profile of
Mood States (POMS) scale and the Clinical Global Impres-
sions (CGI) scale. A significant improvement in menopausal
complaints for all testing protocols were recorded. (Vorberg,
1984).

Note: Cimicifuga racemosa should not be substituted for
hormone replacement therapy with estrogen. There is no
information to date that the herb contains cardioprotective
effects or protective effects against osteoporosis, as those
seen with estrogen therapy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Climacteric complaints
* Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the plant is used for
rheumatism, sore throats and bronchitis. The tincture is also
used as a sedative, for choreic states (involuntary, rapid
motions), fever, lumbago (pain in the lumbar region) and
snakebite. The herb is also available commercially in
combination with St. John's Wort for depressive moods
associated with premenstrual and menopausal symptoms.

Chinese Medicine: The Chinese have used Black Cohosh for
the above indications as well as for measles in the pre-
exanthem stage.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The use of Black Cohosh is contraindicated during pregnan-
cy due to an increased risk of spontaneous abortion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages, although occasional stomach complaints
have been observed.

Drug Interactions: Black Cohosh can potentiate the effect of
antihypertensive medications. The concomitant use of these
drugs may result in hypotension (Einer-Jensen, 1996;
Lehmann-Willenbrock, 1988).

OVERDOSAGE

An intake of very high dosages of die drug (5 g) or an extract
(12 g) leads to vomiting, headache, dizziness, limb pains and
lowered blood pressure.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Galenic preparations for internal

use.

BLACK COHOSH/93

flow Supplied:
Capsules — 60 mg, 80 mg, 450 mg, 540 mg, 545 mg

Drops
Solutions

Tablets — 60 mg, 120 mg.

Daily Dosage: Alcoholic-aqueous extracts (ethanolic-aque-
ous 40-60% (WV) or isopropanolic-aqueous 40% (V/V))
corresponding to 40 mg drug. The herb is not recommended
for treatment longer than 6 months unless advised by a

physician.

LITERATURE
Benoit PS et al., (1976) Lloydia 39:160.

Berger S, Junior P, Kopanski L, 27-Desoxyactein: a New
Polycyclic Triterpenoid Glycoside fiom Actaea racemosa. In:
PM 54:579-780. 1988.

Beuscher N, Cimicifiga racemosa L. - Die Traubensilberkerze.
In: ZPT 16(5):301-310. 1995.

Corsano S, Panizzi L, Sull' Acteina, principio attivo della
Actaea racemosa. In: Atti Acca Nazi Lincei, Rend, Classe Sci,
Fis. Mat. Nat 38:600-604. 1965.

Daiber W, Klimakterische Beschwerden: ohne Hormone zum
Erfolg! In: Arztl Praxis 35:1946-1947. 1983.

Duke JA, Handbook of Medicinal Herbs. Boca Raton: CRC,
1985.

Duker EM, Kopanski L, Jarry H, Wuttke W, (1991) Effects of
extracts fiom cimicifuga racemosa on gonadotropin release in
menopausal women and ovariectomized rats. Planta Med
57:420-424.

Einer-Jensen N, Zhao J, Andersen KP, Kristoffersen K.
Cimicifiga and Melbrosia lack oestrogenic effects in mice and
rats. In: Matuntas 25(1995):149-153. 1996.

Foldes J, Die Wirkungen eines Extraktes aus Cimicifiga
racemosa. In: Arzd Forsch 13:623-624. 1959.

Genazzani, E et al., (1962) Nature 194:544.

Gerhard I, Liske E, Wustenberg P, Behandlung von
psychovegetativen Beschwerden im Klimakterium mit
Remifemin(R)plus (Poster). In: ZPT 16(5, Supplemental, 6.
Phytotherapiekongrep* in Berlin. 1995.

Gorlich N, Behandlung ovarieller Storungen in der
Allgemeinpraxis. In: Arzd Praxis 14:1742-1743. 1962.
Harnischfeger G, Cillien N, Influence of Cimicifiga racemosa
extract fractions on the proliferation of human carcinoma cells
in vitro with regard to their estrogen receptor sensitivity. In:
PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 40. 1996.
Harnischfeger G, Stolze H, Bewahrte Wirksubstanzen aus
Naturstoffen. Traubensilberkerze. In: Notabene medici 10:446-
450. 1980.

Jarry H, Gorkow Ch, Wutdce W, (1995) Treatment of
Menopausal Symptoms with Extracts of Cimicifuga Racemosa,

----- PAGE 345 -----
94/BLACK COHOSH

In vivo and in vitro Evidence for Estrogenic Activity. In, Loew
D, Netbrock N (Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
Klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S 99-112.
Jarry H, Hamischfeger G, (1985) Studies on the endocrine
effects of the contents of Cimicifuga racemosa, 1. Influence on
the serum concentration of pituitary hormones in ovariectomized
rats. Planta Med 51:46-49.

Jarry H, Hamischfeger G, Diiker E, (1985) Studies on the
endocrine effects of the contents of Cimicifuga racemosa, 2. In
vitro binding of compounds to extrogen receptors. Planta Med
51:316-319.

Jarry H, Isolierung pharmakogologisch aktiver Substanzen aus
Cimicifuga racemosa. In: Dissertation, math.-naturwiss. 1984.

Jarry H. Ludwig L, Stephan A, Wuttke W, Erste Beweise fur
eine direkte Wirkung von Inhaltsstoffen von Cimicifuga
racemosa auf die in-vitro- Steroidsekretion von porcinen
Granulosa- und Lutealzellen (Poster). In: ZPT 16(5,
Supplement):7-8, 6. Phytotherapiek.

Kesselkauf O, Uber die Behandlung klimakterischer
Beschwerden mit Remifemin. In: Med Monatsschr 11:87-88.
1957.

Kramer H, Geisenhofer H, Erfahrungen mit dem Cimicifuga-
raparat Remifemin. In: Therapie der Gegenwart 97:238-239.
1958.

Lauritzen C, Nichthormonale Therapie klimakterischer
Beschwerden. In: Gynakol Praxis 14:43-56. 1990.
Lehmann-Willenbrock E, Riedel HH, Clinical and
endocrinologic studies of the treatment of ovarian insufficiency
manifestations following hysterectomy with intact adnexa.
Zentralbl Gynakol 1988.110(10): 611-8.
Liske E, Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga
racemosa for gynecologic disorders. Adv Ther 1998 Jan-
Feb;15(1):45-53.
Liske E, Wustenberg P, Therapy of climacteric complaints with
Cimicifuga racemosa: herbal medicine with clinically proven
evidence. Menapause. 1998 5:250.
Ne(3elhut T, Schellhase C, Dietrich R, Kuhn W,
Untersuchungen zur proliferativen Potenz von Phytopharmaka
mit ostrogenahnlicher Wirkung bei Mammakarzinomzellen. In:
Arch Gynecol Obstetrics 254:817-818. 1993.

Petho A, Umstellung einer Hormonbehandlung auf ein
pflanzliches Gynakologikum moglich? In: Arztl Praxis 47:1551-
1553. 1987.
Radics L et al., (1975) Tetrahedron Letters 48:4287.
Shibata M et al., (1980) Yakugaku Zasshi 100:1143.
Shibata M, (1977) J Chem Soc Jpn 97:911.

Stoll W, (1987) Phytotherapeutikum beeinflufj atrophisches
Vaginalepithel, Doppelblindversuch Cimicifuga vs.
Ostrogenpraparat. Therapeutikon 1:23-32.

Stolze H, Der andere Weg klimakterische Beschwerden zu
behandeln. In: Gyne 1:14-16. 1982.

Suntry L, (1984) Pat. JP 84/20298 Japan.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tyler VE, The bright side of black cohosh. Prevention
Magazine, April 1997.

Vorberg G, Treatment of menopausal symptoms. ZFA
1984;60:626-629.

Warnecke G, (1985) Beeinflussung klimakterischer Beschwerden
durch ein Phytotherapeutikum. Erfolgreiche Therapie mit
Cimicifuga- Monoextrakt. Med Welt 36:871-874.

Winterhoff H, (1993) Arzneipflanzen mit endokriner
Wirksamkeit. Z Phytother 14:83-94.

Further information in:

Chan EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Black Currant

Ribes nigrum

TRADE NAMES
Bio-EFA Black Currant, Black Currant, Black Currant Oil,

Black Currant Seed Oil

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves collected
after the flowering season and dried, the fresh ripe fruit with
the tops and stems and the fresh leaves collected in summer.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers form richly blossomed
racemes. Each is in the axil of a pubescent bract, which is
shorter than the petiole. The petiole is pinnate has 2 small
bracteoles. The sepals are together with the 5 small stamens

----- PAGE 346 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

on the campanulate flower axis within which the single-
valved ovary and the divided style is sunk. The hanging
flowers are self-pollinating. The multi-seeded, black, glandu-
lar punctuate berries develop from the ovary.

“Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a sturdy perennial bush
“ up to 2 m high. The branches are pale, hard and initially

£r

pubescent. The leaves are alternate, petiolate, becoming
quickly glabrous on the upper surface and have numerous
yellow resin glands on the undersurface. The 3- to 5-lobed
leaf blade has a cordate base and doubly dentate margin.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Eurasian forests as far as
the Himalayas, Canada and Australia and is cultivated in
many regions.

Production: Black currant leaves are the leaves of Ribes
nigrum collected during or shortly after the flowering season.
Leaves are harvested from cultivated crops during or shortly
after flowering. They are air-dried in the shade or carefully at
a maximum temperature of 60° C.

Black currant fruits are the ripe fruits, with stalks attached,
of Ribes nigrum. Fruits are harvested when fully ripe, and
utilized immediately or deep frozen.

Other Names: Quinsy Berries, Squinancy Berries
ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: BLACK CURRANT LEAVES

Flavonoids: including astragalin, isoquercitrin, rutin

Oligomeric proanthocyanidins
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 0.1 to 0.27% of fresh weight)
Volatile oil (traces)

EFFECTS: BLACK CURRANT LEAVES

A salidiuretic effect is attributed to die drug through a
‘diuretic factor’ that is not closely defined. In animal
experiments, a hypotensive, anti-exudative and prostaglan-
din-release inhibiting effect has been proven.

COMPOUNDS: BLACK CURRANT FRUITS
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 0.1 to 0.3%)

Anthocyans: chiefly cyanidin-3-O-rutinoside and delphini-
din-3-O-rutinoside

Phenol caroboxylic acid derivatives: caffeoyi-, p-cumaroyl-
and feruloyl-quinic acids; p-cumaroyl and feruloyl glucoses

Flavonoids: chief components isoquercitrin, myricetin glu-
coside, rutin

Fruit acids (3.5%): malic acid, citric acid, isocitric acid
Invert sugar

Pectins

BLACK CURRANT / 95

COMPOUNDS: BLACK CURRANT SEEDS

Fatty oil (30%) with high gamma linolenic acid content
Monosaccharides: invert sugar

EFFECTS: BLACK CURRANT FRUIT AND SEEDS

The extract of the drug that contains anthocyane has a
hypotensive and spasmolytic effect in animal experiments. In
addition, an antimicrobial and xanthine-oxidase and lipo-
peroxidase inhibiting effect has been proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

BLACK CURRANT LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Black Currant leaves are used internally to
increase micurition. In folk medicine they are used internally
for arthritis, gout and rheumatism, diarrhea, colic, jaundice
and liver ailments, painful micturition, urinary stones,
convulsive coughs and whooping cough. Black Currant is
used externally for treatment of wounds and insect bites.

BLACK CURRANT FRUITS

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Black Currant fruit is used
internally to relieve colds, hoarseness and coughs, diarrhea
and stomachache. It is also used as a source of vitamin C.
Preparations are used on mucous membranes as a gargle for
hoarseness, strep throat and other inflammations of the oral

cavity.

Black currant dried berries are used for bladder complaints,
venous insufficiency, hemorrhoids, bruising and petechiae

CONTRAINDICATIONS
BLACK CURRANT LEAVES
Contraindicated in edema resulting from reduced cardiac and

renal activity.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BLACK CURRANT LEAVES AND FRUITS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
BLACK CURRANT LEAVES

Mode of Administration: Black currant leaves are available
as whole, crude and powder drug for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, add 1 to 2 heaped teaspoons
(2 to 4 gm) Black currant leaves to boiling water (150 ml),
and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage:
Tea — 1 cup to be drunk several times a day.
Poultice — freshly rubbed Black Currant leaves or leaves

soaked in warm water are dried and used as a compress.
Place dried drug on wounds and fresh rubbed leaves on

insect bites.

----- PAGE 347 -----
96 /BLACK CURRANT
Storage: Should be protected from light and moisture

BLACK CURRANT FRUITS
Mode of Administration: Black Currant fruit is available as

whole drug for internal use.

Daily
Syrup — 5 to 10 ml, by the tablespoon, taken several times

Dosage:

daily, or eaten as jelly or sweets.

Gargle — with the juice and equal parts of warm water.

LITERATURE
BLACK CURRANT LEAVES

Kyerematen G, Sandberg F, (1986) Acta Pharm Suecica 23:101.
Lietti A et al., (1976) Arzneim Forsch 26(5):829.
Senchute GV, Boruch IF, (1976) Rastit Resur 12(1): 113.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

BLACK CURRANT FRUITS
Kyerematen G, Sandberg F, (1986) Acta Pharm Suecica 23:101.

Lietti A et al., (1976) Arzneim Forsch 26(5):829.
Senchute GV, Boruch IF, (1976) Rastit Resur 12(1): 113.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Black Haw

Viburnum prunifolium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark of the trunk

and the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers of the Viburnum species are
white and in richly blossomed, flat, apical cymes. The
central florets are campanulate and fertile; the lateral ones
are much larger, rotate and infertile. The calyx margin is
small and 5-tipped. The corolla of the fertile florets is
campanulate and 5-petalled. There are 5 stamens, a semi-
inferior ovary and 3 sessile stigmas. The fruit of the Black
Haw is a shiny, black, juicy berry. The fruit of Viburnum
opulus is red.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: Black Haw is a deciduous tree 5 m
tall. It has gray-brown bark and green, grooved branches.
The leaves are opposite, petiolate, 3 to 5 lobed, roughly
dentate, green on both surfaces and softly pubescent beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the eastern and central
U.S.

Production: Black Haw bark is the bark of the trunk and
branches of Viburnum prunifolium.

Other Names: Stagbush, American Sloe, European Cranber-
ry, Cramp Bark, Guelder Rose, Snowball Tree, King's
Crown, High Cranberry, Red Elder, Rose Elder, Water Elder,
May Rose, Whitsun Rose, Dog Rowan Tree, Whitsun
Bosses, Silver Bells, Wild Guelder Rose

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: amentoflavon (a_biflavone)

Triterpenes: including among others oleanolic acid, ursolic
acid as well as their acetates

Hydroxycoumarins: scopoletin, aesculetin, scoplin

Cajfeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid, isochlorogenic

acid
Phenol carboxylic acids: salicylic acid, salicin
Tannins (2%)

Arbutin — (traces)

EFFECTS
The drug has a spasmolytic and, to date, an undefined effect

on the uterus.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Black Haw is used for complaints of

Unproven Uses:
ysmenorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

osages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: An extract is used as a constituent
of a tea mixture made from Black Haw bark, Camomile
flowers, and Peppermint leaves.

LITERATURE

Handjieva N et al., PH 27:3175. 1988.

Horhammer L, Wagner H, Reinhardt H, Chemistry,
pharmacology, and pharmaceutics of the components of
Viburnum prunifolium and V. opulus. In: Botan Mag (Tokyo)
79(Oct/Nov.): 510-525. 1966.

Jarboe CH et al., (1967) J Med Chem 10: 448.

----- PAGE 348 -----
0 CRC Press

£p

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Jarboe CH et al., (1969) J Org Chem 34: 4202.
Jensen SR et al., PH 24:487. 1985.
Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
1975.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Black Hellebore

Helleborus niger

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried rhizome with or without roots and the fresh under-

ground parts.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is white with a greenish
margin, reddish on the outside. It is hanging and splayed.
There are 5 broadly ovate, campanualate bracts with red-
brown borders, which tend toward each other. The petals are
altered to nectaries. There are numerous yellow stamens. The
fruit is a pod-like, many-seeded follicle with a curved beak
and horizontal stripes. The seeds are matte black, ovate and
have a long swelling on them.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial subshrub up
to 50 cm high. The stem is erect, glabrous, branched, woody
at the base and almost leafless. The basal leaves are long-
petioled, thickish, coriaceous, glabrous, dark green above
with a lighter underside.

Characteristics: The plant is poisonous; rhizome is black-
brown.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the forests of southern
and central Europe.

Production: Black Hellebore root is the root of Helleborus
niger.

Not to be Confused With: Helleborus foetidus, Helleborus
niger and Helleborus viridis are different plants widn
different active compounds. They may be confused with the
subterranean parts of Trollius eurpaeus, Aconitum napellus,
Astrantia major, Actaea spicata and Adonis vernalis.

Other Names: Christe Herbe, Christmas Rose, Melampode

BLACK HELLEBORE/97

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: HELLEBORUS FOETIDUS
Steroid saponins: mixture known as helleborin

COMPOUNDS: HELLEBORUS NIGER
Steroid saponins: mixture known as helleborin

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (bufadienolide): including

hellebrin, deglucohellebrin (only traces)
Alkaloids: celliamine, sprintillamine

COMPOUNDS: HELLEBORUS VIRIDIS
Steroid saponins: mixture known as helleborin

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (bufadienolide): including
hellebrin, deglucohellebrin

Alkaloids: celliamine, sprintillamine, sprintillin

EFFECTS: ALL SPECIES
The plant is said to have a typical saponin effect (irritates
mucous membranes) and is in general extremely toxic.

Note that other varieties of Helleborus also contain hellebrin
with a digitalis-like effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Black Hellebore is used as
a laxative, for nausea, worm infestation, to regulate menstru-
ation and as an abortifacient, as well as for acute nephritis.
Also used in the treatment of head colds.

Homeopathic Uses: Used to treat acute diarrhea, encephali-
tis, cephalitis, kidney inflammation and states of confusion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The mucous membrane-irritating saponin effect of
the drug is the chief focus in cases of poisoning. Symptoms
include scratchy feeling in mouth and throat, salivation,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, shortness of breath,
possible spasm and asphyxiation. Disorders of cardiac
function (cardiac arrhythmias are to be expected with large
intakes of the rhizome of Helleborus viridis). Poisonings are
recorded among the animals that feed on the plant. Follow-
ing stomach and intestinal emptying (gastric lavage, sodium
sulfate) and the administration of,activated charcoal, therapy
for poisonings consists of diazepam for spasm and electro-
lyte replenishment and sodium bicarbonate infusions for any
acidosis that may arise. Intubation and oxygen respiration
may also be necessary.

Pregnancy: In folk medicine, Black Hellebore is used as an
abortifacient.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Black Hellebore is obsolete and

dangerous as a drug in allopathic doses.

----- PAGE 349 -----
98/BLACK HELLEBORE

Daily Dosage: The average dose is 0.05 gm; the maximum
single dose is 0.2 gm; the largest daily dose is 10 gm. A
powder with a medium content of 10% is used for head
colds.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Glombitza KW et al., Do roots of Helleborus niger contain
cardioactive substances. In: PM 55:107. 1989.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Petricic J et al.. Acta Pharm Jugos! 27:127. 1977.

Petricic J, Acta Pharm Jugosl 24:179. 1974.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and their effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, Pub; HMSO,
UK 1984.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
WiPner W, Kating H, Botanische und phytochemische
Untersuchung an europaischen und kleinasiatischen Arten der
Gattung Helleborus. In: PM 26:128-143, 228-249, 364-374.
1974.

Black Horehound

Ballota nigra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The aerial parts of the plant are used
medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The clearly stemmed flowers are | to 1.5
cm long. They are arranged in 4 to 10 fairly loose and often
short-stemmed cymes in the axils of the cauline leaves. The
bracteoles are arrow-shaped and soft. They are half as long
as the funnel-shaped calyx, which is downy to silky-shaggy
haired. The calyx has 5 awned tips. The corolla is usually

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

reddish-lilac, occasionally white. It contains a straight tube
that grows out of the calyx tube and has a ring of hairs at the
base. It has an elliptoid, slightly domed upper lip, which is
slightly compressed from the outside. There is an equally
long, downward hanging, white-marked lower lip, and an
obovate, often edged or weakly dentate middle lip. The
stamens are slightly hairy at the base and have small,
distinctly spreading pollen sacks. The plant produces a hard
fruit. The nuts are ovoid, 12 mm long and quite smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Horehound is a perennial 0.30 to 1 m
high shrub with a short creeping rhizome and upright, sturdy,
angular, branched stems. The whole plant is pubescent and
fresh green. In the autumn, the plant is often tinged brown-
violet. The opposite leaves have a 0.5 to 1 cm long petiole.
The lower leaves are larger and have an ovate to almost
round, 2 cm long by 1.5 to 3.5 cm wide leaf blade. They are
weakly cordate, blunt or wedge-shaped at the base and finely
crenate to roughly and unevenly serrate. Both sides are
pubescent, the upper surface often becoming glabrous and
somewhat glossy.

Characteristics: The whole plant has an unpleasant smell of
essential oil.

Habitat: The plant is considered to be a weed in western,
central and northern Europe, but was intentionally intro-
duced to the U.S.

Production: Black Horehound is the aerial part of Ballota
nigra, gathered when in bloom. It is collected in the wild or
from cultivated plants propagated by sowing seeds or
planting cuttings at the end of winter. The harvest is in July
and August. There are no special conditions for drying.

Not to be Confused With: The drug can be confused with
Folia melissae. Adulterations with hybrids of Marubium
vulgare have been found on the market.

Other Names: Black (Stinking) Horehound

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes, marrubiin: 7-acetoxymarrubiin, ballotinon, bal-
lotenol, ballonigrin (to some extent bitter principles)

Volatile oil (traces, unpleasant smell)

Caffeic and ferulic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic
acid

Tannins

EFFECTS
Horehound acts as a stimulant, antiemetic and antispasmod-

ic; however, the mode of action has not been satisfactorily
explained. According to older literature, a drop in arterial
blood pressure and bradycardia occurred in a dog when it

----- PAGE 350 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

was injected intravenously with an infusion (2.5g infusion
per kg body weight). When a decoction of the fresh plant
was administered intravenously, the volume of gall secre-

tions tripled within 30 minutes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

2
a

Unproven Uses: Internally, Horehound is used as a sedative
in cases of hysteria and hypochondria, as a spasmolytic for
stomach cramps and complaints, for whooping cough and to
increase bile flow. Horehound is also used to treat nervous,
upset stomach, nausea and vomiting. In France, it is
traditionally used in the symptomatic treatment of nervous
disorders in adults and children, especially for mila sleep
disorders and for the symptomatic treatment of coughs.
Furthermore, Horehound enemas and suppositories are used
against worm infestation. Externally, Horehound is used for
gout. The drug's efficacy has not been adequately proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

m DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally in the
form of liquid extracts and tinctures. It is also used

externally.

Preparation: Liquid extract: 1:1 in 25% ethanol. Tincture:
1:10 with 45% ethanol. Alcohol tincture from the fresh plant

with 90% alcohol.

Daily Dose: Single dose of the drug is 2 to 4 g (as an

infusion); Liquid extract: 1 to 3 ml; Tincture: 1 to 2 ml.

LITERATURE
Balansard J, Compt Rend Soc Biol 115:1295-1297. 1933.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Nederl 21 (4): 417.

Savona G et al., (1976) J Chem Soc (P) 1: 1607-1609.
Savona G et al., (1977) J Chem Soc (P) 1: 322-324 et 497-
499.

£ Savona G et al., La chimica e h'ndustria 58:378. 1976.

Seidel V et al., Phenylpropanoid glycosides from Ballota nigra.
In: PM 62(2): 186-187. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

1994.

BLACK MULBERRY/99

Black Mulberry

Morus nigra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe berries and
the root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is monoecious or dioecious. The
greenish flowers are in catkin-like inflorescences. The male
flowers are ovate to cylindrical; the female flowers ovate or
globular. The flowers have a 4-bract involucre, which
enlarges and becomes fleshy in the female flowers. The
female flowers have 2 stigmas, the male flowers have 4
stamens. All of the fruit from the catkins develops into
blackberry-like false berries, which are really a series of
fleshy drupes that are edible and pleasant-tasting.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree grows from 6 to 12 m high.
The bark is gray-brown. The leaves are alternate with flat-
grooved, somewhat hairy petioles. They are cordate or ovate.
sessile, unevenly lobed, and serrate with short rough hairs on
the upper surface.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated worldwide in temperate
regions.
Other Names: Purple Mulberry, White Mulberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRUIT
Fruit acids (1.9%): including malic acid, citric acid

Saccharose (10%)

Pectins

Ascorbic acid (0.17%)

Flavonoids: including, among others rutin
COMPOUNDS: IN THE LEAVES

Flavonoids: including among others rutin (2-6%)

The constituents of the rhizome rind are not known.

EFFECTS
The active agents are sugar, acids, pectin and rutin, but there

is no information available regarding their effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a mild laxative and in
the treatment of inflammations of the mucous membranes of
the respiratory system.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

----- PAGE 351 -----
100/BLACK MULBERRY

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as a

comminuted drug, juice or syrup.
Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 2 to 4 ml of syrup.

LITERATURE
Deshpande VH, (1968) Tetrahedron Lett 1715.

Kem W, List PR Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Kimura Y et aL (1986) J Nat Prod 94(4):639.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nomura T et al., (1983) Planta Med 47:151.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge 1986.

Black Mustard

Brassica _ nigra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds from

which oil is extracted.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are terminal or axillary
and compressed into a semi-sphere. The flowers have 4 free
sepals, 4 free petals, 6 stamens and | ovary. The sepals are
3.5 to 4.5 mm long and appear linear because of slits on the
edge. They are yellowish-green, usually glabrous, upright
and slightly splayed. The yellow petals are twice as long as
the calyx, obovate, rounded at the tip and narrowed to a stem
at the base. The ovary is on the receptacle. The style is thin
and has a semi-globose, cushion-like stigma. The fruit is an
erect pod, which is linear and rounded or angular with a thin
dividing wall. It is 10 to 25 mm long and pressed onto the
stem. The seed is globose, brown, matte and punctate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Black. Mustard is an annual that
grows up to | m tall and is slim-branched with thin fusiform
roots. The stem grows up to 1 m. It is almost round and
bristly-haired at the base, with a bluish bloom toward the
top. The stem is glabrous with upright branches almost in
bushels. The leaves are petiolate, up to 12 cm long and 5 cm
wide. The lower leaves are grass-green and covered in | mm
long bristles. They are pinnatifid and densely dentate, with 2
to 4 obtuse lobes on each side and a large end section. The
upper stem and branch leaves are smaller, usually glabrous
and blue-green, ovate or lanceolate and slightly dentate.

Habitat: Black Mustard grows in temperate regions

worldwide.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Production: Mustard seeds are the seeds of Brassica nigra.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates: chiefly sinigrin (allylglucosinolates, 1-5%);
grinding the seeds into powder and then rubbing with warm
water (not with hot water because enzymes would be
destroyed), as well as chewing, releases the volatile mustard
oil allylisothiocyanate

Fatty oil (30-35%)
Proteins (40%)

Phenyl propane derivatives: including sinapine (choline
ester of sinapic acid, 1%)

EFFECTS

The hyperemic effect is the main effect and is employed for
various indications where increased blood flow is desired.
The drug contains glucosinolates whose main constituent,
sinigrin, is converted through enzymatic hydrolysis to allyl
mustard oil. This causes a stabbing pain and an intense
reddening of the skin. Upon contact with the skin, Allylsen
oil causes the severity of the inflammation to increase,
potentially to the extent were blisters and necrosis may

occur.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: External uses include bronchial pneumonia,
sinusitis, pleurisy, lumbago and sciatica for which a mustard
poultice is applied, sometimes to achieve an antirheumatic
effect (mustard spirit 2%). Foot baths and full baths are used
to prompt increased circulation (headaches and mild glauco-
ma) or to stimulate the cardiopulmonary system (frost bite
and vascular disease).

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include irritation of
the upper respiratory tract and the gastrointestinal tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of Black Mustard is contraindicated in individuals with
gastrointestinal ulcers or inflammatory kidney diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Gastrointestinal complaints (and, rarely,
kidney irritation) could occur following internal administra-
tion, due to fiie mucus-membrane-irritating effect of the
mustard oil. The drug possesses minimal potential for
sensitization; contact allergies have been observed. The
draining effect associated with the drug's administration
makes it inadvisable in the presence of varicosis and venous
disorder.

Sneezing, coughing and possible asthmatic attacks can result
from breathing the allylisothiocyanate that arises with the

----- PAGE 352 -----
W_ ulcerations and_necroses.

Ww

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

preparation and application of mustard poultices. Eyes
should be protected when preparing or using the poultices
because the vapors can cause eye irritation. Long-term
external application or too-intensive reactions upon the skin
can lead to injury such as blister formation, suppurating
Mustard poultices are to be
removed after no more than 30 minutes.

Drug Interactions: Avoid concomitant use of preparations
containing ammonia, because ammonia with mustard oil
forms inactive thiosinamine.

Pediatric Use: Black Mustard should not be administered to
children under 6 years of age.

OVERDOSAGE
Internal overdosage can lead to vomiting, stomach pain and
diarrhea. In severe cases, these can be accompanied by
somnolence, cardiac weakness, breathing difficulties and
even to death through coma. Following installation of
activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis (suitable body
position, quiet, warmth), the therapy for poisonings consists
of administering mucilaginosa for the protection of mucus
membranes and generous amounts of fluids. Possible cases
of acidosis should be treated with sodium bicarbonate
infusions. In case of shock, plasma volume expanders should
be infused. Cardiac massage, intubation and oxygen respira-
tion may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Used externally as a mustard
plaster, foot bath or full bath. On rare occasions, Black
Mustard is used as a constituent in antirheumatic prepara-
tions and cardiac ointments.

How Supplied: Allyl mustard oil: 1 to 3% solution,
ointments, emulsions and other rubs (including a rheumatism

liniment) are available from commercial sources.

Preparation: To prepare a mustard poultice, mix approxi-
mately 100 g mustard flour with lukewarm water and pack in
linen. Use on the chest should not exceed 10 minutes (with a
maximum of 3 to 5 minutes for children). Limit use on the
face to 3 to 4 minutes and take care to avoid the eye area.
When mustard paper is used, it is immersed in warm water
and then placed on the painful area of skin.

To prepare a full mustard bath, mix 100 to 200 g mustard
flour with cold water and press through a cloth into the warm
bath. A mustard footbath should be prepared in a bucket or
other container that allows the warm water to extend up the
leg to the desired position. Add 1 to 3 dessertspoons of
mustard flour and stir.

Daily Dosage: The poultice is placed on the chest for about
10 minutes (with a maximum of 3 to 5 minutes for children).
Foot bath use should be limited to 10 minutes.

BLACK NIGHTSHADE/101

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; acute: 3 times daily; chronic once
a day (HAB34).

Storage: The stored drug should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Halva S et al., Agric Sci Finl 58:157. 1986.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hill CB et al., J Am Soc Hort Sci 112(2):309. 1987.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Black Nightshade

Solanum nigrum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried herb
collected during the flowering season, the whole fresh plant
collected during the flowering season and the whole fresh
plant with berries.

Flower and Fruit: The small white flowers are in 6- to 10-
blossomed, umbel-like, nodding, axillary inflorescences. The
calyx is 5-tipped and does not drop. The corolla is 5-tipped
with a short tube. There are 5 stamens wim clavate anthers
inclining toward each other. The corolla is rotate and has 1
superior ovary. The fruit is a pea-sized black, occasionally
green or yellow, berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Solanum nigrum is an annual plant
10 to 50 cm in height. The stem is erect, leafy and angular
with outward-inclined branches. The leaves are fleshy,
petiolate, rhomboid or ovate. They narrow to a cuneate base,
which is crenate-dentate and glabrous or sparsely pubescent.

----- PAGE 353 -----
102 /BLACK NIGHTSHADE

Characteristics: The plant has a musk-like odor when

wilting and is poisonous.
Habitat: The plant is found worldwide.

Production: Black Nightshade is the herb of Solanum
nigrum picked in uncultivated regions (the wild) and dried in

the open air.

Not to be Confused With: Black Nightshade was often called
Petty (a corruption of "petit") Morel, to distinguish it from
the Deadly Nightshade, or Great Morel, as it is also
poisonous but apparently less so.

Other Names: Garden Nightshade, Petty Morel, Poisonberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid alkaloid glycosides: in the foliage and in unripe fruits
(0-2.0%). Ripe fruits are, as a rule, free of alkaloids.

Chief alkaloids: solasonine, solamargine, P-solamargine
Steroid saponins: with tigogenin as an aglycone

EFFECTS
According to folk medicine, the herb should work as an
antispasmodic, pain reliever, sedative and narcotic; however,
there are no studies available. In animal experiments, the
steroid alkaloid glycosides have a local anesthetic effect,
increase sleep duration and significantly inhibit the occur-
rence of acetlysalicylic acid-induced stomach ulcers. The
effect is attributed to the inhibition of pepsin and hydrochlo-
ric acid secretion.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, Black Nightshade is used for
gastric irritation, cramps and whooping cough. Externally,
the herb is used for psoriasis, hemorrhoids, abscesses,

eczema and bruising.

Chinese Medicine: Black Nightshade is used for furuncles,
carbuncles, abscesses, erysipelas, sprains, strains, contusions,
chronic bronchitis and acute hepatitis.

Indian Medicine: Black Nightshade is used for rheumatic
pain, coughs, asthma, bronchitis, wounds, swellings, ulcers,
flatulence, dyspeptic complaints, vomiting, dysuria, earache,
hiccups, eye disease, leprosy and skin diseases.

Homeopathic Uses: Black Nightshade is used for cerebral
and meningeal irritation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses resulting from the intake of large quantities of
fresh foliage with high alkaloid content could lead to
gastrointestinal signs of irritation, characterized by queas-
iness, vomiting, headache and, in rare cases, mydriasis.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is available as a ground
drug, tincture and liquid extract for internal and external use.

Preparation: To prepare a rinse or moist compress, add a
handful of drug to 1 liter of water and boil for 10 minutes. A
tincture is prepared in a ratio of 1:1 with 95% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: Externally, use as a compress or rinse.
Internally, the dose is 10 drops of liquid extract 2 to 3 times

daily, or 5 to 10 gm of tincture daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Johnson R, Lee JS, Ryan CA, Regulation of expression of a
wound-inducible tomato inhibitor I gene in transgenic
nightshade plants. Plant Mol Biol, 45:349-56, 1990 Mar.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Moundipa PF, Domngang FM, Effect of the leafy vegetable
Solanum nigrum on the activities of some liver drug-
metabolizing enzymes after aflatoxin Bl treatment in female
rats. Br J Nutr, 45:81-91, 1991 Jan.

Ridout CL et al., PA 44:732. 1989.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schreiber K, Kulturpflanze 11:451-501. 1963.

Sultana S, Perwaiz S, Iqbal M, Athar M, Crude extracts of
hepatoprotective plants Solanum nigrum and Cichorium intybus
inhibit free radical-mediated DNA damage. J Ethnopharmacol,
45:189-92, 1995 Mar.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 354 -----
<£.

™.

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Black Pepper
Piper nigrum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the berries, which
have been freed from the pericarp, and the dried berry-like
fruit, which has been collected before ripening.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are pendulous, axillary
spikes 5 to 15 cm long containing over 100 inconspicuous
white florets. The florets have 1 large ovary with 3 stigmas,
2 stamens and a reduced perianth. Red berry-like drupes
form the 30 to 50 flowers, which are fertilized.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is actually a liane, which
in cultivation is trained on posts or wire. It can grow to over
6 m. The stem is strong and woody, and the leaves are
cordate, glossy and pale green. The leaves are 5 to 10 cm
wide, 8 to 18 cm long and are on 5 cm long petioles.

Habitat: The plant grows wild in southern India and is
cultivated in tropical Asia and the Caribbean.

Production: Black Peppers are the dried fruits of Piper
nigrum, harvested before ripening. The whole ears are
plucked and separated from the spindles that have been
dried, or the fruit is first brushed from the spindles and then
dried. Once the shell has been removed, the green stone-fruit
is sun-dried or roasted, after which it blackens.

Not to be Confused With: Foreign fruits of the Piperacae
family. It is most frequently confused with peppershells,
pepper spindles or stiles, ie. by-products of the extraction of
white pepper from black pepper.

Other Names: Piper, Pepper Bark

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (1.2-2.6%): chief components- sabinene (15-

25%), limonene (15-20%), caryophyllene (10-15%), beta-
pinene (10-12%), alpha-pinene (8-12%), delta3-carene (5%)

Acid amides (pungent substances): chief components- piper-
ine, additionally including among others piperylin, pipero-
lein A and B, cumaperine

3,4-dihydroxy phenyl ethanol glycosides (substratum for the
enzymatic black colouring of the fresh fruits)

Polysaccharides (45%)
Fatty oil (10%)

EFFECTS
The drug stimulates the thermal receptors and increases
secretion of saliva and gastric mucous. It has an antimicro-

BLACK PEPPER/103

bial effect. It influences liver and metabolic functions, and
has an insecticidal effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include stomach disor-
ders and digestion problems, neuralgia and scabies.

Chinese Medicine: Black Pepper is used for vomiting,
diarrhea and gastric symptoms in China.

Indian Medicine: Indian uses include arthritis, asthma, fever,
coughs, catarrh, dysentery, dyspepsia, flatulence, hemor-
thoids, hiccoughs, urethral discharge and skin damage.

Homeopathic Uses: Piper nigrum is used for irritation of the
mucous membranes and galactorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Black Pepper is used internally for
stomach disorders and externally as an irritant ointment for
neuralgia and scabies.

Daily Dosage: Single doses range from 0.3 to 0.6 gm. The
daily dosage is 15 gm.
Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10

globules 1 to 3 times a day or from D4: 1 ml injection
solution sc twice weekly (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Atal CK et al., (1975) Lloydia 38:256.

Freist W, Der scharfe Geschmack des Pfeffers - Ein altes
Ratsel, nur teilweise gelost. In: Chemie iu. Zeit 23(3): 135-142.
1991.

Kapil A, Piperine. A Potent Inhibitor of Leishmania donovani
Promastigotes in vitro. In: PM 59(5):474. 1993.

Koul IB, Kapil A. Evaluation of the Liver Protective Potential
of Piperine, an Active Principle of Black and Long Peppers. In:
PM 59(5):413. 1993.

Raina ML et al., (1976) Planta Med 30:198.

Richard ML et al., (1976) J Food Sci 36:584.

Schroder, Buch. In: Schroder R: Kaffee, Tee und Kardamom,
Ulmer-Verlag, Stuttgart. 1991.

Traxter JT, (1971) J Agric Food Chem 19:1135.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.
Pub. CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 355 -----
104/BLACK PEPPER

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Black Root
Leptandra virginica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried rhizome
with the roots. The roots have a very different action
according to whether they are used fresh or dry. The dried
root is milder.

Flower and Fruit: The stems end in terminal, 15 to 25 cm
long spikes of white flowers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial herb, which
grows to about 120 cm high. The rhizome is horizontal,
cylindrical, branched and dark red to dark purple-brown on
the outside. The simple, erect stems grow in intervals of 1.2
to 3.2 cm from the rhizome. They are smooth and finely
downy. The leaves are whorled (4 to 7 in one whorl),
lanceolate, on short petioles, pointed and finely serrate.

Habitat: Indigenous to the eastern U.S. but grows elsewhere.

Production: Black Root and its rhizome are the complete
underground parts of Leptandra virginica.

Other Names: Bowman's Root, Physic Root, Hini, Oxadod-
dy, Tall Speedwell, Tall Veronica, Whorlywort, Culveris

Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: composition unknown

Cinnamic acid derivatives: including among others 4-me-
thoxycinnamic acid, 3,4-dimethoxycinnamic acid and their

esters
Tannins
The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
The drug has diaphoretic, carminative and cathartic effects.
It is also a cholagogue and a laxative.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Black Root is used for chronic constipation
and liver and gallbladder disorders. It is also used as an

emetic.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for diarrhea and

inflammation of the liver and gallbladder.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The emetic
and laxative effects of the drug are used therapeutically.

DOSAGE

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Veronica virginica).

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Blackberry

Rubus fruticosus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, roots

and berries.

Flower and Fruit: The white or sometimes pale pink flowers
are in cymes. The calyx is 5-sepaled, the corolla is 5-
petalled. There are numerous stamens and ovaries. The small
fruit forms a black or reddish-black aggregate fruit, the
blackberry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a fast-growing, thorny
bush up to 2 m high. The generally blunt stems are densely
covered in tough thorns that creep or curve backward. The
leaves are usually 5-paired pinnate, glabrous above, and gray
to white tomentose beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and_ has

naturalized in America and Australia.

----- PAGE 356 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production: Blackberry root bonsists of the underground
parts of Rubus fruticosus as well as its preparations.
Blackberry leaf consists of the dried, fermented or unfer-
mented leaf, gathered during the flowering period, of Rubus
fruticosus as well as its preparations.

Other Names: Blackberry, American, Dewberry, Bramble,
Goutberry, High Blackberry, Thimbleberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BLACKBERRY ROOT

Saponins
Tannins

EFFECTS: BLACKBERRY ROOT
There is no reliable information available.

COMPOUNDS: BLACKBERRY LEAF

Fruit acids: including citric acid, isocitric acid
Flavonoids

Tannins (8 to 14%): gallo tannins, dimeric ellagitannins

EFFECTS: BLACKBERRY LEAF

Blackberry leaf has astringent and antidiarrheal effects due
to the high tannin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

BLACKBERRY ROOT

Unproven Uses: Blackberry root is used in folk medicine &r.
a prophylaxis for dropsy. It is also used in gastrointestinal

conditions.
BLACKBERRY LEAF
Approved by Commission E:

* Diarrhea
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Blackberry leaf is used for non-specific, acute diarrhea and
mild inflammation of the mucosa of the oral cavity and
throat.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BLACKBERRY ROOT AND LEAF

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
BLACKBERRY ROOT
No information is available

BLACKBERRY LEAF
Mode of Administration: Balckbeny leaf is available as

crude drug for infusions and other preparations for internal
use, as well as for mouthwashes. The drug is a component of
various tea mixtures.

BLADDERWORT 105

Daily Dosage: 2 to 5 gm drug. To prepare a tea, scald 1.5 gm
drug, steep for 10 to 15 minutes, strain (1 teaspoon
equivalent to approximately 0.6 gm drug).

LITERATURE
BLACKBERRY LEAF

Henning W, (1981) Lebensm Unters Forsch 173:180.
Gupta RK et al., J Chem Soc Perkin 1:2525. 1982.
Mukherjee M et al., PH 23:2881. 1984.

Wollmann Ch et al., PA 19:456. 1964.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

BLACKBERRY ROOT
Henning W, (1981) Lebensm Unters Forsch 173:180.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Bladderwort

Utricularia vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The vertical peduncle is 10 to 35 cm high
and bears 4 to 15 flowers in a loose raceme. The petioles are
short and campanulate, 13 to 20 mm long with a bilabiate

margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Utricularia vulgaris is a water plant,
which appears at flowering time. The water shoot is 60 cm
long with double-rowed leaves facing all directions. The
water leaves are 1 to 8 cm long and have 2 to 3 large lobes.
Each lobe is pinnatifid and ends in numerous tips. There are
8 to 209 tubes per leaf.

Habitat: Europe

----- PAGE 357 -----
106 /BLADDERWORT

Production: Bladderwort is the whole plant of Utricularia
vulgaris.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids: including globularin, scutellarioside II
Phenylpropane derivatives: 1-p-cumaroyl-glucoside

EFFECTS
The plant has diuretic, antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory
effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

The drug was formerly used internally in the treatment of
urinary tract disorders and externally for burns. The active
substances in Bladderwort increase gallbladder secretions;
consequently, the drug is used to treat skin and mucous
membrane inflammation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete in many parts
of Germany. Bladderwort is used internally and externally in
other parts of the world.

Preparation: To prepare a diuretic infusion for internal use,
add 2 gm of drug per 100 ml of water. To prepare an anti-
inflammatory infusion for external use, add 6 gm of drug per
100 ml of water.

Daily Dosage: Internally, as a diuretic infusion, drink two
small cups daily. Externally, the anti-inflammatory infusion
is used in mouthwashes, cleansers, cosmetics and face packs.

LITERATURE
Baumgartner DL, Laboratory evaluation of the bladderwort
plant, Utricularia vulgaris (Lentibulariaceae), as a predator of
late instar Culex pipiens and assessment of its biocontrol
potential. J Am Mosq Control Assoc, 23:504-7, 1987 Sep.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Bladderwrack

Fucus vesiculosus

TRADE NAMES
Bladderwrack (available from numerous manufacturers and

as combination product)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried thallus
and the fresh thallus of Bladderwrack.

Flower and Fruit: Some thallus ends look grainy and it is
here that the reproductive organs are found. The fructifica-
tions consisting of 3 cm long ovoid receptacles are found in
the tips of these thalli. They are either cordate or ovately
flattened with grainy bladders.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is often over | m long,
olive green when fresh and black brown when dry. The stem
of the thallus is flat, repeatedly bifurcated and has a midrib
along the whole length. Beside this midrib there are often
scattered pores and numerous air-filled bladders.

Habitat: The plant is found on the North Sea coast, the
western Baltic coast, and on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.

Production: Bladderwrack consists of the dried thallus of
Fucus vesiculosus, of Ascophyllum nodosum, or of both
species, as well as their preparations. The algae are harvested
when the tide is out, then washed in fresh water and dried at
60° C.

Other Names: Sea wrack, Kelpware, Black-Tang, Bladder
Fucus, Cutweed, Fucus, Quercus marina, Kelp-Ware,
Rockwrack

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Inorganic iodine salts

Organically-bound iodine: in particular in proteins and
lipids, also present as diiodothyrosine

Polysaccharides: including alginic acid, fucane, fucoidine
(strongly sulfated)

Polyphenold: Phlorotannins

EFFECTS
The drug is antimicrobial, has a hypoglycemic effect in
animal experiments and leads in vitro to hemaglutination of
human erythrocytes because of the polyphenolic substances.

Its use in the treatment of thyroid conditions associated with
hypethyrosis has merit because of the high iodine content.
There is information on its apparent usefulness in weight
reduction, which must be strongly criticized for the reasons
given above.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Bladderwrack are used
internally for diseases of the thyroid, obesity, overweight,
arteriosclerosis and digestive disorders and externally for

sprains.

----- PAGE 358 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Homeopathic Uses: In Homeopathy Fucus vesiculosus is
used for obesity and goitre.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: Dosages above 150 gm iodide/day carry with them
the danger of induction or worsening of a hyperthyroidism.
For that reason, the drug should no longer be administered
due to its variable iodide content (0.03 - 1%). Allergic
reactions have been known to occur.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

Drug Interactions: Bladderwrack has a hypoglycemic effect.
Theoretically, there may be an interaction with other anti-
hyperglycemic medications. Monitor patients carefully if
they are concurrently using glucose lowering agents.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Bladderwrack is available as drops
and fluid extract for internal use.

How Supplied: Fluid Extract: 1:1

Daily Dosage:
Infusion — single dose: 5 to 10 gm drug 3 times daily.

Extract — single dose: 4 to 8 ml 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

Maximum daily intake of iodine is limited to 120 Lig.
Storage: Should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Beress A, Wassermann O, Bruhn T, Beress L, A new
procedure for the isolation of anti-HIV compounds
(polysaccharides and polyphenols) from the marine alga Fucus
vesiculosus. In: JNP 56(4):478-488. 1993.

Criado MT et al., (1983) IRC Med Sci 11(3):286.

Curro F et al., (1976) Arch Med Interna 28(1): 19.

Frohne D, Phytotherapeutika und Schilddruse. In: Intern Praxis
32(1)158. 1992.

Glombitza KW et al., (1977) Planta Med 32(1):33.

Glombitza KW, Lentz G (198'i) Tetrahedron 37(22):3861.
Phillips DJH (1979) Environ Pollut 18(1):31.

Quang-Liem P, Laur MH (1974) Biochimie 56(677):925.
Quang-Liem P, Laur MH (1976) Biochimie 58(11/12): 1367,
Stahl E et al., DAZ 115:1893. 1975.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

BLESSED THISTLE / 107

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.*

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Blessed Thistle

Cnicus benedict us

TRADE NAMES
Blessed Thistle is available from a number of manufacturers.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The dried leaves and upper stems, includ-
ing the inflorescence, and the flowering parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The blossom is a pale yellow composite,
its solitary flower sessile on the tips of the twigs. The florets
are tubular. The few lateral florets are sterile, have 3-part
borders and are smaller than the numerous androgynous
florets. The epicalyx is ovate. The inner bracts end in a long,
rigid and pinnatifid thorn. The outer bracts terminate in a
simple thorn. They are broad, leafy and connected with the
cordate-oblong leaflets of the epicalyx by numerous web-like
hairs. The fruit has a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The thistle grows to 30 to 50 cm
high. The stems are heavily branched, thistle-like, villous
and glutinous pubescent. The leaves are oblong, emarginate
to pinnatifid, thorny-dentate, and roughly reticulate.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong and bitter taste.

Habitat: The thistle comes from southern Europe but is
cultivated in other regions of the continent.

Production: Blessed Thistle herb consists of the dried leaves
and upper stems, including inflorescence, of Cnicus
benedictus.

Other Names: St. Benedicts Thistle, Cardin, Holy Thistle,
Spotted Thistle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpene lactone-bitter principles: chief components
cnicin, additionally, salonitenolide, artemisiifolin

Lignans (also bitter): trachelogenin, arctigenin, nor-

tracheloside

----- PAGE 359 -----
108/BLESSED THISTLE

Volatile oil: components including n-nonane, n-undecane, ni-
tridecane, dodeca-l,ll-dien-3,5,7,9-tetrain (polyyne), p-cy-
mene, fenchon, citral, cinnamaldehyde

Triterpenes: alpha-amyrin, multiflorenol

Flavonoides: including apigenin-7-O-glucoside, luteolin,
astragalin

EFFECTS

The main constituent is the amaroid cnicin, which is

antimicrobial, cytotoxic and antitumoural. The amaroids
stimulate the secretion of saliva and gastric juices. In animal,

tests an anti-edemic effect was demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
* Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: St. Benedict Thistle is used as a cholagogue.
Internal folk medicine applications include loss of appetite,
anorexia, fever and colds, and as a diuretic. External

application for wounds and ulcers is noted.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
St. Benedict Thistle is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug exhibits a strong potential for sensitization (cross-
reactions with mugwort and cornflower, among others);
however, allergic reactions have been seen only rarely.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and dried

extracts for infusions or other bitter-tasting galenic prepara-

tions for internal use.

How — Supplied:
Capsules — 340 mg, 360 mg

Extract — 1:1

Tablets

Preparation: Infusions are prepared by pouring boiling water
over 1.5 to 2 gm of drug, allowing to set, then straining after
10 to 20 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Four to 6 gm of drug. The dosage for the
aromatic bitter is 1 cup 1/2 hour before meals. One cup of tea

is taken 3 times a day.

LITERATURE

Banhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R, (1975) Phytochemistry 14:
2709.

Farnsworth NR et al., (1975) J Pharm Sci 64(4):535.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES.

Harnischfeger G, Stolze H, notabene medici 11:652. 1981.
Urzua A, Acuna P, (1983) Fitoterapia 4:175

Vanhaelen-Fastre R, PM 24:165. 1973.

Vanhaelen-Fastre R, Vanhaelen M. (1976) Planta Med 29:179.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Bloodroot

Sanguinaria canadensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are roots and the whole

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The plant bears a white flower with 8 to
2 petals on a 15 cm long scape. It is wax-like and has
golden stamens. The seed is an oblong, narrow capsule

approximately 2.5 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant grows to about
5 cm high. The rhizome is thick, round, fleshy and slightly
curved at the end. It is 2.5 to 10 cm long and has orange-red
rootlets. The 1 basal palmately-lobed leaf appears when the
flower dies. The down-covered, grayish green leaf is
clasping, 15 to 25 cm long and has 5 to 9 lobes. Protruding
ribs are recognizable on the under surface.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the northeastern U.S.

Production: Canadian Bloodroot is the root-stock (rhizome)

of Sanguinaria canadensis.

----- PAGE 360 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Indian Paint, Tetterwort, Red Root, Paucon,
Coon Root, Snakebite, Sweet Slumber, Indian Plant, Pauson,

Sanguinaria

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the benzophenanthridine type (4-
7%): chief alkaloid sanguinarine, further including among
others, chelerythrine. oxysanguinarine: protoberberine-type:
berberine, coptisine: protopine-type: protopine. alpha- and

beta-allocryptopine
Resins
Starch

EFFF.CTS
The alkaloid sanguinarin is antimicrobial and anti-inflamma-
tory. Its use as an antiplaque agent and for gingivitis is
plausible and has been documented in diverse studies. The
alkaloids initially act as a narcotic, causing severe cramping
that is followed by a local paralysis of sensitive nerve
endings.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

The drug was formerly used as an expectorant, as an active

antiplaque agent, and as a mouthwash.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Bloodroot is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

The drug has an emetic effect in dosages above 0.03 g, and
was previously used therapeutically. Higher dosages of the
drug severely irritate the mucus membranes. Overdoses can
cause vomiting, diarrhea, intestinal colic, and possible

collapse.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete in most
countries. Bloodroot is still used in homeopathic prepara-
tions, as an ingredient in some pharmaceutical preparations,
and as a component of toothpaste and mouthwashes.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Medizinische Mundpflege mit Sanguinaria-Extrakt. In:
DAZ 131(16):XLH. 1991.

Collins KR, Pat. EP 25649 (1981) Europe.
Elliott JQ, Pat. US 4515779 (1985) USA.
Ladanyi P, Pat. CH 638973 (1983) Switzerland.
Maiti M et al., Febs Lett 142:280.

BLUE COHOSH/109

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Blue Cohosh

Caulophyllum _ thalictroides

TRADE NAMES
Blue Cohosh Root Liquid (available from numerous manu-

facturers and as a combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Medicinal parts are the dried rhizome and
roots and preparations of the fresh roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence on the terminal leaf is
panicled, 3 to 6 cm long and surrounded by a leaf-like bract.
The flowers are yellowish-green to purple and are | cm in
diameter. The 6 sepals are arranged in 2 rows. The 6 petals
are markedly reduced, inconspicuous and gland-like. The 6
stamens are as long as the petals. The ovary opens before it
is ripe and contains 2 dark blue 5 to 8 mm long, roundish
seeds on solid stems. These resemble drupes because of the
fleshy seed-shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a leafy, 30 to 70 cm
high erect perennial with a brownish-gray, branched rhi-
zome. The leaves are inserted in the middle of the shoot with
a large, almost sessile leaf, which is tri-pinnate and
resembles 3 foliage leaves. The leaflets are stemmed,
obovate, finely divided into 3 lobes, and wedge-shaped at the
base.

Characteristics: Taste is sweetish, then bitter; almost

odorless.

Habitat: The plant is found in the damp woods of the eastern
part of North America.

----- PAGE 361 -----
110 /BLUE COHOSH

Production: Blue Cohosh is the dried root and root-stock of
Caulophyllum thalictroides. It is collected in the wild.

Other Names: Papoose Root, Squawroot, Blueberry Root,
Beechdrops, Blue Ginseng, Yellow Ginseng

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Quinolizidine alkaloids: main alkaloids (-)-anagyrines, (-)-
N-methyl-cytisines, and (-)-baptifoline

Isoquinoline alkaloids: magnoflorine
Triterpene saponins: caulophyllosaponin
Caulosapogenin

EFFECTS
An unspecified glycoside, which has been localized from the
drug and then injected into the ears of rabbits, causes a
strong local irritation. Applying a solution into the rabbit's
eyes leads to inflammation. Glycoside is supposed to have an
oxytoxic effect.

The weak estrogenic, spasmolytic effect is probably caused
by, as yet unknown constituents; the ensuing nicotine effect
is possibly caused by N-methylcytisine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally it has been used for amenorrhoea,
dysmenorrhoea, threatened miscarriage, contraction-like
spasms, rheumatic symptoms, and in particular conditions
resulting from uterus atonia.

Indian Medicine: In India, die drug is known as a treatment
for gynecological disorders. In English and American
medicine, the drug has been used since the beginning of the
20th century for worm infestation, dehydration, menstrual
ailments, cramps, and mainly to stimulate contractions and
act as an antispasmodic during labor.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses include for problems of menstrua-
tion and labor, as well as rheumatism of the fingers and toes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated

therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: The drug should not be taken during the first
three months of pregnancy due to its estrogenic effect and
possible teratogenic action of the anagyrines.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as a

decoction or a liquid extract.

How Supplied:
Liquid — I:1

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Preparation: Infusion (no specifications); liquid extract 1:1,
in ethanol 70% (V/V)

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 0.3 to 1 gm of
drug; 0.5 to 1 ml of liquid extract.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules 30 to 60
minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic); parenterally:
1 to 2 ml 3 times a day sc (HAB34).

LITERATURE
Benoit PS et al., (1976) Lloydia 39:160.

Di Carlo FI et al., (1964) J Reticuloendothelial Soc 1:224.
Flom MS et al., (1967) J Pharm Sci 56:1515-1517.

Strigina LI et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 15:1583.

Strigina LI et al., (1976) Khim Prir Soedin 5:619.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Bog Bean

Menyanthes _ trifoliata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white or reddish-white,
medium-sized and have many blossomed racemes on long,
leafless peduncles. There are 5 sepals. The corolla is fused
with 5 tips and is pubescent inside. There are 5 reddish
stamens and | superior ovary. The fruit is an ovate capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Menyanthes trifoliata is a perennial
green, glabrous aquatic plant that grows from 15 to 30 cm
high. The herb has a small, finger-thick creeping rhizome.
The decumbent stem varies in length according to condi-
tions. Leaf sheaths surround the stem. The leaves are on
long, fleshy, grooved petioles. They are trifoliate, 5 cm long
and 2.5 cm wide, and have obovate leaflets.

Characteristics: The herb has a strong bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, Asia and
| America.

----- PAGE 362 -----
JP*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production: Bog Bean leaf consists of the leaf of Men-

yanthes trifoliata.

Other Names: Buck Bean, Bog Myrtle, Brook Bean, Marsh
Clover, Moonflower. Trefoil, Water Shamrock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

fridoide monoterpenes (bitter principles):
7', 8'-dihydrofoliamenthin, additionally
others sweroside, loganin, menthiafolin, foliomenthin

chief components
including among

Monoterpene alkaloids: including gentianin E

Flavonoids: including among others rutin, hyperoside,
trifolin
Hydroxycoumarins: — scopoletin

Caffeic acid derivatives
Pyrridine alkaloids: including gentianine, gentianidine

Triterpene glycosides: lupeol, beta-amyrenol, betulin, betu-
linic acid, alpha-spinasterol, stigmast-7-enol

EFFECTS
The drug stimulates saliva and gastric juice secretion. An
antimicrobial effect has been demonstrated in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
* Dyspeptic complaints
* Loss of appetite

Because it is a bitter and promotes gastric secretion, the drug
is used for loss of appetite and peptic discomfort.

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses, particularly in Europe-
an countries, include diseases of the digestive system and

fevers.

Chinese Medicine: Insomnia, weak stomach and intestines,
spleen disorders, intermittent fever, headache, breathing
difficulties, amenorrhea, ear ache, jaundice, edema, gout,
scabies and furuncles are among the applications in Chinese

medicine.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of the drug is contraindicated for patients with diarrhea,

dysentery or colitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of overdose include vomiting and diarrhea.

BOG BILBERRY/111
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:
other bitter-tasting preparations for internal use.

Comminuted herb for teas and

Preparation: Pour boiling water over 0.5 to 1 g of the finely
cut drug (1 teaspoonful = 0.9 g) or place the drug in cold
water and bring rapidly to a boil. Allow either preparation to
steep for 5 to 10 minutes, then strain.

How Supplied: The drug is a component of standardized
preparations of various tonics.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 15 to 3 g of the
drug. The dosage for the infusion is 1/2 cup, unsweetened,
before each meal.

LITERATURE

Battersby AR et al.. (1967) J Chem Soc Chem Commun. 1277.
Ciaceri G. (1972) Fitoterapia 43:134.

Janeczko Z et al.. A triterpenoid glycoside from Menyanthes
trifoliata. In: PH 29(12):3885-3887. 1990.

Junior P, Weitere Untersuchungen zur Verteilung und Straktur
der Bitterstoffe von Menyanthes trifoliata. In: PM 32(12): 112.
1989.

Phillipson JD, Anderson LA. (1984) Pharm J 233:80 et 111.
Swaitek L et al., (1986) Planta Med 6:60P.

Tumon H et al.. The effect of Menyanthes trifolita L. on acute
renal failure might due to PAF-inhibition. In: Phytomedicine
1:39-45. 1994.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1., 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Oeorg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Bog Bilberry
Vaccinium uliginosum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried ripe fruit.

----- PAGE 363 -----
112/BOG_ BILBERRY

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in axils of small
leaves at the end of short lateral branches. They are hanging
and white or reddish in color. The pedicle is encircled at the
base with a light brown bud husk. The calyx is fused with the
ovary. The fruit is a round or pear-shaped, blue-frosted, 7 to
10 cm long, multi-seeded berry. The light brown seeds are
sickle-shaped with sharp ends, and have a punctate-reticulate
skin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an angular shrub up to
80 cm high with round, gray-brown, glabrous branches and a
creeping rhizome. The leaves are deciduous, obovate or
oblong, entire, tough and short-petioled. The undersurface
has a protruding, reticulate vein system and is blue-green.
The upper surface of the leaves is light matte-green to almost
white.

Habitat: The plant is common throughout the Northern
Hemisphere.

Production: Bog Bilberries and leaves are the ripe fruit and
leaves of Vaccinium uliginosum. The collection or picking
occurs in uncultivated regions. The drug is either air-dried in
the shade or dried artificially.

Not to be Confused With: The Bog Bilberry has smaller
flowers and berries than the common Bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus; see separate entry).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE LEAVES
Tannins: catechin tannins

Triterpenes: alpha-amyrin, friedelin, ursolic acid
Sterols: beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol-3-O-beta-glucoside
Flavonoids: including hyperoside

COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRUITS
Anthocyans: including chief components: malvidin-3-O-glu-
coside, delphinidine-3-O-glucoside, delphinidine-3-O-ara-

binoside

Organic acids: including benzoic acid

Flavonoids: including hyperoside, myricetin, myricetin-5'-
methyl ether

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Bog Bilberry is used for gastric and
intestinal catarrh, diarrhea and bladder complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

OVERDOSAGE
Signs of poisoning following consumption of large quantities
of the fruits have occurred very rarely. Signs include
queasiness, vomiting, states of intoxication, feelings of
weakness and visual disorders. Presumably, these poisonmgs
can be traced back to the plant being infested with the lower
fungus Sclerotinia megalospora.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as a
liquid extract (tea).

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour 250 ml of cold water
over 2 heaping teaspoons of drug; steep for 10 to 12 hours
and strain.

Daily Dosage: Drink 1 cup of the prepared tea, unsweetened,
once or twice a day.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Giftstoffe mikrobieller Endo- und

Epiphyten. Gefahren fur Mensch und Tier. In: DAZ
132(42):2231. 1992.

Boldo

Peumus boldo

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are racemes of whitish
or pinkish campanulate flowers. The berries are small,
yellowish-green and edible.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a strongly aromatic,
heavily branched evergreen shrub 5 to 6 m tall. The leaves
are sessile, opposite, oval, about 5 cm long with an entire
and slightly revolute margin. They are rather thick and
coriaceous with a protruding midrib and a row of small
glands on the upper surface. Both surfaces are slightly
pubescent.

----- PAGE 364 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Characteristics: Boldo has a bitter, aromatic odor and a
camphoraceous, lemony taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Chile and Peru. It is
naturalized in mountainous Mediterranean regions and on the
western coast of the U.S.

Production: Boldo leaf consists of the dried leaves of
Peumus boldus.

Other Names: Boldu, Boldus

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Isoquinoline alkaloids of the aporphine type (0.25-0.5%):
main alkaloid boldine (0.1%)

Volatile oil (2-39c): chief components are p-cymene, cineol,
ascaridiole

Flavonoids: including _ rhamnetin-3-0-arabinoside-3'-0-
rhamnoside (peumoside), isorhamnetin-3-0-glucoside-7-0-
rhamnoside (boldoside), _isorhamnetin —_dirhamnoside
(fragroside)

EFFECTS

Boldo has been shown to be antispasmodic, choleretic and to
increase gastric secretions.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Boldo is contraindicated in patients with bile duct obstruc-
tion and those with severe liver diseases. Patients who have
gallstones should consult a physician before using the drug.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The volatile oil should not be used, because it
contains up to 40% of the toxin ascaridole.

OVERDOSAGE

Signs of paralysis are reported to appear following intake of
very high dosages. A case is described in the older scientific
literature in which depression, color hallucinations, sound
hallucinations and partial motor aphasia occurred following
the consumption of boldine over a period of months.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and

other, virtually ascaridol-free preparations for internal appli-
cation. Because of the ascaridol content, essential oil and
distillates of Boldo leaf should not be used.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 4.5 gm

BONESET 113

LITERATURE
Belts TJ, J Chromatogr 511:373. 1990.

Bombardelli E et al., (1976) Fitoterapia 47:3.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Eds.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlas
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Kreitmar H, (1952) Pharmazie 7:507.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-5.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Reuter HD, Pflanzliche Gallentherapeutika (Teil I) und .Teil Il).
In: ZPT 16(1):13-20 u. 77-89. 1995.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzendfte.
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges..
Stuttgart 1997.

Uraua A, Acuna P, (1983) Fitoterapia 4:175.

Wichtl M (Eds.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsge-s.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wolters B, Arzneipflanzen und Volksmedizin Chiles. In: DAZ
134(39):3693. 1994.

Boneset
Eupatorium perfoliatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb after

flowering.

Flower and Fruit: There are numerous flower heads in
terminal, large and slightly convex cymose-paniculate inflo-
rescences. They consist of 10 to 12 white, inconspicuous
florets with bristly pappus whose hairs are arranged in a
single row. The fruit is a tufted achene.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Eupatorium perfoliatum is a
perennial herb with a horizontal hairy rootstock. The stems
are rough-haired and grow to about 1.5 m. The leaves are
opposite, 10 to 15 cm long, lanceolate, crenate, tapering to
narrow point and fused at the base. They have shiny yellow
points due to the resin glands, which are visible on the
undersurface.

Characteristics: The taste is astringent and persistendy
bitter.

----- PAGE 365 -----
114/BONESET

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to the eastern U.S.

Production: Boneset is the complete aerial part of Eupatori-

um perfoliatum.

Other Names: Agueweed, Crosswort, Feverwort, Indian
Sage, Sweating Plant, Teasel, Thoroughwort, Vegetable

Antimony

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including eupatorin, astragalin, rutin, hyperoside

Sesquiterpene lactones: including eupafolin, euperfolitin,
eufoliatin, eufoliatorin, euperfolide
Jmmunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroxylans)

EFFECTS
The herb acts as an antiphlogistic, a diaphoretic and a bitter,

in addition to stimulating the body's immune system. In a
comparative study of the homeopathic preparation Eupatori-
um D2 with aspirin in the treatment of feverish catarrh, a
similar positive tendency was observed. In vitro, the
phagocytic action of granulocytes was increased.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: On rare occasions, Boneset is used in folk

medicine.

Homeopathic Uses: Boneset is used as a treatment for flu

and febrile diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Sensitization after skin contact with the plant is possible.
Older scientific literature (Lewin) calls attention to the fact
that the drug can lead to enhanced outbreaks of sweat and

diarrhea in therapeutic use.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
preparations and dilutions.

Boneset is used in homeopathic

LITERATURE
Antibiotika und Immunabwehr. In: Symbiose 4(2):20. 1992.

Benoit PS et al., (1976) Lloydia 39:160.

Bohlmann F et al., (1977) Phytochemistry 16:1973.
Elsasser-Beile U, Willenbacher W, Bartsch HH, Gallati H,
Schulte Monting J, Kleist von S et al., Cytokine production in
leukocyte cultures during therapy with echinacea extract. In: J
Clin Lab Analysis 10(6):441-445. 1996.

Herz W et al., (1977) J Org Chem 42(13):2264.
Vollmar A et al., (1986) Phytochemistry 25:377.
Wagner H (1972) Phytochemistry 11:1504.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Woerdenbag HJ, Eupatorium perfoliatum L.- der
"durchwachsene" Wasserhanf. In: ZPT 13(4): 134-139. 1992.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Borage

Borago _ officinalis

TRADE NAMES

Borage Oil rom numerous

capsules are available

manufacturers.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried Borage

flowers and the dried or fresh foliage, stems and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in separate, terminal,
erect, leafy racemes. The calyx is divided almost to the base
into 5 rough-haired tips. The 15 to 2.5 cm wide corolla is
usually sky blue (occasionally white) and has a short tube.
The scales of the tube are white. The 5 stamens have a
broadened filament and a violet, spur-like appendage. The
anthers are black-violet. The style is thread-like with a head-
like stigma. The ovary is divided into 4 valves. The small nut
js elongate-ovate, about 7 to 10 mm long, light brown,
keeled, ribbed, warty and rough.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Borage is an annual, succulent,
bristly-haired herb, 15 to 60 cm high. The erect, vertically
grooved stems are covered in rough, whitish hairs. The
leaves are alternate, clasping, solitary, entire-margined and
hairy. They are also folded, curved in at the margins, green

----- PAGE 366 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

on top and whitish on the underside. The leaves are 3 to 10
cm long and elliptoid to ovate.

Characteristics: Borage has a taste similar to cucumber.

Habitat: Borage originated in the Mediterranean region, but

<qfé is now found all over Europe and the U.S.

Production: Borage oil is the fatty oil of the seeds of Borago
officinalis. Borage leaves are the dried leaves and inflores-
cence of Borago officinalis. The herb most often grows wild,
but is cultivated on a small scale in Yugoslavia, Rumania,
Bulgaria and Turkey. Borage is harvested during the
flowering period. Due to the plant's very high water content,
it should be artificially dried at 40°C.

Not to be Confused With: The herb can be confused with
Echium vulgare.

Other Names: Burrage, Bugloss, Burage

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BORAGE OIL

Fatty oil: chief fatty acid is gamma-linolenic acid (17-25%),
linoleic acid

EFFECTS: BORAGE OIL
The drug acts as an astringent and as a sequestering agent.

COMPOUNDS: BORAGE LEAF
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: supinin, lycopsamin, 7-acetyl-lycop-
samin, intermedin, 7-acetyl- intermedine, amabiline,

thesinine

Silicic acid (to some extent water-soluble)
Mucilages

Tannins

EFFECTS: BORAGE LEAF
The tannins in Borage leaves have an astringent effect and
the mucins a sequestering effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BORAGE OIL
Unproven Uses: The oil is used for neurodermatitis and as a

food supplement.

BORAGE LEAF
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Borage is used as a
sequestering and mucilaginous agent for coughs and throat
illnesses and as a bronchial treatment. It is also used as an
anti-inflammatory agent for kidney and bladder disorders, as
an astringent and to treat rheumatism. Preparations using
Borage are also used for blood purification and dehydration;
the prevention of chest and peritoneal inflammation and
rheumatism of the joints; as a pain-relieving, cardiotonic,
sedative, sudorific; as a performance-enhancing agent; and
for phlebitis and menopausal complaints.

BORAGO OFFICINALIS / 115

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BORAGE OIL

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

BORAGE LEAF
Even though the hepatotoxic and hepatocarcinogenic pyrrol-
izidine alkaloid content is small, the drug should not be
administered. External use may present less of a potential for
problems.

DOSAGE
BORAGE OIL

Mode of Administration: In capsules, sometimes in combina-
tion with vitamins.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 500mg, 1000 mg

BORAGE LEAF
Storage: The drug should be protected from light and

moisture.

LITERATURE
BORAGE OIL

Fell KR, Peck JM, (1968) Planta Med 4: 411.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Ippen H, Gamma-Linolensaure besser aus Nachtkerzen- oder aus
Borretschol? In: ZPT 16(3): 167-170. 1995.

Luthy J et al., (1984) Pharm Acta Helv 59 (9/10); 242.

BORAGE LEAF
Dodson CD, Stermitz FR, JNP 49(4):727-728. 1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Larson KM, Stermitz FR, JNP 47(4):747-748. 1984.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Borago_ officinalis
See Borage

----- PAGE 367 -----
116 /BOSWELLIA CARTERI

Boswellia carteri

See Frankincense

Boxwood

Buxus sempervirens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried Boxwood

tree leaves and the woody aerial parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: Clusters of axillary yellow flowers open
in early spring. The male flowers are evenly shaped and have
4 tepals, 4 stamens and a small rudimentary ovary. The
female flowers have 4 to 8 tepals, 3 fused carpels with 3 free,
short, thick styles. The fruit is a capsule with oblong. 5 to 6
mm long seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Boxwood is an evergreen monoe-
cious shrub or tree growing to a height of 6 m with variable
forms and leaf shapes. The green branches are initially
pubescent, later glabrous, olive green, angular and densely
covered with ovate leaves, which are usually opposite. The
upper surface of the leaves is smooth, coriaceous, dark green
and very glossy. The lower surface is lighter in shade, and
the lamina margin is smooth.

Characteristics: The leaves have a nauseous taste.

Habitat: The plant is found mainly in southern and central
Europe with a clear division into east and west regions, i.e.,
northwest Spain and southern France in the west and the
Balkans to northern Greece and Asia Minor in the east. It is
otherwise extensively cultivated.

Production: Boxwood leaves are the leaves of Buxus
sempervirens. They are collected ftom the wild.

Other Names: Dudgeon, Bush Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid alkaloids: including cyclobuxine-D, cyclobuxine-B,
cycloprotobuxine-A, cycloprotobu

EFFECTS
The. cycloprotobuxine in the drug was shown to have a

cytotoxic effect in vitro as well as an inhibitory effect on the
growth of mycobacterium tuberculosis.

In animal tests, an inhibition of motility, including tetanus,
spinal paralysis and respiratory paralysis, was demonstrated.

A hypotensive effect has been described.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine preparations were used
internally for rheumatism and constipation (decoction), as a
diaphoretic (aqueous extract), for malaria (tincture) and
pneumonia (ethanol extract), and externally for rashes, hair
loss, gout and rheumatic complaints (ointment)

Homeopathic Uses: Buxus sempervirens is used for greasy
scalp with dandruff and for hair loss.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Contact dermatitis, in particular through contact
with the freshly harvested plant, is possible.

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of toxic dosages of the drug leads to vomiting,
diarrhea, severe clonic spasms, eventually to signs of
paralysis and ultimately to fatal asphyxiation. The fatal
dosage in dogs is Ol gm of the alkaloid mixture/kg body
weight (approximately 5 to 10 gm of the drug/kg body
weight). The treatment for poisonings proceeds through
suppression of the spasms with diazepam or barbiturates (no
more than absolutely necessary) followed by gastric lavage
and possible oxygen respiration. Phenothiazines and analep-
tics are not to be administered.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Boxwood is obsolete as a drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, | tablet or 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution sc

twice weekly. (HAB34)

LITERATURE
Atta-ur-Rahman et al., Alkaloids fiom Buxus species. In: PH

31(8):2933-2935. 1992.

Atta-ur-Rahman et al.. New alkaloids from Buxus sempervirens.
In: INP 52:1319-1322. 1989.

Atta-ur-Rahman et al., Steroidal alkaloids from leaves of Buxus
sempervirens. In: PH 30(4): 1295-1298. 1991.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und.Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Khodshaev BU et al., (1984) Khim Prir Soedin 6:802.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

----- PAGE 368 -----
4&

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Willaman JJ. Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33(3A):1.

Brassica napus
See Oilseed Rape

Brassica nigra

See Black Mustard

Brassica oleracea

See Cabbage

Brassica rapa

See Wild Turnip

Brazilian Pepper Tree

Schinus terebinthifolius

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Medicinal properties have been attributed
to the bark, leaves, fruit and seeds.

Flower and Fnut: The flowers are in panicles up to 15 cm
long. The flowers are small, ivory white to greenish, and the
structures are in five. The calyx is 5-tipped. There are 5
petals, 10 stamens and a superior ovary developing from a
single carpel and a style in 3 sections. The fruit is a bright
pink to red, glossy, single-drupe with a diameter of
approximately 5 mm, a thin pergament-like exocarp, an oleo-
resin-rich mesocarp and a hard endocarp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are alternate, up to 40 cm
long, odd pinnate, with 7 to 13 leaflets up to 8 cm long, | to
2 cm wide, sessile, elongate, glossy, finely serrate or jagged-
edged. The branches do not hang down.

Characteristics: The fruit is aromatic and sweetish.
Habitat: Indigenous to Central America and South America.

Production: Brazilian peppers (Pink peppers) are the ripe
unpeeled seeds of Schinus terebinthifolius Raddi, which are

BRAZILIAN PEPPER TREE/117

harvested in winter (May to August) and then air- or freeze-
dried.

Other Names: Christmas-Berry Tree, Florida Holly

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (2.0 to W.0%): chief components including
limonene, alpha-phellandrene, beta-phellandrene, alpha-pi-
nene, beta-pinene, including as well p-cymol, sabinene,
terpinolene, in some chemical varieties up to 50% delta3-

carene
Alkyl phenols (0.1%): cardanols, cardols, 2-methyl
cardolenes

Fatty oil (in the seeds 20 to 60%)

Flavonoids: including _biflavonoids, for example
amentoflavone

Triterpenes: masticadienonic acid, 3-epimasticadienonic acid

EFFECTS
The "antibiotic activity" with which the drug is credited has
not yet been proven. Its use on wounds and inflammatory
alterations of the skin appears plausible, due to the antimi-
crobial, astringent and anti-inflammatory characteristics of
the gallic acid it contains.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internal folk medicine uses have included
treatment of tumors and as a diuretic. In Brazil, a liquid
extract and tincture are prepared ftom the bark and used
internally as a stimulant, tonic and astringent, and externally
for rheumatism, gout and syphilis. The leaf and fruit have
been added to baths for wounds and ulcers. (Hager, 1949.)
The effect seems plausible due to the gallic acid content but
has not yet been sufficiently clinically proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages, although
there is some danger of sensitization (alkyl phenols).
Sensitizations occur particularly frequently in North Ameri-
ca. Stomach upset and vomiting have been observed
following the ingestion of a number of the fruits.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Should not be administered to individuals with a pre-existing
sensitivity to alkyl phenols.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole drug, tincture and extract for

internal and external use.

Daily Dosage: There is no information in the literature.

----- PAGE 369 -----
118/BRAZILIAN PEPPER TREE

Storage: Store tightly sealed and protected from light in a

cool* dry place.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Haridbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hayashi T, Nagayama K, Arisawa M, Shimizu M, Suzuki S,
Yoshizaki M, Morita N, Ferro E, Basualdo I, Berganza LH,
Pentagalloylglucose, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor from a
araguayan crude drug, Molle-i (Schinus terebinthifolius). J Nat
rod, 39:210-1, 1989 Jan-Feb.

Jain MK, Yu BZ. Rogers JM, Smith AE, Boger ET, Ostrander
RL, Rheingold AL, Specific competitive inhibitor of secreted
hospholipase A2 from berries of Schinus terebinthifolius.
hytochemistry, 39:537-47, 1995 Jun.

Ramos Ruiz A, De la Torre RA, Alonso N, Villaescusa A,
Betancourt J, Vizoso A, Screening of medicinal plants for
induction of somatic segregation activity in Aspergillus
nidulans. J Ethnopharmacol, 39:123-7, 1996 Jul 5.

Brewer's Yeast

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the mature, debit-
tered, bottom-fermented Brewer's Yeast.

Flower and Fruit: The cells may be single, in pairs, in chains
or aggregate. On a suitable solid fertile base the individual
cell colonies have smooth margins, are slightly convex to flat
and are whitish to cream-yellow. Older individual colonies
are slightly raised, smooth or slightly lobed (sometimes in
sections), or folded, and are yellowish to light brown. The
vegetative reproduction is via multilateral budding. Ascos-
pores are produced from the vegetative cells. There are
normally 1 to 4, occasionally more, round, smooth-walled

ascospores per ascus.

Characteristics: Brewer's Yeast is found extensively in the
wild, and it lives as a saprophytic parasite or symbiotically.

Habitat: Brewer's Yeast is grown worldwide.

Production: Medicinal yeast consists of fresh or dried cells

of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and/or of Candida utilis.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Vitamins of the B group (per 100 gm): thiamin 8-15 mg,
riboflavin 4-8 mg, nicotinic acid amide 45-90 mg, pantothen-
ic acid 7-25 mg, pyridoxine 4-10 mg, biotin 20 jig, folic acid
1-5 mg, vitamin B-12 20 fig

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Polysaccharides: mannans, glucans

Proteins
Amines
Sterols: ergosterol, zymosterol

EFFECTS
The yeast is antibacterial and stimulates phagocytosis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
* Eczema, furuncles, acne
+ Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Brewer's Yeast is used for constipation and
itching skin diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. The intake of large quantities can cause gas.
Allergic intolerance reactions are possible (itching, urticaria,
exanthema, Quinck's disease). Migraine headaches can be
triggered in susceptible patients.

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous intake of monoamine
oxidase inhibitors can cause an increase in blood pressure.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Medicinal yeast and galenic prepa-
rations are available for internal use. Pharmaceutical forms

include tablets and compound preparations.
Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 6 gm.
Storage: Store in air-tight containers protected from light.

LITERATURE

Aflmann C, Mikroorganismen:Bioth2rapeutika bei
Infektionskrankheiten. In: DAZ 136(46):4136-4137. 1996.
Anonym, Hefepraparate haben sich bewahrt. In: PTA 5(9):433.
1991.

Bockeler W, Thomas G, (1989): In-vitro-Studien zur
destabilisierenden Wirkung lyophilisierter Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Hansen CBS 5926-Zellen auf Enterobakterien. Lafk
sich diese Eigenschaft biochemisch erklaren? In, Miiller J,
Ottenjann R, Seifert J (Hrsg), Okosystem Darm, Springer
Verlag, S 142-153.

Czerucka D, Roux 1, Rampal P, (1994) Saccharomyces boulardii
inhibits sectretagogue-mediated adenosin-cyclic monophosphate
induction in intestinal cells. Gastroenterology 106:65-72.

Ewe K, (1983) Obstipation - Pathophysiologic Klinik, Therapie.
Int Welt 6:286-292.

Gedek B, Hagenhoff G, (1989) Orale Verabreichung von
lebensfahigen Zellen des Hefestammes Saccharomyces cerevisiae

----- PAGE 370 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Hansen CBS 5926 ,und deren Schicksal wahrend der Magen-
Darm-Passage. Therapiewoche 38 (Sonderheft): 33-40.

Hochter W, Chase D, Hagenhoff G, (1990) Saccharomyces
boulardii bei akuter Erwachsenediarrhoe. Miinch Med Wschr

132: 188-192.

“Hojgaard L, Arffmann S, Jorgeasen M, Krag E, (1981) Tea
consumption, a cause of constipation. Br Med J 282: 864.

Jahn HU, Zeitz M. (1991) Immunmodulatorische Wirkung von
Saccharomyces boulardii beim Menschen. In: Seifert J,
Ottenjann R, Zeitz M, Bockemuhl J (Hrsg) Okosystem Darm
III. Springer-Verlag, S 159-164.

Kollaritsch HH. Toburen D, Scheiner O, Wiedemann G, (1988)
Prophylaxe der Reisediarrhoe. Munch Med Wschr 130: 671-673.

Massot J, Desconclois M, Astoin J, (1982) Protection par
Saccharomyces boulardii de la diarrhee Escherichia coli du
souriceau. Ann Pharm Fr 40: 445-449.

Plein K, Hotz J, (1993) Therapeutic effect of Saccaromyces
boulardii on mild residual symptoms in a stable phase of
Crohn's disease with special respect to chronic diarrhea - a
pilot study. Z Gastroenterol 31: 129-134.

Schmidt CH, (1977) Unspezifische Steigerung der
,’’ Phagozytoseaktivitaten von Peritoneal-makrophagen nach oraler
™ Gabe verschiedener Hefepriiparationen. Dissertation Freie
Universitit Berlin.

Sinai Y, Kaplan A, Hai Y et al., (1974) Enhancement of
resistance to infectious disease by oral administration of
Brewer's Yeast. Infection Immunol 9: 781-787

Surawicz Ch, Elmer GW, Speelman P, McFarland LV, Chinn J,
van Belle G, (1989) Die Prophylaxe Antibiotika-assoziierter
Diarrhoen mit Saccharomyces boulardii. Eine prospektive
Studie. Gastroenterol 96: 981-988.

Tempe JD, Steidel AL, Blehaut H, Hasselmann M, Lutun PH,
Maurier F, (1983) Prevention par Saccharomyces boulardii des
diarrhees de ralimentation enterale debit continu. La Semaine
des Paris 59: 1409-1412.

Weber R, Regio Seminar Pharma: Reisemedizinische Beratung.
n: DAZ 135(25):2352-2354. 1995.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

m (Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
“* 1994 (unter Saccharomyces).

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

BRITISH ELECAMPANE (XUAN-FU-HUA) / 119

British Elecampane
(Xuan-Fu-Hua)

Inula britannica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flower.

Flower and Fruit: The semi-globose composite flowers are
surrounded by bracts; they have a diameter of 2.5 to 5 cm,
are single or in umbelliferous racemes with bracts arranged
in a number of rows. The lingual florets are yellow and up to
1 mm wide, the tubular florets are 5-tipped, androgenous and
numerous. The anther has an appendage tail. The fruit is a
cylindrical, long-ribbed, 1.3 mm long achene. The pappus is
single-rowed, approximately 5 mm long and consists of fine,
rough bristles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows up
to 60 cm high. The leaves are alternate and simple. The
lower leaves narrow into the short petiole, entire or dentate.
The upper leaves are sessile and rounded at the base,
lanceolate, sparsely pubescent above, and are covered below
in dense silky hairs or almost glabrous. The stem is upright,
round, weakly ribbed, silky-haired to almost glabrous. The
root is creeping.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Asia and Europe.

Production: Elecampane flowers are the inflorescences of
Inula britannica and Inula japonica, dried in the sun or shade
after harvesting.

Not to be Confused With: Arnicae flos

Other Names: Alant-Okleuveasis

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpenes: sesquiterpene lactones, particularly gaillar-
din but also including britanin

Flavonoids: including isoquercitrin

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS

It has been reported that a watery extract of the sesquiter-
pene-containing drug inhibits in vitro cAMP-phosphodiester-
ase up to 60%, and prevents the infection of human embryo
muscle cells with the herpes simplex virus II. The drug is
also assumed to possess potential for sensitization, due to the
sesquiterpene lactones with exocyclic methylene groups it
contains. The secretolytic and emetic effect with which the
drug is credited has not been documented. The flower of the
East Asian species is used as a depurative.

----- PAGE 371 -----
120/BRITISH ELECAMPANE (XUAN-FU-HUA)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Indications in folk medicine include feel-
ings of fullness in the chest and diaphragm area, vomiting,
coughs and symptoms of the efferent urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug.

Preparation: The drug is roasted with a honey solution until
it is no longer sticky. A decoction is prepared by boiling 3 to
9 g drug in a sealed sachet.

Storage: Store in a dry place.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

lijima K, Kiyohara H, Tanaka M, Matsumoto T, Cyong JC,
Yamada H Preventive effect of taraxasteryl acetate from Inula
britannica subsp, japonica on experimental hepatitis in vivo.
Planta Med, 61:50-3, 1995 Feb.

Broad Bean
Vicia faba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh flower.

Flower and Fruit: The white or bluish short-pedicled flowers
have black spots on the standard. They are arranged in
groups of 2 to 4 in the upper leaf axils. The calyx tips are
uneven, with the upper ones shorter than the lower. The pod
is leathery and velvety on the flat surface. The seeds are
large, flat, ovate or oblong, and brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 60 to 125 cm high. The
stem is erect and has no climbers. The leaves are pinnate and
the leaflets elliptical, fleshy, blue-green and terminate
acutely. The stipules are ovate and semi-saggitate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the temperate regions of
the world.
Production: Broad Beans are the seeds of Vicia faba.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Pyrimidine derivatives: vicine (vicioside, 0.4-0.8%), convi-
cine (0.1-0.6%)

Lectins: The isolectins mixture is referred to as favine

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA, up to 8%)
Starch
Proteins (26%)

Tannins (2%)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Formerly, Broad Bean flowers were used in
the treatment of coughs and kidney and genital complaints.
Externally, they are used as a poultice for skin inflammation,
warts and burns.

Homeopathic Uses: An essence of the fresh plant after

flowering is used in homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Following division of the glycosides in the intestine
resorption and oxidation through dehydration of SH-groups
in the erythrocyte membrane, the pyrimidine derivatives can,
in high dosages, lead to hemolysis.

OVERDOSAGE
The intake of large quantities of raw or only briefly cooked
seeds can lead to queasiness, vomiting, diarrhea and feelings
of vertigo. In severe cases, overdosage may lead to acute
hemolytic anemia with fever, icterus, hemoglobinuria, oligu-
ria and anuria, particularly among individuals with genetical-
ly caused glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency
(inadequate protection of the erythrocytes by glutathione),
which is also known as favism. Favism is treated by
transfusion of washed erythrocytes and administration of
prednisone. Elevations in blood pressure are also possible
due to the L-DOPA content of the seeds.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Broad Bean preparations are now

obsolete.

LITERATURE

Chevion M, Maer J, Glaser G, Naturally occuring food
toxicant: favism-producing agents. In: CRC Handbook of
Naturally Occuring Food Toxicants, CRC Press, Boca Raton,
Florida. 1983.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Vered Y et al., The influence of Vicia faca (Broad bean)
seedlings on urinary sodium excretion. In: PM 63(3):237-240.
1997,

----- PAGE 372 -----
A

Ww

£

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Brooklime

Veronica beccabunga

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh flowering
plant freed from the root, the fresh aerial parts collected
during the flowering season and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in loose, axillary,
diagonal clusters. The accompanying leaves are linear, as
long as or shorter than the flowers. The peduncles and
pedicles are glabrous. The calyx is dorsiventral and divided
into 4. The sepals are lanceolate to spatulate and acuminate;
the front ones are larger than the back ones. The corolla is
rotate with a very short tube, 4 to 9 mm wide and azure blue.
The ovary is green and the stigma capitual-like. The fruit is a
cordate, almost globular, narrow-winged capsule. The seeds
are 0.6 mm long and 0.45 mm wide. They are yellow, oval
and flatly convex with a fairly smoo'h back.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial with a
creeping rhizome. The stem is ascending, up to 50 cm high,
round and filled with latex. The leaves are petiolate, ovate or
broad elliptical, obtuse, narrowly serrate, glabrous and
glossy.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe,
western and northern Asia and northern Africa, and is
naturalized in eastern North America.

Production: Brooklime is the aerial part of Veronica
beccabunga. The collection or picking occurs in uncultivated
regions in Europe, west and north Asia, North Africa and

North America.

Other Names: Beccabunga, Mouth-Smart, Neckweed.
Speedwell, Water Purslane, Water Pimpernel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes: aucubin (0.8%)
Flavonoids: including among others scutellarin glycosides

The drug has not been extensively investigated.

EFFECTS
Brooklime has a diuretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Brooklime is used to lessen the elimination
of urine. It is also used for constipation, liver complaints,
dysentery and lung conditions. The drug has also been
reported to be effective against bleeding of the gums.

BROOM CORN /121

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994,

Tnouye H et ah, (1974) Planta Med 25:285.

Kato Y, (1946) Folia Pharmacol Jap 42:37 (via CA 47: 1845i.

Swiatek L et al.. Asta Pol Pharm 25:597. 1968.

Broom Com
Sorghum vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers and inflorescences are large
spadix-like and solitary. They may also be in pairs and
terminal on long, stiff, indistinct panicles. The panicles may
be bushy-branched or occasionally tangled-branched. The
individual spikelets are usually ovate to round, and the spelts
are usually broad-lanceolate. The spelts become hard, shiny
and dentated at the tip. The seeds are small, round and white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is reed-like and similar to
maize but is not as tall.

Habitat: The plant is common in Spain, Italy and southern
Europe. It is widely cultivated in the U.S.

Production: Broom Corn seeds are the seeds of Sorghum

vulgare.
Other Names: Darri, Durri, Guinea Cora, Sorghum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: dhurrin (in the fruits, in contrast
with the foliage [250-700 mg/100 gm] only in very low
concentrations: 0.005-5 mg/100 gm)

Starch (70%)

Proteins (10%)

Fatty oil (3%)

Vitamins of the B group: thiamin (Bl), riboflavine (B2)

EFFECTS
Broom Corn is a demulcent that is soothing to the alimentary

tract.

----- PAGE 373 -----
122/BROOM CORN +

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the seeds’ are used for
digestive disorders, but it is mainly used as a cereal grain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Broom Corn can be administered as

an infusion, but is mostly used as a cereal grain.

LITERATURE

Erb N et al. PM 41:84. 1981.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Seigler D, Cyanogene Glykoside (Vortragsref.). In: DAZ
132(25): 1365. 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biclogie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Brown Kelp

Macrocystis pyrifera

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the thallus.

Flower and Fruit: This brown algae grows up to 100 m long.
Generations switch between sporophyte and gametophyte.
The haploid male or female gametophytes are tiny plantlets.
The 50 to 100 m long sporophyte is made up of root-like
rhizoids, a rope-like cauloid, and phylloids that are leaf-like,
coriaceous-thick sections with a large elongate to pear-
shaped air-bladder at the base. The rhizoids form a conical
adhesive disc of up to 1 m in diameter. The phylloids grow
up to 1 m long, are attached to the cauloid-like leaflets and
are covered with sporangia.

Habitat: Found along the west coast of United States
(primarily California) and along the coast of Chile.

Production: Brown algae thallus is the dried thallus, usually
only the phylloid, of Macrocystis pyrifera. (Macrocystis
integrifolia may be added.) The algae are harvested using
vessels called mowing ships.

Other Names: Giant Kelp, Long-Bladder Kelp, Sea Kelp

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Alginic acid (15 to 20%)

Polysaccharides: fucoidan, laminaran

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

lodine (0.1 to 0.5%): to some extent organically bound

Proteins

Cyclitols: laminitol (4-C-methyl-meso-inositol)

Sugar alcohols: mannitol

EFFECTS
Brown algae thallus serves chiefly as a source of iodine. The
drug has also been demonstrated to have an influence on the
immune system, as well as antiviral qualities. In a study with
400 women, the daily intake of 5.5 g of macrocystis powder
over a period of 6 to 8 weeks led to an elevation of
hemoglobin levels of 86% over normal values. Although
licensed as a substance to aid weight loss, no adequate
experimental data are available to support that effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include weight reduc-
tion. The drug is used as a commercial pharmaceutical
preparation in the U.S. for anemia in pregnancy. In Japan the
drug is used for hypertension.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Brown Kelp should not be used by individuals with a
familial disposition to thyroid illness or hyperthyroidism.

OVERDOSAGE

Long-term administration of daily dosages that exceed 150
micrograms iodine carry with them the danger of worsening
an existing hyperthyroidism. Quantities over 300 micro-
grams iodine per day can precipitate hyperthyroidism.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
available for internal use.

Brown Kelp preparations are

Storage: Store in tightly sealed container.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
OOrogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Zeller SG, Gray GR, Analysis of Macrocystis pyrifera and
Pseudomgnas aeruginosa alginic acids by the reductive-cleavage
method. Carbohydr Res, 226:313-26, 1992 Mar 30.

Brunfelsia hopeana

See Manaca

----- PAGE 374 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Bryonia alba

See White Bryony

Bryonia cretica
See Red Bryony

Buckthorn

Rhamnus  catharticus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the whole, ripe,
dried fruit and the fresh ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The small, dioecious, greenish-yellow
flowers are in axillary cymes. The calyx is fused, has 4
segments and droops. The petals are small and are on the
edge of the calyx tube, which has short stamens. The ovary is
4-valved with a style that is divided in 4. The fruit is a pea-
sized, black berry-like drupe. The seeds are 5 mm long and
triangular with a narrow split, which separates slightly at the
end and is surrounded by a cartiliginous margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant occurs in a variety of
forms, usually as a bush that is up to 3 m in height, but
occasionally as a tree with a bent trunk that grows up to 8 m.
The boughs are usually stiffly spread; the branches are more
or less clearly opposite, glossy, glabrous or occasionally
pubescent and end in a thorn. The leaves are clustered on the
older branches, opposite on the younger ones. They are ovate
or elliptical, finely serrate with 2 to 3 lateral ribs curved
towards the midrib.

Characteristics: The flowers are fragrant, the heartwood is
orange-red.

Habitat: The plant is common all over Europe, Western Asia
and North Africa.

Production: Buckthorn, consists of the dried ripe berries of
Rhamni catharticus and its preparations. Buckthorn is
harvested in uncultivated regions in autumn and dried.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with the fruit of
Frangula alnus.

Other Names: Hartsthorn, Common Buckthorn, Purging
Buckthorn, Way thorn, High way thorn, Ramsthorn

BUCKTHORN/123

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (2 to 7%): anthranoids, chief compo-
nents glucofrangulin A, diacetylglucofrangulin, frangulin A

Flavonoids (1 to 2%): including catharticin (rhamnocitrin-3-
O-rhamnoside), xanthorhamnine = (rhamnetin-3-O-rha-
mnoside)

Tannins (3 to 4%): oligomeric proanthocyanidins

EFFECTS
The drug has a laxative effect because of the anthranoid
content. Anthranoids have an anti-absorptive hydrogogic
effect resulting in a more liquid stool and an increase in
volume of the content of the intestine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

Buckthorn is used internally for constipation and for bowel
movement relief in cases of anal fissures and hemorrhoids. It
is used after recto-anal surgery and in preparation for
diagnostic intervention in the gastrointestinal tract and to
achieve softer stool.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine it is used as a diuretic (in
‘blood-purifying' remedies).

Homeopathic Uses: Rhamnus catharticus is used for poor
digestion.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindicated in intestinal obstruction, acute inflammatory
intestinal diseases, appendicitis and abdominal pain of
unknown origin. Use during pregnancy or while nursing only
after consulting a physician. The drug is not to be adminis-
tered to children under 12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Spasmodic gastrointestinal complaints could occur
as a side effect to the drug's purgative effect. Long-term use
leads to loss of electrolytes, especially potassium ions. This
may lead to hyperaldosteronism, inhibition of intestinal
motility and enhancement of the effect of cardioactive
steroids, which in rare cases may result in cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Nephropathies, edema and accelerated bone deteriora-
tion may be the result of long term use.

Drug-Interactions: Resorption of other medications could be
reduced due to the laxative effect. In the case of chronic use/
overuse, a potassium deficiency leads to an increase in the
effect of cardiac glycosides as well as effecting heartbeat-
regulating drugs.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

----- PAGE 375 -----
124/BUCKTHORN

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of large quantities of the fresh berries could lead
to European cholera or kidney irritation. The question of the
increase in probability of developing colonic carcinomas
following long-term administration of anthracene drugs has
not yet been fully clarified. Recent studies show no
connection between the administration of anthracene drugs
and the frequency of carcinoma of the colon.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Buckthorn solid
pharmaceutical forms and in commercial compounded prep-
arations for oral intake. It is also available parenterally for

is available in

homeopathic use.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour boiling water over 4 gm
cut drug and strain after 10 to 15 minutes or put the drug in
cold water, bring to boil, boil for 2 to 3 minutes and strain
while still warm. (1 teaspoon corresponds to approximately

3.8 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: 2 to 5 gm drug corresponding to 20 to 30 mg
hydroxyanthracene derivative per day calculated as glucof-

rangulin A
Tea — 1 cup mornings and evenings.

The individual dose is the minimum dose required to
produce a soft stool. Administration should be limited to a

few days.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D3: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day (HAB1)

Storage: Buckthorn should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ

136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

Anonym, Anwendungseinschrankungen fur Anthranoid-haltige
Abfiihrmittel angeordnet. In: PUZ 25(6):341-342. 1996.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.

Belkin M et al., (1952) J Nat Cancer Inst 13:742.
Coskun M, Int J Pharmacogn 30:151. 1992.

Demirezer LO, Glucofrangulinanthrone A/B, deren
Oxidationsformen und davon abgeleitete Zuckerester aus
Rhamnus-Arten. In: Dissertation Universitat Frankfurt/Main.
1991.

Klimpel BE et al., Anthranoidhaltige Laxantien - ein Risiko fur
die Entwicklung von Tumoren der ableitenden Harnwege. In:
PUZ 26(1 ):33, Jahrestagung der DPhG, Berlin, 1996. 1997.

Rauwald HW Just, J-D, (1981) Planta Med 42:244.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Thesen R. Phytotherapeutika - nicht immer harmlos. In: ZPT
9(49): 105. 1988.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L. Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Thomson RH, Naturally Occuring Quinones, 2nd Ed., Academic
Press New York 1971.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Buckwheat

Fagopyrum esculentum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh aerial
parts, and the leaves and flowers collected during the
flowering season and later dried.

Flower and Fruit: Short, compact, long-peduncled thryses
form in the leaf axils and at the end of the branches. The
involucre is 3 to 4 mm long. It has 5 bracts, is pink or white
and usually green at the base. The floret has 8 stamens with
golden yellow nectaries at the base. The fruit is a sharply
triangular achaene.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Buckwheat is an annual 15 to 60 cm
high plant with an erect, usually red stem covered in
alternating, sagittate and sessile leaves. The lobes are obtuse
or rounded with sweeping borders. The lower leaves are
petioled, the upper ones less so. The root is fusiform. Tatar
Buckwheat (Fagopyrum tataricum), which is used in the
pharmaceutical industry, is easily distinguishable from
Fagopyrum esculentum by its green flowers, usually green

stems, and curved, dentated and squat achaenes.

----- PAGE 376 -----
(Q*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central Asia and is
cultivated in Europe.

Production: Buckwheat herb consists of the flower and
leaves of Fagopyrum esculentum, which are® harvested
during flowering season and dried. The harvest takes place
50 to 60 days after sowing and before the fruit forms. There
is a slight loss of rutin if it is quickly dried (20 to 40
minutes) at high temperatures (105° to 135° C).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: rutin (up to 8% in the leaves), quercitrin,
hyperoside

Anthracene derivatives (naphthadianthrones, chiefly in the
blossoms): fagopyrine (0.01%), protofagopyrine

EFFECTS
Buckwheat increases the venous tone (antiedematic, capil-
lary sealing), which can be attributed to the rutin in the herb.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used as a
venous and capillary tonic and as a prophylaxis to prevent
general hardening of the arteries. The drug alleviates venous
stasis and varicose veins.

Homeopathic Uses: Buckwheat is used to treat skin and liver
diseases with itching and headache.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

OVERDOSAGE
The intake of large quantities of the Buckwheat plant leads

to phototoxicoses in animals due to the photosensitizing
effect of the naphthadianthrones. There are no dangers for
humans in the application of therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Buckwheat is taken orally as tablets

and in teas.

Preparation: Follow package instructions for making Buck-
wheat tea.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic); from
D6: parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute, 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day (HABI).

LITERATURE

Adamek B, Drozdzik M, Samochowiec L, Wojcicki J, Clinical
effect of buckwheat herb, Ruscus extract and troxerutin on
retinopathy and lipids in diabetic patients. In: Phytotherapy Res
10(8):659-662. 1996.

BUGLE/125

Anonym, Nicht-Brotgetreidearten: Alternative Korner unter der
Lupe. In: DAZ B6(38):3229-2330. 1996.

Bassler R, PA 12:758-772 et 834-841. 1985.
Couch JF, Naghski J, Krewson CF, Science 103:197-198. 1974.

Gaidies I, Buchweizen, eine Venenhilfe. In: PTA 6(7):439.
1992.

Hagels H et al.. Two anthraquinones and a bianthraquinone
from Fagopyrum tataricum. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th
Ann Congress of GA. 125. 1996.

Ihme N et al.. Leg oedema protection ftom a buckwheat herb
tea in patients with chronic venous insufficiency: A single
centre, randomised, double blind, placebo controlled clinical
trial. In: European J Clin Pharmacol 50(6)443-447. 19%.
Koscielny J, Radtke H, Hoffmann KH, Jung F, Miiller A,
Griitzner KI, Kiesewetter H, Fagorutin-Tee bei chronisch
venoser Insuffizienz (CVI). In: ZPT 17(3): 145-159. 1996.

Samel D, de Witte P, Fagopyrins from Fagopyrum esculentum
and their PTK inhibitory activity. In: PM 61(Abstracts of 43rd

Ann Congr):67. 1995.

Further information in:

Hiinsel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992. (unter Buchweizen).

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Bugle
Ajuga reptans

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts
collected during the flowering season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 1 to 15 cm long. The
flowers are in spikes. They are located in the axils of
undivided bracts at the end of the stem. The 5-tipped, hairy
calyx is short-stemmed, erect, labiate and campanulate. The
tips are triangular and about as long as the tube. The corolla
is bright violet-blue, pink or white. It is downy-haired on the
outside with a long straight tube, which has a circle of hairs
under the stamen. There are 4 stamens with yellow anthers.
The 4 mericarps are 2 mm long and finely reticulate.

----- PAGE 377 -----
126/BUGLE

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ajuga reptans is a shrub, up to 30
cm high with overground rooting runners sprouting from the
rosette-like basal leaves. The flower stem is quadrangular,
villous above and glabrous below. The rest of the plant is
glabrous. The basal leaves are large, long-petioled, spatulate
and dentate. The cauline leaves are crossed opposite, short-
petioled, small and oval. The lowest or at least the third-
lowest stem is flower-bearing. There are some upper false
whorls, which are compressed into a false spike.

Habitat: The plant is found in Europe, Britain, and parts of
Asia and northern Africa.

Production: The aerial parts of Ajuga reptans are picked
when in bloom and dried. Gathered in uncultivated areas (the

wild).

Other Names: Bugula, Middle Comfrey, Middle Confound,
Sicklewort, Carpenter's Herb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoid glycosides and ajugols

Phytoecdysone: — ajugalactone

Diterpene bitter principles

Caffeic acid derivatives: including rosemary acid

EFFECTS
There is no information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, Bugle is used as an astringent for
inflammation of the mouth and larynx. It is also used for
gallbladder and stomach disorders. Externally, the plant is
used for the treatment of wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Bugle is used topically, in alcoholic
extracts, as a water infusion and in teas.

LITERATURE
Breschi M, Martinotti E, Catalano S, Flamini G, Morelli I,
Pagni A, Vasoconstrictor activity of 8-O-Acetylharpagide from
Ajuga reptans. In: JNP 55: H45-H48. 1992.

Camps F, et al., (1985) An Quim 81C(1):74-75.

Camps F, et al., (1981) Rev Latinoamj Quim 12:81-88. 1981.
Camps F, Coll J, (1993) Insect allochemicals from Ajuga
plants. In: PH 32:1361.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Komissarenko NF, et al., (1976) Khim Prir Soedin 11:109-110.
1976.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Nederl. 21(4):417.

Ruhdorfer J, Rimpler H, (1981) Z Naturforsch 36c:697-707.
1981.

Bugleweed

Lycopus virginicus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh or dried
herb collected during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, almost radial in
dense axillary whorls. The calyx is campanulate with a
glabrous tube and 4 or 5 regular, usually erect, tips. The
corolla is whitish with the tube only partly showing and a
few uneven lobes. The epicalyx and calyx sepals are shorter
than in the European variety. There are only 2 fertile stamens
with initially parallel, later spreading pollen sacs. The upper
stamens are reduced to staminoids or completely disappear.
The fruit is a flattened, rectangular, stunted, and smooth

nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial
with runners. The quadrangular, 60 cm high smooth stems
grow from the perennial creeping root. The stems bear pairs
of opposite, short-petioled leaves. The upper ones are dentate
and pointed; the lower ones wedge-shaped to entire-mar-
gined. They are glabrous and glandular-punctate on the
lower surface.

Habitat: The plant grows in North America. Lycopus

europaeus, Gypsywort, is a close European relative.

Production: Bugleweed consists of the fresh or dried, above-
ground parts of Lycopus europaeus and/or Lycopus virgini-
cus, as well as preparations collected in the wild and air-
dried.

Other Names: Sweet Bugle, Water Bugle, Virginia Water
Horehound, Gypsywort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Caffeic acid derivatives:
and their oligomerics created through oxidation

rosmaric acid, lithospermic acid

Flavonoids: including acacetine-, apigenein-, luteolin glyco-
sides, among them cosmosiin, genkwanin, pilloin, apigenin-,
acacetine- and luteolin-7-O-glucuronides.

Diterpenes: tetrahydroxy-delta8(9)-pimaric acid methyl ester

----- PAGE 378 -----
nA

£»

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Volatile oil (0.1%)

EFFECTS
Bugle weed has antigonadotropic and antithyrotropic effects.

It inhibits the peripheral de-iodination of T4. The phenolic
constituents of the drug have an atigonadotropic effect. They
cause a lowering of the prolactin level and have a depressant
effect on the thyroid as a result of an inhibition of iodine
transport and the release of preformed thyroid hormone.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Nervousness and insomnia
+ Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

Unproven Uses: Bugleweed is used for mild thyroid
hyperfunction associated with disturbances of the autonomic
nervous system. It is also used for tension and pain in the
breast (mastodynia). In folk medicine, it is used for
functional and organic cardiac conditions, liver and kidney

disease.

is used to treat

Homeopathic Uses: Lycopus_ virginicus
hyperthyroidism in homeopathic preparations.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in hypofunction of the thyroid

and thyroid gland enlargement without function disturbance.
There should not be any simultaneous administration of

thyroid hormone preparations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated

therapeutic dosages.

Drug Interactions: No simultaneous administration of thy-
roid preparations. Administration of Lycopus preparations
disturbs the administration of diagnostic procedures with

radioactive isotopes.

OVERDOSAGE

Enlargement of the diyroid gland is possible only through
administration of the drug in very high dosage. Sudden
discontinuation of Lycopus preparation can lead to a rebound
phenomenon with increased TSH secretion and prolactin
increase of the hyperthyroid

secretion, as well as an

symptom complex and mastodynia.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb, freshly pressed
juice and other galenic preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 1 to 2 gm of the
drug for teas, and water-ethanol extracts containing the
equivalent of 20 mg of the drug.

BUGLEWEED/127

Each patient has his own individual optimal level qf thyroid
hormone. Only rough estimations of dosage are possible for
thyroid disorders, in which age and weight must be

considered.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

LITERATURE
Aufmkolk M, (1985) Endocrinology 116(5):1687.

Bucar R et al., Flavonoid glycosides from Lycopus europaeus.
In: PM 61(5):489. 1995.

Frombling-Borges A, (1987) Intrathyreoidale Wirkung von
Lycopus europaeus, Pflanzensauren, Tyrosinen, Thyroninen und
Lithiumchlorid. Darstellung einer Schilddrusensekretions-
blockade. Inauguraldissertation. Westfalische Wilhelms-
Universtitiit. Munster.

Frombling-Borges A, Intrathyreoidale Wirkung von Lycopus
europaeus, Pflanzensauren. Kaltumjodid und Lithiumchlorid. In:

ZPT 10(!):1. 1990.

Gumbinger HG et al., (1981) Contraception 23(6):661.

Hegnauer R, Kooiman P, (1978) Planta Med 33(1): 13.

Jeremic D et al.. (1985) Tetrahedron 41(2):357.

John M, Gumbinger HG, Winterhoff H, The oxidation of
caffeic acid derivatives as model reaction for the formation of
potent gonadotropin inhibitors in plant extracts. In: PM

59(3): 195. 1993.

Jung F, Kiesewetter H, Mrowietz C, Pindur G, Heiden M,
Miyashita C, Wenzel E, Akutwirkungen eines zusammen-
gesetzten Knoblauchpraparates auf die FliepTahigkeit des Blutes.
In: ZPT 10(3):87. 1989.

Kartnig T, Lycopus europaeus L. - Wolfsfup oder Wolfstrapp.
In: ZPT 10(1):31. 1989.

Kern W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Neerl 21(4)417.
Sourgens H et al., (1982) Planta Med 45:78.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 379 -----
128/BULBOUS BUTTERCUP

Bulbous Buttercup
Ranunculus bulbosus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the latex and the
fresh flowering herb with root.

Flower and Fruit: The large golden yellow flowers consist
of 5 sepals hanging down, 5 petals on grooved stems and
numerous stamens and ovaries. The small fiuit has a short
curved beak.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 10 to 30 cm
high and has a tuber on the underground part of the stem.
The basal leaves are long-petioled, trifoliate with orbicular
and pinnasect leaflets. The middle one has a longer petiole
and is sheath-like at the base. The stems are branched and
tuberously thickened at the base. The plant is appressed
pubescent above and patently pubescent below.

Habitat: The plant grows in the northern parts of Europe and
in the northeastern U.S.

Production: Bulbous Buttercup is the whole plant in flower
of Ranunculus bulbosus with root.

Other Names: Crowfoot, Cuckoo Buds, Frogwort, King's
Cup, Meadowbloom, Pilewort, St. Anthony's Turnip, Frogs-
foot, Goldcup

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

The glycoside ranunculin: changes enzymatically when the
plant is cut into small pieces, and probably also when it is
dried, into the pungent, volatile protoanemonine that quickly
dimerizes to non-mucous-membrane irritating anemonine.
When dried, the plant is not capable of protoanemonine
formation.

EFFECTS
The active agents cause signs of toxic irritation; the drug is
also said to cause symptoms of drowsiness and tiredness.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for skin diseases,
rheumatism, gout, neuralgia, influenza and meningitis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The administration of the drug during pregnancy is absolute-
ly contraindicated.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages of the dehydrated drug.

Extended skin contact with the freshly harvested, bruised

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

difficult to heal due to the resulting protoanemonine, which
is severely irritating to skin and mucous membranes. If taken
internally, severe writation to the gastrointestinal tract,
combined with colic and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the
urinary drainage passages, are possible. Symptomatic treat-
ment for external contact should consist of mucilage, after
irrigation with diluted potassium permanganate solution; in
case of internal contact, activated charcoal should follow

gastric lavage.

Pregnancy: The administration of the drug during pregnancy
is absolutely contraindicated.

OVERDOSAGE

Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in
animal experiments.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The herb is used as an extract in
homeopathic dilutions.

LITERATURE

Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Bupleurum chinense
See Chinese Thoroughwax (Chai-Hu)

Burdock
Arctium lappa

TRADE NAMES
Burdock Root (available from numerous manufacturers).

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the ripe

plant can lead to blister formation and cauterizations that are j seed and the fresh or dried roots.

----- PAGE 380 -----
4p

ff*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The crimson flowers grow in long-
peduncled, loose cymes. The heads are fairly large, globose
and almost glabrous. All flowers are funnel-shaped and
androgynous. The bracts are green and coriaceous with a
barb-shaped inward-curving tip. The fruit is compressed arid
has a bristly tuft, which falls off easily. The fruits separate
from their stems on ripening.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to a height of 80 to
150 cm. The stem is erect, rigid, grooved, branched and
downy to wooly. The leaves are alternate, petiolate, broad to
ovate-cordate. They are blunt and slightly wooly to hairy on
the underside. The lowest leaves are very large and have a
latex-filled stem.

Habitat: Burdock grows in Europe, northern Asia and North
America.

Production: Burdock root consists of the fresh or dried
underground parts of Arctium lappa, Arctium minus and/or
Arctium tomentosum. Roots are gathered in the autumn of
the plant's first year or the early part of the second year.

Other Names: Bardana, Beggar's Buttons, Burr Seed, Clot-
Bur, Cockle Buttons. Cocklebur, Fox's Clote, Great Burr,
Happy Major, Hardock, Hareburr, Lappa, Love Leaves,
Personata, Philanthropium, Thorny Burr

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (small amounts) of very complex make-up:
including, among others, phenylacetaldehyde, benzaldehyde,
2-alkyl-3-methoxy-pyrazines

Lignans: neoarchtiin A
Sesquiterpene lactones

Polyynes: chief components are trideca-l, ll-dien-3, 5,7,9-
tetrain, as well as sulfur derivatives

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid, isochlo-
rogenic acid

Polysaccharides: insulin (fructose), mucilage's (xyloglu-
cans, acidic xylans)

Triterpenes: including alpha-amyrin, omega-taraxasterol,
present to some extent as acetic acid ester

Phytosterols: beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol and
their esters

Tannins

EFFECTS
In vitro, the drug shows mild antimicrobial activity. No other

information is available.

BURDOCK/129

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Burdock Root are used for
ailments and complaints of the gastrointestinal tract, as a
diaphoretic and diuretic, and for blood purifying. Externally,
they are used for ichthyosis, psoriasis and seborrhea of the
scalp. The claimed efficacies have not been documented.

Chinese Medicine: Burdock is used to treat carbuncles,
ulcers and erythema of the skin as well as sore throats.
Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a slight potential for sensitization via skin
contact with the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Administered as a drug and, for
external use, in the form of burdock oil (extract with fat oil).

How Supplied:
Capsules — 460 mg and 475 mg

Fluid Extract — 1:1

LITERATURE

Bryson PD et al., (1978) J Am Med Ass 239 (20):2157.
Dombradi G, (1970) Chemotherapy 15:250.

Ichihara A et al., (1968) Tetrahedron 44:3961.

Ichihara A et al., (1978) Tetrahedron Letters 33:305.
Morita K et al., (1984) Mutat Res 129(1):25.

Naya K et al., (1972) Chem Letters 3:235.

Schulte K et al., (1967) Arzneim Forsch 17:829.
Takeda H, Kiriyami S, (1979) J Nutr 109(3):388.
Tsujita J et al., (1979) Nutr Rep Int 20(5):635.

Yamada Y et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14:582.
Yamanouchi S et al., (1976) Yakugaku Zasshi 96(12): 1492.
Further information in:

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulte KE et al Arzneim Forsch 17 (1967), 825.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 381 -----
130/BURNING BUSH

Burning Bush

Dictamnus_ albus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried and
occasionally the fresh leaves, the fresh or dried root, and the

fresh or dried root rind.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are terminal racemes and
pink with dark veins. They are large and irregular, with 5
sepals and 5 petals. There are 2 bracteoles that are slightly
zygomorphous. The 10 stamens are long, threadlike and bent
forward. The ovaries have 5 carpels fused at the base on a
short gynophore. The fruit is a capsule that bursts open into
mericarps ejecting the seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 0.5 to 15 m high
perennial. Numerous erect, unbranched and sticky-glandular-
haired shoots grow from the root. The leaves are alternate.
odd, 7 to 11 pinnate and transparently punctuated with oil

glands.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong lemon or cinnamon
fragrance. The oil is easily inflammable.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central Europe and parts
of Asia, and is cultivated in the northern U.S.

Not to be Confused With: Burning Bush herb can be
confused with that of the herb Dictamni cretici. Previous
sources cite a confusion between Burning Bush root and
Carophyllaceen root.

Other Names: Fraxinella, Dittany, Gas Plant, Diptam

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: BURNING BUSH ROOT

Volatile oil: chief components are the fraxinellone deriva-
tives, thymol methylether, beta-pinene, pregeijerene,
geijerene

Furoquinoline alkaloids: including skimmianine, gamma-
fagarine, dictamnine

Limonoids: including limonin, obacunone, dictamdiol, limo-
nin diosphenol

EFFECTS: BURNING BUSH ROOT
In vitro, a mutagenic effect on Salmonella typhimurum and a
phototoxic effect on bacteria and yeasts have been observed.

In animal tests, a contraceptive effect was observed through
the inhibition of implantation, as well as a slight increase in
hair growth of shaved mice after the application of an
alcoholic extract.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

COMPOUNDS: BURNING BUSH HERB
Volatile oil: chief components (according to breed) anethole
(+) estragole, anethole (+) myrcene, limonene, 1,8-cineol, p-
cymene (+) estragole

Furoquinoline alkaloids: including skimmianine, gamma-
fagarine, dictamnine

Furocoumarins: including psoralen, xanthotoxin, auraptene,
bergaptenE

Limonoids: including limonin, obacunone, obacunone acid
Flavonoids: including rutin, diosmin, isoquercitrin

EFFECTS: BURNING BUSH HERB
See Burning Bush root.

A 40% reduction in egg laying by Clonorchis sinensis
(Chinese liver fluke) was observed when infected rabbits
were given an evaporated extract of the drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
BURNING BUSH ROOT

Unproven Uses: Infusion of the root is used to treat stomach
disorders, cramps and worm infestation, and to promote
menstruation.

In Greece, it is used as a tonic and a stimulant.

Chinese Medicine: Burning Bush root is used for jaundice,
inflammation of the skin, rheumatic ailments, fever, hemor-
rhage of the womb, thread fungus, as a sedative, tonic and
for nervous crying in children. It is also found in decoctions
for the external treatment of eczema, impetigo and scabies.

Indian Medicine: Burning Bush root is used for amenorrhea
and the regulation of labor.

BURNING BUSH HERB

Unproven Uses: In the Middle Ages, the drug was used as a
cure or remedy for wounds, to promote menstruation and to
aid the expulsion of afterbirth. It served as a urinary aid and
was used in the treatment of epilepsy, in combination with
mistletoe and peony.

At the end of the 19th century, the drug was applied as an
ointment for rheumatism. The infusion is used as a remedy
for worm infestation, to treat stomach disorders and cramps
and to promote menstruation. In Greece, it is used as a tonic
and stimulant.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
BURNING BUSH ROOT AND HERB

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
plant can trigger phototoxicoses through skin contact. The
furoquinoline derivatives have a mutagenic effect in the

Ames test.

----- PAGE 382 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
BURNING BUSH ROOT

Mode of Administration: Mostly obsolete as a drug. It is
occasionally used in tea mixtures.

Preparation: To prepare a tea infusion, add | teaspoon of
drug to 2 glasses of hot water.

Daily Dosage: Drink the tea preparation throughout the day.

BURNING BUSH HERB
Mode of Administration: Mostly obsolete as a drug. The herb
is sometimes used internally as an infusion.

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by adding 20 gm 01"
dried herb to I liter of water; or 1 gm fresh or 2 gm dried
herb to 1 cup of water.

Daily Dosage: Drink one cup of the infusion 2 to 3 times
daily after meals.

LITERATURE
Kanamori H, Sakamoto I, Mizuta M. Chem Pharm Bull

34:1826. 1986.
Reisch J, PM 15:320. 1967.

Renner W, PA 12:763-776. 1962.

Renner W, PA 17:763. 1962.

Szenedrei K, Novak I, Varga E, Buzas G, PA 23:76-77. 1968.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Burr Marigold

“ Bidens tripartita

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole Burr Marigold plant is used

medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The flower heads are solitary, erect or
inclined, 15 to 25 mm long and wide, generally with no
lingual blossoms. There are two rows of bracts. The inner
row is ovate and brownish-yellow; die outer is oblong and

BURR MARIGOLD /131

green. The petals are brownish-yellow. The fruit is glabrous,
distinctly compressed, brownish-green, with thorny edges
and 2 to 4 awns.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Bidens tripartita is an erect annual
growing 15 to 100 cm high with a fibrous fusiform root. The
stem is erect, heavily branched, glabrous or somewhat
downy ,and often brownish-red. The leaves are dark green,
opposite and narrow to a short, winged petiole. The leaves
are usually 3 to 5 lobed, ovate-rhomboid to lanceolate with
pointed, roughly dentate tips and straight or narrowly curved
teeth.

Habitat: The plant is found in damp regions throughout
Europe.

Production: Burr Marigold is the aerial part of Bidens
tripartita.

Other Names: Water Agrimony

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including isookanin-7-O-glucoside and_tride-
cane derivatives such as trideca-l,12-dien-3,5,7,9-tetrain

Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone, scopoletin

Polyynes (tridecane derivatives): including trideca-i, 12-
dien-3,5,7,9-tetrain

Water-soluble polysaccharides
Bitter principles
Tannins

Volatile oil: including eugenol, ocimene, cosmene

EFFECTS
Astringent, diaphoretic and diuretic effects are attributed to
the plant, but remain unproven. In a study that has not been
described in detail, a choleretic effect caused by the flavones
and flavonoids was proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include gout, hematuria,
loss of hair, scurvy and toothache. The roots were used for
scorpion bites. It was used for other indications when a
diuretic, diaphoretic or astringent effect was desired.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

----- PAGE 383 -----
132/BURR MARIGOLD

LITERATURE

Bauer R, Neues von "immunmodulierenden Drogen" und
"Drogen mit antiallergischer und antiinflammatorischer
Wirkung". In: ZPT 14(1):23-24. 1993.

Ben'ko GN, (1983) Rastit Resur 19 (4),516.
Morozova SS et al., (1981) Rastit Resur 17 (1),101.
Further information in:

Alvarez L, Marquina S, Villarreal ML, Alonso D, Aranda E,
Delgado G, Anti-inflammatory activity of Taiwan folk medicine
"ham-hong-chho" in rats. Am J Chin Med, 62:273-8, 1995.

Alvarez L, Marquina S, Villarreal ML, Alonso D, Aranda E,
Delgado G, Bioactive polyacetylenes from Bidens pilosa. Planta
Med, 62:355-7, 1996.
Alvarez L, Marquina S. Villarreal ML, Alonso D, Aranda E,
Delgado G, Constituents and biological activity of Bidens pilosa
L. grown in Egypt. Acta Pharm Hung, 62:317-23, 1991.

Brandao MG et al., Antimalarial activity of extracts and
fractions from Bidens pilosa and other Bidens species
(Asteraceae) correlated with the presence of acetylene and
flavonoid compounds. J Ethnopharmacol, 57:131-8, 1997.

de Tommasi N, Pizza C, Aquino R, Cumanda J, Mahmood N,
Flavonol and chalcone ester glycosides from Bidens leucantha. J
Nat Prod, 60:270-3, 1997 Mar

Geissberger P, Sequin U, Constituents of Bidens pilosa L.: do
the components found so far explain the use of this plant in
traditional medicine? Acta Trop, 57:251-61, 1991.

Jaeger AK, Hutchings A, van Staden J, Screening of Zulu
medicinal plants for prostaglandin-synthesis inhibitors. J
Ethnopharmacol, 52:95-100, 1996.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Martin Calero M et al., Healing process induced by a flavonic
fraction of Bidens aurea on chronic gastric lesion in rat. Role
of angiogenesis and neutrophil inhibition. Z Naturforsch C ,
51:570-7, 1996.

Morozova SS et al Rastit Resur 17 (1981), 101 Further
information in: Kern, W.; List, P.H.; Horhammer, L. (Ed.):
Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde.
1-8, Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1969.

Butcher's Broom
Ruscus aculeatus

TRADE NAMES

Butcher's Broom (available from numerous manufactures),
Butcher's Broom Root, Curcu Capsules

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb and the
rhizome.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The small greenish white flowers are
solitary or in a few clusters and grow from the middle of the
leaves. They are dioecious. The corolla is deeply divided into
6 segments. In one variety the stamens are fused at the base.
In fertile varieties the style is surrounded by a honey gland.
The fertile flowers develop into cherry-sized, scarlet berries,
which ripen in September and remain on the tree all winter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial evergreen
subshrub that grows 20 to 80 cm high. The stems are erect,
woody and heavily branched. The leaves are small, brown-
membranous, triangular to lanceolate, and scale-like. The
phylloclades (short shoots spread like leaves) are oblong,
stiff, double-rowed, up to 2.5 cm long and terminate in a

sharp tip.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe,
western Asia and North Africa.

Production: Butcher's Broom consists of the dried rhizome
and root of Ruscus aculeatus.

Other Names: Kneeholm, Pettigree, Sweet Broom, Knee
Holly, Jew's Myrtle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins (4-6%): chief components, ruscine, rusco-
side, aglycones neoruscogenin, ruscogenin

ruscodibenzofurane

Benzofiranes: euparone,

EFFECTS
In animal tests, there was an increase in venous tone and an

electrolyte-like reaction on the cell wall of capillaries.
Butcher's Broom is antiphlogistic and diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Hemorrhoids
+ Venous conditions

The herb is used as supportive therapy for discomfort of
chronic venous insufficiency, such as pain and heaviness, as
well as cramps in the legs, itching, and swelling. Butcher's
Broom also is used as therapy for hemorrhoid complaints,
such as itching and burning.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Stomach complaints and queasiness can occur in

Tare cases.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Extracts and their preparations for

internal use.

----- PAGE 384 -----
134/BUTTERCUP

OVERDOSAGE
Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in

animal experiments.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Buttercup is available as a ground
dried herb and as an extract.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM _ 11:338-347. 1963.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U: Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Butternut

Juglans cinerea

TRADE NAMES
Black Walnut (Juglans nigra), Black Walnut Hulls, Alcohol
Free Black Walnut Green Hulls

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark of the tree

and root.

Flower and Fruit: The tree has male catkins and female
flowers. The male catkins are 5 to 8 cm long. The fruit is 4 to
6.5 cm and ovoid-oblong. The fruit is pubescent, viscid and
strong smelling. The hard nut is ovoid-oblong with 4
prominent and 4 less prominent sharp ridges and many
broken grooves between them.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Butternut tree grows up to 30 m tall.
The bark is gray and deeply fissured. The leaf scars have a
prominent pubescent band on their upper edge. The 6 to 12
cm long leaflets are oblong-lanceolate, acuminate and
appressed-serrate. They are finely pubescent above, glandu-
lar and pubescent beneath.

Habitat: Butternut is indigenous to the forests of the U.S.

Production: Butternut bark is the inner rind of Juglans
cinerea.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: White Walnut, Oil Nut, Lemon Walnut, and
Black Walnut

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Fatty oil

Tannins
Juglone
Juglandis folium

EFFECTS
Vermifuge, laxative, tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the bark are used for
disorders of the gallbladder, for hemorrhoids and in the
treatment of skin diseases. Juglone has antimicrobial, anti-
neoplastic and antiparasitic properties as well as being a
gentle laxative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Available preparations include
liquid and dry extracts that are used internally and externally.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 95 mg, 500 mg, 3.5 gm

Fluid Extract -1:1

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Buxus sempervirens

See Boxwood

Cabbage

Brassica oleracea

TRADE NAMES
Cabbage Tables (available from various manufacturers)

----- PAGE 385 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

How Supplied:
Capsules — 75 mg, 370 mg. 470 mg, 475 mg

Daily Dosage: Raw extract, equivalent to 7 to Il mg total
ruscogenin (determined as the sum of neoruscogenin and
ruscogenin obtained after fermentation or acid hydrolysis).

LITERATURE
Adamek B, Drozdzik M, Samochowiec L. Wojcicki J. Clinical
effect of buckwheat herb. Ruscus extract and troxerutin on
retinopathy and lipids in diabetic patients. In: Phytotherapy Res
10(8):659-662. 1996.

Bombardelli E et al.. (1972) Fitoterapia 43:3.

Dunaouau CH et al.. Triterpenes and sterols from Ruscus
aculeatus. In: PM 62(2):189-190. 1997.

Rauwald HW, JanpVn B. Desglucoruscin and Desglucoruscosid
als Leitstoffe des Ruscus-aculeatus-Wurzelstock. Analytische
Kennzeichnung mittel HPLC und DC. In: PZW 133(1):61-68.
1988.

Schiebel-Schlosser G. Stechender Mausedom. eine Venenhiife.
In: PTA 8(7):586. 1994.

Vanhoutte PM (1986) in: Advances in Medicinal
Phytochemistry, Ed. D Barton, WD Ollis, Pub. John Wiley
1986.

Further information in:

Kem W. List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsa.). Hasers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde. I-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Buttercup
Ranunculus acris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The golden-yellow, medium-sized flowers
are on long, round pedicles. The 5 sepals and 5 petals are
close. There are numerous stamens and ovaries. The broad
obovate petals are very glossy and have a broad scale on the
surface. The small fruit is in an almost globular capitulum.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leafy plant grows from 30 to 80
cm. The erect stem has few branches. The petioles and

BUTTERCUP/133

pedicles are appressed and downy. The basal leaves are long-
petioled and palmate with rhomboid tips, which are divided
into 2 or 3. The similar cauline leaves are shorter-petioled.

Characteristics: The fresh herb is spicy and poisonous; once
dried, it is no longer poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern Europe.
Production: Buttercup is the fresh herb Ranunculus acris.

Other Names: Acrid Crowfoot, Batchelor's Buttons, Blister-
weed, Burrwort, Globe Amaranth, Gold Cup, Meadow-
bloom, Yellows, Yellowweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glycoside ranunculin: as protoanemonine-forming agent in
the freshly harvested plant (0.36-2.66% of the fresh weight)
that changes enzymatically when the plant is cut into small
pieces, and probably also while it is drying, into the pungent,
volatile protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to non-mu-
cous-membrane-irritating anemonine. Once dried, the plant
may not be capable of protoanemonine formation.

Saponins

EFFECTS
The active agents are ranunculin, protoanemonin and anemo-
nin. On contact with the skin, the juice of the plant causes
redness, swelling and blisters. If taken internally, it can lead
to burning in the mouth, vomiting, stomachache and pains in
the liver.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Buttercup is used for blisters, bronchitis,
chronic skin complaints, neuralgia and rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug. Extended skin contact with
the freshly harvested, bruised plant can lead to blister
formation and cauterizations that are difficult to heal due to
the resulting protoanemonine, which is severely irritating to
skin and mucous membranes. If taken internally, severe
irritation to the gastrointestinal tract, combined with colic
and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the urinary drainage
passages, may occur.

Symptomatic treatment for external contact should consist of
mucilaginosa, after irrigation with diluted potassium perman-
ganate solution. In case of internal contact, administration of
activated charcoal should follow gastric lavage.

----- PAGE 386 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh cabbage head and juice derived from the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences have long-pedicled
flowers. The flowers are large and have 4 erect, narrowly
elliptoid sepals 6 to 12 mm long. The 4 petals are about
twice as long as the calyx and are sulphur yellow. The
margin broadens at the tip and narrows at the base to an
equally long wedge-shaped funicle stem. The stamens are
erect and close to the ovary. The central honey gland is
almost erect. The fruit is oblong, pod-like, almost cylindrical
and has a domed lid. The dividing wall of the fruit is thin as
well as pitted and folded between the dark brown seeds,
which have a diameter of 15 to 4 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant can be annual, biennial or
perennial. It is about 2 m high and has thin roots. The stem is
woody from the first year and is covered in leaf nodes. It has
a bluish bloom and is branched toward the top. The leaves
are fleshy, blue-green and glabrous. The lower leaves are
petiolate. lyre-shaped, pinnatifid or simple. The upper leaves
are oblong to linear-oblong, usually entire-margined and
narrowed to rounded at the base and sessile.

Habitat: Wild Cabbage was originally found in the Mediter-
ranean region. Today it grows wild as far north as southern
England and Helgoland, and cultivated varieties are found in
temperate and damp climates worldwide.

Production: White cabbage juice is the juice of Brassica
oleracea.

Other Names: Colewort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mustard oils (breakdown products of the glucosinolates
accompanying cell destruction): allyl mustard oil, methyl
sulfinyl alkyl isothiocyanates, 'methyl sulfonyl alkyl
isothiocyanates

3-kydroxy-methyl-indole
5-vinyl-oxazolidine-2-thion (goitrin)
Rhodanides

Alkyl nitriles

Amino acids: including S-methyl cysteine sulphoxide, S-
methyl methionine sulphoxide and, when extracted from red
cabbage, also anthocyans, including cyanidine-5-0-gluco-
side-3-0-sophoroside

EFFECTS
Cabbage protects the mucous membrane of the stomach from
gastric hydrochloric acid. The gastroprotective effect of the

CABBAGE/135

juice is attributed to the regenerative ability of the mucous
membrane that is caused by an anti-ulcer factor (vitamin U).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include drinking the
juice for Roemheld syndrome, gastritis, gastric and duodenal
ulcers, gastralgia and subacidity.

Homeopathic Uses: Preparations of the flowering herb are
used for hypothyroidism.

Indian Medicine: Cabbage leaves are used for disorders of
the thyroid, gastrointestinal tract, itching and cough, as well
as for asthma, gout and hemorrhoids.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a standard
preparation or prepared from chopped and pressed Cabbage
for internal use. Also available in homeopathic preparations.

How Supplied:
Tablet — 500 mg

Preparation: White cabbage (Brassica Oleracea Var. Capita-
ta) extract is prepared by processing leaves by mashing or
using a centrifuge. The resulting mass is pressed through a
linen cloth.

Daily Dosage: To augment a bland diet take 1 liter of juice
daily for at least 3 weeks but not more than 6 weeks as a
dietary additive.

For gastralgia and subacidity, the dose is 1 teaspoonful to be
taken before meals, 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

Storage: The fresh juice will keep for approximately 24
hours if kept cool.

LITERATURE
Josefsson E, PH 6:1617-1627. 1967.

Kaoulla N et al., PH 19:1053-1056. 1980.

Larson KM, Stermitz FR, JNP 47(4):747-748. 1984.
Petroski RJ, Tookey HL, PH21:1903-1905. 1982.

Slominski BA, Campbell LD, J Agric Food Chem 37:1297-
1302. 1989.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

----- PAGE 387 -----
136 /CABBAGE

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Gaesalpinia bonducella
See Divi-Divi

Cajuput
Melaleuca leucadendra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the oil distilled from

the fresh leaves and twigs.

Flower and Fruit: The tree has racemes of small, sessile,
creamy white flowers on long terminal spikes up to 15 cm
long, which themselves terminate in a tuft of leaves. The
flowers have numerous stamens extending to 15 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Melaleuca leucadendra is a large tree
up to 40 m tall with a flexible trunk and irregular pendulous
branches. The tree is covered in a pale, lamellate bark, which
is soft and spongy and occasionally peels off its layers. The
leaves are alternate, entire-margined, oblong-lanceolate,
tapering, ash-colored and on short petioles.

Characteristic: It has an odor reminiscent of camphor and
eucalyptus.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Southeast Asia and the
tropical regions of Australia. It is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Cajuput oil consists of the essential oil of
Melaleuca leucadendra. It is extracted from the fresh leaves
and twig tips of a number of varieties collected from the wild
or from cultivation, followed by air-drying and aqueous
steam distillation.

Other Names: White Tea Tree, Swamp Tea Tree, Paperbark
Tree, White Wood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Chief constituents: cineol, (+)-alpha-terpineol, (-)-alpha-ter-
pineol, (+)-alpha-terpineol valerate, (-)- alpha-terpineol val-
erate, furthermore alpha-pinenes and bicyclic sesquiterpenes,
non-rectified oils also contain 3,5-dimethyl-4, 6-di-O-meth-
yl-phloroacetophenone

EFFECTS
In vitro, the drug has an antimicrobial and a rubefacient

effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Rheumatism

* Neurogenic pain

* Temporary relief of muscular pain
* Tendency to infection

* Wounds and burns

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for painful muscles and
joints in rheumatic disorders, sciatica, lumbago, slipped disk
and low back pain. Cajuput is also used for muscular tension
and pain following sports injuries such as sprains, bruising,
and pulled muscles or ligaments.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
No internal administration of the drug should take place in
the presence of inflammatory illnesses of the gastrointestinal
area or of the biliary ducts, nor in the presence of severe liver
diseases. Preparations containing the oil should not be
applied to the faces of infants or small children (glottal
spasm or bronchial spasm or even asthma-like attacks or
respiratory failure might occur).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages; however, contact dermatitis is possible.

Pediatric Use: The drug should not be applied to the facial
area, in particular not around the nose, of infants and small
children (glottal spasms could occur).

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses of cajuput oil (more than 10 gm) could lead to
life-threatening poisonings, due to the high cineole content.
Symptoms include including loss of blood pressure, circula-
tory disorders, collapse and respiratory failure. Vomiting is
not to be induced in the case of poisoning, because of the
danger of aspiration. Following administration of activated
charcoal, the therapy for poisonings consists of treating
spasms with diazepam (i.v.), treating colic with atropine,
electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen
respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cajuput oil is used only for external

purposes.

LITERATURE
Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.,

CRC Press 1975.

----- PAGE 388 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lowry JB, (1973) Nature 241:61.
Opdyke DU. (1976) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 14,

Steinegger E. Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Calabar Bean
Physostigma venenosum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are pendulous racemes
“ o f bean-like flowers. The fruit is a dark brown pod up to 15
“cm long containing two or three dark brown or blackish
kidney-shaped seeds that are about 2.5 cm long. They are
rounded at the ends, uneven and somewhat polished with the
hilum extending along the whole convex side. The cotyle-
dons are whitish.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a large, perennial,
twining, woody climber with large, pinnate, trifoliate leaves.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to western Africa and is
cultivated in India and parts of South America.

Production: The Calabar Bean is the seed of Physostigma
venenosum.

Other Names: Chop Nut, Ordeal Bean

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Indole alkaloide (0.3 - 0.5%): main alkaloid physostigmine,
secondary alkaloids include physovenine, geneserine,
eseramine

mStarch (up to 50%)
Proteic substances
Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The main alkaloid, physostigmine, is miotic, spasmogenic,
negatively chronotropic and curare-antagonistic. It causes an
increase in tone in the parasympathetic system and the
striated muscles. In particular, it causes the pupils to

CALABAR BEAN/ 137

contract, thus reducing intraocular pressure. It is a glandular
stimulant and increases peristalsis of the gastrointestinal
tract. It reduces heart rate and is a curare antidote.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is frequently used in the treatment
of glaucoma. It is also a poison antidote. Its use in the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease to reduce memory loss and
confusion is being investigated.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is only used in the extraction of physostigmine.
Symptoms of poisoning include: diarrhea, dizziness, nausea,
salivation, stupor, sweats and vomiting.

OVERDOSAGE

Lethal doses can cause muscle twitching, spasms, tachycar-
dia and cyanosis through asphyxiation. Following gastric
lavage, poisonings are treated with atropine; in the case of
spasms, diazepam is also used. Forced diuresis can be useful.
The lethal dose for an adult is 6 to 10 mg of physostigmine
(corresponding to approximately 2 to 3 Calabar Beans).
Poisonings are possible through inappropriate administration
of physostigmine eye drops, due to drainage into the mouth
or nose.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an eye medication, in drops and
ointments. It is used as an antidote in the form of an injection
solution. For gastrointestinal use, it has been replaced by
synthetic prostigmine.

Daily Dosage: Apply 1 to 2 eye drops 3 times daily to the
conjunctival sac.

LITERATURE
Die G, 125 Jahre Physostigmin. In: ZPT 11(2):7. 1990.

Morbus A, Was gibt es Neues aus der Forschung? In: DAZ
133(23):2090. 1993.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Eds.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 389 -----
138/CALAMINT

Calamint
Calamintha nepeta

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried foliage,
stems, leaves and flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The medium-sized to large flowers are 5
to 20 blossomed cymes. The pedicle is 0 to 22 mm long and
the tubular calyx is 3 to 7 mm by | to 15 mm in size and
slightly downy to very downy on the inside. The upper tips
are 0.5 to 1.5 mm and the lower ones are | to 2 mm, downy.
They occasionally have long, ciliate hairs. The corolla is
white to lilac and purple.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Calamint is a perennial, 30 to 80 cm
high, slightly to densely downy shrub. The leaves are oval,

obtuse, almost entire-margined or lightly to deeply crenate-
serrate, with 9 teeth on each side.

Habitat: Britain, Europe, northern Africa

Production: Calamint is the above-ground part of Calamin-
tha nepeta. It is collected in the wild.

Other Names: Basil Thyme, Mountain Mint, Mountain
Balm, Mill Mountain

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (0.35%: including pulegone, menthone, menthol

and its ester, P-bisobolen, cineol, thymol

Triterpenes: including calaminthadiol, ursolic acid

EFFECTS
The drug is a diaphoretic and expectorant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Calamint has been used for febrile colds and
respiratory diseases. The drug is also used in folk medicine
for hiccups, as a diuretic and for stomach

complaints.

tinnitus,

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
de Pooter HL, Goetghebeur P. Schamp P, PH 26(12):3355-

3356. 1987.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Kokkalo E, Stefanaou E, Flavour Fragrance J 5(1):23-26. 1990.

Calamintha nepeta

See Calamint

Calamus

Acorus calamus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome after the

removal of all other material.

Flower and Fruit: Green flowers, like small dice, form a
tightly packed, slim, conical spadix. The plant is non-fruit-
bearing and propagates from the rhizome.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 60 to 100 cm
tall. The stem is triangular and sprouts from a horizontal,
round root-stock, which has the thickness of a thumb. The
upper shoot forms a grooved flower sheath. The leaves are
oblong, sword-shaped and arranged in two rows. The leaves
have no stems.

Characteristics: The rhizome has an intensely aromatic
fragrance and a tangy, pungent and bitter taste. The leaves
often undulate on the margins.

Habitat: Today Calamus is found all over the world. It
probably originated in India and North America.

Production: Calamus root-stock is the dried, coarsely ground
and mostly peeled, root-stock of Acorus calamus. Calamus
oil is extracted from the same plant.

Other Names: Sweet Flag, Sweet Sedge, Grass Myrtle,
Myrtle Flag, Sweet Grass, Sweet Myrtle, Sweet Rush, Sweet
Root, Sweet Cane, Gladdon, Myrtle Sedge, Cinnamon Sedge

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief constituents are heavily dependent upon
the chemical strain (divtri-, tetraploid); beta-asarone (cis-
isoasarone), alpha- and gamma-asarone, beta- gurjuns, aco-
rone (bitter), ZZ-Deca-4,7-dienal (odor-determining)

EFFECTS
Calamus is an aromatic, bitter stomachic, which stimulates

appetite and digestion. It has spasmolytic, carminative and
sedative effects, in addition to being externally hyperemic.

----- PAGE 390 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used in the form of teas, for
dyspeptic disorders, gastritis and ulcers. It is used externally
for rheumatism, gum disease and tonsillitis.

£ Indian Medicine: Calamus is used for dyspeptic complaints,
worms, pain syndrome and toothache.

Chinese Medicine: Acorus calamus stimulates peptic juices
for disorders of the gastrointestinal tract. It is used externally
for fungal infections.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Long-term use of this drug should be avoided.
Malignant tumors appeared in rats that received Indian
Calmus oils over an extended period (tetraploid strain, over
80% f5-asarone in volatile oil).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Calamus preparations are for
internal and external use. Preparations are used as a bitter,
stomachic, carminative, digestant, sedative, rubefacient,
balneotherapeutic and corrigent. Calamus is available in tea
Amixtures, as an oil or extract and as a bath oil.

Preparation: Steep with hot water to make a tea. For use in a
bath, add 250 to 500 gm of the drug to the bath water.

Storage: Store for a maximum of 18 months. If in powder
form, however, do not keep for more than 24 hours.

LITERATURE
Iguchi M et al., (1973) Tetrahedron Letters 29:2759.
Keller K et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(1):6.
Keller K, Stahl E, Composition of the essential oil from beta-
asarone free calamus. In: PM 47(2):71. 1983.
Keller K, Stahl E, Kalmus: Inhalsstoffe und (3-Asarongehalt bei
verschiedenen Herkunften. In: DAZ 122(48):2463-2466. 1982.
Mazza G, Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric studies
of the constituents of the rhizome of calamus. In: J Chromatogr
328:179-206. 1985.
Rohr M, Naegeli P, (1979) Phytochemistry 18(2):279 and 328.
Saxena DB, Phenyl indane from Acorus calamus. In: PH
25(2):553. 1986.

«Schneider K, Jurenitsch J, Kalmus als Arzneidroge: Nutzen oder
Risiko. In: Pharmazie 47(2):79-85. 1992.
Stahl E, Keller K, Classification of typical commercial Calamus
drugs. In: PM 43(2): 128-140. 1981.
Taylor JM et al., Toxicity of oil of calamus (Jammu variety).
In: Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 10:405 (Abstract). 1967.
Further information in:

Chan, EH et al. (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE / 139

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeuuschen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New

York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart. 1997.

Calendula officinalis
See Marigold

California Peppertree

Schinus molle

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Medicinal properties have been attributed
to the plant's leaves, bark, fruit and gum resin.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in apical, heavily
branched, hanging, 5 to 30 cm long panicles. The flowers are
small, yellowish-white, and their structures are in fives. The
calyx is 5-tipped. The flower has 5 petals, 10 stamens and a
superior ovary that develops from a carpel. The style is
divided into 3. The fruit is a coral red, single-seeded drupe
with a diameter of approximately 7 mm, a thin pergament-
like exocarp, an oleo-resin-rich mesocarp and a_ hard
endocarp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is an evergreen, up to 15 m
high. The leaves are alternate, up to 25 cm long and odd
pinnate. There are 17 to 35 leaflets, 1.6 to 6 cm long, 2 to 8
mm wide, sessile, linear-lanceolate, punctate with oil glands
and dentate. The branches hang down.

----- PAGE 391 -----
140/CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE

Characteristics: The leaves give off a pepper-like smell
when rubbed; the fruit is aromatic and somewhat sweet.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to Central America and
South America.

Production: California Peppertree (or Peruvian Peppertree)
leaves are the leaflets of Schinus molle. California Pepper-
tree fruits are ripe unpeeled drupes of Schinus mollek, which
are air- or freeze-dried.

Not to be Confused With: Other Schinus species.

Other Names: Australian Pepper Tree, Brazilian Pepper
Tree, False Pepper, Peruvian Mastix Tree, Peruvian Pepper-

tree, Weeping Pepper Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE LEAVES

Volatile oil (0.2 to 1.0%): chief components including alpha-
phellandrene, beta-phellandrene, limonene, including as well
T-cadinol, elemol, germacrene D, gamma-eudesmol

Flavonoids: including kaempferol, myricetin, quercetin
Resins
Mucilages

EFFECTS: CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE LEAVES

The leaves contain unknown bitter substances and tannins,
which make administration for inflammatory alterations of
the skin and oral mucous membranes plausible.

COMPOUNDS: CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE FRUIT

Volatile oil (2.0 to 5.0%): chief components including alpha-
phellandrene, beta-phellandrene, limonene, alpha-pinene,
beta-pinene, including as well camphene, carvacrol, p-cy-
mol, 4-ethyl phenol

Triterpenes: including 3-epiisomasticadienolalic acid, 3-epi-
masticadienolic acid, isomasticadienonic acid, masticadien-
onic acid

Fatty oil (in the seeds 6 to 14%)
Resins (with long-chained fatty acids, C22 to C28)

EFFECTS: CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE FRUIT

The fruit resin is purgative in effect. The essential oil is
fungicidal and is said to be excreted primarily through the
lungs and the kidneys. No experimental data are available for
the traditional areas of administration.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Internal uses in folk medicine include
infections of the pharynx, respiratory tract conditions,
rheumatism (decoction), for leucorrhea, suppuration of the
mucous membranes and hypertension (infusion), for swell-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ings, loss of teeth, conjunctivitis (leaf juice), and as a
diuretic. External indications are considered to include uterus
prolapse, eye inflammations, joint pains, colds (used as
healing baths), as a vulnerary and for rheumatism.

CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE FRUIT

Unproven Uses: Used internally as a stomachic, tonic, for
nausea, vomiting, anuria, gastric complaints, loss of appetite,
conditions of the respiratory tract, blennorrhagia, for muscu-
lar pain and as a diuretic. Preparations from the fruit are used
externally for rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE LEAVES AND FRUIT

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE LEAVES

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 30 g drug to 500 ml
water.

Daily Dosage: For inflammation of the mucous membranes,
gargle with infusion 3 times daily. For wound cleansing,
wash wounds with infusion.

CALIFORNIA PEPPERTREE FRUIT
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug are used in
preparations for internal and external use.

Daily Dosage: No information is given in the literature.
Storage: Tightly sealed, cool, dry and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Dikshit A, Naqvi AA, Husain A, Schinus molle: a new source
of natural fungitoxicant. Appl Environ Microbiol, 38:1085-8,
1986 May.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Vargas Correa JB, Sanchez Sol s L, Farfpn Ale JA, Noguchi
H, Moguel Ba~nos MT, Vargas de la Pe~na MI, Allergological
study of pollen of mango (Magnifera indica) and cross
reactiyity with pollen of piru (Schinus molle). Rev Alerg,
38:134-8, 1991 Sep-Oct.

California Poppy
Eschscholtzia californica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of Eschscholtzia

californica are the aerial parts collected during the flowering
season and dried.

----- PAGE 392 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The bright yellow-to-orange flowers are
solitary, axillary and long-pedicled. They are 2.5 to 4 cm in
diameter with a cup-shaped receptacle. The sepals are fused.
Four crenate petals, orange-red at the base, form an open
dish. The stigma is thread-like. There are numerous yellow

JP*stamens. The fruit is an oblong, 4 to 6 cm pod-like exploding
capsule, which spreads small globular seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Eschscholtzia californica is a bluish-
green annual or perennial that grows 30 to 60 cm high. The
leaves are sparse. The strongly pinnatifid leaves have linear
sections and taper to a thin tip.

Habitat: The plant grows in California and is cultivated in
central Europe and southern France.

Production: The Califomian Poppy herb consists of the
aerial parts of Eschscholtzia californica. It is collected in
uncultivated regions.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

lsoquinoline alkaloids: The main alkaloid is californidine.

Included are others, such as eschscholzine (escholzine),
A(rprotopine, alpha-allocryptopine. beta-allocryptopine.

Cyanogenic glycosides (in the freshly-harvested plant)

EFFECTS
The main active principle californidine has sleep-inducing,
sedative, anxiolytic and spasmolytic effects. In mice, a hot
water extract had a significant sleep-inducing effect. In other
animal experiments an anxiolytic and spasmolytic effect was

proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the drug are used for
insomnia, aches, nervous agitation, enuresis nocturna in
children, diseases of the bladder and liver, reactive agitative
and masked depressions, melancholia, neurasthenia, neurop-
athy, organic neuroses, vegetative-dystonic disorders, mood
swings, weather sensitivity, vasomotor dysfunctions, vegeta-
tive-endocrine syndrome, constitutional weakness of the
nervous system and vasomotor cephalgia. The tea is used as

a sedative.

m

Homeopathic Uses: Eschscholtzia californica is used to treat
insomnia.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

CALOTROPIS/141

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is rarely prescribed, yet is
a component of some standardized preparations in combina-
tion with plant sedatives. Medical or clinical documentation
and other experimental material about phytotherapeutic
application of the Califomian Poppy herb are unavailable. As
the efficacy of the claimed uses has not been documented, a
therapeutic application cannot be justified.

Preparation: The tea is prepared using 2 gm herb per 150 ml
water. The liquid extract (Extractum Eschscholziae) should
be prepared according to the German Pharmacopoeia
(DAB) 10.

Daily Dosage: The tea is taken as a drink. The average
single dose for the liquid extract is | to 2 ml.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D2: 5 drops, | tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily
(chronic); from D4: parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times
daily; chronic: once a day (PF X).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Jain L et al., Alkaloids of Eschscholtzia californica. In: PM
62(2): 188. 1997.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sturm S, Stuppner H, Mulinacci N, Vincieri F, Capillary zone
electrophoretic analysis of the main alkaloids from
Eschscholtzia californica. In: PM 59(7)25. 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Weischer ML, Okpanyi SN, Pharmakologie eines pflanzlichen
Schlafinittels. In: ZPT 15(5):257-262. 1994.

Calluna vulgaris
See Heather

Calotropis
Calotropis procera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried root and
root bark. The bark with its outer cork layer removed is
known as Mudar, and is used medicinally.

----- PAGE 393 -----
142/CALOTROPIS

Flower and Fruit: The fragrant flowers are 2.5 cm in
diameter and form umbel-like flower clusters. The erect
petals are whitish and have purple spots on the upper half.
The bracts of the corolla are smooth or downy with a divided
tip. The ovate follicles are 7.5 to 10 cm long by 5 to 7.5 cm
wide. The seeds have a tuft of silky hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This upright herbacious perennial
normally grows to a height of 1.8 to 2.4 m. The leaves are
short-petioled, 6 to 15 cm long by 4.5 to 8 cm wide, oblong-
elliptoid to broadly ovate. The bark appears in irregular short
pieces, slightly quilled or curved and about 0.3 - 0.5 cm
thick. The external portion is grayish-yellow, soft and
spongy. The internal portion is yellowish-white. The fracture
is short.

Characteristics: The taste is acrid and bitter.

Habitat: Indigenous to parts of Asia, India, Africa, Pakistan
and on the Sunda Islands

Production: Calotropis bark is the dried root bark of
Calotropis procera.

Other Names: Mudar Bark, Mudar Yercum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroids (cardenolids): including calotropin,
calactin, uscharidin

EFFECTS

The cardenolid glycocides calotropine shows an anti-tumor
effect in vitro on human epidermoid carcinoma cells of the
rhinopharynx. It is also works as an expectorant and a
diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The powdered root bark is used to treat
dysentery. It has a similar effect to that of the ipecacuanha
root. In Indian and African folk medicine, the bark is used to
treat epilepsy, hysteria, cramps, cancer, warts, leprosy,
elephantitis, worms, fever, gout and snake bites. In particu-
lar, the milky juice is used against boils, ulcers, swellings
and rheumatism. In Africa, it is used to treat toothache,
syphilis, digestive disorders and diarrhea.

Indian Medicine: The smoke (fumes) from the bark is used
for coughs and asthma and as a sudorific.

Homeopathic Uses: Calotropis procera is used for obesity.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

| OVERDOSAGE
The drug is highly toxic. Higher dosages cause vomiting,
diarrhea, bradycardia and convulsions. Very high dosages
may cause death. Following gastric lavage, treatment for
poisonings should proceed symptomatically (for further
measures, see Digitalis).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Calotropis is used in a ground form,
as a powder, as smoke (fume) and also topically.

Daily Dosage: As an expectorant and diaphoretic 200 mg to
600 mg; as an emetic 2 gm to 4 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 to 10 drops, | tablet, 5 to
10 globules 1 to 3 times daily; from D6: 1 ml injection
solution sc twice weekly (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Seiber JN et al., (1982) Phytochemistry 21(9):2343.
Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33(3A):1.

Calotropis gigantea
See Giant Milkweed

Calotropis procera

See Calotropis

Caltha palustris

See Marsh Marigold

Calystegia sepium

See Greater Bindweed

Camellia sinensis

See Green Tea

----- PAGE 394 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Camphor Tree

Cinnamomum camphora

DESCRIPTION
j/Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is camphor oil extracted

from the tree.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, white and sessile
on 1 to 15 mm long pedicles. The petals are pubescent on
the inside. The flowers are caespitose, on long axillary
petioles. The 15 mm stamens form 3 circles and are
pubescent with broad, sessile-cordate glands. The fruit is a
purple-black, 1-seeded, 10 to 12 mm oval drupe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree
growing up to 50 m tall and 5 m in diameter. The trunk is
erect at the lower part and knottily branched above. The
leaves are alternate on long petioles, oval-lanceolate, acumi-
nate, grooved and glossy. They are light yellowish-green
above and paler beneath; they grow to 5 to 11 cm long by 5
cm across.

Habitat: Camphor trees are indigenous to Vietnam and an
Mpxzz extending from southern China to southern Japan.

Production: Purified camphor is obtained from the chipped
wood of the Cinnamomum camphora tree using steam
distillation followed by sublimation to yield the oil.

Other Names: Gum Camphor, Laurel Camphor, Cemphire

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Camphora is a single substance: D(+) -camphor ((1R,4R)-
1,7,7-trimethyl-bicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-2-on), extracted from
the volatile oil of the trunk of the camphor tree, Cinnamo-
mum camphora. L(-)-camphor also occurs in nature. Synthet-
ic camphor is DL-camphor.

EFFECTS

Used externally, camphor acts as a bronchial secretolytic and
hyperemia Internally, the effect is that of a respiratory
analeptic and bronchospasmolytic. It should be noted that the
effect only sets in at dosages considered toxic. An antibacte-
rial effect has been noted in vitro, with cineol the main active

Jtrinciple.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Arrhythmia

* Cough/bronchitis

¢ Hypotension

* Nervous heart complaints
¢ Rheumatism

CAMPHOR TREE/143

Unproven Uses: External uses in folk medicine include
muscular rheumatism and cardiac symptoms. Among inter-
nal uses are hypotonic circulatory regulation disorders and
digestive complaints. Inflammation of respiratory-tract mu-
cous membranes is treated with both internal and external
applications.

Indian Medicine: Uses include muscle pain, cardiac insuffi-
ciency and asthma.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Camphor should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Local administration can lead to skin irritation, as
well as to resorbent and/or airborne poisonings. Contact
eczema occasionally appears following the application of
oily salves containing camphor. The drug is sometimes used
as a hashish substitute because 6 to 10 g leads to
intoxication.

Pediatric Use: Camphor salves should not be administered
to infants.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisonings that have been seen, particularly in
children, include intoxicated states, delirium, spasms and
respiratory control disturbances. Treatment proceeds symp-
tomatically. Less than 1 g can be a lethal dosage for young
children. For adults, the lethal dosage is considered to be
approximately 20 g. However, toxicity in adults has been
noted after use of as little as 2 g.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: As a liquid (camphor spirit) for
topical application or inhalation, and also semi-solid oint-
ments and Internally, in liquid or solid

preparations.

liniments.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations
include creams, ointments, balms and gels.

Daily Dosage: Internal average daily dosage: 2 to 4 g drug;
0.05 to 0.2 g essential oil. For external use, camphor spirit
(DAB 10) 9.5 to 10.5% camphor to be rubbed in several
times a day: Depending on prescribed application, concentra-
tions generally are not higher than 25% for adults and no
higher than 5% for small children.

Storage: Camphor should be stored in containers filled so
there is no empty air space left and also should be protected
from light.

LITERATURE
Bean NE, Camphora -curriculum vitae of a perverse terpene. In:

Chem in Brain 8(9):386. 1972.

----- PAGE 395 -----
144/CAMPHOR TREE

Burrow A, Eccles R, Jones AS, (1983) The effects of camphor,
eucalyptus and menthol vapor on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation. Acta Otolaryng (Stockholm) 96:157-161.

Stone JE, Blundell MJ, (1951) Anal Chem 23:771.
Takaoka D et al., (1975) Nippon Kagaku Kaishi 12:2192.

Further information in:

Bruchhausen F von, Ebel S, Frahm AW, Hackenthal E (Hrsg.),
Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 7-
9 (Stoffe), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,

993.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

York 1995.

Canadian Fleabane
Erigeron canadensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial

parts of the plant and the fresh aerial parts of the flowering

plant.
Flower and Fruit: Canadian Fleabane has very small
yellowish-white composite flowers in long, terminal,

branched panicle-like inflorescences. The involucre is in a
number of rows. The composite head has numerous florets.
The ray florets are linguiform, female, white or reddish. The
disc florets are tubular and androgynous. The stamens are
fused. The fruit is an achaene, 1.2 to 1.5 mm long, brownish
and has short appressed hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Erigeron canadensis is an annual or
biennial 30 to 100 cm high. The root is thin and fusiform, the
stem erect, roundish, slightly ribbed, greenish with paler ribs
and is covered in scattered patent hairs. It is branched from
the peduncle. The leaves are alternate, pointed, ciliate,
narrowly lanceolate and up to 10 cm wide and tapering to the

petiole.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to America but is found
globally today.

Production: Canadian Fleabane is the flowering plant and
seeds (without the root) of Erigeron canadensis. The plant is
collected in the wild in high summer, then hung in bundles to

dry.
Other Names: Coltstail, Flea Wort, Horseweed, Prideweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: including (++)-limonene, alpha-cis-bergamots,
beta-trans-famesene, beta-pinenes, myrcene, cis, cis-matri-
cariamethyl ester (polyyne)

Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug is reported to have anti-edema and antiphlogistic

effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for diarrhea, dysentery, as
an antithelmintic, a mild hemostyptic, for uterine bleeding,
gout, rheumatic symptoms, dropsy, tumors, and bronchitis.
In African folk medicine, it is used in the treatment of
granuloma annulare, sore throats, urinary tract infections and
for medicinal baths.

Homeopathic Uses: Erigeron canadensis is used for bleeding
of the bladder, hemorrhoids, menorrhagia and metrorrhagia,
gastritis, hepatitis and cholecystitis

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used topically and in

alcoholic extracts.

Daily Dosage: Tea: 3 cups daily after meals; Liquid extract:
approximately 2 teaspoons.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Grancia D et al., (1985) Ceskoslov Farm 34(6):209.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Conyza).

Lasser B et al., (1983) Naturwissenschaften 70:95.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 396 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Canadian Golden Rod

Solidago canadensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial
parts collected during the flowering season, the fresh
inflorescences and the flowering twigs.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow composite flowers are in erect
racemes facing all directions and are simple or compound.
They are medium-sized. The involucral bracts are imbricate
and arranged in numerous rows. The ray florets are narrow,
lingual and female. The disc florets are funnel-shaped, 5-
tipped and androgynous. The fruit is an achene, which is
cylindrical with numerous ribs. It is brown, sparsely
pubescent and 3.5 to 4.5 mm long with a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that ranges

£| in size from a few centimeters to over 1 m. The rhizome is
cylindrical, noded, diagonally ascending and short. The stem
is erect, cane-like, angularly grooved above, usually red-
tinged beneath, and glabrous to loosely appressed pubescent
higher up. The basal leaves are long-petioled, elliptical,
acuminate and narrowing to the winged stem. The lower
ones are serrate and the upper ones entire-margined.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, Asia and North
America.

Production: Golden Rod is the aerial part of Solidago
virgaurea. It occurs in the wild in Hungary, former Yugosla-
via, Bulgaria and Poland. Golden Rod herb consists of the
above-ground parts of Solidago serotina (synonym S.
gigantea). Solidago canadensis and its hybrids are gathered
during the flowering season and carefully dried.

Not to be Confused With: Despite qualitative and quantita-

tive differences in their effects, drugs containing Solidago

gigantea or Solidago canadensis are exchanged with Solida-

go virgaurea on the market; confusions with Senecio species
J*are also conceivable.

Other Names: Aaron's Rod, Woundwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD

Triterpene saponins: bisdemosides of the bayogenin, bearing
acylglycosidically-bound arabino residue

Polysaccharides (water-soluble): beta-1,2-fructans, acidic
polysaccharides

CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD / 145

Volatile oil (0.6%): chief components curlone, germacrene
D, alpha-pinene, beta-sesquiphellandrene, limonene

Diterpenes of the trans-clerodane and ladanum types
Carotenoids (as blossom pigments)

Flavonoids (2.4%): rutin (1.4%), including as well hypero-
side, quercitrin, astragalin

Cajfeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

COMPOUNDS: CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD (GIGANTEA
VARIETY)

Triterpene saponins (9%): bisdesmoside of the bayogenins:
GS1-GS4

Volatile oil (0.5%): chief components gamma-cadinene-
diterpenes of the cis-clerodane-type, including among others
6-deoxysolidagolactone IV-18,19-olide

Carotenoids (as blossom pigments)

Flavonoids (3.8%): quercitrin (1.3%), further including
among others hyperoside, rutin, isoquercitrin

Cajfeic acid derivatives: including among others chlorogenic
acid

EFFECTS: CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD
Canadian Golden Rod is diuretic, weakly spasmolytic and,
because of the saponin componant, antiphlogistic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: The herb is used as a flushing-out therapy
for inflammatory diseases of the lower urinary tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Irrigation therapy is contraindicated in cases of edema
resulting from reduced cardiac and/or kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a weak potential for sensitiza-
tion. Care must! be taken in patients with chronic renal
diseases, and the drug should be used in this patient
population only under the supervision of a doctor.

DOSAGE
SOLIDAGINIS VIRGAUREAE HERBA

Mode of Administration: As chopped drug by itself or in
combination preparations.

----- PAGE 397 -----
146/CANADIAN GOLDEN ROD

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 6 to 12 gm of
comminuted drug prepared as an infusion. Fluid intake of at

least 2 liters daily is recommended.

be protected from light and

Storage: The drug must

moisture.

LITERATURE
Bader G et al., (1987) Pharmazie 42(2): 140.

Goswami A et al., (1984) Phytochemistry 23(4):837.
Metzer J et al., (1984) Pharmazie 39(12):869.
Lassere B et al., (1983) Naturwissenschaft 70:95.
Reznicek G et al., PM 55:623. 1989.

Reznicek G et al., Tetrahedron Lett 30:4097. 1989.

Reznicek G, Freiler M, Schader M, Schmidt U, Determination
of the content and the composition of the main saponins from
Solidago gigantea AIT. Using high-perfomance liquid
chromatography. In: J Chromatog" A 755(1): 133-37. 1996.
Tiansheng L et al., Polyacetylenes and diterpenes from Solida
canadensis. In: PH 32:1483. 1993.

Weyerstahl P, Marshall H, Christiansen C, Kalemba D, Gora J,
Constituents of the essential oil of Solidago canadensis
("Goldenrod") from Poland. In: PM 59(3):281. 1993.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Canarium species
See Chinese Olive

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cane-Reed

Costus specious

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is ovoid, apical and 4 to
7 cm long. The zygomorphic flowers are each supported by
one narrow, ovate, acuminate, coriaceous, thickly haired, red
to red-brown bract. There is a bracteole, which is approxi-
mately 2 cm long, violet to brown-red and _ sparsely
pubescent. The calyx is approximately 2.5 cm long, green to
red-brown and tubular. The 3 petals are approximately 6 cm
long, white to pale pink and silky haired. The corolla tube is
approximately 1.5 cm long. The lobes are elliptical to ovate
and 6 to 7 cm long. The lobes are white to pale pink, with a
yellow lip in the center made up of 5 stamens. When spread
out, the lobe is broad obviate and crenate. There is 1 fertile
stamen, which is white to yellowish and up to 5 cm long.
The style is thread-like and the ovary 3-chambered and
inferior. The fruit is a light red, loculicidal capsule. The

seeds are black, 2 to 4 mm wide, with a narrow, fleshy aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Costus specious is a herbaceous
perennial, upright, up to 3 m high. The leaves have tubular
sheaths, which are 0.7 to 1.2 cm in diameter and a pubescent
to glabrous. The ligula is 1 to 2 mm long; the leaves are 12 to
25 cm long, 3 to 6 cm wide, narrow elliptical, thorny-tipped,
glabrous above and downy-haired beneath. The stem is
upright. The rhizome is up to 50-cm long, 3 cm thick and
rich in starch.

Habitat: India

Production: Kust or costus root is the dried rhizome of

Costus speciosus.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion may occur with
Saussurea lappa and Canella winterana. The drug itself is

used to adulterate Gloroisa superba.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid saponins (1 to 4%): chief components dioscin and

gracillin, aglycones diosgenin, tigogenin

Steroids: including beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol

glucoside

sterols,

Curcuminoids (3 %): including curcumin

EFFECTS
The saponin fraction of the drug exhibits
antiexudative, spasmolytic, choleretic and anesthesia-pro-

estrogenic,

I longing effects.

----- PAGE 398 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: for febrile conditions, coughs, skin condi-
tions, retention of the placenta, post-partum bleeding,
threatening abortion, insufficient uterine contractility and
snake bites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. It is
conceivable that gastric complaints and nausea might be
experienced, as well as kidney irritation, due to the high
level of saponin content.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdose could lead to European cholera, increased diuresis

and shock.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb preparations, cut and
powdered drug for internal use.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed) Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
“Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994

Canella

Canella_ winterana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark of the tree.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small and seldom open.
They are violet and fused in clusters to the tips of the
branches. The involucre is sometimes fused at the base. The
stamens are fused to form a pollen tube. The fruit is an
elongate berry with 4 reniform seeds. The fruit changes color
from green to blue and then to a shiny black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Canella winterana is a tree that
grows up to 15 m andis only branched at the top. The bark is
whitish-yellowish on the outside and chalk-like on the inside.

Jjjpie leaves are alternate, oblong, thick, and are a dark,
intense laurel-green shade.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to the Caribbean and Florida.

Not to be Confused With: It is often sold as the rarer Cortex
winteranus.

Other Names: Canella alba, White Cinnamon, White Wood,
Wild Cinnamon

CAPSELLA BURSA-PASTORIS / 147

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1%): chief components eugenol, cineol, pinene,
caryophyllene, myristicin

Resins (8%)

Sesquiterpenes: including muzigadial, warburganal (pun-
gent-tasting dialdehydes)

Mannitol (6-8%)

Starch (12%)

EFFECTS
Canella has a stimulant and tonic effect. The sesquiterpenes
contained in the bark have antimycotic and molluscacidal
effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In Central and South America, Canella is
used internally to treat upset stomach, fever and conditions
ofthe mouth and throat; it is used externally for rheumatism.
In the West Indies, it is used to treat scurvy and as a spice.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Canella is available in whole, cut

and powdered forms.

LITERATURE
El Feraly M et al., (1980) J Nat Prod 43:407.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C. Thomas USA 1981.

Canella winterana
See Canella

Cannabis sativa

See Marijuana

Capsella bursa-pastoris
See Shepherd's Purse

----- PAGE 399 -----
148 /CAPSICUM SPECIES

Capsicum species

See Cayenne

Garambola

Averrhoa carambola

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: Cymose inflorescences grow from the
trunk. The flowers are radial, and their structures are
arranged in fives. The petals are free; there are 10 stamens
and a 5-chambered ovary. The fruit is a berry, approximately
10 cm long. The berry is acuminate, 5-sided and star-shaped
in cross-section. It is translucently amber-yellow.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Averrhoa carambola is a tree, that
grows up to 5 m high. The leaves are alternate, odd pinnate
and 10 to 12 cm long.

Habitat: India

Production: The fruit of the Carambola tree is the ripe fruit
of Averrhoa carambola.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Oxalic acid (0.3% of fresh weight)

Vitamin C (0.05% of fresh weight)
Monosaccharides/polysaccharides
Carotinoids

EFFECTS
No definitive data available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: Carambola is used for diarrhea, vomiting,
severe thirst, hemorrhoids, intermittent fever, scabies and
liver pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

There is no evidence of any health risks connected with
limited consumption of the fruit or the preserves made from
them. Nevertheless, due to the high oxalate content, which
corresponds approximately to that of rhubarb stalks, the
ingestion of large amounts over extended periods should be
avoided.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Neto MM, Robl F, Netto JC, Depressant action of averrhoa

carambola. Med J Malaysia, 13:279-80, 1980 Mar.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Neto MM, Robl F, Netto JC, Intoxication by star fruit
(Averrhoa carambola) in six dialysis patients? (Preliminary
report) news. Nephrol Dial Transplant, 13:570-2, 1998 Mar.

Caraway
Carum  carvi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit and the oil
obtained from the squashed fruit when ripe.

Flower and Fruit: The main trunk and the side branches
each terminate in a compound flowering umbel of 8 to 16
umbel rays. The epicalyx and calyx are almost non-existent.
The florets are white or reddish and very small. The fruit is a
schizocarp that is glabrous, oblong and elliptoid. It consists
of 2 mericarps that are 3 to 6 mm long, sickle-shaped,
brownish with 5 lighter, angular main ribs (caraway seeds).

Leaves, Stem and Root: Carum carvi is usually a biennial, 30
to 100 cm high plant with a fleshy, fusiform tap root. The
stem is erect, angular, grooved, filled with latex, glabrous
and branched from the ground up. The rosette leaves and the
cauline leaves are glabrous and in part tri-pinnate. The lower
pinna are typically crossed.

Characteristics: The plant has a caraway taste and an
aromatic smell.

Habitat: Caraway is found in Europe, Siberia, the Caucasus,
the Near East, the Himalayas, Mongolia and Morocco.
Found wild in North America after being introduced.

Production: Caraway oil consists of the essential oil
extracted from the ripe fruits of Carum carvi. Caraway is
harvested when completely ripe and threshed 3 weeks later.
The oil is recovered from the crushed seeds by a process of
aqueous steam distillation.

Not to be Confused With: Carvon is occasionally added in
synthetic form.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
In the berries: volatile oil, fatty oil, polysaccharides,

proteins, furocoumarins (traces)

In volatile oil: in particular D-(+)-carvone and D-(+)-
limonene

EFFECTS
In animal tests the drug had a spasmolytic effect. The
antimicrobial effect has been demonstrated against bacillus,
pseudomonas, and Candida; dermatomyces are also inhibited.
The choleretic effect has been described in a study which is
not accessible.

----- PAGE 400 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Caraway is used for gastrointestinal cramps,
>4> flatulence and feelings of fullness, as well as nervous
cardiac-gastric complaints.

In folk medicine, Caraway is used to improve lactation in
nursing mothers, as an emmenagogue and to settle the
stomach. The essential oil is used as constituent in mouth-
washes and bath additives.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

An intake of larger dosages of the volatile oil (see for
example in caraway liquor) for extended periods can lead to
kidney and liver damage.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations from the essential oil

4f are for internal use. The comminuted fresh drug is used for

infusions and other galenic preparations.

How Supplied: Powder, capsules, film tablets, coated tablets,
drops and tea.

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by pressing | to 2
teaspoonfuls of seeds before using and pouring 150 ml of hot
water over it, draining after 10 to 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose of oil is 2 to 3 drops
on sugar; caraway, | to 5 gm. The average daily dose of oil
is 3 to 6 drops; caraway, 15 to 6 gm.

Storage: Protect from light and moisture in glass or metal

containers.

LITERATURE
Debelmas AM, Rochat J, (1967) Plant Med Phytother 1:23.

Harries N et al., (1978) J Clin Pham 2:171.
Hopf H, Kandler O, (1977) Phytochemistry 16:1715.

Koedam A, Scheffer JJC, Barheim Svendsen A, Z Lebensm
g Unters Forsch 168:106-111. 1979.

Salveson A et al., Sci Pharm 46(2):93-100. 1978.
Further information in:

Chan, EH et al. (Eds). Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

CARDAMOM/149

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979. "
Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Simon JE, Chadwick AF, Craker LE (Eds.), Herbs. An Indexed
Bibliography 1971-80. Archon Books, USA 1984.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Cardamom

Elettaria cardamomum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the seeds and fruit plus seeds harvested shortly after

ripening.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering shoots grow on the stem
very close to the ground. The panicle branches can grow up
to 8 cm. The flowers are alternate and covered by sheath-like
bracts before opening. The calyx is slightly wider above,
finely striped, obtusely 3-tipped and does not droop. The
corolla is greenish white. The lobes are rounded, somewhat
curly, white with a yellowish border with blue veins and
lines in the center. The only fertile stamen is set into the edge
of the petals. The sterile stamens are arranged beside the
styles on the receptacle. The pollen is globular and prickly.
The ovary is inferior, oblong, obovate with 3 valves, each
with 12 horizontal ovules. The fruit is 6 to 18 mm long, 6 to
10 mm thick, short-stemmed, ovate or elliptical to oblong.
The seeds are light brown, gray or dark red brownish. They
are very roughly wrinkled, 4 to 5 mm long, irregular edged
and the whole seed is surrounded by an almost colorless seed
coat. Mysore and Malabar cardamoms are usually blanched
pale and have a smooth surface. They are sold commercially
less often than the Green Aleppy or Ceylon varieties.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Elettaria cardamomum is a perennial
with a thick, tuberous rhizome and numerous long roots.
There are up to 30 erect, glabrous, green stems that are 2 to 3
m high. The leaves are in 2 rows with a leaf membrane at the
end of a soft-haired sheath. The leaf surface is lanceolate,
clearly acuminate and up to 60 cm long. The leaves are
entire-margined, downy above, silky-haired beneath and

----- PAGE 401 -----
150/CARDAMOM

punctuated by numerous small oil cells. The seeds are about
4 mm diameter and dark-reddish-brown.

Characteristics: Cardamom has an aromatic and pleasant
odor. The taste is aromatic and pungent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous in southern India and Sri
Lanka and is cultivated in tropical regions in southeast Asia
and Guatamala.

Production: Cardamom consists of the dried, almost ripe,
greenish to yellow-gray fruit of Elettaria cardamomum.
Medicinal use is limited to the seed, which is removed from
its fruit capsule. The main harvest is in October and
November of the third year after planting. The fruit is then
dried either in the sun or in so-called ‘curing houses' and
then sorted according to size, form, color etc.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: composition varies according to the specific
strain, chief components cineol, alpha-terpinyl acetate,
linalyl acetate

Fatty oil
Starch

EFFECTS

The drug is a cholagogue and has virustatic properties. The
essential oil (monoterpene) of the drug is antibacterial and
antimycotic. In animal experiments the essential oil caused
an increase in the secretion of bile and a reduction of gastric
juice production.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

« Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Liver and gallbladder complaints

* Loss of appetite

* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: Cardamom is also used for dyspepsia. In
folk medicine it is used for digestive complaints, vomiting
and diarrhea, morning sickness and loss of appetite as well as
Roemheld syndrome.

Chinese Medicine: Cardamom is used for stomachache,
nausea, vomiting and flatulence.

Indian Medicine: In Indian medicine, Cardamom is used for
disorders of the efferent urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug can trigger gallstone colic, due to its
motility-enhancing effect.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground seeds, as well as galenic
preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 1.5 gm of drug.
When using a tincture, the dosage range is | to 2 gm.

Storage: Cardamom should be stored in a cool, dry place
protected from light in tightly sealed containers. The powder
can be stored for a maximum of 24 hours. Loose seeds
without the testa cannot be stored.

LITERATURE
Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. I, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Haginiwa H et al., (1963) Yakagaku Zasshi 83:623.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewis YS, Nambuduri ES, Philip T, Perfim Essent OH Res
57:623-628. 1966.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Carex arenaria

See German Sarsaparilla

Carica papaya
See Papaya

Carlina acaulis
See Carline Thistle

----- PAGE 402 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Carline Thistle

Carlina acaulis

DESCRIPTION

£ Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

9>

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are made up of individual
heads that are 7 to 13 cm in diameter. The disc florets are
androgynous, pink to violet, and have a 5-tipped radial
corolla. The outer bracts are thorny. The middle bracts
consist of glossy white, acuminate, 3 to 4 cm long leaves.
The stamens have bristly-tipped appendages. The styles are
cylindrical with short stigma lobes. The fruit is 5 mm long,
obclavate to cylindrical, and bluntly angular with bifurcated
hairs at the tip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Carlina acaulis is a 30 cm high
thistle-like, leafy plant with milky latex. The stem is
compressed and under 5 cm long. The whorled to alternate
leaves are flat or slightly frilled and a little tough, 10 to 20
cm long, pinnatifid to pinnatisect with broad, thorny tips.
The rhizome is finger thick and has 1 or more heads.

Habitat: The plant extends from Spain, Italy and the Balkans
across central Europe to central Russia.

Production: Carline Thistle (Dwarf Thistle) is the root of
Carlina acaulis collected in autumn and dried. It is collected
in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Sometimes Carline Thistle is
adulterated by addition of other Carlina species.

Other Names: Stemless Carlina Root, Dwarf Carline,

Ground Thistle, Southernwood Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: chief components carlina oxide

Inulin (18 to 20%) (fructosan)
Tannins

EFFECTS

Jf There is no valid data on the mode of action. The essential

oil hinders the growth of Staphylococcus aureus up to a
dilution of 1:2 X 105. Carline Thistle has mild diuretic,
spasmolytic and diaphoretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for cholecysto-
pathy, digestive insufficiency and for spasms in the alimenta-
ry canal. In Spain, it is used to treat colds and illnesses
accompanied by fever.

CAROB/151

Externally, it is used as a wash for dermatosis, and to rinse
wounds and ulcers; as a mouthwash to alleviate symptoms
associated with cancer of the tongue.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Carline Thistle is used both
internally and externally.

Daily Dosage: Common preparations and doses are:

Decoction: Boil 3 gm of drug in 150 ml of water for 5
minutes, drink 3 cups daily.

Infusion: 2 teaspoons of the drug to be boiled in 1 cup of
water for 10 minutes, leave to draw for half an hour, take 3
to 4 cups daily between mealtimes.

Tincture: 20 gm of chopped drug, left to draw for 10 days in
80 gm of ethanol 60%, use 40 to 50 drops, 4 to 5 times daily.

Wine: Add 50 gm of the drug to 1 L of white wine, leave to
draw for a minimum of 12 days, then strain; drink one full
small glass before mealtimes.

Externally it is used as a decoction; 30 gm of the drug added
to I L of water.

Storage: Should be stored in tightly sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Schilcher H, Hagels H, Carlinae radix. Verfalschung,
Verwechslung oder Ersatzdroge. In: DAZ 130(40):2186. 1990.
Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Carob

Ceratonia siliqua

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit and the

bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is erect and lateral in
old wood. It is often bushy, clustered or catkin-like, and
unisexual with erect receptacles. There is no corolla. The
male flowers have 5 long filaments with long slits and
opening pollen tubes. The female flowers have short-

----- PAGE 403 -----
152/CAROB

stemmed ovaries. The pods are 10 to 20 cm by 2 cm, tough
leathery, brown-violet, flat and often rounded to a horn
shape. There are numerous, lumpy and glossy brown seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This walnut-like tree is usually
under 6 m high, broad-crowned, sparsely branched and with
cracked gray-brown bark. There are 2 to 4 paired pinnate
leaves. The leaflets are obovate, 4 to 5 cm long, curved,
glabrous, glossy dark green above and red-brown beneath.

Habitat: Indigenous to southeastern Europe and west Asia,
otherwise cultivated.

Production: Carob seed flour is the ground endosperm of the
seeds of Ceratonia siliqua.

Not to be Confused With: Carob Tree, Jacaranda procera or
Jacaranda caroba.

Other Names: St. John's Bread, Locust Bean, Locust Pods,
Sugar Pods

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Mucilages: chiefly made up of galactomannanes

Proteic substances

Flavonoids: including _ isoschaftoside, _ neoschaftoside,

schaftoside

EFFECTS

In various test series and studies, the effect of carob gum on
the serum glucose level, the secretion and activity of
digestive enzymes, the secretion of gastrointestinal hormones
as well as on the serum lipid level was proven. The
hypoglycaemic and hypolipidaemic effect is attributed to an
increase in viscosity of the gastrointestinal content.

Effects on nitrogen balance, efficacy in infantile diarrhea, as
well as an anti-exudative, anticoagulant and antiviral effects
have been demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Carob is used in dietary agents for acute
nutritional disorders, diarrheal disorders, dyspepsia, entero-
colitis, celiac disease and sprue. It is also used for habitual
vomiting in babies, acetonemic vomiting, rumination, retch-
ing cough and vomiting.

Carob seed flour is used in the production of glutin-free
starch bread, which is used for vomiting during pregnancy,
celiac disease and obesity.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: It is obsolete as a drug but is
included in thickening powders and as a baking aid for
glutin-free starch bread.

Preparation: As a baking aid or thickening agent, dissolve in
cold liquid, boil for 1 to 2 minutes, cool and mix into the
prepared baby food.

Daily Dosage: For a 3 to 10% arabon preparation, add 20 to
30 mg of drug to water, tea or milk, to be drunk during the
course of the day. As a baking agent in glutin-free bread for
babies, add 14 to 1/2 gm of drug (max. 2 gm) to 100 ml
liquid; adults 1% to 3% additive to low-calorie starters and

desserts.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

McLeary BV, Biomass A Cellulose and Hemicellulose 160:523.
1988.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Carrageen

Chondrus — crispus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of carrageen, the Irish
seaweed, is the thallus that has been freed from the adhesive
disc then dried and bleached in the sun.

Flower and Fruit: Gamatangia: The spematangia are color-
less and are at the end of the younger thaljus lobes. The
spermatia are 7.5 to 10 pm long and 4 to 5 p:m wide; the
carposporangia are 20 to 20 jim long and 14 to 25 \\m wide
and have no outer threads. The tetrasporangia, along with the
cruciform arranged tatra spores, are in the'medulla of the
short side branches.

Thallus: Chondrus crispus is a perennial red algae that grows
in waters up to 25 m deep. The thallus is usually yellow-
green to purplish-brown when fresh, white to yellow and
translucent after drying. Thallus fronds, are 10 to 30 cm long
on an adhesive disc, arising from a subcylindrical stem. They

----- PAGE 404 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

then become flattened, curled and sometimes 'bifid. The
segments are linear and usually 3 to 8 mm wide. The margin
is linguiform, later repeatedly dividing into bifid thallus
lobes. The thallus is cartilaginous and double-layered. The
internal tissue is made up of reticulately linked cells. The
bark layer is at right angles to the thallus. The bifurcated cell
strings are like strings of pearls that are spread radially.

Habitat: Carrageen is found from the coast of Iceland to the
Baltic, from northern Russia to the south of Spain, Morocco
and the Cape Verde Islands, and also in parts of North
America and some Japanese coastal regions.

Production: Carrageen is the dried and bleached thalli of
Chondrus crispus as well as other varieties of Gigartina
species. After being cleaned, the algae are left to bleach in
the sun, then dried.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with related
species of Gigartina stellata and Gigartina pistillata.

Moss, Chondrus,  Carrahan,

Other Names: _ Irish
Carrageennan

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Carrageenans: (carrageenine): in particular kappa-, iota- and
lambda-carrageenan (muciform galactane sulphates)

Proteins

Mineral salts: including iodides and bromides

EFFECTS
The drug contains hydrocolloids of the carrageenan type.
Carrageen is considered a mucilage because it hinders the
effect of peptides in digestive enzymes. It also acts as an
expectorant and secretory agent. In animal experiments the
drug was not absorbed. There are no studies available on
absorption in humans. The drug's purported demulcent and
antitussive effects have not been confirmed.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine internal uses of Carrageen
include as roughage for constipation and as a mucilage for
diarrhea, as well as for peptic ulcers. Sometimes a decoction
is used for coughs, bronchitis and tuberculosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Intracutaneous injections of solutions, however, can
trigger local inflammations.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Seldom used as a drug, but is

included in compound preparations as syrup and granules.

CASCARA SAGRADA/153

Preparation: Irish moss extract is prepared using a diluted,
almost boiling alkali solution. Filtration and vacuum inspis-
sation follow prior to extensive dehydration. A decoction is
prepared by combining 1.5 g drug with 1 cup water.

Storage: The drug should be stored in tightly sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
Chapman B, Chapman VJ, Chapman DJ, Seaweeds and their
uses. Chapmann and Hall, London, New York 1980.

Standoff DJ, Renn DW, (1975) ACS Symp Ser. 15:282.
Thomson AW, Home CHW, (1976) Brit J Exp Pathol 57:455.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Carthamus tinctorius
See Safflower

Carum carvi

See Caraway

Cascara Sagrada

Rhamnus_ purshiana

TRADE NAMES
Cascara Sagrada (available from numerous manufacturers),
Cascara Sagrada Bark Mild Stimulant Laxative, Cascara
Sagrada Natural Laxative, Cascara Sagrada Bark

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in axillary richly
blossomed racemes. The receptacles are green and the sepals
are larger than the petals. Both receptacles and sepals are
white. The ovary is longer than the style and is trilocular.
The fruit is dark purple and top-shaped. The seeds are ovate,
black, glossy, domed on the outside and have a distinct line
on the inside.

----- PAGE 405 -----
154/CASCARA SAGRADA

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is either a bush or a 6 to
18 m tall tree with branches which are gray tomentose when
young. The leaves are oblong-ovate, rounded at the base or
sometimes narrowing at the petiole. On the longer shoots
they are up to 17 cm long and 7.5 cm wide with an 8 to 18
mm long petiole. The margins are finely dentate and the
young leaves are tomentose, later becoming dark-green but
not coriaceous even in autumn.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the western part of North
America and is cultivated on the Pacific coast of the U.S.,
Canada and in eastern Africa.

Production: Cascara Sagrada bark consists of the dried bark
of Rhamnus_ purshiana.

Not to be Confused With: The bark of other Rhamnus
species.

Other Names: Purshiana Bark, Sagrada Bark, Sacred Bark,
Bitter Bark, Yellow Bark, Dogwood Bark, California Buck-
thorn, Chittem Bark, Cascara Buckthorn

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (8-10%): anthranoids, chief compo-
nents cascarosides A and B (stereoisomeric aloin-8-gluco-
sides), C and D (stereoisomeric 1 I-deoxy-aloin-8-
glucosides), E and F (C-glucosyl-emodin-anthron-8-
glucosides), further including aloin, 11-deoxyaloin

EFFECTS
Laxative Effects

The anthranoid compounds of Cascara are carried unab-
sorbed to the large intestine where the active aglycon is
released by bacterial hydrolysis of the sugar. The intestinal
bacterial flora reduces anthraquinone aglycons to the active
components of 1,8-dihydroxy-anthracene derivatives, which
have the laxative effect (de Witte & Lemli, 1990).

The anthranoids are anti-absorptive, hydrogogic and inhibit
the absorption of electrolytes and water from die colon. The
laxative effect is caused by an increase in the volume of the
intestinal contents with the resulting increase in pressure and
stimulation of intestinal peristalsis. In addition, stimulation
of the active chloride secretion into the intestine by nitric-
oxide-donating compounds or nitric oxide itself increases
water and electrolyte content (Izzo, 1998). Aloin and other
anthranoid derivatives stimulate prostaglandin production in
isolated segments of intestinal tissue, thus contributing to die
cathartic action (Cohen, 1982; Capasso, 1983).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CLINICAL TRIALS ,
Bowel Preparation

The effectiveness and acceptability of three bowel-cleansing
regimens was determined in 271 patients for colonoscopy.
Senna laxative (X-prep), combined with a saline enema, a
polyethylene glycol electrolyte lavage solution (Golytely 4
liters) or combined regimen of Cascara-Salax laxative
(PicoSalax) and 1.51 Golytely was administered. No clinical-
ly important differences were found between the three bowel
preparation regimens (Borkje, 1991).

A prospective, randomized clinical trial was conducted to
determine the side effects, patient acceptance, residual liquid
and stool during colonoscopy and also quality of examina-
tion of three colon cleansing methods. Three hundred
ambulatory patients were randomly assigned to one of the
following three groups for colon preparation: Group 1, (4
liters of Golytely), group 2, (2 liters of Golytely combined
with Cascara-Salax), and group 3, (X-Prep (a Senna prepara-
tion) combined with an enema). X-Prep caused significantly
more abdominal cramps than Group | or Group 2. Vomiting
was most frequent with Group 1, and the patients preferred
X-Prep to 4 liters of Golytely. The cleanest colon was
obtained with 4 liters of Golytely; 2 liters of Golytely with
Cascara-Salax was least effective. The quality of the
examination was equal in groups | and 3, which were both
significantly better than group 2 (Hangartner, 1989).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

Cascara Segrada is used for constipation, relief of defecation
with anal fissures, hemorrhoids, and as a recto-anal post-
opeiative treatment. The herb is also used in preparation of
diagnostic procedures of the gastrointestinal tract and to
obtain a soft stool.

Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, Cascara is used as a tonic
and for cleaning wounds.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for rheumatism and as
a digestive aid.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in intestinal obstruction, acute
inflammatory intestinal disease (colitis, Crohn's disease,
irritable bowel), appendicitis and abdominal pain of un-
known origin. Cascara drug is not to be administered to
children under 12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Spasmodic gastrointestinal complaints can occur as
a side effect to the drug's purgative effect. In rare cases,
prolonged use may lead to heart arrhythmias, nephropathies,

----- PAGE 406 -----
£T

fik

ok

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

edema and accelerated bone deterioration. Intake of the fresh
rind could lead to European cholera, intestinal colic, bloody
diarrhea and kidney irritation.

Electrolyte Abnormalies: Long-term use leads to loss of
electrolytes, in particular potassium ions. Hyperaldosteron-
ism, albuminuria, hematuria, inhibition of intestinal motility,
and muscle weakness may occur. Enhancement of cardioac-
tive steroids and antiarrythics may also occur as a conse-
quense of hypokalemia.

Carcinogenesis: The probability of carcinomas in the colon
following long-term administration of anthracene drugs has
not yet been fully clarified. Cascara glycoside may act as
weak promoters in colon carcinogenesis in animal models
(Mereto, 1996). One study determined aloin-enriched diets
did not promote incidence and growth of adenomas, carcino-
mas or significant hepatotoxicity after 20 weeks (Siegers,
1993a). Anthranoid laxative abuse is a relative risk factor for
colorectal cancer (Siegerss, 1993b).

Drug Interactions:

Thiazide Diuretics/Corticoadrenal Steroids/Liquorice Root
— These drugs may potentiate potassium deficiency when
used concomitantly with Cascara.

Antiarrythmics — Loss of potassium associated with pro-
longed use of Cascara may potentiate arrhythmias when
given concomitantly with antiarrhythmic medications.

Digitalis Glycosides — With prolonged use or abuse of
Cascara, loss of potassium may potentiate digitalis toxicity.

Indomethacin (NSAIDS) — Indomethacin given concomi-
tantly with anthracene derivatives had a decrease in thera-
peutic effect due to the inhibition of prostaglandin E2 (SEE
EFFECTS) (Cohen, 1982; Capasso, 1983).

Pregnancy: Use during pregnancy or while nursing only
after consulting a physician.

Nursing Mothers: Cascara has been identified by the
American Academy of Pediatrics as compatible with breast-
feeding. (Hagemann, 1998).

Pediatric Use: The drug is not to be administered to children
under 12 years of age.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid or solid forms of medication
are exclusively for oral use. The drug is used as comminuted
drug, powder or dry extracts for infusions, decoction, and as
a cold maceration or elixir.

How Supplied:
Capsule — 425 mg, 440 mg, 450 mg, 850 mg

CASCARA SAGRADA / 155

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, add 2 gm finely cut
drug to boiling water and strain after 10 minutes. (1
teaspoonful = 2.5 gm drug)

Daily Dosage: Administer 20 to 30 mg hydroxyanthracene
derivatives daily, calculated as cascaroside A.

Tea: Take | fresh cup mornings and evenings.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D3: 5 drops, | tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day (HAB34)

Note: The individually correct dosage is the smallest dosage
necessary to maintain a soft stool. Stimulating laxatives must
not be used over a period of more than | to 2 weeks without
medical advice.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ
136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

Anonym, Anwendungseinschrankungen fur Anthranoid-haltige
Abfuhrmittel angeordnet. In: PUZ 25(6)341-342. 1996.

Borkje B; Pedersen R: Lund GM et al. Effectiveness and
acceptability of three bowel cleansing regimens. Scand J
Gastroenterol 1991 Feb:26(2): 162-6.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.

Capasso F; Mascolo N; Autore G: Duraccio MR. Effect of
indomethacin on aloin and 18 dioxianthraquinone-induced
production of prostaglandins in rat isolated colon. Prostaglandins
1983 Oct;26(4):557-62.

Cohen MM. The effect of cathartics on prostaglandin synthesis
by rat gastrointestinal tract. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1982
Apr;8(4):389-97.

de Witte P, Cuveele J, Lemli J, Bicascarosides in fluid extracts
of Cascara. In: PM 57:440. 1991.

de Witte P; Lemli L. The metabolism of anthranoid laxatives.
Hepatogastroenterology 1990 Dec:37(6):601-5.

Evans FJ et al., (1975) J Pharm Pharmacol 27.91P.
Fairbairn JW et al., (1977) J Pharm Sci 66:1300.
Fairbairn JW, Simic S, (1964) J Pharm Pharmacol 16:450.

Griffini A et al., Isolation and characterisation of pure
Cascarosides A, B, C, and D. In: PM 58(Suppl.7):A593. 1992.

Hagemann TM. Gastrointestinal medications and breastfeeding. J
Hum Lact 1998 Sep;14(3):259-62.

Hangartner PJ; Munch R; Meier J et al. Comparison of three
colon cleansing methods: evaluation of a randomized clinical
trial with 300 ambulatory patients. Endoscopy 1989
Nov;21(6):272-5.

Helrnholz H, Ruge A, Piasecki A, Schroder S, Westendorf J,
Genotoxizitat der Faulbaumrinde. In: PZ 138(43):3478. 1993.

----- PAGE 407 -----
156/CASCARA SAGRADA

Izzo AA; Mascolo N; Capasso F. Nitric oxide as a modulator
of intestinal water and electrolyte transport. Dig Dis Sci 1998
Aug;43(8): 1605-20.

Klimpel BE et al., Anthranoidhaltige Laxantien - ein Risiko fur
die Entwicklung von Tumoren der ableitenden Harnwege. In:
PUZ 26(1 ):33 Jahrestagung der DPhG, Berlin, 1996. 1997.
Manitto P et al., Studies on Cascara, part 2. Structure of
cascarosides £ and F. In: JNP 58(3):419-423. 1995.

Mereto E; Ghia M; Brambilla G. Evaluation of the potential
carcinogenic activity of Senna and Cascara glycosides for the
rat colon. Cancer Lett 1996 Mar 19;101( 1 ):79-83.

Siegers CP; Siemers J; Baretton G. Sennosides and aloin do not
promote dimethylhydrazine-induced colorectal tumors in mice.
Pharmacology 1993a Oct:47 Suppl 1:205-8.

Siegers CP; von Hertzberg-Lottin E; Otte M; Schneider B.
Anthranoid laxative abuse—a risk for colorectal cancer? Gut
1993b Aug;34(8): 1099-101.
Thesen R, Phytotherapeutika - nicht immer harmlos. In: ZPT
9(49): 105. 1988.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, kimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Cascarilla
Croton eluteria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, with white petals
and a pleasant fragrance.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a small tree that rarely
grows to more than 6 m. It has small, opposite, ovate-
lanceolate leaves about 5 cm long. Scales beneath densely
cover the leaves, giving them a silver-bronze appearance.
Above, the scales are scattered and white. The bark occurs in
short quilled pieces, usually with a chalky, more or less
cracked, white surface, with black dots due to the fruit of
lichens. The transverse fracture is reddish-brown.

Characteristics: The taste is aromatic and bitter.

Habitat: Indigenous to the West Indies, also grown in
tropical areas of America.

Production: Cascarilla bark is the bark of Croton eluteria.

Other Names: Sweet Wood Bark, Sweet Bark, Bahama
Cascarilla

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (1.5 to 3%): chief components are p-cymene,
limonene, alpha-thujone, pinenes, linalool, myrcene, terpeni-

nol-4

Diterpene bitter principles: including Cascarillin A (15%)

Resins (25%)

EFFECTS
Cascarilla is a stimulant and a tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cascarilla is used for digestive disorders,

diarrhea and vomiting.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
extract or tincture.

Available as a powder, liquid

LITERATURE
Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,

CRC Press 1975.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Mc Echean CE et al., J Chem Soc 166B:633. 1966.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 408 -----
”

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Cashew

Anacardium occidentale

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the finely chopped
bark, the cashew nut, the fresh leaves and extracted cashew
oil.

Flower and Fruit: Flowers are in terminal, cyme-like, 10 to
20 cm long panicles and are polygamous. The pedicles are 2
to 3 mm long. The calyx is deeply divided into five sepals,
which are lanceolate, erect, imbricate, glabrous inside and
covered on the outside with short, thick, gray hairs. The
corolla is 5-petaled. The petals are lineal-lanceolate, 7 to 8
mm long by | mm wide, acute, soft and gray-haired on the
outside. The petals are glabrous and yellow with a red stripe
on the inside that curls outward in the later stages. Seven to
10 stamens are fused at the base, but only one 8 to 9 mm
long stamen is fertile; the sterile ones are shorter. Anthers are
yellowish-white, oblong-ovate and burst open along a
vertical slit. The gynoecium is obovate, 2 mm long, one-
valved and elongates to a 4 mm long wedge-shaped style
with a spot-like stigma. The flowers are followed by a

tw fleshy, edible receptacle, which partly encloses the fruit. The

fruit is reniform, with a smooth, pale grayish-brown drupe,
about 2 to 3 cm long and 1 em thick.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Cashew is a broad evergreen
tree from 6 to 10 m high with smooth glabrous branches,
densely leafed toward the tops. It has short-petioled leaves
that are alternate, coriaceous and entire-margined. The leaf
blade is obovate, 12 to 14 cm by 6 to 8 cm with a prominent
midrib and 10 to 14 veins that are almost parallel.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Caribbean and Central and
South America; it is cultivated everywhere in the tropics
especially in Africa and India.

Production: Fruit of the Cashew tree is harvested with the
stem removed.

Other Names: East Indian Almond

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEED CASE

* Alky I phenoles

Anacardic acid
Cardol
Methyl cardol

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS
Fatty oil

Chief fatty acids: oleic acid and linolenic acid

CASHEW /157

Proteins
Starch

EFFECTS

It has been demonstrated in vitro that the dried extract
prepared with ethanol is effective against the gram-positive
bacteria Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus. It also
acts as an astringent and cauterizing agent due to the
phenolic skin stimulant (anacardic acid) found mostly in the
skin of the fruit, but also in the fruit itself.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cashew is used for gastrointestinal ailments
in Brazil and Nigeria. Cashew shell oil and cashew fruit are
used as skin stimulants and cauterizing agents for ulcers,
warts and corns. In Brazil and Nigeria, the bark is used to
make an astringent decoction to treat toothache and inflam-
mation of the gums. External uses in Haiti include amenor-
thea, and internally cashew is used for dysentery. Young
leaves are used in the Philippines in the treatment of
diarrhea, dysentery and hemorrhoids; older leaves are used
as hot poultices for burns and skin disorders Efficacy for
these indications has not been documented.

Indian Medicine: Cashew bark is used for fevers, as a
laxative and anthelmintic, and to treat diabetes insipidus.
One particular form is used to treat snake bites. Cashew shell
oil is used as a runefacient and skin stimulant in the
treatment of leprosy, elephantitis, psoriasis and ring worm, in
addition to warts and corns.

Homeopathic Uses: Cashew is used to treat severely itching
rashes with blistering and also facial erysipelas.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The alkyl phenoles contained in the seed case of the nut are
strong skin irritants. Contact between the seed case and skin
can lead to erythemas with nodule and blister formation.
Frequent contact can lead to rimose exanthemas The roasted
seeds eaten as cashew nuts are free of alkyl phenoles, as is
the plant stalk.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available preparations include
acajou oil, cashew oil, oleum anacardiae and fatty oil
extracted from the seeds.

Preparation: Preparations are often compounds, particularly
in homeopathy.

Homeopathic Dosage: Daily dosage is 5 drops, | tablet, 10
globules, every 30 to 60 minutes for acute conditions; or one
of those options 1 to 3 times daily for chronic conditions.
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily; Ointments, rinses and
poultices: 1 dessertspoon : 1/4L water 1 to 2 times daily
(HAB34).

----- PAGE 409 -----
158/CASHEW

LITERATURE

Banerjee S, Rao AR, Promoting action of cashew nut shell oil
in DMBA-initiated mouse skin tumour model system. Cancer
Lett, 47:149-52, 1992 Feb 29.

Barroso MAT, Hort Sciences: 8:99. 1973.

Behl, Buch. In: Behl PN, Captain RM, Bedi BMS, Gupta S:
Skin Irritant and Sensitizing plants found in India, PN Behl,
India. 1967.

Kubo I, et al., Tyrosinase inhibitors from Anacardium
occidentale. In: JNP 57(4):545. 1994.

Laurens A, Paris RR, (1976) Plant Med Phytother 11:16.
Nagaraja KV, Plant Foods Hum Nutr 37:307-311. 1987.
Nagaraja KV, Qual Plat - Plant Foods Hum Nutr 37:69-75.
1987.

Neuwinger HD, Arzneipflanzen Schwarzafrikas. In: DAZ
134(6):453. 1994.

Ogunlana EO, Ramstad E, (1975) Planta Med 27:354.

Paul VJ, Yeddanapalli LM, J Am Chem Soc 78:5675-5678.
1956.

Samant SK, Rege DV, Lebensm-Wiss Technol 22:164-168.
1989.

Smit HF, Woerdenbag HJ, Singh RH, Meulenbeld GJ, Labadie
RP, Zwaving JH, Ayurvedic herbal drugs with possible
cytostatic activity. J Ethnopharmacol, 47:75-84, 1995 Jul 7.
Sullivan JT, et al., (1982) Planta Med 44:175.

Tyman JHP, Anal Chem 48:30-34. »976.

Tyman JHP, Kiong LS. Lipids 13:525-532. 1978.

Further information in:

Franca F, Lago EL, Marsden PD, Plants used in the treatment
of leishmanial ulcers due to Leishmania (Viannia) braziiiensis in
an endemic area of Bahia Brazil. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop,
47:229-32, 1996 May-Jun.

George J, Kuttan R, Mutagenic carcinogenic and cocarcinogenic
activity of cashewnut shell liquid. Cancer Lett, 47:11-6, 1997
Jan 15.

Gil RR, Lin LZ, Cordell GA, Kumar MR, Ramesh M, Reddy
BM, Mohan GK, Narasimha AV, Rao A, Anacardoside from
the seeds of Semecarpus anacardium. Phytochemistry, 58:405-7,
1995 May.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Jurberg P, et al., Effect of Niclosamide (Bayluscide WP 70)
Anacardium occidentale hexane extract and Euphorbia splendens
latex on behavior of Biomphalaria glabrata (Say 1818) under
laboratory conditions. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz, 58:191-4, 1995
Mar-Apr.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Kubo I, et al., Tyrosinase inhibitors from Anacardium
occidentale. J Nat Prod 57 (1994), 545.

Laurens A, Paris RR, Plant Med Phytother 11 (1976), 16.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mendes NM, de Oliveira AB, Guimaraes JE, Pereira JP, Katz
N, Molluscacide activity of a mixture of 6-n-alkyl salicylic
acids (anacardic acid) and 2 of its complexes with copper (II)
and lead (II). RJV Soc Bras Med Trop, 47:217-24, 1990 Oct-
Dec.
Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.
Smit HF, Woerdenbag HJ, Singh RH, Meulenbeld GJ, Labadie
RP, Zwaving JH, Ayurvedic herbal drugs with possible
cytostatic activity. J Ethnopharmacol, 47:75-84, 1995 Jul 7.
Vijayalakshmi T, Muthulakshmi V, Sachdanandam P, Salubrious
effect of Semecarpus anacardium against lipid peroxidative
changes in adjuvant arthritis studied in rats. Mol Cell Biochem,
36:65-9, 1997 Oct.

Vijayalakshmi T, Muthulakshmi V, Sachdanandam P,
Semecarpus anacardium-induced facial oedema. Br J Dermatol,
58:338-9, 1996 Aug.

Cassia fistula

See Golden Shower Tree

Cassia species

See Senna

Castanea sativa
See Spanish Chestnut

Castor Oil Plant

Ricinus communis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the seeds, the fat extracted from the oil, the ripe seeds

and the dried seeds.

----- PAGE 410 -----
w*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are terminal and
almost panicled and 15 to 50 cm long. The pedicled female
flowers are in the upper section and the male flowers are
clustered in the lower section of the inflorescence. The male
ones have a 3 to 5 part perianth with numerous, heavily
branched stamens which bear up to 1,000 separate bursting
anthers. The female perianth is divided in 5. The ovary is
trilocular. The style has 3 red, doubly split stigma branches.

The fruit capsule is soft prickly or smooth and grooved, | to
2.5 cm in diameter. The capsule bursts open when ripe
flinging out the large brightly speckled seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ricinus communis is an annual plant
in Central Europe, a bi- or -triennial shrub in Southern
Europe and a perennial tree in the tropics. There is a taproot
and lateral roots near the surface. The stem is erect and
hollow. As it grows older, the stem becomes green or
brownish-red. The leaves are petioled, greenish or reddish,
often frosted blue, and arranged in a spiral. The leaf blade is
peltate, 10 to 60 cm long and wide. The blade is usually
divided into palmate, ovate-oblong or lanceolate lobes. The
ribs are palmate and the margins are irregularly serrate.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated widely today in the tropics
and subtropics and in temperate latitudes where maize

thrives.

Production: Castor Oil is fatty oil obtained from the seeds of
Ricinus communis. It is obtained by mechanical harvesting
followed by sorting. Fruits that open by bursting when ripen,
must be harvested before ripening and then threshed.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with the
poisonous seeds of other Euphorbiaceae.

Other Names: Castor Bean, Mexico Seed, Castor Oil Plant,
Castor Oil Bush, Palma Christi

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

CASTOR OIL SEEDS

Fatty oil (42 to 55%, see below for constituents)

Proteic substances (20 to 25%)

Lectins (0.1 to 0.7%): including ricin D (RCA-60, severely
toxic), RCA-120 (less toxic)

Pyrridine alkaloids: ricinine (up to 0.3%)

Triglycerides: chief fatty acids ricinoleic acid (12-hydroxy-
oleic acid, 85 to 90%)

Tocopherols (vitamin E)

EFFECTS
The laxative principle of Castor Oil is the ricinolic acid.
Ricinolic acid is anti-absorptive and secretogogic. In animal

CASTOR OIL PLANT /159

experiments, stimulation of PgE2 synthesis in the small
intestine was proven. The possible reason for effectiveness
of ricini semen is the antimicrobial activity of the seeds
(ricin is highly toxic).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Castor Oil is used internally in folk
medicine for acute constipation, intestinal inflammation, for
removal of worms, and as a form of birth control. The oil is
used externally for inflammatory skin disorders, furuncles,
carbuncles, abscesses, inflammation of the middle ear and
headaches (poultice.)

Chinese Medicine: In China, Castor Oil is used to treat sore
throat, facial paralysis, dry stool, furuncles, ulcers and
festering inflammation of the skin.

Indian Medicine: In India, the drug is used for dyspeptic
complaints and joint pains.

Homeopathic Uses: Ricinus communis is used to treat
diarrhea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Castor Oil is contraindicated in intestinal obstruction, acute
inflammatory intestinal diseases, appendicitis, abdominal
pain of unknown origin, during pregnancy and while
nursing. The drug is not to be administered to children under
12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages of Castor Oil. Allergic skin rashes have
been observed in rare cases.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage can lead to gastric irritation with nausea,
vomiting, colic and severe diarrhea. Long-term use leads to
loss of electrolytes, especially potassium ions. This effect
may lead to hyperaldosteronism, inhibition of intestinal
motility and enhancement of the effect of cardioactive

steroids.

Castor beans are severely poisonous due to the toxic lectin
content. The ricinus lectins disturb the function of ribosomes
and thereby prevent protein synthesis. 12 castor beans are
believed to be fatal for an adult. Symptoms include severe
gastroenteritis with bloody vomiting and bloody, diarrhea,
kidney inflammation, loss of fluid and electrolytes and
ultimately circulatory collapse. Death is usually the result of
hypovolemic shock.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate) and installation of

----- PAGE 411 -----
160 /CASTOR OIL PLANT

medicinal charcoal, the therapy for castor bean poisoning
includes treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.), generous
supplies of fluids, electrolyte substitution and treating
possible cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions.
In case of shock, plasma volume expanders should be
infused. Monitoring of kidney function and blood coagula-
tion is essential. Papain activated with H2-S has been
attempted as an antidote.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Castor Oil is available as whole

drug, in solid, semi-solid and in compounded pharmaceutical
preparations for internal and external use.

Preparation: Industrial production using specific procedures.

Daily Dosage:

Internally — for acute constipation or as a laxative against
worms, at least 5 (x2 g) or 10 (xl g) capsules must be taken;
Caster Oil is also available in compound preparations.

Externally — a paste made of ground seeds is applied to the
affected skin areas twice daily. A course of treatment takes

up to 15 days.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

LITERATURE

Anonym, Pharmaceutical Care: "Den Mi(3brauch von Laxanzien
vermeiden helfen". In: DAZ 135(20): 1867-1868. 1995.

BGA, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken:Poly-(oxyethylen)-35-
Rizinusol. In: DAZ 132(33): 1733. 1992.

Macfarlane N, Trop Se 17:217-228. 1975.

Scarpa A, Guerci A, Various uses of the castor oil plant
(Ricinus communis L.), a review. In: ETH 5(2): 117. 1982.
Further information. in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist" U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Cat's Claw

Uncaria tomentosa

TRADE NAMES
Cai's Claw (available from numerous manufacturers), Cat's
Claw Power, Cat's Claw Inner Bark, Cat's Claw Bark

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root bark

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are bisexual and sessil. The
calyx is tubular 1 to 2 mm in length and 1 mm in diameter.
The corolla is 7-12 mm long, 4 mm in diameter and contains
5 roundish lobes. The stamens are in fives and fused. The
anthers are 1 mm in length; the stigma eliptical. The ovary is
inferior. The fruits are elliptical, 6-8 mm in length and 4-6

mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Uncaria tomentosa is a large woody
vine that sometimes reaches heights of 100 feet. The bark
has longitudinal fissures and range from yellow to yellow-
green in color. The leaves are simple, opposite, elliptic or
ovate. They range in size from 7 to 18 cm in length and from
4 to 13 cm wide. The margins of the leaf are entire, with a
roundish base.The spines are woody and occur in pairs. They
are curved like a cat's and thorn-like.

Characteristics: The sap of Uncaria tomentosa is watery and

has an astringent taste.

Habitat: Cat's Claw is indigenous to the rainforest areas of
Central and South America

Production: Cat's Claw is harvested in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: There are several plants with the
common name of Una de Gato. Confusion can occur with
Anadenanthera flava, Bauhinia aculeata, Berberis goudotii,
Celtis uguanae, Doxantha ungis catti, Mimosa albida,
Pisonia aculeata, Rubus urticaefolius, the various Smilax
species and Zanthoxylum panamensis (Obregon, 1995).

----- PAGE 412 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Una de Gato, Paraguaya, Garbato, Tambor
hausca, Toron

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Alkaloids: including 5-alpha-carboxystrictosidine, isoptero-
A* podine, mitraphylline, isomitraphyllin, isorynchophylline,

rynchophyllin

Triterpenes

Organic acids: oleanolic acid, ursolic acid

Glycosides: quinovic acid glycosides

Procyanidins: (-)-epicatechin, cinchonain | a, cinchonain Ib
Sterols: beta-sitosterol (60%), stigmasterol, capesterol

EFFECTS
Anti-inflammatory/Immunostimulating Effects — The sterol
componants of Cat's Claw have been found to have anti-
inflammatory activity (Scnatore, 1989). Carrageenan-in-
duced rat paw edema was shown to respond to per oral doses
of various extracts of Cat's Claw dried root bark (Aquino,
1991). The beta-sitosterol fraction, which accounts for 60%

“ of the total steroid content in the herb is thought to be

~ responsible for most of the anti-inflammatory effect (Sena-
tore, 1989). Uncaria tomentosa extract has been found to
stimulate interleukin-| and interleukin-6 production by
alveolar macrophages (Lemaire, 1999).

Effects on Platelet Aggregation — Rhynchophylline, an
alkaloid present in Cat's Claw, has been found to inhibit
venous and cerebral thrombosis in rabbits. It has also
demonstrated platelet aggregation inhibition (Chen, 1992).

Effects on Serotonin and Dopamine — In one study,
rhynchophylline increased the serotonin levels in the hypo-
thalamus and cortex of rat brain and reduced the dopamine
levels in the cortex, amygdala, and spinal cord. Rhyncho-
phylline increased the release of endogenous dopamine from
4 brain regions. The release of serotonin was increased in 2
brain regions (Shi, 1993).

Hirsutine, an alkaloid present in Uncaria tomentosa has a
potent ganglion blocking effect. Hirsutine was found to
block nicotine induced dopamine release in rat pheochromo-

j’ cytoma cells. Hirsutine was found to be equipotent to

hexamethonium in blocking the inward current activated by
nicotine (Nakazawa, 1991).

Antihypertensive Effects — Hirsutine has antihypertensive
effects. This effect can partly be explained by die ability of
hirsutine to reduce intracellular calcium levels by inhibiting
calcium release from the calcium store and increasing
calcium uptake into the calcium store. Hirsutine was also
found to exhibit calcium channel blocking activity by

CAT'S CLAW/161

inhibiting the calcium influx through voltage dependent
calcium channels in the rat aorta (Horie, 1992).

Contraceptive Effect — There is only anecdotal evidence of
the use of Cat's Claw in the prevention of pregnancy. In
Peru, it has been used for this purpose for years in some
rainforest tribes, but the amount of drug used would be
considered very high. A decoction prepared from 11 to 13
pounds of the root is reduced to about 1 cup and taken at the
time of menstruation. It is claimed that sterility can be
maintained for 3 to 4 years after one dose (Cabieses, 1994).

Effects on Cancer — Aqueous extracts of Uncaria tomentosa
suppressed cell growth through induction of apoptosis in two
different human leukemic cell lines. Apoptosis was demon-
strated by the fact that both DNA single and double strand
breaks increased within 24 hours of treatment with the
Uncaria tomentosa extract (Sheng, 1998).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The effects that have some scientific
evidence of efficacy include antiviral, immunostimulating,
and anti-inflammatory properties.

Cat's Claw has been used in folk medicine for rheumatic
complaints, diarrhea, gastritis, treatment of wounds, as an
adjunct to cancer treatment, asthma, menstrual irregularity
and as a contraceptive.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Cat's Claw is contraindicated in pregnancy and in nursing
mothers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Serum estradiol and progesterone levels may be
reduced after long-term Cat's Claw use. In one study, long
term use (8 weeks) of Uncaria tomentosa resulted in a
precipitous drop in both estradiol and progesterone serum
levels (Rodriguez, 1998).

Uncaria tomentosa prevented estrogen from binding to
estrogen receptors on breast cancer cells (Salazar & Jay me,
1988).

There is one report of acute renal failure associated wim
Cat's Claw ingestion in a patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus. Though the patient was taking several other
medications at the time, Cat's Claw was the only agent that
was discontinued. Urinalysis results gradually returned to
baseline following discontinuation of the herb (Hilepo,
1997).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cat's Claw is available in a powder
form, capsules and liquid for internal administration.

Preparation: To prepare a decoction, add 30 g of powder to
800 ml water; allow to simmer on the stove for 45 minutes or

----- PAGE 413 -----
162 /CAT'S CLAW

until there is about 500 ml liquid remaining. Allow to cool,
then strain and refrigerate (Schauss, 1998).

How Supplied:
Capsule — 250 mg, 350 mg, 400 mg, 440 mg, 500 mg, 505

mg, 540 mg
Liquid — 4:1

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 250 to 1000 mg daily.
The total alkaloid equivalent should be 10 to 30 mg.
Decoction dosage is 60 ml once daily in the morning on an
empty stomach (Schauss, 1998).

Storage: Cat's Claw should be stored at room temperature
away from heat, moisture and direct light.

LITERATURE
Aquino R, De Feo V, De Simone F et al: Plant metabolites:

new compounds and anti-inflammatory activity of Uncaria
tomentosa. J Nat Prod 54(2):453-459. 1991.

Chen C, et al., Inhibitory effect of rhynchophylline on platelet
aggregation and thrombosis. In: Chung Kuo Yao Li Hsueh Pao,
13(2); 126-30, Mar. 1992.

Cabieses, Fernando. The saga of the Cat's Claw, In: Via
Lactera Editores: Lima, Peru, 1994.

Hilepo JN, Bellucci AG & Mossey RT: Acute renal failure
caused by "cat's claw" herbal remedy in a patient with
systemic lupus erythematosus (letter). Nephron 77(3):361-369.
1997.

Horie S, et al.. Effects of hirsutine, an antihypertensive indole
alkaloid from Uncaria rhynchophylla, on intracellular calcium in
rat thoracic aorta. In: Life Sci, 50(7):491-8, 1992.

Lemaire I, Assinewe V, Cano P et al: Stimulation of
interleukin-1 and -6 production in alveolar macrophages by the
neotropical liana, Uncaria tomentosa (una de gato). J
Ethnopharmacol 64(2): 109-115. 1999.

Nakazawa K, et al.. Inhibition of ion channels by hirsutine in
rat pheochromocytoma cells. In: Jpn J Pharmacol, 57(4):507-15,
Dec, 1991.

Obregon LE: Identificacion correcta de "una de gato" (genero
Uncaria). Natura Medicatrix 40(summer):28-30. 1995.

Rodriguez H, Massey PJ, Rodriguez K et al: Inhibition of
steroid hormone production by a nutrition supplement "una de
gato" or "cat's claw." Biol Reprod 58(1):208. 1998.

Salazar EL & Jayme V: Depletion of specific binding sites for
estrogen receptor by Uncaria tomentosa. Proc Western
Pharmacol Soc 41:123-124. 1998.

Schauss AG: Cat's Claw (Uncaria tomentosa). Nat Med J 1998;
1(2): 16-19.

Senatore A, Cataldo A, Iaccarino FP et al: Ricerche
fitochimiche e biologiche sull? Uncaria tomentosa (Italian). Boll
Soc Ital Biol Sper 65:517-520. 1989.

Sheng Y, Pero RW, Amiri A et al: Induction of apoptosis and
inhibition of proliferation in human tumor cells treated with

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

extracts of Uncaria tomentosa. Anticancer Res 18(5A):3363-
3368. 1998.
Shi J, et al., Effects of rhynchophylline on motor activity of

mice and serotonin and dopamine in rat brain. In: Chung Kuo
Yao Li Hsueh Pao, 14(2): 114-117, Mar, 1993.

!
Cat's Foot
Antennaria dioica
DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flower.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has bright red and white,
dioecious composite flowers. They are very small and are in
terminal cymes. The female flowers are bright red with
thread-like, cylindrical corolla. The male flowers are white
with a funnel-shaped corolla. The bracts of the male are
white, the female, pink. The fruit has a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 7 to 20 cm tall, with
leafy rooting runners. The stem is erect with basal leaves that
are spatulate, green above, gray beneath, cauline, linear and

erect.

Habitat: Cat's Foot is found in Europe, Asia and America as
far north as the Arctic.

Production: Cat's Foot flower consists of the fresh or dried
flowers of Antennaria dioica.

Not to be Confused With: Occasional confusion occurs with
die flower heads of Helichrysum stoechas or Helichrysum

angustifolium.

Other Names: Mountain Everlasting, Life Everlasting,

Cudweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Anthracene

derivatives

Flavonoids: including luteolin and its glucosides
Bitter substances
Mucilages
Saponins

Tannins

EFFECTS
In animal tests, a mild spasmolytic and choleric effect has

been reported.

----- PAGE 414 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, preparations of Cat's Foot
flower are used as a diuretic, for diarrhea, and to treat
respiratory and intestinal diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
uses is not documented, a therapeutic application cannot be
recommended.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
1 gm finely cut drug, then strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

LITERATURE
Delaveau P, et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:49.

Didry N, et al.. (1982) Ann Pharm Fr 40 (1):75.

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Swiatek L, et al., (1982) Planta Med 30:153, 12P.

Catechu

Acacia catechu

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Black catechu is extracted from the
heartwood in a process of distillation and is used in a variety
of preparations.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow in closely sitting spikes
from the leaf axils. The calyx is about 1 to 2 mm and
covered in gray hairs. The corolla is yellow. The pod is about
10 to 15 cm long, dark brown and veined with 6 to 8 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Acacia catechu is a medium-sized
tree with brown bark and downy-haired branches. The leaf
stems of the double-pinnate leaves are about 15 cm long and
have glands at the base and between the upper 5 to 7 cm long
fronds. The leaflets are sessile, close, pale green and smaller
than 1 cm. There are a few short thorns in pairs.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to India and Burma.

Production: The heartwood is ground and boiled in water for
12 hours. The wood residue is removed and die extract
steamed to the consistency of a syrup. The syrup is stirred
and cooled in molds. The dried mass is broken up into
irregular pieces.

CATECHU/163

Not to be Confused With: Haematoxylon campechium and
the seeds of Areca catechu, tar products and admixtures of
earth, alumen, iron carbonate and sand.

Other Names: Cutch

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Catechins (2-12%): (&plus;)- and (-)-catechin, (&plus;)- and
(-)-epicatechin

Catechin tannins (20-60%)

EFFECTS
Catechu is an astringent and antiseptic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, Catechu is used for chronic
catarrh of the mucous membranes, dysentery and bleeding.
Externally, Catechu is a constituent of tooth tinctures, mouth
washes and gargles. It is used externally in hemostatic
powders, dressing solutions and injection solutions. It is also
used for mucosa, gingivitis, stomatitis and

pharyngitis.

colitis

Indian Medicine: Catechu is a constituent of preparations for
mouth ulcers, throat infections and toothache.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for poorly healing
ulcers, weeping skin diseases, oral ulcers with bleeding and

traumatic injuries.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Catechu tincture can be painted on
mucous membranes or used for mouth washes.

Preparation: Catechu tincture.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug is 0.3 to 2
gm to be taken orally, 3 times daily; single dose is 0.5 gm.

Twenty drops of Catechu tincture is added to a glass of
lukewarm water for use as a mouthwash, or the tincture may
be applied with a brush in undiluted form to affected mucous
membranes.

LITERATURE
Sham JSK et al., (1984) Planta Med 2:177.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeuuschen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 415 -----
164/CATECHU

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Catha edulis

See Khat

Catnip

Nepeta cataria

TRADE NAMES
Catnip is available from numerous manufacturers, sometimes
as Catnip Leaf, Catnip Herb or Catnip Herb Liquid.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts of

the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is spike-like and the
lower verticillasters distant from each other. The small
individual flowers are on short pedicles. The bracts are 1.5 to
3 mm and linear-awl-shaped. The sepals are 5 to 6.5 mm
long and ovate. The tips are 15 to 2.5 mm long, linear-
lanceolate and patent. The corolla is 7 to 10 mm long,
slightly longer than the calyx and white with small purple
spots.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The root of the plant is perennial.
The stems are up to | m high, angular, erect and branched.
They are leafy and gray-pubescent to tomentose, which gives
the entire plant a whitish-gray appearance. The leaves are 2
to 8 cm, ovate, cordate at the base, crenate or serrate and
gray-tomentose beneath. The petiole is 0.5 to 4 cm in length.

Characteristics: The plant has a characteristic aromatic
scent, reminiscent of Mint and Pennyroyal.

Habitat: Catnip is indigenous to Europe and naturalized in
the US.

Production: Catnip is the aerial part of Nepeta cataria. The
harvesting'of uncultivated plants takes place during the
flowering season. The drug is manually cut during dry and
sunny weather. The woodless parts of the plant are sorted out
and the usable material is then left to dry in the shade.

Other Names: Catnep, Catnip, Catmint, Catswort, Field
Balm

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.2-0.7%): chief components are nepetalactone
(share 80-95%), additionally including among others epi-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

nepetalactone, caryophyllene, camphor, thymol, carvacrol,
pulegone

EFFECTS

Active agents are bitter and tannin substances, as well as
essential oil. Catnip is considered to have antipyretic,
refrigerant, antispasmodic, sedative and diaphoretic effects.
The tea has a diuretic effect and increases gallbladder
activity.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include treatment of
colds, colic and fevers. It is also used for nervous disorders
and migraine, since preparations from the mint have a
calming effect. It is also used in the treatment of gynecologi-
cal disorders. Nepeta cataria has a long tradition in England
and France as a kitchen and medicinal herb and was used
occasionally as a stimulating drink until the introduction of
black tea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Catnip is not to be taken during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Orally in ground and dried forms.
Flowers are usually ingested in tea form, because the
important constituent elements are to some extent volatile.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 380 mg

Fluid extract — 1:1
Liquid — 1:01

Preparation: To prepare an infusion (tea), add 10 dessert-
spoonfuls per liter of water, leave this to steep for 10
minutes, then strain.'

Daily Dosage: 2 to 3 cups of the tea daily.
LITERATURE

Harvey JW et al., (1978) Lloydia 41:367.

Hatch RC, (1972) Amer J Vet Res 33:143.

Margolis JS, In: Complete Book of Recreational Drugs, Cliff
House Books USA 1978.

Roitman JN, (1981) Lancet 1:944.

Sakan T et al., (1967) Tetrahedron 23:4635.

Sastry SD et al., (1972) Phytochemistry 11:453.

Sherry CJ et al., (1981) Quart J Crude Drug Res 19(1):31.
Tagawa M, Murai F, (1983) Planta Med 47:109.

----- PAGE 416 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Young LA et al.. In: Recreational Drugs, Berkeley Publishing
Co. USA 1977.

Further information in:

Clark IM, Forde BG, Hallahan DL, Spatially distinct expression
of two new cytochrome P450s in leaves of tfepeta racemosa:
‘identification of a trichome-specific isoform. Plant Mol Biol,
33:875-85. Mar 1997.

Hallahan DL et al.. Purification and characterization of an
acyclic monoterpene primary alcohol:NADP+ oxidoreductase
from catmint (Nepeta racemosa). Arch Biochem Biophys,
33:105-12. Apr 1. 1995.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Massoco CO, Silva MR, Gorniak SL, Spinosa MS, Bernardi
MM Behavioral effects of acute and long-term administration of
catnip (Nepeta cataria) in mice. Ve' Hum Toxicol, 33:530-3.
Dec 1995.

Osterhoudt KC. Lee SK. Callahan JM, Henretig FM, Catnip
and the alteration of human consciousness. Vet Hum Toxicol,
33:373-5. Dec 1997.

Simon E, Chadwick AF, Craker LE (Eds.), Herbs. An Indexed
Bibliography 1971-80 Archon Books USA 1984.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Caulophyllum_thalictroides

See Blue Cohosh

Cayenne
Capsicum species

TRADE NAMES

Cayenne (available from numerous manafacturers), Cayenne
I Herbal, Cayenne Peppers, Cayenne 30,000 Heat Units,
Premium Cayenne, Cayenne Power Herb, Cayenne 40,000
BTU, Natural Herbal Cayenne, Zostrix

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The
Capsicum species are used medicinally.

fresh or dried fruits of different

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are usually solitary, but may
occasionally be in pairs or in threes. They are hanging and
long-pedicled. The calyx is semi-globose to campanulate and

5

CAYENNE/165

has 5 to 7 tips. The corolla is wheel-shaped with a short tube,
varying in color from white to yellow, occasionally from
purple to violet with whitish-green or violet markings. There
are 5 to 6 stamens with violet anthers and 5 small papillous
staminoids. The ovary is superior. The dividing walls are
partially underdeveloped. The seed carriers at the top are
attached to the walls and fused to a column below. The berry
is 1.5 to 5 cm long and up to 9 cm thick; it varies in form.
The calyx remains. The wall of the fruit is tough and leathery
and may be red, yellow-green or brownish. The seeds are
numerous, light, yellowish-white, flat, disc, circular or
kidney-shaped and thickened at the margins. The surface is
pitted.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Capsicum annum is an annual
(perennial in the tropics) 20 to 100 cm high plant with an
erect stem, which is somewhat woody and angular. It is
sparsely branched higher up. The leaves are usually solitary,
long-petioled, oval, lanceolate to ovate, obtusely accuminate,
wedge-shaped at the base, entire-margined or slightly curved

and glabrous.

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to Mexico and Central
America and is cultivated today in wanner regions of the

globe.

Production: Paprika consists of the dried ripe fruit of
Capsicum anuum or Capsicum fructescens. The fruit is
harvested when completely ripe and dried at a maximum
temperature of 35° C.

Not to be Confused With: Other varieties of Capsicum

anuum.

Other Names: Capsicum, Grains of Paradise, African Pep-
per, Bird Pepper, Chili Pepper, Sweet Pepper, Hungarian
Pepper, Red Pepper, Goat's Pod, Zanzibar Pepper, Paprika,
Tabasco Pepper, chilies, Chili

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Capsaicinoids (amides of the vanillyl amine with C8 - CI 3-

fatty acids): chief components capsaicin (32-38%), dihydro-

capsaicin (18-52%)

Carotinoids (0.3-0.8%): in particular capsanthin (dark red),
alpha-carotin, violaxanthine, free or as fatty acid esters

Flavonoids: including apiin, luteolin-7-O-glucoside

Steroid saponins: mixture referred to as capsicidine, in the

seeds

Volatile oil (0.1%): 2-methoxy-3-isobutyl pyrazine and N-
(13-methyl tetradecyl)acetamide (capsiamide)

----- PAGE 417 -----
166 /CAYENNE

EFFECTS
Pain Modulation

The most important active ingredient in the herb is the
capsaicin, which exerts hyperemic effects. Cutaneous noci-
ceptors are also known as peripheral sensory neurons of
primary sensory neurons activated by noxious stimuli (Biro,
1997; Nakamura, 1999). Peripheral fibers produce a local
response consisting of edema, redness and vasodilation,
while afferent fibers relay nocioceptive information to the
central nervous system resulting in the perception of pain
and burning. Long-term desensitization of the fibers occurs
after repeated exposure to capsaicin, and results in a
subsequent loss of pain sensation (Appendino, 1997).

Capsaicin binds to the C-type vanilloid receptor (VR1) and
opens a cationic channel allowing the influx of calcium. The
calcium influx is an excitatory response, which initiates
release of neuropeptides (substance P). The neuropeptides
are responsible for chemogenic pain, thermoregulation and
neurogenic inflammation. By blocking the calcium channel,
there will be a depletion of substance P in the sensory nerves
and loss of pain (Appendino, 1997; Biro, 1997; Jung, 1999).

Antimicrobial

Capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin have antimicrobial effects
against Bacillus cereus, Bacillus subtilis, Clostridium sporo-
genes, Clostridium tetani, and Streptococcus pyogenes
(Cichewicz, 1996). Capsaicin has shown bactericidal activity
against H. pylori and therefore, could have a protective effect
against H. pylori-associated gastroduodenal disease (Jones,
1997). A recent study using capsaicin from jalapeno peppers
did not support the role for jalapenos in the treatment of H.
pylori infection (Graham, 1999).

Antineoplastic

Capsaicin, once thought to be carcinogenic, has been shown
to not cause any significant increase in papilloma formation,
abnormal hyperplasia or inflammatory lesions. The drug
does not induce the epidermal ornithine decarboxylase
activity, suggesting that it lacks tumor-promotional activity
(Park, 1997; Park, 1998). Chemoprotective effects of capsai-
cin and dihydrocapsaicin include the inhibition of microsom-
al monooxygenases involved in carcinogen activation (Surh,
1995).

Detoxification/Gastroprotective/Thrombolytic Effects

Capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin have detoxification activity
with pharmacologically active substances by interacting
irreversibly with hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes (Surh,
1995). Capsaicin has a gastroprotective effect against gastric
mucosal injury caused by aspirin (Yeoh, 1995). Capsicum
has been found to induce increased fibrinolytic activity and
simultaneously cause hypocoagulability of blood (Visudhi-
phan, 1982).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Many documented trials are based on observations of various
extracts of the drug. The initial local effect is pain, then
warmth, then hypersensitivity; reversible or irreversible
peripheral nerve damage is possible.

CLINICAL TRIALS
Pain Modulation

The efficacy of topical capsaicin was determined in 22
patients with chronic severe painful diabetic neuropathy over
an 8-week study period. The randomized, placebo-controlled
study demonstrated a significant improvement with capsaicin
0.75% applied 4 times daily for the overall clinical improve-
ment of pain status, as measured by physician's global
evaluation and by a categorical pain severity scale. The
capsaicin treatment group had a 16% decrease in mean pain
intensity by a visual analogue scale (VAS) versus 4.1%
decrease with the placebo group. The capsaicin treatment
group had a 44.6% decrease in mean pain relief on VAS
versus 23.2% decrease with the placebo group. Approxi-
mately 50% of subjects reported improved pain control or
were cured in a follow-up, open-label study, and 25% were
unchanged or worse (Tandan, 1992).

Gastroprotective Effects

The efficacy of capsaicin as a gastroprotective agent was
determined in 18 healthy volunteers with normal index
endoscopies. The volunteers underwent two studies four
weeks apart to evaluate the effect of capsaicin against
aspirin-induced gastric mucosal injury. Each volunteer took
20 g chili orally with 200 ml water in one study and 200 ml
water in another study. After 30 minutes, each case was
followed with 600 mg aspirin with 200 ml water. Endoscopy
was repeated 6 hours later, and the gastroduodenal mucosal
damage was assessed by a previously validated scoring
system. The median gastric injury score in the chili group
was significantly less, demonstrating a gastroprotective
effect of chili in human subjects (Yeoh, 1995).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Muscular tensions
+ Rheumatism

Unproven Uses: Cayenne is used for painful muscle spasms
in areas of shoulder, arm and spine. In folk medicine the herb
is used for frostbite, chronic lumbago and as a gargle for
hoarseness, sore throats and infected throats. The drug is also
used internally for gastrointestinal disorders, seasickness and
as prophylactic therapy for arteriosclerosis, stroke and heart
disease.

The herb is used in cream form for circulation and as a
female orgasm stimulant. Use should be limited to 2 days,

----- PAGE 418 -----
"Ww

mt

oA

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and should only be used again after 2 weeks. Longer usage
can cause festering dermatitis, blistering and ulceration (See
PRECAUTIONS).

Indian Medicine: Cayenne is used for gout, arthritis, sciatica,
coughs and hoarseness. It has been used for lowering the
temperature in malaria, yellow fever, scarlet fever and
typhus. It is used for cholera, edema and anorexia nervosa. It
is used in compound preparations for loss of appetite,
dyspepsia and diarrhea (tablets 1:1:1; Cayenne pepper,
rhubarb and ginger root) and for alcoholism as an infusion
(Cayenne pepper with sugar and cinnamon) to reduce the
desire for alcohol.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for inflammation of the
efferent urinary tract, the alimentary canal, the mouth and
throat, and middle ear infection.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: There has not yet been a final determination of
possible health hazards or side effects in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Internal administration may increase gastrointestinal peristal-
sis resulting in diarrhea, intestinal and gallstone colics.
Besides the intended stimulating effect, external applications
can lead to blister and ulcer formation. Investigations into
mutagenicity, teratogenicity and carcinogenicity yielded
contradictory results. Warning: Use should be limited to 2
days and should only be used again after 2 weeks. Keep
away from the eyes!

Hematologic Effects: Capsicum has been found to induce
increased fibrinolytic activity and simultaneously cause
hypocoagulability of blood (Visudhiphan, 1982).

Hypersensitivity: Anaphylaxis and rhinoconjunctivitis symp-
toms have been associated with the herb due to its antigenic
components (Jensen-Jarolim, 1998; Vega de la Osada, 1998).
Contact dermatitis has been reported from the direct
handling of chili peppers containing capsaicin (Williams,
1995). A hypersensitivity reaction known as plasma cell
gingivitis may occur with the herb, and may cause severe
gingival inflammation, discomfort and bleeding (Serio,
1991). One study suggest the allergy is rarely an autonomous
sensitization, but rather a consequence of pollen allergy on
the basis of immunologic cross-reactivity (Ebner, 1998).

Respiratory Effects: Alveobronchiolitis and fibrotic changes
have occurred as a result of a respirable paprika dust
preparation used after a single intratracheal dose (Tatrai,
1992). Chronic exposure to chili peppers has been associated
with an increase in cough (Blanc, 1991).

Drug Interactions: Aspirin and salicylic acid compounds-

The bioavailabilities of aspirin (acetylsalicyhc acid) and of
salicylic acid were reduced when given concomitantly with

CAYENNE/167

Capsicum annuum extract, containing 100 mg of capsaicin
per gram as a result of the gastrointestinal effects of
capsaicin (Cruz, 1999).

OVERDOSAGE
Toxic dosages lead to life-threatening hypothemias by
affecting the thermoreceptors. High doses of the drug (or the
herb) administered over extended periods can cause chronic
gastritis, kidney damage, liver damage and neurotoxic
effects. The treatment for poisonings proceeds
symptomatically.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of Cayenne are
exclusively for external indications in antirheumatic oint-
ments and plasters.

How Supplied:
Capsules—400 mg, 445 mg, 450 mg, 455 mg, 500 mg

Cream—0.25% capsaicin, 0.75% capsaicin

Preparation: A liquid extract is prepared by percolating 100
gm drug with 60 gm ethanol. Other formulations include:
Capsicum-oleoresin with 90% ethanol and a tincture with
90% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: External daily dose: 10 gm drug; Tincture:
(1:10); Semi-solid preparations: maximum 50 mg capsaicin
in 100 gm neutral base. The cream is applied to the affected
area not more than 3 or 4 times daily (Zostrix Package Insert,
1998).

Internal application: Decoction: '/: liter water with 5 gm
powdered drug, 3 gm powdered Cascarilla bark and 5 gm
powdered rhubarb root; 2 cups per day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times a day (chronic);
ointment: once or twice daily (HAB1)

Storage: Should be well sealed and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Behandlung chronischer Schmerzen: Capsaicin -
Lichtblick fur Schmerzpatienten. In: DAZ 137(13): 1027-1028.
1997.

Anonym, Phytotherapie:Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012°015. 1996.

Bascom R, Kageysobotka A, Prous D, Effect of intranasal
capsaicin on symptoms and mediator release. In: J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 259(3): 1323. 1991.

Biro T, Acs G, Acs P et al., Receptor advances in
understanding of vanilloid receptors: a therapeutic target for
treatment of pain and inflammation in skin. J Invest Dermatol
1997; 2:56-60.

Blanc P, Liu D, Juarez C, Boushey HA, Cough in hot pepper
workers. Chest 1991 Jan;99(1):27-32.

----- PAGE 419 -----
168 /CAYENNE

Camara B, Moneger R, (1978) Phytochemistry 17:91.

Cichewicz RH, Thorpe PA. The antimicrobial properties of
chile peppers (Capsicum species) and their uses in Mayan
medicine. J Ethnopharmacol 1996; 52:61-70.

Cruz L, Castaneda-Hernandez G, Navarrete A et al., Ingestion
of chili pepper (Capsicum annuum) reduces salicylate
bioavailability after oral aspirin administration in the rat. Can J
Physiol Pharmacol 1999 Jun:77(6):441-6.

Ebner C, Jensen-Jarolim E. Leitner A. Breiteneder H,
Characterization of allergens in plant-derived spices: Apiaceae
spices, pepper (Piperaceae), and paprika (bell peppers,
Solanaceae). Allergy 1998:53(46 Suppl):52-4.

Fusco BM, Fiore G. Gallo F et al., 'Capsaicin-sensitive'
sensory neurons in cluster headache: pathophysiological aspects
and therapeutic indication. Headache 1994 Mar;34(3): 132-7.

Gal IE, (1967) Pharmazie 22:120.

Graham DY, Anderson SY. Lang T et al.. Garlic or jalapeno
peppers for treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection. Am J
Gastroenterol 1999 May;94(5): 1200-2.

Jensen-Jarolim E, Santner B. Leitner A et al.. Bell peppers
(Capsicum annuum) express allergens (profilin. pathogenesis-
related protein P23 and Bet v 1) depending on the horticultural
strain. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1998 Jun:1 16(2): 103-9.

Jung J, Hwang S, Kwak J et al.. Capsaicin binds to the
intracellular domain of the capsaicin-activated ion channel. J
Neurosci 1999 Jan 15;19(2):529-38.

Kohane D, Kuang Y, Lu N et al., Vanilloid receptor agonists
potentiate the in vivo local anesthetic activity of percutaneously
injected site 1 sodium channel blockers. Anesthesiology 1999
Feb;90(2):524-34.

Kreymeier J, Rheumatherapie mit Phytopharmaka. In: DAZ
137(8):611-613. 1997.

Masada Y et al., (1971) J Food Sci 36:858.
Monsereenusom Y et al., (1982) Crit Rev Toxicol 10:321.

Nakamura A, Shiomi H, Recent advances in neuropharmacology
of cutaneous nociceptors. Jpn J Pharmacol 1999 Apr;79(4):427-
31.
Park KK, Surh YJ, Effects of capsaicin on chemically induced
two-stage mouse skin carcinogenesis. Cancer Lett 1997 Mar
19; 114(1-2): 183-4.

Park K, Chun K, .Yook, Surh Y, Lack of tumor promoting
activity of capsaicin, a principal pungent ingredient of red
pepper, in mouse skin carcinogenesis. Anticancer Res 1998
Nov-Dec; 18(6A):4201-5.

Surh YJ & Lee SS, Capsaicin, a double-edged sword: toxicity,
metabolism and chemopreventive potential. Life Sci 1995;
56:1845-1855.

Surh YJ, Lee RC, Park KK, Mayne ST et al., Chemoprotective
effects of capsaicin and diallyl sulfide against mutagenesis or
tumorigenesis by vinyl carbamate and N-nitrosodimethylamine.
Carcinogenesis 1995 Oct;16(10):2467-71.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Surh YJ, Ahn SH, Kim KC et al., Metabolism of capsaicinoids:
evidence for aliphatic hydroxylation and its pharmacological
implications. Life Sci 1995 Mar 10;56(16):PL305-11.

Surh YJ & Lee SS, Capsaicin in hot chili pepper: carcinogen,
co-carcinogen or anticarcinogen? Fd Chem Toxic 1996; 34:313-
316.

Vega de la Osada F, Esteve Drauel P, Alonso Lebrero E, et al.,
Sensitization to paprika: anaphylaxis after intake and
rhinoconjunctivitis after contact through airways. Med Clin
(Bare) 1998 Sep 12;111(7):263-6.

Williams S, Clark R, Dunford J, Contact dermatitis associated
with capsaicin: Hunan hand syndrome. Ann Emerg Med 1995
May;25(5):713-5.

Yeoh KG, Kang JY, Yap I et al., Chili protects against aspirin-
induced gastroduodenal mucosal injury in humans. Dig Dis Sci
1995 Mar;40(3):580-3.

FURTHER INFORMATION IN:
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tandan R, Lewis G, Krusinski P et al., Topical capsaicin in
painful diabetic neuropathy. Controlled study with long-term
follow-up. Diabetes Care 1992 Oct; 15(10): 1434.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ceanothus americanus
See New Jersey Tea

----- PAGE 420 -----
4p

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Cedar

Cedrus libani

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the

wood and the oil.

Flower and Fruit: The male cones are 3 to 5 cm; the female
cones are 7 to 12 cm and almost cylindrical-truncate or

umbilicate at the apex.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The cedar is a majestic tree that
grows up to 40 m in height with a rigid leading shoot and a
flat crown. The young branches are glabrous. The needle-
like leaves are dark green and 20 to 30 mm long.

Habitat: The Lebanon Cedar is indigenous to the Lebanese
mountains and the southwest of Turkey, Cyprus, the Atlas
Mountains and the Himalayas. The tree is also found in Asia
and Africa.

Production: Cedar oil is the essential oil extracted from the
leaves and wood of Cedrus libani.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

When extracted from Cedrus libani (true cedarwood oil):
borneol

When extracted from Cedrus atlantica (atlas cedarwood oil):
cadinene, alpha- and gamma-atlantone

When extracted from Cedrus deodora (Himalayan cedar-
wood oil): alpha- and gamma-atlantone, p-methyl-delta-3-
tetrahydroacetophenone, (+)-longiborneol, himachalol, all-
ohimachalol

EFFECTS
Cedar has an expectorant effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cedar wood oil is used for catarrhal

conditions of the respiratory tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Externally, the drug is used as a rub
(Bormelin balm). It is also used internally as an inhalation.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

CELANDINE/169

Cedrus libani

See Cedar

Celandine

Chelidonium majus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal pans are the aerial parts that
have been collected during the flowering season and dried.
The root, which has been collected in late autumn and dried,
and the fresh rhizome are also used medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has yellow flowers arranged in
umbels. There are 2 sepals, 4 petals, numerous yellow
stamens and | ovary. The fruit is pod-like and many-seeded.
The seeds are black-brown and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Celandine is a 30 to 120 cm high
plant with an erect stem. The stem has irregularly bifurcated,
thickened nodes. The leaves are alternate and indent-pinnati-
fid. The upper leaves are pinnatisect, dull green above, sea-
green beneath. The plant contains a dark-yellow latex.

Characteristics: Celandine has a hot and bitter taste. The
latex has a narcotic fragrance.

Habitat: Celandine is found throughout Europe and the
temperate and subarctic regions of Asia.

Production: Celandine herb consists of the dried, above
ground parts of Chelidonium majus gathered during flower-
ing season. The herb is collected in the wild during the
flowering season and dried at high temperatures.

Greater Celandine root is the root, harvested between August
and October, of Chelidonium majus. The herb is gathered in
uncultivated regions and harvested commercially.

Other Names: Tetterwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: CELANDINE HERB

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the protoberberine type: including
coptisine (main alkaloid), berberine

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the benzophenanthridine type:
including chelidonine, sanguinarine, chelerythrine

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the protopine type: including

protopin, cryptopine

Caffeic acid derivatives: including 2-(-)-coffeoyl-D-glyceric
acid, coffeoyl-L-malic acid

----- PAGE 421 -----
170 /CELANDINE

EFFECTS: CELANDINE HERB
Celandine has mild analgesic, cholagogic, antimicrobial,
oncostatic and central-sedative effects. It also acts as a
spasmolytic on smooth muscles. In animal tests, Celandine is
a cytostatic. It also has a nonspecific immune-stimulating
effect.

Note: The blood pressure-lowering effects and the therapeu-
tic efficacy for mild forms of hypertonia (borderline
hypertonia) need further investigation.

COMPOUNDS: CELANDINE ROOT
Isoquinoline alkaloids of the protoberberine type: including
coptisine (main alkaloid), berberine

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the benzophenanthridine type:
including chelidonine. sanguinarine, chelerythrin

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the protopine-type: including
protopin, cryptopine

Caffeic acid derivatives: including 2-(-)-coffeoyl-D-glyceric
acid, coffeoyl-L-malic acid

EFFECTS: CELANDINE ROOT
Only clinical studies and experiments on the fresh plants are
available. However, previous studies have shown that the
extract, with an alkaloid content of 80%, should have similar
effects to those of the fresh leaves. These effects include
immobilization in mice, when it was applied subcutaneously
and orally. On rabbit intestines it caused limpness; and in
higher doses, tone reduction. When applied to the rabbit
uterus, it caused contraction of the smooth muscle. Positive
inotropic effects were observed in isolated cat and frog
hearts; in a canine heart-lung preparation it stimulated the
heart, raised blood pressure and widened the arteries.

Experimental data are unavailable, therefore the results must
be considered unofficial.

An oncostatic effect was observed through the cytotoxic
results of Eagle's 9 KB carcinoma of the naso-pharynx in
cell cultures.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
CELANDINE HERB
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Liver and gallbladder complaints

Unproven Uses: Celandine is used for spasmodic pain of the
bile ducts and the gastrointestinal tract. In folk medicine, it
was used for skin conditions such as blister rashes, scabies
and warts. It is said to be effective in the treatment of
cholecystitis, chloelithiasis, catarrhal jaundice, gastroenteri-
tis, and diffuse latent liver and gall bladder complaints. It has
also been used for intestinal polyps and breast lumps. Other
uses include angina pectoris, cramps, asthma, arteriosclero-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

sis, high blood pressure, stomach cancer, gout, edema and
hepatitis.

Chinese Medicine: Celandine is used for inflammation of the
rim of the eyelid, febrile and ulcerating dermatitis, warts,
edema, ascites, jaundice and stomach carcinomas

CELANDINE ROOT
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the fresh roots are chewed
to alleviate toothache, and a powder derived from the roots is
applied to ease tooth extraction.

Chinese Medicine: Preparations are used for irregular
menstruation.

Homeopathic Uses: Chelidonium majus is used for inflam-
mation, stones and chronic disorders of the hepatobiliary
system, rheumatism and inflammation of the lungs and
pleura.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
CELANDINE HERB

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Older scientific literature credits the
plant with toxicity (burning in the mouth, nausea, vomiting,
bloody diarrhea, hematuria, stupor), but recent studies offer
no clear proof of this; animal experiments yielded no results.

No symptoms of inflammation were observed in the eyes of
rabbits following introduction of the chyle. Nevertheless,
contact between it and the eyes should be avoided.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

CELANDINE ROOT
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Older scientific literature credits the plant with
toxicity (burning in the mouth, nausea, vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, hematuria, stupor), but recent studies offer no clear
proof of this. Animal experiments yielded no examples of

toxicity.

DOSAGE
CELANDINE HERB

Mode of Administration: Comminuted and powdered drug
for infusions and decoctions; dried extracts for liquid and
solid medicinal forms for internal use.

Preparations:
Fluid extract — 1:1 in 25% ethanol.

Tincture — 1:10 in 45% ethanol (BHP83).

Tea — allow IV2 dessertspoonfuls to draw in boiling water
for 10 minutes.

----- PAGE 422 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Infusion — 15 gm dried herb to 1 liter of water, leave to

draw for 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 2 to 4 gm of drug in
liquid or solid extracts, equivalent to 12 to 30 mg total
alkaloids calculated as chelidonine; fluid extract, 1 to 2 ml
three times daily; decoction, 3 cups daily; infusion, 3 cups

between meals.

Storage: Celandine herb should be protected carefully from
light.

CELANDINE ROOT

Mode _ of Administration: Most standardized and compound
preparations contain the extract of Celandine herb; various
homeopathic preparations also contain dilutions of the fresh
herb Greater Celandine.

Daily Dosage: The standard dose is 0.5 gm of drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
daily (HAB1).

Storage: Preparations must be stored carefully.

LITERATURE

CELANDINE HERB

Aberlein H et al., Chelidonium majus L, Components with in
vitro affinity for GABA A receptor. Positive cooperation of
alkaloids. In: PM 62(3):227-231. 1996.

Anonym, Brennpunkt ZNS. In: DAZ 137(25):2166-2167. 1997.

Amason JT, Gurein B, Kraml MM, Mehta B. Rehmond JC,
Scaiano JC, Phototoxic and photochemical properties of
sanguinarin. In: Photochemistry and Photobiology 55(1 ):35.
1992.

Baumann J, (1975) Ober die Wirkung von Chelidonium,

Curcuma, Absinth und Carduus marianus auf die Galle- und
Pankreassekretion bei Hepatopathien. Med Mschr 29:173.

Boegge SC et al., Reduction of ACh-induced contraction of rat
isolated ileum by Coptisin, Caffeoylmalic acid, Chelidonium
majus, and Corydalis lutea extracts. In: PM 62(2): 173-174.
1997.

Diener H, Schollkraut. In: PTA 8(2): 145. 1994.

Dostal J et al.. Structure of chelerythrine base. In: JNP
58(5):723-729. 1995.

Fulde G, Wichtl M, Analytik von Schollkraut, Hauptalkaloid
Coptisin. In: DAZ 134(12): 1031. 1994.

Hahn R, Nahrstedt A, Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives,
caffeoylmalic and new caffeoylaldonic acid esters, from
Chelidonium majus. In: PM 59(1):71. 1993.

Hamacher H, Haben Phytopharmaka eine Zukunft? In: DAZ
131(42):2155. 1991.

CELANDINE/171

Kim DJ, Ahn B, Han BS, Tsuda H, Potential preventive effects
of Chelidonium majus L (Papaveraceae) herb extract on
glandular stomach tumor development in rats treated with N-
methyl-N'-nitro-N nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) and hypertonic
sodium chloride. In: Can. .

Mitra S et al., Effect of Chelidonium majus L. on experimetal
hepatic tissue injury. In: Phytother Res 10(4):354-356. 1996.

Reuter HD, Pflanzliche Gallentherapeutika (Teil I) und (Teil II).
In: ZPT 16(1): 13-20 u. 77-89. 1995.

Schilcher H, Pharmazeutische Aspekte pflanzlicher
Gallentherapeutika. In: ZPT 16(4):211-222. 1995.

Schmidt M, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Gallenwegstherapeutika.
In: DAZ 135(8):680-682. 1995.

Taborska E et al.. The alkaloids of Chelidonium majus L. and
their variability. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 145. 1996.

Vahlensiek U et al., The effect of Chelidonium majus herb
extract on the choleresis in the isolated perfused rat liver. In:
PH 61(3):267-270. 1995.

Vavreckova C, Gawlik I, Miiller K, Benzophenanthridine
alkaloids of Chelidonium majus: I. Inhibition of 5- and 12-
lipoxygenase by a non-redox mechanism. In: PM 62(5):397-401.
1996.

Willaman JJ and Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A):1.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 423 -----
172 /CELANDINE

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

CELANDINE ROOT
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Literatur zu den Wirkungen der Inhaltsstoffe vgl. Chelidonii
herba.

Celastrus scandens

See American Bittersweet

Celery

Apium graveolens

TRADE NAMES
Celery Seed, Celery Seed-Power, Celery Liquid

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root, above-
ground foliage and stems, the fruit (seeds) of the plant and
the oil extracted from the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The umbels are greenish-white, small, 6 to
12 rayed, star-shaped and splayed. Some umbels are top-
heavy, short petioled or sessile, and some are terminal and
more or less long-petioled with no involucre. Petals are
usually 0.5 mm, white or greenish to yellowish, cordate at
the base and have indented tips. The fruit is almost spherical
and somewhat compressed at the side. The 5 mm mericarps
are rounded in section. They are 5-cornered with 5 equal,
weakly protruding, bow-shaped main ribs. The edge of the
ribs form the edge of the mericarps. The fruit axis is bristly
and slightly crenate at the tip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The glabrous plant is a biennial and
reaches a height of 30 to 100 cm. The root of the wild variety
is fusiform, about 5 to 7 mm thick, branched and becomes
woody in the second year. The root of the cultivated variety
is fleshy, roundly tuberous and reaches a diameter of over 15
cm. The stem is erect, with edged grooves, often hollow and
branched. The leaves are glossy and rich green. The basal
and lower cauline leaves are more or less long-petioled and
pinnatifid. The upper cauline leaves are sometimes opposite.
They are on short white-membrane-edged sheaths and are
almost sessile and tri-pinnate. The lower leaves are roundish,
almost blunt at the base with broad, lozenge-shaped,
indented-serrate, blunt and short-thorned tips. The upper

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

cauline leaves are wedge-shaped and acuminate, also 3-lobed
or pinnate or lanceolate and entire-margined.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong odor.

Habitat: Celery is found in Europe from England and
Lapland to southern Russia. The plant also grows in western
Asia as far as eastern India; in northern and southern Africa
and South America; and is cultivated and grows wild in
North America, Mexico and Argentina.

Production: Celery seed consists of the fruit of Apium
graveolons; celery herb consists of the fresh or dried above-
ground parts of the plant; and celery root is the plant's fresh
or dried underground parts.

Other Names: Smallage

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: CELERY SEED (FRUIT)

Volatile oil: chief constituents ((:) - limonene, beta-selinene,
phthalides among them 3-butyliden phthalide, 3-butyl
phthalide, 3-isovaleryliden-3a, 4-dihydrophthalid, 3-isobu-
tyliden phthalide, sedanoid, neocnidilid)

Flavonoids: graveobioside A and B, apiin, isoquercitrin

Furocoumarins: including bergapten, —_isoimperatorin,

isopimpinellin
Fatty oil

EFFECTS: CELERY FRUIT

In animal tests, a sedative and anticonvulsive effect was
demonstrated, a diuretic effect could not be proven. The
essential oil contained in the drug had a mildly inhibiting
effect on bacteria and fungi.

COMPOUNDS: CELERY HERB
Volatile oil): including (+)-limonene, myrcene, beta-seli-
nene, alpha-terpineol, carveol, dihydrocarvone, geranyl ace-
tate, phthalides (including 3-butyliden phthalid, 3-butyl
phthalid, 3-isobutyliden dihydrophthalid)

Flavonoids: including apiin, luteolin-7-O-apiosyl glucoside,
chrysoeriol glucoside

Furocoumarins: including bergaptene, xanthotoxin,

isopimpinellin
Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS: CELERY HERB
In animal tests, a sedative and anticonvulsive effect was
demonstrated, a diuretic effect could not be proven. The
essential oil contained in the drug had a mildly inhibiting
effect on bacteria and fungi.

----- PAGE 424 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

COMPOUNDS: CELERY ROOT

Volatile oil: chief constituents (+)-limonene, beta-pinene, p-
cymene, cis-, 3-methyl-4-ethyl-hexane), phthalides (includ-
ing 3-butyliden phthalid, 3-butyl phthalid,  ligustilid,
neocnidilid)

Flavonoids: including apiin, luteolin-7-O-apiosyl glucoside
Furocoumarins: including bergaptene
Polyyne: including falcarinol, falcarindiol

EFFECTS: CELERY ROOT
In animal tests, a sedative and anticonvulsive effect was

demonstrated; a diuretic effect could not be proven. The
essential oil contained in the drug had a mildly inhibiting
effect on bacteria and fungi.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
CELERY FRUIT. HERB AND ROOT

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine use of celery and prepara-
tions of celery are used as a diuretic, for regulating the
bowels, for glandular stimulation, rheumatic complaints,
gout, gall and kidney stones. Other traditional uses include as
a prophylactic for nervous agitation, for loss of appetite and
exhaustion. Celery is also used as a cough treatment and as a
helminthic.

Homeopathic Uses: Celery preparations are used in homeo-
pathy for ailments of the ovaries and rheumatism.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
CELERY SEED (FRUIT)

The drug should not be used during pregnancy. Also,
because of the kidney-irritating effect of the volatile oil, the
drug should not be administered to individuals with kidney
infections.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
CELERY FRUIT, HERB AND ROOT:

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Nevertheless, because of the kidney-irritating effect
of the volatile oil, the drug should not be administered in the
presence of kidney infections. Latent yeast infections of the
plant could cause the furanocoumarin content of the fresh
root to rise to 200 times its original level under storage
conditions. For this reason, the relatively large amounts of
furanocoumarins frequently to be found in stored celeriac
bulbs, or in incorrectly dehydrated drug samples, could lead
to phototoxicoses.

DOSAGE
CELERY SEED (FRUIT)

Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug, liquid
extract, and as a component in a variety of tea mixtures.

CELERY /173

How Supplied:
Capsules — 450 and 505 mg

Fluid Extract — 1:1

Preparation: To prepare a liquid extract, percolate | kg of
seed in a specula process to | liter of fluid extract. The
essential oil is removed after filtration with paper soaked in
alcohol.

For an infusion, pour boiling water on 1 g of the squeezed
drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Decoctions are prepared in a 1:5 ratio.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage of the seeds is 1.2 to 4 g and
as an infusion, | g drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, | tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB34).

Storage: Celery seed should be kept tightly sealed, away
from light and moisture.

CELERY HERB
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug as well as a

variety of tea mixtures.

Preparation: Celery is contained in a variety of tea mixtures
(kidney and bladder teas).

Daily Dosage: Pressed juice of the fresh plant: 23 g (15 ml)
3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB34).

Storage: The herb should be kept sealed, away from light
and moisture.

CELERY ROOT
Mode of Administration: The drug is available in a few

combination preparations for internal use.

Preparation: A cough mixture is prepared by boiling the root
juice with sugar.

Dosage: Pressed juice of the fresh plant: 23 g (15 ml) 3.
times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10

globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB1).

Storage: Celery root should be kept sealed, away from light

and moisture.

LITERATURE
Beier RS, Oertli EH, Psoralen and other phytoalexins in celery.
| In: PH 22(11):2595. 1983.

----- PAGE 425 -----
174/CELERY

Bjeldanes LF, Kim I, (1977) J Org Chem 42:2333.

Fehr D, (1979) Pharmazie 29(5):349 et 34 (10):658.

Garg SK et al., (1979) Phytochemistry 18:1580 et 1764.

Garg SK et al., (1980) Planta Med 38:363.

Gijbels MJM et al., Phthalides in roots of Apium graveolens,
A- graveolens var. rapeceum, Bifora testiculata and Petroselinum
crispum var. tuberosum. In: Fitoterapia 56:17. 1985.

Harborne JB, in "The Biology and Chemistry of the
Umbelliferae," Ed. V. N. Hey wood. Pub. Academic Press,
London 1971.

Lewis DA et al., (1985) Int J Crude Drug Res 28 (1):27.

Mac Leod G, Ames JM. Volatile components of celery and
celeriac. In: PH 28(7): 1817-1824. 1989.

Nigg HN. Strandberg JO. Beier RC, Petersen HD, Harrison JM,

Furanocoumarins in Florida celery varieties increased by
fungicide treatment. In: J Agricult Food Chem 45(4): 1430-1436.

1997.

Tsi D et al., Effects of aqueous celeiy (Apium graveolens)
extract on lipid parameters of rats fed a high fat diet. In: PM
61(0:18-21. 1995.

Uhlig, JW, Chang A, Jen JJ, Effect of phthalides on celery
flavor. In: J Food Sci 52(3):658-660. 1987.

Yu RS, You SQ, (1984) Acta Pharm Sinica 19 (8):566.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Centaurea cyanus

See Cornflower

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Centaurium erythraea
See Centaury

Centaury

Centaurium erythraea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried, aerial
parts of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The different-sized flowers form a dense
or loose cyme. They are purple to pink-red. seldom white.
The calyx tube is pentangular with awl-shaped tips. There
are 5 petals fused into a tube, 5 stamens mostly fused to the
corolla and 1 superior, narrowly linear ovary. The stigma is
2-lobed. The fruit is a large, yellow, many-seeded capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual that grows to
between 5 and 30 cm high. The stem is erect, quadrangular
and unbranched. The cauline leaves are crossed opposite,
fleshy, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, and sessile. The basal
leaves are rosette-like, obovate and narrowed to a petiole.

Characteristics: Centaury has a very bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is found in the Mediterranean region and
as far as Britain and Scandinavia. It is cultivated in the U.S.

Production: Centaury consists of the dried aerial parts, in
flower, of Centaurium erythraea. The plant is harvested
during the flowering season and dried quickly to retain the

flower color.
Not to be Confused With: Other Centaurium varieties.

Other Names: Feverwort, Centaury Gentian, Filwort, Cento-
ry, Christ's Ladder, Bitter Herb, Bitterbloom, Bitter Clover,
Eyebright, Rose Pink, Wild Succory, Canchalagua

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoide bitter principles (monoterpenes): in particular
swertiamarin, including among others  gentiopicrin,

sweroside
Pyrridine alkaloids: gentianine, gentianidine
Xanthones: including methyl bellidifoline

EFFECTS
Centaury increases gastric secretion and salivation because
of the typical bitter reaction, also antiphlogistic and antipy-
retic effects have been studied in various animal experi-
ments. The effect for loss of appetite, stomach complaints
and dyspepsia can also be attributed to the amaroids.

----- PAGE 426 -----
4

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
* Loss of appetite .

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for loss of appetite,
dyspepsia and poor gastric secretion. In folk medicine, it is
used for fever, worm infestation and as a hypotensive. It is
also used for diabetes in Mallorca, and for expelling kidney
stones in Egypt. Externally, it is used in the treatment of
wounds.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Because of its secretion-activating effect, the drug should not
be administered in the presence of stomach or intestinal

ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and

“* other bitter-tasting preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Tea: Brew 2 to 3 gm drug with 150 ml boiling
water and strain after 15 minutes; Centaurium Extract:
extract of 1 part drug to 10 parts water and 1 part 98%

ethanol steamed till thickened (EB6).

Liquid extract: 1:1 25% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 6 gm ofdrug or | to

2 gm of extract; single dose is 1 gm.

en 3 times daily on a wafer with
en 1/2 hour before meals.

The powdered drug is tal
honey; the infusion is tal

The daily dose of extractum Centaurii fluidum is 2 to 5 ml.

Storage: Keep protected from light and moisture in sealed

containers.
LITERATURE
Bishay DW et al., (1978) Planta Med 33:422.

D'Agostino M et al., (1985) Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper 61 (2): 165.
Do T et al., PM 53:580. 1987."

Lacroix R et al., (1973) Tunisie Med 51:327.

Neshta NM et al., (1983) Khim Prir Soed 1:106.

Schimmer O, Mauthner H, Centaurium erythraea RAFN.
Tausendgiildenkraut. In: ZPT 15(5):299-304. 1994.

Schimmer O, Mauthner H, Polymethoxylated xanthones from
the herb of Centaurium erythraea with strong antimutagenic
properties in Salmonella typhimurium. In: PM 62(6):561-564.
1996.

van der Sluis WG, Plant Syst Evol 149:253-286. 1985.

CETRARIA ISLANDICA/175

van der Sluis WG et al., (1980) Planta Med 39:268.
van der Sluis WG, PM 41:221-231. 1981.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Centella asiatica
See Gotu Kola

Centranthus ruber
See Red-Spur Valerian

Cephaelis ipecacuanha

See Ipecac

Ceratonia_ siliqua
See Carob

Getraria islandica
See Iceland Moss

----- PAGE 427 -----
176/CHAMAEMELUM NOBILE

Chamaemelum nobile
See English Chamomile

Chaste Tree

Vitex agnus-castus

TRADE NAMES
Chasteberry Power, Vitex, Alcohol-Free Chaste Tree Bern'

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe dried fruit

and the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The 8 to 10 cm, blue, occasionally pink
flowers form terminal, branched, spike-like inflorescences.
The calyx and epicalyx of the bilabiate corolla are pubescent.
The fruit is a globular to oblong, 3 to 4 mm, reddish black, 4-
seeded drupe. It is surrounded up to two-thirds in cup-like
fashion by the calyx. The exocarp has short-stemmed.
glandular hairs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a | to 6 m high bush or
tree with quadrangular, gray, tomentose, young branches.
The leaves are deciduous, crossed-opposite, long-petioled
and palmate. They have 5 to 7 entire-margined, up to 10 cm
long, lanceolate leaflets. The under surface of the leaf is

white and tomentose.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
as far as western Asia.

Production: Chaste Tree fruits consist of the ripe, dried fruits
of Vitex agnus-castus.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Iridoid glycosides: agnoside, aucubin

Flavonoids: including casticin, 3,6,7,4'-tetramethylether, 6-
hydroxy-kempferol -3,6,7,4'-tetramethylether, 6-hydroxy-
kempferol-3,6,7-trimethylether (penduletin), quercetagenin-
3,6,7-trimethylether (chrysosplenol D)

Volatile oil (0.8-1.6%): including among others, 1,8-cineole,
lime, alpha-pinene, beta-pinene, as well as bornyl acetate,
camphor, p-cymol, sabinene

Fatty oils

EFFECTS
The drug is dopaminergic and FSH-suppressive; it also
inhibits lactation (main active principles aucubin and agno-
side). In addition, the drug represses the release of prolactin
and improves the symptoms of PMS.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

In older animal experiments, the drug was tested on the
ovaries and resulted in a reduction of cystic and bleeding
follicles. In other animal experiments, an inhibition of
lactation and a normalization of stress-induced hyperprolac-
tin anemia was observed. In clinical studies, the positive
effect on symptoms resulting from hyperprolactin anemia
was proven.

A dopaminergic effect via bonding on D2-receptors was also
shown.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
* Menopausal complaints

Unproven Uses: Chaste Tree preparations are used to treat
irregularities of the menstrual cycle, premenstrual com-
plaints, menstrual disturbances caused by corpus luteum
insufficiency, insufficient milk production and mastodynia.
It is also used to control libido, increase milk flow, reduce
flatulence, suppress appetite, and induce sleep. Additional
uses include the treatment of impotency, spermatorrhea,
prostatitis, swelling of the testes, sexual neurasthenia,
sterility, amenorrhea, uterine pain, and swelling of the
ovaries. Chaste Tree is also used to induce menstruation.

Homeopathic Uses: Chaste Tree is used for male sexual
disturbances, disturbances of milk flow, and nervous
depression.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy and in nursing
mothers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Occasionally, the administration of the drug leads
to the formation of rashes.

Drug Interactions: Because of the dopaminergic effect of the

drug, a reciprocal weakening of die effect can occur in case
of ingestion of dopamine-receptor antagonists.

Pregnancy: The drug should not be administered during
pregnancy
Nursing Mothers: The drug should not be used by breast-

feeding mothers.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug avail-
able as capsules, drops, film tablets, and compound
preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 40 mg, 100 mg

Liquid Extract — 1:1

----- PAGE 428 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Preparation: For the dried extract, preparations of 100 gm
contain 0.2 gm dried extract in a ratio of 1:5, in either

ethanol or water.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage of aqueous-alcoholic

j’*\ extracts is 30 to 40 mg of the drus.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times a day; parenterally: 1 ml injection

solution sc twice weekly (HAB1).
LITERATURE
Becker H. Hemmung der Prolaktinsekretion. In: T W

Gynakologie 6:2-10. 1991.
Bohnert KJ. Hahn G. Erfahrungsheilkunde 39:494-502c. 1990.

Dittmann FW. Bohnert KJ. Peeters M. Albrecht M. Lamertz M,
Schmidt U. Prumenstruelles Syndrom. Behandlung mit einem
Phytopharmakon. In: TW Gynakologie 5:60-68. 1992.

Feldmann HU. Albrecht M. Lamertz M. Bohnert KJ, Therapie
bei Gelbkorperschwache bzw. pramenstruellem Syndrom mit
Vitex-agnus-castus-Tinktur. In: Gyne 11:421-425. 1990.

Jarry H. Leonhardt S. Gorkow C. Wuttke W. (1994) In vitro
prolactin but not LH and FSH release is inhibited by
compounds in extracts of Agnus castus, direct evidence for a

“t dopaminergic principle by the dopamine receptor assay. Exp
~ Clin Endocrino!

102:448-454.

Jarry H. Leonhardt S. Wuttke W. Behr B, Gorkow C. (1991)
Agnus castus als dopaminerges Wirkprinzip in Mastodynon N.
Z Phytother 12:77-82.

Kustrac D et al.. The composition of the essential oil of Vitex
agnus-castus. In: PM 58(7):A681. 1992.

Lehmann-Willenbrock E. Riedel HH. (1988) Klinische und
endokrinologische Untersuchungen zur Therapie ovarieller
Ausfallserscheinungen nach Hysterektromie unter Belassung der
Adnexe. Zent Gyniikol 110:611-618.

Loew D, Gorkow C, Schrodter A. Reitbrock S, Merz PG,

Schnieders M, Sieder C, Zur dosisabhangigen Vertraglichkeit
eines Agnus-castus-Spezialextraktes. In: ZPT 17(4):237-243.
1996.

Merz PG, Schrodter A, Rietbrock S, Gorkow Ch, Loew D,
(1995) Prolaktinsekretion und Vertraglichkeit unter der
Behandlung mit einem Agnus-castus-Spezialextrakt (B1095E1).
Erste Ergebnisse zum Einfluf} auf die Prolaktinsekretion. In,
Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
linischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 93-97.

ropping D, Bohnert KJ, Peeters M, Albrecht M, Lamertz M,
Vitex agnus-castus. Behandlung gynakologischer
Krankheitsbilder. In: Therapeutikon 5:581-585. 1991.

Reuter HD, Bohnert KJ, Schmidt U, (1995) Die Therapie des
ramenstruellen Syndroms mit Vitex agnus castus. Kontrollierte
Doppelblindsrudie gegen Pyridoxin. Z Phytother Abstractband,
S.7.

Reuter HD, Bohnert KJ, Schmidt U, Die Therapie des
pramenstruellen Syndroms mit Vitex agnus castus. Kontrollierte

CHAULMOOGRA /177

Doppelblindstudie gegen Pyridoxin.. In: ZPT, Abstract-Band,
8.7. 1995.

Roder D, Therapie von Zyklusstorungen mit Vitex agnus-castus.
In: ZPT 15(3):155-159. 1994.

Wichtl M, Phytopharmaka: Agnus castus - ein Dopamin-
Agonist? In: DAZ 132(8):360. 1992.

Winterhoff H, (1993) Arzneipflanzen mit endokriner
Wirksamkeit. Z Phytother 14:83-94.

Winterhoff H, Gorkow C, Behr B, Die Hemmung der Laktation
bei Ratten als indirekter Beweis fur die Senkung von Prolaktin
durch Agnus castus. In: ZPT 12(6): 175-179. 1991.

Wuttke W, Gorkow Ch, Jarry J, (1995) Dopaminergic
Compounds in Vitex Agnus Castus. In, Loew D, Rietbrock N
(Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 81-91.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Chaulmoogra
Hydnocarpus_ species

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: Chaulmoogra is found in all of the named
species. The expressed oil is known as Gynocardia oil in
Britain and Oleum Chaulmoograe in the U.S.

Flower and Fruit: The grayish seeds are about 2 to 3 cm
long and 1.5 cm in diameter. They are irregularly angular
with rounded ends. The kernel is oily and encloses two thin,
heart-shaped, three-veined cotyledons and a straight radical.

Characteristics: The taste is acrid and the odor disagreeable.

Habitat: Malaysia, Indian subcontinent.

----- PAGE 429 -----
178/CHAULMOOGRA

Production: Chaulmoogra seeds are the seeds of various
Hydnocarpus varieties. Chaulmoogra oil is the fatty oil
extracted from the seeds.

Other Names: Hydnocarpus

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: CHAULMOOGRA SEEDS

Fatty oil (30-40%, bitter-type consistency)
Proteins (25%)
Cyanogenic glycosides

Flavolignans

EFFECTS: CHAULMOOGRA SEEDS

The chauimoogric acid in the drug is antimicrobial. The drug
has sedative, febrifuge and dermatic effects. The flavonol
lignans hydnocarpin, hydnowightin and neohydnocarpin
isolated from the seeds are lipid lowering, anti-inflammatory
and antitumoral in animal experiments.

COMPOUNDS: CHAULMOOGRA OIL
Triglycerides: chief fatty acids D-hydnocarpic acid, D-chaul-
moogric acid, D-gorli acid (cyclopentene fatty acids)

EFFECTS: CHAULMOOGRA OIL
The chauimoogric acid in the drug is antimicrobial.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Externally, preparations of Hydnocarpus are
used in the treatment of various skin conditions such as
psoriasis and eczema. It is also used as an injection in the

treatment of leprosy.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Chaulmoogra is used for
leprosy, scabies and furuncles.

Indian Medicine: Uses include leprosy, skin diseases,
itching, leocodermia, eczema, flatulence and diabetes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Coughing, dyspnea, laryngospasms, kidney damage, visual
disorders, head and muscle pain, and central paralyses are
side effects following intake of the oil. It is severely irritating
in local application.

OVERDOSAGE

Following stomach and intestinal emptying (inducement of
vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium
permanganate solution, sodium sulfate), the treatment for
poisonings consists of the instillation of activated charcoal
and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth), and of electrolyte
substitution and the countering of any acidosis imbalance
that may appear through sodium bicarbonate infusions. In the
event of shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused.
Monitoring of kidney function is necessary. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be required.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

The seeds are severely poisonous due to their cynagenic
glycoside content. Injections of solutions of Dicobalt-EDTA
or of thiosulfates, or administration of methemoglobin-form-
ing agents, such as amyl nitrite, are recommended as
antidotes. The triggering of vomiting and gastric lavage
should be carried out in a parallel fashion. Circulatory
support measures and artificial respiration may be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The seeds and oil in various
preparations, as powder, oil, emulsion and ointments.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Lefort D et al., (1969) Planta Med 17:261.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sleumer, (1947) Pharm Ztg 83:165.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Cheiranthus cheiri
See Wallflower

Gheken

Eugenia chequen

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are usually solitary, occasion-
ally in threes. The receptacle is top-shaped and pubescent.
There are 4 pubescent or ciliate sepals. The petals are white,
oval and 5 to 8 mm long. The stamens are numerous but
small. The ovary is glabrous. The fruit is a red or black-
violet, glabrous, globular berry, 6 to 8 mm in diameter. It has
2 to 3 seeds which are dark, lentil-shaped and are about 4
mm in diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree, which
grows up to 15 m high and sometimes looks like a shrub.
The leaves are coriaceous, ovate, about 1 to 1.5 cm long, 0.5
to 1 cm wide, entire-margined, very shortly petioled with
numerous minute, round, translucent oil-cells.

4|

----- PAGE 430 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Characteristics: The leaves have a bitter taste that is
astringent and aromatic, reminiscent of bay leaves. The odor
is slight and they contain an essential oil.

Habitat: Eugenia chequen grows in Chile.

** Production: Cheken leaves are the leaves of Eugenia
chequen.

Other Names: Arryan, Myrtus Chekan

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Bitter substances

Volatile oil: including alpha-pinene, 1,8-cineol

EFFECTS
The ethanol extract inhibits xanthinoxydasis. The essential

oil has a similar effect on germinating salad seeds such as

auxin. An antibacterial and antimycotic effect has also been

demonstrated. In the agar diffusion test, the leaf oil was

effective against Pseudomonas acruginsosa, Trichophyton

mentagrophytes and Aspergillus niger. It also affects fat

metabolism: the oil is used against hyperlipoprotinemia. It is
AAused as a tonic, a diuretic and an expectorant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In South American folk medicine, a
decoction of the leaves is used in the treatment of diarrhea,
fever, gout, as a tonic, diuretic, an antihypertensive, and as a

digestive aid.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a decoction and as a liquid

extract.

Chelidontum majus

See Celandine

+.

Chelone glabra

See Balmony

Chenopodium ambrosioides
See Wormseed Oil

CHERRY LAUREL/179

Chenopodium vulvaria

See Arrach

Cherry Laurel

Prunus laurocerasus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are erect and in slender
racemes 10 to 12 cm long with 3 mm pedicles. The petals are
obovate, 3 mm long and white. The fruit is black and
globular-ovoid. The smooth kernel within the fruit is ovoid
and acute, with a long black weal.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen shrub or
tree, completely glabrous, and grows up to 6 m high. The
bud scales drop early. The petioles are 1 cm long and
glandless. The leaf blades are obovate-lanceolate and 8 to 15
cm long. They are curved, entire or with a finely serrate
margin, coriaceous and bright green. The upper surface of
the leaves is glossy. The lower surface has 1 to 4 protruding
nectaries in the axils of the ribs.

Characteristics: Poisonous. The fruit is similar to black
cherries, and smells of hydrocyanic acid.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to parts of Asia and is
cultivated in many temperate areas.

Production: Cherry Laurel leaves are the leaves of Prunus
laurocerasus.

Not to be Confused With: Other forms of Prunus species.

Other Names: Cherry-Bay

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: prunasin (corresponding to 0.5-
2.5%, 50-210 mg HCN/100 gm)

EFFECTS
The drug acts as a tonic for the stomach, an anti-irritant and a

sedative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cherry Laurel is used to treat coughs and

the common cold.

Homeopathic Uses: Cherry Laurel is used for dry coughs,
whooping cough, cyanosis and spasms.

----- PAGE 431 -----
180/CHERRY LAUREL

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses of Cherry Laurel water prepared from the drug
can lead to fatal poisonings. Ingestion of the leathery leaves
and the seeds is improbable; the fruit pulp is low in
cyanogenic glycosides (yielding 5-20 mg HCN/IOO gm). The
recommended antidotes include the injection of solutions of
Dicobalt-EDTA or thiosulfates, or the administration of
methemoglobin-forming agents, e.g., amyl nitrite, 4-dimeth-
yl aminophenol. The inducement of vomiting or gastric
lavage should be done in parallel fashion. Circulatory
support and artificial respiration may also be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a watery
breathing stimulant and = an

extract, an aromatic, a

antispasmodic.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. I-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sommer W, Dissertation Universitat Kiel. 1984.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Chickweed

Stellaria media

TRADE NAMES
Chickweed Herbs, Wild Countryside Chickweed

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh flowering or
dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The solitary white flowers are located in
the leaf or branch axils. They open at 9 am and, in good
weather, remain open for 12 hours. The 5 double petals are
shorter than the oblong-lanceolate sepals. There are 2 to 5
stamens and 3 stigma. The fruit is globular or ovate and
covered in teeth. It opens when ripe and the seeds are shaken
out through the movement of the plant.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 5 to 30 cm high. The
stem is decumbent and weak, heavily branched and often
grows to an impressive length. It creeps along the ground, is
fleshy, pale green, and slightly thickened at the nodes. The
leaves are opposite and orbicular-ovate. The lower ones are
long-petioled and the upper ones are sessile. They are 1.25
cm long and 0.70 cm wide and sit in pairs on the stem.

Characteristics: The stem is pubescent on one side.
Habitat: The plant is found worldwide as a weed.

Production: Chickweed is the fresh herb in flower of

Stellaria media.

Other Names: Adder's Mouth, Passerina, Satin Flower,

Starweed, Starwort, Stitchwort, Tongue-Grass, Winterweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including, among others, rutin
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C,_ 0.1-0.15%)

Alkaloids

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally. Chickweed is used for rheuma-
tism, gout, stiffness of the joints, tuberculosis, and diseases
of the blood. Externally, it is used for poorly healing
wounds, hemorrhoids, inflammation of the eyes, eczema and
other diverse skin diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used as a tea or in the
form of juice for poultices, and in baths for medicinal

purposes.

LITERATURE
Tsotsoriya G et al., (1977) Kromatogr Met Farm 172 (via CA

90:51421).

----- PAGE 432 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Watt JM. Breyer-Brandwijk MG. The Medicinal, Poisonous
Plants of Southem. Easter Africa. 2nd Ed. Livingstone 1962.

Chicory

Cic ho Hum intybus

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried leaves and roots, which are collected in autumn; the
whole plant collected and dried in the flowering season; and

the fresh plant and root.

Flower and Fruit: Size: The numerous flower heads are 3 to
4 cm in diameter and are terminal or axillary, solitary or in
groups, sessile or short-pedicled. The epicalyx bracts are
bristly ciliate, often glandular-haired. The inner bracts are
oblong-lanceolate and erect, the outer ones ovate, splayed
and half as long as the inner ones. The androgynous lingual
florets are usually light blue, but occasionally white or pink.
The fruit is an achaene 2 to 3 mm in length. It has no hair
tuft and is ovate and straw yellow to blackish.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant can grow to a height of 2
m and has a hardy, 10 to 30 cm long, thick root. The stem is
rigidly erect, sparsely branched above and often bristly. The
leaves are 10 to 30 cm long and 1 to 5 cm wide. Diey are
obovate, oblong, shaped like a cross-cut saw or slit, with
numerous stiff hairs beneath. The lowest leaves in a basal
rosette are petiolate. The upper ones as well as those near the
inflorescences are alternate, oblong to lanceolate, crenate-
dentate and sessile.

Characteristics: Chicory has a bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is found in Europe, the Middle East as far
as Iran, north and south Africa, all of America, Australia and

New Zealand.

Production: Chicory consists of the dried leaves and
underground parts of Cichorium intybus, which are collected
in autumn in the wild and air-dried.

Other Names: Succory, Hendibeh

CHICORY /181

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpenes: sesquiterpene lactones, especially lactucin,
lactucopicrin, 8-desoxy lactucin, guaianolid glycosides, in-
cluding chicoroisides B and C, sonchuside C

Caffeic acid derivatives: chiroric acid, chlorogenic acid,
isochlorogenic acid, dicaffeoyl tartaric acid

Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone
Flavonoids: including hyperoside
Polyynes

EFFECTS
An anti-exudative, choleretic, negatively chronotropic and
negatively inotropic effect has been described due to the
plant's sesquiterpene lactones, cinnamic acid derivatives and
flavonoids. Animal studies have noted a distinct reduction of
pulse rate and contractility; a mildly cholagogic effect; and
lowered cholesterin level in rats' livers and plasma. Applica-
tion for dyspeptic complaints seems plausible because of the
amaroid (guaianolide) content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Loss of appetite
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, the herb is used
externally for liver complaints and as a gargle. Among
internal uses are sore throat, hemorrhoids, tuberculosis,
abdominal cramps, melancholy, deafness and rashes. The
juice of the chicory plant is also used as a laxative for
children.

Indian Medicine: Medicinal uses include headaches, dyspep-
tic symptoms, skin allergies, vomiting and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a slight potential for sensitization via skin
contact with the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions as
well as other bitter-tasting preparations for internal use.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations
include drops and compound preparations.

Preparation: Prepare an infusion by scalding 2 to 4 g drug
with boiling water, allowing it to stand for 10 minutes, then
straining. A tea is prepared by brewing 2 to 4 g of the whole
herb with 150 to 250 ml boiling water and then straining it
after 10 minutes.

----- PAGE 433 -----
182/CHICORY

Daily Dosage: 3 to 5 g comminuted drug. Single dose: 2 to 4
g whole herb for an infusion.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ

136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): H64.
1992.

Balbaa S et al., (1973) Planta Med 24:133.
Benoit PS et al., (1976) Lloydia 39:160.
Kawabata S, Deki M, (1977) Kanzei Chuo Bunsek 17:63.

Miiller K, Wiegrebe W, Psoriasis und Antipsoriatika. In: DAZ
137(22): 1893-1902. 1997.

Noldenn U, Dissertation Universitat Bonn. 1989.

Proliac A, Blanc M, (1976) Helv Chem Acta 58:2503.

Wagner, H, In 'The Biology and Chemistry of the
Compositae," Eds V. N. Heywood et al. Academic Press,
London 1977.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ghimaphila umbellata

See Pipsissewa

Chinese Cinnamon

Cinnamomum aromaticum

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal
collected and dried after they have finished blossoming, and
the whole or partly peeled, dried bark of thin and young
branches, as well the oil extracted from them.

parts are the flowers

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small on short, slender,
silky pedicles. They are arranged in threes in cymous
panicles in the leaf axils and in larger panicles at the end of
the branches. The perianth is slightly silky, about 3 mm long,
with oblong-lanceolate petals. The fruit is a juicy, pea-sized,
elliptoid, smooth drupe.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: This evergreen tree grows up to 7 m
tall with aromatic bark and angular branches. The bark is
brown, in quilled pieces, sometimes with the remains of the
outer layer present. The 7.5 to 10 cm long leaves are
oblanceolate and pubescent on 6 to 8 cm long petioles, more
or less tapered toward the base. They are coriaceous,

alternate and brown underneath.

Habitat: Indigenous and cultivated in southern China,

Vietnam, Laos and Burma.

Production: Chinese Cinnamon consists of the completely or
partly peeled, dried stem bark from the aboveground or thin-
branched axis of Cinnamomum aromaticum. The drug, from
branches 2 to 3 cm thick, is peeled with horn knives, freed
from cork and outer rind, and dried in the sun for 24 hours.

Not to be Confused With: Chinese Cinnamon should not be
confused with waste products from the production process or
other barks and materials, nor with the skins of horse

chestnut seeds.

Other Names: Cassia, False Cinnamon, Bastard Cinnamon,
Cassia Lignea, Cassia Bark, Cassia aromaticum, Canton

Cassia

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components are cinnamaldehyde, weiter-
hin cinnamylacetate, cinnamyl alcohol, o-methoxycinnamai-
dehyde, cinnamic acid, coumarin

Diterpenes: cinnzeylanoles, cinncassioles A to E
Tannins: catechin tannins

Oligomere _ proanthocyanidins

Mucilages

EFFECTS

The essential oil and its main constituent cinnamaldehyde
are antibacterial, fungistatic, improve immune resistance in
animal tests (inhibiting allergic reactions Type I and II),
promote motility, inhibit ulcers and act on the digestive tract

(tannin content).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite
+ Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include symptomatic
treatment of gastrointestinal disorders (mild, colicky upsets
of the gastrointestinal tract, bloating, flatulence and diar-
rhea), as well as for temporary states of exhaustion and to
increase weight. Efficacy has been sufficiently proven for

----- PAGE 434 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

gastric complaints and it is plausible for diarrhea, but the
evidence is not sufficient for the other indications.

Chinese Medicine: Among uses in Chinese medicine are
impotence, diarrhea, enuresis, rheumatic conditions, testicle
hernia, menopause syndrome, amenorrhea, abortion and to
stabilize immunity.

Indian Medicine: Digestive complaints, vomiting and diar-
rhea are the most common uses in Indian medicine.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of medicinal preparations of Chinese Cinnamon is
contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug possesses a medium potential
for sensitization, primarily due to the cinnamaldehyde.

Pregnancy. The drug is not to be administered in time of
pregnancy.
DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted bark for infusions,
essential oil, as well as other galenic preparations for internal
use.

Preparation: To prepare a tincture of Chinese Cinnamon,
moisten 200 parts cinnamon bark evenly with ethanol an
percolate to produce 1000 parts tincture.

Daily Dosage: 2 to 4 g drug; 0.05 to 0.2 g essential oil. The
average single dose is | g.

Storage: Chinese Cinnamon should be stored in a cool, dry
environment in tightly sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Hikino H, Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, Vol I.,

Academic Press UK 1985.

Lockwood GB, Die Hauptbestandteile des atherischen Ols von
Cinnamomum cassia BLUME. In: PM 36(4):380-381. 1979.

Nagai H et al., (1982) Jpn J Pharmacol 32(5):813.
Nohara T et al., (1982) Phytochemistry 21(8):2130.
Nohara T et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(8): 1849.

Nohara T et al., Cinncassiol E, a diterpene fiom the bark of
Cinnamomum cassia. In: PH 24:1849. 1985.

Nohara T et al., PH 21:2130-2132. 1982.

Otsuka H et al., (1982) Yakugaku Zasshi 102:162.
Sagara K et al., J Chromatogr 409:365-370. 1987.
Senayake UM et al., (1978) J Agric Food Chem 20:822.

Structure of potent antiulcerogenic compounds fiom
Cinnamomum cassia, Tetrahedron 44:4703. 1988.

CHINESE MOTHERWORT 183

Further information in:
Chan, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1991
1994,

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin.
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Chinese Motherwort

Leonurus japonicus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The
properties.

fruit is said to have medicinal

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is long with whorls of a
few flowers at some distance from each other. The bracts are
short and usually have a thorn-like awn. The flowers are
sessile and dorsiventral. The calyx is narrow clavate.
approximately 8 mm long, short-haired. The calyx teeth are
upright, the lower 2 are longer than the 3 upper ones. The
corolla is bilabiate, made up of 5 fused petals, approximately
10 mm long, lilac to pink. The upper lip has a purple middle
lobe and the lower lip is divided into 3. There are 2 long and
2 short stamens. The ovary is superior, 2-carpled and 4-
chambered. The fruit breaks up into 4 black. 3-edged
approximately 2 mm long, 1-seeded mericarps.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows to
a height of up to 1 m. The leaves are petiolate, 5 to 10 cm
long, ovate to cordate, narrowing cuneiformly at the base.
The lower leaves are palmately divided to the middle: the
sections are pinnatifid with linear-acuminate lobes. The
upper leaves are decussate opposite, simple, lanceolate.
entire and pubescent on both surfaces. The stem is gray-
green, upright, branched and square; the surface is grooved,
and the ribs are pubescent.

Habitat: Leonurus japonicus is found in China, North and
South Korea, and Japan.

Production: Chinese Motherwort fruit is the dried fruit of
Leonurus japonicus.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Diterpenes: including leonurine

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids oleic acid and linolenic acid

----- PAGE 435 -----
184 /CHINESE MOTHERWORT

EFFECTS
When taken internally, the alkaloid-containing drug (chief
active ingredient leonurine) is said to have a contracting
effect upon the uterus and to have generally anti-inflam-
matory effects upon various organ systems.

Topical application is said to reduce edema connected with
injuries.
Watery drug extracts reduce blood pressure in animal

experiments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Chinese Motherwort is used internally for
inflammation of the kidney, the throat and the retina; for
disturbances of menstruation, and in obstetrics for lochias-
tase. Externally, the fruit is used for swelling of the tissue
after trauma.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used as a cardiac tonic, for
nervous cardiac disturbances, anxiety states and nervous
breathlessness.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Feelings of weakness, outbreaks of sweating, enhanced
sensitivity to pain and feelings of closeness in the chest can
all follow intake of higher dosages of the drug (starting at

30 g).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug. Prepa-
rations are administered internally and externally

Preparation: Infusion: 4 to 10 g drug
Daily Dosage: Not specified in the literature

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Chinese Olive

Canarium species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the resin.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in helicoid or
scorpiod cymes; the structures are in threes. The 3 petals are
thick and often coriaceous; the 3 sepals are usually fused into
a cup- or jug-shaped calyx. There are 6 stamens, and the
ovary is 3-chambered with an ovule in each chamber; the
stigma is 3-lobed. The fruit is an ovoid drupe with a thin,
resin-rich mesocarp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is monoclinous or diclinous,
reaching heights up to 15 m. The leaves are odd pinnate. The
leaflets are short-petiolate and very irregular. The stipules
are round or slit.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to the Spice Islands,
Philippines, China, Melanesia, and Moluccas.

Production: Elemi is the oleoresin (soft) exuding from fresh
cuts made in Canarium luzonicum and the residual resin
(hard) left to dry on the tree. The soft elemi is obtained by
cutting split secretion channels and, after knocking off the
hard elemi, collecting the resin which dries on that tree.

Other Names: Elemi

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpenes (70 to 80%): particularly alpha- and beta-amy-
rin, including alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta-elemic acid, brein,
maniladiol

Volatile oil (20 to 30%): chief component limonene (25%),
also including alpha-phellandrene, elemol, eudesmol, carva-
crol, methyl eugenol

EFFECTS
The resin is credited with promoting the healing of wounds.
An immunostimulating effect was demonstrated in animal
experiments. Topical administration causes skin irritation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The resin is used in folk medicine as an
expectorant for coughs as well as for gastric complaints,
ulcers and rheumatism (plaster).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. According
to older sources, stomach complaints, kidney irritation and
hemorrhagic erosions have been observed following admin-
istration of the essential oil. Topical application causes skin
irritation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the resin are used
topically.

Preparation: Elemi resin is prepared by melting the resin at
low heat and putting it through a filter. This cleaning process

----- PAGE 436 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

results in a somewhat darker elemi. Plasters are prepared
using 25% drug in ointment.

Storage: Store in well-sealed tins protected from light.

LITERATURE

«+ Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,

Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Chinese Rhubarb
(Da-Huang)

Rheum palmatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried under-
ground parts, and most of the root bark in the dried form.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is an erect panicle
foliated to the tip. The flowers have narrow, red, pink or
whitish yellow tepals. The tepals are curved and located far

“eback in the mature flowers to facilitate wind pollination. The

fruit is red-brown to brown, and oval. The fruit is angular,
about 10.2 mm to 7.8 mm wide and usually has scarious
wings. The nutlet is 6 to 10 mm long and 7 mm in diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a large, sturdy
herbaceous perennial. The stem grows to over 15 m high.
The leaves are orbicular-cordate, palmate lobed, somewhat
rough on the upper surface and 3 to 5 ribbed. The lobes are
oblong-ovate to lanceolate, dentate or pinnatisect. The root
system consists of a tuber, which after a number of years
measures 10 to 15 cm in diameter and has arm-thick lateral
roots.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the western and north-
western provinces of China and is cultivated in many regions
around the world. The main producers are China and Russia.

Production: Chinese Rhubarb consists of the dried under-
ground parts of Rheum palmatum, Rheum officinale or of
both species. Stem parts, roots and most -of the bark are
removed from the rhizomes.

Not to be Confused With: Other Rheum species such as
Rheum rhaponticum or Rheum rhabarbarum. Garden Rhu-
barb is Rheum ponticum.

Other Names: Rhubarb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (3-12%): chief components 1- or 8-
O-fJ-glucosides of the aglycones rheumemodin, aloe-emodin,

CHINESE RHUBARB (DA-HUANG) / 185

thein, chrysophanol, physcion (together 60-80%), 8,8'-diglu-
cosides of dianthrones (10-25%), including among others,
sennosides A and B

Tannins: gallo tannins, including among others galloyl
glucose, galloyl saccharose, lindleyine, isolindleyine

Flavonoids (2-3%)
Naphthohydroquinone glycosides

EFrECTS
Main active principles: hydroxyanthracene derivatives, tan-
nins and a small proportion of flavonoids

The laxative effect is due to the hydrogogic and anti-
absorptive properties of the anthranoids. This effect causes
an increase in the volume of the intestinal contents resulting
in pressure and stimulation of intestinal peristalsis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

Unproven Uses: Rhubarb is used as an appetite stimulant and
for digestion problems, gastrointestinal catarrh and painful
teething (children). External uses include burn treatment and
skin conditions.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Rhubarb is used for delirium,
tenesmus, edema, amenorrhea and abdominal pain. Efficacy
for digestion problems is plausible because of the tannin
content but not without risk because of the anthranoids
(toxicity); efficacy for the other indications has not been
proven.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include diarrhea and
teething.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Chinese Rhubarb is contraindicated in cases of intestinal
obstruction, acute inflammatory intestinal disease, appendici-
tis and abdominal pain of unknown origin.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Spasmodic gastrointestinal complaints can occur as
a side effect to the drug's purgative effect. Long-term use
leads to losses of electrolytes, in particular potassium ions.
The loss of electrolytes may lead to hyperaldosteronism,
inhibition of intestinal motility and enhancement of the
effect of cardioactive steroids. Long term use may lead to
heart arrhythmias, nephropathies, edema and accelerated
bone deterioration.

The increased incidence of carcinoma of the colon following
long-term administration of anthracene drugs has not yet
been fully clarified. Recent studies show no association

----- PAGE 437 -----
186/CHINESE RHUBARB (DA-HUANG)

between the administration of anthracene drugs and the

frequency of carcinoma of the colon.

Stimulating laxatives must not be used over an extended
period (1 to 2 weeks)* without medical advice.

Drug Interactions: Potassium deficiency can cause an

increase in the effect of cardiac glycosides.

Pregnancy: Use during pregnancy or while nursing only

after consulting a physician.

Pediatric Use: The drug is not to be administered to children

under 12 years of age.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid or solid forms of medication
are exclusively for oral use. The drug is available as
comminuted drug, powder or dry extracts for teas, decoc-
tions, cold macerations or elixirs. Extracts of the drug are
often constituents of laxatives, cholagogics and gastrointesti-
nal remedies, and are found in "slimming cures," "spring-
time tonics" and "blood purifying" teas.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion to be used as a laxative,
use 1.0-2.0 gm coarse powdered drug; for a stomachic, 0.1 to
0.2 gm powdered drug stirred with sufficient liquid (may be
flavored with cinnamon, ginger, or peppermint oil) or scald
and strain after 5 minutes. (1 teaspoonful = approximately

2.5 gm drug)

Daily Dosage: As a laxative, the dose is 1.0 to 2.0 gm of

drug prepared according to instructions above. As an

astringent and stomachic, the dose is 0.1-0.2 gm.

1.2 to 4.8 gm drug corresponds to 30 to 120 mg hydroxyan-
thracene derivatives/day, calculated as rhein.

Tea — 1 cup mornings and/or evenings
Extract — Single dose: 0.3 to 1 gm

Laxatives should be used for the shortest possible time

(maximum | to 2 weeks)

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ

136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

Anonym, Anwendungseinschrankungen fur Anthranoid-haltige
Abfuhrmittel angeordnet. In: PUZ 25(6):341-342. 1996.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.
Fairbairn JW, (1976) Pharmacol 14(Suppl 1):48.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Foust B, In: Foust MC. Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ 1992.

Friedrich H, Hohle J, (1966) Arch Pharm 299:857.

lida K et al., Potent inhibitors of tyrosinase activity and
melanin biosynthesis from Rheum officinale. In: PM 61(5):425-
428. 1995.

Kashiwada Y et al., (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32(9):3461.

Klimpel BE et al., Anthranoidhaltige Laxantien - ein Risiko fiir
die Entwicklung von Tumoren der ableitenden Harnwege. In:
UZ 26(1 ):33, Jahrestagung der DPhG, Berlin, 1996. 1997.

Nonaka G et al., (1977) Chem Pharm Bull 25:2300.
et al., (1974) Chem Pharm Bull 22:823.

Sanches EF, Feritas TV, Ferreiraalves DL, Velarde DT, Diniz
MR, Cordeiro MN, Agostinicotta G, Biological activities of
venoms from south American snakes. In: Toxicon 30(1 ):95.
1992.

Tsuboi et al., (1977) Chem Pharm Bull 25:2708.

Oshio H

Van Os FHL, (1976) Pharmacol 14(Suppl 1):7.

Zwaving JH, (1972) Planta Med 21:254.

Zwaving JH, (1974) Pharm Weekbl 109:1169.

Further information in:

Chan EH et al., (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 438 -----
4F

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Chinese Thoroughwax
(Chai-Hu)
Bupleurum chinense

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a compound umbel.
The flower structures are arranged in fives. The flowers are
radial and small; the petals are yellowish, almost orbicular;
the calyx teeth are insignificant. The ovary is inferior and 2-
chambered. The fiuit is a double achaene.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Thoroughwax is an upright herba-
ceous perennial, which grows about 30 to 70 cm high. The
leaves are alternate, arranged in spirals, simple and entire.
The stem is hollow, gnarled and branched.

Habitat: China, Japan and central Europe

Production: Bupleuri roots are the dried roots of Bupleurum
chinense. They are collected in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with Bupleurum
longiradiatum.

Other Names: Chai Hu

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins (saikosides.1.2 to 4.9%, content declin-
ing with the diameter of the root): saikosaponins a, bl, b2, ¢
and d, aglycones are the so-called saikogenins

Steroids: sterols, including alpha-spinasterol, stigmasterol
Polyynes: saikodiine A, B and C

EFFECTS
The drug is not usually used alone, but rather used in various
drug mixtures.

The saiko saponins or saikogenins that the drug contains
have exhibited antipyretic, edema-protective and anti-inflam-
matory effects in animal experiments. At the same time, an
inducement of the depletion -of corticosterone and a liver-
protective effect could be demonstrated, as could a sedative
and an analgesic effect. The drug is also credited with
antitussive, anti-ulcerogenic and blood-pressure lowering
characteristics.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Chinese Thoroughwax is used for inflam-

matory conditions (oriental regions).

Chinese Medicine: Preparations are used for shivering and
fever, jaundice, chest pain, bitter taste in the mouth, nausea,
vomiting, malaria and deafness.

CHIRETTA 187

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: The drug is not to be administered during
pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

The ingestion of larger dosages of the drug may lead to
gastroenteritis, intestinal colic and diarrhea, due to the
saponin content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole drug and cut drug prepara-
tions for internal and external use.

Preparation: The drug is usually only used in Chinese and
Japanese medicine in compounded preparations.

Storage: Should be well sealed (to protect against insects),
and air dried.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.

Jin RL. Shi L, Kuang Y, Comparative studies on the roots of
wild and cultured Bupleurum chinense. DC Chung Yao Tung
Pao, 20:11-3, 61, 1988 Apr.

Ohtsu S, Izumi S, Iwanaga S, Ohno N, Yadomae T. Analysis
of mitogenic substances in Bupleurum chinense by ESR
spectroscopy. Biol Pharm Bull, 20:97-100, 1997 Jan.

Zhang J, Comparison on saikosaponin levels in the root of
Bupleurum chinense of various sizes. Chung Yao Tung Pao.
20:13-4, 1985 Apr.

Chionanthus_ virginicus

See Fringetree

Chiretta

Swertia chirata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb, which is cut
and dried when the seed is ripe.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers are small and form
a yellow panicle. The fruit is a single-valved capsule, which
tastes very bitter and is odorless.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual and grows up
to 90 cm high. The branching stem is brown or purplish. 2 to

----- PAGE 439 -----
188 /CHIRETTA

4 mm thick, cylindrical below and becoming quadrangular
toward the top. The leaves are smooth, opposite, lanceolate
or ovate and entire-margined with 3 to 7 longitudinal ribs.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern India and Nepal.
Production: Chiretta is the aerial part of Swertia chirata.

Other Names: Chirata, Chirayta, Indian Balmony, Indian

Gentian

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Iridoide_ monoterpines as (1.3%): chief
components swertiamarin (0.4%), sweroside (0.2%), includ-
ing as well gentiopicrin. amarogentin, amaroswerin

bitter substances

Xanthone derivatives: including mangiferin (0.12%), swer-
chirin (methyl bellidifoline), swertianin, 7-O-methyl swertia-
nin, chiratol, swertiapunicoside, chiratanin

EFFECTS
Chiretta stimulates the secretion of gastric juices. In animal
experiments, an anticholinergic (due to swertiamarin), anti-
phlogistic, hypoglycemic (due to xanthone derivatives), and
centrally suppressing effect has been described.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Chiretta is used for dyspeptic disorders, loss
of appetite, problems with the production of gastric juices
and disorders of the digestive system.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used in patients who have gastric or
duodenal ulcers due to the drug's stimulation of gastric juice

secretion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is a constituent part of

various preparations, especially drops.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 15 to 20 drops, 3 times
daily before meals. For nervous disorders, 10 to 15 drops are

taken daily between meals.

LITERATURE

Dalai SR et al. (1953) J Ind Chem Soc 30: 455.
Ghosal S et al. (1973) J Pharm Sci 62: 926.

Goyal H et al. (1981) J Res Ayur Siddha 2 (3): 286.
Hikano H et al. (1984) Shoyakugku Zasshi 38: 359.
Komatsu M et al. (1971) Jpn Kokai 71 (27): 558.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ray S et al. Amarogentin, a naturally occuring secoiridoid
glycoside and a newly recognized inhibitor of topoisomerase I
from Leishmania donovani. In: JNP 59(1):27-29. 1996.

Sharma PV (1982) Indian J Pharm Sci 44 (2): 36.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Chives

Allium schoenoprasum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried

aerial parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The cyme has numerous florets. The
sheath of the inflorescence has 2 or 3 flaps. The flap is
broad-ovate and shorter than the inflorescence; it is white or
reddish. The florets are dense and globose with no bulbils.
The petals of the perianth are lanceolate-ovate and acute or
pointed. They are 7 to 11 mm long, bluish or white to
yellowish, and have a dark middle stripe. The stamens are
shorter than the perianth. They are awl-shaped and fused
with each other and the perianth petals at the base. The
perianth surrounds the capsule like a balloon.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Allium schoenoprasum is a perenni-
al, 15 to 30 cm high plant. The base is branched with
numerous erect, closely packed leaves. Thin sheaths form
incomplete, oblong bulbs. The bulb skin is thin, white and
splitting when mature. The stem is round, usually smooth
and leafy from the lower third. The compact leaves are
completely hollow, round, somewhat elastic, and gray or

gray-green.

Habitat: Chives grow wild in the temperate regions of
Europe and North America and are cultivated in Europe,
Turkistan, North America and from Siberia to Japan.

Production: Chives are the complete aerial parts of Allium
schoenoprasum, which are harvested before flowering.

Other Names: Cive Garlic, Civet, Chive

----- PAGE 440 -----
£?

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alliins (alkyl cysteine sulfoxides): in particular, methyl] alliin
(S-methyl-L-(+)-cysteine sulfoxide) and pentyl alliin (S-
pentyl-L-(+)-cysteine sulfoxide), as well as their gamma-
glutamyl conjugates; in the course of cutting up the fresh
foliage, the alliins undergo a transformation (which is
triggered by fermentation) into the so-called alliaceous oils,
e.g., dimethyl-disulfide-mono-S-oxide

EFFECTS
The volatile and non-volatile sulphur bonds are said to be
anthelmintic. However, efficacy has not been documented in
scientific studies.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used to expel worms and
intestinal parasites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The intake of large quantities can lead to stomach
irritation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Chives are used fresh or dried, as a

cut drug.

LITERATURE
Kameoka H, Hashimoto S, Two sulfur containing constituents
from Allium schoenoprasum. In: PH 22:294-295. 1983.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994.

Hashimoto S et al., Food Sci 48:1858. 1983.

Chocolate Vine (Mu-Tong)

Akebia quinata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The dried stems and fruits of the Akebia

quinata are frequently used in medicine.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is racemose, hanging, 5
to 9 cm long, with | to 3 female flowers. The pedicle is 3 to
5 cm long. There are 3 to 4 violet to pink-violet sepals up to
15 cm long and 5 to 7 apocarpic, blue-violet carpels. There
are 4 to 15 male flowers with 3 violet to lilac sepals and 6 to
7 violet to black stamens. The fruit is an elongate pome, 6 to
9 cm long, dark violet when ripe with white spots and a
coriaceous cupule. The seeds are numerous, red-brown to

CHOCOLATE VINE (MU-TONG) / 189
black, ovoid, approximately 6 mm long and embedded in
jelly-like tissue.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Akebia quinata is a climbing shrub
that grows up to 10 m high. The shrub is deciduous,
diclinous and monoecious. The leaves are alternate and
arranged in fives. The petiole and the stems of the leaflets
are approximately 2 cm long. The leaflets are up to 2.5 cm
long, rounded at the base and entire. The trunk is silvery or
gray, with cork warts.

Characteristics: The fruit is edible.
Habitat: Japan, China, Korea

Production: Chocolate vine is the dried stem of Akebia
quinata.

Other Names: Five-Leaflet Akebia, Mu Tong

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: akebosides, aglycones oleanolic acid
and hederagenin

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol
glucoside, betulin

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides: saccharose
Cyclitols: meso-inositol

EFFECTS
Animal experiments have demonstrated an anti-edemic
effect attributed to the saponin mixture contained in the drug.
In addition, diuretic, uricosuric, centrally depressant, antipy-
retic, mild analgesic and motility-inhibiting (intestinal)
effects have been reported, although no results of controlled
clinical studies have as yet been published.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the plant have been used for

acute urinary tract infections and ascites.

Chinese Medicine: Mu Tong is used for laryngitis and dry
coughs, urinary stones, disturbances of bladder function,
galacturia, convulsions, anemia and hematuria.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The inges-
tion of larger dosages of the drug may lead to gastroenteritis,
intestinal colic and diarrhea, due to the saponin content. The
drug is not to be administered during pregnancy.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 3 to 9 gm in the form of a decoction.

----- PAGE 441 -----
190/CHOCOLATE VINE (MU-TONG)

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Yang DJ. The study of the constituents of Clematis and Akebia
spp. II. On the saponins isolated from the stem of Akebia
quinata Decne. (1) (authors transl) Yakugaku Zasshi, 9:194-8,
1974 Feb.

Yang DJ. Tinnitus treated with combined traditional Chinese
medicine and Western medicine. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa
Chin, 9:270-1, 259-60. 1989 May.

Chondrodendron
tomentosum

See  Pareira

Chondrus crispus

See | Carrageen

Chrysanthemum
cinerariifolium
See Pyrethrum

Chrysanthemum

leucanthemum
See Ox-Eye Daisy

Cichorium intybus
See Chicory

Cicuta virosa
See European Water Hemlock

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cimicifuga racemosa
See Black Cohosh

Cinchona pubescens

See Quinine

Cinnamomum aromaticum

See Chinese Cinnamon

Cinnamomum camphora

See Camphor Tree

Cinnamomum verum

See Cinnamon

Cinnamon

Cinnamomum verum

TRADE NAMES
Cinnamon bark liquid extract is available from several

manufacturers.

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the cinnamon oil
extracted from the bark, the cinnamon bark of younger
branches and the cinnamon leaf oil.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are whitish-green, inconspic-
uous and have an unpleasant smell. They are about 0.5 cm
long; arranged in loose, axillary or terminal panicles; and
covered in silky hairs. The fruit is berry-like, ovoid-oblong,
short-thomed and half-enclosed by the attached epicalyx.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a heavily foliated
evergreen tree 6.5 to 12 m tall with a pale brown bark in thin
quills, several rolled inside one another. The branches are
cylindrical with a gray-brown bark. The tough leaves, which
are opposite and splayed horizontally to leaning, are initially
red then turn green. They are about 12 cm by 5 cm,
roundish-ovate or ovate-lanceolate to oblong, more or less
acuminate and entire-margined. The leaves smell like cloves.

----- PAGE 442 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Habitat: Cinnamon is indigenous to Sri Lanka and southwest
India.

Production: Cinnamon consists of the dried tree bark,
"separated from the cork and outer rind, of young shoots

**K growing on the branches of Cinnamomum verum. The tree is

widely cultivated, and the harvested bark is dried in the
shade.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with other
powdered cinnamon varieties.

Other Names: Ceylon Cinnamon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: chief components - cinnamaldehyde, weiterhin

eugenol, cinnamylacetate, cinnamyl alcohol, o-methoxycin-
namaldehyde, cinnamic acid

Diterpenes: cinnzeylanol, cinnzeylanin
Oligomeric proanthocyanidins

Mucilages

4» EFFECTS

The cinnmaldehyde in the cinnamon bark's essential oil is
antibacterial, fungistatic and promotes motility. It has a
mildly positive estrogen effect on the genital system of
animals in tests, although the constituent responsible is
unidentified. Cinnamon increases gastric secretions slightly
and is an insecticide due to the diterpenes cinnzeylanin and
cinnceylanol.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: In addition, folk medicine internal uses
include infantile diarrhea, chills, influenza and worm infesta-
tion. Cinnamon is used externally for. cleaning wounds.

Indian Medicine: Uses in Indian medicine include toothache,
nausea and vomiting, and halitosis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
* Use of the drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug possesses a medium potential
for sensitization because of the cinnamaldehyde content.

Pregnancy: The drug is not to be administered to pregnant
women.

CINNAMON/191

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions;
essential oil, as well as other galenic preparations for internal
use. Bath additives, drops and compound preparations for
external use.

How Supplied:
Extract — I:1

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour hot water over 0.5 to 1 g
cinnamon bark and strain after 10 minutes. A tincture is
made from a maceration of 20 parts cinnamon bark + 100
parts 70% ethanol V/V (OAB90).

Daily Dosage: 2 to 4 g drug; 0.05 to 0.2 g essential oil. One
cup of tea/infusion is taken 2 to3 times daily at mealtimes.
Liquid extract is taken 3 times in 1.5 to 1 ml doses. Two to 4
ml of tincture are taken 3 times daily. The standard single
dose is 0.5 to | g of the drug.

Storage: Protect from light and moisture in non-synmetic
containers.

LITERATURE
Buchalter L, (1971) J Pharm Sci 60: 144.
Isogai A et al., (1977) Agric Biol Chem 41: 1779.

Kato Y, (1975) Koryo 113: 17, et 24.

Kaul R, Pflanzliche Procyanidine. Vorkommen, Klassifikation
und pharmakologische Wirkungen. In: PUZ 25(4): 175-185.
1996.

Schneider E, Cinnamomum verum - Der Zimt. In: ZPT

9(6): 193. 1988.

Schroder, Buch. In: Schroder R: Kaffee, Tee und Kardamom,
Ulmer-Verlag, Stuttgart. 1991.

Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.): Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 443 -----
192 /CINQUEFOIL

Ginquefoil

Potentilla erecta

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the rhizome freed

from the roots, the fresh underground parts collected in the
spring, the dried rhizome and the rhizome gathered in the
spring.

Flower and Fruit: The small, yellow, long-pedicled flowers
grow opposite the leaves or at branching points on the stem.
The 4 sepals have a 4-bract epicalyx. There are 4 free petals.
which are obcordate and somewhat darker at the base. There
are usually 16 stamens and numerous ovaries with thread-
like styles. The receptacle is domed. The fruit is nut-like.
hard, 1 seeded, ovate, grooved and occasionally smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is about 30 cm high and a
rhizomatus herbacious perennial. The rhizome is 1 to 3 cm
thick, irregular, gnarled to cylindrical, woody, dark-brown
outside and blood red inside. The stem is erect or decumbent.
never rooting, branching. The trifoliate rosette-like basal
leaves wilt early and are gone before flowering. The cauline
leaves are sessile, trifoliate and appear to be in fives because
of 2 stipules

Characteristics: The plant is odorless and has an astringent
taste.

Habitat: The plant is found as far north as Northern
Scandinavia and as far south as Northwest Africa, Italy.
Central Spain and the Balkans.

Production: Cinquefoil rhizome consists of the dried rhi-
zome, freed from the roots, of Potentilla erecta (syn:
Potentilla tormentilla N.) and its preparations. After harvest-
ing the rhizome is air-dried.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with Radix
bistortae and the rhizomes of Geum species.

Other Names: Cinquefoil, Septfoil, Thormantle, Biscuits,
Bloodroot, Earthbank, Ewe Daisy, Flesh and Blood, Shep-
herd's Knapperty, Shepherd's Knot, English Sarsaparilla

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Catechins: including (-)-gallocatechin gallate, (-)-epigalloca-
techin gallate, dimerics and trimerics of the catechin
derivatives

Catechin tannins (15 to 20%), transformed under storage
conditions into non-water soluble  tanner's _ reds

(phlobaphenes)

Flavonoids: including kaempferol

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Gallo tannins (3.5%), including agrimonine, pedunculagin,
levigatines B and F proanthocyanidins

Tannins (17 to 22%)

Triterpenes: including tormentoside, ursolic acid, e-epi-po-
molic acid

EFFECTS
The drug is astringent, antimicrobial and molluscidal be-
cause of the tannin complex (gallic tannins and ellagic
tannins). In animal experiments an antihypertensive, anti-
allergic, immune-stimulating, antiviral and interferon-induc-
ing effect has been demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Diarrhea
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Tormentil is used internally to treat non-specific acute
diarrhea. The drug is used externally for gingivitis, stomatitis
and pressure caused by prosthetic devices.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used internally
for acute and subacute gastroenteritis and diarrhea and
externally for poorly healing wounds, frostbite, burns and
hemorrhoids.

PRECAUTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. There are
reports in the literature of gastric complaints or vomiting
following intake of the drug or its extracts.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Tormentil is available in solid,
liquid and compounded preparations for internal and external

use.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, 2 to 3 gm finely cut or
coarsely powdered drug is added to cold water, and rapidly
brought to a boil, steep for some time and then strain. A cold
water decoction may be used to avoid loss of tannin strength
that occurs during the boiling process (1 teaspoon is
equivalent to approximately 4 gm drug).

To prepare a tincture, 1 part cut rhizome is percolated with 5
parts 70% ethanol (V/V) (DAB 10)

Daily Dosage: 4 to 6 gm drug

Tincture (1:10): 10 to 20 drops to one glass of water as a
rinse several times a day

Tea: | cup to be taken 3 to 4 times a day (acts as an anti-
j diarrheal agent.)

----- PAGE 444 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wine decoction: For diarrhea soak 2 to 4 gm powdered drug
with red wine)

Storage: The herb should be protected from light.

LITERATURE

‘W* Bilia AR, Ctalano S, Fontana C, Morelli I, Palme E, A new

saponin from Potentilla tormentilla. In: PM 58(7)23. 1992.

Geiger C et al., EUagitannins from Alchemilla xanthochlora and
Potentilla erecta. In: PM 60(4):384. 1994.

Glasl H, DAZ 123:1979, 1983.
Lund K, Rimpler H, (1985) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 125(3): 105.

Lund K, Rimpler H, (1985) Tormenullwurzel. Dtsch Apoth Z
125:105-107.

Lund K, Tormentillwurzelstock. Phytochemische Untersuchungen
des Rhizoms von Potentilla erecta (L.) RAUSCHEL. In:
Dissertation Universitit Freiburg. 1986.

Scholz E, Rimpler H, Osterr Apoth Ztg 48:138. 1994.
Vennat B et al., J Pharm Belg 47:485. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers

“Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6

(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R. Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Citrullus colocynthis

See Bitter Apple

Citrus aurantifolia

See Lime

Citrus aurantium
See Bitter Orange

CLEAVERS/193

Citrus limon

See Lemon

Citrus sinensis

See Sweet Orange

Cladonia pyxidata

See Cupmoss

Claviceps purpurea
See Ergot

Cleavers

Galium aparine

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts
collected during the flowering season and dried, as well as
the fresh, flowering herb and the fresh or dried whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: There are a few small white or greenish
flowers in axillary, peduncled cymes. The corolla is about
* 15 to 1.7 mm long and has a pointed tip. The pedicles do not
turn back before the fruit ripens. The 4 to 7 mm long
mericarps are covered in barbed bristles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 60 to 150 cm high. The
stem is decumbent or climbing, sharply quadrangular even to
the point of being winged and branched. There are long
cauline leaves. The margins and midrib of the leaves are
thorny. The foliage leaves are arranged in false whorls of 6
or 8. They are lanceolate from a wedge-shaped base, 30 to 60
mm long and 3 to 8 mm wide, obtuse and thorny tipped.

Habitat: A common wild plant throughout Europe, in Asia
from Siberia to the Himalayas, and in North and South
America.

Production: Cleavers is the flowering herb of the aerial part
of Galium aparine, which is garnered and then dried.

Other Names: Clivers, Goosegrass, Barweed, Hedgeheriff,
Hayriffe, Eriffe, Grip Grass, Hayruff, Catchweed, Scrat-
weed, Mutton Chops, Robin-Run-in-the-Grass, Love-Man,
Goosebill, Everlasting Friendship, Bedstraw, Coachweed,

----- PAGE 445 -----
194/CLEAVERS

Cleaverwort, Goose Grass, Gosling Weed, Hedge-Burs,

Stick-a-Back, Sweethearts

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tridoide asperuloside

monoterpenes:

Benzyl isoquinoline alkaloids: including protopine

Beta-carbolin alkaloids: harmine

Quinazoline alkaloids: | -hydroxydesoxypeganin, 8-hydroxy-

2,3-dehydrodesoxypeganin
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

The drug is used internally as well as externally for ulcers,
festering glands, lumps in the breast and skin rashes. It is
also used for lithuresis and calculosis and as a diuretic for
dropsy, bladder catarrh and retention of urine (ischuria).

Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Used topically in alcoholic extracts.

Internally as a tea and juice.

Daily Dosage: As a tea, add 4 teaspoonfuls (3.3 to 4.4 gm)
of the drug to 2 glasses of hot water. Drink in sips during the
course of the day.

LITERATURE

Berkowitz, WF et al., (1982) J Org Chem 47:824.

Bhan MK et al., (1976) Ind J Chem 14:475.

Buckova et al., (1970) Acta Fac Pharm Univ Comeniana 19:7.
Burnett AR, Thomsom RH, (1968) J Clin Soc (6):854.

Corrigan D et al., (1978) Phytochemistry 17:1131.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Inouye H et al., (1974) Planta Med 25:285.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Clematis

Clematis recta

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh, flowering
plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in many blossomed
terminal cymes. The individual blossoms are white and
similar to Clematis vitalba, except that the bracts are only
downy on the edges. The nutlet is glabrous, with a thickened
edge and a long tail.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to about 50 to 125
cm high. The stem is non-climbing, erect, leafy and glabrous.
The leaves are pinnatifid. The leaflets are smaller than those
of Clematis vitalba.

Characteristics: The plant is poisonous.
Habitat: The plant grows in Europe.

Production: Clematis herb is the whole fresh flowering plant
of Clematis recta. The herb is gathered when the plant is in
full flower. It is turned regularly while being dried in the
shade.

Other Names: Upright Virgin's Bower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-forming the freshly
plant: presumably, the glycoside ranunculin changes enzy-
matically when the plant is cut into small pieces (and
probably also when it is dried) into the pungent, volatile
protoanemonine that quickly dimerises to anemonine. Once
dried, the plant may not be capable of protoanemonine

agents in harvested

formation.
Saponins

EFFECTS
The fresh plant induces blistering on the skin and mucous
membranes and is a fungicide. Sun plants are more effective

than shade plants.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Clematis was formerly used as a remedy for
venereal diseases (syphilis), chronic skin conditions, gout,
rheumatism and bone disorders, as well as a diuretic. In the
pharmaceutical industry, it is used for rheumatic pains,
headaches and varicose veins. In folk medicine, it is used for
blisters and as a poultice for festering wounds and ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: Clematis is used in homeopathic dilu-
tions for ulcers and poor wound healing.

----- PAGE 446 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug. Extended skin contact with
the freshly harvested, bruised plant can lead to blister

V formation and cauterizations that heal poorly, due to the

released protoanemonine, which is severely irritating to the
skin and mucous membranes. If taken internally, severe
irritation to the gastrointestinal tract, combined with colic
and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the urinary drainage
passages, are possible.

Symptomatic treatment for external contact consists of
mucilaginosa, after irrigation with diluted potassium perman-
ganate solution. In case of internal contact, administration of
activated charcoal should follow gastric lavage.

OVERDOSAGE

Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in
animal experiments. The risk associated with use of this
plant is less than that of many other Ranunculaceae (e.g.,
Anemones nemorosae) due to the relatively low levels of
protoanemonine-forming agents.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is seldom used today. It is
available in the form of decoctions, which are used for
poultices, as well as extracts and drops.

Homeopathic Dosage: Clematis is used in homeopathic
dilutions D3 and D4.

Storage: The herb should be stored in tightly sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Kizu H, Shimana H, Tomimori T, Studies on the constituents
of Clematis species. VI. The constituents of Clematis stans
Sieb. et Zucc. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 43:2187-94, 1995
Dec.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Shropshire CM, Stauber E, Arai M, Evaluation of selected
plants for acute toxicosis in budgerigars. J Am Vet Med Assoc,

0 200:936-9, 1992 Apr 1.

Southwell IA et al., Protoanemonin in australian Clematis. In:
PH 33:1099. 1993.
Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

CLOVE/195

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Clematis recta

See Clematis

Clematis vitalba

See Traveller's Joy

Clove

Syzygium aromaticum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the whole or macerated flower buds, the pedicles and
leaves, the dried flower buds and the not quite ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in triply-triple-branched
cymes. They are short-pedicled, whitish-pink, approximately
6 mm wide and have 2 scale-like bracteoles. The calyx tube
is 1 to 1.5 cm long and cylindrical. The 4 sepals are fleshy
and there are 4 petals. The fruit is 2 to 2.5 cm long, 13 to 15
cm wide and is crowned by 4 curved sepals. The fruit is 1-
seeded.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 20 m high, pyramid-
- shaped evergreen tree. The diameter of the trunk is 40 cm.
The branches are almost round. The leaves are 9 to 12 cm
long and 3.5 cm wide. They are coriaceous, elliptical to
lanceolate, short, obtusely tipped and narrowing in a cuneate
form to the petiole, which is 2.5 cm long. There is 1 main rib
and more than 20 lateral ones.

Characteristics: The taste and odor are characteristic.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Molucca Islands and
is cultivated there and in Tanzania, Madagascar, Brazil and
other tropical regions.

----- PAGE 447 -----
196/CLOVE

Production: Cloves consist of the hand-picked and dried
flower buds of Syzygium aromaticum (syn. Jambosa caryo-
phyllus, Eugenia caryophyllata).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (15-21%): chief components eugenol (70-90%),
eugenyl acetate (aceteugenol, up to 17%), beta-caryophyl-
lene (5-12%)

Flavonoids: including astragalin, isoquercitrin, hyperoside,
quercetin-3,4'-di-0-glycoside

Tannins (10%): ellagitannins, including eugenin

Triterpenes: oleanolic acid (1%), crataegolic acid (maslic
acid, 0.15%)

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol

EFFECTS
Clove is antiseptic, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, spas-

molytic and a local anaesthetic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Dental analgesic
+ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Clove oil is used internally for stomach
ulcers and externally for colds and headaches. It is also used
externally as a local analgesic and dental antiseptic.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for halitosis, toothache,
eye disease, flatulence, colic, gastropathy, and anorexia.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Allergic reactions to eugenol occur rarely. In
concentrated form, oil of clove may be irritating to mucosa.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a powdered, ground, or whole
herb for the recovery of the essential oil, and other galenic

preparations for topical use.

Daily Dosage: Aqueous solutions corresponding to 1 to 5%
essential oil are used externally for mouthwashes. In
dentistry, the undiluted essential oil is used.

Storage: Do not store the drug in plastic containers, and
protect it from light.

LITERATURE

Cai L, Wu ChD, Compounds from Syzygium aromaticum
possesing growth inihibitory activity against oral pathogens. In:
JNP 59(10):987-990. 1996.

Debelmas AM, Rochat J, (1967) Plant Med Phytother 1:23.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Deiniger R, Gewiirznelken (Syzygium aromaticum) und
Nelkenol - aktuelle Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT 12(6):205. 1992.

Kato Y, (1975) Koryo 113:17 and 24.

Narayanan CS, Matthew AG (1985) Ind Perf 29(1/2): 15.
Tanaka T, Orii Y, Nonaka GI, Nishioka I, Kouno I, Syziginins
A and B, two ellegitannins from Syzygium aromaticum. In: PH
43(6)1345-1348. 1996.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht.. In:
DAZ 132(37): 1873. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, iNew York, 1992-
1994.
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Club Moss

Lycopodium — clavatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the spores and the

fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: Sulfur yellow, minute spores, carried in
large numbers in 2 to 3 cylindrical yellow-green cones,
develop in August at the ends of leafy, 15 cm high stalks
extending from aerial branches.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant has a 1 m_ long,
procumbent stem with only a few roots. It is covered with
yellowish-green leaves, densely arranged in spirals, which
are entire-margined, linear, smooth and end in a long, white,
upwardly bent hair tip. There are numerous erect, circular, 5

cm high branches on the mainstem.

Habitat: The plant is found worldwide, but it originated in
China and Eastern Europe.

Production: Club Moss is the aerial part Lycopodium
clavatum. It is collected in the uncultivated regions and air-

dried or dried artificially at a maximum of 40° C.

----- PAGE 448 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Stags Horn, Witch Meal, Wolfs Claw,
Vegetable Sulfur

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

£ Alkaloids (0.2%): including among others those of the

g

lycopodine- and lycodan-types (derived from piperidine
alkaloids), chief alkaloids lycopodine and dihydrolycopo-
dine, in traces also nicotine.

Triterpenes: including alpha-onocerin, lycoclavatol, lycocla-
vanol, serratendiol (demonstrated in plants of Japanese
origin)

campesterol and

Steroids: including _ beta-sitosterol,

stigmasterol

Flavonoids: including among others chrysoeriol, luteolin

EFFECTS
Club Moss has a diuretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, it is used internally for
bladder and kidney complaints, also for pharyngeal catarrh
and tonsillitis, menstruation complaints, rheumatism and
impotence; externally for wounds, itching and suppurating
eczema of the skin.

Homeopathic Uses: Herb and spores are used in liver and
gallbladder complaints, general blood poisoning, inflamma-
tion of the respiratory tract, disorders of the intestinal tract,
varicose veins, metabolic diseases, chronic and acute skin
conditions, inflammation of the female genital organs and
menstruation complaints, as well as behavioral and mood
disturbances.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Irritations should be expected with extended used of

the drug.

OVERDOSAGE
Despite the toxicity of the alkaloids, no poisonings have

been, recorded.

DOSAGE

*e Mode of Administration: In folk medicine, chopped drug is

used in teas.

Daily Dosage: Single dose: 15 gm drug. Tea: 1 cup to be
taken 2 to 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally; 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

COCA/197

LITERATURE
Blumenkopf TA, Heathcock CH, The Alkaloids, Vol. 5, Ed.

SW Pelletier, John Wiley 1985.

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Leete E, The Alkaloids, Vol. 1, Ed. SW Pelletier, John Wiley
1983.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Cnicus benedictus

See Blessed Thistle

Coca

Erythroxylum

coca

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves of the
coca bush.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small and greenish white.
They are in axillary clusters. The fruit is a red almost 1 cm
long drupe with 1 seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Erythroxylum coca is a small shrub-
like tree up to 5 m tall. The leaves are brownish-green, oval,
thin but tough, up to 5 cm long and 2.5 cm wide with two
lines on the surface parallel to the midrib. The margins are
entire, the apex rounded. There are 2 faint projecting lines on
the upper surface parallel to the midrib which stiffen the leaf.
There are small stipules in the leaf axils, which later become
brown and hard.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Andes region of
South America; it is cultivated in Indonesia, India and Sri

Lanka.

Production: Coca leaves are the dried leaves of Erythroxy-

lum coca.

Other Names: Bolivian Coca, Cocaine, Cuca, Peruvian Coca

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Tropane alkaloids: main alkaloid (-)-cocaine, including,
among others, cis-cinnamoyl cocaine, trans-cinnamoyl co-
caine, also including alpha-truxillin, —_ beta-truxillin,

benzoylecgonin

----- PAGE 449 -----
198/COCA

EFFECTS
The leaves act as a local anesthetic and stimulate the central
nervous system. In high doses, the drug causes paralysis of

motor neuron fibers.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The plant is used in the manufacture of the
local anesthetic cocaine hydrochloride. It is a model for
synthetic local anesthetics. Cocaine is still occasionally used

in ophthalmology.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Chewing an excessively large quantity of the
leaves can cause psychic disturbances and_ hallucinations.
Chronic use can lead to poor nutritional states and disinterest
in work, due to the suppression of feelings of hunger and the
resulting reduction in food intake. The enhanced vulnerabili-
ty to illness and the reduced life expectancy are also
conditioned by the immunosuppressive effect of the drug.
Beyond that, the drug is probably carcinogenic in effect.
embryotoxic and sensitizing. The observed dependence on
the drug (cocoaism) is mainly psychically conditioned.
although withdrawal symptoms are also known (need for
sleep, bulimia, anxiety, irritability, tremor). For the toxicolo-
gy of cocaine, consult publications (Lewin, Teuscher).

Pregnancy: Cocaine passes into the embryo or fetus and is
embryotoxic.

Nursing Mothers: Cocaine passes into the mother's milk.
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Use of Erythroxylum
obsolete except for use in 2% eyedrops.

coca is

LITERATURE
Aynilian G et al., (1974) J Pharm Sci 63:1938.

Brustschmerzen und Atherosklerose durch Cocain. In: DAZ
130(49):2723. 1990.

Chen GJ, Pillai R, Erickson JR, Martinez F, Estrada ALO,
Watso RR, Cocaine immunotoxicity - abnormal cytokine
production in hispanic drug users. In: Toxicol Lett 59(1-3):81.
1991.

Evans WC, ETH 3:265. 1981.

Grieb G, Mipbildungen: Schadigt Cocain menschliche
Spermien? In: DAZ 132(12):578. 1992.

Homstedt B et al., (1977) Phytochemistry 16:1753.

Moore JM et al., 1-Hydroxytropacocaine: an abundant alkaloid
of Erythroxylum novogranatense var. novogranatense and var.
truxillense. In: PH 36(2):357. 1994.

Novak M, Salemink C, (1987) Planta Med 53(1): 113.

Novak M, Salemink CA, Khan I, ETH 10:261. 1984.
Sukrasno N, Yeoman MM, Phenylpropanoid metabolism during
growth and development of Capsicum frutescens fruits. In: PH
32:839. 1993.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tuerner CE, Ma C, Elsohly MA, ETH 3:293. 1981.

Wiggins RC, Pharmacokinetics of Cocaine in pregnancy and
effects on fetal maturation. In: Clinical Pharmacokinetics
22(2):85. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Cochlearia officinalis
See Scurvy Grass

Cochlospermum gossypium

See Cotton Tree

Cocillana Tree

Guraea rusbyi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are radial, and their structures
are in fives. They are white to yellowish and inconspicuous.

The ovary is superior.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows as a tree, rising up
to 5 m high. The leaves are large and pinnatifid.

Habitat: Guraea rusbyi is indigenous to Cuba, Brazil and

Bolivia.

Production: Cocillana bark is the bark of the trunk of Guarea
rusbyi, which is collected in the wild.

----- PAGE 450 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol

Tannin
Alkaloids

EFFECTS
The drug is said to be expectorate, emetic and laxative in
effect. In higher dosages, it is said to be menstruation-
inducing. The emetic effect is credited to the alkaloid
fraction, which has not been more precisely defined.
Experimental data have not been made available. The bark of
the tree induces vomiting and can frequently bring on a
feeling of weakness and nausea. But it can also provide a
stimulatory expectorant and has been used successfully in
the treatment of bronchitis and respiratory illnesses.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Uses in folk medicine have included

treatment of chronic bronchitis and coughs and also as an
emetic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The drug is
said to induce vomiting and diarrhea in high dosages.

CONTRAINDICATION
Because it is said to induce menstruation, it should not be
administered to anyone who is pregnant.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug

preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Tinctures are prepared using drug 1:10 60%
ethanol (V/V) (BHP83). Liquid extracts contain drug 1:
60% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).

Daily Dosage:

Decoction — from 0.5 to 1 g drug, 3 times daily

Liquid extract — 0.5 to 1 ml, 3 times daily

Tincture — 5 to 10 ml, 3 times daily

Syrup — 2 to 4 ml, 3 times daily

Dose for children — 14 to 13 of the above doses.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,

Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

COCOA 199

Cocoa

Theobroma cacao

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seed skins that
remain after making cocoa and cocoa butter: the seeds which
have been partly freed from their skins and lightly roasted:
and the raw, dried, unroasted seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are on the main trunk
and thicker branches on a so-called "flower cup."" The
cyme-like branchlets are short, noded and persistent. There
are 5 sepals, which are narrow. The petals are cap-shaped
and stemmed with flag-like laminas. The stamen tube, wiih 5
fertile stamens and 5 awl-shaped staminoids. is short. Trie
fruit is a 15 to 25 cm long and 10 cm thick, large berry. It is
oblong or obovate, thick-skinned, yellow or reddish, grooved
and sometimes bumpy and cucumber-like. The 20 to 50
seeds are arranged in rows and embedded in a pink, fruity.
sweetish-sour pulp. They are pressed flat, almond-shaped.
reddish-brown and without endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 4 to 6 m. occasionally
up to 13 m, tall tree with an irregular knotty trunk and a
broad crown. The young branches are rounded. The leaves
are coriaceous or paper-like, alternate and in 2 rows on the
branches. The petiole is downy, cushioned, and 1.5 to 2 cm
long. The lamina is oval or elliptical, slightly asymmetrical.
rounded at the base with a conspicuous tip. The upper
surface is green and pale when dry. The lower surface is
paler green, glabrous or has a few, tiny, simple, branched
and scattered hairs.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated globally in tropical regions.

Production: Cocoa seeds consist of the seeds of Theobroma
cacao, which have been removed from their shells, ferment-
ed and lightly roasted. Cocoa consists of the testae of
Theobroma cacao. Cocoa butter is the hard fat obtained from
the ripe cocoa seeds of Theobroma cacao. After removal of
the germ-roots and the shell from the seeds, the seeds are
removed from the shell and crushed. The cocoa fat is
squeezed out at a temperature of 70° C to 80° C and allowed
to cool.

Other Names: Cacao, Chocolate Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COCOA SEED

Purine alkaloids (3 to 4%): main alkaloid theobromine (2.8
to 3.5%), with a lesser amount of caffeine (0.1 to 0.4%)

Fat (50%): chief fatty acids oleic acid (33 to 39°c). stearic
acid (30 to 37%), palmitic acid (24 to 31%)

Proteic substances (10 to 16%)

----- PAGE 451 -----
200 /COCOA

Starch (5 to 9%)

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (2 to 4%):  saccharose,

glucose, fructose

Biogenic amines: including phenyl ethyl amine, tyramine,
tryptamine, serotonin

Isoquinoline alkaloids:  salsolinol

Catechin tannins (10%): including oligomeric proanthocyan-
idins (8%)

Oxalates (0.6 to 1%)

EFFECTS: COCOA SEED
Cocoa seeds can cause constipation because of the tannin
content. The drug contains methylxanthines, mainly theobro-
min, which have a diuretic, broncholytic, and vasodilatory
effect. They also stimulate cardiac muscle performance and
act as a muscle relaxant.

COMPOUNDS: COCOA SEED COAT
Purine alkaloids: main alkaloid
with less caffeine (0.02%)

theobromine (0.4-1.2%)

Fat (5%)

Biogenic amine: including phenyl ethyl amine, tyramine,

tryptamine, serotonin

Catechin tannins: among them, proanthocyanidins

EFFECTS: COCOA SEED COAT
Cocoa can cause constipation. Cocoa contains methylxan-
thines, which have a diuretic, bronchyolitic, and vasodilatory
effect. They also improve cardiac muscle performance and

act as a muscle relaxant.

COMPOUNDS: COCOA BUTTER

Triglycerides (melting temperature 31 to 35°C): chief fatty
acids oleic acid (33 to 39%), stearic acid (30 to 37%),
palmitic acid (24 to 31%)

Free fatty acids
Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol

(0.001 to 0.1%)

Purine alkaloids

EFFECTS: COCOA BUTTER

The main constituents are triglycerides. High doses of cocoa
butter, in contrast to similar saturated fatty acids, do not
cause an increase of serum cholesterol and the LDL fraction.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

COCOA SEED

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Cocoa seeds are used for
infectious intestinal disease, diarrhea and as a secretolytic. It
is also used to regulate the thyroid and as a mild stimulant
(in compound drinks containing caffeine.)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

COCOA SEED COAT
Preparations of cocoa seed coat are used for liver, bladder,
and kidney ailments, diabetes, as a tonic and general remedy
and as an astringent for diarrhea.

COCOA BUTTER
Cocoa Butter is used by the pharmaceutical and cosmetic
ingredient in dermatologic

industries as an inactive

preparations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

COCOA SEED

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with either the proper administration of desig-
nated therapeutic dosages or the consumption of normal
amounts of chocolate products. Large dosages lead to
constipation due to the tannin content. Cocoa and cocoa
products can cause allergic reactions. The amines can trigger

migraine attacks.

Pediatric Use: Large quantities of chocolate products can
lead to overexcitability, racing pulse and sleep disorders in
children because of the caffeine content, which can be as
high as 0.2% in milk chocolate and 0.4% in bitter chocolate.

COCOA SEED COAT

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Cocoa and cocoa products can cause allergic
reactions. Large dosages lead to constipation due to the
tannin content. The amines can trigger migraine attacks.

COCOA BUTTER
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

COCOA BUTTER

Mode of Administration: Cocoa Butter is used as a pharma-
ceutical base for suppositories and vaginal globules. It is an
additive for ointments and cosmetic preparations, such as
skin creams and lip balms.

Storage: Store in a cool, dark place.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Naturw R, 49:481. 1996.

----- PAGE 452 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schroder B, In: Schroder R. Kaffee, Tee und Kardamom,
Ulmer-Verlag, Stuttgart. 1991.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Coconut Palm

Cocos nucifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in up to 15 m
long, spindle-shaped, branching axillary inflorescences,
which are surrounded by a woody spathe. On each of the 20
to 40 lateral branches of the inflorescence there is only one,
3 to 3.5 cm large, yellowish-green-white female flower.
There are 200 to 300 male flowers at the apex of the single

ff branches with their structures arranged in threes. The flowers

are up to 15 cm wide and yellowish; the ovary is 3-carpeled
and fused. The drupe is up to 30 cm long and weighs 15 to
2.5 kg. The exocarp is smooth and impervious to water. The
mesocarp is fibrous (certain floating ability, coconut fiber)
and the endocarp woody and hard. The stone kernel is
incorrectly called a nut. The inconspicuous embryo is
embedded in the fat rich endosperm (copra). Inside the
unripe fruit there is approximately 500 ml of clear, sweet-
tasting liquid (coconut milk), which reduces when the fruit
ripens. At the side stem insert there are 3 shoot holes, only
one of which is covered with a membrane. These allow the
embryo to penetrate the surrounding fiber layer.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Coconut Palm is diclinous and
monoecious. The tree grows up to 30 to 35 m high. The
frond is up to 5 m long, | to 1.7 m wide (up to 15 kg in
weight) and clasps the trunk with a wide petiole. The bark is
thick and the surface is shaggy with remains of the leaf bases
of fallen leaves. The trunk is divided into nodes and
internodes. Adventitious roots arise from the base of the

HIT trunk.

Characteristics: One palm tree produces up to 70 ripe fruit
per year.

Habitat: The native country of this species is disputed, but is
believed to be the Pacific regions.

Production: Coconut oil is the fat extracted from the dried
solid part of the endosperm of Cocos nucifera through cold
pressing. Completely ripe fruit is harvested, followed by

COCONUT PALM /201

manual or mechanical opening of the kernel and then
followed by the extraction of the endosperm (known as
copra). It is dried in the sun, over a fire or in special drying
houses. The pressed oil is refined and cleaned.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids lauric acid (45 to 50%), myristic
acid (13 to 20%), palmitic acid (7 to 10%), caprylic acid (5
to 10%), including as well stearic acid, linoleic acid, caproic
acid.

Free fatty acids (3 to 5%)

Delta-lactones of 5-hydroxy-fatty acids: particularly delta-
octalactone (as aroma compounds)

EFFECTS

Coconut oil is characterized by having a large quantity of
short-chained fatty acids and a rather small amount of
unsaturated fatty acids. It is chiefly used as a dietetic. An
immunomodulating effect was observed in animal experi-
ments, as was an inhibiting effect upon the growth of
carcinoma cells of the colon in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The oil of Coconut Palm has been used for
poorly healing wounds and skin infections (Africa). Internal-
ly it is used for colds and inflammation of the throat (with
salt; Central America) and for tooth decay (southeast Asia).

Indian Medicine: Coconut Palm oil is used for dysuria,
coughs, bronchitis and to stop hair from turning gray.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the use of
the drug as a food or as a pharmaceutical vehicle or raw
substance (including its use in the extraction of short- and
medium-chained fatty acids and in the manufacture of soaps
and solubilizing agents).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal and external use.

Preparations are intended for

Storage: Protect from light in tightly sealed containers at a
maximum temperature of 25° C.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Eghafona NO, Immune responses following cocktails of
inactivated measles vaccine and Arachis hypogaea L.
(groundnut) or Cocos nucifera L. (coconut) oils adjuvant.
Vaccine, 84:1703-6, 19% Dec.

----- PAGE 453 -----
202 /COCONUT PALM

Jaggi KS, Arora N, Niphadkar PV, Gangal SV,
Immunochemical characterization of cocos nucifera pollen. J
Allergy Clin Immunol, 84:378-85, 1989 Sep.

Karmakar PR, Chatterjee BP, Cocos nucifera pollen inducing
allergy: sensitivity test and immunological study. Indian J Exp
Biol, 84:489-96, 1995 Jul.

Nalini N, Sabitha K, Chitra S, Viswanathan P, Menon VP,
Antifungal activity of the alcoholic extract of coconut shell -
Cocos nucifera Linn. J Ethnopharmacol, 84:291-3, 1980 Sep.

Nalini N, Sabitha K. Chitra S$, Viswanathan P, Menon VP,
Histopathological and lipid changes in experimental colon
cancer: effect of coconut kernel (Cocos nucifera Linn.) and
(Capsicum annum Linn.) red chilli powder. Indian J Exp Biol,
84:964-71, 1997 Sep.

Cocos nucifera

See Coconut Palm

Coffea arabica
See Coffee

Coffee
Coffea arabica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the seed

in various forms and stages.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are axillary dense
clusters with 10 to 20 flowers. The sessile or very short
pedicled partial inflorescences bear dense, overlapping apical
leaves. The calyx is 2.5 to 3 mm long with a blunt 5-tipped
border. The corolla is white and fragrant. The stamens come
from the mouth of the tube and are exserted. The ripe fruit is
ellipsoid, 12 to 18 mm long by 12 to 15 mm wide with a 3 to
6 mm long stem. It is initially green, later yellow and dark
red when ripe. The exocarp is tough and the mesocarp fleshy
and slightly sweet. The endocarp is hard. The seeds are flat-
convex with a groove on the flat adaxial side. They are 8 to
12 mm long, 5 to 8 mm wide and 3 to 5 mm thick. When
fresh, the seeds are gray-green. They turn brown after

roasting.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Coffea arabica is an evergreen shrub
or small tree up to 8 m high with many basal branches. The
young branches are glabrous and flattened, and the nodes
produce many shoots. The bark of the fruiting branches is

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ashy-white. The leaves are 6 to 20 cm long, 2.5 to 6 cm wide
and live for 2 to 3 years. They are glabrous, slightly
coriaceous, dark green, glossy and elliptoid-lanceolate, with
a distinct leaf tip. The border is occasionally extensively
ribbed.

Habitat: Coffee's area of origin is disputed, but it is now
cultivated in many tropical regions of the world, including
Brazil, Mexico, Columbia and Ethiopia.

Production: Coffee charcoal is produced by roasting the
outer seed parts of the green, dried fruit of Coffea arabica
(and other Coffea species) until almost black, then grinding
the carbonized product.

Coffee beans are the seeds of Coffea arabica, which are ripe
for harvest nine months after flowering. Thereafter, they are
processed using one of two methods. In the dry method, the
beans are dried for 3 to 4 weeks in the sun, or mechanically
with air-stream dryers. In the wet method, the beans are
placed in a water-filled tank, where only the ripe ones sink to
the bottom. The ripe fruit is then mechanically crushed and
subsequently fermented. Fermentation lasts for approximate-
ly 48 hours (for arabica varieties). Afterward, the coffee is
dried mechanically or in the sun.

Not to be Confused With: Coffee beans are not easily
confused with other drugs. However, ground and roasted
coffee may contain coffee substitutes such as chicory,
dandelion root, figs, sugar beet root, lupin seeds, rye kernels

and barleycorn.

Other Names: Arabica Coffee, Arabian Coffee, Caffea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COFFEE CHARCOAL
Purine alkaloids: main alkaloid caffeine

Trigonelline

Carbonization products of hemicelluloses

EFFECTS: COFFEE CHARCOAL
Coffee charcoal contains purine alkaloids, with caffeine as
the man constituent, and is absorbent and astringent.

COMPOUNDS: COFFEE BEANS (SEEDS)
Purine alkaloids: main alkaloid caffeine (0.6 - 2.2%), with it

theobromine, theophylline
Caffeic and ferulic acid ester of quinic acid: in particular

chlorogenic acid
Trigonelline

ester: atractylosides

Norditerpene glycoside

Diterpenes: including the diterpene alcohol fatty acid esters
kahweol and cafestol

----- PAGE 454 -----
A

w*

£t

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

In roasted coffee beans: numerous aromatic substances
yielded from carbohydrates, proteins, fats and aromatic acids

through pyrolysis

EFFECTS: COFFEE BEAN'S

Most of the indicated effects of coffee are due to the
presence of caffeine. The primary effects of caffeine can be
summarized as follows: Caffeine has a positive inotropic
effect. In higher concentrations, it has a positive chronotrop-
ic effect on the heart and CNS. It causes a relaxation of the
smooth muscles of blood vessels (except for cerebral blood
vessels) and the bronchial tubes. Moreover, caffeine works
as a short-lived diuretic and produces an increase of gastric
secretions and the release of catecholamines.

Caffeine works competitively to block adenosinal receptors
that lie on cell surfaces in the brain, fat tissue, liver, kidneys,
heart and erythrocytes.

Heart, circulation, vessels: People who normally do not
drink coffee react 1 hour after an intake of 250 gm, with an
increase of 10 mm Hg in their systolic blood pressure.
Habitual coffee drinkers are tolerant in this regard.

Blood: After 9 weeks of an average daily intake of 5.6 cups
of coffee (steeped for 10 min.), the overall and LDL
cholesterol increases significantly. The use of coffee filters
can reduce this by up to 80%.

Digestive tract: Oral intake of 200 mg of chlorogene acid
doubles gastric secretion, as does caffeine alone.

Miscellaneous: In animal studies, a diet consisting of 20%
green coffee impedes the growth of DMBA-induced tumors

in hamsters by 90%.

Outcome of the stimulating effects of caffeine commence a
few minutes subsequent to taking the drug. The maximum
plasma concentration of caffeine is reached between 15 and
45 minutes later. The plasma half-life amounts to 4 to 6
hours.

Coffee extracts made from roasted and unroasted seeds are
used analogously with other drugs containing caffeine for
physical and mental fatigue. The drink can also be used
therapeutically in cases of hypotonia, as an analeptic agent,
in the treatment of influenza (flu) and migraine and as an
additive to analgesia.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
COFFEE CHARCOAL
Approved by Commission E:

« Diarrhea
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Coffee is used for nonspecific, acute
diarrhea, and local therapy of mild inflammation of the oral

COFFEE /203

and pharyngeal mucosa. In folk medicine coffee is also used
for festering wounds.

COFFEE BEANS (SEEDS)

Unproven Uses: Coffee is used to treat hypotonia and as a
constituent of analgesics. In folk medicine coffee is also used
to increase performance capability as well as for anemia,
hepatitis and edema.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include insomnia
and neuralgias.

Indian Medicine: Unripe seeds are used in Indian medicine
for migraine and fever; ripe seeds for diarrhea; and strong
coffee to treat opium and alcohol intoxication.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
COFFEE CHARCOAL

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded.

Drug Interactions: The drug can hinder the resorption of
other medicines.

COFFEE BEANS

General: Health risks following the proper administration of
designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. Quantities
corresponding to as much as 500 mg caffeine daily (5 cups
of coffee) spread out over the day are toxicologically
harmless for healthy adults accustomed to drinking coffee.
Caution is advised for persons with sensitive cardiovascular
systems, kidney diseases, hyperfunction of the thyroid gland,
higher disposition to convulsions and certain psychic disor-
ders (for example, panic anxiety states). Side effects of
coffee intake, mainly caused by its chlorogenic acid content,
can include hyperacidity, stomach irritation, diarrhea and
reduced appetite. Non-specific symptoms such as _ rest-
lessness, irritability, sleeplessness, palpitations, dizziness,
vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite and headache appear with
the long-term intake of dosages exceeding 1.5 g caffeine per
day. Caffeine can lead to psychic as well as physical
dependency (caffeinism). Symptoms of withdrawal can
include headache and sleeping disorders.

Pregnancy: Pregnant womerr should avoid caffeine, under no
circumstances exceeding a dosage of 300 mg per day (3 cups
of coffee spread out over the day).

Nursing Mothers: Infants nursing from mothers who take
drinks caffeine may suffer from sleeping
disorders.

containing

OVERDOSAGE

Dosages exceeding 1.5 g caffeine per day can lead to
stiffness, arrhythmic spasms of different muscle groups,
opisthotonus and arrhythmic tachycardia. Fatal poisonings

----- PAGE 455 -----
204/COFFEE

with the drug are not conceivable: The lethal dosage (LD50)
for an adult is approximately 150 to 200 mg caffeine per kg
body weight (for which 50 kg body weight = 7.5 g = 75 cups
of coffee), although there are cases of survival also with 106
g caffeine. The death of a child following the intake of 5.3 g-
of caffeine has been reported. The first signs of poisonings
are vomiting and abdominal spasms. The therapy for caffeine
poisoning should begin with the inducement of vomiting or
gastric lavage. Afterward, activated charcoal and sorbitol
should be given to retard resorption. Spasms are to be treated

with diazepam.

DOSAGE

COFFEE CHARCOAL

Mode of Administration: Powdered coffee charcoal and _ its
preparations intended for internal consumption or local

application.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose for internal use is 9 g
of ground drug. The average single dose is 3 g of powder.

Storage: Coffee charcoal should be stored in well-sealed

containers.

COFFEE BEANS
Mode of Administration: The ground beans
different types of infusion, ie. cooked coffee (filter, espresso
etc.). Caffeine is used in various combinations and prepara-
tions for numerous therapeutic uses. Commercial pharma-
ceutical preparations include tablets, coated tablets,
compresses and diverse compound preparations.

are used in

Preparation: The dried seeds are roasted until they procure a
deep brown color and a characteristic aroma. This process is
usually carried out in the country of consumption. During
roasting, the beans float for 15 to 3 minutes in hot gas at
220°C to 270°C.

Daily Dosage: 15 g drug

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

Storage: The beans should be stored in sealed containers

away from light and moisture.

LITERATURE

COFFEE CHARCOAL
Kuhn A, Schafer G, (Kaffeekohle). In: Dtsch Med Wochenschr

23:922-923. 1939.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

COFFEE BEANS
Anonym, Wieviel Coffein ist in welchem Produkt? In: PTA

5(1):40. 1991.
Battig K, Kaffee in wissenschaftlicher Sicht. In: ZPT 9(3):95.
1988.
Bornkessel B, Sind Kaffeetrinker starker gefahrdet? In: DAZ
131(5):189. 1991.

Butz S, Nurses'-Health-Studie: Kaffe - kein Risikofaktor fur
koronare Herzkrankheit? In: DAZ 136(19): 1680-1582. 1996.
Coffein: Entzugssyndrom bei Kaffeetrinkern. In: DAZ
133(6):441. 1993.

Dieudonne S, Forero ME, Llano I, Lipid analysis of Coffea
arabica Linn, beans and their possible hypercholesterolemic
effects. Int J Food Sci Nutr, 159:135-9, 1997 Mar.

Ferre, Buch. In: Ferre F. Kaffee-Eine Kulturgeschichte. 1992.

Garattini, Buch. In: Caffeine, Coffee, and Health. Garattini S.
Monographs of the Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological
Research, Milan. Raven Press, New York. 1993.

Martin E, Cholesterolspiegel erhohender Faktor in Kaffeelipiden.
In: DAZ 130(42):2376. 1990.

Mensink RP, Lebbink WJ, Lobbezoo IE, Weusten-Van der
Wouw MP, Zock PL, Katan MB, Diterpene composition of oils
from Arabica and Robusta coffee beans and their effects on
serum lipids in man. J Intern Med, 237:543-50, 1995 Jun.

Phillips R, Smith D, Characterization of coffea canephora alpha-
D-galactosidase blood group B activity. Artif Cells Blood
Substit Immobil Biotechnol, 103:489-502, 1996 Sep.

Ponepal V, Spielberger U, Riedel-Caspari G, Schmidt FW, Use
of a Coffea arabica tosta extract for the prevention and therapy
of polyfactorial infectious diseases in newborn calves. DTW
Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr, 103:390-4, 1996 Oct.

Ratnayake WM, Pelletier G, Hollywood R, Malcolm S, Stavric
B, Investigation of the effect of coffee lipids on serum
cholesterol in hamsters. Food Chem Toxicol, 33:195-201, 1995
Mar.

Schroder, Buch. In: Schroder R: Kaffee, Tee un
Ulmer-Verlag, Stuttgart. 1991.
Schroder-Rosenstock K, KaffeegenufI - ein medizinisches
Problem. In: DAZ 130(35):1919. 1990.

Silnermann K et al., (Entzugssymptome nach regelmaf3igem
Kaffeegenup).Jn: New Engl J Med 327:1109. 1992.

Kardamom,

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 456 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

4/2 Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,

Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Cola

Cola acuminata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The seeds are the medicinal parts of the

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers with a diameter of 15
cm or the androgynous flowers with a diameter of 2.5 cm are
axillary or on branches in cymes of few flowers. The 5 part
chalice-shaped perigone is white to yellow and marked with
red on the inside. The star-shaped fruits have 5 coriaceous,
thick, dark brown, unkeeled follicles arranged at right angles
to the stem. The fruits grow up to 20 cm long and 5 cm wide.
There are up to 14 ovate or square seeds of about 2.5 cm
diameter in 2 rows with a white fleshy seed shell. The seed
kernel is usually reddish or red, occasionally white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree 15 to
20 m tall. The trunk is branched down as far as the base. The
bark is dark green, rough and breaks off in pieces as it ages.
Branches have leaves only at their ends. The tough
coriaceous leaves are 15 to 18 era long and 10 cm wide,
elliptoid to ovate, and end in a curled and spiraled tip. Both
sides are dark green and glossy.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Togo, Sierra Leone and
Angola. It is found today in all tropical regions and
cultivated widely.

Production: The ripe fruit is harvested and the seeds are
removed and dried. Cola nut is the endosperm freed from the
testa of various Cola species, particularly Cola nitida.

fi; Not to be Confused With: Other varieties of Cola, such as

Male kola which contains no caffeine.
Other Names: Kola Tree, Guru Nut, Cola Nut, Cola Seeds,
Bissy Nut

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Purine alkaloids: main alkaloid caffeine (0.6 - 3.7%),

additionally theobromine, theophylline

(+)-catechin, (-)-epicatechin

COLA /205

Catechin tannins
Oligomeric proanthocyanidins
Starch

EFFECTS
Cola's purine (caffeine) content makes it a strong CNS
stimulant. In humans it acts as a respiratory analeptic,
lipolytic, mildly positively chronotropic and mild diuretic. In
addition, it stimulates gastric acid and increases motility of
the gastrointestinal tract. In animal tests. Cola is also
analeptic, lipolytic, stimulates production of gastric acid and
increases gastric motility.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Lack of stamina

Unproven Uses: Cola is used internally to decrease mental
and physical fatigue. In folk medicine it is chewed to treat
diarrhea, suppress hunger, thirst, morning sickness and
migraine. It is also used to promote digestion. It is ground
and made into poultices for wounds and inflammations. Cola
is also an indigenous cult drug.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of Cola is contraindicated during pregnancy. The drug
should not be administered in the presence of stomach or
duodenal ulcers, due to the drug's stimulation of gastric juice
secretion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks following the proper administration of designat-
ed therapeutic dosages have not been recorded. Side effects
that may occur include difficulty falling asleep, hyperexcita-
bility, nervous states of restlessness and stomach complaints.
Signs of poisoning following the intake of Cola drinks (20 to
60 mg caffeine per glass) or medications or stimulants
containing Cola extracts are not expected. Small children
should avoid the intake of large quantities of Cola drinks.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Powdered drug and other galenic
preparations for internal use.

How Supplied: Capsules, tablets, tonics.

Preparation: Dry extract: from the percolation 1:1 with 45%
ethanol; fluid extract: percolation with 70% ethanol (V/V);
Cola tincture: 1:5 with 70% ethanol; Cola wine: 50 parts
fluid Cola extract with 850 parts Xeres wine and 100 parts
sugar syrup.

Daily Dosage: 2 to 6 g of Cola nut drug, usually taken | to
3 g, 3 times daily; 0.25 to 0.75 g of Cola extract: 2.5 to 7.5 g
of Cola liquid extract; 10 to 30 g of Cola tincture; 60 to
180 g of Cola wine.

----- PAGE 457 -----
206/COLA

Storage: Cola should be protected from light in sealed
containers.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Morton, JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C. Thomas USA 1981.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R: Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Cola acuminata
See Cola

Colchicum
Colchicum autumnale

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The fresh flowers and the dried ripe seeds,
collected in early summer and then sliced, as well as the
tubers (fresh and dried) are the medicinal parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The 5 to 20 cm flowers usually bloom in
autumn. They are a bright lilac-pink, and solitary or in pairs
from the corm. The 6 bracts of the involucre are fused into a
long, narrow tube. The flower has 6 stamens and 3 thread-
like styles. The ovaries are on the side of the corm. The 3-
valved capsule is initially green, later becoming brown and
wrinkled, and contains black seeds with sticky appendages.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Colchicum can grow to 40 cm in
height. The 3 to 4 broadly lanceolate leaves are tulip-like;

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

leaves appear together with the fruit in spring. They are 8 to
25 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide and overlap at the base to form a

tube.

Characteristics: All parts of the plant are very poisonous and
have a disgustingly bitter and scratchy taste.

Not to be Confused With: The tubers are sometimes confused
with cooking onions.

Habitat: Colchicum autumnale is primarily a central Europe-
an plant found in northern Ireland, England, northern
Germany, southern Poland, the Ukraine, Bulgaria, Turkey,
Albania and northern Spain. It also grows in central Asia.

Production: Colchicum seeds are the dried seeds of Colchi-
cum autumnale harvested in the wild in June or July and air-
dried. Colchicum bulbs are the cut and dried tubers of the
plant harvested in early summer. After the surrounding
leaves have been removed, the tubers are cut into slices and
dried at temperatures of 60°C or lower. Colchicum flowers
are collected from the wild in late summer and autumn and

then air-dried.

Other Names: Meadow Saffron, Meadow Saffran, Autumn
Crocus, Naked Ladies, Upstart

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COLCHICUM BULB
Tropolone alkaloids: colchicine, colchicoside and N-deace-
alkaloids include

tyl-N-formyl-colchicine; | companion

demecolcine
Starch

COMPOUNDS: COLCHICUM SEEDS
Trupolone alkaloids: colchicine and colchicoside

Fatty oil

COMPOUNDS: COLCHICUM FLOWERS
Tropolone alkaloids: colchicine and N-deacetyl-N-formyl-
colchicine, additional alkaloids including demecolcine

EFFECTS: COLCHICUM BULBS, SEEDS AND FLOWERS
Colchicum inhibits mitosis through the inhibition of motility,
particularly of the phagocytosing lymphocytes. This is of

.-therapeutic use for blocking the immigration and the

autolysis of phagocytes in inflammatory processes and

thereby producing an antiphlogistic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
COLCHICUM BULBS, SEEDS AND FLOWERS

Approved by Commission E:

* Gout
+ Mediterranean fever

Unproven Uses: Due to the plant's toxicity, internal applica-
tion is seldom used with the exception of acute attacks of

----- PAGE 458 -----
A

A

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

gout and familial Mediterranean fever. Efficacy for these
uses appears plausible. The drug was previously used for
skin tumors, condyloma, psoriasis, necrotic vasculitis, tendo-
vaginitis, inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract, morbus

Behect, liver cirrhosis, acute and chronic leukemia; also for
lice, asthma, dropsy and rheumatism.

Homeopathic Uses: In addition to acute and chronic gout,
Colchici is also used for inflammation of the kidney and
gastrointestinal tract, bodily secretions, tendovaginitis and
acute joint rheumatism. Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The drugs are severely poisonous.
poisoning, including stomachaches, diarrhea, nausea, vomit-
ing and, less frequently, stomach and intestinal hemorrhages,
can occur even with the administration of therapeutic

Signs of

dosages.

Kidney and liver damage, hair loss, peripheral nerve
inflammation, myopathia and bone marrow damage with
their resulting symptoms (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
megaloblastic anemia, and, more rarely, aplastic anemia)
have been observed following long-term administration.

Pregnancy: Colchicum is not to be used during pregnancy
because of possible teratogenic damage. This also has been
noted following intake of the drug by the father before

conception.
OVERDOSAGE

Three to 6 hours following intake of acutely toxic dosages,
burning of the mouth, difficulty swallowing and _ thirst
appear. After 12 to 14 hours, the following appear: nausea,
severe stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, bladder spasms,
hematuria, falling blood pressure and spasms, and later,
progressive paralysis. Death follows through exhaustion,
asphyxiation or circulatory collapse. The fatal dosage for an
adult is 5 g of the seeds, 1 to 15 g for a child. The fatal
dosage of an intake of colchicine lies between 7 mg and 200

mg.

The treatment for poisonings, following gastric lavage and
the administration of a saline purgative (such as sodium
sulfate), proceeds symptomatically (diazepam for convul-
sion, atropine for intestinal spasm) and includes possible
intubation and oxygen respiration.

DOSAGE
COLCHICUM BULBS, SEEDS AND FLOWERS

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug, freshly pressed
juice and other galenic preparations taken orally.

How Supplied: Ampules, tablets.

Daily Dosage: For an acute attack of gout, an initial oral
dose corresponding to 1 mg colchicine, followed by 0.5 to

COLCHICUM AUTUMNALE / 207

15 mg every | to 2 hours until pain subsides. Total daily
dosage must not exceed 8 mg of colchicine. For prophylactic
and therapeutic purposes, the dosage should correspond to
0.5 to 15 mg of colchicine.

Storage: All forms of the drug should be stored in containers
that protect them from light and dampness. In addition, the
seeds should be stored over lime.

LITERATURE

Fell KR. Ramsden D, (1967) Lloydia 30:123.

Gasisc O, Potesilova H, Santavy F, PM 30:75-81. 1976.
Grobner W, Wlater-Sack I, Gicht und ihre medikamentose
Therapie. In: DAZ 131(35):1789. 1991.

Heide L, Traditionelle Arzneipflanzen in der Gesundsheitsver-
sorgung der Dritten Welt. Moglichkeiten und Grenzen. In: DAZ
133(23):2067. 1993.

Potesilova H, Coll Czech Chem Comm 32:141-157. 1967.
Santavy F, Reichstein T, Helv Chim Acta 33:1606-1627. 1950.
Santavy F, Talas M, Coll Czech Chem Comm 19:141-152.
1954.

Santavy F et al., PM 43:153-160. 1981.

Santavy F et al.. Coll Czech Chem Comm 48:2989-2993. 1983.
Santavy F, (1957) Pharm Zentralhalle 96:307.

Ulrichova J et al.. Biochemical evaluation of colchicine and
related analogs. In: PM 59(29): 144. 1993.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Colchicum autumnale

See Colchicum

----- PAGE 459 -----
208/COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS

Collinsonia canadensis

See Stone Root

Colombo

Jateorhiza palmata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
roots cut in slices when fresh and then dried.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is dioecious. The male
inflorescences are 40 cm long and have green sepals, which
are 2.7 to 3.2 mm long and 12 to 16 mm wide. The stamens
are free and are fused at the base with the involuted margins
of the petals. The female inflorescence is 8 to 10 cm long
and has a | to 15 mm rust-red. pubescent ovary. The fruit is
a 2 to 2.5 cm long and 15 to 2 cm wide globose drupe
containing a moon-shaped stone.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a woody, branched
liane, which can climb to tree height. The liane is initially
downy, then bristly to villous. The leaves are opposite and
have an 18 to 25 cm long petiole. The leaf blades are 15 to
35 cm long and 18 to 40 cm wide. They are bristly haired on
both surfaces, broadly rounded, deeply cordate at the base
and usually have 5 broad-ovate lobes. The root has a
diameter of 3 to 8 cm. It is greenish-black. The root has a
floury consistency, an indented center and a thick bark. The
transverse section is yellowish, with vascular bundles in
radiating lines.

Characteristics: The taste is mucilaginous and very bitter,
the odor is slight.
Habitat: Indigenous to Mozambique, east Aftica and Mada-

gascar. It is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Colombo root is the root of Jateorhiza palmata,
which has been sliced horizontally and dried. The tuber
roots, stemming from the rhizome, are dug up in March,
washed and thinly sliced, and then dried quickly in the shade

to avoid “decomposition.
Other Names: Calumba

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Isoquinoline alkaloids: main alkaloid palmatine, additionally
jatrorrhizines (jateorhizine), columbamine, and

bisjatrorrhizines

Diterpene bitter principles: including palmarin, chasmanthin
and their glucosides (palmatoside A and B), columbin,
jateorin and their glucosides (palmatoside D and E)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug is no longer used as a bitter (amarum). The
alkaloids have a narcotic effect. They act similarly to
morphine, increasing resting muscle tone in the smooth
muscle of the intestinal tract. Colombo alkaloids are said to
act as a CNS paralyzing agent in frogs, and palmatin has the
same effect on mammals. No further information is

available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine it is used for digestive
disorders accompanied by diarrhea, dyspeptic disorders,
chronic diarrhea in patients with lung disease, subacidic
gastritis and chronic entercolitis.

The drug is used in some European countries as an
antidiarrheal agent because of its morphine-like side effects.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Higher dosages of the drug may trigger vomiting and pains
in the epigastrium.

OVERDOSAGE
According to older sources, very high dosages can also lead
to signs of paralysis and unconsciousness (Lewin).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Due to its morphine-type action, its
use as an antidiarrheal agent is limited. Otherwise, the
chopped root is used (no preparations known).

Preparation: Colombo liquid extract is prepared with diluted
ethanol, according to the German pharmacopoeia. Colombo
wine is prepared using 100 parts coarsely powdered drug and
1000 parts xeres wine. The extract is pressed out after 8 days
and filtered.

Daily Dosage: The dose of the decoction is 1 dessertspoon-
ful every 2 hours. The liquid extract standard single dose is
20 drops. Tincture of Colombo standard single dose is 2.5
gm. Colombo wine standard single dose is 5 gm.

Storage: Colombo must be kept dry at all times.

LITERATURE
Chan, EH et al. (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 460 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Overton KH, Wier NG, Wylie'A, J Chem Soc 1482-1490.
1966.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Colt's Foot

Tussilago farfara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried inflores-
cences, the dried leaves and the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow compound flowers are in
small, solitary capitula at the end of the scapes. The lateral
florets are lingual, narrow and female. The disc florets are
tubular-campanulate, 5-petalled and male. The involucral
bracts are almost as long, linear-lanceolate and have a
scarious margin. The fruit is 3 to 11 mm long, cylindrical,
brown, glabrous and stemmed. The pappus is in a number of
rows and consists of long, glossy white hairs, which are
much lonser than the fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, 10 to 30 cm
high. It has a broadly branched, underground shoot and root
system with a thin round, scaly base. There is also an up to
18 m long, far-reaching, creeping shoot. The flower stern is
a scaly, round, tomentose scape covered with lanceolate,
reddish scales, which is 30 cm long when the fruit ripens.
The leaves, which appear after flowering, are basal, coria-
ceous, cordate-round, angular, irregularly dentate, long-pe-
tioled and tomentose beneath. The leaves can reach a
diameter of up to 30 cm.

Characteristics: The taste and texture is slimy-sweet and the
leaves have a honey-like smell when they are rubbed.

Habitat: The plant grows wild in most of Europe, central,
western and northern Asia. It has spread to the mountains of
northern Africa and has been introduced into North America.

Production: Colt's Foot flower consists of the fresh or dried
flowers of Tussilago farfara. Colt's Foot herb consists of the
fresh or dried, above-ground parts of Tussilago farfara.
Colt's Foot root consists of the fresh or dried, below-ground
parts of Tussilago farfara.

Not to be Confused With: The leaves of various Petasites
species, but petasine and flavonoids can be identified using
thin layer chromatography.

Other Names: British Tobacco, Bullsfoot, Butterbur, Cough-
wort, Rower Velure, Foal's-Foot, Horse-Foot, Horsehoof,
Hallfoot, Ass's Foot, Foalswort, Fieldhove, Donnhove

COLTS FOOT 209

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COLT'S FOOT FLOWER
Mucilages (7%): acidic polysaccharides

Tannins
Triterpenes: including beta-amyrin, arnidiol. faradiol
Steroids: including beta-sitosterol

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (traces, not in plants from all places
of origin): tussilagine, isotussilagine, senkirkine. senecionine

Flavonoids

COMPOUNDS: COLT'S FOOT HERB

Mucilages (8%): acidic polysaccharides

Tannins (5%)

Triterpenes: including alpha-amyrin, beta-amyrin
Steroids: including beta-sitosterol, campesterol

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (not in plants from all places of
origin): senkirkine (0.01%), senecionine. _ tussilagine,

isotussilagine
Flavonoids

COMPOUNDS: COLTS FOOT ROOT
The roots have not been fully investigated. Only the presence
of triterpenes and sterols has been established.

EFFECTS: COLT'S FOOT FLOWER, HERB, AND ROOT

The mucin contained in the drug has a sequestering effect
and envelopes the mucous membrane with a layer that
protects the throat from chemical and physical irritation and
thereby reduces cough irritation. The pyrrolizidine alkaloids
are antibacterial, carcinogenic, and hepatotoxic.

COMPOUNDS: COLT'S FOOT LEAF
Mucilages (8%): acidic polysaccharides
Tannins (5%)

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (traces, not from all sources):
tussilagine, isotussilagine, senkirkine 0.01%), senecionin

Steroids: including beta-sitosterol, campesterol
Triterpenes: including alpha- and beta-amyrin
Flavonoids

EFFECTS: COLT'S FOOT LEAF
The pyrrolizidine alkaloids are antibacterial, carcinogenic,
and hepatotoxic. The mucin polysaccharides cause a demul-
cent, sequestering, and anti-inflammatory effect. In animal
experiments there was evidence ofa stimulating effect on the
ciliated epithelium.

----- PAGE 461 -----
210 /COLT'S FOOT

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

COLT'S FOOT FLOWER. HERB, AND ROOT

Unproven Uses: When added to Colt's Foot leaf, the flower,
herb, and root are used to treat rheumatism.

COLT'S FOOT LEAF'

Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
+ Bronchitis
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Colt's Foot leaf is used for inflammation of
the oraFand pharyngeal mucosa. In addition, cigarettes made
of the leaves are used to help cure smoking addiction.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
COLT'S FOOT FLOWER. HERB, ROOT. AND LEAF
Administration during pregnancy and while nursing is

contraindicated.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
COLT'S FOOT FLOWER, HERB, AND ROOT
Because of the possible hepatotoxic and
pyrrolizidine alkaloid content, the administration of the
blossoms should be avoided.

carcinogenic

COLT'S FOOT LEAF
Colt's Foot leaves may no longer be brought into circulation
in Austria. In Germany, dosages cannot exceed an intake of
10 meg pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1.2-unsaturated necic
parent substances in the form of tea mixtures, and an intake
of 1 meg in the form of extracts.

Because even traces of the alkaloids present some danger,
one should forgo any administration of the drug.

DOSAGE

COLT'S FOOT FLOWER, HERB, AND ROOT

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally through
the use of tea and standardized remedies.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, add 1.5 to 2.5 gm cut drug to
boiling water, then strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Storage: Protect the drug from light and store it tightly
sealed.

COLT'S FOOT LEAF
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut, and powdered drug
used in teas, infusions, extracts, and tinctures.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour hot water over 1.5
to 2.5 gm of drug and allow to draw for 10 minutes. Other
preparations are made as follows: liquid extract: 1:1 with
20% ethanol; extract: 1.1 with 25% ethanol; tincture: 1:5
with 45% ethanol.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Daily Dosage: The total daily dose is 4.5 to 6 gm of drug.
The maximum daily dosage must not be more than 1 meg of
total pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1.2 unsaturated necine

structure.

The tea is given several times a day. The dosage for the
extract is 2 ml 3 times daily; for the tincture, it is 8 ml 3
times daily.

Storage: Protect the drug from light and store it tightly
sealed.

LITERATURE
COLT'S FOOT FLOWER, HERB, AND ROOT
Delaveau P et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:49.

Didry N et al., (1982) Ann Pharm Franc 40(1 ):75.
Engalycheva EI et al., (1982) Farmatsiya 31(2):37.
Franz G, PM 17:217. 1969.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Hirono I et al., (1976) Gann 67(1): 125.
Hirono I et al., (1979) J Natl Cane Inst 63(2):469.

Thrig M, Pyrrolizidinalkaloidhaltige Drogen im Handverkauf? In:
PZ 137(40):3128. 1992.

Kraus C et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(2):89.

Miething H, Steinbach RA, Ermittlung der Freisetzungsraten des
Pyrrolizidinalkaloids Senkirkin in Huflattich-Teegetranken. In:
PZW 135(4): 153. 1990.

PapVeiter CM, Co-occurence of 2-pyrrolidineacetic acid with

four isomeric tussilaginic acids in Arnica species and Tussilago
farfara. In: PM 58(7)94. 1992.

Roder E et al., (1981) Plant Med 43:99.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Wagner H, In: Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, Vol. 1,
Academic Press, UK 1985.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

----- PAGE 462 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.

4t mbH Stuttgart 1997.

jfe

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

COLT'S FOOT LEAF

Delaveau P et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:49.

Didry N et al., (1982) Ann Pharm Franc 40(1 ):75.
Engalycheva El et al., (1982) Farmatsiya 31(2):37.

Franz G, PM 17:217. 1969.

Hiller K. Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Hirono I et al., (1976) Gann 67(1): 125.

Hirono I et al., (1979) J Natl Cane Inst 63(2):469.

Thrig M, Pyrrolizidinalkaloidhaltige Drogen im Handverkauf? In:
Z 137(40):3128. 1992.

Kraus C et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(2):89.

Miething H, Steinbach RA. Ermittlung der Freisetzungsraten des
Pyrrolizidinalkaloids Senkirkin in Huflattich-Teegetriinken. In:
PZW 135(4): 153. 1990.

PapVeiter CM, Co-occurence of 2-pyrrolidineacetic acid with
four isomeric tussilaginic acids in Arnica species and Tussilago
farfara. In: PM 58(7)94. 1992.

Roder E et al., (1981) Plant Med 43:99.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Wagner H, In: Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, Vol. 1,
Academic Press, UK 1985.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

COLUMBINE/211

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Columbine
Aquilegia vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the stems and
leaves, the aerial parts gathered and dried in flowering
season, and the seeds and preparations of the whole plant
also gathered in flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The long-stemmed flowers are terminal,
hanging, and either dark blue, dark violet, pink or white. The
5 sepals spread like petals. They are broadly ovate, and end
in a blunt, green tip. The 5 petals are hood-shaped with long,
inwardly hooked spurs. There are numerous stamens and
usually 5 ovaries. The follicle is oblong, erect and glandular-
downy. The seeds are glossy black, oval, 2.2 to 2.5 cm long
by 15 cm wide. They are thick, blunt-tipped and anatropous.
The raphe forms a distinct line on the side of the plant.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 30- to 60-cm high plant has a
many-headed, light brown and branched rhizome. The stems
are erect and usually branched. They are glabrous or soft-
haired. The basal leaves are long-petioled and trifoliate. The
leaflets are wedge-shaped to ovoid, blunt, irregularly crenate
to serrate, and bluntly lobed. The underside of the leaves are
usually light green and pubescent. The cauline leaves are
smaller than the basal leaves and simpler. The highest leaves
are usually made up ofa few elongate-ovate, entire-margined

lobes.

Habitat: Columbine is indigenous to central and southern
Europe and is also found in the eastern U.S. and Asia.

Production: Columbine herb is the complete aerial part of
Aquilegia vulgaris harvested while in flower and dried.

Other Names: Culverwort, Capon's Feather, Culver Key

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: dhurrin (presumably

trigloquinine,

only traces)

EFFECTS

It is not known which constituents are responsible for the
herb's effects. The cyanogenic glycoside trigloquinine could
possibly be of toxicological interest but is probably only
present in traces.

----- PAGE 463 -----
212/COLUMBINE

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Columbine is used internally for scurvy and
jaundice; the herb is also used to treat states of agitation due
to its supposedly tranquilizing effect.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used to treat menopausal
vomiting and dysmenorrhea in young women. It is also used
to treat the sensation of a lump in the throat (globus
hystericus) and nervous shaking.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Poisonings from the leaves because of the cyanogenic
glycoside content have not been observed. The amount of
hydrocyanic acid that is released from the leaves is

apparently too small to cause toxicity.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Columbine is available in tablets
and capsules for internal use.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc twice
a week (HAB)I).

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Fat LTS, Proc Kon Nederl Akad Wetensch Ser C82:197. 1979.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Combretum micranthum
See Opium Antidote

Comfrey
Symphytum officinale

TRADE NAMES
Comfrey (available from numerous manufacturers)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh root and

the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are dull purple or violet. They
are arranged in crowded, apical, 2-fayed hanging cymes. The
calyx is fused and has 5 tips. The corolla is also fused and is
cylindrical-campanulate with a pentangular tube and 5-
tipped border. The tips are revolute and there are 5 awl-
shaped scales in the mouth of the tube. The scales close
together in a clavate form and have a glandular tipped
margin. There are 5 stamens and 1 style. The ovary is 4-
valved. The fruit consists of 4 smooth, glossy nutlets.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 30 to 120 cm
in height. The root is fusiform, branched, black on the
outside and white on the inside. The stem is erect and stiff
haired. The leaves are wrinkly and roughly pubescent; the
lower ones and the basal ones are ovate-lanceolate and
pulled together in the petiole; the upper ones are lanceolate
and broad.

Characteristics: The root is slimy and horn-like when dried.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and temperate
Asia and is naturalized in the U.S.

Production: Comfrey herb consists of the fresh or dried
above-ground parts of Symphytum officinale. Comfrey leaf
consists of the fresh or dried leaf of Symphytum officinale.
Comfrey root consists of the fresh or dried root section of
Symphytum officinale.

Other Names: Ass Ear, Black Root, Blackwort, Boneset,
Bruisewort, Consound, Gum Plant, Healing Herb, Knitback,

Knitbone, Salsify, Slippery Root, Wallwort, Consolida,
Boneset

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Allantoin

Mucilages (Fructans)

Triterpene saponins: including symphytoxide A

Tannins

Silicic acid: to some extent water-soluble

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (0.03% in the leaves): including

echinatine, lycopsamine, 7-acetyl lycoposamine, echimidine,
lasiocarpine, symphytine, intermedine, symveridine.

EFFECTS
Anti-inflammatory Effect—Comfrey suppresses
infiltration during the inflammation process (Shipochliev,
1981).

leukocyte

----- PAGE 464 -----
4P

Jfr

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Demultant Effect—The mucilages act as demultants for a
soothing and irritation reduction effect.

Hypotensive Effect—Symphytoxide A, a triterpene saponin,
exhibited hypotensive activity in anesthetized rats (Ahmad,

1993).

Tissue/Nerve Stimulation—Allantoin, a component in Com-
frey, stimulates tissue repair and wound healing through cell
proliferation (Rieth, 1968). Allantoin has also had significant
effect on cellular multiplication in degenerating and regener-
ating peripheral nerves (Loots, 1979).

CLINICAL TRIALS
The anti-inflammatory effects of Comfrey were studied in
musculoskeletal disorders. Forty-one patients with musculo-
skeletal rheumatism were treated with either a pyrrolizidine
alkaloid-free ointment or placebo for 4 weeks. The patient
illnesses consisted of epicondylitis, tendovaginitis, and peri-
arthritis. Efficacy was determined by evaluation of different
pain parameters (tenderness on pressure, pain at rest, pain on
exercise). There was significant improvement with the
ointment compared to placebo at weeks 1, 2. and 4 in
patients with epicondylitis. There was improvement with
tendovaginitis at week 1 and 2, but not at week 4 with the
ointment compared to placebo. There was no improvement
in the peri-arthritis patients in either of the two treatment
groups (Petersen, 1993).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Blunt injuries

Externally, Comfrey is used for bruises, sprains and promo-
tion of bone healing.

Unproven Uses: The root has been used externally as a
mouthwash and gargle for gum disease, pharyngitis, and
strep throat. Internally, the root has been used for gastritis
and gastrointestinal ulcers. In Folk medicine, the root of the
plant has been used for rheumatism, pleuritis, and as an anti-
diarrheal agent.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Comfrey is contraindicated in pregnancy and in nursing
mothers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Hepatotoxicity: Internal administration of the drug, due to
the presence of pyrrolizidine alkaloids, has resulted in
hepatocyte membrane injury with hemorrhagic necrosis and
loss of microvilli (Yeong, 1993). Hepatic veno-occlusive
disease and severe portal hypertension has been associated
with Comfrey ingestion, and in one case report, death
resulted by liver failure (Ridker, 1989; Yeong, 1990).

COMFREY /213

Carcinogenic/Mutagenic Effects: Mutagenic effects are asso-
ciated with aqueous extracts of the alkaloid fractions
(Furmanowa, 1983). Hepatocelluar adenomas have been
reported in animal models receiving diets containing Com-
frey roots and leaves (Hirono, 1978). Comfrey also has
chromosome-damaging effects in human lymphocytes (Beh-
ninger, 1989).

Gastrointestinal/Kidney/Pancreas Effects: Comfrey, through
the pyrrolizidine alkaloids, has been shown to produce
lesions in the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, and renal
glomeruli in animal models (Winship, 1991).

Respiratory Effects: Pulmonary endothelial hyperplasia from
the pyrrolizidine alkaloids has been seen in animal models
(Miskely, 1992).

Use in Pregnancy: The drug is contraindicated during
pregnancy.

Use in Nursing Mothers: Use of the drug while nursing is
contraindicated.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The crushed root, extracts, and
pressed juice of the fresh plant are used as semi-solid
preparations and poultices for external use. The drug is a
component of standardized preparations of analgesics, anti-
rheumatic agents, antiphlogistics, antitussives, and
expectorants.

How Supplied:
Cream—1.25 oz,, 2 oz.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over 5
to 10 gm comminuted or powdered drug, steep 10 to 15
minutes, then strain (1 teaspoonful = 4 gm drug). For
external application, a decoction of 1:10 is used, or the fresh
roots are mashed.

Daily Dosage:

External Use—The daily dosage should not exceed | meg of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids for external preparations calculated
with 5 to 7% drug, maximum | ppm/gm for commercial
pharmaceutical preparations. The drug should be used for a
maximum of 4 weeks.

Tea—When using the infusion, take 1 cup 2 to 3 times daily,
but not for a long duration (SEE PRECAUTIONS).

LITERATURE
Ahmad VU; Noorwala M; Mohammad FV et al. Symphytoxide
A, a triterpenoid saponin fiom the roots of Symphytum
officinale. Phytochemistry 1993 Mar;32(4): 1003-6.

Behninger C; Abel G; Roder E et al. Studies on the effect of
an alkaloid extract of Symphytum officinale on human
lymphocyte cultures. Planta Med 1989 Dec;55(6):518-22.

----- PAGE 465 -----
214/COMFREY

Bhandari P, Gray AI (1985) J Pharm Pharmacol 37:50P.
Branchlij et al., (1982) Experientia 38:1085.

Culvenor CJJ et al., (1980) Experientia 36:377.

Franz G, (1969) Planta Med 17:217.

Furmanowa M, Guzewska J, Beldowska B. Mutagenic effects of
aqueous extracts of Symphytum officinale L. and of its alkaloid
fractions. J Appl Toxicol 1983 Jun;3(3): 127-30.

Furuya T, Araki K, (1968) Chem Pharm Bull 16:2512.

Garrett BJ; Cheeke PR; Miranda CL et al. Consumption of
poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea, Symphytum officinale,
Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum) by rats: chronic
toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-metabolizing
enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982 Feb; 10(2-3): 183-8.

Gracza L et al., (1985) Arch Pharm 312(12): 1090.
Gray AI et al., (1983) J Pharm Pharmacol 35:13P.

Hirono I, Mori H, Haga M. carcinogenic activity of Syphytum
officinale. J Natl Cancer Inst 1978 Sep; 61(3):865-9.

Thrig M, Pyrrolizidinalkaloidhaltige Drogen im Handverkauf? In:
PZ137(40):3128. 1992.

Kozhina IS et al., (1970) Rastit Resur 6:345.

Loots JM; Loots GP; Joubert WS. The effect of allantoin on
cellular multiplication in degenerating and regenerating nerves.
S Afr Med J 1979 Jan 13;55(2):53-6.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Miskelly FG & Goodyer LI: Hepatic and pulmonary
complications of herbal medicines. Postgrad J 1992; 68:935-936.
Mohammad FV et al., Bisdesmosidic triterpenoidal saponins
from the roots of Symphytum officinale. In: PM 61(1):94.

1995.

Miitterlein R, Arnold CG, Untersuchungen zum
Pyrrolizidingehalt und Pyrrolizidinalkaloidmuster in Symphytum
officinale L. In: PZ-W_ 138(5/6): 119. 1993.

Noorwala M et al., A bisdesmosidic triterpene glycoside from
roots of Symphytum officinale. In: PH 36(2):439. 1994.
Petersen G et al., Anti-inflammatory activity of a pyrrolizidine
alkaloid-free extract of roots of Symphytum officinale. In: PM
59(7)A703. 1993.

Rieth H. Stimulation of tissue reparation with allantoin as
adjuvant of the antifungal treatment. Mykosen 1968 Jan
311(1):93-4.

Ridker PN; McDermont WV. Hepatotoxicity due to comfrey
herb tea. Am J Med 1989 Dec;87(6):701.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Shipochliev T; Dimitrov A; Aleksandrova E. Anti-inflammatory
action of a group of plant extracts. Vet Med Nauki
1981;18(6):87-94.

Schoental R et al., (1970) Cancer Res 30:2127.

Stamford IF, Tavares IA, (1983) J Pharm Pharmacol 35:816.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Taylor A, Taylor NC, (1963) Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 114:772.
Weston CFM et al., (1987) Brit Med J 295:183.

White RD et al., (1983) Toxicol Letters 15:25.

Winship KA: Toxicity of comfrey. Adverse Drug React Toxicol
Rev 1991; 10:47-59.

Yeong ML, Wakefield SJ, Ford HC. Hepatocyte membrane

injury and bleb formation following low dose comfrey toxicity
in rats. Int J Exp Pathol 1993 Apr;74(2):211-7.

Yeong ML, Swinburn B, Kennedy M, Nicholson G. Hepatic
veno-occlusive disease associated with comfrey ingestion. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 1990 Mar-Apr;5(2):211-4.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.): Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York,
980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M: Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Commiphora molmol
See Myrrh

Common Kidney Vetch

Anthyllis vulneraria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
flower.

----- PAGE 466 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The many-floreted capitula are in the
upper bract axils. The papilonaceous flowers are almost
sessile and have an upright corolla up to 20 mm long. The
calyx is membranous and up to 17 mm long. It is tubular-
bottle-shaped and shaggy to felt-haired. The color is yellow

‘4B to white at the bottom, turning violet toward the top. The

petals are whitish-yellow to yellow or occasionally crimson.
They have a free standard, slightly shorter wings, and an
acute, often red, carina. Ten stamens are fused into a tube.
The ovaries are stemmed with a thickened style and rounded
stigma. The pod-fruit is enclosed in the dried calyx. It is
ovate, reticulate, dark brown, single-seeded, and does not
spring open. The seed is ovate, smooth, shiny and checkered
yellow-green.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Anthyllis vulneraria is a 15 to 30 cm
high half-rosette shrub with a sturdy tap-root and a short,
entire or often branched rhizome. The stem is upright,
unbranched or branched, and tomentose. The leaves are
variously pinnate, depending on where they are on the stem.
All leaves are entire-margined, glabrous or slightly pubes-
cent above, and thickly tomentose beneath. The stipules are
small and generally connected to a clasping sheath.

“ Characteristics: Kidney Vetch has a weak aromatic odor and

4f

dry taste.

Habitat: The plant is found all across Europe to the
Caucasus and the Middle East. It is found in the south to the
Sahara and Ethiopia.

Production: Kidney Vetch are the flowers of Anthyllis
vulneraria wimout their stems.Woundwort is collected in the
wild and then dried quickly in the shade.

Other Names: Ladies' Fingers, Lamb's Toes, Kidney Vetch,
Staunchwort, Woundwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins

Saponins
Flavonoids .
Isoflavonoids
Lectins

EFFECTS

Antiviral activity was demonstrated with an ethanol extract
of the plant. The flavonols quercetin and rhamnetin have a
mutagenic effect. The herb's use in the treatment of ulcers
and wounds may be due to the tannins (probably of the
catechin type).

COMMON STONECROP/215

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Kidney Vetch tea is used in the treatment of
ulcers and wounds both internally and externally. The drug is
also used in a tea for coughs that also contains ribwort, as an
ingredient of blood-purifying teas, and for exposure and
vomiting. It is used internally for diseases of the mouth and
throat.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations are available for
internal uses, often as teas, and external uses including

poultices, washes and rinses.

Preparation: To prepare tea, use 1 dessertspoonful of the
flowers per 250 ml of water.

LITERATURE
Czeczot H, Tudek B, Kusztelak J, Szymezyk T, Dobrowolska
B, Glinkowska G, Malinowski J, Strzelecka H, Isolation and
studies of the mutagenic activity in the Ames test of flavonoids
naturally occurring in medical herbs. Mutat Res. 240:209-16,
1990 Mar.

Sile A, Vanaga A, Nauka-Prakt Farm: 82-85. 1974.

Vetter J, Seregelyes-Csomos A, Magy Allatory Lapja 43(8):479-
482. 1988.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Common Stoneerop

Sedum acre

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
aerial parts collected during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are leafy, twining cymes on
short pedicles. There are 5 ovate sepals and 5 golden yellow
petals that are 7 to 9 mm long, lanceolate and twice as long
as the calyx. The fruit is a follicle, which splits after
flowering to form a 5-rayed star, which is 3 to 5 mm long
and has numerous seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant grows 2 to 15
cm high. It has many heavily branched shoots, which often
creep underground and form grass. The leaves are thick,
fleshy, almost round, acute, appressed and knobby-domed.

----- PAGE 467 -----
216 /COMMON STONECROP

They are rounded at the base and have no spur-like

appendage.

Characteristics: The texture is slimy and the taste hot and

pepper-like.

Habitat; Common Stonecap is common to all of Europe,
western Siberia, the Caucasus region and North America.

Production: The flowering parts of Sedum acre are picked
while in bloom and then dried, either in the sun or,
preferably, with the use of artificial heat.

Other Names: Wallpepper. Golden Moss, Wall Ginger, Bird
Bread, Prick Madam, Gold Chain, Creeping Tom, Mousetail,
Jach-of-the-Buttery

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Piperidine alkaloids (0.39c):
sedinon

chief alkaloids are sedinine,

Flavonoids: including among others, glycosides of isorham-
netin, quercetin, limnocitrin

(10%)

Tannins

Hydroquinone — glycosides: Arbutin

Mucilages (30%)

EFFECTS
In animal experiments, the drug displayed both motility-
inhibiting and motility-stimulating effects. The alkaloids and
tannins may make use of the drug in the treatment of wounds
plausible, but no reliable documentation is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for coughs
(Spain) and high blood pressure (central Europe), edema and
febrile conditions. Externally, it is used for wounds and
ulcers resulting from burns, hemorrhoids, warts, eczema, and

oral ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, Common Stonecap is
used for hemorrhoidal pain and anal fissures.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be administered in the presence of
inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract or of the

urinary drainage passages.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Dosages consisting of over 10 g of the juice or 1 to 3.5 g of
the dried foliage of the fresh plant result in queasiness,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

vomiting and diarrhea. However, cases of poisoning have not
been recorded in recent times.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Decoctions or syrups for internal
use; poultice of fresh leaves for external use.

Preparation: A decoction is prepared using 1 teaspoonful of
the drug in 1 cup of water. Prepare a syrup by mixing 100 g
of plant juice with 180 g of sugar.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug as a
decoction is 3 g (approximately 2 teaspoonfuls). Average
syrup dosage is 1 dessertspoonful every 3 hours. In external
application as a poultice, the fresh plants are crushed and
placed on the wart or skin area exhibiting eczema.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Francis LPS, Francis GW, PM 32:268-274. 1977.

Halin F et al., Tetrahedron 41:2891. 1985.

Hootele C et al., Tetrahedron 41:5563. 1985.

Niklon B et al., Acta Pharm Jugosl 40:555. 1980.

Van der Wal R et al., PM 43:97. 1981.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur

Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teusch'er E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Condurango

Marsdenia condurango

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark of the

branches and trunks.

----- PAGE 468 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in umbel-like inflores-
cence. The calyx and the campanulate to funnel-shaped
corolla have 5 sepals and petals. Pollination is only possible
by insects. The fruit is a follicle containing the seeds, with a
tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a climbing shrub with
pubescent shoots. The trunk can have a diameter of 10 cm.
The transverse section shows granular, yellowish-white,
scattered, fine and silky fibers. The outer surface is
brownish-gray, often warty, with patches of lichen. The
tough, ovate, 8 to 11 cm long and 5 to 8 cm wide leaves are
very pubescent. They are crossed opposite.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and acrid. The odor is
faintly aromatic.

Habitat: The plant grows on the western slopes of the Andes
in Ecuador, Peru and Columbia.

Production: Condurango bark consists of the dried bark of
branches and trunk of Marsdenia condurango.

Not to be Confused With: Asclepias umbellata or Elcomar-
thiza amylacea

Other Names: Eagle Vine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pregnane- and pregn-S-ene glycosides (mixture known as
condurangin): including condurango glycosides A, AO, Al,
BO, C, CI, DO, EO, E2

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid, neo-
chlorogenic acid

Flavonoids: including trifoliin, hyperoside, quercitrin, rutin,
and saponarin

EFFECTS
The drug contains bitter condurango glycosides (conduran-
gin). As with other amaroid drugs, a reflexive increase of
saliva and gastric juice secretion is to be expected. The drug
stimulates the secretion of saliva and gastric juices. It has an
antitumoral effect in animals.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
« Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Condurango is used for loss of appetite. In
folk medicine, it is used for atonia of the stomach, painful
nutritional disorders, for stomach cancer to alleviate nausea,
as an appetite stimulant and to increase tolerance of food.

CONDURANGO /217

Homeopathic Uses: Condurango is used for cracked skin,
constriction of the alimentary canal, and for ulceration of the
lips and anus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions and
other bitter-tasting preparations for internal use.

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by adding 15 gm
comminuted drug to cold water and bringing to a boil; strain
when cold. The drug is also added to wine; 50 to 100 gm of
the drug per liter.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of aqueous extract is
0.2 to 0.5 gm; tincture, 2 to 5 gm; liquid extract, 2 to 4 gm;
bark, 2 to 4 gm; Infusion and wine: | cup or 1 liquor glass 30
minutes before meals.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day. Apply ointment | to 2 times a day (acute and chronic)
(HAB1).

Storage: Condurango should be kept tightly sealed and
protected from light.

LITERATURE
Berger S et al., Arch Pharm 320:924. 1987.

Berger S et al., PH 27:1451. 1988.

Hayashi K et al., (1980) Chem Pharm Bull 28:1954.

Hayashi K et al., (1981) Chem Pharm Bull 29:2725.
Steinegger E, Koch H, Pharm Acta Helv 56:244 et 57:211.
1982.

Takase M et al., (1982) Chem Pharm Bull 30:2429.
Tschesche R, Kohl H, Tetrahedron 24:4359. 1968.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 469 -----
218/CONGOROSA

Congorosa
Maytenus _ ilicifolia

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried

leaf.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in clusters in the leaf
axils; the bracts have a reddish border. The flowers are
radial; their structures are in fives. The calyx is reddish and
5-tipped. The petals are free, oval to elliptical and yellow.
The male flowers have 5 stamens approximately 2 mm long
with their ovary covered by a disc. The female flowers have
1 mm long stamens and a 2-carpeled, fused ovary on a thick
fleshy disc. The fruit is a reddish, 2-chambered capsule. The
seeds are reddish with a thin aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Congorosa grows as a dioecious
evergreen shrub or tree, reaching up to 5 m high. The leaves
are alternate, 2 to 15 cm long and | to 7 cm wide. They are
elliptical to lanceolate, coriaceous and covered on both sides
with 4 to 7 prickly teeth. Sometimes the leaves are
completely entire, with very narrow, dropping stipules.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to South America.

Production: Congorosa leaves (Argentinean name) are the
dried leaves of Maytenus ilicifolia.

Not to be Confused With: Congorosa is sometimes confused
with (and adulterated with) Verba Mate.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Macrocyclic alkaloids (0.00005%): maytansinoides, includ-
ing maytansine, maytanprine, maytanbutine

EFFECTS
The quinoid triterpene maytenin contained in the drug
exhibits antimicrobial and tumor-inhibiting properties, par-
ticularly in topical administration for the treatment of basal
cell carcinomas. Maytansine exhibits significant cytotoxic
and antitumoral efficacy (similar to that of vinca alkaloids).
Additionally, an ulcer-preventing effect has been demon-
strated in both animal and human studies.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Congorosa is used mainly in South Ameri-
can folk medicine. In Brazil, external uses focus primarily on
skin conditions such as eczema and skin ulcers. Internal uses
include skin cancer, gastrointestinal complaints, gastrointes-
tinal ulcers, hyperacidity, flatulence, gastralgia, dyspepsia,
pain, states of exhaustion and anemia.

In Argentina, Congorosa is used for asthma, alcoholism and
as a vulnerary. Other varieties are also used for inflammatory
swelling and eye conditions.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PRECAUTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Animal
experiments revealed embryotoxic and teratogenic effects of
maytansines (no detailed description of dosage or experi-
mental procedure available). Should not be used during

pregnancy.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

preparations are during

Congorosa contraindicated

pregnancy.
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Preparations are available for
internal and external use.

How Supplied: Capsules

Daily Dosage:
Infusion/decoction (2 to 5%) — 100 to 400 ml internally.
Externally as required.

Powder — 5 to 20 g

Liquid extract — 5 to 20 ml
Extract — | to4 g

Tincture — 25 to 100 ml
Elixir/wine/syrup — 50 to 100 ml

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lima OG de, Coelho JS, Weigert E, Albuquerque IL d', Lima
D de A, Moraes e Souza MA, Antimicrobial substances fiom
higher plants. XXXVI. On the presence of maytenin and
pristimerine in the cortical part of the roots of Maytenus
ilicifolia from the South of Brazil. Rev Inst Antibiot (Recife),
11:35-8, 1971 Jun.

Conium maculatum
See Hemlock

Contrayerva

Dorstenia —_ contrayerva

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots of a

number of species.

----- PAGE 470 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The plant has long-pedicled, greenish
flowers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, growing to
a height of up to 30 cm. It is stemless with palmate leaves.
The rhizome is about 2 to 4 cm long and | cm thick. It is
reddish-brown on the outside, paler on the inside and rough
with leaf scars. The rhizome is nearly cylindrical and tapers
suddenly at the end into a tail-like root with numerous
curled, wiry rootlets.

Characteristics: The taste is slightly aromatic, then acrid.

Habitat: Contrayerva is found in Mexico, Peru and the West
Indies.

Production: Contrayerva root is the rhizome of Dorstenia
contrayerva and related varieties.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Cardioactive steroids (cardenolides): syriogenin

Furocoumarins
Volatile oil

EFFECTS
Diaphoretic and stimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the root are used as a
stimulant and to treat low stamina. It has also been used as
an antidote for snakebite (uncertain mechanism).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
plant can trigger phototoxicoses through skin contact.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground root as an infusion.

LITERATURE
Casagrande C et al., Tetrahedron 30:3587. 1974.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kanamori H, Sakamoto I, Mizuta M, Chem Pharm Bull
34:1826. 1986.

Renner W, PA 17:763. 1962.

Reisch J, PM 15:320. 1967.

Szenedrei K, Novak I, Varga E, Buzas G, PA 23:76-77. 1968.
Renner W, PA 12:763-776. 1962.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

COOLWORT/219

Convallaria majalis
See Lily-of-the-Valley

Coolwort

Tiarella cordifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has inconspicuous white
flowers in racemes. The buds are pink-tinged. The few seeds
are somewhat clavate. They have a light acrid taste and are
odorless.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 15 to 20 cm high
herbaceous perennial, which produces runners. The simple
leaves are usually slightly 5-lobed and cordate. The basal
leaves are often deep red-orange. The cauline leaves have
deep red spots and veins, although the latter are often
lacking.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America from
Virginia to Canada.

Production: Coolwort is the aerial part of Tiarella cordifolia.
Other Names: Foam Flower, Mitrewort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
The effective agents of the plant are unknown.

EFFECTS
The herb is a diuretic and a tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Coolwort is used for conditions of the
urinary tract and digestive disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
witii the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is ground for infusions.

LITERATURE
No literature is available.

----- PAGE 471 -----
220/COPAIBA BALSAM

Copaiba Balsam
Copaifera langsdorjfi

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the resin- oil
(containing resin and essential oil) tapped from drillings in
the trunk.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small and yellow.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Copaifera langsdorffi is an evergreen
tree up to 18 m high with compound leaves.

Characteristics: The resin oil consists of resin and essential
oil. The resin oil (oleoresin) ranges in viscosity from very
liquid to a resin-like substance, and in color from a pale
yellow to a red or fluorescent tint. The taste is unpleasant
and there is a characteristic smell. A single tree can yield up
to 40 liters.

Habitat: Copaiba Balsam is indigenous to tropical regions of
South America and South Africa.

Production: Copaiba Balsam is extracted from Copaifera
reticulata and other varieties from cavities drilled into the

tree trunk.

Other Names: Copaiva

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: chief constituent alpha- and beta-caryophyllene,

beta-bisabolene, L-cadinene, ~)-alpha-copaene

Resins: in particular, diterpenoid oleoresins including eperu-
8(20)-en-15,18-dicarboxylic acid, (-)-16beta-kaurane-19-car-
boxylic acid, copaiferic acid, (+)-hardwickiic acid, copalic
acid

EFFECTS

Possible bacteriostatic effect on
sesquiterpenes give the drug an antimicrobial effect.

the urinary tract. The

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The obsolete drug is still used in some
homeopathic preparations. Folk medicine employed Copaiba
Balsam as a stimulant, laxative and diuretic for conditions
such as infections of the urinary tract, chronic inflammation
of the mucous membranes of the lungs, kidney stones and

gonorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is irritating to the mucous membranes and toxic in
large amounts. Stomach pains appear after the intake of 5 g
of the drug. Repeated doses bring about summer cholera,
shivers, tremor, pains in the groin and insomnia. Skin contact
can lead to contact dermatitis such as erythema, papular or

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

vesicular rash, urticaria and petechias. Occasionally, the

rashes leave brown spots after healing.

LITERATURE
Delle Monache G et al., (1971) Tetrahedron Letters 8:659.

Ferrari M et al., (1971) Phytochemistry 10:905.

Further information. in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.
CRC Press 1975.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Copaifera langsdorffi

See Copaiba Balsam

Goptis  trifolia

See Goldthread

Coral Root

Corallorhiza odontorhiza

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots of the

parasite.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has 10 to 20 flowers in terminal
panicles. The flower heads are hood-like, reddish or purplish
on the outside, paler and flecked with purple lines on the
inside. One petal forms a lip with purple spots and a purple
rim. The fruit is a large, bent-back, ribbed, long capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Coral Root is a perennial found
growing around the roots of trees in woodlands. The rhizome
is small, brown, coral-like, about 2 to 3 cm long and 2 mm in

----- PAGE 472 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include gastritis,

coughs, skin impurities, edema and worm purging.
Homeopathic Uses: Dilutions are used for gastritis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated homeopathic dosages of the
drug.

OVERDOSAGE

2 to 3 gm of the seeds are considered harmless to humans;
poisonous levels are reached between 3 and 5 gm, due to the
toxic triterpene saponin content. Dosages over 5 gm are
considered lethal. Signs of poisoning include local irritation
of mucous membranes (sneezing, lacrimation, conjunctivitis,
salivation, nausea, vomiting, colic, diarrhea). The ingestion
of toxic levels leads to headache, dizziness, restlessness,
circulatory disorders, deliria and possible spasms. Death
occurs through asphyxiation. Long-term ingestion of acute
non-toxic dosages can cause chronic signs of poisoning. The
toxins are not affected by baking or cooking.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-

“ ing, gastric lavage, sodium sulfate) and the instillation of

activated charcoal, the treatment for poisoning includes
diazepam or barbital (i-v.) for spasms. In the event of shock,
plasma volume expanders shou'd be infused. Monitoring of
kidney function is necessary. Intubation and oxygen respira-
tion may also be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb preparations for
internal, external and parenteral uses.

Homeopathic Dosage: Parenterally: Can be given 1 ml sc, 3
times daily for acute use; and once a day for chronic use but
only from D2 (HAB34). Orally: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10
globules, every 30 to 60 minutes for acute use; and | to 3
times daily for chronic use.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kende H, Shen TC, Nitrate reductase in Agrostemma githago.
Comparison of the inductive effects of nitrate and cytokinin.
Biochim Biophys Acta, 216:118-25, 1972 Nov 24.

Siepmann C, Bader G, Hiller K, Wray V, Domke T, Nimtz M,
New saponins from the seeds of Agrostemma githago var.
githago. Planta Med, 216:159-64, 1998 Mar.

Smith RA, Miller RE, Lang DG, Presumptive intoxication of
cattle by corn cockle, Agrostemma githago (L) Scop. Vet Hum
Toxicol, 216:250, 1997 Aug.

CORN POPPY/223

Stirpe F, Gasperi-Campani A, Barbieri L, Falasca A,
Abbondanza A, Stevens WA, Ribosome-inactivating proteins
from the seeds of Saponaria officinalis L. (soapwort), of
Agrostemma githago L. (com cockle) and of Asparagus
officinalis L. (asparagus), and fiom the latex of Hura crepitans
L. (sandbox tree). Biochem J, 216:617-25, 1983 D.

Corn Poppy

Papaver rhoeas

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
flowers and seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary, terminal or
axillary, and have a diameter of 10 cm. The pedicles are
bristly, irregularly curved and usually axillary. The two
sepals are green, bristly and fall off. The 4 petals are
orbicular, usually scarlet or crimson (though occasionally
white or violet) with a round, shiny, often white-bordered
deep-black mark at the base. The fruit capsule is broad-
elliptical, dark brown and reticulate-pitted.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Poppy is an annual, occasionally
biennial, multiple-stemmed plant 25 to 90 cm high. The
stems are erect to semi-erect, simple or branched with stiff,
protruding hairs. They have basal rosette lanceolate leaves
and deeply indented cauline leaves. The foliage leaves are
oblong-lanceolate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect and very bristly.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, northern Africa
and temperate regions in Asia, and has been introduced in
North and South America.

Production: Corn Poppy flower consists of the dried petals
of Papaver rhoeas as well as its preparations.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can occur with Papaver
dibium and Papaver argemone.

Other Names: Copperose, Corn Rose, Cup-Puppy, Head-
ache, Headwark, Red Poppy

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Isoquinoline alkaloids (0.1%): chief alkaloids rhoeadine,
isorhoeadine, rhoeagenine, coptisine, isocorydine, stylopine

Anthocyans: including among others mecocyanin (cyanidin-
3-isosophoroside), cyanin

Mucilages

----- PAGE 473 -----
224/CORN POPPY

EFFECTS
No information is available other than that the drug, which
contains alkaloids (not opium alkaloids), is said to be

convulsive.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Corn Poppy flower is used for diseases and
disorders of the respiratory tract, for disturbed sleep, as a
sedative and for the relief of pain. In folk medicine, it is used
to make a cough syrup for children, as a tea for insomnia, for
pain relief and as a sedative.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathy uses Corn Poppy flower
for states of agitation and excitation and also for spasms of
the hollow organs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug itself is non-toxic due to the low level of
alkaloid content, but reports exist in the scientific literature
of children being poisoned by intake of the fresh foliage
(with blossoms). Poisoning symptoms include vomiting and
stomach pain.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a component of "metabolic"

teas.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, use 1 g of the flowers to 1 cup
hot water. To make an infusion, scald 2 teaspoonfuls drug,
steep for 10 minutes and strain (1 teaspoonful is equal to
approximately 8 g drug). A poultice is prepared using 1 to 2
teaspoonfuls of tincture to 250 ml of water. (Prepare tincture
in accordance with HAB1 guidelines.)

Daily Dosage: As an expectorant for inflammation of the
bronchial mucous membranes, drink 1 cup infusion 2 to 3
times a day. The infusion may be sweetened with honey.

Homeopathic Dosage: Full bath: 2/3 dessertspoon tincture in
a bath (correspondingly less for partial baths).

Storage: Corn Poppy flower should be thoroughly dried
before storing in a tightly sealed container that protects it

from light.

LITERATURE
El-Masry S et al., (1981) Planta Med 41:61.

Fairbairn JW, Williamson EM, (1978) Phytochemistry 17:2087.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Gasic O et al., Hem Pregl 33:23. 1992.
Kalaw Y, Sariyar S, PM 55:488. 1989.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Vedagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A): 1.

Com Silk

Zea mays

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the seed.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is monoecious. The male
flowers form terminal racemes of spikes with 2-flowered
husks. The female flowers are axillary. The spikes are at
varying distances from the ground and are enclosed in a
number of thin leaves, the sheath-like maize husk. The
spikes consist of a cylindrical substance, the cob, on which
the seeds are arranged in 8 rows of 40 or more. Single
whitish-green threads of a silky appearance grow from the
eyes of the seeds and hang outside the husk, where they
catch the pollen. The Maize seeds are usually yellow but can

be darker to almost black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 1 to 3 m high and sturdy
with a solid stem covered in alternate, over 4 cm wide, linear

leaves.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to America and is cultivated
all over the world as green fodder or as a cereal crop.

Production: Corn Silk flowers are the styles and stigmas of
Zea mays. The styles of the female flowers, as they begin to
grow out of the pillow-lace, are gathered for medicinal or
therapeutic purposes. They are removed by hand and dried in
the shade.

Other Names: Indian Corn, Maize, Stigmata maydis

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (0.2%): including among others carvacrol, alpha-

terpineol, menthol, thymol

Flavonoids: including among others may sin, maysin-3'-etiiyl

ether

----- PAGE 474 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
thickness, with minute warts and transverse scars. The
fracture is short and horny.

Characteristics: The taste is sweetish, then bitter. The odor
is strong and peculiar when fresh.

W-- Habitat: The parasite is indigenous to the U.S.

Production: Coral Root is the rhizome of Corallorhiza
odontorhiza.

Other Names: Crawley Root. Scaly Dragon's Claw, Chicken
Toe, Crawley, Fever Root, Turkey Claw

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Unknown

EFFECTS
Coral Root has diaphoretic, febrifuge and sedative effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Coral Root is used for colds. It is very
efficient at inducing perspiration. Its scarcity prevents its
wider use.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

A- Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-

tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internally as a liquid extract.

LITERATURE
No references are available

Corallorhiza odontorhiza
See Coral Root

Coriander
Coriandrum sativum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the coriander oil
and dried ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white, compact, 3 to 5
blossomed umbels with no involucre. The floret has a 3-bract
epicalyx. The border of the calyx has 5 tips. The corolla of
the androgynous lateral florets is splayed. The fruit is
globular and has a diameter of 3 cm, is straw yellow to
brownish, and drops without dividing.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Coriandrum sativum is a 20 to 70 cm
high plant with a bug-like smell. The root is thinly fusiform.

CORIANDER / 221

The stem is erect, round, glabrous and branched above. The
leaves are light green, entire below and double-pinnate
above.

Characteristics: The fresh herb and unripe fruit have a bug-
like smell. Ripe fruit has a pleasant, tangy smell and taste.

Habitat: The herb is found in the Mediterranean region.
central and eastern Europe, eastern Asia, and North and
South America.

Production: Coriander consists of the ripe, dried, spherical
fruit of Coriandrum sativum and its varieties vulgare A. and
microcarpum. The fruit is threshed when it is rust red and is
dried in lofts.

Not to be Confused With: Grains and legumes.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.4 to 1.7%): chief components D-(+)-linalool
(coriandrol, share 60 to 75%). including in addition borneol.
p-cymene, camphor, geraniol, limonene, alpha-pinene: me
unusual, bug-like smell is caused by the trans-tridec-2-enale
content

Fatty oil (13 to 21%): chief fatty acids petroselic acid, oleic
acid, linolenic acid

Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone, scopoletin

EFFECTS
The essential oil of coriander stimulates the secretion of

gastric juices and is a carminative and spasmolytic; in vitro it
has antibacterial and antifungal effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
+ Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Coriander is used for dyspeptic complaints.
loss of appetite and complaints of the upper abdomen.

In folk medicine, Coriander is also used for digestive and
gastric complaints; in other cultures for coughs, chest pains.
bladder complaints, leprosy rash, fever, dysentery, externally
for headaches, oral and pharyngeal disorders, halitosis, post-
partum complications; the folk indications have not been
proven.

Chinese Medicine: Coriander is used in China for loss of
appetite, the pre-emptive phase of chickenpox and measles.
hemorrhoids and rectal prolapse.

Indian Medicine: In India, Coriander is used to treat nose
bleeds, coughs, hemorrhoids, scrofulous, painful micturation.
edema, bladder complaints, vomiting, amoebic dysentery and
dizziness.

----- PAGE 475 -----
222 /CORIANDER

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug possesses a weak potential for sensitization.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Crushed and powdered drug, as
well as other galenic preparations for internal indication.

Preparations: Coriander extract 1:2 is prepared by percolat-
ing 1 weight part of the drug with 45% ethanol so that 2
weights tincture is produced. The infusion is prepared by
pouring 150 ml of boiling water over 2 tsp. of crushed drug
and straining after 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3.0 gm of drug. The
single dose is 1 gm.

Infusion — 1 fresh cup between meals.
Tincture — 10 to 20 drops after meals.

Storage: The non-comminuted drug is stored at a maximum
temperature of 25°C, protected from light in well-sealed
containers.

LITERATURE

Calcandi V. Ciropol-Calcandi I. Georgescu E, PA 16(6):331-
334. 1961.

Diedreichsen A et al., Chemotypes of Coriandrum sativum L. in
the Gatersleben Genebank. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th
Ann Congress of GA, 82. 1996.

Formacek. Buch. In: Formacek, V, Kubeczka KH: Essential
Oils Analysis by Capillary Gas Chromatography and Carbon-13-
NMR Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons, Chicester, New York,
Brisbane, Toronto. Singapore 1982.

Gijbels MJM et al.. (1982) Fitoterapia 53(1/2):17.
Ram AS, Devi HM, (1983) Indian J Bot 6(1):21.
Schratz E, Quadry SMJS, PM 14(3):310-325. 1966.
Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Mascolo N et al., Phytother Res 1 (1987), 28.

Simon JE, Chadwick AF, Craker LE (Eds.), Herbs. An Indexed
Bibliography 1971-80. Archon Books, USA 1984.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Coriandrum sativum

See Coriander

Corn Cockle

Agrostemma — githago

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the herb is the seed.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are apical or arranged in twos
or threes like a curled cyme; the 5 sepals of the calyx have 2
to 4 cm long tips that project above the corolla; the flower
tube is 14 to 18 mm. The 5 petals are 30 to 35 mm long, dark
purple and occasionally whitish. There are 5 styles and 10
stamens. The ovary is superior, undivided and has a central
placenta. The fruit capsule is 15 to 18 mm long with

numerous 2.5 to 3.5 mm long, warty seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Agrostemma githago is an annual

herb that grows upright, up to 100 cm high. The leaves are
10 mm

opposite, linear-lanceolate, acuminate and up to
wide. The stem is upright, usually unbranched, shaggy-gray-
pubescent. The primary root is spindle-shaped and heavily

branched.
Habitat: Europe and Asia

Production: Corn cockle seed is the dried seed of Agrostem-

ma githago.

Other Names: Cockle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: chief component is githagoside (0.04%,
gypsogenine tetraglycoside), additional components are gyp-
sogenin and quillaic acid gylcosides

Fatty oil: 6%

Steroids: sterols, including alpha-spinasterol

Unusual amino acids: orcyl alanine (0.4%)

EFFECTS
The drug exhibits an antimycotic effect. Cornflower seeds
are toxic in higher dosages.

----- PAGE 476 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Bitter substances

Saponins (2-3%)

Tannins: the main one is probably proanthocyanidins
Mt Sterols: including among others beta-sitosterol, ergosterol

Alkaloids (0.05%)

6-methoxybenzoxazolinone

Fatty oil (2%)

EFFECTS
The active agents are saponin, essential oil and tannin. Maize
stimulates the cardiac muscles, increases blood pressure, acts
as a diuretic and sedates the digestive tract.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Maize is used for disorders of the urinary

tract.

Chinese Medicine: Maize is used in the treatment of liver
disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
“ with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid extract, in medicinal prepa-
rations and combinations.

Preparation: Prepare an infusion using 2 teaspoons of drug
per cup of water. A tincture is prepared by adding 20 gm of
drug to 100 ml of 20% alcohol (leave to stand for 5 days).

Daily Dosage: Drink | cup of infusion every other day. Take
2 to 3 teaspoons of tincture per day.

LITERATURE

Chan H, But P, Pharmacology. Applications of Chinese Materia

Medica, Vol 1, World Scientific Singapore 1986.

Hahn SJ, (1973) Kiat'ollick Taehak Uihak Nonmun J 25:127

(via [51).

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:

Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
" Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag

Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used

in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York

1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,

Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Paris F, Schauenberg P, Guide des Plantes Medicinales,

Delachaux et Niestle Switzerland 1969.

CORNFLOWER / 225

Cornflower

Centaurea cyanus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fast-growing
ray flowers and the dried ray florets, which have been
separated from the receptacle and epicalyx, and to a lesser
extent the tubular florets, which have usually been separated
from the ovaries.

Flower and Fruit: The 3 cm wide flowers are solitary and
terminal. The tubular flowers are blue, the cultivated ones
are usually all purple-violet, pale pink or white. The lateral
florets are larger, in rays and funnel-shaped. The oblong gray
fruit is an achaene with the remains of a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Growing 20 to 70 cm high, the
annual or biennial plant contains fusiform, pale tap roots. It
has a rosette of basal leaves and an erect, branched, spider-
web-pubescent angular stem, covered in alternate, faintly
linear-lanceolate leaves. The basal leaves are lyre-shaped,
pinnatafid and long-petioled. The upper leaves are non-
compound.

Habitat: The plant is probably indigenous to the Middle
East, but is cultivated worldwide because of grain
production.

Production: Cornflower consists of the quickly dried flowers
of Centaurea cyanus. The plant is harvested during the
flowering season from June to August.

Other Names: Centaurea, Bachelor's Buttons, Bluebonnet,
Bluebottle, Blue Centaury, Cyani, Bluebow, Hurtsickle, Blue
Cap, Cyani-flowers

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthocyans: chief components succinyleyanin (centaurocya-
nin, cyanidine - 3 -0-(6-0- succinyl - beta- D- glucosyl)-5-0-
beta-D-glucoside)

Flavonoids
Bitter principles (structure unknown)

EFFECTS
The drug has an antibacterial effect in vitro (centaurocyanin),
but only for the aerial parts of the plant without the flowers.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Cornflowers and their preparations are used
internally for fever, constipation, leucorrhea, menstrual
disorders and vaginal Candida, and as a laxative, tonic and
bitter. The flowers are also used as a diuretic and an
expectorant, or as a stimulant for liver and gall bladder
function. Externally, Cornflowers are used in preparation of

----- PAGE 477 -----
226/CORNFLOWER

eye washes for eye inflammation and conjunctivitis, and for
eczema of the scalp.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug possesses a weak sensitization potential.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cornflower is rarely used today.
Occasionally, it is used as an inactive ingredient in tea

mixtures.

Preparation: The infusion is prepared by adding | gm of
drug per cup.

Dosage: The tea should be drunk several times daily.
Storage: Store carefully and protect from light.
LITERATURE

Bandyukova V, Khalmatov K, (1967) Khim Prir Soedin 3:57.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kakegawa K et al., PH 26:2261-2263. 1987.
Suljok G, Laszl&oacute;-Bencsik A, PH 24:1121-1122. 1985.
Takeda K et al., PH 27:1228-1229. 1988.

Cornus florida
See Dogwood

Cornus _ officinalis
See Asiatic Dogwood

Corydalis cava

See Corydalis (Yan-Hu-Suo)

Corydalis (Yan-Hu-Suo)

Corydalis cava

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the tubers collected
and dried when the plant is dormant. The fresh tuber
collected just before flowering is also used.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: Flowers first appear in the fourth.or fifth
year. There are 4 to 5 racemes of 6 to 12 blooms, which are
symmetrically 2-sided. There are 2 entire-margined bracts
under the racemes. The flowers are dull red or yellowish-
white, seldom lilac, brown-red or dark blue. The sepals are
very small. The upper petal is drawn out into a downward
curved spur; the front end is curved upward like a lip. The
inner petals form a hood-like protective cover for the 6
stamens fused into 2 bundles. There is one ovary. The fruit is
a pale green pod 20 to 25 cm long. The seeds are 3 mm wide,
black, round, smooth and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and grows to
about 15 to 30 cm. A number of erect- stems grows from the
tuberous rhizome, which quickly becomes hollow. The stems
bear the racemes and the 2 leaves. The 2 leaves under the
racemes are long-petioled, double trifoliate, sea green above,
and whitish green beneath.

Characteristics: The flowers have a slight fragrance of resin.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern and central
Europe.

Production: Corydalis tubers are the rhizomes of Corydalis
cava. The tubers are dug up in autumn or in spring, once the
ground has thawed. They are thoroughly cleaned, the roots
and greenery are removed, and the remainder is sliced. The
material is dried in a well-aired place, turned regularly and
kept in temperatures not exceeding 40°C.

Other Names: Early Fumitory, Turkey Corn, Squirrel Corn,
Yan-Hu-Suo

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids: very complex, breed-specific mixture
of approximately 40 alkaloids, including (&plus;)-bulbocap-
nine and (+)-corytuberin (aporphine-type) as well as (-)-
corydaline (berberine-type)

EFFECTS
The full extract has a mildly sedative, sleep-inducing,
spasmolytic, tranquilizing and hallucinogenic effect. It
suppresses the CNS, reduces blood pressure and impedes
movement of the small intestine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Formerly, Corydalis was used for hyper-
kinetic conditions. Today, it is occasionally used for treat
melancholia, pathological neuroses and mild forms of
depression, as well as for severe nerve damage, trembling
limbs and emotional disturbances.

Folk medicine: Corydalis was used in the past for worm
infestation, menstruation disorders, Menier's disease and

----- PAGE 478 -----
*£

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Parkinson's. Externally, the plant was used for poorly
healing wounds and ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: Used for inflammations of the respira-
tory tract and the eyes, rheumatism, hyperorexia, diarrhea
and furunculosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Poisonings among humans have not yet been observed.

OVERDOSAGE
Clonic spasms
overdosages.

with musculature tremor occur with

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a full

extract in ready-made preparations.

Daily Dosage: Externally: as a compress, 3 to 5 gm of drug
to 1/8 Liter of water.

Homeopathic Dosage: Oral: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules

A every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily

(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day; eye drops 1 to 3 times daily; liquid
dilutions D2 to D6: 20 to 60 drops; D12 to D30: 15 to 45
drops (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte, -
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Santavy F, in Manske RHF (Ed.), The Alkaloids, Vol XII,
Academic Press New York, p. 333-354. 1970.

Slavfk J, Slavfkova L, Collect Czech Chem Commun 44:2261-
2273. 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

COSTUS 1221

Corynanthe pachyceras

See Hwema Bark

Costus

Saussurea costus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in tough, orbicular,
axillary or apical capitula with a diameter of 2.5 to 3.8 cm
surrounded by an involucre. The epicalyx sepals are in a
number of rows, ovate to lanceolate, acuminate, stiff and
revolute. The tubular florets are dark blue to black-violet.
The fruit is an achene up to 8 mm long with a brownish,
feather-like pappus that is up to 17 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Saussurea costus is a herbaceous
upright perennial growing to a height of up to 2 m. The
leaves are alternate, the lamina simple, irregular dentate,
basal, 0.5 to 12 m long and triangular. The petiole is lobed-
winged. The cauline leaves are smaller, petiolate or sessile
with 2 clasping lobes at the base. The plant has a strong, hard
root up to 6 cm thick.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to India and China.

Production: Indian Costus roots are the dried roots of
Saussurea costus, which are harvested in September and
October when the concentration of essential oils is highest.

Not to be Confised With: Because of the similarity in name,
confusion sometimes occurs with Costus speciosus. The
plant is also confused with Inula racemosa. In the past,
confusion existed with many plants such as Byronia or
Galanga, which went under the name of Kostus. However,
differentiation has been established.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (1 to 6%): chief components dehydrocostus
lactone (35%) and costunolid (15%), including as well
alpha-, beta- and gamma-costol, elemol, cyclocostunolide;
aroma bearers include acetic acid, 4-ethyl octanoic acid,
heptanoic acid, 3-methyl butyric acid, 7-octenoic acid,
isopropyliden pentanoic acid

Resins (6%)
Polysaccharides: inulin (18%)
Lignans: including olivil-4"-0-beta-D-glucoside

Sesquiterpenes: saussureamines A to E

----- PAGE 479 -----
228/COSTUS

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol

EFFECTS

The drug contains large quantities of essential oil with the
sesquiterpene lactones, costunolid and dehydrocostus lac-
tone. Various drug extracts exhibit antimicrobial and fungi-
static efficacy, and have an influence over liver metabolism
and liver sugar levels. The saussure amines it contains inhibit
the formation of stress-related stomach ulcers. A broncho-
spasmolytic effect has also been described. A dry extract of
the drug administered in 500 mg dosages p.o. 3 times daily
over a 3-month period led to a statistically significant
reduction of angina pectoris attacks among patients with
coronary heart disease.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: The root has been used in India since
ancient times as a universal antidote and as a contraceptive
(Tschirch manual). It was also used medicinally as an
aromatic and stimulant (according to Hoppe's work on drugs
- 1958).

Chinese Medicine: Internal uses include gastric complaints,
flatulence, coughs, cholera, loss of appetite and asthma.
Externally, it has been used for poorly healing wounds and
skin conditions. Efficacy for these indications has not yet
been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. It is
conceivable that the plant could cause allergic reactions due
to its sesquiterpene lactone content, but no cases of this have
as yet been documented.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug prepara-

tions for internal and external use.

LITERATURE
Cheminat A, Stampf JL, Benezra C, Farrall MJ, Fr chet JM,
Allergic contact dermatitis to cosrus: removal of haptens with
polymers. Acta Derm Venereol, 61:525-9, 1981.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Costus specious
See Cane-Reed

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cotton

Gossypium — hirsutum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: Single axillary, radial flowers are
structured in fives. The calyx is approximately 4.5 cm long,
fused, divided into 5 and surrounded by 3 large, deeply
dentate, epicalyx sepals. The 5 petals are 5 to 7 cm long,
free, white to cream-yellow. The stamens are numerous, and
the filaments are fused into a tube. The ovary is superior, and
the carpels are fused. There is 1 style, with 3 to 5 stigmas
that project through the stamen tube. The fruit is a walnut-
sized capsule that opens on 3 to 5 sides and has 8 to 10
reniform, 3 to 5 mm thick, black seeds. These are covered in
single-celled hair up to 46 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This evergreen shrub grows up to 2
m high and is typically cultivated as an annual. The leaves
are alternate, long-petiolate, 3- to 7-lobed, with serrate
margins, a rounded base and stipules that drop.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the U.S., China,
Commonwealth of Independent States, India, Pakistan and

Egypt.

Production: Cotton seeds are the ripe seeds of Gossypium
hirsutum, Gossypium oleum and Gossypium herbaceum, as
well as other cultivated Gossypium species. Cotton seed oil
is the refined, fatty oil from the seeds. The oil is extracted
using solvents or pressing followed by refinement with a
yield of approximately 19%. Gossypium semen is derived
from the industrial extraction of cottonseed oil.

Not to be Confused With: Mistaken identity can occur with
sesame and kapok oil, which are sometimes used to
adulterate Cotton oil preparations.

Other Names: American Cotton Plant, Cotton Seed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COTTON OIL

Fatty oil: chief fatty- acids include linoleic acid (55%),
palmitic acid (22%), oleic acid (15%), myristic acid (5%), as
well as stearic acid, eicosanoic acid, di- cyclopropene-fatty
acids malvalic acid and sterculiac acid

Lignans: gossypol (traces)

Steroids: sterols, particularly beta-sitosterol, as well as
campesterol, stigmasterol, delta7-stigmasterol, 24-methyl
cycloartenol

Tocopherols (vitamin E): including 0.04% alpha-tocopherol,
0.04% gamma-tocopherol

----- PAGE 480 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS: COTTON OIL
The oil contains large amounts of unsaturated fatty acids and

is chiefly used as a dietetic.

COMPOUNDS: COTTON SEED

* Fatty oil (20 to 30%): chief fatty acids include linoleic acid

(55%), palmitic acid (22%), oleic acid (15%), myristic acid
(5%), as well as stearic acid, eicosanoic acid, the cyclopro-
pene-fatty acids malvalic acid and sterculic acid

Protein (20 to 25%)

Lignans: (+)-gossypol and (-)-gossypol (0.1 to 6.0%, yellow
to red in color); there are also cultivated forms that are low
in gossypol (gossypol content < 0.01%)

Flavonoids

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (7%): saccharose, raffi-
nose, stachyose, glucose, fructose

EFFECTS: COTTON SEED

The pigment substance gossypol contained in the seeds
inhibits enzymes of the energy metabolism, decouples the
respiratory chain from the oxidative phosphorylation, re-
duces the cellular ATP concentration, lessens membrane

jr potentials and inhibits the acrosomal sperm proteinase

acrosine (anti-fertility effect). A cytostatic effect has been
demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
COTTON OIL

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine indications for Gossypii
oleum have included hypercholesteremia and vitamin E
deficiency. It is also used when a non-nitrogenous or
parenteral nourishment is required.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
COTTON SEED

Indian Medicine: Among indications in Indian medicine are
headache, coughs, dysentery, constipation, gonorrhea, chron-
ic cystitis, fever, poor lactation, epilepsy and snake bites.
Reference is also made to use as an abortifacient and
aphrodisiac. Efficacy for these indications has not yet been
proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
COTTON OIL

4p’No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper

administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Animal
experiments over a period of several weeks involving the
administration of cyclopropene-fatty acids led to elevated
cholesterol and triglyceride blood levels in rabbits and to a
delayed sexual development in young female rats.

COTTON SEED
The drug is toxic, due to its gossypol content. Chronic
ingestion of Cotton seed will lead to fertility disorders in

COTTON TREE/229

men. After feeding sheep and cattle a total of 2 to 3 kg of
Cotton seed press cakes over a period of 3 to 4 weeks,
gastroenteritis, kidney damage with hematuria and icterus
were observed. Death occurred 24 to 48 hours after first
appearance of symptoms. Eye damage (Cotton seed
blindness) was also noted.

DOSAGE
COTTON OIL

Preparation: Emulsion 10 to 15%: sterilization is carried out
at 150° C for 1 hour.

Daily Dosage: Emulsion 40%: 60 ml p.o. in a single dose.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Ed.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Cotton Tree

Cochlospermum — gossypium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant is the root,
which yields a laxative, and the hard exudate of the aromatic
bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in apical, sparsely
flowered panicles. Flowers are 11 to 15 cm in diameter with
4 to 5 free silky-haired sepals, 4 to 5 gold-yellow petals and
numerous stamens. The superior ovary has 5 carpels with
many ovules attached to the walls. The fruit is an oval, dark-
brown, hanging capsule 5 to 10 cm long, 4 cm thick and
loculicidal. The seeds are reniform, approximately 7 mm
long, 5 mm wide and villous.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cochlospermum gossypium grows
as a tree, rising up to 10 m high. The leaves are 10 to 20 cm
wide and palmate-lobed. The 3 to 5 lobes are acuminate, or
digitate; the petioles are 6 to 17 cm long. The young
branches are velvet-haired and tinged reddish, the older ones
are glabrous and ash gray.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to India, Southeast Asia,
Kenya and Mauritius.

Production: Cotton Tree gum is made up of the irregularly
formed, leathery clumps of the exudate from the bark of
Cochlospermum gossypium.

I Other Names: Cotton Shell

----- PAGE 481 -----
230/COTTON TREE

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Water-soluble polysaccharides:  partially-acetylated, acidic

heteroglycans

EFFECTS
The drug (acetylized acid polysaccharide) is laxative in
effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used in folk medicine for
constipation and sluggishness of the bowels.

Indian Medicine: Uses include coughs, diarrhea, dysentery,
pharyngitis and venereal disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages, nor with
the drug's use as a pharmaceutical vehicle.

DOSAGE

Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

Daily Dose: A single dose of 3 g drug with plenty of liquid

LITERATURE

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeb nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Gowhage

Mucuna pruriens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
hairs on the pod and the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow in racemes in twos and
threes. They are large and white, with a bluish-purple
papilionaceous corolla. The pod is pubescent, thick and
leathery and averages about 10 cm in length. Pods have the
shape of the sound opening in a violin. They are dark brown,
covered with 0.25 cm long stiff hairs and contain 4 to 6
seeds. The seeds are made up of conical, sharply acuminate
cells less than 1 mm in diameter and barbed at the apex.
They are extremely irritating to the skin and must be handled

with caution.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a climbing legume with
long, thin branches and opposite, lanceolate leaves 15 to 30
cm in length. The petioles are pubescent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to tropical regions, especial-
ly India and the West Indies.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

j Production: Cowhage bean pods are the bean pods of

Mucuna pruriens. The drug is derived from the hair of the

pods.
Other Names: Cowitch, Couhage, Kiwach

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Serotonin: 5-methyl-N,N-dimethyl-tryptamine

EFFECTS
Externally, Cowhage is a cutaneous stimulant and rubefa-
cient. Internally, the drug has an anthelmintic effect.
Carminative, hypotensive, hypoglycemic and cholesterol-
reducing effects have also been described.

Experiments carried out on frogs demonstrated that prurieni-
nin slowed down the heart rate, lowered blood pressure and
stimulated intestinal peristalisis. The reduction in blood
pressure was caused by the release of histamines; the
spasmolysis of smooth muscle by indole bases.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used externally for rheumatic
disorders and muscular pain, and internally for the treatment
of worm infestation.

Indian Medicine: Uses in Indian medicine include gonor-
rhea, sterility and general debility.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Once in contact with the skin, the stinging hairs lead to
extremely aggressive itching and burning, accompanied by
long-lasting inflammation, caused by the  injection-like
introduction of serotonin and proteins (mucunain, proteolytic
enzyme). The intake of the hairs for the purpose of fighting
intestinal worms should be avoided. Internal administration
of the drug in the form of extracts may be harmless due to
the difficulty involved in resorbing the active ingredients.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used
extract form and powder form.

internally in

LITERATURE
Bell EA, Jansen DH, (1971) Nature 229:136.

Ghosal S et al., (1971) Planta Med 24:434.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Infante ME, Perez AM, Simao MR, Manda F, Baquete EF,
Fernandes AM, Cliff JL, Outbreak of acute toxic psychosis
attributed to Mucuna pruriens. Lancet, 29:1129. Nov 3, 1990.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 482 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Manyam BV, Paralysis agitans and levodopa in ‘Ayurveda :
ancient Indian medical treatise. Mov Disord, 29:47-8. 1990.

Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C Thomas USA 1981.

4£ Revilleza MJ, Mendoza EM. Raymundo LC, Oligosaccharides

in several Philippine indigenous food legumes: determination
localization and removal. Plant Foods Hum Nutr, 29:83-93. Jan,
1990.

Roth L. Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Woerdenbag HJ. Pras N, Frijlink HW, Lerk CF, Malingre TM,
Antidiabetic evaluation of Mucuna pruriens Linn seeds. JPMA J
Pak Med Assoc, 29:147-50. Jul, 1990.

Cowslip

Primula veris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots and

flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in richly blossomed
umbels with a short peduncle. The flowers are turned to one
side and grow in clusters (up to 25) from the center of the
leaf rosette. The calyx is cylindrical and appressed with a
green margin. The remaining part of the calyx is yellow and
it is 12 to 15 cm long. The corolla is odorless, usually sulfur
yellow and has a tube with 5 triangular, orange spots. The
fruit is an oval capsule with 15 to 2.5 mm-long brown,
warty seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This 10 cm high plant is a
herbaceous perennial with a short sturdy rhizome. The green
plant parts are covered in 2 mm long segmented hairs. The

4£ leaves are revolute in the bud. They are wrinkled, ovate or

ovate-oblong and are rounded at the base. They narrow
quickly to the winged stems. During the flowering season
they are irregularly dentate with blunt teeth. They are 3 to 6
cm long during the flowering season, but grow larger later.
The upper side of the leaf is glabrous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to all of Central Europe as
far as the Southern European mountains. There are many
subspecies.

Production: Cowslip flower consists of the dried, whole
flowers with calyx of Primula veris and/or Primula elatior as
well as their preparations. Cowslip root consists of the dried

. rhizome with roots of Primula veris and/or Primula elatior as

well as their preparations. Cowslip root is harvested at best
in the third year of growth.

Other Names: Oxlip, True Cowslip, Peagles, English Cows-
lip, Butter Rose, Herb Peter Paigle, Key Flower, Key of
Heaven, Fairy Caps, Petty Mulleins, Buckles, Crewel.
Palsywort, Plumrocks, Mayflower, Password. Primrose.
Arthritica, Our Lady's Keys

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: COWSLIP FLOWER

Flavonoids (3%): including rutin, kaempferol-3-O-rutino-
side, isorhamnetin-3-O-glucoside; isorhamnetin rhamnosyl
robinoside, isorhamnetin robinoside, isorhamnetin rutino-
side, kaempferol robinoside, limocitrin-3-O-glucoside. quer-
cetin gentiobioside, quercetin-3-O-glucoside, quercetin
robinoside

Primine
Triterpene saponins

EFFECTS: COWSLIP FLOWER

The drug has an expectorant effect, which is due to the
flavonoid and saponin content. An increase of the volume of
been demonstrated in animal

bronchial secretion has

experiments.

COMPOUNDS: COWSLIP ROOT

Phenol glycosides (0.2 to 2.3%, high values in the Spring):
primulaverin (3%, 2-hydroxy-5-methoxy- benzoic acid
methyl ester-O-xyloglucoside) changing over during dehy-
dration into the characteristic-smelling 5-methoxy-methyl
salicylate

Triterpene saponins (5 to 10%): chief components primulic
acid A (chief aglycone protoprimulagenin)

EFFECTS: COWSLIP ROOT

The saponin content gives the drug expectorant and diuretic
effects. Recent studies on these effects are not available. The
mode of action is postulated to be due to vagal stimulation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
COWSLIP FLOWER
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Cowslip flower is used internally for catarrh
of the respiratory tract. In folk medicine it is used for
insomnia, anxiety states, as a cardiac tonic for feelings of
dizziness and cardiac insufficiency. It is also used as a nerve
tonic for shaking limbs, headaches and neuralgia.

----- PAGE 483 -----
232 /COWSLIP

Homeopathic Uses: Primula veris is used to treat headaches
and skin rashes

COWSLIP ROOT
Approved by Commission E:
* Cough/Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Cowslip root is used internally for catarrh of
the respiratory tract. In folk medicine it is used internally for
whooping cough, asthma, gout, rheumatic arthritis, bladder
and kidney disease, migraine, dizziness, stomach cramps,
scurvy and neuralgia. Externally it is used for headaches and
skin impurities.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
COWSLIP FLOWER
Contraindicated in known allergies to Cowslip.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
COWSLIP FLOWER

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The epigeal organs of the Primula species possess a
very high potential for sensitization due to the primine
content. In the cases of Primula veris and P. elatior, the
primine content is quite low, but sensitizations are neverthe-
less possible.

COWSLIP ROOT
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
COWSLIP FLOWER
Overdose could lead to gastric complaints and nausea.

COWSLIP ROOT
Overdose could lead to queasiness, nausea, gastric com-

plaints and diarrhea.

DOSAGE
COWSLIP FLOWER

Mode of Administration: Cowslip preparations are available
as solid and liquid pharmaceutical forms for oral intake and
also available parenterally for homeopathic use.

Preparations: Tea: boiling water is poured over 2 to 4 gm
drug and strained after 10 minutes (1 teaspoon corresponds
to approximately 13 gm drug).

Liquid extract — drug 1:1 with 25% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83)

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 gm of drug. The
single dose is 1 gm of drug.

Tea — | cup several times a day. As a bronchial tea, several
cups a day, possibly sweetened with honey

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Liquid extract — 1 to 2 ml 3 times a day

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: i to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34); different doses for children.

Storage: Should be protected from light and moisture.

COWSLIP ROOT
Preparations: Tea: 0.2 to 0.5 gm finely cut drug are added to
cold water and brought to the boil, left to draw for 5 minutes
and strained (1 teaspoon corresponds to approximately 3.5
gm drug).

Extract: Percolation with 50 parts water and 50 parts ethanol,
then filtration and vacuum drying. The residue is dissolved
in 60 parts ethanol and 40 parts water and neutralized with
ammonia. It is then cooled for 24 hours and filtered again. It
is finally dehydrated to produce a dry extract under low
pressure. (OAB90)

Liquid extract: the Primula extract is dissolved in a mixture
of ethanol (30 parts), glycerol 85% (20 parts) and water (20
parts) and filtered when cool. (OAB90)

Tincture: 20 parts root and 100 parts diluted ethanol are
processed to a tincture in accordance with the OAB VII

maceration procedure.

Syrup: 15 parts Cowslip are dissolved in 20 parts water
while being heated. It is then mixed with 10 parts 85%
glycerol and 68.5 parts simple syrup. (OAB90)

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 1 gm of drug. The
single dose is 0.5 gm of drug.

Tincture: The daily dose is 7.5 gm.
Extract: The single dose is 0.1 to 0.2 gm.
Liquid extract: The single dose is 0.5 gm.

Tea: as an expectorant, | cup every 2 to 3 hours, sweetened
with honey

Storage: Cowslip should be protected from light.

LITERATURE

COWSLIP FLOWER
Biiechi S, Antivirale Saponine, pharmakologische und klinische
Untersuchungen. In: DAZ 136(2):89-98. 1996.

Busse WW et al., (1984) J All Clin Immunol. 73:801.

Calis I, YCiriiker A, Ruegger H, Wright AD, Sticher O,
Triterpene saponins fiom Primula veris ssp. macrocalyx and
Primula elatiro ssp. meyeri. In: JNP 55:1299-1306. 1992.

Grecu VL, Cucu V, (1975) Planta Med 25:247.
Karl C et al., (1981) Planta Med 41:96.

----- PAGE 484 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Middleton E, Drzewiecki G, (1984) Biochem. Pharmacol.
33:3333.

Thieme H, Winkler HJ, (1971) Pharmazie 7:434.

Further information in:

4Qf Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakoiogie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4.'Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

COWSLIP ROOT
Biiechi S, Antivirale Saponine, pharmakologische und klinische
£ Untersuchungen. In: DAZ 136(2):89-98. 1996.

Busse WW et al., (1984) J All Clin Immunol. 73:801.

Calis I, Yuruker A, Riiegger H. Wright AD. Sticher O,
Triterpene saponins from Primula veris ssp. macrocalyx and
Primula elatiro ssp. meyeri. In: JNP 55:1299-1306. 1992.

Grecu VL, Cucu V, (1975) Planta Med 25:247.
Karl C et al., (1981) Planta Med 41:96.

Middleton E, Drzewiecki G, (1984) Biochem. Pharmacol.
33:3333.

Thieme H, Winkler HJ, (1971) Pharmazie 7:434.

Wagner H et al., Radix-Primulae-Extrakte. HPLC-Analyse. In:
DAZ 126:1489-1493. 1986.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

£' Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

CRANESBILL/233

Cranesbill

Geranium maculatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the plant's dried
rhizome and the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a terminal, cymose
umbel. The flowers are radial with the structures arranged in
fives with a 2.5 to 4 cm diameter. There are 5 free, pubescent
sepals, 5 free purple petals and 10 stamens. The ovary is
formed from 5 carpels, which are fused to the sides of the
central column with their long awns. The fruit is a
schizocarp, which breaks up into 5 mericarps with beak-like
extensions and 1 seed each.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herbaceous perennial grows
upright, rising to 60 cm high. The leaves are opposite, in
fives with cuneiform lobes and whitish-green spots when
older. Leaves growing from the rhizome are large with long,
pubescent petioles: those growing from the trunk have short
petioles; stipules are present. The stem is upright, green,
pubescent and dichotomously branched. The rhizome is
thick, cylindrical and branched.

Habitat: The plant is found throughout Europe, but also in
North America from Newfoundland to Manitoba and as far
south as Georgia and Missouri. It grows in shady and moist
ground in mixed and deciduous forests.

Production: American Cranesbill herb is the dried aerial
herb of Geranium maculatum harvested during the flowering
season. American Cranesbill root is the dried rhizome of
Geranium maculatum, which is collected in late summer and

autumn.

Other Names: Alumroot, Crowfoot, Geranium, Spotted
Cranesbill, Spotted Geranium, Storksbill, Wild Cranesbill

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: CRANESBILL HERB
Tannins (30%): gallotannins

COMPOUNDS: CRANESBILL ROOT

Tannins (10 to 28%): gallotannins

EFFECTS

The tannins give the drug astringent, hemostyptic and tonic
properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine indications have included
hemorrhoids, duodenal ulcers, diarrhea, metrorrhagia, heavy
menstruation and dysmenorrhea. Efficacy for these internal
use indications has not yet been proven.

----- PAGE 485 -----
234/CRANESBILL

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for stomach ulcers and
bleeding of the mucous membranes, but efficacy for these
indications has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Because of
its high tannin content, the intake of preparations of the drug
could lead to digestive disorders. Individuals with sensitive
stomachs could experience nausea and vomiting.

DOSAGE
CRANESBILL HERB
Daily Dosage: Powder/Infusion: | to 2 g, 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: Literature notes the drug's impor-
tance as a homeopathic medicine, but does not state dosage.

CRANESBILL ROOT
Preparation: Liquid extract - drug 1:1 45% ethanol (V/V)
percolated (BHP83).

Daily Dosage:

Decoction — 1 to 2 g drug, 3 times daily

Liquid extract — 1 to 2 ml, 3 times daily

Tincture — 2 to 4 ml, 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily, or 1 ml injection solution sc
twice weekly (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der harmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Crataegus laevigata

See English Hawthorn

Grithmum maritimum
See Samphire

Crocus sativus
See Saffron

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Croton eluteria

See Cascarilla

Croton Seeds

Croton  tiglium
DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Paris: The seeds are the medicinal parts. The oil

is extracted from the seeds and is toxic; | ml can be fatal.

Flower and Fruit: Croton tiglium is a shrub or tree that
grows up to 6 m. The leaves are alternate, smooth, ovate or
acuminate. They are dark green above and paler beneath,
with an unpleasant smell. There are inconspicuous flowers in
terminal racemes. The seeds have a brown, mottled appear-
ance. The outer layer of the seed is easily removed, leaving a
hard, black coat.

Characteristics: Croton Seed oil is yellowish or reddish-
brown and rather viscid, with an unpleasant odor. It is toxic
and should be handled with extreme care.

Habitat: The tree is found throughout Asia and China.

Production: Croton oil is extracted from the seeds of Croton
tiglium.

Other Names: Tiglium, Tiglium Seeds

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: phorbol ester, including 12-O-tridecane olyphor-
bol-13-acetate (TPA, myristoylphoarbolacetate, MPA)

Fatty oil

EFFECTS
Croton Seed oil is a laxative, skin-irritant, co-carcinogenic,
nephrotoxic. It is a drastic irritant. TPA is a carcinogen,
affecting prostaglandin metabolism.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: At present, it is used only in Chinese
medicine and in very small doses as a remedy for gall
bladder colic, obstruction of the bowels and malaria. The
drug is obsolete in Europe.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Croton Seed oil is used for
edema, furuncles, constipation, chest and stomach pain,
worm infestation and sore throat.

Indian Medicine: Indian uses include constipation, abdomi-
nal disorders, worm infestation, convulsions and attacks of

dizziness.

----- PAGE 486 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The phorbol esters of the oils are severe co-carcinogenics.
Therapeutic uses as well as skin or mucous membrane
.contacts with the drug are to be strictly’ avoided. The drug

A possesses acute toxicity. When applied to the skin, it brings

about itching, burning and after a time, blisters. If taken
internally, it leads to burning in the mouth, vomiting,
dizziness, stupor, painful bowel movements and ultimately to
collapse.

OVERDOSAGE

One to 2 drops are already acutely toxic; the lethal dosage is
put at 20 drops. After stomach and intestinal emptying,
treatment of poisonings can only proceed symptomatically.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Croton Seed oil is obsolete as drug

LITERATURE
Berenblum I, Shubik P. (1947) Brit J Cancer 1:379.

Evans FJ (Ed.), Naturally Occurring Phorbol Esters, CRC Press
1986.

Evans FJ. Taylor SE, (1983) Prog Chem Org Nat Prod 44:1.

& Hecker E, (1968) Cancer Res 28:2338.

4h

McEchean CE et al., J Chem Soc 166B:633. 1966.
Nishizuka Y, (1984) Nature 308:693.
Further information in:

Chan, EH et al., (Eds): Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Croton tiglium

See Croton Seeds

CUBEB/235

Cubeb

Piper cubeba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried, not fully
ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowering spikes are about 4 cm
long and have 2 or 3 stamens. The female spikes are made up
of about 50 individual flowers, which mostly consist of the
oblong ovary of 4 fused carpels with 4 sessile stigmas. The
infructescence is 4 to 5 cm long. When ripe, the base of the
ovary grows into a stem-like, cylindrical lower part. The
upper portion of the fruit is globular and holds the seed,
which contains a tiny embryo in a small cavity at the apex.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 5 to 15 m high
dioecious climbing shrub. The branches are initially pubes-
cent, later glabrous. The leaves are glabrous, entire-mar-
gined, coriaceous, ovate to oblong-elliptical and up to 15 cm
long and 6 cm wide.

Characteristics: The odor is warm and reminiscent of

turpentine.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Indonesia and is
cultivated in Sri Lanka, India and Malaysia.

Production: Cubebs are the fruit of Piper cubeba. The fruit is
harvested when still green and dried in the sun.

Other Names: Java Pepper, Tailed Cubebs, Tailed Pepper

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (10 to 20%): chief constituents alpha- and beta-
cubebenes (11%), copaene (10%), cubebol (10%), delta-
cadinene (9%), humulenes

Lignans: chief components (-)-cubebin, additionally (-)-
cubebinin, dihydroclusin, (-)-dihydrocubebin, hinokinin

Resins
Fatty oil (12%)

EFFECTS
The sesquiterpene-rich essential oil is said to be expectorant
in chronic bronchitis. The resinous acids in the drug are said
to have an antiseptic and astringent effect on the urinary
tract. There is no information on the mode of action.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include treatment for
urinary tract diseases, flatulence and stomach complaints,
headaches (dizziness), chronic bronchitis, to increase libido
and for poor memory.

----- PAGE 487 -----
236/CUBEB

Homeopathic Uses: Piper cubeba is used for inflammation of
the mucous membrane of the urogenital tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

OVERDOSAGE

High dosages (over 8 gm) cause irritation of the urinary
passages, kidney and bladder pains, albuminuria and urina-
tion problems. Beyond this, vomiting, diarrhea, cardiac pain
and skin rashes can occur. After stomach and_ intestinal
of poisonings should proceed

emptying, treatment

symptomatically.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cubeb is contained in medicinal

preparations, such as bath additives.

Daily Dosage:

Powder — 2 to 4 g daily for internal administration
Extract (1:1) — daily dose: 2 to 4 ml

Tincture (1:5) — daily dose: 2 to 4 ml

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc twice
weekly (HAB1); children's dosage does not equal adult dose.

LITERATURE
Batterbee, J E et al., (1969) J Chem Soe (c), 2470.

Ikeda RM, (1962) J Food Sci 27:455.

Koul SK et al., Phenylpropanoids and (-)-ledol from Piper
species. In: PH 32:478. 1993.

Lawrence BM, Perfum Flavor 5:28. 1980.

Ohta Y et al., (1966) Tetrahedron Letters 52:6365.

Opdyke DU, (1976) Food Cosmet Toxicol 14.

Prabhu BR, Mulchandani. NB, (1985) Phytochemistry 24 (2),
329.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlaa Landsberg Lech 1993.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cucurbita pepo

See Pumpkin

Cudweed

Gnaphalium uliginosum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The aerial parts are the medicinal parts of

the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flower heads are 3 to 4
mm by 5 mm, sessile and in terminal racemes of 3 to 10.
They are shorter than the leaves growing from the leaf axil.
The involucral bracts are oblong to linear and brownish.
There are 50 to 150 female florets, 5 to 8 hermaphrodite
florets. The achaene is 0.5 mm_ oblong-cylindrical. The
pappus is 15 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The stems are 5 to 20 cm high and
branched. The leaves are 10 to 50 mm by 2 to 5 mm, linear-
lanceolate to oblong-obovate. They are downy and greenish
above; whitish and even more downy beneath.

Habitat: The plant is native to many parts of Europe, the

Caucasus and west Asia. It has been introduced into
America.
Production: Cudweed is the aerial part of Gnaphalium

uliginosum.

Other Names: Cotton Weed, Dysentery Weed, Everlasting,
Mouse Ear, Wartwort, Cotton Dawes

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Tannins

The constituents of the drug have not been extensively

investigated.

EFFECTS
Cudweed is an astringent and a stomachic. According to
unconfirmed sources, the drug also has antidepressive,

aphrodisiac and hypotensive effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a gargle and rinse in the
treatment of diseases of the mouth and throat.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

----- PAGE 488 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid extract used as a gargle and

rinse.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

W Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Cumin

Cuminum cyminum

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the Cumin oil

extracted from the ripe fruit and the ripe, dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in umbels radiating in
groups of 3 to 5. The petals are white or red, oblong and
deeply bordered with a long indented tip. The involucral
bracts are long and simple. The style is short and turned
outward at the end. The ovary is inferior and 3-Iocular. The
fruit is a schizocarp, about 6 mm long and 1.5 mm wide and
crowned with awl-shaped calyx tips. The mericarp is almost
' round in transverse section, with 5 thread-like, bristly main

ribs and bristly secondary ribs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a delicate, glabrous
annual 10 to 50 cm high. The stem is bifurcated at the base
and glabrous. The leaves are glabrous and finely pinnatifid
with oblong-linear tips, of which the lower are mostly

doubly trifoliate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Turkestan (Hager) or
northern Egypt (Grieve), but is cultivated today in the whole
of the Mediterranean region as well as in Iran, Pakistan,

India, China, the U.S. and South America.

Production: Cumin is the dried ripe fruit of Cuminum

cyminum.

Not to be Confused With: Certain Indian products, such as
Carum carvi and the fruit of the earth chestnut, Bunium
bulbocastanium can be mistaken for or confused with
Cumin. Synthetic coloring is frequently added to Turkish

products.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (2 to 5%): chief components cuminaldehyde,
gamma-terpenes, beta-pinenes, p-cymene, 1,3-p-menthandial

Fatty oil (10 to 15%): chief fatty acids petroselic acid,

palmitic acid

Proteic substances (15 to 20%)

CUMIN /237

EFFECTS
Antimicrobial: The drug contains fatty oil (mainly petroselic
acid and oil acid) and has an antimicrobial effect. A powder
suspension of the drug has diverse inhibitory effects; it stunts
mycelium growth, toxin production or afla-toxin production
in Aspergillus ochraceus, C. versicolor, and C. flavus.

Influence on blood-clotting: A dried Cumin ether extract
inhibits (in vitro) arachidon acid-induced plate aggregation
in platelet-rich human plasma.

Mutagenic effect: In comparison to Salmonella thyphimurum
TA 100, a mutagenic effect of the polar fractions of
chloroform extract and methanol extract of Cumin did

appear.

Influence of pharmacological metabolism: An injection of a
dried ether extract prolonged the phenobarbituate hypnosis
of female albino mice, up to 120%; a higher dose shortened
it to 83%.

Estrogenic effect: An acetone extract of cumin, administered
to female albino rats (ovariectomised, ovaries have been
removed) led, depending on the dosage, to an increase in the
weight of the uterus, an increase in the amount of protein in
the endometrium and an increase of alkali phosphates.

Other effects (for which there are no experimental results)
include the following: obstructive influence on_ fertility,
galactogen, antispasmodic, diuretic and aphrodisiac.

Cumin also has carminative, stimulant and analgesic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Cumin is used as a
carminative for stomach disorders, diarrhea and colic,
particularly in veterinary medicine.

In America, Africa and India the drug is used as an abortive
and as an emmenagogue.

In Indonesia, Cumin is used in cases of bloody diarrhea and
headache (paste is applied to the forehead). It is also taken
orally for rheumatic ailments.

Indian Medicine: In India, Cumin is used as an abortifacient,
for kidney and bladder stones, chronic diarrhea, leprosy and
eye disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated dierapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cumin is used both internally and

externally in ground form and as a pressed oil.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 300 to 600 mg of
drug (equivalent to 5 - 10 fruits).

----- PAGE 489 -----
238/CUMIN

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Harborne JB, Williams CE, (1972) Photochemistry 11:1741.
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New
York 1980.

Tassan CG, Russel GF, J Food Sci 40:1185-1188. 1975.

Varo PT, Heinz DE, (1970) J Agric Food Chem 18:234 et 239.

Cuminum cyminum

See Cumin

Gup Plant
Silphium  perfoliatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 5 to 8 cm wide, long-
pedicled and clustered. The sepals are overlapping, and the
petals are egg-yolk yellow. The disc-like flowers are
androgynous with long thread-like styles. The lateral flowers
are female and lingual. The double-winged fruit is com-
pressed and has a pappus of lateral awns.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant is a 1.25 to 2.5
m high plant with a branched rhizome. The erect, angular,
smooth stem is branched higher up and foliated up to the tip.
The leaves are opposite, rough, ovate, acuminate, crenate,
dark green above and blue-green beneath. The lower leaves
are up to 30 cm long, and the upper ones are oblong-ovate,
sessile and fused at the base to a cup form.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the western U.S., Oregon
and Texas.

Other Names: Ragged Cup, Indian Gum, Prairie Dock, Pilot
Plant, Polar Plant, Rosinweed, Turpentine Weed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins

Sesquiterpenes: including among others silphinene, silphi-
perfolen, 8-hydroxy-presilphiperfolane

EFFECTS
The drug is a tonic and has a diaphoretic effect.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cup Plant has been used for digestive

disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cup Root is not used in modern

medicine.

LITERATURE
Davidyants ES et al.. (1984) Khim Prir Soedin. 5:666.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Cupmoss
Cladonia pyxidata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The wineglass-shaped scyphi of Cladonia

pyxidata are used medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: Cupmoss is a lichen, not a moss as the
name suggests. The scyphi are grayish-white, about 2.5 cm
long, wineglass-shaped, with hollow stems and terminal

cups.

Characteristics: The taste is mucilaginous and slightly
sweet. There is no odor.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America and is
also common in other areas including Great Britain.

Other Names: Chin Cups

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Lichen acids: including fumaroprotocetraric acid, barbatic

acid, psoromic acid
Mucilages

EFFECTS
Cupmoss has the effect of an expectorant and antitussive.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cupmoss is used for coughs, bronchitis, and
also in the treatment of whooping cough.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

----- PAGE 490 -----
T™.

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cupmoss is used internally as an

infusion with honey.

LITERATURE
Hoppe HA, (1975-1987): Drogenkunde. 8. AufL, Bde 1-3, W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Cupressus sempervirens
See Cypress

Curcuma

Curcuma xanthorrhizia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried, tuberous
rhizomes cut into slices.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is large; it is purple or
crimson. The corolla has a red margin. Otherwise it is very
similar to Curcuma domestica.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, 1.75 m high
and leafy. The leaves are in long thin sheaths on the rhizome.
The leaf blades are broadly lanceolate or oblong and have a
narrow, purple mark on the midrib. The main rhizome is
thickened like a tuber, ovate, the size of a fist with numerous
roots and thin lateral rhizomes. The roots terminate partially
in ovate tubers.

Habitat: Curcuma is indigenous to the forests of Indonesia
and the Malaysian peninsula. It is cultivated mainly on Java,
in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines.

Production: Japanese turmeric consists of the sliced, dried,
tuberous rhizomes of Curcuma xanthorrhiza. Curcuma is
cultivated and harvested in the second year of growth. After
the rhizome has been washed, die main mick root is isolated,

fa cut and dried at a temperature of 50°C.

Not to be Confused With: The rhizome of Curcuma
domestica.

Other Names: Tewon Lawa, Temu Lawak

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (3 to 12%): chief components ar-curcumene
(alpha-curcumene), xanthorrhizol, beta-curcumene, germa-
crene, furanodien, furanodienone

CURCUMA /239

Curcuminoids (0.8 to 2%): including curcumin,

demethoxycurcumin
Non-phenolic diarylheptanoids: alnustone
Starch (30-40%)

EFFECTS
Curcuma acts in a manner similar to turmeric root but is
mainly choleretic and antitumoral (animal testing).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Liver and gallbladder complaints
« Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Curcuma is used for dyspepsia, particularly
feelings of fullness after meals and meteorism.

In Indonesia it has long been used for liver and gallbladder
complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Stomach complaints can occur following extended use or in
the case of overdose. Because of the stimulating effect of the
drug on the biliary tract, it should not be administered if
there is a bile duct blockage. Colic can occur when the
patient suffers from gallstones.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions and

other galenic forms for internal use.

Preparation: The infusion is prepared by pouring 1 cup of
boiling water over 1/2 tsp. of drug and straining after 10
minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 2 gm of drug;
infusion: 2 to 3 times daily between meals.

Storage: It should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Brennpunkt ZNS. In: DAZ 137(25):2166-2167. 1997.

Baumann J, (1975) Tiber die Wirkung von Chelidonium,
Curcuma, Absinth und Carduus marianus auf die Galle- und
Pankreassekretion bei Hepatopathien. MedMschr 29:173.

Claeson P et al., Non-phenolic linear diarylheptanoids from
Curcuma xanthorrhiza: a novel type of topical anti-inflammatory
agents: Structure-activity relationship. In: PM 62(3):236-240.
1996.

Guttenberg A, (1926) Das Cholagogum Curcumen. Klein Wschr
5:1998-1999.

Maiwald L, Schwantes PA, (1991) Curcuma xanthorrhiza Roxb.,
eine Heilpflanze tritt aus dem Schattendasein. Z Phytother
12:35-445.

----- PAGE 491 -----
240/CURCUMA

Reuter HD, Pflanzliche Gallentherapeutika (Teil I) und (Teil II).

In: ZPT 16(0:13-20 u. 77-89. 1995.

Sabieraj J, Wirkung von Curcuma xanthorrhiza. In: DAZ
131(13):609. 1991.

Schilcher H, Pharmazeutische Aspekte pflanzlicher
Gallentherapeutika. In: ZPT 16(4):211-222. 1995.

Schmidt M, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Gallenwegstherapeutika.
In: DAZ 135(8):680-682. 1995.

Veit M, Beeinflussung der Leukotrien-Biosynthese durch
Curcumin. In: ZPT 14(1 ):46. 1993.

Further information in:
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. W'iss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Curcuma domestica

See Turmeric

Curcuma xanthorrhizia

See Curcuma

Curcuma zedoaria
See Zedoary

Cuscuta epithymum
See Dodder

Cyamopsis_ tetragonoloba

See Guar Gum

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cyclamen

Cyclamen europaeum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried rhizome
with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are pinkish-red, solitary and
nodding on erect stems. The 5 sepals are ovate, pointed and
dentate. The corolla is a short campanulate tube with 5
revolute tips; it is darker at the base. There are 5 stamens and
1 ovary. The fruit is a capsule, which opens on 5 sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from about 5 to 10
cm. The rhizome is a disc-like tuber. The leaves are long-
petioled, orbicular or cordate, crenate, glabrous, with a white
edge above and red beneath. The petioles and pedicles are

roughly glandular.
Characteristics: The flowers are fragrant and poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is found in the Alps and the alpine
regions of southern Europe.

Other Names: Groundbread, Sowbread, Swinebread, Ivy-
Leafed Cyclamen

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: including cyclamine, deglucocyrlamine
I, deglucocyclamine II

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used to treat menstrual
complaints, emotional disorders/nervous states and digestive

problems.

Homeopathic Uses: Cyclamen is used for migraine and its
accompanying autonomic symptoms, and for the treatment
of premenstrual syndrome.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The intake of even small dosages (0.3 gm) can lead to
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and stomach pain.

OVERDOSAGE

High dosages can cause spasm and asphyxiation. Following
gastric lavage and the administration of activated charcoal,
the treatment for poisoning should proceed symptomatically
(e.g., treatment of convulsions with diazepam, treatment of
colic with atropine).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cyclamen is used in homeopathic
treatments. It is also used topically and in alcoholic extracts.

----- PAGE 492 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE

Braccini I, Herve du Penhoat C, Michon V, Goldberg R,

Clochard M, Jarvis MC. Huang ZH, Gage DA, Structural

analysis of cyclamen seed xyloglucan oligosaccharides using

cellulase digestion and spectroscopic methods. Carbohydr Res,
276:167-81, 1995 Oct 16.

Calis I, Satana ME, Yrker A, Kelican P, Demirdamar R,
Alacam R, Tanker N, Ruegger H. Sticher O, Triterpene
saponins from Cyclamen mirabile and their biological activities.
J Nat Prod, 60:315-8, 1997 Mar.

Calis I, Yrker A, Tanker N, Wright AD. Sticher O, Triterpene
saponins from Cyclamen coum var. coum. Planta Med,
276:166-70, 1997 Apr.

Jaspersen-Schib R, Theus L, Guirguis-Oeschger M, Gossweiler
B, Meier-Abt PJ, Serious plant poisonings in Switzerland 1966-
1994. Case analysis from the Swiss Toxicology Information
Center. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 60:1085-98, 1996 Jun 22.

Tschesche R. Mercker HJ, Wulff G. Liebig Ann Chem 721:194.

1969.

Tschesche R, Striegler H. Fehlhaber HW, Liebig Ann Chem
691:165. 1966.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Cyclamen europaeum

See Cyclamen

Cydonia oblongata

See Quince

CYPRESS/241

Gymbopogon citratus

See Lemongrass

Gynanchum vincetoxicum

See German Ipecac

Gynara scolymus

See Artichoke

Cynoglossum officinale
See Hound's Tongue

Cyperus articulatus

See Adrue

Cypress

Cupressus sempervirens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the cones, branches

and oil.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cupressus sempervirens is a tree that
grows up to 30 m tall. The leaves are 0.5 to 1 mm, dark
green and obtuse. The male cones are 4 to 8 mm, the female
are 25 to 40 mm. They are elliptical-oblong (rarely globose),
green when young and shining yellowish-gray when ripe,
with 8 to 14 short and obtusely spiked scales. There are 8 to
20 seeds on each scale,

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Turkey and is cultivated
throughout the Mediterranean region.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Chief components: alpha-pinene,
trene, p-cymene, L-cadinene, cedrol, terpinenol-4, terpineol,
acetyl- and isovalerianyl esters of monoterpene alcohols

D-camphene, D-silves-

EFFECTS
Cypress acts as an expectorant.

----- PAGE 493 -----
242/CYPRESS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is
coughs and bronchitis.

used externally for head colds,

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

Kidney irritation is likely w

DOSAGE

ith intake of larger dosages.

Mode of Administration: Occasionally, Cypress is used

externally as an ointment.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer

L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag

Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,

1969.

Cypress Spurge

Euphorbia cypahssias

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
flowering plant with the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal cymes. They
are yellow-green but usually red after flowering. What

appear to be flowers are in
shaped invulucres there is 1

fact inflorescences. In the jug-
hanging pistil with a 3 valved

ovary and 3 styles each with 2 stigmas and numerous
stamens. Four half-moon-shaped nectaries are at the edge.
The fruit is covered in small papilla.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The

plant is about 15 to 30 cm high.

The stem is erect, unbranched, and glabrous. The leaves are
alternate, sessile, linear, entire-margined and very narrow on

the non-flowering branches.

Characteristics: The entire p!
is poisonous.

lant contains white latex, which

Habitat: Indigenous to Europe and Mediterranean.

Production: Cypress Spurge

herb and root is the whole plant

in flower and root of Euphorbia cyparissias.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: ingenan-di- and
droxy-ingenol-3-(2,3-dimethy

triester, for example 13-hy-
Ibutyryl)-13- dodecanoate, 13-

hydroxy - ingenol - 5 - (2,3-dimethylbutyryl)-13-dodecanoate,
13-hydroxy-ingenol-3-(2,3-dimethylbutyryl)-13-decanoate

Triterpenes

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The diterpene esters in the drug are severely toxic, a strong
irritant, drastically purgative and encourage growth of
tumors.

In animal tests and in vitro there are indications of a
cytotoxic, non-specific immune-stimulating, antiphlogistic
and strongly laxative effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Cypress Spurge is used
internally for constipation, toothache and as a diuretic
(macerate). It is used externally for warts and corns
(ointment).

Homeopathic Uses: Euphorbia cyparissias is used for
diseases of the respiratory organs, diarrhea, and skin
diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The Ingenan esters are severely inflammatory in their effect
and cocarcinogenic. Administration of the drug should be
avoided because of the cocarcinogenic effect.

A particular danger exists with the chyle of the freshly
harvested plant, but the ingenan ester retains its efficacy
even after drying, which means that the drug also is acutely
toxic. If it gets on the skin, the chyle causes reddening,
itching, burning and blisters.

In the eye, the chyle leads to swelling of the lids,
conjunctival inflammation and corneal defects. If taken
internally, the chyle in the drug causes burning in the mouth
and vomiting. Very high dosages cause pupil enlargement,
dizziness, stupor, painful bowel movements, cardiac rhythm
disorders and ultimately collapse. Skin contact with the chyle
requires thorough cleaning. Contact with the eye requires
thorough rinsing with water. Following stomach and
intestinal emptying, the treatment of poisonings is carried out
symptomatically.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cypress Spurge is used only in
homeopathic dilutions.

Daily Dosage: Macerate/decoction: 0.5 to 1 gm daily

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); From D6 parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times
daily; chronic: once a day. Children should be given a
weaker dose (HAB1)

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 494 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin-L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oksuz S et al., Biological active compounds. In: PM 60(6):594-
596. 1994.
Ott HH, Hecker E, Experientia 37:88. 1981.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Cypripedium calceolus

See Nerve Root

*Cytisus laburnum

See Laburnum

Cytisus scoparius

See Scotch Broom

Daemonorops draco
See Dragon's Blood (Xue-Jie)

Daffodil

Narcissus pseudonarcissus

DESCRIPTION

W Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bulb, die leaves
and the flowers, or the whole flowering plant without the
roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary and bending on
compressed 2-edged pedicles. They are pale yellow. At the
base of the flower there is a dry, membranous sheath that is
split higher at the side. The perigone is 6-tipped and splayed
like a plate. The secondary corolla is egg-yolk yellow and
cylindrical, with an undulating, folded, unevenly crenate

DAFFODIL/243

margin. The stamens are fused to the tube. The ovary is
inferior, the style is thread-like and the stigma obtuse.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 15 to 30 cm
high. The leaves are basal, sprouting from an ovate, brown
bulb. They are erect, linear, flatly grooved, and have 2
grooves rather than a keel.

Characteristics: Daffodil has a weak unpleasant odor and is
poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is found all over Europe and is cultivated
elsewhere.

Production: Daffodil is the flowering plant Narcissus
pseudonarcissus without the root.

Other Names: Lent Lily

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Amaryllidacae alkaloids (0.08-0.15% in the bulb, with
considerably less in the foliage): including, among others,
hemanthamine, galanthine, galanthamine, pluviine, maso-
nine, homolycorine

Chelidonic acid

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Daffodil is used for irritation of the mucous
membranes, such as bronchial catarrh, whooping cough,
colds and asthma.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The plant possesses a weak potential for sensitiza-
tion, a condition called "daffodil itch."

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage or accidental intake of the bulbs (e.g., confusing
them with cooking onions) can lead to poisoning. Symptoms
include vomiting, salivation, diarrhea and central nervous
disorders following resorption.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Daffodil is available ground and as
an extract. It is also found in homeopathic remedies.

LITERATURE

Furusawa E, Suzuki N, Ramanathan S, Furusawa S, Cutting W,
Effect of long-term administration of Narcissus alkaloid on
Rauscher leukemia and combinations with standard drugs. In:
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 140:1034-1040. 1972.

Moraes-Cerdeira RM et al., Alkaloid content of different bulb
parts of Narcissus cv. Ice follies. In: PM 63(1):93-94. 1997.

----- PAGE 495 -----
244 /DAFFODIL

Suzuki N, Tania S, Furusawa S, Furusawa E, Therapeutic
activity of narcissus alkaloids on Rauscher leukemia: Antiviral
affect in vitro and rational drug combination in vivo. In: Proc
Soc Expl Biol Med 145:771-777. 1974.

Tojo E, (&plus;)-Narcidine, a new alkaloid from Narcissus
seudonarcissus. In: JNP 54: 1387. 1991.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.): Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Damiana
Turnera diffusa

TRADE NAMES
Damiana Leaves (from various manufacturers), Wild Coun-

tryside Damiana Leaves

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves harvest-

ed during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow, solitary and
axillary. The fruit is a small, globular, many-seeded capsule,

which breaks up into 3 parts. It is aromatic and resinous.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a small shrub that grows
up to 60 cm high. The leaves are | to 2.5 cm long and up to 6
mm wide. They are smooth and pale green on the upper
surface and glabrous with a few scattered hairs on the ribs
underneath. The leaves are ovate-lanceolate, short-petioled
and have 2 glands at the base. They have a few serrate teeth
and recurved margins.

Habitat: The plant is found mainly in the region of the Gulf
of Mexico, the Caribbean and southern Africa.

Production: Damiana leaf consists of the leaf of Turnera
diffusa and its variations. Damiana herb consists of the herb
of Turnera diffusa and its variations.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.5-0.9%): chief components 1,8-cineole, alpha-
and beta-pinene, p-cymene, as well as thymol, alpha-copene,
gamma-cadinene, calamene

Tannins (4%)
Resins (7%)
Hydroquinone glycosides: arbutin (0.2-0.7%)

Cyanogenic glycosides: tetraphylline B_ (barterin)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Damiana preparations are
aphrodisiac and for prophylaxis and treatment of sexual

used as an

disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
How — Supplied:

Capsules — 380 mg, 384 mg, 395 mg, 450 mg
Fluid Extract — 1:1

LITERATURE
Auterhoff H, Haufel HP, (1968) Arch Pharm 301:537.

Dominguez XA, Hinojosa M, (1976) Planta Med 30:68.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3: W de
Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Jin J, (1966) Lloydia 29(3):250.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 496 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Dandelion

Taraxacum officinale

TRADE NAMES
Dandelion Root (available from various manufacturers)
Alcohol-Free Dandelion, Wild Countryside Dandelion Root

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves
harvested before the flowering season, the dried root
collected in autumn, the dried aerial parts with the rhizome
harvested before the flowering season and the whole fresh

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is a golden yellow composite
flower. The composite head is solitary and has a diameter of
3 to 5 cm. All the florets are lingual and androgynous. The
epicalyx is oblong-campanulate. The tepals are arranged in 3
imbricate rows, 2 of which are turned back. The inner one is
long acuminate with a white margin and erect. The
receptacle has no bracts. The fiuit is small, long-beaked,
light gray-brown, ribbed and has a parachute-like tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial, hardy and is
found in a number of forms. It grows to about 30 cm tall and
has a short rhizome. The rhizome turns into a many-headed,
20 to 50 cm long and 2 cm thick taproot. The hollow stem is
erect or ascending. The basal leaves are glabrous or villous,
usually deeply notched, lanceolate and lobed like a saw.
They narrow to a red-violet tinged petiole and end in a large
deltoid tip.

Characteristics: The flower opens in the morning and closes
in the evening remaining closed all night and in dull weather.
The plant parts contain bitter latex.

Habitat: Dandelion grows in most temperate regions of
Europe and Asia.

Production: Dandelion root with herb consists of the entire
Taraxacum officinale plant gathered while flowering. It is air
dried.

Not to be Confused With: Cichorium intybus and the leaves
of various Leontodon species.

Other Names: Blowball, Cankerwort, Lion's Tooth, Priest's
Crown, Swine Snout, Wild Endive

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpene lactones (bitter substances): including, among
others, taraxinacety 1 - 1'- O - glucosides, 1 1,13- dihydrotaraxi-
nacetyl - 1 '- O - glucosides, taraxacolide - 1 '- O - glucosides,
4alpha, 15,11 beta, 13 - tetrahydroridentin B

DANDELION 245
Triterpenes and sterols: beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol-gluco-
sides, taraxasterol, psi-taraxasterol, taraxerol, taraxol

Flavonoids: including among others, apigenin-7-O-gluco-
sides, luteolin-7-O-glucosides

Mucilages
Inulin (2-40%, high values in autumn)

EFFECTS
The amaroids in Dandelion are cholagogic and secretolytic
in the upper intestinal tract. The saluretic effect demonstrated
in animal experiments requires further investigation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints

¢ Infections of the urinary tract

¢ Liver and gallbladder complaints
+ Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Dandelion is used internally for distur-
bances in bile flow, inflammatory conditions of the efferent
urinary tract, and dyspepsia. It is also used for liver and
gallbladder disorders, hemorrhoids, congestion in the portal
system, gout, rheumatic disorders, eczema, and other skin
disorders. The drug has a diuretic effect and is used for
kidney and bladder complaints and kidney stone formation.
A diabetic infusion is made from the roots and leaves.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for acute mastitis.
urinary disorders, and agalactia.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for chronic ulcers.
tuberculosis, flatulence, colic, kidney disease, gout, jaundice.
and biliary stones.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications include closure of the biliary ducts.
gallbladder empyema, and ileus. Consultation with a doctor
is necessary in the presence of biliary ailments.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper

administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Superacid
_ gastric complaints are possible due to the drug's secretion-

stimulating effect. The drug possesses weak potential for

sensitization reactions.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut, and powdered drug is
available in the form of drops, tinctures, juice, and in
compound preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules—425 mg, 475 mg, 515 mg, 520 mg,

Liquid—1:1

----- PAGE 497 -----
246 /DANDELION

Preparation: To make a tea, use 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls finely
cut drug with 150 ml rapidly boiled water; strain after 15
minutes and drink warm.

To make a decoction, use 3 to 4 gm cut and powdered drug
per cup of water. To make an infusion, use 3 to 4 gm cut

drug per 1 cup of water.

For an extract, mix 1 part coarsely powdered Dandelion root
with 8 parts of water and 1 part spirit of wine.

Daily Dosage: When using a tincture, the recommended
dosage is 10 to 15 drops 3 times daily. A cup of the freshly
made tea can be taken mornings and evenings.

Storage: The drug should be protected from light and
moisture.

LITERATURE

Baba K et al., (1981) Yakugaku Zasshi 101(6):538.

Bohm K, (1959) Untersuchungen iiber choleretische Wirkungen
einiger Arzneipflanzen. Arzneim Forsch Drug Res 9:376.

Budzianowski J, Coumarins, caffeoyltartaric acids and their
artifactual estres from Taraxacum officinale. In: PM 63(3):288.
1997.

Czygan FC, Taraxacum officinale WIGGERS - Der Lowenzahn.
In: ZPT 11(3):99. 1990.

Hansel R et al., (1980) Phytochemistry 19:857.

Kotobuki Seiyaku KK, (1981) Pat. JP 81/10117 Japan.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Rauwald HW, Huang DT, (1985) Phytochemistry 24(7): 1557.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
994.

Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
sberg 1988.

flanzen,
HH, Lan

Hausen B, Allergiey
Verlagsgesellsch. ml

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York

1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Daphne mezereum

See Mezereon

Date Palm

Phoenix dactylifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are androgynous and are in
branched, cob-like inflorescences. The 3 carpels form 1
ovary. The fruit is a 1-seeded berry about 5 cm long (the date
with the characteristic seed).

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Date Palm is a woody plant
growing primarily in girth. The leaves form a large long-
petioled tuft at the top of the trunk. The lamina are frond-like
pinnatifid.

Habitat: Date Palm is found from India to northern Africa.
Production: Dates are the fruits of Phoenix dactylifera.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRUIT PULP
Sugar (50%): saccharose, inverted sugar

Leucoanthocyanidine

Piperidine derivatives: pipecolic acid, 5-hydroxy-pipecolic

acid, baikiaine

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS
Fatty oil (10%)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: Date Palm is used for bronchitis, clouding
of the cornea, headaches, inflamed wounds, kidney disease

and gastric complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

----- PAGE 498 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
Preparation: Honey made from dates is produced in Algeria

using juice-rich dates, which are dried in the sun; the leftover
liquid results in date honey. Date honey is used to treat chest
complaints.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Wylegalla R, Biblische Botanik: Pflanzen und F-tichte aus dem
gelobten Land. In: DAZ 137(11):867-869. 1997.

Datura stramonium
See Jimson Weed

Daucus carota
See Wild Carrot

Delphinium consolida
See Larkspur

Delphinium staphisagria

See Stave sac re

Devil's Claw
Harpagophytum procumbens

TRADE NAMES
Devil's Claw (available from a number of manufacturers),
Devil's Claw Secondary Root, Devil's Claw Root Tuber

DESCRIPTION
* Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried tubular
secondary roots and the thick lateral tubers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow on short pedicles in the
leaf axils and are solitary, large and foxglove-like. The petals
are pale-pink to crimson. The seed capsules are bivalvular,
compressed at the sides and ovate. The capsules are 7 to 20
cm long, 6 cm in diameter, and very woody with longitudi-
nally striped rind. They have a double row of elastic, arm-
like, branched appendages with an anchor-like hook. The

DEVIL"S CLAW /247

capsules contain about 50 dark oblong seeds with a rough
surface.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and leafy. It
has a branched root system and branched, prostrate shoots 1
to 15 m long. The leaves are petiolate and lobed, and may be
opposite or alternate. The aerial parts of the plant die back in
the dry season. The tuber (storage) roots are formed from the
main and lateral roots. The main roots have obtuse,
quadrangular, upright collar-like sections, 10 to 20 cm long
and 30 to 60 cm thick, which are covered in a fissured cork
layer. The nodes of the lateral roots are up to 60 mm thick
and 20 cm long, and are light-brown to red-brown on the
outside. The roots extend out to an area of about 150 cm
around the plant and grow down to a depth of 30 to 60 cm.

Characteristics: The dried, pulverized secondary tubers and
roots are yellowish-gray to bright pink and horn-like in their
hardness. They have a bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant originated in South Africa and Namibia,
and has spread throughout the Savannas and the Kalahari.

Production: Devil's Claw root consists of the dried lateral
roots and secondary tubers of Harpagophytum procumbens.
The lateral roots are cut into slices or pieces, or pulverized
immediately after digging because they harden and become

very difficult to cut once dry.
Other Names: Grapple Plant, Wood Spider

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Liridoide monoterpenes: including harpagoside (extremely

bitter), harpagide, procumbide

Phenylethanol derivatives: including acteoside (verbasco-
side); isoacteoside

Oligosaccharides: stachyose
Harpagoquinones (traces)

EFFECTS
Devil's Claw stimulates gastric juice secretion and is
choleretic. Anti-inflammatory, analgesic (and tiius anti-ar-
thritic) effect has been shown in animal experiments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
+ Loss of appetite
* Rheumatism

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Devil's Claw is used as an
ointment for skin injuries and disorders. The dried root is
used for pain relief; pregnancy discomforts; arthritis; aller-
gies; metabolic disorders; and kidney, bladder, liver and

----- PAGE 499 -----
248 /DEVIL'S CLAW

gallbladder disorders. In South Africa it is used for fevers
and digestive disorders. Devil's Claw is also used for
supportive therapy of degenerative disorders of the CNS

system.

Homeopathic Uses: Chronic rheumatism is the primary use
for Devil's Claw in homeopamy.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used in the presence of stomach or
duodenal ulcers, due to the drug's stimulation of gastric juice

secretion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug has a sensitizing effect.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As comminuted drug for infusions
and other preparations for internal use, as an ointment for

external use.

How — Supplied:
Capsules — 405 mg, 480 mg, 510 mg, 520 mg

Tablets

Preparation: To make an infusion, use 1 _ teaspoonful
(equivalent to 4.5 g) comminuted drug with 300 ml boiling

water. Steep for 8 hours and strain.
Daily Dosage: For loss of appetite, the recommended dosage

is 1.5 g of drug; otherwise 4.5 g of drug is used. The infusion
can be taken 3 times a day.

tablet or 5 to 10
1 ml injection

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1
globules 1 to 3 times a day, or from D3
solution sc twice weekly (HAB1). The ointment is applied 1
to 3 times a day. For external use, 1 dessertspoon of the
tincture should be diluted with 250 ml and used for washes

or poultices.

Storage: Store Devil's Claw in a container that protects it
from light and moisture. ,

LITERATURE

Abramowitz M, (1979) Med Letters 21:30.

Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.
Anonym, Phytotherapie:Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ'136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Baghdikian B et al., An analyticyl study, anti-inflammatory and
analgesic effects of Harpagophytum procumbens and
Harpagophytum zeyheri. In: PM 63(2): 171-176. 1997.
Spasmolytika. In: ZPT

Carle R, Pflanzliche Antiphlogistika un
9(3):67. 1988.
Circosta C et al., (1984) J Ethnopharmacol 11:259.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Eichler O, Koch C, (1970) Arzneim Forsch 20(1): 107.

Erdos A et al., (1978) Planta Med 34:97.

Haag-Berrurier, M et al., (1978) Plant Med Phytother 12(3): 197.
Kreymeier J, Rheumatherapie mit Phytopharmaka. In: DAZ
37(8):611-613. 1997.

Lichti H, Von Wartburg A. (1964) Tetrahedron Letters 15:835.
Sticher O, (1977) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 32:1279.

Tunmann P, Stierstorfer N. Tetrahedron Letters 15:1697.
Wenzel P, Wegener T, (1995) Teufelskralle. Ein pflanzliches
Antirheumatikum. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 135(13): 1131-1144.

Wolf E. Teufelskralle hat Entzundungen im Griff. In: PZ
42(14): 1122. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Dicentra cucullaria
See Turkey Corn

Dictamnus albus
See Burning Bush

Digitalis
Digitalis purpurea

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves (in
powder form), the ripe dried seeds, the fresh leaves of the 1-
year-old plant or the leaves of the 2-year-old plant collected
at the beginning of flowering. In the past, the drug of

Digitalis purpurae was the raw material employed in

----- PAGE 500 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

isolating the cardiac glycosides. Today, Digitalis lantana is
used.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are carmine red with white-
edged spots on the inside. The flowers appear in long
hanging racemes. They have 5 free, short-tipped sepals. The
corolla is about 4 cm long, campanulate, bilabiate with an
obtuse upper lip and an ovate tip on the lower lip. The flower
is glabrous on the outside and has a white awn on the inside.
There are 2 long and 2 short stamens, and | superior ovary.
The fruit is a 2-valved, ovate, glandular, villous capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a biennial with a
branched tap root. In the first year it develops a leaf rosette.
In the second it produces a 2 m high, erect, unbranched,
gray, tomentose stem. The leaves are alternate, ovate,
tapering upward and petiolate. Almost all leaves are crenate;
only the highest ones are entire-margined.

Characteristics: The plant is very poisonous; it tastes hot-
bitter with a slightly unpleasant odor.

Habitat: Digitalis is indigenous to Europe. It was introduced
to the east and the American continent.

Production: Digitalis leaves are the leaves of Digitalis
purpurea or of Digitalis lanata. Digitalis lanata corresponds
to Digitalis purpurea but has a milder effect. The rose leaves
are harvested during the first period of vegetation in early
autumn. The drying period is decisive for the content of
cardenolide glycosides. The temperature for drying is 30° C
to 50°C.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion seldom occurs due to
cultivation under controlled conditions.

Other Names: Foxglove, Dead Men's Bells, Dog's Finger,
Fairy Fingers, Fairy Gloves, Finger Rower, Folks' Glove,
Lion's Mouth, Ladies' Glove, Witches' Gloves, Gloves of
Our Lady, Fairy Caps, Fairy Thimbles, Virgin's Glove

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides 0.5 to 1.5%):
including ones of the -

- A-sequence (aglycone digitoxigenin): purpurea glyco-
side A (primary glycoside), digitoxin (secondary glycoside)

- B-sequence (aglycone gitoxigenin): purpurea glycoside
B (primary glycoside), gitoxin (secondary glycoside), Digita-
linum verum

- E-sequence (aglycone gitaloxigenin): glucoverodoxin,
glucogitaloxin, gitaloxin
including digipurpurin, diginin,

Pregnane _ glycosides:

digitalonin

DIGITALIS/249

Steroid saponin: including desgalactotigonin. digitonine,
purpureagitoside

Anthracene derivatives: anthraquinones

EFFECTS
The drug contains cardioactive cardenolide glycosides that
are positively inotropic, negatively chronotropic and improve
the contraction power of cardiac muscle.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug's use originated
in Ireland, then came to Scotland and England and finally to
central Europe. It was used to treat ulcers in the lower
abdomen, boils, headaches, abscesses and paralysis. Exter-
nally, the drug was used for the granulation of poorly healing
wounds and to cure ulcers. Furthermore, the drug was used
for cardiac insufficiency, especially high blood pressure.

Use of the raw product has become obsolete because the
effect is not reproducible. The use of pure glycosides is
recommended instead. Digitoxin is available in mono
preparations (extract) and is used as an isolated pure
substance.

Homeopathic Uses: Digitalis purpurea is used for cardiac
insufficiency and migraine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Because of the narrow therapeutic range of digitalis
glycosides, a certain percentage of patients may experience
side effects immediately upon administration of therapeutic
dosages: hypertonia in gastrointestinal area, loss of appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea and headache.

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous administration of
arrhythmogenic substances (sympathomimetics, methylxan-
thines, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, quinidine) increases the
risks of cardiac arrhythmias.

OVERDOSAGE
With overdosage, in addition to the already-mentioned

symptoms, the following can also occur:

Heart: cardiac rhythm disorders, all the way up to life-
threatening ventricular tachycardia, atrial tachycardia with
atrioventricular block

Central nervous system: stupor, visual disorders, depression,
confused states, hallucinations, psychoses

Lethal dosages lead to heart failure or asphyxiation. Admin-
istration over extended periods leads in rare cases to
gynecomastia. Because of the difficulties in standardizing
the drug, the administration of pure glycosides is to be
preferred (digitoxin).

The first measures to be taken in case of poisoning are
gastric lavage and activated charcoal instillation. All other

----- PAGE 501 -----
250 /DIGITALIS

measures proceed according to the symptoms. For loss of
potassium, careful replenishment is necessary. For ectopic
irritation build-up in the ventricle, administration of pheny-
toin as an antiarrhythmatic is recommended. Lidocaine
should be used in cases of ventricular extrasystole, and for
partial atrioventricular block, atropine is recommended. The
prophylactic installation of a pacemaker is often necessary.
For elimination of the glycosides hemoperfusion is possible,
the administration of cholestyramine for interrrupting the
enterohepatic circulation and/or the application of digitoxin
antibodies (antigen-binding fragments, digitalis antidote
{Boehringer Mannheim}, is very likely only fully effective
with digitoxin poisoning).

The drugs and pure glycosides should be administered in the
following situations (among others): atrioventricular block of
the 2nd and 3rd degree, hypercalcaemia, hypocalcaemia,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, carotid sinus syndrome, ven-

thoracic aortic aneurysm, WPW-

tricular tachycardia,

syndrome.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Today, the drug is obsolete. Due to
the lack of reproductivity of content, the use of appropriate
pure glycosides is advisable. Digitoxin is contained in mono
preparations (extract) and used as an isolated pure substance.

Preparation: Tincture: shaken for 1 day in 25% ethanol at a

ratio of 1:10.

The manufacture of the digoxin and digitoxin is a complicat-

ed process that involves fermentation, extraction and

evaporation.
Storage: Store carefully away from sources of light.

LITERATURE
Brisse B, Anwendung pflanzlicher Wirkstoffe bei kardialen

Erkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(4): 107. 1989.

Buschauer A, Entwicklung neuer positiv inotroper Arzneistoffe:
Suche nach einm "Digitalisersatz". In: PZW 134(1)3. 1989.

Cohn JN, (1974) J Am Med Ass 229: 1911.

Holtje HD, Molecular Modelling von Digitaloiden. In: PZ
137(37):2812. 1992.

Ikeda Y et al., Quantitative HPLC analysis of cardiac
glycosides in Digitalis purpurea. In: JNP 58(6):897-901. 1995.
Lichius JJ, Weber R, Kirschke M, Liedtke S, Brieger D, Neues
vom Fingerhut und seinen Kaffeesaureestern. In: DAZ
135(40):3794-3800. 1995.

Lustenberger, B, In: Lustenberger J (Basler Dissertationen zur
Geschichte der Pharmazie und Naturwissenschaften, Bd. 4), Der
Weg zur Etablierung der Reinglykoside in der Digitalistherapie.
Juris Druck - Verlag Dietikon. 1993.

Rail B, Herzinsuffizienz: Was bringt die Digitalis-Therapie? In:
DAZ 137(3): 126-27. 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Thomas Ret al., (1974) J Pharm Sci 63:1649.

Tschesche R, Briigmann G, Tetrahedron 20:1469-1475. 1964.
Voigt G, Hiller K, Sci Pharm 55:201-207. 1987.

Wichtl M, Buhl W, Huesmann G, DAZ 127:2391-2400. 1987.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Digitalis Lanata

Digitalis lanata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The leaves are the medicinal part of the

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is long and densely
flowered, with racemes facing all directions. The bracts are
glandular-haired with ciliate edges. The flower structures are
in fives. The sepals are fused, the calyx tubular. The petals
are fused to a campanulate corolla, which is glandular-haired
on, the outside, white with yellow-brown spots, 18 to 25 mm
long and unevenly bilabiate. The upper lip has 4 points, and
is flat and hem-like. The lower lip is almost as long as the
corolla tube and is turned away from it. There are 4 stamens,
often stretching out of the corolla tube. The ovaries are
superior, 2-chambered, clavate, glandular-haired, gradually
merging into the stigmas. The fruit is a 10 mm _ long
septicidal, brittle capsule. The seeds are approximately 1.5

mm long and red-brown.

----- PAGE 502 -----
M*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: Digitalis lanata is a herbaceous
biennial or perennial, upright, up to 1.2 m high. The leaves
are sessile, simple, narrow-lanceolate, 15 to 35 cm long,
entire and ciiiate in the upper area of the shoot axis. The
stem is upright, usually green, grooved-edged, usually
glabrous below and long woolly-haired in the upper half.
The plant has a primary root with no shoot-bearing roots.

Habitat: The plant's habitat extends from Greece and the
Balkans across the northern coast of the Black Sea to the
Caucasus and the Caspian Sea.

Production: Woolly foxglove leaves are the dried leaves of
Digitalis lanata. Annual cultivation begins with sowing in
April; harvesting is between September and November. The
roughly cut leaves are dried for 10 to 12 hours at 50° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides) (0.5 to 1.5%)
of the following series, including:

A-series (aglycone digitoxigenin): including lanatoside A
(0.05 to 0.25%) glucodigifucoside (0.01 to 0.15%), glucoe-
vatromonoside (0.02 to 0.05%), digitoxin, alpha- and beta-
acetyldigoxin

B-series (aglycone gitoxigenin): lanatoside B (0.01 to
0.15%), glucogitoroside (0.02 to 0.12%), Digitalinum verum
(0.02 to 0.12%), gitoxin, alpha- and beta-acetylgitoxin

C-series (aglycone digoxigenin): \anatoside C (0.08 to
0.24%), desacetyl lanatoside C, digoxin

D-series (aglycone diginatigenin): lanatoside D, diginatin,
diginatigenin gitaloside

E-series (aglycone gitaloxigenin): lanatoside E, glucovere-
doxin (0.01 to 0.14%), glucoverodoxin (0.02 to 0.12%),
gitaloxin

Pregnane derivatives: including digifolein, glucodigifolein,
diginin, digipronin, lanafolein, gitonine

Steroid saponins: including lanagitosides I and II, tigonin,
desglucolanatigonin, aglycones including tigogenin, diga-
logenin, digitogenin, gitogenin

EFFECTS
The cardioactive cardenolide glycosides contained in the
drug are positively inotropic and negatively chronotropic.
Digitalis lanata is known to be highly resorbent when
administered orally. It produces rapid results and wide-
ranging effects; has strong diuretic properties; is quickly
abating; and demonstrates good tolerability. Digitalis lanata
has three times the physiological effect of Digitalis purpurea
and is preferred for its fast-acting effect. Despite these

DIGITALIS LANATA/251

qualities, the drug is now obsolete and has been replaced by
pure cardenolide glycosides.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Because of the unsatisfactory reproducibility during produc-
tion, this drug is obsolete today; the pure cardenolide
glycosides are used. The simultaneous administration of
arrhythmogenic substances (sympathomimetics, methyl xan-
thines, phosphodiestrase inhibitors, quinidine) increases the
risk of cardiac arrhythmias.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Because of the difficulties involved in standardiz-
ing the drug, the administration of pure glycosides is to be
preferred (digitoxin, digoxin, alpha-acetyldigoxin, beta-ace-
tyldigoxin, lanatoside C, deslanoside). Patients receiving no
more than therapeutic dosages might experience the follow-
ing side effects: hypertonias in gastrointestinal area, loss of
appetite, vomiting, diarrhea and headache.

Drug Interactions: Neither the drug nor pure glycosides
should be administered in the presence of first- and second-
degree AV-Block, hypercalcemia, hypokaliemia, hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy, carotid sinus syndrome, ventricle
tachycardia, thoracic aortic aneurysm or WPW syndrome.

OVERDOSAGE
With overdosage, in addition to the symptoms above, the
following can also occur:

Heart: Cardiac rhythm disorders as serious as life-threaten-
ing ventricular tachycardias and atrial tachycardias with
atrioventricular block.

Central nervous system: Dizziness, vision disorders, depres-
sions, states of confusion, hallucinations, psychoses.

Lethal dosages (for humans, 2 to 3 g of the drug) initially
lead to signs of nausea, vomiting and diarrhea caused by
irritation of the gastrointestinal tract. Slowed pulse, extrasys-
toles and conduction disturbances result from resorption.
These are followed by ventricular fibrillation and later death
from cardiac arrest.

The first-aid measures to be taken with poisonings are gastric
lavage and instillation of medicinal charcoal. All other’
measures proceed according to the symptoms: careful
potassium substitution for potassium; phenytoin as an
antiarrhythmic for ectopic stimulation formation in the
ventricle; lidocaine for ventricular extrasystole; atropine for
partial atrioventricular block.

The prophylactic insertion of a cardiac pacemaker is
recommended. Hemoperfusion for the elimination of the
glycosides and cholestyramine administration for the inter-
ruption of the enterohepatic circulation are possible.

----- PAGE 503 -----
252 /DIGITALIS LANATA

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is not used today. The
following preparation and supply information is for historical

reference.
How Supplied: Whole and powdered drug.

Preparation: Tincture; powder: ethanol 25%; 1:10; suc-
cussed for 24 hours.

Storage: Store securely and protect from light.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kallfelz HC, Reinhardt D, Treatment of heart insufficiency in
infancy and childhood with a combined drug made of digitalis
lanata glycosides, Thei Ggw, 110:357-8 passim, 1971 Mar.
Pitra J, Hor3k P. Cardiac glycosides. XII. Digoxin, the
fermented drug of undulating foxglove (Digitalis lanata EHRH)
Cesk Farm, 21:142-4. 1972 May.

Schneider KW, Gattenlohner W, Different changes of central
hemodynamic: due to Digitalis purpura and ianata preparations,
Veth Dtsch Ges Inn Med, 77:980-2, 1971.

Digitalis lanata

See Digitalis Lanata

Digitalis purpurea

See Digitalis

Dill
Anethum graveolens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the seed, the fresh or

dried leaves and the upper stem.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow flowers are in large, 20 to 50
rayed umbels. There is no involucre or calyx. The petals
have an inward-curving point, which is not indented. The
fruit is flattened and oval with a rib on the back, which is
sharp-edged. Ribs that appear on the edge have a winged
edge.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 40 to 120 cm tall. The
stem is erect, round, smooth, dark-green and white-striped.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

The stem is branched above, with a bluish bloom. The leaves
are double and more pinnate, feathery, white-tipped leaflets
with a deep groove on the upper surface. The leaf sheath is
oblong with a thick-skinned edge.

Characteristics: Dill has an aromatic scent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean
region, southern Russia, and cultivated throughout Europe as
well as North and South America.

Production: Dill herb consists of the fresh or dried leaf and
upper stem of Anethum graveolens. Dill seed consists of the
dried fruit of Anethum graveolens.

Other Names: Dilly

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: DILL HERB

Volatile oil (0.5 to 1.5%): chief constituents are carvone, dill
apiole, (+) limonene

Phthalides

EFFECTS: DILL HERB
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: DILL FRUIT
Volatile oil (2.5 to 4.0%): chief constituents are carvone
(approximately 50%), dill apiole, (+) — limonene

Phtalides

Fatty oil

Furanocoumarins: including bergaptene
Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone

EFFECTS: DILL FRUIT
The fruit of the Dill plant has an antispasmodic effect on the
smooth muscles of the gastrointestinal tract, and a bacterio-
static effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
DILL HERB

Unproven Uses: Dill herb is used for prevention and
treatment of diseases and disorders of the gastrointestinal
tract, kidney and urinary tract, for sleep disorders and for
spasms.

DILL FRUIT
Approved by Commission E:

+ Dyspeptic Complaints

Indian Medicine: Dill is used for halitosis, worm infestation,
complaints of the repiratory tract and syphilis.

----- PAGE 504 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

DILL HERB
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction

with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DILL FRUIT
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Photodermatosis is possible after contact with the
juice of the freshly harvested plant.

DOSAGE

DILL FRUIT

Mode of Administration: Whole seeds and crushed fruits are
used to make teas and other galenic preparations for internal

application.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage of the seeds is 3
gm; essential oil daily dose is 0.1 to 0.3 gm.

LITERATURE

DILL HERB

Badoc A, Contribution a l'etude du genre Anethum. In:

Memoire Diplome superieur Rech Biol et Physiol, Univ Sci
£ Techn Lille Flandres Artois No. 122. Dec. 1986.

Debelmas AM, Rochat J. (1967) Plant Med Phytother 1:23.
Dranik LI. (1970) Khim Prir Soed 6:268.

Gijbels MJ et al., (1983) Sci Pharm 51:414.

Harborne JB. (1969) Phytochemistry 8:1729.

Kosawa M et al., (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:220.

Poggendorf A, Gockeritz D, Pohloudek-Fabini R, Der Gehalt an
atherischem 01 in Anethum graveolens. In: PA 32(10):607.
1977.

Varo PT, Heinz DE, (1970) J Agric Food Chem 18:234 et 239.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

DILL FRUIT
A* Badoc A, Contribution a l'etude du genre Anethum. In:'
Memoire Diplome superieur Rech Biol et Physiol, Univ Sci

Techn Lille Flandres Artois No. 122, Dec. 1986.
Debelmas AM, Rochat J, (1967) Plant Med Phytother 1:23.
Dranik LI, (1970) Khim Prir Soed 6:268.

Gijbels MJ et al., (1983) Sci Pharm 51:414.

Harborne JB, (1969) Phytochemistry 8:1729.

Kosawa M et al., (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:220.

DIVI-DIVI /253

Poggendorf A, Gockeritz D, Pohloudek-Fabini R, Der Gehalt an
atherischem 01 in Anethum graveolens, m: PA 32(10):607.
1977.

Varo PT, Heinz DE. (1970) J Agric Food Chem. 18:234 et 239.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979

Dionaea muscipula

See Venus Flytrap

Dioscorea villosa

See Wild Yam

Dipsacus silvestris

See  Teazle

Dipteryx odorata

See Tonka Beans

Divi-Divi
Caesalpinia bonducella

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is seed.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are dorsiventrally zygomor-
phous and arranged in dense clusters. The sepals are free or
fused at their base, or fused to the base of the petals and
stamens to form the corolla. The petals are separate from
each other but have an ascending bud covering. There are
twice as many stamens as petals, usually 10. The ovary
always has only | carpel. The fruit is indehiscent or a legume

with yellow nuts.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Divi-Divi is a tree or shrub that
grows to a height of 9 m, with alternate entire-margined or
double-pinnate thorny leaves.

----- PAGE 505 -----
254/DIVI-DIVI

Habitat: Sri Lanka, Brazil, South America

Production: Nikkar nuts are the seeds of Caesalpinia

bonducella.
- Other Names: Nikkar Nuts, Nichol Seeds, Gray Nicker

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil (20 to 25%, bonduc nut oil): chief fatty acids are
linoleic acid, oleic acid, palmitic acid, stearic acid

Proteins
Starch

Diterpenes: including, among others, alpha-, beta-, gamma-,
eta-caesalpine

Saponins

EFFECTS
Divi-Divi is a febrifuge and tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: The roasted seeds are used
illnesses and in the treatment of diabetes.

in febrile

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Seeds are ground and roasted for

internal use.

LITERATURE

Balmain et al., Tetrahedron 1967:5027. 1967.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Dodder

Cuscuta epithymum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts of

the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are reddish, wax or flesh-
colored. They are arranged in small clusters. The calyx is
divided into 5 and the corolla is fused to a 4 to 5 tipped tube
with fringed scales inside. There are 5 stamens and 1 ovary.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a leafless parasite up to
150 cm high. The stem is yellow or reddish, thread-like,
branched, with sucking roots, and climbing.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe, Asia and South Africa.

Production: Dodder is the whole plant of Cuscuta

epithymum.

Other Names: Lesser Dodder, Dodder of Thyme, Devil's
Guts, Beggarweed, Hellweed, Strangle Tare, Scaldweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Tannins
A purgative principle
The drug has been subjected to very little investigation.

EFFECTS
Dodder has hepatic and laxative effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Dodder is used for disorders of the urinary
tract, spleen and liver.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion ot designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. It is
conceivable that the drug triggers intestinal colic in cases of
overdosage.

LITERATURE

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Pagnani F, Ciarallo G, (1974” Boll Chim Farm 113(1):30.

Dog Rose

Rosa canina

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the petals, the Rose
hips with and without seeds and die seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The pink flowers are usually solitary or in
clusters of 2 or 3. The receptacle deepens to form a cup
whose upper edge the 5 pinnatifid sepals and 5 petals and
numerous stamens sit. There are long white silky hairs in ffie
receptacles and numerous ovaries. The ovaries grow into
stiff-haired nuts surrounded by the receptacle and become
the scarlet 'rosehip'.

----- PAGE 506 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an approximately | to 3
m high shrub with hanging branches and erect root shoots
that are covered in tough, sickle-shaped prickles that are
appressed below. The leaves are pinnatifid with 5 to 7

ft, leaflets. They are markedly petiolate, obovate, smooth-mar-
gined, glabrous, glossy and dark green above, lighter and
simple-serrate beneath.

Characteristics: The sepals revolute at the end of the
flowering period and drop when the fruit ripens.

Habitat: Rosa canina grows in Europe and North Africa and
is extensively cultivated.

Production: Dog Rose fruit consist of the ripe, dried fruit
(nutlet) of various species of the genus Rosa particularly
Rosa moschata. The fruits are secondary products of Dog
Rose shells. Dog Rose shells consist of the ripe, fresh or
dried, opened seed receptacle, whole or cut and freed from
hairs, of Rosa canina, Rosa pendulina, Rosa rugosa, Rosa
moschata and other Rosa species. The ripe receptacles are
harvested by hand and dried in the air, sun or in drying plants
at a maximum temperature of 80° C. The dry Dog Roses are
broken up and the fruit and skins are separated by sieving.

Other Names: Brier Hip, Hip, Rose Hip, Sweet Briar, Brier
Rose, Eglantine Gall, Hogseed, Dog-Berry, Sweet Brier,
Wild Brier, Witches' Brier

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: DOG ROSE FRUITS

Fatty oil (8 to 10%)
Tocopherol (vitamin E)
Volatile oil (0.3%)
Proteic substances

EFFECTS: DOG ROSE FRUITS

The pectin and fruit acid content are responsible for the
diuretic and laxative effect.

COMPOUNDS: DOG ROSE SHELLS

Carotinoids

Flavonoids
Fruit acids: malic acid, citric acid

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (12 to 15%): invert sug-
ar, saccharose

Pectins
Tannins
Vitamins: ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 0.2 to 2.4%)

EFFECTS: DOG ROSE SHELLS
The drug is a vitamin C supplement

DOG ROSE 255

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

DOG ROSE FRUITS

Unproven Uses: Dog Rose fruits are used in folk medicine
for disorders of the efferent urinary tract and the kidneys.
kidney stones, rheumatic conditions such as rheumatism, and
gout, colds, scurvy and febrile conditions.

DOG ROSE SHELLS

Unproven Uses: Dog Rose shells are used in folk medicine
for colds and ‘flu,! intestinal conditions, digestive com-
plaints, vitamin C deficiency, gallstones, subacidic-stomach.
infectious diseases, conditions of the efferent urinary tract.
edema, rheumatism and gout, bleeding and leucorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
DOG ROSE FRUITS AND SHELLS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
DOG ROSE FRUITS

Mode of Administration: Dog Rose fruits are available as
whole and powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: The single dose is 2 gm drug.
Storage: Dog Rose should be stored in a dry and dark place.

DOG ROSE SHELLS
Mode of Administration: Dog Rose shells are available as
whole, crude and powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: Tea: 2 to 5 gm drug added to 1 cup and
steeped for 10 to 15 minutes

Storage: Should be stored in dark place.

LITERATURE

DOG ROSE SHELLS
Czygan FC, Rosa canina L. - Die Hunds- oder Heckenrose. In:

ZPT 10(5): 162. 1989.
Jaretzky R, Pharm Zentralh 82:229. 1941.

Kurucu S, Coskun M, Kartal M, High pressure liquid
chromatographic determination of ascorbic acid in the fruits of
some Rosa species growing in Turkey. In: PM 58(7)75. 1992.

Luckner M, BepMer O, PA 21:197. 1966.
Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients U«d
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 507 -----
256/DOG ROSE

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homdopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart. Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

DOG ROSE FRUITS

Czygan FC, Rosa canina L. - Die Hunds- oder Heckenrose. In:
ZPT 10(5): 162. 1989.

Jaretzky R. Pharm Zentralh 82:229. 1941.

Luckner M, Bepler O. PA 21:197. 1966.

Further information in:

Kern W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used

in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New York
1980.

Dogwood

Comus_ florida

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark. Fresh
bark is also used occasionally.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are sessile, small, greenish,
and in clusters of 12 to 20 at the splayed end ofa tough, 3
cm long stem. The bracts are white or pale reddish, ovate to
long and are longer than the inflorescence. The petals are
about 4 mm long. The fruit is a scarlet berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a deciduous shrub or a 4
to 9 m high tree, which is heavily branched and has a dark
gray, thick and rough bark. The branches are smooth and
covered in leaf scars. The leaves are 7 to 10 cm long,
opposite, petiolate, entire, ovate acuminate at both ends, and
somewhat rough. The upper surface is dark green. In autumn
the upper surface is bright red to violet. The underside is
always whitish-green. The leaves are slightly pubescent

when young.

Habitat: Cornus florida is indigenous to eastern and southern
North America; other varieties are found in Europe.

Production: American Boxwood bark and root-bark are the
dried and occasionally fresh bark and root-bark of Cornus
florida. It is collected in the wild.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: Dog-Tree, Box Tree, Boxwood, Budwood,
False Box, Cornelian Tree, Cornel, Bitter Redberry, Green
Ozier, Swamp Dogwood, Silky Cornel, Osier, Rose Willow

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins: including sarsapogenin-O-beta-D-galacto-
side, | sarsapogenin-0-beta-D-xylosyl-(I (2)-beta-D-galacto-
side

Iridoide monoterpenes: cornin (verbenalin)
Tannins

EFFECTS
Effect on mollusks: The drug destroys the biomphalaria
glabratus snails (carrier of bilharziose).

Cardiac effect: Heart activity, at different levels up to the
cessation of heartbeat, is examined depending on the

concentration of the methanol extract.

Antiplasmodic effect: Induced malaria on chicks and Peking
ducks was treated for 5 days with a water-insoluble fraction.
As a result, antiplasmodic activity toward P. cathemerium
could be observed, similar to that deployed by quinine and
sulfadiazine. To date, the results cannot be sufficiently

assessed.
The bark works as a tonic, an astringent and a stimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In North America, the dried bark was used
in folk medicine for strength, to stimulate appetite, for fever
and for chronic diarrhea. It is used externally as an astringent
for wounds and boils. Formerly, it was in use as a
replacement for quinine. It is still used for headaches and

fatigue.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses include for poor digestion and
chronic attacks of fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Formerly — the
internally as a tincture as an alternative to quinine and

drug was used

externally as a liquid extract.

Homeopathic Dosage: Oral: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules
every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day (HAB34).

Preparation: Decoction or infusion (no specifications).

----- PAGE 508 -----
of

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Caetano-Anolles G, Trigiano RN, Windham MT, Sequence
signatures from DNA amplification fingerprints reveal fine
population structure of the dogwood pathogen Discula
destructiva. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 145:377-83, 1996 Dec 15

Jacobs, B, In: Jacobs ML. Burlage HM: Index of Plants of
North Carolina with Reputed Medicinal Uses, USA. 1958.
Jensen SR, Kjaer A, Nielsen BJ, Biochem Syst Ecol 3:75-78.
1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hostettmann K. Hostettmann-Kaldas M, Nakanishi K, Helv
Chim Acta 61:1990. 1978.

Dorema ammoniacum

See Ammoniac Gum

Dorstenia contrayerva

See Contrayerva

Dragon's Blood (Xue-Jie)

Daemonorops draco

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the red resin fom the
fruit, which is extracted from both Daemonorops draco and
Daemonorops propinquis.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged along the
branch. The fruit is a cherry-sized berry ending in a point.
When the fruit are ripe, they are covered in a reddish,
resinous substance, which is separated in various ways.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Dragon's Blood is a tree with long,
thin, flexible stems, which are inclined to climb when they
are older. The leaves have thorny petioles, which grow into
long appendages. The bark is covered in hundreds of
flattened thorns.

Habitat: Malaysia, Indonesia.

Production: Dragon's Blood resin is the resin of Daemono-
rops draco.

Other Names: Dracorubin, Sanguis Draconis, Draconis
Resina, Xue-Jie

DRYOPTERIS FILIX-MAS / 257

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Ester resins (dracoresin): benzoyl ester of dracoresinotannol

Dracoresen
Flavane quinones: including dracorubin (dracocarmin), dra-

corhodin, both colored an intense red

EFFECTS
Dragon's Blood has an astringent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The resin is used for diarrhea, digestive
disorders and as a coloring agent.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The resin is used in a powder form.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Merlini L, Gasini G, J Chem Soc Perkin I 1976:1570. 1976.
Rao SR et al., INP 45:646. 1982.

Drimys winteri
See Winter's Bark

Drosera ramentacea

See Sundew

Dryas octopetala

See Mountain Avens

Dryopteris filix-mas
See Male Fern

----- PAGE 509 -----
258/DUCKWEED

Duckweed

Lemna minor

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The plant flowers infrequently. The tiny
inconspicuous flowers have 2 unevenly sized stamens and |
pistil. A delicate membranous bract surrounds 3 flowers,
which are located on the edge of the stem. The fruit is
tubular with 1 ovule. The seeds have longitudinal ribs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Lemna minor is a water plant with
leaf-like organs that are 2 to 6 mm long. They are flat, have 3
to 5 ribs, and are sometimes pigmented with red. Two to six
leaf-like shoots stick together, and each bears a root with a
rounded root cover.

Characteristics: The plant has leaf-like shoots with 1 root
per leaf.

Habitat: The plant is found worldwide in cooler, oceanic
climates. The plant is not found in east Asia and South

Africa.
Production: Duckweed is the fresh plant Lemna minor.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: in particular C-glucosyl-flavone,
among others orientin, isoorientin, vitexin, isovitexin, luto-
narin, vicenin-1; also O-glycosides, including among others
apigenin-7-O-glucoside, luteolin-7-O-glycoside

including

Cyclopentane fatty acids, with structure resembling

prostaglandin
Polysaccharides: apiogalacturonans
Cardiac steroids (cardenolides)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Duckweed is used internally for inflamma-
tion of the upper respiratory tract and externally for gout and
rheumatism.

Chinese Medicine: Duckweed is used for measles, edema,
joint pain, dysuria, acne, erysipelas and epilepsy.
Homeopathic Uses: Duckweed is used for chronic colds.
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction

with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The plant is available as fresh or
ground herb and as an extract.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml s.c, acute: 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Dusty Miller
Senecio bicolor

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh plant
harvested before flowering, the herb of the flowering plant,
and the whole fresh, flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has numerous yellow capitula,
12 to 15 cm in diameter, on short peduncles. The calyx only
has a few sepals. There are 10 to 12 lingual florets. The fruit
is striped.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Senecio cineraria is a semi-shrub
that grows up to 80 cm high. The stem is erect, heavily
branched at the base, and sometimes snow-white tomentose.
The leaves are densely pubescent beneath and more or less
cobwebbed on the upper surface. They may have sparse
greenish hairs. The lower leaves are oval to lanceolate,
pinnatifid, and the outer lobes are usually longer than they
are wide.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to die Mediterranean
region, naturalized in North America and cultivated as an
ornamental plant in many countries.

Production: Cineraria juice is the juice of the whole Senecio
cinerarian plant.

Other Names: Cineraria Maritima

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (0.9% in the blossoming foliage):
including, among others, jaconine, jacobine, otosenine,
retrorsine, senecionine, seneciphylline

Polyynes

----- PAGE 510 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
The active agents are the alkaloids jacobin, senecionin, and

otosenin These pyrrolizidine alkaloids are hepatotoxic and
carcinogenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Though no longer recommended, the plant
previously was administered for ailments of the eye, as an
emmenagogic, and in cataplasms and oral rinses.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, the juice is used to treat
eye-sight problems (for the treatment of spots before the
eyes), migraine, and as an emmenagogue.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Dusty Miller should not be taken internally (except in
homeopathic dosages) because of the potential hepatotoxici-
ty and carcinogenicity of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids and the
1,2-unsaturated necic parent substances.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The use of the sterilized juice is no
longer recommended for internal use, nor is any other
preparation of Dusty Miller.

LITERATURE
Adams R et ah, J Am Chem Soc 71:1953-1956. 1941.
Barger G et al., J Chem Soc:584. 1937.

Habib AM, PM 26:279. 1974.

Klasek A et al., Coll Czech Chem Comm 40:2524. 1975.
Nachmann RJ, PH 22:780-782. 1983.

Resch JF et al., PM 47:255. 1983.

Roder E, DAZ 132:2427. 1992.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33(3A):1.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Senecio bicolor).

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter
Cineraria maritima).

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994 (unter
Senecio bicolor).

Dwarf Elder

Sambucus ebulus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the ripe, dried or fresh fruit and the dried roots.

DWARF ELDER/259

Flowers and Fruit: The reddish-white flowers are in a
terminal, umbrella-like, richly blossomed, paniculate cyme
with 3 main branches. The calyx margin is 5-tipped. The
corolla has fused petals and is rotate with 5 acuminate tips.
The 5, stamens have dark red anthers and an inferior, 3-
valved ovary with 3 stigmas. The fruit is a black, globular,
berry-like drupe with at least 3 to 4 ovate seeds. When ripe,
the fruit stems are erect and violet or crimson.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Dwarf Elder is a perennial, herb-like
plant 0.5 to 2 m high with a sturdy, finger-thick, branched
rhizome that creeps deeply and horizontally. The stems are
leafy, erect, sturdy and branched above. They die off in
autumn. The leaves are crossed opposite, odd-pinate with 3
to 4 pairs of ovate-lanceolate leaflets and 2 large, ovate-
lanceolate, and serrate stipules.

Characteristics: The fragrance is similar to that of sunflow-
ers or almond.

Habitat: The plant is found from southern Sweden through-
out central and southern Europe, in northern Africa, in
western Asia as far as Iran, and in North America.

Production: Dwarf Elder root is the root of Sambucus
ebulus, which is collected in the spring or late autumn and
then air-dried.

Other Names: Dane wort, Wale wort, Blood Elder, Blood
Hilder

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoides: ebuloside, 6'-0-apiosyl-ebuloside, 7,7-0-dihydroe-
buloside, secoebuloside, isoswer-oside

Nauseant, purgative resins with unresolved structure

EFFECTS
The drug is said to be a mild diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Dwarf Elder is used in folk medicine as an
ingredient in different teas prepared to assist in weight
reduction and alleviate rheumatism. The drug also is used for
constipation and as an emetic and to treat edema and kidney
disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Healtii risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

OVERDOSAGE

According to older scientific reports, large quantities of all
parts of the plant, (in particular the raw berries) leads to
vomiting, bloody diarrhea, cyanosis, dizziness, headache,
and unconsciousness. Cases of death are also mentioned.

----- PAGE 511 -----
260 /DWARF ELDER

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Dwarf Elder is obsolete as a drug in
most countries. It is found in some tea mixtures, but is not
used in medicinal preparations.

LITERATURE
Gross GA, Phytochemische Untersuchungen von Inhaltsstoffen
der Zwergholunderwurzel, Dissertation Ziirich. 1985.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Petkov V, Markovska V, (1981) Plant Med Phytother 15(3): 172.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Dyer's Broom

Genista tinctoria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The entire plant has medicinal applications.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in short, terminal
racemes. They are golden yellow and bean-shaped, 1.5 to 2
cm long and are on pedicles, which are shorter than the
calyx. The petal stems of the 4 lower petals are initially
straight, but in moments of tension, when for instance, they
are touched by an insect, they curl down suddenly and the
flower opens. The fruit is a smooth pod 2.5 to 3.5 cm long. It
is brown, compressed at the sides, and contains 5 to 10

seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 30 to 60 cm high,
always thornless subshrub with a creeping, woody rhizome.
The florescent green stems are smooth and produce fairly
rigid, smooth or pubescent forked branches, which sprout
lanceolate leaves. The leaves are alternate, glabrous, entire-
margined, 1.25 to 2.5 cm long, nearly sessile, and with a
ciliate margin. The stipules are linear-awl-shaped.

Habitat: Dyer's Broom is indigenous to the Mediterranean
region, the Canary Islands, Europe and western Asia, and
cultivated elsewhere, including the eastern U.S.

Production: Dyer's Broom leaves are the green leaves of
Genista tinctoria.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: Dyer's Weed, Dyer's Greenwood, Dyer's
Whin, Furze, Green Broom, Greenweed, Wood Waxen

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Quinolizidine alkaloids: main alkaloids — cytisine, methyl-
cytisine, anagyrine, as well as isosparteine, lupanine,

tinctorin
Flavonoids: in particular luteolin glycosides

Isoflavonoids: genistein, genistin

Lectins

EFFECTS

The drug acts as a purifier, cathartic, diuretic, purgative and
emetic. It increases heart rate, strengthens the walls of blood
vessels, stimulates kidney blood circulation and affects

metabolism.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Formerly, the drug was used as a purgative
and to remove bladder stones, as well as for digestive
disorders and gout. Once an infusion has been taken,
breathing deepens and pain in the lumbar and pelvic region
is alleviated.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Overdosage can lead to diarrhea and to symptoms
of a cystine poisoning. Anagyrine has exhibited teratogenic
effect in animal experiments.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as an
infusion.

Preparations: To prepare an infusion, use 1 teaspoonful of
the ground drug per cup of water.

Daily Dosage: Drink 1 to 2 cups of infusion daily.
LITERATURE

Atkinson JE et al., (1969) Tetrahedron 25:1507.

Bricout J, (1974) Phytochemistry 13:2819.

Harborne JB, (1969) Phytochemistry 8:1449.

Hrochova V, Sitaniova H, Farm Obz 51:131. 1982.

Inouye H et al., (1968) Tetrahedron Letters 4429.

Inouye H et al., (1970) Chem Pharm Bull 18:1856.

Lewis JR, Gupta P, (1971) J Chem Soc Chem Comm 4:629.

Rulko F, (1976) Pr Nauk Akad. Med Wroclawin 8:3.
Sadritdinov F, (1971) Farmakol Alkaloidov Serdechnykh
Glikozidov 146.

----- PAGE 512 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Swietek L, Dombrowicz E, (1984) Farm Pol 40(12):729.
Ulubelen A et al., (1971) Lloydia 34(2):258.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al. (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Echinacea

Echinaceae species

TRADE NAMES
Echinacea (available from numerous manafacturers), Echina-
cea Root, Echinacea Standardized, Echinacea Root Herbal,
Echinacea angustifolia Herb, Echinacea purpurea Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are, depending on
varieties, the roots, leaves or the whole plant in various

stages of development.

Flower and Fruit: The flower-heads are large and solitary on
terminal peduncles with spreading ray florets. The bracts are
in a number of rows. The bracts are leafy, rigid, thorny
tipped, and longer than the conical erect disc florets. The
reddish or occasionally white florets are conspicuous. The
Hgual florets are usually sterile and 3 cm long. The pappus is
small or absent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Echinacea is usually a perennial herb
and grows up to 45 cm. in height. The leaves are large,
solitary, opposite or alternate and are smooth-margined.
They are 7 to 20 cm long and have a rough surface. The
leaves are entire-margined and are on slender petioles. A
transverse section of the rhizome shows a thin bark and a
yellowish, porous wood, which is flecked with black.

ECHINACEA / 261

Characteristics: The taste is slightly sweet then bitter
leaving a tingling sensation on the tongue. The odor is faintly
aromatic.

Habitat: Echinacea purpurea and Echinaceae pallida grow in
the middle or eastern U.S. and is cultivated in Europe.

Production: Echinacea purpurea herb consists of the fresh,
above-ground parts, harvested at flowering time. The root
consists of the fresh or dried underground part, gathered in
autumn. Echinacea pallida herb consists of the fresh or dried
above-ground parts, collected at the time of flowering.
Echinacea angustifolia herb and root consist of the fresh or
dried roots, or above-ground parts collected at the time of
flowering.

Not to be Confused With: The herbs and roots of Echinacea
purpurea, Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea pallida have
different medicinal properties. Some Echinacea species may
be confused with or adulterated with Parthenium

integrifoium.

Other Names: Black Sampson, Niggerhead, Rudbeckia,
Sampson Root, Purple Coneflower, Hedgehog, Red

Sunflower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA PURPUREA HERB

Water-soluble immunostimulating polysaccharides (4-O-me-
thylglucuronylarabinoxylans, acidic arabinorhamno-galac-
tans)

Volatile oil (under 0.08-0.32%): components including
germacrene alcohol, borneol, bornylacetate, pentadeca-8-en-
2-on, germacrene D, caryophyllene, caryophyllene epoxide

Flavonoids: ferulic acid derivatives including cichoriic acid,
cichoriic acid methyl ester, 2-0- caffeoyl-3-O-feruloyl-tar-
taric acid, 2,3-O-diferuloyl tartaric acid 2-O-caffeoyl tartaric
acid

Alkamides: including undeca-2E,4Z-dien-8,10-diin acid- and
dodeca-2E,4E-8Z,10E/Z- tetraen acid isobutylamide

Polyenes:  trideca-l,ll-dien-3,5,7,9,-tetraine,  trideca-1-en-
3,5,7,9,11-pentaine, trideca-8,10,12-trien-2,4,6-triine, pon-

tica epoxide

COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA PURPUREA ROOT
Water-soluble immunostimulating polysaccharides

Water-soluble immunostimulating glycoproteins

Volatile oil (0.2%): components including caryophyllene,
humules, caryophyllene epoxide, dodeca-2,4-dien-l-yl-iso-
valerate, germacrene D, palmitic acid, linolenic acid

----- PAGE 513 -----
262/ECHINACEA

Caffeic and ferulic acid derivatives (0.6-2.1%): including
cichoriic acid, cichoriic acid methyl ester, 2-0- caffeoyl
tartaric acid

Alkamides (0.01-0.04%): including undeca-2E,4Z-dien-8, 10-
diinacetyl- and dodeca-2E,4E-8Z,10E/Z-tetracetyliso-buty-
lamide

Polyynes (0.01 mg/%): including trideca-l-en-3,5,7,9,11 -pen-
tain, trideca-1,1 I-dien-3,5,7,9,-tetraine, trideca-8,10,12-trien-
2,4,6-triine, pontica epoxide

Effective pyrrolizidine alkaloids: tussilagine, isotussilagine

COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA PALLIDA HERB
Volatile oil (0.1%)- including 1,8-pentadecadien

Flavonoids: in particular rutin

Caffeic acid derivatives: Cichoriic acid, chlorogenic acid,
isochlorogenic acid, verbascoside

Alkamides: including dodeca-2E,4E-8Z,10E-tetracetyliso-

butylamide

COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA PALLIDA ROOT

Water-soluble immunstimulating polysaccharides (arabino-
rhamnogalactans)

Volatile oil (0.2 - 2%): chief components include pentadeca-
8Z-en-2-on, pentadeca-1,8Z-dien, 1 -pentadecan

Caffeic acid derivatives: echinacoside

Alkamides: including isomeric dodeca-2E,4E-8Z, 10E/Z-tet-
raenic acid-isobutylamide

Polyynes: including trideca-l-en-3,5,7,9,11-pentain, pontica
epoxide

COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA HERB

Volatile oil (under 0.1%): typical components consist of

epishyobunol, beta-farnesene, alpha- and beta-pinenes, myr-
cene, carvomenthene, caryophyllene

Flavonoids
Caffeic acid derivatives: cichoriic acid, chlorogenic acid,
isochlorogenic acid, verbascoside, echinacoside

Alkamides: dodeca-2E,4E-8Z, 1 0E-tetracetyl-

isobutylamide

including

Polyynes: including trideca-l-en-3,5,7,9,11-pentaine, pontica
epoxide

COMPOUNDS: ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA ROOT
Volatile oil (under 1%): components include dodeca-2,4-
dien-1-ylisovalerate, as well as palmitic acid, linolenic acid

Flavonoids

Caffeic acid derivatives (0.3 to 1.3%): echinacoside, cynarin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Alkamides (0.01%): including dodeca-2E,4E-8Z,10E/Z- tet-
racetyl isobutylamide

Polyynes: including trideca-l-en-3,5,7,9,11-pentaine, pontica
epoxide, in dehydrated roots only traces

EFFECTS: ALL VARIETIES
General

Echinacea activity is directed towards the nonspecific
cellular immune system. The herb exerts anti-inflammatory,
immunostimulating, bactericidal, and wound healing actions,
depending on the type of plant species. The main active
principles of the immunostimulating, antibacterial and viros-
tatic drug are the alkamides, glycoproteins, caffeic acid
derivatives (cichoriic acid and  echinosides) and
polysaccarides.

Immunostimulating

Ethanolic root extracts of the Echinacea purpurea, Echinacea
pallida and Echinacea angustifolia were shown to cause a
23% increase of the phagocytosis rate in granulocyte smears
in vitro (Jurcic, 1989; Melchart 1995). Confirmed by the
carbon clearance test and granulocyte tests, the ethanolic root
extracts significantly enhance phagocytosis (Bauer, 1988).
The ethanolic extracts of aerial parts of Echinacea angustifo-
lia and Echinacea purpurea exert immunostimulatory effects
also through metabolic and bactericidal activities of perito-
neal macrophages. The ethanolic extracts of both Echinacea
plants also increase the total weight of the spleen (Bukovsky,
1993).

Anti-Inflammatory

Polyunsaturated alkamides in Echinacea angustifolia exert
anti-inflammatory effects through inhibition of cyclooxyge-
nase and 5-lipoxygenase (Muller-Jakic, 1994). The polysac-
charide fraction of Echinacea angustifolia exerts anti-
inflammatory effects (Tubaro, 1987), and the polysaccharide
from Echinacea purpurea induces an acute phase reaction.
The acute phase reaction occurs with enhancing the sponta-
neous motility of PMN and increasing the ability of these
cells to kill bacteria such as staphylococci. (Roesler, 1991).

Cytokine Stimulation

Arabinogalactan, a highly purified polysaccharide from plant
cell cultures of Echinacea purpurea, is effective in activating
macrophage cytotoxicity actions against tumor cells and
microorganisms (Leishmania enriettii). This polysaccharide
induces macrophages to produce tumor necrosis factor
(TNF-alpha), interleukin-1 (TL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), inter-
leukin-10 (IL-10) and interferon-beta. The component also
induces a slight increase in T-cell proliferation (Burger,
1997; Luettig, 1989; Roesler, 1991). Extracts of Echinacea
purpurea stimulate cell-mediated immunity through the

----- PAGE 514 -----
jt

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

production of lymphokines by lymphocytes (Coeugriiet,
1987). Echinacea purpurea herb has shown some short-term
viral resistance against influenza, herpes, and vesicular
stomatitis viruses, which has been credited to an interferon-
like effect (Wacker, 1978).

Collagen Protectant

The caffeic acid derivatives exert a protective effect on the
free-radical-induced degradation of Type HI collagen. Colla-
gen degradation was inhibited the greatest by echinacoside
and chicoriic acid, then cynarine and chlorogenic acid. The
collagen protection from free radical damage is through a
scavenging effect on reactive oxygen species and/or C-, N-,
S-centered secondary radicals. These activities may be useful
for the treatment/protection of photodamage of the skin by
UVA/UVB radiation, in which oxidative stress plays a
critical role (Facino, 1995).

CLINICAL TRIALS

A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial evalu-
ated the effect ofa fluid extract of Echinacea purpurea on the
incidence and severity of colds and respiratory infections.
There were 109 patients with a history of more than 3 colds
or respiratory infections in the previous year included in the
study. The fluid extract, given 4 mL twice daily for 8 weeks,
did not significantly decrease the incidence, duration or
severity of colds and respiratory infections compared to
placebo (Grimm, 1999).

The efficacy and safety of Echinaforce® (Echinacea purpu-
rea preparation from 95% herb and 5% root), Echinacea
concentrate (same preparation at 7 times higher concentra-
tion), and special Echinacea purpurea root preparation were
evaluated in the treatment of the common cold. There were
559 volunteers with a common cold included in the study.
The participants received 2 tablets 3 times daily. The
primary endpoint was the relative reduction of the complaint
index, which is a group of 12 symptoms that occur during
common cold. Echinaforce® and its concentrated prepara-
tion were significantly more effective than the special extract
or placebo treatment group. All treatments were well
tolerated with the frequency of adverse events not signifi-
cantly higher than in the placebo group (Brinkeborn, 1999).

The safety and efficacy of Echinacea angustifolia and
Echinacea purpurea ethanolic root extracts for the prevention
of upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) was determined
in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The time until
the first URTI (time and event) and adverse effects were
evaluated in 302 patients. The root extract dosages were 50
drops twice daily for 12 weeks from Monday to Friday. The
time until occurrence of a URTI was 66 days in the
Echinacea angustifolia group, 69 days in the Echinacae
purpura group and 65 days in the placebo group. Though the

ECHINACEA / 263

results do not prove efficacy of prophylaxis, the authors
conclude that Echinacea may reduce the risk of developing a
URTI by 10 to 20% (Melchart, 1998).

A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study was
conducted to determine the effect of an extract of Echinaceae
pallidae root with influenza infections of the upper respira-
tory tract. A dose of 900 mg daily was evaluated for the
relief of symptoms, including shortening of the illness period
and curing cough and hoarseness. The length of the illness
period was reduced significantly with the extract from 13 to
9 days compared with placebo. The strongest effects on the
clinical symptoms were achieved after 8-10 days (Brauning.
1993).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ECHINACEA PURPUREA HERB
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

* Fevers and colds

* Infections of the urinary tract

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
« Tendency to infection

* Wounds and burns

Echinacea purpurea herb is used internally as supportive
therapy for colds and chronic infections of the respirator)
tract and lower urinary tract. It can also be applied locally to
poorly healing superficial wounds.

ECHINACEA PURPUREA ROOT
Unproven Uses: Echinacea purpurea root is used for acute
and chronic respiratory tract infections (of viral and bacterial
origin); increased susceptibility to infection due to temporar-
ily lowered resistance, treatment of leukopenia following
radio and cytostatic therapy and in support of anti-infectious
chemotherapy.

ECHINACEA PALLIDA ROOT
Approved by Commission E:

« Fevers and colds

Echinacea pallida root is used as a supportive therapy for
influenza-like infections.

ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA HERB AND ROOT

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, native Americans use the
drug externally for burns, swelling of the lymph nodes, and
insect bites. The drug is used internally for pain associated
with headaches and stomach aches, measles, coughs and
gonorrhea. The drug has also been used for rattlesnake bites.
Today the drug is used for prophylaxis and treatment of 'flu'
infections, sepsis, and mild to moderate cold infections.
Externally, the drug is used for treatment of poorly healing

----- PAGE 515 -----
264 /ECHINACEA

wounds and inflammatory conditions such as abscesses and
leg ulcers.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

ALL VARIETIES AND FORMS

Because of a possible activation of autoimmune aggressions
and other overreactive immune responses, the drug should
not be administered in the presence of multiple sclerosis,
eukosis, collagen disease, AIDS or tuberculosis. Parenteral
administration should not be used in patients with tendencies
to allergies, especially allergies to members of the composite
family (Asteraceae). Echinacea should not be used during
pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
ALL VARIETIES AND FORMS

General: When used parenterally, dose-dependent short-term
fever reactions, nausea and vomiting can occur. Caution
should be exercised if the drug is administered parenterally
to people with diabetes. Hypersensitivity reactions with
anaphylaxis have been reported (Mullins, 1998). Rashes,
itching, occasional swelling of the face, breathing difficul-
ties, dizziness and a drop in blood pressure have been
observed after administration of preparations containing
Echinacea.

Fertility: High concentrations of Echinacea had adverse
effects on oocytes in animal models (Ondrizek, 1999).

Pregnancy: Parenteral administration should be avoided
during pregnancy.

Drug Interactions: The immune-stimulating effect of echina-
cea may interfere with drugs that have immunosuppressant
effects. Interaction may occur when using cyclosporine or
other anti-rejection drugs. Echinacea may also interfere with
the cancer chemotherapeutic effect of corticosteroids.

DOSAGE

ECHINACEA PURPUREA HERB

Mode of Administration: Pressed juice and galenic prepara-
tions for internal and external use.

Preparation: The pressed juice is prepared in a concentration
of 2.5:1 and is stabilized with 22% alcohol. Other complicat-
ed methods of preparation are known.

Daily Dosage: When used internally, the recommended
dosage is 6 to 9 ml of the expressed juice. The recommended
dosage for parenteral administration should be individual-
ized, depending on the seriousness of the condition as well as
the specific nature of the respective preparation. Parenteral
application requires a gradation of dosage, especially for
children. The manufacturer is required to show this informa-
tion for the respective preparation. When used externally,
semi-solid preparations containing at least 15% pressed juice
are used for a maximum of 8 weeks.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ECHINACEA PURPUREA ROOT
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for decoctions
and galenic preparations.

Daily Dosage: When using the tincture, 30 to 60 drops
should be taken three times a day.

Storage: Echinacea should be protected from light sources,
and, if possible be uncomminuted.

ECHINACEA PALLIDA HERB AND ROOT
Mode of Administration: As a liquid preparation for oral use.

Preparation: A 15 tincture is made using 50% (V/V)
ethanol and native dried extract (50% ethanol in a 7 to 11:1
proportion)

Daily Dosage: The daily dose is 900 mg of drug. The drug
should be used for a maximum of 8 weeks.

Storage: Protect from light sources. If possible, store
uncomminuted.

ECHINACEA ANGUSTIFOLIA HERB AND ROOT

Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy in the claimed
areas of application has not been documented, therapeutic
application cannot be recommended. Because of the risks,
the use of parenteral preparations is not justified.

How Supplied:
Capsule — lOOmg, 125mg, 250mg, 380mg 390mg, 400mg,
430mg, 450mg, 500mg

Liquid — 120mg/5mL
Preparation: The root tea is prepared using 1/2 teaspoonful

of comminuted drug with boiling water. Strain after 10
minutes.

Daily Dosage: For colds, drink 1 cup freshly made tea
several times daily.

Storage: Protect from light sources. If possible, store
uncomminuted.

LITERATURE
Bauer R, Arzneipflanzenportrat: Echinacea- welche Inhaltsstoffe

wirken immunmodulierend? In: DAZ 132(23): 1233. 1992.
Bauer R, Echinacea. In: PM 59(6):94. 1992.

Bauer R, Jurcic K, Puhlmann J, Wagner H, Immunologische in
vivo- und in vitro Untersuchnugnen mit Echinacea-Extrakten.
In: Arzneim Forsch 38:276-281. 1988.

Bauer R, Neues von "immunmodulierenden Drogen" und
"Drogen mit antiallergischer und antiinflammatorischer
Wirkung". In: ZPT 14(1):23-24. 1993.

Bauer R, Remiger P, Jurcic K, Wagner H, Beeinflussung der
Phagozytoseaktivitat durch Echinacea-Extrakte. In: ZPT 10:43-
48. 1989.

----- PAGE 516 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Bauer R, Remiger P, Wagner H, Echinacea-Vergleichende DC-
und HPLC-Analyse der Herba-Drogen von Echinacea purpurea,
Echinacea pallida und Echinacea angustifolia. In: DAZ 128:174-
180. 1988.

Bauer R~ Wagner H, Echinacea - Der Sonnenhut - Stand der
Forschung. In: ZPT 9(8): 151. 1988.

Bauer R, Wagner H, Echinacea-Drogen - Who is who? In: ZPT
9(6):191. 1988.
Bauer R, Wagner H, Echinacea. Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Stuttgart 1990.

Bauer, R et aL, (1985) Helv Chim Acta 68:2355.
Bauer, R et al., (1987) Phytochemistry 26(4): 1198.
Becker H. (1982) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 122(45):2320.

Beuscher N, Scheit KH, Bodinet C. Egert D, Modulation der
‘orpereigenen Immunabwehr durch polymere Substanzen aus
Baptisia tinctoria und Echinacea purpurea. In:
Immunotherapeutic prospects of infectious diseases, Hrsg.
Masihi KN. Lange W. Springer, Heidel.

Beuscher N, Uber die medikamentose Beeinflussung zellularer
Resistenzmechanismen im Tierversuch. Aktivierung von

Peritonealmakrophagen der Maus durch pflanzliche Reizkorper.
In: Arzneim Forsch 32(1): 134-138. 1977.

Bodinet C, Beuscher N, Antiviral and immunological activity of
glykoproteins from the root of Echinacea purpurea. In: PM,
Abstracts of the 39th Annual Congress of Medicinal Plant
Research. 1991.

Bohlmann F, Hoffman H. (1983) Phytochemistry 22(5): 1173.

Braunig B, Dorn M, Knick E, Echinaceae purpureae radix: zur
Starkung der korpereigenen Abwehr bei grippalem Infekten. In:
ZPT 13(1):7. 1992.

Brinkeborn R, Shah D, Degenring F. Echinaforce and other
Echinacea fresh plant preparations in the treatment of the
common cold. A randomized, placebo controlled, double-blind
clinical trial. Phytomedicine. 1999 Mar;6(1):1-6.

Bukovsky M, Kostalova D, Magnusova R et al: Testing for
immunomodulating effects of ethanol-water extracts of the
above-ground parts of the plants echinaceae Moench and
Rudbeckia L. Cesk Farm 1993a;42:228-231.

Burger RA; Torres AR; Warren RP et al. Echinacea-induced
cytokine production by human macrophages. Int J
Immunopharmacol 1997 Jul;19(7):371-9.

Busing KH, Hyaluronidasehemmung durch Echinacin. In:
Arzneim Forsch 2:467-469. 1952.

Cheminat A, Zawatzky R, Becker H, Brouillard R,
Caffeoylconjugates from Echinacea Species: Structure and
biological activity. In: PH 27(9):2787-2794. 1988.

Coeugniet EG & Elek E. Immunomodulation widi Viscum
album and echinacea purpurea extracts. Onkologie 1987;
10(suppl 3):27-33.

Die Chemie der Pflanze (Standard, Wirksamkeit). In: Symbiose
4(3): 11. 1992.

ECHINACEA /265

Dorn M, (1989) Milderung grippaler Effekte durch ein
pflanzliches Immunstimulans. Natur- und Ganzheitsmedizin
2:314-319.

Facino RM; Carini M; Aldini G et al. Echinacoside and
caffeoyl conjugates protect collagen from free radical-induced
degradation: a potential use of Echinacea extracts in the
prevention of skin photodamage. Planta Med 1995
Dec;61(6):510-4.

Forth H, Beuscher N, Beeinflussung der Haufigkeit banaler
Erkaltungsinfekte durch Esberitox. In: Z Allgemeinmed 57:2272-
2275. 1981.

Grimm W, Muller H. A randomized controlled trial of the
effect of fluid extract of Echinacea purpurea on the incidence
and severity of colds and respiratory infections. Am J Med
1999 Fee; 106(2): 138-43.

Harnischfeger G, Stolze H, (1980) Notabene Medici 10:484.
Jacobson M, (1967) J Org Chem 32:1646.

Jurcic K, Melchart D. Holzmann M, Martin P, Bauer R,
Doenecke A, Wagner H, Zwei Probandenstudien zur
Stimulierung der Granulozytenphagozytose durch Echinacea-
Extrakt-haltige Praparate. In: ZPT 10(2):67-70. 1989.

Kinkel HJ, Plate M. Tullner HU, Objektivierbare Wirkung von
Echinacin-Salbe auf die Wundheilung. In: Med Klinik 79:580-
583. 1984.

Luettig B; Steinmuller C; Gifford GE et al. Macrophage

activation by the polysaccharide arabinogalactan isolated from
plant cell cultures of Echinacea purpurea. J Natl Cancer Inst
1989 May 3;81(9):669-75.

May G, Willuhn G, (1978) Arzneim Forsch 28:1.

Melchart D, Linde K, Worku F, Bauer R, Wagner H, (1994)
Immunomodulation with Echinacea - a systematic review of
controlled clinical trials. Phytomedicine 1:245-254.

Melchart D; Walther E; Linde K et al. Echinacea root extracts
for the prevention of upper respiratory tract infections:a double-
blind, placebo-controlled randomized trial. Arch Fam Med 1998
Nov-Dec;7(6):541-5.

Mose JR, (1983) Med Welt 34:51.

Muller-Jakic B; Breu W; Probstle A et al. In vitro inhibition of
cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase by alkamides from
Echinacea and Achillea species. Planta Med 1994 Feb;60(1):37-
40.

Mullins RJ. Echinacea-associated anaphylaxis. Med J Aust 1998
Feb 16; 168(4): 170-1.

Ondrizek RR, Chan PJ, Patton WC, King A. An alternative
medicine study of herbal effects on the penetration of zona-free
hamster oocytes and the integrity of sperm deoxyribonucleic
acid. Fertil Steril 1999 Mar;71(3):517-22.

Parnham MJ, Benefit-risk assessment of the squeezed sap of the
purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) for long-term oral
immunostimulation. In: Phytomedicine 3(1):95-102. 1996.

----- PAGE 517 -----
266 /ECHINACEA

Proksch A, (1982) Uber ein immunstimulierendes Wirkprinzip
aus Echinacea purpurea. Dissertation, Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universitat, Miinchen.

Roesler J, Emmendorffer A, Steinmuller C et al. Application of
purified polysaccharides from cell cultures of the plant
echinacea purpurea to test subjects mediates activation of the
phagocyte system. Int J Immunopharmacol 1991; 13:931-941.

Samochowie CE et al., (1979) Wiad Parazyt. 25(1) 77.

Schoneberger D. Einflup* der immunstimulierenden Wirkung von
Prefisaft aus herba Echinaceae purpureae auf Verlauf und
Schweregrad von Erkaltungskrankheiten. Forum Immunologic
1992;8:18-22.

Schulte KE et al., (1967) Arzneim Forsch 17:825.

Schulte KE, Riicker G, Perlick J, Das Vorkommen von
Polyacetylen-Verbindungen in Echinacea purpurea MOENCH
und Echinacea angustifolia DC. In: Arzneim-Forsch 17:825-829.
1967.

Schumacher A, Echinacea angustifolia und die spezifische und
unspezifische zellulare Immunantwort der Maus. In: Dissertation
Heidelberg. 1989.

Stimpel M et al., (1984) Infect Immunol 46(3):845.

Stimpel M, Proksch A, Wagner H et al., (1984) Macrophage
activation and induction of macrophage cytotoxicity by purified
polysaccaride fractions from the plant Echinacea purpurea.
Infect Immunity 46:845-849.

Stimpel M, Proksch A, Wagner H, Lohmann-Matthes ML,
Macrophage activation and induction of macrophage cytotoxicity
by purified polysccharide fraction from plant Echinacea
purpurea. In: Infect Immun 46:845-849. 1984.

Tubaro A, Tragni E, Del Negro P et al: Anti-inflammatory
activity of a polysaccharide fraction of echinacea angustifolia. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39:576-569.

Vergin H, Wolter R, Untersuchungen zur Phagozytose-Aktivitat
der isoliert perfundierten Rattenleber mit Echinacea purpurea-
haltigen Praparaten. In: Natura med 1/2:27-29. 1988.

Vomel Th, (1985) Arzneim Forsch 3511(9): 1437.
Von Roder E et al., (1984) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 124(45):2316.
Wacker A, Hilbig W, (1978) Planta Med 33:89.

Wacker A, Hilbig W, Virushemmung mit Echinacea purpurea.
In: PM 33:89-102. 1978.

Wagner H et al., (1984) Arzneim Forsch 34:659.

Wagner H, Stuppner H, Puhlmann J, Briimmer B, Deppe K,
Zenk MH, Gewinnung von immunologisch aktiven
Polysacchariden aus Echinacea-Drogen und - Gewebekulturen.
In: ZPT 10(2):35. 1989.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Echinaceae species

See Echinacea

Elecampane

Inula helenium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried or fresh

rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are yellow composite
flowers in loose, terminal, panicled cymes. They are 7 to 8
cm in diameter. The involucre is imbricate and cup-shaped.
The inner bracts are dry at the tip and splayed, the outer ones
are like leaves and ovate. The female lateral florets are
narrowly linguiform. The androgynous disc florets are
tubular. The receptacle is flat, slightly pitted and glabrous.
The flowers are a bright yellow. The achaenes are cylindri-
cal, 4 to 5 mm long, brown, glabrous and have 4 tips. The
pappus is 8 to 10 mm long and consists of brownish, fine,
rough, brittle bristles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and 80 to 180
cm high. The rhizome is short with compact branches. It is
tuberous and has sturdy, 1 cm thick and 50 cm long roots.
The stem is erect, branched above and villous. The leaves are
large, tomentose beneath and irregularly dentate. The cauline
leaves are cordate-acute. The basal leaves are oblong and

petiolate.

Characteristics: The rhizome has a strong odor, the taste is
pungent, bitter and tangy.

Habitat: Indigenous to Europe and temperate Asia, intro-
duced to the U.S. and China.

----- PAGE 518 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production: Elecampane root is the root of Inula helenium. It
is harvested in autumn. The roots are then cut and hung up to
dry or dried artificially at 50° C.

Other Names: Alant, Elfdock, Elfwort, Horse-Elder, Horse-
heal, Scabwort, Wild Sunflower, Yellow Starwort, Velvet
Dock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components alantolactone, isoalantolac-
tone, 11,13- dihydroisoalantolactone, 11,13- dihydroalanto-
lactone (the mixture of alantolactone derivatives is also
known as helenalin or elecampane camphor)

Polyynes
Polysaccharides: above all inulin (fructosan)

EFFECTS

The main active principles are alantolacton, isoalantolacton
and other sesquiterpenlactones. Compounds of this kind have
an antiphlogostic and antibiotic effect. Antifungal activity
has also been demonstrated.

The antimicrobial and anthelmintic effect results from the
sesquiterpene lactones. Alantolactone and isoalantolactone
are antitumoral, and helenin shortens clotting time. Alanto-
lactone and heler.in lead to complete paralysis of the
spontaneous contraction of the intestine in animal studies.

The plant has mild antiseptic and expectorant effect due to
the essential oil, which contains sesquiterpene.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the rhizome are used to treat
bronchitis, whooping cough and bronchial catarrh. In folk
medicine, Elecampane is used as a stomachic, diuretic,
carminative and cholagogue, as well as for menstrual
complaints.

Homeopathic Uses: Inula helenium preparations are used for
stomach ulcers and chronic cough.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The drug is severely irritating to mucous mem-
branes and strongly sensitizing.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Larger administrations of the drug lead to vomiting, diarrhea,
spasms and signs of paralysis. Following gastric lavage,
intestinal emptying (sodium sulfate) and the administration
of activated charcoal powder, poisoning is treated with the
antimetic  trifluopromazine.

ELECAMPANE/267

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The comminuted drug is used in tea
mixtures. The extract is used as a constituent in numerous
pharmaceutical preparations, including gastrointestinal reme-
dies, alterants, gout remedies, diuretics and in numerous
expectorants.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, boiling water is poured
over 1 gm of ground drug and left to draw for 10 to 15
minutes, after which time it is strained through a tea strainer
(1 teaspoonful corresponds to about 4 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: Average single dose | gm.

Tea—I cup is drunk 3 to 4 times daily as an expectorant;
may be sweetened with honey.

Helenium Extract—The single dose is 0.5 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic once a
day (HAB34).

Storage: Store in a cool place, protected from light, not in
plastic containers.

LITERATURE
Kerimov SS, Chishov OS, (1974) Khim Prir Soed 10:254.

Khvorost PP, Komissarenko NF, (1976) Khim Prir Soed 6:820.

Kiesewetter R, Miiller M, (1958) Pharmazie 13:777.
Lauro L, Rolih C, Observations and research on an extract of
Inula viscosa Ait. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper, 66:829-34, 1990 Sep

Pazzaglia M, Venturo N, Borda G, Tosti A, Contact dermatitis
due to a massage liniment containing Inula helenium extract.
Contact Dermatitis, 61:267, 1995 Oct

Rosik GH et al., Khim Farm Zh 21:632-634. 1987.

Tripathi YB, Chaturvedi P, Assessment of endocrine response
of Inula racemosa in relation to glucose homeostasis in rats.
Indian J Exp Biol, 61:686-9, 1995 Sep

Vishnakova SA et al., (1977) Rasut Resur 13:428.

Zinchenko V et al., Rastit Res 19:544-548. 1983.

Further information in:

Alonso Blasi N, Fraginals R, Lepoittevin JP, Benezra C, A
murine in vitro model of allergic contact dermatitis to
sesquiterpene alpha-methylene-gamma-butyrolactones. Arch
Dermatol Res, 284:297-302, 1992

Fokina GI, Frolova TV, Roikhel VM, Pogodina W,
Experimental phytotherapy of tick-bome encephalitis. Vopr
Virusol, 36:18-21, 1991 Jan-Feb.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Veriag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 519 -----
268/ELECAMPANE

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

lijima K, Kiyohara H, Tanaka M, Matsumoto T, Cyong JC,
Yamada H, Preventive effect of taraxasteryl acetate from Inula
britannica subsp. Japonica on experimental hepatitis in vivo.
Planta Med, 61:50-3, 1995 Feb.

Jiang B, Liao X, Jia X, Ye X, Ding J, Yu X, Wu Y, Studies
and comparisons on chemical components of essential oils from
Clematis hexapetala Pall, and Inula nervosa Wall. Chung Kuo
Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 15:488-90 512, 1990 Aug.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wang Q, Zhou BN, Zhang RW, Lin YY, Lin LZ, Gil RR,
Cordell GA, Cytotoxicity and NMR spectral assignments of
ergolide and bigelovin. Planta Med, 62:166-8, 1996 Apr

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Elephant-Ears

Bergenia crassifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Whole plant has medicinal properties.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in curled cymes.
Their structures are arranged in fives and tfiey are radial with
the 2 to 3 ovaries joined only at the base. The petals are red
or pink-violet and up to 1.5 cm long. The ovary is superior,
and the fruit has numerous seeds. The seeds are brown to
brown-black, edged, up to 2 mm long and 0.5 mm thick.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Bergenia crassifolia is a herbaceous
perennial that grows up to 50 cm high. The leaves are basal,
oval, up to 20 cm long, over 10 cm wide, orbicular, fleshy,
glabrous, with indented glands and slightly dentate. The
rhizome is up to 3 cm thick, above ground and covered with
the sheaths of the previous year's leaves.

Habitat: Russia, Mongolia

Production: Bergeniae rhizoma are the dried rhizomes of
Bergenia crassifolia. They are collected in the wild and air-
dried for 2 weeks.

Other Names: Learner Bergenia, Siberian Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Hydroquinone glycosides: arbutin (1.8 to 2.3%)

Phenol carboxylic acids: bergenin (6.7 to 10.1%, lactones)

Tannins (28%)

EFFECTS

The watery extracts of the drug have astringent, bacteriostat-
ic, local hemostyptic and antiphologistic effects, due to the
tannin content and that of other phenolic constituents. The
arbutin they contain exhibits urine-disinfecting effect (com-
parable to Uva ursi). A shortening of blood coagulation time
could be demonstrated in animal experiments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Elephant-Ears have been used for fever,
tuberculosis, pneumonia, diarrhea, intestinal disease and
rheumatism. The drug is also used for skin leishmaniosis and

as a hemostyptic.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Preparations are contraindicated in pregnancy, breast-feeding
and children under 12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction wim the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Because of
its high tannin content, the intake of preparations of the drug
could lead to digestive disorders; individuals with sensitive
stomachs may experience nausea and vomiting.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdose could lead to inflammatory irritation of the
mucous membranes of the bladder and urinary tract,

accompanied by urgency and blood in the urine. Long-term
administration of the drug could lead to liver damage, due to
the possible hepatotoxicity of the hydroquinone released,
particularly among children.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal and external use.

Whole drug preparations for

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

1994,

Kindl H, Conversion of (4-3H)L-phenylalanine into (4-
3H)pyrocatechol and (3-3H)hydroquinone in leaves of Bergenia

----- PAGE 520 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

crassifolia. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem, 350:1289-90, 1969
Oct.

Elettaria cardamomum

See Cardamom

Eleutherococcus senticosus

See Siberian Ginseng

Elm Bark

Ulmus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the inner bark of the

young branches.

minor

Flower and Fruit: The reddish brown flowers appear before
the leaves. They are androgynous, short-pedicled and in
globular clusters. The perigone is campanulate-top-shaped
and greenish with a purple margin. There are 3 to 4 stamens
witii dark violet anthers. The tree is wind pollinated. The
fruit is a broad-winged, almost circular, oval or elliptical and
glabrous achaene. The reddish nutlet reaches to the front
margin of the notch.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ulmus minor is a 40 m high tree
with black-brown, finely fissured bark. The branches, which
develop long grooves, have alternate, petiolate, 6 to 10 cm
long leaves with 8 to 12 lateral ribs. The leaves are ovate.
The lamina is irregular and the margin double-serrate. The
petioles are 8 to 15 mm longer than the buds, which develop
in spring on short branches and form into clusters before
flowering.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe as far as the
Mediterranean.

Production:. Smooth-leaved Elm bark is the bark of Ulmus
minor. The bark is gathered for therapeutic or medicinal
purposes. It is manually cut in circles and the bark is
removed from the young (new) twigs (the diameter of the
twig should not be more than 1 cm). The long grain and the
upper layer of the bark must be removed, then the bark is
dried.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilage: yielding mainly D-galactose, L-rhamnose, D-ga-
lacturonic acid after hydrolysis

ENGLISH ADDERS TONGUE/269

Tannins (3%)
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid

Sterols: including, among others, beta-sitosterol, stig-
masterol

EFFECTS
The drug has diuretic and astringent properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally, the drug is used for digestive
disorders and severe cases of diarrhea. Externally, it is used
to treat open wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Elm bark is used both internally

and externally in various preparations.

Preparation: The ground bark is used for infusions. A
decoction from the bark can be prepared using 2 teaspoons
of the drug per cup of water. Externally, a 20% decoction is
used, which is diluted 1:1 with water, for the treatment of
festering and open wounds.

Daily Dose: The dosage of the decoction prepared from die
bark is 1 cup 2 to 3 times daily. In powder form, a dose of 2
to 5 gm may be taken daily.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-

1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

English Adder's Tongue
Ophioglossum vulgatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

root and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The plant's 12 to 40 ripe yellow sporangia
on either side of the middle panicle form an acuminate spike.
The tip contains no sporangia.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This fern grows from 8 to 25 cm
high. The stems, covered in the remains of leaves, grow
singly from the underground roots. The stems consist of a
few sturdy, yellow fibers and are round, hollow and

----- PAGE 521 -----
270/ENGLISH ADDER'S TONGUE

succulent. Each bears a smooth, oblong-oval, acuminate,
entire frond.

Characteristics: Though a member of the Fern family, the
appearance of English Adder's Tongue is not at all typically
fern-like.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Britain.

Production: English Adder's Tongue is the aerial part of
Ophioglossum vulgatum.

Not To Be Confused With: English Adder's Tongue is not
related to American Adder's Tongue (Erythronium

americanum).
Other Names: Serpent's Tongue, Christ's Spear

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including among others quercetin-3-methyl
ether-7-diglucoside-4' glucoside

The constituents of the drug have not been thoroughly
investigated.

EFFECTS
See Erythronium americanum.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
See Erythronium americanum.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: See Erythronium americanum.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

English Chamomile
Chamaemelum nobile

"DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the English
Chamomile oil extracted from the fresh or dried filled or
unfilled flower heads and the dried aerial plant parts; the
dried flower heads of the cultivated, filled varieties; and the
fresh aerial parts of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The stems end in 12 to 18 fruit-bearing,
white florets, which are about 2 to 2.5 cm wide. The epicalyx
is semi-globose. The bracts are in a number of rows and are
lanceolate to spatulate with a broad membranous border. The

receptacle is clavate, filled with latex, and covered at the
edge with slit bracts. The linguiform florets are female and
silver-white. The tubular florets are androgynous and yellow.
The corolla of every floret has a short appendage at the base,
which surrounds the tip of the fruit. The achaenes are 2 mm
long, light brown and almost triangular with vertical ribs.
The achaenes are smooth and have no pappus.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 15 to 30 cm high plant has a
deeply buried rhizome. The rhizome sprouts numerous,
ascending, occasionally upright, simple or branched, round-
ed, vertically grooved, pubescent stems. The stems are
covered in alternating, heavily segmented, gray-green to
rich-green leaves that are 2 to 4 cm long.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern and western
Europe and northern Africa, and is cultivated all over
Europe. The main exporters are Belgium, France, Great
Britain and Italy, as well as Poland, the Czech and Slovakian
Republics, North America and Argentina.

Production: English Chamomile consists of the dried flowers
of the cultivated double flowered variety of Chamaemelum
nobile. The plant is harvested in June and July, then dried at
temperatures of 35°C.

Other Names: Ground Apple, Whig Plant, Roman

Chamomile

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components include ester of angelic- or
tiglic acid with isobutanol, isoamyl alcohol or 3-methyl-
pentan-l-ol, to some extent present as hydroperoxides

Sesquiterpene lactones: in particular nobilin, besides 3-
epinobilin, 1,10-epoxynobilin, 3-dehydronobilin that is
present to some exient as hydroperoxides, including 1-beta-
hydroperoxy-isonobilin and 4-alpha-hydroperoxy-manolide

Flavonoids: including anthemoside, cosmosioside, luteolin-
7-0-glucoside

Caffeic and ferulic acid ester
Polynes: Including cis- and trans-dehydromatricaria ester

EFFECTS
In contrast to true chamomile, few studies are available. The
essential oil is active against gram-positive bacteria and
dermatomyces. The drug is also cytostatic and acts on the
CNS, causing a reduction of aggressive behavior in animal
tests. Efficacy in dyspepsia (including flatulence) may be
due to the amaroids.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the French use English
Chamomile mainly for feelings of fullness, bloating and mild

----- PAGE 522 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

spasmodic gastrointestinal disturbances and sluggishness of
the bowels. It is also used for menstrual complaints,
nervousness, hysteria and general debility. It is used
topically for inflammation of the mouth and throat, rhinitis,
toothache, earache, headache and influenza. The oil is used
in mouthwashes.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used in homeopathy to treat
nervous gastrointestinal disorders, but efficacy has not been

proven.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of the drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug possesses a small potential for
sensitization.

Pregnancy: The drug is not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
uses is not documented and there is a certain risk involved, a
therapeutic application cannot be recommended. English
Chamomile is used in folk medicine as a fluid extract,
tincture, elixir, wine, syrup, ointment and powder.

Preparation: To prepare a decoction, add 3 g drug to 100 ml
water. An infusion is prepared using 7 to 8 capitula per cup.
A liquid rub is prepared using | dsp diluted in 250 ml water.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose of the drug is 15 g at
the main meals. The average daily dose of an infusion is 50
ml to 200 ml. When used as a bath additive, add 50 g to 10
liters of water. Liquid rubs are applied as poultices or washes
2 to 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes for acute conditions. For chronic condi-
tions: | to 3 times daily; Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute 3
times daily; Chronic: once a day (HAB1)

Storage: Store in well-sealed glass or metal containers
protected from moisture.

LITERATURE
Damiani P et al., (1983) Fitoterapia 54:213.

Herisset A et al., (1971) Plant Med Phytother 5(3):234.

Herisset A et al., (1974) Plant Med Phytother 8(4):306 and 287.

Holub M, Samek Z, (1977) Collect Czech Chem Commun 42:
1053.

Isaac O, Chamaemelum nobile (L.) Allioni - Rdmische Kamille.
In: ZPT 14(4):212. 1993.

ENGLISH HAWTHORN/271

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

English Hawthorn

Crataegus laevigata

TRADE NAMES
Hawthorn, Hawthorn Extract (available from numerous
manufacturers and as a combination product), Hawthorne
Berries, Hawthorn Flowers, Leaves & Berries, Standardized
Hawthorn Extract, Hawthorn Extract, Hawthorn Power,
Time Release Hawthorn Power, HeartCare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are generally white
thorn flowers, leaves, fruit, and various mixtures of different

plant parts.

Flowers and Fruit: The white flowers are in richly-blos-
somed cymes. The sepals are usually short, more or less
triangular, entire-margined or, particularly the American
variety, fairly long with glandular tips. The petals are usually
separate, orbicular, crenate, white or occasionally red. There
are 10 to 20 stamens and | to 5 carpels, which are more or
less fused to the receptacle. There are 2 ovules, the upper one
is sterile and covers the lower fertile one like a cap. There is
1 seed in each chamber. The false fruit is ovoid or globose
and crowned by the remains of the sepals. It is red, black, or
yellow and mealy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Hawthorn is a bulky shrub or small
tree, 15 to 4 m high with hard wood and usually thorny
branches. The leaves have many forms. They are shallow, 3
to 5 lobed, with the lobes pointed forward. The leaves are
unevenly serrate, obovate, yellowish-green, and glossy.

Characteristics: The flowers have an unpleasant smell and a
slightly bitter taste; the fruit has a sour taste.

----- PAGE 523 -----
272 /ENGLISH HAWTHORN

= Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern temperate zones
of Europe, Asia, and North America.

Production: Hawthorn consists of the leaves and flowers of
Crataegus laevigata and. occasionally other species. The
medicinal parts of the Hawthorn plant are collected in the
wild and dried at room temperature.

Not to be Confused With: Hawthorn is sometimes mistaken
for the flowers, leaves, and fruit of Robinia pseudoacacia,
Sorbus aucuparia or Prunus spinosa.

Other Names: Haw, May, Whitethorn, Hawthorn

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoides (1.8%): O-glycosides, including hyperoside
(0.28%), rutin (0.17%)

6-C- and 8-C-glycosyl compounds, including  vitexin

(0.02%), vicenin-1, orientin

6-C- and 8-C-glycosyl compounds, linked O-glycosidically
as well as with other monosaccharides, including vitexin-2"-
O-alpha-L-rhamnoside (0.53%), —_ vitexin-2"-0-alpha-L-
rhamnoside-4'"-acetate

Oligomeric proanthocyanidins (2.4%)
Biogenic amines, including tyramine

Triterpenes ( 0.6%): including oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, 2-
alpha-hydroxy oleanolic acid (crataegolic acid)

EFFECTS

The active principles are procyanidins and flavonoids. They
cause an increase in coronary blood flow due to dilatory
effects resulting in an improvement of myocardial blood
flow. The drug is positively inotropic and positively chrono-
tropic. The cardiotropic effect of Crataegus is said to be
caused by the increased membrane permeability for calcium
as well as the inhibition of phosphodiesterase with an
increase of intracellular cylco-AMP concentrations. In-
creased coronary and myocardial circulatory perfusion and
reduction in peripheral vascular resistance were observed.
High doses may cause sedation. This effect has been
attributed to the oligomeric procyanidins (Anonym, 1994).

Crataegus extract has been found to prolong the refractory
period and increase the action potential duration in guinea
pig papillary muscle. One study demonstrated that a Cra-
taegus extract blocked the repolarizing potassium currents in
ventricular myocytes of guinea pigs. This effect is similar to
that of class HI antiarrhythmic drugs and may explain the
antiarrhythmic effect of Hawmorn (Muller, 1999).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Decrease in cardiac output (Stage II NYHA)

Hawthorn is used for senile heart, chronic cor pulmonale,
and mild forms of bradycardia! arrhythmias.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Hawthorn is also used as a
cardiotonic, for hypertension, ischemia of the heart, arrhyth-
mia and as a sedative. Hawthorn has a high flavonoid content
and is used to prevent collagen destruction in joints and
decrease inflammation and decrease the fragility of capillar-
ies. Hawthorn has shown some effectiveness in lowering
cholesterol levels in at least one study. Several extracts from
different componants of the plant have demonstrated antioxi-
dant effects.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Hawthorn is used to reduce
food stagnancy and blood stasis (Chen, 1995).

Homeopathic Uses: Therapeutic dilutions are used for
cardiac insufficiency, senile cardiac insufficiency, dysrhyth-
mia, and angina pectoris.

CLINICAL STUDIES
Cardiac Effects

Several studies that have used animal models demonstrate
the cardiac effects of Hawthorn. The influence of the main
flavonoids from Hawthorn on coronary flow, heart rate, left
ventricular pressure and the velocity of contraction and
relaxation was investigated on isolated guinea pig hearts
maintained at a constant perfusion pressure was the focus of
one study. The study recorded an increase in coronary flow
of 186% for one of the main glycosides, luteolin-7-gluco-
side; 66% for the hyperoside component and 66% for the
rutin flavonoid. Coronary relaxation velocity increased by
104% in the luteolin-7-glucoside arm, 62% for hyperoside
and 73% for rutin. Positive inotropic and chronotropic
effects were noted for all of the above extracts as well. The
beta adrenergic effects of the flavonoids were prevented by
the addition of propranolol. The authors postulate that the
mechanism of action for the cardiac effects of Hawthorne is
due to the inhibition of the 3', 5'-cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate phosphodiesterase enzyme (Schussler, 1995). It
should be noted that in a more recent study, the positive
inotropic effect of Hawthorn was not attributed to phospho-
diesterase inhibition or to a beta-sympathomimetic effect
(Muller, 1999).

Another small, placebo controlled, randomized double-blind
study was performed to test the efficacy of a special extract
(WS 1442) of Hawthorn in a group of 30 patients with stage
Il NYHA cardiac insufficiency. Treatment duration was 8
weeks. Primary parameters were alteration in the pressure-x-

----- PAGE 524 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

rate product (PRP) under standardized loading on a bicycle
ergometer, and the score of a subjective questionnaire on
improvement of complaints. Secondary target parameters
included exercise tolerance and the change in heart rate and
arterial blood pressure. A statistically significant improve-
ment in both primary and secondary parameters were noted
in the WS 1442 group over that of the placebo group
(Leuchtgens, 1993).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Hawthorn is contraindicated in children under 12 years of
age. Use of Hawthorn during the first trimester of pregnancy
is contraindicated.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: It is recommended that Hawthorn supplements be
prescribed and monitored by a physician. During treatment
with Hawthorn, the clinician should monitor heart rate and
blood pressure on a regular basis.

Higher doses can produce hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia,
and sedation. Less serious adverse effects include dizziness
and tremor.

Accidental corneal scratches caused by thorns of hawthorn
bushes have resulted in blindness in 88 out of 132 reported
cases in Ireland (Duke, 1985).

Drug Interactions Hawthorn may potentiate the effects of
cardiac glycosides. If Hawthorn therapy is initiated in
patients taking digoxin, digitoxin or g-strophanthin, the
dosage of standard cardiac glycosides should be adjusted
downward.

Hawthorn may cause a hypertensive effect when used in
combination with beta-blockers (Murray & Pizzorno, 1996).

Because Hawthorn has an action similar to Class Ill
antiarrhythmics, use with other antiarrhythmics should be

discouraged.

Hawthorn has been found to inhibit the inward flow of
potassium channels resulting in an increased action potential
in cardiac ventricular cells. Drugs that act in a similar
manner such as cisapride are likely to interact with Hawthorn
and should therefore not be taken in conjunction with
Hawthorn.

Pregnancy: Hawthorn is contraindicated during the first
trimester of pregnancy.

Nursing Mothers: There are no warnings in the literature
regarding use of Hawthorn in nursing mothers.

Pediatrics: Hawthorn is not recommended for children under
the age of 12 years.

ENGLISH HAWTHORN/273

OVERDOSAGE
The LDS50 via intraperitoneal injection in the mouse model
has been reported at a single dose of 1,170 mg/kg and 750
mg/kg in the rat. In both species, signs of overdose included
sedation, dyspnea, tremor and piloerection (Schlegelilch &
Hey wood, 1994). The same authors reported that an oral
dose if 3,000 mg/kg in mice and rats was well tolerated with
no negative clinical signs or death reported in the animal
models.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The dried and comminuted drug for
decoctions as well as liquid or dry extracts for oral intake.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 80 mg, 100 mg, 300 mg, 450 mg, 455 mg, 480
mg, 500 mg, 510 mg, 565 mg

Liquid — 250 mg/ml
Tablets — 80 mg

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 5 gm of drug or 160
to 900 mg extract administered in divided doses, 3 times
daily, (ethanol 45% V/V or methanol 70% V/V) standardized
on procyanidin or flavonoids; single dose: 1 gm of drug
several times daily. The duration of treatment is minimum 6
weeks.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc twice
a week; ointment 1 to 2 times a day (HAB1)

Storage: Hawthorn should be protected from light and
moisture in well-sealed containers at temperatures below

25° C.

LITERATURE
Ammon HPT, Handel M, (1981) Crataegus, Toxikologie und
Pharmakologie. Teil 1, Toxizitat. Planta Med 43:105-120.
Ammon HPT, Handel M, (1981) Planta Med 43:105, 209 et
313.

Anonym, 5. KongreJJ fur Phytotherapie: Phytoforschung
intensiviert. In: DAZ 133(48):4593. 1993.

Anonym, Behandlung der leichten Herzinsuffiziens:
Weijklornextrakt und ACE-Hemmer im Vergleich. In: DAZ
134(39):3749. 1994.

Anonym, Phytopharmaka fur altere Menschen: Ginkgo, Kava,
Hypericum und Crataegus. In: DAZ 135(5):400-402. 1995.

Anonym, Weipdorn bei Herzinsuffiziens und Angina pectoris.
In: Symbiose 4(3): 16. 1992.

Bahorun T, Gressier B, Trotin F, Brunet C, Dine Th, Luyckx
M, Vasseur J, Cazin M, Cazin JC, Pinkas M, Oxygen species
scavenging activity of phenolic activities, fresh plant organs and
pharmaceutical preparations. In: Arzneim Forsch 46(11): 1086-
1089. 19%.

----- PAGE 525 -----
274 /ENGLISH HAWTHORN

Bahorun T, Trotin F, Pommery J, Vasseur J, Pinkas-M,
Antioxydant activities of Crataegus monogyna extracts. In: PM
60(4):323-328. 1994.

Beretz A et al., (1980) Planta Med 39(3):241.

Chen JD, WU YZ, Tao ZL et al: Hawthorn (shan zha) drink
and its lowering effect on blood lipid levels in humans and
rats. World Rev Nutr Diet 77:147-154. 1995.

Ciplea AG, Richter KD, (1988) The protective effect of Allium
sativum and Crataegus on isoprenaline-induced tissue necroses
in rats. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 38:1588-1592.

Czygan FC, Crataegus-Arten- WeipMom. Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. In: ZPT 15(2): 117. 1994.

Dingermann T, Phytopharmaka im Alter: Crataegus, Ginkgo,
Hypericum und Kava-Kava. In: PZ 140(23):2017-2024. 1995.
Duke JA: Handbook of Medicinal Herbs, 2nd ed. CRC Press,
Inc, Boca Raton, FL, pp 146-147. 1985.

Eichstadt H, Bader M, Danne O, Kaiser W, Stein U, Felix R,
(1989) Crataegus-Extrakt hilft dem Patienten mit NYHA II-
Herzinsuffizien Therapiewoche 39: 3288-3296.

Ficarra P et al.. (1984) Farm Ed Prat 39(10)342.

Ficarra P et al., (1984) Farm Ed Prat 39(5)148.

Fischer K, Jung F, Koscielny J, Kiesewetter H, (1994)
Crataegus-Extrakt vs. Methyldigoxin. EinfluP auf Rheologie und
Mikrozirkulation bei 12 gesunden Probanden. Miinch Med
Wschr 136 (Suppl 1), 35-38.

Forster A, Forster K, Buhring M, Wolfstadter HD, (1994)
Crataegus bei ma(3ig reduzierter linksventrikularer
Auswurffraktion. Ergospirometrische Verlaufsuntersuchung bei
72. Patienten in doppelblindem Vergleich mit Plazebo. Miinch
Med Wschr 136 (Suppl I). 21-26

Iwamoto M et al., (1981) Planta Med 42(1 ):1

Joseph G, Zhao Y, Klaus W (1995) Pharmakologisches
Wirkprofil von Crataegus-Extrakt im Vergleich zu Epinephrin,
Amrinon, Milrinon und Digoxin am isoliert perfundierten
Meerschweinchenherzen. Arzneim Foisch/Drug Res 45: 1261-
1265
Kaul R, Pflanzliche Procyanidine. Vorkommen, Klassifikation
und pharmakologische Wirkungen. In: PUZ 25(4): 175-185.
1996.
Klensch O, Nagell A, Die Darreichungsform Tee am Beispiel
Weipdornblatter mit Bluten. In: DAZ 134(32):3005. 1994.

Krzeminski T, Chatterjee SS, (1993) Ischemia and early
reperfusion induced arrhythmias, beneficial effects of an extract
of Crataegus oxyacantha L. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 3:45-48.

Kurcok A, (1992) Ischemia- and reperfusion-induced cardiac
injury; effects of two flavonoids containing plant extracts
possessing radical scavenging properties. Naunyn-
Schmiedebergs's Arch Pharmacol 345 (Suppl RB 81) Abstr
322.

Kurzmann M, Schimmer O, Weifkiorn - Flavonoidmuster und
DC-Identitatspriifung. In: DAZ 136(33):2759-2764. 1996.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leuchtgens H, Cratagus Special Extract WS 1442 in NYHA II
heart failure. A placebo controlled randomized double-blind
study. In: Fortschr Med 20;111(20021: 352-4 Jul 20,1993.

Loew D, (1994) Crataegus-Spezialextrakte bei Herzinsuffizien.
Kassenarzt 15:43-52.

Loew D, Phytotherapie bei Herzinsuffizienz. In: ZPT 18(2):92-
96. 1997.

Meier B, Neue Erkenntnisse zur Analytik und Wirksamkeit von
Wei|3dorn. In: DAZ 136(44):3877-3879. 1996.

Murray M & Pizzorno J: A Textbook of Natural Medicine, 2nd
ed. Batyr University Publications, Seattle, WA, USA, ppV
Cratag-1-4. 1996.

Muller A, Linke W, Klaus W: Crataegus extract blocks
potassium currents in guinea pig ventricular cardiac myocytes.
In: Planta Med 65(4): 335-9 May, 1999.

Popping S, Rose H, Ionescu I, Fischer Y, Kammermeier H,
(1995) Effect of a Hawthorn Extract on Contraction and Energy
Turnover of Isolated Rat Cordiomyocytes. Arzneim Forsch/Drug
Res 45:1157-1161.

Rehwald A et al., HPLC analysis of the flavonoids of Crataegi
folium cum flore. In: PM 59(7)28. 1993.

Reuter HD, Crataegus als pflanzliches Kardiakum. In: ZPT
15(2):73. 1994.

Rewerski W et al., (1971) Arzneim Forsch 21:886.

Schlegelmilch R, Heywood R, (1994) Toxicity of Crataegus
(Hawthorn) Extract (WS 1442). J Am Coll Toxicol 13:103-111.

Schmidt U, Kuhn U, Ploch M, Hubner WD, (1994)
Wirksamkeit des Extraktes LI 132 (600 mg/Tag) bei 8wochiger
Therapie. Plazebokontrollierte Doppelblindstudie mit Weifklorn
an 78 herzinsuffizienten Patienten im Stadium II nach NYHA.
Munch Med Wschr 136(Suppl 1): 13-20.

Schussler M et al., Effect of flavonoids from Crataegus species
in Langendorf perfused isolated guinea pig heart. In: PM
58(7)46. 1992.

Schuessler M et al., Cardiac effects of flavonoids from
Crataegus species. In: PM 59(7)88. 1993.

Schussler M, Holzl J, Fricke U, Myocardial effects of
flavonoids from Crataegus species. In: Arzneimittelforschung
45(8): 842-5, Aug, 1995.

Siegel G, Casper U, (1995) Crataegi folium cum flore. In,
Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 1-14.

Siegel G, Casper U, Walter H, Hetzer R, (1994) WeipMom-
Extrakt LI 132. Dosis- Wirkungs-Studie zum Membranpotential
und Tonus menschlicher Koronararterien und des
Hundepapillarmuskels. Miinch med Wschr 136(Suppl 1):45-56.

Sprecher E, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: ZPT 9(2):40. 1988.

Sticher O, Rehwald A, Meier B, (1994) Kriterien der
pharmazeutischen Qualitat von Crataegus-Extrakten. Miinch Med

Wschr 136(Suppl 1):69-73.

----- PAGE 526 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Tauchert M, Loew D, (1995) Crataegi folium cum flore bei
HerzinsuffizienZ In, Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg)
Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 137-144.

“  Tauchert M, Ploch M, Hubner WD, (1994) Wirksamkeit des

*

00

£k

Weipdorn-Extraktes LI 132 im Vergleich mit Captopril.
Multizentrische Doppelblindstudie bei 132 Patienten mit
Herzinsuffizienz im Stadium II nach NYHA. Munch Med
Wschr 136(Suppl 1):27-34.

Tauchert M, Siegel G, Schulz V, (1994) Weipdom-Extrakt als
pflanzliches Cardiacum (Vorwort). Neubewertung der
tfierapeutischen Wirksamkeit. Miinch Med Wschr

136(Suppl 1):3-5.

Trunzler G, Phytotherapeutische Moglichkeiten bei Herz- und
arteriellen Gefafkrkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(5): 147. 1989.
Wagner H, Grevel J, (1982) Planta Med 45:98.

Wichtl M, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: DAZ 132(30): 1576. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotiierapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

English Horsemint
Mentha longifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are sometimes interrupted
lower down by | cm thick, gray to white, downy, panicled,
false spikes. The false spikes are arranged with linear, villous
bracts, which are longer than the flowers. The calyx is fluffy
and woolly pubescent with awl-shaped tips. The corolla is
lilac to flesh-colored. The fruit is a finely speckled nutlet

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial. It has a
sturdy rhizome with underground runners. The shoots are

ENGLISH IVY/275

densely covered in 1- or more-celled tomentose hairs with
few glands and a mild odor. The stem is erect, simple or
branched, up to 1 m high, tough and obtusely angular. The
leaves are sessile, oblong-ovate to lanceolate, usually acumi-
nate, with 6 to 12 pairs of curved pinnate veins. The
underside of the leaves are gray to white tomentose.

Production: English Horsemint is the aerial part of Mentha
longifolia, the dried herb.

Habitat: The plant is common in all of Europe to southern
Sweden.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components piperitone (share 60-80%),
furthermore beta- caryophyllene (5-15%), germacren D (5-
15%), 1,8-cineole (2-7%), limonene (1-8%), with other
chemotypes chief components D-carvone, piperitone, iso-
menthone &plus; menthofurane, menthone, piperitol, men-
thol or linalool

Flavonoids: including among others diosmin, hesperidin,
quercitrin, thymonin, apigenine-7-glucuronide

EFFECTS
English Horsemint has carminative and stimulant effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for digestive disorders,
particularly for flatulence. Historically, it has been used for
all kinds of pain, headaches in particular.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The ground drug is used internally
as an infusion; it is used externally as a bath additive.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogdh), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

English Ivy
Hedera helix

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and

berries.

----- PAGE 527 -----
276 /ENGLISH IVY

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are greenish-yellow
umbels, which form dense, semi-globular clusters. The calyx
tips are short, almost triangular, tomentose and drooping.
The 5 petals are oblong and slightly involute. There are 5
stamens and | inferior ovary with 5 valves. The style is fused
into a column. The fruit is a globular, usually 5-valved berry,
which becomes black and ripens in spring. It contains 3 to 5
reniform, triangular, acute seeds, which are reddish-violet
when young, later dark brown, and finally black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen perennial,
which creeps or, by means of adventitious roots, climbs to a
length of 3 to 15 m. The stem is branched, the leaves are
alternate, petioled, glabrous, glossy, coriaceous. Younger
leaves are 5-lobed; the leaves of older flowering plants are
ovate-rhomboid.

Characteristics: The berries and leaves have a bitter taste.

Habitat: English Ivy is indigenous to the temperate regions
of Europe, and also north and central Asia. It is cultivated in

the U.S.

Production: English Ivy leaf consists of the dried leaves of
Hedera helix.

Other Names: Gum Ivy, True Ivy, Woodbind

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: aglycone hederagenin, oleanolic acid,
bayogenin, chief components hederosaponin C (hederacoside
C, slightly transforming into alpha-hederin, aglycone heder-
agenin), additionally hederosaponin B (hederacoside B)

Volatile oils: including some with methylethylketone,
methylisobutylketone

Polyynes: including falcarinol, 11,12-didehydrofalcarinol
Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, campesterol
Flavonoids: including rutin

EFFECTS
English Ivy is an expectorant and antispasmodic. In animal
experiments, the drug is anti-exudative and cytotoxic.
Hedera saponin C exhibits an antiviral, antibacterial, antimy-
cotic, anthelmintic and mollusicidal, as well as an antiflagel-
late, effect. The fresh leaves are an irritant to the skin and
mucosa and can have an allergenic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

m Cough
* Bronchitis

English Ivy is a respiratory catarrh used for the symptomatic
treatment of chronic inflammatory bronchial conditions.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, English Ivy is used
internally for liver, spleen and gallbladder disorders and for
gout, rheumatism and scrofulosis. Externally, it is used for
burn wounds, calluses, cellulitis, inflammations, neuralgia,
parasitic disorders, ulcers, rheumatic complaints and
phlebitis.

Homeopathic Uses: English Ivy is administered in homeopa-
thy for rachitic states.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or sid’ effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug has a medium potential for sensitization through skin

contact.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: English Ivy is available as commi-
nuted drug and other galenic preparations for internal
external use.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include drops, suppositories and tablets.

Preparation: Prepare a tea by adding | heaped teaspoonful
of drug to 14 liter of hot water and steeping the mixture for
10 minutes. A poultice is prepared by mixing fresh Ivy
leaves 1:3 with linseed meal. To make an infusion, add 1
heaping teaspoonful of drug to one-quarter cup boiling water
and steep for 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Tea and other infusions can be taken
internally 3 times daily. The average daily dose is 0.3 to 0.8
g of drug. Fresh leaves may be laid upon festering wounds
and burns; a decoction of fresh leaves (200 gm/liter water)
may be used externally for rheumatism. The daily dose of a
tincture is 40 to 50 drops; single dose: 5 to 10 drops.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Balansard G et al., (1980) Planta Med 39:234.

Czygan FC, Hedera helix L. - Der Efeu. In: ZPT 11 (4): 133.
1990.

Elias R et al., INP 54:98-103. 1991.

Gladtke E, Zur Wirksamkeit eines Efeublatterpraparates
(Prospan).' In: Inte Praxis 32(1)187. 1992.

Hansen L, Boll PM, (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):285.
Julien J et al., (1985) Planta Med (3):205.
Mahran GH et al., (1975) Planta Med 29:127.

Trute A, Gross J, Mutschler E, Nahrstedt A, In vitro
antispasmodic compounds of the dry extract obtained from
Hedera helix. In: PM 63(2): 125-129. 1997.

----- PAGE 528 -----
“* Wulff G, DAZ 108:797-807.

*fe

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Trute A, Nahrstedt A, Identification and quantitative analysis of
phenolic dry extracts of Hedera helix. In: PM 63(2): 177-179.
1997.

Tschesche R, Schmidt R, Wulff G, Z Naturforsch 20B:708-709.
1965.

1968.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. AufL, Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde *-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

English Lavender
Lavandula angustifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil
extracted from the fresh flowers and/or the inflorescences,
the flowers collected just before opening and dried, the fresh
flowers and the dried flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in false whorls of 6 to 10
blossoms forming interrupted terminal spikes. The pedicles
are 10 to 15 cm long downy stems. The bracts are 5 mm
long, ovate to broadly triangular, often brown and brown-
violet or violet-tinged. The tubular calyx has 5 uneven tips, it

ENGLISH LAVENDER/277

is amethyst-colored, tomentose and after flowering it is
closed by a lidlike appendage of its upper tip. The corolla is
longer with a cylindrically fused base, the lips are flat, and
the upper lip is larger with 2 lobes. The lower lip is 3-lobed
with even* tips. The stamens are enclosed in the tube. The
ovary consists of 4 carpels and has a nectary below it. The
fruit is a glossy brown nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: English Lavender is a 60 cm high
subshrub and is heavily branched with leafy, erect, rod-like,
gray-green, young branches. The leaves are sessile, oblong-
lanceolate, entire-margined, involute, gray, later green with
glandular spots beneath.

Characteristics: The flowers have a fresh aromatic

fragrance.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
but is common in most of southern Europe and is cultivated
extensively.

Production: English Lavender flower consists of the dried
flower of Lavandula angustifolia, gathered shortly before
fully unfolding, as well as its preparations. Flowering shoots
are harvested when the middle section of the spike is
flowering; it is cut 10 cm beneath the insertion of the spike.
The most valuable part is the receptacle.

Not to be Confused With: Other varieties of lavender such as
Lavendula intermedia (Lavendin) and Lavendula latifolia.
The varieties are often mixed commercially. When the drug
material has a high proportion of stem and leaf material, it is
considered less valuable.

Other Names: French Lavender, Garden Lavender, Lavender

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1-3%): chief components (-)-linalool (making
up 20-50%) and linalyl acetate (30-40%), furthermore,
including among others, cis-ocimene, terpinene-4-ol, beta-
caryophyllene, lavandulyl acetate

Hydroxycoumarins: including among others, umbelliferone,
herniarin

Tannins (13%)

Cqffeic acid derivatives: including among others, rosmaric
acid

EFFECTS

The drug contains essential oil. The main active constituents
are linalyl acetate and linalool.

In a 1936 study, a choleretic and cholagogic effect was
described. In addition, an antimicrobial effect has been
demonstrated in vitro. In animal experiments a neurodepres-
sive effect was demonstrated (shortening of the falling-

----- PAGE 529 -----
278/ENGLISH LAVENDER

asleep period and lengthening of sleep duration) and a
reduction of motor activity.

In humans, after inhalation of the drug, an effect on the
limbic cortex (similar to nitrazepam) was demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite

+ Nervousness and insomnia
* Circulatory disorders

* Dyspeptic compaints

Internally, English Lavender is used for mood disturbances
such as restlessness or insomnia, functional abdominal
complaints (nervous stomach irritations, Roehmheld syn-

drome, meteorism, nervous intestinal discomfort).

Externally, English Lavender is used in balneotherapy for
treatment of functional circulatory disorders.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, English Lavender is used
for migraine, cramps and bronchial asthma. Externally, it is
used for rheumatic conditions (the drug as an extract in
liniments), as a sedative in cases of tension, exhaustion; also
for poorly healing wounds (lavender baths) and for sleep as
aroma therapy (herb pillow).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The volatile oil possesses a weak potential for

sensitization.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The whole drug is
infusions, as an extract and as a bath additive. Combinations
may be

used for

with other sedative and/or carminative herbs

beneficial.

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by adding 5 to 10 ml of
drug per cup of hot water (150 ml), draw for 10 minutes, and
strain. For external use as bam additive, 100 g of drug is
scalded or boiled with 2 liters of water and added to the bath.

Daily Dosage: A tea prepared as indicated above can be
administered 1 cup three times daily. One to 4 drops of
Lavender oil may be placed on a sugar cube.

LITERATURE

Atanassova-Shopova S, Roussinow KS, (1970) On certain
central neurotropic effects of lavender essential oil. Bull Inst
Physiol 8:69-76.

Buchbauer G, Jirovet L, Jager W, Dietrich H, Plank C,
Karamat E, (1991) Aromatherapy: Evidence for Sedative Effects
of the Essential Oil of Lavender after Inhalation. Z Naturforsch
46c: 1067-1072.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Guillemain J, Rousseau A, Delaveau P. (1989) Effets
neurodepresseurs de I'huile essentielle de Lavandula angustifolia
Mill. Ann Pharmaceutiques Francaises 47:337-343.

Herisset A et al., (1971) Plant Med Phytother 5:305.

Ianova LG et al., (1977) Khim Prir Soedin 1:111.

Kaiser R, Lamparsky D, (1977) Tetrahedron Lett 7:665.

Meyer A, Der Duft des Monats: Lavendel. In: DAZ
133(40):3667. 1993.

Mukherjee BD, Trenkle RW, (1973) J Agric Food Chem
21:298.

Schilcher H, Pflanzliche Psychopharmaka. Eine neue
Klasbifizierung nach Indikationsgruppen. In: DAZ 135(20): 1811-
1822. 1995.

Schulz V, Hubner WD, Ploch M, Klinische Studien mit
Psycho-Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT 18(3): 141-154. 1997.

Ter Heide R et al., (1970) J Chromatography 50:127.

Timiner R et al., (1975) J Agric Food Chem 23:53.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

English Plantain
Plantago lanceolata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the dried herb and the fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The globular or shortly cylindrical spikes
are on erect or ascending, 5-grooved, appressed pubescent

----- PAGE 530 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

peduncles. The flowers are small, almost colorless behind
scarious, narrow-acuminate bracts. The scarious calyx is
deeply divided into 4 parts and has a cylindrical tube and a
margin with 4 ovate tips. There are 4 long stamens with
yellowish-white filaments and anthers and 1 superior ovary.
The fruit is a bivalvular, 3 to 4 mm long capsule. The seeds
are oblong, 2 mm long and blackish.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and grows
from 5 to 50 cm high. It has a very fibrous root. All the
leaves are in basal rosettes and are lanceolate or linear-
lanceolate, deeply 3 to 5 ribbed, entire-margined or short-
dentate.

Habitat: The plant is widespread in the cool temperate
regions of the world.

Production: English Plantain herb consists of the fresh or
dried above-ground parts of Plantago lanceolata, harvested at
flowering season (May to September) and dried quickly at 40
to 50° C.

Not to be Confused With: the similar Digitalis-lanata leaves.

Other Names: Buckhorn, Chimney-Sweeps, Headsman,
Narrow-Leaved Plantain, Ribgrass, Ribwort, Ripplegrass,
Soldier's Herb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes (2-3%): chief components are aucu-
bin (rhinantin) and catalpol as well as asperuloside

Mucilages (2-6%): glucomannans, arabinogalactane, rham-
nogalacturonane

Flavonoids: including among other chief components apige-
nine-6,8-diglucoside, luteolin-7-glucuronide

Cqffeic acid esters: chlorogenic acid, neochlorogenic acid,
acteoside (verbascoside)

Tannins

Hydroxycoumarins: aesculetin
Saponins (traces)

Silicic acid

EFFECTS

Liquid extract and the pressed juice of fresh Plantain herb
have a proven bactericidal effect. The aucubigenin (hydrol-
ised acubin) and an antimicrobial saponin are believed to be
responsible for the antibacterial effect. In addition, accelera-
tion of blood clotting has been demonstrated and a possible
epithelization effect has been mentioned.

ENGLISH PLANTAIN/279

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

« Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the pressed juice of
English Plantain is used internally for conditions of the
respiratory tract, cystitis, enuresis, liver disease, stomach
cramps, diarrhea and as a diuretic.

Externally the plant is used for wounds, furuncles, conjuncti-
vitis and as a hemostyptic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted herb and other
galenic preparations for internal and external use. It is
available as macerations, liquid extracts, lozenges, syrup and
pressed juice of the fresh plant. The drug is available in
many standardized preparations of antitussives and
expectorants.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over 2
to 4 gm cut drug (or put in cold water brought to a boil) and
strain after 10 minutes (1 teaspoonful = approximately 0.7
gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 to 6 gm of herb.

Tea—1 cup of freshly made tea to be drunk several times a
day.

LITERATURE
Brautigam M, Franz G, Schleimpolysaccharide aus
Spitzwegerichblattem. In: DAZ 125:58. 1985.

Davini E, The quantitative isolation and antimicrobial activity
of aglycone of aucubin. In: PH 25:2420. 1986.

Elich J, Die antibakterielle Aktivitat einiger einheimischer
Plantago-Arten. In: Disseration Universitat Berlin. 1962.

Koedam A, Plantago - history and use. In: Pharm Weekbl
112(10):246-252. 1977.

Murai M et al., Phenylethanoids in the herb of Planatago
lanceolata and inhibitory effects on arachidonic acid-induced
mouse ear edema. In: PM 61(5):479-480. 1995.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

----- PAGE 531 -----
280/ENGLISH PLANTAIN

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ephedra sinica
See Ma-Huang

Epigae repens
See Trailing Arbutus

Epilobium species
See Willow Herb

Equisetum arvense

See Horsetail

Ergot
Claviceps purpurea
DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the fungus is the
sclerotium, which grows on rye plants and is later dried.

Flower and Fruit: Ergot is a permanent form of a fungus that
is a parasite on ripening rye, wheat and other grasses. It is
black, hard and much larger than the grains of rye. The cycle

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

of the fungus begins with the infection of the ovary by an
ascospore. The spore, usually deposited by a visiting insect,
germinates on the stigma, and the hyphae grows down into
the ovary where it appropriates food destined for the grain.
When the ovary has been completely destroyed, the myceli-
um grows. Horizontal walls are formed and fat vacuoles
become visible. The hyphae of the skin layer store purple
pigment 3 weeks after the infection a long, curved, black
sclerotium develops. It reaches a length of up to 8 cm and
bears minute condia, which are made up of the remains of
the ovary and the style embedded into the loose mycelium.
The sclerotium usually falls to the ground before harvest and
survives the winter. In the spring, 1 to 3 cm long red-
stemmed, capitula-like, pink fruiting bodies grow out of it,
which in turn produce 50 to 70 um long thread-like
ascospores.

Habitat: Claviceps purpurea grows as a parasite on rye
(occasionally on other grasses), and is found in all areas of
the world where rye is cultivated.

Production: Ergot consists of the sclerotium of Claviceps
purpurea, a parasitic fungus harvested after it has grown on
cultivated rye.

Other Names: Cockspur Rye, Hornseed, Mother of Rye,
Smut Rye, Spurred Rye

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Indole alkaloids (ergot alkaloids, varying by variety of ergot)

Chief alkaloid of the lysergic acid amide type: ergometrine
(ergobasine)

Chief alkaloid of the lysergic acid ergopeptine type:
ergotamine, ergovaline, ergosine, ergocristine, ergocornine,
alpha- and beta-ergocryptine, further alkaloids of the clavine
type: including among others agroclavine, elymoclavine,
festuclavine

Peptide alkaloids (ergopeptine group): especially ergot-
amine, as well as ergovaline, ergosine, ergocristine, ergocor-
nine, alpha- and beta-ergocryptine

Xanthone derivatives (ergochromes): including, among oth-
ers, secalonic acid A to C, ergoflavin

Anthracene derivatives: including, among others, clavoru-
bine, endocrocine

Amines: including, among others, — trimethylamine,
methylamine

Fatty oil

EFFECTS

The drug contains ergoline alkaloids of which only ergomet-
rin and ergopeptine have a therapeutic and toxic effect. The

*fE

*

«é

----- PAGE 532 -----
‘|

£-

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

action of ergot is traceable to its stimulation of the smooth
musculature. However, therapeutic use cannot be recom-
mended because of the risks involved.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Although the risk involved is too high to
recommend therapeutic use, ergot and ergot preparations
were previously used in gynecology and obstetrics. Uses
included hemorrhages, climacteric hemorrhages, menorrha-
gia and metrorrhagia, before and after miscarriage, for
removal of the placenta and shortening of the afterbirth
period, for atonia of the uterus and also for migraine.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include uterine and
muscle spasm, convulsions, paralysis, circulatory problems
accompanying arterial disease and a tendency to bleed.
Efficacy has not been proven.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Ergot is now contraindicated for all therapeutic use, but
especially in the presence of peripheral blood flow disorders
such as Raynaud's disease. Thrombangitis obliterans, severe
arteriosclerotic vascular changes, liver function disorders,
severe coronary insufficiency, kidney damage, pregnancy,
nursing, infectious diseases, sepsis, hypertonia and severe
hypotonia.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages, but thera-
peutic use is not recommended because of the many side
effects. Among side effects that may occur are queasiness,
vomiting, feeling of weakness in the legs, muscle pain,
numbness in the fingers, angina complaints, tachycardia or
bradycardia, localized edema and itching.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage or long-term administration can lead to throm-
bosis, damage to the vessels of the retina (combined with
optic atrophy) gangrene of the extremities, hemiplagia and
convulsions.

Symptoms of acute poisonings include queasiness, vomiting,
diarrhea, thirst, skin coolness, itching of the skin, rapid and
weak pulse, paresthesia, numbness of the extremities,

fe confusion or unconsciousness.

Chronic poisonings appear as:

Ergotismus gangrenosus: characterized by painful arterial
blood flow disorders of the extremities with dry gangrene,
angina complaints, field of vision losses, aphasias.

Ergotismus convulsivus: characterized by muscle twitching,
later clonic spasm and ultimately tonic spasms, hemiplagia,
loss of consciousness and death.

ERGOT/281

Drug overdose is managed by' gastrointestinal emptying
through inducement of vomiting and gastric lavage with
burgundy-colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium
sulfate. That is followed by installation of activated charcoal
and shock prophylaxis (quiet and warmth). The therapy for
poisonings consists of treating angiospasms with Nitrolingu-
al-spray and vascular massage, sedatives for spasm (di-
azepam or chloral hydrate), administration of blocking
agents, electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of
acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc: acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

Storage: Ergot must be stored in tightly sealed containers
and kept in a cool place, protected from light. The powdered
form should not be stored.

LITERATURE
Anon., Ergotamin. Deutsche Apotheker Ztg 134 (1994), 1887
Anon., Hepetitis C - Hohes Riskiko fir Medizinberufe. In: PUZ
25(6):344. 1996.
Anon., Parkinson-Krankheit: Mehe Lebensqualitat bei
(Combination von L-DOPA mit Dopaminagonisten. In: PUZ
24(2): 101. 1995. Anon

Anon. Vom Ergolin-Pharmakophor zu selektiven Arzneistoffen.
Deutsche Apotheker Ztg 132 (1992), 1235

Crespi-Perellino N et al., INP 50:1065-1074. 1987.
Ergotamin. In: DAZ 134(20): 1887. 1994.
Flieger M et al., INP 47:970-976. 1984.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kobel H, Sanglier JJ, Biotechnology 4:569-609. 1986.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Marshall M, Wiistenberg P, Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen venosen Insuffizienz. In: Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen venosen Insuffizienz, Braun Fachverlage, Karlsruhe
1994. 1994,

Milhahn HC et al., Contributions to the dissociation between
antineoplastic and mutagenic activities of the ergot minor

----- PAGE 533 -----
282/ERGOT
alkaloid festucalavine by substitution at C-2. In: PM
59(7): A&83. 1993.

Militz M, Antoniusfeuer, Mutterkron und Isenheimer Altar. In:
PZ 141(9):720-721. 1996.

Neurotransmitter: Serotoninagonisten und -antagonisten in der
Pharmakotherapie. In: DAZ 133(51/52):4895. 1993.

Perellino NC, et al., Identification of ergobine, a new natural
peptide ergot alkaloid. In: INP 56(4):489-493. 1993.

Pertz H, Naturally occuring clavines: Antagonism/partial
agonism at 5-HT2alpha receptors and antogonism at alpha 1-
adrenoceptors in blood vessel. In: PM 62(5)387-392. 1996.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schlenger R, 50 Jahre LSD. In: DAZ 133(32):2903. 1993.

Schmidt M, LSD, Psilocybe, Ololiuqui. In: PTA 8(3): 186. 1994.

Seeger R, Neumann HG, D-(&plus;)-Lysergsaurediethylamid
(LSD). In; DAZ 132(42):2244, 1992.

Seiffer B, Therapie der Akromegalie. In: Med Mo Pharm
15(5); 159. 1992.

Stadler PA, PM 46:131-144. 1982.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Vom Ergolin-Pharmakophor zu selektiven Arzneistoffen. In:
DAZ 132(23): 1235. 1992.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wang BH, Polya GM, The fungal teratogen secalonic acid D is
an inhibitor of protein kinase C and of cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase. In: PM 62(2): 111-114. 1997.

Wenzlaff H, Dihydroergotamin. In: DAZ 136(26):2179-2181.
1996.

Erigeron canadensis

See Canadian Fleabane

Eriodictyon  californicum

See Yerba Santa

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Eryngium campestre
See Eryngo

Eryngo

Eryngium campestre

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
dried flowers and dried roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant bears small terminal cymes on
oval to globular capitula on sweeping inflorescences. The
linear-lanceolate to awl-shaped bracts terminate in sharp
thorns. The sepals are lanceolate, terminate in thorny tips and
are twice as long as the white or gray-green petals. The fruit
is compressed obovate with lanceolate, pointed scales.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 15 to 60 cm high,
perennial, with a whitish or yellow-green color. The
bifurcated stem is erect, thick, grooved and spare. The stem
forms a round bush with the branches. The leaves are tough,
short-petioled or sessile. The upper leaves are clasping,
double pinnatesect and thorny dentate. The root is cylindri-
cal, thick, brown and woody.

Characteristics: The root is spicy.

Habitat: The plant grows in most parts of Europe and
northern Africa and has been introduced into North America.

Production: Eryngo root is the root of Eryngium campestre,
which is gathered and dried in the spring and autumn. It is
gathered in uncultivated regions. The roots are halved and
air-dried. Eryngo herb is the dried leaves and blossoms of

Eryngium campestre.
Other Names: Eringo, Sea Holly, Sea Holme, Sea Hulver

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ERYNGO ROOT

Triterpene saponins
Furanocoumarins
Pyranocoumarins: including egelinol and its angeloyl-,

senecionyl- or benzyl-esters agasyllin, grandivetin and egeli-
nol benzoate

Monoterpene glycosides of the cyclohexenol type: including
3-(beta-D-glucosyloxymethy])-2,4,4-trimethyl-2,5-cyclohex-
adien-1-one

Caffeic acid ester: chlorogenic acid, rosmarinic acid

Oligosaccharides: _1-kestose

----- PAGE 534 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS: ERYNGO ROOT
The root is said to be mildly expectorant and spasmolytic;
however, there is no scientific evidence to support this.

COMPOUNDS: ERYNGO HERB

TTriterpene saponins

Caffeic acid ester: chlorogenic acid, rosmarinic acid
Flavonoids

EFFECTS: ERYNGO HERB
The herb is said to be a mild diuretic and an expectorant;
however, there is no scientific evidence to support this.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
ERYNGO ROOT

Unproven Uses: The root is used in the treatment of bladder
and kidney stones, renal colic, kidney and urinary tract
inflammation, urinary retention and edema. It is also used for
coughs, bronchitis, skin disorders and respiratory disorders.

ERYNGO HERB

Unproven Uses: The herb is used in the treatment of urinary

tract infections and as an adjuvant to treat inflammation of
«the efferent urinary tract, prostatitis and bronchial catarrh.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

ERYNGO ROOT AND HERB

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE

ERYNGO ROOT

Mode of Administration: The comminuted root is contained
in tea mixtures, extracts, decoctions, liquids and tinctures.

Preparation: To make a tea, use 1 level teaspoonful of the
ground root per cup of boiling water (30 to 40 gm per liter
boiling water). Allow to draw until cold. To make a
decoction, boil 4 teaspoonfuls of the ground root in | liter of
water for 10 minutes and allow to draw for 15 minutes. The
tincture is prepared by soaking 20 gm ground drug in 80 gm
of 60% alcohol for 10 days.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 3 to 4 cups of the tea; 2 to
3 cups of the decoction; 50 to 60 drops of the tincture in 3 or
divided doses; or 2 to 3 gm of the liquid extract.

ERYNGO HERB
Mode of Administration: The herb is administered as an

extract and in homeopathic dilutions (from E. yuccifolium).
LITERATURE

Bhargava SK, Dixit VP, (1985) Plant Med Phytother 19(1):29.
Erdelmeier CAJ, Sticher O, (1985) Planta Med 51(5):407.
Gracza L et al., (1985) Arch Pharm 312(12): 1090.

EUCALYPTUS 283

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994.

Hiller K, In "The Biology and Chemistry of the Umbelliferae'.
Ed. V. N. Hey wood, Academic Press London 1971.

Hiller K, Linzer B PA 22:321. 1967.

Kartnig T, Wolf J. Flavonoide aus den oberirdischen Teilen von
Eryngium campestre. In: PM 59(3):285. 1993.

Lisciani R et al., (1984) J Ethnopharmacol 12(39):263.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-5.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Erysimum diffusum

See Gray Wallflower

Erythronium americanum

See American Adder's Tongue

Erythroxylum coca

See Coca

Eschscholtzia_ californica
See California Poppy

Eucalyptus

Eucalyptus globulus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the fresh leaves and branch tips as well as the dried

leaves.

Flower and Fndt: The flowers are solitary on short pedicles.
They have a somewhat pointed, but low operculum stretch-
ing over the surface of the stamens. There are no sepals but
there are numerous long stamens turned inward, which open
along the whole length in 2 splits. The fruit is 10 to 15 by 15

----- PAGE 535 -----
284/EUCALYPTUS

to 30 mm and is a depressed-globose, somewhat tapering
toward the base, with 4 main ribs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Eucalyptus is a deciduous tree up to
40 m tall with silver-gray bark, which has scattered warts.
The trunk is twisted. The juvenile leaves are 7 to 16 by 4 to 9
cm, ovate to broadly lanceolate, cordate, very glaucus. The
mature leaves are 10 to 13 by 3 to 4 cm, lanceolate to
falcate-lanceolate, acuminate, asymmetrical rounded and

glossy green.

Habitat: Eucalyptus is indigenous to Australia and Tasma-
nia. It is cultivated today in some subtropical regions of
southern Europe, Africa, Asia and America.

Production: Eucalyptus oil consists of the volatile oil from
various cineol-rich species of Eucalyptus, such as Eucalyptus
globulus, Eucalyptus fructicetorum (syn. Eucalyptus poly-
bractea) and/or Eucalyptus smithii. The oil is obtained by
steam distillation, followed by rectification of the fresh
leaves and branch tops. Eucalyptus leaf consists of the dried,
mature leaves from older trees of Eucalyptus globulus. To
harvest eucalyptus, the trees are cut down; drying takes place
in the shade.

Not To Be Confused With: Camphor oil and by-products of
turpentine manufacture: the oil is also blended with other
expensive oils, such as rosemary and thyme. The properties
of Eucalyptus leaves vary from species to species.

Other Names: Blue Gum, Fever Tree, Gum Tree, Red Gum,
Stringy Bark Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: EUCALYPTUS OIL

Chief constituent of the rectified volatile oil: 1,8-cineol (over
80%), furthermore p-cymene, alpha-pinenes, limonene, gera-
niol, camphene

EFFECTS: EUCALYPTUS OIL
Some of the subsequent properties mentioned refer to
isolated cineole. As the standardized commodity, the drug
contains 80 to 90% cineole.

In vitro, eucalyptus oil has an antibacterial and fungicidal
effect. The drug inhibits prostaglandin biosynthesis and has a
mild hyperemic, expectorant and secretolytic motor effect
when used topically. In animal experiments eucalyptus was
demonstrably cough relieving and displayed a surfactant
effect. In vitro, the oil was enzyme inducing and improved
pulmonary compliance. It is secretolytic, expectorant, mildly
antispasmodic, and a mild local hyperemic.

COMPOUNDS: EUCALYPTUS LEAF
Volatile oil: chief constituent 1,8-cineol (45-75%), in addi-
tions myrtenol, alpha-pinenes, beta-pinenes, pinocarvon,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

gamma-terpenes, aliphatic aldehydes (butyr-, capron-,

valerenaldehyde)

Euglobale: macrocarpale (with acylphloroglucinol-monoter-
pene or else sesquiterpene- parent substances)

Flavonoids: rutin, hyperoside, quercitrin

EFFECTS: EUCALYPTUS LEAF
The drug has been shown to be secretolytic, expectorant,
weakly antispasmodic, deodorizing, cooling and diuretic. In
animal experiments the blood-sugar level of uninfluenced
plasma insulin was reduced. The euglobulin is said to have
an anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative effect in animal
experiments and inhibits in vitro TPA-induced EBV-EA
activity.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
EUCALYPTUS OIL
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis
* Rheumatism

Eucalyptus oil is used internally and externally for catarrh of
the respiratory tract and externally for rheumatic complaints.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the oil is used for asthma,
coughs, diseases of the frontal sinuses, fever, flu, gastric
complaints, hoarseness, incipient scarlet fever and measles,
worm infestation and as an intestinal antiseptic.

EUCALYPTUS LEAF
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Eucalyptus leaf is used internally as a catarrh of the
respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, it is used internally for the
treatment of bladder diseases, asthma, fever, flu, whooping
cough, liver and gallbladder complaints, loss of appetite and
diabetes. It is used externally for wounds, acne, poorly
healing ulcers, stomatitis, bleeding gums, pain and rheuma-
tism, neuralgia, gonorrhea and as a gastrointestinal remedy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
EUCALYPTUS OIL

General: The administration of the drug leads in rare cases
to nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. It should not be taken
internally with inflammation of the gastrointestinal area and
the biliary ducts or with severe illnesses of the liver.

Pediatric Use: Infants and small children should not have
preparations containing the oil applied to their faces as this
practice can lead to glottal or bronchial spasms, asthma-like
attacks or even death by asphyxiation.

----- PAGE 536 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EUCALYPTUS LEAF

General: The administration of the drug leads in rare cases
to nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. It should not be taken
internally with inflammation of the gastrointestinal area and
the biliary ducts or with severe illnesses of the liver.
Poisonings occur with the volatile oil but are not likely with
administration of the leaf drug.

Pediatric Use: Infants and small children should not have
preparations containing the oil applied to their faces as this
practice can lead to glottal or bronchial spasms, asthma-like
attacks or even death by asphyxiation.

OVERDOSAGE
EUCALYPTUS OIL

Overdoses can lead to life-threatening poisonings. Severe
poisonings are possible for children after a few drops;
poisonings have been known in adults with 4 to 5 ml.
Symptoms include drop in blood pressure, circulatory
disorders, collapse and asphyxiation. Because of the danger
of aspiration, vomiting should not be induced. Following the
administration of activated charcoal, therapy consists of
diazepam for spasms, atropine for colic, electrolyte replen-
ishment and sodium bicarbonate infusions for any acidosis
that may arise. Intubation and oxygen respiration may also
be necessary.

DOSAGE
EUCALYPTUS OIL
Mode of Administration: Essential oil and other galenic

preparations are available for internal and _ external
application.
Preparation: 1,8-cineole is recovered through a renewed

fractional distillation of the oil.

Daily Dosage: For internal use, the average daily dose is 0.3
to 0.6 gm eucalyptus oil.

Inhalation: 2 to 3 drops in boiling water, inhale the steam
(single dose: 0.2 gm corresponding to 10 drops). Oil: 3 to 6
drops added in 150 ml water, to be taken several times a day.

When used externally, the concentration is 5 to 20%
essential oil,.in oil and semi-solid preparations and 5 to 10%
essential oil, in aqueous-alcoholic preparations. If the
essential oil is used, several drops may be nibbed into the
skin.

Storage: Eucalyptus must be kept in appropriate, tightly
sealed containers protected from light; different consign-
ments must be stored separately.

EUCALYPTUS LEAF
Mode of Administration: Eucalyptus leaf is administered as
the comminuted leaf for infusions and other galenic prepara-

EUCALYPTUS/285

tions for internal and external application. The drug may also
be administered by inhalation.

Preparations:
Eucalyptus tincture — 1:5 70% ethanol (V/V)

Eucalyptus liquid extract — 60% 1:1

Eucalyptus syrup — pour 1500 ml on 100 gm cut drug and
leave to draw for 6 hours and strain. 180 gm sugar is added
to 100 ml infusion, brought to a simmer and filtered.

Tea — pour boiling water over 15 to 2 gm of the finely cut
rug, cover and leave to draw for 5 to 10 minutes, strain.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 4 to 6 gm of drug,
divided up every 3 to 4 hours. Single dose: 15 gm several

times a day

The average dose for the tincture is 3 to 4 gm.
Eucalyptus tea — 1 cup up to 3 times a day.
Eucalyptus syrup — 2 to 5 dessertspoons daily.

Eucalyptus powder — daily dose 4 to 16 gm; divided over 3
to 4 hours.

Storage: Eucalyptus must be kept in appropriate, tightly-
sealed, non-synthetic containers; different consignments
must be stored separately.

LITERATURE

EUCALYPTUS OIL

Anonym, Phytotherapie:Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Boland B, In: Eucalyptus leaf oils. Boland DJ. Brophy JJ,
House APN (Eds.). Inkata Press, Melbourne, XII + 252 pp.
1992.

Boland DJ, Brophy JJ, House APN, Eucalyptus leave oils. In:
Inkata Press Melbourne. 1991.

Boukef K et al., (1976) Plant Med Phytother 10:24, 30:119.
Burrow A, Eccles R, Jones AS, (1983) The effects of camphor,
eucalyptus and menthol vapor on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation. Acta Otolaryng (Stockholm) 96:157-161.

Fox N, (1977) Effect of Camphor, Eucalyptol and Menthol on
the vascular state of the mucos membrane. Arch Otolaryngol 6:
112-122.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, (1995a) Effekt von Pfefferminz- und
Eukalyptusolpraparationen in experimentellen
Kopfschmerzmodellen. Z Phytother 16:23-33.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M, Stolze H. Heuss D, (1995)
Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine 2:
93-102.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M, Stolze H, Heuss D, (1995)
Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine 2:
93-103.

----- PAGE 537 -----
286/EUCALYPTUS

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Soyka D, (1994) Effect of peppermint
and eucalyptus oil preparations on neurophysiological and
experimental algesimetric headache parameters. Cephalalgia 14:
228-234.

Gobel H, Stolze H, Dworschak M, Heinze A, (1995) Oleum
menthae piperitae, Wirkmechanismen und klinische Effektivitat
bei Kopfschmerz vom Spannungstyp. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N
(Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 177-184.

Grafe AK, Besonderheiten der ArzneimitteltJherapie im
Sauglings- und Kindesalter. In: PZ 140(30):2659-2667. 1995.

Ikeda RM et al., (1962) J Food Sci 27:455.

Linsenmann P, Hermat H, Swoboda M. (1989) Therapeutischer
Wert atherischer Ole bei chronisch-abstruktiver Bronchitis.
Atemw Lungenkrankh 15:152-156.

Linsenmann P, Swoboda M. (1986) Therapeutische Wirksamkeit
atherischer Ole bei chronisch-obstruktiver Bronchitis.
Therapiewoche 36:1161-1166.

Osawa K et al., Macrocarpals H, I, and J from the leaves of
Eucalyptus globulus. In: JNP 59(9):824-827. 1996.

Patel S, Wiggins J, (1980) Eucalyptus oil poisoning. Arch Dis
Childh 55:405-406.

Rommelt H, Schnizer W, Swoboda M, Senn E, (1988)
Pharmakokinetik atherischer Ole nach Inhalation mit einer
terpenhaltigen Salbe. Z Phytother 9:14-16.

Ziinker KS, Bliimel G. (1983) Terpene-induced lowering of
surface tension in vitro. In: A rationale for surfactant
substitution. Resp Exp Med 182:33-38.

Zanker KS, Bliimel G, Probst J, Reiterer W, (1984) Theoretical
and experimental evidence for the action of terpens as
modulators in lung function. Prog Resp Res 18:302-304.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

EUCALYPTUS LEAF
Anonym, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Boland B, In: Eucalyptus leaf oils. Boland DJ, Brophy JJ,
House APN (Eds.). Inkata Press, Melbourne, XII + 252 pp.
1992.

Boland DJ, Brophy JJ, House APN, Eucalyptus leave oils. In:
Inkata Press Melbourne. 1991.

Boukef K et al., (1976) Plant Med Phytother 10:24, 30:119.

Burrow A, Eccles R, Jones AS, (1983) The effects of camphor,
eucalyptus and menthol vapor on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation. Acta Otolaryng (Stockholm) 96:157-161.

Fox N, (1977) Effect of Camphor, Eucalyptol and Menthol«M*C"*»’,.

the vascular state of the mucous membrane. Arch Otolaryngol
6: 112-122.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, (1995a) Effekt von Pfefferminz- und
Eukalyptusolpraparationen in experimentellen
Kopfschmerzmodellen. Z Phytother 16:23-33.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M, Stolze H, Heuss D, (1995)
Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine
2:93-102.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M, Stolze H, Heuss D, (1995)
Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine
2:93-103.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Soyka D, (1994) Effect of peppermint
and eucalyptus oil preparations on neurophysiological and
experimental algesimetric headache parameters. Cephalalgia 14:
228-234.

Gobel H, Stolze H, Dworschak M, Heinze A, (1995) Oleum
menthae piperitae, Wirkmechanismen und klinische Effektivitat
bei Kopfschmerz vom Spannungstyp. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N
(Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S. 177-184.

Grafe AK, Besonderheiten der Arzneimitteltherapie im
Sauglings- und Kindesalter. In: PZ 140(30):2659-2667. 1995.

Ikeda RM et al., (1962) J Food Sci 27:455.

Linsenmann P, Hermat H, Swoboda M, (1989) Therapeutischer
Wert atherischer Ole bei chronisch-abstruktiver Bronchitis.
Atemw Lungenkrankh 15:152-156.

----- PAGE 538 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Linsenmann P, Swoboda M, (1986) Therapeutische Wirksamkeit
atherischer Ole bei chronisch-obstruktiver Bronchitis.
Therapiewoche 36:1161-1166.
Osawa K et al., Macrocarpals H, I, and J from the leaves of
Eucalyptus globulus. In: JNP 59(9):824-827. 1996.

atel S, Wiggins J, (1980) Eucalyptus oil poisoning. Arch Dis
Childh 55:405-406.
Rommelt H, Schnizer W, Swoboda M, Senn E, (1988)
harmakokinetik atherischer Ole nach Inhalation mit einer
terpenhaltigen Salbe. Z Phytother 9:14-16.

Zanker KS, Blumel G, (1983) Terpene-induced lowering of
surface tension in vitro. In: A rationale for surfactant
substitution. Resp Exp Med 182:33-38.

Zanker KS, Blumel G, Probst J, Reiterer W, (1984) Theoretical

and experimental evidence for the action of terpens as
modulators in lung function. Prog Resp Res 18:302-304.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R. Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbli Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Eucalyptus globulus

See Eucalyptus

EUROPEAN ELDER/287

Eugenia chequen
See Cheken

Eugenia uniflora
See Surinam Cherry

Euonymus species
See Wahoo

Eupatorium cannabinum
See Hemp Agrimony

Eupatorium perfoliatum

See Boneset

Euphorbia cyparissias
See Cypress Spurge

Euphorbia _resinifera
See Spurge

Euphrasia officinalis
See Eyebright

European Elder
Sambucus nigra

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark peeled
from the branches in spring and freed from the cork, the air-
dried flowers, the fresh and dried leaves, the fresh and dried
ripe fruit, the dried roots, and the fresh leaves and

inflorescences in equal parts.

----- PAGE 539 -----
288/EUROPEAN ELDER

Flower and Fruit: The strongly perfumed, yellowish-white
flowers are in large, flat, apical, richly and densely blos-
somed erect cymes with 5 main branches. The edge of the
calyx is small and 5-tipped. The corolla is rotate, deep, and
has 5 petals. There are 5 stamens and | inferior ovary. The
fruit is a black-violet, berry-like drupe with blood-red juice.
The seeds are brownish, ovate, and domed on the outside.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a shallow-rooted, up to
7 m high tree or bush with spreading branches containing dry
white latex. The bark of the trunk is light brown to gray, and
fissured. The bark on the young branches is green and
covered with gray lenticles. The leaves are odd 3 to 7
pinnate. They are matte green above and light blue-green
beneath. The leaflets are ovate or oblong acuminate, and
densely serrate.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong, somewhat
numbing perfume.

Habitat: European Elder is indigenous to almost all of
Europe.

Production: Elder flowers consist of the inflorescence of
Sambucus nigra, which are collected in the wild, sifted and

dried.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion sometimes arises with
the flowers of Sambucus ebulus.

Other Names: Black Elder, Black-Berried Alder, Boor Tree,
Elder, Bountry, Ellanwood, Ellhorn

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (up to 3%): chief components are rutin, isoquer-
citrin, quercitrin, hyperoside, astragalin, nicotoflorin

Volatile oil (0.03-0.14%): higher share (65%) of free fatty
acids, including among others palmitic acid (share 38%)

Caffeic acid derivatives (3%): chlorogenic acids

EFFECTS

Animal tests have shown that Alder increases bronchial
secretion. A diaphoretic effect is apparent, but the mecha-
nism is unknown.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis
* Fevers and colds

The drug is used for colds and coughs. It is a sweat-
producing remedy for the treatment of feverish colds.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Elder flowers are used
internally as a sudorific tea and for colds and other feverish
conditions. Elder is also used as an infusion, as a gargle/

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

mouthwash and for respiratory disorders such as coughs,
head colds, laryngitis, flu, and shortness of breath. Elder is
used occasionally by nursing mothers to increase lactation.
Externally, herbal pillows are used for swelling and
inflammation.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy is inflam-
mation of the respiratory tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb and other galenic
preparations for infusions.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, brew 2 teaspoonfuls (3
to 4 g) of elder flowers in 150 ml of boiling water and strain
after 5 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug is 10 to 15
gm. The infusion (tea) should be freshly prepared and drunk
in doses of 1 to 2 cups several times—especially in the
afternoon and evening.

Homeopathic Dosage: For adults, 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily;
chronic once a day (HAB1). Adjust dosages for children.

Storage: Elder should be stored where it is protected from
light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Bauer R et al., (1985) Helv Chim Acta 68:2355.

Czygan FC, Holunder wird wieder gesellschaftsfahig. In: ZPT
15(2): 111. 1994.

Eberhardt R, Pfannhauser W, Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 181:97.
1985.

Inoue T, Sato K, (1975) Phytochemistry 14:1871.
Lawrie W et al., (1964) Phytochemistry 3:267.
Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.
Paulo E, (1976) Folia Biol 24(2):213.
Petitjean-Freytet C et al., J Pharm Belg 46:241. 1991.
Richter W, Willuhn G, DAZ 114:947. 1974.

WiUuhn G, Richter W, PM 31:328. 1977.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 540 -----
if?

A

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients; Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schuiz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

European Five-Finger Grass

Potentilla reptans

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh flowering

plant and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary or in pairs on
long thin pedicles opposite the leaves. The calyx has 5
segments and is 10 to 25 mm across. The golden yellow
petals are obcordate and up to twice as long as the calyx. A
ring-like swelling at the base of the stamens exudes a kind of
honey. The small fruit is oblong-ovate and wrinkled.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial
with a thin, divided rhizome and rosettes of basal leaves. The
basal leaves produce 30 cm to 100 cm-long flowering stems
from their axils, which are rooted at the nodes. The stems are
pubescent or almost glabrous, have no glands and are often
tinged red. The cauline leaves are long-petioled and 5 to 7
digitate. The basal stipules are fused to the petiole. The
leaflets are obovate, 10 to 70 mm long, dentate to serrate and
pubescent or almost glabrous.

Habitat: Europe. The plant is common in Europe, Western

Asia, North America, Ethiopia and the Near East. Potentilla
canadensis is indigenous to Canada and the U.S. and is very
similar.

Production: European Five-Finger Grass and root is the
complete plant of Potentilla reptans.

The drug is a mixture of green and brown in color and has no
particular smell or taste. The roots are dug up in September/
October and then dried in a sunny, airy place.

EUROPEAN GOLDEN ROD / 289

Other Names: Cinquefoil, Five Fingers, Five-Finger Blos-
som, Sunkfield, Synkfoyle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins (6 to 12%)

Flavonoids: including quercetin-3,7-diglucuronide

EFFECTS
The drug is astringent and has wound healing effect due to

the tannin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: European Five-Finger Grass is used inter-
nally for diarrhea and fever; externally for inflammation of
the mucous membranes of mouth and gums, toothache, and
heartburn.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There have been complaints of gastrointestinal
upset in conjunction with the drugs use reported in the
literature.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available as crude drug and as an

infusion for internal and external use.

Preparation: A decoction for internal use is prepared by
adding 3 gm of drug per 100 ml of water. A decoction using
6 gm of drug per 100 ml of water is used for external
application and mouth rinses.

Daily Dosage: Internally, 2 to 3 cups of a decoction prepared
according to the formula above are administered daily.
Externally, a decoction using the formula above is adminis-
tered as a gargle, mouthwash or rinse. Moist compresses may
be applied to affected areas of the skin.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

European Golden Rod

Solidago virgaurea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial
parts collected during the flowering season, the fresh
inflorescences and the flowering twigs.

----- PAGE 541 -----
290 /EUROPEAN CrOLDEN ROD

Flower and Fruit: The yellow composite flowers are in erect
racemes facing all directions and are simple or compound.
They are medium-sized. The involucral bracts are imbricate
and arranged in numerous rows. The ray florets are narrow,
lingual and female. The disc florets are funnel-shaped, 5-
tipped and androgynous. The fruit is a cylindrical achene
with numerous ribs. It is brown, sparsely pubescent and 3.5
to 4.5 mm long with a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that ranges
in size from a few centimeters to over | m. The rhizome is
cylindrical, noded, diagonally ascending and short. The stem
is erect, cane-like, angularly grooved above, usually red-
tinged beneath, and glabrous to loosely appressed pubescent
higher up. The basal leaves are long-petioled, elliptical,
acuminate and narrowing to the winged stem. The lower
ones are serrate and the upper ones entire-margined.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, Asia and North
America.

Production: Golden Rod is the aerial part of Solidago
virgaurea. It occurs in the wild in Hungary, former Yugosla-
via, Bulgaria and Poland

Not to be Confised With: Despite qualitative and quantita-
tive differences in their effects, drugs containing Solidago
gigantea or Solidago canadensis are exchanged with Solida-
go virgaurea on the market; confusions with Senecio species
are also conceivable.

Other Names: Aaron's Rod, Woundwort, Goldenrod

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins (0.2 to 0.3%):

In the European form—3,28-bisdemosidic ester saponins,
including acyl-virgaurea saponins 1, 2 and 3; the acid
components are acetic acid and beta-hydroxy butyric acid;
aglycone is polygalic acid.

In the Asian fonn—ti- or tridemosidic solidago saponins I to
XXIX, acyl-virgaurea saponin 1, acylvirgaurea saponin 2,
bellis saponin BA2

Volatile oil (0.4 to 0.5%, in the stored drug less than 0.2%):
chief components

In the European form—alpha-pinene, beta-pinene, limonene,
delta-elemene, gamma-cadinene, beta-phellandrene, myrcene

In the Asian form—limonene, germacrene-D, germacrene-B
and beta-caryophyllene

Polysaccharides (water-soluble, 6 to 8%)

Diterpenes: cis-clerodane-derivatives, presumably only in
the Asian variety

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Carotinoids (as blossom pigments)

Flavonoids (1.1 to 2%): chief component rutin (0.8 %),
including as well hyperoside, isoquercitrin, avicularin, quer-
cetin-3-O-beta-D-robinoside, astragalin, nicotiflorin, ka-
empferol-3-O-beta-D-galactoside, kaempferol- 3-0-
alpha- arabinoside, kaempferol - 3 - O - beta - D - robinobioside,
isorhamnetin - 3 - O - beta - D- galactoside, isorhamnetin - 3 - O -
beta - D - glucoside, isorhamnetin - 3 - O - beta - D - rutinoside,
rhamnetin - 3 - O - glucorahamnoside

Phenol glucosides (hydroxy benzylbenzoyte diglucosides, 0.2
to 1.0%): leicarposide (0.2 to 1%), virgaureoside A (0.01 to
0.14%), benzyl-2,6-dimethoxy-benzoate

Caffeic acid derivatives (0.2 to 0.4%): including chlorogenic
acid, neochlorogenic acid, 3,5-dicaffeoyl quinic acid

Phenol carboxylic acids: salicylic acid (0.1%), as well as
vanillic acid, protocatechuic acid, ferulic acid, caffeic acid,
sinapineic acid—free, estered or glycosylated

Polyynes (in the roots): 2,8-cis-trans-matricaria ester, 2,8-
cis-cis-matricaria ester, cis-lachnophyllum ester, matricaric
acid lactone, lachnophyllum lactone

EFFECTS
The drug has a diuretic effect due to the leiocarposide and
the phenol glycosides. Golden Rod also inhibits the forma-
tion of urinary calculi. Leiocarposide displays an analgesic
effect. The saponin is antimicrobial, weakly spasmolytic and
anti-exudative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Golden Rod is used
internally for rheumatism, gout, diabetes, hemorrhoids,
prostatic hypertrophy, nervous bronchial asthma, internal
bleeding, enlargement of the liver, acute exacerbation of
pulmonary tuberculosis; externally for inflammations of the
mouth and throat as well as festering wounds

Homeopathic Uses: Solidago virgaurea is used for renal
insufficiency and liver disorders.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Irrigation therapy is c6ntraindicated in cases of edema
resulting from reduced cardiac and/or kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a weak potential for sensitiza-
tion. Care must be taken in patients with chronic renal

----- PAGE 542 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

diseases, and the drug should be used in this patient
population only under physician supervision.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As chopped drug by itself or in

combination preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls (3 to
5 gm) of drug is scalded with simmering water (150 ml) and
strained after 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 6 to 12 gm of
comminuted drug prepared as an infusion. The infusion
dosage is one cupful, 2 to 4 times daily between meals. The
recommended dosage for the liquid extract is 0.5 to 2 ml
liquid extract (1:1) in 25% ethanol 2 to 3 times daily. A
dosage of 0.5 to 1 ml tincture (1:5) in 45% ethanol, 2 to 3
times daily is commonly used. Ample fluid intake should be
ensured. In folk medicine, 0.5 to 2 gm drug as an infusion is
taken 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

Storage: The drug must be protected from light and
moisture.

LITERATURE
Bader G et al., (1987) Pharmazie 42(2): 140.

Bader G, Plohmann B, Franz G, Hiller K, Saponins from
Solidago virgaurea L. - Possible agent for therapy of cancer?
In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 21.

1996.

Bader G, Wray V, Hiller K, The main saponins fiom the aerial
parts and the roots of Solidago virgaurea subsp, virgaurea. In:
PM 61(2);158-161. 1995.

Goswami A et al., (1984) Phytochemistry 23(4):837.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewerrung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Hiller K, Bader G, Goldruten-Kraut Portrait einer Arzneipflanze.
In: ZPT 17(2): 123-130. 1996.

Inose Y, Miyase T, Ueno A, Studies on the constituents of
Solidago virga-aurea L. 1. Structural elucidation of saponins in
the herb. In: Chem Pharm Bull 39: 2037. 1991.

Kalemba D, Phenolic acids in four Solidago species. In: PA
47:471-472. 1992.

Lassere B et al., (1983) Naturwissenschaft 70:95.

Metzer J et al., (1984) Pharmazie 39(12):869.

Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
prostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.
Sokeland J, Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1):8.
1989.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE/291

Vonkruedener S et al., Effects of extracts from Populus tremula
L., Solidago virgaurea L. and Fraxinus excelsior L. on various
myeloperoxidase systems. In: Arzneim Forsch 46(8):809-814.
1996.

Further information in: *

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997,

European Mistletoe

Viscum album

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and
twigs collected before the berries form, the fresh herbs of
certain host plants, the fresh leafy twigs with fruit collected
in the autumn, the whole fresh plant collected from apple
trees, the leaves and the berries.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is yellowish-green, dioecious
and appears in insignificant, small, 3 to 5 flowered clusters.
The perigone of the male flower is 4 tipped. The stamens are
fused with the tips. The female flower is smaller and has 4
tepals with a thick stigma sitting on die short style. The fruit
is a glossy, white, globular, pea-sized berry with thick sticky
flesh. When ripe, it is white to yellowish or orange and has 1
to 2 oval or angular seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a semi-parasitic, almost
round bush growing on deciduous trees, which are 30 to 80
cm in diameter. The round branches are repeatedly bifurcat-
ed and thickened to knots at the joints and are the same
yellowish-green as the leaves. The leaves are alternate,
sessile, lanceolate or lanceolate-spatulate, coriaceous and
evergreen.

----- PAGE 543 -----
292/EUROPEAN MISTLETOE

Habitat: European Mistletoe is found mostly in Europe and
as far as Iran. It is not found in America or Australia. It is
cultivated in central Europe and China.

Production: European Mistletoe berries are the fresh or dried
fruit of Viscum album. Mistletoe stem is the fresh or dried
stem of Viscum album. Mistletoe herb consists of fresh or
dried younger branches with flowers and fruits of Viscum
album. The drug is collected in the wild during the spring
and is air-dried or put in driers at a maximum temperature of
40° C.

Other Names: Mistletoe, Mystyldene, All-Heal, Birdlime,
Devil's Fuge

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE FRUIT

Mucilage (2%, referred to as Viscin): The mock berries of
the Mistletoe have not been fully investigated. Presumably,
they lack the toxic lectins and viscotoxins.

EFFECTS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE FRUIT
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE STEM
The Mistletoe stems contain the same constituents as the
Mistletoe foliage (Visci alhi herba), but because of the high
percentage of support elements lacking any effective ingredi-
ents, these constituents exist only in very low concentrations.

EFFECTS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE STEM
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB
Lectins (glycoproteins with 11% carbohydrate): Mistletoe
lectin I (ML I, VAA 1, viscumin), mistletoe lectin IT (ML ID),
mistletoe lectin II (ML III, VAA ID, the lectin fractions
named are isolectin mixtures

Polypeptides (built up out of 46 amino acids, 0.05-0.1%):
viscotoxins A2, A3, B, Ps 1-

Mucilages (knovm as viscin, 4-5%): including among others
galacturonans, arabino galactans

Sugar alcohols: including among others mannitol, quebra-
chitol, pinitol, viscumitol

Flavonoids: including glycosides of quercetin, quercetin

methyl ethers, isorhamnetin, sakuranetin and homoeriodic-

tyol; in the subspecies V. album ssp. platyspermum:

homoeriodictyol - 7 - O - glucoside, isorhamnetin - 3 - O - rutino-
side, isorhamnetin-3-[apiosyl (1->6)]-glucosyl-7-0-rham-

noside, 5,7-dimethoxyflavanone-4'-0-glucoside, 3',5,7-

trimethoxyflavanone-4' - O-glucoside

Phenyl alyl alcohols: including among others syringin

(syrigenin-4'-0-glucosides), coniferyl-4'-[apiosyl (1-2')]

glucoside

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Lignans: including among others syringaresinol and _ its
glycosides

Triterpenes: including among others alpha-amyrin (alpha-
viscol), beta-amyrin acetate, betulic acid, oleanolic acid,
ursolic acid *
EFFECTS: EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB

The Mistletoe lectins in the drug are hypotensive, cytotoxic
and immune-stimulating. It causes significant improvement
of the symptoms of chronic joint conditions, and a signifi-
cant lengthening of survival times of cancer patients as well
an improvement of quality of life.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
EUROPEAN MISTLETOE FRUIT

Unproven Uses: The fruit acts on circulation by regulating
blood pressure. It is also an expectorant and a tonic. In
addition, the fruit is used to treat internal bleeding, epilepsy,
arteriosclerosis, cramps, gout, hysteria and major blood loss.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE STEM
Unproven Uses: The stem of European Mistletoe is used for
its calming effect; in the treatment of mental and physical
exhaustion; and as a tranquilizer against nervous conditions
such as agitation, anxiety and increased excitability.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB
Approved by Commission E:

+ Rheumatism
* Tumor therapy (adjuvant)

Unproven Uses: For treating degenerative inflammation of
the joints and as palliative therapy for malignant tumors
through nonspecific stimulation. Other uses include long-
term therapy for cases of mild high blood pressure and as an
arteriosclerosis prophylactic.

European Mistletoe tea may be used for high blood pressure,
epilepsy, whooping cough, asthma, vertiginous attack, amen-
orrhea, diarrhea, chorea, nervous tachycardia, hysteria and
nervousness.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for joint pain, tendon
and muscle pain, lumbago, back pain, vaginal bleeding
during pregnancy and agalactia.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for dizziness, high and
low blood pressure, cardiac arrhythmia and joint
degeneration.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB

Contraindications for parenteral administration of the herb
include protein oversensitivity, chronic-progressive infec-
tions, e.g., tuberculosis, and conditions of high fever.

%

41

™.

----- PAGE 544 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE FRUIT

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper “administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The berries are said to have emetic and evacuant
effects and to have caused the death of children. However,
unambiguous proof for these effects does not exist.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE STEM
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The drug is
non-toxic with peroral administration. Local reactions can
occur with parenteral administration of European Mistletoe
extracts such as wheal formation, possibly also necrosis,
chills, fever, headache, anginal complaints, orthostatic circu-
latory disorders and allergic reactions.

The wheal formation and the elevation of body temperature
are considered signs of immune system stimulation and
therefore as positive therapeutic effects.

DOSAGE

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB

Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered herb are
available in the forms of juice, coated tablets, drops, oil
preparations, ampules and compound preparations.

Preparation: A medicinal tea is prepared using 2.5 gm (1
teaspoonful) finely cut drug with 1 cup cold water, steeped
for 12 hours at room temperature, then strained. European
Mistletoe wine is prepared by adding 40 gm drug to 1 liter
wine; the preparation is ready for use after 3 days.

A liquid extract is made in the ratio of 1:1 with diluted
ethanol; a tincture is made in the ratio of 1:5 with 45%

ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dose is 10 gm drug.
The dosage of medicinal tea is 1 to 2 cups daily. European
Mistletoe wine dosage is 3 to 4 glasses daily, liquid extract
dosage is 1 to 3 ml 3 times daily, and the tincture dosage is
0.5 ml 3 times daily.

The dosage for the treatment of hypertonia and as an
arteriosclerotic prophylactic is 2 to 6 gm of European
Mistletoe powder 3 times daily by mouth.

Storage: European Mistletoe must be stored away from the
light over an appropriate drying agent.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE/293

LITERATURE

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE FRUIT

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Teuscher E. Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

EUROPEAN MISTLETOE HERB AND STEM

Anonym, Allergie auf Mistelextrakt. In: ZPT 13(3):96. 1992.
Anonym, Die Mistel. In: DAZ 136(48):4330-4332. 1996.
Anonym, Integrative Konzepte in der Onkologie: Misteltherapie
(S. 19). In; NGM Suppl. 1/94:1-36. 1994.

Anonym, Misteltherapie aus schulmedizinischer Sicht. In: DAZ
131(37):1894. 1991.

Anonym, Optimale Misteldosierung. In: PZ 140(35):3082. 1995.
Anonym, Phytotherapie: Einsatz von Mistelextrakten in der
Tumortherapie. In: DAZ 135(1):73. 1995.

Anonym, Sind Mistelpraparate mehr als nur Adjuvanzien in der
onkologischen Therapie? In: ZPT 15(6):353-355. 1994.

Becker H, Exner J, (1980) Z Pflanzenphysiol. 97

Berg P, Stein G, Ein Inhaltsstoff allein geniigt nicht, s. auch
folgenden Artikel. In: ZPT 16(5):282. 1995.

Beuth HJ, Mistel: "In der Onkologie nur Praparate einsetzen,
die auf Mistellektin standardisiert sind!" In: ZPT 16(1):40-41.
1995.
Beuth J, Ko HL, Gabius HJ, Burrichter H, Oette K, Pulverer
G, (1992) Behavior of lymphocyte subsets, expression of
activation markers in response to immunotherapy with
galactoside-specific lectin from Mistletoe in breast cancer. Clin
Invest 70:658-661

Beuth J, Ko HL, Pulverer G, Angewandte Lektinologie. In:
DAZ 134(25):2331. 1994.

Beuth J, Lenartz D, Uhlenbruck G, Lektionoptimierter
Mistelextrakt. In: ZPT 18(2):85-91. 1997.

Bloksma N et al., (1982) Planta Med 46:221.

Dumont S et al., Lectins from Mistletoe (Viscum album L.)
induce the production of cytokines by cultured human
monocytes. In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):57. 1995.
Franz G, Phytotherapie in der Tumorbehandlung. In: DAZ
130(26): 1443. 1990.

Franz H, (1985) Pharmazie 40(2):97.

Franz H et al., (1981) Biochem J 195:481.

Gabius HJ, Gabius S, Die Misteltherapie auf dem
naturwissenschaftlichen Priifstand. In: PZ 139(22): 1745. 1994.

Hamacher H, Mistel (Viscum album L.) - Forschung und
therapeutische Anwendung. In: ZPT 18(1):34-35. 1997.

----- PAGE 545 -----
294 /EUROPEAN MISTLETOE

Gabius HJ, Gabius S, Joshi SS, Koch B, Schroeder M, Manzke
WM, Westerhausen M, (1994) From ill-defined extracts to the
immunomodulatory lectin: Will there be a reason for
oncological application of Mistletoe? Planta Med 60:2-7.

Gabius HJ, Gabius S, Miinchner-Phytotherapietagung 1992.
Neues iiber die Misteltherapie. In: ZPT 14(1):17. 1993.

Gabius HJ, Mythos Mistel: Anspruch und Wirklichkeit. In: PZ
140(12): 1029-1030. 1995.

Hajto T, Hostanka K, Frei K, Rordorf Chr, Gabins H-J. (1990a)
Increased secretion of tumor necrosis factor interleukin 1: und
interleukin 6 by Heiman mononuclear cells exposed to
galactoside - specific lectin from clinically applied Mistletoe
extract. Cane Res 50:3322.

Hajto T, Hostanka K. Gabius HI. (1989) Modulatory potency of
the galactoside-specific lectin from Mistletoe extract (Iscador),
the host defense system in vivo in rabbits, patients. Cane Res
49:4803.
Hajto T, Hostanka K, Gabius HI. (1990) Zytokine als Lectin-
induzierte Mediatoren in der Misteltherapie. Therapeutikon
4:136-145.

Hamacher H. Mistel (Viscum album L.) - Forschung und
therapeutische Anwendung. In: ZPT 18(1):34-35. 1997.
Hamacher H. Scheer R, Anthroposophie/Phytotherapie: Mistel-
Forschung und therapeutische Anwendung. In: DAZ
136(34):2904-2905. 1996.

Hassauer W et al., (1979) Onkologie 2(1):28.

Hauser SP. (1993) Mistel - Wunderkraut oder Medikament?
Therapiewoche 43(3):76-81.

Keine H, (1989) Klinische Studien zur Misteltherapie
‘arzinomatoser Erkrankungen. Eine Obersicht. Therapeutikon
3:347-353.

Kleijnen J, Knopschild P, (1994) Mistletoe treatment for cancer.
Review of controlled trials in humans. Phytomedicine 1:255-
260.

Kwaja TA et al., (1980) Experientia 36:599.

Loew, B, In: Loew D, Rietbrock N: Phytopharmaka II:
Forschung und klinische Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag,
Darmstadt, 1996.

Luther P et al., (1980) Int J Biochem 11:429.
Muller J, (1962) Ger Offen DE 1:130:112.
Olsn'es S et al., (1982) J Biol Chem 257:1371.
Rentea R et al., (1981) Lab Invest. 44(1 ):43.

Saenz MT, Ahumada MC, Garcia MD, Extracts from Viscum
and Crataegus are cytotoxic against larynx cancer cells. In: Z
Naturforsch C 52(1-2):42-44. 1997.

Salzer G, Havelec L, (1978) Onkologie 1(6):264.
Salzer G, Muller H, (1978) Prax Klein Pneumol 32(11):721.

Samuellson G et al., (1981) Acta Pharm Sueca 18:179.

Schmidt S, Unkonventionelle Heilverfahren in der
Tumortherapie. In: ZPT 17(2): 115-117. 1996.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Schwarz T et al., Stimulation by a stable, standardised
Mistletoe preparation of cytokine production in an in vitro
human skin bioassay. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 1996.

Stirpe F et al., (1982) J Biol Chem 257(22): 13271.

Timoshenko AV et al., Influence of the galactoside-specific
lectin from Viscum album and its subunits on cell aggregation
and selected intracellular parameters of rat thymocytes. In: PM
61 (2): 130-133. 1995.

Uhlenbrock S, Weihnachten, Miraculix und die Anthroposophie.
In: PZ 140(51/52):4602-4603. 1995.

Wagner H et al., (1986) Planta Med (2): 102.

Wagner H, Die Mistel in der Tumortherapie. In: DAZ
32(20): 1087/1088. 1992.

Wagner H, Jordan E, (1986) Structure, properties of
polysaccarides from Viscum album (L). Oncology (Suppl 1):8-
5.

Wagner H. Pflanzliche Immunstimulanzien. In: DAZ

31(4): 117. 1991.

Wasielewski S, Krebserkrankungen: Streit um alternative
Heilverfahren in der Onkologie. In: DAZ 135(24):2234-2235.
995.

Woynarvski JM et al., (1980) Hoppe-Seylers Z Physiol Chem
361(10): 1525 et 1535.

Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfiinder HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 546 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

European Peony

Paeonia officinalis

DESCRIPTION

A Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried ripe

seeds, the fresh underground parts harvested in spring and
the fresh root.

Flower and Fruit: The large flowers are solitary at the ends
of the stems. The calyx consists of 5 green, partly corolla-
like sepals. The wild species has 5 to 8 ovate, red petals that
are 4 to 5 cm long; the cultivated forms have many more.
The stamens are light-red with long yellow anthers. The 2 or
3 ovaries have red stigmas and develop into tomentose
follicles containing numerous, dark, glossy, pea-sized seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: In its winter state, the plant has a
turnip-like rhizome and close, gnarled root fibers that are
brown on the outside and white inside. The stem is leafy,
erect, lightly branched and glabrous, with a stalk about 50
cm high. The leaves are alternate, more or less petiolate with
a dark green glossy upper surface and a light green finely
pubescent undersurface.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the mountains ot
southern Europe from Portugal to Albania and Hungary, as
far as Asia Minor. It is widely cultivated as a garden plant.
Production: European Peony flower consists of the petals of
Paeonia officinalis and/or Paeonia mascula. European Peony
root consists of the dried secondary roots of Paeonia
officinalis and/or Paeonia mascula. The cultivated Peony
roots are dug up in spring, cleaned and dried in the sun or
artificially. The flowers are harvested in dry weather shortly
after the end of flowering and dried quickly in the shade or
in moderate sunshine.

Other Names: Peony, Piney

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: EUROPEAN PEONY FLOWERS

particular paeonin  (paeonidin-3,5-

Anthocyans: in
diglucoside)

Tannins (pentagalloyl glucose)
Flavonoids: in particular kaempferol glycosides

EFFECTS: EUROPEAN PEONY FLOWERS

The plant contains anthocyanin glycosides and tannins (main
active principle: paeonidin-3, 5-diglucoside). Animal tests
have demonstrated strong uterine contraction, tone reduction
in the gastrointestinal tract and a drop in blood pressure.
Anticonvulsive and analgesic effects could not be demon-
strated, although hypertonia has been reported in animal
tests.

EUROPEAN PEONY/295

COMPOUNDS: EUROPEAN PEONY ROOT
Monoterpenes: monoterpene ester glucosides of the pinane-
type: chief component paeoniflorine (1.5 to 3.5%)

EFFECTS* EUROPEAN PEONY ROOT

The plant contains anthocyanin glycosides and tannins (main
active principle: paeonidin-3, 5-diglucoside*. Animal tests
have demonstrated strong uterine contraction, tone reduction
in the gastrointestinal tract and a drop in blood pressure.
Anticonvulsive and analgesic effects could not be
demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
EUROPEAN PEONY ROOT

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine. European Peony root is
used for neurasthenia and neurasthenia syndrome, neuralgia,
migraines and allergic disorders such as excitability, epilepsy
and whooping cough.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are hemor-
thoids and other anal conditions.

EUROPEAN PEONY FLOWERS

Unproven Uses: The flowers were formerly used as a folk
medicine remedy for epilepsy, as an emetic, emmenagogue
and abortifacient, for diseases of the skin and mucous
membranes, fissures, anal fissures associated with hemor-
thoids, gout, rheumatoid arthritis and ailments of the
respiratory tract.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include hemorrhoids
and other anal conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Side ef-
fects that may occur, particularly in cases of overdosages,
include gastroenteritis with vomiting, colic and diarrhea.
Because efficacy has not been documented, therapeutic use
cannot be recommended.

DOSAGE
EUROPEAN PEONY FLOWERS

Mode of Administration: Therapeutic use cannot be recom-
mended because efficacy has not been proven.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include drops and compound preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, use | g Tree Peony
flowers per cup water.

Daily Dosage: Drink one cup of infusion per day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops. 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic).
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute. 3 times daily: chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

----- PAGE 547 -----
296 /EUROPEAN PEONY

Storage: Store protected from light and moisture for no
longer than 1 year.

EUROPEAN PEONY ROOT
Mode of Administration: European Peony root is adminis-
tered as a tincture. European Peony flowers are used as an
inactive ingredient in cough and fumigant teas and as a
coloring agent in cough syrup.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include drops and compound preparations.

Daily Dosage: Tincture: 30 to 50 drops daily.

Storage: Store protected from light and moisture for no
longer than | year.

LITERATURE

Caesar W, Die Pfingstrose. In: DAZ 130(23): 1339. 1990.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Hikino H, Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, Vol I,
Academic Press UK 1985.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

European Sanicle
Sanicula europaea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh flowering
herb and the basal leaves collected during the flowering
season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The white or reddish inflorescences form
acyme with small head-like umbels with 4 to 6 linear bracts.
The calyx is 5-tipped and there are 5 petals. The androgy-
nous florets are in the center of the small umbel surrounded
by 10 to 20 male florets. The ribless fruit is densely covered
with barbed thorns and almost globular, with long styles that
curve downwards. The mericarps are distinctly domed and
almost flat at the narrow groove. There are numerous oil
lines.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial, plant grows 20 to 40
cm high. The short rhizome is solid, horizontal, multi-
segmented, broken off and covered in thick fibers. It has
scales formed by leaf stalk remnants at the neck and has a
number of segments. The stem is usually undivided, erect,
grooved, and has only | to 2 sessile leaves. The leaves are
basal, long-petioled, and palmate with 5 lobes. The tips are
3-lobed. The lateral tips are divided in 2 and especially
glossy underneath.

Characteristics: The taste is slightly salty, bitter and dry.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, Asia Minor, the
Caucasus, western Siberia, northern Africa, and in the
mountains of tropical Africa.

Production: European Sanicle consists of the dried, above-
ground parts of Sanicula europaea, which is collected in the
wild.

Not to be Confused With: Commercially, the herb may be
mixed with leaves of Cardamine enneaphylos. In some areas,
Astrantia major is labeled as sanicle and used accordingly in
folk medicine.

Other Names: Poolroot, Self-Heal, Sanicle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins (up to 13%): including among others,
acyl-saniculosides A-D, aglycones including A1-barrigenol,
Rl-barrigenol, barringtogenol

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid, chlorogenic acid
Flavonoids: chief components rutin, isoquercitrin, astragalin

EFFECTS
The drug has a mild astringent and expectorant effect. It also
reduces edema in animal experiments. The saponin complex
has been shown to be antimicrobial and antifungal.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

European Sanicle is used for mild inflammation of the
mucous membranes of the respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: Past external uses in folk medicine have
included wounds and contusions, and European Sanicle has
been used internally for stomach inflammations and bloody
vomiting, among other applications.

Homeopathic Uses: The primary application of European
Sanicle in homeopathy is for diarrhea.

----- PAGE 548 -----
w*

jé

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
3 dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for decoctions

and other preparations for oral application.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations
include juices, tablets and compound preparations.

Preparation: No information is available.
Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 4 to 6 g of the herb.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (Chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily: chronic once a
day (HAB34).

Storage: The drug must be kept in sealed containers,
protected from light.

LITERATURE
Engel S, Hom K, Phytodermatosen (lurch Dictamnus albus.
Sanicula europaea und Philodendron consanguineum. In: Dermat
Mschr 158(1):22-27. 1972.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hiller K et aL PA 24:178. 1969.
Hiller K et al., PA 22:220-221. 1967.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

European Water Hemlock
Cicuta virosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome with

roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is a white umbelliferous
blossom with distinct calyx tips. The petals have indented
tips. The style cushion is flat. The fruit is brown-yellow, 2.5
mm by 3 mm, and has dark-brown stripes.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to a height of 30 to
120 cm. The leaves are 2- to 3-pinnate. The leaflets are
lanceolate and sharply serrate. The whole plant is glabrous.
The rhizome is tuberous, fleshy and hollow. The stem is
erect, round, hollow, glabrous, branched above, and forms
adventitious roots at the nodes.

EUROPEAN WATER HEMLOCK/297

Characteristics: The rhizome has a bad odor and is
extremely poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and Asia.
Other Names: Cowbane

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Polyynes: including cicutoxin (0.07-0.2* in the fresh
thizome tuber), isocicutoxin, cicutol, cicudiole. falcarindiol

Furanocoumarins
Alky I phthalides

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used in homeopathic
dilutions for migraine, painful menstruation, worm infesta-
tion and inflammation of the skin.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The freshly harvested root stock is extremely poisonous due
to its cicutoxin content. The plant itself is weakly poisonous.

OVERDOSAGE
Two to 3 gm of the root stock are said to be fatal for an
adult. The toxicity of the drug declines through dehydration
and storage. Symptoms of poisoning, following the initial
stupor and nausea, include severe tonic-clonic spasms,
unconsciousness, canosis and extremely widened pupils.
Death occurs through asphyxiation at the peak of a convul-
sive attack or through heart failure.

Forced diuresis, hemodialysis and hemoperfusion are initiat-
ed as treatment for poisonings. Gastric lavage should only be
carried out under anesthetic because of the danger of
convulsion. Benzodiazepine or barbiturates are used to
lessen the effects of the spasms.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used topically and
internally as a dilution of the mother tincture.

LITERATURE
Bilia AR, Ctalano S, Fontana C, Morelli I, Palme E. A new
saponin fiom Potentilla tormentilla. In: PM 58(7)23. 1992.

Strauss U, Wittstock U, Schubert R, Teuscher E, Jung S, Mix
E, Cicutoxin from Cicuta virosa—a new and potent potassium
channel blocker in T lymphocytes. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun, 219:332-6. 1996.

Wittstock U, Hadacek F, Wurz G, Teuscher E, Greger H.
Polyacetylenes from water hemlock, Cicura virosa. In: PM
61(5):439-445, 1995.

Wittstock U, Lichtnow KH, Teuscher E, Effects of cicutoxin
and related polyacetylenes from cicuta virosa on neuronal action

----- PAGE 549 -----
298/EUROPEAN WATER HEMLOCK

potentials: a comparative study on the mechanism of the
convulsive action. In: PM 63(2): 120-124. 1997.

Wittstock U. Lichtnow KH, Teuscher E, Effects of
polyacetvlenes from Cicuta virosa on the electrical activity of
molluscan giant neurones. In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann
Congr):84. 1995.

Wittstock U. Wurz G. Hadacek F, Greger H, Teuscher E,
Biocative polyacetylens from Cicuta virosa. In: PM 58(7)22.
1992.

Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Lewin L. Girte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4.Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttaart 1997.

Evening Primrose

Oenothera biennis

TRADE NAMES

Evening Primrose Oil Capsules (available from numerous
manufacturers), Mega Primrose Oil, Oil of Evening Prim-
rose. Original Primrose for Women, Royal Brittany Evening

Primrose Oil

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal
extracted from the ripe seeds and the fresh plant gathered at
the beginning of the flowering season.

parts are the fatty oil

Flower and Fruit: The fragrant flowers are 2 to 3 cm long
and are solitary in the leaf axils. The open ones are lower
than the buds. The sepals are lanceolate, acuminate, turned
down, thin, more or less pale green and smooth on the
outside with a few scattered hairs. The petals are obovate.
The ovary is inferior. The style has a 4-sectioned stigma. The
fruit is a linear-oblong, quadrangular, downy-villous capsule
that's up to 3 cm long. The seeds are 1.5 mm long, dark gray
to black with irregular sharp edges.

FDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: This biennial grows up to 1 m and
has a spindle-shaped, fleshy, turnip-like root, which pro-
duces leaf rosettes in the first year. The stem is erect,
unbranched or branched higher up and angular. The ovary is
a capsule covered in short glandular hairs, with simple, light
hairs on the purple papilla. The cauline leaves are short-
petioled or sessile, often hanging, oblong-lanceolate, point-
ed, irregular and finely dentate.

Characteristics: The flowers are fragrant and open in the

evening.

Habitat: Originally indigenous to North America, it is now
naturalized throughout most of Europe and parts of Asia.

Production: Evening Primrose oil is the fatty seed oil of
Oenothera biennis. The oil is extracted by means of a cold-
extraction process, which involves hexane in steel or glass-
lined tanks. The extract is washed and the solvent removed

using low pressure.

Other Names: Fever Plant, King's Cureall, Night Willow-
herb, Scabish, Sun Drop

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids linoleic acid (65-80%), gamma-
linolenic acid (8-14%), oleic acid (6-11%), palmitic acid (7-
10%)

EFFECTS

Gamma-linolenic acid (a component in Evening Primrose
oil) is converted to dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid and then to
prostaglandin El (PGE1) in-vivo by the enzyme delta-6-
desaturase. PGE1 has anti-inflammatory and cell membrane
stabilizer activity in the body. Evening Primrose oil supple-
ments provide increased levels of dihomo-gamma-linolenic
acid in the blood of people with a deficiency of the enzyme
delta-6-desaturase. Gamma-linolenic acid is also a compo-
nent in breast milk, but is not added to infant formulas. It has
been postulated that gamma-linolenic acid may be beneficial
to neural development in breast-fed infants (Newall, 1996).

A review of the literature involving human trials shows that
EPO has not been effective in the treatment of atopic asthma,
weight loss, atopic dermatitis, arthritis, attention deficit
disorder, diabetes or premenstrual syndrome. Animal studies
have demonstrated benefits in treating hypertension, throm-
bosis, hypercholesterolemia and platelet aggregation.

CLINICAL TRIALS
Mastalgia

A retrospective study covering seven years involving 566
women with cyclical breast pain (mastalgia) was performed.
Most women were first treated with Vitamin B-6 (pyridoxine
HCL) 100 mg daily for a 3-month period. Those that did not

----- PAGE 550 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

respond were given 3 g of Evening Primrose Oil (EPO) daily
for a one-month period followed by 2 g daily for an
additional two months. Other women were given the
Evening Primrose oil regimen as first-line treatment. 58% of
the pyridoxine/EPO treatment group reported pain relief and

w 59% of the EPO first-line group reported relief. The author

concluded that good responses can be obtained from
products devoid of significant side effects, such as EPO and
Vitamin B-6 as a first line treatment (McFayden, 1992).
Tamoxifen and danazol should be reserved for those patients

who do not respond to EPO or pyridoxine.

Premenstrual — Syndrome

A meta-analysis of 7 placebo-controlled trials involving the
use of EPO for the treatment of premenstrual syndrome
(PMS) was carried out in 1996. The authors note that two
well-constructed studies in the group failed to show any
statistically relevant beneficial effects with EPO in treating
PMS symptoms. The scoring in the remaining studies was
not consistent and therefore the authors were not able to pool
the results for statistical analysis (Budeiri, 1996).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Evening Primrose oil is used for neuroder-
matitis, premenstrual syndrome and as a dietary aid. The
drug is also used to treat hyperactivity in children, high
cholesterol levels, menopausal hot flashes and mastalgia.

Capsules containing 500 mg of Evening Primrose oil have
been approved for use in Germany, in the treatment of and to
relieve the symptoms of atopic eczema.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

There are case reports of seizures in schizophrenic patients
that were being treated with Evening Primrose oil along with
phenothiazine medications. Practitioners should be aware
that Evening Primrose oil has a potential to lower the seizure
threshold in patients with seizure disorders or those being
treated with drugs that lower the seizure threshold.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Evening Primrose oil is available in
capsules for oral administration.

How Supplied:
Capsules—500 mg, 1300 mg.

Most commercial products (capsules) are standardized for
gamma linolenic acid content of 9%.

Daily Dosage: Treatment with Evening Primrose oil may
require up to 3 months duration before positive results are

attained for all indications listed below (Newall, 1996).
Atopic eczema

Adult—6 to 8 grams daily in divided doses

EVENING PRIMROSE / 299

Pediatric—2 to 4 grams daily in divided doses

Mastalgia (breast pain)

3 to 4 grams daily in divided doses

Storage: Evening Primrose oil is rinsed in nitrogen and
stored in cooled tanks lined with polyethylene. Commercial
products should be stored at room temperature in an area that
is dry and not in direct sunlight.

LITERATURE

Berth-Jones J, Placebo controlled trial of essential fatty acid
supplementation in atopic dermatitis. In: Lancet 341:1557-1560.
1993,

Budeiri D, Li Wan Po A, Doman JC, Is Evening Primrose oil
of value in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome? Control
Clin Trials 17:60-68. 1996.

Haslett C et al., (1983) Int J Obesity 7(6):549.

Horrobin DF. (1983) J Reprod Med 28(7):465.

Thrig M, Blume H, Nachtkerzenol-Praparate: Ein
Qualitatsvergleich. In: PZ 139(9):668. 1994.

Ippen H, Gamma-Linolensaure besser aus Nachtkerzen- oder aus
Borretschol? In: ZPT 16(3): 167-170. 1995.

McFayden IJ. Forrest AP, Chetty U, Cyclical breast pain -
some observations and the difficulties in treatment. BJCP
46:161-164.1992.

Midwinter RE et al., (1982) Lancet I, 339.

Pye J K et al., (1985) Lancet II, 373.

Seaman GVF et al., (1979) Lancet 1:1139.

Ten Hoor F. (1980) Nutr Metab 24(Suppl. 1):162.
Willuhn G, Phytopharmaka in der Dermatologie. In: ZPT
16(6):325-342. 1995.

Wright S, Burton JL, (1982) Lancet II, 1120.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Newall CA, Anderson LA & Phillipson JD, Herbal Medicines.
The Pharmaceutical Press, London, 110-113.1996.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 551 -----
300/EYEBRIGHT

Eyebright
Euphrasia officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Eyebright (Available from numerous manufacturers) Eye--
bright Herb, Herbal Eyebright, NuVeg Eyebright

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: White, bluish or reddish-violet flowers are
in spike-like inflorescence in the axils of the upper leaves.
The calyx has 4 tips and is glabrous to short bristly. The
corolla is bilabiate and is 8 to 12 mm long. The upper lip is
domed, helmet-like and revolute at the tips. The lower lip
has 9 dark violet long stripes. There are 4 stamens and 1
superior ovary. The fruit is a narrow, oblong capsule with a
ciliate edge. The seeds are numerous and grooved.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is about 30 cm high. It is
annual. The stem is rigid, erect, lightly branched below. The
leaves are opposite, sessile and grass-green. They are ovate
or oblong-ovate and twice as long as wide. The involucral
bracts have 4 to 7 teeth.

Characteristics: Eyebright is odorless and has a bitter and
salty taste. It is semi-parasitic.

Habitat: Europe.

Production: Eyebright consists of the whole plant of
Euphrasia officinalis gathered during flowering season.
Eyebright herb consists of the fresh or dried, above-ground
parts of Euphrasia officinalis.

Other Names: Euphrasia

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes: aucubin, catalpol, euphroside, ixoro-
side, veronicoside, verproside, mussaenoside, ladroside

Lignans: dehydrodiconiferyl-4-beta-D-glucoside

Flavonoids: including apigenin-, chrysoeriol- and luteolin-7-
O-galactosides and -rhamnogalactosides

Tannins

EFFECTS
No documentation available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Eyebright preparations are used externally
as lotions, poultices, and eye-baths, for eye complaints
associated with disorders and inflammation of the blood
vessels, inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, as a
preventive measure against mucus and catarrh of the eyes.

In folk medicine, Eyebright is used for blepharitis, conjuncti-
vitis, styes, eye fatigue symptoms, functional eye disorders
of muscular and nervous origin, coughs and hoarseness.

The efficacy of the herb for its‘ claimed uses is not
documented.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy of the claimed
uses is undocumented, and external eye application is not
absolutely hygienic, therapeutic use cannot be
recommended.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, add 2 to 3 gm of finely cut
drug to boiling water; strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Decoction — 2%.

Daily Dosage: A decoction is used 3 to 4 times daily for eye
rinses.

LITERATURE

Harkiss KJ. Timmins P. (1973) Planta Med 23:342.
Luezak S, Swiatek L, Plantes Med Phytother 24:66. 1990.
Salama O et al., PH 20:2603. 1981.

Salama O, Sticher O, (1983) Planta Med 47:90.

Sicher O, Salama O, PM 39:269. 1980.

Sicher O, Salama O, PM 42:122. 1981.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997."

Fagopyrum esculentum

See Buckwheat

----- PAGE 552 -----
“p

t

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

False Schisandra

Kadsura japonica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The fruit of the plant is considered to have
medicinal value, but efficacy has not been documented.

Flower and Fruit: Single axillary flowers on up to 4 cm
long, purple stems; there are 9 to 15 white, reddish or yellow
tepals. Male flowers have numerous stamens; female flowers
have numerous carpels and a superior ovary. The fruit is a
berry-like, globose aggregate fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This dioecious climbing shrub has
leaves that are 6 to 11 cm long, elliptical to lanceolate,
simple, pergament-like with a slightly crenate margin.

Habitat: Indigenous to Japan.

Production: False Schisandra fruit are the dried fruits of
Kadsura japonica. They are collected in the wild.

Not to be Confiised With: Schisandra chinensis

Other Names: Kadsura fruit

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil: including germacrene C

Lignans: dibenzo[a,c]cyclooctene lignans, including binan-
kadsurin-A-ester

EFFECTS
Although clinically unsubstantiated, False Schisandra fruit is
credited in classical Chinese-Tibetan medicine with an
efficacy analogous to that of Schisandra fruit. That drug
exhibits liver-protective, inflammation- and tumor-inhibit-
ing, neuroleptic and anti-convulsive effects, as well as a non-
specific enhancement of physical performance ability.
Experimental documentation regarding analogous efficacy of
kadsura fruit has not been forthcoming, however.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The fruit is used for chronic coughs and
asthma, chronic diarrhea, enuresis, spermatorrhoea, night
sweats and insomnia.

H Chinese Medicine: The fruit is used as an analgesic for pains

in the bones, ligaments, stomach and during menstruation, as
well as for spontaneous, painful local swellings.

DOSAGE
Preparation: Before being dried and cut, the fruits are

simmered in vinegar.
Daily Dosage: 1.5 to 6 g
Chinese Dosage: 9 to 15 g drug daily

FALSE UNICORN ROOT/301

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,
1992-1994.

False Unicorn Root

Veratrum luteum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are numerous, greenish-
white, without covering leaves. They are dioecious and
arranged in terminal racemes of 15 cm with nod-like
feathers. The petals are narrow and shorter than the stamens,
while the filaments taper to a point. The anthers are terminal
and 2-lobed. The petals of the female flowers are linear, the
stamens short, and the ovary ovate, deltoid and grooved. The
stigmas are oblong, have 3 grooves and open upward. The
fruit is numerous and capsule-like, compressed and acute.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial with a strong
leafy stem 30 to 90 cm high. The stem is undivided, smooth
and angular. The foliage leaves are alternate; the lower ones
spatulate and the upper ones lanceolate. The basal leaves are
20 cm long, 1.25 cm wide, narrow and whorled at the base.
The rhizome is tuberous and stunted. It is approximately 1.25
cm long.

Characteristics: False Unicom Root has a bitter taste.
Habitat: The plant grows in the Mississippi Delta region.

Production: False Unicorn Root is the rhizome of Veratrum
luteum.

Other Names: Starwort, Helonias Root, Blazing Star, Fairy-
Wand

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid saponins: (mixture is referred to as chamaelirin, ca.

10%), aglycone diosgenin

EFFECTS
Oxytocic, diuretic, anthelmintic

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: False Unicom Root is used for menstrual
disturbances, dysmenorrhea and pregnancy complaints.

----- PAGE 553 -----
302 /FALSE UNICORN ROOT

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The appearance of gastric complaints is
conceivable with the drug, due to the high saponin content,
particularly in cases of overdosage.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

LITERATURE
Atta-Ur-Rahman, Ali RA, Choudhary MI, New steroidal
alkaloids from rhizomes of Veratrum album. In: JNP 55:565-
570. 1992.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston, Berlin 1962-1997 (unter
Chamaelirium luteum (L.) GRAY).

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter
Helionas dioica).

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Fennel
Foeniculum vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the Fennel oil
extracted from the ripe fruit and the dried ripe fruit and
Fennel seeds of Foeniculum vulgare.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is fairly large umbels
almost 15 cm across on very irregular rays. The flowers are
fairly small and usually androgynous. The petals are a rich
yellow, broadly ovate and have an involute lobe at the tip.
The style is very short and almost wart-like. The fruit is
glabrous, brownish or greenish-gray. They are 6 to 10 mm
long, somewhat cylindrical with blunt ribs and strongly
domed.

Leaves, Stem and Fruit: The plant is biennial to perennial,
about 80 to 15.0 cm high, glabrous, sea-green to glaucous and
has a strong spicy smell. The stem is erect, round, glabrous,
smooth and filled with latex. The lower leaves are petiolate
and have long sheaths.

Characteristics: Fennel has a spicy aroma.

Habitat: Fennel is indigenous to the Mediterranean region,
has spread to England, Germany, South Tyrol and Argentina.
Fennel is also found today in Iran, India and China.

Production: Fennel oil is the essential oil obtained from the
dried, ripe fruits of Foeniculum vulgare by steam distillation.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
Fennel seed consists of the dried, ripe fruits of Foeniculum
vulgare.

Other Names: Large Fennel, Sweet Fennel, Wild Fennel,
Fenkel, Bitter Fennel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: FENNEL OIL
When extracted from bitter fennel the chief components are:

Trans-anethols (50-75%)
Fenchone (12-33%)
Estragole (2-5%?)

Additional components are - alpha-pinenes. camphene, p-
cymene, myrcene, limonene, alpha- and beta-phellandrene,
gamma-terpenes, terpinols, cis-ocimene

When extracted from sweet fennel the chief components are:
Trans-anethole (80-90%)

Fenchone (1-10%?)

Estragole (3-10%c)

Additional components are - alpha-pinenes. camphene, p-
cymene, myrcene, limonene, alpha- and beta-phellandrene,
gamma-terpenes, terpinols, gamma-fenchen

EFFECTS: FENNEL OIL

Stimulation of gastrointestinal motility; in higher concentra-
tions, antispasmodic; experimentally, anethole and fenchone
have shown a secretolytic action on the respiratory tract. In
vitro, it is antimicrobial.

COMPOUNDS: FENNEL SEED
Volatile oil

With bitter fennel the chief components are:
Trans-anethole (50-75%)

Fenchon (12-33%)

Estragole (2-5%)

Additional components - alpha-pinenes, camphene, p-cy-
mene, myrcene, limonene, alpha- and beta-phellandrene,
gamma-terpenes, terpinols cis-ocimene

With sweet fennel the chief components are:
Trans-anethole (80-90%)

Fenchon (1-10%)

Estragole (3-10%)

Additional components - alpha-pinenes, camphene, p-cy-
mene, myrcene, limonene, alpha- and beta-phellandrene,
gamma-terpenes, terpinols, gamma-fenchen

----- PAGE 554 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Hydroxycoumarins (traces): — umbelliferone, _ scopoletine,
osthenol, scoparin, Furocoumarins traces) including bergap-

ten, columbianetin, psoralen, xanthotoxin
Pyranocoumarins

Flavonoids

Fatty oil

EFFECTS: FENNEL SEED

The seed promotes gastrointestinal
concentrations, Fennel has an antispasmodic effect. Experi-
mentally, anethole and fenchone have been shown to have a
secretolytic effect in the respiratory tract of frogs. Aqueous
Fennel extracts raised the mucociliary activity of the ciliary

motility. In higher

epithelium.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
FENNEL OIL

Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
* Bronchitis
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Peptic discomforts, such as mild, spastic
disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, feeling of fullness,
flatulence; catarrh of the upper respiratory tract. Fennel
honey is used for catarrh of the upper respiratory tract in

children.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Allergic reactions following intake of Fennel have
been only very rarely observed. Cross Sensitivity among
patients with celery allergy appear to be possible.

Pregnancy: Preparations, excluding the drug itself and tea
infusions are not to be administered during pregnancy.

Pediatric Use: Preparations, excluding the drug itself and tea
infusions are not to be administered to small children.

DOSAGE
FENNEL OIL
Mode of Administration: Essential oil and galenic prepara-

tions for internal use.

Note: Diabetics must check the sugar content of available

preparations.
Daily Dosage: 0.1 to 0.6 ml of Fennel oil

Duration of administration: Maximum of 2 weeks.

FENNEL/303

FENNEL SEED
Mode of Administration: Crushed or ground seeds for teas,
tea-like products, as well as other galenic preparations for

internal use.

Daily Dosage: 5 to 7 gm of drug

LITERATURE

Betts TJ, J Pharm Pharmacol 20:469-472 et 61S-64S. 1968.
Czygan FC. ZPT 8:82. 1987.

El-Khrisy EAM et al.. (1980) Titoterapia 51:273.

Forster HB et al., (1980) Planta Med 40(4):309.

Gershbein LL, (1977) Food Cosmet Toxicol 15(3):173.
Harborne JB, Williams CE, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:1741.

Harries N et al., (1978) J Clin Pharm 2:171.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Karlsen J et al., (1969) Planta Med 17:281.
Karlsen J et al., PM 17:281-293. 1969.

Kunzemann J, Hermann K, (1977) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch
164:194.

Massoud H, Study on the essential oil in seeds of some fennel
cultivars under egyptian environmental conditions. In: PM
58(7):A681. 1992.

Parzinger R, Fenchel. In: DAZ 136(7):529-530. 1996.
Rothbacher H, Kraus A, (1970) Pharmazie 25:566.
Shah CS et al., PM 18:285-295. 1970.

Stahl E, (1980) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 45:2324.

Trenkle K, PA 27:319-324. 1972.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 555 -----
304/FENNEL

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997

Fenugreek

Trigonella foenum-graecum

TRADE NAME
Fenugreek Seed (from various manufacturers) Premium

Fenugreek Seed

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, dried

seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The 0.8 to 18 cm long flowers are solitary
or in pairs in the leaf axils. They are almost sessile. The
calyx tube is membranous and usually longer than the
lanceolate tips. The corolla is usually pale yellow, occasion-
ally darker or violet and about double the length of the calyx.
The wings are about half as long as the standard and the
carina is very obtuse, round and barely longer than the calyx.
The fruit is a 2.5 to 10 cm long and 0.5 to I cm wide, erect,
leaning, linear and appressed pubescent pod with a long lip.
The 4 to 20 seeds are flattened, divided into 2 uneven halves
by a deep groove, ovate to di-shaped. yellow-brown, or
brown-red and very hard when dry.

Leaves, Stern and Root: The plant is an annual, 10 to 50 cm
high herb with a long vertical taproot. The stem is sturdy,
round, erect or decumbent and branched. The leaves are
trifoliate and the petioles are 0.5 to 2 cm long. The leaflets
are 1 to 3 cm long, obovate to oblong-lanceolate, obtusely
deltoid to rounded. The stipules are fairly large, membra-
nous, ovate, acute and more or less softly pubescent.

Habitat: The species is common all over the Mediterranean
region as far as India and China and southward as far as
Ethiopia. The main regions of cultivation are southern
France, Turkey, northern Africa, India and China.

Production: Fenugreek consists of the ripe, dried seed of
Trigonella foenum-graecum.

Other Names: Greek Hay Seed, Bird's Foot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Mucilages (25-45%, mannogalactans)

Proteins (25-30%)
Proteinase inhibitors

Steroid saponins (1.2-1.5%): including trigofoenosides A to
G (to some extent bitter), aglycones including diosgenin,
yamogenin, gitogenin, smilagenin, tigogenin, yuccagenin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Steroid saponin-peptide ester: including foenugraecin

Sterols: chief constituents 24xi-ethyl-cholest-5-en-3beta-ole
(65%), sterols that are to some extent estered

Flavonoids: including isoorientin, isovitexin, orientin, orien-
tin arabinoside, isoorientin arabinoside, saponaretin, vicenin-
1, vincenin-2, vitexin

Trigonelline (coffearin, N-methylbetaine of the nicotinic
acid, 0.4%)

Volatile oil (0.01%): aroma bearer 3-hydroxy-4,5-dimethyl-
2(5H)-furanone

EFFECTS
Externally, the drug acts as an emollient. Internally, Fenu-
greek reduces blood sugar, but the mode of action is unclear.
In addition, a lipid-lowering effect attributed to the saponin
fraction has been proven as well as a hydrogogic effect.
There is no indication of a lactation-promoting effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Loss of appetite
¢ Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: Internal uses include upper respiratory
catarrh, diabetes, and to increase milk production. External-
ly, the drug is used as poultice for local inflammation, ulcers,
and eczema.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used to treat cold pain in the
lower abdomen, impotence, and hernia (said to be due to
cold 'chi').

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for fever, vomiting,
anorexia, coughs, bronchitis, and colitis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Sensitization is possible through repeated external
administration of the drug.

Drug Interactions: Fenugreek has hypoglycemic effect.
There is a potential for the herb to interact with hypoglyce-
mic drugs that are used to treat diabetes resulting in an
exaggerated hypoglycemic effect.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug is
available in the form of teas and compound preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 575 mg, 610 mg, 626 mg

----- PAGE 556 -----
#

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Preparation: To prepare a tea, leave 0.5 gm drug to steep in
cold water for 3 hours, then strain; the tea may be sweetened
with honey. A poultice is prepared as a thick paste made
from the powdered seeds: add 50 gm of powdered drug to 'U
liter of boiling water for 5 minutes. To make a cold
maceration, soak 0.5 gm of drug in cold water, then filter.

Daily Dose: The daily internal dose ot the drug is 6 gm. One
cup of the tea may be taken several times a day. For loss of
appetite, take 2 gm of cut drug with fluid 3 times daily,
before meals. The cold maceration can be drunk several
times a day.

LITERATURE

Abdo MS. Al-Khafawi AA, (1969) Planta Med 17:14.

Adamska M. Lutomski J, (1971) Planta Med 20:224.

Al-Meshal IA et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 56 (4):232.

Ali L et al.. Characterization of the hypoglycemic effect of
Trigonella foenum graecum seed. In: PM 61(4):358-360. 1995.

Bohlmann MB et al., (1974) Phytochemistry 13:1513.
Girardon P et al.. (1985) Planta Med 51 (6):533.

Girardou P et al., PM 51:533. 1985.

Gupta RK. Jain DC, Thakur RS, PH 23:2605. 1984.

Gupta RK. Jain DC, Thakur RS, PH 24:2399. 1986.

Gupta RK, Jain DC, Thakur RS, PH 25:2205. 1986.

Hardman R et al., (1980) Phytochemistry 19:698.

Ribes G et al.. (1986) Ann Nutr Metab. 28:37.

Ribes G et al., (1986) Phytother Res 1(1):40.

Ribes G et al.. (1986) Proc. Soc Exp Biol Med 183:159.
Sood AR et al., (1976) Phytochemistry 15:351.

Weder JK. Heufiner K, Z Lebensm Untersuch Forsch 193:242
et 321. 1991.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al., (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

FEVER BARK/305

Ferula foetida

See Asa Foetida

Ferula gummosa

See Galbanum

Ferula sumbul
See Sumbul

Fever Bark
AI st on ia constrict a

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark of the root

and trunk.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are creamy white and star-
shaped.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Alstonia are evergreen trees, which
grow to a height of 15 m. The leaves are glossy, oblong and
petiolate. The tree has a 2 to 7 cm rusty-brown, rugose
periderm, which is deeply fissured. The inner surface is
yellowish brown and coarsely striated longitudinally, frac-
ture fibrous.

Characteristics: The tree is a protected species in some
countries. The taste is very bitter, the odor is slightly
aromatic.

Habitat: Alstonia constricta is indigenous to Australia;
Alstonia scholaris is indigenous to India and the Philippines.

Production: Alstonia bark is the trunk and branch bark of
Alstonia constricta.

Other Names: Australian Quinine, Australian Febrifuge,
Alstonia Bark, Devil Tree, Dita Bark, Pale Mara, Devil's Bit,
Australian Fever Bush, Pali-Mara

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids: including reserpine, deserpidine, alstonine,
tetrahydroalstonine, alstonidine, yohimbine

EFFECTS
The drug is said to be a febrifuge, antispasmodic and

antihypertensive. The antihypertensive effect is due to the
reserpine and echitamin content.

----- PAGE 557 -----
306 /FEVER BARK

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a febrifuge and
stimulant and for its reserpine content. In the past, it was
used to treat rheumatism.

Chinese Medicine: In the Far East, Fever Bark is used for
diarrhea and malaria. It has also been used as a uterine
stimulant.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Due to the presence of pharmacologically active
indole alkaloids of the beta-carbolin type, side effects may
resemble those of Rauwolfia. Symptoms of poisoning
following the intake of higher dosages are conceivable.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The forms available are powder,
liquid extract, infusion and tincture. Up-to-date information
on usage is not available.

Preparation: Fever Bark is available as an infusion, 1:20, a
tincture, 1:8 or 1:10 and as a liquid extract, 1:1.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the infusion is 15
to 20 ml; tincture, 2 to 4 ml; liquid extract, 4 to 8 ml.

LITERATURE
Atta-ur-Rahman AM, et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24:2771.

Chopra RN, et al., (Eds.) Chopra's Indigeneous Drugs of India,
Vol 1, Dhur and Sons Calcutta 1938.

Goyal H, et al., (1981) J Res Ayur Siddha. 2 (3):286.
Khan I. Qureshi Z, (1967) J Pharm Pharmacol 19:815.
Kucera MV, et al., (1973) Afric J Pharm Pharm Sci: 3228.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

Sharp TM, (1934) J Chem Soc 287.
Further information in:
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Feverfew

Tahacetum parthenium

TRADE NAMES
Feverfew (available from numerous manufacturers), Fever-
few Extract, Herbal Sure Feverfew, NuVeg Feverfew Leaf,
Premium Feverfew Leaf, Feverfew Traditional Herb, Stand-
ardized Feverfew Extract, Feverfew Leaf, Mygrafew

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb of the

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The 5 to 20 composite flower heads are in
a dense corymb. The epicalyx has a diameter of 6 to 8 mm.
The lingual florets are white and female. The ray florets are
2.5 to 7 mm. The achenes are 12 to 15 mm and 5- lo 8-
ribbed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a strongly aromatic
perennial. The leaves are pinnatisect to pinnatifid and
yellowish-green. The basal and lower cauline leaves are
more or less ovate with 3 to 7 oblong-elliptical to ovate
segments, which are subpinnately divided. They are crenate
or entire-margined.

Habitat: The plant originated in southeastern Europe and is
now found all over Europe, Australia and North America.

Production: Feverfew leaves are the leaves of Tanacetum
parthenium. The plant is cut before full flowering. It is dried
in thin layers in the shade, at temperatures not exceeding 35°
Cc.

Other Names: Featherfew, Featherfoil, Midsummer Daisy

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.75%): chief constituents are L-camphor, trans-
chrysanthyl acetate, including, camphene, p-cymene, gam-
ma-terpinene, D-germacrene, linalool, borneol,
terpinenes-4-ol

Sesquiterpene lactones: especially parthenolide, and also 3-
beta-hydroxy-parthenolide, costunolid, reynosin, 8-beta-hy-
droxy-reynosin, tanaparthin-alpha-peroxide, canin, artecanin,
secotanapartholide A

Flavonoids: including apigenin-7-0-glucuronide, chrysoer-
iol-7-0-glucuronide, luteolin-7-0-glucuronide, luteolin-7-0-
glucoside, tanetin

Polyynes: presumably only in fresh plants

EFFECTS
Sesquiterpene lactones, especially parthenolide, are the
active compounds in Feverfew (Groenewegen, 1986; Sum-
ner, 1992). Parthenolide, although a key determinant of
biological activity for Tanacetum parthenium leaf extracts, is
not the sole pharmacologically active constituent (Brown,
1997). Other sespuiterpene lactones such as 3-beta-hydroxy-
parthenolide, secotanapartholide A, canin and artecanin,
contain an alpha-methylene butyrolactone unit responsible
for anti-secretory (anti-inflammatory) activity (Groeneweg-
en, 1986). Physiochemical methods were used to measure
partholide in several purported commercial Feverfew prod-
ucts. The results found a wide variation in partholide content

----- PAGE 558 -----
aE

Sir

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and in some products, partholide was not detected (Heptin-
stall, 1992).

Crude chloroform extracts of fresh Feverfew leaves (rich in
sesquiterpene lactones) and of commercially available pow-
dered leaves (lactone-free) produce a dose-dependent inhibi-
tion of thromboxane B2 and leukotriene B4 (eicosanoids) for
an anti-inflammatory effect (Sumner, 1992). Anti-inflamma-
tory properties of Feverfew also consist of inhibition of
cellular phospholipases. which prevents release of arachidon-
ic acid (Makheja, 1982). Parthenolide and chrysanthenyl
acetate have also been shown to inhibit prostaglandin
synthetase (Pugh, 1988). Extracts of Feverfew also inhibit
granule secretion in blood platelets and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (Heptinstall. 1985).

Major flavonol and flavone methyl ethers (tanetin) of the
herb inhibit the major pathways of arachidonate metabolism
in leukocytes (Williams, 1999).

Feverfew extract and parthenolide inhibit human blood
aggregation and serotonin (5-HT) secretion by platelets
(Groenewegen, 1990). The extract does this through neutral-
izing cellular sulfhydryl-affecting substances, which are
properties of monocyte adherence (Krause, 1990). The
chloroform extract of the Feverfew leaf contains an unidenti-
fied substance capable of producing a selective, open-
channel block of voltage-dependent potassium channels,
which results in an anti-spasmodic effect (Barsby, 1993).
Feverfew extract inhibited anti-IgE-induced histamine re-
lease in a unique way, which concludes that Feverfew extract
contains a novel type of mast cell inhibitor (Hayes, 1987).

CLINICAL TRIALS

The efficacy of dried Feverfew leaves for migraine prophy-
laxis was assessed in a randomized, placebo-controlled,
double-blind, cross-over study. The study consisted of 72
patients with classic or common migraine headaches for over
2 years. The effect of 1 capsule daily of Feverfew was
determined by the use of diary cards and visual analogue
scores. Duration of treatment was 4 months. After this time,
Feverfew was associated with a reduction in number and
severity of attacks in each 2-month period. The degree of
vomiting was also reduced in the Feverfew treatment group.
A significant improvement in the visual analogue scale was
also observed in the Feverfew treatment group (Murphy,
1988).

Patients already taking Feverfew for migraine prophylaxis
were randomized in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
The placebo groups had a significant increase in the
frequency and severity of headache, nausea and vomiting
with the emergence of untoward effects during the early
months of treatment. There was no change in the frequency
or severity of symptoms of migraine in the Feverfew

FEVERFEW/307

treatment group, thus suggesting that Feverfew may be taken
prophylactically to prevent attacks of migraines (Johnson,

1985).

A double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluated the use
of dried chopped Feverfew (70-86 mg) in patients with
symptomatic rheumatoid arthritis. There were 41 patients
involved in the study, and they were observed during a 6-
week period. Variables assessed in the study included
stiffness, pain (visual analogue scale), grip strength, articular
index, full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urea,
creatinine, C reactive protein, complement breakdown prod-
ucts, rheumatoid factor titre, immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA,
IgM), functional capacity, and patient and observer global
opinions. There were no important differences in clinical or
laboratory variables between the groups during the study
period (Pattrick, 1989).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Feverfew is used mainly for migraine, arthritis, rheumatic

diseases and allergies.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Feverfew is used for
cramps, as a tonic, a stimulant, a digestive agent and a blood
purifier. Other uses in folk medicine include migraine
prophylaxis, digestion problems, intestinal parasites and
gynecological disorders. The herb is also used as a wash for
inflammation and wounds, as a tranquilizer, an antiseptic,
and following tooth extraction as a mouthwash. The infusion
is used for dysmenorrhea. In post-natal care, Feverfew is
used to reduce lochia. The drug is used externally as an
antiseptic and insecticide.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The herb is not to be used during pregnancy or during breast-

feeding.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug has a high potential for
sensitization via skin contact. Feverfew has been known to
cross-react with Tansy, Yarrow, Marguerite, Aster, Sunflow-
er, Laurel and Liverwort (Schmidt, 1986). A post-Feverfew
syndrome has been reported in about 10% of migraine
patients who abruptly stopped taking Feverfew. Rebound
headaches, insomnia, muscle stiffness, joint pain, fatigue,
nervousness and tension have occurred (Miller, 1998).

Gastrointestinal: Gastrointestinal irritation and abdominal
pain or heartburn have been reported (Johnson, 1985;
Murphy, 1988; O'Hara, 1998). Glossitis and stomatitis are
significant problems if they do occur (Brown, 1996). The
occurrence of glossitis and stomatitis with encapsulated
products has not been shown to be more common than
placebo (Johnson, 1985; Murphy, 1988).

----- PAGE 559 -----
308 /FEVERFEW

Skin: There are reports of allergic dermatitis on exposure to
the leaves and petals of Feverfew (Schmidt, 1986). Two
elderly individuals suffering from acute recurrent photoder-
matitis were shown to be allergic to Feverfew (Mensing,
1985). Eczema was reported in greenhouse workers exposed
to various members of the Compositae family, including
Feverfew (Paulsen, 1998). A recent investigation does not
support the theory of airborne sesquiterpine lactone-contain-
ing plant parts, or of direct release of sesquiterpene lactones
from living plants as the only explanations for airborne
Compositae dermatitis (Christensen, 1999).

Musculoskeletal: Feverfew contains sesquiterpenes (parthe-
nolide and cynaropicrin), which have been shown to induce
toxic and irreversible inhibition of smooth muscle contractil-
ity when there are high concentrations in the tissue (Hay,

1994).

Drug Interactions: Although reports are sketchy, and most
involve animal subjects and in vitro research, there is a
strong possibility that Feverfew may interact with thrombo-
lytics, anticoagulants and platelet aggregation. The mecha-
nism of action is believed to be inhibition of arachidonic
is a precursor for prostaglandins that are

acid, which
involved in the clotting mechanism.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
both internally and externally.

Feverfew preparations are used

How Supplied:
Capsules — 80 mg, 380 mg, 384 mg, 400 mg, 500 mg, 1000
mg

Tablets — 12mg (standardized to 600 meg sesuiterpine

lactone content)

Preparation: To make an infusion, use 2 teaspoonfuls of the
drug per cup, allow to draw for 15 minutes. To make a
strong infusion, double the amount and allow to draw for 25

minutes.

Daily
Capsules — 200 to 250 mg daily for the treatment of
migraines; the usual standardization level is 0.2% partheno-
lide content (Brown, 1996). Freshly dried powdered Fever-
few of 25 mg is approximately equal to 0.1 mg of
sesquiterpine lactones (SL) (Mervyn,1986).

Dosage:

Fresh leaf— 1 to 3 leaves (25 to 75 mg) once or twice daily
has been recommended (Johnson et al, 1985; O'Hara, 1998).

Unproven uses — 3 cups of the infusion are taken per day.
The stronger infusions are used for washes.

Storage: Store the herb in sealed containers.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Abad MJ, Berjemo P, Villar A, Phytother Res 9:79-92. 1995.
Anderson D, Jenkinson PC, Dewdney RS, Blower SD, Johnson
ES, Kadam NP, Human Toxicol 7:145-152. 1988.

Anonym, Naturmedizin: Mutterkraut gegen Migrane. In: DAZ
137(28):2424. 1997.

Awang DVC, Dawson BA, Kindack DG, Crompton CW,
Heptinstall S, INP 54:1516-1521. 1991.

Barsby RW, Knight DW, McFadzean I, A chloroform extract of
the herb Feverfew blocks voltage-dependent potassium currents
recorded from single smooth muscle cells. J Pharm Pharmacol
1993 Jul;45(7):641-5.
Berry MI, (1984) Pharm J 232:611.
Bohlmann F, Arndt C, Bomowski H, Kleine KM, Herbst P,
Chem Ber 97, 1179-1192. 1964.
Bohlmann F, Zdero C, (1982) Phytochemistry 21(10):2543.
Brown AMG et al., Inhibition of human neutrophils by aqueous
and organic extracts of Tanacetum ssp. In: PM 62, Abstracts of
the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 66. 1996.

Brown AM, Edwards CM, Davey MR et al., Pharmacological
activity of Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz-Bip):
assessment by inhibition of human polymorphnuclear leukocyte
chemiluminescence in-vitro. J Pharm Pharmacol 1997
May;49(5):558-61.
Christensen LP; Jakobsen HB; Paulsen E et al. Airborne
Compositae dermatitis: monoterpenes and no parthenolide are
released from flowering Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
plants. Arch Dermatol Res 1999 Jul-Aug;291(7-8):425-31.
Collier HOJ et al., (1980) Lancet 11:922.
Deweerdt CJ, Bootsma HPR, Hendricks H, Herbal medicines in
migraine prevention. In: Phytomedicine 3(3):225-230. 1996.
Govindachari TR et al., (1964) Tetrahedron 21(6): 1509.
Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall S, A comparison of the effects
of an extract of Feverfew and parthenolide, a component of
Feverfew, on human platelet activity in-vitro. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1990 Aug;42(8):553-557.

Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall S, Lancet, No 8471, 44-45.
1986.
Groenewegen WA, Knight DW, Heptinstall S. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1986 Sep;38(9):709-712.

Groenewegen WA, Knight DW, Heptinstall S, Progr Med Chem
29:217-238. 1992.

Guin JD, Skidmore G, Arch Derm 123:500-503. 1987.

Hay AJ, Hamburger M, Hostettmann K et al., Toxic inhibition
of smooth muscle contractility by plant-derived sesquiterpenes

caused by their chemically reactive alpha-
methylenebutyrolactone functions. Br J Pharmacol 1994; 112:9-

12.

Hayes NA, Foreman JC, J Pharm Pharmacol 1987
Jun;39(6):466-70.

Heptinstall S et al., (1985) Lancet 1:1071.

----- PAGE 560 -----
gl

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Heptinstall S. Awang DVC, Dawson BA, Kindack D, Knight
DW, May J, J Pharm Pharmacol 44:391-395. 1992.

Heptinstall S, Groenewegen WA. Spangenberg P, Losche W, J
Pharm Pharmacol 39:459-456. 1984.

Heptinstall S. Groenewegen WA. Spangenberg P, Losche W, J
Pharm Pharmacol 39:459-465. 1987.

Heptinstall S. Groenewegen WA. Spangenberg P, Losche W, J
Pharm Pharmacol 39:459-465. 1987.
Heptinstall S. J R Soc Med 81:373.

Heptinstall S. White A. Williamson L, Mitchell J, Extracts of
everfew inhibit granule secretion in the blood platelets and

polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Lancet 1985 May
31(8437):1071-4.

Hylands PJ. Hylands DM. Dev Drugs Mod Med 100-104. 1986.

1988.

es}

Johnson ES. Kadam NP. Hylands DM et al., Efficacy of
Feverfew as prophylactic treatment of migraine. Brit Med J
1985 Aug 31:291(6495) 291:569.
Krause S, Arese P. Heptinstall S. Losche W. Influence of
substances affecting cell sulfhydryl/disulfide status on ahderence
of human monocytes. Arzneimittelforschung 1990 Jun;40(6):689-
92.

Losche W. Mazurov AV et al.. An extract of Feverfew inhibits
interaction of human platelets with collagen substrates. Thromb
Res. 1987; 48(5):511-518.

Losche W, Mazurov AV, Heptinstall S, Groenewegen WA,
Repin VS, Till U, Throm Res 48:511-518. 1978.

Losche W. Mazurow AV. Voyno-Yasenetskaja TA.
Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall. Repin VS. Folia Haematol
115:181184. 1988.

Losche W, Michel E. Heptinstall S, Krause S, Groenewegen
WA, Pescarmona GP, Thielmann K, Plant Med 54:381-384.
1988.

Makheja AN, Bailey JM, (1981) Lancet 11:1054.

Makheja AN, Bailey JM, A platelet phospholipase inhibitor
from the medicinal herb Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium).
Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1982 Jun;8(6):653-60.

Makheja AN. Bailey JM. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 8:653-660.
1982.

Mensing H, Kimmig W & Hausen BJ, Airborne contact
dermatitis. Hautarzt 1985; 36:398-402.

Mervyn L, Standardized Feverfew preparations. Lancet 1986;
1:209.

Miller LG, Herbal medicinals: selected clinical considerations
focusing on known or potential drug-herb interactions. Arch

Intern Med 1998; 158:2200-2211.

Mitchell JC, Geissman TA, Dupuis G, Towers GHN, Invest

Dermatol 56:98-101. 1971.

Murphy JJ, Heptinstall S, Mitchell JRA, Randomized double-

blind placebo-controlled trial of Feverfew in migraine
prevention. Lancet 1988 Jul 23:2(8604): 189-192.

FICUS CARICA /309

OHara MA, Kiefer D, Farrell K et al., A review of 12
commonly used medicinal herbs. Arch Fam Med 1998; 7:523-
536.

Pattrick M, Heptinstall S, Doherty M, Feverfew in rheumatoid
arthritis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Ann Rheum
Dis 1989 Jul;48(7):547-9.

Paulsen E. Occupational dermatitis in Danish gardeners and
greenhouse workers (II). Etiological factors. Contact Dermatitis
1998 Jan:38(1):14-9.

Pugh WJ. Sambo K. Prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors in
Feverfew. J Pharm Pharmacol 1988 Oct;40(10):743-5.

Romo de Viva A, Jiminez H, (1965) Tetrahedron 21(7): 1742.

Schmidt RJ, Plant dermatitis. Compositae. Clin Dermatol 1986
Apr-Jun:4(2):46-61.

Sumner H. Salan U, Knight D. Hoult J, Inhibition of 5-
lipoxygenase and cyclo-oxygenase in leukocytes by feverfew.

Involvement of sesquiterpene iactones and other components.
Biochem Pharmacol 1992Jun 9:43(11):2313-20.

Voyna-Yasenetskaja TA. Losche W, Groenewegen WA,
Heptintall S, Repin VS, Till U, J Pharm Pharmacol 40:501-502.
1988.

Warren RG. Austr J Pharm 67:475. 1986.

Williams CA, Harborne JB, Geiger H, Hoult JR, The flavonoids
of Tanacetum parthenium and T. vulgare and their anti-
inflammatory properties. Phytochemistry 1999 Jun;51(3):417-23.

Williams CA, Hoult JR, Harborne JB et al., A biologically
active lipophilic flavonol from Tanacetum parthenium.
Phytochemistry 1995 Jan;38(1):267-70.

Willuhn G, Parthenolid - Sesquiterpenlacton zur
Migriineprophylaxe. In: DAZ 133(37):3292. 1993.

Further information in:

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W. List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte =- Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Ficus carica
See Figs

----- PAGE 561 -----
310 /FIELD SCABIOUS

Field Scabious

Knautia arvensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leafy stem
including the flower heads and the fresh aerial parts of the

flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flat-domed, composite flowers are on
long, pubescent, glandular or non-glandular pedicles. The
androgynous heads are 2 to 4 cm in diameter and contain 85
to 100 florets. The female capitula are smaller and contain 55
to 60 florets. The florets are blue-lilac, occasionally red-lilac
or yellowish-white to pure white. The lateral florets are ray-
like. The 2- to 3-rowed involucre bracts are lanceolate,
compressed and long-haired. The edge of the calyx has 8 to
16 bristles. The corolla is fused and 4 tipped. There are 4
stamens and | inferior ovary. The fruit is a nutlet 5 to 6 mm
long and about 2 mm wide. The fruit is thickly covered in
vertical hairs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and 30 to 150
cm high. The rhizome is branched and has a strong taproot.
The rhizome produces a flowering stem from the leaf rosette,
which survives the winter. The stem is erect, lightly
branched and has short gray hairs. The leaves are opposite,
gray-green and matte. The lower ones are petioled, oblong
and entire-margined. The upper leaves are sessile, pinnatisect
and have lanceolate tips.

Habitat: The plant is found all over Europe except the
Arctic. It is also found in the Caucasus and western Siberia.

Production: Field Scabious herb consists of the leafy stems
and flower heads and also occasionally the root of Knautia

arvensis.
Other Names: Devil's Bit, Seabridge

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins: knautioside (1.1-1.7%)

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol glucoside, knautio-
sides A and B

Iridoide monoterpenes: including dipsacan
Flavonoids: including leucanthoside, luteoloside
Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug is said to have an astringent, antiseptic, expectorant
and even purgative effect. None of these effects have been

proven.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for chronic skin diseases,
eczema, anal fissures, pruritus ani, urticaria, scabies, favus,
and for the cleansing and healing of ulcers. It is also used to
treat coughs and throat complaints, as well as cystitis.

Homeopathic Uses: Field Scabious is used in homeopathic
remedies to treat respiratory tract inflammations and poor
digestion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Decoction and infusion prepara-
tions are used both internally and externally.

Preparation: For preparation of the drug, use approximately
30 gm infusion or decoction, add to 1 liter of hot water,
strain and cool.

Daily Dosage: For chronic eczema, add 4 teaspoonfuls to 2
glasses of water, leave to draw for 10 minutes and drink
during the course of the day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml s.c, acute: 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Figs
Ficus carica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit and the

tree sap latex.

Flower and Fruit: In its known form, the fig is neither a fruit
nor a flower. It is a hollow, fleshy receptacle enclosing
numerous flowers, which are never exposed to sunlight, but
nevertheless develop fully and produce seeds. The inflores-
cence is hidden in the body of the fruit. The edge of the pear-
shaped receptacle is curved inwards forming an almost
closed hollow space. The numerous fertile and sterile florets
are on the inner surface. When it ripens, the receptacle

----- PAGE 562 -----
«

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

enlarges and the one-seeded fruit becomes embedded in it. It
appears as a single purple-brown fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ficus carica is a deciduous, heavily
branched tree growing to 4 m or more. The leaves are downy

. beneath and are 10 to 20 cm long, broad-ovate to orbicular

with 3 to 5 deep lobes.

Habitat: Indigenous to Asia Minor, Syria and Iran. It is
cultivated or grows wild in many subtropical regions.

Production: Figs consists of the dried fruits of Ficus carica.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Furanocoumarins: including psoralen, bergaptene

Fruit acids: citric acid, malic acid
Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (approximately 50%), to
some extent transformed into inverted sugar

Mucilages

Pectin

Vitamin B and C

EFFECTS
No information is available

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Fig preparations are used as a laxative.

Chinese Medicine: In China, figs are used for dysentery and
enteritis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Siewek F et al. (1985) Z NaturForsch 40 (1/2): 8.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Figwort

Scrophularia nodosa

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

dried herb harvested before flowering, the herb with the root,
and the root alone.

FIGWORT/311

Flower and Fruit: The reddish-brown or greenish-yellow
flowers are in terminal panicles. The calyx has 5 segments,
with ovate, narrow-tunicate margined cusps. The corolla is a
bilabiate, swollen, almost globular tube. The upper lip is
divided into 2 and the lower lip is 3-lobed with revolute
lobes. There are 4 stamens and 1 superior ovary. The fruit is
an ovate, many-seeded, and pointed green capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant grows from 50
to 100 cm high. The root capitula have ovate, tuberous
nodes. The stem is erect, sharply quadrangular, often purple,
glabrous, and has a row of hairs at the nodes. The leaves are
crossed opposite, dark green, oblong, double serrate and
often cordate at the base.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, central Asia, and
North America.

Other Names: Throatwort, Carpenter's Square, Kernel wort,
Heal-All Scrofula Plant, Rosenoble

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Iridoides: including monoterpenes

Flavonoids: including among others, diosmin
Tannins
Saponins

EFFECTS
Figwort has a diuretic and mildly laxative effect. (No new
research is available.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: External uses as folk remedies have
included skin rashes, venereal warts, hemorrhoids, lacrima-
tion and earache. According to English sources, the plant
was used as a remedy for rabies.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for low resistance,
chronic tonsillitis, and tonsillar hypertony as well as for
lymphedema.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: Homeopathic preparations of the mother tinc-
ture are derived from the whole Figwort plant in dilutions.

Homeopathic Dosage: 15 to 20 drops to be taken orally 3
times daily. Scrophularia nodosa can be administered by
injection for long-term treatment

LITERATURE
Inouye H et al., (1974) Planta Med 25:285.

----- PAGE 563 -----
12 /FIGWORT

Jerznanowska Z, Pijewska L, (1954) Acta Polon. Pharm 11:1.
Kato Y, (1946) Foha Pharmacol Jap. 42:37 (via CA 47:1843)

Pauli GF, Ofterdinger-Daegel, S, Teborg D, Digitalis,
Scrophularia & Co. In: DAZ 135(2): 111.1995.

Pethes E et al., (1973) Herba Hung 12:101.
Swann K, Melville C, (1972) J Pharm Pharmacol 24:170P.

Weinges K, Von der Eltz H. (1978) Justus Liebigs Ann Chem
1968.

Further information in:

Fernandez MA. Garcia MD. Saenz MT Antibacterial activity of
the phenolic acids fractions of Scrophularia frutescens and
Scrophularia sambucifolia. J Ethnopharmacol, 53:11-4, Jul 26
1996.

Fernandez MA. Garcia MD. Saenz MT Anti-inflammatory
effects of different extracts and harpagoside isolated from
Scrophularia frutescens L. Farmaco. 53:443-6, Jun 1996.
Fernandez MA, Garcia MD. Saenz MT Gas chromatographic
determination of chlorothalonil in leaves and roots of
Scrophularia and in soil. J AOAC Int. 53:587-8, Mar-Apr 1996.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Filipendula ulmaria

See Meadowsweet

Fish Berry
Anamirta cocculus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the ripe,
dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit:' The plant's petiolate inflorescences are
panicle-like, 16 to 40 cm long and usually inserted in the
stem. Male flowers are occasionally axillary. The two outer
petals are smaller and about 1 mm long. The inner ones are
whitish or yellowish-green, broad-elliptoid, 2 to 3 mm long,
in 2 alternating, triple whorls and are imbricate. The
synandria are formed from a short-stemmed, globose cluster

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

of about 30 to 35 anthers. The pollen is round and
tricolporate. The female flowers have 3 tepals as well as
small staminoids. The 3 or 4 carpels are set sideways on a
central, erect fruit axis that becomes conically oblong when
the fruit ripens. The style is inserted in the side and the
stigma is turned back. The drupes are globose to reniform, 9
to 11 mm long, glabrous, and sit on the short, spreading
branches of the fruit axis. The fruit is about 1 cm long,
blackish, and contains a horseshoe-shaped seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Anamirta cocculus are hardy, woody
lianas with ash-gray to straw-yellow striped bark. The leaves
are ovate to cordate. The leaf blade is 16 to 28 cm long and
10 to 24 cm wide and coriaceous. The main veins are
arranged in palmate fashion at the base with parallel
secondary veins. The 6 to 18 cm petiole is thickened at both

ends.

Characteristics: The fruit shell is tasteless, the seed is bitter

and oily.
Habitat: The plant grows in India. Sri Lanka and Malaysia.

Production: Fish Berry seeds are the fruit of the false myrtle
Anamirta cocculus. They are collected in the wild and sun-
dried after harvesting.

Other Names: Levant Nut, Crow Killer, Fish Killer, Indian
Berry, Cocculus Indicus

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpens: picrotoxin, a mixture of picrotoxinine and its
by product picrotin, picrotoxin acid methyl ester

Isoquinoline alkaloids: menispermine, paramenispermine

Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The effect of the drug is due to the picrotoxin content.
Picrotoxin paralyzes presynaptic blocking mechanisms and,
like strychnine, has an analeptic effect in low doses. The
central ends of the parasympathetic nerves are stimulated, as
is the medulla oblongata. Breathing frequency is initially
increased and subsequently decreased. The pulse slows due
to the stimulation of the vagus and an increase in blood
pressure. Central nervous system-stimulated vomiting along
with an increase in perspiration and saliva are probably also
due to the action of picrotoxin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In the past, the drug was used as an
insecticide in powder form for scabies. Its use against skin
parasites and lice, while not substantiated, seems plausible. It
was also used in cases of barbituric acid poisoning. In more
recent times, it has been used in the treatment of peripheral
and vestibular nystagmus, and in both long and short-term

----- PAGE 564 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

therapy for peripherally based dizziness as well as travel
sickness.

Indian Medicine: The seeds have been used externally in
India and on the Malaysian archipelago for gout, skin
diseases and parasites. The tender leaves are used as a
contracting agent for the womb after birth.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for nervous exhaustion,
attacks of dizziness, cramps, paralysis, dysmenorrhea and
occipital headaches. Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is very poisonous. Mild poisonings cause head-
ache, dizziness, nausea, coordination disturbances, general
depression and spastic twitching.

OVERDOSAGE

With high dosages, the symptoms above are followed by
frequent vomiting, sleepiness and tonic-clonic spasms. Death
follows, often not until days later, through asphyxiation and
heart failure. Two to three Cocculus kernels can be fatal.

Treatment consists of inducing vomiting and/or gastric
lavage, purging with sodium sulphate, instillation of activa-
ted charcoal and forced diuresis. The spasms should be
suppressed with diazepam, but only as much as is absolutely
necessary. In case of fever, the patient should be wrapped in
ice packs, administered high-caloric infusions and possibly
given oxygen respiration. Phenothiazines and analeptics
should be avoided.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In combination preparations.

How Supplied: Commercial preparations include ampules,
drops and tablets.

Preparation: Liquid extract is prepared using a 1:1 ratio of
the drug and 90% ethanol A mixture of the extract and
coconut oil is prepared using a ratio of 1:8

Tincture: 1:10 tincture: 70% ethanol

Unguetum cocculi: 125 g extract plus 650 g coconut oil plus
50 g beeswax and 250 g paraffin

Picrotoxin extraction is made using special procedures;
maximum yield 1.5%

Daily Dosage: One to 5 mg can be taken by healthy patients
who do not experience side effects. For peripheral states of
dizziness: 1 mg to 5 mg (picrotoxin) slow intravenous
infusion. As a long-term treatment: 1 mg suppositories for 3
weeks.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every

30 to 60 minutes (for acute conditions), or 1 ml twice a week
sc or ointment | or 2 times daily for chronic conditions.

FLAX/313

Storage: Because they are poisonous, preparations should be
secured in tightly closed containers, protected from light and
unauthorized access.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pikrotoxin - Renaisssance eines "obsoleten’
pflanzlichen Arzneistoffes. In: ZPT 10(3): 101. 1989.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl.. Bde 1-3. W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck. Haug

om

Lewin L. Gifte und
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart. Jena. New
York 1995.

Flax

Linum — usitatissimum

TRADE NAMES
Bio flax, Flaxseed Oil, New Energy

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the stem as a sterile
linen thread, the oil extracted from the seeds, the dry ripe
seeds, the linseed cakes and the fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are panicle-like loose cymes
on long peduncles in the leaf axils of the upper part of the
stem. They have 5 ovate, acuminate, finely ciliate sepals and
5 obovate petals, which are sky blue and longer than the
sepals. There are 5 stamens fused at the base and 1 ovary.
The fruit is an almost globular, 6 to 8 mm long capsule on an
erect or slightly bent stem. The seeds are flat, brown and

glossy.
Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual and grow>

from 20 to 150 cm high. The root is short, fusiform and light
I yellow. The stem is unbranched, erect or ascending in shon

----- PAGE 565 -----
314/FLAX

curves. The leaves are smooth edged, gray-green, sessile and
almost awn-like acuminate.

Characteristics: The plant flowers only in the morning.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated in temperate and tropical,
regions the world over.

Production: Flaxseed consists of the dried, ripe seed of the
collective variations of Linum usitatissimum as well as its
preparations. The various cultivars of Linum usitatissimum
are equally acceptable for the indications listed. The plant is
cultivated. The ripe seeds are recovered from the capsules by
threshing. The oil contained within the seeds is perishable.
Processing of the seeds should take place by cold pressing at
a temperature below 40° C.

Not to be Confused With: Lolium temulentum and weed
seeds.

Other Names: Flaxseed, Lint Bells, Winterlien, Linseed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilages (3-10%, in the epidermis, high swelling capacity):
including arabinoxylans, galactans, rhamnogalacturonans

Cyanogenic glycosides (0.05-0.1%): linustatin and neolinus-
tatin (yielding under optimal conditions 30-50 mg HCN per
100 gm)

Fatty oil (30-45%): chief fatty acids linolenic acid (40-70%),
linoleic acid (10-25%), oleic acid (13-30%)

Proteins (20-27%)
Lignans: secoisolariciresinol-diglucoside

Phenylpropane_ derivatives: including among others,

linusitamarine

EFFECTS
The bulk material and mucins (swelling agent and mucilage)
are responsible for the laxative effect.

In animal experiments a reduction of cholesterol levels in the
liver was observed (due to the unsaturated fatty acids). A
blood sugar lowering effect was also proven. The antitumo-
ral effect is attributed to the lignans (lignans are antimycotic,
anti-oxidative and anti-estrogenic).

Toxic principle: there is a discussion on the toxic effect of
the cyanogenic glycosides in the drug which may cause
prussic acid poisoning in humans. However, neither high
single doses nor chronic intake of linseed have caused any
signs of poisoning in humans.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

¢ Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: Internally, Flax is used for irritable colon,
diverticulitis and as mucilage for gastritis and enteritis. A
decoction is used for bladder catarrh and inflammation,
gastritis.

Externally, Flaxseed is used for removing foreign bodies
from the eye. A single Flaxseed is moistened and placed
under the eyelid, the foreign body should stick to the mucous
secretion of the seed; as cataplasm for local skin
inflammation.

Indian Medicine: Flax is used in India as a tea for coughs,
bronchial conditions, urethritis, diarrhea and gonorrhea;
externally for skin infections. The seeds are also used in
Indian veterinary medicine.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Flaxseed is contraindicated in the following conditions:
ileus, stricture of the esophagus and in the gastrointestinal
area, acute inflammatory illnesses of the intestine, of the
esophagus and of the stomach entrance.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The use of large quantities of the drug
as a laxative with too little fluid intake can lead to an ileus.
The cyanogenic glycosides present no danger with the intake
of therapeutic dosages; the glycosides are broken down only
to a limited extent in the body. An elevation in the
concentration of cyanide ions and of the detoxification
product thiocyanic acid in the blood could not be
demonstrated.

It is recommended that if flaxseed is taken for inflammatory
bowel conditions, that the flaxseed be preswollen before use
(Bisset & Wichtl, 1994).

Drug Interactions: The absorption of other drugs taken
simultaneously may be delayed.

Food Interactions: The absorption of Flaxseed oil is
facilitated when taken with food.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internally, the cracked or coarsely
ground seed, in which only the cuticle and mucilage
epidermis are damaged is used. Linseed gruel and other
galenic preparations are also available for internal use.
Externally, as linseed meal or linseed expellent.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 1000 mg, 1300 mg

Oil

Seeds (whole or crushed)

Powder

----- PAGE 566 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Preparation: To prepare a demulcent for use in gastritis and
enteritis, allow 5 to 10 gm of whole seeds to stand in cold
water for 20 to 30 minutes, then pour off the liquid (Bisset &
Wichtl, 1994).

Daily
Constipation — | dessertspoon of whole or bruised (not
with at least 150 ml of liquid 2 to 3 times daily.

Dosage:

ground) see

Lower Cholesterol — 35 to 50 gm daily of the crushed

seeds. May be incorporated into muffins or breads (Arjmandi
et al, 1998).
Decrease platelet aggregation — 1 to 2  tablespoonfuls

flaxseed oil daily (Allman et al, 1995).

Gastritis and enteritis — 2 to 4 tablespoons of milled linseed
repared as recommended above (the seeds should not be
taken in the dry state, should be pre-hydrated.)

External — 30 to 50 gm Flaxseed flour for a hot moist

cataplasm or compress.

Storage: Flaxseed oil must be processed and stored properly
(see "Production" above). Flaxseed meal is less vulnerable
to rancidity when exposed to light and heat than the
processed oil. The seeds should be protected from light and
stored in a sealed container. The oil should also be protected
from light and should be refrigerated.

LITERATURE

Allman MA, Pena MM & Pang D: Supplementation with
flaxseed oil versus sunflower seed oil in healthy young men
consuming a low fat diet: effects on platelet composition and
function. In: Eur J Clin Nutr 49(3): 169-178, 1995.

Anonym, Leinol als diatetisches Adjuvans. In: DAZ
135(16): 1501. 1995.

Anonym, Leinsamen (Semen Lini) ist ungiftig. In: ZPT 5:770.
1984.

Anonym, Pharmaceutical Care:""Den Mifjbrauch von Laxanzien
vermeiden helfen." In: DAZ 135(20): 1867-1868. 1995.

Arjmandi BH, Khan DA. Juma S et al., Whole flaxseed
consumption lowers serum LDL-cholesterol and lipoprotein(a)
concentrations in postmenopausal women. In: Nutr Res

18(7): 1203-1214, 1998.

Bisset NG & Wichtl M (eds): Lini semen. Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals: A Handbook for Practice on a Scientific
Basis. Medpharm Scientific Publishers, CRC Press, Stuttgart,
Germany, pp 298-300. 1994.

Curry CE, (1982) Laxative products. In: Handbook of
Nonprescription Drugs. Am Pharmac Assoc, Washington, S 69-
92.

Ecker-Schlipf B, Ostrogensubstitution mit Leinsamen und
Sojamehl. In: DAZ 131(19):953. 1991.

FOENICULUM VULGARE/315

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Schiebel-Schlosser G, Leinsamen - die richtige Wahl. In: PTA
8(4):300. 1994.

Schulz V, (1984) Clinical Pharmacokinetics of Nitroprusside,
Cyanide, Thiosulphate and Thiocyanate. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics 9:239-251.

Schulz V, Loffler A, Gheorghiu Th, (1983) Resorption von
Blausaure aus Leinsamen. Leber Magen Darm 13:10-14.

Sewing KFR, (1986) Obstipation. In: Fulgraff G, Palm D
(Hrsg) Pharmakotherapie. Klinische Pharmakologie, 6. Auflage.
Fischer, Stuttgart, S 162-168.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfiinder HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
potheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachvedag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Foeniculum vulgare

See Fennel

----- PAGE 567 -----
316/FOOL'S PARSLEY

Fool's Parsley

Aethusa cynapium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the entire fresh
plant and the dried aerial parts (herb).

Flower and Fruit: The plant has white long-stemmed umbels
with many florets and no involucre. The calyx has 5 fused
sepals. There are 5 white, sometimes reddish, obcordate,
irregular petals. The flowers have 5 stamens and a 2-valved
ovate ovary. The fruit is a 3 to 5 mm wide, globose
schizocarp, straw yellow when ripe with red-brown stripes; it
opens easily. Each section has 5 triangular ribs with | or 2
oil grooves in the hollow and 2 in the joints.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a leafy, 60 cm high
annual or biennial plant. The root is thin, spindle-shaped and
whitish. The stem is erect, round, grooved, hollow, glabrous
and usually forked with a bluish bloom, which rubs off when
handled. The leaves are glossy, dark green above and light
green beneath. Leaflets are serrate with a triangular outline
and double to treble pinnatifid. They give off an unpleasant
garlic odor when rubbed.

Characteristics: The plant is poisonous. The plant can be
mistaken for Parsley because of its similar appearance, but
the plant is poisonous and can have fatal consequences. This
similarity has resulted in its being given the name Fool's
Parsley. It also bears a resemblance to Hemlock, though it is

not as poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern and central
Europe, introduced into North America; cultivated and used
as an ornamental plant for meadows in southern Germany.

Not to be Confused With: Young garden parsley is very
similar. However, it differs in the glossiness of the under-
side surface of the leaf and pungent, burning, garlic-like
smell of the leaves when rubbed.

Other Names: Dog Poison, Fool's-Cicely, Small Hemlock,
Dog Parsley, Lesser Hemlock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Polyynes: (only in freshly-harvested leaves) including aethu-

sin, aethusanol A, aethusanol B

Flavone glycosides: including rutoside, narcissine, camphor

oil-3-glucorhamnoside
Ascorbic acid

EFFECTS
No information is available.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Fool's Parsley has been used for gastroin-
testinal complaints in children, infantile cholera, summer
diarrhea and convulsions.

Homeopathic Uses: Aethusa cynapium is used for milk
intolerance in children, pylorus cramp, acute diarrhea with
vomiting and poor concentration (HABI).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Fool's Parsley is considered a toxic plant. The older
literature contains descriptions of poisonings, sometimes
fatal, occurring as a result of confusing garden parsley with
the freshly harvested drug. Probably, however, these had to
do with poisonings by spotted hemlock. Caution should
nevertheless be exercised.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The juice of the fresh drug is used
in poultices; also available as alcoholic extracts.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules, I to 3 times daily; injection solution | ml twice

weekly sc (HABI).

LITERATURE
Bohlmann F, et al., Chem Ber 93:981. 1968.

Bohlmann F, et al., Chem Ber 88:1245. 1960.
Teuscher E. et al., PA 45:537. 1990.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Forget-Me-Not
Myosotis arvensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering plant.

----- PAGE 568 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The blue flowers are in leafless racemes.
The calyx is fused and leaf-like with 5 tips. The corolla is
shaped like a stemmed plate, has 5 tips, and is glabrous with
yellow scales in the tube. The tube is enclosed in the calyx.
There are 5 stamens and a 4-valvular ovary. The fruit stems
are twice as long as the caylx and stand out. The calyx is
closed when the fruit ripens. The fruit is composed of 4
nutlets.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is leafy and grows from 15
to 40 cm high. The stem is erect or ascendent and pubescent.
The leaves are alternate. The lower leaves are petiolate and
oblong-obovate, the upper ones sessile and lanceolate to
lanceolate-oblong.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe.

Production: Forget-Me-Not is the flowering plant Myosotis
arvensis.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Forget-Me-Not is used in the treatment of
respiratory disorders and nose bleeds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity are possible conse-
quences when taken internally, due to the presence of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necic parent
substances. Therefore, the drug should not be taken

internally.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is administered ground
and as an extract for external use.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag

£ Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Fragaria vesca
See Strawberry

FRANGULA /317

Frangula

Rhamnus frangula

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried bark of
the trunk and branches and the fresh bark of the trunk and
branches.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 2 to 10 axillary
blossomed cymes on pedicles that are 1 to 3 times as long.
The flowers are greenish white, infundibular, 3 to 4 mm long
with 5 sepals and 5 petals, which are initially pubescent. The
sepals are 3 mm long, oblong-triangular and acute. The
petals are whitish, erect and stemmed. The petals enclose the
stamens. The stamens are somewhat shorter than the petals
and have large anthers and short filaments. The fruit is a
globular, initially green, later red when ripe. The black-
purple drupe is about 8 cm wide containing 2 to 3 seeds. The
seeds are wide, flat triangular-lentil-shaped with a longer,
very narrow groove.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a thornless, 1 to 3 m
high bush or a 7 m high weedy tree. The branches are piled
on the boughs and densely foliated. The bark is initially
green later gray-brown and covered in gray-white lenticles.
The leaf buds are pubescent. The leaves are thin, soft when
young later becoming stiffer. They are broadly elliptical to
obovate and about 3.5 to 5 cm long. The leaves are usually
entire-margined and pubescent on the ribs of the under
surface.

Characteristics: The heartwood is bright yellow-red. The
odor is somewhat foul and the taste is disgustingly bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to all of Europe, Western
Asia, Asia Minor and the Caucasus; it has spread to the wild
in North America.

Production: Frangula bark consists of the dried bark of the
trunks and branches of Rhamnus frangula. The bark is peeled
in May and June, then either dried and stored for 1 year to
dry or heated for 1 hour at 100° C.

Other Names: Buckthorn, Frangula, Alder Buckthorn, Black
Alder, Dog Wood, Black Dogwood, Black Alder Tree,
European Black Alder, Black Alder Dogwood, Arrow Wood,
European Buckthorn, Persian Berries, Alder Dogwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (4 to 6%): anthranoids, chief compo-
nents glucofrangulin A, glucofrangulin A-diacetate (estered
at rhamnose remnant), as well as frangulin A, frangulin C

Naphthalene derivatives: naphthoquinones

Peptide alkaloids (traces): including frangulanine

----- PAGE 569 -----
318/FRANGULA

EFFECTS

The bark contains anthracene derivatives and their aglycones
which have an anti-absorptive and hydrogogic effect. The
anthracene derivatives induce active secretion of electrolytes
and water in the intestinal lumina and inhibit the absorption
of electrolytes and water from the colon by stimulating
propulsive contractions. This results in accelerated intestinal
passage time. In this manner, the increased water and
subsequent volume of the intestinal content raise pressure

and stimulate intestinal peristalsis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

Unproven Uses: Frangula bark is used to ease bowel
evacuation in the case of anal fissures, hemorrhoids and after
rectal-anal surgery. It may also be used in preparation for

exploratory surgery of the gastrointestinal tract.

Homeopathic Uses: Rhamnus frangula is used for weak
digestion with a tendency to diarrhea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The drug is not to be used with intestinal obstruction, acute
inflammatory intestinal diseases, appendicitis or with chil-
dren under 12 years of age. The drug is not to be
administered during pregnancy or while nursing.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: Long-term use leads to loss
especially potassium ions. This may lead to hyperaldosteron-
ism, inhibition of intestinal motility and enhancement of the
effect of cardioactive steroids, which may lead to arrhyth-
mias. Nephropathies, edema and accelerated bone deteriora-
tion are possible after long term use.

of electrolytes,

The question of an increased incidence of carcinoma of the
colon following long-term administration of anthracene
drugs has not yet been fully clarified. Recent studies show no
definite connection between the administration of anthracene
drugs and the frequency of carcinoma of the colon.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Vomiting and spasmodic gastrointestinal complaints could
occur as side effects to the drug's purgative effect or with

overdosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Frangula Bark is available in solid
pharmaceutical form and in commercial compounded prepa-
rations for oral intake. It is also available parenterally for
homeopathic use.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Preparations:

Tea — scald 2 gm finely cut drug and strain after 15
minutes. The drug may also be left to steep in cold water for
12 hours.

Dry extract — percolation of 100 gm bark with methanol,
after 1 day 400 gm to 500 gm percolate are extracted. The
liquids (percolate and pressed juice) are left to stand for 8
days at 2 to 8° C before being filtered and dried. The
glucofrangulin content must be stabilized at 15 to 17%.

Daily Dosage: 20 mg_ to 180 mg _ hydroxy-

anthracene derivatives
Tea — 1 cup mornings and evenings

The correct dosage for each individual is the smallest dosage
necessary to maintain a soft stool. Frangula bark should not
be used continuously for more than 1 or 2 weeks.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D3: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily;

chronic: once a day (HAB1)

Storage: Frangula may be stored for at least 1 year if

protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ

136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

Anonym. Pharmaceutical Care: "Den MiJ3brauch von Laxanzien
vermeiden helfen". In: DAZ 135(20): 1867-1868. 1995.

Demirezer LO. Glucofrangulinanthrone A/B, deren
Oxidationsformen und davon abgeleitete Zuckerester aus
Rhamnus-Arten. In: Dissertation Universitat Frankfurt/Main.
1991.

Helmholz H, Ruge A, Piasecki A, Schroder S, Westendorf J,
Genotoxizitiit der Faulbaumrinde. In: PZ 138(43):3478. 1993.

Pailer M, Haslinger E, (1972) Monatsh. Chem 103:1399.

Sydiskis RJ, Owen DG, Lohr JL, Rosier KHA, Blosmster RN,
Inactivation of enveloped viruses by anthraquinones extracted

from plants. In: Antimicrob Agents Chemother 35:2463-2466.

1991.

Van Os FHL, (1976) Pharmacology I4(Suppf 1)7:18.
Wagner H et al., (1978) Planta Med 33:53.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 570 -----
“tk

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Frankincense

Boswellia carteri

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the tree is the resin
gum exuded when incisions are made in the bark of the

trunk.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary on short stalks
and single axillary inflorescences. The calyx is small, 5-
toothed and perennial. The corolla has 5 elongated petals,
and there are 5 stamens. The long anthers fall early. The fruit
is a capsule divided into 3 parts with a seed in each section.
The seeds are surrounded by a wide membranous leaf.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Boswellia carteri is a richly foliated
tree whose leaves alternate unevenly on the branches to the
tips. The 10 pairs and one leaflet are short-stalked, elongat-
ed, blunt, serrate, finely pubescent and mostly alternate. The
base of the leaf is a fleshy cup-shaped disc that is larger than
the corolla. The plant grows on few roots, which appear to be
fused with the stony soil via an inert mass.

Habitat: Boswellia carteri is found in Somalia and parts of
Saudi Arabia.

Production: (Indian) Frankincense or Olibanum is the
hardened gum resin of Boswellia carteri, which exudes when
incisions are made in the trunk. It is collected after being

allowed to harden in the open air for about three weeks.

Not to be Confused With: The exuded gum resin of the trunk
of Boswellia serrata also is called Frankincense or Olibanum.

FRANKINCENSE /319

Other Names: Olibanum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (5-9%): chief components 1-octyl acetate (sliare
60%), 1-octanol (share 12.7%), including as well alpha-
inene (3.5%), incensol (2.7%)

Resins (60%): components including among others alpha-
oswellic acid, beta-boswellic acid, methyl ester of 3-acetyl-

Vboswellic acid

Mucilages (12-20%)

EFFECTS
Externally, Frankincense can cause mild irritation of the

skin. Internally, it is a mild carminative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

The drug is considered obsolete for medicinal use because its
mode of action has not been documented. In vitro, the alpha
and beta boswellic acids showed antimicrobial activity and
inhibited the complementary system. The mucin, triterpene
and essential oil content make application for respiratory
conditions and its use for wounds seem plausible.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is considered obsolete, even though no health
hazards or side effects are known in conjunction with the
proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE

Preparation: The Frankincense resin is obtained by tapping
the bark and leaving the exudate for about three months,
during which time it hardens slightly, allowing the resin to
be collected.

LITERATURE
Ammon HPT, Entziindliche Darmerkrankungen: Weihrauch bei
Colitis ulcerosa, siehe auch folgenden Artikel. In: DAZ

137(3): 125. 1997.

Ammon HPT, Hemmstoffe der Leukotrienbiosynthese. In: DAZ
137(3): 139-40. 1997.

Ammon HPT, Weihrauch - ein neuer Weg in der Therapie der
+"Entziindungen. In: DAZ 132(45).2442. 1991.

Ammon §, Ein pflanzliches Antirheumaticum. In: DAZ
131(19):972. 1991.

Ammon T, Lipoxygenasehemmer aus Weihrauch. In: DAZ
133(37):3295. 1993.

Anonym, Weihrauchtherapie. In: DAZ 134(4):324-325. 1995.
Hoernlein RF et al., Die Hemmung der 5-Lipoxygnesae durch
Acetyl-11-keto-P-Boswelliasaure (AKBA): Struktur-

Wirkungsbeziehungen. In: 8. Fruhjahrstagung der DPhG, Salzau,
Abstracts, in PUZ 25(3): 140. 1996.

----- PAGE 571 -----
320 /FRANKINCENSE

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Kreymeier J, Rheumatherapie mit Phytopharmaka. In: DAZ
137(8):611-613. 1997.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Martinetz D, Der Indische Weihrauch - neue Aspekte eines
alten Harzes. In: ZPT 13(4):121. 1992.

Miiller-Bohn T, Chemie und Pharmakologie des Weihrauchs:
Boswelliasauren gegen chronische Polyarthritis und Colitis
ulcerosa. In: DAZ 136(48):4324-4325. 1996.

Pfister-Hotz G, Phytotherapie in der Geriatric In: ZPT

18(3): 165-162. 1997.

Rail B et al., Boswellic acids and protease activity (s.auch
foigende Abstracts). In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann
Congr):105. 1995.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wasielewski S, Maligne G, Weihrauchextrakt bei bosartigen
Hirntumoren. In: DAZ 137(26):2250-2251. 1997.

Fraxinus excelsior
See Ash

Fraxinus ornus

See Manna

French Tarragon

Artemisia dracunculus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial

parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are drooping, almost globular
and 2 to 3 mm across. They are whitish, later reddish, and
clustered in loose panicles. The sepals of the epicalyx are
oblong-elliptic and mostly green; the inner ones are ovate
with a broad membranous edge. The ray florets are female.
The disc florets are androgynous and infertile. The corolla is
yellow with a glabrous receptacle.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a glabrous, 60- to 120-
cm high herbaceous perennial. There are numerous stems,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

which are bushily branched with flowering branches at the
top. The leaves are simple, lanceolate-linear, 2 to 10 cm by 2
to 10 mm, thorn-tipped, entire or slightly serrate, and
somewhat glossy.

Characteristics: The odor is aromatic and intense.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Germany, Russia and
southern Europe.

Production: French Tarragon leaves or herbs are picked
when in bloom and carefully dried.

Other Names: Little Dragon, Mugwort, Estragon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil of complex, variety-specific composition (0.25-
3.1%): chavicol methyl ether dominates in German species,
accompanied by ocimene, myrcene, alpha-pinene, beta-pi-
nene, camphene, limonene, linalool

Flavonoids: including quercetin and patuletin glycosides

Hydroxycoumarins: including herniarin, scopoletin
hocoumarins: including artemidin

Polyynes

EFFECTS

The essential oil of the drug is an appetite stimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: French Tarragon is used as an appetite

stimulant.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Both the fresh and dried plant is

used, mostly as a culinary herb.

LITERATURE

Balza F, Jamieson L, Towers GHN, Chemical constituents of
the aerial parts of Artemisia dracunculus. In: JNP 48:339. 1985.
Greger H, Bohlmann F, Zdero Ch, Neue Isocumarine aus
Dracunculus. In: PH 16:795. 1977.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lakupovic J, Tan RX, Bohlmann F, Jia ZJ, Huneck S,
Acetylenes and other constituents from Artemisia dracunculus.
In: PM 57:450. 1992.

Marco JA et al., Sesquiterpenes lactones from Artemisia
species. In: PH 32:460. 1993.

----- PAGE 572 -----
4Kb

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Schormiiller B, In: Schormiiller J: Alkaloidhaltige GenufSmiittel,
Gewiirze, Kochsalz, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York. 1970.

Thieme H, Nguyen XT, PA 27:255-265. 1972.

Vostrowsky O et al., Uber die Komponenten des atherischen
Ols aus Estragon (Artemisia dracunculus L.). In: Z Lebensm
Untersuch Forsch 173:365-367. 1981.

Fringetree

Chionanthus_ virginicus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root or tree

bark.

Flower and Fruit: The tree bears long peduncles of white,
snowdrop-like flowers with fringed petals the same size as
magnolia flowers. The flowers are androgynous, but on some
stalks the flowers are almost exclusively male or female. The
calyx is short and consists of four parts. The four petals are
fused at the base. They are initially green but turn snow
white and extend about 2.5 cm. Two stamens are enclosed in
the short tube. The fruit is 15 to 2 cm across, dark blue to
black, and oval and with a hard stone.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Fringetree is a deciduous shrub or
tree up to 10 m tall. The leaves are smooth or downy, oblong
or oval, 7.5 to 20 cm long and opposite. The root bark is
about 3 mm thick and consists of irregular, quilled pieces up
to about 8 cm long. The exterior of the bark is dull brown
with concave scars. The inner surface is smooth and buff
colored. The fracture is short and dense with projecting
bundles of stone cells.

Characteristics: Fringetree is almost odorless and very
bitter. The bark is so dense that, unlike most other barks, it

sinks in water.

Habitat: Fringetree grows in the central and southern U.S.
and also in eastern Asia.

Production: Fringetree root bark is the root bark of
Chionanthus virginicus.

Other Names: Gray Beard Tree, Old Man's Beard, Poison
Ash, Snowflower, White Fringe, Chionanthus, Snowdrop
Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Lignane glycosides: phillyrin (chioanthine)

Saponins

FROSTWORT/321

EFFECTS
Fringetree, because of its saponin content, is said to have
hepatic, cholagogue, diuretic and tonic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Fringetree is used in treatment of the liver
and gallbladder conditions (including gallstones). North
American folk uses include jaundice, hepatatrophy, wounds
and ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: Although mention is made of significant
homeopathic use, no details are given.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid extract and preparations are
administered internally.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AutL. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Jacober H, Pharm Acta Helv 34:585. 1959.

Frostwort

Helianthemum canadense

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The plant flowers twice each season, once
early and again near the end. The first flowers are flat with
large, bright yellow petals. The second flowers are in
terminal clusters.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that grows 3
to 6 cm high and has a simple, erect and sparsely branched
white stem. The few branches are slender and purplish-green
with opposite leaves and leaf scars. The leaves are linear, up
to 1.5 cm long, grayish-green and downy.

Characteristics: The taste is astringent and bitter. The plant
is odorless.

Habitat: Frostwort is indigenous to the eastern U.S., but is
now also found in Europe.

Production: Frostwort is the aerial part of Helianthemum
canadense.

----- PAGE 573 -----
322 /FROSTWORT

Other Names: Frost Plant. Frostweed, Rock-Rose, Sun Rose

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins
Glycoside: helianthinin

The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
Frostwort is astringent and tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
The herb is used internally for digestive disorders and

externally for ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
iquid extract.

Frostwort is administered as a

LITERATURE

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.h Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Fucus vesiculosus
See Bladderwrack

Fumaria officinalis
See Fumitory

Fumitory
Fumaria officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried herb and
the aerial parts of the fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The short pedicled flowers are in erect,
dense, terminal racemes opposite the leaves and are 5 to 8
mm long. The outer petals are rounded at the front and are

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

crimson to pink. But like the inner petals they are dark-red to
black at the tip and have a green keel. The fruit, which
appears in the flowering season, is nut-like, globular, slightly
flattened at the side, green and has a dent in the top.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 10 to 50 cm high and
has a tender, erect, angular, branched, hollow and glabrous
stem which, like the leaves, is bluish green. The leaves are
alternate and divided into 3-pinnate sections. They are
petiolate, double pinnate, soft with petioled palmate or

pinnatifid pinna.
Characteristics: The herb has a bitter, salty taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
to northern Africa and in all of Europe and Siberia. The herb
has been introduced into North and South America.

Production: Common Fumitory herb consists of the dried,
above ground parts of Fumaria officinalis, gathered during
the flowering season.

Not to be Confused With: The very similar species F.

vaillanti and F. schleicheri.

Other Names: Earth Smoke, Hedge Fumitory, Beggary,

Fumus, Vapor, Wax Dolls

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including rutin

Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives: including caffeoylmalic

acid

Isoquinoline alkaloids: some of them include -
Protoberberine-type: including (-)-scoulerine
Protopine-type: including protopine; main alkaloid
Spirobenzylisoquinoline-type: fumaricine, (+)-fumariline
Indenobenzazepine-type: including fumaritine, fumarofine
Organic acids: fumaric acid

EFFECTS
Fumitory has a light, antispasmodic effect on the bile ducts
and the gastrointestinal tract. It is also amphicholeretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:
* Liver and gallbladder complaints

Spastic discomfort in the area of the gallbladder and bile
ducts, as well as the gastrointestinal tract.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the herb has been used for
skin diseases, constipation, cystitis, arteriosclerosis, rheuma-

----- PAGE 574 -----
i*t

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

tism, arthritis, as a blood purifier, hypoglycemia and for

infections.

Homeopathic Uses: for chronic, itching eczema resulting

from liver disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and its galenic

preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
2 to 3 gm drug and strain after 20 minutes.

Infusions for gallbladder

Daily Dosage: 6 gm of drug.
complaints, drink 1 warm cup 30 minutes before meals.

Pressed juice—2 to 3 teaspoons (2.4 to 3.5 gm drug) daily as
a cold or hot infusion.

Grated fresh plant—1l teaspoon 3 times daily (about 50%

plant material).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB34).
Storage: Protect from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Duke JA, (1985) Die amphocholeretische Wirkung der Fumaria

officinalis. Z Allg Med 34: 1819.

Hahn R, Nahrstedt A, High Content of Hydroxycinnamic Acids
Esterified with (&plus;)-D-Malic-Acid in the Upper Parts of
Fumaria officinalis. In: PM 59(2): 189. 1993.

Mardirossian ZH et al.. PH 22:759. 1983.
Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A): 1.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der. Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

GALBANUM /323

Galanthus nivalis
See Snowdrop

Galbanum
Ferula gummosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the oily gum-resin.

Two types of Galbanum are used: Levant or Soft Galbanum
is more viscous and often contains small root pieces. Persian
or Hard Galbanum sometimes contains pieces of stem and is
friable in texture.

Flower and Fruit: The plant bears yellowish-white flowers
in a few flat umbels. The fruit is thin and flat. The seeds are

glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ferula gummosa is a perennial plant
with a firm, smooth and hollow stem that grows up to 1.75 m
tall. The leaflets are glossy, ovate, wedge-shaped and have

sharply serrate margins.

Characteristics: The gum-resin occurs in translucent, yel-
lowish or bluish-green masses of tears. Soft Galbanum
(Levant) is more viscous and may contain small pieces of
root. Hard Galbanum (Persian) is friable and may contain

pieces of stem. The odor is similar to musk or turpentine.

Habitat: The plant is found in central Asia, Iran, the

Mediterranean region and also at the Cape of Good Hope.

Production: Galbanum is the resin from the roots and trunk
of Ferula gummosa and other related varieties. The exuding
without wounding the plant.

resin is collected from the pit

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

substances chiefly galbaresenic acid and

(60%):

Resinous
galbanic acid

Mucilages (40%)

Volatile oil (10-20%): including among others, alpha-pi-
nenes, beta-pinenes, myrcene, cadinenes, guaiazulene, aroma

bearer undecatriene

EFFECTS
The drug acts as stimulant, expectorant, and vulnerary. In

vitro an antimicrobial effect has been proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally, Galbanum is used for digestive
disorders and flatulence; externally it is used in the treatment

of wounds.

----- PAGE 575 -----
324/GALBANUM

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
external use.

Preparations for internal and

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.l. Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Autl. Bde 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Galega officinalis

See Goat's Rue

Galeopsis segetum
See Hempnettle

Galipea officinalis

See Angostura

Galium aparine

See Cleavers

Galium odoratum
See Sweet Woodruff

Galium verum
See Lady's Bedstraw

Gambir

Uncaria species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and
young shoots of the plant.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are single or in loose, globose
inflorescences. The flowers are fused and grow in fives. The
corolla is funnel-shaped, the 2-part ovary is inferior. The
fruit is a loculicidal capsule opening on 2 sides. The seeds
are long-winged at both ends.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This woody liana or climbing shrub
has leaves that are opposite and short-petiolate. Young
branches are 4-sided or orbicular and have pairs of stipules.
Using Uncaria gambir as a prototype, the calyx is 5-tipped,
the corolla light purple. The leaves are 6 to 11 mm long with
a I to 2 cm long petiole, coriaceous, lanceolate to oval,
entire, pubescent at the veins. After the leaf-axillary flower
branches drop, a barbed tendril, which is 1 to 2 cm long and
woody, is formed.

Habitat: Indonesia and Malaysia

Production: Yellow catechu is the dried aqueous extract of
the leaves and young shoots of Uncaria gambir. Cultivated
stock is harvested, then the leaves and shoots are boiled with
water to form a decoction that is pressed and evaporated to
the consistency of syrup. The resulting lumps are dried in the
sun.

Not to be Confused With: Acacia
Other Names: Yellow Catechu

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Catechin tannins (20 to 50%): among them gambirines Al to

A3 (astringently active flavanol dimers)

Flavanols (JO to 50%): particularly (+)-catechin, gambirines
BI to B3 (dimers)

Indole alkaloids of the beta-carboline type (presumably only
traces in the drug): including gambirtanine, dihydro-
gambirtanine

EFFECTS
The drug is astringent in effect because of the tannins it
contains, which are also said to exhibit antibacterial and
algicidal efficacy. The flavonoid fraction (cyanidanol = (+)-
catechin) is said to be hepatoprotective in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Catechu tincture is used in folk medicine for
diarrhea, nausea and gastrointestinal disturbances. Decoction
is used for ulcers of the stomach and oral mucosa, and also
asthma. The effect for diarrhea appears plausible because of
the tannin content.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

----- PAGE 576 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal use.

Whole and powdered drug for

Preparation: Tincture: 200 g drug (pounded), 50 g cut
cinnamon to 1 liter 45% ethanol, macerated (BP88)

Daily Dosage: 0.5 to 2 g drug; Catechu Tincture: 2.5 to 5 ml

LITERATURE
Balz JP. Das NP. Uncaria elliptica a major source of rutin.

Planta Med, 25:174-7, 1979 Jun.

Blaschek W. Hansel R. Keller K. Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeb nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Chang CC. Tung LH. Chen RR. Chiueh CC, A study on the
antihypertensive action of uncarine A, an alkaloid of Uncaria
formosana used in Chinese herb medicine. Taiwan I Hsueh Hui
Tsa Chih. 25:61-9, 1979 Feb.

Chang P. Koh YK. Geh SL. Soepadmo E. Goh SH. Wong AK,
Cardiovascular effects in the rat of dihydrocorynantheine

isolated from Uncaria callophylla. J Ethnopharmacol, 25:213-5,
989 Apr.

Endo K. Oshima Y, Kikuchi H. Koshihara Y, Hikino H,

er Hypotensive principles of Uncaria hooks. Planta Med, 25:188-
90, 1983 Nov.
Haginiwa J. Sakai S. Takahashi K, Taguchi M, Shujiro S,
Studies of plants containing indole alkaloids. I. Alkaloids in
Uncaria genus. Yakugaku Zasshi, 25:575-8, 1971 May.

Law KH. Das NP, Initiation and maintenance of callus tissue
culture of Uncaria elliptica for flavonoid production. Prog Clin
Biol Res. 25:67-70, 1988.

Lin CC. Lin JM, Chiu HF, Studies on folk medicine 'thang-
kau-tin' from Taiwan. (I). The anti-inflammatory and liver-
protective effect. Am J Chin Med, 57:37-50, 1992.

Lin JM, Lin CC, Chen MF, Ujiie T, Takada A, Studies on
Taiwan folk medicine, thang-kau-tin (II): Measurement of active
oxygen scavenging activity using an ESR technique. Am J Chin
Med, 57:43-51. 1995.

Mimaki Y, Toshimizu N, Yamada K, Sashida Y, Anti-
convulsion effects of choto-san and chotoko (Uncariae Uncis
cam Ramlus) in mice, and identification of the active principles.
Yakugaku Zasshi, 57:1011-21, 1997 Dec.

ML Yamanaka E, Kimizuka Y, Aimi N, Sakai S, Haginiwa J,
Studies of plants containing indole alkaloids. IX. Quantitative
analysis of tertiary alkaloids in various parts of Uncaria
thynchophylla MIQ. Yakugaku Zasshi, 25:1028-33, 1983 Oct.

Yano S. Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K,
Alkaloids from the leaves of Uncaria homomalla. Planta Med,
57:749-52, 1980 Sep.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K,
Alkaloids of Uncaria pterppoda. Isolation and structures of

GAMBOGE/325

pteropodine and isopteropodine. J Chem Soc Perkin 1, 57:2245-
9, 1966.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K.
Ca2+ channel blocking effects of hirsutine, an indole alkaloid
from Uncaria genus, in the isolated rat aorta. Planta Med,
57:403-5, 1991 Oct.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K,
Gambirine, a new indole alkaloid from Uncaria gambier roxb.
Tetrahedron Lett, 57:1571-4, 1967 Apr.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K,
Studies on flavonoid metabolism. Biosynthesis of (+)-
14Ccatechin by the plant Uncaria gambir Roxb. Biochem J,
57:73-7, 1967 Oct.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S, Watanabe K,
Studies on Uncaria alkaloid. XXI. Separation of rhynchophylline
and corynoxeine (author's transl.). Yakugaku Zasshi, 57:758-9,

1975 Jun.

Yano S, Horiuchi H, Horie S, Aimi N, Sakai S. Watanabe K,
The antihypertensive effect of Uncaria rhynchophylla in
essential hypertension (author's trans!.). Taiwan I Hsueh Hui
Tsa Chih, 57:749-52, 1980 Sep.

Zhu M, Bowery NG, Greengrass PM, Phillipson JD,
Application of radioligand receptor binding assays in the search
for CNS active principles from Chinese medicinal plants. J
Ethnopharmacol, 57:153-64, 1996 Nov.

Gamboge

Garcinia hanburyi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the tree is the resin
extracted from the plant.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree grows to about 15 m and
has a diameter of about 30 cm. The bark is usually in the
form of cylindrical sticks, deep orange-brown and opaque.
The transverse fracture is smooth and almost conchoidal.

Characteristics: The taste is innocuous at first, then becomes
very acrid and causes an unpleasant stinging sensation
shortly after being placed in the mourn. The powder is highly
sternutatory.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Indochina and Sri Lanka.

Production: Gamboge is the gum-resin from the trunk of
Garcinia hanburyi harvested from trees that are at least ten

years old.

Other Names: Camboge, Gutta Cambodia, Gutta Gamba,
Gummigutta, Tom Rong, Gambodia

----- PAGE 577 -----
326/GAMBOGE

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Resins (70-75%): consisting mainly of yellow or red-colored
benzophenones and xanthones, including morellic acid,
isomorellic acid, alpha-gambogic acid (alpha-guttic acid)

Mucilages (25-30%)

EFFECTS
The drug's mucilage content produces a strong laxative
effect. The beta gutteriferine componant acts as a strong
irritant to intestinal mucous membranes and also exhibits
antimicrobial properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Gamboge is used for the treatment of
digestive disorders, in particular constipation, and is used in
combination with other laxatives.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
As little as 0.2 g of the drug can lead to abdominal pain and

vomiting.

OVERDOSAGE
Fatalities have been observed with administration of 4 g.

DOSAGE
No information is available in the literature.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11.
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Lu GB et al., (1984) Yao Hsueh Husueh Pao 19 (8): 636.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Garcinia hanburyi
See Gamboge

Garden Cress
Lepidium sativum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh or dried
herb harvested during or shortly after the flowering season.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The racemes are terminal or axillary. The
sepals are elliptical, 1 to 1.5 mm long and bristly downy. The
petals are longer than the calyx, white or reddish, oblong-
spatulate and indistinctly stemmed. The anthers are often
violet. The fruit is a compressed, orbicular-ovate, 5 to 6 mm
long, clearly winged small pod on an erect stem. The seeds
are ovate, almost smooth and red-brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Garden Cress is a 20 to 40 cm high
herb with a glabrous bluish bloom. The stem is erect, round
and branched. The leaves are light green and thin. The basal
leaves are usually lyrate-pinnatesect. The lower cauline
leaves are usually doubly or singly pinnatesect. All leaves
have dentate to prickly segments.

Characteristics: Garden Cress has a radish-like taste. The
seeds have a slimy skin and swell in water.

Habitat: The herb is grown worldwide.

Production: Garden Cress is the fresh plant (aerial part) of
Lepidium sativum, harvested during the flowering season or
shortly afterward. The fresh herb has a spicy odor. It is rarely
dried, either naturally or artificially, since the fresh plant is
used most often.

Not to be Confused With: Adulterations rarely occur, since it
is usually cultivated.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRESH FOLIAGE

Glucosinolates: chief components glucotropaeolin, yielding
benzyl isothiocyanate (benzyl mustard oil) and its autolysis
products (including benzyl cyanide, 3-phenyl propionitrile,
benzaldehyde) when the plant is bruised

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 37%)

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS

Glucosinolates (3.5 to 5.3%): glucotropeolin
Cucurbitacins

Cardiac steroids (cardenolides)

EFFECTS
The antibacterial action of Garden Cress has been demon-
strated in various tests. It was completely inhibitory in the
case of 3 microorganisms, although the antibacterial charac-
teristics depended largely on the age of the plants used. An
antiviral effect against the encephalitis virus Columbia SH,
was demonstrated in tests on mice. Its diuretic action has not
been proven through experiments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The herb is used for coughs, vitamin C
deficiency, constipation, poor immunity and as a diuretic.

----- PAGE 578 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Indian Medicine: Garden Cress is used for vitamin C
deficiency, liver disease, asthma, hemorrhoids and as an
abortifacient.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

*/** No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The mustard oil contained in Garden Cress can
cause skin blisters and necrosis in higher concentrations. It is
sometimes misused as an abortifacient because the internal
administration of mustard oil causes severe anemia of the
internal organs.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Garden Cress is administered as a
freshly cut herb in oral preparations.

LITERATURE
Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Tori R, Rollin P, Streicher H. Thtem J, Palmieri S, The
myrosinase-glucosinolate interaction mechanism studied using
some synthetic competitive inhibitors. FEBS Lett, 385:87-90,

# 1996 Apr 29.
Rao KV. Beach JW, Streptonignn and related compounds. 5.
Synthesis and evaluation of some isoquinoline analogues. J Med
Chem, 19:1871-9, 1991 Jun.
Ugazio G et al., co-toxicological study conducted with a battery
of biological and phytological tests on sediments carried out on
a series of 24 tributaries of the Po in 1994 and 1995. G Ital
Med Lav Ergon, 19:10-6, 1997 Jan-Mar.

Garlic
Allium sativum

TRADE NAMES
Garlic (available from numerous manufacturers), Garlicin,
Garlique, Garlic Oil, Garlic Power, Triple Garlic, High
Potency Garlic Oil, Garlic Odorless, Chinese Tian Shan
Garlic, Deodorized Garlic, Kyolic Reserve Aged Garlic
Extract, Odor Free Concentrated Garlic, Aged Garlic Ex-
tract, Kyolic Hi-Po Formula, High Alicin Garlic, Standard-
ized Garlic, Natural Garlic Oil

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the whole fresh
bulb, the dried bulb and the oil of garlic.

Flower and Fruit: The plant consists of a cluster of long
flowers where the floral axis terminates in a single flower
and contains few florets (small flowers or buds). There are
numerous | cm deciduous bulbs capable of producing new

GARLIC /327

plants, which shed simultaneously. The flowers usually
remain in bud form and often do not produce any seed. The
petals are reddish or greenish-white and longer than the
stamens. The anthers of the middle stamens are spread at the
base and have fan-shaped tips.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Allium sativum is a perennial plant
that grows 25 to 70 cm high. The plant contains an erect,
rigid or curved stem, which is leafy in the middle. The leaves
are flat, 4 to 25 mm, straight and broad, with a wedge-shaped
tip; they can be rough or smooth-edged. The sheath, or lower
part of the leaf surrounding the stem, is pointed and longer
than the flower cluster. The garlic bulb is usually a
compound bulb, and the secondary bulbs are oval in shape.
The bulb skin color is either silky white or green.

Habitat: Central to southern Asia is considered the region of
origin; garlic has been introduced to the Mediterranean with
cultivation worldwide.

Production: Garlic bulbs, either fresh or carefully dried,
consist of the main bulb with several secondary bulbs
(cloves). Garlic may be harvested in September and October
when the leaves and bulbs are dry.

Other Names: Poor Man's Treacle, Clove Garlic, Common
Garlic, Allium, Stinking Rose

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alliins (alkylcysteine sulfoxides): in particular allylalliin,
propenyl alliin and methylalliin (including their gamma-
glutamyl conjugates. Once cut, the alliin in the freshly
harvested bulbs is converted to allicin (diallyl-disulphide-
mono-S-oxide). Bulbs that have been dried and then re-
moistened, ferment into alliaceous oils. These oils are
oligosulfides, ajoens (dialkyl-trithlaalkane-monoxides) and
vinyl dithiins.

Fructosans (polysaccharides)
Saponins

EFFECTS
The alliin in the drug is antimicrobial, lipid-reducing, anti-
oxidative and fibrinolytic. The antibacterial, antimycotic and
lipid-reducing effects have been well-documented. Inhibition
of thrombocyte aggregation, increased bleeding time and
clotting time, and enhancement of fibrinolytic activity have
been demonstrated in clinical trials.

A study of the lipid-lowering effect with isolated hepatocytes
suggest that garlic extracts are responsible for early inhibi-
tion of sterol synthesis due to their sulfur-containing
compounds. Alliin, the main sulfur-containing compound of
garlic, when coverted to allicin, exerts inhibitory effects on

----- PAGE 579 -----
328 /GARLIC

key enzymes in cholesterol biosynthesis, including HMG
CoA reductase (Gebhardt, 1993; Gebhardt, 1996).

Garlic tablets studied in vitro were found to enhance natural
killer (NK) cells, which are an important part of the immune
system in fighting cancers, viruses and certain bacteria.
Antioxidative effects of garlic, determined by an increase in
intracellular glutathione (GSH) levels, are responsible for
decreasing poor cellular function and premature aging.
Antiviral activity was also noted in vitro with garlic tablets
(See, 1999).

Ajoen is the antithrombotic compound that inhibits fibrino-
gen receptors on platelets (Robbers, 1996). The allicin and
oligosulfides in garlic oil have antiplatelet activity through
inhibition of adenosine diphosphate, collagen and _beta-
thromboglobulin release after collagen stimulation. The
compounds also exert antithrombotic effects through inhibi-
tion of platelet thromboxane formation (Bordia, 1998;
Legnani 1993).

CLINICAL TRIALS
A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study in-
volving 42 outpatients was conducted over a 12-week period
to assess the effects of standardized garlic powder tablets on
serum lipids and lipoproteins, glucose and blood pressure.
Standardized garlic powder administered 900 mg daily
produced a significantly greater reduction in serum total
cholesterol (262+/- 34mg/dL to 247 +/-40mg/dL with garlic
compared to 276+/-34mg/dL to 274+/- 29mg/dL with
placebo). Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) was
significantly reduced with garlic treatment by 11% compared
to 3% with placebo treatment. No significant change was
demonstrated in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglyc-
erides, serum glucose, blood pressure and other monitored
parameters (Jain, 1993).

The lipid-lowering effect of garlic powder tablets was tested
by administering a dose of 900 mg daily (equivalent to
approximately 2.7 grams or | clove of fresh garlic daily) to
28 outpatients with hypercholesterolemia. After 12 weeks of
treatment, there were no significant lipid or lipoprotein
changes in either the placebo- or garlic-treated groups
(Isaacsohn, 1998).

A 5 mg dose of steam distilled garlic oil was administered
twice daily to 25 outpatients with moderate hypercholesterol-
emia in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
The hypocholesterolemic effect of garlic oil was determined
after a 12-week period. The commercial garlic oil prepara-
tion did not have a significant effect on serum lipoproteins,
cholesterol absorption or cholesterol synthesis (Berthold,
1998).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Note: There are contradicting results regarding the lipid-
lowering effect of garlic, which may be attributed to lack of
manufacturing standardization of the products used in the
studies. The fresh garlic may contain higher amounts of the
active ingredient, allicin, which is inactivated upon cooking.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Arteriosclerosis
« Hypertension
* Raised levels of cholesterol

Garlic is used internally as an adjuvant to dietetic measures
for elevated lipid levels. The herb is also used for prevention
of age-related vascular changes and arteriosclerosis.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, garlic is utilized internally
for inflammatory respiratory conditions, whooping cough
and bronchitis. Garlic is also used for gastrointestinal
ailments, particularly digestive disorders with flatulence and
gastrointestinal spasms. Other uses consist of menstrual
pains, treatment of diabetes, and as a tonic for diverse
illnesses and debilities. Externally, garlic is used for corns,
warts, calluses, otitis, muscle pain, neuralgia, arthritis and
sciatica.

Indian Medicine: Garlic is used in bronchitis, constipation,
joint pain and fever.

Homeopathic Uses: Garlic is used in conditions such as
inflammation of the upper respiratory tract, digestive com-
plaints and muscle rheumatism in the lumbar region.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Adverse effects such as headache, myalgia, fatigue
and vertigo have been seen with therapeutic doses of garlic
(Holzgartner, 1992).

Allergic Reactions: Frequent contact with the drug may
result in allergic reactions such as contact dermatitis and
asthma (Asero, 1998; Lee, 1991).

Burns: Garlic associated partial thickness burns and necrosis
have been reported in several case studies in which the herb
remained in contact with the skin for a minimum of 6 to 18
hours (Roberge, 1997; Garty, 1993; Parish, 1987).

Gastrointestinal: Abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea and a feeling of fullness have occurred with garlic
therapy (Holzgartner, 1992; Berthold, 1998)

Hematologic: A significant decrease in hematocrit values
and plasma viscosity have been associated with the adminis-
tration of garlic powder (Jung, 1991). There has been risk of
postoperative bleeding with TURP (trans-urethral resection
of prostate) or mammaplasty surgery (Burnham, 1995;

----- PAGE 580 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

German, 1995). Also, spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma
has been reported with garlic (Rose, 1990).

Hypersensitivity: Occupational asthma induced by inhalation
and ingestion of garlic’ has been observed (Lybarger, 1982).

if Ocular: The alliin, S-alkyl cysteine sulfoxide, which decom-

poses into a variety of thiosulfinates and polysulfides via
allinase upon extraction (crushing), produces a lacrimation
effect (Augusti, 1996).

Olfactory: Garlic therapy is associated with body odor or
halitosis (Berthold, 1998).

Nursing: Not to be used while nursing.

Drug Interactions: Concomitant use of garlic with antico-
agulants such as Coumadin and antiplatelets such as aspirin
and dipyridamole could increase the risk of bleeding due to
the effect of garlic on platelet aggregation and fibrinogen.
(Agerwal, 1996; Bordia, 1998; Legnani, 1993; Newall, 1996;
Robbers, 1996). NSAID's, such as indomethacin, could
increase bleeding time by decreasing platelet aggregation
(Agerwal, 1996; Bordia, 1998; Legnani, 1993).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The minced bulb and preparations

are for internal use and external treatment. Garlic oil
maceration or garlic oil resulting from steam distillation is
widely available.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 3 mg, 100 mg, 270 mg (total allicin 5000 meg),
300 mg, 500 mg, 580 mg (total allicin 3 mg), 600 mg (total
allicin 2500 meg or standardized to 500 meg allicin), 1000
mg, 1500 mg, 5000 mg

Dried powder

Oil macerations

Tablets — 300 mg, 400 mg (total allicin 3 mg), 500 mg, 600
mg (total allicin 5000 meg), 810 mg

Preparation: Garlic oil maceration — Bulbs are homoge-
nized and stirred in fatty oil (1:1) for 48 hours, then filtered.

. Solid garlic extract — An extraction of the chopped bulbs
with ethanol or methanol is allowed to evaporate.

Aqueous extract — Fresh bulbs are macerated in cold water
(1:1).

Fermented garlic — The minced drug is soaked over a long
duration in a water-ethanol mixture, volatile agents escape,
and the garlic becomes odorless. Steam distillations and
tinctures are also possible.

GARLIC /329

Daily Dosage:

General — The average daily dose is 4 gm of fresh garlic or
8 mg of essential oil. One fresh garlic clove, 1 to 2 times
daily.

Arteriosclerosis — Daily doses of 600-800 mg of garlic
powder and dried garlic have been shown to be effective
(Harenberg, 1988: Kiesewetter. 1991).

Hyperlipidemia — A total daily dose of 600-900 mg of
garlic powder (standardized to 1.3% of alliin content) has
been shown effective (Holzgartner, 1992; Isaacsohn, 1998;
Mader, 1990; Simons, 1995).

Hypertension — The effective dose is garlic powder taken
200-300 mg three times daily (Auer, 1990; Sigagy, 1994).

External — Fresh garlic applied to the skin as an antimicro-
bial dressing should not be left for more than a few hours
due to case reports of burns (Garty, 1993; Parish, 1987:
Roberge, 1997).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 times daily sc; ointment 1 to 2 times
daily (HAB1)

Storage: Garlic should be hung in plaits in a dry place.

LITERATURE
Agarwal KC, Therapeutic actions of garlic constituents. Med

Res Rev 1996; 16(1): 111-124.

Anonym, Knoblauch. Blockade der Cholesterinsynthese in der
Leber. In: DAZ 134(45):4468. 1994.

Apitz-Castro R et al., (1983) Thromb Res 32:155.

Asero R, Mistrello G, Roncarolo D et al., A case of garlic
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998 Mar;101(3):427-8.
Augusti KT, Therapeutic values of onion (Allium cepa L.) and
garlic (Allium sativum L.). Indian J Exp Biol 19%
Jul;34(7):634-40.

Augusti KT, Benaim ME, (1974) Clin Chim Acta 60:121.
Augusti KT, Mathew PT, (1974) Experientia 30:468.

Block E et al., (1984) J Am Chem Soc 106:8295.

Berthold HK, Sudhop T, von Bergmann K, Effect of garlic oil
preparation on serum lipoproteins and cholesterol metabolism: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998 Jun 17,279(23): 1900-2.
Bordia A et al., Effect of garlic (Allium sativum) on blood
lipids, blood sugar, fibrinogen and fibrinolytic activity in
patients with coronary artery disease. Prostaglandins Leukot
Essent Fatty Acids. 1998 Apr;58(4):257-63.

Brahmachar MD, Augusti KT, (1962) J Pharm Pharmacol 14:
254 and 617.

Bumham BE, Garlic as a possible risk for postoperative
bleeding. Plast Reconstr Surg 1995 Jan;95(1):213.

Chaudhuri BN et al., (1984) Biomed Biochim Acta 41:1045.

----- PAGE 581 -----
330/GARLIC

Garty BZ, Garlic Burns. Pediatrics 1993 Mar;91(3):658-9.

Gebhardt R, Multiple inhibitory effects of garlic extracts on
cholesterol biosynthesis in hepatocytes. Lipids 1993;28:613-619.

Gebhardt R, Beck H, Differential inhibitory effects of garlic-

derived organosulfur compounds on cholesterol biosynthesis in
primary rat hepatocyte cultures. Lipids 1996 Dec;31(12):1269-
76.

German K, Kumar U, Blackford HN, Garlic and the risk of
TURP bleeding. Br J Urol 1995 Oct:76(4):518.

Harenberg J, Giese C, Zimmermann R. Effect of dried garlic on
blood coagulation, fibrinolysis, platelet aggregation and serum
cholesterol levels in patients with hyperlipoproteinemia.
Atherosclerosis 1988 Dec;74(3):247-9.

Holzgartner H, Schmidt U, Kuhn U, Comparison of the efficacy
and tolerance of a garlic preparation vs. bezafibrate.
Arzneimittelforschung 1992 Dec;42( 12): 1473-7.

Ide N et al., Aged garlic extract and its constituents inhibit
Cu+-induced oxidative modification of low density
lipoproteins.PM (1997) 63(3):263-264.

Imai J et al., Antioxidant and radical scavenging effects of aged
garlic extracts and its constituents. PM (1994) 60(5):417.

Isaacsohn JL, MoserM, Stein EA et al.. Garlic powder and
plasma lipids and lipoproteins: a multicenter, randomized.
placebo-controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 1998 Jun

8:158(11): 1189-94.

Jain AK, Vargas R, Gotzkowsky S, McMahon FG, Can garlic
reduce levels of serum lipids? A controlled clinical study. Am J
Med (1993) 94:632-635.

Jain RC, Vyas CR, (1974) Brit Med J 2:730.

Jung EM, Jung F, Mrowietz C et al.. Influence of garlic
powder on cutaneous microcirculation. A randomized placebo-
controlled double blind cross-over study in apparently healthy
subjects. Arzneimittelforschung 1991 Jun;41(6):626-30.

Jung F, Kiesewetter H, Mrowietz C, Pindur G, Heiden M,
Miyashita C, Wenzel E, (1989) Akutwirkungen eines
zusammengesetzten Knoblauchpraparates auf die Flie(3fahigkeit
des Blutes. ZPT 10(3):87.

Kabelik J, (1970) Pharmazie 25:266.

Kiesewetter H, Jung F, Pindur G et al., Effect of garlic on
thrombocyte aggregation, microcirculation, and other risk
factors. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1991 Apr;29(4):151-
5.

Koch HP, Der lange Weg zum "geruchlosen Knoblauch." PUZ
(1996) 25(4): 186-191.<

Koch HP, Epidemiologic der Knoblauchforschung. DAZ
(1992)132(40):2103.

Koch HP, Hormonwirkungen bei Allium-Arten. ZPT
(1992)13(6):177.

Koch HP, Metabolismus und Pharmakokinetik der Inhatsstoffe
des Knoblauchs. Was wissen wir dariiber? ZPT (1992) 13(3):83.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Koch HP, Saponine in Knoblauch und Kiichenzwiebel. In: DAZ
133(41):3733. 1993.

Koch HP. Wie "sicher" ist Knoblauch? Toxische, allergische
und andere unerwiinschte Nebenwirkungen. DAZ (1992)
132(27):1419.

Koch B, In: Koch HP, Lawson.LD: Garlic - The Science and
Therapeutic Application of Allium sativum L. and Related
Species, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore. 1996.

Kubitschek J, Knoblauch blockiert Cholesterolsynthese in der
Leber. ZPT (1995) 16(2):74, s. auch (3):146.

Lawson LD, Wang ZJ, Pre-hepatic fate of the organosulfur
compounds derived from garlic (Allium sativum). PM (1993)
59(7)88.

Lee TY, Lam TH, Contact dermatitis due to topical treatment
with garlic in Hong Kong. Contact Dermatitis 1991

Mar;24(3): 193-6.

Legnani C, Frascaro M, Guazzaloca G et al., Effects of a dried
garlic preparation on fibrinolysis and platelet aggregation in
healthy subjects. Arzneimittelforschung 1993 Feb;43(2): 119-22.

Lybarger JA, Gallagher JS, Pulver DW et al., Occupational
asthma induced by inhalation and ingestion of garlic. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1982 May;69(5):448-54.

Mader FH. Treatment of hyperlipidemia with garlic-powder
tablets. Evidence from the German Association of General
Practitioners’ multicenter placebo-controlled double-blind study.
Arzneimittelforschung 1990 Oct;40(10): 1111-6.

Miitsch-Eckner M, Erdelmeier CAJ, Sticher O, A novel amino
acid glycoside and three amino acids from Allium sativum. JNP
(1993) 56(6):864.

Nagae S et al., Pharmacokinetics of the garlic compound S-
allylcystein. PM (1994) 60(3):241.

Newall CA, Anderson LA, Philpson JD, Herbal Medicine: A
Guide for Healthcare Professionals. London, UK: The
Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

Parish RA, Mclntire S, Heimbach DM, Garlic burns: a
naturopathic remedy gone awry. Pediatr Emerg Care 1987
Dec;3(4):258-60.

Reuter HD, 6. Kongrep der Gesellschaft fur
Phytotherapie:Satelliten-Symposium "International Garlic
Research". ZPT (1996) 17(1):13-25.

Reuter HD, Chemie, Pharmakologie und medizinische
Anwendung von Knoblauch. ZPT (1989) 10(4): 124.

Reuter HD, II. Internationales Knoblauch-Symposium. ZPT
(1991)12(3):83.

Robbers JE, Speedie MK, Tyler VE, Pharmacognosy and
Pharmacobiotechnology. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins,
1996.

Roberge RJ, Leckey R, Spence R, Krenzelok EJ, Garlic burns
of the breast. Am J Emerg Med 1997 Sep;15(5):548.

Rose KD, Croissant PD, Parliament CF, Levin MB.
Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma with associated platelet

----- PAGE 582 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
dysfunction from excessive garlic consumption: a case report.
Neurosurgery 1990:26:880-82.

Schiewe FP, Hein T, Knoblauch bei Hyperlipidamie. ZPT
(1995)16(6):343-348.

Schoetan A et al.. (1984) Experientia 40(3>:26I.

See, D, Gurnee K. LeClair, M. An in vitro screening study of
196 natural products for toxicity and efficacy. JAN A 1999
Winter:2( 1 ):25-39.

Sendl A, Phytotherapie: Biirlauch und Knoblauch im Vergleich.
DAZ (1993)133(5):392.

Siegers CP. Neues zur arteriosklerotischen Wirkung des
Knoblauchs. ZPT (1993)14(1):21.

Simons LA. Balasubramaniam S. von Konigsmark M et al.. On
the effect of garlic on plasma lipids and lipoproteins in mild
hypercholesterolemia. Atherosclerosis 1995 Mar; 113(2):219-25.

Walper A et al.. Effizienz einer Diatempfehlung und einer
zusiitzlichen Phytotherapie mit Allium sativum bei leichter bis
mapiger Hypercholesteriniimie. Medwelt (1994) 45(7/8):327.

Wenkert E et al.. (1971) Experientia 28:377.
Whitaker JR. (1976) Adv Food Res 22:73.

Wichtl M, Pflanzliche Pille fiir die ewige Jugend. DAZ
(1991)131(17):837.

Further information in:

Chan H. But P. Pharmacology and Applications of Chinese
Materia Medica Vol 1. World Scientific, Singapore 1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen BM, Allergiepflanzen - Pflanzenallergene. Ecomed
Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

GERMAN CHAMOMILE/331

Gaiiltheria procumbens

See Wintergreen

Gelidium amansii
See Agar

Gelsemium sempervirens

See Yellow Jessamine

Genista tinctoria

See Dyer's Broom

Gentiana lutea

See Yellow Gentian

Geranium maculatum
See Cranesbill

Geranium robertianum
See Herb Robert

German Chamomile
Matricaria Recutita

TRADE NAMES

Chamomile Flowers (available from numerous manufactur-
ers), Standardized Chamomile Extract, Wild Chamomile,
Kid Chamomile

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts consist of the entire

flowering herb or only the flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flower heads are terminal and long-
pedicled. The flower is white with a yellow center. The
margin flowers are obtuse with a tunicate margin. The ray
florets are white, linguiform, female and 3-toothed. The disc

----- PAGE 583 -----
332/GERMAN CHAMOMILE

florets are tubular, androgynous, 5-toothed, with a hollow
receptacle.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 20 to 40 cm high herb
with an erect, glabrous stem, which is branched above. The
leaves are 2 to 3 pinnatisect and have a narrow thorny tip.

Characteristic: The receptacle of the compound head of
German Chamomile is hollow which distinguishes it from
other types of chamomile.

Habitat: German Chamomile is indigenous to Europe and
northwest Asia, naturalized in North America and elsewhere.

Production: German Chamomile consists of the fresh or
dried flower heads of Matricaria recutita and their
preparations.

Other Names: Pin Heads, Chamomilla. Chamomile, Single
Chamomile, Hungarian Chamomile

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil {0.4-1.5%): chief components (-)-alpha-bisabolol
(levomenol), bisabolol oxide A, bisabolol oxide B, bisabolo-
lone oxide A, beta-trans-farnesene, trans-en-yne-dicycloether
(polyyne spiroether, adjoining cis-en-yn-dicycloether), cha-
mazulene (blue in color, arising from the non-volatile
proazulene matricin after steam distillation), spathulenol

Flavonoids: flavone glycosides: aglycones apigenin, luteolin,
chrysoeriol, chief glycosides apigenin-7-O-glucoside, apige-
nin glucoside acetate, - flavonol glycosides, aglycones
including quercetin, isorhamnetin, patuletin, for example
rutin, hyperoside

Unbound, Highly Methoxylized Flavonoids: jaceidinem
chrysospenol, chrysosplenetin

Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone, herniarin

Mucilages: (10% in the mucilage ribs, fructans) including
rhamanogalacturonane

EFFECTS
Gastrointestinal Effects

The proteolytic activity of pepsin is reduced by (-)-alpha-
bisabolol in the gastrointestinal tract (Isaac, 1975). The (-)-
alpha-bisabolol exerts a protective effect from gastric
toxicity produced by acetylsalicylic acid (Torrado, 1995).

Anti-Inflammatory Effects

Chamazulene exerts anti-inflammatory effects through inhi-
bition of leukotriene B4 formation (Safayhi, 1994). The en-
yne dicycloether inhibits degranulation of mast cells to
prevent histamine release (Miller, 1996). Apigenin, a flavo-
noid, effectively blocks intercellular adhesion molecule-1
upregulation and leukocyte adhesion in response to cyto-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

kines. This activity is through a mechanism unrelated to free
radical scavenging or leukocyte formation (Panes, 1996).

Antioxidant Effects

Chamazulene, a volatile oil, exerts antioxidant effects
through inhibition of lipid peroxidation (Rekka, 1996).
Chamazulene also blocks chemical peroxidation of arachi-
donic acid for antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects
(Safayhi, 1994).

Antineoplastic Effects

Apigenin applied topically has effects on skin tumorigenesis
through inhibition of skin papillomas and a tendency to
decrease the conversion of papillomas to carcinomas (Li,
1996; Wei, 1990). Apigenin inhibits UV-induced tumorigen-
esis when applied topically via G2/M and Gl cell-cycle
arrest in keratinocytes (Lepley, 1996; Lepley, 1997). The
chemoprevention mechanisms occur through inhibition of
the mitotic kinase activity, perturbation of cyclin Bi levels,
and inhibition of protein kinase C (Lepley, 1996; Lin, 1997).
Apigenin suppresses transcriptional activation of cycloox-
ygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase in macro-
phages, which is important for the prevention of
carcinogenesis and inflammation (Liang, 1999).

Anxiolytic Effects

Flavonoids are CNS-active molecules and the chemical
modification of the flavone nucleus dramatically increases
the anxiolytic potency (Paladini, 1999). Apigenin is a ligand
for the central benzodiazepine receptors exerting anxiolytic
and slight sedative effects (Viola, 1995).

Miscellaneous Effects

Apigenin has been associated with an increase in atrial rate
as a result of a reduction in noradrenaline uptake and a
reduction in monoamine oxidase activity (Lorenzo, 1996).
The herb exerts antibacterial and drying effects on weeping
wound areas, which increase healing (Glowania, 1987).
Chamomile oil has antimicrobial activity against some skin
pathogens such as Staphylococcus and Candida species
(Aggag, 1972).

CLINICAL TRIALS
A Phase III, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluated
chamomile mouthwash for prevention of 5-fluorouracil(5-
FU) chemotherapy induced oral mucositis. There were 164
patients included in the study at the time of their fist cycle of
5-FU based chemotherapy, All patients received oral cryo-
therapy for 30 minutes with each dose of 5-FU. Chamomile
mouthwash was administered three times daily for 14 days in
the treatment group. Stomatitis scores determined by health
care providers and by patients suggested no difference of

----- PAGE 584 -----
"fe

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

stomatitis between the chamomile and placebo-treatment
group (Fidler, 1996).

The efficacy of Kamillosan cream (topical chamomile
cream) was compared to steroidal (0.25% hydrocortisone,
0.75% fluocortin butyl ester) and non-steroidal (5% bufexa-
mac) deramatologic agents for the maintenance therapy of
eczematous disease. There were 161 patients suffering from
inflammatory dermatoses on hands, forearms, and lower legs
included in the study. The patients had initially been treated
with 0.1% difluocortolone valerate. The Kamillosan cream
was slightly less effective as 0.25% hydrocortisone and
superior to 5% bufexarnac and 0.75% fluocortin butyl ester
(Aertgeerts, 1985).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

¢ Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the skin

* Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Tendency to infection

* Wounds and burns

Chamomile is used internally for inflammatory diseases of
the gastrointestinal tract associated with gastrointestinal
spasms, irritation of the oral pharygeal mucous membrane
and upper respiratory tract. Externally, the drug is used for
skin and mucous membrane inflammations, pulpitis, gingivi-
tis, respiratory catarrh, and ano-genital inflammation.

Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, the herb is used internally
for diarrhea and flatulence. The herb is used externally for
furuncles, hemorrhoids, abscesses, and acne.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for inflammation and
cramps in the gastrointestinal tract, teething symptoms,
severe pain, inflammation of the upper respiratory tract, and
dysmenorrhea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Chamomile should not be taken by anyone with a known
allergy to its components or other members of the Composi-
tae family (eg, arnica, yarrow, feverfew, tansy, artemesia)
(Hausen, 1996). A case report indicates chamomile may
precipitate severe anaphylactic reactions in patients with hay
fever and bronchial asthma caused by a variety of pollens
(grass, olive, and mugwort) (Subiza, 1989).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Anaphylactic Reactions: Ingestion of chamomile-tea infusion
has precipitated an anaphylactic reaction in an 8 year old
male with hay fever and broncial asthma caused by a variety
of pollens (Subiza, 1989).

GERMAN CHAMOMILE / 333
Contact Dermatitis: Chamomile, a Compositae plant, is
associated with allergic contact dermatitis (Hausen, 1996;
Pereira, 1997; Rodriguez-Serna, 1998).

Allergic Conjunctivitis: Chamomile tea eye washing to treat
ocular reactions has induced allergic conjunctivitis witii lid
angioedema (Subiza, 1990).

Drug Interactions:

Coumarin Anticoagulants — Due to the content of hydroxy-
coumarins in chamomile, there may be an additive effect
when taken with warfarin.

Alcohol/Benzodiazepines — Chamomile has week anxiolyt-
ic properties at benzodiazepine receptor sites, thus concomi-
tant use of alcohol and benzodiazepines should be avoided.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid and solid preparations are

available for external and internal application.

How Supplied:
Capsule — 125 mg, 350 mg, 354 mg

Liquid — 14

Oil — 100%

Preparation: An infusion for internal use is prepared by
pouring boiling water (150 ml) over 3 gm of chamomile,
cover for 5 to 10 minutes and strain. (1 teaspoonful = 1 gm
drug).

An infusion for external poultice application is prepared by
pouring one and one-half cups of hot water over 2 dessert-
spoons of the drug, cover, leave to draw for 15 minutes and
then strain. Ointments and gels are available in strengths of 3
to 10%.

Daily Dosage: An internal single dose is approximately 3 gm
as an infusion. Liquid extract 14 ml or | cup of freshly
made tea is administered 3-4 times daily. Externally as a bath
additive, 50 gm is added to 1 Liter of water or 6 gm of drug
for a steam bath. Washes and gargles may be administered
several times a day.

Homeopathic Dosage: Internally, the herb is given as 5-10
drops, 1 tablet, or 5-10 globules. Externally, dilute 1
dessertspoon with 250 ml water and use 2-3 times daily in
poutices or washes (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Achterrath-Tuckerman U et al., (1980) Planta Med 39(1 ):38.

Aertgeerts P, Albring M, Klaschka F, Nasemann T, Patzelt-
Wenczler R, Rauhut K, Weigl B, (1985) Vergleichende Priifung
von Kamillosan(Creme gegeniiber steroidalen (0,25 %
Hydrocortison, 0,75 % Bluocortinbutylester) und nichtsteroidalen

----- PAGE 585 -----
334/GERMAN CHAMOMILE

(5 % Bufexamac) Externa in der Erhaltungstherapie von
Ekzemerkrankungen. Z Hautkr 60:270-277.

Aggag M, Yousef R. Study of antimicrobial activity of
chamomile oil. Planta Med 1972 Sep;22(2): 140-4.

Albring M, Albrecht H, Alcorn G, Liicker PW, (1983) The
measuring of the anti-inflammatory effect of a compound of the
skin of volunteers. Meth Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 5:75-77.

Ammon HPT, Kaul R. (1992) Pharmakologie der Kamille und
ihrer Inhaltsstoffe! Dtsch Apoth Z 132(Suppl 27):3-26.

Dorsch W, Neues iiber antientziindliche Drogen. In: ZPT

14(1 ):26. 1993.

Fidler R, Loprinzi C, O'Fallon J et al. Prospective evaluation of
a chamomile mouthwash for prevention of 5-FU-induced oral
mucositis. Cancer 1996 Feb 1;77(3):522-5.

Fuller E et al.. Anti-inflammatory activity of Chamomilla
polysaccharides. In: PM 59(7)66. 1993.

Fuller E, Franz G, Neues von den Kamillenpolysacchariden. In:
DAZ 133(45 ):4224. 1993.

Gasic O et al., (1983) Fitoterapia 2:51.

Glowania HJ; Raulin C; Swoboda M. Effect of chamomile on
wound healing—a clinical double-blind study. Z Hautkr 1987
Sep 1:62(17): 1262, 1267-71.

Habersang S, (1979) Planta Med 37(2): 115.

Hausen HM, Busker E, Carle R. (1984) Ober das
Sensibilierungsvermogen von Compositenarten. VII.
Experimentelle Untersuchungen mit Ausziigen und Inhaltsstoften
von Chamomilla recutita L. Rauschert und Anthemis cotula L.
Planta Med 50:229-234.

Heilmann J, Kamillenflavonoide: Nur Aglyka dringen in die
Haut ein. In: DAZ 133(37):3296. 1993.

Isaac D, (1980) Die Kamillentherapie - Erfolg und Bestatigung.
Dtsch Apoth Ztg 120:567-570.

Isaac O, (1979) Planta Med 35(2):3, 118.

Isaac O; Thiemer K. Biochemical studies on camomile
components/IIl. In vitro studies about the antipeptic activity of
(-)-alpha-bisabolol. Arzneimittelforschung 1975 Sep;25(9):1352-
4.

Jakovlev V et al., (1979) Planta Med 35(2):3.
Jakovlev V et al., (1983) Planta Med 49(2):67.

Jakovlev V, Isaac O, Flaskamp E, (1983) Pharmakologische
Untersuchungen von Kamillen-Inhaltsstoffen. VI.
Untersuchungen zur antiphlogistischen Wirkung von Chamazulen
und Matricin. Planta Med 49:67-73.

Jakovlev V, Isaac O, Flaskamp E, Pharmakologische
Untersuchungen von Kamilleninhaltsstoffen VI. Untersuchungen
zur antiphlogistischen Wirkung von Chamazulen und Matricin.
In: PM 49:67. 1983.

Jenss H, (1985) Zur Problematik funktioneller Magen-Darm-

Krankheiten am Beispiel des Colon irritabile. In: Oepen I
(Hrsg) An den Grenzen der Schulmedizin, eine Analyse

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

umstrittener Memoden. Deutscher Arzte-Verlag Koln, S 197-
212.

Lepley DM; Pelling JC. Induction of p21IAVAFI and Gl cell-
cycle arrest by the chemopreventive agent apigenin. Mol
Carcinog 1997 Jun;19(2):74-82.

Lepley DM; Li B; Birt DF; Pelling JC. The chemopreventive
flavonoid apigenin induces G2/M arrest in keratinocytes.
Carcinogenesis 1996 Nov;17(1 1):2367-75.

Li B; Pinch H; Birt DF. Influence of vehicle, distant topical
delivery, and biotransformation on the chemopreventive activity
of apigenin, a plant flavonoid, in mouse skin. Pharm Res 1996
Oct; 13(10): 1530-4.

Liang YC; Huang YT; Tsai SH et al. Suppression of inducible
cyclooxygenase and inducible nitric oxide synthase by apigenin
and related flavonoids in mouse macrophages. Carcinogenesis
1999 Oct;20( 10): 1945-52.

Lin JK; Chen YC; Huang YT; Lin-Shiau SY. Suppression of
protein kinase C and nuclear oncogene expression as possible
molecular mechanisms of cancer chemoprevention by apigenin
and curcumin. J Cell Biochem Suppl 1997:28-29:39-48.

Lorenzo PS; Rubio MC; Medina JH; Adler-Graschinsky E.
Involvement of monoamine oxidase and noradrenaline uptake in
the positive chronotropic effects of apigenin in rat atria. Eur J
Pharmacol 1996 Sep 26;312(2):203-7.

Maiche AG. Grohn P. Maki-Hokkonen H. (1991) Effect of
chamomile cream and almond ointment of acute radiation skin
reaction. Acta Oncol 30:395-396.

Miller Th, Wittstock U. Lindequist U, Teuscher E, Effects of
some components of the essential oil of chamomile,
Chamomilla recutita, on histamine release from mast cells.
Planta Med 1996 Feb:62(1):60-61.

Nissen HP, Blitz H, Kreysel HW. (1988) Profilometrie, eine
Methode zur Beurteilung der therapeutischen Wirksamkeit von
Kamillosan-Salbe. Z Hautkr 63:184-190.

Paladini AC: Marder M; Viola H et al. Flavonoids and the
central nervous system: from forgotten factors to potent
anxiolytic compounds. J Pharm Pharmacol 1999 May:51(5):
519-2.

Panes J; Gerritsen ME; Anderson DC et al. Apigenin inhibits
tumor necrosis factor-induced intercellular adhesion molecule-1
upregulation in vivo. Microcirculation 1996 Sep;3(3):279-86.

Pereira F; Santos R; Pereira A. Contact dermatitis from
chamomile tea. Contact Dermatitis 1997 Jun:36(6):307.

Rekka EA; Kourounakis AP; Kourounakis PN. Investigation of
the effect of chamazulene on lipid peroxidation and free radical
processes. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol 1996
Jun;92(3):361-4.

Redaelli C et al., (1981) J Chrom. 209:110.

Redaelli C et al., (1981) Plant Med 42:288.

Rodriguez-Serna M; Sanchez-Motilla JM; Ramon R; Aliaga A.
Allergic and systemic contact dermatitis from Matricaria
chamomilla tea.Contact Dermatitis 1998 Oct:39(4): 192-3.

----- PAGE 586 -----
™

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Safayhi H et al., Chamazulene: an antioxidaht-type inhibitor of
leukotriene B4 formation. In: PM 60(5):410. 1994.

Schilcher H, (1987) Die Kamille. Handbuch fur Arzte,
Apotheker und andere Naturwissenschaftler. Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft, Stuttgart Ammon HPT, Sabieraj J, Kaul R,
Kamille - Mechanismus der antiphlogistischen Wirkung von
Kamillenextrakten und -inhaltsstoffen. In: DAZ 136(22): 1821-
1834. 1996.

Sorkin B, Untersuchungen zur Wirksamkeit von Kamille am
Menschen. In: Seifen, Ole. Fette. Wachse 108(1):9-10. 1982.

Subiza J; Subiza JL; Hinojosa M et al. Anaphylactic reaction
after the ingestion of chamomile tea: a study of cross-reactivity
with other composite pollens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1989
Sep;84(3):353-8.

Subiza J, Subiza JL, Alonso M et al. Allergic conjunctivitis to
chamomile tea. Ann Allergy 1990 Aug;65(2): 127-32.

Szelenyi I et al., (1979) Planta Med 35(3):218.

Torrado S; Torrado S; Agis A et al. Effect of dissolution
profile and (-)-alpha-bisabolol on the gastrotoxicity of
acetylsalicylic acid. Pharmazie 1995 Feb:50(2): 141-3.

Vilagines P et al., (1985) C R Acad Sci (111)301(6):289.
Viola H: Wasowski C: Levi de Stein M et al. Apigenin, a

£ component of Matricaria recutita flowers, is a central

m

w

enzodiazepine receptors-ligand with anxiolytic effects. Planta
Med 1995 Jun;61(3):213-6.

Wei H, Tye L, Bresnick E. Birt D. Inhibitory effect of
apigenin, a plant flavonoid. on epidermal ornithine
lecarboxylase and skin tumor promotion in mice. Cancer Res
990 Feb 1;50(3):499-502.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Chamomilla recutita).

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988 (unter Chamomilla
recutita).

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

GERMAN IPECAC / 335

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

German Ipecac

Cynanchum vincetoxicum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves or rhizome with the attached roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has small white flowers in
peduncled cymes, 5 sepals and a wheel-shaped corolla.
There is a 5-lobed secondary corolla. There are 5 stamens
whose anthers are fused to a 5-sectioned wreath. The 2
superior ovaries have a common stigma. The fruit is a 5 cm
long, glabrous, striped, clavate follicle. The seeds have silky
tufts of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 30 to 100 cm.
The underground creeping rhizome has heavily branched
runners. The stem is unbranched, thin and erect. The leaves
are opposite, short petioled, ovate to oblong and entire-

margined.

Characteristics: The fresh rhizome has an intensive odor.
The taste is sweet, then bitter-hot. It is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe.

Production: German Ipecac herb and rhizome are the leaves
and rhizome (including attached roots) of Cynanchum
vincetoxicum. The subterranean rhizome, including parts of
the roots, are dug up in autumn, cleaned and quickly dried at

temperatures of up to 50° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Saponin-like  15-oxasteroide glycosides (mixture _ termed
vincetoxin): aglycones including hirundigenin, anhydrohi-

rundigenin, vincetogenin

Isoquinoline alkaloids: including tylophorine
EFFECTS
The drug has diuretic, diaphoretic, digestive and emmena-
gogic effects. The alkaloids have an antitumoral effect, and

the chloroform extract has an antimicrobial effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug was formerly used as a diuretic,
for the treatment of kidney

diaphoretic and emetic, an
complaints, edema, the plague, snake bite and dysmenorrhea.
Today, it is used in the treatment of digestive and kidney
disorders and for dysmenorrhea. The poultices heal swellings

----- PAGE 587 -----
336/GERMAN_ IPECAC

and bruising. The drug can also be found in homeopathic

preparations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

According to older scientific literature, "vincetoxin" in high
dosages causes vomiting, apnea and cardiac paralysis in
animal experiments. Seed extracts led to advancing paralysis
of the central nervous system. Poisonings of humans have
not been found in recent reports.

DOSAGE
Mode_ of Administration:
alcoholic extract and homeopathic dilution.

As an infusion, powdered drug.

Preparation: The drug is prepared as an infusion.

Daily Dosage: The infusion should be administered under

medical supervision.

LITERATURE

Froiine D, Plunder HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Autl. Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.

Kennard O et al.. Tetrahedron Letters 3799-3804. 1968.

Lewin L. Gifte und Vergihungen. 6. Autl., Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

German Sarsaparilla

Car ex arenaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is somewhat hanging
and consists of 6 to 16 ovoid, 1 cm long, terminal, straight,
greenish spikes. The lower ones are female; the middle ones
are female at the base and male at the tip. The upper ones are
only male. These are simple greenish unisexual flowers
without a corolla. They have 1 husk with an ovary
surrounded by a tubular-like involucre. The style has 2
stigmas, 3 stamens and a fruit oval. It is somewhat acute at

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

both ends, and the tube has a winged edge. The flowers form
many blossomed spikelets, which in turn form a terminal,
oblong ear. The middle spikelets contain male flowers at the
tip and female flowers at the base. The upper spikelets are
male. "

Leaves, Stem and Root: German Sarsaparilla is a 15 to 45 cm
high plant with a 2 to 5 mm thick, horizontally creeping
rhizome, which produces extremely long runners. The plant
has black-brown basal leaves, which break up into long
fibers. The stem is sturdy, upright and about 1 mm thick. It is
sharply triangular, rough above, and surrounded by brown
leaf sheaths at the base. The leaves are linear and usually
grooved. The lamina are rigid and gradually tapering forward
to the involute tip. The roots form such a thick mass that they
prevent water from getting in and thus prevent the washing
away of dykes and dams.

Characteristics: The rootstock has an aromatic-turpentine

odor.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe mainly on the Atlantic,
Baltic and southern Scandinavian coasts as far as central
Germany. It was introduced to the American Atlantic coast.

Production: German Sarsaparilla consists of the dried,
underground parts of Carex arenaria. The root is dug up in
March and April, dried and cut into pieces for sale.

Not to be Confused With: Other Carex varieties

Other Names: Red Sedge, Sand Sedge, Red Couchgrass, Sea
Sedge

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Volatile oil: contents include methyl salicylate and cineol

Flavonoids: including tricine

Tannin: (8 to 10%, catechin tannins)

EFFECTS

There are no studies available on efficacy. The main
constituents, saponins, essential oil and flavones, as well as
the tannins, are most likely responsible for the effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: There are no documented indications to
date. In folk medicine, preparations of German Sarsaparilla
are used for the prevention of gout, rheumatism, inflamma-
tion of the joints, for skin ailments and as a diaphoretic and
diuretic; further, for venereal disease, flatulence, colic, liver
edema, lung tuberculosis and

disorders, diabetes,

amenorrhea.

----- PAGE 588 -----
jm,

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
uses are not documented, a therapeutic application cannot be
recommended. The cold maceration and the decoction are
used in folk medicine.

Preparation: A decoction is prepared by adding 3 gin drug
to 1 cup water. A cold maceration is made by adding 2
teaspoonfuls drug to 14 liter water.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 gm drug as a
decoction. The cold maceration is dosed 1 cup, 2 to 3 times
daily.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Germander

Teucrium — chamaedrys

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb collected
during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 10 to 12 mm long and are
erect. They are arranged on long pedicles in 1-to-6 blos-
somed, false racemes inclined to one side. The calyx is
tubular-campanulate, often tinged with red-violet and is
pubescent. The corolla is usually carmine red, occasionally
white. The stamens and styles are exserted. The nutlet is
ovoid, 1.5 to 2 cm long, smooth, finely reticulate and has a
large, circular, attaching surface.

Leaves, Stem.and Root: The plant is a subshrub with a short-
lived main root from which grow long-reaching, branched,
thin woody roots and a stem-producing runner. The stems
are usually erect and branched. The older branches are
decumbent; the younger ones erect, tough, round and lanate.
The branches are occasionally covered in glandular hairs,
which are often red-violet. The leaves are in close pairs and
are always covered in teeth. They are summer-green and
have distinctly protruding pinnatifid ribs.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
as far as Anatolia and the Urals.

GERMANDER / 337

Production: Germander is the aerial part of Teucrium
chamaedrys.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (0.07%): chief components beta-caryophyllene
(20%), humulene (15%)

Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others, harpagide,
acetyl harpagide

Diterpenes: including among others, teugin. teuflin, teufli-
din, dihydroteugin, teucrin A, B, E, F, G, marrubiin

Cajfeic acid derivatives: including among others, teucroside

Flavonoids: including among others, cirsiliol, cirsimaritin,
luteolin

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains strong amaroids, is said to have a
cholagogic effect, but this has not been scientifically proven.
The toxic principle is therefore unknown. Higher doses or
poisoning results in hepatitis-like symptoms, which may
include liver cell necrosis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Germander is used as a digestive aid, as a
rinse for gout, as weight-loss aid and for fever.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is highly toxic and should not be used (see

PRECAUTIONS) .

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Liver cell necrosis has been observed following intake of the
drug. Symptoms include jaundice and an elevated level of
aminotransferase in the blood. One case of death has been
recorded. For that reason, the drug is not to be administered.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Germander is occasionally used in

tea mixtures (see PRECAUTIONS).

Daily Dosage: Dosages of more than 600 mg daily can cause
toxic effects.

LITERATURE
Chialva F et al., J High Res Chromatogr Chromatogr Commun

5:182. 1982.

Fikenscher LH, Hegnauer R, Plant Med Phytother 3(3): 183.
Malakov PY et al., PH 24:301-303. 1985.

Reinbold AM, Popa PD, (1974) Khim Prir Soedin. 589.
Rodriguez MC et al., (1984) Phytochemistry 23(7): 1467.
Rodriguez MC et al., PH 23:2960-2961. 1984.

Rovesti P, (1957) Ind Perf. 12:334.

Savona G et al., PH 21:721-723. 1982.

----- PAGE 589 -----
338 /GERMANDER
Sticher O, Lahloub MF, (1982) Planta Med 30:124.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Geum rivale

See Water Avens

Geum urbanum

See Bennet's Root

Giant Milkweed

Calotropis gigantea
DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

bark and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in umbels. The
flower structures are arranged in fives. The corolla is fused
and campanulate, 3 to 5 cm wide and split up to two-thirds of
the length. The lobes are greenish with purple tips. The
paracorolla is composed of 5 cap-like points. The 5 stamens
and the 2 styles are fused to a stemmed gynostegium and the
pollen sticks together to form to a pollinium. The sepals are
ovate and the ovary superior. The fruit is a swollen follicle, 9
to 10 cm long and turned back. The seeds have a silky tuft of

hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Calotropis gigantea is a shrub,
occasionally tree-like, which grows up to 3 m high. The
leaves are sessile with the base clasping th&stem, fleshy, 10
to 20 cm long and 4 to 10 cm wide, elongate-ovate or

elliptical. The stem is woody.
Habitat: India, China, and Malaysian archipelago

Other Names: Giant Swallow Root, Swallow Wort, Crown

Flower

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
(cardenolids): _calotropin,

Cardioactive steroid glycosides

calactin and uscharidin
Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, taraxasterol

EFFECTS

The drug contains cardioactive cardenolide glycosides and
exhibits an emetic-cathartic effect resembling that of Ipeca-
cuanha. The calotropin demonstrates anti-tumor qualities
against human epidermoid carcinoma cells of the nasophar-

ynx, in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Giant Milkweed has been used for dysen-
tery, vomiting, toothache, syphilis, convulsions, warts,

leprosy and digestion problems.

Indian Medicine: Preparations are used for skin conditions,
intestinal worms, coughs, ascites and anasarca.

Homeopathic Uses: Calotropis gigantea is used for obesity.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Higher dosages cause severe mucous membrane irritation,
characterized by vomiting and diarrhea, as well as bradycar-
dia and convulsions, sometimes leading to death. It is not
known whether those compounds found in the plant that
belong chemically to the cardioactive steroid glycoside
group are indeed cardioactive, because of their unusual
structure (the sugar remnant is bound to the aglycone both as
a glycoside and as an ether). Mucilaginous drinks are
recommended to treat the symptoms of inflammation;
morphine and atrophine for treating pain.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug preparations

for internal use.

Daily Dosage: As an emetic: 2 to 4 gm; As a diaphoretic and
expectorant: 200 to 600 mg.

Homeopathic Dosage: (from D4) 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to
10 globules, 1 to 3 times daily or from D6 1 ml injection
solution sc. twice weekly (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kiuchi F, Fukao Y, Maruyama T, Obata T, Tanaka M, Sasaki
T, Mikage M, Haque ME, Tsuda Y, Cytotoxic principles of a

----- PAGE 590 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Bangladeshi crude drug, akond mul (roots of Calotropis
gigantea L.). Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 46:528-30, 1998 Mar.

Sen S, Sahu NP, Mahato SB, Flavonol glycosides from
Calotropis gigantea. Phytochemisjry, 232:2919-21, 1992 Aug.

4£ Sengupta A, Bhattacharya D, Pal G, Sinha NK, Comparative

studies on calotropins DI and DII from the latex of Calotropis
gigantea. Arch Biochem Biophys, 232:17-25, 1984 Jul.

Gillenia trifoliata

See Indian Phasic

Ginger
Zingiber officinale

TRADE NAMES
Ginger Root (available from numerous manufacturers,)
Ginger Kid, Alcohol Free Ginger Root, Ginger Power,
Caffeine-Free Ginger Root, Quanterra Stomach Comfort

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flower scape grows directly from the
root and terminates in a long, curved spike. A white or
yellow flower grows from each spike.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ginger is a creeping perennial on a
thick tuberous rhizome, which spreads underground. In the
first year, a green, erect, reed-like stem about 60 cm high
grows from this rhizome. The plant has narrow, lanceolate to
linear-lanceolate leaves 15 to 30 cm long, which die off each

year.

Characteristics: The fracture is short and fibrous. The odor
and taste are characteristic, aromatic and pungent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southeastern Asia, and is
cultivated in the U.S., India, China, the West Indies and

tropical regions.

Production: Ginger root consists of the peeled, finger-long,
fresh or dried rhizome of Zingiber officinale.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (2.5-3.0%): chief components vary greatly,
depending upon country of origin: (-)-zingiberene and ar-
curcumene, beta-bisabolene and ar-curcumene, neral and
geranial, D-camphor, beta-phellandrene, geranial, neral and
linalool, (E)-alpha-farnesene, important as aroma carrier
zingiberol (mixture of cis- and trans-beta-eudesmol)

GINGER/339

Aryl alkanes

Gingerols: chief components [6]-gingerol (pungent sub-
stances), [8]-gingerol, [10]-gingerol

Shogaols: chief components [6]-shogaol (pungent substane),
[8]- shogaol, [10]- shogaol (artifacts formed during storage.

arising from the gingerols)
Gingerdiols

Diarylheptanoids: including among others, gingerenone A
and B

Starch (50%)

EFFECTS

Compounds isolated from the Ginger rhizome have been
studied in numerous in vitro and animal experiments. Other
studies show that Ginger root is positively inotropic.
antithrombotic; has anti-oxidant, anti-migraine and anti-lipi-
demic effects, and promotes secretion of saliva, gastric juices
and bile.

Anti-Emetic Effects

The components in Ginger that are responsible for the anti-
emetic effect are thought to be the gingerols and sho-
gaols.The mechanism of action is not due to a nystagmus
response or vestibular stimulation (Holtmann, 1989). In
contrast to most anti-emetic medications that act on the CNS.
the anti-emetic effect of Ginger is thought to be due to local
gastrointestinal actions (Mowrey & Clayton, 1982).

Anti-Inflammatory Effects

The anti-inflammatory effect of Ginger is thought to be due
to inhibition of cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase, results
in reduced leukotriene and prostaglandin synthesis (Kiuchi.
1992; Srivastava & Mustafa, 1992).

Miscellaneous Effects

In humans, Ginger increases the tone and peristalsis of the
intestine (Bisset, 1994; Iwu, 1993). The root of Zingiber
officinale has also shown immune system stimulation
(Chang, 1995) and platelet aggregation inhibitory activity
(Verma, 1993).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Motion Sickness

One double-blind, randomized, non-placebo controlled study
compared the effectiveness of Ginger and six other common-
ly used non-herbal drugs (scopolamine, dimenhydrinate with
caffeine, cyclizine, cinnarizine, cinnarizine with domperi-
done, meclizine with caffeine) in 1489 participants during
whale-watching voyages off the coast of Norway. 78.3% of
those that took 500 mg of Ginger root 2 hours prior to a boat

----- PAGE 591 -----
340 /GINGER

trip were symptom-free for the 6-hour duration. The =
incidence of severe vomiting did not differ in a statistically
significant way between Ginger and any of the other test
groups (Schmid, 1994).

Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting

A double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 120
females that underwent gynecologic outpatient surgery was
performed. The participants were randomly given either 1
gm of powdered Ginger root or 10 mg of metoclopramide
orally and evaluated for incidence of postoperative nausea
and vomiting. Ten percent of the patients in the Ginger group
had one or more episodes of vomiting. 17.59c of the
metoclopramide arm and 22.5% of the placebo group had
one or more episodes of vomiting. Fifteen percent of the
Ginger group and 32.5% of the metoclopramide group
required antiemetic treatment compared to 37.5% of the
placebo group. The authors concluded that the Ginger group
had a statistically significant lower incidence of nausea and
vomiting when compared to placebo (Phillips, 1993).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Loss of appetite
* Travel sickness
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine. Ginger is used as a
carminative, expectorant, and astringent.

Chinese Medicine: In China. Ginger is used to treat colds,
nausea, vomiting and shortness of breath.

Indian Medicine: Indian medicine uses include anorexia,
dyspeptic symptoms and pharyngitis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The German Commission E contraindicates the use of
Ginger in morning sickness associated with pregnancy. Most
research provides evidence that Ginger can be used and is
effective in the treatment of morning sickness. It is
recommended that excessive doses are avoided for this
purpose (see PRECAUTIONS and ADVERSE REACTIONS).

Because of its cholagogic effect, the drug should not be
taken in the presence of gallstone conditions except after
consultation with a physician.

Ginger has been found to inhibit thromboxane synthesis,
therefore it should not be used by patients who are at risk for
hemorrhage (Bracken, 1991)

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction wiuh the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

It has been reported that administration of 6 grams of dried
powdered Ginger has been shown to increase the exfoliation
of gastric surface epithelial cells in human subjects. It is
postulated that this action may possibly lead to ulcer
formation. Therefore, it is recommended that dosages on an
empty stomach be limited to 6 grams (Desai, 1990).

There have been reports that Ginger can cause hypersensitiv-
ity reactions resulting in dermatitis. Large overdoses can
system depression and cardiac

cause central nervous

arrhythmias.

Pregnancy: A study in 27 pregnant patients with hypereme-
sis gravidarum (persistent vomiting occurring prior to the
20th week of pregnancy and requiring hospitalization) found
that 1 gram per day (250 milligrams 4 times a day) for 4 days
caused no adverse effects. One spontaneous abortion oc-
curred; a causal relationship between the abortion and the
use of Ginger was not determined. All infants were normal
(Fischer-Rasmussen, 1990).

Drug Interactions: More than one in-vitro study confirms an
antithrombotic effect. It is recommeded that patients taking
anticoagulants or those with bleeding disorders avoid the use

of large doses of Ginger.

OVERDOSAGE
According to research, the LD50 of 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol
is set between 250 and 680 mg/kg. (Fulder & Tenne, 1991;
Suekawa et al, 1984.) Toxicity tests in mice using a Ginger
extract via lavage resulted in no mortality or adverse effects
in doses up to 2.5 g/kg over a 7 day period. When the dose
was increased to between 3 and 3.5 g/kg, a 10% to 30%
mortality rate was reported (Macola, 1989.)

Overdosage may cause cardiac arrhythmia and CNS depres-
sion (Iwu, 1993).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted rhizome and dry
extracts for teas and other galenic preparations for internal
use. The powdered drug is used in some stomach
preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 100 mg, 400 mg, 420 mg, 460 mg, 470 mg, 500

mg, 550 mg, 1000 mg
Chewable Tablets — 67.5 mg
Fluid Extract — 1:1

Liquid — 14

Oil — 100%

Tea Bags

----- PAGE 592 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
0.5 to 1 g drug and strain after 5 minutes (1 teaspoonful = 3 g
drug).

Daily
ANTI-EMESIS

Capsules/Powder — 0.5 to 2 grams (Bisset,1994; Schmid et
1994)

Dosage:

al

CHEMOTHERAPY-INDUCED NAUSEA AND VOMITING
All dosage forms — 1.5 grams (Myer et al, 1995).

DYSPEPSIA
Capsules/Powder — 2 to 4 grams/day

HYPEREMESIS GRAVIDARUM
Capsules/Powder — 1 gram/day given for 4 days (Fischer-
Rasmussen et al, 1990).

MOTION SICKNESS
Capsules/Powder — 1 gram to be taken 30 minutes before
travel; for continuing symptoms, 0.5 to 1 gram every 4 hours
(Muller & Clauson, 1997).

POSTOPERATIVE NAUSEA AND VOMITING
Capsules/Powder — 0.5 to 2 gram daily

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS. OSTEOARTHRITIS
Powder — 1 to 2 grams/day (Srivastava & Mustafa, 1992).

Storage: Powdered Ginger root should be stored in a cool,
dry place protected from light. Powdered Ginger should not

be stored in plastic containers.

LITERATURE
Bisset NG (ed). Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals; a
Handbook for Practice on a Scientific Basis. Medpharm

Scientific Publishers, Stuttgart and CRC Press, Boca Raton,

1994.

Bone ME, Wilkinson DJ, Young JR et al.. Ginger root- a new
antiemetic. The effect of ginger root on postoperative nausea
and vomiting after major gynecological surgery. Anaesthesia
45:669-71. 1990.

Bracken J, Ginger as an antiemetic: possible side effects due to
its thromboxane synthetase activity. Anaesthesia; 46:705-706.
1991.

Chang CP, Chang JY, Wang FY et al.. The effect of Chinese
medicinal herb Zingiberis rhizoma extract on cytokine secretion
by human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J
Ethnopharmacol 48:13-19. 1995.

Chen CC, Ho CT, J Agric Food Chem 36:322. 1988.

Denyer CV, Jackson P, Loakes DM, Isolation of antirhinoviral
sesquiterpenes from ginger (Zingiber officinale). In: JNP
57(5):658-662. 1994.

Desai HG, Kalro RH & Choksi AP, Effect of ginger & garlic
on DNA content of gastric aspirate. Ind J Med Res 92:139-41,
1990.

GINGER /341

Erler J et al., Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 186:231. 1988.

Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT
15(3); 137. 1994.
Fischer-Rasmussen W, Kjaer S, Dahl C et al., Ginger treatment
of hyperemesis gravidarum. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
38:19-24. 1990.

Fulder S & Tenne M, Ginger as an anti-nausea remedy in
pregnancy; the issue of safety. Herbalgram 1991; 38(Fall):47-50.

Gujral S et al., (1978) Nutr Rep Int 17:183.
Harvey DJ, J Chromatogr 212:75. 1981.

Iwu MM (ed), Handbook of African Medicinal Plants. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1993.

Hikino H, In: Economic, Medicinal Plant Research. Vol. 1.
Acadamic Press UK 1985.

Kasahara Y, Hikino H, (1983) Shoyakugaku Zasshi 37:73.

Kawvai T et al., Anti-emtic principles of Magnolia obovata bark
and Zingiber officinale rhizome. In: PM 60:17. 1994.

Kikuchi F et al., (1982) Chem Pharm Bull 30. 754.

Kikuzaki H, Kobayashi M, Nakatani N, Constituents of
Zingiberaceae. 4. Diarylheptanoids from Rhizomes of Zingiber
officinale. In: PH 30: 3947. 1991.

Kikuzaki H, Kobayashi M, Nakatani N, Diarylheptanoids from
rhizomes of Zingiber officinale. In: PH 30(11):3647-3651. 1991.

Kikuzaki H, Tsai SM, Nakatani N, Gingerdiol relate
compounds from the rhizomes of Zingiber officinale. In: PH
31(5):1783-1786. 1992.

Kiuchi F, Iwakami S, Shibuya M et al., Inhibition of
prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthesis by gingerols and
diarylheptanoids. Chem Pharm Bull 40(2):387-391. 1992.

Macolo N, Jain R, Jain SC et al., Ethnopharmacologic
investigation of ginger (Zingiber officinale). J Ethnopharmacol
27:129-40, 1989.
Maries RJ, Kaminski J, Arnason JT, Pazos-Sanou L, Heptinstall
S, Fischer NH, Crompton CW, Kindark DG, A bioassay for
inhibition of serotonin release from bovine platelets. In: JNP
55:1044-1056. 1992.

Mikawa U et al., Delayed-type allergy-controlling agents
containing gingerones. In: Patent Jap. 1988.

Mowrey DB, Clayson DE, (1982) Lancet II, 655.

Muller JL & Ciauson KA., Pharmaceutical considerations of
common herbal medicine. Am J Managed Care 1997; 3:1753-
1770. 1997.

Nagabhushan M, Amonkar AJ, Bhide SV, Mutagenicity of
gingerol and shoagol and antimutagenicity in zingerone in
Salmonella/microsme assay. In: Cancer-Lett (Shannon Irel)
36(2)221-233. 1987.

Narasimhan S, Govinarajan VS, (1978) J Food Tech 13:31.

Phillips S, Ruggier R & Hutchinson SE., Zingiber officinale
(ginger) - an antiemetic for day case surgery. Anaesthesia
48:715-717. 1993.

----- PAGE 593 -----
342/GINGER

Sailer R, Hellenbrecht D, Zingiber officinale. In: Tagl Praxis
33(3):629. 1992.

Suekawa M et al.. (1984) J Pharmacobio-Dyn 7 (11):836.
Sugaya A et al., (1975) Shoyakugaku Zasshi 29:160.

Further information in:

Chan H, But P, Pharmacology, Applications of Chinese Materia
Medica, Vol 1, World Scientific Singapore 1986.

Kern W. List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schmid R, Schick T, Steffen R et al.. Comparison of seven
commonly used agents for prophylaxis of seasickness. J Trav
Med 1:203-206. 1994.

Srivastava KC & Mustafa T. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) in
rheumatism and musculoskeletal disorders. Med Hypotheses
39:342-348. 1992.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Suekawa M, Ishige A, Yuasa K et al.. Pharmacological studies
on ginger. I. Pharmacological actions of pungent constituents,
(6)-gingerol and (6)-shogoal. J Pharm Dyn 7:836-848. 1984.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Wichd M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ginkgo
Ginkgo biloba

TRADE NAMES

Ginkgo Biloba (available from numerous manufacturers and
as a combination product), Bioginkgo, Gincosan, Ginexin
Remind, Ginkai, Ginkoba, Ginkgo Go!, Ginkgold, Ginkgo
Power, Ginkgoba, Ginkgo Leaf, Quanterra Mental
Sharpness, Ginko Biloba Premium Extract, Gingko Biloba
Extract, Activated Ginkgo, Nuveg Ginkgo Power, Time
Release Ginkgo Power, Senior Ginkgo Power, Herbal Sure
Maximum Strength Gingko Biloba

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
leaves, and the seeds separated from their fleshy outer layer.

Flower and Fruit: The tree flowers for the first time when it
is between 20 and 30 years old. The flowers are dioecious.
They are in the axils of the lower leaves of the current year's
short shoots. The male flowering parts are attached to short
catkins. The female flowers have longer pedicles and are at
the end ofa leafless branch. Fertilization occurs months after
pollination by spermatozoids, although usually only one
ovule is fully formed. The light green or yellowish seeds,
incorrectly called fruit, later become fleshy and plum-like.
They have a diameter of 2.5 to 3 cm, and each contains a
two-edged edible nut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ginkgo biloba is a 30 to 40 m high
dioecious tree with a girth of about 4 m. The trees can live
for hundreds of years. The bark is light to dark brown with
rough grooves and reticulate fissures. The leaves are fan-
shaped with bifurcated ribs and glabrous. They are fresh
green to golden yellow in autumn. The female trees are
pointed and pyramid-shaped; the male trees are broad and

sparer.

Characteristics: The seeds smell like butyric, capric or

valeric acid when ripe.

Habitat: Ginkgo is indigenous to China, Japan and Korea,
and is also found in Europe and the U.S.

Production: The leaves are harvested either mechanically or
by hand from plantations or in the wild. The leaves are then
dried and pressed into balls. A dry extract from the dried leaf
of Ginkgo biloba is manufactured using acetone/water and
subsequent purification steps without addition of concen-
trates or isolated ingredients.

Other Names: Maidenhair-Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (0.5-1.8%):
triosides of quercetin, isorhamnetins, 3-0- methylmyristi-
cins, and kaempferol, to some extent estered with p-coumar-

including monosides, biosides and

ic acid
Biflavonoides (0.4-1.9%): for example, amentoflavone, bilo-
betin, 5-methoxybilobetin, ginkgetin, isoginkgetin

Proanthocyanidins (8-12%)

Trilactonic diterpenes (0.06-0.23%): ginkgolide A, B, C

bilabolids — (0.04-0.2%)

Trilactonic sesquiterpene

EFFECTS
Ginkgolide B is a potent inhibitor of platelet-activating

factor (PAF), which is important for the induction of

----- PAGE 594 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

arachidonate-independent platelet aggregation. Ginkgolide B
blocks the binding to PAF to its receptor resulting in an
antagonistic effect (Chung, 1987). This effect will inhibit
PAF-induced bconchoconstriction and airway hyperactivity,
along with T-lymphocyte proliferation and cytokine produc-
tion. PAF induces inflammation and changes in vascular
permeability (Braquet, 1989: Delia Loggia, 1993).

Ginkgo biloba exerts ischemic protective and antioxidant
effects through the flavonoids. This occurs through a free
scavenger action and prevention of lipid peroxidation. Lipid
peroxidation is involved in producing tissue and vascular
damage, and neuronal loss, which may lead to dementia
(Dorman, 1992; Koc, 1995; Otamiri, 1989). The herb also
reduces neutrophil infiltration and increases blood flow to
prevent the progression of dementia ischemia. The anti-
oxidant and membrane-stablizing activity increases cerebral
hypoxia tolerance (Koltringer, 1989; Otamiri, 1989).

Other effects consist of spasmolytic properties through direct
action on alpha-adrenoceptors and smooth muscle relaxing
properties via the signal transduction pathway, intracellular
cAMP, antagonism of the adrenergic nervous system and
hyperpolarization (Hellegouarch, 1985; Struillon, 1995).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Dementia

A placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial with a
particular extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb 761) was conducted
to assess the efficacy and safety in Alzheimer's disease and
multi-infarct dementia. Alzheimer's Disease Assessment
Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog), Geriatric Evaluation
by Relative's Rating Instrument (GERRI) and Clinical
Global Impression of Change (CGIC) were used to evaluate
the response in 309 patients over a 52-week period. EGb 120
mg daily was safe and was shown to stabilize or improve
cognitive performance and the social functioning of dement-
ed patients for 6 months to | year (Le Bars, 1998).

Peripheral Occlusive Arterial Disease

The clinical efficacy of Ginkgo biloba special extract (EGb
761) was demonstrated in 111 patients with peripheral
occlusive arterial disease (POAD) in Fontaine stage lib and
intermittent claudication. The mean pain-free walking dis-
tances were very similar at the beginning of the treatment
period. After 8, 16 and 24 weeks, the EGb treatment group
was significantly better than the placebo group with maxi-
mum walking distance and relative increases of the pain-free
walking distance. The doppler indices remained nearly
unchanged during the coarse of therapy (Peters, 1998).

GINKGO/343

Equilibrium Disorders

An open, controlled study consisted of 44 patients complain-
ing of vertigo, dizziness or both, caused by vascular
vestibular disorders. The patients were randomly treated with
extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb 761) 80 mg twice daily or
with betahistine dihydrochloride (BI) 16 mg twice daily for 3
months. A complete neuro-otologic and equilibrimetric
examination was performed at baseline and after 3 months of
treatment, including an evaluation of clinical findings.
Dizziness and vertigo improved in 64.7% of patients in the
BI treatment group and in 65% of those in the EGb 761
treatment group in the first month of therapy. No significant
changes were observed in cranial scans for patients with a
‘central’ cranial pattern or with the equilibrium score. EGb
761 induced a slight decrease of saccadic delay and
considerably increased saccadic velocities while BI im-
proved saccadic accuracy but did not modify delay. EGb 761
improved smooth pursuit gain three times more than BI.
Both drugs asymmetrically reduced nystagmus maximum
velocity and improved the sinusoidal vestibulo-ocular reflex.
BI considerably reduced, whereas EGb 761 considerably
improved, visuovestibular ocular reflex (Cesarani, 1998).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Symptomatic relief of organic brain dysfunction
¢ Intermittent claudication

* Vertigo (vascular origin)

¢ Tinnitus (vascular origin)

The Commission E approvals listed are limited to special
standard extracts of Ginkgo.

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for disturbed brain
functions that result in dizziness and headache with emotion-
al lability and anxiety. Ginkgo has been demonstrated to
improve concentration and memory deficits as a result of
peripheral arterial occlusive disease.

Chinese Medicine: Among traditional Chinese uses for
Ginkgo biloba are asthma, tinnitus, hypertonia and angina
pectoris.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathy includes tonsillitis and
cephalgia among the indications for use of Ginkgo.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in patients knowa to be
hypersensitive to Ginkgo biloba preparations.

Patients with known risk factors for intracranial hemorrhage
(systematic arterial hypertension, diabetes amyloid senile
plaques) should avoid the use of Ginkgo biloba due to a
recent case report of subarachnoid hemorrhage associated
with the herb (Vale, 1998).

----- PAGE 595 -----
344 /GINKGO

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Mild gastrointestinal complaints could occur as
side effects (Cohen, 1998). Also, blood pressure problems,
allergic reactions and phlebitis have occasionally been
documented after parenteral administration. Allergic skin
reactions have been observed on extremely rare occasions.
The possible hypersensitivity reactions consist of occurrence
of spasms and cramps and, in cases of acute toxicity, atonia
and adynamia.

Fertility: Ginkgo has adverse effects on oocytes (Ondrizek,
1999):

Hematologic Effects: Spontaneous bilateral subdural hemato-
mas, subarachnoid hemorrhage and an increase in bleeding
time have been associated with chronic Ginkgo biloba
ingestion (Rowin, 1996; Vale. 1998).

Drug Interactions: Antithrombolytic Agents (anticoagulants,
antiplatelets and aspirin) — Spontaneous bleeding has been
associated with the herb due to its potent inhibitory effect on
the platelet-activating factor (PAF). Case reports involving
the herb associated with subarachnoid hemorrhage and
intracerebral hemorrhage suggests an additional risk of
intracerebral hemorrhage with the use of thrombolytic
therapy (Matthews, 1998; Rowin, 1996; Vale, 1998).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ginkgo is available in liquid or
solid pharmaceutical forms, for oral intake and parenterally

for homeopathic use.

How Supplied:
Capsules—30 mg, 40 mg, 50 mg, 60 mg, 100 mg, 120 mg,

260 mg, 400 mg, 420 mg, 440 mg, 450 mg, 500 mg
Extract—S0:1
Liquid—40mg/5mL

Tablets—30 mg, 40 mg, 60 mg, 80 mg, 120 mg, 260 mg
Daily Dosage: Ginkgo biloba extract should be standardized
to contain 24% flavone and 6% terpene lactones: 40 to 80
mg three times a day (van Beek, 1998). Studies have
demonstrated efficacy with 120 mg daily in 2 to 3 divided
doses for dementia, peripheral arterial occlusive disease and
for equilibrium disorders like tinnitus or vertigo (Cesarani,
1998; Le Bar, 1998; Peters, 1998).

Chinese Medicine: In traditional Chinese medicine, the daily
dose is 3 to 6 g of leaves as an infusion.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

parenterally: 1 to 2 ml acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once a
day (HAB1).

Storage: Ginkgo must be protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE

American Psychiatric Association (Ed.), DSM-IV. Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Ed. R. R.
Donnelly & Sons Company 1994.

Amling R. Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.

Anonym. Ginkgo und Crataegus. In: DAZ 137(20): 1751-1753.
1997.

Anonym. Phytopharmaka fur altere Menschen: Ginkgo, Kava,
Hypericum und Crataegus. In: DAZ 135(5):400-402. 1995.
Anonym. Psycho-Phytos: Ginkgo, Johanniskraut und Kava-Kava.
In: DAZ 135(18): 1632-1634. 1995.

Bach D, Behandlung der benignen Prostatahypertrophie. In: ZPT
17(4):209-218. 1996.

Bauer R, Zschocke S, Medizinische Anwendung von Ginkgo
iloba Geschichtliche Entwicklung. In: ZPT 17(5):275-283.

1996.

Beske F, Kunezik T, (1991) Fruhzeitige Therapie kann
Milliarden sparen. Der Kassenarzt 42:36-42.

Blaha L, (1989) Differential diagnose der zerebralen Insuffizienz
in der Praxis. Geriatrie und Rehabilitation 2,1:23-28.

Braquet P (Ed.), Ginkgolides. Chemistry, Biology,

Pharmacology and Clinical Perspectives. Vol I. JR Prous
Science, Barcelona 1988.
Braquet P (Ed.), Ginkgolides. Chemistry, Biology,
harmacology and Clinical Perspectives. Vol II, JR Prous
Science, Barcelona 1989.
Briichert E, Heinrich SE, Ruf-Kohler P, (1991) Wirksamkeit
von LI 1370 bei alteren Patienten mit Hirnleistungsschwache.
Munch Med Wschr 133(Suppl 1):9-14.
Bundesgesundheitsamt, (1991) Empfehlungen zum

Wirksamkeitsnachweis von Nootropika im Indikationsbereich
"Demenz" (Phase HI). Bundesgesundheitsblatt 7:342-350.

Burkard G, Lehrl S, (1991) Verhaltnis von Demenzen vom
Multiinfarkt- und vom Alzheimertyp in arztlichen Praxen.
Munch Med Wschr 133(Supp. 1):38-43.
Caesar W, Alles uber Ginkgo. In: DAZ 134(44):4363. 1994.
Cesarani A, Meloni F, Alpini D et al., Ginkgo biloba (EGb
761) in the treatment of equilibrium disorders. Adv Ther 1998
Sep-Oct;15(5):291-304.

Chung KF, Dent G, McCusker M et al., Effect of a ginkgolide
mixture (BN 52063) in antagonising skin and platelet responses
to platelet activating factor in man. Lancet 1987 Jan
3151(8527):248-51.

Cohen AJ & Bartlick B: Ginkgo biloba for antidepressent-
induced sexual dysfunction. J Sex Marital Ther 1998; 24:139-
143.

----- PAGE 596 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Delia Loggia R, Sosa S, Tubaro A, Bombardelli E, Anti-
inflammatory activity of Ginkgo biloba flavonoids. In: PM 59
(1992), A588.

Deutsches Institut fiir medizinische Dokumentation und
Information (Hrsg.), ICD-10. Internationale und statistische

‘eeKlassifikation der Krankheiten und verwandter

Gesundheitsprobleme. 10. Revision. Bd 1. Urban &
Schwarzenberg, Munchen Wien Baltimore 1994.

Dfeudis FV, Ginkgo biloba extract (EGb 761): Pharmacological
activities and clinical applications. In: Elsevier Editions
Scientifiques Paris. 1991.
Dingermann T, Phytopharmaka im Alter: Crataegus, Ginkgo,
Hypericum und Kava- Kava. In: PZ 140(23):2017-2024. 1995.

Dorman D, Cote L, Buck W, Effects of an extract of Gingko
biloba on bromethalin-induced cerebral lipid peroxidation and
edema in rats. Am J Vet Res 1992 Jan;53(1): 138-42.

Dom M. Braunig B, Gross HD, Ginkgo-Dragees bei zerebraler
Leistungsschwache. In: ZPT 12(6): 180. 1991.

Ermini-Funfschilling D, (1992) Moglichkeiten und Grenzen
eines Gedachtnistrainings mit Patienten bei beginnender
Demenz. Z Moderne Geriatrie 12:459-456.

Gravel E, (1989) Vergleich zweier Personengruppen beziiglich
jfcder Auswirkungen des mentalen Trainings ("Gehirn-Jogging")
auf die Selbsteinschiitzung der Leistungsfiihigkeit in
Abhangigkeit von der Trainingszeit (Tageszeit der
Trainingsdurchfuhrung). Geriatrie & Rehabilitation 2,1:44-46.

Hartmann A, Schulz V (Hrsg.), (1991) Ginkgo biloba, Aktuelle
Forschungsergebnisse 1990/91. Munch Med Wschr 133:1-64.

Hellegouarch A, Baranes J, Clostre F et al.. Comparison of the
contractile effects of an extract of Ginkgo biloba and some
neurotransmitters on rabbit isolated vena cava. Gen Pharmacol
1985; 16:129-132.

Hopfenmuller W, (1994) Nachweis der therapeutischen
Wirksamkeit eines Ginkgo biloba-Spezialextraktes. Metaanalyse
von 11 klinischen Studien bei Patienten mit
Hirnleistungsstorungen im Alter Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res
44:1005-1013.

Israel L, Dell'Accio E, Martin G, Hugonot R, (1987) Extrait de
Ginkgo biloba et exercices d'entra nement de la memoire.
Evaluation comparative chez personnes (gees ambulatoiRes
Psychologie Medicinale 19(8):1431-1439.

Joyeux M et al., Comparative antilipoperoxidant, antinecrotic

iyand scavenging properties of terpenes and biflavones from

Ginkgo and some flavonoids. In: PM 61(2): 126-129. 1995.

Kanowski S, (1991) Klinischer Wirksamkeitsnachweis bei
Nootropika. Munch Med Wschr 133:5-8.

Kanowski S, Herrmann WM, Stephan K, Wierich W, Horr R,
(1995) Proof of efficacy of the Ginkgo biloba special extract
EGb 761 in outpatients suffering from primary degenerative
dementia of the Alzheimer type and multi-infarct dementia.
Pharmacopsychiatry 4:149-158.

GINKGO /345

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P, (1992a) Ginkgo biloba for cerebral
insufficiency. Br J Clin Pharmac 35:352-358.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P, (1992b) Ginkgo biloba. Lancet, 1136-
1139.

Koalik F et al., (1992) Kombinierte Anwendung von nootroper
Therapie und kognitivem Training bei chronischen organischen
Psychosyndromen. Neuropsychiatrie 6:47-52.

Koc R, Akdemir H, Kurtsoy A et al., Lipid peroxidation in
experimental spinal cord injury. Comparison of treatment with
Ginkgo biloba, TRH and mehtylprednisolone. Res Exp Med
(Berl) 1995;195(2): 117-23.

Koltringer P, F.ber O, Lind P et al., Mikrozirkulation und
Viskoelastizitaet des Vollblutes unter Ginkgo-biloba extrakt.
Eine plazebokonntrollierte, randomisierte Douppelblind-Studie.
Perfusion 1989: 1:28-30.

Krieglstein J, Neuroprotective properties of Ginkgo biloba-
constituents. In: ZPT 15(2):92-96. 1994.

Kurz A, Ginkgo biloba bei Demenzerkrankungen. In: Loew D,
Rietbrock N (Hrsg.), Phytopharmaka. Steinkopff Verlag,
Darmstadt 1995, S 145-149.

Le Bars PL, Katz MM, Berman N et al., A placebo-controlled,
double-blind, randomized trial of an extract of Ginkgo biloba
for dementia. North American EGb Study Group. JAMA 1997
Oct 22-29;278(16): 1327-32.

Matthews MK, Association of Ginkgo biloba with intracerebral
hemorrhage. Neurology 1998;50:1933-4.

Nieder M, (1991) Pharmakokinetik der Ginkgo-Flavonole im
Plasma. Munch Med Wschr 133:61-62.

Oberpichler-Schwenk H, Krieglstein J, (1992) Pharmakologische
Wirkungen von Ginkgo-biloba-Extrakt und -Inhaltsstoffen.
Pharmazie in unserer Zeit 21:224-235.

Ondrizek RR, Chan PJ, Patton WC, King A. An alternative
medicine study of herbal effects on the penetration of zona-free
hamster occytes and the integrity of sperm deoxyribonucleic
acid. Fertil Steril 1999 Mar;71(3):517-22.

Otamiri T, Tagesson C: Ginkgo biloba extract prevents mucosa
damage associated with small-intestinal ischaemia. Scand J
Gastroenterol 1989; 24:666-670.

Peters H, Kieser M, Holscher U. Demonstration of the efficacy
of Ginkgo biloba special extract EGb 761 on intermittent
claudication—a placebo-controlled, double-blind multicenter trial.
Vasa 1998 May;27(2):106-10.

Pfister-Hotz G, Phytotherapie in der Geriatrie. In: ZPT
18(3): 165-162. 1997.

Riederer P, Laux G, Poldinger W (Hrsg.),
Neuropsychopharmaka. Band 5: Parkinsonmittel und Nootropika.
Springer Verlag, Wien Noew York 1992, S. 161-324.

Rosenblatt M, Mindel J, Spontaneous bilateral hyphema
associated with ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extract. N Engl J
Med. 1997 Apr 10; 336(15): 1108.

----- PAGE 597 -----
346 /GINKGO

Rowen J, Lewis S, Spontaneous bilateral subdural hematomas
associated with chronic Ginkgo biloba ingestion. Neurology
1996 Jun;46(6): 1775-6.

Rupalla K, Oberpichler-Schwenk H, Krieglstein J,
Neuroprotektive Wirkungen des Ginkgo-biloba-Extrakts und
seiner Inhaltsstofe. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg.)
Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag. Darmstadt 1995, S 17-27.

Schilcher H, Ginkgo biloba L. In: ZPT 9:119. 1998.

Schmid M. Schmoll H (Hrsg.), Ginkgo. Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Stuttgart 1994.

Schmid B, In: Schmid, Schmoll gen. Eisenwert: Ginkgo, Ur-
Baum und Arzneipflanze, Mythos, Dichtung und Kunst. 1994.

Schwabe U, Paffiath D (Hrsg.), Arzneiverordnungsreport '95.
Gustav Fischer Verlag. Stuttgart Jena 1995, S 214-224, 373-
374.

Sowers S. Weary PE, Collins OD, Cnoley EP, Ginkgo tree
dermatitis. In: Arch Dermatol 81:452-456. 1965.

Spegg H, Ginkgo biloba - ein Baum aus Urzeiten, ein
Phytopharmakon mit Zukunft. In: PTA 4(12):576. 1990.

Sprecher E, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: ZPT 9(2):40. 1988.

Sticher O, (1993) Ginkgo biloba - Ein modernes pflanzliches
Arzneimittel. Vierteljahresschrift der Naturforschenden
Gesellschaft in Zurich 138/3:125-168.

Sticher O, Hasler A. Meier B, Ginkgo biloba - Eine
Standortbestimmung. In: DAZ 131(36): 1827. 1991.

Sticher O. Quality of Ginkgo preparations. In: PM 59(1):2-11.
1993.

Struillon L, Cohen Y, Vilde JL et al.. Ginkgo biloba extract
EGb 761 is not active against Mycobacterium avium infection
in C57BL/6 mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1995;
39:1013-1014.

Vale, S, Subarachnoid hemorrhage associated with Ginkgo
biloba. Lancet 1998 Jul 4;352(9121):36.

Vesper J, Hansgen KD, (1994) Efficacy of Ginkgo biloba in 90
Outpatients with Cerebral Insufficiency Caused by Old Age.
Phytomedicine 1:9-16.

Volz HP, Hansel R, (1994) Ginkgo biloba - Grundlagen und

Anwendung in der Psychiatric Psychopharmakotherapie 1:70-76.

Volz HP, Hansel R, (1994) Kava-Kava und Kavain in der
Psychopharmakotherapie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1:33-39.

Vorberg G, Schenk N, Schmidt U, (1989) Wirksamkeit eines
neuen Ginkgo-biloba- Extraktes bei 100 Patienten mit zerebraler
Insuffizien. Z Herz & plus; GefafJe 9:396-401.

Wichtl M, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: DAZ 132(30): 1576. 1992.

Woerdenberg HJ, Van Beek TA, Ginkgo biloba. In: DeSmet
PAGM, Keller K, Hansel R, Chandler RF ed., Adverse Effects
of Herbal Drugs. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1997; 3:51-
66.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

FURTHER INFORMATION IN:
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G. Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ginkgo biloba

See Ginkgo

Ginseng
Panax ginseng

TRADE NAMES

Ginseng (available from numerous manufacturers), Ginsana,
Gin Zip, Chinese Red Panax Ginseng, Manchurian Ginseng,
Premium Blend Korean Ginseng, Ginseng Complex, Korean
Ginseng, Siberian Ginseng, Korean Ginseng Extract, Korean
White Ginseng, The Ginseng Solution, Herbal Sure Korean
Ginseng, American Ginseng Root, Korean Ginseng Root,
Standardized Siberian Ginseng Root, Natural Ginseng,
Ginseng Up, Herbal Sure Chinese Red Ginseng, Siberian
Ginseng Power Herb, Time Release Korean Ginseng Power,
American Ginseng, Chinese Red Panax, Concentrated Gin-
seng Extract, Eleuthero Ginseng Root, Siberian Ginseng
Root, Korean White Ginseng Root, Centrum Ginseng, Gin-
Action, Ginsai, Ginseng Concentrate, Ginseng Manchurian,
Ginseng Natural, Ginseng Power Max 004X G-Sana, Lynae
Ginse-Cool, Power Herb Korean Ginseng

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is simple or branched
with 1 to 3 umbels of 15 to 30 flowers. The flowers are

----- PAGE 598 -----
we

&

gL

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

"androgynous and have greenish-yellow corollas. The ovary
is inferior. The fruit is a pea-sized, globular to reniform,
scarlet, smooth and glossy drupe, which contains 2 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, and stands
erect from 30 to 80 cm high. It has a smooth, round stem and
bears terminal whorls of 3 to 5 palmate leaves. The leaflets
are thin, finely serrate, gradually acuminate, 7 to 20 cm long
and 2 to 5 cm wide. The rhizome tapers at the ends and is
often palmate at the tip, giving it a human-like form.

Habitat: Panax ginseng is indigenous to China. It is
cultivated in China, Korea, Japan and Russia.

Production: Ginseng root consists of the dried main and
lateral root and root hairs of Panax ginseng.

Other Names: Five-fingers, Red berry, American Ginseng,
Chinese Ginseng, Korean Ginseng, Oriental Ginseng

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins

Aglycone (20S)-protopanaxadiol: including ginsenoside Ral,
Ra2, Ra3, Rbl, Rb2, Rb3, notoginsenoside R4, Rsl, Rs2,
Rs3, Rs4, malonylginsenoside Rbl, Re, Rd

Aglycone (20S)-protopanaxytriol: including ginsenoside Re,
Rf, Rgl, notoginsenoside RI

Aglycone oleanolic acid: including ginsenoside Ro, chikuset-
susasaponin-V Rbl, Rb2, Re, Rd, Re, Rgl

Water-soluble polysaccharides: panaxane A to U

Polyynes: including falcarinol (panaxynol), falcarintriol
(panaxytriol), examples estered with acetic acid or linolenic
acid

EFFECTS

The main active component in Ginseng consists of the
ginsenosides, a diverse group of steroidal saponins. There
are twenty-five ginsenosides that have been separated and
detected based on the sugar unit sequences and aglycone
moieties (Attele, 1999; Fuzzati, 1999; Wang, 1999). The
ginsenosides demonstrate the ability to target a myriad of
tissues, producing a variety of pharmaceutical’ responses
quite different from one another. A single ginsenoside may
initiate multiple or opposing actions in the same tissue, thus
making the overall phamacology of ginseng complex (Attele,
1999).

Cognitive Function Effects

The loss of nicotinic receptor binding has been associated
with age-related cognitive impairments. Nicotinic receptor
stimulation of the central nervous system is beneficial for
neuroprotection against age associated cognitive disorders. A

GINSENG /347
non-ginsenoside component of the herb has demonstrated
affinity for the nicotinic receptor. This binding of the
compound to the receptor results in nicotinic activity (Lewis,
1999). Ginsenoside-Rg2 and -Rg3 block nicotinic acetylcho-
line and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors. This results in
an inhibitory effect of the acetylcholine-evoked secretion of
catecholamines. (Tachikawa, 1999). These different effects
of Panax gingseng contribute to the variety of pharmacologi-
cal effects.

Antineoplastic Effects

A protopanaxadiol component of Ginseng was shown to
inhibit proliferation of pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells
resistant to cisplatin (Lee, 1999). Ginsenoside-Rs4 and -Rs3
elevates protein levels of p53 and p21WAFI, which are
associated with the induction of apoptosis in human hepato-
ma cells (Kim, 1999). Ginsenoside Rh2 induces apoptotic
cell death in the glioma cell line through activation of
caspase and production of oxygen species (Kim, 1999).

Antioxidant Effects

The antioxidant effects of Ginseng protect against oxidative
DNA and protein (globin) damage caused by free radicals
(Lee, 1998). Antioxidant activity of the herb also provides a
hepatoprotective effect by increasing hepatic gluathione
peroxidase activity (Voces, 1999). Antioxidant intervention
by Ginseng is exerted by weak radical scavenging activity
and stimulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in
cardiac tissue (Maffei, 1999).

Antiplatelet Effects

The antiplatelet components consist of panaxynol and
ginsenosides Ro, Rgl, and Rg2 in the diethyl ether and 1-
butanol fractions of the herb. Panaxynol inhibits the aggrega-
tion, release reaction, and thromboxane formation in platelets
while ginsenosides Ro, Rgl, and Rg2 suppress the release
reaction only (Kuo, 1990; Teng, 1989).

Antiviral Effects

Ginseng induces production of interferon, enhances natural
killer cell and antibody dependent cytotoxic activities, and
stimulates cell mediated immunity (Singh, 1983; Singh,
1984).

Decrease in Alcohol Levels

The effect of ginseng in the reduction of blood ethanol levels
may be attributed to different mechanisms. Ginseng in-
creases alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity at high concentrations due to an augmented induc-
tion of the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system. Ginseng
enhances blood alcohol clearance in man (Lee, 1987). The

----- PAGE 599 -----
348 /GINSENG

ginsenosides also reduce plasma ethanol by a delay in gastric
emptying time (Koo, 1999).

Hypolipidemic/Cardiac_ Effects

Ginseng saponins activate lipoprotein lipase, an enzyme that
reduces chylomicrons and very low-density lipoproteins, and
results in a decrease of triglycerides and cholesterol (Inoue,
1999). The ginsenosides demonstrate negative chronotropic
effects and positive and negative inotropic effects on the
heart (Wu, 1988). The anti-arrhythmic properties of Rgl
consist of prolonged ventricular refractoriness and repolari-
zation, and increased ventricular fibrillation threshold (Wu,
1995).

Miscellaneous Effects

Stimulation of corticotrophin secretion and increased hepatic
ribonucleic acid (RNA) and protein synthesis are effects of
the saponin glycosides in Ginseng. Panax ginseng is
comprised of at least 28 different saponin glycosides, which
contain nuclei resembling those of steroids (Punnonen,
1980). The ginsenosides also stimulate insulin release and
increase insulin receptors to exert a hypoglycemic effect
(Guodong, 1987). Ginseng also decreases blood sugar
through glucose metabolism related to adrenergic receptors.
Ginseng decreases lactic acid and stimulates other respira-
tory enzymes in the electron transport chain to promote
aerobic oxidation (Yao, 1990). The saponins have shown
enhancement of erectile capacity mediated by endothelium-
derived relaxing factor and peripheral neurophysiologic
enhancement (Choi, 1999; Choi, 1995).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Cognitive Function

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was
conducted to evaluate the effect of Ginseng on cognitive
function over an 8-week period. There were 112 healthy
volunteers over 40 years of age. The primary outcome was
the change in score on each cognitive test, evaluated at
baseline, and again at 8 weeks. Oral standardized ginseng
400 mg daily was significantly better compared to placebo
with abstract thinking and a tendency toward faster simple
reaction times. There was no difference between the groups
with regard to concentration, memory, or subjective experi-
ence (Sorenson, 1996).

Hypoglycemic

The effect on blood glucose with Ginseng was demonstrated
in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study including 36
newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetic patients. Ginseng 200 mg
daily improved glycated hemoglobin, serum aminoterminal-
propetptide concentration and physical activity after 8 weeks
of therapy. Ginseng 100 mg and 200 mg daily dose elevated

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

mood, improved psychophysical performance, and reduced
fasting blood glucose and weight (Sotaniemi, 1995).

Antiviral

The properties of a standardized extract of ginseng root for
inducing a higher immune response in vaccination against
influenza were evaluated in 227 volunteers. The placebo-
controlled, randomized, double-blind study was conducted
over a 12-week period. Oral standardized ginseng extract
100 mg daily was given over the entire 12-week period, with
anti-influenza polyvalent vaccination given to all volunteers
at week 4. There were significantly fewer cases of influenza
or the common cold in the ginseng-treatment group, and
significantly higher antibody titers and natural killer cell
levels at 8 and 12 weeks in the ginseng treatment group
(Scaglione, 1996).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Lack of stamina

Ginseng is used internally for fatigue and debility, and for a
decrease capacity for work and concentration.

Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, Ginseng is used for loss
of appetite, cachexia, anxiety, impotence and sterility,
neuralgia and insomnia.

Chinese Medicine: In Chinese medicine, Ginseng is used for
hemoptysis, gastric disturbances, and vomiting.

Homeopathic Uses: Ginseng is used for rheumatism and
debility.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Caution should be taken in patients with cardiovas-
cular disease or diabetes. Hypertension resulting from
Ginseng Abuse Syndrome is associated with prolonged high
dose Ginseng with concomitant use of caffeine (Siegel,
1979; Siegel, 1980). General adverse effects include insom-
nia, epistaxis, headache, nervousness, and vomitting.

Mastalgia: Mastalgia with diffuse breast nodularity has been
reported with Ginseng use (Palmer, 1978).

Vaginal Bleeding: Oral Ginseng and Ginseng face cream
have been associated with post menopausal vaginal bleeding
(Greenspan, 1983; Hopkins, 1988).

Pregnancy/Lactation: Maternal use of Ginseng has been
associated with neonatal androgenization, thus it is not
recommended for use during pregnancy or lactation (Awang,
1991).

Drug Interactions:
Diabetic Agents/Insulin — Caution should be taken when
taking an antidiabetic agent or insulin to lower blood glucose

----- PAGE 600 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

because Ginseng has been shown to have hypoglycemic
effects (See EFFECTS and CLINICAL TRIALS).

Warfarin/NSAIDS/Antiplatelet Agents — A case report of a
47-year old male with a mechanical valve in the aortic
position taking warfarin had a decrease in the INR 2 weeks
after initiating Ginseng therapy. The INR returned to normal
2 weeks after discontinuation of warfarin (Awang, 1991).
Due to the antiplatelet effect of Ginseng, avoid concomitant
use with antiplatelet agents or NSAIDS.

Phenelzine (MAOI) — Headache, tremors, and mania have
been reported with concomitant use of phenelzine and
Ginseng (Jones, 1987).

Loop Diuretics — Germanium, present in most Ginseng
products, was reported to cause loop diuretic resistance in a
63 year old male with glomerulonephritis. Germainium
causes nephrotoxicity in the nephron segment where loop
diuretics work (Becker, 1996).

OVERDOSAGE
Massive overdosages
Syndrome, which is characterized by hypertension, insom-
nia, hypertonia and edema.

can bring about Ginseng Abuse

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug infusions, pow-
der and galenic preparations for internal use. Various
standardized preparations containing Ginseng root are

available.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 10Omg, 150mg. 200mg, 250mg, 404mg, 405mg,
410mg, 424mg, 470mg, 500mg, 505mg, 535mg, 560mg,
1000mg, 1250mg

Liquid — 300mg/ml
Tablet — 350mg, 500mg

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over 3
gm comminuted drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 1 to 2 gm root.
The infusion may be taken 3 to 4 times a day over 3 to 4

weeks.

Cognitive Function — Oral standardized Ginseng 400 mg
daily was effective in improving cognitive function (Soren-
son, 1996).

Hypoglycemic Effects — Dosage of 100-200 mg of oral
standardized Ginseng has been effective in Type 2 diabetic
patients (Sotaniemi, 1995).

Antiviral — Studies have proven efficacy in addition
vaccination with 100-200 mg daily of oral standardized

Ginseng extract (Scaglione, 1996).

GINSENG/349

Erectile Dysfunction — Korean Red Ginseng given orally as
600 mg three times daily has been effective (Choi, 1995).

Physical and Psychological Performance Capacity (lack of
stamina) — Ginsana given 100 mg twice daily has improved .
oxygen capacity, reduction of maximum stress frequency,
increase in ling function parameters and shortened reaction
time to visual stimulants after 11 weeks (Forgo, 1985).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 5 to 10 globules or 1
mL injection solution sc twice weekly.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Kann Ginseng die Leistungsfahigkeit erhohen? In:
DAZ 132(12):XLVMI. 1992.

Anonym, Mythos-Tonikum-Arzneimittel. Ginsengextrakt bei
Atemwegserkrankungen. In: DAZ 134(26):2461. 1994.

Attele AS; Wu JA; Yuan CS. Ginseng pharmacology: multiple
constituents and multiple actions. Biochem Pharmacol 1999 Dec
1:58(11): 1685-93.

Avakian EV et al., (1984) Planta Med 50:151.

Awang DV. Maternal use of ginseng and neonatal
androgenization. JAMA 1991 Jul 17;266(3):363. '

Baldwin CA et al., (1986) Pharm J 237:583.

Bauer R, Neues von "immunmodulierenden Drogen" und
"Drogen mit antiallergischer und antiinflammatorischer
Wirkung". In: ZPT 14(1):23-24. 1993.

Becker BN; Greene J; Evanson J et al. Ginseng-induced
diuretic resistance. JAMA 1996 Aug 28;276(8):606-7.

Blasius H, Phytotherapie: Adaptogene Wirkung von Ginseng.
In: DAZ 135(23):2136-2138. 1995.

Caesar W, Ginsengwurzel in Europa. Eine alte Geschichte. In:
DAZ 131(19):935. 1991.

Choi H, Seong D, Rha K. Clinical efficacy of Korean red
ginseng for erectile dysfunction. Int J Impot Res 1995
Sep;7(3): 181-6.

Choi Y, Rha K, Choi H. In vitro an
effect of Korean red ginseng on erection. J urol 1999
Oct; 162(4): 1508-11.
Forgo I, Schimert G. Zur Frage der Wirkungsdauer des
standardisierten Ginseng-Extraktes G 115 bei gesunden
Leistungssportiern. Notabene medici 1985 9:636-649.

Fulder SJ, (1981) Am J Chin Med 9:112.

Fuzzati N; Gabetta B; Jayakar K et al. Liquid chromatography-
electrospray mass spectrometric identification of ginsenosides in
anax ginseng roots. J Chromatogr A 1999 Aug 27;854(1-2):69-
79.

Greenspan EM. Ginseng and vaginal bleeding. JAMA 1983 Apr
5;249(15):2018.

Guodong L, Zhongqui L. Effects of ginseng saponins on insulin
release from isolated pancreatic islets of rats. Chin J Integr
Trad Western Med 1987;7:326.

in vivo experimental

----- PAGE 601 -----
350 /GINSENG

Hansen L, Boll PM, (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):285.

Hirakura K, Morita M, Nakajima K, Ikeya Y, Mitsuhashi H,
Polyacetylenes from them roots of Panax ginseng. In: PH
30:3327-3333. 1991.

Hopkins M, Androff L, Benninghoff A. Ginseng face cream
and unexplained vaginal bleeding. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1988,159:1121-1122.

Hyo-Won B, Il-Heok K, Sa-Sek H, Byung-Hun H, Mun-Hae H.
Ze-Hun K, Nak-Du K, (1987) Roter Ginseng. Schriftenreihe des
Staatlichen Ginseng-Monopolamtes der Republik Korea.

Inoue M; Wu CZ; Dou DQ et al. Lipoprotein lipase activation
yy red ginseng saponins in hyperlipidemia model animals.
Phytomedicine 1999 Oct;6(4):257-65.
Jones BD; Runikis AM. Interaction of ginseng with phenelzine.
J Clin Psychopharmacol 1987 Jun;7(3):201-2.
Kim HE, Oh JH, Lee SK, Oh YJ. Ginsenoside RH-2 induces
apoptotic cell death in rat C6 glioma via a reactive oxygen and
caspase dependent but Bcl-X(L)-independent pathway. Life Sci
1999;65(3):PL33-40.
Kim SE; Lee YH; Park JH; Lee SK. Ginsenoside-Rs3, a new
diol-type ginseng saponin, selectively elevates protein levels of
p53 and p21WAFI leading to induction of apoptosis in SK-
HEP-1 cells. Anticancer Res 1999 Jan-Feb;19(1A):487-91.
Kim SE; Lee YH; Park JH; Lee SK. Ginsenoside-Rs4, a new
type of ginseng saponin concurrently induces apoptosis and
selectively elevates protein levels of p53 and p21WAFI in
human hepatoma SK-HEP-| cells. Eur J Cancer 1999
Mar;35(3):507-I1.

Kitigawa I, (1983) Yaligali Zasshi 103:612.

Konno C et al., (1984) Planta Med 50(5):434.

Koo MW. Effects of ginseng on ethanol induced sedation in
mice. Life Sci 1999;64(2): 153-60.

Kuo SC; Teng CM; Lee JC et al. Antiplatelet components in
Panax ginseng. Planta Med 1990 Apr;56(2): 164-7.

Lee FC; Ko JH; Park JK; Lee JS. Effects of Panax ginseng on
blood alcohol clearance in man. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol
1987 Jun;14(6):543-6.

Lee BM, Lee SK, Kim HS. Inhibition of oxidative DNA
damage, 8-OhdG, and carbonyl contents in smokers treated with
antioxidants (vitamin E, vitamin C, beta-carotene and red
ginseng). Cancer Lett 1998 Oct 23; 132(I-2):219-27.

Lee SJ; Sung JH; Lee SJ et al. Antitumor activity of a novel
ginseng saponin metabolite in human pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells resistant to cisplatin. Cancer Lett 1999
Sep 20;144(1):39-43.

Lewis R; Wake G; Court G et al. Non-ginsenoside nicotinic
activity in ginseng species. Phytother Res 1999 Feb;13(1):59-64.

Maffei F, Carini M, Aldini G, et al. Panax ginseng
administration in the rat prevents myocardial ischemia-
reperfusion damage induced by hyperbaric oxygen: evidence for
an antioxidant intervention. Planta Med 1999 Oct;65(7):614-9.

Matsuda H et al., (1986) Chem Pharm Bull 34(3): 1153.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Obermeier A, (1980) Zur Analytik der Ginseng- und
Eteutherococcusdroge. Dissertation Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universitat Miinchen.

Palmer BV, Montgomery ACV, Monteiro JC. Ginseng und
mastalgia. BMJ 1978; 1:1284.

Petkov VD et al., Memory effect of standardized extracts of
Panax ginseng(G 115), Ginkgo biloba(GK 501) and their
combination Gincosan (PHL-00701). In: PM 59(2).106. 1993.

Pfister-Hotz G, Phytotherapie in der Geriatric In: ZPT
18(3): 162-165. 1997.

Ploss E, (1988) Panax Ginseng C. A. Meyer. Wissenschaftlicher
Bericht. Kooperation Phytopharmaka, Koln Bonn Frankfurt Bad

Homburg.

Punnonen R; Lukola A. Oestrogen-like effect of ginseng. Br
Med J 1980 Oct 25;281(6248): 1110.

Ro JY; Ahn YS; Kim KH. Inhibitory effect of ginsenoside on
the mediator release in the guinea pig lung mast cells activated
by specific antigen-antibody reactions. Int J Immunopharmacol
1998 Nov;20(Il):625-41.

Scaglione F; Cattaneo G; Alessandria M et al. Efficacy and
safety of the standardised Ginseng extract G115 for potentiating
vaccination against the influenza syndrome and protection
against the common cold. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1996;22(2):65-
72.

Sieg! RK, (1979) Ginseng abuse syndrome - problems with the
panacea. J Amer Assoc 241:1614-1615.

Siegl RK, (1980) Ginseng and the high blood pressure. J Am
Med Assoc 243:32.

Singh VK, George CX, Singh N, et al. Combined treatment of
mice with Panax ginseng extract and interferon inducer.
Amplification of host resistance to Semliki forest virus. Planta
Med. 1983 Apr;47(4):234-6.
Singh VK, Agarwal SS, Gupta BM. Immunomodulatory activity
of Panax ginseng extract. Planta Med 1984 Dec;50(6):462-5.

Sonnenborn U, Proppert Y, (1990) Ginseng (Panax ginseng
C.A. Meyer). Z Phytotherapie 11:35-49.

Sorensen H, Sonne J. A double-masked study of the effects of
ginseng on cognitive functions. Curr Ther Res 1996;57:959-68.

Sotaniemi E, Haapakoski E, Rautio A. Ginseng therapy in non-
insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes Care 1995
Oct; 18(10): 1373-5.

Sprecher E, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: ZPT 9(2):40. 1988.

Sprecher E, Phytotherapeutika als Wunderdrogen? Versuch einer
Bewertung. In: ZPT 10(1):1. 1989.

Tachikawa E; Kudo K; Harada K et al. Effects of ginseng
saponins on responses induced by various receptor stimuli. Eur
J Pharmacol 1999 Mar 12;369(1):23-32.

Takahashi M, Yoshikura M, (1966) Yakugaku Zasshi 86:1051
and 1053.

----- PAGE 602 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Teng CM: Kuo SC; Ko FN et al. Antiplatelet actions of
panaxynol and ginsenosides isolated from ginseng. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1989 Mar 24;990(3):315-20.

Voces J, Alvarez A, Vila L, et al. Effects of administration of
the standardized Panax ginseng extract Gl 15 on hepatic
antioxidant function after exhaustive exercise. Comp Biochem
Physiol C Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol 1999 Jun; 123(2): 175-
84.

Wang B. Yang M. Jin Y, Liu P. Studies on the mechanism of
ginseng polypeptide induced hypoglycemia. Yao Hsueh Hsueh
Pao 1990:25(10):727-31.

Wang X: Sakuma T: Asafu-Adjaye E. Determination of
ginsenosides in plant extracts from Panax ginseng and Panax
quinquefolius L. by LC/MS/MS. Anal Chem 1999 Apr
15:71(8): 1579-84.

Wichtl M. Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: DAZ 132(30): 1576. 1992.
Wu JX: Chen JX. Negative chronotropic and inotropic effects
of Panax notoginseng saponins. Chung Kuo Yao Li Hsueh Pao
1988 Sep:9(5):409-12.

Wu W: Zhang XM: Liu PM et al. Effects of Panax
notoginseng saponin Rgl on cardiac electrophysiological
properties and ventricular Fibrillation threshold in dogs. Chung
Kuo Yao Li Hsueh Pao 1995 Sep;16(5):459-63.

Youn YS. (1987) Analytisch vergleichende Untersuchungen von
Ginsengwurzeln verschiedener Provenienzen. Dissertation Freie
Universitit Berlin.

Further information in:

Chan. EH et al.. (Eds) Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Frohne D. Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur

potheker. Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.

mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

GLOBE FLOWER / 351

Glechoma hederacea
See Ground Ivy

Globe Flower

Trollius europaeus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: Every branch of the stem bears a solitary,
terminal flower. They are up to 5 cm in diameter, globular
and have no calyx. The flowers usually have 10 perianth
segments. The petals are lemon yellow. The outer petals are
occasionally green underneath. They are bent. The stamens
are approximately 12 mm long and have a 0.5 to 5 mm long

appendage.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 10 to 70 cm high and
glabrous. The stem is hollow, smooth and branched upward.
The basal leaves are long-petioled and 3 to 5 lobed. The
lobes are cuneate and more or less deeply indented and
serrate. The cauline leaves are smaller and more or less

sessile.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern and central

Europe.

Production: Globe flowers are the flowers of Trollius

europacus.

Other Names: Globe Ranunculus, Globe Crowfoot, Globe

Trollius

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Ranunculin: protoanemonine-forming substance in the fresh-
ly harvested plant that changes enzymatically when the plant
is cut into small pieces. The pungent, volatile protoanemo-
nine quickly dimerizes to the non-mucous membrane irritat-
ing anemonine. When dried, the plant is not capable of

protoanemonine formation.

Flavonoids

Carotinoids: including neoxanuhine (trollixanthine), xantho-
phyll epoxide

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Formerly, the plant was used to treat scurvy.

It loses most of its active properties on drying.

----- PAGE 603 -----
352/GLOBE FLOWER

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
losages. Extended skin contact with the freshly harvested,
bruised plant can lead to blisters and cauterizations due to
the resulting protoanemonine formation, which is severely
irritating to skin and mucous membranes.

If taken internally, severe iritation to the gastrointestinal
tract, combined with colic and diarrhea, as well as irritation
of the urinary drainage passages, are possible. Because of the
very low level of protoanemonine-forming substances in the
plant, the danger of poisoning is quite low.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Glycine soja
See Soybean

Glycyrrhiza glabra

See Licorice

Gnaphalium uliginosum
See Cudweed

Goa Powder

Andira araroba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried and
pulverized latex of the trunk and branches.

Flower and Fruit: Andira araroba is a large smooth tree
whose yellowish wood has vertically running channels and
spaces. The latex collects increasingly in these spaces as the
tree ages. The bark forms in long flat pieces about 3 mm
thick and is grayish-white and fissured externally. The inner

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

surface is brownish and striated. The fracture is laminated
with yellow fibers.

Characteristics: The taste is mucilaginous and bitter, and the
odor is slight but disagreeable.

Habitat: The tree grows in Brazil.

Production: Goa powder is exuded from the nuclear cavity
of Andira araroba. The exuded substance is purified by
recrystalization in benzol, thus producing raw chrysarobin.

Other Names: Araroba, Bahia Powder, Brazil Powder,
Chrysatobine, Crude Chrysarobin, Ringworm Powder

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthrone derivatives: in particular chrysophanolanthrone,
dehydroemodine anthrone monomethyl ether, emodine an-
throne monomethyl ether, dimerics of these compounds

EFFECTS
The powder is a strong reducing agent. It causes severe
erythema upon contact with the skin. It inhibits glucose-6-
phosphate-dehydrogenization in psoriatic skin conditions.
The drug easily absorbs through the skin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Goa Powder is used for psoriasis in
chrysarobin ointments and for various kinds of dermatomy-
cosis. It has been widely replaced by synthetic anthranol,
which is also used in the treatment of psoriasis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is severely irritating to skin and mucous mem-
branes (redness, swelling, pustules and conjunctivitis, even
without eye contact). Internal administration leads to vomit-
ing, diarrhea and kidney inflammation (with as little as
0.01 g). External administration on large skin areas could
cause resorptive poisonings.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Goa Powder is administered

topically in emulsion form, but has largely been replaced by
the synthetic anthranol cignolin.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Abwehr von Arzneimittelrisiken, Stufe II. In: DAZ
136(38):3253-2354. 1996.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.

Miuiller K, Wiegrebe W, Psoriasis und Antipsoriatika. In: DAZ
137(22): 1893-1902. 1997.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 604 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Thomson RH, Naturally Occurring Quinones, 2nd Ed.,
Academic Press New York 1971.

Goat's Rue
Galega officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves collected
at the beginning of the flowering season and dried, as well as
the tips of the flowering branches.

Flower and Fruit: The plant's long-peduncled, axillary
racemes are made up of numerous | cm long, slightly
inclined florets. The petals are bluish-white and short
stemmed. The filaments are fused. The fruit is a round,
indented pod that grows 2 to 3 cm long and 2 to 3 mm thick,
and contains many seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The strong, bright green shrub has
numerous 40 cm to | m high, erect, branched, hollow stems.
It has a divided rhizome with brown fibers sprouting
numerous erect, corrugated, round, tall stems. The leaves are
odd-pinnate; the leaflets are 15 to 4 cm long and 4 to 16 mm
wide, elliptical to lanceolate and thorny-tipped with a rich
green upper surface and a lighter undersurface.

Characteristics: The plant is odorless unless bruised, where-
upon it emits a disagreeable smell, which probably gave rise
to the common name Goat's Rue.

Habitat: Goat's Rue grows wild throughout Europe and
Asia.

Production: Goat's Rue herb consists of the dried, above-
ground parts of Galega officinalis, harvested during the
flowering season.

Other Names: Italian Fitch, French Lilac

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Guanidine derivatives: galegine, 4-hydroxygalegine
Quinazoline alkaloids: (+)-peganine

Lectins

Flavonoids: including galuteolin

EFFECTS

The herb contains galegin, which affects blood sugar. In
vitro, an inhibiting effect on the glucose transport of human

epithelium cells has been demonstrated. The reported blood
sugar-lowering effect of Goat's Rue herb on humans has not

GOATS RUE/ 353

been documented, nor have die reported aggregation-inhibit-
ing, lactagogic and diuretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Goat's Rue herb are used as
a diuretic, and also as supportive therapy for diabetes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages have not
been recorded.

Poisonings have only been observed in animals, and then
only following the intake of large quantities of the plant.
Sheep reportedly experienced salivation, spasms, paralyses
and death through asphyxiation following ingestion of
inordinate amounts.

Drug Interactions: A possible interaction exists with hypo-
glycemic medication. Goat's Rue should not be used by
diabetics currently maintained with commercial pharmaceu-
tical hypoglycemics.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
uses is not documented, therapeutic application cannot be
recommended. Goat's Rue cannot be recommended for
diabetes mellitus because of the severity of the disease and
the availability of effective therapeutic alternatives.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
2 gm of ground drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Liquid Extract — Drug 1:1

Tincture — 1:10 45% ethanol

LITERATURE

Barthel A, Reuter G, PA 23:26. 1968.

Reuter G, Flora 154:136. 1964.

Schreiber K, Pufahl K, Brauninger H, Liebigs Ann Chem
671:142. 1964.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. HMSO, UK
1984.

----- PAGE 605 -----
354 /GOAT'S RUE

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E. Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Golden Ragwort

Senecio aureus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh plant
harvested during the flowering season and the dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The few capitula are in a loose, many-
blossomed corymb that is up to 2.5 cm wide. They are
surrounded by a double involucre and consist of 8 to 12
yellow lingual, female florets. There are also numerous
androgynous, tubular ray florets, which are somewhat
darker.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant grows up to 60
cm tall. The rhizome is 2 to 5 cm thick, has numerous
thread-like roots, and produces an erect or ascending stem.
The root bark is hard and blackish. It surrounds a ring of
whitish, woody bundles and a large, dark, central pith. The
stem is fluffy-haired when young, later glabrous, and bears
alternate leaves. The basal leaves grow up to 15 cm long.
They are long-petioled, simple, round, and reniform with a
cordate base. The cauline leaves are shorter, incised and
pinnatifid, becoming bracts.

Characteristics: The herb has a bitter and astringent taste.
The smell is slightly acrid.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America.

Other Names: Squaw Weed, Golden Senecio, Golden
Groundsel, Ragwort, Coughweed, Cocash Weed, Grundy
Swallow, Life Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids:
florosenine, otosenine

chief alkaloids are floridanine,

Sesquiterpenes of the eremophilane-type: including among
others, ligularenolide, tetrahydroligularenolide, dehydrofuki-
none, trans-9-oxofuranoeremophilane

Flavonoids: including among others, kaempferol-3-O-gluco-
syl acetate, quercetin-3-O-glucosyl acetate

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The active agents are seneciionin (aurein), other alkaloids,
and resins. The drug has menstruation stimulant, diuretic,
and astringent properties, although the mode of action has
not been documented. The “pyrrolizidine alkaloids are
hepatotoxic and carcinogenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Life Root is used for loss of blood
(bleeding) and menopausal symptoms.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Life Root should not be taken internally. Hepatotoxicity and
carcinogenicity are possible due to the pyrrolizidine alka-
loids and 1,2-unsaturated necic parent substances.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internal use of Life Root is not

recommended.

Daily Dosage: The traditional average daily dose of the drug
as a liquid extract is 4 g taken 3 to 4 times daily. (See
Precautions and Adverse Reactions.)

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Nachmann RJ, PH 22:780-782. 1983.

Resch JF et al., PM 47:255. 1983.

Roder E et al., (1983) Planta Med 49:57.

Roder E, DAZ 132:2427. 1992.

Zalkow LH et al., (1979) J Chem Soc Perkin Trans. 1:1542.

Golden Shower Tree
Cassia fistula

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

bark, fruit and seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in loose, hanging, 30 to
50 cm long racemes. There are 5 pale yellow, ovate petals.
The diameter of the corolla is approximately 3.8 cm. The
calyx is deeply divided and 5-toothed. There are 10 stamens.
The fruit is a legume, 30 to 60 cm long, hanging and
indehiscent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cassia fistula is a tree, that grows up
to 9 m high. The leaves are 20 to 40 cm long, 4- to 8-paired
pinnate. The leaf spindle is hairy and the leaflet is petiolate,
ovate to oval, acuminate, 5 to 12 cm long, 4 to 9 cm wide

----- PAGE 606 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and silvery haired underneath. The young bark is smooth and
greenish-gray. Older bark is dark brown and rough.

Habitat: India, Africa and South America

Production: Cassia pods are the dried ripe fruit of Cassia
fistula.

Not to be Confised With: Very occasionally the tree has
been confused with South American Cassia species.

Other Names: Canafistula. Indian Laburnum, Pudding Pipe
Tree, Purging Cassia

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (1% in the mesocarp): sennosides,
fistulinic acid

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (50%): particularly sac-
charose

Fruit acids: citric acid
Steroids: sterols (in the seeds), including beta-sitosterol
Fatty oil (in the seeds)

EFFECTS
The anthracene derivatives have a laxative effect. Prepara-
tions from the fruit have demonstrated antimicrobial and
antiviral effects in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Indian Medicine: Golden Shower Tree is used for flatulence,
constipation, fever, anorexia, gout, jaundice, itching and skin
conditions. Efficacy for constipation is plausible because of
the anthranoid content; the other indications have not been

proven.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated with ileum, acute-inflammatory

diseases of the intestine and appendicitis. It is also contrain-
dicated for children under 12 years of age and for women
during pregnancy or while nursing.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The ques-
tion of the increase in probability of the appearance of
carcinomas in the colon following long-term administration
of Anthracene drugs has not yet been fully clarified. Recent
studies, however, have revealed no connection between the
administration of Anthracene drugs and the frequency of
carcinomas of the colon.

OVERDOSAGE

In the case of overdose, cramp-like gastrointestinal com-
plaints could occur as a side effect of the laxative effect of
the drug. Prolonged administration leads to loss of electro-

GOLDENSEAL/355

lytes, particularly of potassium ions, which in turn leads to
aldosteronism, albuminuria, hematuria, inhibition of intesti-
nal motility, muscle weakness, enhancement of the effect of
cardioactive steroids and an influence upon the effect of
antiarrhythmics. In rare cases, administration of the drug
may lead to cardiac arrhythmia, nephropathy, edema and
accelerated osteoclasis.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole drug preparations are for
internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an extract, use pulp and distilled
water in a 1:1 ratio, macerate, then exhaustively percolate
with distilled water and filter. Evaporate to a soft extract.

Daily Dosage: 4 to 8 gm of fruit pulp

LITERATURE
el-Saadany SS, el-Massry RA, Labib SM, Sitohy MZ, The
biochemical role and hypocholesterolaemic potential of the
legume Cassia fistula in hypercholesterolaemic rats. Nahrung,
35:807-15, 1991.

Esposito Avella M, Diaz A, de Gracia I, de Tello R, Gupta
MP, Evaluation of traditional medicine: effects of Cajanus cajan
L. and of Cassia fistula L. on carbohydrate metabolism in mice.
Rev Med Panama, 16:39-45, 1991 Jan.

Esposito Avella M, Diaz A, de Gracia I, de Tello R, Gupta
MP, Studies on the possibilities to infect the cells of callus of
Cassia fistula by an animal virus & induce production of
interferon-like antiviral factor(s). Indian J Exp Biol, 16:349-55,
1981 Apr.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Goldenseal

Hydrastis canadensis

TRADE NAMES
Golden Seal, Goldenseal (Available from numerous manu-
facturers), Goldenseal Power, Golden Seal Herb, Golden
Seal Root, Golden Seal Plus, Goldenseal Root Alcohol Free,
Herbal Sure Goldenseal Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the air-dried

rhizome with the root fibers.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is small, solitary, terminal and
erect. It has 3 small greenish white petals which drop as soon
as they come out. The fruit is a group of small, fleshy,

----- PAGE 607 -----
356/GOLDENSEAL

oblong carmine berries with 1 or 2 hard, black and glossy
seeds. The fruit is similar to the raspberry but is not edible.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a low herbaceous
perennial about 30 cm high. It has a horizontal bright yellow,
knotty and twisted rhizome about 0.6 to 18 cm thick out of
which the root fibers grow. It is folded longitudinally and
encircled by old leaf scars. The fracture is short and shows a
dark, yellow cut surface, thick bark, large pith and broad
medullary rays. The flowering stem appears in spring and is
erect, cylindrical, downward pubescent, 15 to 30 cm tall and
has a few short brown scales at the base. It bears 2 clearly
ribbed, dark green and pubescent, cauline leaves. The lower
one is sessile the upper one petiolate, round and divided into
7 lobes and finely serrate. There is also a root leaf on a long
petiole, which is similar to the cauline leaves but larger.

Characteristics: The taste is very bitter, the smell is strong,
characteristic and disagreeable.

Habitat: Indigenous to the U.S., cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Goldenseal root is the rhizome of Hydrastis
canadensis. The root is dug up in the autumn and dried.

Not to be Confused With: Goldenseal is often adulterated
with Bloodroot.

Other Names: Orange Root, Yellow Root, Yellow Puccoon,
Ground Raspberry, Wild Curcuma, Turmeric Root, Indian
Dye, Eye Root, Eye Balm, Indian Paint, Jaundice Root,
Warnera, Indian Plant

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids: chief alkaloids hydrastine (1.5 to
4%), berberine (0.5 to 6%), (-)-canadine (0.5%)

Starch

EFFECTS

Many of the studies that have been conducted focus on the
berberine and hydrastine componants that are found not only
in Goldenseal, but also in numerous other herbs commonly
used in Chinese and Indian medicine. The effects reported
here focus on these componants and not necessarily the
Goldenseal in it's raw form.

Berberine sulfate has been shown to inhibit the growth of
Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas
vaginalis, in vitro. The parasites all exhibited morphological
changes after exposure to berberine sulfate (Kaneda, 1991).
In one experiment by Swab et al (1981), berberine hydro-
chloride reduced the cholera toxin-induced secretion of
water, sodium and chloride in perfused rat ileum. Berberine
was also found to inhibit the intestinal secretory response of
Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli enterotoxins without
causing histological damage to the intestinal mucosa (Sack,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

1982). Berberine is also active against other intestinal
infections that cause aute diarrhea such as Shigella dysenteri-
ae, Salmonella paratyphi and various Klebsiella species.
Berberine sulfate has been shown to block the adherence of
Streptococcus pyrogenes and E. coli to host cells, possibly
explaining it's mechanism of action against numerous
pathogens (Sun, 1988).

Berberine was found to be the active constituent in an extract
of Hydrastis canadensis root that demonstrated activity
against a multiple drug-resistant strain of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Gentry, 1998). Berberine also inhibits Helico-
bacter pylori (Bae, 1998).

Berberine has a long history of use for eye infections. In one
study that looked at effectiveness in treating trachoma,
berberine was more effective than sulfacetamide in eradicat-
ing Chlamydia trachomatis from the eye and preventing
relapse of symptoms (Babbar, 1982; Mohan, 1982).

Berberine has a choleretic (bile-stimlating) effect and has
been shown to lower bilirubin levels (Chan, 1977).

Berberine inhibited the effects of tumor promotors on the
skin using a mouse model (Nishino, 1986). There is evidence
that berberine also has a direct tumor killing effect and has
the ability to stimulate production of white blood cells
(Zhang, 1990; Liu, 1991).

Berberine has hypotensive, antisecretory and sedative ef
fects. The mechanism for these effects may be explained by
the fact that berberine has platelet alpha 2 adrenoceptor
agonist activity that is similar to that of clonidine (Hui,
1984).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Goldenseal is contraindicated in pregnancy.

Goldenseal is contraindicated in people with glucose-6-
phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency (Chan, 1993).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Goldenseal is used as an antiseptic external-
ly on wounds and herpes labialis. It is also used for gastritis
and as an astringent. The berberine componant is used to
treat acute diarrhea caused by numerous gastrointestinal
pathogens. Berberine is also used as an adjunct treatment in
various cancers and in neutropenia resulting from radiation
and chemotherapy. Berberine has been used to treat tracho-
ma, gastric ulcers and gallbladder disease.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathic dilutions, Hydrastis
canadensis is used for the treatment of irregular menstrua-
tion, digestive problems and bronchitis.

----- PAGE 608 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: If taken over an extended period, the drug can
bring about digestive disorders, mucous membrane irritation,
constipation, excitatory states, hallucinations and occasional-

y deliria.

Pregnancy: Goldenseal should not be taken during

regnancy.

Drug Interactions: Berberine has an antagonistic effect on
the anticoagulant activity of heparin (Preininger, 1975).

There have been reports of decreased vitamin B absorption
with higher doses of Goldenseal (Tierra, 1980).

Drug/Laboratory Interactions: At one time it was believed
that Goldenseal could mask the detection of tetrahydrocanna-
binol (THC/Marijuana) in illicit drug urinalysis. This effect
has since been disproved (Mikkelsen & Ash, 1988).

OVERDOSAGE

The LD50 for berberine in rats was found to be greater than
1,000 mg/kg of body weight making the toxicity of this
componant in Goldenseal very low (Haldon, 1975). The
hydrastine componant appears to be the toxic compound in
Goldenseal. High doses result in strychnine-like convulsions
and gastrointestinal relaxation (Osol & Garrar, 1955). Other
effects of overdose that have been reported include difficulty
in breathing, bradycardia and central paralysis.

Following stomach and intestinal emptying (inducement of
vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium
permanganate solution, sodium sulfate) the treatment for
poisonings consists of the instillation of activated charcoal
and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth). The treatment of
spasms with diazepam (I.V.), electrolyte substitution and the
countering of any acidosis imbalance that may appear with
sodium bicarbonate infusions may be necessary. In the event
of shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be required.

DOSAGE

Daily Dosage:

Extract — Standardized extract (5% hydrastine) 250-500 mg
3 times daily (Werbach & Murray, 1994)

Fluid extract — 'U to 1 teaspoonful (1.25-5 ml) (Grieve,
1971)

Solid extract — 325-520 mg (Grieve, 1971)

Local antiseptic — 1 teaspoonful powder steeped in 1 cup
boiling water for 15 minutes. Swish around the mouth or
gargle for mouth or throat sores (Tyler, 1997).

Travelers diarrhea — One capsule (500-1000 mg root) 3
times daily (Tyler, 1997)

GOLDENSEAL/357

Storage: Store at room temperature. Avoid moisture, high
temperatures and direct light.

LITERATURE

Babbar OP, Chhatwal VK, Ray IB et al: Effect of berberine
chloride eye drops on clinically positive trachoma patients. Ind
J Med Res 76(suppl):83-88. 1982.

Bae EA. Han MJ, Kim NJ et al: Anti-helicobacter pylori
activity of herbal medicines. Biol Pharmaceut Bull 21(9):990-
992. 1998.

Chan MY: The effect of berberine on bilirubin excretion in the
rat. Comp Med East West 5:161-168. 1977.

Galefi C et al., Canadinic acid: an alkaloid from Hydrastis
canadensis. In: PM 63(2): 194. 1997.

Gentry EJ, Jampani HB, Keshavarz-Shokri A et al:
Antitubercular natural products: berberine from the roots of
commercial Hydrastis canadensis powder. J Nat Prod
61(10): 1187-1193. 1998.

Gleye J et al., (1974) Phytochemistry 13:675.

Grieve M: A Modern Herbal. Dover Publications, Inc. New
York, New York, p 362-364. 1971.

Haginiwa J, Harada M, (1962) Yakugaku Zasshi 82:726.

Haldon B: Toxicity of berberine sulfate. Acta Pol Pharm
32:113-120. 1975.

Hui K. Yu J, Chan W, Tse E: Interaction of berberine with
human platelet alpha 2 adrenoceptors. Life Sci 49(4): 315-24.
1991.

Kaneda Y, Torii M & Tanaka T: In vitro effects of berberine

sulfate on the growth of Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia
and Tricomonas vaginalis. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 85:417-425.
1991.
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New-
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Liu CX et al: Studies on plant resources, pharmacology and
clinical treatment with berbamine. Phytother Res 5:228-230.
1991.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mikkelsen SL & Ash KO: Adulterants causing false negatives
in illicit drug testing. Clin Chem 34:2333-2336. 1988.

Mohan M, Pant CR, Angra SK et al: Berberine in trachoma.
Ind J Opthalmol 30:69-75. 1982.
Nishino H, Kitagawa K, Fujiki H et al: Berberine sulfate

inhibits tumor-promoting activity of teleocidin in two stage
carcinogenesis on mouse skin. Oncology 43:131-134. 1986.

----- PAGE 609 -----
358/GOLDENSEAL

Osol A & Farrar CG (eds): The Dispensatory of the United
States of America, 25th ed. JB Lippincott Company,
Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp 660-661. 1955.

Preininger V: The pharmacology and toxicology of the
Papaveraceae alkaloids, in Manske RHF & Holmes HL (eds):
The Alkaloids, Vol. 15. Academic Press, p 239. 1975.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sack RB & Froehlich JL: Berberine inhibits intestinal secretory
response of Vibrio cholerae toxins and Escherichia coli
enterotoxins. Infect Immun 35:471-475. 1982.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Sun D, Courtney HS & Beachey EH: Berberine sulfate blocks
adherence of Streptococcus pyogenes to epithelial cells,
tibronectin, and hexadecane. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
32:1370-1374. 1988.

Swabb EA, Tai YH & Jordan L: Reversal of cholera toxin-
induced secretion in rat ileum by luminal berberine. Am J
ysiol 1981; 241:G248-252.

Tierra M: The Way of Herbs. Unity Press. Santa Cruz, CA,
USA, 1980.

Tyler VE: The Honest Herbal. George F Stickley Company,
iladelphia, PA, USA, pp 111-112. 1982.

Tyler VE: Golden Seal: can this herb boost immunity.
revention July:68-70. 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
flanzliche Homdopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Zhang RX, Dougherty DV & Rosenblum ML: Laboratory
studies of berberine used alone and in combination with 1,3-
is(2-chloroethyl)-I-nitrosourea to treat malignant brain tumors.
Chinese Med J 103:658-665. 1990.

Goldthread
Coptis trifolia

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the rhizome and
sometimes the stems and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The solitary flowers are small and white,
and are arranged on leafless scapes.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Goldthread is a perennial plant in
bushes of up to 15 cm with yellowish, scaly leaves at the
base and long-petioled, obovate, evergreen leaves. The
rhizome is thread-like, golden yellow with a matte surface

and very small roots.

Characteristics: Goldthread has a very bitter taste and slight
odor.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: Coptis trifolia is indigenous to India and Coptis
groenlandica, which is also used, is indigenous to Greenland

and Iceland.

Production: Goldthread rhizome is the rhizome of Coptis
trifolia.

Other Names: Mouth Root, Cankerroot, Yellowroot, Coptis,
Coptide, Coptis Groenlandica

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Isoquinoline alkaloids (6 to 9%): including coptin, berberine

EFFECTS
The herb is a bitter tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Goldthread is used in digestive disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not

recorded.

Berberine has a mutagenic effect upon yeast cells and in the
Ames test (intercalation into the DNA), although that does
not necessarily mean a mutagenic effect for the drug when
administered to humans.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internally as a powdered drug or a

liquid extract.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Ed), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1969.

Gossypium herbaceum

See Levant Cotton

Gossypium hirsutum

See Cotton

----- PAGE 610 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Gotu Kola

Centella asiatica

TRADE NAMES

Jf\ Gotu Kola (available from numerous manufacturers and as a

combination product), Gotu Kola Herb, Wild Countryside
Gotu Kola, Natural Herbal Gotu Kola, Alcohol Free Gotu
Kola Herb

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried above-
ground parts, the fresh and dried leaves and stem.

Flower and Fruit: The pedicles are 12 to 4 cm long. The
sepals of the epicalyx are oval to circular, with a membra-
nous border. They are about 2.5 to 3 mm long and 15 to 2.5
mm wide. The umbels have 2 or 3 sessile or short-pedicled
florets. The petals are white, to purple or pink. The calyx is
not generally dentate. The fruit is oval to globular in shape,
and has a diameter of 2 to 5 mm. The mericarps are clearly
flattened at the sides and usually have 7 to 9 ribs and are
raised rugose.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Centella asiatica is a tender umbel
plant, which has numerous creeping stems. The stems have
roots at the nodes, which are smooth. The circular-reniform
leaves are 2 to 6 cm long and 15 to 5 wide, with a crenate
margin and 5 to 9 ribs. The petioles are 3 to 30 cm long.

Characteristics: Gotu Kola is almost tasteless and odorless.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southeast Asia, India, Sri
Lanka, parts of China, the western South Sea Islands,
Madagascar, South Africa, southeast U.S., Mexico, Venezu-
ela, Columbia, and eastern South America.

Production: Hydrocotyle herb is the aerial part of Centella
asiatica. The plant is gathered throughout the year and dried
in the sun.

Other Names: Indian Pennywort, Marsh Penny, Indian
Hydrocotyle, White Rot, Thick-leaved Pennywort, Hydro-
cotyle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene acids: including asiatic acid, madecassic acid (6-
hydroxy asiatic acid), terminolic acid

Triterpene acid ester from oligosaccharides (pseudosapo-
nins): including asiaticoside, asiaticoside A, asiaticoside B

Volatile oil (0.1%)

EFFECTS
The main constituents of the drug are triterpene acids and
their sugar residues (asiaticoside and madegassoside).

GOTU KOLA/359

Anti-Inflammatory Effects

Anti-inflammatory effects exerted by extracts of Centella
asiatica were demonstrated by a reduction of acute radiation
reaction in rats (Chen, 1999).

Anti-Neoplastic Effects

Cytotoxic and antitumor effects of Centella asiatica involve
direct action on DNA synthesis. The development of solid
and ascites tumors was decreased by the herb (Babu, 1985).

Ulcer-protective Effects

Asiaticoid (suspended in propylene glycol) administered
orally to rats, significantly reduced the formation of stress-
induced ulcers (Ravokatra, 1993). An extract of the herb also
significantly inhibited gastric ulceration induced by cold and
restraint stress in animal models. The dose dependent
reduction of gastric ulceration was associated with a dose
dependent increase of the GABA level in the brain (Chatter-
jee, 1992).

Vascular/Venous Tone Effects

Ethanol extracts of Centella asiatica, in vitro, had a
remarkable enhancement of fibroblast cell attachment and
tissue plasminogen activator (Kim, 1993). Varicose veins are
associated with increased uronic acid and lysosomal en-
zymes involved with mucopolysaccharide (beta-glycuroni-
dase, beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase) metabolism. Total
triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica (TTFCA) decreases
uronic acid, beta-glycuronidase, beta-N-acetylglucosamini-
dase, and arysulfatase in the connective tissue and vascular
wall (Arpaia, 1990).

Wound Healing Effects

Asiaticoside facilitates wound healing through an increase in
peptidic hydroxyproline content, tensile strength, collagen
synthesis, angiogenesis and epithelialization, as shown in
animal models (Bonte, 1994; Maquart, 1990; Shukla, 1999).
Asiatic acid and madecassic have also demonstrated an
increase in peptidic hydroxyproline showing an increased
remodeling of the collagen matrix (collagen synthesis) in
wounds (Bonte, 1994; Maquart, 1999). Asiaticoside also
induces enzymatic and non-emzymatic antioxidants, namely
superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, vita-
min E, and ascorbic acid in newly formed tissue (initial stage
of wound healing) (Shukla, 1999).

CLINICAL TRIALS

Chronic Venous Insufficiency

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evalu-
ated the efficacy of a titrated extract of Centella asiatica in

treating chronic venous insufficiency. Ninety-four patients
with chronic venous insufficiency were included in the

----- PAGE 611 -----
360/GOTU KOLA

study. The asiaticoid mixture, administered as 60 mg daily
and 120 mg daily for 2 months, led to significant improve-'
ment in subjective (heaviness in the legs, pain in standing up,
edema) and objective (plethysmographic measurements of
vein tone) parameters compared to placebo (Pointel, 1987).

Venous Hypertension

The effect of an extract of Centella asiatica with capillary
filtration and ankle edema was evaluated in patients with
venous hypertension. Sixty-two patients were included in the
study and administered either placebo or the extract as 60 mg
or 30 mg three times daily. Capillary filtration rate and ankle
edema both significantly improved in a dose-dependent
manner in the extract-treatment groups. The subjective
symptoms (swelling, sensation, restless lower extremity, pain
and cramps, and tiredness) were significantly improved in
the extract-treatment groups, with no change in the placebo-
treatment group (Belcaro, 1990).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for rheumatism
and skin diseases. Externally, the drug is used for poorly
healing wounds, leprosy sores, and post-operative scarring.
In Asia, the drug is used to enhance urination, for physical
and mental exhaustion, diarrhea, eye diseases, inflamma-
tions, asthma, and high blood pressure.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for skin diseases, syphilis,
rheumatism, and leprosy. Gotu kola is also used for the
treatment of mental illness, epilepsy, hysteria, and for

dehydration.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for dysentery and
summer diarrhea, vomiting, jaundice, urinary calculi, epis-

taxis and scabies.

Homeopathic Uses: Gotu Kola is used for skin diseases
associated with itching and swelling and inflammation of the

uterus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Allergic Contact Dermatitis: Although there have been case
reports of allergic contact dermatitis due to Centella asiatica,
the plant's sensitizing capacity is considered low (Bilbao,
1995; Danese, 1994; Gonzalo, 1996; Hausen, 1993).

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Gotu Kola is available in liquid or
solid pharmaceutical forms, for oral intake. Gotu Kola is also
available parenterally for homeopathic use.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 400 mg, 435 mg, 439 mg, 440 mg, 450 mg, 500
mg

Liquid — 1:1; 250 mg/ml

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Daily Dosage: 0.6 gm of dried leaves or infusion taken 3
times daily; normal single dose is 0.33 to 0.68 gm.

Varicose Veins — Centella asiatica extract administered as
60 mg daily has shown improvement (Arpaia, 1990).

Venous Hypertension — Total triterpenic fraction of centella
asiatica (TTFCA) tablets have demonstrated improvement of
venous hypertension at doses of 30 mg given three times
daily or 60 mg given three times daily (Belcaro, 1990).

Chronic Venous Insufficiency — Titrated extract of Centella
asiatica (TECA) administered as 120 mg daily and 60 mg
daily have demonstrated efficacy in chronic venous insuffi-

ciency (Pointel, 1987).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules or 1 ml injection solution sc twice weekly; ointment
1 to 2 times daily (HAB1).

Storage: Store in a cool, dry place and in well-sealed

containers.

LITERATURE
Asakawa Y et al., (1982) Phytochemistry 21(10):2590.

Allegra G et al., (1981) Clin Terap. 99:507.

Arpaia MR, Ferrone R, Amitrano M, Nappo C, Leonardo G,
del Guercio R, Effects of Centella asiatica extract on
mucopolysaccharide metabolism in subjects with varicose veins.
Int J Clin Pharmacol Res, 10:229-33, 1990

Babu TD, Kuttan G, Padikkala J, Cytotoxic and anti-tumour
properties of certain taxa of Umbelliferae with special reference
to Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. J Ethnopharmacol, 48:53-7,
1995 Aug 11.

Belcaro GV; Rulo A; Grimaldi R. Capillary filtration and ankle
edema in patients with venous hypertension treated with
TTFCA. Angiology 1990 Jan;41(1): 12-8.

Belcaro GV; Grimaldi R; Guidi G. Improvement of capillary
permeability in patients with venous hypertension after
treatment with TTFCA. Angiology 1990 Jul;41(7):533-40.

Bilbao I; Aguirre A; Zabala R et al. Allergic contact dermatitis
from butoxyethyl nicotinic acid and Centella asiatica extract.
Contact Dermatitis 1995 Dec;33(6):435-6.

Bonte F; Dumas Mf Chaudagne C; Meybeck A, Influence of
asiatic acid, madecassic acid, and asiaticoside on human
collagen I synthesis. Planta Med 1994 Apr;60(2): 133-5.

Bosse JP et al., (1979) Ann Plastic Surg 3(1).T3.

Brevoort P, Der Heilpflanzenmarkt der USA - Ein Uberblick.
In: ZPT 18(3): 155-162. 1997.

Castellani C et al., Boll Chim Farm 120:570-605. 1981.

Chatterjee TK; Chakraborty A; Pathak M; Sengupta GC. Effects
of plant extract Centella asiatica (Linn.) on cold restraint stress
ulcer in rats. Indian J Exp Biol 1992 Oct;30(10):889-91.

----- PAGE 612 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Chen YJ; Dai YS; Chen BF et al. The effect of tetrandrine and
extracts of Centella asiatica on acute radiation dermatitis in rats.
Biol Pharm Bull 1999 Jul:22(7):703-6.

Danese P; Carnevali C; Bertazzoni MG. Allergic contact
dermatitis due to Centella asiatica extract. Contact Dermatitis
1994 Sep:31(3):201.

Di Carlo FI et al., (1964) J Reticuloendothelial Soc 1:224.
Dutta T, Basu UP, (1968) Ind J Exp Biol 6(3): 181.

Dutta T, Basu UP, (1967) Ind J Chem 5:586.

Dutta T Basu UP, Bull Nat Inst Sci India 37:178-184. 1968.
Gonzalo Garijo MA, Revenga Arranz F, Bobadilla Gonzalez P.

Allergic contact dermatitis due to Centella asiatica: a new c’ise.
Allergol Immunopathol (Madr), 24:132-4. 1996 May-Jun.

Grimaldi R et al., Pharmacokinetics of the total triterpenic
fraction of Centella asiatica after single and multiple
administrations to healthy volunteers. A new assay for asiatic
acid. J Ethnopharmacol. 24:235-41, 1990 Feb.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH. Landsberg 1988.

Hausen BM. Centella asiatica (Indian pennywort), an effective
therapeutic but a weak sensitizer. Contact Dermatitis 1993
Oct;29(4): 175-9.

Kim YN; Park YS; Kim HK et al. Enhancement of the
attachment on microcarriers and tPA production by fibroblast
cells in a serum-free medium by the addition of the extracts of
Centella asiatica. Cytotechnology 1993;13(3):221-6.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Maquart FX, Bellon G, Gillery P, Wegrowski Y, Borel JP,
Stimulation of collagen synthesis in fibroblast cultures by a
triterpene extracted from Centella asiatica. Connect Tissue Res.
24:107-20, 1990.

Maquart FX: Chastang F: Simeon A et al., Triterpenes from
Centella asiatica stimulate extracellular matrix accumulation in
rat experimental wounds. Eur J Dermatol 1999 Jun;9(4):289-96.

Montecchio GP, Samaden A, Carbone S, Vigotti M, Siragusa S,
Piovella F, Centella asiatica Triterpenic Fraction (CATIF)
reduces the number of circulating endothelial cells in subjects
with post phlebitic syndrome. Haematologica, 48:256-9, 1991
May-Jun.

Pointel JP; Boccalon H; Cloarec M et al., Titrated extract of
Centella asiatica (TECA) in the treatment of venous-
insufficiency of the lower limbs. Angiology 1987 Jan;38(1 Pt
1):46-5.

Rao PS, Seshardri TR, (1969) Curr. Sci 38:77.

Ravokatra A; Loiseau A; Ratsimamanga-Urverg S et al., Action
of asiaticoside (pentacyclic triterpene) extracted from
Hydrocotyle madagascariensis on duodenal ulcers induced with

GOUTWEED 361

mercaptoethylamine in male Wistar rats. C R Acad Sci Hebd
Seances Acad Sci D 1974 Apr 29;278(18):2317-21.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Shukla A; Rasik AM; Jain GK et al. In vitro and in vivo
wound healing activity of asiaticoside isolated from Centella
asiatica. J Ethnopharmacol 1999 Apr;65(1):I-II.

Shukla A; Rasik AM; Dhawan BN. Asiaticoside-induced
elevation of antioxidant levels in healing wounds. Phytother Res
1999 Feb:13(1):50-4.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Suguna L, Sivakumar P, Chandrakasan G. Effects of Centella
asiatica extract on dermal wound healing in rats. Indian J E\p
Biol, 24:1208-11, 1996 Dec

Tang W. Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin.
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Vecchaio AD et al.. (1984) Farm Ed Prat 39(10):355.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka unJ
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Goutweed
Aegopodium podagraria

DESCRIPTION

Flower and Fruit: The flowers range from 50 to 100 cm.
They have large white or reddish double umbels that are
usually androgynous. The flowers have no involucre and no
calyx. The petals are white or pink, about 1.5 mm_ long,
obcordate and cuneate at the base. The fruit is oblong and
brownish with pale veins. The fruit is slightly pressed in at
the sides, unwinged, unstriped, with a 3 mm-long mericarp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The stem is erect, angular, grooved.
hollow, glabrous and branched. The lower leaves are double
trifoliate, and the upper leaves trifoliate. The leaflets are

ovate and crenate-serrate.
Characteristics: Propagates via underground runners.
Habitat: Indigenous to Europe (not Spain), West Asia.

Production: Goutweed is the aerial part of Aegopodium

podagraria.

Other Names: Goutwort, Ground Elder, Gout Herb. Herb
Gerard(e), Jack-Jump-About, Goatweed, Ashweed,
Achweed, English Masterwort, Pigweed, Eltroot, Bishop's
Elder, Weyl Ash, White Ash, Bishopsweed, Bishopswort.

----- PAGE 613 -----
362 /GOUTWEED

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Polyynes: only in freshly-harvested leaves

Flavonol glycosides: including hyperoside, isoquercitrin
Cajfeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid
Ascorbic acid

EFFECTS
No information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The herb is used internally as an infusion
for gout and rheumatic diseases. It is used externally in
macerations for poultices and baths for hemorrhoids, gout
and rheumatic diseases, as well as for kidney and bladder
disorders and intestinal disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:
fresh herb is squeezed

nternally as a tea; externally, the
or poultices.

Daily Dosage: There is no exact dosage. A daily recom-
mended dose consists of 1 to 2 dessertspoonfuls (30ml) of
the juice of the fresh plant.

LITERATURE
Bohlmann F et al., Chem Ber 93, 981. 1968.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994.

Harborne JB, Williams CA, PH 11 (5): 1741-1750. 1972.

Schneider V, Ernahr-Umschau 31(2):54-57. 1984.

Grains-of-Paradise
Aframomum melegueta

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary, mauve and wax-
like. The fruit is 10 cm long, pear-shaped and scarlet. The
seeds are small, hard, shiny, reddish-brown and oyster-
shaped. They have an aromatic and pungent taste and smell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Aframomum melegueta is a reed-
like plant, 1 to 2.5 m high. The leaves are long and narrow.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to tropical West Africa.

Not to be Confused With: The seeds can be mistaken for
peppercorns.

Other Names: Guinea Grains, Melegueta Pepper, Mallaguet-
ta Pepper

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Pungent substances: including hydroxyphenylalkanones and
hydroxyphenylalkanoles

Tannins
Starch
Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The seed is a stimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Grains-of-Paradise was used as a stimulant.
Now it is obsolete as a drug.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Due to the constituent pungent substances, the intake of
larger dosages may lead to irritation of the stomach and the

urinary tract.

LITERATURE
Connell WD, J Chem 23:369. 1970.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Grape

Vitis vinifera

TRADE NAMES

Grape Seed Extract (Available from numerous manufactur-
ers), Red Wine Extract, Grape Seed, Activin, Dr. Masqueli-
er's Authentic OPC

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the fruit

and the juice.

----- PAGE 614 -----
4p"

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in compound compact
panicles. The petals are about 5 mm long and droop like the
sepals. The fruit is oblong to globular. 6 to 22 mm long, dark
blue-violet, red, green or yellow, juicy, sweet or sour. The
seeds are pear-shaped, with hard skin and two long dimples
on the side.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The vine is a 30 cm high climber
with deep, heavily-branched roots and a woody trunk. The
trunk has striped, loose bark. The brown-red to brown-
yellow branches are glabrous or slightly downy and finely
grooved. The leaves are orbicular, generally in 3 to 5 lobes
or blades. They are deeply notched at the stem. The upper
surface of the leaves is glabrous, the under surface is lanate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern Europe and
western Asia and is cultivated today in all temperate regions
of the world.

Production: Vine leaves are the foliage leaves of Vitis
vinifera.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids (4 to 5%): including. kaempferol-3-O-gluco-
sides, quercetin-3-O-glucosides

Tannins: procyanidolic oligomers (proanthocyanidins), in-
cluding constituent monomers of catechin epicatechin

Non-flavonoids (Stilbenes): resveratrol and viniferins

Fruit acids: including, tartaric acid, malic acid, succinic
acid, citric acid, oxalic acid

Phenylacrylic acid derivatives: p-cumaroyl acid, caffeoyl
acid, feruloylsuccinic acid

EFFECTS

Antiatherosclerotic Effects: The oxidation of low-density
lipoproteins (LDL) by free radicals is associated with the
initiation of atherosclerosis. Proanthocyanidin decreases the
number of LDL-positive macrophage-derived foam cells in
atherosclerotic lesions. The compound also inhibits the
oxidation of cholesteryl linoleate in LDL to exert a reduction
in atherosclerosis of the aorta (Nuttall, 1998, Yamakoshi,
1999).

Anticarcinogenic/Antitumor: Chemoprotective properties of
proanthocyanidins include activity against free radicals and
oxidative stress (Ye, 1999). The anti-tumor-promoting acitv-
ity due to strong antioxidant effects of the compound has
been demonstrated in animal models (Zhao, 1999).

Antioxidant Effects: Proanthocyanidin from the Grape Seed
extract exerts a concentration-dependent inhibition of oxy-
gen free radicals. In one study, the antioxidant effect of
proanthocyanidin was more potent compared to vitamin C

GRAPE/363

and vitamin E succinate (Bagchi, 1997). The compound also
inhibits peroxidation of phosphatidylcholine liposomes
(Plumb, 1998).

Hair Growth: Proanthocyanidins extracted from Grape
Seeds promote proliferation of hair follicle cells, and possess
remarkable hair-cycle converting activity from the telogen
phase to the anagen phase. Epicatechin and catechin are the
constitutive monomers inducing the degree of polymeriza-
tion inducing hair growth (Takahashi, 1998).

Hepatoprotective Effects: Proanthocyanidin has been shown
to significantly attenuate acetaminophen induced hepatic
DNA damage, apoptosic and necrotic cell death of liver
cells. The component also antagonizes acetaminophen in-
duced changes in bcl-XI expression (Ray, 1999).

Ischemia Prevention: Maintenance of microvascular injury
by procyanidins occurs through the scavenger effect of
reactive oxygen species (Maffei Facino, 1994). Procyanidins
also reduce ventricular contraction in a dose-dependent
fashion. Procyandins decrease coronary perfusion pressure
and improve cardiac mechanical performance. (Maffei Faci-
no R, 1996).

Vascular Effects: Procyanidins isolated from Grape Seed
stabilizes capillary walls and prevents increases in perme-
ability which inhibits edema (Robert, 1990; Zafirov, 1990).
Overproduction of hyaluronan content associated with patho-
logic venous walls, in particular vein-lymphatic edema, is
decreased by procyanidolic oligomers (Drubaix, 1997).
Procyanidolic oligomers cross-link collagen fibers, resulting
in reinforcement of the natural cross-linking of collagen that
forms the collagen matrix of vascular connective tissue
(Tixier et al, 1984). The vascular activity of procyanidin has
positive effects on diabetic retinopathy, night vision and
ocular stress (Boissin, 1988; Corbe, 1988; Soyeux, 1987).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Peripheral Venous Insufficiency

The efficacy of Grape Seed extract was evaluated for the
treatment of venous insufficiency and symptoms due to
hormonal supplementation. Grape Seed extract (150 mg
twice daily) was administered to 4,729 patients in an open-
label study. Peripheral venous insufficiency was evaluated
45 and 90 days after treatment. The efficacy score was based
on symptoms of nocturnal cramps, paresthesias, sensation of
warmth, cyanosis and edema. The sensation of heaviness in
the legs decreased in 57% of cases by day 45 and 89.4% by
day 90. In addition, the improvement of symptoms occurred
in 66% of cases by day 45 and 79-83% of cases by day 90
(Henriet, 1993).

----- PAGE 615 -----
364/GRAPE

Ocular Effects

A lower resistance to glare and alteration of scotopic vision
are associated with retinal pathology related to age, fatigue
and stress. The effect of procyanidolic oligomers (PCO) on
light vision and chorioretinal circulation was determined in
100 subjects. PCO (Endotelon) was administered in tablets
of 50 mg four times daily for five weeks. Improvements in
visual adaptation to low luminances and visual performances
after glare, as measured by a nyctometer were significant
(Corbe, 1988).

Postoperative Edema

The effect of PCO from Grape Seed extract was shown to
have protective effects on the postoperative edema compared
to placebo in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Thirty-two female patients undergoing a_ facelift
administered either 300 milligrams Grape Seed extract or
placebo daily over the 5 days preceding the operation, and
postoperatively from days 2 to 6. Prophylactic decrease in
postoperative facial edema was the main efficacy criteria.
The Grape Seed extract cohort scored significantly better
than placebo against postoperative facial swelling (Baruch,
1984).

were

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, Grape preparations are
used in venous diseases and blood circulation disorders.

Indian Medicine: Grape is used for headache, dysuria,

scabies, skin diseases, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids and vomiting.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. A reversible inhibition of intestinal
enzyme activity (alkaline phosphatase, sucrase and dipepti-
dyl peptidase) was demonstrated in animal models (Tebib,

1994).

DOSAGE
How Supplied:
Capsule—25 mg, 30 mg, 50 mg, 60 mg, 500 mg

Tablet—50 mg

Daily Dosage: Grape Seed extract has been used for
preventive therapy with 50 mg daily and treatment doses of
150-600 mg daily in divided doses (Arne, 1982; Baruch,
1984; Corbe; 1988; Delacroix, 1981; Henriet, 1993; Nuttall,

1998; Soyeux, 1987).

LITERATURE

Arne JL: Contribution to the study of procyanidolic oligomers:
Endotelon in diabetic retinopathy. Gaz Med France 1982;
89(30):3610-3614.

Bagchi D; Garg A; Krohn RL et al. Oxygen free radical
scavenging abilities of vitamins C and E, and a grape seed

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

roanthocyanidin extract in vitro. Res Commun Mol Pathol
harmacol 1997 Feb;95(2): 179-89.

Baruch. Effect of Endotelon in postoperative edema. Results of
a double-blind study versus placebo in 32 female patients. Ann
Chir Plast Esthet 1984;29(4):393-5.

Bavaresco L; Fregoni C; Cantu E; Trevisan M. Stilbene
compounds: from the grapevine to wine. Drugs Exp Clin Res

1999;25(2-3):57-63.

Boissin JP; Corbe C; Siou A. Chorioretinal circulation and
dazzling: use of procyanidol oligomers (Endotelon). Bull Soc
Ophtalmol Fr 1988 Feb;88(2): 173-4, 177-9.

Corbe C; Boissin JP; Siou A. Light vision and chorioretinal
circulation. Study of the effect of procyanidolic oligomers
(Endotelon). J Fr Ophtalmol 1988;11(5):453-60.

Delacroix P: Double-blind trial of endotelon in chronic venous
insufficiency. Rev Med 1981;27-28:1793-1802.

Drubaix I; Maraval M; Robert L; Robert AM. Hyaluronic acid
(hyaluronan) levels in pathological human saphenous veins.
Effects of procyanidol oligomers. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1997
Jan;45(1):86-91.

Henriet JP. Veno-lymphatic insufficiency. 4,729 patients
undergoing hormonal and procyanidol oligomer therapy.
Phlebologie 1993 Apr-Jun;46(2):313-25.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Maffei Facino R, Carini M, Aldini G, et al. Free radicals
scavenging action and anti-enzyme activities of procyanidines
from Vitis vinifera) A mechanism for their capillary protective
action. Arzneimittelforschung 1994 May;44(5):592-601.

Maffei Facino R, Carini M, Aldini G, et al. Procyanidines from
Vitis vinifera seeds protect rabbit heart from ischemia/
reperfusion injury: antioxidant intervention and/or iron and
copper sequestering ability. Planta Med 1996 Dec;62(6):495-
502.

Nutall SL, Kendall MJ, Bombardelli E et al: An evaluation of
the antioxidant activity of a standardized grape seed extract,
Leucoselect(R). J Clin Pharm Ther 1998; 23:385-389.

Plumb GW; De Pascual-Teresa S; Santos-Buelga C et al.
Antioxidant properties of catechins and proanthocyanidins: effect
of polymerisation, galloylation and glycosylation. Free Radic
Res 1998 Oct;29(4):351-8.

Ray SD, Kumar MA, Bagchi D. A novel proanthocyanidin
1H636 grape seed extract increases in vivo Bcl-XL expression
and prevents acetaminophen-induced programmed and
unprogrammed cell death in mouse liver. Arch Biochem
Biophys 1999 Sep 1;369(1):42-58.

Robert L; Godeau G; Gavignet-Jeannin C et al. The effect of
procyanidolic oligomers on vascular permeability. A study using
quantitative morphology. Pathol Biol (Paris) 1990 Jun;38(6):608-
16.

----- PAGE 616 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Soyeux A; Seguin JP; Le Devehat C; Bertrand A. Endotelon.
Diabetic retinopathy and hemorheology (preliminary study). Bull
Soc Ophtalmol Fr 1987 Dec;87(12):1441-4.

Takahashi T; Kamiya T; Yokoo Y. Proanthocyanidins from
grape seeds promote proliferation of mouse hair follicle cells in
vitro and convert hair cycle in vivo. Acta Derm Venereol 1998
Nov;78(6):428-32.

Tebib K, Rouanet JM, Besancon P. Effect of grape seed tannins
on the activity of some rat intestinal enzyme activities. Enzyme
Protein 1994-95;48(1):51-60.
Tixier JM; Godeau G; Robert AM: Hornebeck W. Evidence by
in vivo and in vitro studies that binding of procyagenols to
elastin affects its rate of degradation by elastases. Biochem
Pharmacol 1984 Dec 15:33(24):3933-9.

Yamakoshi J; Kataoka S; Koga T; Ariga T. Proanthocyanidin-
rich extract from grape seeds attenuates the development of
aortic atherosclerosis in cholesterol-fed rabbits. Atherosclerosis
1999 Jan; 142(1): 139-49.

Ye X; Krohn RL: Liu W et al. The cytotoxic effects of a
novel [H636 grape seed proanthocyanidin extract on cultured
human cancer cells. Mol Cell Biochem 1999 Jun; 196(1-2):99-
108.

Zafirov D; Bredy-Dobreva G; Litchev V et al. Antiexudative
and capillaritonic effects of procyanidines isolated from grape
seeds (V. Vinifera). Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg
1990;16(3):50-4.

Zhao J, Wang J, Chen Y, Agarwal R. Anti-tumor-promoting
activity of a polyphenols fraction isolated from grape seeds in
the mouse skin two-stage initiation-promotion protocol and
identification of procyanidin B5-3'-gallate as the most effective
antioxidant constituent. Carcinogenesis 1999 Sep;20(9): 1737-4.

Gratiola officinalis
See Hedge-Hyssop

Gray Wallflower

Erysimum diffusum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the plant's radish.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in densely flowered
racemes. The 4 sepals are upright and gray-haired, the 4
petals yellow, long-petiolate, pubescent on the lower surface
and 8 to 14 mm long. There are 2 short and 4 long stamens;
the ovary is superior with 4 fused carpels. The fruit is a 3.5
to 8 cm long, approximately 1 mm wide, 4-sided, appressed
pubescent, dehiscent pod that opens on 2 sides. The seeds are

elongate with a diameter of approximately 1 to 15 mm.

GRAY WALLFLOWER/365

Leaves, Stem and Root: Gray Wallflower is a herbaceous
biennial or perennial upright that grows up to 12 m high.
The leaves are alternate. The lower ones are petiolate, 1 to 8
mm wide, gray-haired, narrow, linear-lanceolate, entire or
dentate; the middle and upper ones are sessile. The stem is
edged, covered in jointed hairs and branched in larger plants.
The root is thin, spindle-shaped and branched.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Commonwealth of
Independent States and Hungary.

Production: The gray-leaved wild radish is collected during
the flowering season of the two-year-old plants of Erysimum
diffusum and dried after harvesting at a maximum tempera-
ture of 40° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolids, 1 to 3%): chief
component erysimoside (primary glycoside, aglycone k-stro-

phanthidin, 0.6%)

Helveticoside {secondary — glycoside)

Canescine
Cheirotoxin
Erycanoside

EFFECTS

The drug contains cardioactive glycosides of the cardenolide
type with k-strophantidin as the aglycone. It is accordingly
positively inotropic and negatively chronotropic in its effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug was used in the past for cardiac
insufficiency (NYHA I and II), but can no longer be
recommended.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

Although poisonings among humans are both unknown and
unlikely, due to the difficulties accompanying resorption of
the glycosides, the possibility of a poisoning resulting from
either high dosages of the drug or its glycosides through
peroral administration is not to be completely ruled out.

DOSAGE
How Supplied: capsules; tablets.

Storage: Drug should be stored in a tightly sealed, secure
container.
LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6

----- PAGE 617 -----
366/GRAY WALLFLOWER

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Great Burnet
Sanguisorba officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh aerial parts, the dried herb, the rhizomes and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The composite heads are ovate-oblong.
approximately 1 to 2 cm long and consist of 5 to 10 usually
androgynous flowers. The calyx has 4 dark red-brown tips, 4
stamens with stiffly patent red filaments and yellow anthers.
The smooth, spike-like, quadrangular fruit calyx has 1 carpel
and 1 style and is narrowly winged. The fruit is a nut
enclosed in the perigone tube.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Great Burnet is a semi-rosette shrub
with a strong dark brown root that produces thick fibers and
a short rhizome. The stems are erect, angular, glabrous, and
bifurcated. The rosette leaves are 20 to 40 cm long and
consist of 7 to 15 ovate leaflets, which are cordate at the base
and blue-green beneath. There are only a few cauline leaves.
which taper towards the top.

Characteristics: The brown-red composite head is character-
istic for this plant.

Habitat: The plant is widespread in the northern, temperate
regions of Europe, temperate Asia, and North America.

Production: Great Burnet is the Sanguisorba officinalis plant
in flower. The fresh aerial parts are collected in the wild
during the flowering season. The rhizomes and roots are
harvested in autumn, then washed and dried.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including among others, rutin, flavonoid sulfates

Tannins: including ellagitannins, sanguinarine H-l1,

casuarinin

Triterpene glycosides: aglycones pomolic acid, tormentolic
acid, including among others, ziyuglycosides I and II
(sanguisorbin), betulinic acid, ursolic acid

Sterols: including beta-sitosterol

EFFECTS
The drug has been credited with decongestant, astringent and

diuretic properties, but no investigation into effects has been

carried out.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for female
disorders, menorrhagia during menopause, hot flushes,
dysentery, enteritis, diarrhea, bladder restraint, hemorrhoids,
phlebitis, and varicose veins. Externally, Great Burnet is
used in plaster for wounds and ulcers. Folk medicine uses
included administration of the plant latex as a remedy for

pulmonary tuberculosis.

Chinese Medicine: The Chinese use Great Burnet as an
astringent and hemostyptic for nosebleeds, dysentery, reptile
bites and bloody coughs.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are uterine
bleeding, varicose veins and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally and
externally. It is available in ground form and is used as an
extract, juice or tea. A plaster is used externally.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB34).
LITERATURE
Bastow KF et al.. Inhibition of DNA topoisomerase by sanguiin

H-6, a cytotoxic dimeric ellagitannin from Sanguisorba
officinalis. In: PM 59(3):240. 1993.

Chang, EH et al. (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kaneta M et al., Agric Biol Chem 43:657. 1979.

Kashiwada Y, Nonaka GI, Niskioka I, Chang JJ, Lee KH,
Antitumor agents, 129. Tannins and related compounds as
selective cytotoxic agents. In: JNP 55:1033-1043. 1992.

Kosuga T et al., (1981) Yakugaku Zasshi 101(6):501.
Kosuga T et al., (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32(11):448.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nonaka GI et al., (1982) J Chem Soc Perkin Trans. 10(4): 1067.
Nonaka GI et al., (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32(2):483.

Reher G et al., PH 31:3909-3914. 1992.

Sunstar Inc. (1980) Pat. JP 80/120509 Japan.

Tanaka T et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22(11):2575.

----- PAGE 618 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Tanaka T et al., (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32(1): 117.
Tanake T et al., (1985) J Chem Res (S)6:176.
Yosioka I et al., Chem Pharm Bull 19:1700. 1971.

Greater Bindweed
Calystegia sepium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the whole flower-

ing plant and the root.

Flower and Fruit: The solitary white flowers are about 5 cm
long, the pedicle is quadrangular. Under the calyx there are 2
cordate, pointed, red-bordered bracts, which extend to cover
the calyx. There are 5 sepals. The corolla is fused and
conical. There are 5 stamens and | superior ovary. The fruit
is a capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is about 10 to 30 cm high
and has a creeping rhizome. The stem is angular, glabrous
and twining. The leaves are alternate, petiolate, cordate or
arrow-shaped. The base of the leaves are acuminate, and they
often have dentate lobes. Most twining plants seem to follow
the course of the sun and bind round a support from left to
right. But the Bindweed will always twine against the sun,
confounding all attempts to train it, even dying in the
process.

Characteristics: The flowers close in damp weather.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and eastern U.S.

Production: The upper part of the herb is harvested during
the flowering season and dried at temperatures of no more
than 40° C in a well-aired place.

Other Names: Devil's Vine, Hedge Lily, Lady's Nightcap,
Rutland Beauty, Hedge Convolvulus, Old Man's Night Cap,
Bearbind

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glycoretines: polymeric, resinous glycosides of hydroxy
fatty acids (C12-C16) with oligosaccharides; the hydroxyl
groups have been esterified with acetic, propionic, isobutyric
and valeric acids, among others

Tannins

EFFECTS

The drug has a powerful effect; activity in the smooth
muscle area is stimulated, intestinal peristalsis is increased,
and there is an increase in bile production.

GREEK SAGE/367

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Greater Bindweed is used for fevers, urinary
tract diseases, as a purgative for constipation and to increase
the production of bile.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. It is conceivable that an overdose of the drug would
trigger intestinal colic.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The pressed juice, powdered root
and an infusion are used internally. The drug is rarely used
anymore due to its strong intestinal effects.

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by adding 1 to 2
teaspoons of cut drug per cup of water.

LITERATURE
Asano N, Kato A, Oseki K, Kizu H, Matsui K, Calystegins of
Physalis alkekengi var. francheti (Solanaceae). Structure
determination and their glycosidase inhibitory activities. Eur J
Biochem, 14:369-76, 1995.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Peumans WJ, Winter HC, Bemer V, Van Leuven F, Goldstein
VJ, Truffa-Bachi P, Van Damme EI, Isolation of a novel plant
lectin with an unusual specificity from Calystegia sepium.
GlycoconJ J, 14:259-65, 1997.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg / Lech 1993.

Van Damme EJ, Barre A, Verhaert P, Rouge P, Peumans WJ,
Molecular cloning of the mitogenic mannose/maltose-specific
rhizome lectin fiom Calystegia sepium. FEBS Lett, 14:352-6,
1996.

Greek Sage

Salvia triloba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the leaf.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in false whorls of 2 to 6
blossoms. The calyx is campanulate, dentate, 5 to 8 mm
long, often purple and pubescent. The corolla is 16 to 25 mm
long, typically lilac or pink but occasionally white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Salvia triloba grows as a semi-shrub,
up to 12 m high. The leaves are petiolate and tomentose.
The lamina is simple or pinnatifid with 1 to 2 pairs of lateral
leaf sections and a large elongate-ovate end section. The

----- PAGE 619 -----
368/GREEK SAGE

stem is square, appressed pubescent, grayish-white beneath
and green above.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Greece, the Common-
wealth of Independent States, Albania, Turkey and Cyprus.
Various species are particularly widespread in the Mediterra-
nean region.

Production: Greek Sage leaves are the dried leaves of Salvia
triloba, which are harvested once a year if collected in the
wild and three times a year when cultivated.

Other Names: Three-Lobed Sage, Turkish Sage

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1.5 to 3.5%): chief component 1.8-cineole (40
to 67%), camphor (2 to 25%), thujone (5 to 6%), including
as well camphene, beta-caryophyllene, myrcene, alpha-pi-
nene, beta-pinene

Flavonoids: including 7-O-glucosides and 7-O-glucuronides
of apigenin, chrysoeriol, hispidulin, luteolin, 6-methyl luteo-
lin, as well as salvigenin, jaceosidin

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid (1.0 to 2.5%)
Diterpenes: including carnosol (0.5%)
Triterpenes (8%): ursolic acid, oleanolic acid

EFFECTS
The chief active ingredient (cineole) of the drug's essential
oil has an antimicrobial effect. The combined action of the
essential oil and the tannins is antiseptic and anti-inflamma-
tory, particularly in the region of the mouth and throat.
Decoctions and infusions of the leaves exhibit antihyperten-
sive, spasmolytic and blood sugar-reducing effects in animal
experiments, during which the plasma insulin levels remain
unchanged. The hypoglycemic effect is traced to the
inhibition of intestinal glucose resorption. A sedative effect
has also been described.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Salvia triloba is used internally for diabetes
in Israel and Cyprus, and elsewhere for cardiac symptoms,
lung complaints, colds, coughs, nervousness and digestion
problems. Externally it is used to treat skin damage.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with die proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Aqueous decoctions and infusions
prepared from the whole, cut and powdered drug are used
internally. The fresh cut leaves are applied topically.

Preparation: The literature contains no detailed descriptions.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Storage: Store tightly sealed and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Ulubelen A, Ozturk S, Isildatici S, A new flavone from Salvia
triloba Lf (Labiatae). J Pharm Sci, 57:1037-8, 1968 Jun.

Green Hellebore
Helleborus viridis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The drug derived from the plant's rhizome
and roots is obsolete in medicine today.

Flower and Fruit: There are 2 to 3 flowers with a diameter
of 4 to 7 cm and 5 ovate, grass-green, broad flower bracts.
The petals are in the form of petaloid honey glands, and
there are numerous stamens. The ovary is superior with the
carpels only fused at the base. The fruit is a 25 to 28 mm
long follicle with beak. The seeds have a narrow longitudinal
strip with a ring at the end.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows
upright, up to 40 cm high. There are 2 basal, long-petioled
leaves; the lamina is divided like a foot into 7 to 13 sections
that are narrow-lanceolate, serrate and dark green. The stem
is upright, branching higher up and leafless to that point. The
cauline leaves are similar to the basal ones but sessile and
smaller. The rhizome is usually branched.

Habitat: The various species of Hellebore grow mainly in
mountainous regions of Europe and North America. The
plant is most commonly found in the Alps; Helleborus viridis
is found growing as far north as northwest France.

Production: Green Hellebore root is the dried rhizome with
roots of Helleborus viridis.

Not to be Confused With: Adulteration and mistaken identity
can occur with Hellebori nigri rhizoma, Actaea spicata,
Adonis Trollius europaeus and Eupatorium

cannabium.

vernalis,

Other Names: Bear's Foot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (bufadienolids, 0.5 to 1.5%):
chief component hellebrin, including deglucohellebrin

Alkaloids of unknown structure: celliamine, sprintillamine,
sprintilline

----- PAGE 620 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Steroid saponins

EFFECTS
The steroid saponin mixture helleborin is severely toxic and
irritating to mucous membranes (ptarmic). It exhibits digi-

«* talis-like effects through the cardioactive glycosides it

contains (hellebrin). The alkaloids it contains produce an
excitation of the motor centers, eventually leading to
convulsions and respiratory failure and triggering bradycar-
dia in the heart and a negatively inotropic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is obsolete today because the risks
of use are considered too high, given that efficacy for
previously accepted indications has not yet been proven.

Previous uses in folk medicine included nausea, constipation
and worm infestation. Root preparations were used also for
heart failure and as a diuretic. Helleborus viridis was
employed as a laxative according to Hager (around 1930)
and was important in homeopathic medicine.

Homeopathic Uses: Helleborus viridis is used for diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

“ The drug is not to be administered in allopathic medicine. No

risks are known in connection with the administration of
homeopathic dosages of the drug.

OVERDOSAGE

The mucous membrane-irritating effect of the saponins
appears to play the largest role in poisonings with the drug.
resulting in scratchiness in mouth and throat, salivation.
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, shortness of breath,
and possible convulsions and asphyxiation. The ingestion of
very large dosages leads to disorders of cardiac function
(cardiac arrhythmias).

Following gastrointestinal emptying (gastric lavage, sodium
sulfate) and the administration of activated charcoal, the
treatment for poisonings consists of the treatment of spasms
with diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution and the counter-
ing of any acidosis that may appear through sodium
bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen respiration may
also be required.

Cases of fatal poisonings are known among animals who fed

£f on the leaves of the plant.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: | g drug; maximum single dosage: 0.2 g drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
to 30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once a
day (HAB34).

GREEN TEA / 369

Storage: Store securely.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Johnson CT, Routledge JK, Suspected helleborus viridis
poisoning of cattle. Vet Rec, 89:202, 1971 Aug 14.

Green Tea

Camellia sinensis

TRADE NAMES
Green Tea Leaf (available from numerous manufacturers and
as a combination product,) Green Tea Extract, Green Tea,
Standardized Green Tea Extract, Green Tea Power, Chinese
Green Tea Bags, Green Tea Power Caffeine Free

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the very young
downy leaves, from which green or black tea is prepared
according to the treatment being given.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow short-pedicled and
singly or in clusters of a few flowers in the leaf axils. They
are white or pale pink and have a diameter of 3 to 5 cm. The
flowers have between 5 and 7 sepals and petals at a time.
The petals are fused at the base with the numerous stamens.
The ovary has 3 chambers. The fruit is a greenish-brown,
woody capsule with a diameter of 1 to 1.5 cm and contains 1
to 3 smooth brown seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen, heavily-
branched shrub. The leaves are glossy dark green, alternate,
short-petiolate, coreacious, lanceolate or elongate-ovate and
roughly serrate. The young leaves appear silver because of
the covering of downy hairs on the surface.

Habitat: The plant does not originate in the wild. It was
originally cultivated in China and is grown as a tea plant
today in India, China, Sri Lanka, Japan, Indonesia, Kenya,
Turkey, Pakistan, Malawi and Argentina.

Production: Tea leaves are the fermented and/or dried leaves
of Camellia sinensis. Harvesting takes place under stringent
quality control. Green Tea is produced by steaming the
fresh-cut leaf. Black Tea is produced by allowing the leaves
to oxidize. During oxidation, enzymes present in the tea
convert many of the polyphenolic therapeutic substances to
less active compounds. Oxidation does not occur with Green
Tea because die steaming process inactivates die enzymes
responsible for oxidation. The anti-oxidant activity of Green
Tea is six times greater than that of Black Tea.

----- PAGE 621 -----
370/GREEN TEA

Other Names: Black Tea, Chinese Tea, Green Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Purine alkaloids (methyl xanthines): caffeine (previously
referred to as theine or teine; depending upon the develop-
ment stage of the leaves, 2.9-4.2%, content declining with
age), theobromine (0.15-0.2%), theophylline (0.02-0.04%)

Thterpene saponins (theafolia saponins): aglycones includ-
ing among others, barringtogenol C, Rl-barringenol

Catechins: in unfermented (green) tea 10-25%, with fermen-
tation partially changing over into oligomeric quinones with
tannin character, into theaflavine, theaflavin acid, thearubi-
gene, or into non-water soluble polymeric- flavonoids:
including, among others, quercetin, kaempferol, myrecetin

Flavonoids: including quercetin, kaempferol, myricetin

Caffeic acid derivatives: including among others, chlorogen-
ic acid, theogallin

Anorganic ions: high fluoride content (130-160 mg/kg),
potassium and aluminum ions

Volatile oil: chief components linalool, in fermented tea also
2-methylI-hept-2-en-6-on, alpha-ionon and beta-ionon, more
than 300 volatile compounds are involved in tea aroma

EFFECTS

The caffeine in the drug has a centrally stimulating and
antidepressive effect (adenosine antagonism.) Adenosine
antagonism leads to dilation of the renal vessels with a
consecutive increase of the rate of filtration (diuresis).
Caffeine is positively inotropic, promotes the secretion of
gastric juices, glycolysis and lipolysis. In animal tests,
bradykinin and prostaglandin antagonism caused a capillary
sealing and anti-inflammatory effect.

An antidiarrheal effect can be attributed to a combination of
the tannin effect and the fact that doses of 400 mg
polyphenols administered three times daily promotes the
growth of Lactobacillis and Bifidobacter species while
inhibiting the growth of Clostridium perfringens and Clos-
tridium difficile (Yamamoto, 1997).

There is clinical evidence that Green Tea has cancer
preventive effects. The types of cancer that Green Tea has
been shown to prevent as demonstrated in well controlled
clinical studies include cancers of the pancreas, colon, small
intestine, stomach, breast and the lung.

Green Tea mouthwashes have been shown to inhibit the
growth of cavity-associated bacteria such as Streptococcus
mutans, Streptococcus salivarius and Escherichia coli (Ra~
sheed 1998; Haider, 1998).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CLINICAL TRIALS
Cancer Treatment/Prevention

A large (n = 2226) case-control study was conducted in
China, where recently diagnosed cancer cases (pancreatic,
colon and rectum) among residents between the ages of 30
and 74 years were included. Controls (n = 1552) were
selected and matched to cases by age and gender and
adjustments were made for age, income, education and
cigarette smoking. As tea consumption increased, the inci-
dence of all three cancers decreased. Women with the
highest tea consumption (> or = 200 g/month) had a 33%
reduced risk for colon cancer, 43% reduced risk of rectal
cancer and 47% reduction in the risk for pancreatic cancer
(p= 0.07, 0.001 and 0.008 respectively). For men who
consumed > or = 300 g/month of Green Tea, the risk of
colon cancer was reduced by 18%, for rectal cancer there
was a 43% reduction of risk and for pancreatic cancer the
risk reduction was 47% (p= 0.38, 0.04 and 0.04 respectively)

(Ji, 1997).

A two-part case control study of 472 Japanese women with
stage I, II or III breast cancer was conducted. The first part
of the study assessed the association between consumption
of Green Tea prior to clinical cancer and the number of
axillary lymph node metastases for premenopausal women or
the increased expression of progesterone receptor and
estrogen receptor among postmenopausal women with stage
I or II cancer. The second part of the study investigated the
recurrence rate of those with stage I or II breast cancer in
relation to the amount of Green Tea consumption. There was
an inverse relationship between the amount of Green Tea
consumption and the rate of cancer recurrence. The recur-
rence rate was 16.7% for those that consumed > or = 5 cups/
day and 24.3% among those consuming < or = 4 cups/day (p
< 0.05). The authors concluded that increased consumption
of Green Tea prior to clinical cancer onset is significantly
associated with improved prognosis of stage I and II breast
cancer, and that this association may be related to a
modifying effect of Green Tea on the clinical characteristics
of the disease (Nakachi, 1998).

Dental Caries Prevention

An extract of oolong tea (semifermented tea leaves of
Camellia sinensis) containing polymerized polyphenols in
0.2% ethanol was administered to 35 volunteers between 18
and 29 years of age to test the inhibitory effect of the extract
on dental plaque deposition. The study was repeated 1 week
after the first trial using 0.2% ethanol without the tea extract.
The oolong tea cohort showed significant inhibition of
plaque deposition (Ooshima, 1994).

In another study, it was demonstrated that total inhibition of
Streptococcus mutans was possible after exposure to a 0.1%

----- PAGE 622 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

infusion of Chinese Green Tea polyphenols (CTP) for 5
minutes. Plaque Index and Gingival Index decreased signifi-
cantly (p < 0.001) after a 0.2% CTP rinse and brush regimen
was used by the shidy participants. The authors conclude that
CTP is an effective agent to prevent dental caries (Chung,
1993).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Though no Commission E monograph is available for Green
Tea, there is clinical evidence that Green Tea is likely to be
useful as a cancer preventive and as a preventive for dental

caries.

Unproven Uses: Internal application: Green Tea is used for
stomach disorders, migraine, symptoms of fatigue, vomiting
and diarrhea when taken as a beverage. It can be used to
increase performance (stimulant effect).

Homeopathic Uses: Camellia sinensis is used for cardiac and
circulatory conditions, headaches, states of agitation, states
of depression and stomach complaints.

Indian Medicine: In India, tea preparations are used for
diarrhea, loss of appetite, hyperdipsia, migraine, cardiac
pain, fever and fatigue.

Chinese Medicine: In China Green Tea is used to treat
migraine, nausea, diarrhoea resulting from malaria and
digestion problems. It is also used as a cancer preventive.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Side effects of tea consumption are possible with persons
who have sensitive stomachs, chiefly due to the chlorogenic
acid and tannin content. Hyperacidity, gastric irritation,
reduction of appetite, as well as obstipation or diarrhea,
could be the result of intense tea consumption. These side
effects can be generally avoided by the addition of milk
(reduction of the chlorogenic acid and other tannins).

Care should be taken with patients that have weakened
cardiovascular systems, renal diseases, thyroid hyperfunc-
tion, elevated susceptibility to spasm and certain psychic
disorders, such as panicky states of anxiety. With long-term
intake of dosages above 1.5 g caffeine per day, non-specific
symptoms occur, such as restlessness, irritability, sleepless-
ness, palpitation, vertigo, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite
and headache.

Pregnancy: Pregnant women should not exceed a dosage of
300 mg per day (5 cups of tea spread out over the course ofa
day).

Nursing Mothers: Infants whose nursing mothers consume
beverages containing caffeine could suffer from sleep
disorders.

GREEN TEA/371

Children: There have been reports of microcytic anemia in
infants that were fed an average of 250 ml Green Tea daily.
This effect may possibly be due to impairment of iron
metabolism (Merhav, 1985).

Drug Interactions: The resorption of alkaline medications
can be delayed because of chemical bonding with the

tannins.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage (quantities corresponding to more than 300 mg
caffeine, or 5 cups of tea as a beverage) can lead to
restlessness, tremor and elevated reflex excitability. The first
signs of poisoning are vomiting and abdominal spasm. Fatal
poisonings are not possible with tea beverages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Green Tea is administered as an
infusion or in capsule form for internal use.

How Supplied: The usual concentration of total polyphenols
in dried Green Tea leaf is around 8% to 12%. One cup of
Green Tea normally contains 50 to 100 milligrams polyphe-
nols (Murray & Pizzorno, 1998; Yamamoto, 1997).

Capsules — 100 mg, 150 mg, 175 mg, 333 mg, 383 mg, 500
mg

Liquid — 1:1
Tablets — 100 mg

Dried extract (instant tea) — Processed using steam extrac-
tion followed by drying

Filter tea bags — Available commercially containing 1.8 to
2.2 gm tea

Preparation: To prepare a tea, boiling water is poured over a
heaped teaspoon of leaf tea, a level teaspoon of crushed
leaves or a tea bag and left to draw for 3 to 10 minutes as
required. The caffeine is almost completely drawn after
approximately 3 minutes. The tannin-containing substance
(and with it the antidiarrheal action) increases when the tea is
left to brew.

Daily Dosage: A daily dose of 300 to 400 mg of polyphenols
is typical. The amount of polyphenols in 3 cups of Green Tea
is between 240 and 320 mg.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution sc twice

weekly (HAB1).

Storage: Store tightly sealed and dried; store separately from
other chemicals and aromatic substances.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Griiner Tee schutzt vor Krebs. In: DAZ 137(24):2045.

1997.

----- PAGE 623 -----
372 /GREEN TEA

Biiechi S, Antivirale Saponine, pharmakologische und klinische
Untersuchungen. In: DAZ 136(2):89-98. 1996.

Graham B, In: Graham HN: Tea: The Plant and Its
Manufacture, Chemistry, and Consumption of the Beverage. In:
The Methylxanthine Beverages and Foods: Chemistry. -
Consumption, and Heath Effects, Alan R. Liss, New York,
S.29-74. 1984.

Haslam E, Natural polyphenols (vegetable tannins) as drugs:
possible modes of action. In: JNP 59(2):205-215. 1996.

Imai K, Nakachi K, Cross sectional study of effects of drinking
Green Tea on cardiovascular and liver disease. In: Brit Med J
310:693-696. 1995.

Jain AK, Shimoi K, Nakamura Y, Kada T. Hana Y, Tomita J,
Crude tea extracts decrease the mutagenic activity of N'-methyl-
N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine in-vitro and in gastric tract of rats.
In: Mutat Res 210(1)1-8. 1989.

Ji BT, Chow WH, Hsing AW et al., Green Tea consumption
and the risk of pancreatic and colorectal cancer. Int J Cancer
70(3):255-258. 1997.

John TJ, Mukundan P, Antiviral property of tea. In: Curr Sci
47:159. 1978.

Ludewig R, (1995) Schwarzer und Griiner Tee als Genup*- und
Heilmittel. Dtsch Apoth Z 135:2203-2218.

Murray MT & Pizzorno: Camellia Sinensis (green tea), in A
Textbook of Natural Medicine. Churchill Livingstone, pp 625-
627. 1998.

Nakachi K, Suemasu K, Suga K, Takeo T. Imai K, Higashi Y.
influence of drinking Green Tea on breast cancer malignancy
among Japanese patients. In: Jpn J Cancer 89(3): 254-61. Mar,
89.

Rasheed A & Haider M, Antibacterial activity of Camellia
sinensis extracts against dental caries. Arch Pharm Res 21:348-
352. 1998.

Scholz E, Camellia sinensis (L.) O. KUNTZE. Der Teestrauch.
n: ZPT 16(4):231-250. 1995.

Schroder B, In: Schroder R: Kaffee, Tee und Kardamom.
Ulmer-Verlag, Stuttgart. 1991.

Sur P, Ganguly DK, Tea root extract (TRE) as an
antineoplastic agent. In: PM 60(2): 106. 1994.

Yamamoto T, Juneja LR, Chu DC et al.. Chemistry and
Applications of. green tea. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA,

997.
Yoshizawa S et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):44.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
980.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Grindelia camporum

See Gumweed

Ground Ivy

Glechoma  hederacea

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb collected
during the flowering season and dried, the fresh aerial parts
collected during the flowering season, and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 2- to 6-blossomed false
whorls in the axils of the foliage leaves. The individual
flowers are 1 to 2 cm long with distinct pedicles and
bracteoles that are 1 to 1.5 mm long. The calyx is bilabiate
and tubular, with 5 tips. The bilabiate corolla is 15 to 22 mm
long, usually blue-violet but occasionally red-violet or white.
The fruit is a nut of about 2 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This perennial herb grows 15 to 60
cm high and has a creeping main stem, which roots at the
lower nodes and keeps its leaves in winter. The quadrangular
stem is up to 2 mm thick and often tinged with blue-violet, as
are the petioles. The leaves are crossed opposite, long-
petioled, reniform to broadly cordate, crenate; dark green
above and paler green beneath.

Characteristics: The plant has a mild unpleasant smell; the
taste is hot and bitter.

Habitat: Ground Ivy is a common wild plant in Europe.

----- PAGE 624 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production:' Ground Ivy is the aboveground part of Glecho-
ma hederacea, gathered when in flower (from April to June).
It is air-dried in the shade to keep loss of the essential oil to a
minimum.,

Other Names: Alehoof. Gill-Go-over-the-Ground, Lizzy-
Run-up-the-Hedge, Gill-to-by-the-Hedge, Robin-Run-in-the-
Hedge, Catsfoot, Hedgemaids, Tun-Hoof, Haymaids,
Turnhoof, Creeping Charlie. Cat's-Paw

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (traces): chief components (-)-pinocarvone, (-)-
menthone, (+)-pulegone. also including germacran D, germa-
cran B, cis-ocimene

Sesquiterpenes: glechomafuran, glechomanolide

Hydroxy fatty acid: 9-hydroxy-10-trans, 12-cis-octadeca-
diendic acid

Cajfeic acid derivatives: rosmaric acid

Flavonoids: including cymaroside, cosmosyin, hypersoside
isoquercitrin

EFFECTS

“r The drug is said to be an anti-inflammatory, which is

Ate

believed to be due to the tripterpen content. No detailed
information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used internally
for inflammation of gastrointestinal mucous membranes and
diarrhea. Ground Ivy is also used for mild respiratory
complaints of the upper bronchia; in the symptomatic
treatment of coughs; and as a diuretic in cases of bladder and
kidney stones. Externally, the drug is used for the treatment
of poorly healing wounds, ulcers and skin diseases. In Italy,
it is used for arthritis and rheumatism.

Chinese Medicine: Ground Ivy is used to treat carbuncles,
erysipelas, lower abdominal pain, scabies, scrofulous, irregu-
lar menstruation, coughs, dysentery and jaundice. Efficacy
has not, however, been proven for these indications.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include diarrhea
and hemorrhoids.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. Fatal
poisonings were observed among horses following intake of
large quantities of the fresh plant. Mice who were fed solely
on the plant died after 3 to 4 days.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as well

as externally.

GROUND PINE/373

Preparations: The liquid extract (1:1) is prepared by using
25% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The normal single daily dose of the dried
drug is 2 to 4 gm internally; externally, crushed leaves are
placed on the affected areas.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day; suppositories: 1 suppository 2 to 3 times daily
(chronic and acute) (HAB34)

Storage: Ground Ivy should be stored where it is not
exposed to light.

LITERATURE
Barberan FAT, (1986) Fitoterapia 57(2):67.

Bohinc P, Korbar-Smid J, Cicerov-Cergol M, Uber die
kardiotonischen Substanzen des Gnadenkrautes - Gratiola
officinalis. In: Sci Pharm 47:108-113. 1979.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sevenet T, Looking for new drugs: what criteria? J
Ethnopharmacol, 32:83-90, Apr 1991.

Ground Pine
Ajuga chamaepitys

DESCRIPTION
Flower and Fruit: The plant has 2 to 4 flowers at each node.
The petals are 4 to 6 mm. The tips of the petals are as long as
or shorter than the tube: The corolla is yellow with red or
purple markings, rarely entirely purple. The lower lip is
entire, and the stamens are exerted. The filaments are hairy.
The mericarps are 2 to 5 mm long, obovate and reticulate-
wrinkled with a pitted surface.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ground Pine is an annual or short-
lived perennial. The stem is 5 to 30 cm long. It is usually
heavily branched, glabrous to densely villous. The leaves are
3-partite with linear segments. They are 0.5 to 4 mm wide.
The segments are sometimes 3-pinnatifid. The bracts are
similar to the leaves.

----- PAGE 625 -----
374/GROUND PINE

Habitat: Sandy, stony areas of southern Britain and parts of

Europe.
Other Names: Yellow Bugle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Diterpene bitter principles

Caffeic acid derivatives: including rosemary acid

EFFECTS

Emmenagogue (stimulates menstrual flow), stimulant,

diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Ground Pine is used for gout, rheumatism
and gynecological disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground Pine is
compounded preparations as a liquid extract for internal use.

available in

LITERATURE
Camps F, et al.. (1985) An Quim 8IC(1):74-75.
Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Nederl 21(4):417.

Groundsel
Senecio vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb collected

during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow composite flowers are in
compact cymes. The small capitula have tubular florets but
no lingual ones. The bract calyx is globose. The involucre
and the very short outer bracts have black tips. The fruit is
1.2 to 2 mm long and densely downy. The pappus, which is 3
times as long as the fruit, is silky and pure white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Groundsel grows from about 10 to
30 cm high. It is annual, biennial or occasionally perennial.
The plant has a thin, fusiform, pale root, which is densely
covered in lateral roots. The stem is erect, simple or
branched. The leaves are glabrous or cobweb-lanate and
pinnatisect. The lower leaves narrow to the petiole; the upper
ones are slit at the base and clasping. The tips are detached,
oblong, obtuse and unevenly acute dentate.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: The plant is common in all of Europe, northern and
central Asia, northern Africa and has been introduced into
various other parts of Africa as well as Australia and the

Americas.

Production: Groundsel is the flowering plant of Senecio
vulgaris. The herb is gathered in uncultivated regions and
dried in the shade.

Other Names: Grundy Swallow, Ground Glutton, Simson

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (up to 0.16% in the fresh foliage):

chief alkaloids are senecionine, seneciphylline

Flavonoids: including among others, isorhamnetin-3-O-glu-
cosides, isorhamnetin-3-O-rutinosides, isorhamnetin-3-

monosulphate
Volatile oil (traces)

EFFECTS
The toxic principles of the drug are the pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, which are hepatotoxic and carcinogenic. Use of
Groundsel for worm infestation can be explained by the high
toxicity of the drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internal use of Groundsel is not recom-
mended because, similar to S. jacoboeae, it contains toxic
and carcinogenic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Prior uses have
included the treatment of worm infestations, colic and
epilepsy. The pressed juice has been used for dysmenorrhea,

epilepsy, and as a styptic in dentistry.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Groundsel should not be taken internally because hepatotox-
icity and carcinogenicity are possible due to the pyrrolizidine
alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necic parent substances in its

makeup.

DOSAGE
Mode_ of Administration:
advised.

Internal use of Groundsel is not

LITERATURE
Bull LB et al. in: The Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids, Pub. Wiley NY

1968.

Mansour RMA, Saleh, NAM (1981) Phytochemistry 20:1180.
Quails CW, Segall H J (1978) J Chrom. 15:202.

Toppel G, Hartmann T (1986) Planta Med 6:25P.

Van Borstel K et al., PH 28:1635-1638. 1989.

Van Dooren Bos R et al., (1981) Planta Med 42:385.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

----- PAGE 626 -----
j*

4p

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Guaiac
Guaiacum officinale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The primary medicinal part is the resin of
the heartwood, which is used for various preparations. The
wood also has some medicinal properties.

Flower and Fruit: The pale blue star-shaped flowers are in
false umbels with 6 to 10 blooms that have 2 cm long
pedicles. There are 5 sepals, 5 petals, 10 stamens and a
bilocular ovary. The fruit is a bilocular, cordate capsule that
is compressed at the side and contains a long and hard seed,
in each chamber.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Guaiacum officinale is an evergreen

tree that grows to 13 m high and has a greenish-brown.
usually twisted trunk covered in furrowed bark. The heart-
wood is greenish brown and heavier than water, with an
aromatic taste. The opposite leaves are short-petioled,
coriaceous and di- to tri-pinnate. The leaflets are ovate or
oblong, obtuse and entire-margined.

Characteristics: The shavings turn green on exposure to the
air and blue-green in the presence of nitrogen.

Habitat: The plant grows in Florida, on the Antilles, in
Guayana, Venezuela and Columbia. It is closely related to
Guaiacum sanctum, which grows in the Bahamas and
southern Florida.

Production: Guaiac wood consists of the heartwood and
sapwood of Guaiacum officinale and/or Guaiacum sanctum.

Other Names: Guaiacum, Lignum Vitae, Pockwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY '
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins: aglycone oleanolic acid

Resin: containing, among others, the lignans (-)-guaiaretic
acid, dihydroguajaretic acid, guaiacin

Isoguajacin: alpha-guaiaconic acid, tetrofuroguaiacine A and
B

Volatile oil: chief components sesquiterpene alcohols; such
as guaiole, which changes into quaiazulene with steam
distillation

GUAIAC /375

EFFECTS
Guaiacum officinale is fungistatic because of its saponin

content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
¢ Rheumatism

Guaiac is used as supportive therapy for rheumatic

complaints.

Unproven Uses: Although folk medicine use has declined, it
is used for respiratory complaints, skin disorders and syphilis
in the Caribbean.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. High
dosages of the drug can lead to diarrhea, gastroenteritis and
intestinal colic. Skin rashes have also been observed
following intake of the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The comminuted wood is used for
decoctions and other galenic preparations for internal use.
The essential oil. known as guaiac wood oil. must be
evaluated separately.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include drops, ointments and compound preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, use 15 g drug in 1 cup
cold water (150 ml). Slowly bring to a boil, remove from
heat and let steep, then strain after 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 4 to 5 g of the drug.
When using a tincture (Guajaci Ligni Tinctura), 20 to 40
drops make a single dose.

LITERATURE
Ahmad VU, Bano N, Bano S, PH 23:2612-2616. 1984.
Ahmad VU, Bano N, Bano S, PH 25:951-952. 1986.

King FE, Wilson JG, (1964) J Chem Soc:4011-4024.

King FE, Wilson JG, J Chem Soc: 1572-1580. 1965.
Kratochvil JF et al., (1971) Phytochem 10:2529.

Majuinder PL, Bhattacharya M, (1974) Chem Ind 77.
Schrecker AW, (1957) J Am Chem Soc 79:3823.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimirtel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 627 -----
376 /GUAIAC

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Guaiacum officinale

See Guaiac

Guar Gum

Cyamopsis _ tetragonoloba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole plant has medicinal properties.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in axillary, 6- to 30-
flowered racemes. The structures of the flowers are arranged
in fives. The sepals are fused and hairy on the outside; the
lower calyx teeth are longer than the upper ones. The corolla
is butterfly-shaped (flag, 2 wings, keel formed from 2 fused
petals), small and reddish; there are 10 stamens. The fruit
developing from a carpel is an upright, 3.8 to 5 cm long,
sparsely haired legume with 5 to 6 seeds; these have a very
well-developed, slimy endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cyamopsis tetragonoloba is an
annual herb, which grows up to 60 cm high. The leaves are
alternate, triple-pinnate; the leaflets are broad-elliptical,
acuminate, dentate, pubescent on both surfaces. They
measure 3.8 to 7.5 cm long and 1.2 to 5 cm wide. The petiole
is 2.5 to 3.8 cm long, while the stipules are 6 to 10 mm long.
The root and root tuber have symbiotic bacteria, which
bonds nitrogen from the air.

Habitat: The plant is native to the Indian subcontinent. It
originated from India, Australia, South Africa and the U.S.

Production: Guar Gum is the powder extracted by milling
from the endosperm of Cyamopsis tetragonoloba. A dry or
wet milling process separates the endosperm from the seed
shell!

Other Names: Aconite Bean, Calcutta Lucerne, Guar,

Clusterbean

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Water-soluble polysaccharides: galactomannans (85%)
Proteins (2 to 5%)
Saponins (0.1%)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
Clusterbean or Guar Gum causes a lowering of postprandial
serum glucose values through (among other things) the
influence of the hydrocolloid guar upon glucose resorption
(delaying of stomach emptying into the duodenum), a
reduction of glucosuria, improvement of the HBAI value
and leveling of the blood sugar profile. A lipid-lowering
effect has also been demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internal application: Guar Gum has been
used for diabetes mellitus, for postprandial hyperglycemia
and glucosuria, and for hyperlipoproteinemia. It has also
been used to regulate digestion.

Indian Medicine: Night blindness, dyspeptic complaints,
anorexia, constipation and agalactia have all been treated
with Guar Gum.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindicated in diseases of esophagus, stomach and
intestine, which might hinder passage of the chyme.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages of the drug,
nor with its use as a pharmaceutical vehicle. Possible side
effects, particularly at the beginning of treatment, might
include feelings of fullness, nausea, wind and diarrhea.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia (outbreaks of sweating, vertigo,
ravenous hunger) and resorption difficulties involving vita-
mins, minerals and medications (such as contraceptives!)
have been observed, although rarely. Inadequate intake of
fluids could lead to the danger of bolus formation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Powdered drug, granules and

tablets for internal use.

Daily Dosage: Commercial pharmaceutical preparation with
one dose of 5 gm per tablet or granules, 3 times daily.

Storage: Keep Guar Gum sealed tightly.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Guarana
Paullinia cupana

TRADE NAME
Guarana (available from numerous manufacturers), Guarana

Seed

----- PAGE 628 -----
“Flower and Fruit:

*k

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the peeled, dried,
roasted and pulverized seeds, formed into a thick paste with

water.

The usually unisexual flowers are
inconspicuous, yellow to whitish and fragrant. They are in 30
long panicles, which only produce female or male flowers at
any one time. The fruit is a hazelnut-sized, deep yellow to
red-orange 3-sectioned capsule, which bursts open when ripe
and releases | purple-brown to black seed in a cup-like aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a woody, evergreen
perennial vine up to 10 m long, which climbs through the
jungle. It is bushier in its cultivated form. The leaves are
large, palmate, coriaceous, distinctly ribbed and roughly
crenate-serrate.

Characteristics: A paste is formed from the pulverized and
roasted seeds, formed into rolls or bars and dried. The taste is
astringent, bitter then sweet, and the odor is reminiscent of
chocolate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Amazon basin and
has been introduced into other rain forests. The main area of
cultivation is between Maues and Manau in Brazil.

Production: Guarana seeds are the seeds of Paullinia cupana.
A preparation is also made from the ground seeds. Over a
period of approximately 75 days, the pollinated flower
develops a "ripe" guarana raceme, which is harvested by
hand from October to December. Seeds (up to 80 per
raceme) are taken out of the capsule shells, soaked for a time
in water and then finally separated from the arillus.
Subsequent to being dried in the sun, the seeds are roasted
for 2 to 3 hours in special clay ovens. Once they have
cooled, the parchment-like shell is removed and the seeds are
ground down. Following this, the resulting paste is smoked
over aromatic charcoal. The final product is dark brown in
color and in stick form.

Other Names: Brazilian Cocoa, Guarana Bread, Paullinia

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Purine alkaloids: chief alkaloid caffeine (3.6-5.8%), in
addition, small amounts of theophylline and theobromine

Tannins (12%): oligomeric proanthocyanidins, condensed

tannins

Cyanolipides: including among others, 2,4-dihydroxy-3-
methylene-butyronitrile

Saponins
Starch (30%)
Proteins (15%)

GUARANA/377

EFFECTS
Guarana produces a stimulating effect, due to the presence of
purines (caffeine, theobromine, theophylline). Caffeine is
centrally stimulating, has a positive inotropic and, in high
concentrations, has a positive chronotropic cardiac effect. It
relaxes the vascular muscles (with the exception of cerebral
vessels that constrict) and the bronchial tube.

Caffeine works as a short-term diuretic and increases gastric
secretion. Furthermore, it increases the release of catechol-
amines. Inhibition of blood platelet aggregation has been
observed.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Guarana is used as a tonic for fatigue and to
quell hunger and thirst, for headache and dysmenorrhoea,
digestion problems, fever and as a diuretic. Its effect in
stimulating the circulation, heart and diuresis can be
explained by the caffeine content.

Homeopathic Uses: Headache

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Quantities corresponding to up to 400
mg caffeine per day (7 to 11 gm of the herb), spread out over
the day, are toxicologically harmless to a healthy adult
habituated to caffeine, through regular consumption of
coffee or black tea.

One must remember that the quantities of caffeine consid-
ered harmless are calculated to include all of the foodstuffs
and beverages containing the substance (including coffee,
tea, cola, etc.). Caution is advised for patients with sensitive
cardiovascular systems, renal diseases, hyperthyroidism,
increased tendency to spasms and certain psychic disorders
such as panic anxiety.

Drug Interactions: The diuretic action of Guarana may lead
to hypokalemia with excessive use. Hypokalemia may
increase digoxin toxicity.

Pregnancy: Pregnant women should avoid caffeine, and
under no circumstances exceed a dosage of over 300 mg per
day.

Nursing Mothers: Infants whose nursing mothers consume
caffeine products could suffer from sleeping disorders.

OVERDOSAGE
The first symptoms of poisoning are dysuria, vomiting and
abdominal spasms.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The seeds of Paullinia cupana are
grated and taken directly as powder or diluted in water or

----- PAGE 629 -----
378/GUARANA

juice as a drink. It is not in use as a drug. It is available in

various medicinal preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 200 mg

Liquid — 1:1
Tablets — 800 mg. 1000 mg

Daily Dosage: Average single dose: 1 gm of the powder

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 10 globules every 30 to 60
minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic): parenterally:
to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily: chronic: once a day
(HAB34)

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Guarana; -
33(3):218. 1993.
Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
994.
Katzung W, Guarana: - ein Naturprodukt mit hohem
Coffeingehalt. In: Med Mo Pharm 16(11):330-333. 1993.
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New
York, 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Ed.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

ler neue Muntermacher. In: DAZ

Gum Arabic

Acacia Senegal

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The latex from the trunk and branches is

the medicinal part of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences, which grow from the
leaf axils, are up to 10 cm long. The flowers are white and
grow in cylindrical, dense spikes. The calyx is cup-shaped
with 5 sepals. The 5 petals are lanceolate. The numerous
stamens are long and fused at the base. The pods are about
10 cm long and contain 5 to 6 shiny brown seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Acacia Senegal is up to 6 m tall with
a 12 to 25 cm thick, slightly leaning trunk, which has knotty
branches and a thin crown. The sapwood is white and the
heartwood is black. The bark is fibrous, gray on the outside

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

and rust-colored on the inside. The leaves are double
abruptly pinnate. The leaflets are in 10 to 15 pairs, narrow,
gray-green, up to 5 mm long, opposite and very short-
petioled. There are 2 to 3 stipules, which have formed into
thorns, and are covered on the" upper surface with yellow,

fleshy glands.

Habitat: Acacia Senegal is found in the tropical Savannah
belt of Africa, in the southern Sahara (Senegal, Gambia), in
Arabia, Beludschistan and Sind. Grown in forest-like condi-
tions in the western and southwestern Sahara region (Sene-
gal, Gambia, Ivory Coast, northern Dahomey and northern

Nigeria).

Production: Acacia gummi, the latex, is the result of a
wound infection of the tree, which has occurred naturally or
has been induced. The incised bark is removed in strips of
approximately 4 cm by 60 cm. The liquid discharge dries to
form a hard, glazed substance, which is collected on a
weekly basis. The latex is harvested from trees, ranging from
3 to 12 years old.

Not to be Confused With: According to DAB 10 (EUR), USP
XXII, only latex from Acacia Senegal or other African
varieties are officially recognized. In other words, Asian,
Australian and American latex are not official.

Other Names: Acacia, Cape Gum, Egyptian Thorn, Gum
Acacia, Gum Senegal

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Colloidally soluble polysaccharides:
(acidic arabinogalactan)

especially Arabic acid

Glycoproteins

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Acacia gummi is used in the preparation of
emulsions. The drug is used as a mild stimulant and to
impede absorption. It is also used for the treatment of catarrh
and diarrhea. Acacia is often a constituent of cough drops. It
is also used in veterinary medicine for mild diarrhea in small
animals, foals and calves.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Acacia is used as a pharmaceutical
aid and is also administered internally in combination

preparations.

----- PAGE 630 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Storage: The drug should be stored in tightly closed
containers.

LITERATURE
Beuscher N, Bodinet C Willigmann I. Harnischfeger G,

“T Biological activity of Baptisia tinctoria extracts. In: Inst, fiir

Angew. Botanik der Univ. Hamburg, Angewandte Botanik,
Berichte 6, 46-61. 1997.

Randall RC, Phillips GO. Williams PA. Food Hydrocolloids
3:65-75, 1989.

Further information in:

Berger F, Handbuch der Drogenkunde. W Maudrich Verlag
Wien 1964.

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Gumweed

Grindelia —camporum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowering
branches and the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: Gumweed has a number of individual
composite heads, each with a diameter of 2 to 3 cm, at the
end of leafy stems. The involucral bracts are 3 to 8 mm by
0.5 to 1 mm, with very viscid, cylindrical, deflected apexes.
If present, the ligules are 7 to 15 mm long and yellow to
orange-yellow. The inner florets are yellow. The achaenes
are 2 to 3 mm, oblong and brown. The 2 to 8 pappus-awns
are 3 to 5 mm long and usually finely serrulate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an erect biennial or
perennial herb or small bush that grows up to | m high, often
branched above. The alternate leaves are 3 to 7 cm long,
triangular to ovate-oblong, clasping, resinous-punctate, ser-
rate-crenate or entire-margined, and light green. They break
off easily when dry.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Southwestern U.S. and in
Mexico.

Production: Gumweed herb consists of the dried tops and
leaves of Grindelia robusta and/or Grindelia squarrosa,
which are gathered during flowering season.

GUMWEED/379

Other Names: August Flower, Grindelia, Rosin Weed, Tar
Weed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpene acids: grindelic acid, hydroxygrindelic acid, 6-
oxogrindelic acid. 7alpha,8alpha-epoxygrindelic acid

Volatile oil: including, among others, borneol, bornyl
acetate, camphene, camphor, myrcene, alpha- and _beta-
pinene

Polyynes: including matricarianol, matricarianolacetate
Saponins
Tannins

Flavonoids: including kaempferol-3,7-dimethyl ether, ka-
empferol-3-dimethyl ether, luteolin, quercetin, quercetin-
3.3'-dimethyl ether

EFFECTS

In vitro, the drug has an antimicrobial, fungistatic and
spasmolytic effect caused by the resin, which contains
diterpenes, and the phenol carbolic acids. An antibacterial
effect has also been demonstrated in vitro. In addition, an
inflammation-inhibiting effect has been proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
* Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Gumweed is also used for infections in the
mucous membranes of the upper respiratory tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks following the proper administration of designat-
ed therapeutic dosages are not recorded. Side effects listed in
older scientific literature (Lewin) include gastric irritation
and diarrhea. Large dosages, however, are said to have a
poisonous effect.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for teas and
other galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: The tincture is prepared in a 1:10 or 1:5
concentration with 60% to 80% ethanol (v/v).

Daily Dosage: The recommended dosage is 4 to 6 g of drug
or 3 to 6 g Gumweed liquid extract. If using the tincture, the
dosage is 15 to 3 ml.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

----- PAGE 631 -----
380 /GUMWEED

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mascolo, N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Schimmer O, Egersdorfer S. Grindelia-Arten - Die Grindelie.
In: ZPT 9(3):86. 1988.

Timmermann B et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(5): 1031.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Guraea rusbyi

See Cocillana Tree

Haematoxylon

campechianum
See Logwood

Hagenia abyssinica

See Kousso

Hamamelis virginiana
See Witch Hazel

Haronga

Haronga madagascariensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the tree are the

leaves and bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are richly blossomed,
terminal and umbel-like, with a diameter of about 20 cm.
The flowers are small and white; they have 5 sepals, 5 petals,
4 stamens and a fanned ovary with 2 ovules per section. The
fruit is a roundish, reddish drupe. The seeds (approximately

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

10) are cylindrical and have black glandular hairs and a

reticulate surface structure.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Haronga madagascariensis is a small
evergreen tree that grows up to 8 m high with a heavily
branched crown. It has opposite, elliptical-oval leaves, which
are rounded to cordate at the base and dotted black. The
upper surface is dark green. The lower surface has red-brown

hairs.

Habitat: The plant originated in Madagascar and east Africa;
it grows in many areas throughout tropical Africa.

Production: Haronga is a collective term for extracts from
the leaves and bark of the trunk and branches of Haronga
madagascariensis, as well preparations made from those
components. The leaves are collected and then air-dried
whole; the bark is peeled and also air-dried.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives: including harunganin, madagascin,
madagascinanthrone, haronginanthrone, chrysophanol, phys-
cione, hypericin, pseudohypericin, madagascarine

Volatile oil (traces)

Oligomeric _ procyanidins

Flavonoids (in the leaves): including quercetin-3-O-arabin-
soide, quercetin-3-O-xyloside, quercitrin

EFFECTS
Haronga has a digestion regulatory effect through stimula-
tion of the excretory function of the pancreas and gastric
juice secretion. In animal experiments, it has demonstrated a
choleretic, cholecystokinetic and antihepatoxic effect. An
antimicrobial effect has also been observed.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Haronga is used for mild exocrine pancreat-
ic insufficiency. Internal uses of the bark and leaves in folk
medicine include constipation, diarrhea, liver and gallbladder
conditions, worm infestations, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids, men-
strual disturbances and puerperal fever. The bark is used
externally for eczema. The effect for the external application

seems plausible because of the drug's antibacterial effect.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The drug is not to be used in patients with acute pancreatitis,
severe liver function disorders, gallstone illnesses, obstruc-
tion of the biliary ducts, gallbladder empyema or ileus.

----- PAGE 632 -----
4gt,

A

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Photosensitization in fair-skinned people can be caused by
hypericin and pseudohypericin, but is unlikely due to the
small size of therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As comminuted Haronga bark with

leaves for decoctions, extracts and other preparations.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical repara-
tions include drops, tablets and compound preparations.

Preparation: Extracts are standardized to 0.1% chrysophanic
acid derivatives; tinctures are standardized to 0.01% chryso-
phanic acid derivatives.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 7.5 to 15 mg of an
aqueous-alcoholic dry extract corresponding to 25 to 50 mg
drug.

LITERATURE
Baldi A et al.. Polyphenols from Harungana madagascarienis.
In: PM 58(7)91. 1992.

Buckley DG et al., Aust J Chem 25:843-855. 1972.
Fisel J et al., DAZ 106:1053-1060. 1966.

Gehrmann B, Analytische Studie an Harungana
madagascariensis Lam. ex Poir. In: Dissertation Universitat
Hamburg. 1989.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Messerschmidt W, DAZ 106:1209-1211. 1966.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Haronga madagascariensis

See Haronga

Harpagophytum procumbens

See Devil's Claw

HARTSTONGUE/381

Hartstongue

Scolopendrium vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the frond.

Flower and Fruit: Two rows of large sporangia lie almost
horizontally on the under surface of the fronds, with a long
film stretching toward the margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The evergreen plant is a fern with
long, wide, simple, short-petioled dark green fronds. They
are arranged in clusters and are broad linear-lanceolate, 2-
lobed cordate at the base and acuminate higher up, with a
sinuate margin. The stem is covered in brown, almost hair-
like scales. The root is bushy, short and sturdy.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe,
North America, northern Africa, and eastern Asia.

Production: Hartstongue is the aerial part of Scolopendrium
vulgare.

Other Names: Hind's Tongue, Horse Tongue, Buttonhole,
God's-Hair

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins

Mucilages

Flavonoids: including among others, kaempferol-7-rhamno-
side-3-coffeoyl-7-diglucoside

Thiaminase (probably present only in the fresh plant)
Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides: saccharose, invert sugar

EFFECTS
Hartstongue is a diuretic and has a mild laxative effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Hartstongue is used in folk medicine for
digestive disorders, urinary tract diseases, and spleen and
liver complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Hartstongue is used internally as an

infusion.
LITERATURE

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

----- PAGE 633 -----
382/HARTSTONGUE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969 (unter Phyllitis
scolopendrium).

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Heartsease

Viola tricolor

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial
parts, the fresh aerial parts of the flowering plant and the

whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The solitary, long-pedicled flower is
yellow or tricolored. It has 5 lanceolate, acute and uneven
sepals with an appendage and 5 uneven petals, the largest of
which is spurred. The 5 stamens also have an appendage at
the tip. There are 3 fused superior ovaries. The fruit is an
ellipsoid, obtusely angular capsule, which bursts open at 3
points. The seeds are pear-shaped and yellow.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Heartsease is annual to perennial and
grows about 30 cm high. The shoots are usually yellowish
green, glabrous or covered in scattered hairs. The stem is
erect, angular, unbranched or branched, glabrous or short-
haired. It has short internodes below and longer ones above.
The leaves are alternate, glabrous, or short-haired. The lower
leaves are cordate; the upper ones are oblong-elliptical. The
stipules are lyrate-pinnatesect and have a large, crenate
terminal tip.

Characteristics: The plant is odorless and the taste slimy-

sweetish.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to temperate Eurasia, from
the Mediterranean to India and as far as Ireland. It is
cultivated in Holland and France.

Production: Viola herb consists of the dried, above-ground
parts of Viola tricolor, mainly of the subspecies vulgaris and
subspecies arvensis, harvested at flowering season. The herb
is cultivated predominantly in central Europe. The flowering
above-ground parts are harvested in die summer months and
carefully dried on a well ventilated floor or at 45° C to
50° C. Two to three harvests per year are possible.

Other Names: European Wild Pansy, Johnny-Jump-Up, Wild
Pansy

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (0.2-0.4%): including among others rutin (viola-
quercitrin, 23%), luteolin-7-O-glucosides, scoparin, sapona-
rine, violanthin, vicinein-2, vitexin

Phenol carboxylic acid: salicylic acid (0.06-0.3%), violuto-
side (violutin, glucoarabinoside of the methyl salicylate)

Mucilage (10%)
Tannins (2-5%)
Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone
Triterpene saponins (speculated)

EFFECTS

The drug has soothing, salve-like effects due to its mucin
content; in animal experiments oral administration brought
about an improvement of eczema-like skin conditions after
long-term use. The antisporiatic effect attributed to the drug
may be explained by the saponin content, as can its use for
catarrh of the upper respiratory tract. In vitro the drug is
hemolytic and increases chloride elimination in the urine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved hy Commission E:

* Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: External uses include mild seborrheic skin
diseases, cradle cap in children and various skin disorders,
including wet and dry exanthema, eczema, Crusta lactea,
acne, impetigo and Pruritus vulvae. The plant is used
internally as a mild laxative for constipation and as an
auxiliary agent to promote metabolism.

Historic uses of Heartsease include the treatment of respira-
tory catarrh, throat inflammation, whooping cough and
feverish colds.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for eczema and
inflammation of the urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug is
available for infusions, decoctions and other galenic prepara-
tions. It is also available in ointments and shampoos for
external use.

Preparation: To make a tea, pour | cup of scalding water
over | dessertspoonful of drug. An infusion for internal use
is prepared using 5 to 10 gm drug per | liter of water. A

----- PAGE 634 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

decoction for internal use is prepared by adding 1.5 gm drug
to 1 cup water. The drug is also used as a bath additive.

Daily Dosage: A cup of tea should be taken 3 times daily
after meals. The dose for the infusion is 1 dessertspoonful 3

Jf times daily. The dose for the powdered drug is 1/2
teaspoonful in hot sugar water 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

Storage: Heartsease must be kept stored away form light
sources, and if possible, from moisture in well-sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
Horhammer L et al., (1965) Tetrahedron Letters 1707.

Komorowski T et al., Herba Pol 29:5. 1983.
Manez S, Villar A, PA 44:250. 1988.
Molnar P et al., PH 25:195. 1986.

Further information in:

A Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Heather
Calluna vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the complete herb
with leaves, the flowers, and the growing shoots of the plant
that are collected and dried when the plant is in bloom, as
well as the fresh aerial parts collected at the same time.

HEATHER/383

Flowers and Fruit: The inflorescence is turned to one side,
dense and hanging. The short-pedicled flowers are nodding,
pale-violet-pink and occasionally white; they have 4 small,
oval, fringed bracts. The calyx has 4 violet-pink, glossy and
petaloid sepals, which have the consistency of straw. The 8
stamens form a brown-red club. The superior ovary has 4
sections, and the style is larger than the calyx. The style has
a thick, button-like, 4-knobbed stigma. The fruit capsule is
globose, 1.5 mm long and 4 sectioned. The fruit is covered in
thick white bristles and is many-seeded. The dividing walls
break off easily.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Calluna vulgaris is a dwarf shrub,
0.2 to | m high with decumbent, rooting shoots and
ascending branches. The small stems are thin, gray-brown,
heavily branched and have numerous upright branches. The
leaves are linear-lanceolate, in groups of 4 rows. They are
imbricate, 1 to 3.5 mm long, revolute, sessile and have 2 mm
long points at the base. The margins are glandular with
downward-pointing spurs.

Habitat: With the exception of a few Mediterranean islands,
the plant is distributed throughout most of Europe, Russia
and Asia Minor, as well as on the Atlantic coast of North

America.

Production: The herb is harvested from July to October and
dried.

Not to be Confused With: Erica tetralix.
Other Names: Ling

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including kempferol, quercetin, myricetin, taxi-
folin, and the glycosides of each, as well as callunin

Catechin tannins (3-7%): (+)-catechin, (-)-epicatechin
Oligomeric proanthocyanidins

Cqffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid
Phenols: orcin, orcinol

Triterpenes: including ursolic acid (2.5%)

Steroids: beta-sitosterol

Hydroquinone glycosides: including arbutin

EFFECTS
Heather is said to be diuretic, antimicrobial, cholagogic and
antirheumatic. It is also used as an agent for wound healing.
However, these effects have not yet been documented.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Heather and/or Heather

flowers are used as a diuretic for diseases and ailments of the

----- PAGE 635 -----
384/HEATHER

kidneys and the lower urinary tract, and for enlargement of
the prostate. They are also used for gastrointestinal disorders,
colic, liver and gallbladder disease, gout, rheumatism,
respiratory complaints, insomnia, agitation and wounds.

The efficacy for the claimed uses is not documented.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered forms are
available for internal and external use.

Preparation: A decoction is prepared by adding 1.5 gm of
the drug to 14 liter of water and then boiling for 3 minutes.
For a bath additive, 500 gm of the drug is boiled in a few
liters of water, strained and added to the bath. A liquid
extract 1:1 is also used.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the decoction is 3
cups daily between meals; the dose for the liquid extract is 1
to 2 teaspoonfuls daily.

Externally, the drug is added to full baths.

Heather should be stored in well-dried, sealed

containers.

Storage:

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Jalal MAF, Read DJ, Haslam E, Phenolic composition and its
seasonal variation in Calluna vulgaris. In: PH 21(6): 1397. 1982.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mantilla JLG, Vieitez E, An Edafol Agrobiol 34:765-774. 1975.

Simon A et al., Further flavonoid glycosides from Calluna
vulgaris. In: PH 32:1045. 1993.

Simon A et al., Two flavonol 3-[triacetylarabinosyl(1-6)
glucosides] from Calluna vulgaris. In: PH 33:1237. 1993.

Hedera_ helix

See English Ivy

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hedge Mustard

Sisymbrium officinale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh, flowering
herb and the fresh aerial parts of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences at the end of the stems
and branches have no bracts and are initially umbelliferous-
racemous, later stretching into spikes. The pedicles are thin
and approximately 1.5 cm long, bearing the small flowers.
The 4 sepals are 1.5 to 2.5 mm long, erect, pubescent and
narrowly elliptical. The petals are pale yellow and 3 to 4 mm
long. The stamens have 0.5 to 0.5 mm long anthers. The fruit
is a pubescent pod appressed to the axis of the infructes-
cence. The fruits are 1 to 15 cm long and 1 to 1.5 mm thick.
The almost-smooth seeds are about 1 mm long, ovate,
compressed and unwinged with reddish, yellow-brown seed-

skins.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual or biennial, 30
to 60 cm high, and has a thin taproot. The stem is branched,
round, leafy and covered in scattered patent hairs. The basal
leaves and lower cauline leaves are petiolate-pinnatifid with
3 to 9 segments. The upper leaves are oblong-lanceolate,
simple or with 2 to 4 lateral segments, and often hastate and

pubescent.

Habitat: The herb is found mainly in temperate Europe, but
it also grows as far as northern Africa and eastern Siberia.

Production: Hedge Mustard is the fresh flowering herb of
Sisymbrium officinale.

Other Names: Singer's Plant, St. Barbara's Hedge Mustard,
English Watercress, Erysimum, Thalictroc

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides, 0.05% in the
tips of the foliage): including among others corchorosid A
and helveticosid

Glucosinolates: chiefly sinigrin (allylglucosinolates) and
glucohapin (3-butenylglucosinolates), releasing through cell
destruction the volatile mustard oil allylisothiocyanate and 3-
butenylisothiocyanate

Vitamins: ascorbic acid (vitamin C, up to 0.2 % in the fresh

foliage)

EFFECTS

Hedge mustard contains cardio-active steroids (cardenolids)
and is said to be spasmolytic and analgesic. Its use for
pharyngitis and laryngitis as well as severe hoarseness may
be due to the mustard oils.

----- PAGE 636 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used for
laryngitis and pharyngitis, severe hoarseness including loss
of voice, chronic bronchitis and inflammation of the
gallbladder.

' PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

It is conceivable that overdosage would have digitalis-like
effects. These include queasiness. vomiting, diarrhea, head-
ache and cardiac rhythm disorders. Cases of poisonings have
not, however, been recorded.

DOSAGE
Daily Dosage: The average daily internal dose of the drug is
0.5 to 1.0 gm, which would be equal to 3 to 4 cups daily of
an infusion. It takes between 6 and 8 g of drug to make | g
extract.

Externally, the infusion is used as a gargle or mouthwash,
several times daily.
| LITERATURE

Bachelard HS, Trikojus VM. (1963) Austral. J Biol Sci 16:
147.

Ockendon JG, Buezki ST. (1979) Trans Brit Mycol Soc 72:156.
Schultz OE, Gmelin R. Naturforsch Z. 7b:500-506. 1952.
Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Hedge-Hyssop
Gratiola officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb and roots.
(In contrast to what its name suggests, Hedge-Hyssop is not
a member of the Hyssop family, even though it has a
similarly bitter taste.)

Flower and Fruit: The pedicled flowers are arranged singly
in the axils of the upper leaf pairs and are a pale red or
yellowish-white. The calyx is only fused at the base and has

HEDGE-HYSSOP / 385

5 tips. The corolla has a distinct tube and a bilabiate border.
The upper lip is margined, and the lower lip is divided into 3.
There are 4 stamens, 2 sterile and 2 fertile, and 1 superior
ovary. The fruit has 4 lids, which burst open.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial mat grows
15 to 30 cm high. The stem grows from a creeping scaly
rhizome. It is erect and becomes glabrous and quadrangular
higher up. The leaves are opposite, lanceolate, weakly
serrate, smooth and pale green.

Characteristics: The plant is poisonous and has a bitter taste.

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to western and central Asia,
as well as southern Europe.

Production: Hedge-Hyssop is the herb of Gratiola officina-
lis, which is harvested shortly before flowering. The upper
portion of the stem is cut down, then dried in thin layers in
the shade at temperatures not exceeding 45° C.

Other Names: Gratiola

6 ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cucurhitacins: gratiogenin, 16-hydroxygratiogenin, cucurbi-
tacins E, I, the glycosides gratiogenin-3beta-D-glucoside,
gratioside (gratiolin, gratiogenindiglucoside), elaterinide,
desacetylelaterinide

Saponins
Lignans
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
The glycosides are said to be cardiotonic. The cucurbaticins,
especially elaterinide, cause a reduction of the contraction
power of cardiac muscle, a lowering of cardiac frequency
and a distinct increase in coronary flow. Elaterinide has a
laxative effect. The drug is a strong purgative; it eliminates
intestinal parasites and increases micturation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb was formerly used as a purgative
and for treating the liver. In folk medicine, it is used as
purgative and emetic for gout, liver complaints and constipa-
tion, as well as for chronic skin conditions. The drug is only
to be taken under medical supervision of a doctor because of
its toxicity.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include stomach
colic and bladder and kidney conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Nonetheless, the drug is extremely poisonous. It is severely

----- PAGE 637 -----
386 /HEDGE-HYSSOP

irritating to mucous membranes due to the cucurbitacin and
cucurbitacin glycosides content, out of which cucurbitacins
are released in watery environments.

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of toxic dosages leads to vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, colic, kidney irritation and initially to elevated
diuresis, then to anuria. Very high dosages lead to spasm,
paralysis and circulatory collapse. Fatalities are seen only
rarely. Following gastric lavage, the treatment for poisonings
should proceed symptomatically.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Hedge-Hyssop is most effective in
alcoholic extracts, but it.also is used in infusions and in
homeopathic dilutions. Today, it is rarely used in folk

medicine.

Daily Dosage: A single dose of tea is noted as containing
0.3 g drug.
Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every

30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HABI).

LITERATURE

Bohine P, Korbar-Smid J, Cicerov-Cergol M, Uber die
kardiotonischen Substanzen des Gnadenkrautes - Gratiola
officinalis. In: Sci Pharm 47:108-113. 1979.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Muller A, Wichtl M, Herzwirsamkeit des Gnadenkrautes
(Gratiola officinalis). In: Pharm Ztg 124(37): 1761-1766. 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Helianthemum canadense

See Frostwort

Helianthus annuus

See Sunflower

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Helichrysum arenarium

See Immortelle

Helleborus niger
See Black Hellebore

Helleborus viridis
See Green Hellebore

Hemlock

Conium maculatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh flowering foliage, the branches and the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has white flowers in 10 to 20
rayed umbels. The 3 to 5 triangular to lanceolate bracts are
acuminate; 3 to 6 small bracts only on the outside of the
small umbels. The blossoms have 1.5 mm white petals. The
fruit is ovate with undulating veins. Deep indentations on the
mericarp on the seam side—with no oil marks in the
indentations—are a unique feature.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant can be annual or perennial;
it grows up to 2 m high. The stem is erect, tubular, hollow,
round and finely grooved. It is branched above, glabrous
with brownish-red marks below. The leaves are a glossy dark
The root is whitish and fusiform or

green, 3-pinnate.

branched.

Characteristics: When wilting, the highly poisonous herb
smells of mice. It tastes disgustingly salty and pungent. The
stem has distinctive red marks.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and the temperate
zones of Asia, North Africa, and North and South America.

Production: Hemlock is the fresh or dried leaves and the
flowering branch tips of Conium maculatum. They are
gathered from June to September in the second year of
grown and air-dried in a shaded, open location.

Not to be Confused With: Hemlock may be confused with

water hemlock, canine parsley, wild chervil and with

tuberous chervil.

Other Names: Cicuta, Poison Parsley, Poison Root, Poison
I Snakeweed, Spotted Crowbane, Spotted Hemlock, Spotted

----- PAGE 638 -----
A

jig

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Parsley, Water Parsley, Winter Fern, Herb Bennet, Spotted
Corobane, Musquash Root, Beaver Poison, Kex, Kecksies

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Piperidin alkaloids: main alkaloid coniine, including, among
others, N-methyl coniine, gamma-coniceine

The piperidin alkaloids are volatile and are likely to be
present in toxicologically harmful quantities only in the
freshly harvested plant, particularly in its berries, and in the
freshly dried plant.

Polyynes: including falcarinol, falcarindiol
Furanocoumarins: including bergaptene, xanthotoxin

EFFECTS
The plant is poisonous. The effects of the drug are caused by
coniine in particular. Toxic doses given to mice, rats, guinea
pigs and cats provoked the autonomous ganglion, clonic and
tonal contractions of individual limbs, cramps and eventual-
ly, paralysis. Small doses given to mice led to blood pressure
reduction in the short term. Higher doses resulted in a rise in
blood pressure. Smaller doses stimulated respiration in cats,
while higher doses impeded or slowed down the initial
stimulus. In isolated guinea pig ileum, coniine brought on
contractions. In isolated perfused rabbit hearts, coniine was
negatively inotropic while a stable heart beat was main-
tained. With anesthetized cats, a suppression of the muscle
contraction reflex took place. Feeding or injecting lethal
doses of coniine into cows, horses, pigs, sheep and hamsters
was initially stimulating, producing twitching of the eyes and
ears, which was followed by muscular debility, collapse,
limpness and deam through paralysis. Coniine absorbed
through the skin and mucous membranes is stimulating at
first, then causes gradual paralysis of the spinal cord and
blockage of the medulla oblongata. Nicotine-like receptors
are at first activated, then paralyzed.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses : Use is inadvisable due to the uncontrollable
amounts of coniine. Formerly, in folk medicine, the drug was
used internally for neuralgia, rheumatism of the muscles and
joints, stiffness of the neck, tetanic and epileptic cramps,
bronchial spasms and pylori spasms. Externally, the drug
was used as an ointment for coughs, asthma, sciatica,
backache and neuralgia.

Homeopathic Uses: Swollen glands, pareses, calcification of
cerebral vessels and depressive moods are considered to be
indications for use in homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The drug is severely poisonous and use is not
advised.

HEMLOCK/387

Pregnancy: The drug has a teratogenic effect with chronic
intake.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning following intake of toxic quantities
(corresponding to 150 mg coniine, approximately 10 g of the
freshly dried berries, approximately 30 g of the freshly dried
leaves) include burning of the mouth, scratchy throat,
salivation, rolling of the eyes, visual disorders and weakness
in the legs. Lethal dosages (corresponding to approximately
500 mg coniine) cause glossoplegia, mydriasis, pressure in
the head, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of
orientation, rising central paralysis, dyspepsia and cyanosis.
Death ultimately results through central asphyxiation, in the
cases of very high dosages, and also through curare-like
paralysis of the breathing musculature.

Following stomach and intestinal emptying (gastric lavage,
sodium sulfate) and the administration of activated charcoal,
plasma volume expanders and sodium bicarbonate infusions
should be given in case of shock or to restore acidosis
balance. If necessary, intubation and respiration should be
carried out.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Hemlock is obsolete and strongly
advised against as an internal drug because of the danger of
poisoning. Homeopathic dilutions and ointments containing
hemlock are used externally.

How Supplied: Liquid rubs, ointments.

Daily Dosage: Use is discouraged, but the maximum single
dose mentioned for internal use is 0.3 g, not to exceed 15 g,
per day. The standard single dose is 0.1 g.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day; ointment 1 to 2 times daily (HAB34).

Storage: Hemlock should be stored above caustic lime, well
dried, in closed containers and kept for no more than one
year.

LITERATURE
Cromwell BT, Biochem J 64:259-266. 1956.

Kreitmair H, PA 3:565-566. 1948.

Madaus S, Schindler H, Arch Pharm 276:280-290. 1938.
Roberts MF, (1975) Phytochemistry 14:2395.

Roberts MF, (1980) Planta Med 39:216.

Seeger R, Neumann HG, DAZ-Giftlexikon Coniin. In: DAZ
131(13):720. 1991.

----- PAGE 639 -----
388/HEMLOCK

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hemp Agrimony

Eupatorium cannabinum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in compact, terminal,
umbrella-like umbels. They are small dull pink tubular
androgynous flowers whose corolla tube has a 5-tipped edge.
The epicalyx is cylindrical and consists of a few bracts. The
edge of the calyx consists of yellowish hairs. The style is
divided in two parts and shows above the flower. The corolla
is covered in resinous spots. The angular fruit bears a crown
of hair and is dirty white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a small perennial herb
75 to 150 cm high. The rhizome is woody and has stems
growing from it, which have short axillary branches. The
stems are erect, reddish, pubescent and resinous below. The
root leaves are long-petioled. The opposite cauline leaves are
short-petioled, trifoliate and serrate and covered in resinous

spots.
Habitat: Hemp Agrimony grows in damp regions of Europe.

Production: Hemp Agrimony is the flowering herb of

Eupatorium cannabium.

Other Names: Holy Rope, St. John's Herb, Sweet-Smelling
Trefoil, Water Maudlin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Caffeic acid ester: chlorogenic acid

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Immunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroxylans)

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: including echinatine, supinine, euca-
necine, amabiline, lycopsamin, intermedin

Sesquiterpene lactones: including eupatoriopicrin, eupatolid

EFFECTS
Eupatorin is said to be cytotoxic and has an immune-

stimulating effect. It is also a bitter tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for disorders of the liver
and gallbladder and for fevers.

Homeopathic Uses: Eupatorium cannabinum is used to treat
illnesses of the respiratory organs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Because of the pyrrolizidine alkaloid content with 1,2-
unsaturated necic parent substances, hepatotoxicity and
carcinogenicity are likely consequences of internal use.
Therefore the drug should not be taken internally. Sensitiza-

tion after skin contact with the plant has been reported.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used topically as an
alcoholic extract, as a tea, and as an inhalation for the

treatment of colds.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Positive Auswirkungen von Olivenol auf den

Blutdruck. In: ZPT 12(1):13. 1991.
Antibiotika und Immunabwehr. In: Symbiose 4(2):20. 1992.

Elsasser-Beile U, Willenbacher W, Bartsch HH, Gallati H,
Schulte Monting J, Kleist von S et al.. Cytokine production in
leukocyte cultures during therapy with echinacea extract. In: J
Clin Lab Analysis 10(6):441-445. 1996.

Hendriks H et al., (1983) Pharm Weekblad 5:281.
Pederson E (1975) Phytochemistry 14:2086.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Vollmar A et al., (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):377.

Winterhoff H, Gumbinger HG, Pharmakologische
Untersuchungen mit Pflanzenextrakten. Probleme und
Losungsmoglichkeit. In: DAZ 130(49):2668. 1990.

Woerdenbag HJ et al., (1987) Phytother Res 2(2):76.

Further information in:
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

----- PAGE 640 -----
w*

4|-

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Hempnettle

Galeopsis segetum

TRADE NAMES
Hempnettle is available from numerous manufacturers.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The large, pale yellow, bilabiate flowers
are in false whorls on the branch ends. The calyx is evenly 5-
dentate and covered in patent glandular hairs. The upper lip
of the corolla is domed, finely dentate and pubescent. The
lateral tips of the 3-lobed lower lip are wide, obtuse and have
1 hollow erect tooth at either side of the base. The stamen
halves are horizontal. The fruit is smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb grows 15 to 100 cm high.
The stem is erect, heavily branched and downy, with
unthickened nodes. The leaves are ovate and serrate. The
lower ones are long petiuled, the upper are short petioled.

Habitat: Hempnettle is found in southern and central Europe.

Production: Hempnettle consists of the aboveground parts of
Galeopsis segetum Necker (synonym Galeopsis ochroleuca
Lamarck) and is gathered in the wild during the flowering

season.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes: including harpagide, 8-O-acetylhar-
pagide, antirrinoside, 5-O-glucosylantirrinoside

Silicic acid (to some extent water-soluble)
Tannins
Flavonoids

EFFECTS

The herb acts as expectorant, due to its saponin content, and
as an astringent because of the tannins, silicic acid, iridoids
and antirrhinoside.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

M Cough
* Bronchitis

HENBANE/389

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the herb is used for
pulmonary afflictions and as a diuretic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground and cut herb for teas and
other galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
2 g of comminuted drug, strain after 5 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Average daily dose: 6 g drug. One cup of the
infusion may be taken several times daily and, if preferred,
sweetened with honey.

LITERATURE
Junod-Busch U. Dissertation ETH Zurich. 1976.

Kem W. List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Tomas-Barberan FA et al.. PH 30:3311. 1991.
Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Henbane
Hyoscyamus niger

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves or
the dried leaves with the flowering branches, the dried seeds
and the whole fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in almost sessile terminal,
one-sided leafy and revolute spikes. The calyx is jug-shaped,
5-tipped and does not drop. The corolla is funnel-shaped, 5-
lobed, dirty yellow with violet veins and dark violet in the
tube. The flower has | superior ovary and 5 stamens. The
fruit is a swollen pixidium with up to 200 seeds. The seeds
are gray-brown, pitted, slightly reniform, compressed, 1 to
13 mm long and | mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is erect and grows up to 80
cm high. It is an herb with simple leaves. The root is
fusiform and turnip-like at the top. The stem is erect and
sticky-villous. The leaves are oblong, roughly crenate-den-
tate and gray-green. The basal leaves are petiolate, and the
cauline leaves are stem clasping.

----- PAGE 641 -----
390/HENBANE

Characteristics: Henbane has a strong, distinctive odor. The
plant is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, western and
northern Asia, and northern Africa. It has been introduced to
eastern Asia, North America and Australia.

Production: Henbane leaf consists of the dried leaves or the
dried leaves and flowering tops of Hyoscyamus niger,
harvested from cultures or in the wild when in bloom and
dried mechanically or in the sun. Henbane seeds are the
seeds of Hyoscyamus niger.

Other Names: Devil's Eye, Fetid Nightshade, Stinking
Nightshade, Hen Bell, Hogbean, Jupiter's Bean and Poison
Tobacco

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: HENBANE LEAF

Tropane alkaloids (0.05- 0.28%): chief alkaloid (-)-hyoscya-
mine, under storage conditions changing over to some extent
into atropine, and scopolamine

Flavonoids: including, among others, rutin

COMPOUNDS: HENBANE SEED

Tropane alkaloids (0.05-0.3%): chief alkaloid (-)-hyoscya-
mine, under storage conditions changing to some extent into
atropine, and scopolamine

Fatty oil

EFFECTS: HENBANE LEAF AND SEED

Main active agents: Alkaloids, flavonids. Henbane prepara-
tions produce a parasympatholytic or anticholinergic effect
by competitive inhibition of acetylcholine. This inhibition
affects the muscarinic action of acetylcholine but not its
nicotine-like effects on ganglia and motor end plates.

Henbane preparations exert peripheral actions on the auto-
nomic nervous system and on smooth muscle, as well as the
central nervous system. Because of their parasympatholytic
properties, they cause relaxation of organs containing
smooth muscle, particularly in the region of the gastrointesti-
nal tract. Furthermore, they relieve muscular tremors of
central nervous origin.

The spectrum of actions of Hyoscyamus niger additionally
includes a sedative effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
HENBANE LEAF

Approved by Commission E:
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Preparations of henbane oil are used for the
treatment of scar tissue.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

In folk medicine, Henbane is used internally for various pain
syndromes, in particular toothache and facial pain, painful
ulcers and tumors, stomach cramps and lower abdominal
pain. Externally, henbane oil is used for the treatment of scar
tissue.

It has been used for hundreds of years in so-called witches'
ointments, as a repellent against mice and rats, as stunning
agent for fish and to increase the narcotic effect of beer.

Indian Medicine: Used for toothache, bleeding gums and
nose, orchitis, dysmenorrhea, worm infestation, black vomit,
asthma, diverse pain syndromes and meningitis.

HENBANE SEED
Approved by Commission E:

« Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Internal application: Spasms of the gastroin-
testinal tract; preparations of Henbane oil are used for the
treatment of scar tissue.

In folk medicine, Henebane was formerly used as a fumigant
for asthma and toothache.

Chinese Medicine: Used for convulsions, psychoses, joint
pains, stomach pains, asthma, chronic dysentery and

diarrhea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
HENBANE LEAF AND SEED

Tachycardiac arrhythmias, prostatic adenoma, angle-closure
glaucoma, acute pulmonary edema, mechanical stenoses in
the area of the gastrointestinal tract, megacolon.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
HENBANE LEAF AND SEED

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Skin reddening, dryness of the mouth, tachycardiac arrhyth-
mias, mydriasis (the 4 early warning symptoms of a
poisoning), accommodation disorders, heat build-up through
decline in sweat secretion, miction disorders and obstipation
can occur as side effects, particularly with overdoses.

Drug Interactions: Enhancement of anticholinergic action by
tricyclic antidepressants, amantadine, antihistamines, pheno-
thiazines, procainamide and quinidine.

OVERDOSAGE
HENBANE LEAF AND SEED

Because of the high content of scopolamine in the drug,
poisonings lead at first to somnolence, but then also, after the
intake of very high dosages, to central excitation (rest-
lessness, hallucinations, deliria, and manic episodes), fol-
lowed by exhaustion and sleep. Lethal dosages carry with
them the danger of asphyxiation (for adults starting at 100

----- PAGE 642 -----
4£

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

mg atropine, with an alkaloid-rich drug at 30, considerably
less for children). Severe poisonings are particularly con-
ceivable in connection with the misuse of the drug as an
intoxicant. Treatment for poisonings include gastric lavage,
temperature-lowering measures with wet cloths (no antipy-
retics!), oxygen respiration for respiratory distress, intuba-
tion, parenteral physostigmine salts as an antidote, diazepam
for spasms and chlorpromazine for severe excitation.

DOSAGE

HENBANE LEAF

Mode of Administration: Standardized Henbane powder and
galenic preparations for internal application.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 0.5 gm of
standardized Henbane powder corresponding to 0.25 to 0.35
mg total alkaloid. Maximum daily dose is 3.0 gm of
standardized Henbane powder corresponding to 15 to 2.1
mg total alkaloid, calculated as hyoscyamine.

Storage: Keep protected from light in tightly sealed
containers.

HENBANE SEED

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as an

emulsion or powder.

Storage: Should be stored separate from other medicines.

LITERATURE

HENBANE LEAF

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kraft K, Europaische Rauschdrogen. In: ZPT 17(6):343-355.
1996.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sharova EG et al., Khim Prir Soedin (1):126. 1977.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

HENNA /391

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wellen BJ, Zur Geschichte des Bilsenkrautes. Eine
pharmaziehistorische Untersuchung besonders zu Hyoscyamus
niger L. In: Dissertation Universitat Marburg. 1986.

HENBANE SEED
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Tattje DHE et al., Zusammensetzung der etherischen Ole von
Laurus nobilis, L. nobilis var. angustifolia und L. azorica. In:
PM 44:116-119. 1982.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Henna

Lawsonia inermis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the pulverized
leaves, the fruit and the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in small impressive
groups of 4 panicles and yellowy-white to brick-red. The
calyx is top-shaped, later bowl-shaped without appendages.
The petals are thick, very wrinkled, yellowish-white to brick-
red. The stamens are arranged in pairs. The fruit is an
indehiscent or a fibrously torn berry. The seeds are small and

angular, and the seed skin is spongy at the tip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Henna is a deciduous, 2 to 6 m high
shrub with partly thorny, short shoots and opposite paired,
narrowly acuminate lanceolate leaves.

Habitat: Found in Egypt, India, the Middle East, Kurdistan

and Iran.
Production: Henna is the aerial part of Lawsonia inermis.

Other Names: Alcanna, Egyptian Privet, Jamaica Migno-
nette, Mignonette Tree, Reseda, Henne, Mehndi, Mendee,

Smooth Lawsonia

----- PAGE 643 -----
392/HENNA

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Naphthalene derivatives (1,4-naphthaquinones): in particular
lawsone (2-hydroxy-|,4-naphthaquinone), arising during de-
hydration of the leaves out of the precursor 1,2,4-trihydroxy-
naphthalen-4-beta-D-glucoside

Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug is an astringent and a diuretic, and has an

antibacterial effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used externally for eczema.
scabies, fungal infections and ulcers. It is also used for
amebic dysentery and gastrointestinal ulcers. In African folk
medicine, it is used as an abortifacient. The drug is also
contained in facial and hair lotions and is used to treat
dandruff.

Indian Medicine: Henna root preparations are used to treat
leprosy, skin diseases, amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea. Henna
leaves are used to treat wounds, ulcers, dysuria, coughs,
bronchitis, one-sided headache, rheumatism and anemia. The
flowers are used for headache, fever and acute psychosis.
Henna seeds are used to treat intermittent fever, diarrhea and
dysentery.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Stomach complaints are possible due to the tannin content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Henna is used rarely for internal
use in ground form or as an infusion. Henna is applied
externally as an ingredient in hair and skin lotions.

Daily Dosage: For internal use, 3 gm of powder leaves to be
taken daily, for amebiasis and ulcers.

LITERATURE
Bardwaj DK et al. (1978) Phytochemistry 17:1440.

Karawya MS et al., (1969) Lloydia 32:76.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Mahmood ZF et al., (1983) Fitoterapia 4:153.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges. mbH
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hepatica nobilis

See American Liverleaf

Heracleum sphondylium
See Hogweed

Herb Paris

Paris quadrifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole fresh plant
when the fruit begins to ripen.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary and terminal. The
sepals are lanceolate, acuminate, 3-veined and 4 times as
wide as the linear-awl-shaped petals. The stamens are thread-
like to awl-shaped and bear linear anthers in the middle. The
ovary has 5 thread-like stigmas, both of which are purple-
brown. The fruit is a blue-black globular berry the size of a
small cherry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 15 to 30 cm high plant is a
perennial herb with a creeping, fleshy rhizome. The stem is
erect, round, unbranched and crowned by 4 acuminate
leaves. The leaves are whorled, almost obovate, acute,
entire-margined and glabrous. The leaves have 3 to 5 ribs.
They are dark green and matte above, pale and slightly
glossy beneath.

Characteristics: The plant has an unpleasant smell and is
poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and Asian
Russia.

Production: Herb Paris is the fresh plant of Paris quadrifolia,
when the fruit is ripe.

Not to be Confused With: Poisoning can occur in children
when they confuse the fruit of the Herb Paris plant with that
of blueberries.

Other Names: One Berry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins: chief components are pennogenin triglyco-
side, pennogenin tetraglycoside, and their bisdemosidic
precursors (26-O-glucosides), including 1-dehydrotrillenoge-

nin

----- PAGE 644 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
The active agents are the saponins (which irritate mucous
membranes), paristyphnin, paridin, citric acid and pectin.
The parissaponins are local irritants as well as absorptive
when taken orally. The main toxin is paristyphnin, which,
when taken orally, leads to miosis and can consequently
cause paralysis of the respiratory system.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: Herb Paris is used as a homeopathic

remedy for headaches, neuralgia, nervous tension, dizziness,
palpitations and migraine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is considered poisonous. Symptoms of poisoning
following intake of the berries include nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, miosis and headache. However, no serious poison-
ings have been recorded in this century.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Herb Paris is available in homeo-

pathic dilutions.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-

# Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Beilin. Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nohara T et al., Chem Pharm Bull 30:1851. 1982.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Herb Robert

Geranium robertianum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh or dried aerial parts collected during the flowering
season, as well as the whole fresh or dried plant.

Flower and Fruit: The peduncles are usually distinctly
longer than the bracts and the 2.2 to 7 mm long, permanently
erect pedicles. The flowers are longer than their pedicles.
There are 5 separate sepals and 5 petals. The sepals are erect
when they first bloom and hang when the fruit matures. The

HERB ROBERT / 393

petals have long stems. There are 10 stamens and 5 ovaries
with long styles, which form an upward curve when mature.
The fruit is circular and 2 cm long, with 3 mm long
protruding, reticulate, glabrous or pubescent fruit lobes
which are upward horizontally wrinkled. These permanently
enclose the smooth, finely spotted seeds. The fruit lobes
burst off from the central column without the awn.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Geranium robertianum is a 20 to 40
cm high annual or hardy annual with a weak, branched tap
root and a long hypocotyl. The stems are heavily branched.
usually red, and glandular-haired. The leaves are 3- to 5-
sectioned compound leaves with petiolate. entire-margined
to double-pinnasect leaflets.

Characteristics: Herb Robert has an unpleasant smell often
associated with goats or bugs.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the area stretching from
Europe to China and Japan; to Africa southward as far as
Uganda; to the Atlantic seaboard of North America; and the
temperate areas of South America.

Production: Herb Robert is the aerial parts of Geranium
robertianum, which are gathered between May and October
in uncultivated regions, then dried in the open air in the
shade.

Not to be Confused With: The herbs of Geranium palustre
and Geranium pratense are frequently used as an
adulteration.

Other Names: Dragon's Blood, Storkbill, Wild Crane's-Bill

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercetin-3-O-rhamnogalacto-
side, kaempferol-3-O-rhamnoglucoside, hyperoside

Tannins: geraniin, isogeraniin, beta-penta-O-galloylglucose

EFFECTS
The drug has the following effects:

Antiviral: The extract of the fresh herb, including rhizome,
has been shown to have a mild antiviral effect against the
vesicular stomatitis virus. In another study, however, the
aqueous solution of the ethanol extract was not shown to
have an antiviral effect against the polio virus Type 1,
measles, coxsachie-B2, adeno- or Semliki forest virus.

Antimicrobial: The fraction of an extract produced with 80%
ethanol was shown to have an inhibitory effect on the growth
of Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylo-
coccus aureus. In the serial dilution test, growth of Micros-
porum canis and Trichophyton mentagrophytes was
completely stunted.

----- PAGE 645 -----
394/HERB ROBERT

Hypotensive effect: Effects have only been described in
general reviews.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for functional
impairment of the liver and gallbladder, inflammatory
conditions of gallbladder and its ducts, inflammation of the
kidney and bladder, and calculosis. Folk medicine uses have
also included internal use of the drug for diarrhea. In
addition, washed fresh leaves are chewed or prepared as an
infusion or decoction used as a mouthwash or gargle for
inflammatory conditions of the oral mucous membrane.
External application is used to treat poorly healing wounds.
These uses appear plausible because of the tannins.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as well

as externally.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, add 1 dessertspoonful
of drug to 1/2 liter of cold water. Bring to a boil and leave to
steep.

Daily Dosage: Internally, the average single dose of the drug
is 15 g; drink 2 to 3 cups of the infusion daily, between
meals.

LITERATURE
Haddock EA et al., J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1:2535-2545.

1982.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Karnig T, Bucar-Stachel J, PM 57:292-293. 1991.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Herniaria glabra

See Rupturewort

Hibiscus
Hibiscus sabdariffa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

flowers.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary, axillary and
almost sessile. The calyx is red, the corolla is yellow, and the
anthers are blood red. The fruit is a 2 cm long, ovoid, many-
seeded capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Hibiscus is a 0.15 to 1 m bushy
annual that is branched from the base. The stems are reddish,
almost glabrous. The basal leaves are undivided and ovate;
the cauline leaves are 3-lobed and 7.5 to 10 cm wide. The
lobes are 2.5 cm wide and crenate.

Habitat: Hibiscus sabdariffa originally came from the area
around the source of the Niger. It grows worldwide in the
tropics and is cultivated in Europe.

Production: Hibiscus flowers consist of the calyces of
Hibiscus sabdariffa (sabdariffa ruber variety).

Other Names: Guinea Sorrel. Jamaica Sorrel, Red Sorrel,
Roselle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids (15-30%): in particular hibiscus ((+)-allohydroxy
citric acid lacton), additionally lemons, malic acid, tartaric
acid

Anthocyans (intensive red): including delphinidin-3-xyloglu-
coside, delphinidin-3-glucoside, cyanidin-3-xyloglucoside

Flavonoids: including gossypetin

Mucilages: rhamnogalacturonans, arabinogalactans, arabi-
nans

EFFECTS
Hibiscus tea has a laxative effect due to the high content of

poorly absorbable fruit acids.

Aqueous extracts of hibiscus leaves have a relaxant effect on
the uterus musculature. The drug also has a hypotensive
effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Hibiscus flowers are used for loss of
appetite, for colds that affect the respiratory tract and
stomach, to dissolve phlegm, as a diuretic and gentle
laxative, and for disorders of circulation.

Chinese Medicine: Preparations of the plant are used to treat
carbuncles, swelling and inflammation of the skin, scalding,
conjunctivitis and herpes zoster.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Hibiscus sabdariffa is available as a

tea preparation.

----- PAGE 646 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Preparation: To make a tea, pour boiling water over 1.5 gm
comminuted drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

LITERATURE
Franz M, Franz G, Hibiscus sabdariffa - Hibiscusbluten. In:

ZPT 9(2):63. 1988.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Menpen HG, Staesche K, DAZ 114:1211. 1974.
Miiller BM, Franz G, PM 58:60. 1992.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Hibiscus sabdariffa

See Hibiscus

High Mallow

Malva sylvestris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flowers,

the dried leaves and the whole of the flowering fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The bright purple flowers with long dark
stripes are clustered in leaf axils. They have 3 epicalyx
leaves, 5 sepals and 5 petals that are much longer than the
calyx and have a deep margin. The numerous stamens are
fused to a 10 to 12 mm column. The fruit stems are erect or
slanted to one side. The ovaries are made up ofa ring of 9 to
11 carpels. The fruit is a 7 to 9 mm wide and 2 mm thick
disc, which breaks up into mericarps. These are glabrous or
covered in a few scattered hairs, sharply angular and
punctate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Malva sylvestris is a biennial or
perennial leafy herb 0.3 to 12 m high. The stems are
branched, prostrate to curved, ascending, slightly woody and
roughly pubescent. The leaves are alternate, long-petioled,
reniform-orbicular, 5-lobed and crenate-serrate.

Characteristics: High Mallow has a 3-leaved epicalyx
(compare with Althaea officinalis).

HIGH MALLOW / 395

Habitat: The plant probably originated in the southern
European-Asia region. Today the tree can be found in
subtropical and temperate latitudes of both hemispheres.

Production: Blue Mallow flower and leaves consist of the
dried flowers of Malva sylvestris and/or Malva sylvestris
sps. Mauri tiana, Ascherson and Graebner, as well as its
preparations. High Mallow leaves are harvested from June to
the beginning of September and dried in thin layers in the
shade. High Mallow flowers are harvested without the
pedicles from the end of June to October and are dried in
layers in the shade.

Not to be Confused With: Other varieties of Malvae. the
leaves of Althaea officinalis.

Other Names: Mallow, Blue Mallow, Mauls, Cheeseflower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MALVA LEAF

Flavonoids: including among others hypolaetin-3-glucoside.
gossypetin-3-glucoside; also flavonoid sulfates including
among others gossypetin-8-0-beta-D-glucuronide-3-sulfate

Mucilages: 6-8% (galacturonorhamane and

arabinogalactans)

COMPOUNDS: MALVA FLOWER

Anthocyans: including among others malvin
Mucilages: 10% (galacturonorhamane and arabinogalactane)

EFFECTS: MALVA LEAF AND FLOWER
Leaf: Main active principles - polysaccharides, flavonoids.
tannins; Flower: Main active principles - polysaccharides.
flavonoids.

The drug has a mucous membrane-protective effect: it
relieves irritation because of the high level of mucilaginous
material.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
MALVA FLOWER
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
¢ Bronchitis
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used internally
for bronchial catarrh, gastroenteritis, bladder complaints, and
it is used externally for wounds. Externally, it is used as a
poultice and bath additive for wound treatment.

MALVA LEAF
Approved by Commission E:

m Cough

* Bronchitis

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

----- PAGE 647 -----
396 /HIGH MALLOW

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used as
poultices and bath additives for wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

MALVA LEAF AND FLOWER

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

MALVA FLOWER
Mode of Administration: High Mallow flowers are in various

tea mixtures as an inactive ingredient.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, 15 to 2 gm of
comminuted drug is added to cold water and boiled or

scalded and strained after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 5 gm of the drug.
Tea: Drink 2 to 3 times a day.

Storage: The drug should be protected from iight, moisture
and insects.

MALVA LEAF
Mode of Administration:
other preparations are for internal use.

Comminuted herb for teas and

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 5 gm of the drug.
Tea: drink 2 to 3 times a day.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour 150 ml of boiling
water over 3 to 5 gm of the drug (about 2 teaspoonfuls) and
leave to draw for 2 to 3 hours; stir occasionally.

Storage: The drug should be protected from light, moisture
and insects.

LITERATURE

MALVA LEAF AND FLOWER

Classen B, Amelunxen F, Blaschek W, Analytical and structural
investigations of the mucilage of Malva species. In: PM
59(7)14. 1993.

Classen B, Amelunxen F, Blaschek W, Malva sylvestris -
Mikroskopische Untersuchungen zur Entstehung von
Schleimbehaltem. In: DAZ 134(38):3597. 1994.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.
Papageorgiou VP, (1980) Planta xMed 38 (3): 193.

Schneider K, Ullmann V, Kubelka W, Malvaceen-
Schleimdrogen. Zur Bestimmung des Quellungsfaktors. In: DAZ
130(42):2303. 1990.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Hippophae rhamnoides

See Sea Buckthorn

Hogweed

Heracleum sphondylium

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried roots, the
herb collected in the flowering season and dried, the fruit,
the fresh herb and the whole fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 15 to 30 rayed, flat
umbels with no involucre. The numerous epicalyx leaves are
lanceolate and densely pubescent. The petals have a cordate
margin with indented lobes. They are irregular, often
pubescent on the outside, whitish or greenish, green-yellow
or yellowish and sometimes pink. The fruit is compressed,
flat, 8 mm long and 5 mm wide, roundish-oval and brownish
yellow. The fruit has 10 ribs and oil grooves.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 80 to 150 cm
high, is biennial to perennial and has a strong tuberous,
whitish-yellow root. The stem is erect, angular, grooved,
hollow, stiff-haired and branched above. The leaves are large
and odd-pinnate, with 1 to 3 pairs of leaflets. The leaflets are
large, ovate and lobed to pinnate. There is a 3-lobed terminal
leaflet. The basal leaves are very large and have grooved
petioles, which gradually merge into leaf sheaths. The basal
and stem foliage are clasping.

Characteristics: There is hot, yellow latex in the stem. The

leaf umbel is fragrant.

Habitat: Heracleum sphondylium is found in most of Europe
and in western and northern Asia. Subspecies are found
mainly in northwestern Europe, eastern and central Europe,
and in the Mediterranean region.

Production: Hogweed is the aerial part of Heracleum

sphondylium collected between June and August and dried.

----- PAGE 648 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Masterwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Furocoumarins (0.5-0.6%): in particular bergaptene, isopim-

W> pinellin, pimpinellin, isobergaptene, sphondin

Volatile oil: including those containing n-octylacetate

EFFECTS

Hogweed is considered a mild expectorant; however, this has
not been scientifically proven. A phototoxic effect should be
expected after administration.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used to relieve
muscle cramps, stomach disorders, digestion problems,
diarrhea, gastrointestinal catarrh and diarrhea following a
cold. The furocoumarin methoxsalin is used in the treatment

of psoriasis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Phototoxic effects must be avoided following intake of the
drug due to its furocoumarin content. For that reason, UV-

radiation and solaria should be avoided after its administra-
tion. The same danger exists following contact with the
freshly bruised plant.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: An infusion is used internally.

Preparation: To make an infusion, add 3 teaspoonfuls of
herb to 2 glasses of cold water and allow to draw for 8 hours.

Daily Dosage: The preparation should be drunk throughout
the day.

LITERATURE
Baerheim Svendsen A et al., PM 7:113-117. 1959.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Veriagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G: Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ognyanov I et al., PM 14:19-21. 1966.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4.Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U: Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

HOLLY /397

Holly
Ilex aquifolium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried foliage
leaves, the fresh leaves, the young leafy branches with the
ripe berries and the flowers of the branch tips with the
leaves.

Flower and Fruit: Because of the shrinking of the one sex,
the flowers are usually dioecious. The inflorescence is a | to
3 flowered axillary cyme. They are white. The calyx is small
and has 4 to 5 tips. The 5-petalled corolla is rotate. The
ovary is superior. There are 4 to 5 stamens. The coral red
fruit is a 4-sectioned, sessile, berry-like, pea-sized drupe with
4 to 5 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 10 m high evergreen
bush or tree with smooth, dark, gray-brown bark. The bark
on the younger branches is green and glossy. The branches
and foliage are glabrous. The leaves are alternate, coria-
ceous, stiff, ovate or elliptical and acute. The lower ones are
thorny denate, the upper ones entire-margined.

Characteristics: The flowers have a weak pleasant scent.
The berries are poisonous to children.

Habitat: The plant is found in central Europe, North
America and eastern Asia.

Production: Holly leaves and fruits are the leaves and fruits
of Ilex aquifolium.

Other Names: Hulver Bush, Holm, Hulm, Holme Chase,
Holy Tree, Christ's Thorn, Hulver Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Nitrile glycosides: menisdaurin, not cyanogenic

Flavonoids: including, among others, rutin, kaempferol and
quercetin glycosides

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid
Sterols: beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol

Triterpenes: alpha-amyrin, alpha-amyrinester, beta-amyrin,
ursolic acid

Purine alkaloids: only traces of theobromine

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Holly is used as a diuretic. Also used for
coughs, digestive disorders and jaundice.

----- PAGE 649 -----
398/HOLLY

In folk medicine, Holly is used for fever, chronic bronchitis,
constipation, rheumatism and gout.

aquifolium is used for

Homeopathic Uses: Tlex

conjunctivitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
The intake of more than 5 berries can lead to nausea,

vomiting and diarrhea. Fatal gastrointestinal inflammation is
said to have taken place following the ingestion of very large
quantities (20 to 30 berries) (Lewin). Stomach emptying and
the administration of activated charcoal should therefore be
carried out with the intake of more than 10 berries. Further
treatment should proceed according to symptoms. Poisonings
have not been reported in recent times.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a tea and alcoholic extract for

internal use.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE
Catalano S, Marsili A, Morelli J, Pistelli L, Constituents of the

leaves of Ilex aquifolium. In: PM 33:416. 1978.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Ilex paraguariensis).

Lassere B et al., (1983) Naturwissenschaft 70:95.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, Pub; HMSO
UK 1984.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hollyhock

Alcea rosea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flowers of
plants bearing dark purple flowers.

Flower and Fruit: Six to 10 cm flowers sit in the axils of the
cauline leaves singly or in groups of 2 or 4, with the upper
ones forming long spikes. Sepals of the epicalyx are broadly
triangular and sharp-edged. The epicalyx is significantly
shorter than the calyx and both are gray-green haired.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Hollyhock is a biennial plant. In the
second year it produces a spire-like, hairy stem up to 3 m
tall. The leaves are cordate-orbicular to rhomboid, weakly 3-
to 5-lobed and slightly scabrid-setulose. The sepals are
epiclyx-subacute and triangular. The flowers are found in the
leaf axils with short peduncles. The petals are 30 to 50 mm,
contiguous, usually pink but sometimes white or violet. The
mericarps are 7 mm long. The dorsal face has a deep, narrow
furrow with rugose angles produced into parallel wings. The
lateral faces are appressed-setose.

Habitat: The plant was originally indigenous to southwest
and central Asia. A few species were probably introduced
into southeast central Europe as ornamental plants and then
spread in the wild. Hollyhock is now widely cultivated in
Europe and temperate regions of Asia. The main suppliers of
the drug are Belgium, Hungary, Bulgaria, former Yugosla-
via, Rumania, Albania.

Production: Hollyhock flower consists of the flowers of
Alcea rosea as well as their preparations. The flowers are
harvested when not quite in full bloom on plants with over 2

to 3 years of growth, then air-dried at 35°C.
Other Names: Althea Rose, Malva Flowers, Rose Mallow

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilages (acetylated galacturonorhamane)

Anthocyans (termed althaein): delphinidine- and malvidine-

mono glycosides

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The herb, roots and seeds have been used
internally and externally for treating coughs and lung
diseases. The Hollyhock's flower is used as mucilage for
prophylaxis and therapy of diseases and discomforts of the
respiratory, gastrointestinal and urinary tracts, and to relieve
fever and thirst. Other folk uses include external application
for skin inflammations and ulcers. Infusions and decoctions

----- PAGE 650 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

made with the flowers have been used as a gargle for oral
and pharyngeal inflammation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Administered internally as a
mucilage for respiratory, gastrointestinal and urinary tract
discomforts and diseases, and to relieve fever and thirst.
External applications include use for skin inflammations and
ulcers. Infusions and decoctions, often with added herbs, are
used as a gargle for oral and pharyngeal inflammation.

How Supplied: Whole, cut and powdered drug.

Preparation: To prepare as a tea, use 1 to 2 g of the drug per
teacup. For a mouthwash, boil 15 g drug with 100 ml water.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Autl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Alcea rosea).

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Autl, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992 (unter Alcea rosea).

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Honeysuckle

Lonicera caprifolium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowers, the

seeds and the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in sixes directly on the
upper leaf pair. There are sometimes whorls of 6 in the next
1 or 2 leaf pairs. The corolla has a tight, 25 to 28 mm long
tube, and a bilabiate margin. It is yellowish-white, often red-
tinged, glabrous inside and glandular outside. The ovary is
jug-shaped. The fruit is a berry. They are ellipsoid, 8 mm
long and coral red. The seeds are ellipsoid, flattened,
longitudinally grooved and 4 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Honeysuckle is an up to 4 m high,
deciduous, clockwise-climbing shrub. The foliage leaves are
short-petioled, elliptical or obovate, blunt, entire, glabrous,
blue-green beneath and 4 to 10 cm by 3.5 to 6 cm. The
leaves are shortly fused in pairs, but the upper ones are fused
to an oval or circular leaf through which the stem grows.

HONEYSUCKLE/ 399

They are short-petioled and elliptical. The lower leaves are
paired.

Habitat: The plant grows in the northern temperate zones as
far as the northern edges of the subtropics and is cultivated
extensively.

Production: Honeysuckle flowers and leaves are from
Lonicera caprifolium.

Other Names: Goat's Leaf, Woodbine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Further constituents are largely unknown; iridoide monoter-
penes have been demonstrated in the rind including among
others loganin (extremely bitter), that possibly also occurs in
the drug.

EFFECTS
The main active principles are saponin and luteolin. The

drug has a laxative and diaphoretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for digestive disorders,
malignant tumors and as a diaphoretic agent. It is rarely used
today.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Because of the saponin content, irritation of the gastrointesti-
nal tract and possibly of the kidneys, urinary passages and
urinary bladder are possible in the event of overdosage. Case
studies are not known. (The berries of the red honeysuckle
are considered poisonous. Intakes above 10 berries are said
to trigger nausea, vomiting and tachycardia, elevated body
temperature, exanthemas and cyanosis.)

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 651 -----
400/HOPS

Hops
Aumulus lupulus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the glandular hairs
separated from the infructescence, the whole dried female
flowers, the fresh cones (preferably with few seeds) collected
before the seeds ripen and the fresh or dried female
inflorescence.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are yellowish-greenish,
inconspicuous and about 5 mm in diameter. The female
flowers are in richly blossomed, heavily branched inflores-
cence. The ovary, which has 2 long downy stigma, is
surrounded at the base by a round compressed nutlet. A
yellowish fruit cone grows from the female flower. The
inside of the bracts is covered with small, glossy, light
yellow glandular scales, which contain hop bitter (Lupulin).

Leaves, Stem and Root: The hop plant is a perennial. The
annual shoots reach a height of 6 m (12 m when cultivated).
The stems are pencil-thick, green and do not tum woody.
They are covered in 6 rows of climbing barbs. The leaves are
3 to 5 lobed, serrate and opposite.

Characteristics: Lupulin has a very strong odor and an
extremely bitter taste.

Habitat: Indigenous to Europe, cultivated in Asia, U.S. and
elsewhere.
Production: Hop cones consist of the whole dried female

inflorescence of Humulus lupulus. After the harvest, the
hops are dried on racks at temperatures of 30 to 60° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Acylphloroglucinols (10%)

Alpha-bitter acids: including, among others, humulone,
cohumulone, adhumulone

Beta-bitter acids: including, among others, lupulone, colupu-
lone, adlupulone

Volatile oil (0.3-1.0%): very complex in makeup, chief
components myrcene, humulene, beta-caryophyllene, unde-

cane-2-on, furthermore 2-methyl-but-3-en-ol (particularly
following storage, as breakdown product of the
acylphloroglucinols)

Resins (oxidation products of the bitter acids)

Phenolic acid: including, among others, ferulic acid, caffeic
acid and their derivatives, for example, chlorogenic acid

Tannins: oligomeric proanthocyanidines

Flavonoids: including, among others, xanthohumole

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug is a sedative and therefore has sleep-inducing
effect. This effect, however, strongly depends on the quality
of the extract used.

In animal experiments, the 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol exhaled by
the plant caused a long and deep narcotic sleep after a short
period of excitation.

The hop bitter acids are antibacterial and antimycotic. They
stimulate the secretion of gastric juices. In animal experi-
ments, a strong spasmolytic effect on the smooth muscle of
the intestinal tract has been reported.

An estrogenic principle is considered plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Nervousness and insomnia

Unproven Uses: Used as a bitter and stomachic to stimulate
the appetite and increase the secretion of gastric juices.

In folk medicine, Hops has been used internally for nerve
pain, priapism, inflammation of the intestinal mucous
membrane and tension headaches and used externally for
ulcus cruris, ulcers and skin abrasions.

Homeopathic Uses: Humulus lupulus is found in prepara-
tions for treating nervousness and insomnia.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The fresh plant has a sensitizing effect (hop-
picker's disease), which may occur, more rarely, with the
dust of the drug as well.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug, powdered drug
or dry extract powder for infusions or decoctions or other
preparations; liquid and solid preparations for internal use
and externally for bath additives.

Hops is often found in combination with other sedatives.

How Supplied:
Liquid extract — drug: 1:1 45% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).

Tincture — drug 1:5 60% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83)

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, boiling water is poured
over the ground hop cones and left to draw for 10 to 15
minutes (1 teaspoonful is equal to 0.4 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: For most indications, a single dose of 0.5 gm
is given.

----- PAGE 652 -----
m

A

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

To promote sleep, a single dose of 1 to 2 gm drug is given;
liquid extract: single dose: 0.5 to 2 ml; tincture: single dose:
1 to 2 ml.

Tea: 1 cup before bedtime for 2 to 3 days.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI1).

Storage: Protect from light and moisture in well-sealed
containers.

LITERATURE
Bravo L et al.. (1974) Boil Chim Farm:306.

Caujolle F et al.. (1969) Agressologie 10:405.

Field JA et al.. Determination of essential oils in hops by
headspace solid- phase microextraktion. In: J Agric Food Chem
44(7): 1768-1772. 1996.

Fintelmann V, Klinisch-arztliche Bedeutung des Hopfens. In:
ZPT 13(5): 165. 1992.

Ganzer BM, Hopfen: nicht nur fur die Bierbrauerei. In: PZ
37(38):2824. 1992.

Hansel R et al.. (1982) Planta Med 45(4):224.

Hansel R, Pflanzliche Beruhigungsmittel Moglichkeiten und
Grenzen der Selbstmedikation. In: DAZ 135(32):2935-2943.
995.

Hansel R, Wagener HH. (1967) Versuche, sedativ-hypnotische
Wirkstoffe im Hopfen nachzuweisen. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res
7:79-81.

Hartley RD, (1968) Phytochemistry 7:1641.
artley RD, Fawcett CH, (1968) Phytochemistry 7:1395.

olzl J, Inhaltsstoffe des Hopfens (Humulus lupulus L.). In:
ZPT 13(5): 155. 1992.

Kumai A, Okamoto R, (1984) Toxicol Lett 21(2):203.
Moir M et al.. (1980) Phytochemistry 19(10):2201.

Orth-Wagner S, Ressin WJ, Friedrich I, Phytosedativum gegen
Schlafstorungen. In: ZPT 16(3): 147-156. 1995.

Schmalreck AF et al., (1975) Can J Microbiol 21:205.

Schulz V, Hubner WD, Ploch M, Klinische Studien mit
Psycho-Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT 18(3): 141-154. 1997.

Stevens JF, Ivancic M, Hsu VL, Deinzer ML, Prenylflavonoids
from Humulus lupulus. In: PH 44(8): 1575-1585. 1997.

Stocker HR, (1967) Sedative und hypnogene Wirkung des
Hopfens. Schweizer Brauerei Rundschau 78:80-89.

Tobe H, Muraki Y, Kitamura K, Komiyama O, Sato Y,

Sugioka T, Maruyama HB, Matsuda E, Nagai M, Bone

resorption inhibitors from hope extract. In: Biosc Biotech
Biochem 61(1):158-159. 1997.

Wohlfart R, (1983) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 123:1637.

HOREHOUND / 401

Wohlfart R, Hansel R, Schmidt H, (1983) Nachweis sedativ-
hypnotischer Wirkstoffe im Hopfen. 4. Mittlg. Die
Pharmakologie des Hopfeninhaltsstoffes 2-Methyl-3-buten-2-ol.
Planta Med 48:120-123.

Wohlfart R, Wurm G, Hansel R, Schmidt H, (1983) Der Abbau
der Bittersauren zum 2-Methyl-3-buten-2-ol, einem
Hopfeninhaltsstoff mit sedativ-hypnotischer Wirkung. Arch
Pharmaz 315:132-137.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. AufL Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K. Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Hordeum distichon
See Barley

Horehound
Marrubium vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flowering
branches, the fresh aerial parts of the flowering plant and the

whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The small, white 5 to 7 mm long, labiate
globular flowers are sessile. There are 6 to 8 richly flowered
false whorls that are 1.5 to 2 cm long on each stem. The
calyx is tubular, white and tomentose with 10 awl-shaped
tips, which are curved back in a hook. The corolla is white
and downy. The fruit is an ovate. 1.5 to 2 mm long, obtusely

----- PAGE 653 -----
402/HOREHOUND

triangular, smootfi, gray-brown with darker marbling or light

brown nut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial herb with a
fusiform root and a multi-headed, often woody, root crown.
The stems are erect, branched, obtusely quadrangular, and
about 40 to 60 cm high and 7 mm thick at the base. The
branches are curved, spreading out, obtusely quadrangular,
and loosely downy, like the leaves. The leaves are tomen-
tose-downy, petiolate, orbicular and unevenly crenate. They
have distinct veins on the underside and are wrinkled.

Characteristics: The leaves smell tangy when rubbed and
contain musk juice, which taste bitter and hot.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
to central Asia. It has become established in central Europe;
introduced to America, South Africa and Australia.

Production: Horehound herb consists of the fresh or dried,
above-ground parts of Marrubium vulgare as well as their
preparations. The plant is harvested during the flowering
season from June to August. Fast drying is recommended.

Other Names: Houndsbane, Marrubium, White Horehound

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpene hitter principles:
(0.1-1.0%), premarrubiin (0.1%)

chief components marrubiin

Caffeic acid derivatives: including among others chlorogenic
acid, cryptochlorogenic acid

Flavonoids: including among others chrysoeriol, vicenin II,
lactoyl flavones, for example luteolin-7-lactate, apigenin-7-

lactate

Volatile oil (traces): including among others camphene, p-

cymene, fenchene

EFFECTS

The bitter ingredients act as a gastric juice stimulant;
marrubinic acid acts as a choleretic. In animal experiments, a
significant increase of bile secretion was observed after
administration of marrubinic acid and its salt. The main
active principles, essential oil, diterpene-amaroids, tannins
and flavonoids that the drug would probably
stimulate gastric juice secretion.

indicate

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
+ Loss of appetite
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for dyspepsia, loss of

appetite, bloating and flatulence, and respiratory catarrh. In
folk medicine, it is used internally for acute and chronic

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma, tuberculosis, pulmo-
nary catarrh, respiratory infections, diarrhea, jaundice, debil-
ity and painful menstruation, and as a laxative in higher
doses; externally for skin damage, ulcers and wounds, and as
a gargle for mouth and throat infections.

Homeopathic Uses: Inflammation of the respiratory tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb, freshly pressed
plant juice and other galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
1 to 2 gm of the drug; strain after 10 minutes. For a liquid
extract, prepare as a (1:1) dilution with ethanol (20%).

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 4.5 gm of the drug;
30 to 60 ml pressed juice.

The infusion dosage is 1 to 2 gm of the drug taken up to 3
times daily. The liquid extract dosage is 2 to 4 ml 3 times
daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

LITERATURE

Bartarelli IM, (1966) Boll Chim Farm 105:787.

Brieskorn CH, Feilner K, (1968) Phytochemistry 7:485.

Busby MC et al., (1983) Proc R IR Acad Sect B 83:1.

Cahen R, (1970) C R Soc Biol 164:1467.

Henderson MS, McCrindle R, (1969) J Chem Soc Chem Comm
15:2014.

Karryev MO et al., (1976) Izv Akad Nauk Turkm Ser Biol
3:86.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Nicholas HJ, (1964) J Pharm Sci 53:895.

Pandler WW, Wagner S, (1963) Chem Ind 42:1693.

Popa DP et al., (1968) Khim Prir Soedin 4(6):345.

Popa DP et al., (1974) Rastit Resur 10(3):365.

Popa DP, Salei LA, (1973) Rastit Resur 9(3):384.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AuflL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 654 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Horse Chestnut

Aesculus — hippocastanum

TRADE NAMES
Horse Chestnut (available from numerous manufacturers),
Horse Chestnut-Power, Venastat, Standardized Horsechest-
nut Extract

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried Horse
Chestnut leaves, the oil extracted from the peeled fruit
capsules (seeds) and dried chestnut seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are in stiffly upright
panicles gradually thickening near the distal end. Most of the
flowers are male, but a few are female or androgynous. The
calyx is fused and bell-shaped with 5 irregular tips. The
petals are 10 to 15 mm long with a yellow spot, which turns
red. There are 3 upward petals and 2 downward, which are
folded at the edge. The flower is ciliate and cordate (heart
shaped) at the base and contains 7 S-shaped, bending
stamens with red anthers that are longer than the petals. The
ovary is 3-valved, superior and velvety. The fruit capsules
are green and globular with soft spines and fine hairs. There
are 1 to 3 red-brown seeds (Chestnuts) within the capsules,
which are shiny brown with a yellowish gray-brown navel
and a tough shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The seasonal tree is up to 35 m high;
it includes a large regular crown and widely spread roots.
The trunk is initially smooth but later has thinly scaled,
peeling and fissured bark. The young twigs are yellowish to
red-brown and are initially covered with brown hairs. The
buds gradually thicken near the distal end and are extremely
sticky with dark red bud scales to protect the seed plant bud.
The leaves are long, 5 to 7 palmate, with a 20 cm long
grooved petiole. The leaflets are initially red-haired, 20 cm

HORSE CHESTNUT/403

long, cuneate-obovate, acute and dentate. The leaflets are
rich green above and beneath are light green.

Habitat: Although the herb is indigenous to the mountains of
Greece, Bulgaria, the Caucasus, northern Iran and the
Himalayas, it is cultivated elsewhere, especially in northern
Europe including the British Isles, Denmark, Scandinavia
and Russia (Narva and St. Petersburg).

Production: Horse Chestnut leaf consists of the fresh or
dried leaf of Aesculus hippocastanum. A dry extract is
manufactured from Horse Chestnut seeds standardized to a
content of 16-20% triterpene glycosides (calculated as
anhydrous aescin).

Not to be Confused With: The leaves of the Horse Chestnut
are commonly confused with those of Sweet Chestnut.

Other Names: Spanish Chestnut, Buckeye, Common Horse
Chestnut, Conqueror Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: HORSE CHESTNUT LEAF
Triterpene saponins

Hydroxycoumarins: chief component is aesculin, in addition
fraxin and scopolin

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercitrin, and isoquercitrin
Tannins

EFFECTS: HORSE CHESTNUT LEAF

The main active principles of the anti-exudative effect and
improvement of venous tone are hydroxycoumarins (aesculin
and fraxin), triterpene saponins in the petioles and leaf veins,
flavonoids and a rich supply of tannins. Although the drug is
said to have an anti-exudative effect and improve venous
tone, there is a lack of clinical data to support the efficacy.

COMPOUNDS: HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS

Triterpene saponins (3-5%): The triterpene saponine mixture
known as aescin (also escin) consists of diacylated tetra-and
pentahydroxy-beta-amyrin compounds.The compounds bear
a glucuronic acid remnant substituted with 2 monosaccharide
remnants in position 3 at the OH-group. Aglycones, protoes-
cigenin and barringtogenol C, are bonded like esters onto the
OH-group at position 21 with either angelic or tiglic acid, or
with either alpha-methyl butyric or isobutyric acid remnants.
The OH-group in position 22 (beta-escin) or 28 (cryptoescin)
is acetylated, and both positional isomeric compounds
remain in equilibrium though migration of the acetyl
remnant.

Flavonoids: in particular biosides and triosides of the
quercetins

Oligosaccharides: including 1-kestose, 2-kestose, stachyose

----- PAGE 655 -----
404/HORSE CHESTNUT

Polysaccharides: starch (50%)

Oligomeric proanthocyanidins, condensed tannins: (only in
the seed-coat)

Fatty oil (2-3%)

EFFECTS: HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS
As found in different animal tests and preclincal investiga-
tions, the principal ingredient of Horse Chestnut seed extract,
triterpene glycoside mixture (aescin), has an anti-exudative,
vascular tightening effect, and reduction of vascular perme-
ability which result in an antiedemic effect. The vein-toning
properties of the Horse Chestnut extract also demonstrated
improvement of venous return flow. A significant reduction
of transcapillary filtration was seen in a placebo-controlled
human pharmacological trial (Bisler, 1986). Significant
improvement in the symptoms of chronic venous insufficien-
cy was demonstrated in diverse, randomized, double-blind
and cross-over studies (Calabrese, 1993; Steiner, 1990).

There are indications that Horse Chestnut seed extract
reduces the activity of lysosomal enzymes, which increases
in chronic pathological conditions of the veins. The enzymes
will break down glycoacalyx (mucopolysaccharides) in the
region of the capillary walls, allowing proteins to leak into
the interstitium. The activity of the enzymes is reduced by
the aescin and so the breakdown of glycoacalyx is also
inhibited. The transcapillary filtration of low-molecular
proteins, electrolytes and water into the interstitium is
inhibited through a reduction of vascular permeability by the
aescin.

CLINICAL TRIALS
The efficacy and safety of Horse Chestnut seed extract,
given as Venostasin retard (50mg aescin) twice daily, was
compared to mechanical compression involving bandages
and stockings in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical
study. The study consisted of 240 patients with chronic
venous insufficiency over a 12-week period. The results
determined a similar decrease of lower leg volume of
approximately 25% and noted compression treatment is
uncomfortable, not convenient and subject to poor compli-
ance (Diehm, 1996).

Venostasin retard was administered to 52 pregnant women
with edema due to venous insufficiency in a placebo-
controlled, double-blind, cross-over study. A significant
reduction of edema and greater resistance to edema provoca-
tion was demonstrated in the Venostasin retard group. There
were also less severe symptoms of pain, fatigue, swelling
and itching with patients receiving Venostasin retard therapy
(Steiner, 1990).

A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study was
conducted on 40 patients with venous edema in chronic deep

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

vein incompetence to determine the edema-reducing effect of
Horse Chestnut seed extract. The edema reduction effect and
reduction of leg volume with edema provocation of the
Horse Chestnut seed extract were both statistically signifi-
cant (Diem, 1992).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
HORSE CHESTNUT LEAF

Unproven Uses: Eczema, superficial and deep varicose
veins, leg pains, phlebitis, hemorrhoids, pains before and
during menstruation. In folk medicine, the leaves are used as
a cough remedy, as well as for arthritis and rheumatism.

HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS
Approved by Commission E:

* Venous conditions (chronic venous insufficiency)

Treatment of symptoms found in pathological conditions of
the veins of the legs (chronic venous insufficiency), for
example pain and a sensation of heaviness in the legs,
nocturnal cramps in the calves, pruritis and swelling of the
legs.

Unproven uses: Horse Chestnut seeds are used for symptoms
of post-traumatic and post-operative soft tissue swelling.
Further indications are painful injuries, sprains, bruising,
pain syndrome of the spine, edema, rheumatic disease and
varicose veins.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic treatments include hemor-
rhoids, lumbar and low back pain, venous back pressure.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
HORSE CHESTNUT LEAF

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. One case of liver damage following intramuscular
administration of an extract of the drug (origin details of the
drug uncertain) is known.

Drug Interactions: Horse Chestnut leaf has a coumarin
componant and may interact with warfarin, salicylates and
other drugs with anti-coagulant properties.

HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS
Health risks following the proper administration of designat-
ed therapeutic dosages are not recorded. Susceptible patients
may nevertheless experience mucous membrane irritations of
the gastrointestinal tract (e.g. nausea) following intake of the
drug; decrease in kidney function with pre-existing renal
insufficiency and acute nephrotoxicity. Hepatotoxicity and
urticaria have also been observed. I.V administration of
aescin can lead to anaphylactic reactions.

----- PAGE 656 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE
HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS

The intake of larger quantities of Horse Chestnut seeds (in
one case of a child with 5 seeds) can bring about vomiting,
diarrhea, severe thirst, reddening of the face, enlargement of
pupils, vision and consciousness disorders. Following stom-
ach and intestinal emptying (gastric lavage, sodium sulfate)
and the administration of activated charcoal, therapy for
poisonings consists of diazepam for spasms, atropine for
colic, electrolyte replenishment and sodium bicarbonate
infusions for any acidosis that may arise. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE

HORSE CHESTNUT LEAF

Mode of Administration: Extracts of the drug are contained
in "vein teas" or "hemorrhoid teas," as well as in
pharmaceutical preparations for the treatment of venous

symptoms.
Preparation: One ampule corresponds to 4 mg flavones in
0.9% NaCl.

Daily Dosage:
Infusion (as a tea)—Pour boiling water over | tsp. of finely
cut drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes (Itsp = | gm drug).

Intravenously—I to 2 ampules daily.
Intramuscularly—1 ampule daily.

HORSE CHESTNUT SEEDS

Mode of Administration: Available in liquid and solid
preparations for internal use; semi-solid preparations for
external use; and parenterally for homeopathic use.

How Supplied:
Ampules

Capsules — 250 mg, 300 mg, 485 mg
Coated tablets

Drops

Ointment/Gels

Tablets

Tincture

Preparation: Stabilized extract of Horse Chestnut (5:1) is
standardized for aescin; tincture of Horse Chestnut 1:1 with
75% ethanol; isolated aescin.

Daily Dosage:

Intravenous—Doses of 5 mg once or twice daily of aescin as
the sodium salt has been used for treatment or prevention of
post-traumatic edema and potoperative edema. The maxi-
mum daily dose is 20 mg (Brandt, 1992/1993).

HORSE CHESTNUT/405

Oral—Aescin from encapsulated standardized extracts are
initially given at doses of 10 mg (Chandler, 1993). The
encapsulated standardized extract has been used for the
treatment of postoperative or traumatic edema, hemorrhoids
or symptoms due to varicose veins in doses providing 40 to
120 mg of aescin per day (Schlesser, 1991). Aescin (escin)
100 mg corresponding to 250-312.5 mg extract may be
administered twice daily in delayed-release form.

Tincture—For the treatment of painful hemorrhoids, a dose
of 1:10 tincture is 0.6 ml (Reynolds, 1977).

Topical—A 1 to 2% gel is applied topically several times
daily for soft tissue injuries, bruises and symptomatic relief
of varicose veins (Fachinfo Reparil (R)- Sportgel 1994;
Fachino Opijo (R) N gel, 1991; Calabrese & Preston 1993).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc; ointment 1 to 2 times
daily (HAB1).

Storage: The herb should be stored in a dry and dark place.

LITERATURE
Aizavva X, Fukui. Yamada K, Kogo H, Aescin,
antiinflammatory action of Aescin (1, intravenous injection). In:
Pharmacometrics (Tokyo) 8:211. 1974.

Alter H, (1973) Zur medikamentbsen Therapie der Varikosis. Z
AUg Med 49(17): 1301-1304.

Annoni F, Mauri A, Marincola Resele LF. (1979) Venotonic
activity of Escin on the human saphenous vein. Arzneim
Forsch/Drug Res 29:672.

Arnold M, Przerwa M, Die therapeutische Beeinflufibarkeit
experimentell erzeugter Odeme. In: Arzneim Forsch 26:402-409.
1976.

Auster F, Wirkung eines RoPkastanienpraparates auf die
Resistenz der Hautkapillaren. In: Pharmazie 11:726-730. 1956.

Bisler H, Pfeifer R, Kluken N, Pauschinger P, (1986) Wirkung
von Ropkastaniensamenextrakt auf die transkapillare Filtration
bei chronischer venoser Insuffizien. Z Dtsch Med Wschr 111:
1321-1328.

Brandt D (ed.): Reparil (R) -Ampoules. In: MDR, MIMS Desk
Reference Vol 28. MIMS, Pretoria, 1992/93.

Buechi S, Antivirale Saponine, pharmakologische und klinische
Untersuchungen. In: DAZ 136(2):89-98. 1996.

Calabrese C, Preston P, Report of the results of a double-blind,
randomized, single-dose trial of a topical 2% escon gel versus
placebo in the acute treatment of experimentally-induced
hematoma volunteers. Planta Med 59:394-397. 1993.

Chandler RF, Herbal Medicine: Horse Chestnut. Can Pharm J
1993; 126:297-306.

Comaish JS, Kersey PJ, Contact dermatitis to extract of horse
chestnut (esculin). Contact Dermatitis 1980 Jan;6(2): 150-1.

----- PAGE 657 -----
406 /HORSE CHESTNUT

Daub B, Chronische Veneninsuffizienz: RoBkastanienextrakt
oder Kompressionsstrumpf - gleiche Wirkung. In: DAZ
136(12):946. 1996.

De Smet PA, Van den E, Lesterhuis W, Hepatotoxicity
associated with herval tablets. BJM 1996; July 13, 313:92.

Diehm C, Vollbrecht D, Amendt K, Comberg HU, Medical
edema protection-clinical benefit in patients with chronic deep
vein incompetence. A placebo controlled double blind study.
Vasa 21 (2): 199-92.1992,

Diehm C, Trampisch HJ, Lange S, Schmidt C, Comparison of
leg compression stocking and oral horse-chestnut seed extract in
patients with chronic venous insufficiency. Lancet Feb
3;347:292-294. 1996.

Ehringer H, Objektivierbare Venentonisierung nach oraler Gabe
eines Kombinationspraparates mit RoBkastanienextrakt. In:
Arzneim Forsch 18:432. 1968.

Escribano MM, Munoz-Bellido FJ, Velazquez E et al., Contact
urticaria due to aescin. Contact Dermatitis 1997 Nov:37(5):233.

Fachinformation: Opino (R) N gel, Aescin. Toponwerke GmbH
& Co, KG, Koeln, 1991.

Fachinformation: Reparil (R)- Sportgel, Aescin, Diethylamin-
salicylat. Madaus AG, Koeln, 1994.

Felix W, Schneider E, Schmidt A, Grimm G, Vasoaktive
Wirkung von alpha-Aescin. In: Fischer H (Hrsg) Ergebnisse der
Angiologie: Chronische Veneninsuffizienz. Pathogenese und
medikamentose Therapie, Schattauer, Stuttgart, 30:93-105. 1984.

Felix W, Spektrum Venenmittel. In: Arzneimitteltherapie heute.
Bd. 45. Spektrum Venenmittel. Aesopus Verlag Zug S 29.
1986.

Felix W, Wirkungsmechanismen der internen Therapie mit
"Venopharmaka". In: Dt med J 21:458-465. 1970.

Fink Serralde C. Dreyfus Cortes GO, Colo Hernandesz,
Marquez Zacarias LA, (1975) Valoracion de la escina pura en
el tratamiento del sindrome des estasis venosa cronica. Munch
Med Wschr (mex. Ausgabe) 117(1):41-46.

Fischer H, Pflanzliche Venentherapeutica. In: Therapiewoche
34:4101-4106. 1984.

Fricke U, (1995) Venenmittel. In: Schwabe U, Paffrath D
(Hrsg), Arzneiverordnungs-Report '95. Gustav Fischer Verlag
Stuttgart, Jena, S 421-430.

Friederich HC, Vogelsberg H, Neiss A, (1978) Ein Beitrag zur
Bewertung von intern wirksamen Venenpharmaka. Z
Hautkrankheiten 53(11):369-374.

Girerd I, DiPasquale, Steinetz G, Beach BG, Pearl VLW, The
anti-edema properties of aescin. In: Arch internat Pharmacodyn
Ther, Bruxelles 133:127-137. 1961.

Hampel H, Hofrichter G, Liechn HD, Schlemmer W, Zur
Pharmakologie der Aescin-Isomere unter besonderer
Beriicksichtigung von alpha-Aescin. In: Arzneim Forsch 20:209-
215. 1970.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hellberg K, Ruschewski W, de Vivie R, Drug induced acute
renal failure after heart surgery. Thoraxchir Vask Chir 1975
Aug;23(4):396-9.

Hitzenberger G, (1989) Die therapeutische Wirksamkeit des
RoBkastaniensamenextraktes. Wien Med Wschr 139(17):385-389

Hiibner G, Wray V, Nahrstedt A, Flavonolglycosides in
Aesculus hippocastanum L.: Isolation, structure elucidation and
quantification. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress
ofGA, 139. 1996.

Jacker HJ, Zur Pharmakologie der RoBkastanie. In: PZH
116(9):959-968. 1977.

Konoshima T, Lee KH. (1986) J Nat Prod 49(4):650.

Kreysel HW, Nissen HP, Enghofer E, A possible role of
lysosomal enzymes in the pathogenesis of varicosis and the
reduction in their serum activity by Venostasin. Vasa 12(4):377-
82. 1983.

Locks H, Baumgartner H, Konzett H, (1974) Zur Beeinflussung
des Benentonus durch RoBkastanienextrakte. Arzneim Forsch
24:1347.

Lohr E, Garanin G, Jesau P, Fischer H, (1986) Odemprotektive
Therapie bei chronischer Veneninsuffizienz mit Odemneigung.
Munch Med Wschr 128:579-581.

Longiave D, Omini C, Nicosia S, Berti F, (1978) The Mode of
Action of Escin on Isolated Veins, Relationship with PGF2.
Pharmacol Res 10:145.

Lorenz D, Marek ML, (1960) Das therapeutisch wirksame
Prinzip der RoBkastanie (Aesculus hippocastanum). Arzneim
10:263-272.

M, Dormandy JA, (1987) Oedema of long distant
flights. Phlebol 2:123-124.

Marshall M, Loew D, (1994) Diagnostische MaBnahmen zum
Nachweis der Wirksamkeit von Venentherapeutika. Phlebol
23:85-91.

Forsch

Marshal

Marshall M, Wustenberg P, Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen venosen Insuffizienz. In: Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen venosen Insuffizienz, Braun Fachverlage, Karlsruhe
1994.

Neiss A, Bohm C, (1976) Zum Wirksamkeitsnachweis von
RoBkastaniensamenextrakt beim varikosen Symptomenkomplex.
Munch Med Wschr 7:213-216.

Pauschinger P, tl987) Klinisch experimentelle Untersuchungen
zur Wirkung von RoBkastaniensamenextrakt auf die
transkapillare Filtration und das intravasale Volumen an
Patienten mit chronisch venoser Insuffizien. Z Phlebol Proktol

16:57-61.

Preziosi P, Manca P, (1965) Arzneim Forsch 15:404.
Proserpio G et al., (1980) Fitoterapia 2:113.

Rao GS et al., (1974) J Pharm Sci 63:471.

Reynolds JEF, Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia.
Pharmaceutical Press, London, 1998.

A

----- PAGE 658 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Rothkopf M, Vogel G, Neue Befunde zur Wirksamkeit und zu
Wirkungsmechanismen des Ro(3kastanien-Saponins Aescin. In:
Arzneim Forsch 26:225-235. 1976.

Rothkopf M, Vogel G, Lang W, Leng E, Animal experiments
on the question of the renal toleration of the horse chestnut
saponin aescin. Arzneimittelforschung 1977;27(3):598-605.

Rudofsky G, Neip A, Otto K, Seibel K, (1986) Odemprotektive
Wirkung und klinische Wirksamkeit von
Ro(3kastaniensamenextrakt im Doppelblindversuch. Phlebol
Proktol 15:47-54.

Schlesser JL (ed.). Drugs Available Abroad. Gale Research Inc.
Detroit, MI, 1991.

Simini B, Horse-chestnut seed extract for chronic venous
insufficiency (letter;comment). Lancet 1996 Apr 27;347

(9009): 1182-3.
Steiner M, Hillemanns HG, (1986) Untersuchung zur
odemprotektiven Wirkung eines Venentherapeutikums. Munch
Med Wschr 31:551-552.

Steiner M, Untersuchung zur odemvermindernden und
odemprotektiven Wirkung von Ro(3kastanienextrakt. In: Phlebol
Proktol 19:239-242. 1990.

Steiner M, Hillemanns HG, Venostasin retard in the
management of venous problems during pregnancy. Phlebology
5:41-44. 1990.

Vayssairat M et al.. Horse-chestnut seed extract for chronic
venous insufficiency. In: Lancet 347(9009): 182-183. 1996.
Vogel G, Aesculus hippocastanum L. - Die Ropkastanie. In:
ZPT 10:102 - 106. 1989.

Vogel G, Marek ML, Stoeckert J, Weitere Untersuchungen zum
Wirkungsmechanismus des RoPkastanien-Saponins Aescin. In:
Arzneim Forsch 13:59. 1963.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al. (Ed.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials
Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzheimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

HORSEMINT/407

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

-York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Horsemint

Monarda_ Punctata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow in axillary whorls. They
are bilabiate. The corolla is yellow with red spots. The 2
stamens and the sessile bracts are yellow and purple.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and grows
up to 90 cm high with a branched, round stem. The leaves
are opposite, lanceolate and downy.

Characteristics: The taste is pungent and bitter; the odor

reminiscent of thyme.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the eastern and central
US.
Monarda Lutea, Wild

Other Names: Spotted Monarda,

Bergamot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: including among others thymol (20%), thymol
methyl ether, thymol hydroquinone; in Monarda punctata
varieties, maritima including also gamma-terpinene, geranyl-
formate, nerylformate

EFFECTS
The drug has carminative, stimulant and emmenagogic

effects.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is not to be used during pregnancy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for digestive disorders,
flatulence and dysmenorrhea.

Indian Medicine: American Indians use the drug for

inflammations, rheumatism and backache.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. (Oil from the plant, however, is only to be

----- PAGE 659 -----
408/HORSEMINT

administered externally. Even then, because it raises blisters
in its pure form, it should be diluted with olive oil before

application.)

DOSAGE
Mode, of Administration: Ground drug used as an infusion.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Horseradish

Armor acta rusticana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the fresh

or dried horseradish root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is made up of numer-
ous, richly flowered racemes (cymes). The fragrant flowers
are on 5 to 7 mm long, upright pedicles. The sepals are 2.5 to
3 mm long, broadly ovate, with a membranous white margin.
The white petals are 5 to 7 mm long and broadly obovate.
The inner stamens are 2.5 mm long; the outer ones 1.5 mm
long. The stigma is broad, round and gently 2-lobed. The
small pods are on 20 mm long, upright spreading stems.
They are globose to obovate and 4 to 6 mm long. The seeds
are smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 40 to 120 cm high. It is
a sturdy and glabrous perennial. The root is quite thick and
woody. In cultivated varieties, it is thick and fleshy with
numerous root heads, which are light yellowish-white and
have horizontal underground runners. The sometimes soli-
tary stems are upright, branched above, grooved and hollow.
The leaves are long-petioled, oblong-ovate, cordate at the
base, 30 to 100 cm long and unevenly crenate. The lower
cauline leaves have shorter petioles and are lobed or comb-
shaped pinnate with linear-oblong, entire-margined or serrate
sections. The upper cauline leaves with narrowed bases are
sessile, oblong or lanceolate, unevenly crenate to serrate and
obtuse. The uppermost leaves are linear or almost entire-
margined.

Characteristics: The rootstock has an odor that is strong and
irritating, and a sharp, burning taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Volga-Don region but
has spread to almost all of Europe and other parts of the
world.

Production: Horseradish consists of the fresh or dried,
peeled or unpeeled roots of Armoracia rusticana.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
Other Names: Mountain Radish, Red Cole, Great Raifort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates sinigrin and gluconasturtin: The freshly
harvested root contains the glucosinolates sinigrin (0.3%)
and gluconasturtin, which release enzymatically triggered
(myrosinase) allyl mustard oil (up to 90%) and a little 2-
phenyl mustard when the root is cut up. The dehydrated root
contains both of these mustard oils.

EFFECTS
Horseradish works antimicrobially against gram-positive and
gram-negative pathogens, and is hyperemic on skin and
mucous membranes and carcinostatic (due to the mustard
oils). Horseradish demonstrated an antispasmodic effect in
animal experiments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/Bronchitis
* Infections of the urinary tract

Unproven Uses: Internally, Horseradish is used to treat
inflammation of the respiratory tract and as supportive
therapy for infections of the urinary tract. Externally, the
drug is used for inflammation of the respiratory tract and for
hyperemic treatment for minor muscle aches. In folk
medicine, horseradish is administered for influenza, respira-
tory ailments, digestion, gout, rheumatism, and liver and
gallbladder disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include eye inflam-
mations, upper respiratory tract inflammations and upper
abdominal colic.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Because of the mucous membrane-irritating effect of the
mustard oils, the intake of the drug should not be carried out
in the presence of stomach or intestinal ulcers or in patients
with a history of kidney disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated

therapeutic dosages.

Pediatric Use: Preparations of horseradish should not be
administered to children under 4 years of age.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Fresh or dried root that has been cut

or ground, freshly pressed juice or other galenic preparations
for internal or external applications.

----- PAGE 660 -----
“T

jg|

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dose: The average dose for internal use is 20 g of
fresh root; for external use, ointments and gels with a
maximum of 2% mustard oils may be used.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc (HAB34). The mother
tincture and first decimal dilution to be taken diluted wi
water.

Storage: Fresh roots should be buried in soil or sand.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutisehen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Simon JE, Chadwick AF, Craker LE (Eds), Herbs. An Indexed
Bibliography 1971-80. Archon Books, USA 1984.

Stoll A, Seebeek E, Helv Chim Acta 31:1432-1434. 1948.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharniakologie. 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Horsetail

Equisetum — arvense

TRADE NAMES
Alcohol Free Horsetail, Horsetail, Horsetail Grass, Wild

Countryside Springtime Horsetail

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried green,
sterile shoots and fresh sterile shoots.

Flower and Fruit: Horsetail appears in two forms during the
year. From March to April the red-brown to straw yellow
simple stem develops with leaves arranged in a number of
levels on the stem in whorls. The leaves are brown, fused to
a sheath at the lower level with black-tipped, dry sporangia
cones at the tip sprinkling greenish spore powder. In May
and June there is a sterile summer form with 10 to 14 cm
high stems and numerous branches that are arranged in
whorls at the nodes. The stem and branches are deeply
grooved, usually square and rough.

HORSETAIL /409

Habitat: Horsetail grows throughout Europe. It grows in
Asia as far south as Turkey and Iran. The plant is also found
in the Himalayas, central and north China and Japan.

Production: Horsetail consists of the fresh or dried, green,
sterile stems of Equisetum arvense harvested in the summer.
The herb is collected in the wild and air-dried.

Not to be Confused With: Other Equisetum species.

Other Names: Bottle-Brush, Corn Horsetail, Dutch Rushes,
Field Horsetail, Horse Willow, Horsetail Grass, Horsetail
Rush, Paddock-Pipes, Pewterwort, Scouring Rush, Shave
Grass, Toadpipe

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: (0.6 to 0-9%): apigenin-5-0-glucoside, genkwa-
nin-5-O-glucoside, kaempferol-3,7-di-0-glucoside, kaemp-
ferol-3-0-(6'-0-malonyl-glucoside)-7-0-glucoside,
kaempferol-3-O-sophoroside, luteolin-5-O-glucoside, quer-
cetin-3-O-glucoside

Caffeic acid ester (up to 1%): including chlorogenic acid,
dicoffeoyl-meso-tartaric acid

Silicic acid (5 to 7.7%): to some extent water-soluble

Pyridine alkaloids: nicotine (traces), palustrine (in the
gamatophytes and in the rhizome styrolpyrone glucosides,
including equisetumpyrone)

EFFECTS
Horsetail has a mild diuretic and spasmolytic action in
animal tests. The flavonoids and silicic acid contribute to the

astringent effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones
« Wounds and burns

Internal preparations are used for post-traumatic and static
edema, flushing-out therapy for bacterial and inflammatory
diseases of the lower urinary tract and renal stones. It is used
externally as a supportive treatment for poorly healing
wounds.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Equisetum arvense is used
for tuberculosis, as a catarrh in the kidney and bladder
regions, as a hematostatic for profuse menstruation, nasal,
pulmonary and gastric hemorrhages, for brittle fingernails
and loss of hair, for rheumatic diseases, gout, poorly healing
wounds and ulcers, swelling and fractures and for frostbite.

----- PAGE 661 -----
410/HORSETAIL

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Horsetail is contraindicated in patients who have edema due
to impaired heart and kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

A doctor should be consulted when the drug is utilized as a
bath additive in cases of major skin lesions, acute skin
lesions of unknown origin, major feverish and infectious
diseases, cardiac insufficiency and hypertonia.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and
other galenic preparations are available for oral administra-
tion. Comminuted herb for decoctions and other galenic
preparations are used externally.

Preparation: To make a tea. pour 200 ml boiling water over
2 to 3 gm drug and boil for 5 minutes. Strain after 10 to 15
minutes. To make an infusion, use 15 gm drug per 1 cup
water. A liquid extract is prepared in a 1:1 ratio in 25%

alcohol.

Daily Dosage: Daily dose of Horsetail is 6 g drug. The drug
should be administered with plenty of fluids.

The internal dosages are as follows:
Infusion — 2 to 4 g
Liquid extract — 1 to 4 ml 3 times daily

Tea — 2-3 g per cup repeatedly during the day between
mealtimes

External use:
Compresses: 10 g drug to 1 liter

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc 3 times daily (HAB1).

Storage: Horsetail must be protected from light in well-
sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Beckert C, Veit M, Styrylpyrone im Schachtelhalm. In: DAZ

137(28):2474-2475. 1997.
Eugster C, Heterocycles 4:51. 1976.
Gibelli C, (1931) Arch Int Pharmacodyn 41:419.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Karrer P et al., Helv Chim Acta 32:2397-2399. 1949.
Pohl RW, (1955) Am Fern J 45:95.

Sokeland J, Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1):8.
1989.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Veit M, Problem bei der Bewertung pflanzlicher Diuretika. Als
Beispiel Schachtelhalmkraut DAB 10 (Equiseti herba). In: ZPT
15(6):331-341. 1994.

Veit M et al., Flavonoids of the Equisetum hybrids in the
subgenus Equisetum. In: PM 58(7)97. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Hound's Tongue
Cynoglossum officinale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial and root
of the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are on short, bent pedicles,
which grow to 1 cm after flowering. The corolla is cup-
shaped and larger than the calyx. The corolla is initially dark
violet, then dull brown. It is occasionally white with
thickened, velvety purple or light red, tubular scales. The
nutlets are flat, ovoid and light brown. They are 5 to 7 mm
wide, thickened at the edge and covered with barbs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a biennial. The taproot
is 10 to 30 cm long and up to 1.5 cm thick. It is reddish
colored with a few fibers. The shoots are gray-green and
smell of mice. The stems are usually rigidly erect, angular,
hairy and heavily foliated. They are 30 to 80 cm high and up
to 1 cm thick. The lower leaves are in rosettes, which form a
tough, coriaceous sheath at the base. The upper leaves are
sessile and clasping.

Habitat: Especially common in Germany and Switzerland,
now also found in the U.S. in areas where Germans and

Swiss settled.

Production: Hound's Tongue herb consists of the above-
ground parts of Cynoglossum officinale. Hound's Tongue

----- PAGE 662 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

root is the root of Cynoglossum officinale. The root is
gathered in the second spring and then dried.

Other Names: Dog's Tongue, Dog-Bur, Gypsy Flower,
Sheep-Lice, Woolmat

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: HOUNDS TONGUE HERB
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (0.7 to 1.5%): main alkaloids helio-

supine, echinatine, also 7-angeloylheliotridine,
acetylheliosupine
EFFECTS:

No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: HOUNDS TONGUE ROOT
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: main alkaloids presumably, as in the
plant, heliosupine and echinatine

Tannins

EFFECTS: HOUND'S TONGUE ROOT
The root has antidiarrheal and wound-healing effects. It is

both toxic and carcinogenic.

According to previous reports, cynoglossin has a paralyzing
effect on the peripheral nerve ends of frogs. The substances
consolicin and consolidin have a paralyzing effect on the
CNS, which is 3 times stronger than the effect of cynoglos-
sin. The toxicity should disappear with storage.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
HOUND'S TONGUE HERB

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Hound's Tongue have been
used as an antidiarrheal and an expectorant. The effective-
ness of the herb for the claimed applications is not
documented.

CYNOGLOSSUM ROOT

Unproven Uses: In the past, it was used as an analgesic both
internally and externally, as a cough sedative and for
diarrhea. The root is used externally in the treatment of

wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
HOUND'S TONGUE HERB AND ROOT

WARNING: The traditional folk medicinal preparations
should not be used!

Because of its high pyrrolizidine alkaloid content with 1,2-
unsaturated necine parent substances, the drug is both
hepatotoxic and hepatocarcinogenic in effect. The drug
should under no circumstances be taken internally.

DOSAGE
HOUND'S TONGUE HERB AND ROOT
See Warning above regarding internal use.

HOUSELEEK/411

Storage: The herb should be protected from light and kept
dry above annealed calcium chloride in air-tight, sealed glass
or chalk containers, with the possible addition of a few drops
of chloroform or carbon tetrachloride as an insecticide. It
should be® renewed annually.

LITERATURE
HOUND'S TONGUE HERB

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Knight AP, Kimberling CV, Stermitz FR, Roby MR,
Cynoglossum officinale (hounds-tongue) - a cause of
pyrrolizidine-alkaloid poisoning in horse. In: J Am Vet Med
Assoc 185(6):647-650. 1984.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Mattocks AR, Pigott CD, Pyrrolizidine lakloids from
Cynoglossum germanicum. In: PH 29(9):2871. 1990.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

HOUND'S TONGUE ROOT

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Knight AP, Kimberling CV, Stermitz FR, Roby MR,
Cynoglossum officinale (hounds-tongue) - a cause of
pyrrolizidine-alkaloid poisoning in horse. In: J Am Vet Med
Assoc 185(6):647-650. 1984.

Mattocks AR, Pigott CD, Pyrrolizidine lakloids fiom
Cynoglossum germanicum. In: PH 29(9):2871. 1990.

Houseleek

Sempervivum tectorum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh leaves

before flowering and their juice.

Flower and Fruit: The pink or red flowers are in cymes on
their own peduncles, which are about 22 cm high. The
individual flowers are short-pedicled and splayed in a star
shape. The 12 sepals and petals are twice as long as the
calyx. The 24 stamens are in 2 circles. There are 24 ovaries.
The small fruit is many-seeded and fused at the base.

----- PAGE 663 -----
412 /HOUSELEEK

Leaves, Stem and Root: The green succulent leaves grow.
directly from the perennial fibrous root and form a dense,
obovate, basal rosette 5 to 10 cm in diameter. They are
fleshy and juicy, flat, 2.5 to 5 cm long. The purple leaves are
sessile-oblong with a ciliate margin and are often in carpets
of tufts.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central and southern
Europe and now grows wild in northern Europe, northern
Africa, and western Asia.

Other Names: Jupiter's Eye. Jupiter's Beard, Thor's Beard,
Bullock's Eye, Sengreen, Ayron, Ayegreen, Aaron's Rod,
Hens and Chickens, Liveforever, Thunder Plant

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids: L(-)-malic acid, isocitric acid, succinic acid
Tannins

Mucilage

EFFECTS

The active agents are the leaves containing tannin, bitter
substances, sugar, and mucous. Results of research carried
out to date point to a possible liver-protective and anti-
oxidative effect. There are no studies available for the
astringent, diuretic and antiseptic effects attributed to the
drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Houseleek is used internally to relieve
severe diarrhea. Folk medicine uses include dysentery,
dysmenorrhea and amenorrhea, impairment of hearing and
fever, worm infestation, uterine neuralgia, tonsillitis, head-
ache and toothache. Externally, the drug is used for bums,
wounds, ulcers and swelling caused by insect bites, open
wounds, sore nipples, corns, inflammation of the throat,
hemorrhoids, eczema, stomatitis, oral fungal infections and
inflammation of mucous membranes and for the treatment of
itchy and burning skin parts. A gargle of diluted juice made
from the leaves is used for stomatitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Houseleek is used internally as a
decoction. Freshly pressed leaves and their juice is used

externally.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, allow 15 g of the drug
to steep in 1000 ml water for 10 minutes. Poultices are
prepared using crushed fresh leaves. A compress is made by
soaking a cloth in plant juice that has been diluted with

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

water. Gargles are prepared using plant juice diluted with
water and sweetened with honey. The pure plant juice is used
for ear drops.

Daily Dosage: Infusion dosage is 1 cup every 3 hours.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Humulus lupulus
See Hops

Hwema Bark

Corynanthe — pachyceras

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is an apical, up to 10-
cm long panicle. The calyx has 4 short tips. The corolla tube
is white and urn-shaped with 4 narrow, approximately 2-mm
long lobes. The lobes have globular appendages, with 4
stamens and a 2-chambered ovary. The fruit is a 7 to 10 mm
long and 2 to 4 mm wide, loculicidal capsule, which is black
when ripe, with numerous double slit winged seeds.

Leaves and Trunk: Corynanthe pachyceras is a tree that
grows up to 20 m high. The leaves are opposite, with simple
lamina that are paper-like. The lamina grow from 15 to 25
cm long and 5 to 7 cm wide. They are elongate-ovate with
approximately 12 mm long stipules. The branches are
glabrous and the trunk bark is dark green to reddish brown.

Habitat: Tropical Africa

Production: Hwema bark is the dried bark of Corynanthe
pachyceras. It is dried in the sun or drying cupboard with
circulating air at temperatures less than 70° C_ after
harvesting.

Not to be Confused With: Incorrect identification can occur
with Cinchonae cortex and sometimes with Yohimbe Cortex.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids of the beta-carboline and oxindole type:
chief alkaloids corynanthine (1.2%) and corynantheidine,
including as well, corynanthidine (alpha-yohimbine), beta-

----- PAGE 664 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

yohimbine, corynantheine, dihydrocorynantheine, corynox-
ine, corynoxeine

EFFECTS

The alkaloid-containing drug (yohimbine-corynantheine
type) affects the CNS by inhibiting motility in animal

experiments. The drug is spasmolytic, blood pressure reduc-

ing and also mildly analgesic and locally anesthetic in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Hvvema Bark preparations
are used for fever and malaria (infusion), leprosy (decoc-
tion), colds, and to lower blood pressure (dry extract).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The LD50
in mice was determined to be 4.9 mg dry extract/kg body
weight, I.V. The symptoms observed included convulsions
and dyspnea.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses among humans could conceivably lead to signs of

poisoning.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug, liquid and
solid preparations for internal use; solid preparations for
external use.

Preparation: To prepare a dry extract (10:1), the bark
powder is succussed for 30 minutes at 95°C with a 10-fold
amount of isotonic Nacl solution. It is filtered after cooling
and the solution is concentrated to double the weight of the
drug. Freeze-drying follows a 48-hour clarification period.
This produces a brown powder. Drugmative dry extract is
10:1.

Daily Dosage: Dry extract — 200 mg | to 4 times daily.

How Supplied: Tablets, capsules, suppositories and drink
ampules.

Storage: Hwema Bark should be stored in a dry place.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed) Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994

Hydnocarpus species

See Chaulmoogra

HYDRANGEA/413

Hydrangea
Hydrangea arborescens

DESCRIPTION ;
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome

and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is flat cymes of umbels
with creamy white flowers. They are androgynous or
completely sexless and have inferior ovaries. The fruit is a
schizocarp or capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Hydrangea is a marsh plant, a bush
up to 3 m high whose leaves are only pubescent on the veins
of the undersides. The petiole is 2 to 5 cm long. The leaves
are simple or lobed and opposite. There are no stipules. The
bark is rough and tends to peel off. The roots are of various
lengths and widths. They are pale gray on the outside and
solid with a slight splitting structure.

Habitat: Indigenous to the eastern U.S. as far south as
Florida.

Production: Hydrangea root is the root of Hydrangea
arborescens.

Other Names: Seven Barks

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Saponins

Flavonolids: including, among others, rutin

Volatile oil

Isocoumarin derivatives: including, among others,

hydrangenol

EFFECTS
The drug has a diuretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Hydrangea is used in the treatment of
conditions of the urinary tract, particularly bladder and

kidney stones.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. According to information in older medical litera-
ture, the intake of larger dosages can lead to dizziness,
feelings of constriction in the chest and central nervous
system disorders. The plant has a weak potential for
sensitization (chief allergen hydrangenol).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a liquid extract, in compounded

preparations.

----- PAGE 665 -----
414/HYDRANGEA"

LITERATURE
Bate-Smith EC, (1978) Phytochemistry 17:267.

Der Mardirossian A et al., (1976) J Toxicol Environ Health 1:
939.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen. Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH, horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Hydrangea arborescens

See Hydrangea

Hydrastis canadensis
See Goldenseal

Hyoscyamus niger

See Henbane

Hypericum perforatum

See St. John's Wort

Hypoxis rooperi

See African Potato

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hyssop
Hyssopus officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Hyssop (available from numerous manufacturers and as
combination product), Hyssop Herb

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the
flower tips and the essential oil.

Flower and Fruit: The dark-blue bilabiate flowers are
medium-sized false whorls in one-sided, terminal, leafy
racemes. The calyx is downy, 5-tipped and glabrous inside.
There are 4 stamens, which are turned away from each other
and extend far above the perianth. The style is very long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen subshrub
about 60 cm high. The stem is erect, quadrangular, shrubby
and branched. The leaves are sessile, lanceolate, acute,
entire-margined, punctate, glabrous, dark green and paler

beneath.

Characteristics: The plant has a weak sweetish smell. The
taste is bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern Europe and
grows wild in the Mediterranean region. It is cultivated

elsewhere.

Production: Hyssop herb consists of the fresh or dried
aboveground parts of Hyssopus officinalis. Hyssop oil
consists of the essential oil of Hyssopus officinalis, obtained
by steam distillation.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
In the foliage:

Volatile oil

Tannins

Bitter principles: including, among others, marubiin
Flavonoids: glycosides of hesperidin and diosmetin
In the volatile oil:

Chief components: 1-pinocamphone, isocamphone, pinocar-

vone, alpha- and beta-pinene

EFFECTS
l-pinocamphone and isopinocamphone are the toxically
active constituents of the drug. The oil has an antimicrobial
and anthelmintic effect. Extracts of the leaves are antimicro-
bial, antiviral (herpes simplex) and mildly spasmolytic.

----- PAGE 666 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Hyssop herb are used for the
gentle stimulation of circulation, for intestinal catarrhs, for
diseases of the respiratory tract, colds, chest and lung
ailments.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Isolated cases of tonic-clonic spasms have been observed
among adults after intake of 10 to 30 drops of the volatile oil
over a number of days (2 to 3 drops for children).

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Hyssop herb preparations are

available as capsules for internal use.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 445 mg

LITERATURE
Joulain D, (1979) Riv Ital Ess Prof Piante Off Ar Sap Cosm

48:479.

Kem W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufi., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food. Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Opdyke DU, (1978) Food Cosmet Toxicol 16 (Suppl. 1):787.

Hyssopus_ officinalis

See Hyssop

Iberis amara
See Bitter Candytuft

Iceland Moss

Cetraria islandica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried thalius

commonly known as Iceland Moss.

ICELAND MOSS 415

Flower and Fruit: Cetraria islandica is a lichen that grows on
the ground and has a stiff, curling thalius. The thalius is from
2 to 6 cm high, erect, dichotomously branched, with a 1 to 10
cm wide section. The upper surface is olive-brown-green or
brown, the underside is whitish to light brownish. The
margins are covered in 0.5 mm long papilla, which contain
the reproductive parts.

Characteristics: Iceland Moss tastes bitter, and when wet,
has a smell reminiscent of seaweed.

Habitat: Grows in the boreal, alpine and Arctic regions of
the Northern Hemisphere and in some regions of the
Southern Hemisphere.

Production: Iceland Moss consists of the dried thalius of
Cetraria islandica as well as its preparations. It is collected in
the wild, then air-dried, moistened, cut and re-dried.

Other Names: Iceland Lichen, Cetraria. Eryngo-Leaved
Liverwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilages, glucans (50%): \ichenan (lichenan). isolichenan
(isolichenan)

Aromatic lichen acids (2-3%): fumarprototcetraric acid,
protocetraric acid, cetraric acid

Aliphatic lichen acids (1.0-1.5%): esp. protolichesteric acid

EFFECTS
The bitter organic acids have an antibiotic effect. It is also a

demulcent and a mild antimicrobial.

The drug has an demulcent effect due to the sesquitering
action of the polysaccharides. An ethanol precipitation of the
aqueous extract containing lichenan and isolichenan demon-
strated an antitumoural effect in animal tests.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

* Dyspeptic complaints

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
+ Loss of appetite

r

Unproven Uses: Iceland Moss is also used for irritation of
the oral and pharyngeal mucous membranes; loss of appetite
and gastroenteritis (the bitter organic acids). In folk medi-
cine, the drug has been used for lung disease, kidney and
bladder complaints, gastric conditions, nausea and vomiting
(in particular in pregnancy and with migraine), bronchitis,
whooping cough and diarrhea. It is also used externally for
poorly healing wounds.

----- PAGE 667 -----
416/ICELAND MOSS

Homeopathic Uses: Cetraria islandica is used to treat

bronchitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. In rare cases, external administration of the drug led

to sensitization.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted thallus for infusions
and other galenic formulations for internal use; comminuted
thallus preferably for cold maceration and other bitter-tasting

preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
15 to 2.5 gm of comminuted drug and strain after 10
minutes (I teaspoonful = 13 gm of drug); infusion may be

sweetened.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 4 to 6 gm. Single

dose: 15 g drug in a teacup.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

daily (HABI).
Storage: Store in the dark and well-sealed containers.

LITERATURE

Anonym, Niedere Pflanzen ganz gro{3 - 39. Jahrestagung der
Gesellschaft fur Arzneipflanzenforschung in Saarbriicken. In:
DAZ 131(37): 1899.

Pengsuparp Th, et aL Mechanistic evaluation of new plant-
derived compounds that inhibit HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. In:
JNP 58(7): 1024-1031. 1995.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.
Pub. CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Cetraria).

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ignatius Beans
Strychnos ignatii

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds and
the dried root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in dense, axillary thyrses.
Their parts are arranged in fives. They are greenish-white,
pubescent and have a 2-valved superior ovary. The fruit is a
golden-yellow berry. The berry is up to 13 cm wide and has
a hard exocarp. The fruit pulp is yellow and contains up to
40 seeds. The seeds are 2 to 3 cm long by 2 cm wide, oval or
rounded-angular, obtuse and very hard.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a climbing shrub with
hooked stems that are up to 20 m long. The truck is up to 10
cm thick. It is occasionally a small tree. It bears leaves that
are up to 25 cm long, broad-ovate, opposite and short-

petioled.

Habitat: The plant is common all over southeastern Asia and
is cultivated there; especially in Vietnam and the Philippines.

Production: Ignatius beans are the seeds of Strychnos ignatii.

Not to be Confused With: The seeds of S. lanata and S.
multiflora were once treated in the same manner as I[gnatii

seeds.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids (2.5-5.6%): chief alkaloid strychnine (share
45-60%), in addition, above all, brucine, further including,
among others, 12-hydroxystrychnine, alpha-colubrine, ica-
jine, vomicine, novacine. There are also chemical strains for
which brucine predominates, and others in which strychnine

occurs only in traces.
Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains strychnine and brucine, is psy-

choanaleptic (see Nux Vomica).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Preparations made of the Ignatius Bean are
used to treat faintness. Therapeutic use as a bitter or tonic is
not recommended.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for nervous disorders,
cramps in hollow organs and muscles, and depressive states.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is severely toxic due to the strychnine content and
should not be administered in allopathic medicine.

----- PAGE 668 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning can occur after ingestion of one
bean. Strychnine doses of as little as 15 mg (30-50 mg of the
drug) initially cause restlessness, feelings of anxiety, height-
ening of sense perception, enhanced reflexes, equilibrium
disorders and painful stiffness of the neck and back
musculature. Later, twitching, tonic spasms of the masseter
and neck musculature, and finally, painful convulsions of the
entire body are triggered by visual or tactile stimulation.
Dyspnea comes following spasm of the breathing muscula-
ture. Death occurs through suffocation or exhaustion. The
lethal dosage for an adult is approximately 50 mg strychnine
(1-2. gm of the drug). Chronic intake of subconvulsive
dosages can also lead to death under similar conditions after
a period of weeks. This is due to an accumulation of drug in
the body, particularly in those who have liver damage.

Following the administration of a watery suspension of
activated charcoal, the therapy for poisoning consists of
keeping external stimulation to a minimum through place-
ment in a quiet, warm, darkened room. Convulsions should
be treated with dosages of diazepam or barbital (i.v.). High-
calorie glucose infusions should also be given. Intubation
and oxygen respiration may also be required. Gastric lavage
should be avoided, due to the danger of triggering convul-
sions. Analeptics or phenothiazines should not be adminis-
tered. Because of the possibility of unwanted effects
occurring in conjunction with the administration of therapeu-
tic dosages, one should forgo any administration of the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: It is used in the manufacture of

strychnine and brucine.

Daily Dosage: If the drug is taken internally, the maximum
single dose is 0.1 gm; the maximum daily dosage is 0.3 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day (HAB1).

Storage: Mark the container as "poisonous" and keep
tightly sealed; protect the drug from cool air and light.

LITERATURE
Bisset NG, Phillipson JD, INP 39:263. 1976.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lenrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

IMMORTELLE 417

Marini-Bettolo GB, Advances in the research of curare and
Strychnos. In: Rend Accad Naz 40:1975-1976, 1-2. 61-76.
1977.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart. Jena. New
York 1995.

Tlex aquifolium
See Holly

Ilex paraguariensis
See Mate

Illictum verum

See Star Anise

Immortelle

Helichrysum arenarium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the composite
heads and the whole of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The small orange flowers are in dense
clustered cymes. The bracts are dry-membranous and usually
lemon-yellow. All the florets are tubular and funnel-shaped.
The fruit is pentangular with a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 10 to 30 cm
high. The stem is erect, unbranched and gray-tomentose. The
leaves are alternate. The lower leaves are spatulate and the
upper ones lanceolate, acute and as gray-tomentose as the
stem.

Characteristics: Immortelle has a weak aroma.
Habitat: The plant grows in Europe and the U.S.

Production: Immortelle consists of the dried flowers of
Helichrysum arenarium gathered shortly before fully
unfolding.

----- PAGE 669 -----
418 /IMMORTELLE

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with the
capitula of Helichrysum stoechas and Helichrysum
augustifolium.

Other Names: Common Shrubby Everlasting, Eternal Flow-
er, Goldilocks, Yellow Chaste Weed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: in particular isosalipurposide (intensive yellow
chalcone glycoside), naringenin-5-glucosyl-glucoside, heli-
chrysin A and B (C-2-enantiomeric narigenin-5-O-gluco-
sides, B-salipurposide)

Phthalides: including 5-methoxy-7-hydroxy-phthalides and
their monoglucoside

Alpha-pyrone derivatives: arenole, homoarenole
Sesquiterpene bitter principles

Volatile oil (traces)

Caffeic acid derivatives

EFFECTS
The drug has antibacterial principles, and is mildly choleretic
and mildly spasmolytic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: The drug is used as an adjunct in the
treatment of chronic cholecystitis and gallbladder complaints
with accompanying cramps. In folk medicine, it is used as a
diuretic and for jaundice, gout, rheumatism, kidney com-
plaints and dropsy.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Because of the bile-stimulating effect of the drug, it is not to

be administered when there is biliary obstruction. The
presence of gallstone illnesses can lead to colic.

PRECAUTICNS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Immortelle is used as a comminut-
ed herb for infusions and other galenic preparations for
internal use. Pharmaceutical cholagogues contain extracts of
the drug. It is an inactive ingredient in many tea specialties.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include teas, drops and compound preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over 2
teaspoonfuls of the drug (3 to 4 g). Allow to stand for 10

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

minutes and then strain. Drink throughout the day and make
a fresh batch daily.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 g of drug.
Storage: Store Immortelle protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Derkach AI et al., Chem Nat Comp 6:722. 1986.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Dmgs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mericli AH et al., Sci Pharm 54:363. 1986.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Impatiens biflora
Weed

See Jewel

Impomoea_ hederacea

See Morning Glory

Indian Hemp
Apocynum cannabinum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root and the
juice obtained from the fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The small whitish-green, occasionally
pink to violet flowers are on pods that grow to 2 to 4 mm in
length. The calyx is deeply lobed and half as long as the
corolla. The petals are oblong-lanceolate. The tufts of hair on
the seeds are 2 to 3 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: (indian Hemp is a perennial up to 2 m
tall. It has an erect stem, which branches at the top. The
whole plant is glabrous or downy. The short-petioled leaves
are 5 to 11 cm long, yellowish-green and oblong or oblong-
ovoid. The tips of the leaves are initially rounded and then
terminate abruptly in a thorny tip.

----- PAGE 670 -----
W

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Characteristics: The plant has an acrid taste and is to a
certain degree poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is found mostly in the U.S. and Canada.

Not to be Confused With: Indian Hemp (Cannabis indica),
though both species contain latex and their tough, fibrous
bark can be used as a substitute for hemp, hence the name.

Production: Indian Hemp root is the root of Apocynum
cannabinum, which is gathered (and sometimes dried), in
autumn. The plant is cultivated as a crop in Germany and
Russia.

Other Names: Bitterroot, Catchfly, Dogbane, Fly-Trap,
Honeybloom, Milk Ipecac, Milkweed, Mountain Hemp,
Wallflower. Wild Cotton, Canadian Hemp

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolids): in particular
cymarin, k-strophantoside, apocannoside, cynocannoside

EFFECTS

The high content of cardenolide glycosides causes bradycar-
dia and increased contraction of the heart. Blood pressure is
lowered, and rebound vagotonia hypertension can occur. The
drug increases diuresis and stimulation of the vasomotor
centers. It causes more severe irritation of the intestinal
mucous membrane than digitalis and strophantus prepara-
tions. It has a lower therapeutic effect on atrial fibrillation

than digitalis.

Cardenollide glycoside cymine has an effect that is similar
but generally weaker than glycoside strophantine, with the
exception of the stronger diuretic effect in edema. It is less
cumulative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The juice of the fresh plant is used in the
treatment of condylomatosis and warts. American Indians
use the roots for asthma, dropsy, coughs, syphilis and
rheumatism. In folk medicine, the root is used to strengthen
weak heart muscles following pneumonia, valvular insuffi-
ciency and senile heart. It is also used as a diuretic.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include cardiac
insufficiency, renal inflammation with edema, and vomiting
with diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug should be administered only by someone who is
expert in its use. Topical irritation of the mucous membrane
of the alimentary canal, accompanied by nausea and
vomiting, is more common than in other drugs containing
cardenolid glycosides. Vomiting and gastrointestinal irrita-
tions can occur, even with the administration of therapeutic

INDIAN NETTLE /419

doses of the drug because of the mucous membrane-irritating
resin fraction.

OVERDOSAGE

For possible symptoms of overdose and treatment of
poisonings see Digitalis folium. Despite the strong efficacy
of the drug's cardioactive steroid glycosides in parenteral
application, serious poisoning in the course of peroral
administration is unlikely, due to the low resorption rate.

DOSAGE
Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of die liquid extract is
10 to 30 drops to be taken 3 times daily or 0.3 to 0.6 ml. ofa
1:10 tincture.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or every 1 to 3 days (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc (HAB1).

Storage: Store in secure area as the drug is poisonous.

LITERATURE
Belkin M et al., (1952) J Nat Cancer Inst 13:742.

Destuelles J et al.. Therapie 28:103-113. 1973.

Kupchan SM et al.. J Med Chem 7:803-805. 1964.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Indian Nettle

Acalypha indica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the whole
flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is spike-like, has 3 to 7
female flowers below, which consist only of a 3-carpeled-

----- PAGE 671 -----
420 /INDIAN NETTLE

ovary with 3 styles. The male flowers are above these with 4
sepals and 8 stamens. On the tips of the young flower shoots
are T-shaped, hairy structures approximately 2 mm _ wide
with 2 side openings. The fruit is a 3-chambered capsule
with 3 gray-brown seeds of approximately | mm diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Indian nettle is an annual, upright,
nettle-like diclinous, monoecious herb, which grows up to 60
cm high. The leaves are alternate, long-petiolate, round to
rhomboid, 2 to 6 cm long, 15 to 5 cm wide narrowing to the
petiole. They are matte above, glossy beneath with strongly
protruding ribs, dentate at the front and smooth toward the
base. The margin, petiole and ribs are weakly pubescent with
2 awl-like stipules. The stem is usually unbranched and
pubescent. The main root is unbranched with thin secondary

roots.

Habitat: from India, Indochina and

Ethiopia.

The plant comes

Other Names: Cat's Nettle

Production: Indian nettle is the whole fresh plant of
Acalypha indica collected during the flowering season and
dried.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: acalyphin (0.3%, 3-cyanopyridone
derivative)

Tannins: including tri-O-methyl ellagic acid
Volatile oil

EFFECTS
The drug is hemostyptic and antibacterial in effect (cyano-
genic glucoside acalyphine). In vitro, proof of an accelera-
tion of blood coagulation exists, which is due to the high
levels of calcium salts. The leaf latex is said to have emetic
and expectorant effects upon children. When administered as
a suppository for constipation, it is said to immediately relax
the contracted anal sphincter.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally used for worm infestation and
constipation, for pregnant women, also for upset stomach
and bronchitis. Externally used for eczema and skin rashes,
ear ache (decoction), tumors (juice), as well as for cuts and
other wounds, and also for inflammation of the joints (cut
leaves and stems).

Indian Medicine: Preparations are used for ulcers, changes to
the skin, bronchitis, constipation, croup and earache.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects other than possible gastric
irritation are known in conjunction with the proper adminis-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

tration of designated therapeutic dosages. Dermatitis has
been observed following skin contact with the latex of the
fresh plant. Cyanide poisonings from the drug are unlikely,
due to the relatively low levels of cyanogenic glycoside
content and the lack of stimuli leading to ingestion.

OVERDOSAGE

In animal experiments (rabbits), administration of large
quantities of the drug led to gastrointestinal inflammation
and to a change in blood color to chocolate-brown,
indicating the presence of additional toxic substances.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid preparations and other
galenic preparations for internal use and liquid preparations
for external use.

Preparation:

Decoction: 100 gm drug to | liter water

Extract: 1000 gm drug to 1000 ml 90% ethanol (V/V)
Infusion: 50 gm drug to 1 liter water

Juice: 800 gm drug to 800 ml water and 200 ml ethanol 90%
Tincture: 125 gm drug to 1000 ml ethanol 90% (V/V)

Daily Dosage:

Decoction — single dose: 15 to 30 ml
Extract — single dose: 0.3 to 2 ml
Infusion — single dose: 15 to 30 ml
Juice — single dose: 0.3 to 2 ml

Tincture — single dose: 2 to 4 ml

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Senanayake N, Sanmuganathan PS, Acalypha indica induced
haemolysis in G6PD deficiency. Ceylon Med J, 26:1996 Jan.

Senanayake N, Sanmuganathan PS, Acute intravascular
haemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient
patients following ingestion of herbal broth containing Acalypha
indica. Trop Doct, 26:32, 1996 Jan.

Shanmugasundaram KR, Seethapathy PG, Shanmugasundaram
ER, Anna Pavala Sindhooram - an antiatherosclerotic Indian
drug. J Ethnopharmacol, 7:247-65, 1983 May.

----- PAGE 672 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Indian Physic
Gillenia trifoliata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried and
pulverized root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white and tinged with red.
They are arranged in a few loose, terminal panicles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This perennial herb has irregular,
cylindrical roots, which are usually transversely grooved and
up to 15 cm long. The external surface is blackish, and the
transverse section shows a thick, reddish bark, which easily
separates from the white woody center. Sprouting from the
root are a number of stems 60 to 90 cm high. The leaves and
leaflets have various forms.

Characteristics: Indian Physic is odorless, but the plant has a
pleasantly bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the eastern U.S., and is
cultivated in Europe and elsewhere.

Production: Indian Physic is the root bark of Gillenia
trifoliata.

Other Names: Indian Hippo, Bowman's Root, American
TIpecacuanha, Gillenia

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Resins

Gillein (Gillenin)
The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
The drug is an expectorant, emetic and a "blood purifier."

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used in the treatment of
digestive disorders, particularly in cases in which a safe and
reliable emetic is required. Folk medicine applications also
include use with dyspepsia, dropsy, rheumatism and chronic
constipation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a powder,
an infusion or a tonic for internal use.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

INDIAN SQUILL/421

Indian Squill
Urginea indica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The parts used medicinally are the horizon-
tal and vertically cut strips of the dried, middle, fleshy onion
layers of the white flowering variety (which are collected
after flowering) as well as the fresh, fleshy onion layers of
the white and red varieties.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a 10 to 60 cm long,
loose raceme with 4 to 30 flowers in the axils of the bracts,
which usually drop before the flower. The peduncle is
upright, up to 1 m high, cylindrical, ribbed, glabrous and
reddish-brown. The pedicle is up to 3.5 cm long, splayed
when in flower and upright when the fruit is ripe. The
flowers are radial with 6 corolla-like tepals, which are 5 to
12 mm long, campanulate and reddish-green. There are 6
stamens, 3 fused carpels and a 3-chambered, superior ovary.
The fruit is a capsule, 10 to 25 cm long, with 12 to 30 seeds.
The seeds are clavate to elliptical with a diameter of 4 to 10
mm, dark brown to black, with orbicular, translucent wings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Indian squill is a herbaceous
perennial bulb plant that reaches up to 35 cm. The flowering
varieties might reach up to 1 m high. The leaves are basal, in
2 rows, 13 to 35 cm long, 6 to 30 mm wide, linear to
lanceolate or sword-shaped, flat, parallel-veined, glabrous
and whorled at the base. The bulb is whitish, globose to
ovoid with a diameter of 3 to 7 cm. The outer layer is
membranous, the inner one fleshy.

Characteristics: The bulb tastes bitter; slimy.
Habitat: India and Sri Lanka

Production: Indian squill is the dried and cut bulb of Urginea
indica freed from the outer layers shortly after harvesting.
The bulbs are dug up, cleaned and cut into quarters. Then the
core is removed and the remaining pieces are dried in the sun
or over a fire until the weight is reduced by 80%.

Not to be Confused With: Because of the similarity in name,
it can be confused with Scilla indica.

Other Names: South Indian Squill

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (bufadienolids, 0.1 to 1.5%):
chief components proscillaridin A and scillaren A, including
as well scillipheoside, scillarenine-bis-alpha-rhamnoside,
scillicyanogenine glucoside, scillicyanosidine glucoside,
scilliglaucosidine glucoside

Mucilages (50%, glucomannoxylans)

----- PAGE 673 -----
422 /INDIAN SQUILL

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, campesterol,

stigmasterol

EFFECTS
The drug's content levels of cardioactive glycosides explain
the administration in the presence of cardiac insufficiency
and cardio-conditioned edema formation. The expectorant
may be due the drug's effect as a mild irritant of the
gastrointestinal tract combined with an increase in secretions
of the bronchial system. The drug's administration as an
antirheumatic appears plausible, due to the skin-irritating
effect of the oxalate raphides it contains.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: For chronic bronchitis, asthma and cardiac
insufficiency as a treatment of second choice in the case of
hypersensitivity to digitalis.

Indian Medicine: For edema, digestion disturbances, menstr-
uation disorders, worm infestation, chronic bronchitis, asth-
ma, rheumatism and skin conditions.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Neither the drug nor pure glycosides should be administered
in the presence of first- and second-degree AV-Block,
hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
carotid sinus syndrome, ventricle tachycardia, thoracic aortic
aneurysm, WPW syndrome.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Because of the limited therapeutic range of the cardioactive
steroid glycosides, a number of patients receiving no more
than therapeutic dosages might experience the following side
effects: hypertonia in gastrointestinal area, loss of appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea, headache and irregular pulse.

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous administration of
arrhythmogenic substances (sympathomimetics, methyl xan-
thines, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, quinidine) increases the
risk of cardiac arrhythmias. Contact witii the latex of the
fresh bulbs can lead to skin inflammation (Scilla dermatitis).

OVERDOSAGE

Overdose could lead to hypertonia in gastrointestinal area,
loss of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, headache and irregular
pulse along with the following:

- heart: cardiac rhythm disorders as serious as life-threaten-
ing ventricular tachycardias, atrial tachycardias with atrio-
ventricular block.

- CNS: dizziness, vision disorders, depressions, states of
confusion, hallucinations, psychoses.

Lethal dosages lead to cardiac arrest or to asphyxiation.
Because of the difficulties involved in standardizing the

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

drug, the administration of pure glycosides is to be preferred
(proscillaridin A).

The first-aid measures to be taken with poisonings are gastric
lavage and instillation of activated charcoal. All other
measures proceed according to the symptoms: careful
potassium replacement for potassium loss; phenytoin as an
antiarrhythmic for ectopic stimulation formation in the
ventricle; lidocaine for ventricular extrasystole; atropine or
orciprenaline for pronounced bradycardia. The prophylactic
insertion of a cardiac pacemaker is recommended. Hemoper-
fusion for the elimination of the glycosides or cholestyra-
mine administration for the interruption of the enterohepatic
circulation are possible.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb, cut drug, powdered
drug and other galenic preparations for internal and external
use.

Preparation: Liquid extract: 100 g drug are percolated with
70% ethanol and then evaporated to 850 ml; the rest is filled
to 1000 ml again with 70% ethanol and filtered (BPC79).

Tincture: 100 gm drug is macerated with 1000 ml 60%
ethanol (BPC79).

Acetic acid maceration: 100 gm drug is macerated with 1000
ml acetic acid in a closed vessel and then filtered. Finally the
filtrate is heated and re-filtered after 7 days (BPC79).

Daily Dosage:

Drug: single dose: 60 to 200 mg; Tincture: 0.3 to 2 ml;
Liquid extract: 0.06 to 0.2 ml; Acetic acid essence: 0.6 to 2
ml.

Storage: Store in a dry place and below 25°C.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994

Inula britannica
See British Elecampane
(Xuan-Fu-Hua)

Inula helenium

See Elecampane

----- PAGE 674 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Ipecac

Cephaelis ipecacuanha

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the pulverized
roots of the 3-to-4-year-old plant, which have been dug up
and dried quickly in the sun.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal, capitulum-
shaped inflorescences surrounded by 4 to 6 bracts. The
individual florets have a 5-tipped calyx, ciliated at the tips
with a white campanulate-conical, 5-tipped corolla. A bitter,
dark purple, fleshy drupe develops from the 2-carpeled
ovary.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cephaelis ipecacuanha is a perenni-
al, evergreen, leafy plant about 40 cm high with a 2 to 4 mm
thick rhizome from which sprout numerous 20 cm long
fibrous roots. Some of these roots develop into tubers. The
green stem may be creeping or ascending, simple or
branched. It is somewhat quadrangular, occasionally bears
adventitious roots. The opposite leaves are entire-margined,
and the leaf blade, narrows into the short petiole. There are
stipules at the base of the leaf, which are slit like awls and
fused together with the petiole-like leaf sheath.

Habitat: Indigenous to the sparser woods of Brazil; cultivat-
ed in India and on the Malaysian archipelago.

Production: Ipecac is the root of Cephaelis ipecacuanha. The
subterranean parts of the 3-to-4-year-old plants are quickly
dried in the sun and then cut into pieces of 5 to 10 cm in
length.

Other Names: Ipecacuanha, Ipecacuanha Rio, Matto Grosso

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids of the emetine type (2-4%): chief
alkaloids emetine and cephaelin

Starch (30 to 40%)

EFFECTS
Emetine hydrochloride and cephaelin hydrochloride, alka-

loids contained in the drug, have a locally irritating effect on
the gastric mucous membrane and are thus responsible for
the reflex increase of bronchial secretions and the expecto-
rant effect. The saponins probably support this effect.

The drug affects the sensory stomach nerves; it is secretory
in small doses and emetic in larger doses. It is also
spasmolytic and expectorant. It is partially effective in
amoebic dysentery due to the action of the alkaloid emetin
on the magna-form of the pathogen.

IPECAC 423

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Ipecac is contained in expectorants and
secretory preparations; it is used for amoebic dysentery, as a
bronchial treatment and as an emetic in cases of poisoning. It
is also used as an expectorant and to soothe and assist in
coughing up of thick phlegm and in the treatment of
croupous bronchitis in children.

Homeopathic Uses: Ypecae is used to treat bronchitis.
asthma, whooping cough, gastrointestinal inflammations.
disorders in blood pressure and bleeding of the mucous
membranes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages as an expectorant. Administration over
extended periods can lead to myopathias. Frequent contact
with the drug can trigger allergic reactions of the skin and
the mucous membranes ("druggist's asthma," the allergen is
a glycoprotein).

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Higher dosages of the drug (1 to 2 gm) have a nauseate
effect (therapeutically used as an emetic). Toxic dosages can
lead to mucous membrane erosion in the gastrointestinal
tract, tachycardia, drop in blood pressure and cardiac rhythm
disorders, as well as disorders in respiratory function and
possibly to convulsions, shock and coma.

Following intestinal emptying (sodium sulfate), the treatment
for poisonings consists of the administration of generous
amounts of liquids (warm tea), instillation of activated
charcoal and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth), me treat-
ment of spasms with diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution
and the countering of any acidosis imbalance that may
appear through sodium bicarbonate infusions. In the event of
shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused. Moni-
toring of kidney function is necessary. Intubation and oxygen
respiration may also be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ipecac is used orally as a tincture.
extract and fluid extract and in medicinal preparations with a
standardized alkaloid content.

Preparation: Ipecac extract: After the alkaloids have been
determined the powder is stabilized with lactose or dextrin,

(DAB 10).

Tincture: | part root powder with 8 to 12 parts 70% ethanol
(DAB 10).

These preparations are stabilized to a standardized alkaloid
content.

----- PAGE 675 -----
424 /IPECAC

Dosage: Infusion 0.5%: 10 ml (adults)

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day; suppositories: 2 to 3 times daily (chronic) (HAB1).

Storage: Store carefully in the dark in tightly sealed

containers.

LITERATURE
Berrens L, Young E, (1963) Int. Arch All. Appl. Immunol.

22:51.

Garrettson LK, Ipecac home use- we need hope replaced with
data- editoral comment. In: J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 29(4):515.
1991,
Kleinschartz W, Litovitz T, Overda GM, Bailey KM, Kuba A,
The effect of milk on Ipecac-induced emesis. In: J Toxicol
Clint Toxicol 29(4):505. 1991.

Kunkel N, Vergiftungen: Aktivkohle, Ipecacuanhasirup oder
Magenspulung? In: DAZ 132(30): 1587. 1992.

Nagakura N et al.. Four tetrahydroisoquinoline-monoterpene
glucosides from Cephaelis ipecacuanha. In: PH 32:761. 1993.

Wiegrebe W, Kramer WJ, Shamma M, The emetine alkaloids.
n: JNP 47(3):397. 1984.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Hombopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ipomoea orizabensis

See Mexican Scammony Root

Ipomoea purga
See Jalap

Tporuru
Alchornea floribunda

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The female inflorescence is apical and up
to 25 cm long; the male inflorescence is axillary and 10 to 25
cm long with pale green flowers. The ovary is 3-carpeled and
fused. The fruit is a 3-chambered capsule with glossy
brownish seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Alchornea floribunda is a tree or
shrub up to 4.5 m, occasionally up to 10 m high. The leaves
are clustered at the end of the glabrous branches. They are
short-petiolate, lanceolate to spatulate, 15 to 35 cm long, 6 to
13 cm wide, glabrous above and slightly downy beneath. The
stipules are 3 to 9 mm long and downy.

Habitat: Tropical Africa, Amazon region

Production: Niando root is the fresh or dried root of
Alchornea floribunda collected in the wild.

Other Names: Macochihua, Niando, Malan

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Imidazole alkaloids (0.6 to 1.2%): alchornein (0.4%),

isoalchornein (0.005%)
Tannins

EFFECTS

The drug has stimulating and hallucinogenic effect upon
humans, due to the alkaloids it contains (chief active
ingredient alchornein). An elevation in the sensitivity of the
sympaticus to adrenaline was demonstrated in animal
experiments. In- comparison to atropine, alchorneine tartrate
has a strong anticholinergic, vagolytic and peristalsis-inhibit-
ing effect; in addition, it exhibits the action of a weak local

anesthetic.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug can be used for respiratory and
urinary tract infections and conditions of the gastrointestinal

----- PAGE 676 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

tract. The indigenous people of the Amazon have used the
bark and roots of Iporuru for many different purposes for
hundreds of years. One of the more popular preparations is
an alcoholic bark tincture used to treat rheumatism, arthritis,
colds and muscle pains. In Africa the drug is used frequently

W as an aphrodisiac and hallucinogen.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Nothing has been documented regarding side effects in
connection with therapeutic administration.

OVERDOSAGE
The drug is considered severely toxic. High dosages in
animal experiments led to severe excitation and spasms.
Cases of death through exhaustion have been observed
among humans following over-stimulation and hallucination.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb and cut drug prepara-

tions for internal use.

Preparation: There are traditional preparations in the form
of macerates or palm wine with the appropriate dosage.

LITERATURE

de Smet PA, Some ethnopharmacological notes on African
hallucinogens. J Ethnopharmacol, 261: Drug Information Center,
Royal Dutch Association for the Advancement of Pharmacy.
The Hague, The Netherlands. 96.

Duke J, and Vasquez R, Amazonian Ethnobotanical Dictionary,
CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton. FL, 1994.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Raymond-Hamet Goutarel R, Are the stimulant effects of
Alchomea floribunda Mueller Arg. in men due to yohimbine. C
R Acad Sci Hebd Seances Acad Sci D, 261:3223-4, 1965 Oct
18.

Iris species

See Orris

Jaborandi
Pilocarpus microphyllus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers are in terminal or
axillary racemes that are up to 30 cm long and 0.5 cm wide.
The pedicles are 0.1 to 15 mm long and have alternate

JABORANDI/425

bracts. The flowers have a diameter of 4 to 5 cm and are
glabrous. The 5 sepals are free, broadly triangular to
orbicular and coriaceous. The petals have forward-bending
tips and are thinly coriaceous and somewhat translucent. The
oval anthers have an oblong gland. The disc is 0.5 mm high
and 13 to 1.5 mm in diameter. The ovary is 0.5 mm and
extends past the disc with a head-like stigma. The mericarp
has roundish, flattened, black-brown seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a tree or shrub 3 to 7 m
high with a trunk diameter of 3 to 7.5 cm. The branches are
pubescent when young and glabrous when older. The leaves
are alternate to opposite, odd-pinnate with | to 5 pairs of
pinna. The pinna are sessile, elliptical, distinctly asymmetri-
cal at the base and have an indented tip. The leaflets are dull
green, up to 5 cm long and 3 cm wide, with entire, slightly
recurved margins and an uneven base. The ribs are promi-
nent on the upper surface and have visible oil cells.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and the odor slightly
aromatic.

Habitat: The plant grows in the northeastern part of Brazil.

Production: Jaborandi leaves are the dried leaves of Pilocar-
pus microphyllus.

Other Names: Arruda Brava, Arruda do Mato, Jamguarandi,
Juarandi

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Imidazole alkaloids (0.5-1.0%): chief alkaloid is “-pilocar-
pine, through drying and under storage conditions changing
over to some extent into isopilocarpine, companion alkaloids
including pilocarpidine, pilosine and others

Volatile oil (0.5%): chief components are limonene and
undecanone

EFFECTS
The drug affects the parasympathetic system. It increases the
secretion of saliva, sweat, gastric juices and tears, and
stimulates the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract,
bronchi, bile duct and bladder.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Jaborandi has been used in the treatment of
glaucoma. In folk medicine, it has been used for epilepsy,
convulsions, gonorrhea, ischuria, as an anesthetic for mucous
membranes, for fever, influenza, pneumonia, gastrointestinal
inflammations, kidney disease, psoriasis, neurosis and
poisoning.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug is used today as an industrial

----- PAGE 677 -----
426 /JABORANDI

agent for the manufacture of pilocarpine, but is used

medicinally only for homeopathic applications.

The incorrect administration of pilocarpine eyedrops can
lead to poisoning through leakage into the nose or mouth.
Symptoms include bradycardia, bronchial spasms, colics,
collapse and possible cardiac arrest, convulsions, drop in
blood pressure, dyspnea, nausea, severe salivation, strong
secretion of sweat and vomiting.

Pregnancy: Jaborandi should not be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
The lethal dose is approximately 60 mg of pilocarpine,
corresponding to 5 to 10 gm of the drug. Individuals with
cardiac and circulatory illnesses are particularly susceptible.
Following stomach and intestinal emptying (gastric lavage,
sodium sulphate), the treatment for poisonings consists of the
instillation of activated charcoal with atropine and the use of
diazepam in the case of spasms. Forced dialysis and the
administration of plasma volume expanders can also be
useful.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Jaborandi is obsolete by itself as a

drug.

LITERATURE
Craveiro AA et al., (1979) J Nat Prod 42:169.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tedeschi E, Kamionsky J, Fackler S, Sarel S, Isr J Chem
11:731-733. 1973.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Jack-in-the-Pulpit
Arisaema atrorubens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence (spadix) is yellowish-
white, later brown, club-shaped and surrounded by a larger
spathe. The spathe is greenish on the outside and white-
striped with a weak purple-violet tinge on the inside. The
fruit is a scarlet berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Jack-in-the-Pulpit is a herbaceous
perennial rhizome, which extends up to 30 cm high. The
leaves are basal and trifoliolate-digitate. The leaflets are
ovoid, acuminate and entire. The rhizome is tuberous with
hair-like roots at the top, shaped into a wreath.

Habitat: The plant is found in North America and China.

Production: Arisaema root is the fresh rhizome of Arisaema

atrorubens.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Polysaccharides: — starch

Pungent substances: structures are unknown (only in the

fresh root)

EFFECTS

The pungent substances contained in the fresh drug are
severely irritating to skin and mucous membranes, as well as
being toxic. This toxicity is eliminated through dehydration
and/or extended cooking. The dried or cooked root serves as

a source of starch.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Preparations have been used for chronic
bronchitis, asthma, colic, gastrointestinal disturbances, in-
flammation of the oral mucosa, rheumatism, for bumps, eye
inflammations and abscesses (as a poultice) and as a

contraceptive by the Hopi Indians.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The fresh rhizome is considered toxic. Internal administra-
tion leads to severe mucous membrane irritation and acute
gastrointestinal inflammations, and skin inflammation.

Pregnancy: Contraindicated in pregnancy (used as a contra-
ceptive in folk medicine).

DOSAGE
No information is available.

----- PAGE 678 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Jacob's Ladder

Polemonium caeruleum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers grow in clusters at
the end of the lateral branches. They are open, slightly
hanging and have 5 sepals and 5 petals. The corolla is 2 to
2.5 cm, deep blue and has a short pollen tube. The stamens
are enclosed in the tube and have yellow anthers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial. The plant is
bright green and smooth. The upper section is covered in
short glandular hairs. The rhizome is short and creeping, and
the stem is 45 to 90 cm high, hollow and quadrangular. The
leaves with numerous pairs of leaflets are 125 to 2.5 cm
long. These are pinnate and alternate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central and northern
Europe.

Production: Jacob's Ladder is the aerial part of Polemonium
caeruleum.

Other Names: Charity, English Greek Valerian

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins

Flavonoids

EFFECTS
All parts of the plant contain saponin, which has astringent,

diaphoretic and hemolytic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Jacob's Ladder is used for febrile and

inflammatory conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The ground drug is used as an

infusion.

JALAP 427

LITERATURE
Reznicek G et al., A new ester saponine ftom Polemonium
caeruleum. In: PM 59(7)12. 1993.

Further information in:
Ker W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Jalap
Ipomoea purga

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root tuber.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are single or in twos
(occasionally in threes or fours), radial, with their structures
grouped in fives. There are 5 narrow-lanceolate, purple-
punctate sepals. The petals are fused to a 7 cm wide, funnel-
shaped red corolla, and there are 5 stamens. The superior
ovary is 2-chambered. The fruit is a capsule with 4 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This winding herb grows up to 4 m
high. The leaves are alternate, up to 9 cm long and 5 cm
wide, cordate, acuminate and entire. The stem is purple-
tinged and glabrous. The rhizome is tuberously thickened.
milky, approximately 5 cm long, with tuberous, thickened
secondary roots.

Habitat: Ipomoea purga grows in South and Central
America, Mexico and Jamaica.

Production: Jalap resin (also known as jalap or Jalapae
resina) is the resin of Ipomoea purga derived from alcoholic
extraction of the jalap root powder. The tuberous, tfiickene
secondary roots (black rhubarb tubers) of Ipomoea jalapae
tuber are harvested from May to autumn and dried in the sun-
on hot ash or over an open fire

Not to be Confused With: Jalap resin may be confused with
Brazil jalap, Aloe, Orizaba jalap, colophonium, starch.
dextrin and guaiac resin. Confusion can arise between Jalap
tuber and Ipomoea orizabensis, Ipomoea operculata, Opercu-
lina turpethum, Convolvulus scammonia and Mirabilis
jalapa.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
Ipomoea purga is a centuries-old purgative and vermifuge. It
has also been used as an anthelmintic.

COMPOUNDS: JALAP RESIN

Glycoretines: convulvin (55%, non-ether-soluble), jalapin
(7%, ether-soluble), convulvin and jalapin are mixtures made
up of resinous glycosides of hydroxy-fatty acids (CI2 to
CI6) with oligosaccharides, their hydroxy | groups estered to

----- PAGE 679 -----
428 /JALAP

the fatty acid esters with, among others, acetic acid,
propionic acid, iso-butyric acid, alpha-methylbutyric acid,
tiglic acid and iso-valeric acid or n-valeric acid.

EFFECTS: JALAP RESIN
The drug has a drastic laxative effect due to the glycoretines

it contains.

COMPOUNDS: JALAP TUBER

Resins (5 to 209c): glycoretines (see Jalap resin)
Polysaccharides: starch

EFFECTS: JALAP TUBER
The drug has a drastic laxative effect due to the glycoretines
it contains.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

JALAP RESIN
Unproven Uses: Used for constipation, colic and pain in the

intestinal region, dysentery, colitis and rheumatism.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for restlessness at night
in children and diarrhea in homeopathic medicine.

JALAP TUBER
Unproven Uses: Jalap tuber is considered to be obsolete. In

the past, it was used as a laxative and purgative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

JALAP RESIN
General: The drug's laxative effect frequently produces
nausea, cramp-like pains and gastroenteritis.

Pregnancy: Administration is not advisable during pregnan-
cy, particularly because of the possible teratogenic effect.

JALAP TUBER
General: Jalap tuber is to be used only under the supervision
of an expert qualified in the appropriate use of this
substance. The drug's laxative effect is frequently accompa-
nied by nausea, cramp-like pains and gastroenteritis.

Pregnancy: The administration of jalap tuber is not advisable
during pregnancy, particularly because of the possible
teratogenic effect.

DOSAGE
JALAP RESIN
Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

Daily Dosage: 15 g drug; maximum single dosage: 0.1 to
0.3 g drug

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10
globules, every to 30 to 60 minutes (acute) and | to 3 times
daily (chronic); parenterally: 1 to ml sc acute: 3 times daily;
chronic once a day (HAB34).

Storage: Store securely in a tightly sealed container,
protected from light.

JALAP TUBER
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug

Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

Daily Dosage: maximum 4.5 g drug; single dosage: maxi-
mum 15 g drug

Storage: Store protected from light in a secure, tightly sealed
container.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Jamaica Dogwood

Piscidia piscipula

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has blue to white flowers with
white stripes out of which 4 pods with 4 longitudinal wings
develop.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a tree or shrub up to 15
m high with compound leaves. The bark is 3 to 6 mm thick
and dark gray-brown with thin, longitudinal and transverse
ridges. It is roughish and wrinkled, and somewhat fissured.
The fracture is tough, fibrous, showing blue-green or
brownish-green patches.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and acrid and the odor
characteristic.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to Central America and the
northern parts of South America.

Production: Jamaica Dogwood is the root bark of Piscidia
piscipula.

Other Names: Dogwood, Fish Poison Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Isoflavonoids: including among others jamaicine, ichthy-
none, the rotenoids rotenone, milleton, isomilletone

Tannins

EFFECTS
Research indicates mat Jamaica Dogwood is mildly sedative

and spasmolytic.

----- PAGE 680 -----
Afc

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for states of anxiety and

fear and as a daytime sedative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug and liquid extract are no
longer in use. It has been used in some medicinal

preparations.

LITERATURE
Aurousseau M et al., (1965) Ann Pharm France 23:251.

Heller W, Tamm C, (1975) Helv Chim Acta 58:974.

Nordal A et al.. (1966) Acta Chem Scand 20:1431.

Pietta P, Zio C. (1983) J Chrom. 260:497.

Schwartz JSP et al.. (1964) Tetrahedron 20:1317.

Stamm OA et al., (1958) Helv Chim Acta 41:2006.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food. Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Jambolan
Syzygium cumini

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried bark, the
dried seed kernels, the disintegrated kernels, the dried trunk

bark and the macerated seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in compound, triple
panicles. They are sessile, whitish, fragrant, and are usually
on older branches behind the leaves. The calyx tube is 4 to 6
mm long and twisted. The petals are hood-like. There are
approximately 60 stamens, which are as long as the calyx
tube. The drupe is initially pink, becoming black when ripe.
The drupe is 12 to 3 cm long, globular to ovate, 1-valved, 1-

JAMBOLAN/429

seeded and edible. The seeds are subcylindrical, about 6 mm
long and rather less in diameter. One end of the seed is
truncated and has a central depression. Externally, they are
hard, tough and blackish-brown; internally they are pinkish-
brown.

Characteristics: The taste of the seeds is faintly astringent
and aromatic; the odor is slight.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the east Indian Malayian
region. It has spread as far as China and Australia and is
cultivated on the Antilles.

Production: Jambolan seed consists of the dried seed of
Syzygium cumini (syn. Syzygium jambolana). Because the
commodity consists mostly of the dried, fallen apart cotyle-
dons, they must be broken apart in order to produce the drug.
Jambolan bark consists of the dried bark from the trunk of
Syzygium cumini (syn Syzygium jambolana).

Other Names: Jambul, Jamum, Java Plum, Rose Apple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: JAMBOLAN SEED

Fatty oil (3-5%): containing oleic acid, myristic acid,
palmitic acid and linoleic acid, sterculiac acid and malvalic
acid (cyclopropylidenic acids), among others, as well as
vernolic acid (epoxy fatty acid)

Tannins (6%): including corilagin, 3,3'-Di-0-methyl ellagic
acid, galloyl glucose

EFFECTS: JAMBOLAN SEED

Anti-inflammatory actions were demonstrated in animal
experiments. Results of hypoglycemic and CNS experiments
were not conclusive.

COMPOUNDS: JAMBOLAN BARK
Tannins: gallic and ellagic acid derivatives including 3,3'-
Di-O-methyl ellagic acid

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol
glucoside

Triterpenes: betulinic acid, friedelin, friedelan-3-alpha-ole,
epi-friedelanol, eugenin

Flavonoids: including myricetin, kempferol, quercetin,

astragalin

EFFECTS: JAMBOLAN BARK
The bark has astringent effects because of the tannin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
JAMBOLAN SEED

Unproven Uses: Jambolan seed is used for diabetes and in
combination preparations for atonic and spastic constipation,
diseases of the pancreas, gastric and pancreatic complaints,
nervous disorders and as a diuretic.

----- PAGE 681 -----
430 /JAMBOLAN

JAMBOLAN BARK

Approved by Commission E:

+ Diarrhea
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

'

+ Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: Preparations are used internally for bronchi-
tis, asthma, and dysentery, and externally for ulcers.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for diabetes, leucorrhea,
stomachache, fever, dysuria, and inflammation of the skin.

Homeopathic Uses: Syzygium cumini is used for diabetes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

JAMBOLAN SEED

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Administration in the presence of diabetes mellitus
is not recommended, due to the fact that the blood sugar-

reducing effect is Unproven.

JAMBOLAN BARK
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

JAMBOLAN SEED

Daily Dosage: A single dose is made up of 30 seeds (1.9 gm)
in powdered form.

JAMBOLAN BARK
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted herb for decoc-
tions and other galenic preparations for internal use (gargle,
infusion) and local application (compresses).

Preparation: To make a decoction for internal and external
use, place 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls of comminuted drug in about
150 ml cold water, bring to a boil, simmer for 5 to 10
minutes and strain.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 3 to 6 gm drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally:T to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times a day; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

LITERATURE

JAMBOLAN SEED

Bhatia IS et al., PM 28:346. 1975. Saeed MT et al., J Oil
Technol Assoc India 19:86-88. 1991. Bhatia IS et al., PH
10:219. 1971. Desai HK et al., Ind J Chem 13:97-98. 1975.

Jain, SR, Sharma SN, (1967) Planta Med 15(4):439.
Linde H, (1983) Arch Pharm 316(11):971.
Mukherjee SK et al., (1963) Ind Med Gaz 3:97.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Nair AGR, Subramanian S, (1962) J Sci Ind Res India 21B,
437, *

Shrothi, DS et al., (1963) Ind J Med Res 51:464.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3: W de
Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1986.

JAMBOLAN BARK

Bhargava KK et al., Curr Sci 43:645-646. 1974.

Bhargava KK et al., Curr Sci 43:645. 1974.

Bhatia IS et al., PM 28:346. 1975.

Jain, SR, Sharma SN, (1967) Planta Med 15(4):439.

Kopanski L, Schnelle G, PM 54:572. 1988.

Linde H, (1983) Arch Pharm 316(11):971.

Mukherjee SK et al., (1963) Ind Med Gaz 3:97.

Nair AGR, Subramanian S, (1962) J Sci Ind Res India 2IB,
437.

Sengupta D, Das PB, J Ind Chem Soc 42:255. 1965.

Shrothi DS et al., (1963) Ind J Med Res 51:464.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3: W de
Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1986.

Japanese Atractylodes

Atractylodes japonica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
whole plant and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flowers are surrounded by
bracts. The capitulas are apical and upright, with a diameter
of 15 to 2 cm. The calyx is double-rowed and double-
pinnate. The lingual florets are in 7 or 8 rows, whitish and 1
to 12 cm long. The fruit is an achaene. The pappus is
brownish and 8 to 9 mm long.

----- PAGE 682 -----
%

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an upright, herbaceous
perennial with a rhizome that extends up to 1 m high. The
basal leaves wilt rapidly; the upper cauline leaves are
alternate, small, usually simple and sessile. The lower leaves
are long-petiolate, 8 to 10 cm long. The lamina is pergament-
like, single pinnate with 3 to 5 elongate-elliptical leaflets.
The apical leaflet is larger with short thorns on the margin.
The rhizome is elongate, gnarled, 2 to 3 cm thick and up to 8
cm long.

Habitat: Japan.

Production: Japanese Atractylodes rhizome is the dried
rhizome of Atractylodes japonica.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (1.5%): constituents not investigated

Sesquiterpenes: atractylon, atractylenolids I to III, eudesma-
4 (14), 7(Il)-dien-8-one

Polyynes: including diacetylatractylodiol, (4E, 6E, 12E)-

tetradecatrien-8, 10-diin-l, 3-diolacetate

Water-soluble polysaccharides: atractan A, atractan B

EFFECTS

The furanosesquiterpenes isolated from the essential oil of
the drug exhibit antimicrobial, hepatoprotective, mildly
analgesic, antiphlogistic, tumor-inhibiting and antioxidative
effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Japanese Atractylodes has been used for
gastric complaints, inflammations, heavy sweating and as a
diuretic.

Chinese Medicine: Preparations are used for loss of appetite,
physical and mental exhaustion, diarrhea, edema, nausea and
vomiting.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb, cut drug, powdered
drug and liquid preparations for internal use.

Preparation: The powder is prepared in accordance with Jap
XI. There is no information available on the preparation of
the infusion.

Daily Dosage: Internally: single dose: 0.5 to 1.0 gm of
powder; daily dose: 15 to 3.0 gm of powder

Infusion: single dose: 1 to 15 gm; daily dose: 3 to 5 gm

Storage: Should be tightly sealed.

JAPANESE MINT 431

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G.
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin.
Heidelberg 1998.

Satoh K, Nagai F, Ushiyama K, Kano I, Specific inhibition of
Nat,K(+)-ATPase activity by atractylon, a major component of
byaku-Jutsu, by interaction with enzyme in the E2 state.
Biochem Pharmacol (1997 Feb 21) 53(4):611-4.

Japanese Mint

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial
parts of the plant and the essential oil, which is extracted by
steam distillation followed by partial removal of menthol and
rectification.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in densely globular.
sessile, 8- to 12-blossomed false whorls with small linear-
lanceolate bracts. The inflorescence is leafy at the apex. The
bracts are like the leaves, smaller above. The tepals are 15
by 2.5 mm, broadly campanulate and hairy. The corolla is
lilac, white or, rarely, pink. The nutlets are pale brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Japanese Mint is a pubescent.
fragrant perennial or occasionally annual that grows up to 60
cm. The stems are ascending or erect. The leaves are 15 to
70 mm by 10 to 40 mm, and are elliptic-lanceolate to broadly
ovate, usually elliptical with the base narrowing to a petiole.
and shallowly dentate.

Habitat: The plant is found in Europe as far north as the 65th
latitude, in Asia (particularly in Siberia), the Caucasus, the
Himalayas, China, Mongolia, Korea and Japan. It was
probably introduced to North America.

Production: Mint oil consists of essential oil recovered from
Mentha arvensis var. piperascens. The oil is obtained by
steam distillation of the fresh, flowering herb, followed by-
partial removal of menthol and rectification.

Menthol is obtained from various species of Mentha, chiefly
M. arvensis var. piperascens (from Japan), M. arvensis var.
glabrata (from China) and M. piperata (from America). The
product extracted from the first two is less valuable than the
third, even though it contains a higher proportion of menthol.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Chief components: menthol (25-40%), menthone (15-30**).
isomenthone (7-12%), limonene (7-12%), neomenthol (2-
4%), menthyl acetate (1-5%), beta-caryophyllene (2-5%).

----- PAGE 683 -----
432/JAPANESE MINT

piperitone (0.5-4%), alpha- and beta-pinene (2-4% each).
The composition does not reflect the relationship of the
components to one another in the plant. The volatile oil
gained through steam distillation loses 30 to 50% of the
menthol through winterization and rectification.

EFFECTS
Japanese Mint has carminative, cholagogic, antimicrobial
and, possibly, secretolytic effects on the bronchial mucosa. It
is also cooling to the skin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

« Fevers and colds

« Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Liver and gallbladder complaints

* Pain

* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: Internally, the herb is used for sensitivity to
weather changes, breathing difficulties, flatulence, functional
gastrointestinal and gallbladder disorders, and catarrhs of the
upper respiratory tract. Externally, it is used for headaches,
myalgia and neuralgic ailments. It is used both externally
and internally for functional cardiac complaints.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for headaches, dyspeptic
complaints, diarrhea and vomiting, toothaches and skin

rashes.

Indian Medicine: The herb is used for joint pains, dyspeptic
complaints, diarrhea and vomiting, coughs and asthma,
headaches and toothaches, as well as general debility.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications for the internal administration of the drug
include occlusion of the biliary ducts, gallbladder inflamma-
tion and severe liver damage. Gallstone sufferers could
experience colic due to the cholagogic effect.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The intake can lead to gastric complaints in susceptible
patients. Volatile oils containing menthol can worsen the
spasms of bronchial asthma. The volatile oil possesses a
weak potential for sensitization due to its menthol content.

Pediatric Use: Preparations containing the oil should not be
applied to the faces of infants or small children, particularly
not in the nasal area (glottal spasm, bronchial spasm, asthma-
like attacks, or even possible respiratory failure could occur).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

OVERDOSAGE
Cases of poisoning are not recorded. The minimal lethal
dosage of menthol is estimated to be 2 gm, although
individuals have survived higher dosages (8 to 9 gm).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The essential oil and other galenic
preparations are available for internal and external applica-
tion. Varieties are commercially available as Brazilian,
Chinese, Indian and Japanese mint oil.

Daily Dosage: For internal use, the average daily dosage is 3
to 6 drops. When used as inhalation therapy, 3 to 4 drops are
placed in hot water. To use externally, rub a few drops on the
affected area.

In folk medicine, 2 drops are placed in a glass of water, tea
or juice and taken once or twice a day. To make a heart
poultice, 10 to 20 drops are placed on a compress, which is
applied externally for 10 to 15 minutes. For headaches, 1 to 2
drop.-, can be rubbed on the temples.

Storage: Store in air-tight containers protected from light;
oils of different batches should not be mixed.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994,

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Jasmine

Jasminum officinale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

fresh and dried flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are single or in 2 to 12
flowered, axillary cymes. The sepals are fused, with 5 awl-
shaped, 6 to 8 mm long tips. The corolla is white. The
corolla tube is 15 to 18 mm long with 8 to 9 mm long, ovate
tips, which broaden like plates. There are 2 stamens. The
fruit is a black berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Common jasmine is a procumbent or
climbing shrub, that grows up to 5 m high. The leaves are
opposite and 5 to 7 pinnatifid. The leaflets are elongate-
lanceolate, acute, narrowing at the base, weakly pubescent
on both surfaces with a ciliate margin. The branches are
initially lightly pubescent, later becoming glabrous, slightly
edged, green and cane-like.

----- PAGE 684 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Characteristics: The flowers are very fragrant.
Habitat: France, Italy, China, Japan, India, Morocco, Egypt

Production: Common jasmine flowers are the dried, fresh
flowers of Jasminum officinale var. grandiflorum

Other Names: Royal Jasmine, Italian Jasmine, Catalonian
Jasmine, Poet's Jasmine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Pyrridine alkaloids: jasminine (presumably an artifact)

EFFECTS
No definitive data are available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Jasmine is used for hepatitis and abdomi-

nal pain in liver cirrhosis or dysentery.

Indian Medicine: Preparations are used for pain symptoms of
the stomach, head, teeth and eyes, for leprosy, itching, skin
disease and dysmenorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: Jasmine is available as a tea blend or oil.

LITERATURE
No data available

Jasminum officinale

See Jasmine

Jatamansi

Nardostachys jatamansi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the

rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 1 to 5 capitula, which
are usually surrounded by bracts. Their structures are in
fives, the petals fused, the corolla tube 6 mm long and lightly
pubescent on the inside. The fruit is crowned by pointed
ovate calyx tips, which are covered in splayed white hairs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This upright herbaceous perennial
grows to a height reaching up to 60 cm high. The leaves are

JATAMANSI /433

opposite, grow from the rhizome, are 15 to 20 cm long, 2.5
cm wide, spatulate and narrow toward the petiole. The
cauline leaves are sessile, opposite, 2.5 to 7.5 cm. long and
narrow-ovate. The finger-thick, woody rhizome is covered
with reddish brown fibers from the remains of the petioles.

Habitat: Nardostachys jatamansi is indigenous to China,
India and Nepal.

Production: Jatamansi roots are the dried roots and rhizome
of Nardostachys jatamansi. An essential oil is extracted from

the rhizome.
Not to be Confused With: Selinum vaginatum

Other Names: Indian Nard, Indian Spikenard, Spikenard,
Nard, Narrow-Leaved-Echinacea

ACTION AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.3 to 0.4%): including valeranone (jataman-
sone), nardosinone, calarene, beta-maaliene. maaliol, beta-
ionone, 1(10)-aristelonone-(2), nardol, valerenal

EFFECTS
Valid data regarding the pharmacological efficacy of the
drug have not yet become available. In animal experiments, a
limiting effect upon convulsant thresholds and a reduction of
motor coordination ability traceable to the sequiterpene
ketone valeranone contained in the drug have been demon-
strated. The authors conclude from this that the substance is
anticonvulsive in effect without exhibiting neuroleptic char-
acteristics. In addition, it manifests an antiulcerogenic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In combination with cold water, the various
oils are considered to be effective against nausea, stomach-
ache, flatulence, liver problems, jaundice and kidney com-
plaints, insomnia and headache. Externally, the oil is added
to a steaming bath to treat inflammation of the uterus. The
oils are also used in eye compounds and as poison antidotes.

Indian Medicine: Jatamansi is used for nervous headache,
excitement, menopausal symptoms, flatulence, epilepsy and
for pain in the intestinal region.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of the drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Jatamansi root is used in the forms
of a whole, cut or powdered drug for internal and external

use.

----- PAGE 685 -----
434/JATAMANSI

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include capsules and compound preparations.

Daily Dosage:
Powder — 0.6 to 13 g drug as a single dose

Pure drug — 5 g of the drug 3 times daily with a cup of
water

Liquid extract/tincture (1:10) — 1 wineglassful, 3 times
daily (corresponds to approximately 2 g drug per single
dose)

Infusion (1:40) — 1 wineglassful, 3 times daily (corresponds
to approximately 2 g drug per single dose)

Storage: Seal tightly and store in a cool, dry place.

LITERATURE
Dixit VP, Jain P, Joshi SC, Hypolipidaemic effects of Curcuma
longa L and Nardostachys jatamansi, DC in triton-induced
hyperlipidaemic rats. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol, 32:299-304,
1988 Oct-Dec.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,
Rucker G, Tautges J, Sieck A, Wenzl H, Graf E, Isolation and
pharmacodynamic activity of the sesquiterpene valeranone fiom
Nardostachys jatamansi. DC Arzneimittelforschung, 28:7-13,
1978.
Rucker G, Tautges J, Sieck A. Wenzl H, Graf E, Nardostachys
jatamansi: a chemical, pharmacological and clinical appraisal.
Spec Rep Ser Indian Counc Med Res, 28:1-117, 1978.

Jateorhiza palmata
See Colombo

Java Tea

Orthosiphon — spicatus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and stem

tips collected during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers usually are arranged in a
whorl of 6 (occasionally 10) blooms. The calyx tube is short
with an upright-curved upper lip. The corolla is blue to light
violet. The corolla tube is about 2 cm long with a broad
upper lip that has 3 indentations. The lower lip is narrow and
ovate-lanceolate. The 4 stamens are blue and 2.5 to 3 cm
long. The style is as long as the stamen, and the ovary has a

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

disk. The fruit breaks up into 4 oval-oblong nutlets with
bumpy surfaces.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 40 to 80 cm high herb.
The stem is quadrangular and glabrous to pubescent with
crossed, opposite leaves. The leaves are about 75 mm long,
usually short-petioled, ovate-lanceolate with an irregularly
coarse, roughly serrate to dentate (or occasionally crenate)
margin. The upper surface is brownish-green, the lower
surface gray-green with strong, protruding ribs and glandular
punctate markings. The plant resembles Peppermint.

Characteristics: The herb has a weak, unusual smell
reminiscent of a cattle pen. The taste is salty, bitter and

astringent.

Habitat: The plant is found in an area extending from
tropical Asia to tropical Australia and is cultivated in those
areas and elsewhere.

Production: Java Tea consists of the dried leaf and stem tips
of Orthosiphon spicatus, which is harvested shortly before
flowering. The leaves are then dried in a well-ventilated
location.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with other
Orthosiphon varieties and Eupatorium varieties from Java.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.02-0.06%): including among others beta-
caryophyllene, alpha-humulene, caryophyllene-epoxide
Flavonoids: in particular more highly methoxylized exam-
ples (0.2%) including eupatorin, sinensetin, scutellarine
tetramethyl ethers, salvigenin

Caffeic acid derivatives: including among others 2,3-dicof-
feoyltartrate, rosmaric acid, 2-caffeoyl tartrate.

Diterpene ester: orthosiphole A to E, (diterpene dibenzoyl
diacetyl ester of primarane type)

Triterpene saponins: (up to 4.5%): aglycone hederagenin

EFFECTS

Java Tea has been shown in human and animal tests to be a
mild diuretic. The essential oil of the drug, which contains
sesquiterpenes, is antimicrobial, antiphlogistic and possibly
antitumoral.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, it is used for the above
conditions and also for gout, rheumatism, hematuria and

albuminuria.

wk

«“

----- PAGE 686 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of the drug for irrigation therapy is contraindicated in
the presence of edema resulting from reduced cardiac or

renal activity.

“| PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and

other galenic preparations for internal use.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include:
Capsules

Drops
Tablets

Preparation: To make an infusion (tea), pour 150 ml hot
water over the drug and strain after 10 minutes.

4| Daily Dosage: The daily dosage ranges from 6 to 12 g drug.
Adequate fluid intake (at least 2 liters per day) is essential.

Storage: Java Tea should be stored in a tightly sealed
container that protects it from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16):1425-1440. 1995.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Proksch P, Orthosiphon aristatus (Blume) Miquel - der
Katzenbart. In: ZPT 13(2):63. 1992.

Steinegger E> Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

- Takeda Y et al., Orthosiphol D and E, minor diterpenes fiom
Orthosiphon stamineus. In: PH 33:411. 1993.

Teuber R, Neue Naturstoffe aus Orthosiphon stamineus
Bentham. In: Dissertation Universitat Marburg. 1986.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

JEQUIRITY /435

Jequirity
Abrus precatorius

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, roots
and seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are racemes of pink
blossoms. The fruit is a pod with oval seeds, which are
rounded at the ends. They are about 3 mm in diameter, hard,
red and glossy, with a large black dot at one end. One variety
has white seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This deciduous climbing plant with
compound leaves grows to about 4 m.

Characteristics: The plant is a protected species in some
countries.

Habitat: The plant originated in India and is found today in
all tropical regions of the world.

Other Names: Indian Licorice, Wild Licorice, Prayer Beads,
Crab's Eyes, Gunga, Goonteh, Rati

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Toxic lectins: abrine and isolectins.

EFFECTS
Jequirity is an irritant and abortifacient.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Jequirity was used for chronic conjunctivitis
and as a contraceptive in folk medicine, but is no longer used

for these purposes.

Indian Medicine: Jequirity is used for coughs as well as
inflammations and conditions of the upper respiratory tract
and lungs.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used in hepatitis and
bronchitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is very poisonous because it contains the toxic
lectin abrine and isolectins.

OVERDOSAGE
Severe poisonings among adults following the intake of one
half to two seeds, as well as cases of death among children
following the consumption of two seeds, have been recorded.
Besides gastrointestinal emptying, counter-measures include,
administration of large amounts of fluid, monitoring of the
circulatory system, administration of anti-epileptic drugs and
possibly artificial respiration.

LITERATURE
Desai VB, Rupawala EN, (1966) Ind J Pharm 29:235.

----- PAGE 687 -----
436 /JEQUIRITY

Desai VB, Sirsi M, (1966) Ind J Pharmac 28:340.

Dupaigne P, (1974) Plantes Med Phytother 8:104.

Karawya MS et al., (1981) Fitoterapia 4:175.

Ku SC et al., (1995) Planta Med 61:307.

Lin JY, Liu SV, (1986) Toxikon 24:757.

Lin JY et al., (1981) Toxikon 19:41.

Murray DR, Vairinhos F, (1982) Z Pflanzenphysiol 108:471.

Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Herausg.), Hagers Handbuch
der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Springer Verlag Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte -
Vorkommen, Wirkung. Therapie, allergische Reaktionen, 3.
Aufl., ecomed 1988.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Jewel Weed

Impatiens biflora

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The axillary flowers are orange-yellow
with large reddish-brown spots. They have an irregular form.
The sepal sac abruptly contracts to a spur of about 5 to 9
mm. The spur is bent 180 degrees to lie parallel with the sac.
The fruit is an oblong capsule which, when ripe, bursts open
at the slightest touch and spreads the seeds over large

distances.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a glabrous, fleshy
annual 20 to 180 cm high. The stems are simple or branched
and have swollen nodes. The leaves are thin, ovate, with 5 to
12 (up to 14) teeth on each side and are often undulate. They

are rich green.

Habitat: Impatiens is common in the temperate regions and
in South Africa, but it grows mostly in the mountainous,
tropical regions of Asia and Africa.

Production: Jewel Weed is the aerial part of Impatiens

biflora.

Other Names: Wild Balsam, Balsam-Weed, Spotted Touch-
Me-Not, Slipperweed, Silverweed, Wild Lady's Slipper,
Speckled Jewels, Wild Celandine, Quick-in-the-Hand

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Naphthalene derivatives: 1.4-naphthoquinone, in particular
lawsone (2-hydroxy-l, 4- naphthoquinone), yielding from
the precursor through drying of the leaves 1,2,4-trihydroxy-

naphthalene-4-beta-D-glucoside

EFFECTS
Jewel Weed is a digestive, appetite stimulant and diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Jewel Weed is used for mild digestive
disorders. In folk medicine the fresh plant is used as an
ointment for hemorrhoids and the juice is used for removing

warts.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Administered as the ground drug
and as an infusion.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1 — 11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Jimson Weed

Datura stramonium

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves or
the dried leaves with the tips of the flowering branches.
Occasionally the fruit, the ripe seeds and the fresh, aerial
parts of the plant are used. Parts of the plant are regarded as

poisonous.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are large, white, solitary,
terminal or in the branch bifurcations. The calyx has a long
5-edged and short 5-tipped tube. The corolla is funnel-
shaped and folded with a short 5-sectioned border. There are
5 free stamens and | superior ovary. The fruit is a 5 cm long
4-valved capsule, which is densely thorny and walnut-sized.
The numerous seeds are 3.5 mm long, flat, reniform and
black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual and grows to
12 m high. It has a simple or bifurcated, round, erect
glabrous stem. The leaves are 20 cm long, long-petioled,
ovate, dentate, glabrous and dark green.

Characteristics: The foliage has an unpleasant smell; the
| flowers are fragrant and poisonous.

----- PAGE 688 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Habitat: Jimson Weed is found in most temperate and
subtropical parts of the world, probably originated in Central
America.

Production: Jimson Weed leaf consists of the dried leaf, or
the dried leaves and flowering tops of Datura stramonium.
Jimson Weed seed consists of the ripe seed of Datura
stramonium.

Other Names: Devil's Apple. Devil's Trumpet, Jamestown
Weed, Mad-Apple. Nightshade. Peru-Apple, Stinkweed,
Stinkwort, Stramonium, Thorn-Apple, Datura

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: JIMSON WEED LEAF

Tropane alkaloids (0.1-0.65%): chief alkaloids (-)-hyoscya-
mine, under drying conditions changing over to some extent
into atropine and scopolamine (ratio 4:1), furthermore
including, others, apoatropine,  belladonnine,
tigloylmeteloidin

among

Flavonoids

Hydroxycoumarins: including, among others, umbelliferone,
scopolin, scopoletin

Withanolide: including, among others, withastramonolide

COMPOUNDS: JIMSON WEED SEED

Tropane alkaloids (0.4-0.6%): chief alkaloids (-)-hyoscya-
mine, under drying conditions changing over to some extent
into atropine, and scopolamine (ratio 4:1).

Indole alkaloids ($-carboline type): including, among others,
fluorodaturin (very fluorescent).

Lectins
Fatty oil (15-45%)
Proteins (12-25%)

EFFECTS: JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED

The drug contains alkaloids (hyoscyamine, scopolamine) in
extremely varying concentrations. The effect is anticholiner-
gic and parasympatholytic (see Belladonna); the scopola-
mine fraction is more responsible for this effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED

Due to the inconsistent alkaloid content of the raw herb, the
authors do not recommend use of non-standardized Jimson
Weed products.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Jimson Weed preparations
have been used for asthma, convulsive cough, pertussis
during bronchitis and influenza, for severe catarrh and as an
expectorant. It was also used as a basic therapy for diseases
of the autonomic nervous system. In the 18th century

JIMSON WEED/437

stramonium was first used for epileptic fits, and it was also
used for hallucinogenic effect in magic and witch potions.

Homeopathic Uses: Used for infection with high tempera-
tures, cramps and inflammations of the eyes.

Chinese Medicine: Used in Chinese medicine for general
states of pain. It is smoked for asthma, dyspnea and coughs;
externally for rheumatism.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED

Glaucoma, suspicion of glaucoma, paralytic ileus, pyloric
stenosis, enlarged prostate, tachycardic arrhythmias, acute
pulmonary edema.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED

General: Patients with urine retention or coronoary sclerosis
should not use Jimson Weed.

Drug Interactions: Jimson Weed will have an additive effect
when taken with other anticholinergic medications.

OVERDOSAGE
JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED

The intake of very high dosages leads to central excitation
(restlessness, compulsive speech, hallucinations, delirium,
manic episodes), followed by exhaustion and sleep.

The 4 early warning symptoms of poisoning are skin
reddening, dryness of the mouth, tachycardic arrhythmias
and mydriasis. Accommodation disorders, heat build-up
through decline in sweat secretion, miction disorders and
severe constipation can occur as side effects, particularly
with overdosages.

Lethal dosages (for adults starting at 100 mg atropine,
depending upon atropine content, 15 to 100 g of the leaf
drug, 15 to 25 g of the seed drug, considerably less for
children) carry with them the danger of asphyxiation.
Treatment for poisonings include stomach emptying, temper-
ature-lowering measures with wet cloths (no antipyretics),
oxygen respiration for respiratory distress, intubation, paren-
teral physostigmine salts as antidote, diazepam for spasms
and chlorpromazine for severe excitation.

DOSAGE
JIMSON WEED LEAF

Daily Dosage: Stabilized leaf powder: 0.05 to 0.1 gm drug
as a single dose up to 3 times a day; daily dose: 0.6 gm drug
(OAB90); as a narcotic: 1 gm drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5
to 10 globules 1 to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc
twice weekly; eye drops | to 3 times a day (HAB1).

Storage: Keep carefully stored and protected from light.

----- PAGE 689 -----
438/JIMSON WEED

JIMSON WEED SEED,

Daily Dosage: Seeds: single oral dose: 0.05 gm; daily dose:
0.6 gm drug (EB6); seed tincture: single oral dose: 0.3 gm;
daily dose: 3.0 gm (EB6).

Homeopathic Dosage: from D4: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5
to 10 globules 1 to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc
twice weekly; eye drops 1 to 3 times a day (HAB1).

Storage: Keep carefully stored and protected from light.

LITERATURE
JIMSON WEED LEAF AND SEED
Evans WC, PH 23:1717. 1984.

Friedmann M, Levin CE. J Agric Food Chem 37:998. 1989.

Itoh T et al., PH 17:971. 1978.

Kraft K, Europaische Rauschdrogen. In: ZPT 17(6):343-355.
1996.

Mechler E, Hann N, PM 42:102. 1981.

Mirazamatov RT et al.. Khim Prir Soedin (3):381. 1986.
Sharova EG et al., Khim Prir Soedin (1):126. 1977.
Tursunova RL et al./Khim Prir Soedin (1):91. 1978.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4..Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Jojoba

Simmondsia chinesis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the liquid Jojoba

wax.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are axillary. The male
flowers are small and yellow and have no petals. The female
flowers are usually solitary, inconspicuous and pale green.
There may also be inflorescences in the form of panicles,
umbels and cymes. Pollination is by wind. The fruit capsules
contain 1 to 3 seeds although 1-seeded capsules are the most
common. The seeds are approximately 2 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a heavily branched,
evergreen dioecious bush. The male plants are larger, taller
and less compact than the female. The desert variety develop
taproots up to 3.6 m in length. The horizontal root branches
reach from 60 to 90 cm in depth. The leaves are thick,
coriaceous, blue-green, entire-margined and oblong. They
are in pairs and depending on the dampness of the soil the
leaves may remain on the bush for 2 to 3 periods of growth.

Characteristics: The oil from the fruit has a pleasant scent

and taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to areas extending from the
Sonora dessert of the U.S. to northwest Mexico. It is
cultivated in India and Israel.

Production: From the cultivation (of plants) in Mexico and
in South America. Liquid Jojoba wax is a clear, light yellow,
oily liquid, that is extracted from the seeds of Simmondsia

chinesis.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Liquid wax exters: esters in position 9-10 simple unsaturated
C20- and C22-fatty acids, chiefly gadolenic acid (20:1(9),
make up 70% of the fatty acids) with the corresponding
alcohols, chiefly eicosanol (20:1 (9)-OH) and docosenol
(22:1 (9) OH)

EFFECTS
Active agents are the simple unsaturated C20/22 - fatty acids

and alcohol.

Jojoba oil has a robust and stable constitution. It is used in
skin care products as a carrier (substance) for oxidation
sensitive substances (Vitamin A).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Skin care - cosmetics

%

ft

----- PAGE 690 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper external administration of designated thera-
peutic dosages. Jojoba wax is not suitable for internal use.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In ointments and creams as a
medium (or vehicle) for oxidation sensitive substances.

LITERATURE
Knoepfler NB et al.. Agr Food Chem 6:118. 1958.

Miwa TK. J Am Oil Chem Soc 48:259. 1971.

Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992,

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Juglans cinerea

See Butternut

Juglans regia
See Walnut

Jujube (Da-Zao)
Zyzyphus jujube

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit. The Jujube
berry is classed with raisins, dates and figs, and can be eaten
fresh or dried.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, pale yellow and
solitary. The fruit is of variable size, depending on the origin,
but is usually up to 3 cm long and 1.5 cm in diameter. The
fruit is red, smooth and shiny when fresh, brownish-red and
grooved when dried. It is pulpy and contains | or 2 acute,
oblong seeds.

Characteristics: The taste of the fruit is sweet and

mucilaginous.

Habitat: The plant grows in southern Europe, Africa, Middle
East and the Far East.

JUJUBE (DA-ZAO) / 439

Production: Jujube berries are the fruit of Zyzyphus jujube;
Zyzyphus vulgaris is also used.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins: zyzyphus saponins I, II and HI,
jujuboside-B, in the seeds jujuboside-A and -B, aglycone
jujubogenine

Mucilage
Tannins (10%)

Flavonoids: including among others naringenin-6,8-di-C-
glucosides, in the seeds spinosin (C-glycoflavone)

Isoquinoline alkaloids: oxonuciferin, nornuciferin
Peptide alkaloids: daechucyclopeptide, daechualkaloid-A

Triterpenes: betulinic acid, betulonic acid, maslinic acid,
alphitolic acid and oleanolic acid

Hydroxycoumarins
Sugars: including among others saccharose, glucose, fruc-
tose, galactose

Fruit acids: including among others malic acid, tartaric acid

EFFECTS
Jujube is emollient, anti-allergenic and sedative. Zyzyphus
vulgaris also has a hypotensive effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Jujube is used as a nutrient and tonic. It is
also used as a prophylactic against liver disease and stress
ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No healdi hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

LITERATURE
Ahn YS et al., (1982) Korean J Pharmacol 18 (1):17.
Cyong J et al., (1979) Proc Symp. Wakan-Yaku 12:1.
Cyong J, Hanabusa K, (1980) Phytochemistry 19:2747.
Cyong J, Takahashi M, (1982) Chem Pharm Bull 30:1081.

Hikino H, In: Economic, Medicinal Plant Research, Vol. 1,
Acadamic Press UK 1985.

Ikram M et al., (1981) J'Nat Prod 44:91.

Inoue O et al., (1978) J Chem Res 144.

Okamura N et al., (1981) Chem Pharm Bull 29:676, 3507.
Shibata S et al., (1970) Phytochemistry 9:677.

Woo WS et al., (1979) Phytochemistry 18:353.

Yagi A et al., (1978) Chem Pharm Bull 26:1798.

----- PAGE 691 -----
440 /JUJUBE (DA-ZAO)

Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Juniper

Juniperus communis

TRADE NAMES
Juniper (available from numerous manufacturers and as
combination product), Juniper Berry, Euro Quality Juniper
Berries

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil
from the berry cones; the ripe, dried berry cones; the ripe
fresh berry cones; the fresh or dried pseudo fruit or berry;
and the ripe berry.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is usually dioecious, occasional-
ly monoecious and occasionally bears androgynous flowers.
The yellowish male flowers are in elliptical catkins consist-
ing of numerous stamens in 3-segmented whorls in the leaf
axils of young shoots. The greenish female flowers are
almost ovoid and consist of 3 carpels. The carpels become
fleshy and in the second year when ripe form pea-sized,
globular, and dark-brown to violet, blue-frosted juniper
berries. The berries ripen for 2 or 3 years so that blue (ripe)
and green (unripe) berries are found on the same tree. The
seeds are light brown, oblong-triangular. They are somewhat
warty between the edges and have a hard shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Juniperus communis is a tree or
shrub found in varying forms from 2 to 10 m in height. The
bark is smooth and yellow-brown at first, later fissured, gray-
black and peeling. The buds are covered in scale-like
needles, which can be distinguished from the foliage needles
by their length. The leaves are needles in whorls of 3
spreading from the branchlets. They are evergreen, stiff,
pointed, prickly and sea green. The outer and inner
membranes have thickened cell walls.

Characteristics: The berries have a tangy smell. The taste is
tangy-sweet, then resinous and bitter.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: Europe, northern Africa, north Asia and North
America.

Production: Juniper Berry is the ripe, fresh or dried spherical
ovulate cone (berry) of Juniper communis as well as its
preparations. The ripe berries are harvested from the end of
August to the middle of September and then dried at room
temperature and sorted.

Other Names: Juniper Berry, Ginepro, Enebro

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1-2%); make-up is very dependent upon the
source of the drug, chief components monoterpene hydrocar-
bons, for example alpha-pinene, beta-myrcene, gamma-mu-
urolen, sabinene, additionally including among others
limonene, beta-elemene, beta-caryophyllene, beta-pinene,
gamma-cadinene, terpinene-4-ol

Diterpenes

Catechin tannins

Flavonoids

Monosaccharides: inverted sugar (20 to 30%)
Oligomeric proanthocyanidins

EFFECTS
The diuretic effect is attributed to the essential oil content.
The drug works to lower blood pressure and as an
antidiabetic. In animal experiments a hypotensive, antidia-
betic and antiexudative effect was proven. In vitro, an
antiviral effect was also demonstrated.

In older studies a spasmogenic, expectorant and broncho-
spasmolytic effect has been described, for which there are no

new data.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Loss of appetite
* Dyspeptic complaints

Unproven Uses: Juniper is used externally for rheumatic
symptoms (as a bath additive). In folk medicine it is used
internally to regulate menstruation and to relieve menstrual
pain, flushing out therapy for inflammatory diseases of the
lower urinary tract, gout, arteriosclerosis, for severe irritation
resulting from bronchitis and diabetes (ground juniper
berries). It is often chewed for halitosis.

Homeopathic Uses: Juniperus communis is used for dis-
charge disturbances of the efferent urinary tract and dyspep-
tic complaints.

----- PAGE 692 -----
aft

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications for internal administration include preg-
nancy and inflammatory renal diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Long-term internal administration or
overdosage can bring about kidney irritation and kidney
damage. External administration for large skin wounds, acute
skin diseases, feverish diseases, cardiac insufficiency or
hypertonia should only take place under the supervision of a

doctor.
Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Whole, crushed or powdered drug
for infusions and decoctions, alcohol extracts, and in wine.
Essential oil is used for oral application in liquid and solid
medicinal forms. Combinations with other plant drugs in
bladder and kidney teas and similar preparations may be
useful. Juniper berry is also used as bath salts in the
treatment of rheumatism.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 515 mg
Liquid — 1:1

Oil — 100%

Daily Dosage: The daily dose is 2 to 10 gm of the drug,
corresponding to 20 to 100 mg of the essential oil. The
duration of use should be limited to a maximum of 6 weeks.
A 1:20 dilution infusion (0.5 gm in 1 teacup) may be taken 3
times daily. Tincture (1:5): 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily. Liquid
extract: 2 to 4 ml 3 times daily.

For diabetes: 10 freshly ground berries to taken daily with
water for 15 days; repeat after a month's break from
treatment.

Homeopathic Uses: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
daily (HAB1).

Storage: Juniper should be protected from light.

LITERATURE

Chatzopoulou PS, Katsiotis ST, Study of the Essential Oil from
Juniperus communis "Berries" (Cones)Growing in Greece. In:
PM 59(6):554. 1993.

De Pascuale Teresa J, (1977) An Quim. 73(3):463.
Freidrich H, Engelshowe R, (1978) Planta Med 33:251.

JUNIPER/441

Lamer-Zarawska E, Phytochemical studies on flavonoids and
other compounds of juniper fruits (Juniperus communsi L.). In:
Pol J Chem 54(2):213-219. 1980.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.

Ramie S. Murko D, Chemical composition of fruit of Juniperus
species. In: Archiv Farm 33(1): 15-20. 1983.

Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
prostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.

Schilcher H, Emmrich D, Koehler C, Gaschromatographischer
Vergleich von atherischen Wacholderolen und deren
toxikologische Bedeutung. In: PZW 138(3/4)85. 1993.

Schilcher H. Heil BM, Nierentoxizitat von
Wacholderbeerzubereitungen. In: ZPT 15(4):205-213. 1994.

Schmidt M. Wacholderzubereitungen. Mufi die Monographic
umgeschrieben werden? In: DAZ 135(14): 1260-1264. 1995.

Sbkeland J. Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1 ):8.
1989.

Thomas AF, (1972) Helv Chim Acta 55:2429.
Thomas AF, (1972) Helv Chim. Acta 56:1800.

Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
997.

Teuscher
Stuttgart

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte-Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M
Stuttgart

(Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
997.

----- PAGE 693 -----
442/JUNIPERUS COMMUNIS

Juniperus communis

See Juniper

Juniperus sabina
See Savin Tops

Justicia adhatoda

See Malabar Nut

Kadsura japonica

See False Schisandra

Kalmia_ latifolia

See Mountain Laurel

Kamala

Mallotus philippinensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the glands and

hairs covering the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The tree has dioecious flowers. The male
flowers are in threes in the axils of the bracts, while the
female flowers are on longer, heavily branched, lateral
boughs. Both flowers are covered by rust-red matted hairs.
The fruit is a 3-lobed, pea-sized capsule from which a red,
mealy powder is obtained, which consists of minute glands
and hairs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Mallotus philippinensis is an 8 to 10
m high tree with a diameter of 90 to 120 cm. The bark of the
slender branches is pale, and the younger ones are covered in
rust-red matted hairs. The leaves are alternate and have
articulate petioles, which are 2.5 to 5 cm long. The leaf blade
is rusty tomentose, 8 to 15 cm long, ovate with two
inconspicuous basal glands. It is entire-margined, coriaceous
and glabrous above with very prominent ribs below.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to India, Ethiopia, Saudi
Arabia, China and Australia.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Production: Kamala fruit skins are from the fruits of
Mallotus philippinensis, covered in hairs and glands. The
fruit is collected in the uncultivated regions and cleaned.

Other Names: Kameela, Kamcela, Spoonwood, Rottlera
Tinctoria

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Phloroglucinol derivatives (red to yellow, 47 to 80%): chief
constituents include rottlerin (ca. 1%), isorottlerin (ca.
0.1%), 3-hydroxy rottlerin, 3,4-dihydroxyrottlerin, meth-
ylene-bis-methyl phloroacetophenone and their resinous
polymers, that arise through auto-oxidation

Bergenin
Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug has an anthelmintic and purgative effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: nternally, Kamala is used to treat tape
worm infestations (ascarides, rectal worms), constipation,
kidney and bladder stones, leprosy lesions and as a
contraceptive; externally for parasitic skin diseases and
wound infections of the ear.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used orally as a powder

or liquid extract.

Daily Dosage: For worms: adults: 6 to 12 gm drug in 2 to 3
portions at 30 minute intervals; young children: 1.5 gm drug;
school children: 3 gm drug. Preparations can be sweetened
with honey prior to administration.

Storage: Keep tightly sealed, dry and protected from light

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lounasmaa M et al., (1975) Planta Med 28:16.

Widen CF, Puri HS, (1980) Planta Med 40:284.

----- PAGE 694 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Kava Kava
Piper methysticum

TRADE NAMES
Kava Kava (available from numerous manfacturers) Alcohol
Free Kava Kava, Kava Kava Power, Kava Kava Premium,

Kava Kava Root

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the peeled, dried,
cut rhizome, which has normally been freed from the roots,
and the fresh rhizome with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has numerous small flowers in
spike-like inflorescences 3 to 9 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 2 to 3 m high, erect
dioecious bush. The leaves are very large, measuring 13 to
28 cm by 10 to 22 cm. They have a deeply cordate base and
9 to 13 main ribs that are slightly soft on the undersurface.
The stipules are large. The plant has a massive, 2 to 10 kg,
branched and very juicy rhizome with many roots. They are
blackish-gray on the outside and whitish on the inside. The
fracture is mealy and somewhat splintery. The central
portion is porous with irregularly twisted thin woody
bundles, separated by broad medullary rays, forming meshes
beneath the bark.

Characteristics: The taste is pungent and numbing, and the
odor is reminiscent of lilac.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the South Sea Islands and
is mainly cultivated there.

Production: Kava Kava rhizome consists of the dried
rhizomes of Piper methysticum.

Other Names: Ava, Ava Pepper, Intoxicating Pepper, Kawa,
Kawa Pepper, Tonga, Kew

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Kava lactones (kava pyrones, 5-12%): chief components
include (+)-kavain, dihydrokavain (marindinine), (+)-meth-
ysticin, dihydromethysticin, yangonine, desmethoxy-
yangonin

Chalcones: including flavokavin A and B

EFFECTS

The kava pyrones in the drug have centrally muscle-relaxing,
anticonvulsive and antispasmodic effects. The herb also
contains hypnotic/sedative, analgesic and psychotropic prop-
erties contributing to its use for anxiety and insomnia.

The centrally muscle-relaxing, analgesic and anticonvulsive
action of the kava pyrones, kavain, dihydrokavain, dihydro-
methysticin and (+/-) kavain (synthetic kava pyrone) is

KAVA KAVA/443

attributed to the interaction with ion channels. The interac-
tion consists of fast and specific inhibition of voltage-
dependent sodium channels and reduction of currents
through voltage-activated sodium and calcium channels
(Friese, 1998; Gleitz, 1995; Gleitz, 1996; Schirrmacher,
1999). The paralysis effect of Kava on neuromuscular
transmission and muscle contractility is similar to that of
local anesthetics (Jameison, 1989; Singh, 1983). The lipid
soluble extract (kava resin) decreases spontaneous motility
and motor control (Jamieson, 1989).

The analgesic action of kavain, dihydrokavain, methysticin
and dihydromethysticin is due to antinociceptive activities.
Nalaxone (opiate antagonist) is ineffective in reversing the
antinociceptive activities, thus indicating the analgesia pro-
duced from the compounds occurs via non-opiate pathways
(Jameison, 1990; Jameison, 1989).

The lipid soluble components of kava do not interact with
benzodiazepine binding sites, but do seem to potentiate the
activity of GABA-A in the brain center for sedative effects
(Davies, 1992; Jussofie, 1994). The psychotropic properties
of Kava have been demonstrated by the inhibition of
norepinephrine uptake by kavain, dihydromethysticin and the
racemate (+/-) kavain (Seitz, 1997). One study did find that
desmethoxyyangonin, methysticin, yangonin, dihydrometh-
ysticin, kihydrokavain and kavain reversibly inhibit MAO-B
(Uebelhack, 1998). An increase of dopamine and serotonin
by activation of neurons results in central nervous system
effects (Fachinfo Antares 120(R), 1996).

A recent study investigated the antithrombotic activity of
kava pyrones. Kavain exerts antithrombotic action on human
platelets through the inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) as
a primary target. This suppresses the generation of throm-
boxane (TXA2), which normally induces aggregation of
platelets and exocytosis of ATP by its binding on TXA2
receptors (Gleitz, 1997).

CLINICAL TRIALS

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was
conducted with 101 outpatients suffering from anxiety of
non-psychotic origin who met DSM-IH-R criteria. Improve-
ments in anxiety were seen after week 8 with a standardized
Kava Kava extract (70% kava-pyrone). The study continued
over a 25-week period with significant improvement based
upon the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA), somatic and
psychic anxiety, Clinical Global Impression, Self-Report
Symptom Inventory and Adjective Mood Scale (Volz, 1997).

The anxiolytic effect of a special kava extract (70 mg of kava
pyrones three times daily) was compared to two benzodiaze-
pine preparations (oxazepam 15Smg/day, bromazepam). The
multi-center, double-blind study involved 172 patients.
There was a therapeutically relevant reduction in the severity

----- PAGE 695 -----
444/KAVA KAVA

of anxiety according to the HAMA scale in all three groups.
There wasn't a statistically significant difference between the
three types of treatment in terms of reducing anxiety (Woelk,
1993).

A standardized Kava extract give'n 100 mg three times daily
was compared to placebo in a randomized, double-blind
study. The study included 58 patients with anxiety syn-
dromes not caused by mental disorders. The HAMA overall
score of anxiety symptoms revealed significant reduction in
the Kava treatment group compared to placebo after 1 week
of therapy. After 4 weeks of therapy, an even greater
reduction in anxiety symptoms was seen with the Kava
treatment group, with no adverse reactions (Lehmann, 1996).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
* Nervousness and insomnia

Kava Kava is used for nervous tension, stress and agitation.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the herb is used as a
sleeping agent and sedative; for asthma, rheumatism, dys-
peptic symptoms, chronic cystitis, syphilis, gonorrhea and
weight reduction.

Homeopathic Uses: Kava Kava is used for states of
excitement and exhaustion. It is also used for gastritis and
pain in the urethra.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The drug is contraindicated in patients with endogenous
lepression because it increases the danger of suicide. It is
also contraindicated during pregnancy and in nursing moth-
ers. The herb is contraindicated in persons with endogenous
depression, because there is an increased risk of suicide in

this population.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Administration of the herb leads to rare cases of allergic
reactions and gastrointestinal complaints. Slight morning
tiredness can appear at the beginning of the therapy. Motor
reflexes and judgment when driving may be reduced while
taking the herb.

Central Nervous System: Dyskinesia and choreoathetosis of
the limbs, trunk, neck and facial musculature have been
reported secondary to the administration of kava (Schelosky,
1995; Spillane, 1997).

Endocrine: Following long-term use of high doses of Kava
extract, weight loss was reported (Mathews, 1988).

Hepatotoxicity: Increase in gamma-glutamyl transferase
(GGT) levels have been associated with high doses of Kava
extract (Mathews, 1988). Two cases of acute hepatitis with

an increase of liver enzymes were reported. Necrotizing

FDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

hepatitis was determined after a liver biopsy, and upon
discontinuation of Kava, liver tests normalized (Stahl, 1998).

Musculoskeletal: Minor inhibition of movement and im-
paired motor reflexes have been observed with the use of
Kava (Jamieson, 1990).

Ocular: Increase in pupil diameter, reduction of the near
point of accommodation and near point of convergence, and
disturbance to the oculomotor balance have been reported
with Kava (Garner, 1985). Eye irritation has been reported
with the heavy consumption of Kava (Ruze, 1990).

Skin: Heavy chronic consumption of Kava is associated with
a peculiar, scaly rash suggestive of ichthyosis (Ruze, 1990).
A reversible, slight yellowing of the skin has been associated
with long-term use of Kava. Sebotropic drug reactions
resulting from Kava-Kava extract therapy has been reported
(Jappe, 1998).

The drug should not be taken for longer than three months
without a doctor's supervision.

Drug Interactions:

Alcohol — Concomitant use of Kava Kava with alcohol
results in an increase in each other's hypnotic action. The
alcohol also increases the possibility for kava toxicity
(Jamieson, 1990).

Alprazolam —- Kava used simutaneously with alprazolam
has resulted in coma (Almeida, 1996).

CNS depressants, such as barbituates — The herb may
potentiate the effectiveness of substances that act on the
central nervous system.

Psychoactive agents — The intensity of psychoactive agents
may be intensified with kava (Jamieson, 1990).

Dopamine — Kava Kava has been reported to antagonize the
effect of dopamine. Patients with Parkinson's Disease taking
levodopa should avoid the use of the herb (Baum, 1998;
Cupp, 1999; Schelosky, 1995).

Pregnancy: The drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

Nursing Mothers: The drug is contraindicated in nursing
mothers.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage can result in disorders of complex movement,
accompanied by undisturbed consciousness, later tiredness
and tendency to sleep.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted rhizome and other

galenic preparations for oral use.

----- PAGE 696 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

How Supplied:
Capsules — 100 mg, 125 mg, 128 mg, 150 mg, 250 mg, 390

mg, 400 mg, 425 mg, 455 mg, 500 mg
Liquid — 1:1, 1:2

Preparation: There are a number of different extraction
recipes depending on the pharmaceutical companies.

Daily Dosage:

Capsules — The root extract is taken 150 mg to 300 mg
twice daily, with a daily dosage of kava pyrones 50 to 240
mg (Herberg, 1996; Lehmann, 1996).

Tincture — The tincture is taken as 30 drops with water
three times daily (Chavallier, 1996).

Infusion — Take 1/2 cup twice daily (Chavallier. 1996).

Note: The drug should be administered with food or liquid
due to its lipid solubility (Fachinfo Antares 120 (R). 1996).
The activity of the herb is enhanced when mixtures of the
kava pyrones are taken instead of a single pyrone (Jamieson,
1989).

Homeopathic Dosage: The herb is taken as 5 to 10 drops, 1
tablet or 5 to 10 globules 1 to 3 times daily, or 1 ml injection
solution sc twice weekly (HAB1).

Storage: The herb should be stored away from direct light,
moisture and heat at room temperature.

LITERATURE
Almeida JC & Grimsley EW, Coma from the health food store:

interaction between kava and alprazolam (letter). Ann Intern
Med 1996; 125:940-941.

Backhaus C, Krieglstein J. (1992) Extract of kava and its
methysticin constituents protect brain tissue against ischaemic
damage in rodents. J Pharmacol 215:265-269.

Baum SS, Hill R, Rommelspacher H, Effect of kava extract and
individual kavapyrones on neurotransmitter levels in the nucleus
accumbens of rats. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
1998 Oct;22(7): 1105-20.

Bhate H, Gerster G, Fracza E, (1989) Orale Pramedikation mit
Zubereitungen aus Piper methysticum bei operativen Eingriffen
in Epiduralanasthesie. Erfahrungsheilkunde 6:339-345.

Bhate H, Gerster G, Behandlung mit Phytotranquilizern vor der
Narkose. Therapeutikon 1992 5:214-222.

Chavallier, A, The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants. DK
Publishing Company, New York, New York, 1996.

Cupp MJ, Herbal remedies: adverse effects and drug
interactions. Am Fam Physician 1999 Mar 1;59(5): 1239-45.
Davies LP, Drew CA, Duffield P et al., Kava pyrones and
resin: studies on GABAA, GABAB and benzodiazepine binding
sites in rodent brain. Pharmacol Toxicol 1992 Aug;71(2): 120-6.
Dingermann T, Phytopharmaka im Alter: Crataegus, Ginkgo.
Hypericum und Kava-Kava. In: PZ 140(23):2017-2024. 1995.

KAVA KAVA/445

Emser W, Bartylla K, (1991) Verbesserung der Schlafqualitat.
TW Neurol Psychiatr 5:636-642.

Fachinformation: Antares (R) 120, kava-kava extract. Krewel
Meuselbach GmbH, Eitorf, 1996.

Fachinformation: Kavasporai (R) forte, kava-kava extract.
Mueller Goeppingen Gmbh & Co KG, Goeppingen, 1996.

Friese J, Gleitz J, Kavain, dihydrokavain, and dihydro-
methysticin non-competitively inhibit the specific binding of
3H]-batrachotoxinin-A 20-alpha-benzoate to receptor site 2 of
voltage-gated Na+ channels. Planta Med 1998 Jun:64(5):458-9.

Garner LF & Klinger JD, Some visual effects caused by the
everage kava. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13:307-311.

Gepner B, Cnota P, (1994) Untersuchung der Vigilanz nach
Applikation von Kava-Kava-Extrakt, Diazepam oder Placebo. Z
Phytother 15:30-37.

Gleitz J, Beile A, Wilkens P et al.. Antithrombotic action of
the kava pyrone (+)-kavain prepared from Piper methysticum on
human platelets. Planta Med 1997 Feb;63(1):27-30.

Gleitz J et al., Kavain inhibits non-stereospecifically veratridine-
activated Na+; channels. Planta Med 62(6):580-581. 1996.

Gleitz J, Friese J, Beile A et al.. Anticonvulsive action of (+/-)-
kavain estimated from its properties on stimulated synaptosomes
and Na+ channel receptor sites. Eur J Pharmacol 1996 Nov
7:315(1):89-97.

Gleitz J, Beile A, Peters T et al., (+/-)-Kavain inhibits
veratridine-activated voltage-dependent Na(+)-channels in
synaptosomes prepared from rat cerebral cortex.
Neuropharmacology 1995 Sep;34(9): 1133-8.

Hansel R, Beiersdorff HU, (1955) Arzneim Forsch 9:581.

Hansel R, Kava-Kava (Piper methysticum G. Forster), in der
modernen Arzneimittelforschung Portarit einer Arzneipflanze. In:
ZPT 17(3): 180-195. 1996.

Hansel R, Pflanzliche Sedativa. In: ZPT 11(1):14. 1990.

Hansel R, Woelk H, (1995) Spektrum Kava-Kava. 2. Auflage.
Aesopus Verlag GmbH, Basel.

Herberg KW, Alltagssicherheit unter Kava-Kava-Extrakt,
Bromazepam und deren Kombination. Z Allge Med
1996;72:973-977.

Herberg KW, (1991) Fahrtuchtigkeit nach Einnahme von Kava-
Spezial-Extrakt WS 1490. Z Allge Med 67:842-846.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH, The antinociceptive actions of kava
components in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990

Jul;17(7):495-507.
Jamieson DD, Duffield PH, Cheng D et al., Comparison of the
central nervous system activity of the aqueous and lipid extract
of kava (Piper methysticum). Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1989
Sep-Oct;301:66-80.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH, Positive interaction of ethanol and
kava resin in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990
Jul;17(7):509-14.

----- PAGE 697 -----
446/KAVA KAVA

Jappe U, Franke I, Reinhold D et al., Sebotrophic drug reaction
from kava-kava extract therapy: a new entity? J Am Acad
Dermatol 1998; 38(1): 104-106.

Johnson E, Frauendorf A, Stecker K, Stein U, (1991)
Neurophysiologisches Wirkprofil und Vertraglichkeit von Kava-
Extrakt WS 1490. TW Neurol Psychiatr 5:349-354.

Jussofie A et al., Kavapyrone enriched extract from Piper
methysticum as modulator of the GABA binding site in
different regions of rat brain. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1994
Dec; 1 16(4):469-74.

Kinzler E, Kromer J, Lehmann. (1991) Wirksamkeit eines
Kava-Spezial-Extraktes bei Patienten mit Angst-. Spannungs-
und Erregungszustanden nicht-psychotischer Genese. Arzneim
Forsch/Drug Res 41:584-588.

Lehmann E, Kinzler E, Friedemann J, Efficacy of a special
Kava extract (piper methysticum) in patients with states of
anxiety, tension and excitedness of non-mental origin - A
double-blind placebo-controlled study of four weeks treatment.
Phytomedicine 1996,2:113-119.

Mathews JD, Riley MD, Fejo L et al., Effects of the heavy
usage of kava on physical health: summary of a pilot survey in
an Aboriginal community. Med J Aust 1988; 148:548-555.

Munte TF, Heinze HJ, Matzke M, Steitz J, (1993) Effects of
oxacepam and an extract of Kava roots (Piper methysticum) on
event-related potentials in a word recognition task.
Neuropsychobiology 27:46-53.

Norton SA & Ruze P, Kava dermopathy. J Am Acad Dermatol
1994; 31:89-97.

Ruze P, Kava-induced dermopathy: a niacin deficiency? Lancet
1990 Jun 16:335(8703): 1442-1445.

Schelosky L, Raffauf C, Jendroska K et al., Kava and
dopamine antagonism. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995
May;58(5):639-40.

Schirrmacher K, Busselberg D, Langosch JM et al., Effects of
(+/-)-kavain on voltage-activated inward currents of dorsal root
ganglion cells from neonatal rats. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol
1999 Jan;9(1-2): 171-6.

Schmidt M, Kava-Kava. In: PTA 8(5):374. 1994.

Seitz U, Schule A, Gleitz J, [3H]-monoamine uptake inhibition
properties of kava pyrones. Planta Med 1997 Dec;63(6):548-9.
Siegel RK, (1976) Herbal intoxication. Psychoactive effects
from herbal cigarettes, tea and capsules. JAMA 236:473-476.

Singh YN, Effects of kava on neuromuscular transmission and
muscle contractility. J Ethnopharmacol. 1983 May;7(3):267-76.

Smith RM, (1979) Tetrahedron 35(3):437.

Spree MH, Croy HH, Antares - ein standardisiertes Kava-Kava-
Praparat mit dem Spezialextrakt KW 1491. Der Kassenarzt.
1992;17:44-51.

Stahl S, Ehret V, Dahm HH et al., Necrotizing hepatitis after
taking herbal remedies. Dtsch Med Wochenschr 1998;

123(47): 1410-1414.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Uebelhack R, Franke L, Schewe HJ, Inhibition of platelet
MAO-B by kava pyrone-enriched extract from Piper
methysticum Forster (kava-kava). Pharmacopsychiatry 1998
Sep;31(5): 187-92.

Volz HP, Kieser M, Kava-Kava Extract WS 1490 versus
Placebo in Anxiety Disorders - A Randomized Placebo-
controlled 25-week Outpatients Trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997
Jan;30(1):1-5.

Volz HP, (1995) Die anxiolytische Wirksamkeit von Kava-
Spezialextrakt WS 1490 unter Langzeittherapie - eine
randomisierte Doppelblindstudie. Z Phytother Abstractband, S 9.

Volz HP, Hansel R, (1994) Kava-Kava und Kavain in der
Psychopharmakotherapie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1:33-39.
Warnecke G, Pfaender H, Gerster G, Gracza E, (1990)
Wirksamkeit von Kawa-Kawa-Extrakt beim klimakterischen
Syndrom. Z Phytother 11:81-86.

Woelk H et al., Behandlung von Angst-Patienten. Z
Allgemeinmed 1993;10:271-277.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopamika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Kelp

Laminaria hyperborea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the stem-like part of

the thallus.

Flower and Fruit: The plant fits the general description of
brown algae. It is unsegmented to heavily segmented and can

----- PAGE 698 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

grow into plants many meters in length. The thallus is
reminiscent of root, leaf or stem-like organs (in the case of L.
hyperborea_ stem-like). The color is greenish-brown to
reddish.

Habitat: The plant grows on the North Atlantic coast.

Production: Kelp consists of the dried, stem-like parts of the
thallus of Laminaria hyperborea (syn. Laminaria cloustonii).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Salts of alginic acid (laminaric acid, 25%)

Iodine (to some extent organically bound, 0.3-0.45%)

Reserve carbohydrates: laminarin (47%). mannttol (5-6%),
fucoidin, mannitol glucoside

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of kelp are used for the
regulation of thyroid function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The danger of induction or worsening of hyperthy-
roidism following internal administration of the drug exists
with dosages above 150 ulg iodide per day. In rare cases, it
can lead to severe allergic reactions.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Chen FP, Soong YK, Hui YL, Successful treatment of severe
uterine synechiae with transcervical resectoscopy combined with
laminaria tent. Hum Reprod. 75:943-7, 1997 May.

Chiu KW, Fung AY, The cardiovascular effects of green beans
(Phaseolus aureus) common rue (Ruta graveolens) and kelp
(Laminaria Japonica) in rats. Gen Pharmacol, 75:859-62. 1997

Nov.

Drozhzhina VA, Petrishchev NN, Fedorov IuA, The
enhancement of the physiological resistance of the periodontal
tissues in white rats under the action of biologically active
substances from Laminaria. Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova,
75:126-33, 1995 Dec.

Glatstem IZ, Pang SC, McShane PM, Successful pregnancies
with the use of laminaria tents before embryo transfer for
refractory cervical stenosis. Fertil Steril, 75:1172-4, 1997 Jun.

Jain JK, Mi shell DR Jr, A comparison of misoprostol with and
without laminaria tents for induction of second-trimester
abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol, 75:173-7, 1996 Jul.

KHAT/447

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lin A, Kupfermine M, Dooley SL, A randomized trial of extra-
amniotic saline infusion versus laminaria for cervical ripening.
Obstet Gynecol, 75:545-9, 1995 Oct.

Nguyen MT, Hoffman DR, Anaphylaxis to Laminaria. J Allergy
Clin Immunol, 75:138-9, 1995 Jan.

Read SM, Currie G, Bacic A, Analysis of the structural
heterogeneity of laminarin by electrospray-ionisation-mass
spectrometry. Carbohydr Res, 75:187-201, 1996 Feb 23.
Schneider D, Halperin R, Langer R, Caspi E, Bukovsky I,
Abortion at 18-22 weeks by laminaria dilation and evacuation.
Obstet Gynecol, 75:412-4, 1996 Sep.

Khat

Catha edulis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the tree are the

leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a cyme growing from
the leaf axil. The flowers are radial and inconspicuous, with
a fleshy disk and their structures are in fives. The calyx is 5-
lobed and there are 5 elongate-oval, white-yellowish petals,
5 stamens, and 3 blunt stigmas. The fruit is 3-sided capsule
with chamber containing 1, occasionally 2, seeds. The
brownish seeds have a wing-like, whitish aril.

Leaves: Khat is an evergreen shrub or tree that reaches about
2 to 25 m high. The leaves are opposite on flowering
branches. They are alternate, coriaceous, 3 to 12 cm long,
oval to ovate and crenate or dentate. The upper surface of trie
leaves is wax-like glossy and olive green. The older leaves
are occasionally red-violet.

Habitat: Ethiopia, Kenya, North Yemen, and northern
Madagascar

Production: Khat or Arabian tea is the fresh leaves or shoots
of Catha edulis. The leaves are harvested in the early
morning, 5 to 8 years after planting. They are kept in banana *
leaves, paper or plastic to prevent it drying out.

Other Names: Abyssinian Tea, Arabian Tea, Somali Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Phenyl alkyl amines (0.3 to 0.9%): khatamine, in fresh
leaves as chief effective agent (S)-(-)-cathinone (50% in
young leaves, in fully-developed leaves only 2%), becoming
dimers during dehydration, as well as (+)-norpseudoephed-

----- PAGE 699 -----
448/KHAT

rine (cathine), (-)-norephedrine, merucathinone, pseudome-
'rucathinone, (-)-formyl norephedrine

Sesquiterpene polyester alkaloids: cathaedulines Kl to K15

Catechin tannins

Volatile oil

EFFECTS

The alkaloid-containing drug (chief active ingredient cathi-
none) is centrally stimulating and indirectly sympathomimet-
ic (amphetamine-like effect). In addition, the leaf
preparations have ulcer-protective and insecticidal effects,
and the drug's high tannin content makes it constipating.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Khat has been used for centuries in Islamic
culture to improve communicative abilities, performance and
to suppress feelings of hunger. The leaves can be chewed or
administered as an infusion (Yemen) or paste (Ethiopia/
Somalia). Khat leaves are said to have an aphrodisiac effect
and are used for depression, headache, gonorrhea, gastric
complaints, coughs, asthma and fever.

The medicinal use of Khat preparations is obsolete today.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The fresh shoot tips may lead to central excitation, suppres-
sion of appetite, widening of the pupils, increased motor
activity, hypertonia and hyperthermia through the sympatho-
mimetic effect of cathinone (the other constituents account
for only approximately 10% of the effect) and its ability to
bypass the blood-brain barrier. Moderate dosages (100 to
300 g of the fresh leaves) lead to a state of general well
being, mental alertness and exaggerated self-regard. Physical
ability is temporarily enhanced and the need for sleep is
reduced. Depression and anxiety states can follow once the
effect wears off. Diabetics could experience hyperglycemia.
The tannin content of the drug leads to constipation and
Acute poisonings have not been

digestive disorders.

recorded.

Chronic use can lead to such long-term ill effects as
emaciation (through appetite suppression), increased suscep-
tibility to infection, nervousness, insomnia and disturbances
of the circadian rhythm. In addition, Khat preparations have
been associated with ulcers in the digestive tract and liver
and kidney damage. When the drug is used over periods of
years, it can lead to personality disorders.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
powdered drug

Available as whole herb and

Storage: Can be kept for several months deep-frozen

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Al-Ahdal MN, McGarry TJ, Hannan MA Cytotoxicity of Khat
(Catha edulis) extract on cultured mammalian cells: effects on
macromolecule biosynthesis. Mutat Res, 204:317-22, 1988 Feb

Al-Meshal I A, Tariq M, Parmar NS, Ageel AM Anti-
inflammatory activity of the flavonoid fraction of khat (Catha
edulis Forsk). Agents Actions, 19:379-80, 1986 Jan

Balint GS, Balint E Kath (Catha edulis) - a plant containing an
amphetamine-like substance Orv Hetil, 136:1063-6, 1995 May

14

Dhadphale M, Mengech A, Chege SW Miraa (catha edulis) as
a cause of psychosis. East Aft Med J, 19:130-5, 1981 Feb

Geisshiisler S, Brenneisen R The content of psychoactive
henylpropyl and phenylpentenyl khatamines in Catha edulis
Forsk. of different origin. J Ethnopharmacol. 19:269-77, 1987
May
Geisshiisler S$, Brenneisen R The presumed neurotoxic effects of
Catha edulis - an exotic plant now available in the United
Kingdom. Br J Ophthalmol, 19:779-81. 1986 Oct

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed) Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994

Kalix P Catha edulis, a plant that has amphetamine effects.
harm World Sci, 18:69-73, 1996 Apr

Kalix P Hyperthermic response to (-)-cathinone, an alkaloid of
Catha edulis (khat). J Pharm Pharmacol, 11:662-3, 1980 Sep

Nabil Z, Saleh M, Mekkawy H, Allah GA Effects of an extract
of khat (Catha edulis) on the toad heart. J Ethnopharmacol,
18:245-56, 1986 Dec

Nencini P, Amiconi G, Befani O, Abdullahi MA, Anania MC
Possible involvement of amine oxidase inhibition in the
sympathetic activation induced by khat (Catha edulis) chewing
in humans. J Ethnopharmacol, 11:79-86, 1984 Jun

Tariq M, Al-Meshal I, Al-Saleh A Toxicity studies on Catha
edulis. De Toxicol Environ Sci, 11:337-40, 1983

Knautia arvensis
See Field Scabious

Knotweed

Polygonum aviculare

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb, some-
times with the root, collected during the flowering season
and dried, as well as the fresh aerial parts collected during

the flowering season.

----- PAGE 700 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are axillary cymes
with 1 or a few flowers. The flowers are very small, short-
pedicled, inconspicuous and green or red with white
margins. The epicalyx has 5 bracts and is fused at the base.
There are 5 stamens, and the superior ovary has 3 styles. The
fruit is a nut, which is as long as the epicalyx and is matte
brown with wrinkled stripes, ovate to almost elliptical and
flattened on 3 sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a sturdy annual. The
main stem is initially erect, up to | m high and heavily
branched. It later becomes closely procumbent and spreads
along the ground. The leaves are alternate, entire-margined,
short-petioled with varying forms on the main and side
shoots. They are broadly elliptical to linear-lanceolate, acute
or obtuse. At the base of the leaves there is a scarious
divided leaf sheath. The thin, fusiform, brownish roots
produce a few hair-thin lateral roots.

Characteristics: The appearance depends on the location. It
may also have an ascending stem.

Habitat: The plant is found in most temperate regions of the

world.

Production: Knotweed herb consists of the dried herb,
occasionally containing roots, of Polygonum aviculare,
gathered during flowering season.

Other Names: Allseed Nine-Joints, Armstrong, Beggarweed,
Bird's Tongue, Birdweed, Centinode, Cow Grass, Crawl-
grass, Doorweed, Hogweed, Knotgrass, Ninety-Knot, Pig-
tush, Pigweed, Red Robin, Sparrow Tongue, Swine's Grass,
Swynel Grass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (0.1-1%): chief components are avicularin (quer-
cetin-3-arabinoside), hyperoside, quercitrin, quercetin-3-ga-
lactoside, additionally including among others vitexin,
isovitexin, rhamnazine bisulphate

Silicic acid (1%): partially water-soluble
Tannins

Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, scopoletin
Lignans: aviculin

EFFECTS

Knotweed has astringent properties. In vitro, the flavonoid
fraction is said to inhibit aggregation of human erythrocytes,
probably by an effect on cyclo-oxigenase.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:
* Cough/bronchitis

KNOTWEED/449

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

The herb is used as a mild catarrh of the respiratory tract for
inflammatory changes to the oral and pharyngeal mucosa.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine iris used as a supportive
treatment for pulmonary disorders, as a perspiration inhibitor
in cases of tuberculosis, as a diuretic, as a hemostatic in
cases of hemorrhage and for skin disorders.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Knotweed is used for gonor-
rhoea, jaundice, skin defects, dysentery (red), itching and
tapeworm in children.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, Polygonum aviculare is
used for rheumatism of the fingers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a ground herb for teas and other
galenic preparations for internal use and local application.
The drug is a component of various pectoral and bronchial
teas. The extract is found in standardized preparations of
antitussives and diuretics.

Preparation: To make a tea, place 1.5 gm finely cut drug in
cold water and bring to a simmer. Strain after 5 to 10
minutes (1 teaspoonful = 14 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 4 to 6 gm of drug.

Tea—As a supportive treatment for coughs and bronchial
catarrh, drink 1 cup 3 to 5 times a day.

Infusion for external use—The daily dose is 5 g drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl-; Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Haverland F, PA 18:59-87. 1963.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 701 -----
450 /KOMBE SEED

Kombe Seed
Strophanthus hispidus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the ripe

seed.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a many-blossomed,
umbelliferous raceme. The flowers are radial and their
structures are in fives. The sepals are 13 to 1 cm long and
0.1 to 1 cm wide. They are unevenly divided into five, the
outer tips ovate, the inner ones lanceolate and densely
pubescent. The corolla is tubular, with the upper part
broadened into a cup shape. The margin is covered with 10
scales, 1.1 to 2 cm long with a diameter of 0.8 to 7 cm. The
margin is white or yellow, with a purple spot in the shaft.
There are 5 stamens and a 2-chambered, semi-inferior ovary.
The fruit is a follicle, 24 to 48 cm long, 13 to 18 cm in
diameter, dark brown, hard, grooved and white punctate with
lenticles. The seeds are spindle-shaped, flat, 1 to 18 cm
long, 2 to 3 mm wide, densely pubescent with an upright, 4
to 8 cm long tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Strophanthus hispidus is either a
liana, up to 100 m long, or a shrub, up to 5 m high. The
leaves are opposite. The petiole is 1 to 5 mm long, the
lamina 15 to 22 cm long and 8 to 12 cm wide. They are
simple, elliptical to obovate, acuminate, rounded at the base
or cordate. The trunk has a diameter of up to 6 m and has
dark gray bark. The branches are dark brown or almost
black. The young branches are stiffly villous and punctate
with lenticles.

Characteristics: The plant contains latex.
Habitat: West and Central Africa

Production: Brown Strophanthus seeds are the ripe seeds of
Strophanthus hispidus freed from the bushel-like appendage.
The seeds are first harvested after 3 years (first flowering).
Then the fruit is picked, and the seeds are removed.

Not to be Confused With: Often confused in the past with
Strophanthus kombe, S. sarmentosus and other Strophanthus
species. Can also be confused with Alafia, Futumia, Kickxia
and Holrrhena species.

Other Names: Arrow Poison

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolids, 4 to 8%): chief
glycoside presumably k-strophanthoside (primary glycoside,
strophanthidin glucosyl cymaroside) from which cymarin
(strophantidin cymaroside) is formed through fermentation

of the seeds

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Saponins (0.2%)

Fatty oil (30%): chief fatty acids oleic acid, linoleic acid,
palmitic acid and 9-hydroxy-deltal2-octadecenoic acid

EFFECTS

The action mechanism of the drug is dependent upon the
cardioactive cardenolide glycosides it contains (see S. kombe
semen and strophantine effects).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the herb have been used in

the past for cardiac complaints.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, preparations are used
for nervous cardiac complaints and cardiac insufficiency.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous administration of
quinidine, calcium salts, saluretics, laxatives and glucocorti-
coids enhance effects and side effects. For symptoms of an
acute poisoning and treatment, see Digitalis folium.

OVERDOSAGE

Nausea, vomiting, headache, stupor and cardiac arrhythmias
could occur as side effects with parenteral administration of
glycoside mixtures of the drug, particularly with overdoses.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Communited drug, herb powder,
liquid preparations for internal use.

Homeopathic Dosage: (from D4) 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10
globules every to 30 to 60 minutes, maximum 12 times daily
(acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2
ml sc, IV, IM, 3 times daily (acute) and once a day (chronic)
(HPUS88).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994

Kousso
Hagenia abyssinica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the
unripe fruit and the dried panicles of female flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The small flowers are large-branched,
thickly glandular-haired panicles up to 0.5 m long. They are
androgynous, male or female. The male flowers are greenish

----- PAGE 702 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and have fertile stamens and hairy bracts. The female
flowers are dark-red.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Hagenia abyssinica is tree that grows
up to 6 m high with tuft-like, erect, pinnatifid leaves.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northeast Africa and is
cultivated in Ethiopia.

Production: Kousso flowers are the flowers of Hagenia
abyssinica.

Other Names: Cossoo, Kooso. Kosso

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Acylphloroglucinols (kosotoxine): monomelic, dimeric, trim-
eric compounds, such as protocosin (trimeric); acyl residues
are isobutyryl- isovaleryl- and alpha-metylbutyryl residues;
representatives include, for example, cosin K6 and cosin
K8 (monomerous), cusso toxin (dimerous), protocosin
(trimerous)

Tannins

EFFECTS
Kousso is a vermifuge because of its complex mixture of
aglyphloroglucinols, which has a taeiafugic effect. An
antitumoral effect has also been described

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: This obsolete drug, which can no longer be
procured, formerly was used to treat tapeworm infestation.
Its efficacy depended on the composition of the drug.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Side effects include irritation of the gastrointestinal tract,
salivation, nausea and diarrhea. A tendency toward fainting
spells, headache and general weakness has been connected
with the use of the drug during use as a tapeworm cure.
Abortive effects have been described. The drug should no
longer be administered in allopathic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Conditions of collapse and vision disorders have been
observed with overdosages. The treatment for poisoning
consists of gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), installation of activated
charcoal and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth). Diazepam
(intravenous) should be used to treat spasms. Atropine and
electrolyte substitution should be employed. Possible cases
of acidosis should be countered with sodium bicarbonate
infusions. In case of shock, plasma volume expanders should
be administered. Monitoring of kidney function is essential.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

LABRADOR TEA /451

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete in most
countries.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Metzner J et al., Antispastische Wirkung von Hagenia
abyssinica. In: PM 47(4):240-241. 1983.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schiemenz GP, Schroeder JM, Z Naturforsch 40B(5):669-680.
1985

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994. Metzner
J et al Antispastische Wirkung von Hagenia abyssinica. Planta
Med 47 (1983), 240-241

Woldemariam TZ, Fell AF, Linley PA, Chromatographic and
spectroscopic studies on the constituents in male and female
flowers of Hagenia abyssinica. J Pharm Biomed Anal, 8:859-65.
1990.

Woldemariam TZ, Fell AF, Linley PA, Bibby MC, Phillips
RM, Evaluation of the anti-tumour action and acute toxicity of
kosins from Hagenia abyssinica. J Pharm Biomed Anal, 10:555-
60, 1992 Aug

Krameria triandra

See Rhatany

Labrador Tea

Ledum latifolium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and the
flowering shoots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in flat, terminal umbels.
The calyx i£ small and has 5 tips. The 5-petalled corolla is
white. The 10 stamens grow from the edge of a honey ring.
The ovary is superior. The fruit is a 5-valvular capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The evergreen, branched shrub
grows to about 1.5 m. The young branches are gray or rust-
colored. The 1.25 to 2.5 cm long leaves are alternate, short-
petioled, entire-margined, and linear, have revolute margins,

----- PAGE 703 -----
452 /LABRADOR TEA

and are stiff, coriaceous, dark green above, rust-colored and
woolly-downy underneath. L. palustre is larger, more
regularly formed and has larger leaves.

Characteristics: It has a numbing, tangy aroma and is
poisonous. It is a protected species.

Habitat: The plant grows in Greenland, Canada and the U.S.
The very similar variety L. palustre is more common in
northern Europe and northern Asia.

Production: Labrador herb is the aerial part of Ledum
Tatifolium and L. palustre.

Other Names: St. James's Tea, Marsh Tea, Wild Rosemary

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.9-2.6%): chief components sesquiterpenes, in
particular ledol (ledum camphor, porst camphor) and palus-
trol, Japanese sources also yield ascaridol

Catechin tannins
Flavonoids: including among others hyperoside
Hydroglycosides: arbutin

EFFECTS
Internally mildly expectorant. Externally antiphlogistic (nei-
ther proven).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Labrador Tea has been used for respiratory
conditions. Externally, it has been used for skin

inflammation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: Initially, the drug causes severe gastrointestinal
irritation (vomiting, gastroenteritis, diarrhea), due to its ledol
content. Following absorption, the drug causes severe CNS
excitation. This effect may lead to spasms and paralysis in
some cases.

Pregnancy: Contraindicated. Poisonings in earlier times
were seen in connection with its misuse for purposes of

abortion.

OVERDOSAGE

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), and instillation of
activated charcoal, the treatment of poisonings consists of
treating spasms with diazepam (I.V.) and colic with atropine;
electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Monitoring of kidney

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

function is essential. Intubation and oxygen respiration may
also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Labrador Tea is obsolete as a drug.
It has been used as an extract in some bath additives and is

also contained in homeopathic preparations.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Laburnum

Cytisus laburnum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The seeds are the medicinal parts.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers bow down in clusters of 10 to
30. There are 10 to 25 cm long racemes. The calyx is short,
campanulate, pubescent and marked brown at the base. The
anthers are orange. The pod is 5 to 8 cm by 8 to 9 cm, flat,
lumpy and silky-haired with wings. The seeds are flat and
dark brown.

. Leaves, Stem and Root: Cytisus laburnum is a small shrub or
tree that can occasionally grow up to 7 m high. It has light
gray branches and smooth, dark green, initially erect
branchlets. The alternate leaves are almost in rosettes on
short shoots with 2 to 7 cm long petioles. The leaflets are
elliptical to ovate, rounded or thorn tipped. They are
glabrous above and light gray pubescent beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to mountainous regions of
Europe. It is also cultivated worldwide.

| Other Names: Golden Chain, Pea Tree, Bean Trifoil

----- PAGE 704 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Quinolizidine alkaloids (1-3%): main alkaloids (-)-cytisine
(95%), as well as (-)-N-methylcytisine, epibaptifoline

Lectins

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Experiments in the use of cytisine as a
pesticide (lice) have shown that in the necessary concentra-
tion the danger of poisoning is too high.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
There are no indications for this drug. The drug is severely
toxic. See Overdosage section.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning include nausea, dizziness, salivation,
pains in the mouth, in the throat and in the stomach area,
outbreaks of sweat, headache as well as extended, severe,
and sometimes bloody vomiting. If no vomiting occurs,
excitatory states can come about from the centrally stimulat-
ing effect of the drug, with tonic-clonic spasms that later
change over into paralyses. Anuria and uremia have also
been observed. Death comes through asphyxiation.

Fifteen to 20 seeds or 3 to 4 unripe berries are considered
fatal for an adult. While poisonings occur relatively frequent-
ly, cases of death have not been recorded in recent times. If
no vomiting has occurred, poisonings are treated with gastric
lavage, then through the administration of activated charcoal;
spasms are to be treated with chlorpromazine or diazepam.
In cases of asphyxiation, intubation and oxygen respiration
are to be carried out.

LITERATURE
Frohne D. Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Greinwald R, Untersuchungen zur chemotaxonomischen
Bedeutung von Leguminosenalkaloiden und zum
Alkaloidstoffwechsel in transformierten Geweben und
Zellkulturen. In: Dissertation Universitat Wurzburg. 1988.

Gresser G, Der Besenginster - Cytisus scoparius (L.) LINK. In:
ZPT 17(5):320-330. 1996.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

LACTUCARIUM / 453

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Seeger R, Neumann HG, Cytisin. In: DAZ 132(7):303. 1992.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Tschirch C, Kraus L, Goldregen-Alkaloid Cytisin. In: DAZ
132(47):2560. 1992.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Lactuca virosa

See Lactucarium

Lactucarium
Lactuca virosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried latex and
the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flowers are in pyramid-
shaped panicles. The capitula have a few florets. They are
androgynous, pale yellow, lingual florets. The bracts are
imbricate. The fruit is 4-lipped and black with a broad edge.
It is glabrous at the tip. It has a whitish beak that is as long as
the fruit, making the hair tuft look stemmed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is biennial, up to 12 m
high, with a fusiform, pale root that produces the erect,
branched and hollow stem. It is smooth, light green and
sometimes has purple spots. The leaves are oblong to
obovate, narrowed at the base, clasping and usually simple.
They are thorny-tipped, lie horizontally and are thorny on the
underside of the midrib.

Characteristics: The whole plant contains milky latex.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to western and southern
Europe and is cultivated in Germany, Austria, France and
Scotland.

Production: Lactucarium leaves are the leaves of the aerial
part of Lactuca virosa. They are gathered when in flower and
then dried.

Not to be Confused With: L.sativa, L.serriola, L.quercina and
Sonchus oleraceus.

----- PAGE 705 -----
454/LACTUCARIUM

Other Names: Prickly Lettuce, Strong-Scented Lettuce,
Green Endive, Lettuce Opium, Acrid Lettuce, Poison Let-

tuce, Wild Lettuce

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
lactucopicrin (lactupictin,

Sesquiterpene lactones: \actucin,

intybin)

Triterpenes: including among others, taraxasterol, beta-

amyrin

EFFECTS
The herb is supposed to have a narcotic effect. It is an
analgesic and spasmolytic, and is said to act as a tranquilizer.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Medicines containing Lactucarium are used
to treat whooping cough attacks. The drug is used for
bronchial catarrh, asthma and urinary tract diseases. The oil
of the seeds is used for arteriosclerosis and was also used as

wheat germ oil.

Homeopathic Uses: Lactuca virosa is used for laryngitis,
tracheitis with heavy coughing, for swelling of the liver and
for urinary complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a low potential for sensitization.

OVERDOSAGE

The following signs of poisoning can occur through overdos-
age or following intake of the fresh leaves, as in salads:
outbreaks of sweating, acceleration of breathing, tachycardia,
pupil dilation, dizziness, ringing in the ears, vision disorders,
pressure in the head, somnolence, on occasion also excitato-
ry states. The toxicity is, however, relatively low. Following
gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomiting, gastric
lavage with burgundy-colored potassium permanganate solu-
tion, sodium sulfate), as well as instillation of activated
charcoal, the of poisonings should proceed

symptomatically.

treatment

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Due to its poison content, the drug
is only administered under medical supervision. It is ground
and used as an alcoholic extract and further processed in the

pharmaceutical industry.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-

Ges Stuttgart 1997.
Huang ZJ et al., (1982) J Pharm Sci 71(2):270.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Kern W, List PH, HorhammerX (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag’
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Marquardt P et al., (1976) Planta Med 30:68.
Rees S, Harborne J, (1984) Bot J Linn Soc 89(4):313.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruban G et al., (1978) Acta Crystalogr Sect B 34(4): 1163

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Lady Fern
Athyrium filix-femina

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome when
gathered in spring or autumn.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Athyrium filix-femina is a 10- to 40-
cm high fern. The pencil-thick, creeping rhizome is densely
covered with dark-brown hairs. Numerous tomentose, long,
branched, dark-brown root fibers sprout from the rhizome.
The not-so-numerous leaves are in rigid, upright, double
rows. They are coriaceous, glabrous, oblong-lanceolate or
oblong, deeply pinnatifid and wintergreen. The petioles are
semi-round, smooth and whitish. On the underside of the leaf
tips there are 2 parallel rows of large groups of filmless
sporangia, which are initially yellowish and later turn dark

brown.

Habitat: Lady Fern is indigenous to Britain, parts of Europe
and the U.S.

Other Names: Common Polypody, Brake Root, Rock Brake,
Rock of Polypody, Oak Fern

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
(8%)

Tannins
C-glucosyl flavones: including mangiferin
Phytoecdysones

Amaroids

Saponin: including the steroid saponin osladin

Essential oil

----- PAGE 706 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
The drug is a mild expectorant; a choleretic-type effect is
questionable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven *Uses: The drug is used for respiratory and
gastrointestinal tract illnesses.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete in German-
speaking countries. However, Lady Fern is still found in
commercial preparations as drops and tablets, as well as in
preparations used in the religious system of anthroposophy.

Daily Dosage: In anthroposophic medicine, the usual dose to
treat gastrointestinal illnesses is 1 to 2 tablets or 10 to 20
drops taken 3 times daily.

LITERATURE
Abraham H, Zucker und Supstoff. In: PTA 7(10):744. 1993.

Anonym, Niedere Pflanzen ganz gro|3 - 39. Jahrestagung der
Gesellschaft fur Arzneipflanzenforschung in Saarbriicken. In:
DAZ 131(37): 1899.

Constantinescu E et al.. (1966) Pharmazie 21:121.

Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Jizba J et al., (1971) Tetrahedron Lett 18:1329.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus GrL“hrbuchjder Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Ge.org Q/ims Verlag Hildesheim 1979".

Lady's Bedstraw

Galium verum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The small lemon-yellow flowers are in
dense terminal panicles. The peduncle is very downy. The
corolla is 2 to 3 mm wide, usually golden yellow, and smells
strongly of honey. The border of the calyx is pointed, and the
ovaries are bivalvular and inferior. The fruit is smooth,
indehiscent, 1.5 mm long, glabrous and eventually black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The true plant is a 30 to 100 cm high
herbaceous perennial with a cylindrical, creeping rhizome
that sprouts runners. The stem is ascending or erect, bluntly

LADY'S BEDSTRAW/455

quadrangular with 4 vertical lines, downy or glabrous and
rough. The leaves are in false whorls of 8 to 12. They are
linear, dark green above, and gray and short-haired beneath.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong honey fragrance.

Habitat: The plant grows throughout Europe (with the
exception of Lapland and arctic Russia), as well as in Asia
Minor, Iran and Syria.

Production: Lady's Bedstraw is the herb of Galium verum.
collected during the flowering season and dried.

Other Names: Yellow Galium, Cheese Rennet, Curdwort.
Maid's Hair, Yellow Cleavers, Petty Mugget, Cheese
Renning

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids: asperuloside, monotropein, scandoside, desacety-
lasperulosidic acid, asperulosidic acid, giniposidic acid.
daphylloside

Rennin

Flavonoids : including rutin, isorutin, palustroside, cynaro-
side, quercetin-3-O-glucoside, quercetin-7-O-glucoside

Anthracene derivatives
Caffeic acid ester: chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally, the drug is used in folk medicine
for swollen ankles and as a diuretic for bladder and kidney
irritation. Externally, it is used for poorly healing wounds.
The efficacy of this drug has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Currently obsolete but formerly the
drug was used internally as a tea and topically in alcoholic
extracts as a moist poultice.

Preparation: To prepare a tea or infusion, pour 250 ml of
cold water over 2 heaping teaspoonfuls of die drug, bring to
simmering point, simmer for 2 minutes and then allow to
draw.

Daily Dosage: Internally, 2 to 3 cups of tea daily.

LITERATURE
Bajthe-Horvath K et al., PH 21:2917-2919. 1982.
Borisov MI et al., Rastit Resur 11:351. 1975.

Burmett AR, Thomsom RH, (1968) J Clin Soc (6):854.

----- PAGE 707 -----
456/LADY'S BEDSTRAW

Corrigan D et al., (1978) Phytochemistry 17:1131.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Mathe-feet al., (1982) Planta Med 45:158.
Raynaud J. Mnajed H, (1972) C R Acad Sci Paris 274:1746.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Lady's Mantle

Alchemilla vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb collected in
the flowering season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has inflorescences of small,
insignificant, yellow-green, many-flowered cymes. The peri-
anth is 4-leaved. The flower has 4 stamens, 1 ovary and an
inferior style. The fruit is enclosed in the calyx. The flowers
are infertile.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Alchemilla vulgaris is a hardy, half-
rosette shrub, which grows from 30 to 50 cm. It has a
branched stem, which is villous to glabrous. The basal leaves
are round, 7- to 9-lobed (dew cup); cauline leaves are short-
petioled to sessile, 5- to 7-lobed, crenate or serrate and
villous. Even the older leaves remain more or less folded.

Characteristics: Lady's Mantle is odorless and has an

astringent taste.

Habitat: The plant gfovfs in the Northern Hemisphere from
North America, Greenland and Europe to the Mediterranean
and Iceland; and Asia from the Caucasus and the Himalayas

to Siberia.

Production: Lady's Mantle herb consists of the fresh or dried
above-ground parts of Alchemilla vulgaris gathered at
flowering time, as well as its preparations. It is produced
mostly through cultivation.

Other Names: Bear's Foot, Leontopodium, Lion's Foot,

Nine Hooks, Stellaria

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Bitter principles
Flavonoids

Tannins

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS

Lady's Mantle herb has astringent properties, due to the
presence of tannins. It has also been shown to inhibit tumor
growth. In mice the total retardation of breast neoplasm-
induced tumors was achieved using agrimoniin and the
average life expectancy of the animals was increased. An
extract of the drug hinders the enzymes elastase, trypsin and

a-chymotrysin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Diarrhea

Unproven Uses: Lady's Mantle is used for mild and non-
specific diarrhea and gastrointestinal disorders.

In folk medicine the drug is used internally for menopausal
complaints, dysmenorrhea, gastrointestinal disorders, and as
a gargle for mouth and throat inflammation. Externally, it is
used for ulcers, eczema, skin rashes and as an additive in
baths for the treatment of lower-abdominal ailments.

Homeopathic Uses: Alchemilla vulgaris is used for Ieucor-
rhea and for chronic diarrhea resulting from liver disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Lady's Mantle herb is administered
as a cut herb for infusions and decoctions, as well as other
galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Tea: 2 to 4 gm drug to 150 ml hot water left to
draw for 10 minutes. .Prepare a fresh batch every day.

Daily Dosage: Lady's Mantle herb is administered in 2 to 4
gm single doses as an infusion; the average daily dose is 5 to
10 gm of herb. The tea is taken 3 times daily between meals.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc; Ointment: Apply 1 to
2 times daily (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Dome AJ et al., PH 25:65-68. 1986.

Filfpek J, The effect of Alchemilla xanthochlora on lipid
peroxidation and superoxide anion scavenging acticity. In: PA
47:717-718. 1992.

Geiger C, Rimpler H, PM 56:585-586. 1990.

Geiger C. Ellagitannine aus Alchemilla xanthochlora
ROTHMALER und Potentilla erecta (L.) RAEUSCHEL.
Beitrage zur Analytik und Strukturaufklarung. In: Dissertation
Universitat Freiburg. 1990.

----- PAGE 708 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Schimmer O, Felser C. Alchemilla xanthochlora ROTHM.- Der
Frauenmantel. In: ZPT 13(6):207. 1993.

Schimmer O, Lindenbaum M, Tannins with antimutagenic
properties in the herb of Alchemilla species and Potentilla
anserina. In: PM 61(2): 141-145. 1995.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim. 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York. 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Veriagsges.
Stuttgart. 1997.

Laminaria hyperborea
See Kelp

Lamium album
See White Nettle

Larch
LarfxaecTducL.. _

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the outer bark

separated from its outermost layer.

Flower and Fruit: The female flowers are cone-shaped,
erect, 2 cm long, short-pedicled, round-ovate and encircled
by scales at the base. The covering scales turn dark red when
in bloom. The male catkins are sessile, about 1.5 cm long,
sulfur yellow, ovoid-globular. The seeds are light brown,
glossy with 13 mm long and 5 mm wide wings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Larch is a deciduous tree that grows
up to 54 m high tree (stunted at high altitudes) with a straight
trunk, brown-red bark and pyramid-shaped, sparsely foliated
crown. The main branches are horizontal and turned up at the
tips. The secondary branches are hanging. The foliage is
light green with delicate needles, arranged singly in spiral
rows on long shoots and in bushels on short ones. They fall
in autumn.

LARCH /457

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central Europe, cultivated
in North America. It was first introduced to England in 1639.

Production: The balsam of Larix decidua is obtained by
drilling into the trunks. The balsam contains up to 20%
essential oil.

Other Names: European Larch, Common Larch

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (14-15%): chief components: (-)-alpha-pinene
(70%), Delta3-carene (10%) (-)-beta-pinene (6.5%), beta-
pyrones (3%)

Resins: including among others oleoresin acids (50-65%):
including among others laricinolic acid, alpha- and beta-
laricinolic acid

EFFECTS
When used externally the drug has a hyperemic and
antiseptic effect due the essential oil content. Its use for
catarrhal infections of the upper respiratory tract also seems
plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Fevers and colds

* Cough/bronchitis

* Tendency for infections

* Blood pressure problems

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Rheumatism

* Common cold

Unproven Uses: The drug has been used to treat neuralgic
discomforts and furuncles.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Inhalation may cause acute inflammation of the airway

passages.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper external administration of designated thera-
peutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Resorptive poisonings, such as kidney and central nervous
system damage, are possible with large-area administration.
Kidney damage is conceivable with internal administration.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Available in form of ointments,

gels, emulsions and oils.

Preparation: Liquid and semi-solid preparations 10 to 20%.

----- PAGE 709 -----
458/LARCH

LITERATURE

Freudenberg K, Weinges K, (1959) Tetrahedron Letters 17:19.
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Larix decidua
See Larch

Larkspur

Delphinium consolida

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds of the

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in short racemes and are
lue, pink or purple. The petals are fused to a helmet-like
‘orm with a honey spur at the back, which reaches into the
ack of the 5 sepals. There is usually only 1 glabrous ovary,
ut numerous stamens. The fruit is a follicle with black,
flattened seeds, which have sharp edges and a_ scarred

surface.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 15 to 40 cm.
Larkspur is an annual and has a thin stem that is sparsely
ranched from the middle. The leaves are alternate and
divided into narrow linear sections. The lowers ones are
petioled and the upper ones sessile.

Habitat:_E’ope, western U.S.

Production: DetpWfhium flower consists of the* flowers of

Delphinium consolida.
Not to be Confused With: the flowers of Delphinium oriental.

Other Names: Knight's Spur, Lark Heel, Lark's Claw,

Lark's Toe, Staggerweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpene alkaloids: chief alkaloid delphinine

The presence of alkaloids has sometimes been described in
the literature but they cannot always be found.

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Larkspur is obsolete. It is used only as an
inactive ingredient in tea mixtures. Preparations of delphini-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

um flower are sometimes used as a diuretic and vermifuge,
as a sedative and an appetite stimulant. In folk medicine,
Larkspur is used occasionally as a diuretic. It was formerly
used as an anthelmintic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

OVERDOSAGE

Although the delphine has a paralyzing effect upon peripher-
al and motor nerve endings and the central nervous system,
poisonings among humans by Delphinium consolida have
never been observed.

Toxic dosages in animal experiments have led to death
through asphyxiation (LD50 rabbits 1.5-3.0 mg/kg body
weight, I.V.). Poisonings of animals with fatal results by
Delphinium species are particularly frequent in the U.S.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy of Delphinium
and its preparations is not documented, a_ therapeutic

administration cannot be recommended.

Preparation: Larkspur is found only in teas, often as an
inactive ingredient.

LITERATURE

Atta-ur-Rahman AM, Nasreen A, Akhtar F, Shekhani MS,
Clardy J, Parvez M, Choudhary MI, Antifungal diterpenoid
alkaloids from Delphinium denudatum. J Nat Prod, 60:472-4,
1997 May.
Bhandary KK, Ramasubbu N, Joshi BS, Desai HK, Pelletier
SW, Structure of delvestine: a norditerpenoid alkaloid from
Delphinium vestitum Wall. Acta Crystallogr C, 59:1704-7, 1990
Sep 15.
Ding LS, Chen WX, Diterpenoid alkaloids from Delphinium
kamaonense var. glabrescens. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 59:438-40,
1990.
Gheorgiu A et al., Ann Pharm Frnac 22 (1964), 49.
Manners GD, Panter KE, Pelletier SW, Structure-activity

relationships of norditerpenoid alkaloids occurring in toxic
larkspur (Delphinium) species. J Nat Prod, 59:863-9, 1995 Jun.

Yum L, Wolf KM, Chiappinelli VA, Description of a scale for
rating the clinical response of cattle poisoned by larkspur. Am J
Vet Res, 41:488-93, 1991 Mar.

Further information in:

Alkondon M, Pereira EF, Wonnacott S, Albuquerque EX,
Blockade of nicotinic currents in hippocampal neurons defines
methyllycaconitine as a potent and specific receptor antagonist.
Mol Pharmacol, 41:802-8, 1992 Apr.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Ed), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1969.

----- PAGE 710 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Olsen JD, Sisson DV, Toxicity of extracts of tall larkspur
(Delphinium barbeyi) in mice hamsters rats and sheep. Toxicol
Lett, 59:33-41, 1991 Apr.

Park JC, Desai HK, Pelletier SW Two new norditerpenoid
alkaloi.djjfcom Delphinium elatum var. 'black night’. J Nat
Prod, 59:291-5, 1995 Feb.

Ralphs MH, Olsen JD, Comparison of larkspur alkaloid extract
and lithium chloride in maintaining cattle aversion to larkspur
in the field. J Anim Sci, 70:1116-20, 1992 Apr.

Siemion RS. Raisbeck MF, Waggoner JW, Tidwell MA,
Sanchez DA, In vitro ruminal metabolism of larkspur alkaloids.
Vet Hum Toxicol, 34:206-8, 1992 Jun.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Ulubelen A, Desai HK, Srivastava SK, Hart BP, Park JC, Joshi
BS, Pelletier SW, Mericli AH. Mericli F, Iarslan R,
Diterpenoid alkaloids from Delphinium davisii. J Nat Prod,
59:360-6, 1996 Apr.

Yum L, Wolf KM, Chiappinelli VA. Nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors in separate brain regions exhibit different affinities for
methyllycaconitine. Neuroscience, 41:545-55, 1996 May.

Laurel

Laurus nobilis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the fruit

and the oil.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in axillary bushy umbels
or sbpjjsgfacemous panicles. They are dioecious, whitish-
green with 4?*p6tals*fused at the base. The* male flower
usually has 10'to'"12 stamens; the female has 4 staminoids.
The ovary is short-stemmed with one chamber with a
hanging ovule, a short style and a triangular obtuse stigma.
The fruit develops on the stem into deep-black 2 cm long
ovate berries.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Laurel is an evergreen shrub or up to
10 m high tree with smooth, olive green to black bark. The
dark-green bay leaves are lanceolate and alternate, about 10
cm long and acuminate at both ends. They are short petioled
and their margins are often sinuate and coriaceous.

Habitat: Laurel is indigenous to Mediterranean countries.

Production: Bay leaves are the leaves of Laurus nobilis. Bay
berries are the fruits of Laurus nobilis.

Other Names: Sweet Bay, True Laurel, Bay, Roman Laurel,
Noble Laurel, Daphne, Bay Laurel, Bay Tree, Grecian
Laurel

LAUREL/459

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: LAUREL LEAF
Volatile oil (1-3%): chief components 1,8-cineol

Sesquiterpene lactones: dehydrocostuslactone, costunolide,
furthermore eremanthin, laurenbiolide

Isoquinoline alkaloids: including, among others, reticulin

COMPOUNDS: LAUREL FRUIT
Volatile oil (1-4%): including, among others, 1,8-cineol,
alpha- and beta-pinene, citral, methylcinnamat

Sesquiterpene lactones: dehydrocostuslactone, costunolid,
furthermore eremanthin, laurenbiolide

Fatty oil (25-55%): chief fatty acids lauric, palmitic, oleic
acid The green salve-like laurel oil is gained by pressing or
cooking the berries. Besides fatty oil, it contains the
components of the volatile oil and a large percentage of
sesquiterpene lactones.

EFFECTS

Laurel leaves are externally rubefacient and allergenic
because of die essential oil they contain. An antimicrobial,
insect repellent effect has been

tmnt

molluscidal and
demonstrated.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Both forms are used as a skin stimulant
(rubefacient) and for rheumatic conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a medium potential for
sensitization.

DOSAGE
LAUREL LEAF

Mode of Administration: The essential oil is used in
ointments and soaps.

LAUREL FRUIT

Mode of Administration: The mixture of essential and fatty
oils, extracted through pressing, was formerly used in the
treatment of furuncles; today Laurel is used externally in
veterinary medicine, as an udder ointment.

LITERATURE
Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
erlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.
Hogg JW et al., (1974) Phytochemistry 13:868.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 711 -----
460/LAUREL

Novak M. (1985) Phytochemistry 24(4):585.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger Er Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tada H' eTaL (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:667.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tori K et aL (1976) Tetrahedron Lett 5:387.

Laurus nobilis

See Laurel

Lavandula angustifolia
See English Lavender

Lavender Cotton
Santolina chamaecyparissias

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow flower heads are 1 cm wide,
almost semi-globular, long-pedicled, homogamous and with-
out lingual florets. The corolla tube is compressed and
somewhat winged, with a one-sided appendage. The fruit is

glabrous.*

Leaves, Stem affd foot: The evergreen plant fs a bushy,
aromatic subshrub with brittle branches. There are 4 compact
rows of small leaves that are narrow, linear, 2 to 3 cm wide,
fleshy, obtuse, paired-pinate, gray-tomentose, and occasion-

ally green.
Habitat: The plant is common in the Mediterranean region.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong scent similar to that
of chamomile.

Production: Lavender Cotton is the aerial part of Santolina
chamaecyparissias.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1%): chief components artemisiaketone (3,5,6-
trimethyl-1,5-heptadien-4-one, 65%), as well as myrcene,

alpha-pinene

Alkaloids

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug has anti-inflammatory, digestive, stimulation of
menstruation, and anthelmintic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Lavender Cotton is used for digestive
disorders, PMS, worm infestation, stomach complaints and
also to treat jaundice.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used internally as an
infusion, but medicinal use has generally ceased.

LITERATURE
Becchi M, Carrier M, (1980) Planta Med 38(3):267.

Giner R et al., (1986) Planta Med 6:83P.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lawsonia inermis

See Henna

Ledum latifolium
See Labrador Tea

Lemna minor
See Duckweed

Lemon
Citrus limon

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the juice, peel and
oil of the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: Flowers are arranged singly or in short,
sparsely flowered racemes, hermaphrodite or functionally
male. The petals are suffused with purple on the outer
surface. There are 25 to 40 stamens in coherent groups. The
fruit is yellow when ripe and grows to 6.5 to 12.5 cm. It is 8-

«

----- PAGE 712 -----
Ok

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

to 10-locular, oblong or ovoid, with a broad, low, mamilli-
form projection at the apex. The rind is somewhat rough to
almost smooth. The pulp is acidic.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Citrus limon is a small tree, growing
only 3 to" 6 m talf with twigs that are angular when young
and soon become rounded and glabrous with stout axillary
spines. The leaves are pale green, broadly elliptical, acute
and serrate or crenate. The petiole has a flat wing or is
merely margined and is distinctly articulated with the lamina.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to northern India, cultivated
in Mediterranean regions and worldwide in subtropical
regions.

Production: Lemons are the fruit, lemon peel is the skin of
the fruit and lemon oil the essential oil extracted from the
skins of Citrus limon.

Other Names: Limon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil in the fresh and dehydrated peel: chief compo-
nents (+)-limonene in addition to citral (as an odor-bearer),
n-nonanal, n-decanal, n-dodecanal, linalyl acetate, geranyl
acetat, citronellyl acetat, methyl anthranilate; also in pressed
oils, lipophilic flavinoids, including sinensetin, nobiletin and
furocoumarins

Flavonoids: in particular the bitter neohesperidosides narin-
gin and neohesperidin dyhydro chalcones, furthermore
hesperidin, rutin and ericitrim

EFFECTS
The cj*D“avonoids in lemon affect vascular permeability
and are anti?infJ*immatory, diuretic and a‘ source of
vitamin C. rod

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Lemon is used as a source of vitamin C in
cases of general low resistance, scurvy and colds. In folk
medicine, lemon juice was recommended as a drink for
fever, as a remedy for acute rheumatism and as an antidote to
intoxicants, particularly opium. Additional traditional uses
that are still recommended include sunburn, and as a quinine
substitute for malaria or to reduce body temperature in
typhus patients.

Indian Medicine: Uses in Indian medicine include as a
remedy for shaking and heartburn.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a low potential for sensitization through
skin contact with volatile oil.

LEMON BALM /461

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Lemon is used internally in the
form of oil, tincture or fresh fruit.

LITERATURE
Calomme M et al.. Inhibition of bacterial mutagenisis by Citrus
flavonoids. In: PM 62(3):222-226. 1996.

Calomme M et al., PM 62:222. 1996.

Clavarano I, Essenze Deriv. Agrum 36:5. 1966.

Horowitz RM, Gentili B, Tetrahedron 19:773. 1963.

Paris R, (1977) Plant Med Phytother 1 l(Suppl):129.

Paris R, Delavean P. (1977) Plant Med Phytother

1 (SuppI):198.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.). Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge. London 1986.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997. * '

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Lemon Balm
Melissa officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Lemon Balm (available from numerous manufacturers and as
combination product), Melissa Lemon Balm Herb, Quanterra
Sleep

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted by
distillation, the dried leaves, the fresh leaves and the whole

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The small white bilabiate flowers are in 6
one-sided false whorls in the axils of the upper leaves. The

----- PAGE 713 -----
462/LEMON BALM

calyx is campanulate, bilabiate, and it has a shortly dentate
upper lip. The corolla tube is curved upward. The upper lip is
slightly domed and divided in two parts, the lower lip is 3-
lobed with an extended middle lobe. The flower has 4
stamens. The fruit is an oblong-ovate, 1.5 to 2 mm long and
chestsyit-brown, nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that grows
up to 90 cm high, with an erect, quadrangular, branched and
sparsely haired to glabrous stem. The leaves are petiolate and
have an ovate to rhomboid, 2 to 6 cm long and 1.5 to 5 cm
wide crenate leaf blade, which is shortly pointed at the end,
and stunted or wedge-shaped at the base. It is usually only
pubescent above or completely glabrous.

Characteristics: Before flowering, the taste and smell is
lemon-like, later becoming astringent to balm-like and
warming.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the east Mediterranean
region and west Asia, and is cultivated in central Europe or
established in the wild.

Production: Lemon balm is the fresh or dried leaves of
Melissa officinalis as well as its preparations. The leaves are
collected before flowering or before there is too much
branching. Leaves and stem are separated and comminuted
and dried quickly at temperatures between 30 to 40° C.

Not to be Confused With: Nepeta cataria. var. citriodora
(lemon cat mint).

Other Names: Balm, Sweet Mary, Honey Plant, Cure-AH,
Dropsy Plant, Melissa

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatit&f&fi-*{(W2-0.8%): chief components geranial (citral
a), neral (citral "S), citronellal (together 40°75% of the
volatile oil, aroma-carrier), furthermore, linalool, geraniol,
geranylactetate, methyl citronellate, trans-P-ocimene, 1-Oc-
ten-3-ol, 6-methyl-5-heptene-2-on. beta-caryophyllene, cary-
ophyllebepoxide, germacren D, eugenol

Glycosides: of the alcoholic or phenolic components of the
volatile oil, for example eugenol glucoside

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmaric acid (up to 4.7%)

Flavonoids: including among others cynaroside, cosmosiin,
rhamnocitrin, isoquercitrin

Triterpene acids: including among others ursolic acid. Only
the very fresh drug (maximum 6 months old) is usable as a
sedative, because of the low volatile oil content and its high
volatility; the requirements of the German-language medica-
tion texts do not take this into consideration (no minimum
content requirement given).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug has mild sedative and carminative, spasmolytic,
antibacterial, antiviral, anti-oxidative and anti-hormonal
effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Nervousness and insomnia

The drug is used for nervous agitation and sleeping
problems.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is utilized as
decoctions of the flowering shoots for nervous complaints,
lower abdominal disorders, meteorism, nervous gastric
complaints, hysteria and melancholia, chronic bronchial
catarrh, nervous palpitations, vomiting, migraine, nervous
debility, headache and high blood pressure. It is used
externally for rheumatism, nerve pains and _ stiff necks
(compress).

Homeopathic Uses: Melissa officinalis is used for menstrual
irregularities.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb, herb powder,
liquid extracts or dry extracts for teas and other galenic
preparations; liquid and solid forms for internal and external
use; combinations with other sedative and/or carminative
herbs may be beneficial.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 395 mg

Preparation: To prepare an infusion pour one cup of hot
water over 15 to 4.5 gm of the drug and strain after 10
minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 15 to 4.5 gm of
drug.
Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every

30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB34).

Storage: Store in well-sealed, non-plastic containers, protect-
ed from light and moisture for up to 1 year.

LITERATURE
Aufmkolk M, (1985) Endocrinology 116(5): 1687.
Aufmkolk M et al., (1984) Endocrinology 115(2):527.
Aufmkolk M et al., (1984) Horm Metab Res 16(4): 183.

----- PAGE 714 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Brieskom CH, Krause W, (1974) Arch Pharm 307(8):603.
Buechner KH et al., (1974) Med Klein. 69(23): 1032.
Chlabicz J et al., (1984) Pharmazie 39(11):770.

Cohen RA, Kucera LS, Herrmann EC Jr, Antiviral activity of
Melissa Brficihalis "(Limon Balm) extract. In: Proc Soc Exp Biol
Med 117:431-434. 1964.

Czygan FC, Melisse - Objekt der Grundlagenforschung. In:
DAZ 132(12):599. 1992.

De Jong CAG. (1978) Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 112(3):82.
Enjalbert F et al., (1983) Fitoterapia 2:59.
Forster HB et al,. (1980) Planta Med 40(4):309.

Hermann EC Jr., Kucera LS, Antiviral substances in plants of
ie mint family (Labiatae): II. Nontanninia polyphenols of
Melissa officinalis. In: Proc soc Exp Bio Med 124:869. 1967.

Koch-Heitzmann I, Schultze W, 2000 Jahre Melissa officinalis.
Von der Bienenpflanze zum Virustatikum. In: ZPT 9(3):77.
988.

Kiimel G, Stoll L, Brendel M, Herpes simplex. Therapie mit
rezeptfreien Topika. In: DAZ 131(30):1609. 1991.

Kucera LS, Hermann EC Jr, (1967) Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
24:865 et 874.

Mohrig A, Melissenextrakt bei Herpes simplex - die Alternative
zu Nucleosid-Analoga. In: DAZ 136(50):4575-4580. 1996.

Orth-Wagner S, Ressin WJ, Friedrich I, Phytosedativum gegen
Schlafstorungen. In: ZPT 16(3): 147-156. 1995.

Ozarowski A, (1982) Wiad 4:7.

Pertz H, Naturally occuring clavines: Antagonism/partial
agonism at 5-HT2alpha receptors and antogonism at alpha 1-
adrenoceptors in blood vessel. In: PM 62(5)387-392. 1996.

Richter T, Melissa officinalis - Ein Leitmotiv fur 1000 Jahre
MedizinggscWehte. In: DAZ 133(41):3723. 1993.

Sarer E, Kokdil G,Cpnstituterits of the essential ofl from
Melissa officinalis. In: PM 57:89. 1991.

Schultze W, Konig WA, Hilker A, Richter R, Melissenole. In:
DAZ 135(7):557-577. 1995.

Thieme H, Kithe C, (1973) Pharmazie 28(1 ):69.
Uehleke B, Phytobalneologie. In: ZPT 17(1):26-43. 1996.

Vogt HJ, Tausch I, Wobling RH, Kaiser PM (1991)
Melissenextrakt bei Herpes simplex." Allgemeinarzt 14:832-841.

Wagner H, Sprinkmeyer L, (1973) Dtsch Apoth Z 113:1159.
Walz A, Melisse hilft heilen. In: DAZ 136(2):26. 1996.
'Wolbling RH, Milbradt R, (1984) Therapiewoche 34(9): 1193.

Zitiert nach: Koch- Heitzmann I, Schultze W, (1984) Melissa
officinalis. Eine alte Arzneipflanze mit neue therapeutischen
Wirkungen. Dtsch Apoth Z 124:2137-2145.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

LEMON VERBENA /463

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R. Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart. Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Lemon Verbena
Aloys ia trip hy I la -»-

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the oil of vervain as a
distillate of the fresh twigs and the dried leaves and stems.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has numerous small flowers in
panicle-like spikes. The hairy calyx is about 3 mm long with
4 tips. The petals are white or bluish, and fused to a 4 to 5
mm long funnel at the base. There are 2 short and 2 long

stamens in the funnel.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Aloysia triphylla is an up to 3 m tall
shrub. The branches are striate and scabrous. They bear
leaves in whorls of 3 or 4 on the stem. The leaves are entire-
margined, short-petioled, lanceolate and about 7 to 10 cm
long. They have lateral veins almost at right angles to the
midrib, and are dotted on the underside with oil-bearing

glands.

Characteristics: The leaves have a lemony fragrance.

Habitat: The plant originated in Argentina, Chile and Peru,
and is cultivated in most other warmer countries. Main
countries of cultivation are Algeria, Chile, Israel and

Morocco.

Production: Lemon Verbena leaves are the leaves and stems,
in whole and ground form, of Aloysia triphylla. The shrubs
are propagated by runners or cuttings. They are cut from the
second year of growth, in the month of July, before
flowering. The young lateral branches appear in October.

They are dried rapidly in thin layers or bundles. The dried

----- PAGE 715 -----
464/LEMON VERBENA

leaves are then stripped off. The harvest consists of
approximately 10,000 kg of the leaf drug per hectare.

Other Names: Herb Louisa, Lemon-Scented Verbena

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COM“ttU'NDS '
Volatile oil: main constituents are geraniol and neral

Flavonoids: including apigenin-, diosmetin- and luteolin-7-
O-glucosides. in addition to mono-, di- and trimethoxyfla-
vones, including eupatorin. (See Lippiae triphylla
aetherolum.)

Iridoids: iridoid glycosides including geniposidic acid

EFFECTS
The leaves are considered to be antispasmodic, sedative and
are a febrifuge. There are no up-to-date studies available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In France, Lemon Verbena is used in the
symptomatic treatment of digestive disorders, agitation and
insomnia. The drug has also been used in the treatment of
febrile hemorrhoids, varicose veins and impure skin. In
Morocco it is also used for chills and constipation. Efficacy
has not been proven in any of these areas. The plant is used
as an inactive ingredient to improve the flavor in medicinal
teas.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: In France, the infusion is available
in vat“ rcstaurantsjiinder the name "Vervaine oderante."
Used in various medicinal preparations 'and tea mixtures.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 5 to 29 g of the leaf
per | liter of water.

Daily Dosage: Drink 2 to 5 cups of the infusion during the
course of the day. In preparations with a high water content
(such as instant teas), the daily dose equivalent should not
exceed 10 g. The upper limit for daily dosages of powders
and tinctures is 5 g.

Storage: The drug must be stored in sealed containers,
protected from light and dampness.

LITERATURE
Breitweiser K, (1943) Pharmaz Ind 10:76.

Carnat A, Carat AP, Chavignon O, Heitz A, Wylde R,
Lamaison JL, Luteolin 7-diglucuronide the major flavonoid
compound from Aloysia triphylla and Verbena officinalis. Planta
Med, 61:490, 1995 Oct.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Killacky J et al., (1976) Planta Med 30:310.
Rimpler H, Sauerbier H, Biochem Syst Ecol 14:307-310. 1986.
Skalta H, Shammas G, PM 54:265. 1988.

Tomas-Barberan FA, Harborne JB, Self R, PH 26:2281-2284.
1987.

Torrent Marti MT, Rev R Acad Farm (Barcelona) 14:39-55.
1976.

Lemon-Wood

Schisandra sphenanthera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Medicinal properties are attributed to the
fruit and seed of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in clusters with a few
blossoms in the axils of the bracts. There are 5 to 8 tepals.
The perigone of the male flowers has 5 to 8 sections and 11
to 19 stamens. The female flowers have a similar perigone
and 30 to 50 ovaries. The fruit is elongate-elliptical, slim and
hangs in aggregate clusters. The individual fruit is round,
fleshy, brown-red to dark brown and berry-like.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The dioecious Schisandra sphe-
nanthera has leaves that are alternate and arranged like
whorls on short shoots. The petiole is J to 3 cm long. The
lamina is dark green to-brown, 5 to 11 cm long and 3 to 7 cm
wide. It is ovate to elliptical, acute at both ends and serrate to
dentate. The young branches are purple.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China.

Production: Southern schisandra fruit is the dried, ripe fruit
of Schisandra sphenanthera.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

Lignans (in the seeds 2 to 10%): dibenzo[a,c]cyclooctene
derivatives, including schizandrins A and B, schizandrols A
and B, schizantherins A to E, additional lignans with other
parent including epigalbacin, anwulignan,
ganschisandrin

substances,

Fatty oil (in the seeds)

----- PAGE 716 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS

Various lignans have been isolated from the drug that are
also present in Schisandra chinensis; some of the action
mechanisms described there may also apply to Schisandra
sphenapjhera. (See Schisandra chinensis.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: The plant is used for dyspnea, coughs
caused by disturbance of lung function, dry mouth, thirst,
spontaneous or night sweats, nocturia, insomnia, amnesia
and anxiety states. Efficacy for these indications has not yet
been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole drug and preparations for

internal use.

Preparation: To prepare Cuwuweizi powder, the drug is
evaporated in the ratio of 1:5 with vinegar in closed
containers until the surface turns black. The product is then
ground to a powder.

Daily Dosage: The literature has no information.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Liu CS, Fang SD, Huang MF, Kao YL, Hsu JS, Studies on the
active principles of Schisandra sphenanthera Rehd. et Wils. The
structures of schisantherin A, B, C, D, E and the related
comfja*m!?LiSci Sin. 21:483-502, 1978 Jul-Aug.

Lemongrass

Cymbopogon citratus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves
and the Lemongrass oil of Cymbopogon citratus and the
citronella oil from Cymbopogon nardus.

CYMBOPOGON CITRATUS

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 30 cm long and have false
spikes with reddish brown sheaths 15 to 25 mm long. The
racemes are 15 to 17 mm long. The sessile spikelet is 6 mm
long and the upper spelts are 0.7 mm wide, lanceolate,
narrowly winged, flattened at the back, slightly concave and
ribless in the lower part. The stemmed spikelet is 4.5 mm
long, and the lower spelt is 0.7 mm wide. Inflorescences are
rarely formed on this variety.

LEMONGRASS /465

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cymbopogon citratus is a perennial
plant with a smooth and glabrous stalk up to 2 m. The leaf
blade is linear, acuminate, up to 90 cm long and 5 mm wide
and smooth on both sides. The leaf sheaths are round,
glabrous and smooth. The ligule is paper-like and less than |
mm long.

CYMBOPOGON NARDUS

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is very large and
consists of a l-meter long spike with numerous racemes up
to 20 mm long and arranged in zigzag order. The sessile
spike is 5 mm long. The lower spelt is oblong-lanceolate,
usually flat, narrowly winged with 3 ribs. The awn, if there is
one, is 5 mm long. The petiolar spike is 5 mm long, and the
lower spelt lanceolate has 7 ribs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cymbopogon nardus is a perennial
plant with a stalk that grows up to 2 to 2.5 m. It is smooth
arid glabrous. The leaf blade is up to 1 m long and 1.5 cm
wide and usually light green. The upper surface is smooth,
the lower surface and the margin are rough. The leaf sheaths
are glabrous and yellowish-green. The basal leaf sheaths are
also glabrous but green to reddish. The ligule is paper-like
and about 1 mm long.

Characteristics: Cymbopogon species have essential oils in
tube-like cells with corked walls.

Habitat: Citronella grass was originally indigenous to the
tropics and the subtropics of the Old World. Today it is
cultivated in Central and South America and Queensland,

Australia.

Production: Lemongrass consists of the above-ground parts
of Cymbopogon citratus. West Indian Lemongrass oil
consists of the es'se'ntial oil from Cymbopogon citratus.
Citronella oil consists of the essential oil from Cymbopogon
winterianus.

Other Names: Citronella, Fevergrass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: LEMONGRASS LEAVES
Volatile oil (0.2-0.4%)

COMPOUNDS: LEMONGRASS LEAVES
Citral (65-86%)

Myrcene (12-20%)
COMPOUNDS: CITRONELLA OIL
Citronellal (32-45%)

Geraniol (12-25%)
Geranyl acetate (3-8%)
Citronellyl acetate (1-4%)

----- PAGE 717 -----
466/LEMONGRASS
EFFECTS

In rats, i.v. administration of an infusion caused a drop in
arterial pressure and a mild diuretic effect. The oral

administration of an imprecise amount of extract caused a
drop in temperature and tendency to lengthen intestinal
passage’ dme. Because of the small number of experiments
carried out, a hypotensive action cannot be considered as
conclusively proven. The essential oil has an antibacterial
effect in animal tests: in higher doses, it has a sedative/
analgesic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Externally, Lemongrass is used for lumba-
go, neuralgic and rheumatic pain, sprains, and as a mild
astringent. Internally, the herb is used for gastrointestinal
symptoms and mild states of agitation.

Indian Medicine: Lemongrass is used for intestinal parasites,
stomach complaints, flatulence, leprosy, bronchitis and

fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The application of salves with the volatile oil upon the skin
has led in rare cases to signs of allergy. A toxic alveolitis
was observed in 2 cases following inhalation of the volatile
oil.

DOSAGE

No information is available.
Storage: Store in air-tight containers protected from light.

LITERATURE
De Silva MG, Mfg Chemist 30:415-416. 1959.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuchdgr Pharrnazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(r>ogenOTopringer. yejlag Berlin, Heidelberg, Newjfork, 1992-
1994, *\ 4

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Sarer E, Scheffer JIC, Svendsen AB, Composition of the
essential oil of Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) STAPF cultivated in
turkey. In: Sci Pharm 51:58. 1983.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Leonurus cardiaca

See Motherwort

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leonurus japonicus

See Chinese Motherwort

Lepidium sativum

See Garden Cress

Leptandra virginica
See Black Root

Lesser Celandine
Ranunculus ficaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh herb.

Flower and Fruit: The golden yellow flowers have a
diameter of 25 mm. The calyx usually has 3 sepals, the
corolla 8 or more petalswhich are glossy and spread out in a
star-shape. Since the petals are green underneath, the flowers
are inconspicuous when closed. There are numerous stamens

and ovaries. The fruit is 1-seeded and indehiscent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 5 to 15 cm
high. The stems are decumbent and bear bulbils in the leaf
axils. The leaves, like the stems, are glabrous and fleshy. The
lower ones are long-petioled, alternate and orbicular-cordate.
The upper ones are 5-lobed. There are-fleshy, cylindrical
clavate tubers between the roots.

Characteristics: The herb has a hot, unpleasant taste and is

toxic.

Habitat: The plant is found all over Europe, western Asia
and northern Africa.

Production: Lesser Celandine is the fresh herb of Ranuncu-

lus ficaria.
Other Names: Pilewort, Figwort, Smallwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

The glycoside ranunculin as protoanemonine-forming agent:
The freshly-harvested plant (0.06-0.35% of the fresh weight,
of which only 3% of the overall content of the plant is
contained in the leaves, 68% in the stalks, 25% in the
blossoms) changes enzymatically when it is cut into small
pieces, and probably also when it is dried, into the pungent,
volatile protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to non-mu-

----- PAGE 718 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

cus-membrane-irritating anemonine. When dried, the plant is
not capable of protoanemonine-formation.

EFFECTS
Active agents are tannin, the alkaloids chelidonin and

“ cholerytrin, the saponin fikarin and large quantities of
vitamin C.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Lesser Celandine is used for scurvy,
treatment of bleeding wounds, gums and swollen joints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The dangers of irritation of the skin and mucus membranes
are relatively low with pilewort. The consumption of small
quantities of the fresh leaf sheaths (before blossoming; the
stem should be discarded) as a springtime salad is
unproblematic.

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction

with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages of the dehydrated drug. Extended skin contact with

the freshly-harvested, bruised plant can lead to blister

formation and cauterizations which are difficult to heal due
- to the resulting protoanemonine, that is severely irritating to
“skin and mucus membranes.

If taken internally, severe irritation to the gastrointestinal
tract, combined with colic and diarrhea, as well as irritations
of the urinary drainage passages, are possible. Symptomatic
treatment for external contact should consist of irrigation
with diluted potassium permanganate solution; in case of
internal contact, administration of activated charcoal should
follow gastric lavage.

OVERDOSAGE .* Jer" —
Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in

animal experiments.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground and as an extract. The drug
extracts can be added to baths to treat hemorrhoids, warts
and scratches.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Kolesnik et al., (1963) CA 59:7856.

Pourrat H, Pourrat A, (1966) Bull Soc Chim Franc 2410.
Pourrat H et al., (1979) Ann Pharm Frane 37:441.

Pourrat H et al., (1982) Ann Pharm Frane 40:373.
Ruijgrok HWL, PM_ 11:338-347. 1963.
Texier O et al., (1984) Phytochemistry 23(12):2903.

LESSER GALANGAL /467

Further information in:
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Lesser Galangal

Alpinia — officinarum
DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the

rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: Galangal is a perennial plant. It is similar
in appearance to the sword lily.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Lesser Galangal has a dark, reddish-
brown, cylindrical rhizome about | to 2 cm in diameter and 3
to 6 cm long. The stem is marked at short intervals with
raised rings, which are the scars of the leaf bases. Stems are
up to 15 m with long narrow lanceolate leaves bearing
racemes of orchid-shaped flowers, white and veined red. A
fracture of the rhizome is hard and tough, showing a pale
inside with a darker central column.

Characteristics: Lesser' Galangal has a pungent and spicy
taste. The odor is aromatic, rather like ginger.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China and entered
Europe via India and Arabia in the Middle Ages.

Production: Lesser Galangal consists of the dried rhizome of
Alpinia officinarum.

Not to be Confised With: The rhizome of Kaempferia
galanga and other Alpina species

Other Names: Galanga, East India Root, Chinese Ginger,
China Root, India Root, East India Catarrh Root, Gargaut,
Colic Root, Catarrh Root, Galangal

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components-sesquiterpene hydrocarbons,
sesquiterpene alcohols

Diarylheptanoids: mixture termed galangol, some of them
pungent substances

----- PAGE 719 -----
468/LESSER GALANGAL

Gingerole: phenyl alkanones, pungent substances
Starch

Tannin

Flavonoids: including galangin, galangin-3-methylether,

kaempferide

EFFECTS
The plant is said to have antispasmodic, antiphlogistic and
antibacterial properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
+ Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include painful upper
abdominal syndrome of the Roemheld complex type, slugg-
ish digestion, and for liver and gallbladder complaints.
Additional uses include fevers and colds, cough/bronchitis,
tendency for infections, and inflammation of the mouth and
pharynx.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for pain, particularly
stomach pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not reported.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and powder, as
well as other galenic preparations for oral administration.

Preparation: Infusion - Pour boiling water over 0.5 to 1 g
drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosages‘ino 4r g. The infusion dosage-is 1 cup 30

minutes before’ meals.

LITERATURE

Collins KR, Pat EP 25649 (1981) Europe.

De Pooler HL, et al., PH 24:93. 1985.

Haraguchi H, et al., Antifungal activity from Alpinia galanga
and the competition for incorporation of unsaturated fatty acids
in cell growth. In: PM 62(4):308-313. 1996.

Haraguchi H, et al., PM 62:308. 1996.

Itokawa H, et al., (1987) Planta Med 53(1 ):32.

Mitsui S, et al., (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:2377.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press, 1975.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Levant Cotton
Gossypium herbacewn

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root bark, the
fresh inner-root bark and the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow flowers have a dark red spot at
the base of the petals. The calyx is 2 to 2.5 cm long. The
bracts are broadly deltate-ovate to semicircular, usually at
least as wide as long. Their margins have 6 to 8 acute or
shortly acuminate teeth, usually less than 3 times as long as
wide. The fruit is beak-shaped, terminally rounded, up to 18
mm long, with 3 to 4 chambers. The seeds, which are
embedded in the hairs, are square with gray pubescense.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Gossypium herbaceum is an
evergreen shrub 2 m high and 1 to 1.5 m wide. The few
branches are glabrous to sparsely haired and foliated. The
leaves are broadly cordate, coriaceous, reticulate, pubescent
with undulate margins. They have a short tip and narrow

base.

Habitat: The variety isindigenous to Asia and Africa. Today
it is mainly cultivated in Egypt, China, India, Anatolia and
the southern U.S.

Other Names: Cotton Root, Cotton

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (traces): including with beta-bisabolol

Resinous substance: containing, among others, salicylic acid
and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid

Dimeric sesquiterpenes: (+)-gossypol, (+) -gossypol, p-hem-
igossypol in some strains presumably in very low quantities)

The drug has not been investigated in recent times.

EFFECTS
A histamine-releasing effect has been observed in vitro, in
the lung tissue of pigs. The drug also appears to have
emmenagogic, oxytocic and contraceptive (male) effects, but
constituents have not yet been sufficiently investigated. The

----- PAGE 720 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

oxytocic effect, similar to that of secale, has been observed
in animal experiments, making its use as a contraction
stimulant seem plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses:, The drug has many indications in folk
medicine, such as amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, irregular
menstruation, nausea, fever, headache, diarrhea and dysen-
tery; as an oxytoxic, to expel the afterbirth, for urethritis,
nerve inflammation, poor lactation, metrorrhagia, hemor-
rhage, menorrhagia and atonic amenorrhea, painful menstru-
ation and climacteric complaints.

Chinese Medicine: Cotton is used in China as a male
contraceptive.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used chiefly in gynecology
to treat menstrual disturbances, menstrual bleeding, morning
sickness and uterine bleeding.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded.

Pregnancy: Cotton is not to be administered during pregnan-
cy, except at delivery.

OVERDOSAGE

In animal studies, numerous poisonings, some of them fatal,
have been observed following long-term feeding with large
quantities of cotton seed press cakes.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used as a decoction,
liquid extract and tincture, as well as in combination with
secale‘h“drastis, chaemaelirium and leonurus.

Preparatioris!*Tirfcture and liquid extracfof 2 to 4 ml, liquid
extract 20 to 40 drops per single dose.

Daily Dosage: The standard single dose to be taken
internally is 2 g of the drug, or 10 g of a 20% decoction, i.e.
1 teaspoonful for a single-dose decoction. The dosage of the
liquid extract administered during labor is a single dose of 1
to 2 level teaspoonfuls, with another similar dose given 2 to
4 times daily after the birth as a post-natal styptic.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

Storage: Store Cotton in well-filled containers, protected
from light and heat.
LITERATURE

Byzova MV, Kraev AS, Pozmogova GE, Skriabin KG,
Molecular characteristics of chalcone synthase gene families

LICORICE. 469

from two cotton species using the polymerase chain reaction.
Mol Biol (Mosk), 26:432-40, Mar-Aprl992.

Dai RX et al., (1978) Acta Biol Exp Sinica 11:27.
Dorsett PH et al., (1975) J Pharm Sci 64:1073.
Hamasaki Y, Tae HH, (1985) Biochim Biophys Acta 843(11:37.

Liu ZQ et al., In: Recent Advances in Fertility Regulation.
Beijing 1980, Eds. C. C. Fen et al. Pub. S. A. Atar. Geneva

1981.

Qian SZ et al., (1980) Chin Med J 93:477.
Stipanovic RD et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14:1077.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH. Landsberg 1988.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), JMedicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, London 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifie.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Zheng MS, Zhang YZ Anti-HBsAg herbs employing ELISA
technique. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 26:560-2 518.
Sep1990.

Levisticum officinale

See Lovage

Liatris spicata
See Marsh"Blazing Star

Licorice
Glycyrrhiza glabra

TRADE NAMES
Licorice Root (available from numerous manufacturers)
Wild Countryside Licorice Root, Standardized Licorice,
Licorice Power, Phyto Power, Licorice

----- PAGE 721 -----
470 /LICORICE

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the unpeeled, dried
roots and the runners, the peeled dried roots, and the rhizome
with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The axillary inflorescences are upright.
spike-like and 10 to 15 cm long. The individual flowers are 1
to 1.5 cm long, bluish to pale violet and short-pedicled. The
calyx is short, bell-shaped and glandular-haired. The tips of
the calyx are longer than the tube, and are pointed lanceolate.
The petals are narrow, the carina petals are not fused, and
they are pointed but not beaked. The fruit is a pod, 15 to 2.5
cm long, and 4 to 6 mm wide. It is erect and splayed, flat
with thick sutures, glabrous, somewhat reticulate-pitted, and
usually has 3 to 5 brown, reniform seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a herbaceous perennial.
It is 1 to 2 m high and has a long sturdy primary taproot. The
taproot is 15 cm long and subdivides into 3 to 5 subsidiary
roots, 1.25 m in length. There are several horizontal woody
stolons which may reach 8 m. New stems are produced every
year. They are sturdy, erect, branched either from the base or
from further up, and are generally rough at the top. The
foliage leaves are alternate, odd pinnate and 10 to 20 cm
long. The leaflets are in 3 to 8 pairs. The stipules are very
small and drooping.

Habitat: Individual varieties of Glycyrrhiza are found in
different regions. Glycyrrhiza glanulifera is found in south-
eastern Europe and western Asia. Glycyrrhiza pallida and
violocea are found in Iraq. Glycyrrhiza typica is indigenous
to southern Europe and southwest Asia.

Production: Licorice root consists of the peeled and un-
peeled, dried roots and stolons of Glycyrrhiza glabra.
Lirnrirjtiipg is the extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra.

Other Names: Sweet Root, sweet wort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: LICORICE EXTRACT

Triterpene saponins (3-15%): (according to DAB 1996, 4-
6% in the adjusted Licorice extract, according to D AC 1995,
5-7% in the dry Licorice extract): chief components are
glycyrrhetic acid (sweet-tasting, aglycone 18 betaglycyr-
rhetic acid, salts termed glycyrrizin)

Flavonoids: aglycones, including liquiritigenin, isoliquiri-
tigenin (its chalcone), isolicoflavonol

Isoflavonoids: aglycones formononetin, glabren, glabridin,
glabrol, 3-hydroxyglabrol, glycyrrhisoflavone

Cumestan derivatives: glycyrol, isoglycyrol, liqcoumarin

Hydroxycoumarins: including herniarin, umbelliferone, gly-
cycoumarin, licopyranocumarin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol

The drug contains considerably more free flavonoid and
isoflavonoid aglycones than the root drug does, due to the
hydrolysis that takes place during the extraction procedure.

COMPOUNDS: LICORICE ROOT

Triterpene saponins (3-15%): chief components glycyrrhetic
acid (sweet-tasting, aglycone 18beta-glycyrrhetic acid, salts
termed glycyrrhizin), 18-alpha-glycrrhetic acid, glycyrrhetic
acid methyl ester, glabric acid, glabrolide, uralenic acid

Flavonoids: aglycones including liquiritigenin, isoliquiritige-
nin (its chalcone), isolicoflavonol, isoliquiritin, licoricidin

Isoflavonoids: aglycones formononetin, glabren, glabridin,
glabrol, 3-hydroxyglabrol, glycyrrhisoflavone

Cumestan derivatives: glycyrol, isoglycyrol, liquocoumarin

Hydroxycoumarins: including herniarin, umbelliferone, gly-
cycoumarin, licopyranocoumarin

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol

Volatile oil (very little): with anethole, estragole, eugenol,
hexanoic acid

EFFECTS: LICORICE EXTRACT AND ROOT
Anti-Inflammatory/Anti-platelet Effects

Glabridin exerts anti-inflammatory effects through inhibition
of tyrosinase activity, superoxide anion production, and
cyclooxygenase activity (Yokota, 1998). Licoricidin, a
potent compound in the root, has an inhibitory effect on
isoPAF(platelet-activating factor) acetyltransferase resulting
in anti-inflammatory activity (Nagumo, 1999). Isoliquiritige-
nin, an aldose reductase inhibitor, exerts anti-platelet effects
through inhibition of cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and
peroxidase activity (Tawata, 1992). The anti-inflammatory
effects of glycyrrhizin is attributed to its anti-thrombin action
through inhibition of thrombin induced platelet aggregation
(Francischetti, 1997).

Antiulcer Effects

Licorice has protective effects against gastric ulcers induced
by aspirin (Dehpour, 1994). Licorice has the ability to
release endogenous secretin, which is a potential mediator of
the antiulcer actions (Shiratori, 1986). Carbenoxolone, a
succinate derivative of glycyrrhetic acid, has been shown to
accelerate the healing of ulcers (Barbara, 1979; Bianchi,
1985). Deglycyrrhizinated licorice is also effective for
healing ulcers and lacks undesirable side effects seen with
carbenoxolone (Morgan, 1982).

----- PAGE 722 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Antiviral/Antifiingal Effects

Glycyrrhizin suppresses the secretion of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) surface antigen (HbsAg) in patients with HBV. The
compound is thought to bind to hepatocytes at a concentra-
tion able to modify the expression of HBV-related antigens
on the hepatocytes and suppress sialylation of HbsAg (Sato,
1996). Glycyrrhizin stimulates interferon gamma produced
by T-cells for an antiviral effect against influenza virus
infection (Utsunomiya, 1997). Antiviral action of glycyrrhiz-
in on the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) occurs by
inhibiting replication through interference with virus-cell
binding and also suppression of giant cell formation. (Ito,
1987; Nakashima, 1987). Glycyrrhizin induces CD4 T cells,
which suppress type 2 cytokines produced by burn-associ-
ated type 2 T cells. This improves resistance to Candida
alibicans associated with thermal injury (Utsunomiya, 1999).

Mineralcorticoid Effects

Licorice inhibits the enzyme 11-beta- hydroxysteroid dehy-
drogenase in the kidney, which leads to decreased transfor-
mation of Cortisol into cortisone. The mineralocorticoid
action of Cortisol causes a decrease in serum potassium and
an increase in serum sodium concentration resulting in
retention of water, causing weight increase and hypertension
(Palermo, 1996). Glycyrrhetic acid, the hydrolytic metabolite
of glycerrhizic acid causes the inhibition of peripheral
metabolism of Cortisol and produces a pseudo-aldosterone-
like effect (Heikens, 1995). Licorice induces high blood
pressure also through inhibition of NADPH-dependent short
chain dehydrogenase/reductase enzymes in the kidney
(Duax, 1998).

MisceUerteoys. Effects

Glabridin has been shown to inhibit UVB induced pigmenta-
tion and erythema in skins of giunea pigs (Yokota, 1998).
Isoliquiritin inhibits granuloma angiogenesis in a concentra-
tion dependent manner (Kobayashi, 1995). Glycyrrhizin has
therapeutic effects on liver dysfunction associated with
cytomegalovirus infection (Numazaki, 1994). Glycyrrhizin
has complementary effects on intracelluar calcium mobiliza-
tion to block neuromuscular transmission (Dezaki, 1995).
Licorice exerts a choleretic effects through glycyrrhizin and
other unknown components (Raggi, 1995).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Gastric Ulcer

A double-blind study involving thirty-four patients was
conducted to compare carbenoloxalone and pirenzepine for
treatment of a chronic gastric ulcer. Carbenoxalone was
administered as 300 mg daily for 1 week followed by 150
mg daily for 5 weeks. Pimzepine was administered as 150
mg daily for 6 weeks. There was no significant difference

LICORICE/471

between the groups at the end of the treatment period with
ulcers healed in 59% of the pirenzepine group and in 52% of
the carbenoxolone group. The healing rates in this study do
not compare well with reported treatment success rates of
H2-receptor antagonists (Bianchi, 1985).

Peptic Ulcer

A randomized, single-blind trial compared the efficacy of
deglycyrrhizinated licorice (Caved-S®) to cimetidine in 100
patients with peptic ulcer disease. The patients were adminis-
tered either cimetidine 200 mg 3 times daily plus 400 mg at
night or Caved-S plus antacid combination, 2 tablets to be
chewed 3 times a day between meals. Caved-S® was as
effective as cimetidine for healing peptic ulcers over 6 and
12 weeks but was slower in reducing night pain from peptic
ulcer. The medications were equally effective and superior to
placebo for the prevention of recurrences with peptic ulcers.
Endoscopic evaluation showed healing of ulcers in 60% and
66% of the Caved-S and cimetidine groups, respectively at
the end of 6 weeks. After 12 weeks, healing had occurred in
88% and 94%, respectively (Morgan et al, 1982).

Hepatitis

A retrospective study evaluated the long-term use of a
glycyrrhizin-containing solution for prevention of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma (HCC) in patients with chronic hepatitis C.
One-hundred and ninety-two patients with chronic hepatitis
C were included in the study. Stronger Neo-Minophagen C
(SNMC), an intravenous solution containing 0.2% glycyr-
thizin, 0.1% cysteine, and 2% glycine in physiologic
solution, 100 milliliters (mL) daily was administered to 83
patients over an 8 week period, then followed by 2 to 7 times
per week for 2 to 16-years (median 10.1 years). The other
109 patients were treated with other herbal remedies, such as
vitamin K, for | to 16 years (median, 9.2 years). The 10-year
rate occurrence of HCC were 7% in the SNMC treatment
group and 12% respectively in the non-SNMC treatment
group. The 15-year rate was 12% in the SNMC treatment
group and 25% in the other treatment group (p=0.032).
Elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT), a characteristic of
chronic hepatitis and a risk factor for the development of
HCC normalized in 35.7% in the SNMC treatment group,
which was significantly better than the 6.4% of the other
treatment group (Arase et al, 1997).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
LICORICE ROOT
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis
* Gastritis

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for catarrh of the upper
respiratory tract as well as for gastric/duodenal ulcers. In

----- PAGE 723 -----
472 /LICORICE

folk medicine, the herb is used for appendicitis, constipation,
and to increase milk production and micturation. The drug is
also used as a treatment for epilepsy and inflammation of the
gastrointestinal and urogenital tract. Externally, the herb is
used for dermatoses.

Indian Medicine: Internally, the herb is used for gastric
ulcers, headaches, bronchitis, eye diseases and sore throat.
The drug is used externally for wounds and cuts.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for sore throats,
carbuncles, spleen disorders, dry cough, and dehydration.

LICORICE EXTRACT
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for gastritis, gastric ulcers,
ulcer prophylaxis, and viral liver inflammation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
LICORICE ROOT AND FRUIT

Contraindications include chronic hepatitis, cholestatic dis-
eases of the liver, cirrhosis of the liver, severe renal
insufficiency, diabetes, arrythmias, hypertension, hypertonia,
hypokalemia, and pregnancy. Tobacco use has been associ-
ated with licorice toxicity (Synhaivsky, 1980).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
LICORICE ROOT AND EXTRACT

General: Intake of the herb over a prolonged period of time
may result in hypokalemia, hypernatremia, edema, hyperten-
sion and cardiac complaints.

Endocrine: Pseudoaldosteronism reported with the use of
licorice is attributed to glycyrrhetenic acid, the hydrolytic
metabolite of glycerrhizic acid. Hypertension and hypoka-
lemic metabolic alkylosis (e.g. lethargy, paresthesias, muscle
cramps, hejdaches) are possible consequences of the hyper-
mineraTcorticoijJ, effect- of Licorice extracts. Retention of
sodium and water and suppression of the renin-aldosterone
system is associated with extracts of the root (Heikens, 1995;
Seelen, 1996). Hypokalemic rhabdomyolysis, resulting in
acute renal failure and profound deposition of calcium into
the damaged skeletal and cardiac muscles was reported with
glycyrrhizin use (Saito, 1994).

Drug Interactions: Furosemide/Thiazide Diuretics - Due to
the additive effect of hypokalemia, the concomitant use of
these medications with licorice is not recommended.

Digitalis Glycosides - Hypokalemia associated with the
prolonged use of licorice may potentiate digitalis toxicity.

Anti-arrythmic Agents (procainamide, quinidine) - Hypoka-
lemia and severe ventricular tachycardia of torsades de
pointes type reported with licorice consumption may be
potentiated with concomitant use of anti-arrythmic agents
(Eriksson, 1999).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Corticosteroids - Concomitant use of licorice with corticoste-
roids potentiates effects due to the prolonged half-life of
Cortisol.

OVERDOSAGE
LICORICE ROOT AND EXTRACT

The intake of higher dosages (above 20 gm per day for the
extract and above 50 gm per day for the root) over an
extended period of time will lead to hypokalemia, hyperna-
tremia, edemas, hypertension and cardiac complaints. In rare
cases, myoglobinemia has resulted due to the mineralcorti-
coid (aldosterone-like) effect of the saponins (Heikens, 1995;
Saito, 1994; Seelen, 1996). Preparations from the drug
should not be administered for longer than 6 weeks. The
complaints disappear after discontinuing the daig. (SEE PRE-
CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS)

DOSAGE
LICORICE ROOT

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug, drug powder,
dry extracts for infusions, decoctions, liquid or solid forms
for internal use. Various teas contain extracts of the drug, for
example, bronchial teas, gastric teas, and laxative teas.

The drug should not be .administered for more than 6 weeks
(see side effects).

How Supplied:
Capsules — lOOmg, 200mg, 400mg, 444mg, 445mg, 450mg,
500mg

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use | to 15 gm of
finely comminuted drug and add cold water. Bring to a boil,
or pour the boiling water over the drug and allow to draw for
10 to 15 minutes and then strain (1 teaspoonful = 3 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 5 to 15 gm of the
root, equivalent to 200 to 600 mg of glycyrrhizin. The drug
is not to be taken longer than 6 weeks (SEE OVERDOSAGE).
Succus liquiritiae: 0.5 to 1 gm for catarrhs of the upper
respiratory tract and 15 to 3.0 gm for gastric/duodenal
ulcers.

Tea - Drink one cup of tea after meals.

LICORICE EXTRACT

Mode of Administration: The drug is widely available in
medicinal preparations, as tea or in drop form; the juice of
licorice is found in liquorice edible goods and preparations.

Preparation: For preparation of tea, pour a cup of boiling
water over | teaspoon of juice, leave to draw for 5 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Drink one cup of tea after each meal. The
dosage for the drop form is 25 drops to be taken 4 times
daily.

----- PAGE 724 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE

Aikawa Y, Yoshiike T, Ogawa H, Effect of glycyrrhizin pain
and HLA-DR antigen expression on CD8-positive cells in
peripheral blood of herpes zoster patients in comparsion with
other antiviral agents. In: Skin Pharmacol 3:268-271. 1990.

AmagayiTS et al..\F Pharmacobiodynamics 7 (12):923.

Anderson J, Smith WG, (1961) The antitussive activity of
glycyrrhetinic acid and its derivatives. J Pharm Pharmacol

Arase Y. Ikeda K. Murashima N et al: The long term efficacy
of glycyrrhizin in chronic hepatitis C patients.Cancer 1997;
79:1494-1500.

Baba M, Shigeta S, Antiviral activity of glycyrrhizin against
varicella-zoster virus in vitro. In: Antiviral Res 7:99-106. 1987.
Barbara L; Belsasso E: Blasi A et al. Pirenzepine and
carbenozolone in gastric ulcer. Preliminary results of a
multicentre double-blind controlled clinical trial. Scand J
Gastroenterol Suppl 1979;57:21-4.

Bardhan KD et al., (1978) Gut 19:779.

Bhardwaj DK et al., (1977) Phytochemistry 15:352.

Bhardwaj DK et al., (1977) Phytochemistry 16:401.

Bhardwaj DK, Singh R,(1977) Curr Sci 46:753.

Christensen SB et al.. An antileishmanial chalcone from Chinese
licorice roots. In: PM 60(2): 121. 1994.

Dehpour AR; Zolfaghari ME: Samadian T; Vahedi Y. The
protective effect of liquorice components and their derivatives
against gastric ulcer induced by aspirin in rats. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1994 Feb;46(2): 148-9.

Dezaki K; Kimura I; Miyahara K; Kimura M. Complementary
effects of paeoniflorin and glycyrrhizin on intracellular Ca2+
mobilization in the nerve-stimulated skeletal muscle of mice.
Jpn J Pharmacol 1995 Nov;69(3):281-4.

Duax Wi#3nosh D. Structure and mechanism of action and
inhibition of sterold\Uehydrogenase enzymes involved in
ypertension. Endocr Res 1998 Aug-Nov;24(3-4):521-9.

Eriksson JW; Carlberg B; Hillorn V. Life-threatening ventricular
tachycardia due to liquorice-induced hypokalaemia. J Intern
Med 1999 Mar,245(3):307-10.

Epstein MT et al., (1977) Brit Med J 19:488.

Fintelmann V, Modeme Phytotherapie am Beispiel
gastroenterologischer Erkrankungen. In: ZPT 11(5): 161. 1990.

Francischetti IM; Monteiro RQ; Guimaraes JA. Identification of
glycyrrhizin as a uhrombin inhibitor. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1997 Jun 9,235(1 ):259-63.

Hattori T, Ikematsu Sh, Koito A, Matsushita Sh, Maeda Y,
Hada M, Fujimaki M, Takatsuki K, Preliminary evidence for
inhibitory effects of glycyrrhizin on HIV replication in patients
with AIDS. In: Antiviral Res 11:255-262. 1989.

Hayashi H et al., Distribution patterns of saponine in different
organs of Glycyrrhiza glabra. In: PM 59(4):351. 1993.

Hayashi Y et al., (1979) Yakuri to Chiryo 7:3861.

LICORICE/473

Heikens J, Fliers E, Endert E et al. Liquorice-induced
hypertension: a new understanding of an old diseasexase report
and brief review. Neth J Med 1995; 47:230-234.

Inoue H, Saito K, Koshihara Y, Murota S, (1986) Inhibitory
effect of glyzyrrhetinic acid derivatives of lipoxygenase and
prostaglandin synthetase. Chem Pharm Bull 34:897.

Ito M, Nakashima H, Baba M, Pauwels R, De Clercq E,
Shigeta S, Yamamoto N, Inhibitory effect of glycyrrhizin on the
in vitro infectivity and cytopathic activity of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV (HTLV-III/LAV). In: Antiviral
Res 7:127-137. 1987.

Kato H; Kanaoka M; Yano S; Kobayashi M. 3-
Monoglucuronyl-glycyrrhetinic acid is a major metabolite that
causes licorice-induced pseudoaldosteronism. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1995 Jun;80(6): 1929-33.

Khaksa G et al., Anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive activity
of disodium glycyrrhetinic acid hemiphthalate. In: PM
62(4):326-328. 1996.

Killacky J et al., (1976) Planta Med 30:310.
Kinoshita T et al., (1978) Chem Pharm Bull 26: 141 et 135.
Kiso Y et al., (1984) Planta Med 50:298.

Kobayashi S; Miyamoto T; Kimura I; Kimura M. Inhibitory
effect of isoliquiritin, a-compound in licorice root, on
angiogenesis in vivo and tube formation in vitro. Biol Pharm
Bull. 1995 Oct; 18(10): 1382-6.

Kumagai A, Takata M, (1978) Proc Symp Wakan-Yaku 11:73.

Miething H, Speicher-Brinker A, Hansel R,
Hochdruckfliissigchromatographische Untersuchungen der
Flavonoidfraktion in Siipholzwurzeln und deren
pharmazeutischen Zubereitungen. In: PZW 135(6):253. 1990.

Morgan AG, McAdam WAF, Pacsoo C et al: Comparison
etween cimetidine and Caved-S in the treatment of gastric
ulceration, and subsequent maintenance therapy. Gut 1982;
23:545-551.

Nagumo S; Fukuju A; Takayama M et al. Inhibition of
lysoPAF acetyltransferase activity by components of licorice
root. Biol Pharm Bull 1999 Oct;22(10): 1144-6.

Nakashima H; Matsui T; Yoshida O et al. A new anti-human
immunodeficiency virus substance, glycyrrhizin sulfate;
endowment of glycyrrhizin with reverse transcriptase- inhibitory
activity by chemical modification. Jpn J Cancer Res 1987
Aug;78(8):767-71.

Neilsen I, Pedersen RS, (1984) Lancet 1:8389.

Nose M et al., A comparision of the antihepatotoxic activity
between glycyrrhizin and glycerrhetinic acid. In: PM 60(2): 136.
1994.

Numuzaki K, Umetsu M, Chiba S, Effects of glycyrrhizin in
children wim liver dysfunction assiciated with cytomegalovirus
infections. In: Tohoku J Exp Med 172:147-153. 1994.

Palermo M; Shackleton CH; Mantero F; Stewart PM. Urinary
free cortisone and the assessment of 11 beta-hydroxysteroid

----- PAGE 725 -----
474/LICORICE

dehydrogenase activity in man. Glin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1996
Nov;45(5):605-I1.

Raggi MA; Bugamelli F; Nobile L et al. The choleretic effects
of licorice: identification and determination of the
pharmacologically active components of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Boll
Chim Farm- 199> Dec; 134( 11 ):634-8.

Rees WDW et al., (1979) Scand. J Gastroenterol. 14:605.
Saitoh T et al.. (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:991.

Saitoh T et al.. (1978) Chem Pharm Bull 26:752.

Saitoh T et al.. (1976) Chem Pharm Bull 24:752 et 1242.

Sato H; Goto W; Yamamura J et al. Therapeutic basis of
glycyrrhizin on chronic hepatitis B. Antiviral Res 1996
May;30(2-3):171-7.

Saito T; Tsuboi Y; Fujisawa G et al. An autopsy case of
licorice-induced hypokalemic rhabdomyolysis associated with
acute renal failure: special reference to profound calcium
deposition in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Nippon Jinzo Gakkai
Shi 1994 Nov:36( 11): 1308-14.

Seelen MA; de Meijer PH; Braun J et al. Hypertension caused
by licorice consumption. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 1996 Dec
28;140(52):2632-5.

Synhaivsky A. Licorice, snuff; and hypokalemia. N Engl J Med
1980 Aug 21;303(8):463.

Segal R et al.. (1985) J Pharm Sci 74 (1):79.

Shiratori K; Watanabe S; Takeuchi T. Effect of licorice extract
(FmlOO) on release of secretin and exocrine pancreatic secretion
in humans. Pancreas 1986:1(6):483-7.

Suzuki H, Ohta Y, Takino T, Fujisawa K, Hirayama C, Effect
of glycyrrhizin on biochemical test in patients with chronic
hepatitis. Double blind trial. In: Asian Med J 26:423-438. 1983.

Takechi M, Tanaka Y, Structure-activity relationships of the

synthetic methyl glycyrrhetate glycosides. In: PH 32:1173.

Tamura Y, Nishikawa T, Yamada K, Yamamoto M, Kumagai
A, (1979) Effects of glyzyrrhetinic acid and ist derivatives on
Delta5-reductase in rat liver. Arzneimittel Forsch/Drug Res 29:
647.

Tanaka S et al., (1987) Planta Med 53 (1):5.

Tawata M; Aida K; Noguchi T et al. Anti-platelet action of
isoliquiritigenin, an aldose reductase inhibitor in licorice. Eur J
Pharmacol 1992 Feb 25;212(1):87-92.

Utsunomiya T; Kobayashi M; Hemdon DN et al. Effects of
glycyrrhizin, an active component of licorice roots, on Candida
albicans infection in thermally injured mice. Clin Exp Immunol
1999 May;116(2):291-8.

Utsunomiya T; Kobayashi M; Pollard RB; Suzuki F.
Glycyrrhizin, an active component of licorice roots, reduces
morbidity and mortality of mice infected with lethal doses of
influenza virus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997
Mar;41(3):551-6.

Van Hulle C, (1970) Pharmazie 25:620.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Veit M, Wirkungen der Glycyrrhetinsaure auf den
Steroidstoffwechsel. In: ZPT 14(1):43. 1993.

Watanabe Y, Watanabe K, (1980) Proc Symp Wakan-Yaku
13:16.

Yagura T et al., (1978) Proc Symp Wakan-Yaku 11:79.
Yamamura Y, Kawakami J, Santa T, Kotaki H, Uchino K,
Sawada Y, Tanaka N, Iga T, Pharmacokinetic profile of
glycyrrhizin in healthy volunteers by a new high-performance
liquid chromatographic method. In: J Pharm Sci 81(10): 1042-
1046. 1992.

Yokota T; Nishio H; Kubota Y; Mizoguchi M. The inhibitory
effect of glabridin from licorice extracts on melanogenesis and
inflammation. Pigment Cell Res 1998 Dec;11(6):355-61.

Further information in:

Chang EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hikino H, Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, Vol L.,
Academic Press UK 1985.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Lilium candidum
See White Lily

----- PAGE 726 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Lilium martagon
See Martagon

Lily-of-the-Valley
Convallaria majalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flower
tips and the dried inflorescence, the Lily-of-the-Valley herb,
the dried root rhizome with the roots, the flowering aerial
parts and the whole, fresh, flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in racemes nodding to
one side, usually with a triangular penduncle. The tips are
hemispheric, campanulate. 6-petalled with ovoid revolute
tips. The perigone is white or pink. The stamens are attached
to the base of the perigone. The fruit is a bright red, globular
berry with 2 blue seeds. The plant is autosterile.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 15 to 20 cm high plant has 2 to
3 leaves at the tip of the runner-like, branched rhizome. The
eaves are elliptoid and acute. They taper to a long, sharp
petiole at the base, which is clasped by a membranous
sheath.

Characteristics: Fragrant but poisonous (all parts).

Habitat: The plant is native to Europe and has been
introduced into the U.S. and northern Asia.

Production: Lily-of-the-Valley herb consists of the dried,
above-ground parts of Convallaria majalis (or closely related
species’ ottected during the flowering season. The harvest-
ed parts of the plant must be dried quickly at*ia maximum
temperature of 60°C.

Not to be Confused With: Lilly-of-the-Valley is easily
confused with Polygonatum odoratum.

Other Names: May Lily, May Bells, Convallaria, Our Lady's
Tears, Convall-Lily, Lily Constancy, Jacob's Ladder, Lad-
der-to-Heaven, Muguet

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides): varying
according to geographical source, chief glycoside convalla-
toxin (western and northwestern Europe), convalloside
(northern and eastern Europe), or convallatoxin + convalla-
toxol (central Europe)

EFFECTS
Only older studies are available, which indicate the conval-
lara glycosides are qualitatively similar to digitoxin and

LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY /475

strophanthin. The studies show Lily-of-the-Valley to have
the following effects:

Cardiac: The power and speed of cardiac muscle contraction
is increased and there is a reduced relaxation time. The beat
frequency is slowed, stimulation transfer is delayed and the
ability of the chamber muscles to be stimulated is increased
(positively inotropic, negatively chronotropic, negatively
dromotropic and positively bathmotropic effect.)

Renal: In animal tests, the effect was natriuretic and diuretic.

Venous: In animal tests, Lily-of-the-Valley demonstrated a
dose-dependent, veno-constrictive effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Arrhythmia
* Cardiac insufficiency NYHA I and II
* Nervous heart complaints

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for mild cardiac insuffi-
ciency (stage I-II NYHA), heart insufficiency due to old age
and chronic cor pulmonale. In folk medicine, Lily-of-the-
Valley was also used- for weak contractions in labor,
epilepsy, dropsy, strokes and ensuing paralysis, conjunctivi-
tis and leprosy. Use for these applications is no longer
common because of the drug's toxic effect.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks following the proper administration of
designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. Nausea,
vomiting, headache, stupor, disorders of color perception and
cardiac arrhythmias can occur as side effects, particularly
with an overdosage. - ,

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous administration of
quinidine, digoxin, calcium salts, saluretics, laxatives and
glucocorticoids enhances effects and side effects.

OVERDOSAGE

For symptoms of an acute poisoning and therapy, see
Digitalis folium. The dangers of poisoning are relatively low
with oral application, due to the poor absorbability of the
glycosides.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb, as well as
galenic preparations for internal use; no longer considered
safe because of the levels of toxins.

How Supplied: All information is based on stabilized Lilly-
of-the-Valley powder as specified in the German pharmaco-
poeia. No other forms can be recommended. However,
commercial pharmaceutical preparations are available as
capsules, drops, solutions and tablets.

----- PAGE 727 -----
476/LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY

Preparation: Tincture 1:10; liquid extract: 1:1; dry extract:

4:1.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug: 0.6 g of
tincture; 0.6 g of liquid extract; 0.15 g of dried extract. The
average single dose: 2 g of tincture: 0.2 g of liquid extract;
0.05 g-"of dry extract. In intravenous application, the full
effective dose of convaltoxin is 0.4 to 0.6 mg, the prepared
dose 0.2 to 0.3 mg.

Storage: The preparations should be stored in well-sealed
containers and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Bleier W et al., (1965) Pharm Acta Helv 40:554.

Holzl J. Franz C. PM 24:378. 1973.

Kopp B, Kubelka W, (1982) Planta Med 45:87.

Krenn L, Schlifelner L, Stimpfl T, Kopp B, HPLC separation
and quantitative determination of cardenolides in Herba
Convallariae. In: PM 58(7)A82. 1992.

Laufke R, (1958) Planta Med 6:237.

Loew D. Phytotherapie bei Herzinsuffizienz. In: ZPT 18(2):92-
96. 1997.

Loew DA, Loew AD, Pharmakokinetik von herzglykosidhaltigen
Pflanzenextrakten. In: ZPT 15(4): 197-202. 1994.

Tschesche R et al., (1959) Naturwissensch. 46:109.

Tschesche R, in Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, Ed. H.
Wagner and L. Horhammer, Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, Berlin
1971.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftprlanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel*EfXetier K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der'Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Lime
Citrus aurantifolia
DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal component is the bergamot
oil extracted from the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The fragrant flowers are small and pure
white. The fruit is about half the size of a lemon, with a
smoother, thinner peel, a greenish-yellow color and sweet
taste.

Leaves. Stem and Root: The evergreen tree is small, bent,
thorny and normally only grows to a height of 2.5 m. The
leaves are ovate-lanceolate and acuminate.

Habitat: Lime is indigenous to Southern Asia and is
cultivated in the West Indies, semi-tropic areas of the U.S.

and Central America.

Production: Limes and lemons are the fruit of Citrus

aurantifolia.
Other Names: Limette, Italian Limetta, Adam's Apple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (in the fruit rind): containing, among others,
citral, (+)-limonene, pinenes, alkanes, alkanols, alkanals,
beta-bisabolene; also, in pressed oils, furocoumarins

Citric acid

Flavonoids: including hesperidine

EFFECTS
Lime acts as an antiscorbutic and refrigerant as well as a
vitamin C supplement.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Lime is used as a source of vitamin C to treat scurvy and in
cases of general low resistance.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a low potential for sensitization through
skin contact with the juice of the fruit or wim the volatile oil.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Lime is used internally as a liquid

extract of the fresh fruit.

----- PAGE 728 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Kovats et al., Helv Chim Acta 46:2705. 1963.

Lund ED, Bryan WL, (1977) J Food Sci 42:385.

Natarajan S et al., (1976) Econ Bot 30:38.

Shaw PE*Cbleman RL, (1971) J Agric Food Chem 19:1276.
Stanley et al., PH 6:585. 1967.

Strickler et al., Helv Chim Acta 49:2055. 1966.

Tatum JH, Berry RE, (1977) Phytochemistry 16:1091.

Wilson W, Shaw PE, (1977) J Agric Food Chem 25:211.
Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Linaria vulgaris
See Yellow Toadflax

Linden

Tilia species

DESCRIPTION
Medicilffif Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried
flowers. "eso

Flower and Fruit: The yellowish-white flowers are arranged
in clusters of 5 to 11. The calyx is 5-sepaled, oblong or
ovate-lanceolate, acute and deep. The 5 petals are spatulate-
lanceolate with crenate tips. There are numerous stamens and
1 superior ovary, which is almost globular and has silky-
haired villi. The fruit is a 1-seeded, pear-shaped, indistinctly
angular, thin-shelled nut. There is a tongue-shaped, parch-
ment-like, greenish- or yellowish-white bract at the base of
the flowers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Linden is an impressive tree up to 25
m high with a large, closed crown. The bark is fissured,
gray-brown or black-gray. The bark of the branches is
smooth. The branchlets are olive-green, brown or brown-red
with white warts. The leaves are long-petioled, uneven at the
base and broadly cordate. They have a dark upper surface
and are bluish-green beneath with rust-colored tufts of down
in the vein axils.

LINDEN /477

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong, sweet fragrance
and the fruit tastes slightly sweet, slimy and dry.

Habitat: The tree is common in northern temperate regions.

Production: Linden charcoal consists of the charcoal ob-
tained from the wood of Tilia cordata and/or Tilia platyphyl-
los. Linden leaf consists of the dried leaf of Tilia cordata
and/or Tilia platyphyllos. Silver Linden flower consists of
the dried flowers of Tilia tomentosa (synonym Tilia argen-
tea). Linden wood consists of the dried sapwood of Tilia
cordata and/or Tilia platyphyllos. Linden flower consists of
the dried flower of Tilia cordata and/or Tilia platyphyllos.

Not to be Confused With: Linden flower should not be
confused with Tilia tometosa and Tilia x euchlora

Other Names: Lime, Linn Flowers

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: LINDEN CHARCOAL
Extremely adsorbent charcoals

EFFECTS: LINDEN CHARCOAL
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: LINDEN LEAF

Flavonoids: including tiliroside, kempferol-3,7,-dirhamno-
side, kempferol-3-0-glucoside-7-0-rhamnoside, linarine (a-
cacetin-7-rutinoside), quercetin-3,7-di-0-rhamnoside, quer-
cetin-3-0-glucoside-7-0-rhamnoside

Tannins

Mucilages

EFFECTS: LINDEN LEAF

The apparent diaphoretic effect has not been proven.

COMPOUNDS: SILVER LINDEN FLOWER

Flavonoids: including astragalin, isoquercitrin, kempferitrin,
quercitrin, tiliroside, quercetin-3-0-glucoside-7-0-rhamno-
side, kempferol-3-O-rhamnoside, kempferol-3-O-glucoside-
7-O-rhamnoside, quercetin-rhamnoxyloside

Hydroxycoumarins: including, among others, calycantho-
side, aesculin

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid
Mucilages

EFFECTS: SILVER LINDEN FLOWER

A possible sedative-anxiolytic effect and an anti-stress effect
are under investigation. The flavone-like substances in the
drug are thought to be responsible for these effects.

COMPOUNDS: LINDEN WOOD
Mucilages

----- PAGE 729 -----
478 /LINDEN

Sterols: beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, stigmastenol and their
fatty acid esters

Triterpenes: squalene

EFFECTS: LINDEN WOOD

The djUxetic, hypotensive, and choleretic effects ascribed to
the drug are insufficiently documented. In animal experi-
ments, an increase of bile secretion and a lowering of arterial
pressure have been described. Aqueous extracts of the drug
are antimicrobial.

COMPOUNDS: LINDEN FLOWER

Flavonoids (1%): including chief constituents astragalin,
isoquercitrin, kempferoI-3-O-rhamnoside, quercitrin, tiliro-
side (astragalin-6"-p-cumaroylester), including as well rutin,
hyperoside, afzelin, kempferitrin

Mucilages( 10%): arabino galactans with uronic acid share

Volatile oil (0.01-0.02%): including linalool, germacrene,
geraniol, 1,8-cineole, 2-phenyl ethanol, phenyl ethyl benzo-
ate, alkanes

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid
Tannins

EFFECTS: LINDEN FLOWER

The antitussive, astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic, sedative,
and analgesic effects attributed to the drug have not yet been
widely supported by experimental data. The toxic principle is
unknown.

An alcoholic extract of the flowers is antimicrobial in vitro
with the tannins, glycosides, and the essential oil the active
components. Tilia flavonoids, which have not been described
in detail, are anti-edemic in animal experiments. In addition,
varioifs*peTimeotal rjesults point to a sedative effect. The
diaphoretic effect is controversial. After steam inhalation
with a lime flower additive, an improvement of the
symptoms of uncomplicated colds was observed in compari-
son to a control group (only steam).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
LINDEN CHARCOAL
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Linden charcoal are used
internally for intestinal disorders and externally for ulcus
cruris (leg ulcers).

LINDEN LEAF
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Linden leaf are used as a

diaphoretic.

SILVER LINDEN FLOWER-

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Silver Linden flower are
used for catarrhs of the respiratory tract and as an antispas-
modic, expectorant, diaphoretic and diuretic.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LINDEN WOOD

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Linden wood are used for
diseases and ailments of the liver and gallbladder systems
and for cellulitis.

LINDEN FLOWER
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
* Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: The flowers are used for catarrh of the
respiratory tract and as a diaphoretic for feverish colds and
infectious diseases, where a sweating cure is needed. It is
occasionally used as a diuretic, a stomachic, an antispasmod-
ic and a sedative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
LINDEN FLOWER

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a commi-
nuted herb for teas, infusions, and other galenic preparations
for internal use. The drug is a component of some
standardized urologic, antitussive, and sedative preparations;
it is also found in cold remedy tea mixtures.

Preparation: To make a tea, pour boiling water over 2 gm
drug, or add the drug to cold water and boil briefly; steep 5'
to 10 minutes and strain (1 teaspoonful = 1.8 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dosage is 2 to 4 gm
of drug.

LITERATURE
LINDEN LEAF

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

SILVER LINDEN FLOWER
Buchbauer G, Jirovetz L, Atherisches Lindenbliitenol -
Aromastoffanalyse. In: DAZ 132(15):748. 1992.

Further information, in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed,
CRC Press 1975.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag'Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Rodi L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

LINDEN WOOD

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 730 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LINDEN FLOWER
Buchbauer G, Jirovetz L, Atherisches Lindenbliitenol-
Aromastoffanalyse. In: DAZ 132(15):748. 1992.

Hildebrandt G, Engelbrecht P, Hildebrandt-Evers G, (1954)
Physiologhefee -Grundlagen fiir eine tageszeitliche Ordnung der
“Schwitzprozeduren. Z Klin Med 152:446-468.

Kram G, Franz G, PA 49:149. 1985.
Kram G. Franz G, PM 49:149. 1983.
Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Oims Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
* Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Limffift eatharticum

See Mountain Flax

Linum usitatissimum
See Flax

Liquidambar orientalis

See Sto rax

Liriodendron tulipifera
See Tulip Tree

Lithospermum erytrorhizon

See Purple Gromwell

(Ying Zicao)

Lobaria pulmonaria

See  Lungmoss

Lobelia

Lobelia inflata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried
herb and the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are on long pedicles in the
leaf axils. They are pale violet-blue and lightly tinged with
pale yellow. The fruit consists of an ovoid or flattened
bilocular capsule containing numerous small, brown and
reticulate seeds. —

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an erect annual or
biennial herb 30 to 60 cm high. The stem is pubescent,
angular, branching near the top. It contains an acrid latex.
The leaves are pale green or yellowish, the lower ones are
petiolate, the upper ones are sessile. They are alternate,
ovate-lanceolate, 3 to 8 cm long, with a dentate margin and a
finely pubescent lamina.

Characteristics: After chewing the leaves“the taste is similar
to tobacco. The taste 'is' acrid, the odor faintly irritant.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the regions in the north
of U.S., Canada and Kamchatka. It is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Lobelia is the aerial part of Lobelia inflata.

Other Names: Indian Tobacco, Pukeweed, Asthma Weed,
Gagroot, Vomitwort, Bladderpod, Eyebright, Emetic Herb,
Emetic Weed, Wild Tobacco and Vomitroot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Piperidine alkaloids (6%): chief alkaloids L-lobeline (alpha-
lobeline); companion alkaloids including among others
lobelanine, lobelanidine, norlobelanine, and isolobinine

EFFECTS
The main active principle is lobelin. The drug has a
stimulating effect on the respiratory center but it is broken
down too quickly in the body to be used as a respiratory
analeptic.

----- PAGE 731 -----
480 /LOBELIA

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Homeopathic Uses: Lobelia inflata is used only in homeopa-
thy as an asthma treatment and also as an aid in curing
addiction to smoking.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage leads to dryness of the mouth, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, burning in the urinary passages,
feelings of anxiety, dizziness, headache, shivering, respira-
tory difficulties, paraesthesias, outbreak of sweating, brady-
cardia, cardiac arrhythmias, somnolence and muscle
twitching; death can occur through respiratory failure,
accompanied by convulsions. 0.6 to 1 gm of the leaves are

said to be toxic, 4 gm fatal.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), instillation of activated
charcoal, and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth), the therapy
for poisonings consists of treating spasms with diazepam
(i.v.), children with chloral hydrate (rectal); monitoring of
ECG. Cardiac massage and artificial respiration may also be

required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is no longer used.
constituent in some homeopathic preparations.

tis a

LITERATURE
Chang?Hfihet-aL, (Eds): Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research® World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Gross D, (1971) Fortschr Chem Org Naturst 29:1.
Karawya MS et al., (1971) J Ass Off Ann Chem 54(6): 1423.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte,und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schwarz HD, 100 Jahre Lobelin. In: ZPT 11(5): 159. 1990.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopamika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Lobelia inflata

See Lobelia

Logwood

Haematoxylon campechianum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the tree is the
unfermented heartwood.

Flower and Fruit: The small yellow flowers grow in axillary
racemes. There are 5 petals. The fruit is a flat pod, usually
with 1 seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Haematoxylon campechianum is a
10 to 12 m high tree. The twisted branches are thorny, while
the bark is rough and dark. The leaves have 4 pairs of small,
smooth and cordate stipules whose tips point to the small
trunk.

Habitat: The plant originated in the tropical regions of the
U.S. and is cultivated in the Caribbean and other regions.

Production: Logwood is the wood from Haematoxylon
campechianum. The cultivated trees are felled in their 11"

year and the red heartwood is extracted.
Other Names: Blood wood, H. lignum, Peach wood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Homoisoflavanes (neoflavane derivatives): to some extent in
glycosidic bonds, changing over into the intensively red-
colored, quinoide hematein through oxidation

Tannins

EFFECTS
Logwood has astringent properties, due to the isoflavone
hematoxylin. An antiphlogistic effect has been proven in
animal experiments and an antimicrobial effect in vitro.
Hemateine and hematoxylin are said to inhibit the production
of melanin in skin when used topically.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses have included diarrhea

and hemorrhage.

J

----- PAGE 732 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
However, internal administration of hematoxylin carried out
in animaJL/experiments led to elevated body temperature,

jft vomiting, anuria, coma and death. Reports of these studies

provided no information regarding dosage (Lewin).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is administered as an

infusion and a liquid extract.

Daily Dosage: A single dose of a decoction equal to 1 g of
drug is mentioned, but the number of times it could be taken
daily was not specified.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PR Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lolium temulentum

See Taumelloolch

Lonicera_ caprifolium
See Honeysuckle

Loosestrife

Lysimachia .vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow in long-peduncled
racemes in the axils of the upper stem and in terminal,
panicled inflorescence. The pedicle is about | cm long,
downy and glandular-haired. The calyx is split almost to the
base. The filaments are glandular-haired, usually fused to die
middle with each other and in a tube containing the ovary.

A The seeds are triangular, covered thickly in long warts,

whitish and 1.5 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and has
underground runners, which produce new buds. The stem is
erect, up to 15 m tall, branched, obtusely angular, leafy and
thickly downy. The leaves are slightly downy with glandular
hairs. The leaves are in whorls or opposite, rarely spiralled,
up to 14 cm long and 3.5 cm wide, short petioled, tightly
reticulate and red-glandular punctate.

LOTUS/481

Habitat: The plant is found in the temperate regions of
Europe and Asia.

Production: Loosestrife is the aerial part of Lysimachia
vulgaris.

Other Names: Yellow Willowherb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: glycosides of the myricetin, kaempferol and
quercetin, including among others rutin

Steroids: beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol

The constituents of the drug have not been extensively
investigated.

EFFECTS
Loosestrife has an astringent effect.
principle is rutin.

The main active

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Loosestrife is used for scurvy, diarrhea and
dysentery, as well as hemorrhages (nose bleeds and heavy
menstrual blood flow’ and wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used externally in the
powdered form.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lophophora_ williamsii
See Peyote

Lotus

Nelumbo — nucifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots, the seeds
and the aerial parts of the flowering plant.

----- PAGE 733 -----
482/LOTUS

Flower and Fruit: The solitary flowers are 16 to 23 cm
across, pink and scented. They grow above the leaves. The
seeds are 1.7 by 13 cm and ovoid.

Leaves, Stein and Root: The rhizome is 10 to 20 cm long,
stout and branching. It bears numerous scale-like leaves as
well as foliage" leaves. The foliage leaves are peltate and
have no sinuses. The petioles are 1 to 2 cm long, the lamina
are 30 to 100 cm in diameter and are almost circular, glossy
and unwettable.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to India.
Production: Lotus is the whole plant of Nelumbo nucifera.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Isoquinoline alkaloids: including.

benzyl isoquinoline type: armepavine, n-methyl coclaurine

aporphine type: roemerine (remerine), nuciferine, n-nomu-
ciferine, nornuciferine, anonaine, liriodenine, asimilobin,
lirinidin

proaporphine type: prunuciferine

Flavonoids: including hyperoside, isoquercitrin, nelumbo-
side, quercetin glucuronide, camphor glucuronide

Tannins

EFFECTS
Active agents are the alkaloids nelumbin and roemerine in

the leaves. The drug is an astringent.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The powdered beans are used in the
treatment of digestive disorders, particularly diarrhea. The
flowers are-used,as aji astringent for bleeding.

Indian Medicine: Lotus is used for cholera, diarrhea, worm
infestation, vomiting, states of exhaustion and intermittent
fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the plant are
available in powder and liquid extract for internal use.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R: Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Lovage
Levisticum officinale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome
and roots, the cut, dried herb and the dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 8 to 20 rayed
compound umbels. There is an involucre and epicalyx. There
is no calyx. The orbicular petals are pale yellow and
involute. The fruit is yellow-brown, 5 to 7 mm long,
compressed, and has sharply keeled to winged ribs.

Leaves,.Stem and Root: The plant is a sturdy perennial. It has
a thick, spindle-shaped, branched root, which is brownish-
yellow on the outside and whitish on the inside. The stem is
erect, round, hollow, finely grooved, glabrous and up to 4 cm
thick at the base. The leaves are rich green, glossy,
coriaceous; the lower ones double pinnate, the upper ones
simple-pinnate. The leaflets are broad and obovate.

Characteristics: The rubbed leaves give off an aromatic
scent. The fruit is very fragrant.

Habitat: Lovage is indigenous to the Mediterranean region.
It grows wild in the Balkans and northern Greece and is
cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Lovage root consists of the dried rhizomes and
roots of Levisticum officinale, as well as their preparations.
Roots of 2-year-old plants are collected in autumn. It is
important that the roots are not damaged during the drying
process since this would result in a loss of the essential oil.

Not to be Confused With: Angelicae radix, Pastinacae radix
or Pimpinellae radix.

Other Names: Lavose, Sea Parsley

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.35-1.7%): chief components alkylphthalides
(aroma-bearers), including among others 3-butylphthalide,
ligusticumlactone (E- and Z-butylidenphthalides), E- and Z-
ligustilide furthermore, including among others, alpha- and
beta-pinene, beta-phellandrene, citronellal

Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone
Coumarin
Furocoumarins: bergaptene, apterin

Polyynes: including among others, falcarindiol (probably
only in the fresh rhizome)

EFFECTS
Lovage has diuretic, sedative, antimicrobial and cholinergic

properties.

----- PAGE 734 -----
*P

£ Storage:

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

The Hgustilide-containing essential oil has an antispasmodic
effect on smooth muscle.

The folk use for gastric complaints is probably based on the
specific odor caused by phthalide as well as on the bitter
taste, which increases saliva and gastric secretions.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Lovage is used for flushing-out therapy for inflammation of
the lower urinary tract and flushing-out therapy for preven-
tion of kidney gravel.

Unproven Uses: The folk medicine uses include dyspeptic
complaints, such as indigestion, heartburn, feelings of
fullness, flatulence, menstrual complaints. Lovage is also
used as a secretolytic for respiratory catarrh.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Because of the irritating effect of the volatile oil, the drug
should not be administered in the presence of inflammation
of the kidneys or of the urinary drainage passages, nor with
reduced kidney function. No irrigation therapy is to be
carried out in the presence of edema resulting from reduced
cardiac and kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug possesses a low potential for
sensitization. An elevation of UV-sensitivity among light-
skinned people is possible (phototoxic effect of the

furocoumarins).

Pregnancy. Not tffbeT used during pregnancy.*

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb and other galenic
preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 4 to 8 gm drug. Ample intake of liquid is

essential. Tea: 2 to 4 gm drug to | cup, several times a day
between meals.

Infusion: 15 gm per cup.

Protect from light and insects in well-sealed
containers. The whole drug should be stored not longer than
18 months; the powdered drug, not longer than 24 hours.

LITERATURE
Albulescu D et al., (1975) Farmacia 23:159.

Bjeldanes LF, Kim [, (1977) J Org Chem 42:2333.
Fischer FC, Svendson AB, (1976) Phytochemistry 15:1079.
Gijbels MJ et al., (1981) Chromatographia 14(8):451.

LUFFA/483

Gijbels MJ et al., (1982) Planta Med 44:207.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AuflL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lawrence BM, (180) Perf Flav 5:29.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Vollmann C, Levisticum officinale - Der Liebstockel. In: ZPT
9(4): 128. 1988.

Yu SR, You SQ, (1984) Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao 19(8):566.
Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Luffa

Luffa aegyptica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried network of
vascular bundles of the ripe cucumber-like plant. When
dried, the dense vascular network mat-makes up the fruit
becomes the Loofah; which is used to scrub and soften the
skin.

Flower and Fruit: The plant bears solitary, yellow, female
flowers, which are 5 to 10 cm wide and have an oblong,
clavate calyx tube. The fruit is cylindrical or oblong-clavate.
It is not ribbed, prickly or sharp-edged. It is somewhat
tomentose, up to 40 cm long and 5 to 15 cm thick. The seeds
are blackish, smooth and winged.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual climbing plant
that grows from 3 to 6 m high. The stems are thin and
pentangular. The leaves are cordate-indented, 15 to 30 cm
long and wide and 3- to 7-lobed.

Habitat: The plant probably originated in India and was
brought to Egypt in the Middle Ages. Today, it is cultivated
in the tropical regions of the world.

Production: Luffa sponge consists of the dried fiber structure
of the ripe cucumber-like fruits of Luffa aegyptica. The ripe
fruit is freed of soft material by banging and washing.

----- PAGE 735 -----
484/LUFFA

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: LUFFA FRESH FRUIT

Triterpene saponins: including among others lucyoside A-M
(aglycones including oleanolic acid, hederagenin 21-hy-
droxy-hederagenin, gypsogenin, arjunolic acid)

CucurBitacins (the young fruits are eaten as salad)
Sterols: including delta5-sterols, delta7-sterols
Triterpenes (triterpene acids): including bryonolic acid (3%)

The luffa fungus (Luffa, Luffa aegyptica) is likely to be
mostly free of soluble constituents and to consist chiefly of
cellulose, hemicelluiose and pectins.

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Luffa sponge are used as a
preventive for infections or colds, as a remedy for colds and
nasal catarrhs, and for sinusitis and suppuration of the sinus.

Chinese Medicine: Luffa is used for coughs, chronic
bronchitis, diseases of the spleen and paralyzing diseases.

Indian Medicine: Luffa is used for splenopathy, leprosy,
syphilis, bronchitis, fever and hematuria.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
HanseLJ*Kellex K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der ,jgha’snazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., flde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Luffa aegyptica

See Luffa

Lungmoss

Lobaria pulmonaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the lichen.

Flower and Fruit: Lobaria pulmonaria is a lichen, with
deeply pinnatisect lobes with indented tips, measuring from

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

15 cm up to hand size. It is found on the trunks of old
woodland trees and is browinsh-green or red-brown with a
reticulate, punctate structure. It is tomentose and whitish-
brown beneath and is covered with glabrous white spots on
the margin and on the reticulate ridges.

Habitat: Lungmoss is found throughout Europe.

Production: Lungmoss is the whole lichen tissue of Lobaria
pulmonaria. The lichen is gathered throughout the entire
year. The minute roots in the subterranean part, along with
any possible earth, are cleaned off (do not gather dry lichen,
as they are mostly found on dead plants, and therefore are no
longer effective).

Not to be Confused With: Common Lungwort, which is a
plant.

Other Names: Oak Lungs, Lungwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Lichen acids: including among others stictictic, norstictic,
thelophoric acid, gyrophoric acid

Mucilages

EFFECTS mt
The drug has diaphoretic, expectorant, anti-inflammatory,
and antimicrobial effects. The active agents exhibiting the
antimicrobial effects are unknown.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: As a result of the relaxing effect of
Lungmoss on the respiratory tract, the drug is used for all
chronic respiratory tract illnesses: bronchitis, coughs and
asthma, as well as for irritable coughs and smoker's cough.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Lungmoss is available as dried
lichen as a liquid extract for internal use. Lichen preparations
can be bought as sweets, syrups or pastilles.

Storage: The drug should be stored in glass or porcelain
containers, protected from light.

LITERATURE
Catalano S et al., (1976) Phytochemistry 15:22.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 736 -----
1&

m

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Lungwort

Pulmonaria officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried herb and
the fresh, aerial parts of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The blue, later blue-violet flowers are in
terminal curled cyme-like inflorescences on flowering
branches. The calyx is fused and has 5 tips. The corolla is
fused to a tube and the 5 tips are rotate. There are 5 stamens
and a 4-valved ovary with 1 style. There are both long and
short-styled flowers. There are 5 tufts of hair at the entrance
to the corolla tube. The fruit consists of 4 nuts 3.5 to 4 mm in
length, glabrous when ripe, glossy brown to black, mildly
keeled with a distinct displaced ring.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 15 to 30 cm
high. The rhizome is quite thin and branched. First it
produces flowering shoots and then the leaf rosettes. The
shoots are fresh green and covered in glandular hairs. The
stems are erect or ascending, slightly angular and pubescent.
The rosette-like basal leaves that form after flowering are
long petioled, cordate-ovate, acute, more long than wide with
whitish spots. The cauline leaves are alternate, taper to a
winged stem and are sharply pointed; only the lower ones
have some pinnatifid ribs.

Characit/stics’ The taste is slightly bitter and slimy.
Habitat: The plant is common in many parts of Europe.

Production: Lungwort consists of the dried plant section of
Pulmonaria officinalis and its effective pharmaceutical
preparations. Lungwort is collected in uncultivated regions
and air-dried.

Not to be Confused With: Lungwort is occasionally adulter-
ated with other Pulmonaria species, particularly Pulmonaria
mollis.

Other Names: Dage of Jerusalem, Common Lungwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Allantoin

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid, rosmarinic acid

Flavonoids (0.3 to 0.5%): especially O-glycosides of the
kaempferol and quercetin

LUNGWORT/485

Mucilages: polygalacturonane, arabinogalactans, rhamno-
galacturonane

Silicic acid: more than 2.5% water-soluble silicic acid
Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug has an expectorant, soothing effect due to the
mucilaginous polysaccharide and tannin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Lungwort is used internal-
ly for illnesses and conditions of the respiratory tract,
gastrointestinal tract, kidney and efferent urinary tract; and
externally in the treatment of wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Lungwort is available as whole, cut
and powdered drug for internal and external use. It is also
available in commercial forms as syrup, juice, drops and in
compounded preparations.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, 1.5 gm finely cut drug is put
in cold water which is brought quickly to a boil or it is
scalded with boiling water and strained after 5 to 10 minutes
(1 teaspoon corresponds to approximately 0.7 gm drug).

Liquid extract: 1:1 with 25% ethanol. (V/V)

Daily Dosage: As bronchial tea it is drunk in sips throughout
the day. It may be sweetened with honey.

Storage: Should be protected from light

LITERATURE
Brantner A, Kartnig Th, Flavonoid glycosides from aerial parts
of Pulmonaria officinalis. In: PM 61(6):582. 1995.

Luthy J et al., (1984) Pharm Acta Helv 59(9/10):242.

Miiller BM, Franz G, Polysaccharide aus Pulmonaria officinalis
- Wertgebende Bestandteile der Droge? In: PZW 135(6):243-
251. 1990.

Further information in: ..

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 737 -----
486 /LUNGWORT

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Lupinus luteus
See Yellow Lupin

Lycium barbarum
See Lycium Berries (Go-Qi-Zi)

Lycium Bark (Di-Gu-Pi)
Lycium chinense

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fruit and root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has 1 to 3 axillary, radial
flowers. The calyx and petals are fused; the calyx is bilabial
with a double-toothed upper lip and triple-toothed lower lip.
The corolla is funnel-shaped, light purple or violet with a 5-
lobed margin. There are 4 stamens, which are hairy at the
base. The ovary is 2-chambered with | style. The fruit is a
yellow-orange, elongate, sweet-tasting berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Lycium chinense is a shrub that
grows up to 3 m high. The leaves are alternate, ovate-
lanceofertg?fb«rhomboid, narrowing suddenly to the petiole,
and bright grfferifTKe branches are cane-like, initially
upright, then hanging down bow-like and thornless.

Habitat: The plant is native to eastern Asia, particularly to
China and Japan.

Production: Lycium bark is the dried root bark of Lycium
chinense or Lycium barbarum. Harvest begins in early spring
or in late autumn when the roots are dug up and then peeled.
The root bark is then cleaned and dried in the sun. Lycium
leaves are the dried leaves of Lycium chinense.

Other Names: Chinese Matrimony Vine, Chinese Wolfberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: LYCIUM ROOT BARK

Polyamines: kukoamine A _ (spermidin-dihydrocaffeoyl-
bisamide)
Dipeptides: Lyciumamide (N-benzoyl-L-phenylalanyl-L-

phenylalaninol-acetate)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Cyclopeptides: lyciumin A, lyciumin B

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, Salpha-stigmas-
tan-3,6-dione

Diterpenes: sugiol

EFFECTS: LYCIUM ROOT BARK
The methanolic root extract and the kukoamine A isolated
from the plant are reported to have had significant antihyper-
tensive effects in animal experiments. The isolated octapep-
tides lyciumines A and B are believed to inhibit the activity
of renin and the angiotensin-converting enzyme. Experimen-
tal data confirming these results are not available.

COMPOUNDS: LYCIUM LEAVES
Steroids: withasteroids (0.1%), including withanolide A,
withanolide B

Sterols: including _ beta-sitosterol and __ beta-sitosterol

glucoside

EFFECTS: LYCIUM LEAVES
No experimental data regarding the pharmacological efficacy
of the drug are available. In vitro experimental models have
indicated that the steroid withanolide isolated from it may
have immunosuppressive effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

LYCIUM ROOT BARK

Unproven Uses: The root of the plant is used in fever and
blood pressure-reducing medications. The berries are consid-
ered to provide a liver and kidney tonic.

Chinese Medicine: Used internally for fever, hyperhidrosis,
thirst, coughs, nose bleeds, pulpitis, diabetes, hypertension,
malaria and for black vomit. External uses include eczema
and rheumatism. Efficacy for these indications has not yet
been proven.

LYCIUM LEAVES
Unproven Uses: Preparations from the leave are used in folk
medicine for whooping cough and paroxysmal cough (Iberi-
an peninsula), as a mouthwash for toothache (Indonesia).

Chinese Medicine: Lycium leaf is used for inflammatory
processes, such as rheumatism, and as a tea taken for pain.

Indian Medicine: Used for rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
LYCIUM ROOT BARK AND LEAVES

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
LYCIUM ROOT BARK
Contraindications include pregnancy,
common cold and diarrhea.

symptoms of the

----- PAGE 738 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LYCIUM LEAVES
Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE

LYCIUM ROOT BARK

Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug
preparations are administered internally and externally.

Storage: Store in a dry place.

LYCIUM LEAVES
Mode of Administration: Lycium leaf is administered as a tea

or as an infusion for use as a gargle.

Daily Dosage: Drug/tea: 9 to 15 g or 6 to 12 g, depending on
the literature source. For Whooping Cough, | cup of tea
sipped throughout the day.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kim HP, Kim SY, Lee EJ, Kim YC. Kim YC, Zeaxanthin
dipalmitate fiom Lycium chinense has hepatoprotective activity.
Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol, 97:301-14, 1997 Sep.
Kim SY, Choi YH, Huh H, Kim J. Kim YC, Lee HS, New
antihepatotoxic cerebroside fiom Lycium chinense fruits. J Nat
Prod, 60:274-6, 1997 Mar.

Lycium Berries (Go-Qi-Z1)
Lycium barbarum

DESCREPASIT ~
Medicinal Parts: ihe medicinal part is-the frait.

Flower and Fruit: There are 1 to 3 axillary, radial flowers.
The calyx and petals are fused; the calyx is bilabial with the
upper lip double-toothed and the lower lip triple-toothed.
The corolla is funnel-shaped, light purple or violet with a 5-
lobed margin. There are 4 stamens, which are hairy at the
base. The ovary is 2-chambered with 1 style. The fruit is a
scarlet, elongate, sweet-tasting berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Lycium barbarum is a shrub,
growing up to 3 m high. The gray-green leaves are alternate,
lanceolate and gradually narrow to the petiole. The branches
are cane-like, initially upright, then hanging down bow-like
and often thorny.

Habitat: The shrub is indigenous to China and Mongolia.

Production: Barbary wolfberry fruits are the dried ripe fruit
of Lycium barbarum. The fruit is harvested in summer or
autumn. The whole fruit, with stem attached, is dried in the

LYCIUM BERRIES (GO-QI-ZI) /487

sun until the skin is hard and the fruit pulp is soft inside.
After drying, the fruit stem is removed.

Other Names: Bastard Jasmine, Box Thorn, Common
Matrimony Vine, Prickly Box, Tea Plant, Barbary, Tea Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Water-soluble polysaccharides

Glycoproteins
Carotinoids: particularly physalien (zeaxanthin dipalmitate)

EFFECTS.

A possible immunostimulating and hypoglycemic effect has
been described, The plant contains a mydriatic acting
protein.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is administered as a non-specific
strengthening agent, due to the minerals and vitamins

. (particularly vitamin C) that it contains. Lycium barbarum is

also used as a purgative and diuretic.

Chinese Medicine: The plant is used to treat weakness of the
lumbar region and knee; liver and kidney disorders, diabetes,
tinnitus, impaired hearing, poor sight, anemia, coughs,
dizziness and excessive tear production.

Indian Medicine: Lycium barbarum is used for ascitis,
anemia, menstruation disorders, toothache, scabies and

bleeding hemorrhoids.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Application: Whole, cut and powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: Drug/tea: 6 to 12 g or 6 to 15 g, depending on
the literature source.

Storage: Store in cool, dry place and in tightly sealed
container.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Liu B, Effects of Lycium barbarum L and Drynaria fortunei, J
Smith on in vitro attachment and growth of human gingival
fibroblasts on root surfaces, Chung Hua Kou Chiang Hsueh Tsa
Chih, 27:159-61, 190, 1992 May.

----- PAGE 739 -----
488/LYCIUM BERRIES (GO-QI-ZI)

Lu CX, Cheng BQ, Radiosensitizing effects of Lyctum
barbarum polysaccharide for Lewis lung cancer, Chung Hsi I
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 11:611-2, 582, 1991 Oct.

Ren B, Ma Y, Shen Y, Gao B, Protective action of Lycium
barbarum L. (LbL) and betaine on lipid peroxidation of
erythrocyte membrane induced by H202, Chung Kuo Chung
Yao~Tsa Chihf 20:303-4, inside cover, 1995 May.

Lycium chinense
See Lycium Bark (Di-Gu-Pi)

Lycoperdon species
See Puff Ball

Lycopersicon esculentum

See Tomato

Lycopodium clavatum
See Club Moss

Lycopus yirginieus
See Bugleweed ~

Lysimachia nummularia
See Moneywort

Lysimachia vulgaris

See Loosestrife

Lythrum salicaria

See Purple Loosestrife

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ma-Huang
Ephedra sinica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the young canes
collected in autumn and the dried rhizome with roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small and occasionally
reduced to acuminate scales. They are fused in pairs at the
base. They are unisexual, usually dioecious and sometimes
monoecious. The male inflorescences consist of 2 to 24
blooms. The involucre is 2-lobed and fused to a tube. The
fruit is a red, berry-like false fruit formed from the upper
bract. '

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 30 cm tall lightly
branched subshrub with lengthened, cylindrical branches that
are 1 to 2 mm in diameter. It is similar in appearance to
Horsetail, and is sometimes twining and often has under-
ground runners. The stem and branches are round with
numerous vertical grooves of gray-green or bright green
coloring. Very small leaves are occasionally reduced to
pointed scales and are almost always fused at the base to
form a sheath. They are reddish brown.

Habitat: Ephedra sinica grows mainly in Mongolia and the
bordering area of China, Ephedra gerardiana is from India.

Production: Ma-Huang consists of the dried, young branch-
lets, harvested in the fall, of Ephedra sinica, Ephedra
shennungiana, or other equivalent Ephedra species. It is
mostly cultivated. The plant is harvested as late as possible
after the last rain, but before the winter frost and is air-dried
in the sun.

Not to be Confised' With: Many similar species
Other Names: Desert Herb, Ephedrine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alkaloids of the 2-aminophenylpropane type: main alkaloids
L-(-)-ephedrine (IR,2S-(-)- ephedrine) and D-pseudoephed-
rine (1S,2S-(+)- ephedrine); lesser alkaloids L-norephedrine,
D-norpseudoephedrine.

EFFECTS
The level of the active principles can fluctuate drastically.
Ephedrine acts by indirectly stimulating the sympathomimet-
ic and central nervous system. The herb is bacteriostatic,
positively inotropic and positively chronotropic. In animal
tests ephedrine acts as an antitussive.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:
* Cough/bronchitis

----- PAGE 740 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Unproven Uses: Ma-Huang is used for diseases of the
respiratory tract with mild bronchospasms in adults and
children over the age of six. Various indications include
asthma, cardiovascular stimulation and as a CNS stimulant.

Chines&"Me'"dicine: The drug has been used for over 4000
years for severe febrile illnesses, bronchial asthma, joint
symptoms, inability to perspire, coughing with dyspnea,
edema and pains in the bones.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications include states of anxiety and restlessness,
high blood pressure, angle-closure glaucoma, cerebral perfu-
sions, prostate adenoma with residual urine volume, pheo-
chromocytoma and thyrotoxicosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Common side effects include headache, irritability,
motor restlessness, nausea, sleeplessness, tachycardia, uri-
nary disorders and vomiting. Higher dosages may result in
blood pressure and cardiac rhythm disorders.

Dependence can develop with extended intake. Because of
the danger of the development of tachyphylaxis and of
dependence, the drug should only be administered for short
periods.

Pregnancy: Ma-Huang should not to be used during
pregnancy

Drug Interactions: Ephedra has an addictive effect on the
CNS when used in conjunction with caffeine, decongestants
and other central stimulants.

Cardiac heart glycosides or halothane: disturbance of heart
rhythm.

Guanethidine“njfeanGement of the sympathomimetic effect

MAO-inhibitors: potentiate the sympathomimetic action of
ephedrine.

Secale alkaloid derivatives or oxytocin: development of high
blood pressure.

OVERDOSAGE

Life-threatening poisonings are seen with very high dosages
of the drug (over 100 gm, lethal dosage with oral administra-
tion corresponding to approximately 1 to 2 gm L-ephedrine).
Symptoms of poisoning include severe outbreaks of sweat-
ing, enlarged pupils, spasms and elevated body temperature.
Death following overdose is due to heart failure and
asphyxiation. Following stomach emptying (gastric lavage
with burgundy-colored potassium permaganate solution),
therapy consists of the administration of activated charcoal
and prophylaxis against shock. Spasms should be treated
with diazepam, electrolyte substitution should be employed,
and sodium bicarbonate infusions should be used to prevent

MA-HUANG/489

acidosis. Intubation and oxygen respiration are also on
occasion necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ma-Huang is administered as a
comminuted herb, as well as other galenic preparations for
internal use.

Daily Dosage: For adults, the average single dose is 15 to 30
mg total alkaloid, calculated as ephedrine, for a total dose of
120 mg per day. When used in children, single doses of herb
preparations corresponding to 0.5 mg total alkaloid per kg of
body weight are employed. The recommended daily dosage
for children is 2 mg.

Tea — Made with 1 to 4 gm, 3 times daily.
Ephedra tincture (1:1) — medium single dose 5 gm.
Ephedra extract — 1 to 3 ml 3 times daily.
Ephedra tincture (1:4) — 6 to 8 ml 3 times daily.
Storage: Ma-Huang must be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Gazaliev AM, Fazilov SD, Zhurinov MZ, Khim Prorod Soed
23:862-864. 1987.

Harada M, Nishimura M, J Pharm Dyn 4:691-699. 1981.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 741 -----
490/MACROCYSTIS PYRIFERA

Macrocystis pyrifera

See Brown Kelp

Madder

Rubia tinctorum

TRADE NAMES
Madder Whole Root (available from numerous manufactures

and as combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fruit: The small yellowish-green flowers are in
loose, leafy, long-peduncled terminal or axillary cymes. The
margin of the calyx is indistinct, 4 to 5 sectioned and has a
tip which is curved inward. There are 5 stamens and an
inferior ovary. The fruit is a black, pea-sized glabrous,
smooth drupe containing 2 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant grows from 60
to 100 cm high. The pencil-thick rhizome creeps widely
underground. The stem is quadrangular with backward
turning prickles at the edges. The stems are at times so thin
that they are more descendent than erect. The leaves are in
whorls, in fours below, in sixes above. They are oblong to

lanceolate with 1 rib and are protrudingly reticulate beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Southern Europe,
Western Asia and North Africa and is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Madder root consists of the dried root of Rubia
tinctorunLjis well as its preparations.

Other Nam'es'Dyer's  Madder, Robbia'"""

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (rubiadins, 2 to 4%): chief compo-
nents alizarin, lucidin, pseudopurpurin (purpurin carboxylic
acid), purpurin, rubiadin and die glucosides and/or the
primerosides of these compounds.

EFFECTS
Madder root inhibits calcium oxalate crystallization in the
kidney. Lucidin is the toxic principle and is mutagenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Madder root is used to dissolve kidney

stones
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Because of the possible carcinogenic effect of the rubiadins,
the drug should not be administered.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
How Supplied:
Liquid — 14

LITERATURE
Anonym, Rubiae-tinctorum-radix-haltige Humanarzneimittel,
Widerruf der Zulassung. In: DAZ 133(11):888. 1993.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.

Courchesne M. Brassard P, Identification and characterization of
naturally occuring rubiadins. In: JNP 56(5):722. 1993.

Nung V N et al., (1971) Plant Med Phytother 5:177.

Schumann C. Apotheker und die Entwicklung der Farberei. In:
PZ 140(39):3446-3451. 1995.

Westendorf J. Phytotberapie: Anthranoide in Arzneipflanzen. In:
DAZ 133(25 ):2345. 1993.

Westendorf J, Poginskky B, Marquardt H, Marquardt H, The
genotoxicity of Lucidin, a natural component of Rubia
tinctorum L., and lucidinmethylether, a component of ethanolic
Rubia extracts. In: Cell Biol Toxicol in press. 19.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.
Thomson RH, Naturally Occuring Quinones, 2nd Ed., Academic
Press New York 1971.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.,.Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Magnolia
Magnolia glauca

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The bark is the medicinal part.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The inner bark occurs in long,
fibrous strips. The outer surface is rough, almost granular
and pitted. The inner surface is striated but almost smooth.
The fracture is short with the inner part tough and fibrous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America.

----- PAGE 742 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production: Magnolia bark is the bark from the trunk and
branches of Magnolia glauca.

Other Names: White Laurel, Beaver Tree, Swamp Sassafras,
White Bay, Sweet Bay, Holly Bay, Indian Bark, Red Bay,
Swamp Laurel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Neolignans: magnolol

Volatile oil

The constituents of the drug have not been widely
investigated.

EFFECTS
Magnolia has diaphoretic, anti-inflammatory and stimulant

effects. It is also a tonic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The preparations are used for digestive
disorders; used rarely, except in Oriental medicine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Magnolia has been used internally
as a powder or liquid extract.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
BirkhaosirVErlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horharamer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Yajara S, Nishiyori T, Kohda A, Nohra T, Nisbioka I, Isolation
and characterization of phenolic compounds fiom Magnolia
cortex produced in China. In: Chem Pharm Bull Tokyo
39:2024. 1991.

Magnolia glauca

See Magnolia

Mahonia aquifolium

See Mountain Grape

MAIDENHAIR/491

Maidenhair

Adiantum capillus-veneris

TRADE NAMES
Oregon Grape (Berberis aquifolium variety available from
numerous manufacturers) Oregon Grape Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The dried fronds (Maidenhair) are used as a
drug as well the dried herb with rhizome and roots
(Maidenhair with roots).

Flower and Fruit: There are lumps of sporangia without a
veil on the underside of the lateral lobes. The sporangia are
square to reniform and later, dark brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Maidenhair is a hardy, up to 35 cm
high plant with an aromatic lily fragrance. It has a creeping
rhizbme. The leaves are double-rowed, tender, glabrous and
up to 50 cm long. They have a glossy black petiole and are
covered with hairs at the base. The leaf-blade is ovate to
oblong-ovate. The leaflets are light-green periolate. The
pinnules have hair-like petioles. The veins of the sterile
pinna terminate in teeth at the edge of the leaf.

Habitat: Southern Europe, Atlantic coast as far as Ireland,
from the south to the southern Alpine valleys (Tessin,
southern Tyrol).

Production: Maidenhair fern, which is gathered in June and
dried, is the frond of Adiantum capillus-veneris.

Not to be Confused With: It has sometimes been observed
that the drug has been made impure by an addition of
bracken leaf fronds (Pteridium aquilinum).

Other Names: Venus Hair, Rock Fem, Hair of Venus, Five-
Finger Fern, Maiden Fern

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids
Proanthocyan idins
Hydroxycinnamic acid ester

EFFECTS

The drug is an expectorant, beneficial in bringing up phlegm,
and a demulcent.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In the middle ages, the drug was used for
various illnesses of the respiratory tract, in the form of so-
called pectoral teas and as a syrup for severe coughs.
Because of its similarity to Maidenhair, the drug was used to
treat a lack of hair growth and to promote dark hair color.

----- PAGE 743 -----
402 /MAIDENHAIR

It is still taken as an infusion in Spain, Belgium and the
Canary Islands to treat bronchitis, coughs and whooping
cough, and also for painful and excessive menstruation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy. Not to be used during pregnancy

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is taken internally as a tea
prepared from the ground or powdered drug.

Daily Dosage: The standard single dose is 15 gm of the
drug to 1 cup of liquid per dose (average single dose)

Storage: Protect from light.

LITERATURE
Berti G et al., Tetrahedron Lett: 1-5. 1964.

Cooper-Driver G, Swain T, Bot J Linn Soc 74:1-21. 1977.
Imperato F, PH 21:2158-2159. 1982.

Imperator F, (1982) Phytochemistry 21(8):2158.

Jain SR, Sharma SN, (1967) Planta Med(4):439.

Twaij HAA et al., (1985) Indian J Pharmacol 17(1):73.

Malabar Nut

Justicia adhatoda

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried foliage
leaves, j4fiQwer collected in the flowering season, the dried
bark of the trunk, branches and roots, and the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in dense, 2.5 to 7.5 cm
long peduncled, axillary spikes. The bracts are elliptical, and
the bracteoles are oblong-lanceolate. The calyx is 1.5 cm
long, glabrous or black pubescent, with 5 sections containing
regular lanceolate segments. The corolla is white with red to
purple bands. The corolla tube is 13 cm long and is
cylindrical and pubescent inside of the lower half. The upper
lip is convexly domed. The anthers are arrow-shaped and
sometimes spurred at the base. The ovary is bivalvular with a
2-lobed stigma. The fruit is a 4-seeded, short-haired,
longitudinally grooved capsule. The seeds are orbicular,
glabrous, slightly bumpy-warty and 5 to 7 mm across.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen, unpleas-
ant-smelling shrub 2.5 m high with numerous, usually
opposite, branches. The bark is yellow. The leaves are 8 to
25 cm long, 2.5 to 8 cm wide, short-stalked, opposite,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

lanceolate to elliptical, tapering to an acute apex with entire
margins. The leaf blade and petiole are finely pubescent.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and die odor tea-like.

Habitat: Originally indigenous to northern India, the plant is
now found in all the areas of Ayurveda medicine in India, Sri
Lanka and the Maylan archipelago.

Production: Wasaca leaves are the leaves of Justicia

adhatoda.
Other Names: Arusa, Adulsa

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Quinazoline alkaloids: including vasicine and vasicinone

Volatile oil

EFFECTS
Mildly spasmolytic, bronchodilatory and expectorant

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: For acute and chronic bronchial infections,
catarrh of the upper respiratory tract and tuberculosis as an
expectorant and to alleviate coughs.

Indian Medicine: Justicia adhatoda is used as an expectorant
and secretory agent.

Homeopathic Uses: Justicia adhatoda preparations are used
for hay fever and acute inflammation of the upper respiratory
tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS -,

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Because of the vasicine content, the
administration of large dosages can lead to excitatory states.

Pregnancy: Administration during pregnancy is to be
avoided.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:Today, the extract of the leaves is
only found in some combination preparations.

Daily Dosage: | to 2 gm as drug or liquid extract (1:1) with
40% ethanol (V/V)

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute), and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute. 3 times daily; Chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Brain KR, Thapa BB, J Chromatogr 258:183-188. 1988.

----- PAGE 744 -----
4§

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Cooper-Driver G, Swain T, Bot J Linn Soc 74:1-21. 1977.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen)/Sprihger Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Male Fern

Dryopteris filix-mas

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried fronds,

die dried rhizome collected in autumn with the leaf bases, the
fresh rhizome and the fresh aerial parts.

Flower and Fruit: On the underside of the leaflets there are 2
rows of sori, covered by kidney-shaped, red-brown film. The
spores are dark brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The root is a crooked half-under-
ground fleshy rhizome, covered in the remains of dark brown
petioles, which produces long branched root fibers. The
remains of the petioles are linear-lanceolate and tomentose
with red-brown scales. The foliage grows in a crown, with
fronds arranged in spirals, 60 cm to 1.5 m high. There are 2-
pinnate, oblong-lanceolate, alternate, sessile leaflets, subdi-
vided with round segments. The young fronds are rolled in
spirals and thickly covered in hairs. They gradually open out
as the fronds grow.

Habitafftfic* plant is found in the temperate zones of
Europe, northern Asia and in North and'South" America.

Production: Male Fern leaf consists of the fresh or dried leaf
of Dryopteris filix-mas. Male Fern herb consists of the fresh
or dried above-ground parts of Dryopteris filix-mas. Male
Fern rhizome consists of me fresh or dried rhizomes
separated from the attached roots. The root-stock is collected
in autumn and gently dried.

Not to be Confused With: The rhizomes of most European
Dyopteris species.

Other Names: Aspidium, Bear's Paw Root, Fern, Knotty
Brake, Male Shield Fern, Marginal Fern, Sweet Brake

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MALE FERN RHIZOME

Acylphloroglucinoles (2%, mixtures termed raw filicin or
filicin): in particular, flavaspidic acids, filicinic acids,
paraspidin, desaspidin

Tannins

MALE FERN/493

COMPOUNDS: MALE FERN LEAVES

Acylphloroglucinoles (0.2%, mixtures termed raw filicin or
filicin): in particular, flavaspidic acids, filicinic acids,
paraspidin, desaspidin

Flavonoids

EFFECTS

Male Fern herb has an anthelmintic effect and is strongly
cytotoxic against band worms and liver flukes, although
roundworm and oxyuris are resistant. It is also cell toxic,
virostatic and antiviral. The pharmacological effect is largely
due to the flavaspidic acid with filicic acids being the main
active principle.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Male Fern herb are used
externally for rheumatism, sciatica, muscle pain, neuralgia,
earache and toodiache, for festering and poorly healing
wounds, burns, hemorrhoids, for teething in infants, and
sleep disorders, as well as internally for tapeworms and
flukes.

Homeopathic Uses: Dryopteris filix-mas is used for weak
sight and damage to the optic nerve.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be administered in the presence of
anemia, cardiac, liver or kidney diseases or diabetes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The following can occur even with therapeutic
dosages: queasiness, nausea, severe headache, vomiting,
diarrhea.

Pregnancy: The drug’ should not be used during pregnancy.

Pediatric Use: The drug should not be administered to
children under 4 years.

Use in the Elderly: The drug should not be administered to
elderly persons.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosages in susceptible patients can lead to liver, cardiac
and kidney damage as well as central nervous system
disorders, psychoses and permanent injuries such as paraly-
sis and visual disorders may be seen as a result of overdose.

Cases of death, particularly among children, have been
observed following administration of Filmaron oil (10%
solution of volatile extracts of the rhizomic drug in cooking
oil).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Warning: Dosages may be toxic!
Due to the risks, internal application is not recommended; if
possible other remedies should be used. Because the efficacy

----- PAGE 745 -----
494/MALE FERN

of the claimed applications is not documented, therapeutic
usage is not recommended.

Preparation: Filix-mas extract: The percolate is completely
freed from ether by steaming (maximum 50° C). It is made
into a dried extract in a vacuum. The content is stabilized
with high-fat cooking oil (DAB6)

Daily Dosage: The single and daily dose of Filix-mas extract
is 6 to 8 gm for adults and 4 to 6 gm for children. In case of
an unsuccessful cure, the treatment may only be repeated
after an interim of a few weeks. The single and daily
maximum dose of Filix-mas liquid extract is 3 gm. The
maximum daily dosage of Aspidinolfilicium oii solution is
20 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1);

Storage: The drug is stored over adsorbant calcium for a
maximum duration of | year, with a relative humidity below
0.05 in sealed containers away from light sources.

LITERATURE
Bottari F et al., (1972) Phytochemistry 11:2519.

Calderwood JM et al., J Pharm Pharmacol 21:55 S.
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Karl CJPj*ersen PA, Muller G, Z Naturforsch 360607-610.
198." '"V% ~

. gs
Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Widen CJ, Sarvela J, Britton OM, On the location and
istribution of phloroglucinols (Filicins) in Ferns. In: Ann Bot
Fennici 20:407. 1983.

Widen CJ, Vida G, Euw JV, Reichenstein T, Helv Chim Acta
54:2824-2850. 1971.

Mallotus philippinensis

See Kamala

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Malus domestica
See Apple Tree

Malva sylvestris

See High Mallow

Manaca

Brunfelsia hopeana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of Manaca are the
roots and stem.

Flower and Fruit: The blue or white flowers are large,
conical and very fragrant. The calyx is divided into 5
sections, with rounded lobes and 2 lips covering the bud.
There are 4 fertile anthers, which fuse together above where
they divide into 2 stigma-like lobes. The fruit is a fleshy or
leathery capsule with numerous large seeds embedded in it.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Manaca is a shrub with obovate,
deciduous leaves. The tough, woody roots are about 1.5 cm
in diameter. They are yellow in the center and have a papery,
pale brown epidermis. The stems have a small yellow
medulla.

Habitat: Manaca grows in South America, the West Indies
and Brazil.

Production: Manaca root is the root of Brunfelsia hopeana.
Other Names: Pohl, Vegetable Mercury

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

The active ingredients of the drug have not yet been
adequately investigated. The spasmogenic bninfelsamidine
(pyrrole-3-carboxamidine, identical with Nierembergia tox-
in) has been demonstrated in the related species Brunfelsia
grandiflora.

EFFECTS
Diuretic and antirheumatic effect have been attributed to

Manaca.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Manaca is used in the treatment of
rheumatic conditions. In the past, folk medicine uses have
included syphilis and scrofulosis.

----- PAGE 746 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. In animal experiments, anxiety states, restlessness.
increas«:-~in cardiac and pulmonary frequency, elevated
salivation, vomiting, muscle tremors and tonic-clonic spasms
were observed following intake of plant parts of Brunfelsia-
species, as well as death.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid extract preparations for

internal use.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lloyd HA et a!., Brunfeslamidine: A novel convulsant from the
medicinal plant Brunfeksia grandiflora. In: Tetrahedron Letters
26(22):2623-2624. 1985.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Mandragora_ officinarum
See Mandrake

Mandrake- -

Mandragora officinarum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried under-
ground part, the fresh herb and the root.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers are on light green
pedicles. They are glabrous on the outside. The corolla is
light green to yellow. The calyx is lanceolate with a pointed
tip, half as long as the 3 cm corolla. The hairs on the outside
of the corolla have heads, which consist of 15 cells and sit on
a tiny stem of 2 to 3 cm. The fruit is yellow, globular and
extends with a diameter of 2 to 3 cm well beyond the calyx.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant has a thick, tuberous root
and is almost stemless. The root is light brown on the
outside, simple or branched, and up to 60 cm deep. The
leaves are all the same size, pubescent, short petiolate, ovate-
lanceolate. They have a disgusting smell.

MANDRAKE/495

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
and bordering frost-free regions.

Production: Mandrake root is the dried, underground part of
Mandragora vernalis or M. officinarum. The plant is
gathered in uncultivated regions.

Not to be Confused With: The roots of Atropa belladona,
whose alkaloid pattern is similar.

Other Names: Mandragora, Satan's Apple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MANDRAGORA ROOT

Tropane. alkaloids (0.4%): chief alkaloids (-)-hyoscyamine,
under storage conditions changing over to some extent into
atropine, and scopolamine

COMPOUNDS: MANDRAKE HERB

The leaves have hardly been investigated, but in view of the
demonstrated toxicity, the same alkaloid mixture is to be
assumed.

EFFECTS: MANDRAKE ROOT AND HERB

The action of the drug is mainly due to the anticholinergic
effect of the main alkaloids (atropine, hyoscamin and
scopolamine).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Mandragora is one of the oldest of the
medicinal plants. In folk medicine, a tincture of Mandragora
radix was used for stomach ulcers, colic, asthma, hay fever
and whooping cough. Today, Mandrake is only used in
homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Skin red-
dening, dryness of the mouth, tachycardiac arrhythmias,
mydriasis (the 4 early warning symptoms of a poisoning),
accommodation disorders, heat build-up through decline in
sweat secretion, micturition disorders and constipation can
occur as side effects, particularly with overdoses.

OVERDOSAGE
Because of the high content of scopolamine in the drug,
poisonings lead at first to somnolence, but then also, after the
intake of very high dosages, to central excitation (rest-
lessness, hallucinations, delirium and manic episodes),
followed by exhaustion and sleep. Lethal dosages (for adults
starting at 100 mg atropine, considerably less for children)
carry with them the danger of respiratory failure. Severe
poisonings are particularly conceivable in connection with
the misuse of the drug as an intoxicant.

The treatment for poisonings include stomach emptying;
temperature-lowering measures with wet cloths (no antipy-
retics!); oxygen respiration for respiratory distress; intuba-

----- PAGE 747 -----
496/MANDRAKE

tion; parenteral physostigmine salts as antidote; diazepam for
spasms while monitoring respiratory function; catheter for
cystoparalysis.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is now obsolete and is
only rarely used In medicinal preparations. In homeopathy,
dilutions from the fresh herb are used.

LITERATURE

Al-Khali S, Alkofahi A, The chemical constituents of
Mandragora autumnalis. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 149. 1996.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. AufL. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.
Jackson BP, Berry MI, Hydroxytropane tigliates in the roots of
Mandragora species. In: PH 12(5): 1165-1166. 1973.

Kraft K, Europaische Rauschdrogen. In: ZPT 17(6):343-355.
1996.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Scholz E, Alraunenfruchte - ein biblisches Aphrodisiakum. In:
ZPT 16(2): 109-110. 1995.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner Hfesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche HomoSpaffiika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Tena, New
York 1995.

Manna
Fraxinus ornus

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the juice extracted
from the bark starting from the 8m to the 10th year. This tree
yields from its bark a sugary sap known in pharmacy as
Manna.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is in upright, later
hanging, feathery panicles. The sepals are very short. The
petals are fused at the base in pairs. They are linear to
narrowly linguiform and white. The 2 stamens have very

long filaments. The fruit is a nutlet. It is hanging, linguiform,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

3 to 4 mm long and 7 to 10 mm wide. It is rounded at the
base or narrowed wedge-shaped, glossy dark brown, flat and
longitudinally striped. The seeds are ovate, 15 to 20 mm by 4
to 5 mm, broad, flat, longitudinally striped and brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Fraxinus ornus is a tree growing up
to 8 m tall with gray, crust-embossed bark. The new-year's
branchlets are olive-green or browny gray-green, somewhat
glossy, with numerous, light-brown lenticels. The long
shoots are downy to the tip; the short shoots are awned at the
base. The terminal and lateral buds are orbicular and 4-
scaled. The leaflets are elliptical-ovate-lanceolate or ovate,
tapering to a tip and crenate-serrate. The upper surface is ric’
green and the underside lighter green with pink veins. The
nerves are pink-tomentose.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to southern Europe, exten
ing to the southern borders of the Alps and as far as
European Turkey. The tree is cultivated in Italy.

Production: Manna consists of the dried sap generated from
the slit bark of trunk and branches of Fraxinus ornus, as well
as its preparations in effective dosage. The eight to ten year-
old trees are incised. The manna flows out of the bark and is

collected.
Other Names: Flowering Ash, Manna Ash, Flake Manna

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Alditols: Mannitol (70-90%)

Oligosaccharides: Stachyose, Mannotriose, Glucose, Fruc-
tose

EFFECTS
Manna acts as a laxative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

Unproven Uses: Manna is also used for ailments where an
easier elimination and a soft stool is desirable, such as anal
fissures, hemorrhoids, and post-rectal/anal surgery.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is not to be used in the presence of ileus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Susceptible persons could experience flatulence and

nausea.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb and other galenic

preparations for internal use.

----- PAGE 748 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dosage: For adults, 20 to 30 gm of drug; For children,
2 to 16 gm of drug. Manna, like other laxatives, should not
be used for an extended period of time.

LITERATURE

*Tansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Fraxinus ornus).

Maranta arundinacea

See Arrowroot

Marigold

Calendula officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Califlora Calndula Gel, Calendula Gel, Calendula Ointment

DESCRIPTION

4Q Flower and Fruit: On the tip of each stem there is a 5 to 7
cm composite flower head consisting of an epicalyx of
numerous narrow-lanceolate sepals, which are densely cov-
ered on both sides with glandular hairs. The inner section of
the flower head is made up of orange-yellow tubular florets.
The disc florets are pseudohermaphrodites; the female
sterile. The zygomorphic ray florets at the edge are female,
their stamens are completely absent, and their inferior
ovaries are much more developed than those of the tubular
florets. -SeBftJEonns only in the female ray flowers. The
heterocarp acherte$*are~sickle-shaped, curved and ringed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is usually an annual,
seldom biennial. It grows to between 30 and 50 cm high and
has a 20 cm long tap root and numerous thin, secondary
roots. The stem is erect, angular, downy and branched from
the base up or higher. The alternate leaves are almost
spatulate at the base, oblong to lanceolate above and are all
tomentose.

Characteristics: The plant has a strong, unpleasant smell.

Habitat: Central and southern Europe, western Asia and the
US.

Production: Marigold flowers are the ray florets of the
completely unfolded, collected and dried capitula of Calen-
dula officinalis. Harvest begins in July. Drying takes place in
the shade at a maximum of 45° C. Calendula herb consists of
the fresh or dried above-ground parts of Calendula officinalis
harvested during flowering season.

MARIGOLD /497

Not to be Confused With: Other Asteraceae; arnica and
saffron are often adulterated with Marigold.

Other Names: Calendula, Holligold, Goldbloom, Golds,
Mary Bud, Ruddes, Mary Gowles, Holigold, Marybud

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MARIGOLD FLOWERS

Triterpene saponins (2 to 10%): glycosides A to F (mono- or
bisdemosidic oleanolic acid glycosides)

Triterpene alcohols: tirterpene monooles (0.8%), triterpene
dioles (4%) and triterpene trioles, including lupeol, taraxast-
erol, psi-taraxasterol, faradiol, arnidiol, their mono- and
diesters (chiefly acetic acid, lauric, myristic and palmitic
acid as acid components)

Flavonoids (0.3 to 0.8%): including isorhamnetin and

quercetin glycosides

Hydroxycoumarins: including scopoletin, umbelliferone, es-
culetin

Carotinoids: chief components lutein, zeaxanthine

Volatile oil (0.2%): chief components alpha-cadinol, T-
cadinol, fatty acids

Water-soluble polysaccharides (15%): rhamnoarabinogalac-
tans, arabinogalactans

Polyynes

EFFECTS: MARIGOLD FLOWERS

The results of numerous studies on the mode of action are
available. The flowers are antimicrobial .due to the terpene
alkaloids, lactone and'flavones contained in the essential oil.
Flavonoids isolated from flowers of Calendula officinalis
demonstrated positive antimicrobial activity against Staphy-
lococcus aureus (at a concentration of 1 milligram/milliliter
(Dumenil et al., 1980). Other studies have demonstrated the
flavones to be effective against Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Sarcina lutea and Candida monosa.

Organic extracts of the dried flowers of Calendula officinalis
exhibited potent anti-HIV activity in an in-vitro MTT/
tetrazolium-based assay. It was also found that the organic
extract caused a significant dose- and time-dependent
reduction of HIV-1 reverse transcription activity (Kalvatchev
et al, 1997).

Antiviral tests performed using the oleanolic acid glycosides
from the aerial parts of the plant demonstrated an inhibitory
effect against Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Only one
compound (3.MH) significantly affected replication in Rhi-
novirus (HRV) cultures (De Tommasi et al., 1991).

----- PAGE 749 -----
498/MARIGOLD

Topical application of Calendula has been shown to enhance
the granulation and epithelialization of damaged skin (Klou-
chek-Popova et al., 1982).

CLINICAL STUDIES
Wound Treatment/Tissue Repair

In one study, surgically induced skin wounds in rats were
treated with a 5% Calendula ointment in combination with
allantoin. Histological studies of the damaged tissue at 8
hours, 24 hours and 48 hours after inflicting the wounds
were performed. The drug combination was found to
markedly stimulate physiological regeneration and epithelial-
ization. This effect was attributed to more extensive metabo-
lism of glycoproteins, nucleoproteins and collagen protein
during the regenerative period in the tissues (Klouchek-
Popova et al., 1982).

In another in-vitro study, an extract of Calendula was shown
to induce formation of new blood vessels, which is important
in the process of granulation (Patrick et al., 1996).

Anti-Inflammatory Action

The anti-inflammatory activity of the 3 main triterpendiol
esters of Marigold were tested against Croton oil-induced
edema of the ears in mice. Faradiol-3-myristic acid ester and
faradiol-3-palmitic acid ester were found to have the same
dose-dependent anti-inflammatory activity. The non-esteri-
fied faradiol was more active than the esters and had an
equivalent effect on inflammation as an equimolar dose of
indomethacin (Zitterl-Eglseer, et al., 1997).

In another study, the faradiol monoester was proven to be the
most relevent anti-inflammatory principle due to its quantita-
tive prevalence in the flowers. The unesterified faradiol was
found tojbjuthe most active of all tested compounds, equal to
indomethacin"y>ejfect-(Delia Loggia et al.,. 19.94).

COMPOUNDS: MARIGOLD HERB
Triterpene saponins

Flavonoids
Carotinoids
Volatile oil

EFFECTS: MARIGOLD HERB

The astringent and granulation-promoting effect may be
attributable to the essential oil, saponin and the amaroid
loliolid. Efficacy has not been documented with valid data.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
MARIGOLD FLOWERS
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
+ Wounds and burns

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Externally, Marigold is used for inflammation of the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa, poorly healing wounds, leg ulcers, to
clean wounds, and for acute and chronic skin inflammation.

Unproven Uses: Marigold has been used extensively as a
folk medicine. Externally it is used for varicosis, vascular
disease wounds, inflammatory skin disease, anal eczema,
proctitis, conjunctivitis. It is a constituent in treatments for
sore, dry skin, bee stings and frostbite.

Marigold is used internally for inflammatory conditions of
internal organs, gastrointestinal ulcers, constipation, worm
infestation and dysmenorrhea. It is also used as a diuretic and
diaphoretic. In the past (19th century), Marigold was used as
a cancer therapy but is no longer in use today for this
purpose.

Homeopathic Uses: Calendula officinalis is used for frost-
bite, burns to the skin and poorly healing wounds. The
efficacy of the homeopathic uses has not been proven.

MARIGOLD HERB

Unproven Uses: Preparations are used for circulation, ulcers,
spasms, swelling of the glands, jaundice, and for wounds and
eczema. The herb is used in Russia for strep throat, on the
Canaries for coughs and cramps and in China for irregular
menstruation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
MARIGOLD FLOWERS AND HERB

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a low potential for sensitization after
frequent skin contact with the drug. A low rate of contact
dermatitis (less than 1%) occurred in patients patch-tested
with a tincture of 10% Calendula. Only- 2 of 1032 patients
had a positive skin reaction to Calendula (Bruynzeel et al,
1992).

DOSAGE
MARIGOLD FLOWERS

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for decoctions,
and other preparations to be applied topically. It is available
as tinctures, liquid extracts and infusions.

How Supplied: Powder, gel ointment, ophthalmic solution,
tincture (10%), tea (infusion), shampoo and hand cream.

Cream

Gel — 7%, 10%
Ointment — 4%
Ophthalmic solution
Tea

Tincture

----- PAGE 750 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Shampoo

Preparation:
Tea — 150 ml of hot water are poured over 1 to 2 teaspoons
drug and strained after approximately 10 minutes.

Diaphoretic — 2 to 4 ml tincture to 250 to 500 ml water or
0.5 to 1 ml liquid extract 1:1 ethanol 40%.

Ointment (10 to 20%) — 2 to 5 g drug in 100 g ointment
with a fatty base.

Marigold oil — olive oil extraction 1:10 peanut oil; this 1:1
in 40% ethanol or 1:5 in 90% ethanol.

Daily
Sore Throat and Inflammation, powder — 1 to 2 grams of
Calendula powder to 150 milliliters of water (Bisset, 1994).

Dosage:

Sore Throat and Inflammation, tea — 1 to 2 grams in one
cup of water, steep 10 to 15 minutes.

Peptic Ulcer, tea — 1 to 4 grams in one cup of water, steep
10 to 15 minutes. Take three times daily (Mills, 1991).

Wound Treatment, ointment 2% to 5% — Apply topically to
the affected area (Bisset, 1994).

Wound Treatment, compress — Steep one tablespoon herb
in 500 milliliters water for 10 to 15 minutes and apply as a
moist compress (Weiss, 1985).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution sc twice
weekly (HAB1).

Sfora™gProtejct from light and moisture. May be stored a
maximum of.*3 years:

MARIGOLD HERB
Mode of Administration: Since efficacy has not been proven
the therapeutic value is uncertain.

Preparation: Contained in Kneipp's Calendula Ointment.

LITERATURE

MARIGOLD PLOWERS

Ahmed AA et al., Sesquiterpene glycosides from Calendula
officinalis. In: JNP 56(10):1821. 1993.

Antibiotika und Immunabwehr. In: Symbiose 4(2):20. 1992.

Bisset NG, Calendulae floss - marigold, in Herbal Drugsand
Phytopharmaceuticals; a Handbook for Practice on a Scientific
Basis. Medpharm Scientific Publishers, Stuttgart and CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1994.

Bruynzeel DP, Van Ketel WG, Young E et al., Contact
sensitization by alternative topical medicaments containing plant
extracts. Contact Dermatitis 1992: 27:278-279.

MARIGOLD/499

Delia Loggia R et al., The role of triterpenoids in the topical
antiinflammatory activity of Calendula officinalis flowers. In:
PM 60(6):516-520. 1994.

De Tommasi N, Conti C, Stein ML, Pizza C, Structure and in
vitro antiviral activity of triterpenoid saponins from Calendula
arvensis. Planta Med (1991 Jun) 57(3):250-3.

Dumenil G, Chemli R & Balansard G et al., Evaluation of
antibacterial properties of marigold glowers (Calendula
officinalis L.) and mother homeopathic tinctures of C.
officinalis L. and G. arvensis L. Ann Pharm Fr 1980;
38(6):493-499.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.
Isaac O, Calendula officinalis L.- Die Ringelblume, Portrait
einer Arzneipflanze. In: ZPT 15(6):357-370. 1994.

Isaac O, Die Ringelblume. Botanik, Chemie, Pharmakologie,
Toxikologie, Pharmazie und therapeutsche Verwendung,
Wissenschaftl. Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart, 1992.

Kalvatchev Z, Walder R & Garzaro D, Anti-HIV activity of
extracts from Calendula" officinalis flowers. Biomed
Pharmacother 1997; 51:176-180.

Kasprzyk Z, Pyrek J, (1968) Phytochemistry 7:1631.
Kasprzyk Z, Wilkomyrski B, (1973) Phytochemistry 13:2299.

Kloucek-Popova E, Popov A, Pavlova N et al., Influence of the
physiological regeneration and epithelization using fractions
isolated from Calendula officinalis. Acta Physiol Pharmacol
Bulg 1982; 8(4):63-67.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg OltnS Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mennet-von Eiff M, Meier B, Phytotherapie in der
Dermatologie. In: ZPT 16(4):201-210. 1995.

Mills SY, Out of the Earth: The Essential Book of Herbal
Medicine. Viking Arkana, London, 1991.

Patrick KFM, Kumar S, Edwardson PAD et al., Induction of
vascularisation by an aqueous extract of the flowers of
Calendula officinalis L the European marigold. Phytomedicine
1996; 3(1); 11-18.

Pyrek J, (1977) Roczniki Chemii 51:1141, 2331, 2493.
Samochowiec E et al., (1979) Wiad Parazytol 25(1):77.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Vecherko LP et al., (1975) Khim Prir Soed 11(3):366.

Weiss RF, Herbal Medicine. Ab Arcanum, Gothernburg,
Sweden, 1985.

----- PAGE 751 -----
500/MARIGOLD

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Veriagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wilkomirski B, (1985) Phytochemistry 24(12):3067.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995,

Willuhn G, Ringenblumenbliiten (Calendulabliiten). In: Tagl
Praxis 33(3):685. 1992.

Zitterl-Eglseer K, Sosa S, Jurenitsch J et al., Anti-oedematous

activities of the main triterpendiol esters of Marigold (Calendula
officinalis L.). J Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57:139-144.

Marijuana
Cannabis sativa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the twig tips of the
female flowers, with either flowers or fruit attached, the
flower-bearing twigs that have been dried; the ripe hemp
fruit and various homeopathic preparations of the fresh dried
plant-parts.

Flower and Fruit: Hemp is dioecious. The female flowers
are reduced to the perigone with one bract. The complete
inflorescences form a leafy, false spike. The male flowers
form panicles rich in pollen. Pollination is by wind. The fruit
is a gray-green, glossy achene, 3.5 to 5 mm long and 2.5 to 4
mm wide. The seeds have little endosperm, are white, oily-
fleshy and hooked.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Cannabis is an annual or biennial
plant, which is usually branched and grows up to 5 m. The
plant ha''s"1lret™'rough-Jiaired and compressed bristles. The
leaves are lohg-petioled and 3 to 7 pinnate. The leaflets are
lanceolate and serrate.

Habitat: The plant probably originated in the Middle East.
Today it is grown worldwide in temperate and tropical
regions.

Production: Indian hemp is the dried flowering or fruiting
branch tips of Cannabis sativa var. indica. Production
lepends on the origin. One method is by striping the leaves.
Another method is stripping the resin exuded from the
flowers and multiple fruit, which is shaped into balls or sheet
forms. The final method involves cutting 5 cm to 10 cm long
branch tips, which have just borne fruit, removing the leaves,
pressing the shooting tips and gathering them into bundles.

Not to be Confused With: Prior to being used as a narcotic,
marijuana was often combined with Nicotiana tabacum,
Lavandula officinalis, Nepeta catarina or Origanum vulgare.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

It is possible to confuse Marijuana with varieties of Urtica,
Moraceae, Ulmaceae and Boraginaceae.

Other Names: Cannabis, Pot, Bhang, Grass, Indian Hemp,
Weed, Ganja, Kif

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Cannabinoids: chief active agent 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (9-

THC = 1-THC), in addition to 60 additional cannabinoids

Volatile oil: of a very complex composition, with, among
other things beta-caryophyllenes, humules, caryophyllene
oxide, alpha-pinenes, beta-pinenes, limonene, myrcene, beta-
ocimene

Flavonoids: including canniflavone-1, canniflavone-2

EFFECTS
Psychotropic action: In most subjects the effect is registered
following an oral dose of 20 mg d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol or
after inhaling a cigarette with 2% d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.
The symptoms are mood swings, reduction in drive, inability
to think clearly, confusion, lack of concentration, impairment
of short term memory and perception of time. Sensory
impressions become heightened or experienced differently.

Complex tasks become more difficult, the capacity to
understand or empathize is impaired. Negative reactions
such as anxiety, panic and psychosis can occur.

It is only possible to describe this effect in animal tests, on
the basis of free behavioral and controlled behavioral tests. A
stimulating effect has also been observed with lower doses.
Not all cannaboids cause the same effect. CBC, CBD and
CBG have no psychomimetic effect. Various interactions
occur in combination with d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.

Antiemetic action: has been reported in clinical studies
involving cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.

Anticonvulsive action: d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol reduces the
clinical and electrographic convulsion intensity in cats.

Analgesic characteristics: d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol displays
analgesic characteristics, while at the same time partially
increasing sensitivity to pain.

Body temperature: In animal tests, d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
and other cannaboids reduced body temperature. The maxi-
mum reduction was relatively small. A stronger hypothermic
effect was observed in higher doses, which affected
behavior.

Respiratory tract: The inhalation of marihuana smoke
caused bronchial dilation in healthy subjects. Methacholine-
induced asthma attacks can be terminated by inhaling
marihuana, in this case only psychomimetic cannaboids are
active.

fl

T™.

----- PAGE 752 -----
“I

Al

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Eyes: The ability of cannabis products to reduce intraocular
pressure was discovered accidentally during trials on the
effect of inhaling high doses. During the tests, intraocular
pressure dropped by 45%. Eye drops applied locally had the
same effect as standard medication but the effect lasted
longer.

Immune system: In vitro and in animal testing, depending on
the tissue, the immune system was significantly suppressed
after cannaboid administration.

Antimicrobial action: CBC, CBDA. CBG and d-9-tetrahy-
drocannabinol displayed antibacterial effects. CBC and d-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol are bacteriostatic and bactericidal
against streptococci and staphylococci.

Tumor inhibiting effect: The in-vitro inhibiting effect of d-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol, d-8-tetrahydrocannabinol and CBN on
the growth of transplanted lung tumors has _ been
documented.

Heart, circulation: Cannaboids increase heart frequency,
peripheral vasodilatation causes an increase in systolic blood
pressure in the prone position and a decrease in the supine
position.

Other effects: d-9-tetrahydrocannabinol is said to be an
appetite stimulant. Long term usage leads to a clear increase
in tolerance for most of the pharmacological effects.

Mode of action: Most cannaboids act on the CNS. The
multiplicity of effects does not point to just one receptor.
Possible interaction with cell-wall lipids or effects on
prostoglandin biosynthesis is under discussion at present.

When administered orally, the first psychotropic reactions
take SfffeV‘O to 60 minutes later. The effect is at its
optimum between* 2 to 3 hours later and-lasts for a total of 8
hours. When inhaled the effect sets in within a few minutes,
reaches its climax or maximum after 30 minutes and lasts for
3 hours.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Cannabis was first mentioned in the
pharmacopoeia of the Chinese Emperor about 3,000 years
ago. Cannabis resin was used for beriberi, constipation,
female conditions, gout, malaria, rheumatism and absent-
mindedness. In medieval herbals, it was mostly used
externally. There are recipes for balms for healing contrac-
tures and for cooling poultices for the head and joints and for
podagra.

In 1845, the herb tips were mentioned for internal adminis-
tration for gonorrhea, angina pectoris and choking fits. It was
not until the nineteenth century that Indian hemp was
described as having a euphoric effect; it was used for
insomnia, neuralgia, painful rheumatism, painful gastrointes-

MARIJUANA/501

tinal disorders, cholera, tetanus, epilepsy, strychnine poison-
ing, acute bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma, impending
abortion and weak contractions. The extract was used as a
sedative and mild soporific.

Current literature on phytotherapeutic drugs cite as indica-
tions for Indian hemp: painful disorders of the alimentary
canal such as ulcers or cancer; respiratory disorders such as
asthma, emphysema or chronic bronchitis; neuralgia, mi-
graine; urinary tract disorders; mental disorders such as
anxiety, neurasthenia or hysteria.

Dronabinol (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, Marinol®) is
marketed as an appetite stimulant in the treatment of AIDS-
related anorexia and as an antiemetic for chemotherapy-
induced emeses.

Indian and Chinese Medicine: In early Indian and Chinese
me'dicine, it was used for nervous depressive states, insom-
nia, vomiting, tetanus and coughs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The intake x>fLtoxic dosages, as is common with the
smoking of cannabis, leads almost at once to euphoric states
(pronounced gaiety, laughing fits) with exaggerated appre-
hension of sensual impressions. Alterations in the perception
of time and space, as well as acoustical, visual and sensory
hallucinations, lasting for 2 to 3 hours are common in higher
dosages.

Driving ability can be disturbed for as long as 8 hours.
Although only rarely reported, acute poisoning symptoms
include nausea, vomiting, tear flow, hacking cough, distur-
bance of cardiac function and numbness of the limbs.
Despite its widespread use as a recreational drug, instances
of death are very rare. The results of chronic abuse are
laryngitis, bronchitis, apathy, psychic decline and distur-
bances of genital functions.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Marijuana is widely used as an
illegal recreational drug. It is usually either smoked or eaten
to produce mind-altering effects. The extracted or syntheti-
cally produced delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol component is
used legally in capsule form for oral administration.

How Supplied:
Capsules — (Marinol®) 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg

Dried Herb

Daily Dosage: The former average oral single dose of the
drug was 0.1 gm.

----- PAGE 753 -----
502/MARIJUANA

Appetite stimulation — (Marinol®) 2.5 mg to 10 mg twice
daily

Antiemetic (Marinol®) 5 mg/m? to 15 mg/m? four to six

times daily

Narcotic — hash ..and tobacco are mixed. | cigarette contains
0.5 gm to 1 gm of the drug with at least 5 mg to 10 mg d-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol for the psychotropic effect. More exact
dosages are almost impossible to stipulate due to the
varieties of action of the different cannaboids and because of
varying breathing techniques.

Storage: Store with care, protected from light. Studies have

shown that 9-tetrahydrocannabinol has a strong affinity with
synthetics and rubber and is easily absorbed by them.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Cannabis: Hanf als Nutzpflanze. In: DAZ
135(27):2538-2541. 1995.

Anonym, Rezeptorforschung: Korpereigener Ligand des
Cannabis-Rezeptors isoliert. In: DAZ 133(24):2214. 1993.

Bayewitch M, Rhee MH, Avidor-Reiss T, Breuer A,
Mechoulam R, Vogel Z Cannabis sativa - deceptive weed? S
Afr Med J, 271:1269-70, 1995 Dec

Bonnin A et al Effects of perinatal exposure to delta 9-
tetrahydrocannabinol on the fetal and early postnatal
development of tyrosine hydroxylase-containing neurons in rat
brain. J Mol Neurosci, 7:291-308, 1996 Winter

Castle DJ, Ames FR Cannabis and the brain. Aust N Z J
Psychiatry, 30:179-83, 1996 Apr

Clarke CC, Marijuana botany. In: And/Or Press, Berkeley,
California. 1981.

DrogenmiPbrauch: Drogen im Straf3enverkehr. In: DAZ
134(27):2575. 1994.

Evans ASp“fafc; 11985) J Pharm Pharmacol.
Evans AT et al."Y1987) FEBS 211:119.
Evans AT et al., (1987) Biochem Pharmacol 36:2035.

Evans FJ, Cannabinoids - The separation of central from
peripheral effects on a structural basis. In: PM 57:60. 1991.

Fairbairn JW et al., J Pharm Pharmacol 28:130.
Fairbairn JW, Pickens JT (1981) Br. J Pharmacol 72:401.
Gil EW et al., (1970) Nature 228:135.

Goedecke H, Karkos J, Die arzneiliche Verwendung von
Cannabisprodukten. In: DAZ 136(34):2859-2862. 1996.

Jungmayr P, Rauschmittel: Macht Marihuana dumm? In: DAZ
136(34):2867-2868. 1996.

Kovar KA, Cannabis - was ist das? In: DAZ 132(43):2302.
1992.

Nahas, B, In: Marihuana in Science and Medicine. Nahas G
(Ed.) Raven Press New York. 1984.

Paris RR et al., (1976) Plant Med Phytother 10:144.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Ross SA, ElSohly MA, The volatile oil composition of fresh
and air-dried buds of Cannabis. In: JNP 59(1):49-51. 1996.

Ruh MF, Taylor JA, Howlett AC, Welshons WV Failure of
cannabinoid compounds to stimulate estrogen receptors.
Biochem Pharmacol, 53:35-41, 1997 Jan 10

Ruh MF, Taylor JA, Howlett AC, Welshons WV The volatile
oil composition of fresh and air-dried buds of Cannabis sativa.
J Nat Prod, 53:49-51, 1996 Jan

Segelman A et al., (1977) J Pharm Sci 66:1358.

Taschner KL, Drogen und Stra|3enverkehr. In: DAZ
134(35):3299. 1994.

Taura F, Morimoto S, Shoyama Y Three acyclic bis-
phenylpropane lignanamides from fruits of Cannabis sativa.
Phytochemistry, 271:1003-7, 1995 Mar

Turner CE et a!., (1980) J Nat Prod 43:169.

Vidal C, Fuente R, Iglesias A, Saez A Bronchial asthma due to
Cannabis sativa seed. Allergy, 40:647-9, 1991 Nov

Yamamoto I, Matsunaga T, Kobayashi H, Watanabe K,
Yoshimura H Analysis and pharmacotoxicity of feruloyltyramine
as a new constituent and p-coumaroyltyramine in Cannabis
sativa L. Pharmacol Biochem Behav, 40:465-9, 1991 Nov

Yamaudi T, (1975) Phytochemistry 14:2189.

Further information in: ——

Barrett ML et al Biochem Pharmacol 34 (1985), 2019
Burstein S, Ozman K Biochem Pharmacol 34 (1982), 2019

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Gruenwald J, Brendler T, Jaenicke C (Eds) Physicians Desk
Reference for Herbal Medicines. Medical Economics Company
Inc., Montvale, 1998

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hernandez ML, Garcia-Gil L, Berrendero F, Ramos JA,
Fernandez-Ruiz JJ delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol increases
activity of tyrosine hydroxylase in cultured fetal mesencephalic
neurons. J Mol Neurosci, 8:83-91, 1997 Apr

Lercker G, Bocci F, Frega N, Bortolomeazzi R Cannabinoid
acids analysis. Farmaco, 40:367-78, 1992 Mar

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Mackie K, Hille B Cannabinoids inhibit N-type calcium
channels in neuroblastoma-glioma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A, 89:3825-9, 1992 May 1

Mackie K, Hille B Passive consumption of marijuana through
milk: a low level chronic exposure to delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol(THC). J Toxicol Clin Toxicol, 89:255-60,
1990

----- PAGE 754 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Navarro M, Rubio P, de Fonseca FR Behavioural consequences
of maternal exposure to natural cannabinoids in rats.
Psychopharmacology (Berl), 122:1-14, 1995 Nov

“ Romero J, Garcia-Palomero E, Lin SY, Ramos JA, Makriyannis

A, Ferandez-Ruiz JJ Cannabis sativa—a plea for
decriminalisation. S Aft Med J, 58:1268-9, 1995 Dec

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Thomas BF, Adams IB, Mascarella SW, Martin BR, Razdan
RK Structure-activity analysis of anandamide analogs:
relationship to a cannabinoid pharmacophore. J Med Chem,
58:471-9, 1996 Jan 19

Marrubium vulgare
See Horehound

Marsdenia condurango

See Condurango

Margli Blazing Star

Liatris spicata*' ~

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is compound spikes of
carmine red flowers, 4 to 8 mm in diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and has an
erect, leafy stem up 2 m. The leaves are opposite, up to 30
cm long and | cm wide. The rhizome is | cm or more in
diameter. It is gnarled with several cup-shaped scars. The
rhizome is brownish and slightly wrinkled on the outside.
Inside it is whitish with dark gray spots.

Characteristics: The root is very solid. The taste is bitter,
and the odor is faintly aromatic, resembling cedar.

Habitat: U.S., cultivated in parts of Europe.

Production: Marsh Blazing Star is the rhizome of Liatris
spicata.

MARSH MARIGOLD/503

Other Names: Button Snakeroot, Gay-Feather, Backache
Root, Colic Root, Devil's Bite

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Coumarin

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercetin-3-O-glucoside

EFFECTS
Main active principle: Coumarin. There is no reliable
information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Marsh Blazing Star has been used for
disorders of the kidney, dysmenorrhea, as a diuretic and for
gonorrhea treatment.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground drug as an infusion.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lowry JB, (1973) Nature 241:61.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Seshadri TF, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:881.

Marsh Marigold

Caltha palustris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried aerial part
of the flowering plant

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are about 4 cm in diameter.
The involucre is simple and has 5 or more yolk-yellow, 12 to
18 mm long ovate bracts, that are glossy greenish on the
outside. There are numerous stamens and 5 to 8 ovaries. The
fruit is a star-shaped follicle with a short beak. The seeds are
dark brown to black, measuring about 2.5 cm long by 1.3 cm
wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Caltha palustris is a 15 to 30 cm high
perennial marsh plant with a sturdy, many-headed rhizome.
The glabrous, hollow stem is ascending or decumbent. The
leaves are dark green and have an oily-glossy, cordate to
reniform, crenate or serrate-margined leaf blade. The petioles

----- PAGE 755 -----
504/MARSH MARIGOLD

are grooved. The cauline leaves have shorter petioles and are
smaller, clasping, and often have a membranous leaf sheath.

Characteristics: The plant is highly poisonous.

Habitat: Caltha palustris is found in all temperate regions of
the Northern Hemisphere.

Other Names: Cowslip, Kingcups, Water Blobs, Horse
Blobs, Bull's Eyes, Leopard's Foot, Meadow Routs, Verru-
caria, Solsequia, Sponsa Solis, Palsy Root, Water Dragon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-forming agents: In the freshly harvested
plant, it is presumably the glycoside ranunculin that changes
enzymatically when the plant is cut into small pieces, and
probably also when it is dried. It then changes into the
pungent, volatile protoanemonine that is severely irritating to
skin and mucous membranes but quickly dimerizes to
anemonine; when dried, the plant is not capable of protoane-
monine formation

Triterpene saponins: including hederagenin glycosides
Triterpene lactones: caltholid, palustrolid

Isoquinoline alkaloids (aporphine type, very small quanti-
ties): including corytuberine, magnoflorine, protopine

EFFECTS
The drug lowers cholesterol levels and raises blood sugar
levels in rats subsequent to oral administration (according to
unavailable Russian research). There are also reports of anti-
inflammatory effects on formaldehyde-induced inflamma-
tion.

The drug contains alkaloids of the benzylisoquinoline type
(magnoflorine, triterpene saponins, triterpene lactones). In
animal tests magnoj3ori«e temporally lowejs blood pressure
and induces hypothermia in mice. An effect on the nicotine
receptor in the parasympathetic nervous system is under
discussion.

Insufficient information is available for an authoritative
assessment of these effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Marsh Marigold was formerly used for
jaundice, liver and bilious complaints. Some Native Ameri-
can tribes and those practicing Russian folk medicine used
the plant for dressing and cleansing skin lesions and sores.
When administered internally, it is meant to have a laxative
and diuretic effect. Since this has not been sufficiently
proven, and the side effects of Marsh Marigold are so
dangerous, its internal use is not recommended.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used externally for skin
rashes.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug.

Extended skin contact with the freshly harvested, bruised
plant can lead to treatment-resistant blisters and cauteriza-
tions due to the release of protoanemonine, which is severely
uritating to skin and mucous membranes.

If taken internally, large quantities could lead to severe
irritation of the gastrointestinal tract, combined with colic
and diarrhea, as well as with irritation of the urinary drainage
passages.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptomatic treatment for external contact should consist of
irrigation with diluted potassium permanganate solution
followed by mucilage. Ingestion of the drug should be
treated with gastric lavage followed by activated charcoal.
The toxicity of this plant is less than that of many other
Ranunculaceae (Anemones nemorosae) due to the relatively
low levels of protoanemonine-forming agents.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:-Because of the herb's toxicity, its
use is not recommended other than topically and as an
extract.

LITERATURE
Bhandari P et al., Triterpenoid saponins fiom Caltha palsutris.
In: PM 53(1):98-100. 1987.

Bhandari P et al., Two nortriterpene lactones from Caltha
palustris. In: PH 23(8): 1699-1702. 1984.

Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Bruni A et al., Protoanemonin detection in Caltha palustris. In:
JNP 49(6): 1172-1173. 1986."

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Gcs Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drpgen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 756 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Marshmallow

Althaea officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Marshmallow is'available from a number of manufacturers,

often as Marshmallow Root.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the mallow
flowers, leaves, syrup and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The reddish-white flowers are usually in
axillary or terminal clusters. The 6 to 9 sepals of the epicalyx
are fused at the base, pointed and 8 to 10 mm long. There are
5 sepals, 5 heart-shaped petals and numerous stamens fused
together with the anthers to a column. The ovaries are in a
ring. There are numerous styles. The mericarps are smooth
and downy. The 5 to 8 mm fruit is disc-like and breaks up
into the mericarps, which are downy on the outside and often
have fine, branched and radiating ribs. The seeds are dark-
brown, glabrous, kidney-shaped and somewhat compressed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 60 to 120 cm high, hardy,
velvety plant has a thick erect root up to 50 cm long by a few
cm with secondary roots. The erect, succulent stem is usually
woody at the base but unbranched. The leaves are short-
petioled with an ovate, acute leaf-blade. The secondary
leaves are narrow and drooping. The lower leaves are 5-
lobed, and the upper cauline leaves are often triangular,
wider than they are long, and irregularly and roughly dentate.

Habitat: The plant was originally indigenous to Asia and
then spread westward to southeast Europe and eastward to
China. In temperate latitudes, Marshmallow is established as
a gardSFplant.

Production: Marshmallow root consists of the dried root,
unpeeled or peeled, of Althaea officinalis. The root cultures
are harvested from October to November, and after cleaning,
are carefully dried at a maximum temperature of 35° C.
Marshmallow leaves consist of the dried leaves of Althaea
officinalis. After harvest, the leaves are dried at a tempera-
ture of 40° C.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with other Althea
species.

Other Names: Moorish Mallow, Cheeses, White Maoow,
Althea, Mortification Root, Sweet Weed, Wymote, Mallards,
Schloss Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Mucilages: mixture of colloidally soluble polysaccharides,
particularly galacturonic rhamnans, arabinogalactans, ara-
bans and glucans

MARSHMALLOW /505

Pectins

Starch

EFFECTS

The drug alleviates local irritation, inhibits mucociliary
activity, stimulates phagocytosis, and functions as an anti-
inflammatory and anticomplementary agent, immune stimu-
lant and hypoglycemic. Efficacy has been demonstrated
when used as a gargle for inflammation of the mucous
membrane of the mouth and throat.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Uses of the drug include irritation of the
oral and pharyngeal mucosa and associated dry cough; mild
inflammation of the gastric mucosa; as cataplasm for light
inflammations and skin burns; and for insect bites. In folk
medicine, marshmallow is employed for catarrh of the
mouth, throat, gastrointestinal tract and urinary tract, as well
as for inflammation, ulcers, abscesses, burns, constipation
and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Drug Interactions: The absorption of other drugs taken
simultaneously may be delayed.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cut leaves for aqueous extracts as
well as other galenic preparations for internal use. Cut or
ground root for aqueous extracts as well as other galenic
preparations for internal use. Marshmallow syrup is to be
used only for treatment of dry coughs.

Note: Diabetics need to consider sugar concentration of
marshmallow syrup.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 460 mg

Cough mixture

Drops

Liquid — Generally in syrup form, which is also called
"snail juice": (1:1)

Powder

Tablets (coated and uncoated)

Preparation: To prepare a tea, use 10 to 15 g with 150 ml of
cold water and allow to stand for 90 minutes, then warm to

drink.

----- PAGE 757 -----
506 /MARSHMALLOW

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 6 gm of the root
and 5 gm of the leaf. The tea dosage is several cups of the
slightly warmed tea taken during the course of the day. A
single dose of the syrup is 10 gm.

Storage: The drug should be protected from light sources
and insects.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Franz G, (1986) Planta Med 6:76P.
Capek P, et al., Carbohydr Res 164:443. 1987.

Franz G, Madaus A, Stabilitat von Polysacchariden.
Untersuchungen am Beispiel des Eibischschleims. In: DAZ
130(40):2194. 1990.

Franz G, PM 14:90. 1966.

Franz G, PM 55:493. 1989.

Gudej J, (1981) Acta Pol Pharm 38:385.

Gudej J, Bieganowska HL, Chromatographia 30:333. 1990.
Gudej J, PM 57:284. 1991.

Hahn-Deinstrop E, Eibischwurzel Identifizierung von
Eibischwurzel-Extrakt und Gehaltsbestimmung in einem Instant-
Tee. In: DAZ 135(13): 1147-1149. 1995.

Kardosova A, et al., (1983) Coll Czech Commun 45:2082.
Kochich P, et al., (1983) Sov J Bioorg Chem 9(2): 121.

Nosal'ova G, Strapkova A, Kardosova A, Capek P, Zatureck'y
L, Bukovska E, Antitussive Wirkung des Extraktes und der

Polysaccharide aus Eibisch (Althaea officinalis L. var. robusta).
In: PA 47(3):224-226. 1992.

Nosolova G, et al., PA 47:224. 1993.
Shimizu N, Tomoda T, Chem Pharm Bull 33:5539. 1985.

Tomoda M et al., (1977) Chem Pharm Bull 25:1357.
Tomodalvf*ral\(19.80X.Chem Pharm Bull 28:824%
Tomoda M et al., (1987) Planta Med 53(1):8.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Martagon

Lilium martagon

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, stem
and flowers, which are collected when the plant is complete-

ly mature.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is terminal and
racemous with 3 to 10 inclined flowers. The flower buds are
globose or oblong-ovate. The tepal petals are 3 to 3.5 cm
ong, involute and orange with dark spots. They contain a
ciliate mauve honey gland. The anthers are red. The fruit is a
2-winged capsule witJi an erect fruit stem. The seeds are flat,
ight brown and 6 to 8 mm long. Since the seeds do not ripen
in northern regions, propagation takes place by means of
ulbils, which occur at the leaf axils. Flowers are produced

during the third year of growth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, 30 to 60 cm
igh or higher. The bulb is golden yellow, ovate and about 5
cm long. The stem is erect, round, glabrous or with short
rough hairs on the upper section. The stem is green or
spotted red and leafy in the middle. The leaves are 7 to 11
ribbed, oblong-spatulate, shortly ciliated and up to 15 cm
long.

Habitat: The plant comes from China and Japan, but is also
cultivated in central and southern Europe.

Production: Martagon is the tuber of Lilium martagon.
Other Names: Purple Turk's Cap Lily, Turk's Cap

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Soluble polysaccharides
Starch

Gamma-methylene glutamic acid
Tuliposide
The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
No information is available.

----- PAGE 758 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a diuretic and in the
treatment of dysmenorrhea. It is used externally for ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: All the above uses are also employed in
homeopathic medicine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Martagon is available as cut drug
for internal use in infusions and external use in poultices.
Homeopathic dilutions are also available.

LITERATURE
Satou T, Mimaki Y, Kuroda M, Sashida Y, Hatakeyama Y, A
pyrroline glucoside ester and steroidal saponins from Lilium
martagon. Phytochemistry, 41:1225-30, 1996 Mar.

Masterwort
Peucedanum ostruthium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fnut: The white flowers form many-blossomed
compound umbels. There is no involucre. The epicalyx has
only a few leaves. The calyx is indistinct The petals have
indented, pointed tips.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 50 to 100 cm
high. X“rhj.zome is gray-brown and produces runners. The
stem is rounds sirghtiy grooved and glabrous. The basal
leaves are doubly trifoliate. The leaflets are ovate to oblong,
about 4 cm wide, roughly serrate and pale green beneath.
The lateral leaflets are dipinnate. The terminal leaflet is
tripinnate. The cauline leaves are small with a bulbous,
membranous sheath.

Characteristics: Masterwort has an aromatic-bitter taste.
Habitat: The plant grows in central Europe.

Production: Masterwort rootstock is the rhizome of Peuceda-
num ostruthium. The thickened rhizomes are harvested.
These are dug up in autumn or spring, then cleaned, freed
from any root or green residue, cut and dried at a
temperature of 35° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components alpha-pinene, (+)-phellan-
drene, (+)-limonene, esters of isobutyric and isovaleric acid

MASTERWORT/S507

Furocoumarins: in particular imperatorin, oxypeucedanin,
osthrutol gamma-chromones: peucenine

Phthalides
Polyynes

EFFECTS
Masterwort is said to be stomachic and to have a mild
sedative effect. Its main action is as a diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Masterwort is used for bloating, flatulence,
Roemheld syndrome, digestive disorders, weak stomach and
intestinal catarrh.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Light-skinned individuals may experi-
ence an increase in UV-sensitivity, due to the phototoxic
effect of the furocoumarins.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Masterwort is obsolete as a drug in
German-speaking countries. It is occasionally used as a
constituent in medicinal preparations in combination with
other bitters. It is administered as a powder or as an infusion.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use a cold extraction of
1 teaspoonful of the drug over a period of 8 hours.

Daily Dosage:
Infusion — Can be drunk throughout the day.

Powder — 0.5 gm to 2 gm can be taken 2 to 3 times daily.

Storage: Store in a dry place, in closed containers.

LITERATURE
Gijbels MIM et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 61(1):17.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schimmer O et al., (1980) Planta Med 40(1):68.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 759 -----
508/MASTIC TREE

Mastic Tree

Pistacia lentiscus

DESCRIPTION
Medicitml Parts: The medicinal part is the resin.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is compact and spike-
like. The flowers are yellowish or purplish. The drupe is
approximately 4 mm, globose, apiculate and is red, but later
turns black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a small evergreen tree or
shrub | to 8 m high. The trees are said to be exclusively
male. The leaves are bipinnate. The 8 to 12 leaflets measure
I to 5 cm by 0.5 to 15 cm. They are lanceolate to ovate-
lanceolate, mucronate and coriaceous. The rhachis is broadly
winged. The petioles are glabrous.

Habitat: The tree thrives in the Mediterranean region,
Portugal, Turkey, on the Canaries and in tropical Africa.

Production: Mastic resin is the resin from the trunk of
Pistacia lentiscus.

Other Names: Lentisk

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Resins (90%): chief components are the triterpenes mastic
acid, isomastic acid, oleanolic acid and tirucallol

Volatile oil (I-3%): including alpha-pinene, myrcene, lina-
lool, beta-pinene, beta-caryophyllene (constituents vary a
great deal)

EFFECTS®*4,_
In animal experiments Mastic is ulcer protective. The
amaroids and essential oil are astringent and aromatic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Mastic Tree resin was formerly used in
dentistry, as a material for fillings. The masticated resin
releases substances that freshen the breath and tighten the

gums.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pediatric Use: There is an occasional risk of diarrhea in
small children.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The resin is used for the production
of chewing gum and is used in the food and drink industries.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE
AlSaid MS et al., Evaluation of Mastic, a crude drug obtained
from Pistacia lentiscus for gastric and duodenal anti-ulcer
activity. In: ETH 15:271. 1986.

Mamer FJ, Freyer A, Lex J, Triterpenoids fiom gum Mastic,
the resin of Pistacia lentiscus. In: PH 30(11):3709-3712. 1991.
Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Mate

Ilex paraguariensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried or roasted
leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are axillary and are in
clusters of 40 to 50. They have a 4 to 5 sepaled calyx and 4
to 5 petalled corolla, are unisexual and dioecious. The fruit is
a globoid reddish drupe with 5 to 8 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen shrub or
tree up to 20 m tall with pale bark and an oblong-oval crown.
The leaves are alternate, obovate, acuminate with a crenate
or serrate margin. They are dark green above and pale green
beneath and are tough, coriaceous and 6 to 20 cm long and 3

to 9 cm wide.

Characteristics: The taste is astringent and bitter. The odor
is characteristic and ar6matic.

Habitat: The plant is only found in South America between
the 20th and 30th parallel.

Production: Mate consists of the dried leaf and leaf stem of
Ilex paraguariensis. It is harvested every 2 years from May to
September, then dried and cut.

Other Names: Yerba Mate, Jesuit's Tea, Paraguay Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Purine alkaloids: chief alkaloids caffeine (0.4-2.4%) and

theobromine (0.3-0.5%)

Cajfeic acid derivatives: including among others chlorogenic
acid, neochlorogenic acid, cryptochlorogenic acid

Flavonoids: including among others rutin, isoquercitrin,
kaempferol glycosides

Triterpene saponins (mate saponins)

T™.

----- PAGE 760 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Nitrite glycosides: menisdaurin, not cyanogenic
Volatile oil

EFFECTS
The main active principles are caffeine in varying amounts,
tannins and small amounts of essential oil. Depending on the
caffeine content the drug can display analeptic, diuretic,
positively inotropic and positively chronotropic, glycogeno-
lytic and lipolytic effects.

The centrally stimulating effect of the drug is due to the
chlorogenic acids.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:
« Lack of stamina

Mate is used for mental and physical fatigue.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Mate is used internally for
ulcers, rheumatism, anemia, neurasthenia, depression, as a
diuretic for oliguria and as a prophylaxis against fever and
infections. Externally Mate is used as a poultice for ulcers
and inflammation.

Homeopathic Uses: Ilex paraguariensis is used to treat poor
digestion.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Mate is available as comminuted
herb ffi‘dnfusions, herb powder and as galenic preparations
for internal use.“nie-drug is available as filter teas in mono
tea form and in various tea combinations such as bladder and
kidney teas.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour water that has just
been brought to boil over 1 teaspoonful drug (2 gm) and
leave to draw for 5 to 10 minutes, then strain. The briefly
infused drink is more stimulating, less astringent and tastes
better (caffeine dissolves more quickly than the tannins).

Roasted leaves: The dried leaves are heated for 20 minutes to
100° C and then rinsed with water. The leaves are stored for
3 to 4 days to allow the taste and aroma to develop (DAC86).

Daily Dosage: 3 gm of drug.
Tea: as required (1 teaspoon corresponds to 2 gm drug).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

MATICO/509

LITERATURE
Baltassat F et al., (1985) Plant Med Phytother 18(4): 194.
Gosmann G et al., Triterpenoid saponins from Ilex
paraguariensis. In: JNP 58(3):438-441. 1995.

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Ilex paraguariensis).

Kraemer KH et al., A new polar saponin from Ilex
paraguariensis. In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):62.
1995.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.),Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Matico

Piper elongatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the leaf.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a long spike of up to
20 cm, opposite the leaf. The flowers have no tepals and are
very small with 4 stamens and an obovoid ovary with a very
short 3-stigmaed style’. The fruit is a very narrow, black, 1-
seeded drupe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Piper elongatum is a shrub that
typically grows to over 2 m high. The leaves are alternate,
entire, up to 20 cm long and 4 cm wide, short petiolate and
coriaceous. The lamina is elongate-lanceolate, long acumi-
nate and punctate with oil glands. The leaf base is unevenly
cordate; the petiole is winged and clasps the stem. The stem
is round, conspicuously jointed and pubescent toward the

top.
Characteristics: The leaves have an aromatic smell when
rubbed and a bitter, mildly astringent taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Argentina, Columbia and
Tanzania.

Production: Piper elongatum is cultivated as a medicinal
plant in the countries of origin. Matico leaves are the dried
leaves of Piper elongatum. The fresh leaves are also used
medicinally.

----- PAGE 761 -----
510/MATICO

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can occur widi Piper
aduncum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.3 to 6.0%): chief component dill apiol, as well
as asaltone, parsley apiol

Tannins
Sesquiterpene: maticin

EFFECTS
Use as a hemostyptic could possibly be a result of the tannin
content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The hemostyptic effect of the leaves is used
externally for bleeding wounds and in the treatment of
ulcers. Internally, it is used for urogenital complaints
(primarily bacterial infections), atonic diarrhea and dysen-
tery. In Peru, Matico is considered to be an aphrodisiac. It
has also been used for minor wounds such as leech bites and
after tooth extraction.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The leaves are administered as
whole, cut and powdered forms for internal and external use.

Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

Daily Dosage:
Powder — 0.5 to 2 g drug, 3 to 4 times daily

Infusion — single dose: 1 g drug per cup; or 10% infusion:
taken 3 or 4 times daily.

LITERATURE. ,*<" *r ~
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Matricaria Recutita

See German Chamomile

Mayapple
Podophyllum peltatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome
and the resin extracted from it.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The solitary white flowers are located in
the stem bifurcation between 2 leaves. When the flower
drops, the developing fruit swells to me size and shape of a
2.5 to 5 cm long rosehip. It is yellow and fleshy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial reaching a
height of 40 cm. It has a bifurcated, 45 cm high stem and
deeply indented, umbrella-like, hand-sized leaves. The
rhizome is reddish-brown and is 0.5 cm in diameter.
Depending on the time of harvesting, the surface of the
rhizome may be smooth or wrinkled. Nodes occur at
intervals of 3 to 5 cm, and the fracture is whitish.

Characteristics: The odor is unpleasant and acrid.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northeast North America.

Production: Mayapple rhizome consists of the dried rhizome
and connected roots of Podophyllum peltatum. Mayapple
resin consists of the resin of the dried and aged rhizome of
Podophyllum peltatum.

Not to be Confused With: Mayapple should not be confused
with English Mandrake or Bryonia dioica.

Other Names: Duck's Foot, Ground Lemon, Hog Apple,
Indian Apple, Mandrake, Raccoon Berry, Wild Lemon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE ROOT

Podophyllin: mixture of ethanol-soluble extractive material
from the root

Lignans: chief components podophyllotoxin (20%), includ-
ing as well, alpha-peltatin (5%), beta-peltatin (10%), 4'-
dimethyl podophyllotoxin, dioxypodophyllotoxin

EFFECTS
The drug is antimitotic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

M Warts

Preparations of Mayapple are used externally for removal of
pointed condyloma. The treated skin surface must not be
larger than 25 sq. cm. Be sure to protect skin adjacent to the
treated area.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: The drug is severely irritating to skin and mucous
membranes. External administration of the drug over large
skin areas can also bring about resorptive poisonings. The
drug should not be taken internally in allophathic medicine.
With external use, die skin area to be treated should not
exceed 25 sq. cm. The drug serves as an industrial drug for

----- PAGE 762 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

the extraction of podophyllotoxin and its semi-synthetic
derivatives that are used in tumor therapy.

Use in Pregnancy: The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

In dosages over 0.2 gm, it causes severe abdominal pain,
bloody-watery diarrhea, vomiting of liquid bile, dizziness,
headache, coordination disorders, spasms, nephritis, later
collapse and death in coma through respiratory failure.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate) and instillation of
activated charcoal, the therapy for poisonings consists of
treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution
and treating possible cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbon-
ate infusions. In case of shock, plasma volume expanders
should be used. Monitoring of kidney function is essential.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The dried rhizome is used for
production of resin exclusively for external application.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 1.5 to 3.0 gm root, 15 to
3.0 gm liquid extract or 2.5 to 7.5 gm tincture.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Dermatologie: Gemeine Warze, Flachwarze und spitze
Feigwarze. In: DAZ B4(22):2059. 1994.

Auterhoff H, May O, (1958) Planta Med 6:240.
Chatterjee R, (1952) Econ Bot 6:342.
Dewick P et al., (1982) Phytochemistry 20:2277.

Enzell CR, Wahlberg I, Aaasen AI, Fortschr Chem Org
NaturStSfle 34:1. 1977.

Franz G, Biogene Cytostatica. In: DAZ 13t)(35):f003. 1990.
Hartwell JL, Detly WE, (1950) J Am. Chem Soc 72:246.

Jardine I, In: Anticancer Agents Based on Natural Product
Models, Ed. Cassady JM, Douros JD., Academic Press 1980.

MacRae WD, Towers GHN, Biological activities of lignans. In:
PH 23(6): 1207-1220. 1984.

Stoll A et al, (1954) J Am Chem Soc 76:5004, 6431.

Stoll A et al., (1955) J Am. Chem Soc 77:1710.

Wartburg A et al., (1957) Helv Chim. Acta 40:1331.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

MEADOWSWEET /511

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Maytenus ilicifolia

See Congorosa

Meadowsweet
Filipendula ulmaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flowers,
the dried aerial parts ~6f the flowering plant, and the fresh
underground and aerial parts of the flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The radial flowers are in terminal
compound, loose cymes arranged with erect, very irregular
branches. The 5 to 6 free sepals are triangular, pointed, 1 mm
long, downy on the outside and fused to the flat receptacle at
the base. The 5 to 6 petals are obviate, narrowed to a short
stem, yellowish white and 2 to 5 mm long. The ovaries are
glabrous or downy and have a flattened-stigma-bearing style
under 1 mm. The one-seeded indehiscent fruit twine in a
spiral.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and grows to
about 50 to 200 cm high. The stem is erect, simple or
branched above, woody below, angular, usually glabrous or
occasionally tomentose. The leaves are alternate, long-
petioled to almost sessile, irregularly odd-pinnate with paired
opposite pinna. These are ovate, rounded at the base or short-
wedge-shaped, double serrate to dentate. The pinna is dark
green and usually glabrous above and gray to white
tomentose beneath and only pubescent on the ribs.

Characteristics: The leaves smell very different from the
flowers, having a pleasant, almond-like fragrance.

Habitat: The plant is found in northern and southern Europe,
North America and northern Asia.

Production: Meadowsweet flower consists of the dried
flower of Filipendula ulmaria (syn. Spiraea ulmaria), as well
as its preparations. Meadowsweet herb consists of the dried

----- PAGE 763 -----
512/MEADOWSWEET

above-ground parts of Filipendula ulmaria, harvested during
flowering season, as well as its preparations. The plant is
combed off during the flowering season and air-dried in a
dark place.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with elder
flowers and Filipendula hexapetala.

Other Names: Bridewort, Dolloff, Meadsweet, Meadow
Queen, Meadow-Wort, Queen of the Meadow, Lady of the
Meadow, Spireaea ulmaria

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MEADOWSWEET FLOWER

Flavonoids: chief components - spiraeoside (quercetin-4'-0-
glucosides, 3-4%), further including among others kaempfer-
ol-4'-0-glucosides, hyperoside, rutin

Volatile oil (0.2%): chief components salicylaldehyde and
methyl salicylate (yielded through dehydration from mono-
tropitin - salicylaldehyde primveroside - and spiraeine -
salicylic acid ester primveroside), further, a little vanillin and
heliotropine

Tannins: ellagic tannins

EFFECTS: MEADOWSWEET FLOWER

Meadowsweet has antiphlogistic and astringent effects. The
drug, which contains salicylate, has an antimicrobial, antipy-
retic and diuretic effect. In animal tests the flavonoid fraction
had a positive effect on die healing of stomach ulcers and a
tone-increasing effect on smootJi muscle was observed.

COMPOUNDS: MEADOWSWEET HERB
Etheric oil (traces): including salicylic acid ester

Flavonoids: including rutin, hyperoside, quercetin-3-O-glu-
curonide, auercetin-3-O-arabinoside

Tannins: ellagictafinins

EFFECTS: MEADOWSWEET HERB

The drug, which contains salicylate, has an antimicrobial,
antipyretic and diuretic effect. In animal tests the flavonoid
fraction had a positive effect on the healing of stomach
ulcers and a tone-increasing effect on smooth muscle was
observed.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
* Bronchitis
« Fever and cold

Meadowsweet is used as supportive therapy for colds, for
febrile colds, and as a diuretic.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Meadowsweet is used as a
diuretic, for rheumatism of the joints and muscles, for gout,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

for bladder and kidney disease and for headaches. Meadow-
sweet herb is used for stomach complaints with hyperacidity,
prophylaxis and therapy of stomach ulcers and for diarrhea
in children.

Homeopathic Uses: Filipendula ulmaria is used for rheuma-
tism and inflammation of mucous membrane.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Preparations are contraindicated when sensitivity to salicy-
late exists.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with die proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage can lead to queasiness and stomach complaints.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and other galenic
preparations for infusions. Meadowsweet flower is contained
in various tea mixtures which are used for the flu,
rheumatism, kidney and bladder inflammations.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
3 to 6 gm cut drug, steam for 10 minutes and then strain.
Fluid extract (herb): 1:1 in 25% ethanol (BHP83). Tincture
(herb): 1:5 in 45% ethanol (BHP83)

Daily Dosage: 2.5 to 3.5 gm of Meadowsweet flower or 4 to
5 gm Meadowsweet herb. Infusion dosage is 1 cup several

times a day (1 tsp. = 14 gm drug). Liquid extract (herb)
daily dose: 1.5 to 6 ml; Tincture (herb) daily dose: 2 to 4 ml

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute),or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic); from
D6: parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day (HAB1)

Storage: Should be protected from light and moisture.
LITERATURE

Bamaulov OD, (1978) Rastit Resur 14(4):573.

Barnaulov OD et al., (1977) Rastit Resur 13(4):661.
Barnaulov OD, Denisenko P, (19809 Farmakol Toksicol
43(6):700.

Csedo K et al., The antibiotic activity of Filipendula ulmaria.
1988. In: PM 59(7)75. 1993.

Genig AY efal., (1977) Mater S'ezola Farm B SSR 3:162.

Grafe AK, Besonderheiten der Arzneimitteltherapie im
Sauglings- und Kindesalter. In: PZ 140(30):2659-2667. 1995.

Haslam E et al., (1985) Ann Proc Phytochemistry Soc Eur 25:
252.

Horhammer L et al., Arch Pharm 61:133. 1956.
I Kasamovski LS, (1962) Tr Khar'kovsk Farmats Inst 2:23.

----- PAGE 764 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS MERCURY HERB /513

Lindeman A et al., (1982) Lebensm Wiss Technol. 15(5):286. ari 7 ‘
Thieme H, (1965) Pharmazie 20:113. Mentha ensis var.
piperascens

Valle MG et al., PM 54:181.
Further information in: See Japanese Mint

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992- . .
1994 Mentha longifolia

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3, See English Horsemint
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

4p"

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Mentha piperita

Stuttgart 1997.

See Peppermint

Medicago sativa Mentha pulegium

See Alfalfa
See Pennyroyal

¢ Melaleuca alternifolia

See Tea Tree

Mentha spicata

See Spearmint

Melaleuca leucadendra
See Cajuput

Menyanthes trifoliata

See Bog Bean

Melaleucaea_ viridiftofa —
See Niauli Mercurialis annua

See Mercury Herb

Melilotus officinalis
See Sweet Clover Mercury Herb

Mercurialis annua

m
. . . DESCRIPTION
Melissa officinalis Medicinal Parts: The drug is the flowering plant.
See Lemon Balm Flower and Fruit: The plant has yellow-green flowers. The

male flowers are in tightly packed, interrupted ears, on thin,
hair-like pedicles. They have 12 stamens. The female
flowers are short-petioled in twos or threes in the leaf axils.

Mentha aquatica The style is short or non-existent. There are 2 stigmas. The

See Wild Mint fruit is a 2-headed capsule.

----- PAGE 765 -----
514/MERCURY HERB

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual that grows 20
to 50 cm high. The stem is erect, cross-branched, obtuse,
quadrangular, glabrous and segmented. The leaves are
opposite, petiolate, ovate to lanceolate, light green and have
a ciliate margin.

Characteristics: The plant has an unpleasant smell when
rubbed. The whole plant has no latex.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe and is naturalized in the
eastern U.S.

Production: Mercury Herb is the flowering herb of Mercuri-
alis annua.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Cyanogenic glycosides (small amounts)

Pyridone derivatives (that color the urine red): including
among others hermidin

Saponins (1%)

Amines: including among others, methyl amine (mercuria-
line), ethyl amine, propyl amine, isobutyl amine, isoamyl
amine

Flavonoids: including among others, rutin, narcissine,

isorhamnetin.

Nothing is known regarding the type of the toxins. The
cyanogenic glycosides are probably not responsible for the
toxicity.

EFFECTS
The drug is slightly poisonous, and it can lead to diarrhea
and an overactive bladder. The root and stock act as strong
laxatives.

INDICATIONS ANOUSAGE"
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for suppurating inflamma-
tion, as a laxative and diuretic, and as an adjuvant in the
treatment of gastrointestinal and urinary tract diseases.

Homeopathic Uses: Mercury Herb is used for rheumatism
and colds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The fresh plant, in particular the root and the rhizome, are
considered poisonous. Symptoms of poisoning include
diarrhea, nerve paralysis, and liver and kidney damage.
Poisonings, including fatal ones, are only known among
animals. There are no reports available on the drug's toxicity
in humans. The intake of small doses would likely lead to
nothing more than diarrhea.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is administered ground, as
an extract, in juice and in homeopathic dilutions.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischea Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Mexican Scammony Root

Ipomoea orizabensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried roots and
the steamed etfianol extract from the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has reddish-purple, campanulate
flowers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Mexican Scammony Root is a
twining plant with large cordate leaves. The root tuber is
about 18 to 25 cm long, 9 to 10 cm wide and cylindrical-
fusiform. It is grayish-brown to brownish-black and wrinkled
externally. Inside the section shows irregular concentric
rings and scattered resin glands, resembling jalap.

Characteristics: The taste is acrid and resinous. The odor is
slight.

Habitat: Mexico

Production: Mexican Scammony Root is the root extracted
from Ipomoea orizabensis. Both the root and the yielded
resin are effective as drugs.

Other Names: Ipomoea, Jalap, Mexican Jalap

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glycoretines (12-15%, resinous): polymeric ester glycosides
made up of hydroxy- and dihydroxy fatty acids bonded in
ester-like fashion (including 11-hydroxy palmitic acid =
jalapinolic acid), on the hydroxyl groups of which oligosac-
charide remnants are bonded as glycosides. These bear in
turn short-chained acyl remnants (acetyl, isobutyryl, isovale-

ryl, and tigoyl remnants).

----- PAGE 766 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS

The drug has a strong laxative effect on the small and large
intestines caused by resin (Resina Scammoniae) combined
with ester glycoside mixtures (glycoretine).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations have been used as a very

drastic purgative for constipation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Intestinal colic occurs frequently as a side effect.

Pregnancy: Mexican Scammony Root is contraindicated in
pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosages cause vomiting.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is obsolete as a drug in
many countries. Used on rare occasions in combination
preparations. The same applies to other Ipomoea varieties
e.g., I. turpethum, I. operculata.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 1 gm of drug.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
HandbucJ“det.Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): SpringeriVerlag Berlin, Heidelberg, Ney”* York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Noda N et al,, Tetrahedron 43:3889. 1987.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Shellard EJ! PM 9:146-152. 1961.
Singh S, Stacey BE, (1973) Phytochemistry 121701.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wagner H, (1973) In "Chemistry in Biochemical
Classification", Nobel Symposium (1973).

MEZEREON/S515

Mezereon

Daphne mezereum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark, which is
collected before the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are dark pink. They appear
before the leaves in irregular, sessile clusters usually in
threes. There is a 4-tipped calyx with an external silky-haired
tube. There are 8 stamens in 2 rows and | free ovary. The
fruit consists of a bright red, pea-sized, juicy, ovoid, 1-
seeded berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 50 to 150 cm high
perennial. It is a deciduous, sparsely branched shrub with
reed-like, grayish or yellow-brown branches that are very
tough. The leaves are short-petioled, lanceolate, narrowing
toward the petiole and entire-margined.

Characteristics: Mezereon has a strong, pleasant fragrance.
The plant is poisonous and can be fatal if ingested. It is a
protected species.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe as far as Siberia.
It is cultivated in the U.S., Canada and elsewhere.

Production: Mezereon root, root bark and bark are from
Daphne mezereum. The bark of the trunk and the root are
gathered before flowering, dried and rolled up but with the
phloem facing outward. Care should be taken not to destroy
the plant during the harvest.

Other Names: Spurge Olive, Spurge Laurel, Daphne, Spurge
Flax, Wild Pepper, Dwarf Bay, Camolea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: diterpene esters, daphnane derivatives, including
mezerein, daphnetoxin

Hydroxycoumarins: including umbelliferone, daphnetin,
daphnoretin (dimerous), triumbellin (trimerous) and hy-
droxycoumarin glycosides, for example daphnin, daphnorin

Flavonoids

EFFECTS

The drug acts as a powerful skin stimulant, hallucinogenic
and a rubifacient. A possible immunostimulating effect has
been observed in vitro. Antitumoral, anticoagulant and
abortifacient effects have been observed in animal tests.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Use of Mezeron is no longer recommended
due to its toxicity.

----- PAGE 767 -----
516/MEZEREON

In the past, Mezeron root was used to relieve headache,
toothache, gout, whooping cough, syphilis, constipation and
worm infestation. It was used externally for joint pains and
to increase circulation in the case of rheumatic complaints,
skin conditions and conjunctivitis. The drug is known in old
drug manuals as “'Spanish fly plaster' or Drouotic plaster and
recommended for various pain symptoms.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathic medicine, Daphne
mezereon is used for skin conditions such as cradle cap,
shingles, weeping eczema and encrusted, weeping blisters, as
well as for neuralgia and pains in the bones.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

External contact with the severely irritating toxic diterpenes
of Daphne mezereon causes erysipeloid reddening of the
skin, swelling, blister formation and shedding of the
epidermis. Extended exposure leads to the formation of
necroses. Contact with the eyes causes severe conjunctivitis.
If taken internally, reddening and swelling of the oral
mucous membranes, feeling of thirst, salivation, stomach
pains, vomiting and severe diarrhea occur.

Resorption of the drug may cause headache, dizziness,
stupor, tachycardia, spasms and possibly death through
circulatory collapse. Cool wrappings and anesthetic salves
are recommended for treatment of the skin injuries.

OVERDOSAGE

Poisoning resulting from ingestion of the drug should be
treated with gastric lavage and calcium gluconate, IV.
Administration of corticosteroids may also be indicated.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is seldom used today.
Used injjemeppathic dilutions, topically and internally.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: | to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

Storage: The effect fades if it is stored for too long.
Therefore, do not store for a period of more than 2 years.

LITERATURE
Evans B, In: Evans FJ:Naturally Occuring Phorbolesters, CRC

Press Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. 1986.

Kupchan SM, Baxter RL, (1974) Science 187:652.
Nyborg J, La Cour, T, (1975) Nature 257:824.
Ronlan A, Wickberg B, Tetrahedron Lett 4261. 1970.
Schildknecht H et al., (1970) Chem Ztg 94:347.
Schindler H, PM 10:232. 1962.

Stout GH et al., (1970) J Am Chem Soc 92:1070.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl. Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflauzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Milk Thistle

Silybum marianum'

TRADE NAMES
Milk Thistle (available from numerous manafacturers),
Silymarin, Milk Thistle Extract, Milk Thistle Super Com-
plex, Milk Thistle Phytosome, Alcohol Free Milk Thistle
Seed, Milk Thistle Extract, Milk Thistle Plus, Silymarin
Milk Thistle, Milk Thistle Power, Time Release Milk Thistle
Power, Thisilyn Standardized Milk Thistle Extract

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the ripe

seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are large, solitary and
purple. They consist of somewhat nodding, composite flower
heads. The perigone is globular. The inner tepals taper to a
slender point, and the outer tepals are tough at the base, then
spread and terminate at a horny tip. There are only tubular
florets. The fruit is brown, spotted and glossy, with a white
tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 70 to 150 cm
high with an erect stem. The leaves are arranged in different
levels with the lower leaves indented-pinnatisect, and the
upper ones lanceolate and clasping. There are white spots
along the ribs of the leaf and yellow thorns at the margin.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe.

Other Names: Marian Thistle, Mediterranean Milk Thistle,
Mary Thistle

----- PAGE 768 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: MILK THISTLE HERB

Flavonoids: in particular, apigenin-, luteolin- and kaempfer-
ol-7-0-glycosides, apigenin-4,7'-di-0-glucoside, kaempferol-
7-0-glucoside-3-sulfate

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol
glucoside

Polyynes
Organic Acids: fumaric acid (3.3%)
(Silymarin is absent; it is localized only in the seed case)

EFFECTS: MILK THISTLE HERB
The cholagogue effect of the drug has not been documented.

COMPOUNDS: MILK THISTLE SEED

Silymarin (flavonolignan mixture, 1.5-3%): chief components
silybin A, silybin B (mixture known as silibinin), isosilybin
A, isosilybin B, silychristin, silydianin

Flavonoids: apigenin, chrysoeriol, eriodictyol, naringenin,
quercetin, taxifolin

Fatty oil (20-30%)

EFFECTS: MILK THISTLE SEED
Hepatoprotective Effects

The hepatoprotective activity of the seed is from silymarin,
in particular, silychristin and silydianin. The compounds
seem to inhibit the entrance of toxins and block toxin-
binding sites through alteration of the liver cell's outer
membrane. (Hikino, 1994; Leng-Peschlow, 1996). The
hepatoprotective effect of silibinin also involves different
functioas=ofJthe Kupffer cells. Silibinin decreases production
of superoxide-“anfen radicals and _nitric,-oxide-, (free-radical
scavenger or antioxidant) by the Kupffer cells. Silibinin also
inhibits leukotriene formation by the Kupffer cells (Dehm-
low, 1996). Silymarin increases glutathione production by
the liver, intestines and stomach. Glutathione is used for
detoxification cells in the liver (Valenzuela, 1989). Silibinin
decreases hepatic and mitochondrial glutathione oxidation
induced by iron overload and is a mild chelator of iron
(Pietrangelo, 1995).

Protective Effects

The seed exerts an anti-inflammatory effect through inhib-
tion of leukotriene production by silymarin (Leng-Peschlow,
1996). A renoprotective effect of the herb on kidney cells
damaged by acetaminophen, cisplatin and vincristin was
demonstrated in a recent study. Silibinin and silychristin
demonstrated remarkable stimulatory effects on proliferation
rate, biosynthesis of protein and DNA, and activity of the
enzyme lactate dehydrogenase in kidney cells (Sonnenbi-

MILK THISTLE/517

chler, 1999). Silibinin reduces intracellular and secreted
forms of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels and inhibits
cell growth via a Gl arrest in cell cycle progression in
hormone-refractory prostate carcinomas. Silibinin-induced
Gl arrest decreases the kinase activity of cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs) and associated cyclins for an anticarcinogen-
ic effect (Zi, 1999; Zi, 1998)

Liver Regenerative Effects

Silymarin stimulates RNA polymerase I in the cell nucleus
of the hepatocytes, resulting in an increase of ribosomal
protein synthesis and the regenerative ability of the liver.
This mechanism is of particular importance in the antidote
effect against death-cap mushroom poisoning since the
poison which it contains, alpha-Amanitin, inhibits this
enzyme in the cell nucleus. The drug also has a cholagogic
effect.

CLINICAL TRIALS
Hepatoprotection

A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial was
conducted to determine the hepatoprotective effect of
silymarin in 170 cirrhosis patients. The patients were given
either 140 mg silymarin three times daily or a placebo. After
treatment for two years, biochemical markers did not change
significantly. After a four-year analysis, treatment was seen
most effective in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis and
Child's A group classification of portal hypertension. The
drug was ineffective in patients with Child's B and C group
hypertension (Ferenci, 1989).

The effect of silymarin in 200 alcoholic patients with
cirrhosis of the liver was demonstrated in a controlled,
double-blind, randomized and multicenter trial. The study
was comparing 450 mg of silymarin (150 mg/ three times per
day) with placebo. Patient survival was similar in the
silymarin and placebo treatment group after 2 years of
therapy. No relevant side effects were observed in either
group, and the results indicated that silymarin has no effect
on survival and the clinical course in alcoholics with liver
cirrhosis (Pares, 1998).

Silymarin 420 mg per day was compared to placebo in a
double-blind, controlled study to determine the effect on
chemical, functional and morphological alterations of the
liver. The study involved 106 patients with relatively slight
and subacute liver disease induced by alcohol abuse. The
patients were selected on the basis of elevated serum
transaminase levels. After 4 weeks, there was a highly
significant decrease of S-SGPT and S-SGOT in the silymarin
treatment group. There was also a decrease in the serum total
and conjugated bilirubin with the silymarin treatment group,
although the decrease was not significant. Histological

----- PAGE 769 -----
518/MILK THISTLE

changes normalized significantly more in the silymarin
treatment group (Salmi, 1982).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
MILK THISTLE HERB

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Milk Thistle herb are used
as a stimulant, for functional disorders of liver and gallblad-
der including jaundice, gallbladder colic and diseases of the
spleen. The herb was formerly used as a malaria treatment,
emmenagogue and for uterine complaints.

MILK THISTLE SEED
Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
* Liver and gallbladder complaints

The drug is used for toxic liver damage, adjunctive treatment
in chronic inflammatory liver disease and hepatic cirrhosis.

Unproven Uses: The drug is also used as an antidote to
death-cap mushroom poisoning.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

MILK THISTLE HERB AND SEED

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Episodes of severe sweating, abdominal cramping,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and weakness were recently
reported in Australia, but the reaction was found to be due to
a substance in the Milk Thistle product other than silybin
(Adverse Drug Reaction Advisory Committee, 1999).

Drug Interactions: The concomitant use of silymarin and
butyrophenones or phenothiazines results in a reduction of
lipid peroxidation (Palasciano, 1994). Silymarin has an
atagonistic effect with yohimbine and phentolamine when
given siflffulaneously (Di Carlo, 1993).

DOSAGE
MILK THISTLE HERB

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by pouring boiling
water over 1/2 teaspoonful of the drug and then straining
after 5 to 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average dose of the infusion is 2 to 3
cups daily.

MILK THISTLE SEED
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions and
extracts; tinctures for liquids and solid forms.

How Supplied:
Capsules—70 mg, 100 mg, 140 mg, 150 mg, 175 mg, 180
mg, 500 mg, 540 mg, 1000 mg, 1050 mg

Liquid—1:1, 1:2

Tablet—S0 mg, 500 mg

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, add 3 gm of the drug to
cold water and bring to a boil. Drain after 10 to 20 minutes.

Daily Dosage: For liver dysfunction or ailments, the daily
dosage has been effective and well tolerated at 140 to 420
mg divided in 2 to 3 doses (Ferenci, 1989; Frerick, 1990;
Pares, 1998; Schuppan, 1998). The average dose of silymarin
was approximately 33 milligrams/kilogram/day for cyclo-
peptide mushroom poisoning. Silymarin administered up to
48 hours after mushroom ingestion appears to be effective in
preventing severe liver damage in Amanita phalloides
poisoning (Hruby, 1983).

Although products are usually standardized to 70% to 80%
(not milligrams) of silymarin, the silymarin concentrations
may vary without government regulation (Flora et al, 1998).

Storage: Store away from direct light, heat and moisture;
keep at room temperature.

LITERATURE
MILK THISTLE HERB
Ahmed AA et al., PH 28:1751. 1989.

DAZ 25:1427. 1990.
Khafagy SM et al., Sci Pharm 49:157. 1981.

Kem W, List PH, Horiiammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mericli AH, PM 54:44. 1988.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

MILK THISTLE SEED

Baumann J, (1975) Uber'die Wirkung von Chelidonium,
Curcuma, Absinth und Carduus marianus auf die Galle- und
Pankreassekretion bei Hepatopathien. Med Mschr 29:173.

Benda I, Zenz W, (1973) Wien Med Wschr 123:512.
Desplaces A et al., (1975) Arzneim Forsch 25, 89.

Dehmlow C, Erhard J, de Groot H, Inhibition of Kupffer cell
functions as an explanation for the hepatoprotective properties
of silibinin. Hepatology 1996 Apr,23(4):749-54.

Devault RL, Rosenbrook W, (1973) J Antibiotic 26:532.
Hruby K et al., (1983) Hum Toxicol 2(2):183.

Neu R, (1960) Arch Pharm 293:269.

Pelter A, Hansel R, (1968) Tetrahedron Letters 19:2911.
Poser G, (1971) Arzneim Forsch 21:1209.

Qiu SJ et al., (1981) Chin J Cardiol 9:61.

Tuchweber B et al., (1973) J Med 4:327.

Vogel G et al., (1984) Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 51:265.
Wagner H et al., (1971) Tetrahedron Letters 22:1985.

----- PAGE 770 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

An adverse reaction to the herbal medication milk thistle
(Silybum marianum). Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory
Committee. Med J Aust 1999 Mar 1;170(5):218-9.

Arnone A, Meriini L, Zanarotti A, (1979) Constituents of
Silybum 4Qarianum, Structure of isosilybin and stereochemistry
of isosilybin. J Chem Soc (Chem Commun):696-697.

Benda L, Dittrich H, Ferenzi P. Frank H. Wewalka F, (1980)
The influence of therapy with silymarin on the survial rate of
patients with liver cirrhosis. Wien Klin Wschr 92(19):678-683.

Bode JCh, (1986) Arzneimittel fiir die Indikation
"Lebererkrankungen". In: Dolle W, Miiller-Oerlingshausen B,
Schwabe U (Hrsg.), Grundlagen der Arzneimitteltherapie.
Entwicklung. Beurteilung und Anwendung von Arzneimitteln.
B.I.- Wissenschaftsverlag, Mannheim Wien Zurich, S 202-211.

Bode JCh, 0981) Die alkoholische Hepatitis, ein
KrankheiLsspektrum. Internist 220:536-545.
Di Carlo G, Autore G, Izzo AA et a!., Inhibition of intestinal

motility and secretion by flavonoids in mice and rats: structure-
activity relationships. J Pharm Pharmacol 1993; 45:1054-1059.

Dolle W, Schwabe U, (1988) Leber- und
Gallenwegstherapeutika. In: Schwabe U, Paffrath D (Hrsg.),
Arzneiverordnungsreport 88, Gustav Fischer. Stuttgart New
York. S 242-253.

Feher J, Deak G, Muezes G, Lang I, Niederland V, Nekam K,
Karteszi M, (1989) Hepatoprotective activity of silymarin
legalon therapy in patients with chronic alcoholic liver disease.
Orv Hetil 130(51):2723-2727.

Frerick H, Kuhn U, Strenge-Hesse A et al. Silymarin - ein
Phytopharmakon zur Behandlung von toxischen
Leberschaden.Der Kassenarzt 1990;33/34:36-41.

Ferenci P, Dragosics B, Dittrich H, Frank H, Benda L, Lochs
H, Meryn S, Base W, Schneider B, (1989) Randomized
controllsd“ttial of silymarin treatment in patients with cirrhosis
of the liver. J Hepatol 9(1):105-113. “

Fintelmann V, Albert A, (1980) Nachweis der therapeutischen
Wirksamkeit von Legalon bei toxischen Lebererkrankungen im
Doppelblindversuch. Therapiewoche 30(35):5589-5594.

Flora K, Hahn M, Rosen H et al., Milk Thistle (Silybum
marianum) for the therapy of liver disease. Am JGastroenterol
1998; 93:139-143.

Hahn G, Lehmann HD, Kiirten M et al., (1968) Zur
Pharmakologie und Toxikologie von Silymarin, des
antihepatotocischen Wirkprinzips aus Silybum marianum (L.)
Gaertn. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 18:698-704.

Hruby K, Fuhrmann M, Csomos G, Thaler H, (1983)
Pharmakotherapie der Knollenblatterpilzvergiftung mit Silibinin.
Wien Klein Wschr 95(7):225-231.

Hruby K, Csomos G, Fuhrmann M, Thaler H, Chemotherapy of
Amanita phalloides poisoning with intravenous silibinin. Hum
Toxicol 1983 Apr,2(2): 183-95.

Kalmar L, Kadar J, Somogyi A et al., Silibinin (Legalon-70)
enhances the motility of human neutrophils immobilized by

MILK THISTLE /519

formyl]-tripeptide, calcium ionophore, lymphokine and by normal
human serum. Agents Actions 1990; 29:239-246.

Koch H, (1980) Leberschutz-Therapeutika. Pharmazie in unserer
Zeit 9:33-44:65-74.

Leng-Peschlow E, Properties and medical use of flavonolignans
(silymarin) from Silybum marianum. Phytother Res 1996;
10(suppl):S25-S26.

Leng-Peschlow E, Strenge-Hesse A, (1991) Die Mariendistel
(Silybum marianum) und Silymarin als Lebertherapeutikum. Z
Phytother 12:162-174.

Lorenz D, Mennicke WH, Behrendt W, (1992) Untersuchungen
zur Elimination von Silymarin bei cholecystektomierten
Patienten. Planta Med 45:216-233.

Martines G, Copponi V, Cagnetta G, (1980) Aspetti del danno
epatico dopo somministrazione sperimentale di alcuni farmaci.
Arch Sci Med 137:367-386.

Martini GA, (1988) Hepatozellulare Erkrankungen,
Leberkrankheiten. In: Riecker G (Hrsg.), Therapie innerer
Krankheiten, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, S 638-652.

Marugg D, Reutter FW, (1985) Die Amanita-phalloides-
Intoxikation. Moderne therapeutische Mafinahmen und klinischer
Verlauf. Schweiz Rundschau Med (Praxis) 14(37):972-982.

Mennicke WH, (1975) Zur biologischen Verfiigbarkeit und
Verstoffwechselung von Silybin. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 115(33): 1205-
1206.

Palasciano G, Portinacasa P, Palmieri V et al., The effect of
silymarin on plasma levels of malondialdehyde in patients
receiving long-term treatment with psychotropic drugs. Curr
Ther Res 1994; 55:537-545.

Pares A, Planas R, Torres M et al., Effects of silymarin in
alcoholic patients with cirrhosis of the liver, results of a
controlled, double-blind, jandomized and multicenter trial. J
Hepatol 1998 Apr;28(4):615-21.

Peeters H (Ed.), (1976) Phosphatidylcholine. Biochemical and
Clinical Aspects of Essential Phospholipids. Springer Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg New York.

Rauen HM, Schriewer H, (1971) Die antihepatotoxische
Wirkung von Silymarin bei experimentellen Leberschaden der
Ratte durch Tetrachlorkohlenstoff, D-Galaktosamin und
Allylalkohol. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 21:1194-1201.

Reuter HD, (1992) Spektrum Mariendistel und anderd leber-
und gallewirksame Phytopharmaka. In: Bundesverband Dtschr
Arzte fur Naturheilverfahren (Hrsg.) Arzneimitteltherapie heute.
Aesopus Verlag, Basel.

Salmi HA, Sama S, (1982) Effect of silymarin on chemical,

functional and morphological alterations of the liver. A double-
blind controlled study. Scand J Gastroenterol 17(4):517-521.

Schulz HU, Schurer M, Krumbiegel G, Wachter W,
Weyhenmeyer R, Seidel G, (1995) Untersuchungen zum
Freisetzungsverhalten und zur Bioaquivalenz von Silymarin-
Praparaten. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 45:61-64.

----- PAGE 771 -----
520/MILK THISTLE

Schuppan D, Strosser W, Burkard G, Walosek G et al.,
Verminderung der Fibrosierungsaktivitat durch Legalon bei
chronischen Lebererkrankungen

Z Allgemeinmed 1998; 11/12:577-584.

Sonnebichler J, Zetl I, (1984) Untersuchungen zum
Wirkungsmechanismus von Silibinin, Einflup* von Silibinin auf
die Synthese ribosomaler RNA, mRNA und tRNA in
Rattenlebern in vivo. Hoppe-Seyler's Physiol Chem 365:555-
556.

Sonnenbichler J, Zetl I, (1986) Biochemical effects of the
flavonolignane silibinin in RNA, protein and DANN synthesis
of rat livers. Prog Clin Biol Res 213:319-331.

Sonnenbichler J, Zetl I, (1987) Stimulating influence of a
flavonolignane on proliferation, RNA synthesis and protein
Synthesis in liver cells. In, Okoliczanyi L, Csomos G, Crepaldi
G (Eds.), Assessment and management of hepatobiliary disease.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, S 265-272.

Sonnenbichler J, Zetl I, (1988) Specific binding of a
flavonolignane to an estradiol receptor. In: Plant flavonoids in
Biology and Medicine II, Biochemical, cellular, and medicinal
properties. Alan R Liss, New York, S 369-374.

Sonnenbichler J, Scalera F, Sonnenbichler I et al., Stimulatory
effects of silibinin and silicristin from the Milk Thistle Silybum
marianum on kidney cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999
Sep;290(3); 1375-83.

Varis K, Salmi HA, Siurala M, (1978) Die Therapie der
Lebererkrankung mit Legalon; eine kontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. In: Aktuelle Hepatologie, III. Internationales
Symposium Koln 15.-17. November 1978. Hanseatisches
Veriagskontor. Lubeck, S 42-43.

Valenzuela A, Aspillaga M, Vial S, Guerra, Selectivity of
silymarin on the increase of the glutathione content in different
tissues.#f=the.rat. Planta Med 1989 Oct;55(5):420-2.

Vogel G, (1980) The anti-amanita effect of silymarin. In:
Faulstich et al., (Eds.), Amanita toxins and poisoning.
Witzstrock, Baden-Baden Koln New York, S_ 180-187.

Wagner H, Seligmann O, Seilz M, Abraham D, Sonnenbichler
J, (1976) Silydianin und Silychristin, zwei isomere Silymarine

aus Silybum marianum L. Gaertn. (Mariendistel). Z Naturforsch
31b:876-884.

Zi X, Agarwal R, Silibinin decreases prostate-specific antigen
with cell growth inhibition via Gl arrest, leading to
differentiation of prostate carcinoma cells: implications for
prostate cancer intervention. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999
Jun 22;96(13):7490-5.

Zi X, Feyes DK, Agarwal R, Anticarcinogenic effect of a
flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, in human breast cancer cells
MDA-MB 468: induction of GI arrest through an increase in
Cipl/p21 concomitant with a decrease in kinase activity of
cyclin-dependent kinases and associated cyclins. Clin Cancer
Res 1998 Apr;4(4): 1055-64.

I

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

aus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
ruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ma
Nac!

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

Wagner H,
pflanzliche
York 1995.

Wichd M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Monarda didyma

See Oswego Tea

Monarda Punctata

See Horsemint

Moneywort

Lysimachia nummularia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried

whole flowering plant.

Fruit and Flower: The flowers are solitary or in pairs. The
leaf axils have 5 free, almost cordate sepals. The corolla is
rotate, divided into 5 and fused at the base. It is rich yellow
and spotted with dark red glands on the inside. There are 5
glandular-haired stamens fused at the base and | ovary. The
fruit is a 4- to 5-mm long globular capsule. The seeds are
triangular, blackish-brown, warty and 1.5 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial. The stem is
a runner-like creeper, lightly branched, quadrangular, gla-
brous to slightly pubescent with roots at the nodes. It grows
from 10 to 45 cm. The leaves are entire-margined, crossed-

----- PAGE 772 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

opposite, short-petioled, red-glandular punctate and orbicular
elliptical.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to all of Europe and the
Caucasus and has been introduced into America and Japan.

Production: Moneywort is the complete plant of Lysimachia
nummularia. The whole flowering plant, including the root,
is collected, cleaned and dried in the shade.

Other Names: Creeping Jenny, Creeping Joan, Herb Two-
pence, Meadow Runagates, Running Jenny, Serpentaria,
String of Sovereigns, Twopenny Grass, Wandering Jenny,
Wandering Tailor

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including among others glycosides of myricet-
ins, kempferols and quercetins, including rutin, hyperosides

Tannins
Triterpene saponins
The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
Moneywort is mildly astringent and expectorant. Extracts of
the aerial plant parts are said to be antibacterial in vitro;
however, scientific results are not available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Moneywott is used externally as a vulnerary
and for acute and chronic eczema. It is used internally for
diarrhea and excessive salivation, and as an expectorant for
coughs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards- or side effects are known jn conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: To make a tea, pour 250 ml boiling water over
2 heaping teaspoonfuls drug and leave to draw for 5 minutes.
For a wound poultice, dilute the tea preparation with the
same amount of chamomile tea.

Daily Dosage: For the treatment of coughs, drink 1 cup of
tea, 2 to 3 times daily with honey if desired.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Pram N et al., PA 38:494. 1083.

MONKSHOOD/S521

Monkshood

Aconitum napellus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Deadly poison.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 50 to 160 cm long and
form violet, bluish or reddish upright racemes. The calyx has
5 petal-like sepals. The upper sepal is convex and helmet-
shaped. There are 2 petals with nectar-releasing spurs under
the upper sepal. There are numerous glabrous or ciliate
stamens. There are 3 glabrous ovaries with 10 to 14 ovules.
The fruit is a 16 to 20 mm long by 5 mm thick follicle. The
seeds are glossy black and triangular with narrow wings on
the edges.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Aconitum napellus is a 0.5 to 1.5 m
high shrub with a tuberous, thickened, fleshy root and an
erect, rigid, undivided stem. The racem axis and petioles are
glabrous or hairy. The leaves are dark green, glossy above
and lighter beneath. They are palmate and 5 to 7-pinnatasect
The sections of the leaf are rhomboid in outline and deeply
indented with oblong tips.

Characteristics: The "plant is extremely poisonous.

Habitat: Aconitum napellus is common to the Alps and the
Carpathians and is to be found in all the mountainous regions
of Europe. The plant is found as far as Sweden in the north,
as far as England and Portugal in the west, as far as the
Pyrenees in the south and as far as the Carpathians in the
east.

Production: Monkshood tuber consists of the fresh or dried
tubers and roots of Aconitum napellus- harvested in autumn
after flowering. Monkshood herb consists of the dried herb
of Aconitum napellus collected at the beginning of the
flowering season. The collected roots are quickly dried at
40° C.

Not to be Confused With: Other blue-flowering Aconitum
species.

Other names: Aconite, Wolfsbane, Blue Rocket, Friar's Cap,
Mousebane

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Nor-diterpene alkaloids: including aconitine, mesaconitine,
hypaconitine, N-desethyl aconitine, oxoaconitine

EFFECTS
The efficacy of the drug is based on the di-ester alkaloids
aconitin, mesaconitin and hypaconitin. Aconitin raises mem-
brane permeability for sodium ions and retards repolariza-
tion. Aconitin is initially stimulating, and then causes
paralysis in the motor and sensitive nerve ends, and in the

----- PAGE 773 -----
522/MONKSHOOD

CNS. The other di-ester alkaloids function in a similar
fashion. Hypaconitin works more intensely. Aconitin applied
in small doses triggers bradycardia and hypotension; in
higher doses it has at first, a positive inotropic effect,
followed by tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmia and cardiac
arrest. E/ester alkaloids were shown to be analgesic in
animal experiments. Applied topically in humans, the drug is
initially stimulating, in the form of itchiness or burning, and
then anesthetizing. The drug has an anti-febrile effect.
Therapeutic doses influence the heart minimally; the heart
rate may increase slightly. Given orally, the drug is active
after a few minutes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used to reduce pain from
neuralgia, particularly with trigeminus and intercostal neural-
gia. It is also used for myalgia, muscular and articular
rheumatism, serous skin inflammation and migraine. Prepa-
rations of blue monkshood are used for pain, facial paralyses,
ailments of the joints, arthritis, gout, rheumatic complaints,
inflammation, pleurisy, pericarditis sicca, fever, and skin and
mucosal diseases, as well as for disinfecting and wound
treatment. In experimental pharmacology, Aconitin is used
due to its ability to trigger cardiac arrhythmia.

Chinese Medicine: Monkshood is used for analgesia, as an
anti-inflammatory and a cardiac tonic.

Homeopathic Uses: Aconitum napellus is used for acute
inflammatory illnesses, cardiac palpitations with anxiety
states and painful peripheral nerve disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is highly toxic. Signs of poisoning can appear even
with the administration of therapeutic dosages. The first sign
of poisoning is -a tingling of the mouth, fingers and toes,
which then spreads'f/veF the entire body surface and changes
into a furry sensation. Body temperature decreases quickly
and queasiness, vomiting, diarrhea and urination follow.

OVERDOSAGE

With fatal doses, breathing becomes irregular and the
heartbeat slows down and becomes arrythmic. Intense pains
are characteristic. Death usually follows within 6 hours due
to heart failure or asphyxiation. For adults, the estimated
fatal dosage lies between 1 to 2 g. Countermeasures include
gastrointestinal emptying, keeping the patient warm, cardio-
vascular and pulmonary support, magnesium and calcium
infusions, administration of atropine to fight bradycardia,
lidocaine for relieving the arrythmias, possibly artificial
respiration, pain relief (no opiates).

DOSAGE
Mode_ of Administration:

The use of the drug is risky and not recommended.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Preparation: Aconiti tinctura: 1:1

Daily Dosage:

Aconiti tinctura: Average dose 0.1 gm; maximum dose 0.2
gm; maximum daily dose 0.6 gm. Only standardized
preparations should be used.

Externally: Aconiti tinctura is applied with a brush.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times per day (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc; Ointment 1 to 2
times daily (HAB1).

Storage: The herb must be kept in a dry place protected from
light and insects.

LITERATURE

Bugatti C, Colombo ML, Tome F, Extraction and purification
of lipoalkaloids from Aconitum napellus roots and leaves. In:
PM 58(7)95. 1992.

Hikino H et al., J Pharm Dyn 2:78-83. 1979.
Honerjager P, Meissner A, Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's Arch
Pharmacol 322:49-58. 1983.

Katz A, Rudin HP, Staehlin E, Pharm Acta Helv 62: 216-220.
1987.

Katz A, Staehlin E, Pharm Acta Helv 54:253-265. 1979.
Kimura M et al., Japan J Pharmacol 48:290-299. 1988.

Liu H, Katz A, Norditerpenoid alkaloids fiom Aconitum
napellus ssp. neomontanum. In: PM 62(2):190-191. 1997.

Rao MR, (1966) Acta Pharm Sinica 3, 195.
Further information in:
Chan H, But P (Eds.), Pharmacology and Applications of

Chinese Materia Medica, Vol 1, Ed. World Scientific Singapore
1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AuflL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 774 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 199S-

Morinda citrifolia

See Noni

Moringa oleifera
See Behen

Morning Glory
Impomoea hederacea

DESCRIPTION

41 Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds and root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering branches bear | to 5 radial
flowers with structures in fives. The 5 sepals are 13 to 2.5
cm long, narrow-lanceolate, acuminate and rough-haired at
the base. The 5 petals are 3.8 to 5 cm long, funnel-shaped,
spotted blue-pink or are fused at the base of the orange
corolla. The plant has 5 stamens and a superior 3-chambered
ovary. The fruit is a capsule with a diameter of approximate-
ly 8 mm containing 4 to 6 smooth seeds.

Leaves, Stem dnd'Ro6i: This winding herb grows | to 3 m
high. The leaves are alternate, ovate-cordate and entire, with
a diameter of 5 to 12.5 cm. The stem is slightly pubescent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China, India, and Central
and South America.

Production: Morning Glory seeds are the dried, ripe seeds of
Ipomoea hederacea. The plants are harvested in autumn
before the seeds open, then dried in the sun. The seeds are

fe then removed and cleaned.

Not to be Confused With: Morning Glory seeds are similar to
and sometimes confused with the seeds of other Ipomoea
species.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids of the ergoline type (0.5%): chief alkaloids
lysergol (50%) and chanoclavine (35%). Smaller amounts of
penniclavine and elymoclavine

MORNING GLORY 7 523

Fatty oil (12 to 14%): chief fatty acids oleic acid, palmitic
acid, stearic acid

Resins (15%): glycoretines (macromolecular, resinous glyco-
sides of hydroxy-fatty acids [CI2 to CI6]) with oligosaccha-
rides, the so-called pharbitinic acids; the latter's hydroxyl
groups are estered with (among others) alpha-methylbutyric
acid, tiglic acida and valeric acid to the fatty acid remnant

EFFECTS

The drug has a drastic laxative effect due to the glycoretines
it contains, which presumably explains its usefulness against
ascarid and tapeworm infestations.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Morning Glory has been used for worm
infestation and constipation.

Indian Medicine: Morning Glory is used for constipation,
flatulence, parasite infestation, scabies and dyspepsia. Ac-
cording to the Tschirch manual, the roots of Ipomoea species
have long been in use in India, and the drug also was used
extensively by the Persians and Arabs.

Chinese Medicine: Uses of Morning Glory include edema,
constipation, parasite infestation and feelings of fullness.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug's laxative effect is frequently accompanied by
cramp-like pains.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Because of the possible teratogenic effect, the drug should
not be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE ~
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug.

Preparation: Resin is made by heating the powdered drug
until it melts, then cooling it to form a pale translucent mass.

Daily dosage:

Drug — 0.5 to 3 g drug

Resin — daily dose: 0.3 g; maximum single dose: 0.1 g
Chinese Dosage:

Powder — 15 to 5 g drug, can be raised to 12 to 15 g
Tea — 24 to 30 g drug

Storage: Store in dry place.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 775 -----
524/MORUS NIGRA

Moms nigra
See Black Mulberry

Motherwort

Leonurus cardiaca

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh aerial
parts collected during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: Small, bright red, bilabiate flowers are in
dense false whorls in the upper leaf axils. The calyx is
funnel-shaped with 5 rigid, awned tips, which are bent
outward. The corolla is densely villous on the outside and
longer than the calyx. The stamens stretch out longer than
the flower. The fruit is a brown, triangular, 2.5 to 3 mm long
nutlet with a tuft of hair at the tip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and has a
short woody rhizome. It grows to about 120 cm. The stem is
erect, quadrangular, grooved, hollow, often red-violet and
usually hairy. The leaves are long-petioled, pubescent or
glabrous. The lower leaves are palmate and cordate at the
base. The upper leaves are 3-lobed. The upper surface is dark
green, the lower surface light green.

Characteristics: Motherwort has an unpleasant smell.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central Europe and
Scandinavia through temperate Russia to central Asia. It was
introduced to North America and has become established in
the wild there.

ProductionrApt’p,rwx>rt herb consists of the above-ground
parts of Leonurus cardiaca, gathered during flowering
season, as well as their preparations. They are collected in
the wild and dried at 35° C.

Other Names: Lion's Tail, Lion's Ear, Throw-Wort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Diterpene bitter principles: \eocardin

Iridoide monoterpenes: ajugoside (leonuride), ajugol, galiri-
doside, reptoside

Flavonoids: including, among others, rutin, quercitrin, iso-
quercitrin, hyperoside, genkwanin

Leonurin: (syringa acid esters of 4-guanidino-butane-l-ols)
Betaine: stachydrine (N-dimethyl-L-proline)

Caffeic acid derivatives: caffeic acid-4-O-rutinoside

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tannins
Volatile oil (traces)

EFFECTS
Mildly negatively chronotropic, hypotonic, sedative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Nervous heart complaints

Unproven Uses: Hyperthyroidism and flatulence. In folk
medicine it is used for bronchial asthma, climacteric
symptoms and amenorrhea.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic treatments include use for
cardiac complaints, flatulence and hyperthyroidism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and
other galenic preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 4.5 gm herb; infusion: 2 to 4 gm drug 3 times
daily; liquid extract (1:1): 2 to 4 ml 3 times daily; tincture:
daily dose: 2 to 6 ml.

Homeopathic Dosage: Acute states: 5 drops, | tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes. Chronic states: 5 drops, 1
tablet, 10 pellets or a knife tip 1 to 3 times daily.
Parenterally: Acute: 1 to 2 ml sc, 3 times daily; chronic: | to
2 ml once a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Buzogany K, Cucu V, Accumulation, distribution and
conservation dynamics of iridoids in Leonurus cardiaca L. and
L. villosus Desf. In: Farmacia (Bukarest): 34(3): 173-176. 1986.

Chang CF, Li CZ, (1986) Chung I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih 6(1):39.
Kartnig T et al., (1985) J Nat Prod 48(3):494.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Need. 21(4):417.

Malakov P et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(10):2341.

Peng Y, (1983) Bull Chin. Mat Med 8:41.

Reuter G, Diehl HJ, (1970) Pharmazie 25:586.

Schilling G et al., (1975) Liebigs Ann Chem:230.

Tschesche R et al., (1980) Phytochemistry 19:2783.

Weischer ML, Okpanyi SN, Pharmakologie eines pflanzlichen
Schlafimittels. In: ZPT 15(5):257-262. 1994.

Xia XX, (1983) J Trad Chin Med 3:185.

----- PAGE 776 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994. _,

Madaus G, Lehxbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Mountain Ash Berry

Sorbus aucuparia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, dried fruit
or the dried and then boiled fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is broadly umbellifer-
ous-paniculate, erect, floriferous, loosely tomentose, occa-
sionally completely or almost completely glabrous. The
calyx has 5 segments. There are 5 white petals and numerous
stamens. The ovary is inferior and has 2 to 4 free styles,
which are pubescent in the lower portion. The false fruit is
almost gtebular with a diameter of 9 to 10 mm and is scarlet.
There are usaally*3 Seeds which are narrow-oblong, acute
and reddish.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is usually a medium-sized
tree up to 16 m high with a round, rather loose crown. The
bark is smooth and pale gray, later becoming vertically
fissured and blackish. The leaves are odd-pinnate with 5 to
11 almost sessile leaflets. These are oblong-lanceolate,
irregularly thorny-tipped and serrate, pubescent or almost
glabrous.

Characteristics: The flowers have an unpleasant smell and
the berries are sharp-tasting and sour. Sorbus moravica tastes
sweet in contrast

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe, to
Western Siberia and Asia Minor, and is found in North
America.

Production: Mountain Ash Berry consists of the fresh or
dried fruit, or fruit cooked and dried thereafter, of Sorbus

MOUNTAIN ASH BERRY /525

aucuparia as well as its preparations. The ripe, shiny red fruit
is harvested from August to October

Other Names: Quick-Beam, Rowan Tree, Witchen, Europe-
an Mountain Ash, Sorb Apple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides (0.06%; in the seeds 0.2 to 0.59c:
traces in the fruit pulp): in the seeds amygdalin, in the fruit
pulp prunasin

Fruit acids: malic acid (3 to 5%), tartaric acid

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides: saccharose, glucose,

fructose, sorbose

Parasorboside (bitter substance): parasorbic acid is formed
from it through cell destruction (lactone of the (5S)-Hydrox-
yhex-2-en-acid-1, pungent in odor, mucus-membrane-irritat-
ing, 0.1 to 0.3% of the fresh weight). Parasorbic acid is
destroyed through dehydration or volatilized during cooking.
It is present only in traces (less than 0.01%) in the cultivated
variety, that contains few bitter substances.

Sugar alcohols: sorbitol

Tannins

Vitamins: ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 0.03 to 0.13%, higher
content in the non-bitter fruits)

EFFECTS
The parascorbic acid is weakly laxative and irritating to the
mucous membrane. Ascorbic acid is a vitamin C supplement.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven uses: Mountain Ash is used in folk medicine for
kidney diseases, diabetes, rheumatism, disorders of the uric
acid metabolism, for dissolution of uric acid deposits,
menstruation disturbances, the alkalization of the blood, to
improve the metabolism and for vitamin C deficiency.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug or with the consumption of
fruit sauces, juices, jellies, jams, etc. produced through
cooking.

OVERDOSAGE
Because of the formation of the mucus-membrane-irritating
parasorboside that results from cutting up the fruit, the intake
of very large quantities ofthe fresh fruit leads to gastroenteri-
tis, vomiting, queasiness, gastric pain, diarrhea, kidney
damage (albuminuria, glycosuria) and to polymorphic
exanthemas.

----- PAGE 777 -----
526 /MOUNTAIN ASH BERRY

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Mountain Ash is available as whole
and crude drug forms.

Daily Dosage: A puree is used for diarrhea. Freshly pressed
juic$ (or juice with sugar) is taken by the dessertspoonful for
conditions of the lungs and pleura with fever.

LITERATURE
Fikenscher LH et al., PM 41:313. 1981.

Letzig E et al., Nahrung 7:591. 1963.
Sicher O, Salama O, PM 39:269. 1980.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Mountain Avens
Dryas, ,@etQpetala

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Mountain Avens or Silverweed Herb is the
whole dried plant of Dryas octopetala.

Flower and Fruit: The flower stalk is upright, 2 to 8 cm
long. The diameter of the flowers is 2 to 4 cm; there are 6 to
9 sepals, which are glabrous on the inside and brown, felt-
like and glandular on the outside. There are 6 to 9 white
petals and numerous stamens. The carpels are numerous, free
and densely haired, with apical styles twisted like screws.
The fruit is like a nut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This evergreen dwarf shrub grows
up to 0.5 m high. The leaves are 0.5 to 4 cm long, up to 2.5
cm wide, coriaceous, crenate, short-petiolate; the lamina is
spatulate, obovate or elongate-elliptical, with a cordate base,
wrinkled and glabrous above, tomentose beneath; the stip-
ules are dry-membranous and sharply acuminate. The small
stem is heavily branched, the leaves on the horizontal

branches are double-rowed, the upright stem has leaves all
around. The plant has a primary taproot.

Habitat: The shrub grows in the Arctic, subarctic and high
mountainous regions.

Production: The plant is collected in the wild, cut and
powdered.

Other Names: Silverweed Herb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins (2.5 to 5.5% in the root; 7.5 to 14% in the leaves)

Catechin tannins (7 to 14%)

Flavonoids (0.7 to 1.6%): glycosides of quercetin, kaempfer-
ol, isorhamnetin, limocitrin, gossypetin, corniculatusin and
sexangularetin

Triierpenes: including tormentoside

EFFECTS
Due to its tannin and flavonoid glycoside content, the drug is
astringent in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include stomach pains
and diarrhea.

The effect appears to be plausible because of the flavonoid
glycoside content, but is Unproven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The inges-
tion of larger dosages can lead to digestive complaints and
constipation, due to the high tannin content. Available data
are insufficient to classify the drug's safety.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Schulthess H, Dissertation Zurich; 1945.

Mountain Flax

Linum catharticum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb, the fresh
flowering plant and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are on loose, panicled,

branched, sparsely leafed twining stems on long peduncles in
the leaf axils. They hang before flowering. The sepals are

----- PAGE 778 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

elliptically acuminate, 2 to 2.5 mm long with ciliate glands.
The 5 white petals are up to 5 mm long, and yellow at the
base. There are 5 stamens fused at the base and | ovary with
5 headed stigma on long thin styles. The fruit is erect,
globular, 2 to 3 cm long and incomplete 10-valved with long,

(P_ pubescent, dividing membranes. The seeds are elliptical, 1 to

15 mm long, flat, smooth and light brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an inconspicuous annual
(occasionally perennial) that grows up to 30 cm. It has a long
erect or ascending stem, which is undivided or dividing into
the flowering branches. The leaves are opposite or alternate,
entire-margined, sessile and have a partly ciliate margin.

Habitat: Found in central Europe as far as the British Isles
and southward as far as the Mediterranean countries, the
Caucasus, Iran and northern Africa.

Production: Mountain Flax is the flowering plant (aerial
part) of Linum catharticum, collected in the uncultivated
regions.

Other Names: Purging Flax, Dwarf Flax, Fairy Flax, Mill
Mountain

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

& Lignans: achromatin (bitter), presumably present in the fresh

plant as a glycoside
Tannins
Volatile oil

The constituents of the drug have not been extensively
investigated.

EFFECTS
MountakFFlax has a laxative effect in therapeutic doses of

up to 0.5 gm* Higfi'ddSes cause vomiting-and gastroenteritis.

Although the amaroid linin is not laxative, it is probably
present in the form of a glycoside, which has a stronger
laxative effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Its use as a laxative is obsolete. In folk
medicine Mountain Flax is used for constipation, oliguria,
edema, worm infestation, catarrhal and rheumatic conditions.

Homeopathic Uses: Used homeopathically for coughs,
hemorrhoids, diarrhea, catarrh and rheumatic disorders,
dropsy and worm infestation. Also used as a purgative and
emetic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug can lead to vomiting, inflammations of the
gastrointestinal tract and diarrhea. The emetic and laxative
effects are used therapeutically.

MOUNTAIN GRAPE/527

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground and as an extract.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, add 2.5 gm to | cup of
hot water.

Dosage: 2.0 gm powder as a single dose.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mountain Grape
Mahonia aquifolium

TRADE NAMES
Oregon Grape (Berberis aquifolium variety available from
numerous manufacturers) Oregon Grape Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome
and the roots, the dried branch and twig bark, as well as the
root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The heavily scented flowers are either in
dense 5 to 10 cm panicles or in groups of 3 to 6 in erect 5 to
8 cm racemes in the leaf axils. The flowers are yellow and
have 9 sepals, 6 petals and 6 stamens, which are about 8 cm
long. The pedicles are 5 to 10 mm long. The fruit is a
globose, purple-black, frosted berry with red juice. The 2 to
5 seeds are glossy brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a fast-growing,
evergreen, stoloniferous shrub about 50 to 150 cm high with
stout stems, sparingly branched. The leaves are odd-pinnate,
10 to 20 cm long with 3 to 6 pairs of leaflets. The leaflets are
4 to 8 cm by 2 to 4 cm, ovate, distally spinose dentate,
coriaceous, dark and shining green.

Habitat: Indigenous to the Pacific U.S.; ornamental or
cultivated in Europe.

Production: Mountain Grape bark consists of the branch and
twig bark as well as the twig tips of Mahonia aquifolium.

Other Names: Holly-Leaved Berberis, Oregon Grape

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids (in the root bark, 7 to 16%, in the
stem bark, 2.4-4.5%):

benzyl isoquinoline type: including among others berberine

----- PAGE 779 -----
528/MOUNTAIN GRAPE

bisbenzyl isoquinoline type: including among others berba-
mine, oxyacanthine

aporphine type: including among others isocorydine

EFFECTS

The use of the drug as a tonic for loss of appetite is plausible
in view of the alkaloid and amaroid content. The berberine
has a mild mutagenic effect. It is an antipsoriatic when used

externally.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for scaly skin,
psoriasis, eczema, bronchitis, gastritis, cholecystitis and
digestion problems.

Homeopathic Uses: Mountain Grape is used for dry skin
rashes (e.g., for psoriasis between the acute phases) and for
liver and gallbladder conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available in commercial

ointments for external use.
Storage: Protect from light.

LITERATURE

Anonym, Ein Lichtblick in der Psoriasistherapie. In: DAZ
134(8):646. 1994.

Augustin M, Mahonia aquifolium bei Psoriasis. In: ZPT
17(1):44. 1996.

Galle K.Ifladr'-S, Wagner H, Mahonia. In: DAZ 134(49):4883.
1994. dette!

Mennet-von Eiff M, Meier B, Phytotherapie in der
Dermatologie. In: ZPT 16(4):201-210. 1995.

Misik V et al., Lipoxygenase inhibition and antioxidant
properties of protoberberine and aporphine alkaloids isolated
from Mahonia aquifolium. In: PM 61(4):372-373. 1995.

Muller K, Ziereis K, Gawlik I, The antipsoriatic Mahonia
aquifolium and its active constituents II: Antiproliferative
activity against cell growth of human keratinocytes. In: PM
61(1):74-75. 1995.

Muller K, Ziereis K, The antisporiatic Mahonia aquifolium and
its active constitutents; Pro- and antioxidant properties and
inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase. In: PM 60(5):421. 1994.

Niedner R, Wiesnauer M, Dermatologie: Mahonia aquifolium -
ein Phytopharmakon in der Psoriasistherapie. In: DAZ
132(37): 1890. 1992.

Petersen-Lehmann J, Homoopathische Salbe gegen
Schuppenflechte. In: PZ 137(38):2892. 1992.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33(3A): 1.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter
Berberis aquifolium).

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fach verlag Lands berg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflafrizliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Mountain Laurel
Kalmia latifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried

leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a compound um-
belled-raceme with numerous flowers. The flowers are red,
whitish or purple-brown to chocolate brown; solitary on long
glandular-hairy pedicles in the axils of the bracts and 2
lateral, brown bracteoles. The bud has 10 folds and spreads
out in a bowl shape. There are 10 stamens, red anthers
without appendages that burst open at irregular holes. The
fruit is an erect, orbicular, 5-to-7-valvular capsule. The
numerous seeds are flat, oblong, 1 mm long and fly easily.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a heavily branched
shrub or tree about 4 m high with reddish-brown or gray
branches. The evergreen, laurel-like, ovate-lanceolate acumi-
nate, glabrous leaves are alternate, 4 to 12 cm long and have

a 1 to 3 cm long petiole. They are red-brown on the lower

surface, have numerous glandular hairs and a distinct midrib.

The upper surface is dark green.

Habitat: Eastern U.S.

Production: Mountain Laurel leaves are the leaves (fresh or
dried) of Kalmia latifolia.

Other Names: Broad-Leafed Laurel, Calico Bush, Spoon-
wood, Sheep Laurel, Rose Laurel, Laurel, Lambkill, Moun-
tain Ivy

----- PAGE 780 -----
Ht

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes (andromedan- derivatives): including among
others grayanotoxin I (andromedotoxin, asebotoxin, acety-
landromedol, rhodotoxin), grayanotoxin II, HI, XVIIL, lyonol
A, leucothol A, kalmiatoxine

Acylphloroglucinols: including among others 2\6'-dihy-
droxy-4' -methoxy-acetophenone, phloretin

Flavonoids: including among others asebotin, hyperoside

EFFECTS
Use of Mountain Laurel is no longer recommended because

of the formation of grayanotoxins, which are highly toxic.
Efficacy for the recorded indications has not been proven.

According to earlier sources (which are questionable), the
drug is antiphlogistic and mildly diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Today, the drug is only used in homeopath-
ic dilutions. In the past it was used as a decoction in the
treatment of tinea capitis and to treat psoriasis, herpes and

secondary syphilis.

m Homeopathic Uses: Uses include rheumatism, shingles,

nerve pain, rheumatic and cardiac pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The andromedan derivatives of the drug prevent the closure
of the excitable cells of the sodium channels and thereby
prevent conduction. Painful mucous membranes in the
mouth and in the stomach, increased salivation, cold sweat,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and paresthesias are experienced
following intake of the drug. Dizziness, headache, fever
attacks»j&well as intoxicated states with temporary loss of
vision, follow.lateR Muscle weakness, coordination disorders
and spasms can also occur. Bradycardia, cardiac arrhyth-
mias, drops in blood pressure, eventual cardiac arrest and
respiratory failure can lead to death.

OVERDOSAGE
Following gastrointestinal emptying, (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate) and instillation of
activated charcoal, the treatment of poisoning consists of
electrolyte replacement, countering of acidosis with sodium
bicarbonate, plasma volume expanders ifrequired, diazepam
(1.V.) in case of spasms and oxygen in case of respiratory
failure.

DOSAGE
Mode
preparations.

of Administration: Available in homeopathic

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);

MOUSE EAR/529

parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wolters B, Zierpflanzen aus Nordamerika. In: DAZ
137(26):2253-2261. 19977"

Mouse Ear

Pilosella qfficinarum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowering aerial

parts.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow, composite flowers are
solitary at the end of long pedicles. There are bright yellow,
lingual florets. The lateral ones are usually striped reddish
underneath. The bracts are linear and acute, have a membra-
nous margin and are covered in star-hairs. They have black
glandular hairs at the base. The fruit is cylindrical and has a
simple, brittle tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial herb, which
grows up to 30 cm. Erect, leafless stems grow from the
rosette of basal leaves. The plant produces long, leafy
runners. The leaves are oblong or obovate to lanceolate.
iThey bear long bristles, which are thickened at the base and
are star-haired to tomentose beneath.

Habitat: Trie plant grows in large areas of Europe and
temperate Asia. It is also found in North America.

Production: Mouse Ear is the aerial part of Pilosella
officinarum.

----- PAGE 781 -----
530/MOUSE EAR

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including among others luteolin-7-glucoside,

isoetin
Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, skimmine

Tannins

EFFECTS

The plant has been shown to have diuretic, spasmolytic and
diaphoretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Mouse Ear is used internally in the
treatment of asthma, bronchitis, coughs and whooping cough
and externally in the treatment of wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally and
externally as a liquid extract.

LITERATURE
Bate-Smith EC et al., Phytochemistry 7:1165.

Duquenois P, (1965) Mem Soc Bot Franc 41.

Guerin JC, Reveillere HP, (1985) Ann Farm Franc 43(1 ):77.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

MadausjG“Lehrbuch. der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Geprg jQlms- Verlag Hildesheim J979.*

Mucuna pruriens
See Cowhage

Mugwort
Artemisia vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root and the
above-ground parts of the plant, particularly the dried branch
tips.

Flower and Fruit: The flower heads are ovoid, 3 to 4 mm
long by 2 mm wide. The numerous flowers are short-

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

stemmed, erect or slightly drooping. They are in dense
heavily branched panicles with numerous lanceolate bracts.
The bracts are downy white with a green midrib. The inner
bracts are lanceolate and acuminate. The outside ones are
oblong and obtuse with broad membranous margin. The
flowers are yellowish or red-brown and almost glabrous. The
inner flowers are androgynous and those on the outside are
female. The receptacle is glabrous. The fruit has an indistinct
margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a long-stemmed, 70 to
150 cm high shrub with a branched, many-headed and
creeping rhizome without runners or rosette. The shoots are
slightly, pubescent, often red-tinged and have a weak
unpleasant smell. The erect or ascending, edged, coriaceous
stems die off each year. They are in branched panicles and
downy. The leaves are 5 to 10 cm long, coriaceous, and the
margins are often rolled back. The upper surface is usually
dark green and glabrous, occasionally pubescent, and the
lower surface is tomentose. The basal leaves are short-
petioled and lobed with an end section and | to 2 pairs of
small side leaflets. The rest of the leaves are sessile or almost
sessile with a slit base. The lower leaves are double-pinnate,
the middle and upper ones are pinnatifid and lanceolate,
acuminate, entire-margined or slightly serrated.

Characteristics: Mugwort has a pleasant tangy taste. The
root is sweet and pungent, the herb is aromatic and bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Asia and North America,
and is also distributed all over Europe except in the south.

Production: Mugwort herb consists of the above-ground
parts of Artemisia vulgaris. The branch tips are gathered
during the flowering season and carefully dried. Other fresh
above- and underground parts of the plant are harvested at
the beginning of winter, primarily from the wild. Mugwort
root consists of the below-ground parts of Artemisia
vulgaris.

Not to be Confused With: Some confusion can arise with
Asinthii herba.

Other Names: Felon Herb, St. John's Plant, Wormwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (complex composition): chief constituents, ac-
cording to plant variety, 1,8- cineol, camphor, linalool or
thujone

Sesquiterpene lactones: including vulgarin, pilostachyin,
pilostachyin C

Lipophilic flavonoids

Polyynes

----- PAGE 782 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Hydroxycoumarins: for example, umbelliferone, aesculetin

EFFECTS
The aqueous extract and essential oil show antimicrobial

activity in laboratory tests.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Mugwort is not to be used during pregnancy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Mugwort is used in complaints and
problems involving the gastrointestinal tract such as stomach
ulcers and indigestion. The plant is also used for worm
infestations, epilepsy, persistent vomiting, to promote circu-
lation, as a sedative, and for delayed or irregular menstua-
tion. The root is used for asthenic states as a tonic, and in
combination with other remedies also for psychoneuroses,
neurasthenia, depression, hypochondria, autonomic neuroses,
general irritability and restlessness, insomnia and anxiety
states. The efficacy of Mugwort for the listed indications has
not been substantiated.

Chinese Medicine: Mugwort is used in China for female
complaints as well as for ulcers and burns.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses of the root include
convulsions and worm infestations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Sensitization through skin contact has
been observed, almough very rarely.

Pregnancy: Mugwort is not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGES,
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
applications is not verified, therapeutic administration is not
recommended.

Preparation: "Moxibustion" (China, Japan) leaves are
ground with water in a mortar and, after removal of the
larger remnants, small cones are formed and dried to be later
burnt onto the skin of the patient Tea is prepared by
allowing | tsp. to draw in 150 to 200 ml boiling water for 10
minfites. A liquid extract is prepared in a 1:1 proportion from
a mixture of the drug in 25% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: An infusion (drug 0.5 to 2 g) is given 3 times
daily. Usual dosage of tea is one cup 2 or 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hoffmann B, Herrmann K, (1982) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch

174 (3):211.

MUIRA-PUAMA/S31

Jork H, Juel S, (1979) Arch Pharm 312:540.
Juel S et al, (1976) Arch Pharm 309:458.
Kaul VK et al., (1976) Ind J Pharm 38 (1):21.

Marco JA et al., Sesquiterpenes lactones from Artemisia
species. In: PH 32:460. 1993.

Marco JA, Sanz JF, Hierro P, Two eudesmane acids from
Artemisia vulgaris. In: PH 30:2403-2404. 1991.

Michaelis K et al., On the essential oil components from
blossoms of Artemisia vulgaris L. In: Z Naturfosch 37(3/4): 152.
1982.

Nano GM et al., (1976) Planta Med 30:211.

Nano GM et al., Composition of some oils from Artemisia
vulgaris. In: PM 30(3):211. 1976.

Stefanovic M et al., (1982) Glas Khem Drush Beogr 47 (3):7.

Wallnofer B, Hofer O, Greger H, Polyacetylenes from Artemsia
"Vulgares" Group. In: PH 28(10):2687. 1989.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Muira-Puama
Ptychopetalum olacoides

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried roots and
the dried trunk with bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are racemous; there
are | or 2 per axil. They have 5 to 8 flowers and are about 2
cm long. The calyx is narrow and has 5 tips. The corolla is
white, oblong and about 1.3 to 2 mm long. The outside is
smooth, and the inside is white pubescent. There are usually
10 stamens with long anthers. The ovary is clavate. The fruit
is a long elliptical drupe that is initially green and changes to
pink and finally to lilac-black when ripening. The pericarp is
thin, and the endocarp is crusty.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 5 to 15 m high tree
with a trunk 25 cm in diameter, which is vertically grooved.
The leaves are oblong-lanceolate, very tapered and narrow
toward the base. They are sometimes acute, coriaceous,
smooth and gray or frosted to blue-green beneath. The dried

----- PAGE 783 -----
532/MUIRA-PUAMA

leaves are matte with a dark green to black upper surface and
a dark gray undersurface. The ribs are pinnatifid, curved,
becoming distinct at the margin and protruding on the
undersurface. The petioles are deeply grooved and do not
thicken.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Guyana and the Amazon
region of Brazil.

Production: Muira-Puama consists of the wood from the
trunk and/or roots of Ptychopetalum olacoides and/or Pty-
chopetalum unicatum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene acid esters (0.4-0.5%): chief components are
behenolic acid esters of lupeol (60%), including, among
others, fatty acid esters of beta-sitosterol

Sterols: beta-sitosterol, campesterol, lupeol

Volatile oil: chief components are alpha-pinene (25%),
alpha-humulene (10%), beta-pinene (8%), beta-caryophyl-
lene (8%) camphene (7%), camphor (6%),

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Muira-Puama is used internally for diarrhea,
loss of appetite and for the prevention of sexual disorders.
The herb is also used externally for the prevention of sexual
disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages*

DOSAGE woe
Mode of Administration: Muira-Puama is administered
whole, ground, as a powder and as an extract.

Preparation: To prepare a liquid extract, mix the.powdered
herb in a ratio of 10:2:1 with spirit of wine and glycerine.
Then percolate the mixture with spirit of wine, yielding 10
parts liquid extract.

Daily Dosage: When used internally, a single dose is 0.5 gm
drug. The daily dosage for the liquid extract and the
decoction is 0.5 to 2 ml 3 times daily. For external use, die
herb can be added to baths.

LITERATURE
Auterhoff H, Momberger B, Arch Pharm 304:223-228. 1971.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Mullein

Verbascum densiflorum

TRADE NAMES
Mullein Leaf, Alcohol-Free Mullein Leaves, Mullein Leaves

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb at die
beginning of the flowering season, the flowers and the root.

Flower and Fruit: The large, yellow flowers with a diameter
of 30 to 35 mm are in apical spike-like racemes. The calyx is
divided deeply into five. The corolla is rotate, has a short
tube and a 5-lobed, uneven margin. There are 5 stamens of
uneven length. The 3 upper ones are lanate and have long
anthers. There is 1 superior ovary. The fruit is a 2-lobed

capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is biennial. It has petiolate
basal leaves and is up to 2 m high. The stem is erect,
undivided or lightly branched above. It is tomentose like the
leaves and calyx. The leaves are alternate, turned downward
and finely crenate. The lower ones are lanceolate or oblong
lanceolate; the upper ones, ovate.

Characteristics: The flowers have a honey-like fragrance
and an almond-like taste. The leaves are slimy and bitter.

Habitat: The plant is widespread in Europe, temperate Asia
and North America.

Production: Mullein flower consists of die dried petals of
Verbascum densiflorum and/or of Verbascum phlomoides.

Not to be Confused With: Other Verbascum species.

Other Names: Torch Weed, Aaron's Rod, Blanket-Leaf,
Candlewick Plant, Flannelflower, Feltwort, Hedge-Taper,
Jacob's Staff, Shepherd's Club, Velvet Plant, Shepherd's
Staff, Torches, Our Lady's Flannel, Blanket Herb, Woollen,
Rag Paper, Wild Ice Leaf, Clown's Lungwort, Golden Rod,
Adam's Flannel, Beggar's Blanket, Clot-Bur, Cuddy's lungs,
Duffle, Fluffweed, Hare's Beard, Hag's Taper

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Mucilage (3%): including among others, arabino galactans,
xyloglucans

Triterpene saponins: chief components verbascosaponine
(0.007%)

Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others, aucubin,
6beta-xylosylaucubin, catalpol, isocatalpol, methyl catalpol

----- PAGE 784 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Caffeic acid derivatives: verbascoside (acteoside)

Flavonoids (0.5-4.0%): including among others, rutin, dios-
min, quercetin-7-O-glucoside, hesperidine, apigenin-7-O-
glucoside, kempferol-7-O-glucoside

Invert sugar (11%)

EFFECTS
Mullein alleviates irritation and has an expectorant effect due

to its mucin and saponin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Mullein is used internally for catarrh of the
respiratory tract, bladder and kidney conditions, enteritis,
rheumatism, coughs, flu, intestinal pain caused by colic,
asthma, cystitis, hemorrhoids, dermatoses, and painful diar-
rhea. The plant is used externally for earache, ear furuncles,
eczema of the auditory canal, middle ear infection, inflam-
matory skin diseases with itch, burns, eczema, weeping
eczema, nappy dermatitis, insect bites, and itching in the anal
and genital regions.

tt PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut, and powdered drug is
available in the form of teas and other galenic preparations
for internal and external use.

How Supplied:
Liquid — 250"n4mT, 285 mg/ml - -

Liquid Extract — 1:1

Preparation: To prepare tea, pour boiling water over 1.5 to 2
gm finely cut drug and strain after 10 to 15 minutes (1
teaspoonful is equivalent to 0.5 gm drug).

To make an oil preparation, pour 100 gm of olive oil over a
handful of fresh flowers. Leave the mixture outdoors in the
sun, stirring several times a day, then filter after 3 to 4
weeks.

To prepare a tincture, add 20 gm cut drug to 80 gm of 70%
ethanol and leave to draw for 10 days.

Daily Dose: The daily dose is 3 to 4 gm of drug. The tincture
dose is 20 to 30 drops taken several times a day.

Storage: Mullein must be protected from light and particu-
larly from moisture to prevent the drug from changing color
to brown or dark brown due to the iridoid content.

MUSKMALLOW7 533

LITERATURE

Grzybek J, Szewezyk A, Verbascum-Arten - Konigskerze oder
Wollblume Portrait einer Arzneipflanze. In: ZPT 17(6):389-398.
1996.

Haslinger E, Schroder H, Sci Pharm 60:202. 1992.
Klimek B, PA 48:51. 1991.

Kraus K, Franz G, DAZ 127:665. 1987.

Seifert K et al., PM 51:409. 1985.

Swiatek L et al., PM 45:153. 1982.

Swiatek L et al., Pharm Weekbl (Sci Ed) 9:246. 1987.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Musa paradisiaca

See Plantain

Muskmallow

Abelmoschus moschatus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds of the
plant and the oil extracted from them.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary and axillary.
They have 5 to 7 pubescent, linear, 1.5 cm long epicalyx
leaves. The sepals are about 3 cm long. The corolla has a
diameter of 7.5 cm. The petals are sulfur yellow with a
crimson spot at the base. The petals are ovate and lightly
pubescent. The fruit is a 5 to 8 cm long capsule, which is
shaped like a pentagonal pyramid and filled with numerous
large seeds. The seeds are kidney-shaped, compressed and
about 3 mm in diameter. They are grayish-brown, with
numerous striations that are concentric around the hilum.

----- PAGE 785 -----
534/MUSKMALLOW

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual erect herb
about 1 to 2 m high with star-shaped, pubescent stem, stalks
and leaves. The leaves are 15 to 25 cm long, cordate to round
with 3 to 7 lobes, which taper to a point. The petioles are as
long or longer than the leaves. The stipules are oblong and
pubescent.

Characteristics: The seeds have a strong, musky smell, and
the taste is oily. The seed pods have an aromatic flavor and
are used in some parts of the Middle East to mix with and
flavor coffee.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Africa, India, Java and
South America and is cultivated in all tropical regions.

Production: Muskmallow seeds are the dried seeds of
Hibiscus abelmoschus. The seeds are dried in the open air.

Not to be Confused With: Foenugraeci semen.

Other Names: Muskseed, Ambrette Seed, Abelmosk, Am-
bretta, Egyptian Alcee, Target-Leaved Hibiscus, Okra

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil and chief fatty acids: palmitic acid, linoleic acid,
stearic acid

Volatile oil: ambrette oil, chief components famesylacetate,

macrocyclic lactones as carriers of the musk smell such as
hexadec-7-en-16-olide (ambrettolide), tetradec-5-en-14-olide

Sterols: including beta-sitosterin, beta-sitosterin-beta-D-
glucoside
EFFECTS
Muskmallow is said to be an aromatic, a stimulant and
carminative.

e CEAN A.

INDICATIONS AWD tf SAGE
Unproven Uses: The various preparations are used internally

and externally for snake bite, cramps, stomach and intestinal
disorders with cramps, loss of appetite and headache.

Homeopathic Uses: Muskmallow is used for feelings of
tightness in die rib cage area.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Muskmallow is used as a tea or

tincture, and is administered both internally and externally.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE
Maurer B, Greider A, (1977) Helv Chim Acta 60:1155.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Srivastava KC, Rastogi SC, (1969) Planta Med 17:189.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Abelmoschus moschatus).

Myosotis arvensis
See Forget-Me-Not

Myrica cerifera
See Southern Bayberry

Myrica gale

See Sweet Gale

Myristica fragrans

See Nutmeg

Myroxylon balsamum

See Tolu Balsam

Myrrh
Commiphora molmol

TRADE NAMES

Myrrh is sold as Myrrh Commiphora, Myrrh Gum, Guggal
Resin, Wild Countryside Myrrh Gum (available from
numerous manufacturers).

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The resin, which has exuded from the bark
and dried in the air, is the medicinal part. Myrrh is the pale
yellow granular secretion that is discharged into cavities in
the bark when it is wounded. The exudate hardens to a red-
brown mass about the size of a walnut.

Flower and Fruit: The yellowish-red inflorescences are
panicled. The fruit is brown, about 7 mm long, ovate and
I acuminate.

----- PAGE 786 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: Commiphora molmol is a thorny
shrub or small tree up 3 m high. It has a thick trunk and
numerous irregular knotted branches and smaller clustered
branchlets. A few trifoliate leaves grow at the end of short
branches, with very small lateral leaflets dentate only at the
tip. The terminal leaflet is 1 cm long, obovate and glabrous.
The oleo-gum resin exudes from fissures or incisions in the
bark and is collected as irregular masses or tears, varying in
color from yellowish to reddish-brown, often with white
patches.

Characteristics: The surface may be oily or covered with
fine dust. The taste is bitter and acrid. The odor is aromatic.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to eastern Mediterranean
countries, Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Yemen and South
Arabia.

Production: Myrrh is collected in the wild from June to
August and consists of oleo-gum resin exuded from the
stems of Commiphora molmol after incisions have been
made in the bark. It is then air-dried. Myrrh can also
originate from other Commiphora species if the chemical
composition is comparable to the official drug.

Not to be Confused With: Some confusion can arise with
"False myrrh" or Commiphora mukul.

Other Names: Guggal Gum, Guggal Resin, Didin, Didtfiin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (2-10%): chief components are sesquiterpenes
including, among others, delta-elemene, beta-eudesmol,
alpha-copaene and furosesquiterpenes, especially 5-acetoxy-
2-memoxy-4,5-dienone (aroma-bearer), furanoeudesma-1,3-
dien," isofufanogermacren (curzeren), curzenenone, 2-
methoxy-furanoguaia-9-ene

Triterpenes (30-50%): including 3-epi-alpha-amyrin, alpha-
amyrenone

Mucilages (30-60%): chiefly methyl-glucurono-galactans)

EFFECTS

Myrrh has a local astringent, disinfectant and granulation-
promoting effect because of its essential oil (consisting
mainly of sesquiterpenes) and amaroids.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Myrrh is used for the topical treatment of
mild inflammations of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa. In
folk medicine, Myrrh is occasionally used internally as a
carminative for non-specific intestinal infections and also as
an expectorant for coughs. Folk medicine uses have also

MYRRH/535

included stimulating the appetite and the flow of digestive
juices.
Chinese Medicine: Uses include carbuncles, furuncles,

wounds (as a styptic), amenorrhea and abdominal tumors.

Indian Medicine: Among uses in Indian medicine are
menstrual disorders, stomach complaints, wounds, ulcers and
inflammations of the skin and mouth.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of myrrh is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Powdered resin, myrrh tincture and
other galenic preparations for topical use.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 657 mg

Dental powders — 10% powdered resin
Liquid — 1:1 (Myrrh gum)
Oil — 100% (Myrrh commiphora)

Preparation: Prepare 1:5 tincture using 90% ethanol (V/V)
in accordance with DAB 10.

Daily Dosage: Myrrh tincture: Paint an undiluted tincture
(1:5) on 2 to 3 times daily for external applications. As a
rinse, use 5 to 10 drops in a glass of water; as a gargle, 30 to
60 drops in a glass of water. In dental powders: 10% of
powdered resin.

Storage: The herb and its preparations should be stored in
sealed containers that protect them from light and moisture.
A desiccant should be present because the carbohydrate
component of the drug readily absorbs water. For this reason,
powdered forms should not be stored.

LITERATURE
Arora RB et al., (1972) bid J Med Res 60(6):929.

Bajaj AC, Dev S, (1982) Tetrahedron 38(19):2949.

Brieskorn CH, (1980) Tetrahedron Lett 21(6):1511.

Brieskorn CH et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22:187 et 1207.
Delaveau P et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:49.

Kodama M et al., (1975) Tetrahedron Lett 35:3065.

Malhotra SC, Ahuja MMS, (1971) Ind J Med Res 59(10):1621.
Mester L et al., (1979) Planta Med 37(4):367.

Mincione E, Iavarone C, (1972) Chim Ind 54:424 and 525.
Pernet R, (1972) Lloydia 35:280.

----- PAGE 787 -----
536/MYRRH

Ruecker G, (1972) Arch Pharm 305(7):486.

Srivastava M et al., (1984) J Biosci 6(3):277.

Tripathi SN et al., (1975) Ind. J Exp Biol 13(1):15.

Wiendl RM, Franz G, Myrthe. Neue Chemie einer alten Droge.
In: DAZ 134(1):25. 1994.

Wylegalla R, Biblische Botanik: Pflanzen und Friichte aus dem
gelobten Land. In: DAZ 137(11):867-869. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Myrrhis odorata

See Sweet Cicely

Myrtus communis*

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves (dried
and as a source of oil), twigs and the fresh, flowering
branches.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are medium-sized and stiff.
They are short, glandular-haired pedicles, which are covered
in bracteoles. They grow solitary in the leaf axils. The petals
are white with fine glands and a somewhat tomentose margin
covered with fine hairs. The anthers are yellow. The berries
are pea-sized, orbicular or ovoid-ellipsoid, blue-black or
white. They are crowned by the calyx.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Myrtle is an evergreen, bushy shrub
or a small tree growing up to 5 m high witih opposite
branches and quadrangular cane-shaped, initially delicately
glandular, downy branches. The dark green leaves are
glossy, glabrous, coriaceous, opposite-paired or whorled,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ovate to lanceolate, entire-margined, acuminate and 1-3 cm
long.

Characteristics: The berries have a sweet-spicy taste.

Habitat: Myrtle grows from the Mediterranean region to the
northwestern Himalayas.

Production: Myrtle leaves are the dried leaves of Myrtus
communis. Myrtle oil is the essential oil of Myrtus commu-
nis, which is extracted from the leaves and branches through
steam distillation. (The percentage extracted ranges from 0.1
to 0.5%.) May and June are the best months for harvesting,
since the plant has the highest concentration of essential oil
during this period.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with the
leaves of Bux semper-virens and Vaccinium vitisidaea,
which resemble Myrtle.

ACTIONS ANO PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MYRTLE OIL

Chief components: 1,8-cineol (15-45%), alpha-pinene (15-
38%), myrtenol (1-5%), myrtenylacetate (4-20%), limonene
(4-10%), alpha-terpineol (2-12%), geraniol (0.5-1.5%), gera-
nylacetate (1-5%), myrtol (a myrtle oil fraction that boils
between 160-180°C, ~xhief components 1.8-cineole and
alpha-pinene)

EFFECTS: MYRTLE OIL
The oil's mono- and sesquiterterpenes display antibacterial,
fungicidal and disinfectant activity.

COMPOUNDS: MYRTLE LEAVES
Volatile oil (0.1-0.5%): (see Myrtle Oil compounds listing
above for composition)

Tannins (gallotannins, condensed tannins)
Acylphloroglucinols: myrtocommulon A and B

EFFECTS: MYRTLE LEAVES

The leaves, which contain essential oil and tannins, display
antimicrobial activity. An antiademic and hypoglycemic
effect was demonstrated in animal experiments. An effect on
the central nervous system (an increase in the duration of
sleep) was also proven. The efficacy in cold infections may
be attributable to the deodorizing and bronchosecretolytic
effect of the essential oil.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
MYRTLE OIL

Unproven Uses: Myrtle oil is used internally in folk
medicine for acute and chronic infections of the respiratory
tract such as bronchitis, whooping cough, tuberculosis of the
lung, as well as for bladder conditions, diarrhea, hemor-
rhoids, prostatitis and worm infestation. It is sometimes used

I as a substitute for Buchu.

----- PAGE 788 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

MYRTLE LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine internal uses include diar-
thea, hemorrhoids, prostatitis, bronchitis, sinusitis, tubercu-
losis and colds. Among external uses are ear infections, tired
limbs, fatigue and leukorrhea. External applications include
ear infections, tired limbs, and leukorrhea.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
No internal administration of the drug should take place in
the presence of inflammatory illnesses of the gastrointestinal
area or of the biliary ducts, or in the case of severe liver
diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. In rare cases, the internal administration
of Myrtle oil as a drug leads to nausea, vomiting and
diarrhea.

Pediatric Use: Preparations containing the oil should not be
applied to the faces of infants or small children because of
the possibility of triggering glottal spasm, bronchial spasm,
asthma-like attacks or even respiratory failure.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses of Myrtle oil (more than 10 g) can lead to life-
threatening poisoning, due to the high cineole content.
Symptoms include, among others, a decrease in or loss of
blood pressure, circulatory disorders, collapse and respira-
tory failure. Do not induce vomiting if poisoning occurs,
because of the danger of aspiration. Following administra-
tion of activated charcoal, the therapy for poisonings consists
of treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.); treating colic with
atropintffand providing electrolyte substitution. Treat possi-
ble cases ofaddosTs with sodium bicarbonate infusions.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
MYRTLE OIL

Mode of Administration: Myrtle is available in various
medicinal/pharmaceutical preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Prepare an infusion by mixing 15 to 30 g of the
drug with 1 L water and leave to draw for 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Single dose: 0.2 g of drug to be taken
internally.

Storage: Protect from light and keep tightly sealed.

MYRTLE LEAVES

Preparation: Prepare an infusion by mixing 15 to 30 g of the
drug with 1 L water and leave to draw for 15 minutes. A
wash is prepared by adding 30 g of leaves to 1 L of water
and letting it stand.

NASTURTIUM/537

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage of powder from the
leaves is 5 g taken before meals. 3 cups of an infusion may
be taken each day. Washes may be used several times daily.

Storage: Store the leaves in a tightly sealed container that
blocks exposure to light.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Joseph MI et al., (1987) Pharmazie 42 (2): 142.
Lawrence BM, Perfumer Flavorist 15:65-66. 1990.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C Thomas USA 1981.

Peyron L, Plantes Med Phytother 4:279-285. 1970.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992-

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Myrtus communis
See Myrtle

Narcissus pseudonarcissus
See Daffodil

Nardostachys jatamansi.

See Jatamansi

Nasturtium

Tropaeolum majus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh herb, the
whole fresh flowering plant and the seeds.

----- PAGE 789 -----
538 /NASTURTIUM

Flower and Fruit: The handsome campanulate flowers are
orange with flame-red to fiery red stripes. The calyx is
bilabiate, colored and has a spurred upper lip. There are 5
uneven petals. The 2 upper petals are unstemmed, the 3
lower ones are stemmed and fringed at the base. There are 8
stamens and a superior ovary with a 3-stigmaed style. The
fruit is a 3-valved pericarp. It is orbicular-reniform, fleshy,
wrinkled when ripe and dirty yellow.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual, sometimes
perennial and often creeping or climbing plant, 0.3 to 5 m
long. The main root is thin and forms an underground
runner. The stem is round, branched, fleshy and glabrous,
like the whole plant. The leaves are alternate, long-petioled,
hastate and almost circular. The leaves are 3 to 5 cm and
deeply lobed at the petiole.

Characteristics: The flowers are fragrant and the leafy parts
smell and taste like cress.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to warmer regions of South
America and is becoming naturalized in the Mediterranean
region, otherwise found as a garden or ornamental plant.

Production: Garden Nasturtium consists of the aerial parts,
the seeds or leaves of Tropaeolum majus.

Other Names: Indian Cress

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates (0.1%): in the fresh, unbruised plant: chief
components are glucotropaeolin, yielding benzyl isothiocya-
nate after cell destruction

Ascorbieefficid -(vitamin C, 300 mg/100 gm fresh weight)
Cucurbitacins (in the fruits): including cucurbitacins B
and E

Fatty oil (in the seeds, 7.5%): chief fatty acids erucic acid
(50%), 11-cis-eiconsenic acid (25%), oleic acid (12%)

Oxalates

Flavonoids: including among others, isoquercetin and quer-
cetin glycosides

Carotinoids (as blossom pigments): lutein, zeaxanthine

EFFECTS
Benzyl! mustard oil extracted from Nasturtium is bacteriostat-
ic, virostatic, and antimycotic in vitro. Mustard oils are
eliminated mainly via the breath or are collected and
eliminated in the urine; used externally, Nasturtium is a
rubefacient.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Infections of the urinary tract
* Cough
* Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Nastertium is used internally for infections
of the urinary tract and catarrh of the upper respiratory tract.
It is also used internally for mild muscular pain, skin
diseases, scurvy, tuberculosis, conditions of the respiratory
and urinary tracts, and menstrual disorders. The herb is used
externally for hair loss and for infected and poorly healing
wounds.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Do not administer to patients with gastrointestinal ulcers or
kidney diseases.

Do not administer to infants or small children.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Administration of higher dosages of the
fresh plant or of its volatile oil can lead to mucous membrane
irritation of the gastrointestinal tract. External administration
involving long-term intensive contact with the fresh plant
can lead to skin irritations. The plant possesses a low
potential for sensitization.

Pediatric Use: Not to be administered to infants or small
children.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The cut drug is available in the
form of coated and filmed tablets * and compound
preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, add 30 gm of leaves to |
liter of water.

Daily Dosage: The dose for the extract is 144 mg of
benzylisothiocyanate taken 3 times daily. The dose for the
infusion is 2 to 3 cups per day; for the pressed juice, 30 gm
per day. f

LITERATURE
Franz G, Kapuzinerkresse (Tropaeolum majus L.) Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. In: ZPT 17(4):255-622. 1996.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 790 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Pintao AM et al., In vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of
benzyl isothiocyanate: a natural product from Tropaeolum
majus. In: PH 61(3):233-236. 1995.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Nasturtium officinale

See Watercress

Neem

Antelaea azadirachta

TRADE NAMES
Neem (available from numerous manufacturers)

DESCRIPTION
Mediemal .Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
bark, die leaves? the" branches, the seeds and the latex.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has small white flowers.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Antelaea azadirachta is a deciduous
tree up to 16 m high with leaves that are compound,
alternate, oblong, ovate-lanceolate and pointed. The bark is
grayish-brown, externally fissured, and has a buff inner
surface and fibrous fracture.

Characferistics: The plant has no odor, the taste is bitter.

Habitat: Indigenous to the woods of India and Sri Lanka.
Found today in other tropical regions such as Indonesia,
Australia and western Africa.

Production: Neem tree bark, leaves and seeds are the trunk
and branch bark, leaves and seeds of Azadirachta indica or of
the closely related variety (in the literature often given as a
synonym) of Melia azedarach.

Other Names: Azedarach, Holy Tree, Nim

NEEM/ 539

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: NEEM SEED OIL

Triterpenes and tetranortriterpenes (limonoids and protoli-
monoids of the gedunin-group): for example nimbolin A and
B, nimbin, gedunin

COMPOUNDS: NEEM BARK AND LEAVES
Tannin

Volatile oil

EFFECTS
Azadirachta indica has anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
properties. Melia azedarach has an anthelmintic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Azadirachta indica is used in inflammatory
and febrile diseases (including malaria, although uncon-
firmed). Melia azedarach is used for worm infestation.

Indian Medicine: Antelaea azadirachta is used for inflamma-
tory and febrile diseases (including malaria and leprosy,
although unconfirmed), dyspeptic complaints and worm
infestation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or "side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a tincture.
A slightly narcotic decoction can be prepared (said to lower
a fever). An ointment for killing lice is administered
topically.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 475 mg

LITERATURE
Adnrei GM et al., (1986) Experientia 42 (7):843.
Anon Pat. Appl 83/234, 294 Japan 1983.

Bray DH et al., (1985) Trans Royal Soc Trop Med Hyg 79:
426.

Ekong DEU, (1967) Chem Comm 808.
Ekong DEU, Ibiyemi SA, (1971) Chem Comm: 1177.

EI Said et al., (1968), Study of certain Nigerian plants used in
Fever. Communication at the Inter-Africa Symposium Dakar.

Garg GP, Nigam SK, Ogle CW, The gastric antiulcer effects of
the leaves of Neem tree. In: PM 59(3):215. 1993.

Godvindachari T et al., JNP 55:596-601. 1992.

Kraus W, Bokel M, (1981) Chemische Berichte 114:267.
Lavie D, Levy EC, (1969) Tetrahedron Letters 3525.
Okpanyi SN, Ezenkwu GC, (1981) Planta Med 41:34.
Pat. Appl 83/234, 294 Japan (1983).

----- PAGE 791 -----
540/NEEM

Rojatkar SR et al., 1-Tigloyl-3-acteyl-ll-hydroxy-4j5-
methylmeliacarpin from Azadirachta indica. In: PH 32:213.
1993.

Rucker G, Malariawirksame Verbindungen aus Pflanzen,
insbesondere Peroxide. In: PUZ 24(4): 189-195. 1995.

Siidiqui S et al., INP 55:303-310. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

Nelumbo nucifera

See Lotus

Nepalese Cardamom

Amomum aromaticum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: ‘Jhe‘medicinal parts of the giant are the

bark and fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in globose, 4 cm
long spikes with single flowers in the axils of the scale-like,
stem-clasping bracts. The inner flower bracts are elongate,
ribbed and thorn-tipped. The flowers are pale yellow with a
tubular, 3-toothed calyx. The corolla petals are tubular. The
flower tube is approximately, 2.5 cm long. The petals are 2.5
cm long, lanceolate, blunt and somewhat cap-shaped. The lip
is twice as long as the petals. The lip is round with a
cuneiform base and single stamen. The fruit is 3-chambered
and narrow ovoid in shape. It is approximately 3 cm long
and has numerous 3 mm long seeds in each chamber.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Amomum aromaticum is a herba-
ceous perennial, which grows up to | m high. The leaves are
lanceolate, up to 25 cm long and 6 cm wide. They are
pubescent beneath, with a 2 mm long ligule. The rhizome is
up to 5 m long with shoots growing in clusters from it.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: India

Production: The ripe fruit is harvested in autumn and dried
in the sun at low temperatures. Nepalese cardamoms are the
dried, ripe fruit of Amomum aromaticum.

Not to be Confused With: Amomum aromaticum may be
confused with Amomum subulatum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1%): chief constituent 1.8-cineole, including as
well, alpha- and beta-pinene, limonene, myrcene, terpinene,
p-cymol, terpineol, nerolidol, !H-indene-2,3-dihydro-5-car-
boxyl aldehyde

EFFECTS

The efficacy of the drug in the context of folk medicine is
believed to be traceable to the cineole contained in the
essential oil, although scientific data regarding this are not
available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Nepalese cardamom is used for malaria,
diarrhea, vomiting and digestive disturbances.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdoses of the essential oil can lead to life-threatening
poisoning, due to the high levels of cineole. Symptoms
include reduced blood pressure, circulatory disorders, circu-
lary collapse and asphyxiation. Vomiting is not to be induced
in the case of poisoning, due to the danger of aspiration.

Following instillation of activated charcoal, the therapy for
poisoning consists of the treatment of spasms with diazepam,
of colic with atropine, electrolyte substitution and the
countering of any acidosis that may appear with sodium
bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen respiration may
also be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb, cut drug and liquid

preparations for internal use.
Daily Dosage: As decoction 3-6 gm.
Storage: Should be protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 792 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Nepeta cataria
See Catnip

£-

Nerium oleander
See Oleander

Nerve Root

Cypripedium calceolus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome
with the roots, the fresh underground parts harvested in
autumn and the fresh roots. The roots of several varieties are
used as a sedative and antispasmodic.

Flower and Fruit: The plant develops terminal inflores-
cences with 1 to 2 flowers that have leaf-like bracts. The
flowers are 4 to 9 cm long by 0.5 to | cm wide. They are
linear-lanceolate and twisted. The petals are green, green-
brown or yellow. The petals, including the protruding lip or
shoe, are splayed. The shoe is 3 to 4 cm long in the shape of
an inflated sack. It is lemon yellow to gold with purple spots
and veins. The pollen is powdery. The pollen seeds are in 4
groups. The ovary is single-valved and pubescent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Nerve Root is a perennial, 15 to 70
cm high. The plant has a horizontal rootstock with scales and
thick root fibers. The stem is round with short hairs, and is
(x>vered'aTme"base with scaly brown leaves. There are 3 to 4
leaves above these, which are broad, elliptical/sheath-like,
folded and acute. The upper surface is bright green, the
underside is paler.

Characteristics: The plant has a faintly gentian-like smell
and has an irritating effect on the skin.

Habitat: Indigenous to the U.S. and Canada, cultivated in
Europe.

Production: Lady's Slipper rhizome is the rhizome of
Cypripedium calceolus.

Not to be Confused With: Other Cypripedium varieties

Other Names: Lady's Slipper, American Valerian, Bleeding
Heart, Moccasin Flower, Monkey Flower, Noah's Ark,
Slipper Root, Venus Shoe, Yellows

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

NEW JERSEY TEA/541

Phenanthrene quinones: including cypripedine (2,8-dime-
thoxy-7-hydroxy-1,4-phenanthrene quinone

Tannins

EFFECTS

The constituents of the drug have not been investigated.
Some species of Cypripedium contain allergens and skin-
irritating phenanthrene quinones. Nerve Root is astringent
and hemostyptic. No additional information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used for
insomnia, emotional tension, states of agitation, nervousness
and hysteria. It is also used internally in the treatment of
menorrhagia and diarrhea, as well as externally in the
treatment of pruritus vulvae.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
plant possesses a medium potential for sensitization through
skin contact.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:,The drug is administered in its dry
form or as liquid extract. The supply of higher (concentrated)
doses should be avoided.

Preparation: Liquid extract: 1:1 in 45% alcohol.

Daily Dosage: To be taken internally, 2 teaspoonfuls (2 to 4
gm) of the dried drug as an infusion.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schmalle HW, Hausen BM, Naturwissenschaften: 66:527. 1979.

New Jersey Tea

Ceanothus americanus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the dried root bark and the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences grow in the axils of the
upper leaves and have long peduncles. They are 5 to 15 cm
long, panicled, and have numerous cyme-like partial inflo-

----- PAGE 793 -----
842/NEW JERSEY TEA

rescences. The flowers are white, the petals are 2 to 3 mm
long and twice as long as the sepals. The fruit is a globose
capsule with a diameter of about 7 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ceanothus americanus is a low
deciduous shrub 40 to 100 cm high with greenish-purple
branches. The petioled leaves are alternate, 3 to 10 cm long
by 1.5 to 5 cm wide, ovate or oblong-ovate, rounded at the
base, lightly pointed at the tip, and with pinnatifid nerves.
The upper surface is glabrous or has finely compressed silky
hairs. The lower surface is densely gray and pubescent. The
leaf blade is finely and irregularly serrated. The root is
tough, woody, dark brown, and striated or finely wrinkled
longitudinally. The bark is thin, brittle and dark brown.

Characteristics: The taste is astringent; odorless.

Habitat: Indigenous to eastern and central North America. It
is also used for breeding garden hybrids.

Production: Red Root is the root of Ceanothus americanus.
The shrub is cultivated.

Other Names: Red Root, Wild Snowball, Jersey Tea,
Mountain-Sweet, Walpole Tea, Redroot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyclic peptide alkaloids (0.16% in the root cortex): includ-
ing ceanothines A to E, americine, adouetines X and Y
cyclic peptines

Triterpenes: including ceanothusic acid, ceanothenic acid,
and betulic acid

EFFECTS
The taiwjjas Jhave an astringent effect. In blood taken from
young rats, .an~aq«eoas-ethanol extract of the drug reduced
blood-clotting time by 25%. However, the results are
difficult to assess. The hemostyptic effect is attributed to the
acid fraction of the drug. The drug is still useful as an
astringent, expectorant and antispasmodic. There is no valid
data on the expectorant and antispasmodic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Formerly, New Jersey Tea was used as an
astringent, in the clotting of the blood, for fever, gonorrhea,
syphilis, and for colds and chills, especially of the respiratory
organs.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, Ceanothus americanus
is used to treat enlarged spleen.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Orally as a liquid extract.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc 3 times daily (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lagarias JC et al., (1979) J Nat Prod 42:220 et 663
Mayo de P, Starratt AN, Canad J Chem 40:1632-1641. 1962.
Servis RE et al., J Am Chem Soc 91:5619-5624. 1969.

Niauli

Melaleucaea viridiflora

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the young or
shrubby plants and the oil, which is distilled from the fresh
leaves and twigs.

Flower and Fruit: The plant grows up to 15 m.

Characteristics: The presence of traces of copper in the
Niauli oil make it slightly greenish. The aromatic odor is
reminiscent of camphor.

Habitat: The plant grows in tropical parts of southeast Asia
and Australia. -?-

Production: Niauli oil consists of the essential oil from the
leaves of Melaleucaea viridiflora, obtained by water
distillation.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Chief components: 1,8-cineole (up to 40%), viridiflorol (up
to 25%), nerolidol (up to 95%), linalool (up to 30%), (+)-
alpha-terpineol and (-)-alpha-terpineol as well as their valeric
acid esters, alpha-pinene, limonene

EFFECTS
The drug is antibacterial and stimulates circulation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Niauli is used for catarrhs of the upper
respiratory tract, rheumatism, neuralgia, cystitis.

----- PAGE 794 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications to internal use include inflammatory
illnesses of the gastrointestinal area or of the biliary ducts,
and severe liver diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The internal administration of Niauli oil
as a drug leads, in rare cases, to nausea, vomiting and
diarrhea.

Drug Interactions: Niauli oil contains 35-60% cineole.
Cineole causes the induction of the enzymes involved in the
detoxification of the liver. The effect of other drugs can
therefore be reduced and/or shortened.

Pediatric Use: Preparations containing the oil should not be
applied to the faces of infants or small children, since glottal
spasm, bronchial spasm and asthma-like attacks are possible,
as is respiratory failure.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosages of Niauli oil (more than 10 gm), can lead to
life-threatening poisonings due to the high cineole content.
Symptoms include, among others, fall in blood pressure,
circulatory disorders, collapse and respiratory failure. In case
of poisoning, vomiting should not be induced because of the
danger of aspiration. Following administration of activated
charcoal, the therapy for poisonings consists of treating
spasms with diazepam (i.v.). treating colics with atropine,
electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen
respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The oil and other galenic prepara-
tions are for internal and external application.

Preparation: Oily nose drops are prepared in a 2 to 5%
concentration in vegetable oil. For external use, preparations
contain 10 to 30% active ingredient in oil.

Daily Dosage: For internal use, the single dose is 0.2 gm,
with the daily dosage ranging from 0.2 to 2.0 gm.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimuttel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

NIGHT-BLOOMING CEREUS /543

Nicotiana tabacum

See Tobacco

Night-Blooming Cereus
Selenicereus grandiflorus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
flowers, the fresh young stems and flowers, and the fresh
young shoots and sprouts.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 18 to 25 cm long and
have a diameter of 15 to 27 cm. They have numerous, long-
acute, lanceolate tepals that are arranged in a spiral. The
outer tepals are brown; the middle ones are light yellow and
the inner ones are spatulate to acute, lanceolate and snow
white. The numerous stamens are white and have yellow
anthers. The styles with the 4-rayed stigmas become yellow
toward the top. The ovary is globular and bumpy, with
triangular scales and many brownish-gray hairs and thorns,
which are approximately 10 mm long, dark brown and
bristly.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant has a succulent trunk as
well as a 1 to 4 cm thick snake-like, creeping or climbing,
branched stem, which can grow to 10 m long or longer. The
stem is 4- to 8-sided, green to bluish, has no bumps and is
covered in adventitious roots. It has white tomentose axis
buds on the protruding vertical ribs with 6 to 11 needle-like
thorns that are 4 to 6 mm long.

Characteristics: The plant has sweet-smelling flowers,
which only bloom for about 6 hours before dying.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Central America and is
cultivated in Mexico and also in Europe.

Production: The young shoots and flowers are harvested in
June or July and then preserved in alcohol. Some cultivated
production is done in greenhouse settings, particularly in
Europe.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with the
flowers of Opuntia maxima, Selenicereus hamatus, and
Selenicereus pteranthus. The drug is adulterated commercial-
ly with the flowers of Opuntia vulgaris and Opuntia ficus-
indica.

Other Names: Sweet-Scented Cactus

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (1.5%): including among others, narcissin, rutin,
I cacticine, kaempferitine, grandiflorin, hyperoside

----- PAGE 795 -----
544/NIGHT-BLOOMING CEREUS

Amines: (found only in the shoots) chief components are
hordenine (cactine), tyramine, N-methyltyramine, N,N-di-
methyl tyramine

Betacyans: (in the blossoms, yellow pigments)

EFFECTS

The drug has an effect similar to digitalis, which includes
cardiac stimulation as well as coronary and peripheral vessel
dilation. The drug is also said to stimulate the motor neurons
of the spinal cord. In addition, the drug may act topically as
an antiphlogistic, but this is Unproven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Preparations of Selenicereus grandiflorus
are used for nervous cardiac disorders, angina pectoris,
stenocardia, and urinary ailments. In Mexico and Central
America, folk medicine internal uses include hemoptysis,
menorrhagia, dysmenorrhea, hemorrhage, cardiac com-
plaints, cystitis, shortness of breath and dropsy. Externally, it
also is used in these countries as a skin stimulant for
rheumatism.

Homeopathic Uses: Night-Blooming Cereus is used to treat
heart disease in homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Intake of the fresh juice is said to cause itching and
pustules on the skin, burning of the mouth, queasiness,
vomiting and diarrhea.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Fluid extracts and tinctures are used
internally and externally.

Preparations’: iHujd extract (Extractum Cerei Ikjuidum 1:1);
Tinctura Cerei (1:4) BPC 34; Tincture in sweetened water
(1:10).

Daily Dosage: For the folk medicine dosages, a liquid
extract is used in doses up to 0.6 ml, one to 10 times daily.
The Tincture Cerei dosage is 0.12 to 2 ml taken 2 to 3 times
daily. Dosage for the tincture in sweetened water is 10 drops,
3 to 5 times daily.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G: Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter Cactus
grandiflorus).

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Willaman JJ, Schubert BG (1961) Tech. Bull 1234: USDA
Washington DC.

Noni

Morinda citrifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaf, fruit and root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is globose. The flowers
are radial, their structures in fives with fused yellowish-white
tepals. The ovary is inferior with 1 stigma. The fruit is a
many-seeded, glassy-white berry the size of a chicken egg.

Leaves, Branches: Morinda citrifolia is a tree that is
occasionally shrub-like. It grows up to 10 m high. The leaves
are opposite, 10 to 30 cm long. The petiole is approximately
12 mm long. The lamina is coriaceous, glossy, elliptical to
elliptical-ovate, acuniinate, somewhat crenate and cuneiform
at the base with stipules. The branches are square, divided
jointed and contain nodes.

Characteristics: The fruit is inedible.
Habitat: Malaysia

Production: Noni fruit and leaves are the fresh ripe fruit and
dried leaves of Morinda citrifolia.

Other Names: Mengkudu

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Iridoids: asperulosid, deacetylasperuloside

EFFECTS
No definitive data available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Noni is used for diabetes, as a blood purifier
(for women), for fever and stomachache (Malaysia).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: The dried leaves are used as hot compresses on
the chest and stomach (for fever and stomachache).

----- PAGE 796 -----
Ok

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Hirazumi A, Furusawa E, Chou SC, Hokama Y,
Immunomodulation contributes to the anticancer activity of
morinda citrifolia (noni) fruit juice. Planta Med, 39:7-9, 1996.

Younos C, Rolland A, Fleurentin J, Lanhers MC, Misslin R,
Mortier F, Analgesic and behavioral effects of Morinda
citrifolia. Planta Med, 56:430-4, 1990 Oct.

Northern Prickly Ash

Zanthoxylum americanum

TRADE NAMES
Prickly Ash Autumn-Harvested

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root bark and

the berries.

Flower and Fruit: The greenish-yellow flowers are in
terminal umbels. The fruit is black or deep blue and enclosed
in a gray shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an aromatic shrub or
small tree up to 3 m tall. The branches are alternate and the
leaves pinnatifid. The bark and the petioles are covered in
sharp spines about 5 mm long. The bark is brownish-gray on
the outside and faintly furrowed with whitish patches and
flattened spines that are about 5 mm long.

Characteristics: The leaves and berries have an aromatic
lemon-like fragrance, and the bark has a pungent, acrid taste.

Habitat: The plant grows in North America.

Other "rfSrnes:' Prickly Ash, Toothache Tree, Yellow Wood,
Suterberry ™ ee

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Pyranocoumarins: xanthoxyletin (xanthoxyloin), xanthyle-

tin, alloxanthyletin

Isoquinoline alkaloids: chelerythrine, berberine, N-methyl-
isocorydine, laurifoline, magnoflorine, nitidine

Volatile oil
Resins

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Northern Prickly Ash is used for low blood
pressure, rheumatic disorders, fever and inflammation.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for toothache, headache,
eye and ear conditions, dyspeptic symptoms, colic, flatu-

NUTMEG/S545

lence, worm infestation, diarrhea, fever, coughs, asthma,
paralyses and leprosy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage is said to lead to salivation, increased cardiac
function and elevated blood pressure. Severe poisonings
resulting from intake of the drug have not been recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid extract, in preparations and
in combinations.

How Supplied: Liquid extract—1:4

LITERATURE
Fish F et al., (1975) Lloydia 38:268.

Fish F, Waterman PG, (1973) J Pharm Pharmac. 25S, 115.

Kem W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia-of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press, Cambrigde 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Nutmeg
Myristica fragrans

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are die nutmeg seeds,
which through various processes yield several therapeutic
components. They include the essential oil of the seed; the
compressed, dried aril; the mixture of fat, oil and color
pigment from the pressed seeds; the dried seed kernels freed
from the aril and shell of the nut; calcified seed kernels; and
the dried seed kernels.

Flower and Fruit: Myristica fragans is either male or female,
although mere are male trees with female flowers and fruit
The flowers are unisexual. The male flowers are in sparsely
flowered inflorescence; the female ones are solitary and
inconspicuous. The flowers have a simple 3-lobed involucre;
the filaments are fused to a tube. The fruit ripens 7 to 10

----- PAGE 797 -----
546/NUTMEG

months after flowering. The fruit is fleshy, almost round,
acuminate at the stem end, 3 to 6 cm long and 2.5 to 5 cm
thick. The fruit is light yellow and about the size of a peach.
The fruit flesh bursts open when ripe and exposes the bright
red seed's aril that surrounds the dark brown seed. Within
the aril, the seed kernel is covered in a hard brown testis that
shows the marks of the aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Nutmeg is an evergreen tree up to 15
m in height. The smooth bark is green on the young
branches, then turns grayish-brown. The alternate leaves are
dark green, entire-margined, sharp edged, short-petioled,
ovate-elliptical and up to 8 cm long.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Molucca Islands and
New Guinea and has spread to Indonesia, the West Indies
and other tropical areas, where it also is cultivated.

Production: Nutmeg is the seed of Myristica fragrans. After
harvesting, the nut is shelled and dried (maximum 45° C),
and the seed is opened after 4 to 8 weeks. The lacy, fleshy
covering of the nut, which is scarlet when fresh and dark
orange when dried, yields Nutmeg and Mace. After being
separated, both parts are dried slowly. The nut is ground and
then distilled. Nutmeg butter is made by pressing and
steaming the nuts to extract the fatty and essential oils from
the seeds.

Not to be Confused With: Several other nuts are often given
the name nutmeg. Confusion may occur with calabash
nutmeg (Monodora myristica), Papua nutmeg (Myristica
succedanea) and Myristica malabarica, Laurelia sempervi-
rens, Atherosperma moschatum, Ravensara aromatica, Cryp-
tocarya moschata, Torreya californica. Nutmeg oil is
sometimes confused with the oil from the green leaves of
Myristicafragrans.

Other NameSx’\M&ce* ~ -«@

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: NUTMEG

Volatile oil (7-16%)

Fatty oil (30-40%): fatty acids including among others
lauric, myristic, pentadecanoic, palmitic, heptadecanoic,
stearic, oleic acid

Triterpene saponins
Sterols: including among others beta-sitosterol, campesterol

COMPOUNDS: NUTMEG OIL
Monoterpene hydrocarbons 80%): including
(39%), alpha-pinene (13%), beta-pinene (9%)

sabinene

monoterpene alcohols (5%): including 1,8-cineole (3.5%)

phenyl propane derivatives (10 to 18%): including myristicin
(2 to 5%), elemicin (1 to 2.5%)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Fatty oil (30 to 40%) in the nutmeg oil rendered through
pressing

EFFECTS

In animal experiments, the eugenol in the essential oil
inhibits, dose-dependently, medicinally induced diarrhea and
slows down the transport of active carbon in the gastrointes-
tinal tract. An effect on prostaglandin synthesis and an
antimicrobial effect have also been demonstrated. The use of
the drug for dysentery and rheumatic complaints seems
plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internal folk medicine uses of nutmeg
include diarrhea and dysentery, inflammation of the stomach
membranes, cramps, flatulence and vomiting. Externally, the
oil is used for rheumatism, sciatica, neuralgia and disorders
of the upper respiratory tract.

Chinese Medicine: Indications include diarrhea, vomiting
and digestive problems.

Indian Medicine: Indications in Indian medicine include
headaches, poor vision, insomnia, fever and malaria, cholera,
impotence and general debility.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are nervous
physical symptoms, digestive problems with flatulence and

disturbed perception.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. However, the drug can trigger allergic contact
dermatitis.

OVERDOSAGE: NUTMEG SEED AND OIL
Ingestion of 1 to 3 "nuts" (or even fewer) can produce
amphetamine derivatives through bioconversion of the
phenylpropane derivatives in the human body. This eventual-
ly leads to intense thirst, nausea, reddening and swelling of
the face, and alterations of consciousness from mild changes,
such as anxiety or lethargy, to intensive hallucinations. The
stupor can last from 2 to 3 days. The therapy for poisonings
consists of gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), and installation of
activated charcoal. That is followed by treating spasms
intravenously with diazepam; treating colic with atropine;
electrolyte substitution; and treating possible cases of
acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case of shock,
plasma volume expanders should be infused. Monitoring of
kidney function is essential. Intubation and oxygen respira-
tion may also be necessary.

----- PAGE 798 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Nutmeg oils, extracts, powders,
syrups and butters are used internally. The oil also is used
externally as a liniment 10%

Preparation: There is no information in the literature.
Daily Dosage:

Infusion/decoction: 1%, 50 to 200 ml daily.

Liquid extract: 1 to 2 times daily.

Oil: 1 to 3 drops internally 2 to 3 times a day.
Powder: 0.3 to 1 g; not to exceed 3 times daily.
Syrup: 10 to 40 ml daily.

Tincture: 2 to 10 ml daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once a
day (HAB1).

Storage: Nutmeg should be stored in tightly sealed contain-
ers and kept cool and dry. The oil should be protected from
light in containers that are tightly sealed, completely filled
and kept at a temperature not to exceed 25° C.

LITERATURE: NUTMEG SEED AND OIL

Baldry J et al., (1976) Int Flav Food Add 7:28.

Bennett A et al., New Eng J Med 290:110.

Effertz B et al., (1979) Z Pflanzenphysiol 92:319.

Forrest JE et al., (1974) J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1(2):205.
ForrestJE*Heacock.PvA, (1972) Lloydia 35:440.

Forrest TP et«t, Jpt973) Naturwissenschaften 60:257.
Gottlieb OR, (1979) J Ethnopharmacol 1:309.

Isogai A et al., (1973) Agric Biol Chem 37:198 et 1479.
Kim et al., (1978) Biochim. Biophys Acta 537:22.

Miller EC et al., (1983) Cancer Res 43:1124.

Misra V et al., (1978) Ind J Med Res 67:482.

Pecevski J et al., (1980) Toxicol Lett 7:739.

Rasheed A et al., (1984) Planta Med 50(2):222.

Sanford KJ, Heinz DE, (1971) Pharm Acta Helv 59(9/10):242.
Sanford KJ, Heinz DE, (1971) Phytochemistry 10:1245.
Sarath-Kumara SJ et al., (1985) J Sci Food Agric 36(2):93.
Shafkan I et al., (1977) New Eng J Med 296:694.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

NUX VOMICA/547

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chernie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Nux Vomica

Strychnos nux vomica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, dried
seeds and the dried bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are terminal and cyme-
like. The flowers have a 5-tipped calyx and a white to
greenish-white plate-shaped corolla with a long tube. There
are 5 sessile stamens in the mouth of the corolla tube. The
ovary is superior, 2-valved and has a lorlg style and a 2-lobed
stigma. The fruit, when ripe, is an orange-red, globular berry
with a diameter of 4 to 6 cm. The pulp is white, bitter and
surrounded by a tough, brittle exocarp about 1.5 mm thick.
There are usually 1 to 9 seeds in the pulp, of which 2 to 4 are
erect. The seeds are disc-like, orbicular, 12 to 25 mm wide,
radially striped, appressed pubescent and exceptionally
bitter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a tree up to 25 m high
with a "trunk circumference of up to 3 m. The branches are
obtuse-quadrangular, close together and repeatedly bifurcat-
ed. They are glabrous and they have | to 2 leaf pairs, which
are thjckened at the nodes. The trunk bark is blackish-ash-
gray and the branch bark is gray. The twigs are green and
glossy. The leaves are petiolate and crossed-opposite. The
leaf blade is glabrous, broadly ovate, entire-margined and
has a curved main rib. The broad stipules dry later.

Habitat: The plant grows all over southeast Asia from
Pakistan to Vietnam.

----- PAGE 799 -----
S48/NUX VOMICA

Production: Nux Vomica consists of the seeds of Strychnos
nux-vomica. The berries are picked when ripe. The hard
exocarp is removed and the seeds are taken out and washed
to remove any pulp residue. They are subsequently dried in
the sun.

Not to be Confused With: The seeds of Strychnos nux-
blanda, Strychnos potatorum and Strychnos wallichiana. Nux
vomica powder may be confused with the powder of date
nuts or olive stones and with by-products of stone-nut
processing.

Other Names: Poison Nut, Quaker Button's

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids (2.0-5.0%): chief alkaloids strychnine and
brucine (approximately in a 1:1 ratio), including among
others, 12-hydroxystrychnine, 15-hydroxystrychnine, alpha-
colubrine, beta-colubrine, icajine

Fatty oil
Polysaccharides as insoluble reserve substances
Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others, loganin

EFFECTS
Nux Vomica increases reflex excitability. Endogenic and
exogenic stimuli reach the targeted organ without hindrance
and, as a result, possess a strengthened effect that can be
attributed to the alkaloid strychnine. The toxic principle
strychnine deadens the inhibitory synapse of the CNS and
results in overextended musculature reactions.

The strychnine and brucine components act as competitive
antagonists of the neurotransmitter glycine. The drug is
psychoaaateptic due to an increase in reflex action, ice.,
endogenic and-~e)tGgenic stimuli reach-the targeted organ
without hindrance and as a result have a strengthened effect.
In addition, strychnine is cholinolytic in animal experiments.

In lower doses, the drug causes a reflexive increase of
glandular secretion in the gastrointestinal tract through the
amaroids.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Nux Vomica and its preparations are used in
combinations for diseases and conditions of the gastrointesti-
nal tract, organic and functional disorders of the heart and
circulatory system, diseases of the eye, nervous conditions,
depression, migraine, and climacteric complaints. In addi-
tion, the herb is used as a tonic, an appetite stimulant, for
respiratory complaints, for secondary anemia and for unspe-
cific geriatric complaints.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for general pain, febrile
illnesses, sore throat and abdominal tumors.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for loss of appetite,
anemia, lumbago, asthma, bronchitis, constipation, diabetes,
intermittent and malarial fever, skin diseases, paralyses, and
muscle weakness; a special procedure is supposed to
detoxify the seeds.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for inflammations of
the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, disorders of the
urinary tract, febrile illnesses, hepatocystic disorders, hemor-
rhoids, dizziness, headache, neuralgia, rheumatic pain,
cramps, paralyses, insomnia and nervous irritability.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is severely toxic due to the strychnine content and
is not recommended for use.

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning can occur after ingestion of one
bean. Strychnine doses of as little as 15 mg (30-50 mg of the
drug) initially cause restlessness, feelings of anxiety, height-
ening of sense perception, enhanced reflexes, equilibrium
disorders, and painful stiffness of the neck and back
musculature. Later, twitching, tonic spasms of the masseter
and neck musculature, and finally painful convulsions of the
entire body that are triggered by visual or tactile stimulation
occur. Dyspnea comes following spasm of the breathing
musculature. Death occurs through suffocation or exhaus-
tion. The lethal dosage for an adult is approximately 50 mg
strychnine (1-2 gm of the drug). Chronic intake of subcon-
vulsive dosages can also lead to death under similar
conditions after a period of weeks. This is due to an
accumulation of drug in the body, particularly in those who
have liver damage.

Following the administration of a watery suspension of
activated charcoal, the therapy for poisoning consists of
keeping external stimulation to a minimum through place-
ment in a quiet, warm, darkened room. Convulsions should
be treated with dosages of diazepam or barbital (i.v.). High-
calorie glucose infusions should also be given. Intubation
and oxygen respiration may also be required. Gastric lavage
should be avoided, due to the danger of triggering convul-
sions. Analeptics or phehothiazines should not be adminis-
tered. Because of the possibility of unwanted effects
occurring in conjunction with the administration of therapeu-
tic dosages, one should forgo any administration of the drug.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Nux Vomica is used almost
exclusively in homeopathy. Radioactively tagged strychnine
is used in medicine to detect glycinergic receptors. In
industry, the drug is used as an active agent for pest control.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 0.02-0.05 gm.

----- PAGE 800 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

The daily dosages for various preparations are as follows:
liquid (0.05 to 2 ml), extract (0.005 gm, with a maximun
dose of 0.1 gm), tincture (0.5 to 2 ml (BP80), or Strychni-
num nitricum (maximum single dose of 0.005 gm).

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

Storage: Mark the container as "poisonous" and keep
tightly sealed; protect the drug from cool air and light.

LITERATURE
Bisset NG, Phillipson JD, JNP 39:263. 1976.

Galeffi C, ETH:2:129-134. 1980.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Maier W, Groger D, Pharm Zentralhalle 107:883. 1968.

Marini-Bettolo GB, Advances in the research of curare and
Strychnos. In: Rend Accad Naz 40:1975-1976, 1-2, 61-76.
1977. Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen.
Pflanzengifte, 4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech
1993, Ar-_ -

Rodriguez F et al. PH 18:2065. 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 19915.

Nymphaea odorata

See American White Pond Lily

OAK/549

Oak

Quercus robur

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried bark of
the young branches and the lateral shoots, the dried bark of
the trunk and branches, the dried leaves of various oak
species and the seed kernels without the seed coats.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are reddish brown and
monoecious. The male flowers consist of a 5-part perigone
with 6 to 10 stamens that appear in small groups in limp,
hanging catkins. The female flowers, solitary or in groups of
up to 5, appear in a involucre which clasps the base of the
fruit and which later becomes bowl-shaped. The fruit is
solitary or in groups of up to 5 on | shared, glabrous or
occasionally sparsely pubescent stem. They are oblong-
ovdte, acuminate and enclosed in the cupule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is about 50 m high with a
broad, irregular, heavily branched crown and a trunk which
divides into gnarled, strong, bent branches. The bark is
deeply fissured, thick and grey-brown. The leaves are short-
petioled, almost sessile, oblong-obovate, almost lobed,
usually cordate or polled at the base.

Habitat: The tree is widespread in Europe, Asia Minor and
the Caucasus region.

Production: Oak bark consists of the dried bark of young
branches and saplings of Quercus robur and/or Quercus
petraea, harvested in the spring, as well as their preparations.
Oak bark is harvested from March to April. The trees fall
every 10 years. The bark is dried rapidly.

Other Names: Common Oak, Pedunculate Oak, English Oak,
Tanner's Bark

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Catechin tannins: oligomeric proanthocyanidins

Ellagitannins: (including castalagin, pedunculagin, vesvalag-
in, 2,3-(S)-hexahydroxy diphenoyl! glucose), flavano-ellagi-
tannins (acutissimins A and B, eugenigrandin, guajavacin B,
stenophyllanin C)

Gallo tannins
Monomeric and dimeric catechins and leucocyanidins
Tannins (12 to 16%)

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains tannins, is astringent, antiphlogis-
tic, antiviral and anthelmintic.

----- PAGE 801 -----
S50/0AK

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Cough/bronchitis

+ Diarrhea

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Inflammation of the skin

Unproven Uses: Oak is used internally for non-specific
diarrhea. In smaller doses it is used as a stomach tonic. The
drug is used externally for inflammatory skin diseases,
inflammation of the mouth and throat as well as the genital
and anal area, suppurating eczema, hyperhydrosis, intertrigo
and as an adjuvant treatment of chilblains.

Oak is also used in folk medicine internally for hemorrhagic
stool, non-menstrual uterine bleeding, hemoptysis and chron-
ic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. External uses
include hemorrhoid bleeding, varicose veins, uterine bleed-
ing, vaginal discharge (washes/douches), rashes, chronic,
suppurating eczema and eye

itching, scaley and

inflammations.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Whole-body baths are contraindicated with large-area weep-
ing eczemas and skin injuries, with feverish and infectious
illnesses, with cardiac insufficiency in stages III and IV
(NYHA) and with hypertonia in stage IV (WHO).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Internal administration could lead to
digestive complaints because of the secretion-inhibiting
effect of the tannins.

Drug-Interactions: The absorption of alkaloids and other
alkaline Tmigs* may bejreduced or inhibited.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Oak is available as whole, crude
and powdered drug form, as a bath additive and in
compounded preparations. It is also available in solid
pharmaceutical form for oral intake.

Preparation:

Tea — 1 gm finely cut or coarse powdered drug is put in
cold water, rapidly boiled and strained after some time (1
teaspoon corresponds to 3 gm drug).

Bath additive — 5 gm drug is boiled with 1 Liter water and
added to the full or hip bath.

Daily Dosage:
Internally — 3 gm of drug; Tea: 1 cup 3 times a day.

Externally — Rinses/gargles: boil 2 dessertspoons finely cut
drug with 3 cups water.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Bath additive — duration: 20 minutes at 32 to 37° C.
Storage: Should be tightly sealed and protected from light
LITERATURE

Ahn BZ et al., Arch Pharm 304:666. 1971.

Glasl H, DAZ 123:1979. 1983.

Konig M et al., Ellegitannins and complex tannins from
Quercus petraea bark. In: JNP 57(10):1411-1415. 1994.
Pallenbach E, Scholz E, Konig M, Rimpler H,
Proanthocyanidins from Quercus petraea bark. In: PM
59(3):264. 1993.

Scalbert A et al., PH 27:3483. 1988.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht. In:
DAZ 132(37): 1873. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drdgen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New

York 1995. -

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Oak Gall

Quercus infectoria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the leaf.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are tangled into
hanging, axillary cadcins, with a 6- to 8-tepaled perigone and
6 to 10 stamens. The female sessile flowers are single or in
small groups in the leaf axils of dropping stipules. The
perigone is 6-tipped with an inferior 3-chambered ovary
surrounded by an initially inconspicuous and then later cup-
shaped cupula. The fruit is up to 4 cm long, cylindrical,
shiny brown and is 3 times longer than the cupula, which is

covered with narrow scales.

----- PAGE 802 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows as a shrub or small
tree, diclinous and monoecious. The leaves are alternate,
approximately 5 cm long, short-petiolate, elongate, sinuate,
roughly thorny-tipped serrate.

Characteristics: Apical galls are formed by the laying of
eggs by the gall wasp (Andricus gallae-tinctoriae) in the
young leaf buds.

Habitat: The various Quercus species originated in Iran, Iraq
and Turkey, but are now widespread and_ particularly
common in Asia Minor, Europe and North Africa.

Production: Oak Gall is the gall of Quercus infectoria
produced by gall wasps (Andricus gallae-tinktoriae) laying
their eggs in the leaf buds. The development of the larva
probably stimulates the bud as an infection would and
produces the gall as a reaction.

Other Names: Gallinaccia Oak

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins (60 to 70%): gallotannins, particularly hexa- and
heptagalloyl-glucoses

Phenol carboxylic acids: gallic acid (3%), ellagic acid (2%)

EFFECTS

The astringent quality of the drug can be explained by the
tannins it contains. The dry extract exhibits analgetic,
hypoglycemic and sedative-hypnotic efficacy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: External uses include treatment of inflam-
mation of the skin and frostbite and as an adjuvant in the
treatment of infectious skin conditions. Oak gall is used
exterrilury "for chilblains and gingivitis, for which efficacy
appears plausible but has not yet beeti sufficiently
documented.

Indian Medicine: Uses include intestinal hemorrhaging,
coughing blood, diarrhea, dysentery, ulcerative stomatitis,
coughs, bronchitis, dyspepsia, fever, gonorrhea, leucorrhea,
menorrhagia, impetigo, eczema, hemorrhoids, pharyngody-
nia, diabetes, hyperhidrosis and tonsillitis.

Chinese Medicine: Dysentery, hyperhidrosis, oral ulceration,
leucorrhea, hemorrhoids, wounds and rectal prolapse are
considered to be indications. Efficacy for these indications
has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
external administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the whole, cut and
powdered drug have internal and external applications.

OATS /551

Preparation:
Tincture — Powdered gall apples are mixed roughly 1:5 with
spirit of wine.

Storage: The drug should be stored in a tightly sealed
container.

LITERATURE
Dar MS, Ikram M, Fakbuhi T, Constituents of Quercus
infectoria. Planta Med, 65:286-7, 1977 May.

Dar MS, Ikram M, Fakouhi T, Pharmacology of Quercus
infectoria. J Pharm Sci, 65:1791-4, 1976 Dec.

Dar MS, Ikram M, Fakouhi T, Studies on Quercus infectoria;
isolation of syringic acid and determination of its central
depressive activity. Planta Med, 65:156-61, 1979 Feb.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Oats

Avena sativa

TRADE NAMES
Wild Oats, Oat Bran, Oatstraw

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
above-ground plant, the ripe, dried fruits, and the dried,
threshed leaf and stem.

Flower and Fruit: The spikelet has 2 to 3 flowers. The outer
glume has no awn, is 18 to 30 mm long and has 7 to 11 ribs.
The top glumes grow from 12 to 24:;mm long, have 2
divisions and a dentate tip. They have 7 ribs and can either
be awned or unawned. The awn is 15 to 40 mm long, upright
and rough. The double ribbed husks are 10 to 20 mm long
and are thickly ciliate on the short ridge. The 3 stamens are
2.5 to 4 mm long. The ovary has a pinnatifid stigma. The
fruit is 7 to 12 mm long, narrowly elliptoid and pubescent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Oat is a light-green annual grass
with a bushy root. The stalks are 60 to 100 cm high, smooth
and glabrous. The linear-lanceolate tapering, flat leaves are
in double rows, and the leaf sheath is clasping. The ligula is
short and ovate with triangular pointed teeth. The leaf blade
is linear-lanceolate and is 45 cm long by 5 to 15 mm wide.

Habitat: Oats originated in England, France, Poland, Germa-
ny and Russia, and are now cultivated worldwide.

Production: Wild oat herb consists of the fresh above-
ground parts of Avena sativa, which are harvested shortly
before the height of the flowering season and then quickly

----- PAGE 803 -----
552/0ATS

dried. Oats consist of the ripe, dried fruits of Avena sativa.
Oat bran is taken from the outer layer of the husked fruit. To
make rolled oats, the husked fruit is treated with steam, then
crushed. Oat straw consists of the dried, threshed leaves and
stems of Avena sativa, also harvested shortly before the
height of the flowering season.

Other Names: Grain, Groats, Oatmeal, Straw

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: OAT HERB

Soluble oligo- and polysaccharides: including saccharose,
kestose, neokestose, bifurcose, beta- glucans, galac-
toarabinoxylans

Silicic acid (partially water-soluble)
Steroid saponins: avenacoside A and B
Unusual amino acids: avenic acid A and B

Flavonoids: including vitexin-, isovitexin-, apigenin-, isoor-
ientin-, tricinglycosides

EFFECTS: OAT HERB

In one poorly constructed experimental investigation, the
drug was said to lower the uric acid level and to display an
antihepatoxin effect in animal experiments. The mode of
action was not explained.

COMPOUNDS: OAT FRUIT

Starch

Soluble polysaccharides: in particular beta-glucans and
arabinoxylans

Proteic substances: including gliadin, avenin, avenalin

Peptides: alpjia-avenothionine, beta-avenothionine

Steroid saponinsT avenacoside A and B * " *

Sterols: including beta-sitosterol, delta-5-avenasterol
Fatty oil

Vitamins of the B-group

Amines: including gramine

EFFECTS: OAT FRUIT

Dehusked oats are, according to various studies, able to
lower serum cholesterol and to hinder prostaglandin biosyn-
thesis. The latest research attributes the cholesterol-lowering
effect to the water-soluble polysaccharides, in particular
beta-glucans.

COMPOUNDS: OAT STRAW

Soluble oligo- and polysaccharides: including saccharose,
kestose, neokestose, bifurcose, beta-glucans, _galac-
toarabinoxylans

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
Silicic acid (partially water-soluble)
Steroid saponins: avenacoside A and B
Unusual amino acids: avenic acid A and B

Flavonoids: including vitexin-, isovitexin-, apigenin-, isoor-
ientin-, tricinglycosides

EFFECTS: OAT STRAW
There is no information available concerning the efficacy of
oat straw.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
OAT HERB

Unproven Uses: Wild oat herb preparations are used for
many purposes, including acute and chronic anxiety, atonia
of the bladder and connective tissue, connective tissue
deficiencies, excitation, gout, kidney ailments in Kneipp
therapy, neurasthenic and pseudoneurasthenic syndromes.
old age symptoms, opium and tobacco withdrawal treatment,
rheumatism, skin diseases, sleeplessness, stress, weakness of
the bladder, and as a tonic and roborant. The efficacy for the
claimed applications is not documented.

Homeopathic Uses: Oats are used in homeopathy for
exhaustion and insomnia.

OAT FRUIT

Unproven Uses: Oat preparations are used for diseases and
complaints of the gastrointestinal tract, gallbladder and
kidneys, for cardiovascular disorders, constipation, diabetes,
diarrhea, physical fatigue, rheumatism, and as a gruel for
chest and throat complaints. The claimed efficacy has not
been fully substantiated. ™

OAT STRAW
Approved by Commission E:

* Inflammation of the skin
+ Warts

Unproven Uses: The drug is employed externally for
seborrheic skin disorders, especially those accompanied by
itch. Oat straw is used for abdominal fatigue, bladder and
rheumatic disorders, eye ailments, frostbite, gout, impetigo
and metabolic diseases. It is used in foot baths for
chronically cold or tired feet. It is also used as a tea for flu
and coughs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
OAT HERB, FRUIT AND STRAW

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

----- PAGE 804 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE

AVENA HERB

Mode of Administration: The herb is used in combination
therapy, as a tea for internal use, and in homeopathic mother
tinctures and dilutions.

How — Supplied:
Liquid — 1000 mg/ml

Preparation: To make a tea, 3 gm drug is boiled in 250 ml
water, which is strained after cooling.

Daily Dosage: The tea is taken repeatedly throughout the
day and shortly before going to bed.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB1).

Storage: The herb should be protected from light and

moisture.

OAT FRUIT
Mode of Administration: The fruit is used in homeopathy and
in combination preparations.

OAT STRAW

Mode of Administration: As a comminuted herb for decoc-
tions and other galenic preparations as teas and bath
additives.

Preparation: To make oat straw bath, 100 g chopped drug is

boiled with 3 liters water for 20 minutes and the decoction is
added to the bath.

Daily Dosage: 100 g of herb is used for one full bath.

LITERATURE "

OAT HERB "****, ~ = »
Anand CL, (1971) Nature 233:4%.

Connor J et al., (1975) J Pharm Pharmacol 27:92.
Effertz B et al., (1979) Z Pflanzenphysiol 92:319.
Gabrinowicz JW, (1974) Med J Aust Ii:306.

Kim et al, (1978) Biochim Biophys Acta 537:22.
Schneider E,. Losliche Silikate im griinen Hafer. In: ZPT
11(4): 129. 1990.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht.. In:
DAZ 132(37):1873. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

OATS /553
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
WichU M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

OAT FRUIT
Connor J et al., (1975) J Pharm Pharmacol 27:92.

Effertz B et al., (1979) Z Pflanzenphysiol 92: 319Anand CL
(1971) Nature 233:496.

Gabrinowicz JW, (1974) Med J Aust Ii: 306.
Kim et al., (1978) Biochim Biophys Acta 537:22.

Schneider E, Losliche Silikate im griinen Hafer. In: ZPT
11(4):129. 1990.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht.. In:
DAZ 132(37): 1873. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

OAT STRAW

Kim et al., (1978) Biochim Biophys Acta 537:22.

Anand CL, (1971) Nature 233:496.

Connr J et al., (1975) J Pharm Pharmacol 27:92.

Effertz B et al., (1979) Z Pflanzenphysio*92:319.
Gabrinowicz JW, (1974) Med J Aust Ii: 306..

Jaspersen-Schib R, Ballaststoffe als Lipidsenker. In: DAZ
132(39): 1991. 1992.

Schneider E, Losliche Silikate im griinen Hafer. In: ZPT
11(4); 129. 1990.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht. In:
DAZ 132(37):1873. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 805 -----
$54/OCIMUM BASILICUM

Ocimum basilicum
See Basil

Oenanthe aquatica

See Water Fennel

Oenanthe crocata

See Water Drop wort

Oenothera biennis

See Evening Primrose

Oilseed Rape

Brassica napus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
roots and seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in racemes with 4 upright,
splayed sepals. The 4 petals are yellow, 11 to 14 mm long,
almost twice as long as the calyx, with an orbicular-elliptical
surface. TJ*cre_are 2 short and 4 long stamens. The ovary is
superior, with 4foseti calpels. The fruit is 4.5 to 11 cm long
and is a dehiscent pod opening on 2 sides with a septum and
20 to 40 seeds. The seeds are globose and approximately 1.5
to 3 mm in diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Oilseed Rape is an annual or
biennial herb that grows up to 14 m high. The leaves are
alternate with a bluish bloom; the lower ones are petiolate
and pinnatisect, with relatively large terminal lobes and are
slightly pubescent. The middle and upper leaves are sessile,
partly clasping, simple, glabrous, dentate or entire. The stem
of larger plants is branched. The root is thin and spindle-
shaped.

Habitat: Europe, North Africa, U.S.

Production: The seeds are cold-pressed and then refined.
Rapeseed oil is the cold-pressed and refined oil from the ripe
seeds of Brassica napus.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Not to be Confused With: Rapeseed oil may be adulterated
with resins and mineral oil. Sinapis arvensis is a permitted
substitute.

Other Names: Colza, Cole, Rape, Rape Seed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids: oleic acid (60%), linoleic acid
(20%), linolenic acid (10%), as well as palmitic acid, stearic
acid, eicosanoic acid, behenic acid. Varieties with high
erucic acid content (40 to 50%) are no longer cultivated
(reduction of the erucic acid content in the Common Market
countries to below 5%)

Sterols: beta-sitosterol, campesterol, brassicasterol, estered
to some extent

EFFECTS
Rapeseed oil, when ingested in high dosages over an
extended period of time, is cardiotoxic. The drug is chiefly
used as a substitute for olive oil and in the manufacture of
salves and liniments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
No medicinal indications

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages of the oil,
which is low on erucic acid.

DOSAGE
Storage: Store in the dark, in well-filled containers.

LITERATURE
Butcher RD, Goodman BA, Deighton N, SnDth WH, Evaluation
of the allergic/irritant potential of air pollutants: detection of
proteins modified by volatile organic compounds from oilseed
rape (Brassica napus ssp. oleifera) using electrospray ionization-
mass spectrometry. Clin Exp Allergy, 25 (1995).

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeuuschen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Slabas AR, Cottingham IR, Austin A, Hellyer A, Safford R,
Smith CG, Immunological detection of NADH-specific enoyl-
ACP reductase from rape seed (Brassica napus) - induction,
relationship of alpha and beta polypeptides, mRNA translation
and interaction with ACP. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1039:181-8,
1990 Jun 19.

Olea europaea
See Olive

----- PAGE 806 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Oleander

Nerium oleander

DESCRIPTION

£ Medicinal Parts: The leaves are the medicinal part of the

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The corolla is 4 to 7 mm in diameter,
usually pink to red but sometimes white. The petals are
thickly covered in glands. The tube is 2 cm long as are the
obtuse and patent lobes. The anther appendages are long,
pubescent and twisted. The follicles are 8 to 16 cm by 0.5 to
1 cm, erect and reddish-brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The evergreen plant can be tree or
shrub-like. The trunks are up to 4 m high. The leaves are 6 to
12 by 12 to 2 cm, linear-lanceolate, sharp-edged, coriaceous,
dark green.

Habitat: Nerium oleanJer grows mainly in the Mediterrane-
an region but also in parts of Asia. It is cultivated in Europe.

Production: Oleander leaf is the leaf of Nerium oleander,
collected shortly before flowering and then dried in the
shade.

Other Names: Rose Laurel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardiac steroids (cardenolide): chief components are 16-
acetyl neogistonin, adynerin, S5alpha-adynerin, gentiobiosyl-
adynerin, delta 16-dehydroadynerin, digitoxigenin olean-
droside, gentibioosyl-odoroside A, gentiobiosyl-oleandrin,
glucosylleandrin, oleandrigenin glucoside, kaneroside, ne-
riaside, nerigoside’jieriumoside

Pregnanes and pregnane glycosides: including 12beta-hy-
droxy- 1 6alpha-metfioxy-pregna-4,6-dien-3,20-dione

EFFECTS

Oleander is positively inotropic and negatively chronotropic.
The cardenolide glycosides of the drug are qualitatively
digitoxin-like in their action, but generally weaker, probably
due to the lower rate of absorption.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses of Oleander leaf include
diseases and functional disorders of the heart, as well as skin
diseases. Previous internal application for myocardial insuf-
ficiency, decompensated hypertonia and cardiac insufficien-
cy is no longer common.

Indian Medicine: Among uses in Indian medicine are
scabies, eye diseases (using only the juice of the leaves) and
hemorrhoids.

OLEANDER/SS55

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Side effects can include, particularly in the case of overdos-
ages, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, stupor and
cardiac arrhythmias.

Drug Interactions: The simultaneous administration of the
drug with quinidine, calcium salts, saluretics, laxatives or
glucocorticoids increases both efficacy and side effects. For
symptoms of an acute poisoning and therapy see Digitalis.
The scientific literature (Lewin) contains numerous descrip-
tions of fatalities.

OVERDOSAGE
See PRECAUTIONS and ADVERSE REACTIONS.

DOSAGE
How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include solutions, coated tablets and compound
preparations.

Dosage: No information is available.

Storage: Oleander should be stored where it is protected
from dampness and light.

LITERATURE
Loew D, Phytotherapie bei Herzinsuffizienz. In: ZPT 18(2):92-
96. 1997.

Loew DA, Loew AD, Pharmakokinetik von herzglykosidhaltigen
Pflanzenextrakten. In: ZPT 15(4): 197-202. 1994.

Siddiqui S et al., Isolation and structure of two cardiac
glycosides fiom the leaves of Nerium oleander. In: PH
26(1):237-241. 1985.

Yamauchi T et al.. Quantitative variations m the cardiac
glycosides of oleander. In: PH 22:2211-2214. 4983.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Hoihammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 807 -----
556/OLEANDER

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Olive
Olea europaea

TRADE NAMES
Olive oil and Olive leaves are available from numerous
manufacturers. The leaves are sometimes marketed as Olive

Leaf-Powder.

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the oil extracted from the ripe drupes, and the fresh branches
containing leaves and clusters of flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in small axillary clustered
inflorescence. The calyx has 4 tips. The white corolla has a
short tube and 4 lobes. The superior ovary is bilocular, with
each side having 2 hanging anatropal ovules. The drupe has
1 to 2 seeds, is fleshy, plum-like or round. The smooth drupe
is initially green, then red and finally blue-black when ripe.
The very hard stone contains oblong compact seeds with
many endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Olive grows as a medium high shrub
ora tree up to 10 m high. The plant has pale bark and cane-
like, quadrangular to round, initially downy, thorny or
thomless*branches. The leaves are opposite, entire, stiff,
coriaceous, nairoVF-elliptical to lanceolate or eordate with
thorny tips. The upper surface is dark green, glabrous or
covered with scattered scutiform hairs; the underside shim-
mers silver with scuitform hairs.

Habitat: The plant grows in almost all of the southern
European countries and throughout the entire Mediterranean
region as far as Iran and beyond the Caucasus. Olive trees
are cultivated in many regions of the world.

Production: Olive leaves consist of the fresh or dried leaves
of Olea europaea. The leaves are harvested from cultivated
trees and dried in the shade. Olive oil is the fatty oil
extracted from the drupes of Olea europaea, using the cold-
press method.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise between Olive
leaves and the leaves of Nerium oleander. The oils of
Camellia sasanqua and other Camellia species can be
mistaken for Olive oil.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: Olivier

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: OLIVE LEAVES

Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others, oleoropine
(6-9%), additionally 6-O-oleoropinesaccharose, ligstroside,
oleoroside, oleoside-7, 1 1-dimeth-ylether

Triterpenes: including oleanolic acid, maslinic acid

Flavonoids: \uteolin-7-O-glucoside, apigenine-7-O-glu-
coside

Chalcones: olivin, olivin-4'-0-diglucoside

EFFECTS: OLIVE LEAVES

Animal tests demonstrated hypotensive, antiarrhythmic and
spasmolytic effects on the smooth muscle of the intestine,
caused by the terpenes and phenols of die drug.

COMPOUNDS: OLIVE OIL
Chieffatty acids: oleic acid (56-83%), palmitic acid (8-
20%), linoleic acid (4-20%)

Steroids (0.125 to 0.25%): beta-sitosterol, delta7-stigmaster-
ol, deltaS-avenasterol, campesterol, stigmasterol

Tocopherols (0.02%)

EFFECTS: OLIVE OIL

Through die presence of polyunsaturated fatty acids, the drug
has an antisclerotic effect by positively influencing die
serum lipids. A reduction of plasma glucose was also
observed. Contraction of the gallbladder was observed with
the increase of cholecystokinin in die plasma.

(Use for gallstones is not advised because, efficacy has not
been proven and use may cause colic.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
OLIVE LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include hypertonia,
arteriosclerosis, rheumatism and gout, diabetes mellitus and
fever.

OLIVE OIL

Unproven Uses: Internal uses of die oil in folk medicine
include cholangitis, inflammation of the gallbladder, flatu-
lence, constipation, icterus, Roemhel syndrome, gastrointes-
tinal ulcers and kidney stones. Externally, it has been used
for psoriasis, eczema, sunburn, mild burns and rheumatism.
Its use as a lubricant for constipation and dry skin conditions
appears plausible because of trie oily characteristics.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The internal administration of die drug can trigger colic
among gallstone sufferers, so its use is contraindicated.

----- PAGE 808 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

OLIVE LEAVES

Mode of Administration: The drug is available for oral use in
mono and combination tea mixture preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 580 mg

Drops

Preparation: An infusion is prepared by pouring 150 ml of
hot water over 7 to 8 g of the dried leaves. Prepare a tea by
pouring hot water over 2 teaspoonfuls of the drug and
allowing it to steep for 30 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Tea: 3 to 4 cups throughout the day.

OLIVE OIL

Daily Dosage:

Constipation — 100 to 500 ml Olive oil at body temperature
applied rectally.

Gastrointestinal ulcers — 15 to 30 ml 3 taken times daily at
mealtimes.

LITERATURE
OLIVE LEAVES

Bianchi G, Pozzi N, 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol, a major C6-C2
phenolic in Olea europaea. In: PH 35(5): 1335. 1994.

Bianco A et al., Partial synthesis of oleuropein. In: JNP
55(6):760-766. 1992.

Duarte J et, al., Effects of oleuropeosid in isolated guinea-pig
atria. In: PM 59(4):318. 1993.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
CDrogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kuwajima H et al., A secoiridoid glucoside from Olea
europaea. In: PH 27(6): 1757. 1988.

Lasser B et al., (1983) Naturwissenschaften 70:95.
OLIVE OIL

Anonym, Positive Auswirkungen von Olivenol auf den
Blutdruck. In: ZPT 12(1):13. 1991.

Hemming S, Ist Olivenol erlaubt? In: DAZ 131(29):1525. 1991.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lasser B et al., (1983) Naturwissensch. 70:95.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

ONION/ 557

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Onion
Allium cepa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bulb.

Flower and Fruit: The peduncles are up to 3 cm long. Trie
flowers.are greenish-white, in orbicular umbels, with 6 free
flower bracts that are shorter than the 6 stamens. The
pedicles are eight times as long as the flowers. The fruit is a
thin-skinned capsule. The seeds are black and angular. The
flowers are in globular umbels, before blooming in membra-
nous sheaths.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial or biennial.
There are many varieties and can be compressed-globose.
ovate or oblong. Most varieties have secondary bulbs.
Leaves are shorter than the peduncle, tubular or swollen, and
blue-green. There is a hollow scape, which is gray-blue.
expanded and bloated below the middle.

Habitat: Central Asia is considered to be the region oi
origin. Onion was introduced to the Mediterranean and is
cultivated worldwide.

Production: Onion consists of the fresh or dried, thick and
fleshy leaf sheaths and stipules of Allium cepa.

©

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY ~
COMPOUNDS

Alliins (alkylcysteine sulphoxides): in particular allylalliin
(allyl-L (+)-cysteine sulphoxide) and its gamma-glutamyl
conjugates, that in the course of cutting up either the freshly
harvested bulbs or those that have been already dried and
then re-moistened, are transformed into the so-called allia-
ceous oils.

Fructosans (polysaccharides, 10-40%)

Saccharose and other sugars

Flavonoids: including —_quercetin-4'-O-beta-D-glucoside

(spiraeoside)
Steroid Saponins

EFFECTS
The thiosulphinate exhibits an antimicrobial effect, and is

effective against Bacillus subtilis, Salmonella typhi. Pseu-
domonas aeroginosa and Escherichia coli.

----- PAGE 809 -----
558/ONION

Lipid and blood pressure lowering effect: Certain constitu-
ents function similarly to those in garlic, although this is not
yet clinically proven.

Dimethyl and diphenyl-
using

Inhibits thrombocyte aggregation:
tiiiosulphinateboth retard thrombocyte biosynthesis
thrombase stimulation.

Antiasthmatic and antiallergic effect: Guinea pigs sensitized
using ovalbumin were protected from asthma attack through
the oral administration of onion juice. Administration of an
ethanol onion extract significantly reduced allergy-induced
bronchial constriction in asthma patients.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite

+ Arteriosclerosis

* Dyspeptic complaints

+ Fevers and colds

* Cough/bronchitis

¢ Hypertension

* Tendency to infection

+ Inflammation of the mouth an
* Common cold

pharynx

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is administered
internally for cough, whooping cough, bronchitis, asthma
and angina. Onion has been used to stimulate gallbladder
functions, for digestive disorders with bloating and colic
pain, for dehydration, as an aid at the introduction of
menstruation. Onion is also used for ascariasis, high blood
pressure, arteriosclerosis and in the treatment of diabetes.
Externally the drug is used for insect bites, wounds, light
burns, fujjmcles, warts, and in the after-care of bruises.

Indian Medicine: t5nion preparations are*Used for dyspeptic
conditions, respiratory conditions, wounds, pain and for
malarial fever.

Chinese Medicine: Preparations are used for worm infesta-
tion, fungal and bacterial infections.

Homeopathic Uses: Allium cepa is used for acute inflamma-
tory' illnesses, pain syndrome, flatulent colic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The intake of large quantities can lead to stomach
complaints. Frequent contact with the drug leads on rare
occasion to allergic reactions (hand eczema).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
fresh onions and other oral galenic preparations.

Cut onions, pressed juice from

Preparation: Onion oil maceration: same as garlic macera-
tion drug extract 1:1.

Old recipe: Siripus Cepae: freshly grated onions 15 g; water
60 ml; ethanol 90% (\7V) 15 ml; saccharose 150 g; the
ethanolic extract is boiled with the saccharose.

Popular: pressed juice and onion syrup: made of 500 g
onions, 500 g water, 100 g honey and 350 g sugar.

Onion tincture: 100 g minced onions in 300 g ethanol 70%
macerated for 10 days.

Daily Dosage: Raw drug is used therapeutically.

Externally the juice is spread or laid on as a poultice or in

slices.

Internally: onion tincture 4 to 5 teaspoonfuls daily; onion
syrup 4 to 5 tablespoons daily.

Average daily dose: 50 g of fresh onions or 20 g of dried
drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc; Ointment 1 to 2
times daily (HAB1)

LITERATURE

Agarwal RH, Controlled trial of the effect of cycloalliin on the
fibrinolytic activity of venous blood. In: Atherosclerosis 27:347-
351. 1977.

Augusti KT, Benaim ME, (1974) Clin Chim Acta 60:121.
Augusti KT, (1976) Curr Sci 45:863.
Dorsch W, et al., (1984) Eur J Pharmacol 107(1):17.
Jain RC, Vyas CR, (1974) Brit Med J 2:73)3.

Kabelik J, (1970) Pharmazie 25:266.

Koch HP, Hormonwirkungen bei Allium-Arten. In: ZPT
13(6): 177. 1992.

Kumari K, Augusti KT, Antidiabetic effects of S-methylcystein
sulphoxide on alloxan diabetes. In: PM 61(1):72-74. 1995.

Liakopoulou-Kyriakides M, et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24:
600 and 1593.

Maugh TH, (1979) Science 204:293.
Spare CG, Virtanen Al, (1963) Acta Chem Scand 17:641.

Tverskoy L, Dmetriey A, Kozlovsky A, Grodzinsky D, Two
phytoalexins from Allium-cepa bulbs. In: PH 30:799. 1991.

Vollhardt BR, Zwiebelolmazerat (z.B. Alligerol). In: Intern
Praxis 32(1):201. 1992.

Wagner H, Bayer Th, Dorsch W, Das antiasthmatische
Wirkprinzip der Zwiebel (Allium cepa L.). In: ZPT 9(6): 165.
1988.

Whitaker JR, (1976) Adv Food Res 22:73.
Zwiebeln gegen Durchfall. In: Medical Tribune 14:26. 1993.

----- PAGE 810 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim. 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York. 1995.

Ononis spinosa

See Spiny Rest Harrow

Onopordum acanthium
See Scotch Thistle

Ophioglossum vulgatum

See English Adder's Tongue

Opium Antidote

Combretum micranthum

DESCRIPTION _
Medicinal Parts: The dry leaves and stems are the medicinal

parts of the plant.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are 10 to 13 cm long and
about 6 cm wide, with 8 to 10 lateral spreading veins,
transparent in the axils. The surface of the young leaves has
small scales.

Characteristics: The taste is astringent and strong.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China, Malaysia and
Indonesia.

Production: Combretum leaves are the dried leaves of
Combretum micramthum.

Other Names: Combretum, Jungle Weed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pyrrolidine alkaloid betaines: stachydrines, 4-hydroxysta-
chydrines, combretin-A (betaines drawn from the proline)

OREGANO/559

Catechin tannins
Flavonoids: including vitexin, saponaretin, orietin

EFFECTS
The drug has mild choleric and astringent effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug has been used for cholecystopa-
thy, dyspepsia and liver disease. It is obsolete as a drug and
now found only in combination preparations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

LITERATURE
Bassene E, Plantes Med Phytotherapie 21:173. 1987.

Bassene E et al., Ann Pharm France 44:491. 1986.

Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New Jfork, 1969.

Orchis species
See Salep

Oregano

Origanum vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the fresh or dried leaves through a process of steam
distillation, the herb picked during the flowering season and
freed from the thicker stems and dried, as well as the fresh
flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The bright purple labiate flowers are in
cyme-like panicles with elliptical, pointed and usually dark
purple bracts, which are longer than the calyx. The calyx is
tubular and has 5 even tips. The upper lip of the corolla is
flat. The lower lip has 3 lobes; the middle lobe is the widest.
There are 4 stamens, the longer ones extending beyond the
lower lip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Origanum vulgare is a woody
perennial plant, which grows up to 90 cm high. The upper
part is branched. The plant has rhizome-like runners and is
downy, bristly or velvet-like. The leaves are 10 to 40 cm

----- PAGE 811 -----
560/OREGANO

long and 4 to 25 mm wide, ovate, entire-margined or slightly
crenate, glabrous or pubescent, translucent-punctate and
petiolate.

Characteristics: The plant has an aromatic scent, similar to
Origanum majorana.

Habitat: The plant is common throughout Asia, Europe and
northern Africa.

Production: Oregano consists of the above-ground parts of
Origanum vulgare. It is harvested 5 cm above the ground
during the flowering season and dried carefully on the field
or under a roofed loft.

Other Names: Mountain Mint, Origano, Wild Marjoram,
Winter Marjoram, Wintersweet

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.15-1.0%): chief components carvacrol (share
40-70%), gamma-terpinene (8-10%), p-cymene (5-10%),
additionally alpha-pinene, myrcene, thymol. There are also
strains with thymol, linalool + terpinene-4-ol, linalool,
caryophyllene +germacren D, or germacren D as chief
components

Flavonoids: including naringin
Caffeic acid derivatives: in particular, rosmaric acid (5%)

EFFECTS
The essential oil, which contains carvacrol, is antimicrobial
in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Oregano herb is used for respiratory
disorders’such "as coughs, inflammation of the bronchial
mucous membranes and as an expectorantT In folk medicine,
it is used for coughs, dyspepsia, painful menstruation,
rheumatoid arthritis, scrofulosis, urinary tract disorders and
as a diaphoretic.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Oregano is used for colds,
fever, vomiting, dysentery, jaundice and malnutrition for
children.

Homeopathy Uses: Oregano is used to increase sexual
excitability.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Oregano infusions and powders are

used as teas, gargles and bath additives.

Preparation: For internal use, pour 250 ml boiling water
over | heaped teaspoonful and strain after 10 minutes; the
tea can be sweetened with honey. The unsweetened infusion
is used as gargle and mouthwash. To use as a bath additive,
pour | | of water over 100 g drug, strain after 10 minutes and
add to a full bath.

Daily Dosage: Tea: 1 cup several times a day. Powder: 0.5 to
1 dessertspoon 2 to 3 times daily with food.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or | ml injection solution sc twice
weekly (HAB34).

Storage: Store Oregano where it is protected from moisture
and light.

LITERATURE
Afshaypuor S et al., Volatile constituents of Origanum vulgare
ssp. Viride (syn. O. heracleoticum) from Iran. In: PM 63(2): 179-
180. 1997.

Afshaypuor S, Essential oil constituents of wild marjoram fiom
Tran. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA,
133. 1996.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeuuschen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Oriental Arborvitae*

Thuja orientalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves
and leafy branches.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence forms cones with
horned cone scales. The male cones are apical and globose
with 3 to 6 stamens. The female cones are small, ovoid to
globose with 3 pairs of scales, the upper one sterile, the
middle one with 1 ovule and the lower one with three. The
seeds are ovoid to elliptical and have no wings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Oriental arborvitae is a diclinous,
monoecious, evergreen tree, which grows up to 10 m high.
The leaves are decussately arranged, scale-like, imbricate,
appressed to the branches, thick and acute. The edge leaves
are pressed together and keeled. The surface leaves are
ovate-rhomboid, grooved on the back, needle-like when
young and acutely splayed. The branches are vertical,

----- PAGE 812 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS.

flattened and vertically branched. The smaller branches are
the same color on both sides.

Habitat: China, Korea, Afghanistan, Iran

Production: Oriental Aborvitae tops are the dried leaves and
leafy branches of Thuja orientalis. They are harvested from
cultivated stock in late summer or early autumn, followed by
drying in the shade.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with other
Thujae species.

Other Names: Chinese Arborvitae

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.4%): containing alpha-pinene, alpha-thujone
(6%)

Flavonoids: including tricetin-3-glucoside
Wax (0.5%, estolides): chief acid juniperic acid

EFFECTS
The terpene-containing drug is severely toxic. The hemo-
styptic and hair growth-promoting effects with which it is
credited have not yet been documented in experimental data.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Oriental Arborvitae is used for coughing
blood, nose bleeds, dysentery, hematuria and hair loss.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
ModeofX3ministration: Whole herb preparations, cut and

powdered dfii*g for internal and external use.*

Preparation: to prepare Biotae Cacumen. The rubbed
branches are roasted in an iron pan until the surface
blackens.

Daily Dosage: 3 to 18 gm of drug

Storage: Should be stored in a dry place and protected from
light.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Origanum majorana

See Sweet Marjoram

ORRIS /561

Origanum vulgare

See Oregano

Orris
Tris species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome with the

roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are long-pedicled and
perfumed. The tepals are white or slightly blue. The outer
ones are darker with a yellow beard. The andiers are as big
as the filaments. The upper lip of the stigma branch is
inclined forward. The fruit is a large capsule with a number
of sections in which the brown seeds are lined up like rolls of
coins.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plants are perennial, 30 to 100
cm high. The rhizome is thick and short. The strong flower-
bearing stem is branched from the middle. The leaves are
broad, sword-shaped, usually curved and gray-green.

Habitat: Indigenous to southern Europe.

Production: Orris root is the root of Iris germanica, Iris
versicolor and other varieties.

Other Names: Iris, Florentine Orris, White Flag Root, Blue
Flag, Flag Lily, Liver Lily, Poison Flag, Snake Lily, Water
Flag, Wild Iris, Yellow Flag, Yellow Iris, Dragon Flower,
Myrtle Flower, Fliggers, Flaggon, Sheggs, Segg, Daggers,
Jacob's Sword, Gladyne

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief constituent's irone, in particular alpha-,
beta- and gamma-irone (odor resembling violets)

Triterpenes: Iridale (mono-, bi- and spirocyclic compounds,
precursors of the irones), including among others irigermanal

Isoflavonoids: including, among others, irilon, irisolone,
irigenine, tectorigenin and their glycosides including iridine

Flavonoids

Xanthones: C-glucosylxanthones, for example iris xanthone,
magniferin

Starch

EFFECTS

Orris root is mildly expectorant. Some of the flavonoids (in

particular the isoflavon irigenin) have an inhibitory effect on
c-AMP phosphodiesterase. Root extracts are said to have an

----- PAGE 813 -----
562/ORRIS

ulcer-protective, spasmolytic and serotonin-antagonistic

effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Orris has been used for disorders of the

respiratory system.

Homeopathic Uses: This species has been used to treat
disorders of the respiratory tract or thyroid gland, for
digestion complaints and headaches.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The juice of the fresh plant has a
severely irritating effect upon skin and mucous membranes.
If taken internally, it can lead to vomiting, abdominal pain
and bloody diarrhea. Severe inflammation occurs following
mucous membrane contact.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
dilutions, as a constituent of various combination prepara-

Iris is available in homeopathic

tions and in various tea mixtures.

LITERATURE

Bambhole VD, Jiddewar GG, (1985) Sach Ayurveda 37(9):557.
Duke JA, A Handbook of Medicinal Herbs, Pub. CRC Press
Boca Raton 1985.

El Moghazy AM et al., (1980) Fitoterapia 5:237.
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur

Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutische»~Pfaxisr4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Krick W et al., (1983) Z Naturforsch Sect C Biosci 38 (9/10):
689.
Lewin L, Gifte und Vergifrungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Morita N et al., (1973) Chem Pharm Bull 21, 600.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and Their Effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, Pub; HMSO
UK 1984.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tsukida K et al., (1973) Phytochemistry 12:2318.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Orthosiphon spicatus

See Java Tea

Oryza sativa

See Rice

Oswego Tea
Monarda didyma

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The terminal flowers are in 1 to 3 richly
blossomed false whorls supported by bracts. The bracts bear
leaflets that are pale green with a reddish tinge. The calyx
tips are awl-shaped. The corolla is scarlet and 3.5 to 6 cm in
length. The plant is propagated using root cuttings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a bristly haired to
glabrous 50 to 90 cm high herbaceous perennial with
runners. The stems are erect, acutely quadrangular, grooved
and hard. The leaves are in pairs, ovate-lanceolate, clearly
petiolate, crenate and often rough on both sides.

Characteristics: Monarda didyma has a scent similar to that
of the bergamot orange.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to swampy regions from
Georgia and Michigan in the U.S. and to wet areas extending
northward to Ontario, Canada.

Other Names: Scarlet Monarda, Bee Balm, Blue Balm, High
Balm, Low Balm, Mountain Balm, Mountain Mint,

Bergamot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.1-0.3%): including among others carvacrol,
thymol, p-cymene, linalool, linalyl acetate, limonene, oci-
mene, alpha-pinene, camphene, Delta3-carene

Flavonoids: including linarin, didymin (isosakurenatin-7-O-
beta-D), isosakuranin, genkwanin

----- PAGE 814 -----
4

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Anthocyans: monardein (triacyliertes pelargonidine-3, 5-di-
O-glucoside, 2 malonyl- and | p-cumaroyl- residue)

EFFECTS
The drug has antispasmodic, digestive, carminative and
diuretic effects; it is also used to regulate menstruation.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Oswego Tea is not to be used during pregnancy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for flatulence and other
digestive disorders and also menstrual complaints including
premenstrual syndrome (PMS). In Europe, the herb is
sometimes used as an aromatic, carminative and antipryreti-
cum. Former use of the drug as an alternative to quinine is no
longer common.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground drug (powder) prepared as
an infusion or tea.

LITERATURE

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Nikolaevski VV, Kononova NS, Pertsovski i AI, Shinkarchuk

IF, Effect of essential oils on the course of experimental
atherosclerosis. Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter.52-3, Sep-Oct, 1990.

Shubina LP, Siuttn *5A, "Savchenko VM, Inhalations- of essential
oils in the combined treatment of patients with chronic
bronchitis. Vrach Delo:66-7, May 1990.

Ox-Eye Daisy
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum

DESCRIPTION

Flower and Fruit: Long pedicled flowers with a semi-
globular calyx. Sepals are imbricate, green and wide, the
corolla golden-yellow and orbicular. The young flowers are
white and 1 to 2 cm long. The fiuit is 2.5 to 3 mm long and
top-shaped.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ox-Eye Daisy is a perennial growing
10 to 100 cm high. It is somewhat hairy or glabrous with
cylindrical knotted root. The stem is erect, glabrous, simple
or divided into numerous oblong 1-headed branches. The

OX-EYE DAISY/563

leaves are tough, compound and glabrous or slightly
pubescent. The cauline leaves are petiolate, linear to ovate-
oblong, roughly dentate to almost pinnatisect.

Habitat: The plant is found in Britain, Europe, Russia, Asia
and numerous other parts of the world.

Production: Ox-Eye Daisy is the above-ground part of
Chrysanthemum leucanthemum.

Other Names: White Weed, Golden Daisy, Herb Margaret,
Maudlinwort, White Daisy, Great Ox-Eye, Goldenseal,
Marguerite, Moon Daisy, Horse Gowan, Maudlin Daisy,
Dun Daisy, Butter Daisy, Horse Daisy, Moon Flower, Moon
Penny, Poverty Weed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyclitols: including meso-inositol, L(-)-quercitol, meso-ino-
sitok L(-)-quercitol

Polyynes: among them the strongly sensitizing trideca-
3,5,7,9,11-pentain-l-ol and its acetate

Flavonoids: including niviaside (a C-glycosyl flavone,
containing a cyclitol instead of a sugar), apigenein-7-0-
glucuronide

EFFECTS

Ox-Eye Daisy herb and flowers are used similarly to
Chamomile as a tonic, although they have a much weaker
effect. They are also considered to have an antispasmodic
and diuretic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internal folk medicine uses include asthma,
whooping cough and nervous agitation. Among external
applications are skin ulcers, wounds and nose bleeds. (Also
see Chamomile.)

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is, however, a strong potential for sensitiza-
tion resulting from skin contact with the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: See Chamomile.

Daily Dosage: Decoction: 1 cup 3 times daily.
LITERATURE

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 815 -----
564/OX-EYE DAISY

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Oxalis acetosella
See Wood Sorrel

Paeonia officinalis

See European Peony

Pagoda Tree
Sophora japonica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are in large, broad,
sweeping terminal panicles made up of racemes. The flowers
are papilionaceous with a patent standard. The lower edge of
the lateral wing petals are bent over so that one surrounds the
others. The fruit is a round pod tied in around the seeds like a
string of pearls.

Leaves, Stem and Trunk: The tree is reminiscent of the
robinia, with a densely branched crown. It grows 12 to 15 m
high. It has smooth, green branches. The leaves are odd-
pinnate with 11 to 15 leaflets. The leaflets are ovate, acute,
dark green above and glaucous beneath. The main leaf
petiole is very thick at the base.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China and Japan, and is
found in Europe as an ornamental and roadside tree.

Production: Pagoda Tree seeds are the ripe seeds of Sophora
japonica.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS:
Quinolizidine alkaloids (0-0.04%): including among others
cytisine, N-methyl cytisine, matrine, sophocarpine

Flavonoids: including rutin, sophorine
Toxic lectins

Polysaccharides: galactomannans
Fatty oil

Proteins

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The active agent, rutin, increases the permeability of the

capillaries.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: Pagoda Tree is used in homeopathy for
dysentery.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards, side effects, or cases of poisoning are
known in conjunction with the proper administration of
designated therapeutic dosages. Nevertheless, according to
older reports, regular consumption of the seed meal can
cause facial edema and even death. Cystine poisonings are
possible through the intake of very high dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a mother tincture in homeopath-
ic dilutions. Sophora is used by the pharmaceutical industry
in the production of rutin (a substance that influences the
resolution and porousness of the dilation of the capillaries).
The drug is contained in medicinal preparations, which are
used to stabilize blood circulation and as a cure for nervous
disorders and inflammation.

LITERATURE
Izaddoost M, PH 14:203. 1975.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Panax ginseng
See Ginseng

Papaver rhoeas
See Corn Poppy

Papaver somniferum
See Poppyseed

----- PAGE 816 -----
4l

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Papaya
Carica papaya

TRADE NAMES
Papaya (available from numerous manufacturers), Papaya
Digestive Enzyme, Papaya Enzyme Double Strength, Papaya
with Papain

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and

fruits.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has varying yellow to yellow-
ish-white flowers of both sexes. The male flowers form
many-branched, hanging panicles with small flowers. The
female flowers are almost sessile in the leaf axils on the
trunk. In addition there are androgynous, fertile flowers. The
yellow to yellow-green berry fruit is up to 30 cm long, 15 cm
thick and weighs 2 to 5 kg. The fruit is clavate and lightly
grooved. It contains numerous peppercorn-sized seeds sur-
rounded by orange-yellow and melon-flavored flesh.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Carica papaya is a 4 to 8 m high
bushy tree with an unbranched fleshy-woody trunk that is
hollow in the middle. The leaves are long-petioled, very
large and segmented into 5 to 7 palmate lobes, which
terminate in sharp tips.

Habitat: Indigenous to tropical Amenca. Cultivated in all
tropical regions today.

Production: Papaya leaves consist of the fresh or dried
leaves of Carica papaya harvested before the fruit appears.
Raw papain is the latex from Carica papaya, which has been
dried using Various methods; where necessary the latex is
decontaminated mechanically or by filtration.

Other Names: Melon Tree, Papaw, Mamaeire

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: RAW PAPAIN

Proteolytic enzymes (proteinases): papain, chymopapain A
and B, proteinase A and B, papaya peptidase A

Other enzymes: lysozyme, chitotransferase, glycosidases,
callase, pectinesterases, lipases, phosphatases, cycloligases

EFFECTS: RAW PAPAIN

The proteolytic activity of the' raw papain enzymes can be
used within the parameters of enzyme substitution for
digestive complaints, particularly pancreatic conditions.
Papain has an antimicrobial, anthelmintic and anti-ulcerative
effect.

The results of the analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects are
contradictory. Experiments have shown that papain has an

PAPAYA/ 565

edema-reducing effect. The fibrinogenous effect has not
been sufficiently proven.

COMPOUNDS: PAPAYA LEAVES

Polyketide alkaloids: carpaine, pseudocarpaine
Glucosinolates

Cyanogenic glycosides (traces): including prunasin
Saponins

Proteolytic ferments (ficin)

EFFECTS: PAPAYA LEAVES

No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

RAW PAPAIN

Unproven Uses: Papaya is used for gastrointestinal digestion
complaints, inflammations and ulcers in the gastro-duodenal
area, and pancreas excretion insufficiency.

PAPAYA LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Papaya leaf preparations are used singly or
in combinations for prophylaxis and therapy of diseases and
disorders of the gastrointestinal tract and for infections with
intestinal parasites.

Indian Medicine: Worm infestation, damage to die urinary
tract and stones, hemorrhoids, coughs and bronchitis have
been treated with Papaya leaves.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
RAW PAPAIN AND PAPAYA LEAVES
Papaya is contraindicated in pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

RAW PAPAIN

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Because of the fibrinolytic effect, a
tendency to bleed is possible when there is a predisposition
to clotting delay and during treatment with anticoagulants.
Allergic reactions, including asthma attacks, are also
possible.

Drug Interactions: There has been some documented inter-
actions with warfarin. Papaya extract has been shown to
increase the international normalized ratio (INR) levels when
used in conjunction with warfarin.

Pregnancy: Because of the experimentally proven embryo-
toxic and teratogenic effects, as well as its known abortifa-
cient effect in humans, unripe papain fruit should not be used
during pregnancy.

----- PAGE 817 -----
506/PAPAYA

PAPAYA LEAVES

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
RAW PAPAIN

Daily Dosage: The dosage depends on the composition of
the enzyme substitute preparation.

How Supplied:
Chewable Tablets
Tablets

PAPAYA LEAVES
Daily Dosage: No information is available.

LITERATURE
RAW PAPAIN

Buttle DJ et al., Affinity purification of the novel cysteine
proteinase papaya proteinase IV, and papain from papaya latex.
In: Biochem J 261(2):469-476.

Lohiya NK et al., Antifertility effects of aqueous extract of
Carica papaya seeds in male rats. In: PM 60(5):400. 1994.

McKee RA, Smith H, Purification of proteinases fiom Carica
papaya. In: PH 25:2283. 1986.

Zoch E, Uber die Inhaltsstoffe des Handelspapains. In: Arzneim
Forsch 19:1593. 1969.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Shaw D, Leon C, Kolex S, Traditional remedies and food
supplements: a 5-year toxicological study (1991-1995). Drug Saf
1997 Nov; 17(5):342-56.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PAPAYA LEAVES
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, London 1986.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Pareira

Chondrodendron tomentosum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the curare, which is
the extract from the fresh or dried trunk, along with the bark
and the dried roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow in axillary clusters 10 to
15 cm long on stems that are often unbranched. There are 9
outer pubescent sepals about 1 mm long. The inner 6 sepals
are about 3.5 mm long and glabrous. The petals are 0.4 mm
long. The fruit is a drupe about 12 mm long and 9 mm wide
on'a stem 4 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a climber that grows up
to 30 m in height. The stems are velvety. The petioles are
short-haired at the base, have long erect hairs near the leaf
blade and are about 8 to 12 cm long. The leaves are
somewhat coriaceous,-entire-margined, sparse above and
tomentose beneath. They are mildly cordate, triangular-ovate
or roundish and obtuse, 10 to 15 cm in length and width. The
root is about 2 to 5 cm in diameter, tortuous, black,
longitudinally furrowed with transverse ridges and some
constrictions. Internally the root is grayish-brown, and the
transverse section shows three or four concentric rings
traversed by wide medullary rays. The stem pieces are
similar but the external surface is grayish and marked with
numerous round, warty lenticels. a

Characteristics: The taste is at first bitter, then slightly
sweet- The plant is odorless.

Habitat: The plant is found in western Bolivia, Peru,
Ecuador, central Columbia and Panama.

Production: Pareira root is the root of Chondrodendron
tomentosum. Tubocurare is extracted from the fresh or dried
trunk with bark of the same plant.

Other Names: Pereira Brava, Velvet Leaf, Ice Vine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Bibenzyl isoquinoline alkaloids: including, among others, D-
tubocurarine, chondrocurarine, (-)-curine, (+)-chondrofoline,
chondrocurine, isochondrodendrine

EFFECTS
Tubocurare contains tubocurarine and acts as an emmena-

gogic and diuretic.

----- PAGE 818 -----
*L

4jt

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Only the tubocurarine extracted from the
bark and twigs is in use. It is a peripheral muscle relaxant,
which inhibits the stimulation of transference in the neuro-
muscular, hence causing a paralysis of the skeletal muscles.
Tubocurare is used in modern anesthetics as tubocurarine. In
Brazil, an infusion of the root is taken internally and the
crushed leaves applied externally as treatments for poisonous
snake bites.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include inflamma-
tions of the urinary tract and enlarged prostate.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the oral administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the drug. The alkaloids with curare-like effect,
such as tubocurarine, are not resorbed with oral administra-
tion of the drug.

OVERDOSAGE
Nausea and heavy urine flow have been observed in
individuals poisoned with tubocurare.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Use of drug is no longer common.

Storage: The plant is considered poisonous and should be
stored in clearly marked containers mat are impervious to
insects.

LITERATURE
Guha et al., (1979) J Nat Prod 42:1.

Further information in:

Hansel R, KellerK**Rimpler H, Schneider G (HrsgO, Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Parietaria officinalis
See Pellitory-of-the-Wall

Paris quadrifolia
See Herb Paris

PARSLEY/567

Parsley

Petroselinum crispum

TRADE NAME
Parsley Leaf, Parsley Herb (available ftom numerous
manufacturers)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the parsley fruit, the dried, separated schizocarp. the
fresh or dried aerial parts, the dried underground pans and
the whole fresh plant at the beginning of the flowering
season.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are long pedicled.
terminal, occasionally apical, 10 to 20 rayed yellowish
umbels. The involucre has 1 to 2 bracts, and the epicalyx has
6 to*8 leaves. The petals are splayed with a curved tip. The
style thickening is very developed. The fruit is orbicular-
ovate, 2.5 mm long and greenish-gray.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a biennial. It is glabrous.
has a characteristic odor and grows from 60 to 100 cm high.
The usually numerous stems grow from | root and are erecu
round, finely grooved, glabrous and branched. The root is
thin or thick fusiform to tuberous, vertical and almost
fiberless. The leaves are ovate and tripinnate. The upper ones
are shorter stemmed and less compound. The leaflets are
tripinnate.

Characteristics: Parsley has a spicy smell.

Habitat: The plant originated in the Mediterranean region

and is cultivated worldwide today. ca

Production: Parsley consists of the fresh or dried plant
section of Petroselinum. Parsley root is the dried root of
Petroselinum crispum. The fresh herb is harvested from
cultivations. Parsley seed consists of the dried ripe fruits of
Petroselinum crispum.

Not to be Confused With: The leaves of Aethusa cynapium.

Other Names: Hamburg Parsley, Persely, Petersylinge. Rock
Parsley

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PARSLEY HERB

Volatile oil (0.02-0.3%): chief components, according to
breed, up to 90%

Apiole
Myristicin

Lallyl-2,3,4,5-tetramethoxybenzole: additionally including

among others mentha-1,3,8-triene (up to 50%, aroma-bear-

----- PAGE 819 -----
568 /PARSLEY

er). alpha- and beta-pinene, alpha- and beta-phellandrene,
hybrid strains also exist

Furocoumarins: including among others, bergapten, oxy-
peucedanin, isopimpinellin, psoralen, = xanthotoxin,
imperatorin

Flavonoids (1.9-5.6%): chief components apiin

Vitamins: in particular ascorbic acid (up to 165 mg per 100
gm)

COMPOUNDS: PARSLEY ROOT

Volatile oil (0.05-0.12%): chief components of Petroselinum
crispum ssp. crispum apiole, myristicin, terpinolene, tubero-
sum apiole, beta-pinene, additionally including among oth-

ers, alpha- and beta-pinene, (&plus;)-limonene, _ beta-
bisabolene
Phthalides: including among others, ligustilide, senky-

unolide

Furocoumarins: including among others, bergaptene, oxy-
peucedanin, isopimpinellin, psoralen, xanmotoxin and
imperatorin

Flavonoids (0.2-1.3%): chief components apiin
Polyynes: including among others, falcarinol, falcarindiol

EFFECTS: PARSLEY HERB AND ROOT
Although its mode of action has not been clearly explained,
its use for urinary tract complaints seems plausible.

COMPOUNDS: PARSLEY FRUIT

Volatile oil (2-6%): chief components, according to breed
Apiole (58-80J& ”

Myristicin (49-77%)
1 -allyl-2,3,4,5-tetramethoxybenzole (50-60%)

Alpha- and beta-pinene, beta-phellandrene: among others

Furocoumarins: including among others bergapten, oxy-
peucedanin, isopimpinellin, psoralen, xanthotoxin arid

imperatorin
Fatty oil: chief fatty acid petroselic acid (60-80%)

EFFECTS: PARSLEY FRUIT

In animal experiments, a diuretic effect is said to have been
demonstrated with low doses as well as a moderate increase
in uterine tone. Higher doses increase contractility of the
smooth muscle of the intestine, bladder and especially the
uterus and therefore may be abortifacient; this explains its
use for menstruation complaints.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PARSLEY HERB AND ROOT
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
¢ Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: The herb is used for flushing the efferent
urinary tract and for the prevention and treatment of kidney
gravel. In folk medicine, it is used for gastrointestinal
disorders, jaundice, kidney and bladder inflammation, as a
diuretic and as an emmenagogue.

Homeopathic Uses: Inflammation of the urinary tract and
irritable bladder.

PARSLEY FRUIT

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the fruit has been used for
menstrual disturbances, disorders of the gastrointestinal tract,
the, kidneys and lower urinary tract, and as a digestive.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
PARSLEY HERB, ROOT AND FRUIT

The herb is contraindicated in patients allergic to parsley or
apiole, those with kidney inflammations and in pregnant
women. Irrigation therapy should not be carried out in the
presence of edema resulting from reduced cardiac and
kidney function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
PARSLEY HERB AND ROOT

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug leads rarely to contact
allergies; photodermatosis is also conceivable following
intensive skin contact between freshly harvested plant parts
and light-skinned individuals.

Pregnancy: Therapeutic doses are contraindicated in

pregnancy.

PARSLEY FRUIT

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug leads rarely to contact
allergies; photodermatoses occur somewhat more frequently
following skin contact.

Pregnancy: Parsley fruit preparations are contraindicated in
pregnancy; an abortive effect has been observed.

OVERDOSAGE

PARSLEY HERB, ROOT AND FRUIT

The administration of higher dosages of the volatile oil or of
preparations with high concentrations of the volatile oil can
lead to poisonings. Symptoms include elevated contractility
of the smooth musculature, in particular of the urinary
bladder, of the intestines and of the uterus. Other symptoms

----- PAGE 820 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

may include anuria, bloody stools, emaciation, fatty liver*
hemolysis, methemoglobinuria and mucous membrane

bleeding.

DOSAGE

PARSLEY HERB AND ROOT

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions as
well as other galenic preparations with a comparably small
proportion of essential oil to be taken orally. Dry extracts are
used in pharmaceutical products, such as tablets.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 450 mg, 455 mg

Liquid — 1:1
Preparation: Infusion: Pour boiling water over 2 gm finely

cut drug and strain after 10 to 15 minutes.

Daily Dosage: A total of 6 gm in the appropriate
preparations.

Infusion: 2 to 3 cups over the course of the day.

Adequate intake of liquid is essential for flushing out
treatment.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HABI1). The daily dosage is 6 gm drug. Adequate
intake of liquid is essential for flushing out treatment.

Storage: Protect from light and moisture and tightly sealed.

PARSLEY FRUIT
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the fruit are for

internal use.

Preparation: To rrfake'an infusion, pour boiling* water over
lgm freshly pressed drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is | gm.
Tea — Two to 3 cups of the infusion can be taken daily.
Storage: Protect from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
PARSLEY HERB AND ROOT

Ashraf M et al., (1980) Pak J Sci Ind Res 23(3/4): 128.
Bjeldanes LF, Kim I, (1977) J Org Chem 42:2333.

Busse WW et al., (1984) J All Clin. Immunol. 73:801.
Chaudhary SK et al., (1986) Planta Med (6):462.

Gijbels MJM et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 61(1): 17.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Eds.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Harborne Jr. B, Williams CE, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:1741.
Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Innocenti G et al., (1976) Planta Med 29:165.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New
York 1980.

MacLeod AJ et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(11):2623.
MacLeod AJ, Snyder CH, Subramanian G, Volatile aroma
constituents from parsley leafs. In: PH 24(Il):2623-2627. 1985.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Middleton E, Drzewiecki G, (1984) Biochem Pharmacol
33:3333.

Neuhaus-Carlisle K et al., Calcium-antagonistic activity of
extracts and constituents of Petroselinum crispum and other
pheaylpropane derivatives. In: PM 59(7):A582. 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Jormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengiile.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg/ Lech 1993.

Sokeland J, Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1):8.
1989.

Stahl E, Jork H, Chemische Rssen bei Arzneipflanzen. I. Mitt.
Untersuchung der Kultu'rvaTietaten europaischer
Petersilienhrkiinfte. In: Arch Pharmaz 297:273-281. 1964.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Warncke D, Petroselinum crispum - Die Gartenpetersilie. In:
ZPT 15(1):50-58. 1994.

Wichtl M (Ed.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsses. Stungan
1997.

Zheng GQ, Kenney PM, Lam LKT, Myristicin - a potential
cancer chemopreventive agent from parsley leaf oil. In: J Agric
Food Chem 40(1): 107. 1992.

PARSLEY FRUIT

Ashraf M et al., (1980) Pak J Sci Ind Res 23(3/4): 128.
Bjeldanes LF, Kim I, (1977) J Org Chem 42:2333.

Busse WW et al., (1984) J All Clin. Immunol. 73:801.
Chaudhary SK et al., (1986) Planta Med (6):462.

Gijbels MJM et al., (1985) Fitoterapia 61(1): 17.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Eds.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 821 -----
570/PARSLEY

Harbome Jr. B, Williams CE, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:1741.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen. Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Innocenti G et al., (1976) Planta Med 29:165.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

MacLeod AJ et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(11):2623.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Middleton E, Drzewiecki G, (1984) Biochem Pharmacol
33:3333."
Neuhaus-Carlisle K et al.. Calcium-antagonistic activity of
extracts and constituents of Petroselinum crispum and other
phenylpropane derivatives. In: PM 59(7):A582. 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Jormann K. Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifle.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg/ Lech 1993.

Sokeland J, Phytotherapie in der Urologie. In: ZPT 10(1 ):8.
1989.
Stahl E, Jork H, Chemische Rssen bei Arzneipflanzen. I. Mitt.

Untersuchung der Kulturvarietaten europaischer
Petersilienhrkunfte. In: Arch Pharmaz 297:273-281. 1964.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Warncke D, Petroselinum crispum - Die Gartenpetersilie. In:
ZPT 15(1):5G-5S: *994r

Wichtl M (Ed.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

Zheng GQ, Kenney PM, Lam LKT, Myristicin - a potential
cancer chemopreventive agent from parsley leaf oil. In: J Agric
Food Chem 40(1): 107. 1992.

Parsley Piert

Aphanes arvensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
above-ground section.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in axillary clusters of 10
to 20. They are encircled by stipules. The sepals are erect,
acuminate-ovate and pubescent on the outside and on the

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

margins. They are glabrous on the inside and draw together
when the fruit ripens. The fruit is 1 mm long, ovate, keeled,
flat and jug-shaped. The calyx is vertically wrinkled and
pubescent.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual or hardy
annual 2 to 30 cm long and dull green in color. The root is
thin, branched and fusiform. The stem is generally branched
and decumbent, with short internodes. The leaves are 3 to 5
lobed fan- or diamond-shaped. The upper ones are short-
petioled. The lower leaves are sessile and usually rough-
haired, occasionally only ciliate. The stipules are semi-ovate,
indentate-serrate, leafy and pubescent.

Habitat: Parsley Piert grows in Britain, Europe, northern
Africa, and the U.S.

Production: Parsley Piert herb is the above-ground part of

Aphanes arvensis.

Not to be Confused With: The plants name is a reference to
the serrated shape of the leaves; it is not related to the

parsley herb.

Other Names: Parsley Breakstone, Field Lady's Mantle,

Parsley Piercestone

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannin

EFFECTS
The herb is claimed to be effective as a diuretic and a

psychostimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Parsley Piert is used in folk remedies in the
treatment of urinary tract disorders, especially kidney and
bladder stones, and as a diuretic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The fresh or dried drug and the
liquid extract are used.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 822 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Parsnip
Pastinaca sativa

DESCRIPTION

“Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried fruit, the

ML

dried herb, the dried root and the fresh, 2-year-old root of
cultivated plants.

Flower and Fruit: The golden yellow flowers are in 8- to 12-
rayed umbels, which are quite flat and contain androgynous
blooms. There is usually no involucre or epicalyx, or they
consist of | or 2 dropping bracts. The petals are even-sized,
golden yellow, 0.5 mm long when rolled up and | mm wide.
The fruit is broad-elliptical, compressed, similar to a lentil, 5
to 7 mm long and 4 to 5.5 mm wide. It is yellow-brownish
when ripe. The fruit is marked with oil marks and hollows.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a biennial, which grows
from 30 to 100 cm. The root is fusiform or tuberous like a
carrot or turnip. It is whitish and usually bears only I stem.
The stem is erect, angular, grooved, short-haired to glabrous
and branched above. The leaves are simple pinnate, glossy
above, paler and soft-haired beneath. The cauline leaves are
on a long sheath, which is rolled at the edge. The basal
leaves are petiolate; the leaflets are ovate-oblong and deeply
lobed at the base. The terminal leaflet is 3 lobed and roughly
crenate to serrate.

Characteristics: The turnip-like root tastes like carrot.

Habitat: Parsnip grows wild in most parts of Europe and
Asia Minor as far as western Siberia. It is naturalized in the
U.S. It is cultivated in Europe, America, Australia, India,
China and southern Africa.

Production: Parsnip root or herb are the dried parts of
Pastinaca sativa.

Not to be Confused With: Other types of root such as
Corium, Parsley Roots and the root of Bear's Breech (also
known as Hogweed).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PARSNIP HERB

Furocoumarins: in particular angelicin, bergaptene, xantho-
toxin, imperatorin, psoralen

fe Volatile oil: chief components cis- and trans-beta-ocimene,

trans-beta-farnesene, terpineols, palmitolactone
Flavonoids: including rutin

COMPOUNDS: PARSNIP ROOT
Furocoumarins: in particular angelicin, bergaptene, xantho-
toxin, imperatorin, psoralen

Volatile oil (1.9-3.1%): chief components including aliphatic
ester, in particular octylbutyrate (29-85%), in certain strains

PARSNIP /571

also octylacetate, additionally other esters and some myristi-
cin (depending on strain, 5-65%)

Fatty oil: chief fatty acid petroselic acid (46%)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PARSNIP HERB

Unproven Uses: The herb is used in kidney and gastrointesti-
nal complaints and for digestion problems.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for delirium.

PARSNIP ROOT
Unproven Uses: The root is used for kidney stones, sprains
and fever.

Homeopathic Uses: The root is used for delirium.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. An increase in UV-sensitivity is possible among
light-skinned persons (due to phototoxic effect of the
furocoumarins).

DOSAGE

PARSNIP HERB

Mode of Administration: Available ground, as a decoction of
the dried herb.

Preparation: 1 handful of Parsnip herb cooked in 1 liter of
water for 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: For the first 8 days, drink-one wine-glassful 3
times daily; during the second week drink ope water glassful.
The daily intake can be increased up to 2 liters. The cure
takes 4 to 6 weeks.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
daily (HAB34).

PARSNIP ROOT
Daily Dosage: Take 1 teaspoon of freshly grated root,
containing 50% plant material, 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
daily (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Ivie GW, Holt DL, Ivey MC, Natural toxicants in human foods:
psoralen an raw and cooked parsnip roots. In: Science 213:909.
1981.

----- PAGE 823 -----
572/PARSNIP

Kubeczka KH et al., Uber das atherische Ol der Apiaceae
(Umbelliferae). II. Das atherische 01 der oberirdischen Teile
von Pastinaca sativa. In: PM 31(2): 173-184. 1977.

Stahl E et al., Uber das atherische 01 der Apiaceae
(Umbelliferae). V1.Untersuchungen zum Vorkommen von
Chemotypen bei Pastinaca sativa. In: PM 371(12):49-56. 1979.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg 0lms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Parthenocissus quinquefolia

See American Ivy

Pasque Flower

Pulsatilla pratensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole fresh plant
collected during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary and almost
always nodding. They have 6 campanulate, close, bright-
violet tepals. These are usually thickly silky-haired on the
outside with revolute tips, and are 1.5 to 3 cm long. The
stamens are yellow and numerous; the longer ones are at
least two-thirds the length of the tepals. The carpels with the
style are as long as the tepals. The ripe fruit is oblong and
densely pubescent. The protruding style is up to 6 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, 7 to 50 cm
high with a strong, dark, usually divided, rhizome. The basal
leaves usually appear after the flowers and are not hardy.
They are 3 to 4 pinnate with narrow linear acuminate end
sections that, along with the petioles, are thickly white
villous. The stems are erect and densely pubescent with 3
whorled high leaves, divided into linear, pubescent tips.

Characteristics: The plant is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant originated in southwestern Europe and
now also grows in central and eastern Europe.

Production: Pasque Flower herb consists of the dried, above-
ground parts of Pulsatilla vulgaris and/or Pulsatilla pratensis.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: Easter Flower, Meadow Anemone, Passe
Flower, Pulsatilla, Wind Flower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-forming agents: In the freshly harvested
plant, presumably the glycoside ranunculin changes enzy-
matically when the plant is cut into small pieces, and
probably also when it is dried, into the pungent, volatile
protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to anemonin. When
dried, the plant is not capable of protoanemonine-formation.

Triterpene saponins

EFFECTS

In animal experiments, the protoanemonin and anemonin had
an antipyretic and motility-inhibiting effect. In the inhibition
test, an antibiotic effect was shown. Protoanemonin is a
strong local irritant to the mucous membranes and skin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pasque Flower is used for diseases and
functional disorders of genital organs; inflammatory and
infectious diseases of skin and mucosa; diseases and
functional disorders of the gastrointestinal tract and the
urinary tract; neuralgia; migraine; and general restlessness. It
has also been used to treat iritis, scleritis, gray cataract and
glaucoma.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include inflammation
of the respiratory tract, digestive organs, female genital
organs, bladder, eyes, middle ear, menstruation complaints,
problems during pregnancy and nursing, rheumatism, prob-
lems with voiding urine, headaches, insomnia, measles,
mumps and depressive states.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction witii the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages of the dehydrated drug. Extended skin
contact with the freshly harvested, bruised plant (which
releases protoanemonine that is severely irritating to skin and
mucous membranes) can lead to blister formation and
cauterizations that are difficult to heal. If taken internally,
severe irritation to the gastrointestinal tract, combined with
colic and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the urinary
drainage passages, are possible.

Pregnancy. Administration of the drug during pregnancy is
absolutely contraindicated.

----- PAGE 824 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE

Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in
animal experiments.

“ Symptomatic treatment for external contact should consist of
“ mucilaginosa, after irrigation with diluted potassium perman-

ganate solution; in case of internal contact, activated
charcoal should follow gastric lavage.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered forms of
the drug are used, as are homeopathic forms for internal use.

Daily Dosage: A single dose of a decoction/liquid extract/
infusion is 0.12 to 0.3 g taken 3 times daily. The usual single
dose of the drug is 0.2 g; Powder 0.1 to 0.4 g; Tincture:
single dose: 0.3 to 1 ml.

Conditions of the inner eye: | to 3 pills 3 times daily (from
powder and extract at 50 g /75 pills).

Homeopathic Dosage: From D2: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5
to 10 globules | to 3 times a day; from D3: 1 suppository 2
to 3 times a day; from D4: 1 ml injection solution sc twice
weekly and 3 to 4 nose drops 3 to 5 times a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Pourrat A et al., (1980) Planta Med 38:289.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Siess M, Seybold G, Untersuchungen iiber die Wirkung von
Pulsatilla pratensis, Cimicifiga racemosa und Aristolochia
clematis auf den Ostrus infantiler und kastrierter wei|3er Mause.
In: Arzneim Forsch 10:514. 1960.

Further information in:
Chan H, But P (Eds.), Pharmacology and Applications of

Chinese Materia Medica, Vol 1, World Scientific Singapore
1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufi., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

j£ Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,

Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

PASSION FLOWER/573

Passiflora incarnata

See Passion Flower

Passion Flower
Passiflora incarnata

TRADE NAME
Passion Flower (available from numerous manufacturers),
Alcohol Free Passion Flower Liquid

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the whole or cut
dried herb and the fresh aerial parts. The yellow pulp from
the berry is edible. Several other related species also have
edible fruits or healing properties.

Flower and Fruit: The axillary pedicle grows up to 8 cm and
bears 1 flower. The flowers are androgynous and rayed with
a diameter of 5 to 9 cm and have an involucre. The 5 sepals
are green on the outside, white on the inside and tough. The
5 petals are white to pale red. There is a secondary corolla
inside the petals made up of 4 thread wreaths arranged in
rays around the axis of the flower, which are white on the
inside and purple on the outside. The ovary has 3 carpels and
3 style branches, which end in a thickened stigma. The 5
base and fused to the

stamens are joined at the

androgynophor.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Passion Flower is a perennial
vine on a strong, woody stem reaching up to about 10 m in
length. The vine is initially angular, later.gray and rounded
with longitudinally striated bark. The leaves are alternate,
petiolate, serrate and very finely pubescent. The under
surface is hairier than the upper surface. There are bumpy
extra-floral nectaries on the leaf blades. Stipules and tendrils
grow from the leaf axils.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to an area from the
soumeast U.S. to Argentina and Brazil. It is cultivated in
Europe as a garden plant.

Production: Passion Flower herb consists of the fresh or
dried aerial parts of Passiflora incarnata. The flowering
shoots are cut 10 to 15 cm above the ground, usually after
the formation of the first apple-sized fruit. The harvest is
dried in a hay drier or in die air. For a maximum flavonoid
content in the flowering shoot, twice yearly harvest is
recommended; opinions are not, however, unanimous.

Not to be Confused With: Passiflora caeulea, Passiflora
foetida or Passiflora edulis

Other Names: Granadilla, Maypop, Passion Vine

----- PAGE 825 -----
574/PASSION FLOWER

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids (up to 2.5%): in particular C-glycosyl-flavones,
including among others isovitexin-2"-o-glucoside, schafto-
side, isoschaftoside, isoorientin, isoorientin-2"-o-glucoside,
vicenin-2, lucenin-2

Cyanogenic glycosides: gynocardine (less than 0.1%)
Volatile oil (trace)

The frequently postulated presence of harmaline alkaloids
could not be confirmed.

EFFECTS
Passion Rower contains glycosides and in animal tests is
hypotensive and stimulates respiration. Sedative or spasmo-
lytic effects could not be definitively proven. The use of the
herb for nervous agitation, difficulty falling asleep or
nervous gastrointestinal symptoms needs further investiga-
tion. A motility-inhibiting effect has been observed in animal
tests.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Nervousness and insomnia

Unproven Uses: Passion Flower is used internally for
depressive states such as hysteria, general nervous agitation,
insomnia and nervous gastrointestinal complaints. The herb
is used externally for hemorrhoids and as a bath additive for
nervous agitation.

Homeopathic Uses: Passifloraincamata is used for insomnia,
convulsions and agitation.

PRECAUTIONS.MMO ADVERSE REACTIONS .. ~
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted herb for tea and
other galenic preparations for internal use or as sedative bath

additives.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 400 mg

Liquid (alcohol free) — 1:1

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour 150 ml of hot water
over | teaspoon drug and strain after 10 minutes. To make a
rinse for the external treatment of hemorrhoids, put 20 gm
drug into 200 ml simmering water, strain and use when
cooled.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Daily Dosage:

Tea — Pour 150 ml of hot water over 1 teaspoon of the herb
and strain after 10 minutes. Drink 2 to 3 times throughout the
day and one-half hour before bedtime.

Tincture — 0.5 to 2 ml, 3 times daily.

External use — 20 gm of the herb in 200 ml simmering
water. Strain and use when cool as a wash or rinse.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml SC, acute: 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day; ointment: 1 to 2 times daily; 1 suppository 2 to 3
times daily (acute and chronic) (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Anon, Phytotherapeutika: Nachgewiesene Wirkung, aber
wirksame Stoffe meist nicht bekannt. In: DAZ 137(15): 1221-
1222. 1997.

Aoyagi N et al., (1974) Chem Pharm Bull 22:1008.

Bennati E, (1968), Boll Chim Farm 110:664.

Bennati E, Fedeli E, (1968) Boll Chim Farm 107:716.
Busse WW et al., (1984) J All Clin. Immunol. 73:801.

Caesar W, Passionsblume. Kulturhistorische Aspekte einer
Arzneipflanze. In: DAZ 137(8): 587-93. 1997.

Hansel R, Pflanzliche Beruhigungsmittel Moglichkeiten und
Grenzen der Selbstmedikation. In: DAZ 135(32), 2935-2943.
1995.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Loehdefink J, Kating H, (1974) Planta Med 25:101.

Lutomski J, Malek B, (1975) Planta Med 27:381.

Lutomski J, Wrocinski T, (1960) Bui Inst Ros Lee 6:176.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Maluf E, Barros HMT, Frochtengarten -ML et al., (1991)
Assessment of the Hypnotic/Sedative Effects and Toxicity of
Passiflora edulis Aqueous Extract in Rodents and Humans.
Phytother Res 5:262-266.

Meier B, (1995) Passiflora incarnata - Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 16:115-126.

Meier B, (1995) Passiflorae herba - pharmazeutische Qualitat. Z
Phytother 16:90-99.

Middleton E, Drzewiecki G, (1984) Biochem Pharmacol
33:3333.

Poethke W, et al., (1970) Planta Med 18:303.

----- PAGE 826 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Proliac A, Raynaud J, (1986) Pharmazie 41:673.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg / Lech 1993.

Schilcher H, (1995) Pflanzliche Psychopharmaka. Eine neue
Klassifizierung nach Indikationsgruppen. Deutsche Apotheker
Ztg 135:1811-1822.

Schilcher H Z, (1968) Naturforsch 23B:1393.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Speroni E, Minghetti A, (1988) Neuropharmacological activity
of extracts from Passiflora incarnata. Planta Med:488-491.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsgesellschaft Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M, (Ed) Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

Pastinaca sativa
See Parsnip

Patchouli

Pogostemon cablin

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Part&Hit medicinal parts are4he young leaves
and shoots and the oil extracted from them.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers, which are whitish and often
have reddish marks, grow in terminal and axillary spikes.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a pubescent, perennial
herb, which grows from 60 to 90 cm high. The stem is erect
and quandrangular, and the leaves are ovate, opposite and
soft.

£ Characteristics: The ovate leaves have a strong characteris-

tic odor when rubbed. The extracted oil is used in perfumery.
The desired characteristics improve with age.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated in tropical and subtropical
regions worldwide.

Production: Patchouli oil is extracted from the leaves of
Pogostemon cablin.

Other Names: Putcha-Pat, Patchouly

PEANUT/S575

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1.5-4%): chief components are sesquiterpenes,
including among others patchouli alcohol (35%), alpha-
guaiene (20%), alpha-bulnesen (20%), beta-patchoulen (2%)
as well as nordehydropatchoulol (aroma-bearer); Sesquiter-
pene pyridine alkaloids were isolated from the volatile oil,
including among others patchouli pyridine, epiguai pyridine

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
There is no known medicinal use. The herb is used in
perfumes and cosmetics.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: It is used only in the perfume and
cosmetic industry.

LITERATURE

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Paullinia cupana

See Guarana

Pausinystalia yohimbe
See Yohimbe Bark

Peanut
Arachis hypogaea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The oil has medicinal applications.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are 5 to 7 cm long,
monosymmetrical and have a large golden-yellow standard.
The flowers have lemon-yellow wings and a pure white
carina. They are arranged singularly or in pairs in the leaf

----- PAGE 827 -----
576/PEANUT

axils. They blossom at sunrise and wilt in the same morning,
during which time they stretch from 5 to 20 cm and act
negatively phototropically downward. After pollination, a
meristem develops at the base of the ovary, from which the
fruit axis grows. The fruit only starts to grow when the stem
is 5 to 10 cm underground, where it grows horizontally. The
fruit is a 4 cm long by 1.5 cm thick closed pod with a
fibrous, reticulate-wrinkled wall and 1 to 4 large seeds with
no endosperm and a thin, red shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The peanut plant is an annual
herbaceous 30 to 70 cm high legume, with glabrous, double
pinnate leaves and a decumbent to upright stem.

Habitat: Peanuts were originally indigenous to tropical and
sub-tropical South America. Today, Arachis hypogaea is
cultivated in all tropical and sub-tropical regions worldwide
except in the rain forests.

Production: Peanut oil is the fatty oil extracted from the
husked seeds of Arachis hypogaea by means of a "cold
press" method or by hexane extraction and refining.

Other Names: Arachis, Groundnuts, Monkey Nuts

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids include oleic acid, linolic acid and
palmitin acid. Also present in small quantities are longer-
chained fatty acids such as eicosanoic acid and tetracosanoic
acid.

EFFECTS

The effect obtained when used as an enema for constipation
and in dermatology for dry skin, eczema and dandruff is
achieved primarily* from the drug's oiliness, although it has
been shown to contain lectines.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Peanut oil is added to ointments and
medicinal oils, and applied rectally in rectal constipation. It
is also used in dermatology for crusting and scaling of the
scalp (with hair), baby care and dry skin. Other applications
include use as a bath additive for subacute and chronic
eczema and for atrophic eczema and ichthyosis.

The pharmaceutical and medical industries use peanut oil as
a vehicle for medication in external, enteral or parenteral
preparations; the cosmetics industry uses it in skin, sun and
massage oil. Domestically, it is used as a salad or cooking oil
that is said to lower blood cholesterol levels.

Indian Medicine: Peanut oil is used for constipation,

neuralgia and dislocated joints.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an enema, oil, bat
medicinal base component.

additive and

Daily Dosage: As a rectal enema, use 130 ml of oil at body
temperature. For use in a bath, the recommended concentra-
tion is 4 ml per 10 liters of water. Adults should bathe for 15
to 20 minutes 2 to 3 times weekly. Children and babies
should bathe for a few minutes 2 to 3 times weekly.

Storage: Protect from light in well-sealed and, if possible,
fully filled containers. Oils from different deliveries should
not be stored together. Oils with a tocopherol content less
than 50 mg/100 mg do not store well.

LITERATURE
Adrian J, Jacquot R, Valeur Alimentaire de TArachide et ses
Derives, Maisonneuve et Larose, Paris 1968.

Avichezer D, Arnon R, Differential reactivities of the Arachis
hypogaea (peanut) and Vicia villosa B4 lectins with human
ovarian carcinoma cells grown either in vitro or in vivo
xenograft model. FEBS Lett, 395:103-8, 1996 Oct 21.

Boudreaux HB, Frampton VL, (1960) Nature 185:469.

Codex Alimentarius Commission, Alinorm 79/17, Report 10th
Session. Codex Committee on Fats and Oils, London 1987.

Eghafona NO, Immune responses following cocktails of
inactivated measles vaccine and Arachis hypogaea L.
(groundnut) or Cocos nucifera L. (coconut) oils adjuvant.
Vaccine, 14:1703-6, 1996 Dec.

Garcia GM, Stalker HT, Shroeder E, Kochert G, Identification
of RAPD SCAR and RFLP markers tighdy linked to nematode
resistance genes introgressed from Arachis cardenasii into
Arachis hypogaea. Genome, 39:836-45, 1996 Oct.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Further information in:

Bhagya S, Prakash V, Srinivasan KS, Effect of different
roteolytic enzymes on tile nature of subunit composition of
arachins from groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.). Indian J
Biochem Biophys, 12:154-9, 1992 Apr.
Boudreaux HB, Frampton VL, Nature 185 (1960), 469.

Burks AW, et al., Identification and characterization of a
second major peanut allergen Ara h II with use of the sera of

atients with atopic dermatitis and positive peanut challenge. J
Allergy Clin Immunol, 90:962-9, 1992 Dec.

Calori-Domingues MA, Fonseca H, Laboratory evaluation of
chemical control of aflatoxin production in unshelled peanuts

----- PAGE 828 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

(Arachis hypogaea L.). Food Addit Contam, 12:347-50, 1995
May-Jun.

Codex Alimentarius Commission Alinorm 79/17, Report 10th
Session. Codex Committee on Fats and Oils, London 1987.
1987.

' Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Langkilde NC et at, Human urinary bladder carcinoma
glycoconjugates expressing T-(Gal beta(I-3)GalNAc alpha 1-O-
R) and T-like antigens: a comparative study using peanut
agglutinin, poly- and monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Res.
52:5030-6, 1992 Sep 15.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Sanford GL, Harris-Hooker S, Stimulation of vascular cell
proliferation by beta-galactoside specific lectins. FASEB J,
52:2912-8, 1990 Aug.

Sreenivas A, Sastry PS, A soluble preparation from developing
groundnut seeds (Arachis hypogaea) catalyzes de novo synthesis
of long chain fatty acids. Indian J Biochem Biophys, 14:213-7,
1995 Aug.

Srivastava R, Rajput YS, Khare SK, Tyagi R, Gupta MN,
Purification and characterization of an acid phosphatase fiom
Arachis hypogaea. Biochem Mol Biol Int, 224:949-56, 1995
Apr.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Swamy MJ, Gupta D, Mahanta SK, Surolia A, Further
characterization of the saccharide specificity of peanut (Arachis
hypogaea) agglutinin. Carbohydr Res, 137:59-67, 1991 Jun 25.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997. ,, , %

Urtz BE, Elkan GH, Purification and partial characterization of
acyl carrier proteins from developing oil seeds of pisa
(Actinodaphne hookeri) and ground nut (Arachis hypogaea).
Indian J Biochem Biophys, 224:137-46, 1995 Jun.

Zhang X, Ling L, Dai R, Constituents of the seed coat of
Arachis hypogaea L. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih,
137:356-8 384, 1990 Jun.

Pear

Pyrus communis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The fleshy fruit is typically smaller near
the stem and larger at the apical end, with a relatively tough
skin. The core has a number of carpels, which are large and

PELLITORY/577

edible. The seeds are pointed at one end and rounded at the
other. When ripe, they are dark brown to black, glabrous and
about 0.5 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The pear is a tree, up to 20 m tall,
with a long-clavate crown. The bark is dark brown to black
and broken into square plates. The glabrous or slightly
pubescent branches are glossy brown or thorny. The leaves
are 2 to 8 cm long, ovate-round, acuminate, tough and
serrate. The ribs are protruding.

Habitat: The Pear Tree grows mainly in the temperate
regions of the Northern Hemisphere.

Production: Pears are the fruit of Pyrus communis.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids: malic acid (0.06-0.1%), additionally citric acid,
quinic acid

Cyanogenic glycosides: amygdalin (only in the seeds)

Aromatic substances: including (E,Z)-2.4-deca-dien-(E)-2-
octen and -(Z)-4-decenacylethylester. acetic acid hexylester

Caffeic acid derivatives: in particular 5-caffeoyl quinic acid
Pectin

EFFECTS
In folk remedies, Pear is said to be astringent and cooling.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pear is used in the treatment of mild
digestive disorders, while its syrup is used as a diuretic and
laxative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS "
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Fresh fruit (as food)

LITERATURE
Belitz HD, Grosch W, Lehrbuch der Lebensmittelchemie, 4.
Aufl., Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York 1992.
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Pellitory
Anacyclus Pyrethrum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

----- PAGE 829 -----
578/PELLITORY

Flower and Fruit: Each stem bears a 1 cm wide flower. The
bracts are fused. The ray florets are white and tinged purple
beneath. The disc florets are pointed. The fruit has transpar-
ent wings.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Pellitory is a perennial grass plant
whose thickened, hollow stems grow a short distance along
the ground before turning upward. The plant grows to about
45 cm high and has double-pinnate, tough leaves. The root is
almost cylindrical, easily twisted, tapered and crowned with
a tuft of gray hair. The outside is brown and fissured with
shiny black markings.

Habitat: The plant grows in North Africa and is cultivated m
the Mediterranean.

Production: Pellitory root is the root of Anacyclus

Pyrethrum.

Other Names: Pellitory of Spain, Pyrethre, Pyrethrum,
Roman Pellitory, Spanish Camomile

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alkamides: including deca-2, 4-dien acid-isobutylamide,
anacycline, dehydroanacycline

Lignans: including sesamine
Inulin (fructosan)
Tannins

EFFECTS
Application to the skin stimulates the nerve ends, resulting in
redness and irritation (hot, burning sensation). Pellitorin
(rather than anacycline) is me local irritant. The drug, which
contains alkamides. (pellitorin) and tannins,had ajp inhibitory
effect in vitro on cyclo-oxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase
(affecting prostaglandin metabolism), and also an antimicro-
bial, insecticidal and molluscicidal effect. In tests on animals
and humans, a local anesthetic effect was observed indicat-
ing ptery mandibular block with infiltration of the long
buccal nerves after extraction of mandibular molars.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Pellitory is used externally for rheumatic
conditions, the treatment of toothache. Pellitory is used
internally as a tonic to aid digestion and as an insecticide.

Indian Medicine: Used as a gargle for toothache and as a
powder mixed with honey for epilepsy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

OVERDOSAGE

Signs of irritation are possible in connection with overdoses
due to the mucous-membrane-stimulating character of the
alkamides.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: There is mention of use as a gargle
and as a powder, but no precise information is available.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Pellitory-of-the-Wall

Parietaria officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The small, green, sessile flowers grow in
axillary racemes and bloom throughout the summer. The
bracteoles are free and shorter than the calyx. The filaments
of the stamens are strangely jointed and so elastic that when
they are touched before the flower has opened, they uncoil
from meir rolled-up position and distribute the pollen. The
achaenes are black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, heavily
branched, bushy and leafy. It grows to 70 cm high. It has a
reddish hard stem and narrow petiolate, ovate-lanceolate or
elliptical, long-acuminate leaves 2.5 to 5 cm long. The leaf
stalk is shorter than the leaf blade. The stem and the
undersurface of the leaf ribs are pubescent with short, soft
hairs. The uppersurface of the leaves is almost glabrous and
the ribs sunken.

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to Europe.

Production: Pellitory-of-the-Wall is the aerial part of Parie-
taria officinalis.

Other Names: Lichwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including among others kaempferol-, quercetin-
and isorhamnetin-3-glucosides, -3-sophoroside, -3-rutino-
sides, -3-neohesperidosides

Caffeic acid derivatives: including caffeoyl malic acid
Bitter principles

EFFECTS
The drug is a mild diuretic.

----- PAGE 830 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
The herb is used to treat diseases of the urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is obsolete as a drug, but
is occasionally used in commercial medicinal preparations.

LITERATURE
Budzianowski J et al., (1985) J Nat Prod 48(2):336.

Geraci D et al.. (1978) Immunochemistry 15:491.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Pennyroyal
Mentha pulegium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil
extracted from the fresh plant, the dried aerial parts and the
whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in axillary, loose and
globular false. whorls. The calyx is cylindrical-funnel-
shaped, grooved and is-awned in the tubeyThe IQwer tips are
awl-shaped, the upper ones shorter and wider. The upper lip
has 3 tips and is curved slightly upward. The lower lip is
divided in two and is straight. The corolla is violet, glabrous
or downy. It has a tube, which suddenly widens in a sack-
like manner and has a slightly developed ring of hair as well
as lobes. These extend well beyond the calyx. The nutlets are
glossy brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Pennyroyal is a glabrous to downy
perennial, which grows from 10 to 40 cm high. The stem is
ascendent or decumbent, branched and slightly downy. The
leaves are elliptical to narrow ovate-elliptical, short-petioled,
entire-margined, translucently glandular punctate with 1 to 3
pairs of shallow teeth and curved pinnate ribs.

Characteristics: Strongly aromatic.

Habitat: The plant thrives in western, southern and central
Europe, in Asia as far as Turkmenistan, Iran, in the Arab
countries and Ethiopia. It is naturalized in America.

PENNYROYAL/579

Production: Pennyroyal is the flowering herb of Menma
pulegium. The plants are harvested during the flowering
season and dried.

Other Names: Pulegium, Run-by-the-Ground, Lurk-in-the-
Ditch, Pudding Grass, Piliolerial, Mosquito Plant, Squaw
Balm, Squawmint Tickweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1-2%): chief constituents D-pulegone (60-90%).
menthone (10-20%), isomenthone (2-10%), additionally
including among others piperitone, neoisomenthylacetate

Tannins: presumably rosmaric acid
Flavonoids: including among others diosmin, hesperidin

EFFECTS

Pennyroyal oil (main component pulegone) has an antimicro-
bial and insecticidal effect. There is no scientific proof of the
described effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for digestive disorders.
liver and gallbladder disorders, amenorrhea, gout, colds and
increased micturation; externally, it is used for skin diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: European Pennyroyal oil is hepatotoxic in effect.

Acute poisonings are not to be feared in conjunction with the
proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages of
the foliage drug. Still, because of its hepatotoxicity. it is
recommended that the drug not be used.

Pregnancy: In high doses, Pennyroyal has* been reported to
cause abortion. Use in pregnancy is not recommended.

OVERDOSAGE
Severely acute poisonings have been observed following
administration of 5 gm of the volatile oil. Vomiting, blood-
pressure elevation, anesthetic-like paralysis and death
through respiratory failure have been reported following
larger dosages. Cases of death have been described following
misuse of the volatile oil to induce abortion.

DOSAGE
See: PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS.

Mode of Administration: Internally as a ground drug, an
extract and a tea. The oil is applied topically.

Daily Dosage: The average daily internal dose of the dried

drug is 1 to 4 gm, taken 3 times daily. Pennyroyal is

prepared as an infusion. Drink one cupful at a time during
I the course of the day. Extract: 1 to 4 ml, 3 times daily.

----- PAGE 831 -----
580/PENNYROYAL

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Miller EC et a!.. (1983) Cancer Res 43: 1124.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Gifipflanzen. Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E. Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Peppermint
Mentha piperita

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the aerial parts of the flowering plant, the dried leaves
and flowering branch tips, the fresh flowering plant and the
whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are false spikes with
numerous inconspicuous bracts. The calyx is tubular with a
ring of hair. The corolla is violet, glabrous inside and has an
almost even margin divided into four parts.

Leaves, Stem qgdgoot: The plant is a perennial’ 50 to 90 cm
high. The usually branched stems are normally glabrous, but
sometimes they are gray-tomentose and are often tinged
violet. The leaves are short-petioled, oblong-ovate and
serrate. The plant has over- and underground runners.

Habitat: Common in Europe and the U.S., usually cultivated.

Production: Peppermint oil consists of the essential oil of
Mentha piperita obtained by aqueous steam distillation from
freshly harvested, flowering springs and preparations of
same. Peppermint leaves consist of the fresh or dried leaf of
Peppermint as well as its preparations.

Peppermint leaf is harvested several times a year. The
maximum leaf harvest and highest oil content is shortly
before the flowering season. The harvest is dried mechani-
cally on drying belts at a temperature of 42° C. Peppermint is
harvested mechanically shortly after flowering and dried in
the field.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Not to be Confused With: Peppermint should not be confused
with rectified mint oil. Sometimes adulterated by increasing
the ester content with racemic menthol acetate.

Other Names: Brandy Mint, Lamb Mint

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PEPPERMINT LEAVES

Volatile oil: chief components: menthol (35-45%), menthone
(15-20%), menthyl acetate (3-5%), neomenthol (2.5-3.5%),
isomenthone (2-3%), menthofurane (2-7%), additionally
including among others limonene, pulegone, alpha- and beta-
pinene, trans-sabinene hydrate

Caffeic.acid: including among others, rosmaric acid

Flavonoids: apigenine-, diosmetin- and luteolin glycosides,
free lipophile methoxylized flavone including among others,
xanthomicrol, gardenine D

EFFECTS: PEPPERMINT LEAVES
The drug has a spasmolytic effect on the smooth muscle of
the digestive tract. It also has antiviral, antimicrobial,
diuretic, cholagogic, carminative and mild sedative effect.

COMPOUNDS: PEPPERMINT OIL
Chief components: menthol (35-45%), menthone (15-20%),
menthyl acetate (3-5%), neomenthol (2.5-3.5%), isomen-
thone (2-3%), menthofurane (2-7%), additionally including
among others limonene, pulegone, alpha- and beta-pinene,
trans-sabinene hydrate

Lubiatentannins: including, among others rosmaric acid

Flavonoids: apigenine-, diosmetin- and luteolin glycosides,
free lipophile methoxylized flavone including, among others
xanthomicrol, gardenine D

EFFECTS: PEPPERMINT OIL
The drug has a spasmolytic effect on smooth muscle of the
gastrointestinal tract. It is a carminative, cholagogue, anti-
bacterial, insecticidal and secretolytic agent; it also has a
cooling effect on the skin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PEPPERMINT LEAVES
Approved by Commission E:

* Liver and gallbladder complaints
9 Dyspeptic complaints
The drug is used for convulsive complaints of the gastroin-

testinal tract as well as gallbladder and bile ducts.

Unproven Uses: In folk use, peppermint is utilized for
nausea, vomiting, morning sickness, respiratory infections,
dysmenorrhea and colds.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for colds.

----- PAGE 832 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PEPPERMINT OIL
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold
* Cough/bronchitis

*kKM Fevers and colds

4l

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
¢ Liver and gallbladder complaints

* Dyspeptic complaints

* Tendency to infection

The drug is used internally for cramps of the upper
gastrointestinal tract and bile ducts, irritable colon, catarrhs
of the respiratory tract, and inflammation of the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa.

Unproven Uses: Externally, Peppermint oil is used for
myalgia and neuralgia.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
PEPPERMINT LEAVES
Contraindicated in cases of gallstones.

PEPPERMINT OIL

Contraindications for the internal administration of the drug
include occlusion of the biliary ducts, gallbladder inflamma-
tion and severe liver damage. Gallstone carriers could
experience colic due to the cholagogic effect.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
PEPPERMINT LEAVES

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Gallstone
carriers could experience colic due to the cholagogic effect.

PEPPERMINT OIL

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The intake can lead to gastric complaints in susceptible
persons. The volatile oil possesses a weak potential for
sensitization due to its menthol content. One is advised
against administration of the drug in the presence of a
tendency to gastroesophageal reflux.

Pediatric Use: Preparations containing the oil should not be
applied to the faces of infants or small children, particularly
not in the nasal area (glottal spasm or bronchial spasm up to

Aasthma-like attacks or even possible respiratory failure).

OVERDOSAGE

Cases of poisoning are not recorded. The minimal lethal
dosage of menthol is estimated to be 2 gm, although
individuals have survived higher dosages (8 to 9 gm).

DOSAGE
PEPPERMINT LEAVES

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions,
extracts of peppermint leaves for internal use.

PEPPERMINT/581

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour 150 ml of hot
water over | dessertspoonful of the drug, strain after 10
minutes (one study has shown that the maximum level of
menthol and methon is present after this time).

Tincture: leave 200 parts leaves in spirit of wine for 10 days
(shaken at intervals), which is filtered after this time (EB6).

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug is 3 to 6
gm. The average daily dose of the tincture (1:10) is 5 to 15
gm. Tea: | cup to be consumed 3 to 4 times a day between
meals. Infusion: 2 to 4 gm drug, drink slowly in sips while
warm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

Storage: Peppermint should be stored cool and dry and
protected from light in non-plastic containers.

PEPPERMINT OIL
Mode of Administration: The essential oil and the galenic
preparations are for internal and external use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily internal dose is 6 to 12
drops; inhalation, 3 to 4 drops in hot water; for irritable
colon, daily dose: 0.6 ml; single dose: 0.2 ml in enteric
coated form.

Externally, a few drops rubbed into the affected skin areas
several times a day (2 to 4 times). For young children: Rub 5
to 15 drops on the chest and back. The drug is available as
semi-solid and oily preparations (5 to 20%); aqueous-ethanol
preparations (5 to 10%); nasal ointments with 1 to 5%
essential oil.

Storage: Peppermint should be stored cool and dry and
protected from light in non-plastic containers.

LITERATURE
Bowen ICH, Cubbin IJ, (1993) Mentha piperita and Mentha
spicata. In: De Smet PAGM

Bromm B, Scharein E, Darsow U, Ring J, (1995) Effects of
menthol and cold on histamine-induced itch and skin reactions
in man. Neuroscience Lett 187:157-160.

Burrow A, Eccles R, Jones AS, (1983) The effects of camphor,
eucalyptus and menthol vapor on nasal resistance to airflow and
nasal sensation. Acta Otolaryng (Stockholm) 96: 157-161.

Clark M, (1981) Econ Bot 35:59.

Dew MJ, Evans BK, Rhodes J, (1984) Peppermint oil for the
irritable bowel syndrome: a multicentre trial. Br J Clin Pract
38:394-395.

Eccles R, Jones AS, (1982) The effects of menthol on nasal
resistance to airflow. J Laryngology Otology 97:705-709.

----- PAGE 833 -----
582/PEPPERMINT

Eccles R, Lancashire B, Tolley NS. (1987) Experimental studies
on nasal sensation of airflow. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockholm)
103:303-306.

Eccles R, Morris S, Tolley NS, (1988) The effects of nasal
anaesthesia upon nasal sensation of airflow. Acta Otolaryngol
(Stockholm) 106:152-155.

Fintelmann V, Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Phytotherapie bei
Magen-Darm- Krankheiten. In: ZPT 10(1 ):29. 1989.

Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT
15(3): 137. 1994.

Friederich HC, Vogelsberg, H, Neiss A, (1978) Ein Beitrag zur
Bewertung von intern wirksamen Venenpharmaka. Z
Hautkrankheiten 53 (11):369-374.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, (1995a) Effekt von Pfefferminz- und
Eukalyptusolpraparationen in experimentellen
Kopfschmerzmodellen. Z Phytother 16:23-33.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M. Stolze H, Heuss D, (1995)
Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms. Phytomedicine
2:93-102.
Gobel H, Schmidt G, Dworschak M. Stolze H, Heuss D,
(1995b) Essential plant oils and headache mechanisms.
Phytomedicine 2:93-103.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Effekt von Pfefferminz- und
Eukalyptusolpraparationen in experimentellen
Kopfschmerzmodellen. In: ZPT 16(1):23-33. 1995.

Gobel H, Schmidt G, Soyka D, (1994) Effect of peppermint
and eucalyptus oil preparations on neurophysiological and
experimental algesimetric headache parameters. Cephalalgia
14:228-234.

Grafe AK, Besonderheiten der Arzneimitteltherapie im
Sauglings- und Kindesalter. In: PZ 140(30):2659-2667. 1995.
Hamann KF, Bonkowsky V, (1987) Minzolwirkung auf die
Nasenschleimhaut von Gesunden. Dtsch Apoth Z 125:429-436.

Harries N et al.,(1978) J Clin Pharm 2:171.

Hawthorn M, Ferranthe J, Luchowski E, Rutledge A, Wie XY,
Triggle DJ, (1988) The actions of peppermint oil and menthol
on calcium channel dependent processes in intestinal, neuronal
and cardiac preparations. Aliment Pharmacol Therap 2:101-118.
Hefendehl FW, Murray MJ, (1973) Planta Med 23:101.

Heinzs A, (1995c) Oleum menthae piperitae: Wirkmechanismen
und klinische Effektivitat bei Kopfschmerz vom Spannungstyp.
n: Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung
und klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S
177-184.
Herrmann EC Jr., Kucera LS, Antiviral substances in plants of
the mint family (Labiatae). III. Peppermint (Mentha piperita)
and other mint plants. In: Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 124:874-878.
995.

Hills JM, Aaronson PI, (1991) The mechanisms of action of
peppermint oil on gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Gastroenterol
01:55-65.

Kantarev N, Peicev P, (1977) Folia Med 19(1):41.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Keller K, Hansel R, Chandler RF, (eds) Adverse Effects of
Herbal Drugs 1. Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York,
S 171-178.

Kucera LS, Hermann EC Jr, (1967) Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
124:865 et 874.

Leiber B, (1967) Dieskussionsbemerkung. In: Dost FH, Leiber
B (Hrsg) Menthol and menthol-containing external remedies.
Thieme Stuttgart 1967, S. 22.

Leicester RJ. Hunt RH, (1982) Peppermint oil to reduce solonic
spasm during endoscopy. Lancet: 989.

Nash P, Gould SR, Barnardo DE, (1986) Peppermint oil does
not relieve the pain of irritable bowel syndrome. Br J Clin
Pract 40:292-293.

Noller HG, (1967) Elektronische Messungen an der
Nasenschleimhaut unter Mentholwirkung. In: Menthol and
menthol-containung external remedies. Thieme, Stuttgart, S 146-
153, 179.

Rees WDW. Evans BK, Rhoes J, (1979) Treating irritable
bowel syndrouie with peppermint oil. Brit med J 11:835-838.

Reuter HD, Pflanzliche Gallentherapeutika (Teil I) und (Teil ID.
In: ZPT 16(1): 13-20 u. 77-89. 1995.

Rohmeder J, Menthol: Verum statt Racemicum. In: PZ
139(4):300. 1994.

Sommerville KW, Richmond CR, Bell GD, (1984) Delayed
release peppermint oil capsules (Colpermin) for the spastic
colon syndrome: a pharmacokinetic study. Br J Clin Pharmac
18:638-640.

Taylor BA, Luscombe DK, Duthie HL, (1983) Inhibitory effect
of peppermint on gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Gut 24: A
992 (Abstract).

Weizel A, (1980) Colon irritabile. Therapiewoche 30:3898-3900.

White DA, Thompson SP, Wilson CG, Bel JD, (1987) A
pharmacokinetic comparison of two delayed release peppermint
oil preparations, Colpermin and Mintec for treatment of the
irritable bowel syndrome. Int J Pharmaceutics 40:151-155.

Wildgrube HJ, (1988) Untersuchung zur Wirksamkeit von
Pfefferminzol auf Beschwerdebild und funktionelle Parameter
bei Patienten mit Reizdarmsyndrom (Studie). NaturHeilpraxis
41:2-5.

Further information in:

Fenarolis Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Voir 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

----- PAGE 834 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

A Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer

Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena. New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Perilla

Perilla _fructescens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plants are the
leaf-bearing branches and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 2-blossomed false
whorls in the axils of the triangular bracts in 5 to 15 cm long,
spike-like, downy-haired inflorescences. The calyx is cam-
panulate, bilabiate, 3 to 10 mm long, with a triple-toothed
upper lip and a lower lip divided in two. The corolla is 4 to 5
mm long, almost radial, with a short tube and a broadened,
almost circular section having a whitish, 5-lobed margin.
There are 4 stamens of almost equal length and a superior, 2-
carpeled, 4-chambered ovary. The fruit is globose, gray-
brown, with plirple reticulate stripes and-a-diameter of
approximately 1.5 mm. The pericarp is thin and brittle; the
seeds yellowish-white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb, stands up to | m high. The
leaves are long-petiolate. The lamina is wide-ovate, acumi-
nate, rounded at the base, crenate, curly, dull green with
brown-red spots to blackish-purple. The leaves are glossy
and downy-haired along the veins. The stem is square,
branched and downy.

Habitat: The species is found in India, Burma, Japan and
China.

Production: Perilla leaves are the dried leaves and leaf-
bearing branches of Perilla fructescens. Harvesting is from
July to August, after which the leaves and branches are dried
in the sun or shade.

Other Names: Beefsteak Plant

PERILLA/583

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: constituents vary greatly according to chemo-
type, with perillaldehyde, L-limonene + perillaldehyde,
perilla ketone, myristicin, dill apiole or elsholtzia ketone
predominating

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid (0.4 to 1.7%)

Monoterpene glucosides: including perillosides A to D,
citrusine C

Flavonoids: apigenin glucoside and luteolin glucoside,
estered to some extent with caffeic acid

EFFECTS

Perilla aldehyde (chemotype PA) is sedative and antibacteri-
al in effect; perilla ketone (chemotype PK) acts as a
propulsive in the gastrointestinal tract. In addition, a
cytotoxic and antitumorous effect was able to be demon-
strated. Perilla leaves may trigger allergic skin reactions
(Kanzaki & Kimura, 1992.) In at least one study, serum
cholesterol and triglyceride levels in rats that were fed Perilla
oil were lowered (Sakono et al, 1993.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used pharmaceutical® as an
antiseptic and for diseases of the mouth. The oil may also
have positive antilipidemic effects.

Chinese Medicine: Perilla is used in traditional Chinese
medicine for colds with fever, coughs, shortness of breath,
chills, swelling of the nasal mucous membrane, headache
and to treat poisoning from ingestion of fish or crab. Efficacy
for these indications has not yet been proven.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Use during pregnancy is contraindicated because perillaldeh-
yde was demonstrated to have a mutagenic effect in some in
vitro studies.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The plant
possesses potential for sensitization. In tests with sheep using

.15 to 20 mg/kg body weight administration per infusion,

Perilla ketone triggered pulmonary edema. Perillaldehyde
had mutagenic effect in some in vitro studies.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut, powdered drug prepa-
rations and oil for internal use.

Daily Dosage: Extract (aqueous): 3 to 10 g

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen

----- PAGE 835 -----
584/PERILLA

Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Kanzaki T, Kimura S, Occupational allergic contact dermatitis
from Perilla frutescens (shiso). Contact Dermatitis (1992 Jan)
26(1):55-6.

Sakono M, Yoshida K, Yahiro M, Combined effects of dietary
protein and fat on lipid metabolism in rats. J Nutr Sci
Vitaminol (Tokyo) (1993 Aug) 39(4):335-43.

Perilla fructescens
See Perilla

Periwinkle

Vine a minor

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves,
the fresh aerial parts of the flowering plant and the whole
fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary, long-pedicled, 40
to 50 mm in diameter and grow in the axils of the upper
leaves. The calyx is funnel-shaped with long, narrow-linear,
pointed-ciliated tips. The corolla is light blue or violet widi a
funnei-shaped tube and 5 irregularly terminated tips. The
fruit is a follicle. It is oblong, acuminate, 15 to 2 mm long
and has 2 to 3 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial subshrub, 10
to 60 cm high. The non-flowering shoots are prostrate root at
the nodes. The flowering shoots are ascending, up to 20 cm
high and woody at’the*base. The leaves are evergreen, ovate,
tapering at the front and distinctly pinnate-ribbed. They are 5
cm by 2 cm, petiolate with finely ciliated margins, which
become glabrous later.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern Spain, through
western France, eastward via central and southern Europe as
far as the Caucasus; it has been naturalized in many regions.

Production: Periwinkle herb consists of the above-ground
parts of Vinca minor.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Indole alkaloids (0.15-1.4%): chief alkaloid vincamine

(ebumamine-type, 25-65%), including as well vincine,
apovincamine, vincadifformin

Flavonoids: including kempferol-3-0-rhamnoside-7-0-glu-
coside, kempferol-3-0-rhamnoglucoside-3-0-galactoside,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

kempferol-3-0-rhamnoglucoside-3-0-glucoside,  quercetin-

3-0-rhamnoglucoside-7-0-glucoside

EFFECTS

The alkaloid vincamine is hypotensive, negatively chrono-
tropic, spasmolytic, hypoglycemic and sympatholytic. Scien-
tifically validated studies on the hypotensive effect on
humans have not yet been carried out. Its use as an amaroid
seems plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Periwinkle is used internally for circulatory
disorders, cerebral circulatory impairment and support for
the metabolism of the brain. It is also used internally for loss
of memory, hypertension, cystitis, gastritis and enteritis,
diarrhea, raised blood sugar levels and to help weaning.
Periwinkle is used externally for sore throats, nose bleeds,
bruising, abscesses, eczema and to stop bleeding.

Homeopathic Uses: Periwinkle is used for weeping eczema
and bleeding mucous membranes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Gastroin-
testinal complaints and skin flushing have been observed as
side effects.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage will bring about a severe drop in blood pressure.
Cases of poisonings have not yet been recorded.

Treatment includes gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of
vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-coloured potassium
permanganate solution, sodium sulphate), instillation of
activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis (appropriate body
position, quiet, warmth). The therapy for poisonings consists
of treating bradycardia with atropine or Alupent, cardiac
arrhythmias with lidocaine or phenytoin and treating possible
cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case
of shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug is
available in the form of capsules, ampules, coated and filmed
tablets, and compound preparations.

Preparation: To make a tea, pour 200 ml boiling water over
1 teaspoonful of drug, steep for 10 minutes, then strain. To
make a decoction, boil 60 gm of drug in | liter of water for 2
minutes, steep for 10 minutes, then strain.

To make an infusion, boil 15 gm of drug in 14 liter of water.
To make wine, macerate 100 gm of drug in 1 liter of wine
for 10 days, decant, then press. To make a liquid for
gargling, boil 2 dessertspoonfuls of drug for a few minutes in
12 liter water.

----- PAGE 836 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dosage: The usual drug dosage is as follows: Tea—2
to 3 cups daily; Decoction—2 to 4 cups between meals;
Infusion—drink after meals for diarrhea; Wine—1 dessert-
spoonful after meals; a gargle or wash can be used externally
as needed.

ti Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every

m

30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc. acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

LITERATURE
Behninger C, Abel G, Schneider E, Vinca minor zeigt keine
antimitotische Eigenschaften. In: ZPT 13(2):35. 1992.

Gosset-Gamier J et al., (1965) Bull Soc Chim Franc 676.
Janot MM et al.. (1962) Bull Soc Chim Franc 1079.
Kaul JL, Trojanek (1966) Lloydia 29:25.

Neczypor W, PA 24:273. 1969.

Taylor, B, In: Taylor WI. Famsworth N (Ed.): The Vinca
Alkaloids, Marcel Dekker Inc.. New York. 1973.

Trunzler G, Phytodierapeutische Moglichkeiten bei Herz- und
arteriellen Gefa(3erkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(5): 147. 1989.

Vinpocetin. In: ZPT 14(1): 11. 1993.
Further information in:

" Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers

Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg-1992. "

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.

Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und

pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Persea americana

See Avocado

Persicaria bistorta

See  Bistort

PETASITES /585

Persicaria hydropiper

See Smartweed

Petasites
Petasites hybridus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried or fresh
leaves, the underground parts collected in autumn and dried,
the aerial parts collected toward the end of the flowering
season and the whole fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The reddish flowers appear before the
leaves, immediately after the snow has melted. They grow on
flowering shafts from the base of the plant. The shaft is erect,
thick *and has purplish scales. The ones bearing the male
flowers are 15 to 20 cm high and those bearing the female
flowers are 40 cm high. The capitula of the mainly male
flowers are initially in ovate, compact racemes. The flowers
are tubular campanulate. The female flowers have a thread-
like, tight tube and a bilabiate margin. The involucre is in 1
to 2 rows and is reddish. A prismatic fruit with a yellowish-
whitish pappus develops from the flower.

Leaves, Stern and Root: The short and gnarled rhizome lies
vertically or somewhat slanted in the ground. It is about 4 cm
thick, brownish and thickened at die nodes. The root creeps
and branches under the surface. The leaves are large, basal,
long-petioled and roundish with a deeply cordate base. It is
gray underneath and irregularly dentate.

Cfiaracteristics: Petasite has the largest leaves of all
indigenous flora and has an unpleasant smell.

Habitat: The species is found in northern Asia, Europe and
some areas of North America.

Production: Petasite consists of the whole plant of Petasites
hybridus. Petasite leaf consists of the leaves of Petasites
hybridis. The leaves are harvested before the end of the
flowering season and quickly dried. Only leaves that are the
size of the palm of the hand are picked, as these are said to
have a higher level of active principles than the larger leaves.
Petasite root consists of the dried underground parts of
Petasites hybridus. A distinction is made between andrody-
namic and gynodynamic varieties. The roots of the former
are dug up in autumn and of the latter in spring. After being
dug up they are washed and dried. If drugs containing
petasin are to be extracted, then cultivation must be carried
out under laboratory conditions.

Not to be Confused With: Other Petasite varieties and the
leaves of Adenostyles alliariae or Tussilago farfara.

----- PAGE 837 -----
586/PETASITES

Other Names: Blatterdock, Bog Rhubarb, Bogshorns, Butter-
bur, Butter-Dock, Butterfly Dock, Capdockin, Flapperdock,
Langwort, P. Vulgaris, Umbrella Leaves

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PETASITES LEAF

Sesquiterpene alcohol esters: chief components including
among others according to chemotype - petasitine, neopetasi-
tine and isopetasitine, or furanopetasin and 9-hydroxy-
furanoeremophilone

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: senecionine, integerrimine, senkir-
kine, presumably only in traces

Volatile oil: including, among others, dodecanal (aroma-
bearer)

Flavonoids: including among others, isoquercitrin, astra-
galine

Mucilages
Tannins

EFFECTS: PETASITES LEAF
A spasmolytic effect has been demonstrated in animals.

COMPOUNDS: PETASITES ROOT
Sesquiterpene alcohol esters: including among others, chief
components according to chemotype - petasitine, neopetasi-
tine and isopetasitine or furanopetasine and 9-
hydroxyfuranoeremophilone

Volatile oil (0.1-0.4%): including among others, 1-nonen,
eremophilone, furanoeremophilone

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: senecionine, integerrimine

EFFECTS: PETASITES ROOT
In animals, the* pfyrrolizidine alkaloids mhibir leukotriene
synthesis and are spasmolytic and spasmoanalgesic as well
as cytoprotective. In humans, it provides analgesia for
nervous headaches. Its application for psychasthenic symp-
toms seems plausible.

In higher doses and with chronic use, a hepatotoxic,
mutagenic, teratogenic * and carcinogenic effect may be
expected.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PETASITES LEAF

Unproven Uses: Petasite leaves are used to stimulate the
appetite and to treat nervous cramp-like states and states
associated with pain, colic and headaches. In folk medicine,
the leaves are used internally for respiratory disorders, liver,
gallbladder or pancreas disorders, as a prophylaxis for
agitation and to induce sleep. Externally, the leaves are used
to heal wounds and as a poultice for malignant ulcers.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PETASITES ROOT
Approved by Commission E:

* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: The underground stem is used as an adjunct
in the treatment of acute spastic pain in the efferent urinary
tract, particularly if stones are present. It is also used for
respiratory disorders, particularly for coughs, whoopin»
cough and bronchial asthma. Other uses include gastrointes-
tinal disorders, migraine and tension headaches.

Homeopathic Uses: Smooth muscle cramps.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
All forms of the drug should not be used during pregnancy or
by nursing mothers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
PETASITES LEAF

General: One should entirely forgo any administration of the
drug, due to the presence of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with
hepatotoxic and carcinogenic effects in the parts of the plant
above ground, as even mere traces of the alkaloids present a
danger. The industrial manufacture of extracts virtually free
of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is possible. The drug should not be
used without knowledge of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids
content.

Note: Alkaloid-free varieties are cultivated.

Pregnancy: The administration of the drug during pregnancy
is to be completely ruled out.

Nursing Mothers: The drug should not be consumed by
nursing mothers.

PETASITES ROOT
One should unconditionally forgo any administration of the
drug, due to the presence of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with
hepatotoxic and carcinogenic effect. The industrial manufac-
ture of extracts virtually free of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is
possible.

DOSAGE
PETASITES LEAF

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over
12 to 2 gm comminuted drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Drink 2 to 3 cups of the infusion per day.

Note: The herb should not be used unless the pyrrolizidine
content is known. The maximum daily dose of pyrrolizidine
alkaloids is 0.1 micrograms.

PETASITES ROOT
Mode of Administration: Extracts obtained with ethanol or
lipophilic solvents and other galenic preparations for internal
use.

----- PAGE 838 -----
“P

4p*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dosage: Dosing of herbal preparations is highly
dependent on a variety of factors, such as growing and
harvesting conditions, plant parts, extraction methods used
and the dosage form chosen by the manufacturer. Standard-
ization to single constituent makers has proven unreliable.
Since no official standards have been established to date to
regulate production of herbal medicines in the United States,
dosage ranges must be employed as guidelines.

Preparations equivalent to 4.5 to 7 gm drug may be used.
When used internally, the daily dosage must not exceed 0.1
micrograms of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1.2 unsaturated
necine structure including their N-oxides. When used
externally, the maximum daily dosage should not exceed 10
micrograms of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1.2 unsaturated
necine structure including their N-oxides. Teas should not be
used.

Homeopathic Uses: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

PETASITES LEAF

Bicket D et al., Identification and characterization of inhibitors
of peptide-leukotriene-synthesis from Petasites hybridus. In: PM
60(4):318. 1994.

Brune K, Analgetische Wirkung von Pestwurz. In: DAZ
133(37):3296. 1993.

Brune K, Bickel D, Peskar BA, Gastro-Protective Effects by
Extracts of Petasites hybridus: The Role of Inhibition of
Peptido-leukotriene Synthesis. In: PM 59(6):494. 1993.

Bucher K, (1951) Ober ein antispastisches Prinzip in Petasites
officinalis Moench,‘Arch Exp Path Pharmacol 213:69.

Carle R, Pflanzliche Antiphlogistika und Spasmolytika. In: ZPT
9(3):67. 1988.

Chizzola R, Distribution of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids
senecionine and intergerrimine within the Petasites hybridus. In:
PM 58(7)93. 1992.

Dorsch W, Neues iiber antientzundliche Drogen. In: ZPT
14(1):26. 1993.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hasler A et al., Trace analysis of pyrrolizidine alkaloids by
GC-NPD of extracts from the roots of Petasites hybridus. In:
M 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 147. 1996.

PETASITES/S587

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mauz Ch et al., (1985) Pharm Acta Helv 60:4.

Meier B, Die Pestwurz - Stand der Forschung. In: ZPT
15(5):268-284. 1994.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PETASITES ROOT
Bicket D et al.. Identification and characterization of inhibitors
of peptide-leukotriene-synthesis from Petasites hybridus. In: PM
60(4):318. 1994.

Brune K, Analgetische Wirkung von Pestwurz. In: DAZ
133(37):3296. 1993.

Brune K, Bickel D, Peskar BA, Gastro-Protective Effects by
Extracts of Petasites hybridus: The Role of Inhibition of
Peptido-leukotriene Synthesis. In: PM 59(6):494. 1993.

Bucher K, (1951) Ober ein antispastisches Prinzip in Petasites
officinalis Moench. Arch Exp Path Pharmacol 213:69.

Carle R, Pflanzliche Antiphlogistika und Spasmolytika. In: ZPT
9(3):67. 1988.

Chizzola R, Distribution of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids
senecionine and intergerrimine within the Petasites hybridus. In:
PM 58(7)93. 1992.

Dorsch W, Neues iiber antientz&uuml;ndliche Drogen. In: ZPT
14(1):26. 1993.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Gruenwald J, Brendler T, Jaenicke C (Eds.), Physicians’ Desk
Reference for Herbal Medicines. Medical Economics Company
Inc., Montvale, 1998.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hasler A et al., Trace analysis of pyrrolizidine alkaloids by
GC-NPD of extracts from the roots of Petasites hybridus. In:
PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 147. 1996.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mauz Ch et al., (1985) Pharm Acta Helv 60:4.
Meier B, Die Pestwurz - Stand der Forschung. In: ZPT
15(5):268-284. 1994.

Roder E, Pyrrolizidinhaltige Arzneipflanzen. In: DAZ
132(45):2427-2435. 1992.

----- PAGE 839 -----
588/PETASITES

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Petasites hybridus

See Petasites

Petroselinum crispum
See Parsley

Peucedanum ostruthium

See Masterwort

Peumus boldo
See Boldo

Peyote

Lophophora williamsii

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Paris: 'The*medicinal parts are the "pincushion-
like, aerial, transversely cut and dried, tough-corky shoot,
and the fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers grow from the center of the
cactus head. They are | to 2.5 cm long and | to 2.2 cm
across. The outer petals are green with a darker middle stripe
and have green-pink or white margins. The filaments are
white with yellow anthers. The ovary is glabrous. The fruit is
a 15 to 20 mm long berry, which is 2 to 3.5 mm across,
sturdy, clavate, initially fleshy, glabrous and red. It turns
brown-white and dries out when ripe. The seeds are black,
rough, | to 15 mm long and | mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a succulent, spineless,
globular or top-shaped, bluish-green cactus with up to 13
distinct vertical ribs. It grows to 20 cm. From one rhizome
side shoots are produced to create a cactus formation of 1.5
m across. The roots are tuberous and 8 to 11 cm long. The

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES.

aerial part has a diameter of 4 to 12 cm, and the pressed-in
top is filled with gray, woolly bushels of hair. The head is
divided into irregular flat warts by horizontal grooves.
Roundish aueroles of paintbrush-like yellowish or whitish
tufts of hair grow from the tip of the warts.

Habitat: The plant grows in northern Mexico and bordering
southern Texas.

Production: Mescal Button stem consists of the pincushion-
like cactus Lophophora willamsii, cut into slices and dried.
The root and hair tuft of the Peyote plant are cut off.
Particularly mescaline and chlorophyll-rich center is dried as
a slice. This slice is referred to as the Mescal Button.

Other Names: Pellote, Mescal Buttons, Devil's Root, Dump-
ling Cactus, Sacred Mushroom

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alkaloids phenylethylamine type: chief among them mesca-
line (up to 7%), hordenine; tetrahydroisoquinoline type:
including among others pellotin, anhalonidine, anhalamine

EFFECTS

Peyote has an emetic and a hallucinogenic effect. The
psychotropic effects of Peyote consumption are mainly due
to the mescaline content. Controlled pharmacological studies
on the Peyote cactus are unknown. Mescal beans cause
visual, auditory, taste and kinesthetic hallucinations.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Peyote is rarely used as a medicinal
preparation. In folk medicine, Peyote is one of the oldest
hallucinogens.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Due to its mescaline content, the drug causes chiefly visual,
but also aural, kinesthetic and synesthetic hallucinations
when taken in dosages of between 4 and 12 dried slices of
the sprout (so-called Mescal Buttons: diameter 3 to 4.5 cm,
thickness 0.5 cm).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Peyote is obsolete as a drug; it is
often ingested illegally for its hallucinogenic effect.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kapadia GJ, Fayez MB, (1970) J Pharm Sci 59:1699.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter
Anhalonium).

>

----- PAGE 840 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Seeger R, Mescalin. In: DAZ 133(2):24. 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33(3A):1.

Phaseolus vulgaris
See Bean Pod

Phoenix dactylifera

See Date Palm

Phragmites communis
See Reed Herb

Phyllanthus amarus
See Black Catnip

Physalfe alkekengi

See Winter Cherry

Physostigma venenosum
See Calabar Bean

Phytolacca americana
See Poke

Picea species
See Spruce

PICRORHIZA /589

Picrasma excelsa

See Quassia

Picrorhiza

Picrorhiza kurroa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
rhizome, which is cut and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a terminal, dense
spike, 5 to 10 cm long, on an upright peduncle over a rosette
of dentate leaves (may be absent). The sepals are fused.
approximately 6 mm long. The calyx is 5-lobed and
pubescent, the corolla 5-lobed, radial, pale blue or reddish-
blue. There are A stamens, and the ovary is 2-chambered
with numerous ovules. The flowers are dimorphic, having
either 6 to 8 mm long corollas and 8 mm long filaments or a
single 6 mm long corolla and 2 cm long filaments. The fruit
is an approximately 1.3 cm long, ovoid, 4-sided capsule. The
seeds are ellipsoid with a translucent, thick, blistery aril.

Leaves, Stem and Roots: The leaves on this herbaceous
creeping perennial are alternate, 5 to 15 cm long and 2 to 6
cm wide. The lamina is coriaceous, spatulate to narrow-
elliptical with a rounded tip. The margin is dentate and the
petiole winged. The rhizome is woody, up to 25 cm long.
and covered in the remains of dried leaf bases.

Habitat: The plant is native to the mountains of India, Nepal.
Tibet and Pakistan.

Production: Kharbagehindi (Arabic name) roots are the cut
and dried rhizome of Picrorhiza kurroa, which are collected
in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Mistaken identity can occur with
Lagotis cashmiriana.

Other Names: Kharbagehindi

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids: catalpol derivatives, including picroside I (0.6 to
7.4%, extremely bitter), kutkoside (10-O-vanilloyl catalpoL
with picroside I present in a stable state as a mixed crystal:
kutkin), picroside II (3 to 5%), minecoside (0.5%), veronico-
side and picroside II

Acetophenone derivatives: androsine (0.1 to 0.7%), apocynin
(0.1%), picein

----- PAGE 841 -----
590/PICRORHIZA

Cucurbitacins: chief component 25-acetoxy-2beta-D-gluco-
syloxy-3,16,20-trihydroxy-9-methyl-19-norlanosta-5,23-
dien-22-one (1.0 to 1.5%. extremely bitter)

Glycoproteins

EFFECTS

The acetophenone derivatives androsine and apocynine are
bronchospasmolytic and antiasthmatic in effect. In addition,
antiphlogistic, immunostimulating, antibacterial and antivi-
ral, hepatoprotective, choleretic, spasmolytic and insecticidal
action mechanisms were able to be demonstrated. The
positive influence of Picrorhiza kurroa in the treatment of
vitiligo is traceable to the immunomodulating and hepatopro-
tective characteristics of the drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses have included menstrual
complaints, enteritis, gall bladder complaints, for stomach
conditions as an emetic, fever, constipation, chronic dysen-
tery, scabies, leucoderma, joint pain, chronic asthma, infec-
tions, inflammations, coughs, hepatitis and snakebite.

Chinese Medicine: Picrorhiza is used for fever induced by
strain, hyperemia, dysentery, jaundice, carbuncles, hemor-
rhoids, epilepsy and malnutrition in children.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare a tincture, 100 g finely cut and
crushed Kharbagehindi root with 37.5 g dried and crushed
orange peels, 12.5 g crushed cardamom to 1000 ml 45%

ethanol.

Daily Dosage: Powder: 0.6 to 1.2 g drug; as an antiperiodic
3 to 4 g. Tincture: 2 to 4 ml.

LITERATURE

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeb nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Chander R, Dwivedi Y, Rastogi R, Sharma SK, Garg NK,
Kapoor NK, Dhawan BN, Effect of different extracts of kutaki
(Picrorhiza kurroa) on experimentally induced abnormalities in
the liver. Indian J Med Res, 95:34-7, 1990 Feb.

Chander R, Dwivedi Y, Rastogi R, Sharma SK, Garg NK,
Kapoor NK, Dhawan BN, Evaluation of hepatoprotective
activity of picroliv (from Picrorhiza kurroa) in Mastomys
natalensis infected with Plasmodium berghei. Indian J Med Res,
95:34-7, 1990 Feb.

Dorsch W, Sruppner H, Wagner H, Gropp M, Demoulin S,
Ring J, Antiasthmatic effects of Picrorhiza kurroa: androsin

prevents allergen- and PAF-induced bronchial obstruction in
guinea pigs. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol, 95:128-33, 1991.

Mahajani SS, Kulkami RD, Effect of disodium cromoglycate
and Picrorhiza kurroa root powder on sensitivity of guinea pigs
to histamine and sympathomimetic amines. Int Arch Allergy
Appl Immunol, 42:137-44, 1977.

Pandey BL, Das PK, Immunopharmacological studies on
Picrorhiza kurroa Royle-ex-Benth. Part III: Adrenergic
mechanisms of anti-inflammatory action. Indian J Physiol
Pharmacol, 42:120-5, 1988 Apr-Jun.

Pandey BL, Das PK, Immunopharmacological studies on

Picrorhiza kurroa Royle-ex-Benth. Part IV: Cellular mechanisms
of anti-inflammatory action. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol, 42:28-
30, 1989 Jan-Mar.
Shukla B, Visen PK, Patnaik GK, Dhawan BN, Choleretic

effect of picroliv, the hepatoprotective principle of Picrorhiza
kurroa. Planta Med, 95:29-33, 1991 Feb.

Vaidya AB, Antarkar DS, Doshi JC, Bhatt AD, Ramesh V,
Vora PV, Perissond D, Baxi AJ, Kale PM, Picrorhiza kurroa

(Kutaki) Royle ex Benth as a hepatoprotective agent -
experimental & clinical studies. J Postgrad Med, 42:105-8, 1996

Oct-Dec.

Picrorhiza kurroa

See Picrorhiza

Pilocarpus microphyllus
See Jaborandi

Pilosella officinarum
See Mouse Ear

Pimenta racemosa

See Pimento

Pimento
Pimenta racemosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the berries and the
oil extracted from them.

----- PAGE 842 -----
A

g|

m

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are racemes of white
or lilac flowers, which develop very quickly into the
infructescence. The fruit is a brown, globular berry, which is
about 0.75 cm in diameter. The fruit has a rough surface and
the remains of the calyx are present as a toothed ring at the
apex. It contains 2 reniform seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is an evergreen up to 12 m
in height. The leaves are oblong and coriaceous.

Characteristics: The odor is aromatic and reminiscent of
cloves.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the West Indies and is
cultivated in South America, Central America and Jamaica.

Production: Pimento leaves are the foliage leaves of Pimenta
racemosa. Pimentae fructus is obsolete as a drug.

Other Names: Allspice, Clove Pepper, Jamaica Pepper,
Pimenta

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (hay oil, 0.7-1.2%): chief components- eugenol
(50-60%), chavicol (20%), additionally including among
others eugenol methyl ether, methyl chavicol, myrcene,
limonene, (-)-phellandrene, 3- octanon, |-octen-3-ole, citral

EFFECTS
Pimento is antiseptic and analgesic, and is a skin irritant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pimento is used externally in rubefacient

lotions or liniments.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration Of designated
therapeutic dosages. Allergic reactions to eugenol occur
rarely.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Pimento preparations are adminis-
tered externally as lotions or liniments.

LITERATURE
Hogg JW et al., (1971) Am Perf Cosmet 86:33.
Kato Y, (1975) Koryo 113:17 et 24.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Eds.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Oishi K et al., (1974) Nippon Suisan Gakaishi 40:1241.
Saito Y et al., (1976) Eiyo To Shokuryo 29:505.

PIMPINELLA/591

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Pimpinella
Pimpinella major

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizome,
the dried roots and the fresh roots collected in May.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are in compound 5- to
I5‘rayed umbels. There is no involucre or epicalyx. The
flowers are small. The petals are uneven with curved lobes.
The style is longer than the ovary during the flowering
season. The fruit is dark brown to black, oblong-ovate,
compressed at the sides, 2 to 3.5 mm long, heavily grooved
and has no beak.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The 50 to 100 cm high plant is a
perennial. During the flowering season, it develops lateral
rosettes of leaves for the following year. These are usually
glabrous, occasionally finely downy to short-bristly. The root
is fusiform or carrot-shaped. The root is 10 to 20 cm long
and I to 15 cm thick, gray-yellow and somewhat ringed.
The stem is erect, angular, grooved, hollow, glabrous,
somewhat leafy and branched from the ground up. The
leaves are simple pinnate and glossy. The leaflets of the
lower leaves are petiolate. They are ovate or oblong-indented
or serrate acuminate.

Characteristics: The fresh root smells rancid, suet or carrot-
like. The taste is tangy at first then burning-hot.

Habitat: The plant grows all over Europe with the exception
of Scandinavia and the southern Balkans. It has been
introduced to North America.

Production: Pimpinella herb consists of the above-ground
parts of Pimpinella saxifrage and/or Pimpinella major.
Pimpinella root consists of the dried rhizomes and roots of
Pimpinella saxifrage and/or Pimpinella major. The root is
dug up in spring and autumn. The uncut root is dried at
temperatures of 40° C to prevent loss of essential oils. The
drying process is completed when the roots can be broken.

Not to be Confused With: Pimpinellae radix should not be
confused with other Apiaca roots. It is often adulterated with
the roots of Heracleum sphondylium, Heracleum mantegaz-
zianum and Pastinaca sativa.

Other Names: Pimpernell, Saxifrage, Burnet Saxifrage

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PIMPINELLA HERB
Flavonoids

The foliage of the plant has not been fully investigated.

----- PAGE 843 -----
592/PIMPINELLA

EFFECTS: PIMPINELLA HERB
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: PIMPINELLA ROOT
Volatile oil (0.05 to 0.7%): chief components- trans-epoxy-
pseudo-isoeugenol (20-57%), additionally _ pregeijeren
(10%), geijerene (3%), beta-bisabolene, germacrenes A to D,
1,4-dimethyl azulene

Furocoumarins (1.2-2.3%): including among others bergap-
tene, isopimpinellin, pimpinellin, isobergapten, sphondine

Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, scopoletin

Caffeic acid esters: including among others, chlorogenic

acid

Polyynes: including trideca-2,8,10-trien-4,6-diine; trideca-

2,8-dien-4,6-diin-10-ole

EFFECTS: PIMPINELLA ROOT

The drug contains essential oil. The efficacy of the drug as a
flushing-out therapy in bacterial infections of the urinary
tract seems plausible. The expectorant effect has not been

proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

PIMPINELLA HERB

Preparations of Pimpinella herb are used internally for lung
ailments and to stimulate gastrointestinal activity. The herb
is used externally for varicose veins.

PIMPINELLA ROOT

Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Preparations of the root are also used for colds, chills and
catarrh of the yppef- respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, it is used internally for
disorders of the urinary organs, inflammation of the bladder
and kidney, bladder and kidney stones, and edema. It is also
used as flushing-out therapy in bacterial inflammation of the
efferent urinary tract. Externally, it is used for inflammation
of the oral and pharyngeal mucous membrane and as a bath
additive for poorly healing wounds.¢

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include febrile states
and spinal pain. Efficacy of the flushing-out therapy seems
plausible, efficacy for the other indications has not been

sufficiently proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
PIMPINELLA HERB

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

PIMPINELLA ROOT

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Photosensitivity may occur in light-skinned

individuals.

DOSAGE

PIMPINELLA ROOT

Mode of Administration: Pimpinella root is administered as a
tincture (Tinctura Pimpinellae) and as a comminuted herb for
teas and other galenic preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 6 to 12 g drug for infusions or 6 to 15 ml
pimpernel tincture (1:5).

Folk medicine — Add freshly cut drug to cold water and
bring to the boil, use as a gargle and as a bath additive.

Infusion — 3 to 10 g; 1 cup 3 to 4 times daily (sweetened
with honey).

Gargle tincture — 30 drops in a glass of water.
For coughs — 5 to 10 drops on a sugar lump.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once

a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
PIMPINELLA HERB

Bohn IU, Pimpinella saxifraga und Pimpinella major-Kleine und
Grofe Bibemeile. In: ZPT 12(3):98. 1991.

Kubeczka KH, Formacek V, New Constituents from the
Essential Oils of Pimpinella. In: Brunke EJ (Ed.) Progress in
Essential Oil Research, Walter de Gruyter & Co, Berlin 1986.
1986.

Martin R et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(3): 198.

Reichling J, Martin R, Pseudoisoeugenole - eine Gruppe
seltener Phenylpropanoide im Genus Pimpinella: Biosynthese
unfd biologische Wirkung. In: PZW 136(5/6)225. 1991.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PIMPINELLA ROOT

Bohn IU, Pimpinella saxifraga und Pimpinella major-Kleine und
Grope Bibernelle. In: ZPT 12(3):98. 1991.

Kubeczka KH, Formacek V, New Constituents from the

Essential Oils of Pimpinella. In: Brunke EJ (Ed.) Progress in
Essential Oil Research, Walter de Gruyter & Co, Berlin 1986.

Martin R et al., (1985) Planta Med 51(3): 198.

----- PAGE 844 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Reichling J, Martin R, Pseudoisoeugenole - eine Gruppe
seltener Phenylpropanoide im Genus Pimpinella: Biosynthese
unfd biologische Wirkung. In: PZW 136(5/6)225. 1991.

Further information in:

9 Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers

€r

Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Pimpinella anisum

See Anise

Pimpinella major
See Pimpinella

Pineapple- me
Ananas comosus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The white, blue or purple flowers are
arranged in approximately 30 cm long spikes. The flowers
are in the axils of reddish, thorny bracts. The 3 sepals are
free or fused at the base, and the 3 petals form a tube. Tnere
are 6 stamens and a 3-chambered ovary. The fruit is fused
with the thickening receptacle to an oval to cylindrical, cone-
like pseudocarp. The pseudocarp is 10 to 25 cm thick, 15 to
25 cm high, 0.5 to 5 kg in weight, yellow to orange-red with
large warts and a hexagonal area bearing a leaf cluster at the

tip.
Leaves, Stem and Root: Ananas comosus is a leafy rosette

perennial plant, which grows up to 12 m high. The leaves
are narrow-linear, thorny-tipped, up to 0.9 m long and 6 cm

PINEAPPLE/S593

wide. They are usually thorny dentate and arranged in
rosette. The stem is short.

Characteristics: The fruit is usually parthenocarpic. The
cultivated fruits are seedless. The fruit pulp is white to
yellow with a sourish-sweet, aromatic smell and taste.

Habitat: Hawaii, Japan, Taiwan

Production: Bromelain is a mixture of proteolytic enzymes
from the main stump of Ananas comosus. Bromelain is
produced from the main pineapple stumps harvested after 4
years. The main stumps are pressed and put through an
extraction process with water. The juice is then precipitated
with acetone to produce raw bromelain. The resulting waste
product is a soft wax, which is used in the cosmetic industry.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Proteases: mixture of at least 5 chemically very similar
cysteine proteinases, including EC 3.4.22.4 and EC 3.4.22.5,
that can be deactivated with oxidizing substances or activa-
ted with thiols such as cysteine, as well as small amounts of
a phosphatase, a peroxidase or protease inhibitors.

EFFECTS

Pineapple is antiphlogistic, fibrinolytic and proteolytic. The
proteolytic enzymes promote the healing of wounds. In
addition, an inhibition of thrombocyte aggregation and an
antineoplastic effect have been observed, as well as an
elevation of the serum level of antibiotics when administered
concurrently.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Wounds and burns

Unproven Uses: Internal application: For post traumatic and
postoperative swelling to stimulate healing and as an enzyme
substitution for digestive symptoms after pancreatic disease.
The drug can also be used for edema, digestive complaints,
for inflammation and febrile conditions (Hawaiian Islands,
Philippines and South America), for asthmatic conditions in
children (Zaire) and as a vermifuge (Brazil). Pineapple bran
is used in weight reduction.

Indian Medicine: The fruit is used for dyspeptic symptoms,
constipation, amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea, as well as for
black vomiting and fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Gastric
complaints and diarrhea may occur as side effects of internal
administration. Allergic reactions following repeated admin-
istration have been observed.

----- PAGE 845 -----
594/PINEAPPLE

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Available as tablets, granules and
galenic preparations for internal use; compounded prepara-
tions for external use.

Daily Dosage: Internal application: 80 to 240 mg of raw
bromelain in galenic preparations, corresponding to 200 to
600 FIP units.

Storage: Seal tightly and air dry.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Harrach T, Eckert K. Schulze-Forster K. Nuck R. Grunow D,
Maurer HR, Isolation and partial characterization of basic
proteinases from stem bromelain. J Protein Chem. 57:41-52,
1995 Jan.

Holtum JA, Summons R. Roeske CA, Comins HN, O'Leary
MH, Allergic reactions, including asthma, to the pineapple
protease bromelain following occupational exposure. Clin
Allergy, 57:443-50, 1979 Sep.

Hotz G. Frank T, Zoller J, Wiebelt H, Antiphlogistic effect of
bromelaine following third molar removal. Dtsch Zahnarztl Z,
57:830-2, 1989 Nov.

Taussig SS, Batkin S, Abortifacient effect of steroids from
Ananas comosus and their analogues on mice. J Reprod Fertil,
22:461-2, 1976 Mar.

Taussig SJ. Batkin S, Bromelain, the enzyme complex of
pineapple (Ananas comosus) and its clinical application. An
update. J Ethnopharmacol, 22:191-203, 1988 Feb-Mar.

Taussig SJ. Batkin S, Modulation of pulmonary metastasis
(Lewis lung carcinoma) by bromelain, an extract of the
pineapple stem (Ananas comosus). Letter Cancer Invest, 22:241-
2, 1988.

Pink Root

Spigelia marilandica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried rhizomes
and roots.

Fruit and Flower: The inflorescences are terminal, some-
times branched spikes inclined to one side. The flowers are
erect. The high leaves are tiny or awl-shaped in fives, and
they are narrow. The 5-petaled corolla is red or yellow. The
fruit is a 2-valved capsule. The seeds are angular and packed
tightly in the fruit.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that grows
up to 45 cm high and has fibrous, twisted roots. The stem is

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

quadrangular and glabrous. The foliage leaves are opposite,
membranous, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, rounded
at the base, entire-margined and sessile. The stipules are
small.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the U.S.

Production: Pink Root and herb are the rhizome and aerial
parts of Spigelia marilandica.

Other Names: American Wormgrass, Indian Pink, Maryland
Pink, Pinkroot, Starbloom, Wormgrass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

The drug has not been investigated in recent times. Older
sources include, among others, references to the presence of
acidic resins, volatile oil, tannins, waxes and a volatile base
(presumably identical with isoquinoline).

EFFECTS
Pink Root has anthelmintic actions.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for worm infestation, as a
febrifuge and for malaria.

Homeopathic Uses:- Spigelia marilandica is used as a

calmative during states of excitement.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

According to older sources, the drug allegedly contains a
toxin that paralyzes the spinal marrow and leads to death
through asphyxiation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a powdered root or herb or as a
liquid extract.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Pinus Bark

Tsuga canadensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the latex, which
exudes from the plant and the essential oil.

Flower and Fruit: The pedicle of the male flower is shorter
than the scale sheath. The cones are small (1.5 to 2.5 cm
long) and light brown. The wood contains no resin.

----- PAGE 846 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The young shoots are villous,
becoming pubescent. The leaves have a leaf cushion and are
flat, short (1 to 15 cm long) and obtuse. The upper surface is
dark green and the under surface has 2 blue-white long
stripes.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America.
Other Names: Hemlock Bark, Canada Pitch, Hemlock Gum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins (8-15%)

Flavonoids: hemlock tannin
Stilbene derivatives (8-10%): picea tannols

EFFECTS
The active agents are the tannin, hemlock tannin, and picea
tannols. The drug has astringent, anti-inflammatory, diapho-
retic, and diuretic properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pinus Bark is used for digestive disorders,
diarrhea, and diseases of the mouth and throat. It was
formerly used to treat scurvy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Administration in allopathic medicine is not
common.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a liquid
extract, in medicinal preparations and combinations.

LITERATURE
Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufi., Bde 1-3: W de
Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Pinus species
See Scotch Pine

Piper betle

See Betel Nut

PIPSISSEWA 596

Piper cubeba

See Cubeb

Piper elongatum

See Matico

Piper methysticum

See Kava Kava

Piper nigrum

See Black Pepper

Pipsissewa
Chimaphila umbellata

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried ler.es
(occasionally mixed with twigs and flowers), the fresh ierial
parts of the flowering plant and the complete dried pLiat.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has terminal inflorescences 10
cm long with umbels of 2 to 7 flowers. The flowers. *inch
are initially bright pink and men white, are nodding and
mildly campanulate. The 5 sepals are obbvate. denuze and
about a third as long as the 5 petals. The petals are broadly
ovate, domed, pink and 5 to 6 mm long. The 10 stamens are
thickened at the base, the edges are winged and ciliare. The
anthers are short, thick and red. The style is very short and
the stigma broad and shorter than the anthers. The fnm is a
5-grooved capsule with erect stems.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial semi-shrub
growing up to 25 cm high with an upright, angular stem and
a creeping white rhizome. The evergreen, alternate leaves are
short-petioled, coriaceous, ovate-spatulate to linear and
wedge-shaped. The leaf margin is sharply serrate.

Habitat: The plant grows extensively in Europe. Asia,
Siberia, and North and South America. It is a protected
species in Germany.

Production: Pipsissewa is the aerial part of Chimaphila
umbellata, which is collected in the wild.

----- PAGE 847 -----
596/PIPSISSEWA

Not to be Confused With: Confusion sometimes arises with
Chimaphila maculata.

Other Names: Prince's Pine, Ground Holly, Umbellate
Wintergreen, Butter Winter, King's Cureall, Love in Winter,
Rheumatism Weed, King's Cure

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Hydroquinone glycosides: chief component isohomoarbutin,
additionally homoarbutin

Naphthacene_ derivatives (naphthoquinone): chimaphilin

(2,7-dimethyl-1,4-naphthoquinone)
Flavonoids: including among others hyperoside, avicularin
Tannins: (4-5%)

EFFECTS

The drug contains quinine, which is said to be a urinary
antiseptic. (See Uva Ursi) Alcoholic and aqueous extracts of
the plant are said to have antimicrobial properties in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internal applications include acute and
chronic cystitis and edema.

Indian Medicine: Pipsissewa is used internally by American
Indians for complaints of the kidneys and bladder, and to
regulate menstruation, both before and after giving birth. It is
also used for rheumatism and cancerous conditions. It is used
externally for skin diseases and smallpox.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are chronic
inflammation of the efferent urinary tracts, prostate gland
and mammary glands.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a weak sensitizing effect, due to
its chimaphilin content. The drug is not suitable for long-
term use because of its hydroquinone glycoside content. (See
Uva-Ursi leaf.)

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Constituent of homeopathic prepa-
rations in dilutions or as a mother tincture.

Preparation: A liquid extract is prepared 1:1 with ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The usual single dose is 2 g drug, | to 3 g
drug in a tea, or 1 to 4 ml of extract.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily, or 1 ml injection solution sc
twice weekly (HAB1).

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Bolkart KH et al., (1968) Naturwissenschaften 55:445.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Thomson RH, Naturally Occuring Quinones, 2nd Ed., Academic
Press New York 1971.

Walewska E, Thieme H, (1969) Pharmazie 24:423.

Piscidia piscipula
See Jamaica Dogwood

Pistacia lentiscus
See Mastic Tree

Pitcher Plant

Sarracenia purpurea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and
roots.

Flower and Fruit: The androgynous flowers usually have
numerous stamens and a large 3- to 5-valved superior ovary.
The style spreads into a wide, stemmed umbrella, which
spreads over the stamens. The 5 stigma sit as small cone-like
structures on the underside of the roof of the tips. The
numerous marginal ovules are on individual axillary shafts.
The fruit is a valved capsule. The small, membranous, thin-
skinned seeds contain an abundance of endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sarracenia purpurea is a strange,
perennial plant with leaves that are in a basal rosette and
change into a tube or beaker-like formation. The beaker
bears a long wing-like strip on the side turned towards the
stem. These beakers are often very colorful and fill up with
rainwater and insects. During hot weather they are closed
because of a concentration of fibers. The enclosed rainwater
and insects form a mass, which probably acts as a fertilizer
and has a strong odor.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the U.S.

Production: Pitcher Plant root and leaves are the root and
leaves of Sarracenia purpurea.

----- PAGE 848 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Eve's Cups, Fly-Catcher, Fly-Trap, Hunts-
man's Cup, Purple Side-Saddle Flower, Side-Saddle Plant,
Water-Cup, Smallpox Plant

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
+ COMPOUNDS

Piperidine alkaloids: coniine, gamma-conicein (particularly

in the trapping fluid of the pitcher leaves)

EFFECTS
The drug has stomachic, diuretic, and laxative effects due to
its active agents, which include sarracenia acid, tannin, resin,
and the alkaloid sarracenin, which is similar to veratrin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pitcher Plant was formerly used for
digestive disorders, particularly constipation, also for urinary
tract diseases, and as a cure for smallpox. Indigenous North
American Indians believe the drug not only saved lives of
smallpox victims, but they also administered it to prevent
scar formation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Both the root and leaf preparations

are considered completely obsolete.

LITERATURE
Foder GB, Colasenko B, In: Alkaloids, Vol. 3, Ed. SW

Pelletier, Pub. John Wiley 1985.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Plantago afta

See Psyllium Seed

Plantago lanceolata
See English Plantain

Plantago ovata
See Psyllium

PLANTAIN /597

Plantain

Musa paradisiaca

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence, growing through the
false trunk and curving downward, bears groups of male
flowers in the axils of the bracts at the tip, groups of
androgynous flowers beneath and finally female flowers.
The flowers are zygomorphic with 5 fused and 1 free tepal.
There are 5 stamens and a superior ovary. The fruit is a
berry. The 10 to 16 single fruits that develop from the
flowers of a bract are called a hand.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herbaceous perennial grows up
to 6 m high. The leaves are very large, entire and simple.
They are often pinnatifid and grow from an underground
rhizome. The leaf sheaths form a hollow false trunk. There
are adventitious roots.

Characteristics: A seedless berry fruit develops from the
female flowers without pollination.

Habitat: The plant grows in tropical areas.

Production: Plantain banana pulp is the unripened pulp of
Musa paradisiaca. Plantains are harvested when still green
and ripened in special rooms for 3 to 10 days.

Other Names: Banana, Banana Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Polysaccharides: starch (20% of fresh weight)

Protein (1% of fresh weight)
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C): 10 to 20 mg/100 g fresh weight

Amines: serotonin (28 g/g fresh weight), tyramine (7 g/o
fresh weight), dopamine (8 g/g fresh weight), noradrenaline
(2 g/g fresh weight)

Fruit acids: including malic and citric acid

Aromatic substances: 180 components, including isopente-
nyl acetate (chief aroma-bearer)

EFFECTS
The starchy fruit has antiu\cerogenic and cholesterol-reduc-
ing effects, and is a source of potassium. In East Africa and
elsewhere, Plantain is used to prepare a narcotic drink.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for dyspepsia, gastrointes-
tinal complaints, diabetes, scurvy, diarrhea, hypertension and
gout. The roots of the tree have been used as an anthelmintic

----- PAGE 849 -----
598/PLANTAIN

and considered useful in alleviating bronchocele. The juice
was used as a snakebite antidote.

Indian Medicine: Uses include worm disease, scabies, severe
thirst, bronchitis, itching, kidney disease, pharyngalgia and
dysuria. Efficacy for these indications has not yet been

proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. It is
conceivable that the amine content could trigger attacks of
migraine headache. The freqency of myocardial fibrosis in
tropical countries is said to be caused by chronic ingestion of
the plant. (Plantain should never be eaten raw; it must be
cooked or fried.)

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the whole, cut and
powdered drug are administered orally.

Preparation: Plantain starch is extracted through the elutria-
tion of the ground fruit pulp. Plantain powder is produced by
dividing the fruit into slices and air- or chamber-drying them
to a water content of only 15%, and then grinding. Plantain
powder (or the unripened mashed fruit) is added to milk and
drunk or made into bread called Chapatis.

LITERATURE

Chattopadhyay S, Chaudhuri S, Ghosal S, Activation of
peritoneal macrophages by sitoindoside-IV, an anti-ulcerogenic
acylsterylglycoside from Musa paradisiaca. Planta Med, 94:16-8,
1987 Feb.

Englyst HN, Cummings JH. Digestion of the carbohydrates of

banana (Musa paradisiaca sapientum) in the human small
intestine. Am J Clin Nutr, 44:42-50, 1986 Jul.

Goel RK, Gupta S, Shankar R, Sanyal AK, Anti-ulcerogenic
effect of banana powder (Musa sapientum var. paradisiaca) and
its effect on mucosal resistance. J Ethnopharmacol, 18:33-44,
1986 Oct.

Lyte M, Induction of gram-negative bacterial growth by
neurochemical containing banana (Musa x paradisiaca) extracts.
FEMS Microbiol Lett, 44:245-50, 1997 Sep 15.

Mukhopadhyaya K, Bhattacharya D, Chakraborty A, Goel RK,
Sanyal AK, Effect of banana powder (Musa sapientum var.
paradisiaca) on gastric mucosal shedding. J Ethnopharmacol,
21:11-9, 1987 Sep-Oct.

Srivastava A, Raj SK, Haq QM, Srivastava KM, Singh BP,
Sane PV, Association of a cucumber mosaic virus strain with
mosaic disease of banana, Musa paradisiaca - an evidence using
immuno/nucleic acid probe. Indian J Exp Biol, 94:986-8, 1995
Dec.

Usha V, Vijayammal PL, Kurup PA, Aortic/glycosaminoglycans
alterations in antiatherogenic action of dietary fiber from unripe
banana (Musa paradisiaca). Indian J Med Res, 94:143-6, 1991
Apr.

Usha V, Vijayammal PL, Kurup PA, Effect of dietary fiber
from banana (Musa paradisiaca) on cholesterol metabolism.
Indian J Exp Biol, 44:550-4, 1984 Oct.

Usha V, Vijayammal PL, Kurup PA, Effect of dietary fiber
from banana (Musa paradisiaca) on metabolism of carbohydrates
in rats fed cholesterol free diet. Indian J Exp Biol, 44:445-9,
1989 May.

Platycodon § grandiflorum

See Balloon-Flower (Jie-Geng)

Pleurisy Root

Asclepias tuberosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The plant bears panicles of deep yellow
and orange petalous flowers on the apex of the stem.

Leaves, Stem and Root:. The plant is perennial, erect, 50 to
100 cm high with a fleshy tuberous root stock bearing a few
stout, hairy stems. The leaves are alternate, oblong, glabrous,
narrowly lanceolate and dark green. The under surface of the
leaves is somewhat lighter than the upper surface. The
rootstock is mildly ring-shaped with a branched crown. The
roots are grooved lengthwise, grayish brown on the outside
and whitish on the inside. The tissue is made up of
concentric rings, which divide easily. The root is tough, short
and starchy. Asclepias tuberosa is devoid of the latex typical
of the genus (see Asclepias incarnata).

Characteristics: Pleurisy Root has a nutty and bitter taste.
The odor is faint.

Habitat: Indigenous to America and Canada.
Production: Pleurisy Root is the root of Asclepias tuberosa.

Other Names: Butterfly Weed, Canada Root, Flux Root,
Orange Swallow-Wort, Swallow-Wort, Tuber Root, White
Root, Wind Root, Orange Milkweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive (cardenolids)
glucofrugoside, coriglaucigenin (aglycone)

steroids including frugoside,

EFFECTS
Pleurisy Root is
diaphoretic and antispasmodic.

said to act as an expectorant, tonic,

----- PAGE 850 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pleurisy Root is used for coughs, pleurisy,
disorders of the uterus, as an analgesic and to ease breathing.

The plant plays a particularly important role in the medicine

L of American Indians as a remedy for pleurisy. It is also used
as a diaphoretic in treating pneumonia, inflammation of the
mucous membranes, local or general atrophy, diarrhea,
dysentery, rheumatism and stomach ache. Pleurisy Root is
also used as a diaphoretic and expectorant.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Pleurisy Root is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
The drug has an emetic effect in higher dosages, and
digitalis-like poisonings are possible due to the cardioactive
steroid content. For possible symptoms and treatments for
poisonings, see Digitalis purpurea.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as a
liquid extract and is also available in combination
preparations.

LITERATURE
Costello CH, Butler CL, (1950) J Am Pharm Ass Sci Ed

39:23.
Pagani F, (1975) Boll Chim Farm 114(8):450.

Petricic J, (1966) Arch Pharm Ber Dtsch. Pharm Ges
299(12): 1007.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormana K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Plumbago

Plumbago zeylanica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the leaf

and root.

POGOSTEMON CABLIN /599

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are radial, their structures are
arranged in fives with white petals and a superior ovary. The
fruit is a 1-seeded nut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Plumbago is a semi-shrub. The
leaves are simple and entire.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Malaysia and China.

Production: Plumbago herb is the dried aerial part of
Plumbago zeylandica.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Naphthalene derivatives: chief component plumbagin
(0.04%), including as well 3-chlorplumbagin, isoshinano-
lone, 3,3'-biplumbagin, elliptinone (6,6'-biplumbagin), dro-
serone, 3,6'-biplumbagin (chitranone), zeylanone, isozey-
lanone, maritinone, 2-methyl naphthazarine

EFFECTS
No definitive data available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: The.herb has been used for rheumatism,
intestinal parasites, joint pain, anemia, scabies and furuncles.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Daily Dosage: 9 to 15 gm of drug

LITERATURE
No data available.

Plumbago zeylanica
See Plumbago

Podophyllum peltatum

See Mayapple

Pogostemon cablin
See Patchouli

----- PAGE 851 -----
600/POISON Ivy

Poison Ivy

Rhus toxicodendron

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves collected
after flowering and dried, the fresh young shoots, the young
flowering branches and the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The pedicled flowers are in axillary,
pubescent panicles. They are dioecious, sometimes androgy-
nous. The stemmed petals are whitish-green with red hearts.
The fruit is an almost globular, glabrous, yellow or
yellowish-white, 10-grooved drupe. The fruit varies in size
and contains a viscous latex in resin channels, which turns
black in the air.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a dioecious shrub up to

1 m high with ascending, procumbent or climbing rooting
branches and underground runners. The branches are initially
green and softly pubescent, later brown and glabrous. There
are numerous lenticels on the two-year old shoots. The
leaves are trifoliate with 8 to 14 cm long petioles. The
leaflets are oblong, acute or obtuse, entire-margined or
roughly serrate in the middle. They have a dark-green upper
surface and slightly pubescent lower surface, which is a
lighter green.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America; it is also
found in east Asia and is cultivated in Germany in botanical
and apothecary gardens.

Production: Poison Ivy leaves are the leaves of Rhus
toxicodendron. Subsequent to the flowering period, the
leaves of R. toxicodendron are gathered and then well-dried.
Gloves should be worn to protect hands while gathering the
leaves, as they can cause unpleasant inflammation of the
skin.

Not to be Confused With: Although it is sometimes called
"Ampelopsis hoggii," Rhus toxicodendron actually has
nothing in common with the Ampelopsis group of vines.

Other Names: Poison Oak, Poison Vine, Epright Sumach

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alkyl phenols: urushiol, chiefly _ cis,cis-3-(n-heptadeca-
8',H'-dienyl)catechol, cis,cis, cis-3-(n-heptadeca-8'lI\14'-
trienyl)catechol, cis-3-(n-heptadec-8'-enyl)catechol

Tannins
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
"Rhus poison," even in very small amounts, causes severe
irritation to the skin. Following contact it can result in

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

reddening, swelling and herpes simplex-like blisters. It also
has a strong toxic effect if taken internally. The mother
tincture (main constituents: gallic acid and urushiol) inhibits
in vitro prostaglandin biosynthesis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic uses: The drug is used to treat rheumatism in
the joints and muscles; overexertion (stress and_ strain);
febrile infections with giddiness; inflammation of the respi-
ratory tract, gastrointestinal tract and the eyes; menstrual
disturbances; anxiety and depressive states; and itching skin
diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Contact with larger quantities of the allergen can bring about
resorption and generalized erythema; in severe cases also
fever and unconsciousness. Severe conjunctivitis and corneal
inflammations, with possible loss of sight, may result after
contact with the eyes. External application of the drug should
be avoided. Skin affected by accidental contact should be
intensively rinsed with a soapy solution and then cleaned
with ether or ethanol. The points of inflammation should be
covered with bicarbonate of soda paste (mixed with water).
Internal treatment is carried out with systematically effective
corticosteroids. Cooling bandages give relief in mild cases.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdoses of homeopathic preparations lead to severe
mucous membrane irritation, accompanied by queasiness,
vomiting, intestinal colic and diarrhea, as well as signs of
resorption, e.g., vertigo, stupor, kidney damage (nephritis,
hematuria).

Following gastrointestinal emptying (gastric lavage with
burgundy-colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium
sulfate), installation of activated charcoal and shock prophy-
laxis (quiet,, warmth), the therapy for these sorts of poison-
ings consists of treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.),
electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case of shock, plasma
volume expanders should be infused. Monitoring of kidney
function is essential. Intubation and oxygen respiration may
also be necessary. Furthermore, the leaves possess a very
severe potential for sensitization, due to their urushiol
content. Following sensitization (which can also occur
through contact with decorative art from the Far East, such
as wooden chairs that have been treated with toxicodendron
lacquers), renewed contact leads within a few hours to
itching eczemas and eventual blister formation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Homeopathic dilutions of the

mother tincture.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);

----- PAGE 852 -----
£t

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34); children are given different doses.

Storage: In tightly sealed containers, not to be kept for more
than a year.

LITERATURE
Gross M et aL PH 14:2263. 1975.
Millet S et aL PH 15:553. 1976.

Randall RC. Phillips GO, Williams PA. Food Hydrocolloids
3:65-75. 1989.

Shobha SV et aL, Inhibition of soybean lipoxygenase-1 by
anacardic acids, cardols, and cardanols. In: JNP 57(12): 1755-
1757. 1994.

Symes WF. Dawson CR, Nature 171:841. 1953.

Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. AufL Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Lewin L. Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993 (unter
Toxicodendron).

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. AufL, Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Poisonous Buttercup
Ranunculus sceleratus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh herb.

Flower and Fruit: The plant produces numerous flowers.
They are small, pale yellow and 4 to 10 mm in size. The
petals are as long as the calyx. The sepals are revolute, ovate
and downy. There are many stamens and numerous ovaries.
The fruit consists of an oblong, ear-like capitula. The calyx
and corolla drop easily.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 20 to 60 cm
high with an annual root. The plant is pale, glossy,

POISONOUS BUTTERCUP/601

yellowish-green, fleshy and glabrous. The upper part of the
stem is occasionally pubescent. The stem is erect, tubular,
glabrous and branched. The leaves are palmate: The lower
ones are long-petioled with 2- to 3-lobed segments, and the
upper ones are sessile and usually trifoliate.

Characteristics: A bruised leaf coming into contact with the
skin creates a blister that heals very slowly.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central and northern
Europe.

Production: Poisonous Buttercup is the fresh herb of R.
sceleratus, which is gathered in October.

Other Names: Celery-Leaved Crowfoot, Cursed Crowfoot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glycoside ranunculin: as protoanemonine-forming agent in
the, freshly harvested plant (1.4% of the fresh weight) that
changes enzymatically when the plant is cut into small
pieces, and probably also while it is drying, into the pungent.
volatile protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to non-mu-
cous-membrane-irritating anemonine. When dried, the plant
may not be capable of protoanemonine formation.

Saponins

EFFECTS
The active agents are ranunculin, protoanemonin and anemo-
nin and flavoid in the leaves. The plant is highly toxic. The
juice contains protoanemonin, which causes pain and burn-
ing sensations, increases saliva secretion and causes severe
inflammation of the tongue.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Poisonous Buttercup is used as a skin
stimulant for skin diseases (such as scabies) and leukoderma.

Homeopathic Uses: Poisonous Buttercup is used for skin
complaints, swollen muscles and joints, and influenza.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug. Extended skin contact with
the freshly harvested, bruised plant can lead to blister
formation and cauterizations that are difficult to heal due to
the resulting protoanemonine, which is severely irritating to
skin and mucous membranes. If taken internally, severe
irritation to the gastrointestinal tract, combined with colic
and diarrhea, as well as irritation of the urinary drainage
passages, may occur. Symptomatic treatment for external
contact consists of mucilaginosa after irrigation with diluted
potassium permanganate solution. In case of internal contact.
administration of activated charcoal should follow gastric
lavage.

----- PAGE 853 -----
602/POISONOUS BUTTERCUP

OVERDOSAGE

Death by asphyxiation following the intake of large quanti-
ties of protoanemonine-forming plants has been observed in
animal experiments.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is available as a mother
tincture and extract in homeopathic dilutions.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg 01ms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM _ 11:338-347. 1963.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Poke

Phytolacca americana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried root and

the berries.

Flower and Fruit: The racemes are about 10 cm long and
more or less erect. The flowers are androgynous. There is a
calyx without a corolla. The involucre segments are 2.5 cm,
broadly ovate, greenish-white and turn reddish at the fruit.
There are 10 stamens and 10 carpels, which are fused. The
fruits are 10 mm depressed-globose, purplish-black berries,
which cover the stem like a raceme. They are similar to

blueberries.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a glabrous, perennial
herb, somewhat woody at the base. The root is long and
fleshy. The stems are 1 to 3 m high, hollow, bifurcated and
often marked with grooves. The leaves are alternate, entire-
margined, unpleasantly scented, 12 to 25 cm by 5 to 10 cm,
ovate-lanceolate and petiolate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the U.S. and has also
become common in Mediterranean countries.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Production: Poke Root and berries are the root and fruit of
Phytolacca americana.

Other Names: American Nightshade, American Spinach,
Bear's Grape, Branching Phytolacca, Cancer-Root, Coakum-
Chongras, Cokan, Crowberry, Inkberry, Jalap, Phytolacca
Berry, Phytolacca Root, Pigeon Berry, Pocan, Poke Root,
Poke Berry, Pokeweed, Red Weed, Red-Ink Plant, Scoke,
Skoke, Virginian Poke

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: POKE FRUIT

Triterpene saponins (mixture termed phytolaccatoxin): phy-
tolaccoside A-G, phytolaccasaponin B, aglycones 28,30-
dicarboxy-oleans, including jaligonic acid, esculentic acid,

phytolaccagenic acid, pokeberrygenin

Triterpenes: including alpha-amyrin, beta-amyrin, taraxast-
erol, psi-taraxasterol, tirucallol

Lectins (pokeweed-mitogens)

Ribosome: inactivating proteins (1-RIP), in the seeds

Betacyans (red pigments): including among otfiers phytolac-
canin (betanin), particularly in the fruits

Lignans: caffeic acid aldehyde-oligomerics; including

among others americanme A, B and D
Histamine: gamma-aminobutyric acid (in the rhizomes)

Saccharose: cyclitols

EFFECTS: POKE FRUIT
An antihepatotoxic and antiviral effect has been demon-
strated for the fruit. The saponins have an emetic effect.

COMPOUNDS: POKE ROOT

Triterpene saponins (mixture termed phytolaccatoxin): phy-
tolaccosides A, B, D, D2, E (chief component, aglycone
phytolaccagenin), F, G, phytollaccasaponin B, aglycone
28,30-dicarboxy-oleans, including jaligonic acid, jaligonic
acid-30-methyl ester, esculentic acid, phytolaccagenic acid

Amines: histamine (0.13 to 0.16%), in the roots
Starch

EFFECTS: POKE ROOT

An anti-edemic and immune-stimulating effect has been
demonstrated for the root. The saponins have an emetic
effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
POKE FRUIT
Unproven Uses: Rheumatism and skin ulcers

POKE ROOT
Unproven Uses: Poke has been used to treat dysmenorrhoea,
dyspepsia, catarrh, rheumatism, tonsillitis, pharyngitis, syph-

----- PAGE 854 -----
m

£

A

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ilis, mumps, conjunctivitis, scabies, ring worm infestation,
ulcers, constipation and as an emetic.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathic medicine include
inflammation of the mucous membranes (particularly of the
respiratory tract), feverish infections, inflammation of condi-
tions of the mammary glands and rheumatic conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: All parts of the plants are poisonous, due to the
presence of mucous membrane-irritating saponins and of the
toxic, perorally effective lectins. The toxicity is reduced
through cooking, since this destroys the lectins.

Pediatric Use: Emergency poison treatment procedures
should be instituted in small children who consume even one
berry.

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning include diarrhea (sometimes
bloody), dizziness, hypotension, severe thirst, somnolence,
tachycardia, vomiting, and in severe cases, spasm and death
through respiratory failure. Up to 10 berries are considered
harmless for an adult, but could be dangerous for a small
child. Adults who consume more than 10 berries and small
children who consume any berries should be treated for
poisoning. This includes stomach and intestinal emptying
(inducement of vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-
colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium sulphate)
and instillation of activated charcoal. Electrolyte substitution
and the use of sodium bicarbonate to treat possible acidosis
may be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Administered as a powder, liquid
extract and tincture.

Daily Dosage: Usual dosage is 60 to 100 mg

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml SC, IV., IM, acute: 3 times daily;
chronic: once a day (HAB1).

Storage: The drug should be stored in paper or sacks made
from cloth.

LITERATURE

Aron GM, Irvin JD, (1980) Antimicrob Agents Chem 17:1032.
Kang SS, Woo WS, Triterpenes from the berries of Phytolacca
americana. In: JNP 43(4):510-513. 1980.

Ker W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Lewis WH, JAMA. 1979 Dec. 21; 242(25):2759-60.

POLEY/603

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

MecPherson A, In: Toxic Plants, Ed. AD Kinghorn, Columbia
Press 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Shin KH et al., (1979) Soul Taehakkyo Saengyak Opjukjip 18:
90.

Sick WW, Shin KH, (1976) Yakhak Hoe Chi 20(3): 149.

Sick WW et al., (1976) Soul Taehakkyo Saengyak Opjukjip 15:
103.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin.
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tomlinson JA et al., (1974) J Gen Virol 22:225.
Ussberg MA et al., (1977) Ann N Y Acad Sci 284:431.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Woo WS, Kang SS, (1978), 88:4750.

Polemonium caeruleum
See Jacob's Ladder

Polemonium reptans
See Abscess Root

Poley
Teucrium polium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are axillary forming a
capitula. They are fused and sessile, and their structures are
in "fives. The calyx is turned slightly upward with 5
acuminate tips and is white-gray pubescent. The corolla is
reddish-white or yellowish. The upper lip is deeply divided
into two and fused to half of the lower lip so that it appears
5-tipped. There are 4 stamens, which are much longer than
the corolla, and a 2-carpeled ovary, divided, but not to the
base. The fruit is a nutlet.

----- PAGE 855 -----
604/POLEY

Leaves, Stem and Root: Poley is a dwarf shrub that grows up
to 45 cm high. The leaves are decussate, obovate to elongate,
crenate, involute and pubescent. The stem is densely covered
with white, greenish or golden hairs.

Habitat: Mediterranean region

Production: Poley herb is the dried aerial part of Teucrium
polium collected during the flowering season.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: including picropolin, picropolinol, picropolinon,
teucrin A, teucrin PI , teucrin H3 , montanines B and C,
teupolins I to V, gnaphalidin. the diterpene spectrum varies a
great deal according to both the subspecies being investi-
gated and its source

Volatile oil (0.1 to 1%): the following have been demon-
strated to be chief components, varying according to
chemical race, alpha-pinene and beta-pinene, alpha-cadinol,
alpha-humulene, beta-caryophyllene, caryophyllene oxide,
cedrol, gamma-cadinene, delta-cadinene, limonene, linalool,
menthofurane, myrcene, ocimene, T-cadinol, terpine-4-ol

Iridoids: iridoid glycosides, including 8-O-acetyl harpagide,
harpagide, teucardoside

Flavonoids: including apigenin-7-O-glucoside, luteolin-7-O-
glucoside, acacetine, apigenin, cirsiliol, cirsimaritin. eupato-
rin, luteolin, salvigenin

EFFECTS
The antidiabetic and anti-ulcer efficacy with which the drug
has been credited has not yet been documented in definitive
clinical studies. A reduction of the ulcer index was described
in connection with animal experiments; furthermore, a
definite reduction of the blood sugar levels was exhibited
following the I.V. administration of a 4% decoction of the
dried herb. The drug is additionally antibacterial, antipyretic
and possibly anti-edematic and antiexudative in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Poley is used for diabetes (Israel), gastric
complaints (North Africa), fever (Italy) and as a vulnerary

(Spain).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal use.

Cut drug and liquid extract for

Daily Dosage: Single dose for infusion: 1.5 gm drug per cup

Storage: Should be tightly sealed and protected from light.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Autore G, Capasso F, De Fusco R, Fasulo MP. Lembo M,
Mascolo N, Menghini A, Antipyretic and antibacterial actions of
Teucrium polium (L.). Pharmacol Res Commun, 16:21-9, 1984
Jan.

Capasso F, Cerri R, Morrica P, Senatore F, Chemical
composition and anti-inflammatory activity of an alcoholic
extract of Teucrium polium L. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper,
59:1639-43, 1983 Nov 30.

Gharaibeh MN, Elayan HH, Salhab AS. Hypoglycemic effects
of Teucrium polium. J Ethnopharmacol, 24:93-9. 1988 Sep.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpier H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Mattei A, Rucay P, Samuel D, Feray C. Reynes M, Bismuth H,
Liver transplantation for severe acute liver failure after herbal
medicine (Teucrium polium) administration, letter J Hepatol,
22:597, 1995 May.

Rizk AM, Hammouda FM, Rimpier H, Kamel A, Chemical
composition of the wild Egyptian plant Teucrium polium L.
harmazie, 22:540-1, 1974 Aug.
Rizk AM, Hammouda FM. Rimpier H. Kamel A, Iridoids and
flavonoids of Teucrium polium herb. Planta Med. 22:87-8, 1986
Apr.
Rizk AM, Hammouda FM, Rimpier H, Kamel A, On the
essential oil of Teucrium polium L. Pharmazie. 22:351-2, 1974
May.
Suleiman MS, Abdul-Ghani AS, Al-Khalil S. Amin R, Effect of
Teucrium polium boiled leaf extract on intestinal motility and
blood pressure. J Ethnopharmacol. 22:111-6, 1988 Jan.

Polygala amara
See Bitter Milkwort

Polygala senega

See Seneca Snakeroot

Polygonatum multiflorum

See Solomon's Seal

Polygonum aviculare
See Knotweed

----- PAGE 856 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Pomegranate
Punica granatum

DESCRIPTION

“ Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the root, the bark,

the fruits, the peel of the fruit and the flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are infundibulate or rotate,
usually solitary or in pairs of threes at the tips of the
branches. The calyx and receptacle are bright coral-red and
have a tough margin. There are 5 to 8 bright-red campanulate
nodding petals and numerous stamens. The filaments are
orange-red and the anthers yellow-gold. The ovary consists
of 2 or 3 layers lying on top of one another. The fruit is an
apple-sized, round, 146 to 12 cm wide false berry whose skin
turns from bright red to leather-brown. The seeds are roughly
square and purple, later acquiring a soft red outer skin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an erect, roughly
branched shrub up to 1.5 m high ora small, tree 3 to 5 m tall
with a curved trunk and glabrous 4- to 6-edged, sometimes
spiny-tipped branches. The branches are narrowly winged
when young. The trunk later becomes fissured and twisted.
The leaves are generally opposite or in clusters on the short
shoots. They are deciduous, simple, pinnate-veined, short-
petioled, glabrous, hard, oval-lanceolate with a tough middle
rib.

Habitat: The plant probably originated in Asia. Today it is
widespread in the Mediterranean region as far as South
Tyrol, the Near East, South Africa, South Asia, China,
Australia, U.S., and South America.

Production: Pomegranate bark is the dried bark of the trunk
roots and branches of Punica granatum. The roots, trunk and
older branches are collected at the beginning of autumn.
Their bark is peeled off and air-dried.

Other Names: Delima, Grenadier

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: POMEGRANATE FRUIT PEEL

Tannins (25 to 28%, gallo tannins): including punicalin
(granatine D), punicalagin (granatine C), granatine A,
granatine B

COMPOUNDS: POMEGRANATE STEMS AND ROOT
Tannins (20 to 25% gallo tannins): including punicalagin,
punicacortein C, casuarin

Piperidine alkaloids (0.4% in the rind of the stem, up to
0.8% in the rind of the root): chief alkaloids isopelletierine,
N-methylisopelletierine, pseudopelletierine

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains tannins and alkaloids, is anthel-
mintic and amoeboid.

POMEGRANATE/ 605

Pelletierin triggers, like strychnine, a raised stimulant reflex,
which can escalate to tetanus and is effective against diverse
tapeworms, ring worms and nematodes.

The tannins in the drug makes it usefull as an astringent for
sore throats, diarrhea and dysentery.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Pomegranate is used for
infestation with tapeworm and other worms, for diarrhea and
dysentery, as an abortifacient and astringent; externally used
for hemorrhoids and as a gargle in cases of sore throat.

Homeopathic Uses: Punica granatum is used for gastrointes-
tinal disturbances.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Pomegranate is used to treat
chronic diarrhea and dysentery, blood in the stool, worm
infestation and anal prolapses.

Indian Medicine: In India, uses include diarrhea, dysentery,
vomiting and eye pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The high
levels of tannin content in the drug could lead to gastric
irritation.

OVERDOSAGE

Due to the alkaloid content, overdoses with the rind of the
stem or the root (above 80 gm) lead to vomiting, including
the vomiting of blood, later to dizziness, chills, vision
disorders, collapse and possible death through respiratory
failure. Total blindness (amaurosis) could occur within a few
hours or a few days.

Following gastrointestinal emptying, (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), installation of
medicinal charcoal and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth),
the therapy for poisonings consists of treating spasms with
diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution and treating possible
cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case
of shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused.
Monitoring of kidney function is essential. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Pomegranate is available as whole,
crude and powder forms for internal and external use. It is
also available in parenteral form for homeopathic use.

Preparation:
Decoction — 1 part drug and 5 parts water.

Macerations — 60 parts drug and 400 parts water macerated
for 12 hours to half the initial volume.

----- PAGE 857 -----
606/POMEGRANATE

Liquid extract — percolation of 1000 parts coarse powder
and 59% ethanol (V/V). The percolate is evaporated to the
initial amount of the drug (EB6).

Decoction — 250 parts bark powder and 1500 parts water
boiled for 30 minutes (Belg IV).

Daily Dosage:

Tapeworm treatment | (decoction) — 4 doses of 60 ml with
2 hour intervals between doses accompanied before treat-
ment and after treatment by a laxative.

Tapeworm treatment 2 (maceration) — administration of 3
doses of 65 ml with a duodenal probe at 30 minute intervals;
a laxative is administered after an hour.

As pomegranate bark juice extract — single dose: for
tapeworm 20 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or I to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

Storage: Pomegranate should be sealed in containers and
protected from moisture.

LITERATURE
Beckham N, Phyto-oestrogens and compounds that affect
oestrogen metabolism. In: Aust Herbalism 7:11-16. 1995.

Foder GB, Colasenko B, In: Alkaloids, Vol. 3, Ed. SW.
Pelletier, John Wiley 1985.

Neuhofer H et al., The occurence of pelletierine derivatives in
Punica granatum. In: 37. Annual Congr Med Plant Res
Braunschweig 1989 Pl-13. 1989.

Schilling G, Schick H, On the structure of punicalagin and
punicalin. In: Liebigs Ann Chem (11):2240. 1985.

Tanake T et al.. (1986) Chem Pharm Bull 34(2):656.

Wylegalla R, Biblische Botanik: Pflanzen und Friichte aus dem
gelobten Land. In: DAZ 137(11):867-869. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Pontian Rhododendron

Rhododendron ponticum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is its leafy
branches.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is an umbelliferous
raceme with 8 to 15 single flowers on 3 pubescent pedicles
that are up to 3.5 cm long. The flower structures are in fives
and fused. The calyx is inconspicuous, up to 3 mm long, and
5-toothed. The corolla is campanulate, 5-lobed, 4 to 5 cm in
diameter, violet to pink-violet with green-yellow spots on the
upper lobes. There are 10 stamens and a multi-chambered
ovary on sessile disc. The fiuit is an elongate-cylindrical
capsule. The seeds are small and can fly.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Rhododendron ponticum is an
evergreen shrub typically growing up to 5 m high, occasion-
ally up to a tree height of 8 m. The leaves are 8 to 15 cm
long, 3 to 5 cm wide with a 1 to 2 cm long petiole. The
lamina is elliptical-elongate, acute at both ends, entire,
coriaceous, dark green, smooth and glabrous above, pale
green and glabrous beneath. The plant is heavily branched.
The branches are glabrous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Balkan states, the
Commonwealth of Independent States, Spain, Portugal and
England.

Production: Pontian rhododendron herb is the dried leafy
branches of Rhododendron ponticum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes of the andromedan type: grayanbtoxin I (andro-
medotoxin, acetylandromedol, asebotoxin, rhodotoxin, 0.001
to 0.02%), grayanotoxin II (andromedol), grayanotoxin HI
(andromedenol)

Flavonoids: myricetin, gossypetin, azaleatin, malvin

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, alpha-amyrin,
ursolic acid

EFFECTS
The drug has the effect of reducing blood pressure in animal
experiments, due to the diterpenes it contains of the
andromedan type (grayanotoxins). Historically,’ effects also
have been described as stimulating, narcotic, diaphoretic and
diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Therapeutic use is no longer recommended because of the

drug's possibly dangerous side-effects due to its toxic
content.

----- PAGE 858 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses have focused on
primary hypertension and arthritis. Various species of
Rhododendron have been used for rheumatic and gouty
conditions and for stones.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
All medicinal administration of the drug is discouraged. The
observed effect (lowered blood pressure resulting from
bradycardia) is the first sign of a toxic reaction.

The plant is toxic because of its andromedan derivative
content. The grayanotoxins it contains prevent the closure of
the sodium channels and thus inhibit conduction.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning in case of overdosage could include
salivation, cold sweats, paresthesia, vomiting, diarrhea,
severe stupor, coordination disorders, spasm, bradycardia,
cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, and eventually death
through cardiac failure or apnea. While poisonings among
humans have not been documented, poisonings (including
fatal ones such as "goat death") occur frequently among
animals. The presumed explanation is that the leathery leaves
are not tempting to humans to eat, and because of the low
levels of andromendan derivatives present in medicinal
preparations.

Toxic and/or lethal dosage levels cannot be determined with
any precision because the plant's andromendan derivative
content can vary so wildly. The LDSO for mice amounts to
5.1 mg grayonotoxin I/kg body weight, p.o.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate), installation of
medicinal charcoal and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth),
the therapy for poisonings consists of treating spasms with
diazepam (IV), bradycardia with atropine and electrolyte
substitution, and treating possible cases of acidosis with
sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case of shock, plasma
volume expanders should be infused. It is crucial that no
opiates are administered. Monitoring of kidney function is
essential. Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be
necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole drug. Folk medicine modes
also include administration as a tea or cigarette.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include coated tablets and compound preparations.

Daily Dosage: There are no more exact details available.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

POPLAR 607

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Keller S, von Kiirten S, Pachaly P, Zymalkowski F, Sterines
and triterpenes from Rhododendron ponticum. Pharmazie.
25:621-5, 1970 Oct.

Thieme H, Walewska E, Winkler HJ, Isolation of salidroside
from leaves of Rhododendron ponticum x catawbiense.
Pharmazie, 24:783, 1969 Dec 12.

Poplar

Populus species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark, leaves.
and leaf buds.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is dioecious. The carmine red
flowers are in large, cylindrical hanging, thick catkins with
carmine anthers. The male flowers have carmine red anthers:
the female flowers have carmine stigmas. The flowers appear
before the leaves. The seeds, which ripen in May/June, are
very small and have a white lanate tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree may grow up to 30 m. The
bark is initially yellow brown and later black-gray and
fissured. The leaf buds are viscid. The leaves are almost
circular with a dark green upper surface and a light grey-
green under surface. They are dentate or lobed with obtuse
teeth, initially silky-haired, later glabrous. The petioles are
long, thin and laterally compressed.

Habitat: There are both European and North American
species within the genus that have spread to other temperate
zones.

Other Names: White Poplar, Canadian Poplar, Black Poplar.
Trembling Poplar, European Aspen, Quaking Aspen

Production: Poplar bark consists of the fresh or dried bark of
salicin-rich Poplar species as well as their preparations.
Poplar leaves consist of the leaves of salicin-rich Poplar
species as well as their preparations. Poplar buds consist of
the dried, unopened leaf buds of Populus species, as well as
their preparations.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES

Glycosides and esters yielding salicylic acid:

In Populus alba (leaf 6%, bark 2%) chief components:
salicortin, tremulacin, salicin

In Populus nigra (leaf 2%, bark 1.5%) chief components:
salicortin, salicin

----- PAGE 859 -----
608/POPLAR

In Populus tremula (leaf 3%, bark 2%) chief components:
salicin, tremulacin, salicortin including as well as salirepo-
side, populin, tremuloidin

EFFECTS
Poplar bark and
antibacterial and spasmolytic effects.

leaves have antiphlogistic, analgesic,

The salicylate acid derivatives and flavonoids are responsible
for the antiphlogistic, analgesic, spasmolytic and antibacteri-
al characteristics of the drug. The beneficial effect in
micturition complaints due to prostate hypertrophy may be
due to the content of zinc lignans in the drug.

COMPOUNDS: POPLAR LEAF BUDS
Flavonoids: (particularly in the glutinous coating of the
buds, also yielding propolis) including chrysin, tectochrysin,
galengine, izalpinine, galangin-3-methyl ether, kaempferol-
3-methyl ether, pinocembrin, pinocembrin-7-methyl ether,
apigenin

Glycosides and esters yielding salicylic acid: including

salicin, populin
Volatile oil: chief components alpha- and beta-caryophyllene

EFFECTS: POPLAR LEAF BUDS
Poplar buds have antiphlogistic, antibacterial and wound

healing effects.

INDICATIONS

POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES

Unproven Uses: Poplar bark and leaves are used for pain and
rheumatism therapy; and in micturition complaints due to
prostate hypertrophy.

POPLAR LEAF BUDS

Approved by Commission E:

* Hemorrhoids
* Wounds and bums

Unproven Uses: Poplar buds are used for superficial skin
injuries, external hemorrhoids, frostbite and sunburn.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES
Contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity to salicylates.

POPLAR LEAF BUDS
Contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity to salicylates,
propolis and balsam of Peru, which may be a componant in
commercially available ointments.

PRECAUTIONS

POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

POPLAR LEAF BUDS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. External
administration of the drug occasionally leads to allergic skin
reactions.

DOSAGE

POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES

Mode of Administration: Poplar leaves are available in crude
form as well as galenic preparations for internal use. Poplar
bark is only available in compounded preparations.

Daily Dosage: 10 gm of drug

POPLAR LEAF BUDS
Mode of Administration: Poplar buds are available in semi-
solid preparations for application to the skin.

How Supplied: Semi-solid preparations equivalent to 20% to
30% of drug.

Daily Dosage: Externally, 5 gm drug.

LITERATURE

POPLAR BARK AND LEAVES
Anonym. Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
ringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Jossang A et al., Cinnamrutinoses A and B, glycosides from
opulus tremula. In: PH 35(2):547. 1994.

Picard S et al., Isolation of a new phenolic compound from
leaves of Populus deltoides. In: JNP 57(6):808-810. 1994.

Thieme H, Benecke R, (1969) Pharmazie 24:567.

Vonkruedener S et al., Effects of extracts from Populus tremula
L., Solidago virgaurea L. and Fraxinus excelsior L. on various
myeloperoxidase systems. In: Arzneim Forsch 46(8): 809-814.
1996.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.

ub. CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

POPLAR LEAF BUDS
Anonym, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

----- PAGE 860 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Jossang A et al., Cinnamrutinoses A and B, glycosides from
Populus tremula. In: PH 35(2):547. 1994.

Picard S et al., Isolation of a new phenolic compound from
leaves of Populus deltoides. In: JNP 57(6):808-810. 1994.

Thieme H, Benecke R, (1969) Pharmazie 24:567.

Vonkruedener S et al., Effects of extracts from Populus tremula
L., Solidago virgaurea L. and Fraxinus excelsior L. on various
myeloperoxidase systems. In: Arzneim Forsch 46(8):809-814.
1996.

Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1. 2nd Ed.
Pub. CRC Press Boca Raton 1975.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Poppyseed

Papaver somniferum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the latex extracted

from the seed capsule.

Flower and Fruit: A solitary flower grows on a long,
glabrous or pubescent pedicle. The flowers are erect with a
diameter of 10 cm. There are 2 green, glabrous, falling sepals
and 4 violet-white or red petals with a darker mark at the
base. The fruit is round or ellipsoid and often has a very
large capsule! The numerous seeds are reniform, pitted,
black, and blue-frosted or whitish.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The opium Poppy is an annual that
grows 30 to 150 cm high. It is a 1-stemmed blue-gray frosted
plant. The stem is erect, straight or branched and produces,
as does the whole plant, white milky latex. The leaves are
entire, glabrous, serrated or crenate at the margin and
clasping.

Characteristics: The cultivation of the plant and the extrac-
tion and sale of opium is banned in many countries.

POPPYSEED/609

Habitat: The plant originated in western Asia. It is cultivated
worldwide commercially.

Production: Opium is the thickened latex collected from the
outside of immature Poppy capsules that have had incisions
made in the fruit capsules. The unripe seed capsules suitable
for the production of opium are trimmed. Subsequent to
drying, the processed latex is scraped off and formed into
pieces of varying size. The obtained material is referred to as
raw opium (Rohopium) and is also the basic substance used
for the production of heroin.

Other Names: Garden-Poppy, Mawseed, Opium Poppy

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids (20-30%): chief alkaloids morphine
(3-23%), narcotine (2-10%), codeine (0.2-3.5%), papaverine
(0.5-3%), thebaine (0.2-1%).] The alkaloids are present as
salts'of meconic acid, lactic acid or fumaric acid.

Benzyl isoquinoline type: papaverine (0.5 to 3%)
Phthalide isochinoline type: narcotine (noscapine, 2 to 10’)
Rubber (5-10%)

Resins

Mucilages

EFFECTS

The main alkaloid is morphine, which is a strong analgesic
that, even in small doses, causes euphoria, sedation then
narcotic sleep. It depresses breathing and slows down
evacuation of the stomach, causing constipation and urine
retention. Codeine has an antitussive effect and papaverine is
spasmolytic and vasodilatory.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Opium is used most frequently as a sedative
and/or analgesic. Uses in folk medicine include as a sedative
in cases of typhus, intestinal tuberculosis and _ intestinal
ulcers; for spasms of smooth muscle, bile ducts and urinary
tract; for peritonitis; for gallstones, kidney stones and
bladder colic; as well as for coughs and certain types of
depression.

Chinese Medicine: Uses in Chinese medicine include chronic
coughs, diarrhea, dysentery, anal prolapse and abdominal
symptoms.

Indian Medicine: Irritable cough, ear and eye inflammation,
proctologic symptoms, diarrhea and dysentery are considered
indications for use in Indian medicine.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications include pregnancy (alkaloids pass through
the placenta barrier), nursing (alkaloids entering the mother's

----- PAGE 861 -----
610/POPPYSEED

milk), illnesses connected with reduced respiratory function,
pancreatitis, colon ulcers, elevated internal cranial pressure,
acute hepatitis propheria and biliary colic. Caution is to be
observed when administering in the presence of Addison's
isease and hypothyroidism because of opium's centrally
epressive effect.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. However,
the following can occur as side effects: clonic twitching,
constipation, dizziness, general weakness, headache, hyper-
thermia, itchy skin, rashes and trembling of the hands.
Sensitization has been reported, with papaverin the presumed

allergen.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage leads initially to reduction of mental capacity,
reactive euphoria, analgesia, miosis, bradycardia, slowed
respiration. That can progress to respiratory failure, cyanosis.
tonic-clonic spasms, pylorospasm and sphincterism, intesti-
nal atonia, nausea, vomiting, pulmonary and brain edemas.
Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulfate) and instillation of
activated charcoal, the therapy for poisoning consists of
electrolyte substitution, treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions and administration of
plasma volume expanders in the event of shock. Intubation
and oxygen respiration may also be necessary. Naloxone
(i.v.) is suitable as an antidote.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Opium is obsolete as
Morphine is administered as a pure substance and in
combination with other active substances, although it has
been extensively replaced by synthetic analgesia. Codeine is
used by itself and in combination with other agents.
Numerous cases of death due to opium use are known.

a drug.

LITERATURE
Amann T, Zen
527. 1996.

Bethke T, Codein. In: DAZ 133(6):433. 1993.

MH, Endogenes Morphin. In: DAZ 136(7):519-

Buch, In: Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Volume
104/1 und 104/11: Opioids I und II. Springer-Verlag Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York, 1993.

Buchbauer G et al., Headspace constituents of opium. In: PM
60(2): 181. 1994,
Czygan FC, Hellas und Phytopharmaka. In: DAZ 135(51/
52):4707-4711. 1995.

Freye E, Leopold C, Opiate und Opiatantagonisten. I.
Theoretischen Grundlagen der Opioidwirkung. In: DAZ
131(29):1517. 1991.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Pfeifer S, Mohn - eine Arzneipflanze seit mehr als zweitausend
Jahren, Teil 1 und 2. In: PA 17:467-479 et 536-554. 1962.

Repasi J, Hosztafi S, Szab&oacute; Z, 5'-0-Demethylnarcotin:
A New Alkaloide from Papaver somniferum. In: PM 59(5):477.
1993.

Znek MH, Uber das Opium, das den Schmerz besiegt und die
Sucht weckt. In: PZ 139(48):4185. 1994.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Populus species
See Poplar

Potentilla

Potentilla anserina

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are leaves and flowers,
whole or macerated, collected during or shortly before the
flowering season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary on long pedicles
of lateral shoots growing from the stem nodes. They are 1.5
to 3 cm wide. There are 5 epicalyx bracts, 5 sepals and 5
petals. The last are twice as long as the sepals and are golden
yellow, ovate and without a distinct margin. The 20 stamens
have ovate anthers. The styles occur laterally, are thread-like

----- PAGE 862 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and only thickened at the stigmas. The ripe fruit is glabrous,
ovate to almost globular and grooved on the back.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a two-axis herbacious
perennial with a short, thick, branched rhizome and rosettes
of basal leaves. The stems are 80 cm long, creeping, rooting
at the nodes, softly pubescent eventually becoming glabrous.
The leaves are unevenly paired, pinnate and glossy with
silky white hairs beneath, tomentose and fresh green above.

Characteristics: The plant has an almond-like fragrance and
dry taste.

Habitat: The plant is found in temperate and colder regions
of the entire Northern Hemisphere.

Production: Potentilla herb consists of the fresh or dried leaf
and flowers of Potentilla anserina harvested shortly before or
during flowering, as well as its preparations.

Other Names: Cinquefoil, Crampweed, Goosegrass, Goose
Tansy, Moor Grass, Silver Cinquefoil, Goosewort, Prince's
Feathers, Trailing Tansy, Wild Agrimony

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Tannins (5 to 10%): chiefly ellagitannins

Flavonoids: including quercitrin
Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, scopoletin

EFFECTS
The drug is astringent because of the tannin concentration.

On isolated rat uterus a paralyzing effect was proven which
is due to the presence of ammonium salts. The empirical
evidence of a spasmolytic effect in dysmenorrhea could not
be definitively proven.

INDICATIONS
Approved by Commission E:

* Diarrhea
* Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
+ Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

Internal application for topical treatment of inflammation of
the oral and pharyngeal mucosa, adjuvant treatment of non-
specific, acute diarrhea, and dysmenorrhea symptoms.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Potentilla is used external-
ly as a wash for poorly healing wounds.

PRECAUTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There have been complaints of stomach irritation
associated with Potentilla.

POTENTILLA REPTANS /611

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Potentilla is available in commer-
cial forms for oral intake. It is also available in crude and
powder forms.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour boiling water over 2 gm
finely cut drug, strain after 10 minutes (1 teaspoon corre-
sponds to approximately 0.7 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: 4 to 6 gm of drug; Tea: 1 cup freshly

prepared several times a day between meals.
Storage: Protect from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Eisenreichova E et al., Cesk Farm 23:82-84. 1974.

Kombal R, Glas! H, Flavan-3-ols and flavonoids from Potentilla
anserina. In: PM 61(5):484-485. 1995.

Schimmer O, Lindenbaum M, Tannins with antimutagenic
properties in the herb of Alchemilla species and Potentilla
anserina. In: PM 61(2):141-145. 1995.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Potentilla anserina

See Potentilla

Potentilla erecta
See Cinquefoil

Potentilla reptans
Sge European Five-Finger Grass

----- PAGE 863 -----
612/PREMORSE

Premorse
Scabiosa succisa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are purple-blue, globular and
long pedicled composite blooms, with a 2 to 3 rowed
involucre. The florets are all the same size. The epicalyx has
thorn-tipped teeth and the calyx has 5 bristles. The corolla is
fused and has 4 tips. There are 4 stamens and 1 inferior
ovary. The fruit is a nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 15 to 80 cm
high. It has a short, finger-thick rhizome, which looks bitten
off. In the first year of growth, the root resembles a carrot.
Later it becomes woody and dies off except for the upper
part, which accounts for its appearance. The remaining upper
part then develops lateral roots. The stem is erect, sparsely
branched, pubescent and has few leaves. The basal leaves are
petiolate, oblong and obtuse. The cauline leaves are narrow
and acute.

Habitat: Scabiosae succisae is indigenous to all of Europe.
Production: Premorse is the aerial part of Scabiosa succisa.
Other Names: Devil's Bit, Ofbit, Premorse scaboius

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others, dipsacan,
cephalaroside (structures unknown)

Saponins

Tannins

Flavonoids: including among others, saponarine (C-glyco-
syl-flavone)

Triterpenes: including among others, ursolic acid

EFFECTS
Premorse is a febrifuge and a diaphoretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for febrile colds and

coughs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The herb is ground as a
infusion.

lrug for

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969 (unter Succisa pratensis).

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Primula veris
See Cowslip

Prunella vulgaris
See Self-Heal

Prunus laurocerasus
See Cherry Laurel

Prunus serotina
See Wild Cherry

Prunus species
See Almond

Prunus spinosa
See Sloe

Psyllium

Plantago ovata

TRADE NAMES
Psyllium Husk, Psyllium Husk Bulk-Forming Laxative,
Psyllium Husks, Konsyl Easy Mix, Konsyl for Kids, Konsyl
Powder Sugar Free Unflavored, Metamucil

----- PAGE 864 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe and dried
seeds, the epidermis, the adjacent, broken-down layers of the
Indian variety and the fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are on cylindrical, glabrous
or finely pubescent scapes, which are only slightly longer
than the leaves. They form 0.5 to 3.5 cm long spikes. The
bracts are about 3 mm, suborbicular to ovate and sometimes
shortly pubescent. The sepals are about 2.5 mm, similarly
shaped, almost free, keeled at the apex with wide scarious
margins. The anterior ones are usually pubescent. The
xorolla-tube is 15 to 2 mm long and glabrous. The lobes are
2.5 mm, ovate-orbicular, subobtuse to very shortly acumi-
nate. The stamens are exserted up to 1 mm and the capsule is
about 3 mm. The seeds are 2.2 to 2.5 mm and cymbiform.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual almost
stemless, softly pubescent plant. The plant may have one or
several rosettes. The leaves are 2.5 to 12 cm by 0.1 to 0.8
cm, linear to linear-lanceolate. The leaves are entire-mar-
gined or slightly denticulate and sparsely to densely villous-
lanate.

Habitat: The plant grows in India, Afghanistan, Iran, Israel,
northern Africa, Spain and the Canary Islands. The plant is
cultivated in India and neighboring countries, Arizona and
southern Brazil.

Production: Psyllium consists of the ripe seeds or epidermis
of Plantago ovata (synonym: Plantago isphagula).

Other Names: Blood Plantago, Indian Plantago, Ispaghula,
Sand Plantain, Spogel, Blond Psyllium, Black Psyllium

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PSYLLIUM SEED
Mucilages (20-30%): chiefly
glacturonosidorhamnoses

arabinoxylans — and

Fatty oil
Iridoids: aucubin
Proteic Substances

COMPOUNDS: PSYLLIUM SEED EPIDERMIS
Mucilages (parent substances arabinoxylans)

EFFECTS
The drug is rich in mucins with swelling properties that exert
laxative and anti-diarrheal effects. Psyllium also lowers
serum cholesterol levels, reduces postprandial blood glucose,
decreases gallstone formation, and decreases the feeling of
fullness.

Antidiarrheal: When used for diarrhea, psyllium absorbs
water to increase the bowel content viscosity and delay
gastric emptying (Washington, 1998).

PSYLLIUM/613

Decreases Hypercholesterolemia: Psyllium increases choles-
terol and bile acid fecal excretion but does not affect
cholesterol synthesis (Miettinen, 1989). Psyllium may lower
serum cholesterol levels by replacing dietary fats, thereby
reducing the amount available for absorption, and not
directly affecting cholesterol (Swain, 1990). A decrease in
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels and total
cholesterol with the herb have been seen in many studies
(Davidson, 1998; MacMahon, 1998; Rodriguez-Moran,
1998; Romero, 1998). Although one study indicated an
increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and a
decrease in serum triglycerides (TG) with Psyllium, other
studies have reported no change in these parameters (Ander-
son, 1988; Bell, 1989; Davidson, 1998; Rodriguez-Moran,
1998).

Glucose Control: Postprandial glucose and fasting plasma
glucose significantly improved in type 2 diabetic patients
taking psyllium (Anderson, 1999; Rodriguez-Moran, 1998).

Inhibition of Gallstones: Psyllium hydrocolloid exerts bile
acid sequestrant properties determined by a rise in the cholic/
chenodeoxycholic acid ratio. This activity protects against
cholesterol gallstone formation (Berman, 1975). Psyllium
also protects against cholesterol - gallstone formation by
reducing biliary cholesterol saturation index. The protective
effect is associated with a selective decrease in biliary
cholesterol and chenodeoxycholic acid (Schwesinger, 1999).

Irritable Bowel Syndrome/Ulcerative Colitis: Stool frequen-
cy and consistency, abdominal pain and abdominal disten-
tion have shown improvement in irritable bowel syndrome
patients taking psyllium (Hotz, 1994; Prior, 1987). A
decrease in transit time of bowel content may also be seen
with the herb (Prior, 1987).

Laxative Effects: Psyllium decreases the passage time of the
bowel content by increasing the volume of the stool, thus
exerting a laxative effect. The herb acts as stool softener by
increasing stool water content. Psyllium was superior to
docusate sodium in subjects with chronic idiopathic consti-
pation (McRorie, 1998).

Weight Reduction: Psyllium may be a useful supplement in
weight control diets as it decreases fat intake, and increases
the subjective feeling of fullness (Turnbull, 1995). The herb
exerts these actions by increasing the time for intestinal
absorption by inhibition of pancreatic enzymes such as
amylase (Hansen, 1982; Hansen, 1987; Rigaud, 1998).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Hypercholesterolemia/Hyperglycemia

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was
conducted to determine the lipid and glucose lowering
effects of Psyllium in type 2 diabetic patients. One hundred

----- PAGE 865 -----
614/PSYLLIUM

twenty-five subjects were included in the study and received
either placebo or Psyllium (5 gm three times daily) over a 6-
week period. Prior to the treatment period, all patients
participated in a 6-week period of diet counseling. Fasting
plasma glucose, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and
triglyceride levels were significantly reduced in the Psyllium
treatment group compared to placebo. HDL significantly
increased in the Psyllium treatment group compared to the
placebo group, suggesting Psyllium as a useful adjunct to
diet in Type 2 diabetes (Rodriguez-Moran, 1998).

Hypercholesterolemia/Hyperglycemia

The safety and effectiveness of Psyllium husk fiber as an
adjunct to diet was evaluated in patients with type 2 diabetes
and mild- to-moderate hypercholesterolemia. After a 2-week
dietary stabilization phase, 34 patients were randomly
assigned to receive 5.1 gm psyllium or placebo twice daily
for an 8 week period. The Psyllium group had significant
improvements in glucose and lipid values compared with the
placebo group. Serum total and LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions were 8.9% (P < 0.05) and 13.0% (P = 0.07) lower,
respectively, in the Psyllium treatment group compared to
the placebo group. All day and postprandial glucose concen-
trations were 11.0% (P < 0.05) and 19.2% (P< 0.01) lower in
the Psyllium treatment group than in the placebo group
(Anderson, 1999).

Ulcerative Colitis

The objective of an open label, parallel-group, randomized
clinical trial was to assess the efficacy and safety of Plantago
ovata seeds compared to mesalamine in maintaining remis-
sion in ulcerative colitis patients. One hundred and five
ulcerative colitis patients who were in remission received
oral treatment with Plantago ovata seeds (10 gm twice daily),
mesalamine (500 mg three times daily), or Plantago ovata
seeds plus mesalamine at the same doses. After 12 months,
treatment failure rate was 40% in the Plantago ovata seed
group, 35% in the mesalamine group, and 30% in the
Plantago ovata plus mesalamine group. The probability of
continued remission was similar between all treatment
groups (Mantel-Cox test, p = 0.67; intent-to-treat analysis),
thus implicating the herb might be as effective as mesala-
mine to maintain remission in ulcerative colitis (Fernandez-
Banares F, 1999).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Constipation

* Diarrhea

* Raised levels of cholesterol
* Hemorrhoids

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Psyllium is used for disorders where easy bowel movements
with a loose stool is desirable (e.g., in patients with anal
fissures and hemorrhoids; following anal/rectal surgery; and
during pregnancy).

Unproven Uses: In Folk medicine, the herb is used internally
for inflammation of the mucous membrane of the urogenital
tract and gastrointestinal tract, and dysentery. Externally,
Psyllium is used for gout, rheumatism, furuncles and as an
analgesic.

Indian Medicine: Psyllium is used for gastritis, chronic
diarrhea, constipation, dysentery, dry cough, gout, gonor-
thea, nephropathy, dysuria, duodenal ulcers and
hemorrhoids.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in patients who have pathologi-
cal narrowing in the gastrointestinal tract, obstruction or
threatening obstruction of the bowel (ileus), or difficulties in
regulating diabetes mellitus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Incorrect administration procedures (with too little
fluid) can cause the product to swell and lead to obstruction
of the esophagus or of the intestine,, particularly with older
people. Patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
should avoid use of Psyllium due to inhibitory actions on
pancreatic lipase (Hansen, 1987).

Allergic Reactions/Anaphylaxis: Allergic reactions ranging
from sneezing to chest congestion and wheezing were
reported in three nurses after Psyllium use (Ford, 1992). One
patient reported anaphylaxis after Psyllium ingestion, and
had experienced recurrent rhinitis and asthma related to
Psyllium exposure for the past 15 years (Vaswani, 1996).
IgE mediated anaphylaxis was reported after the ingestion of
Psyllium seed laxative (Seggav, 1984). Occupational allergic
rhinitis reaction was confirmed by elevation of antipsyllium
IgE after exposure to a Psyllium-based powdered laxative
(Schwartz, 1989).

Flatulence Symptoms: Psyllium did not cause greater gas-
eous symptoms compared to placebo reported in one study
(Zumarraga, 1997). One study decreased flatulence symp-
toms by adding psyllium to half the usual dose of bile acid
sequestrant resins to maintain efficacy and tolerability of
resins (Spence, 1995).

Drug Interactions: The absorption of other drugs taken
simultaneously may be delayed. There is a possibility that
insulin dosage adjustment (downward) will be necessary
when diabetics use psyllium products.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The whole or coarsely-chopped

drug as well as other galenic preparations are used internally-

----- PAGE 866 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Sufficient fluid must be taken with the drug (150 ml water
per 5 gm drug). One study did show a greater effect of
Psyllium on cholesterol after mixing with food (Wolever,
1994). The dose should be taken one-half hour to one hour
after taking other medication.

How Supplied:
Capsule — 525 mg, 567 mg, 610 mg, 625 mg

Powder — 2.0 gm Psyllium per dose, 3.4 gm Psyllium per
dose, 6.0 gm Psyllium per dose (available in a variety of

package sizes)

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage ranges from !2 to 40 gm of
the drug. The powder products should be administered as 1
teaspoonful (3.4 gm to 6.0 gm drug) in 8 oz. of fruit juice or
cool water. Either stir briskly or shake for 3-5 seconds,
depending on the specific product. Psyllium may be taken up
to 3 times daily (Prod. Info. Konsyl®. 1999; Prod. Info.
Metamucil®, 1999).

Children: For children 6 to 12 years of age administer 1
teaspoonful (2.0 gm of the drug) in an empty glass and add 8
oz. of cool water. Stir briskly for 3-5 seconds. The dose may
be taken up to 3 times daily (Prod Info Konsyl for Kids®,
1999)

LITERATURE
Anderson JW, Zettwoch N. Tietyen-Clark et al. Cholesterol
lowering effects ot PSYLLIUM hydrophilic mucilloid for
hypercholesterolemic men. Arch Intern Med 1988; 148:292-296.

Anderson JW; Allgood LD; Turner J et al. Effects of psyllium
on glucose and serum lipid responses in men with type 2
diabetes and hypercholesterolemia. Am J Clin Nutr 1999
Oct;70(4):466~73.

Anonym. Pharmaceutical Care: "Den Mijtorauch von Laxanzien
vermeiden helfen." In: DAZ 135(20): 1867-1868. 1995.

Bell LP; Hectome K: Reynolds H et al. Cholesterol-lowering
effects of psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid. Adjunct therapy to a
prudent diet for patients with mild to moderate
hypercholesterolemia. JAMA 1989 Jun 16;261(23):3419-23.

Bergman F; van der Linden W. Effect of dietary Fibre on
gallstone formation in hamsters. Z Emahrungswiss 1975
Sep;14(3):217-24.

Curry CE, (1982) Laxative products. In: Handbook of
Nonprescription Drugs, Am Pharmac Assoc, Washington, S 69-
92.

Davidson MH; Maki KC; Kong JC et al. Long-term effects of
consuming foods containing psyllium seed husk on serum lipids
in subjects with hypercholesterolemia. Am J Clin Nutr 1998
Mar:67(3):367-76.

Ershoff BH, (1976) J Food Sci 41:949.

Femandez-Banares F; Hinojosa J; Sanchez-Lombrana JL.
Randomized clinical trial of Plantago ovata seeds (dietary fiber)
as compared with mesalamine in maintaining remission in

PSYLLIUiM /615

ulcerative colitis. Spanish Group for the Study of Crohn's
Disease and Ulcerative Colitis (GETECCU). Am J Gastroenterol
1999 Feb;94(2):427-33.

Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT
15(3); 137. 1994,

Ford MA; Cristea G Jr: Robbins WD et al. Delayed psyllium
allergy in three nurses. Hosp Pharm 1992 Dec;27(12):1061-2.

Gelpi E et al., PH 8:2077-2081. 1969.

Hansen WE. Effect of dietary fiber on pancreatic lipase activity
in vitro. Pancreas 1987:2(2): 195-8.

Hansen WE; Schulz G. The effect of dietary fiber on pancreatic
amylase activity in vitro. Hepatogastroenterology 1982
Aug:29(4): 157-60.

Hotz J; Plein K. Effectiveness of plantago seed husks in
comparison with wheat bran on stool frequency and
manifestations of irritable colon syndrome with constipation.
Med Klin 1994 Dec 15:89(12):645-51.

Kasper H, (1985) Ernahrungsmedizin und Diatetik. 5. Aufl.
Urban & Schwarzenberg. Miinchen Wien. Leng-Peschlow E.

Jaspersen-Schib R, Ballaststoffe als Lipidsenker. In: DAZ
132(39): 1991. 1992.

Kasper H, (1985) Ernahrungsmedizin und Diatetik. 5. Aufl.
Urban & Schwarzenberg. Miinchen Wien. Leng-Peschlow E.

Kennedy JF et al., Carbohydr Res 75:265-274. 1979.
Khorana ML et al.. (1958) Ind J Pharm 20:3.

Koedam A, Plantago - history and use. In: Pharm Weekbl
112(10):246-252. 1977.

McRorie JW; Daggy BP; Morel JG et al. Psyllium is superior
to docusate sodium for treatment of chronic constipation.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998 May;12(5):491-7.

Maciejko JJ; Brazg R; Shah A et al. Psyllium for the reduction
of cholestyramine-associated gastrointestinal symptoms in the
treatment of primary hypercholesterolemia. Arch Fam Med 1994
Nov;3(Il):955-60.

MacMahon M; Carless J. Ispaghula husk in the treatment of
hypercholesterolaemia: a double- blind controlled study. J
Cardiovasc Risk 1998 Jun;5(3): 167-72.

Mengs U, (1990) No renal pigmentation by plantago ovata
seeds or husks. Med Sci Res 18:37-38.

Miettinen TA; Tarpila S. Serum lipids and cholesterol
metabolism during guar gum, plantago ovata and high fibre
treatments. Clin Chim Acta 1989 Aug 31;183(3):253-62.

Miller JN, In: Industrial Gums, Ed. R. L. Whistler, Academic
Press 1973.

Oshio H, Inouye H, (1982) Planta Med 44:204.

Popov S, (1978) IUPAC Int Symp Chem Nat Prod 11(2):61
(via CA 92:59170).

Prior A & Whorwell PJ. Double-blind study of ispaghula in
irritable bowel syndrome. Gut 1987; 28:1510-1513.

----- PAGE 867 -----
616 /PSYLLIUM

Product Information: Metamucil®, Proctor & Gamble,
Cincinnati, OH, 1999.

Product Information: Konsyl for Kids®, Konsyl
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, 1999.

Product Information: Konsyl®, Konsyl Pharmaceuticals. Inc.,
Fort Worth, Texas, 1999.

Rigaud D; Paycha F; Meulemans A et al. Effect of psyllium on
gastric emptying, hunger feeling and food intake in normal
volunteers: a double blind study. Eur J Clin Nutr 1998
Apr:52(4):239-45.

Rodriguez-Moran M; Guerrero-Romero F; Lazcano-Burciaga G.
Lipid- and glucose-lowering efficacy of Plantago Psyllium in
type II diabetes. J-Diabetes Complications 1998 Sep-
Oct;12(5):273-8.

Romero AL; Romero JE; Galaviz S; Fernandez ML. Cookies
enriched with psyllium or oat bran lower plasma LDL
cholesterol in normal and hypercholesterolemic men from
Northern Mexico. J Am Coll Nutr 1998 Dec;17(6):601-8.

Sandhu JS et al., Carbohdr Res 93:247-259. 1981.

Schwartz HJ; Arnold JL: Strohl KP. Occupational allergic
rhinitis reaction to psyllium. J Occup Med 1989 Jul;31(7):624-6.

Schwesinger WH; Kurtin WE; Page CP et al. Soluble dietary
fiber protects against cholesterol gallstone formation. Am J Surg
1999 Apr;177(4):307-10.

Seggev JS; Ohta K; Tipton WR. IgE mediated anaphylaxis due
to a psyllium-containing drug. Ann Allergy 1984
Oct;53(4):325-6.

Spence JD; Huff MW; Heidenheim P et al. Combination
therapy with colestipol and psyllium mucilloid in patients with
hyperlipemia. Ann Intern Med 1995 Oct 1;123(7):493-9.

Swain JF; Rouse IL; Curley CB; Sacks FM. Comparison of the
effects of oat bran and low-fiber wheat on serum lipoprotein
levels and blood pressure. N Engl J Med 1990 Jan

18:322(3): 147-52.

Tomoda M et al., (1987) Planta Med 53(1 ):8.

Turnbull WH: Thomas HG. The effect of a Plantago ovata seed
containing preparation on appetite variables, nutrient and energy
intake. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1995 May;19(5):338-42.

Washington N; Harris M; Mussellwhite A; Spiller RC.
Moderation of lactulose-induced diarrhea by psyllium: effects on
motility and fermentation. Am J Clin Nutr 1998
Feb;67(2):317-21.
Wolever TM; Jenkins DJ; Mueller S et al. Method of
administration influences the serum cholesterol-lowering effect
of psyllium. Am J Clin Nutr 1994 May;59(5): 1055-9.

Zumarraga L; Levitt MD; Suarez F. Absence of gaseous
symptoms during ingestion of commercial fibre preparations.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1997 Dec; 11 (6): 1067-72.

Further information in:

Chan EH et al. (Ed.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials
Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, PhytotherapieVPhytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Psyllium Seed
Plantago  afra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a 12-mm long spike
with glandular hairs and ovate-lanceolate bracts with a
midrib and translucent lateral lamina. The corolla is disc-
shaped with 4 translucent petals. The edge of the calyx has 4
acute lobes. The sepals are 3 to 4.5 cm and lanceolate. The
ovary is superior, and the fruit is a 2-sectioned, membranous
pyxidium. The seeds are dark brown, glossy and narrowly

oblong in outline.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an artnual that is erect
widi stems up to 60 cm high. The stems have ascending,
pubescent branches with patent or ascending hairs and are
more or less minutely glandular above. The leaves are 3 to 8
by 0.1 to 0.3 cm, linear or linear-lanceolate and are not
fleshy. The bracts are 3.5 to 8 mm and all have a similar
shape. They are ovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, sharp-edged
or acuminate with a broad dry membranous margin without
lateral ribs.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
and western Asia. Psyllium Seeds are cultivated in Spain,
central Europe, Israel, Russia, India, Pakistan, Japan, Cuba
and southern Brazil.

Production: Psyllium Seed (blonde) consists of the dried,
ripe seed of Plantago psyllium (syn. Plantago afra) and of
Plantago indica (syn. Plantago arenaria), with a swell index
of at least 10, and its formulations.

Not to be Confused With: The seeds of other Plantago seeds.

----- PAGE 868 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Plantain, Fleaseed, Flea Wort, Psyllion,
Psyllios

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Mucilages (only in the epidermis of the seed coat, 10-12%):

chiefly arabinoxylans

Iridoids: aucubin (0.14%)

Pyrridine_ alkaloids: boschniakines, including plantagonine,
indicaine, indicainine

Proteic substances

Fatty oil

EFFECTS
The mucins are laxative and antidiarrheal; they regulate
intestinal peristalsis through the swelling effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Diarrhea
* Constipation

Unproven Uses: Psyllium Seed is used internally for
constipation, diarrhea, cystitis and all conditions in which a
soft stool is desirable, such as anal fissures, hemorrhoids,
anal-rectal surgery and pregnancy. It is also used externally

for furunculosis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Psyllium Seed is contraindicated in pathologic constriction
of the gastrointestinal tract, inflammatory illnesses of the
gastrointestinal tract, the threat or presence of ileus and in
severely variable diabetes mellitus.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Allergic reactions could, however, arise
in isolated cases (rhinitis, conjunctivitis, asthma and urticar-
ia). Incorrect administration procedures (with too little fluid)
can lead to obstruction (blockage) of the esophagus or the
intestine, particularly with older people.

Drug Interactions: Absorption of other drugs taken simulta-

neously could be delayed.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Internally as whole, cut or pow-

dered drug, and externally as a poultice.

Preparation: The ratio for the liquid extract is 1:1 (25%

ethanol).

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dose is 12 to 40 g
drug. The dose for the liquid extract is 2 to 5 ml.

PTYCHOPETALUM OLACOIDES / 617

Storage: The cut drug should be protected from light and
moisture and used within 24 hours.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Pharmaceutical Care: "Den Mipbrauch von Laxanzien
vermeiden helfen". In: DAZ 135(20): 1867-1868. 1995.

Curry CE, (1982) Laxative products. In: Handbook of
Nonprescription Drugs, Am Pharmac Assoc, Washington, S 69-
92.

Fintelmann V, Phytopharmaka in der Gastroenterologie. In: ZPT
15(3):137. 1994,

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Jaspersen-Schib R, Ballaststoffe als Lipidsenker. In: DAZ
132(39):1991. 1992.

Karawya MS et al., PM 20:14-35. 1971.
Kennedy JF et al., Carbohydr Res 75:265-274. 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ptelea trifoliata
See Wafer Ash

Pterocarpus santalinus
See Red Sandalwood

Ptychopetalum olacoides

See Muira-Puama

----- PAGE 869 -----
618 /PUFF BALL

Puff Ball

Lycoperdon _ species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts and
the mature spores of the fungus.

Flower and Fruit: The giant form of this fungus attains a
diameter of 20 to 50 cm and a weight of 9 kg. The outer
covering is at first whitish, smooth and downy. It later turns
gray-yellow or ochre, develops grooves and patches, and
starts to break off from above. The now-visible inner section
bursts at the vertex and disintegrates. The content is
composed of a whitish mass, which turns yellow and mushy
and finally breaks down into greenish-brown spore dust. A
cup-shaped receptacle with torn edges remains.

Habitat: Lycoperdon species are indigenous to Europe.

Production: Puff Ball is the aerial part and the mature spores
of Lycoperdon species.

Other Names: Bovista, Hart's Truffle, Deer Balls

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Calvacin (mucoprotein)
Steroids: mycosterols

Urea

EFFECTS

The main active agents are various amino acids, glucos-
amine, sterol, enzymes and approximately 3% urea.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for dysmenorrhea, nose

bleeds and skin disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: Lycoperdon is used for anemia, skin
complaints and chronic catarrh.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The young mushroom is edible.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Puff Ball is available ground or in
alcoholic extracts.

LITERATURE
Gasco A et al., (1974) Tetrahedron Lett 38:3431.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Pulmonaria officinalis
See Lungwort

Pulsatilla pratensis

See Pasque Flower

Pumpkin
Cucurbita pepo

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried

seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flower is yellow, monoecious, very
large and solitary in the leaf axils. The male flower has a
longer pedicle. The calyx is fused to the corolla except for
the 5 awl-shaped tips. The corolla is 5-tipped and funnel-
shaped. The interior is pubescent. There are 3 stamens fused
to the anther. The ovary is inferior and 3-locular. The fruit is
very large with many seeds. The flesh is fibrous, yellow-
orange to white, and has a viscous placenta. The seeds are 7
to 15 mm long, narrow, broad or narrow-ovate with a
shallow groove and flat ridge around the margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Annual plant 3 to 8 m long. The
stem is sharply-angular with longitudinal grooves and hairy
spines. The leaves are alternate, very large and bristly,
petiolate with 5 to 7 lobes from a cordate base.

Characteristics: The seeds taste somewhat like almonds.

Habitat: Pumpkin is indigenous to America and widely
cultivated, especially in temperate climates.

Production: Pumpkin seed consists of the ripe, dried seed of
Cucurbita pepo and cultivated varieties of Cucurbita pepo.

Other Names: Field Pumpkin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroids: Delta5-, Delta7- and Delta8-phytosterols (24- alkyl
sterols), including clerosterol, isofucosterol, sitosterol, stig-
masterol, cholesterol, isoavenasterol, spinasterol

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids are oleic acid and linoleic acid
Proteic substances (25 to 42%)

Unusual amino acids: including cucurbitin (vermifuge)

I Gamma-tocopherol

----- PAGE 870 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
As well as amaroids (cucurbitacin), the drug contains delta-
7-sterols, which are similar in conformation to the dihydros-
testerone. Cucurbitacin has anthelmintic properties.

There are no pharmacological studies that substantiate the

empirically documented clinical efficacy; the empirical
evidence indicates efficacy for prostate hyperplasia. Pump-

kin is also antiphlogistic and antioxidative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Irritable bladder
* Prostate complaints

Unproven Uses: Pumpkin is used for irritable bladder,
micturition problems accompanying prostate adenoma stages
I to IL. This the difficulties
associated with an enlarged prostate without reducing the
enlargement. Medical supervision is essential.

medication relieves only

In folk medicine, it is also used for kidney inflammation,
intestinal parasites, particularly tape worm, and vulnary.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and coarsely ground seed
and other galenic preparations are for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 10 gm of ground
seeds; I to 2 heaping dessert spoons with liquid in the
mornings and evenings.

Storage: It should be protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Welche Bedeutung haben pflanzliche Prostatamittel.
In: DAZ 133(9):720. 1993.

Koch E, (1995) Pharmakologie und Wirkmechanismen von
Extrakten aus Sabalfruchten (Sabal fructus), Brennesselwurzeln
(Urticae radix) und Ktirbissamen (Cucurbitae peponis semen)
bei der Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. In: Loew
D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg.) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S 57-79.

Miersch WDE, Benigne Prostatahyperplasie. In: DAZ
133(29):2653. 1993.

Nahxstedt A, (1993) Pflanzliche Urologica - eine kritische
Ubersicht. Pharm Z 138:1439-1450.

Schabort JC, (1978) Phytochemistry 17:1062.
Schiebel-Schlosser G., Kiirbiskerne starken die Blasenfunktion.
In: PTA 4(11):552. 1990.

Schilcher H, Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Phytotherapie am
Beispiel pflanzlicher Urologika. Urologe [B] 27 (1987), 316-319

PURPLE GROMWELL (YING ZICAO) /619

Schilcher H, (1987a) Pflanzliche Diuretika. Urologe [B] 27:215-
222; (1987b)n Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Phytotherapie am
Beispiel pflanzlicher Urologika. Urologe [B] 27:316-319.
Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
prostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.

Schilcher H, Dunzendorfer U, Ascali F, Dekta-7-Sterole, das
prostatatrope Wirkprinzip des Kiirbis? In: Urologe (B) 27:316-
319. 1987.

Tewary JP, Srivasta MC, (1968) J Pharm Sci 57:328.

Further information in: .

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Oliver-Bever B (Ed.), Medicinal Plants of Tropical West Africa,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, London 1986.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl*, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Punica granatum

See Pomegranate

Purple Gromwell
(Ying Zicao)
Lithospermum erytrorhizon

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root,
which is dried.

Flower and Fruit: The radial flowers are in axillary or apical
racemes. The calyx has up to 5 tips, and the sepals are fused.
The petals are white and also fused. The corolla tube is
approximately 4 mm long. The diameter of the corolla is
approximately 4 mm. There are 5 stamens and one superior,
2-carpeled, 4-chambered ovary. The fruit is a glossy nutlet,
approximately 3 mm long, ovoid and gray-white.

----- PAGE 871 -----
620 /PURPLE GROMWELL (YING ZICAO)

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows up
to 80 cm high. The leaves are alternate, sessile, simple,
lanceolate to elongate-lanceolate with acute tips and parallel
veins. It has a few upright, roughly pubescent stems and a
thick root.

Characteristics: The root becomes purple when dried.
Habitat: This herb is indigenous to Korea, China and Japan.

Production: Purple Gromwell root or Ying Zicao (Chinese)
is the dried root of Lithospermum erythrorhizon. The 3-year-
old roots are collected in spring or,autumn, cleaned, cut in
slices and then dried.

Other Names: Ying~£icao

ACTION AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Naphthalene derivatives (0.5 to 3%): isohexenylnaphthaza-
rines, particularly esters of the (R)-(+)-shikonins with short-
chained fatty acids, including acetic acid, isobutyric acid,
isovaleric acid

Water-soluble polysaccharides: \ithospermans A to C

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: chief alkaloid intermedine, as well
as myoscorpine, hydroxymyoscorpine

Hydroquinone derivatives (0.3%): furylhydroquinones and

furylquinones, including shikonofurane A to E

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid, lithospermic acid,

caffeic acid esters of higher alcohols, for example

docosanylcaffeat

EFFECTS
The naphthoquinone derivatives contained in the drug are
antimicrobial, antiphlogistic, analgetic, antipyretic tumor-
inhibiting and immunomodulating in their activity. In
addition, a hypoglycemic effect from the glycane fraction
has been described.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Uses in folk
constipation, smallpox, strangury, bacterial skin conditions
and insect bites (Korea).

medicine include fever,

Chinese Medicine: Uses include constipation, swellings,
tumors and eczema of the skin. Efficacy for these indications

has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is no longer considered safe for internal use.
Hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity are to be assumed for the
drug, due to the pyrrolizidine alkaloid content with 1,2-
unsaturated necic parent substances.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Whole drug.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Preparation: There is no exact information in the literature.

Daily Dosage: Drug/tea: 3 to 10 g. The traditional daily dose
for smallpox is 5 to 8 g drug to taken internally. (The drug is
no longer considered safe for internal use.)

LITERATURE

Bechthold A, Berger U, Heide L, Partial purification, properties,
and kinetic studies of UDP-glucose:p-hydroxybenzoate
glucosyltransferase from cell cultures of Lithospermum
erythrorhizon. Arch Biochem Biophys, 288:39-47, 1991 Jul.

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G, (Eds) Hagers Handbuch der .Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeb nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,

we

Heidelberg 1998. a

Hisa T, Kimura Y, Takada K, Suzuki F, Takigawa M, Isolation
and hypoglycemic activity of lithospermans A, B and C,
glycans of Lithospermum erythrorhizon roots. Planta Med,
18:157-8, 1998 Mar-Apr.

Hisa T, Kimura Y, Takada K, Suzuki F, Takigawa M,
Shikonin, an ingredient of Lithospermum erythrorhizon, inhibits
angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro. Anticancer Res, 18:783-90,
1998 Mar-Apr.

Purple Loosestrife
Lythrum salicaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowering plant
without the roots and flowering branch tips.

Flower and Fruit: The purple flowers are in axillary whorls
and form terminal spikes. There are 6 small sepals, 6 long
thin tips, 6 free petals, 12 stamens and 1 half-superior ovary.
There are flowers with long, short or medium-long styles and
similar stamens.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual and grows
from 60 to 120 cm high. It has a creeping rhizome with 4 to
6 unbranched, erect, 6-sided, reddish-brown, pubescent
stems. The leaves are simple lanceolate, 7.5 to 15 cm long,
sometimes opposite and sometimes clasping whorls.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe including Russia,
central Asia, Australia and North America.

Production: Purple Loosestrife is the plant in flower,
excluding the root, of Lythrum salicaria. Before the seeds
form, the plants are cut and gathered during the blossoming
period, which occurs from June to August. The material is
bound into small bundles. It is hung in an open-air, shaded

area to dry.

Other Names: Loosestrife, Lythrum, Purple Willow-Herb,
Long Purples, Milk Willow-Herb, Rainbow Weed, Soldiers,

----- PAGE 872 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Spiked Loosestrife, Spiked. Willow Sage, Salicaire, Flower-
ing Sally, Blooming Sally

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins (ellagitannins = lythrartannin, condensed tannins)
Flavonoids: including among others vitexin, orientin
Phthalides: diisobutyl-, butyl-, isobutyl-. dibutylphthalides

Steroids: beta-sitosterol «-
EFFECTS “*

The active agents are tannin, pectin, resins, cholin and
salicarin.

The drug has an anti-inflammatory, astringent, and antibiotic
effect. The astringent properties of the Purple Loosestrife is
attributed not just to the tannin content, but also to the
glycoside salcarin, which has a special antimicrobial effect
on various bacteria in the intestinal tract.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for diarrhea,
chronic intestinal catarrh and menstrual complaints; external-
ly, in the treatment of varicose veins, bleeding of the gums,
hemorrhoids and eczema.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as well

as externally.

Preparation: For internal use, an infusion is made from 3 gm
of the drug added to 100 ml of water. To prepare a tincture,
add 20 gm of the drug to 100 ml of 20% alcohol (leave to set
for 5 days).

Daily.Dosage: Two to 3 cups of an infusion are to be taken
per day. Two to 3 teaspoons of the tincture should be taken

per day.
Storage: Keep wrapped in paper or in cloth sacks.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PYRETHRUM / 621

Pyrethrum

Chrysanthemum _ cinerariifolium
DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The part of the plant used for medicinal

purposes (primary as an insecticide) is the flower.

Flower and Fruit: Solitary flower heads are at the end of
long slender peduncles, consisting of white lingual florets
and yellow tubular florets. The fruit is an achene.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Pyrethrum is .a. perennial, 20 to 60
cm high plant with an erect stem covered in alternating,
pinnate, roughly serrated leaves. The underside of the leaves
is downy.

Characteristics: The entire plant gives off a heavy perfume.

Habitat: Pyrethrum is indigenous to Kenya and the Mediter-
ranean region and is widely cultivated in other parts of the
world.

Production: Pyrethrum flowers are the just-opening com-
pound flower heads of 2-to-8-year-old Chrysanthemum
-cinerariifolium and/or Chrysanthemum coccineum. The
heads are left to wilt and then dried in special drying plants.

Other Names: Dalmatian Pellitory, Dalmation Insect Flowers

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pyrethrine (ester ofmonoterpene acid with alkylcyclopenten-
olone, ]%): chief components pyrethrines I and II, cinerines
I and II, jasmoline I and II

Flavonoids: including apigenin-, luteolin- and quercetin-7-
O-glucosides and —glucuronides

Sesquiterpenes: sesquiterpene lactones, including pyrethro-
sine, cyclopyrethrosine

Lignans: sesamine

Polyynes: thiophenes, including 5-(4-hydroxy-1-butenyl)-
2,2'-bithienyl

EFFECTS
Pyrethrum exhibits a neurotoxic effect on the sodium canal
of insects with no development of habitual immunity.
Pyrethrine and cinerine are contact insecticides that paralyze
the nerve center of lower animals.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Pyrethrum is used as an insecticide for
scabies, head lice, crab lice and their nits.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
witii the proper administration of designated therapeutic

----- PAGE 873 -----
622 /PYRETHRUM

dosages. The pyrethrines possess only limited toxicity in
humans, with dosages up to 2 g of the drug are considered
non-toxic.

OVERDOSAGE
Dosages exceeding 2 g of the drug have been observed to
produce poisoning symptoms including headache, ringing in
the ears, nausea, paresthesias, respiratory disturbances and
other neurotoxic complaints.

Following gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium
permanganate solution and installation of activated charcoal,
the therapy for poisonings consists of treating possible cases
of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In case of
shock, plasma volflme expanders should be infused. Moni-
toring of kidney function is essential. Intubation and oxygen
respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Externally as a liquid extract. (Area
must be rinsed after use.) Some homeopathic remedies
contain Pyrethrum mother tincture and dilutions.

How Supplied: Solutions, sprays and shampoos.

LITERATURE :
Anonym, Bio-Insektensprays: Wirken Pyrethroide als
Nervengifte? In: DAZ 132(31): 1632. 1992.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl. Nachdruck, Haug*
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Pachaly P, Pflanzenschutzmittel in der Apotheke - Pyrethrum.
In: DAZ 132(19): 1032. 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993 (unter
Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium).

Stuttgen G, Skabies und Lause heute. In: DAZ 132(34): 1745.
1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Pyrola rotundifolia

See Round-Leafed Wintergreen

Pyrus communis

See Pear

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Quassia

Picrasma excelsa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
trunk wood.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in leaf-axillary, richly
blossomed cymose panicles. The flower structures are in
fours or fives. There are 5, 0.6 to 0.9 mm long, pubescent
sepals, 5 yellow-green (in male flowers approximately 2 mm
long, in androgynous flowers 3 mm long) petals, 10 stamens
and 5 carpels surrounded by a disc. The fruit is a 1-seeded,
orbicular to oval, blue-black drupe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: An evergreen, this tree is usually
dioecious and grows to a height of up to 25 m. The leaves
are alternate, 15 to 35 cm long, odd pinnate, with 9 to 13
leaflets. The leaflets are 5 to 13 cm long, 20 to 45 cm wide,
blunt-acuminate and glossy. The trunk has gray grooved
bark.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous to the Caribbean and
northern Venezuela.

Production: Bittervvood is the dried trunk wood of Picrasma
excelsa, collected in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Mistaken identity can occur with
Rhus metopium.

Other Names: Ash. Bitter Ash, Bitterwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpenes: decanor-triterpenes (picrasan derivatives, quas-
sinoids, simaroubolides, 0.15 to 0.3%), chief components
quassin (nigaki lactone D) and neoquassin (both extremely
bitter), and also including isoquassin (picrasmine) and 18-
hydroxyquassin

Indole alkaloids: beta-carboline types, including N-methoxy-
2-vinyl-beta-carboline and canthinone types, including can-
thine-6-one, 4-rmethoxy-5-hydroxycanthine-6-one

EFFECTS

The bitter substances contained in the drug (quassinoids and
canthinones) exhibit antimicrobial, antiviral, anthelminthic
and insecticidal effects. Quassia extract is positively inotrop-
ic and negatively chronotropic in animal experiment models.
An antitumorous activity was able to be demonstrated for
various quassionoids. The drug's use to stimulate appetite
and promote digestion is traceable to the bitter substances it
contains.

----- PAGE 874 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include dyspepsia
(Mexico and Brazil), loss of appetite, and stimulation of
gastric juice and saliva production. These effects are
attributed to the amaroid content. Quassia is also used for
fever (Costa Rica and Surinam), malaria, dysentery, gonor-
rhea (Brazil), lice and worm infestations, as an antiseptic
wound treatment, for diarrhea (Costa Rica and Brazil), for
snake bites (Guyana), for liver disease, edema and menstrual
complaints.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include poor
digestion and liver disease.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Internal
administration has occasionally led to dizziness and head-
ache, as well as uterine pain.

OVERDOSAGE

Gastric mucous membrane irritation has been observed with
cases of overdosage, followed by vomiting. It is said that
prolonged use can lead to weakened vision and total
blindness.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations are available for
internal and external use.

Daily Dosage:
Drug — single dose, 0.3 to 0.6 g, 3 times daily; Tincture:

daily dose; 2 to 4 ml; Lice: apply tincture twice weekly to
the scalp.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute), and | to 3 times daily (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, IV, IF; Acute: 3 times daily;
Chronic: 1 to 3 times daily (HA).

Storage: Store protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Wagner H, Nestler T, Neszmelyi A, New constituents of
Picrasma excelsa. Planta Med, 36:113-8, 1979 Jun.

Quassia amara

See Amargo

QUEBRACHO/623

Quebracho

Aspidosperma quebracho-bianco

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences, which grow from the
upper leaf axils, are opposite or in threes. They are shaped
like a thyrsus and are warty to almost glabrous with
numerous flowers. The flowers are 1 to 3 cm long. The
bracts, which fall off, are very small and have a 2 to 3 mm
stem. The sepals are ovate, obtuse, -I- to 2 mm long and
uneven. The corolla is white, yellow or yellowish-green,
smooth or uneven on the outside. The tube is 3 to 5 mm long
and has long, narrow, lanceolate petals. The stamens are in
the middle of the corolla tube. The anthers are 1 mm long.
The follicles are cylindrical to ovoid, 4 to 10 cm long and 1
to 7 cm wide. They are very woody, slightly warty, with or
without a midrib, uneven and stemless.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree grows to a height of 20 m
and has slim branches. The young branches are warty; the
older branches are smooth with thin orange-brown bark. The
leaves are opposite or trifoliate, oblong-elliptoid, ovate--
lanceolate to lanceolate, acuminate and gradually narrow at
the base. They are 3 to 5 cm long by 0.5 to 15 cm wide,
coriaceous, often yellow-green and smooth. The leaves have
20 to 30 pairs of steeply ascending secondary ribs, which are
very close to each other and sunk into a thick mesophyll. The
exterior of the bark is grayish and deeply fissured. The inner
surface is yellowish-brown, often with a reddish tint, and is
grooved. The transverse fracture shows a coarsely granular
outer layer and a fibrous or splintery, darker inner layer.

Characteristics: The bark has a bitter taste and is odorless.

Habitat: The plant grows in Chile, Argentina, southeast
Bolivia and southeast Brazil.

Production: Quebracho bark is the bark of Aspidosperma
quebracho-bianco.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with
Aspidosperma horco kebracho.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids (0.5-1.5%): chief alkaloids aspidospermine
(30%), yohimbine (quebrachine, 10%), further including,
among others, (-)-quebrachamine, akuammidine

Tannins

EFFECTS
Quebracho bark works as an expectorant and stimulates the
respiratory center. A respiratory-stimulating effect has been
proven for the main alkaloid aspidospermin in animal tests,

----- PAGE 875 -----
624/QUEBRACHO

but there are no studies available on the effect of the whole
drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internal folk medicine uses of Quebracho
include bronchial asthma, breathing difficulties, bronchitis,
fever, cramps and loss of appetite.

in homeopathy are primarily
with accompanying

Uses
tract conditions

Homeopathic Uses:
chronic respiratory
breathing difficulties.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Side ef-
fects can include, among others, salivation, headache,

outbreaks of sweating, vertigo, stupor and sleepiness.

OVERDOSAGE
Intakes of larger-than-recommended
lead to queasiness and vomiting.

therapeutic dosages

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is available in extract and
powder form, and is often used in combination bronchial
preparations. However, it is rarely used as a“drug in asthma

remedies.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations

include powder, tablets, coated tablets, drops and elixir.

Preparation: Quebracho tincture is a 1:5 (ethanol 70%)

combination.

Daily Dosage: A single dose of the drug is 1 to 2 g.

(Recommended daily amount not specified.)

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution sc

twice weekly (HABI).

Storage: Keep the drug in tightly sealed containers.
LITERATURE

Biemann K et al., J Am Chem Soc 85:631. 1963.

Jemec GB, Hausen BM, Contact dermatitis from Brazilian box
tree wood (Aspidosperma sp.). Contact Dermatitis, 25:58-60,
1991.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lyon RL et al., (1973) J Pharm Sci 62: 218.

Markey S et al.. Tetrahedron Lett 157. 1967.
Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A): 1.
Wilson E et al., Rev farm (Buenos Aires) 125:9, 1983.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen .Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Makkar HP, Blummel M, Becker K, Formation of complexes
between polyvinyl pyrrolidones or polyethylene glycols and
tannins and their implication in gas production and true
digestibility in in vitro techniques. Br J Nutr, 73:897-913, 1995.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Quercus infectoria
See Oak Gall

Quercus robur
See Oak

Quillaja
Quillaja saponaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the inner bark.

Flower and Fruit: The terminal inflorescence consists of
white androgynous flowers with a calyx and corolla but no
epicalyx. They are arranged in groups of 3 to 5 on the
peduncle. The flower head is 5-lobed, splayed flat and
formed into a disc on the upper surface. The many-seeded
carpels spread into a star shape in the ripe fruit. The seeds

are winged with little or no endosperm.

----- PAGE 876 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is up to 18 m tall. The
leaves are smooth, glossy, short petioled, and oval. The bark
is thick, dark and very hard. It is odorless, very bitter and
astringent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Chile, Peru and is
cultivated in India and California.

Production: Quillaja Bark is the bark of Quillaja saponaria.

Other Names: Quillai, Quillaja Bark, Soap Tree, Panama
Bark, and Cullay

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS ~
Tannins (10 to 15%)

Triterpene saponins (8.5 to 17%): chief saponins quillajasa-
ponins 17 (QS 17, QS IID), 18 (QS 18), 21 (QS 21), chief
saponin quillaic acid

EFFECTS

Because of its saponin content the drug is lipid-lowering,
anti-exudative and immune-stimulating in animal experi-
ments. The expectorant and purgative effect is also attributed
to the saponin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Quillaja is used internally for coughs,
chronic bronchitis, and conditions of the respiratory tract. It
is used externally for dandruff.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Mucus membrane irritation could occur in the event of
overdosage. Overdosage complaints include gastroenteritis,
combined with vertigo, stomach pain and diarrhea. The drug
possesses a low potential for sensitization.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Quillaja is available as liquid
extract and tincture for internal and external use.

LITERATURE
Higuchi R et aL, (1987) Phytochemistry 26 (1):229.
Higuchi R et al., PH 27:1165. 1988.

Higuchi R, Komori T, PH 26:2357. 1987.

Labriola RA, Denlofeu, V, (1969) Experientia 25:124.
Lallouette P et al., (1967) C R A S Paris D 265:582.

Topping DL et al., (1980) Proc Nutr Soc Aust 5:195.
Wolters B, Arzneipflanzen und Volksmedizin Chiles. In: DAZ
134(39):3693. 1994.

QUINCE/625

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Stemegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992. ++

Teuscher E, 3iogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Quillaja saponaria

See Quillaja

Quince
Cydonia oblongata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit and seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are pink, relatively large,
solitary and perfumed. The fruit is yellow, downy and apple
or pear-shaped.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Qunice is a 3 to 6 m high tree or
shrub with tomentose branches covered in alternate, ovate
leaves. The undersurface of the leaves is grass-green and
tomentose.

Habitat: Quince is indigenous to southwest and central Asia,
but it has also spread to Europe and in particularly the
Mediterranean.

Production: Quince seeds are the seeds of Cydonia oblonga-
ta. The ripe quinces are picked, stored for a period, then cut
and finally dried at temperatures not exceeding 50°C. The
seeds are gathered up and used in whole or ground form.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: amygdalin (corresponding to 0.4 -
1.5%, 27 to 75 mg HCN/100 g)

Mucilages
Fatty oil

----- PAGE 877 -----
626 /QUINCE

EFFECTS
The main active principles are mucilage, some tannins and
vitamin C. There is no information is available on the mode

of action.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Quince is used as a demulcent in digestive
isorders and diarrhea. As a lotion, it is used to soothe the
eyes. The seeds are also used to treat coughs and gastrointes-
tinal catarrh. Additionally, the herb is used as compresses or
poultices for injuries, inflammation of the joints, injuries of
the nipples and gashed or deeply, cut fingers.

RECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

ealth risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Because quince mucilage is prepared from the whole seeds,
nd/or the whole seeds are taken internally, the cyanogenic
glycosides are credited with a slight toxicological relevance.

x=

2

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used as a powder, a
lotion, a decoction and an extract.

Preparation: Extract/decoction: 1 tsp. -of whole seeds per
cup of water. A viscous poultice is prepared from the ground

seeds.

LITERATURE
De Tommasi N et al., New tetracyclic sesterterpenes from
Cydonia vulgaris. In: JNP 59(3):267-270. 1996.

Huber P, Landw Versuchst 75:462. 1911.
Sommer W, Dissertation Universitat Kiel. 1984.

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Reis D. Vian B, Chanzy H, Roland JC, Liquid crystal-type
assembly of native cellulose-glucuronoxylans extracted from
lant cell wall. Biol Cell, 30:173-8, 1991

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Quinine
Cinchona pubescens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark of 6- to

8-year-old trees.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The 35 cm long inflorescence is panicled,
opposite, often leafy and densely blossomed. The flowers are
almost sessile, and the tube is thickly covered in silky hairs.
The calyx has appressed hairs, and the tips are short and
widely acuminate. The corolla is red or pink and 10 to 12
mm long. The fruit is an oblong, glabrous and longitudinally

grooved capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree,
sometimes a bush, which grows from 5 to 15 m high, with a
dense crown. The branches are at right angles to the trunk.
The young branches are usually pubescent. The stipules are
large, ovate, obtuse or acuminate, silky-haired or glabrous.
The leaves have an up to 8 cm long petiole. The leaf blade is
15 to 40 cm long and 7 to 25 cm wide, oblong-elliptoid to
roundish with curved side ribs. The bark occurs in quills or
flat pieces up to 30 cm long and 3 to 6 mm thick. The
external surface is brownish-gray, usually fissured with an
exfoliating cork. Lichens and mosses may be seen as
grayish-white or greenish patches. The inner surface is
yellowish to reddish-brown. The fracture is fibrous.

Characteristics: The bark has an astringent, bitter taste and
the odor is slight.

Habitat: The herb is indigenous to mountainous regions of
the tropical U.S. and is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Cinchona bark consists of the dried bark of
Cinchona pubescens or other varieties. Trees are felled at
between 6 and 12 years. They are dried slowly in the sun
initially and then artificially dried at maximum temperatures

of 70° C.
Not to be Confused With: Yellow factory bark
Other Names: Peruvian Bark, Jesuit's Bark, Cinchona

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Quinoline alkaloids (5-15%): main alkaloids
(0.8-4%), quinidine (0.02-0.4%), cinchonine (1.5-3%), cin-
chonidine (1.5-5%)

are quinine

Triterpenes: bitter acid monoglycosides, in particular,phino-
vic acid-3-O-chinovoside, chinovic acid-3-O-glucoside

Catechin tannins  (3-5%)

EFFECTS
Quinine promotes stimulation of tfie secretion of saliva and

gastric juices.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite
* Dyspeptic complaints

----- PAGE 878 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Unproven Uses: Quinine is used internally to correct loss of
appetite, dyspepsia and flatulence with a sense of fullness.
The bark is used for malaria, flu, enlarged spleen, muscle
cramps, muscle pain, cancer and gastric disorders. External-
ly, it is used for scrapes and skin ulcers.

Chinese Medicine: Quinine is used for malaria, fever and
alcohol intoxication.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used to treat intermittent fever,
malaria, intercostal neuralgia, sciatica and neuritis (especial-
ly of the arm).

Homeopathic Uses: Quinine is used to treat general poison-
ing, attacks of feverT inflammation of the respiratory tract,
acute diarrhea, anemia, general debility, skin rashes and
neuralgia.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Quinine should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Sensitization to Quinine and Quinidine have been
observed (eczema, itching). Even at therapeutic dosages, an
enhanced pseudohemophiliac effect can occur through the
triggering of thrombocytopenia.

Drug Interactions: Because of the possibility of thrombocy-
topenia, care must be taken when Quinine preparations are
administered along with other drugs that are known to
precipitate thrombocytopenia.

OVERDOSAGE
In cases of overdose (more than 3 gm Quinine) or of long-
term administration of the drug or its alkaloids, nausea,
summer cholera, headache, fall of body temperature, intra-
vascular hemolysis, cardiac arrhythmias, buzzing in the ears,
hearing and visual disorders (all the way to complete
deafness and blindness) may occur. Death comes with
dosages of 10 to 15 gm of Quinine through heart failure and
asphyxiation. Following gastric lavage, the symptomatic
therapy for acute poisonings includes atropine for bradycar-
dia and phenytoin in the presence of tachycardic heart
rhythm disorders. Forced diuresis and hemodialysis are not
suitable as therapeutic measures.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug are
used in various galenic preparations, including tonics, drops,
tablets, compresses, ampules, coated tablets, suppositories
and compound preparations.

Preparation: A tea is prepared by pouring 150 ml of boiling
water over 1/2 teaspoonful of the drug and allowing it to
draw for 10 minutes. A decoction is prepared by adding 0.5 g
to 1 teacup of water. A tincture in the proportion of 1:5 in
75% ethanol is also used.

QUININE/627

Daily Dosage: Total daily dose is | to 3 gm of drug. The
liquid extract daily dose is 0.6 to 3 gm of cinchona liquid
extract, which contains 4 to 5% total alkaloids. A daily dose
of 0.15 to 0.6 g cinchona extract with 15 to 20% total
alkaloids may also be used.

The standard single dose of the extract is 0.2 gm. The liquid
extract single dose is 0.5 to 1 gm.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

Storage: Keep protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE
Chinidin: Photoallergische Reaktion. In: DAZ 133(30):2765.
1993.

Hamorrhoidenbehandlung: Ambulant oder stationar. In: DAZ
133(40):3616. 1993.

Risdale CE, Hasskarls cinchona barks. 1. Historical review. In:
Reinwardtia 10, Teil 2: 245-264. 1985.

Schonfeld, Fleischer K, Eichenlaub D, Die Malariavorbeugung.
Miickenschutz und Arzneimittel zur Kurzzeitprophylaxe und
Notfallbehandlung. In: DAZ 133(21):1981. 1993.

Further information in:

Chan, EH et al. (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Manske RHF, Holmes HL, fortgefiihrt von Rodrigo RGA*
Brossi A): The Alkaloids - Chemistry and Physiology, 111:1,
XIV: 181, XXXIV:331, Academic Press New York 1950-1997.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 879 -----
628 /QUININE

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen, 4. Aufl:. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Radish

Raphcinus sativus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts". The medicinal part is the fresh root. The
plant is an important drug in homeopathic medicine.

Flower and Fruit: The raceme is loose and has about 30
flowers. The pedicles are 1 to 2 cm long and are covered in
scattered bristles. The sepals are 6.5 to 10 mm long, oblong,
acute, glabrous or with scattered bristles and red or green.
The petals are 17 to 22 mm long, obovate, slightly margined,
violet or white with dark veins. The fruit is on upright, patent
stems. They are upright, cylindrical and conically acuminate.
The upper segment is up to 9 cm long.and even or slightly
constricted between the seeds, and straw-like on the outside.
The seeds are ovate. 4 mm long and 3 mm wide, light brown
with a black hilum.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The root is annual or biennial and
thin. The stem is up to 1 m high, bent, cane-like, branched,
glabrous or covered with bristles and often violet, particular-
ly in the axils of the lateral branches. The lower leaves are
lyrate-pinnatisect with large sweeping crenate end segments
and smaller, oblong-ovate, obtuse, dentate lateral lobes. They
are light green, often red-veined and covered with scattered,
appressed bristles.

Characteristics: The large, thick, tuberous, fleshy root, is hot
to the taste.

Habitat: The plant is probably indigenous to China and
Japan and today is cultivated in most temperate regions of
the world.

Production: Radish consists of the fresh roots of Raphanus
sativus and/or of Raphanus sativus, as well as_ their
preparations. It is a cultivated plant.

Other Names: Common Radish, Garden Radish

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates in the fresh,
ponent 4-methylthio-3-butenyl-giucosinolate,
sinigrin, glucoraphanine

unbruised rhizome: chief com-
glucobrassin,

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug is said to be choleretic, antimicrobial and to
increase motility in the upper gastrointestinal tract, an effect
caused by the mustard oils.

A choleretic effect and an antiviral effect were proven in
animal experiments.

Radish has a secretolytic effect in patients suffering from

chronic bronchitis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission.E:

* Cough/Bronchitis -
* Dyspeptic complaints

Radish is used internally for respiratory catarrh and dyspep-
tic disorders, especially those related to dyskinesia of the bile

ducts.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Radish is used for

whooping cough and gallstones.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Radish is used to treat coughs,
diarrhea and abdominal pain.

Indian Medicine: Uses in India include dyspeptic com-
plaints, nausea, flatulence, gallbladder disturbances, head-
ache, neuralgias, and urological conditions.

Homeopathic Uses: Raphanus sativus is used for poor

digestion and oily skin.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Administration of higher dosages of the fresh root could lead
to mucus membrane irritation of the gastrointestinal tract.
Due to the cholagogic effect of the drug, biliary colic could
be triggered in patients with gallstones.

DOSAGE

Preparation:

Radish-honey juice — 1 radish is grated and the resulting
juice is mixed with honey, then allowed to stand for 10

hours.

Radish plant juice — The Radish is washed, cut and grated
and up to 17% of the liquid is pressed out. 1-liter of juice is
extracted from 1.3 kg of fresh drug.

Daily
Pressed juice — 50 to 100 ml; ‘h tablespoon several times
daily over a 3-day period.

Dosage:

----- PAGE 880 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Radish-honey juice — spoonfuls taken over the course of the
day for whooping cough.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

LITERATURE
Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie. Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Ragwort

Senecio jacoboea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial
parts of the flowering plant and the entire fresh plant
gathered during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The golden yellow composite flowers
grow in dense, terminal, erect, branched cymes. The
linguiform ray florets are female. The disc florets are tubular
and androgynous. The capitula has a diameter of 15 to 20
mm. The involucre is cylindrical. The bracts are in 1 row and
are oblong-lanceolate, acuminate and black at the tip, with a
short 1- to 4-leafed epicalyx. The lateral fruit is glabrous and
has drooping tufts of hair. The other fruit is covered in thick
tufts of loosely attached hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is biennial to perennial and
grows 30 to 90 cm high. The stem is erect, branched above
and cobweb-pubescent. The basal leaves are lyrate-pinnati-
fid. The cauline leaves are pinnatifid with indented pinna.
The lateral tips are almost at right angles and have small, 4-
sectioned, slit ears that clasp the stem.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to all of Europe, Asia Minor
and northern Africa, and is naturalized in North America.

Production: Ragwort is the flowering plant of Senecio
jacoboea. The plant is gathered in the wild, usually during
the flowering season. The cut drug is dried away from direct
sunlight.

Other Names: Ragweed, St. James Wort, Stinking Nanny,
Staggerwort, Dog Standard, Cankerwort, Stammerwort

RAGWORT/ 629

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (0.1-0.9%): the alkaloid spectrum
depends upon the chemotype. Jacobine chemorype: chief
alkaloid jacobine; erucifoline chemotype: chief alkaloids
erucifoline and O-acetylerucifoline

Volatile oil (traces)

EFFECTS
The toxic principles of the drug are the pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, which should be assumed to be hepatotoxic and
carcinogenic. Countless experiments have shown the plant to
be acutely and chronically poisonous in animals.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Because of its potential carcinogenic effect. Ragwort should
not be used. Traditional folk medicine uses have included
painful menstruation, urinary tract inflammation. chronic
cough, rheumatism, anemia and anemic headaches.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Ragwort should not be taken internally since hepatotoxicity
and carcinogenicity are possible due to die pyrrolizidine

.alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necic parent substances in its -

makeup.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used externally as a
component of lotions, but should not be taken internally.

Preparation: The lotion is made using | pan of the drug and
5 parts of 10% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The lotion is applied topically for the
treatment of rheumatic arthritis.

LITERATURE
Bradbury RB, Culvenor CO, (1954) Austr J Cbem 7. 378.
Deinzer ML et al., Science 195:497. 1977.

Schoental R, (1968) Cancer Res 28:2237.

Van Dooren, Bos R et al., (1981) Planta Med ~2:385.
Van Dorren B et al., PM 42:385. 1981.

Witte L et al., PH 31:559. 1985.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur

Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AutL Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G: Lehrbuch der Biologischen ArmeimineL Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 881 -----
630/RAGWORT

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Ranunculus acris
See Buttercup

Ranunculus bulbosus
See Bulbous Buttercup

Ranunculus ficaria

See Lesser Celandine

Ranunculus sceleratus*

See Poisonous Buttercup

Raphanus raphanistrum
See Wild Radish

Raphanus sativus
See Radish

Raspberry
Rubus idaeus

TRADE NAMES
Alcohol Free Red Raspberry Leaf, Certified Organic Red
Raspberry, Red Raspberry Leaves, Red Raspberry Leaves
Glycerine, Wild Countryside Red Raspberry Leafs

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and

fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are in cymes. The calyx
has 5 sepals and the corolla is 5-petalled. There are

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

numerous stamens and ovaries. Similar to the blackberry, the
small fruit forms a red aggregate fruit, the raspberry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Raspberry is a 2 m high deciduous
bush with erect, woody stems, which are densely covered in
tough thorns. The aerial part is usually biennial while the
creeping root is perennial. The leaves are pale green. There
are 3 leaves that sit atop 7 leaflets.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and Asia and is
cultivated in temperate climates.

Production: Raspberry leaf consists %f the leaf of Rubus
idaeus.

Not to be Confused With: Blackberry leaves.
Other Names: Red Raspberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins: gallo tannins, ellagic tannins
Flavonoids

EFFECTS

The main active agents are tannin, flavonoids, and vitamin
C. The tannins give the fruit an astringent effect.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Raspberry leaf is used for disorders of the
gastrointestinal tract, the respiratory tract, the cardiovascular
system, and the mouth and throat. In folk medicine,
Raspberry preparations were used to facilitate childbirth.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: As a component of purgative and
"blood purifying" teas, and in fruit tea mixtures.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, scald 1.5 gm finely cut
drug, steep for 5 minutes and then strain. (1 teaspoonful =
0.8 gm drug).

LITERATURE
Bamford DS et al., (1970) Brit J Pharmacol 40(1): 161P.

Beckett A et al., (1954) J Pharm Pharmacol 6:785.

Czygan FC, Die Himbeere - Rubus idaeus L. In: ZPT
16(6):366-74. 1995.

Henning W, (1981) Lebensm Unters Forsch 173:1.
Henning W, (1981) Lebensm Unters Forsch 173:180.
Marczal G, (1963) Herba Hung 2:343.

----- PAGE 882 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

tinal tract with subsequent increase of peristalsis. The drug is
severely toxic in higher dosages.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug can be used for respiratory tract
and rheumatic conditions, gastrointestinal tract, metabolic
disorders, liver disease, and acute and chronic infectious
conditions.

Homeopathic Uses: Bryonia cretica is used for acute and
chronic rheumatism, peritonitis, and inflammation of the
respiratory organs and the pleura.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated homeopathic therapeutic dos-
ages. Side effects connected with the ingestion of the base
tincture and DI include signs of irritation in the gastro-
intestinal tract. All parts of the plant are strongly toxic, due
to the cucurbitacins content, which is irritating to mucous
membranes.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning include vomiting, bloody diarrhea,
colic, kidney irritation, anuria, spasms,-palsies and aborted
pregnancy. Death occurs through asphyxiation. Forty berries
are considered lethal for an adult, 15 for a child. 3.5 gm of
the drug is considered poisonous; one death has been
documented following the ingestion of an infusion made
from 30 gm of the root.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (in case vomiting has
not occurred, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassi-
um permanganate solution, sodium sulfate) and installation
of activated charcoal, the therapy for poisoning consists of
treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution
and treating possible cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbon-
ate infusions. In the event of shock, plasma volume
expanders should be infused. Monitoring of kidney function
is imperative. Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be
necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid and solid preparations for
internal use; semi-solid preparations for external use.

Preparation:

Wine — 40 gm drug to 1 L white wine, leave to draw for 1
day.

Tincture — 10 gm to 90 gm ethyl alcohol (60%), leave to
draw for 8 days.

Honey decoction — 20 gm drug to 250 gm honey and 350
gm wine vinegar, simmer for 30 minutes at a low tempera-
ture, strain when cool and store in a well-sealed bottle.

RED CLOVER/633

Ointment — Mix 30 gm cut drug with the same amount of
Vaseline or wax.

Daily Dosage:

Powder — 0.3 to 0.5 gm as a laxative and emetic.
Decoction — 0.5 gm to 1 gm per cup.

Wine — | to 2 dessertspoons daily.

Tincture — 1 to 10 drops per day; maximum 20 drops.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml'injection solution sc.
twice weekly; ointment 1 to 2 times daily; mother tincture
DI diluted to be taken with liquid (HAB1)

Storage: Should be sealed tightly.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Red Clover

Trifolium pratense

TRADE NAMES
Red Clover liquid, Red Clover Blossom, Red Clover Herb,
Promensil, EuroQuality Red Clover Blossoms, NuVeg Red
Clover Concentrate

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried and the
fresh flower heads.

Flower and Fruit: One to 4 globular, ovate flower heads
form on the tip of the stem. The calyx is tubular-campami-
late. The petals are light carmine to fleshy red, occasionally
yellowish-white or pure white. The fruit is a pod, which is
ovate, 1-seeded and thin-skinned. The seed is oblong-ovate,
yellow to brownish or violet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial herb, 15 to
40 cm high with a bushy rhizome and a basal leafrosette. An
erect, angular stem grows from the rhizome. The rhizome is
covered in alternate, trifoliate, elliptical or ovate leaves,
which have a characteristic arrow-shaped white spot on the
upper surface. The leaflets are short-petioled, almost entire-
margined, appressed, softly pubescent on both surfaces or
only on the upper surface.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, central Asia,
northern Africa and is naturalized in many other parts of the
world.

----- PAGE 883 -----
634/RED CLOVER

Production: Red Clover flowers are the flowers of Trifolium
pratense. The dried flower buds are used to produce the drug.

Other Names: Purple Clover, Trefoil, Wild Clover

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: including among others, benzyl alcohol, 2-
phenyl ethanol, their formates and acetates, methyl salicy-
late, methyl anthranilate (likely only in the fresh blossoms)

lsoflavonoids: including among others, biochanin A

Coumarin derivatives

Cyanogenic glycosides: presumably lotaustralin, linamarin

EFFECTS
Red Clover has antispasmodic and expectorant effects and
also promotes the skin's healing process.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, Red Clover is used for coughs
and respiratory conditions, particularly whooping cough.
Externally, it is used in the treatment of chronic skin
conditions such as psoriasis and eczema.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally and
externally as a liquid extract and in medicinal preparations.

Preparation: Liquid extract 1:1 can be prepared in 25%

ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 4 gm of drug, taken as an
infusion, up to 3 times a day. Alternately, 1.5 to 3 ml of the
liquid extract can be taken 3 times daily.

LITERATURE
Dewick P, (1977) Phytochemistry 16:93.

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press, 1975.

Guggolz J et al., (1961) Agric Food Chem 9(4):331.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbucruder Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kattaev NS et al., (1972) Khim Prir Soed 6:806.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Sachse J, (1974) J Chrom 96(1): 123.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Yoshihara T et al.. (1977) Agric Biol Chem 41(9): 1679.

Red Currant

Ribes rub rum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit and

leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in hanging, many-
blossomed racemes. The green flowers are inconspicuous
and their structures are in fives. The sepals and petals are
fused with the hollowed receptacle. The calyx tips are wide
obovate and longer than the petals. The corolla tube is flat
with a pentagonal ring swelling. There are 2 carpels fused
with the corolla tube to an inferior, single-chambered ovary.
The ovary has a concave tip and a disc ring. The fruit is
multi-seeded red berry. The cultivated forms are pink or

white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ribes rubrum grows as a shrub,
reaching up to 2 m high. The leaves are alternate, over 10 cm
wide with a petiole half as long as the lamina, which is 3- to
5-lobed. The lobes are blunt to acute, double crenate and
cordate at the base with an acute indentation.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Western Europe.

Production: Red Currants are the fresh ripe berries of Ribes

rubrum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids: chief fruit acid is citric acid; other acids include
malic acid, isocitric acid and tartartic acid

(7%): D-glucose,

Monosaccharides/polysaccharides
D-fructose

Pectins (15%)

Fatty oil (in the seeds 20%) with gamma-linolenic acid (6%)
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 0.005 to 0.015%)

Cqffeic acid derivatives: including caffeoyl glucose, p-cu-
maric acid-O-glucoside

EFFECTS

Red Currant is a source of vitamin C and exhibits in vitro
radical scavenger qualities. The fruit and juice are considered
cooling and antiscorbutic and have often been used as a

febrifuge. The jelly prepared from the berries has an

----- PAGE 884 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

antiseptic effect and was often used to treat burns to prevent
the formation of blisters. The leaves are said to have
emmenagogic properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Red currant has been used in folk medicine
to treat febrile conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
No data are available in the literature.

LITERATURE ~
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994,

Red Maple

Acer rubrum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are red and aromatic, forming
round bunches. The ovary is formed from 2 simple carpels
pressed together at the sides, which are also present in the
male flowers in rudimentary form. Each section contains 2
ovules. The fruit is a schizocarp with 2 one-sided or many-
sided, often heavily veined wings. There is usually only one
seed in each section.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Red Maple tree grows to a
height of up to 36 m. The leaves are crossed-opposite,
petiolate and partially 3-lobed.

Habitat: Canada and the U.S., introduced into England and
Europe around 1650.

Production: Red Acom bark is the trunk bark of Acer
rubrum.

Other Names: Swamp Maple, Bird's Eye Maple, Sugar
Maple

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins

Triterpenoid saponins
Allantoins

EFFECTS
Red maple has an astringent effect.

RED SANDALWOOD/635

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Red Maple is used for eye conditions (folk
medicine of the North American Indians).

This product should not be used otherwise.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug.

LITERATURE
No literature references are available.

Red Sandalwood

Pterocarpus santalinus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the wood.

*Flower and Fruit: The tree bears spikes of yellow flowers. -

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 6 to 8 m high tree with
red bark.

Habitat: The plant grows in South India, Sri Lanka and the
Philippines.

Production: Red Sandalwood consists of the heartwood of
the trunk of Pterocarpus santalinus separated from the
sapwood, in some regions also obtained from other Pterocar-
pus species. It is collected in uncultivated regions.

Other Names: Real Sandalwood, Rubywood, Red Saunders,
Sappan, and Sanderswood Red

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Benzxanthenone derivatives (red pigments): chief compo-
nents santalins A and B (red), additionally santalin AC and
santalin Y (yellow)

Isoflavonoids: santal, pterocarpine, and homopterocarpine
Stilbene derivatives: pterostilbene

Volatile oil (traces): chief components cedrol (cedar cam-
phor, up to 50%), including as well pterocarpol, isopterocar-
pol, eudesmol

EFFECTS
In animal experiments, extracts of the wood are hypoglyce-
mic. Insecticidal and antidiabetic effects are attributed to the
pterostilbene constituent. In addition CNS-suppressive, spas-

----- PAGE 885 -----
636 /RED SANDALWOOD

molytic and anti-exudative affects have been described,
although detailed information is unavailable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: Red Sandalwood is used for headaches,
toothaches, vomiting, black vomit, diarrhea, fever and
conditions of the eye. It is also used to treat stomach ulcers,
gallbladder complaints, diabetes, and snakebite poisoning.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Red Sandalwood is available as
whole, crude and powdered drug forms for internal and
external use.

Preparation: To prepare a tincture, 200 parts coarsely
powdered drug are mixed with 1000 parts ethanol (EB6).

Daily Dosage: As a tincture, 5 gm.
Storage: Red Sandalwood should be tightly sealed, pow-
dered and protected from light.
LITERATURE

Kumar N et al., PH 13:633. 1974.

Kumar N et al.. PH 14:521. 1974.

Kumar N et al., PH 15:1417. 1976.
Seshadri TR. (1972) Phytochemistry 11:881.
Seshadri TR, PH 11:881. 1972.

Singh S et al., Fitoterapia 63:555. 1992.
Singh S et al., Fitoterapia 64:84. 1993.

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Red-Rooted Sage
(Dan-Shen)

Salvia miltiorrhiza

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried rhizome and root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are false whorls with 6

to 8 flowers arranged very close together in glandularly
haired racemes with a few lanceolate bracts. The calyx is

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

campanulate, dark purple and glandularly pubescent. The
upper lip is simple, the lower lip is longer than the upper lip
and thorny-double-dentate with an inner dense ring of white
hairs. The petals are violet and glandularly pubescent on the
outside. The corolla tube is approximately 1.9 cm long; the
upper lip slightly enlarged and turned out. There are 2 long
and 2 short stamens and a superior, 2-carpeled, 4-chambered
ovary. The fruit breaks up into 4, 1-seeded mericarps.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Salvia miltiorrhiza is a herbaceous
perennial growing upright to a height of up to 80 cm. The
lower leaves are cordate to ovate. The upper leaves are
trifoliolate, crenate-dentate, pubescent above and along the
ribs of the lower surface. The rhizome is thick and short.

Habitat: The plant is found in China and Japan.

Production: Red sage (red ginseng) root is the dried rhizome
and root of Salvia miltiorrhiza. The plant is dug up in spring
or autumn, cleaned, cut and dried.

Not to be Confused With: Mistaken identity can occur with
Salvia przewalskii or Salvia trijuga.

* Other Names: Red Ginseng, Red-Rooted Salvia, Dan-Shen

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: the so-called tanshinones, including cryptotansh-
inone, isocryptotanshinone, isotanshinones I and II, tanshi-
nones I and II, miltiron, ferruginol, salviol

Caffeic acid derivatives: including rosmarinic acid, lithos-

permic acid ethyl ester, salvianolic acids A to E

EFFECTS
Patients with coronary heart disease experienced an improve-
ment in various hemodynamic parameters. At the same time,
a significant increase in coronary blood flow due to a
reduction of vascular resistance was demonstrated. The drug
is antithrombotic, antihypertonic, antimicrobial, antipyretic/
anti-inflammatory and hepatoprotective in its effect; it is also
said to possess sedative characteristics.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Preparations of the root are used for
metrorrhagia, pain following menstruation, amenorrhea, post
partum bleeding and pain, angina pectoris, furuncles, carbun-
cles, painful swellings, swelling of the liver and spleen, and
joint pain. Efficacy for these indications has not yet been
proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with die proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

----- PAGE 886 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug and

preparations are for internal use.

their

Preparation: Jiudanshen - Slices of the root, to which wine
has been added in accordance with the Jiuzhi method, are

roasted until dry.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage of the drug is 9 to 15 g. The
daily dosage of tea is an amount prepared from 3 to 15 g of
the drug.

Storage: The drug should be stored in a dry place.

LITERATURE

Chang HM. Chui KY, Tan FW, Yang Y, Zhong ZP, Lee CM,
Sham HL, Wong HN, Effect of abietane-type pigments from
Salvia miltiorrhiza on post-hypoxic recovery of cardiac
contractile force in rats, letter Planta Med, 56:288-9, 1991 Jun.

Chang HM, Chui KY, Tan FW, Yang Y, Zhong ZP, Lee CM,
Sham HL, Wong HN, Effect of Liqustrazini and Salvia
miltiorrhiza on extracorporeal fibroblast culture. Chung Hsi I
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 56:547-8, 518. 1987 Sep.

Chang HM, Chui KY, Tan FW, Yang Y, Zhong,ZP, Lee CM,
Sham HL, Wong HN, Structure-activity relationship of
miltirone, an active central benzodiazepine receptor ligand
isolated from Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge (Danshen). J Med
Chem. 56:1675-92, 1991 May.

Chang HM, Chui KY, Tan FW, Yang Y, Zhong ZP, Lee CM,
Sham HL, Wong HN, Studies on the chemical components of
Dan-shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge) (author's transl). Yao
Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 56:489-94, 1980 Aug.

Cc

ien KY, Wen SF, Zhi ZJ, Shao JS, Preliminary observation
of 131Cs distribution in experimental acute myocardial
infarction and coronary insufficiency treated with root of Salvia
miltiorrhiza, flower of Chrysanthemum morifolium and
Chrysanthemum indicum. J Tradit Chin Med, 56:265-70, 1983.

Chen WZ, Pharmacology of Salvia miltiorrhiza Yao Hsueh
Hsueh Pao, 56:876-80, 1984 Nov.

Cheng YY, Fong SM, Chang HM, Protective action of Salvia
miltiorrhiza aqueous extract on chemically induced acute
myocardial ischemia in rats. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih,
56:609-11, 582, 1990 Oct.

eng YY, Fong SM, Hon PM, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on
e cardial ischemia in rats induced by ligation. Chung Kuo
ung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 26:424-6, 390, 1992 Jul.

Q aa

eng YY, Fong SM, Hon PM, Li CM, Chang HM, Prevention
and treatment of isoproterenol induced ventricular fibrillation in
rats by aqueous extract of Salvia miltiorrhiza. Chung Hsi I
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 18:543-6, 518, 1991 Sep.

Ding Y, Soma S, Takano-Yamamoto T, Matsumoto S, Sakuda
M, Effects of Salvia miltiorrhiza biinge (SMB) on MC3T3-E1
cells. J Osaka Univ Dent Sch, 26:21-7, 1995 Dec.

RED-ROOTED SAGE (DAN-SHEN) / 637

Dong JC, Xu LN, Beneficial effects of acetylsalvianolic acid A
on focal cerebral ischemic rats subjected to middle cerebral
artery thrombosis. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 56:6-9. 1996.

Du H, Qian Z, Wang Z, Prevention of radiation injury of the
lungs by Salvia miltiorrhiza in mice. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho
Tsa Chih, 26:230-1, 198, 1990 Apr.

Fu X, Tian H, Sheng Z, Wang D, Multiple organ injuries after
abdominal high energy wounding in animals and the protective
effect of antioxidants. Chin Med Sci J, 56:86-91. 1992 Jun.

H nsel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994. - >

Hu L, Yu T, Jia Z, Experimental study of the protective effects
of astragalus and Salvia miltiorrhiza bunge on glycerol induced
acute renal failure in rabbits. Chung Hua Wai Ko Tsa Chih,
26:311-4, 1996 May.

Huang YS, Zhang JT, Antioxidative effect of three water-
soluble components isolated from Salvia miltionhiza in vitro.
Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 18:96-100, 1992.

Li W, Zhou CH, Lu QL, Effects of Chinese materia medica in
activating blood and stimulating menstrual flow on the
endocrine function of ovary-uterus and its mechanisms. Chung
Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 56:165-8, 134, 1992
Mar.

Liu GT, Zhang TM, Wang BE, Wang YW, Isolation and
ioactivity of new tanshinones. J Nat Prod, 43:157-60, 1987
Mar-Apr.

Liu GT, Zhang TM, Wang BE, Wang YW, Prediction and
revention of hypertension syndrome of pregnancy. Chung Hsi |
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 43:530-2, 516, 1992 Jan 22.

Liu GT, Zhang TM, Wang BE, Wang YW, Prognostic factors
and treatment of severe acute pancreatitis. Chung Hua Nei Ko
Tsa Chih, 43:82-5, 125, 1991 Feb.

Liu GT, Zhang TM, Wang BE, Wang YW, Protective action of
seven natural phenolic compounds against peroxidative damage
to biomembranes. Biochem Pharmacol, 43:147-52, 1992 Jan 22.

Lo AC, Chan K, Yeung JH, Woo KS., The effects of Danshen
(Salvia miltiorrhiza) on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of warfarin in rats. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet, 56c257-
62, 1992 Oct-Dec.

Luo HW, Hu XJ, Wang N, Ji J, Platelet aggregation inhibitors
from Salvia miltiorrhiza. Bunge Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 56:830-
4, 1988 Nov.

Ma XH, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on experimental hepatic
regeneration. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 56:180-1, 1983
May.

Murakami S, Kijima H, Isobe Y, Muramatsu M, Aihara H,
Otomo S, Li LN, Ai CB, Effect of salvianolic acid A, a
depside from roots of Salvia miltiorrhiza, on gastric H+,K(+>-
ATPase. Planta Med, 56:360-3, 1990 Aug.

----- PAGE 887 -----
638/RED-ROOTED SAGE (DAN-SHEN)

Qi XG, Protective mechanism of Salvia miltiorrhiza and
Paeonia lactiflora for experimental liver damage. Chung Hsi I
Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 18:102-4, 69, 1991 Feb.

Sato M, Sato T, Ose Y, Nagase H, Kito H, Sakai Y,
Modulating effect of tanshinones on mutagenic activity of Trp-
P-1 and benzoapyrene in Salmonella typhimurium. Mutat Res,
56:149-54, 1992 Feb.

Shen YC, The protective effects of Salvia miltiorrhiza on the
warm ischemic kidney: experimental study in animals. Chung
Hua Wai Ko Tsa Chih, 56:759-61, 783, 1988 Dec.

Sun RY, Dilative effect of injection of radix Angelicae, Salvia
miltiorrhiza and ligustrazin on the pulmonary vessels in rats.
Chung Kuo I Hsueh.Ko Hsueh Yuan Hsueh Pao. 56:40-4, 1988
Feb.

Wang JZ, Chen ME, Xu YQ, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza co.
on angiotensin II and atrial natriuretic polypeptide in rabbits.
Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 18:420-1. 390. 1991 Jul.

Wang L, Huang X, Ding Z, Chen H, Peng R. Yuan G. Zhou
D, The effects of Salvia miltiorrhiza and polysaccharide
sulphate on the adhesion of erythrocytes of the patients with
cerebral thrombosis to cultured endothelial cells. Hua Hsi I Ko
Ta Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 26:381-5, 1995 Dec.

Wu BQ, Cerebral infarction in 141 cases treated by traditional
Chinese medicine and Western medicine. Chung*Hsi I Chieh
Ho Tsa Chih, 56:656-7, 644, 1989 Nov.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS. Cardiovascular
pharmacology of Panax notoginseng (Burk). F.H. Chen and
Salvia miltiorrhiza. Am J Chin Med. 18:145-52. 1986.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P. Shiao MS. Effect of Salvia
miltiorrhiza on serum lipid peroxide, superoxide dismutase of
the patients with coronary heart disease. Chung Kuo Chung Hsi
I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 18:287-8, 1996 May.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Effects of Salvia
miltiorrhiza Bunge on isolated perfused liver and portal vein of
rats. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 18:749-51, 764, 1992
Dec.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Experimental
study of Salvia miltiorrhiza on prevention of restenosis after
angioplasty. Chung Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih,
18:480-2, 1996 Aug.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Hypotensive
action of Salvia miltiorrhiza cell culture extract. Am J.Chin
Med, 18:157-66, 1990.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, In vitro
cytotoxicity of tanshinones from Salvia miltiorrhiza. Planta
Med, 18:339-42, 1997 Aug.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Increase of
vitamin E content in LDL and reduction of atherosclerosis in
cholesterol-fed rabbits by a water-soluble antioxidant-rich
fraction of Salvia miltiorrhiza. Arterioscler Thromb Vase Biol,
18:481-6, 1998 Mar.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Possible active
components of tan-shen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) for protection of

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

the myocardium against ischemia-induced derangements. Planta
Med, 18:51-4, 1989 Feb.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Prevention of

reperfusion injury of an ischemic flap: an experimental study

Chung Hua Cheng Hsing Shao Shang Wai Ko Tsa Chih,

18:216-7, 249, 1992 Sep. 1

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, Studies on
cardiovascular actions of Salvia miltiorrhiza. Am J Chin Med,

18:26-32, 1986.

Wu YJ, Hong CY, Lin SJ, Wu P, Shiao MS, The effects of
Danshen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) on warfarin pharmacodynamics
and pharmacokinetics of warfarin enantiomers in rats. J Pharm
Pharmacol, 18:402-6, 1995 May. -

Xie M, Jin ZY, Ye GH, Clinical research of compound salviae
miltiorrhizae injection for severe pancreatitis. Chung Kuo Chung
Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 43:269-70, 1995 May.

Xu HT, Chen SL, Li LS, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on the
left ventricular diastolic function in coronary artery stenosis.
Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 26:737-9, 710, 1990 Dec.

Xue QF, Effect of ligustrazine and Salvia miltiorrhiza on
microcirculation in the hamster cheek pouch. Chung Hua I
Hsueh Tsa Chih, 56:334-7, 382, 1986 Jun.

Yu GR, Clinical and experimental study on the effect of Salvia
miltiorrhiza on microcirculation and 2,3 diphosphoglyceric acid m
in patients with coronary heart disease. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho

Tsa Chih, 56:596-8, 581, 1988 Oct.

Yu GR, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on mesenteric
microcirculatory blood flow in the dog measured by the
Doppler effect of laser light. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih,
56:546-7, 516, 1984 Sep.

Yu NC, Zhu YL, Cai LJ, Changes in plasma 6-keto-PGF1
alpha, TXB2 lipid peroxides in acute cerebral infarction patients
and the effects of Salvia miltiorrhiza on these! three indices.
Chung Hua Nei Ko Tsa Chih, 56:596-9, 651, 1988 Oct.

Yu NC, Zhu YL, Cai LJ, New platelet aggregation inhibitors
from Tan-Shen; radix of Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge. Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 56:1670-5, 1983 May.

Yu NC, Zhu YL, Cai LJ, The effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on
the ischemic injury of the intercalated disc of heart in rabbits.
(author's transl) Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 56:416-20, 1979,Jul.

Zhang FC, Zheng LJ, Effects of different administration of
Salvia miltiorrhiza and heparin on antithrombin IITAg,
antithrombin III: A and alpha 2-macroglobulin in patients with
cor pulmonale. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 18:589-91,
579, 1991 Oct.

Zhang JQ, Zhou YP, Inhibition of aldose reductase from rat
lens by some Chinese herbs and their components. Chung Kuo
Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 56:557-9, 576, 1989 Sep.

Zhang JY, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza root on calcium
deposition in experimental fracture healing. Chung Hsi I Chieh
[> Ho Tsa Chih, 56:536-9, 515, 1984 Sep.

----- PAGE 888 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Zhang XL, Preliminary study of rose shu-xin oral liquid in the
treatment of angina pectoris in coronary heart disease. Chung
Kuo Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 56:414-6, 389. 1992 Jul.

Zhang YW, Xue Y, Zhang BQ, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on
hyperfibrinogen in patients with malignant lymphoma. Chung
Hsi I Chich Ho Tsa Chih. 56:607-8. 582, 1988 Oct.

Zhao BL, Jiang W, Zhao Y. Hou JW, Xin WJ. Scavenging
effects of Salvia miltiorrhiza on free radicals and its protection
for myocardial mitochondrial membranes fiom ischemia-
reperfusion injury. Biochem Mol Biol Int, 38:1171-82. 1996
May.

Zhou Y. Pan LM, Zhan S. Studies and preparations of fufang
danshen granules. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 56:540-3.
575-6. 1992 Sep.

Zhu P. Experimental study on myocardial protection with
verapamil and Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge cardioplegia. Chung
Hua Wai Ko Tsa Chih, 26:9-12, 60. 1990 Jan.

Zhuang HM, Zhu HY. Qin ZL, Effect of Salvia miltiorrhiza on
the survival time of a heart allograft in experimental animals.
Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 56:29-30, 6. 1988 Jan.

Red-Spur Valerian

Centranthus — ruber

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers are in dense
cymes, red, pink or seldom white. The corolla is tubular and
spurred at the base. Each flower contains 1 stamen. The fruit
is small and dry. The margin of the surrounding calyx forms
a pinnatifid rosette or a papus.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from about 30 to 80
cm high. The rhizome is perennial and very branched. The
stems are tough, bushy at the base, hollow and smooth. The
leaves are 5 to 10 cm long in opposite pairs, somewhat
fleshy and entire-margined.

Habitat: The plant is probably indigenous to the Mediterra-
nean region, although it is found in Europe.

Other Names: Pretty Betsy, Bouncing Bess, Delicate Bess,
Drunken Sailor, Bovisand Soldier

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids (iridoid epoxy compounds, 1-3%): valepotriates,
including valtrate, acevaltrate, didrovaltrate

EFFECTS
The drug has sedative and equilibratory effects.

REED HERB/639

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is not in current use. It was

previously used as a sedative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Handjieva N et al.. PM 34:203. 1978.

Hegnauer R: Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Bde 1-11,
Birkhiiuser Verlag Basel, Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Marekow NL, PM 23A:48. 1977.

Schneider G, Valepotriat-Artefakte aus Centrantus ruber. In:
Arch Pharmaz 318(6):515- 519. 1985.

Reed Herb

Phragmites — communis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the stem and the

rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The grassy flowers appear in long
panicles of up to 30 cm with a thick crown of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a sturdy grass with a
long, creeping rhizome. It grows up to 3 m and has gray-
green leaves.

Habitat: Reed Herb is common worldwide.

Production: Reed Herb and rhizome are the stem (base) and
rhizome of Phragmites communis.

Other -Names: Common Reed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including tricine, luteolin, chrysoeriol, rutin,
isoquercitrin

Vitamin A (5 mg/100 gm in the fresh foliage)

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C, 100 mg/100 gm in the fresh
foliage)

B vitamins

----- PAGE 889 -----
640 /REED HERB

Sugar: in particular saccharose, inverted sugar (relatively
high content in the rhizome)

Triterpenes: including beta-amyrin, taraxerol, taraxerone

EFFECTS
The plant has diuretic and diaphoretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Reed Herb is used as a diuretic and
diaphoretic to treat digestive disorders. The juice is used to
soothe insect bites.

Chinese Medicine: Reed Herb is used for diabetes, leukemia
and breast cancer.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations are used internally and
externally. The fresh and dried forms are used as infusions.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Tsitsa-Tzardi E, Skaltsa-Diamantidis H, Philianos S, Delitheos
A, Chemical and pharmacological study of Phragmites
communis Trin. Ann Pharm Fr, 48:185-91. 1990.

Van Ree R, Driessen MN, Van Leeuwen WA, Stapel SO,
Aalberse RC, Variability of crossreactivity of IgE antibodies to
group I and V allergens in eight grass pollen species. Clin Exp
Allergy, 22:611-7, 1992 Jun.

Rehmannia (Di-Huang)
Rehmannia_ glutinosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root
r

tuber.

Flower and Fnrit: The inflorescences are racemes with
approximately 10 flowers. The flower structures are in fives;
the calyx is approximately 15 cm long, 5-trpped and
campanulate. The corolla is a tube that broadens higher up, is
3 to 4 cm long and red-violet. There are 4 stamens and a
superior, 2-chambered ovary. The fruit is a loculicidal

capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows up
to 40 cm high. The leaves are alternate, 3 to 10 cm long and

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

1.5 to 4 cm wide. The lamina is obovate to lanceolate and
undulating with a crenate margin; the leaves and stem are
velvet-pubescent. The roots are partly thickened to tubers.

Habitat: Rehmannia glutinosa is indigenous to China, Japan
and Korea.

Production: Rehmannia glutinosa is harvested in autumn; the
root tuber is either cleaned and used as it is (called
Shoudihuang or Xiandihuang) or is moistened with steam,
cut into slices and dried over a fire until the water is reduced
by 80% (Shengdihuang).

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoids: chief component catalpol (0.3 to 0.5%), including
ajugol, aucubin, melittoside, rehmaniosides A to D

Monoterpene: rehmapicroside
Jonone glucosides: rehmaionones A and B

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides: stachyose (10%, based
upon the fresh weight), saccharose, raffinose, D-fructose, D-
glucose, D-galactose

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, campesterol,
stigmasterol
EFFECTS

The phenolic glycosides of the drug are antibacterial,
immunosuppressive and antihepatotoxic in effect. Verbasco-
side inhibits the thromboxane synthetase system; its efficacy
with rheumatic diseases, among others, is thus plausible.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: The drug is used in traditional Chinese
medicine as a diuretic and for its nourishing and strengthen-
ing effect on the liver, kidney and heart. The fresh and dried
forms are used differently.

Shoudihuang (fresh root tuber) is used in the liver and
kidney meridians for paralysis of the larynx, irregular
menstruation, allergic lowered immunity, insomnia, vertigo,
tinnitus, impaired hearing,-hyperhidrosis, diabetes and in-
creased frequency of urination.

Shengdihuang (dried root tuber) is used mainly in the heart,
kidney and liver meridians for febrile conditions, dry mouth,
nose bleeds, internal bleeding, rheumatism, constipation,
hepatitis, diabetes and metrorrhagia.

Efficacy for the indications rheumatism, eczema and viral
hepatitis (IV) has been proven in clinical trials with
decoctions of the fresh root. Efficacy for the otfier indica-
tions has not yet been proven.

----- PAGE 890 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug. Prepa-

rations are for internal use.
Preparation: Shoudihuang can be prepared in two ways:

Jiushoudihuang (jiudun method): The drug is simmered in
yellow rice wine over a low flame until all of the wine has
been absorbed (30 to 50 kg for 100-kg drug). It is then dried
in the sun until the.outcr skin (initially slimy) is dry, and is
then cut into 2 to % mm thick slices, which are dried.

Zhengshoudihuang (zheng method): Using this method, the
drug is steamed until it is smooth and black (80% loss of
moisture). It is then cut into 2 to 4 mm thick slices and dried.

Daily Dosage: Decoction — 9 to 15 g drug

Storage: The fresh root is stored in sandy earth, protected
from frost. The dried drug is stored dry in areas having good
air circulation.

LITERATURE
Feng GP, Zhang SD, Yi NY, Effects of Rehmannia glutinosa,
Plastrum testudinis, Aconitum carmichaeli and Cinnamomum
cassia on the beta-adrenergic receptors of hyperthyroid rat
kidneys. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 116:606-8, 582,
1986 Oct.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeuuschen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kubo M, Asano T, Matsuda H, Yutani S, Honda S, Studies on
Rehmanniae radix. III. The relation between changes of
constituents and improvable effects on hemorheology with the
processing of roots of Rehmannia glutinosa. Yakugaku Zasshi,
116:158-68, 1996 Feb.

Lu CS, Effects of Rehmannia glutinosa in the treatment of
Sheehan's syndrome. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih,
116:476-8,451, 1985 Aug.

Ni M, Bian B, Wang H. Constituents of the dry roots of
Rehmannia glutinosa. Libosch Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa
Chih, 116:297-8, inside backcover, 1992 May.

Ni M, Bian B, Wang H, On the constituents of rhizome of
Rehmannia glutinosa Libosch. forma hueichingensis. Hsiao
Yakugaku Zasshi, 116:593-6, 1971 May.

Yuan Y, Hou S, Lian T, Han Y, Studies of Rehmannia
glutinosa Libosch. f. hueichingensis as a blood tonic. Chung
Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 17:366-8, inside backcover, 1992
Jun.

Zha LL, Experimental effect of Rehmannia glutinosa on the
pituitary and adrenal cortex in a glucocorticoid inhibition model

RHATANY /641

using rabbits. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih. 116:95-7, 70,
1988 Feb.

Rehmannia glutinosa
See Rehmannia (Di-Huang)

Rhamnus catharticus
See Buckthorn

Rhamnus frangula

See Frangula

Rhamnus_purshiana

See Cascara Sagrada

Rhatany

Krameria_ triandra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the air-dried root,
separated from the rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The 7 to 12 mm long flowers are spare
terminal racemes. The calyx is petaloid. The sepals are
splayed, lanceolate, dark red, silky-haired on the outside.
The petals are irregular, with 2 glands, wedge-shaped, 3 to 5
mm wide, crimson and spatulate. The flower has 3 stamens.
The ovary is ovate, covered in bristly hairs with a thick
glabrous style. The fruit is solitary angular and bristled. It is
ovate and has numerous red-black bristly thorns.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 0.3 to 1 m high
subshrub whose long, 3 cm thick root is covered in a brown-
red, smooth, peeling bark. The younger branches are dark
green, silky to bristly haired, the older ones are black and
often gnarled. The leaves are entu-e-margined, ovate, silver-
gray pubescent, 6 to 15 mm long and 2 to 6 mm wide.

Habitat: Rhatany is mostly found in Peru, but there are a few
areas in countries bordering Peru and in the central Andes
where it is also found.

----- PAGE 891 -----
642/RHATANY

Production: Rhatany root consists of the dried root of
Krameria triandra Ruiz et Pavon as well as its preparations
collected in the wild, washed and air-dried in the shade.

Not to be Confused With: roots of other Krameria species

Other Names: Rhatania. Krameria Root, Mapato

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins (JO-15%): oligomeric proanthocyanidins

Tanner's reds (phlohaphenes): polymeric, insoluble oxyda-
tion products of the tannins

Neolignans: including among others rhatany phenols Hl
(0.3%)

EFFECTS

In vitro the drug is antimicrobial, fungitoxic and astringent.
Because of the tannin and lignan content, local treatment of
oral and pharyngeal mucous membrane inflammation seems

reasonable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:
* Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

In folk medicine used internally as an
inflammation of female

Unproven Uses:
antidiarrheal agent for enteritis,
genital organs and urinary tract. It is used externally to
strengthen gums and clean teeth.

Homeopathic Uses: Krameria triandra is used for bleeding
mucous membranes and painful conditions of the rectum.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Internal administration can lead to digestive com-
plaints because of the secretion-inhibiting efficacy. Allergic
mucus membrane reactions have been observed in rare cases.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:
and other galenic preparations
especially in oral and pharyngeal areas.

Comminuted herb for decoctions
for topical application,

The drug is a component of various standardized prepara-
tions of pharyngeal remedies.

Preparation: 1.5 to 2 gm coarsely powdered drug in boiling
water, strain after 10 to 15 minutes (1 teaspoonful = approx.

3 g drug).
Daily Dosage: About 1 gm comminuted drug in 1 cup of

water as decoction or 5 to 10 drops of Rhatany tincture in 1
glass of water, 2 to 3 times daily.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Undiluted Rhatany tincture painted on the affected surface 2
to 3 times daily. Tea: freshly prepared as a rinse or gargle 2
to 3 times a day.

Storage: Rhatany should be protected from light.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufi., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

SchoJz E, Rimpler H, Osterr Apoth Ztg 48:138.-1994.
Scholz E, Rimpler H, PM 55:379. 1098.
Scholz R, Rimpler H, (1986) Planta Med (6):58P.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

-Williams V et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22:569.

Rheum palmatum
See Chinese Rhubarb
(Da-Huang)

Rhododendron ferrugineum
See Rust-Red Rhododendron

Rhododendron ponticum
See Pontian Rhododendron

Rhus aromatica

See Sweet Sumach

Rhus toxicodendron
See Poison Ivy

----- PAGE 892 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Ribes nigrum

See Black Currant

Ribes rubrum
See Red Currant

Rice

Oryza sativa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the

seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The panicle is up to 30 cm long. The husk
is 7 to 9 mm long with 5 clearly protruding veins. They have
8 cm long, light or dark red awns, or no awns at all. The seed
is tightly covered by the layers of the husk and is compressed
from the side.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Rice is an annual. The stem is
hollow, leafy and erect. The leaves are clasping and sheath-
like at the base and grow up to | m in length. The leaf
surface is up to 60 cm long and 1.5 cm wide. The leaves
have bristly ciliate spikelets at the base.

Habitat: Rice is probably native to China and India. Today it
is cultivated widely in wet areas in the tropics and sub-
tropics.

Production: Rice is the seed of Oryza sativa.
Other Names: Nivara

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Starch (70%)

Proteins: including prolamines, glutelins, _ globulins,

albumins

Fatty oil (1,0-1.8% in the entire fruit, 7—I2 % in the germ):
chief fatty acid linoleic acid (45%)

Polysaccharides, soluble: galactoarabinoxylan

Monosaccharides, oligosaccharides: glucose, _ fructose,
saccharose
Flavonoids: including tricine, _tricine-7-O-glucoside,
tricinine

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, gamma-sitosterol,
campesterol

RICINUS COMMUNIS / 643
Diterpenes: momilactone A, momilactone B
Trigonelline
Trypsin inhibitors
Lectins
Vitamins of the B-group

EFFECTS
Rice has been shown to be effective for pain relief and
sedation of the digestive tract.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Rice is used during recovery from disorders
of the gastrointestinal tract, illnesses of the gastrointestinal
tract and diarrhea.

Chinese Medicine: Among uses in Chinese medicine are
diabetes, spontaneous perspiration, diarrhea and debility.

Indian Medicine: Rice is used for pneumonia, diarrhea and
diseases of the colon.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: Rice seeds are boiled in water before ingestion.

LITERATURE
Belitz HD, Grosch W, Lehrbuch der Lebensmittelchemie, 4.
Aufl. Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1992.

Huesing JE, Murdock LL, Shade RE, Rice and stinging nettle
lectins - insecticidal activity similar to wheat germ agglutinin.
In: PH 30:3565. 1991.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Swaminathan S, Rice, This member of the grass family is one
of three on which the human species largely subsists. In:
Scientific American 250(1 ):80. 1984.

Vignols F, Wigger M, Garcia-Garrido JM, Grellet F, Kader JC,
Delseny M, Rice lipid transfer protein (LTP) genes belong to a
complex multigene family and are differentially regulated. Gene,
195:177-86, Aug 22, 1997.

Ricinus communis
See Castor Oil

----- PAGE 893 -----
644 /ROSA CANINA

Rosa canina
See Dog Rose

Rosa gallica & Rosa
centifolia

See Rose

Rose -

Rosa gallica & Rosa centifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the petals and the
oil extracted from them. Rose is also used in homeopathic
medicine.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are usually solitary, more
rarely in twos and threes, on 2 to 3 cm long, thickly-
glandular pedicles. The calyx is round to peaf-shaped and is
usually thickly covered with stem glands and gland bristles.
The velvety petals are pink to purple, 2 to 3 cm long and
wide. The style and stigma form the ovary that is surrounded
by carpels enclosed in the calyx, forming woolly capitula.
The ripe, red-brown false fruit is 1 to 15 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant, a descendant of Rosa
gallica is a low shrub with extensive runners and above
ground reed-like shoots, which are erect and branched. They
usually grow to between 0.5 to 1 m and are covered with
long, revolute or erect thorns and stem glands of different
length. The leaves, which are usually penfoliate, less
frequently trifoliate, have long glanular, dark green above,
lighter and bluer below, leaflets. They grow together at the
leaf stem that terminate in free tips.

Habitat: Rose is probably indigenous to Iran and is
cultivated worldwide.

Production: Rose flowers consist of the dried petals of Rosa
gallica and Rosa centifolia that are gathered prior to fully
unfolding. The petals are harvested by hand and dried in the
shade.

Other Names: Cabbage Rose, Hundred-Leafed Rose, French
Rose, Damask Rose

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins: oligomeric proanthocyanidins

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Volatile oil (in the fresh blossoms): chief components (-)-
citronellol, geraniol, nerol, phenyl ethanol, Including as well
(-)-linalool, and citral

EFFECTS
The astringent effect attributed to the drug is due to the
tannin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: Rose flowers are used in folk medicine
internally for diarrhea, tuberculosis of the lungs, pulmonary
catarrh and asthma, hemorrhage and leucorrhea. Externally,
it is used for inflammations of the oral and pharyngeal
mucosa, suppurating wounds and lid inflammation.

Indian Medicine: In India, Rose is used for coughs,
bronchitis, asthma, fever and general debility. It is also used
for wounds and hyperhydrosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
" dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Rose flowers are available as
whole, crude and powdered drug forms for internal and
external use.

Preparation:

Tea — | to 2 gm drug added to | cup (200 ml) water.
Rose vinegar — 60 gm petals added to 750 ml red wine
vinegar.

Daily Dosage:

Tea infusion — up to 3 cups per day. It is also used for rinses
and washes.

Powder — 5 to 10 gm with honey or liquid.
The leaves can be applied directly to the eyes.

Storage: Should be tightly sealed and stored in dry arid cool
place.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 894 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Rosemary

Rosmarinus officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Rosemary Leaf (available from numerous manufacturers and

as combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the leaves and the leafy stems, the flowering, dried twig
tips, the dried leaves, the fresh leaves, the fresh aerial parts
collected during flowering and the flowering branches.

Flower and Fruit:" Labiate flowers grow on tometose
inflorescences in the leaf axils of the upper part of the
branches. The calyx is 3 to 4 mm. green or reddish, initially
tomentose, later 5 to 7 mm and glabrous. The venation is
conspicuous. The corolla is 10 to 12 mm long, bluish,
occasionally pink or white. The nutlet is brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen, branched
subshrub, 50 to 150 cm high with erect, climbing or
occasionally decumbent brown branches. The leaves are
linear, coriaceous, entire-margined, light gre‘en and some-
what rugose above. They are tomentose, 15 to 40 mm by 12
to 3.5 mm.

Characteristics: The plant has a very pungent aroma.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
and Portugal and is cultivated there as well as on the Crimea,
in the Transcaucasus, Central Asia, India, Southeast Asia,
South Africa, Australia and the U.S.

Production: Rosemary leaves consist of the fresh or dried
leaves of Rosmarinus officinalis collected after flowering as
well as their preparations. The leaves are harvested after
flowering on sunny, warm days and dried.

Not to be Confiised With: May be confused with Ledum
palustre, Andromeda polifolia, Teucrium montanum, Taxus
baccata, Santolina rosmarinfolia, and S. chamaecyparissus.

Other Names: Polar Plant, Compass-Weed, Compass Plant

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Caffeic acid derivatives: chief component rosmarinic acid

Diterpenes (bitter): including carnosolic acid (picrosalvin),
isorosmanol, rosmadial, rosmaridiphenol, rosmariquinone

Flavonoids: including cirsimarin, diosmin, hesperidin, hom-
oplantiginin, phegopolin

Triterpenes: chief components oleanolic acid, ursolic acid
and their 3-acetyl esters

ROSEMARY / 645

Volatile oil (1.0 to 2.5%): chief components 1,8-cineole ( 20
to 50%), alpha-pinene (15 to 25%), camphor (10 to 25%),
including as well camphene, borneol, bornyl acetate, beta-
caryophyllene, p-cymene, limonene, linalool, myrcene, al-
pha- terpineol, verbenone

EFFECTS
The drug is mildly antimicrobial and antiviral (probably
because of the diterpenes).

Animal tests have demonstrated spasmolytic effects on the
gallbladder ducts and on the upper intestine. The tests have
confirmed choleretic, liver-protective, anti-convulsive, anti-
mutagenic and tumor-inhibiting effects. The metabolism of
the drug is accelerated by the presence of 1,8 cineol. In
humans Rosemary oil improves circulation when applied
externally because of a certain skin irritating effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Blood pressure problems
* Dyspeptic complaints
* Loss of appetite

.* Rheumatism

Rosemary is used internally for dyspeptic disorders and
externally for hypotonic circulatory disorders and rheumatic
conditions.

Unproven Uses: Rosemary is used in folk medicine for
digestive symptoms, headaches and migraine, dysmenorrhea,
amenorrhea and oligomenorrhea, states of exhaustion, diz-
ziness and poor memory. It is used externally as a poultice
for poorly healing wounds, for eczema, as an analgesic for
injuries of the mouth and throat, topically for myalgias,
intercostal neuralgia and sciatica. '

Homeopathic Uses: Rosmarinus officinalis is used for

gastrointestinal disorders.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Rosemary preparations should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Contact allergies have been observed on
occasion.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Very large quantities of rosemary leaves misused for the
purpose of abortion, can lead to deep coma, spasm, vomiting,
gastroenteritis, uterine bleeding, kidney irritation, and to
death in humans.

----- PAGE 895 -----
646/ROSEMARY

DOSAGE

Mode_ of Administration:
crude and powdered drug forms for internal and external use.
It is also available in compounded preparations.

Rosemary is available as whole,

How Supplied:
Liquid — 1:1

Preparation:
Tea — pour boiling water over 2 gm finely cut drug and
strain after 15 minutes (1 teaspoon corresponds to approxi-

mately 2 gm drug).

Rosemary wine — Add 20 gm drug in 1 Liter wine, let stand
for 5 days, shake occasionally.

Tincture — 1:5 with 70% ethanol (V/V)
Liquid extract — 1:1 45% ethanol (V/V)

Daily Dosage: The daily dose is 4 to 6 gm drug.
Tea — 1 cup several times a day

Tincture (1:5) — single dose: 20 to 40 drops
Liquid extract — single dose: 2 to 4 ml

Externally — semi-solid and liquid forms wjth 6 to 10%
essential oil

Bath additive — 50 gm drug to 1 Liter hot water added to
full or hip bath

Washes — use 1% infusion

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

Storage: Rosemary should be protected from light and

moisture.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Phytotherapie:Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
ringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Boehlens MH, Perfum Flav 10:21-24, 26 et 28-37. 1985.
Brieskorn CH, Zweyrohn G, (1970) Pharmazie 25:488.

Brieskorn CH, Domling HJ, (1969) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch
14:10.

Brieskorn CH, Michel H, (1968) Tetrahedron Letters 30:3447.

Czygan I, Czygan FC, Rosmarin - Rosmarinus officinalis L. In:
ZPZ 18(3): 182-186. 1997.

Haraguchi H et al., Inhibition of lipid peroxidation and
superoxide generation by diterpenoids from Rosmarinus
officinalis. In: PM 61(4):333-336. 1995.

Houlihan CM et al., (1985) J Am Oil Chem Soc 62(1):96.
Koedan A, Gijbels MJM, (1978) Z Natur Forsch 33C, 144.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Kreis P, Juchelka D, Motz C, Mosandl A, Chirale Inhaltstoffe
atherischer Ole. In: DAZ 131(39):1984. 1991.

Litvinenko VI et al., (1970) Planta Med 18:243.
Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.
Tattje DHE, (1970) Pharm Weekbl 105:1241.
Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
994. -

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Rosinweed

Silphium laciniatum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a stately 1 to 4 m high
herbaceous perennial, with an almost leafless, round shaft.
The leaves are 30 to 60 cm long. They are long-petioled,
simple or double pinnate leaves. The leaves are alternate,
with their edges turned upward and downward and their
surfaces facing north and south.

Characteristics: The taste of the root is bitter and then acrid.

The roots are odorless.

Habitat: The plant grows in the midwestern U.S., especially
Ohio.

Other Names: Compass Weed, Polar Plant, Pilot Weed

----- PAGE 896 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Resins (smelling terpene-like, mastic-like)

Volatile oil
Inulin (in the root)

EFFECTS
The active agents are resin, with 19% terpene and 37% of a
resin acid, and inulin in the root. The drug has antispasmod-
ic, diuretic and diaphoretic effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy, the drug is used for the
treatment of digestive disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Rosinweed is available as a tincture

or liquid extract.

LITERATURE * ‘

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Rosmarinus officinalis

See Rosemary

Round-Leafed Wintergreen
Pyrola rotundifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The white, sometimes reddish flowers are
in many-blossomed, nodding racemes turning to all sides.
The calyx is divided in 5 almost to the base and has
lanceolate, revolute, splayed tips. The corolla has 5 petals
and is flatly campanulate. The 10 stamens are curved
upward. The ovary is superior with 5 sections and a
downward curving style. The fruit is a 5-sectioned capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 15 to 30 cm
high. The stem is erect, obtusely angular and glabrous; it has
2 sheath-like bracts. The leaves in die basal rosette are

RUBIA TINCTORUM / 647

petiolate, orbicular and glabrous. They are grass-green,
glossy, somewhat cordate at the base, shallowly crenate,
coriaceous and evergreen.

Characteristics: The flowers have a slight, pleasant fra-
grance, and the leaves are astringent.

Habitat: The plant originated in the South Sea islands but is
now naturalized in other climates.

Production: Wintergreen leaves are the leaves of Pyrola
rotundifolia.

Other Names: Wintergreen

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY "oe
COMPOUNDS

Hydroquinone derivatives (4-8%): chief components isoho-
moarbutin, additionally homoarbutin (arbutin)

Naphthacene_ derivatives (naphthoquinone): chimaphilin

(2,7-dimethyl-1,4-naphthoquinone)
Tannins (up to 18%)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wintergreen is used for bladder inflamma-
tion and urinary tract diseases, diseases of the prostate and
kidney disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a weak sensitizing effect due to
its chimaphilin content. The drug is not suitable for long-
term use because of its hydroquinone glycoside content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is administered ground
and as an extract.

LITERATURE

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969 (unter Pirola rotundifolia).

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter Pirola
rotundifolia).

Rubia tinctorum
See Madder

----- PAGE 897 -----
648/RUBUS FRUTFCOSUS

Rubus _fruticosus

See Blackberry

Rubus idaeus

See Raspberry

Rue

Ruta —— graveolens".

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are oil extracted from
the herb, the herbal parts of the plant harvested after
flowering, the fresh aerial parts of the plant collected at the
beginning of the flowering season and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow flowers are in cymes, which
are on twining branches with entire or 3-lobed bracts. The
calyx has 4 or 5 segments. The 4 to 5 petals are spoon-like
concave.-ovate and end suddenly in the" stem. The 8 to 10
stamens are in 2 circles. The single short, broadly ovate
ovary has 4 to 5 grooves and is covered with hemispherical
glands. The fruit is a globular, 4 to 5 valvular, many-seeded
capsule. The seeds are angular and have a bumpy brown
skin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a sturdy shrub 30 to 80
cm high with a woody root and a crooked, branched
rhizome. The shoots are glabrous, pale green and more or
less covered in oil glands. The stems are erect, rigid, round,
lightly branched and woody from below. The leaves are 4 to
11 cm long and 3 to 7 cm wide, odd-pinate, with | to 3
pinnatesect pinna. The terminal segments are spatulate to
lanceolate. The front leaves are very finely crenate or serrate,
somewhat fleshy, pale yellowish or bluish green.

Characteristics: The odor is tangy and the taste is hot,
somewhat bitter and can cause skin irritation.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Balkans as far as Siebenge-
birge, upper Italy and central Italy and is cultivated
elsewhere. Rue is completely naturalized in the southern
Alps, southern France and Spain.

Production: Rue leaves consist of the dried leaves of Ruta
graveolens. Rue herb consists of the dried above-ground
parts of Ruta graveolens. Both are dried in the shade at a
maximum of 35° C.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with other
Ruta species.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Other Names: Herb-of-Grace, Herbygrass

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Alkaloids (0.4-0.4%): furoquinoline alkaloids including
among others, skimmianin, gamma-fagarine, dictamnin,
kokusaginine, ptelein

Acridine alkaloids: including arborinine- 2-arylquinoline
Quinazoline alkaloids: including among others, arborine
Quinoline alkaloids: including graveoline, graveolineine

Volatile oil (0.2-0.4%): chief components are nonan-2-one
(50%), nonan-2-ylacetate, undecan-2-one, undec-2-ylacetate
further including, among others, linalyl acetate, 1,8-cineole,
menthol

Flavonoids: chief component is rutin (2-5%)

Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, herniarin, gravelliferon,
rutacultin

Furocoumarins: bergapten, psoralen, xanthotoxin, chalepen-
sin, isopimpinellin, isoimperatorin, rutarin, rutaretine

Pyranocoumarins: including among others, xanthyletine
Lignans: savinin, helioxanthine

EFFECTS
The alkaloids in the drug are anti-exudative. Chalepensin
inhibits fertility, and the coumarin derivatives and alkaloids
are spasmolytic. In addition, the drug is antimicrobial,
abortifacient and photosensitizing.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of rue herb and/or leaves are
used for menstrual disorders, as an effective uterine remedy
and as an abortive agent. In folk medicine, Rue is used for
menstrual complaints, as a contraceptive and as an abortive
agent. The herb is also used for inflammation of the skin,
oral and pharyngeal cavities, earache, toothache, for feverish
infectious diseases, for cramps, as an obstetric remedy,
hepatitis, dyspepsia, diarrhea and intestinal worm
infestations.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are contu-
sions, sprains, bruising, varicose veins and rheumatism

(especially of the spine).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Rue is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The drug can lead to photosensitization, due to its furocou-
marine and furoquinoline content; photodermatoses have

----- PAGE 898 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

been observed following skin contact with the fresh leaves.
Sensitization is possible following skin contact.

Pregnancy: Vomiting, epigastric pain, liver damage, kidney
damage, depression, sleep disorders, feelings of vertigo,
delirium, fainting, tremor, and spasm, occasionally with fatal
outcome, have occurred after misuse of extracts of the plant
as an abortive agent.

OVERDOSAGE
Vomiting, epigastric pain, liver damage, kidney damage,
depression, sleep disorders, feelings of vertigo, delirium,
fainting, tremor, and spasm, occasionally with fatal outcome,
have occurred in cases of overdose.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the leaves and root
are used internally as a tea and also externally.

Preparation: Tea or a cold decoction is prepared by adding 1
heaping teaspoonful to 1/4 liter of water. (1 teaspoonful is

roughly equivalent to 2.8 g drug).

Daily Dosage: 0.5 g of the drug is considered a medium
ose. The tea may be

single dose; 1.0 g the maximum daily
taken several times a day. - ve

Delayed menstruation—2 cups per day of the infusion

For topical use, leaves are used to fill hollow teeth for
toothache and juice from the leaves is used as an ear drop for
earaches.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times a day or 1 ml injection solution sc twice
a week (HAB1)

LITERATURE
Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1 ):9. 1991.

Becela-Deller C, Die Weinraute. Heilpflanze zwischen Magie
und Wissenschaft. In: DAZ 131(51/52):2705. 1991.

Becela-Deller C Ruta graveolens L. - Weinraute. In: ZPT
16(5):275-281. 1995.

Grundon, MF, In "The Alkaloids Vol. 11", Pub. Royal Soc
Chem (1981).

Hellwig B, Phytochemie, Hauterkrankungen und zentrales
Nervensystem, 21. Seminarkongrep* der Bundesapothekerkammer
in Erfurt. In: DAZ 135(38):3492 ff 1995.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):28.
Novak I et al. (1967) Planta Med 15:132.
Opdyke DLJ, (1975) Food Cosmet Toxicol 13: Suppl 713.

Paulini H, Waibel R, Kiefer J, Schimmer O,
GravacridondiolacetaU a new dihydrofuroacridone alkaloid from
Ruta graveolens. In: PM 57:82. 1991.

Reisch J et al., (1967) Pharmazie 22: 220 et (1970) 25:435.

RUMEX CRISPUS / 649

Reisch J et al., (1976) Phytochemistry 15:240.
Robbins RC, (1967) J Atheroscler Res 7:3.
Rozsa Z et al., (1980) Planta Med 39:218.

Schimmer O, Furochinolinalkaloide als biologisch aktive
Naturstoffe. In: ZPT 12(5): 151. 1991.

Van Duuren BL et al., (1971) J Natl Cancer Inst 46:1039.
Varga E et al., (1976) Fitoterapia 47:107.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Rumex acetosa

See Sorrel

Rumex aquaticus
See Water Dock

Rumex crispus
See Yellow Dock

----- PAGE 899 -----
650/RUPTUREWORT

Rupturewort

Herniaria glabra

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh flowering

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in flat clusters of 7 to 10
in the leaf axils or opposite the leaves along the stem. They
are yellow-white and very small. The fruit is a membranous
capsule covered by the calyx and contains 1 seed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual small shrub of
about 15 cm. The stem tends to be decumbent. It is round
and branched. The entire-margined,
elliptical and opposite. The leaves are alternate.

leaves are sessile,

Characteristics: The plant is yellow-green and glabrous; it
creates suds when rubbed under water.

Habitat: The plant is found in the temperate and southern
regions of Europe and in Asian Russia.

Production: Rupturewort is the complete aerial part of
Herniaria glabra or Herniaria hirsuta.  -

Other Names: Flax Weed, Herniary

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Triterpene saponins:
medicagen, gypsogen,

herniaria saponins I-VII (aglycones
16-hydroxy-medicagen)

Flavonoids: including hyperoside

Hydroxycoumarins: umbelliferone, herniarin

EFFECTS

The main active principles (saponins, flavonoids, coumarins
and small amounts of tannins) are reported to have mild
spasmolytic and diuretic effects, which have not been

scientifically proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Herniaria glabra is used for disorders of the
efferent urinary tract, inflammatory disorders of the kidneys
and bladder, respiratory disorders, nerve inflammation, gout
and rheumatism, and as a blood purifier.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is administered as an
infusion and in tea mixtures, as an extract in drops and in
urological pharmaceutical preparations.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Preparation: Put 1.5 gm comminuted drug (1 teaspoonful is
equal to 1.4 gm) in cold water and bring briefly to a boil.
Strain after 5 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Drink 1 cup 2 to 3 times daily as a diuretic.

LITERATURE

Cart J, Reznicek G, Korhammer S, Haslinger E, Jurenitsch J,
Kubelka W, The first spectroscopically confirmed saponin from
Herniaria glabra. In: PM 58(7)09. 1992.

Franck HP, (1975) Dtsch. Apoth Ztg 115:1206.

Freiler M et al., A new triterpenesaponin from Herniaria glabra.
In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):66. 1995.

Freiler M et al., Sci Pharm 64:359. 1996. f KroTikowska M,
Wolbis M, (1979) Acta Pol Pharm 36:469.

Reznicek G et al., PA 48:450. 1993.
Tama M et al., (1981) Clujul Med 54(1 ):73.

Zoz et al., (1976) Rastit Resur 12(3):411 (via CA 85:174257). f
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer

Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheirri 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Ruscus aculeatus

See Butcher's Broom

Rust-Red Rhododendron
Rhododendron ferrugineum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried foliage
leaves, the dried leafy branches and the fresh leafy branches.

Flower and Fruit: The pink flowers are in umbel-like
racemes. The calyx has 5 short ovate tips. The corolla is
fused and funnel-shaped with an edge divided into 5
segments. It is covered on the outside with white or golden-
yellow resin spots. There are 10 stamens and 1 superior
ovary. The fruit is a 5-valved capsule. The seeds are

fusiform, about 1 mm long and light brown.

----- PAGE 900 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen shrub up to
1 m high and is richly branched from the base upward. The
branches are sturdy and elastic with gray-brown bark. The
leaves are oblong-lanceolate, tough and glabrous. The
margin is entire, involuted. The leaves are dark green above,
densely scaled underneath and sometimes rust-colored.

Characteristics: The leaves are not ciliate at the edge.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Alpine chain from the
Pyrenees to the southern Croatian mountains, but not in the
Carpathians.

Production: Rust-Red Rhododendron consists of the dried
leaves of Rhododendron ferrugineum.

Not to be Confused With: The leaves of R. hirsutum. The
plant product may be altered through the addition of
cranberry leaves.

Other Names: Rosebay, Snow Rose

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: RHODODENDRON AUREUM
Diterpenes of the andromedan type (presence questionable)

Hydroquinone glycosides: arbutin (ericolin)

Flavonoids: including polystachoside, avicularin, myricetin,
gossypetin, azaleatin

Phenol glycosides (bitter substances): rhododendrine (betu-
loside, 4-(3'-glucosyloxybutyl)-phenol)

COMPOUNDS: RHODODENDRON FERRUGINEUM
Diterpenes of the andromedan type (presence questionable,
but probable)

Flavonoids: including myricetin, gossypetin, azaleatin

Phenol glycosides (bitter substances): rhododendrine (betu-
loside, 4-(3'-glucosyloxybutyl)-phenol)

COMPOUNDS: RHODODENDRON PONTICUM

Diterpenes of the andromedan type: grayanotoxin I (andro-
medotoxin, acetyl andromedol, asebotoxin, rhodotoxin),
grayanotoxin II (andromedol), grayanotoxin III
(andromedenol).

Flavonoids: including myricetin, gossypetin, azaleatin

Phenol glycosides (bitter substances): rhododendrine (betu-
loside, 4-(3'-glucosyloxybuty!)-phenol)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Because the drug's composition is not fully known, its use
cannot be recommended.

RUST-RED RHODODENDRON / 651

Unproven Uses: Rust-Red Rhododendron is used to treat
rheumatic symptoms, calculosis, geriatric complaints, gout,
high blood pressure, meteorosensitiveness, migraine, muscu-
lar pain and neuralgia.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for neuralgia, rheuma-
tism, and inflammation of the testicles.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The Rhododendron species mentioned are considered poi-
sonous. The grayanotoxins prevent the closure of the sodium
channels and thus paralyze conduction.

OVERDOSAGE

Signs of poisoning could include cardiac arrhythmias,
coordination disorders, diarrhea, hypotension, cold sweats,
paresthesia, salivation, severe stupor, spasm bradycardia,
vomiting and eventually death through cardiac failure or
apnea. Unambiguous proof of toxicity is available only for
the foliage, blossoms and sap of Rhododendron ponticum.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulphate), administration of
activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis (quiet, warmth),
therapy for poisonings consists of treating spasms with
diazepam (i.v.), bradycardia with atropine, electrolyte substi-
tution and treating possible cases of acidosis with sodium
bicarbonate infusions. In case of shock, plasma volume
expanders should be infused. Opiates should not be given.
Monitoring of kidney function is essential. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 5 to 6 gm of drug as an
infusion.

LITERATURE
Bewu(?tlos nach Verzehr eines Honigbrotchens. In: DAZ
132(27): 1440. 1992.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), tiagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Keller S auf dem et al., PA 25:621-625. 1970.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
I 4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

----- PAGE 901 -----
652/RUST-RED RHODODENDRON

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G. Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin.
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttsart 1997.

Ruta graveolens
See Rue

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

See Brewer's Yeast

Safflower
Carthamus tinctorius

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowers, seeds
and the oil extracted from its embryos.

Flower and Fruit: Axillary flowers grow in the leaf axils.
They are initially red-yellow, later bright orange. The heads
are up to 4 by 3 cm and are encircled by upper leaves. The
bracts are light green and have thorny tips with a thorny
appendage. The fruit is 6 to 8 cm long, obovate or pear-
shaped and bluntly wedge-shaped at the base with protruding
long ribs. The pappus consists of scales.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Carthamus tinctorius is an annual
plant, that grows up to 90 cm high. It has a thin fusiform
root. The stem is erect, simple or branched at the top into
stiff, glabrous, whitish-yellow and glossy branches. The
leaves are long, fairly soft, and glabrous with a thorny-
serrate margin and tip.

Habitat: The plant is said to be indigenous to Iran, northwest
India and possibly parts of Africa. It is also found in the Far
East and North America, and can be cultivated.

Production: Safflower blooms are the dried flowers of
Carthamus tinctorius. The flowers are gathered as they begin
to wilt, the calyx and inferior ovary are removed, the
remainder is put in the shade where it is mildly warm, and

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

left to dry. Direct sunlight destroys the coloring pigment.
Safflower or thistle oil is the oil extracted from the embryos
of the fruits of Carthamus tinctorius.

Other Names: Dyer's Saffron, American Saffron, Fake
Saffron, Bastard Saffron, Zaffer

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SAFFLOWER FLOWERS

Chalcones and their p-quinones: carthamin (yellow), cartha-
mone (red-orange)

Flavonoids

EFFECTS: SAFFLOWER FLOWERS 3
No information is available.

COMPOUNDS: SAFFLOWER OIL
Fatty oil: chief fatty acids linoleic acid (55-88%), linolenic
acid

Carotinoids

EFFECTS: SAFFLOWER OIL
Safflower oil lowers the serum cholesterol levels.

- INDICATIONS AND USAGE

SAFFLOWER FLOWERS
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, it is mainly used as a
stimulant, purgative, antihydrotic, emmenagogue, abortifa-
cient, expectorant, pneumonic and for tumors. It is also
added to teas for soothing which soothe coughs and
bronchial conditions.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Safflower flowers treat amenor-
rhoea and stomach tumors, as well as for external and
internal wounds.

Indian Medicine: The flowers are used for scabies, arthritis,
and chest pains.

SAFFLOWER OIL
Unproven Uses: Safflower oil is used for the prophylaxis of

arteriosclerosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
SAFFLOWER FLOWERS AND OIL

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

SAFFLOWER FLOWERS
Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
SAFFLOWER FLOWERS
Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 gm of decoction;

single dose is 1 gm.

----- PAGE 902 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE

SAFFLOWER FLOWERS

Akihisa T, Yasukawa K, Oinuma H, Kasahara Y, Yamanouchi
S, Takido M, Kumaki K. Tamura T, Triterpene alcohols from
the flowers of Compositae and their anti-inflammatory effects.
Phytochemistry, 12:1255-60, 1996 Dec.

Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.

Caldes G et al., (1981) J Gen Appl Microbiol 27, 157.

Chan, EH et al., (Eds.). Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Liu F, Wei Y, Yang XZ, Li FG, Hu J, Cheng RF, Hypotensive
effects of safflower yellow in spontaneously hypertensive rats
and influence on plasma renin activity and angiotensin II level.
Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao. 27:785-7, 1992.

Lu ZW, Liu F, Hu J, Bian D, Li FG, Suppressive effects of
safflower yellow on immune functions. Chung Kuo Yao Li
Hsueh Pao, 12:537-42, 1991 Nov.

Martiner Flores H, Cruz Mondragon C, Larios Saldana A
Reduction of crude fiber content in safflower meal (Carthamus
tinctorius L) and its potential use in human food. Arch
Latinoam Nutr. 284:295-8, 1996 Dec.

Nose M, FuJimoto T, Takeda T, Nishibe S, Ogihara Y,
Structural transformation of lignan compounds in rat
gastrointestinal tract. Planta Med, 53:520-3, 1992 Dec.

Shi M, Chang L, He G, Stimulating action of Carthamus
tinctorius L. Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels and Leonurus
sibiricus L. on the uterus. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih,
20:173-5 192, 1995 Mar.

Thomson RH, Naturally Occurring Quinones, 2nd Ed.,
Academic Press New York 1971.

Yasukawa K et al., Inhibitory effect of alkane-68-diols the
components of safflower on tumor promotion by 12-0-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in two-stage carcinogenesis in
mouse skin. Oncology, 53:133-6, 1996 Mar-Apr.

Zhang HL, Nagatsu A, Watanabe T, Sakakibara J, Okuyama H,
Antioxidative compounds isolated from safflower (Carthamus
tinctorius L.) oil cake. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 45:1910-4,
1997 Dec.

Zhang HL, Nagatsu A, Watanabe T, Sakakibara J, Okuyama H,
Tinctormine a"novel Ca2+ antagonist N-containing
quinochalcone C-glycoside from Carthamus tinctorius L. Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 45:3355-7, 1992 Dec.

SAFFLOWER OIL
Caldes, G et al., (1981) J Gen Appl Microbiol 27, 157.

Chan, EH et al., (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

SAFFRON/653

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Xu SX, (1986) Chung Yao Tung Pao 11(2):42.

Saffron

Crocus sativus aloe

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the stigma and

style.

Flower and Fruit: The lily-like flowers have two 2 bracts at
the base. There is a pale violet-veined calyx, yellow anthers
and a white filament. The thread-like style is 10 mm long.
The stigma is bright orange. The plant is non-fruit-bearing.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The grass-like plant is a perennial
that grows 8 to 30 cm high. There is a large squat tuber,
surrounded by reticulate and fibrous sheaths. The leaves are
erect or splayed, narrow, and have a ciliate margin and keel.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to India, the Balkans and
the eastern Mediterranean region. It is cultivated in India,
Spain, France, Italy and the Middle East.

Production: Saffron is produced by drying the brown-red
stigma over fire.

Not to be Confused With: The powdered drug is more or less
always adulterated; Calsendula officinalis, Carthamus tincto-

rius are usually used.

Other Names: Spanish Saffron

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Apocarotinoid glycosides: in particular crocin (crocetin-beta-
digentiobioside), colored intensive yellow orange %

Picrocrocin up to 4%): the
apocarotinoids and picrocrocin are presumably breakdown
products of a carotinoid-digentiobioside-diglucoside (proto-

(glycosidic bitter principle,

crocin)

Volatile oil (0.4 to 1.3%): components 4,5-dehydro-beta-
cyclocitral (safranal), 4-hydroxy-beta-cyclocitral (breakdown
products of the picrocrocin)

Carotinoids: lycopene, alpha-, beta-, gamma-carotene

Fatty oil

----- PAGE 903 -----
654 /SAFFRON

Starch

EFFECTS
Small doses of Saffron stimulate the secretion of the gastric
juices. Large doses stimulate the smooth muscle of the

uterus.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Saffron is no longer of interest medicinally.
It is sometimes used in folk medicine to stimulate digestion.

Chinese Medicine: Chinese uses include menorrhagia, amen-
orrhea, high-risk deliveries and postpartum lochiostasis.

Indian Medicine: In India, Saffron is used for bronchitis,
sore throat, headache, vomiting and fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded.

Pregnancy: The herb is not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

Lethal poisonings can occur with overdoses or through the
abuse of larger doses as an abortient (abortive dosage
approximately 10 gm, lethal dosage approximately 12 to 20
gm).

Symptoms of poisoning include vomiting, uterine bleeding,
intestinal colic, bloody diarrhea, hematuria, severe schwere
purpuras, hemorrhaging of skin of the nose, lips and eyelids,
attacks of dizziness, stupor, yellowing of the skin and the
mucous membranes (through inclusion of the apocarotino-
dermas) and central paralysis.

The treatment consists of stomach and intestinal emptying
(gastric lavage, sodium sulfate) and the administration of
activated charcoal; convulsions to be treated with diazepam,
colics with atropine, and any eventual acidosis with sodium
bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen respiration may

also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Storage: It is stored in air-tight, non-synthetic containers and
protected from light.

LITERATURE
Dhingra VK et al., (1975) Ind J Chem 13:339.

Dufresne C, Cormier F, Dorion S, In vitro formation of
crocetin glucosyl esters by Crocus sativus callus extract. Planta
Med, 16:150-3, 1997 Apr.

Duquenois P, (1972) Bull Soc Pharm Strasbourg 15:149.

Escribano J, Alonso GL, Coca-Prados M, Fernandez JA, Crocin
safranal and picrocrocin from saffron (Crocus sativus L.) inhibit
the growth of human cancer cells in vitro. Cancer Lett, 100:23-
30, 1996 Feb 27.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Morimoto S et al., Post-harvest degradation of carotenoid
glucose esters in saffron. In: PM 60(5):438. 1994.

Thesen R, Phytotherapeutika - nicht immer harmlos. In: ZPT
9(49): 105. 1988.

Wagner K, Dissertation Universitat Saarbriicken. 1969.
Further information in:

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers: Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Liakopoulou-Kyriakides M, Skubas Al, Characterization of the
platelet aggregation inducer and inhibitor isolated from Crocus
- sativus. Biochem Int, 22:103-10, 1990 Oct.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nair SC, Kurumboor SK, Hasegawa JH, Saffron
chemoprevention in biology and medicine: a review. Cancer
Biother, 5:257-64, 1995 Winter.

Nair SC, Pannikar B, Panikkar KR, Antitumor activity of
saffron (Crocus sativus). Cancer Lett, 57:109-14, 1991 May 1.

Nair SC, Salomi MJ, Panikkar B, Panikkar KR, Modulatory
effects of Crocus sativus and Nigella sativa extracts on
cisplatin-induced toxicity in mice. J Ethnopharmacol, 16:75-83,
1991 Jan.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Salomi MJ, Nair SC, Panikkar KR, Inhibitory effects of Nigella
sativa and saffron (Crocus sativus) on chemical carcinogenesis
in mice. Nutr Cancer, 16:67-72, 1991.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 904 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Sage
Salvia officinalis

TRADE NAMES

Sage (available from a number of manufacturers), Alcohol-

Free Sage.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh leaves
and the fresh flowering aerial parts, the dried leaves, and the
oils extracted from the flowers and stems.

Flower and Fruit: The medium-sized, pale violet, white or
pink labiate flowers are in 6- to 12- blossomed false whorls,
which are arranged above each other in 4 to 8 rows. The
surrounding leaves fall early. The calyx is 10 to 14 mm long,
funnel-shaped-campanulate, downy, glandular punctate and
bilabiate. The upper lip has 3 throrny-awned teeth; the lower
lip has 2. The corolla tube has a ring of hair inside. The
upper lip is almost straight and the lower lip has 3 segments.
There are 2 stamens with almost semicircular bent filaments.

Leaves,.Stem and Root: Sage grows as.a bush up to 60 cm
high. The stem is erect and woody at the base with leafy,
quadrangular, white-gray tomentose branches. The leaves are
simple, oblong or oblong-lanceolate and narrowed at the
base. They are petiolate, densely and finely crenate, ribbed-
wrinkled, and white-gray tomentose initially, tough, and
evergreen.

Characteristics: The leaves are aromatic, tangy, and bitterly
astringent.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
and has naturalized in all of Europe. It is cultivated in North
America.

Production: Sage leaf consists of the fresh or dried leaf of
Salvia officinalis. In the wild, sage is collected from the
former Yugoslavia, the Adriatic coast and those areas that
are farther from the coast but are still under Mediterranean
influence. The harvest lasts from mid-July until December,
depending on the area. October is recommended as the most
favorable time to harvest Dalmatian sage.

When Sage is cultivated, it is recommended that the harvest
take place beginning in the second vegetation year at the
beginning of the flowering period and in the afternoon.

Sage can be dried in direct sunlight, but up to 25% of the oil
can be lost. Drying in shade reduces oil loss to 2 to 10%.
Optimum drying conditions for preventing oil loss use a
drying chamber with vertical incoming air currents at 50° C
with 0.9% absolute humidity.

SAGE /655

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with the
leaves of Salvia triloba and also with Salvia or Phlomis
species.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1.5-3.5%): chief constituents alpha-thujone and
beta-thujone(20-60%), 1,8-cineole (6-16%), camphor (14-
37%), borneol, isobutyl acetate, camphene, linalool, alpha-
and beta-pinene, viridiflorol, alpha- and beta-caryophyllene
(humulene)

Caffeic acid derivatives (3-6%): rosmarinic acid, chlorogenic
acid - ye
Diterpenes: chief components carnosolic acid (picrosalvin,
0.2-0.4%), rosmanol, safficinolide

Flavonoids: including, among others, apigenin- and luteolin-
7-glucosides, numerous methoxylated aglycones, including
among others, genkwanin, genkwanin-6-methylether

Triterpenes: chief components ursolic acid (5%)

- EFFECTS

Sage has antibacterial, fungistatic, virostatic, astringent,
secretolytic, and perspiration-inhibiting effects. In animal
experiments, the herb was found to be antihypertensive and
choleretic. It acts on the CNS and is a spasmolytic agent.
Proof of an antidiabetic effect found in one study has not yet
been confirmed. The essential oil has bactericidal, fungistat-
ic, and virostatic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Loss of appetite
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
« Excessive perspiration

Sage is used externally for inflammation of the mucous
membranes of the nose and throat and internally for
dyspeptic symptoms and as a diaphoretic.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the drug is used internally
for gastric disorders such as loss of appetite, bloating,
flatulence, diarrhea, enteritis, and excessive perspiration.
Externally, Sage is used as a rinse and gargle for light
injuries and skin inflammation, bleeding gums, stomatitis,
laryngitis, pharyngitis, and for firming the gums.

Homeopathic Uses: The most common application in
homeopathy is for excessive perspiration.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Sage preparations are contraindicated during pregnancy.

----- PAGE 905 -----
656 /SAGE

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Sage preparations should not be taken during
pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
A sense of heat, tachycardia, feelings of vertigo and
epileptiform convulsions can occur following extended
intake of ethanolic extracts of the drug or volatile oil, or
through overdosage (corresponding to more than 15 g of the
sage leaves). ,

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Cut herb for infusions, alcoholic
extracts, and distillates for gargles, rinses, and other topical
applications such as compresses or poultices. The pressed
juice of fresh plants is also used. In folk medicine, Sage is
used internally as an antihidrotic infusion and "medicinal
cigarettes" are used for asthma.

How Supplied: Sage is available as an alcohol-free 1:1 liquid.

'

Preparation: v

Tincture — prepared 1:10 with 70% ethanol.
Liquid extract — 1:1 with 45% euianol.

The formulas for several "generic" folk medicine decoc-
tions and infusions follows.

Decoction No. 1 — One spoonful of powdered drug scalded
with 1 cup of water, quickly strained, and sweetened.

Decoction No. 2 — 15 g of the fresh leaves with 200 ml of
water heated for 3 minutes.

Infusion No.1 — Scald 20 g dried leaves with 1 liter water,
steep for 15 minutes, strain, press, and sweeten if required.

Infusion No. 2 — Pour | liter boiling water over 50 g drug,
strain after 15 minutes and sweeten with honey.

Antihidrotic infusion — Scald 20 g of the dried leaves wiuh 1
liter water, steep 15 minutes, strain, compress and sweeten if
required.

Cardiac insufficiency — A tonic infusion is prepared by
pouring | liter boiling water over 50 g of the drug, strain
after 15 minutes, sweeten with sugar or honey.

Diabetes — Prepare a fortified wine made by boiling 100 g
of the leaves with one liter wine for 2 minutes.

Inflammation of the bronchial mucous membranes — An
expectorant honey is made by mixing 50 g of the powdered
drug with 80 g of honey.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Nervous exhaustion — A fortified wine is manufactured
using an 8-day maceration of 100 g of the leaves with one
liter of wine.

Tumors — The drug is worked into an ointment base or
pounded into a paste together with salt and vinegar to make
an adhesive paste.

Wounds — The drug is prepared as a cleanser or rinse to
heal wounds using a wine made by heating 100 g of the
leaves with 0.5 liter white wine for 1 minute.

Daily Dosage: The average daily internal dose is 4 to 6 g of
the drug; 0.1 to 0.3 g of the essentia] oil; 2.5 to 7.5 g of the
tincture; 15 to 3 g of the liquid extract.

Antihidrotic — 0.25 g of the powdered drug (spoonful or
capsules) taken before meals for excessive perspiration and
nervous complaints.

Cardiac insufficiency — 1 glass of the tonic infusion can be
taken 4 times daily. The decoction dosage (using No. 1 or
No. 2) is 1 glass at hourly intervals.

Diabetes — 1 glass of the wine preparation after meals.
‘Halitosis — The leaves may be chewed occasionally.

Inflammation of the bronchial mucous membranes — 1
spoonful of the expectorant in the morning and at bedtime.

Nervous complaints — 0.25 g of the powdered drug
(spoonful or capsules) before meals.

Externally, the following dosages/applications are often
used:

Antihidrotic infusion — 200 ml of infusion | to three times
daily.

Gargles and rinses — 2.5 g of the drug or 2 to 3 drops of
essential oil in 100 ml of water as infusion or 5 g of the
alcoholic extract in 1 glass of water.

Inflamed mucous membranes — Undiluted alcohol extract is
applied repeatedly.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1), Special doses must be prepared for children.

Storage: Sage leaves are to be protected from light and
humidity in sealed containers. Storage duration of coarsely
cut drug is 18 months; powder, maximum 24 hours. The
tincture is stored in tightly sealed containers away from light.
The liquid extract may be kept for up to 2 years.

LITERATURE
Brieskom CH, Bichele W, (1971) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 111:141.

----- PAGE 906 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Brieskorn CH, Salbei - seine Inhaltstoffe und sein
therapeutischer Wert. In: ZPT 12(2):91. 1991.

Ferguson G et al., (1973) J Chem Soc Chem Comm 281.

Linger R, Mechtler C, Tanzler HO, Jurenitsch J, Differences of
the composition of the essential oil within an individium of
Salva officinalis. In: PM 59(7)35. 1993.

Murko D et al., (1974) Planta Med 25:295.

Paris A, Strukelj B. Renko M Turk V, Puki M, Umek A,
Korant BD, Inhibitory effect of camosolic acid on HIV-1
protease in cell free assays. In: JNP 56(8): 1426-1430. 1993.

Raic D, Novina R, Petricic J, Acta Pharm Jugosl 35:121. 1985.

Tada M et al.. Antiviral diterpenes from Salvia officinalis. In:
PH 35(2):539. 1994.
Telekova D et al., PA 49:299. 1994.

Further information in:
Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, Vol. 1, 2nd Ed.,
CRC Press 1975.

Frohne D., Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

SALEP 657

Salep

Orchis species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
tubers of Orchis morio and other varieties.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers form erect spikes. The
surrounding leaves are sometimes large and longer than the
flowers; they are often colored. The pollen mass is enclosed
in 1 to 2 sectioned anthers. The ovary is almost always
twisted. The seed skins can be with or without a reticulate

thickening.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The species are perennial, medium-
sized, glabrous plants with a round, ovate or variously
palmate tuber. The leaves are green, sheath-like and tapering.

Habitat: The plant comes from central and southern Europe.

Production: Saiep tubers are the subterranean parts of Orchis
morio and other varieties of Orchis. They are gathered
during flowering season, dried and processed into Salep
powder.

Other Names: Cuckoo Flower, Levant Salep, Orchid. Sahlep.
Saloop, Satyrion

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Mucilage (Salep mannan, up to 50%): glucans, glucoman-

nans (partially acetylized)

Starch (25%)
Proteins (5-15%)
EFFECTS

The mucilage is rich in mucine and polysaccharides, which
act as a demulcent and have protective and sequestering
effects on mucous membranes. In animal tests, a lowering of
the plasma cholesterol effect was proven. In addition, the
drug is said to be analgesic, cholagogic and hypoglycemic.
but no further details are available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for unspecified diarrhea.
particularly in children, and for heartburn, flatulence and

indigestion.

Indian Medicine: Uses in Indian medicine'include diabetes.

hemiplegia, chronic diarrhea, neurasthenia and general

debility.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated dierapeutic

dosages.

----- PAGE 907 -----
658 /SALEP

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As
medicinal preparations.

a powdered formulation in

Daily Dosage: Dosage for commercial pharmaceutical

preparations for heartburn, flatulence and indigestion is often
1 teaspoon of powder stirred into a glass of warm water and
drunk before or after meals.

LITERATURE

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Salix Species
See White Willow

Salvia miltiorrhiza
See Red-Rooted Sage
(Dan-Shen)

Salvia officinalis
See Sage

Salvia triloba

See Greek Sage

Sambucus ebulus
See Dwarf Elder

Sambucus nigra
See European Alder

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Samphire

Crithmum — maritimum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts:
medicinal parts.

The aerial parts of the plant are the

Flower and Fruit: The 10 to 20 radiating umbels are
medium-sized, sturdy and domed. The barely 1 mm _ long
petals are yellow or greenish-white. The style is very short
and barely visible. The fruit is ovate-oblong. The fruit wall is
thick and filled with a spongy, air-retaining tissue.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, glabrous
shrub with woody base. The root is long, cylindrical, thick,
hard, knotty, ringed, gray, branching upward and polycephal-
ous. The stem is erect, 20 to 50 cm high, round, tender,
grooved, hollowed, woody and with fewer branches higher
up. The leaves are sea green, fleshy and glossy.

Habitat: The plant grows on the Atlantic, Mediterranean and
Baltic coasts.

Production: Samphire herb is the above-ground part of

Crithmum maritimum.

Other Names: Sea Fennel, Sampier, Crest Marine, Pierce-
Stone, Peter's Cress.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Polyynes: including falcarindiol

Furanocoumarins

Ascorbic acid (high content)

EFFECTS
Samphire is a diuretic and also a source of vitamin C.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for scurvy and states of

general resistance.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Samphire is used internally and is

available as an extract and a food additive.

LITERATURE
Francke W, (1982) Econ Bot 36 (2): 163.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

----- PAGE 908 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Sandalwood

Santalum album

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the trunk wood, the heartwood freed from the sapwood
and the bark, and the dried wood.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in numerous, small, short
pedicled, odorless and erect paniculate inflorescences. There
is no calyx. The perianth is 4 to 5 mm long, campanulate and
changes from yellow to deep red. There are 4 stamens at the
mouth of the tube, which have simple hairs at their base. The
semi-inferior ovary with 3 ovules is free in the bud and later
enclosed in the disc. The fruit is a round, black, pea-sized
drupe with a crown made up of the perianth remains.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a small evergreen tree
up to 10 m high that flowers the whole year round. It has
smooth bark and pendulous branches. The leaves are
opposite, 4 to 6 cm long and 2 cm wide, lanceolate, entire-
margined, and matte underneath. The petiole is approximate-
ly 1 cm long.

ve

Characteristics: The wood has a characteristic odor.

Habitat: The tree grows wild in India and also is cultivated
there and on Timor and the Sunda Islands.

Production: Sandalwood consists of the heartwood, the trunk
and branches of Santalum album or Pterocarpus santalinius,
which has been freed from the bark and sapwood.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion can arise with other
sandalwoods, i.e. the heartwood of Pterocarpus santalinus.
The white sapwood, which contains almost no essential oil,
is occasionally marketed as Lignum santali albi. The
brownish-yellow to brown-red root wood is, in contrast, rich
in essential oil, but is disallowed as a drug in EB6.

Other Names: Sanderswood, White Saunders, Yellow

Saunders

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (3-5%): chief components santalols (50% cis-
alpha-santalol, 20% cis-beta-santalol, 4% epi-beta-santalol),
further including among others, alpha-bergamotol, alpha-
bergamotal

Tannins
Resins

EFFECTS
The essential oil of Sandalwood has disinfecting effect on
the urinary tract. However, if used in high doses and for long
periods, it can be toxic to the kidneys.

SANDALWOOD / 659

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract

Sandalwood is used for inflammatory conditions of the
efferent urinary tract. It is generally used in combination
with other diuretic or urinary disinfecting drugs.

Chinese Medicine: The Chinese use Sandalwood primarily
for epigastric pain, chest pain and vomiting.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses of the drug in homeopathy include
urethral inflammation. It is advisable to use Sandalwood in
combination with other diuretic or urinary disinfecting drugs.

Indian Medicine: Internal uses include heat stroke, sunstroke
and resulting fever. It is used as an infusion mixed with
honey (in Kerala); with water cooked in rice {in Nepal): in
the treatment of gonorrhea and as an anti-aphrodisiac in
ayurvedic medicine.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Sandalwood is contraindicated in diseases of the kidney.

. PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction w ith the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Intake can
occasionally lead to skin itching, queasiness, gastrointestinal
complaints and hematuria. The drug possesses minimal
potential for sensitization.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Sandalwood is used internally in
preparations derived from comminuted drug.

Preparation: Sandalwood oil should only be taken in an
enteric-coated form.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 10 g of the drug; 1

to 15 g of the essential oil.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE
Adams DR et al., (1975) Phytochemistry 14:1459.

Brunke EJ, Dragoco Rep 35:102-109. 1980.

Demote DR et al., (1976) Helv Chim Acta 59:737.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 909 -----
660 /SANDALWOOD

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg 01ms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Patnikar SK. Naik CG, (1975) Tetrahedron Letters 15:1293.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aurl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Sandarac

Tetraclinis articulata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
naturally flowing resin and the bark.

Flowers and Fruit: The inflorescences are apical on the
lateral branches and conical. The male flowers are 4 to 5 mm
wide. There are 4 stamens with very short filaments and
scale-like anthers. The female flowers are very small, with 4
scales in 2 pairs arranged like whorls. The upper surface of
the flower is fleshy, with a swelling at the base almost
completely covering the ovules, which are on woody, dark-
brown, approximately 12 mm long cone scales. The seeds
are narrow ovoid with large, membranous wings on bo,th

sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Tetraclinis articulata grows as a
monoclinous, monoecious evergreen shrub or tree, reaching
a height of up to 12 m. The leaves are opposite, scaly, long
and down-turned. They grow close together in groups of 2
pairs on young branches in whorls. The branches are jointed

and somewhat pressed together.

Habitat: North Africa, particularly Morocco and Algeria

Production: Sandarac gum is the resin that flows naturally
from the branches and bark of Tetraclines articulata.

Sandarac Gum _ Tree,

Other Names: Arartree, Alerce,

Gharghar

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes (95%): diterpene acids:
callitrolic acid, sandaracinic acid, sandaracinolic acid, san-

including pimaric acid,

daracolic acid, callitrisinic acid

Bitter substances

Volatile oil (1.3%): including alpha- and_beta-pinene,

limonene, thymoquinone

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The resin is said to be antibacterial and bacteriostatic in
effect. Experimental data supporting these effects is not

available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The plant's use as a fumigant for rheumatic
and gouty complaints and edematous swellings has been
known since the 19th century. Other folk medicine uses

include fever and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction.with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut
inhaled or used in the form of compresses.

drug is either

LITERATURE

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
-Heidelberg 1998.

Sanguinaria canadensis

See Bloodroot

Sanguisorba_ officinalis

See Great Burnet

Sanicula europaea

See European Sanicle

Santalum album

See Sandalwood

Santolina chamaecyparissias

See Lavender Cotton

----- PAGE 910 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Saponaria officinalis

See Soap wort

Sarracenia purpurea

See Pitcher Plant

Sarsaparilla
Smilax species

TRADE NAMES
Sarsaparilla (available from numerous manufacturers) Sarsa-

parilla Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried roots, the
entire underground part and the tuberous swellings produced
by the runners.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white ,to pale green,
yellow or brown. They are dioecious, usually in axillary
cymes or racemes, and contain 6 petals in 2 circles. The
ovate to lanceolate tepals are curved outward. The male
flowers have 6 stamens with thick filaments and anthers,
which are fused at the base of the petals. The female flowers
have 6, sometimes only 3, staminoids. The ovate ovary ha's 3
carpels, each with 1 to 2 atropic ovules and with an almost
sessile, bent-back, 3-lobed stigma. The fruit is a globular,
red, blue or black berry with 1 to 6 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The species are evergreen shrubs or
semishrubs with climbing branches and stipular tendrils.
They have a short, gnarled, perennial, creeping or ascending
rhizome with numerous long roots stretching over many
meters. The branched, thorny, nodular stem has the thickness
of an arm and is yellowish-green. The leaves are in 2 rows.
They are alternate, simple and often hardy, with 3, occasion-
ally 5, reticulately joined main ribs. The leaf sheaths are
ovate and cordate, sagittate and petiolate, or often stipule-
like. They turn into climbing tendrils above and break off at
this point when they die.

Habitat: The species is indigenous to tropical and subtropi-
cal regions of America, eastern Asia and India. In Europe,
only the variety S. aspera is found in the Mediterranean
region.

Production: Sarsaparilla consists of the dried root of Smilax
species, such as Smilax aristolochiaefolii, Smilax regelii and
Smilax febrifuga. The plant is collected in the wild from
January to May. The roots are cut up and air-dried.

SARSAPARILLA / 661

Not to be Confused With: Adulterations and mistaken
identity often occurs among the Smilax species.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins (0.5-3%): chief components are sarsaparil-
loside, along with parillin, as a breakdown product; also
including among others desglucoparillin, desglucorhamno-
parillin, aglycones sarsapogenin

EFFECTS
The steroid saponins in the drug are responsible for its
irritating effect on the skin and the strong diuretic and
diaphoretic effect in high doses, as well as its effect as an
emulsifier and foam stabilizer.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Sarsaparilla root are used
for skin diseases, psoriasis, rheumatic complaints, kidney
diseases, and as a diuretic and diaphoretic.

Homeopathic Uses: In homeopathy Smilax is used for
itching skin rashes, rheumatism and inflammation of the
urinary organs.

- PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Stomach
complaints and queasiness may occur in rare cases, as could
kidney irritation.

DOSAGE

Daily Dosage:

Powder — 0.3 to L5 g drug

Tea — 3 cups daily with meals

Cold water extract — 500 ml mornings and evenings
Decoction — | to 5 g 3 times daily

Tincture — 5 to 15 g per day

Liquid extract — 8 to 15 ml

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

LITERATURE
Elmunajied DT et al., (1965) Phytochemistry 4(4):587.
Thurmon FM, (1942) New Eng. J Med 227(4):128.
Tschesche R et al., (1969) Chem Ber 102:1253.
Tschesche R et al., Chem Ber 102:53-61. 1969.
Tschesche R et al., Liebigs Ann Chem 699:212. 1966.

Tschesche R, In: Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Ed. H
Wagner, L Horhammer, Pub. Springer-Verlag (1971).

----- PAGE 911 -----
662 /SARSAPARILLA

Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs. Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olmserlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M. Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E. Biogene "Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Sassafras

Sassafras albidum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil of
the root wood, the peeled and dried root bark, and the root

wood.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers appear before the leaves.
They are dioecious, small and yellowish, and form loose
cymes. The perigone has 6 tepals. The male flower has 6
filaments and the female has 1 ovate ovary and 6 bent
stamens. The fruit is a pea-sized, oval drupe that, when ripe,
is dark blue and appears in the beaker-shaped receptacle.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sassafras albidum is a deciduous
tree up to 30 m tall with numerous branches. The bark of the
trunk and of the thicker branches is rough, deeply grooved
and grayish. The bark of the outer branches is green. The
alternate leaves are petiolate and 7 to 12 cm long. Some are
simple ovate, others deeply 2- or 3-lobed. The root bark is a
bright, rusty-brown and its irregular pieces are soft, brittle
and corky. They grow in distinct layers and show numerous
oil glands. The root itself is brownish-white with clear
concentric rings traversed by narrow medullary rays.

Characteristics: The taste is sweet and slightly astringent
and the odor is pleasantly aromatic. Sassafras' carcinogenic
effect, however, has made its use inadvisable.

Habitat: The plant is common to eastern North America,
Mexico, and Taiwan.

Production: Sassafras wood is the root wood of Sassafras
albidium. The woody roots (up to 20 cm thick) are dug up in

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

autumn, then shredded, cut or sawn into cubes. The wood
must not be moistened when being cut because moisture will
cause a deterioration of smell and taste in the later drying

process.

Not to be Confised With: Sassafras root wood is sometimes
confused with the wood of the tree's trunk, which has
distinctive annual ring growth and marrow, or with the bark,
which has calculus and primary fibers. Another difference is
that the trunk wood and bark have little smell or taste.

Other Names: Ague Tree, Cinnamon Wood, Saxifrax,
Sassafrax

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY mr
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (6-9%): chief components safrole (up to 90%), 5-
methoxyeugenol (up to 30%), asarone (up to 18%), camphor
(up to 5%)

Isoquinoline alkaloids: representatives of the aporphine and
reticuline type (less than 0.1%)

EFFECTS

The drug is said to
undocumented. The toxic characteristics are determined by
contains safrole (sassafras aetherole-

ave a mild diuretic effect, which is

the essential oil, whic
um that is renal toxic and carcinogenic).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Sassafras is considered obsolete, but
previously was used for disorders of the urinary tract. The
drug, which was formerly an ingredient of "blood-cleaning
tea," has also been used for skin disorders, inflammation of
the mucous membranes, rheumatism and syphilis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Because of the carcinogenic effect of the safrole, neither the
drug nor its volatile oil should be administered.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is a constituent of tea

mixtures.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, add 50 g of the drug to
1 liter of water. To prepare a tea, add 1 teaspoonful (3 g) of
the drug to boiling water and strain after 10 minufes. A
tincture is prepared using 200 parts coarse powder mixed
with 100 parts diluted wine spirit.

Daily Dosage: A single dose of tincture consists of 5 g.
Storage: Keep Sassafras in a tightly sealed tin container.

LITERATURE
Albert K, Sassafrasol zum Abtanzen? In: PZ 142(11):878. 1997.
Borchet P et a!., (1973) Cancer Res 33:575.

Brophy JJ, Goldsack RJ, House APN, Lassak EV, J Ess Oil
Res 5:117-122. 1993.

----- PAGE 912 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Chowdhury BK et al., (1976) Phytochemistry 15:1803.

Kamdem DP et al., Chemical composition of essential oil from
the root bark of Sassaftas albidum. In: PM 61(6):574-575.
1995.

Kampen KR van, Sudan grass and sorghum poisoning of horse:
a possible lathyrogenic disease. In: J Am Vet Medic Assoc
156. 629-630. 1970.

Miller EC et al., (1983) Cancer Res 43:1124.
Segelman AB et al., (1976) J Am Med Ass 236:477.
Sethi ML et al.. (1976) Phytochemistry 15:1773.
Further information in:

Frohne D. Pfiinder HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L. Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.,. Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M. Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Eeomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Sassafras albidum

See Sassafras

Satureja hortensis

See Summer Savory

Saussurea costus

See Costus

SAVIN TOPS /663

Savin Tops
Juniperus sabina

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Paris: The medicinal parts are the essential oil of
the leaves and branch tips; the dried leafy branch tips; the
fresh, youngest non-woody branch tips with leaves; and the
branches and leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The male and female flowers are at the
end of the twigs, which are covered in leaf-scales. The male
flowers are up to 2 mm wide and oblong to ovate. The
female flowering branch bears the flowers erect when in
bloom, later curved inward. The flowers have 4 carpels,
which develop into pea-sized berry-cones with 4 ovate seeds.
The seeds are ovate and striped with numerous edges.

Leaves, Stem and Root: It is generally a 4.5 m_ high,
dioecious, evergreen shrub with either an erect trunk, an
irregular crown or numerous low-lying branches with erect
tips. The bark of the young branches are light brown, of
more mature branches red-brown and peeling. The young
plants up to 10 years have only needle-like 4 mm long, blue-
green leaves whose tips stand out. -Mature plants have
triangular, scale-like, imbricate leaves.

Habitat: Found in southern and central Europe, the Caucasus
and the southern mountains of Asian Russia, as well as in the
northern U.S.

Production: Savin Tops is the young shoots and twig tips of
Juniperus sabina.

Other Names: Savin, Savine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (3-5%): chief components sabinyl acetate,
sabinene, further including among others beta-myrcene,
terpin-4-ol, gamma-terpinene, alpha-pinene, limonene

Lignans: including among others deoxypodorhizone, deoxy-
podophyllotoxin, junaphtoinsaure, deoxypicropodophyllo-
toxin, and dehydropodophyllotoxin

Hydroxycoumarins: including among others cumarsabine, 8-
methoxycumarsabine, siderin, 4-methoxy-5-methylcouma-

rin- propiophenone
Propiophenone derivatives: including among others 2-hy-

droxy-3,4-dimethoxy-6-methyl-propiophenone

EFFECTS
The drug is hyperemic both internally and externally, and is
a strong irritant to the skin and mucous membrane.

Lignans are also said to have antineoplastic and antiviral
properties: The main substance is 3 to 5% essential oil with

----- PAGE 913 -----
664 /SAVIN TOPS

thujon acting as the principal ingredient, along with contain-
ing podophyllotoxin and other lignans.

A diuretic effect has been described for the essential oil and
the drug is also said to be emmenagogic and hemostyptic.

The use of the drug on viral warts seems justified because of
the podophyllotoxin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: For external use only, in the treatment of fig

warts.

Homeopathic Uses: Juniperus sabina is used for metrorrha-
gia, gout, inflammation of the urogenital tract, rheumatism
and warts.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is severely toxic. External administration, in
particular of the volatile oil, can lead to severe skin irritation,
blister formation, necroses and resorbent poisonings.

OVERDOSAGE

One is cautioned against internal administration of the drug
and of the volatile oil. Fatal poisonings have occurred
repeatedly following administration of the drug in either
powder form or infusion as an abortient. Symptoms include,
among others, queasiness, cardiac rhythm disorders, spasm,
kidney damage and hematuria. Death finds the patient in a
state of central paralysis and deep unconsciousness. The
internal administration of 6 drops of the volatile oil is life-
threatening for humans.

Following gastrointestinal emptying, (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage, sodium sulfate) and instillation of
activated charcoal, the therapy for poisonings consists of
treating spasms with diazepam (I.V.), colic with atropine,
electrolyte substitution and treating possible cases of acidosis
with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Monitoring of kidney
function, blood coagulation and liver values is essential.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.
The level of danger depends upon the age of the drug of the
volatile oil, as the toxicity probably develops chiefly through
the formation of terpene peroxides during storage. The fresh
tips of the branches contain presumably very little toxicity.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: For external use, as a powdered
drug. Internal application is obsolete because of the danger
of intoxication.

Daily Dosage: maximum | gm externally.

Savin Tops powder - Powder twice daily, put bandages into
the folds of skin.

Skin ointment - Average content: 50% drug.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Feliciano AS, Del Corral JMM, Gordaliza M, Castro A, Acid
and phenolic lignans from Juniperus sabina. In: PH 30: 3483-
3485. 1991.

Fourier G et al., PM 57:392-393. 1991.

Fournier G et al., Pharm Belg 45:293. 1990.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Auflj.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hartwell, JL et al., (1953) J Chem Soc 75: 235.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheirn 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Saw Palmetto

Serenoa repens

TRADE NAMES

Saw Palmetto (available from numerous manafacturers), Saw
Palmetto Berries, Saw Palmetto Standardized, Centrum Saw
Palmetto, Proactive Saw Palmetto, Standardized Saw Pal-
metto ExtractCap, Saw Palmetto Extract, Saw Palmetto
Power, Premium Blend. Saw Palmetto, Herbal Sure Saw
Palmetto, Quanterra Prostate, Super Saw Palmetto Plus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the partially dried
ripe fruit, the ripe fresh fruit and the ripe dried fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The inconspicuous cream flowers are in
short, densely pubescent, paniculately branched  inflores-
cences. The fruit is deep purple to almost black. It is an
ovate, 3 cm long, 1-seeded berry. It has a hard but fragile
pericarp that covers a pale brown, spongy pulp. The
endocarp is thin and papery. The fruit is slightly wrinkled,

----- PAGE 914 -----
w*

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

1.25 to 2.5 cm long and 1.25 cm in diameter. The hard seed
is pale brown, oval or globular, and has a hilum near the
base. The whole panicle can weigh up to 4 kg.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a bushy palm with a
maximum height of 6 m. The large, yellow-green leaves
have up to 20 segments and form a crown.

Characteristics: The taste of the seeds is soapy and
unpleasant.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the coastal regions of the
southern states of the U.S., from South Carolina to Florida
and southern California.

Other Names: Sabal, Shrub Palmetto

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroids: Sterols, including beta-sitosterol, beta-sitosterol-3-
O-glucosides, beta-sitosterol-3-O-diglucoside, beta-si toster-
ol-fatty acid esters and their glucosides, for example beta-
sitosterol-3-O-myristate,  beta-sitosterol-3-O-(6-0-myristyl-
beta-glucosides)

Flavonoids: including isoquercitrin, kaempferol-3-O-gluco-
sides, rhoifolin

Water-soluble polysaccharides (galactoarabane with uronic
acid)

Fatty oil: free fatty acids

The lipophilic components (fatty oil with phytosterines) can
be found in ethanolic and hexane-extracts. The anti-exuda-
tive components (polysaccharides) are found in aqueous
extracts. Ethanolic extracts contain both component groups.

EFFECTS
Anti-Androgenic Effects

The lipophilic extract of the herb inhibits binding of
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) to the cytosolic androgenic
receptor and alpha l-adrenoceptor in the prostate, thus
preventing accumulation of the steroid, which may lead to
prostate hyperplasia (Carilla, 1984; Goepel, 1999). Anti-
androgenic effects of the lipophilic extract also consist of 5-
alpha-reductase and 3- ketosteroid reductase inhibition.
These enzymes are responsible for the conversion of
testosterone to DHT and for conversion of DHT to an
androgen compound, respectively (Sultan, 1984).

Anti-Estrogenic Effects

The herb lowers cytosol and nuclear receptor values for
estrogen which result in an anti-estrogen effect since
progesterone receptor content is linked to estrogenic activity.

Anti-estrogenic agents inhibit stromatic prostate mass
growth in patients with benign prostate hypertrophy (DiSil-

SAW PALMETTO / 665

verio, 1992). There is also some evidence with inhibition of
several steps involved in prolactin receptor signal transduc-
tion in ovary cells (Vacher, 1995).

Anti-Inflammatory Effects

The hexane extracts of the herb have demonstrated anti-
inflammatory activity (Champault, 1984). Inhibition of the
synthesis of arachidonic acid inflammatory metabolites,
through a double blocking of cyclooxygenas and 5-lipoxy-
genase pathways results in anti-inflammatory properties.
(Breu, 1992). The drug also contains anti-spasmodic proper-
ties by inhibiting calcium influx and activation of the
sodium/calcium ion exchanger. Induction of-protein synthe-
sis plays a role in the antispasmotic effect with cyclic AMP
as a possible mediator. Extracts of the drug may also
antagonize the contracting effect of acetylcholine on urinary
bladders. (Gutierrez, 1996).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia

The effect of Saw Palmetto on voiding symptoms and
urodynamic parameters was determined in men with lower
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) presumed secondary to
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). The study was conduct-
ed over a 6-month period with Saw Palmetto 160 mg given
twice daily. Parameters evaluated included peak urinary flow
rate, postvoid residual urine volume, pressure-flow study and
serum prostate-specific antigen. The herb was well-tolerated
and significantly improved urinary tract symptoms. There
was no significant improvement in objective measures of
bladder outlet obstruction (Gerber, 1998).

A 6-month, double-blind, randomized equivalence study was
conducted to compare the effects of a Saw Palmetto extract
(320 mg Permixon) with those of a 5 alpha-reductase
inhibitor (5 mg finasteride). The study included 1098 men
with moderate benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH) using the
International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) as the primary
end-point. The finasteride and Permixon treatment groups
relieved the symptoms of BPH including a decrease in IPSS,
improved quality of life and increased peak urinary flow
rate. There was no statistical difference in improvement
between the two treatment groups. Finasteride markedly
decreased serum PSA levels and prostate volume while
Permixon had little effect on androgen-dependent parame-
ters. This conclusion suggests that other pathways might also
be involved in the symptomatology of BPH (Carraro, 1996).

Serenoa repens given 160 mg twice daily was compared to
alfuzosin 2.5 mg three times daily to determine the effect on
63 benign prostatic hyperplasia. The double-blind, compara-
tive, parallel-groups study determined efficacy by assess-
I ment of clinical symptoms (Boyarsky's nscale, visual

----- PAGE 915 -----
666/SAW PALMETTO

analogue scale, clinical global impression), urinary flow
rates (uroflowmetry) and residual urinary volume (transab-
dominal ultrasound). The Serenoa repens treatment group
had similar improvement to that of the alfuzosin treatment
group, but significant effects were in favor of the alfuzosin
treatment group with overall clinical impression and visual
analogue scale (Grasso, 1995).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Prostate complaints
+ Irritable bladder

Saw Palmetto is used for urination problems in benign
prostate hyperplasia stages I and II. This medication relieves
only the difficulties associated with an enlarged prostate
without reducing the enlargement.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Saw Palmetto is used for
inflammation of the urinary trnct, bladder, testicles and
mammary glands. It has been used for nocturnal enuresis,
persistant cough, eczema and improvement of libido.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for micturation

problems and inflammation of the urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Stomach complaints following intake have been
observed in rare cases. Patients with hormone-dependent
cancers should observe caution and speak to a physician
regarding the use of Saw Palmetto because of its anti-
estrogenic, estrogenic and anti-androgenic effects. The use of
Saw Palmetto with pregnancy and breast feeding is not
recommended due to its potential hormonal effects.

Drug Interactions: Saw Palmetto is believed to exert
estrogen, androgen and alpha-adrenergic blocking effects.
Because of this, the use of hormones, hormone-like drugs or

adrenergic drugs concomitantly may need to be adjusted.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb and other galenic

preparations for oral use.

How Supplied:

Capsule—80 mg, 125 mg, 160 mg, 227 mg, 250 mg, 320 mg
450 mg, 500 mg, 565 mg, 570 mg, 585 mg, 600 mg, 1000

mg
Liquid—1:1

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 1 to 2 gm of the
drug or 320 mg of the lipophilic extract (hexane or ethanol
90% v/v). Dosages used in studies demonstrated efficacy at

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

160 mg given twice daily or 320 mg given once daily
(Carraro, 1996; Gerber, 1998; Grasso, 1995).

LITERATURE
Anonym, Welche Bedeutung haben pflanzliche Prostatamittel.
In: DAZ 133(9):720. 1993.

Aso Y, Boccon-Gibob L, Brendler CB et al., (1993) Clinical
research criteria. In: Cockett AT, Aso Y, Chatelain C, Denis L,
Griffith K, Murphy G (eds.), Proceedings of the second
international consultation on benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
Paris, SCI S. 345-355.

Bach D, (1995) Medikamentose Langheitbehandlung der BPH
Ergebnisse einer prospektiven 3-Jahres-Studie mit dem
Sabalextrakt IDS 89. Urologe [B]35:178-183. ~ ~-

Bach D, Behandlung der benignen Prostatahypertrophie. In: ZPT
17(4):209-218. 1996.

Bach D, Ebeling L, Long-term drug treatment of benign
prostatic hyperplasia - Results of a prospective 3-year
multicenter study using Sabal extract IDS 89. In: Phytomedicine
3(2): 105-111. 1996.

Bauer R, Neues von "immunmodulierenden Drogen" und
"Drogen mit antiallergischer und antiinflammatorischer
Wirkung". In: ZPT 14(I):23-24. 1993.

Bazan NG, Authie D, Braquet P, Effect of Serenoa repens
extract (Permixon (r)) on estradiol/testosteron-induced
experimental prostate enlargement in the rat. In: Pharmacol Res
34(3/4): 171-179. 1996.

Becker H, Ebeling L, (1988) Konservative Therapie der
benignen Prostata-Hyperplasie (BPH) mit Cemilton (N) -
Ergebnisse einer placebokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie.
Urologe [B]28:301.

Becker H, Ebeling L, (1991) Phytotherapie der BPH mit
Cemilton(N) - Ergebnisse einer kontrollierten Verlaufsstudie.
Urologe [B]31:113.

Berges RR, Windeler J, Trampisch HJ, Senge TH, (1995)
Randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial of G-
sitosterol in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Lancet
345:1529-1532.

Breu W, Hagenlocher M, Redl K et al., Antiphlogistische
Wirkung eines mit hyperkritischem Kohlendioxid gewonnenen
Sabalfrucht-Extraktes. In vitro Hemmung des Cyclooxygenase-
rund 5-Lipoxygenase-Metabolismus. Arzneiiriittelforschung 1992;
42:547.

Breu W, Stadler F, Hagenlocher M et al., Der Sabalfrucht-
Extrakt SG 291. Ein Phytotherapeutikum zur Behandlung der
benignen Prostatahyperplasie. Z Phytother 1992; 13:107-115.

Carraro JC et al., Comparision of phytotherapy (Permixon (R))
with finasteride in the treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia:
a randomized international study of 1,098 patients. In: Prostate
29(4):231-240. 1996.

Carilla E, Briley M, Fauran F et al., Binding of Permixon(R), *
new treatment for prostatic benign hyperplasia, to the cytosolic

----- PAGE 916 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

androgen receptor in rat prostate. J Steroid Biochem 1984;
20:521-523.

Carraro J. Raynaud J, Koch G et al., Comparison of
phytotherapy (Permixon) with finasteride in the treatment of
enign prostate hyperplasia: a randomized international study of
1.098 patients. Prostate 1996 Oct;29(4):231-40.

Casarosa C. Cosci M, 0 di Coscio, Fratta M, (1988) Lack of
effects of a lyposterolic extract of Serenoa repens on plasma
levels of testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing
hormone. Clin Ther 10:5.

DiSilverio F, D'Eramo GD, Lubrano C et al., Evidence that
Serenoa repens extract displays an anti-estrogenic activity in
prostatic tissue of benign prostatic hypertrophy patients. Eur
Urol 1992: 21:309.

DiSilverio F, D'Eramo G. Flammia GP et ah, Pharmacological

combinations in the treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy. J
Urol (Paris) 1993a; 99:316-320.

Engelmann U. Phytopharmaka und Synthetika bei der
Behandlung der benignen Prostatahypertrophie. In: ZPT
18(0:13-19. 1997.

Gerber GS, Zagaja GP, Bales GT, et al., Saw Palmetto
(Seronoa repens) in men with lower urinary tract symptoms:
effects oh urodynamic parameters and voiding symptoms.
Urology 1998 Jun;51(6): 1003-7.

Goepel M. Hecker U, Krege S et al.. Saw Palmetto extracts
potently and noncompetitively inhibit human alpha 1-
adrenoceptors in vitro. Prostate 1999 Feb 15;38(3):208-I5.

Gutierrez M, Garcia De Boto MJ, Cantabrana B et al.,
Mechanisms involved in the spasmolytic effect of extracts from
Sabal serrulata fruit on smooth muscle. Gen Pharmacol 1996;
27:171-176.

Grasso M. Montesano A, Buonaguidi A et al.. Comparative
effects of alfuzosin versus Serenoa repens in the treatment of
symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. Arch Esp Urol 1995
Jan-Feb;48( 1):97-103.

Gutierrez M, Hidalgo A & Cantabrana B, Spasmolytic activity
of a lipidic extract from Sabal serrulata fruits further study of
the mechanism underlying this activity. Planta Med 1996;
62:507-511.

Hansel R et al., (1964) Planta Med 12:169.

Hamischfeger G, Stolze H, (1989) Serenoa repens - Die
Sagezahnpalme. Z Phytother 10:71-76.

Koch E, (1995) Pharmakologie und Wirkmechanismen von
Extrakten aus Sabalfriichten (Sabal fructus): Brennesselwurzeln
(Urticae radix) und Kurbissamen (Cucurbitae peponis semen)
bei der Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. In: Loew
D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S 57-79.

Mattei FM, Capone M, Acconia A, Medikamentose Therapie
der benignen Prostatahyperplasie mit einem Exktrakt der

Sagepalme. In: Therapiewoche Urologie, Nephrologie 2:346-350.

1990.

SAW PALMETTO / 667

Miersch WDE, Benigne Prostatahyperplasie. In: DAZ
133(29):2653. 1993.

Nahrstedt A, (1993) Pflanzliche Urologica - eine kritische
Ubersicht. Pharm Z 138:1439-1450.

Niederprum HJ, Schweikert HU, Zanker KS, (1994) Testosteron
5D-reductase inhibition by free fatty acids from Sabal serrulata
fruits. Phytomedicine 1:127-133.

Plosker GL, Brogden RN, Serenoa repens (Permixon (R)): A
review of its pharmacological and therapeutic efficacy in benign
prostatic hyperplasia. In: Drugs & Aging 9(5):379-395. 1996.
Ravenna L et al., Effects of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa
repens (Permixon (R)) on human prostatic cell lines. In:
Prostate 29(4):219-230. 1996. ~~.

Rhodes L, Primka RL, Berman CH, Vergult F. Gabriel M,
Pierre-Malice M, Gibelin B, Comparision of Finasteride
(Proscar(R)), a Salpha-reductase inhibitor, and various
commercial plant extracts in in vitro and in vivo Salpha
reductase inhibition. In: Prostate.

Schilcher H, (1987) Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der
Phytotherapie am Beispiel pflanzlicher Urologika. Urologe [B]
27:316-319.

Schilcher H, (1987) Pflanzliche Diuretika. Urologe [B]27:215-
-222.

Schilcher B, In: Schilcher H: Phytotherapie in der Urologie.
Hippokrates Verlag Stuttgart. 1992.

Shimada H et al., Biological active acylglycerides from the
berries of Saw Palmetto (Serenoa repens). In: JNP 60(4):417-
418. 1997.

Sultan C, Terraza A, Devillier C et al.. Inhibition of androgen
metabolism and binding by a liposterolic extract of 'Serenoa
repens £" in human foreskin fibroblasts. J Steroid Biochem
1984; 20:515-519.

Vacher P, Prevarskaya N, Skryma R et al., The lipidosterolic
extract from Serenoa repens interferes with prolactin receptor
signal transduction. J Biomed Sci 1995; 2:357-365.

Wagner H, Flachsbarth H, (1981) Planta Med 41:244.
Wichtl M, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: DAZ 132(30): 1576. 1992.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 46>
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 917 -----
668/SCABIOSA SUCCFSA

Scabiosa succisa

See Premorse

Scarlet Pimpernel

Anagallis arvensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
flowering herb, usually with the roots removed.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has 6 to 10 brick-red flowers in
the leafaxils, which are up to 2.5 times as long as the bracts.
The symmetrically radiating flower has a double perianth. It
has 5 sepals that are 4 to 5 mm long, entire-margined.
narrow-lanceolate and acute. The wheel-shaped corolla is
usually vermilion, but occasionally blue-flesh colored, lilac
or white. The tip of the corolla is obovate to oval, about 7
mm long by 6 mm wide, overlapping at the base, entire-
margined or slightly crenate with 50 to 70 glandular hairs. Its
5 stamens have a distinct awn and are fused to a funnel at the
tube. The anthers are short, ellipsoid and cordate at the base.
The superior ovary is globose and one-valved with an oblong
style and head-like stigma. The fruit is a globose pyxidum, 4
to 5 mm in diameter, that contains 20 to 22 rough wart-like,
brown seeds 13 mm long by | mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Anagallis arvensis is an annual herb
with prostrate, creeping, square stems up to 30 cm long. Its
thinner, branched, ascending stems grow to a length of 6 to
30 cm. The square shoots, like the leaves, are thickly covered
with short hairs when young; they later become glabrous.
The leaves are opposite, occasionally in whorls of 3, ovate to
lanceolate, up to 20 mm long by 10 mm wide, sessile, entire-
margined, acute and spotted black on the underside.

Characteristics: The flowers, which are poisonous, close at
night and open at about 9:00 each morning. They also close
at the first sign of rain.

Habitat: The plant is widely distributed throughout Europe,
Asia, the U.S. and non-tropical South America.

Production: Scarlet Pimpernel herb is the dried herb in
flower of Anagallis arvensis, generally without the root but
occasionally including the whole plant. It is collected in the
wild and also cultivated.

Not to be Confiised With: The blue flowering form of Scarlet
Pimpernel is often confused with Anagallis foemina, and
occasionally with Stellaria media.

Other Names: Adder's Eyes, Poor Man's Weatherglass, Red
Chickweed, Red Pimpernel, Shepherd's Barometer

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: including anagalline, chief sapogenine
13, 28-epoxy-16- oxooleanan

Cucurbitacins: including cucurbitacins E, B, D, I and L
Flavonoids
Caffeic acid derivatives

EFFECTS
In vitro and animal tests showed the drug (main constituents
saponins and amaroids of the cucurbitacin group) to have
fungitoxic, antiviral, taecidal, spermicidal, estrogenic, oxyto-
cic and hemolytic effects. The aqueous extract of the dried
leaves is fungitoxic. Triterpenglycoside, anagalloside and
aglycon anagalligenones, when isolated from the drug,
displayed inhibitory results against numerous micro-organ-
isms. Aqueous extracts showed uterine contracting activity
in rats, guinea pigs, rabbits, and on strips of human uterine
material. The triterpene saponins isolated from the drug
demonstrated action against human sperm. The methanol
extract of the drug demonstrated estrogen activity in the
Allen-Doisy test. The saponins isolated from the powder’
drug with ethanol demonstrated hemolytic activity in human
blood. The methanol extract of the dried powdered drug is
antiviral against Herpes simplex Type I, Adenovirus Type II
and Polio Type II, among others. The saponins are the active
constituents. The acetyl-saponin isolated from the drug acts
as a teniacide.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used to treat depression,
disorders of the mucous membranes, hemorrhoids, herpes,
painful kidney and liver disorders (in particular, to increase
urination), poorly healing wounds and pruritus. The herb is
used as a supporting treatment in various carcinomas. It is
used both internally and externally (as a poultice) to treat
pains in the joints.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for snake bites, dog
bites, fish poisoning, joint ailments and edema.

Indian Medicine: Employed as a treatment for menstruation
disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: Used in the treatment of skin rashes,
warts and urinary tract infections.

Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Large doses or long-term administration could lead
to gastroenteritis and nephritis, due to the cucurbitacins
content of the drug.

----- PAGE 918 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE
Higher dosages (no amounts specified) are said to have a
strong diuretic, diarrheic and mildly narcotic effect.

DOSAGE

A Mode of Administration: Scarlet Pimpernel topically as a

poultice and internally as an infusion.

Preparation: For the treatment of liver and kidney disorders
as well as dropsy, add one teaspoonful of the drug to a glass
of hot water and let it steep for 10 minutes. Drink throughout
the day.

Daily Dosage: The usual dosage is 18 g of the powder 4
times a day.

Homeopathic Dosage: The oral dosage is 5 to 10 drops, 1
tablet or 10 globules daily. The parenteral dosage is 1 ml
twice a week sc. Topically, ointment can be applied 1 to 2
times daily.

LITERATURE
Alimbaeva PK, Mukhamedziev MM, Rast Resur 5:380-385.
1969.

Aliotta G. De Napoli L. Giordano F. Piccialli G. Piccialli V,
Santacroce C, An oleanen triterpene from Anagallis arvensis. In:
PH 31(3):929-933. 1992.

Amoros M and Girre RL, (1977) Phytochemistry 26(3):787.
Amoros M et al.. (1979) PlantMed Phytother 13:122.

Amoros M, Fauconnier B, Girre RL, In vitro antiviral activity
of a saponin fiom Anagallis arvensis, Primulaceae, against
herpes simplex virus and poliovirus. In: Antiviral Res 8:13-25.
1987.

Banerji R et al., (1981) Indian Drugs 19:121.

Buechi S, Antivirale Saponine, pharmakologische und klinische
Untersuchungen. In: DAZ 136(2):89-98. 1996.

Yamada Y et al., (1978) Phytochemistry 17:1798.
Yamada Y et al., Chem Pharm Bull 26:3107-3112. 1978.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

SCHISANDRA (WU-WEI-ZI)/669

Schinus molle

See California Peppertree

Schinus_ terebinthifolius

See Brazilian Pepper Tree

Schisandra_ chinensis
See Schisandra (Wu-Wei-Zi)

Schisandra sphenanthera

See Lemon-Wood

Schisandra (Wu-Wei-Zi)

Schisandra chinensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in clusters with a few
blossoms in the axils of the bracts. There are 6 to 8 tepals.
The perigone of the male flowers has 6 to 8 tepals that are 6
to 11 mm long and 5 mm wide, and 5 to 15 stamens. The
female flowers have a similar perigone and 17 to 40
elongated, elliptical ovaries. The round, fleshy, berry-like
fruit grows as a slim, hanging aggregate or as bloomed
individual fruits. The fruit is deep red to black-brown and
appears partly white-powdered. The fruit has a diameter of 5
to 8 mm and contains | to 2 reniform seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This liana plant can be monoecious
or dioecious. The leaves are alternate. They are arranged like
whorls on short shoots. The petiole is 1 to 4 cm long. The
lamina is 5 to 11 cm long, 3 to 9 cm wide, elongate to ovate-
elliptical, serrate to dentate with up to 3 teeth per cm. The
upper surface is green or brown. The lower surface is partly
pubescent. The young branches are brown to purple.

Characteristics: The crushed seeds taste hot and are

aromatic.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northeastern China and
Korea.

----- PAGE 919 -----
670/SCHISANDRA_ (WU-WEI-ZI)

Production: Northern schisandra fruit is the dried, ripe fruit
of Schisandra chinensis. The fruit is harvested in autumn,
then steamed before being dried in the sun.

Other Names: Chinese Mock-Barberry, Lemonwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: containing among others, alpha- and beta-
chamigrene, chamigrenal. sesquicarene, (+)-ylangene

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

Lignans (in the seeds 5 to 20%): dibenzo[a,c]cyclooctene
derivatives, including schizandrine A to C, schizandrol A
and B, schizantherine A and B, gomisins D to J, KI to K3,
LI and L2, MI and M2. N and O, P to T, the gomisins
present to some extent as esters, among them those of
angelic acid, benzoic acid and acetic acid; additional lignans
with other parent substances, including pregomisin

Fatty oil (in the seeds): chief fatty acids oleic acid and
linoleic acid

EFFECTS
The lignans isolated from the drug (schizandrin, schizandrol)
are liver-protective in effect, acting as radical scavengers and
promoting liver regeneration. Anti-inflammatory and tumor-
inhibiting characteristics have also been demonstrated.
Schizandrol A is said to be neuroleptic, anticonvulsive and
sedative in effect. Schisandra fruits and seeds are believed to
bring about a non-specific increase in physical performance
ability and to be antithelminthic in effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Chinese Medicine: The plant is used mainly for conditions of
the digestive tract such as intestinal inflammation, and also
for insomnia, enuresis, pollakisuria, nightly ejaculation,
coughs, chronic diarrhea, dyspnea, insomnia, spontaneous
outbreaks of sweating, hepatitis, neurasthenia and anxiety

states. Efficacy for these indications has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and powdered drug and their
preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare Cuwuweizi powder, the drug is
evaporated in the ratio of 1:5 with vinegar in closed
containers until the surface turns black. This substance is

then ground to a powder.
Daily Dosage: Powder/tincture/extract: 1.5 to 6 g daily

Storage: Store in dry area with good air circulation to avoid

fungal formation.

"

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
994.

p SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Determination and
tudy of lignan distribution in the fruits of Schisandra chinensis
Turcz.). Baill Farmatsiia, 78:34-7, 1972 May-Jun.

SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Determination of
lignans in the fruits of Schisandra chinensis (Trucz.) Baill. and
. Sphenanthern Rehd. et Wils. using HPLC and their
romatograms. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 78:611-4,
39-40, 1989 Oct.

ip SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Determination of
e active ingredients in Chinese drug wuweizi (Schisandra
inensis) by TLC-densitometry. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 78:49-
3, 1990.
SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Ecological
investigation on Schisandra chinensis (Turez.) Baill. of the
Changbai Mountain. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 78:204-
5, 255, 1992 Apr.

SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Effect of a lignan-
enriched extract of Schisandra chinensis on aflatoxin Bl and
cadmium chloride-induced hepatotoxicity in rats. Pharmacol
Toxicol, 78:413-6, 1996 Jun.

SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Pharmacological
studies on an oil emulsion of Schisandra chinensis. Chung Yao
Tung Pao, 78:185-6, 1984 Jul.

SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Preliminary studies
on the processing of Schisandra chinensis. Chung Yao Tung
Pao, 78:26-7, 1986 Mar.

Ip SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, Schisandra
chinensis-dependent myocardial protective action of sheng-mai-
san in rats. Am J Chin Med, 78:255-62, 1996.

Tp SP, Mak DH, Li PC, Poon MK, Ko KM, The occurrence of
some important lignans in Wu Wei Zi (Schisandra chinensis)
and its allied species. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 78:138-43, 1983
Feb.
Ip SP, Poon MK, Che CT, Ng KH, Kong YC, Ko KM, Anti-
oxidant activity of dibenzocyclooctene lignans isolated from
Schisandraceae. Planta Med, 21:311-3, 1992 Aug.

Ip SP, Poon MK, Che CT, Ng KH, Kong YC, Ko KM, '
Schisandrin B protects against carbon tetrachloride toxicity by
enhancing the mitochondrial glutathione redox status in mouse
liver. Free Radic Biol Med, 21:709-12, 1996.

Ko KM, Ip SP, Poon MK, Wu SS, Che CT, Ng KH, Kong
YC, Effect of a lignan-enriched fructus schisandrae extract on
hepatic glutathione status in rats: protection against carbon
tetrachloride toxicity. Planta Med, 21:134-7, 1995 Apr.

Liu CS, Fang SD, Huang MF, Kao YL, Hsu JS, Studies on the
active principles of Schisandra sphenanthera Rehd. et Wils. The
structures of schisantherin A, B, C, D, E and the related
compounds. Sci Sin, 21:483-502, 1978 Jul-Aug.

Oe se aa

Hs Do

Aad

----- PAGE 920 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Nishiyama N, Wang YL. Saito H, Beneficial effects of S-113m,
a novel herbal prescription, on learning impairment model in
mice. Biol Pharm Bull, 21:1498-503, 1995 Nov.

Tong Q, Deuteration of dimethyl 4,4'-dimethoxy-5,6,5',6'-
dimethylenedioxybipheny 1-2,2' -dicarboxylate (BDD): a remedy
for chronic hepatitis. Chung Kuo I Hsueh Ko Hsueh Yuan
Hsueh Pao, 21:42-5, 1990 Feb.

Yasukawa K, Ikeya Y, Mitsuhashi H, Iwasaki M, Aburada M,
Nakagawa S, Takeuchi M. Takido M, Gomisin A inhibits tumor
promotion by 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in two-stage
carcinogenesis in mouse skin. Oncology, 21:68-71, 1992.

Scolopendrium vulgare

See Hartstongue

Scopolia

Scopolia carniolica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The nodding flowers are solitary and
axillary on long bending pedicles. The calyx is campanulate
with obtuse tips. The corolla is tubular-campanulate, glossy
brown outside, and matte olive-green inside. The anthers are
large and yellowish. The fruit is a 2-valved pixidium. The
seeds are 3 to 4 mm long, brownish-yellow and bumpy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The erect perennial plant grows from
30 to 60 cm high. The rhizome is horizontal, slightly bent
and almost cylindrical. The rhizome grows up to 12 cm long
and 5 cm thick, and is covered in tough, loose-skinned fibers.
The color varies between yellowish-brown to dark brownish-
gray. The stems bear scale-like stipules at the base that are
bifurcated, fleshy and also glabrous or with scattered hairs.
The 12 cm by 4 to 9 cm foliage leaves are petiolate, obovate,
entire-margined or lightly sinuate and dull green.

Characteristics: Scopolia is considered to be a narcotic. The
taste is initially somewhat sweet, then bitter and biting. The
plant is odorless.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern Germany,
Austria, Hungary, and southwest Russia.

Production: Scopolia root consists of the dried rhizome of
Scopolia carniolica.

Other Names: Scopola, Japanese Belladonna, Belladonna
Scopola, Russian Belladonna

SCOPOLIA /671

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tropane alkaloids (0.2-0.5%): chief alkaloid (-)-hyoscya-
mine, which changes (to some extent) under drying condi-
tions into atropine; also including scopolamine

Hydroxycoumarins: including among others, scopoletins,
scopoline

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acids

EFFECTS
The drug acts as a parasympatholytic/anticholinergic via
competitive antagonism of the neuromuscular transmitter
acetylcholine. Because of its parasympatholytic properties,
Scopolia root relaxes the smooth muscle organs and elimi-
nates spastic conditions, especially of the gastrointestinal
tract and the bile ducts.

Conditions of muscular tremors and muscular rigidity caused
by central nervous impulses, are alleviateH. The action on the
heart is positively chronotropic and positively dromotropic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Liver and gallbladder complaints

The drug is used for spasms and colic-like pain of the
gastrointestinal tract, bile ducts, and urinary tract for adults
and for children over 6 years of age.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in angle-closure glaucoma,
prostatic adenoma with residual urine, tachycardia, mechani-
cal stenosis in the area of the gastrointestinal tract, and
megacolon.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
However, accommodation disorders, heat build-up due to a
decline in sweat secretion, micturition disorders, and obstipa-
tion can occur as side effects, particularly with overdosages.
Scopolia should be used only under the supervision of an
expert qualified in its appropriate use.

Drug Interactions: Scopolia increases the effectiveness of
simultaneously administered tricyclic antidepressants, aman-
tadine, and quinidine.

OVERDOSAGE

The four early warning symptoms of atropine poisoning are
skin reddening, dryness of the mouth, and tachycardiac
arrhythmias and mydriasis. In addition, other side effects,
particularly with overdosages, can include accommodation
disorders, heat build-up through decline in sweat secretion,
micturition disorders, and obstipation.

----- PAGE 921 -----
672 /SCOPOLIA

The intake of very high dosages leads to central excitation
(restlessness, compulsive speech, hallucinations, delirium,
manic episodes, followed by exhaustion and sleep). Poten-
tially lethal dosages for adults start at 100 mg of atropine,
depending upon alkaloid content, and may result from use of
between 20 to 50 g of the drug: considerably less can prove
lethal for children.

The treatment for poisonings includes gastric lavage; temper-
ature-lowering measures with wet cloths (no antipyretics!);
oxygen respiration for respiratory distress; intubation; paren-
teral physostigmine salts as antidote; diazepam for spasms
and chlorpromazine for severe excitation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted root, powder and
other galenic preparations for oral application.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is equivalent to 0.25
mg of total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine. The
maximum daily dose should not exceed the equivalent of 3.0
mg of total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine. The
maximum recommended single dose is equivalent to 1.0 mg
of total alkaloids, calculated as hyoscyamine.

LITERATURE
A

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Nicolic R et aL, Acta Pharm Jugosl 26:257. 1976.

Roth L, Daunderer M,, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Smart RG et al., J Forens Sci 32:303. 1987.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic. Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Scopolia carniolica
See Scopolia

Scotch Broom

Cytisus — scoparius

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried and
stripped broom flowers, the dried aerial parts (broom herb)
and freshly picked flowers.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The bilabiate flowers are bright yellow,
20 to 25 mm long, large, solitary or in pairs. The flowers are
on 2 or 3 obovate bracts on short stems, or singly in the leaf
axils. They seem to form long racemes. The corolla is bright
yellow, sometimes white. The standard is revolute, the wings
obtuse. The ovary is short-stemmed and villous with a
glabrous, strongly hooked style. The pod is oblong, com-
pressed, glabrous on the surfaces, villous on the seams and is
a matte black. There are numerous brown-black seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Scotch Broom is a shrub that grows
from 0.5 to 2 m high. The tap root is very sturdy and woody.
The bark of the root is brown. The branches are thick,
usually crooked, and the bark is also brown." Young shoots
are glabrous, later pubescent. The branchlets are cane-like,
erect and pentagular. The leaves are small, short-petioled,
with 3 obovate to lanceolate, 1 to 2 cm long and 1.5 to 9 mm
wide, pointed leaflets. The leaflets, particularly on the
undersurface, are silky pubescent. After flowering, sessile
and entire leaves torm on the upper shoot.

Habitat: The herb is found in Europe, northern Africa,
Canary Islands, North America, Chile, South Africa and
Japan.

Production: Scotch Broom herb consists of the aerial parts of
Cytisus scoparius. Broom flowers consist of the flowers of
Cytisus scoparius.

Not to be Confused With: The herb should not be confused
with other Cytisus or Genista varieties. The flowers should
not be confused with Spanish Broom.

Other Names: Broom, Broomtops, Besom, Scoparium, Irish
Tops, Basam, Bizzom, Browme, Brum, Breeam

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SCOTCH BROOM HERB

Quinolizidine alkaloids (0.5 to 1.6%): main alkaloid (-)-
sparteine, including among others 11, 12-dehydrosparteine,
17-oxosparteine, lupanine, alpha-isosparteine

Biogenic amines: including tyramine, epinine, dopamine
Flavonoids: including spirasoside, isoquercitrin, scoparin
Isoflavonoids: including genistein, sarothamnoside

EFFECTS: SCOTCH BROOM HERB

No specific studies are available. Tyramine acts indirectly on
the sympathetic nervous system as a vasoconstrictor and
hypertensive.

COMPOUNDS: SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS

Quinolizidine alkaloids (0.004%) (very small quantities):
main alkaloid (-)-sparteine

Biogenic amines: including tyramine (0.13 to 2%)

----- PAGE 922 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Flavonoids: including scoparin (C-glycosylflavone)

EFFECTS: SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS

The drug can contain over 2% tyramine. It contains small
amounts of alkaloids. The main alkaloid is sparteine.
Tyramine acts as an indirect sympathicomimetic, vasocon-
strictoral and hypotensive. Sparteine acts negatively inotrop-
ic and negatively chronotropic; because of the very minimal
amounts of sparteine no intense effect can be expected.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SCOTCH BROOM HERB
Approved by Commission E:

* Circulatory disorders
* Hypertension

Unproven Uses: The herb is used for functional heart and
circulatory disorders, as an adjunct in the stabilization of
circulation and to raise blood pressure. Folk medicine uses
include pathological edema, cardiac arrhythmia, nervous
cardiac complaints, low blood pressure, heavy menstruation,
hemorrhaging after birth, as a contraction stimulant, for
bleeding gums, hemophilia, gout, rheumatism, sciatica, gall
and kidney stones, enlarged spleen, "jaundice, bronchial
conditions and snake bites.

SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS
Unproven Uses: The use of the pure drug cannot be
recommended except as an inactive ingredient in teas. In folk
medicine, the flowers are used for edema, rheumatism, gout,
kidney stones, jaundice, liver disorders, enlarged spleen and
as a blood purifier.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
SCOTCH BROOM HERB AND FLOWERS

The drug is contraindicated in high blood pressure, A-V
block, pregnancy and with MAO inhibitor drugs.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
SCOTCH BROOM HERB

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Scotch Broom preparations should not be used in
cases of high blood pressure or with atrioventricular block.

Drug Interactions: Use of Scotch Broom herb with mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors (amine content) may cause a
hypertensive crisis.

Pregnancy: The herb should not be used during pregnancy
(abortive effect).

SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS

Healtii risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug should not be used in cases of high blood pressure or

SCOTCH BROOM / 673

when the patient is being treated with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (amine content).

OVERDOSAGE
SCOTCH BROOM HERB

Doses corresponding to more than 300 mg_ sparteine
(approximately 30 gm of the drug), lead to dizziness.
headache, palpitations, prickling in the extremities, feeling of
weakness in the legs, outbreaks of sweat, sleepiness, pupil
dilation and ocular palsy. If no vomiting has occurred.
poisonings are treated with gastric lavage and administration
of activated charcoal. Spasms are to be treated with
chlorpromazine or diazepam. In cases of asphyxiation.
intubation and oxygen respiration are to be carried out. No
deaths through poisonings with this drug have been proven
beyond a doubt (though they certainly have been with
sparteine).

DOSAGE

SCOTCH BROOM HERB

Mode of Administration: The herb is available in aqueous
essential oil extracts for internal administration.

Preparation: Tea: Pour 150 ml boiling water over 1 to 2 gm

.drug and strain after 10 minutes

Decoction — from 1 to 2 gm drug.
Liquid extract — 1:1 25% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).
Tincture — 1:5 45% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).

Daily Dosage: The daily dose of the infusion is 1 cup fresh
infusion 3 times daily. The liquid extract dosage is | to 2 ml
daily. The tincture internal use dosage is 0.5 to 2 ml.
Aqueous-ethanol extracts corresponding to 1:15 drug are
also used.

Storage: Carefully protect from light and moisture.

SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS
Mode of Administration: Since the efficacy for the claimed
uses has not been documented, and considering the risks, a
therapeutic application cannot be justified. To be used only
under the supervision of an expert qualified in the appropri-
ate use of this substance.

Preparatfon: To prepare an infusion, Pour 200 ml boiling
water over | teaspoon of flowers and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Infusion dosage is | cup daily. For pathologi-
cal edema, | liter infusion per day is administered in 4
portions during meals for 1 month.

LITERATURE
SCOTCH BROOM HERB
Brum-Bousquet M, Delaveau P, (1981) Plant Med Phytoiher

15(4):201.
Brum-Bousquet M et al., (1981) Planta Med 43(4):367.

----- PAGE 923 -----
674/SCOTCH BROOM

Kurihara T, Kikuchi M, (1980) Yakugaku Zasshi 100(10): 1054.
Murakoshi I et al., (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):521.

Seeger R. Neumann HG, Spartein. In: DAZ 132(30): 1577.
1992.

Vixcardi P et al., (1984) Pharmazie 39(11):781.

Wink M. Heinen HJ, Vogt H, Schiebel HM, Plant Cell Rep
3:230-233. 1984.

Wink M et al., (1981) Planta Med 43(4):342.

Young N et al., (1984) Biochem J 222(1 ):41.

Further information in:

Chan EH et al., (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.
Gresser G, Der Besenginster - Cytisus scoparius (L.) LINK. Z
hytother 17 (1996), 320-330.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Konami Y, Yamamoto K, Osawa T, Irimura T, The primary
structure of the Cytisus scoparius seed lectin and a
carbohydrate-binding peptide. J Biochem (Tokyo), 112:366-75,
1992 Sep.. -

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg / Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

SCOTCH BROOM FLOWERS
Brum-Bousquet M, Delaveau P, (1981) Plant Med Phytother

15(4):201.
Brum-Bousquet M et al., (1981) Planta Med 43(4):367.
Kurihara T, Kikuchi M, (1980) Yakugaku Zasshi 100(10):1054.
Murakoshi I et al., (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):521-524.

Seeger R, Neumann HG, Spartein. In: DAZ 132(30):1577.
1992.
Vixcardi P et al., (1984) Pharmazie 39(11):781.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wink M, Heinen HJ, Vogt H, Schiebel HM, Plant Cell Rep
3:230-233. 1984.

Wink M et al., (1981) Planta Med 43(4):342-352.
Young N et al., (1984) Biochem J 222(1):41.

Further information in:

Chan EH et al., (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
-Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Scotch Pine
Pinus species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the tar extracted
from the trunks, branches and roots. The oil extracted from
the fresh needles, branch tips or fresh twigs is also used
medicinally, as are the pine tips from fresh and dried shoots.
The purified oil from the resin balsam, the tar extracted from
the wood, the young shoots and the flowering branches of
male and female flowers with pollen are also used.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are sulfur-yellow in the
form of ovate catkins. The female flowers are purple and
long-pedicled in erect, 5 to 6 mm long cones that hang down
after flowering. The ripe cones are ovate-clavate, matte
brown and have rhomboid scales. The hilum is small, smooth
and light brown. The seeds are 3 to 4 mm long, oblong with
wings, which are 3 times as long as the seed.

----- PAGE 924 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is 10 to 30 m high with a
straight, slim, cylindrical trunk or a gnarled twisted one. It
has a girth of 18 to 3.6 m. The crown is umbrella-shaped.
The bark of the older trees is gray-brown on the outside and
rust red on the inside. Bark of older trees is deeply fissured
below and peeling. The bark of the young trees is fox-red
and thinly peeling. The buds are reddish, 6 to 12 mm long,
oblong-oval and somewhat resinous. The needles are in pairs
and remain on the trees for 3 years. They are various lengths,
rigid, twisted, bluish-green with interrupted rows on the
outside and minimally dentate.

Habitat: Pinus sylvestris is found in Europe, Siberia, the
Crimea, the Caucasus and Iran.

Production: Pine shoots (Pini turiones) consist of the fresh or
dried, 3 to 5 cm long shoots of Pinus sylvestris. Pine shoots
are collected at die beginning of spring. The essential oil
(Pini aetheroleum) is obtained from fresh needles, tips of the
branches or fresh branches with needles and tips of Pinus
sylvestris, Pinus mugo ssp. pumilio, Pinus nigra or Pinus
pinaster. The oil is recovered form the fresh needles and
branch tips using steam distillation with a successful yield of
0.15-0.6%. Purified turpentine oil (Terebindiniae aetherole-
um rectificatum) is the essential oil obtained from the
turpentine of Pinus species, especially Pinus palustries (syn.
Pinus australis), and Pinus pinaster.

Not to be Confused With: Pine shoots should not be confused
with the shoots of Picea abies and Abies alba. Pine oil should
not be confused with "pine oils" that are synthetically
produced.

Other Names: Dwarf-Pine, Pine Oils, Pix Liquida, Pumilio
Pine, Scotch Fir, Stockholm Tar, Swiss Mountain Pine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: PINE SHOOTS

Volatile oil (0.2-0.5%): including among others bornyl
acetate, cadinene, Delta3 -carene, limonene, phellandrene,
alpha-pinene

Resins

Bitter principles: pinicrin
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
EFFECTS: PINE SHOOTS

Pine shoots have secretolytic and mildly antiseptic effects
and stimulate the peripheral circulation.

COMPOUNDS: PINE NEEDLE OIL

From Pinus mugo: chief components include Delta3-carene
(up to 35%), alpha- and beta-pinene (20%), beta-phellan-
drene (15%)

SCOTCH PINE/675

From Pinus nigra: chief components include alpha-pinene
(48-65%), beta-pinene (up to 32%), germacren D (up to
19%)

From Pinus palustris: chief components include alpha-and
beta-pinene (95%)

From Pinus silvestris: chief components include alpha-
pinene (10-50%), Delta3-carene (up to 20%), camphene (up
to 12%), beta-pinene (10-25%), limonene (up to 10%),
additionally including among others myrcene, terpinolene,
bornyl acetate

EFFECTS: PINE NEEDLE OIL
The essential oil is secretolytic, hyperemic and weakly

antiseptic.

COMPOUNDS: TURPENTINE OIL, PURIFIED

Chief components of the raw turpentine oil yielded from
turpentine from Pinus silvestris include: (-)-alpha-pinene (ca.
39-87%), Delta3-carene (ca. 14-33%), (-)-beta-pinene (share
up to 27%), limonene (6%), camphene (ca. 5%), from out of
which and from out of the volatile oils of other pine species
purified turpentine oil. Therebinthinae aetheroleum rectici-
factum is realized through fractional ‘distillation. It must -
contain at least 90% pinenes, but no more than 0.5 % Delta3-
carene.

EFFECTS: TURPENTINE OIL. PURIFIED
The essential oil is hyperaemic, antiseptic and increases
bronchial secretion in animal tests.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PINE SHOOTS
Approved by Commission E:

* Blood pressure problems

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

« Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Neuralgias

* Tendency to infection

Pine shoots are used internally for catarrhal conditions of the
upper and lower respiratory tract. Externally, it is used for
mild muscular pain and neuralgia.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, preparations of pine shoot
are used internally for uncomplicated coughs and acute
bronchial diseases and topically for nasal congestion and
hoarseness.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include weak liga-
ments of the upper ankle joint, inflammation of the .
respiratory tract, chronie rheumatism, eczema and urticaria.

----- PAGE 925 -----
676 /SCOTCH PINE

PINE NEEDLE OIL
Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

* Fevers and colds

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Neuralgias

+ Rheumatism

« Tendency to infection

The essential oil is used internally and externally for
congestive diseases of the upper and lower respiratory tract.
Externally, it is used for rheumatic and neuralgic ailments.

TURPENTINE OIL, PURIFIED
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
+ Rheumatism

Purified turpentine oil is used internally and externally for
chronic diseases of the bronchi with profuse secretion. It is
used externally for rheumatic and neuralgic ailments.

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include bladder catarrh,
gallstones and phosphorous poisoning. Externally, the oil is
used for scabies, burns, frostbite and skin injuries.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
PINE SHOOTS AND PINE NEEDLE OIL
Contraindications include bronchial asthma and whooping

cough.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

PINE SHOOTS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Patients with extensive skin injuries, acute skin
diseases, feverish or infectious diseases, cardiac insufficien-
cy or hypertonia should not use the drug as a bath additive.

PINE NEEDLE OIL
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Signs of
irritation could appear on skin and mucous membranes.
Bronchial spasms could worsen. Patients with extensive skin
injuries, acute skin diseases, feverish or infectious diseases,
cardiac insufficiency or hypertonia should not use the drug
as a bath additive.

TURPENTINE OIL, PURIFIED
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper external administration of
designated therapeutic dosages. However, resorptive poison-
ings, such as kidney and central nervous system damage, are
possible with large-area administration. Where large skin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

injuries, severe feverish or infectious diseases, cardiac
insufficiency or hypertonia are present, entire-body baths
with the volatile oil added should be carried out only
following consultation with a physician.

Kidney damage is conceivable with internal administration
of therapeutic dosages. Inhalation should be avoided with
acute inflammation of the breathing passages.

Pediatric Use: Cases of death, in particular among children,
following intake of the oil have been reported in the
scientific literature.

OVERDOSAGE
TURPENTINE OIL, PURIFIED

Severe poisonings are possible with the intake of large
dosages. Symptoms include albuminuria, diarrhea, dyspnea,
dysuria, feelings of vertigo, hematuria, intestinal colic,
queasiness, reddening of the face, salivation, skin efflores-
cences, sore throat, staggering walk, strangury, thirst,
twitching and vomiting. Poisonings can also occur through
inhalation of the vapors or through skin contact. Fifty grams
is the approximate lethal dosage for an adult. Cases of death,
in particular among children, following intake of the oil are
known from the scientific literature. Gastric lavage with
bicarbonate of soda solution, intestinal emptying through
administration of sodium sulphate, the administration of
paraffin oil, activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis
(suitable body position, quiet, warmth) should be instituted.
Thereafter, therapy for poisonings consists of treating
spasms with diazepam (i.v.), electrolyte substitution, and
treating possible cases of acidosis with sodium bicarbonate
infusions. In case of shock, plasma volume expanders should
be infused. Monitoring of kidney function is essential.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
PINE SHOOTS

Mode of Administration: Pine shoot is available as a
comminuted herb for internal use in teas, syrups and
tinctures. Alcoholic solutions, oils or ointments are used

externally.

Daily Dosage:
Internal — daily dose: 2 to 3 g drug several times a day.

External — as a bath additive: 100 g alcoholic extract in a
full bath.

Semi-solid preparations — 20 to 50% ointment to be rubbed
in several times a day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1). The dose is different for children.

----- PAGE 926 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PINE NEEDLE OIL

Mode of Administration: The essential oil is administered in
alcoholic solutions, ointments, gels, emulsions, oils or as an
inhalant. It is used externally as bubble baths and bath salts.

Daily Dosage: For internal use. the daily dose is 5 gm drug.
For inhalation therapy, add 2 g oil to 2 cups hot water and
breathe in the vapors several times daily. When used
externally, several drops of a liquid or semi-solid preparation
containing 10 to 50% drug may be rubbed onto the affected
area. To use as a bath additive, use 0.025 gm drug per liter
water and bathe for 10 to 20 minutes at a temperature 35 to
38° C.

Storage: Keep protected from light in tightly sealed

containers.

TURPENTINE OIL, PURIFIED

Mode of Administration: Purified turpentine oil is adminis-
tered externally in the form of ointments, gels, emulsions,
oils, as a plaster and as an inhalant.

Daily Dosage:
External Dose — Varies according to the type and severity
of the condition as well as the instructions of manufacturer.

As a bath additive and plaster — Use as directed by
manufacturer.

Ointment/gel — 20% ointment/gel to be applied to the
affected area several times a day.

Inhalation — 5 drops oil in hot water 3 times a day, inhale.

LITERATURE

PINE SHOOTS

Glasl H et al., Gaschromatographische Untersuchung von
Arzneibuchdrogen 7. Mitt.: GC-Untersuchung von Pinaceen-Olen
des Handels und Versuche zu ihrer Standardisierung. In: DAZ
120(2):64-67. 1980.

Ikeda RM, (1962) J Food Sci 27455.

Roschin VI et a]., (1985) Khim Prir Soedin 1:122.
Zinkel DF, (1975) Chemtech 5(4):235.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der'Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

PINE NEEDLE OIL

Glasl H et al., Gaschromatographische Untersuchung von
Arzneibuchdrogen 7. Mitt.: GC-Untersuchung von Pinaceen-Olen

SCOTCH PINE /677

des Handels und Versuche zu ihrer Standardisierung. In: DAZ
120(2):64-67. 1980.

Ikeda RM, (1962) J Food Sci 27:455.

Roschin VI et al., (1985) Khim Prir Soedin 1:122.
Zinkel DF, (1975) Chemtech 5(4):235.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York, 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

TURPENTINE OIL. PURIFIED

Bauer L, (1973) Die Feinstruktur der menschlichen
Bronchialschleimhaut nach Behandlung mit Ozothin. Klin
Wochenschr 51:450-453.

Glasl H, Wagner H, DAZ 120:64-67. 1980.
Iconomou N et al., J Chromatogr 16:29. 1964.
Ikeda RM, (1962) J Food Sci 27:455.

Travani J, (1972) Wirkung eines Broncholytikums auf die
tracheobronchiale Reinigung. Arzneim Forsch (Drug Res)
22:1744-1746.

Roschin VI et al., (1985) Khim Prir Soedin 1:122.

Zanker KS, Blumel G, Probst J, Reiterer W, (1984) Theoretical.
experimental evidence for the action of terpens as modulators in
lung function. Prog Resp Res 18:302-304.

Zinkel DF, (1975) Chemtech 5(4):235.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytodierapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopadiika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

----- PAGE 927 -----
678 /SCOTCH THISTLE

Scotch Thistle

Onopordwn — acanthium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb and the

root.

Flower and Fruit: The large, light-red composite flowers are
terminal on the branches. The bracts are linear-lanceolate,
thorny-tipped, splayed at the bottom and like cobwebs. The
plant has only tubular androgynous flowers. The bristles of
the hair calyx are reddish, short pinnate and almost twice as
long as the fruit. The flower heads fall after the fruit ripens
and the seeds fall out.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is biennial and grows from
30 to 150 cm. The stem is erect and branched. It appears to
be winged because of the downward leaves, which are
broader than the stem. The leaves are rough, irregularly
thorny and dentate to pinnatisect. When young they appear
almost white.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe,
with the exception of the far north; k was introduced to
North America.

Production: Scotch Thistle is the aerial part of Onopordum
acanthium.

Other Names: Woolly Thistle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpene lactones (bitter principles): including, among
others onopordopicrin

Flavonoids: including luteolin-7-O-glucoside
Hydroxycoumarins: esculin

Caffeic acid derivatives

Betaine: stachydrine

Polyynes

EFFECTS
A cardiotonic effect is questionable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is considered obsolete. In the
religious system of anthroposophy, Scotch Thistle is used as
a cardiac stimulant.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Scotch Thistle is available in the
form of drops, ampules and tablets. In anthroposophic
medicine, a preparation of the fresh leaves is used internally.

LITERATURE

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Scrophularia nodosa
See Figwort

Scullcap

Scutellaria lateriflora

TRADE NAMES
Scullcap (available from numerous manufacturers), Wild
American Scullcap, Wild Countryside Scullcap

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the herb.

Flower and Fruit: The pink or blue flowers are in short,
chiefly lateral false spikes. The calyx is fluffy, dorsiventral
and flattened, with 2 rounded, entire-margined lips. The
lower lip has a helmet-shaped, concave appendage. The 4
ascending stamens have pairs of ciliated anthers. The fruit is
a globular to flattened-ovoid warty nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial herb grows to 60 cm
in height and is thickly covered with simple and glandular
hairs. The stem is erect and heavily branched. The foliage
leaves are usually ovate to lanceolate or linear, petioled,
entire-margined or crenate.

Characteristics: The herb has a bitter, slightly astringent
taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America and is
cultivated in Europe.

Production: Scullcap is the aerial part of 3- to 4-year-old
Scutellaria lateriflora and related species, which is harvested
in June and then pulverized.

Other Names: Blue Pimpernel, Helmet Flower, Hoodwort,
Mad-Dog Weed, Madweed, Quaker Bonnet

----- PAGE 928 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoids

Flavonoids: including among others, scutellarin
Volatile oil
Tannins

EFFECTS

Scullcap has sedative, antispasmodic (little research), anti-
inflammatory, and also lipid peroxidation inhibitor effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The drug was formerly used for hysteria and
nervous tension, epilepsy, chorea, and other nervous disor-
ders. It has also been used as a bitter tonic and febrifuge.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

v

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is available as a powder

and liquid extract for internal use.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 425 mg, 429 mg, 430 mg

LITERATURE

Barberan FAT, (1986) Fitoterapia 57(2):67.

Kimura Y et al., (1984) Planta Med 50:290.

Kimura Y et a!., (1985) Planta Med 51:132.

Kimura Y et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):48.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Need. 21(4):417.

Kubo M et al, (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32(7):2724.
Nicollier GF et al. (1981) J Agric Food Chem 29:1179.
Takido M et al., (1979) Yakugaku Zasshi 99(4):443-444.
Yagma, MS, Benson GG, (1979) J Nat Prod 42(2):229.

Further information in:
Chan, EH et al. (Eds.), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

SCURVY GRASS / 679

Scurvy Grass

officinalis

Cochlearia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
harvested and dried basal leaves of the first or second year;
the aerial parts harvested shortly before or during flowering
in the second year; or the fresh aerial parts of the plant
collected at the onset of flowering.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in racemes that
are initially tight and somewhat hanging, which then grow
longer. The flower is large, white and fragrant. The sepals
are about 15 to 2 mm long, narrowly elliptoid, with a white
membranous edge. The petals are about 4 to 5 mm long,
oblong-obovate. The stamens are yellow. The fruit is a 4 to 7
mm long, globular or ovate pod. crowned by the short style.
The 2 to 4 seeds in each loculus are roundish-elliptoid, a
little compressed and 1 to ? mm long. The seed shell is
usually red-brown and finely warty.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The glabrous biennial or perennial
plant is a 15 to 35 cm high evergreen. It has a fusiform,
fibrous rhizome from which grows one or more stemmed
shoots that are sterile and fertile. The leafy stems are
ascending or almost erect, simple or branched, angular and
grooved. The long-petioled basal leaves are in loose whorls.
The fleshy, juicy cauline leaves are petiolate, ovate, angular-
dentate, and the upper ones are stem-clasping.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong taste and, when
rubbed, a strong fragrance.

Habitat: The plant is found in central and northern Europe,
Asia and North America.

Production: True Scurvy Grass consists of the dried basal
leaves of Cochlearia officinalis harvested in the first year, or
the aerial parts harvested during the flowering season in the
second year. The cultivated plant is dried rapidly with
artificial heat at temperatures below 35°C.

Not to be Confused With: Scurvy Grass is occasionally
confused with Ranunculus _ficaria.

Other Names: Scrubby Grass, Spoonwort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates: chief components in the freshly harvested,
unbruised plant include glucocochlearin; with the destruction
of the cells, the plants yield secretions of butyl mustard oil,
and among others, glucotropaeolin (yielding butyl mustard
oil) and sinigrin (yielding allyl mustard oil).

Flavonoids

----- PAGE 929 -----
680 /SCURVY GRASS

Tropane_ alkaloids: tropine, m-hydroxybenzoyl-tropine

(cochlearin)
Vitamin C

EFFECTS
The mustard oil glycosides in the drug, in ethereal oil and in
an ethanol solution are strong external skin and mucous
membrane irritants.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Scurvy Grass is used internally for vitamin
C deficiency, and was used in folk medicine primarily as an
agent for scurvy and scrofula. However, it was also valued
for nose bleeds, rheumatism, gonorrhea, "blood-cleansing or
purification" cures, gout, rheumatism, stomachache and as a
diuretic. External applications include use as a mouthwash
for gum disease and as a poultice for ulcers.

Homeopathic Uses: Among uses in homeopathy are eye
inflammation and stomach disorders.

Efficacy has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
administration of higher dosages can lead to irritation of the
mucous membrane of the gastrointestinal tract.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Alcoholic extracts of Scurvy Grass
are used topically. Freshly pressed juice is for internal use.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times a day; or 1 ml injection solution sc
twice weekly; as an jye drop: 1 drop 1 to 3 times daily
(HAB1)

LITERATURE
Cole RA, PH 15:759-762. 1976.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Scutellaria lateriflora
See Scullcap

Sea Buckthorn

Hippophae rhamnoides

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, yellow-red
berries.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is dioecious and has greenish-
yellow, insignificant flowers in numerous, sturdy clusters in
the axils of scales. There are 2 bracts and a simple calyx. The
male calyx is divided in 2 down to the base, with brown-
spotted ovate sepals; it has 4 stamens attached to the base.
The female calyx is a tight tube clasping-the ovary with
erect, inward-inclined tips. The fruit is a bright orange,
globular, ellipsoid, false berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an angular, thorny 1.5 to
4.5 m high shrub with numerous thorn-tipped and thorny
branches. The leaves are 5 to 8 cm long, linear-lanceolate,
shoi t petioled, glabrous above, tomentose beneath. The plant
spreads by underground runners.

Habitat: Hippophae rhamnoides is indigenous to Europe and
some northern regions of Asia.

Production: Sea Buckthorn berries are the false fruit of
Hippophae rhamnoides. The fatty oil is extracted from both
the seeds and the fruit flesh. The harvest is from August to
December, until the first snow. As soon as the fruit has been
picked, it is immediately processed. The juice is produced
without any contact with metal substances.

Other Names: Sallow Thorn

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids: chiefly malic acid, additionally acetic acid,
quinic acid

Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C): 0.2-1.4%

Flavonoids: in particular kaempferol, isorhamnetin-as well
as quercetin tri- and tetra-glycosides

Carotinoids: beta-carotine, gamma-carotine, lycopene

Fatty oil (in the seeds 12%): chief fatty acids oleic acid,
isolinol acid, linolenic acid, stearic acid

Sugar alcohols: mannitol, quebrachit

EFFECTS
The drug is used as a vitamin C supplement. The vitamin C
constituent encourages the healing of wounds and epitheliza-
tion. It strengthens sight and inhibits sclerosis and the aging

process.

The oil has a liver-protective, ulcer-protective, tumor-protec-
tive, anti-oxidative and wound-healing effect. The oil is said

----- PAGE 930 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

to be anticoagulative. The flavones are said to improve the
contractility and pumping ability of cardiac muscle, reduce
peripheral resistance and promote vascular elasticity.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as an infection prophy-
laxis, in particular during the time just before spring and
during periods of convalescence. It is used externally as a
treatment for radiation damage, such as x-ray damage and
sunburn, and as fatty oil for the treatment of wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Buckthorn is an extract constituent

in various vitamin C concentrates and juices.

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dose is 5 to 10 gm of
one of the Buckthorn products.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Sponger Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Sedum acre

See Common Stonecrop

Selenicereus grandiflorus
See Night-Blooming Cereus

Self-Heal

Prunella vulgaris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole flowering

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The blue-violet or brownish-blue labiate
flowers are clustered in semi-whorls at the end of stems and
lateral branches. The accompanying leaves are red-brown.
The upper lip of the calyx has 3 tips and the lower lip has 2
tips. The corolla is about 1 cm longer than the domed upper
lip. The lower lip has 3 lobes. There are 4 stamens, the
longer ones have a straight awl-shaped tip. The style is
divided into two. The small fruit is flung out of the calyx.

SELF-HEAL/681

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 10 to 30 cm
high. The stems are usually ascendant, sometimes creeping.
The leaves are petiolate, ovate to lanceolate, dentate or
entire-margined and crossed opposite.

Habitat: Prunella vulgaris is indigenous to Europe and Asia
and practically all temperate regions of the world.

Production: Self-Heal is the complete plant in flower of
Prunella vulgaris.

Other Names: Woundwort, Prunella, Hook-Heal, Slough-
Heal, Brunelia, Heart of the Earth, Blue Curls, Heal-All,
Brown wort, Carpenter's Herb, Carpenter's Weed, Sickle wort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Bitter principles

Flavonoids: including rutin, hyperoside.
Tannins
Triterpene saponins

Triterpenes, ursolic acid, oleanolic acid

‘EFFECTS

There is no information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Self-Heal is used for inflammatory diseases
and ulcers in the mouth and throat, gastrointestinal catarrh,
as a remedy for diarrhea, hemorrhage and gynecological
disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. '

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Self-Heal is available as crude
drug, as an extract and as a gargle solution.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, use | dessertspoon of the drug
per cup of water.

LITERATURE
Kojima H. et al., (1987) Phytochemistry 26(4): 1107.

Tabba HD, Chang RSh, Smith KM, Isolation, purification and
partial characterization of prunellin, an anti-HIV component
from aqueous extracts of Prunella vulgaris. In: Antiviral Res
11:263-274. 1989.

Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 931 -----
682/SEMPERVIVUM TECTORUM

Sempervivum tectorum

See Houseleek

Senburi
Swertia japonica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves and stems, which are used"as an amaroid and tonic.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in dense apical panicles.
The flowers are radial and fused, and their structures are in
fives. The 5 calyx tips are up to 5 mm long and linear to
lanceolate. The petals are 12 to 17 mm long, fused to a tube,
with 5 broadened, elongate elliptical tips. The petals are
white with reddish veins at the margin. Pairs of villous
glandular scales are ciliate and twisted in the bud. There are
5 stamens and a superior, single-chambered ovary. The style
is very short and the stigma 2-lobed. The fruit is a capsule;
the seeds are ovate to clavate.
v-

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herbaceous plant grows to
approximately 20 cm high. The leaves are opposite and
simple. The lower leaves are small and lanceolate. The
cauline leaves are 1.5 to 3.5 cm long and 1 to 3 mm wide,
linear to elongate-lanceolate, and acuminate with an involute
margin. The stem is square in cross-section, 2 mm thitk,
dark green to dark red. The root is woody.

Characteristics: All parts of the plant taste very bitter.

Habitat: Swertia japonica is found in Korea, China and

Japan.

Production: Japanese chirata is the dried herb of Swertia
japonica harvested during its flowering season.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Iridoids (bitter substances): secoiridoid glycosides, includ-
ing amarogentin (0.01 to 0.05%) and amaroswerin (0.05 to
0.3%), the representatives that are chiefly responsible for the
bitter taste, as well as the less bitter representatives
swertiamann (1.0 to 2.5%), gentiopicroside (0.5%) and
sweroside (0.2%)

Flavonoids: including swertisin, isoswertisin, swertiajapo-
nin, isovitexin

Xanthone derivatives (yellow): including swertianin, nor-

swertianin, methyl swertianin, swertianol (bellidifolin)

Monoterpene alkaloids

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The use of the drug as an amarum is traceable to the bitter
substances it contains (secoiridoid glucoside). The allergenic
effect connected with topical application should be taken
into consideration.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Uses in folk medicine include poor diges-

tion and loss of appetite.

Chinese Medicine: Insomnia and poor digestion are consid-
ered indications for use in Chinese medicine. Efficacy for
these indications has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations: Drops.

Daily Dosage: 30 to 50 mg of the powder.

LITERATURE

Basnet P, Kadota S, Shimizu M, Takata Y, Kobayashi M,
Namba T, Bellidifolin stimulates glucose uptake in rat 1
fibroblasts and ameliorates hyperglycemia in streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetic rats. Planta Med, 61:402-5, 1995 Oct.

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,

Schneider G, (Eds) Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgeba nde 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

el-Sedawy AI, Shu YZ, Hattori M, Kobashi K, Namba T,
Metabolism of swertiamarin from Swertia japonica by human
intestinal bacteria. Planta Med, 33:147-50, 1989 Apr.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Artificial bases from Swertia japonica. Makino
Yakugaku Zasshi, 45:1202-4, 1966 Dec.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Biologically active principles of crude drugs:
pharmacological actions of Swertia japonica extracts,
swertiamarin and gentianine (author's transl.). Yakugaku Zasshi,
45:1446-51, 1978 Nov.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Biosynthesis of C-glucosylflavones in Swertia
japonica (author's transl.). Yakugaku Zasshi, 45:165-71, 1979
JFeb.
Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Hepatoprotective principles of Swertia japonica
Makino on D-galactosamine/lipopolysaccharide-induced liver
injury in mice. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 45:1823-7, 1997
Nov.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. I. On

----- PAGE 932 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

the structures of swertisin and isoswertisin. Chem Pharm Bull
(Tokyo), 45:263-9, 1967 Mar.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. II.
Isolation and structure of new flavonoid, swertiajaponin. Chem
Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 45:1567-72, 1967 Oct.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S. Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. HI.
On the flavonoid constituents of the plants of Swertia.
Yakugaku Zasshi, 45:832-7, 1968 Jul.
Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. IV.
Isolation and structure of xanthones. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo),
45:155-62. 1969 Jan.

Hase K, Li J, Basnet P. Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. V.
On the xanthone constituents of the plants of Swertia.
Yakugaku Zasshi, 45:410-7, 1969 Mar.
Hase K, Li J, Basnet P, Xiong Q, Takamura S, Namba T,
Kadota S, Studies on the constituents of Swertia japonica. VI.
On the flavonoid and xanthone constituents of Swertia
randaiensis. Hayata and S. swertopsis Makino Yakugaku Zasshi,
45:1276-82. 1969 Sep.

Yamahara J, Kobayashi M. Matsuda H. Aoki S, Anticholinergic
action of Swertia japonica and an active constituent. J
Ethnopharmacol, 33:31-5, 1991 May-Jun.

Seneca Snakeroot
Polygala senega

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fruit: The raceme is 8 cm long and is smaller
than the bracts. The petals are pale red, the wings are
yellowish-white with green veins.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial herb with up
to 40 cm high stems, which sprout in the axils of the scale-
like bracts of the previous year's growth. The leaves are 8
cm long and 3 cm wide, alternate, ovate-lanceolate to
lanceolate, acuminate and denticulate. The upper surface is
rich green; the under surface somewhat paler. The root varies
in color from pale yellowish-gray to brownish-gray. It is
usually twisted or almost spiral and has a thick, irregular,
gnarled crown.

Habitat: Polygala senega is indigenous to the central and
western U.S.

Production: Seneca Snakeroot consists of the dried root with
remains of aerial stems of Polygala senega and/or other
closely related species or a mixture of Polygala species.

SENECA SNAKEROOT /683

Not to be Confused With: The roots of other Polygala
species.

Other Names: Milkwort, Mountain Flax, Rattlesnake Root,
Seneca, Senega Snake Root, Senega, Seneka, Snake Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SNAKEROOT (SENEGA SPECIES)

Triterpene saponins (6-12%): chief components senegins II
to IV, chief aglycone presenegin

Oligosaccharide esters: senegosene A-I
Xanthone derivatives
Methyl salicylate (traces) and its glucoside

COMPOUNDS: SNAKEROOT (TENUIFOLIA SPECIES)
Triterpene saponins (6-12%): chief components onjisapo-
nine aglycone presenegenin

Oligosaccharide esters: tenuifolosen A-P

Polygalite (acerite, 1.5-anhydrosorbite) and its glycosides,
for example polygalite-2-alpha-galactoside

EFFECTS
The rhizome is secretolytic and works as an expectorant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: The drug is used for congestion of the
respiratory tract, as an expectorant in cases of bronchitis with
minor sputum output and tracheitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. With prolonged use, gastrointestinal
uritation can occur.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage leads to nausea, diarrhea, gastric complaints and
queasiness.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As a comminuted root for decoc-
tions and other galenic preparations for internal use or as an
extract. It is a component of various standardized antitussive

preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion, place 0.5 gm comminut-
ed drug in cold water, heat to a simmer and strain after 10
minutes (1 teaspoonful = 2.5 gm drug).

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 1.5 to 3.0 gm root or
liquid extract (1:2) or 2.5 to 7.5 gm tincture (1:10). To use

----- PAGE 933 -----
684/SENECA SNAKEROOT

the infusion as an expectorant, drink 1 cup of tea 2 to 3 times
daily. In serious cases, the tea can be taken every two hours
if the patient is observed for side effects.

LITERATURE

Corner JJ et al., (1962) Phytochemistry 1:73.

Kako M et al., Hypoglycemic effect of the rhizomes of
Polygala senega in normal and diabetic mice and its main
component, the triterpenoid glycoside senegin-II. In: PM
62(5)440-443. 1996.

Shibata S, In: Progress in Phytochemistry, Vol. 6, Ed. Reinhold
et al., Pergamon Press 1980.

Shoji J et al.'. (1971) Yakugaku Zasshi 91:198.

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Senecio aureus
See Golden Ragwort

Senecio bicolor
See Dusty Miller

Senecio jacoboea
See Ragwort

Senecio nemorensis
See Alpine Ragwort

Senecio vulgaris

See Groundsel

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Senna

Cassia species

TRADE NAMES

Senna Extract, Senna Leaf, Ex-Lax Regular Strength, Ex-
Lax Maximum Strength, X-Prep Bowel Evacuant Liquid,
SenokotXTRA, Senokot, Senokot Children's Syrup

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts:
and flowers.

The medicinal parts are the leaves, fruit

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow, occasionally
white or pink. They are located in axillary or terminal
positions on erect racemes. The calyx is deeply divided with
a short tube and 5 regular, imbricate sepals. There are 5
layered petals. The 4 to 10 stamens are often irregular and
partially sterile. The ovary is sessile or short-stemmed with a
short or oblong style. The pod can be cylindrical or flat,
angular or winged and often with horizontal walls between
the seeds. The seeds are numerous and either horizontally or
vertically compressed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The genus Cassia comprises shrubs,
subshrubs, and herbaceous perennials with paired-pinnate
leaves. There are axes with stem glands either between the
leaflets or on the petiole. The stipules have varying shapes.

Habitat: Cassia species is found in the tropical and
subtropical regions of all continents except Europe. Most
varieties are indigenous to North, Central, and South

America.

Other Names: Tinnevelly Senna, India Senna, Alexandrian

Senna, Khartoum Senna

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (2.5-3.5%): chief components senno-
sides A, Al and B, as well as sennosides C and D

Naphthacene derivatives: including 6-hydroxymusizin glu-
coside (0.85% in Cassia senna), tinnevellin-6-glucosides
(0.3% in Cassia angustifolia)

EFFECTS
Laxative Effects

Senna is an anthranoid-type stimulating laxative. The
laxative effect is due to the action of sennosides and their
active metabolite, rhein anthrone, in the colon. The laxative
effect is realized by inhibition of water and electrolyte
absorption from the large intestine, which increases the
volume and pressure of the intestinal contents. This will

stimulate colon motility resulting in propulsive contractions.

<J

™

----- PAGE 934 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

In addition, stimulation of active chloride secretion increases
water and electrolyte content of the intestine. These changes
in active electrolyte transport are dependent on calcium in
the serosal surface (Donowitz, 1984; Yamauchi, 1993). The
laxative action of Senna is partially via stimulation of
colonic fluid and electrolyte secretion, and this secretion is
mediated by stimulation of endogenous prostaglandin E2
formation (Beubler. 1988: Yamauchi, 1993).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Laxative Effects

A randomized, single-blind study evaluated the efficacy of
Senna compared to polyethylene glycol (PEG) for mechani-
cal preparation for elective colorectal resection. Five hun-
dred twenty-three patients included in the study were
undergoing resection, followed by anastomosis. All patients
received 5% providone iodine antiseptic enema before
surgery, and ceftriaxone sodium and metronidazole were
given at anesthesia induction. Senna was significantly better
than PEG with regard to colonic cleanliness and less fecal
matter in the colonic lumen. The risk for moderate or large
intraoperative fecal soiling was lower with senna and overall
clinical tolerance did not differ significantly between the
treatment groups. Senna was better tolerated in patients with
stenosis. There was no statistical difference between the
treatment groups with postoperative infective complications
or anastomotic leakage (Valverde. 1999).

A prospective randomized trial evaluated the efficacy of the
addition of senna to a polethylene glycol electrolyte lavage
solution (PEG-ELS). One hundred and twenty patients
received either a Senna extract with PEG-ELS or placebo
with PEG-ELS before a total colonoscopy. Superiority by
physician assessment was seen in the group with Senna. The
colon was free of solid debris in 66.7% of patients after
PEG-ELS and in 90% after Senna/PEG-ELS administration,
which was a significant difference. Patient tolerance was
similar in both groups, and significantly less lavage fluid was
needed in the Senna/PEG-ELS treatment group (Ziegenha-
gen, 1991).

A randomized, open, parallel group study was conducted to
determine the efficacy of senna compared to lactulose in
terminal cancer patients treated with opioids. Ninety-one
terminal cancer patients were treated with either senna
(starting with 0.4 mL daily) or lactulose (starting with 15 mL
daily) for a 27-day period. The main outcome measures were
defecation-free intervals of 72 hr, days with defecation,
general health status, and treatment cost. Both treatment
groups had similar scores for defecation-free intervals and in
days with defecation. The final scores for general health
status were similar in both groups (Agra, 1998).

SENNA /685

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
* Constipation

Senna is used for constipation and for evacuation of the
bowel prior to diagnostic tests of the gastrointestinal and
colorectal area.

Indian Medicine: The herb is used for constipation, liver
disease, jaundice, splenomegaly, anemia, and typhoid fever.

Note: Stimulating laxatives must not be used over a period of
more than | to 2 weeks without medical advice.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The herb is not to be administered in the presence of
intestinal obstruction, acute inflammatory intestinal diseases
or appendicitis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Spasmodic gastrointestinal complaints can occur as
a side effect to the drug's purgative effect or from
overdosage. In rare cases, prolonged use may lead to cardiac
arrhythmias, nephropathies, edema and accelerated bone
deterioration. Senna abuse has also resulted in tetany,
aspartylglucosamine excretion, and . hypogammaglobulin-
emia (Levine, 1981; Malmquist, 1980; Prior, 1978).

Electrolyte Abnormalies: Long-term use leads to loss of
electrolytes, in particular potassium ions. As a result of
hypokalemia, hyperaldosteronism, albuminuria, hematuria,
inhibition of intestinal motility, and muscle weakness may
occur. Enhancement of cardioactive glycosides and antiar-
rythics may also occur with hypokalemia.

Finger Clubbing: Senna abuse has resulted in finger
clubbing, which was reversible upon discontinuation of the
drug (Levine, 1981; Malmquist, 1980; Prior, 1978; Silk,
1975).

Cathartic Colon: Anatomic alteration of the colon is seen
secondary to chronic use with Senna (more than three times
weekly for 1 year or longer). The result is a loss of haustral
folds, a finding that suggests neuronal injury or damage to
colonic longitudinal musculature (Joo, 1998).

Carcinogenesis: Carcinogenic activity in the colon following’
long-term administration of anthracene drugs has not yet
been fully clarified. Study findings are controversial regard-
ing the correlation between the administration of anthracene
drugs and the frequency of carcinomas in the colon (al-
Dakan, 1995; Mereto, 1996).

Melanosis Coli: Prolonged use of Senna may lead to
melanosis coli. Precursors of the melanic substance in
melanosis coli may be derived from anthranoid laxatives
(Benavides, 1997).

----- PAGE 935 -----
686 /SENNA

Occupational Sensitization: \gE-mediated allergy, asthma,
and rhinoconjunctivitis have been reported after occupational
exposure to senna products (Helin, 1996, Marks, 1991).

Tissue Damage: Chronic treatment with anthranoids in high
doses reduces vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and somato-
statin levels in the colon, which may represent damage to the
enteric nervous tissue (Tzavella, 1985).

Drug Interactions:

Digitalis Glycosides — With prolonged use or abuse of
Senna, loss of potassium may potentiate digitalis toxicity.

Antiarrythmics — Loss of potassium associated with pro-
longed use of Senna may potentiate arrhythmias when given
concomitantly with antiarrhythmic medications.

Estrogen — The serum level of estrogen is decreased when
given concomitantly with Senna due to the effect of
intestinal transit on the absorption of estrogens (Lewis,
1998).

Indomethacin (NSAIDS) — Indomethacin given concomi-
tantly with Senna pod extract had a dose-dependent inhibi-
tion of net fluid transport due to~ the, inhibition of
prostaglandin E2 (SEE EFFECTS), which decreases the
therapeutic effect of the Senna (Beubler, 1985).

Nifedipine (calcium channel blocker) — Therapeutic effects
induced by rhein anthrone also involve the calcium channel
which can be blocked by nifedipine, but not verapamil (SEE
EFFECTS) (Yamauchi, 1993).

Pregnancy: The drug should not be used during pregnancy
or while nursing.

Pediatric Use: Not to be used by children under 2 years of
age. Children between the ages of 2-12 years should follow
proper dosage recommendations.

Elderly: Elderly patients should initially take half of the
normal prescribing dose.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb, powder or dried
extracts for teas, decoctions, cold macerates, or elixirs.
Liquid or solid forms of medication exclusively for oral use.

How Supplied:

Capsule — 25 mg, 450 mg

Chewable tablet — 15 mg sennosides
Granules — 15 mg sennosides per teaspoon

Liquid — 2.5 oz. (alcohol 7% by volume), 8.8 mg
sennosides per teaspoon

Tablet — 8.6 mg sennosides, 15 mg sennosides, 17 mg
sennosides, 25 mg sennosides

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour hot water (not
boiling) over 0.5 to 2 gm of comminuted drug, steep for 10
minutes, then strain; or steep in cold water for 10 to 12
hours, then strain. The cold water method, according to
various authors, should result in a solution containing less
resin, which is responsible for abdominal pain. The drug
takes effect after a latency period of 10 to 12 hours.

Daily Dosage:
Constipation — The average dose is 20 to 60 mg sennosides.

Chewable Tab — Adults and children 12 years of age and
over, chew 2 tabs once or twice daily. Children 6 to under 12
years of age, chew | tab once or twice daily (Prod Info Ex-
Lax®, 1998).

Granules (15 mg sennosides per teaspoon) — Adults and

children 12 years of age, administer 1 teaspoon once daily
with a maximum of 2 teaspoons twice daily. Children 6 to 12
years of age, administer *h teaspoon once daily with a-
maximum of | teaspoon twice a day. Children 2 to 6 years of
age, administer 'U teaspoon daily with a maximum of 'h

teaspoon twice daily (Prod Info Senokot®, 1993).

Liquid (8.8 mg sennoside per teaspoon) — Children 6 to 12
years of age, administer 1 to 1 ‘h teaspoon once daily witii a
maximum of 1*h teaspoon twice daily. Children 2 to 6 years
of age, administer ‘h to 7A teaspoon once daily with a
maximum of *A teaspoon twice daily (Prod Info Senokot®,
1991).

Pills — Adults and children 12 years of age and over should
take 2 pills once or twice daily with a glass of water.
Children 6 to under 12 years of age: take 1 pill once or twice
daily with a glass of water. Children under 6 years of age:
consult a doctor (Prod Info Ex-Lax®, 1998).

Tablets (8.6 mg sennosides) — Adults and children 12 years
of age, administer 2 tablets once daily with a maximum of 4
tablets twice daily. Children 6 to 12 years of age, administer
1 tablet once daily, with a maximum of 2 tablets twice daily.
Children 2 to 6 years of age, adminster “/ tablet once daily
with a maximum of 1 tablet twice daily (Prod Info
Senokot®, 1993).

Tablets (17 mg sennosides) — Adults and children 12 years
of age, administer 1 tablet once daily with a maximum of 2
tablets twice daily. Children 6 to 12 years of age, administer
*h tablet once daily with a maximum of 1 tablet twice daily
(Prod Info SenokotXTRA®, 1993).

----- PAGE 936 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Bowel Evacuation:

Liquid (alcohol 7% by volume) — Adults and children 12
years of age and older should take one bottle between 2 and
4 p.m. on day prior to x-ray or other diagnostic procedures.
Drink entire contents of bottle. A strong bowel action can be
expected approximately 6 hours after drinking the prepara-
tion (Prod Info X-Prep®,1998).

Storage: Senna should be protected from light (DAB 10
EUR), and stored for a maximum of 3 years (2.AB-DDR).

LITERATURE

Agra Y; Sacristan A: Gonzalez M et al. Efficacy of senna
versus lactulose in terminal cancer patients treated with opioids.
J Pain Symptom Manage 1998 Jan: 15(1): 1-7.

al-Dakan AA; al-Tuffail M; Hannan MA. Cassia senna inhibits
mutagenic activities of benzo[a]-pyrene, aflatoxin Bl, shamma
and methyl methanesulfonate. Pharmacol Toxicol 1995
Oct;77(4):288-92.

Anonym, Sennahaltige Laxanzien: Alte Arzneipflanze in neuem
Licht? In: DAZ 133(28):2594. 1993.

BGA, Arzneimittelrisiken: Anthranoide. In: DAZ 132(21): 1164.
1992.
Benavides SH: Morgante PE: Monserrat AJ et al. The pigment

of melanosis coli: a lectin histochemical study. Gastrointest
Endosc 1997 Aug;46(2):131-8.

Beubler E, Kollar G. Stimulation of PGE2 synthesis and water
and electrolyte secretion by senna anthraquinones is inhibited by
indomethacin. J Pharm Pharmacol 1985 Apr,37(4):248-51.

Beubler E; Kollar G. Prostaglandin-mediated action of
sennosides. Pharmacology 1988:36 Suppl 1:85-91.

Choi JS et al.. In vitro antimutagenic effects of anthraquinone
aglycones and naphthoquinones. In: PM 63(1): 11-14. 1997.

Christ B et al., (1978) Arzneim Forsch 28:225.

Donowitz M; Wicks J: Battisti L et al. Effect of Senokot on rat
intestinal electrolyte transport. Evidence of Ca+ dependence.
984. Sep:87(3):503-12.

Gastroenterology

Dufour P, Gendre P, (1988) Long-Termin mucosal alterations
by sennosides, related compounds. Pharmacology 36(Suppl
1): 194-202.

Fairbaim JW (1964) Lloydia 27:79.
Fairbairn JW (1976) Pharmacol 14(Suppl 1):48.
Fairbaim JW, Shrestha AB, (1967) Lloydia 30:67.

Helin T; Makinen-Kiljunen. Occupational asthma and
rhinoconjunctivitis caused by senna. Allergy 1996
Mar;51(3): 181-4.

Jahn K et al., Toxicology of Cassia fikifiki Aubreville 6
Pellegrin in relation to other species of the genus Cassia (s.1.).
In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 57.
1996.

SENNA /687

Joo JS; Ehrenpreis ED; Gonzalez L et al. Alterations in colonic
anatomy induced by chronic stimulant laxatives: the cathartic
colon revisited. J Clin Gastroenterol 1998 Jun;26(4):283-6.

Klimpel BE et al., Anthranoidhaltige Laxantien - ein Risiko fur
die Entwicklung von Tumoren der ableitenden Harnwege. In:
PUZ 26(1):33, Jahrestagung der DPhG, Berlin, 1996. 1997.

Lemli J, Cuveele J. (1975) Phytochemistry 14:1397.
Lemli, J et al., (1981) Planta Med 43:11.

Leng-Peschlow E. Mengs U, Sennalaxantien: Sicher und
wirksam. In: PZ 140(8):668-676. 1995.

Levine D; Goode AW; Wingate DL. Purgative abuse associated
with reversible cachexia, hypogammaglobulinaemia, and finger
clubbing. Lancet 1981 Apr 25; 1(8226):919-20. -" :-

Lewis SJ, Oakey RE. Heaton KW. Intestinal absorption of
estrogen: the effect of altering transit-time. Eur J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 1998 Jan;10(1):33-9.

Malmquist J; Ericsson B; Hulten-Nosslin MB et al. Finger
clubbing and aspartylglucosamine excretion in a laxative-abusing
patient. Postgrad Med J 1980 Dec;56(662):862-4.

Marks GB; Salome CM; Woolcock AJ. Asthma and allergy
associated with occupational exposure to ispaghula and senna
products in a pharmaceutical work force. Am Rev Respir Dis
"1991 Nov;144(5): 1065-9.

Mereto E; Ghia M; Brambilla G. Evaluation of the potential
carcinogenic activity of Senna and Cascara glycosides for the
rat colon. Cancer Lett 1996 Mar 19;101(1):79-83.

Prior J, White I. Tetany and clubbing in patient who ingested
arge quantities of senna. Lancet 1978 Oct 28;2(8096):947.

Product Information: Ex-Lax®, chocolated laxative pieces.
Novartis, Summit. NJ, USA, 1998.

roduct Information: Ex-Lax®, regular and maximum strength
laxative pills. Novartis, Summit, NJ, USA, 1998.

Product Information: SenokotXTRA®, standardized senna
concentrate. Purdue Frederick, Norwalk, CT, USA, 1993.

Product Information: Senokot®, extract of standardized senna.
urdue Frederick, Norwalk, CT, USA, 1991.

roduct Information: Senokot®, standardized senna concentrate.
Purdue Frederick, Norwalk, CT, USA, 1993.

roduct Information X-Prep®, extract of standardized senna.
Gray Pharmaceuticals, Norwalk, CT, USA, 1998.

Schultze W, Jahn K, Richter R, Volatile constituents of the

dried leaves of Cassia angustifolia and C. acutifolia (Sennae
folium). In: PM 61(6):540-543. 1996.

Silber W, Spriihgetrockneter Senna-Extrakt. In: DAZ
131(9):349. 1991.
Silk DB; Gibson JA; Murray CR. Reversible finger clubbing in
a case of purgative abuse. Gastroenterology 1975 Apr;68(4 Pt
1):790-4.
Sprecher E, Uber die Qualitat von Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT

r 12(4): 105. 1991.

----- PAGE 937 -----
688/SENNA

Sydiskis RJ, Owen DG, Lohr JL, Rosier KHA, Blosmster RN,
Inactivation of enveloped viruses by anthraquinones extracted

from plants. In: Antimicrob Agents Chemother 35:2463-2466.

1991.

Tzavella K; Schenkirsch G: Riepl RL et al. Effects of long-
term treatment with anthranoids and sodium picosulphate on the
contents of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, somatostatin and
substance P in the rat colon. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1995
Jan:7(1): 13-20.

Valverde A; Hay JM; Fingerhut A et al. Senna vs polyethylene
glycol for mechanical preparation the evening before elective
colonic or rectal resection: a multicenter controlled trial. French
Association for Surgical Research. Arch Surg 1999

May; 134(5):514-9.

Van Os FHL (1976) Pharmacol 14(Suppl 1):7.

Yamauchi K; Yagi T; Kuwano S. Suppression of the purgative
action of rhein anthrone, the active metabolite of sennosides A
and B, by calcium channel blockers, calmodulin antagonists and
indomethacin. Pharmacology 1993 Oct;47 Suppl 1:22-31.

Ziegenhagen DJ; Zehnter E; Tacke W et al. Addition of senna
improves colonoscopy preparation with lavage: a prospective
randomized trial. Gastrointest Endosc 1991 Sep-Oct;37(5):547-9.

Further information in: " «=

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used.
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Serenoa repens

See Saw Palmetto

Sesame

Sesamum orientale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the seed.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are short-pedicled, single or
in groups of 2 or 3 in the leaf axils. The "flowers are
zygomorphic; the calyx 5-tipped, 2 to 5 mm long, pubescent
and does not drop. The corolla is campanulate, 5-lobed and
distinctly bilabiate. It is 1.5 to 3.5 cm long, white or reddish.
The lower lobes are the longest. There are 4 stamens. The
ovary is usually 2-chambered (but can be up to 10-cham-
bered) with a false septum, 1 to 1.5 mm long and pubescent.
The fruit is a square, brownish, 2 to 3 cm long and up to 1
cm wide, multi-seeded capsule. The seeds are yellowish-
white, brownish, reddish or black, 1.5 to 4 mm long, 1 to 2
mm wide, 0.5 to 1 mm thick, and smooth or finely ribbed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb grows upright to a height
of 1.2 m. The lower leaves are opposite and the petiole is 3
to 11 cm long. The lamina 4 to 20 cm long and 2 to 10 cm
wide. It is elongate-ovate, entire or 3-lobed, then dentate.
The upper leaves are opposite or alternate. The petiole is up
to 3 cm long. The lamina is 0.5 to 2.5 cm wide, lanceolate
and usually entire. Young leaves are pubescent and sticky.
The stem is square to hexagonal, eiuher completely pubescent
or only on the upper section. The taproot grows down to a
depth of almost 1 m. The stem is branched or unbranched.

Characteristics: The plant's rily seeds are odorless with a

sweet taste.

Habitat: Sesame orientale is cultivated worldwide in tropical
and subtropical temperate zones, but the main sesame oil-
producing countries are India, Sudan, Burma and China.

Production: Sesame oil is the oil of Sesamum orientale,
which is pressed or extracted from the ripe seeds and refined.

Other Names: Beniseed, Gingelly, Oriental Sesame

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil (97 to 98%): chief fatty acids are oleic acid (35 to
50%), linoleic acid (35 to 50%), palmitic acid (7 to 12%),
stearic acid (3 to 6%)

Lignarts (0.8 to 1.7%): including sesamine sesamolin

----- PAGE 938 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol (0.4%), campe-

sterol

EFFECTS

The lignan sesamine contained in the drug is immunosup-
pressive in vitro. In view of its oily nature, use as a clysma
for softening the stool and topically on dry skin diseases is
plausible. Its effect as a purgative seems logical but has not
been clinically proven. Sesame oil treated with lipase is
cytotoxic in vitro. Because of its high levels of linoleic acid,
sesame oil is a valuable dietetic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine internal uses include treating
constipation, especially dyschezia; external uses include

and crust formations, for swellings,

removal of scabs
rheumatism and as a massage oil. Its use as a laxative is

considered obsolete.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. The drug
possesses a limited potential for sensitization.

DOSAGE

v-
Mode of Administration: Preparations are available for
internal and external use.

Preparation: Sesame oil for parenteral application is pro-
duced from Sesamum orientale by heating in a drying
chamber to 140°C or by means of germ filtration with the
addition of 5% benzyl alcohol followed by heating at 120° C
for 1 hour in the drying chamber.

Storage: Store in tightly sealed containers and protect from
light.

LITERATURE

Aregheore EM, A review of implications of antiquality and
toxic components in unconventional feedstuffs advocated for use
in intensive animal production in Nigeria. Vet Hum Toxicol,
40:35-9, 1998 Feb.

Badifu' GI, Akpagher EM, Effects of debittering methods on the
proximate composition, organoleptic and functional properties of
sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) seed flour. Plant Foods Hum
Nutr, 51:119-26, 1996 Feb.

Bhatnagar A, Gupta A, Chlorpyriphos, quinalphos and lindane
residues in sesame seed and oil (Sesamum indicum L.). J Sci
Food Agric, 60:596-600, 1998 Apr.

Bhatnagar A, Gupta A, Dissociation and denaturation behaviour
of sesame alpha-globulin in sodium dodecyl sulphate solution.
Int J Pept Protein Res, 60:385-92, 1998 Apr.

Chambers SJ, Carr HJ, Lambert N, An investigation of the
dissociation and denaturation of legumin by salts using laser
light scattering and circular dichroism spectroscopy. Biochim
Biophys Acta, 1037:66-72, 1990 Jan 19.

SESAME/689

Egbekun MK, Ehieze MU, Proximate composition and
functional properties of fullfat and defatted beniseed (Sesamum
indicum L.) flour. Plant Foods Hum Nutr, 51:35-41, 1997.

Guerra MJ, Jaffe WG, Sangronis E, Obtaining protein fractions
from commercial sesame cakes (Sesamum indicum). Arch
Latinoam Nutr, 34:477-87, 1984 Sep.

Guerra MJ. Jaffe WG, Sangronis E, Os sesamum genus
proximale tibiale. Cesk Radiol, 34:477-87, 1984 Sep.

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kadirvel R. Studies on sesame oil cake meal (Sesamum
indicum) in chick mash. Indian Vet J, 45:529-36, 1968 Jun.

Kumar KS. Murthy SK, Studies on lipolytic enzymes of oil
seeds. Part I. Sesamum indicum (gingelly). Enzymologia,
33:243-9, 1967 Nov 30.

Lakshmi TS, Nandi PK, Prakash V, Interactions of sugars with
alpha-globulin from Sesamum indicum L. Indian J Biochem
Biophys, 51:135-41, 1985 Jun.

Marston A, Potterat O, Hostettmann K, Isolation of biologically
active plant constituents by liquid chromatography. J
Chromatogr, 60:3-11, 1988 Oct 19.

Mehrotra RS, Tiwari DP, Organic amendments and control of
foot rot of Piper betle caused by Phytophthora parasitica var.
piperina. Ann Microbiol (Paris), 35:415-21, 1976 Apr.

Otaiza ER. Valeri H, Cumare V, Selenium content in the blood
of cattle from Venezuela. I. Central and Portuguese zones. Arch
Latinoam Nutr, 60:233-46, 1977 Jun.

Perez C, Saad R, Enzymatic modification of proteins of
commercial sesame meals (Sesamum indicum, L.). Arch
Latinoam Nutr, 34:735-48, 1984 Dec.

Plietz P, Damaschun G, Zirwer D, Gast K, Schwenke KD,
Prakash V, Shape and quaternary structure of alpha-globulin
from sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) seed as revealed by small
angle x-ray scattering and quasi-elastic light scattering. J Biol
Chem, 1986 Sep 25; 261(27): 12686-91.

Prakash V, Nandi PK, Association-dissociation behavior of
sesame alpha-globulin in electrolyte solutions. J Biol Chem,
60:240-3, 1977 Jan 10.

Prakash V, Nandi PK, Dissociation, aggregation and
denaturation of sesame alpha-globulin in urea and guanidine
hydrochloride solutions. Int J Pept Protein Res, 60:97-106,
1977.

Prakash V, Nandi PK, Jirgensons B, Effect of sodium dodecyl
sulfate, acid, alkali, urea and guanidine hydrochloride on the
circular dichroism of alpha-globulin of Sesamum indicum L. Int
J Pept Protein Res, 51:305-13, 1980 Apr.

Rajamohan T, Kurup PA, Histopauiologic studies on sesamoid
bones of the hoof in cattle with purulent podotrochlitis. Berl
Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr, 35:289-93 concl, 1976 Aug 1.

----- PAGE 939 -----
690 /SESAME

Rajamohan T, Kurup PA, Lysine: arginine ratio of a protein
influences cholesterol metabolism. Part 1 - Studies on sesame
protein having low lysine: arginine ratio. Indian J Exp Biol,
35:1218-23, 1997 Nov.

Saad R, Perez C, Functional and nutritional properties of
modified proteins of sesame (Sesamum indicum, L.). Arch
Latinoam Nutr, 34:749-62, 1984 Dec.

Saad R, Perez C, Persistance of antibiotics in leaves of
sesamum (Sesamum indicum L.). Hindustan Antibiot Bull,
34:107-8, 1984 Aug-Nov.

Salgado JM, Goncalves CM, Sesame seed (Sesamum indicum,
L.). I. Methods for preparing an edible white flour. Arch
Latinoam Nutr, 38:306-11, 1988 Jun.

Sheela P, Amuthan G, Mahadevan A, Cloning of extracellular
lipase gene from Xanthomonas campestris pathovar sesami on
to Escherichia coli. Indian J Exp Biol, 60:27-31, 1996 Jan.

Tasneem R, Prakash V, Aggregation, dissociation and
denaturation of sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) alpha-globulin in
cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide solution. Int J Pept Protein
Res, 8:120-8, 1977.

Tasneem R, Prakash V, Association-dissociation and
denaturation behaviour of an oligomeric seed prote-in alpha-
globulin of Sesamum indicum L. in acid and alkaline solutions.
Int J Pept Protein Res, 8:319-28, 1977.

Tasneem R, Prakash V, Resistance of alpha-globulin from
Sesamum indicum L. to proteases in relationship to its
structure. J Protein Chem, 8:251-61, 1989 Apr.

Tasneem R, Prakash V, The nature of the unhydrolysed fraction
of alpha-globulin, the major protein component of Sesamum
indicum L. hydrolysed by alpha-chymotrypsin. Indian J

Biochem Biophys, 29:160-7, 1992 Apr.

Thompson EW, Richardson M, Boulter D, The amino acid
sequence of sesame (Sesamum indicum L.) and castor (Ricinus
communis L.) cytochrome c. Biochem J, 51:439-46, 1971 Feb.

Wankhede DB, Tharanathan RN, Sesame (Sesamum indicum)
carbohydrates. J Agric Food Chem, 51:655-9, 1976 May-Jun.

Yukawa Y, Takaiwa F, Shoji K, Masuda K, Yamada K,
Structure and expression of two seed-specific cDNA clones
encoding stearoyl-acyl carrier protein desaturase from sesame,
Sesamum indicum L. Plant Cell Physiol, 37:201-5, 1996 Mar.

Yun TK, Kim SH, Lee YS, Trial of a new medium-term model
using benzo(a)pyrene induced lung tumor in newborn mice.
Anticancer Res, 15:839-45, 1995 May-Jun.

Sesamum orientale

See Sesame

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Shepherd's Purse

Cap sella bursa-pastoris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the aerial portion of

the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The plant stays in bloom for almost the
whole year. The flowers are white and about 4 to 6 mm long.
The 4 sepals are 1 to 2 mm long and the 4 petals are 2 to 3
mm long. There are 6 stamens. The inflorescence is extended
after flowering. The many-seeded pod is 4 to 9 mm long and
almost as wide. It is glabrous, flattened, long-stemmed,
triangular and obcordate. The seeds are 0.8 to 1 mm long and
red-brown with a short style.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Shepard's purse is a 2 to 40 cm high
plant with a simple fusiform root and a simple upright stem.
The stem is glabrous or has scattered hairs on the lower
section. The basal leaves form a rosette and are petioled,
entire-margined or pinnatifid. The few cauline leaves are
alternate, smaller, sessile, entire, very wrinkled and involute.

Habitat: Worldwide, except tropical regions.

Production: Shepherd's Purse herb consists of the fresh or
dried aboveground parts of Capsella bursa, collected in the
wild during the summer and dried rapidly.

Other Names: Shepherd's Scrip, Shepherd's Sprout, Lady's
Purse, Witches' Pouches, Rattle Pouches, Case-Weed, Pick-
Pocket, Blindweed, Pepper-and-Salt, Poor Man's Parmacet-
tie, Sanguinary, Mother's Heart, Cocowort, St. James' Weed,
Shepherd's Heart, Toy wort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Cardioactive steroids: presumably only in the seeds

Glucosinolates, sinigrin: 9-methyl sulfinyl nonyl glucosino-
late, 9-methyl sulfinyl decyl glucosinolate

Flavonoids: including rutin, luteolin-7-rutinoside
Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid.

The plant very often acts as a host to endophytic fungi
(Albugo Candida, Peronospora parasitica), so the presence
of mytotoxins is a possibility.

EFFECTS

A number of different studies have shown both a lowering
and elevation of blood pressure, positive inotropic and
chronotropic cardiac effects, and increased uterine contrac-
tion. Despite numerous studies a clear therapeutic use could
not be identified.

----- PAGE 940 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Nosebleeds
« Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
* Wounds and burns

Unproven Uses: Internally, the plant is used for mild
menstrual irregularities such as menorrhagia and metrorrha-
gia. Externally, it is used for nosebleeds and superficially
bleeding skin injuries. Shepherd's Purse is seldom used in
folk medicine today. In America itjs used for headaches. In
Spain a decoction of the fresh plant is used for bladder
inflammation.

Homeopathic Uses: Capsella bursa-pastoris is used for
uterine and mucous membrane bleeding as well as for
calculosis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for tea and other
galenic preparations for internal use and_ external
administration.

Daily Dosage: Internally, the average daily dose is 10 to* 15
gm of drug. The liquid extract daily dose is 5 to 8 gm drug.
The infusion may be drunk throughout the day. Externally an
infusion is prepared by adding 3 to 5 gm drug to 150 ml
water.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops or 1 tablet or 10 globules
every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times a day sc (HAB1)

Storage: Shepard's Purse should be protected from light and
moisture.
LITERATURE

Farkas L, In "Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry Ist Int Cong.
Munich 1971", Springer-Verlag 1971.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hill RK, in "The Alkaloids Vol. 7\ Ed. SW Pelletier, John
Wiley 1984.

Kuroda K, Tagaki K, (1968) Nature 220:707.
Kuroda K et al., (1976) Cancer Res 36:1900.
Kuroda K, Kaku T, (1969) Life Sci 8(1): 151.

SHORT BUCHU / 691

Kuroda K, Tagaki K, (1969) Arch Int Pharmacodyn 178(2):
382. 392.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Giftstoffe mikrobieller Endo- und
Epiphyten. Gefahren fur Mensch und Tier? In: DAZ
132(42):2231. 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Vermathen M, Glas! H. Effect of the herb extract of Capsella
bursa pastoris on blood coagulation. In: PM 59(7)70. 1993.
Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttsart 1997. ~~

Short Buchu

Barosma species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves of
Barosma betulina, Barosma crenulata and Barosma serratifo-
* lia gathered during the flowering season, as well as the"
ethereal oil extracted from the dried leaves of Barosma
betulina.

Flower and Fruit: The pentamerous flowers of Barosma
betulina form a white or pink corolla 12 mm in diameter with
lanceolate petals. The fruit is a 7 mm long capsule with 5
chambers and one seed per chamber. The upper surface is
greenish-brown and rough. The fruit springs open at the 5
valves. The seeds are ovoid, oblong, about 5 mm long and 2
mm wide, glossy black and hard with no endosperm. The
flowers of Barosma crenulata are pink or white and attached
to short leafy side branches.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Barosma betulina is a small shrub
with light green to yellowish leaves. The leaves are 12 to 20
mm in length, opposite, rigid and coriaceous. They are
rhomboid or obovate, short-petioled and slightly pubescent,
blunt and revolute at the apex. Each indentation has an oil
gland. The oil glands form small raised structures onJJie leaf
surface. The stem is about 2 to 3 mm in diameter, reddish-
brown and rough (due to the oil glands) with 4 long grooves.
The intemodes are 8 to 20 mm long.

Barosma crenulata is a slender glabrous bush 2 to 3 m high.
It is branched somewhat angularly. The bark is violet-brown.
The leaves of Barosma crenulata vary in form, and are
opposite and pubescent on both surfaces. They reach up to 3
cm in length with an obtuse, but not a revolute, tip.

Barosma serratifolia bush is very similar to the above,
almough the leaves are longer, obtuse at the tip and narrowed

----- PAGE 941 -----
692 /SHORT BUCHU

on both edges. The leaves are lanceolate, have a long,
serrated, saw-shaped margin and a blunt apex. They are
yellowish green and up to 4 cm long with an oil gland at the
apex and indentations on the margin. There are smaller oil
glands spread over the leaf blade.

Characteristics: The leaves have a peppermint odor.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Cape region of South
Africa.

Production: Short Buchu leaf consists of the dried leaves of
Barosma betulina harvested when in flower and in fruit. In
South Africa, collection of the leaves is strictly controlled by
the government to prevent destruction of the plant in the
wild.

Not to be Confused With: Other Barosma and Diosma

species.

Other Names: Buchu

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components diosphenol and _psi-diosphe-
nol (as a mixture known as buccocamphor), limonene, (+)-
menthone, 8-9-isomenthone, pulegone, furthermore (-)- cis-
and (+)-trans-8-mercapto-p-menth-3-one (odor-determining,
so-called cassis aroma)

Flavonoids: including rutin and diosmetin

EFFECTS
No studies of the drug are currently available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Short Buchu leaf is used for inflammation
and infection of the kidneys and urinary tract, for bladder
irritation, as a disinfectant of the urinary tract and as a
diuretic. In Europe the drug has been in use since the 16th
century for the treatment of gout, various bladder disorders
and rheumatism, and for the prostate gland. In South Africa
it is still widely used, typically as a brandy made from the
plant and used to treat stomach complaints.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Short Buchu is not to be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages, but it is noted that the volatile oil could lead to
signs of irritation.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Since the claimed efficacy has not
been documented, the application of Buchu leaf cannot be
recommended. Buchu is used in various preparations and

combinations.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

How Supplied: Short Buchu is available as an_ extract,
tincture and infusion.

Preparation: A fluid extract is prepared using 1000 parts
powdered Buchu leaves plus 400 parts 90% ethanol (V/V)
7:3 water produce 1000 parts fluid extract (EB6).

Infusion —. fluid extract 1:1 90% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).
Buchu leaf tincture — 1:5 60% ethanol (V/V) (BHP83).

Daily Dose: The daily dose of the drug is 1 g to 2 g. Fluid
extracts of 0.3 to 1.2 ml are taken 3 times daily. Dosage for
the tincture is 2 to 4 ml up to 3 times daily. Infusion usage is
typically 1 g per cup.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);

parenterally: 1 to 2 ml 3 times daily sc (HAB34).

Storage: The drug must be kept cool, dry and away from the
light in sealed containers.

LITERATURE
Didry N, Pinkas M, (1982) Plant Med Phytother

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kaiser R et al., (1975) J Agric Food Chem 23: 943-950.

6 (4): 249.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Siam Benzoin
Styrax tonkinensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the resin
obtained from the trunk.

Flower and Fruit: Styrax tonkinensis is a tree that grows up
to 20 m high. It is very similar to Styrax benzoin, but the
flowers are smaller, the calyx is 3 to 4 mm long, the corolla
is white and up to 9 mm long. The fruit is up to 12 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are oval, 4.5 to 10 cm
long and 2 to 6 cm wide.

----- PAGE 942 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Habitat: Laos

Production: Siam Benzoin is the balsam of Styrax tonkinen-
sis, or other related species, obtained by making cuts in the
trunk. The optimal age of tree to be harvested is 7 years. The
tree is cut, which stimulates it to exude resin to heal the cuts.
The resin is then collected in a vessel, and left to melt to a
homogenous mass in the sun.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Ester mixture (90%): bestehend aus coniferyl benzoate (60
to 70%), p-cumaryl benzoate (10 to 15%), as well as
cinnamyl benzoate, cinnamyl cinnamate

Benzoic acid (10 to 20%)
Vanillin (0.5%)
Triterpenes: alpha-siaresinolic acid (5%)

EFFECTS
The expectorant effect with which the drug is credited could
not be proven experimentally (it possibly originated in
connection with an "aroma therapy,” due to its vanilla
content).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Siam Benzoin is used for respiratory
catarrh.

Chinese Medicine: In China, preparations are used for
stroke, syncope, post partal syncope due to heavy loss of
blood, chest and stomach pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb, powdered drug and
other galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: To prepare a tincture, use powder in 90%
ethanol (V/V) 1:5 macerate (DAB9).

Daily Dosage: 0.5 gm; single dose: 0.05 gm
Storage: Should be tightly sealed, and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

James WD, White SW, Yanklowitz B, Allergic contact
dermatitis to compound tincture of benzoin. J Am Acad
Dermatol, 11:847-50, 1984 Nov.

SIBERIAN GINSENG / 693

Siberian Ginseng

Eleutherococcus senticosus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the pulverized root
rind, the pulverized root and an alcoholic fluid extract of the
thizome and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in umbels. The central
umbel is on a long, thick peduncle. The style is fused into a
column to the tip and has 5 small stigma lobes.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Siberian Ginseng is a | to 3 m high
shrub whose branches are thickly covered with'pale, thorny
bristles pointing downward at an angle. The leaves are in
groups of 5 and are thorny-serrate. The petiole is covered in
fine bristles.

Habitat: Siberian Ginseng grows in Siberia, northern China,
Korea and Japan.

Production: Siberian Ginseng consists of the dried roots and/
or rhizome of Eleutherococcus senticosus as well as their

-preparations in effective dosage.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

Hydroxycoumarins: isofraxidin

Lignans: sesamine, eleutheroside D (epimeric diglucosides
of syringaresinols)

Steroids: including _ beta-sitosterol-3-O-beta-D-glucoside
(daucosterol, eleutheroside A, 0.1%)

Phenylacrylic acid derivatives: eleutheroside B (syringin)

Polysaccharides: immunostimulatingly effective polysaccha-
rides (eleutherane A-G)

Steroid glycosides: eleutheroside A (daucosterol, beta-stig-
masterol-3-O-beta-D-glucoside)

Triterpene saponins: eleutheroside I, eleutheroside K (beta-
hederin), eleutheroside L, eleutheroside M (hederasaponin
B), for all of these aglycone oleanolic acid

EFFECTS
The liquid extract of the drug has an immune-stimulating/
immune-modulating and antiviral effect. In various stress
models, e.g., immobilization test and coldness test, the
endurance of rodents was enhanced. With healthy volunteers,
the lymphocyte count, especially that of T-lymphocytes,
increased following intake of liquid extracts.

----- PAGE 943 -----
694/SIBERIAN GINSENG

Hypoglycemic effects have also been demonstrated with the
herb along with enhancement of platelet aggregation-inhibit-
ing effects (Hikino, 1986; Yun-Coi, 1987).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved By Commission E:

+ Lack of stamina
* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: Siberian Ginseng is used as a tonic for
invigoration and fortification in times of fatigue and debility
or declining capacity for work and concentration, and during

convalescence.

Chinese Medicine: Siberian Ginseng is used for kidney pain,
retention of urine, impotence, sleep disturbance, loss of
appetite, pain and weakness in the hip and knee joints,
rheumatoid arthritis and as a stimulant for the immune

system.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be administered to patients with

hypertension.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

Drug Interactions:
Digoxin — elevated serum levels (McRae, 1996)

Antidiabetic Agents/Insulin — may potentiate effects (Hiki-

no, 1986)

Anticoagulants/Antiplatelets/Antithrombotics — may en-
hance effects (Yun-Choi, 1987)

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Powdered or cut root for teas, as
well as aqueous-alcoholic extracts for internal use.

Preparation:

Extract (Siberian Ginseng) — root powder 1:7 75% ethanol
extracted with back flow to which is added a 10% alpha-
naphthol solution until there is no reaction. It is then
evaporated to a paste (ChinP IX).

Liquid extract — medium fine root powder can be produced
using a through flow procedure with 40% ethanol (V/V)
(1000 gm drug to 1 Liter extract), (Ross XI).

Daily Dosage: 9 to 15 gm root bark; 9 to 27 gm root; 0.3 to
0.5 gm drug extract 3 times daily. The average daily dosage
is 2 to 3 gm of root.

Storage: Should be stored in well-aired, dry place, protected
from light

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE
Bauer R, Neues von "immunmodulierenden Drogen" und
"Drogen mit antiallergischer und antiinflammatorischer
Wirkung." In: ZPT 14(1):23-24. 1993.

Bladt S, Wagner H, Woo WS, (1990) Taiga-Wurzel. Dtsch
Apoth Ztg 27:1499-1508.

Bohn B, Nebe Cr, Birr C, (1987) Flow-cytometric studies with
Eleutherococcus senticosus extract as an immunomodulatory
agent. Arzneim Forsch (Drug Res) 37:1193-1196.

Hikino H, Takahashi M, Otake K, Konno C, Isolation and
ypoglycemic activity of A, B, C, D, E, F, and G: glycans of
Eleutherococcus senticosus roots. J Nat Prod 1986 Mar-Apr;
49(2):293-7.

Kaemmerer K, Fink J, (1980) Untersuchungen von
Eleutherococcus-Extrakt auf trophanabole Wirkungen bei Ratten.
Der Praktische Tierarzt 61:748-753.

Koch HP, Eidler S, (1988) Eleutherococcus Senticosus.
Sibirischer Ginseng. Wissenschaftlicher Bericht. Kooperation
hytopharmaka, Koln Bonn Frankfurt Bad Homburg.

McRae S, Elevated serum digoxin levels in a patient taking
digoxin and Siberian ginseng. CMAJ 1996 Aug 1;155(3):293-5.
Obermeier A, (1980) Zur Analytik der Ginseng-und
Eteutherococcusdroge. Dissertation Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universitat Miinchen.

Sprecher E, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: ZPT 9(2):40. 1988.
Wagner H, Norr H, Winterhoff H, Drogen mit
"Adaptogenwirkung" zur Starkung der Widerstandskrafte. In:
ZPT 13(2):42. 1992.

Wagner H, Pflanzliche Immunstimulanzien. In: DAZ
131(4):117. 1991.

Weber R, Eleutherococcus senticosus. In: PTA 4(11):558. 1990.
Wichtl M, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: DAZ 132(30): 1576. 1992.
Yun-Choi HS, Kim JH, Lee, Potential inhibitors of platelet
aggregation from plant sources, III. J Nat Prod 1987 Nov-
Dec;50(6):1059

Zorikov PS, Lyapustina TA, (1974) Change in a concentration
of protein and nitrogen in the reproductive organs of hens
under the effect of Eleutherococcus extract. Deposited DOC
VINL732-774, 58-63: ref Chem Abstracts 86 (1977).

Further information in:

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W, Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin,
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

----- PAGE 944 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Silphium laciniatum

See Rosinweed

Silphium perfoliatum

See Cup Plant

Silybum marianum
See Milk Thistle

Simaruba

Simaruba amara

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root bark.

Flower.and Fruit: The flowers grow in small racemes with
dense matte-white petals.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Simaruba amara is a tree that grows
over 18 m high. The roots are long and spread horizontally.
The leaves are 22 to 27 cm long. The tree has numerous
long, bent branches covered in smooth, grayish bark. The
bark that is used commercially is thin and flat with a
yellowish or grayish-yellow color. The bark is tough, fibrous
and almost impossible to break.

Characteristics: The taste is very bitter and odorless.

Habitat: The plant grows on the Caribbean islands and the
northern parts of South America.

Other Names: Dysentery Bark, Mountain Damson, Bitter
Damson, Slave Wood, Stave Wood, Sumaruba

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Bitter substances: quassinoids (breakdown products of
triterpenes), including among others simarubin (1%), simaru-
bidin, simarolide, 13,18-dehydro-glaucarubinone

Tannins (20-27%)
Volatile oil (0.1-0.2%)
5-hydroxy-canthin-6-one
Alkaloids

EFFECTS
The active agents are tannin, simarubin, essential oil and fat.
The drug has a sedative effect on the smooth muscle of die

intestine. It constricts the vessels of the intestinal tract.
Simaruba is a tonic and febrifuge.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Simaruba was formerly used in the treat-
ment of febrile illnesses and dysentery. Recent research
indicates that it may be effective in treating malaria. The
drug is used for unspecified enteritis, diarrhea and as a bitter.
It may cause vomiting, and is also used as an abortive.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug triggers vomiting in high dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a liquid
extract for internal use.

Daily Dosage: The average dose is 1 gm of the drug to be
taken internally.

Storage: Protect against dampness.
LITERATURE

Bray DH et al., (1987) Phytother Res | (1):22.
Geissmann T, (1964) Ann Rev Pharmacol 4:305.
Kuroda K et al., (1976) Cancer Res 36:1900.
Polonsky J et al., (1978) Experientia 34 (9): 1122.

Further information in:

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Simaruba amara

See Simaruba

Simmondsia chinesis
See Jojoba

Sinapis alba
See White Mustard

----- PAGE 945 -----
696/SISYMBRIUM OFFICINALE

Sisymbrium_ officinale
See Hedge Mustard

Sium sisarum
See Skirret

Skirret

Sium sisarum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence has 10 to 30 rayed-
umbels with 1 to 5 lanceolate-narrow involucral bracts. The
petals are white, about | mm long and broad orbicular-
elliptical. The fruit is broad-ovate, about 3.5 by 2 to 2.5 mm
in diameter and brownish with light ribs. The fruit segments
in cross-section are obtuse pentagons with thin walls.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sium sisarum is a perennial glabrous
plant on a stubby rhizome with clustered, often tuberous
roots. The stem is about 30 to 80 cm high, round and
branched. The lower leaves are simple pinnate, oblong and
serrate. The upper leaves are narrower and more acuminate,
and are usually lanceolate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to China; it is cultivated in
Europe.

Production: Skirret root is the root of Sium sisarum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Oligosaccharides: saccharose (4-8%)

Starch (4-18%)
Mucilage

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The dnig is used for digestive disorders and

loss of appetite.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
wim the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Skirret root is available as cut drug

for internal use.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Skunk Cabbage

Symplocarpus foetidus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds, the

rhizome and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has numerous small purple
flowers in a red-brown, oval, high, spadix-like inflorescence.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and grows
up to 75 cm high. It has a thick tuberous rhizome, which is
truncate at both ends, dark brown and up to 4 cm in
diameter. The rhizome is gnarled and woody and bears
numerous roots and root scars. The roots are up to 8 cm long,
0.5 cm in diameter and transversely wrinkled. The leaves are
similar to cabbage leaves and they surround the
inflorescence.

Characteristics: The taste is hot and the odor is unpleasant.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the northern U.S.
Production: Skunk Cabbage root and rootstock are the
rhizome and roots of Symplocarpus foetidus.

Other Names: Dracontium, Meadow Cabbage, Polecatweed,
Skunkweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (bad-smelling)

Resins
The constituents of the drug have not been fully investigated.

EFFECTS
Skunk Cabbage is an antispasmodic, a diaphoretic, an
expectorant and a sedative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The plant is used for bronchitis and asthma.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
witii die proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

----- PAGE 946 -----
698/SLOE

finishes flowering before the leaves unfold. The calyx is
campanulate with long tips, which are twice as long as the
tips of the 5 petals. The fruit is dark blue, frosted, globular,
diameter approximately 10 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sloe is a bulky bush about 3 m high.
The branches are velvet-haired when young. The numeroug
lateral branches are almost horizontal and end in sharp
thorns. The bark is black-brown.

Characteristics: The fruit tastes exceptionally sour and is
only really edible after several frosts.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe and parts of Asia.

Production: Sloe fruit consists of the fresh or dried ripe fruit
of Prunus spinosa as well as its preparations. Sloe flower
consists of the dried flowers of Prunus spinosa as well as its

preparations.

Not to be Confused With: May be confused with the flowers
of Prunus padus syn. Padus avium.

Other Names: Blackthorn, Wild Plum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SLOE FRUIT
Cyanogenic glycosides: amygdalin, only in the seeds

Fruit acids

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides
Tannins

EFFECTS: SLOE FRUIT
Sloe fruit has an astringent effect.

COMPOUNDS: SLOE FLOWER
Cyanogenic glycosides: amygdalin (traces, likely only in the
fresh blossoms)

Flavonoids: including quercitrin, rutin, and hyperoside

EFFECTS: SLOE FLOWER
There is no reliable information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SLOE FRUIT

Approved by Commission E:

+ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Sloe fruit is used externally for inflammation of the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa (as a gargle).

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine the fruit juice is used as a
gargle for mouth, throat, and gum inflammation. Syrup and
wine are employed as a purgative or diuretic and as jam for a
weak stomach.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

SLOE FLOWER
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Sloe flower are used for
common colds, diseases and ailments of the respiratory tract,
as a laxative, for diarrhea, for prophylaxis and treatment of
gastric spasms, flatulence, intestinal diseases and_ gastric
insufficiency.
Homeopathic Uses: Prunus spinosa is used for cardiac
insufficiency and 'nervous headaches’.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

SLOE FRUIT AND FLOWER

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

SLOE FRUIT

Mode of Administration: Sloe fruit is available as crude drug
for infusions and other galenic preparations for mouth rinses.

Daily Dosage: External use — 2 to 4 gm drug

SLOE FLOWER
Mode of Administration: Sloe
-available in various commercial compounded preparations.

flower preparations are

Preparation: Tea: pour boiling water over 1 to 2 heaped
teaspoons, stir occasionally for 5 to 10 minutes and strain.

Daily Dosage: Drink 1 to 2 cups during the day or 2 cups in
the evening. (1 teaspoon corresponds approximately to 1 gm

drug)

Storage: Should be protected from light and moisture, at best
not longer than 1 year.

LITERATURE

SLOE FLOWER
Irizar AC, Fernandez MF, Constituents of Prunus spinosa. In:
JNP 55:450-454. 1992.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1/3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

SLOE FRUIT
Irizar AC, Fernandez MF, Constituents of Prunus spinosa. In:
JNP 55:450-454. 1992.

----- PAGE 947 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage results in queasiness and vomiting.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Skunk Cabbage is administered as a
liquid extract in various medicinal preparations.

LITERATURE
Adolf A. Hecker E (1980) Tetrahedron Letters 21:2887
Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Slippery Elm

Ulmus rubra

TRADE NAMES
Slippery Elm Bark

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is" the dried inner rind
separated from the outer bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in dense, almost sessile
clusters. There are 5 to 9 tepals and the same number of
stamens. The stigmas are bright red. The fruit is almost top-
shaped to broad-elliptical, 1 to 2 cm long, wide and glabrous,
except for the rust-red downy center. The seeds are inserted
in the center.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree is medium-sized and grows
up to 20 m tall with spread branches forming an open crown.
The younger branches are red-brown or orange and more or
less downy. The bark is deeply fissured. The buds are large,
tust-red and downy. The leaves are obovate to oblong, 10 to
20 cm long and have a double-serrate margin. The lamina is
long acuminate and sharply asymmetrical at the base. The
leaves, are dark green above and very rough, densely downy
beneath. They darken in autumn.

Characteristics: The texture is mucilaginous and the odor
slight but characteristic. The powdered inner bark is used for
its mucilaginous quality. Taken as a drink, it relieves
irritation of the mucous membrane. The same water-retain-
ing properties allow the powder to be used as an emollient
poultice.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America.

Production: Slippery Elm bark is the inner bark and wood of
Ulmus fulva.

Other Names: Red Elm, Sweet Elm

SLOE 7 697

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroids: sterols, including cholesterol, campesterol, beta-

sitosterol

Sesquiterpenes: including 5-isopropyl-3,8-dimethyl-2-naph-
thol, 2-hydroxy-5-isopropyl-8-methyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-3-
naphthyl aldehyde

Tannins (very little)

EFFECTS
Slippery Elm is demulcent, emollient and soothing to the

alimentary canal.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE "oe
Unproven Uses: Internally, the drug is used in the treatment
of gastritis and gastric or duodenal ulcers. Externally, it is
used in the treatment of wounds, burns, skin conditions,
swollen glands, gout, and rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole and cut drug is available in
the form of a decoction for internal use and poultices for
external use.

How Supplied: Capsules — 370 mg

Preparation: A decoction is made in a ratio of 1:8 with
ethanol.

Daily Dosage: The dose for the decoction is 4 to 16 ml per
day. Externally, the coarsely ground drug is used as a
poultice.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kim JP, Kim WG, Koshino H, Jung J, Yoo ID Sesquiterpene
O-naphthoquinones fiom the root bark of Ulmus davidiana.
Phytochemistry, 43:425-30, 1996 Sep.

Sloe

Prunus spinosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The white, pedicled flowers are solitary
but appear close to each other on the branches. The bush

----- PAGE 948 -----
700/SMARTWEED

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde. 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg 01ms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Smilax species

See — Sarsaparilla

Sneezewort

Achillea ptarmica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white, composite and in
cymes at the tip of the stem. The bracts are lanceolate and
short-haired. The ray florets are linguiform and female. The
disc florets are tubular and androgynous. The chaff scales are
lanceolate and hairy-tipped. The fruit is hairless.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 30 to 80 cm
high. The rhizome is creeping, and the stem is upright and
glabrous. The leaves are glabrous, alternate, simple, lanceo-
late, acute, sessile and finely serrated. They are slightly
glossy and dark green.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northern and central

Europe.

Production: The rhizome is dug up in the autumn of its
second year of bearing fruit, washed, freed of any green
areas and dried in the shade at a temperature of 35° C.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil

Polyynes: including pontica expoxide, tridecatrien-( 1,3,5)-

triin-(7,9,1 1 )-cis-dehydromatricaria ester

Alkamides: trans-dehydromatricaria acid

isobutyl amide

including

EFFECTS
No information is available.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In the past, Sneezewort was used as a
remedy for tiredness, loss of appetite, urinary tract com-
plaints, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, rheumatism and other
painful disorders. Today it is considered a remedy for
toothache, flatulence and problems with elimination; the
herb also helps to regulate bowel movements.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages, although persons with compound allergies should
avoid salves prepared from the drug.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Sneezewort is available as a topical
preparation and in alcoholic extracts.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 2 teaspoonfuls of
the comminuted drug to 2 cups of water.

Daily Dosage: A daily infusion can be drunk, or the fresh
root can be chewed.

LITERATURE
Kuropka G, Neugebauer M, Glombitza KW, Essential oils of
Achillea ptarmica. In: PM 57:492. 1991.

Riicker G et al., trans-Pinocarveylhydroxid aus Achillea
ptarmica. In: PM 60(2): 194. 1994.

Snowdrop

Galanthus nivalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: Although disputed, some attribute medici-

nal properties to the bulb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are single on approximately
10 cm long peduncles, are campanulate, drooping and
shorter than the hood-like bract. The perigone has 6 tepals,
the outer 3 oval, white, 14 to 18 mm long and free. The inner
3 tepals are shorter, with an indentate tip, a green longitudi-
nal stripe on the inside and a green half-moon- shaped 'spot
on the outside. The 6 stamens are short and inclined toward
each other. The ovary is barrel-shaped and has 1 style. The
fruit is a yellowish-green, 3-chambered capsule with up to 12
seeds in each chamber. Itis initially fleshy, and later springs
open in folds. The seeds are elliptical, 3 to 4 mm long, with a
thin membranous skin and a small and narrow horn-like

appendage.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This bulb plant is hardy and grows
to 10 to 25 cm high. There are only 2 basal leaves, up to 0.8
cm wide and up to 10 cm long, with a blue-green bloom.

41

----- PAGE 949 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Smartweed
Persicaria hydropiper

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and the
whole plant harvested during the flowering season.

Flower and Fruit: The greenish pink flowers are in sparse,
thin, hanging false ears. The 4-bract involucre is inconspicu-
ous with a reddish tip and is glandular-punctate. The flowers
are androgynous. There are 6 to 8 stamens, 2 of which have
no function. The fruit has a flat and a domed side. It is black,
punctate, nut-like, roughly bumpy and surrounded by a
remaining epicalyx.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 30 to 50 cm
high. The branched stems, which are from 60 to 90 cm long,
are first creeping and later semi-erect and often tinged red.
The leaves are oblong-lanceolate, short petioled, narrowed at
both ends and alternate; they are glandular and ciliate on the
under surface. The leaf sheaths at the base of the leaves.are
loose, glabrous and ciliated at the margin.
Characteristics: Smartweed has an extraordinarily hot,
pepper-like taste and is often used as a pepper substitute. The
plant has characteristic long, thinly curved, hanging, flower-
ing branches.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to large parts of Europe,
Asian Russia and Arctic regions.

Production: Smartweed is the fresh plant, in flower, of
Polygonum hydropiper. The flowering herb is cut and
washed, the roots are removed and discarded and the herb is
dried in the shade.

Not to be Confused With: Polygonum hydropiper is some-
times adultered with polygonum persicaria, P. mite and P.
minus.

Other Names: Water Pepper, Arsesmart

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including rhamnazin, rhamnazin bisulfate, persi-
carin (isorhamnetine sulfate) quercitrin, and hyperoside

P-cumaroyl glycosides: hydropiperoside

SMARTWEED 7699

Sesquiterpenes: sesquiterpene aldehydes (pungent sub-
stances), polygoidal (tadeonal), and warburganal

Tannins

EFFECTS
Smartweed is a hemostyptic.

INDICATIONS
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Smartweed is used
internally for uterine bleeding, menstrual bleeding, bleeding
of hemorrhoids (piles), gastrointestinal bleeding, rheumatic
pain, as a diuretic, for bladder and kidney disease and gout;
and used externally for poorly healing wounds, sprains,
contusions, rheumatism and gout.

Chinese Medicine: Smartweed is used for severe digestive
problems, vomiting, diarrhea, dysentery, scabies and external
wounds in China.

Homeopathic Uses: Polygonum hydropiper is used to treat
varicose veins.

PRECAUTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The consumption of larger quantities of the fresh
kraut can lead to gastroenteritis. External use is not advisable
because of the drugs irritant effect on the skin.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Smartweed is available in crude
powder form for oral intake and in parenteral form for
homeopathic use.

Preparation: Tea — Pour 14 Liter hot water over 1 heaped
teaspoon drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: Tea — 3 times a day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

LITERATURE
Asakawa Y, Takemoto T, (1979) Experientia 35:1429.
Barnes CS, Loder JW, (1962) Aust J Chem 15:322.

Furuta, T. et al., (1986) Phytochemistry 25(2):517. .

Fukujama Y et al., Hydropiperoside, a novel coumaroly
glycoside from the root of Polygonum hydropiper. In: PH
22:549-552. 1983.

Kifakh SY, Blinova KF, (1984) Khim Prir Soedin 5:658.
Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 950 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

They are linear and slightly keeled on the underside. The
outer leaf has an open sheath, the inner leaf a closed sheath.
The bulb is globose to ovoid and approximately 1.5 cm wide.

Habitat: The plant is native to Switzerland and Austria as
well as other sections of southern Europe, but also has spread
to other parts of Europe including Bulgaria and the
Commonwealth of Independent States.

Production: The Snowdrop bulb is the fresh bulb of
Galanthus nivalis, which is harvested in the flowering
season.

ACTION AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Amaryllidaceae alkaloids (0.2 to 1.6%): including galantha-
mine, hemanthamin, narwedine, nivalidine, hippeastrine,
lycorine, nivaline, narciclasine, pretazettine. The alkaloid
spectrum depends greatly upon the variety.

Lectins

EFFECTS
The drug is now considered toxic. Previous use was based on
die effect of the alkaloid galanthamine contained in the drug
as a competitive inhibitor of true cholinesterase. The
administration of this isolated alkaloid for decurarization in
connection witfi anesthetics thus appeared plausible, as did
use for postoperative atonia of the gastrointestinal tract and
of die bladder, myasthenia and other conditions. The effects
of ouher alkaloids contained in the drug are virostatic, tumor-
inhibiting, positively inotropic and negatively chronotropic,
as well as being respiratory analeptics.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internal application: Snowdrop has been
used for myasthenia, myopathy, symptoms resulting from
polyneuropathy, neuritis, myelitis and injuries to the spine,
as well as postoperative intestinal, gastric and bladder atonia.
It has also been used in anesthetics, for thrombosis and
thrombo-embolism, Glaucoma (rare) and Alzheimer's

disease.

DOSAGE
The drug is no longer used therapeutically. The literature
includes mention of previous use of an aqueous solution of
Galanmamine hydrobromide 0.15 to 0.35 mg per kg of body
weight IV, IM, sc.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is toxic. Oral ingestion leads to symptoms
resembling those of physostigmine poisoning: diarrhea, colic
and vomiting (acetylcholine esterase inhibition through
galanmamine). Fatal poisonings have not been recorded.

SOAPWORT /701

LITERATURE
Amin Ky Beillevaire D, Mahmoud E, Hammar L, Mardh PA,
Frman G, Binding of Galanthus nivalis lectin to Chlamydia
trachomatis and inhibition of in vitro infection. APMIS,
103:714-20, 1995 Oct.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kalashnikov ID, Isolation of alkaloids from Galanthus nivalis L
Farm Zh, 103:40-4, 1970

Plaitakis A, Duvoisin RC, Homer's moly identified as
Galanthus nivalis L.: physiologic antidote to stramonium
poisoning. Clin Neuropharmacol, 6:1-5, 1983 Mar.

Venturi VM, Piccinin GL. Taddei I, Pharmacognostic study of
selfsown Galanthus nivalis (var. gracilis) in Italy Boll Soc Ital
Biol Sper, 103:593-7, 1965 Jun 15.

Soapwort

Saponaria officinalis

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
roots, and the leaves harvested in summer before or during
the flowering season of the first and second year of growth.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers generally are flesh-colored,
sometimes white, grow in racemes and have a 5-tipped fused
calyx. The petals have long stems. The ovary is superior and
has 1 style. The fruit is a capsule wim 4 teeth at the tip and
bursts open when ripe. The seeds are reniform-globular and
black-brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant is leafy and
grows about 100 cm high. The stems are round, erect, and
finely downy. The leaves are crossed opposite, oblong to
lanceolate, acute, entire-margined, 3-veined and taper to a
short petiole.

Characteristics: The plant has a weak fragrance. The leaves
and root contain bitter tasting saponine and produce suds
when rubbed under water.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the temperate regions of
North America, Asia, and Europe.

Production: Soapwort herb consists of the dried, above
ground parts of Saponaria officinalis. The herb is harvested
in the summer before flowering in the first and second years
of the plant's growtii.

Soapwort root consists of the dried roots, rhizomes and
runners of Saponaria officinalis. The roots are plowed up in

----- PAGE 951 -----
702/SOAPWORT

autumn, after the herb has been mown. The root is cleaned
and then dried artificially at 50° C.

White Soapwort root consists of the dried, underground parts
of Gypsophila species, particularly Gypsophila paniculata.
The roots of Gypsophilae radix are dried quickly under high
temperatures or in direct sunlight. The roots are cut into 5
mm thick slices to avoid a separation of the sugars from the

saponines.

Not to be Confused With: Saponaria officinalis should not be
confused with Gypsophilae species and Solanum dulcamara.

Other 'Names: Soapwood, Soap Root, Latherwort, Bouncing
Bet, Fuller's Herb, Bruisewort, Crow Soap, Sweet Betty,
Wild Sweet William, Dog Cloves, Old Maids’ Pink

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SOAPWORT HERB
Triterpene saponins: chiefly aglycone quillaic acid

Flavonoids: including among others, saponarine (C-glyco-
syl-flavone)

seeds)

Ribosome-inactivating proteins (in the

EFFECTS; SOAPWORT HERB
Because of the high saponin content, the drug is antibiotic,
expectorant, antiphlogistic, cholesterol-lowering and spermi-
cidal. In high doses, it becomes irritating to the mucous
membrane, cytotoxic and emetic.

COMPOUNDS: SOAPWORT ROOT

Triterpene saponins (2 to 8%): aglycones quillaic acid,

gypsogenic acid

EFFECTS: SOAPWORT ROOT
Because of the high saponin content, the Soapwort root is
antibiotic, expectorant, antiphlogistic, cholesterol-lowering
and spermicidal. The drug is expectorant because of its effect
on the gastric mucosa. In high concentrations, it has been
shown to be irritating to the mucous membranes, cytotoxic

and emetic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

SOAPWORT HERB

Unproven Uses: In addition to uses as an expectorant for
cough and other diseases of the respiratory tract, folk
medicine internal uses also encompass constipation, gas-
trointestinal disorders, liver and kidney disorders, rheumatic
gout, neurasthenia and oxyuriasis. External folk medicine
indications include skin rashes, eczema and as a gargle for
tonsillitis.

SOAPWORT ROOT

Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

The drug is used for inflammation of the mucous membranes
of the upper respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: In addition to respiratory applications,
internal folk medicine uses occasionally include diseases of
the liver, gallbladder and kidney, constipation, gout and as
an emmenagogue. Among external uses are skin disorders,
lingual mycoses and rheumatic complaints.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

SOAPWORT HERB AND ROOT

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Localized
skin and mucus membrane irritations are possible with the
administration of larger dosages.

DOSAGE
SOAPWORT HERB
Daily Dosage: As an aqueous extract, take 1 to 2 g daily.

Constipation—2 glasses daily of a decoction, (Preparation
instructions are not given.)

Storage: The herb should be stored in a container that
protects it from light and moisture.

*SOAPWORT ROOT
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for teas and
other galenic preparations for internal use. Drug extracts are
contained in a few standardized preparations of antitussives.

Preparation: To prepare tea, use 0.4 g of medium fine cut (1
teaspoonful is approximately equal to 2.6 g of the drug).

Decoction—10 g/180 g drug with the addition of 1 g sodium
carbonate and simple syrup to 200 g.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 30 to 150 mg of the
drug corresponding to 3 to 15 mg of gypsophilia saponin. As
an expectorant, 1 dessertspoonful of the decoction is taken
every 2 hours.

Storage: The root should be stored tightly sealed and

protected from light.

LITERATURE
SOAPWORT HERB

Kern W, List PH, Horhamrner L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

SOAPWORT ROOT
Carzaniga R et al., Planta 194:461. 1994.
Henry M et al., Plantes Med Phytother 15:192. 1981.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 952 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Solanum dulcamara
See Bittersweet Nightshade

Solanum nigrum
See Black Nightshade

Solidago canadensis
See Canadian Golden Rod

Solidago virgaurea
See European Golden Rod

Solomon's Seal
Polygonatum multiflorum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried rhizome and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The odorless, greenish-white campanulate
flowers are in 2 to 6 blossomed racemes, usually without an
accompanying leaf. The perigone tube is tightly cylindrical,
9 to 20 mm long and 2 to 4 mm wide. It is drawn together
over die ovary and opens out like a funnel at the top. The
tepals at die tip are pubescent on die inside, and the filaments
are softly pubescent. The fruit is a blue-black, frosted berry,
8 to 9 mm in diameter witii a disgusting, sweet taste.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial 30 to 80 cm
high herb. The stems are sturdy, round and glabrous. The
leaves are ovate to elliptical, 5 to 15 cm long and 3 to 7.5 cm

SOLOMON'S SEAL/703

wide, narrowing suddenly at the base. They are glabrous,
dark green above and gray-green frosted beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, the Near East,
eastern Asia, the Himalayas, Siberia and North America.

Production: Solomon's Seal rhizome is the rhizome of
Polygonatum multiflorum. The root-stocks should be dug up
during the dormant seasons, autumn and spring. Earth and
roots are removed and the rhizomes cut into pieces of a few
centimeters in length.

Other Names: Dropberry, Lady's Seals, Sealroot, Sealwort,
St. Mary's Seal

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid saponins (2.5%): 1 unnamed saponins, aglycones
diosgenin, or else (25R)-furost-5-en-3beta,22alpha,26-triole

Mucilages
Acetidin-2-carboxylic acid

EFFECTS

The steroid saponins may be responsible for the anti-
inflammatory effect of the drug. It works as a tonic, and
relieves and soothes upset stomach.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The plant was formerly used in the
treatment of respiratory and lung disorders. It was used
externally in the treatment of bruises, furuncles, ulcers or
boils on me fingers, hemorrhoids, redness of the skin, and for
edema and hematoma.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
witfi the proper administration of designated Uierapeutic
dosages. Extended administration of me drug in merapeutic
dosages can lead to gastrointestinal irritation.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage leads to nausea, diarrhea, gastric complaints and
queasiness.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug has been used internally
as an infusion and externally as a poultice, but is now
obsolete.

Storage: Store in paper and clotii sacks.

LITERATURE
Janeczko Z, (1980) Acta Polon. Pharm 37:559.

Kato A, Miura T, Hypoglycemic action of the rhizomes of
Polygonatum officinale in normal and diabetic mice. In: PM
60(3):201. 1994.

Sugiyama M et al., Chem Pharm Bull 32:1365-1372. 1984.

----- PAGE 953 -----
704/SOLOMON'S SEAL

Tomoda M et al., Chem Pharm Bull 21:2511-2516. 1973.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg 01ms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Sophora japonica
See Pagoda Tree

Sorb Apple

Sorbus domestica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is umbelliferous-racem-
ous and tomentose. The sepals and petals are also tomentose.
The petals are white to light red, and the carpels are
pubescent. The dividing membranes are not split. There are 2
ovules in each ovary chamber. The fruit is false pear-shaped-
globular, yellow, speckled red on the sun side. The seed is
flat, brown and sharp-edged.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sorbus domestica is a bush or tree
up to 13 m high, with branches that are initially gray-
tomentose, later glabrous. The winter buds are glabrous or
have hairy tips, and are sticky. The leaves are pinnatifid with
13 to 21 sessile, serrate and acuminate leaflets. The serrate
teeth are long and finely acuminate. The lower surface is
bluish-green and initially villous-cobweb pubescent, later
glabrous.

Habitat: The plant is cultivated in Europe and elsewhere.

Production: Sorb Apple berries are the fruit of Sorbus

domestica.

Other Names: Sorvice Tree, Cheque Tree, Ash

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sugar alcohols: sorbitol

The fruits do not contain parasorboside, in contrast to those
of Sorbus aucuparia.

The drug has not been fully researched.

EFFECTS .
The active agents are pectin, tannin, organic acids (sorbic
acid) and sorbitol. The fruit has astringent, anti-inflammatory
and pain-relieving properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally, the berries act as an astringent
for the intestinal tract. Externally, preparations are used for
skin cleansing.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Fresh juice from the berries and a
decoction made from the dried fruit are used internally. The
decoction is also applied externally as a wash to the affected
areas. See also Mountain Ash Berry (Sorbus aucuparia).

Daily Dosage: Fresh juice: 50 to 80 gm; decoction: add 5 gm
of drug to 100 ml of water and drink 1 to 2 cups.

LITERATURE
No literature is available.

Sorbus aucuparia
See Mountain Ash Berry

Sorbus domestica
See Sorb Apple

Sorbus torminalis
See Wild Service Tree

Sorghum vulgare

See Broom Corn

----- PAGE 954 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Sorrel

Rumex acetosa

TRADE NAMES
Sorrel (available from a number of manufacturers), Sheep

Sorrel

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh leaves
and the whole herb.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has small greenish unisexual,
dioecious flowers growing in narrow, loose panicles. There
are 6 tepals. The 3 inner ones are longer, closer together, and
turn red when the fruit ripens. When mature they are often
red-tinged, membranous, entire-margined and have a scale-
like downwardly curved welt at the base. The three
outermost tips are revolute. There are 6 stamens and 3 styles
with a paintbrush-like stigma. The fruit is a triangular,
brown-black nut enclosed in the wing-like enlarged inner
tepal.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant can grow up to 100 cm
high. The leaves alternate on the erect, grooved stems, which
are unbranched up to the panicles. The leaves are fleshy,
grass green, hastate or spit-shaped. The lower leaves are
long-petioled; the upper ones are short-petioled, sessile and
clasping. There is a membranous, dentate or fringed cone at
the base of the leaves.

Characteristics: The stem is red-tinged, and the herb has a
sour taste. It gets its acidity from the same salt that is present
in Rhubarb.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe.

Production: Sorrel is the aerial part of Rumex acetosa.
ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Oxalates: oxalic acid, calcium oxalate
Tannins (7-10%)

Flavonoids

Anthracene derivatives: anthranoids, aglycones, physcion,
chryosphanol, emodin, aloe-emodin, rhein, and their gluco-
sides, as well as aloe-emodin acetate

EFFECTS
Sorrel acts as a diuretic. It stimulates secretion, and improves
resistance to infections (antibacterial), although some of
these effects are questionable.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for acute and chronic
inflammation of die nasal passages and respiratory tract. It is

SOUTHERN BAYBERRY/705

also used as an adjuvant in antibacterial therapy. Folk
medicine uses include stomach ailments, liver and biliary
ailments and purification of the blood.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Oxalate poisonings are conceivable only with the consump-
tion of very large quantities of the leaves as a salad.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is described as obsolete.

How Supplied:
Tablets

Liquid — 14

Daily Dosage: The dosage for adults is 2 coated tablets or 50
drops (drops with 19% Ethanol) taken 3 times daily.

LITERATURE
Ito H. Effects of the antitumor agents from various natural
sources on drug-metabolizing system, phagocytic activity and
complement system in sarcoma 180-bearing mice. Jpn J
Pharmacol, 40:435-43, Mar 1986.

Southern Bayberry

Myrica cerifera

TRADE NAMES
Southern Bayberry is available from a number of manufac-
turers, sometimes labeled Bayberry Bark or Bayberry Root
Bark.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried root bark
and die wax extracted from die berries.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are unisexual and have no
calyx or corolla. They are small and yellowish fii scaly
caticins. The fruit is small groups of round, gray-white
berries containing numerous black seeds, which have a crust
of usable greenish-white wax. The wax helps keep die
berries in a suitable statcfor germination for a period of 2 to
3 years.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Southern Bayberry is an evergreen
shrub or small tree that grows up to 10 m high. The bark has
a white, peeling outer layer, which covers a red-brown inner
layer. The leaves are lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, glossy
or resinous, and punctate on both sides. -

----- PAGE 955 -----
706/SOUTHERN BAYBERRY

Characteristics: The taste is astringent and bitter. The leaves
have an aromatic odor.

Habitat: The plant is found in the eastern and southern
regions of the U.S. and around Lake Erie.

Production: Bayberry bark is the bark from the trunk and
branches of Myrica cerifera.

Other Names: Bayberry, Candleberry, Tallow Shrub, Vege-
table Tallow, Waxberry, Wax IVlyrtle, Myrica

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (traces)

Tannins
Resins

The constituents of the drug have not been extensively
investigated.

EFFECTS
The active compounds have diaphoretic, stimulant and
astringent effects.

\-
INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally for coughs and

colds, and externally for skin diseases and ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side elfects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Higher dosages of the drug are said to trigger
vomiting, and are used as an emetic.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a liquid
extract for internal use, and in powder form.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 450 mg, 475 mg

Liquid Extract — IT

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Paul BD et ah, (1974) J Pharm Sci 63:958.
Yoshizawa S et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):44.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Southern Tsangshu
(Cang-Zhu)

Atractylodes lance a

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
whole plant and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flowers are surrounded by
bracts. The capitulas are apical and upright, with a diameter
of 15 to 2 cm. The calyx is double-rowed and double-
pinnate. The lingual florets are in 7 or 8 rows, whitish and 1
to 12 cm long. The fiuit is an achaene.-The pappus is
brownish and 8 to 9 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Southern Tsangshu is an upright,
herbaceous perennial with a rhizome that extends up to | m
high. The basal leaves wilt rapidly, the upper cauline leaves
are alternate, small, usually simple and sessile. The lower
leaves are long-petiolate and 8 to 10 cm long. The lamina is
pergament-like, single pinnate with 3 to 5 elongate-elliptical
leaflets. The apical leaflet is larger with short thorns on the
margin. The rhizome is elongate, gnarled, 2 to 3 cm thick
and up to 8 cm long.

Habitat: Cang-Zhu is indigenous to Japan and China.

Production: Southern Tsangshu rhizome is the dried rhizome
of Atractylodes lancea. The rhizome is dug up in spring or
autumn and dried. In order to obtain the cut drug, the
rhizome is soaked after being cleaned and cut into slices.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (1.5%): components including p-cymol, beta-
selinene, alpha curcumene, elemol, hinesol, beta-eudesmol

Sesquiterpenes: 3  beta-hydroxyatractylon, 3beta-acetoxy-
atractylon

Polyynes: including atractylodin, atractylodinol, acety-
latratylodinol
EFFECTS

The sesquiterpenes and furanosesquiterpenes contained in
the essential oil of the drug have hepatoprotective, immuno-
stimulating and intestinal motility-enhancing effects, while
also inhibiting the secretion of gastric juices. The smoke of
the“dmg is said to have antiseptic characteristics, while the
essential oil is additionally credited with a sedative effect,
derived from its beta-eudesmol and hinesol content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Southern Tsangshu is used for diarrhea,
feelings of fullness in the lower abdomen, lack of strength
including atrophy, rheumatic pain, colds and night blindness.

----- PAGE 956 -----
4

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for gastroenteritis,

edema, disturbances of renal function and generalized pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole herb, cut and powdered drug
for internal use.

Preparation: The powder is prepared in accordance with Jap
XI or ChinP IX. It is roasted using the Fuchao method.

Dosage: 3 to 9 of gm of drug

Storage: Should be stored in a dry and cool place and in
tightly sealed containers.

LITERATURE

Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Gong QM, Wang SL, Gan C, A clinical study on the treatment
of acute upper digestive tract hemorrhage with we.n;she
decoction. Chung Hsi I Chieh Ho Tsa Chih, 29:272-3, 260,
989 May.

Hiraoka N, Atractylodes lancea autotetraploids induced by
colchicine treatment of shoot cultures. Biol Pharm Bull, 16:479-
83, 1998 May.

Hwang JM, Tseng TH, Hsieh YS, Chou FP, Wang CJ, Chu
CY, Inhibitory effect of atractylon on tert-butyl hydroperoxide
induced DNA damage and hepatic toxicity in rat hepatocytes.
Arch Toxicol, 70:640-4, 1996.

Kimura M, Diwan PV, Yanagi S, Kon-no Y, Nojima H,
Kimura I, Potentiating effects of beta-~eudesmol-related
cyclohexylidene derivatives on succinylcholine-induced
neuromuscular block in isolated phrenic nerve-diaphragm
muscles of normal and alloxan-diabetic mice. Biol Pharm Bull,
18:407-10, 1995 Mar.

Kimura M, Nojima H, Muroi M, Kimura I, Mechanism of the
blocking action of beta-eudesmol on the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor channel in mouse skeletal muscles.
Neuropharmacology, 30:835-41, 1991 Aug.

Kiso Y, Tohkin M, Hikino H, Antihepatotoxic principles of
Atractylodes rhizomes. J Nat Prod, 46:651-4, 1983 Sep-Oct.

Muroi M, Tanaka K, Kimura I, Kimura M, Anti-inflarnmatory
principles of Atractylodes rhizomes. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo),
50:2954-8, 1979 Dec.

Muroi M, Tanaka K, Kimura I, Kimura M, Beta-eudesmol (a
main component of Atractylodes lancea)-induced potentiation of
depolarizing neuromuscular blockade in diaphragm muscles of
normal and diabetic mice. Jpn J Pharmacol, 50:69-71, 1989

May.

SOYBEAN /707

Nojima H, Kimura I, Kimura M Blocking action of
succinylcholine with beta-eudesmol on acetylcholine-activated
channel activity at endplates of single muscle cells of adult
mice. Brain Res, 575:337-40, 1992 Mar 20.

Resch M, Steigel A, Chen ZL, Bauer R 5-Lipoxygenase and
cyclooxygenase-1 inhibitory active compounds from
Atractylodes lancea. J Nat Prod, 61:347-50, 1998 Mar.

Sakamoto S, Kudo H, Suzuki S, Sassa S, Yoshimura S,
Nakayama T, Maemura M, Mitamura T, Qi Z. Liu XD,
Yagishita Y, Asai A Pharmacotherapeutic effects of toki-
shakuyaku-san on leukorrhagia in young women. Am J Chin
Med, 24:165-8, 1996.

Satoh K, Nagai F, Ushiyama K, Kano I Specific inhibition of
Nat,K(+)-ATPase activity by atractylon, a major component of
byaku-jutsu, by interaction with enzyme in the E2 state.
Biochem Pharmacol, 51:339-43, 1996 Feb 9.

Usuki S Blended effects of herbal components of
tokishakuyakusan on rat corpus luteum function in vivo. Am J
Chin Med, 16:107-16, 1988.

Wang GT Antianoxic action and active constituents of
atractylodis lanceae rhizoma. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo),
10:2033%, 1990 Jul.

Wang GT Treatment of operated late gastric carcinoma with
prescription of strengthening the patient's resistance and
dispelling the invading evil in combination with chemotherapy:
follow-up study of 158 patients and experimental study in
animals Chung Hsi I Chieh.

Yamahara J, Matsuda H, Huang Q, Li Y, Fujimura H Intestinal
motility enhancing effect of Atractylodes lancea rhizome. J
Ethnopharmacol, 29:341-4, 1990 Jul.

Soybean
Glycine soja

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the soya lecithin
extracted from the soya bean, the soya oil and the soya seed.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are small, inconspicuous,

short pedicled, upright, axillary and in 3 to 8 blossomed

clusters. The sepals are campanulate or tubular-campanulate
and somewhat bilabiate. The corolla is usually purple,
exceeding the calyx only slightly or not at all. The stamens
are diadelphous or monodelphous. The style is glabrous. The
pod is linear or oblong and constricted between the seeds.
The pod is septate and dehiscent. There are 2 to 4 seeds,
which are oblong-ovate, white, yellow or black-brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The soya plant is an erect or twining
annual bushy plant. The stem and leaves are thickly villous.
The leaves are trifoliate, the leaflets are large, ovate, entire-

----- PAGE 957 -----
708 /SOYBEAN

margined and, particularly on the margins and on the ribs of
the lower surface, pubescent.

Habitat: The soya plant is indigenous to east Asia but has
never been found in the wild. Glycine soja is found in the
Amur-Ussuri area, northern China, Taiwan, Korea and

Japan.

Production: Lecithin consists of the phospholipid mixture
from Glycine soja seeds and its preparations. Virgin Soybean
oil is mixed with 2% water at 60° to 80° C. After the
swelling times it is separated by centrifugation and the
lecithin paste is evaporated at 100° C in a vacuum until the
remaining water content is 0.2 to 0.8%.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Phospholipids (45-60%): in particular phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylinositol

Fatty oil (30-35%)
Steroids: Phytosterols (2-5%)

EFFECTS

The phospholipids extracted from soya lecithin was shown to
have lipid-reducing properties in animal experiments and
clinical trials.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Raised levels of cholesterol

Unproven Uses: Soybean is used for less severe forms of
hypercholesterolemia when dietary measures are required.
Soybean is also used for liver and gallbladder complaints,
anemia, poor concentration, cerebral and nerve conditions,

and general debility.

Chinese Medicine: Soybean is used for hyperhidrosis, night
sweats, confusion and joint pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or major side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Minor side effects include occasional
gastrointestinal effects, such as stomach pain, loose stool and
diarrhea.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations for oral admin-

istration.

Daily Dosage: The average dose is 3.5 gm of phospholipids
(phosphatidylcholine).

Storage: Soybean preparations must be protected from light
and tightly sealed.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Glycine).

Steinegger E, Hansel R: Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Spanish Chestnut

Castanea sativa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves collected
and dried in autumn, and preparations of the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The male, monoecious, yellowish-white
flowers are in 12 to 20 cm long, erect catkins consisting of
numerous, 7-flowered clusters. These are located in the leaf
axils, of the upper branches. There are 3 to 6 female flowers
at the base of unopened male catkins. When the fruit ripens
in October, the outer soft thorny husk bursts into 4 lobes,
revealing a brown-skinned sweet chestnut that needs "wine
weather" to ripen.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree grows from 15 to 30 m
high. The bark is smooth at first, olive green, later dark
brown, and vertically reticulate. The leaves are 8 to 25 cm
long, coriaceous, oblong-lanceolate with long, pointed,
serrated teeth.

Habitat: Northern temperate hemispheres; prefers maritime
climate.

Production: Spanish Chestnut leaves consist of the leaves of
Castanea sativa collected from September to October. The
leaves are collected and air-dried.

Other Names: Sweet Chestnut, Husked Nut, Jupiter's Nut,
Sardian Nut, Chestnut

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins (6 to 8%): ellagitannins, including pedunculagin,
tellimagrandin I and II, casuarictin, potentillin, castalagin,
vescalagin

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercitrin, myricetin

EFFECTS
No information is available.

----- PAGE 958 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Spanish Chestnut leaves are used for
complaints affecting the respiratory tract, such as bronchitis
and whooping cough, leg pain, circulation and diarrhea, and
as a gargle for sore throats.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Preparation: An infusion is prepared by pouring boiling
water over 5 gm of comminuted drug and then straining it.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 5 gm of drug or 5
gm of liquid extract.

LITERATURE
Haddock EA et al.. PH 21:1049-1062. 1982.

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen. 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Spearmint
Mentha spicata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the steamed
distillation of the fresh, flowering, aerial parts, and the leaves
collected during the flowering season and dried.

Flower and Fruit: The spike-like inflorescence consists of
false whorls in the axils of the bracts. The 5-tipped calyx is
campanulate; glabrous or pubescent and is surrounded by a
5-tipped, pale lilac, pink or white corolla, which is almost
half as long again as the calyx. The nutlet is reticulate in
pubescent plants and smooth in glabrous plants.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 30 to 60 cm during the
flowering season. Runners grow from the buds at the base of
the stem. The quadrangular stem is ascendent or erect and
usually thickly pubescent. The leaves are oblong-ovate or
lanceolate, decussate, smooth or wrinkled, regularly serrate,
and glabrous to thickly pubescent. The upper leaves are
sessile, the lower ones short petiolate.

SPEARMINT/709

Habitat: The plant probably originates from the Mediterrane-
an region and is now naturalized in large pans of Europe and
North America.

Production: Spearmint is the aerial pan of Mentha spicata.
Spearmint oil is the essential oil extracted from the plant.

Other Names: Curled Mint, Garden Mint. Mackerel Mint,
Our Lady's Mint, Green Mint, Spire Mint. Sage of Bethle-
hem, Fish Mint, Lamb Mint

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FOLIAGE
Volatile oil (0.8-2.5%) -

Flavonoids: thymonin

Caffeic acid derivatives: including among others rosmaric
acid in the volatile oil

Chief components: L-carvone (40-80%. aroma-carrier), (-)-
limonene (5-15%), additionally including among others beta-
bourbonene, cis- and transcarvylacetate. caryophyllene, 1,8-
cineole, dihydrocarveol, trans-sabinene hydrate

EFFECTS
The oil produced contains a high proportion of carvon,
which produces the spearmint smell. It has antispasmodic,
carminative and stimulant effects.

In vitro, an antimicrobial effect was observed. The drug is
insecticidal and shows a neurodepressive effect in animal
experiments (increased duration of sleep).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Spearmint is used for digestive disorders
and as a remedy for flatulence. The essential oil is used as an
aromatic preparation. Spearmint leaves are used as

carminative.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The volatile oil possesses a weak potential for
sensitization due to its menthol and L-carvone content.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Spearmint is mainly used internally
in the form of an oil or concentrate.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G tHrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene. ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Hefendehl FW, Murray MJ, (1973) Planta Med 23:101.

----- PAGE 959 -----
710/SPEARMINT

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Murray MJ et ah, (1972) Crop Sci 12:723.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Subramanian SS. Nair AGR, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:452,

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Speedwell

Veronica officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried herb
collected during the flowering season, the fresh aerial parts
of the flowering plant and the dried aerial’ parts collected
during the flowering season.

Flower and Fndt: The erect bright blue or lilac flowers are
in axillary, peduncled, spike-like racemes. The flowers are
small, pedicled and have 4 slightly fused sepals. The corolla
has a very short tube, is flatly splayed and has 4 uneven tips.
There are 2 stamens and 1 superior ovary. The fruit is a
triangular capsule narrowed at the base. The fruit chambers
each have 5 to 10 seeds. The seeds are about 1 mm long,
oval and flat; the back of the seed is smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 10 to 20 cm high
herbaceous perennial with runners that tend to form grass.
The root system consists mainly of shoot-producing roots.
The stem is creeping, and the flower-bearing branches are
erect. The whole plant is roughly pubescent. The leaves are
obovate-ovate, elliptical or oblong, short-petioled and
serrate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to almost all of Europe,
parts of Asia and North America. The sources of the drug are
Bulgaria, die former Yugoslavia and Hungary.

Production: Speedwell consists of the above-ground parts of
Veronica officinalis imported from Bulgaria, the former
Yugoslavia and Hungary. Only the flowering herb is
harvested (without roots or lower parts) and subsequently
dried fully in the shade before it is cut.

Not to be Confused With: Veronica chamaedrys or Veronica
allionii.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes (0.5-1.0%): including among others
aucubin, catalpol, catalpol esters (including among others
minecoside, verminoside, veronicoside), mussaenoside,

ladroside

Flavonoids (0.7%): including among others luteolin-7-O-
glucosides (cinaroside), 6-hydroxyluteolin-7-monoglucoside

Triterpene saponins (10%)
Cajfeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid (0.5%)

EFFECTS be
Speedwell exhibits a protective effect against ulcers and
accelerates ulcer healing. Its use as an astringent in the
treatment of wounds and as a gargle for inflammations of the
mouth and throat is plausible because of the amaroid-like
properties of the drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Speedwell preparations are used for dis-
eases and discomfort of the respiratory, gastrointestinal and
lower urinary tracts. It is also used for the liver and kidneys,
and to treat gout, rheumatoid arthritis and rheumatic

complaints.

In addition, Speedwell is used internally to improve metabo-
lism ("blood-purifying") and for nervous agitation. Exter-
nally, the herb is used as a gargle for inflammation of the
oral and pharyngeal mucosa, promotion of wound healing,
chronic skin complaints, itching and sweating of the feet.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is available as a whole,
cut and powdered drug for internal and external use in
compound preparations.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour | cup of boiling water
over 1.5 gm of drug (1 gm is approximately | teaspopnful).
For the preparation of external lavages and compresses for
ulcers, wounds and eczema, add 1 handful of drug tol liter of
water and boil for 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 1.5 gm of drug.
The dose of the tea (used as an expectorant) is 1 cup taken 2
to 3 times daily.

Storage: Speedwell must be protected from light sources.

LITERATURE
Afifi-Yazar F, Sticher O, (1980) Helv Chim Acta 63:1905.

Afifi-Yazar FU et al., Helv Chim Acta 64:16. 1981.

----- PAGE 960 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Sticher O et al., (1982) Planta Med 45:159.

Sticher O et al., Helv Chim Acta 62:530 et 535. 1979.
Tamas M et al., Clujul Med 57:169. 1985.

Wojcik E, Acta Polon, Pharm 38:621.

Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Spergularia rubra

See Arenaria Rubra

Spigelia anthelmia

See Wormwood Grass

Spigelia marilandica
See Pink Root

Spikenard
Aralia racemosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried
rhizome and roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a large panicle, each
branch of which carries a simple, round, 10 to 15 flower
umbel. The flowers are small and have greenish-white petals.
The drupes are dark red to crimson, roundish and 5-ribbed.
The seeds are compressed and have a similarly formed
endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Aralia racemosa is a herbaceous,
bushy, stiffly branched perennial with a woody base. The
stem extends up to 2 m high and is glabrous and grooved.
The leaflets are thin and oval. The leaflets can grow up to 20
cm long and 16 cm wide, but are usually much smaller and

SPIKENARD 711

cordate at the base. The rhizome is up to 15 cm long and has
a diameter of roughly 2.5 cm with prominent concave scars.
The roots are about 2 cm thick at the base, pale brown, and
wrinkled. The root fracture is short and whitish.

Characteristics: Spikenard has an aromatic odor and taste.

Habitat: The plant grows in North America from central
Canada southward to Virginia.

Production: The root and rhizome of Aralia racemosa are
gathered from the wild in summer and autumn and chopped
while fresh. The freshly chopped roots and rhizomes are
either dried or processed immediately to form a thick paste.

Not to be Confused With: It is possible to confuse Spikenard
with the Aralia nudicaulis root. However, Spikenard can be
distinguished by its lack of spotted hypodermis cells, which
are a feature of the Aralia nudicaulis root.

Other Names: Indian Root, Life of Man, Old Man's Root,
Petty Morell, Spignet

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
*COMPOUNDS
Polyynes: including falcarinole, falcarindiol

Triterpene saponins
Volatile oil (very little)

EFFECTS
Due to its saponin content, the drug's effectiveness as a
reflex expectorant for colds seems plausible. It is also
diaphoretic and stimulates tissue renewal. Its efficacy has not
been proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations are used internally for colds,
chronic coughs and asthma. It is used as an alternative to
Sarsaparilla in the treatment of skin diseases and for
rheumatic conditions. North American Indians use Spikenard
internally to treat backache and externally for bruises,
wounds, swellings and inflammations.,

Homeopathic Uses: Spikenard is used for colds, hay fever
and asthma. Efficacy for colds appears plausible; efficacy for
other uses has not been documented.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Because of the polyyne spectrum,
sensitization and dermatoses connected with the plant are
also possible through skin contact.

Pregnancy: The drug is not to be used during pregnancy.

----- PAGE 961 -----
712 /SPIKENARD

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is administered internally
as a fluid extract.

LS

Preparation: It is prepared as a liquid extract (1:

information on the ethanol content is unavailable.

Daily Dosage: When the drug is prepared as an infusion, the
recommended daily dosage is approximately 15 g per 500
ml, to be drunk, one cup at a time, during the course of the
day. The recommended dosage of the liquid extract is 0.9 g
to 18 g.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice a

week sc (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Ann Y-J, Kim M-J, Yamamoto T, Fujiwawa T, Mitsouka T,
(1990) Selective growth responses of human intestinal bacteria
to Araliaceae extracts. Microbial Ecol Health Disease 3:223-
229.

Hansen L and Boll PM, (1986) Phytochemistry 25 (2):285.
Further information in:

Hansel.R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,
Hoppe HA (1975-1987) Drogenkunde, 8. Aufl., Bde 1-3, W. de
Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Spinach
Spinacia oleracea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Spinach is an annual plant that can
be planted at various times during the vegetation period to
guarantee a year-round supply. The stems may grow up to 1
m or more,and are erect. The leaves are ovate to deltoid-
hastate, entire or dentate. When the plant ripens, the
bracteoles are almost orbicular-obovate, usually wider than
long. They often have a divergent spine at the apex.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: The plant probably originated in Iran and is
cultivated worldwide today.

Production: Spinach consists of the fresh or dried leaf of
Spinacia oleracea.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins: including among others spinach sapo-
nins A and B

Oxalic acid (in young leaves 6-8%, in older leaves up to
16%)

Histamine (up to 140 mg/100 gm fresh weight)

Flavonoids: including among others patuletin, spinacetin,
spinatoside

Chlorophyll (0.3-1.0%)

Vitamins: including among others ascorbic acid (vitamin C,
40-155 mg/100 g)

0.3-0.6%)

Nitrates the fertilizer,

(depending on

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Spinac
and complaints of the gastrointestinal tract, as a blood-

preparations are used for ailments

generating remedy, to stimulate growtii in children, as an
appetite stimulant, for fatigue and for supporting
convalescence.
PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The relatively high nitrate content
makes it advisable to forgo consuming spinach as a foodstuff
too often. Circumstances that lead to reduction (e.g., leaving
spinach standing at room temperature) should also be
avoided to prevent nitrite formation. In addition, the oxalate
content of spinach could reduce calcium resorption.

Pediatric Use: Infants should not receive spinach as a
foodstuff until after their fourth month (danger of methemo-
globin formation through nitrites).

DOSAGE
No information is available.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 962 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Spinacia oleracea
See Spinach

Spiny Rest Harrow

Ononis spinosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the roots and
flowering branches.

Flower and Fruit: The pink flowers are solitary or in pairs in
the leaf axils. The calyx is campanulate with 5 segments.
The standard is large and has dark stripes. The ovoid, erect
fruit is a pod as long as or longer than the calyx.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a low subshrub of about
30 to 60 cm with a long taproot. The branches are erect,
spreading, villous and more or less densely covered in short
shoots, which terminate in straight thorns. The leaves are
trifoliate with 3 small, dentate, oblong leaflets. The upper
leaves are entire.

Characteristics: The plant has an unpleasant smell.

Habitat: Spiny Rest Harrow is common in almost all of
Europe, as well as in North Africa and western Asia.

Production: Spiny Rest Harrow root consists of the dried
roots and rhizomes of Ononis spinosa. The plant is harvested
in autumn.

Other Names: Cammock, Petty Whin, Stayplough, Rest-
Harrow, Wild Liquorice, Stinking Tommy, Ground Furze,
Land Whin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoflavonoids:. glycosides, including among others, trifoli-
rhizin (maackiain-7-0-glucoside), ononin (formononetin-7-0-
glucoside), ononin-6-malonylester, homopterocarpin-7-0-
glucoside

Free isoflavonoids: including among others, formononetin,
genistein, biochanin

Volatile oil (0.02-0.2%): chief components anethole, car-
vone, menthol

Triterpenes: including among others, alpha-onocerin (alpha-
onoceradiendiol)

SPINY REST HARROW /713

Lectins

EFFECTS
In combination with sufficient liquid intake, the drug is said
to be diuretic. The diuretic effect is disputed because it is not
sufficiently documented and can be attributed neither to the
essential oil nor to the flavonoids. In animal tests, an anti-
edemic effect was proven. The genistein is mildly estrogenic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Preparations of the drug are used for flushing-out therapy for
inflammatory diseases of the lower urinary tract and also for
prevention and treatment of kidney gravel.

Unproven Uses: Spiny Rest Harrow is popularly used for
gout, rheumatic complaints, as a flushing-out therapy for
inflammatory diseases of the lower urinary tract, and for
prevention and treatment of kidney gravel.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used in the presence of edema
resulting from reduced cardiac or renal activity.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is ground for teas and
other galenic preparations for internal use. Ample liquid
intake (at least 2 liters per day) should accompany use of the
drug.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion (tea), pour boiling water
over 2 to 2.5 g finely cut or coarsely powdered drug and
strain after 20 to 30 minutes (1 teaspoonful equals approxi-
mately 3 g).

Daily Dosage: 6 to 12 gm of drug.

LITERATURE
Dedio I, Kozlowski J, (1977) Acta Pol Pharm 34:97. .

Fujise Y et al., (1965) Chem Pharm Bull 13:93.

Haznagy A, Thot G, Tamas J, Constituents of the aqueous
extracts from Ononis spinosa L. In: Arch Pharm 311(4):318-
323. 1978.

Hilp K et al., (1975) Arch Pharm 308:429.
Horejsi V, Kocourek J, (1978) Biochim Biophys Acta 538.
Kartnig T et al., (1985) Pharm Acta Helv 60(9/19):253.

----- PAGE 963 -----
714/SPINY REST HARROW

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Kirmizigiil S et ah. Spinonin. a novel glycoside from Ononis
spinosa subsp, leiosperma. In: JNP 60(4):378-381. 1997.

Koster J et al., (1983) Planta Med 48:131.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher. E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. VViss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart. Jena. New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Spruce

Picea species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the needles, branch tips or branches and the fresh

Spruce shoots.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are strawberry colored,
the female are crimson or green. The male flowers are in
short-stemmed, cylindrical catkins scattered over the crown.
The female flowers are in elliptical-cylindrical cones at the
top of the crown. The ripe cones are sessile, hanging,
globular-clavate and covered in rhomboid scales, which are
thin, undulating at the tip and dentate. The wings of the small
seeds are 3 times as long as the seeds themselves.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Picea excelsa is a tree that grows
from 30 to 60 m high and has a column-like trunk with
brown-red bark and a girth of about 2 m. The trunk is usually
branched. The branches are horizontal and flat. The young
shoots are reddish-brown or orange-red. The crossed-oppo-
site leaves are scaly and imbricate. The needles remain on
the tree for a number of years. On the upper surface of the
shoots they are pointed forward, on the lower surface they
are pointed toward the sides. They are 13 to 2.5 cm long,
rigid or curved, rich green and have a blunt horn-like tip.

Habitat: The tree is found in northern and central Europe.

Production: The essential oil is obtained from the fresh
needles and twig tops or branches of Picea abies (Syn: Picea
excelsa), Abies alba, Abies sachalinensis or Abies sibirica.
The essential oil is recovered from the needles by a 5 to 6

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

hour continuous process of aqueous steam distillation on a
sieve base of layered and crushed fresh twigs. Preparations
from the fresh 10 to 15 cm long shoots of Picea abies and/or
Abies alba (Syn.: Abies pectinata) are collected in the spring.

Other Names: Balm of Gilead Fir, Balsam Fir, Canada
Balsam, Fir Tree, Hemlock Spruce, Norway Pine, Norway

Spruce, Spruce Fir

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SPRUCE NEEDLE OIL
From Picea abies:

Bornyl acetate (5-25%)
Limonene (10-30%)
Camphene (10-25%)

Alpha-pinene (10-25%): additionally, including among oth-
ers santene, beta-pinene, Delta3-carene, myrcene

From Picea mariana:

Bornyl acetate (37-49%)
Camphene (10-17%)

Alpha-pinene (10%): additionally, including among others

beta-pinene, limonene, Delta3-carene, myrcene, santene

From Abies alba:

Bornyl acetate (2-10%)
Limonene (25-55%)
Camphene  (9-20%)

Alpha-pinene (6-35%): additionally, including among others
beta-pinene, beta-phellandrene, Delta-carene, myrcene,

santene

EFFECTS: SPRUCE NEEDLE OIL
The plants are secretolytic, antibacterial and hyperemic.

COMPOUNDS: SPRUCE SHOOTS (FRESH)
Volatile oil (0.2-0.5%): chief components limonene, alpha-
pinene, borneol, bornyl acetate

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

EFFECTS: SPRUCE SHOOTS (FRESH)
The essential oil has a_ secretory,
hyperemic effect.

mild antiseptic and

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SPRUCE NEEDLE OIL

Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold
* Cough/bronchitis
+ Fevers and colds

----- PAGE 964 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Neuralgias

* Rheumatism

* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: The essential oil is used internally for
catarrhal conditions of the respiratory tract. Externally, it is
used for catarrhal conditions of the respiratory tract, rheu-
matic and neuralgic pain, and tension states.

SPRUCE SHOOTS (FRESH)

Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold

* Cough/bronchitis

* Fevers and colds

* Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx
* Muscular and nerve pains

* Tendency to infection

Unproven Uses: The drug is used internally as a respiratory-
tract catarrh and externally for muscle pains and neuralgia.
In folk medicine, it is used internally for tuberculosis and
externally as a bath additive for patients with neurological
illnesses, - »

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Contraindications include bronchial asthma and whooping
cough. Patients with extensive skin injuries, acute skin
diseases, feverish or infectious diseases, cardiac insufficien-
cy or hypertonia should not use the drug as a bath additive.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages, although bronchial spasms could be worsened.

DOSAGE
SPRUCE NEEDLE OIL

Mode of Administration: Embrocations of alcohol solutions,
ointments, gels, emulsions and oils are available, as well as
bath additives and inhalants.

Daily Dosage:
Infusion — Place 4 drops of oil on a lump of sugar or in a

little water and take 3 times a day.

Inhalation — Add 2 gm of oil to hot water and inhale several
times a day.

External application — A 20 to 30% ointment is rubbed onto
the affected area several times a day.

Bath additive — Add 5 gm oil to a full bath at a temperature
of 35 to 38° C.

Storage: Store in a cool place, in a tightly sealed container,
protected from light.

SPRUCE/715

SPRUCE SHOOTS (FRESH)
Mode of Administration: In galenic preparations for internal
and external application.

Preparation: For inhalation therapy, place 2 gm of oil in hot
water and inhale the vapors. To make a bath additive, boil
200 to 300 gm drug in 1 liter water and strain after 5
minutes; add to a full bath. Make sure it is possible to relax
after the bath.

Daily Dosage: For internal use: 5 to 6 gm of drug is
administered per day.

Four drops of the essential oil may be placediiva little water
or on a lump of sugar and taken 3 times a day.

The inhalation therapy mentioned in the Preparation section
can be used several times a day.

LITERATURE
SPRUCE NEEDLE OIL
Glasl H, Wagner H, DAZ 120:64-67. 1980.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Eds.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Kubeczka KH, Schultze W, Flavour Fragrance J:2.137-148.
1987.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schantz von M, Juvonen S, Acta Bot Fenn 73:5-51. 1966.
Schantz von M, Juvonen S, PM 15:337-341. 1967.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

SPRUCE SHOOTS (FRESH)
Glas] H, Wagner H, DAZ 120:64-67. 1980.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.),. Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kubeczka KH, Schultze W, Flavour Fragrance J :2.137-148.
1987.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schantz M von, Juvonen S, Acta Bot Fenn 73:5-51. 1966.
Schantz M von, Juvonen S, PM 15:337-341. 1967.

----- PAGE 965 -----
716 /SPURGE

Spurge
Euphorbia resinifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the milky
resin that is exuded when cuts are made into this plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is arranged in a
dichasium above the thorn-bearing scales. They are typical
cyathia of the Euphorbia species, which have one female and
a number of male flowers surrounded by 5 greenish-yellow-
ish, tubularly fused bracts. The female flower has a 3-
carpeled ovary with 3 styles: the male flower consists of only
I stamen. The fruit separates into 3 mericarps.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This diclinous, monoecious leafless
shrub has the appearance of cactus and grows to a height of
up to 2.5 m. The trunk is thick at the base, and only slightly
branched higher up. The diameter of the 3- or 4-edged,
fleshy branches is approximately 2 cm. There are scales at
intervals of | cm at the edges, each with 2 short thorns,
which are splayed and approximately 5 mm long.

Characteristics: The plant produces a milk Jatex when the
surface is scored.

Habitat: The shrub grows in the folds of the Great Atlas
Mountains in Morocco and also in North America and the

Canary Islands.

Production: Gum euphorbium or Spurge is the air-dried
latex of Euphorbia resinifera. The plant is cut in late summer
to produce the latex.

Other Names: Poisonous Gum-Thistle, Dergmuse, Dark-
mous, Gum Euphorbium

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: diterpene esters of the ingenan-, tiglic- and
daphnan-types (0.1 to 2%): resinifera factors RL 1 to RL 23,
among them resiniferatoxin, 12-desoxyphorbol-13-isobuty-
rate-20-acetate, 12-Desoxyphorbol-13-phenylacetate-20-ace-
tate

Triterpenes: particularly alpha- and beta-euphorbol, beta-
amyrin, resiniferol

Fruit acids: including malic acid, succinic acid, citric acid
Resins (40%)
Polyterpenes

EFFECTS
The diterpene esters contained in the drug have laxative and
non-specific immunostimulating effects. Severe skin and

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

mucous membrane irritation arises in conjunction with
topical administration.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Use of the medication has been discontinued because of the
related dangers. Because of its harsh effects, the plant's resin
is no longer administered internally despite its properties as a
strong emetic and laxative.

Unproven Uses: External uses in folk medicine have
included application to remove proliferating flesh, warts and
malignant ulcers, as well as for chronic inflammatory
conditions. It was also used as a plaster for gout. Internal
uses included the treatment of dropsy, chronic headaches,
and ear or eye complaints.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used homeopathically for
acute inflammation of the respiratory tract and skin.

Indian Medicine: Uses include constipation and menstrual
complaints and also as an abortifacient. Because of the
danger of rapid intoxication, the drug's use is not advised.
Efficacy for these indications has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

. The drug is severely irritating to mucous membranes and -

skin. Ingestion leads to salivation, burning pains in the
stomach, colic, diarrhea and nephritis. One case of death has
been reported. Chronic application of the drug promotes
tumor formation, so its administration in human medicine is
no longer advised.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Administration of preparations of
Spurge are no longer recommended.

How Supplied: Skin stimulating ointment: 5% drug content

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute from D4) and | to 3 times daily
(chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc; IV; IM acute: 3 times
daily; chronic once a day (HAB1); children are given special
doses.

Storage: Due to the plant's poisonous nature, store securely.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J, Rimpler G,

Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Hergenhahn M, Kusumoto S, Hecker E, New constituents of
Euphorbia resinifera Berg. Acta Chem Scand, 108:3609, 1984.

Hergenhahn M, Kusumoto S, Hecker E, On the active
principles of the spurge family (Euphorbiaceae). V. Extremely
skin-irritant and moderately tumor-promoting diterpene esters
from Euphorbia resinifera Berg. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol,
108:98-109, 1984.

----- PAGE 966 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Squill

Urginea maritima

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts come from the bulbs of
the white latex variety collected after flowering and the
fresh, fleshy bulb scales of the white variety and of the red

variety.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering stem is erect and 50 to 150
cm high. It is often a washed purple color and glabrous. The
flowers, which often number 100, are arranged in richly
flowered, dense racemes up to 60 cm long. The bracts are
membranous and pointed. They are shorter than the pedicles
and drop early. The pedicles are up to 3 cm long, thin and
smooth. The flowers are white, radial and star-shaped. The
ovary is ovate to oblong triangular. The capsule is ovate to
oblong, 3-valved, obtuse or almost pointed. Each chamber
has 1 to 4 seeds, which are elongate, flattened, smooth,
glossy and winged.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial bulb plant.
The bulbs are pear-shaped, about 15 to 30 cm in diameter.
They are rarely sold whole commercially, as they tend to
start growing. The fracture is short, tough and flexible.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and acrid.

Habitat: Indigenous to the Mediterranean and is cultivated
there too.

Production: Squill consists of the sliced, dried, fleshy middle
scales of the onion of the white variety of Urginea maritima,
harvested during the flowering season. It is collected mostly
from uncultivated regions.

Other Names: Scilla

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (bufadienolides, 1-3%):
chief components glucoscillarene A, proscillaridin A, scillar-
ene A; including among others, _ scillicyanoside,
scilliglaucoside

Mucilage

EFFECTS

The drug is inotropic on myocardial work capacity and
negatively chronotropic. The overall effect is economy of
heart action. There is a lowering of increased, left ventricular
diastolic pressure and pathologically elevated venous
pressure.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cardiac insufficiency NYHA I and If

SQUILL /717

« Arrhythmia
« Nervous heart complaints
* Venous conditions

Unproven Uses: Squill is used for reduced kidney capacity.
In folk medicine it is used for catarrhal conditions of the
upper respiratory tract, bronchitis, asthma and whooping
cough, also for wounds and fractures, back pain and
hemorrhoids and for the disinfection of septic wounds.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

The drug and pure glycosides, among others, should not be
administered in the presence of second or third degree
atrioventricular block, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, carotid sinus syndrome, ventricular
tachycardia, thoracic aortic aneurysm or WPW-syndrome.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Because of the narrow therapeutic range of cardioactive
steroid glycosides, side effects could appear even with
therapeutic dosages. Side effects include tonus elevation of
the gastrointestinal area, loss of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea,
headache and irregular pulse.

Contact with the juice of the fresh bulb can lead to skin
inflammation (squill dermatitis). The administration of pure
glycoside is preferable due to the difficulties of standardizing
the drug (proscillaridin A).

Drug Interactions: Increase of effectiveness and thus also of
side effects is possible with concomitant administration of
quinidine, calcium, saluretics, laxatives and extended therapy
with glucocorticoids.

Squill potentiates the positive inotropic and negative chrono-
tropic effects of digoxin.

The simultaneous administration of arrhythmogenic sub-
stances (sympathomimetics, methylxanthines, phosphodies-
terase inhibitors, and quinidine) increases the risk of cardiac
arrhythmias.

OVERDOSAGE

Besides the already-mentioned symptoms, overdosage can
lead to cardiac rhythm disorders, life-threatening .ventricular
tachycardia, atrial tachycardia with atrioventricular block,
stupor, vision disorders, depression, confused states, halluci-
nations and psychosis. Fatal dosages lead to cardiac arrest or
asphyxiation.

Treatment of poisoning includes gastric lavage and instilla-
tion of activated charcoal. All other measures are to be
carried out according to the symptoms. In case of potassium
loss, careful replenishment; for ectopic impulse formation in
the ventricle, administration of phenytoin as antiarrhythmic

----- PAGE 967 -----
718 /SQUILL

drug; lidocaine for ventricular extrasystole; for pronounced
bradycardia, atropine or orciprenaline. The prophylactic use
of a pacemaker is recommended. Hemoperfusion for elimi-
nating the glycosides or the administration of cholestyramine
for interrupting the enterohepatic circulation are possible.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and other galenic

preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Stabilized powder is standardized according to
content, there are no more exact specifications in the

literature, standardization according to DABIO.

Squill Extract — Evaporated extract 1:4; drug: diluted spirit
of wine (EB6)

Acetum Scillae — drug: spirit of wine 1:1 (EB6)

Oxymel Scillae — 5 parts Acetum Scillae: 10 parts purified
honey evaporated in a water bath to 10 parts

Daily Dosage: Single dose: 60 to 200 mg; Daily dose: 180 to
200 mg; Average daily dosage: 0.1 to 0.5 gm of standardized
sea onion powder.

Squill Extract: 1.0 gm; Liquid extract: 0.03 to 2.0 ml;
Tincture: 0.3 to 2.0 ml; Acetum Scillae: 1.0 gm; Acetic acid
maceration: 0.6 to 2.0 ml

Oxymel Scillae: 2.5 gm

Storage: Squill should be protected from light and moisture
at temperatures below 25 °C.

LITERATURE
Brisse B, Anwendung pflanzlicher Wirkstoffe bei kardialen

Erkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(4): 107. 1989.

Eichstadt H, Hansen G, Danne O, Koch HP, Minge C, Richter
W, Schroder R, Die positiv inotrope Wirkung eines Scilla-
Extraktes nach Einmal-Applikation. In: ZPT 12(2):46. 1991.

Garcia-Casado P et al., (1977) Pharm Acta Helv 52:218.

Hakim FS, Evans FJ, (1976) Pharm Acta Helv 52:117.

Kamano Y, Satoh N, Nakayoshi H, Pettit GR, Smith CR,
Rhinovirus inhibition by bufadienolides. In: Chem Pharm Bull
36:326-332. 1988.
Karawya MS et al., (1973) Planta Med 23:213.

Kopp B, Krenn L, Jurenitsch J, Bufadienolide in Meerzwiebeln.
In: DAZ '130(40):2175. 1990.

Krenn L, Ferth R, Robien W, Kopp B, Bufadienolide aus
Urginea-maritima-sensu-strictu. In: PM 57:560. 1991.

Krenn L, Kopp B, 9-Hydroxyscilliphaeosid, a new bufadienolide
from Urginea maritima. In: JNP 59(6):612-613. 1996.

Loew D, Phytotherapie bei Herzinsuffizienz. In: ZPT 18(2):92-
96. 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Loew DA, Loew AD, Pharmakokinetik von herzglykosidhaltigen
Pflanzenextrakten. In: ZPT 15(4): 197-202. 1994.

Majinda RRT et al., Bufadienolides and other constituents of
Urginea sanguinea. In: PM 63(2): 188-190. 1997.

Mathic C, Ourrison G, (1964) Phytochemistry 3:115, 133, 377
et 379.
Sato, Muro T, Antiviral activity of scillarenin, a plant
bufadienolide. In: Jap J Microbiol 18:441-448. 1974.
Vega FA, (1976) An Rev Acad Farm. 42(1):81.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl./Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Joubert JP, Schultz RA Detection of scilliroside in the
preparation of maritime Scille. (Urginea maritima Baker) Ann
Pharm Fr, 42:17-21, 1967 Jan.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Spies T, Praznik W, Hofinger A, Altmann F, Nitsch E, Wutka
R A new bufadienolide from Urginea pancration Planta Med,
235:284-5, Jun, 1992.

Spies T, Praznik W, Hofinger A, Altmann F, Nitsch E, Wutka
R The structure of the fructan sinistrin from Urginea maritima.
Carbohydr Res, 235:221-30, Nov 4, 1992.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Tuncok Y, Kozan O, Cavdar C, Guven H, Fowler J Estimation
of scilladienolides of Urginea maritima as well as in galenicals
and formulations. Planta Med, 33:213-20, May, 1973.

Tuncok Y, Kozan O, Cavdar C, Guven H, Fowler J Preparation
of the naturally occurring complex of the initial scilladienolides
of Urginea maritima. Planta Med, 33:290-7, May, 1973.

----- PAGE 968 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Tuncok Y, Kozan O, Cavdar C, Guven H, Fowler J Separation
of cardiotonic fiom flavonoid compounds of the squill, Urginea
maritima Baker. Experientia, 33:447-8, Apr 15, 1969.

Tuncok Y, Kozan O, Cavdar C, Guven H, Fowler J Urginea
maritima (squill) toxicity. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol, 33:83-6,
1995.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Walli F. Grob PJ. Muller-Schoop J Antineoplastic constituents
of some Southem Affican plants. J Ethnopharmacol, 111:323-
35, Dec, 1980.

Walli F, Grob PJ. Miiller-Schoop J Pseudo-(venocuran-)lupus -
a minor episode in the history of medicine Schweiz Med
Wochenschr. 111:1398-405. Sep 19, 1981.

Walli F, Grob PJ, Muller-Schoop J Traditional medicine in
health care. J Ethnopharmacol, 111:19-22, Mar, 1980.

St. John's Wort

Hypericum perforatum

TRADE NAMES
St. John's Wort (available from numerous manufacturers and
as combination product), St. John's Wort Extract, Alterra,
Advanced St. John's Wort, St. John's Wort Herb, St. John's
Wort High Potency, St. John's Wort Preferred, St. John's
Wort Standardized Extract, St. John's Power Time Release,
Mood Support, KIRA, Centrum St. John's Wort, Hyperi-
calm, St. John's Powder 0.3%, Tension Tamer, Hypercalm,
St. John's Powder, St. John's Extra Strength

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts include the fresh buds
and flowers separated from the inflorescences, the aerial
parts collected during the flowering season and dried, and
the entire fresh flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The golden yellow flowers are in sparsely
blossomed terminal cymes. The 5 sepals are ovate-lanceolate
to lanceolate and very pointed. The sepals are also smooth,
serrate at the tip, and marked by many light and dark glands.
The 5 petals and numerous stamens are fused into 3 bundles.
The ovary has a broad or narrow oval shape. The fruit is a 3-
valvular capsule, which is triangular and oval. The seeds are
cylindrical and shortly pointed at both ends. The seeds are 1
to 3 mm long, either black or dark brown, and covered in
small warts.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial plant is 30 to 60 cm
and contains a long-living branched root and rhizome, which
tapers toward each end. The reddish stem is erect, includes 2
raised edges and can reach 100 cm in height. The oval-

ST. JOHN'S WORT/719

shaped, translucent, punctate leaves are attached directly at
the base and often covered in black glands.

Characteristics: The flowers release an odorless red juice
when squeezed, which tastes weakly bitter and irritating.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to all of Europe, western
Asia and northern Africa. It has been introduced to eastern
Asia, Australia and New Zealand, and it is cultivated in
Poland and Siberia.

Production: St. John's Wort consists of the dried above-
ground parts of Hypericum perforatum gathered during
flowering season. The herb is cut at the start of the flowering
season and dried quickly in bunches in order'to preserve the
oil and secreted contents.

Not to be Confused With: The plant may be mistaken for
other Hypericum species, such as Hypericum barbatum,
Hypericum hirsutum, Hypericum maculatum, Hypericum
montanum and Hypericum tetrapterum.

Other Names: Hardhay, Amber, Goatweed, Klamath Weed,
Tipton Weed, Saint John's Word, St. Johnswort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Anthracene derivatives (0.1-0.15%): favoring naphthodian-
thrones, especially hypericin, pseudohypericin

Flavonoids (2-4%): in particular hyperoside, quercitrin,
rutin, isoquercitrin, and also  biflavonolids including
amentoflavone

Xanthones (0.15-0.72%): 1,3,6,7-tetrahydroxy-xanthone

Acylphloroglucinols: hyperforin with small quantities of
adhhyperforin

Volatile oil: chief components aliphatic hydrocarbons, in-
cluding, among others, 2- methyloctane, undecane, further-
more dodecanol, mono- and sesquiterpenes: including,
among others, alpha-pinene, caryophyllene, additionally also
2-methyl-3-but-3-en-2-ol

Oligomers
Procyanidines and other catechin tannins (6.5-15%")
Cajfeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS

The main active principles of the herb are the flavone and
flavonol derivatives, xanthones and naphthodianthrone (hy-
pericins). A mild antidepressant, sedative and anxiolytic
action of the herb and its preparations has been documented
in clinical studies. Historically, hypericin was thought to
have a weak MAO inhibitor effect. However, recent
literature suggests hypericin is devoid of MAO inhibitory
activity (Bladt, 1994).

----- PAGE 969 -----
720/ST. JOHN'S WORT

More recent studies have indicated that the antidepressive
effect may be largely due to the ability of the herb to inhibit
the reuptake of serotonin and other neurotransmitters. The
activity of the herb could be attributable to the combined
contribution of several mechanisms, each one too weak by
itself to account for the overall effect (Bennett, 1998). A
study concluded that hydroalcoholic hypericum extract
inhibits the reuptake of serotonin, norepinephrine and
dopamine with similar affinities, which leads to a significant
down-regulation of cortical beta- adrenoceptors and seroto-
nin (SHT-2) receptors. This data suggested hyperforin is the
active principle of hypericum extracts in biochemical models
of antidepressant activity (Muller, 1998). The antidepressive
action not only results from the effect on adrenergic
transmitter systems (norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin),
but also from an endocrine effect (melatonin).

Oily Hypericum preparations demonstrate an anti-inflamma-
tory action due to their high flavonoid content. Antiviral
(retroviruses) properties of the herb have not been proven.
No antiretroviral activity determined by virologic markers
and CD4 cell count of hypericin was seen in a study of HIV-
infected patients (Gulick, 1999).

The antibacterial effect of hyperforin was demonstrated in a
recent study. Hyperforin inhibited the growth of gram
positive bacteria, such as Streptococcus pyogenes and
Streptococcus agalactiae. Hyperforin also demonstrated
efficacy against penicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(PRSA) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA). These data indicate the possible use of the herb for
local treatment of infected wounds and eczematous skin

lesions (Schempp, 1999).

CLINICAL TRIALS

A meta-analysis of 23 randomized trials consisting of 1757
outpatients with mild to moderately severe depressive
disorders was conducted to determine the effectiveness of
Hypericum perforatum. Although Hypericum was  signifi-
cantly superior to placebo with fewer adverse effects (19.9%
with Hypericum compared to 52.8% with standard antide-
pressants), there was little standardization and a lack of
information with regard to the diagnostic criteria, compli-
ance control, and dosage regimen of Hypericum and standard
antidepressants (Linde K, 1996).

The equivalence between St. John's Wort and fluoxetine was
demonstrated in a randomized, double-blind, comparative
trial involving 149 outpatients with mild or moderate
depressive episodes (according to International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems).
Patients were treated for 6 weeks. A daily dose of 800 mg
St. John's Wort extract LoHyp-57 (dry extract of
St. John's Wort, drug .extract ratio 5-7:1, solvent, ethanol

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

60% [w/w]) was found to be equivilent in efficacy to 20 mg
fluoxetine (Harrer, 1999).

The effectiveness and tolerance of Hypericum extract LI 160
with a dosage of 300 mg three times daily was compared to
imipramine 25 mg three times daily in a double-blind,
clinical study. The study involved 135 depressed patients
(according to DSM-III-R criteria) treated over a 6-week
period. The analysis demonstrated comparable results be-
tween the treatment groups, with fewer and milder side
effects in the Hypericum group (Vorbach, 1994).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

me

* Anxiety

+ Depressive moods

¢ Inflammation of the skin
¢ Blunt injuries

* Wounds and burns

Internally, the drug is used for psychovegetative distur-
bances, depressive moods, anxiety and nervous unrest.
Externally, the oily Hypericum preparations are used for

. treatment and post-therapy of acute and contused injuries

and for first-degree burns.

Unproven uses: The herb has been used for worm infesta-
tion, bronchitis and asthma, gallbladder disease, gastritis
(also diarrhea), nocturnal enuresis, gout and rheumatism.
Oily Hypericum preparations are used internally for dyspep-
tic complaints, and externally for the treatment of myalgia.

Chinese Medicine: In a gargle solution, the herb is used
externally for tonsillitis. The herb is also administered
externally as a lotion for dermatoses.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb has been used for treatment of
peripheral and central nervous system injuries, depressive
moods, asthma and cerebral-vascular calcification.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Simultaneous use of a MAO inhibitor: St. John's Wort
contains some weak monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI)
properties that may add to the effects of other MAOI drugs,
therefore theoretically increasing the risk for hypertensive
crisis (Hoelzl & Ostrowski, 1986; Muller & Schaefer, 1996;
Suzuki, 1984).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
The tannin content of the drug can lead to digestive
complaints, such as feeling of fullness or constipation.
Patients with a previous history of photosensitization to
various chemicals should be cautious of direct sun exposure
(Wheatley, 1998).

----- PAGE 970 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Central Nervous System Effects: Restlessness (0.3%) and
fatigue (0.4%) occurred in 3250 patients in one study of
depressed patients (Woelk, 1994). In another study, fatigue/
tiredness was reported in 5% of subjects, and restlessness in
6% (Vorbach, 1997). Symptoms are difficult to evaluate
since the herb is being used to treat depression, which may
have similar symptoms. Headache was noted in 7% of
studies reviewed (Wheatley, 1998).

Fertility Effects: High concentrations of St. John's Wort in
vitro, was mutagenic to sperm cells and adversely effected
oocytes. The data suggests St. John's Wort given at high
concentrations damages reproductive cells (Ondrizek, 1999).

Gastrointestinal Effects: Gastrointestinal effects were noted
in 0.6% of patients in one study. Anorexia occurred in 0.55%
(n=18), diarrhea occurred in 0.55% (n=18), nausea occurred
in 0.55% (n=18), and gastrointestinal pain or stomachache
occurred in 0.55% (n=18) of 3250 patients taking Hypericum
extract 300 milligrams 3 times daily (Woelk, 1994). Three
percent of patients in one study developed dry mouth and 5%
had gastrointestinal complaints Vorbach, 1997). Constipation
was reported in 5% of cases reviewed (Wheatley, 1998).

Dertnatologic Effects: Photosensitization has been observed
in animals following intakes of large quantities of the drug
(starting at 3 g per kg body weight, which would be 150 g
for a person weighing 50 kg). St. John's Wort photosensiti-
zation is dose-related, and has occurred with plasma
concentrations of 50 meg of hypericin per ml, according to
Schulz' Rational Phytotherapy—six orders of magnitude
above that of patients taking an extract of 300 mg of 0.6%
hypericin three times a day. Hypericism is defined as a
sensitivity to light seen in animals who have ingested certain
Hypericum species. The Hypericum pigments are carried to
the skin, and in the unpigmented, unhaired portions of the
skin of sheep, cattle, horses, goats and swine may produce
sunlight induced rash and blisters (Giese, 1980; Southwell &
Campbell, 1991). However, such a reaction is unlikely with
administration of therapeutic dosages in humans.

1. Hypericum extract, especially at higher doses or with
long-term use, may cause photosensitivity with sunburn-like
lesions and inflammation of the mucous membranes, at least
in animals (Duran & Song, 1986). Photosensitization has
been demonstrated in a controlled clinical trial using metered
doses of hypericin and subsequent exposure to UVA/UVB
radiation (Roots, 1996).

2. Significant phototoxicity did occur in HIV-infected
persons administered intravenous hypericim, 0.25-0.5 mg/kg
twice weekly, or 0.25 mg three times weekly, or oral
hypericin 0.25 mg/kg daily (Gulick, 1999).

ST. JOHN'S WORT/721

3. Pruritus and exanthema occurred in 17 of 3250 patients
(0.52%) taking Hypericum extract 300 milligrams three
times a day (Woelk, 1994). Pruritus was found in 2% of
patients taking Hypericum for depression (Wheatley, 1998).

4. A case report involved one patient taking St. John's Wort
who developed subacute polyneuropathy after sun exposure
(Bove, 1998).

Drug Interactions:

MAOI—Although there is poor documentation, concomitant
administration of St. John's Wort and a MAOI , such as
tranylcypromine, phenelzine, may lead to increased effects
and possible toxicity (hypertensive crisis)-See~Contraindica-
tions (Hoelzl & Ostrowski, 1986; Mueller & Schaefer, 1996;
Suzuki, 1984). It is prudent to avoid concomitant use with
beta-sympathomimetic amines, e.g., ma huang or pseu-
doephedrine (Miller, 1998).

SSRFs—St. John's Wort taken concomitantly with an SSRI,
such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, fluvoxamine or
citalopram, may lead to an increased effect and possible
toxicity "serotonin syndrome", e.g., sweating, tremor,
flushing, confusion and agitation. St. John's Wort has slight
serotonin reuptake properties. A case report suggests that co-
administration of St. John's Wort with paroxetine has
resulted in a clinical syndrome resembling a sedative/hypnot-
ic intoxication (Gordon, 1998).

Tannic acids present in St. John's Wort may inhibit the
absorption of iron (Miller, 1998).

Concomitant use with other photosensitizers, such as tetracy-
clines, sulfonamides, thiazides, quinolones, piroxicam and
others should be avoided (Miller, 1998).

Hypericum extract has been reported to significantly prolong
narcotic-induced sleeping times and to antagonize the effects
of reserpine (Okpanyi, 1987).

Cyclosporine — Decreased serum concentrations have
occurred with use of St. John's Wort (Bon, 1999). Acute
cellular transplant rejection in heart transplant patients due to
an interaction between St. John's Wort and Cyclosporine has
been reported. St. John's Wort has been proven to induce the
cytochrome P450 enzyme system, the major pathway for
cyclosporine metabolism. Heart transplant rejection has been
reported as soon as 3 weeks after St. John's Wort is added to
the drug regimen of heart transplant patients maintained on
cyclosporine therapy (Ruschitzka, et al., 2000).

Indinavir — An open label study was conducted involving
healthy volunteers that were administered 800 mg indinavir
every 8 hours along with 300 mg St. John's Wort standard-
ized to 0.3% hypericin 3 times daily. Results showed a 57%
reduction in the area under the curve for the protease

----- PAGE 971 -----
722/ST. JOHN'S WORT

inhibitor and an 81% decrease of the extrapolated 8-hour
indinavir trough value. The authors concluded that a
reduction of this magnitude could lead to development of
drug resistance and treatment failure (Piscitelli, et al., 2000).
Clinicians are warned that St. John's Wort may significantly
affect plasma concentrations of any drug that is metabolized
by the cytochrome P450 system.

Ethinyloestradiol and desogestrel (combined oral contracep-
tive) — Breakthrough bleeding has occurred with concomi-
tant use of St. John's Wort (Bon, 1999).

Hypericin causes a reduction in barbiturate-induced sleeping
times (Ozturk, 1992).

Theophylline — The herb has decreased theophylline levels
on a patient stabilized on theophylline therapy (Nebel, 1999).

Co-administration of St. John's Wort extract (LI 160) with
digoxin resulted in a significant decrease in digoxin Grough,
AUC (0-24), and Gix values compared to placebo. There-
fore, St. John's Wort may reduce efficacy of digoxin and
make a patient a nonresponder, whereas increased toxicity
may be anticipated after withdrawal of the herb (Andreas,
1999). ... -

St. John's Wort (600-900 mg/day) taken concomitantly with
sertraline (50-75 mg/day) after 2 to 4 days, resulted in a
presumed serotonin syndrome consisting of dizziness, nau-
sea, vomiting, headache, epigastric pain, anxiety, confusion,
and/or feelings of restlessness and irritability. Cyprohepta-
dine was used to reverse the symptoms and after discontinua-
tion of the herb-drug therapy, all symptoms resolved (Lantz,
1999).

Nefazadine (100 mg BID) and St. John's Wort (300 mg TID)
taken simutaneously resulted in nausea, vomiting and
restlessness after 3 days of therapy. The symptoms improved
after stopping the nefazadine and continuing with St. John's
Wort (Lantz, 1999).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug, herb powder,
liquid and solid preparations for internal use; liquid and
semi-solid preparations for external use; preparations made
with fatty oils for external and internal use.

How Supplied:

Capsules—{(standardized at 0.3% hypericin) 125mg, 150mg,
250mg, 300mg, 350mg, 370mg, 375mg, 400mg, 424mg,
434mg, 450mg, 500mg, 510mg

Capsules, Extended Release—(standardized at 0.3% hyperi-
cin) 450mg, 900mg, IOOOmg

Dried Herb

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Extract—L.T

Injection—1%

Liquid—300 mg/5ml, 250 mg/ml
Liquid Dilutions—3x, 6x, 30x,12c, 30c
Pellets—3x, 6x, 12x, 12c, 30c

Tablets—(standardized at 0.3% hypericin) 1IOOmg, 150mg,
300mg, 450mg

Tincture—1:10

Transdermal—900mg/24hr "ot
Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 2 teaspoonfuls of
drug in 150 ml boiling water and steep for 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: In general, a range of 200 to 1000 micro-
grams/day of hypericin is recommended for treatment of
depression (Anon, 1996). Total hypericin concentrations of
Hypericum extracts may vary widely, therefore caution
should be taken in determining dosage (Fachinfo Helarium
Hypericum, 1996; Fachinfo Remotiv, 1996; Hansgen, 1993;
-Schmidt & Sommer, 1993; Vorbach, 1994; Woelk, 1994).

For depressive moods, it is recommended the herb be
administered for the duration of 4 to 6 weeks; if no
improvement is apparent, a different therapy should be
initiated.

Depression:

Capsules/tablets — 300 mg of the standardized extract
should be administered three times daily (Clausson &
Muller, 1997; Fachinfo Helarium Hypericum, 1996).

Dried herb — 2 to 4 grams taken 3 times daily (Fachinfo
Helarium Hypericum, 1996; Fachinfo Remotiv, 1996; Hans-
gen, 1993; Schmidt & Sommer, 1993; Vorbach, 1994;
Woelk, 1994).

Tea — St. John's Wort as a tea is the traditional method of
administration, with a single dose of 2-3 grams dried herb
placed in boiling water. If dried herb of 2 grams is used, and
the dried herb to extract ratio is 6, a usual dose of the extract .-
would be 300 milligrams (Schultz, 1997).

Liquid extract 1:1 in 25% ethanol — 2 to 4 milliliters taken 3
times daily (Fachinfo Helarium Hypericum, 1996; Fachinfo *
Remotiv, 1996; Haensgen, 1993; Schmidt & Sommer, 1993;
Vorbach, 1994; Woelk, 1994).

Tincture: (1:10) in 45% ethanol — 2 to 4 milliliters, 3 times
a day (Fachinfo Helarium Hypericum, 1996; Fachinfo
Remotiv, 1996; Hansgen, 1993; Schmidt & Sommer, 1993;
Vorbach, 1994; Woelk, 1994).

----- PAGE 972 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wounds, bruising and swelling: The herb is applied topically
and locally for treatment. The activity of the topical
preparations is based on the hyperforin content, which is
highly variable depending on the method of oil preparation.
The preparation may be stable for a few weeks up to 6
months. (Maisenbacher & Kovar, 1992)

Homeopathic Dosage: The daily dosage for homeopathic
indications is 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every 30 to 60
minutes for acute therapy, and 1 to 3 times daily for chronic
use. Parenterally, 1 to 2 ml subcutaneously administered
three times daily for acute therapy and once daily for chronic
therapy. The ointment is applied 1 to 2 times daily for acute
and chronic use (HAB1).

Storage: Store at room temperature, away from heat,
moisture and direct light. Hyperici oleum has a limited shelf
life. One study showed that a sample containing 62
milligrams of hyperforin (the active ingredient in the oil)
contained no hypericin in 14 days. If sunlight is not used to
prepare the oil, then the breakdown is slower, but still less
than 30 days. Various oil preparation methods have been
described, including one with eutanol G, which showed
stability for 6 months. Researchers evaluated’ 6 commercial
samples of oil of Hypericum containing 2.2 to 20.8
milligrams/deciliter. All hyperforin was gone by the end of
five weeks (Maisenbacher, 1992).

LITERATURE

Andreas J, J. Brockmoller et al., Pharmacokientic interaction of
digoxin with an herbal extract from St. John's wort. Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 1999;66:338-345.

Araya OS, Ford EJH, (1981) An investigation of the type of

photosensitization caused by the ingestion of St. John's Wort
(hypericum perforatum) by calves. J Corrip Pathol 91:135-141.

Baldt S, Wagner H, (1994) Inhibition of MAO by Fractions
and Constiuents of Hypericum Extract. J Geriatr Psychiatry
Neurol 7(Suppl 1):57-59.
Bennett DA, Phun L, Polk JF, Neuropharmacology of St.
John's Wort (Hypericum). Ann Pharmacother 1998
Nov;32(I):1201-8.

Bon D, Hartmann K, Kuhn M. Schweitzer Apothekerzeitung
1999; 16:535-36.

Borsini F, Meli A, (1988) Is the forced swimming test a
suitable model for revealing antidepressant activity?
Psychopharmacology 94:147-160.

Bove GM, Acute neuropathy after exposure to sun in a patient
treated with St. John's Wort, The Lancet 1998;352:1121-1122.
Butterweck V et al.. Isolation by MLCCC and NMR
spectroscopy of hypericin, pseudohypericin and 13,118-biapigenin
from Hypericum perforatum. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th
Ann Congress of GA, 119. 1996.

Butterweck V, Winterhoff H, Schulz V, Nahrstedt A,
Pharmacological in vivo testing of fractions obtained from

ST. JOHN'S WORT/723

Hypericum perforatum L. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 65. 1996.

Carpenter S, Kraus GA, Photosensitization required for
inactivation of equine infectious anaemia virus by hypericin. In:
Photochem Photobiol 53:169-174. 1991.

Czygan FC, (1993) Kulturgeschichte und Mystik des
Johanniskrautes. Z Phytother 14:276-281.

Danie K, (1939) Inhaltsstoffe und Priifmethoden homoopathisch
verwendeter Arzneipflanzen. Hippokrates 10:5-6.

Decoaterd LA, Hoffmann E, Kyburz D, Bray D, Hostettmann
K, A new phloroglucinol derivative from Hypericum-calycinum
with antifungal and in vitro antimalarial activity. In: PM
57:548. 1991.

Dingermann T, Phytopharmaka im Alter: Crataegus, Ginkgo,
Hypericum und Kava-Kava. In: PZ 140(23):2017-2024. 1995.
Engelhardt A, (1962) Justinus Kerner und das Johanniskraut.
Apotheker-Dienst Roche 3:51-55.

Ernst E, (1959) St. John's Wort, an anti-depressant? A
systematic, criteria-based overview. Phytomedicine 2:67-71.

Fachinformation: Helarium (R) Hypericum, hypericum extract.
Bionorica GmbH, Neumarkt, 1996.

Fachinformation: Remotiv (R), hypericum extract. Bayer AG,
harma Deutschland, Leverkusen, 1996.

Freytag WE, (1984) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 124(46):2383.

Giese AC, (1980) Hypericism. Photochem Photobiol Rev 5:229-
255.

Gulick RM, McAuliffe V, Holden-Wiltse J et al., Phase I
studies of hypericum, the active compound in St. John's Wort,
as an antiretroviral agent in HIV-infected adults. AIDS clinical
trials group protocols 150 and 258. Ann Intern Med 1999 Mar
16;130(6):510-4.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G, (Hrsg.), (1993)
Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Auflage,
Drogen E-O. Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, S
268-292.
Hansgen KD, Vesper J, Plock M, Multicenter double-blind
study examining the antidepressant effectiveness of the
hypericum extract LI 160. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1994
Oct;7 Suppl LS15-8.

Hansgen KD, Vesper J, (1996) Antidepressive Wirksamkeit
eines hochdosierten Hypericum-Extraktes. Miinch Med Wschr
138:29-33.

Harrer G, Payk TR, Schulz V, (Hrsg) Hypericum als
pflanzliches Antidepressivum. Nervenheilkunde 12:268-366.

Harrer G, Schulz V, (1993) Zur Priifung der antidepressiven
Wirksamkeit von Hypericum. Nervenheilkunde 12:271-273.

Harrer G, Sommer H, Treatment of mild/moderate depressions
with Hypericum. Phytomedicine 1:3-8. 1994.

Harrer G, Schmidt U, Kuhn U, Biller A., Comparison of
equivalence between the St. John's Wort extract LoHyp-57 and
fluoxetine. Arzneimittelforschung 1999 Apr,(4):289-96.

----- PAGE 973 -----
724 /ST. JOHN'S WORT

Hiller KO, Rahlfs V, Therapeutische Aquivalenz eines
hochdosierten Phytopharmakons mit Amytriptylin bei angstlich-
depressiven Versimmungen - Reanalyse einer randomisierten
Studie unter besonderer Beachtung biometrischer und klinischer
Aspekte. In: Forsch.

Holzl J, Inhaltsstoffe und Wirkungsmechanismen des
Johanniskrautes. In: ZPT 14(5):255. 1993.

Holzl J, Ostrowski E. (1986) Planta Med 6:62P.
Holzl J, Sattler S, Schiitt H, Johanniskraut: eine Alternative zu
synthetischen Antidepressiva. In: PZ 139(46):3959. 1994.
Jenike MA (Ed), (1994) Hypericum: A Novel Antidepressant. J
Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 7:S1-S68.

Kil KS, Yum YN, Seo SH, Antitumor activities of hypericin as
a protein tyrosine kinase blocker. In: Arch Pharmacal Res
19(6):490-496. 1996.

Kitanov G et ah. (1984) Khim Prir Soedin 2:269.

Koren H, Schenk GM, Jindra RH, Alth G, Ebermann R, Kubin
A, Koderhold G, Kreitner M, Hypericin in phototherapy. In: J
Photochem Photobiol B - Biology 36(2): 113-119. 1996.

Lantz MS, Buchalter E, Giambanco V, St. John's Wort and
antidepressant drug interactions in the elderly. J Geriatr
Psychiatry Neurol 1999 Spring;2(1):7-10.

Laux G, (1995) Kontrollierte Vergleichsstudien rmt Moclobemid
in der Depressionsbehandlung. Munch Med Wschr 137:296-300.
Leuschner J, (1995) Gutachten zur experimentellen Toxikologie
von Hypericum-Extrakt LI 160. Lichtwer Pharma GmbH,
Berlin.

Linde K et al., St John's Wort for depression - An overview .
and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. BMJ 1996 Aug
3;313(7052):253-8.
Lopez-Bazzocchi I, Hudson JB, Towers GHN, Antiviral activity
of the photoactive plant pigment hypericin. In: Photochem

Photobiol 54:95-98. 1991.
Maisenbacher P, Johanniskrautbl. In: DAZ 132(6):281. 1992.

Maisenbacher P, Kovar KA, Analysis and stability of Hyperici
oleum. Planta Med 1992 Aug;58(4):351-4.

Mathic C, Ourrison G, (1964) Phytochemistry 3:115, 133, 377,
379.

Maurer A, Johne A, Bauer S et al. Interaction of St. John's
wort extract with phenprocoumon. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1999;55: A22..

Miller LG, Selected clinical considerations focusing on known
or potential drug-herb interactions. Arch Intern Med vol 158,
Nov 9, 1998: 2200-2211.

Muller WE, Singer A, Wonnemann M et al., Hyperforin
represents the neurotransmitter reuptake inhibiting constituent of
Hypericum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998 Jun;3I Suppl 1:16-
21.

Muller WE, Schafer C, Johanniskraut In-vitro-Sfudie iiber
Hypericum-Extrakt, Hypericin und Kampferol. In: DAZ
136(13): 1015-1022. 1996.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Muller WEG, Rossol R, (1994) Effects of Hypericum Extract
on the Expression of Serotonin Receptors. J Geriatr Psychiatry
Neurol 7(Suppl 1):63-64.

Muldner H, Zoller M, (1984) Arzneim Forsch. 34II(8):918.
Nebel A, Schneider BJ, Baker R et al: Potential metabolic
interaction between St. John's Wort and theophylline. Ann
Pharmacother 1999; 33(4):502.

Niesel S, (1992) Untersuchungen zum Freisetzungsverhalten und
zur Stabilitat ausgewahlter wertbestimmender
Pflanzeninhaltsstoffe unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung
modemer phytochemischer Analysenverfahren. Inaugural-
Dissertation. Freie Universitat Berlin.

Okpanvi SN, Weischer ML, (1987) Arzneim-Forsch, 37:10-13.
Ozturk Y et al., (1992) op cit.

Piscitelli, S et al., Indinavir concentrations and St. John's Wort.
In: Lancet 2000; 355: 547-548.

Popovic M et al., Biochemical and pharmacodynamic study of
Hypericum perforatum. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 67. 1996.
Rammert K, Phytopharmaka: Johanniskraut als Antidepressivum.
n: DAZ 136(46):4131-4132. 1996.

Reuter HD, Hypericum als pflanzliches Antidepressivum. In:
ZPT 14(5):239. 1993.
Roth L, Hypericum - Hypericin: Botanik, Inhaltsstoffe,
Wirkung. In: ZPT 13(5):174. 1992.

Roth L, Hypericum. In: Roth L: Hypericum Hypericin, Botanik,
Inhaltsstoffe, Wirkung. 1990.

Ruschitzka, F, et al., Acute heart transplant rejection due to
Saint John's Wort. In: Lancet 2000; 355: 548-549.

Sailer R, Hellenbrecht D, Johanniskraut (Hypericum
perforatum). In: Tagl Praxis 33(3):689. 1992.

Schempp CM, Pelz K, Wittmer A, et al., Antibacterial activity
of hyperforin from St John's Wort, against multiresistant
Staphylococcus aureus and gram-positive bacteria. Lancet 1999
Jun 19;353(9170):2129.

Schmidt U, Sommer H, St. John's Wort extract in the

ambulatory therapy of depression. Attention and reaction ability
are preserved. Fortschr Med 1993 Jul 10;111(19):339-42.

Southwell IA, Campbell MH, Hypericin content variation in
Hypericum perforatum in Australia. In: Phytochemistry 30:475-
478. 1991.

Sparenberg B, Demisch L, Holzl J, Untersuchungen uber
antidepressive Wirkstoffe von Johanniskraut. In: PZW 138(2)50.
1993.

Suzuki O et al., (1984) Planta Med 3:272.

Thiele, B, Brink I, Ploch M, (1993) Modulation der Zytkokin-
Expression durch Hypericum-Extrakt. Mervemjeoolimde 12:353-
356.

Volz HP, Hansel R, (1995) Hypericum (Johanniskraut) als
pflanzliches Antidepressivum. Psychopharmakotherapie 2:1-9.

----- PAGE 974 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Vorbach EU, Arnold KH, Hubner WD, Efficacy and tolerability
of St. John's Wort extract Hypericum extract LI 160 in patients
with severe depressive incidents according to ICD-10.
Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (suppl 1):S81-S85.

Vorbach EU, Hubner WD, Arnoldt KH, Effectiveness and
tolerance of the Hypericum extract LI 160 in comparison with
imipramine: randomized double-blind study with 135
outpatients. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 1994 Oct;7 Suppl
LS19-23.

Wagner H, Bladt S, (1993) Pharmazeutische Qualitat der
Hypericum-Extrakte. Nervenheilkunde 12:362-366.

Wheatley D, Hypericum extract. Potential in the treatment of
depression. CNS Drugs 1998; 9:431-440.

Wheatley D, LI 160, and extract of St. John's Wort, versus
amitriptyline in mildly to moderately depressed outpatients - a
controlled 6-week clinical trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30(suppl II):S77-S80.

Willner P, (1984) The validity of animal models of depression.
Psychopharmacology 83:1-16.

Winterhoff H, Butterweck V, Nahrstedt A, Gumbinger HG,
Schulz V, Erping S, Bofihammer F, Wieligmann A, (1995)
Pharmakologische Untersuchungen zur antidepressiven Wirkung
von Hypericum perforatum L. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg.)
Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwendung.
Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S 39-56.

Winterhoff H, Hambriigge M, Vahlensieck W, (1993) Testung
von Hypericum perforatum L. im Tierexperiment.
Nervenheilkunde 12:341-345.

Woelk H, Burkard G, Grunwald J, Benefits and risks of the
hypericum extract LI 160: drug monitoring study with 3250
patients. J Geriatric Psychiatry Neurol 1994; 7(suppl 1):3438.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

STAR ANISE/ 725

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Stachys palustris

See Woundwort

Star Anise

Illicium verum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the ripe fruit, the whole dried fruit and the seeds.

Flower and Fndt: The flowers are yellowish or reddish-
white. The follicles have a diameter of about 2 cm. They are
star-like and formed from eight cybiform carpels. The
follicles open when ripe, each containing one smooth,
polished, brown seed. The pericarp of the seed is brown and
wrinkled below.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree up to
10 m tall with white, birch-like bark. The leaves are 7.5 cm
elliptic-lanceolate and

long, entire-margined, glossy,

acuminate.

Habitat: The plant is only known in its cultivated form. It is
cultivated in China and Vietnam.

Production: Star anise consists of the ripe syncarp of
Illicium verum, as well as its preparations in effective
dosage. The fruit is harvested shortly before it is fully ripe
(August to October).

Not to be Confused With: Should not be confused with the
smaller Japanese star anise (I. lanceolatum or I. religi&sum),
which is poisonous.

Other Names: Aniseed Stars, Badiana

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief constituent trans-anethol, chavicol methyl
ether (estragole), d-limonene, 1-limonene, d-fenchone, d-
pinene, dl-limonene, anisaldehyde

Fatty oil

Flavonoids: including rutin, kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside

----- PAGE 975 -----
726/STAR ANISE

Tannins

EFFECTS

Star Anise is a bronchial expectorant and antispasmodic for
the gastrointestinal tract. The essential oils (star anise oil)
and flavonoids act on the smooth muscle of the gastrointesti-
nal tract and the mucous membrane of the respiratory tract.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Loss of appetite
* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Star Anise is used for catarrh of the

respirator)’ tract and peptic discomfort.

Indian Medicine: Star Anise is used for dyspeptic com-
plaints, flatulence, spasmodic colon pain, dysentery, facial
paralysis, hemiparesis and rheumatoid arthritis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Sensitization has occurred very rarely in cases of
repeated, administration. Berries of UHciuni anisatum are
similar, but contain spasmogenic sesquiterpene lactones;
confusions with Star Anise have been observed.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Herb, ground fresh just prior to use,
and other galenic preparations for internal use.

Daily Dosage: 3 gm of drug or 0.3 gm of essential oil. Single
dose: 0.5 to 1 gm prepared as tea.

Storage: Keep Star Anise protected from light.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Kubeczka KH; DAZ 122:2309. 1982.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Zanglein A, Schultze W, Illicitum verum - Sternanis. In: ZPT
10(6); 191. 1989.

Stavesacre

Delphinium staphisagria

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe, dried
seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are deep blue. The sections of
the involucres are 13 to 20 mm long. The limb of the lateral
honey-leaves gradually narrows to a claw. The follicles are 8
to 11 mm wide and swollen. The seeds are grayish-black,

wrinkled and pitted. They are triangular or square and
convex at the back. The seeds are about 2 cm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is annual and has a 30 to
' 100 cm high stem that is stout and sparsely pubescent. The
leaves are are palmatiform digitate with 5 to 7 lobes,
pubescent on both surfaces with a mixture of very short and
longer hairs. The segments are entire-margined or are made
up of ovate-lanceolate or oblong, sharp-edged lobes.

Characteristics: The seeds are poisonous. They taste bitter
and tingling, and are odorless.

Habitat: The plant is found in Asia Minor and Europe, and is
cultivated in Italy and France.

Production: Stavesacre seeds are the seeds of Delphinium

staphisagria.
Other Names: Lousewort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Diterpene alkaloids: main alkaloid delphinine, including
among others the bi-diterpene alkaloids — staphisine,
staphisagroine

EFFECTS

Stavesacre is arrythrnogenic and has an effect similar to
aconitine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The herb is used in washes and ointments to
kill lice.

Homeopathic Uses: Stavesacre is used for the treatment of

anxiety, urinary tract diseases, acute or acutely recurring
hordeolum or chalazion, seborrheal skin with a tendency to

----- PAGE 976 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

inflammation, odorous perspiration, nervous exhaustion,
neurasthenia with poor memory and hypochondria, sexual
neurasthenia, gonorrhea, melancholia, hysteria, leukorrhea,
headaches, general debility and delicate health, weak blad-
der, scrofulous and swollen glands, hair loss, rheumatism,
nervous diarrhea, habitual obstipation, gastric ulcer, gastritis,
trigeminal neuralgia and conditions of the eyelids.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

External administration of extracts of the drug leads to
reddening, inflammation and eczema. Internal administration
could lead to inflammation of the throat, salivation, nausea,
ructus, skin itching, and urinary and stool urgency.

OVERDOSAGE
The intake of 2 teaspoonfuls of seeds leads to weakened
pulse, stomach pain, labored breathing and collapse.

Treatment of poisoning consists of stomach and intestinal
emptying (gastric lavage, sodium sulphate), and the adminis-
tration of activated charcoal. Further treatment should
proceed symptomatically (i.e. diazepam for spasms, sodium
bicarbonate for acidoses, intubation and oxygen respiration
may also be required).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: An extract from the seeds is used in

homeopathic dilutions.

Storage: The drug should be stored cautiously, as it is
poisonous.

LITERATURE

Kem W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Micovic IV, J Serb Chem Soc 51:355. 1986.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Stellaria media
See Chickweed

STEVIA/727

Stevia

Stevia rebaudiana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The composite flowers are surrounded by
an involucre. The capitula are in loose, irregular, sympodial
cymes. There are 5 overlapping epicalyx sepals, with 5
tubular florets per composite flower. The flowers have light
purple rhacis, white tips and 5 stamens. The fruit is a 5-
ribbed, spindle-shaped achene with 15 to I7,awns.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Stevia rebaudiana is a semi-shrub
that grows up to 30 cm high. The leaves are sessile, 3 to 4
cm long with an elongate-lanceolate or spatulate, blunt-
tipped lamina. The leaves are serrate from the middle to the
tip and entire below. The upper surface of the leaf is slightly
glandular pubescent. The stem is weakly downy-pubescent at
the bottom and woody. The tough rhizome has slightly
branching roots.

* Characteristics: All plant parts taste intensively sweet.
Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Paraguay.

Production: Stevia leaves are the dried leaves of Stevia
rebaudiana.

Other Names: Sweet Herb, Sweetleaf

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: diterpene glycosides, particularly stevioside (5
to 10%), rebaudoside A (2 to 4%), including as well
rebaudoside C and dulcoside A

Volatile oil (0J%): chief components nerolidol and caryo-
phyllene oxide

Flavonoids: including apigenin-4'-Oglucoside, luteolin-7-
O-glucoside

EFFECTS

The use of the drug as a sweetener is based upon the
glycosidal diterpenes present (stevioside's sweetening power
is 300 times that of saccharose). In animal experiments,
stevioside significantly elevated the glucose clearance while
at the same time increasing both salt excretion and urine
flow (measured in percentage of glomerular filtration rate),
which led to a significant lowering of blood pressure.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses include hypertension,
diabetes and as a contraceptive. '«

----- PAGE 977 -----
728 /STEVIA

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
use of the drug as a sweetener.

DOSAGE
Mode _ of Administration:
oral administration.

Stevia is available as cut drug for

LITERATURE

Constantin J, Ishii-Iwamoto EL, Ferraresi-Filho O, Kelmer-
Bracht AM, Bracht A, Sensitivity of ketogenesis and citric acid
cycle to stevioside inhibition of palmitate transport across the
cell membrane. Braz J Med Biol Res, 11:767-71, 1991.

Das S, Das AK, Murphy RA, Punwani IC, Nasution MP,
Kinghorn AD, Evaluation of the cariogenic potential of the
intense natural sweeteners stevioside and rebaudioside A. Caries
Res, 26:363-6, 1992.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Ishii EL, Bracht A, Stevioside, the sweet glycoside of Stevia
rebaudiana, inhibits the action of atractyloside in the isolated
perfused rat liver. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol, 34:79-
91. 1986 Jul.

Ishii-Iwamoto EL, Bracht A, Stevioside is not metabolized in
the isolated perfused rat liver. Res Commun Mol Pathol
Pharmacol, 82:167-75, 1995 Feb.

Ishikawa H, Kitahata S, Ohtani K, Tanaka O,
Transfructosylation of rebaudioside A (a sweet glycoside of
Stevia leaves) with Microbacterium beta-fructofuranosidase.
Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 6:2043-5, 1991 Aug.

Jakinovich W Jr, Moon C, Choi YH, Kinghorn AD, Evaluation
of plant extracts for sweetness using the Mongolian gerbil. J
Nat Prod, 82:190-5, 1990 Jan-Feb.

Kawano T, Simoes LC, Effect of Stevia rebaudiana in
Biomphalaria glabrata. Rev Bras Biol, 34:555-62, 1986 Aug.

Kelmer Bracht A, Alvarez M, Bracht A, Effect of Stevia
rebaudiana on glucose tolerance in normal adult humans. Braz J
Med Biol Res, 34:771-4, 1986.

Kelmer Bracht A, Alvarez M, Bracht A, Effects of Stevia
rebaudiana natural products on rat liver mitochondria. Biochem
Pharmacol, 34:873-82, 1985 Mar 15.

Kelmer Bracht A, Alvarez M, Bracht A, Sterols in Stevia
rebaudiana Bertoni. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper, 34:2237-40, 1984
Dec 30.

Kim KK, Sawa Y, Shibata H, Hydroxylation of ent-kaurenoic
acid to steviol in Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni - purification and
partial characterization of the enzyme. Arch Biochem Biophys,
34:223-30, 1996 Aug 15.

Klongpanichpak S, Temcharoen P, Toskulkao C, Apibal S,
Glinsukon T, Lack of mutagenicity of stevioside and steviol in
Salmonella typhimurium TA 98 and TA -100. J Med Assoc
Thai, 82: S121-8, 1997 Sep.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Matsui M, Matsui K, Kawasaki Y, Oda Y, Noguchi T,
Kitagawa Y, Sawada M, Hayashi M, Nohmi T. Yoshihira K,
Ishidate M Jr, Sofuni T, Evaluation of the genotoxicity of
stevioside and steviol using six in vitro and one in vivo
mutagenicity assays. Mutagenesis, 11:573-9, 1996 Nov.

Melis MS, A crude extract of Stevia rebaudiana increases the
renal plasma flow of normal and hypertensive rats. Braz J Med
Biol Res, 29:669-75, 1996 May.

Melis MS, Chronic administration of aqueous extract of Stevia
rebaudiana in rats: renal effects. J Ethnopharmacol, 47:129-34,

1995 Jul 28.

Melis MS, Renal excretion of stevioside in rats. J Nat Prod,
26:688-90, 1992 May. ro

Melis MS, Stevioside effect on renal function of normal and
ypertensive rats. J Ethnopharmacol, 26:213-7, 1992 Jun.

Melis MS, Sainati AR, Effect of calcium and verapamil on
renal function of rats during treatment with stevioside. J
Ethnopharmacol, 11:257-62, 1991 Jul.

Oliveira-Filho RM, Uehara OA, Minetti CA, Valle LB, Chronic
administration of aqueous extract of Stevia rebaudiana (Bert.)
Bertoni in rats: endocrine effects. Gen Pharmacol, 34:187-91,
1989.

Pezzuto JM, Compadre CM, Swanson SM, Nanayakkara D,
Kinghorn AD, Metabolically activated steviol, the aglycone of
stevioside, is mutagenic. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 82:2478-
82, 1985 Apr.

ezzuto JM, Nanayakkara NP, Compadre CM, Swanson SM,
Kinghorn AD, Guenthner TM, Sparnins VL, Lam LK,
Characterization of bacterial mutagenicity mediated by 13-
ydroxy-ent-kaurenoic acid (steviol) and several structurally
related derivatives and evaluation of potential to induce
glutathione S-transferase in mice. Mutat Res, 169:93-103, 1986
Mar.

Shibata H, Sawa Y, Oka T, Sonoke S, Kim KK, Yoshioka M,
Steviol and steviol-glycoside: glucosyltransferase activities in
Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni - purification and partial
characterization. Arch Biochem Biophys, 34:390-6, 1995 Aug
20.

Smoliar VI, Karpilovskaia ED, Salii NS, Tsapko EV,
Lavrushenko LF, Gulich MP, Kryshevich LP, Grigorenko SN,
Effect of a new sweetening agent from Stevia rebaudiana on
animals. Planta Med, 32:60°3, 1992 Jan-Feb.

Tomita T, Sato N, Arai T, Shiraishi H, Sato M, Takeuchi M,
Kamio Y, Bactericidal activity of a fermented hot-water extract
from Stevia rebaudiana Bertoni towards enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia cob 0157:H7 and other food-borne pathogenic
acteria. Microbiol Immunol, 34:1005-9, 1997.

Yodyingyuad V, Bunyawong S, Analysis of Stevia glycosides
y capillary electrophoresis. Electrophoresis, 6:367-71, 1996
Feb.

Yodyingyuad V, Bunyawong S, Effect of stevioside on growth
and reproduction. Hum Reprod, 6:158-65, 1991 Jan.

----- PAGE 978 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Yodyingyuad V, Bunyawong S, Potential sweetening agents of
plant origin. III. Organoleptic evaluation of Stevia leaf
herbarium samples for sweetness. J Nat Prod, 6:590-99, 1982
Sep-Oct.

Stevia rebaudiana

See Stevia

Stillingia
Stillingia sylvatica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh or dried

root.

Flower and Fruit: The yellow flowers are in terminal spikes
and are apetalous. The fruit is a 3-seeded capsule.

Leaves,- Stem and Root: The plant is a-perermial herb up to
100 cm tall. It has an angular, smooth stem, which contains a
milky latex. The leaves are sessile, coriaceous and narrow at
the base. They are variable in form and color and are 3 to 11
cm long. The root is usually reddish-white on the outside and
has numerous resin glands.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and acrid, the smell is
characteristic and unpleasant.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the southern U.S.
Production: Stillingia root is the root of Stillingia sylvatica.

Other Names: Cockup Hat, Marcory, Silver Leaf, Queen's
Delight, Yaw Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: diterpene esters of the tiglic or daphnan type,
including diesters of 12-deoxyphorbol, of 12-deoxy-5(3-
hydroxyphofbol, of 5p, 12p-dihydroxyresiniferonol-
6a,7oc-oxide, referred to as stillingia factors SI to S9 (S6 =
gniditilactin, yuanhuacin, S7 = prostratin)

Volatile oil
Tannins (10 to 12%)

EFFECTS
The juice of the green root causes inflammation of the skin
and swelling. The drug has laxative, tonic and diuretic
properties.

STINGING NETTLE/729

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used as a 'blood purifier’, for
digestive disorders, and for the treatment of liver, billiary
and skin diseases.

Homeopathic Uses: Stillingia sylvatica is used for secondary
and tertiary syphilis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: The drug is strongly irritating to skin and mucous
membranes. Taken internally, it triggers vomiting (it is used
as an emetic) and diarrhea (it is used as a laxative). Skin
contact leads to inflammation and swelling. The diterpenes
cause inflammation and are likely to be carcinogenic and
virus-activating.

Nursing Mothers: Stillingia should not be administered to
nursing mothers.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: As a liquid extract or tincture.

Storage: The drug should not be kept longer than 2 years.

LITERATURE
Adolf A, Hecker E, (1980) Tetrahedron Letters 21:2887.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. British Herbal Medicine
Association, UK 1983.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel. Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Autl.. Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Zahn P et al., Investigations of homeopathic drugs derived fiom
Hippomane mancinella and Stillingia sylvatica: A potential
iatrogenic risk of cancer? In: PM 59(7)84. 1993.

Stillingia sylvatica

See Stillingia

Stinging Nettle
Urtica dioica

TRADE NAMES
Alcohol Free Nettles Leaf, Basics Stinging Nettle, Certified
Organic Netties Leaf, Nettle Leaf, Nettle Herb, Nettle Power

----- PAGE 979 -----
730/STINGING NETTLE

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried

flowering plant and the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are greenish-white in axillary,
clustered, hanging panicles. The perigone has 4 tepals. There
are 4 stamens and | ovary with a brush-like stigma. The
flowers are dioecious. The male flowers have only stamens
and the female flowers only a style or a seed-producing
organ. The male flower consists of a perianth of 4 segments,
which enclose an even number of stamens. The stamens
curve inward in the bud stage and spring back at the end of
flowering for the anthers to fling out the pollen. The fruit is a
small 1-seeded nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 60 to 150 cm
high and has a winter hard rhizome. The leaves are opposite,
oblong-cordate and roughly serrate. The whole plant is
covered in stinging hairs.

Habitat: The plant is common in most temperate regions of
the world.

Production: Stinging Nettle herb consists of the fresh or
dried above-ground parts of Urtica dioica, Urtica urens and/
or hybrids of these species, collected during flowering
season. Stinging nettle leaf consists of fresh or dried leaves
of Urtica dioica, Urtica urens and/or hybrids of these species,
gathered during flowering season.

Not to be Confused With: The leaves of Laminum album.
Other Names: Nettle

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT

In the stings of the fresh plant: histamine, serotonin,
acetylcholine, formic acid, leukotriens (LTB4, LTC4, LTD4)

Flavonoids (0.7-1.8%): including rutin, isoquercitrin

(0.02%), astragalin, kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside
Silicic acid (1-4%): partially water-soluble

Volatile oil: chief components are ketones, including, among
others, 2-methylhept-2-en-6-on

Potassium-ions (0.6% in the fresh foliage)
Nitrates (1.5 to 3%)

EFFECTS: STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT

The fresh leaves contain acetylcholine, serotin and hista-
mine. The pressed juice (main active principles scopoletine,
beta-sitosterol and caffeoyl malic acid) is diuretic in
combination with sufficient fluid intake. In animal experi-
ments, a local anaesthetic and analgesic effect has been
observed. Caffeoyl acid in vitro, inhibits 5-lipoxygenase-

'

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

dependent leukotriene synthesis. In various studies, an
antirheumatic and anti-arthritic effect was demonstrated.

Anti-inflammatory Effect - In one study, an extract from
Stinging Nettle leaves (IDS 23) was tested for the ability to
inhibit the biosynthesis of arachidonic acid metabolites in
vitro. IDS 23 showed a strong concentration dependent
inhibition of cyclooxygenase derived reactions. A phenolic
acid isolate from the extract inhibited the synthesis of
leukotriene B4 in a concentration dependent manner. The
authors concluded that the combination of these effects may
account for the antiphlogistic effects of this extract of
Stinging Nettle (Obertreis, 1996.)

COMPOUNDS: STINGING NETTLE ROOT

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol (0.03 to 0.06%),
beta-sitosterol-3-O-beta-glucoside (0.03 to 0.5%), (6'-Pal-
mitoyl)-sitosterol-3-0-beta-D-glucoside (0.003%), 7alpha-
hydroxysitosterol (0.001%), Teta-Hydroxysitosterol
(0.001%), stigmasterol, campesterol, stigmast-4-en-3-one

Lectins (0.1%): UDA (Urtica dioica Agglutinin, isolectine
mixture)

Polysaccharides: glucans, glucogalacturonans, acidic arabi-
nogalactans water-soluble with immunostimulating effect)

Hydroxycoumarins: scopoletin

Lignans: including secoisolariciresinol-9-O-glucoside
(0.004%), neo-olivil (0.003%), neo-olivil-4-O-glucoside
(0.004%)
Ceramides

EFFECTS: STINGING NETTLE ROOT

Effects on Prostate Tissue - The root has been show to cause
an increase in the volume of urine, increase of maximum
urinary flow and reduction of residual urine. One study
found that an aqueous extract of the root was the most
effective in treating benign prostatic hyperplasia. The extract
inhibited the binding of sex hormone-binding globulin
(SHBG) to its receptor on human prostatic membranes in a
dose related manner. Inhibition was noted at 0.6 mg/ml and
complete inhibition was achieved at 10 mg/ml (Hryb et al,
1995.) In a second study, most ligans that were tested were
found to have an affinity for SHBG. The affinity of (-)-3,4-
divanillyltetrahydrofuran was found to be extremely high
(Schottner, 1997.)

Viral Inhibition - The (N-acetylglucosamine) n-specific
lectin fron Stinging Nettle was found to be inhibitory to
HIV-1, HIV-2, CMV, RSV and influenza A virus in-vitro at
an EC-50 (50% inhibitory concentration) ranging from 0.3 to
0.9 micrograms/ml (Balzarini, 1992.)

Effects on Systemic Lupus Erythematosus-like Pathology -
Urtica dioica agglutinin (UDA) treated MRL Ipr/Ipr mice

----- PAGE 980 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

were shown to be protected from developing clinical signs of
lupus and nephritis (Musette, 1996.)

CLINICAL TRIALS

One randomized, reference-controlled, multicenter double
blind clinical trial compared therapeutic efficacy of a Sabal
and Urtica extract (PRO 160/120) with finasteride in benign
prostatic hyperplasia (Aiken stages I to I). The study
involved 543 patients that were treated for 48 weeks with
either the PRO 160/120 extract or finasteride in a double
blind design. The primary marker was the change of
maximum urinary flow after 24 weeks of therapy. Secondary
markers included average urinary flow, miction volume and
miction time. Urinary symptoms were recorded by the
Intemational-Prostate-Symptom-Score (I-PSS). There was
also a quality of life questionnaire that was developed by the
American Urological Associacion Ameasurement Commit-
tee (1991). Results were similar for both groups. There was
an increase in urinary flow rate (1.9 ml with PRO 160/120;
2.4 ml with finasteride). Urinary flow increase and miction
time decreases were comparable for both groups. The I-PSS
decreased from 11.3 at the start to 8.2 at 24 weeks and 6.5 by
week 48 for the PRO 16/120 group, and went from 11.8 to
8.0 and 6.2 respectively for the finasteride group. The life
quality scores went from 7.5 at the start of treatment, to 4.2
in the PRO 160/120 group, and from 7.7 to 4.1 in the
finasteride group. The most notable differences between the
groups were in the lower adverse events categories where the
PRO 160/120 group reported less events, in particular imthe
areas of diminished ejaculation volume, erectile dysfunction
and headache (Sokeland & Albrecht, 1997.)

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT
* Infections of the urinary tract

* Kidney and bladder stones

* Rheumatism

The drug is used internally and externally as supportive
therapy for rheumatic ailments. It is used internally as
flushing-out therapy for inflammatory diseases of the lower
urinary tract. Also used as irrigation therapy for prevention
and treatment of kidney stones.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the plant is used internally
as a hematogenic remedy, diuretic for arthritis, rheumatism
of the joints and muscles, and as a component of diabetic
teas (this indication is not recommended). Externally, the
drug is used as a hair and scalp remedy against oily hair and
dandruff.

STINGING NETTLE ROOT
* Prostate complaints, irritable bladder

STINGING NETTLE / 731

Preparations of the root are used for micturition disorders in
prostate adenoma stages I to II. This drug only relieves die
symptoms of an enlarged prostate without eliminating the
enlargement itself.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the root is used for edema,
rheumatism, gout and prostatitis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT

The drug is contraindicated when there is fluid retention
resulting from reduced cardiac or renal function.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT ~~

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. Possible allergic reactions (skin afflic-
tions, edema) have been observed in rare cases following
intake of the drug. Contact urticaria frequently occurs when
skin is exposed to the plant. The urticaria is accompanied by
a stinging sensation that may last as long as 12 hours post
exposure (Oliver, 1991.)

Drug Interactions: Studies have demonstrated that leaf
extracts of Stinging Nettle when used along with diclofenac,
enhance the anti-inflammatory effect of diclofenac.

STINGING NETTLE ROOT

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Occasion-
al, mild gastrointestinal complaints may occur as side effects
of drug intake.

DOSAGE
STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT

Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for infusions and
other galenic preparations for internal use; as stinging nettle
spirit for external application. Drug extracts are contained in
diuretic tea mixtures and in blood-purifying teas.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 1.5 g finely cut
herb in cold water, briefly bring to a boil and steep for 10
minutes, then strain.

Daily Dose: The average daily dose is 8 to 12 g of drug.
Observe ample intake of liquid (minimum 2 liters/day). One
cup several times daily as a diuretic (1 teaspoonfiil = 0.8 g
drug). For external application, a tincture/spiritus (1:10) may
be administered.

STINGING NETTLE ROOT
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drag from the root for
infusions as well as other galenic preparations for oral use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion use 1.5 g coarse
powdered drug in cold water, heat to boiling point for 1

----- PAGE 981 -----
732/STINGING NETTLE

minute, then steep, covered, for 10 minutes, and strain.
(1 teaspoonful = 13 g drug)

Daily Dose: 4 to 6 g drug.
Tea — 15 g coarse powderd drug to water
Dry Extract — 120 mg twice daily

LITERATURE
STINGING NETTLE FLOWERING PLANT
Anonym (1982) Vet Hum Toxicol 24:247.

Chaurasia N, Wichtl M, PM 53:432. 1987.
Hughes RE et al., (1980) J Sci Food Agric 31:1279.

Obertreis B. Giller K et al., Anti-inflammatory effect of Urtica
dioica folia extract in comparison to caffeic malic acid. In:
Arzneimittelforschung 46(1): 52-6, Jan, 1996.

Oliver F, Amon EU, Breathnach A et al., Contact urticaria due
to the common stinging nettle (Urtica dioica)—histological,
ultrastructural and pharmacological studies. Clin Exp Dermatol
16:1-7. 1991.

Schiebel-Schlosser G. Die Brennessel. In: PTA 8(1):53. 1994.

Schilcher H. Urtica-Arten - Die Brennessel. In: ZPT 9(5): 160.
1988.

Schomakers J, Bollbach FD Hagels H, Brennesselkraut -
Phytochemische und anatomische Unterscheidung der Herba-
Drogen von Urtica dioica und U. urens. In: DAZ 135(7):578-
584. 1995.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

STINGING NETTLE ROOT
Anonym (1982) Vet Hum Toxicol 24:247.

Anonym, Extrakt aus Brennesselwurzel wirksam bei benigner
Prostatahyperplasie. In: ZPT 12(5):8. 1991.

Anonym, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Anonym, Welche Bedeutung haben pflanzliche Prostatamittel.
In: DAZ 133(9):720. 1993.

Balzarini J, Neyts J, Schols D et al., The mannose-specific
plant lectins from Cymbidium hybrid and Epipactishelleborine
and the (N-acetylglucosamine)(n)-specific plant lectin from
Urtica dioica are potent and selective inhibitors of human
immunodeficiency virus and cytomegalovirus replication in
vitro. In: Antivir Res 18(12): 191-207, 1992.

Dathe G, Schmid H, (1987) Phytotherapie der benignen
Prostatahyperplasie (BPH). Doppelblindstudie mit Extraktum
Radicis Uricae (ERU). Urologe [B]27:223-226.

Fessler B, Brennesselwurzel bei Prostataadenom. In: Med Mo
Pharm 16(9):287. 1993.

Ganger D, Spiteller G, Aromatase inhibitors from Urtica dioica.
In: PM 61(2): 138-140. 1995.

Goetz P, Die Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie mit
Brennesselwurzeln. In: ZPT 10(6): 175. 1990.

Hirano T et al., Effect of stinging nettle root extract and their
steroidal components on the Na+,K+-ATPase of the benign
rostic hyperplasia. In: PM 60:30. 1994.

Hryb DJ, Khan MS, Romas NA, Rosner W, (1995) The Effect
of Extracts of the Roots of the Stinging Nettle (Urtica dioica)
on the Interaction of SHBG with Ist Receptor on Human
rostatic Membranes. Planta Med 61:31-32.

Huesing JE, Murdock LL, Shade RE, Rice and stinging nettle
lectins - insecticidal activity similar to wheat germ agglutinin.
In: PH 30:3565. 1991.

Hughes RE et al., (1980) J Sci Food Agric 31:1279.

Koch E, (1995) Pharmakologie und Wirkmechanismen von
Extrakten aus Sabalfriichten (Sabal fructus): Brennesselwurzeln
(Urticae radix) und Kurbissamen (Cucurbitae peponis semen)
ei der Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. In: Loew
D, Rietbrock N (Hrsg.) Phytopharmaka in Forschung und
linischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, S 57-79.

Lauel H, Extrakt aus Radix Urticae normalisiert
Hormonhaushalt. In: DAZ 130(51/52):2789. 1990.

Lichius JJ et al., Inhibition of experimentally induced mouse
prostatic hyperplasia by methanolic extracts of Urtica dioica
roots. In: PM 61(Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):89. 1995.

Lichius JJ, Muth C, A new biological evaluation of Urtica
dioica root-extracts. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann
Congress of GA, 20. 1996.

Miersch WDE, Benigne Prostatahyperplasie. In: DAZ
33(29):2653. 1993.

----- PAGE 982 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Musette P, Galelli A, Chabre H et al., Urtica dioica agglutinin,
a V beta 8.3-specific superantigen, prevents the development of
the systemic lupus erythematosus-like pathology of MRL Ipr/Ipr
mice. In: Eur J Immunol 26:1707-1711, 1996.

Nahrstedt A (1993) Pflanzliche Urologica - eine kritische
Ubersicht. Pharm Z 138: 1439-1450.

Noske HD (1994) Die Effektivitat pflanzlicher Prostatamittel am
Beispiel von Brennesselwurzelextrakt. ArzteZ Naturheilverfahren
35 (1): 18-27.

Sabo A et al., Radix Urticae (Urtica dioica): Influence on
erythrocyte deformability and enzymes. In: PM 62, Abstracts of
the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 60. 1996.

Schiebel-Schlosser G, Die Brennessel. In: PTA 8(1):53. 1994.

Schilcher H (1987a) Pflanzliche Diuretika. Urologe [B]27:215-
222: (1987b) Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Phytotherapie am
Beispiel pflanzlicher Urologika. Urologe [B]27:316-319.

Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
prostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.

eS

Schilcher H, Urtica-Arten - Die Brennessel. In: ZPT 9(5): 160.
1988.
Schmidt K (1983) Die Wirkung eines Radix Urticae-Extrakts
und einzelner Nebenextrakte auf das SHBG des Blutplasmas bei
der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. Fortschr Med 101:713-716.

Schmidt K (1983) Die Wirkung eines Radix Urticae-Extrakts
und einzelner Nebenextrakte auf das SHGB des Blutplasmas bei
der benignen Prostatahyperplasie. Fortschr Med 101:713-716.

Schoettner M, Gansser D & Spiteller G: Lignans from the ropts
of Urtica dioica and meir metabolites bind to human sex
hormone binding globlin (SHBG). In: Planta Med 63:529-532,
1997.

Sokeland J, Albrecht J, Combination of Sabal and Urtica extract
vs. finasteride in benign prostatic hyperplasia (Aiken stages I to
II). Comparison of therapeutic effectiveness in a one year
double-blind study. In: Urologe A 36(4):327-33, July, 1997.

Sonnenschein R (1987) Untersuchung der Wirksamkeit eines
prostatotropen Phytotherapeutikums (Urtica plus) bei benigner
Prostatahyperplasie und Prostatitis - eine prospektive
multizentrische Studie. Urologe [B]27:232-237.

Wagner H et al., Studies on the binding of Urtica dioica
agglutinin (UDA) and other lectins in an in vitro epidermal
growtii factor receptor test. In: Phytomedicine 1:287-290. 1994.

Wagner H, Wilier F, Samtleben R, Boos G (1994) Search for
the antiprostatic principle of stinging nettle (Urtica dioica) roots.
Phytomedicine 1:213-224.
Wilier F, Wagner H, Schecklies E, Urtica-Wurzelextrakte. In:
DAZ 131(24):1217. 1991.
Further information in:
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

STONE ROOT/733

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Stone Root

Collinsonia_ canadensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh or dried roots and rhizomes.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are dirty yellow, labiate, with
red venation on the inside in richly blossomed panicles. The
upper lip has an obtuse tip. The side tips of the lower lip are
small and rounded; the middle tips are larger and fringed.
The calyx is acuminate and has 2 stamens. The fruit is a
small globose nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that grows
90 to 120 cm high. The rhizome is grayish-brown, very hard,
fibrous and up to 8 cm long. The shoots are glabrous, often
tinged red, with few side shoots. The bark is very thin. The
leaves are light green above and pale green, glabrous, broad,
cordate or ovate below, becoming narrower and shorter

above.

Characteristics: The smell is strongly aromatic, unpleasant,
and numbing in large amounts. The taste is unpleasantly
bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to North America from
Canada to the Carolinas in the U.S. It is also found in central

Europe.

Production: Stone Root, the rhizome and root of Collinsonia
canadensis, is gathered and dried in autumn.

Other Names: Hardhack, Horseweed, Heal-All, Knob Grass,
Knob Root, Richweed, Richleaf, Knobweed, Hardback

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components are caryophyllene, germa-
crene D, limonene, alpha- and beta-pinenes

Caffeic acid derivatives: including rosmaric acid

EFFECTS
Stone Root has stomachic, tonic
probably due to the presence of the essential oil and rosmaric

and diuretic effects,

acid.

----- PAGE 983 -----
734/STONE ROOT

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Stone Root is used for calculi, kidney
stones, urea (bladder semolina), bladder inflammation,
dropsy and gastrointestinal disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: Preparations of Collinsonia canadensis
are used for hemorrhoids and constipation.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as an
extract, infusion or tincture.

Preparation: Liquid extract (1:1) I ml to 4 ml; tincture (1:5)
2 ml to 8 ml.

Daily Dosage: The drug is generally used as a single dose, 1
to 4 g, internally as an infusion.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times daily; or 1 ml injection solution sc

twice weekly (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Joshi BS. Moore KM, Pelletier SW, Saponins fiom Collinsonia

canadensis. In: JNP 55(10): 1468-1476. 1992.
Lawrence BM et ah, PH 11:2636-2638. 1972. *

Wolters B, Zierpflanzen aus Nordamerika. In: DAZ
137(26):2253-2261. 1997.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Storax

Liquidambar orientalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the balsam from the

trunk and the inner bark. °

Flower and Fruit: The flowers and inflorescences are
unisexual, monoecious and arranged in small, round solitary
capitula. The flowers are yellow. The male flowers' show no
signs of a calyx or corolla. The female flowers have tiny
scaly sepals, and the floret rubes are fused. There are
numerous stamens, and the ovary is semi-inferior. The fruit
is a hard globular schizocarp.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Liquidambar orientalis is a decidu-
ous tree about 12 m tall with many branches and a thick

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

reddish-gray bark. It has alternate, usually 5-lobed leaves.
The leaf blades are usually roughly toothed.

Characteristics: Raw Storax is a thick, viscous, sticky,
aromatic and somewhat bitter-tasting gray-brown mass.
When stored, the drug becomes clearer, an effect caused by a
reduction in the water content.

Habitat: The tree is indigenous from Asia Minor to Syria.

Production: Storax (amber tree balm) is extracted from
Liquidambar orientalis. To extract the balsam, the trunk is
beaten, causing the bark to soak up the exuding resin. The
bark is then boiled and the resulting decoction further
refined.

Not to be Confused With: Fir resin, turpentine, colophony,
olive oil

Other Names: Balsam Styracis, Sweet Gum, Copalm, Gum
Tree, Liquid Amber, Opossum Tree, Red Gum, White Gum

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Aromatic alcohols: phenylpropyl-, cinnamic-, benzyl alcohol

Cinnamic acid (up to 30%): cinnamic acid esters, including
among others cinnamylcinnamate (styracine), cinnamic acid
ethyl esters

Styrene

Triterpenes: oleanolic acid, 3-epioleanolic acid (resin

fraction)
Vanillin (up to 2%)

Volatile oil (depending upon source, I to 20%): with styrol,
benzyl alcohol, cinnamic alcohol

EFFECTS
Storax has anti-inflammatory, diaphoretic and stimulant

effects.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Storax is used for coughs and bronchitis as
an inhalation, externally for wounds and ulcers.

Chinese Medicine: In China, Storax is used in the treatment
of syncope, epilepsy and lactose intolerance in young
children.

Indian Medicine: In India, Storax is used for itching,
suppurating wounds, leprosy, chronic coughs and fever.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Internal
administration of the drug occasionally leads to diarrhea.
Storax can also trigger contact allergies.

----- PAGE 984 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE

External administration over large areas can lead to absorp-
tive poisonings that are characterized by kidney damage
(albuminuria, hemorrhagic nephritis).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Storax is used in combination
preparations for coughs and bronchitis as an inhalation,
externally for wounds and ulcers.

LITERATURE
Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Huneck S. (1968) Tetrahedron 19: 479.

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Strawberry

Fragaria vesca

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are dried leaves
collected during the flowering season, the dried rhizome and
ripe fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The small white flowers are arranged on a
repeatedly bifurcated pedicle. They are usually androgynous.
There are 5 sepals and 5 petals. The sepals are triangular,
pointed or briefly acuminate appressed pubescent. The petals
are oribicular or ovate, glabrous and pure white. There are 20
stamens and numerous ovate, glabrous carpels and a style at
the side. After flowering the receptacle turns into a fleshy
false fruit. The receptacle is 2 cm long, ovate, globular or
clavate, carmine red when ripe. The nutlets are ovate, 0.8 to
15 mm long, brown and matte.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The perennial, herbaceous plant
grows from 20 to 30 cm high. The rhizome is cylindrical,
horizontal or crooked and thickly covered with the residual
died off leaves and stipules. Long runners grow from die
axils of the basal leaves. The stem is erect and is slightly
longer than the basal leaves. The cauline leaves are trifoliate
and roughly serrate from the first quarter upward. The
petioles are very long and, like the stem have patent hairs.
The stipules are lanceolate, long-acuminate, entire-margined,
reddish brown, glabrous above and hairy beneath.

STRAWBERRY / 735

Habitat: Found in almost all of the temperate zones of
Europe and Asia.

Production: Strawberry leaf consists of the dried leaf of
Fragaria species, mainly Fragaria vesca. The leaves are
collected in the wild and air-dried in a shady place.

Not to be Confused With: Other Fragaria species, although
they have the same value.

Other Names: Wild Strawberry, Mountain Strawberry.
Wood Strawberry, Alpine Strawberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

Flavonoids: including rutin, quercetin
Tannins: ellagic acid tannins, oligomeric proanthocyanidins

EFFECTS
Strawberry leaf has astringent and diuretic properties; but no
studies are available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of strawberry leaf are used
externally as compresses for rashes, and internally for catarrh
of the gastrointestinal tract, diarrhea, intestinal sluggishness,
liver disease, jaundice, catarrh of the respiratory tract, gout,
rheumatoid arthritis, nervous tension, kidney ailments in-
volving gravel and stones and as a diuretic. Because of the
tannin content, its efficacy in treating mouth and throat
inflammation and diarrhea is plausible.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Healuh risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug should not be taken in presence of strawberry allergy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Strawberry leaves are only used
occasionally in folk medicine, the berries are used more
commonly.

Preparation: Pour boiling water over 1 gm of comminuted
drug and strain after 5 to 10 minutes.

Decoction — boil 375 gm green leaves with 1.15 Liter water
until only 550 ml remain.

Infusion — add 4 gm drug to 150 ml boiling water.

Extract — boil 20 gm drug with 500 ml water until only half

remains.

Daily Dosage: Tea: As an antidiarrheal agent, several cups
per day.

Decoction — for diarrhea, 1 teaspoon every 3 to 4 hours.

----- PAGE 985 -----
736 /STRAWBERRY
Extract — for diarrhea, a spoonful before bed and on rising.

Infusion — one dose onlv for children with diarrhea. The
decoction is used as a gargle.

LITERATURE
Haddock EA et al.. PH 21:1049. 1982.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Henning W (1981) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 173:180.
Lund K, Dissertation Universitat Freiburg i. Br. 1986.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Strophanthus

Strophanthus species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds,
which have been freed from their appendages and dried.
Most of the species are poisonous.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal or lateral
panicles with few flowers or in richly blossomed, umbellifer-
ous panicles. Their parts are in fives. They are white or
yellowish, radially symmetrical and sometimes fragrant. The
calyx has 5 elliptical-lanceolate to obovate sepals and a short
tube with a campanulately splayed upper part, which has 10
scales on the margin. The anthers are acute with a partly
tailed middle section. The ovary is 2-valved, semi-inferior
and has numerous ovules. The fruit has 1 to 2 follicles,
which are oblong, 8 to 58 cm long, splayed or horizontal on
one level. The greenish-brown seeds are 8 to 25 mm long,
fusiform and often flattened. The seeds have an awn-like
appendage and a long tuft of hair at the base, which
eventually drops off.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plants are climbing lianes,
occasionally erect shrubs, subshrubs or trees. They contain
milky latex. The leaves are opposite, ovate to elliptical,
short-petioled, simple, entire-margined and usually cor-
iaceous.

Habitat: Strophanthus is indigenous to tropical Africa.

Production: Strophanthus seeds are the seeds of Strophan-
thus gratus. Kombe-Strophanthus seeds are the seeds of
Strophanthus kombe. The plant is harvested mostly by

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

African tribes in the wilderness or in protected areas in the
vicinity of African settlements.

Not to be Confused With: Strophanthi semen should not be
confused with African Strophantus species.

Other Names: Kombe

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: STROPHANTHUS GRATUS SEEDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides, 3-8%): chief
glycoside strophanthin-G (ouabain, over 80%), further in-
cluding acolongifloroside K, strogoside, among others

Saponins (0.2%)
Fatty oil (35%)

EFFECTS: STROPHANTHUS GRATUS SEEDS
The active agent, Strophanthin-G, is a cardioactive glycoside
that has actions similar to digitalis, but is milder. No clinical
test results are available. The drug is poorly absorbed by the
gastrointestinal tract.

COMPOUNDS: STROPHANTHUS KOMBE SEEDS
Cardioactive steroid glycosides: (cardenolides, 4.0-4.5%, the
mixture known as Strophanthin-K) chief glycoside K-stro-
phanthoside (60-80%), erysimoside (15-25%), strophoside,
(10-15%)

Saponins (0.2%)
Fatty oil (35%)

EFFECTS: STROPHANTHUS KOMBE SEEDS
The effects are similar to Strophanthus gratus, but milder.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
STROPHANTHUS GRATUS SEEDS

Unproven Uses: Strophanthus is used for arteriosclerosis,
cardiac insufficiency, gastrocardial symptoms, hypertension
and neurodystonia.

Homeopathic Uses: Strophanthus gratus is used for cardiac
insufficiency and anxiety.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Queasiness, vomiting, headache, stupor, disturbance of color
vision and cardiac arrhythmias could occur as side effects, in
particular through overdosages connected with parenteral
administration of strophanthin-G or glycoside mixtures.

Drug Interactions: Simultaneous administration of quini-
dine, calcium salts, saluretics, laxatives and glucocorticoids
enhance both effects and side effects.

----- PAGE 986 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE

Queasiness, vomiting, headache, stupor, disturbance of color
vision and cardiac arrhythmias are the most likely conse-
quence of overdosage. Overdosage is more likely to occur
with parenteral administration of strophanthin-G or glyco-

side mixtures.

For a review of symptoms of an acute poisoning and therapy,
see Digitalis folium. The danger of poisoning after oral
administration is relatively low, due to the poor absorption of
the glycosides.

DOSAGE

STROPHANTHUS GRATUS SEEDS

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as injection
solutions and capsules and in combination preparations.

Preparation: A tincture is prepared by using 1 part coarsely
ground powder (previously specially treated) stabilized for
content with 10 parts 70% ethanol (V/V) (DAB6)

Daily Dosage: Tincture daily dose is 1.5 g. The single dose
is 0.5 g.

Homeopathic Dosage: From D4: 5 drops, | tablet or 10
globules (from D2): Tincture: single dose: 0.5 g and daily
dose: 15 g.

STROPHANTHUS KOMBE SEEDS
Mode of Administration: The drug is available in mono-
preparations, and is rarely used in combinations.

Homeopathic Dosage: From D4: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules (from D2) every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3
times daily (chronic); parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3
times daily; chronic: once a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

STROPHANTHUS GRATUS SEEDS

Brisse B, Anwendung pflanzlicher Wirkstoffe bei kardialen
Erkrankungen. In: ZPT 10(4): 107. 1989.

Geiger UP et al., Helv Cheim Acta 50:179. 1967.
Jager HH et al., Helv Chim Acta 48:202. 1965.
Tittel G et al., PM 45:207. 1982.

Tittel G et al., Pharm Ind 48:822. 1986.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

STRYCHNOS IGNATII / 737
Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic. Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart. Jena. New
York 1995.

STROPHANTHUS KOMBE SEEDS -3L
Kaiser F et al., Liebigs Ann Chem 643:192. 1961.
Kaiser F et al., Naturwissenschaften 46:670. 1959.
Kartnig T et al., J Chromatogr 52:313. 1970.
Makarevich IF, Khim Prir Soedin 180. 1972.
Puchkova EI et al.. Rastit Resu 11:268. 1975.

Further information in:
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (.Hrsg.), Hagers

-Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6

(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie.
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Strophanthus hispidus

See Kombe Seed

Strophanthus species
See Strophanthus

Strychnos ignatii

See Ignatius Beans

----- PAGE 987 -----
738/STRYCHNOS NUX VOMICA

Strychnos nux vomica

See Nux Vomica

Styrax benzoin

See Benzoin

Styrax paralleloneurum

See Sumatra Benzoin

Styrax tonkinensis

See Siam Benzoin

Sumatra Benzoin
Styrax

paralleloneurum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the
balsamic resin obtained from the damaged trunk.

Flower and Fruit: Styrax paralleloneurum is a tree thai
grows up to 35 m high. The flowers are small, the corolla is
violet, and the calyx is 3 to 4.5 mm high. The fruit is 5 to 9
mm in diameter.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are ovate or lanceolate
and 6 to 16 cm long.

Habitat: Sumatra

Production: Sumatra Benzoin (Gum Benzoin) is the balsam-
ic resin from the damaged trunk of Styrax benzoin and
Styrax paralleloneurum. The optimal age of a tree to be
harvested is 7 years. The tree is cut which causes it to exude
resin to heal the cuts. The resin is then collected in a vessel
and left to melt to a homogenous mass in the sun.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Ester mixture (70 to 80%): composed of coniferyl benzoate
and cinnamyl benzoate, as well as cinnamyl cinnamoate
(styracine), propyl cinnamoate

Phenylacrylic acids: cinnamic acid (10 to 20%)

Vanillin (0.4 to 0.6%)

Triterpenes: including sumaresinolic acid

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
Sumatra Benzoin has a mild expectorant effect possibly due
to its vanilla content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of the resin have been used for
respiratory catarrh.

Chinese Medicine: Sumatra Benzoin preparations are used
for stroke, syncopes, postpartum syncope due to heavy loss
of blood, chest and stomach pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internal use.

Whole herb preparations for

Storage: Should be tightly sealed and stored below 25° C.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

James WD, White SW, Yanklowitz B, Allergic contact

dermatitis to compound tincture of benzoin. J Am Acad
Dermatol, 11:847-50, 1984 Nov.

Sumbul

Ferula sumbul

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome wifii the

roots.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 2.5 m tall shrub. It has
a solid, cylindrical, thin stem, which produces about 12
branches. The fern-like leaflets are blue-gray. The basal
leaves are about 50 cm long and triangular while the cauline
leaves reduce gradually in size until they are little more than
sheath leaves. The roots are 2.5 to 7.5 cm thick. They are
covered on the outside witii a blackish-brown, paper-like,
horizontally folded cork, which is sometimes fibrous. The
fracture is spongy and roughly fibrous with white spots and
resin drops.

Characteristics: The odor is strong and musk-like; the taste
is bitter and aromatic.

Habitat: The plant is found in some parts of Russia,
Turkestan, and northern India.

----- PAGE 988 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Production: Sumbul or Musk root is the root of Ferula
moschata (Reinsch, Kozo) or Ferula sumbul.

Other Names: Ferula, Musk Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Volatile oil (0.3-0.5%)

Resins (17%)
Bitter substances
Hydroxycoumarins: including among others, umbelliferone

Short-chained acids: butyric acid, angelic acid, methylcro-
tonic acid, and valeric acid

EFFECTS
The active agents include essential oil, resin, angelic acid,
umbelliferon.

The effects are unclear; and sedative effect has not been
proven

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Indian Medicine: Sumbul root is used for states of debility,
asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia, dysmenorrhea, diarrhea,
hypertension and excessive excitability

Homeopathic Uses: Ferula sumbul is used to treat nervous
cardiac symptoms.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Sumbul is used as liquid extract or

tincture.
LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Summer Savory
Satureja_hortensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh or dried
plant harvested during the flowering stage.

Flower and Fruit: The lilac or whitish labiate flowers are in
axillary, 5-blossomed, false whorls. The calyx is tubular-

SUMMER SAVORY / 739

campanulate, regular, and has 5 tips. The corolla does not
have a ring of hair. The upper lip is straight and margined.
The lower lip has 3 divisions and is red-spotted at the mouth
of the tube.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb grows 30 to 45 cm in
height with erect, heavily branched, and shortly pubescent
stems. The leaves are crossed opposite, up to 3 cm long,
short-petioled, lanceolate to linear-lanceolate and entire-
margined. They are rather thick with a ciliate margin and are
glandular punctate on both surfaces.

Characteristics: Summer Savory has a spicy scent and a

taste that is spicy and peppery. mt

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern Europe and
northern Africa, and is extensively cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Summer Savory is the aerial pan of Satureja
hortensis.

Other Names: Bean Herb, Savory

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

. COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.2-3.0%): chief components carvacrol (30%),
p-cymene (20-30%), alpha-thujene, alpha-pinene, beta-myr-
cene, alpha- and beta-terpinene, beta-caryophyllene, thymol

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid (0.2 to 1.3%),
chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS
The tannin content of the drug provides astringent qualities.
Summer Savory also has a mild antiseptic effect due to the
presence of cymol and carvacrol in the essential oil. An
aqueous extract of the herb has antiviral properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Savory is used for acute gastrointestinal
enteritis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as an
infusion that is prepared from ground plant.

Daily Dosage: Three teaspoonfiils of the drug can be taken
daily in the form of a hot tea. To prepare the tea, do not boil
but leave the drug to steep in scalding hot water.

LITERATURE
Herisset A et al., (1974) Plant Med Phytother 8(4):306, 287.

----- PAGE 989 -----
740/SUMMER SAVORY

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY: Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G: Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Opdyke DLJ (1976) Food Cosmet Toxicol: 14.

Zani F et al., Studies on the genotoxic properties of essential
oils with Bacillus subtilis rec-assay and Salmonella/microsome
reversion assay. Planta Med, 57:237-41, 1991 Jun

Sundew

Drosera ramentacea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole herb.

Flower and Fruit: Size: The plant is from 7 to 20 cm tall.
The flowers are white and arranged in racemes turned to one
side. There are 5 sepals, 5 petals and 1 ovary with 3 to 5
styles. The fruit is capsular.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are basal rosette, long-
petioled and thickly covered in red glandular hairs. The
thickened ends have a drop of viscid juice to trap insects.

Characteristics: The herb has a sour, bitter, hot taste.

Habitat: Europe, India, China, North and South America, on
wet and peat ground.

Production: Sundew consists of the dried, above- and below-
ground parts of Drosera ramentacea.

Not to be Confused With: Asian varieties.
Other Names: Dew Plant, Lustwort, Youthwort, Red Rot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Naphthoquinone derivatives:

If the source is Drosera rotundifolia: plumbagin,
ramentaceone

If the source is Drosera ramentacea: ramentone, ramenta-
ceone, biramentaceone, plumbagin

If the source is Drosera madagascariensis: 7-methyl juglone,
plumbagin

If the source is Drosera peltata: plumbagin, droserone, 8-

hydroxydroserone

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The drug has secretolytic, broncho-spasmolytic, and antitus-
sive effects.

The pharmacological mode of action can be traced to 1, 4
naphtoquinone and plumbagin. Plumbagin showed an anti-
phlogistic effect in vitro through the inhibition of prostaglan-
din synthesis and an antimicrobial and cytostatic effect in
animal experiments.

A possible immune-stimulant effect is the subject of recent
studies, the results of which are not yet available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved By Commission E:

wow

* Cough/Bronchitis

Sundew is used for respiratory problems, particularly for
coughing fits and dry coughs.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Sundew is used for

asthma and warts.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid and solid preparations for
external and internal application. The plant is a protected
species and is in danger of extinction.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
1 to 2 gm drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose is 3 gm drug. The
dosage of the infusion when used as a broncholytic is 1 cup,
3 to 4 times daily.

LITERATURE
Ayuga C et al., (1985) An R Acad Farm 51(2):321.

Budzianowski J et al., Ellagic acid derivatives and further
naphthoquinones from Dionea muscipula and four species of the
genus Drosera in vitro cultures. In: PM 59(7)54. 1993.

Croft S et al., (1985) Ann Trop Med Parasitol 79(6):651.

Franz G, Workshop uber Sonnentaukraut. In: DAZ
135(47):443 1-4433. 1995.

Krenn L, Langer R, Kopp B, DAZ 135:867. 1995.

Langer R, Kopp B, Qualitatsprufung von Sonnentaukraut. In:
DAZ 135(8):657-664. 1995.

Schilcher H, Elzer M, Drosera - der Sonnentau, ein bewahrtes
Antitussivum. In: ZPT 14(1):50. 1993.

Vichnanova SA et al., (1973) Planta Med (Suppl):185.

Wunderer H, Zentral und peripher wirksame Antitussiva: eine
kritische Ubersicht. In: PZ 142(11):847-852. 1997.

Zenk MH, Furbringer M, Steglich W, PH 8:2199. 1969.

----- PAGE 990 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Further information in:

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde I-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Thomson RH. Naturally Occurring Quinones, 2nd Ed.,
Academic Press New York 1971.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttsart 1997.

Sunflower

Helianthus annuits

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the ray
florets, the leaves, the ripe fruit, the oil extracted from the
seeds and the mature flower heads. y

Flower and Fruit: The very large, composite flowers are
solitary or in small clusters, usually nodding, and 10 to 40
cm wide on the stems. The bracts in a number of rows are
leaf-like, ovate, acute and sparsely bristly. The 20 to 70
asexual, linguiform golden-yellow ray florets are 3 to 10'cm
long and | to 3 cm wide. The numerous tubular disc florets
are androgynous. They may be brown, purple or yellow, with
black or purple anthers. There are small 3-pointed paleas on
the base of the capitula. The fruit is compressed at the sides,
obovate to almost wedge-shaped; it is an achaene. It is
densely appressed, downy and whitish, straw yellow or gray
to black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The sunflower is a | to 3 m high
annual plant with a long primary root and numerous lateral
roots. The stem is erect, branchless or branched higher up,
densely covered in hairs, and filled with thin white pith. The
leaves are alternate, cordate-triangular, long-petioled, irregu-
larly crenately serrate and covered with short bristles on both
sides.

Habitat: Helianthus annuus is indigenous to central and
eastern North America and is cultivated worldwide.

Production: Sunflower oil is the fatty oil of the achenes of
Helianthus annuus, which is recovered from the fruits,
excluding the shell, by cold pressing. The ray florets and
leaves are collected at the beginning of the flowering season.

Other Names: Corona Solis, Marigold of Peru

SUNFLOWER / 741

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SUNFLOWER OIL

Triglycerides: chief fatty acids linoleic acid (35-62%). oleic
acid (25-42%), palmitic acid (4-7%)

Steroids: Sterols including campesterol, cholesterol, beta-
sitosterol

EFFECTS: SUNFLOWER OIL
Useful as a dietary supplement.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SUNFLOWER OIL

Sunflower oil is used internally to alleviate constipation (as a
lubricant). It is used externally as massage oil, for poorly
healing wounds (as an oil dressing) and in the treatment of
skin lesions, psoriasis and rheumatism. Sufficient informa-
tion on the efficacy of the drug is not available.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
SUNFLOWER OIL

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
SUNFLOWER OIL

Mode of Administration: In folk medicine, the drug is mainly
for external use. In other areas, it is used as an inactive
ingredient in pharmaceutical preparations.

Storage: Keep protected from light, in tightly sealed
containers. Oils from different deliveries should not be
mixed.

LITERATURE

Bader G, Streich S, Griindemann E, Flatau S, Hiller K,
Enzymatic degradation of the triterpenoid saponin helianthoside
2. Pharmazie, 52:836-8, 1997 Nov.

Grotjohann N, Janning A, Eising R, In vitro photoinacuvation
of catalase isoforms from cotyledons of sunflower (Helianthus
annuus L.). Arch Biochem Biophys, 346:208-18, 1997 Oct 15.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Huesa Lope J et al,, Grasas Aceites 25:350-353, 1974.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Matsumoto T, Nagakawa M, Itoh T, PH 23:921-923. 1984.

Plohmann B, Bader G, Hiller K, Franz G, Immunomodulatory
and antitumoral effects of triterpenoid saponins. Pharmazie,
52:953-7, 1997 Dec.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 991 -----
742/SURINAM CHERRY

Surinam Cherry

Eugenia uniflora

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the bark of the
plant's main stem, the leaves and its fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are radial, in clusters of 1 to
8. The sepals are fused; the calyx has 4 or 5 points and a tube
approximately 15 mm long. The sepals are ovate-elliptical,
revolute and up to 4 mm long. The 4 or 5 petals are white,
elongate-ovate and 8 to 12 mm long. There are numerous
very conspicuous stamens. The ovary is an inferior coeno-
carp. The fruit is a red, juicy berry with 8 vertical grooves
and a diameter of 1 to 3 cm; it is usually 1-seeded.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows as a shrub or low
evergreen tree, which reaches a height of 3 to 10 m. The
leaves are opposite, 2.5 to 7 cm long and 15 to 4.5 cm wide,
short-petiolate, elliptical-ovate, blunt-tipped, slightly cordate
at the base, entire, densely and translucently punctate. The
trunk is slim (about the thickness of an arm), the bark is
smooth and light brown.

Characteristics: The plant produces a shiny red, cherry-sized
vitamin-rich fruit, whose strongly acidic taste is like that of a
nectarine.

Habitat: The plant grows abundantly in the tropics, especial-
ly in Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay.

Production: Surinam Cherries are the fresh fruit of Eugenia
uniflora, and Surinam Cherry leaves are the dried leaves of
the same plant.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SURINAM CHERRY LEAVES

Volatile oil (0.2 to 1%): composition very dependent on the
variety.

Components of an African variety include: furanodien
(20%), — selina-1,3,7(1l)-trien-8-one (17%), oxidoselina-
1,3,7(ll)-trien-8-one (14%), in addition to caryophyllene,
germacrene B, germacrene D, cis- and trans-ocimene, beta-
selinene, spathulenol and viridiflorol

In a South American variety, the chief components include
carvone, pulegone, nerolidol, limonene and verbenone,
flavonoids: including quercitrin, myricitrin, and tannins.

EFFECTS: SURINAM CHERRY LEAVES
The flavonoids quercitrin and myricitrin contained in the
drug have an inhibiting effect on the xanthine oxidase; the
essential oil exhibits antimicrobial and antimycotic effect. A
possible protective effect in relation to hyperlipidemia has
been proposed. The drug may also exhibit astringent effects

FDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

due to tannins and flavonoids whose identities have not yet
been determined.

COMPOUNDS: SURINAM CHERRY FRUIT
Volatile oil: components including isofuranodiene, germa-
crene B, selina-4(14),7(U)-diene

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides (6%): L-fructose, D-glu-
cose, saccharose

Carotinoids: including lycopine, gamma-carotine, beta-
cryptoxan thine

Fatty oil (in the seeds and the pulp)
Fruit acids: citric acid (2%)

EFFECTS: SURINAM CHERRY FRUIT
The fruit contains vitamin C, tannins and citric acid, which
explain its use as a dietetic. The essential oil of the fruit is
said to have an antimicrobial effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SURINAM CHERRY LEAVES

Unproven uses: Folk medicine practices include use of the
bark as an astringent in the treatment of diarrhea, gout, fever,
hypertension, gastrointestinal complaint, edema and eye
infections. The leaves have been made into a tea and as a
component of a distilled oil, used for treating chronic
inflammation of the mucous membranes of the respiratory
organs, primarily rhinitis.

SURINAM CHERRY FRUIT
Unproven Uses: Folk medicine includes use as a dietetic, but
efficacy for that use has not yet been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction wiuh the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages of either
drug.

DOSAGE
There is no information in the literature.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Wazlawik E, Da Silva MA, Peters RR, Correia JF, Farias MR,
Calixto JB, Ribeiro-Do-Valle RM, Analysis of the role of nitric
oxide in the relaxant effect of the crude extract and fractions
from Eugenia uniflora in the rat thoracic aorta. J Pharm
Pharmacol, 49:433-7, 1997 Apr.

----- PAGE 992 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Swamp Milkweed

Asclepias — incarnata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the rhizome with

roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are reddish-purple. They are
located on terminal umbels in clusters of 2 to 6 on a 5 cm
long peduncle. The umbels consist of 10 to 20 small florets.
The fruit is a long pod.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herbaceous plant is up to 80 cm
high. The stem is erect and smooth. The upper part of the
stem is branched and very leafy. The leaves are opposite,
petiolate, oblong, lanceolate, hairy, acute and cordate at the
base. They are 10 to 18 cm long, 2.5 to 5 cm wide and sharp-
edged. The rhizome is about 2 to 3 cm in diameter,
yellowish-brown, irregularly globular or oblong, hard and
knotty. The rhizome is covered with a thin, tough bark and is
surrounded by light brown rootlets that are about 10 cm long.

Characteristics: The taste is sweetish, acrid and bitter. The
plant's roots exude latex that is typical of \ne genus (and
giving rise to the name Milkweed,) which is slightly acrid_
and has a strong odor that decreases on drying.

Habitat: Swamp Milkweed is indigenous to America,
Canada and Asia.

Other Names: Swamp Silkweed, Rose-Colored Silkweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Cardioactive steroids (cardenolids): including asclepiadin

EFFECTS
The root is said to contain asclepiadin (cardiac glycoside),
which is positively inotropic and emetic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Similar to other Asclepiadaceae, Swamp
Milkweed is mainly used for digestive disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: The main importance of medicinal use
of the American varieties is in homeopathy, but further
details are not available.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug has an emetic effect in higher dosages,
and digitalis-like poisonings are possible due to the cardioac-
tive steroid content. For possible symptoms and treatments
for poisonings, see Digitalis folium.

SWEET CICELY / 743

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Sweet Cicely

Myrrhis odorata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
entire herb and the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers appear in early
summer. The complex umbels are flattened on top, many-
rayed and more cyme-like at the end of the branches. The
rays of the androgynous flowers are covered in thick down.
The pedicles of the male flowers are hollow. In the flowering
season, the umbels are erect and closed. The fruit is
elongate-pyramid-shaped, 2 to 2.5 cm long, compressed at
the sides and brown to glossy black.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial with a thick,
gnarled, brown, branched and polycephalous rhizome. The
stem is erect, 50tgc£20 erri KghVcane-irk'e and, higher up, is
glabrous or villous and branched. The nodes are covered in
long, fine hairs. The 2- to 4-pinnatisect leaves are large, soft,
triangular and covered underneath with short, soft bristles.

Characteristics: The leaves smell like garden lovage and
taste like anise.

Habitat: The herb is found in mountainous regions from the
Pyrenees to the Caucasus and is cultivated elsewhere.

Production: Sweet Cicely root and herb are the whole plant
of Myrrhis odorata.

Other Names: Sweet Chervil, Sweet Bracken, Sweet-Fern,
Sweet-Cus, Sweet-Humlock, Sweets, The Roman Plant,
Shepherd's Needle, British Myrrh

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components are trans-anethole, additional-
ly germacrene-D, anisaldehyde, limonene, chavicolmethyl
ether, beta-caryophyllene, alpha-pinene, alpha-farnesene,
myrcene. Also, in the roots, trans-isoosmorhizol.

Flavonoids: apigenine-7-O-glucoside, luteolin-7-O-gluco-

side

EFFECTS

The drug is said to be a carminative, digestive and
expectorant.

----- PAGE 993 -----
744 /SWEET CICELY

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The herb is used as a blood purifier and an
expectorant, as well as for asthma and other breathing
difficulties. Balms and salves made from it are used to treat
fresh wounds and sores and relieve the pains of gout.

The roots are used to treat chest and throat complaints and
also urinary complaints. The fresh herb is used externally for
gout swelling and indurations. Previous folk medicine uses
also included use of a decoction from the roots for snake and

dog bites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground root is used to make tonics
and infusions for internal and external use. Salves are used

externally.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhiiuser Verlag Basel. Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelbers, New York, 1969.

Sweet Clover

Melilotus officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The small yellow flowers are in many-
blossomed, long-peduncled racemes. The standard and wings
are the same length, but longer than the carina. Of the 10
stamens, 9 are fused. The fruit is an obtuse, glabrous, light
brown to black, thorny-tipped, horizontally wrinkled and
usually one-seeded pod.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial and 60 to 120
cm high. The smooth ascending or decumbent stems are
heavily branched. The leaves are alternate, glabrous, trifoli-
ate and long petipled. The leaflets are obovate and dentate.
The stipules are awl-like bristly.

Characteristics: The fragrance similar to

woodruff or hay.

plant has a

Habitat: The plant is found all over Europe, Australia and
North America, as well as in temperate regions of Asia.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Production: Sweet Clover consists of the dried or fresh leaf
and flowering branches of Melilotus officinalis, and/or

Melilotus altissimus.

Other Names: Melilot, King's Clover, Yellow Sweet Clover,
Hay Flowers, Sweet Lucerne, Wild Laburnum, Hart's Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRESH PLANT

Coumarinic acids glycosides: including melilotoside

COMPOUNDS: IN THE DEHYDRATED DRUG
Free coumarin (0.4-0.9%): formed from
acids during dehydration, furthermore 3,4-dihydrocoumarin,

melilotol, melilotin

the coumarinic

Hydroxycoumarins: including among others umbelliferone,
scopoletin, herniarin. fraxidin

Flavonoids: including, among others, kampferol- and quer-
cetin glycosides

Triterpene saponins: including azuki saponin-V-carboxylate,
azuki saponin II, aglycones soya sapogenols B and E,
melilotigenin

Volatile oil: traces of very complex composition

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS

Canavanin
Trigonelline

EFFECTS
The drug has an antiphlogistic, antiexudative and anti-
edematous effect, which explain its use for inflammatory and
congestive edema. It increases venous reflux and improves
lymphatic kinetics.

Animal experiments showed an increase in healing wounds.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Blunt injuries
+ Hemorrhoids
+ Venous conditions

The drug is used internally for problems arising from "chronic
venous insufficiency, such as pain and heaviness in legs,
night cramps in die legs, itching and swelling; for the
supportive treatment of thrombophlebitis, postthrombotic
syndromes, hemorrhoids and lymphatic congestion. Exter-
nally, the drug is used for contusions, sprains and superficial
effusions of blood.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Sweet Clover is used as a
diuretic.

----- PAGE 994 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Administration of the drug in higher dosages can
lead to headache and stupor, transitory liver damage is
possible for a very small number of particularly susceptible
patients. Elevation of liver enzyme values usually disappears
following discontinuance of the drug. (Monitoring of the
liver enzyme values is recommended.)

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions and
other galenic preparations for oral use; liquid forms of
medication for parenteral application; ointments, liniments,
cataplasms and herbal sachets for external use; ointments
and suppositories for rectal use.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water over
1 to 2 teaspoonfuls of comminuted, cut drug, then strain after

5 to 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the herb or
preparation in amounts corresponding to 3 to 30 mg of
coumarin; parenteral application corresponding to 1.0 to 7.5

mg of coumarin. .

Infusion — As a therapy for varicose veins, 2 to 3 cups
daily.
External — As a poultice for hemorrhoids.

Storage - The drug must be stored away from light in sealed
containers to prevent loss of coumarin.

LITERATURE
Abou-Donia AHA, (1976) Ph. D. Thesis, Faculty of Pharmacy,

University of Alexandria, Egypt.

Bos R et al.. Analysis of coumarin in Melilotus officinalis. In:
M 61(Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):68. 1995.

Foldi M, Kovach AGB, Varga L, Zoltan OT, Die Wirkung des
Melilotus-Praparates Esberiven R auf die Lymphstromung. In:
Arztl Forsch 16:99. 1962.

Foldi M, Zoltan OT, Obal F, Experimentelle lymphostatische

Encephalopathie als Folgeerscheinung einer cervikalen
Lymphangiothrombophlebitis und deren Therapie mit Cumarin
aus Melilotus officinalis. In: Arzneim Forsch 20:1626-1628.

970.

Foldi-Borcsok E, Bedall FK, Rahlfs VW, Die antiphlogistische
und odemhemmende Wirkung von Cumarin aus Melilotus
officinalis. In: Arzneim Forsch 21:2025-2030. 1971.

Hammouda FM, Rizk AM, Seif EL-Nazar MM, Abou-Youssef
AA, Ghaleb HA, Madkour MK, Pholand AE, Wood G,
Flavonoids and coumarins from elilorus. In: Fitotherapia
54(6):249-255. 1983.

Hong ND et al., (1983) Korean J Pharmacognosy 14(2):51.

SWEET GALE/745

Johne HO, Experimentelle und klinische Untersuchung mit dem
Melilotuspraparat Esberiven. In: Arztl Forsch 14:473-474. 1960.

Marshall M, Wiistenberg P, Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen enosen Insuffizienz. In: Klinik und Therapie der
chronischen venosen Insuffizienz, Braun Fachverlage, Karlsruhe
1994.

Mislin H, Die Wirkung von Cumarin aus Melilotus officinalis
auf die Funktion des Lymphangioms. In: Arzneim Forsch
21:852-853! 1971.

Plouvier V, (1963) Compt Rend 257:4061.

Wiistenberg, P, Baumann G, Verdacht der Toxizitat von
Cumarin nicht bestatigt. In: PZ 139(13):1058. 1994.

Further information in: md

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Sweet Gale
Myrica gale

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves and
branches as well as the wax extracted from the catkins.

Flower and Fruit: Sweet Gale plants are either male or
female. The male plants produce groups of stemless catkins
on the leafless branches of the previous year's growth. The
fruit catkins are about the same size but somewhat thicker
and grow in closely packed resinous nutlets. They are dry

and compressed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is usually dioecious, but
plants may change sex from year to year. Sweet Gale is a
deciduous shrub up to 2.5 m high. The branches have
scattered yellowish glands. The leaves are 2 to 6 cm long,

----- PAGE 995 -----
746 /SWEET GALE

almost lanceolate, cuneate at the base and more or less
serrate near the apex. They are pubescent beneath with shiny
yellow, fragrant glands on both surfaces.

Characteristics: The branches and leaves are fragrant when
bruised.

Habitat: Sweet Gale is indigenous to the higher latitudes of
the northern hemisphere.

Production: Sweet Gale is the aerial part of Myrica gale.
Other Names: Bog Myrtle. Dutch Myrtle, Bayberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.4-0.7%): including among others alpha-pi-
nene, delta-cadinene, gamma-cadinene, limonene, beta-myr-
cene, alpha-phellandrene. beta-phellandrene, 1,8-cineole,
nerolidol, p-cymene, alpha-copaene, beta-caryophyllene

Flavonoids: including myricitrin
Triterpenes: including ursolic acid, oleanolic acid

EFFECTS
Sweet Gale has an astringent and aromatic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Sweet Gale has been used in digestive
disorders. A strong brew of dried bark is also, used in
Sweden as a vermifuge and to cure itching.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The volatile oil of the drug is considered toxic. Mixing plant
extracts with beer, as practiced in the Middle Ages, is said to
have led to manic episodes.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is ground. Information on
preparations is not available.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Malteru KE, Faegri A, (1982) Acta Pharm Suec 19: 43

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Von Schantz M, Kapetanidis I. Qualitative und qunatitative
Untersuchung des atherischen Ols von Myrica gale L.
(Myricaceae). In: Pharm Acta Helv 46(10/11):649. 1071.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Sweet Marjoram
Origanum major ana

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves and flowers, the fresh aerial parts of the flowering
plant and the whole of the fresh, flowering plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inconspicuous, sessile flowers barely
extend above the gray tomentose bracts surrounding them.
The calyx appears to have only 1 sepal because the 2 lower
sepals are almost non-existent and the upper 3 are complete-
ly fused. The calyx is 2.5 cm long and otherwise resembles
the bracts. The corolla is white to pale lilac or pink, 4 mm
long, with a few uneven, pointed tips. The 2 upper tips are
fused together to form a lip. The stamens are enclosed in the
corolla or extend above it. The fruit is a smooth, light brown
nutlet, 0.75 to 1 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is biennial with a main
shoot that is heavily branched. It grows 20 to 25 cm high.
The downy to tomentose shoots are gray-green to whitish,
and sometimes tinged with red. The leaves are spatulate,
.short-petioled, 0.5 to 2 cm long and 0.5 to 1 cm wide, entire-
margined and rounded. They are gray-tomentose on both
surfaces, somewhat thick and usually without distinct ribs.
The false whorls are mostly covered by the 3 to 4 wide,
circular, gray-green bracts, which are fused to globular,
racemous or panicled capitula.

Characteristics: The plant has a distinctive tangy odor and a
bitter taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the southeastern Mediter-
ranean region and is cultivated in Germany.

Production: Marjoram herb consists of the dried leaf and
flower of Origanum majorana (synonymous with Majorana
hortensis), gathered during the flowering season and stripped
off the stems. Drying must be fast to avoid blackening of the
leaves. Marjoram oil consists of the essential oil of
Origanum majorana obtained by aqueous steam distillation
of the fresh or dried leaves and flowers stripped from the
stems and harvested during flowering season. Depending on
the area of cultivation, there may be two crops of the aerial
plant parts per year.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: MARJORAM HERB

Chief components in the volatile oil of the foliage: cis-
sabinene hydrate (40 to 50%), cis-sabinene hydrate acetate
(20 to 30%), sabinene (10%) and trans-sabinene hydrate
(2%); cis-sabinene hydrate acetate transforms itself witfi
steam distillation into (among others) terpinene-4-ol (in
volatile oil yielded through steam distillation, 15 to 40%),

----- PAGE 996 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

gamma-terpinene (in volatile oil yielded through steam
distillation, 2 to 12%), alpha-terpinene, limonene and
terpinols, that leads to change of aroma

COMPOUNDS: MARJORAM OIL
Volatile oil (1 to 3%)

Flavonoids: including diosmetin, luteolin, apigenin and their
C- and O-glycosides, including vitexin, orientin, thymonine

Hhydroquinone_ glycosides: including arbutin (0.15 to

0.45%), methyl arbutin
Cajfeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid, chlorogenic acid
Water soluble polysaccharides (13%)

Triterpenes: including ursolic acid (0.5%), oleanolic acid
(0.2%)

EFFECTS: MARJORAM HERB AND OIL
In vitro, Marjoram is antimicrobial, antiviral and insecticidal.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for rhinitis and colds in
infants; rhinitis in small children and gastritis. In folk
medicine, Majoram herb and oil are used for cramps,
depression, dizziness, gastrointestinal disorders, migraine,
nervous headaches, neurasthenia, paralysis, paroxysmal
coughs, rhinitis and as a diuretic.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathy sometimes uses Marjoram
to increase sexual excitability.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The drug is not suitable for longer-term
use because of its arbutin content.

Pediatric Use: Marjoram salve should not be administered to
infants or small children.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Marjoram herb is used as an
infusion for teas, mouthwashes and poultices (5% infusion).
The oil is used in ointments and a few compound
preparations.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, pour 250 ml boiling water
over | to 2 teaspoonfuls of Marjoram herb and strain after 5
minutes. An ointment is prepared by leaving 20 parts
Marjoram herb to stand with 1 part ammonia and 10 parts
spirit of wine for a few hours. It is then heated with 100 parts
Vaseline in a water bath until the spirit of wine and ammonia
have evaporated. Then the ointment is filtered (EB6).

Daily Dosage: Sip 1 to 2 cups of tea throughout the day.

SWEET ORANGE / 747

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times a day or | ml injection solution sc twice
weekly (HAB1).

Storage: Dried Marjoram herb may be stored for up to 2
years in air-tight containers.

LITERATURE
Brosche T, Vostrowsky O. Uber die Komponenten des
atherischen Ols aus Majorana hortensis

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994 (unter Ongnum majorana).

Herrmann K, (1962) Lebensm Utters Forsch. 116:224.

Kucera LS, Hermann Jr EC, (1967) Proc Soc Exp Biol Med
124: 865-874.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lossner G, (1968) Planta Med 16:54.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Moench, In: Z Naturforsch 36C:23-29. 1981.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Sweet Orange

Citrus — sinensis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried
peel as well as the oil extracted from the peel.

Flower and Fruit: The fragrant flowers are arranged singly
or in short, limp racemes. The fruit is depressed-globose to
shortly ovoid, 10- to 13-locular. The peel is thin to rather
thick, nearly smooth, orange to orange-yellow When ripe.
The pulp is sweet. The core remains solid when ripe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Citrus sinensis is an evergreen tree
with rounded crown. The branches are angular when young,
then become terete, with a few slender, rather flexible
axillary spines. The leaves are acute, rounded below; the
petioles are narrowly winged.

Habitat: Like other Citrus varieties, the plant is indigenous
to Asia and is cultivated in the Mediterranean and othei
subtropical regions in many parts of the world.

----- PAGE 997 -----
748/SWEET ORANGE

Production: Orange peel consists of the fresh or dried outer
peel of ripe fruits of Citrus sinensis, separated from the white
pith layer, as well as its preparations in effective dosage.

Other Names: Orange, China Orange, Citrus dulcis

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components in the fresh pericarp include
(+)~Jimonene, furthermore citral (as an odor-bearer), citro-
nellal, nootkatone, sinesal, n-nonanal, n-decanal, n-dodeca-
nal, linalyl acetate, geranyl acetat, citronellyl acetat, methyl
anthranilate. Pressed oils also contain lipophilic flavonoids
and furocoumarins.

Flavonoids

EFFECTS
Sweet Orange promotes gastric juice secretion.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
* Dyspeptic complaints
+ Loss of appetite

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. There is a low potential for sensitization through
skin contact with the volatile oil.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb for teas and
other bitter-tasting galenic preparations for oral
administration.

Daily Dosage: 10 to 15 gm of drug.

LITERATURE
Thrig M, Qualitatskontrolle von sup’em Orangenschalenol. In: PZ
140(26):2350-2353. J 995.

Further information in:

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Sweet Sumach

Rhus aromatica

>ESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried and fresh
aot bark.

lower and Fruit: The flowers are in 1 to 1.5 cm long, false
tikes. They are yellow-green and often appear before the

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

leaves are fully developed. The fruit is a globular, yellow-
red, pubescent drupe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a fragrant 1 to 2.4 m
high shrub with glabrous red-brown annual growth and small
to 10 cm-long trifoliate leaves. The leaflets are oval and the
middle one is cuneate at the base. The leaflets are irregularly
dentate and initially pubescent on both sides. Later the
leaflets turn glabrous on the upper surface and eventually
pubescent only on the ribs of the lower surface.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Atlantic North America.

Production: Sweet Sumach root-bark is the, root-bark of
Rhus aromatica.

Other Names: Polecat-Bush, Smooth, Sumach, Sweet Fra-
grant Sumach, Sumac

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Phenol glycosides: orcin-O-beta-D-glucoside

Steroids: sterols, including beta-sitosterol, stigmast-7-en-
3beta-ole

Tannins
Triterpenes: including oleanolic aldehyde

Volatile oil (0.01 to 0.07%), very complex in mixture, with
constituents including delta-cadinene, camphene, delta3-car-
ene, beta-elemene, famesyl acetone, alpha- and beta-pinene,
fatty acids

EFFECTS
The drug has an antimicrobial and antiviral effect due to the
tannins (gallic acid). In animal experiments it increased
contraction of the smooth muscles of ileum. Two older
studies describe an improvement in the symptoms of urinary
incontinence.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine Sweet Sumach is used for
irritable bladder, urinary incontinence, enuresis nocturna and
uterine bleeding.

Homeopathic Uses: Rhus aromatica is used for weak bladder
conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Sweet Sumach is available in crude
powder form and in compounded preparations for oral
intake. It is also available in parenteral form for homeopathic
use.

----- PAGE 998 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dosage: Single dose is 1 gm.

Bed-wetting—5 to 20 drops depending on age, to be taken 2
to 3 times daily, over an extended period.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops. 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
arenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

Storage: Should be stored in dry place, protected from direct
ight.

LITERATURE

Baer H, In: Toxic Plants. Ed. AD Kinghorn, Columbia Press
1979.

Effenberger S, Schilcher H. Gewiirzsumachrinde. In: ZPT
11(4): 113. 1990.

Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
rostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.
Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Sweet Vernal Grass
Anthoxanthum odoratum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole plant is considered to have

medicinal properties.

Flower and Fruit: The green, solitary, flowered spikelet has
4 spelts, the lower half of which are as large as the upper and
taller than the flowers. Both of the upper spelts are awned,
with 2 stamens. The style is long, the stigma pinnate, and
spikelets form an oblong false ear.

Leaves, Stem, and Root: The plant-size ranges from 15 to 50
cm. The plant grows as thick grass. The leaves are ciliate at
the base of the lamina. The leaf sheath is deeply grooved and
hairy.

Characteristics: Sweet Vernal Grass has a scent of dried
woodruff or new-mown hay and a tangy taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Britain, Europe and
temperate Asia.

Production: Sweet Vernal Grass is the whole Anthoxantlium

odoratum plant in flower.

SWEET VERNAL GRASS / 749

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Hydroxy cinnamic acid glycosides: in the fresh plant

Melilotoside and coumarin: triggered by a beta-glucosidase
during dehydration of the plant

Iridoids: asperuloside, monotropein, scandoside

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for headache, nausea.
sleeplessness and conditions of the urinary tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The freshly harvested plant contains glycosidic precursors of
coumarin, which release coumarin in the process of dehydra-
tion (the drug contains up to 1.5% coumarin). No health
hazards or side effects are known in conjunction with the
proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

. The administration of higher levels of the drug can lead to

headache and dizziness. Liver injuries are possible among
susceptible patients during long-term treatment. The abnor-
mal liver values disappear when the drug is discontinued, but
on going observation of liver enzyme values of the blood is
recommended.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used externally as an
extract.

LITERATURE
Brown SA. C and J Biochem Physiol 38:143/1960.

Fentem JH, Fry JR, Thomas NW, Species differences in the
hepatotoxicity of coumarin-a comparision of rat and Mongolian
gerbil. In: Toxicology 71 (1-2): 129. 1992.

Further information in:

Kern W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Vejlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Poisonous Plants in Britain and their effects on Animals and
Man, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, Pub; HMSO
(1984) UK.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmacologic 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

----- PAGE 999 -----
750 /SWEET VIOLET

Sweet Violet

Viola odorata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the essential oil
from the leaves, the dried flowers, the air-dried leaves
collected during the flowering season, the flowering herb,
the dried rhizome, the fresh aerial parts collected during the
flowering season and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The dark violet flowers are solitary on 3
to 7 cm long pedicles. The flowers are 1.5 to 2 cm long and
fragrant. The 5 sepals are obtuse, glabrous and have an
appendage. There are 5 uneven petals, which are unevenly
spurred and which have a broad margin. The 5 stamens have
an appendage at the tip. The flower has 3 fused ovaries. The
fruit is a globular capsule, approximately 7.5 mm. It is 3 to 6
sided, clearly and densely short-pubescent and often violet. It
can be found pressed to the receptacle.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Violet is 5 to 10 cm high. It is a
rosette plant with a short, thick but soft ground axis. The
rooting runners are 10 to 20 cm long and 15 mm thick. They
produce flowers in the second year. The. shoots are a strong
dark green with scattered appressed hairs or almost glabrous.
The leaves are petiolate, broadly cordate, obtuse or short-
acuminate and crenate. The leaves, which appear first, are
reniform-cordate and the younger ones are rolled up. There
are lanceolate stipules at the base of the leaves.

Characteristics: The plant is strongly scented.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to or naturalized in large
parts of Europe and the Middle East as far as central Asia; it
is also found in North America.

Production: Sweet Violet root consists of the dried root of
Viola odorata. Sweet Violet herb is the dried plant section of
Viola odorata. The rhizome is imported ftom the former
Czechoslovakia and Romania. The rootstock is dug up,
pounded to remove any soil residue, washed and air-dried.

Other Names: Garden Violet

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME AND HERB

Volatile oil (0.04%): salicylic acid methyl ester (formed out
of glycosidic precursors during plant drying), beta-nitropro-
pionic acid

Saponins

Alkaloids

EFFECTS: SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME AND HERB
The drug acts as an expectorant due to its saponin content.
The alkaloid violin has an emetine-like effect.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

COMPOUNDS: SWEET VIOLET FLOWER

Volatile oil (0.003%): aroma-carrier trans-alpha-ionone (par-
mone), chief constituents (-)-zingiberene, (+)-curcumene,
dihydro-beta-ionone, 2,6-nonadien-l-al,  undecan-2-one,
isoborneol

EFFECTS: SWEET VIOLET FLOWER
The drug has antimicrobial and broncho-secretolytic effects
due to the. saponin content.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME AND HERB

Unproven Uses: The rhizome is used for conditions of the
respiratory organs, particularly for dry catarrh, and rheuma-
tism of the minor joints; it is additionally used for fever, skin
diseases, inflammation of the oral mucosa, nervous strain,
headache and insomnia.

The herb is used internally for coughs, hoarseness, pneumo-
nia, throat inflammations, bronchitis accompanied by fixed
mucous, nervous strain, insomnia and hysteria. It is also used
to induce sweating. Externally, the herb is used to treat
various skin diseases.

SWEET VIOLET FLOWER

Unproven Uses: The flowers are used to prepare an infusion
tea, which is used as an expectorant for bronchial catarrh; as
an antitussive for chronic bronchitis; and for whooping
cough, asthma and migraine. Sweet Violet syrup is used as
an expectorant and to lessen irritation for bronchial catarrh
(children's remedy).

Homeopathic Uses: The flowers are used for inflammation
of the respiratory tract and rheumatism of the wrist.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME, HERB, AND FLOWER

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME AND HERB

Preparation: An herbal tea is prepared by adding 2
teaspoonfuls Sweet Violet herb with 14 liter water. 4

Daily Dosage: The average single dose of the rhizome is 1
gm orally. The 5% rhizome decoction dosage is 20 gm. The
5% rhizome infusion dosage is 1 dessertspoonful 5 to 6 times
daily. The herbal tea dosage is | cup 2 to 3 times daily.

SWEET VIOLET FLOWER
Preparation: To prepare an infusion, decoction or tea, use |
heaping teaspoonful of drug with | cup of water.

Daily Dosage: The dosage for the infusion, decoction or tea
is 1 cup twice daily, or taken in sips I to 2 times per hour.

----- PAGE 1000 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

The dosage of Sweet Violet syrup is 1 to 2 dessertspoonfuls
every 2 hours.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops. | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

LITERATURE
SWEET VIOLET RHIZOME AND HERB

Farnsworth NR, (1968) Lloydia 246.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Watt JM, Breyer-Brandwijk MG. The Medicinal, Poisonous
Plants of Southern, Eastem Affica, 2nd Ed, Livingstone 1962.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L. (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A):1.

SWEET VIOLET FLOWER

Farnsworth NR, (1968) Lloydia 246.

Roberg'M, Arch Pharm 275.145. 1937.

Ruzicka L, Schinz H, Helv Chim Acta 25:760. 1942.

Uhde G et al., Helv Chim Acta 55:2621. 1972.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, (1970) Lloydia 33 (3A):I.

Further information in: ;
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Watt JM, Breyer-Brandwijk MG. The Medicinal, Poisonous
Plants of Southern, Eastern Africa, 2nd Ed, Livingstone 1962.

Sweet Woodruff

Galium odoratum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried or fresh
aerial parts collected during or shortly before the flowering
season.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in loose terminal cymes.
The petals are fused to a funnel-shaped, white, 1.5 mm long
tube. The border of the tube is divided in 4 and is 2 to 3.5
mm long. The 4 stamens are fused with the corolla. The
involucre bracts are small, lanceolate or almost bristle-like.

SWEET WOODRUFF/751

The 2-seeded indehiscent fruit is globular. 2 to 3 mm long
and thickly covered with white barbed bristles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sweet Woodruff is a 10 to 35 cm
herbaceous perennial with a thin cylindrical circular rhi-
zome. The stem is erect, quadrangular, smooth and, apart
from the bristly nodes, glabrous and glossy. The leaves are in
false v/horls of 6 to 9, the lower ones are obovate-oblong, the
middle and upper ones are lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate.
They are entire-margined, thorny tipped, glabrous and rough-
edged.

Characteristics: Sweet Woodruff is aromatic when dried; the
taste is bitter and tangy.

Habitat: The plant grows in northern and central Europe,
Siberian and northern Africa.

Production: Sweet Woodruff herb is the fresh or dried aerial
part of Galium odoratum. It is gathered during or shortly
before flowering. The herb must be turned regularly while
being dried.

Not to be Confused With: Gallium mollugo or Gallium
sylvaticum

Other Names: Master of the Wood, Woodwrad, Woodruff

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRESH PLANT
O-hydroxycinnamic acid glucoside: melilotoside

COMPOUNDS: IN THE DRIED PLANT
Coumarin (0.4-1%)

Iridoids: asperuloside (0.05-0.3%), monotropein (0.04%),
scandoside

EFFECTS

The coumarin content may impart antiphlogistic, antiedemat-
ic, spasmolytic and lymphokinetic properties. However, due
to the low level of coumarin, the therapeutic effect is
doubtful.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Sweet Woodruff is used as a treatment for
nervous agitation, sleeplessness, nervous menstrual disor-
ders, congested liver, jaundice, hemorrhoids, circulation
disorders and venous conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The freshly harvested plant contains melilotoside as glyco-
sidic precursor of coumarins. In the process of dehydration,
coumarin is released (content up to 1% coumarin in freshly
dried drug). Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded. Headache and stupor can occur with the adminis-
tration of higher dosages of the drug. Susceptible patients
could experience liver damage following long-term adminis-

----- PAGE 1001 -----
752/SWEET WOODRUFF

tration. This effect is reversible following discontinuation of
the drug. Liver enzyme values should be monitored.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The herb is obsolete as a drug in
many countries, and since 1981 is not allowed to be used in
the manufacture of aroma or flavoring in German-speaking

countries.

Preparation: To make a tea, place 2 teaspoonfuls (1.8 gm
drug) in one glass water. An infusion of 5% drug is used for
insomnia, and a forehead poultice made of crushed herb is
used for headache.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 1.0 gm drug. The
preparations can be taken during the day or shortly before
going to bed.

Storage: The drug should be protected from light sources to
avoid brown coloring.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Cumarin (1,2-b-Benzopyron) - Neue Erkenntnisse zur
Tumortherapie. In: Med Welt 45(5):62-63. 1994.

Anonym, Leberschaden durch Cumarin? InrDAZy 134(15): 1372.
1994,

Berkowitz WF et al., (1982) J Org Chem 47:824.
Bajthe-Horvath K et al., PH 21:2917-2919. 1982.
Burnett AR, Thomsom RH, (1968) J Clin Soc (6):854.

Casley-Smith JR, Casley-Smith JR, Effects of varying doses of
7-hydroxy-coumarin and coumarin in acute lymphoedema and
other high-protein oedemas. In: Progress in Lymphology, X,
Adelaide, 1985: 194-196. 1985.

Cox D, O'Kennedy R, Thomes RD, The rarity of liver toxicity
in patients treated with coumarine (1,2-Benzopyrone). In:
Human Toxikol 8:501-506. 1989.

Egan D, O'Kennedy R, Moran E, Cox D, Prosser E, Thornes
RD, The pharmacology, metabolism, analysis, and applications
of coumarin and coumarin-related compounds. In: Drug
Metabolism Reviews 22(5):503-529. 1990.

Ellinger A, Zur pharmako-dynamischen Charakterisierung des
Cumarins. In: Schmiedebergs Arch exp Pathol Pharmakol Suppl.
Festschrift, $.150-163. 1908.

Fentem JH, Fry JR, Thomas NW, Species differences in the
epatotoxicity of coumarin - a comparision of rat and
Mongolian gerbil. In: Toxicology 71(1-2):129. 1992.

Hardt TJ, Ritschel WA, The effect of coumarin and 7-
ydroxycoumarin on in vitro macrophage phagocytosis of latex
articles. In: Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 5(1):39-43.
1983.

Hausen BM, Schmieder M, The sensitizing capacity of
coumarins. In: Contact Dermatitis 15(3): 157-163. 1986.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hazleton LW, Tusing TW, Zeitlin BR, Thiesen R, Murer HK,
Toxicity of coumarin. In: J Pharmacol Exp Ther 116:348-358.
1956.

Inouye H et al., (1974) Planta Med 25:285.
Kooiman P, Acta Bot Neerl 18:124-137. 1966.

Laub E, Olszowski W, Woller R. Waldmeister und Maibowle.
harmazeutisch und lebensmittelchemische Aspekte. In: Dtsch
Apoth Ztg 125:848-850. 1985.

Mascolo N et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1 (1):28.

Rosskopf F, Kraus J, Franz G, Immunological and antitumor
effects of coumarin and some derivatives. In: PA 47(2): 139-142.
1992.

Sporn A, Toxicity of coumarin as a flavoring agent. In: Igenia
(Bucharest’: 121-126. 1960.

Sticher O et al., (1971) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 111:1795.

Wiistenberg, P, Baumann G, Verdacht der Toxizitat von
Cumarin nicht bestatigt. In: PZ 139(13): 1058. 1994.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss.
-Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Swertia chirata
See Chiretta

Swertia japonica

See Senburi

----- PAGE 1002 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Symphytum_ officinale

See Comfrey

Symplocarpus foetidus

See Skunk Cabbage

Syzygium aromaticum
See Clove

Syzygium cumini

See Jambolan

Tamarind
Tamarindus indica

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit pulp and

the dried seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers form a terminal raceme and
have three, | cm long petals which are initially whitish, then
yellowish with light-red stripes. They have a calyx with a
narrow, top-shaped base and 4 thickly covered segments.
The stamens are fused in a sheath, which is open at the top.
The fruit is a 20 cm long and 3 cm wide, matt-brown,
slightly compressed, indehiscent, bean-like pod. The fruit
has 3 to 12 seeds that are very hard and glossy brown. The
seeds are 14 mm long and have an irregular, roundish-
quadrangular shape. The mesocarp is odorless, mushy and
sweet-tasting.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to tropical Africa and is
naturalized in North and South America from Florida to
Brazil. It is cultivated in subtropical China, India, Pakistan,
Indochina, on the Phillippines and in Java and Spain.

Production: Tamarind paste is derived from the fruit of
Tamarindus indica. The fruit is fermented for a long time in
the sun. The initially red-brown fruit attains a black or black-
brown hue and becomes more aromatic and sour. The paste
is boiled to a glutinous mass, which is the finished product.

Other Names: Imlee

TAMARIND / 753

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fruit acids: tartaric acid (3-10%); including among others,
malic acid, citric acid, lactic acid

Invert sugar (25-30%)
Pectin
Pyrazines and thiazols (aromatic substances)

EFFECTS
The drug, which contains organic acids and pectine, is said
to be laxative; however, the mode of action has not been
documented.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for chronic or acute
constipation and liver and gallbladder ailments.

Indian Medicine: The drug is used for bilious vomiting,
alcohol intoxication, fever, pharyngitis, stomatitis, constipa-
tion and hemorrhoids.

Homeopathic Uses: Tamarindus indica is used for

stomachaches.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Tamarind is taken orally and is
usually used in combination with other laxatives, such as

figs.

Preparation: To make a clean paste, soften the raw tamarind
paste in hot water, strain through a sieve, and steam to a soft
consistency in a water bath; mix the paste with sugar.

Daily Dosage: 10 to 50 gm of cleaned tamarind paste, pure
or with other purgatives, is taken in fruit cubes.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
aday(HAB34).

Storage: Store in a tightly sealed container. ‘

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Ishola MM et al., J Sci Food Agric 51:141. 1990.

Khurana AL, Ho CT, J Liq Chromatogr 12:419-430. 1989.

Lee PL et al., (1975) J Agric Food Chem 23:1195.

----- PAGE 1003 -----
754/TAMARIND

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Tamarindus indica

See Tamarind

Tamus communis
See Black Bryony

Tanacetum parthenium

See Feverfew

Tanacetum vulgare
See Tansy

Tansy
Tanacetum vulgare

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part consists of the dried
flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are flat, round and
button-like composite flowers in cymes. The bright golden
yellow flowers consist only of tubular flowers. The fruit has
5 ribs without tufts of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plants grow from 60 to 120 cm
high. The stem is erect, glabrous, angular, red-tinged and
leafy. The leaves are alternate, simple or double pinnatifid,
15 cm long and 12 cm wide and have a long emarginate tip.

Characteristics: The herb has a strong aromatic smell. The
taste is bitter and camphor-like. The plant is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Production: Tansy flower consists of the inflorescence of
Chrysanthemum vulgare (syn. Tanacetum vulgare). Tansy
herb consists of the above-ground parts of Chrysanthemum
vulgare (syn. Tanacetum vulgare). Tansy oil is the oil
extracted from Tanacetum vulgare.

Other Names: Buttons, Daisy, Hindheal, Parsley Fern

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: TANSY FLOWER AND HERB

Volatile oil (0.5 to 0.9% in the foliage, 0.8 to 1.8% in the
blossoms): constituents of the volatile oil vary greatly
according to variety. The following could appear as main
constituents: artemisia ketone, (-)-thujone.-(+)-isothujone,
1,8-cineole, alpha-pinene, alpha-terpinyl acetate, borneol,
bornyl acetate, davanone, germacrene D, L-camphor (+)
umbellulone, camphor, lyratol (+) lyratol acetate, piperitone,
sabinene, thuj-4-en-2-ylacetate (+) trans-Carveyl acetate,
trans-chrysanthenol (+) trans-chrysanthenyl acetate, umbel-
lulone, as well as (+)-vulgarol A (8%), vulgaron B (up to
12%). Hybrid varieties exist.

Sesquiterpenes: sesquiterpene lactones, including crispolid,
deacetyl crispolid, tatridins A and B, tavulin, artemorin,
parthenolide (in some varieties), reynosine, armefoline,
dentatin A, santamarin, chrysanthemine

Flavonoids: including cosmosiin, apigenin-7-O-glycoside,
cynaroside, luteolin-7-O-glucoside, quercimetrin, eupatilin,
acacetin-7-glucobioside

Hydroxycoumarins: including scopoletin

Polyynes: including _— diterthiophene, _triterthiophene

(phototoxic)

EFFECTS: TANSY FLOWER AND HERB
The oil, which contains thujone, is an insect repellent. The
sesquiterpenes in the leaves are antimicrobial. A leaf extract
has displayed an anti-edemic effect, and the polysaccharide
fraction is said to have an ulcer-protective effect in rats.

COMPOUNDS: TANSY OIL
Constituents of the volatile oil vary greatly according to
variety. The following could appear as chief constituents:
artemisia ketone, (-Hhujone, (+)-isothujone,  1,8-cineole,
alpha-pinene, alpha-terpinyl acetate, borneol, borny! acetate,
davanone, germacrene D, L-camphor (+) umbellulone, L-

.camphor, lyratol (+) lyratol acetate, piperitone, sabinene,

thuj-4-en-2-ylacetate (+) trans-carvyl acetate, trans-chrysan-
thenol (+) trans-chrysanthenyl acetate, umbellulone, among
others. Hybrid varieties exist.

EFFECTS: TANSY OIL
The thujone-type oil is antimicrobial, anthelmintic, and
repellent to various insects.

----- PAGE 1004 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

TANSY FLOWER AND HERB

Unproven Uses: Tansy preparations are used as an anthel-
mintic, for migraine, neuralgia, rheumatism, bloating and
loss of appetite.

TANSY OIL
Unproven Uses: Tansy oil is used internally for gout,
rheumatic complaints, joint pains, stomach cramps, gastroin-
testinal infections, intermittent fever, dizziness and dysme-
rheumatism, gout,

norrhea. It is used externally for

contusions, sprains and wounds.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

TANSY FLOWER AND HERB

The administration of therapeutic dosages of drugs that have
a high thujone content (see Tanaceti aetheroleum) can lead to
poisoning. Beyond that, there is a medium potential for
sensitization via skin contact with the drug. Internal adminis-
tration of the drug in allopathic dosages is to be avoided.

s
TANSY OIL
Particularly toxic are volatile oils with high thujone content.
Poisonings occur chiefly through the misuse of the drug as
an abortifacient. Administration in allopathic dosages is to be

avoided.

OVERDOSAGE

TANSY OIL

Symptoms of poisoning include vomiting, abdominal pain,
gastroenteritis, severe reddening of the face, mydriasis, fixed
pupil, tonic-clonic spasms, cardiac arrhythmias,
bleeding, kidney damage and liver damage. Death occurs
after 1 to 3.5 hours. The lethal dosage is approximately 15-
30 gm. The treatment for poisonings can only proceed

uterine

symptomatically.

DOSAGE
TANSY FLOWER AND HERB
Daily Dosage: Administration in allopathic dosages is to be

avoided.

TANSY OIL
Mode of Administration: The drug is found in extract form in
a small number of combination preparations.

Daily Dosage: Administration in allopathic dosages is to be
avoided. The documented single dose is 0.1 gm.

LITERATURE
TANSY FLOWER AND HERB
Banthorpe DV et al., (1973) Planta Med 23:64.

TANSY /755

Brown AMG et al., Tissue culture, biochemistry and
pharmacology of Tanacetum ssp. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the
44th Ann Congress of GA, 33. 1996.

Hendriks H, Bos R, Woerdenbag, Der Rainfarn - eine
potentielle Arzneipflanze? In: ZPT 14(6):333. 1993.

Holopainen M, (1968) Planta Med (6):20P.
Nano GM et al., (1983) Fitoterapia (4): 135.
Ognyanov I, Tochorova M, (1983) Planta Med 48:181.
Schearer WR, (1984) J Nat Prod 47(6):964.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH. Landsberg 1988.

Kern W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

harmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
TANSY OIL

Banthorpe DV et al., (1973) Planta Med 23:64.

Brown AMG et al., Tissue culture, biochemistry and
pharmacology of Tanacetum ssp. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the
44th Ann Congress of GA, 33. 1996.

Hendriks H, Bos R, Woerdenbag, Der Rainfarn - eine
potentielle Arzneipflanze? In: ZPT 14(6):333. 1993.

Holopainen M, (1968) Planta Med (6):20P.

Nano GM et al., (1983) Fitoterapia (4): 135.

Ognyanov I, Tochorova M, (1983) Planta Med 48:181.
Schearer WR, (1984) J Nat Prod 47(6):964.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur.
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH, Landsberg 1988.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 1005 -----
756/TANSY

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Taraxacum officinale

See Dandelion

Taumelloolch

Lolium temulentum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The spikes are uninterrupted, 30 cm long
and green. The 5 to 7 spikelets form the ear. The glume is
longer than the spikelet, which has 7 ribs and no awn. The
husk is cartilaginous, with 5 ribs and a stiff, straight awn.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The stalk is rigid and erect. The leaf
sheaths are rough and weakly bulbous on the upper leaves.

Characteristics: The spikelets have their narrow sides turned
toward the main axis (in contrast to the couch grass). A
parasitic fungus, which is often present on the plant, forms
an alkaloid, making the plant poisonous.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe and Mediterranean

regions.

Production: Taumelloolch seeds are the ripe seeds of Lolium

temulentum.

Other Names: Bearded Darnel, Cheat, Drake, Ray-Grass,
Tare

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

The active ingredients are not known. However, the toxicity
of Lolium rigidum is caused by bacterial toxins, the so-called
kidney toxins, which are unusual nucleosides with uracil as
the base.

EFFECTS

The active agents are temulentin, temulentic acid, free fatty
acids, tannin and glycosides. The fruit has been suspected of
poisoning for some time; however, the toxic principle
generally remains unexplained. The drug's ability to relieve
gastroenteritis can possibly be attributed to the free fatty
acids.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Taumelloolch is used for dizziness, nerve
pain, nose bleeds, sleeplessness, stomach cramps and urinary

incontinence.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug can be toxic. In earlier times, poisonings were
frequently caused by the presence of the plant's berries in
grain. No cases of poisoning are known in recent times. The
plant has now become extremely rare through intensive seed-
corn purification.

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning include dizziness, headache, colic,
confusion, staggering, vision and speech disorders, somno-
lence, and, in rare cases, death through respiratory failure.
The treatment of poisoning consists of gastrointestinal
emptying (inducement of vomiting, gastric
burgundy-colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium
sulphate), administration of activated charcoal and shock
prophylaxis (quiet, warmth). Further management consists of
treating spasms with careful administration of diazepam
(i.v.) and icepacks for fever. Phenothiazines and analeptics
should not be administered. Intubation and oxygen therapy

lavage with

may be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The plant is administered ground

and as a liquid extract.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L, (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Taxus baccata

See Yew

----- PAGE 1006 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Tea Tree

Melaleuca alternifolia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Pans: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves and branch tips from which an oil is extracted by

steam distillation.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a 3 to 5 cm long
spike. The flowers are sessile with a campanulate epicalyx
on which the sepals sit like tips. The tips are 3 to 4 mm long.
The petals are free, approximately twice as large as the calyx
tips. There are numerous conspicuous stamens, in 5 bundles
approximately 2 cm long. The ovary is inferior and partially
fused with the hollow receptacle. It is in 3 parts with a thick
pistil and a capitular stigma. The fruit is a woody, cylindrical

capsule with a diameter of 3 to 4 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This tree reaches heights up to 7 m.
The leaves are simple, coriaceous, 1 to 2.5 cm long, acute-
lanceolate, and sometimes slightly sickle-shaped with oil
glands. The young shoots are tomentose, the older branches
glabrous. The trunk has a paper-like, whitish bark.

Habitat: Melaleuca alternifolia is indigenous to Australia.

Production: Tea tree oil is the essential oil extracted from
the leaves and branch tips of Melaleuca alternifolia, Melaleu-
ca dissitifolia and other Melaleuca species by aqueous steam
distillation. Ideally, the leaves and shoots have first been
stored for six weeks.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Terpinenes: Primarily terpinene-4-ol (45%), gamma-terpi-
nene (18%), alpha-terpinene (8%), 1.8-cineole (6%), alpha-
terpineol (5%), as well as alpha-pinene, limonene, p-cymol,
terpinolene, viridiflorene

EFFECTS
The terpenes present in the essential oil exhibit efficacy that
is antimicrobial, possibly antiviral and weakly antimycotic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Tea Tree Oil is used for conditions of the respiratory tract
and for skin conditions. It is also used as a disinfectant. The
oil's administration against acne has been demonstrated in at
least one clinical test.

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine internal uses have included
tonsillitis, pharyngitis, colitis and sinusitis. Externally, Tea
Tree Oil is used for ulcers of the oral mucous membrane,
gingivitis, root canal treatment, mycosis of the nail, skin
infections, ulcers, burns and insect bites.

TEAZLE/757

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

In several cases involving children, overdosage (10 ml for a
child) led to coordination weakness and a state of confusion.
A very high dosage (70 ml) led to coma.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the oil are used
internally and externally.

Storage: Store tightly sealed and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W. Hansel R. Keller K, Reichling J. Rimpler G,
Schneider G (Eds). Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Carson CF. Cookson BD. Farrelly HD, Riley TV, Susceptibility
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus to the essential oil
of Melaleuca alternifolia. J Antimicrob Chemother, 35:421-4.
1995 Mar.

Carson CF. Hammer KA. Riley TV, Broth micro-dilution
method for determining the susceptibility of Escherichia coli
and Staphylococcus aureus to the essential oil of Melaleuca
alternifolia (tea tree oil). Microbios. 82:181-5. 1995.

Carson CF, Riley TV. Antimicrobial activity of the major
components of the essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia. J Appl
Bacteriol. 78:264-9, 1995 Mar.

Carson CF, Riley TV, In-vitro activity of the essential oil of
Melaleuca alternifolia against Streptococcus, spp letter J
Antimicrob Chemother, 78:1177-8, 1996 Jun.

Carson CF, Riley TV, Toxicity of the essential oil of Melaleuca
alternifolia or tea tree oil. letter; comment. J Toxicol Clin
Toxicol, 33:193-4, 1995.

Hammer KA, Carson CF, Riley TV, Susceptibility of transient
and commensal skin flora to the essential oil of Melaleuca
alternifolia (tea tree oil). Am J Infect Control, 24:186-9, 1996
Jun.

Nenoff P, Haustein UF, Brandt W, Antifungal activity of the
essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree oil) against
pathogenic fungi in vitro. Skin Pharmacol, 9:388-94, 1996.

Teazle
Dipsacus silvestris
DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole flowering

plant with root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are lilac with 8 em long,
cylindrical capitula. The bracts are lanceolate-awl-shaped.

----- PAGE 1007 -----
758 /TEAZLE

curved upward, thorny and longer than the capitulum. The
outer bracts with their straight, flexible, thorny tips are
longer than the flowers. The calyx is basin-shaped, and the
corolla is fused with 4 tips. There are 4 stamens and 1
inferior ovary. The fruit is a nutlet.

Leaves. Stem and Root: The plant is a biennial that grows 80
to 150 cm high. The stem is erect, angular and thorny. The
basal leaves are rosette-like, crenate-serrate. The cauline
leaves are oblong with a thorny midrib underneath.

Habitat: With the exception of northern Norway, Sweden
and Finland, wild Teazle is grown throughout all of Europe,
North Africa and Asia Minor.

Production: Common Teazle root is the underground part of

Dipsacus silvestris.

Other Names: Barber's Brush, Brushes and Combs, Card
Thistle. Church Broom, Venus' Basin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tridoide
sweroside, sylvestroside HI and IV

monoterpenes: including cantleyoside, loganin,

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Teazle is used externally for small wounds,
fistulae, eczema and as a rub in the treatment of rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
alcoholic extracts.

Teazle is used externally in

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim, 1979.

Suh HW, Song DK, Son KH, Wie MB, Lee KH, Jung KY, Do
JC, Kim YH, An iridoid glucoside from dipsacus asperoides.
Phytochemistry, 27:239-40, 1996 May.

Suh HW, Song DK, Son KH, Wie MB, Lee KH, Jung KY, Do
JC, Kim YH, Studies on the chemical constituents of Dipsacus
asper Wall. Yao Hsueh Hsueh Pao, 27:1167-72, 1996 Oct.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES
Zhang Y, Kiyohara H, Matsumoto T, Yamada H, Fractionation
and chemical properties of immunomodulating polysaccharides

from roots of Dipsacus asperoides. Planta Med, 27:393-9, 1997
Oct.

Terminalia arjuna

See Arjun Tree

Terminalia chebula
See Tropical Almond

Tetraclinis articulata

See Sandarac

Teucrium chamaedrys

See Germander

Teucrium polium
See Poley

Teucrium scordium

See Water Germander

Teucrium scorodonia
See Wood Sage

Theobroma cacao

See Cocoa

----- PAGE 1008 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Thuja

Thuja occidentalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the leaves and branch tips, the young dried branches,
the fresh, leafy annual branches and the fresh, leafy branches
collected in spring.

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are dark brown, the
female flowers are yellow-green. They are monoecious. The
male flowers are arranged in small, terminal catkins and the
female flowers are-~almost star-shaped. The ripe cones are
brown-yellow, 6 to 8 mm long, ovate and covered in
coriaceous, obtuse scales. The lower ones are patent at the
tips. The seeds are brown-yellow, 3 to 5 mm long and
approximately 1 mm wide. They are narrowly winged the
whole way around.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a narrowly clavate, 12 to
21 m high tree with short horizontally spread branches and
red-brown, striped peeling trunk. The trunk is usually
branched from the base up. The leaves are scale-like, crossed
opposite, imbricate, flattened on the branch side and folded
at the margins. They are dark green above and matte-green
beneath. The scales on the upper part of the branches have a
globular glandular swelling.

Habitat: The plant originated from eastern North America
and is found in Europe mainly as an ornamental plant and is
partly naturalized.

Production: Thuja herb is the young branch tips and young
shoots of Thuja occidentalis. The harvest should take place
in spring when the content of the active agents is optimal.
The herb should be dried in the shade and handled with care.

Not to be Confused With: Other forms of Thuja.

Other Names: Arborvitae, Hackmatack, Swamp Cedar, Tree
of Life, White Cedar

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Water-soluble immuno stimulating polysaccharides and

glycoproteins
Water-soluble immunostimulating glycoproteins

Volatile oil (1.4-4%): chief components (-)-thujone (alpha-
thujone, 59%), (+)-isothujone (beta-thujone, 7-10%), fen-
chone (10-15%)

Flavonoids: including among others, quercitrin, mearusitrin,
the biflavonoids hinoki flavone, amentoflavone, bilobetin-
procyanidins

Lignans

THUJA/759

Tannins

EFFECTS
The antiviral effect of the drug is attributed to many reasons.
The topical use for viral wart growth is plausible. Prolifera-
tion of T cells caused by polysaccharides (esp. CD-4 and T-
helper/inducer-cells) and an increase in the production of
interleukin-2 has been demonstrated.

The essential oil, because of its thujone content, causes
spasm and leads in high doses to clonic-tonic convulsions,
severe metabolism disturbances through fatty degeneration
of the liver, and damage of the renal parenchyma.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Thuja is used for respiratory tract infections
and in conjunction with antibiotics in the treatment of
bacterial skin infections and herpes simplex. Other possible
uses include the treatment of rheumatism, trigeminal neural-
gia, strep throat, gout, pruritus, blepharitis, conjunctivitis,
otitis media, pertussis, tracheitis, kidney and bladder com-
plaints, enuresis, psoriasis, amenorrhea, and cardiac insuffi-
ciency. The drug is used externally as an ointment for
treating pains in the joints, arthritis, and muscle rheumatism,
as well as infected wounds and burns.

Homeopathic Uses: Thuja occidentalis is used for rheuma-
tism, depressive states, poor digestion, and skin and mucous
membrane conditions.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: The drug's toxic effect is due to the thujone
content. The doses should be strictly followed because of the
toxicity of the drug. Allopathic preparations do not contain
any thujone.

The toxicological limit, up to which thujone can be
administered orally without risk to health, has been estab-
lished at 1.25 mg/kg body weight. Only poisonings con-
nected with the consumption of the leaves and shoots of
fresh plants have been recorded since 1980. In therapeutic
dosages of medications, the thujone content is far below the
toxicological limit.

Use in Pregnancy: The drug is misused as an abortifacient.
Thuja should not be taken during pregnancy.

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning, often seen after misuse of the drug
as an abortifacient, include queasiness, vomiting, painful
diarrhea, and mucous membrane hemorrhaging. Instances of
death have been reported.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-

----- PAGE 1009 -----
760 /THUJA

manganate solution, sodium sulphate), administration of
activated charcoal, and shock prophylaxis (appropriate body
position, quiet, warmth), the treatment for poisoning consists
of treating spasms with diazepam (i.v.), colic with atropine,
administering electrolytes and treating possible cases of
acidosis with sodium bicarbonate infusions. Monitoring of
kidney function is essential. Intubation and oxygen respira-

tion may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut, and powdered drug is
found in compound preparations. *« -

Preparation: To ma“e an extract of 1:1, use 50% ethanol; for
an extract of 1:10, use 60% ethanol. To make a tincture, mix
100 parts Thuja powder and 1,000 parts diluted spirit of wine
(EB6).

Daily Dosage: The daily dose for the extract is 1 to 2 ml 3
times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI). wee

Storage: Mark the container as "poisonous" and protect
from light and excessive heat.

LITERATURE
Anonym, Behandlung mit pflanzlichen Immunmodulatoren. In:

Symbiose 5(2):9. 1993.

Anonym, Echinacea-Praparate. In: DAZ 136(22):1814-1820.
1996.

Baumann J, Flamme D, Harnischfeger G, DAZ 127:2518-2522.
1987.

Baumann J, Vergleichende pharmakognostisch-phytochemische
Untersuchungen an Drogen der Familie der Cupressaceae. In:
Diplomarbeit Gottingen. 1987.

Beuscher N, Kopanski L, Purification and biological
characterization of antiviral substances from Thuja occidentalis.
In: PIM 52:555-556. 1986.

Beuscher N, Kopanski L, Reinigung und biologische
Charakterisierung von antiviralen Substanzen aus Thuja-
occidentalis. In: PM 52(6):555-556. 1086.

Beuscher N, Uber die medikamentose Beeinflussung zellularer
Resistenzmechanismen im Tierversuch. Aktivierung von
Peritonealmakrophagen der Maus durch pflanzliche Reizkb'rper.
In: Arzneim Forsch 32(1): 134-138. 1977.

Beuscher N, liber die medikamentose Beeinflussung zellularer
Resistenzmechanismen im Tierversuch. III. Steigerung der
Leukozytenmobilisation bei der Maus durch pflanzliche
Reizkorper. In: Arzneim Forsch 30(I):821-825. 1977.

Gohla S, Dissertation Universitat Hamburg. 1988.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Gross G, Papillomvirus-Infektionen der Haut. In: Med Welt
36:437-440. 1985.

Khurana SMP, Effect of homoeopathic drugs on plant viruses.
In: PM 20:142-146. 1971.

Sait MA, Garg BR, Indian J Dermatol Vernerol Leprol 51:96-
98. 1985.

Schubert W, Die Inhaltsstoffe von Thuja occidentalis. In:
Dissertation Technische Universitat Braunschweig. 1987.

Tachibana Y et aL Mitogenic activities in african traditional
herbal medicines. In: PM 59(4):354. 1993.

Von R, (1961) Can J Chem 39:1200.

Wagner H, Antivirales Prinzip von Thuja aufgeklart. In:
Phytoformum (Medisculab) 1/93:4. 1993.

Zellner J, Arch Pharm 262:381-397. 1924.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-

.1994..

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, JenayjNew
York 1995.

Thuja _ occidentalis
See Thuja

Thuja orientalis

See Oriental Arborvitae

----- PAGE 1010 -----
4&

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Thyme

Thymus vulgaris

TRADE NAMES
Red Thyme and White Thyme, Thyme Herb, Thyme Leaf
and Flower

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the oil extracted
from the fresh, flowering herb: the dried leaves; the striped
and dried leaves; and the fresh aerial part of the flowering
plant.

Flower and Fruit: "The blue-violet to bright red labiate
flowers are arranged in 3 to 6 blossomed axillary clusters.
The calyx is bilabiate with a 3-tipped upper lip and a 2-
tipped lower lip. The upper lip of the corolla is straight and
the lower lip is divided in 3. The stamens are splayed from
the base.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a dwarf shrub that
grows up to 50 cm high with an erect, woody and very
branched-bushy and downy stem, which never roots. The
leaves are short-petioled, linear or oblong-round, acute,
glandular-punctate with an involute margin and a tomentose
under surface.

Characteristics: The odor is aromatic and the taste tangy,
somewhat bitter and camphor-like.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Mediterranean region
and neighboring countries, northern Africa and parts of Asia.
It is extensively cultivated.

Production: Thyme consists of the stripped and dried leaves
and flowers of Thymus vulgaris, Thymus zygis, or both
species.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (LO-2.5%): chief components thymol (20-55%),
p-cymene (14-45%), carvacrol (1-10%), gamma-terpinene
(5-10%), borneol (up to 8%), linalool (up to 8%)

Caffeic acid derivatives: rosmarinic acid (0.15-1.35%)

Flavonoids:' including among others, luteolin, apigenin,
naringenin, eriodictyol, cirsilineol, salvigenin, cirsimaritin,
thymonine, thymusine, partially present as glycosides

Triterpenes": including among others, ursolic acid (1.9%),
oleanolic acid (0.6%)

EFFECTS
Thyme is a bronchial antispasmodic, an expectorant, and an
antibacterial agent. In animal experiments, a spasmolytic
effect was demonstrated for the flavone fraction and an
expectorant effect on ciliary activity for the terpenes.

THYME/761

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough
* Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: The herb is used internally for catarrh of the
upper respiratory tract, dyspeptic complaints, asthma, laryng-
itis, chronic gastritis and whooping cough. Externally, it is
used as a mouthwash and gargle for inflammations of the
mouth and throat, pruritus, and dermatoses. It is also used
externally for tonsillitis and poorly healing wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a low potential for sensitization.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Thyme is available as a comminut-
ed drug, powder, liquid extract or dry extract for infusions
and other galenic preparations. Liquid and solid medicinal
forms for internal and external application are available.
Combinations with other herbs, which have expectorant
‘action, are also available. Extracts of the drug are compo-"
nents of standardized preparations of antitussive and cough
remedy teas.

How Supplied:
Oil — 100%
Liquid — 1:1, 1:5

Preparation: To prepare a tea, use 1.5 to 2 gm drug with
boiling water, steep for 10 minutes, then strain. (1 teaspoon-
ful is equivalent to 14 gm drug.) To prepare an infusion, add
1 to 2 gm drug to 150 ml of water. For a bath, add a
minimum of 0.004 gm thyme oil to | liter of water, filter,
then add to bath water drawn at a temperature of 35-38° C.
Alternatively, add 500 gm of drug to 4 liters of boiling water,
filter, then add to bath water.

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dosage is 10 gm
drug with 0.03% phenol, calculated as thymol. When using a
liquid extract, 1 to 2 gm is taken | to 3 times daily. The
single dose for the infusion is 1.5 gm drug, or | to 2 gm drug
per cup of water taken several times a day. The dose for the
powder is 1 to 4 gm drag twice daily.

The tea can be taken several times a day as needed. A 5%
infusion can be used for compresses. Baths should be taken
for 10 to 20 minutes.

Storage: Keep the herb in a tightly sealed container, and
protect from light and moisture.

----- PAGE 1011 -----
762/THYME

LITERATURE
Czygan FC, Hansel R. Thymian und Quendel - Arznei und

Gewurzpflanzen. In: ZPT 14(2):104. 1992.

Haraguchi H et al., Antiperoxidative components in Thymus
vulgaris. In: PM 62(3):217-221. 1996.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bevvertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Kreis P, Juchelka D, Motz C. Mosandl A, Chirale Inhaltstoffe
atherischer Ole. In: DAZ 131(39): 1984. 1991.

Messerschmidt W, PM 13:56-72. 1965.

Miguel JD. (1976) J Agric Food Chem" 24:833.

Montes GM et al.; (1981) An Real Acad Farm 47(3):285.
Schratz E, Horster H. PM 19:160. 1970.

Sourgens H et al., (1982) Planta Med 45:78.

Svendsen AB, Karlsen J, (1966) Planta Med 14:376.
Vampa G et al.. Plantes Med Phytother 22:195. 1988.
Van den Broucke CO et al, (1983) Pharm Weekbl 5(1 ):9.
Weiss B. Fliick H, Pharm Acta Helv 45:169. 1970.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.. New York

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Thymus serpyllum

See Wild Thyme

Thymus vulgaris
See Thyme

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Tiarella cordifolia

See Coohvort

Tilia species
See Linden

Tobacco

Nicotiana tabacum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flowers are in many-
branched panicles. The sepals are 12 to 25 mm long and
tubular to tubular-campanulate. The tips are triangular,
pointed and unequal. The corolla is 30 to 55 mm long,
funnel-shaped, pale greenish-cream and often pinkish distal-
Jy. The limb is 10 to 15 mm with pointed lobes, which are
sometimes subentire. The four stamens are unequal and
sometimes slightly exerted. The capsule is 15 to 20 mm long,
ellipsoid to globose.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Tobacco is an annual or biennial
plant, 1 to 3 m in height. The plant has a long fibrous root
and an upright, round, pubescent and stick stem, which is
heavily branched at the top. The leaves are up to 50 cm in
length. They are ovate to elliptical or lanceolate, pointed,
alternate and sessile. They sometimes have a short, winged
petiole.

Habitat: The plant originates from tropical America and is
cultivated worldwide, in particular in the U.S., China,
Turkey, Greece, Holland, France, Germany and most sub-

tropical countries.

Production: Tobacco leaves are the cultivated, unfermented
leaves of Nicotiana tabacum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Pyridine alkaloids (0.5-8.0%, among select cultivars 1.5%):
chief alkaloid nicotine (30-60% share of the alkaloid
mixture) including among others N-formyl nor-nicotine,
cotinine, myosmine, nicotyrine, anabasine, nicotelline

EFFECTS

In small doses, Tobacco increases blood pressure and the
activity of the gastric mucous membrane. In larger doses, it
reduces blood pressure and lowers muscle tone of the

----- PAGE 1012 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

gastrointestinal tract. Tobacco is a stimulant to the respira-
tory and central nervous system.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Nicotine is used to help break the smoking

habit.

Apache Indians use the drug to treat toothache, mosquito
bites and bee stings. In Brazil and Guyana, Tobacco is used
for worm infestation, skin parasites and biliary flow distur-
bances. The drug's use in these conditions is not advised
because of the risk of toxicity.

Indian Medicine: Tobacco is used for toothache, dental
caries, earache, suppurating rhinitis, hernias, and painful

swellings.

Homeopathic Uses: Tobacco is used for angina pectoris, low-
blood pressure and vomiting with diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Tobacco leaves are severely poisonous. The chief toxin is
nicotine, a liquid alkaloid, that can be resorbed through the
skin.

OVERDOSAGE

The lethal dosage for nicotine for an adult is 40 to 100 mg,
although this can be considerably elevated through habitua-
tion (with smoking Tobacco, 2 to 7 g of the drug; one
cigarette contains 10 mg nicotine, of which I to 2 mg are
inhaled during smoking). Symptoms of an acute poisoning
include dizziness, salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, trembling
of the hands and feelings of weakness in the legs; very high
dosages can lead rapidly to spasms, unconsciousness, cardiac
arrest and respiratory failure. Poisonings occur in particular
through the ingestion of cigarettes by children, the handling
of insecticides containing nicotine (through skin contact) and
in connection with the harvesting of Tobacco (also through
cutaneous resorption). Nicotine patches also represent a
danger for children.

Following gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium
permanganate solution, instillation of activated charcoal and
sodium sulphate solution, the therapy for poisonings consists
of treating spasms with diazepam (i.vl), chloral hydrate for
children (rectal); cardiac massage; administration of orcipre-
naline; and atropine for severe sympathetic excitation.
Intubation and oxygen respiration may also be necessary. No

centrally effective analeptics are to be given.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
internally as a gum and externally as a transdermal patch.

The nicotine alkaloid is used

Preparation: Nicorette (chewing gum); also as transdermal
patches.

TOBACCO/763

Daily Dosage: Nicotine as a pure alkaloid in smoker's
remedies; nicotine (2 to 4 mg) bound by polacrilin (8 to 16
mg). Nicorette is an ion exchanger and therefore causes the
slow release of nicotine, which is absorbed in the saliva over
and over again. Eventually, the doses are reduced as the
breaking of the habit progresses.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily: chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Anonym, Harvard-Studie: Herzkrank durch Pas >i\ rauchen. In:

DAZ 137(22): 1860. 1997.
Anonym, Passivrauchen:Risiko fur vorzeitigen Herztod. In: DAZ
137(14): 1097. 1997.

Anonym, Rauchen und Gesundheit. In: DAZ 13125): 1313.
1991.
Anonym, Rauchen wahrend der Schwangerschaft -

Lungenfunktion von Sauglingen gestort. In: DAZ 137(8):554.
1997.

. Anonym, Raucherinnen schaden ihren Knochen. In: DAZ

137(26):2226. 1997.

Anonym, Risiken des Rauchens in der Schwangerschaft. In:
DAZ 131(20):1010. 1991.

Anonym, Risikofaktoren: Primare Prevention des Schlaganfalls.
In: DAZ 136(24): 1999-2003. 1996.

Anonym, Zigaretten: Raucher haben ein doppeltes Alzheimer-
Risiko. In: DAZ 137(17):1423. 1997.

Bakoula C et al., Obective passive smoking indicators and
respiratory morbidity in young children. In: DAZ 135(46 »:4330-
4331 et 4334. 1995.

Bhide SV et al., Beitrag Tabakforsch Int 14:29. 1987.

Borisjuk NV, Davidjuk YM, Kostishin SS, Miroshnichenco GP,
Velasco R, Hemleben V, Volkov RA, Structural analysis of
rDNA in the genus Nicotiana. Plant Mol Biol. 35:655-60. 1997
Nov.

Devarenne TP, Shin DH, Back K, Yin S, Chappell J.
Characterization of cucumber mosaic virus. IV. Movement*
protein and coat protein are both essential for cell-to-cell
movement of cucumber mosaic virus. Virology. 349:237-48.
1997 Oct 27.

Duncker S, Atemwegserkrankungen: Passivrauchen
verschlimmert Bronchialasthma bei Kindern. In: DAZ
136(3): 184. 1996.

Enzell CR, Wahlberg I, Aaasen Al, Fortschr Chem Org
Naturstoffe 34:1. 1977.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 1013 -----
764 /TOBACCO

Jungmayr P, Schlaganfall: Wie hoch ist das Risiko fur

Exraucher? In: DAZ 136(2):28. 1996.

Kammerer S, Nichtraucherschutz. Passivrauchen erhoht
Lungenkrebsrisiko. In: DAZ 135(14): 1264-1266. 1995.

Kern W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York. 1969.

Klotz KL, Liu TT. Liu L. Lagrimini LM, Expression of the
Tobacco anionic peroxidase gene is tissue-specific and

levelopmentally regulated. Plant Mol Biol. 36:509-20. 1998
Mar.

Langheimer P. Rauchen und freie Radikale. In: DAZ
34(10):836. 1994.

Lewin L. Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Lippiello. Buch. In: The Biology of Nicotine. Current Research
Issue. Lippiello PM, Collins AC. Gray JA. Robinson JH (Eds.).
Raven Press New York. 1992.

Matsushima S. Ohsumi T. Sugawara S, Agric Biol Chem
(Tokyo) 47:507. 1983.

Miiller CE, Nicotin - GenuPmittel oder Arzneistoff. In: DAZ
135(36):3253-3268. 1995.

Olbrich A, Das Lungenemphysem - Neuere Apsekte zu
Pathogenese und Therapie. In: DAZ 135(47):4393-4405. 1995.

Piotrowski M. Oecking C. Five new 14-3-3 isoforms from
Nicotiana tabacum L.: implications for the phylogeny of plant
14-3-3 proteins. Planta. 204:127-30. 1998 Jan.

Roth L. Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Seigel R, Collings PR, Diaz JL, Econ Botany 32:16. 1977.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Wasielewski S, Neuropharmakologie: MAO-B-Hernmung:
Psychoaktiver Zigarettenrauch. In: DAZ 136(30):2529-2530.
1996.

Wasielewski S, Zigarettenrauch: Wie Passivrauchen Herz und
Kreislauf schadigt. In: DAZ 135(28):2605-2606, siehe auch S.
2606 rechts. 1995.

Willaman JJ, Hui-Li L, Lloydia 33(3A):1. 1970.

Tolu Balsam

Myroxylon balsamum

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the balsam from
the sweltered trunks, the hardened resin balsam that has been
extracted from damaged trunks, softened and_ purified

through a process of melting and sweltering.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

flowers
simple, richly

Flower and Fruit: The androgynous
pedicles approximately 12 cm
blossomed racemes. The calyx is inferior, broadly tubular or
oblong-campanulate, dark green with short, rough hairs. The
5 petals are white and stemmed. The standard is almost
circular. The stamens are bright red and the 1-valve ovary is
on a long stem. The fruit is a 1-seeded, indehiscent, winged
pod. The seeds are distinctly curved, brow-red and reniform.

grow on
long on

Leaves, Stem and Root: These balsam trees grow to 25 m tall
with a round, spreading crown that only starts to branch at a
height of 13 to 19 m. The bark is smooth, yellow-gray or
brown with numerous lenticles. The leaves are usually odd-
pinnate and have 4 to 7 obovate, acuminate, coreacious,
short-petioled leaflets. The upper surface is dark green and
the lower surface pale green.

Characteristics: Before drying, the resin smells strongly of
vanilla or benzoin.

Habitat: Myroxylon balsamum is indigenous to South and
Central America, Sri Lanka and Jamaica.

Production: Peruvian balsam consists of the balsam generat-
ed from scorched tree trunks of Myroxylon balsamum. The
bark of 10-year-old trees is removed just above ground level
and this area is scorched with a flame, after which the
balsam is collected in cloths placed on the scorched area.

Tolu Balsam consists of the balsam generated from the
incised tree trunks of Myroxylon balsamum. The balsam is
purified by melting, straining and solidifying. A V-shaped
incision is made in the tree trunk, and a vessel is secured
under the incision to collect the resin, which is then cleaned.

Other Balsam Tree, Peruvian Balsam, Tolu

Opobalsam

Names:

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: PERUVIAN BALSAM

Ester mixture, so-called cinnamein (50-70%):
benzyl benzoate and benzyl cinnamoate

made up of

Resins (20-30%): chief constituent cinnamic acid ester of the
so-called peruresitannols (polymer)

Volatile oils: including some with nerolidol

EFFECTS: PERUVIAN BALSAM -

The drug has an antibacterial/antiseptic effect, promotes the
granulation process and is antiparasitic (especially for
scabies). The main active constituent is an ester mixture that
mainly contains benzyl benzoate.

COMPOUNDS: TOLU BALSAM
Ester mixture (10-20%): made up of benzyl benzoate and
benzyl cinnamoate

Free benzoic acid/free cinnamic acid (10 to 30%)

----- PAGE 1014 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS
Resins (up to 80%)
Volatile oil

EFFECTS: TOLU BALSAM

The undiluted oil showed antibacterial and fungicidal effects
in the diffusion test. The drug also acts as an expectorant.
The effect on the respiratory tract appears to work in the
field of aromatherapy.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
PERUVIAN BALSUM
Approved by Commission E:

* Wounds and burns
« Hemorrhoids

External Use: for infected and poorly healing wounds, for
burns, decubitus ulcers, frostbite, leg ulcers, bruises caused

by prostheses and hemorrhoids.

Unproven Uses: Although no longer used internally, it was
used previously for fevers, colds, coughs, bronchitis, inflam-
mation of the mouth and pharynx, and a tendency to
infection. External folk medicine uses are the treatment of
eczema and itching. Outdated uses include* treatment of
scabies; as a liniment for headaches, toothache and rheumat-
ic symptoms; and use of the resin for uterine and umbilical
venous bleeding.

Homeopathic Uses: Indications in homeopathy include
chronic mucous membrane inflammation of the respiratory
and urinary organs.

TOLU BALSAM

Approved by Commission E:
* Cough

* Bronchitis

Tolu Balsam is used to treat inflammation of the mucous
membranes of the respiratory tract.

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine externa] uses include the
approved indications above, as well as the treatment of
wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
PERUVIAN BALSAM

Peruvian balsam often causes contact allergies. Urticaria,
recurring aphthoid oral ulcers, Quincke's disease and diffuse
purpura can all occur, among other ailments (possibly also
following internal administration, for example, of foods
containing Peruvian Balsam). Photodermatoses and photo-
toxic reactions are possible without ingestion. Kidney
damage has been observed following internal as well as
external use of large dosages (such as albuminuria, pyelitis
and necroses of the canaliculus epithelia).

TOLU BALSAM / 765

TOLU BALSAM

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. However, just as is the case with Peruvian Balsam,
allergic reactions are possible.

DOSAGE
PERUVIAN BALSAM

Mode of Administration: Galenic preparations for external
use.

How Supplied: Commercial pharmaceutical preparations
include ointments and suppositories.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops. 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute. 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34).

Daily Dosage: Galenic preparations containing 5 to 20%
Peruvian Balsam, for extensive surface application not more
than 10% Peruvian Balsam. Duration of application should
not exceed | week.

Storage: Store Peruvian Balsam in a container that seals
"tightly and prevents exposure to light.*

TOLU BALSAM
Mode of Administration:
Balsam are used internally.

Various preparations of Tolu

Preparation: To prepare Tolu Balsam syrup, dissolve the
drug in 96% alcohol in a water bath with reflux; add 85%
glycerol and water, then warm the mixture. Let stand for a
week before adding saccharose. Prepare a 1000 ml tincture
with 200 g Tolu Balsam and 92.3% ethanol.

Daily Dosage: Average daily dosage is, 0.6 g of drug,
depending on the preparation.

Storage: Store protected from light in tightly sealed contain-
ers with a suitable drying agent. Do not store Tolu Balsam in
powder form.

LITERATURE

PERUVIAN BALSAM
Friedel HD, Dissertation Marburg. 1986.

Gharbo SA, Hussein FT, Nassra AA, UAR J Pharm Sci
11:170-173. 1970.

Glas] H, Wagner H, DAZ 114:45-47. 1974.

Lund K, Rimpler H, (1985) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 125(3): 105.
Rudski E, Grzywaz Z, (1977) Dermatologia 155(2): 115.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 1015 -----
766 /TOLU BALSAM

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C. Thomas, USA 1981.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

TOLU BALSAM
Harkiss KJ, Linley PA, PM 35:61-65. 1979.

Lund K, Rimpler H, (1985) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 125(3):105.
Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America.
Charles C. Thomas, USA 1981.

Rudski E, Grzywaz Z, (1977) Dermatologia 155(2): 115.
Wahlberg I, Enzell CR, Acta Chem Scand 25:352-354. 1971.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997:

Tomato

Lycopersicon esculentum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh leaves,
the fresh herb collected during the flowering season or the
whole plant.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in lateral, cyme-like coils.
The tips of the calyx are linear-lanceolate. The corolla is
yellow, as long as the calyx and has a very short tube. It is
divided into pointed, lanceolate lobes. The stamens are fused
to the tube. The stigma is greenish and capitular. The fruit is
a large, juicy, smooth, round to ovoid berry with a short,
obtuse tip. It is scarlet, occasionally yellow or whitish with a
diameter of 2 to 10 cm. The seeds are reniform, flattened,
whitish-gfay-yellow and villous-tomentose.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tomato plant is an annual with a
fusiform, fibrous root. The stem grows to 120 cm, and is
leafy, heavily branched and glandular-haired. The leaves are
broad-petiolate, odd-pinnate, petiolate, ovate-lanceolate, pin-
natifid, dentate and slightly involute leaflets. The leaves have
a gray-green underside.

Habitat: The plant probably originated in southern or Central
America; today it is only cultivated.

Production: Tomato tincture is the homeopathic motner
tincture of the whole plant Lycopersicon esculentum.

Other Names: Love Apple

. ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Steroid alkaloid glycosides: chief alkaloid alpha-tomatine

EFFECTS
The tomatin content has been shown to be antibacterial. In
animal experiments, a lowering of blood pressure was
observed after IV administration of tomatin hydrochloride.
Lectin isolated from the fruit is said to have an effect on cell
ivision and DANN synthesis in human leukocyte cultures.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, Tomato is used externally
for sore eyes (extract) and inflammations of the mouth and

throat (decoction).

Indian Medicine: Tomato is used for 'flu' infections (tea),
also for flatulence, atonic dyspepsia and anorexia.

Homeopathic Uses: Lycopersicon esculentum is used to treat
rheumatic conditions, colds, chills and digestive disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE

Signs of poisoning are not to be expected with less tiian 100
gm of the fresh leaves (or green tomatoes) and for that
reason is unlikely. Symptoms would be severe mucous
membrane irritation (vomiting, diarrhea, and colic). Follow-
ing absorption, dizziness, stupor, headache, bradycardia,

----- PAGE 1016 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

respiratory disturbances, mild spasms and, in very severe
cases, death through respiratory failure could occur.

Case studies are not known.
DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is commonly used in
homeopathic dilutions.

Preparation: The mother tincture is produced by maceration
or percolation of the fresh or dried drug, with an ethanol
content of 45%.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Tomaten als Krebsschutz. In: DAZ 134(6):485. 1994.

Tonka Beans

Dipteryx odorata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The beans are usually 2 to 5 cm long and
1 cm in diameter. They have a grayish or black color.

Characteristics: The bean has a characteristic odor, like
new-mown hay of coumarin.

Habitat: South America
Production: Tonka Beans are the seeds of Dipteryx odorata.
Other Names: Tonquin Bean

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Coumarin (1-3% to 10%)

Fatty oil

EFFECTS

Tonka Beans have a tonic and aromatic effect.
INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Whooping cough (no longer used).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
therapeutic administration of drugs containing coumarin can

TRAGACANTH / 767

lead to slight liver damage (elevated liver enzyme values in
the blood) in a very small number of patients, that is,
however, reversible following discontinuance of the drug.

OVERDOSAGE
The intake of very high dosages (4 gm coumarin, equivalent
to 150 gm of the drug) could bring about stupor, headache,
nausea and vomiting.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Tonka Beans are obsolete as a drug.

LITERATURE
Kalume DE, Sousa MV, Morhy L, Purification characterization
sequence determination and mass spectrometric analysis of a
trypsin inhibitor from seeds of the Brazilian tree Dipteryx alata
(Leguminosae). J Protein Chem, 14:685-93, Nov, 1995.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Sullivan G, (1968) J Agric Food Chem 30(3):609.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tragacanth

Astragalus — gummifer

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal product of the plant is the
gum-like exudation from the trunk and branches.

Flower and Fruit: The axillary flowers are solitary or in
groups of 2 or 3 and are sessile. The calyx is 6 to 7 mm long
and densely pubescent. The corolla is yellowish to white and
sometimes has bluish or reddish veins. The standard, wings
and carina are each 9 to 10 mm long. The fruit is ovoid, 4
mm long with dense, silky hairs. The seed is oval, smooth
and about 3 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Astralagus gummifer is a low shrub
that grows up to 30 cm high and has gray branches that
become glabrous. The older branches have scale-like re-
mains of the stipules from the previous year, which
disappear later, and a 1 to 4 cm long perennial, thorny leaf
column. The 8 to 14 leaflets are folded, oblong-ovate, 2.5 to
6 mm long and 0.7 to 2.5 mm wide, blue-gray and glabrous
or sparsely pubescent beneath.

Habitat: The plant grows in Turkey, Syria, Lebanon,
northwest Iraq and the border area between Iran and Iraq.

----- PAGE 1017 -----
768/TRAGACANTH

Production: Tragacanth is the latex that exudes primarily
from immediately under the bark of Astralagus gummifer
and other varieties. It is extracted by making an incision in
the trunk and branches of shrubs growing in the wild. When
dried, it forms flakes that swell in water to form a gelatinous
mass.

Other Names: Gum Dragon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Polysaccharides (water-soluble part, approximately 40%):
tragacanthine, which can decompose into tragacanthic acid
(galacturonane with side chains consisting of D-xylose, L-
fucose, D-galactose)

Arabino-galactane-protein complex (non-water  soluable
part, approximately 60%): containing bassorin, a composi-
tion similar to that of tragacanthine

EFFECTS
Tragacanth has a laxative effect, primarily due to stimulating
stretching of the intestinal wall, which results in increased
peristalis.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Tragacanth is used as a laxative. Folk
medicine uses in Europe and the Arab world have included
treatment for tumors of the eyes, liver and throat. Efficacy
has not been proven.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Allergic reactions have been observed in rare cases.
Insufficient fluid supply following intake of large quantities
of tragacanth can lead to obstruction ileus, as well as to
esophageal closure.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
combinations and preparations.

Tragacanth is used in various

Daily Dosage: Recommended daily dosage is not specified.
A typical single dose is 1 tsp. granulated drug (approximate-
ly 3g) added to 250 to 300 ml liquid for oral administration.

Storage: Tragacanth cannot be stored for any significant
length of time because of its instability.

LITERATURE
Anderson DMW, Bridgeman MME, PH 24:2301-2304. 1985.
Aspinall GO, Baillie J, J Chem Soc: 1702-1714. 1963.

Fang S et ah, (1982): You Ji Hua Xue 2: 26.

Gralen N, Kartholm M, J Colloid Sci 5:21-36. 1950.
Osswald H, (1968) Arzneim Forsch 18: 1495.

Srimal RC, Dhawan CN, (1973) J Pharm Pharmacol 25: 447.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Whistler RL et al., (1976) Adv Carbohydr Chem Biochem 32:
235.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs, Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl. Wiss Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Trailing Arbutus
Epigae repens
DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh or dried
leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in apical dense racemes.
They are white with a reddish tinge and are very fragrant.
They are divided at the tip into 5 segments which open in a
star shape.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a fragrant evergreen
branching shrub with rust-colored, pubescent, round stems.
Roots develop at the stem nodes, which spread quickly. The
leaves are petioled, broadly ovate, 2.5 to 4 cm long and
about 2 cm wide, coriaceous, entire-margined, reticulate,
witfi a cordate base and short pointed apex and short hairs on
the undersurface. The branches, petioles and leaf nerves are
very pubescent.

Characteristics: The plant has a similar action to Buchu on
the urinary system.

Habitat: Indigenous to North America, established as an
ornamental plant in.Europe.

Production: Trailing Arbutus is the aerial part of Epigae
repens.

Other Names: Eleuthero, Gravel Plant, Ground Laurel,
Mountain Pink, Water Pink, Winter Pink

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Arbutin (hydroquinone glucoside)

Tannins

----- PAGE 1018 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS
Eleuthero has astringent and diuretic properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Trailing Arbutus is used for urinary tract

conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Nausea and vomiting can also occur with stomach sensitivity
in children. Liver damage, cachexia, hemolytic anemia and
depigmentation of the hair is possible with long-term use of
the drug.

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosages could lead to inflammatory reactions of the
mucous membranes of the bladder and urinary passages,
accompanied by strangury and possible blood in the urine.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Trailing Arbutus is available as an

infusion or extract for internal use.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Traveller's Joy

Clematis vitalba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in leafy cymes.
The blossoms are small and white with 4 downy, revolute or
splayed bracts. The stamens and ovaries are numerous. The
fruit is a red-brown, long-tailed nut.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to about 15 to 5 m
high. The leaves are petiolate and 5-pinnate. The leaflets are
ovate or slightly cordate, acute and lobed. The petioles are
clinging and the stems climbing, grooved, at first leafy then
woody.

Characteristics: The flowers have a slight scent resembling
white thorn. The plant is poisonous if ingested in large
amounts.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe.

TRAVELLER'S JOY/769

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-forming agents: In the freshly harvested
plant, it is presumably the glycoside ranunculin that changes
enzymatically when the plant is cut into small pieces, and
probably also when it is dried. It then changes into the
pungent, volatile protoanemonine that is severely irritating to
skin and mucous membranes but quickly dimerizes to
anemonine; when dried, the plant is not capable of protoane-
monine formation.

Saponins

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug causes blistering and was formerly
used to treat diseases of the male genitals, as well as for
poorly healing wounds. Today, it is used in small doses, both
internally and externally, for migraine.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages of the dehydrated drug.

Extended skin contact with the freshly harvested, bruised
plant can lead to treatment-resistant blisters and cauteriza-
tions due to the release of protoanemonine, which is severely
irritating to skin and mucous membranes. If taken internally,
severe irritation to the gastrointestinal tract, combined with
colic, diarrhea and irritation of the urinary drainage passages,
are possible. Symptomatic treatment for external contact
should consist of irrigation with diluted potassium perman-
ganate solution followed by mucilage.

OVERDOSAGE

Ingestion of the drug should be treated with gastric lavage
followed by activated charcoal. Death by asphyxiation
following the intake of large quantities of protoanemonine-
forming plants has been observed in animal experiments.
The toxicity of this plant is less than that of many other
Ranunculaceae (Anemones nemorosae) due to the, relatively
low levels of protoanemonine-forming agents.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used topically and is
also available in alcoholic extracts.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 1019 -----
770/TRAVELLER'S JOY

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K: Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Southwell IA et al., Protoanemonin in australian Clematis. In:
PH 33:1099. 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tree of Heaven

Ailanthus altissima

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried trunk and

root bark.

Flower and Fruit: The small, greenish-yellow flower is in
branched, axillary or terminal panicles. Some of the flowers
are male, some female and some androgynous. The calyx is
short and has 5 glandular, fused sepals. The sepals are much
longer than the corolla and have 5 hollow, splayed petals.
There are 10 stamens, often only 5 in the androgynous and
rudimentary remains in the female flowers. There are 5
obovate, compressed ovaries with 5 splayed stigmas. There
is a narrow, oblong-lanceolate schizocarp, 4 to 5 cm by 1
cm. It is winged above and below, first green then brown-red
and finally brown. The seed is orbicular and found in the
middle of the fruit section. It is thin-skinned, without any
recognizable endosperm and has an ovate, flat cotyledon.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Ailanthus altissima is a beautiful,
ark is smooth, pale

fast-growing tree, up to 30 m high. The
and vertically striated. The branches are initially fine-haired,
yellow or red-brown. The leaves are up to 1 m long and odd-
pinnate. The upper surface of the leaves is dark green and the
under-surface is light gray-green. Both sides of the leaf are
glandular-haired. The leaflets are ovate to oblong-lanceolate.
The shallow, cordate base of the leaflets has 1 to 3 small
lobes at either side, each with 1 gland. The wood surface is

satin-like and white.

Characteristics: The flowers have a strong elder flower
scent. The fresh bark and leaves give off an unpleasant,

nauseating smell.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Habitat: The tree was originally indigenous to China. Today
it grows in the wild and is cultivated in tropical and
northern Europe and North

subtropical eastern Asia,

America.

Production: Tree of Heaven bark is the trunk and branch
bark of Ailanthus altissima. The bark is gathered year-round.
The outer bark is removed and dried in the sun. After drying,
there is a process of sorting and removing foreign bodies,
washing, macerating and a second drying.

Other Names: Ailanto, Chinese Sumach, Vernis de Japon

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Quassinoids: including ailanthone, quassin
Indole alkaloids of the beta-carbolic type
Tannins

EFFECTS

An antimalarial action is being tested in an in-vitro trial. The
active agents also have astringent, antipyretic, and antispas-
modic properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In Africa, Tree of Heaven is used for
cramps, asthma, fast heart rate, gonorrhea, epilepsy and
tapeworm infestation. It is increasingly used in the treatment
of malaria.

Chinese Medicine: The drug is used for pathological
leukorrhea, diarrhea, chronic diarrhea, chronic dysentery and

dysmenorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Large doses of the drug are said to lead to queasiness,
dizziness, headache, tingling in the limbs and diarrhea.

OVERDOSAGE
Fatal poisonings have been observed in animal experiments.
Treatment of poisonings should be conducted symptomati-
cally, following stomach and intestinal emptying.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:
researched as a drug; up until now it has only been used in
folk medicine.

Tree of Heaven is still being

Daily Dosage: 6 to 9 gm of drug

Storage: Keep in a dry, well-ventilated area away from

moths.

LITERATURE

Bray DH, et al., (1987) Phytother Res 1(1):22.
Casinovi CG, et al., (1964) Tetrahedron Lett: 3991.
Casinovi CG, et al., (1965) Tetrahedron Lett: 2273.

----- PAGE 1020 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Furuno T, et al., (1984) Bull Chem Soc Jpn 57:2484-2489.
Geissmann T, (1964) Ann Rev Pharmacol 4:305.

Ghosh P et al, (1977) Lloydia 40(4):636.

Ishibashi M, et al., (1983) Bull Chem Soc Jpn 56:3683-3693.
Ishibashi M, et al., (1984) Bull Chem Soc Jpn 57:2013-2014.
Ishibashi M, et al., (1985) Bull Chem Soc Jpn 58:2723-2724.
Ishibashi M, et al., (1983) Chem Pharm Bull 31:2179-2182.
Ishibashi M, et al., (1985) Tetrahedron Lett: 1205-1206.
Naora H, et al., (1983) Bull Chem Soc Jpn 56:3694-3698.
Niimi Y, et al., (1987) Chem Pharm Bull 35:4302-4306.
Ohmoto T, et al., (1981) Chem Pharm Bull 29:390-395.
Ohmoto T, et al., (1984) Chem Pharm Bull 32:170-173.
Polonski J, (1985) Prog Chem Org Nat Prod 47:221.
Polonsky J, (1973) Fortschr Chem Org Naturst 30:101.

Riicker G, (1995) Malariawirksame Verbindungen aus Pflanzen,
insbesondere Peroxide. In: PUZ 24(4): 189-195.

Varga E, et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:337-339.
Varga E, et al., (1981) Fitoterapia 52:183-186.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, (1992) Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck,
Haug Verlag, Heidelberg.

Madaus G, (1979) Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde
1-3, Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, (1993) Giftpflanzen,
Pflanzengifte, 4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech.

Trifolium pratense
See Red Clover

Trigonella foenum-graecum
See Fenugreek

Trilltum erectum
See Beth Root

TRITICUM /771

Triticum
Agropyron repens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome collected
in spring or autumn.

Flower and Fruit: Five to 7 flowered spikelets in groups of
20 form a 10 cm-long ear. The ears are usually short, upright
and usually dense green and inconspicuous grass with 5
veined, lanceolate, sharply keeled glume. The spike stem is
glabrous. The glume is 8 to 11 mm long, acuminate or
awned. The anthers are 5 to 6 mm. The fruit is 6 to 7 mm
long, flat to the front with | groove.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Triticum is a 0.2 to 15 m perennial
plant with a hardy creeping rhizome. The rhizome has long
white runners, is segmented and hollow. The leaves are thin,
flat, grass-green or gray-green. The upper surface is rough
and often covered in solitary, long hairs.

Characteristics: The spikelets have their broad side turned
toward the wave-like curved main axis. The plant is
odorless; the taste sweetish.

Habitat: Indigenous to the temperate regions of the Northern
Hemisphere. Introduced to Greenland, South America,
Australia and New Zealand.

Production: Triticum rhizome consists of the rhizome, roots
and short stems of Agropyron repens, harvested in spring
before the blade develops, as well as its preparations. The
rhizomes are collected after the fields are harrowed. They are
cleaned, washed and dried at approximately 35° C.

Not to be Confused With: The rhizomes of Cynodon
dactylon, Poaceae and Carex species (a frequent occurrence).

Other Names: Couch Grass Quitch Grass, Witch Grass,
Twitch-Grass, Scotch Quelch, Dog-Grass, Quickgrass,
Cutch, Durfa Grass, Quack Grass, Elytrigia repens

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Mucilages

Triticin (polyfructosan)
Sugar alcohols
Soluble silicic acid

Volatile oil: including carvacrol and carvone-containing P-
hydroxyalkyl cinnamic acid alkyl ester

EFFECTS
The essential oil has an antimicrobial effect.

----- PAGE 1021 -----
772/TRITICUM

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Infections of the urinary tract
* Kidney and bladder stones

Unproven Uses: Triticum is used as a flushing-out therapy,
for inflammatory diseases of the urinary tract and the
prevention of kidney gravel. The drug is also used for
cystitis, kidney stones, gout, rheumatic pain and chronic skin
disorders. Due to the high mucilage content, the drug is used
as a soothing cough remedy. The infusion is used for
constipation. It is also used as fructose-containing additive

for diabetics.

Homeopathic Uses: Agropyron repens is used to treat

urinary tract infections.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
No flushing-out therapy if edema is present due to cardiac or

renal insufficiency.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. For flushing-out therapy, ensure copious fluid

intake.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration; Comminuted herb decoctions and
other galenic preparations for internal use.

Preparation: Liquid extract: 1:1; Tincture: 1:5; Tea: Pour

boiling water over the drug and strain after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 3 to 10 gm of drug
in 1 cup of boiling water; average daily dose is 6 to 9 gm of

drug.

Tea: 12 to 24 gm drunk fresh several times a day; Liquid
extract: 4 to 8 ml 3 times daily; Tincture: 5 to 15 ml 3 times
daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet, 10 globules every 30
to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times a day (chronic);
Parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; Chronic: once
a day (HABI).

Storage: The drug must be kept in sealed containers,
protected from light and moisture.

LITERATURE

Bell EA, Jansen DH, (1971) Nature 229:136.

Boesel R, Schilcher H, PM 55:399-400. 1989.

Kiesewetter R, Muller M, (1958) Pharmazie 13:777.
Koetter U, et al., Isolierung und Strukturaufklarung von p-

Hydroxyzimtsaurealkylesterverbindungen aus dem Rhizom von
Agropyron repens, 2. Mitt. In: PM 60(5):488. 1994.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Koetter U, Kaloga M, Schilcher H, Isolierung und
Strukturaufklarung von p-Hydroxyzimtsaurealkylester-
Verbindungen aus dem Rhizom von Agropyron repens; 1. Mitt.
In: PM 59(3):279. 1993.

Paslawska S, Piekos R, (1976) Planta Med 30:216.
Racz-Kotilla E and Mozes E, (1971) Rev Med 17:82.

Schilcher H, Boesel R, Effenberger ST, Segebrecht S, Neuere
Untersuchungsergebnisse mit aquaretisch, antibakteriell und
prostatotrop wirksamen Arzneipflanzen. In: ZPT 10(3):77. 1989.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl, Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Triticum aestivum
See Wheat

Trollius europaeus
See Globe Flower

Tropaeolum majus

See Nasturtium

Tropical Almond
Terminalia chebula

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the tree is the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in 5 to 7 cm
long, axillary spikes. The flowers are small and fused. Their
structures are arranged in fives. The sepals are almost
glabrous and yellowish-white; the calyx tube is 5-tipped.
There are no petals, but there are 10 stamens and a single-
chambered, inferior ovary. The style is long and projects out
of the bud. The fruit is a glabrous, ovoid drupe, yellow to
orange-brown when ripe and 2 to 4 cm long.

----- PAGE 1022 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: Tropical Almond is a tree that grows
up to 25 m high. The leaves are alternate or opposite, 7 to 18
cm long, 4 to 6 cm wide and coriaceous. The petiole is
approximately 2.5 cm long, with 2 glands at the upper end.
The lamina is ovate or elliptical, blunt and orbicular at the
base. It is finely crenate and woolly pubescent beneath. The
branches are rust colored, woolly or glabrous, and the trunk
has a brown, longitudinally fissured bark.

Habitat: India

Production: Tropical Almond fruit is the dried ripe fruit of
Terminalia chebula.

Not to be Confused With: Can be confused with emblica and
Terminalia bellirica.

Black Myrobalan, Chebulic Myrobalan,

Other Names:
Myrobalan

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tannins (20 to 45%): gallotannins, including terchebulin,
terflavin A, punicalagin, corilagin, chebulic acid, and chebu-
linic acid

(9%):

Monosaccharides/oligosaccharides including D-glu-

cose, D-fructose, saccharose
Fruit acids: including quinic acid (1.5%), shikimic acid (2%)

Fatty oil (in the seeds, to 40%)

EFFECTS
Its high tannin content explains the use of the drug as an
astringent. A variety of experiments have demonstrated
antibacterial, cardiotonic and antiarteriosclerotic (lowering
of cholesterol levels) effects for the drug.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Chinese Medicine: Tropical Almond _ is
diarrhea, chronic dysentery, rectal prolapse, loss of voice
because of chronic coughs, blood in the stool, leucorrhea,
night sweats and undesired discharges.

used for chronic

Indian Medicine: The drug is used in the treatment of
wounds, ulcers, gingivitis, excitation, gastric complaints,
anorexia, worm infestation, flatulence, hemorrhoids, jaun-
dice, for liver and spleen disease, pharyngodynia, hiccups,
coughs, epilepsy, eye disease, skin changes, leprosy, inter-
mittent fever, cardiac dysfunction, gastritis and neuropathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages, although
even therapeutic dosages could lead to constipation, due to
the high tannin content (administration as an antidiarrheal).

TROPICAL ALMOND / 773

OVERDOSAGE

The administration of extremely high doses (25% of the
fodder) over a period of 4 weeks to rats led to kidney and
liver damage; mice developed liver tumors in a related
experiment (750 mg/kg body weight of the tannin fraction
over a period of 12 weeks).

DOSAGE
Mode
internal and external use.

of Administration: Whole herb preparations for

Daily Dosage: 3 to 9 gm
Storage: Should be stored in a dry and cool place.

LITERATURE

el-Mekkawy S, Meselhy MR, Kusumoto IT, Kadota S, Hattori
M, Namba T, Inhibitory effects of Egyptian folk medicines on
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reverse transcriptase.
Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 20:641-8, 1995 Apr.

Grover IS. Bala S, Antimutagenic activity of Terminalia chebula
(myroblan) in Salmonella typhimurium. Indian J Exp Biol,
30:339-41. 1992 Apr.

Hamada S. Kataoka T, Woo JT, Yamada A, Yoshida T,
Nishimura T, Otake N. Nagai K, Immunosuppressive effects of
gallic acid and chebulagic acid on CTL-mediated cytotoxicity.
Biol Pharm Bull. 20:1017-9, 1997 Sep.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994,

Jiang JY. Influence of processing methods on the quality of
Terminalia chebula. Chung Yao Tung Pao, 20:24-6, 1986 Sep.

Kurokawa M, Nagasaka K, Hirabayashi T, Uyama S, Sato H,
Kageyama T, Kadota S, Ohyama H, Hozumi T, Namba T, et al
Efficacy of traditional herbal medicines in combination with
acyclovir against herpes simplex virus type 1 infection in vitro
and in vivo. Antiviral Res, 45:19-37, 1995 May.

Miglani BD, Sen P, Sanyal RK, Purgative action of an oil
obtained from Terminalia chebula. Indian J Med Res, 20:281-3,
1971 Feb.

Phadke SA, Kulkami SD, Screening of in vitro antibacterial
activity of Terminalia chebula, Eclapta alba and Ocimum
sanctum. Indian J Med Sci, 43:113-7, 1989 May.

Sato Y, Oketani H, Singyouchi K, Ohtsubo T, Kihara M,
Shibata H, Higuti T, Extraction and purification of effective
antimicrobial constituents of Terminalia chebula Retz. against
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Biol Pharm Bull,
20:401-4, 1997 Apr.

Shiraki K, Yukawa T, Kurokawa M, Kageyama S,
Cytomegalovirus infection and its possible treatment with herbal
medicines. Nippon Rinsho, 56:156-60, 1998 Jan.

Shiraki K, Yukawa T, Kurokawa M, Kageyama S, Influence of
processing methods on the quality of Terminalia chebula.
Chung Yao Tung Pao, 56:24-6, 1986 Sep.

----- PAGE 1023 -----
774/TROPICAL ALMOND

Sohni YR, Bhatt RM, Activity of a crude extract formulation in
experimental hepatic amoebiasis and in immunomodulation
studies. J Ethnopharmacol. 45:119-24. 1996 Nov.

Sohni YR, Kaimal P, Bhatt RM, The antiamoebic effect of a
crude drug formulation of herbal extracts against Entamoeba
histolytica in vitro and in vivo. J Ethnopharmacol, 45:43-52.
1995 Jan.

Thakur CP, Thakur B, Singh S, Sinha PK, Sinha SK. The
Ayurvedic medicines Haritaki. Amala and Bahira reduce
cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis in rabbits. Int J Cardiol.
21:167-75. 1988 Nov.

Yukawa TA, Kurokawa M. Sato H. Yoshida Y. Kageyama S.
Hasegawa T, Namba T, Imakita M. Hozumi T. Shiraki K.
Effect of tannins from Terminalia chebula Retz. on the
infectivity of potato virus X. Acta Microbiol Pol B, 32:127-32.
1970.

Yukawa TA, Kurokawa M. Sato H. Yoshida Y. Kageyama S.
Hasegawa T, Namba T, Imakita M. Hozumi T. Shiraki K.
Prophylactic treatment of cytomegalovirus infection with
traditional herbs. Antiviral Res, 32:63-70, 1996 Oct.

Tsuga canadensis
See Pin us Bark

Tulip Tree

Liriodendron tulipifera

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The bark is said
properties.

to have medicinal

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are apical, ringle with 3
revolute, greenish-white sepals. There are 6 petals, 4 to 5 cm
long, greenish-yellow with orange bands near the base on the
inside similar to the tepals of the tulip. The flower has
numerous stamens and numerous apocarpic ovaries on a
spindle-shaped column. The small, 1-seeded nut with pointed
wings is in a 6 to 8 cm long, cone-like, aggregate fruit that is
light green when ripe.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Liriodendron tulipifera is a tree, up
to 60 m high. The leaves are alternate with saddle-shaped
middle lobes and 2 large lateral lobes, almost square in
outline, 8 to 15 cm long and wide, and usually rounded at the
base. The upper leaf surface is fresh green, the lower surface
a weak blue. The petioles are 5 to 10 cm long. The young
branches are yellow-green in summer and reddish-brown in
winter and spotted with lenticles. The young trunks are dark
green to gray and spotted white with lenticles. The trunks (up

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

to 3 m thick) of older trees have a brown, deeply grooved
bark.

Characteristics: The leaves are bright golden-yellow in

autumn.
Habitat: Indigenous to North America, Europe and China.

Production: The Tulip Tree bark is the peeled and dried
branch bark of Liriodendron tulipifera.

Other Names: Yellow Poplar

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids (0.1%), particularly of the aporphine
type: including remerine, lysicamine, liriodenine, lanugosine
Lignans (0.1%): including liriodendrin
Volatile oil (0.1%): cis-beta-ocimene,

beta-pinene, bornyl acetate

chief components

Hydroxycumarins: esculetin methyl and dimethyl esters

EFFECTS

The alkaloids contained in the drug are antimicrobial in
effect, and a positively inotropic effect has been described.
Its usefulness as a tonic and a stimulant appears to be
plausible, based upon its qualities as a bitter substance.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: According to Hoppe's 1958 work on drugs,
Linodendron tulipifera is used as a febrifuge and antiperiod-
ic. Folk medicine indications have included fever, menstrual

complaints, insomnia and malaria.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is considered toxic, due to its alkaloid content.
Administration in animal experiments led to coma (exact
details unavailable). No case of poisoning among humans
has been recorded.

DOSAGE
Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

Daily dosage: Powder: 4 to 8 g daily; decoction (30:500)
60 g daily.

LITERATURE

Doskotch RW, el-Feraly FS, Antitumor agents. II. Tulipinolide,
a new germacranolide sesquiterpene, and constunolide. Two
cytotoxic substances from Liriodendron tulipifera L. J Pharm ,
Sci, 28:877-80, 1969 Jul.

Hufford CD, Funderburk MJ, Morgan JM, Robertson LW, Two
antimicrobial alkaloids from heartwood of Liriodendron
tulipifera L. J Pharm Sci, 64:789-92, 1975 May.

Rzedowski M, Furmanowa M, Molak W, Liriodenine in tissue
culture of Liriodendron tulipifera L. II. Quantitative analysis
and antifungal effect. Acta Pol Pharm. 42:300-4, 1985.

----- PAGE 1024 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Schulz HK, Hausen BM, White wood allergy (author's transl)
Derm Beruf Umwelt, 28:158-60, 1980.

Turkey Com

Dicentra  cucullaria

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried tuber.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is racemous. The 4 to
10 flowers are odorless, white and often tinged pink. The
flowers are hanging, with yellow to yellow-orange tips and
widely splayed spurs. The fruit is oval and 9 to 13 mm long.
The seeds are reniform, 2 mm long, black and glossy.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Turkey Corn is a delicate, glabrous,
15 to 40 cm high plant on a tawny yellow, tuberous rhizome.
The rhizome has subglobular, pink, smaller tubers about 0.5
cm in diameter, with a scar on both depressed sides. All the
leaves are basal and almost triangular in outline. They are 3-
pinnate and bluish-green on the underside.

Characteristics: The taste of the tuber is bitter.

Habitat: Canada and U.S.

Production: Turkey Com root is the root of Dicentra
cucullaria.

Other Names: Squirrel Corn, Staggerweed, Bleeding Heart,
Corydalis, Dutchman's Breeches

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Isoquinoline alkaloids: including bicuculline, corlumine,
protopine, cryptopine, cularine

EFFECTS
Diuretic and tonic

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Turkey corn is used for digestive disorders,
urinary tract diseases, menstrual disorders and skin rashes.
Formerly it was used for syphilis.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Bicuculline is a centrally acting, spasmogenic antagonist of
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Due to the bicuculline
componant, poisonings are possible if higher dosages are
consumed, but none have been reported to date.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as a liquid

extract.

TURMERIC /775

LITERATURE
Kanamori H, Sakamoto I, Mizuta M, Chem Pharm Bull
34:1826. 1986.

Manske RHF, Canad J Res 7:265-269. 1932.

Manske RHF, Canad J Res Sect B 16:81-90. 1938.

Tusboi NS, J Labelled compd Radiopharm 13:353. 1977.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Turmeric

Curcuma domestica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the stewed and

dried rhizome.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is cone-like, 10 to 15
cm long, and is attached to a stem enclosed in a sheathing
petiole. The flower has 2 pale green bracts, which are 5 to 6
cm long. The covering bracts are whitish, often red-tinged.
The individual flowers are yellowish-white or yellow. The
flowers have a tubular, 3-lobed calyx and funnel-shaped, 3-
tipped corolla. The fruit is a gobular capsule.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Curcuma domestica is a perennial,
erect and leafy plant with very large, lily-like leaves up to
12 m long. The leaf blade is ovate-lanceolate, thin, entire-
margined and narrows to a long sheath-like petiole. The
main rhizome is thickened to a tuber and has numerous roots.
The roots in turn terminate in partially elliptical tubers. The
secondary rhizomes are digit-shaped with no roots. All
rhizomes are yellowish-brown with stipules and appear
transversely ringed when they die.

Habitat: Turmeric is probably indigenous to India; it is
cultivated today in India and other tropical regions of
southeast Asia.

Production: Turmeric root consists of the fmger-like, often
tuber-like, scalded and dried rhizomes of Curcuma longa. It

----- PAGE 1025 -----
776 /TURMERIC

is harvested from February to April. The rhizomes are boiled
in water for 5 to 10 minutes and then dried in the sun.

Adulterations: The synthetic color pigments azo and anilin
are sometimes added to the herb.

Not to be Confused With: Curcuma xanthorrhiza, Curcuma
aromatica and Curcuma zedoaria

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (3-5%): alpha-
source), artumerone, alpha- and gammaz-atlantone, curlone,

and beta-tumerone (aroma

zingiberene, curcumol

Curcuminoids (3-5%): including curcumin, demethoxy cur-
cumin, bidemethoxy curcumin

1,5-diaryl-penta-1,4-dien-3-one derivatives

Starch (30-40%)

EFFECTS
Turmeric has antihepatotoxic, antihyperlipidemic and anti-
inflammatory effects. It is also antioxidative (inhibits lipid
peroxide formation in the liver), antitumoral and antimicro-
bial (in particular, the sesquiterpene derivatives). It has
insect repellent and antifertile effects. It also inhibits
prostaglandin formation, in vitro.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints
* Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Turmeric is used for dyspeptic disorders,
particularly feelings of fullness after meals and regular
abdominal distention due to gas. The drug is also used for
diarrhea, intermittent fever, edema, bronchitis, colds, worms,
leprosy, kidney inflammation and cystitis. Other uses include
headaches, flatulence, upper abdominal pain, chest infec-
tions, colic, amenorrhea and blood rushes. It is used
externally for bruising, leech bites, festering eye infections,
inflammation of the oral mucosa, inflammatory skin condi-

tions and infected wounds.

Chinese Medicine: Turmeric is used for pains in the chest,
ribs, abdomen, liver and stomach; nose bleeds; vomiting
with bleeding; and heat stroke.

Indian Medicine: Turmeric is used for inflammation, wounds
and skin ulcers, itching, stomach complaints, flatulence,
conjunctivitis, constipation, ringworm infestation and colic.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

General: The drug should not be used by people with
obstructed biliary ducts; those with gallstones should take it
only under the supervision of a physician.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Pregnancy: Turmeric should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.
Stomach complaints can occur following extended use or in
the case of overdose.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Whole, cut and powdered drug
available as capsules, solution, coated tablets and compound

preparations.

Preparation: To prepare a tea, scald 0.5 to 1 gm drug in
boiling water, cover, draw for 5 minutes and then strain. The

tincture strength is 1:10.

Daily Dosage: The average dose is 1.5 to 3 gm of drug. The
powder should be taken 2 to 3 times daily after meals; the tea
(2 to 3 cups) should be taken between meals. The tincture

dose is 10 to 15 drops 2 to 3 times daily.

Storage: Turmeric should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Ammon HP, Wahl MA, Pharmacology of Curcuma longa.
Planta Med, 57:1-7, 1991.

Ammon HPT, Anazodo MI, Safayhi H et al., Planta Med
58:226, 1992.

Ammon HPT, Wahl MA, Pharmacology of Curcuma longa.
Planta Med 57:1-7, 1991.

Anto RJ, George J, Babu KV, RaJasekharan KN, Kuttan R,
Antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic activity of natural and
synthetic curcuminoids. Mutat Res, 42:127-31, 1996.

Apisariyakul A, Vanittanakom N, Buddhasukh D, Antifungal
activity of Turmeric oil extracted from Curcuma longa
(Zingiberaceae). J Ethnopharmacol, 30:163-9, 1995.

Babu PS, Srinivasan K, Hypolipidemic action of curcumin the
active principle of Turmeric (Curcuma longa) in streptozotocin
induced diabetic rats. Mol Cell Biochem, 30:169-75, 1997.

Basu AB, Ind J Pharm 33:131, 1971.

Bonte F, Noel-Hudson MS, Wepierre J, Meybeck A, Protective
effect of curcuminoids on epidermal skin cells under free
oxygen radical stress. Planta Med, 8:265-6, 1997.

Chan MM, Inhibition of tumor necrosis factor by curcumin a
hytochemical. Biochem Pharmacol, 42:1551-6, 1995.

Charles V, Charles SX, The use and efficacy of Azadirachta
indica ADR (‘Neem') and Curcuma longa (‘Turmeric’) in
scabies. A pilot study. Trop Geogr Med, 30:178-81, 1992.

Dhar ML, et al Indian J Exp Biol 6:232, 1968.

Donatus IA, SardJoko, Vermeulen NP, Cytotoxic and
cytoprotective activities of curcumin. Effects on paracetamol-
induced cytotoxicity lipid peroxidation and glutathione depletion
in rat hepatocytes. Biochem Pharmacol, 39:1869-75, 1990.

----- PAGE 1026 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Ferreira LA, Henriques OB, Andreoni AA, Vital GR, Campos
MM, Habermehl GG. de Moraes VL. Antivenom and biological
effects of ar-turmerone isolated from Curcuma longa
(Zingiberaceae). Toxicon, 30:1211-8. 1992.

Ferreira LA, Henriques OB, Andreoni AA, Vital GR, Campos
MM, Habermehl GG, de Moraes VL. Toxicity studies on
Alpinia galanga and Curcuma longa. Planta Med. 30:124-7.
1992.

Garg SK, Planta Med 26:225. 1974.

Hanif R, Qiao L, Shiff SJ, Rigas B. Curcumin a natural plant
phenolic food additive inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell
cycle changes in colon adenocarcinoma cell lines by a
prostaglandin-independent pathway. J Lab Clin Med, 42:576-84.
1997.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Ed). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994.

Hasmeda M, Polya GM, Inhibition of cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase by curcumin. Phytochemistry. 42:599-605. 1996.
Huang HC, Jan TR, Yeh SF, Inhibitory effect of curcumin an
anti-inflammatory agent on vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation. Eur J Pharmacol. 54:381-4, 1992.

Inagawa H et al.. Homeostasis as regulated by activated
macrophage. II. LPS of plant origin other than wheat flour and
their concomitant bacteria. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 54:994-7.
1992.

Kiso Y et al., Planta Med 49:185. 1983.

Krishnamurthy N et al., Trop Sci 18:37, 1976.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Limtrakul P, Lipigorngoson S, Namwong O, Apisariyakul A,
Dunn FW, Inhibitory effect of dietary curcumin on skin
carcinogenesis in mice. Cancer Lett, 8:197-203, 1997.

Masuda T et al., Anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory
curcumin-related phenolics from rhizomes of Curcuma
domestica. Phytochemistry 32:1557, 1986.

Mehta K, Pantazis P, McQueen T, Aggarwal BB,
Antiproliferative effect of curcumin (diferuloylmethane) against
human breast tumor cell lines. Anticancer Drugs, 8:470-81,
1997.

Nagarajan K, Arya VP, J Sci Ind Res 41:232, 1982.

Nakayama R et al., Two curcuminoid pigments from Curcuma
domestica. Phytochemistry 33:501, 1993.

Polasa K, Sesikaran B, Krishna TP, Krishnaswamy K, Turmeric
(Curcuma longa)-induced reduction in urinary mutagens. Food
Chem Toxicol, 47:699-706, 1991.

Priyadarsini KI, Free radical reactions of curcumin in membrane
models. Free Radic Biol Med, 54:838-43, 1997.

Rafatullah S, Tariq M, Al-Yahya MA, Mossa JS, Ageel AM,
Evaluation of Turmeric (Curcuma longa) for gastric and

TURNERA DIFFUSA / 777

duodenal antiulcer activity in rats. J Ethnopharmacol, 47:25-34,
1990.

Ravindranath V. Satyanarayana MN. Phytochemistry 19:2031,
1980.

Ruby AJ. Kuttan G, Babu KD. RaJasekharan KN, Kuttan R,
Anti-tumour and antioxidant activity of natural curcuminoids.
Cancer Lett. 42:79-83, 1995.

Selvam R. Subramanian L, Gayathri R, Angayarkanni N. The
anti-oxidant activity of Turmeric (Curcuma longa). J
Ethnopharmacol. 47:59-67, 1995.

Sikora E. Bielak-ZmiJewska A. Piwocka K, Skierski J.
Radziszewska E. Inhibition of proliferation and apoptosis of
human and rat T lymphocytes by curcumin a curry pigment.
Biochem Pharmacol, 54:899-907. 1997.

Soni KB. RaJan A, Kuttan R. Reversal of aflatoxin induced
liver damage by Turmeric and curcumin. Cancer Lett. 66:115-
21. 1992.

Srimal RC. Dhawan CN. J Pharm Pharmacol 25:447, 1973.

Srinivas L. Shalini VK. ShylaJa M, Turmerin: a water soluble
antioxidant peptide from Turmeric Curcuma longa. Arch
Biochem Biophys, 30:617-23, 1992.

Srivastava KC. Bordia A, Verma SK. Curcumin a major
component of food spice Turmeric (Curcuma longa) inhibits
aggregation and alters eicosanoid metabolism in human blood
platelets. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids, 52:223-7.
1995.

Steinegger E. Hansel R. Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Tang W. Eisenbrand G, Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin.
Springer Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsgesellschaft Stuttgart 1997. '

Veit M, Beeinflussung der Leukotrien-Biosynthese durch
Curcumin. Z Phytother 14:46, 1993.

Verma SP, Salamone E, Goldin B, Curcumin and genistein
plant natural products show synergistic inhibitory effects on the
growth of human breast cancer MCF-7 cells induced by
estrogenic pesticides. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 233:692-
6. 1997.

Wagner H et al., 6th Int Conf. Prostaglandins and Related
Compounds. Florence, Italy. Pub. Fondzione Giovanni
Lorenzini. June 3-6, 1986.

Wichtl M (Ed.). Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

Turnera diffusa

See Damiana

----- PAGE 1027 -----
778/TISSILAGO FARFARA

Tussilago farfara

See Colt's Foot

Ulmus minor
See Elm Bark

Ulmus rubra

See Slippery Elm

Uncaria species
See Gambir

Uncaria tomentosa
See Cat's Claw

Urginea indica
See Indian Squill

Urginea maritima
See Squill

Urtica dioica
See Stinging Nettle

Usnea

Usnea_ species

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: Research into this species is
complete, making it difficult to establish which lichens are
used for the extraction of which drug, and which lichens

not yet

have been described by earlier botanists.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: Mycelia flourishes on a variety of trees
(on the trunk, branches branchlets) as a whitish, reddish, or
black lichen.

Habitat: Usnea is found worldwide in cool, damp places.

Production: Usnea consists of the dried thallus of Usnea
species, primarily of Usnea barbata, Usnea florida, Usnea
hirta and Usnea plicata.

Other Names: Tree Moss, Old Man's Beard, Beard Moss

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Lichen acids (polyketides): including among others (+)-usnic
acid, thamnolic acid (hirtellic acid), usnaric acid (salazinic
acid), lobaric acid, stictinic acid, protocetraric acid, everninic
acid, barbatinic acid (rhizonic acid), diffractaic acid (dirhi-
zonic acid), barbatolic acid. The lichen acid spectrums of the
different species vary from one another, with usnic acid the
chief constituent.

Mucilage

EFFECTS
The drug is antimicrobial.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses: The species are used for mild inflammation
of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Following overdosage, signs of poisoning could
appear. These signs have yet to be described.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is available as lozenges
and equivalent solid forms of medication.

Daily Dose: The daily dose is 600 mg. For lozenge
preparations, use the equivalent of 100 mg of herb; take 1

lozenge 3 to 6 times daily.

LITERATURE
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Okuyama E et al., Usnic acid and diffractic acid as analgesic
and antipyretic components of Usnea diffracta. In: PM
61(2): 113-115. 1995.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

----- PAGE 1028 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Usnea_ species

See Usnea

Utricularia vulgaris
See Bladderwort

Uva-Ursi

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

TRADE NAMES
Uva-Ursi (available from numerous manufacturers). Uva-
Ursi Leaf, Uva Ursi Leaves, Standardized Uva-Ursi Extract

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried leaves and preparations of the fresh leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are on 3 to 12 short, hanging
stalks, where they are in clusters at equal length and distance
on the terminal end of the stalks. The pedicle has 2 small.
ciliate, oval-shaped leaves at the base with the subtending
flower clusters. The calyx is 1 mm long, palmate and has 5
membranous tips. The corolla (fused petals of the inner
whorl) is ovoid to jug-shaped, white or reddish with a red
border, 5 to 6 mm long with 5 short tips rolled backward.
The 10 stamens are half in length as the corolla tube. The
filaments are heavily thickened at the base. The crimson
anthers have porous openings and a long whip-like, curling
appendage. The ovaries are 5- to 7-valved, and the style is
longer than the stamens. The fruit is a globular, pea-sized.
scarlet, floury drupe. The fruit has 5 to 7 stone seeds. 4 mm
in length, which are kidney-shaped and also compressed at
the sides.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a decumbent (reclining
on the ground with ascending extremities), up to 15 m long,
creeping espalier with elastic, red-brown branches. The
leaves are alternate, coriaceous, short-petioled. spatulate-
obovate or wedge-shaped, entire-margined and _ slightly
revolute. They are 12 to 30 mm long by 4 to 15 mm wide.
glabrous, glossy and evergreen. The underside is distinctly
reticulate, and the midrib and the margins are often downy.

UVA-URSI /779

Characteristics: The leaves have a bitter, astringent taste.
They are distinguished from the cranberry by the reticulate
vein structure and non-glandular spots beneath.

Habitat: The plant has spread from the Iberian Peninsula
across Central Europe north to Scandinavia and east to
Siberia. The plant is also found in the Altai mountains, the
Himalayas and North America.

Production: Uva-Ursi (Bearberry) leaves consist of the fresh
or dried leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, which are
gathered in the wild. The arbutin content is highest in
December and January and also when the leaves are dried
rapidly. The main sources are Spain, Italy, Austria, Switzer-
land, Scandinavia, Poland, Russia and Bulgaria.

Not to be Confiised With: The leaves are sometimes confused
with the leaves of other Ericaceae, such as Buxus
sempervirens.

Other Names: Arberry, Bearberry, Bear's Grape, Kinnikin-
nick, Mealberry, Mountain Box, Mountain Cranberry, Red-
Berried Trailing Arbutus, Redberry Leaves, Rockbeery,
Sagackhomi, Sandberry, Upland Cranberry, Red-Beery,
Upland Cranbeery, Common Bearberry, Arbutus Uva-Ursi,
Red Bearberry, Kinnickinick

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Hydroquinone glycosides: arbutin (arbutoside, hydroqui-
none-O-beta-D-glucoside, 5-16%), methyl arbutin (O-methyl
hydroquinone-O-beta-D-glycoside, up to 4%), galloyl deriv-
atives of arbutin (0.05%): O-galloyl hydroquinone-O-beta-
D-glucoside (p-galloyl oxyphenyl-O-beta-D-glucoside), 2'-
O- galloyl arbutin, 6'-0-galloyl arbutin, free hydroquinone
(usually under 0.3%) as decomposition product of arbutin,
emerging as the leaves age or during dehydration

Piceoside: (4 - hydroxyacetophenone - O - beta - D - gluco-
pyranoside)

Phenol carboxylic acids: including gallic acid (free 180 mg/
100 g), p-coumaric acid (18.0 mg/100 g), syringic acid (16.8
mg/100 g), salicylic acid (12.0 mg/100 g), p-hydroxybenzoic
acid (9.6 mg/100 g), ferulic acid (6.0 mg/100 g), caffeic acid
(6.0 mg/100 g), lithospermic acid (dimeric caffeic acid)

Tannins (15-20%): gallo tannins including penta-O-galloyl-
beta-D-Glucose and hexa-O-gailoyl-beta-D-glucose; ellagi-
tannins, including corilagin (1-0-galloyl-3,  6-di-O-
hexahydroxydophenol-beta-D-gulcoside); condensed _ tan-
nins, chiefly proanthocyanidins and their monomerics, in-
cluding cyanidin, delphinidin

Iridoide: monotropein (0.025%)

Flavonoids: flavonol glycosides, including hyperoside (0.8-
1.5%) which is the chief flavonol glycoside, quercitrin-3-

----- PAGE 1029 -----
780/UVA-URSI

isoquercitrin,
isomeric

beta-D-0-6'-galloyl galactoside, quercitrin,
myricitrin, myricetin-3-O-beta-D-galactoside, 2
quercetin arabinosides, aglycones of these compounds

Enzymes: including a beta-glucosidase (arbutase), that is
rendered inactive with dehydration and processing of the
drug, due to the high tannin content

Triterpenes: including among others ursolic acid (0.4-0.8%),
alcohol uvaol, beta-amyrin

EFFECTS

The tannins in Uva-Ursi act as an astringent, and the phenol
glucocsides and their aglyca have an antibacterial effect. The
antimicrobial effect is associated with the aglycon hydroqui-
none released from arbutin (transport form) or arbutin waste
products in the alkaline urine. The drug has urine-sterilizing
properties that are attributed to bacteriostatic hydroquinones,
conjugates of glucuronic acid and sulfuric acid. The maxi-
mum antibacterial effect is expected 3 to 4 hours after
administration. There are no clinical studies available that
have been definitively evaluated.

CLINICAL TRIALS
Neph rolith iasis

The effects of Uva-Ursi with prevention and treatment of
kidney stone formation was studied in rats. It concluded that
beneficial effects from Uva-Ursi on urolithiasis can be
attributed to some disinfectant action (Grases, 1994).

Diuresis

The aqueous extract of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi was studied
in rats involoving diuresis. The pharmacological evaluation
revealed an increase in urine flow without an increase in
urinary sodium excretion (Beaux, 1999).

Antibacterial Properties

The effect of aqueous extracts of Uva-Ursi leaves to decrease
surface hydrophobicity of 155 Escherichia coli strains was
determined in cattle. The adhesion of microbes on host cells
is important for development of Gram-negative microbe-
induced infections and is influenced by the surface hydro-
phobicity of the microbial cell. Bactericidal action of Uva-
Ursi was low, but the decrease in cell surface hydrophobicity
may influence the bacteria's virulent properties (Turi, 1997).
The aqueous extract of Uva-Ursi leaves was also studied in
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) strains to determine possible
changes in cell surface hydrophobicity. The tannic acid in
the Uva-Ursi was determined to have the highest activity of
decreasing cell surface hydrophobicity as well as antibacteri-
al activity against H. Pylori (Annuck, 1999)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Infections of the urinary tract

Uva-Ursi is used for inflammatory disorders of the efferent
urinary tract.

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, the herb is used for all
forms of urogenital and biliary tract disease.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for inflammations of
the efferent urinary tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is contraindicated in pregnant women, nursing
mothers and children under 12 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Individuals with gastric sensitivity may experience nausea
and vomiting following intake of preparations made from the
drug due to its high tannin content.

Pregnancy. The drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

Nursing Mothers: The drug is contraindicated in nursing
mothers.

Pediatric Use: Liver damage is conceivable in connection
with administration of the drug over extended periods,
particularly with children, due to the possible hepatotoxicity
of the hydroquinones released. The drug is contraindicated in
children under 12 years of age.

Drug Interactions: Uva-Ursi preparations should not be
administered with any substance that causes acidic urine
since this reduces the antibacterial effect. Because the urine-
disinfecting effect of the hydroquinones released in the
urinary tract only occurs in an alkali environment, the
simultaneous administration of medication or food that
increase uric acid levels in the bladder is to be avoided.

The sodium sparing effect of Uva-Ursi may offset the
diuretic effect of thiazide and loop diuretics.

Uva-Ursi may add to the gastrointestinal irritation that
occurs with NSAID use.

OVERDOSAGE
Overdosage can lead to inflammation and irritation of the
bladder and urinary tract mucous membranes. Liver damage
is conceivable in connection with administration of the drug
over extended periods, particularly with children, due to the
possible hepatotoxicity of the hydroquinones released.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Uva-Ursi is available as comminut-
ed drug, drug powder or dried extract for infusions or cold

----- PAGE 1030 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

macerations, and also as extracts and solid forms for oral
administration. It is also a component of urologic combina-
tion and single-component preparations.

How Supplied:
Capsules—150 mg, 455 mg, 505 mg
Teas

Solutions

Preparation: To make a tea, pour boiling water over 2.5 gm
finely cut or coarse powdered drug (Il teaspoonful is
equivalent to 2.5 g drug.), or place the drug in cold water that
is rapidly brought to a boil. The tea should draw (to extract
the essence) for 15 minutes and then be strained. Teas may
contain up to 30% Uva-Ursi in combination with other
drugs. For higher Uva-Ursi content, prepare cold macerate
(over 6 to 12 hours) to lower the tannin content.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage of finely cut or powdered
drug is 10 g (corresponding to arbutin content of 400 to 840
mg) or 0.4 g dry extract in a single dose. A single dose of
liquid extract is 2 g. Daily dosages of an infusion or cold
maceration are 3 g drug to 150 ml water as an infusion or
cold maceration up to 4 times a day or 400 to 840 mg
hydroquinone derivatives calculated as water-free arbutin.
The urine should be alkaline.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB1).

Storage: Store in well-sealed containers protected from light.

LITERATURE

Annuk H, Hirmo S, Turi E et al., Effect on cell surface
hydrophobicity and susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to
medicinal plant extracts. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1999 Mar
1;172(1):41-5.

Beaux D, Fleurentin J, Mortier F, Effect of extracts of
Orthosiphon stamineus Benth, Hieracium pilosella L., Sambucus
nigra L. and Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng, in rats.
Phytother Res 1999 May;13(3):222-5.

Britton G, Haslam E, J Chem Soc (London): 7312. 1965.
Denford KE, (1973) Experientia 29:939.

Frohne D, (1970) Planta Med 18:1.

Frohne D, (1986) Arctostaphylos uva-ursi: Die Barentraube. Z
Phytother 7:45-47.

Hiller K, Pharmazeutische Bewertung ausgewahlter Teedrogen.
In: DAZ 135(16): 1425-1440. 1995.

Thring M, Blume H, Zur pharmazeutischen Qualitat von
Phytopharmaka 2. Mitt.: Vergleichende Bewertung von Arbutin
enthaltenden Urologika. In: PZW 135(6)267. 1990.

Jahodar L et al., (1978) Pharmazie 33(8):536.

UVA-URSI/781

Jahodar L et al., (1981) Pharmazie 36(2):294.
Jahodar L et al., (1985) Cesk Farm. 34(5): 174.
Kraus L, DAZ 111:1225. 1974.

Kubo M et al., Pharmacological studies on leaf of
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi: Combined effect of 50% methanolic
extract from Arctostaphylos uva-ursi and prednisolone on
immuno-infl animation.

Matsuda H et al., Pharmacological studies on leaf of

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi: Effect of 50% methanolic extract from
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi on melanin synthesis. Yakugaku Zasshi,
112:276-82, 1992 Apr

Matsuda H et al., Pharmacological studies on leaf of
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi: Effect of water extract from
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi on the antiallergic and anti-
inflammatory activities of dexamethasone ointment. Yakugaku
Zasshi, 112:673-7, 1992 Sep.

Matsuda H, Nakata H, Tanaka T, Kubo M, Phenolic acids in
leaves of Arctostaphylos uva ursi L. Vaccinium vitis idaea L.
and Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie, 110:680-1, 1991 Sep.

Matsuda H, Tanaka T, Kubo M, Pharmacological studies on
leaf of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. III. Combined
effect of arbutin and indomethacin on immuno-inflammation.
Yakugaku Zasshi, 111:253-8, 1991 Apr-May.

Matsuda H, Nakata H, Tanaka T, Kubo M, Pharmacological
study on Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. II. Combined
effects of arbutin and prednisolone or dexamethazone on
immuno-inflammation. Yakugaku Zasshi, 110:68-76, 1990 Jan.

Matsuo K, Kobayashi M, Takuno Y, Kuwajima H, Ito H,
Yoshida T, Anti-tyrosinase activity constituents of
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. Yakugaku Zasshi, 117:1028-32, 1997
Dec.

Ng TB et al., Examination of coumarins, flavonoids and
polysaccharopeptides for antibacterial activity. In: General
Pharmacology 27(7):1237-1240. 1996.

Paper DH, Koehler J, Franz G, Bioavailalibilty of drug
preparations containing a leaf extract of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
(Uvae Ursi Folium). In: PM 59(7)

Thesen R, Phytotherapeutika-nicht immer harmlos. In: ZPT
9(49): 105. 1988.

Thieme H, Winkler HJ, PA 26:235 et 419. 1971.

Turi M, Turi E, Koljalg S et al., Influence of aqueous extracts
of medicinal plants on surface hydrophobicity of Escherichia
coli strains of different origin. APMIS 1997 Dec; 105(12):956-
62.

Grases F, Melero G, Costa-Bauza A et al., Urolithiasis and
phytotherapy. Int Urol Nephrol 1994;26(5):507-11.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

----- PAGE 1031 -----
782 /UVA-URSI

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ritch-Krc EM, Thomas S, Turner NJ, Towers GH, Carrier
herbal medicine: traditional and contemporary plant use. J
Ethnopharmacol, 117:85-94, 1996 Jun.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Stammwitz U, Pflanzliche Harnwegsdesinfizienzien - heute noch
aktuell? Z Phytother 19(1998), 90-95.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Uzara

Xysmalobium undulatum

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: Different
extraction depending on the area. The drug is therefore easier
to categorize according to its definitive active substances

varieties are used for drug

(bitters) than to its particular varieties.

Flower and Fruit: The root has a weak and unusual odor.
The taste is bitter with a burning effect after it has been
chewed for a long time.

Habitat: South Africa

Production: Uzara root consists of the dried, underground
parts of 2- to 3-year-old plants of Xysmalobium undulatum.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolides, mixture __re-
ferred to as uzarone or xysmalobin): including among others
uzarin (5.5%), xysmalorin (1.5%), allo-uzarine, allo-xysma-

lobin, urezin, uzaroside, ascleposide, glucoascleposide

Pregnane derivatives: delta5-pregnene-3beta-ol-20-one  glu-
coside, Salpha-pregnane-3beta-ol-20-one glucoside

EFFECTS
Uzara inhibits intestinal motility. In high dosages, it has

digitalis-like effects on the heart.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Diarrhea

Unproven Uses: Uzara is used as a treatment for dysentery.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Uzara should not be administered concomitantly with other
cardioactive glycosides.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Drug Interactions: Because Uzara contains cardioactive
glycosides, there is a potential for interaction with digoxin
and other cardiac glycosides. This interaction has not been
reported in the literature for orally administered Uzara. The
lack of reports may be due to the fact that the glycocides are

not well absorbed from the gut.

OVERDOSAGE
Because the glycosides are absorbed only with difficulty and
because their cardiac effect is minimal, poisonings following
oral intake are unlikely, although conceivable. There have
been cases of fatalities following parenteral application of
Uzara drugs.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is available as ethanol-
water extracts in liquid form or as dry extracts for internal
use. Pharmaceutical forms include coated tablets, drops and

compound preparations.

Daily Dose: The daily dose should be equivalent to 45 to 90
mg of total glycosides, calculated as uzarin. Follow the
manufacturer's dosing instructions.

LITERATURE
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979 (unter
Gomphocarpus).

Pauli G, Schiller H, Asymmetric key position in Uzara steroids.
In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 113.
1996.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schmidt M, Uzarawurzel. In: PTA 8(6):498. 1994.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

----- PAGE 1032 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Vaccinium myrtillus
See Bilberry

Vaccinium uliginosum
See Bog Bilberry

Vaccinium vitis-ideae
See Alpine Cranberry

Valerian
Valeriana officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Valerian Root (available from numerous manufacturers,)
Herbal Sure Valerian Root, NuVeg Valerian Root, Valerian
Root Alcohol Free, Valerian Power Time Release, Valerian
Root Power, Standardized Valerian, Natural Herbal Valerian
Root, Nature's Root Nighttime, Quanterra Sleep

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the carefully dried
underground parts and the dried roots.

Flower and Fruit: The androgynous, bright, pink-to-white
flowers are in panicled cymes. The calyx consists of 10
revolute tips. The corolla is funnel-shaped with a 5-sectioned
margin. The tube has a bump at the base. There are 3
stamens. The ovary is inferior and has 3 chambers. The fruit
is ovate-oblong, yellow, indehiscent and has a 10-rayed tuft
of white hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 50 to 100 cm high and
has a short, cylindrical rhizome with finger-length, bushy
round roots. The stem is erect and unbranched. The leaves
are odd-pinnate with 11 to 23 lanceolate, indented-dentate
leaflets. The lower ones are petiolate and the upper ones
sessile and clasping with a white sheath.

Characteristics: The flowers are fragrant and the rhizome
smells strongly when dried. The odor is not present in the
fresh plant. Hydrolysis of componants in the root form
isovaleric acid which is responsible for the offensive smell.

VALERIAN /783

Habitat: The plant is found in Europe and in the temperate
regions of Asia. It is cultivated mainly in central Europe,
England, France, eastern Europe, Japan and the U.S.

Production: Valerian root, consisting of fresh underground
plant parts, or parts carefully dried below 40° C of the
species Valeriana officinalis. Cultivation is possible in low-
lying, sandy, humus soil that is well supplied with lime and
situated in a damp area. The root is harvested in September.
The fresh roots are washed, chopped, and carefully dried in
circulating air under 40° C.

Not to be Confused With: Confusion with other species
seldom occurs since the plant is primarily supplied via
cultivation. The most dangerous adulteration of the plant
occurs by the addition of the roots of Veratrum album.

Other Names: Ail-Heal, Amantilla. Setwall, Setewale. Ca-
pon's Tail, Heliotrope, Vandal Root

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoids: valepotriates (valeriana-epoxy-triacylates, iridoide
monoterpenes, 0.5-2.0%) chief components (50-80%). iso-
valtrate (up to 46%), isovaleroxyhydroxy didrovaltrate
(IVDH-valtrate, 10-20%), including among others, didroval-
trate, acevaltrate

Volatile oil (0.2-1.0%): chief components (-)-bornyl isoval-
erenate and isovalerenic acid (both aroma-carriers), includ-
ing among others, (-)-bomyl acetate, isoeugenyl valerenate,
isoeugenyl isovalerenate, also with some strains valerenal,
valeranone, cryptofaurinol

Sesquiterpenes: valerenic acid (0.1-0.9%), 2-hydroxyvaler-
enic acid, 2-acetoxy-valerenic acid

Pyridine alkaloids (traces, cat pheromone): actinidine,

valerianine, alpha-methylpyrrylketone
Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid.

The subspecies within the collective species differ in their
constituent substances spectra.

EFFECTS
In animal experiments, the interaction of the various
constituents are centrally depressive, sedative, anxiolytic,
spasmolytic, muscle relaxing and anti-ulcerogenic. The
pharmacological efficacy is heavily dependent on the quality
of the extract used.The main effect in humans is to reduce
sleep induction time. In vitro the valerenic acid componants
have been shown to decrease the degradation of gamma—
aminobutyric acid (GABA.) Animal experiments have dem-
onstrated an increase of GABA at the synaptic cleft via
inhibition of re-uptake and an increase in secretion of the
neurotransmitter. The increase of available GABA is one
factor that may be responsible for the sedative properties of

----- PAGE 1033 -----
784 /VALERIAN

Valerian root (Houghton, 1998; Santos et al, 1994.) One
other mechanism that may contribute to the sedative
properties of Valerian could be the high levels of glutamine
present in the extract Unlike GABA, glutamine more
effectively crosses the blood-brain barrier where it can be
taken up by the nerve terminals and converted to GABA
(Santos. Fero, 1994.)

CLINICAL TRIALS
Improvements in sleep quality ratings were demonstrated in
a well constructed, randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-
center study involving 121 patients. Subjects were given
either 600 mg of a 70% ethanol extract (5:1, n = 61) of
Valerian root that was standardized to 0.4 - 0.6% valerenic
acid or placebo (n = 60) one hour before bedtime for 28
consecutive nights. Patients were given two standardized
sleep questionaires; one that measured the depression/mood
scale and another global clinical impression scale. Sixty-six
percent of the Valerian treatment arm rated the therapeutic
effect as either good or very good at the end of the 28 day
trial. This compared to only a 29% equally positive rating by
the placebo participants. (Vorbach, 1996).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Nervousness and insomnia

Unproven Uses: Valerian is used for restlessness, sleeping
disorders based on nervous conditions, mental strain, lack of
concentration, excitability, stress, headache, neurasthenia,
epilepsy, hysteria, nervous cardiopathy, menstrual states of
agitation, pregnancy, menopause, neuralgia, fainting, ner-
vous stomach cramps, colic, uterine spasticity and states of
anxiety.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Gastrointestinal complaints can occur in rare cases, contact
allergies in very rare ones.

With long-term administration, the following can occasional-
ly appear: headache, restless states, sleeplessness, mydriasis,
disorders of cardiac function.

When large skin injuries or acute skin illnesses, severe
feverish or infectious diseases, cardiac insufficiency or
hypertonia are present, entire-body baths with the addition of
the volatile oil or of extracts from the drug should be
avoided.

Drug Interactions: Valerian may potentiate the effect of
other CNS depressants. Animal studies have shown that
Valerian has an additive effect when used in combination
with barbiturates and benzodiazepines (Leuschner, 1993;
Hiller, 1996.) Though there has been no evidence of

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

potentiation of the CNS depressive effect when combined
with alcohol, it is not recommended that Valerian be used in
conjunction with alcohol. Because of the sedative effect of
Valerian, operation of machinery or motor vehicles should
be avoided for several hours after injesting Valerian
products.

Pregnancy: Use of Valerian during pregnancy or in nursing
mothers is not recommended.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Valerian is used internally as
expressed juice from fresh plants, tincture, extracts, and
other galenic preparations. Externally, it is used as a bath
additive, though efficacy is Unproven for this indication.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 100 mg. 250 mg, 380 mg, 400 mg, 445 mg, 450
g, 475 mg, 493 mg. 495 mg, 500 mg, 530 mg, 550 mg, 1000

mg.
Liquid — 1:1

Tablets — 160 mg. 550 mg
Tea Bags

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 2 to 3 g of drug per
cup. A tea is prepared by adding | teaspoonful (3 to 5 g) of
drug to 150 ml of hot water and strain after 10 to 15 minutes.
An extract is prepared by mixing 2 parts root powder to 6
parts spirit of wine and 9 parts water. For external use, 100 g
of comminuted drug is mixed with 2 liters hot water; this is
then added to the bath.

Daily Dosage: The daily dose of Valerian extract is 100 mg
to 3800 mg. Total internal daily dose is 15 g of root powder.

Infusion — One cup one to several times per day

Tea — One cup (150 ml) 2 to 3 times daily and before
bedtime.

Tincture — 1/2 to 1 teaspoonful (1 to 3 ml) one to several
times per day.

Tincture (1:5) — several times daily 15 to 20 drops in water.

Extract — equivalent 2 to 3 g drug, one to several times per
day.

Plant juice — Adults take 1 tablespoonful 3 times daily.
Children take | teaspoonful 3 times daily.

External use — As a bath according to preparation instruc-
tions above.

Sleep Aid — 400 mg to 900 mg of the extract 30 minutes
before bedtime

Restlessness — 220 mg extract three times daily

----- PAGE 1034 -----
gil

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Storage: Must be kept from sources of light; tinctures and
extracts should be stored at room temperature in tightly
closed, non-plastic containers.

LITERATURE

Anonym. Phytotherapeutika: Nachgewiesene Wirkung, aber
wirksame Stoffe meist nicht bekannt. In: DAZ 137(15): 1221-
1222. 1997.

Becker H et al.. (1983) Planta Med 49(1 ):64.

Bodesheim U. Holzl J, Isolation and receptor binding properties
of alkaloids and lignans from Valeriana officinalis L. In: PA
52(5):386-391. 1997.

Bos R et al., (1983) Phytochemistry 22 (6): 1505.

Bos R et al.. Seasonal variation of the essential oil, valerenic
acid derivatives, and valepotriates in Valeriana officinalis roots.
In: PM 59(7)98. 1993.

Bounthanh C et al., (1981) Planta Med 41:21.
Bounthanh C et al., (1983) Planta Med 49:138.

Bounthanh C. Bergmann C, Beck JP, Haag-Berrurier M, Anton
R (1981) Valepotriates, a new class of cytotoxic, antitumor
agents. Planta Med 41:21-28.

Braun R et al.. (1982) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 122:1109.
Braun R et al.. (1984) Planta Med 1.

Braun R, Dittmar W. Machut M. Weickmann S. (1982)
Valepotriate mit Epoxidstruktur - beachtliche Alkylantien. Dtsch
Apoth Z 122:1109-1113.

Braun R, Dittmar W, von der Hude W. Scheutwinkel-Reich M,
(1985) Bacterial mutagenicity of the tranquilizing constituents of
Valerianaceae roots. Naunyn- Schmiedeberg's Arch Pharmacol
Suppl 329:R28.

Donath F, Roots I, (1995) Untersuchung zur Erfassung der
Wirkung von Baldrianextrakt (LI 156) auf das Pharmako-EEG
bei 16 Probanden. Z Phytother Abstractband, S. 10.

Eickstedt KW von, (1969) Arzneim Forsch 19:995.

Eickstedt KW von, Rahmann R, (1969)
Psychopharmakologische Wirkungen von Valepotriaten.
Arzneim-Forsch 19:316-319.

Funk ED, Friedrich H, (1975) Planta Med 28:215.
Gross D et al., (1971) Arch Pharm 304:19.

Grusla D, (1987) Nachweis der Wirkung eines Baldrianextraktes
im Rattenhim mit der 14C-2-Desoxyglucose-Technik.
Dissertation, Phillipps-Universitat, Marburg.

Hansel R, (1984) Bewertung von Baldrian-Praparaten:
Differenzierung wesentlich: Dtsch Apoth Z 124:2085.

Hansel R, Pflanzliche Beruhigungsmittel Moglichkeiten und
Grenzen der Selbstmedikation. In: DAZ 135(32):2935-2943.
1995.

Hansel R, Pflanzliche Sedativa. In: ZPT 11(1):14. 1990.
Hansel R, Schultz J, (1982) Dtsch Apoth Ztg 122(5):215.

VALERIAN/785

Hansel R, Schulz J, (1982) Valerensauren und Valerenal als
Leitstoffe des offizinellen Baldrians. Dtsch Apoth Z 122:215-
219.

Hansel R. Schulz J, (1985) Beitrag zur Qulaitatssicherung von
Baldrianextrakten. Pharm Industrie 47:531-533.

Hardy M, Kirk-Smith MD, Stretch DD (1995) Replacement of
drug treatment for insomnia by ambient odour. Lancet 346:701.

Hazelhoff B, (1984) Phytochemical, Pharmacological Aspects of
Valeriana compounds. Dissertation, Universitat Groningen.

Hazelhoff B et al., (1979) Pharm Weekbl Sci Ed. 1:71.
Hendricks H, Bruins AB, (1980) J Chromatogr 190:321.
Hendricks R et al., (1977) Phytochemistry 16:1853.
Hendriks H et al., (1981) Planta Med 42(1 ):62.
Hendriks H et al., (1985) Planta Med (3):28.

Hendriks H, Bos R, Woerdenbag HJ, Koster AS, (1985) Central
Nervous Depressant Activity of Valerenic Acid in the Mouse.
anta Med 51:28-31.

Hiller KO. Zetler G, (1996) Neuropharmacological Studies on
Ethanol Extracts of Valeriana officinalis: Behavioural.
Anticonvulsant Properties. Phytotherapy Res 10:145-151.

Hiller KO. Kato G, Anxiolytic activity of psychotropic plant
extracts. I. Test of ethanolic Valeriana extract STEI Val. In:
PM 62. Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA, 65. 1996.

Hiller KO. Rahlfs V, Therapeutische Aquivalenz eines
hochdosierten Phytopharmakons mit Amytriptylin bei angstlich-
depressiven Versimmungen - Reanalyse einer randomisierten
Studie unter besonderer Beachtung biometrischer und klinischer
Aspekte. In: Forsch.

Holzl J, Baldrian ein Mittel gegen Schlafstorungen. In: DAZ
136(10):751-759. 1996.

Jansen W, (1977) Doppelblindstudie mit Baldrisedon.
Therapiewoche 27:2779-2786.

Kamm-Kohl AV, Jansen W Brockmann P, (1984) Moderne
Baldriantherapie gegen nervose Storungen im Senium. Med
Welt 35:1450-1454.

Krieglstein J, Grusla D, (1988) Zentraldampfende Inhaltsstoffe
im Baldrian. Dtsch Apoth Z 128:2041-2046.

Kubitschek J, Baldrian beeinfluPt die Melatoninwirkung. In: PZ
142(6):433 1997.

Leathwood PD et al., (1982) Pharmacol Biochem Behav 17:65.
Leathwood PD, Chauffard F (1983) J Psychiatr. Res 17(2): 115.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F, (1983) Quantifying the effects of
mild sedatives. J Psychiat Res 17:115-122.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F, (1984) Aqueous extract of valerian
reduces latency to fall asleep in man. Planta Med 50:144-148.

Meier B, Linnenbrink N, Status und Vergleichbarkeit
pflanzlicher Arzneimittel. In: DAZ 136(47):4205-4220. 1996.

Miiller-Bohn T, Pflanzliche Sedativa und Antidepressiva. In:
DAZ 136(24):2032-2033. 1996.

----- PAGE 1035 -----
786 /VALERIAN

Orth-Wagner S, Ressin WJ, Friedrich I, Phytosedativum gegen
Schlafstorungen. In: ZPT 16(3): 147-156. 1995.

Popov S et al., (1974) Phytochemistry 13:2815.
Reidel E et al., (1982) Planta Med 46:219.

Riedel E, Hansel R, Ehrke G. (1982) Hemmung des Gamma-
Aminobuttersaureabbaus durch Valerensaurederivate. Planta Med
46:219-220.

Riicker G, Tautges J, Sieek A. Wenzel H. Frag E, (1978)
Untersuchungen zur Isolierung und pharmakodynamischen
Aktivitat des Sesquiterpens Valeranon aus Nardostrachys

jatamansi DC Arzneim-Forsch/Drug Res 28:7.

Santos MS. Ferreira F, Cunha AP et al., (1994) An Aqueous
Extract of Valerian Influences the Transport of GABA in
Synaptosomes. Planta Med 60:278-279.

Schilcher H. Pflanzliche Psychopharmaka. Eine neue
Klassifizierung nach Indikationsgruppen. In: DAZ 135(20): 1811-
1822. 1995.

Schimmer O, Roder A, Valerensauren in Fertigarzneimitteln und
selbst bereiteten Ausziigen aus der Wurzel von Valeriana
officinalis L.s.l. In: PZW 137(1 >:31-36. 1992.

Schulz H. Jobert M. (1995) Die Darstellung sedierender/
Tranquilisierender Wirkungen von Phytopharmaka im
quantifizierten EEG Z Phytother Abstractband. S. 10.

Schulz H. Stolz C. Muller J, (1994) The effect of a valerian
extract on sleep polygraphy in poor sleepers. A pilot study.
Pharmacopsychiat 27:147-151.

Schulz V, Hiibner WD, Ploch M. Klinische Studien mit
Psycho-Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT 18(3): 141-i54. 1997.

Sprecher E, Pflanzliche Geriatrika. In: ZPT 9(2):40. 1988.

Sprecher E, Ober die Qualitat von Phytopharmaka. In: ZPT
12(4); 105. 1991.

Thies PW, Funke S, (1966) Tetrahedron Letters 11:1155.

Torii S, Fukuda H, Kanemoto H, Miyanchi R, Hamauzu Y,
Kawasaki M, (1988) Contingent negative variation (CNV), the
psychological effects of odour. In: Van Toller St, Dodd GH
(eds) Perfumery. The psychology, biology of fragrance.
Chapman, Hall, London New York. S_ 107-146.

Trossell K, Wahlberg K, (1966) Tetrahedron Letters 4:445.
Tyler VE, (1987) The new honest herbal. A sensible guide to

herbs, related remedies. 2nd ed Stickley Co.. Philadelphia, S
125-126.

Van Meer JH, Labadine RP, (1981) J Chromatogr. 205(1 ):206.
Veith J et al., (1986) Planta Med (3): 179.

Vorbach EU, Arnold KH, (1995) Wirksamkeit und

Vertraglichkeit von Baldrianextrakt (LI 156) versus Placebo bei
behandlungsbediirftigen Insomnien. Z Phytother Abstractband, S
1.
Vorbach EU, Gortelmeyer R & Bruning J: Therapie von

Insomnien. Wirksamkeit und Vertraeglichkeit eine
Baldrianpraeparats. Psychopharmakotherapie 1996; 3:109-115.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Werner, Arzneipflanzen in der Volksmedizin. In: DAZ
130(45):2510. 1990.

Wichtl M, Volksmedizinisch verwendete pflanzliche
Arzneimittel. In: ZPT 11(3):71. 1990.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs. Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York
1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K. Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Valeriana officinalis

See Valerian

Venus Flytrap

Dionaea muscipula

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Pans: The entire fresh plant is used medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The peduncles are leafless, up to 45 cm
long with 3 to 10 radial flowers arranged in an umbelliferous
raceme. The sepals are fused, and the 5 petals are free and
white. There are 15 to 20 stamens and 5 superior carpels.
The styles are fused to a column with 5 stigmas on the tip.
The fruit is an ovoid capsule, which splits when ripe. The
numerous seeds are ovoid, black and smooth.

----- PAGE 1036 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: This herbaceous perennial grows up
to 45 cm high with leaves that are arranged in a basal rosette.
The leaves are 6.5 to 13 cm long, have a cuneiform
broadened petiole and an orbicular lamina with 2 sides
forming a trap. The leaf sides have 15 to 20 stiff bristles on
the edge and 3 sensitive bristles on the surface. The nectar
glands are on the periphery and the digestive glands toward
the center. When the sensitive bristles are stimulated, the
lamina halves snap shut and the bristles on the edge lock
together. Digestion of the trapped insect takes approximately
6 days after which the trap slowly opens again. There are
only adventitious roots on the fully grown plant.

Characteristics: The plant is carnivorous.
Habitat: Dionaea muscipula is native to North America.

Production: Venus flytrap herb is the whole fresh, aerial
plant of Dionaea muscipula, which is harvested shortly
before the flowering season and processed immediately.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Naphthalene derivatives: napthoquinones, including hydro-
plumbagin-4-O-beta-glucoside, (0.6%), plumbagin (0.2%)

Flavonoids: including quercetin-3-O-galactoside, quercetin-
3-O-glucoside, kaempferol-3-O-galactoside, kaempferol-3-
O-glucoside

Phenol carboxylic acids: glucosides of gallic acid, ellagic
acid, 3-O-methyl-ellagic acid and 3,3-dimethyl ellagic acid

Enzymes (in the secretions of the digestive glands): prote-
ases, phosphatases, nucleases

EFFECTS
The pressed fresh plant (chief active ingredient plumbagin)
is immunostimulating, antineoplastic and spasmogenic due
to the lysophosphatidinic acid component.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug extracted from the plant is used
chiefly in the treatment of malignant conditions such as
tumors in advanced stages (mammary carcinoma, bladder
carcinoma, prostate carcinoma and osteosarcoma) and also
for hematological systemic conditions (such as Hodgkin and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma) as well as solid tumors.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Parenteral administration of medicinal preparations made
from the fresh plant led to elevated body temperature, chills
and circulatory damage. Circulatory collapse, possibly as a
result of contamination with endotoxins is possible. Skin
contact with the fresh plant may cause irritation.

VERONICA BECCABUNGA / 787

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations of the pressed juice
have been administered orally, by inhalation and
parenterally.

How Supplied: Availability of the pressed juice of the fresh
plant in two commercial preparations was halted in 1986.

Daily Dosage: Juice from the fresh plant used orally and as
an inhalant: 50 to 60 drops 5 times daily p.o.: 25 drops with
1 ml physiological NaCl in a cold atomizer. Injection
solution: initial dose is 2 ml ampule daily for 14 days.
Maintenance dose: | ampule every second to third day ILM.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K, Reichling J. Rimpler G.
Schneider G (Eds), Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen

Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin.
Heidelberg 1998.

Veratrum album
See White Hellebore

Veratrum luteum

See False Unicorn Root

Veratrum viride

See American Hellebore

Verbascum densiflorum
See Mullein

Verbena officinalis

See Vervain

Veronica beccabunga

See Brooklime

----- PAGE 1037 -----
788 /VERONICA OFFICINALIS

Veronica officinalis
See Speedwell

Vervain
Verbena officinalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried aerial

parts collected during the flowering season, the fresh,
flowering herb, the flowers and the whole fresh plant.

Flower and Fruit: The small flowers are pale lilac and
arranged in thin paniculate spikes. The calyx is fused to a
short, 5-tipped tube. The corolla has a 5-tipped, bent tube
and a bilabiate margin. The mouth of the tube is closed by a
cross of hairs. There are 4 stamens and 1 ovary, which
breaks up into four, 1-seeded mericarps. These are oblong-
cylindrical, 15 to 2 mm long, warty on the inside,
reticulately grooved and light brown on the outside. The
seeds are grooved on the inside and have very little
endosperm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The true variety is an annual or
biennial to perennial with a fusiform, branched, whitish root.
The stem is erect, rigid, quadrangular and branched above.
The leaves are opposite, dull green, ovate-oblong and have a
short broad petiole. They are deeply divided in 3 with
notched, crenate tips. They are wrinkled and roughly
bristled.

Habitat: The plant is probably indigenous to the Mediterra-
nean region. It is cultivated worldwide, but mainly in eastern
Europe.

Production: Verbena herb consists of the above-ground parts
of Verbena officinalis. The herb is predominantly cultivated
in eastern Europe. It is collected in the wild and harvested in
southeastern Europe. After being cut, the drug is hung in
bunches to dry.

Note: Improper drying leads to hydroiytic decomposition of
verbenalin.

Not to be Confused With: Lippiae triphyllae folium

Other Names: Enchanter's Plant, Herb of the Cross, Juno's
Tears, Pigeon's Grass, Pigeonweed, Simpler's Joy, Herb of
Grace

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes (0.2-0.5%): including among others
verbenalin (cornin, 0.15%), hastatoside (0.08%), dihydro-
verbenalin (0.01%)

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flavonoids: including among others luteolin, scutellarin and
6-hydroxy-luteolin glycosides, artemitin, sorbifolin, pedali-
tin, nepetin (eupafolin)

Caffeic acid derivatives: verbascoside 0.8%), eucovoside,
martynoside

EFFECTS
The amaroid-like affect of the iridoid glycosides explains its
use as an astringent. The drug is weakly anti-edemic,
analgesic, cytotoxic and antitumoral. The verbenalin has
antitussive, secretolytic, and lactation-promoting properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Preparations of Vervain are used for
diseases and ailments of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa,
such as sore throat, and for diseases of the respiratory tract,
such as coughs, asthma and whooping cough.

In addition, the drug is used internally for pain, cramps,
fatigue, nervous disorders, digestive disorders, liver and
gallbladder diseases, jaundice, kidney and urinary tract
complaints, menopausal complaints and irregular menstrua-
tion. It is also used to promote lactation and to treat
rheumatic diseases, gout, metabolic disorders, chlorosis and
edema. The drug is used externally as a gargle for cold
symptoms and for diseases of the oral and pharyngeal cavity.

Vervain is also used for antipruritic treatment of skin
diseases and minor topical burns (in France) and for arthritis,
rheumatism, dislocations and contusions.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for edema, chronic
malaria, dysmenorrhea and carbuncles.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for bruising and
cerebral convulsions. “

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Vervain should not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE .
Mode of Administration: Vervain is available as whole, cut
and powdered drug for internal and external use.

Preparation: The ratio for the liquid extract is LT in 25%
ethanol; the tincture should be mixed with 40% ethanol. An
infusion is prepared by adding 5 to 20 gm drug to 1 liter
water.

Daily Dosage: For the liquid extract, take 2 to 4 ml daily.
For the tincture, take 5 to 10 ml up to 3 times per day. For
the infusion, take 2 to 4 gm up to 3 times per day.

----- PAGE 1038 -----
4F

HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Chinese Medicine Dosage: The daily dose is 4.5 to 9 gm of
the drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily; parenterally: 1 ml injection
solution sc twice weekly (HAB34).

Storage: Vervain must be stored in a dry environment to
avoid hydrolytic decomposition of verbenalin.

LITERATURE
Carat A et aL, PM 61:490. 1995.

Inouye H et al., (1974) Planta Med 25:285.
Mcllroy RJ, In: The Plant Glycosides, Amold. London 1951.
Reynaud J et al., Pharm Acta Helv 67:216. 1992.

Weber R, Dissertation Marburg. 1995.
Yip L, Pei S, Hudson JB, Towers GHN. Screening of
medicinal plants fiom Yunnan Province in southwest China for
antiviral activity. In: ETH 34:1-6. 1991.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aurl, Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen. 4. Aufl. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Viburnum prunifolium
See Black Haw

Vicia faba

See Broad Bean

Vinca minor

See Periwinkle

Viola odorata

See Sweet Violet

VIROLA /789

Viola tricolor

See Heartsease

Virola

Virola_ theiodora

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in panicles. The male
inflorescence has numerous flowers and is brown, gold-
yellow and pubescent. The female flowers are either single
or in clusters of 2 to 10 flowers. They are fused and have 3 to
5 stamens. The ovary develops from only 1 carpel with 1
ovule. The fruit is orbicular-oval, 10 to 20 mm long and 8 to
15'mm wide.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Virola theiodora is a diclinous tree
that grows up to 23 m high. The leaves are alternate, 9 to 35
cm long and 4 to 12 cm wide; the lamina is simple, elongate
to wide oval, acute, entire and paper-like. The trunk is
approximately 0.5 m thick and cylindrical with a smooth,
brown-speckled bark with gray spots.

Characteristics: The flowers have sharply astringent

fragrance.
Habitat: Amazon region
Production: Virola bark is the dried bark of Virola theiodora.

There are various methods of production. Either the bark is
scraped off, dried over a fire and powdered, or the outer bark
is peeled off before sunrise and the inner bark with the resin
is scraped off and cooked to a syrup. The syrup is pulverized
after drying in the sun.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Tryptamine derivatives: particularly N,N-dimethyl trypt-
amine, 5-methoxy-NN-dimethyl tryptamine (5-MeO-DMT)

EFFECTS
Due to its psychotropic and narcotic-hallucinogenic charac-
teristics (tryptamine alkaloids), the drug is chiefly used in the
form of a snuff powder in connection with ritual and
religious ceremonies. The resin is also administered topically
to yeast infections of the skin and for the promotion of the
healing of wounds.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Virola is used for skin disease and fungal
skin diseases, to speed the healing of wounds, and to clean
infected wounds (South America).

----- PAGE 1039 -----
790 /VIROLA

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The drug is not used as a medication. The drug has a
psychomimetic effect when administered through the nasal

mucous membrane.

OVERDOSAGE

Signs of poisoning include nausea, increased irritability,
numbness in the limbs, coordination disorders and hallucina-
tions, among others. The tryptamine derivatives are resorbed
only to a very limited extent following oral administration.

DOSAGE
Preparation: There is no information in the literature.

LITERATURE

de Smet PA, A multidisciplinary overview of intoxicating snuff
rituals in the Western Hemisphere. J Ethnopharmacol, 13:3-49,
1985 Mar.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

MacRae WD, Towers GH, Justicia pectoralis: a study of the
basis for its use as a hallucinogenic snuff ingredient. J
Ethnopharmacol, 12:93-111, 1984 Oct.

MacRae WD, Towers GH, Phytochemical investigation of
Virola peruviana, a new hallucinogenic plant. J Pharm Sci,
12:1561-3, 1973 Sep.

McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott FS, Alkaloids in certain
species of Virola and other South American plants of

ethnopharmacologic interest. Acta Chem Scand, 12:903-16,
1969.

McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott FS, Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors in South American hallucinogenic plants. Part 2:
Constituents of orally-active Myristicaceous hallucinogens. J
Ethnopharmacol, 12:179-211, 1984 Nov.

Plotkin MJ, Schultes RE, Virola: a promising genus for
ethnopharmacological investigation. J Psychoactive Drugs,
22:357-61, 1990 Jul-Sep.

Virola theiodora

See Virola

Viscum album

See European Mistletoe

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Vitex agnus-castus

See Chaste Tree

Vitis vinifera
See Grape

Wafer Ash

Ptelea  trifoliata

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the leaves, the
young bark and the root bark. The plant is also used in
homeopathic medicine.

Flower and Fruit: The small, greenish-white flowers are in
loose, terminal cymes and are dioecious. The 4- to 5-sepalled
calyx and the 4 to 5 petals are downy on the outside. There
are 4 to 5 stamens whose filaments are hairy at the base. The
compressed ovary has a short style and stigma which is
divided in two. The fruit is circular and winged with a broad,
greenish-white, later ochre-colored margin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a bush or small tree up
to 4 m high with glabrous, smooth, dark or red-brown
branches. The younger branches, leaves and petiols are
downy. The leaves are large, 3-lobed, lanceolate narrowing
to both ends, entire, dark green above, lighter beneath and
covered with numerous fine glandular spots.

Characteristics: The flowers are pleasantly perfumed and the
fruit is bitter-tangy.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Eastern North America
and is cultivated in Europe as an ornamental bush.

Production: Wafer Ash is the root-bark of Ptelea trifoliata.

Other Names: Pickaway Anise, Prairie Grub, Scubby Tre-
foil, and Stinking Prairie Bush, Swamp Dogwood, Hop Tree,
Three-Leafed, Wingseed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Furoquinoline alkaloids:
nine (beta-fagarine), ptelein, dictamnine, and maculosidine

including kokusaginine, skimmia-

Furanocoumarins: including isopimpinellin, marmesin, and
phellopterin

----- PAGE 1040 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

EFFECTS

Wafer Ash is antimicrobial. The alkaloid content acts against
microbes; pteleatinium chloride acts against mycobacteriwn
tuberculosis and yeast fungus.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wafer Ash is used for stomach complaints,
gallstones, and rheumatism. It's root bark is used as a tonic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The plant could trigger phototoxicosis through skin
contact, possibly also through internal ingestion of larger
quantities.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wafer Ash is available as an

extract.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl, Bde. I-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifie,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wahoo

Euonymus species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the trunk and root

bark and the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellowish-green, small
and flat in double cymes with few blossoms. There are 4
sepals, 4 petals, 4 stamens and 4 styles on a glandular disc,
which surrounds the ovary. The fruit is a 4-lobed, obtuse,
pink capsule which bursts open at the tip showing the seeds
covered in an orange-yellow skin.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an unwieldy shrub up to
3 m high with green rectangular young branches. The older
branches are light gray. The leaves are opposite, oblong-
lanceolate or elliptical, acuminate, finely serrate and
glabrous.

Characteristics: The seeds are poisonous.

Habitat: The plant grows in the Eastern and Central U.S. and
Canada.
Production: Wahoo root bark is the bark of the root and

young branches of Euonymus atropurpureus. Wahoo fruit is
the fruit of Euonymus europaeus.

WAHOO/791

Other Names: Burning Bush, Fusanum, Fusoria, Gadrose,
Gatten, Gatter, Indian Arrowroot, Pigwood, Prickwood,
Skewerwood, and Spindle Tree

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: WAHOO ROOT BARK {EUONYMUS
ATROPURPUREUS)

Cardioactive steroids (cardenolides) in the root: including

euatroside, euatromonoside

COMPOUNDS: WAHOOO FRUIT (EUONYMUS EUROPAEUS)
Cardioactive steroids (cardenolides) in the seeds: including
evonoside, evobioside, evomonoside, evolonoside, glucoevo-
noloside, glucoevonogenin

Alkaloids: polyester from a sesquiterpene polyol with
pyrridine carbon acids (for example, evonine)

Peptide alkaloids: including frangula amine, franganin,
frangufolin

/-benzyl-tetrahydro-isoquinoline alkaloids
Purine alkaloids: caffeine, theobromine

EFFECTS: WAHOO ROOT BARK AND FRUIT
The drug is reported to be a laxative and a choleretic. Larger
doses have an effect on the heart.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: In the past, the drug was used as a
cholagogue, laxative, diuretic and tonic, and for dyspepsia.
Today, it is used in homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Poisonings caused by the berries have been recorded. Thirty-
six berries of Euonymus europaeus are said to be enough to
kill a person. After a latency period of several hours,
intestinal colic, severe, sometimes bloody diarrhea, elevation
of body temperature, shortness of breath and circulatory
disorders with signs of collapse occur. Often there is
elevation of cerebrospinal pressure with increasing stupor
that may progress unconsciousness. The first measures to be
taken with poisonings are gastric lavage, intestinal emptying,
the instillation of activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis
(which includes quiet, heat and the possible administration of
a plasma volume expander). All other measures depend on
the symptoms. For loss of potassium, careful replenishment
of potassium should be undertaken. Lidocaine can be
administered for ventricular extrasystole; atropine for partial
atrioventricular block. For elimination of the glycosides
hemoperfusion is possible, as is the administration of
cholestyramine to interrupt enterohepatic circulation. Intuba-
tion and oxygen respiration may also be necessary in cases
of asphyxiation.

----- PAGE 1041 -----
792/WAHOO

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wahoo root bark and fruit are not
recommended for use. as the drug is considered too

dangerous.

LITERATURE
Bishay DW et al., PH 12:693. 1973.

Bliss CA, Ramstad E. J Am Pharm Assoc 46:423. 1957.
Briining R, Wagner H. PH 17:1821. 1978.

Kislichenko SG et al., Khim Prir Soedin 386. 1969.
Kislichenko SG et al.. Khim Prir Soedin 193 et 241. 1967.
Tschesche R, Wirtz S. Snatzke G. Chem Ber 88:1619. 1955.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch ftir
Apotheker. Toxikologen und Biologen. 4. Aufl.. Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Gazzinelli RT, Romanha AJ. Fontes G. Chiari E. Gazzinelli G.
Brenner Z, Distribution of carbohydrates recognized by the
lectins Euonymus europaeus and concanavaiin A in monoxenic
and heteroxenic trypanosomatids. J Protozool. 38:320-5, Jul-
Aug, 1991.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nickrent DL, Franchina CR, Phylogenetic relationships of the
Santalales and relatives. J Mol Evol, 26:294-301. Oct, 1990.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Roussel F, Dal ion J, Wissocq JC, Cytotoxic cardenolides from
woods of Euonymus alata. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo), 26:615-
7. Mar, 1996.
Roussel F, Dalion J, Wissocq JC, Euonymus europaeus lectin
as an endothelial and epithelial marker in canine tissues. Lab
Anim, 26:114-21. Apr, 1992.

Roussel F, Dalion J, Wissocq JC. Lectin binding defines and
differentiates M-cells in mouse small intestine and caecum.
Histochem Cell Biol, 26:161-8. Aug, 1995

Roussel F, Dalion J, Wissocq JC. Occupational wood-dust
sensitivity from Euonymus europaeus (spindle tree) and
investigation of cross reactivity between E.e. wood and
Artemisia vulgaris pollen (mugwort). Allergy, 26:186-90. Apr,
1991.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wang W, Wang J, Zhao D, Liu H. Zhou W, Chen K,
Comparison of Spatholobus suberectus Dum Euonymus alatus
(Thunb.) Sieb. and Eupolyphaga sinensis Walker on regulation

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

of plasma lipid. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tsa Chih, 38:299-301
320, 1991 May

Wallflower

Cheiranthus cheiri

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried flowers,
the dried ripe seeds and the fresh aerial parts of the erect
plant before flowering.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are golden yellow to orange-
yellow in dense racemes on 10 to 14 cm long, pubescent,
erect stems. The sepals are 9 to 11 mm _ long, linear-
lanceolate, with a membranous border. The stigma is curled
back. The fruit is a pod, which has no beak but has distinct
ribs*. The seeds are arranged in 1 row, are 3 mm long,
oblong, narrowly winged and light brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from about 30 to 70
cm. The stems are woody below and semi-shrub-like with
gray-appressed hairs and thick foliage above. The leaves are
lanceolate with revolute tip, short-petioled, entire-margined

and hairy.
Characteristics: The plant has a pleasant fragrance.

Habitat: The plant is probably only indigenous to the eastern
Mediterranean region, but is cultivated today in Europe,
northern Africa, western Asia, Japan and New Zealand.

Production: Wallflower can be obtained from commercial
growers (cultivated regions).

Other Names: Géillyflower, Wallstock-Gillofer, Giroflier,

Handflower, Keiri, Beeflower

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cardioactive steroid glycosides (cardenolids):
high concentration in the seeds (0.5%), including cheirotox-
in, erysimoside, glucoerysimoside, cheiroside A

in particularly

Glucosinolates: glucocheiroline, glucoiberin, which yield the
isothiocyanates cheiroline and iberin

Fatty oil (in the seeds)

EFFECTS
The drug has cardiac effects similar to digitaloid drugs, due
to the cardenolide glycosides. Its application for constipation
is plausible because of the inhibition of Na’ and H20
absorption and the stimulating effect on the smooth muscles
of the gastrointestinal tract.

----- PAGE 1042 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wallflower is used for cardiac insufficien-
cy, as a laxative and to encourage menstruation.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for wisdom tooth pain.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
For possible symptoms of overdose and treatment of
poisonings see Digitalis folium. Despite the strong efficacy
of the drug's cardioactive steroid glycosides in parenteral
application, serious poisoning is not expected due to the
presumably low resorption rate following oral admini-
stration.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wallflower is used internally in
drops and an infusion as well as in some combination
preparations.

Preparation: To make an infusion from the flowers, mix 2 to
3 gm of drug per 100 ml of water.

Daily Dosage: Drink 3 to 4 cups of the infusion daily.

LITERATURE
Belokon VF. Makarevich IF, Khim Prir Soedin 424. 1980.

Makarevich IF, Belokon VF, Khim Prir Soedin 662. 1975.

Moore IA, Tamm C, Reichstein T. Helv Chim Acta 37:755.
1954.

Schwarz H. Katz A, Reichstein T, Pharm Acta Helv 21:250.
1946.

Wagner P, Ber Dtsch Chem Ges 41:4467. 1908.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Fxomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie.
Pharmakoloaie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

WALNUT/793

Walnut

Juglans regia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the feathery
leaflets without the rachis and the green fruit shells.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are green and appear before
the leaves. They are monoecious. The male flowers are 10
cm long, sessile, globular-cylindrical, limp, hanging catkins.
The female flowers are in groups of | to 3 at the tip of
annual growth. They are greenish with a glandular pubescent
calyx and 2 large, curved, warty, reddish stigmas. The fruit is
globular or oblong-globular with a smooth, green, white-
spotted outer shell and a wooden, wrinkled inner shell.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to 25 m and has a
broad, loose-branched crown. The bark is smooth and ash
gray at first; later dark and fissured. The leaves are large,
long petioled, odd-pinnate with 7 to 9 oblong or ovate,
entire-margined leaflets. The leaflets are spotted with glands
when young. The terminal leaflet is the largest and is
petiolate.

Characteristics: The leaves are aromatic when rubbed. The
taste is bitter.

Habitat: The walnut is indigenous to the Middle East and
Iran. Today, it is cultivated in many regions.

Production: Walnut leaf consists of die dried leaf of Juglans
regia.

Other Names: English Walnut, Caucasion Walnut, Circas-
sian Walnut, Persian Walnut

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Tannins (galloylglucose, ellagitannins)

Naphthalene derivatives: The fresh leaves and the fruit peels
contain 1,4,5- trihydroxynaphthalene-4-beta-D-glucoside,
which is transformed into juglone through bruising or drying.
Juglone polymerizes readily into yellow or brown products
(that stain the skin), so there can be hardly any juglone
present in the drug itself.

Flavonoids: including, among others, hyperoside, quercitrin

EFFECTS
Walnut is astringent and fungistatic. The juglone content in
the walnut hulls has been linked to mutagenic action. The
topical use of walnut hulls has been linked to cancer of the
tongue and leukoplakia of the lips. The main active
principles are the tannins and juglon. There is an astringent
effect because of the tannins. The antifungal effect comes
from the juglon content and the essential oil.

----- PAGE 1043 -----
794 /WALNUT

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

+ Inflammation of the skin
H Excessive perspiration

Unproven Uses: Externally, Walnut is used for mild,
superficial inflammation of the skin and excessive perspira-
tion. Internally, the drug is used for gastrointestinal catarrh

and as an anthelmintic (so-called blood purifier).

Chinese Medicine: In China, Walnut is used to treat asthma,
lumbago, beriberi, impotence and constipation.

Indian Medicine: In India, Walnut is used for alternating
rheumatic complaints, and the oil of the seeds is used for
tapeworms. The seeds are said to have an aphrodisiac effect
and are also used for dysentery and colic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode_ of Administration:
and other galenic preparations for external use.

Comminuted drug for decoctions

Preparation: To prepare a decoction, soak 2 teaspoonfuls of
drug in 1 cup of water, boil and strain. An infusion is
prepared by using 1.5 gm of finely cut drug, soaked in cold

water, brought to simmer and strained after 3 to 5 minutes.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose for external use is 3 to

6 gm of drug.
LITERATURE

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Nahrstedt A et al., (1981) Planta Med 42(4):313.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Thomson RH, Naturally Occuring Quinones, 2nd Ed., Academic
Press, New York, 1971.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Willuhn G, Pflanzliche Dermatika. Eine kritische Ubersicht.. In:
DAZ 132(37): 1873. 1992.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Water Avens

Geum _ rivale

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried, under-
ground parts of the plant, the fresh, flowering plant and the
roots.

Flower and Fruit: The flowering peduncle usually sprouts
singly from the axils of the rosette leaves, rarely from the
ends of the stems. It is often tinged red-brown and is downy.
The flowers and subinflorescences are on long, dense and
glandular-haired pedicles. The 5 sepals are red-brown. The 5
petals are pale yellow and tinged dirty pink. The flower
remains attached long after flowering. The carpel axis is
stemmed and villous, and stretches when mature. The fruit is
hooked at the tip.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 30 to 100 cm high
semi-rosette shrub with the primary root replaced by
adventitious roots. The rhizome is simple, thick, cylindrical
and crooked with a terminal rosette. The rosette leaves are
long-petioled, irregularly lyre-shaped and pinnate. The upper
surface is glandular and hairy. The underside is heavily
ciliated along the veins.

Habitat: The plant is found in Europe, temperate Asia and
North America.

Production: Water Avens root is the root of Geum rivale.

Other Names: Cure All, Water Flower, Indian Chocolate,
Chocolate Root, Throat Root, Water Chisch

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS: IN THE FRESHLY HARVESTED RHIZOME

Gein (eugenol transformed into eugenol
through drying or cutting into small pieces

vicianoside):

Tannins
COMPOUNDS: IN THE DRIED RHIZOME AND ROOT

Volatile oil (traces): chief component eugenol

Tannins (15-20%)

EFFECTS

See Geum urbanum; overall, Water Avens has very weak
action.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Uses are the same as for Geum urbanum.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
No information is available.

----- PAGE 1044 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hegnauer R, Pharm Weekblad 87:641-646. 1952.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Water Dock

Rumex aquaticus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried roots.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a large, dense
panicle. The pedicles are filiform and up to 2.5 times as long
as the capsules. The capsules are 6 to 8 mm long, ovate-
triangular, more or less acute, longer than wide and entire-
margined.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb is perennial and has an
erect 100 to 200 cm high stem. The leaves are 7.5 to 10 cm
wide with curly margins. The basal leaves are triangular,
acute, deeply cordate at the base and 15 to 2.5 times as long
as they are wide. The petiole is at least as long as the leaf
blade. The rhizome is dark brown to blackish on the outside
and porous.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe.

Production: The root material is sliced and then dried in the
shade.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Oxalates: oxalic acid, calcium oxalate

Tannins

Anthracene derivatives: including anthranoids

EFFECTS
The active agents are quercitrin, protein, fat, starch, essential
oil and tannin. The herb acts as an aid to digestion.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Water Dock is used for blood purification
and constipation. The powdered form is also useful for
cleaning the teeth or for mouth ulcers. It is used externally
for sores and scorbutic conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

WATER DROPWORT/795

OVERDOSAGE
Oxalate poisonings are conceivable, but only with the
consumption of very large quantities of the leaves as salad.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally and
externally as a liquid extract or as a powder. Use of the herb
went out of favor during the 1g" century.

LITERATURE
Grznar K. Rada K. Farmaceut Obzor 47:195. 1978.

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der

Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Sharma M et al.. Indian J Chem Sect B 15B.544. 1977.

Water Dropwort

Oenanthe —_crocata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the rhizome.

Flower and Fnut: The flowers are in terminal umbels. The
flowering shoots are longer than the 10 to 40 pedicled rays,
which do not micken in the fruiting phase. The cylindrical
fruit is 4 to 6 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a branched, stout
perennial up to 150 cm high. The roots are fleshy and pale
yellow. They have obovoid or ellipsoid tubers close to the
point of attachment to the stem. The stems are hollow, striate
and grooved. The basal leaves are 3- to 4-pinnate. The lobes
of the basal leaves are ovate to suborbicular, cuneate at base.
The lobed. crenate. cauline leaves are 2-, to 3-pinnate and
almost sessile. The lobes of the cauline leaves are ovate to
linear, and the segments are closer and sharper than the basal
leaves.

Characteristics: The plant is extremely poisonous.

Habitat: The plant grows around ditches and ponds in the
U.S., and parts of Europe, excluding Scandinavia, Holland,
Germany. Russia. Turkey and Greece.

Production: Water Dropwort is the root of Oenanthe crocata,
which is collected in the wild.

Other Names: Hemlock, Dead Men's Fingers, Horsebane,
Dead Tongue, Five-Fingered Root, Water Lovage

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Polyynes: including among others the highly toxic oenantho-
toxin as well as oenanthetol, oenanthetone, dihydrooenan-
thotoxin

----- PAGE 1045 -----
796 /WATER DROPWORT

EFFECTS

The pharmacologically active substances of the root drug are
the toxic oenanthotoxin and the less toxic polyacetylenes
oenanthetol and oenantheton. Oenanthotoxin caused an
irreversible inhibition of loading transfer and sodium inflow

at the nerve fibers of frogs.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Water Dropwort was formerly used in the
but this longer be

treatment of epilepsy, use can no

recommended.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include epilepsy and
cerebral convulsions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Use of the drug can no longer be recommended because of
its severe toxicity, due to the oenanthotoxin content.

OVERDOSAGE

Symptoms of poisoning include a burning sensation in the
mouth and nose, dizziness, weakness, chill, mild twitching
and speech disorders. Higher dosages may produce tonic-
colonic spasms, temporarily slowed cardiac activity, uncon-
sciousness, bloody foam at the mouth and death through
respiratory failure.

Following gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution and sodium sulfate), and the
administration of activated charcoal, the therapy for poison-
ings consists of treating spasms with thiobarbiturates (di-
azepam is said to be less effective); hemodialysis or
hemperfusion have been applied successfully.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is obsolete except in
homeopathy. ..

Homeopathic Dosage: Adult dosages are 5 drops, 1 tablet or
10 globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times
daily (chronic); from D4 parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc i.v., i. m.
acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once a day. Children up to 6
years old are given a maximum of half the adult dose;
children up to 12 are given a maximum of two-thirds the
adult dose (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Anet E, Lythgoe B, Silk MH, Tripett S, The chemistry of
oenanthotoxin and cicutoxin. In: Chem Ind 31:757. 1952.
Bohlmann F, Rode KM, Polyacetylenic compounds: CXVII.
Polyynes of Oenanthe crocata. In: Chem Ber 101(4): 1163-1175.
1968.

Grindy HF, Howarth F. Pharmacological studies on hemlock
water dropwort. In: Brit J Pharmacol 11:225-30. 1956.

Mitchell MJ, Routledge PA, Hemlock water dropwort poisoning
- a review. In: Clin Toxicol 12(4):417-426. 1978.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck. Haug
Verlag. Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl.. Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Water Fennel

Oenanthe aquatica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the ripe
seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are white and grow in many-
rayed compound umbels opposite the leaves. They have no
involucre but there is a small epicalyx. The calyx is distinct
with an irregular corolla and petals that have a distinct
order. The calyx narrows at the base and has an involute tip.
The style is long. The fruit is 5 mm long, 1.5 mm wide, with
5 broad obtuse ribs.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows from 30 to 120 cm
igh. The stem is angularly branched, hollow and soft. The
ower end of the 3 cm thick stem, which grows underwater,
has long roots at the nodes. When the stem end reaches
above water, is grows to only 6 mm thick. The leaves are
double pinnate, pinnatifid to pinnatisect with splayed leaf-
ets, which are often turned backward and have lanceolate,
deeply indented-serrate tips. .The underwater leaves have a
thread-like tip.

Habitat: Found near ponds and ditches in both the U.S. and
Europe.

Production: Water Fennel fruit are the ripe seeds of

Oenanthe aquatica, which are collected in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Mistaken identity can occur with
Cicuta virosa, Sium latifolium or Perculanum palustre.

Other Names: Water Dropwort, Horsebane

----- PAGE 1046 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1-2.5%): including among others (+)-beta-
phellandrene, dillapiol. myristicin, l-nonen-3-ol (androle),
volatile polyynes, undecen-4-ole, camphene, isopropyl cy-
clohexene-2-ole-

Polyynes: including among others all-trans-pentadeca-

2,8,10-trien-4,6-diin-12-on
Fatty oil (20%)

Lignans: including arctigenin. matairesinol, dimethyl matair-
esinol, secoisolariciresinol

EFFECTS
The drug's expectorant and antitussive effects are probably
due to the essential oil. The active agents are the essential
and fatty oil, resin, wax. galacton, and mannan and rubber
substances. There is no further information available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Water Fennel is used in folk medicine as an
expectorant and for the relief of coughs due to inflammation
of the bronchial mucus membranes or asthma and suppurat-
ing or festering inflammation of the lungs, as well as a
diuretic and carminative.

Homeopathic Uses: Inflammation of the respiratory tract and
breast pain in nursing mothers are considered indications for
use in homeopathy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground, as an extract and as a tea.

Preparation: A tincture is prepared using the drug in a 1:5
ratio with 70% ethanol (m/m)

Daily Dosage: The recommended daily dose is 4 to 5 g drug.

Homeopathic Dosage: Adult dosage is 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10
globules every 30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily
(chronic); from D4 parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc iv., im. acute,
3 times daily; chronic: once a day. Children up to 6 years are
given half the dose, children up to 12 are given a maximum
of two-thirds the adult dosage (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston. Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL. Bde. 1-8. Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

WATER GERMANDER/797

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Ram AS, Devi HM, (1983) Indian J Bot 6(1):21.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Water Germander

Teucrium scordium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal pans are the herb harvested
during or shortly before the flowering season and the fresh
flowering herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are light red, 8 to 10 mm
long, with short pedicles. They are in inconspicuous clusters
in 1 to 4 blossomed cymes between bracts, which are longer
than the flowers. The calyx has 5 tips and is campanulate-
tubular with a touch violet. The tips of the deeply divided
upper lip lie on the lower lip in such a way as to make it
appear 5-lobed. After flowering, the head drops. There are 4
stamens. The nutlets are 1 mm long and punctate-reticulate.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, downy herb
smelling of garlic. The rhizome creeps in mud and produces
overground runners, which immediately turn into leaves and
flower shoots. The stems are unbranched or branched, erect,
round and villous with soft-hairs. The Jeaves are sessile,
oblong-oval and crossed opposite.

Characteristics: The plant has a garlic-like odor and a bitter
taste.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to most of Europe as far as
northern Africa and central Asia.

Production: Water Germander is the aerial part of Teucrium
scordium. It is picked during or shortly before flowering.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Diterpenes: including among others, 6,20-bisdeacetylteupy-
reinidin, 6-deacetylteupyreinidin, 2beta, 6beta-dihydroxy-
teuscordin, 2beta,6beta-dihydroxyteuscordin, dihydroteugin,
teuflidin, teucrin E, teugin, 2-keto-19-hydroxyteuscordin

EFFECTS
See other Teucrium species.

----- PAGE 1047 -----
798/WATER GERMANDER

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used for the treatment of
festering and inflamed wounds, bronchial ailments, diarrhea,
fever, hemorrhoids, and intestinal parasites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Water Germander is used internally

and externally.

Daily Dosage: Four teaspoonfuls of the herb (7.2 gm) is
taken daily as an infusion. The same preparation can be used
internally or externally.

LITERATURE
Fikenscher LH. Hegnauer R. Plant Med Phytother 3(3): 183.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
1994,

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3.
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Papanov G, Malakov PY, (1981) Z Naturforsch (B)36:112.
Papanov GY et al., PH 24:297-299. 1985.
Singh S et al., Fitoterapia 63:555. 1992.

Watercress

Nasturtium officinale

TRADE NAMES
Watercress (available from numerous manufacturers and as
combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial parts
collected during the flowering season and the entire flower-
ing plant.

Flower and Fruit: On the leading and side shoots there are
terminal, raceme-like inflorescences, which are slightly
umbelliferous and consist of small, white, solitary flowers.
The 4 white sepals are 2 to 3 mm long and glabrous. The 4
white petals are 2.5 to 5 mm long and turn lilac. There are 2
to 4 stamens with yellow anthers and filaments, which also
turn lilac. The fruit is 13 to 18 mm long, with a glabrous pod
on an 8 to 12 cm stem. The seeds are flat, ovate, 1 mm long,
0.8 to 0.9 mm wide and roughly reticulate. There are about
25 sections on each seed surface.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial that grows
from 25 to 90 cm and has creeping runners. The stem is
angular, hollow, decumbent, rooting and branched. The
somewhat fleshy leaves are alternate, usually odd-pinnate,
lyrate and petiolate. They remain grass-green in winter. They
have broad-elliptical, entire-margined or sweeping-crenate
leaflets and roundish, broadly cordate terminal leaflets.

Characteristics: The plant has a radish-like taste and smells
tangy when rubbed.

Habitat: The plant is found almost all over the world and is
cultivated in many regions.

Production: Watercress consists of the fresh or dried above-
ground parts of Nasturtium officinale. The fresh herb is
collected in the wild and dried in shady, well-aired
conditions.

Not to be Confused With: Berula erecta or Cardamine amara
Other Names: Indian Cress

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates in the fresh, unbruised plant (0.9% of fresh
weight): chief components gluconasturtiin (80%), which
releases in the course of cell destruction the mustard oil
phenyl ethyl isothiocyanate, from which 3-phenyl propioni-
trile, among other substances, spontaneously arises; addition-
ally glucotropaeolin (yielding benzyl isothiocyanate), as well
as 7-methyl thioheptyl glucosinolate, 8-methyl thiooctyl
glucosinolate

Flavonoids
Vitamin C (80 mg/100 gm)

EFFECTS
Watercress has antibiotic, antitumoral and diuretic actions.
The diuretic effect is probably due to the mustard oil content.
As an amaroid drug, it stimulates appetite and digestion.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Cough/bronchitis

Unproven Uses: Internally, the plant is used for catarrh of
the respiratory tract, as an appetite stimulant and for
digestion complaints. Externally, a decoction of the leaves in
poultices and compresses is used for arthritis.

Homeopathic Uses: Watercress is used to treat irritation of
the efferent urinary tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications include stomach or intestinal ulcers and
inflammatory renal diseases.

----- PAGE 1048 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The intake of large quantities of the
freshly harvested plant (e.g., in salad) could lead to
gastrointestinal complaints due to the mucous membrane-
irritating effect of the mustard oil.

Pediatric Use: The drug should not be administered to
children under 4 years old.

Pregnancy. The drug should not be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The comminuted herb, freshly
pressed juice, as well as other galenic preparations of the
plant, are for internal use.

How Supplied:

Capsules — 500 mg

Preparation: To make a tea. pour 150 ml boiling water over
2 gm drug (1 to 2 teaspoonfuls), cover for 10 to 15 minutes
and strain.

Daily Dosage: The daily dosage is 2 to 3 cups of the tea
before meals, 4 to 6 gm of the dried herb, 20 to 30 gm of the
fresh herb or 60 to 150 gm of freshly pressed juice.
Externally, the drug is applied as a poultice or a compress.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB1).

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

MacLeod AJ, Islam R, J Sci Food Agric 26:1545-1550. 1975.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Spence RMM, Tucknott OG, PH 22:2521-2523. 1993.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wheat

Triticum aestivum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fruit wall, seed

shell and outer layers of the endosperm.

WHEAT/799

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is a 4 to 18 cm long,
more or less 4-sided and double-rowed awnless spike
(occasionally with an awn up to 16 cm long). The spikelet
has 2 to 6 flowers, 2 to 4 of which are sterile. Each spikelet
has 2 glumes at the base, is approximately 10 mm long,
blunt, keeled at the tip with a blunt or acute tooth. The
flowers are surrounded by 2 bracts; the first is bulbous and
coriaceous, the second smaller and membranous. There are 3
stamens and an ovary with 2 feather-like styles. The fruit is a
yellowish, reddish or brownish orbicular to elongate oval
caryopse.

Leaves, Stein and Root: The herb grows up to 1.5 m high.
The leaves are arranged in two rows, are parallel-veined and
5 to 15 mm wide. The leaf base clasps the stem, the ligule is
short with a ciliate eyelet. The stem is thin-walled, hollow
and glabrous at the nodes.

Habitat: Asia, North America and Europe

Production: Wheat bran is the fruit wall, seed shell and outer
layers of the endosperm of Triticum aestivum. Wheat germ
oil is the fatty oil derived from cold-pressing the embryo of
Triticum aestivum in a filter press.

Not to be Confiised With: Wheat bran is sometimes confused
with rye bran; wheat germ oil with other oils such as sesame
oil.

Other Names: Wheat Bran, Wheat Germ Oil

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: WHEAT BRAN
Polysaccharides

Glucans: starch (15 to 20%), cellulose (30 %)

Heteroglycans (10%): complex arabinoxylans, to some
extent water-soluble

Fatty oil (2%)

Phospolipids (1%)

Glycolipids (0.5%): particularly acyldigalactosyl glycerols
Steroids (0.3%): sterol esters

Proteins (20%)

Lignin

Alkyl resorcinols (0.1 to 0.2%): chiefly with C21- or C17-
side chains

EFFECTS: WHEAT BRAN

Wheat bran is laxative in effect through expanding polysac-
charides, which, through an increased level of fullness
pressure, stimulate intestinal peristalsis and markedly shorten
the transition time. At the same time, a measurable bonding
of bile acids and their elimination from the enterohepatic

----- PAGE 1049 -----
800/WHEAT

circulation takes place. In addition, a significant reduction of
postprandial lipid levels is exhibited. The topical application
of the drug as a bath additive for injured or irritated skin (due
to the carbohydrates and proteins it contains) leads to milieu
changes in the epidermis and thus to a reconstitution of the
callous layer.

COMPOUNDS: WHEAT GERM OIL
Fatty oil: triacylglycerols (60 to 75%), diacylglycerols (to
4%): chief fatty acids linoleic acid (50 to 65%), oleic acid
(15 to 22%), palmitic acid (7 to 18%), linolenic acid (5 to
8%)

Phospholipids (9 to 14%)
Glycolipids (0 to 2%): particularly acyldigalaktosyl glycerols
Free fatty acids (1 to 2%)

Steroids: sterol esters (2.5 to 3%), particularly those of beta-
sitosterol and campesterol

Tocopherols (vitamin E, 0.2 to 0.3%): particularly alpha-
tocopherol (share 60 to 70%), as well as beta-tocopherol,
gamma-tocopherol, alpha-tocotrienol, beta-tocotrienol

Carotinoids (0.15 to 0.25%)

EFFECTS: WHEAT GERM OIL
Wheat germ oil protects and nurtures the skin, is a laxative
and reduces lipids. It is a valuable dietetic because of the
high level of polyunsaturated fatty acids and vitamin E.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

WHEAT BRAN

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine internal uses include consti-
pation. Externally, bran has been used for itching and
inflammatory dermatoses (as a bran bath).

Chinese Medicine: Used to treat spontaneous night sweats.

Indian Medicine: Flatulence, constipation, itching and me-
norrhagia are considered to be indications for use in Indian
medicine. Efficacy for constipation and dermatoses seems
plausible, but efficacy for the other indications has not been
sufficiently proven.

WHEAT GERM OIL
Unproven Uses: Used as a dietary agent because of the high
level of polyunsaturated fatty acids and vitamin E.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

WHEAT BRAN AND WHEAT GERM OIL

No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages.

DOSAGE
WHEAT BRAN

Mode of Administration: Whole drug preparations are for
internal and external use.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Daily Dosage: As a laxative, the dose is 15 to 40 g 1 to 2
times daily, taken with meals and plenty of liquid. For a full/
partial bath: minimum 0.34 g aqueous extract to 1 L water

Chinese Medicine Daily Dosage: 9 to 15 g drug

WHEAT GERM OIL
Mode of Administration: Soft gelcaps or oil for internal and
external use.

Storage: Store tightly sealed in a cool place.

LITERATURE
Blaschek W, Hansel R, Keller K. Reichling J, Rimpler G,
Schneider G, (Eds) Hagers Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen
Praxis. Folgebande 1 und 2. Drogen A-Z. Springer. Berlin,
Heidelberg 1998.

Goff DJ, Kull FJ, The inhibition of human salivary alpha-
amylase by type II alpha-amylase inhibitor from Triticum
aestivum is competitive, slow and tight-binding. J Enzyme
Inhi'b, 252:163-70, 1995.

White Bryony

Bryonia alba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The plant is monoecious, occasionally
dioecious. The male flowers are in long-peduncled racemes,
which are 10 to 12 mm wide and shed easily. The female
flowers are in short-stemmed umbel-like clusters. The sepals
are almost as long as the corolla. The 5-petaled corolla is
yellowish-white and has green veins. The S“styles are almost
completely free. The stigmas are glabrous. The 2 fused,
inferior ovaries are 3-valved. The fruit is a 1- to 2-seeded,
thin-skinned, 7 to 8 mm thick, globose black berry.

Leaves, Stem and Root: White Bryony is an extremely fast-
growing perennial. It has a thick, tuberous root. The root is
fleshy, wrinkled horizontally, yellowish-gray on the outside
and white and slimy on the inside. The grooved, angular
stems are climbing, branched and have long internodes and
simple screw-like climbers. They grow up to 4 m long. The
leaves are short-petioled, broadly cordate, pentagonal to 5-
lobed and covered with short bristles on both sides.

Characteristics: The root is bitter and spicy. The plant is
categorized as extremely poisonous.

Habitat: Indigenous from northeastern and southeastern
Europe and also Iran.

Production: Bryonia root consists of the dried taproot of
Bryonia alba, which is cultivated.

----- PAGE 1050 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Other Names: Devil's Turnip, English Mandrake, Ladies'
Seal, Tamus, Tetterberry, Wild Hops, Wild Nep, Wild Vine,
Wood Vine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cucurbitacins: including cucurbitacins B, D, E, I, J, K, L,
23,24-dihydro-cucurbitacins, —1.2,23,24-tetrahydrocucurbita-
cins, 22-deoxycucurbitacins and bryodulcigenin; cucurbita-
cin glycosides, including bryonin, elaterinide, bryonosid,
bryodulcigenin, cucurbitacin glycosides

Triterpenes with unusual structure: for example, bryonolic

acid

Steroids: including sterols like C-4- and/or C-24-methylated
or ethylated cholest-7-en-3-beta-oles

Polyhydroxy fatty acids: including 9,12,13-trihydroxy-oc-
tadeca-10 (E)-15(Z)-dienic acid.

Lectins

EFFECTS

The mainly glycosidically bonded cucurbitanes contained in
the drug have a strong toxic and cytotoxic effect; in topical
application they are irritating to the skin and mucous
membrane. Various aqueous extracts of the drug display an
antitumoral effect in animal tests. The resin is a drastic
purgative. The methanol extracts have a strong hypoglyce-
mic affect. Use of the drug as an emetic and purgative has
become obsolete because of the toxicity.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Because of its strong purgative and emetic
effect, use of the drug cannot be recommended. Bryonia root
has been used as a laxative, emetic and diuretic in the
treatment of various disorders of the gastrointestinal tract
and respiratory tract and for rheumatic disorders. It has also
been used prophylactically and therapeutically for metabolic
isease, and acute and chronic infectious

disorders, liver
disease.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is highly toxic when freshly harvested. The toxicity
of the drug declines rapidly with dehydration and storage
because of the instability of the cucurbitacins. Due to the
cucurbitacin content, the drug has a severely irritating effect
on skin and mucous membranes. Contact between skin and
the juice of the plant can lead to rash, infection, blister
formation and necroses.

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of toxic dosages can lead to vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, colic, kidney irritation, anuria, collapse, spasms,
paralysis and, under certain conditions, to death.

WHITE BRYONY/801

Following gastric lavage, the treatment for poisonings should
proceed symptomatically. Consumption of 40 berries is
presumed fatal for an adult; 15 for a child.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration:
preparations for the claimed applications is not documented,
and since the use of it as a drastic laxative and emetic is
obsolete, a therapeutic administration cannot be justified
because of the risks involved.

Since the efficacy of Bryonia

Bryonia is found occasionally in some pharmaceutical

preparations.

Preparation: A decoction is prepared by adding 0.5 to 1 g
drug to 1 cup water.

Daily Dosage: Dosage of the powder is 0.3 to 0.5 g as an
emetic and purgative.

LITERATURE
Hylands PJ, Mansour ESS. PH 21(11):2703-2707. 1982.
Konopa J et al.. (1974) Arzneim Forsch 24(10), 1554.

Oobayashi K, Yoshikawa K, Arihara S, Structural revision of
Bryonoside and structure elucidation of minor saponins from
Bryonia dioica. In: PH 31:943-946. 1992.

Panossian AG et al., (1983) Planta Med 47(1), 17-25.

Pohlmann J, The cucurbitacins in Bryonia alba and Bryonia
dioica. In: PH 14(7):1587-1589. 1980.

Suganda AG et al., (1983) J Nat Prod 46(5), 626.
Vartanian GS et al., (1984) Byull Eksp Biol Med 97(3), 295.
Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 1051 -----
802/WHITE BRYONY

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

White Fir
Abies alba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the trees is the timber

of the Fir.

Flower and Fruit: The ovules are in pairs on the upper
surface of the seed scales, in axils of the spirally arranged
covering scales, which are in turn fused into cones. The
cones are 10 to 16 cm long and 3 to 5 cm thick, with
protruding surface scales that are green and tinged brown-red
before ripening. The stamens are arranged like catkins. The
fruit is diclinous, monoecious. The seeds are long-winged on
one side.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The tree grows up to 50 m and
occasionally up to 75 m tall. The needles are 1 to 3 cm long,
18 to 2.3 mm wide. The needles are dark green on the upper
surface with two white stripes on the lower surface. They are
divided with a blunt apex indented at the tip. The trunk is
initially grayish, later scaly.

Habitat: White Fir is found in the Balkan countries. It
originated from former Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Poland, Roma-
nia and Albania.

Production: The essential oil of White Fir is extracted from
the needles and branch tips by aqueous steam distillation for
5 to 6 hours,

Not to be Confused With: May occur with turpentine oils,
cone oils, fir needle oils, camphors, bornyl acetate and
various Pinaceae oils.

Other Names: Common Silver Fir, Swiss Pine

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS .
Limonene (25 to 55%)

Alpha-pinene (6 to 35%)
Camphene (9 to 20%)
Bornyl acetate (2 to 10%)
Santene (2 to 3%)

Tricyclene (1.0 to 2.5%): including among others beta-
pinene, beta-phellandrene and delta3-carene

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS
The essential oil has secretolytic and mildly antiseptic effects
on the bronchial mucous membrane area and hyperemic
effects on the skin. The constituents' camphene, limonene
and alpha-pinene are responsible for the strong expectorate
effect connected with its inhalation.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Co mm is ion E:

* Neuralgia
* Rheumatism

Unproven Uses: Internally, the drug is used for catarrh of the
respiratory tract. Externally, it can be used for nervous unrest
and neuralgic pain. It can also be used for sprains, strains,
contusions, bruising and as a prophylactic treatment for
bedsores.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The plant is contraindicated for conditions like bronchial
asthma, other obstructive bronchial diseases and whooping
cough. Whole-body baths involving the essential oil should
only be undertaken in consultation with a physician in the
presence of larger skin injuries, severe feverish or infectious
diseases, cardiac insufficiency or hypertonia. Inhalation is to
be avoided when the patient suffers from acute infections of
the respiratory passages.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages. Bronchial
spasms could become worse following administration of the
drug.

OVERDOSAGE
Poisonings are possible in connection with overdose and
large-area external administration, including injuries to the
kidneys and the CNS. The use of outdated essential oils with
unsaturated terpene carbohydrates could lead to severe
irritation of the skin and mucous membranes.

Severe poisonings are possible following the ingestion of
very large doses, leading to nausea, vomiting, reddening of
the face, salivation, throat soreness, thirst, diarrhea, intestinal
colic, dyspnea, dizziness, staggering walk, twitching, stran-
guria, dysuria, hematuria, albuminuria and skin efflores-
cence. It should be followed with gastric lavage with sodium
sulfate solutions, intestinal emptying through administration
of sodium sulfate, instillation of paraffin oil and medicinal
charcoal, and shock prophylaxis (suitable body position,
quiet, warmth).

The treatment for poisonings consists of the treatment of
spasms with diazepam (I.V.), electrolyte substitution and the
countering of any acidosis imbalance that may appear
through sodium bicarbonate infusions. In the event of shock,

----- PAGE 1052 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

plasma volume expanders should be infused. Monitoring of
kidney function is necessary. Intubation and oxygen respira-
tion may also be required.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Liquid preparations for internal and
external use.

Daily Dosage:
Drops — 4 drops, 3 times daily in water or with sugar

Inhalation — add a few drops to hot water; and inhale
several times daily

Lotion — rub into the affected parts
Storage: Keep sealed tightly and protected from light.

LITERATURE
Aronow WS, Starling L. Etienne F, D'Alba P, Edwards M. Lee
NH, Pamngao RF, Sales FF, Risk factors for atherothrombotic
brain infarction in persons over 62 years of age in a long-term
healthcare facility. J Am Geriatr Soc, 35:1-3, 1987 Jan.
Faure-Raynaud M, Determination of the chitinolytic activity of
‘Abies alba Mill, litter microorganisms: bacteria and yeasts
(author's transl) Ann Microbiol (Paris), 132B:267-79. 1981 Sep-
Oct.

Faure-Raynaud M, Study of volatile oil from Abies alba Miller.
I. Study of raw material Acta Pol Pharm, 132B:71-7. 1970.
Faure-Raynaud M. Study of volatile oil from sprigs of Abies
alba Miller. II. Study of monoterpene fractions of oil, Acta Pol
Pharm, 132B: 155-62, 1970.

Faure-Raynaud M, Study of volatile oil of fir branches Abies
alba Miller. 3. Study of non-monoterpene fraction and gas
chromatography of oil. Acta Pol Pharm, 132B:301-5, 1970.
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed) Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. AufL, Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

White Hellebore

Veratrum album

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the rhizome and

root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in racemes forming a 30
to 60 cm long panicle. The pedicles are much shorter than
the flowers. The yellowish-white flowers consist of 6 similar
tepals, which are oblong-lanceolate, acute, denticulate and
broadly splayed. There are 6 stamens, which are shorter than
the perigone, and 3 styles. The fruit is capsule-like.

WHITE HELLEBORE/803

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is roughly 60 to 120 cm
high. The rhizome is short, cylindrical and stunted. It has
numerous, long, thick and fleshy root fibers. The round,
cane-like, glabrous stem is almost completely surrounded by
the tight sheaths of the basal leaves. The basal leaves are
whorled, broad, elliptical to linear-lanceolate and heavily
ribbed.

Habitat: The plant is found from Lapland to Italy but not on
the British Isles.

Production: White Hellebore root-stock is the rhizome of
Veratrum album.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Steroid alkaloids (mixture is referred to as veratrine, 0.8-
2.5%): C-nor-D-homo-sterane type-including protoverine,
protoveratrines A and B, germerine, jervine. protoverine,
veratroyl zygadenine

Solidane type-including isorubijervine, rubijerxine

EFFECTS
Internally, the drug reduces blood pressure and heart rate,
inhibits respiration in higher doses, and has an aconitine-like
effect on the conductor system. Externally, the drug causes
severe irritation to the skin, including numbing and poison-
ing through absorption.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Internally, White Hellebore is used for the
treatment of vomiting, cramps, diarrhea, cholera, bradycardia
and Graves' disease. Externally, the drug is used for
neuralgia, rheumatism, joint pain and gout pain.

Homeopathic Uses: White Hellebore is used for neuralgia,
infections, diarrhea, low blood pressure and as a stimulant.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is severely toxic and has numerous severe side
effects, even at therapeutic dosages. It is no longer adminis-
tered in allopathic medicine for that reason. The veratrum
alkaloids severely irritate mucous membranes. By inhibiting
inactivation of sodium ion channels, the resorption of
alkaloids has a paralyzing effect on numerous excitable cells,
particularly those governing cardiac activity.

OVERDOSAGE
The first symptoms of poisoning are sneezing, lacrimation,
salivation, vomiting, diarrhea, a burning sensation in the
mouth and pharyngeal cavity, and inability to swallow. Then,
following resorption, paresthesia, vertigo, possible blindness,
paralysis of the limbs, mild convulsions, lowering of cardiac
frequency, cardiac arrhythmias and hypotension occur.
Death occurs either through systolic cardiac arrest or through
asphyxiation. The lethal dosage is between 10 and 20 mg of

----- PAGE 1053 -----
804 /WHITE HELLEBORE

the alkaloid mixture, corresponding to 1 to 2 gm of the drug.
The alkaloids can be absorbed through uninjured skin.

Treatment of poisoning consists of gastrointestinal emptying
(inducement of vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-
colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium sulphate),
administration of activated charcoal and shock prophylaxis
(appropriate body position, quiet, warmth). Thereafter,
spasms should be treated with diazepam or barbiturates (i.v.),
bradycardia should be treated with atropine, hypotension
should be treated with peripherally active circulatory medi-
cations, electrolyte substitution should be employed, and
possible cases of acidosis should be treated with sodium
bicarbonate infusions. Intubation and oxygen respiration may
also be necessary.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used
tinctures and homeopathic dilutions for internal use; prepara-
tions made with fatty oils are used externally.

in powders,

Preparation: Mix 5 gm drug with 10 gm lanolin and 20 gm
fat for topical application.

Daily Dosage: Internally, the drug is administered as 0.02 to
0.1 gm of powder or 20 to 60 drops of tincture. Externally,
the drug is applied as a poultice or compress.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) and 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml s.c, acute: 3 times daily; chronic:
once a day (HAB34). The globules are from D2; all others
are from D4.

LITERATURE

Atta-Ur-Rahman, Ali RA, Choudhary MI, New steroidal
alkaloids from rhizomes of Veratrum album. In: JNP 55:565-
570. 1992.

Atta-Ur-Rahmann, Ali RA, Gilani A, Choudhary MI, ASftab K,
Sener B, Turkz S, Isolation of antihypertensive alkaloids from
rhizomes of Veratrum album. In: PM 59(6):569. 1993.
Atta-Ur-Rahman et al., Alkaloids ftom Veratrum album. In: PH
30(1):368. 1991.

Brossi, Buch. In: Brossi A, Cordell GA (Eds), The Alkaloids.
Vol. 41. Academic Press, 1250 Sixth Avenue, San Diego, CA.
92101. 1992.

Festa M, Andreetto B, Ballads MA, Panio A, Piervittori R, A
case of Veratrum poisoning. Minerva Anestesiol, 62:195-6, 1996
May.

Fogh A, Kulling P, Wickstrom E, Veratrum alkaloids in
sneezing-powder a potential danger. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol,
20:175-9, 1983 Apr.

Gamier R, Carlier P, Hoffelt J, Savidan A, Acute dietary
poisoning by white hellebore (Veratrum album L.). Clinical and
analytical data. A propos of 5 cases. Ann Med Interne (Paris),
136:125-8, 1985.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Hruby K, Lenz K, Krausler J, Veratrum album poisoning
(author's transl). Wien Klin Wochenschr, 93:517-9, 1981 Sep 4.
Jaspersen-Schib R, Theus L, Guirguis-Oeschger M, Gossweiler
B, Meier-Abt PJ, Serious plant poisonings in Switzerland 1966-
1994. Case analysis from the Swiss Toxicology Information
Center. Schweiz Med Wochenschr, 60:1085-98, 1996 Jun 22.
Marinov A, Koev P, Mirchev N, Electrocardiographic studies of
patients with acute hellebore (Veratrum album) poisoning. Vutr
Boles, 26:36-9. 1987.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homdopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

White Lily
Lilium candidum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh and dried

bulb.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence has 5 to 20 blossoms.
The flowers are white, occasionally striped crimson or
spotted and very fragrant. They are on erect pedicles, the
lower ones nodding. The tepals are obtuse, the anthers
yellow. The style is as long as the sepals. The fruit is obovate
and is seldom developed.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is perennial, 60 to 150 cm
high. It has a broad, ovate, scaled and yellow bulb. The stem
is rigid, erect and leafy. The leaves are oblong to linear-
lanceolate and glabrous. The leaves survive winter, as does
the rest of the plant, which is hardy. The bulb consists of
imbricate, fleshy, lanceolate and bent scales, which are 3.25
cm long and 2.5 cm wide at the broadest point.

----- PAGE 1054 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Characteristics: The bulbs are odorless and have a mildly
bitter and unpleasant flavor.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Mediterranean regions
and is cultivated in many other regions.

Production: Baurenlilien (Farmer's Lily) root is the subterra-
nean part (onion) of Lilium candidum.

Other Names: Meadow Lily, Madonna Lily

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including isorhamnetin glycosides

Gamma-methylene glutamic acid
Soluble polysaccharides: glucomannans
Starch

Tuliposide

The constituents of the drug have not been investigated
extensively.

EFFECTS
The plant has astringent, anti-inflammatory, pain reliever,
diuretic and expectorant properties.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Internally for gynecological disorders and
externally for ulcers, inflammation, furuncles, finger ulcers,
reddened skin, burns and injuries.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: An infusion made from the ground
drug is used internally. The drug is also used externally as a
wet compress (paste).

Daily Dosage: Apply a thick paste, made from fresh or
cooked onions, in the middle of a compress or poultice, to
the affected area. This should be done several times during
the day.

LITERATURE
Delaveau P et al., (1980) Planta Med 40:49.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Masterova I et al., (1987) Phytochemistry 26(6): 1844.
Nagy E et al, (1984) Z Naturforsch 39B(12):1813.

WHITE MUSTARD/805

White Mustard

Sinapis alba

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried seeds.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers form an umbelliferous-
racemous inflorescence. The flowers are on 3 to 7 mm long,
stiff-haired pedicles. When in bloom the 4 narrow, obtuse
sepals lie horizontal. There are 3 green, ovate nectaries at the
base of the stamens. The fruit is a 2 to 4 cm long bristly pod,
divided into two chambers. Each chamber contains two to
three 2.5 mm thick seeds. The chamber ends as a large curled
lip. The seeds vary from brown to white and are arranged in
opposite rows.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Sinapis alba is an annual plant. The
lower part of the plant is covered in stiff, single hairs. The
thin root is yellow to white and branched. The root produces
a 30 to 60 cm high, erect, grooved and branched stem. The
leaves are 4 to 10 cm long, petiolate, lyrate, pinnatifid to
pinnatesect and always have 2 to 3 indented-dentate lobed
pinna.

Habitat: The plant has been introduced and naturalized in all
of Europe and in Siberia, east Asia and America. The areas
of cultivation are western and northern Europe and the
northern U.S.

Production: White Mustard seed consists of the ripe, dried
seed of Sinapis alba.

Not to be Confused With: Otfier Sinapis or Brassica species.
Artificial colorings such as butter yellow or turmeric may be
added.

Other Names: Mustard

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates: chiefly sinalbin (p-hydroxybenzylglucosino-
lates, 2.5%), grinding the seeds into powder and then
rubbing with warm water (not with hot water — enzymes
would be destroyed), as well as chewing, releases the non-
volatile mustard oil p-hydroxybenzyl isothiocyanate

Fatty oil (20-35%)
Proteins (40%)

Phenyl propane derivatives: including among others sina-
pine (choline ester of sinapic acid, 1.5%)

EFFECTS
The p-hydroxybenzyl mustard oil that results from fermenta-
tion of sinalbin is bacteriostatic, irritating to the skin and
hyperemic (as an additive in 35° to 40° C baths).

----- PAGE 1055 -----
806 /WHITE MUSTARD

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Common cold
* Cough/bronchitis
+ Rheumatism

Unproven Uses: Externally, White Mustard is used in
poultices for congestion of the respiratory tract, for topical
hyperemization of the skin as well as for segment therapy of
chronic degenerative diseases affecting the joints and soft
tissue. Mustard baths are used in the treatment of paralytic

symptoms.

In folk medicine, Mustard is used to clear the voice. It is also
used in Mustard plasters and poultices as a counter-irritant.
Mustard is used in footbaths, and for the treatment of
paralytic symptoms in the form of Mustard baths.

Chinese Medicine: In China, White Mustard is used to treat
painfully swollen ribs and chest, coughs, vomiting, regurgi-
tation, ulcerous swelling and rheumatic pains.

Homeopathic Uses: Sinapis alba is used to treat inflamma-
tion of the gastrointestinal tract and the respiratory tract.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

White Mustard is contraindicated in gastrointestinal ulcers
and inflammatory kidney diseases. The drug should not be
given to children under 6 years of age.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages. The danger of nerve damage exists with
long-term intake. Long-term external application carries the
danger of skin injury. The drug possesses minimal potential
for sensitization (possible cause of food allergies).

Pediatric Use: White Mustard preparations should not be
used in children under 6 years of age.

OVERDOSAGE

Gastrointestinal complaints could appear
intake of large quantities, due to the mucous membrane-
irritating effect of the Mustard oil.

following the

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as well
as externally. Ground or powdered seeds are used for

poultices.

Preparation: To prepare an external foot bath, 20 to 30 gm
of the Mustard flour in 1 liter of water is used. To prepare a
Mustard bath, 150 gm of the Mustard flour in a pouch is used
in the bathwater.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dose of the drug is 60 to
240 gm. To brighten and clear the voice, Mustard flour is

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

stirred with honey and formed into balls. 1 to 2 are taken
orally on an empty stomach.

For external use, just prior to application, mix 50 to 70 gm of
the powdered seeds with warm water to prepare a poultice.
The poultice is applied for 10 to 15 minutes for adults and
for 5 to 10 minutes for children, except for those with
sensitive skin where the usage should be shortened. Treat-
ment should not exceed 2 weeks.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HAB34)

Storage: The drug must be protected from light and

moisture.

LITERATURE
Jos,efsson E, J Sci Food Agric 21:94. 1970.

Kerber E et al., Angew Bot 55:457. 1981.
Kjaer A, Rubinstein K, Acta Chem Scand 4:1276. 1953.

Further information in:

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Gifipflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

White Nettle

Lamium album

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the flowers and

leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The white, fairly large bilabiate flowers
are in axillary false whorls of 6 to 16 flowers. The
campanulate calyx is green and has 5 tips. The tube of the
corolla is bent like a knee and the upper lip is curved like a
helmet with a ciliate margin. The lower lip is gordate. The
tube has 1 large and 1 small tip at the edge. There are 2 long
and 2 short stamens under the upper lip. The calyx remains

----- PAGE 1056 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

after flowering and protects the small nut. When the nut is
ripe, slight pressure is sufficient to fling out the seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is 30 to 50 cm high with
an underground creeping stem from which the aerial stems
grow. These are erect, quadrangular, grooved, hollow and
noded. The leaves are crossed opposite, petiolate, ovate to
cordate, acuminate and serrate. The plant has no nettie hairs.
The plant is similar to the stinging nettle but has a different
stem.

Characteristics: The flowers have a weak honey-like fra-
grance and a slimy-sweet taste.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe and central and
northern Asia.

Production: White Nettle flower consists of the dried petal
with attached stamens of Lamium album as well as its
preparations.

Other Names: Blind Nettle. Dumb Nettle, Dead Nettle, Deaf
Nettle, Bee Nettle, Archangel. Stingless Nettle, White
Archangel

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes: including among others lamalbide,

caryoptoside. alboside A and B
Triterpene saponins

Caffeic acid derivatives: including among others rosmaric
acid, chlorogenic acid

Flavonoids: including among others kaempferol glycosides
Mucilages

EFFECTS
Because of the mucins and saponins the drug is expectorant.
It is astringent because of the tannins.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Inflammation of the skin
* Cough/bronchitis
¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx

Unproven Uses:

Internally — catarrh of the upper respiratory passages,
gastrointestinal disorders such as gastritis, sensation of
bloating and flatulence.

Externally — mild inflammation of the mucous membranes
of the mouth and throat, non-specific fluor albus (Ieukorrhea)
mild, superficial inflammation of the skin. In folk medicine
used for climacteric complaints and complaints of the
urogenital tract.

WHITE WILLOW/807

Chinese Medicine: In Chinese medicine, White Nettle is
used for fractures, carbuncles, lumbago and inflammation of
wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug for infusions and
other galenic preparations for internal applications, rinses,
baths and moist compresses; occasionally used as a constitu-
ent of sedative teas and bronchial teas.

Preparation:

Infusion — Pour one cup of water over | gm drug, leave to
draw for 5 minutes and strain.

Extract for poultices — Scald 50 gm of flowers with 500 ml
of water, draw for 5 minutes and strain.

Daily Dosage: For internal use, the average daily dose is 3
gm drug. For external use, 5 gm drug is added to a bath.

LITERATURE
Damtoft S. Iridoid glucosides from Lamium album. In: PH
31(1): 175. 1992.

Gora J et al.. Chemical comparative studies of the herb and
flowers of Lamium album L. In: Acta Pol Pharm 40(3):389-
393. 1983.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.). Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Neerl 21(4)417.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Skrypezak L et al., Phenylpropanoid esters and flavonoids in
taxonomy of Lamium species. In: PM 61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann
Congr):70. 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

White Willow
Salix species
TRADE NAMES

Alcohol Free White Willow Bark, Standardized White
Willow Bark, Wild Countryside White Willow

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark. Salix nigra
is American Willow.

----- PAGE 1057 -----
808/WHITE WILLOW

Flower and Fruit: The male flowers are yellow and the
female green. They are dioecious and appear at the same
time as the leaves on leafy stems in erect catkins. The male
catkins are densely blossomed and cylindrical, up to 6.5 cm
by 1 cm and have 2 stamens. The female catkins are
cylindrical, 4.5 cm by 7 mm. The seeds have a tuft of hair.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Silver Willow is a 6 to 18 m high
tree or bush with fissured gray bark. The leaves are short-
petioled, lanceolate, acuminate and become cuneate at the
base. They are finely serrate, silky-haired tomentose under-
neath and blue-green matte.

Characteristics: The annual twigs are not easy to break off at
the base.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central and southern
Europe.

Production: White Willow bark consists of the bark of the
young, 2 to 3 year old branches harvested during early spring
of Salix alba, Salix purpurea, Salix fragilis and other
comparable Salix species.

Other Names: Willow, Salicin Willow, Withe Withy, Black
Willow, Cartkins Willow, Pussywillow

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glycosides and esters yielding salicylic acid (1.5-12%):
salicin (0.1-2%), salicortin (0.01-11%) and salicin deriva-
tives acylated to the glucose residue (up to 6%, including,
among others, fragilin, populin)

Tannins (8-20%)
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
The efficacy of the drug is due mainly to the proportion of
salicin present. After splitting of the acyl residue, the salicin
glycosides convert to salicin, the precursor of salicylic acid.
Salicylic acid is antipyretic, antiphlogistic and analgesic.
White Willow bark is the phytotherapeutic precursor to
acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin).

The salicin component is responsible for the anti-inflamma-
tory and antipyretic effects. The tannin content has astringent
properties on mucous membranes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

« Rheumatism
« Pain

Salicin is useful in diseases accompanied by fever, rheumatic
ailments, headaches and pain caused by inflammation.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Willow Bark is contraindicated in patients that have a
hypersensitivity to salicylates. Salicylates should not be used
in children with flu-like symptoms due to the association of
salicylates with Reyes Syndrome.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: No health hazards are known in conjunction with
the proper administration of designated therapeutic dosages.
Stomach complaints could occur as a side effect due to the
tannin content.

Drug Interactions: Due to the salicin component, caution
should be exercised when used in combination with salicy-
lates and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. There
are reports that salicylate decreased serum naproxen concen-
trations markedly and increased serum naproxen clearance
by as much as 56% (Furst, 1987).

Though there are no reports of interactions with drugs that
affect blood clotting times, and some studies suggest that
thrombocyte inhibition is unlikely. Anti-platelet medications
and any medication that prolongs the PT time should not be
used with Willow Bark (Wichtl & Bisset, 1994).

Alcohol and barbiturates may mask the symptoms of
salicylate overdosage and may enhance the toxicity of
salicylates.

There have been reports of metabolic acidosis in children
with normal renal and hepatic function that were treated with
salicylates and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for joint pain
and glaucoma. This combination should be avoided (Cowan,
1984).

Disease Interactions: Patients with an'active gastric or
duodenal ulcer should avoid Willow Bark preparations.
Hemophiliacs or anyone with a bleeding disorder should not
use Willow Bark. Willow Bark should be avoided in
asthmatics and diabetics.

Pregnancy: Salicylates should be avoided during pregnancy.

Nursing Mothers: Salicylates have been associated with
rashes in breast-fed infants; use is not recommended.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid and solid preparations for
internal use. Combinations with diaphoretic drugs 'could be
considered. Drug extracts are contained in some standardized
preparations of analgesics/antirheumatics, hypnotics/seda-
tives, and gastrointestinal remedies.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, use 2 to 3 gm of finely
cut or coarsely powdered drug in cold water, boil, allow to
steep for 5 minutes, then strain.

----- PAGE 1058 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Daily Dosage: Average daily dose corresponding to 60-120
mg total salicin.

Infusion—1 cup 3 to 5 times daily. (1 teaspoonful = 1.5 gm

drug)
Liquid Extract—(1:1 in 25% alcohol) 1 to 3 ml 3 times daily.

LITERATURE

Amling R, Phytotherapeutika in der Neurologic In: ZPT
12(1):9. 1991.

Anonym, PhytotherapierPflanzliche Antirheumatika - was
bringen sie? In: DAZ 136(45):4012-4015. 1996.

Cowan, RA, Hartnell G, Lowdell C. Baird I, Leak A,
Metabolic acidosis induced by carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and
salicylates in patients with normal renal function. In: Br Med J
(Clin Res Ed) 289(6441):347-8, Aug 11, 1984.

Furst DE, Sarkissian E, Blocka K et al., Serum concentrations
of salicylate and naproxen during concurrent therapy in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis. In: Arthritis Rheum 30(10): 1157-61,
Oct, 1987.

Kreymeier J, Rheumatherapie mit Phytopharmaka. In: DAZ
137(8):611-613. 1997.

Meier B, Pflanzliche versus synthetische Arzneimittel. In: ZPT
10(6); 182. 1989.

Meier B, Liebi M, Salicinhaltige Arzneimittel. Uberlegungen zu
Wirksamkeit und Unbedenklichkeit. In: (2):50. 1990.

Meier B et al., DAZ 125:341. 1985.
Meier B et al., DAZ 127:2401. 1987.
Meier B et al., ZPT 11:50. 1990.

Meier R et al., A chemotaxonomic survey of phenolic
compounds in swiss willow species. In: PM 58(7)98. 1992.

Nichols-Orians CM et al., PH 31:2180. 1992.

Schmid B, Heide L, The use of Salicis cortex in rheumatic
disease: phytotherapie with known mode of action? In: PM
61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):94. 1995.

Schmid B, Heide L, Wirksamkeit und Vertraglichkeit von
Weidenrinde bei Arthrose: Design und Durchfuhrung einer
Klinischen Studie. In: PUZ 26(1 ):33, Jahrestagung der DPhG,
Berlin, 1996. 1997.

Shao Y et al., PM 55:617. 1989.
Thieme H, PM 13:431. 1965.
Thieme H, PA 20:570. 1965.
Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
harmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl.. Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

WILD CARROT/809

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wild Carrot

Daucus carota

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in compact, terminal

umbels or flattened, compound capitula. The peduncle
divides in ray-like fashion from one particular point. Each
ray divides and forms further umbels with white flowers.
The outer flowers are irregular and larger than the others.
The florets are small. When in bloom, the flower head is
flattened or slightly convex. When they are ripe, the flowers
draw together to form a cup-like structure. The double
achaenes are formed in the fruit umbel. They are slightly

flattened and have numerous bristles arranged in 5 rows.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Wild Carrot is a biennial, 30 cm
to 1 m high cultivated plant with a fusiform, usually red root
and numerous pinnate, segmented, hairy leaves. In the
second year, the plant produces a branched, angular stem
which terminates in the

with alternate jointed leaves,

flowering umbels.
Habitat: Now found in its cultivated form all over the world.

Production: Wild Carrots are the roots of Daucus carota. The
ripe roots are harvested.

Other Names: Carrot, Bird's Neat, Birds' Nest, Bees' Nest,
Queen Anne's Lace, Philtron

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Carotinoids: including alpha-, beta-, gamma-, zeta-carotene,

lycopene

Volatile oil (very little): including among others p-cymene,
limonene, dipenten, geraniol, alpha- and beta- caryophyllene

Polyynes: including falcarinol (carotatoxin)

Mono and oligosaccharides: glucose, saccharose

----- PAGE 1059 -----
810 /WILD CARROT

EFFECTS
Wild Carrot has anthelmintic and antimicrobial activity. It is
also a mild vermifuge. The essential oil has an_ initially
stimulating, followed by a paralyzing, effect on worms. In
controlled animal tests, a temporary reduction of arterial
blood pressure was observed. The pectin content is probably
responsible for the severe constipating effect of the Carrot.
The essential oil has a mild bactericidal effect, especially on
gram-positive bacteria. The drug has a positive effect on
visual acuity and scotopic (twilight) vision, as well as being
a mild diuretic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The Wild Carrot is an unreliable adjuvant in
the treatment of oxyuriasis. It is a useful drug in pediatrics
for tonsillitis, nutritional disorders and as a dietary agent for
digestive disorders. It is also used in medicinal preparations
for dermatological conditions such as photodermatosis and
pigment anomalies. It is used in teas for intestinal parasites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug has a low potential for sensitization through skin
contact.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is taken in a ground form
or consumed as a juice or vegetable. It is found in ready-
made medicinal preparations.

Preparation: The Carrot is finely grated and made into a
juice or syrup.

LITERATURE

Gupta KR, Niranjan GS, (1982) Planta Med 46:240.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen. Pflanzenallergene, ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH. Landsberg 1988.

Harborne JB, In: The Biology and Chemistry of the
Umbelliferae, Ed. VN Heywood, Academic Press, London,

1971.
Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc.,.New
York 1980.

Ram AS, Devi HM, (1983) Indian J Bot 6(1):21.

Wild Cherry

Prunus serotina

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the inner tree bark,
which has an almond-like smell, which dissipates on drying.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The racemes are 6 to 15 cm long with
about 30 flowers. The perianth remains when the fruit ripens.
The 3 to 4 tepals are denticulate and creamy white. The fruit
is 8 mm across, depressed-globose and purple-black. The
endocarp is smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Wild Cherry is a deciduous tree up
to 20 m high with aromatic bark. The leaves are obovate to
elliptical-oblong, acute, finely serrate with flattened, with
forwardly directed teeth. The leaves are dark, glossy green
above, paler and slightly pubescent beneath.

Habitat: Prunus serotina originates from North America but

is cultivated in Europe.
Production: Wild Cherry bark is the bark of Prunus serotina.

Other Names: Wild Black Cherry, Virginian Prune, Black
Choke, Choke Cherry, Rum Cherry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Cyanogenic glycosides: prunasin yielding 0.05 to 0.15%. 5
to 15 mg HCN/100 g

Tannins

EFFECTS
Wild Cherry bark is an astringent, antitussive, and sedative.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Wild Cherry bark is used for coughs,
bronchitis and whooping cough, also used in the treatment of
nervous digestive disorders and diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Cyanide poisonings from the drug are unlikely, due
to both its low cyanogenic glycoside content and the lack of
incitement to ingest it.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Wild Cherry bark is available as
syrup or tincture for internal use and also available in
commercial compounded preparations.

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

----- PAGE 1060 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wild Daisy
Bellis perennis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the whole flowering

plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flower heads are usually found singly
at the end of the sharply angular stem. The flower is small-
to medium-sized and heterogamous. The epicalyx is semi-
spherical to bell-shaped. The sepals of the epicalyx are more
or less double-rowed. The receptacle is conical and glabrous
when bearing fruit. The 1- to 2-rowed female ray flowers are
linguiform, white, pink, purple or bluish and distinctly longer
than the epicalyx. The disc flowers are androgynous, tubular
and 5-tipped. The achenes are obovate, very flattened,
ribless, and have side veins. The flower has no pappus but
may have short, brittle bristles.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Wild Daisy is a 10- to 15-cm high
perennial plant that has basal leaves in rosettes or alternate
leaves at the lower part of the stem; its roots are short and
cylindrical. The rosette leaves are circular to spatulate or
heart-shaped, dentate and occasionally entire-margined with
a single rib; they have vertical hairs on both sides.

Habitat: The plant is distributed from Portugal to the
Moscow region and Asia Minor. It is also found from Great
Britain to Ireland and southern Scandinavia, and as far south
as the Mediterranean, with the exception of the Balearic
Islands and the islands of Sardinia, Sicily, Crete and Cyprus.

Production: The capitula and short stems of the plant are
picked and dried in either the sun or shade.

Other Names: Bruisewort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Triterpene saponins (2.7%): bisdemosides of the bayogenin-
ic and polygalic acid (the latter acylated)

Polyynes: including trans-lachnophyllum ester

Flavonoids: including cosmosiin

EFFECTS
The drug acts as an astringent, reduces mucous production,
and also has anti-inflammatory and fever-reducing effects,
possibly due to the triterpene saponin content.

WILD DAISY /811

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Wild Daisy is used as an expectorant and
for easing diarrhea and gastrointestinal catarrh. It is also used
for treating wounds, skin diseases, coughs and bronchitis,
disorders of the liver and kidneys, and inflammation.

Homeopathic Uses: Wild Daisy is used for bruises, bleeding,
muscular pain (after injuries), purulent skin diseases and
rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is used topically—as an
extract, in teas and in poultices of pressed leaves—for the
treatment of skin diseases. A decoction can be used for
wound poultices.

Preparation: An infusion or cold extract is prepared by
adding 2 teaspoonfuls of drug to 2 cups of water, then
allowing it to draw for 20 minutes. A decoction is made from
the green leaves.

Daily Dosage: The daily dose of the infusion is 2 to 4 cups
per day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules | to 3 times daily; parenterally: 1 ml sc injection
solution twice weekly; ointments: | to 2 times daily (HABI).

LITERATURE

Avato P, Vitali C, Tava A, New acetylenic compounds from
Bellis perennis L. and their antimicrobial activity. In: PM
61 (Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):49. 1995.

Hansel R, Keller K. Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schopke T, Wray V, Hiller K, Triterpenoid saponins of plants
of the Asteraeae tribe (Asteraceae). In: PM 59(7)

Schopke Th et al., Saponin composition of the Bellis genus and
related species. In: PM 6l(Abstracts of 43rd Ann Congr):68.
1995.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Willigmann I et al., Antimycotic compounds from different
Bellis perennis varieties. In: PM 58(Suppl.7)36. 1993.

----- PAGE 1061 -----
812/W1LD INDIGO

Wild Indigo

Baptisia tinctoria

TRADE NAMES:
Health From The Sun Wild Indigo Fresh Root Liquid.
Nature's Answer Alcohol Free Wild Indigo Root Liquid

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are terminal and axillary in 7
to 10 cm long, lightly flowered racemes. The pedicles are 3
to 5 cm long. The calyx is 4 to 5 mm long and glabrous but
has a slight fringe. The corolla is yellow. The standard is
circular with convoluted sides and is slightly shorter than the
oblong wings. The 10 stamens are freestanding. The ovary is
stemmed, elliptoid, drawn together at the style and stigma.
and is glabrous. The fruit is a blue-black, ovoid, slightly
swollen pod, 7 to 15 mm long, with a sharp tip. The seeds
are yellowish-brown, kidney-shaped and 2 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The shrug is many-branched and
grows to m high with woody rootstock and knotty
branches. The stem is 1 to 3 mm thick, round, slightly
grooved and glabrous. The alternating leaves are trifoliate
and have a | to 3 mm long petiole. The stipules are small and
arrow-shaped, and drop early. The leaflets are 1 to 4 cm
long, and 0.6 to 1 cm wide, ovate, almost sessile and entire-
margined. They are wedge-shaped at the base and rounded at
the tip. The distinct midrib on the lower surface is pubescent.
The leaves are brittle. The roots vary in diameter from 0.2 to
15 cm. The outer surface is brownish, vertically wrinkled
and grooved. It is also warty due to root fibers sticking to the
surface. The tissue is solid and fibrous. The transverse
fracture shows a thick bark and whitish wood with concen-
tric rings.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter and acrid; the odor is
faint. The leaves yield an indigo dye; the wood a red dye.

Habitat: Wild Indigo is indigenous to southern Canada and
the eastern and northeastern U.S.

Production: Wild indigo root is the underground part of
Baptisia tinctoria, which is collected and dried in autumn
from plants growing in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Wild Indigo can be confused or
adulterated with the root of Baptisia australis (false blue
indigo) and Baptisia alba.

Other Names: Horse-Fly Weed, Indigo Broom, Rattlebush

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Water-soluble polysaccharide: in particular arabinogalactans

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Glycoproteins

Quinolizidine alkaloids: including cytisine, N-methyl cyti-
sine, anagyrine, sparteine

Isoflavonoids: formononetin baptigenin, pseudobaptigenin,
(-)-maackiain, formononetin and their glycosides baptisin,
pseudobaptisin, trifolirhizin

Hydroxycumarins: including scopoletine

EFFECTS
The ethanol extract has had a significantly positive effect on
the phagocytosis of human erythrocytes. It has also been
found to raise the leukocyte count and to improve the
endogenous defense reaction. Wild Indigo has a mild
estrogenic effect. In animal experimentation, the polysaccha-
ride and glycoprotein fraction contained in the drug demon-
strated an immune-stimulating effect. Changes in mice
included an increase of phagocytosis activity of Kupffer's
cells; a significant, dose-dependent stimulation of lympho-
cytes; and release of interleukin-1 macrophages.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wild Indigo root is used for septic and
typhoid cases with prostration and fever, such as diphtheria,
influenza, malaria, septic angina and typhus. It is used
internally for infections of the uppe. respiratory tract, the
common head cold, tonsillitis, stomatitis, throat and mouth
inflammation of the mucous membranes (catarrh), fever,
lymphadenitis and furunculosis. It is used externally as an
ointment for painless ulcers, inflamed nipples, and as a
douche for leucorrhea. The efficacy of the drug has not been
proven. Native America Indians traditionally have used the
root to make a tea to treat fever, scarlet fever, typhoid and
pharyngitis and externally as an ointment for sores. Water in
which the root has been soaked is used to clean open and
inflamed wounds. Canadian Indians used the plant for
treating gonorrhea and disease of the kidneys and as an
expectorant.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include severe
febrile infections, states of confusion and blood poisoning.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Use of the drug is contraindicated during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Only very high dosages (for example, 30 g of the drug) lead
to signs of poisoning (vomiting, diarrhea, gastrointestinal
complaints, spasms), due to the quinolizidine alkaloid
content.

----- PAGE 1062 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wild Indigo is not common as a
drug, but is found in combination preparations; taken

internally as a tea and tincture; and used externally as an
ointment.

How Supplied:
Drops
Injection solutions

Liquid — [I and 1:2, with and without alcohol.
Suppositories

Tablets

Preparation: To prepare an ointment, use 1 part liquid
extract to 8 parts ointment base. A tincture may be prepared

using the liquid extract in 60% alcohol 1:1.

Daily Dosage: Dosage for a single dose is 0.5 g to 1 g of the
dried drug as decoction, to be taken 3 times daily.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet or 5 to 10
globules 1 to 3 times daily or 1 ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Beuscher H, Kopanski L. Modulation of the immune response
yy polymeric substances from Baptisia tinctoria and Echinacea
angustifolia. In: Pharm Weekblad Sci Ed. 9:229. 1987.

Beuscher N. Beuscher HU, Bodinet C, Enhanced Release of
Interleukin-1 from Mouse Macrophages by Glykoproteins and
Polysaccharides from Baptisia tinctoria and Echinacea Species.
In: PxM, Abstracts of the 37th Annual Congress on Medicinal
lant Research Braunschwe.

Beuscher N, Bodinet C, Willigmann I, Harnischfeger G.
Biologiocal activity of Baptisia tinctoria extracts. In: Inst, fur
Angew. Botanik der Univ. Hamburg, Angewandte Botanik,
Berichte 6, 46-61. 1997.

Beuscher N, Kopanski L, Erwein C, Modulation der
mmunantwort durch polymere Substanzen aus Baptisia tinctoria
und Echinacea purpurea. In: Adv in the Biosc 68:329. 1987.

Beuscher N, Kopanski L, Stimulation der Immunantwort durch
Inhaltsstoffe aus Baptisia tinctoria. In: PM 1985:381-384. 1985.

Beuscher N, Scheit KH, Bodinet C, Egert D, Modulation der
orpereigenen Immunabwehr durch polymere Substanzen aus
Baptisia tinctoria und Echinacea purpurea. In:
Immunotherapeutic prospects of infectious diseases, Hrsg.
Masihi KN, Lange W. Springer, Heidel.

Beuscher N, Scheit KH, Bodinet C. Kopanski L,

Immunologisch aktive Glykoproteine aus Baptisia tinctoria. In:
PM 55:358-363. 1989.

Bodinet C, Beuscher N, Kopanski L. Purification of
Immunologically Active Glycoproteins from Baptisia tinctoria
Roots by Affinity Chromatography and Isoelectric Focussing.

WILD MINT/813

In: PM, Abstracts of the 37th Annual Congress on Medicinal
Plant Research Braunschwe.

Harnischfeger, Buch, Harnischfeger G, Stolze H, Bewahrte
Pflanzendrogen in Wissenschaft und Medizin, Notabene-Verlag,
Bad Homburg. 1983.

Vomel T, Arzneim-Forsch 35:1437-1439. 1985.

Vomel T, Der Einflup' eines pflanzlichen Immunstimulans auf
die Phagozytose von Erythrozyten durch das retikulohistiozytare
System der isolierte perfundierten Rattenleber. In: Arzneim
Forsch 35(11): 1437-1439. 1985.

Wagner H, Proksch A, Riess-Mauer I, Vollmar A, Odenthal S,
Stuppner H, Jurcic K. LeTurdu M. Fang JN, Arzneim-Forsch
35: 1069-10750. 1985.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M. Kormann K, Gifipflanzen, Pflanzengifte.
4. Aufl., Ecorned Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wild Mint
Mentha aquatica

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried leaf.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in 2 to 3 dense false
axillary whorls with inconspicuous bracts. The upper ones
are fused into a terminal, globular or ovate capitulum. The
calyx is tubular, with 13 ribs and glabrous inside. The tips
are awl-shaped to triangular. The pedicles are pubescent. The
corolla is violet with a ring of hair in the tube. The fruit is
hard with an ovoid, light brown nutlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Wild Mint is a perennial, 20 to 80
cm high plant with a branched underground rhizome and an
erect stem with alternate sessile curly leaves. The stem is
branched in the upper half and terminates in spikes of blue
flowers. The leaves are ovate and serrated.

----- PAGE 1063 -----
814/WILD MINT

Characteristics: The whole plant smells of caraway. The
plant is a result of many cross-breedings in gardens and
fields.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe, northern Africa and
western Asia. In has been introduced to America, Australia
and Madiera.

Production: Wild Mint is the aerial part of Mentha aquatica.
The drug is derived from the dried leaves.

Other Names: Water Mint, Marsh Mint, Hairy Mint

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: chief components - menthofurane, beta-caryo-
phyllene, 1,8-cineole. germacren D, limonene, viridiflorol, a
chemotype contains isopinocamphone as chief constituent
(according to older references, also linalool, linalyl acetate,
cineole, menthone)

Tannins

EFFECTS
The drug is an astringent and a stimulant.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Water Mint is used for diarrhea and

dysmenorrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground drug is used as an infusion.

Preparation: Add approximately 30 gm of the drug to 500
ml of water.

Daily Dosage: As a daily dose, drink a wineglassful during
the course of the day.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Wild Radish
Raphanus raphanistrum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh plant before

flowering.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are bright yellow, sometimes
white with violet veins. The form of the flower corresponds
to that of the Cruciferae. The calyx is erect. The pods are
cylindrical with vertical grooves between which the seeds
are tied (like a string of pearls). The pods fall apart at these
points.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The leaves are petiolate and lyrate,
the upper ones are lanceolate. The leaves and lower part of
the stem are stiff-haired.

Habitat: The plant has been cultivated for a very long time
and is grown in all parts of the world, especially in temperate
regions.

Production: Wild Radish is the fresh plant of Raphanus
raphanistrum before flowering.

Other Names: Jointed-Podded Charlock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Glucosinolates in the freshly harvested, unbruised plant:
chief component glucoputranjivine, which yields isopropyl
mustard oil as the cells are destroyed.

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wild Radish is used for skin conditions and
stomach disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS ~~

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. Administration of high dosages of the freshly
harvested plant can lead to mucous membrane irritation of
the gastrointestinal tract.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wild Radish is administered ground

and as an alcoholic extract.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Wild Service Tree

Sorbus torminalis

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe fruit. It is
always the fruit that is used in the various preparations.

----- PAGE 1064 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in erect, loose umbellifer-
ous panicles on loosely tomentose, later glabrous pedicles.
The petals are white and the anthers light yellow. The false
fruit is orbicular-oblong and 15 cm long. The fruit is
initially reddish-yellow, later brown and speckled. The 4
seeds are oblong, deltoid, 7 mm long and dark red-brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root; The plant is at times a small tree, but
may sometimes grow up to 22 m tall tree with a widely
domed crown. The bark is dark brown or gray. It is cracked
into scaly plates to fairly high up. The older branches are
glabrous, gray-brown, glossy and angular with lighter
lenticles. The younger branches are loosely tomentose,
greenish, later reddish-brown. The buds are broad ovoid and
glabrous with shiny green scales. The buds are brown at the
edge and loosely pubescent or glabrous. The leaves have 5
cm long, thin, downy, loosely tomentose petioles, which are
fresh green. The petioles turn blood-red in autumn.

Habitat: The plant is common in northern temperate zones.
It is cultivated in many regions.

Production: Wild Service Tree berries are the fruits of
Sorbus torminalis.

Other Names: Wild Sorvice, Ash

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Sugar alcohols: sorbitol

The fruits do not contain parasorboside, in contrast to those
of Sorbus aucuparia.

The drug has not been fully researched.

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
See Mountain Ash Berry (Sorbus aucuparia).

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: See Mountain Ash Berry (Sorbus
aucuparia).

LITERATURE
There is no literature available.

WILD THYME/815

Wild Thyme

Thymus serpyllum

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the steamed
distillation of the dried aerial parts, the aerial shoots
collecting during the flowering season and dried, the fresh
aerial parts of the flowering plant and the whole plant.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is globular to very
elongated, often interrupted in false whorls, which are
separate from each other. The calyx is tubular-campanualte
with 10 distinct ribs. The 3 tips of the upper lip are short and
ciliate. The 2 lower tips are awl-shaped, longer than the
upper tips and ciliate. The corolla is 3 to 6 cm long with a
short tube. It is light to dark purple, occasionally white.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a slightly woody
subshrub that grows from 10 to 30 cm high. The flowering
stems are erect. The non-flowering stems are decumbent,
round, or mildly quadrangular, pubescent all around and
rooting at all points. The leaves are small, linear or elliptical
and obtuse. The leaves are also flat, narrowing to the petiole,
ciliate at the base, glabrous or rough-haired with protruding
nerves.

Characteristics: The odor is aromatic.

Habitat: The plant is found in all temperate regions of
Eurasia.

Production: Wild thyme consists of the dried, flowering,
above-ground parts of Thymus serpyllum.

Not to be Confused With: Herba Thymi (thymian)

Other Names: Mother of Thyme, Serpyllum, Shepherd's
Thyme

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.2-0.6%): as a collective species, Thymus
serpyllum (over 20 subspecies) encompasses a large number
of chemical strains with different volatile oil make-up; chief
component is usually carvacrol, further containing, among
others, borneol, isobutyl acetate, caryophyllene, 1,8-cineole,
citral, citronellal, citronellol, p-cymene, geraniol, geranyl
acetate, linalool, linalyl acetate, alpha-pinene, gamma-terpi-
nene, alpha-terpineol, terpinyl acetate and thymol

Flavonoids: including among others scutellarenine-7-O-glu-
coside-4-O-rhamnoside

Cajfeic acid derivatives: in particular rosmarinic acid (2.3%)

EFFECTS
In animal experiments, an antihormonal and thyroid hor-
mone-like effect on the pituitary has been demonstrated. The

----- PAGE 1065 -----
816/WILD THYME

herbs efficacy for treating conditions of the upper respiratory
tract is due to the presence of the aromatic and spicy
smelling essential oil.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

m Cough
* Bronchitis

Unproven Uses: The herb is used internally for catarrhs of
the upper respiratory tract, kidney and bladder disorders, and
as a stomachic, carminative, and expectorant. It is also used
internally for dysmenorrhea, colic-like pain, and whooping
cough. The herb is used externally in herbal cures, baths
(especially for respiratory tract conditions), and alcoholic
extracts, as well as in embrocations for rheumatic disorders
and sprains.

Chinese Medicine: The herb is used for vomiting, diarrhea,
flatulence, coughs, toothache, itching and general pain
syndrome.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wild Thyme is administered as a
comminuted drug for infusions, teas, and other preparations
internally. The drug is a component of various standardized
preparations of antitussives. Alcoholic extracts of the herb
are contained in cough drops.

Preparation: To make an infusion, pour boiling water over
15 to 2 gm finely cut drug, steep for 10 minutes, then strain
(1 teaspoonful = 14 gm drug). For a liquid extract, use a
ratio of 1:1 with either 45% ethanol or 20% ethanol. For a
tincture, use a ratio of 1:10 with 70% ethanol. To make a
bath, add 1 gm drug (or equivalent of 0.004 gm Wild Thyme
oil) to 1 liter water, filter, then add to bath water.

Daily Dosage: The average daily dosage is 4 to 6 gm of
herb. As a stomachic, drink one cup of tea before meals.
Other daily dosages are as follows: powder: take 2 gm drug
mixed with honey; infusion: single dose, 0.6 to 4 gm, 2 to 3
cups per day; liquid extract: single dose, 0.4 to 4 ml 3 times
daily; liquid extract: daily dose, 5 to 15 gm (1 gm or 30
drops).

Storage: Protect from light.

LITERATURE
Adzet T et al., PM, Suppl. 1980:52. 1980.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Langer R et al., Sci Pharm 63:325. 1995.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wild Turnip

Brassica rapa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the root.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in racemes. There are 4
almost horizontally splayed sepals. The 4 petals are yellow,
11 to 14 mm long, approximately 1.5 times as long as the
calyx, with an orbicular-elliptical plate. There are 2 short and
4 long stamens. The 4-carpeled ovary is superior and fused.
The fruit is a 4.5 to 6.5 cm long, dehiscent pod opening on 2
sides, with a septum and 15 to 25 seeds. The seeds are
globose and reticulate with a diameter of approximately 15
to3 mm.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Turnip is an annual or biennial herb,
and grows up to 0.8 m high. The leaves are alternate, grass-
green, with a slight bluish bloom and always bristly
pubescent. The lower ones are petiolate, pinnatisect with a
not-very-large terminal lobe; the middle arid upper ones are
sessile, simple, dentate or entire. The stem of the larger
plants is branched. The root is thin and spindle-shaped.

Habitat: Europe, North Africa, U.S.

Production: The seeds are cold-pressed and then refined.
Rapeseed oil is the cold-pressed and refined oil from the ripe
seeds of Brassica napus and Brassica rapa.

Other Names: Field Mustard, Oilseed Turnip, Turnip Rape,
Turnip Greens, Chinese Cabbage

Not to be Confused With: Rapeseed oil may be adulterated
with resins and mineral oil. Sinapis arvensis is a permitted
substitute.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Fatty oil: chief fatty acids: oleic acid (45 to 65%), linoleic
acid (18 to 32%), linolenic acid (10%), including as well
palmitic acid, stearic acid, eicosanoic acid, behenic acid;

----- PAGE 1066 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

varieties with high erucic acid content (40 to 50%) are no
longer cultivated (reduction of the erucic acid content in the
Common Market countries to below 5%)

Sterols: beta-sitosterol, campesterol, brassicasterol, estered
to some extent

EFFECTS
Rapeseed oil, when ingested in high dosages over an
extended period of time, is cardiotoxic. The drug is chiefly
used as a substitute for olive oil and in the manufacture of
salves and liniments.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
No medicinal indications

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS:
No health hazards are known in conjunction with the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages of the oil,
which is low on erucic acid.

DOSAGE
Storage: Store in the dark, in well-filled containers.

LITERATURE
Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl. Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Inamori Y, Muro C, Sajima E, Katagiri M, Okamoto Y, Tanaka
H, Sakagami Y, Tsujibo H, Biological activity of purpurogallin.
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem, 61:890-2, 1997 May.

Wild Yam

Dioscorea villosa

TRADE NAMES
Wild Yam Extract, Mexican Wild Yam Power, Wild Yam,
Wild Yam Root & Rhizome Extract, Wild Yam Root
(available from numerous manufacturers and as a combina-
tion product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part 4s the dried rhizome
with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has small greenish-yellow
flowers. The male flowers are in drooping panicles; the
female ones in drooping spicate racemes.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Dioscorea villosa is a perennial vine.
It has a pale brown, cylindrical, twisted, tuberous rhizome
and a thin, woolly, reddish-brown stem that measures up to
12 m long. The leaves are broadly ovate, usually alternating,
cordate and 6 to 14 cm long. The upper surface of the leaves

WILD YAM /817

is glabrous and they are pubescent beneath. The fracture is
short and hard.

Characteristics: The taste is insipid at first, then acrid. The
leaves are odorless.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the Southern U.S. and
Canada. It is now widely cultivated in many parts of the
world in tropical, subtropical and temperate regions.

Production: Wild Yam root is the root and rhizome of
Dioscorea villosa.

Other Names: China Root, Colic Root. Devil's Bones,
Rheumatism Root, Yuma

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Saponins: including dioscin (aglycone diosgenin)
Isoquimiclidine alkaloids: including dioscorin
Pyrridinal alkaloids: including dioscorine

EFFECTS
Wild Yam has an antispasmodic, and a mild diaphoretic
effect. The root of the plant is used as a precursor for
manufacturing progesterone and estrogen. Though the
diosgenin componant has been promoted as a "natural
progesterone," diosgenin does not have any progesterone-
like effects. The body does not convert diosgenin into
estrogen or any other steroid.

Anti-Inflammatory Effect:

In the rat model, diosgenin has been found to decrease the
intestinal inflammation that accompanies indomethacin use
(Yamada et al, 1997).

Biliary Cholesterol Elimination Effect:

Diosgenin has been shown to markedly increase the biliary
output of cholesterol and lipid lamellar structures in the rat
model. Diosgenin also has a cytoprotective effect on the rat
liver that is subjected to obstructive cholestasis (Accatino et
al, 1998).

Estrogenic Effect:

Diosgenin has been found to have an estrogenic effect on
mouse mammary epithelium. Ovariectomized mice that
received diosgenin (sc) at dosage levels between 20 and 40
mg/kg for 15 days had significant increases in mammary
development scores. When administered estrogen and
diosgenin, an augmentation of the estrogenic effect was
recorded (Aradhana et al, 1992).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wild Yam is used for rheumatic conditions,
| gallbladder colic, dysmenorrhea and cramps.

----- PAGE 1067 -----
818/WILD YAM

Wild Yam is used industrially as an active agent in the half
synthesis of steroid hormones and for the manufacture of
homeopathic preparations.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Health risks or side effects following the proper
administration of designated therapeutic dosages are not
recorded.

Drug Interactions: There is evidence that the diosgenin
componant of Wild Yam may decrease the anti-inflam-
matory effect of indomethacin by increasing the elimination
constant and reducing plasma levels of indomethacin (Yama-
da et al, 1997). Wild Yam may have an additive estrogenic
effect when administered with estrogen containing drugs.

OVERDOSAGE
Poisoning is conceivable with overdosages because of the
picrotoxin-like effect of dioscorin (see Cocculi fructus).

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Liquid extract.
How Supplied:
Capsules—200 mg, 400 mg, 505 mg, 535 mg

Liquid—1:1; 1:2; 250 mg/ml

LITERATURE

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Willow Herb

Epilobium species

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb and the
roots of the drug containing Epilobium varieties.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are arranged in long clusters
of crimson flowers. The receptacle extends over the ovary.
There are 4 sepals that are often colored and 8 stamens. The
petals are purple to pink seldom white or yellow. The style is
erect or curved downwards. The stigma is capitual or club-
like and has 4 grooves or is divided into 4. The fruit is long,
linear capsule-like, quadrangular, 4-valved and opens with 4
bending valves. The seeds are numerous and smooth or they
may be covered in tiny warts with a white, often short-
stemmed, tuft of hair.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Leaves, Stem and Root: The species includes perennial herbs
and occasionally up to 2 m high sub-shrubs with under-
ground creeping rhizomes. The stems are erect, glabrous or
covered with simple hairs or glandular hairs. The leaves are
entire-margined or dentate. They are alternate or opposite
and in whorls of 3, which are flat or occasionally with a
turned-back border.

Habitat: The plant is found all over Europe, Asia, Africa and
America. Australia, Tasmania and New Zealand.

Production: Willow Herb is the aerial part of Epilobium
parviflorum and other small-blossomed Willow Herbs. The
herb is dried in the open air in the shade.

Other Names: Blood Vine, Blooming Sally, Rose Bay
Willow Herb, Willow-Herb

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: ANGUSTIFOLIUM VARIETY

Flavonoids: in particular myricitrin, isoquercitrin, quercitrin,
guaiaverin, quercetin-3-O-beta-D-glucuronide

Palmitate

Steroids: in particular beta-sitosterol and its ester, including
among others beta-sitosterol caproate

Tannins

COMPOUNDS: HIRSUTUM VARIETY
Flavonoids: in particular guaiaverin, hyperoside, myricitrin,
quercetin-3-0-beta-D-glucuronide,quercetin-3-0-alpha-L-
arabinofuranoside

Steroids: in particular beta-sitosterol
Tannins

COMPOUNDS: PARVIFLORUM VARIETY
Flavonoids: in particular guaiaverin, quercetin-3-O-beta-D-
glucuronide, quercitrin

Palmitate

Steroids: in particular beta-sitosterol and its ester, including
among others beta-sitosterol caproate

Tannins

EFFECTS
Willow Herb is reported to have antiphlogistic and antiexu-
dative effects. A watery infusion revealed a significant
inhibitory effect on edema in rat paws. The methanol
infusion had a distinctly weaker effect.

Antimicrobial effects have also been demonstrated. A
suspension of the fresh drug in ethanol stunts the growth of
the bacteria of Pseudomonas pyocyanea. Tincture and the
liquid extract showed anti-microbial effect against Candida
albicans, Staphylococcus albus and Staphylococcus aureus.

----- PAGE 1068 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

The dried residue of a maceration, which is fixed on filter
paper, shows a weak effect against Bacillus subtilis, Esche-
richia coli, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Shigella _ flexneri,
Shigella sonnei and Staphylococcus aureus. An extra frac-
tion of the drug (insufficiently chemically defined) showed a
tumor-inhibiting effect on transplanted tumors in mice and
rats. The drug was helpful in treating benign prostate

hyperplasia and certain micturition disorders.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Willow Herb is used internally for micturi-
tion problems associated with prostatic hyperplasia (Stages I
to II), and for gastrointestinal disorders and mucous mem-
brane lesions of the mouth. Native Americans use the drug
for rectal bleeding; the Chinese use it for menstrual
disorders. The watery extract is used externally to improve

the healing of wounds.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: The drug is not available as a ready
made medicinal preparation; only as a tea, watery extract or
as a vegetable.

LITERATURE

Ducrey B et al., Inhibition of Salpha-Reduktase and aromatase
y ellagitannins oenothein A and eonothein B from Epilobium
species. In: PM 63(2): 111-114. 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hiemann A, Mayr K, Sci Pharm 53:39. 1985.
Hiermann A, Sci Pharm 63:135. 1995.

Lesuisse D et al., Determination of Oenothein B as the active
5-alpha-reductase-inhibiting principles of the folk medicine
Epilobium parvifloruam. In: JNP 59(5):490-492. 1996.

Slacanin I et al., J Chromatogr 557:391. 1991.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Winter Cherry
Physalis alkekengi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the ripe fruit and
the leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The whitish, long-pedicled flowers are
solitary and nodding. The calyx is fused and 5-tipped. The

WINTER CHERRY /819

corolla is fused with a slightly 5-tipped margin. There are 5
stamens and 1 superior ovary. The fruit is a cherry-sized,
globular, scarlet berry, enclosed in the swollen, orange-red
calyx. It contains numerous flat, reniform seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial and grows
from 30 to 60 cm. The stems are erect or ascending and
angular with opposite, long-petioled, entire-margined leaves.

Characteristics: Winter Cherry has a lantern-like, enlarged
calyx when the fruit is ripe.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to central and southern
Europe, China and Indochina and is naturalized in the U.S.

Production: Winter Cherry fruits are the ripe fruits of

Physalis alkekengi.

Other Names: Strawberry

Tomato

Cape Gooseberry, Coqueret,

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Whitasteroids: among others physalines A-C, F, L-0

Carotinoids: including zeaxanthine dipalmitic acid ester

(red)

EFFECTS
No information is available.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Winter Cherry is used as a diuretic in
kidney and bladder conditions and in the treatment of gout

and rheumatism.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
The ripe fruit is edible, but unripe fruit can cause poisoning
in animals. 3

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug
ground form and as an extract.

is administered in a

LITERATURE
Christen P, Pharm Acta Helv 61:242. 1986.

Dornberger K, Untersuchungen uber potentiell antineoplastisch
wirksame Inhaltsstoffe von Physalis alkekengi L. var. franchettii
MAST. In: PA 41:265. 1986.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Jana M, Raynaud J, (1971) Plant Med Phytother 5:301.
Kawai M et al., PH 26:3313. 1987.
Kawai M, Matsuura T, (1970) Tetrahedron 26:1743.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

----- PAGE 1069 -----
820/WINTER CHERRY

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U. Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie. 2. Aufl.. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Vessal M, Mehrani HA. Omrani GH, Effects of an aqueous
extract of Physalis alkekengi fruit on estrus cycle, reproduction
and uterine craetive kinase BB-isoenzyme in rats. In: ETH
34(1):69-78. 1991.

Volksen W. Zur Kenntnis der Inhaltsstoffe und arzneilichen
Verwendung einiger Physalisanen - Ph. alkekengi, Ph.
tranchettii. Ph. peruviana. In: DAZ 117(30): 1199-1203. 1977.

Yamaguchi H et al.. (1974) Yakugaku Zasshi 94:1115.

Winter's Bark

Drimys — winteri

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried bark of the

trunk and larger branches.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are solitary or in umbels and
often in clusters at the tips of the branches. They are fragrant
and white. The sepals are membranous, broadly ovate to
reniform. The 4 to 14 petals are also membranous, oblong to
narrow-ovate. The 15 to 40 stamens are in 2 to 4 rows. The 2
to 10 carpels are free, ovate or elliptical. There are 9 to 18
ovules on a short seed stalk. The fruit is berry-like, black to
violet, fleshy and usually contains 2 or 3 seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an evergreen tree or
shrub, with brownish or gray wrinkled branches. The bark is
a romatic and smooth. The leaf blade is coriaceous, oblong-
ovate to elliptical, with a somewhat re volute margin. The

undersurface is usually punctate.

Characteristics: Winter's Bark has an astringent taste and
mild smell.

Habitat: The plant is found from central Chile to Cape Horn
and in neighboring Argentina.

Production: Genuine Winter's Bark is the bark of Drimys
winteri. The bark is collected from the dried trunk or
produced from the stronger branches. It is collected in
uncultivated regions.

Not to be Confused With: The drug is often confused with
Cortex Canellae albae and with the bark of Cinnamodendron

corticosum.

Other Names:
Aromatica, Wintera

Pepper Bark, Winter's Cinnamon, Wintera

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpenes: including drimenol, drimenin, confertifoline,
polygodial, isodrimenine, valdiviolide, fuegin,
futranolide, cryptomeridiol, 1 beta-p-cumaroyloxypolygodial,
a trimeric sesquiterpene lactone

winterin,

Volatile oil: chief components eugenol, caryophyllene, 1,8-
cineol, pinenes

EFFECTS
The drug has carminative, stomachic, and tonic effects due to
the sesquiterpenes (bitter effect) and tannins.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: In South America, the drug is used for
toothache, as a stomachic and for dermatitis. Other uses
include digestive disorders, flatulence and colic.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an infusion and domestic herb.

LITERATURE

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C. Thomas USA 1981.

Wintergreen

Gaultheria procumbens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
leaves and the oil extracted from them, as well as the fruit.

Flower and Fruit: The 7.5 mm long, solitary, hanging
flowers grow from the base of the leaves. They are white or
pale pink and campanulate. The fruit is the enlarged calyx.
The scarlet berries are dull red and about 0.5 cm in diameter
when dried. They are fleshy, globular, bilocular, and contain

numerous whitish, ovoid, flattened seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Gaultheria procumbens is a bushy
evergreen plant with procumbent stems and upright rigid
branches up to 15 cm high. It grows best under trees and
shrubs. The branches bear clusters of leaves at their tips. The

----- PAGE 1070 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

leaves are coriaceous, oval, 3 to 5 cm long, glabrous and
glossy above, paler beneath, long and solitary.

Characteristics: Wintergreen has an aromatic odor; the taste
of the whole plant is astringent.

Habitat: Gaultheria procumbens is indigenous to the north-
ern United States and Canada.

Production: Wintergreen leaves are the leaves of Gaultheria
procumbens.

Other Names: Canada Tea, Checkerberry, Deerberry,
Ground Berry, Hillberry, Mountain Tea, Partridge Berry,
Spiceberry, Wax Cluster, Boxberry, Teaberry

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: FRESHLY HARVESTED PLANT
Monotropitoside (Gaultherin): changing into methyl salicy-
late when the plant is dried

COMPOUNDS: DRIED PLANT

Volatile oil: chief component methyl salicylate (96-98%), in
addition to oenanthic alcohol (n-heptan-l-ol) and its ester
(which contributes to the odor of the volatile oil)

EFFECTS
The essential oil has a rubefacient effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wintergreen was previously used as a
carminative, tonic, antiseptic and aromatic. The drug was
also used for neuralgia (particularly sciatica), gastralgias,
pleurisy, pleurodynia (especially for medium stage pain),
ovarialgia, orchitis, epidydimitis, diaphragmitis, uratic arthri-
tis and dysmenorrhea. Folk medicine indications also include
asthma and use of wintergreen as an antiseptic. The drug is
administered externally in the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis and related conditions.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The
drug and its volatile oil can, however, trigger contact
allergies.

OVERDOSAGE
Signs of poisoning such as severe stomach and kidney
irritation appear with overdosages of the drug. Fatal poison-
ings can occur through oral and percutaneous administration
of the pure volatile oil, often following are signs of central
nervous system distress, lung edema and collapse. Poison-
ings with fatal results have been observed following the oral
intake of as little as 4 to 6 g of the volatile oil.

WITCH HAZEL/821

DOSAGE

The drug is seldom used today. The active ingredient, methyl
salicylate, is produced synthetically at a lower cost. Methyl
salicylate is a constituent of liniments and bath additives.

LITERATURE
Friedrich H, Kriiger, N. (1974) Planta Med 26:327.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fiir

Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Kem W. List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L. Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Steinegger E, Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Witch Hazel

Hamamelis virginiana

TRADE NAMES
Witch Hazel (available from numerous manufacturers),

Witch Hazel Leaf

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the plant's
hamamelis water, which is distilled from various plant parts;
the bark; the fresh and dried leaves; the fresh bark of the
roots and branches; and the dried bark of the trunk and
branches.

Flower and Fruit: The androgynous and unisexual flowers
grow in light to golden yellow, short-stemmed clusters on
the trees before the leaves come out. The inflorescence is a
small, head-like spike in the axils of the dropping leaves,
with 5 to 8 flowers. The 4 sepals are ovate or triangular,
curved outward, yellow-brown to brown on the inside. The
petals are bright yellow, long, narrow-linear, rolled to a
spiral in the bud and crushed like tissue paper when open.
The ovary is villous, bivalvular with 2 anatropic ovules.
Fertilization takes place during the spring that follows 5 to 7
months after pollination. The fruit capsule is woody, ovate,
sectioned and divided, hazelnut-like, 12 to 15 mm long and

----- PAGE 1071 -----
822/WITCH HAZEL

thickly pubescent. It bursts so dramatically in autumn that
the 2 dark seeds are projected up to 4 m away from the plant.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a tree-like deciduous
bush that typically grows 2 to 3 m high (but sometimes
reaches heights up to 10 m) with a trunk diameter of 40 cm.
The bark is thin, brown on the outside, reddish on the inside.
The older branches are bushy, divided and silver-gray to
gray-brown. The younger branches are yellowish-brown with
hairs. The alternate leaves have stipules. The leaf margin is
roughly crenate, bluntly indented to irregularly sweeping.

Habitat: Witch Hazel originated in the deciduous forests of
Atlantic North America. The tree is common in European
gardens and parks, and is also cultivated in subtropical
countries.

Production: Witch Hazel leaf is obtained from the leaves of
Hamamelis virginiana, which are collected in autumn and
dried rapidly. Witch Hazel bark is the dried bark of the trunk
and branches of Hamamelis virginiana.

Not to be Confused With: Witch Hazel is sometimes
confused with Hazelnut bark, to which it bears a resem-
blance. Confusion can arise between Witch Hazel leaves and
the leaves of Corylus avellana (hazelnut leaves), which are
sometimes substituted as an adulteration.

Other Names: Hamamelis. Hazel Nut, Snapping Hazel,
Spotted Alder, Striped Alder, Tobacco Wood, Winterbloom

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: WITCH HAZEL BARK

Tannins (up to 12%): including hamamelitannin, monogal-
loyl hamameloses

Catechins: including (+)-catechin, (+)-gallocatechin, (-)-epi-
catechin gallate(III), (-)-epigallocatechin gallate(III)

OUgomeric procyanidins

EFFECTS: WITCH HAZEL BARK
Witch Hazel bark is astringent, anti-inflammatory and
locally hemostatic.

COMPOUNDS: WITCH HAZEL LEAF
Tannins ( 5%): including hamamelitannin

Catechins: including (+)-catechin, (+)-gallocatechin, (-)-epi-
catechin gallate(III), (-)-epigallocatechin gallate(III)
OUgomeric procyanidins

Volatile oil (0.01 to 0.5%): steam distillate, consisting
chiefly of aliphatic carbonyl compounds, for example hex-2-
en-l-ale, 6-methyl-hepta-3,5-dien-2-one aliphatic alcohols,
aliphatic esters

Flavonoids: including quercitrin, isoquercitrin

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS: WITCH HAZEL LEAF
The tannins and tannin elements have an astringent, anti-
inflammatory and locally hemostatic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

* Hemorrhoids

¢ Inflammation of the mouth and pharynx (leaf only)
¢ Inflammation of the skin

* Venous conditions

* Wounds and bums

Unproven Uses: Witch Hazel leaf and bark arc used
internally in folk medicine for non-specific diarrheic ail-
ments (such as inflammation of the mucous membrane of the
large intestine and colon), hematemesis, hemoptysis and also
for menstrual complaints. Efficacy in the treatment of
diarrhea seems plausible because of the tannin content.
Witch Hazel is used externally for minor injuries of the skin,
localized inflamed swelling of the skin and mucous mem-
branes, hemorrhoids and varicose veins. It is also used in
folk medicine for inflammation of the mucosa of the colon,
hematemesis and hemoptysis.

Homeopathic Use: Applications for use of Witch Hazel bark
in homeopathy include hemorrhoids, varicose veins, skin
inflammation and bleeding of the mucous membranes.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks following the proper administration of designat-
ed therapeutic dosages are not recorded. If taken internally,
the tannin content of the drug can lead to digestive
complaints. Liver damage is conceivable following long-
term administration, but rare.

DOSAGE
WITCH HAZEL BARK

Mode of Administration: Witch Hazel Bark is available as
comminuted drug or extract for internal and external use as
galenic preparations. A steam distillate of the fresh leaves
and bark is used for internal and external application.

How Supplied: Forms of commercial pharmaceutical prepa-
rations include: cream; gel; ointment; suppositories.

Preparation: Various formulations of Witch Hazel are
prepared as follows:

External—aqueous steam distillate (Witch Hazel water)
undiluted, or diluted 1:3 with water.

For poultices—20 to 30% in semi-solid preparations.

Extract preparations—semi-solid and liquid preparations,
corresponding to 5 to 10% drug.

Compresses and rinses—decoctions of 5 to 10 g of herb per
cup (250 ml) of water.

----- PAGE 1072 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Ointment/gel—5 g Witch Hazel extract in 100 g ointment
base.

Suppositories—Use 0.1 to 1 g drug.
Daily Dosage: Suppositories can be used 1 to 3 times a day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day, suppositories 2 to 3 times per day and ointment | to 2
times daily (acute and chronic); for the external application,
1 dessertspoonful to be mixed with 250 ml water and then
used as a wash or poultice (HAB1).

Storage: Store Witch Hazel bark protected from exposure to
light.

WITCH HAZEL LEAF

Mode of Administration: Witch hazel
comminuted drug or extract for internal and external use as
galenic preparations. A steam distillate of the fresh leaves
and bark is used for internal and external applications.

leaf is available as

How Supplied:
Liquid —1:1 liquid

Preparation:
Liquid extract—1:1 with 45% ethanol (PF X).

Stabilized liquid extract—100 g of leaf powder are mois-
tened with 45 g 1:2 90% ethanol:water and subsequently
percolated with 540 g 1:2 90% ethanol:water. Separation into
85 g forerun and the residue, which is evaporated until dry.
The dried substance is dissolved with 15 g ethanol:water and
is then mixed with the forerun. This solution is kept for 8
days at 2 to 8° C and then filtered at the same temperature.
Tea: pour 150 ml boiling water over 2 to 3 g drug and strain
after 10 minutes.

Daily Dosage:
Decoction—250 ml water with 5 to 10 g drug for washes or
poultices; 2 to 3 g to 150 ml water as a gargle solution.

Suppositories—0.1 to 1 g drug/supp. 3 times daily.
Tea—1 cup 2 to 3 times daily between meals.
Liquid extract—2 to 4 ml 3 times daily.

Storage: Protect Witch Hazel leaf from light and moisture
when stored.

LITERATURE

WITCH HAZEL BARK

Bernard P et al. J Pharm Belg 26:661

Dorsch W., Neues iiber antientziindliche Drogen. Z Phytother
14: 26. 1993.

WITCH HAZEL/823

Erdelmeier CAJ et al, Antiviral and antiphlogistic activities of
Hamamelis virginiana bark. Planta Med 62: 241-245. 1996.

Friedrich H, Kriiger N, Planta Med 25: 138. 1974.

Haberland C, Kolodziej H, Novel galloylhamamelose from
Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 5908. 1993.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl. Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Hartisch C et al., Dual inhibitory activities of tannins from
Hamamelis virginiana and related polyphenols on 5-
lipoxygenase and Lyso-PAF: Acetyl-CoA-Acetyltransferase.
Planta Med 63: 106-110.

Hartisch C et al., Proanthocyanidin pattern in Hamamelis
virginiana. Planta Med 62 (Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress
of GA) 119. 1996.

Hartisch C et al., Study on the localisation and composition of
the volatile fraction of Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 62
(Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA) 133. 1996.

Knoch HG, Hamorrhoiden I. Grades. Wirksamkeit einer Salbe
auf pflanzlicher Basis. Munch Med Wschr 31/32: 481-484. 1991
Korting HC, Schafer-Korting M, Hart H et al.. Anti-
inflammatory activity of hamamelis distillate applied topically to
the skin. Influence of vehicle and dose. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
44 315-318: 1993.

Laux P. Oschmann R, Die Zaubernufi - Hamamelis virginiana
L. Z Phytother 14: 155-166. 1993.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mennet-von Eiff M, Meier B, Phytotherapie in der
Dermatologie. Z Phytother 16: 201-210. 1995.

Messerschmidt W, Arch Pharm 300: 550. 1967.
Messerschmidt W, Arzneim Forsch 18: 1618. 1968,

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.
Sorkin B, Hametum-Salbe, eine kortikoidfreie
antiinflammatorische Salbe. Phys Med Rehab 21: 53-57. 1980.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmako'gnosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl, Wiss.
Verlagsgesellschaft Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Ed), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

WITCH HAZEL LEAF
Bernard P et al., J Pharm Belg 26: 661.

----- PAGE 1073 -----
824 /WITCH HAZEL

Dorsch W, Neues iiber antientziindliche Drogen. Z Phytother
14: 26. 1993.

Erdelmeier CAJ et al., Antiviral and antiphlogistic activities of

Hamamelis virginiana bark. Planta Med 62: 241-245. 1996.
Friedrich H, Kriiger N, Planta Med 25: 138. 1974.

Haberland C, Kolodziej H, Novel galloylhamamelose from
Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 59: A608. 1993.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed). Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4 - 6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1992-
994.

Hartisch C et al.. Dual inhibitory activities of tannins from
Hamamelis virginiana and related polyphenols on 5-
lipoxygenase and Lyso-PAF: Acetyl-CoA-Acetyltransferase.
janta Med 63: 106-110. 1997.

Hartisch C et al., Proanthocyanidin pattern in Hamamelis
virginiana. Planta Med 62 (Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress
ofGA) 119. 1996.

Hartisch C et al.. Study on the localisation and composition ot
the volatile fraction of Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 62
(Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA) 133.1996.

Knoch HG, Hamorrhoiden I. Grades. Wirksamkeit einer Salbe
auf pflanzlicher Basis. Munch Med Wschr 31/32: 481-484.
1991.

Korting HC, Schafer-Korting M. Hart H et al.. Anti-
inflammatory activity of hamamelis distillate applied topically to
the skin. Influence of vehicle and dose. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
44: 315-318: 1993.

Laux P, Oschmann R, Die ZaubernuP - Hamamelis virginiana
L. Z Phytother 14: 155-166. 1993.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc. New
York 1980.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Mennet-von Eiff M, Meier B, Phytotherapie in der
Dermatologie. Z Phytother 16 (1995), 201-210

Messerschmidt W, Arch Pharm 300: 550. 1967.
Messerschmidt W, Arzneim Forsch 18: 1618. 1968.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Sorkin B, Hametum-Salbe, eine kortikoidfreie
antiinflammatorische Salbe. Phys Med Rehab 21: 53-57. 1980.

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss.
Verlagsgesellschaft Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Wichtl M (Ed), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges. Stuttgart
1997.

Wood Anemone

Anemone nemorosa

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh plant
gathered shortly before the flowers open and the dried aerial
parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The white flowers are solitary and located
at the end of a long stem. The stem is erect when in flower,
white to reddish-violet, and has a diameter of 1.5 to 4 cm.
The usually 6 (but possibly 5 to 9) bracts are oblong-ovate,
entire-margined and glabrous. The flowers have numerous
yellow stamens. The 10 to 20 carpels are oblong with a short
curved beak. They are downy and 4 to 5 mm long. The fruit
is a drooping compound with a roughly haired fruitlet.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Anemone nemorosa is a perennial
plant, 6 to 30 cm high with a horizontally creeping, yellow to
dark brown, roundish rhizome. The stems are usually
solitary, erect, glabrous or sparsely pubescent. There is
usually a long-stemmed basal leaf. The leaf is tri-pinnate and
pinnatifid-serrate. The first row of pinna are stemmed and
have horizontal pinna sections, each with 1 pinna of the
second level. There are cauline rosettes of 3 leaf-like bracts,
which have a 2-cm long petiole. The bracts do not generally
have axillary buds, and are palmate and pinnatifid-serrate.

Habitat: The plant is spread almost all over Europe as far as
the Volga region except in the Mediterranean and northern

Lapland.

Production: Wood Anemone is the aerial part of Anemone
nemorosa, collected shortly before the flowers open.

Other Names: Pasque Flower, Crowfoot, Wind Flower,

Smell Fox

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Protoanemonine-forming (vielding approximately
300 meg protoanemonine per gram of fresh weight):
presumably, the glycoside ranunculin, which changes enzy-
matically when the plant is cut into small pieces (and
probably also when it is dried) into the pungent, volatile
protoanemonine that quickly dimerizes to anemonine; when
dried, the plant is not capable of protoanemonine formation

agents

EFFECTS
No information is available.

----- PAGE 1074 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for stomach pains, delayed
menstruation, gout, whooping cough and asthma.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

Prolonged skin contact with the freshly harvested plant can
lead to slow-healing blisters and cauterizations due to the
formation of protoanemonine. which is severely irritating to
skin and mucous membranes. If taken internally, severe
irritation to the gastrointestinal tract and urinary drainage
passages, as well as colic and diarrhea, are possible.

Symptomatic treatment for external contact should consist of
irrigation with diluted potassium permanganate solution
followed by mucilage.

OVERDOSAGE
In case of internal contact, administer gastric lavage fol-
lowed by activated charcoal. Death by asphyxiation follow-
ing the intake of large quantities of protoanemonine-forming
plants has been observed in animal experiments. The
ingestion of 30 freshly harvested plants is considered the
fatal level for humans.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug can be found in dilute
homeopathic preparations of the mother tincture.

LITERATURE
Bonora A et al., PH 26:2277. 1987.

Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Ruijgrok HWL, PM 11:338-347. 1963.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

WOOD BETONY/825

Wood Betony

Betonica officinalis

TRADE NAMES
Wood Betony Herb Liqui

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the herb, including
the basal leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are crimson and labiate in
terminal, spike-like, irregular formation. The calyx, with 5
even, triangular tips, has long ciliate hairs and is shorter than
the corolla tube. The corolla is curled downward, and the
white tube has no ring of hair. The upper lip is erect, and the
lower lip is 3-lobed .with a broad middle lobe. There are 4
stamens.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to a height of about
30 to 100 cm. The stem is erect, unbranched, quadrangular,
bristly-haired and usually only has 2 distal pairs of leaves.
The basal leaves are rosette-like. The leaves are elongate-
ovate with a cordate base and crenate. The lower ones are
larger and long-petioled, and the upper ones are smaller and
shorter.

Habitat: The plant grows in Europe.

Production: Wood Betony is the flowering plant of Betonica
officinalis collected from June to August at flowering time.
The herb, including the basal leaves, is collected and dried in
the shade at a maximum temperature of 40° C.

Not to be Confused With: Stachys alpina
Other Names: Betony, Bishopswort

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Betaine: including betonicine [(-)-oxystachydrine), (-)- sta-
chydrine), ((+)oxystachydrinej

Caffeic acid derivatives: including chlorogenic acid, isochlo-
rogenic acid, rosemary acid iridoid glycosides

Diterpene lactone
Iridoids: iridoid glycosides, including harpagide
Flavonoids

EFFECTS
The drug is said to act as a tranquilizer, a disinfectant and an
glycosides with hypotensive

astringent. It contains

characteristics.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wood Betony is an astringent. As an
expectorant, it is used for coughs, bronchitis and asthma. It is

----- PAGE 1075 -----
826/WOOD BETONY

contained in combination preparations as a sedative and for
the treatment of neuralgia and anxiety. In folk medicine, it is
used as an antidiarrheal agent, a carmative, and a sedative,
and for catarrh, lung catarrh, heartburn, gout, nervousness,
bladder and kidney stones, and inflammation of the bladder.

Homeopathic Uses: Betonica officinalis is used in homeopa-
thy for asthma and general states of debility.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The herb is used topically, as an
extract and an infusion. The fresh leaves are also used.

Daily Dosage: The infusion can be taken daily. The total
daily dosage of the powder is 1 to 2 gm, to be taken in 3
separate doses. The fresh leaves may be boiled and used for
wounds and swelling.

LITERATURE
Hoppe HA, (1975-1987) Drogenkunde. 8. Aufl, Bde 1-3. W.
de Gruyter Verlag, Berlin, New York.

Kem W, List PH. Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Wood Sage

Teucrium scorodonia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the herb, the fresh
aerial parts of the flowering plant and the whole flowering
plant.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are approximately 1 cm long,
pale yellow or greenish-yellow. They are solitary or in pairs
on short pedicles in one-side-inclined, terminal racemes. The
calyx of the labiate flower is tubular-campanulate and
bilabiate with an undivided upper and a 4-tipped lower lip.
The stamens are pubescent and the anthers are violet. The
nutlet is round, about 2mm long, and almost smooth.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is erect, 30 to 60 cm high
and has far-reaching runners. The stem is erect, paniculate-
branched above, quadrangular and soft-pubescent. The
leaves are petiolate, opposite, wrinkled, ovate or oblong,
unevenly crenate and have a shallowly cordate base.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Characteristics: The plant smells faintly of leeks when being
dried.

Habitat: The plant is common to large parts of western and
central Europe including the Mediterranean region. It is
rarely found in eastern Europe and Scandinavia but it has
naturalized there.

Production: Wood Sage is the aerial part of Teucrium
scorodonia.

Other Names: Ambroise, Garlic Sage, Hind Heal, Large-
Leaved Germander

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.3%): containing among others, alloaromaden-
drene, aristolene, beta-caryophyllene, alpha-caryophyllene
(humulene), spathulenone, caryophyllene epoxide

IriVoide monoterpenes: including among others, acetyl
harpagide, reptoside
Diterpenes: the spectrum varies greatly according to strain,

including among others teuscorodal, teuscorodin, teuscoro-
dol, teuscorodonin, teuflin, teuscorolide, teupolin I

Flavonoids: including among others, cirsiliol, cirsimaritin,
luteolin

EFFECTS
The expectorant effect attributed to the drug may be due to
the amaroids and the essential oil. See other Teucrium
species for the toxic effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wood Sage is used for the treatment of
tuberculosis, chronic bronchial catarrh, inflammation of
mucous membranes of the nose and throat, spasms, hyper-
tension, wounds and liver disorders.

Homeopathic Uses: The herb is used for chronic inflamma-
tion of the respiratory tract.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. °

DOSAGE

Mode of Administration: Wood Sage is obsolete as a drug in
most countries, but it can be found as cut drug in capsules
and drops.

Preparation: To treat bronchitis, a tea is made using 2

teaspoons of herb per cup.

LITERATURE
Bruno M et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(11):2597.

Fikenscher LH, Hegnauer R, Plant Med Phytother 3(3): 183.

----- PAGE 1076 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Marco JL et al., Phytochemistry 21(10):2567.

Marco JL et al., PH 21:2567. 1982.

Marco JL et al., PH 22:727-731. 1983.

Velasco-Negueruela A et al., PH 29:1165-1169. 1990.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wood Sorrel

Oxalis acetosella

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh flowering
plant with the root.

Flower and Fruit: The solitary flower is white or reddish-
white and red-veined with yellow spots. The pedicle is
longer than the leaves. There are 5 sepals and 5 petals, 10
stamens and | ovary with 5 styles. The fruit is an ovate
capsule. It is pentangular, tearing open in long slits when
ripe, thus freeing the seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant grows to a height of
between 5 and 12 cm tall. The leaves are basal, tender, long-
petioled and trifoliate. The leaflets are broad, obovate-
cordate, downy and often tinged red underneath. The stem is
leafless apart from bracts above the middle, which are fused
at the base.

Characteristics: The plant has a pleasant, rather sour odor.

Habitat: The plant is commonly found in woods and forests
throughout Europe.

Production: Wood Sorrel is the aerial part of Oxalis
acetosella, which is harvested while the plant is in blossom.

Other Names: Cuckoo Bread, Cuckowes Meat, Fairy Bells,
Green Sauce, Hallelujah, Shamrock, Sour Trefoil, Stickwort,
Stubwort, Surelle, Three-Leaved Grass, Wood Sour

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Oxalic acid (0.3-1.25%): especially present as potassium salt

EFFECTS
The drug, including the green parts of the plant, contains
clover acid that, in small amounts, affects gallbladder

WORMSEED/827

activity by acting as a diuretic. The fresh plant provides a
substantial source of vitamin C.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Wood Sorrel is no longer used as a remedy,
but previously was used for liver and digestive disorders.
Also, in the past, the fresh leaves were used to treat scurvy,
wounds and inflammation of the gums.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

OVERDOSAGE
Oxalic acid poisonings could occur only through the
ingestion of very large quantities of the leaves, for example
as in salad. The poisonings mentioned in older scientific
literature seem dubious.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Ground and as an extract. Wood
Sorrel is no longer used as a remedy.

LITERATURE
Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen. Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Tosto DS, Hopp HE, Sequence analysis of the 5.8S ribosomal
DNA and internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) from
five species of the Oxalis tuberosa alliance. DNA Seq, 6:361-4,
1996.

Tschesche R, Struckmeyer K, (1976) Chem Ber. 109:2901.

Wormseed
Artemisia cina

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are closed flower-

buds, that have not yet blossomed.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flower heads are about 2
mm long with a diameter of 15 mm. They are ovoid and
greenish-yellow when fresh, later brownish-green. They
contain tiiree to five minute, tubular, androgynous florets
with a slim, cylindrical and glabrous receptacle. The
epicalyces have numerous oblong-obtuse, imbricate scales.

----- PAGE 1077 -----
828 /WORMSEED

Leaves, Stem and Root: Artemisia cina is an evergreen,
perennial semi-shrub, 30 to 60 cm high with many slim
sprouting stems. The gnarled rhizome produces numerous
leaf and flower branches. The stems are smooth and woody
and the leaves pinnatifid on the non-flowering branches. The
leaves on the flowering branches are small and entire-
margined.

Characteristics: The odor is aromatic and the taste bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Iran, Turkestan and the
Kirghizin Steppes around Buchara.

Production: Wormwood flowers are the inflorescent buds of
Artemisia cina (occasionally incorrectly called Wormseed),
which are cultivated and gathered in the wild.

Not to be Confused With: Refined mustard flour
Other Names: Levant, Santonica, Sea Wormwood

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Sesquiterpene lactones: especially alpha-santonin, in addi-
tion to artemisin and beta-santonin

EFFECTS

The anthelmintic and antipyretic effect of the drug can be
attributed to its alpha-santonin content. The drug acts as a
vermifuge action for ascarids, including intestinal parasitic
worms, whose muscles are paralyzed by the santonin. The
worms are then forced into the large intestine where they are
removed by means of a laxative. In rats, the rectal
temperature was lowered during fevers that had been
induced by brewer's yeast injections. This leads to the
speculation that santonin effects body temperature in a
similar manner to dopamine.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for ascarid and oxyuris

infestations.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include fevers,
tendency to convulsions and worms.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Even with the therapeutic dose there is a danger of
poisoning. Side effects may resemble those of the alpha-
santonins: kidney irritation, gastroenteritis, stupor, visual
disorders (xanthopsia), muscle twitching and epileptiform
spasms. Administration in allopathic dosages is to be
avoided.

OVERDOSAGE
Deadly poisonings following the intake of less than 10 g of

the drug are known.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Preparation: Wormwood is considered completely obsolete
as a drug, occasionally available as a powder for use when
more modern antithelmintic agents fail. Symptoms of
poisoning are possible even in therapeutic dosages.

Daily Dosage: The drug is always used in combination with
a laxative. The average single dose is 0.025 g for adults. For
children, take the child's age in years, and double this
amount in milligrams of the drug. According to the Austrian
pharmacopoeia, the single dose is 1 to 2 g. The powder is
administered in the morning and followed later by castor oil
or sodium sulfate. The remedy is repeated on the following
day.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops, 1 tablet, 5 to 10
globules, | to 3 times a day or | ml injection solution twice
weekly sc (HAB34).

LITERATURE

Frohne D, Pfander HJ: Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl, Wiss.
Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wormseed Oil

Chenopodium ambrosioides

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The plant's medicinal parts are the seeds
and the herb, including the flowers.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous small flowers are yellow-
ish-green and form small racemes or roundish spikes in the
axils of the apical leaves. The calyx is divided into 5; the
lobes are ovate and pointed. There are 5 stamens. The ovary
has small, oblong, stemmed glands at the tip. The angular
fruit is enclosed in the calyx. The small seeds are achaenes,
smooth and black.

----- PAGE 1078 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual that grows to
about 1 m in height with a branched, reddish stem. The stem
is covered in alternate-linear to lanceolate leaves.

Characteristics: The whole plant gives off a pleasant
fragrance. The oil is dangerously explosive.

Habitat: Wormseed originated in Mexico and South America
but has spread to the eastern U.S.

Production: Wormseed Oil is the seed oil of Chenopodium
ambrosioides.

Other Names- Mexican Tea, American Wormseed, Jesuit's
Tea

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Ascaridiole (chief constituent - up to 80%): including,
according to variety and breed, p-cymene, L-pinocarvone,
alpha-pinenes and/or alpha-terpenes, limonene. The combi-
nation creates a volatile, explosive oil.

EFFECTS
Wormseed Oil acts as an anthelmintic that causes flight and
defensive reactions in worms. This is due to the main
constituent of the terpene fraction, which is ascaridole, a
monoterpene. This constituent is highly toxic.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Although considered obsolete as a drug,
Wormseed Oil is used against roundworms and hookworms,
if other, more modern anthelmintic drugs fail. The leaves and
seeds have long been used in South American medicine as a
vermifuge, stimulant, anti-asthmatic and abortifacient for
cramps, paralysis and asthmatic complaints.

Chinese Medicine: The Chinese have used Wormseed Oil for
rheumatism of the joints, metrorrhagia, eczema and bites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

Even the administration of therapeutic dosages can lead to
disorders of the central nervous system, including spasms,
signs of paralysis, Pachymeningitis haemorrhagica. Damage
to the Nervus cochlearis is frequent, leading to buzzing in the
ears and hearing impairment (sometimes lasting for years).
In addition, the oil is dangerously explosive.

OVERDOSAGE

Cases of death have been observed following intake of 10
mg of the oil by adults, and much less for children. For that
reason, an administration in allopathic dosages is to be
avoided.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Wormseed Oil is obsolete as a
drug. In clinically described cases, which are exceptional, it

WORMWOOD/829

can be used in combination with a fast-acting and powerful
purgative.

Daily Dosage: Typical adult daily dosage is 20 drops taken
in the morning on an empty stomach. Two hours later, a
purgative is taken. Pediatric dosage is two single doses of
drops taken one hour apart. Each dose has one drop per year
of the child's age.

LITERATURE
Bombardelli E et al., (1976) Fitoterapia 47:3.

Chan, EH et al., (Eds), Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research, World Scientific Pub. Co. Singapore 1985.

Gupta OS, Behari M, (1972) J Ind Chem Soc 49:317.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wormwood

Artemisia absinthium

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the aerial shoots
and leaves of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The numerous flower heads are short-
stemmed and hang in a many-flowered panicle. The capitula
are small, globular, inclined and nearly as long as their 3 to 4
mm width. The bracts are gray, silky-pubescent witii a
rounded tip. The outer bracts are linear-oblong and pubes-
cent, while the inner ones are ovate, obtuse, broad and have a
transparent, membranous margin. The receptacle is rough-
haired. The flowers are yellow and fertile. The disc florets
are androgynous; the ray florets are female with an extending
style stem. The fruit is about 1.5 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: This semi-shrub grows from 60 to
120 cm in height with a woody, hardy rosette and a high-
branch bearing stem. The stem is usually erect and leafy. The
alternate, long-petioled leaves are silky pubescent on both
sides. The lower leaves are abrupt pinnate and the upper ones
simple. The leaf tips are lanceolate to linear-lanceolate,
obtuse to acuminate and 2 to 3 mm wide.

Characteristics: The plant has an aromatic odor and a very
bitter taste.

----- PAGE 1079 -----
830 /WORMWOOD

Habitat: Wormwood grows in Europe, northern Africa, parts
of Asia, and North and South America.

Production: Wormwood consists of the fresh or dried upper
shoots and leaves, the fresh or dried basal leaves, or a
mixture of the aerial plant parts from Artemisia absinthium,
that is harvested during flowering season from cultivated or
wild plants.

Other Names: Green Ginger, Absinthe

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil: with a high level (varies a great deal among
different strains) of (+)-thujone, cis-epoxy ocimene. trans-
sabinyl acetate or chrysanthenyl acetate

Sesquiterpene bitter principles: including absinthine, anab-
sinthine, artabsine and matricine

EFFECTS
The cholagogic, digestive, appetite-stimulating and wound-
healing effects ascribed to the drug are attributed to the
essential oils and amaroids. A significant increase of alpha-
amylase, liapse, bilirubin and cholesterol has been observed
during the 70 to 100 minutes during which patients with liver
disorders were given a suspension of 20 mg extract in 10 ml
water via a duodenal probe. In rabbits, fever induced through
yeast injection was reduced by using an esophageal probe to
administer diverse fractions of the drug. In vitro, a watery
extract of the whole drug is supposed to retard the growth of
Plasmodium falciparum. The essential oil of the drug may
possess an antimicrobial effect. The drug also stimulates the
bitter receptors in the taste buds of the tongue. When bitter
agents are introduced into the mouth, they trigger a reflexive
increase of stomach secretion with higher acid concentration.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Loss of appetite
+ Dyspeptic complaints
* Liver and gallbladder complaints

Unproven Uses: In folk medicine, wormwood preparations
are used internally for gastric insufficiency, intestinal atonia,
gastritis, stomachache, liver disorders, bloating, anemia,
irregular menstruation, intermittent fever, loss of appetite
and worm infestation. Externally, the drug is applied for
poorly healing wounds, ulcers, skin blotches and insect bites.
Efficacy in the above-mentioned popular uses is insufficient-
ly documented.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Due to the drug's thujone content, the internal
administration of large doses can lead to vomiting, stomach
and intestinal cramps, headache, dizziness and disturbances

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

of the central nervous system. Continuous use is not
advisable. The use of volatile oils and spirituous extracts
from the drug for the manufacture of alcoholic drinks is
forbidden in many countries because of possible injuries to
health.

Drug Interactions: The thujone componant may lower the
seizure threshold. Caution must be exercised when adminis-
tering this herb to patients that have a predisposition to
seizures. Drugs that are used to control seizures may have
decreased effectiveness. Wormwood preparations should not
be administered in conjunction with drugs that are known to
lower the seizure threshold.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted herb is used for
infusions and decoctions. Powdered herb, extracts and
tinctures in liquid or solid forms are used for oral administra-
tion. Combination with other bitters or aromatics is common.

Preparation: To prepare an infusion, pour 150 ml boiling
water over 1/2 teaspoonful of the drug, strain after 10
minutes. A decoction is prepared by adding | handful of
drug to 1 liter of boiling water for 5 minutes. To prepare a
tea, use 1 g drug in | cup water.

Daily Dose: The total daily dose is 3 to 5 g of the herb as an
aqueous extract. Internal dose of the infusion is 1 cup freshly
prepared tea taken 30 minutes before each meal. The tincture
dosage is 10 to 30 drops in sufficient water taken 3 times
daily. The liquid extract dosage is 1 to 2 ml taken 3 times
daily.

Externally, a decoction is used for healing of wounds and
insect bites.

Storage: Wormwood must be kept in sealed containers and
protected from light.

LITERATURE
Akhmedov IS et al., (1970) Khim Prir Soedin 6:691.

Akhmedov IS et al., (Artabin, a new lactone from Artemisia
absinthium). In: Khim Prid Soed 5:622. 1970.

Baumann IC et al., (1975) Z Allg Med 51 (17):784.
Beauhaire J et al, (1981) Tetrahedron Letters 22 (24):2269.
Beauhaire J, Fourrey JL, (1982) J Chem Soc Perk Trans: 861.
Del Castillo J et al., (1975) Nature 253:365.

Dermanovic S et al., (1976): 87.

Greger H, Hofer O, New unsymmetrically substituted
tetrahydrofuran lignans fiom Artemisia absinthium. In:
Tetrahedron 36(24):3551. 1980.

Greger H, (1978) Phytochemistry 17:806.

Hoflinan B, Herrmann K, (1982) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 174
(3):211.

----- PAGE 1080 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Kasimov Ah Z et al., (Anabsin-a new diguaianolide from
Artemisia absinthium). In: Khim Prid Soed 4:495. 1979.
Kasymov SZ et al., (1979) Khim Prir Soed 5:658.

Kennedy Al et al.. Volatile oils from normal and transformed
roots of Artemisia absinthium. In: PH 32:1449. 1993.
Kinloch JD, (1971) Practitioner 206:44.
Lemberkovics E et al., Some phytochemical characteristics of
essential oil of Artemisia absinthium L. In: Herba hung
21(3): 197-215. 1982.
Maries RJ. Kaminski J, Arnason JT. Pazos-Sanou L, Heptinstall
S, Fischer NH. Crompton CW, Kindack DG, A bioassay for
inhibition of serotonin release from bovine platelets. In: JNP
55:1044-1056. 1992.

Rucker G, Manns D. Wilbert S. Peroxides as constituents of
plants. 10. Homoditerpene peroxides from Artemisia-absinthium.
In: PH:31(0:340. 1992.

Schneider Von G. Mielke B. (1979) Deutsch Apoth Ztg 119
(25):977.

Stahl E. Gerard D. (1983) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 176 (1):1.
Swiatek L, Dombrowicz E. (1984) Farm Pol 40 (2):729.
Vostrowski O et al., (1981) Z NaturForsch (C) 36 (5/6):369.

Vostrowski O et al., Uber die Komponenten des atherischen Ols
aus Artemisia absinthium L.. In: Z Naturforsch 36(5/6):369.
1981.

Zafar MM, Hamdard ME. Hameed A, Screening of Artemisia
absinthium for antimalarial effects on Plasmodium berghei in
mice: Preliminary report. In: ETH 30(2):223. 1990.

Zakirov SK et al.. (1976) Khim Prir Soedin 4:548.

Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch .der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl.. Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schulz R, Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.
Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
harmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
flanzliche Homoopathika. Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

WORMWOOD GRASS /831

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wormwood Grass
Spigelia anthelmia

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The whole fresh plant, the juice prepared
the dried leaves are used

from the fresh plant and

medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are terminal or
axillary, 5 to 12 cm long spikes turned to one side. They are
often involute. The flowers in the axils of the bracts are
sessile. The flowers are radial and their structures are in
fives. The sepals are free, linear-lanceolate and 2 to 5 mm
long. The 5 petals are fused with a 6.5 to 15 mm long, lilac,
pink or white, funnel-shaped corolla. There are 5 stamens
and a 2-chambered ovary. The fruit is a capsule approxi-
mately 5 mm long and 5 mm wide. The seeds are 2 to 3 mm

long, elliptical or ovoid, dark brown and warty.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The herb grows upright to a height
of up to 60 cm. The leaves are opposite and, because of short
internodes, appear to be in whorls. They are 4 to 18 cm long,
2 to 6 cm wide, very short petiolate, simple, entire, ovate-
lanceolate to elongate-ovate and long acuminate. The
stipules are fused, membranous, broad and triangular. The
leafless, usually

stem and lateral branches are almost

terminating in a 4-leafed whorl.

Habitat: Spigelia anthelmia is indigenous to North, Central
and South America.

Production: Wormwood Grass herb is the dried aerial part of
Spigelia anthelmia, wh'ch is collected in the wild and
cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions of America.

Other Names: Annual Wormwood Grass, American Worm-
wood Grass, Pink Root, Demerara Pinkroot

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS
Flavonoids: including hyperoside, quercetin-di-O-glucoside,

quercetin-O-rhamnoglucoside

Phenol carboxylic acids: vanillic acid, dihydroxy benzoic

acid, caffeic acid

Caffeic acid derivatives: chlorogenic acid

Amines: isoquinoline

Monoterpene alkaloids: actinidine

----- PAGE 1081 -----
832 /WORMWOOD GRASS

EFFECTS
The choline esters contained in the drug are possibly
hypertensive in effect. Depending upon the dosage level,
isoquinoline is positively inotropic in effect on isolated
gerbil hearts. The experimental results in this area require
further testing. The vermifugal action mechanism credited to
the drug has not yet been proven. The isoquinoline found in
the drug is not present at levels required for protoplasma-
destroying effect.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Traditional folk medicine has included use
for worm infestation.

Homeopathic Uses: Homeopathic uses include angina pecto-
ris, neuralgia and headache, acute carditis and worm
infestation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: The drug is considered to be severely poisonous.
Animal poisonings were described in older literature sources,
as was deliberate use to poison humans. The toxin is said to
be a non-volatile alkaloid. Human consumption of large
quantities of the drug is said to lead to vomiting, myositis,
dyspnea and spasms.

Homeopathic Precautions: No health hazards are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
homeopathic dosages.

DOSAGE

How Supplied: Whole and cut drug.
Daily Dosage: The literature has no information.

LITERATURE

Achenbach H, H bner H, Vierling W, Brandt W, Reiter M,
Spiganthine, the cardioactive principle of Spigelia anthelmia. J
Nat Prod, 58:1092-6, 1995 Jul.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Ed), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. AufL, Bde 4-6
(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Wagner H, Seegert K, Gupta MP, Avella ME, Solis P,
Cardiotonic active principles fiom Spigelia anthelmia. Planta
Med, 378-81, 1986 Oct.

Woundwort

Stachys palustris

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh and dried

herb.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Flower and Fruit: The closely sessile flowers have very
small bracteoles. They are arranged in false whorls of 6
florets joined in groups of 10 to 20 into a spike. The calyx is
tubular-campanulate, violet-tinged with awned tips. The
corolla is dull violet and the style pink. The nutlet is
globular, 2 mm long, lightly striped and glossy dark brown.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial, with long
runners and barrel-like white swellings between the nodes.
The shoots are usually loose and have partly appressed,
partly patent silky hairs. They are pubescent or almost
glabrous and almost odorless. The stems are erect or
ascendent from the ground, 30 to 60 cm high, simple or
branched, tough, usually with pubescent edges. The inter-
nodes are 2 to 10 cm long. The leaves are sessile or very
short-petioled, usually clasping, ribbed, matte green and
loosely appressed pubescent on both surfaces.

Habitat: The plant is common in Europe.

Production: Woundwort is the aerial part of Stachys
palustris or Stachys sylvatica.

Not to be Confused With: S. palustris is Marsh Woundwort
and S. sylvatica is Hedge Woundwort. Several other plants
have the name Woundwort, among them, Prunella vulgaris
and Achillea millefolium.

Other Names: Marsh Stachys

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes

Betaines: (-)- and (+)stachydrine
Flavonoids: including among others palu“trin

EFFECTS
Woundwort is said to be a disinfectant, an antispasmodic and
a cure for wounds.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The herb is used externally for the treatment
of wounds and internally for abdominal pain, cramps,
dizziness, fever, gout and menstrual disorders.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an extract or poultice for
external application.

LITERATURE
Barberan FAT, (1986) Fitoterapia 57(2):67.

----- PAGE 1082 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11:
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Kooiman P, (1972) Acta Bot Need. 21(4):417.

Miller FM, Chow LM, (1954) J Am Chem Soc 76:1353

Xysmalobium undulatum

See Uzara

Yage
Banisteriopsis caapi

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence is multi-flowered. The
flowers are 10 to 15 mm wide with pale pink petals. Their
structures are arranged in fives. The fruit, which resembles
that of the maple, is up to 4 mm long and 0.4 mm wide. Each
of the 3 schizocarps has an 18 to 42 mm long and 8 to 22
mm wide wing.

Leaves and Stem: Banisteriopsis caapi is a hardy tree. The
leaves are opposite, 8 to 18 cm long, 3.5 to 8 cm wide, ovate
and entire. The stem is woody with a brown, smooth bark.

Habitat: The plant is native to jungle areas of the Amazon
basin.

Production: Yage bark is the dried or fresh trunk bark of
Banisteriopsis caapi.

Other Names: Ayahuasca, Vine of the Souls

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids (beta-carboline type): particularly harmine
(0.5 to 5.9%), harmaline (0.5 to 3.8%), tetrahydroharmine
(0.3 to 3.3%), harmol (0.05 to 1.2%), harmalol (up to 0.4%)

Pyridine alkaloids: shinunine, dihydroshinunine

EFFECTS
The alkaloid-containing drug is psychotropic and hallucino-
genic in effect, due to the harmine and harmaline it contains
(pronounced MAO-inhibition in vitro and in animal experi-
ments). Lower dosages bring on euphoric states in humans,
while higher dosages have hallucinogenic effects.

YARROW /833

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The plant contains psychoactive substances,
which intensify dreams and experiences.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

The drug is not in medicinal use. Extracts of the drug
(ayahuasca, 5 mg alkaloids/ml), ingested orally in low doses,
have hallucinogenic and euphoric effects. These effects are
primarily due to monoamine oxidase inhibition; later the
effect becomes sedative.

OVERDOSAGE

The intake of higher dosages (corresponding to levels
starting at approximately 0.3 gm alkaloids) leads to vomit-
ing, nausea, ringing of the ears and tendency to collapse.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Fresh or dried herb powder and
liquid preparations for internal use.

Preparation: The fresh or dried cut bark is macerated for
several hours resulting in a bitter syrup, which is then
consumed in small amounts. In addition, some of the bark is
pulverized, mixed with water and then consumed in larger
amounts. The juice can be kept for up to 6 months in tightly
sealed containers.

LITERATURE
McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott F, Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors in South American hallucinogenic plants: tryptamine
and beta-carboline constituents of ayahuasca. J Ethnopharmacol,
10:195-223, 1984 Apr.

McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott F, Relationship between
occurrence of tremor/convulsion and level of beta-carbolines in
the brain after administration of beta-carbolines into mice.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav, 10:-SO-,-SI-.

McKenna DJ, Towers GH, Abbott F, Ritual and medicinal
plants of the Ese'ejas of the Amazonian rainforest (Madre de
Dios, Peru). J Ethnopharmacol, 10:45-51, 1996 May.

Yarrow
Achillea millefolium

TRADE NAMES
Yarrow Flowers, Yarrow Extract, Alcohol-Free Yarrow

Flowers

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The dried flower clusters and above-ground
parts of the herb are used medicinally.

Flower and Fruit: The plant has white, pink or purple
composite flowers in dense cymes with small capitula. The
bracts are imbricate, long, thorn-tipped and taper to a point.
There are 5 white female florets. The disc florets are tubular,

----- PAGE 1083 -----
834/YARROW

yellowish-white and androgynous. The fruit is 1.5 to 2 mm
long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Achillea millefolium are 0.1 to 1.5 m
high plants with hardy, horizontal rhizomes, which grow
from underground runners. The stem is simple, erect and
hairy. The leaves are lanceolate and multi-pinnate with short
acute tips.

Habitat: The numerous subspecies of the Achillea millefoli-
um group are found in various regions. They mainly grow in
regions of eastern, southeastern and central Europe, as well
as on the southern edge of the Alps from Switzerland to the
Balkans.

Production: Yarrow herb consists of the fresh or dried,
above-ground parts of Achillea millefolium, harvested at
flowering season. Yarrow flower consists of the dried
inflorescence of Achillea millefolium.

Other Names: Band Man's Plaything, Bloodwort, Carpen-
ter's Weed, Devil's Nettle, Devil's Playtning, Milfoil, Nose
Bleed, Old Man's Pepper, Sanguinary, Soldier's Wound-
wort, Staunchweed, Thousand Weed, Yarroway, Thousand
Seal, Noble Yarrow, Knight's Milfoil

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (0.2-1.0%): chief components (rendered through
steam distillation) are chamazulene (blue, 6-19%, maximum
40%), camphor (up to 20%), beta-pinene (up to 23%), 1,8-
cineole (up to 10%), caryophyllene (up to 10%), alpha-
pinene (up to 5%), isoartemisiaketon (up to 8%). The
composition depends greatly on the variety, and the volatile
oil of some strains is free of chamazulene.

Sesquiterpene lactones: Mainly guaianolides including,
achillicin, 8-alpha-angeloyloxy-10-epi-artabsin, 2,3-dihydro-
desacetoxy-matricin, alpha-peroxyachifolide. There are also
germacranolides such as millefoild and 3-oxaguaianolides.
Some sesquiterpenes are transformed through steam distilla-
tion into chamazulene (proazulenes).

Polyynes: including pontica epoxide

Alkamids: including _ tetradeca-4,6-diin-10,12-dien acetyl

isobutylamides

Flavonoids: including apigenine-7-O-glucoside, luteolin-7-
O-glucoside, rutin

Betaine: including L-stachydrine, _L-hydrostachydrine

(betonicine)

EFFECTS
The herb has a cholagogue (stimulates the flow of bile)
effect due to the guaianolide and germacranolide content.
The flavonoid content exerts a spasmolytic effect, while the

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

proazulene fraction has an anti-edema and anti-inflammatory
effect. The effect probably results from the interaction of
various structured bonds with the chamazulene and flavo-
noids. The plant has similar effects to those observed in
Chamomile flowers, since some of their components are
identical.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Approved by Commission E:

+ Loss of appetite
+ Dyspeptic complaints
¢ Liver and gallbladder complaints

Unproven Uses: Externally, the herb is used as a sitz bath for
painful, cramp-like conditions of psychosomatic origin in the
lower part of the female pelvis. Yarrow is also used
externally as a palliative treatment for liver disorders and for
the healing of wounds. In folk medicine, it is used for
bleeding hemorrhoids, menstrual complaints, and as a bath
for the removal of perspiration. It is contained in other
cholagogic preparations and biliary tract therapeutic agents.
It is also used as an adjuvant in preparations for many other
indications such as laxatives, cough treatments, gynecologi-
cal agents, cardiac agents and preparations for varicose
veins.

Homeopathic Uses: Achillea millefolium is used in varicose
veins, arterial bleeding, convulsions.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications include allergy to Yarrow and other

composites.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic
dosages. The drug possesses a weak to medium-severe
potential for sensitization resulting in contact dermatitis. The
main compound responsible for the sensitization is a
sespuiterpene lactone, alpha-peroxyachfolid (Hausen, 1991;
Rucker, 1991).

Pregnancy. The drug is not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
How Supplied:
Capsules — 340mg, 350 mg

Liquid’— 1:1, 250 mg/ml

Mode of Administration: As a comminuted drug for teas and
other galenical preparations for internal use and for sitz
baths. The pressed juice of fresh plants is used internally.
The drug is contained in standardized preparations of
cholagogic and gallbladder therapeutics and as an adjunct in
many other preparations, such as laxatives, antitussives,

----- PAGE 1084 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

gynecological products, cardiac remedies and preparations
for varicose veins.

Preparation: To make a tea, place 2 gm of finely cut drug in
boiling water, cover, leave to steep for 10 to 15 minutes, and
then strain. For sitz baths, use 100 gm Yarrow per 20 liters
of water.

Daily Dosage:

Infusion — 4.5 gm Yarrow herb or 3 gm Yarrow flowers.

Tea — A cup of freshly made tea to be drunk 3 to 4 times
daily between meals.

External application — 100 gm Yarrow to be drawn in 1 to 2
liter of water for 20 minutes and added to the bath water.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 to 10 drops 1 to 3 times daily; 1
tablet or 5 to 10 globules: injection solution 1 ml 1/week sc
(HAB1).

Storage: The herb must be protected from light and
moisture. The essential oil should not be stored in synthetic
containers.
LITERATURE

Chandler RF et al.. (1982) Econ Bot 36 (2): 203.
Cuong BN et al.. (1979) Phytochemistry 18: 331.

Czygan FC, Das atherische 01 der Schafgarbe. In: DAZ
134(3):228. 1994.

Czygan FC, Schafgarbe: Alte Heilpflanze neu untersucht. In: PZ
139(6):439. 1994.

Falk AJ et al.. (1974) Lloydia 37: 598.
Falk AJ et al., (1975) J Pharm Sci 64: 1838.

Kastner U et al., Anti-edematous activity of sesquiterepene
jactones from different taxa of the Achillea millefolium group.
In: PM 59(7)69. 1993.

Kastner U, Glasl S, Jurenitsch J, Achillea millefolium - ein
Gallentherapeuticum. In: ZPT 16(1):34-36. 1995.

Kastner U, Glasl S, Jurentisch J, Kubelka W, Isolation and
structure elucidation of the main proazulenes of the cultivar
Achillea collina "Proa". In: PM 58(7)18. 1992.

Kastner U,, Jurenitsch J, Lehner S, Baumann A, Robien W,
Kubelka W, The major proazulenes from Achillea collina
BECKER: a revision of structure. In: Pharm Pharmacol Letters
1(1):27. 1991.

Miiller-Jakic B et al., In Vitro inhibition of cyclooxygenase and
5-lipoxygenase by alkamides from Echinacea and Achillea
species. In: PM 60:37. 1994.

Ochir G, Budesinsky M, Mod O, 3-Oxa-guaianolides from
Achillea-millefolium. In: PH 30(12):4163. 1991.

Orth M, van den Berg T, Czygan FC, Die Schafgarbe -
Achillea millefolium L. In: ZPT 15(3): 176-182. 1994.

YELLOW DOCK/835

Schmidt M, Phytotherapie: Pflanzliche Gallenwegstherapeutika.
In: DAZ 135(8):680-682. 1995.

Smolenski SJ et al.. (1967) Lloydia 30: 144.
Verzar-Petri G et al.. (1979) Herba Hung. 18 (2): 83.
Further information in:

Hansel R. Keller K. Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 5. Aufl.. Bde 4-6
(Drogen). Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg. New York, 1992-
1994.

Hausen B, Allergiepflanzen, Pflanzenallergene. ecomed
Verlagsgesellsch. mbH. Landsberg 1988.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel. Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R. Hansel R. Rationale Phytotherapie. Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

Steinegger E. Hansel R, Pharmakognosie. 5. Aufl.. Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H. Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag. Stuttgart. Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.). Teedrogen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Yellow Dock

Rumex crispus

TRADE NAMES

Yellow Dock (available from a number of manufacturers),
Yellowdock, Alcohol Free Yellow Dock, Yellow Dock Root,
Wild Countryside Yellow Dock Root

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh and dried

roots.

Flower and Fruit: The green androgynous flowers are in
panicles. The inner tips of the perigone are entire-margined,
orbicular or ovate. When the fruit ripens they are slightly
longer than wide. Otherwise die flower is the same as R.
acetosa in that there is a 6-tepalled perigone. The inner tepals
are longer than the outer ones and grow closer together.
When the fruit ripens they are usually red-tinged, membra-
nous, entire-margined and have a downward curved, scale-
like welt at the base. The outer 3 tips are revolute. There are
6 stamens and 3 styles with paintbrush-like stigmas. The

----- PAGE 1085 -----
836/YELLOW DOCK

fruit is a triangular, brown-black nut, which is enclosed by
the wing-like enlarged inner tepal.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is about 100 cm high and
has a carrot-like rhizome. The roots are 20 to 30 cm long,
about 1.25 cm thick, fleshy and are not usually branched.
The roots are rusty brown on the outside, whitish on the
inside and have a relatively thick bark. The stems are
angular, grooved and usually branched from the base up. The
lower leaves are large and have flat petioles. They are
supported at the base or almost cordate, lanceolate acute,
undate-curly at the margins and alternate. The upper leaves
are smaller and narrow-lanceolate.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe and Africa, but
grows wild in many regions of the world.

Production: Yellow Dock root is the fresh root harvested in
spring from Rumex acetosa.

Other Names: Curled Dock

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Oxalates: oxalic acid, calcium oxalate

Tannins (3-6%)
Flavonoids: including among others, quercitrin

Anthracene derivatives (0.9-2.5%): anthranoids, aglycones
physcion, chryosphanol, emodin, aloe-emodin, rhein, their
glucosides

Naphthalene derivatives: neopodin 8-glucoside, lapodin

EFFECTS
No documentation is available, but laxative, alterative and
mildly tonic characteristics have been attributed to Rumex

crispus.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Yeliow Dock is used for acute and chronic
inflammation of the nasal passages and respiratory tract. It is
also used as an adjuvant in antibacterial therapy. The plant
has traditionally been used like the Red Dock (R. aquatica)
for its similar properties, in decoctions for scurvy and other
skin_eruptions, and as a ‘blood cleanser.' It is also used as an
astringent for hemorrhoids and pulmonary bleeding. It has
been used as a remedy for jaundice and a tonic for the
stomach.

Homeopathic Uses: Uses in homeopathy include inflamma-
tion of the mucous membranes of the respiratory tract,
asthmatic conditions, tracheal cough and morning diarrhea.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

dosages. However, mucus membrane irritation, accompanied
by vomiting is possible following intake of the fresh
rhizome, due to its anthrone content. The anthrones are
oxidized to anthraquinones after dehydration and storage.

OVERDOSAGE

Oxalate poisonings are conceivable primarily with the
consumption of numerous leaves eaten as salad. One case of
death following consumption ofa soup made from the leaves
of the curled Yellow Dock has been described (see Frohne).

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Preparations are available in ground
form or as an extract.

How Supplied:
Capsules — 500 mg, 505 mg

Liquid LT

LITERATURE

Fairbairn JW, El Muhtadi FJ, (1972) Phytochemistry 11:263.
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Granar K, Rada K, Farmaceut Obzor 47:195. 1978

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl, Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Midiwo JO, Runkunga GM, (1985) Phytochemistry 24(6): 1390.
Morton JF, An Atlas of Medicinal Plants of Middle America,
Charles C Thomas Pub. USA 1981.

Sharma M et al., Indian J Chem Sect B 15B:544. 1977.
Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - “iologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Koukol J, Dugger WM Jr, Anthocyanin formation as a response
to ozone and smog treatment in Rumex crispus, L. Plant
Physiol, 42:1023-4, Jul 1967.

Yellow Gentian

Gentiana lutea

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts of the plant are the
dried or fresh underground plant organs.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are yellow, terminal, pedicled
and axillary in cyme-like false whorls. The calyx is deeply
divided in 2. The corolla is rotate and divided almost to the
base into 5 or 6 lanceolate tips. There are 5 stamens with 8
mm long anthers and | superior ovary. The fruit is 6 cm long

----- PAGE 1086 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

and capsule shaped. The numerous seeds are flat, oblong or
round, with a membranous edge.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Yellow Gentian is a completely
glabrous perennial plant that grows to 140 cm high. The
rhizome has a number of heads, and the top of the rhizome
can attain the thickness of an arm. The main root is a taproot,
which grows up to | m long. The stem is round, unbranched,
hollow and grooved in the upper region to finger thickness.
The leaves are elliptical, bluish-green, have strongly curved
ribs and grow up to 30 cm long and 15 cm wide.

Characteristics: The drug has a weak, sweetish odor. It
tastes metallic/sweet at first, then bitter.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the mountainous regions
of central and southern European, and cultivated in many
other regions.

Production: The roots are collected from spring through
October, cleaned and swiftly dried. Extended, slower drying
causes the roots to ferment. The roots become brittle through
drying, swollen and spongy through contact with moisture.

Not to be Confused With: The roots of Rumex alpinus or
Gentiana asclepiadea

Other Names: Bitter Root. Bitterwort, Gentian Root, Pale
Gentian

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Iridoide monoterpenes (bitter principles): amarogentin (de-
termines the value), gentiopricroside, swertiamarine,
sweroside

Monosaccharides/Oligosaccharides: saccharose, gentianose
(somewhat bitter), gentiobiose (bitter)

Pyrridine alkaloids

Xanthone derivatives (colored yellow): including gentisin,
gentisein, isogentisin, 1,3J-«"imefhoxyxanthone

Volatile oil (traces)

EFFECTS
The essential active principles are the bitter substances
contained in the herb. These bring about a reflex stimulation
of the taste receptors, leading to increased secretion of saliva
and the digestive juices. Gentian root is therefore considered
to be not simply a pure bitter, but also a roborant and tonic.
There is also a possible cholagogic effect, although it is not
clear ifthe mode of action is sensory-reflexive. In addition, a
fungistatic effect has been proven for the gentian extract.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Approved by Commission E:

* Dyspeptic complaints

YELLOW GENTIAN /837

* Loss of appetite

Unproven Uses: Folk medicine uses of the drug include as a
tonic and in teas to stimulate bile secretion and alleviate loss
of appetite, fullness and flatulence.

Homeopathic Uses: Yellow Gentian is used in homeopathy
for digestive disorders.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug's stimulation of gastric juice secretion rules out its
administration in the presence of stomach or duodenal ulcers.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Comminuted drug and dried
extracts for infusions and teas. Forms of commercial
pharmaceutical preparations include digestives, drops and
coated tablets.

Preparation: Tea is prepared by pouring boiling water over
12 teaspoon of the drug (1 to 2 g) and allowing it to steep
for 5 to 10 minutes. The tea may be sweetened with honey to
alleviate the bitter taste. Decoctions are made using 1 g of
the drug to 1 cup boiled water.

Daily Dosage: The average single dose is 1 g of the drug;
daily dose is 2 to 4 g. The average daily dose of tincture is 1
to 4 ml 3 times daily. Liquid extract: 2 to 4 g; root: 2 to 4 g.
A one-cup dose of cold or lukewarm tea is taken several
times a day, including 1/2 hour before meals.

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, | tablet or 10 globules every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or | to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc acute, 3 times, daily: chronic: once
a day (HAB1)

Storage: The drug must be stored away from light sources.

LITERATURE
Chialva F et al., Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 182:212. 1986.
Hayashi T, Yamagishi T, PH 27:3696. 1988.

Schultze J, Dissertation T.U. Miinchen. 1980.

Wagner H, Miinzing-Vasirian K, DAZ 115:1233. 1975.
Further information in:

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6

(Drogen), Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Schulz R. Hansel R, Rationale Phytotherapie, Springer Verlag
Heidelberg 1996.

----- PAGE 1087 -----
838 /YELLOW GENTIAN

Steinegger E, Hansel R, Pharmakognosie, 5. AufL, Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel, 5. AufL, Wiss. Verlagsges.
mbH Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wichtl M (Hrsg.), Teedrogen, 4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttaart 1997.

Yellow Jessamine

Gelsemium sempervirens

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part of the plant is the dried
rhizome with the roots.

Flower and Fruit: Yellow, strongly perfumed, 2.5 to 4 cm,
funnel-shaped, long flowers grow in axillary or terminal
cymes of 2 to 5 blooms. The fruit consists of 2 separable,
connected pods containing numerous flat-winged seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a perennial evergreen
vine on a tortuous, smooth root with a thin bark and woody
center, showing broad medullary rays. The stem is slender,
woody and up to 6 m high. The leaves are opposite,
lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, short-stemmed, entire-mar-
gined, 2.5 to 10 cm long, dark green above and paler green
beneath.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to southern North America,
along the coast from Virginia to Florida and Mexico.

Production: Gelsemium root consists of the rhizome and
roots of Gelsemium sempervirens.

Not to be Confused With: The plant should not be confused
with yellow flowering Jasmine (Jasminum odoratissimum),
which is also called True Yellow Jasmine or Gelsemium.

Other Names: Gelsemin, Woodbine, Yellow Jasmine, False
Jasmin

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids: main alkaloid gelsemin, including among
others 21-oxygelsemine, gelsemicin, gelsidin, gelsevirin,
sempervirin

Hydroxycoumarins: including scopoletine (gelseminic acid),
fabiatrin

Anthracene derivatives: emodin monomethyl ether

Volatile oil

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

EFFECTS

In animal tests, the following effects on the autonomic
nervous system have been documented: inhibition of cholin-
esterase; cardiac-circulatory effects (vasodilatory, hypoten-
sive); a bronchodilatory effect on respiration; an effect on the
smooth muscle; and an analgesic effect, as well as mydriasis
on rabbits' eyes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used for neuralgia, headache,
gastric disorders, nervous stomach, feelings of fullness and
heartburn.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Particular dangers are associated with administration of the
drug in the presence of cardiac weakness.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks following the proper administration of designat-
ed therapeutic dosages are not recorded. The following side
effects could appear: heaviness of the eyelids, inhibition of
movement of the eyeball, double vision, hypocyclosis,
dryness of the mouth and vomiting. Particular dangers lie
with administration in the presence of cardiac weakness.

OVERDOSAGE
Poisonings through overdosages, sometimes with fatal out-
come, are possible. Extracts corresponding to approximately
0.5 g of the drug can kill a child, 2 to 3 g can be fatal for an
adult. Initial side effects can include heaviness of the eyelids,
inhibition of movement of the eyeball, double vision,
hypocyclosis, dryness of the mouth, swallowing difficulties
or vomiting. They may progress to symptoms of poisoning
that can include headache, dizziness, loss of speech ability,
vision weakness or double vision, pupil enlargement, trem-
bling of the limbs, paralysis or stiffening of the muscles,
cyanosis, shortness of breath and coma.

The therapy for poisonings, following stomach emptying
(gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium permanga-
nate solution), consists of prophylaxis for shock, diazepam
for spasms, electrolyte replenishment and sodium bicarbon-
ate infusions for any acidosis that may arise. Intubation and
oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

DOSAGE
Medicinal preparations are obsolete. Yellow Jessamine is
currently used in homeopathic dilutions only.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen,

4. Aufl, Wiss. Verlagsges. mbH Stuttgart 1997.
Jensen SR et al., (1987) Phytochemistry 26(6): 1725.

----- PAGE 1088 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Leung AY, Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used
in Food Drugs and Cosmetics, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New
York 1980.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. AufL, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M, Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York 1995.

Wenkert E et aL, (1971) Experientia 28:377.

Yellow Lupin

Lupinus luteus

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the seeds and the

aerial parts of the plant.

Flower and Fruit: The terminal flowers are almost sessile.
They are arranged in numerous, distinct whorls. They have
dropping, silky-haired bracts. The corolla is bright yellow
with a blunted boat-shaped tip. The fruit is an oblong-
lanceolate, 5 to 7 cm by | cm, densely pubescent pod with
nodes. It contains 4 to 7 yellowish, reddish-white, black or
dark violet marbled seeds 5.5 to 6.5 mm long.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is an annual with up toa 1
m long taproot, which contains numerous lateral roots. The
stem is light green and pubescent with numerous side shoots.
The 5 to 10 leaves are oblong-obovate to lanceolate, 4 to 8
cm long, acuminate and pubescent on both sides.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to Europe, Asia, and North
and South America.

Production: Lupin herb and seeds are the aerial part and
seeds of Lupinus luteus and other Lupinus species.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS: IN THE FOLIAGE

Quinolizidine alkaloids (0.6-1.6%): sparteine (55-70%),
lupinine (20-30%), p-cumaroyllupinine (10%); in cultivated
strains (sweet lupins), alkaloid content is 0.01-0.8%

YELLOW LUPIN/839

COMPOUNDS: IN THE SEEDS

Quinolizidine alkaloid (0.4-3.3%): lupinine (60%), sparteine
(30%); in some cultivated strains, gramine; in cultivated
strains (sweet lupins), alkaloid content is less than 0.1%

Fatty oil (4-6%)
Carbohydrates: including stachyose (6%)
Proteins (36-48%)

EFFECTS

There has been no research on the effects of the drug;
however, an anthelmintic effect has been established for the
constituents lupinin and benzolylupinin.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Yellow Lupin is used externally for ulcers.
It is used internally for urinary tract disorders and worm
infestation.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
See Overdosage section.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning include salivation, swallowing
difficulties, vomiting, diarrhea, headaches, hypocyclosis,
double vision, cardiac rhythm disorders and_prickling
sensation in the extremities. In cases of severe poisoning,
symptoms include ascending paralysis and possible death
through respiratory failure within a few hours. The intake of
a single seed of bitter lupin is said to be toxic for a child. In
one case, a small child died following intake of several
seeds. The intake of more than one pod of the plant or 10
seeds by an adult is said to trigger vomiting and should be
treated with administration of activated charcoal. Following
gastrointestinal emptying (inducement of vomiting, gastric
lavage with burgundy-colored potassium permanganate solu-
tion, sodium sulfate) and installation of activated charcoal,
the therapy for severe poisonings consists of electrolyte
substitution, treating possible cases of acidosis with sodium
bicarbonate infusions, and administering orciprenaline or
lidocaine for cardiac rhythm disorders. In case of shock,
plasma volume expanders should be administered. Intubation
and oxygen respiration may also be necessary.

The lupinosis seen in animals is caused by mycotoxins.that
are formed from the fungus Phomopsis leptostromiformis,
which can live as an endophyte in lupins.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The drug is used internally as an
infusion, and externally in poultices.

LITERATURE
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur
Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. AufL, Wiss. Verlags-
Ges Stuttgart 1997.

----- PAGE 1089 -----
840 /YELLOW LUPIN

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. AufL, Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen, 6. AufL, Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Plakhota VA, Berezyuk NK, Oleinik GV, Boiko VP, Poisoning
of animals with lupins. In: Veterinariya, Moscow, USSR, No. 8,
79-81. 1966.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Schmeller Th et al.. Binding of quinolizidine alkaloids to
nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. In: JNP

57(9): 1316-1319. 1994.

Seeger R, Lupanin und Anagyrin. In: DAZ 133(17):35. 1993.

Teuscher E, Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologic Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl., Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.

Yellow Toadflax

Linaria vulgaris

DESCRIPTION

Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the fresh or dried
herb.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are in terminal dense
racemes. They are sulfur yellow and remain closed until a
bee gains entry. The calyx is only fused at the base and is 5-
tipped. The corolla has a long sharp spur and is bilabiate
with orange edges. There are 2 large and 2 small stamens
and 1 superior ovary. The fruit is an orbicular, dry capsule
with some chambers, which open when ripe, flinging out the
seeds. The seeds are flattened and are in the middle of a

circular wing.

Leaves, Stem and Root: A number of slim, glabrous, erect,
simple stems 30 to 60 cm high grow from a perennial
creeping root. The numerous leaves are alternate, sessile,
very long and narrow. The leaves and stems are pale blue

and completely glabrous.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to the northern hemisphere
and the southwest U.S.

Production: True Toadflax is the flowering herb of Linaria

vulgaris.

Other Names: Fluellin, Pattens and Clogs, Flaxweed, Ram-
sted, Snapdragon, Churnstaff, Dragon-Bushes, Brideweed,
Toadpipe, Yellow Rod, Larkspur Lion's Mouth, Devil's
Ribbon, Eggs and Collops, Devil's Head, Pedlar's Basket,
Gallwort, Rabbits, Doggies, Calves' Snout, Eggs and Bacon,
Buttered Haycocks, Monkey Flower, Butter and Eggs,

Pennywort

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS
Iridoide monoterpenes: chief component - antirrhinoside

Flavonoids: including among others linarin, pectolinarin,
linariin (pectolinarigenin-7-rhamnoglucoside- acetate)

Aurones: including among others aureusin, bracteatin-6-O-

glucoside
Quinazoline alkaloids: peganine (vasicin)

EFFECTS
The main active agents are the flavon glycosides linarin and
pectolinarin, pectin, phytosterol, tannic acid and vitamin C.

The drug is anti-inflammatory. Diaphoretic and diuretic
effects have been documented.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: Yellow Toadflax is used internally to aid
digestion problems and urinary tract disorders.

Externally, the herb is used for hemorrhoids, ablution of
festering wounds, skin rashes and ulcus cruris.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
No health hazards or side effects are known in conjunction
with the proper administration of designated therapeutic

dosages.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: The powdered form and the extract
are used as a diuretic and a mild laxative (tea). Externally the
herb is used in poultices.

Preparation: Tea infusion is prepared from 1 to 2 teaspoon-
fuls of the drug and 2 to 4 cups of boiling water left to draw

for 18 minutes.
Daily Dosage: Drink the tea during the course of the day.

LITERATURE
Hegnauer R, Chemotaxonomie" der Pflanzen, Bde 1-11,
Birkhauser Verlag Basel, Boston, Berlin 1962-1997.

Tlieva E et al., 5-O-Allosylantirrinoside from Linaria species. In:
PH 32:1068. 1993.

Kern W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1969.

Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

----- PAGE 1090 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Yerba Santa

Eriodictyon californicum

TRADE NAMES
Yerba Santa Resin-Rich Leaf (available from numerous
manufacturers and as combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the dried leaves.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are tubular to funnel-shaped,
lavender or white and clustered at the top of the plant. The
calyx is ciliate. The fruit is a small, oval, grayish-brown seed
capsule containing shriveled, almost black seeds.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The plant is a 2.5 m high, sticky,
evergreen shrub, with woody rhizomes. The trunk is smooth
and usually branched near the ground. It is completely
covered in sticky resin. The leaves are up to 15 cm long and
about 2 cm broad. They are thick, coriaceous, glabrous,
greenish white, lanceolate and irregularly dentate at the
margins. The upper surface appears to be varnished with
resin, the lower surface is reticulate and tomentose.

Characteristics: The taste is balsamic and the odor, pleasant
and aromatic.

Habitat: The plant grows in California, Oregon and parts of
Mexico.

Production: Yerba Santa is the aerial part of Eriodictyon
californicum.

Other Names: Bear's Weed, Consumptive's Weed, Eriodic-
tyon, Gum Bush, Holy Herb, Mountain Balm, Sacred Herb,
Tarweed

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Flavonoids: including eriodictyonin, eriodictyol, chrysoer-
iodictyol, xanthoeriodictyol

Resinous substances: made up of flavonone and flavone
aglycones

Volatile oil (very little)
Tannins

EFFECTS
Yerba Santa is mildly diuretic and masks bitter tastes.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE
Unproven Uses: The drug is used as a constituent of anti-
asthmatic treatments and application by brush (painted on) to
counteract bitter tastes.

YEW/841

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
Health risks or side effects following the proper administra-
tion of designated therapeutic dosages are not recorded.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: As an additive to mask bitter
flavors and for painting on as Tinctura Eriodictyonis.

How Supplied:
Liquid — 1:5

LITERATURE
Johnson ND, Biochem Syst Ecol 11:211. 1983.

Kem W, List PH, Horhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl.. Bde 1-8, Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg. New York, 1969.

Liu YL, Ho DK, Cassady JM, Isolation of potential cancer
chemopreventive agents fiom Eriodictyon californicum. In: JNP
55(3):357-363. 1992.

Yew

Taxus baccata

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal parts are the fresh leaves,
the branch twig tips, and the branches.

Flower and Fruit: The flowers are inconspicuous and
dioecious. The male florets appear in autumn in yellowish
catkins in the axils of the annual needle. The female florets,
with only 1 pistil, are on short pedicles, which have scale-
like high leaves. The hard, pea-sized, dark-brown seed is
surrounded by a crimson, pulpy, beaker-shaped, sweet and
edible aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The Yew may be a bush or small
tree approximately 17 m high with a trunk diameter of over 1
m. The trunk has red-brown bark. The numerous branches
are crowded and evergreen. The needles are 2 to 3 cm long,
arranged in double rows, soft and acute. They are glossy
dark green above, have a distinct midrib, and are lighter
green beneath, matte, with no resin.

Characteristics: Yew is poisonous.

Habitat: The plant is common in large areas of Europe as far
as Anatolia and Sicily.

Production: Yew leaves are the needles of Taxus baccata.

Other Names: Chinwood

----- PAGE 1091 -----
842/YEW

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY

COMPOUNDS

Diterpene esters of the taxane-type (mixture is known as
taxine, 0.6-2.0%): including among others, taxine A, taxine
B, taxol

Flavonoids: including among others, sciadopytisin, ginkge-
tin, sequoia flavone (biflavonoids)

EFFECTS

In animal experiments, the taxin, a mixture of different ester
alkaloids, leads to an improvement in cardiac metabolism.
The motility-inhibiting effect may be attributable to the
biflavonoid fraction. In higher doses the drug is cardiotoxic
and can cause tachycardiac arrhythmia leading to diastolic

cardiac arrest.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: The cooked Yew leaves are used to promote
menstruation; to treat diphtheria, epilepsy, tapeworm, and
tonsillitis; and as an abortifacient. The plants are highly toxic
and their use is not recommended.

Homeopathic Uses: The drug is used for poor digestion and

skin pustules.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The drug is considered an abortifacient and therefore should

not be used during pregnancy.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: The drug is severely toxic: 50-100 gm Yew needles
(fresh weight) are fatal for an adult. The red seed coat of the
berries—although not the green seed—is free of toxic taxane
derivatives.

Use in Pregnancy: The drug is used as an abortifacient.

OVERDOSAGE
Symptoms of poisoning include queasiness, vomiting, severe
abdominal pain, and feelings of vertigo, followed later by
unconsciousness, mydriasis, reddening of the lips, tachycar-
dia, and superficial breathing. Death results from asphyxia-
tion and diastolic cardiac arrest.

Following gastrointestinal emptying, (inducement of vomit-
ing, gastric lavage with burgundy-colored potassium per-
manganate solution, sodium sulphate), and use of activated
charcoal, treatment for poisonings consists of treating
spasms with diazepam or barbital (i.v.). In case of shock,
plasma volume expanders should be infused. The administra-
tion of lidocaine has proven effective in cardiac rhythm
disorders. Monitoring of kidney function, blood coagulation
Intubation and oxygen

and liver values is

respiration may also be necessary.

necessary.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration:
dilutions of the mother tincture.

Yew is used in homeopathic

Homeopathic Dosage: 5 drops, 1 tablet or 10 globules, every
30 to 60 minutes (acute) or 1 to 3 times daily (chronic);
parenterally: 1 to 2 ml sc, acute: 3 times daily; chronic: once
a day (HABI).

Storage: The mother tincture should be protected from light.

LITERATURE
Hoc S, Onkologie: Taxol, ein pflanzliches Zytostatikum. In:
DAZ 133(26):2400. 1993.

Hof-Mussler S, Eiben-Zytostatikum Taxol bei Ovarialkarzinom.
In: DAZ 133(1):42. 1993.

Jenniskens LHD, Identification of six taxine alkaloids from
Taxus baccata needles. In: JNP 59(2): 117-123. 1996.

Kelsey RG, Vance NC, Taxol and cephalomannine
concentrations in the foliage and bark of shade-grown and sun-
exposed Taxus baccata trees. In: JNP 55:912-917. 1992.

Kingston DGI, Sorties and surprises: unexpected reactions of
taxol. In: PM 62, Abstracts of the 44th Ann Congress of GA,
5. 1996.

Kongrepbericht, Taxol in der onkologischen Therapie. In: ZPT
15(2); 114. 1994,
Kubitschek J, Eibenwirkstoff gegen Malaria. In: PZ 140(8):684.
1995.
Ma W et al., New bioactive taxoids from cell cultures of Taxus
baccata. In: JNP 57(1): 116. 1994.
Mujumdar RB et al., (1972) Ind J Chem 10:677.

Poupat Ch et al., Noveau taxoide basique isole des feuilles
D'if, Taxus baccata: La 2-desacetyltaxine A. In: JNP
57(10): 1468-1469. 1994.

Schneider B, Taxol, ein Arzneistoff der Eibe. In: DAZ
134(36):3389. 1994.
Vanek T et al., Study of the influence of year season on
taxanes content in Taxus baccata bark. In: PM 59(7)99. 1993.

Vidensek N, Lim P, Campbell A, Carlson C, Taxol content in
bark, wood, root, leaf, twig and seedling from several Taxus
species. In: JNP 53:1609-1610. 1994.

Vohora Kumar, (1971) Planta Med 20:100.

Wasielewski S, Taxol, ein Zytostatikum aus der pazifischen
Eibe. In: UPTA 7(12):914. 1993.

Further information in:
Frohne D, Pfander HJ, Giftpflanzen - Ein Handbuch fur

Apotheker, Toxikologen und Biologen, 4. Aufl., Wiss. Verlags-
Ges. Stuttgart 1997.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H, Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

----- PAGE 1092 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.
Madaus G, Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck, Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

Roth L, Daunderer M, Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl, Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Teuscher E. Lindequist U, Biogene Gifte - Biologie, Chemie,
Pharmakologie, 2. Aufl. Fischer Verlag Stuttgart 1994.
Teuscher E. Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl.. Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Yohimbe Bark
Pausinystalia yohimbe

TRADE NAMES
Yohimbe, Yohimbe Super Potent, Yohimbized 1000, Yocon
Tablets, Actibine, Aphrobine, Testomar, Yohimex, Super
Yohimbe Plus, Yohimbe Power Max 1500, Yohimbe Power
Max for Women, Yohimbe Power Max 2000.

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the bark.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescence consists of racemes of
yellow blooms.

Leaves, Stem and Root: The evergreen tree grows up to 30 m
in height. The bark is gray-brown, fissured and split, and is
often spotted. The inner fracture is reddish brown and
grooved. The leaves are oblong or elliptical.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter, and the plant is odorless.

Habitat: The plant grows in the jungles of west Africa,
Cameroon, Congo and Gabon.

Production: Yohimbe bark consists of the dried bark of the
trunk and/or branches of Pausinystalia yohimbe.

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Indole alkaloids (2.7-5.9%): including among others yohim-
bine (quebrachine) and its stereoisomers alpha-yohimbine
(rauwolscine), beta-yohimbine, and allo-yohimbine. Includ-
ing also, ajamalicine, dihydroyohimbine, corynantheine,
dihydrocorynantheine, corynanthine (rauhimbin)

Tannins

EFFECTS

Alpha 2-adrenergic Antagonist/Norepinephrine Release:
Rauwolscine is a selective alpha 2-adrenergic receptor
antagonist. Yohimbine increases plasma norepinephrine
(NE) levels by stimulating the rate of norepinephrine release
from sympathetic nerves (alpha 2-adrenergic antagonist)

YOHIMBE BARK/843

(Murburg, 1991). Plasma concentrations of 3-methoxy-4-
hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), the major central nervous
system metabolite of NE, also increases with yohimbine
(Piletz, 1998). Central noradrenergic stimulation of yohim-
bine results in the enhancement of recall and recognition of
emotional material (O'Carroll, 1999).

Analgesic Effects: Yohimbine significantly enhanced the
overall analgesic effect of morphine with postoperative
dental pain (Gear, 1995).

Clonidine Antagonism: Traditionally, yohimbine was
thought to reverse the therapeutic effects of clonidine. One
study demonstrated yohimbine reversed sedation and short-
ened the duration of analgesia associated with clonidine
administered postoperatively. There was no effect on hypo-
tension and bradycardia related to clonidine administration

with yohimbine (Liu, 1993).

Epinephrine Effects: Yohimbine causes an increase in
epinephrine release from the adrenals and results in a dose-
dependent increase in plasma epinephrine (Murburg, 1991).

Improves Sexual Function: Because of the alpha-2 adrener-
gic blockade, the drug may be an effective treatment for
sexual side effects, such as decrease libido and decreased
sexual response, caused by selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (Jacobsen, 1992; Hollander, 1992). There was no
therapeutic response to yohimbine in women with hypoac-
tive sexual desire (Piletz, 1998).

Cardiovascular/Pressor Effects: Yohimbine given in moder-
ate doses increases systolic blood pressure in patients with
orthostatic hypotension due to primary autonomic failure
(Jordan, 1998). Yohimbine-induced enhancement of sympa-
thetic tone in patients with neurally mediated syncope
improves orthostatic tolerance (Mosqueda-Garcia, 1998).

Salivary Effects: Yohimbine (18 mg daily) increases salivary
flow in patients treated with psychotropic drugs (tricyclic
antidepressants or neuroleptics) suffering from xerostomia
(Bagheri, 1997).

Miscellaneous Effects: Through enhancing inhibitory sympa-
thetic input, yohimbine attenuates increases in colonic tone
(Bharucha, 1997).

CLINICAL TRIALS
Non-organic Erectile Dysfinction

A double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was con-
ducted to determine the safety and efficacy of yohimbine
hydrochloride in the treatment of nonorganic erectile dys-
function. Eighty-three patients were included in the inten-
tion-to-treat analysis. Yohimbine (10 mg three times daily)
was administered orally for eight weeks. Subjective criteria
included improvement in sexual desire, sexual satisfaction,

----- PAGE 1093 -----
844/YOHIMBE BARK

frequency of sexual contacts, and quality of erection (penile
rigidity) during sexual contact or intercourse. Objective
criteria were based on improvement in penile rigidity
determined by use of polysomnography in the sleep laborato-
ry. Yohimbine was overall significantly more effective than
placebo for response rate and was well tolerated (Vogt, 1970.

Mixed-type ErecTile Dysfunction

The effect of yohimbine hydrochloride was evaluated in the
treatment of mixed-type impotence. A randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial included 29 patients
administered either yohimbine hydrochloride 36 mg daily or
placebo. The two groups received therapy for 25 days, then a
washout period of 14 days, and finally, a switch of treatment
groups for an additional 25 days. Positive clinical results
were seen in 44% and 48% of patients in the yohimbine and
placebo groups, respectively, with no significant difference
between the groups (Kunelius, 1997).

Pressor Effects with Autonomic Failure

In 35 patients with severe orthostatic hypotension due to
multiple system atrophy or pure autonomic failure, the effect
was determined on seated systolic blood pressure (SBP) of
placebo, phenylpropanolamine (12.5 mg and 25 mg), yohim-
bine (5.4 mg), indomethacin (50 mg), ibuprofen (600 mg),
caffeine (250 mg), and methylphenidate (5 mg). The pressor
response was significant for phenylpropanolamine, yohim-
bine, and indomethacin compared with placebo. In a
subgroup of patients, the pressor effect was confirmed of
phenylpropanolamine, yohimbine, and indomethacin corre-
sponding to a significant increase in standing SBP. The
pressor responses to ibuprofen, caffeine, and methylpheni-
date were not significantly different from placebo, and
phenylpropanolamine and midodrine exerted similar pressor
responses (Jordan, 1998).

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

FDA Approved Indications: Yohimbine Hydrochloride is
indicated as a sympatholytic and mydriatic. Impotence has
been successfully treated with Yohimbine in male patients
with vascular or diabetic origins and psychogenic origins.

Unproven Uses: Yohimbe bark is used as an aphrodisiac,
and for debility and exhaustion.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Yohimbe bark is contraindicated in liver and kidney
diseases.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS

General: Side effects that can appear include anxiety states,
elevated blood pressure, exanthema, nausea, insomnia,
tachycardia, tremor, and vomiting.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD): Yohimbine was
reported to exacerbate anxiety/panic and PTSD-specific
symptoms after oral ingestion of the drug (Southwick, 1999).
Patients with PTSD consists of 2 subgroups, one with a
sensitized noradrenergic system, and the other with a A
sensitized serotonergic system, and is why yohimbine-in-
duced panic attacks occur in different patients (Southwick,
1997).

Hypertension: Yohimbine induced a significant increase in
diastolic pressure, but only in hypertensive patients due to an
alpha 2-adrenoreceptor desensitization or an alteration in the
balance of alpha-adrenoreceptors in human hypertension
(Musso, 1995).

has been associated with a
itory sensory gating (Adler,

Auditory Effects: The drug
transient impairment in au
1994).

‘Salivation: Yohimbine significantly increases salivary flow
in patients treated with psychotropic drugs (tricyclic antide-
pressants or neuroleptics) suffering from xerostomia (Bagh-
eri. 1997).

Panic Disorder: Patients with agoraphobia with panic
attacks had greater autonomic anxiety symptoms, increase in
SBP and Cortisol responses to yohimbine than healthy
patients. Yohimbine also induced panic episodes in these
patients (Gurguis, 1997).

Parkinson's Disease: Patients with Parkinson's Disease have
demonstrated a vulnerability to yohimbine-induced somatic
symptoms such as panic attacks (Richard, 1999).

Drug Interactions:

Naltrexone — Clinically used naltrexone doses alter sensitiv-
ity to yohimbine, and potentiates the drug's side effects, such
as nervousness (Rosen, 1999).

Anti-hypertensive Medications — Because of the increase in
diastolic pressure in hypertensive patients, caution should be
taken with concomitant use of anti-hypertensive medications
(Musso, 1995).

Ethanol — Intoxicating and anxiogenic effects of acute
ethanol administration may be associated with increase
norepinephrine turnover when administered concomitantly
with yohimbine (McDougle, 1995).

OTC stimulants — These may have alpha-1 adrenergic
receptor activity to potentiate hypertension when yohimbine
is given concomitantly.

Morphine — The overall analgesic effect of morphine was
significantly enhanced in the presence of yohimbine in one
study (Gear, 1995).

*

----- PAGE 1094 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

OVERDOSAGE

Overdosage leads to salivation, mydriasis, evacuation, hypo-
tension and disorders of the cardiac impulse-conducting
system with negative-inotropic effect. Death occurs through

cardiac failure.

Treatment of overdosage includes gastrointestinal emptying
(inducement of vomiting, gastric lavage with burgundy-
colored potassium permanganate solution, sodium sulfate)
and administration of activated charcoal. For cardiac rhythm
disorders, treat with lidocaine; possibly using physostigmine
for its anticholinergic effect and electrolyte substitution. For
cases of acidosis, treat with sodium bicarbonate infusions. In
case of shock, plasma volume expanders should be infused.

DOSAGE
How Supplied:
Capsule — 500 mg

Liquid — l00Omg/ml
Tablet — 5.4 mg, 800 mg

Daily Dosage:

Erectile Dysfunction — Yohimbine hydrochloride was
effective for nonorganic erectile dysfunction administered as
30 mg daily (10 mg three times daily). Given up to 30 mg
daily and 36 mg daily, yohimbine, showed no effect for
mixed-type impotence and erectile problems (Kunelius,
1997; Rowland, 1997). For erectile impotence, yohimbine
5.4 mg (1 tablet) three times daily is recommended, and if
side effects of nausea, dizziness or nervousness are reported,
reduce to one-half tablet three times daily. Gradually
increase to 1 tablet three times daily and therapy should not
exceed 10 weeks (Prod Info Yocon®, 1985).

Xerostomia Treatment — Yohimbine 6 mg three times daily
has been effective for increasing salivary flow in patients
treated with psychotropic drugs suffering from xerostomia
(Bagheri, 1997).

LITERATURE

Adler LE; Hoffer L; Nagamoto HT et al. Yohimbine impairs
P50 auditory sensory gating in normal subjects.
Neuropsychopharmacology 1994 Jul;10(4):249-57.

Bagheri H; Schmitt L; Berlan M; Montastruc JL. A
comparative study of the effects of yohimbine and
anetholtrithione on salivary secretion in depressed patients
treated with psychotropic drugs. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1997;52(5):339-42.

Bharucha AE; Novak V; Camilleri M et al. Alpha 2-adrenergic
modulation of colonic tone during hyperventilation. Am J
Physiol 1997 Nov;273(5 Pt 1):G1135-40.

Buffum J, (1982) J Psychoactive Drugs 17:131.
Clark JT et al.. Science 225:847.

YOHIMBE BARK /845

Gear RW; Gordon NC; Heller PH; Levine JD. Enhancement of
morphine analgesia by the alpha 2-adrenergic antagonist
yohimbine. Neuroscience 1995 May;66(1):5-8.

Gurguis GN; Vitton BJ; Uhde TW. Behavioral, sympathetic and
adrenocortical responses to yohimbine in panic disorder patients
and normal controls. Psychiatry Res 1997 Jun 16;71(1):27-39.

Hollander E; McCarley A. Yohimbine treatment of sexual side
effects induced by serotonin reuptake blockers. J Clin
Psychiatry 1992 Jun;53(6):207-9.

Jordan J; Shannon JR; Biaggioni I et al. Contrasting actions of
pressor agents in severe autonomic failure. Am J Med 1998
Aug; 105(2): 116-24.

Kunelius P; Hakkinen J; Lukkarinen O. Is high-dose yohimbine
hydrochloride effective in the treatment of mixed-type
impotence? A prospective, randomized, controlled double-blind
crossover study. Urology 1997 Mar;49(3):441-4.

Liu N; Bonnet F; Delaunay L et al. Partial reversal of the
effects of extradural clonidine by oral yohimbine in
postoperative patients. Br J Anaesth 1993 May;70(5):515-8.

McDougle CJ; Krystal JH; Price LH et al. Noradrenergic
response to acute ethanol administration in healthy subjects:
comparison with intravenous yohimbine. Psychopharmacology
(Bed) 1995 Mar; 118(2): 127-35.

Mosqueda-Garcia R; Fernandez-Violante R; Tank J et al.
Yohimbine in neurally mediated syncope. Pathophysiological
implications. J Clin Invest 1998 Nov 15; 102(10): 1824-30.

Murburg MM; Villacres EC; Ko GN; Veith RC. Effects of
yohimbine on human sympathetic nervous system function. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1991 Oct;73(4):861-5.

Musso NR; Vergassola C; Pende A; Lotti G. Yohimbine effects
on blood pressure and plasma catecholamines in human
hypertension. Am J Hypertens 1995 Jun;8(6):565-71.

Piletz JE; Segraves KB; Feng YZ et al. Plasma MHPG
response to yohimbine treatment in women with hypoactive
sexual desire. J Sex Marital Ther 1998 Jan-Mar;24( 1 ):43-54.

Product Information Yocon® (yohimbine hydrochloride tablets).

Glenwood, Tenafly, NJ, USA, 1985.
Richard IH; Szegethy E; Lichter D et al. Parkinson's disease: a
preliminary study of yohimbine challenge in patients with
anxiety. Clin Neuropharmacol 1999 May-Jun;22(3): 172-5.
Rosen MI; Kosten TR; Kreek MJ. The effects of naltrexone
maintenance on the response to yohimbine in healthy
volunteers. Biol Psychiatry 1999 Jun 15;45( 12): 1636-45.
Rowland DL; Kalian K; Slob AK. Yohimbine, erectile capacity,
and sexual response in men. Arch Sex Behav 1997
Feb;26(1):49-62.

Southwick SM; Morgan CA 3rd; Charney DS; High JR.
Yohimbine use in a natural setting: effects on posttraumatic
stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry 1999 Aug 1;46(3):442-4.

Southwick SM; Krystal JH; Bremner JD et al. Noradrenergic
and serotonergic function in posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 1997 Aug;54(8):749-58.

----- PAGE 1095 -----
846/YOHIMBE BARK

Vogt HJ; Brandl P; Kockott G et al. Double-blind, placebo-
controlled safety and efficacy trial with yohimbine
hydrochloride in the treatment of nonorganic erectile
dysfunction. Int J Impot Res 1997 Sep;9(3): 155-61.

Further information in:

Kern W, List PH, Hdrhammer L (Hrsg.), Hagers Handbuch der
Pharmazeutischen Praxis. 4. Aufl., Bde. 1-8: Springer Verlag
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York. 1969.

Lewin L, Gifte und Vergiftungen. 6. Aufl., Nachdruck, Haug
Verlag, Heidelberg 1992.

Madaus G. Lehrbuch der Biologischen Arzneimittel, Bde 1-3,
Nachdruck. Georg Olms Verlag Hildesheim 1979.

O'CarroN RE: Drysdale E: Cahill L et al. Stimulation of the
noradrenergic system enhances and blockade reduces memory
for emotional material in man. Psychol Med 1999

Sep:29(5): 1083-8.

Roth L, Daunderer M. Kormann K, Giftpflanzen, Pflanzengifte,
4. Aufl., Ecomed Fachverlag Landsberg Lech 1993.

Southwick SM. Morgan CA 3", Charney DS, High JR.
Yohimbine use in a natural setting: effects on posttraumatic
stress disorder. VA CT Healthcare System, Psychiatry Service
116A. West Haven 06516, USA.

Steinegger E. Hansel R. Pharmakognosie, 5. Aufl., Springer
Verlag Heidelberg 1992.

Teuscher E, Biogene Arzneimittel. 5. Aufl., Wiss. Verlagsges.
Stuttgart 1997.

Wagner H, Wiesenauer M. Phytotherapie. Phytopharmaka und
pflanzliche Homoopathika, Fischer-Verlag, Stuttgart, Jena, New
York, 1995.

Yucca filamentosa
See Adam's Needle

Zanthoxylum americanum

See Northern Prickly Ash

Zea mays

See Corn Silk

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

Zedoary

Curcuma zedoaria

TRADE NAMES

Turmeric Power, Turmeric Whole Rhizome, Turmeric Ex-
tract (available from numerous manufacturers and as a
combination product)

DESCRIPTION
Medicinal Parts: The medicinal part is the dried tuberous
part of the rhizome, cut in transverse slices or in longitudinal

quarters.

Flower and Fruit: The inflorescences are on 5 to 15 cm long,
obtuse and silky involucre bracts. The spike-like inflores-
cences are 7.5 to 12.5 cm long and 5 to 7.5 cm wide. The
bracts bearing the flowers are ovate with revolute tips, pale
green with a reddish border, densely punctuated with glands.

There are more or less stiff hairs on the surface, in particular

at the tip. The bracts at the tip of the inflorescence are 5 cm
long, initially white, then pink to crimson. The flowers are
pale yellow. The calyx is 8 mm long, obtuse and 3-tipped.
The tips of the corolla are broadly triangular and pale pink at
the extreme tips. The labellum is light yellow, fluorescent
yellow in the center with very slightly reddish tinged borders
at the lower part. The ovary is 4 to 5 mm long and very
weakly pubescent. The fruit is an ovate, thin, smooth and
irregularly opening capsule. The elliptical seeds have a white

aril.

Leaves, Stem and Root: Curcuma zedoaria is a perennial,
erect and leafy plant. The rhizome has a grayish outer
surface and is ovate to pear-shaped, thick and palmately
branched downwards. It is whitish-yellow, with numerous
thin roots, and it has a strong smell of camphor. The roots
are partially uhickened to ovate, white tubers. The leaves, in
groups of 4 and 6 on the rhizome, are up to 1 m long. The 20
to 60 cm long and 8 to 10 cm wide leaf blade is oblong-
ovate, glabrous, and has a purple mark in the middle of the
leaf.

Characteristics: The taste is bitter; The smell is like camphor
and is reminiscent of cardamom and ginger.

Habitat: The plant is indigenous to northeast India and is
also found in the Moluccas, the Philippines and New Guinea.

Production: Zedoary rhizome consists of the dried rhizome
of Curcuma zedoaria and its preparations. After the root

tubers have been harvested they are washed, cut and dried.

Other Names: Turmeric

----- PAGE 1096 -----
HERBAL MONOGRAPHS

ACTIONS AND PHARMACOLOGY
COMPOUNDS

Volatile oil (1.0-1.5%): chief components zingiberene, 1,8-
cineole, D-camphor, D-camphene, D-borneol, alpha-pinene,
also including among others curcumol, zederone, curcume-
neol, curculone, furanodienone, isofuranodienone

Curcuminoids: curcumin, desmethoxycurcumin,  bisdes-

methoxycurcumin
Starch (50%)

EFFECTS

Main active principles: essential oil, tannins, mucilage,
small-grained starch. In animal tests, the drug has a
choleretic, mildly antacid and spasmolytic effect, as well as
increasing intestinal transit time. The ethanol extract (main
active principle p-methoxy cinnamic acid ethyl ester) is a
strong fungicide. An anti-tumoral effect has also been
proven.

INDICATIONS AND USAGE

Unproven Uses: Zedoary is used as a stomachic for digestive
debility, colic and spasms (stomachic, carminative). In folk
medicine, it is also used as a remedy for nervous diseases.

Indian Medicine: In India, the drug is used for loss of
appetite, tuberculosis, wounds, leukodermia, fever, bronchi-
tis and asthma.

PRECAUTIONS AND ADVERSE REACTIONS
General: No health hazards or side effects are known in
conjunction with the proper administration of designated
therapeutic dosages.

Pregnancy: Not to be used during pregnancy.

DOSAGE
Mode of Administration: Zeodary is available as solid and
liquid dosage forms for oral intake.

ZYZYPHUS JUJUBE/847
How Supplied: Capsules: 300 mg, 450 mg; liquid: 1:4.

Preparation: Extracts of the drug are contained in numerous
combination preparations for gastrointestinal indications and
as cholagogues. To prepare an infusion, pour boiling water
over | to 1.5 gm of comminuted or powdered drug, or put in
cold water and strain after 3 to 5 minutes (1 teaspoonful = 3
gm of drug).

Daily Dosage: Drink 1 cup as an aromatic bitter at meals.

LITERATURE
Gupta SK et al., Lloydia 39:218-222. 1976.

Hansel R, Keller K, Rimpler H. Schneider G (Hrsg.), Hagers
Handbuch der Pharmazeutischen Praxis, 5. Aufl., Bde 4-6
(Drogen): Springer Verlag Berlin. Heidelberg, New York, 1992-
1994,

Hikino H et al., (1970) Chem Pharm Bull 18:752.

Kuronayagi M, Natori S, Yakugaku Zasshi 90:1467-1470. 1970.
Latif MA et al., Br J Nutr 41:57. 1979.

Matthes HWD et al., (1980) Phytochemistry 19:2643.

Shiobara Y et al., (1985) Phytochemistry 24(11):2629.

Zingiber officinale
See Ginger

Zyzyphus jujube

See Jujube

----- PAGE 1097 -----
Glossary

AB-DDR Minister fur Gesundheitswesen der DDR (1987).
Arzneibuch der DDR. 2nd Ed. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin.

abortif acient A drug or chemical that induces abortion.

achene A small 1-seeded fruit which has a pericarp attached
to the seed at only one point.

acuminate Pointed or to taper to a slender point

adaptogen A preparation that acts to strengthen the body and
increase resistance to disease.

alterative Any drug used to favorably alter the course of an
ailment and to restore health. To improve the excretion of

wastes from the circulatory system.

amarum Bitters.

androgynous In botany, flowers with stamen and pistil in the
same bunch.

annual A plant that completes its growth cycle in one year.
anthelmintic An agent or drug that is destructive to worms.
anther The part of the stamen that contains pollen.

antiphlogistic An agent that prevents or counteracts
inflammation and fever.

antisialagogue An agent that prevents or counteracts the
formation or flow of saliva.

Arg 66 6 Farmacopea Argentina 1966.

autumnalis In botany, referring to producing, gathering or
harvesting in the autumn.

Belg IV Pharmacopee Beige IV (1930) + Suppl. to 1953, F. &
N. Dantinne, Stree.

Belg V Pharmacopee Beige V (1962-1968), Vols. 1-3 + Suppl.
Belg VI Pharmacopee Beige VI (1982), J. Duculot-Gembloux.
BfArM German Federal Health Agency.

BHP 83 British Herbal Medicine Association (1983), British
Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Megaron Press. Bournemouth.

BHP 90 British Herbal Medicine Association (1990), British
Herbal Pharmacopoeia.

bitter An alcoholic liquid prepared by maceration or distillation
of a bitter herb or herb part that is often used to improve
appetite or digestion.

blood purification Removal of undesirable agents from the
blood.

BP 68 British Pharmacopoeia XI (1968) + Suppl. 1971, The
Pharmaceutical Press, London.

BP 88 British Pharmacopoeia XLI (1988), Her Majesty's
Stationary Office, London.

----- PAGE 1098 -----
850 / BPC 79

PDR_ FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

BPC 79 The Pharmaceutical Codex (1979), The
Pharmaceutical Press. London.

BPC XX British Pharmaceutical Codex X (1973) [LX (1986),
VII (1963), Vn (1959) VI (1954), V (1949), IV (1934)].

bracteole A small leaf arising from the floral axis.

Brasil 1 Farmacopeia dos Estados Unidos do Brasil (1926).
Brasil 2 Farmacopeia dos Estados Unidos do Brasil (1959).
Brasil 3 Farmacopeia dos Estados Unidos do Brasil (1976).

brightening agent A substance added to the active
constituents.

Cl 10 parts mother tincture and 90 parts ethanol.

C2 (C3, C4, ....) C2 is | part CI and 99 parts ethanol (the
dilutions continue in a 1:99 fashion, each starting with the
previous dilution as the | part fraction and adding 99 parts).

calculosis The condition or formation of calculi.

calyx The outer set of floral leaves consisting of fused or
separate sepals.

campanulate Shaped like a bell.
capitulum A rounded or flattened cluster of sessile flowers.
capsule A closed container that contains seeds or spores.

carminative An aid to relieve gas from the alimentary canal.
An agent that acts to relieve colic.

carpel A small pistil or seed vessel comprising the innermost
whorl of a flower.

cataplasm A poultice or soft external application.

catarrh An inflammation of the air passages usually involving
the nose, throat, or lungs.

catkin An ament or cattail-like spicate inflorescence bearing
scaly bracts.

cauline Growing on the upper portion of a stem.

CF 49 Codex Francais = Pharmacopoea Gallica =
Pharmacopee Francaise VII (1949).

ChinPIX The Pharmacopoeia Commission of PRC (1988),
Pharmacopeia of the People's Medical Publishing House,

Beijing.

choiagogue An agent that stimulates the flow of bile from
the gallbladder to the duodenum.

choleretic An agent that stimulates the production of bile by
the liver.

climacteric The syndrome of physical and psychic changes
that occur during the transition to menopause.

comminuted To break or crush into small pieces.

Commission E Indications relating to the Commission E
monographed as published by the German Federal Health
Agency (BfArM).

cordate A heart-shaped leaf.
coriaceous Tough, strong, and leather-like.

corolla The inner set of floral leaves that consist of separate or
fused leaves.

cortex In botany, the bark of a tree or the rind of a fruit.

cotyledon A seed leaf, or the first set of leaves from the
embryo in seed plants.

crenate In reference to leaf structure, having a margin cut into
rounded scallops.

CsL 2 Pharmacopoea Bohemoslovenica IT (1954) + Suppl.

CsL 3 Pharmacopoea Bohemoslovenica HI (1970) +
Suppl. (1976).

cyme An inflorescence where the axes always end in a single
flower.

D1 (2, 3,4 ....) Mother tincture.

D2 1 part mother tincture and 9 parts ethanol.

D3 (D4, DS, ...) D3 is 1 part D2 and 9 parts ethanol (the
dilutions continue in a 1:9 fashion, each starting with the
previous dilution as the 1 part fraction and adding 9 parts).

DAB Deutsches Arzneibuch (German Pharmacopoeia).

DAB 10 Deutsches Arzneibuch 10. Ed. (1991),

Deutscher Apotheker, Verlag, Govi-Verlag GmbH,
Frankfurt/Main.

----- PAGE 1099 -----
GLOSSARY

DAB 1998 Deutsches Arzneibuch 1998. Deutscher Apotheker
Verlag, Govi-Verlag GmbH. Frankfurt/Main.

DAB 6 Deutsches Arzneibuch 6. Ed. (1926) + Suppl. R. V.
Deckers Verlag, G. Schenck, Berlin.

DAB 7 Deutsches Arzneibuch 7. Ed. (1968) + Suppl.,
Deutscher Apotheker Verlag. Stuttgart, Govi- Verlag GmbH,
Frankfurt/Main.

DAB 9 Deutsches Arzneibuch 9. Ed. (1986), Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft, Stuttgart. Govi-Verlag GmbH,
Frankfurt/Main.

DAC 79 Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Berufsvertretungen
Deutscher Apotheker (Eds.) (1979), Deutscher Arzneimittel-
Codex (und Ergiinzungslieferungen), Govi-Verlag,
Pharmazeutischer Verlag. Frankfurt/Main, Deutscher
ApothekerVerlag, Stuttgart.

DAC 86 Bundesvereinigung Deutscher Apothekerverbande
(1986), Deutscher Arzneimittel-Codex 1986 mit Erganzungen.
Deutscher Apotheker Verlag. Stuttgart, Govi-Verlag,
Frankfurt/Main.

Dan IX Pharmacopoea Danica IX (1948) + Suppl.

deciduous A tree that sheds its leaves at the end of
the growing season.

decoction A liquid substance prepared by boiling plant parts
in water or some other liquid for a period of time.

decumbent A plant, stem, or shoot mat lays on the ground
but terminates with an ascending apex.

dentate Tooth-like projections on the margin ofa leaf.

dessertspoonful A unit of measure equal to about Th.
fluidrams.

diaphoretic An agent that causes sweating or excessive
perspiration.

dioecious In botany, when a plant has either a stamen or
a pistil on each flower.

downy Covered with soft hairs.
dromotropic An effect on nerve fiber conduction.

dropsy An abnormal accumulation of fluid in body tissues
or cavities usually related to an underlying disease.

GLOBULAR / 851

drupe A one-seeded fiuit; as in olive or peach.

EB 6 Erganzungsbuch zum Deutschen Arzneibuch, 6. Ausg.
(1941), Dr. Hans Hosel, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, Berlin.

Egypt 84 Egyptian Pharmacopoeia 1984.

embrocation An external medication applied as a liniment
or other liquid form.

emmenagogue A substance that renews or stimulates
the menstrual flow.

endosperm The albumin of the seed.

epicalyx An external accessory calyx located outside the
true calyx of the flower.

eructation The act of belching.

ESCOP European Scientific Cooperation on Phytotherapy,
Elburg, Holland.

exocarp The outer wall ofa fruit covering.

extraction The portion of a plant that is removed by solvents
and used in drug preparations in solid or liquid form.

febrifuge An agent that counteracts fever: an antipyretic.

floret A little flower; one of the small individual flowers that
form a cluster or head.

flos Flower.

fluidextract A hydroalcoholic preparation of a botanical drug
where | ml of the preparation contains | gm of the standard
botanical.

folium The leaf ofa plant.

fructus Fruit.

furuncle A boil or sore caused by bacterial infection of the
subcutaneous tissue.

galenic preparation Medications prepared from plants as
opposed to refined chemicals.

glabrous Having a smooth surface; without hair or down.

globular Spherical.

----- PAGE 1100 -----
852 / GLOBULE

globule A small round pill of compressed sucrose that has
been saturated with an alcoholic tincture of a specified
homeopathic dilution (commonly 1:100).

HAB | Homoopathisches Arzneibuch, 1.Ed. (1978), 14.
Suppl. (1985), Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, Stuttgart,
Govi-Verlag, Frankfurt/Main.

HAB 34 Homoopathisches Arzneibuch (1934), Verlag Dr.
Willmar Schwabe, Berlin Helv V Pharmacopoea
Helvetica V (1933) +Suppl.

hastate Plant leaves with a triangular shape with the base
coming together on each side into an acute lobe.

Helv VI Pharmacopoea Helvetica VI (1971) + Suppl.,
Eidgenossische Drucksachen- und Materialzentrale, Bern.

Helv VII Pharmacopoea Helvetica VII (1987), Eidgenossische
Drucksachen- und Materialzentrale, Bern.

hilum The scar on a seed which indicates its point of
attachment.

Hisp IX Farmacopea Oficial Espanola LX (1954).

homeopathic Substances that are administered in minute
amounts with the theory that substances that may cause or
mimic a disease in larger amounts can be used to treat or
prevent disease if given in small amounts.

HPUS 78 Homoeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United States
Vin (1978) mit Supplement A (1982).

HPUS 88 Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the
United States/Revision Service (1988).

Hung VII Lang B (Eds.) (1986) Pharmacopea Hungarica VII,
Akademiai kiado, Budapest.

imbricate Overlapping flower petals; as in the bud.

indehiscent A fruit or grain that doesn't open spontaneously
when ripe.

IndP 66 Ministry of Health (1966), Pharmacopoeia of India U,
The manager of publications, Delhi.

IndP 85 Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (1985),
Pharmacopoeia of India III, Publications & Information
Directorate (CSER), New Dehli.

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

IndPC 53 Mukerji B (1953), The Indian Pharmaceutical
Codex, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, New Dehli.

induration The process of hardening.

inflorescence The mode of disposition of flowers or the act
of flowering. The spatial arrangement of flowers along the axis.

infusion The process of steeping or soaking plant matter in a
liquid to extract its medicinal properties without boiling.

involucre A ring or rosette of bracts that surround the base of
a flower cluster.

Ital 6 Farmacopea Ufficiale del Regno dTtalia VI (1940),
Istituto poligrafico dello stato, Rom.

Ital 7 Farmacopea Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana VII
(1965), Istituto poligrafico dello stato P.V., Rom.

Ital 8 Farmacopea Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana VIII
(1972), Vols. 1-3, Istituto poligrafico dello stato P.F., Rom.

Ital 9 Farmacopea Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiane [IX
(1985), Instituto poligrafico e zecca dello stato, Rom.

Jap XI The Pharmacopeia of Japan 11th Edition (1986),
The Society of Japanese Pharmacopoeia, Jakuji Nippo, Ltd.,
Tokyo.

Jug IV Pharmacopoea Jugoslavia IV (1984).

KomE Kommission E Monogr. d. BfArM
(chem. Bundesgesundheitsamt - Fed. Health Agency) publ.
in Bundesanzeiger (German Federal Gazette) Mar 28.

labiate A lip-like part of a plant; like a calyx or corolla.

lanceolate Lance-like or spear shaped; often referring to a
long, tapering leaf:

lignum Woody tissue.

maceration The softening ofa solid preparation by soaking
in a liquid.
meteorism The presence of gas in the intestine or stomach.

monoecious Having stamens and pistils in separate blossoms
on the same plant.

mucilage |. A viscid substance in a plant consisting of a gum
dissolved in the juice of the plant. 2. A soothing application
made from plant gums.

----- PAGE 1101 -----
GLOSSARY

muscarinic An effect characterized by contraction of smooth
muscle, excessive salivation and perspiration, abdominal colic
and excessive bronchial secretion.

Ned 5 Nederlande Pharmacopee V (1926).

Ned 6 Nederlandse Pharmacopee VI (1958),
Staatsdrukkerij - en uitgeverijbedrijf, "s-Gravenhage.

Ned 9 Nederlandse Pharmacopee [X (1983-87),
staatsuitgeverij,'s-Gravenhage.

NF XV National Formulary XV

Nord 63 Pharmacopoea Nordica, Editio Danica III (1963).
Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck, Kopenhagen.

Norv V Pharmacopoea Novegica V (1939).
nutlet The stone in a drupe.
NYHA New York Heart Association.

OAB 81 Osterreichisches Arzneibuch (1981), Vols 1-2,
Osterreichische Staatsdruckerei, Wien.

OAB 9 Osterreichisches Arzneibuch 9. Ed. (1960), Vols. 1-2,
Osterreichische Staatsdruckerei, Wien.

OAB 90 Osterreichisches Arzneibuch (1990) und 1. Suppl.,
Verlag der Osterreichischen Staatsdruckerei, Wien.

obstipation Persistent or intractable constipation.

panicle A loose, multiple flower cluster usually formed from
numerous branches.

pedicel The stalk that supports a single flower in an
inflorescence of flowers arranged upon a common peduncle.

peduncle A stalk that bears a flower or flower cluster.

percolation A liquid containing the soluble portion of a drug
that has been filtered or separated from the plant matter.

perennial A plant that grows for three or more years.

perianth The external envelope of a flower which does not
include the calyx and corolla if they are distinguishable.

pericarp The wall of the ripened ovary ofa flower containing
the germ of the fruit.

petal One of the leaves of the corolla.

RETICULATE / 853

petiolate The footstalk of a leaf:
PF IX Pharmacopee Francaise LX (1973).
PF VIII Pharmacopee Francaise = Codex Francaise VDI (1965).

PF X La Commission Nationale de Pharmacopee (1988),
Pharmacopee Francaise X. L' Adrapharm, Paris, + Suppl.

PhEur Euroaisches Arzneibuch. 2. Ed.

PI Ed 1/1 Pharmacopoea Intemationalis I (1955),
Internationales Arzneibuch, Vol. I, Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Stuttgart.

pinnate Compound leaves or leaflets that have a feather-like
arrangement with leaves arranged on both sides of a common
axis.

pinnatisect Cleft pinnately or almost to the midrib.

pistil The seed-bearing organ of flowering plants consisting of
the ovary and the stigma; usually with a style.

plaster A viscous substance that is spread on linen or cloth and
applied to a part of the body for healing purposes.

Pol IV FarmakopeaPolskalV(1965).
Portug 35 Pharmacopeia Portuguesa(1 935).

Portug 46 Farmacopeia Portuguesa VI (1946) +
Suppl. 1961, 1967.

poultice A soft, moist mass of plant parts' that are wrapped in
muslin or gauze and applied warm or hot to the skin.

pubescent In botany, having a fuzzy surface; covered with
soft fine short hairs.

raceme An inflorescence where flowers are borne on stalks at
an almost equal distance apart along an elongated axis that
continues to grow with flowers opening in succession from
below.

radix The root ofa plant.

reniform When describing a leaf, kidney or bean shaped.

resin An amorphous, solid or semi-solid substance produced by
plants usually as a result of terpene oxidation.

reticulate Veins, fibers, or lines crossing like a network
across the surface of a leaf.

----- PAGE 1102 -----
854 / RHIZOME

PDR_ FOR HERBAL MEDICIM

rhizome An underground stem.
roborant A tonic or substance that gives strength.

Rom IX Farmacopeea Romana, Editia A, [X-A (1976),
Editura medicala.

Ross 10 Gosudarstvviennaja Farmakopoea X SSSR,
National Pharmakopoea Nr. 10 der UdSSR.

Ross 9 Gosudarstwiennaja Farmakopoea IX SSSR,
National Pharmakopoea Nr. 9 der UdSSR.

runners A plant that spreads or forms by means of runners.

scape A flower stalk or peduncle arising from the surface or
below the ground.

SChizocarp A dry fruit that splits at maturity into several
one-seeded carpels.

scrofulous Having an ulcerous or diseased appearance on the
surface.

secretagogue An agent that promotes secretion.
secretolytic To inhibit or dry secretions.
semen A seed or seed-like fruit.

sepal One of the modified leaves comprising a calyx; usually
positioned outside and surrounding the carpels.

serrate Having notched, teeth-like protrusions along the
margin of a leaf that point toward the apex.

sessile Attached directly to the base of a main stem or branch
without the aid of an intervening stalk.

stamen The organ of the flower that comprises the anther and
filament and gives rise to the male gamete.

stipule A stalk.

stomachic An agent that promotes digestion and improves
appetite.

subshrub A perennial plant which has woody stems with the
exception of the terminal portion of new growth, which drops
off annually.

sudorific Causing or inducing sweat.

tendril The portion of a stem, leaf, or stipule that modified ini
a slender, spiral-shaped, touch-sensitive specialized appendag
which acts as an anchor to aid in the plants ability to climb.

tepal Any of the modified leaves that combine to make up the tf
perianth.

testa The hard outer coating of a seed: the exocarp.

tincture An alcoholic or hydroalcoholic mixture prepared
from plant parts.

tomentose Covered with densely matted hairs.
tonic A medication used to fortify and provide increased vigor

turiones A shoot or sprout which develops from a bud on a

subterranean rootstock.

umbel Numerous flower stalks arising from the same point at
the apex of the main stalk and terminating at equal distance
from the joining point.

undulate A wavy formation at the margin ofa leaf, or bendin
ina gradual curve.

USP 23-NF 18 United States Pharmacopeial Convention
(1995), The United States Pharmacopeia USP 23-NF 18 +
Suppl. 1-7.

USP XIX United States Pharmacopeial Convention (1975),
The United States Pharmacopeia USP XLX.

USP XX United States Pharmacopeial Convention (1980),
The United States.

USP XXI United States Pharmacopeial Convention (1985),
The United States Pharmacopeia USP XXI-NF XVI.

USPXXII United States Pharmacopeial Convention (1989),
The United States Pharmacopeia USP XXH-NF XVII.

villous Having long, soft hairs.
vulnery A preparation applied externally.

wineglassful A measure equal to four fluidounces.

A

----- PAGE 1103 -----
Poison Control Centers

Many of the centers listed below are certified by the PDR. Staff members are trained to resolve toxic situa-
American Association of Poison Control Centers. tions in the home of the caller, though hospital referrals
Certified centers are marked by an asterisk after the are given in some instances. The centers also offer a
name. Each has to meet certain criteria. It must, for range of educational services to both the public and
example, serve a large geographic area; it must be open _ healthcare professionals. In some states, these larger cen-
24 hours a day and provide direct-dial or toll-free ters exist side by side with smaller centers offering a
access; it must be supervised by a medical director; and more limited range of services.

it must have registered pharmacists or nurses available
to answer questions from the public.

Within each state, centers are listed alphabetically by
city. Telephone numbers designated "TTY" are teletype

The centers have a wide variety of toxicology resources, lines for the hearing-impaired. "TDD" numbers reach a
including a computerized database of some 750,000 sub- telecommunication device for the deaf.
stances maintained by MICROMEDEX, INC., an affiliate of

ALABAMA
BIRMINGHAM

Regional Pois4m Control Center,
The Children's Hospital of Alabama (*i
1600 7th Ave. South
Birmingham. AL 35233-1711
Business: 205-939-9720
Emergency: 205-933-4050
205-939-9201
800-292-66781 AL)
Fax: 205-939-9245

TUSCALOOSA

Alabama Poison Center, Tuscaloosa <1

2503 Phoenix Dr.

Tuscaloosa. AL 35405

Busine 205-345-0600

Emergency: 205-345-0600
800-462-0800(AL>

Fax: 205-759-7994

ALASKA
ANCHORAGE

Anchorage Poison Control Center.
Providence Hospital
P.O. Box 196604
3200 Providence Dr.
Anchorage. AK 99519-6604
Business: 907-562-2211
ext. 3633

Emergency; 907-261-3193

800-478-3 !93(AK)
Fax: 907-261-3645

FAIRBANKS

Fairbanks Poison Control Center
1650CowlesSt.

Fairbanks. AK 99701

Business: 907-456-7182
Emergency: 907-456-7182
Fax: " 907-458-5553

ARIZONA
PHOENIX

Samaritan Regional Poison Center (*)

Good Samaritan Regional Medical Center

Ancillary-1

11 11 East McDowell Rd.

Phoenix. AZ 85006

Business: 602-4954884

Emereency:  602-
800-

Fax: 602-256-7579

TUCSON

Arizona Poison and Drug Information Center (*)

Arizona Health Sciences Center

1501 North Campbell Ave.

Room. 1156

Tucson. AZ 85724

Emergency: 520-626-6016
800-362-010KAZ)

Fax: 520-626-2720

ARKANSAS
LITTLE ROCK

Arkansas Poison and
Drug Information Center,
College of Pharmacy - UAMS
4301 West Markham St.

Slot 522
Little Rock. AR 72205
Business: 501-661-6161

Emergency: — 800-376-4766<AR)
TDDHTY: — 800-641-3805

CALIFORNIA
FRESNO

California Poison Control System-Fresno/Madera (*)
iren's Hospital

ley Children's Place

Madera, CA 93638-8762

Emergency: 800-876%»766(CA)

SACRAMENTO

California Poison Control System-Sacramento (*)
UCDMC-HSF Room 1024

2315 Stockton Blvd.

Sacramento. CA 95817

Business: 916-734-3415
Emergency:  800-876-4766(CA)
Fax: 916-734-7796
SAN DIEGO

California Poison Control System-San Diego (*)
UCSD Medical Center

200 West Arbor Dr.

San Diego. CA 92103-8925

Emergency: — 800-876-4766(CA)

SAN FRANCISCO

California Poison Control System-San Francisco
San Francisco General Hospital

1001 Potrero Ave.. Room E86

San Francisco. CA 94110

Emergency: 800-876-4766(CA)

COLORADO
DENVER

Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug Center (*)

8802 East 9th Ave.

Denver. CO 80220-6800

Business: 303-739-1100

Emergency: 303-739-1123
800-332-307 3( CO)

Fax: 303-739-1119

CONNECTICUT
FARMINGTON

Connecticut Regional
Poison Control Center (*)

University of Connecticut Health Center
263 Farmington Ave.

Farmington. CT 06030-5365

Business: 860-679-3456
Emergency: 800-343-2722(CT)
Fax: 860-679-1623

PHILADELPHIA, PA,

The Poison Control Center (*)

3535 Market St.

Suite 985

Philadelphia, PA 19104-3309

Emergency: 800-722-7112(PA)
215-386-2100

DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA
WASHINGTON, DC

National Capital Poison Center (*)
3201 New Mexico Ave., NW

Suite 310
Washington, DC 20016
Business: 202-362-3867
Emergency: 202-625-3333
TTY: 202-362-8563
Fax: 202-362-8377
FLORIDA
JACKSONVILLE

Florida Poison Information Center-Jacksonville (*)

University Medical Center

University of Florida Health Science

Center-Jacksonville

655 W. 8th St.

Jacksonville, FL 32209

Emergency: 904-549-4480
800-282-317HFL)

Fax: 904-549-4063

----- PAGE 1104 -----
856
MIAMI

Florida Poison Information Center-Miami (*)

University of Miami,

School of Medicine

Department of Pediatries

P.O. Box 016960 (R-131)

Miami, FL 33101

Emergency: 305-585-5253
800-282-3171 (FL)

Fax: 305-242-9762

TAMPA

Florida Poison Information Center-Tampa {*)
Tampa General Hospital

P.O. Box 1289

Tampa, FL 33601

Emergency: 813-253 4414

(Tampa)

800-282-3171 (FL)
Fax: 813-253-4443
GEORGIA

ATLANTA

Georgia Poison Center (*)

Hughes Spalding Children's Hospital,

Grady Health System

80 Butler St., SE

P.O. Box 26066

Atlanta, G A 30335-3801

Emergency: 404-616-9000
800-282-5846(GA)

TDD: 404-616-9287

Fax: 404-616-6657

HAWAII
HONOLULU

Hawaii Poison Center
1319PunahousSl.

Honolulu. HI 96826
Emergency: 808-941-4411
Fax: 808-535-7922

IDAHO
(DENVER. CO)

Rocky Mountain Poison & Drug Center (*)

8802 E. 9th Ave.

Denver. CO 80220-6800

Emergency: 800-860-0620(ID)
303-739-1123

ILLINOIS
CHICAGO

Ilinois Poison Center (*)
222 South Riverside Plaza

Suite 1900
Chicago, IL 60606

Business: 312-906-6136
Emergency: 800-942-5969(IL)
Fax: 312-803-5400
URBANA

ASPCA/National Animal Poison Control Center (*)
1717S. PhiloRd., Suite 36

Urbana. IL 61802

Business: 217-337-5030

Emergency: 888-426-4435

Fax: 217-337-0599

INDIANA
INDIANAPOLIS

Indiana Poison Center (*)

Methodist Hospital of Indiana

1-65 at 21st St

Indianapolis, IN 46206-1367

Emergency: 317-929-2323
800-382-9097(IN)

Fax: 317-929-2337

IOWA
IOWA CITY

Poison Control Center

The University of lowa Hospitals & Clinies
Dept. of Pharmaceutical Care. CC101 GH
200 Hawkins Dr.

Iowa City, IA 52242

Emergency: 800-272-6477(1A)

SIOUX CITY

Iowa Poison Center
2720 Stone Park Blvd.

Sioux City. IA 51104

Business: 712-277-2222
Emeraencv:  800-352-2222(IA)
Fax: 712-279-7852

KANSAS
KANSAS CITY

Mid-America Poison Control Center,
University of Kansas Medical Center
3901 Rainbow Blvd.

Room B-400

Kansas City, KS_ 66160-7231

Business & 913-588-6633
Emeraencv: _ 800-332-6633(KS)
TDD:" ' 913-588-6639
Fax: 913-588-2350
TOPEKA

Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center
Emergency Department

1500 S.W." 10th

Topeka. KS 66604-1353

Busines 785-354-6000
Emercencv: 785-354-6100

Fax: " 785-354-5004

KENTUCKY
LOUISVILLE

Kentucky Regional Poison Center (*)
Medical Towers South

Suite 572

234 E. Gray St.

Louisville. KY 40202

Business: 502-629-7264
Emeraencv: 502-589-8222
Fax: " 502-629-7277

LOUISIANA
MONROE

Louisiana Drug and Poison Information Center (*)
Northeast Louisiana University School of Pharmacy
Sugar Hall

Monroe. LA 71209-6430

Business: 31C-342-1710

Emergenev:  800-256-9822(LA)

Fax: " 318-342-1744

MAINE
PORTLAND

Maine Poison Control Center
Maine Medical Center

22 Bramhall St.

Portland. ME 04102

Business: 207-871-2950
Emergency: 800-442-6305(ME)
Fax: 207-871-6226

MARYLAND
BALTIMORE

Maryland Poison Center (*)

University of Maryland at Baltimore

School of Pharmacy

20 North Pine St., PH 230

Baltimore. MD 21201

Business: 410-706-7604

Emeraencv: 410-706-7701
800-492-2414(MD)

TDD: 410-706-1858

Fax: 410-706-7184

PDR FOR HERBAL MEDICINES

MASSACHUSETTS
BOSTON

Massachusetts Poison Control System (*)

300 Longwood Ave.

Boston, MA 02115

Emergency: 617-232-2120
S00-682-9211 (MA)

Fax: 617-738-0032
MICHIGAN
DETROIT

Poison Control Center (*)

Children's Hospital of Michigan

4160 John R Harper Pro!!Office Bldg.

Suite 616

Detroit, MI 48201

Business: 313-745-5335

Emergency: 313-745-5711
800-764-7661 (MI)

TDD/TTY: 800-356-3232

Fax: 313-745-5493

GRAND RAPIDS

Spectrum Health Regional Poison Center (*)
1840 Wealthy SE

Grand Rapids. MI. 49506-2968

Busines 616-774-5329

Emergency: 800-764-7661 (MI)
TDD/TTY: 800-356-3232

Fax: 616-774-/204

MINNESOTA
MINNEAPOLIS

Hennepin Regional Poison Center (*)
Hennepin County Medical Center
701 Park Ave.

Minneapolis. MN 55415

Business: 612-347-3144
Emergency: 800-764-7661
(MN. SD)
612-347-3141
TTY: 612-904-4691
Fax: 612-904-4289
MISSISSIPPI
HATTIESBURG

Poison Center,

Forrest General Hospital

P.O. Box 16389

400 South 28th Ave.

Hattiesburg, MS_ 39404

Emergency: 601-288-2100 '
601-288-2197
601-288-2199

Fax: 601-288-2125

JACKSON

Miss
University of M
2500 North State St.

Jackson, MS 39216

Business: 601-984-1675
Emergency: 601-354-7660
Fax: 601-984-1676

sippi Regional Poison Control Center,
sippi Medical Center

MISSOURI
KANSAS CITY

Poison Control Center,
Children's Mercy Hospital
24010illhamRd"

Kansas City, MO. 64108-4619
Busin 816-234-3053
Emergency: 816-234-3430

ST. LOUIS

Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital

Regional Poison Center (*)

1465 South Grand Blvd.

St. Louis, MO 63104

Emeraency:  800-366-8888(MO)
314-772-5200

Fax: 314-577-5355

----- PAGE 1105 -----
POISON CONTROL CENTERS

MONTANA
(DENVER, CO)

Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug Center (*)
8802 East 9th Av
Denver. CO 80220-6800
Emergency: 800-525-5042(MT)
303-739-1123

Fax: 303-739-1119
NEBRASKA
OMAHA

The Poison Center (*)

Children's Hospital

8301 Dodaest.

Omaha. NE 68114

Emergency: 402-354-5555
(Omaha)
800-955-9119
(NE & WY)

NEVADA
(DENVER, CO)

Rocky Mountain Poison

and Drug Center (*)

8802 East 9th Ave.

Denver. CO 80220-6800

Emergency: 800-446-6179(NV)
303-739-1123

Fax: 303-739-1119

NEW HAMPSHIRE
LEBANON

New Hampshire Poison information Center.
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center
1 Medical Center Dr.
Lebanon. NH 03756
Emergency: 603-650-8000
(ask for Poison Center)
800-562-8236(NH)

Fax: 603-650-8986
NEW JERSEY
NEWARK

New Jersey Poison Information and
Education System (*)

201 Lyons Ave.

Newark. NJ 07112

Business 973-926-7443
Emergency: _ 800-764-7661(NJ)
Fax: 973-705-8098

NEW MEXICO
ALBUQUERQUE

New Mexico Poison and

Drug Information Center (*)

University of New Mexfco

Health Sciences Library.

Room 125

Albuquerque, NM_ 87131-1076

Emergency: 505-272-2222
800-432-6866(NM)

Fax: 505-277-5892

NEW YORK
BUFFALO

Western New York Regional Poison
Control Center (*) Children's Hospital of Buffalo
219 Bryant SL
Buffalo. NY 14222
Business: 716-878-1657
Emergency: 716-878-7654
800-888-7655
(NY Western Regions Only)

MINEOLA

Long Island Regional Poison Control Center (*)

Winthrop University Hospital

259 First St.

Mineola,NY 11501

Emergency: 516-542-2323
516-663-2650

TDD: 516-747-3323
(Nassau)
516-924-8811
(Suffolk)
Fax: 516-739-2070
NEW YORK

New York City Poison Control Center (*)
NYC Dept of Health
455 First Ave., Room 123

Box 81
New York. NY 10016
Business: 212-447-8154

Emergency: 800-210-3985
212-3409 1494
212-POISONS
212-VENENOS

TD

Fax

ROCHESTER

Finger Lakes Regional Poison and Drug
Information Center (*) .

University of Rochester Medical Center
601 Elmwood Ave.

Box 321

Rochester, NY 14642

Business: 716-273-4155

Emergency: 716-275-3232
800-333-0542(NY)

TTY: 716-273-3854

Fax: 716-244-1677

SLEEPY HOLLOW

Hudson Valley Regional Poison Center (*)
Phelps Memorial Hospital Center

701 N. Broadway

Sleepy Hollow. NY 10591

914-366-3030
800-336-6997(NY)

Fax: 914-353-1050

SYRACUSE

Central New York Poison Control Center (*)

NY Health Science Center

750 East Adams St.

yracuse. NY 13210

Business: 315-464-7073

Emergency: 315-476-4766
800-252-5655(NY)

Fax: 315464-7077

NORTH CAROLINA
CHARLOTTE

Carolinas Poison Center (*)

Caroiinas Medical Center

5000 Airport Center Pkwy.

Suite B

P.O. Box 32861 -

Charlotte, NC 28208

Business: 704-355-3054

Emergency: 704-355-4000
800-848-6946(NC)

NORTH DAKOTA
FARGO

North Dakota Poison Information Center,
Meritcare Medical Center
720 North 4th St.
Fargo, ND 58122
Business: 701-234-6062
Emergency: 701-234-5575
800-732-2200
(ND, MN, SD)
Fax: 701-234-5090

857

OHIO
CINCINNATI

Cinrinnati Drug & Poison Information Center

and Regional Poison Control System (*)

2368 Victory Pkwy.

Suite 300

Cincinnati, OH 45206

Emergency: 513-558-5111
800-872-5111 (OH)

Fax: 513-558-5301

CLEVELAND

Greater Cleveland Poison Control Center
11100 Euclid Ave.
Cleveland, OH 44106-6010
Emergency: 216-231-4455
888-23 1-4455(OH)
Fax: 216-844-3242

COLUMBUS

Central Ohio Poison Center (*)
700 Children's Dr.

Room L032
Columbus, OH 43205-2696
Business: 614-722-2635
Emergency 614-228-1323

800-682-7625(OH)
800-762-0727
(Dayton only)
TTY: 614-222-2272
F: 614-221-2672

TOLEDO

Poison Information Center of NW Ohio,

Medical College of Ohio Hospital

3000 Arlington Ave.

Toledo. OH 43614

Business: 419-383-3897

Emergency: 419-383-3897
800-589-3897(OH)

Fax: 419-383-6066

OKLAHOMA
OKLAHOMA CITY

Oklahoma Poison Control Center, Univer:
Oklahoma and Children's Hospital of Oklahoma
940 Northeast 13th St.

Room 3512
Oklahoma City. OK 73104
Business: 405-271-5454
Emergency: 800-764-7661 (OK)
TDD: 405-271-1122
Fax: 405-271-1816
OREGON
PORTLAND

Oregon Poison Center (*)

Oregon Health Sciences University

3181 S.W. Sam Jackson Park Rd.

Portland. OR 97201

Emergency: 503-494-8968
800-452-7165(OR)

Fax: 50394-4980

PENNSYLVANIA
HERSHEY

Central Pennsylvania Poison Center (*)

University Hospital

Milton S. Hershey Medical Center

MC H043. P.O. Box 850

500 University Dr.

Hershey, PA 17033-0850

Emergency: _ 800-521-6110(PA)
717-531-6111

Fax: 717-531-6932

----- PAGE 1106 -----
858
PHILADELPHIA

The Poison Control Center (*)
3535 Market St., Suite 985
Philadelphia, PA 19104-3309
Busines 215-590-2003
Emergency: 215-386-2100
800-722-7112(PA)
Fax: 215-590-4419

PITTSBURGH

Pittsburgh Poison Center (*)
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh
3705 Fifth Ave.

Pittsburgh. PA 15213

Business: 412-692-5600
Emergency: 412-681-6669
Fax: " 412-692-7497

PUERTO RICO
SANTURCE

San Jorge Children's Hospital Poison Center
258 San Jorge St

Santurce. PR 00912

Emergency: 787-726-5674

RHODE ISLAND
PROVIDENCE

Lifespan Poison Center (*)
Rhode Island Hospital

593 Eddy St

Providence. RI 02903
Emergency: 40144-5727
Fax: 401-444-8062

SOUTH CAROLINA
COLUMBIA

Palmetto Poison Center,

College of Pharmacy,

University of South Carolina

Columbia. SC_29208

Business: 803-777-7909

Emergency: 803-777-1117
800-922-1117(SC)

Fax: 803-777-6127

SOUTH DAKOTA
(FARGO, ND)

North Dakota Poison Information Center
Meritcare Medical Center

720 North 4th St.

Fargo, ND 58122

Business: 701-234-6062

Emergency: 701-234-5575
800-7."2-2200
(SD, MN, ND)

Fax: 701-234-5090

(MINNEAPOLIS, MN)
Hennepin Regional Poison Center (*)
Hennepin County Medical Center
701 Park Ave

Minneapolis, MN 55415

Busines 612-347-3144
Emergency: 800-764-7661
(MN, SD)
612-347-3141
TTY: 612-9044691
TENNESSEE

MEMPHIS

Southern Poison Center
875 Monroe Ave.

Suite 104
Memphis. TN 38163
Busines 901-448-6800

Emergency: 901-528-6048
800-288-9999(TN)
Fax: 901-448-5419

NASHVILLE

Middle Tennessee Poison Center (*)

The Center for Clinical Toxicology,

Vanderbilt University Medical Center

1161 21st Ave. South

501 Oxford House

Nashville. TN. 37232-4632

Business: 615-936-0760

Emergency: 615-936-2034
800-288-9999(TN)

TDD: 615-936-2047

Fax: 615-936-2046

TEXAS
AMARILLO

Texas Panhandle Poison Center

Northwest Texas Hospital

1501 S. Coulter Dr.

Amarillo.TX 79106

Emergency: 806-354-1000
800-764-766 (TX)

DALLAS

North Texas Poison Center (*)
5201 Ham! Hines Blvd.

P.O. Box 35926

Dallas. TX 75235

Business: 214-590-6625
Emergency: 800-764-766 KTX)
Fax: 214-590-5008

EL PASO

West Texas Regional Poison Center (*)
Thomason Hospital

4815 Alameda Ave.

El Paso. TX 79905

Emergency: 800-764-766 KTX)

GALVESTON

Southeast Texas Poison Center (*)
The University of Texas

Medical Branch

301 University Ave

Galveston. TX 77555-1175

Business: 409-766-4403
Emergency: — 800-764-7661(TX)
Fax: 409-772-3917

SAN ANTONIO

South Texas Poison Center(*)
The University of Texas Health Sciences Center
7703 Floyd Curl Dr.. MC 7849
San Antonio. TX 78229-3900
Emergency: 210-567-5762
800-764-766 KTX)
Fax: 210-567-5718

TEMPLE

Central Texas Poison Center (*)

Scott & White Memorial Hospital

2401 South 3ist St

Temple, TX 76508

Business: 254-724-4636

Emergency: 800-764-7661 (TX)
254-724-7401

Fax: 254-724-1731

UTAH
SALT LAKE CITY

Utah Poison Control Center (*)

410ChipetaWay

Suite 230

Salt Lake City. UT 84108

Emergency: 801-581-2151
800-456-7707(UT)

Fax: 801-581-4199

VERMONT
BURLINGTON

Vermont Poison Center,
Fletcher Allen Health Care
111 Colchester Ave.
Burlington. VT 05401
Business: 802-656-2721
Emergency: 802-658-3456
877-658-3456
(toll-free)
Fax: 802-656-4802

PDR_ FOR HERBAL MEDICINES,

VIRGINIA
CHARLOTTESVILLE

Blue Ridge Poison Center (*)

University of Virginia Health System

Box 437

Charlottesville, VA 22908

Emergency: 804-924-5543
800-451-1428(VA)

Fax: 804-971-8657

RICHMOND

Virginia Poison Center (*)

Virginia Commonwealth University

P.O. Box 980522

Richmond. VA 23298-0522

Emergency:  800-552-6337(VA)
804-828-9123

Fax: 804-828-5291
WASHINGTON
SEATTLE

Washington Poison Center (*)

155 NE 100th St.

Suite 400

Seattle, WA 98125-8012

Business 206-517-2351

Emergency: 206-526-2121
800-732-6985(WA)

TDD: 800-572-0638
206-517-2394
Fax: 206-526-8490

WEST VIRGINIA
CHARLESTON

West Virginia Poison Center (*)

3110MacCorkle Ave. SE

Charleston. WV 25304

Business 304-347-1212

Emergency: 304-348-4211
800-642-3625(WV)

Fax: 304-348-9560

WISCONSIN
MADISON

Poison Control Center,
University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics
600 Highland Ave

F6-133
Madison. WT 53792
Business 608-262-7537

Emergency: 608-262-3702
800-815-8855(W1)

MILWAUKEE

Children's Hospital Poison Center,

Children's Hospital of Wisconsin

9000 W. Wisconsin Ave.

P.O. Box 1997

Milwaukee, WI 53201

Business: 414-266-2000

Emergency: 414-266-2222
800-8 15-8855(WI)

Fax: 414-266-2820

Wyoming
OMAHA, NE

The Poison Center (*)

Children's Hospital

8301 Dodge St

Omaha,'NE68114

Emergency: 402-354-5555

(Omaha)

800-955-9119
(wy, NE)


==================================================
📖 SOURCE TEXTBOOK: The-Herbal-Medicine-Makers-Handbook - Copy.txt
==================================================


----- PAGE 1 -----
Pry MeN RAL
| MEDICINE MAKERS

RP BPOK

such of The M

a? “illustrated by Aina Green”

----- PAGE 2 -----
THE HERBAL
MepIcine-Maker’s HANDBOOK

A Home Manuat

James Green, Herbalist

Illustrated by Ajana Green

I
ie

----- PAGE 3 -----
Disclaimer: The nutritional information, recipes, and instructions contained within this
book are in no way intended as a substitute for medical counseling. Please do not
attempt self-treatment of a medical problem without consulting a qualified health
practitioner. The author and publisher expressly disclaim any and all liability for any
claims, damages, losses, judgments, expenses, costs, or injuries resulting from any
products offered in this book by participating companies and their employees or
agents. Nor does the inclusion of any resource group or company listed within this
book constitute an endorsement or guarantee of quality by the author or publisher.

Text copyright © 2000 by James Green
Interior author photo copyright © 2002 by Carolyn Staub

All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Crossing Press, an imprint of the
Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com

www.tenspeed.com

Crossing Press and the Crossing Press colophon are registered trademarks of Random
House, Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Green, James, 1940-
The herbal medicine-maker’s handbook: a home manual / by James Green.
p.cm.
1. Materia medica, Vegetable—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Traditional medicine—
Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Herbals—Handbooks, manuals, ete. I. Title.

RS164.G674 2000
615'.321-de21 00-030708

eISBN: 978-0-307-77946-5
Illustrations by Ajana Green

v3.1

----- PAGE 4 -----
AcknowLeDGMENTs

I want to express my deepest gratitude to Ajana, graphic artist and
illustrator, for gracing this book with your wonderfully creative
imagination and extraordinary talent. Your aesthetic spirit, wit, and
creative excellence generously conveyed by the illustrations lying
within these pages openly reflect a uniquely brilliant consciousness
I find intrinsic to your generation.... Speaking of which, I sincerely
thank you too, James Snow, for your regard and friendship. Your
clever mind and discerning herbalist’s eye have enhanced this
herbal and spared me litters of technical chagrin. I also wish to
extend my gratitude to Dave Broach for your good-natured
willingness to manifest the cover photo with your patience, your
Hasselblad, and the singular touch of your light, and shutter skills.
And while I’m on this roll, thank you Elaine Gill and skilled staff
members of The Crossing Press. Your support, your fluid spirit of
co-creating, and your confidence in my work as an herbalist and
writer leave little wonder in my mind why your catalogs repertoire
of publications is bursting with the works of so many excellent
authors. This is not to say that we didn’t have to get down and dirty
while tussling with a few differences of opinion, the aftermath of
which found a number of Ajana’s most splendid illustrations
adorning the cutting room floor, alas never to be seen by the
reader’s eyes; and that is the tragic component of this story.
However, the ending is of course a happy one, for all who enjoy
entering aesthetic realms of exquisite fantasy can visit Ajana’s
captivating Web site at <www.ajana-art.com > and experience the
beautiful sanctums of her talent and creative vision. Please note,
dear reader, this is not one of those commonplace commercial
plugs; this is a dad’s fervent praise of his daughter’s superb talent
and fascinating mind ... big difference, big, big difference. Go check
it out ... you'll come back delighted.

----- PAGE 5 -----
For
Bre and Ajana,
my gifted daughters
and artful companions

We dance our madness;
we dance our joy.
Oh precious ones, the fun has just begun.
Wild music is in the air;
there’s beauty flowing everywhere.

----- PAGE 6 -----
‘Tasie or Contents

Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Acknowledgments

Dedication

Protocur: A Word Before the Medicine Show

1 A Field Trip
2 A Few Herbs Are All You Need
3 Gardening and Harvesting, Drying, Garbling, and Storing
4 Kitchen Pharmacy Equipment
5 The Extraction Process
6 Solvents
7 Forms of Herbal Medicine
8 Infusion
9 Decoction

10 Distillation of Hydrosols

11 Flower Essences

12 Tincturing by Maceration

13 Tincturing by Percolation

14 Wine Infusion

15 Vinegar Infusion

16 Glycerin Infusion

17 Oil Infusion

18 Ointment, Salves, & Balms

19 Lotions & Creams

20 Suppositories and Boluses

21 Herb Jellos

----- PAGE 7 -----
22 Syrups, Honeys, Oxymels, and Electuaries

23 Baths for Water Therapy

24 Poultices and Fomentations

25 Complementary Techniques, Terms, and Other
Considerations

26 A Perspective on Medicine

APPENDICES
‘A—The United Plant Savers List of “At-Risk Medicinal Plants”
B—Welcome to the Garden
C—Eight Principles of Excellent Medicine-Making
D—Extract Information Chart
E—Harvesting Information Chart
FFirst Aid for Poisoning by Alkaloids

REFERENCES

RESOURCES

----- PAGE 8 -----


----- PAGE 9 -----
Protocur,

A WORD BEFORE THE MEDICINE SHOW

“The day you decide to appreciate yourself is the day you begin to dance.”
—T. ELDER SACHS

Herbal medicine-making is much like dancing;
it’s easy, it’s natural, and it’s undeniably
elightful. To say the least, it is a lucid
xpression of one’s distinct character. If you have
ever worked with medicinal plants or made
erbal medicines for yourself, you will have to
ike my word for this. However, as you
xperiment with the procedures suggested in this
anual, I promise that during some private
joment, maybe when “shaking your tinctures”
1 while “garbling” some dreamy Mugwort, you
will find yourself thinking, “Hey, that Green guy was right. This is
more damn fun! I think I might even go dancing tonight!” And like
dancing, once you find the rhythm of the music and begin moving
your body with it, you’ll never want to stop.

The ever-engaging green-melodies of herbal medicine-making are
sung by the seductive voices of your neighboring leaves, roots,
barks, rhizomes, flowers, and seeds, while the rhythm you move to
is composed entirely within yourself, by the cadence of your
creative enjoyment. You'll find yourself swinging to the pleasures of
simple fun, personal independence, and a renewed connection with
Earth’s natural beauty and perpetual abundance. And that’s feelin’
good, which is the essence of health. The making is the taking of
herbal medicine.

Keep in mind that herbs, the principal ingredients in homemade
herbal medicines, are basically free once you learn how to correctly
harvest them for yourself (which we will cover in Chapter Three).

----- PAGE 10 -----
Therefore, I can assure you that herbal medicine-making performed
in the home-kitchen is not only simple and fun, it is universally
affordable. This makes perfect sense, for the art and empirical
science of Herbalism were engendered eons ago by the wit and
enduring ingenuity of some remarkably intelligent, resourceful, and
visionary people—our ancestors. This is our cultural heritage.

Herbalism is one of those people’s things. It is indigenous to all
communities of our globe, which is why it thrives so harmoniously
in our homes. To manifest high-quality, health-pumping herbal
preparations, you can take this plant lore in hand, make your own
preparations, and thereby liberate yourself, your family, your
community, and your monetary resources from dependence on
others. Why pay others to frolic in the luscious gardens of Earth,
picking flowers and enjoying themselves making herbal products?
You can do all that frolicking, immersing yourself in wondrous
herbal beauty, and uplifting your mind and spirit. Making your own
herbal medicine both enhances your happiness and boosts your
immune system. And the herbal preparations you make can be
every bit as excellent as those you bring home from the store.
Actually they will be better, profoundly better; this I can also
promise you. Ralph Waldo Emerson, another born-again herbalist,
expressed similar feelings, “When I go into my garden with a spade,
and dig a bed, I feel such an exhilaration and health that I discover
that I have been defrauding myself all this time in letting others do
for me what I should have been doing with my own hands.” I
always suspected that Waldo was in the garden.

Another word, if I may; then we'll get on with the medicine
show. For much of my life, I have focused my attention on health,
herbs, foods, gardens, and making plant medicine. They are my
passion, and I feel passionately about them. As such, tendrils of my
feelings and opinions will undoubtedly intertwine with the rhetoric
of this manual. Knowing the inevitability of this, 1 want to restate
(with some minor alterations) a passage from the prologue of my
other book, The Male Herbal. I haven’t evoked a better way than I
did therein to say to you what I want to say here. Being the
sedulous Sagittarian that I am. I’m accomplished at quoting mv own

----- PAGE 11 -----
thoughts, as references anyway.

So, “When an individual goes public, publishing a book
discussing his experiences, beliefs, and opinions, especially in the
realms of health and personal power, it is important to give the
reader a self-disclosure of one’s bias. Currently, in this Western
culture of ours, the fact that what I have written has been published
tends to display me as an authority. In light of this strange cultural
phenomenon, I wish to supply the discriminating reader and herbal
learner with appropriately insightful information to help him or
her question this authority. Nothing that I say is presented by me as
the Truth! I am merely disclosing my current truth. The printed
voice of this book will share my knowledge, observations, and
opinions based on my experiences, punctuated by what wisdom I
have gathered. Every individual has a share of wisdom to pass
around. As your mind travels through the landscape of ideas I
design and construct for you in this herbal manual, please do not
slip into a passive state of observation. In the light of your life
experiences, measure and question my opinions and conclusions. I
accept the risk of being proven wrong. If the fervor of my
expression of these opinions ascends a street orator’s platform for a
paragraph or two, allow me the social blunder; it’s just an
idiosyncrasy of my particular humanness. Do not fault me for my
passion. Rather, make note of any disagreements you may have, get
back to me, and point out the possible errors of my current beliefs.
This way we can interact and communicate as co-seekers and
creators, and as co-members of a species that obviously has much to
discover about itself and about the transcendent universe in which it
thrives.

“We are, with one another, co-creating a most magnificent and
fascinating age. And our current creation is so very splendid
precisely because each of us contributes a unique perspective. The
term ‘expert’ is derived from the verbal root per meaning to try, to
risk, to press forward. All of us do that with every new thought and
experience we create. Living a life qualifies each of us as an expert.
We don’t have to agree with each other for things to work, merely
appreciate one another and eniov our differences. I can live with

----- PAGE 12 -----
the fact that some people will always think of authors as experts, as
long as it is duly noted that the universal characteristic of experts is
that they normally disagree with one another.”

I’m almost finished here....

As we proceed through this handbook, I will not be giving you
long lists of things to get. I will give you short lists of equipment
and resources that will be completely adequate to get you started. I
encourage you to trust your innovative cunning to guide you further
in a suitable expansion of your assemblage, deciding for yourself
what you will need to best support your particular style and
evolving techniques. Learn the elementary principles, then unfold
in your own way.

I’m not going to include innumerable, point by point, watch-me-
do-it illustrations either. With a few (adroitly placed) drawings, this
handbook will get you started in splendid fashion; it will give you
cardinal processes as practical allies that point the way and
encourage you to embark dauntlessly on your journey. Your
imagination and intrinsic abilities will usher you on from there.
Herbal medicine-making is more engaging this way, and you will
beget astonishingly clever ideas. Remember, Herbalism is a human
response to plants, and this response ever dwells alive and well
within each of us. I ask you to relate to the learning of the overall
process of making herbal medicine more like the way you might
relate to creating art or reading a novel, rather than the way you
might relate to viewing a movie or a TV program that leaves little
if anything to your imagination. Like a Zen painter (don’t I wish), I
will create some empty space suggesting forms and ideas which
your creative imagination can fill in as we proceed. This way we
co-create while experiencing the ripening fruits of this medicine
show. (There are some instances, however, when I will tend to go
on and on; kind of like I am now.) We know that young children
enjoy themselves for a significantly longer time and experience far
more quality time when given simple pine cones, small rocks,
colorful ribbons, and randomly shaped blocks of wood to play with
than they do when given complex, perfectly molded, and fully
complete tovs. The opportunity to pour their own vision into the

----- PAGE 13 -----
empty spaces of the unfinished picture presented by their elemental
toys ignites the fertile fires of their imagination, giving them the joy
of unleashed creative pleasure. The subtle suggestions stimulated by
these rudimentary building units become their most entertaining
playmates and beneficial teachers. Likewise, children soon become
bored with toys that leave little to their innovative imagination; and
so it is with adult human beings, for we are all avid creators and we
all love to play.

As the medicine show proceeds from stage to stage in your home,
create an herbal pharmacy that you tailor to your lifestyle; develop
and refine your medicine-making techniques to suit yourself; and
make notes that clearly record your experiences for future
reference. Rely on the ideas in this handbook merely as starting
places that will give you solid ground on which to place your feet,
then leap high into your creative, innovative nature. Students
become skilled in the basics under the guidance of an experienced
teacher, but they become masters only after leaving the teacher and
exploring areas into which the teacher had not ventured.

Have fun, don’t hesitate. I appreciate your life.

----- PAGE 14 -----


----- PAGE 15 -----
CHAPTER 1

A FIELD TRIP

Let’s begin our immersion into the mosaic of ideas and techniques
that describe herbal medicine-making by first harvesting a wild
plant and making an herbal extract: a Dandelion tincture.

We'll begin this green medicine journey outside your dwelling
place—where the wild plants are. Herbal medicine lives outdoors,
where nature spirits arouse our enchantment, and our vitality is

----- PAGE 16 -----
naturally quickened. With your involvement and, I hope, a freshly
awakened passion, you'll initiate your apprenticeship by
experiencing the elation of harvesting a wild plant and, with it,
creating a simple herbal medicine of excellent quality. So, if you
are not already outdoors reading these words, please, weather
permitting, step outside with me and we’ll find Taraxacum
officinale, a most notorious wild plant...

This is the plant that herbalists, children, and poets call
Dandelion.

Many other people call it a weed and treat it rather rudely.

Let us refer to it as a wild medicinal plant and perceive the
extract we’re about to make with it as an herbal tonic. Our
intention is to connect with a plant spirit and with its alliance
create a nutritional preparation that is easy to assimilate and can be
depended upon to help our digestion, our liver, and our kidneys to
feel good. Then, while this first-born extract is macerating (soaking)
in its menstruum (solvent), we’ll proceed through the following
chapters of this handbook and peruse the rest of the medicine-
making ideas that await our attention.

----- PAGE 17 -----
Dandelion

Common Dandelion (botanical name, Taraxacum officinale)
grows just about everywhere. It should be fairly simple for you to
discover this flowering ally. It is usually denoted by one or more
bright yellow floral asterisks randomly displayed in urban lawns, in
grazed fields, or along neighborhood footpaths.

Dandelions are one of the most common medicinal herbs that
live with us in our neighborhoods. In fact, every year petrochemical
companies reap additional millions from the urban community by
manufacturing and marketing a myriad of designer poisons devised
specifically to alienate and destroy these wily turfgangsters. In
contrast, communities in China eagerly harvest and eat young
Dandelion greens to enrich their diets. along with Purslane

----- PAGE 18 -----
(Portulaca oleracea), and Kudzu (Pueraria lobata), which are two
more “weeds” we tend to curse in this culture. The people of our
southern communities could control the rampant spread of Kudzu
vine through their countrysides by eating it; it’s a superb cardiac
tonic, and it controls alcohol craving—if one wants to; if not, Kudzu
curbs headache and hangovers.

Dandelion’s species name, officinale, means “used in the office or
the workshop.” This indicates that historically Dandelion was (and
of course still is) used medicinally. Dandelion’s genus name,
Taraxacum, is derived from the Greek taraxis, meaning disorder,
and akas, a remedy, further echoing our ancestors’ traditional
esteem for this herb. Keep in mind that there are other plants that,
at casual glance, look similar to a Dandelion. Fear not, though,
there are no toxic or poisonous lookalikes in this country, and it is
very easy to identify the official Taraxacum. Therefore, as I describe
to you the true Dandelion, please pay attention to detail (the third
tule of good herbal medicine-making).

There are three true Dandelion species found in
the U.S.: Taraxacum officinale, common
Dandelion, andT. laevigatum, a red-seeded
specimen, both of which grow in disturbed soils
throughout the temperate regions of the U.S. The
third species, T. ceratophorum, is found in
meadows and other moist places in the
mountains throughout the boreal zone, south, and
at high altitudes.

The Dandelion has a single golden-yellow flower head sitting on
top of each individual flower stalk. This flower head can grow up
to 2 inches wide. These flowers open with the rising of the morning
sun and close down in the evening. They can appear almost any
time of the year, but mainly you find them from April to November
in meadows, pastures, gardens, along the roadsides, and inevitably,
within the rigid boundarv lines of all manicured lawns. Dandelion’s

----- PAGE 19 -----
impetuous blossoming is Nature’s never-ending reminder that
diversity is favored, and therefore rules. The plant’s graceful green
stalks are round, smooth, brittle, and hollow. They grow from 2 to
18 inches tall, and have no other stalks branching off them. Each
Dandelion stalk is straight and unjointed (no stalks branching off it),
growing individually and separately out of a base having a rosette
crown of numerous bright green leaves. These flower stalks often
appear to be growing directly out of the ground. Dandelion never
grows a central stalk. If the plant you are looking at has a tall stalk
that is bearing leaves and flowers, it’s not a Dandelion. However,
there can be a number of flower stalks rising from the center of
each Dandelion plant. Each stalk, as I have mentioned, holds up
only one bright yellow flower head, or one flower bud, or possibly
a single gossamer sphere of plumed seeds. The mature flower can
transform into this globular seed head (faerie’s afro) overnight. The
lobes or edges of the long, lance-shaped Dandelion leaves have
deeply serrated, unevenly pointed teeth (Dent-de-lion, lion’s tooth
in Old French). These pliable leaves are 3 to 12 inches long, 1/2 to
2 1/2 inches wide. The top surfaces, the undersides, and the
midribs of Dandelion’s leaves are bald and feel quite smooth to the
touch. They are not hairy, warty, or prickly like some Dandelion
lookalikes. When you dig a Dandelion up from the ground, with
profound respect and deep gratitude (the first rule of good herbal
medicine-making), you'll find its root to be thick and brittle, having
a thin beige skin on the outside and sap-filled, milky-white
vegetable flesh within. This is commonly called a_ taproot.
Dandelion’s taproot can be branching, and it can grow up to 10
inches long. All parts of the Dandelion plant, when either broken or
wounded, will bleed a bitter-tasting milky-white sap. You'll find
this juice to be a little sweeter in the spring plants.

“Down with lawns; up with herbs.”

—Ryan Drum

Once you have found some Dandelions, harvest an entire plant

----- PAGE 20 -----
including the root, leaves, buds, blossoms, and seed heads, if there
are any. If a portion of the root breaks off and remains in the
ground, great! This root piece will regenerate and produce a new
plant—yet another vegetable contribution to Earth’s dynamic
theater of perpetual abundance.

Now that you have properly identified and graciously harvested
this plant, offer gratitude once again for its life. Consider leaving an
offering, like a strand of your hair, a prayer, a song, a story,
whatever; plant spirits are known to be deeply touched by simple
gestures of appreciation. Wash all the soil off the plant, and bring it
home to your kitchen. If the Dandelion plants you find are small,
you might want to harvest six or seven of them.

If you are unable to locate any living Dandelions in the
neighborhood, or if you suspect the plants that are there have been
sprayed or are too close to the road and might be coated with
odious residues of auto exhaust, the next best thing for you to do is
harvest organically grown or wildcrafted, freshly dried (dehydrated)
Dandelion from an herb or natural food store. Purchase an ounce of
the highest quality Dandelion root you can find and an ounce of
Dandelion leaf. Make sure the dried root material is a deep rich
brown color and has a full bitter flavor when you chew on a piece.
Make sure the dried leaf material shows a rich green color and also
has a discernible bitter flavor. This leaf, dried properly, should
definitely not be brown. If it is brown, don’t bother with it. It’s no
good; shop somewhere else.

Now, lay your fresh medicinal plant(s) on your kitchen
countertop. Cut the root and other parts into small pieces. How
small? As small as your patience and enthusiasm permit. The
smaller the better, because more surface area is exposed. If you are
using dried plant materials, crush or grind them into small pieces,
using a small coffee bean grinder or a mortar and pestle (See
Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy Equipment”). Place these tiny
pieces in ajar with a tight-fitting lid. Use a pint- or quart-size jar
depending on the amount of plant material. Pour 100-proof vodka
into the jar, filling it to the top of the plant material. If you are
working with fresh plant material. at this point vou might pour the

----- PAGE 21 -----
plant with its menstruum into a blender and liquefy it to expose
more surface area to the solvent. Wipe the top ridge of the jar,
cleaning off any stuff that might be clinging to it. Put a piece of wax
paper over the opening as a gasket, and screw down the jar lid.
Tighten it firmly. Shake your tincture energetically. Now, take a
moment to look at it. Admire it for a while, because it is indeed
precious. It is your plant medicine, the enchanted doorway through
which you just entered the enthralling world of Herbalism. Label
the container appropriately. On this label include the name of the
herb, the part of the herb used, (i.e., Dandelion root and top,
Taraxacum officinale) and the date that will arrive fourteen days
from the date you are preparing this extract. This date you write on
the label is the day your tincture will be ready for you to separate
the saturated liquid (the tincture extract) from the then-depleted
plant material (the marc). During those fourteen days, at least once,
even better two or three times a day, affectionately and vigorously
shake your tincture (the “sixth” rule of good medicine-making) with
your mind focused on your appreciation of the plant and your
intention for its use. This is an important routine to attend to, for it
maintains the extraction energy of the menstruum at a more
efficient rate, and it permeates the maturing medicine with your
mindful attention and the healing power of your personal energy.

After a minimum of fourteen days and nights, separate the spent
plant material from the liquid extract. A simple method for doing
this is to line a large hand-held strainer with a square-shaped piece
of cotton muslin cloth (undyed and preferably unbleached cotton
muslin), large enough to hang about an inch or two over the edges
of the strainer.

Place the muslin-lined strainer into a glass or stainless steel
receptacle, and slowly and carefully pour your entire extract into
this straining apparatus. Allow all the liquid to flow through the
cloth. After the liquid has finished flowing through the cloth, join
together all four corners of the cloth and hold them above the plant
material. Grasp them firmly together with one hand, and with the
other hand grasp the ball of plant material and twist it and squeeze
it to press out the rest of the liquid thoroughly. Remove as much of

----- PAGE 22 -----
the liquid as possible from the depleted plant fiber (the marc).
After doing this to your satisfaction, you can discard the marc into
the compost.

Now, pour this herbal extract into a bottle that can be tightly
capped (brown amber glass bottles are the most ideal) and store it
in a cool, dark location. This alcohol/water extract will keep for
many years. (A solution like this requires a minimum of 18-20
percent of the total volume of the liquid to be ethyl alcohol in
order for the alcohol to adequately preserve it. Pure 100-proof
vodka is 50 percent ethyl alcohol, and even when diluted by the
juices of this fresh plant will render sufficient preservative action.)

You have handcrafted an herbal medicine; your initiation is
complete—welcome to the swiftly growing community of
independent lay-herbalists. To conclude this exercise, I would like
to also applaud the co-creator of your handcrafted tincture by
summarizing for you the personal and ecological health-promoting
gifts of the wild Dandelion.

Strainer Lined with Muslin

----- PAGE 23 -----
Squeezing the Liquid Out

An Earth-enriching co-habitant of almost every community,
Dandelion promotes healthy local turf everywhere it grows, unless
it is foolishly poisoned to death. The particular design of
Dandelion’s root system breaks up soil in a unique manner which
greatly enhances the condition of any garden soil. In fact Dandelion
and its sister compositae, Chamomile, another soil-conditioning
plant, have been referred to in farming cultures as “the soil
doctors.” Dandelion’s randomly scattered flowers relieve rampant
urban-lawn monotony. Its vibrant yellow blossoms are aesthetically
and emotionally uplifting. For those who like to play and even
giggle the way you did when you were a babe, Dandelion’s mature
seed heads are a joyous toy which entice bustling human beings to
pause, pick, and blow off its downy hairdo into passing air currents,
watching the seeds eject dramatically, scattering in random
directions, then parachuting serenely to the ground. I pursue this
whimsical ritual as eagerly today as I did when I was a small child,
and the spontaneous affair with these little blowballs remains as
delightful as it always was.

The predominant use of herbs to beautify your
home and health becomes fully affordable as you

----- PAGE 24 -----
learn to harvest your own plants and create your
own elixirs.

When used to affect our body directly, common Dandelion is one
of the finest foods and medicines found in the herbalist’s materia
medica. Young springtime Dandelion leaves have a pleasantly bitter
aromatic flavor. They blend well with other fresh salad plants, and
they carry with them a rich load of bitters and micro-nutrients,
especially the minerals potassium and calcium, and vitamins A and
C. Eating Dandelion greens and other bitters prior to meals is
invaluable for stimulating one’s appetite, digestion, and
assimilation. Regular use of Dandelion extracts often relieves the
uncomfortable maladies commonly experienced in the upper and
lower digestive tract such as poor digestion, gas, nausea, and
constipation.

In general, Dandelion carries substances that stimulate the
function of many glands and organs, especially the kidneys and
liver. It has a tonic affect on the kidneys and encourages kidney
function with its diuretic action, while at the same time it increases
the body’s potassium content, rather than depleting it as other
diuretics commonly do. Dandelion is an excellent substance to
employ for prevention and treatment of biliary problems. It is a
liver and gallbladder tonic that stimulates the healthy discharge and
flow of bile. When taken over a period of 4 to 6 weeks, it can work
as an efficient preventive agent for those individuals who have a
constitutional disposition to form gallstones.

Following are some specific indications and an adult dosage for
using the whole-plant Dandelion tincture you are presently making
(see Chapter Twenty-Five, “Dosage,” to help determine
corresponding children’s dosages).

For physical comfort take 30 to 50 drops of tincture 3 to 4 times
daily to:

© relieve intestinal gas and poor digestion that is due to
insufficient bile

----- PAGE 25 -----
© relieve constipation that is due to sluggish liver activity

e help eliminate skin eruptions that are due to sluggish liver
activity

© relieve difficulty in urinating and/or water retention

© use as a blood purifier to treat chronic auto-toxemia which
is contributing to rheumatism, arthritis, and/or skin
eruptions

The dosage I have suggested is low for this particular herb, for
Dandelion is safe, gentle, and shows no toxicity. Some herbalists
recommend 150 to 300 drops (approx. 5 to 10 ml) of Dandelion
tincture three times a day as a basic adult dosage. However, it is
prudent to begin with a low dosage regardless of the herb you
consider using. Dosages can always be increased after observing
your reaction to a new substance. To gain the full benefit of
Dandelion when employing it as a tonic, it is often best to continue
its use for at least one month up to a year, depending on the
individual’s response and needs. A second year of use can be
beneficial and appropriate for some individuals. For the bodies of
these folks, Dandelion is good food.

This act of nourishing yourself with herbs is fully affordable now
that you are harvesting your own herbs and learning to make
tinctures and other extracts for yourself. Remember, like the mind,
the body appreciates and responds most favorably to variety
(diversity). Don’t take any food or herbal remedy every day. Take
the remedy for 6 days a week with a random day off; do this for
three to four weeks, then take a few days off, and so on. And when
using Dandelion, it is quite appropriate to change the delivery
vehicle by preparing this tonic herb as an herbal tea (a decoction).
Drink it with the tincture, or alternate a dose (1 cup) of tea with a
dose of tincture, or use Dandelion tea in place of Dandelion tincture
altogether, drinking a cupful twice a day.

So, now you have an herbal tincture in the making, and you
know how to store and use this specific health-supporting herbal
tonic once the extraction process is completed. Meanwhile, during
the following hours when you are not eating, dreaming. working.

----- PAGE 26 -----
playing, or shaking your tincture, we can explore more ideas
concerning the home practice of Herbalism and consider other
forms of herbal extracts you can make.

----- PAGE 27 -----


----- PAGE 28 -----
It’s a jungle garden out there; roots and flowers are everywhere.
That’s why this leafy turquoise planet is so dear to the hearts of
herbalists. Here we enjoy an unending variety of plants and animals
to embrace as our allies and teachers. But for an enthusiastic student
herbalist, who has just entered through some unassuming personal
gate into the vast forest of Herbalism. sorting out Earth’s immense

----- PAGE 29 -----
herbal diversity can be somewhat bewildering.

Question: How many herbs should I know to be an effectual
herbalist?

Answer: 30 ... well, maybe 35 ... and probably a fungus as well.

How’s that for an assertive air of authority? Someone has to act
like he or she knows the answer to that question. ’ll reference the
source of this authority shortly.

Certainly, most herbalists I know strongly recommend that a
student limit his or her studies to “a few select herbs.” Get to know
them well by learning to identify them, experience growing them
when possible, communicate with them, discern when, where, and
how best to harvest them, make medicine with them, touch, taste,
smell, and use them. The energies of thirty to thirty-five herbs will
enchant you and keep you sufficiently busy for the following year
or two. Distinguished individuals from the remaining myriad of
herbs that dwell on Earth will, one by one, as situations arise,
attract your attention and attach themselves to your initial
repertory.

So, the subsequent question arises: “Which few select herbs
should I choose?”

Well, the most important principle to guide you in this very
personal selection is to embrace any and all plants that you are
intuitively attracted to: those that touch your spirit in an
exceptionally deep and personal way. These are relationships that
you never want to ignore. A second reliable criterion is to select
herbs that grow near you and can be found thriving in the bioregion
you inhabit, or in closely neighboring bio-regions. The plants you
select should be fairly easy to acquire and always of excellent
quality. Flirt with the currently fashionable and exotic imports, by
all means, but don’t become dependent on their availability.

Most herb students commence their studies by gleaning
information found in popular herb books, and the number of herbs
discussed in today’s herbal literature can be overwhelming. At least,
Ihave found this to be the experience of many students before they
connected with a teacher or attended an herb school. So, if I may
assist vou with some specific suggestions. I will give vou an historic

----- PAGE 30 -----
and authoritative list of plants that you might consider as you
orchestrate your first line of green allies, or you can at least refer to
this list as a model for choosing a comparable group of plants that
live in your area.

The authoritative history: In the late 1980s the California School
of Herbal Studies (CSHS) was co-directed by six herbalists: Tim
Blakley, David Hoffmann, Amanda McQuade Crawford, Mindy
Green, Gina Banghart, and myself. We decided that, in order to
align our individual classes throughout the year, it would be helpful
for all of us to focus on the personalities, actions, and indications of
a central core of tonic and therapeutic plants. As an initial step to
develop this group of medicinals, each of us agreed to provide a list
of thirty favored plants that we felt could be relied upon to supply
an herbalist with pretty much any and all the herbal actions and
uplifting virtues required to provide good health care in a home
and community. The succeeding task of grafting our lists together
and then pruning the aggregation back to thirty plants proved to be
an interesting journey of forbearance and compromise; the results
of that saga attest to the fact that, on a rare occasion, even experts
can come to an agreement, or at least cross-pollinate their opinions.
The hybrid list we ultimately compiled and felt reasonably good
about included the following thirty plants.

CSHS List or 30 Heras

Blackberry (Rubus villosus)

*Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
Calendula (Calendula officinalis)
Cayenne (Capsicum annuum)
Chamomile, German (Matricaria recutita)
Cleavers (Galium aperine)

Comfrey (Symphytum officinale)

----- PAGE 31 -----
Crampbark (Viburnum opulus)
Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
*Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)
Elder (Sambucus nigra)

Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

Ginger (Zingiber officinale)
*Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)
Gumweed (Grindelia spp.)
Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacanthus)
Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis)
Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)
Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

Nettle (Urtica spp.)

Peppermint (Mentha piperita)
*Pipsissewa (Chimaphilla umbellata)
Plantain (Plantago lanceolata or P. major)
St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis)

Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

Willow (Salix alba)

Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)
Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

I have asterisked the plants which are broadly
used in commerce and which, due to over-harvest,
loss of habitat, or by the nature of their innate
rareness or sensitivity are either at risk or have
significantly declined in numbers within their

----- PAGE 32 -----
current range. Use substitute plants when possible
(see the discussion on this page).

Yes, I know; where’s Milk Thistle, where’s Sage, where’s Usnea,
where’s.... Undeniably, this list screams out the names of countless
time-honored herbs that have not been included, and I must say
(using this opportunity to get in a “last word”), the herbs that
would be at the top of the list of thirty (if anybody would have
listened to me) are listed below.

Green's Lonc-Awarrep

EnmeuisHMENTS

Burdock (Arctium lappa)

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

Oat (wild: Avena fatua, cultivated: Avena sativa)
Saw Palmetto (Serenoa serrulata)

Siberian Ginseng (Eleuthrococcus senticosus)

And then there’s Reishi mushroom (Ganoderma

lucidum), a fungus, and.... Well, you can
appreciate the problem we faced.

Please note that most of the thirty plants on the CSHS list grow in
abundance in the northern California region where our school is
located, but as you may also notice, love transcends all rules and
common sense, and some of our most favored plants that made it
onto the list don’t normally grow here. Ginger thrives in moist
tropical regions; Goldenseal and Black Cohosh live in moist and
shady Eastern hardwood forests; Echinacea lives in the open plains
of the Midwest; and Pipsissewa, although it lives in Pacific
Northwest forests, grows very slowly, and therefore, even if

----- PAGE 33 -----
harvested correctly does not recover rapidly. With the recently
ballooning popularity of herbal medicine in this country, these five
plants have all become highly sought-after medicindis, and while
Ginger is abundantly cultivated and therefore not threatened by its
popularity, the other four plants are not yet being adequately
cultivated and are being plucked from their relatively small native
stands at far too rapid a rate. They are simply being over-harvested
from their native environment in order to supply the soaring
commercial demands of people living in the other bio-regions of
the U.S. as well as in Canada and many countries overseas.

The survival of these four plants is currently at great risk, and
therefore humans need to find substitutes whenever possible
(preferably plants that grow in our own backyard bio-regions) until
these plants can be cultivated adequately to supply our commercial
demands. As you can see, since the time we developed our CSHS
list of thirty herbs, herbalists and other plant people have become
quite alert to the fact that a number of important medicinal plants
(in addition to the four on our list) are currently extremely harvest-
sensitive. So, with deep regard for all these plants, I offer the
following suggestions and ask you to heed them:

In general, regarding the four at-risk plants that appear on the
above list of thirty:

© Please become familiar with United Plant Savers’ (UpS) list
of “at-risk” medicinal plants and avoid using them until we
can escort them back to their natural state of abundance.
(See Appendix A for this list as well as an introduction to
the work of UpS.)

Use Black Cohosh sparingly, only when it is specifically
indicated (see indications, this page) and when there is no
substitute available. In this regard, for those living in the
Pacific Northwest region, there is our Baneberry (Actea
rubra), a close relative of Black Cohosh, that can be
harvested and prepared as a reliable substitute. The root of
Baneberry offers nearly all the same actions as Black
Cohosh root. Yes, the berries of Baneberry are toxic. but its

----- PAGE 34 -----
root is not (that’s why we don’t call it Baneroot). In fact, in
the early 1900s batches of Black Cohosh were often
adulterated by mixing Baneberry root with the Cohosh.
When taken as a tincture, Baneberry root bestows the same
anti-inflammatory, sedative, and anti-spasmodic action for
relieving the vast array of dull aching pains as does Black
Cohosh. For a multitude of reasons, but specifically for
invaluable insight into the use of this plant as an important
substitute for the endangered Black Cohosh, I suggest and
highly recommend that you consult Medicinal Plants of the
Pacific West, researched and written by herbalist Michael
Moore.

In place of Pipsissewa when treating urinary tract
inflammation, substitute Uva Ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi)
for its excellent diuretic, antiseptic, and astringent
properties. Prepare it as a cold infusion to eliminate the
extraction of most of its condensed tannins that can be
irritating to some folks, and combine this with
Marshmallow root to help soothe and protect any irritated
tissue.

When utilizing Goldenseal to employ its berberine alkaloid
component, use it only when the plant’s overall specific
indications are absolutely required (see indications, this
page); otherwise use other berberine-containing plants such
as Barberry (Berberis vulgaris), or Oregon Grape (Mahonia
aquifolium), or at least dilute Goldenseal whenever using it:
mixing 1 part Goldenseal to 4 parts Barberry or Oregon
Grape root. When you feel you must use Goldenseal
undiluted, use a reduced dosage, for, when it is truly the
specific plant to use, a small dose is wholly adequate.

Use only organically cultivated Echinacea. Avoid using wild
Echinacea or any commercial products that use wildcrafted
or wild-harvested Echinacea in their ingredients. Three
species of Echinacea are used commercially: E. purpurea, E.
angustifolia, and E. pallida. Echinacea purpurea is easily
and presently cultivated. whereas the other two species are

----- PAGE 35 -----
more difficult to grow and therefore not so widely
cultivated. Due to overaggressive wildcrafting, the native
stands of all three of these species of Echinacea are
disap pearing rapidly.

Goldenseal, Black Cohosh, Echinacea, and
Pipsissewa are four plant allies that are due a
collective show of human appreciation and
currently require our concerted acts of tender
loving care. Discontinuing the wild harvesting of
these plants while using other herbs as
appropriate substitutes will give these generous
medicinals time to repopulate their natural
habitats and will give herb growers time and
resources to develop their skills in cultivating
these herbs for commercial use. Merci.

In addition to the drama of innumerable heartbreaking
revelations of personal love affairs with certain herbs, there was a
rational method to the madness that was conjured up as we six
herbalists compiled the above CSHS list of thirty herbs. Along with
seeking plants that grow well in our climatic zone, we looked very
closely at the actions (also referred to as therapeutic or medicinal
properties) of these plants, and we made sure our final group of
herbs embraced all the actions that we know are essential and
therefore necessary in a well-endowed herbal pharmacy.

Pertaining to these actions, the science of Herbalism, like all
therapeutic sciences, has its particular language. The nutritional and
medicinal actions of each herb in our materia medica constitute the
fundamental vocabulary of the language of Herbalism. Knowledge
of the actions (the biochemical energetics) of each plant and the
plant’s spontaneous affinity for various systems of the body is basic
to successfully employing herbs in health maintenance, disease
prevention, and curative self-care.

----- PAGE 36 -----
Understanding the inherent energetics of each plant that one uses
gives insight and increased autonomy in personal and family health
care. It is too limiting to think or ask, “What herb do I take for ...”
or “What herb will cure my....” This approach stems from the
“magic bullet” (one drug for one disease) myth conjured by
pharmaceutical drug marketing. Herbs are more clever and
practical than that. Each herb can do many things and have more
than one effect on the human body and mind. The therapeutic
actions and the unique blend of organic nutrients of each herb have
a natural affinity for a variety of tissues, organs, and systems of the
body. Supervised by the body’s cellular intelligence which attracts
to itself whatever is needed for toning and healing, these actions are
contributed by the herb to the appropriate systems for preventing
and/or curing a wide variety of conditions.

The art of herbal therapeutics is brought into play as one blends
single nutritional and medicinal plants together into a compound
formula, creating a uniquely synergistic quality that can support
health, and when necessary stimulate or modify the body’s self-
healing vital energy.

Therefore, it is exceedingly useful to understand the terms and
concepts that describe these herbal actions. There are hundreds of
different actions that have been defined through the ages. However,
for our purposes, only about 40 of these need be considered. It’s
important to recognize these terms and learn their definitions; I
assure you it is time well spent. Reading through the upcoming list
of herbs will prove the practicality of this suggestion and afford you
ample practice.

Using this “herbal actions” measure is a reliable technique to
help you select your own group of core plants with which to work.
When one applies it to the group of herbs selected for our CSHS list
of thirty herbs, it can be seen that the actions we felt were essential
are well represented. I will review this for you in the following
section. Along with this, I will include a brief discussion of the
actions of each of the thirty (+5) herbs and the fungus; I will also
suggest the most effective vehicles for administering them by using
infusion. decoction. tincture (and glvcerite). oil infusion, salve.

----- PAGE 37 -----
syrup, lotion, poultice, fomentation, and bolus/suppository.

As we progress through this handbook, exploring diverse
techniques of medicine-making, I will use this list of thirty-five
medicinal plants and a medicinal fungus as a reference and focus on
specific information for extracting them in the various menstra we
discuss.

I offer these lists and accompanying notations to you as a
practical foundation for your personal home pharmacy, but I
encourage you to modify the group of herbs to align with your

intuitive preferences and, depending on where you live, to better fit

the native medicinal plant population of your particular bio-region.
Observe the actions and specific indications of the plants in this
group and match them as best you can.

40 Herpa Actions to Know

Adaptogen—An action concept unique to herbal therapeutics.
Adaptogenic or hormonal modulating action increases the
body’s resistance and endurance to a wide variety of adverse
influences from physical, chemical, and biological stressors,
assisting the body’s ability to cope and adapt.

Alterative—Gradually restores health and vitality to the body
by helping the body assimilate nutrients, eliminate waste, and
restore proper function.

Anodyne, analgesic—Relieves pain when administered orally
or externally.

Antacid—Neutralizes excess acid in the stomach and intestinal
tract.

Anticatarrhal—Counteracts the build-up of excess mucus and
inflammation in sinus or other upper respiratory parts.

Antidepressant—Helps relieve or prevent depressed states of

----- PAGE 38 -----
mind.
Anti-emetic—Relieves nausea and vomiting.

Anti-inflammatory—Combats extensive or  too-painful
occurrence of inflammation. A degree of inflammation is a
necessary process in healing.

Anti-microbial (anti-bacterial, anti-viral)}—Helps the body’s
immune system destroy or resist the proliferation of
pathogenic micro-organisms.

Anti-oxidant—Protects the body against free radical damage
(free radicals are highly reactive compounds that bind to and
destroy other molecules).

Antiseptic—Prevents or eliminates sepsis (infectious destructive
condition of tissue).

Antispasmodic—Prevents or eases spasms or cramping in the
body.

Aperient—A gentle stimulant to digestion, having a very mild
laxative action.

Aphrodisiac—Increases sexual excitement and desire (libido).

Astringent—Contracts, firms, and strengthens body tissues by
precipitating proteins, and can reduce excess secretions and
discharge.

Bitter—Stimulates the normal secretion of digestive juices,
benefiting digestion. This stimulating action helps counteract
physical and, to a certain extent, emotional depression.

Carminative—Rich in aromatic volatile oils having a sweet,
spicy or fragrant aroma which can lend a pleasant flavor to
other herbs, excite peristalsis, promote the expulsion of gas,
and soothe the stomach, supporting healthy digestion.

Cholagogue—Promotes the discharge and flow of bile from the

----- PAGE 39 -----
gallbladder (gogue = to flow).

Counter-irritant (revulsive)—Induces local irritation of skin,
drawing blood and other materials to the surface from deeper
tissues, relieving congestion and inflammation.

Demulcent—Mucilaginous herbs which relax, soothe, and
protect tissue.

Derivative—Draws blood and other fluids from one part of the
body to relieve congestion in another.

Diaphoretic—Induces increased perspiration, dilates
capillaries, increasing elimination through the skin.

Diuretic—Increases the flow of urine.
Emmenagogue—Increases menstrual flow.
Emollient—Applied to the skin to soften, soothe, and protect.

Expectorant—Supports the respiratory system by assisting it to
remove excess mucus.

Febrifuge—Assists the body to reduce fever.
Galactagogue—Increases the flow of mother’s milk.
Hemostatic—Arrests bleeding.

Hepatic—Strengthens and tones the liver, stimulating its
secretory function.

Hypnotic—Has a powerful relaxant and sedative action and
helps to induce sleep.

Hypotensive—Reduces elevated blood pressure.

Immune stimulant—Helps stimulate immune response and
deal with infections.

Laxative—Promotes evacuation of the bowels.

Lymphatic—Support the health and activity of the lymphatic

----- PAGE 40 -----
system.
Nervine—Affects the nervous system; having either a relaxing,
stimulating, and/or tonic effect, depending on the herb used.

Refrigerant—Cooling agents which lower body temperature
and relieve thirst.

Rubefacient—Generates a localized increase in blood flow
when applied to the skin. Often used to warm the skin and
ease the pain and swelling of joints.

Sedative—Calms the nervous system by reducing stress and
nervous irritation throughout the body.

Sialagogue—Promotes the flow of saliva.

Stimulant—Warms the body, quickens circulation, and breaks
up obstructions and congestion.

Stomachic—Stimulative tonic to the stomach.

Styptic—Reduces or stops external bleeding by astringent
action.

Tonic—Stimulates nutrition by improving assimilation which
improves systemic tone, giving increased vigor and strength to
the tissues of body organs.

Vasodilator—Expands blood vessels, allowing increased
circulation.

Vulnerary—Assists the body to heal wounds. This action is
used externally.

It is most useful to recognize and understand the
terms that describe herbal actions. These simple
concepts constitute a major portion of the
vocabulary of herbal knowledge.

----- PAGE 41 -----
ACTIONS AND INDICATIONS FOR THE CSHS LIST OF 30 HERBS

Blackberry (Bramble) is astringent, especially for the
gastrointestinal tract. It allays excessive fluid loss from diarrhea, and
when medical intervention is not available may save lives.
Hemostatic—it stops bleeding of the gastrointestinal tract.

Black Cohosh (an at-risk plant, seek organically cultivated or
employ substitutes when possible) is antispasmodic, anti-
inflammatory, and analgesic and is most useful for its ability to
reduce dull aching pain just about anywhere in the body. Along
with this generalized effect, Black Cohosh has a specific affinity for
the reproductive organs. It relieves the aching pains in the
reproductive tract of males, but is most often used as a regulator of
female imbalances. As an emmenagogue, it is used for relief of
painful menstruation, but is also very effective for relieving
suppressed menstruation. This, along with the fact that its effects
are often long-lasting, suggests that it has a generalized tonic effect
on the uterus and most likely on the male reproductive organs as
well. This plant is widely used for the treatment of rheumatism and
neuralgia and all cases characterized by that kind of pain known as
rheumatic, dull, tensive, and intermittent. Black Cohosh is nervine,
hypotensive, having a powerful influence over the nervous system
as it appears to have a sedating effect on the perception of pain.

When using Baneberry root (Actea rubra), which is recommended
as a substitute for Black Cohosh for relieving pain, use a reduced
dosage, as noted in the latter part of Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing
by Maceration.”

Calendula (Marigold) is anti-inflammatory, vulnerary, lymphatic,
anti-microbial, and anti-fungal. It is unsurpassed for treating local
skin problems that are due to infection, and for treating wounds,
burns, bruises, or strains due to physical damage. It is excellent for
internal digestive inflammation and ulceration. Calendula is
antispasmodic. lymphatic. and emmenagogue for normalizing the

----- PAGE 42 -----
menstrual process, and cholagogue for aiding in the relief of a
gallbladder problem and its accompanying digestive complaints;
hepatic.

Cayenne (Capsicum) is a general tonic, but it’s also quite specific to
the circulatory and digestive systems. It is the most useful of the
systemic stimulants, strengthening the heart, arteries, capillaries,
blood flow, peripheral circulation, and nerves. It helps in
conditions of debility, especially of the elderly, and wards off colds
and catarrh. It is also carminative, and sialagogue. Applied
externally, it is rubefacient and is most useful for cold hands and
feet (sprinkled in socks), and problems like rheumatic pains and
lumbago, and for hoarseness as a gargle; anti-microbial and an
ouchful! but very effective styptic (s & m variety).

Chamomile is anti-inflammatory and pain-relieving for a wide
range of conditions along the entire digestive tract; antispasmodic
for easing muscle cramps; nervine. Chamomile is probably the most
widely used relaxing nervine tonic. It is also used to relieve mental
stress and tension. It is carminative and a mild bitter.

Cleavers is lymphatic; a lymphatic cleanser which relieves
lymphatic swelling, particularly where there is an acute “hot”
inflammation; itis a cooling diuretic that soothes an irritable
urinary tract; tonic, and alterative.

Comfrey (Knitbone) is vulnerary and demulcent, having
unparalleled wound, ulcer, and fracture healing action. It is anti-
inflammatory and soothing to dry inflamed digestive tract;
astringent, able to allay hemorrhaging wherever it occurs; and
expectorant as an age-old remedy for dry irritable coughs,
especially when accompanied by blood streaked mucus.

Comfrey has been praised throughout history as a premier
healing plant used extensively in folkloric Herbalism internally and
externally for the repair of innumerable body wounds and illnesses.
However. in the past few vears reductionist science has proclaimed

----- PAGE 43 -----
Comfrey (in particular, the root and the early spring leaves) to be
the possessor and conveyer of certain toxic components called
pyrrolizidine alkaloids which are said to cause damage to the liver
of human beings. Many herbalists have accepted this as truth and a
number of us have not. Therefore, in order to provide full
disclosure in this printed manual concerning the use of Comfrey, I
feel it prudent to inform the reader of this debate and give current
standard precautions: It is recommended that pregnant women,
young children, and persons with manifest liver disease avoid the
consumption of Comfrey (external use is no problem). Others are
advised to use Comfrey root and leaf on a short-term basis and
preferably avoid the use of the spring leaf, but instead use the leaf
that appears on the latter (second) growth of the year. There are
available in the marketplace pyrrolizidine-free Comfrey tinctures in
which the suspect alkaloids have been removed.

Crampbark is an antispasmodic that relieves voluntary and
involuntary muscular spasm of the entire pelvic viscera, bladder,
womb (anti-abortive), ovaries, and the limbs; it allays convulsions,
asthma, thigh and back pain, and it’s an anti-inflammatory and
nervine, helping to restore sympathetic/parasympathetic balance.
Its astringent action helps allay excessive blood loss in menstruation
and especially in menopause; emmenagogue.

Dandelion (also see Chapter One, “A Field Trip”) has many healing
actions. The root is a general tonic and an effective liver tonic,
hepatic, which acts to “cool” (detoxify) the liver; its cholagogue
action decongests the gallbladder by increasing bile flow; and its
choleretic action promotes bile production. It is anti-rheumatic, as it
stimulates cell metabolism in the body, assisting the body to dump
metabolic waste into the blood to be cleansed by the liver. It is
alterative, relieving skin disorders and degenerative joint disorders,
lowering blood cholesterol. It is a mild laxative, bitter. The leaf is a
safe, highly effective diuretic, the best natural source of potassium
which avoids potassium depletion, so common with the use of
other diuretics; bitter. Young leaves can be eaten raw in salads; they

----- PAGE 44 -----
are best mixed with other salad greens and tossed with a favorite
salad dressing.

Echinacea (an at-risk plant, use only organically cultivated) is an
immune stimulant, assisting the body to resist infection more
efficiently; it is anti-microbial and increases cellular resistance to
virus, and activates the macrophages that destroy both cancerous
cells and pathogens; it is anti-catarrhal and alterative.

“When you settle a share of land, first plant an
Elder tree, then make your home there.”

—T. Exper Sacus

Elder, Black, if I recall correctly, stood at the top of each of our
CSHS lists, being nearly a complete pharmacy by itself. Elder’s
leaves used externally are vulnerary and emollient. When used
internally the leaves are purgative, expectorant, diuretic, and
diaphoretic. Its flowers prepared as a cold infusion are diuretic,
alterative, and cooling; as a warm infusion the flowers are
diaphoretic and gently stimulating. Its berries are diaphoretic,
diuretic, aperient, and when fresh they make good juice and jam.
Elder is the reliable home remedy for cold, flu, fever, skin
eruptions, sprains, bruises, wounds, hayfever, sinusitis, tension,
constipation, rheumatic discomfort, and so on. Look this plant up in
a variety of sources; probably no single herbal tells Elder’s complete
story.

Fennel is carminative, relieving flatulence and colic, and stimulating
digestion and appetite. It is very helpful in improving the flavor of
other herbs. Combined with Catnip (Nepeta cataria), it makes the
best child’s remedy for fever, colic, and general restlessness; it is
anti-spasmodic, having a calming effect on coughs and bronchial
disorders, and anti-inflammatory as a compress and eye wash for
infected eyes and inflamed eyelids, and galactogogue.

----- PAGE 45 -----
Ginger is a diffusive stimulant that is warming by increasing
peripheral circulation; an emergency remedy whenever immediate
stimulation is needed, a master herb for relieving nausea and
motion sickness; an anodyne in gastric and intestinal pain; a
carminative and anti-spasmodic in the digestive tract; diaphoretic
for promoting perspiration in feverish conditions; anti-
inflammatory particularly useful in rheumatic conditions that
benefit from heat; anti-microbial; rubefacient; and a reliable
emmenagogue.

Goldenseal (an at-risk plant; use cultivated Goldenseal or substitute
with other berberine-containing plants or other plants that offer
similar actions) is hepatic, cholagogue, a bitter digestive stimulant,
and a primary anti-microbial for acute infection. It is an invaluable
tonic stimulant for over-relaxed, profusely secreting mucous
membranes having a wide effect on the respiratory, digestive, and
genito-urinary systems, and it has an anti-catarrhal effect, especially
in sinus conditions. It is astringent and emmenagogue.

Gumweed is a relaxing expectorant, which relaxes the smooth
muscles. It is antispasmodic and hypotensive, useful for treatment of
asthmatic and bronchial conditions, especially when accompanied
by rapid heartbeat and nervous response.

Hawthorn is a heart tonic of the first order which maintains the
heart in a healthy condition. It directly effects the cells of the heart
muscle, enhancing both activity and nutrition. It is a specific remedy
in most cardiac disease and facilitates a gentle but long-term
sustained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the entire
cardiovascular system; astringent. It is hypotensive and diuretic.

Marshmallow, due to its abundance of mucilage, is emollient when
used in salves for external use. Used internally, it is a soothing
demulcent indicated for inflamed and irritated states of mucous
membranes. The root is used to treat all inflammatory conditions of
the gastrointestinal tract. including the mouth, gastritis, peptic

----- PAGE 46 -----
ulcers, colitis, etc. The leaves are diuretic, expectorant, and anti-
inflammatory, and are used to relieve dryness of lungs and a
burning or irritated urinary tract; its abundant mucopolysaccharides
mildly stimulate the body’s immune function.

Mugwort is a bitter tonic and foremost digestive stimulant. It is anti-
oxidant, which helps in the metabolism of rancid fats and protects
the liver from damage from free radicals. It is cholagogue, giving a
general stimulating effect on bile flow, helping to remove liver
congestion, especially for those who have eaten (rancid) oily food.
As a nervine tonic, it eases tension, and is antidepressant, as it aids
in depression, particularly when this is due to liver congestion, a
virus, and/or a sedentary lifestyle; it is emmenagogue.

Mullein is expectorant, an extremely beneficial respiratory remedy
that tones the mucous membranes, reduces inflammation, and
stimulates fluid production, thus facilitating expectoration. It is also
demulcent, diuretic, nervine, anti-spasmodic, alterative, astringent,
anodyne, vulnerary, and anti-inflammatory. The oil infusion of the
fresh flowers is particularly effective for soothing and healing any
inflamed surface and easing ear problems (pain). As a fomentation
of leaves it is excellent for local application to any inflamed parts.

Nettle leaf is a spring tonic and a general alterative detoxifying
agent which clears out waste products, strengthens the mucosa of
the urinary, digestive, and respiratory systems, and when taken
fresh works against the allergic response to hayfever. It prevents
uric acid build-up in joints and is extremely helpful in cases of
gout, rheumatism, and arthritis. It is an astringent, which is useful
for relieving excessive discharge and bleeding, and is diuretic and
hypotensive. Nettle root is tonic for the genito-urinary system. It is a
good prostate tonic and quite helpful for benign prostatic
enlargement. It is an excellent potherb cooked like spinach or any
other fresh greens.

Peppermint is one of humanity’s favorite and most uplifting flavors.

----- PAGE 47 -----
It is carminative and anti-spasmodic, having a relaxing effect on the
muscles of the digestive system; it combats flatulence and stimulates
bile and the flow of digestive juices. It is carminative, diaphoretic,
and anti-emetic. As a mild anesthetic to the stomach lining, it often
allays feelings of nausea. It is nervine, and anti-microbial. This plant
(combined with Elder and Yarrow) is a traditional treatment for
fevers, colds, and influenza and thereby has saved countless lives
throughout the ages.

Pipsissewa (an at-risk plant, well substituted for by using an Uva
Ursi and Marshmallow combination) Therefore,Uva_ Ursi
(Bearberry) is diuretic; it has a specific antiseptic and astringent
effect upon the membranes of the urinary system, which it can be
relied upon to soothe and tone. With its anti-microbial action, it is
wonderfully effective for treating bladder infection, gravel, or a
stone in the kidney. It is helpful to blend this plant with
Marshmallow root to increase the soothing and protectant
demulcent action.

Plantain is a magnificent weed that grows everywhere and is readily
available throughout the year. It is vulnerary, expectorant,
demulcent, anti-inflammatory, astringent, diuretic, and anti-
microbial, having excellent healing properties. It is a gentle
expectorant that will soothe inflamed and painful membranes, ideal
for coughs and bronchitis. Its astringency aids in diarrhea,
hemorrhoids, and bladder inflammation where there is bleeding. It
relieves inflammation of the skin and intestinal tract. It is a valuable
treatment for diseases of the blood and glandular conditions. It is a
traditional cure taken internally, and as a poultice for treating the
stings and bites of snakes, spiders, and insects, and as a dressing for
cuts, wounds, and bruises.

St. John’s Wort is nervine. Taken internally, it has a sedative and
pain-relieving effect appropriate for treating neuralgia, anxiety, and
tension, and any irritable and anxious effects of menopausal
changes. As an anti-depressant. it is highly recommended for

----- PAGE 48 -----
treatment of melancholia or “the blues.” As an astringent, it is used
externally as an oil or salve. It is a valuable healing vulnerary and
anti-inflammatory remedy for nerve injuries, muscular bruises,
painful wounds, swelling, varicose veins, and mild burns.

Scullcap is a nerve tonic, having a mild sedative, anti-spasmodic
edge. It is especially appropriate as a primary nervous system tonic
and relaxant for stalwart individuals who have fiery emotions that
promote nerve and muscle tension. This plant is also used
specifically in the treatment of seizure, hysterical states, and
epilepsy, as well as for general muscular and nervous irritability
and tension. It is also well used where there is nervous disorder that
develops twitching, tremors, restlessness, or irregular muscular
action. As a cardiac relaxant, it is useful in sedating heart
imbalances caused by overactive nerves; bitter.

Valerian is primarily a nervine tonic. It is helpful to know Valerian
has a stimulating, warming nature which does not work well for
those who tend to have too great a blood flow to the brain, and too
great a nerve force already. Rather, Valerian, having a warming and
stimulating effect on the body, is a remedy used better for a
nervousness and irritability that comes secondarily to deficiency. It
is best used in people with poor blood circulation in general, but
particularly poor circulation to the brain and nervous centers. It is
well used for anxiety, despondency, and nervousness in individuals
whose face and skin look pale and lifeless, and the skin and body is
cool. It is a particularly useful remedy when there is intestinal
tension leading to gas, cramps, constipation, or irritable bowel type
conditions. For a tonic effect, it should be taken as a fresh plant
extract. This plant is also hypotensive and is used as a relaxing
remedy in hypertension and stress-related heart problems. As a
hypnotic it is well known to improve sleep quality, especially
amongst those who consider themselves to be poor sleepers.
Besides its wonderful relaxing effects, Valerian is also anti-
spasmodic and emmenagogue. It is a suitable remedy for excessive
caffeine intake.

----- PAGE 49 -----
Vitex (Chasteberry) is a uterine tonic which stimulates and
normalizes pituitary gland functions, especially its progesterone-
stimulating function, and therefore acts to normalize the activity of
female sex hormones. This is the basis for its use in everything from
PMS and recovery from taking birth control pills, to dysmenorrhea
and menopause. It is used to stabilize the ovulation cycle. It is well
used to help reduce the undesirable symptoms of menopause and is
helpful in irregular menstruation, especially if accompanied by
endometriosis. It helps relieve hormonally related constipation, and
can assist in the control of acne in teenagers.

Willow is an ancient analgesic remedy used for its pain-relieving,
anti-inflammatory effects. In various forms, it has been employed to
relieve the discomforts of headache, cold, flu, fever, gout, and the
aches and pains of all description.

Yarrow is one of the best of the diaphoretic herbs, making it a
standard remedy for reducing fever. It is used for treating
hypertension. This action is attributed to its vaso-dilating and
diuretic properties. As a tonic, this herb’s main uses are as an
astringent, anti-septic, anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic, and a
diuretic remedy for the genito-urinary system. It is used as an
astringent, anti-inflammatory, and bitter tonic in the gastrointestinal
system, where it can help normalize irritated and inflamed states of
the digestive tract, as its volatile oils contain similar anti-
inflammatory constituents as Chamomile. Its astringent, hemostatic,
and anti-inflammatory properties also make this plant useful for
intestinal bleeding, hemorrhoids with bloody discharge, uterine
hemorrhage, profuse, protracted menstruation, and leucorrhea. It is
also quite effective in relieving menstrual cramps. Used externally,
it is styptic and a wound-healing vulnerary.

Yellow Dock is a hepatic liver stimulant and laxative. As a laxative,
its activity lies somewhere between the bile stimulants (Dandelion,
Oregon Grape) and the more strongly laxative anthraquinone group
(Bitter Aloe, Senna, Buckthorn). Its combination of liver-cleansing

----- PAGE 50 -----
properties and laxative effect seems to assist the body in dealing
with the metabolic wastes often associated with a low-fiber, high-
fat, and meat diet. As a cholagogue, it stimulates the flow of bile
and has a therapeutic effect on jaundice when this is due to
congestion. Yellow Dock is a wonderful alterative for treating oily
and exudative skin conditions. It seems to work through the liver
and bowel to help remove metabolic wastes from the blood. By
improving the liver’s ability to metabolize wastes and fats it takes
the burden off of secondary pathways of elimination, such as the
skin.

Gobo is a young and tender Burdock root
commonly used in Japanese cuisine and available
in many local produce sections.

GREEN’S 5 ADDITIONAL HERBS AND THE FUNGUS

Burdock is a “deep food” and alterative that moves the body to a
state of well-nourished health, promotes the healing of wounds, and
removes the indicators of system imbalance such as low energy,
ulcers, skin conditions, and dandruff. As a diuretic and alterative, it
works through the liver and kidneys to protect against the build-up
of waste products and is considered to be one of the best tonic
correctives of skin disorders. Burdock is a classic remedy for skin
conditions which result in dry, scaly skin and cutaneous eruptions
(eczema, psoriasis, dermatitis, boils, carbuncles, sties), as well as
also being helpful in relieving rheumatism and gout. As a mild
bitter that stimulates digestive juices and bile secretion, it aids
appetite and digestion and is well used in anorexia. Externally, it is
an exceptional fomentation or poultice to promote the healing of
wounds and ulcers, especially when also taken internally on a
regular basis.

Oat spirit is the commuter’s green angel. She

----- PAGE 51 -----
graciously feeds the nervous system of those who
overwork themselves, function on nervous energy
(and caffeine), are chronically under stress, simply
burned out, and possibly a bit depressed by it all.

Ginkgo is first and foremost a vasodilator. It improves circulation to
the brain and periphery and has a normalizing action on the
vascular system, making it important in all conditions stemming
from poor circulation. It improves circulation to all poorly
nourished areas. It enhances memory by improving nerve cell
transmission and brain metabolism by increasing the utilization of
oxygen and glucose. As a brain tonic, free-radical scavenger, and
anti-oxidant, it helps prevent cardiovascular damage and counters
the general effects of aging.

Oat is one of the best nerve tonics for feeding the depleted nervous
system of those who overwork and undernourish themselves, or for
those who function on nervous energy (or caffeine) for too long
without replenishing their reserves. Oat is specific for the individual
who is chronically under stress and is simply burned out. Its anti-
depressive activity is specific for nervous exhaustion and debility
when associated with depression. It is a nutritive that is well used
for convalescence following any prostrating disease and/or nervous
breakdown. Externally, it is demulcent and vulnerary, making a
soothing bath for use in neuralgia and irritated skin conditions.

Saw Palmetto is a nutritive tonic whose influence is directed toward
the entire reproductive apparatus. It works cleverly as a remedial
tonic that stimulates the nutrition of the nerve centers upon and
through which it operates. For the male, this action focuses
particularly on the prostate gland, which it keeps in a state of
wellness. For an enlarged prostate gland and accompanying
diminished sexual drive, it is remarkably therapeutic, as it reduces
the size of the gland and quickly relieves the other disorders that
commonly occur with this condition’s symptoms (i.e.. dribbling

----- PAGE 52 -----
urine, slow initiation of urination, incomplete bladder evacuation).
In females, this plant is beneficial for treating ovarian enlargement,
weakened sexual drive, and with continual use its nourishing
components can help develop small underdeveloped mammary
glands. As a diuretic, antiseptic, and tonic it is a valuable remedy in
treating any infection of the genito-urinary system. As a nutritive
endocrine agent, it is safely used to give a boost to the male sex
hormones and has been reported to reverse sterility in woman
where there is no organic disease or injured tissue. This berry tastes
to me like rancid soap, so I find it is most palatable when taken in
capsule form. For those whose nature will do well with the actions
and flavor of Licorice, this herb does a decent job of covering Saw
Palmetto’s controversial flavor.

Siberian Ginseng is a classic adaptogen in that when taken
consistently it produces a state of non-specific stress resistance. It
helps modify the underlying imbalance caused by stressors,
regardless of the specific nature of the stressor (chemical, physical,
psychological, etc.). In order for an herb to be classified as an
adaptogen, not only must it help one deal with “stress,” but it
cannot cause an imbalance in physiological functions; it must
basically be harmless and should help normalize functions,
regardless of whether they are underactive or overactive.

Siberian Ginseng’s adaptogenic qualities have been shown to
improve generalized resistance to infectious diseases, to lessen
muscular fatigue, to help balance hypertension, and to reduce
damage from radiation. Although its effect on the adrenal cortex
gives it wide-ranging uses, it seems to have a special affinity for the
circulatory system. It has been shown to balance both high and low
blood pressure, reduce serum cholesterol levels, and relieve anginal
pain.

The wide-ranging effects of Siberian Ginseng can be traced largely
to its ability to have positive effect on the general adaptation
syndrome. When confronted with long-term stress, the original
response known as the “alarm reaction” is less severe; the resistance
phase (i.e.. when you are coping with a stress) is prolonged. and

----- PAGE 53 -----
the exhaustive stage that can follow long-term stress is better
handled. All in all, Siberian Ginseng allows one to better handle a
tougher work load, emotional and chemical stressors, living in
congested cities, and the general frazzle of living in our twenty-first
century civilization.

Reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) is a remarkably beneficial fungus for
the human body. First of all, it is a primary supporter of the
immune system, as it is believed to enhance white blood cell
production, stimulate macrophage (scavenger cells of the immune
system) activity, help protect against cancer, and work against
viruses. It is shown to modify the body’s allergic response. Reishi
also provides cardiovascular protection by helping to lower
excessively high blood pressure. It helps lower cholesterol while it
increases the ratio of HDL (good cholesterol) to the LDL (not so
good) cholesterol. At the same time, it inhibits platelet dysfunction
(platelets are components of blood that promote clotting). In
addition to all this, Reishi is a liver protective against damaging
agents, and it seems to have a calming and strengthening effect on
the nervous system, as it is mildly adaptogenic and antioxidant by
protecting the body against free radicals. That’s an herbal ally, my
friends!

Heras to Avo

in PreGNancy

Barberry (which I suggested using as a substitute
for Goldenseal)

Black Cohosh (except for the last month of
pregnancy) and its substitute Baneberry (see
this page)

Cayenne (use sparingly)

Comfrey

----- PAGE 54 -----
Ginger (use very sparingly)
Goldenseal
Mugwort

Oregon Grape (which I suggested using as a
substitute for Goldenseal)

Yarrow

SuGcrsten MetHops oF Extraction

=
macnn :
ose [e . . ele
=| | _
Catendula Pal ° ole le « |e o
Cayenne | * * ele .
=
cuit : :
= we] [sf [efel
oe Hi A
a a : :
ig es Seite
re : * Tos.

----- PAGE 55 -----


----- PAGE 56 -----


----- PAGE 57 -----
IRYI

i i
GARBLING
AND STORING

I find gardening to be the most companionable and fulfilling of all
my herbal experiences. I am wholly, entirely, and utterly convinced
that the power of gardening to promote healing and sustain
wellness goes far beyond that of any other form of medicine, herbal
or otherwise. In fact, with certain individuals I’ve noted that
gardening is the only herbal remedy whose antidepressant action

----- PAGE 58 -----
truly uplifts their spirit and successfully relieves their depression.
Having discovered it, gardening has become the only medicine path
they steadfastly rely on.

Collecting and planting seeds, touching the Earth, relating to
plants, and caring for them as you attune to the flow of the seasons,
simply feels good. All phases of gardening touch my being in a
spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical way. It always fills my
heart and mind with delicious anticipation, which stimulates the
vital flow of any human being’s life force.

In the concluding chapter of The Male Herbal, I asked these
questions regarding Western culture: “Where are all the old men?
Where have they gone? What are they doing? Where have the seeds
of male maturity fallen?” A few years have passed since then, and
during that time I’ve located a vast number of these male elders;
they’re in the garden (with Waldo). That’s why we don’t hear much
from them. They’ve withdrawn from much of society’s commotion
and chatter, and they’re busy talking with plants. They’ve become
active greenmen, and their primary dialogue has transcended to one
of quiet words, the language fulfilled human beings use to
commune with plant spirit. These elders are well and doing fine,
living their wisdom. I’ve been noticing these days an ever-increasing
number of younger men hanging out in gardens, as well.

But I don’t figure that you picked up this book in search of a
gardening manual, so I will get on with other information—even
though my gardening manual would simply say: “Just put your
hands, some roots, and some seeds into the receptive earth and
grow something.” I will, however, place some medicine gardening
documents in the back of this book as Appendix B, and they'll be
there for you when you seek them.

The innate joy of being with plants is reflected in the spontaneous
uplifting of our human spirit as we commingle with our vegetable
allies. Conscientious herbal medicine-making is a transformative
process that materializes this communion, expressing it in the forms
of nourishing plant concoctions and subtle energetic elixirs, and
most importantly as sustained. thriving plant communities.

----- PAGE 59 -----
In my travels as an herbalist, the experience of harvesting
medicinal plants has become the most intimate and compassionate
portion of this communion. As I harvest a plant being, I put forth
my desire to make medicine, and in turn plant spirits acquiesce to
my request for the aid of their embodied nutrients and aesthetic
healing vibration. I strive to receive these gifts with gratitude, and
feel the sacred circle of giving sanction our union. That is a very
good feeling, a feeling of health. In my practice as an herbalist, I
deeply revere this mutually conscious act of alliance.

It is my belief that plants have manifested as one of this planet’s
foremost expressions of love. The clear vibration of love that
radiates from plants is one of the fullest expressions of
unconditional love that I witness. Harvesting is a way of calling
forth and receiving this love. It has become a sacred act in my
practice, one that I try to participate in wholeheartedly with
grateful consciousness and clear communication of my intent.

I recommend herbal medicine-makers involve themselves in this
segment of medicine-making with clear purpose in mind and inner
commemoration in heart. Plant spirits will respond likewise. They
are highly conscious. They are of the same spiritual essence we are.
They adore us, and they communicate this to us with every
vibration of their pure positive energy. Plants are responsive allies
and trustworthy companions, and when we ask them to make
medicine with us, we will do well to approach them with mutual
regard, care, and intelligence.

Herbal medicine-making is the dynamic synapse that lays the
roadway between harvesting plants and consuming plant
preparations. Therefore, the ritual-process of harvesting is the very
foundation of preparing and potentizing these medicines for our
use. Intimate attention to the details of our harvest process is the
rite that allows the medicine-maker to contact and communicate
with the spirit of the plant and imbue this plant spirit in his or her
food and medicine. If we choose to devalue this act by ignoring or
disregarding the presence of plant spirit, we carry off the physical
remnants of the plant, but lose access to the most vital healing
power of the herb. And with this same heedless thrust. we can

----- PAGE 60 -----
damage the sustaining stability and beauty of our environment. I try
to bear this in mind whenever I participate in the circle of giving as
the harvester of another being. This holds for all Earthly harvests—
plant, animal, and mineral.

Certainly, the science and technology we employ to prepare our
herbal preparations are important factors in bringing forth high-
quality herbal medicines, and the main body of this handbook
offers guidelines for these techniques. But as author of this work I
must allege, as I repeat, these are not the most crucial factors. The
harvest is. Therein lies the art and soul of excellent medicine-
making.

In my opinion the harvesting of a plant is the
most critical element in the process of making
truly fine herbal medicine.

A clear compassionate intent for one’s use of a harvest, coupled
with an animated connection with the plant (one that embraces a
sincere regard for the continual welfare of the plant’s community),
is what draws forth the spirit of plants to accompany one’s
medicine. This “plant spirit” is the “active ingredient” in herbal
preparations that medical pharmaceutical science and many
commercial herbal industries are so desperately seeking. The active
ingredient of herbal medicine, the one that truly supports human
health and healing, is not scientifically captured in high-tech
wonder-labs, mysteriously contained and transformed by stainless
steel vessels and bubbling glass beakers. It is simply embraced in
the woodlands, meadows, seashores, and in the domestic gardens
where plants and plant communities live. It is conveyed by a green
spirit, whoever she or he might be, wherever she or he might work.

“Life begins the day you start a garden.”

— A. CHINESE PROVERB

----- PAGE 61 -----
TWO RITUALS

Following are two focusing rituals you might find useful.

These rituals are clearly not intended to impress the plants, and
they are not ordained to flip on some sort of magic switch; plants
are already our allies, and the magic Nature surrounds us with all
the time, where everything imaginable is possible, is always on.
These rituals are for you. To receive what you want, you merely
have to tap into natural enchantment in a nonresistant fashion.
Ritual helps you allow yourself to function at an altered state of
knowing and receptivity. In ritual you focus precisely on what you
want and hold your attention on the vibrations you choose to
harmonize with—at present, the vibration of plant spirit.

The first procedure is a ritualized method for allowing yourself to
communicate with plants and receive them as personal allies. The
second is a ritual that aligns the pace of your physical and mental
energy with the energy of the plant entities you wish to harvest.
Both rituals can help you focus on your intent and align your spirit
in a relationship with a plant, a relationship that allows you to
carry the spirit of the plant along with your harvest of its physical
being. If either one or both rituals appeal to you, adopt them, or
modify them to suit your nature. If they’re not your style, create
your own way. These are merely my means to an end; there are
innumerable other ways to woo plant spirit. Seduction is a highly
personal adventure. Ritual is a partner helping create the energy of
a dance; you are the drummer.

Id like to slip a note in here to readers who live in cities’ densely
populated neighborhoods or other areas where intentional gardens
are not apparent and open spaces are often inaccessible. Plant spirit
resides in each and every plant. Regardless of the size of the
metropolis you inhabit or the thickness of its concrete complexion,
you can spot wild plants growing throughout its brittle surface.
There’s simply no holding them down. Walk the streets and check it
out; healthy plants are rising through the city grid. You'll see them
standing in anonymous cement cracks and poking out of the narrow
seams where building walls reach down and touch adioining

----- PAGE 62 -----
sidewalks. You can find plants growing all along streetside curbs
and down adjacent alleyways; and, their green spirit lounges as
communities of weeds at the edges of asphalt parking lots. Arriving
with the wind, the seeds of diverse plants abound in pretty much
every patch of city dirt. When you start looking, you find Earth’s
plants hanging out all over town. Even the most plant-resistant
environments host their bands of outlaw weeds. Actually plant
spirit, in one form or another, envelops the entire city—every city.
Boundless numbers of fertile seeds lie under city streets and beneath
each metropolitan structure. The precious seeds and spores of
Earth’s ancient forests, jungles, grasslands, and wetlands reside
peacefully in the soils below the urban hubbub, patiently biding
their time, prepared to reemerge whenever opportunities arise. Left
unattended, as our current civilizations move on to other things,
cities will quickly become wild gardens again—it’s inevitable.
Humanity in its expansive exuberance has mowed down the forests
for the time being but certainly has not eliminated them from
Earth’s timeless demeanor. We tend to credit ourselves with abilities
on this orbiting garden we do not truly possess. We are Earth’s
hyperactive children; she loves us and lets us play, but we’re not
running her show. Not really. So for now, there may not be a
sufficient amount of plants growing on urban turf to harvest, but
there are always plenty to relate to and commune with, and, like
other plants, they respond to us. Acknowledge plant spirit that
greets you on the street. Respond to its communication. It’s a silent
language, remember; other humans won’t hear you. Reach out and
touch plants too, rubbing their leaves between your fingers and
smelling their green aromas. Other folks won’t pay much attention
to this gesture either. And if I might add a P.S. to this note, the
plants you encounter on your streets are noteworthy candidates to
adopt as urban allies. Their vibrations are as clear and uplifting as
those of plants growing in gardens and country wilds. If you feel a
green companion touch your spirit, plant its image in your mind
and heart. Let it grow in there too and enjoy the connection; the
plant’s companionable spirit will always be there for you to access.
Cities are rarely lonely places for those who speak with the plants.

----- PAGE 63 -----
We are Earth’s hyperactive children; she loves us
and lets us play, but we’re not running her show.

“The greatest gift of the garden is the restoration
of the five senses.”

—Hanna Rion

A Riva. or Communion

To begin with, let me suggest that there are plants out there
fully prepared and eager to communicate with you. They offer
no resistance whatsoever to the adventure of communicating
with a receptive human being. Over 99 percent of our (human)
being is a vibrational communicator. Under 1 percent is a
verbal communicator even with other human beings, so plants
and animals being virtually 100 percent vibrational
communicators are very similar to you and me in their
vibrational offering. They are quite able and entirely
compatible to communicate with us, and vice versa.

Go outside and look around in the garden or wander
through the forest, the hillsides, the seashore, or along a
country roadway. Note the plants that attract you most
(vibrational communication). Note the ones that you have
always enjoyed looking at, the plant entities that whenever
you are near them you can’t (and never want to) keep your
eyes off. You feel pleasantly uplifted whenever you are near
them (vibrational communication). These are the plants that
are already your visual lovers; and believe me, if you’re that
attracted to them, they are appreciating you just as much
(vibrational communication). So, these are the vegetable folks

----- PAGE 64 -----
to start intentionally communicating with. A mutual,
vibrational connection has already been established without a
word having been spoken. You have entered the green.

At a time when your insides are smiling, like one of my
friends once said, “At a time when you're just feeling happy
for no particular reason,” go sit with one of these plants;
initiate enchantment. You will feel a mutual attraction
touching some undomesticated, wild part of yourself. Be still
and take the opportunity to listen to the sounds of Nature that
surround you. Be still for as long as it takes to reunite with
your deep sense of well-being. In this mutual state of
consciousness plants will further respond to you. Smell the
scents that are flowing around and into you. Feel everything
breathing in rhythm, connecting you with Nature’s intelligent
beauty. Feel your absolute freedom and that of all other beings
present. Touch the plant. It is vibrating in its place of absolute
well-being, as are you. Feel the plant’s leaf. Let your sight
drink its colors. Touch the ethereal softness of its flower’s
petals. Let it experience your vitality and gentleness. These are
the “initial words” of your communication.

Be open to all possibilities. Be open to your feelings and
your visions. Dissolve any sensual separation you might feel
with the plant by letting all intellectual objectivity flow away
with the breeze. Instead, focus on yourself sitting with the
plant, and within this subjective passion let your spirit mingle
and blend with the plant’s spirit.

Ask the plant to give you its name. Dismiss all you think you
know or might have been taught about the plant; instead,
allow its name to come to you. Keep the name silent within
you, like the name of a clandestine lover.

Ask the plant for its song. Every plant has a song. It may give
it to you to sing or to recite as poetry (or for the time being it
may give you a portion of its song as a simple word for use as

----- PAGE 65 -----
a mantra to focus on in meditation for later realization of the
plant’s power). You may also receive an image or a nature
symbol to draw or paint or weave or sculpt. Songs and visual
images are given to you for your personal medicine-use of the
plant. Keep them intimate; hold their energy and knowledge in
your heart and mind. These gifts are the ultimate harvest.

After giving you its name and song, the plant may give you
other gifts by telling you what it will do for you as a medicine
ally. Later, share these gifts with others if you wish, but don’t
exclaim them as universal truth. These are truths shared
between you and the plant; they have been given specifically
to you. It is your medicine.

Extend visions of well-being to the plant and to its
community. They are your allies and you can always speak to
them of that which you want.

Once you have communicated with a plant entity, briefly or
at length, having received its name and any gifts it extends to
you, continue through the succeeding days and nights to
visualize and meditate on the plant’s image and energy. You
may be given more during these meditative states or during
sleep in a dream. Expect this. It has been a long time since
most of us have made ourselves available for intentional
conversation with plant spirits. There is much to be
communicated between plant and human species, and it is a
joy for both to do so.

Later, go dancing. Dance to the rhythm of the drummers and
the shakers; close your eyes and visualize and feel the energy
of this plant. Dance this energy; like attracts like. In this state
of consciousness, other nature spirits can come to you as you
dance, or later that evening.

Remember, plants participate in very active night lives. Enter
your garden during the evening hours and hang out with them
in the quiet moonlight. Experience the magnificent nocturnal

----- PAGE 66 -----
energy that the garden residents emanate ... a very good time
to exchange a few silent “words” and frolic in your garden’s
lunacy.

Summer Serenade for Carolyn

“Night cricket can sing you through a lonely eve;
night cricket will sing you to the morning light.”

—T. Exper Sacus

A Swere Harvest Riva,

Harvest at ease, in rhythm and focus.

Sit for a while with the plants you want to harvest. Treat
yourself to the splendor of their beauty; enjoy the well-being
you share.

Seek out the grandmother plant, the elder of the community.
Focus on this plant and yourself together. Place intimate
energy around the two of you by visualizing warm light
surrounding you or by shaking a rattle and feeling a field of
cohesive energy encircle you (nature spirits and human babies
love the sound vibrations of rattles ... remember?).

Be still in body and energy. Slow down your pace of thought
and action with a ceremonial offering to the grandmother and
her clan. This adjusts your normal human pace to better align
your energy with the energy of the plants. Just sit with the
stillness and empty your mind. Meditate. Tune to your inner
hearing. Plant spirit speaks to these ears.

Communicate clearly your harvest intent and clarify to the
plant and again to yourself the purpose of the medicine you

----- PAGE 67 -----
wish to prepare.

Ask permission to harvest, asking when to harvest, where,
how, and how much. Plants, when listened to, inform you how
best to harvest and receive their gifts.

At this point, it is possible that you might sense a “no”
answer. Honor this. Not all of a plant’s medicine energy is
contained or accessed merely in its physical body. Be content
for the moment to harvest plant communion and
companionship. Come back again later or visit another
community and extend another request.

When you feel permission to harvest, harvest softly. Impact
the plant community and the ecosystem minimally. You only
need enough herb for the year. Upon feeling a sense of
permission, you will have strongly connected with the plant
and infused your harvest with its spirit. As you work through
the harvesting action, maintain communication with the
individual plants you are taking, and sustain focus on your
intended uses. Genius is focus.

As a conclusion to your harvest, express your gratitude to the
plant community. Grandmother will be smiling and you will
know it.

As you are leaving, pause for a moment and look back at the
plant community. Ask yourself if you harvested softly. Does it
show that you were there? How much does it show? Be with
your feelings about this. Learn from them; they are your truth.
A novice’s mistake of effecting an over-enthusiastic harvest is
always forgivable; but it is a teaching to be valued and taken to
heart. Visualize the healing energy of the medicines you are
about to make with the plants given to you by this community
and bid farewell.

Return to your home and process your harvest immediately.

Go dancing that evening. Dance the energy and character of

----- PAGE 68 -----
the plant spirit you harvested. Dance with your plant allies.
Dance your happiness and your gratitude. A plant person’s life
is an expression of joy and companionship.

HARVESTING EQUIPMENT

There is paraphernalia necessary for the harvester. The minimum
equipment required for an impassioned harvester is merely a pair
of hands and some means for getting them to the plants; a healthy
pair of feet is adequate for that job. But I am a stickler for taking
meticulous care of all tools and equipment; therefore, I strongly
recommend protective coverings for your hands and feet. Sandals
and bare fingers are a pleasure to use for harvesting Red Clover or
Calendula blossoms on a warm summer day, but high-top gumboots
(a.k.a. duck boots, galoshes, Wellingtons) and gloves will be deeply
appreciated when harvesting Stinging Nettles on a soggy river bank
in early spring, or for trekking across a sloshy forest floor in search
of Skunk Cabbage. A tough canvas jacket will keep you snug and
protect your arms and torso from spiny stalks as you walk through
forests and pull roots like those of Oplopanax horridum from the
ground, or when you dig Blackberry roots from the earth in the
spring or fall. A lightweight, long-sleeved cotton shirt worn during
hot sunny days of harvesting will greatly assist your body to retain
water and avoid dehydration. A variety of favorite hats protect
harvesters from a hot sun, as well as from cold, rain, and the end
products of bird peristalsis.

I suggest you purchase the best-quality equipment you can
possibly afford. High-quality tools serve you better, are safer to use,
and if taken care of will last significantly longer. The key phrase
here is, if taken care of. Attention to details like keeping hands,
feet, head, and torso protected and healthy; keeping blades sharp,
not pushing any tool past its limits, wiping tools dry after use,
cleaning and oiling them regularly, and storing them in dry places
out of direct sunlight will assure vou a functional. co-independent

----- PAGE 69 -----
relationship with your harvesting equipment. It appears to me that
inanimate objects have sensitive spirits too, and like animate
objects they respond positively to any regard and attention you give
them. All in all, pampered, high-quality equipment ends up being
less expensive, safer, and more enjoyable to use.

In addition to body-protecting paraphernalia, you will need
equipment and tools with which to cut, whittle, scrape, dig, and
carry stuff in. Pruning shears, a knife, a trowel, and paper bags will
do.

In my experience, the best pruning shears are Felco® brand. The
makers of these cutters offer a gratifying variety of ergonomic styles
for both left-handers and right-handers, and for hand sizes of men
and women. Be keenly aware when using shears that they are
known to bite the hand not holding them.

Eourment

Gumboots

Gloves

Canvas Jacket

Long-Sleeved Shirt

Pruning Shears

Pocket Knife

Trowel and a Hori Hori
Paper Bags

Sturdy Basket with a Large Handle
Water Bottle

Plant Guide

Harvesting Information Chart
Lavendar Essential Oil

I also retain the services of a qualified pocketknife at all times.

----- PAGE 70 -----
one whose blade will lock open during use. (It’s a painful slice of
life when a foldable knife blade suddenly closes down on one’s
fingers.) I carry this little tool to help me deal with those
spontaneous odd jobs that inevitably arise during harvesting and
gardening and for innumerable supplementary tasks such as
removing soil from under fingernails, cutting large bars of
chocolate, fending off bears, unwrapping Valentine gifts, and so
forth. A companion pocketknife is an essential tool for an
independent being. I’m not talking about a clunky foreign army
version that includes fold-out dishware and a car port, just a slim,
little, pocket-friendly, one- or two- blade item. I guarantee you will
use it throughout your medicine-making (and other) journeys—
repeatedly. When someone asks me what gift to get for someone
else, man or woman, I suggest buying him or her a cool little
pocketknife (they’re trippy to shop for). But of course the superb
suggestion is usually ignored and wanders off unappreciated.

My best trowel is made of beefy aluminum; its handle and blade
are molded as a single piece, having a very sturdy shaft that doesn’t
bend no matter how high the fervor of my determination escalates
while digging. I also rely on a hori hori, which is a brilliantly
designed Japanese root digging tool that is virtually indestructible.
No one said digging roots was effortless, even with the plant’s
permission, so be equipped.

The best paper bags to use are large, heavy-duty, recycled ones.
Avoid using plastic bags; they retain heat and moisture and quickly
compost (before you can get them home) the fresh herbs they
contain.

A basket is also practical, especially one designed with a large
stiff handle that arches over the top of the basket. You can stick
your arm through the handle and retain the use of both hands for
picking and placing the plant parts into the conveniently positioned
basket hanging on your arm. This is most practical when you need
to reach up to harvest Hawthorn berries or Elder blossoms or when
you are perched in a tree reaching out precariously to collect other
precious arboreal pickings.

In order to take good care of vourself. vou will also need a full

----- PAGE 71 -----
water bottle. Get a quart-size bottle, maybe two of them, as a pint
of water is seldom enough. Put a fresh sprig of Mint, Lemon Balm,
Lemon Verbena, or a slice of Lime in the drinking water. Never go
harvesting without taking water. The arid shadow of dehydration
lurks in nearly every ecosystem. Drink lots of water while
harvesting and gardening. It’s the medicine-maker’s field tonic, and
plants are indulgent water-drinking buddies.

Amidst your enchanted wonderings, you will happen upon many
intriguing plants in the field. If you are a person who likes to give a
name to them, carry a plant identification guide with you. Search
bookstores for pocket guides that speak clearly to your intellect,
ones that focus on the locations you frequent. However, when the
sight of a particular plant stops you in your tracks, I suggest first
sitting and asking the plant itself for its name. Then, following this
private conversation, consult your identification guide, key out the
plant, and note the names others have given it. Practice plant
communion first, then practice using your plant key. You also have
the botanical-poet’s inalienable right to give the plant any
“common” name you choose. I strongly suggest you revel in
exercising this right. It’s fun, intimate, and highly creative. Utilize
all opportunities to beckon and inspire your inner poet.

Some individuals like to keep a record of their harvesting
experiences. In Appendix E, I have given you a sample of the
Harvesting Information Chart we recommend using at the California
School of Herbal Studies for documenting the details of harvest that
pertain to plants we process for our use. This form is offered
merely as a sample guide. Format your own design to suit your
particular interests.

First aid equipment obligatory for the harvesting tasks that await
you can be summarized in three words—Lavender essential oil. I
mean, you shouldn’t be jeopardizing your life and limb out there in
herb-land, but frequently you do put your skin at risk. What with
biting and sucking critters, abrading surfaces, scraping and
puncturing stickers and thorns, bumps, nicks, cuts, pruning shear
bites, I tell you, it can be itchy and irritating out there. And what
one needs most when a cutaneous crisis occurs is an inexpensive.

----- PAGE 72 -----
soothing (anti-inflammatory), cleansing (disinfectant) accessory, that
smells great. This would be a 15 ml bottle of pure Lavender
essential oil. Slather it on any and all offended skin.

ECOLOGICAL HARVESTING PROTOCOL

Ecological harvesting protocol is founded on the knowledge,
experience, intent, and actions of human beings who hold in their
hearts and minds a deep respect for plant communities. These
people I recognize as “plant persons,” the green herbalists. When in
the field, a green herbalist realizes that he or she is a visitor, a guest
in quest of great gifts. This field persona emits respect and
gratitude, and monitors one’s harvesting technique in such manner
that the plant community is honored and can continue to thrive.
Because the relationship between the green herbalist and the plant
community is such that, season to season, the number and health of
the plants will have been sustained or increased, the herbalist will
be welcomed back for the next harvest and the one following that,
as will his or her children, apprentices, companions, and so on for
generations to follow.

Please peruse the “Eight Principles of Excellent Medicine-Making”
found in Appendix C offered for your contemplation.

The primary principles of gathering wild medicinal plants are
discussed below.

Harvest Apunpance Onty

Gather solely in those prime areas that you find abounding with
plants of the same species. Try not to harvest the same stand year
after year. Never harvest or disturb threatened or endangered
plants. Plant them instead. Seek them out and sing to them. You
don’t have to sing out loud. If you have a singing voice like mine
it’s probably better that you don’t. Plants hear a silent song (and
often prefer it). I know this sounds a bit corny, but I find it true in
my experience. Let your songs tell the plants (and wild animals)

----- PAGE 73 -----
how beautiful they are and how deeply you appreciate them.
Communicate to them how much you want them to remain here
with us on Earth. Visualize their well-being and focus on that
vision. Let the wild beings hear what’s in your heart, the heart of
their ally. The positive vision and songs of a singer whose passion is
connected to the source of abundance can singleheartedly turn any
tide from depletion to plenty.

As you gather plants, please assume the responsibility to learn
which plants, if any, are currently on threatened and endangered
lists in the areas you harvest. Keep in mind that a plant can be
abundant in one state and at the same time rare and in great need
of protection and assistance in the next state. Check with your local
herbarium, botanical garden, wildflower groups, native plant
society, or the United Plant Savers (UpS) list of “at-risk” plants (see
Appendix A).

When digging roots, refill the holes, whether deep or shallow.
Whenever possible, replant a section of any budding rhizomes or
any root crowns that you can separate from the roots you harvest.
Scatter the mature seeds of these root-medicine plants around the
area whenever you can. Attempt to leave the area looking as
undisturbed as it did upon your arrival. If possible, make the area
look even better. Often you will find someone’s discarded trash
lying around (they probably figure their high school janitor will get
it later); please pick it up and cart it out. You certainly have my
sincere gratitude for doing this. And please keep in mind at all
times that wild (and frequently garden) plant stands also provide
food for the local wildlife. Human debris left lying around can
entrap and injure or kill wild fauna in the most unimaginably
torturous ways.

You don’t need a lot of plant material to make
enough herbal medicine for the year.

Practice AND Promote Damace Contro

----- PAGE 74 -----
Be aware of your impact on the plant communities that you are
making contact with; make it negligible. Notice the impact of your
footwear and your passage on the terrain. Be aware of simple
erosion factors.

Hard-soled shoes are the most damaging to delicate hillside
ecosystems. It is easy to damage the fragile environment of a rocky
hillside or a wet stream bed by treading on them thoughtlessly.

When harvesting the foliage of bushes or trees, pick from the
borders of the plants, leaving the central core of the plant to
regenerate itself outward.

When harvesting a hillside, begin at the bottom and work your
way up the slope. Leave all the plants growing at the top of the
hill. These are the community members, often referred to as the
grandparent plants, that send their replenishing seed downhill and
also protect young plants. You have to love grandparents of all
species. An annual Grandparents’ Day would do well in this
country; it could be our first interspecies holiday.

Garner Onty From Heatray Prants anp Communities

Plants that appear to be in poor health or are being successfully
harassed by gnawing and sucking insects are probably growing on
the extreme peripheral border of their preferred growing conditions
and are struggling to survive. These are not appropriate individuals
to harvest. However, they may be harbingers of a_ thriving
community lying nearby. Or they may be the only specimen in that
area. Regardless, nod to them appreciatively and continue on.

As a general rule, don’t harvest the first plants of any species you
find in an area, whether weak or strong. Let these pioneering
individuals alone to stake their claim and proliferate as they can.
Even when you do come upon an appropriate size community of
healthy plants pick from the more central portions and let the
plants living on outer borders remain undiminished to tend to their
venture to extend the community outward. This is especially
essential when harvesting plants like St. John’s Wort. which

----- PAGE 75 -----
propagates itself primarily by casting its seeds and experiences a
massively increased harvest due to a sudden rush of popularity. This
has transformed its commercial reputation from one of a “noxious
weed” to that of a “quick antidote” for human depression—foolish
notions as those are.

Remove no more than 10 percent of a native plant community or
20 percent of a naturalized plant community; better yet, leave no
particularly noticeable evidence you were there. Leave enough
leaves, fruit, seeds, and/or flowers on the plants for them to
continue to prosper healthy and strong. I repeat, you don’t need a
lot of plant material to make enough herbal medicine for the year.
And you don’t want more than a year’s supply, because like
gardening the act of going out into the fields and forests of nature
each year and harvesting is itself one of the most healthful active
ingredients in herbal medicine.

Harvest in Unpou.urep Areas

It is best not to harvest downwind from any pollution, or on or near
roadsides coated with auto exhaust residue, or any place that has
been sprayed with herbicides or pesticides. In other words, harvest
50-100 yards away from public roads. I suggest not harvesting
downstream from any mining or chemically laden agricultural
business. The chemical runoff there is often vicious. Seriously
reconsider any impulse to harvest around parking lots, public
parks, fertilized lawns, and any other potentially sprayed or
fumigated areas.

Avoid harvesting beneath high voltage power lines. These high-
tension electric wires must trigger mutations. Yes, it’s possible these
mutations might prove superior to the normal plants of the species,
but the deranging agitation my car radio broadcasts when I drive it
near high voltage lines makes me wonder about the organic static
occurring within the tissues of those hapless plants growing beneath
them. No need to stress these plant communities further by
harvesting them. Human nervous systems (those similar to mine

----- PAGE 76 -----
anyway) don’t do well beneath high-voltage lines either.

Consider initiating your own privately unpolluted growing areas.
May I suggest if you have a lawn, that you quit chemicalizing it (if
you have been), then quit mowing it for a while. About the time
your neighbors start hassling you to cut the weeds, you will discover
a volunteer pharmacy of plant medicines growing right outside
your house. Tell your neighbors you're participating in a science
project. That'll stall them for a couple weeks. Then place neat little
rock borders around the medicinal plants you identify and tell your
neighbors you’re landscaping. That'll give you a few more weeks
before they notify the county officials. You might consider altering
your landscape design to include cultivated medicinal plants that
harmonize with the wild volunteers. There is a myriad of wild and
cultivated herbal alternatives to standardized urban lawns. (See
Appendix B.)

Ger Permission

Private landowners in the U.S. and Canada love to fence themselves
in and become resident ogres. North America is pregnant with
chain link fences, rails, and real estate boundaries. If you are
seeking to harvest “noxious weeds” such as Stinging Nettles,
Dandelions, or St. John’s Wort, I have found that, when asked, land
owners often say, “Hell yah, take all you want; get those damn
things out of here!” So you do them the favor and they love you for
it. They think you're a little odd and a bit eccentric, but there is no
problem. Indulge yourself in being odd now and then; it stirs the
pot. However, when you seek to harvest someone’s Eucalyptus,
Black Walnut, or Hawthorn trees, then you might have to be a little
more persuasive. But get permission. It improves the vibe. If you
seek to harvest plants on Bureau of Land Management (BLM) land,
you are required to obtain a free-use permit, which is obtainable,
for a small fee of course. This is a permit to collect only small
amounts of vegetation. (If you’re a lumber company, for about the
same fee vou can log the entire forest.) The U.S. Forest Service and

----- PAGE 77 -----
the BLM also enforce the following regulations: no picking in or
near campgrounds or picnic areas; no picking any plants closer than
200 feet from trails; and no picking any plants on roadsides.

It becomes a win-win situation once we learn to harvest in a style
that allows the ecology to recover. If you see that someone else,
whether human or animal, has already harvested a plant
community, leave it alone and move on. When you dig a root, in
most cases you take the life of the plant. This is appropriate, life
eats life; it is part of the circle of giving; but give sacred honor to
the giver. Cultivate gratefulness in your heart for the plant’s offering
to your life. Prepare and dispense root medicines with this
heightened appreciation. With the above acts of regard you
perpetuate abundance. The EcoHerbalist’s Fieldbook, written by
Gregory Tilford, is an extraordinary work that will help you harvest
with mindful heart. (See Resources.)

Waar to Harvest anp WHEN

A seasoned herbalist does not gather the various parts of plants
used to make herbal medicines randomly, or at just any time of the
year. There is a specific time in Earth’s solar and lunar cycles when
an herb will yield its best “medicine.” Herbalists for thousands of
years have recorded information concerning the proper time to pick
various herbs. And of course, being experts, they don’t always agree
with each other. However, most do agree that during specific
periods of the plant’s yearly growth and daily life cycle the
medicinal constituents are more fully developed and abundant in
certain parts of the plant than they are in others.

Plants are conveniently divided, for the purposes of the herbalist,
into the roots (and/or rhizomes), stem, inner and outer bark, leaves,
buds, flowers, saps and pitches, fruits, and seeds. These different
parts require different procedures for collection, drying, and
preservation.

Roots

----- PAGE 78 -----
Roots of biennial plants should be dug in the fall of the first year or
in the very early spring of the second year (they die in the fall of
the second year as the plant goes to seed). Perennial plants should
be dug late in the fall after the aerial parts have died back and the
sap has returned underground, or dig them very early in the spring
when the energy of the plant is still most active in the root. If you
dig them in the spring, do so immediately after the plant first
appears above the ground, before too much of the sap and vital
focus of the plant ascend from the root to manifest stem and leaf. In
general, perennial roots should not be gathered until after two or
three years’ growth, and in some cases the root should be allowed
three to seven years to develop full maturity. Roots of annual plants
are best dug immediately before the time of flowering. However,
annual plant roots are seldom used as medicines. For herbal
medicine-makers who are attentive to lunar as well as solar
influences, dig roots on the new moon.

Fleshy or succulent roots should be cut previous to drying to
expose a large surface area to the air. Cutting roots transversely or
longitudinally is more a matter of which you enjoy doing more;
however, I find that if before dehydrating them you cut roots
transversely in small sections, they are easier to grind into powder
later, especially those roots which are quite woody or fibrous. Root-
thizomes like Oregon Grape become very hard and woody when
dry, so they are best cut into very short sections while undried.
Smaller, more fibrous roots are best left whole.

If you are not using a root immediately to prepare a fresh,
undried plant extract, it is important that the root or other parts of
the plant be thoroughly dried. Whereas it is normally adequate to
dry most plants in a heat of about 100° F., in the case of Dandelion,
Burdock, and other succulent roots, apply a heat of about 150°, and
thoroughly dry them in order to destroy the eggs that may have
been deposited by insects. Neglecting this precaution may lead to
the rapid deterioration of the root by some very contented critters
to the dismay of a very discontented herbalist—not a pretty sight.

The smaller and more fibrous roots like those found with some
species of Echinacea and Valerian do better with less heat in drving.

----- PAGE 79 -----
As soon as these roots are dry, they should be placed in airtight
containers (especially roots which contain aromatic essential oils, in
order to best preserve these volatile components). It is best to use
these roots within a year, for their components, unlike those of
other roots, don’t survive storage for long periods of time.

Stems

Stems of herbaceous plants are best gathered after leaves appear
prior to flowering, unless the flowers are to be used along with the
stem as one does with Hyssop and California Poppy. Harvest any
aerial parts of a plant on or near a full moon.

Barks

Whenever possible, take any bark you wish to harvest from small
branches or from pruned branches. Some authorities recommend
gathering the bark of trees in the spring when the inner bark is
transferring the heaviest concentration of water, nutrients, and
medicinal components from the roots to the leaves, but I have
mixed feelings about this. I feel better harvesting the bark in the
fall. The mellow autumn return of the plant’s sap to the roots
doesn’t seem to bleed out of a wound so copiously as it does during
the spring when the sap bursts forth from its winter hibernation and
rises fervently to feed new leaves and flowers. Ask the tree. Barks of
shrubs are best harvested in the spring. At this time, the bark can be
more easily separated from the wood. Of course, never ring a plant
by stripping the bark completely around its girth. This will kill it.
Incisions should be limited to one-quarter or less of the limb’s
circumference. It is generally the inner bark that is used for making
medicine, so the epidermal outer bark is removed and the inner
bark dried. With some plants such as Devil’s Club (Oplopanax
horridus), the whole bark of the root and lower portion of the stalk
is used for medicine. This is an example of a plant that is very
aromatic and high in essential oil. and its root bark must be dried

----- PAGE 80 -----
and stored immediately to retain these volatile components. For
some plants like Oregon Grape (Berberis aquifolium), the whole
bark of the underground rhizome is harvested. Lunar-observant
harvesters usually take plant bark during the three-quarter waning
moon. If you ask, “Does that include root barks?” I’d have to say,
“That’s a good question; you'll have to get the answer from the
plant.”

We create win-win experiences when we learn to
harvest in a style that allows plant communities
to recover and thrive ... our hearts and herbal
pharmacies thrive as well.

Leaves

Leaves should be gathered when fully developed before the flower
blossoms develop, and certainly before the leaves have begun to
wither and fall. Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) and Artichoke (Cynara
scolymus) leaves are exceptions. Ginkgo leaves are best picked as
they are turning yellow, while they are still on the tree and
predominantly green (at least that is what the experts currently
believe). Artichoke leaves are picked in both the spring and the fall,
then blended, each season’s leaves presenting a little different
action than the other. These work well in combination.

Harvest leaves after the morning dew has dissipated and prior to
the more intense heat of the day. The heat of the midday sun
temporarily wilts the energy of many plants. If you notice that the
leaves of plants you wish to harvest are flagging from the heat,
refrain from harvesting them until the early evening when they
perk up again.

Herbs high in essential oils or resins such as Rosemary,
Eucalyptus, Peppermint, and Calendula should be picked in the
morning after the dew dries, during the hottest part of the year
when their oils and resins are most prominently developed.

Leaves of biennial plants are best picked in the spring of the

----- PAGE 81 -----
second year. In the first year biennials develop their root system
most extensively; in the spring of the second year, the juice shoots
up into the stalks and leaves on its way to ultimately create the
plant’s flowers and seeds. So, gather the leaves as the sap is
transiting through them. After the appearance of flowers, the leaves
begin to lose their activity. The juices are now preoccupied with
the development of the fruit and seeds.

The leaves of plants in the Labiaceae (mint) family (currently
called Lamiaceae by professional botanists) are more aromatic as
they approach the flowering tops, and the upper ones are
frequently gathered with the tops.

Flowers

Flowers are gathered just before they are fully developed. The scent
is more lively at this seductive stage and the color more vivid than
when the blossom is fully expanded. Once the blossom is fully open
and has successfully attracted a pollinating insect or has been
brushed by a pollen-laden breeze, the recently fertilized ovary
continues to grow at the expense of the accessory flower organs.
Choose a clear, dry morning after the dew has dissipated to harvest
flowers. Don’t wash flowers and buds. Shake them to remove
insects or debris. If you plan to dry tender, delicate blossoms, it is
preferable to dry them in the shade without artificial heat.

Saps and Pitches

Take these plant secretions in late winter or early spring. They are
usually flowing from a recent wound or have dried on the plant
after seeping from a past wound; so before, during, and on
completion of this harvest, give the tree a hug, as it can probably
use it.

Fruits

----- PAGE 82 -----
Fleshy fruits which are to be used to make exquisite juices,
flavoring syrups, cordials and elixirs are best plucked when they are
close to, but not quite ripe. Blackberries, Mulberries, Raspberries,
and Strawberries express a less glutinous and therefore more
agreeable juice when not perfectly ripe. The vegetable acids at this
stage are not yet completely transformed into sugar, rendering their
aroma fresher and stronger.

Seeds

Seeds are the least perishable portion of the plant. Therefore, they
can be and should be collected when they are perfectly ripe. They
require very little, if any, drying. One just needs to make sure the
seeds are not wet from dew or rain or any other external watering
when they are put into storage.

The Herb

This term generally refers to the whole plant, including the leaves,
stems, foliage, and sometimes the root, and all the parts of the plant
are used together (i.e, Scullcap, California Poppy, Cleaver,
Chickweed). The herb should be gathered when it is freshly in
flower. If the flower is not to be included, the herb should be
collected before the flowers appear, but after the foliage has
appeared. Most plants that have thick and branching stalks or stems
should be deprived of these before drying them or before using
them fresh undried.

DRYING HERBS

After you harvest an herb, the next task is to prolong its potency.
The most efficient way to accomplish this is to eat it on the spot, or
soon thereafter, in which case the fresh plant’s potency will merge
with your own. This is a choice technique to indulge when
harvesting palatable plants like Miner’s Lettuce, Chickweed.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Mullein flowers, and Nasturtium blossoms, or wild berries. You can
also choose to brew a fresh plant tea. However, if you intend to
postpone consumption until a later date, you must select other
procedures for preserving and storing your harvest. Dehydrating
(drying) plants, when done correctly, is a simple, excellent method
for maintaining plant part potencies.

Your goal and the mark of success in drying plants is to end up
with herbs that closely resemble the living plant in color, aroma,
taste, and texture. But, in order to achieve this, the drying procedure
must follow as soon after harvesting as possible. Trust me,
procrastination quickly teaches the wisdom of this counsel. But go
ahead, catch a movie that evening instead of tending to the St.
John’s Wort you spent the afternoon harvesting. Go canoeing and
leave your bag of fresh Nettles sitting around for a couple days. I
have. That’s how I learned what I know (of course the movie was
yet another Hollywood travesty, but the canoeing was an excellent
adventure and the local Nettle community most forgiving of my
negligence—it even showed me a slew of its other luscious patches
along the river’s banks).

There are a couple things to keep in mind when drying herbs. If
herbs are dried too quickly by using too much heat, they roast and
lose their potency. When herbs are dried too slowly, they can mold
and/or self-destruct by enzymatic actions, which also seriously
impoverishes their quality.

Overheating is the reason you often see commercial grade Red
Clover blossoms looking pale or brown in natural food store jars,
and Lavender blossoms, normally brilliant blue-violet on the stalk,
looking languid and gray within this same community of jars. Dried
properly, Red Clover blossoms are vibrant, pinkish red; Lavender
blossoms are a deep velvety lavender.

Once succulent herbs are fully dried there is no
longer enough water available in the vegetable
tissues to support microorganism _ lifestyles;
therefore the potency of one’s precious harvest is

----- PAGE 84 -----
greatly prolonged and herbalists are very happy.

Careless mishandling, in addition to improper heating, is another
reason you find numerous specimens of brownish green and hay-
colored dried leaves and stems in stores instead of the diversity of
vivid green colors you see in wild and domestic herb gardens. As I
mentioned above, a collection of properly handled and correctly
dried herbs will elicit the same diversity and sensual inspiration as
the garden’s collection of juicy green hues. Excessive age (even
though almost any herb will “lose it” over time in storage) is
usually the reason commercial grade Calendula blossoms often
resemble leftover pieces of used Kleenex tissue you pull from the
pocket of an overcoat not worn since the previous winter. Freshly
dehydrated Calendula blossoms dried properly display the same
bright yellows and intense oranges that they radiate while standing
fresh in the garden. I could go on and on describing more examples
of the inferior quality of commercial-grade bulk herbs found on
many (though not all) store shelves, but I’ll spare you the tedium; I
get miffed thinking about it anyway. Ailing folks buy these
exhausted plant materials, and of course, eventually conclude that
herbs don’t work. What can you expect? It’s like giving wilted
flowers to a friend to say you're sorry. Got to do better than that.
The abundance of these examples prompts me to say, “Once you
properly harvest and dry your own herbs and experience their rich
color, aroma, taste, and vitality, you will seldom be satisfied with
any dried herbs you find in a store.” How many restaurants have
you found that truly serve scrumptious “home-cooked meals?” It
doesn’t happen.

So, I have a few suggestions that will help you successfully
preserve your freshly harvested medicinal herbs and savory spices:

+ Herbs dry excellently in warm, shaded, well-ventilated areas.
Circulating dry air is essential. Never dry them in sunlight. With
tender, sensitive plants that you have harvested, the searing
intensitv of direct sunlight takes degenerating liberties often too

----- PAGE 85 -----
hideous to describe. Suffice it to “say, direct sunlight rapidly
depreciates good herb.

+ Prior to drying them, handle fresh green plants with a gentle touch
and process them as soon as possible. Many freshly picked green-
plant parts (Plantain leaves being a prime example) need to be
handled like fragile glass, for any bruising of these leaves will make
the plant turn brownish green upon drying due to the stimulation
(by bruising) and quickening (by heating) of enzyme activity.

+ Protect your drying herbs at night from the evening’s moist air.
The water in this air can rehydrate the drying herb and ignite
enzymatic action and can soon transform your harvest into that
brownish green vegetable carrion color I spoke of earlier. The
positive side of this experience is that these herbs are still suitable
for composting. And compost is good, just less heartbreaking when
made with kitchen waste and grass clippings.

+ Stuffing a paper bag full with fresh herb greens and/or blossoms
will often in a short time ignite the composting syndrome. So,
while transporting, place collections of freshly picked plant parts in
a cool and shady location and get them back out of the bag and
arranged in bundles for hanging or placed onto drying racks as soon
as possible. Don’t put this off. Don’t even think of “processing”
(washing, garbling, slicing) as a next step after “harvesting.” It is not
the next step; it is the second half—the completion—of the
harvesting act. The two experiences are one. Allow as minimal a
time interval as possible to occur between accomplishing both
halves.

Keep in mind that, with most herbs, it is quick and easy to harvest a
large quantity, but it usually takes considerably longer to process
these pickings. Profuse picking followed by procrastination (or
processing fatigue) is a notorious terminator of vast quantities of
potentially good-quality dried herb. For the sake of the plant
communities and to prevent vour own disappointment. try not to

----- PAGE 86 -----
over-harvest, and be determined to complete your day’s work. The
reward is great.

+ Plants are dry enough to be placed in storage only when all of the
parts are brittle. All parts must snap crisply when bent. So, in most
cases, when the stem and all thicker portions of plant pieces are
crisp and brittle, the herb is dry enough to be placed into a storage
container. Cut large roots to see if the centers are completely dry. If
any moisture remains in any portion of a plant, mold, rot, and
enzyme attacks will have their way with it during storage.

+ Stored herbs should be re-inspected occasionally. Dried herbs are
immensely efficient at finding and absorbing any moisture that is
lingering in storage containers. Check your stashes monthly, and if
the herbs don’t feel as crisp as they did before, dry them again. It
doesn’t take much time or effort to give them a desiccating booster.

Hanaine Bunpues anp Dryine Racks

Shaded, dry heat with good air circulation creates the optimal
condition for dehydrating fresh herbs. Any and all ingenious devises
that create these conditions are encouraged, and if successful,
applauded. The optimal air temperature to use for drying ranges
from 85 to a 100° F. (30 to 40° C.), depending on the plant and the
part being dried. When using drying-rack type contrivances, it is
best that the warm air circulates below as well as above the drying
plant parts. If you choose to bundle or string your herbs and hang
them to dry, the air needs to circulate freely around them. This
circulating heat carries away the plant’s moisture. If the warm air
that comes in contact with the moist plant parts can’t move on, but
instead lingers around the plant (incubating and _ stimulating
trouble), the plant parts will either mold, have an enzyme attack, or
rot, none of which leaves you with pleasant memories. Woodland
bare-bottom encounters with poison oak and poison ivy and
desiccating mishaps are notorious villains in herbal horror stories.
Bundling herbs and hanging them in a shaded location amidst

----- PAGE 87 -----
circulating warm air is a simple, inexpensive method to dry plants.
Use rubber bands for bindings; as plants dehydrate, they shrink and
often fall out of twine bindings. Don’t make the bundles too large,
because the plants located in the center of the bundle might be cut
off from the air flow, leading to mold, enzyme attack, rot. Dry or
drying flower heads that are laden with seed can be bundled
together, the heads stuck in a paper bag and secured, and the
bundles hung up or shaken, letting the seeds dislodge from the
heads and collect at the bottom of the bag.

Stringing herbs on a twine or heavy thread (clothesline-like)
works for drying smaller harvests or when drying more delicate
plants that are relatively light in weight. This bundling method
allows each plant to adequately touch the passing air currents.

Bundling Herbs for Drying

----- PAGE 88 -----
Bundling Technique for Collecting Herb Seed

Sheet Technique for Drying Herbs

Laying plants out on sheets in the shade is another method for
drying. I have never been too thrilled by this experience, because
you have to find tall grass to lav the sheet on so air can circulate

----- PAGE 89 -----
below as much as possible, or you need to find four corner posts to
tie the sheet corners to, and all in all it has always been kind of a
pain to contrive. So I haven’t used this method very often, only as a
last resort. Therefore, I am obviously not an expert in this process.
But I am sure there are many folks out there who love to dry plants
using a sheet, dish towel, scarf, or tablecloth; the possibilities are
endless. Avoid using sheets of newspaper, however. Save these for
toilet training puppies and for nesting gerbils. The printer’s ink on
newspapers can pollute the drying plants. It has polluted many fine
minds as well.

Drying racks are my preferred contraption for dehydrating herbs.
These are a series of shelves of screen network (old window screens
work well) stacked in layers at suitable distances from each other,
and placed in large, well-ventilated housings. Upon these racks the
herbs are carefully arranged so as to overlap as little as possible,
and allowed to remain subject to the desiccating action of the air
circulating below as well as above until completely dried. Avoid
using wire screens. The metal tends to react with certain
components of fresh plants. Use nylon screen instead. Actually, we
use stainless steel screen on some of our drying racks. What can I
say, give ’em a little time and “experts” will disagree with their
own selves too.

Stacked Screens for Drying Herbs

----- PAGE 90 -----
Dehydrator Used for Drying Herbs

Commercial (or homemade) dehydrators are readily available. At
one time I owned and used three wooden ones, one large one that
stood on our kitchen pantry floor, and two small ones that hung out
on our countertops. I’m a high energy enthusiast (“excessive” is
probably a more accurate term) and often require more drying
space than others normally do. Ordinarily one dehydrator is
sufficient for home use.

If you choose to use a dehydrator, I strongly suggest you locate it
in or near the kitchen (lab). Make it a convenient and ready-to-use
tool. Don’t store it under a bunch of stuff in a cluttered hall closet
that defies even the most courageous family member to enter.
Relate to your dehydrator as an essential, active appliance, like the
refrigerator, the stove, or the espresso maker. Give it a permanent
location in the active zone of the kitchen. This will be quite
practical and inspiring, encouraging you to become a prolific lay
herbalist. Each time you locate a medicinal plant near your home (a
Dandelion here, a Plantain there, a California Poppy, a cutting or
two of your neighbor’s neglected Rosemary bush, a Mullein leaf,
some fresh garden Thyme, autumn leaves from the Ginkgo tree that
stands down the road, and so on), you can readily harvest and dry
it, and place it in a storage jar for future use. In a short time you
can accumulate a year’s supply of medicines and spices derived
from neighborhood flora. You can do the same, of course, with any
garden plants and fruits that come your way. I’ve even dehydrated
leftover soup (soup leathers), an interesting challenge for the

----- PAGE 91 -----
creative “excessive.”

It’s best not to use ovens or microwaves to dry your plants. You
court disaster. There are too many gut-wrenching stories of people’s
impulsive cravings for chocolate chip cookies and preheating ovens
to 375° F. just after someone else in the household had carefully
laid his or her herbs in the oven to dry by the gentle heat of the
pilot light. And drying fresh herb in a microwave oven is about as
compatible as tank maneuvers on a golf green.

As soon as they are thoroughly dry, herbs should be processed
and prepared for storage. Dried herb that is ignored and left lying
or hanging around uncovered collects dust and cobwebs, and loses
its vital luster. Break down bundles, garble with timely fervor, strip
leaves, flowers, needles and/or berries from stems; do in general
what you need to do in order to separate out the usable parts of the
herb at hand. That’s what “garbling” is all about. Discard the
discolored, dead leaves and extraneous twigs, etc., as compost. It is
best to wait until after the herb has been dried to do all this
stripping and cutting. Mauling fresh herb, even gently, prior to
drying, frequently leads to discoloration due to damaging of plant
tissue. After the plant tissues are dehydrated, however, this no
longer poses a problem.

Pant Press Dryinc

Pressing a plant for no other reason than that it is irresistibly
beautiful, or for preserving a specimen to be identified later, can be
facilitated by using a field press book. This tool is simple to
construct and well worth the effort. Take time to make a good-
quality one. It will serve you well for many years, and can someday
transform itself into a prized and practical heirloom. Grandchildren
seldom ever forget the joy of collecting wildflowers with grandma
and grandpa and putting them in the press book. Your
grandchildren will probably want to keep your old press book after
you decide to move on to the Elysian fields to pick more flowers.
The plant pressings that vou make are suitable to arrange and

----- PAGE 92 -----
display in a home herbarium, a herbal scrapbook, a seasonal plant
diary (call it what you will), or mounted on handcrafted greeting
cards, arranged as inspired flower pictures, or used to embellish
lampshades, whatever. I find that herbal medicine is equally as
effective when gazed upon as art, or walked through in a garden, or
taken as a tea. Healing plant spirit can reside happily in all three.

A simple plant press is composed of three things: rigid wooden
board, absorbent paper, and maintained pressure.

To construct a field press book, first place on the floor a 3/8-inch
thick piece of 10-inch x 16-inch plywood (1/4-inch thick plywood
is too flimsy and 1/2-inch plywood is unnecessarily heavy and
bulky). Upon the plywood, stack three pieces of folded newspaper
(this can be a piece of corrugated cardboard instead), two layers of
paper towel or other white paper, three more pieces of newspaper
or cardboard, two more pieces of paper towel and so on, until you
have created a significant little pile. On top of this place a second
piece of 3/8-inch plywood (cut to the same dimensions as the piece
on the bottom). The plant specimen you collect are placed in
between each two pieces of paper towel.

VELCRO

S

Homemade Plant Press Book

After inserting your plants in this pile, lay three bricks or heavy
rocks on the pile to supply the pressure. In a short time the plants
will flatten out, the paper towels will absorb moisture, and the
warm location vou keep this press in will assist the drving process.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Give it a couple of weeks. Then check the plants, but very carefully.
They are now a thin, fragile commodity. Nine out of ten times, you
will be totally delighted by the results. However, things do happen
that are often hard to talk about, but you'll cope, and it will all
translate into meaningful experiences that you will learn from.
That’s Herbalism. Jot down some timely memoirs in the spiral
notebook that I will soon be discussing. These notes will remind
you what to do differently next time. It’s good to make a mistake; it
means you're courageously pushing your limits by pursuing creative
new adventures, but it’s dumb to make the same mistake twice. I
can attest to that; I can even attest to doing it three times.

To streamline this press book, so you can carry it with you on
hikes and plants walks, you can trade in the bricks for 4 feet of
Velcro® and 34 inches of 1—inch wide cotton strap. You can see
how and where to affix them in the illustration on this page. The
Velcro binds tightly together the two boards (and everything in
between). Place your plants in between the paper towels as
described above, but this time instead of laying bricks on the pile,
kneel on the pile using your body weight to supply the pressure,
and while kneeling wrap the bristly part of both Velcro straps
around and affix them to the furry parts. You can get up now. The
Velcro will sustain the memory of your body weight (could the
space age exist without duct tape and Velcro?).

I suggest embellishing this basic field press book with cotton
strap handgrips affixed to the boards (as illustrated) and a spiral
bound notebook that has been stapled to one of the rigid boards
which gives you a field desktop on which to write in the notebook.
The pages of this notebook are useful for scribbling field notes and
writing plant spirit-inspired lines of poetry. The 1-inch cotton
straps stapled to the outside of both boards form handles with
which to carry the whole works—a curious woodland briefcase for
carting leaves and flowers.

GARBLING HERBS

----- PAGE 94 -----
Garbling is an exercise in the high art of paying attention to detail.
Alertness to the details of harvesting and medicine-making is one of
a herbalist’s most creative and prosperity-promoting allies. Garbling
(the word can be found the dictionary; I didn’t make it up), when
done correctly, is a meticulous, self-satisfying chore (a Virgo turn-
on), the object of which is to remove all excess stems and twigs,
impurities and adulterants, and decayed and deteriorated portions
of the plant, which not only mar appearance but are apt to
contaminate the usable portions. One also removes any small fauna
found crawling on the goods. They were probably minding their
own business, harvesting the plant for their personal agenda before
you muscled in. Be kind by setting them free; they were also most
likely participating in the plant’s pollination conspiracy.

Garbling is an unsung backstage activity akin to the kneading of
bread, the curing of firewood, proofreading manuscripts, and the
arduous pulling of taffy. Mindful garbling transforms good-quality
herb into great-quality herb and great-quality herb into primo herb.
All superior-quality herb, by definition, is always meticulously
garbled. Garbling makes herbal things better. It is appropriately
undertaken anytime before, during, and after the drying process.
Garbling herb is well performed in solitude, where it provides a
prime opportunity to simultaneously garble one’s attitude and
beliefs about life. Yet I find it equally pleasant when performed in
an intimate community atmosphere, wherein it attracts uplifting
companionship and leisurely conversation. Its pace is similar to that
of quilting and whittling, walking with little children, basket
weaving, and chopping the fruits and vegetables at a potluck
dinner.

STORING HERBS

Light, heat, moisture, and exposure to air deteriorate dried
botanicals. Store your dried herbs in airtight, light-shielding, dry
containers that will keep out insects and rodents. I prefer to use
canning jars or clean recycled jars (especially the amber brown jars)

----- PAGE 95 -----
that have wide mouths and tight-fitting lids. Coffee cans also make
good containers, and, in some short-term situations, paper or plastic
bags are appropriate containers. Do whatever you have to do to
store these herb-filled containers in a cool, dark place.

Laseuinc Heras ror Srorace

Label each container clearly including the name you use for the
plant, the location of the harvest, and the date. (As I mentioned
elsewhere, stored herbs can reabsorb moisture in time. Inspect your
dried herb stashes routinely and re-dry them as necessary.) It is a
reasonable idea to also note the general uses and dosage of the
ingredients. This is a good method to refresh not only your memory
of the herb’s virtues but also a subtle way to pique the interest of
casual onlookers. They in turn go out and buy books like this.

When using jars as containers, it is prudent to secure the labels to
the jars instead of to the lids. Jar lids are openly polygamous and
have no qualms whatsoever about being affixed to any fitting jar
that comes along. I’ve been shocked by this conduct a number of
times. If this simple precaution is taken, mislabeling jar contents
can be almost entirely prevented.

Like fresh plants, dried herbs are organic entities that have
various and differing tenures of stability. You seldom find a plant
that retains its full potency indefinitely. Therefore, although there
are exceptions, the generally accepted rules for storage time of
herbs are as follows:

+ Leaves, green parts, and flowers, up to one year
+ Roots, seeds, and barks, two to three years

+ Broken, crushed, or powdered herbs lose their value more rapidly
than whole, uncut herbs.

Enjoy your garden pharmacy; garble passionately;

----- PAGE 96 -----
keep an eye on those jar lids.

BUYING HERBS

First of all, ask to speak to the herbalist on staff. If there is no
herbalist working at the store, act astonished (they'll get the
message); then do your own sleuthing. Ask where the herbs came
from. Are they organically cultivated or wildcrafted, who grew
them or who harvested them? Are any of the species they offer for
sale threatened, and if so were they harvested consciously, etc., etc.
You get the idea (refer to Rule #1 in “Rules (Proposed) of Medicine
Making,” Chapter Twenty-Five). Encourage the herb merchant to
buy from green-conscious suppliers. You’ll probably find that many
do, and they’ll appreciate and respect you for inquiring. Those that
don’t buy from green-conscious sources may learn something from
you.

Now check the store’s herb stock. If the dried herbs displayed on
the shelves are contained in clear glass jars sitting in direct sunlight,
shop elsewhere; that’s inexcusable. If the herbs on the shelves all
look about the same color, they’re probably “commercial grade”
herb and not good quality. Shop elsewhere (refer to Rule #2 in
“Rules (Proposed) of Medicine Making,” Chapter Twenty-Five).
Varieties of herbs as they are growing and co-mingling in the
garden or in the wilds naturally show a diverse array of colors and
shades of green. They will continue to show a similar diversity of
color when properly harvested, dried, and displayed in jars.

If the herb store passes the above examination, proceed to the
taste and smell tests. Upon removing the lid from a jar of herb, you
should smell a fine herbal aroma, and when a tiniest pinch of the
dried herb is placed upon your tongue and slowly chewed and/or
sucked on, it should provide a distinct flavor. Not necessary a
yummy one, but a significant one. Good herb has color, aroma, and
flavor. If all seems harmonious to your senses and to your inquiry,
shop in this store. They probably have good herb to sell you; settle
for nothing less (remember Rule #2).

----- PAGE 97 -----


----- PAGE 98 -----
BitabaMe Ver shave Vey aVevey at stave

The Western symbols of medical power, knowledge, and
competency standardized in mass consciousness by nineteenth and
twentieth century “scientific” fanfare are the images used
extensively by marketers in today’s medical/pharmaceutical
industry to communicate their perspective that all things are made
better by the science and the high-tech industry. These same
nouveau-archetype symbols are being adopted by much of today’s
herbal products industry to suggest that they also produce (herbal)
commodities that the common person—who does not have access
to the company’s advanced technology and special (scientific)
knowledge—can’t match. During the past five years, my mailbox
has found itself stuffed with full-color, high-gloss, printed literature
picturing multi-story, sprawling “modern facilities,” full of towering
stainless steel vats sitting on polished linoleum floors, peopled by
white-coated lab technicians peering through microscopes,
operating computerized analysis equipment, and holding intricately
designed lab-ware, testing and analyzing sterile beakers filled with
colored herbal liquids and aseptic herbal powders. This attempt to
impress “the mailing list” with the company’s mysteriously
advanced abilitv to produce herbal medicine is all about herbal

----- PAGE 99 -----
marketing.

Mind you, there are some excellent herb companies active in the
marketplace run by skilled herbalists whose intent is to make high-
quality herbal products and a good living while also empowering
their customers. These folks provide premium-quality products
while evoking a marketing atmosphere of integrity and sound
herbal education. I praise and honor these folks. However, the
rising trend for many competing companies is to rampantly display
medical cliché symbols accompanied by comparative charts that
applaud their brand’s self-extolled “superior delivery systems,” their
“clinically tested,” “fast-active,” “full-spectrum” this and “power-
herb,” “doctor-approved,” “standardized” that. Please realize that
the commercially correct terms and symbols being used reflect
marketing strategies employed in general to overawe consumers
and specifically to enhance sales; they are “business as usual.” So, in
face of all this, I’m strongly suggesting you not allow yourself to
become overwhelmed or disempowered by the marketers’ razzie
dazzle. None of this glossy-slick corporate propaganda really has
anything to do with you, your health, or Herbalism.

The home-tech environment of your cottage kitchen is where
Herbalism lives. Herbalism thrives in the lay communities and
hand-tended gardens of self-reliant plant people who cherish and
practice their independence. Let the herbal marketers rave on, but
know it is in your home that you can access and create for yourself
the finest, most effective herbal products. In the simple
environment of your domestic dwelling, you can fully empower
yourself with experiences of functional herbal knowledge and
competency; and all you need to help you do this is some basic
knowledge and your own juicy kitchen-lab, supplied with the
following equipment.

JARS AND BOTTLES

Jars are used to hold, blend, shake, seal, and store herbal stuff.
Quart-size and pint-size canning iars are excellent. especially

----- PAGE 100 -----
because their lids are easily renewed. Acquire a couple gallon-size
glass jars, along with a diversity of miscellaneous-sized jars that
reside and function in your kitchen-lab’s container tribe.

Bottles are used for holding dried herbs and finished extracts.
Amber glass bottles are the best to use, for they provide a shade-
like shield to filter out damaging light that can deteriorate herbal
material during storage.

If I may interject a suggestion here: Herbalism at its best
embraces theater, and I recommend that, whenever possible, you
consider doing things a little differently when you package and
present your herbal wares. As a budding herbalist, don’t accept false
limitations. To do so only betrays your human potential. Break
from the ordinary; as you collect common bottles for practical use,
seek wild, colorful, whimsically shaped bottles and other types of
bizarre containers as well. Use these to house and transport your
herbal preparations. Render your herbal craft unique and
fascinating. Why not? It’s all part of the enthusiasm and charisma of
an herbal medicine show. Remember, when you make medicines at
home and distribute your own herbal products to family and
friends, you don’t have the FDA (forever dull administration)
editing your labels, monitoring your moves, or standardizing your
panache. Herbalism thrives freely in the home—you can be as
elaborate, outrageous, and nonconforming as you want. Package as
you will. Have fun, give your herbal medicines a magical air. They
will entertain and entice, manifesting ancillary wonders in a special
way.

RUBBER SPATULAS

Wide ones and narrow ones to help get every bit of herbal material
out of any and all sized containers. It’s akin to garbling and a
gesture of respect. These healing, nourishing substances are too
precious to waste.

----- PAGE 101 -----
ELECTRIC COFFEE GRINDER

These post-Edison mortar and pestles provide a high-rpm
pulverizing blade. Electric coffee grinders are relatively inexpensive
tools that are excellent to use for powdering small portions of dried
herb. Keep in mind that these are designed to be coffee bean
grinding machines. They powder most herbs in good fashion, but
they are not built to grind exceptionally hard materials, and they
burn out when pushed too far. One has to be discriminating,
somewhat gentle, and patient while using them; hardly as patient,
however, as one has to be when using a pre-Edison mortar and
pestle to grind and powder herbs.

MORTAR AND PESTLE

These are used more for creating atmosphere now that herbalists
have electric grinders to do their pulverizing and powdering deeds.
The most useful mortars and pestles are those that an herbalist can
use to help prepare materials for further grinding in their electric
grinder; these are the mortar and pestles designed specifically for
contusion. They are made of brass, iron, or bell-metal which ideally
has been molded into a deep, slender design. These tools can be
used to pulverize roots, barks, and other tough woody materials by
smashing down on them with the metal pestle. The narrow
diameter and exaggerated depth of these devices help prevent the
plant materials from flying out of the container when impacted by
the pestle. A cover of stiff leather a little larger in diameter than the
rim of the mortar is a further deterrent. This leather collar allows
the pestle’s free movement in the process of contusion.

I recommend that you attain an archetypal, white porcelain
Wedgwood mortar and pestle to display on a prominent shelf or
countertop. These were designed for the more gentle act of
trituration, which you will perform at times (see “Trituration,”
Chapter Twenty-Five), rather than contusion. This classic symbol
visually connects an herbalist’s spirit to the grand heritage of the

----- PAGE 102 -----
Galenic art and science of herbal medicine-making.

Deep contusion mortar and pestle with the leather collar

MEASURING CUPS AND/OR GRADUATED CYLINDERS

I find it practical to rely on plastic graduated cylinders. If you have
any klutziness in you at all, or if you suspect you might have some
questionable glass karma, the glass ones are too risky to use on a
daily basis. I possess some beautiful Pyrex® glass cylinders that sit
handsomely in my lab. They’re an inspiration to behold; but I do
most of my work using three plastic measuring cylinders (100 ml,
250 ml, and 500 ml sizes). In my case, it’s definitely the klutz
factor. And in the herb school lab we use plastic exclusively. Our
lab floor is made of cement; and glass measuring devices disappear
faster than Kleenex in a hayfever ward.

----- PAGE 103 -----
LID GRIPS

You'll need three of these to help you loosen jar lids that you
previously tightened and allowed to sit around for a while.
Inevitably, you will find it extremely difficult to remove the lid
when you want to get back inside the jar. (This doesn’t seem to
occur as often when one employs a small kitchen-witch to reside
inside or nearby the pharmacy area of the home.) When this
situation does occur, however, what you do is put one lid grip on
each side of the jar and place this between your thighs (I’m being
serious here), and use the third grip to take hold of the lid. Squeeze
your legs tightly against the jar sides and grimace as you firmly
grasp and twist the obstinate lid counterclockwise. The lid will
loosen. If it doesn’t, repeat the above and add some light profanity.
You might want to make the grimace a little more intense too. This
always works for me. Using this ritual, ’'ve never been denied entry
into a jar of macerating herb.

STIRRING DEVICES

I recommend acquiring a 12- to 14-inch long by 1/2-inch diameter
piece of wooden dowel, some 12-inch long wooden spoons, strong
wooden chopsticks, and other stirring things that have some heft
and can work well to mix and blend dense, mushy concoctions. In a
short time, you will discover and adopt a favorite stick as your
stirring companion. This relationship will thrive for years in a sea
of activity and mutual appreciation.

STRAINERS

These are absolutely necessary to help separate depleted marcs
from saturated menstruums. Acquire a variety of sizes and meshes. I
use 4-inch diameter and 6-inch diameter strainers most often, but I

----- PAGE 104 -----
often find that both smaller and larger ones are more helpful for
specific jobs. At some point release the funds for one of those
svelte, stainless steel, probably European-made, overpriced strainers
that you can find in gourmet kitchen supply stores. The very fine
mesh they provide is most useful for specific filtering tasks that will
arise. The equally overpriced gold mesh coffee filters are useful too.
You'll enjoy acquiring these tools, one by one, as you need them.
Sieves and flour sifters of various-sized mesh also assist one to
produce uniform-grade powders when powdering dried herb (see
“Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

DOUBLE BOILER AND A FLAME SPREADER

These are most useful for creating gentle-heat water baths and for
modifying the heat coming off a stove-top burner. This equipment
is useful for low heat extraction processes (i.e., preparing an oil
infusion by using the digestion method).

FUNNELS

These are obviously used to get liquids (or dried herbs) into a
container through a small opening without also scattering the
material around the floor and countertop. I keep a variety of
different sized—very small to quite large—standard funnels
available for use, along with a wide-throated funnel device
designed to help fill canning jars. I also bought a large plastic
gasoline funnel at an auto supply store. It has a deep holding basket
which is about 12 inches in diameter and a long funnel tube which
I cut off about 1 1/2 inches from where it attaches to the basket.
This now gives me a 3-inch diameter opening coming out of the
basket. This modified device serves as a perfect funnel for
transferring large amounts of dried bulk herb from paper or plastic
bags into storage jars, which is also what I use the canning funnel
for when relocating smaller quantities of dried herb.

----- PAGE 105 -----
MIXING BOWLS

These will be useful for a wide variety of purposes. I hold
passionate affection for a 20-inch diameter wooden bowl that I
found at a yard sale. I use it predominantly, even when it is
obviously too big, just because it is so big—and wooden. I also
recommend thin-gauge stainless steel bowls (they usually sell as sets
of three concentric, differing diameters). They are available at just
about every hardware store and kitchen supply section in town.
Large bowls are useful for garbling fresh and dried herbs, for
blending and rubbing dried herb compounds, for devising water
baths, and for making adequate amounts of chocolate chip cookie
dough when needed. I avoid putting oily stuff, like a cube of butter
and chocolate chips, in my (great big) wooden bowl—it makes the
wood permanently sticky, which complicates things when working
with dry, powdery plant materials.

SCALES

Get yourself a metric scale. You can buy cheap, funky ones at
kitchen supply and department stores, but the problem with these
is that they normally don’t register very accurately on the light end
of the scale (where you will probably be doing much of your
work), and they usually come with an absurdly small holding
container that is not very practical when one is attempting to weigh
unruly, bulky botanicals. So, I suggest that in time you buy a triple
beam scale that is accurate down to a gram weight and can
counterbalance a substantially sized holding basket. You'll
appreciate this expenditure, and you'll enjoy your affluence. Pottery
and ceramic supply stores sell triple beam scales. There are electric
(battery-powered) scales also available in kitchen supply stores.
They are accurate, cheaper than triple beams, and useful when
working on the road.

----- PAGE 106 -----
Celebrate the New Age—go metric.

POURING DEVICES

Glass percolator coffee pot bottoms are my favorite and most
sought after device to use for pouring herbal liquids. I get pushier
than the teens in line for fake IDs when I see one of these well-
spouted containers sitting as yet unclaimed in a yard sale or at a
flea market. These glass sculptures were obviously designed by
folks who knew what is required to pour blissfully with carefree
confidence. The vast majority of spouted measuring cups and other
spouted apparatus sold in stores today are obviously designed by
the same folks who put together computer software manuals; they
(the manuals and the pouring spouts) are ineffectual, having
virtually nothing whatsoever to do with anyone else’s reality. I
suggest you hunt around for containers that have functional pouring
spouts; shun and discard those that don’t. Herbal extracts are too
precious to squander as spillage and drip-page, and one’s temper is
too painful to lose on a routine basis.

TURKEY BASTER

These are useful for decanting fresh-plant oil infusions and will be
discussed further in the oil infusion chapter (vegan basting syringes
are available at health food stores).

FILTER PAPERS

Purchase the unbleached basket style that are used for making
coffee. Place these in a wire mesh strainer to hold them while you
pour your extract through to filter out any unwanted particulate.
You may want to strengthen these filters by using two at a time.
Avoid the “cone style” filter papers, which are glued on the bottom
and side. The glue might be soluble in certain solutions.

----- PAGE 107 -----
COTTON MUSLIN CLOTH

Locate a tough, unbleached cotton muslin in a fabric store. Be sure
to launder it before using to rid it of the sizing found in most new
cloth fabric. Muslin is used for pressing out the marc either by hand
or with a mechanical press.

CALCULATOR

This is useful for doing the math when formulating a menstruum
for weight/volume extraction. Pencil and paper work quite well for
this too.

YOGURT THERMOMETER

This is used to monitor the temperature during the digesting
process of extraction. Yogurt thermometers hover comfortably
around the 100° F. zone, which is ideal for preparing oil infusions.

LABELING MATERIALS

Use whatever materials you require to create and affix labels that
conform to your personal standards of aesthetics and whimsy, and
the instruments to write essential information upon these engaging
tags. Indelible inks are recommended.

PAPER TOWELS

The immediate availability of paper towels on demand is essential
in order to maintain any semblance of sanity while making oil
infusions and while pouring salves. In spite of what I said in the
Prologue, this is a truth.

----- PAGE 108 -----
SPONGES AND RAGS

Have on hand a large collection of sponges and rags for spill
control and general cleanup. A natal moon in the constellation of
Virgo dictated this suggestion; and this is merely a suggestion.
Impetuous, disorderly, hang-loose, rumpled herbal medicine-
making is good too.

And at some point along your acquisition journey, you may want
to acquire the following.

DEHYDRATOR

In the long run, this is probably the most important tool a domestic
herbalist will obtain, and it is worth the expense to buy one that
has a fine-tuned temperature control. I recommend that once you
acquire a dehydrator, you give it a prominent place in the active
area of your kitchen-lab. Each time you come across a wild plant
that is harvestable, you can take it home and place it in the
dehydrator, dry it, and in a hassle-free, short time add it to your
annual stash of that particular plant-medicine. Dandelion,
Chickweed, Plantain, Calendula blossoms, Red Clover blossoms,
Cornsilk, and so forth can be accumulated relatively effortlessly this
way, and by autumn you will have acquired a substantial, high-
quality herbal pharmacy in your home. Inevitably, within a couple
of solar cycles, buying herbs from a store will have become merely
a vaguely disturbing memory.

BLENDER/JUICER

Get the original Vita-Mix® 3600 Plus stainless steel model which
has a 72-ounce stainless steel container (some containers come with
a spigot, some don’t; they both work). I have found these in yard
sales, used-stuff stores, and flea markets; and some folks have
acauired theirs by putting up wanted signs at large health food

----- PAGE 109 -----
stores. These machines will probably be showing up more
frequently now that the Vita-Mix corporation is marketing its newly
designed polycarbonate container. The previous 3600 Plus Vita-Mix
model, which is all stainless steel except for the plastic “two-piece
Action Dome” that attaches to the top of the container, costs about
$300 to $400 when purchased new. I’ve found them used and in
excellent shape for $20, $60, and $150 Canadian in British
Columbia; however, for the work this tool does, it is worth the
$300. This is the best domestic designed machine I’ve found for
powdering herbs and for blending fresh-plant extracts. It is a
powerful, versatile, and very durable product that is well worth its
cost to an inspired medicine-maker. We use these machines in the
California School of Herbal Studies lab, where they have served
many productive, but not always gentle, herb students over the past
20 years. The new model juicers that Vita-Mix now manufactures
have “space—age material” plastic containers (which I’m told will
also fit the older 3600 model motor base); I don’t know, however,
how well these will hold up to the beating of grinding herbs. The
all-stainless steel machines used to come with a five-year warranty.
(Actually, way back, they used to have a lifetime warranty.) But this
most recent model comes with only a one-year warranty. I guess the
space-age material is still in its experimental stage.

YOGURT MAKER

This is well designed for macerating small quantities of oil infusions
at a low heat.

CROCK POT

This would be a superb warming (digestion) vessel for making oil
infusions if it would maintain a heat of 100° F. But in my
experience these cooking devices do not go lower than 150° F.,
which in mv opinion (others will disagree) is too high a

----- PAGE 110 -----
temperature for making good oil infusions. Perhaps one could
employ a clever electrician to somehow derange a crock pot’s
rheostat, so it will consent to remain around 100° F.; this would
then be a superb tool for this purpose.

FOOD PROCESSOR

This is not a priority, but if you have one or can easily acquire one,
it is an excellent tool for mincing fresh garlic and other non-woody,
fresh plant parts in preparation for extraction.

----- PAGE 111 -----


----- PAGE 112 -----
One can imagine how the first sparks of our vast herbal heritage
were ignited. The inaugural attempts at the extraction of herbal
properties were probably made soon after our deep ancestors
discovered that certain plant materials were useful as food for
nourishment, agents for altering consciousness, and medicines to
alleviate physical and mental discomfort. Herbs collected for these

----- PAGE 113 -----
purposes soon dried out, and it is logical to assume that our
ancestral foreherbalists made attempts to restore the succulent
qualities of these plants by steeping them in water. From this act, it
was a simple step to discover that soaking plants in certain liquids
dissolved the therapeutic powers of the plants and allowed their
use in a more convenient, less cumbersome, and often more
palatable form.

Applying heat was probably the subsequent step in the evolution
of more specialized methods of soaking (macerating) with water.
Therein the fundamental extraction processes of warm infusion,
decoction, and digestion were devised. Later, the superior
preservative properties and in some circumstances the superior
solvent properties of vinegar and wine were recognized. Thus
followed in natural progression the rudimental development of
herbal extraction and medicine-making by human beings on this
planet. It all germinated and evolved within the domestic arena of
our common ancestors.

Concentrated ethyl alcohol was not available to the ancient
herbalists as a solvent/preservative for maceration until after the
twelfth century, when it was derived by the distillation of wine. It is
not clear exactly when this happened, but by the sixteenth century
alcohol-based tinctures and “quintessences” were attaining
widespread use.

With the inflation of western reductionist science in the
eighteenth and nineteenth century, paralleled by the pursuit of
“rational” drug therapy in the allopathic medical arena, the
processes of extraction and the isolation of plants’ so-called “active
ingredients” commanded the focus of a burgeoning pharmaceutical
industry. The herbalist’s inclination to summon and commune with
the spiritual essence of a plant conjoined with a ceremony of
appreciating the full array of the plant’s physical and non-physical
nature receded, along with the sightings of faeries and unicorns,
into myth, magic, and “folkloric fancy.”

Concurrently, the common practice of medicine-making in the
home and the layman’s practice of self-medicating with simple
plant preparations declined to near extinction. As commercialized

----- PAGE 114 -----
pharmaceutical technology evolved through this era in concert with
allopathic medical theory and practice, the development of ever
more technologically complex methods of extraction such as
percolation, diacolation, mulcolation, and evacolation were
devised.

This development of ever more complex systems of extraction
has been a highly creative adventure in the world of pharmacy, and
this has served the purpose of many. But all and all, for those
individuals who are once again inclined to focus on the profound
subtle energy of the plant more than on the technologies of physical
extraction, no advancement beyond the fundamental rituals that
derive infusions, decoctions, concentrates, and tinctures is required.
Undeniably, extraction techniques that are more technologically
elaborate or complex than these have provided many an
adventurous herbalist with inspired enjoyment and the pleasure of
satisfying their technological curiosity. Obviously, these laboratory
furtherances have also allowed medical industries to produce plant-
derived pharmaceutical drugs and herbal industries to manufacture
standardized quasi-drugs. However, the potent simplicities of the
fundamental extraction processes we will pursue in this home
manual require no further complexity to serve the purposes of a
conscientious lay herbalist. The simple alchemical acts of infusing,
decocting, digesting, tincturing, and compounding medicinal plants
are as sublime, complete, and transformative today as they were
when our ancestors originally devised them.

Regardless of the technology employed, the intent and joy of the
medicine-maker coupled with the consciousness of the harvester’s
relationship with the plant remains the truly empowering heart and
the salient spirit of Herbalism and herbal medicine-making.
Uncomplicated, ardent medicine-making is as fundamental to the
art and science of Herbalism as simple passionate cooking is to the
art and science of nutrition. High technology has never increased
the nutritional power of good food, simply prepared.

EXTRACTION

----- PAGE 115 -----
The purpose for extraction is to draw out an herb’s unique
organization of chemical components along with its distinctive
energetic virtues, and render these organic idiosyncrasies into a
form that is more easily absorbable, possibly more concentrated,
more palatable, and more convenient to administer than the
original unprocessed form of the plant.

Maceration, or soaking a plant in a solvent, is performed to draw
into a liquid solution the soluble constituents of the plant and to
separate this solution from the insoluble residue or the marc. This
liquid extract can be dispensed directly as is, or it can be readily
incorporated into other delivery vehicles by mixing it with honeys,
syrups, waxes, foods, and so on.

Alcohol, water-alcohol, and to some extent glycerin extracts offer
the lay herbalist an added benefit of a greatly prolonged
preservative action.

Extraction allows us to have our herbs for a long
time and makes it easier for us to eat them too.

Waar Goes on Durine tHe Extraction Process

When a freshly harvested plant is dried, the moisture present in the
tissues evaporates. The walls of the cells and the ducts shrink, and
at the same time the substances inside the cells previously held in
solution by the water crystallize or dry to a solid amorphous mass.
Later, when this dehydrated plant is immersed in a water (aqueous)
or water-alcohol (hydro-alcoholic) menstruum, the above process is
reversed. In this instance, the menstruum is absorbed, causing the
cells to swell and break, leading to direct contact with the
menstruum and the soluble materials inside the cells go back into
solution.

In the case of dried plants whose tissues are relatively soft or
spongy, such as Burdock root or Nettle root, this process takes place
comparatively fast: however. when a plant material is hard or

----- PAGE 116 -----
callous, such as dried WildYam, Stone Root, Oregon Grape root, or
Turmeric, much more time is required. Before the tissues of these
plants can absorb a sufficient amount of menstruum, they must be
broken up into fine pieces in order to expose their softer internal
tissues to the action of the solvent. This is also required when
extracting many seeds and leaves. Designed to shed water in nature,
the walls of the outer (ectodermal) layers of these particular plant
parts are impervious to water, but the walls of their inner
(mesodermal and endodermal) cells are permeable and readily
permit a solvent to diffuse through them and to dissolve the soluble
portion of their contents. Therefore, the outer layer of cells of most
leaves and seeds must be broken down like the hard tissues of
plants mentioned above.

Regardless of the materials of which the cell walls of any plant
part are constructed, the passing of the soluble constituents through
the walls can be a slow process, but it can be quickened by
increasing the surface area of the plant before extraction is begun.
Again, this is accomplished (sometimes easily, sometimes not) by
powdering the dried plant. This not only greatly increases the area
that can be exposed to the solvent, but also causes many of the
ectodermal surface cells to be broken, so that the menstruum can
come in direct contact with the cells’ contents. The application of
heat will also hasten the process of passing a plant’s soluble
constituents through the cell walls, and this is what the specialized
maceration processes of hot infusion, decoction, and digestion are
all about (we’ll discuss those soon). It may be necessary in some
circumstances, however, to avoid high temperatures during an
extraction process. Heat will destroy enzymes which are sometimes
desired; it will drive off volatile components, such as essential oils;
it will coagulate plant proteins which can impede the extraction
process; and it can dissolve out too much of the gums and proteins.

In extraction of dehydrated plant material by maceration, the
dried plant material is normally powdered before applying a
menstruum. The powdered plant is then allowed to remain in
contact with a relatively large volume of menstruum until the
extractive matter is distributed uniformlv throughout the liquid. The

----- PAGE 117 -----
saturated liquid is then poured off (decanted) and the marc
(insoluble pulp) pressed or squeezed to procure any remaining
liquid.

When percolation is used as the extraction process, a column of
menstruum is allowed to flow down through a body of uniformly
packed powdered herb carrying the extractant along with it as it
exits the percolator cone, leaving behind the fully exhausted marc.

If instead, fresh undried plant material is being extracted by
maceration, the menstruum is poured onto the plant and the entire
mixture is pulverized in a blending machine (like an herbal
smoothie) for an adequate time to break down the cell walls and
expose them to the solvent action of the menstruum, or the fresh
plant material can be simply chopped and macerated in pure ethyl
alcohol, which acts to dehydrate the plant, drawing the plant juices
and their chemical constituents into solution (more about these
techniques later).

Before we get into a discussion of plant constituents and their
main solvents, I would like to circumvent those details and give you
an overview of what I consider the most efficient extraction
technique for making superlative herbal medicine.

Again I stress, make detailed notes for yourself.
Refer to the sample Extract Information Form for
medicine-making notes found in Appendix D.
Modify this sample form to suit your own unique
style and method of experimentation. Making
herbal medicine is a very personal and sensual art
and craft; don’t hesitate to be adventurous and
possibly blow it on occasion, just be sure you
make notes. Ultimately, your experience, which is
a creative integration of your successes and your
mistakes, is your best teacher and finest trainer.
Enjoy the plants, savor your extracts, and prize
your notes.

----- PAGE 118 -----
Tue Sensuat Approacs To Successrut TINcTURING AND

Orer Merxons or Herpat Exrracrion

1. The most important step. Acquire organically cultivated or
ethically wildcrafted, meticulously garbled, high-quality herb
that flaunts rich color, a deep aroma, and vivid flavor, because,
please take out your stone notebook and etch the following:
“My herbal extracts can never be any better than the quality of
the herbs I begin with.” (the 2nd rule of good herbal medicine-
making).

2. Prepare the most suitable and efficient menstruum you can
based on your previous experience and your knowledge of the
plant properties. This information will be discussed in the
following chapter. Remember to make detailed notes about the
menstruums you formulate (the 4th rule of good medicine-
making).

3. Make your tincture or other form of extract. (Refer to
Chapters Eight through Seventeen.)

4. Now, use your common senses. Smell your finished extract,
draw some of it into a glass dropper (pipette) and observe
closely its color, put a drop or two of it on your tongue and
taste it ... Mmm! Or maybe, Yuck! (“Yuck!” is not necessarily
bad, but merely intense or surprisingly unusual.) If your settled
extract does not remain cloudy (at first most extracts appear
cloudy before suspended sediment settles out), and it smells
and tastes like the plant it was derived from, you’ve
formulated a good menstruum for the herb at hand.

5. Dispense your herbal preparation. If it performs as you want
it to, you’ve made a good extract; you have your herbal

----- PAGE 119 -----
tonic/medicine. If you’re not totally pleased, next time (and
maybe the time after that) modify your menstruum until you
are pleased; we’ve all done this many times; experience is the
story of one’s venture into the unknown.

----- PAGE 120 -----


----- PAGE 121 -----
MENSTRUUM MENU—7 LIQUIDS TO USE AS SOLVENTS

There are seven liquids readily available to us which we will
discuss for use as menstrua in this manual. They are water, wine,
vinegar, ethyl alcohol, alcohol-water mixture. oil, and glycerin, vour

----- PAGE 122 -----
basic community “potluck” components.

These seven menstrua are common kitchen supplies (except
maybe the glycerin) that are abundant, easy to acquire, safe to use,
and for our purposes, excellent solvents for making liquid extracts
and herbal medicine in a home lab. In fact, most of these seven
liquids are the principal solvents the pharmaceutical and herb
industry professionals use as their primary menstrua (so much for
that proprietary “scientific” mystery). There are many other
menstrua used by these industries also, such as acetone, chloroform,
methyl alcohol, denatured alcohol, amylic alcohol, acetic ether,
sulfuric ether, hexane, and carbon disulfide. In my belief system,
bodily contact with these particular solvents is neither safe nor
pleasant. They are quite irritating to the healthy flow of a human
being’s life force, and in my opinion the complexity of their by-
products renders them a forbidding conundrum for use in creating
kindly internal and external herbal preparations. Sufficient to say
for this manual, further discussion of these toxic substances draws to
a close here. The original liquid seven, however, will receive a
predominance of our focus, for they in the hands of the herbalist
are the prime shakers and movers of the act of herbal extraction. As
an introduction, I will make a cursory overview of them, then give
more specifics in the following pages.

Water

Water is a universal element. One of the most important products
of nature, its presence or absence plays a major role in the
economy of our planet. Water is more or less involved in almost all
the changes that take place in inorganic matter, and it is
quintessential to the growth and existence of all living beings,
whether animal or vegetable. Chemically, water is extraordinarily
talented, ingenious in its field, very stable, and predictable, and
therefore a most versatile and reliable tool. Water, being immensely
abundant, is an inexpensive ingredient. The only controversy
limiting the free use of water in the current adolescent stage of our

----- PAGE 123 -----
civilization is that we have to clean most of our water before we
can consume it. Water’s indefatigable solvent action has dissolved
and is holding in solution much of our culture’s discarded debris,
slowly decomposing this litter (for water is fortunately not a
preservative—except for soft contacts and pet fish) and depositing
its elements back into the earth for the use of ongoing generative
cycles. When we learn to stop making such large messes (and we
are learning) and figure out how to clean up our neighborhoods,
our ground water will become suitable again for extemporaneous
use. Meanwhile, we often need to purify water by using assorted
filtering and distillation techniques. This increases the cost of a
gallon of water for consumption from when it was once abundantly
free to currently around the average U.S. price of a gallon of
gasoline. But aside from this pollution confusion, water is the best
solvent we have. Its basic nature is absolutely consistent and
reliable. We have used it from the very dawn of simple Homo
sapiens’ pharmacy, and its use as a primary menstruum has
remained unchallenged on into the current alchemical shenanigans
practiced within the labyrinths of today’s high-tech pharmacy and
commercial herbal product manufacturing.

A.coHoL

Alcohol is the second most relied upon menstruum for most
medicine-makers. It too is stable (at plus or minus room
temperature) and is also reliably consistent in its actions as a
solvent and preservative. As a solvent, it is so predictable that it is
relied upon in pharmacy both for what it will eagerly dissolve as
well as for what it definitely won’t dissolve. And whereas we can
depend on the fact that water acts the opposite of a preservative,
medicine-makers know that alcohol is probably the best
preservative. Aside from human party animals, not many life forms
or enzymes can thrive for long when immersed in a volume of
alcohol or even in diluted alcohol, and therefore changes due to
disintegration and decomposition are greatly slowed down: shelf

----- PAGE 124 -----
life is significantly increased.

Set the tone for the new millenium, be a lay
herbalist. Water, spirits, wine, vinegar and oil,
culinary and medicinal herbs, common kitchen
equipment, and one’s unleashed passion are the
shakers and movers of herbal medicine-
making ... that’s all one needs to cook as a
community herbalist.

Wine ann Vinecar

The next two common menstrua that we will discuss, which have in
other eras been eagerly employed by medicine-makers, are wine
and vinegar. Both of these liquids do what water does, for H2O is
primarily what they are, but their total chemistry includes a couple
of embellishments to their water body. Wine boasts of a mild touch
of stimulating alcohol, and vinegar a little touch of sour-tasting acid.
The amount of these “touches” from batch to batch is variable and
therefore to a small degree inconsistent in different lots of these
products. These variations are mostly determined by the nature of
the vegetation used for production and the specific manufacturing
process. The presence of the alcohol in wine and the acetic acid in
vinegar supply a degree of preservation action to the waters of
these liquids and also add a little different “bite” to their water-like
solvent action. The inherent natures of wine and vinegar, however,
also carry with them some other “uncontrollable” vegetable matter
which during shelf time can begin to change their nature, affecting
the chemistry and the preservation of the herbal components that
have been dissolved in the extracts. The results are that the overall
blend of these “variables,” “uncontrollables,” and “inconsistencies”
renders these two menstrua less reliable in relation to sustaining
long-range permanence. This is a feature which has greatly
disturbed some medicine-makers in the past, especially those whose
commercial preparations, and the marketabilitv of such. demanded

----- PAGE 125 -----
control, permanence, and a great deal of solvency predictability.
This preoccupation with predictability, control, and permanence is
orchestrated principally by the intensity and toxicity of the
particular medicines they are manufacturing, whereas smaller
quantities of gentler more benign medicinal and culinary
preparations (which is what we will be making) don’t demand such
rigidity.

There is the story of two nineteenth century pharmacists, Lea and
Perrins, who concocted an herbal digestive blend using a vinegar
base menstruum. When completed, this infusion of Tamarind bean
and other highly flavorful herbs turned out quite disgusting to the
senses. Frustrated by the venture, the two men decided to trash the
whole thing, but instead for whatever reasons some of it sat
forgotten in their lab cellar. During this unpremeditated aging
period the vinegar’s inherent variables and inconsistencies, to the
formulators’ eventual surprise and delight, evolved the juice to a
succulent compound solution that is well known today as
Worcestershire sauce (the men obviously kept good notes during
preparation for possible future reference). Wine and vinegar
menstrua will receive considerable attention in later chapters of this
manual.

Mixture or Water anp ALcoHOL

The next menstruum we will discuss is simply a mixture (in
infinitely varying proportions) of the big two, water and alcohol.
These proportions are determined by the nature of the components
of the particular herb being extracted. This type of menstruum is
also referred to as an aqueous-alcoholic menstruum, or other terms
to that effect.

Ou. anv Guycerin

The final two menstrua we explore are oil and glycerin. They are to
me the chemical jesters of the show, sort of like Bozo and his pet

----- PAGE 126 -----
bear. They are sweet, slow, and warm and seem to function in their
own peculiar world. They are fun to play with, both commanding
patience, heightened concentration (especially by those active
members of Virgos Anonymous), and a light-hearted tolerance from
the medicine-maker while she or he is working with these
performers. The nature of the ensuing products derived from the
actions of these two solvents are also pleasant, playful, soft, and
comfort-enhancing companions to one’s life, such as lip balms,
body lotions, soothing therapeutic oils, pain-relieving, wax-
removing ear oils, and balmy unguents.

Oil is a sensually unctuous solvent for the components of many
herbs as well as itself, being a mild, protective component that
carries herbal virtues to the skin quite comfortably. Oil carries these
nutritional and therapeutic virtues to the outer skin of one’s body as
medicinal oils, ear drops, salves, and lotions, and to the inner skins
as nourishing foods when swallowed by the upper end of the
digestive tube, and as mildly coaxing boluses and suppositories
when deposited in the lower end. As we all know by common
experience, oil refuses to mix with water, and in like fashion it
won’t mix with alcohol. Fortunately, however, it does mix well
with paper towels during and after spills, runovers, and other
extemporaneously lubricious emergencies.

Glycerin is the sweet-tasting component of fats and oils. Most
commercial vegetable glycerin is made available to us as a coconut
oil by-product of the soap industry. After being initially derived
from oil, glycerin will no longer mix with it; it’s one of those odd
generation gap things. At the same time, glycerin is a chemical
cousin to alcohol, and an eager playmate with water. In direct
contrast to oil, glycerin will mix quite willingly with both water
and alcohol. Glycerin is the major component in any menstruum
used to form glycerites. Glycerites are alcohol-free, sugar-free,
sweet-tasting extracts popular with children, parents, and those who
refuse to taste anything herbal unless it is sweetened.

Glycerin is often included as a small portion of an aqueous
alcohol menstruum to modify the magnetic relationship that exists
in nature between alkaloids and tannins whenever these two meet

----- PAGE 127 -----
up in a liquid solution. The presence of glycerin generates a sort of
love triangle, the inevitable results of which the tannins and the
alkaloids practice ignoring each other, while the glycerin and
tannins go off by themselves to be alone. This liberates the
alkaloids to do what they pharmacologically do best without being
distracted and ultimately precipitated by the amorous action of
unfettered tannins. Further details of this soap will be disclosed
later.

So, throw any, all, or an appropriate combination of the above
seven liquids into a cauldron along with a harvest of wild and
vibrant herbs and we have the initial makings of a fascinating,
sensual, and colorful show—an Herbal Medicine Show.

SOLVENT ACTIONS OF MENSTRUA

Water

Water, the global menstruum that is forever dissolving the surface of
our planet, has likewise, from time immemorial, been used by
human beings as a solvent to enhance their lives. Water is called the
universal solvent, for it has a more extensive range as a solvent than
any other known liquid. It is also the cheapest and most abundant
solvent available, and is therefore used in the extraction of plant
essences whenever the advantage of using it outweighs any
disadvantages.

Cold water is a good solvent for plant constituents, such as sugars,
proteins, albuminous bodies, gums, mucilaginous substances, pectin,
tannins or plant astringents, plant acids, coloring matter, many
mineral salts, many glycosides, some alkaloids, most all alkaloidal
salts, and, to a slight degree, a hint of essential oils.

Hot or boiling water causes plant tissues to swell and in so doing
bursts the cells. This hot water then dissolves starches and
disintegrates and extracts other vegetable tissues hardly affected by
cold water. Heating a water menstruum permits the more rapid
solution of a plant’s soluble matter. but a frequently encountered

----- PAGE 128 -----
disadvantage inherent with this phenomenon is that the heating
process extracts substances which later separate out from the
solution upon cooling. These precipitated substances can manifest
as sinister-looking scum or foreboding foams and other frightening
apparitions that float on the top of a solution or settle in strange
ways at the bottom of the container. Although aesthetically
disturbing to some, these precipitates are harmless unless you plan
to store the liquid for a while, in which case they provide food for
microorganisms. If you intend to use this tea to make a syrup, or
are keeping it to use later for whatever reason, strain it as soon as it
cools.

Plant tissues are made up of associations of complex bodies. As
the extraction of these plant constituents with water is initiated, the
sugars, gums, plant acids, mineral salts, and coloring matter, which
are the most readily soluble constituents, dissolve first. The solution
of these different substances in water produces a different
menstruum which is now capable of dissolving constituents that
were previously insoluble in pure water. As this phenomenon
progresses, the ongoing compositions act as new extracting
mediums one after another, with water no longer being the sole
menstruum.

All this action instigated by bringing pure water to a boil evolves
liquids of differing solvent capabilities than that of simple cold
water, and in this way it is found that water solutions of plant
constituents may produce important menstrua that are uniquely
different from water alone. This is quite important to understand,
because it gives the ultimate solvency power of simple water and
the classic preparations that employ only water as a menstruum
(teas) the regard they merit. As a result of these idiosyncrasies of a
water menstruum, water may ultimately be made to dissolve water-
insoluble substances that from their characters, at first assumption,
would appear not to be soluble at all in a simple water menstruum.
One finds that water may become a solvent for particles of such
constituents as resins, oils, glucosides, and other plant constituents
that, in a purified condition (isolated from the fully intact organic
chemistry of the plant). are insoluble or nearlv so in pure water.

----- PAGE 129 -----
With this insight, water infusions and decoctions can be recognized
(reinstated in home pharmacy) and relied upon as equally powerful
or in many instances more powerful extraction processes as those
processes that include alcohol and other solvents in the menstruum.

Ive always felt that the humble cup of herb tea is a more overall
potent and effective delivery system of herbal medicine than the
most superlative power-products released by all our commercial
herb industry. Chinese herbalists decocting their often severe-tasting
herbal stews have been relying quite successfully on the potent
alchemy of this simple aqueous delivery system for centuries.

There is a universal disadvantage, however, in using water by
itself as a solvent. As one can affirm from experiencing the forces of
nature, the conservation of status quo is not the work of water on
the surface of this dynamic planet. Water is not one to preserve a
static condition of any substance or being; and this salient
characteristic is reflected by an herbal preparation when using
water as a sole menstruum. Except in its own frozen state or glacial
form, water is not at all a preservative. On the contrary, its presence
stimulates change and is a prime mover in the perpetual
transmutation of forms (and aqueous solutions). Therein, true to its
fine nature, the greatest disadvantage in the use of water as a
menstruum is that it is not a preservative. In fact, water in its
passionate promotion of change is a near antithesis to a
preservative. Its remarkable solvency extracts large amounts of
diverse substances, while its tissue penetration excites plant
enzymes (although these organic catalysts are usually destroyed by
high temperature), and the resulting solution of plant constituents
makes up a fertile soup that can be an excellent media for
enzymatic action and the growth of molds, yeast, and bacteria.
These opportunistic organisms, in their spontaneous feeding
frenzies, radically alter the state of the extract, and this alteration is
usually not on the side of sensory aesthetics or palatability. So one
is required to either consume a water extract within a day or two,
freeze it, or add another substance that can interfere with
destructive enzymatic fervor and insidious multiplication of
microorganisms; and that is what some of the following liquids do.

----- PAGE 130 -----
Erxyt Atcoxo.

Alcohol is more selective in its extraction action, and therefore does
not have as wide a solubility range as water. Ethyl alcohol is a good
general solvent for extracting resins, balsams, camphors (most of
these three are thrown out of solution by diluting them with water),
essential oils, alkaloids and natural alkaloidal salts, glycosides,
organic acids, chlorophyll, most coloring matter, nearly all the acrid
and bitter constituents of a plant, un-crystallized, amorphous
vegetable sugars, and one fixed oil: castor oil. Some sugars,
proteins, gums, mucilaginous substances, and albuminous bodies
are, however, capable of being mixed with dilute alcohol (a
mixture of 50 percent water, 50 percent ethyl alcohol).

Alcohol refuses, however, to abstract gums, mucilaginous
substances, starch, albuminous materials, or many mineral
compounds, and it does not dissolve any appreciable amount of
crystallized cane sugar.

In addition to its selective solvent properties, alcohol paralyzes
enzymes, and at the same time prevents the growth of yeast, molds,
other fungi, and most bacteria; so alcohol solutions seldom if ever
ferment or putrefy. As a consequence of these reliable preservative
properties, alcohol more or less diluted has long been employed as
a solvent in the making of tinctures, fluid extracts (which are
merely concentrated tinctures), and solid extracts. Though not
preferred by some people, alcohol as a preservative is efficient and
often necessary for the following reasons:

1. To eliminate microbial activity and preserve preparations almost
indefinitely

2. To inactivate enzymes which are destructive to alkaloids and
glycosides

3. To control destructive chemical decomposition of glycosides and
saponins due to the presence of water

----- PAGE 131 -----
Alcohol mixes well with water (and glycerin) in all proportions.
As you will find in your medicine-making experiences, alcohol
equals water in importance as a solvent for many active plant
substances, many that water, especially cold water, does not readily
dissolve. It is also a uniquely important agent for the very fact that
(for manipulative pharmacy) it adamantly excludes many other
plant substances which water does dissolve, such as albuminous
matter (plant protein), plant starches, gums, and mucilaginous
materials. This is sometimes referred to as alcohol’s “negative
strength.” These plant components (which often refuse to be filtered
out in certain solutions) when present in a solution will sometimes
act as unsightly (opalescent, cloudy, gummy, jelly-like, ropy, or
syrupy) solution disturbers as well as provide food for microbes.

Mix an appropriate amount of alcohol into an existing extract
being “disturbed” by these components, and they will be thrown
back out of the solution. They can then be removed, leaving the
extract looking far more attractive. To illustrate this banishment of
an offending component (in this instance slimy mucilage by
alcohol) from an herbal solution, make a strong water infusion of
Comfrey root, and when it is cool, pour some into a small
container, add to it a substantial quantity of pure 190-proof ethyl
alcohol, and therein you will behold the outcast. Add more water to
this, thereby diluting the alcohol, and the mucilage will dissolve
back into solution.

For those individuals who are concerned about
the presence of alcohol in an herbal preparation,
the following calculations based on a tincture
containing 60 percent alcohol (most tinctures
contain less) are given for your guidance:

+ A daily nutritional dosage: For adults, 20 drops
3 times a day equals about 1/30th of an ounce of
alcohol spread over 24 hours.

----- PAGE 132 -----
+ An acute dosage: For adults, 20 drops per hour
for approximately 12 hours equals about 1/7th of
an ounce of alcohol spread over the day.

Children are usually given 1/2 to 1/4 of this adult
dosage.

Often, however, the mucilaginous component of an herb is
exactly what one wants to draw into solution. This is true in
preparations of some of our most nourishing and therapeutic plants
such as Comfrey, Marshmallow, Slippery Elm, and Cinnamon. But if
one wishes to preserve an extract of these mucilaginous plants for
any length of time, be well advised to use some alcohol as either a
part of the extracting menstruum or as a later addition. Eighteen to
20 percent ethyl alcohol will be adequate, and usually this is not a
sufficient amount to cause an eviction of the above-mentioned
components.

Safe Storage of Ethyl Alcohol

+ Keep alcohol packaged in bottles out of the sun and away from
heat. I prefer to use high-density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic
bottles; glass bottles full of liquid heat up faster and break too
easily, and in this instance, are a most costly break.

+ Keep container tightly closed to prevent leakage and evaporation.
+ The boiling point of pure ethyl alcohol is 173° F.

+ Be aware that alcohol containers can be hazardous when empty,
for they retain residual vapor that is extremely flammable. Allow
recently emptied containers to sit outdoors with the lid removed, so
the contents will evaporate and dissipate completely.

+ Alcohol is a flammable liquid.

+ Spills: If a spill has not ignited use water sprav to disperse the

----- PAGE 133 -----
vapors and to dilute the spill to anonflammable mixture. —

+ Fire-fighting procedure: Use dry chemical or carbon dioxide.
Water may be ineffective, but should be used to keep the fire-
exposed containers cool.

+ Avoid prolonged inhalation of vapor.

Axconot-WarTER

Alcohol-water mixtures possess few, if any, of the disadvantages
exhibited by water alone in the extraction and preservation of plant
components. The blending of alcohol with water seems to be a
consummate marriage for both extraction maneuvers in the lab and
social merriment in the recreational arena. Some plant constituents
are nearly as soluble in an alcohol-water menstruum as they are in
strong alcohol, and in some cases the alcohol content of the
menstruum can be as low as 25 percent. I recommend you strive for
maximum extraction using a minimum percent of alcohol, keeping
in mind that 15 to 20 percent alcohol by volume—of the end
product—is probably the lowest alcohol content you can contrive
that will preserve the extract for any length of time.

In pharmacy a mixture of 50 percent ethyl alcohol and 50
percent water is commonly referred to as dilute alcohol.

Vinecar

I am referring here to the use of apple cider vinegar or any other
plant vinegar such as plum vinegar, rice vinegar, wine vinegar,
balsamic vinegar, etc.

Vinegar is a sour liquid on account of its acetic acid content. It
has valuable properties as a solvent as well as a preservative. As a
solvent it provides a service that aids in the fixing and extraction of
certain alkaloids and other water-soluble plant components, and it
can be substituted for alcohol in the preparation of extracts,

----- PAGE 134 -----
although this is not a common practice today. Medicinal vinegars
await their renaissance in practical lay Herbalism, and it is intended
that this particular manual will hasten that coming.

Vinegar’s action as a preservative is considered to be excellent,
though inferior to dilute alcohol, and for this reason pure vinegar
preparations are said to be more liable to change than tinctures. In
certain custom-prepared menstrua, vinegar is commonly added as 5
percent to 10 percent of an alcohol-based menstruum to adjust the
pH when that is advantageous (i.e., for making extracts of Lobelia,
Black Walnut, Goldenseal, Ephedra, etc.)

In the late 1800s medicine-makers felt that the state of solution of
some plant components was at its best when vinegar was employed
as the menstruum, at least as far as the medicinal action of these
extracted components was concerned. This was particularly the case
when the activity of the medicine depended on the presence of one
or more alkaloids. A raw free-base alkaloid is often difficult to
bring into solution, but by uniting it with the acetic acid of vinegar
a free base alkaloid forms an alkaloidal salt. Alkaloid salts are
readily soluble in water; therefore, they may be more perfectly
extracted in vinegar than by other menstrua.

However, the fact that vinegar contains inherent vegetable matter
renders it liable to decomposition, and therefore these preparations
are best made in small quantities and renewed at shorter intervals
(annually) than alcohol-containing preparations. One can always, if
desired, add a little alcohol to vinegar solutions to extend their
preservation even further; this generates a medicine that is well
preserved, and still greatly reduces the use of alcohol.

In chemistry, vinegar is generally classed among the derivatives of
alcohol, as it is produced by the oxidation of alcoholic liquids,
especially hard apple cider and wine. Vinegar is a very dilute
solution of acetic acid containing what the pharmaceutical texts
refer to as foreign matters. Why these matters are considered foreign
I’m not quite sure, since they are inherent to and an actual part of
what makes up whole vinegar itself. In the late 1800s the U.S.
Pharmacopoeia’s official description of vinegar is the same as mine.
The Pharmacopoeia defined vinegar as “impure diluted acetic acid

----- PAGE 135 -----
prepared by fermentation.” A clue emerges as to the “foreign”
mystery as it becomes clear that pharmaceutical activists focus
solely on the action of the acetic acid in vinegar and not on the
wholeness of vinegar itself; obviously, they are not at all impressed
with or care about the fact that this wholeness gives vinegar its own
inherent nutritional and medicinal virtues. Over time, vinegar fell
into disfavor by pharmacists because not only was its acetic acid
content found to be too variable, it was also relatively expensive
and was said to be possessed by organic impurities (foreigners).
Pharmacy eventually replaced vinegar with a much cheaper, more
controllable product called acetic acid, nearly pure acetic acid
prepared from wood by destructive fermentation and purification.
Pure acetic acid is cheap, free from impurities, and unvarying in its
intensity. In high pharmacy it is diluted to present a 6 percent
acetic acid content (actually, 5.7 to 6.3 are allowable parameters—I
guess even perfection has its slack side).

In light of all this, however, I think that the obsession with an
acetic acid content that is exactly 6 percent (+ or—.3 percent) is a
bit anal, and I, in addition to being comfortable with a little acidic
variance, am rather fond of the synergy of many botanical
impurities (even though they might lead to a faster change in a
solution). I still prefer to use “crude” vinegar; I feel more
comfortable with its vulgar character and variable acidity.

However, it is wholly understandable why vinegar fell into
disfavor with the medical pharmacy establishment, for it is in the
business of dissolving very heavy duty plant alkaloids and other
intense and often highly toxic components into preparations,
making the therapeutic use of the resulting drugs (as well as the
survival of their patients) extremely dose specific. Responsible
allopathic medical practitioners needed to be entirely sure of the
strength of the extract, which in this case depended on the action of
the acidic acid in the menstruum. So allopathic doctors did not
discard vinegar because it was a poor solvent, but because it was
(expensive and) relatively uncontrollable as almost all natural
plant-derived things are. This is one reason why mainstream
Western allopathic medicine does not use botanical medicines any

----- PAGE 136 -----
longer. It has replaced these with chemical medicines and
synthetically derived plant components. These are highly
controllable and unvarying. Moreover, there are no longer any
foreign, impure matters to contend with that might shorten the
stability of the products.

For those of us, however, who are not dealing in toxic materials
and don’t need an indeterminately long shelf life for our
medicinals, vinegar remains an excellent solvent. We can revive its
use because we are preparing tonics and therapeutic agents derived
from gentler plants that are not dose critical. These plants may be
extracted very well and are adequately preserved by vinegar and
wine solvents.

It is important to realize that during the same era in our medical
history, when the medical establishment made its decision to deal
primarily with toxic botanical and non-botanical substances as their
materia medica, the lay population concurrently surrendered its
health and disease care to these same medical professionals and
proceeded to lose their knowledge of self-medication using
medicinal plants and stopped preparing herbal remedies as their
grandparents and ancestors had done. We all lost touch with this
(folk) technology of independence. As time passed, high-proof ethyl
alcohol became the mainstream pharmacy’s solvent of choice rather
than wines, vinegar, and glycerin to a large extent. In the 1960s,
when we saw the revival of homemade herbal preparations and
self-medication, herbalists began to make their plant concoctions
available in stores. They used ethyl alcohol (and water) as their
primary menstruum probably because of the powerful influence of
mainstream pharmacy and a desire for long shelf life. I don’t think
herbalists disregarded wines and vinegar as viable menstrua because
they weren’t good solvents and preservatives, but because they
weren't as “strong” as alcohol, and therefore not the best menstrua
to use for competitive commercial adventures. Glycerin, considered
a “stronger” solvent and preservative than either wine or vinegar,
has enjoyed a quicker revival in the modern herbal medicine-
making world (maybe not as a star performer, but certainly as a
popular supporting actor). So, although many herbalists today have

----- PAGE 137 -----
experimented with and enjoyed making medicinal herbal wines
and vinegars, not many have taken them very seriously. I think a
greatly elevated regard for these (potentially homegrown) menstrua
will transpire once we change our attitude to one that is based on
experience rather than on the mainstream U.S. pharmaceutical
history and literature. There is much to learn and appreciate about
these excellent natural menstrua.

Lay herbalists (you and I) are in the process of reviving the
foundations of Herbalism in our homeland. We have only just
begun; we are relearning the language of Herbalism. Like
aboriginal youths who return to their native homelands from the
cities, it will take time to revive our traditional living skills. The
language of Herbalism is unique among other medical languages. Its
grammar and syntax are derived from the understanding and uses of
Nature’s organic phenomena. We can embrace this common
language in our homes and communities as we focus on the
wholeness and individual life cycles of local medicinal plants,
redevelop our herbcraft, and recall how wonderful it is to dance
barefooted in the green world.

Vinegar and wines are made from plants that can grow in most
any garden, and their organic nature in turn can render remarkably
efficient menstrua for us to use for making healthful foods, herbal
tonics, and reliable medicines—at home. When you grow medicinal
plants in your garden and also learn to use the wild plants that
grow near your home, you don’t need to preserve herbal extracts
for years on end. These plants come to you anew every year, so you
can make fresh extracts seasonally. You only need to preserve these
for a relatively short time. This is a different rhythm of perception
we can move to, a cyclic, seasonal rhythm that is unending.
Herbalism encourages us to relax into a healthful sense of well-
being with a deep awareness of Nature’s nourishing, perpetual
abundance.

Glycerin is not a carbohydrate and contains no
sugar. Taken internally it is slowly absorbed into

----- PAGE 138 -----
the bloodstream, then slowly metabolized by the
liver. Due to this slow process, glycerin does not
cause any appreciable blood sugar imbalances.

Guycerin

Glycerin (a.k.a. glycerine) is the sweet fraction of a fixed oil. It is
found in all true fats (except cholesterol, which is a fat containing
no glycerin) and oils, of both vegetable and animal origin. Glycerin
was discovered in the late 1700s and came into use in medicine and
pharmacy in the mid-1800s. It is produced through a remarkably
complex process that decomposes fats in a large digester. After
several hours of a bizarre relationship between the fat, the water,
and 150 pounds of steam pressure involving constant agitation, the
fat’s glycerin fraction is ultimately separated from its fatty acids.
The glycerin is distilled out, purified, condensed, and collected for
use. Much of the vegetable glycerin available to us is derived from
coconut oil. There are also glycerin products derived from animal
fat and synthetically contrived from trichlorpropane, which is a
petroleum product. Investigate your sources.

Chemically, glycerin belongs to the class of alcohol, and is termed
glycerol or glyceric alcohol. However it is a tri-atomic alcohol and
contains no ethyl alcohol or methyl alcohol which are di-atomic
alcohols having dramatically different characteristics. Glycerin is not
a carbohydrate and contains no sugar. Taken internally it is slowly
absorbed into the bloodstream, then slowly metabolized by the
liver. Due to this slow process, glycerin does not cause any
appreciable blood sugar imbalances. Glycerin is a valuable solvent
and preservative agent in medicine-making. Some authorities say it
is second only to alcohol in these respects, having a solvent power
about half the strength of pure ethyl alcohol. This would make it an
excellent choice as a solvent for herbs and roots that respond well
to a menstruum having a lower solvent power. In my experience, I
find its range of solvency less extensive than either water or alcohol.
The beauty of glvcerin is that it is capable of mixing with both

----- PAGE 139 -----
water and/or alcohol, so its qualities can be easily combined with
both. Glycerin is clear, odorless, has an agreeable sweet flavor, a
thick, syrupy, stable consistency, produces a sensation of warmth to
the skin and tongue, remains stable when heated, is antibacterial,
and will extract a variety of constituents that make it useful in cases
where neither water nor alcohol are appropriate. It is a notable
substitute for alcohol in the menstrua of extracts given to alcohol-
intolerant individuals. It can be used to prepare children’s tonics or
to use with plants that have relatively large amounts of ligneous
(woody) fiber; water expands these gummy and/or glutinous
materials far more than glycerin does—which is often an
objectionable occurrence. Glycerin abstracts and holds tannates (it is
said to have the capacity to absorb nearly its own weight of tannic
acid), and therefore is exceptionally effective when incorporated as
a portion of a menstruum for herbs containing tannins, as it
reduces, if not eliminates, the precipitating action in a solution
where tannins contact alkaloids, a condition which can greatly
interfere with the activity of the alkaloids. In many respects,
glycerin resembles water as a menstruum more than it does alcohol.
Glycerin will not dissolve or mix with resins or fixed oils, so it is
not suitable for resinous or oily herb extracts. And although it is a
good solvent for a few alkaloids, it is generally inferior to water,
vinegar, and alcohol for extracting most alkaloidal structures.
Glycerin does not extract volatile oils very efficiently, but it readily
mixes with them and preserves them for a short time. When diluted
with water or aromatic hydrosols (see Chapter Ten), glycerin is
demulcent and emollient, lubricating, soothing, and protecting to
the skin and mucous membranes. When used undiluted, it acts as an
irritant that arouses activity. Glycerin readily absorbs water from the
air and is useful for keeping substances moist. It does not ferment
or evaporate at ordinary temperatures, but it does vaporize readily
from a water solution at 212° F. Glycerin, when undiluted, boils at
329° F.

Woe

----- PAGE 140 -----
Wine as a menstruum can produce some delightful herbal infusions,
as its solvent action is akin to an alcohol-water menstruum.
Macerating herbs in wine is a highly creative arena in which to
experiment. However, due to wine’s naturally low alcohol content,
a saturated wine extract might not hold up against the process of
deterioration over an extended period of time unless more alcohol
is added to ensure its stability, especially during warm weather.

At one time, there were several medicated wines and two natural
wines considered official medicines in this country (meaning they
were recognized in the official U.S. Pharmacopoeia and later in the
National Formulary). Some of these medicated wines, such as
Antimony wine and Colchicinum wine, were in fact very potent
allopathic medicines, an improper dose of the later being fatal. But
in time wines lost favor, due to the fact that it was found
impossible to formulate tests whereby spurious wines could be
positively recognized and distinguished from the pure ones.
However, this is no longer an issue for us today with the vast array
of legitimate local wineries currently in action.

Traditionally, white wines were preferred as menstrua for
making medicinal wines because of their small proportion of
tannins (sherry was the strongest white wine and therefore the most
frequently used, and port was the most frequently used red wine).
In the case of red wines, the skin of the grape is allowed to remain
with the expressed juice during fermentation, and the astringent
dark coloring-matter in the skin contains large amounts of tannin.
This can be a problem when infusing herbs that are high in sought-
after alkaloids because, as previously noted, tannins precipitate and
therein pull out of solution these alkaloidal components. Official
wine menstrua were required to contain 16 percent to 24 percent
alcohol (which wine does not contain naturally), so these wines
were fortified with pure grape brandy, which sounds to me like the
makings of good medicine.

On

----- PAGE 141 -----
There are two kinds of oil, fixed oil and volatile. However, volatile
oils (a.k.a. essential oils, aromatic oils) are not really oils at all.
They are only referred to as oils because they blend with oil quite
readily and they react with water much like fixed oils do.
Chemically volatile oils have next to nothing in common with fixed
oils, lacking both fatty acids and glycerin. They are referred to as
“volatile” because, unlike fixed oils, they evaporate readily when
exposed to air. We'll focus on volatile oils and their complementary
aromatic hydrosols in Chapter Ten and continue this section with a
discussion of the unctuous (smooth, slippery, and greasy) oils.

Broadly categorizing, there are actually three
kinds of oil. In addition to the aromatic essential
oils and the vegetable- and animal-derived fixed
oils there are the mineral oils (and paraffin wax).
Mineral oils are a mixture of liquid hydrocarbons
obtained from petroleum, and they may be highly
volatile or non-volatile.

Fixed oils are obtained from both the vegetable and the animal
kingdom and are often called fatty oils, as chemically they are fats.
They are more or less smooth and greasy to the touch, and leave a
permanent grease spot when in liquid condition and dropped on
paper. They vary greatly in their point of congelation, olive oil
becoming solid at a little above 32° F., whereas flaxseed oil can
remain fluid at 4° below zero. Pure fixed oils have little taste or
smell. They are lighter than water, and they do not evaporate
easily; however, they do boil at about 600° F. and at this
temperature are converted into vapor. Heated in open air,
especially with the aid of a wick, fixed oils do take fire and burn
with a bright and sooty flame. These oils are insoluble in water, but
are capable of being mixed with water by the assistance of a
mucilage, forming mixtures which are called emulsions (see
Chapter Nineteen, “Lotions & Creams”). Fixed oils comprise most of
the oils in common use such as Olive. Almond, Sesame. cod liver,

----- PAGE 142 -----
and Castor oil (and mineral oils).

It is not commonly realized that fixed oils, especially when used
as warm/hot infusions and decoctions, are good solvents for
abstracting resins, oleo-resins, essential oils, and flavonoids.

Chemically, in most cases, fixed oils consist primarily of three
substances which are considered the three elementary parts of fat:
olein, stearin, and palmitin. Olein is the liquid portion of fat, and
stearin and palmitin are both solid portions; hence, the consistency
of fixed oils and fats is due to the relative proportion of these
substances. Thus, Almond oil, being composed principally of olein,
is always liquid at ordinary temperatures, while butter, tallow, and
lard, being largely stearin, are solid. Fixed oils are decomposed in
the intestine by the digestive juices into fatty acids and glycerin and
sometimes monoglycerides.

If you are so inclined, do not let these lists of
plant constituents overwhelm you or put you off.
They are important only when you care about
them, and they are equally unimportant if you
don’t care. So, I include them in our discussions
for the benefit of those individuals who are
interested. Feel free to ignore them, for they are
specialized information, not crucial information.
Later, if you decide to focus on them for any
purpose, they are here for you as a reference.

Decomposition and the resulting rancidity of fats and oils are due
to exposure to heat, air, moisture, and/or light. This change is
believed due to the presence of animal and vegetable tissue,
protein, and other albuminous or mucilaginous compound
substances which cause fermentation, induce decomposition,
liberate the fatty acids, and produce volatile, odorous acids.
Rancidity is noticeable by the oil giving a sharp, unpleasant taste
and odor. The presence of water in a fatty oil favors the production

----- PAGE 143 -----
of rancidity.

While you select and prepare your menstrua, keep in mind,
regardless of which solvent or combination of solvents you choose,
the “emptier” a solvent is, the more effective it will be as an
extractant. In other words, a solvent that is not already floating a
bunch of dissolved minerals within its liquid volume obviously has
more room within itself to dissolve and hold the components of an
herb that has been mixed with it. Likewise, once a solvent has
dissolved components of the herb and brought them into solution, it
is no longer as active because in this state it is more saturated and
less hungry (although it might now dissolve components it couldn’t
when it was pure). Therefore, for example, soft water (which by
definition is empty of dissolved mineral content—that’s why it’s still
soft) is overall more active in dissolving an herb than hard water
(which is relatively full of dissolved mineral). Theoretically,
distilled water is completely empty of dissolved minerals and is
therefore a hungry, most powerful solvent, ready and eager to
dissolve any water-soluble thing it can get its lusty molecules up
against. Rainwater is the soft water I most like to use. It’s more wild
and whimsical than distilled water, but it’s not always there for you
when you need it. I’ll talk more about the dynamics of active and
saturated menstrua when I discuss “circulatory displacement” in the
chapter on infusions (which will clearly illustrate why it’s prudent
to “shake your tinctures”).

PRINCIPLE CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS AND THEIR SOLVENTS

When speaking the language of the pharmacologist, these principal
constituents are often called the “active ingredients” of the plant, or
the isolated plant chemicals that have a salient, definable
physiological activity on the body. If an individual has developed
the insight to focus on the activity of the whole plant as a remedy
within a wholistic framework for assisting a person to heal, specific
knowledge of these ingredients is not of great importance.
However. to formulate an efficient menstruum for making a plant

----- PAGE 144 -----
extract, there is value in gaining a general knowledge of these
constituents and an understanding of the specific menstrua in which
they are probably soluble and insoluble. More whole, intact, and
aesthetic herbal medicines can be prepared with this awareness.

When considering the solubility of individual constituents found
in a particular herb, please remain aware that the solubility and
insolubility of the various components I am about to outline for you
come from data created in the reductionist science lab. This
information was derived from each constituent in its isolated form,
totally separated from the organic organization of the whole living
plant. Due to this, Western science is often unable to explain why
and how plant remedies work. Scientific method routinely inhibits
a true understanding of the action of whole herbs or their
individual constituents because the unique organization of the
entire plant is rarely, if ever, tested. So when a plant constituent is
said, for example, to be insoluble in water, this might not be and
very likely isn’t entirely true when that constituent is functioning in
the dynamic context of the whole plant. Science is profoundly
humbled by what actually goes on within the brilliant flesh of a
whole herb. Therefore, in your study of plant constituents, beware
of attempting to understand any medicinal plant by reducing it to
its so-called “active ingredients.” Again, the whole of the plant is
the true reference, the one which one’s whole body is most
biologically familiar with.

Now, to assist you in formulating a suitable menstruum for your
plant extracts, the following discussion of plant constituents and
their solubility is given as a guide to help you make an educated
guess as to what solvent or combination of solvents you will
ultimately find to be your best menstruum for a particular plant.
This discussion is not the final word, for to my knowledge no one,
regardless of his or her credentials, knows the final word in any
area of Herbalism.

Alkaloids

----- PAGE 145 -----
Alkaloids are organic bodies, derived chiefly from plants in which
they are believed to exist in combination with organic acids,
forming salts (a safer, more soluble form of the alkaloid). These
alkaloidal salts are usually well-defined, colorless, odorless,
crystalline, and soluble. Some are not colorless; for example, the
bitter-tasting berberine in Goldenseal and Oregon Grape is yellow.
Alkaloids may be unstable when heated. Most pure alkaloids are
bitter, slightly alkaline, soluble in ether and chloroform, and often
less readily in alcohol. In water they are comparatively insoluble.
On the other hand, the solubility of the alkaloidal salts usually
follow an opposite pattern: they are freely soluble in water and
somewhat soluble in alcohol. The ready solubility of the salts of
alkaloids have caused them to be preferred to the alkaloids
themselves for therapeutic uses. For preparation of extracts with the
highest levels of alkaloids, water/vinegar/alcohol menstrua having
a 35 percent water, to 10 percent vinegar, to 55 percent alcohol
content are recommended.

All the important alkaloids have profound physiological and
pharmacological effects on the body, and some on the mind; many
of them are the most poisonous plant substances known.

The chemical composition of alkaloids is not fully understood.
All of them, however, contain nitrogen, which is a sort of “so what”
bit of information to me, but all the other books mention this fact,
so I thought I probably should too.

Please keep in mind, that while alkaloids and
their salts have distinctive therapeutic properties
of their own, they do not fully nor exactly
represent the action of the whole plant from
which they are derived.

Please keep in mind, that while alkaloids and their salts have
distinctive therapeutic properties of their own, they do not fully nor
exactly represent the action of the whole plant from which they are
derived.

----- PAGE 146 -----
The names of alkaloids end in ine, such as morphine, caffeine,
cocaine, and quinine. Nicotine, which is found in tobacco, is a true
alkaloid. It is very similar to the alkaloids cicutine and coniine that
are found in the seeds and root of Hemlock, a plant which can
cause progressive paralysis of the nervous system and death.
Nicotine is also quite similar to lobeline, an alkaloid found in
Lobelia, which can help people stop smoking.

Balsams (Balsama)

Balsams are resins or oleoresins containing large proportions of
benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, or esters of these acids. Balsams are
soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water. In plants, balsams are a
combination of resins and essential oils (see “Oleoresins”).
Examples: Tolu balsam, Peru balsam, and Benzoin.

Bitter compounds

Physiologically, all bitters have a bitter flavor. This flavor stimulates
the body into reflex action and sets the glands (especially of the
digestive system) to work producing their various effects. In certain
plants, the bitter principle prepares the way for the other active
ingredients. In Hops, for example, a sedative is combined with the
bitter substance. Most bitter compounds are soluble in water and,
on the whole, soluble in alcohol. Optimal amounts of bitters are
derived with menstrua having 30 percent to 60 percent alcohol.
Other examples of bitter herbs: Wormwood, Dandelion, Mugwort,
Feverfew, Gentian, and Globe Artichoke.

Camphors (Camphorae)

Physically and chemically, camphors are closely related to volatile
oils. They constitute one of the elements of many of the volatile
oils, and may be separated from them by subjecting the oils to a
cooling process (for example. menthol from Peppermint oil).

----- PAGE 147 -----
Camphors at ordinary temperatures are (mostly) solid bodies, but
may be easily melted. They are soluble in alcohol, insoluble in
water. Examples: menthol and camphor—from Camphor Tree
wood (Cinnamomum camphora).

Essential oils, volatile oils

These components are volatile and aromatic at low temperatures.
Essential oils are very soluble in alcohol, soluble in fixed oils and
glycerin, very slightly soluble in cold water, and they are vaporized
by boiling water. They form the basis of the various medicinal
waters and hydrosols (see “Oils and fats”).

Enzymes

Enzymes are organic catalysts produced by animal and vegetable
cells. An enzyme usually acts to break down or build up the
molecules of one substance or group, since it is specific for a
particular linkage. They are soluble in water, and insoluble in
alcohol. Enzymes are rendered inactive in alcoholic solutions and
are destroyed by high temperature. The addition of alcohol to a
fresh plant extract containing glycosides prevents the destruction of
the glycosides by enzymes.

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are a widely distributed group of plant constituents
based on two phenolic rings. Because of their structure they are all
anti-oxidants and are fundamental to all colors other than green in
plants. Flavonoids are soluble in water, in alcohol, and in fixed oils.

Glycosides

Glycosides are organic plant principles which play an important
role in the plant’s protective. regulatory. and sanitarv functions.

----- PAGE 148 -----
They are a compound that contains a sugar part attached to a non-
sugar part called the aglycone [sugar + aglycone = glycoside].
When the sugar part is glucose, the substance may be called a
glucoside. Glycosides vary greatly in solubility, but nearly all are
soluble in alcohol. Optimal amounts of glycosides are derived with
menstrua having 30 percent to 60 percent alcohol. Glycosides are
usually of a neutral character until hydrolyzed (reacting with water)
in metabolism, at which point they become active. In plants,
glycosides are frequently associated with alkaloids, and in many
instances they are said to constitute the “active ingredient” of a
plant medicine. Glycoside compounds can be broken apart by
enzymatic action which can continue after a plant is harvested
unless the plant is dehydrated or preserved in alcohol while fresh.
Glycosides are distinguished from alkaloids by the ending in.
Examples: hypericin—which is also soluble in fixed oil (St. John’s
Wort), arbutin (Uva Ursi), glycyrrhizin (Licorice root), aloin (Aloes)
and salicin (Willow).

Gums (Gummata)

Gums are contained in great abundance in vegetation. They are
exudates that are soluble in water, forming a mucilaginous liquid,
or softening to form a jelly-like adhesive mass or paste. All softened
forms are emollient or demulcent, and have a soothing, lubricating,
and often nutritional quality. The dry concrete (unsoftened) state of
this substance is more specifically referred to as a gum. Gums are
insoluble in alcohol. When gums are undesirable in a preparation, a
solvent such as alcohol is selected so it will inhibit solution of the
gummy constituents. (This is an example of employing alcohol’s
“negative strength.”) Examples: Acacia, Tragacanth.

Gum-resins (Gummi-resinae)

Gum-resins are milky exudates composed of (1) a gum or gums
partly or wholly soluble in water and (2) a resin or resins soluble in

----- PAGE 149 -----
alcohol. When triturated and admixed with water, gum-resins yield
emulsions, the gum constituent more or less dissolving while the
resin is mechanically suspended in the solution. Examples: Myrrh,
Asafoetida.

Mucilages

Mucilages (like gums) are expressly soluble in water (they are best
extracted in cold water) and insoluble in alcohol. Extraction of
mucilaginous constituents must be done with as low an alcohol
content as possible. Prove this principle to yourself sometime
(intentionally rather than accidentally) by attempting to make a
fresh plant Comfrey extract using 190-proof ethyl alcohol. Or, even
more entertaining, blend a liquid Comfrey extract with a high
alcohol content tincture—herbal escargot! You can salvage the
results by adding sufficient water.

Oils (Olea) and fats

Oils are fluid substances, and fats are solid or semisolid bodies, both
having a greasy or unctuous feel. Oils are of two types: nonvolatile
and volatile.

Non-volatile or fixed oils (Olea pinguia) are organic substances of
a semisolid or solid consistency, readily soluble in chloroform and
ether, in volatile oils, or other fats. Fixed oils are insoluble in water
or glycerin. More than a small amount of fixed oil in a plant tissue
will greatly reduce the solvent action of an alcohol or water
menstruum. Heated in the presence of alkalis, fixed oils form soaps;
an important by-product is glycerin, a tri-atomic alcohol. Glycerin is
an excellent extractant and preservative component of a fixed oil.
Examples of fixed vegetable oils: Peanut oil, Olive oil, and Castor
oil.

Volatile or essential oils (Olea volatilia) are aromatic, flammable
liquids obtained predominantly by steam distillation and to a lesser
extent by expression (pressing). They are soluble in alcohol and in

----- PAGE 150 -----
fixed oils; some essential oils are very slightly soluble in water.
Essential oils are volatile, oxidizing, and evaporating upon exposure
to air. Not all plants produce essential oils. Pure essential oils are
the materia medica of aromatherapy (see “Essential oils”).
Examples: Lavender, Jasmine, Orange blossom, Rose, Thyme, and
Patchouli oils.

Oleoresins (Oleoresinae)

Resins often occur in more or less homogeneous mixtures with
volatile oils; these mixtures are known as oleoresins. They are
soluble in alcohol and fixed oils, and insoluble in water (see
“Balsams”). Example: Turpentine from conifers.

Proteins

Albumin is a class of protein found in many vegetable tissues and
fluids as well as in animal tissues. Albumin is soluble in water,
insoluble in alcohol, and is coagulated by heat. Those individuals
who believe that a plant’s medicinal action is due solely to its so-
called “active” principles regard these proteins along with other
“inactive” substances (gums, etc.) to be inert, mostly useless, and, all
in all, a bother, merely causing unsightly cloudy solutions and
ultimate putrefaction of the preparation. Other experts disagree and
revere the synergism of the natural organization of the whole plant
as the active component. To avoid extraction or to remove proteins
from a preparation, one can:

+ Use 190-proof absolute alcohol as a menstruum;

+ Precipitate the dissolved proteins from a water extraction by
adding alcohol afterwards; or

+ Coagulate and precipitate the albumin with heat by either boiling
the plant as part of the extraction process, or by boiling the
completed water extract and filtering the solution.

----- PAGE 151 -----
Resins (Resinae)

Resins are non-volatile excretions or secretions of very indefinite
composition, and are chiefly oxidation products of essential oils.
Resins are soluble in alcohol, fixed oils, and essential oils, and
insoluble in water. Resins will melt at a temperature near to that of
boiling water. Examples: Myrrh, Frankincense.

Saponins

Saponins are plant components that possess the unique
characteristic of foaming when shaken with water, even when very
dilute. They have the ability to hold finely divided fatty and
resinous substances in perfect suspension in aqueous mixtures,
producing emulsions of great stability. This is what a soap does that
helps remove oil from hands and cleans greasy dishware. Internally,
many saponins have direct medicinal effects such as those found in
Ginseng, Horse Chestnut, Licorice, and Wild Yam. Other saponins
are quite toxic (sapotoxins). With few exceptions, saponins are
readily soluble in water and also soluble in dilute alcohol.

Starches

Starches are one of the most important derivatives of plant cells.
They are insoluble in ordinary solvents, but swell in boiling water
to form a peculiar jelly-like or mucilaginous paste (starch paste).
Examples: Cornstarch, Arrowroot, Tapioca.

Sugars (Sacchara)

In their most basic form, simple sugars present themselves as single
sugar units and are commonly referred to in science-lingo (not so
simply) as monosaccharides. Saccharide comes from the Greek
word sakcharon, which means sugar (around and around goes the
scientific name game). These sugars have a sweet taste, are soluble

----- PAGE 152 -----
in water, and soluble in dilute alcohol. Two to ten (or so) sugar
units linked together are called oligosaccharides. A huge number of
sugars linked together are referred to as polysaccharides.
Polysaccharides don’t taste sweet and are not very soluble. They are
high molecular weight compounds found in almost all living tissue.
They make up the skeletal substances in the cell walls of higher
plants (i.e., cellulose), the food reservoirs (i.e., starches), or the
protective substances (i.e., exudate gums or sap).

Gaw’s Sweer Sucar-FiieD Formuta

ror Our Lives

CO, + H,0 (in the presence of chlorophyll and light) =
CH,O + Oy

I’ve been told this should actually be, 6 CO, + 6 H,O =
CeH120¢ (glucose) + 6 O, but I’m sorry, to me that’s just not
as poetic. So, in other words: Animal out-breath combined
with pure water within the precious chlorophyll-full bodies of
our herbs, in the presence of sunlight, yields food-full
carbohydrates and free oxygen for animal in-breaths. Amen.

“Absolute alcohol” (100 percent ethyl alcohol) is
hard to produce and maintain because when
subjected to the atmosphere it quickly absorbs 5
percent water (absolute glycerin does the same
thing). Therefore, when I use the term “absolute
alcohol,” I am really referring to the 95 percent
ethyl alcohol/5 percent water mix that is
commonly used by herbal manufacturers.

----- PAGE 153 -----
When in doubt, use “dilute alcohol” as a
menstruum.

Tannins

Tannins are non-nitrogenous bodies that have an astringent taste
and action on body proteins, rendering a protective layer on the
mucous membranes and skin. They strike a blue-black or a green-
black color with ferric (iron) salts. Widely distributed, especially in
barks and leaves, most tannins form precipitates with alkaloids,
albumin (protein), and many metallic salts, particularly iron salts.
For this reason, they are of special interest to medicine-makers who
would avoid the preparation of unsightly mixtures (for example,
combinations of Goldenseal with Oak or Anemopsis) or of
dangerous alkaloidal precipitates. Powerful alkaloids, thus
precipitated, would be apt to be taken in the last doses of a bottle
of medicine in which there had been a failure to “shake the bottle
before using.” The inclusion of glycerin in an extracting menstruum
for a tannin-containing plant will bind the tannins, so they will not
readily precipitate any accompanying alkaloids. Tannins are very
soluble in water, soluble in glycerin, and somewhat soluble in
alcohol. One can achieve an excellent “tannin tincture” using a
menstruum of merely 20 percent alcohol, 80 percent water.

Waxes (Cerae)

Waxes are compounds of fatty acids with certain alcohols. They
differ from fats in that they contain no glycerin. They melt when
heated and are brittle at low temperatures. They come in varying
degrees of solidity. Examples: beeswax, Carnuba wax.

SUMMARY

Since most medicinal plants are made up of representatives from
several of the above-mentioned constituents. categorized as either

----- PAGE 154 -----
active or ballast substances, the extraction agents should not be
geared solely to any individual substance. Alcohol concentrations of
40 percent (sometimes less) to 60 percent (sometimes more) are
customarily utilized, according to the official instructions given in
most pharmacopoeia. Therefore, venturing resolutely into the risky
arena of publicly stating a personal opinion in current herbal
literature, I offer the following, experience-based summation of that
which has gone before ... to beginning students of herbal medicine-
making who are faced with the task and awesome responsibility of
formulating a suitable water-alcohol base menstruum for making an
extract, I boldly suggest: when in doubt, use “dilute alcohol” as a
menstruum. This is a very practical solution. There is sufficient
amount of both water and alcohol to adequately dissolve the
components of any plant and there is enough alcohol to preserve
most any solution. One hundred-proof vodka is a dilute alcohol
(approximately 50 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 50 percent
water) which is available at any liquor store for your use, whereas
190-proof grain ethyl alcohol is not so readily available.

For our purposes, merely divide the proof number (found on all
commercial alcoholic beverage labels) by 2 to determine the
percentage of absolute ethyl alcohol by volume contained in the
product. An 80-proof vodka or gin, for example, is (approximately)
40 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 60 percent other liquid; a 150-
proof rum is (approximately) 75 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 25
percent other liquid.

----- PAGE 155 -----


----- PAGE 156 -----
Herbal medicines can be prepared in different forms or “vehicles.”
These preparations are designed for efficient delivery of herbal
actions and nutrients to the body and mind, and, if they are to be
stored any length of time, for efficiency of preservation. It is not
convenient to administer Saw Palmetto or Uva Ursi, for instance, in
the form of berries and leaves. respectively. It would be a

----- PAGE 157 -----
disagreeable task for an individual, an ailing person in particular, to
chew these crude forms of the plant remedies. And likewise, it
would be difficult for this person to obtain in this way the full
nutritional and medicinal activity of these herbs. However, a water-
alcohol tincture of Saw Palmetto berries or a cold water infusion of
Uva Ursi leaves represents pretty much the true pharmacological
activity of the herbs because the therapeutic and nutritional
principles are held in solution, are easily administered (although in
this case it doesn’t do much to improve the flavor of the Palmetto
berries), and ultimately assimilated, while the indigestible parts
have been separated out and removed.

Some forms of herbal medicine are designed to be taken orally;
others are prepared in forms suitable for topical application either
directly onto the skin, in the ear, as an eye wash, or inserted
vaginally or rectally. Some of these vehicles require a menstruum
for the development of their unique design, others don’t. Following
is a working outline of these various vehicles that will give you an
overall view of the major players in the theater of herbal pharmacy.
Detailed instruction and supplementary information about the
preparation and use of these herbal delivery vehicles is the subject
of the following chapters.

HERBAL PREPARATIONS TAKEN ORALLY

PREPARATIONS USING A MENSTRUUM

Water-based menstruum

© Infusions, teas (one can also use fruit juice as a water-base
menstruum)
Hot infusions
Cold infusions

© Decoctions

Concentrates

© Jellos

e

----- PAGE 158 -----
© Hydrosols
© Flower essences

Alcohol-based menstruum

e Tinctures (maceration)

Folk method
Weight/volume method

e Tinctures (percolation)

e Fluid extracts (1:1 w/v extracts)
Wine-based menstruum

© Wine infusions
Vinegar-based menstruum

© Vinegar infusions
Glycerin-based menstruum

© Glycerites
Oil-based menstruum

© Oil infusions
Sugar or honey-based menstruum

© Syrups

© Oxymels

e Electuaries (honeys, confections)
PREPARATIONS NOT USING A MENSTRUUM

 Succus (expressed plant juice)

© Capsules
© Pills (tablets)

----- PAGE 159 -----
° Powders
© Lozenges (troches)

HERBAL PREPARATIONS FOR TOPICAL APPLICATION
i.e., Skin, vaginal mucosa, or rectal mucosa

Liniments

Lotions and creams
Hydrosols

Flower essences
Medicinal oils and salves
Ointments and balms
Suppositories, boluses
Fomentations (a.k.a. compresses or hot packs)
Poultices

Baths

Full body bath

Sitz bath

Foot and hand baths

Eye washes

® Douches

eoereecececeee

Parrs or Pranrs Emprovep As Hersat Mepicines

PLANT PART EXAMPLE
Barks (Cortices) Willow, Crampbark
Bulbs (Bulbi) Garlic, Onion
Cellular

Hairs Cotton

----- PAGE 160 -----
Piths (Loose spongy tissue)
Spores (Primitive reproductive
bodies)

Glands

Excrescences (An abnormal
outgrowth)

Corms (Cormi; a short, bulblike,

underground, upright stem
having a few scale-like leaves)

Flowers (Flores)

Fruits (Fructi)

Fruiting bodies of fungi Herbs
(Herba)

Juices (Succus; the fluid portion

of a plant)

Leaf and leaflets (Folia et
Foliola)

Lichen (Thallus; a composite
organism consisting of a fungus

Sassafras pith
Lycopodium

Lupulin (from the strobiles
of the Hop)

Nutgall (highest source of
tannic acid)

Trillium

Calendula, Chamomile,
Hawthorn, Elder, Clove
buds, Gumweed

Cayenne, Vitex, Elder berry,
Hawthorn berry, Saw
Palmetto, Fennel

Reishi, Maitake, Turkey Tail

St. John’s Wort, Yarrow,
Scullcap, Nettle,
Peppermint, Mugwort
Cleavers, Plantain,
Wheatgrass

Comfrey, Mullein, Ginkgo,

----- PAGE 161 -----
living symbiotically with an
algae)

Rhizomes (Rhizomata; an
underground root-like stem)

Roots (Radices)

Seeds (Semina)

Thallus (A plant body showing
no differentiation into distinct

members, as stem, leaves, roots,

etc.)

Tubers (Tubera; a short, fleshy,
usually underground stem or
shoot)

Woods (Ligna)

Uva Ursi, Plantain Usnea

Ginger, Wild Yam,
Goldenseal, Black Cohosh,
Valerian

Echinacea, Burdock, Yellow
Dock, Comfrey, Dandelion,
Marshmallow, Siberian
Ginseng

Burdock, Echinacea,
Psyllium, Chia, Flax
(Linseed), Nettle

Kelp, Dulse

Aconite, Devil’s Claw,
Western Peony

Quassia, Sandalwood

----- PAGE 162 -----


----- PAGE 163 -----
CHAPTER &

From the inception of herbal pharmacy, herbal traditions
throughout the world have favored the simple infusion and
decoction of medicinal plants as their predominant form of
extraction. Only within this last 100 years has there been an
emphasis on making concentrated alcohol and/or glycerin solvent
tinctures and other highly concentrated fractional extracts. This

----- PAGE 164 -----
compulsion has followed in the footsteps of those Western scientific
interests who sought to isolate and concentrate pharmaceutically
“active” constituents. Mainstream pharmacy secured its livelihood
by catering to these flourishing medical practitioners who chose to
rely on the drug qualities of botanicals. In current mainstream
medical pharmacy (mimicked by today’s predominant herbal mass
marketing), these concentrated alcohol extracts continue to be
considered more sophisticated; therefore, they are aggressively
marketed as more potent.

After experiencing the energy of a wide variety of differently
prepared extracts, it is my sense that our culture’s current obsession
with so-called “pharmaceutically active ingredients” has erroneously
(and I suspect naively) disregarded as superfluous the remaining so-
called “inactive” or “passive” components. The urgency and
consistency with which twentieth (and now twenty-first) century
medical pharmacists and herbal product marketers have acted to
isolate and concentrate the “active” components as a method to
establish increased “potency” in their products has heedlessly
eliminated vast amounts of each medicinal plant’s complementary
“ballast,” or so-called “inert” components.

In my opinion, these “inert” constituents—common residents in
infusions and decoctions—are carriers of a plant’s “tonic” mineral
stash which a human body requires for successful digestion,
assimilation, elimination, repair, toning, and overall health
maintenance. And equally important (in fact, profoundly essential
to physical health), many of these “passive” components, especially
the non-digestible ones that slide into our colon untouched by our
erosive stomach secretions, supply food for multi-millions of
beneficial microorganisms that dwell in our gut. These
microorganisms have been recently termed “pro-biotics,” for they
are the good-guy germs that live (and ideally are thriving) in our
digestive tract.

Microbiologists have observed many nutrients taken into the
human body as food are not used by the body, but instead appear
to be eaten by friendly bacteria that live in colonies lining the
human intestine. The formidable presence in our gastrointestinal

----- PAGE 165 -----
tract of these beneficial organisms is essential for our physical well-
being, because they participate in the chemistry of digestion and
prevent non-beneficial pathogenic organisms from capitalizing on
any opportunities to establish colonies in our digestive tube. The
pathogens are so overwhelmingly outnumbered that they can’t
secure any intestinal real estate to colonize as home. In other words,
the “inactive” constituents of a plant make up the fodder that feeds
the pro-biotic organisms which render healthy digestion possible
and constitute the substrata of the geography of our entire physical
immune system. With this information, it requires little imagination
to speculate that the “inactive,” “inert” ingredients in whole herbs
are also used as food for these bacteria in the GI tract, and this
allows these microorganisms to assist the body to assimilate the
nutritional components along with the “active” components of the
herb.

Stemming from this insight, I contend that the Chinese style of
low heat, slow decoction, and to a lesser extent our own culture’s
historic use of infusion-pots (see illustrations, this page), yield
medicinal-tonic extracts that are overall superior to other methods
of extraction. These simple techniques supply us with extracts that
deliver not only the pharmacologically active components of an
herb, but their nutritive components as well, along with the fodder
that is used by beneficial intestinal flora to help us digest and
assimilate all of this. And subsequently, these same flora, well-fed,
go about their life cycle, thrive, and therein lay the primal
groundwork for our physical immune system. In other words,
except for those folks who prefer to use herbs simplistically as
drugs rather than as herbal tonic foods and medicines, I fail to see
how we (in spite of the revered evolution of technologically
sophisticated alternative forms of extraction) have improved much
on (unfiltered) herbal tea (or capsules of powdered truly whole
herb) as a potent tonic beverage and plant medicine—I rest my
rant.

A properly prepared herbal infusion or decoction is not merely a
cup of tea. These extraction processes are quick, efficient methods
for preparing and administering an easily assimilated herbal

----- PAGE 166 -----
tonic/medicine/food, and they help supply water for keeping the
body properly hydrated, as well as provide appropriate materials
for abundant pro-biotic proliferation.

The term infusion is derived from the Latin infundere, meaning
to pour in. An infusion is a liquid preparation made by treating
fresh or dehydrated vegetable substances with either hot or cold
water to extract the medicinal and nutritional principles. Herbalists
also use other fluid menstruums for preparing infusions, such as
vinegar, dilute glycerin, wine, juice, etc.

Infusions can be made in three ways:

 Maceration (soaking a properly ground or chopped herb in
a menstruum until it is thoroughly penetrated and the
soluble portions softened and dissolved)

© Digestion (maceration subjected to moderate continual heat
below boiling temperature, the heat quickening the solvent
powers of the menstruum)

* Percolation

Because infusions are generally extemporaneous preparations, and
are frequently needed immediately, the process of maceration is the
most simple, practical, and usually preferred method. In this
chapter I will discuss primarily the maceration method of preparing
herbal infusions.

By definition, herbal infusions represent the solvent action of
boiled water (or in some instances, cold water) on herbs for a given
time period. This period of time varies according to the degree of
ex-tractability of the principles to be dissolved. During the infusion
process, the herb is not subjected to boiling, although it is common
to pour boiling water over the plant material. The infusion process
is particularly suitable for substances with a light structure and
comparatively soft tissue easily exhausted of their principles, such
as flowers, most leaves, soft stems, and some roots. This process of
extraction is also most suitable for those plant tissues containing
volatile or other principles which would be dissipated or injured by
boiling. such as Chamomile and Red Clover blossoms, Peppermint

----- PAGE 167 -----
leaves, or Valerian root. Because the constituents of many of the
plants that are normally infused are volatile, infusions should
always be conducted in closed vessels.

HERB PREPARATION

Herbs are best prepared for extraction with water as a menstruum
by cutting them into thin slices or grinding to a coarse powder,
especially harder parts you want to infuse (like volatile roots such
as Valerian which, unlike most roots, should not be boiled as a
decoction). In this form, they can be easily permeated by the liquid.
If you are wanting to separate all undissolved particles (pro-biotic
fodder) from the final infusion (which I do not recommend, but
some folks insist on relating only to clear liquids), the use of fine
powders should be avoided for they are difficult to remove. Fresh,
undried herbs should be cut into small pieces and/or bruised.
Flowers can be infused whole.

WATER

Clear soft water, rainwater, or distilled water are best for making
infusions. Hard or limestone water from springs or wells are often
unfit, for they are apt to foster precipitation. While the common
practice of using hot water has time-saving advantages, in some
cases, depending on the herbalist’s preference and intent, it can be
inefficient. This is because (for those insisting on clear liquid) many
inert components in an herb are dissolved by the hot water, and as
the infusion cools, these components separate out in a finely
divided condition. When one wants to, it is often difficult to remove
them even by filtration. This mainly affects the appearance and
preservation of the infusion. However, infusions are usually used
directly, and one doesn’t normally intend to preserve them for very
long. Of the inert components found in plants, starch is extracted by
hot water and albumin (plant protein) by cold water. while gum,

----- PAGE 168 -----
sugar, and other extractives are dissolved by both. When infusions
are made with boiling water, starch and other principles are often
taken up, and their presence over time disposes to acidity or
moldiness. Hot water also coagulates plant albumin, which can
materially impair the extraction process. In these instances, cold
water infusions would be preferable. In light of this phenomenon,
plant materials that are high in albumin, such as most roots and
barks, are ordinarily decocted rather than infused. Decoctions are
initiated using cold water, which is then slowly heated as a means
to circumvent problems stemming from the coagulation of albumin;
but we’ll discuss all this in Chapter Nine, “Decoction.”
Consider selecting cold water for the menstruum when:

© The herb contains a valuable volatile constituent (i.e.,
essential oil, frequently found in blossoms and leaves). As
beverage teas, however, we all use hot water for making
Peppermint, Chamomile, Lemon Balm, and the like.

© The desirable principles are readily soluble in water of
ordinary temperature (such as Slippery Elm bark,
Marshmallow root) or would be deteriorated by high
temperatures (such as Wild Cherry bark).

© The herb contains a constituent that is not desired and not
readily dissolved by cold water (such as the safrol in
Sassafras root bark or the tannins in Uva Ursi).

CONTAINERS

The most suitable vessels for infusions are made of glazed
earthenware, porcelain, or glass. Tinned iron, aluminum, or
metallic vessels are unsuited for infusions, and are particularly
objectionable when the herb contains tannin, gallic acid, or an
astringent constituent.

The vessel to be used should be warmed before the infusion
process, so it does not chill the hot liquid menstruum.

An infusion-pot with a design that retains the herb within the top

----- PAGE 169 -----
section of the solvent, similar to one of the accompanying
illustrations, is best suited for preparing an herbal infusion.

The advantage of these designs is that the material is efficiently
exhausted by circulatory displacement. Circulatory displacement
occurs as the molecules of the liquid menstruum in direct contact
with the herb become charged with the soluble ingredients of the
herb and acquire an increased specific gravity. As each charged
molecule sinks to the bottom of the pot, its place is taken by an
unattached molecule (the unsaturated “empty” portion of the
menstruum), which has risen to the top to further extract the
remaining soluble ingredients in the herb. The herb is therefore
constantly subjected to the solvent power of the least impregnated
portion of the menstruum, and this circulation goes on until all of
the soluble matter is extracted or the menstruum becomes fully
saturated.

You can demonstrate the process of circulatory displacement for
yourself if you take a clear glass jar (a pint to a quart size) and fill
it with hot water; then lay a tea bag (preferably a dark-colored tea,
so the process will be most visible) on the very top of the water
and keep it there by tightening down the lid of the jar onto the
string close to the bag. Now leave the jar untouched and observe
the extracted constituents as they descend to the bottom of the jar,
displacing the less dense unattached water molecules. Eventually
the entire menstruum will be equally impregnated with the
extracted herbal constituents. Provided there is sufficient water in
the jar, the herb in the bag will become depleted of its soluble
constituents which have gone into solution.

----- PAGE 170 -----
Alsop’s Infusion Jar

5

Infusion Pitcher

il

Squire’s Infusion Mug

----- PAGE 171 -----
[P

aig

la
SSS,

Homemade Infusion Mug

Whenever using a tea bag or a tea ball, suspend the herb-filled
apparatus in the upper part of the menstruum in order to take full
advantage of the principles of circulatory displacement (stirring is
never required). This is particularly important when using cold
water menstrua, as there are no heat currents to help promote the
infusion.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Infusions should not be made in large quantities unless it is for
immediate use. They are generally difficult to preserve because the
herbal principles extracted by the water begin to decompose fairly
quickly. Infusions soon spoil if special precautions are not taken to
preserve them. Ideally, they should be used within a 12-hour period
with about a 24-hour maximum limit, if stored in a very cool place.

It will help to keep in mind that a pint is
approximately equivalent to 500 ml, a quart is
approximately equivalent to a liter (1000 ml), a

----- PAGE 172 -----
fluid ounce is approximately equivalent to 30 ml,
and an ounce is approximately equivalent to 30
Gm.

DOSAGE

Dosage varies according to type of herb(s) and the size, age, and
condition of the person drinking the infusion. Normally, the
recommended adult dosage is one cupful three times a day. When
an individual appears to have a kidney condition that does not
readily allow adequate urine production, or when there is evidence
of extreme weakness, a reduced dosage is usually recommended.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

The U.S. has distinguished itself as the only major country on
planet Earth that has not officially adopted the metric system as its
conventional system of weights and measures. (By god, no one is
going to tell us what to do!) Outside of our scientific community,
we (and also the people of Burma) still embrace an archaic
measuring system that originally disgorged out of the egocentrism
of a long line of ancient French monarchs, and our esteemed
leaders apparently lack the presence of mind or more likely the
political courage to seriously suggest that we modernize ourselves.
Hear me out now; I’m not suggesting we throw away our current
system, that would be too much like throwing away one’s treasured
old toy (or newest electronic device). No way! I’m simply
suggesting that we make ourselves bi-scale (teach metric in schools)
and learn to measure reasonably well in both systems. Therefore, in
the spirit of this suggestion, I will try to make the measurements
referred to in this manual as user-friendly as possible for us
avoirdupois devotees, and us metric geeks. (It’s tough, though; I
grew up avoirdupois.) Please see Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration.” and Chapter Twenty-Five. the section “Weights and

----- PAGE 173 -----
Measures,” for further discussion of this voluminous controversy.

The method of preparation that follows is based on standard
measurements and procedures directed by official pharmacy
manuals for preparing herbal infusions. It is a clear illustration for
explaining how to make an infusion. This method produces 500 ml
(1 pint) of tea which if consumed in its entirety delivers the activity
of 25 Gm (1 ounce) of dried herb. However, one would normally
not be directed to drink 500 ml of this tea in one day but perhaps
90 ml (3 fluid ounces) of tea 3x a day which would deliver the
activity of 13 to 14 Gm (approximately 1/2 ounce) of dried herb
for the daily dose. Most herbalists today tend to make their
infusions and decoctions more dilute, recommending for example
3-5 Gm of dried herb in 250 ml (approximately 1 cup) of water 3x
a day. This delivers the activity of 9 to 15 Gm of dried herb (and
more liquid than the official method does) for the daily dose. Bear
in mind that the amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal tea
is not so important, the weight of herb used is. (It is this latter
method I will be referring to when giving recommended dosages in
the final section of this chapter.)

Hor Inrusion

Unless otherwise appropriate, hot infusions are made of 1 part
coarsely ground herb (2 parts if using fresh undried herb) to 20
parts of boiling water (or other hot menstruum), or, for
example, 25 Gm (1 oz.) of herb [50 Gm (2 oz.) of chopped
fresh herb] to 500 ml (1 pint) of boiling water.

1. Put the herb into a suitable vessel (with a lid). (It is not
essential but preferable to pre-warm the vessel or enclose the
herb in a suitable container to employ the circulatory
displacement technique discussed above.)

----- PAGE 174 -----
2. Pour boiling water upon the herb.

3. Stir well (do not stir if using the circulatory displacement
technique).

4. Cover the vessel tightly, and let it stand for 20 to 30 minutes
in a warm place.

5. Strain and, if possible, press out the marc (pulp). It is
obvious that bulky herbs and flowers (i.e., Chamomile, Red
Clover blossoms, Mullein leaves) will retain a considerable
proportion of the extract, and this will be lost if the marc is
not pressed.

6. Add enough hot water (pour it through the pressed marc) to
make the infusion measure 500 ml (1 pint).

Cox Infusion

Cold infusions are made using 1 part of herb to 20 parts of
water, or 25 Gm (1 ounce) of coarsely ground herb to 500 ml
(1 pint) of cold water. (Depending on the quality of the herb, a
small amount of Slippery Elm bark or Marshmallow root can
provide an abundance of mucilaginous slime—experiment
with this.)

1. Put the herb into the water and let it remain overnight at
room temperature. With cold infusion it is recommended that
the herb be contained in a small cotton pouch, suspended in
the water overnight, and squeezed out when the infusion
process is completed.

2. Strain, and press the marc.

----- PAGE 175 -----
3. If necessary, add enough cold water to make the infusion
measure 500 ml (1 pint).

Bitter herbs do not require quite as large a
quantity of crude herb as other herbs do, and only
a pinch of a very intense herb like Cayenne is
needed for an effective infusion (use more if you
like the heat wave).

The properties of Goldenseal root are not soluble
enough in water to be efficiently prepared as a
tea.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep As AN Inrusion

Including a recommended dosage—ex. 3-5 Gm (grams) dry
herb. This amount would be infused in approximately 1 cup
water.

As recommended in Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy
Equipment,” it’s best to obtain a scale that measures gram
weight. Using this scale, you can easily prepare the following
recommended dosages; it is impractical and maddening to
attempt to measure these as fractions of ounces or portions of a
spoonful.

HOT INFUSION
Cayenne A pinch to a tolerable amount

Chamomile 3-5 Gm: 3x a day

----- PAGE 176 -----
Cleavers 3-5 Gm:

2-4 Gm:
Comfrey leaf

3x a day or as needed

2x a day (See discussion of

Comfrey in Chapter Two.)

Dandelion leaf 3-5 Gm:
Elder flower &

2-5 Gm:
berry
Fennel, crushed

2-4 Gm:
seed
Ginger, dry 2-3 Gm:
Ginkgo 2-4 Gm:

Goldenseal leaf, dry 1-3 Gm:

Hawthorn leaf,

2-5 Gm:
flower, & berry
Mugwort 2-3 Gm:
Mullein leaf 3-5 Gm:
Nettle herb 3-5 Gm:
Oat spikelets and

3-5 Gm:
straw
Peppermint 3-5 Gm:
Plantain 2-5 Gm:
St. John’s Wort 3-5 Gm:
Saw Palmetto

2-5 Gm:

berries

3x a day

3x a day

3x a day

fresh a few slices
3x a day
3x a day

3x a day

3x a day
to 4x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

----- PAGE 177 -----
mee p tke

dried

Valerian

Yarrow

COLD INFUSION
Burdock root
Chamomile

Cleavers
Comfrey root

Crampbark
Marshmallow root
Mugwort

Nettle root or
whole herb

Peppermint
Uva Ursi

Slippery Elm*

2-5 Gm:

2-5 Gm:

2-5 Gm

3-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:

2-4 Gm:

3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day or as needed

3x a day (See discussion of

Comfrey in Chapter Two.)

3-5 Gm:
3-5 Gm:
2-3 Gm:

2-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:
2-4 Gm:
2-5 Gm:

up to 4x a day
3x a day
3x a day

3x a day

3x a day
3x a day
3x a day

*Slippery Elm has to be included in this section for it is such

an important and commonly prepared cold infusion.

----- PAGE 178 -----


----- PAGE 179 -----
ECOCTION

Decoctions are liquid preparations made by boiling either fresh or
dehydrated herbal substances with water or other fluids. Along with
infusions, decoctions are a standard method for preparing medicinal
teas. Decoction is also the chief method used to extract herbal
constituents for use as fomentations, syrups, and enemas.

Decoction. from the Latin decoquere. meaning to boil down or

----- PAGE 180 -----
away, is normally reserved for herbs that will not yield their active
virtues at a lower temperature and for situations in which no loss of
volatile principles need be feared (for example, with Fenugreek
seed, Astragalus, Sarsaparilla, or Licorice). The object of preparing
decoctions is to secure, in aqueous solution, the soluble active
principles of herbs that are hard and woody and have a close, dense
texture. Their tissues are softened more readily by boiling than by
merely steeping in hot water, and are not injured by heat. This
would be especially hard, ligneous, wood-like herbs such as most
roots, barks, and some seeds.

Herbs whose activity depends on resinous constituents (like
Gumweed and Yerba Santa), or herbs that contain substances liable
to be changed into insoluble and inert materials under boiling heat
(like Marshmallow and Slippery Elm), should never be subjected to
decoction. Likewise, herbs containing volatile principles should
never be subjected to decoction (i.e., Valerian root, Peppermint,
Fennel).

Incompound decoctions where several herbs are employed
together, it is probably best to add different types of herbs at
different points in the process. The hard, ligneous herbal
ingredients that need to be boiled for extended periods should be
added first, while the herbs which more readily yield all their
virtues should be added toward the end of the process. The
aromatic herbs, or those containing volatile oils, should be added
after the decoction has been removed from the heat, so that the
volatile oils will not evaporate. A decoction that includes aromatic
herbs should be kept closely covered until it has cooled down.

HERB PREPARATION

The herbs to be decocted should be cut or ground, the degree of
fineness depending upon the nature of the tissue. Woody, ligneous
herbs may be reduced to a moderately fine powder and/or soaked
in cold water for 12 hours before bringing the water to a boil.
Leaves, however. and other parts of the herb that consist mainly of

----- PAGE 181 -----
loose parenchyma (pulpy or pithy portions) are better used in the
form of a moderately coarse or very coarse powder. When fresh
undried herbs are used in a decoction, the roots should be cut into
very thin slices, barks and woods should be shaved down to small
pieces, seeds lightly crushed, and leaves and whole herbs only
moderately cut.

WATER

Clear, naturally soft water, rainwater, or distilled water should be
used in making decoctions, since hard or limestone water from
springs or wells is often apt to cause precipitation.

CONTAINER

Glazed earthenware, porcelain, or glass vessels are the best choices
for preparing decoctions, as they will bear the heat of boiling water
if heated gradually. Iron vessels are not well suited because the
tannin of astringent herbs will react with the iron, causing
discoloration.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Decoctions are intended for immediate use—ideally within a 24-
hour period, with about a 72-hour maximum limit if stored in a
very cool place. As with infusions, the difficulty in preserving
decoctions arises from the decomposition of the starches and the
mucilaginous and albuminous principles that have been extracted
by the water and retained in the preparation. Except when
demanded for immediate use, decoctions should not be made in
large quantities.

DOSAGE

----- PAGE 182 -----
As always, the proper dosage depends on the age, body weight, and
temperament of the individual. In general, give a wineglass to a
cupful of liquid three times a day.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

[Restated (minus the accompanying preliminary rant) from Chapter
Eight, “Infusions”]

The method of preparation that follows is based on standard
measurements and procedures directed by official pharmacy
manuals for preparing herbal infusions. It is a clear illustration for
explaining how to make a decoction. This method produces 500 ml
(1 pint) of tea which, if consumed in its entirety, delivers the
activity of 25 Gm (1 ounce) of dried herb. However, one would
normally not be directed to drink 500 ml of this tea in one day, but
perhaps 90 ml (3 fluid ounces) of tea 3x a day which would deliver
the activity of 13 to 14 Gm (approximately 1/2 ounce) of dried
herb for the daily dose. Most herbalists today tend to make their
infusions and decoctions more dilute, recommending, for example,
3-5 Gm of dried herb in 250 ml (approximately 1 cup) of water 3x
a day. This delivers the activity of 9 to 15 Gm of dried herb (and
more liquid than the official method does) for the daily dose. Bear
in mind that the amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal tea
is not so important, the weight of herb used is. (It is this latter
method I will be referring to when giving recommended dosages in
the final section of this chapter.)

The amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal
tea is not so important, the weight of herb used
is.

Decocrion

----- PAGE 183 -----
If the strength of the decoction is not otherwise directed:

1. Place 25 Gm of herb (approximately 1 ounce) into a
suitable vessel with a cover. (Use half to three quarters this
amount of herb if you want a weaker decoction.)

2. Pour upon it 500 ml (approximately 1 pint) of cold water. It
is important to begin the process with cold water in order to
ensure the complete extraction of all soluble principles from
the herb by the gradually heated water. The albuminous matter
is subsequently extracted out of the cells and slowly coagulated
outside the herb as the heat is increased to near the boiling
point. If the herb is immersed in boiling water, the albumen
contained in cells will possibly coagulate at once and can
interfere significantly with the extraction of the other
constituents.

3. If time allows, let the herb macerate—soak—a few hours
prior to heating.

4. Cover the container well and bring the ingredients slowly to
a boil.

5. Decrease the heat and simmer it for approximately 10 to 15
minutes. The harder the material, the longer the simmering
time of extraction needed. If not specified, this extraction time
must be determined by observation, common sense, and
experience.

6. After decoction, press the herb hard to make sure all the
solution is removed from the marc (the remaining undissolved
pulp).

7. Allow the pressed decoction to cool to a temperature below
104° E (40° C.), and strain the liquid. If you wish, after it cools,

----- PAGE 184 -----
this decoction can be further strained using a filter paper. By
then, principles which are soluble only in hot water are mostly
precipitated and, if desired, generally can be removed without
weakening the medicinal value of the preparation. However,
even with this precaution, the strained liquid may become
unsightly due to further deposition of matter that is soluble
only in hot water or by the development of apotheme (the
dark deposit which sometimes appears in vegetable infusions
and decoctions once exposed to air). None of this matter is
harmful to drink (some would even contend that it is highly
beneficial—see previous chapter). It just looks disagreeable to
some folks, however, and it is kind to cater to the consumer’s
aesthetic preference.

8. Pour enough water through the marc to return the volume of
water to 500 ml.

A. HISTORIC METHOD OF DECOCTION, ADAPTED FROM Kinc’s

American Dispensatory, 1898.
Decoctum Taraxaci—Decocrion or DanpeLion

Slice and bruise 1 oz. of dried dandelion root, and
boil it in 1 pint of distilled water for 10 minutes.
Strain, and pour upon the residue in the strainer
enough distilled water to make the finished
product measure 1 pint. A little orange peel
added at the end of the boiling period is said to
increase its usefulness. This preparation does not
keep well and must be freshly prepared.

----- PAGE 185 -----
Heres on THE 35 “Heras and A Funcus” List

Twat Are Weu Preparep py Decocrion

Including a recommended dosage—ex. 3-5 Gm (grams) dry
herb. This amount would be decocted in approximately 1 cup
(250 ml) water.

As recommended in Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy
Equipment,” it’s best to obtain a scale that measures gram
weight. Using this scale, you can easily prepare the following
recommended dosages.

Blackberry root
2-5 Gm: 2-4x a day

bark

Black Cohosh root 1-3 Gm: 3x a day

Burdock seeds 2-5 Gm: 3x a day

Comfrey root 2-3 Gm: 3x a day
(See discussion of Comfrey in Chapter
Two.)

Crampbark 2-5 Gm: up to 4x a day
2-6 Gm: 3x a day

Dandelion root (King’s decocts for 10 min.; I decoct it 30
min.)

Echinacea root 2-5 Gm: 3x a day

Ginger fresh slices,

dry

Mullein root 3-5 Gm: up to 4x a day
3-6 Gm: 3x a day

-3 Gm in warm water

Daishi

----- PAGE 186 -----
aioe .
(Decoct 45 minutes.)

Siberian Ginseng 2-4 Gm: 3x a day
Willow bark 2-10 Gm: 3x a day
Yellow Dock root 1-3 Gm: 3x a day

----- PAGE 187 -----


----- PAGE 188 -----
CHAPTER 10

|. DISTILLATION 8
OF HYDROSOLS

Oil and water aren’t miscible, this fact being the inspiration for one
of our culture’s most popular clichés. And while the accuracy of this
statement is experienced time after time by most of us in our daily
lives, there is a particular situation in which an aromatic volatile oil
and water reach out to one another and create a dramatic bond. I
know! I know volatile oils aren’t really oils—give me some slack:

----- PAGE 189 -----
I’m taking a little license here. The story of this chemical cohesion
is a phyto-aqueous enactment of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet,
wherein the youthful opposites of two ego-immiscible families fall
deeply in love and give themselves wholeheartedly to one another
within the heat of a steaming social environment. But unlike
Shakespeare’s grand finale, wherein Romeo and Juliet choose to
leave their uncompromising world and continue their romance in
the nonphysical realms, oil and water sustain their affair in an
ethereal oneness on this physical plane as a delightfully aesthetic
anomaly, and this aromatic coupling is what aromatherapists refer
to as a hydrosol or a hydrolate.

A true hydrosol is a particularly pleasant offspring of the steam
distillation of aromatic plants. The initial introduction and coupling
of water and oil occurs in a heated vessel wherein water as steam
ascends, carrying with it volatile oil molecules dissolved from the
plant material. The two components of this vaporous blend sustain
an ardent embrace until they enter a cooling process, whereupon
the oil soluble components separate out once again from the water.
However an abiding remembrance of the torrid union forever
lingers as the departing aromatic molecules pass on an intimate
part of their qualities to the water, and this amiable water
maintains a subtly delicious memory of the passionate intimacy of
the distillation process being indelibly transformed into an aromatic
hydrosol. Therein, simple steam distillation of certain organic
material results in the production of two complementary liquid
assets: an aromatic volatile oil and a true aromatic hydrosol.

Most volatile oils are derived from plants in which they exist
ready formed. Upon completion of the distillation process the
distillate is usually milky, and on standing separates, with most of
the oil rising to the top, while the water (hydrosol) continues
charged to saturation with the oil. Except for Rose water and
Orange blossom water, throughout the history of volatile oil
production, most hydrosols were disposed of as waste. Only in very
recent times have these fascinating waters been valued as carriers of
a rarefied form of the volatile oils, coexisting in combination with
many mild and soothing water-soluble components of the plant that

----- PAGE 190 -----
are not present in volatile oils. And whereas most volatile oils
contain bitter substances and some harsh components which if not
adequately diluted before application can cause irritation to the
inner and outer skin of the body, the complementary hydrosol
simply does not. Instead, these lotions present soothing, anti-
inflammatory acids and other compounds that gratify the skin, and
these agents are exclusive to the singular nature of aromatic
hydrosols.

Hydrosols are applied directly to the skin or taken internally, as
their flavor is far milder than that of volatile oils; and hydrosols are
much safer to drink, provided they have not been derived from a
toxic plant. Hydrosols make excellent base waters for preparing
syrups, lotions, fomentations, culinary exotica, etc. When applied to
the skin, hydrosols are mildly astringent and highly effective tonics
to be used daily. Not only are they not drying to the skin, but they
pleasantly counteract the drying effects of natural atmospheric
conditions, as well as the adverse conditions contrived by rampant
household, office, and in-flight air-conditioning technology.
Hydrosols are used as skin toners or added to other ingredients to
form compound lotions and hydrating masks. Hydrosols comfort
and nourish ultra-sensitive and/or inflamed skin where other agents
might be too strong. Many hydrosols are good for use on normal
and oily complexions, and on acne skin, and most are suitable for
moisturizing dry skin.

It is important to understand the contrast between true aromatic
hydrosols and commercial products labeled as “flower waters,”
“floral waters,” etc. Whereas hydrosols are a direct product of the
distillation process (a process which gives birth to complementary
sisters, a gentle aromatic water and a more acute volatile oil),
flower waters are generally fragrant liquids made by adding
aromatic volatile oil(s) to distilled water. These waters will not
contain the same hydrophilic (water fond) compounds as hydrosols,
and though often erotically aromatic (if that kind of behavior is
allowed on retail shelves), they are less effective as anti-
inflammatory, moisturizing agents.

In order to accumulate any appreciable quantity of volatile oil.

----- PAGE 191 -----
one must gather and manipulate an enormous amount of plant
material. This is one reason most volatile oils (essential oils) are so
costly. Volatile oils are a particularly precious component of the
plant: the plant manufactures only a diminutive amount of this
substance, granting only a small yield to the anticipative distiller.
However, with a relatively small amount of plant material, one can
readily produce a sufficient quantity of aromatic hydrosol for home
use. Once you contrive and assemble a still and get it functioning,
you will be able to feed it adequately from humble garden harvests
and make an abundance of a variety of hydrosols for yourself and
others. I used to grow a few plants of Catnip (Nepeta cataria) in my
yard, and by distilling their leaves, make enough Catnip hydrosol to
put just about every cat in the neighborhood into deep kitty stupor;
they loved it, couldn’t get enough. Alice’s Cheshire Cat is no longer
the only feline that can grin and fade away. And likewise, a Lemon
Verbena (Aloysia triphylla) hydrosol originating from the same
garden was (is) a human olfactory dream come true.

Another joy inherent in distilling hydrosols is that
it requires only a small amount of aromatic plant
material to produce a sufficient amount of this
holy water to annoint one’s home and body
throughout the year.

STORAGE AND PRESERVATION
Refrigerate your hydrosols. Store them in sterilized, tightly capped
bottles.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
As pointed out previously, hydrosols are a product of steam

distillation. Distillation is a process involving the conversion of a
liquid into a vapor subsequently condensed back to liquid form (the

----- PAGE 192 -----
distillate). This is exemplified at its simplest when steam from a
kettle becomes deposited as drops of distilled water on a surface.
Distillation is used to separate liquids (for our purposes, water and
volatile oils) from non-soluble solids (plant material). It’s
apparently an age-old process utilized by the early experimentalist
Aristotle (this man must have never slept), who mentioned that
pure water is made by evaporation of sea water.

>to.

‘a ae

SS

Homemade Still

The apparatus needed to perform this operation is a still or retort
in which a liquid is heated, a condenser to cool the vapor, and a
receiver to collect the distillate. This simple apparatus is sufficient
to separate volatile liquids from non-volatile materials, which is
what we will be doing here. The pieces of equipment used for
distillation in a lab are commonly made of glass and connected
with corks, rubber bungs, or ground glass joints. This equipment
can be purchased from a laboratory supply house (for megabucks).
However, one can contrive a variety of ingenious homemade
contraptions. I am going to share an example of this down-home

----- PAGE 193 -----
technology with you forthwith. It may not qualify as “ingenious,”
but it is assuredly illustrative and unquestionably loveable.

Equipment

This is a severely simple still that you can put together using
kitchen paraphernalia. Subsequently, if you get hooked on
distillation, you will undoubtedly want to contrive, acquire, and
assemble a more sophisticated apparatus. The rustic design
illustrated in this chapter works reasonably well, belonging to the
same league as the funky skateboards I used to build as a kid by
separating the two halves of the old metal-wheeled roller skates
and nailing them to the front and back of the bottom of a 2 x 6
piece of wood; they got me down the road ... eventually. And
damn it, this still will get you some aromatic hydrosol!

The Still

The still is a common enameled 20.4 L (21.5 quart) canning pot
that is designed to can fruit and vegetables. It’s normally dark blue
or black with white flecks all over it. It can be purchased in most
department stores.

The Condenser

The condenser is the lid of the canning pot placed upside down on
the pot. At the appropriate time, a mass of ice is placed on top of
this.

The Receiver

The receiver is a bowl that is placed inside the pot. It, in turn, is
sitting on a metal veggie steamer basket which has had its center
post removed and is standing in the center of the pot. This elevates
the receiver bowl. so that it is not jostled around by the rumbling

----- PAGE 194 -----
action of the boiling water and herbs during distillation.

To Maxe an Aromatic Hyprosot

1. Clean all the equipment.
2. Place approximately 3 liters (3 quarts) of water in the pot.

3. With the water, mix approximately 200 Gm (10 oz. or so) of
the selected plant or the parts of the plant containing volatile
oil. When appropriate, it is certainly okay to use more plant
material than suggested here; follow your judgment; weigh it
out and make notes.

4. Let this macerate for a couple hours.

5. Remove the center post from the metal veggie steamer
basket and stand the steamer, spread fully opened, in the
center of the pot.

6. Place the receiver bowl on the center of the steamer.
7. Put the lid right side up on the pot.
8. Put all this on the heat and bring it to a boil; keep watching!

9. As soon as the water begins to simmer, turn the lid upside
down on the pot.

10. Lay a thick plastic bag full of ice on the lid. (This way,
when the ice melts, the ensuing bag of water can be easily
removed and dealt with.) This step is semi-optional; the steam
will condense on the condenser lid without using the ice, but
the hydrosol seems to have a little more “something” when

----- PAGE 195 -----
you cool the lid with ice.

11. Adjust the heat to a moderate level. Keep the heat just high
enough to maintain the vaporization of the liquids.

12. Inside the pot, the water/aromatic oil vapor will rise to the
cooler lid, condense back to liquid, flow down to the low
point of the lid, and drip into the receiver which will collect
the hydrosol and volatile oil. Beware of steam whenever lifting
the lid of the pot. Escaping steam enjoys hot-licking
unsuspecting finger skin.

13. Place a wetted filter paper in a funnel.
14. Place the funnel into a jar or bottle that has a lid.

15. When the hydrosol is cool, pour it through the filter paper.
The hydrosol will pass through; if any appreciable volatile oil
is present, it will collect in the bottom of the filter paper cone.
You can collect this volatile oil with a dropper bottle pipette.

16. Cap the jar and refrigerate.

For best results, harvest the plant to be used at
the time of year and the time of the day when it
is highest in volatile oils.

Using this system, as the steam makes it to the
lid, much of it escapes out of the pot. Most of the
volatile oil probably escapes with this portion of
the vapor. When you use a more sophisticated
still that is sealed, you avoid this loss of vapor
and the volatile oil ends up floating on top of the
hydrosol which has been deposited in the receiver

----- PAGE 196 -----
vessel. In other words, don’t expect to collect
much volatile oil using this method. Aromatic
hydrosol, however, you will get, and I suspect you
will be delighted with it. You will probably want
to make more, and soon you will probably want
to upgrade your still ... journeying ever nearer
and nearer to the megabuck equipment
zone ... and no telling where this might lead you.
Follow your fascination and enjoyment, all will
be well and available to you.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep As Hyprosois

Chamomile
Elder blossoms
Fennel
Peppermint
Yarrow

Other common garden plants that present excellent hydrosols
are:

Catnip (for the meowmaster)
Lavender
Lemon balm

Lemon verbena

----- PAGE 197 -----
Orange blossoms
Rosemary
Rose petals

And, of course, experiment with other aromatic plants.

----- PAGE 198 -----


----- PAGE 199 -----
In Chapter Three, in the section on harvesting, I suggested that the
Earth’s plants are a perpetual source of unconditional love. That
probably came over a little schmaltzy to some readers, and, at risk
of losing any fragments of cool-’n-macho status that might remain in
my account, I must avow that conclusion once again in this chapter,
with a further assertion that this love is most luminously expressed
by a plant’s flowers—sensual. uplifting communication with

----- PAGE 200 -----
members of the animal kingdom is a flower’s essence. And as
herbal medicine-makers, we can bring this pure positive energy
into solution—a most subtle aqueous solution.

It has been my recurrent experience and observation that floral
vibrations that have been infused in water that is sitting on the
Earth in a clear glass bowl, floating blossoms in the warm sunlight
of a clear blue sky, can profoundly affect the subtle disposition of
an ailing (or even more promising, a pre-ailing) being. Like a music
master’s hand tuning the eager strings of a perfect Stradivarius, the
pristine clarity of a flower’s uplifting vibrations adjusts the tone of
one’s thoughts and respondent feelings, bringing them back in
harmony with the richness of one’s true nature. When our thoughts
and feelings are in line with our spirit’s unique path, we resume
our journey as a vital creator of a prosperous, healthful, joyous life
—the intrinsic dynamics of a human being’s essence.

The life work of Dr. Edward Bach (1886-1936) pioneered
understanding of the subtle energy and actions of flower essence
medicine. Dr. Bach created a bouquet of subtle, water-infused floral
essences, each of which embraced and treated a being’s subtle
nonphysical nature, ultimately relieving manifested physical
symptoms. More importantly, the essences helped individuals
establish ease in their life, thereby preventing unpleasant physical
manifestations entirely. Edward Bach’s vision was to develop a
system of herbal medicine that anyone, when feeling out of sorts,
could use to diagnose and prepare his or her own medicines, and
treat himself or herself, thereby allaying illness before its physical
symptoms are made manifest. In a short period of seven years, Dr.
Bach succeeded brilliantly, and developed a system of herbal
therapeutics the core of which is pure simplicity. I’m convinced that
the principles underlying this and other forms of subtle energetic
medicine will guide the practical course of mainstream medicine
and the art of self-medicating in the very near future.

One can illustrate Dr. Bach’s insight and technique for treating an
individual whose illness has progressed to the manifestation of
physical symptoms by reprinting a short quotation taken from his
book, The Twelve Healers and Other Remedies: “Take no notice of
the disease. Think onlv of the outlook on life of the one in distress.

----- PAGE 201 -----
The same disease may have different effects [varying states of mind
or moods] on different people; it is these effects that need
treatment, because they guide to the real cause ... as one becomes
well by gaining increased happiness and interest in life, the disease
goes, having been cast off by the increase in health. Health and
disease are caused by how we think, how we feel within ourselves.
Health and disease are the consolidation of mental attitude.”

This chapter explains how to prepare a flower essence infusion
for one’s personal use. At the end of the chapter, I will list the 38
essences, the flowers of herbs, trees, and bushes, and the one non-
flower essence (Rock Water) that Dr. Bach included in his original
materia medica. I have arranged them in the diagnostic fashion I
use them. Therefore, at the conclusion of this list, you will find a
bibliography of books that can be used to study others’ insights and
their systems for using flower essences to alleviate and prevent
human as well as plant and animal illness.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

There are three stages in the preparation of flower essence infusions
before a dose is administered to an individual: the first preparation
is what I will refer to as the Mother Essence; the second is the Stock
Water; and the third is the Medicine Water.

There are two basic methods for preparing the Mother Essence:
the sun method, used for flowers that bloom during the late spring,
summer, and early autumn when the sun is often overhead, full and
hot, and the boiling method, used for the flowers and twigs of
plants that bloom at times other than when the sun is at the most
intense phases of its solar cycle.

Wildflowers growing in their natural habitat rather than
cultivated flowers are preferable (with the exception of Cerato,
Olive, and Vine found in Dr. Bach’s materia medica).

Each individual essence should be made with blossoms gathered
from as many different plants of the same kind as possible.

----- PAGE 202 -----
ABOUT THE EQUIPMENT

When preparing flower essences by either the sun method or the
boiling method, all equipment to be used must be first sterilized by
placing it in a container of cold water, slowly heating it, and gently
boiling it for 20 minutes, then carefully drying it and wrapping it in
a clean cloth. Dr. Bach felt it was important to tend to these details.

Preparine THE Morner Essence py THe Sun Merxop

Equipment

+ One thin-gauge, plain glass bowl, approximately 8 fl. oz. (Do
not use an etched, cut glass, or otherwise ornate bowl or a
Pyrex type oven glass bowl.)

+ A quart jar with a lid to carry water to the flower site
+ A 30 ml (1 0z.), amber dropper bottle with a glass pipette
Method

1. When the dropper bottle and pipette have cooled from the
sterilizing process, fill half the bottle with brandy (or half fill
many bottles with brandy; you will be creating a relatively
large amount of Mother Essence), cap it tightly, and label it
with the name of the flower to be prepared. Note on the label
that this is the Mother Essence. Dr. Bach preferred to use
brandy as a preservative, considering it a purer and more
natural agent than rectified spirit.

2. Decide beforehand which plant community you are going to
harvest, and choose a perfectly sunny morning when there are
no clouds in the sky that might obscure the sun’s light, therein
immersing the bowl and its contents in the most animated

----- PAGE 203 -----
energy of Earth’s crystal clear air element.

3. Take your bowl, jar, and dropper bottle and arrive at the
site a little before 9 a.m. (Pick the flowers at about 9 a.m.,so they
are floating in place as the sun is gaining intensity during the
hours between 9 and noon. By 9 a.m. the flowers will be freshly
opened in full bloom, and most airborne, pollen-spreading
creatures will have not yet arrived.)

4. Sit with the flowers for a few minutes and focus on your
intent; honor and extend gratitude to the plant community.
You'll probably be feeling pretty good right now; you couldn’t
be in a better place than you are at this moment.

5. Place the bowl on the ground near the flowering plants,
thereby connecting the subtle essence to the stabilizing energy
of the Earth element. Choose a location for the bowl that is
well away from trees, bushes, tall grasses, fences—anything
that might cast a shadow over the bowl of basking flowers as
the sunlight brushes across the Earth’s surface.

6. Fill the bowl to the brim with the water you transported in
the jar, or water from a clear stream, if one is nearby. Empty
any unused water from the jar. Do not drink from this jar; it
needs to remain sterile, as it will be used again later.

6. Pick some leaves, preferably from the plant you are
preparing, or from some broadleaf plant, and place them on
the palm of your hand. A Mullein leaf or one of similar
dimensions is ideal.

8. Select the most perfect blossoms and carefully pick the
flower heads just below the calyx (the external, usually green
part of the flower that attaches to the stem) from as many
plants or bushes of the same kind as possible. Let the flowers
fall onto the leaf in your hand.

----- PAGE 204 -----
9. Quickly, carry the flowers to the bowl and float them on the
surface of the water, thereon uniting everything with the
fertile, receptive energy of the water element. Continue this
process until the surface of the water is thickly covered.
Overlap the flowers, but make sure each flower touches the
water. (Throughout this process avoid casting your shadow
over the bowl and avoid touching the water with your fingers.
Eliminate the human vibrations as much as possible from the
flower vibrations in the subtle infusion.)

10. Leave the bowl in full sunshine for 3 to 4 hours to absorb
the resplendent energy of the fire element.

11. After about 4 hours, there will be slight signs of the petals
fading, giving evidence that their subtle properties (vibrations)
have been transmitted to the water. With a stalk from the plant
you are preparing, or with a rigid portion of grass, lift the
flower heads from the water. Do not touch the water with your
fingers. The water will be crystal clear and full with minute,
vibrant bubbles. Many herbalists confess to feelings of elation
at this point.

12. Pour this Mother Essence into the jar that has been
previously emptied, and from this fill the remaining half of the
labeled dropper bottle (or as many bottles as you wish to
prepare with this mother load). Cap it tightly.

Simply, one first prepares a Mother Essence from
wildflowers by using either the sun method or the
boiling method; from this essence one prepares
the Stock Water; from this one prepares a
Medicine Water; from which one takes daily
doses.

----- PAGE 205 -----
Preparing tHe Moruer Essence py tHe Boning Meron
Equipment
+ One 4-quart enamel pot and lid
+ 2 quart jars
+ A 1-ounce, amber dropper bottle with a glass pipette
+ A funnel
+ 2 or 3 pieces of filter paper

Method

1. Sterilize the jars, funnel, and dropper bottle in the enamel
pot. When this equipment has cooled from the sterilizing
process, half fill the dropper bottle with brandy, cap it tightly,
and label it with the name of the flower to be prepared. Note
that this is the Mother Essence.

2. A sunny morning is chosen whenever possible. For the same
reasons you chose 9 a.m. for the sun method, gather the
flowers and twigs at that time.

3. Decide beforehand which plant community you are going to
harvest and take the enamel pot, covered with its lid to keep
out any dust and debris, to the location. Sit with the flowers
and focus on your intent; communicate with the plant
community.

4. Fill the pot about 3/4 full with flowering sprays, including
the leaves, buds, and twigs. Also gather two extra twigs of the
same species of plant. These will be used later.

5. Place the lid on the pot. grab the extra two twigs and the

----- PAGE 206 -----
pot filled with flowering sprays, and quickly return home.

6. Upon returning home, cover the plant parts with
approximately a quart of cold water. Use rainwater, stream
water, pure well water, bottled spring water, or, if nothing else
is available, tap water that has been allowed to sit in an open
container overnight. (Dr. Bach didn’t like the energy of distilled
water; he referred to it as “dead water.” If you want to use
distilled water, let it first sit in a clear glass bottle in the
sunlight for a day. This should resurrect it.)

7. Place the pot uncovered over heat, and bring the water to a
gentle boil. If necessary, press the flowers beneath the water
with one of the twigs you brought home with you to prevent
touching the water with your fingers.

8. Boil the plants over low heat for 1/2 hour.

9. At the end of a half hour, remove the pot from the heat and
set it outdoors to cool.

10. When it is cold, remove all the twigs, leaves, and flowers,
using one or both of the extra twigs as tools to help you. Do
not touch the water with your fingers.

11. Cover the pot with its lid and allow the water to stand long
enough for any sediment to settle to the bottom of the pot.

12. Line the funnel with a filter paper and place this in one of
the two empty jars.

13. Fill the other jar carefully with the flower water from the
pot. Pour slowly not to disturb the sediment.

14. Pour the liquid from this jar into the filtered funnel that is
sitting in the first jar. This will take a while. Often, there is
much sediment and you may need to filter the liquid twice.

----- PAGE 207 -----
15. From this filtered water, fill the remaining half of the
labeled dropper bottle containing the brandy.

16. Cap tightly.

Preparinc THE Srock WaTER

This is the second stage in the preparation of a flower essence
infusion. Later, from this Stock Water, a person’s Medicine
Water is prepared.

To prepare a Stock Water from a Mother Essence which has
been prepared by either the sun method or the boiling
method:

1. Sterilize and dry a 1-0z. amber dropper bottle.

2. Label it with the name of the flower essence. Note that this
is the Stock Water.

3. Fill the bottle with brandy.
4. Add merely 2 drops from the Mother Essence bottle.

5. Cap it tightly and succuss it (shake it vigorously) for a few
moments.

Preparine THE Mepicine Water

This is the third stage in the preparation of the flower essence,
and it is from this one the individual takes the doses suitable
for a human, an animal, or a plant.

----- PAGE 208 -----
1. Determine which essence or combination of essences an
individual requires. (Using 2 or 3 in combination is ideal, and
from my experience, I recommend using no more than 5 at a
time.)

2. Into a sterilized dropper bottle, put 2 drops from the Stock
Water of a selected essence, or 2 drops from each of the
essences selected for use in combination (making a compound
essence).

3. Add a teaspoonful of brandy as a preservative to inhibit the
water from going cloudy.

4. Fill the bottle with water.
5. Cap it tightly and succuss it.

6. Label with the flower(s) name and note it as a Medicine
Water. Include the recommended dosage.

DOSAGE

Focus on the positive aspects for taking the flower essence(s);
clarify and focus on your intent; visualize the experiences of joy and
health you are reviving.

A dose is 4 drops. Taking more than 4 drops per dose does not
increase the benefit.

Hold the dose in the mouth for a few moments before
swallowing to gain the full effect of the flower essence(s).

Normally, an individual takes four doses a day: one first thing in
the morning, one last thing before retiring at night, and two more
times during the day, ideally before meals.

When necessary, doses can be given more frequently, every 15 or
30 minutes, and then hourly until the individual feels uplifted and
more at ease within.

Tf it is difficult to take the doses each time. nlace 16 drons of the

----- PAGE 209 -----
Medicine Water into a glass or thermos of water or juice each
morning and take frequent small sips throughout the day.

Anima. Dosace

Flower essences can be used for pets large or small displaying
emotional perplexities, farm animals, wild fauna, or plants who
have experienced a trauma or shock of any nature.

+ Horses and other large animals: Put 8 drops of an essence (from
the Medicine Water) into a bucket of water or 4 drops onto fruit or
a piece of bread that they will eat.

+ Dog- and cat-size animals: Put 4 drops of any essence (from the
Medicine Water) into the food or drinking water. The essences can
be put onto paws or directly into the mouth if the animal agrees.

+ Or apply essences to beaks, snouts, noses, muzzles, on plumage,
on scales, on tails, on Prancer, on Dancer..., behind ears, or into the
fish bowl.

+ Administer doses 4 times daily.

Pant Dosaces

+ Place 16 to 20 drops of an essence or combination of essences in a
gallon watering can full of water and water the plant’s soil.

+ Put 8 to 10 drops of the same essences in a spray bottle and spray
the plant’s foliage.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

The Mother Essences and the Stock Waters, when prepared as
directed above, will retain their strength indefinitely. If they are
kept for several years, a slight sediment may form at the bottom of
the bottle: this is not harmful. Sometimes. over a lengthy period of

----- PAGE 210 -----
time, the rubber bulb on the dropper top will soften and lose its
tone; it should be replaced with a new sterilized one.

When using the boiling method a large quantity of sediment may
form. This should be filtered twice. Then, even though you have
filtered the liquid a couple of times, after some months more
sediment may form again at the bottom of the Mother Essence
bottle; this should be re-filtered and rebottled.

The Medicine Water will be preserved quite adequately during
the relatively short time it is used by the individual.

It is best to sterilize the bottle each time it is refilled.

SELECTING AND USING FLOWER ESSENCES

My approach to manifesting anything, whether it is health,
friendship, stuff, travel, whatever, is to focus my attention on what
it is I want, rather than on the absence of it, and I give very little
thought to what I don’t want or to anything that doesn’t feel good
to me. Therefore, when I use flower essences to assist other people
to enhance their life processes, I ask him or her to get in touch with
how they want to feel within themselves. I ask them to identify
what feels most like their true nature, to envision their most desired
self-concept, to ascertain who they truly are and what they want to
express.

To assist this process, I have arranged the following list of Dr.
Bach’s particular flower essences by homogeneous positive aspects
of personality. I have assembled word pictures individuals can use
to help form a clear vision of what they feel defines their nature
most closely and how they want to function. I note the
corresponding flower essence whose vibration resonates most
closely to this inspiration. I also include the related “shadows” of
that nature, those traits no longer wanted, and those contrary states
of mind and moods one can slip into that cast a shadow over inner
light and joy. But clouds can merely hide the sun for a while. The
light is the enduring reality that is soon revealed with the gently
effective assistance of flower vibrations. I trust this will be of
assistance to those who are attracted to using this subtle and

----- PAGE 211 -----
remarkably effective vehicle of herbal medicine. 7

Tue Heaury-Aucnine Posrrive Aspects or Dr. Bacu’s 38 Fiower Essences

ONE’S TRUE NATURE FLOWER ESSENCE, SHADOW

. + Tortured
+ lam a genuine
mental state

optimist,
+ Carefree veneer,
cheerful, and .
+ Hides
carefree
symptoms and
-ITama
woes, never
peacemaker at . . .
Agrimony discussing
heart . . .
. (Agrimonia problems with
+I make light of .
. eupatoria or others
discomforts .
. odorata) + Distressed by
+ Thave a fine
quarrels
sense of humor .
+ Worries

that I express
+ Restlessness

freely and db
joyfully without cause’ y
churning
pretense
thoughts
+ I participate in
life with true
joy, beyond
worry or fear + Apprehension,

slam inexplicable

----- PAGE 212 -----
adventurous
and enjoy the
journey of my
creative path
without regard
of difficulty or
danger

+ Lam fearlessly
in touch with
well-being
slama
tolerant,
lenient, and
understanding
of others

+ [have strong
convictions with
high ideals
+Isee the good
in all, and with
unconditional
love I
appreciate the
paths others

choose for

themselves

Aspen
(Poluus

tremula)

Beech
(Fagus
sylvatica)

+ Fears by day or|
night for no
known reason

+ Fear
accompanied by
sweating &

trembling

+ Intolerant

+ Critical of
others

+ Lonely

+ Lacks humility
and sympathy

+ Annoyed

+ Taskmaster

+ Must have
precious and

order

+ Timid

----- PAGE 213 -----
RADE ONENESS

+ Weak-willed

individual .
+ Servile doormat
+ I mix well
. + Too persuaded
with others
. Centaury by others and by
wherein I know . .
(Centaurium convention
my true self and oa.
umbellatum) “Vitality is
set my own
sapped by
tone

. overdoing favors
+ I serve wisely .
. for admired
and quietly
others

+ Tam intuitive
and in touch
with the wise

+ Doubts own
guidance of my

. ability
own inner-
. + Tends to
being
Cerato imitate
-lTama .
. (Ceratostigma + Lacks
visionary and . . .
. willmottiana, confidence in
hold definite .
we Plumbago) own judgment
opinions

+ Seeks advice
+ Confidently, I

stick to my own

from one and all

. + Talkative
desires and

decisions once

I’ve made them

+ Fear of losing

control of mind

tem alos

----- PAGE 214 -----
A ONE OO
quiet, and
courageous

+ Thold a strong
mental focus on
the positive

aspects of life

+lam keenly
observant and
most
appreciative of
contrast

+I focus my
attention in the
present where
my creative
power lies
+lTreap
knowledge of
self from every
observation and
experience

+I change my
creative mental
focus quickly

and easily

Cherry Plum
(Prunus

cerasifera)

Chestnut Bud
(Aesculus
hippocastanum,
White or Horse
Chestnut Bud)

and reason

+ Desperation

+ Violent
impulses

+ Suicidal

+ Fear of insanity]
or doing fearful

things

+ Repeats
mistakes due to
lack of
observation

+ Impatient

+ Habitual
negative thought
+ Tries to forget
the past

+ Slow to learn
how one’s own
thoughts and
beliefs are that
which creates all
unwanted

experiences

----- PAGE 215 -----
+ Lappreciate
others, and I
enjoy their
diversity

+ Tallow and
encourage
others to be
who and as they
are

+My
unconditional
love is generous
and caring

+ Linspire
others with
warmth and
gentleness

+ Tam selfless in
my care for
others

+ My mind is
sensitive to
inspiration

+ Lhave a lively,
passionate
interest in all
things

Chicory
(Chicorium
intybus,

Wild Succory)

+ Bossy

+ Overpossessive
of others

+ Directs affairs
of others

+ Fussy

+ Argumentative
+ Greedy

+ Interferes by
nagging and
criticizing

+ Martyr

+ Self-pity

+ Domineering

+ Intolerant

+ Discontent

+ Fretful

+ Dreamy hope
of a better future|
+ Uses
impractical
thoughts to
escape from

world

----- PAGE 216 -----
+ Tam master of
my own
thoughts and set
my tone in life
+Tam full of
appreciation for
life

+ Thave zestful
desires and a
wonderfully
creative
imagination

+I travel my
inner
dimensions well
+ T maintain
complete
control of
thought

+ Isee things in
correct
perspective and
proportion

+ I'm broad-
minded

+ Trealize that

any physical

Clematis
(Clematis vitalba,
Traveler’s

Joy)

Crab Apple
(Malus

pumila)

+ Diminished
vision and desire|
+ Lack of passion|
and vitality

+ Apathetic

+ Exhaustion

+ Homesickness

+ Lack of interest!
in present
circumstances

+ Indifference

+ Led and
influenced
because thoughts}

are elsewhere

+ Feelings of
uncleanliness
+ Despair

+ Disgust

+ Despondency
+ Congestion
+ Self-hatred

+ Mental
obsession and
concern with
trivia

+ Finicky

----- PAGE 217 -----
disorder is due
to internal

disharmony

+ Thave
unshakable
conviction

+ I’m confident,
responsible, and
reliable

+ Thave
powerful
creative focus
-T'm self-
assured, and my
abilities are
generally
directed toward
the well-being
of others

+ Lhave faith in
my ability to
attract what I
want

+ No obstacle is
too great or any

task too big to

Elm

(Ulmus procera,
English

or Common
Elm)

fussiness
+ The cleanser

essence

+ Overstriving foy
perfection

+ Temporary
feelings of
inadequacy

+ Feelings of
failure

+ Exhausted by
overwhelming
feelings of

responsibility

+ Reduced desire
+ Discouraged by
setbacks
+ Skeptic

----- PAGE 218 -----
be undertaken
with conviction
that it can be
accomplished

+ Lintegrate
contrast to give
me clarity of
desire

+ [have strong
ability to holda
vision and to
appreciate and
enjoy the
journey to its
fulfillment

+ Tam a bearer
of the light in

darkness

+ [have positive
faith that my
visions will be
realized

-Tam
uninfluenced by
statistics,
judgments,

opinions, or

Gentian
(Gentiana
amarella,
Felwort

or Autumn
Gentian)

Gorse
(Ulex europaeus,
Whin

or Common

+ Doubt
+ Discouragement
+ Deflated by
delay

+ Negative
outlook

+ Deep
depression due
to a known caus¢
+ Dark
melancholia

+ Attracts
negativity due to
negative state of

mind

+ Loss of heart

+ Diminished
vision and desire|
+ Hopelessness

+ Despair

+ Given up

+ Negative
attitude

+ Dark

----- PAGE 219 -----
advice of others
+ Tam certain I
can overcome
all obstacles to
realize my
desires

+lam an
uplifter who is
genuinely
interested in
others

+ 1am caring,
understanding,
and helpful

+ With tolerant
good humor I
radiate well-

being

+Iam deeply
connected to
my inner joy

+ Tlove others
and myself

+ T recognize
and appreciate

the achievement

Af mthnen

Furze)

Heather

(Calluna vulgaris,
Ling

or Scotch
Heather)

Holly

melancholy

+ Resigned

+ Lack of
ambition or
interest due to
hopelessness

+ Rapid incessant
talk

+ Always
bringing any
conversation to
themselves

+ Saps vitality of
others by
excessive self-
centeredness

+ Shunned and

avoided

+ Hatred, envy,
jealousy, or
suspicion of
another's
abilities and
success

+ Intolerant

+ For the active,

intense, extrovert

----- PAGE 220 -----
eee
+Ican give
without need of
return

+ Lam loving,
tolerant, and
happy, and I
rejoice in
others’ well-

being and joy

+Tam fully
alive in the
present, the
place of my
creative power
+ luse my past
and present
experiences to
assist in forming
clear visions to
prepare my
future
experiences

+ Tretain the

lessons taught

In tha nant

(Ilex

aquifolium)

Honeysuckle
(Lonicera

caprifolium)

type who wants
to open his or
her heart—for
whom very man
essences are
indicated—this
will help identify
the exact
essences that are
best

+ Dwells upon
thoughts of the
past and holds a
pessimistic
outlook both for
the present and
the future

+ Loss of interest
in the present
due to
homesickness or
chronic nostalgia]

+ Regretful

+ Stagnation that

----- PAGE 221 -----
ae pals
letting the
experiences

pass from mind

+ Tam certain of
my abilities and
strengths even
in the fact of
overwhelming
tasks

+ My mind is
alert

+Tam able to
call up reserves
of strength for
mental and
physical
fortification in
moments of
self-doubt

+ Fatigue passes
as I become
interested in
normal

activities

Hornbeam
(Carpinus
betulus)

diminishes vital,

creative life force

+ Weariness of
the mind

+ Doubt of
strength

+ Suffers fatigue
through dislike
of work that one
is doing

+ Monday
morning or
morning-after
feeling

+ Disinclined to
face future or
even daily
routine

+ Mental and
physical
exhaustion whic!
often passes
when mental
focus is taken off|
of self

----- PAGE 222 -----
+ Lam patient
and efficient
-Tam
spontaneous
and quick in
mind and action
+Iam gentle
and sympathetic
toward others,
understanding
and tolerant
with those
slower than me
+I feel very
capable,
decisive, and
intuitive

+ Lwork well

alone and with

others and I

enjoy doing Impatiens
both (Impatiens

+ I plunge into glandulifera,
life, taking Policeman’s
risks, and ’m Helmet) Larch

(Latrix

Anaidvnd

+ Impatient and
irritable with
those who are
slower

+ Active and
nervous

* Quick flaring
and subsiding
anger

+ Mental tension,
manifesting as
muscular tension|
and pain

+ Injury through
bad temper or
own
impetuousness
+ Exhaustion
from frustrating
nervous effort
when things are
moving too
slowly

+ Lack of

confidence in sel

----- PAGE 223 -----
pete eee A
results

+ Inever think
that, “I can’t”
-ITama
powerful
intentional
creator of my
own
experiences
-Tam
determined and
confident

+ Tuse any
experience of
failure as a tool
for a clearer,
more focused
vision and
stronger

determination

+ T face all
contrast, trials,
and difficulties
with

equanimity,

——et

-

and abilities

+ Anticipation of
failure

+ Despondency
due to failure to
even try

+ Seldom
attempts
anything due to
self-assurance of
inevitable failure|
+ Convinced can’
do as well as
others

+ Wistful feeling
of inferiority,
though lacking
jealousy or envy

of others’ success|

+ Fear and
anxiety of a
known origin
+ Mental

emotional focus

----- PAGE 224 -----
eto am
humor

+ I deal with life
with wise
anticipation,
spontaneity,
and enthusiasm
+ With
understanding,
intuition, and
knowledge I
work fluidly
with the
universal law of
attraction

+ Thave an
inner serenity
and knowing
which nothing
can shake or
destroy

+ ITset my own
tone in all
situations
coming from an

inner stability

and

Mimulus
(Mimulus guttatus,
Monkey

Flower)

Mustard
(Sinapis arvensis,
Wild Mustard

on that which
one does not
want

+ Shy and
retiring, prone t
hide anxieties

+ Deterred by
chronic fears
such as fear of
dark, injury,
poverty, etc.,
which retards the
joy of freely

creating

+ Experience of al
black depression|
almost a
hopeless,
despairing
melancholia
which suddenly
closes down
upon one

without apparent

cause or reason;

----- PAGE 225 -----
oo or Charlock)
to my joy,
freedom, and
overall well-
being

+ In every
moment I am
keenly aware of
the harmony
that abounds
throughout all
+ I persevere in
face of all
contrast and
difficulties
without loss of
faith or
slackening of
confidence

+ Tm keenly
aware that the
visions and

mental focus of

one’s creative Oak
energy are far (Quercus
more effective robur)
for

it can lift just as
suddenly of its
own accord

+ A gloominess
which from out
of the blue
temporarily shuts
down all one’s

joy and pleasure

+ Ceaseless in
efforts even
when depleted
+ Disappointed,
despairing, and
discontent with
self when
unceasing effort
fails

+ Can suffer
breakdown due
to enduring too

much strain of

responsibility

----- PAGE 226 -----
enti eee
than action
alone

+ Joyfully I
inspire others
+Lam helpful
to others while
always
remaining in
harmony with
myself

+ T maintain
interest in life
and peace of
mind even
when required
to be inactive
+I depend fully
on my inner-self
+ Tunderstand
that mental
visualization is
a far superior
channel of
creative power
and healing

than action

Olive
(Olea

europaea)

+ Reliable,
dependable, and
loves to help
others;
characteristically
taking on too
much

responsibility

+ Depleted

+ Complete
exhaustion of
mind and body
due to long-
endured stress or|
illness

+ Suffered a long
time under
adverse
conditions

+ Lack of effort
due to lack of
vitality

+ Feels no

pleasure in life

----- PAGE 227 -----
+ Tattract
happiness and
pleasure in
spite of
temporary

weariness

+ Lacknowledge
my mistakes,
but do not
dwell on them

+ ITsee what I
want by
observing the
contrasting
experiences of
what I do not
want; and then I
focus on a fresh,
positive vision
-Tam
compassionate

+ Lappreciate
myself and
others

+ Linspire and

welt nthaen

Pine
(Pinus sylvestris,
Scots Pine)

+ Fear of losing
friends and
support

+ The
convalescence

essence

+ Self-
condemning

+ Never content
with
achievements

+ Blames self for
own and others’
mistakes and for
everything that
goes wrong

+ Overworks and
stresses self to
“improve” and
become “better”
+ Feels guilt and
despondency

+ Has high ideals

----- PAGE 228 -----
‘pee ny
. and does one’s
helping them to

. best, but is too
thrive

humble and
+ Thave great 1 .
apologetic,
perseverance pores
which disallows

+ Luse “failures” oa
. creative life force
to increase my .
to flower easily

passion and
through self

desire to
manifest my
visions

+ I broadcast

thoughts of

well-being to

all + Excessive fear
+lam keenly and anxiety for
aware of the others
well-being that + Worries and
abounds, and I anticipates

see others in troubles for
their natural others

state of health Red Chestnut + Over-protective|
and wellness (Aesculus of another
+Tam a true carnea) + Negative
uplifter and mental visions
healer with regards to

+Tam able to others

----- PAGE 229 -----
remain calm,
mentally and
physically in
any emergency,
peaceful and
assuring to

others

+Iam a calming
and soothing
individual even
in the most
terrifying
conditions

+ With courage,
Ican rise to
emergencies in
an instant

+I can assume a
selfless state of
mind in
moments to
focus on
another’s well-
being

+ [have no fear
of death, and I

am willing to

Rock Rose
(Helianthemum

nummularium)

+ Foresees
trouble and
broadcasts fear

and anxiety

+ When panic
and extreme
fright are
experienced,
placing the
vibrations of
terror in the
atmosphere

+ Extreme fear
caused by facing
an unexpected o:
unfamiliar
experience or by|
any fear induced
by a terrifying
sight or
nightmare

+ Whenever great

fear or panic is

----- PAGE 230 -----
risk my life to experienced
aid others

+ Lhave high

ideals and a

flexible,

creative mind

+ Inflexible mind
+ Inflexible,
prideful opinion:

+ Tam readil;
y about religion,

open to ee
. politics, or
changing my
. reform
beliefs when . co
. + Mind and life ig

convinced of a

. ruled by
higher truth .

. cherished
I’m not easily .
theories

influenced by
the beliefs of

others, because

+ Hard master on|

self (yet not on

. others)
Iknow I will .
+ Enjoys

find greater, .

Rock Water suppressing one
deeper truths .

(H20, Healing s own faults
from the .
ooo well or stream + Strict in way of|
inspiration of a

water) living, cannot
my own
. deflect from
internal

. ideals, forcing
connection to

life

+ My experience

self to live up to

them

+ Self-denial, a

----- PAGE 231 -----
DED DS
and growth
uplifts and
encourages
others to trust
and respond to
their inner
guidance and to
follow their
own unique
path

+ 1am open-
minded, quick
to make a
decision and
prompt to act
on it

+Tam calm and
determined

+ Tam attentive
and responsive
to my inner
guidance, and
therefore, I set
my own tone
+Ikeep my

poise and

hal

Scleranthus
(Scleranthus

annuus,

martyr to ideals
+ Self-dominatio:
+ Does not
understand that
such practices as
diets are the
result, not the
cause, of

spiritual growth

+ Indecision,
lacking ability to]
make up mind

+ Swayed
between two
things

+ Experience
swings between
joy and sadness,
energy or apathy}
pessimism or
optimism, clarity)
and confusion

+ Unable to

concentrate due

----- PAGE 232 -----
OE ES
The annual

Knawel)

all conditions

+ Lobserve
contrast, and
from this I
make clear
decisions of
what I want

+ My clear
visions come
forth from these
decisions and
give me great
ability to
manifest my
desires

+ All shock has
been
neutralized, and
my mental and
physical
recuperation
has been
accelerated

+ All is well Star of Bethlehem
-lTam (Ornithogalum.

comforted and umbellatum)

uae
changing of min:
+ Conversation
jumps from
subject to subject
+ Erratic body
functions
(symptoms come|
and go, pulse,
pain,
temperature are
here and there)

+ Magpie mind,
full of bits and

pieces

+ Emotional or
physical illness
due to residual
shock from a
current or past
experience or
accident

+ All shock has
an effect; this

effect can

----- PAGE 233 -----
soothed of all
my mental and
physical pains
and sorrows

+ [have strength
and quick
recovery in
spite of shock

+ Thave full
control of my
emotions

+ [know all is
well in the
midst of the
intensity of any
experience

+ In light of
intense contrast,
I learn clearly
what I desire,
and I can focus
on the uplifting
thoughts of
what I want to

change in my

experiences

Sweet Chestnut
(Castanea sativa,
the edible Spanish
chestnut)

manifest at some|
point even after
the incident has
been forgotten

+ Useful for
nonresponsive
folks

+ Acute hopeless
despair

+ Feelings that
one has reached
the limit of one s
endurance

+ Focus on
feelings of great
anguish

+ Suicidal state o
mind

+ Intense feelings!
of abandonment
and the void of
inner darkness

+ “Lonely dark
night of the soul’

+ Over-effort,

----- PAGE 234 -----
OEE NOOO
wise person
+Ikeep my
mind fluid

+ T know that all
persons have a
right to their
opinions, and I
will listen to
them open-
mindedly

+ [have strong
ideals, but I do
not impose
them on others
+ 1am inspired,
enthusiastic,
and
knowledgeable
+ My mind is
alert and full of
interest

+ I know that by
feeling good
and flowing
creative
thought, rather

than he

Vervain
(Verbena

officinalis)

stress, and
tension

+ Lives on nerves.
resulting in
breakdown

+ Fanatic
reformer,
convert, and/or
martyr

+ Imposing will
on others

+ Over-
enthusiastic,
high-strung,
fretful and fussy
+ Impatient,
tense, and
anxious

+ Takes on too
much, leaving n
time to relax and
enjoy life

+ Depleted
mental and
physical vitality
through overuse
of effort and

----- PAGE 235 -----
eee EY eee
action, great
things are
accomplished
effortlessly and

harmoniously

+ Tam a natural
teacher and
leader

+ Tam wise,
loving, and
understanding
+Tam able to
organize and
delegate power
and service with
no need to
dominate
+Lenjoy
helping others
to know
themselves and Vine
to find their
path in life

(Vitis vinifera,
Grape vine)
+Ican inspire

others with my

tinchaleanhla

strong will

+ Strict, violent
temperament

+ Over-aggressive|
and persistent

+ Argumentative

+ Tendency to
crave power and|
dominate others
+ Rides
roughshod over
the opinions of
others

+ Makes no
attempt to
convert others,
but instead is
demanding and
dominating,
often hard and
cruel without
compassion

+ Loses interest ii

----- PAGE 236 -----
ON OO
those that cannot,
confidence and .
be dominated
+ Rigid, inflexible

attitude which

certainty
+ Tam efficient,

certain, and . .
we manifests in
ambitious, a .
extreme tension
quick thinker . ce oe
with stiff, rigid
who can be hysical pai
ical pain,
depended upon Physica’ P

. and disability

in an

emergency to

direct others

with confidence

+ In direct

response to my

inner guidance, + Swayed by a
Iemploy stronger or more
constancy and dominating
determination personality or
as I pursue my forceful

beliefs and circumstance
carry out my + Inspired course
life work is altered by

+ Conventions some link with
that might the past, family
impede my self- tie, habit, or

fulfillment are other outside

----- PAGE 237 -----
easily ignored
-Tam
unaffected by
adverse
circumstances
I'm neither
hindered nor
discouraged by
the opinions or
ridicule of
others

+ Tam a creative
pioneer

+I change my
beliefs and
habits fluidly as
I feel
appropriate
+Tam a free
individual, and
I offer no
resistance to my
inspiration

+ [have great
gentleness and
poise

-ITama

Walnut

(Juglans regia)

influence

+A “link
breaker” from
any influence
from the past or
circumstances of
the present

+ An ally for
advancing stages
of maturity
(teething,
puberty,
menopause) or
for big life-
change decisions
for taking any
step forward and|
breaking
conventions,
leaving all old

limits and habits

----- PAGE 238 -----
tranquil, + Feeling of

objective, superiority to
sympathetic, others

and practical + Proud and aloo
counselor + Disdainful and
+ Tam self- condescending,
reliant and which can
dignified manifest as
+*ITaman mental rigidity
example of Water Violet and physical
integration and (Hottonia stiffness and
confidence to palustris) tension

others + Disapproving o
+I do not others, though
interfere with tolerant and

the affairs of never interfering
others nor do I + Bears grief and
tolerate sorrows in
interference in silence

my affairs + Prefers to be

+ Icreate a alone when ill
serene

environment for
myself and

others

+ Thave a quiet .
+ Persistent

and nnles mind

----- PAGE 239 -----
ee OO II IIAD
undisturbed by
outside
influences

+ 1am at peace
with myself and
with the world
+ From the
serenity of my
mind comes the
solutions to my
problems

+ [have a strong
ability to direct
my thoughts
where I want
them

+ [have learned
to control
thought and
imagination and
put them to my
conscious

creative use

+ 1am energetic,

talented, and

ahla ta dn

White Chestnut
(Aesculus
hippocastanum,
Horse

Chestnut)

mental
arguments and
conversations
with self,
reoccurring like
a stuck record

+ Worries racing
around and
around in the
mind

+ Tortured mind
+ Insomnia

+ Seeks to escape|
thoughts and get
back into the
world

+ Overactive
mentality results
in depression
and fatigue

+ Headaches due
to chronic over-

anxious thoughts|

+ Undecided as
to what to do
with life

----- PAGE 240 -----
aVa— ee
things well

+ [have definite
ambitions and
focus

+ I know just
what I want to
do with my life
+ Ido what I
want to do, and
I let nothing
interfere with
my purpose

+ My life is
filled with
feelings of
usefulness and
happiness

+ My heart is
open to joy and
freedom and
growth

+ Thave the
ability to do
many things
well, and I am

successful and

Wild Oat
(Bromus ramosus,
Hairy or

Wood Brome-

grass)

+ General but
unclear ideas of
what is wanted

+ Despondent
and dissatisfied
due to feelings
that life is
passing by

+ Frustrated and
unhappy due to
a tendency to
drift into
uncongenial
environments
and occupations
+ Indefinite due
to so many ideas|
and ambitions

+ For those weak.
introverted,
despondent type
of persons from
whom very mam
essences are
indicated—this
will help identify

the exact

----- PAGE 241 -----
venom hee a

undertakings

+ Thave a lively
interest in all
happenings,
both in my life
and in the lives
of others

+ My very
interest and
vitality attract
excellent
conditions into
my life, so I
enjoy
happiness, good
health,
prosperity,
growth, and
friendship
+Taccept and
appreciate life
with good
humor, and I

respond to my

Wild Rose
(Rosa canina, Dog
Rose)

essences that are
best

+ Resignation to
illness,
uncongenial
work,
debilitating
relationships,
and/or toa
monotonous life
+ Diminished
desire

+ Makes little
effort to heal,
improve life, or
to envision and
enjoy the
abundant
pleasures of life
+ Feels one
“might as well
get used to it”
and “learn to live
with it all”
+ Observes

conditions and

surrenders to

----- PAGE 242 -----
inner-being’s
constant
guidance and
wisdom

+ Trealize and
fully exercise
my power to
create all my

life experiences

+ Tenjoy my
sense of humor
and well-being
+ T know that all
my experiences
proceed from
my thoughts

+ What is outer
is a clear
reflection of the
sum of my
thoughts and
beliefs

-Tam

Willow

oe (Salix vitellina,
optimistic about |
Yellow Willow or

them without
realizing that
they have create
them

+ Weary, lack
vitality, and are
dull companions|
+ Not depressed,
but resigned to
their apathy and
colorless life

+ Resentment and
bitterness

+ Self-
disempowermen}
by blaming all
one’s self for
whatever
misfortune or
adversity is being
experienced

+ Lack of
appreciation

+ Feels life is
unjust

+ Begrudging and|

eananthel nf all

----- PAGE 243 -----
Ahh roe A ——— aa

Golden Osier)

am the master good fortunes
of my own fate and success of
+Lam fully self- others
empowered, for + Sulking and

I blame no one gloomy

else for my + Pessimistic
experiences + Takes without
+ With my giving

offerings I + Stuck in feeling}
attract unto me of discontent;

+ Lappreciate loath to admit
my life and the any

lives of others improvement

Sources of Other Perspectives

1

N

w

a

. The Collected Writings of Edward Bach, ed. Julian Barnard,

Flower Remedy Programme, 1987, P.O. Box 65, Hereford, HR2
oUW, Great Britain.

. Handbook of the Bach Flower Remedies, Dr. Philip M.

Chancellor, Keats Publishing, Inc., 1980.

. The Medical Discoveries of Edward Bach, Physician, Nora

Weeks, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London, 1973.

. The Bach Flower Remedies Illustration & Preparation, Nora

Weeks and Victor Bullen, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London,
1976.

. Heal Thyself Edward Bach, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London,

1973.

. The Twelve Healers. Edward Bach. C.W. Daniel Company. Ltd..

----- PAGE 244 -----
N

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

London 1973.

. The Bach Remedies Repertory, F.J. Wheeler, C.W. Daniel

Company, Ltd., London, 1970.

. The Original Writings of Edward Bach, J. Howard and J.

Ramsell, The Dr. Edward Bach Healing Trust and Centre, Mount
Vernon, Sotwell, Wallingford, Oxon., OX10 OPZ, England, 1990.

. Questions & Answers Clarifying the Basic Principles and

Standards of the Bach Flower Remedies, J. Ramsell and N.
Murray, The Dr. Edward Bach Healing Trust and Centre, Mount
Vernon, Sotwell, Wallingford, Oxon., OX10 OPZ, England, 1986.
Bach Flower Therapy: Theory & Practice, Mechthild Scheffer,
Torsons Publishers, Inc., 1987.

Flower Essences: Reordering Our Understanding and Approach
to Illness and Health, Machaelle Small-Wright, 1988.

Flower Essence Repertory, Patricia Kaminski & Richard Katz,
The Flower Essence Society, P.O. Box 459, Nevada City, CA
95959, 1994.

Choosing Flower Essences: An Assessment Guide, Patricia
Kaminski, The Flower Essence Society.

Alaskan Flower Essence Project, P.O. Box 1369, Homer, Alaska
99603-1369.

Healing with Australian Flowers, Va’sudeva Barnao, Living
Essences, P.O. Box 355, Scarborough, Western Australia, 6019,
1988.

----- PAGE 245 -----


----- PAGE 246 -----
Herbal tinctures are alcoholic or water-alcohol solutions prepared
from fresh or dried botanicals. It is believed by many that alcohol is
a better solvent than water for extracting plant constituents and that
a mixture of alcohol and water will dissolve nearly all the desired
constituents of a plant, while at the same time acting as a highly
efficient preservative. The term tincture commonly refers to these

----- PAGE 247 -----
alcohol preparations, but it is also used to refer to preparations that
are vinegar, wine, or glycerin based. The glycerin-based tinctures
are more often referred to, however, as glycerites or glycerates.

All official tinctures (as determined by an official U.S.
Pharmacopoeia) are made with an alcohol and water solution or
pure alcohol, the majority of herbal tinctures containing around 60
percent alcohol. The official definition of a tincture is stated to be a
solution that contains at least 45 percent alcohol and has an
herb/menstruum ratio of at least 1:4. Of course these ratios can
always vary and this definition is supplied more as a means to
distinguish concentrated infusions and decoctions which are
sometimes preserved using up to 25 percent alcohol, and “fluid
extracts,” which usually have an herb to menstruum ratio of 1:1.

Aside from those plants that require dehydration such as Pleurisy
root (Asclepias tuberosa) or Wild Yam (Dioscorea villosa), and
those that require a year or more of aging to develop their full
therapeutic potential such as Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana)
and its relatives, the therapeutic potency of tinctures made from
fresh “green” herbs and roots are thought of by some individuals to
be stronger than those of dry plant equivalents. Even though I tend
to prefer fresh plant preparations, I can’t hold to a generalization
like that, but it is interesting that homeopathic mother tinctures of
herbs are almost always made from the fresh plant, since the dry
plant products provide less satisfactory potencies.

There are two fundamental processes for tincturing an herb:
maceration and percolation. Maceration requires no expensive or
unusual equipment or complex procedures, whereas percolation
usually does. And of course each method has its pros and cons, but
then all things being relative, what doesn’t? We will discuss the
maceration method in this chapter and deal with percolation (and
the pros and cons of each) in Chapter Thirteen.

There are two basic methods for making a tincture by
maceration; one requires measurements, the other doesn’t. The first
method we will discuss is simple and very effective. I will refer to it
as the “folk method.” It requires no measuring and is good for
general use. The fact there is no measuring of substances, however.

----- PAGE 248 -----
makes it somewhat vague as to the resultant “tincture strength.”
Tincture strength refers to the amount of herb that has been
concentrated into a given measure of solution.

When one prepares a tincture that will be dispensed by others, it
is important to state on the label the tincture strength of the
preparation, so it can be dispensed in appropriate and accurate
doses. In order to prepare these tinctures for professional use (or as
required by the FDA for all tinctures sold in commerce), use the
method I will refer to as the “weight to volume (w/v) method.” In
this method the weight of the herb and the volume of the
menstruum are measured and noted in order to produce a specific
tincture strength.

The metric system of measure is most convenient for this purpose
because it offers us a working 1 to 1 relationship between a weight
of a solid material with a volume of a liquid. The avoirdupois
system of weight and measure that we normally use in the U.S.
doesn’t readily supply us this convenience.

Simply put, one cubic centimeter of water weighs one gram. For
our practical purposes, we can allow that this holds true for all the
liquids (water, alcohol, wine, vinegar, glycerin) we use to formulate
our menstrua. This is a relationship we can access in our weight to
volume (w/v) method of making tinctures. The relationship of
plant material to menstruum is known as the weight (of herb) to
volume (of menstruum) ratio of the tincture, or the tincture
strength. The most commonly found tincture strengths used in
commerce and in mainstream medicine are 1:5 and 1:10 for dry
plant preparations and 1:2 for fresh plant preparations. There is a
historical precedent for this phenomenon.

In September of 1902 in Brussels, Belgium, a “Conference
Internationale pour l’Unification de la Formule des Medicaments
Heroiques” was held. This gathering brought together delegates
from nearly every “civilized” country. The purpose of this body was
to formulate standards for potent remedies which would be
adopted by the various pharmacopoeias of the world, and therefore
secure the principal object of an international pharmacopoeia. The
protocol agreed upon at this conference was adopted and made

----- PAGE 249 -----
official in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia VIII (1906) and has remained as
a standard. Conforming in principle to the standards recommended
by the International Protocol adopted at Brussels in 1902, these are
the ratios of herbs to menstrua:

Ideally, a 1:5 tincture of dried herb delivers the
action of 20 Gm of herb for each 100 ml of
tincture taken; a 1:10 tincture delivers the action
of 10 grams of dried herb; while a 1:2 tincture of
fresh plants carries the action of 50 grams of fresh
herb with each 100 ml of tincture taken.

+ Tinctures of dried non-toxic botanicals represent the activity of 20
Gm of dried herb in each 100 cc of tincture (a 20% or 1:5 w/v
tincture).

+ Tinctures of dried toxic or intense botanicals represent the activity
of 10 Gm of dried herb in each 100 cc of tincture (often called a
10% or 1:10 w/v tincture).

+ Tinctures of fresh undried plants are made to represent the activity
of 50 Gm of fresh herb in each 100 cc (a 50% or 1:2 w/v tincture).
Pure, undiluted (190-proof) ethyl alcohol is used for the fresh plant
menstruum.

In other words, if you take 100 cc (which is equivalent to 100 ml)
of a 1:5 tincture of dried Stinging Nettle into your body,
theoretically, you receive the same activity as if you ate 20 Gm of
the dried herb. Or if you take 100 ml of a 1:2 tincture of fresh
Nettle, theoretically, you are receiving the same activity as if you
ate 50 Gm of fresh Nettle (you might want to steam those fresh
Nettles first).

Of course these international standards, though excellent, are not
sacrosanct and a lay herbalist can make his or her tinctures in any
strength desired. I usually make my dried Nettle extract at 1:4, mv

----- PAGE 250 -----
fresh St. John’s Wort at 1:1.5, and my fresh Mullein flowers at a 1:1.
I often start out using the suggested standards, but frequently alter
them as I prepare successive batches. My current preferences have
evolved based on my experience with these plant extracts. View all
these processes and standards as principles to use as initial guides,
but ultimately do adjust them according to your own preferences.

It is important to note that, provided one is using good-quality
herb, both methods, the folk and the w/v, make high-quality
tinctures. Neither method is superior to the other (that statement
will draw some debate); the choice is merely a matter of the
medicine-maker’s needs and preferences. Some folks like to
measure ingredients when cooking, some don’t. We will discuss
both methods for preparing tinctures in this chapter.

Regardless of which method you choose for making tinctures,
remember that maceration is floating time, when the alluring
qualities of the liquids have their way with the herbal solids; the
waters and alcohols of the menstruum gently coax the essence of
the plants into solution. This is a time of quiescence as the earth,
air, fire, and water elements of the herb surrender themselves to the
receptive liquid of the menstruum. Inevitably, however, this
relationship will fall into deep slumber as we are all prone to do
within the delicious wetness of a tranquil bath. So, it is the task of
an attentive medicine-maker to shake his or her tinctures routinely,
thereby re-arousing the active part of the extraction process.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE
Store all tinctures in airtight, light-resistant containers and avoid
exposure to direct sunlight and excessive heat.
DOSAGE

Tinctures are normally more concentrated than either infusions or
decoctions and therefore stronger. The dosage to be taken can be

----- PAGE 251 -----
much smaller. The dosage again depends on the herb at hand.
When I use a mild tonic herb such as Nettle, Dandelion, or
Hawthorn, I will take up to five droppersful in a glass of water 2 to
3 times a day. When taking a more intense herb, such as Echinacea
or Chaparral, I take anywhere from 10 to 25 drops, 3 to 4 times a
day. With Cayenne, sometimes 1 drop is plenty.

SUMMARY

Since most medicinal plants are made up of representatives from
various types of constituents, categorized as either active or ballast
substances, the extraction agents should not be geared solely to any
individual substance. When extracting dehydrated plant material,
alcohol concentrations of 40 percent (sometimes less) to 60 percent
(sometimes more) are customarily utilized, according to the official
instructions given in most pharmacopoeia. This range of alcohol to
water varies widely among experienced herbalists. Therefore, as I
suggested in a previous chapter, when formulating a menstruum for
conducting an herbal extraction process of dried plant material,

When in doubt as to a suitable menstruum, choose “dilute
alcohol” as a solvent.

Tivcrurinc sy Using tHe Fork Metuop

Tincturing dry plant material

1. Grind dried herb to a moderately coarse powder (mcp).
2. Place the powder into a large jar that can be tightly closed.
3. Add prepared menstruum (see this page.)

4. Stir the mixture well, so that all of the herb is wet.

----- PAGE 252 -----
5. Add sufficient menstruum to the wet herb so that about 1/4
inch of extra menstruum sits atop the herb; if the herb is
floating, 1/4 inch below the herb.

6. Cap jar tightly.”

7. Check the jar after 12 hours. If the herb has absorbed the
menstruum, add a sufficient amount of menstruum to re-
establish the 1/4 inch of extra liquid.

8. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

9. Pour off (decant) the clear tincture from the top, press the
remaining wet pulp, and combine these two liquids (see
methods for decanting and pressing in Chapter Twenty-Five).

10. Filter if desired.
11. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material when using 190-proof alcohol

1. Chop the fresh plant into small pieces and stuff them into a
canning jar, filling it to the top. Pack the herb into the jar very
tightly. Get as much into the jar as you can, especially when
working with a light herb.

2. Add 190-proof ethyl alcohol, filling the jar to the top. Make
sure all the herb is covered by the alcohol.

3. Cap jar tightly.”
4. Agitate the tincture frequently for 14 days.

5. Decant the liquid, press the remaining wet pulp, and
combine these two liquids.

----- PAGE 253 -----
6. Filter if desired.
7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material when using diluted alcohol
(less than 190-proof)

1. Chop the fresh plant into small pieces and stuff them very
tightly into a canning jar, filling it to the top.

2. Add menstruum (see below), filling the jar to the top. (See
Preparing the Menstruum below.)

3. Pour the entire ingredients (herb and menstruum) into a
Vita-Mix or some other suitable blender and blend it like a
smoothie. (You will have to make a large enough batch, so that
the volume of menstruum required is sufficient to completely
cover the blender blades.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly.”

5. Agitate tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit another
day.

6. Decant, press, and filter.
7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Preparing the menstruum

The nature of the folk method is simplicity. This means using
what is commonly at hand and readily available. The easiest
menstruum to obtain is probably a commercial 80-proof or
100-proof vodka. Eighty-proof vodka is (approximately) 40
percent alcohol by volume; 100 proof is (approximately) 50
percent alcohol by volume. Twenty to 30 percent alcohol is

----- PAGE 254 -----
sufficient to preserve a tincture. Therefore, when making a
dried plant preparation, 80-proof vodka is adequate. When
making a fresh plant preparation, which always incorporates
the juices of the plant (which dilute the menstruum), maybe
100-proof vodka is more judicious (as noted above, 190-proof
would be the most efficient).

Of course, one can always prepare a custom-made
menstruum (as discussed in the next section on weight to
volume method) and use it as a menstruum for this folk
method. Make notes on your decision and on the results that
manifest.

Tincrurinc Usine tHe Weicur to Vorume Meron

Tincturing dry plant material

1. Powder and weigh dried plant and place the powder into a
large jar that can be tightly closed.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see this page).

3. Be sure to mix together all the liquids of the menstruum
thoroughly in a separate container before adding them to the
powdered plant material.

4. Add the menstruum to the powdered herb.

5. Stir well, making sure all of the powdered herb is wet.
(After stirring the herb and menstruum together, some plant
parts—usually the seeds, barks, or roots—will be very wet,
showing a considerable amount of liquid, while some other
parts—certain leaves, flowers—will appear merely dampened
by the menstruum. Do not be concerned about either extreme

----- PAGE 255 -----
condition. Leave them as they are and continue with the
following steps.)

6. Cap jar tightly.

7. Shake tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit another
day.

8. Decant, press, and filter.
9. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material
VARIATION 1

1. Chop and weigh the plant and place it in a large jar.
2. Prepare custom menstruum (see this page).

3. If you chose not to use an undiluted (absolute) 190-proof
ethyl alcohol menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container
before adding them to the plant material.

4. Add the menstruum to the herb.
5. Cap jar tightly.

6. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

7. Decant the tincture, press the remaining wet pulp, and
combine the two liquids.

8. Filter if desired.

9. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

----- PAGE 256 -----
VARIATION 2

1. Chop the plant into small pieces and place them into a Vita-
Mix or some other suitable blender.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see below).

3. Cover the herb with menstruum and blend it like a
smoothie. (You will have to use enough of the menstruum to
cover the blender blades.) Use as much of the measured
menstruum as you can to make the mixture churn actively in
the blender. (In some instances, you may not be able to fit in
all the menstruum during this blending stage.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly. Be
sure you have added all the measured menstruum to the herb
at some point during or after the blending process, in order to
maintain the intended weight to volume proportion.

5. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

6. Decant, press, and filter.
7. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

Preparing the custom weight to volume menstruum
Two problems need to be addressed in preparing a custom
weight to volume (w/v) menstruum: (1) determining the total
volume of menstruum needed for the quantity of herb at hand;
and (2) determining the “correct” (based on your judgment)
combination and proportion of solvents within the menstruum.

To Determine the Total Volume of Menstruum
Example 1: To determine the total volume of menstruum

----- PAGE 257 -----
required to make a 1:5 w/v tincture (also called a 20 percent
tincture) of 400 Gm of powdered dried herb, simply multiply
the weight of the herb by 5 (400 x 5 = 2000). This tells you
that you need to prepare (a volume of) 2000 ml of menstruum
to add to (the weight) 400 Gm of herb to give you a tincture
strength of 1:5.

Example 2: To determine the total volume of menstruum
required to make a 1:10 w/v (10 percent tincture) from 260
Gm of powdered dried herb, multiply 260 by 10 = 2600. You
will need to prepare a volume of 2600 ml of menstruum for
the weight of 260 Gm of herb.

Example 3: To determine the total volume of menstruum
required to make a 1:2 w/v (50 percent tincture) from 215 Gm
of fresh undried herb, multiply 215 by 2 = 430. You will need
to prepare a volume of 430 ml of menstruum for the weight of
215 Gm of fresh herb.

When tincturing a fresh plant, one ordinarily makes a 1:2
w/v (50 percent tincture) and usually, but not necessarily
always, uses a menstruum of pure 190-proof ethyl alcohol
(according to the standards recommended by the International
Protocol adopted at Brussels in 1902).

To Determine the Proportion of Solvents in the Menstruum

WHEN TINCTURING DRIED PLANT MATERIAL,

This step requires some simple research. You need to look up
the unique characteristics of the plant to become acquainted
with its salient organic constituents (to later determine overall
how much is water soluble and how much is alcohol soluble).
As you involve yourself in the art and science of Herbalism,
you will accrue a good working library of herbal references.
Refer to these herbals to give you a list of the constituents

----- PAGE 258 -----
found in commonly used herbs. (See Resources at the end of
this book for references.) Also learn to trust your senses to give
you a plant’s constituent picture. Does it taste bitter (bitters) or
sour (acids), is it astringent (tannins) or demulcent (mucilage),
is it aromatic (volatile oils), etc.?

Using the list of constituents and their prime solvents given
to you in Chapter Six, you can begin to get a sense of the
proportions of water to alcohol that might be best used to
bring most of the properties of this plant into solution. This
will also prove helpful to determine if the plant contains
tannins that would be well managed by the addition of some
10 percent glycerin in the menstruum. If the plant is high in
alkaloids, you might want to add 5 to 10 percent vinegar to
help convert these free alkaloids into alkaloidal salts which are
far more soluble in water and alcohol.

The results of this research will give you a good foundation
for a well-educated guess as to the best initial menstruum to
formulate. There is no one right answer; there is, however, the
“correct” answer for your requirements and preferences. Make
your first batches small; make notes on your decisions and the
results of these decisions; and continue to modify your
menstruum until you have developed the one you like best
(see “The Sensual Approach to Successful Tincturing and Other
Methods of Herbal Extraction” in Chapter Five). The joy of
good herbal medicine-making evolves with the willingness to
experiment and the delight of discovery.

Ultimately, it’s your decision as to what is the best
menstruum for your herbal tincture. A good principle to follow
when formulating a menstruum for dried plant material is to
make the proportion of water as large as possible while still
efficiently dissolving all soluble matter and not endangering
the permanency of the preparation. One special advantage of
this, beside the obvious economic one (alcohol is expensive), is

----- PAGE 259 -----
that such tinctures may be added in small proportions to teas,
baths, and other aqueous preparations without causing serious
precipitation.

Ween Tincrurinc Fresh Prant Mareriat

Use the same method to determine total volume of menstruum
for a quantity of the fresh herb as you would for a dry,
powdered herb. The major difference here is that when
tincturing a fresh plant one ordinarily makes a 1:2 w/v (50
percent tincture) and most often uses a menstruum of
undiluted 190-proof ethyl alcohol (according to the standards
recommended by the International Protocol adopted at
Brussels in 1902).

Example: Find the volume of menstruum required to make a
1:2 w/v (50% tincture) from 454 Gm of fresh herb. Multiply
454 by 2 = 908. You will need to prepare a volume of 908 ml
of menstruum for the weight of 454 Gm of fresh herb.

Whenever using more than one single solvent for
your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate
container before adding them to the plant
material.

Note: Most pharmacopoeias, having adopted the standards of the
1902 International Protocol, hold to using a menstruum of pure
190-proof (95 percent ethyl) alcohol for tincturing fresh plants. This
standard was established by pharmacists based on the theory that
ethyl alcohol, when in contact with the fresh plant tissue for an
adequate length of time, dehydrates the tissue and in so doing
draws into solution all plant constituents that are dissolved in the
plant juice. This leaves behind merely the cellulose and other

----- PAGE 260 -----
insoluble tissues to be discarded. Some herbalists feel it is
unnecessary to blend or shake these macerating mixtures because
this dehydration process occurs automatically and completely
without the need for any other action. Obviously if one chooses not
to blend or shake a tincture of this nature, every part of the plant
material must be immersed in the pure alcohol for the extraction
process to act upon the entire mass.

Keep in mind if you use 100-proof vodka (or any diluted ethyl
alcohol), you need to blend the fresh herb with the menstruum and
shake the macerating tincture regularly.

Hess ON THE “35 HERBS AND A FUNGUS” List THAT
Are Wett PREPARED As A TINCTURE

‘See the "Des section in Chapter Twenty-Five for clelting dosages for chien.

PLANT PART WEIGHTTO — XOFALCOHOL ADULT DOSAGE
VOLUME. INMENSTRUUM
lack Cohosh Ges shiree/00t 12 10% S-2:mk:3x aday
ey 198 15 60-80% 5-2 mk: Sx aday
Buneberry dey root 15 70-80% 10-20 dropscup to xa day?
Burdock fesh rot 12 100% 24 mS a dey
dry oot 15 40-60% 24 mk: 3x a day
seed 15 0% 1-2 mi Seay
Calendula eth dowers 12 100% 1-2 mk axa day
dry dower, 15 60-80% 12m Saxaday_
Cayenne ey fei 1S.0r 1:10 80-95% 1-8 droge
Cleavers fish whole plane 1s. 100% 2eo 4 mide day
(Crampbarle dry bark ry 50-60% 2-3 mikup to dx a day
Dandelion eth root, 12 100% ‘810 15 mi d-4x a day
dry oor 15 3596-659 80 15 ml Ste a day
Echinacea fesh root 12 100% 1-3 mkup toca diy
dry plant oot 15 50-7596 123 mkup 0 5x3 dy
Fennel ‘rushed ced 13 0% 2-4 min warm water a8
ceded
Ginger fh roe 12 100% 2-4 ml in warm water a
dry oot 1 0% ceded
Ginkgo. leaves 15 55-70% 2-3 mi 3xadyy
Goldenseal eth oot 12 10006 a /5% vinegar __S-2mkup to 3x diy
dry ror and/or laf us G-759e1e/Stevnejae 5-2 up te Ia day
Gamweed eth Bowering tops 12 10096 1-2 mk dx a diy
dey tops 15 65-80% 1-2 mk dx aday
Hawthora fiesh eat ower bernie 12. 100% 1-3 mi Seadiy
ay 15 40-70% 13 mi 3eady
Mugwore dey bet 15 000%, ‘5-2 wh: 3x day
Malin fie Bowers ut 100% 2-3 miup w 4xa dy
ary 15. 50-60% 23 mkup w tea dey
Nettle fet heb 12 10096 1-3 mk 3xadiy
dey herb ot root i 40-50% 1-3 mi 3e adv
On fees “ueripe milky "seed 1:1.75 0% 120-759 2-5 mup w 4x a dry
Peppermint dry herb 1 006 1-3 mi Sead?
Plantain es he 12 100% 2-3 mb: 3x aay

‘Se John’s Wort fresh Gowering tops 12 100% 1-3 mi 3x aday

----- PAGE 261 -----
HERBS ON THE “35 HERBS AND A FunGus” List
Tuat Are Wext Preparep As A TINCTURE, continued

PLANT PART WEIGHT TO OF ALCOHOL ADULT DOSAGE
VOLUME IN MENSTRUUM
‘Saw Palmetto fresh berries 12 80-100%
15 60-80% 205 ml:3xa

Sculleap fresh herb 1.75 oF 1:2 100% 1-3 ml: 3x a day

recently dried 15 45-60% 1-3 ml: 3x a day
Siberian Ginseng’ powdered root 135 60% 2-4 ml: up to 4x a day
Uva Ursi leaf 15 50-65% 1-3 mb: 3x a day
Vitex berries 14/15 45-65% 1-2 mb: 3x a day
Valerian fresh root 1:1.5 oF 1:2 _ 100%
Yarrow fresh flowering plant 12 100% I:

dry 45 40-60% 1-3 ml: 3x a day
Yellow Dock —_ fresh root, 12 90% ale./10% glycerin

dry 15 40-50% /10% glycerin

1. (Aatea Ruiba) used 28 a sbstirute for Black Cohosh
12. As per Michael Moore, Medicinal Plants ofthe Pai West

13 Excellent flavoring agent

4. Very difficult to find authentic herb best to buy the authentic extract. Otherwise use powdered root.

* It is important to clean and wipe off the rim of the jar thoroughly before placing the
lid on the jar and tightening it down. It is even advisable after wiping the rim to place
a piece of waxed paper between the rim and the lid of the jar as a gasket. This assures
that a tight seal will be made preventing the loss of any menstruum that can occur due
to constant shaking of the liquid contents. You will know if there has been any leakage
by the discovery of narrow streams of extract appearing on the outside surface of the
jar.

----- PAGE 262 -----


----- PAGE 263 -----
CHAPTER 13

There is a perennial debate amongst herbal medicine-makers and
herbal extract manufacturers as to the superiority and practicality of
percolation versus that of maceration. We probably won’t resolve
the issue in this chapter, but as you will see, we'll definitely
grapple with the question. Maceration (extracting soluble
constituents by simply soaking them in a solvent) is one of the

----- PAGE 264 -----
oldest methods of extraction known to human medicine-makers.
Percolation is a process having a relatively late introduction into
Western pharmacy, but which quickly caught the fancy and blazing
fervor of professional pharmacists and erudite herbalists. It is a
process of extracting the soluble constituents of an herb by the slow
passage of a solvent (mainly, but not entirely, due to the pull of
gravity) through a column of dried powdered plant which has been
packed in a special form of apparatus known as a percolator.
Percolation is sometimes called displacement, because the solvent
after becoming charged with the soluble part of the herb is
displaced by fresh portions of the solvent liquid.

The question of which of these methods of extraction is the
better, I guess, is best answered by stating that each has advantages
and disadvantages over the other.

The percolation process can be found advantageous because:

+ It offers a means of making a tincture in 24 hours (when in a huge
rush, as little as 3 or 4 hours), whereas maceration ordinarily takes
10 to 14 days, sometimes longer.

+ It is easier and faster to prepare more highly concentrated dry
plant tinctures (1:2, 1:3) and fluid extracts (1:1).

+ The soluble constituents of an herb can be removed and collected
more completely by percolation than by the soaking, pressing, and
filtration processes used in maceration. (However, this assertion
probably incites more heated debate than the creation vs. big bang
and evolution contest.)

+ The liquid left in the residue (marc) and discarded after
completion of a successful percolation is pure menstruum, which is
a bit bothersome, but at least all the plant’s constituents dissolved
in the proceeding percolate and have been collected in there
entirety for use. In maceration, the liquid left in the residue is a
finished full-strength tincture, which is never completely removed,
and that is even more irksome.

----- PAGE 265 -----
+ One does not have to press the marc. Maceration requires pressing
in order to remove as much of the saturated solvent (tincture) as
possible from the marc. With more highly concentrated tinctures
(1:3. 1:4), 20 to 25 percent of the extract can remain in the mark if
it is not pressed thoroughly, and, even when pressed thoroughly,
some of the tincture (regardless of its w/v concentration) is always
lost to the marc.

+ Well-made, efficient presses, when available, can be expensive
(percolation requires no pressing).

+ Percolation offers a fascinating challenge and carries a discerning
air of status for those who can do it consistently, like those few
surfers who can ride the big ones—the mountain riders. Actually,
percolation’s not quite as demanding as riding a 40-foot wave.

Maceration is more advantageous in the following circumstances:

+ For the extraction of plants containing large amounts of gum or
mucilage which swell considerably when moistened. Percolation is
only suited for the extraction of close-grained plant materials which
swell only a small amount.

+ For the extraction of fresh undried plant material.

+ For the extraction of plant materials that contain a high
proportion of resins and gum-resins. Neither highly resinous or
gum-resinous plant materials nor fresh plant materials can be
extracted by the percolation method. Due to the physical nature of
these materials, they cannot normally be packed properly to allow
an effective flow of menstruum essential for efficient percolation.

+ For the making of glycerates or the use of menstrua containing
glycerin.
Other practical advantages that are inherent in maceration:

+ The process of maceration is decidedly more simple. requiring less

----- PAGE 266 -----
aptitude, dexterity, and judgment in conducting it, and it requires
little or no practice.

+ It is uniform, always done in the same way.

+ The results are quite predictable in that all of the derived tincture
will be of uniform strength.

+ It requires less constant attention during the process (just shake it
once or twice a day). This is quite significant when dealing with
large quantities.

+ The apparatus required is less complicated and more easily
acquired.

+ It works every time, and it produces excellent tinctures.

With regard to our immediate situation, wherein we are
communicating solely by illustrations and written word, percolation
evokes a significant problem because to learn and develop a
semblance of success in this process of extraction, physical
demonstration and hands-on practice are usually needed. However,
after some deliberation, I decided to pursue this introductory
discussion and instruction in the performance of the percolation
method for the benefit of those who have heard of it and wonder
what the heck it’s all about; for those who are fascinated by the
fabrication and manipulation of apparatus; for those feral spirits
who will take to the challenge of an untutored attempt; and for
those who have previously experienced the making of a tincture by
percolation, but can use a mental review. Ergo...

PERCOLATION

Equipment

----- PAGE 267 -----
You need a percolator cone. This can be a relatively costly
Pyrex® glass cone purchased from a lab equipment supply
house, or it can be a clear glass funnel, or a homemade device
manufactured by removing the bottom of a glass (don’t use a
plastic bottle) 1-liter Crystal Geyser® or Calistoga®-like water
bottle (which is what most of us do). This is done by using a
glass cutter. The idea, design, and popularization of this
homemade percolator is directly attributable to the practical
brilliance of Mr. Michael Moore, herbalist and director of the
Southwest School of Botanical Medicine in Arizona. The
transmogrified water bottle will sit upside down in a wide-
mouthed Mason® canning jar and the screw cap of the bottle
is used to control the rate of drip from—what has now been
converted to—the bottom of the bottle. For percolating smaller
batches of tincture, a Perrier® bottle is better used, as its
diameter is narrower, allowing a small amount of herb to
create a longer column of powdered herb for the menstruum
to percolate through. This can often make for better extraction.
Use a narrow-mouth Mason jar with the Perrier bottle.

You also need a packing rod. This can be any device having
a broad, flat end that can be used to tamp down the powdered
herb while packing it into the cone. A 10” length of 3/4” to 1”
diameter wooden doweling sawed off squarely at the end
works well.

In addition to some of the kitchen pharmacy equipment I
have recommended in Chapter Four, you will also need:

+ unbleached filter paper
+a small container that can be closed airtight
+ plastic bags and rubber bands

+ a small weight like a quartz crystal or a rock that is fairly

----- PAGE 268 -----
impervious to liquids

+ a couple of 1-quart canning jars (when using the homemade
type percolator)

+ well-dried plant material
+ alcohol and water

For a detailed description of the “technical” approach to
percolation, you can read Remington’s Practice of Pharmacy or
Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences. The following method is
a variation of the “lay” method popularized by Michael Moore,
who wheeled onto the campus of our herb school one
afternoon and started cutting the bottoms off of a bunch of
glass Perrier bottles. At the time, we weren’t exactly sure why.

Standard Percolation Cones

----- PAGE 269 -----
Homemade Percolator

Packing Rods

Herb Preparation

You will need to grind and sift your dried plant material to
allow for smooth easy extraction. A coarse #20 powder will
do (see “Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five). The nature of the
plant being percolated is the prime factor as to how finely it
should be powdered in order to be efficiently extracted by

----- PAGE 270 -----
percolation. National Formularies direct anywhere from #20
to #60 powders depending on the herb, with #30 and #40
seeming to be the most often directed. Vary the fineness of the
powder you use as you experiment with each herb. This is
why, over the long run, note-taking is so helpful. Run the
powder through your sifter and remove all chunks and clumps,
leaving a uniformly textured powder. When making a tincture
by percolation, the evenness of the texture of the powder is
probably as important as how finely it is powdered.

Preparation of the Menstruum

Suppose you have decided to prepare a tincture at 1:5
weight/volume in a 60 percent alcohol menstruum:

1. Weigh the freshly ground herb. Let’s say you have 180 Gm.

2. I'll be referring back to this step at the latter part of the
process. Pack the herb into a measuring cup to determine the
compressed volume that the herb fills. Let’s say it is 300 ml
(10 0z). This is approximately the volume of menstruum that
will be retained by the marc and discarded along with the
marc at the completion of this percolation. This amount varies
depending on the herb being used. At the end of this process it
may be found some plant material retains more liquid than
this estimate, some may be less; when finished with the
percolation, one should make note of the actual amount
retained by this herb for the next time it is percolated.
Therefore, that amount of (estimated) menstruum (300 ml)
must be added to the full volume of menstruum that is
required to produce a 1:5 w/v tincture (which in this example
will be 900 ml—5 x 180). So, you will need to prepare 1200
ml (300 ml + 900 ml) total volume of menstruum for this
percolation (See details for calculating a w/v menstruum in
Chapter Twelve).

----- PAGE 271 -----
3. Prepare 1200 ml of 60%:40% menstruum, 60% (720 ml) of
190-proof ethyl alcohol, 40% (480 ml) of distilled water.

4. Mix the alcohol and water together, and set it aside in a
closed container.

Moistening the Herb

This is a preliminary moistening that is done before the herb is
packed into the cone. It allows the dampened powder to swell
upon absorbing the liquid. Some plant powders, if dampened
and packed in the cone before swelling occurs, can expand to
such a degree that the cone ends up being packed too tightly to
allow the liquid that is added later to flow down through it.

1. Add approximately 200 ml of menstruum to the 180 Gm of
powdered herb and mix it thoroughly. (This is about 2/3 to
3/4 of the 300 ml volume calculated-in Step 2, on this page—
to saturate the marc. Remember, we are only dampening the
powder at this time, not yet saturating it). Make the
consistency such that you can pinch some of the moist powder
between your fingers, and it will hold together. Precaution:
Moisten the herb slowly; if it is not moist enough you can
always add more liquid. However, if it gets too moist, the ball
game’s over, maceration wins.

2. Place the moistened powder into a container that can be
tightly sealed to prevent evaporation and let it sit for 1 hour to
over night, depending on your time urgency.

----- PAGE 272 -----
Diameter of Cut Paper

Packing the Cone

1. First cut two round pieces of coffee filter paper. Make their
diameters roughly equivalent to the inside top opening of the
cone.

2. Make a cone out of one of the papers by folding it into fours
(in half twice) then opening it up to form the cone.

----- PAGE 273 -----
Making the Cone

3. Pack this paper coffee filter cone with some of the moist
powder. (Pack it lightly at this point.)

4. Slide the filled paper cone down into the neck of the glass
percolator cone. You may need to use a chopstick to get it in
place. (If you experience some difficulty, relax and hang in
there, you'll get it.) Once it is in place, make sure the paper
cone is adhering to the glass and is sealed completely around
the circumference.

Packing the Filter Paper Cone and Positioning It in Glass Cone
5. Now that the packed paper cone is in place, gradually add
more of the moist powder (about 1/3 of what is left to pack)

on top of this first batch, and tamp it down evenly with the
packing rod.

6. Now put in the second 1/3 of the powder and tamp it down
a little harder and evenly.

7. Follow this with the final 1/3 of the herb. Each successive

----- PAGE 274 -----
portion being pressed a little more firmly than the proceeding
portion. Compress and compact the column of powder very
evenly. When this is done correctly, the packing will look
uniform from the top to the bottom of the cone. It will not
look like three separate layers.

8. Be sure the top surface of the final layer is flat and level.
This is the judgment portion of the operation that will take
some practice. If the column is packed too hard, the
menstruum that is poured on later will not flow at all. If it is
packed too loosely, the herb will redistribute itself as the
menstruum flows through it, creating fissures that disturb the
flow of the menstruum, causing an incomplete extraction. If
the column is not packed evenly throughout the width and
depth of the cone, the flow will descend unevenly, causing an
incomplete extraction. Packing the percolator so that the best
results will be realized is a skill that is acquired only by the
experience of trial and error.

9. Lay the second round piece of filter paper on top of the
packed herb, and on top of this put the quartz crystal or the
rock to weigh the paper down. This is done to protect the top
stratum of the packed powder when the rest of the menstruum
is being poured in.

Adding Some More of the Menstruum

1. Remove the bottle cap from the bottom of the cone so air
can escape as the body of solvent descends. If this is not done,
when more menstruum is poured on, air will bubble up
through the herb instead and mutilate the packing job.

2. Set the packed percolator down into the wide-mouth Mason
jar, making sure the top surface of the powder is level,
horizontal, parallel, perpendicular to vertical, straight across,

----- PAGE 275 -----
ete.

3. Slowly pour the menstruum onto the column of herb. The
menstruum should progress slowly and evenly down the herb
column throughout each successive layer of the moistened
herb. If it does this successfully, this is when the fat lady sings;
this is when you get your wings—or not (till the next time).

4. When the menstruum reaches the bottom of the percolator,
the herb is saturated and the menstruum will begin to drip out
of the bottom. Gently pick up the bottle and replace and
tighten the cap to completely stop the flow of liquid. Place the
cone back into the Mason jar.

5. Be sure to leave a layer of an inch or more of menstruum
sitting on top of the packed herb. This layer must be
maintained throughout the entire percolation until the last
portion of the menstruum has been added. If instead, the
column of powder is exposed to air, the air at once enters the
powder; then when more liquid is poured on, the air must
escape and forces its way to the surface disarranging the well-
packed powder (bummer).

----- PAGE 276 -----
Properly Packed and Imperfect Packed Cones

Let me attempt to illustrate this more clearly for you with the
following comparison. Visualize, if you will, a soiled and
sweaty, battle-worn soldier who, after having just survived the
most gruesome combat episode of a high-budget, Dolby sound,
war film (or if you prefer, just moments after the hottest love
scene in motion picture memory) lying back and taking a long,
slow, deeply satisfying drag on a svelte, name-brand cigarette.
Now, zoom in for a close-up shot of the cigarette’s burning
end. See it glowing brightly as the fire moves gracefully and
evenly down the cigarette’s chemical-laden, nicotine-enhanced,
firm and uniformly packed cylindrical shaft? That’s the move
we want the menstruum to make on the powdered herb as the
solvent flows deftly down a firm, uniformly packed, percolator
column. Now, compare that picture to a scene wherein a small
group of colorfully clad people are sitting in a circle
drumming, talking, and laughing amongst themselves while
one of them takes a lengthy toke on a rather hastily assembled
home-rolled unit. See the fire sputter and crackle unruly as it
speeds down one side of the unevenly packed cylinder leaving
the rest of the paper and its herbal contents, for the time being
untouched. That’s the kind of movement you don’t want to see
the menstruum make. Get the picture? Maybe you have to be
there. But I’m confident a significant number of readers can
relate to the experiences and appreciate my analogies.

The Maceration Period

1. Having made sure that a one- or more-inch layer of
menstruum covers the top of the moist powder, so no air gets
into the column, cover the cone with a plastic bag and secure it
with a rubber band.

----- PAGE 277 -----
2. At this point, the herb is left to macerate for at least 12, but
preferably 24 to 48 hours.

Percolation, the Dripping Period

1. After the period of maceration is completed, remove the
plastic bag and loosen the bottle cap. Allow the menstruum,
carrying with it the extractive (this is called the percolate), to
drip slowly into the Mason jar(s). In fact, the volume of 900 ml
will require two Mason jars. While dripping, before the
accumulating tincture reaches the cap of the percolator, slowly
lift the cone and set it in a second jar to continue dripping.
The drip rate should be approximately 1 drop each 3 seconds
(20 drops per minute). The rate of flow can be adjusted by
tightening or further loosening the cap.

2. Continue to add fresh menstruum until it all drips through.
This can take up to two hours and sometimes longer. The
actual drip rate will depend on the constituents of the herb,
the firmness of the packing, the tightness of the cap, and the
nature of the menstruum used. The higher the menstruum’s
alcohol content, the easier it passes through the herb.

3. When the percolation has finished, there will be
approximately 900 ml of tincture in the Mason jar(s) and
approximately 300 ml of menstruum remaining in the marc, to
do with as you will. The first time you “do” the herb at hand,
you may or may not end up with 900 ml of tincture because
the “300 ml” of extra menstruum you added in Step 2, on this
page, at the very beginning of this procedure may not have
been an accurate estimation due to the nature of the herb and
the nature (alcohol water proportion) of the menstruum. If the
percolate proves to be more or less than 900 ml, so be it. It
won’t be off by more than a few milliliters. Make a note and
adjust the amounts the next time you do this herb. Each herb

----- PAGE 278 -----
will be different.

SUMMARY

For a successful percolation, one that extracts all the constituents
from the entire column of powdered herb, the dampened herb has
to be packed uniformly firm (but not too firm) throughout the
entire length and width of the glass column (this takes some
practice and judgment) and the menstruum must be poured onto
the packed powder ever so gingerly, so it will flow slowly, evenly,
and regularly throughout each successive horizontal layer to the
next. The menstruum must not scoot down one side of the column
in a narrow trail leaving the remainder of the powder untouched,
for this will result in an incomplete extraction. If this does happen
(and it does!), or if you packed the column too firmly and nothing
happens (in extreme circumstances, it can take up to an hour for
the dripping to start, so don’t throw it out too soon), just dump
everything (all the herb and all the menstruum) into a jar and
simply macerate it instead (a point for maceration). You'll end up
with a fine tincture having a 1:5 (plus the extra menstruum, in this
case, +300 ml) tincture strength. Or if while pouring the latter
portions of menstruum into the cone, you see that the flow isn’t
going well, withhold 300 ml of the menstruum; now when you
dump everything into the maceration mode, you will have a 1:5
strength tincture and 300 ml of high-proof cocktail to drown your
tears in.

If any or all of my explanations, illustrations, and candid
analogies remain unclear to you, I’m not too surprised. Percolation
is difficult to put in words; but I tried. You might want to reread the
final point I made in the beginning of this chapter on this page. But
certainly persevere; take the challenge—inevitably glorious success
awaits you. It could be worse; you could be trying to toilet train a
thirsty puppy. So practice packing, and pouring, and dripping by
using inexpensive powdered Fennel seed or like material and
relatively inexpensive 80-proof vodka. Powdered seeds pack easier

----- PAGE 279 -----
than most leaf or flower material, which tend to be a little spongier
when packed, and many roots, which tend to contain a relatively
large amount of albumen and are, therefore, a little more difficult
to begin with. Better yet, find a bulk Chai tea blend (like the one
discussed in Chapter Twenty-Two for making a Chai syrup), and
use plain water as the menstruum. Percolation is a method
commonly used in pharmacy to make aqueous infusions. This will
give you good practice having little financial risk and will render a
delicious Chai tea beverage with which to celebrate your successes,
or toast the lessons of your mishaps. Pure water is more difficult to
flow through a packed cone than pure alcohol or alcohol/water
mixtures; so once you successfully percolate using pure water, you
can flow and drip any menstruum thereafter. Obviously, hold off on
percolating ultra-precious Black Cohosh, or Goldenseal, etc. (or
using relatively expensive high-alcoholic menstruums) until you’ve
got the process mastered.

A final indication as to how successfully you exhausted the plant
material, thereby rendering a full-bodied extract, is reflected by the
taste of the last drops of the percolate. If these final drops have
merely a faint flavor, you can assume that you extracted nearly all
the constituents from the plant material. If these drops are,
however, highly flavorful, there is probably a major portion of the
constituents still remaining in the marc. Do something different next
time. Pack the cone a little more firmly to slow down the flow of
solvent and extend the extraction time, or use a finer powder for
this particular plant, or slow down the drip rate by keeping the cap
tighter. Enjoy the challenge! Be fortified by your failures; celebrate
your success.

DOSAGE

Dosage varies according to type of herb(s) used and the size, age,
and condition of the individual. Refer to the suggested adult dosages
found at the end of Chapter Twelve, “Tinkering by Maceration.”
Also see the “Dosage” section in Chapter Twenty-Five for

----- PAGE 280 -----
calculating dosages for children.

Heras on THE “35 Heras anv A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep py PeRcoLaTion

To help determine a good menstruum formula, refer to the
suggested range of percent of absolute alcohol for dried plant
tinctures found at the end of Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration.”

These are inexpensive and abundant—
Fennel, Nettle, . .
. good practice plants for developing your
and Peppermint . .
percolation dexterity.

Blackb. This is usually better used as an astringent
ack ber!
a infusion or decoction, however.

Black Cohosh

Burdock

Cayenne

Crampbark

Dandelion
This is best used as a fresh plant tincture,

Echinacea but if you are using very recently dried
root it can be well percolated.

Fennel

Ginger

----- PAGE 281 -----
Ginkgo

Goldenseal

It is difficult to find reliable, authentic
Siberian Ginseng dried herb; for this reason, it is probably
better to buy a reputable imported extract.

This is usually better used as a cold infused

Uva Ursi
tea.
Valerian
Vitex
Willow This is usually better used as a tea.
It is a little tricky to render this plant into
Yarrow

a uniform powder.

Yellow Dock

----- PAGE 282 -----


----- PAGE 283 -----
The history of the human race abounds in grapes and finds
humanity romping merrily through the history of wine. Arabian
physicians, as well as Hippocrates, Galen, and Pliny, heartily
acclaimed the medicinal virtues of wine, and modern medical
science is heard singing its praise as well, consistently finding it an
active agent in disease prevention.

----- PAGE 284 -----
Throughout the history of herbal medicine-making, wine was
commonly employed as a menstruum to coax into solution the
virtues of several plants, and the preparations formed were called
vinous tinctures or medicated wines. In the U.S. and Britain, the
wines most often used for menstrua were the official wine sherry,
together with port, madeira, teneriffe, and claret.

Our ancestors found certain advantages in the use of wine as a
pharmaceutical menstruum: it dissolves substances normally
considered insoluble in water, and, to a large extent, resists their
tendency to spontaneous change. At the same time, wine is less a
stimulant than rectified or proof spirit, both from its smaller
proportion of alcohol and from the modified state in which the
alcohol exists in wine’s composition.

Medicated wines are one of the oldest class of Galenic
preparations. They are hydro-alcoholic solutions made from various
plants and employing white (sherry) or red (port) wine as the
principal solvent or menstruum. In 1906, the official U.S.
Pharmacopoeia VIII recognized red wine, white wine, and 8
medicated wines. In 1916, the National Formulary IV included
formulas for 15 wines, all of which were made with sherry, but
none have been official in later editions.

Herbal or medicinal wines are tinctures in which the menstruum
is wine. The solvent power of wines on herb material depends
primarily on the water and alcohol they contain. The acid that wine
usually contains serves in some instances to increase its solvent
power. The absence of uniformity in the proportion of alcohol to
water in commercial wines renders the preparations made with
them of unequal strength. The availability of other preparations
such as tinctures and fluid extracts, which can render a more
standardized strength (at a precision which can seldom be attained
when wine is used), and the legal restrictions affecting the use of
wines during the period of national prohibition, accounted for the
decline in popularity of medicinal wines and their eventual
deletion from official compendia. However, in spite of the
heightened degree of pharmaceutical precision attainable from
mixtures of grain alcohol and water. and the applauded

----- PAGE 285 -----
preservative action of these high-alcohol content extracts, to me
they are somehow less consonant with the human body than
medicinal wines, and for my nature they often vibrate a bit
too ... medical. Herbal wines come across more as flavorsome foods
and genial tonics. In contrast to the use of grain alcohol extracts, the
employment of which often stems from a rather solemn, clinical,
and renovating perspective, herbal wines seem to have a more
festive relationship with the human mind and body. In my
experience, the spirit of imbibing an herbal wine lends itself more
to the mental and spiritual celebration of health and wellness.

As discussed later in the vinegar monologue (Chapter Fifteen),
hyper-extractants and perpetual-preservatives served the
medical/pharmaceutical establishments well in the manufacturing
and marketing of their uniform strength, high potency, heroic
products, but we lay herbalists need not rely so heavily on these
qualities as we create a home pharmacy of herbal tonics. Because
we have made ourselves more independent and can recreate our
herbal preparations annually if we wish, they don’t have to last
“forever” on a shelf. And our handmade meds need not always
present a precise strength or be pharmacologically mega-potent to
touch our health. In addition to their abundant herbal actions, they
provide other components in their overall tonifying therapeutic
effect not found in the use of commercial products. Inherent in their
handmade character are the seasonal joys we experience by nature
of going outdoors into the wilds, along a pathway, and into the
garden, seeking, visiting, and harvesting moderate amounts of our
herbal allies and creating our own premium products. The
handmade nature of our herbal preparations supplies us a
considerably broader spectrum and more wholistic emplacement of
health-enhancing therapeutic actions. So, for all herbal medicine-
makers who agree with my meanderings, wine shines once again as
a welcome solvent/preservative for common use.

THE UNIQUE RELATIONSHIP OF WINE WITH THE HUMAN
BODY, MIND, AND SPIRIT

----- PAGE 286 -----
It would be a sober error to conclude that a given quantity of wine
is equivalent to an equal quantity of water containing a like
percentage of distilled grain alcohol. The peculiar effects of a true
wine depend upon its ethereal and saline elements, such as its
volatile oils, sugar, or acids, which modify materially those effects
that would be produced by its alcohol alone. The grape-derived,
naturally occurring accessory components of pure wine help the
body metabolize and eliminate the wine’s alcohol more gracefully,
excreting it more benignly. Whereas purified alcohol is blunt in its
nature, seeming to bump and bruise the organs and the brain as it
transits through the body. Understand, of course, that any alcoholic
liquid, be it grain alcohol or fine wine taken in excess on a regular
basis, may bump, bruise, and break livers, careers, and families.

In various circles, discussion swings back and forth on the benefits
and evils of imbibing alcohol of any nature. Traditionally it was
believed that the physiological actions of wine on the human
experience afforded many benefits. It was held that genuine
unadulterated wine is essentially a stimulant of the nervous and
circulatory systems, but its mode of stimulation is quite unlike that
of other alcohol. In moderate proportions, wine increases activity
and freedom of action, quickens and brightens the intellect and
imagination, warms the feelings, invigorates the digestive powers,
and it diffuses a cordial satisfaction throughout the whole being. No
wonder Bacchus has always been humanity’s most favored god.

In contrast, the action of distilled alcohol tends to benumb the
faculties even while stimulating them, so that subjectively and
objectively they seem to be struggling under a brute force; the
exhilaration they produce is usually fierce and maudlin and they
often leave in their wake a dull and torpid feeling. Quality wine,
when taken in excess (which occasionally happens), affects the
body less harshly (though harshly none the less) than distilled
alcohol; the latter leads to complications with the liver, heart, and
kidneys, while the former engenders gout, gravel, and nervous
affections.

Wine. especially when used medicinally. needs to be of premium

----- PAGE 287 -----
quality, and fortunately the California wine industry (and I assume
other regions of the U.S.) is providing some excellent quality
beverage and vinum menstrua for our humble domestic use.

During convalescence from fatigue or disease, wine taken in
moderation with food is uplifting and can be an agreeable aid to
recovery. It can also be of significant assistance in chronic
conditions which waste the strength by profuse discharges, or by
pain, or by inducing an anemic condition. In all of these cases, red
wine seems to be more helpful than white. Sparkling wines have
been used to help allay seasickness and other motion sickness.

The primary properties of pure wine are stimulant and
antispasmodic. In convalescence from prolonged fever and the
sinking of one’s vitality, wine is potentially one of the finest
remedies. In some convulsive and spasmodic conditions, wine,
liberally imbibed, can be quite useful. There is evidence that one
glass of red wine a day is beneficial.

THE NATURE AND VARIETY OF WINE

Wine is characterized as a spirituous liquid, the result of the
fermentation of grape juice (the fruit of numerous varieties of Vitis
vinifera), containing natural coloring matter and other substances,
either combined or intimately blended with the spirit. All wine’s
other qualities vary with the nature of each particular wine.

The “spirit,” the intoxicating ingredient in all wine, is alcohol;
hence their relative strength depends upon the quantity of this
substance entering into their composition. Wine’s other ingredients,
aside from water and alcohol, are sugar, gum, extractive, coloring
matter, tannic, malic and carbonic acids, bitartrate of potassium
(tartar), tartrate of lime, aenanthic ether, and volatile oils. The
volatile oil is reportedly the cause of the delicate flavor and aroma
of wine, which is called the “bouquet.” The constituents on this list
are not necessarily present in every wine. Thus sugar is present in
sweet wines, tannic acid in rough wines, and carbonic acid in
effervescent wines. The different kinds of wine derive their various

----- PAGE 288 -----
qualities from their mode of fermentation, the nature of the grape,
the soil, and climate in which it may have grown. Following is a
brief review of those wines that were commonly used in pharmacy
for making medicated wines.

‘Suerry

Sherry (Vinum Xericum, from Xeres, Spain) is of a deep amber
color, and when good, possesses a dry aromatic flavor and fragrance
without any acidity. It ranks among the stronger white wines and
contains between 15 and 20 percent by measure of alcohol. The
U.S. and British pharmacopoeias at one time agreed on indicating it
as the official wine. This was due to the fact that this wine, along
with port wine, are the two varieties of wine most nearly
resembling pure alcohol in their operation. When sherry was
official, it was often made to order by dealers and could in these
instances, by the addition of brandy, range from 20 to 35 percent of
alcohol. This wine, when of good quality and being free from all
acid, is the recommended one to use whenever the stomach is
delicate or has a tendency to acid indigestion.

Porr

Port (Vinum Portense, from Portugal) is of a deep-purple color, and
when young is a rough, strong, and slightly sweet wine. When kept
a certain length of time in bottles, it deposits a considerable portion
of its astringent matter, loses the greater part of its sweetness,
acquires more flavor, and retains its strength. If kept too long, it
deposits the whole of its astringent and coloring matter and
becomes deteriorated. Port is not considered a natural wine due to
the practice of adding to it considerable quantities of brandy, which
causes its heating quality to the palate. This makes it the strongest
of the wines in common use, and its alcoholic strength can be raised
to 30 or 40 percent (keep in mind when choosing a menstruum
that this is 60 to 80 proof). Port can be useful in cases of deep

----- PAGE 289 -----
debility, especially when there is also a condition of loose bowels
and inflammation. This wine can act as a tonic stimulant increasing
the strength of all functions, digestion in particular. A white port is
available to us as well. I have not yet used it, but I assume it is free
of the astringency compulsions found in red port. White port
contains 18 to 20 percent alcohol.

Mapeira

Madeira is the strongest of the white wines in use. It is a slightly
acid wine and when of proper age and in good condition has a rich,
nutty, aromatic flavor. As it occurs on the market, however, it is of
variable quality because less care is taken in its manufacture now
than formerly, and it is subject to adulteration after importation. It
is 6 to 7 percent alcohol, unless fortified. Nutritionally, this is the
most generous of the white wines and is particularly adapted to the
purpose of reviving weakened constitutions and of abetting the
declination of vitality in old age. The slight acidity of Madeira may
disagree with some stomachs, and, as with all acidic wines, this
makes it contraindicated for those who tend to gout.

Carer

Claret is also a red wine and from its moderate strength is ranked as
a light wine. It has a deep purple color and, when good, a delicate
taste in which the vinous flavor is blended with slight acidity and
astringency. It is 12 to 17 percent alcohol. This wine is much less
heating than port, and is useful as an aperient and diuretic.

A favored herb—say Damiana (Turnera
aphrodisiaca), for example, infused in a fine wine
with some mildly mischievous spices and a few
plump raisins touches one’s amorous spirit and
feelings of well-being in a very special way.

----- PAGE 290 -----
Sparkuinc Wines

Sparkling wines, such as Champagne, are more or less sweet (but
can be dry), charged with carbonic acid, bottled before fermentation
is completed, and before the grape sugar is all converted into
alcohol. Alcohol content is 12 percent.

Appts Ciner

Apple cider is 5 to 10 percent alcohol. This is a nutritious wine
carrying with it the apple’s unique spectrum of nutrients.

Meap

Mead is a wine made from honey. This is a fascinating beverage
having a rich history of enhancing merriment while festively
benumbing medieval maidens and raucous warriors. Spawned by
honey bees—our planet’s most brilliant herbalists—mead is a
particularly appropriate menstruum for making herbal extracts.
This fermented flower nectar is 9 to 11 percent alcohol.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

Medicated wines are relatively low alcohol content tinctures
prepared usually by maceration, in which the menstruum is wine.
They have the advantage over water-based infusions and decoctions
since they are much more permanent preparations.

Wine infusions lend very well to the folk method of extraction,
but are also perfectly suited for the weight/volume method. (See
Chapter Twelve for details on these two methods of tincturing.)

DOSAGE

In general. the dose when taking a medicated wine is a

----- PAGE 291 -----
tablespoonful to a wineglassful, two or three times a day.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

In the choice of a wine to use as a menstruum, the purest and most
generous in alcohol should be selected. Sherry, port, madeira, and
teneriffe were preferred by the official pharmacopoeias; sherry and
port having the highest alcohol content.

Medicated wines are liable to undergo a change with time, and
hence it is best that they be made:

+ in small quantities
+ without heat

+ and kept in well-capped bottles, in a cool dark place like other
fine wines

To Prepare A

Mepicarep Wine

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse
powder.

2. Combine with pure undiluted wine of your
choice (see above list of recommended wines).

3. Macerate for fourteen days; shaking the
mixture frequently.

4. Strain.

5. Pour into a sterilized bottle, cap, and store in a
cool location.

----- PAGE 292 -----
Compounp Wine or Comrrey

A classic medicated wine recipe. Restorative Wine Bitters.

1. Take one ounce each of dried Comfrey leaf, Solomon’s Seal
(Polygonatum biflorum), if available, and Spikenard (Aralia
racemosa or A. californica). Reduce them to a moderately
coarse powder and add 1/2 oz. each of Chamomile flowers,
Gentian, Columbo (Frasera Carolinensis, has a Gentian-like
action, include if available), and Cardamom seeds, powdered.

2. Cover these with boiling water, and let them sit in a covered
vessel for 24 hours, then add two quarts of sherry wine. Let
this mixture of herbs and wine macerate for fourteen days;
express and strain. Bottle, cap, and store the wine bitters in a
cold place. (Modify the measurements to suit your needs.)

This classic wine-infusion Comfrey compound was used
traditionally as a tonic for females to help remedy “female
complaints.” I might add that it also serves males to help
remedy female complaints. Take a tablespoonful to a
wineglassful, two to three times a day.

Granp Marnier Domesrigué

250 ml primo-quality brandy

I sumptuous organic orange

2/3 cup granulated sugar

I wide mouth 1/2 gallon clear glass jar with a metal lid

(make four holes in the lid so that string can pass through them)

----- PAGE 293 -----
Some string

4 wooden toothpicks
1. Pour the brandy into the jar.
2. Pour the sugar into the brandy—Do not stir this mixture.

3. Push the toothpicks into the orange, one in each of four
sides.

4. Affix string to the toothpicks and secure the string to the lid
so that when the lid is placed onto the jar, the orange will be
suspended 1 to 2 inches above the surface of the brandy (see
illustration on the following page).

5. Gently (so as not to jostle the brandy/sugar mixture) lower
the orange, which is attached to the lid by hanging in its
toothpick/string cradle, down into the jar and tighten the lid.

6. Let this stand wherever it is going to be completely
undisturbed for 10 days.

7. Once a day, however, without lifting the jar, rotate the jar
one complete rotation. (This is the touch of marnier magic;
perform it with appropriate inner ceremony while holding a
deep in-breath.) Do not, at any point, jostle or shake the
brandy/sugar mixture. The alcohol will slowly vaporize. This
vaporous menstruum will rise and condense on the orange
peel. As it clings to the peel, it will extract the orange’s volatile
oils and drip back into the pool of sweet brandy below, being
one of the most subtly dramatic herbal extractions you will
ever witness.

8. On day 11, remove the orange and stir in any undissolved
sugar.

----- PAGE 294 -----
9. Sip some Grande Marnier.
10. Sip some more Grande Marnier.

11. Bottle and store for further sipping on all special occasions.

Orange Suspension Jar

Next time you prepare this elixir, modify it by doing things a
little differently; poke some coffee beans or clove buds into the
orange peel, or use a mandarin orange, work in an herb or
two, use a different brandy or a different sugar, or all of the
above, whatever. You'll love this one; it’s totally eccentric—the
Addams family would smile fondly upon its antics.

----- PAGE 295 -----


----- PAGE 296 -----
A bottle of vinegar can be found in nearly every household. It sits
on a shelf ready for use in salad dressings, as taste enhancement for
diverse recipes, for pickling, or as a springtime window cleaning
agent; but it is hardly ever employed in modern domestic cuisine
for its nutritional and medicinal properties. Vinegar’s inherent
abundance of nutritional components has been all but forgotten

----- PAGE 297 -----
along with that of sauerkraut, yogurt, miso, and other fermented
foods.

In the early nineteen hundreds, appreciation of vinegar’s
nutritional/medicinal properties entered the dark ages in tandem
with medicinal herbs, but, unlike herbs, full appreciation of
vinegar’s medicinal virtues is still to be revived. When one looks
closely at the inherent constituents of apple cider vinegar, its
health-enhancing properties are rather astounding. Vinegar,
commonly a derivative of apples or grapes (grapes being the
foundation of wine vinegar), contains, in addition to sugar, starch,
gluten, and gum, all the fruit’s inherent mineral salts, most
especially potassium, which play a major role in human
metabolism, respiration, blood conditioning, and nervous system
vitalization. Used topically as a facial cleanser and tonic, cosmetic
vinegar infusions have a timeless reputation for being plant-wise
women’s favored potion for retaining the youth and beauty of their
hair and skin. All these vinegars, cosmetic, medicated, or culinary,
are easily made.

An in-depth study of the medicinal properties of apple cider
vinegar lies in the pages of a little book titled Folk Medicine,
written by D.C. Jarvis, M.D. This once-renowned doctor’s discussion
and guide to the folk medicine practices of Vermonters illustrates
common (palate-pleasing) uses of apple cider vinegar, honey, kelp,
and other plant foods for sustaining health; the book documents
culinary Herbalism at its folkloric best.

So many of the menstrua (oil, wine, vinegar) that were used by
mankind throughout the history of Herbalism, but fell out of
fashion in mainstream pharmacy because they wouldn’t preserve
medicinal extracts indefinitely, are nonetheless excellent for our
domestic use as solvents and preservatives. These are inexpensive,
nutritious, aromatic, and pleasant-tasting components we can make
for ourselves at home, if so inclined. As we reestablish our
experiences as medicine-making lay herbalists, it is a good idea
(having a rich folkloric precedent) to embrace vinegar in the
creative expansion of our contemporary solvent journeys.

The medical/pharmaceutical administrators who made the

----- PAGE 298 -----
decisions to eliminate the use of vinegar (and wine) as an official
menstruum in mainstream pharmacy, replacing their use with
distilled alcohol and harsh solvent-preservatives, had their own
good reasons for doing so. Within the medical crises intervention
and heroic disease-care arena in which these doctors participate,
these decisions were appropriate. But we lay herbalists are not
attempting to make SWAT-drugs, and we are not assembling
products designed to sit for an indeterminate amount of time in a
medical dispensary (or on health food store shelves) waiting for
someone to eventually come along and use them. Instead, we are
making preparations that will be used in our homes and
community within a year or two, and we are preparing extracts that
are to be used as therapeutic agents and tonics which are
formulated to promote health and prevent disease by nipping
illness in the bud; these do not include highly toxic, acutely dose-
specific substances. The herbs used for our purposes are nourishing,
not dangerous, and in most cases yield their properties very well to
a vinegar menstruum and to a wine menstruum. These two benign
solvent-preservatives can adequately infuse our favorite herbs and
conserve the herbal products we prepare for our domestic
purposes. Bear in mind medicated vinegar has been an important
player in official literature throughout medical history. The
pharmacopoeias of many countries have included the Four Thieves
Vinegar as an official medicine. This renowned compound is
composed of vinegar infusions of a wide variety of medicinal plants
—Calamus, Camphor, Cinnamon, Clove, Garlic, Nutmeg,
Peppermint, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, and Wormwood, to name some
that are included in this medical preparation. These plants possess
diverse components which have all been successfully (and
“officially”) extracted using a simple vinegar menstruum.

When deciding on a menstruum to use for your herbal extracts,
keep these things in mind concerning vinegar:

+ Pure, naturally fermented vinegar is nontoxic and can be tolerated
by just about everyone.

----- PAGE 299 -----
+ It is an excellent tonic for the entire digestive tract, and it assists
one’s body to regulate its acid/alkaline balance.

+ It is a food high in mineral content that tastes good (dilute it or
add honey to suit your taste).

+ And for those who resist the use of alcohol for whatever reason,
vinegar and glycerin are fine alternatives.

I encourage all who enjoy the creative process of medicine-making
to experiment with the use of these out-of-fashion, currently “non-
official” solvents, especially now that such excellent quality vinegars
and wines are being made in the U.S. In the earlier years of the
twentieth century, when the medical-pharmaceutical industry
discontinued its use of medicated wines, the U.S. wasn’t producing
much wine of good quality, especially compared to European
imports; therefore, the quality of wine was unreliable. It was also
expensive and a bit of a bother to acquire, especially during the
politically absurd alcohol prohibition period. But times have
changed, and now the currently favored politically contrived
contraband is a benign plant; no longer is government intelligence
waging its domestic war on a mild menstruum. We can now buy
excellent American wines made from delicious grapes grown here
organically, and if you check out the vinegar section of your grocery
stores you will find that the quality and diversity of this medium is
likewise flourishing. This is not surprising seeing as how the fruit
sources and the process of wine and vinegar production are so
closely related.

A look through the marketplace meets the consumer’s eye with a
phenomenal array of vinegar products. One can find peculiar-
shaped bottles of vinegar ranging from the acetous low-life, distilled
white vinegar (made in about 48 hours in steel tanks from grain
alcohol that has been heated, fermented, rapidly oxidized, and often
mixed with sulfites, sugar, caramel coloring, and salt), to certified
organic, raw, unpasteurized apple cider vinegars (made from the
whole apple—not merely the cores and peelings) containing the

----- PAGE 300 -----
natural “mother” of vinegar; or to the exotically fragrant and fruitful
“balsamic” vinegars bottled with fruits of Strawberry, Blueberry,
Cranberry, Pomegranate, or Raspberry; to red and white “wine
vinegars” aged from 2 to 6 years in ash, cherry, or mulberry wood
casks, to brown rice vinegar which is used in making the vinegared
rice known as “sushi.” All of these vinegars make up a fascinating
community of dilute acetic acid liquids ranging from 4.2 to 6
percent acetic acid as mandated by the FDA.

HOW VINEGAR IS MADE

For those who might be interested in making some vinegar, it is an
aromatic sour liquid formed by a two-step fermentation.

The first step of fermentation is accomplished when appropriate
microorganisms turn sugar-containing liquids into alcohol. These
base liquids can be simply a sugar and water mixture, fruit juices
(Peach, Pear, Cherry, Apple, or Grape—the latter two being the
most commonly used in the U.S.), sugar-containing vegetable juices,
infusion of malt (barley), other grains, or rice.

The second step is accomplished by the action of the microscopic
entity, Mycoderma aceti, which takes over and turns the alcoholic
liquids (which are now hard cider, wine, beer, etc.) into a dilute
acetic acid. Mycoderma a. is resident in all free-flowing air, and in
time will find any alcoholic liquid left exposed. It also rides on the
feet of vinegar flies which waste no time zeroing in on any and all
alcoholic zones, most commonly the uncovered kitchen compost
bucket or bowl of ultra-ripe (fermenting) fruit. Mycoderma a. also
resides in great abundance in the naturally occurring, clear, amber-
colored, thick, jellylike substance that it makes in vinegar referred
to by vinegar folks as “the mother.” This mother (a cloudy sediment
of strand-like chains of connected protein molecules that congeal at
the bottom of the bottle) can be filtered out and passed on from
batch to batch as an inoculant which greatly facilitates the
continuance of high-quality vinegar manufacturing.

At 75 to 90° F. the transition of alcohol to vinegar can take about

----- PAGE 301 -----
four months if you’re using a “mother”; but in certain circumstances
this has happened from merely a few weeks to up to six months
depending on the temperature during the fermentation and the
length of arrival time of Mycoderma a.

Theoretically, one should be able to open a bottle of sweet cider,
let it stand at about 70° F., and after about 5 weeks it will turn to a
mild alcoholic hard cider, then to vinegar. This process can be
enhanced and quickened by adding a little “mother” froma
previously made batch to the fermented cider.

THE NATURE OF VINEGAR

The term vinegar is derived from the French vin aigre, denoting a
sour wine. In the U.S., according to FDA regulations, the word
vinegar (when appearing on a commercial label) without an
adjective signifies the cider vinegar made from the juice of apples.
Other acetous liquids may be denoted by various adjectives such as
wine vinegar (grape vinegar), malt vinegar, sugar vinegar, rice
vinegar, or spirit vinegar which is made directly from dilute (grain)
alcohol. By further FDA regulations, all (mercantile) vinegar must
contain at least 4 percent acetic acid (4 grams of acetic acid per 100
cc of volume). Viewed chemically, vinegar is a very dilute (4 to 6
percent) solution of acetic acid, containing foreign matters.

Pure (unmedicated) vinegar is known for its refrigerant qualities.
It diminishes thirst, promotes the flow of saliva, and helps alleviate
restlessness. It promotes the secretions of the kidneys and
respiratory mucous membranes. It is well used for this purpose in
managing fever, acting to diminish the frequency of the pulse and
the heat of the skin. External application of vinegar helps cleanse,
tone, and condition the skin. Vinegar, because of its antiseptic
properties, can be sponged over the body to check perspiration
odor and relieve skin inflammations, sunburn, and itching; it also
reduces surface temperature of the skin in fevers. Used as a lotion,
the evaporation of this liquid produces a refreshing sense of
coolness on the skin: vinegar is used to sponge the surface of the

----- PAGE 302 -----
skin to allay heat or with cotton cloth as a cooling discutient (a
remedy that dissipates accumulations) to bruises and sprains. Used
externally as an ingredient in lotions, vinegar is useful in skin
conditions accompanied by dryness of the epidermis. Used as a
fomentation (see Chapter Twenty-Four), vinegar’s mildly
stimulating nature is often beneficial for treating sprains, bruises,
and bowel distress.

MEDICATED VINEGARS

Medicinal or medicated vinegars are liquid preparations intended
for internal or external use and are made by macerating medicinal
or culinary plants in vinegar (dilute acetic acid). This type of
preparation is an eminently old one, having been in use since the
days of Hippocrates, and medicinal vinegars represent one of the
oldest classes of herbal Galenicals. As a menstruum, vinegar
facilitates the action of stimulants for use as external applications; it
augments and hastens the action of expectorants, and is most useful
for preparing stimulant, astringent, and tonic gargles. Vinegar
tinctures in turn can be converted into either syrups or oxymels, for
internal use (see Chapter Twenty-Two for instruction on making
syrups and oxymels).

Long before distilled spirits were known, the ancients recognized
the solvent powers of vinegar, and they also realized that products
made with vinegar kept for a much longer period of time (due to
its antiseptic properties) than did the infusions and the decoctions
prepared solely with water. Also, in time it was found that for the
most part pure alkaloids, which are a highly active component in
many medicinal plants, are not soluble in water, but that alkaloidal
salts, which are formed upon the reaction of free based alkaloids
with acids, are usually quite soluble in water. The advantage of
using acidic menstrua became apparent, and experience proved the
value of vinegar as a solvent in exhausting the drugs of this
character, such as Goldenseal, Lobelia, Sanguinaria, and other
alkaloid-containing plants.

----- PAGE 303 -----
PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Pure vinegar is a food product that fits well in the kitchen
environment, and therefore with minimal attention does well in the
home pharmacy. When good, vinegar presents an agreeable
penetrating odor and a pleasant acidic sour taste. When long kept,
particularly if exposed to air, it can become muddy and ropy,
acquire an unpleasant smell, putrefy, and lose its acidity. This may
be prevented to some extent if the vinegar is boiled (pasteurized)
for a few minutes, so as to coagulate and separate the gluten. The
vinegar is then filtered and immediately poured into bottles and
capped. This heating process possibly destroys many of the natural
virtues of pure vinegar. The best way to keep one’s vinegar
wholesome is to keep it stored in a cool, dark location, capped,
limiting its exposure to air. Medicated vinegars are kept in the same
way.

In regard to the shelf life of medicinal, tonic, and culinary
vinegars, my experience challenges those authorities who judge
vinegar as a wimpy preservative. Just don’t dilute it any further by
adding water. For this reason, it is advisable to make vinegar
infusions using dried plant instead of fresh plant. The water content
of fresh plants can enter into the solution and dilute the vinegar to
a less than 5 percent acetic acid.

I have one formula sitting on my shelf in a large amber gallon jug
(Dr. John Christopher’s classic Plague Formula—he used this term
as a general reference to any pestilence including the flu). I
assembled it more than twenty years ago. I also bottled some
smaller pint jars full of this batch at the same time, then dipped the
tops of all the bottles in hot wax to seal them. They’ve all been
kicking around with me ever since. I’m mentioning this because
recently we broke into one of the small flasks to see how it
withstood its time exposure. Gleefully, I can report that its potency
and integrity are holding up just fine. This formula consists of apple
cider vinegar and a little glycerin, as co-preservatives along with
some fresh pressed garlic juice and an amalgamation of nine herbal

----- PAGE 304 -----
concentrates: Oak Bark, Mullein, Scullcap, Lobelia, Comfrey (before
a defamation bandwagon proclaimed it toxic), Hyssop, Hydrangea,
Plantain, and Wormwood. Needless to say, there are no words that
can adequately describe its flavor and pizzazz, or any question why
it is a strong, self-preserving, anti-plague ally.

Vinecar Infusion

Vinegar infusions lend themselves very well to the folk method
of extraction, but are also perfectly suited for the
weight/volume method (see Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration,” for details on these two methods).

To prepare medicated vinegar by infusing leaves and flowers
of an herb

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse powder.

2. Combine with pure undiluted vinegar.

3. Macerate for 10 to 14 days; shaking the mixture frequently.
4. Strain, pour into sterilized bottle, and cap.

To prepare medicated vinegar by infusing roots and barks of
an herb

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse powder.
2. Combine with pure undiluted vinegar.
3. Macerate for 10 to 14 days; shaking the mixture frequently.

4. Strain.

----- PAGE 305 -----
5. Heat the infusion to the boiling point (do not boil).
6. Filter while hot.
7. Pour into sterilized bottles and cap.

The purpose of this heating process is to coagulate any
albumin which has been dissolved into the vinegar solution
and remove it, for, otherwise, it can cause rapid fermentation
and spoilage of the preparation. Unlike the flowers and leaves
of most plants, roots and bark usually contain a large quantity
of plant albumin in their tissue, and therefore usually require
this added precaution.

Simple vinegar lotion recipe

This is sponged on or applied as a fomentation to soothe
irritated, itching, burned, or feverish skin. Also used to cleanse
the skin, check perspiration odor, and reduce the surface
temperature of the skin in fever. Combine one part of vinegar
with three or four parts of water.

Poison Oak lotion recipe

This is a recipe for a medicinal vinegar that is most useful to
alleviate the discomforts associated with Poison Oak contact
(I’m a West Coast native and have run into a lot of Poison Oak
in my day, so I know the joy of this recipe from experience.
Poison Ivy doesn’t mingle with us much here in the West,
however, so I have very little experience with its effect on
human skin. I can only assume that this vinegar solution will
also provide similar relief for those allergic to the touch of

Ivy).

1. Make a strong decoction of equal parts Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris) and Horsetail (Equisetum arvense).

----- PAGE 306 -----
2. To 2 parts of this herbal liquid, add 1 part apple cider
vinegar.

3. Add 1 tablespoon of salt per cup of the above mixture of tea
and vinegar. (Store it in the refrigerator.)

4. Apply externally to all affected areas. It might burn at first
(which feels much better than the itching), but this soon stops.

Astringent gargle recipe

Vinegar infusion of Sage leaf (Salvia officinalis). Dilute 1
tablespoonful in 1/4 cup water.

Emetic vinegar recipe

Used to induce vomiting when necessary. Combine 1 oz. of
Lobelia (Lobelia inflata) which has been ground to a
moderately coarse powder with 8 ounces of vinegar. Macerate
for seven days, strain, press, and filter. General dose is 1/2 oz.
to 1 oz. (15 to 30 ml) per treatment.

Vinegar liniment recipe

This is used to rub onto areas of pain or soreness. Heat 1 pint
apple cider vinegar, and add 1 tablespoon Cayenne red
pepper.

Aromatic vinegar recipe

This is used as a mild, soothing water for bathing the forehead
and temples whenever headaches and other indicators of
prolonged stress arise. To 1/2 cup of alcohol, add 1 drop each
of Lavender essential oil, Rosemary essential oil, Juniper
essential oil, Peppermint essential oil, Cinnamon essential oil,
and 2 drops each of Lemon essential oil and Clove essential
oil. Shake this mixture well to thoroughly dissolve the oils in

----- PAGE 307 -----
the alcohol, then add 1/2 cup of pure vinegar and mix this
well. Lastly, add 1 cup of distilled water, mix this well, and let
it stand for 8 days with frequent agitation. Filter the liquid and
store in a tightly closed glass bottle.

The caustic oils of Poison Oak and Poison Ivy are
fixed oils like other vegetable oils. They do not
evaporate readily and therefore must be washed
off of skin, clothing, and pet’s fur. The simple
application of pure Lavender essential oil to the
affected skin is also an excellent drying, anti-
inflammatory remedy for many folks.

Here is a testimonial from a grammar school
teacher who, along with his associate, blissfully
led their grade school munchkins through a
community of Poison Oak:

“James, You asked for a follow-up on the Poison
Oak remedy. Wonderful! Blisters left in 1 1/2 to 2
days, no further spreading and normalized in 4
days. Her kids went to the Dr. for theirs; it kept
spreading with some relief in a week. Thanks,
Tom.”

----- PAGE 308 -----


----- PAGE 309 -----
Glycerites, also known as glyco-extracts or fluid glycerates, are
mixtures of medicinal substances with glycerin. The unique
properties of glycerin as a menstruum provide a number of
advantages. Glycerites can be easily diluted with water or alcohol
without causing precipitation and are excellent to use in place of
alcohol-based tinctures for children and individuals who are

----- PAGE 310 -----
alcohol-intolerant. Glycerites’ sweet flavor makes them especially
appropriate for administering to children.

Glycerin, the sweet principle of oils, was discovered in 1789 and
came into use in medicine and pharmacy around 1846. It is a liquid
obtained by the hydrolysis of vegetable or animal fats or fixed oils.
Glycerin can be made in several ways. One process consists of
subjecting fatty bodies to the action of water at a high temperature
under pressure, whereby the fats, which are glycerides or esters of
the fatty acids, are broken up into glycerin and fatty acids. The
water supplies the hydrogen and oxygen necessary to effect the
change. Glycerin can be synthesized by heating trichlorpropane (a
petroleum product) with water at 365° F. I recommend that you use
non-synthetic vegetable glycerin. Chemically, glycerin belongs to the
class of alcohols, and is sometimes termed glycerol or glyceric
alcohol.

The solvent and preservative properties of glycerin (which often
protect against oxidation) as well as its agreeable taste and stable
consistency render it one of the most valuable liquids known to
pharmacy. It may be added to finished water/alcohol extracts or
used in a menstruum mixed with water, alcohol, or vinegar, or any
combination of the three. Its range of solvency lies somewhere
between that of water and alcohol, and it will extract a variety of
constituents that makes it useful in cases where neither water nor
alcohol are appropriate. It is exceptionally effective in a menstruum
for herbs containing considerable tannin, as it reduces precipitation
of tannins and alkaloids. However, glycerin will not dissolve or mix
with resins or fixed oils, so it is not suitable as a menstruum for
resinous or oily herb extracts. It will preserve volatile oils (though
not indefinitely) even if it does not extract them efficiently.

Glycerin is slightly antiseptic and has anti-fermentative properties
that are excellent, although inferior to those of alcohol. When
diluted, glycerin is demulcent, emollient, soothing, and healing.
Undiluted, it is irritant and stimulant, arousing activity. It is useful
in keeping substances moist, due to its tendency to absorb water
from the air, and its properties adapt it for many medicinal
purposes, both external and internal. Glycerin does not evaporate at

----- PAGE 311 -----
normal temperatures and produces a sensation of warmth to the
skin and tongue.

At present, making glycerites is a somewhat neglected art.
However, with the current popularity of alcohol-free glycerites for
children’s health care, this herbal delivery vehicle is coming into its
own. There is still, unfortunately, only limited experience in the
herbal pharmacy world from which to draw. The following
processes are those that I have explored. I encourage further
creative experimentation and sharing among herbal medicine-
makers, so we can revive and teach this valuable extraction
technique. The dawn of a glycerated herbal renaissance is at hand.

Common belief has it that the presence of 50 percent glycerin by
volume will serve as a good preservative for an herbal solution. It
has been my experience, however, this is not always the case when
storing herbal glycerites. I have found that 60 percent to 75 percent
glycerin is more reliable and suggest that, if some alcohol is
tolerable, adding 10 percent to 15 percent alcohol to the 50 percent
glycerin might be ideal. This is still a greatly reduced alcohol
content, and the flavor will remain superior.

Bear this in mind when doing your math. Because pure (absolute)
glycerin absorbs water quite readily from the air, the commercial
glycerin available already contains about 5 percent water by
volume. When you calculate an appropriate amount of (absolute)
glycerin for its preservative action in a custom menstruum, allow
for this. If you make a menstruum of 50 percent glycerin and 50
percent water figuring that 50 percent glycerin in the solution will
be an adequate preservative, remember that, in fact, this proportion
will contain only approximately 45 percent (absolute) glycerin by
volume and approximately 55 percent water (approximately 5
percent of which was resident in the commercial glycerin). This is
why I suggest using 55-60 percent glycerin by volume in the
menstruum for extracting dry plant material. When extracting fresh
undried plant, the plant’s juices must also be taken into
consideration. If it is a very juicy plant such as fresh Dandelion,
Cleavers. or Scullcap I make it a 1:2 w/v using 80-90 percent

----- PAGE 312 -----
glycerin. For the relatively unjuicy fresh plants that will not dilute
the menstruum to any great extent like Oregon Grape, Red Root, or
Uva Ursi, one can use less glycerin. This is all part of the
experimentation and sharing of experience by herbalists that needs
to be attended to in order to revive this portion of our craft.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Preserve all glycerites in airtight, light-resistant containers and avoid
exposure to direct sunlight and excessive heat. Refrigerate when
possible.

DOSAGE

Glycerites are normally more concentrated than either infusions or
decoctions and therefore stronger. The dosage to be taken can be
smaller. The dosage again depends on the herb at hand and the size
of the person taking the glycerite. When using mild tonic herbs take
up to five droppersful in a glass of water 2 to 3 times a day; for a
more intense herb use anywhere from 10 to 25 drops 3 to 4 times a
day.

Maxine Guycerrres Usinc Driep Pant Materia

Folk Method

See Chapter Twelve for the definition and discussion of “folk
method.”

1. Grind dried herb to a moderately coarse powder (mcp).

2. Place the powdered herb into a large jar that can be tightly
closed.

----- PAGE 313 -----
3. If blending other solvents (water, vinegar, alcohol) with
glycerin for your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container
before adding them to the powdered plant material.

4. Add prepared menstruum to powdered herb.
5. Stir the mixture well, so that all the herb is wet.

6. Add sufficient menstruum to the wet herb, so that about 1/4
inch of extra menstruum sits atop the herb; if the herb is
floating, 1/4 inch below the herb.

7. Cap jar tightly” and shake contents well.

8. Check the jar after 12 hours. If the herb has absorbed the
menstruum, add a sufficient amount of menstruum to re-
establish the 1/4 inch of extra liquid.

9. Shake the glycerite frequently for 14 days.

10. Decant liquid, press the remaining wet pulp, and combine
these two liquids (see discussions about decanting and pressing
in Chapter Twenty-Five).

11. Filter if desired (many glycerites filter very slowly).
12. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.
Dr. Edward Shook’s Method**

8 oz. Powdered herb
2 quarts Distilled water (plus a little extra held aside)

1/4 oz. Potassium sulfate (vitriolated tartar)

----- PAGE 314 -----
8 02. Glycerin

Dissolve the potassium sulfate in water, add the powdered
herb, and simmer until the liquid is reduced to 1 quart. Strain
and retain this decoction and the herb. Again, add enough
water to just cover the herb. Simmer this for 10 minutes. Strain
and retain the liquid. Combine the two liquors, and add the
glycerin, blending thoroughly. Cool the mixture, bottle in
amber-colored bottles, and store in a cool place. Doing the
math shows this mixture to be a little less than 20 percent
glycerin; I suggest full refrigeration as an added preservative.

The Weight to Volume Method
See Chapter Twelve for further discussion and details on

preparing weight to volume (w/v) extracts.

Preparing the custom menstruum

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:4 w/v or 25%
glycerite. Yiewv: asour soo ml

200

G Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
m1,

480 ml Glycerin (60 percent by volume of the

menstruum)

320 ml ___ Distilled water

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:5 w/v or 20% glycerite
which includes 5% vinegar. Yup: asour 1000 ml

200 Gm_ Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
600 Glycerin (60 percent by volume of the

----- PAGE 315 -----
ml menstruum)
50 ml Vinegar (5 percent)
350 ml Distilled water

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:10 w/v or 10%
glycerite which includes 15% alcohol. Yuwp: asour 2000 ml

200

G Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
m1,

1000 ml Glycerin (50 percent by volume of the

menstruum)
300 ml Ethyl alcohol (15 percent)
700 ml __ Distilled water
Making the glycerite

1. Powder and weigh dried plant and place the powder into a
large jar that can be tightly closed.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see samples above). When
blending other solvents (water, vinegar, alcohol) with glycerin
for your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the liquids of
the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container before
adding them to the powdered plant material.

3. Add menstruum to powdered herb.
4. Stir well making sure all of the powdered herb is wet.
5. Cap jar tightly and shake contents well.

6. Shake glycerite frequently for 14 days.

----- PAGE 316 -----
7. Decant, press, and filter (most glycerites filter very slowly).

8. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Porrrarr oF A SuPERSOLVENT

Extracts most herbal components. Mixes well with
other solvents, especially water and alcohol. Does
not cause inebriation and does not mug one’s
liver. Is a non-sugar sweetener that does not
derange ones blood sugar level, is a good
preservative, is colorless and odorless, tastes good,
is free to cross borders, and can even be kosher.

Maxine Guycerrres Usinc Fresh Prant Materia,

The McQuade-Izard Folk Method
This process makes delightfully colored and flavorful extracts.

1. No matter what fresh herb you’re using, fill your maceration
container, packing it to medium density.

2. Dump this out and weigh it; note the weight.
3. Transfer this fresh herb to a blender.

4. Add sufficient (measured amount of) glycerin to cover the
herb and blend until blender top is warm.

This process coats the fresh herb with the glycerin and to a
large extent eliminates oxidation of the plant components as
the blades break down cell walls.

----- PAGE 317 -----
5. Add more glycerin as needed to fully cover the herb (keep
note of the amount added). Fresh plants carry their own water,
so most fresh plants can be blended directly with glycerin
without the addition of water. This depends, however, on the
water content of the herb (make notes).

6. Pour blended marc and menstruum back into the maceration
container and cap tightly.

7. Agitate twice daily for 14 days.
8. Strain, press, and store in amber-colored bottles.

With certain herbs, you may want to add more glycerin after
maceration and pressing to improve preservation. Be aware
that this will dilute the strength of the finished glycerite. Shelf-
life will be between 1 and 3 years depending on the water
content of the fresh plant used. The more water content by
volume, the less preservative power the glycerin will have.
Make appropriate adjustments.

The Weight to Volume (w/v) Method

Preparing the custom menstruum
+ Sample measurements for making a 1:2 w/v or 50% fresh,
juicy plant glycerite
400 Gm Fresh herb (chopped)
ml Glycerin (100 percent by volume of the

800
menstruum)

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:2 w/v or 50% fresh,
not-so-juicy plant glycerite

ann

----- PAGE 318 -----
whi

Fresh herb (chopped)
Gm

Glycerin (75 percent by volume of the
600 ml
menstruum)

200 ml Distilled water
Making the glycerite

1. Chop the plant into small pieces and place them in a
blender.

2. Prepare custom menstruum.

3. Cover the herb with menstruum and blend it like making a
smoothie. (You will have to use enough of the menstruum to
cover the blender blades. Use as much of the measured
menstruum as you can to make the mixture churn actively in
the blender. You may not be able to use all the menstruum in
this blending stage.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly. Be
sure you have added all the measured menstruum to the herb
during or after the blending process, so as to maintain the
intended weight to volume proportion.

5. Shake the glycerite frequently for 14 days.
6. Decant, press, and filter.

7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

----- PAGE 319 -----
om eh whole pa

Tesh root
dy woe
{eh eves and Bowers
died lees
rsh woot
recently dred oot?
Gesh berries
Sowers
eruhed wed
fesh oot
dey wot
Ceideseal fesh oat

dey toot and/or leaf

Hawtiors Teh eal lower. erties
Mogwort
‘Mallia

alslegise

wih SR vine

i
:

ay
dey heb
eh Dower
ay
Neale Geshbew
Ow

ssisalelsalsals

Ary herb or root
Tesh “woripe mally sage seed
dey plane

eppermine Gesh plane

Salley

doy place

fresh er TS eria

recently dred 1s

pondered mot 1s

Ua Uni laf 1s

Vitex Derres iors

Valerian oho 1S 012
cently dried root’ 1s

(Dred plan not very ate

2: Gooden echinors wt dow mt wrong Hoge.

{lee very ical ond utenti Siberian Ginseng inthe mae, bet 6 buy the stent ext.

1 God. guy ein rt doe mt vie ng oe

4
EI
Hy

f
|

eglele|sleelse|eg

* It is important to clean and wipe off the rim of the jar thoroughly before placing the
lid on and tightening it down. After wiping the rim it is even advisable to place a piece
of waxed paper between the rim and the lid as a gasket. This assures that you will have
a tight seal preventing the loss of any menstruum that can occur due to constant
shaking of the liquid contents. You will know if there has been any leakage by the
discovery of narrow streams of extract appearing on the outside surface of the jar.
**From Advanced Treatise on Herbology

----- PAGE 320 -----


----- PAGE 321 -----
OIL INFL

Oil infusions are an infusion of medicinal or culinary herbs in a
fixed oil menstruum. Medicinal oil infusions, when applied to the
skin, form a protective covering and are used to hold other
therapeutic or cosmetic agents to the skin, facilitating the
absorption of the herbal remedies. Oil infusions prepared for use as
food carry the nutrients, flavor. and aroma of culinary herbs to the

----- PAGE 322 -----
gourmet tongue, greatly enhancing the nutritional and aesthetic
pleasures of the herbalist’s cuisine.

Many fixed oils in themselves are well utilized as foods and as
medicines. Medically, these oils are very soothing substances, and
therapeutically they are most useful because of their ability to
soften the keratin layer of the skin. This renders the skin pliable
and tends to prevent cracking of the skin’s surface.

Fixed oils are obtained from both the vegetable and the animal
kingdom. They are often called fatty oils, as they are chemically the
same as fats. They are more or less unctuous (smooth and greasy) to
the touch, and in a liquid condition and dropped on paper, leave a
permanent oily spot. Individual oils vary greatly in their point of
congelation: Olive oil becomes solid at a little above 32° F.,
whereas Flaxseed oil can remain fluid at 4° F. below zero. Pure
fixed oils have little taste or smell. They are lighter than water and
they do not evaporate easily; however, they do boil at about 600° F.
and are converted into vapor at this temperature. Heated in open
air, especially with the aid of a wick, fixed oils do take fire and
burn with a bright and sooty flame generating much heat. These
oils are quite soluble with volatile oils, but are insoluble in water.
However, they are capable of being mixed (miscible) with water by
the assistance of an emulsifier, forming mixtures which are called
emulsions (see “Lotions & Creams,” Chapter Nineteen). Fixed oils
comprise most of the oils in common use, such as Olive, Almond,
Sesame, Cod liver, and Castor oil (and mineral oils). They are well
used as menstrua in warm to hot infusions and decoctions to
abstract resins, oleoresins, and essential oils.

Some oils, such as Castor bean oil and Flaxseed (Linseed) oil,
form fatty acids which act as drugs when decomposed in the
intestines. These unsaturated fatty acids are slightly irritant to the
mucous membrane of the alimentary canal, and as the oils
decompose (hydrolyze) in the intestines, they can render a laxative
effect. This can be a mild cathartic action, as when using Flaxseed
oil, or it can be rather intense, as when using Castor oil. Castor oil
also differs from the other oils in that it contains hydroxy fatty acids
and. therefore. has slightly different solubility properties. It is

----- PAGE 323 -----
soluble to a fair extent in cold 95 percent absolute alcohol, while
the other oils are not. It is also miscible with such substances as
Peruvian balsam, whereas the other oils are not and will separate
on standing.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Oils remain unchanged for a great length of time when kept in cool
airtight glass containers. Rancidity in oils renders them useless in
herbal pharmacy and as foods. It is extremely important to protect
oils from air, light, heat, and moisture. Store all oils in a cool
location (a refrigerator or freezer whenever possible) in tightly
sealed, amber bottles. Fill the bottles as full as possible to eliminate
the oil’s prolonged contact with air during storage.

On Infusions Usinc Driep Pints
The “Folk Method”
1. Grind the dried herb to as fine a powder as possible.

2. Place the powdered herb in a jar that can be capped tightly
and add a fixed oil of your choice (Olive, Sesame, Almond,
etc.). Use enough oil to completely wet the herb.

3. Stir the mixture well.

4. Let the herb settle, then add enough oil to cover the wet
herb an additional % inch. Some lighter herbs will float at first,
so let there be an additional 4%. inch below instead.

5. Many dried herbs will absorb this extra % inch of oil. Check
your mixture 24 hours later, and if absorption has occurred,

----- PAGE 324 -----
add enough oil to re-establish the extra measure of oil.
6. Cap the jar tightly.

7. Place it in a thick paper bag or box to keep light out, and
place in the sun for 7 to 10 days (a warm to hot infusion,
depending on the weather).

8. Shake or stir the mixture every couple of hours each day or
at least several times a day.

9. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
and press the remaining pulp.

10. Allow the infusion to sit still indoors for several days, then
decant and filter out sediment.

11. Bottle in glass containers, cap tightly, label, and store in a
cool dark place.

The Digestion Method
1. Grind dried herb to a powder.

2. Add a fixed oil of your choice, in the proportion of 1 part
powder by weight to 5 parts oil, or a suitable ratio depending
on the nature of the powder. Quantitative ratios are not really
critical for this type of preparation, for its vital energy is not
really dependent on quantitative principles.

3. Place in a water bath, an electric “meat roaster vat,” yogurt
maker, or some other apparatus having a thermostatic control
that allows you to maintain a consistent temperature of around
100° F. (Unfortunately, a crock pot’s lowest range is too hot,
usually about 150° F. or more. Some folks place their oils in an
oven using the heat of the pilot light, but beware of this

----- PAGE 325 -----
technique. There is something about an oil infusion quietly
macerating in an oven that inspires others in the household to
preheat the oven to 350° F. for a spontaneous baking spree.

4. Stir the mixture well, set the heat thermostat at
approximately 100° F., and cover the herb/oil mixture.

5. This maceration (soaking) process using low heat is called
digestion. Ideally, you want to continue this mild heat process
for 10 days and nights at approximately 100°F., stirring it every
two hours. Use a yogurt thermometer to monitor the
temperature.

6. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
and press the remaining pulp. (If you strain the oil while it is
still warm it flows more easily.)

7. Let sediment accumulate for a few days, decant, and filter
the oil.

8. Bottle, cap tightly, label, and store in a cool dark place.

Hot Infusion Method
Taken From a Late Nineteenth Century Physio-Medical Text

1. “Infused oils may be prepared from the finely powdered
herbs: Cayenne, Fucus (Bladderwrack seaweed), Lobelia, and
Comfrey in proportions of 1 part herb powder by weight to 10
parts fixed oil by volume, by the process of decoction. Such
infused oils may be prescribed singly or in combinations as
mildly stimulating, relaxing, or toning liniments for various
skeletal problems, or as the basis for stronger preparations
when the therapeutic affect is reinforced by adding more
powerful essential oils.

----- PAGE 326 -----
2. “The following example illustrates the method for infused
oil of Cayenne, which serves as a model for all others:

Cayenne—in fine powder 100 Gm (4 oz)
Fixed oil Iliter (40 oz)

3. “Mix together smoothly, place in a closed vessel over a
water-bath and digest at 140°-160° F. for 4 hours. Then
remove from heat, allow to cool, and leave for 12 hours for the
powder to settle. Then carefully pour off the clear oil.”

I include this method because I think it is interesting to see
how different (expert) medicine-makers do their stuff. 1 would
never take my oils up to this high a temperature, but these
Physio-medicalists were passionate therapists and pharmacists,
extremely competent in their practice—blessed be diversity.

National Formulary IV (1916) Method

Yew asour 1000 ml

The air-dried
100 Gm in No. 30 powder

herb

Alcohol 100 ml 190-proof (grain) ethyl
alcohol

Ammonia water” 2ml

Sesame oil 1000 ml

* Ammonia water (USP Dilute Solution of Ammonia) is
prepared by mixing 9-10 Gm of ammonia (NH3) into 100 cc
of distilled water. This solution deteriorates rapidly in open
containers.

----- PAGE 327 -----
1. Moisten the herb with the alcohol and ammonia water
(already mixed together).

2. Macerate for six hours in a covered glass or enameled steel
vessel.

3. Add the sesame oil.

4. Using a water bath, warm this mixture at a temperature
between 120° and 140° F. in an open vessel, stirring frequently
until the alcohol and ammonia water are dissipated.

5. Then transfer the mixture to a strainer, express the residue,
and filter the strained oil.

On Infusions Usivc Fresh Piants

The “Herb School Method”
1. (Optional) Wilt the fresh herb for 12 hours (do not dry it).

2. Chop the freshly cut or wilted herb to a fine pulp or grind
plant in a metal Corona grain mill, or in some other suitable
instrument, and place the resultant mash into a “meat roaster
vat,” yogurt maker, or some other apparatus with a
thermostatic control that allows you to maintain a consistent
100° F. temperature.

3. Add a fixed oil of your choice, enough to make your mixture
thick-juicy-wet (Olive or Sesame oil are recommended, Sweet
Almond oil will be used for skin care).

4. Stir the mixture well and smell it (make an olfactory note of
the nature and quality of the aroma).

----- PAGE 328 -----
5. Set the heat thermostat at 100° F. and cover the herb/oil
mixture. With some plants, I leave them uncovered for the first
couple of days to allow moisture to evaporate. Ideally, you
want to digest this oil infusion for 10 days and nights at 100°
F., stirring and smelling it every 2 hours. Use a yogurt
thermometer to monitor the temperature.

6. If this fresh plant oil begins to ferment (a change in its
aroma will alert you), raise the temperature to 150° F.,
immediately let it fall back to 100° F., and continue the
procedure. (This usually eliminates the opportunistic activities
of the fermentation-inducing organisms.)

7. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
(this is accomplished more easily when the oil is still warm)
and press the remaining pulp.

8. Now: At this point we have created a problem that needs to
be dealt with. The juices of the undried herb introduced water
into the infusion. The presence of water in a fatty oil, as
mentioned before, favors fermentation and rancidity, which
will ruin your medicinal oil. All the water must be removed
before permanent storage.

9. So: Allow your oil infusion to sit in a clear glass jar
undisturbed for 4 or 5 days.

10. The water and other impurities (gunk) will settle to the
bottom, at which point you can decant (gently pour off) the oil
or draw it off with a basting syringe and then discard the
water/gunk portion.

11. It is advisable to let this decanted oil sit undisturbed for a
few more days and check it for remaining water impurities.

----- PAGE 329 -----
12. When you are satisfied that the oil is free of all water,
bottle, cap tightly, label, and store it in a cool dark place.

Physio-Medicalist Method for Making Fresh Plant Cold Oil
Infusion

According to William Cook, physio-medical physician and
herbal pharmacist, “Just as fresh plant tinctures are in many
cases better than their dry plant counterparts, so lotions,
ointments, and other forms of surface medication based upon
fresh plant oil infusions may be preferred to dry plant
preparations.”...“Because of its greater oleaginous property,
Olive oil is preferred as the basis for these, whereas infused
oils intended for liniments or rubbing oils are better prepared
from rape-seed oil which is less greasy.... Where it is desired to
avoid the use of heat in preparing the infused oil, and this
especially applies to preparations from flowers the following
method is used”:

1. Fill a canning jar with alternate layers of cotton-wool and
flowers, each layer not exceeding %4 inch.

2. Layer these lightly and do not compress them, so that inter-
spaces are left.

3. Fill up the jar with Olive oil.
4. Seal the jar with cap and screw lid.
5. Set aside in a cool dark place for one month.

6. Remove the contents of the jar, keeping the layers of cotton-
wool and flowers together and intact as far as possible.

7. Place in a press and press out the oil by slow steady
pressure. This removes the plant material and cotton-wool.

----- PAGE 330 -----
8. Filter the oil infusion if necessary to remove particles and
dust.

9. Store in brown glass bottles.

As a precaution, I suggest that you refer back to method 1, The
“Herb School Method,” and proceed with steps 8 through 12.

Heras on THE “35 Heras anv A Funcus” List

Twat Are Weut Preparep As Ou. Infusions

DRY PLANT OIL INFUSIONS

Burdock root
Calendula

Cayenne

Comfrey leaf and root

Elder flower

Ginger

Golden seal leaf and rhizome
Marshmallow root

Mullein leaf

Nettle leaf

Plantain

Yarrow
FRESH PLANT OIL INFUSIONS

Mullein flowers

St. John’s Wort flowering tops, especially in the flower bud
stage

Garlic”

Arnica™*

----- PAGE 331 -----
* Garlic is included in this list because it works so well when
blended in equal parts with Mullein flower and Calendula
flower oils for making an earache remedy. One or 2 drops of
this blend are dropped into the ear canal and the ear is
plugged with a small cotton ball. Please note that I am
recommending here the use of an oil infusion of Garlic, not
Garlic juice.

**Arnica is included in this list because it works so well when
blended in equal parts with Calendula and St. John’s Wort oils
to make an excellent application for soothing traumatic
injuries (from very little traumas to major ones). Rub the blend
of oils directly onto the injured parts, especially bumped,
bruised, and/or crushed parts. If the injury includes an open
wound, rub the oil compound around it; it is not advisable to
put Arnica directly on an open wound. Arnica is equally well
prepared as a dry plant oil.

----- PAGE 332 -----


----- PAGE 333 -----
CHAPTER 18

OINTMENT,
SALVES & BALMS

Salves (also called ointments or unguents) are semi-solid fatty
herbal mixtures normally prepared as external healing mixtures.
They soften when applied to the skin, and provide a healing,
emollient, protective, nourishing, or counter-irritant effect. Salves
can vary in consistency from greasy to thick and hard, depending on
the base used. the elements mixed together. and the purpose

----- PAGE 334 -----
intended for its production. A balm is simply a salve that contains a
relatively high amount of volatile oils. Upon application it delivers
a notably intense cloud of aromatic vapors.

The base for most salves is a mixture of a wax and a fixed oil,
usually mixed or infused with medicinal plant substances (see
Chapter Seventeen, “Oil Infusions”). The oil enhances the
absorption of the medicinal substances into the skin, and the wax
gives firmness to the finished salve for ease of application. I prefer
to make my salves with vegetable oils, although some people use
animal fats. Often, essential oils and/or other solid or liquid
materials are incorporated during the salve-making process.

Body heat melts the wax, and the oil fosters quick absorption of
the plant’s medicinal constituents into the skin. Generally, it is best
to massage the salve into the skin. With counter-irritant salves high
in Cayenne, or salves that incorporate stimulating or warming
essential oils (like Ginger, Peppermint, or Camphor), massage is not
normally required, unless, of course, it feels good, in which case rub
with gusto.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Salves are well stored in dark-colored or opaque glass, tightly
capped jars that have openings sufficiently large to allow easy
access to the semi-solid ingredients. Salves are best kept in cool
locations. They don’t preserve as well in locations where they are
subjected to continual melting and re-cooling (like in automobile
glove compartments and similar environments). In some instances
the presence of benzoin as a preservative in salves can cause
irritation on tender and already irritated skins.

DOSAGE

Use as much salve as needed, but it can be bothersome to leave too
much on the skin surface unless it is to be covered.

----- PAGE 335 -----
GENERAL NOTES

Other ingredients such as vitamin E, honey, or essential oils, etc.,
can be added and stirred into a salve mixture as a very last step
before pouring the salve into its final storage container(s).

+ The best way to add essential oils to a salve is to drop them into
the container just prior to pouring in the warm salve mixture.

+ Some of the ingredients (other than the infused herbs and essential
oils) added to the salve mixture can separate out and settle to the
bottom of the container during the sitting and cooling period. While
the salve is sitting in the final storage container(s), still a little
warm, becoming firm, but not quite hardened (you'll know the
right moment), stir the entire mixture (especially the bottom
portion) briskly with a chopstick. This will suspend all the
ingredients throughout the salve base, which will now quickly
harden and retain the added ingredients in a suspended condition.
But now the top surface will look weird. If you care about this,
place the uncapped jars of salve in a hot oven for a few moments.
This will melt the very top surface of the salve rendering it flat,
smooth and, to some folks, more visually appealing. Or melt the
tops by heating them with the hot air of a hair dryer. I used to use a
hand-held propane torch (available in any hardware store) for this
job when preparing large quantities of salves for my small cottage
industry. Let the surfaces harden, then cap, and store them in a cool
location.

To Maxe a Simpte Satve Srartine with

Driep Heras), Fixep Ou, ann Beeswax

1. To each cup of fixed oil (Olive oil, Sesame oil, Almond oil,
etc.) stir in approximately 1 to 2 oz.” of dry herb or a

----- PAGE 336 -----
formulated combination of dried herbs.

2. Place this mixture in an uncovered container. Put it into an
oven leaving the oven door slightly open or place it over a
burner using a flame shield to disperse the direct heat. Heat
the mixture at a low heat (preferably between 100 and 140°
F.) for 3 to 5 hours. Check the temperature of the mixture
periodically, each time stirring it thoroughly.

3. Line a large strainer with a cotton muslin cloth.

4. Remove the mixture and, while it is still warm and flowing
easily, pour it into the strainer to separate the spent herbs from
the oil infusion. Let this sit until well-drained, press out
remaining oil if you want to, and discard the marc.

5. Measure the amount of infused oil you have at this point
and place it in a suitable container over low heat.

6. Add shaved beeswax (approximately 1 oz. of wax per cup of
oil) to the oil infusion and proceed as outlined in steps 4
through 10 on the following page.

To Maxe a Smmpte Satve From a

Previousty Preparep Hersat Ou Inrusion

1. Measure 1 cup of a previously prepared herbal oil infusion
or 1 cup of a formulated combination of two or more oil
infusions.

2. Set aside a small amount of the same oil or oil blend which
can be added later, if necessary, to alter the consistency of the
salve (see step 8).

----- PAGE 337 -----
3. Pour the measured oil into a stainless steel, earthenware,
unchipped enamel, or glassware container that can be heated.

4. Add 1 ounce of beeswax that has been shaved or grated into
small pieces. Set aside a small amount of beeswax that can be
added later if you decide to alter the consistency of your salve
(see step 8).

5. Warm this oil infusion and beeswax mixture over low heat
until the wax is fully melted.

6. Remove the mixture from the heat and dip a metal spoon
(or like instrument) into the warm mixture.

7. Place this spoon into a freezer, a refrigerator, or the coldest
spot available, so that the salve sample will cool quickly.

8. When cool, the salve will have hardened on the spoon,
allowing you to test its firmness without waiting for the entire
pan of salve to harden. If the sample on the spoon is too soft
for your purposes, add a little more wax to the pan of warm
salve; if the sample is too hard, add a little more of the oil
infusion.

9. Repeat the teaspoon test until your salve consistency is
perfectly suited to your purposes.

10. Pour the liquid salve from the pan into appropriate
containers, and let it cool and harden.

There is no other wax as precious and excellent
as that which the bees make for us. The high
chemistry of its fine texture, subtle aroma, and
soft golden hues is yet another mark of perfection

----- PAGE 338 -----
inherent to the varied skills of these master
herbalists. Send the apiarian workers and their
fecund queens your gratitude while making
salves, lotions, and creams. In nature’s way, they’ll
appreciate your regard.

Vecerasie Larp Vecan SaLve

Pure commercial vegetable lard is a sterile medium composed
of hydrogenated soybean and palm oils. Vegetable lard
hardens at room temperature, making it acceptable when a
salve is needed quickly. Lard has the immediate advantage of
requiring no beeswax for hardening. Using the lard as a
catalyst to draw out the value of fresh cut or dried herbs is
quite appropriate for immediate use, since with no lengthy
storage time spoilage will not be a factor. Actually,
hydrogenated oils, although considered by many nutritionists
to be unwholesome food for many reasons, are less likely to go
rancid than unhydrogenated vegetable oils. That works for us
here.

1. Gather either freshly cut or dried herbs. Have the fresh herbs
chopped and ready. It is okay if they wilt. Use approximately
1 cup chopped fresh herb to 1 cup vegetable lard. Crush or
powder the dry herbs as much as possible. Use approximately
1/2 cup powdered dry herb to 1 cup lard.

2. Melt the lard in a saucepan over low heat. Leave the pot
uncovered throughout the preparation, so the lard will not
overheat and some of the fresh herb’s water content can
evaporate.

3. As soon as the lard is melted, carefully stir in the herbs.

----- PAGE 339 -----
4. Allow the herbs to steep in the lard over low heat (deep-
frying them is a big mistake).

5. Stir the herbs periodically to determine when they have
surrendered their properties to the oil, approximately 1 hour.

6. When satisfied that the decoction is completed, remove the
pot from the heat and pour the contents into a cotton-muslin
lined wire strainer.

7. Strain out the liquid salve, pour into jar, cap, and let it cool.

Be careful when heating lard; it can ignite when it
gets very hot.

Do not use plastic containers to store any medium
that contains volatile oils; the oils will eat the
plastic over time.

PETROLEUM JELLY AROMATIC SALVE (A BALM)

Clear, unmedicated petroleum jelly is a sterile inorganic medium
that, when applied, is not absorbed into the skin. It can therefore
act merely as a carrier for volatile oils. Commercial petroleum jelly
(Vaseline® is a brand name) is easily attained. This is an excellent
substance to use for quickly preparing an essential oil carrier that
can be applied into the nostrils in a small amount. Antiseptic,
decongestive essential oils can be inhaled this way during the day to
relieve nasal and upper respiratory congestion.

Some appropriate essential oils to use for antiseptic and
decongestant properties are Eucalyptus, Rosemary, Pine,
Peppermint, Cypress, and Lavender.

----- PAGE 340 -----
Note:
+ Have paper towels ready—this stuff is sticky.

+ A “square-handled” chopstick is a very handy tool for
manipulating this medium.

+ Two level tablespoonsful of petroleum jelly fill a small 1 fl. oz.
(30 ml) salve jar perfectly.

+ 30-50 drops of any combination of the above essential oils is a
good amount to add to each 1 fl. oz. of petroleum jelly.

+ Plan to spend some time cleaning up; this petroleum jelly stuff is
resilient. (I suggest using paper towels initially, then soap and hot
water.)

To Prepare an Aromatic

Mepicarep VEHICLE

1. Purchase a jar of unmedicated petroleum jelly. This is
readily available in drug stores in 1.75 oz. (49 Gm), 3.75 oz.
(106 Gm), 13 oz. (368 Gm) and 15 oz. (425 Gm) sizes.

2. Melt the petroleum jelly over a very low heat. Do not
overheat it.

3. Just as the jelly turns liquid, move it away from the flame.

4. Add the drops of volatile oils to the liquid and stir them in
quickly. For starters, I suggest using 8-12 drops of each single
essential oil (or 30-50 drops total) per 30 Gm of jelly (adjust
this + or — as you see fit). Use up to 4 different essential oils
per 30 Gm.

----- PAGE 341 -----
5. Immediately pour the warm salve into a glass container(s).

6. Cap immediately so volatile oils do not escape salve as it
cools.

Erxyton Satve

This procedure renders a most superior salve from the dried
resinous, golden-orange flowers of the Calendula officinalis in
particular, and/or from any other dried plant which has
primarily alcohol-soluble properties that are not particularly
oil-soluble (i.e., Arnica, Goldenseal, Gumweed, Chaparral).

1. Weigh out dried powdered herb (let’s say 120 Gm).

2. Measure an equal amount by volume of 190-proof ethyl
alcohol (that will be 120 ml).

3. Mix the herb with the alcohol and stir the mixture until all
of the herb is moist.

4. Place this in a tightly sealed container and let it macerate for
24 hours.

5. Measure out 6 parts by volume of vegetable oil (that will be
720 ml).

6. Pour the oil into a blender and add the moist herb.

7. Blend this at a medium speed until the blender basket feels
warm.

8. Strain by pouring into a muslin cloth-lined strainer and

----- PAGE 342 -----
press.

9. Pour the liquid into a double boiler and heat over a low
flame for a few hours until all the alcohol has evaporated (do
not burn the oil). Check to see if any alcohol is still present by
carefully placing a lighted match to the surface of the oil.

10. Bottle the oil in tightly capped containers and store in a
cool place for future use, or add sufficient beeswax to
transform it into a salve as outlined in steps 4 through 10 on
this page.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuar Are Weut Preparep As Satves

Burdock root

Calendula

Cayenne

Comfrey leaf and/or root
Elder flower

Ginger

Goldenseal leaf and rhizome
Marshmallow root
Mullein leaf

Nettle leaf

Plantain

St. John’s Wort

----- PAGE 343 -----
Yarrow

* The volume of herb will vary greatly depending on its density; 1 ounce of powdered
root or seed will usually present considerably less volume than 1 ounce of powdered
leaf or flowers. It is important that the final proportion of herb to oil is such that it
renders the herb quite wet with oil. It is also recommended that you powder the herb
to a moderately coarse powder whenever possible to expose more surface area to the

oil menstruum.

----- PAGE 344 -----


----- PAGE 345 -----
CHAPTER 19

A

: $
LOTIONS
& CREAMS

Lotions are water preparations containing insoluble materials used
for external application that requires no friction. They are less
intense than liniments, and because they are wetter, they are more
sensual in their effect on the skin than salves. Lotions also require
less rubbing in their application than salves, and they tend to leave
a smaller amount of residue on the skin. The term lotion has

----- PAGE 346 -----
derived from the Latin verb lavare, meaning to wash.

Medicinal lotions usually contain antiseptic or germicidal
substances used to treat skin maladies, or they contain substances
cooling and soothing to irritated skin, and healing to broken or
bruised skin. Some lotions are a blend of liquid solutions, while
others are either emulsions (a dispersion of droplets of a liquid in a
second liquid with which it is insoluble) or suspensions (for our
purposes, a finely divided solid dispersed in a liquid—the solid
settles out more or less rapidly). The emulsions and suspensions
frequently contain insoluble bodies that should be in a condition to
diffuse easily when the liquid is shaken.

Cosmetic lotions normally contain nourishing, softening,
moisturizing, and aromatic substances. The use of vegetable oils in
cosmetic preparations, such as creams, hand lotions, and cold
creams, for dry skin is very extensive. In cosmetic lotions and
creams used for nourishment, Olive oil seems to be preferred, while
expressed Almond oil, Sesame oil, Jojoba oil, Cocao butter, and
Coconut oil follow respectively. These fixed oils are insoluble
(immiscible) in water, but are capable of being mixed with water
by the assistance of an emulsifier, forming an emulsion. Natural
(non-chemical) emulsifiers most often employed are beeswax,
deodorized hydrous lanolin, vegetable glycerin, and lecithin.

EMULSIFYING AGENTS

As defined above, an emulsion is the dispersion of droplets of a
liquid in a second liquid with which it is immiscible. This can
usually be accomplished by merely mixing the two liquids in a
roomy container and agitating them vigorously. However, in order
to stabilize this emulsion, a third agent is generally necessary; this is
called an emulsifying agent or an emulsifier. In addition to making
the suspension of the oil in the water medium more permanent,
this emulsifying agent also works to allow a far more concentrated
emulsion. For our purposes in making lotions and creams this
means we can get a much higher proportion of oil to disperse in

----- PAGE 347 -----
the water. Many medicinal and cosmetic herbal agents are taken
into the body through the skin’s oil components. The natural
emulsifying agents, beeswax, hydrous lanolin, glycerin, and lecithin,
do not interfere with this skin penetration as chemical emulsifiers
are believed by some to do.

As an emulsifier, beeswax will also thicken and harden a cream
or lotion to some extent; lanolin (extracted from sheep wool) is
protective and moisturizing to the skin and tends slightly to thicken
a lotion, but is not as reliable as beeswax for this action; glycerin
has been discussed a great deal in this handbook already, so it is
sufficient to say that as an emulsifier it is a mild preservative and is
also an excellent moisturizing agent for the skin; lecithin is a
smooth and slippery emulsifier and lends these qualities to a lotion.
Avoid using too high a percent of either glycerin, lanolin, or
lecithin, for they can make a lotion somewhat sticky; a half to
three-quarters of a teaspoon of any one or a combination of these
per 8 oz. cup of lotion is sufficient. Lotions and creams tend to
thicken a bit as they age.

COLORING AGENTS

Lotions and creams (and salves and Hp balms, etc.) can be colored
by the addition of various herbal oil infusions. First make a highly
saturated oil infusion (see Chapter Seventeen, “Oil Infusion”) of a
specific coloring plant, then incorporate this pigmented oil as part
of the fixed oil ingredient of a recipe (see inclusion of the Alkanet
and Calendula oils in the Rose Cream recipe, this page). Depending
on the amount used, an oil infusion of Alkanet root (Alkanna
tinctoria) gives a soft pink to deep red color; an oil infusion of
dried Turmeric (Curcuma aromatica) or Calendula petals renders a
bright-hued yellow; and many green plants, especially an oil
infusion of dried Nettle, or Plantain, or Comfrey leaf lend a
delightful green color.

----- PAGE 348 -----
NUTRITIONAL/MEDICINAL AGENTS

Lotions and creams can be enriched by the addition of other herbal
agents. Bees, while being notorious emissaries of dermal
inflammation, also create for us some of our skin’s most
extraordinary accessories: royal jelly, propolis, honey, and pollen.
The apian chemistries of these accomplices blend magically with
the water and oil portions of lotions and creams carrying with them
an enormous array of vitamins, minerals, and enzymes that nourish
our body and enhance our wellness. Herbal tinctures and/or liquid
concentrates including Aloe vera juice and aromatic hydrosols or
floral waters (see Chapter Ten, “Distillation of Hydrosols”) can be
included in a lotion as part of the water content, bringing with
them a host of nutritional and therapeutic actions. Your whimsical
imagination (and accumulating experience) can arrange and
rearrange these ingredients into unique formulas that suit your
personal needs and creative inspiration.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

As an initial step to preserve your lotions and creams, you should
sterilize all the equipment you use to manufacture them, and
sterilize all the containers (including the lids) you use to store the
products. Avoid using your fingers to apply a lotion or cream, for
fingertips readily inoculate the emulsion with microorganisms that
will spoil the lotion as they joyfully procreate at rates even faster
than the speed of human reproduction. Instead, pour your lotions
into a plastic squeeze bottle or a bottle having a pump dispenser
that permits the accurate dispersing of the liquid on targeted areas
in convenient quantities. This eliminates the need to touch the
lotion with your fertile fingers. Use a cosmetic spatula or some
other small instrument to scoop and apply more viscous creams.
Whenever you use a jar or a bottle as a holding and dispensing
container, wipe off the lid after each and every use. Like regular
flossing of teeth. this action greatly inhibits the land-squatting

----- PAGE 349 -----
activities of microorganisms by surprising and temporarily
disorganizing them.

You can incorporate preservative agents as a portion of the
ingredients. Essential oils are anti-bacterial and anti-fungal and are
probably the most easily incorporated, but when including them in
a formula you will need to take into account their properties and
aromas. Lavender and Benzoin are relatively inexpensive essential
oils, and they are quite effective; Rose is not inexpensive, but
effective and exquisite. Tea Tree is effective and inexpensive—I
think it stinks (olfactorily speaking), though some folks like its
scent, but then some folks don’t mind jogging in clouds of exhaust
fumes.

Adding vitamin E oil for an antioxidant to the oil portion of a
recipe also provides a concentrated restorative food for the skin. A
couple of 200 IU capsules expressed into 8 ounces of the lotion
will do quite well.

And, of course, refrigeration is one of your most reliable
preservatives.

A Ligu Lotion Base ror Mepicinat

or Cosmetic Purposes

This preparation is gently astringent, anti-inflammatory, and
moisturizing to the skin. It is a toning agent that can be used
after skin cleansing for sensitive, dry, weather-damaged, and
mature skin. It is especially soothing and healing for chapped
or dry skin, eczema, or psoriasis. The lotion can be used as is
for the inherent actions listed above. It also provides a general
base to which a variety of other herbal agents can be added for
treating specific conditions. Suggested herbal agents are listed
following this base lotion recipe.

1. Mix together 600 ml (20 fl. oz.) of Rosewater (Rose

----- PAGE 350 -----
hydrosol) and 45 ml (1 1/2 fl. oz.) of glycerin.

2. 60 ml (2 fl. oz.) of absolute alcohol can be added to this as a
preservative. This is optional and only necessary if one intends
to take this lotion on the road where it will be stored in
varying temperatures. If refrigeration is available, or if one
adds any of the following alcohol-containing tinctures to the
base, this step is probably unnecessary.

Vulnerary, Anti-inflammatory Lotion

Add Arnica tincture 60 ml (2 fl. 0z.) to create a vulnerary; anti-
inflammatory lotion for washing sprains and bruises; for
providing relief of rheumatic pain and the pain and
inflammation of phlebitis, or whenever there is pain and
inflammation of the skin. (It is considered best, however, not
to use Arnica directly on open wounds.)

Anti-inflammatory, Vulnerary, and Anti-fungal Lotion

Add Calendula tincture 60 ml (2 fl. 0z.) to create an anti-
inflammatory, vulnerary, anti-fungal lotion useful for relieving
inflammation of the skin. (This can be used on an open
wound.)

Antiseptic Lotion
Add Goldenseal tincture 7 to 15 ml (1/4 to 1/2 fl. oz.) and
Myrrh tincture 30 ml (1 fl. oz.) for an antiseptic lotion.
Vulnerary, Astringent, and Demulcent Wash

Add Comfrey 60 ml (2 fl. oz.) tincture as a vulnerary,
astringent, and demulcent wash to assist the healing of external
ulcers, for washing wounds and fractures, varicose veins, and
ulcers.

----- PAGE 351 -----
Other Lotions

Any other appropriate tincture or blend of tinctures, add 60 ml
(2 fl. 02.).

Aw Enusion Tyre Lorion Base ror

Mepicat or Cosmetic Purposes

Start out by using the following simple ingredients to
experiment with as you learn to blend water with oil. Once
you have developed a familiarity and skill with this basic
technique, begin incorporating exotic essential oils and other
precious ingredients. (Some excellent recipes for cosmetic
lotions and other skin care products may be found in
Aromatherapy—A Complete Guide to the Healing Art, by
Kathy Keville and Mindy Green.)

Equipment

Make sure all equipment is sterilized.

Kitchen blender

Plastic spatula

Chopstick

Small funnel

Glass measuring cup (1 cup size)

Metal saucepan (large enough for the measuring cup to sit in)
Grater (for shaving beeswax)

Small glass jar container(s)

Paper towels or tissues

Ingredients

3/4 cup fixed oil

----- PAGE 352 -----
Icup distilled water (or floral water)

1/2 oz. beeswax (shaved)

1. Place lid on blender and remove its center ring; set a wide
mouth funnel into the ring opening.

2. Pour the water into the blender and set it aside. (There must
be enough water used to cover the blades, so they can engage
the liquid sufficiently to generate this emulsion.)

3. Put the oil into a measuring cup, and add the shaved
beeswax to it.

4. Set this into the saucepan of water. The water surface should
reach up to or a little above the level of the oil in the cup,
making a water bath.

5. Place the pan on a low heat and warm the oil just long
enough for the beeswax to melt.

6. Remove the measuring cup containing the oil and beeswax
from the pan.

7. Let the oil/wax mixture cool a few minutes just until you
see a faint rim of hardened wax forming on the side of the
measuring cup.

8. Turn the blender on high speed and very slowly add the
oil/wax until all the oil has been poured into the mixture.
(Some lotion-makers start with a lower setting, and when the
blender motor begins to bog down, turn it up to the next
higher speed, continuing this until the high speed is reached—
it’s a matter of getting to know your machine.)

9. When all is going well, the emulsion will begin to harden

----- PAGE 353 -----
after about two-thirds to three-quarters of the oil/wax has been
added to the water.

10. You can remove the entire blender lid at this point and use
the chopstick to carefully stir the top edges of the lotion as you
pour the remainder of the oil (be mindful of the currently
invisible whirling blades).

11. You now have a silky smooth lotion; you can turn off the
blender.

12. If you choose to add essential oils [30 to 50 drops for this
recipe/15 to 25 drops per 250 ml (8 oz. cup) of lotion], turn
on the blender just long enough to incorporate the oils; do not
overblend the lotion.

13. Pour the lotion into containers, using the spatula to get all
of it.

14. Store in the refrigerator, for at this point, aside form the
essential oils, you have not incorporated any preservatives.

A good emulsion is a product of the combination
of the proper temperature of an oil/wax mixture
and the uniformity of the flow of oil as it is
poured into the churning waters below. This is
not difficult to accomplish, but unsuccessful
attempts have been recorded, predominantly by
those who have successfully performed this
procedure hundreds of times, but are presently
demonstrating the technique in front of many
others. Dignity is such a fragile commodity.

----- PAGE 354 -----
Aw Execanr Ross Cream

A cream is made in the exact same fashion as a lotion,
requiring the same tools as listed above. The consistency of a
cream ends up being thicker, due to employing a little more
wax and a little less liquid. Sometimes when making a cream
all the water will not blend with the oil, so it needs to be
removed by pouring it off or by touching it with an absorbent
tissue; when preparing a lotion this is seldom required.

Ingredients I will not give approximate metric equivalents for
these measurements. I’ve used these, they work well, and I
think their precision is important.

10
beeswax
Gm
11/4
rosewater
cup
11/2
Rose essential oil
ml

Itsp. glycerin

3/4 up almond oil (which includes I tablespoon Alkanet
infused oil, I tablespoon Calendula infused oil)

1. Pour Rosewater and glycerin into blender.

2. Put the blender lid on (remove the center ring from the lid,
so oils can be poured into the blender later), and set aside.

3. Grate the beeswax.

----- PAGE 355 -----
4. Place the Almond oil mixture and grated beeswax into the
glass measuring cup.

5. Place the glass cup into a metal pot and fill the pot with
water up to the level of the oil in the cup, making a water
bath.

6. Heat the oil just until the wax is completely melted.
7. Remove from the heat and set aside.

8. Let this cool a few minutes, just until you see a faint rim of
wax hardened on the side of the measuring cup.

9. Turn the blender on low speed and pour oil/wax mixture
very slowly into the rosewater/glycerin mixture—pour a slow
steady stream using a funnel or the chopstick as a guiding rod
(see “Guiding Rod” under “Decanting,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

10. When the blender motor begins to bog down, turn it up to
the next higher speed. Continue this until you reach the high
speed, until all the oil has been poured into the mixture.

11. While the blender is still running remove the lid.

12. If you see any liquid in the corners of the blender, scrape
the sides down with the spatula until all the liquid is
incorporated and blended together (be aware of the blender
blade).

13. The cream will become either too stiff to take any more oil
or all the water will have been fully blended with the oil. If
any water remains unblended, pour it off or blot it with a
clean absorbent paper tissue.

14. You now have a luscious thick cream.

----- PAGE 356 -----
15. Add the Rose essential oil and blend it in for 10 seconds.
Do not overblend the cream.

16. Scoop the cream into containers and refrigerate.

17. Be sure to wipe the lid after each use!

----- PAGE 357 -----


----- PAGE 358 -----
Recorded history reveals that herbalists and physicians of ancient
India and Egypt used suppositories for local and systemic affect.
“Suppository” is defined as something that is “placed underneath,”
designed to penetrate and dissolve in a body cavity other than the
mouth. In this country, during most of the 1800s, suppositories
were prescribed mainly for local problems. However. as the

----- PAGE 359 -----
fundamental anatomy and physiology of the rectum have become
more clearly understood by Western science, it has become
apparent that herbs can be absorbed from the lower regions of the
rectum and then can enter the general circulation, thus becoming
systemic. We know now that rectal insertion can be an excellent
method for administering herbs to infants, young children, and
adults on correct occasions.

According to the Greeks a bolus was a “lump” or a “clod.” Today
it is defined as “a rounded mass of anything,” a large pill or tablet,
and in some lexicons it is defined as “a large pill for a horse.”
Somewhere along the way, from the time when a bolus was
considered by the Greeks merely a lump and a clod, it has become
a country cousin to the more sophisticated-sounding “suppository.”
Among herbalists the term most commonly used is “herbal bolus.”
So today, for all practical purposes, boluses and suppositories are
considered to be the same thing. Whatever you choose to call this
vehicle, it is a single dosage preparation, intended primarily for
insertion into the vaginal or rectal cavity for local or systemic
action.

The primary advantage of using a bolus is that it is a slippery
little vehicle that gets in there and deposits the goods forthright.
The “goods” are therapeutic and tonic herbs, and “there” are those
inner body parts that, when signaling for help, are soothed and
nourished by an herb being placed right up against them, or at least
as close to them as physically possible. A bolus can be inserted
directly into the vagina to soothe infections and treat inflammation
of the cervix and other inner vaginal tissues, or it can be inserted
into the rectum to soothe and tone mildly or highly disturbed
prostate glands in males, or to soothe and shrink hemorrhoids and
cysts in anyone. Boluses are also employed to deliver herbs directly
to rectal mucous membranes which readily absorb them into the
bloodstream. This can elicit the same systemic effect as herbs that
have been taken orally. In line with this, it is important to note that
a bolus is an excellent means for administering fever-reducing and
other soothing and nourishing herbs to infants and young children
who can’t or won’t take them orally. (A number of piqued children

----- PAGE 360 -----
opt for the oral method the next time around.)

While we’re in this discussion, I’ll insert the concept that enemas
and vaginal douches are extensions of the bolus. Designed to deliver
a single liquid dosage, they are an equally efficient delivery system
to administer herbs “underneath” for local and systemic action.

Medicinal herbs used in boluses can be strong astringents, such as
White Oak bark, used to contract, firm, and strengthen tissues and
to reduce secretions and discharge; demulcent and mild astringents
such as Comfrey root or Marshmallow root used to relax, soothe,
protect, and heal tissues; antimicrobial tonics like Goldenseal,
Echinacea, and Chaparral, used to prevent and allay infection while
toning body tissues; and/or distinct tonic herbs such as Saw
Palmetto, which is often used with Echinacea to soothe and tone an
infected or otherwise disturbed prostate gland.

These active herbal agents are suspended in a solid base designed
to melt at body temperature or in a base that will dissolve and
disperse when in contact with body tissues. The two main types of
bases used for making boluses are cocoa butter and a gelatin-
glycerin mix. The cocoa butter is most appropriately used when dry
herbal preparations are to be administered and the gelatin-glycerin
mix is well used when one wishes to combine liquid preparations
with a base. It is worth noting that the glycerin will extract moisture
from tissue. Therefore, please note that if it is used frequently, it
can cause a drying of the mucosal membranes, possibly provoking
mild inflammation.

THE FORMING MOLD

Enthusiasm about preparing herbal boluses (hey, some folks get
excited about collecting old hub caps) can prompt an all-pervasive
search for bolus-forming molds. From thimbles to fountain pen lids,
you may find yourself haunting supermarkets, hardware stores, flea
markets, garage sales, closets, kitchen drawers, kids’ (those you’re
not even related to) toy boxes, the car’s glove compartment, etc., for
potential molds. If you do find vourself involved in this odd quest. I

----- PAGE 361 -----
suggest you keep it a private pursuit; go about your search telling
no one what you are looking for or why you want it ... It’s simpler
that way and avoids a lot of talk.

I have found numerous potential devices that I won’t bother to
list. Suffice it to say, some of them panned out, most didn’t, but I’ve
learned to enjoy the hunt. All in all, my initial technique, which is
rather standard knowledge, remained the simplest and probably the
overall best. Meanwhile I’ve moved on to other challenges, but the
exhilaration of the hunt lingers, and my eyes remain alert for “the
perfect bolus-shaping mold.” It’s not like bolus consciousness is my
main event, you realize. I seek the burning bush and contemplate
the sound of one hand clapping too, like all the other deep and
spiritual guys.

Therefore, a quick and efficient method for making a shaping
mold:

1. Roll aluminum foil tightly around a fat pencil, a magic marker,
the handle of a large wooden spoon, whatever, depending on the
diameter of the bolus you want. The width of your small finger is a
good size approximation.

2. Leave a substantial portion of the pencil (or whatever shape-
giving device you use) sticking out of one end of the foil wrap, so
that once you are finished rolling it up you can still grasp it and
pull it out of the newly formed tube. Indulge heavily in abundance
by wrapping the foil around the implement a number of times to
supply a sturdy wall to work with.

3. Close off one end of the tube by twisting or crimping the foil and
remove the implement.

4. Find a container that will support this tube (or a number of these
tubes) and can hold it (them) securely upright once it has been
filled with the warm liquid mixture.

----- PAGE 362 -----
Foil Wrapped Snuggly Around the Pencil

L

A Completed Form

Tubes Standing Up in a Narrow Container

----- PAGE 363 -----
SIZE AND SHAPE

Rectal suppositories should weigh around 2-3 Gm each, smaller
sizes being made for infants. Vaginal suppositories should weigh in
at about 4 to 5 Gm each.

Rectal suppositories are retained more easily when they have
been shaped to taper at both ends, the taper being greater at one
end (the front or lead end). Vaginal suppositories are best shaped
into a globular form or oviform (egg-shaped).

METHODS OF PREPARATION

There are two types of boluses or suppositories that I will discuss in
this chapter. The first is made by using cocoa butter as a base, and
the other is a product of a glycerated-gelatin base.

Cocoa Burrer

Cocoa butter, Oleum Theobromatis (also spelled Cacao butter), is a
non-irritating, yellowish-white fat derived from the nut of the
chocolate tree (Theobroma cacao). It is probably the best general
base for boluses and suppositories. It is hard and wax-like at
ordinary temperatures, but melts at 86 to 95° F. (30 to 35° C.). It
can be incorporated with powdered herbs, small portions of
aqueous substances, or with oils, and it does not become rancid.
The cocoa butter melts from the natural temperature of the body
and releases the herbs.

It is suggested that boluses be inserted at night prior to going to
bed, so the person is lying horizontally, a more retentive position
than standing up. The use of protective accoutrements is suggested
to deal with any leakage that might occur.

Cocoa butter begins to liquefy to a semisolid when warmed to
around 86° F. (30° C.) and it usually melts at 93 to 95° F. (34 to 35°
C.), which is slightly below normal human body temperature.
However. in certain circumstances, if the cocoa butter has been

----- PAGE 364 -----
heated to about 97° F. (36° C.) and then quickly cooled in a chilled
suppository mold, it solidifies into a less stable form which will
then melt at about 73 to 75° F. (23 to 24° C.), rendering it difficult
to handle and insert. A bolus in this state might not make it intact
into the intended orifice. So it is worth knowing that for best
overall results one should avoid overheating cocoa butter. This is
best done by melting (liquefying) cocoa butter slowly with low heat
(using a double boiler apparatus or a small glass beaker placed into
a larger container which is half filled with warm water) and pour
the liquefied cocoa butter into molds that are room temperature.

Maxine tHe Cocoa Burrer Base Supposrrory

When using cocoa butter as the base, there are two basic
methods for making boluses, the Cold Process and the Warm
Fusion Process. The latter employs heating and the use of pre-
shaped molds in which to cool and solidify the liquid; the
former requires neither heat nor molds.

In the warm process, the powdered herb(s) is added to the
melted base, poured into a mold, and allowed to cool. In the
cold process, the herbal powder is incorporated with the
unmelted base and the resulting mass is shaped by hand. As to
which method is best, I'd say it pretty much comes down to
which one you enjoy doing more.

----- PAGE 365 -----
Glass Beakers Set Up with Thermometer

Warm Infusion Process

The following warm fusion procedure takes into account that
cocoa butter base herbal boluses, when they are not overheated
and not too rapidly cooled, remain more stable and retain
their ideal melting point of around 90 to 95° F.

1. Grind your herbal ingredients into as fine a powder as
possible. Use the electric coffee bean grinder to grind the herbs
and then run the ground herbs through a fine sieve to ensure
that they are finely powdered. Weigh and make note of the
amount of your herb powder for future reference.

2. Reduce the cocoa butter to small pieces by grating or
shaving it. Avoid using large particles; they melt slowly and
mess with the low temperature melting process. Weigh and
note the amount for future reference.

----- PAGE 366 -----
3. Place the herbs and the cocoa butter into the top portion of
a double boiler or into a small glass beaker and mix them
lightly with a stirring rod or a thermometer. (You're going to
be using the thermometer to help monitor the temperature
soon anyway.)

4. The amount of herb you use in relation to the amount of
binder will depend on the nature of the herb. You will have to
work with this. Make notes. Try to get as much herb into the
mixture as you can while allowing enough base material to
easily bind and hold it all together.

NOTE: Using glass beakers allows you to observe the mixture
better, and most importantly, the thin walls reduce the chance
of overheating. Metal pots and double boilers work fine, but
they offer more of a challenge when it comes to heat control.

5. When using a double boiler, place the top of the boiler
containing the mixture of ingredients into the bottom, which
contains water that has been brought to a boil and removed
from the fire. While stirring, let this heat melt the cocoa butter.
When using glass beakers, place the smaller beaker full of the
ingredients within a larger beaker of hot water. Stir the
mixture with the thermometer and watch the temperature. The
mass will soften at about 89° F. (32° C.) and should be kept at
or below 92° F. (33° C.).

6. When the mixture reaches 92°, separate the beakers or pots.
Stir until the mixture of powdered herbs and cocoa butter
appears to be uniformly blended and fully melted.

7. Pour the thick mixture into a mold that is room
temperature. When using the narrow tube of aluminum foil
described above or any other narrow-shaped device as a

----- PAGE 367 -----
forming mold, a very small plastic funnel will be of great
assistance for this step. After a couple of minutes, the mixture
will become somewhat firm.

8. Place the mold full of the bolus mixture into a freezer for
about 2 minutes.

9. After this brief cooling, remove the bolus from the mold.

10. Cut the boluses into desired lengths, shape them as you
will, and store them in the refrigerator in a small jar which is
labeled. (If you don’t label the jar, inevitably someone will
bite off a piece of one of the boluses thinking it is candy.
Actually, about the only difference between a cocoa butter
bolus and a piece of candy, aside from its social status, is the
addition of a sweetener, and of course the orifice of insertion.)

11. If something doesn’t work out, re-melt the mixture, and do
it again.

In spite of the above precautions, I should assure that this
warm process is fairly low-pressure medicine-making. It is
while percolating tinctures and making lotions that the brow
and palms tend to get a little sweaty. The key here is to melt
the cocoa/herb mixture at a minimum temperature and use a
room temperature mold into which you pour the warm
mixture. If you use a previously cooled mold, it causes a super-
cooling of the cocoa butter and the resultant crystallization
(rehardening) makes for a lower melting point. If you do
overheat the mixture, complete the project, and then let this
batch of boluses age in the refrigerator for a month. Upon
aging, they (both the overheated and the super-cooled boluses)
eventually recoup their normal melting point characteristics.

I praise the medical pharmacists who figured out the
intimate dynamics of this cocoa chemistry and all the other

----- PAGE 368 -----
excellent medicine-making knowledge they have amassed
throughout the years. The members of this inspired profession
avidly pursued this kind of pharmaceutical investigation in the
1930s, 40s, and ’50s while most herbalists (and herbal lay-
pharmacy) in the U.S. had withdrawn into a deep slumber.
But, one by one, we lay-pharmacists are returning to the
medicine-making arena; like recently kissed enchanted frogs,
who have awakened to their original nature, we are emerging
from some strange cultural spell, and can now contribute our
peerless perspective to the evolving art and science of herbal
pharmacy. One acquires deep green insight and unique
capabilities being a frog for a while.

Cold Process

Cocoa butter and other fat bases that do not require melting in
order to mix with powdered herbs can be made into bolus
suppositories by a cold method.

So far, the best tools I’ve found for this method are a dinner
plate and two 1 1/4-inch stainless steel putty knives (you can
find these in the paint section of a hardware store). One putty
knife is used to knead and blend the cocoa butter and herbs
together, and the other one is used to intermittently scrape off
the first one. You'll also want some paper towels close by.

1. Powder the herb(s) you plan to use. If you are using more
than one herb, powder and blend them at this stage.

2. Grate or shave with a putty knife an appropriate quantity of
cocoa butter onto a glass or ceramic dinner plate.

3. Mix the powdered herb with the shaved cocoa butter base
and then work them into a plastic mass with the aid of the
putty knife. A more even distribution of the herb is obtained if
it is first mixed with only a portion of the cocoa butter base,

----- PAGE 369 -----
then the remainder of the base can be worked in gradually.

4. Add essential oils during this blending process if your
formula calls for them.

5. Knead the entire mass with the putty knife until the herbs
(and essential oils, if you’ve added any) are well dispersed. If
you took the suggestion in the margin, have another cookie.

6. Wash your hands well, and, with your fingers, form the mass
into appropriately sized and shaped boluses. The necessary
skill is easy to acquire. Weigh the first bolus to get a sense of
the size you want to make (see size and shape, above). If you
find that the skin temperature of your fingers exceeds the
melting point of cocoa butter, you can keep your hands cool
by dipping them in ice water, or by holding on to the glass of
ice cold milk you’re having with your cookies.

7. Place boluses into a small jar, cap it, label it, and store it in
the refrigerator.

Coconut Oil Base Substitute

Some folks use coconut oil (derived from the fruit of the
Coconut palm, Cocos nucifera) in place of cocoa butter as a
base for making boluses. Rosemary Gladstar, in her book
Herbal Healing for Women, gives the following recipe for such
an event:

“Melt coconut oil in a saucepan over low heat. When the oil
is completely melted, remove it from the heat and stir in the
powdered herb mixture. Add enough herbs to make a thick
paste. When you have added enough powder so that the oil is
thick, yet still pliable enough to work, add (essential oils).
Quickly roll into boluses the size and shape of your small
finger. They will look like herbal tootsie rolls.”

----- PAGE 370 -----
This Cold Process is a lot like making chocolate
chip cookie dough from scratch, which you might
even want to start now for, inevitably, smelling
and handling all this cocoa butter will lead you
into some form of chocolate frenzy.

Maxine tHe Guycerinatep Gettin Base Supposrrory

This mixture of gelatin and glycerin creates a base that readily
incorporates liquid extracts such as herbal infusions,
decoctions, concentrates, tinctures, fluid extracts, and essential
oils into a suppository form. Gelatin is found in the “jello”
section of the grocery store, and glycerin can be purchased in
health food stores, herb stores, and drug stores.

T’'ll give you a basic recipe and method for making this type
of bolus, but you will, I’m sure, quickly modify it in your own
fashion.

1. Into a small glass or stainless steel saucepan, pour 1 oz. (30
ml) of herbal tincture, fluid extract, strong herbal concentrate,
or whatever form of liquid single herb or herbal formula you
wish to use. You certainly can incorporate finely powdered
herbs in this base as well.

2. Add 1 oz. (30 ml) of pure vegetable glycerin.
3. Add 2 oz. (60 ml) of distilled water.
4. Stir these ingredients together until they are well mixed.

5. Open 1 envelope of unflavored gelatin and pour it into the

----- PAGE 371 -----
liquid mixture. (The box of gelatin I buy holds 4 envelopes of
pure granulated gelatin, each containing 7 Gm.)

6. Place this combination on the stove burner over a low
flame.

7. Stir continuously until the gelatin is completely dissolved.
8. Remove the mixture from the stove and pour it into molds.

9. Let it cool a bit and then put it into the refrigerator to
solidify.

An excellent suppository to prepare for treating hemorrhoids
incorporates 25 ml of Witch Hazel (Hamamelis virginiana)
tincture and 5 ml of Horse Chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum)
or California Buckeye (Aesculus californica) tincture in the
above recipe.

A Grune Process

This is a short story about making a bolus by what I call the
Greek Method. This method is a procedure I bumbled upon,
while not having a clue what I was doing, during my first
impromptu attempt to make a herbal bolus.

I assembled a pile of powdered herb on a glass dinner plate.
I then liquefied some cocoa butter and poured this, a little at a
time, onto the pile of powder. Then I kneaded the powder and
cocoa butter together with a small metal cookie spatula until
they were blended. I added more liquid cocoa butter as I
proceeded until I had a well-formed mass (certainly, what I
perceived to be a “lump” or a “clod”). When it felt “right” (and

----- PAGE 372 -----
this is totally up to one’s speculation), I used a second cookie
spatula to scrape off the stuff that had hardened and was
clinging to the first spatula. I then scraped up the other
hardened stuff that had spread all over the plate and on the
countertop. I gathered all of these scrapings into a pile, and
began to press, mold, and form portions of the pile with my
fingers into various shapes and sizes that seemed appropriate
for the dynamics of orifice insertion.

This worked for me at the time, and I was happy with the
results. Yes, the manufacturing process was crude, and some
less aware of the intent behind the task might have judged it
merely as making a mess in the kitchen. But my vision was
clear and my determination was heated. Even during the
moments when I was feeling a little dorky, as I do when first
walking around in a brand new pair of shoes, I was also
experiencing a feeling of contentedness. And although I was
obviously flailing about in the unknown, flickers of discovery
and a measure of success flared in my novice medicine-maker’s
humble demeanor, and I found myself enjoying the initial
stages of my medicine show.

The point of this tender disclosure is not to recommend this
method of production, but simply to convey a suggestion about
medicine-making (and, what the heck, about life in general),
which is: When you get an idea of what you want, plunge in
and do it! Take a risk. You may only semi-succeed, or you may
blow it entirely, but so what? The materials of Herbalism are
inexpensive (actually the cost of cocoa butter is a bit
outrageous). Most likely you'll ultimately create a successful
experience far beyond your initial dream. It’s an adventure,
and it’s fun. If it’s not, you should probably forget about the
whole thing anyway and do something else. And you’re
guaranteed to learn something of value (make notes), and it
might make a poignant story you can divulge someday when

----- PAGE 373 -----
you write your book.

----- PAGE 374 -----


----- PAGE 375 -----
One afternoon, as I was manipulating the makings of glycerated-
gelatin suppositories, getting my procedures clear for writing
Chapter Twenty, I discovered (actually crashed into) an interesting
new(?) herbal vehicle—a medicinal herbal jello.

As a result of this impact and the events that followed, I have
reason to suspect that tonic and therapeutic herbal iellos offer

----- PAGE 376 -----
notable potential for assisting herbalists and parents to increase
child and “ill-tempered adult” patient compliance.

This discovery stemmed from a blunder of mine that involved a
particularly precious tincture of primo-wildcrafted Oregon Grape
root (OGR). The simple pharmaceutical event was supposed to
culminate in a manifestation of many, perfectly molded glycerated-
gelatin suppositories, but instead, ended up as an unintended mass
of OGR jello. Momentarily deranged by my frustration and self-pity
(I was racing toward a publishing deadline at the time), I lost
control. In my mindless anguish, I took a spoon to it all, slashing
and scooping at it blindly as I cried out, “Why me!? Why now!?
Why all that glycerin!? Why my finest OGR tincture!?”

Immediately following the gelatai carnage, as I stood at the
kitchen counter, bewildered, remorseful, emotionally spent,
questioning the meaning of life and the purpose of man’s toil on
earth, gazing aimlessly at the sordid glycerated remains, the empty
tincture bottle laying on its side, the soiled beakers, I ate a spoonful
of the still quivering blunder ... and behold ... I was instantly
uplifted! It was fun, like eating jello always is (even for those
cranky adults who won’t admit it). And it tasted...“all right!” which
OGR tincture never does. Right, kids?

I discovered that jellofied herb effortlessly jiggles and diffuses
ghastly flavors, distracting one’s taste buds from the roots of
bitterness, and the glycerin follows up smoothly with a pleasantly
sweet aftertaste. I liked it! I ate another scoop. The herbalized jello
played in my mouth. I slurped another scoop, then another. My face
smiled big; the universe, amused by my blunder-ability had given
me an answer to my questions ... herb jello (Botanica wiggleus;
Gelatinaceae family)! What an idea! (Individuals requiring a more
sophisticated air of credibility in their future discussions concerning
this important new clinical vehicle can use the currently more
fashionable European-flavored term “phytojel.”) Such a joyous
footnote this will be scribed in the herb section of the Akashic
records and in the future archives of twenty-first century American
phyto-folklore. Herbal pharmacy of the new millennium will have
a wiggle.

----- PAGE 377 -----
Not long thereafter, creativity ablaze, I boarded my bike and sped
to the local grocery store, where I bought myself a couple packs of
lime-flavored Jell-O® (what can I say, lime is green). I flirted with
the idea of getting the sugar-free type Jell-O, but its label said
“aspertame” on the ingredients list, so I reconsidered and bought
the ones that said “sugar” instead. In my belief system, aspertame
makes white sugar the good guy. And, with all that good herb that’s
going to be taken, a little sugar isn’t going to hurt anyone.

Upon returning home, I opened my box of lime Jell-O,
immediately poured a little bit of the green powder into my palm,
and proceeded to lick it, mm-mm! You've gotta do that; every kid
does. Then I poured the rest of the powder onto a scale and
weighed it. I wanted only to use 1/4 of the Jell-O to experiment
with. I weighed out 22 Gm (the 3 oz box said 85 Gm, but I got 86
Gm + my approximately 2 Gm compulsive lick).

Possibly, we’ve turned a significant corner here in
herbal kinderland. Try out the idea of using herb
jellos; have fun with it, and let me know what
recipes and results you come up with. I can be
reached at: JG, P.O. Box 39, Forestville, CA
95436.

Kindernote: Leave an herb jello uncovered in the
refrigerator for a couple weeks and you’ve got
yourself a phyto gummy bear to chew.

Herp Jei.o

1/4 lime Jell-O (I did cherry Jell-O next) =
box approximately 22 Gm

T/A

----- PAGE 378 -----
at
boiling water (60 ml)

cup
tincture (I used Feverfew for my first intentional

herb jello) (30 ml or 1/8 cup)

loz.
loz. cold water (30 ml or I /8 cup)

1. Put the jello powder into a small rectangular shaped baking
tin. (I used a small loaf tin that measured 2 1/2 inches by 4
1/2 inches. Using this squared-off shape makes it easy to
divide the herb jello into equal-sized pieces in order to give
relatively equal-sized doses.)

2. Pour the boiling water onto the jello powder and stir well
for 2 to 3 minutes, making sure that the gelatin is completely
dissolved.

3. Add the tincture and stir this well.
4. Then add the cold water and stir well.

5. Pour this mixture into the pan and/or into any other molds
you wish to use. I bought some candy molds of various forms
(shells, cars, cigars, Christmas trees, etc.) that make kid-
approved shapes for eating. (The research that remains for us
is to discover the jello flavors that work best with each
uniquely flavored herb or herbal blend. This is why I use only
1/4 of the pack, or less, at a time.)

6. Once the herb jello has hardened, cut it into 6 equal
portions, each one delivering about a 5 ml dose of tincture.

The Feverfew jello turned out tasting “all right.” At least it is the
best-tasting. most palatable dose of Feverfew I’ve taken so far. and

----- PAGE 379 -----
taste-wise, Feverfew is one of the herbs most folks applaud the
least.

This water-gelatin vehicle scoots the herbal flavors quickly past
the taste buds and on down to the stomach with a minimal amount
of gustatative resistance; yet in passing, it makes its moves on the
mouth long enough for the tongue to party whimsically with the
gelatin portion.

Following this, I made a cherry St. John s Wort jello and called it
“cherry up.” Next, I assembled a relaxing nervine jello using
Valerian and California Poppy with lemon Jell-O and called it
“mellow yellow jello” (naming your herb jello is optional).

I feel a great potential here for parents, grumps, and wee ones.
One can experiment with all types of flavored Jell-O® brand jellos
in order to find those that cohabit harmoniously in a jelly-body
with otherwise strange and frightful tasting herbal extracts, like
Feverfew, Oregon Grape, Yarrow, and Mugwort. If you prefer to use
no sugar at all, you can use the glycerated-gelatin recipes for
making suppositories that are given in Chapter Twenty. That is
what I did involuntarily the first time. Glycerin is a non-sugar
sweetener. Or one can experiment with using Stevia, which has
been infused into the water that is used to dissolve an unsweetened
gelatin. Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) is an herb that has come to us
from its native land Paraguay. It tastes sweeter than sugar, but by
FDA (the Federal Denial Attendants) pronouncement, cannot be
called a sweetener (this edict is probably another side effect of the
aspertame industry). Use Hains® brand vegetarian jello or a
flavored pectin if you prefer a vegetarian variety.

You can incorporate herbal infusions, decoctions, tinctures—any
and all forms of loathsome tasting herbal liquids children and ill-
tempered adults often refuse to take or complain about so
incessantly it’s hardly worth the effort trying to help them. Of
course, all the naturally good-tasting herbal teas, glycerites, and
tinctures like Lemon Balm, Mint, Chamomile, and Fennel are also
garnished with fun when transformed into a phytojel.

Adults (senior kids) can take a bit of dessert before meals as a
digestive aid. using an herb iello incorporating Peppermint.

----- PAGE 380 -----
Chamomile, Lemon Balm, Ginger, or any of the other carminatives.
Merely the name “Lemon Balm-lemon-lime jello” shimmies with
vibrations of gastric approval and upliftment.

I’m planning to prepare a Meadowsweet jello which will be a
consoling herbal therapeutic treat for any child who is experiencing
diarrhea. The jello portion will proceed to make his or her insides
feel soothed and happy, and the Meadowsweet will supply its
gently efficient internal action to help balance out the child’s
troubled intestine. Catnip and Fennel is an herbal blend I strongly
recommend having on hand in all households inhabited by babies
and young children. It is an excellent compound to use for soothing
children’s colicky digestive systems and for allaying children’s
fevers, especially during childhood fever diseases such measles,
mumps, chickenpox, etc. The name “Catnip-Fennel-jello” carries an
inherent giggle and just sounds like a good time. The babe will love
it as a medicinal treat, and a touch of party. (If the child’s fever is
prolonged and quite troublesome, the insertion of a homecrafted
Meadowsweet, Yarrow suppository will be quite helpful.)

----- PAGE 381 -----


----- PAGE 382 -----
SYRUPS, HONEYS
OXYMELS, AND
ELECTUARIES

RUPS

When an herbalist concocts an admittedly unpleasant-tasting herbal
tincture or tea blend that he or she feels will do a sick child a world
of good. and the ailing little person still has enough reason, will.

----- PAGE 383 -----
and determination to wholeheartedly reject the favor, a sweet syrup
often settles the dispute. Syrup is a traditional way to make herbal
preparations (especially bitter sore throat and cough mixtures)
more palatable for children and for other folks who aren’t ready to
hear that bitter is good.

Syrups are an old and favored form of administering herbal
medication to be taken internally. This popularity is due to a
variety of reasons. Aesthetically, syrups’ sweet flavors are highly
palatable and they offer a pleasing appearance; concurrently, syrup
has a nutrient value as a carbohydrate (in spite of popular opinion,
sugar is not a nutritional problem, whereas manic consumption of
sugar is a problem), and the sugar used in making syrups can be an
eminently effective preservative in place of alcohol or refrigeration
for otherwise unstable herbal solutions.

When using sugar as the preservative, the adequate concentration
of white sugar (sucrose) in a syrup is a crucially important factor in
its keeping quality. (Sucrose is the official chemical name used for
common white sugar in pharmacy texts.)

Sugar is a carbohydrate. When present in a water solution,
diluted sugar provides a nutrient source which vigorously supports
the growth of micro-organisms, especially yeast and molds.
However, the ability of these organisms to grow is decreased as the
concentration of sucrose is increased. Therefore, a simple sugar
syrup needs to approach saturation in order to succeed as an
effective preservative agent. One does not want to attain true
saturation, however, because any slight cooling might start a
crystallization process within the syrup body which can lead to
complications. Large crystals form, which are difficult to re-dissolve,
and the formation of these crystals leaves behind a solution with
insufficient sugar concentration, that will support microorganism
growth. The concentration of sugar in a syrup must be sufficient to
render the solution so saturated with pure sugar (sucrose) that there
is no longer enough water available to provide the environment
required for microorganisms to proliferate. This is similar to drying
herbs for preservation so that not enough water is available in the
dried vegetable materials to provide a proper environment for

----- PAGE 384 -----
bacteria and mold to proliferate and cause deterioration.

The use of sugar as a preservative for making permanent herbal
preparations was quite popular and certainly practical in times
when refrigeration was not a common household luxury. One
winter, while I was immersed in writing this chapter, Sonoma
County, California, hosted an uncompromising windstorm that
felled nearby trees, demolishing numerous power lines. This
supplied me with two electricity-free (void) days to deepen my
appreciation for non-electric light and heat-giving devices not
dependent on electric power. As my refrigerator and freezer slowly
lost their cool, my appreciation deepened as well for stored food
products that don’t rely on electrical power for their preservation.
Experiencing (yet again) the obvious vulnerability of my
dependence on electrical power, my extemporaneously expanding
appreciation soon embraced all the methods I was aware of that
preserve herbal extracts that do not rely on electricity-fed devices,
or on the over-taxed liquids supplied by the alcohol industry.
Therefore, I have decided to discuss here not only the making of
syrups that are best kept in the refrigerator but also a method for
making a syrup that, in line with “the technology of independence,”
when prepared properly, can survive entirely off the grid.

Syrups are defined as saturated solutions of sugar in pure water
or in other aqueous liquids; sugar is the preservative component.
Syrups sometimes contain vinegar, honey, glycerin, and occasionally
a small quantity of alcohol. In pharmacy, when distilled water
alone is used in the nearly saturated solution with sugar, the
distinctive term simple syrup is applied. When the solution contains
various aromatic or pleasantly tasting substances it is called a
flavored syrup, and when the sugar solution contains soluble
principles from various medicinal plants used as therapeutic agents
it is called a medicated syrup. Medicinally, syrups can be divided
into two general groups. The flavoring group composed of those
syrups prepared solely for their agreeable flavor are used chiefly as
vehicles for carrying and improving the taste of other preparations
of medicinal agents (i.e., Peppermint, Blackberry fruit, or Cherry
syrups). The second group. medicated syrups. are prepared to

----- PAGE 385 -----
access their intrinsic medicinal ingredients and are used as
therapeutic agents (i.e., Garlic, Marshmallow, Horehound, Black
Cohosh, and Senna syrups).

CONTAINERS FOR SYRUPS

Mixing (agitating) containers, storage containers, and any funnels or
other implements used to help fill the containers must be dry to
avoid dilution of the syrup, and they must be very clean in order to
avoid contamination of the syrup by fermentation organisms that
frequent imperfectly cleaned bottles. It is best to use small storage
bottles so that a large quantity of syrup will not be exposed to the
air each time the container is opened.

SYRUP DOSAGE

Standard dose for taking a syrup is approximately 1 teaspoonful as
needed, or as some therapeutic literature decrees, ad libitum.

“Sugar is the cleavage of the culinary arts,
chocolate the plunging neckline.”

—T. Exper Sacus

SYRUP PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

All syrups do better if, before bottling, they are first strained
through clean cotton flannel or muslin cloth that has been
previously moistened and wrung out. This removes any particles of
dust and dirt that might find their way into the syrup.

Finished syrups will keep unaltered for a long time if properly
prepared. They are best preserved in sterile, tightly capped bottles
and stored in a cool place where the temperature is uniform. It is
important that. before filling. the storage bottles be clean

----- PAGE 386 -----
(immersed in boiling water for a period of time), and dry to avoid
dilution and possible contamination of the syrup by fermentation
organisms that frequent imperfectly cleaned bottles. It is best if
these storage bottles are fairly small, so that a large quantity of
syrup will not be exposed to the air each time the container is
opened.

Syrups, properly prepared, usually are stored at room
temperature. But for those syrups that don’t keep well, at a risk of
causing some crystallization due to super-cooling the saturated
solution, their original quality is maintained for a longer time if
they are kept in a refrigerator. Air and heat are far more
detrimental to the stability of sugar solutions than diffused light, but
direct sunlight should always be avoided because of the heat
transmitted by the sun’s rays.

Other agents can be added to the syrup, to help prevent
fermentation:

Essential oils, which of course greatly modify the taste, aroma,
and other properties of the preparation.

Brandy, which is much used with aromatics, or a small
proportion of pure ethyl alcohol can be added to syrups to serve as
a preservative as well as a solvent for the addition of alcohol-
soluble ingredients, such as essential oils. Some folks speculate that
the alcohol concentrates in the vapors above the syrup and from
this strategic location prevents the growth of surface molds.

Glycerin can be used in syrups as an agent to help retard
fermentation. It is effective if the concentration is sufficient, 30
percent or more. It has a sweet taste, but its sweetness is not as
pleasing as sucrose. Glycerin is a solvent for tannins, and as such
acts as a preservative against precipitation of extracted vegetable
matter.

Honey is a health-promoting substance that supplies a delightful
flavor and provides excellent preservative activity.

Syrups that go off and ferment are best composted. Once a syrup
has undergone fermentation it is no longer fit for use. Even if an
attempt is made to restore it by boiling, it is quite likely to spoil
again soon. due to the decreased proportion of sugar remaining in

----- PAGE 387 -----
solution.

WATER FOR MAKING SYRUP

The best water to use for making syrups is recently boiled distilled
water. Using this menstruum ensures that the syrup is free from
mineral matter and from spores that might cause fermentation in
the presence of sugar. In the preparation of some syrups and
oxymels, however, vinegar is often used in preference to water or
alcohol (see garlic syrup and oxymel recipes, this page).

SUGAR FOR SYRUPS

The best kind of sugar to use in the preparation of syrup is very
dry, refined white sugar in a crushed, powdered, or granulated
form. This is a chemically pure sugar produced by sugar refineries.
It requires no further preparation. Pure white sugar is best used in
the preparation of an independently permanent (off-grid) syrup due
to the fact that the sugar (sucrose) to water ratio is critical for the
resulting syrup to provide adequate preserving properties. For this
class of preparation, the use of damp sugar should be avoided, as it
can disturb this crucial water/sugar proportion.

If raw, unrefined, or brown sugar is to be relied on as a
preservative, it is necessary to simmer the syrup; then skim or strain
off the froth (in certain pharmacy texts you find the more scornful
term “scum” applied here), which contains vegetable “impurities”
(the organic ballast products of Nature seem to perturb
pharmacists). If impurities are obviously diffused in the liquid,
which will not readily rise as froth, it is useful to add, before
applying heat, a little egg white, previously beaten up with water,
which by coagulating at the boiling temperature forms a clot,
enclosing the impurities, and facilitating their removal. (Gotcha!)

Dissolving sugar in water can be accomplished by either cold or
hot process.

----- PAGE 388 -----
Dissorvinc Sucar py Coun Process

This process is used to dissolve sugar in distilled water to make
a simple syrup; or to dissolve sugar in a medicated liquid
(infusion, decoction, concentrate) to make a medicated syrup,
or in fruit juice to make a flavoring syrup by agitation without
the use of heat. Sufficient agitation is accomplished by shaking
the container vigorously from time to time.

1. Place the properly weighed white sugar in a sterilized bottle
that is one and a half to two times as large as the required
volume of syrup (this allows for active agitation of the mixture
and more rapid solution).

2. Add a properly measured amount of purified water.
3. Securely cap the bottle.

4. Hasten solution by vigorous agitation of the bottle until the
sugar is dissolved. The syrup will be crystal clear when the
sugar is completely dissolved.

5. Finally, the syrup should be strained through a piece of
cotton flannel or muslin placed over the orifice of a large
funnel directing the syrup into a very clean, completely dry
bottle.

Dissorvinc Sucar py Warm Process

In the case of some syrups, where the thick or cohesive
character of the solvent impedes rapid solution of the sugar, or

----- PAGE 389 -----
when the syrup is wanted in a hurry, a moderate heat can be
employed to facilitate solution. This is done as follows:

1. Put the accurately weighed white sugar and properly
measured liquid (plain distilled water, infusion, decoction,
concentrate) into a strong sterilized bottle that is one and a half
to two times as large as the required volume of syrup.

2. Securely cap the bottle.

3. Place it in a water bath and keep it at a temperature of
about 120° to 125° F.

4. Frequently agitate the mixture until perfect solution is
consummated. Loss of any volatile principles is avoided by
keeping the bottle tightly capped throughout and after the
preparation process.

Maxine A Permanent Simpte Syrup THat Requires

No Rerriceration To Preserve

A simple syrup is a very simple preparation, but it has to be
made with care and precision using sterilized equipment along
with proper concentration of the sugar in pure (distilled)
water. These factors are crucial for a self-preserving product
with minimum possibilities of crystallization because the
solution is too concentrated, or not concentrated enough so
that yeast, molds, and bacteria develop.

It has been found that 85 Gm of white sugar (sucrose) to 47
ml of pure water is the ideal proportion to render a perfectly
concentrated solution (syrup) that is self-preserving. This will
render approximately a 64 percent strength of sugar by weight

----- PAGE 390 -----
in the syrup. As mentioned, less sugar allows enough water
activity to promote bacterial growth, and too much sugar
concentration will soon crystallize and precipitate out of
solution. This removes too much sugar from the solution,
thereby making available sufficient water to allow bacterial
growth and consequent fermentation.

1. Weigh out 85 Gm of white sugar. (This is an adequate
amount to experiment with at first.)

2. Place it in a sterilized, dry jar (one of those slender 10 oz.
jam or jelly jars is a good one to use).

3. Pour onto the sugar 47 ml of distilled water (see “Meniscus,”
Chapter Twenty-Five).

4. Cap the jar tightly and agitate it vigorously.

5. Continue agitating it intermittently throughout the day until
the solution is clear.

6. Filter the syrup through a very clean flannel or cotton
muslin cloth.

7. Store in a cool location.

8. Check the syrup during the next two or three months to see
how it’s doing.

Maxine Fiavorine Syrups

Cherry Flavoring Syrup

This makes a brilliant red syrup that is an excellent vehicle for

----- PAGE 391 -----
administering bitter preparations. It has a pleasant taste. This
syrup is acidic due to the malic acid content of the Cherries.

1. Measure out 50 ml of pure Cherry juice. I dilute and use a
Bernard Jensen’s black cherry concentrate purchased from a
health food store (years ago).

2. Weigh out 85 Gm of sugar.

3. Mix, and with assistance of a warm water bath, dissolve the
sugar in the Cherry juice.

4. A small quantity of alcohol (brandy is best) can be added to
help preserve this syrup.
Raspberry Ferment Syrup

Here’s an interesting angle on making a fresh berry syrup
appropriate to contrive when the electrical wires that service
your home have been demolished and everything else in the
refrigerator is also fermenting.

1. Reduce fresh Raspberries to a pulp and let them rest for 3
days.

2. Separate the juice by pressing, and set it aside until it has
completely fermented and become clear.

3. Filter the fermented juice.

4. To 3 parts (90 ml or 3 fl. oz.) of the fermented liquid, add 5
parts (150 Gm or 5 oz.) of white sugar.

5. Heat the mixture until the sugar is dissolved and just
brought to a boiling point.

6. Bottle in clean bottles, cap, and store in a cool place.

----- PAGE 392 -----
Blackberry Fruit Flavoring Syrup

This is a flavoring syrup having slight astringency.
1. Pick and clean ripe Blackberries.

2. Strongly express the juice.

3. Mix 5 parts sugar with 3 parts juice.

4. Heat the mixture until the sugar is dissolved and just
brought to a boiling point.

5. Strain and put hot syrup into sterilized bottles.

6. Cap tightly and store in a cool location.

This nearly saturated sugar solution is supposed
to be anti-fermentative, and I have found it to be
so; however, be forewarned, it is not anti-ant.
Legions of festive six-leggeds will arrive overnight
to celebrate each mislaid drop of this seductively
saccharine elixir.

The manufacture of syrup is considered from two points of view:
first, the method by which the sugar and flavoring is dissolved in
the solvent as discussed above, and second, the method by which
the medicinal constituent is blended with the sugar and/or flavored
syrup as illustrated by the examples below.

There are several methods in which a medicinal constituent(s) is
blended with a syrup. These methods can vary with each different
medicinal agent, and like making any type of herbal preparation,
skill comes from experience complemented by the taking of notes.
There are numerous flavored and medicated svrups useful in herbal

----- PAGE 393 -----
pharmacy. The following examples will illustrate some basic
methods for blending constituents with a syrup.

Mepicarinc Syrups

Medicating a Simple or Flavored Syrup

A simple syrup can be prepared as directed previously and
stored in a cool location, ready for use as a carrying agent.
Merely blend a tincture or finely powdered herb into a
measured portion of the syrup and administer whenever
needed.

A Simply Made Herbal Syrup

1. Begin with an herbal decoction or infusion that has been
concentrated to about a half to a third volume (see
“Concentrates,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

2. To 500 ml (1 pint) of this concentrate, add about 30 to 60
ml (1 to 2 ounces) of honey and 30 to 60 ml (1 to 2 ounces) of
vegetable glycerin. Alter these amounts depending on the
consistency you desire.

3. Tinctures can be added to this syrup by adding 1 part of
tincture to 3 parts of syrup.

4. Even though the honey and glycerin (and the tincture’s
alcohol) will act to preserve this syrup, store it in the
refrigerator whenever possible.

An Embellished Syrup Made from Dried Herbs

1. Weigh out 60 Gm (2 0z.) of the dry herb or herbal mixture
and measure 1 liter (1 quart) of distilled water.

----- PAGE 394 -----
2. Mix and stir together the herb and water, then let this
mixture soak for a few hours if you have the time.

3. Place over a low heat and simmer the mixture slowly until
the liquid is reduced to about 1/2 original volume
(approximately 500 ml or 1 pint).

4. Remove from heat, strain, and press the herbs.
5. Measure the retrieved liquid and pour it back into the pot.

6. Add sweetener to the decoction at the ratio of 2:1 (2 cups
sweetener to 1 cup of liquid).

As sweeteners and preservatives, use any one or a blend of
honey, white or brown sugar, maple syrup, rice syrup, or
vegetable glycerin. This 2:1 proportion will create a very sweet
syrup. Use less sweetening if desired when refrigeration is
accessible.

7. Warm the decoction and sweetener(s) and mix them until
the sweetener is completely dissolved.

8. If you want to thicken the syrup further, simmer it over a
moderate heat for 20 to 30 minutes or until you attain the
desired consistency. If using raw honey, this last step will
destroy its active enzymes. To avoid this, merely warm the
syrup adequately to mix the honey and decoction.

9. At this point, you can add brandy (optional), approximately
6-8 tablespoonsful per pint of syrup.

Brandy is added for flavor and further preservative action. If
this is to be a cough syrup, brandy adds some muscle relaxant
and cough retardant properties. (There are some excellent-
tasting fruit- and spice-flavored brandies on the market.)

----- PAGE 395 -----
You might also want to add a fruit concentrate for flavor and
nutrients. This will dilute the syrup and make it more prone to
fermentation unless you compensate by adding more sugar,
glycerin, or brandy.

10. Once the syrup has cooled down, essential oils such as
Peppermint, Anise, Cardamom, or Ginger can be added for
flavor. Add 5 drops total of a single oil or a blend of oils per
pint of syrup. Add these only 1 drop at a time, and test the
flavor each time; these aromatic oils are extremely
concentrated, and they can easily overpower your syrup.

11. Remove the syrup from the heat and bottle it in clean
bottles for use.

A 5:1 (Syrup to Herb Ratio) Medicinal Syrup
This syrup will have a 1 to 2 teaspoons dose level.

1. Weigh 50 Gm of the cut herb or herb compound.
2. Measure 500 ml of distilled water.

3. Make a decoction that when completed is strained or
expressed.

4. Prepare a concentrate by placing the decoction into a water
bath, and at 140-160’ F., reduce it to 125 ml.

5. Transfer this concentrate to a saucepan and add 200 Gm of
white sugar.

6. Stir this mixture over a gentle heat until the sugar is
completely dissolved.

7. Remove from the heat, cover, and when cool you will have

----- PAGE 396 -----
250 ml of medicated syrup.
8. Pour into small storage bottles.

Using this method, I recently made a syrup from a decoction of
“Redwood Chai,” a non-caffeine blend of herbs (Carob, Ginger,
Cinnamon, Orange Peel, Clove, Chicory, Licorice, Cardamom,
and Fennel) which was formulated by Julie Rothman,
herbalist, and owner of Flower Power Teas in Santa Cruz,
California. The consequent Chai syrup quickly attained a
“nectar for the gods” status in my community; misty-eyed
recurrent tasters revered it as El Dorado, liquid Elysium,
Formicidae heaven ... the Kingdom had definitely come by
spoonfuls—I highly recommend it.

Garlic Syrup

This expectorant syrup is most useful for relieving spasmodic
cough and lung congestion, and will be found especially
appropriate for children.

Avoid using metallic containers or utensils when making this
syrup.

1 Slice and bruise 3 oz. of fresh Garlic.

2 Measure 1/2 pint of vinegar.

3 Measure 1 pound of white sugar.

4 Macerate the Garlic in the vinegar for four days.
5 Strain and press.

6 Add the sugar.

7 Agitate vigorously, or gently warm the liquid until the sugar

----- PAGE 397 -----
is fully dissolved.
8 Bottle in small clean bottles.

Compound Syrup of Blackberry Root
1. Weigh out 2 oz. of cut Blackberry root.

2. Combine with 3/4 oz. each of powdered Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmeg.

3. Simmer the above mixture in 1 pint of distilled water for 1
hour.

4. Strain and press.
5. Add 1 pound white sugar and dissolve it completely.
6. To this syrup add 1 1/2 fl. oz. of brandy.

7. To this mixture add 1 drop each of Clove essential oil and
Cinnamon essential oil.

This syrup supplies the well-known astringent virtues of
Blackberry; it is also aromatic and a gentle stimulant.

Black Cohosh Syrup
1. Measure 4 fl. 0z. of Black Cohosh tincture.

2. Add to 6 oz. of a prepared simple syrup.
3. Carefully evaporate to 8 oz. (1/2 pint).
4. Bottle in clean 2-oz. size bottles.

This makes a pleasant tasting syrup useful for coughs and
other respiratory afflictions. The addition of 1/2 fl. oz. of

----- PAGE 398 -----
Lobelia tincture to 1/2 pint of this syrup will give an
exceptional relaxing expectorant and antispasmodic syrup
useful for treating conditions of difficult breathing, alleviating
dry coughs, and calming irritable contractions of the
diaphragm.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus List”

Tuar Are Weut Prepare As Syrups

Blackberry fruit
Black Cohosh
Burdock
Cayenne
Chamomile
Comfrey root
Dandelion root and leaf
Echinacea
Elder berries
Fennel
Hawthorn
Marshmallow
Mullein

Nettle
Peppermint
Plantain

St. John’s Wort
Uva Ursi
Valerian

----- PAGE 399 -----
Yellow Dock
Ginger

HERBAL HON.

Honey is deposited in honeycomb by the honeybee, Apis mellifica,
our planet s premier herbalists and medicine-makers. Honey is a
peculiar fluid, consistent with the other delightfully peculiar
products that honeybees gather and create, such as royal jelly,
propolis, pollen, and beeswax. In its freshly produced state honey is
fluid, but upon aging it separates into two layers, a rather solid
granular lower layer and a liquid upper layer. The granular layer is
composed principally of dextrose or grape sugar, the upper layer
being mostly levulose or fruit sugar. Honey, normally consisting of
70 or 80 percent sugar in an aqueous solution, has a sweet taste
(although I have a quart of decidedly bitter-tasting Dandelion honey
in my pantry) and a somewhat aromatic odor followed by a faint
acidity. In addition to its sugar content, honey consists of wax,
pollen, coloring, and aromatic constituents. It resembles sugar in its
properties, but it is more laxative. Honey is emollient, demulcent,
nutritive, and mildly laxative. Its emollient and demulcent
properties are most beneficial for relieving dryness and pain in the
throat and for treating cough and difficulty with swallowing.
Combining honey with a strong infusion of Sage is a classic
preparation for relieving hoarseness and respiratory congestion. The
eminent German hydro therapist, Father Kneipp, maintained that if
a little honey were added to herbal remedies, it would greatly
enhance their efficacy, as it acts as a medium to promote better
assimilation of the nutritive components with the body’s tissues.
The advantages of using honey over syrups as a simple vehicle lie
primarily in the user s belief system that honey is more nutritious
and health-promoting than white sugar. I am one of those who
believe this; however, I am also one who realizes how difficult it is
for bees to supplv enough honey for themselves as well as for all of

----- PAGE 400 -----
us. In light of this, I think that syrups are excellent delivery vehicles
that can be used more often, and the amount of sugar that is taken
in these instances is of relatively little consequence. Focus on health
and well-being; it deposes the tyranny of those little diet demons
our minds love to create.

Thank you little furry ones for the sweet nector of
your lives.

Hersat Honeys

To Prepare Herbal (Medicated) Honeys

Herbal (medicated) honeys are thick liquid preparations
closely allied to syrups, differing because honey is used as the
base instead of sugar. They are simply a mixture of honey with
certain medicinal agents (tinctures, glycerites, powders), and
are normally prepared extemporarily.

Glycerin is sometimes added to medicinal honey
preparations to prevent granulation and subsequent separation
of the honey into layers. Some folks add glycerin for the
purpose of better preservation (which is probably redundant
since honey is an excellent preservative agent on its own). The
glycerin is added in the proportion of 5 percent of the amount
of honey.

To Prepare Aromatic Honeys

Aromatic honeys are prepared by adding aromatic essential
oils to a honey-glycerin base. These aromatic honeys preserve
forever, and with the addition of the glycerin, will not readily
crystallize, so they need not be reliquefied by the use of heat
(which readily evaporates volatile oils).

----- PAGE 401 -----
Aromatic honeys are excellent to use as vehicles to deliver
essential oils for flavoring tea, coffee, salad dressing, hot
breakfast cereals, toasted raisin-cinnamon bagels, etc., and they
are well used as digestive aids taken after meals. Some
essential oils that are good to experiment with are: Cinnamon,
Ginger, Angelica, Peppermint, Bergamot, Rose, Lemon, Orange,
Geranium, Dill, and Cardamom.

To each 1/4 cup of honey add 1 or 2 drops of essential oil
and stir them in. As when flavoring a syrup, add the oil only
one drop at a time, for these oils are very intense, and with
some essential oils two drops can be too much (this is rectified
by adding more honey).

An oxymel is a specialized sweet and sour herbal honey, a sweet
honey mixed with a little sour vinegar. This combination is used as
a carrier for herbal infusions, decoctions, concentrates, tinctures, and
so forth. Oxymels are used as a gargle or as a vehicle for intense
herbal aids such as Garlic, Cayenne, and Lobelia.

Oxymers
To Prepare an Oxymel Base
1. Mix 1 pound honey with 1/2 pint vinegar.

2. Place the mixture in a pot and simmer to a consistency of
syrup.

3. To this carrier, one normally adds a medicinal agent
(infusion, decoction, concentrate, tincture) to prepare it as a

----- PAGE 402 -----
gargle or an expectorant medicine.

Garlic Oxymel by the Late Dr. John Christopher

Dilute a small portion; use this as a gargle and take 2
tablepoonsful internally.

1. Measure 8 oz. (250 ml) vinegar into a glass pot.

2. Add 1/4 oz. (7 Gm) crushed Caraway seeds and 1/4 oz.
crushed Fennel seeds.

3. Bring this mixture to a boil and simmer for 15 minutes.

4. Remove from the heat and add 11/2 oz. (45 Gm) of fresh
pressed Garlic.

5. Let this sit until cool.

6. Press and strain the liquid.

7. Add 10 oz. (300 Gm) of honey.

8. Place onto a low heat and simmer to a consistency of syrup.

Lobelia Oxymel by the Late Dr. William H. Cook
This is an effective preparation to use for relieving dry and
irritable coughs, and congestion of the lungs.

1. Macerate Lobelia (preferably the fresh plant if available; dry
plant works too) in enough apple cider vinegar to cover it
completely.

2. Press it after 7 to 14 days.

3. Mix with honey at the proportion of 3 pounds honey to 1
quart of tincture [for a smaller amount use 340 Gm (3/4 lb.) of

----- PAGE 403 -----
honey to 250 ml (8 oz.) of tincture].

4. Evaporate in a water bath to the consistency of thin
molasses.

5. Bottle and refrigerate.

ELECTUARIES

An electuary (more commonly referred to these days as a confection
or conserve) is a delivery vehicle that has been prepared by mixing
an unpleasant tasting, finely powdered herb with honey (sometimes
including a little sugar) or fruit pulp, creating a sweetened and
flavored mass that can be molded into portions about the size of a
marble (nib or an aggie-sized) suitable for oral administration.
When made with honey or the addition of glycerin, electuaries
retain their original soft condition for a long time; if made with
fruit pulp, the moisture gradually evaporates and the mass becomes
dry and hard. If essential oils are to be incorporated in an electuary,
they should first be triturated thoroughly with some sugar to ensure
their uniform distribution throughout the soft mass (see
“Trituration,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

If you’re close, the attempted metric/avoirdupois
conversions in this chapter might push you over
the edge. Sorry.

Execruaries

Rose Electuary

To make a Rose electuary from the petals of garden and/or
wild Roses, which is useful as a mildly astringent, pleasant-

----- PAGE 404 -----
tasting vehicle for deliver of other powders:
20 Rose petals in very fine #60 powder (2/3 02.) (see
Gm “Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five)

160
Gm

30 Gm_ honey (I 0z.)
40 ml_ Rosewater (I 1/3 fl-oz.)

finely powdered sugar (5 oz. +)

1. Heat the Rosewater to approximately 150° F. (65° Q);
remove from the heat.

2. Pour in the Rose powder and rub it to reduce the Roses to a
pulpy mash.

3. Gradually add the honey and sugar.

Orange Electuary

To make an Orange electuary for use to administer very bitter
powders:

1. Grate 120 Gm (4 oz.) of fresh outer peel of Orange.

2. Slowly add 360 Gm (12 oz.) of sugar, mixing it in
thoroughly.

Laxative Electuary
Standard dose is 15 to 30 Gm (1/2 to 1 0z.).

Sometimes honey and sugar are not necessary, as in the
following laxative electuary:

Aan

----- PAGE 405 -----
Gm

40 Gm
40 Gm
40 Gm

10 Gm

Prune deprived of seed

Dates deprived of seed
dried Fig
seedless Raisins

Senna in fine powder or Cascara sagrada in fine

powder

1. Pass all the ingredients through a small hand-cranked meat
grinder (attainable at most antique/collectible stores) to
produce a uniform paste.

2. Store in a tightly covered jar in refrigerator.

----- PAGE 406 -----


----- PAGE 407 -----
BATHS FOR
ATER THERAPY

I considered giving this chapter a controversial title, possibly
incorporating terms like passionate immersions, or wet bodies, or
secrets of water erotica revealed, for, as it is titled, on first
encounter many readers might pass over it (packaging is the gist of
most products these days). For the most part in our culture, we
have lost appreciation for and interest in the profound therapeutic

----- PAGE 408 -----
effects of simple hot, warm, and cold water applications. We have
forfeited most of our conscious knowledge of how to tap into the
healing energetics of water by merely varying its temperature,
getting in it for a short while and back out. This is unfortunate for,
with its characteristic ability to affect human circulation by
transferring heat to and from the body and from here to there in the
body, water therapy lies at the very heart of health maintenance
and natural medicine.

Water’s solvency and fluidity have been major players in most of
the medicinal preparations we have discussed so far, and in many
of them water is one of their primary ingredients. I am compiling
this chapter on baths and other forms of water application, because
intuitively it feels important also to explore the nature of water as
an externally applied tonic and medicine. My instincts make it clear
to me that simple water therapy, or hydrotherapy, is an important
component of any book that promotes homecrafted medicines and
independent domestic health care. I’ve learned a great deal by
undertaking this task, as I too had limited exposure to and
experience in using water/bath therapy. I have relied on the
publications in the early 1900s of professional practitioners of
hydrotherapy, such as physicians J. H. Kellogg, A. Stillé, and G. B.
Wood, along with the teachings of my now deceased friend, Wade
Boyle, N.D., along with other specific information that I found here
and there to guide me in my own _ understanding and
experimentation. So I offer you the following basic principles of
water therapy, and, after having applied much of it myself, I
wholeheartedly encourage you to work with this information to
further educate yourself about the phenomenal uses and pleasures
of full body and partial immersion water/bath therapy. At the very
least immerse yourself in the information about the strategy of the
“whole body, cold water plunge,” and then do it. I’m confident you
will enjoy your experiences as you experiment with these
techniques on your own wet body.

You'll need a good bath thermometer.

A chapter on hydrotherapy has to begin by first dipping its toe in
the water. Water is an enchanting phenomenon. exhibiting

----- PAGE 409 -----
remarkably diverse physical properties and modifications in its
chameleon-like chemical antics. In its pure state, water is a
transparent liquid, lacking color, taste, and smell. Pure water has
been highly esteemed by science’s assumption that its specific
gravity is unity (1.0), and forms the term of comparison for the
specific gravities of all other solids and liquids, earmarking water as
the apple of gravity’s eye.

Not to be totally unyielding, this provocative substance allows
itself to be compressed, but only to the merest extent. When
reduced to 32° F. (0° C.), water freezes and becomes solid, forming
transparent crystals of ice, and when raised to 212° F. (100° C.), it
boils and transforms into an elastic gas. Water’s thermo-antics have
also been honored by scientists by selecting it as their standard for
specific heat, marking it as the official glint in the sun’s resplendent
eye.

As steam, water’s bulk increases nearly 1700-fold, and its
celebrated liquid specific gravity diminishes to merely half that of
atmospheric air where it ascends sun bound, leaving gravity to court
other elements for the time being. This impetuosity is
understandable, for the essence of water’s parental lineage,
hydrogen and oxygen, is obviously a gaseous one, and it is only
judicious for an offspring to commingle with family whenever
possible. Then inevitably, while frolicking with its airy kin, gaseous
water condenses into minute drops (which explains why steam
appears opaque). And likewise, in a bigger picture, the over-
saturation of air with water vapor causes a similar condensation in
the atmosphere where water makes its appearance, this time with
an expansive gesture as opaque clouds, preparing for its inevitable
return as rain to the patient and willful arms of Earth’s gravity.

At the temperature of 39° F. (4° C.), pure water attains its
maximum density where one cubic centimeter weighs precisely one
gram, and increases its bulk and decreases its specific gravity when
either heated or cooled. Therefore, as steam, water expands and
rises into the air, and as ice it expands and floats upon itself.

In the world of liquids, gases, and chemical compounds, water is
definitely not known as abstinent. for it is a voracious entitv with

----- PAGE 410 -----
the power and appetite to dissolve many salts and more or less all
gases, including common air, the constituents of which are always
present in natural water. Therefore, natural water is rarely found in
its purest state.

Globally, water is forever uniformly present in the atmosphere in
the guise of an invisible vapor, even in the driest weather, and, as
we all have experienced, exerts a vital influence on comfort, and on
the animal and vegetable economy of our planet. Water unites with
other bodies either in liquid or solid form, producing in the former
case solutions, and in the latter case hydrates; therefore, when a
vegetable or animal body is deficient in water it is considered
dehydrated.

This chapter is both an ode to the mind boggling
restorative power of simple water baths and a
therapeutic reference for treating acute physical
discomforts and chronic maladies. But the heart of
the chapter is its introduction to you of the quick
cold-water plunge which is probably the most
efficient, reliable, and free health tonic known to
the human body. Enough said—see this page.

Water as the universal solvent has a profound influence in the
operations of nature. Water by far constitutes the major portion of
the mass of all living beings, and it is as essential to their organic
physical nature as it is to the molecular actions and movements by
which life is manifested. Water constitutes the basis of nearly all the
secretions of the body, and nine-tenths of the weight of the blood.
Consequently, water can be seen as an important article of food,
which not only directly supplies one constituent of the body but
also supplies a means of promoting the solution of solid food in the
gastrointestinal organs, facilitating its absorption. Water is also the
solvent of all the body’s secretions and excretions, and the vehicle
by which the excretions are ushered out of the body.

But obviously not all natural water is suitable for food. The

----- PAGE 411 -----
greater part of the water in the world is contained in the ocean;
another large portion consists of spring and river waters, which
(apart from the issue of pollution by civilized human beings) are
commonly so mineralized as to be unfit for ordinary drinking; or of
other water in certain sluggish rivers, stagnant ponds, and marshes,
which contain too large a portion of animal and vegetable matter to
be palatable or wholesome. (I would include chlorinated tap water
somewhere on the “unsuitable for human consumption” list too,
and I'd place artificially fluoridated water at the very top of that
list.)

SOURCES OF WATER FOR HUMAN USE

Common fresh water can be divided according to its source. We are
aware of rain, snow, spring, river, well, lake, and marsh water.
These divisions are not so useful, however, as the source of water is
not always indicative of its quality. From water’s extensive solvent
powers, it is obvious that in its natural state it must be more or less
contaminated with foreign matter. Common water from different
localities and sources possesses innumerable shades of differences.
What is more useful for us as consumers and manipulators of water
is to view water as soft and hard.

Soft water contains only a sparse amount of impurities, ordinarily
tastes good, and when used with soap readily forms lather. Hard
water is impregnated with mineral salts, most commonly sulfate of
lime, which often doesn’t taste so good, curdles soap, and is
relatively unfit for most domestic purposes.

Rainwater and snow water are the purest kinds of natural water;
in effect they are produced by natural distillation where ground
water evaporates, leaving any dissolved materials behind, condenses
in the atmosphere forming clouds, then returns to the earth as
relatively pure rain or snow. Rainwater, however, as it lingers in its
cloud form, ordinarily dissolves and thereby contains atmospheric
air. It is carbonic acid that is dissolved and gives this water its lively
fresh taste.

----- PAGE 412 -----
In its purest state, rainwater is best collected in large vessels away
from buildings and at a time well after the rain has first begun to
fall. Otherwise rainwater will be contaminated with the dust and
various organic and inorganic matters that float in the atmosphere
or have been dissolved in the air, and by impurities derived from
rooftops, etc. Speaking of rooftops, rainwater can be collected in a
relatively pure state even in cities by taking advantage of a heavy
rain after it has descended for a considerable time and washed
away every impurity, and is collected as it flows from roofs and
spouts.

Snow water has a peculiar taste, because when water freezes the
ice crystals formed are free of any and all compounds that may
have been dissolved in the water. Therefore, when snow is newly
melted it contains no air constituents (no dissolved carbonic acid)
and this accounts for its rather stale, lifeless taste. Melting snow and
exposing it to the air for some time allows it to take up the
constituent gases of the atmosphere, and it will taste like other
natural waters. Rain and snow water are both well used as food,
andin the preparation of herbal medicines, fomentations, and
baths. Water equal in purity to distilled water can be obtained by
melting perfectly clear and transparent ice under conditions that
protect it from dust and other impurities. Also sea water, with all
its dissolved salts and minerals, can yield ice of as great a purity as
river water (sea ice that is crystalline with a bluish cast has very
little salt in it—gray or opaque sea ice is salty).

Spring water’s purity and taste depend entirely on the strata
through which it flows; it is usually found to be purest when it
passes through sand or gravel. The refreshing taste of many spring
waters is mainly due to the presence of the carbonic acid they have
dissolved. This water usually contains a trace of common salt
(sodium chloride), and generally other impurities, depending on
the location of the spring. When these saline compounds (salts) are
increased beyond a certain quantity, the spring is called a mineral
spring where we collect various mineral waters, some of which we
bottle for drinking, or sit in at spas for pleasant, healthful soaking.

River water is generally less impregnated with salt matter than

----- PAGE 413 -----
spring water, due to its considerable proportion of rainwater and to
the fact its volume of water is so proportionally large compared to
the surface of its (mineral source) bed. However, even though river
water is normally freer from saline matter, it is more apt to have
certain insoluble matter of a vegetable and earthy nature
mechanically suspended in it, which frequently impair its
transparency.

Well water, like spring water, is liable to contain various
impurities. The purity of well water is often proportional to the
depth of the well and to the consistency with which the water is
drawn and used. Artesian or overflowing wells and springs, because
of their great depth, generally bring forth deliciously pure water.

Lake water (aside from the issue of pollution by civilized human
beings) offers the human community very pure and wholesome
water.

Marsh water is generally stagnant and contains vegetable remains
undergoing decomposition to the delight of innumerable fascinating
plants as well as a myriad of mud and muck-seeking, jumping,
scooting, moist, and warty creatures. However, this water is
considered unwholesome for most human beings’ domestic and
medicinal purposes.

Water, therefore, is known as good (for Homo sapiens’ use) if it is
lively, clear, without smell, and does not curdle soap; and upon
being evaporated to dryness, leaves an insignificant residue. This
form of water answers well for the cooking of grains and
vegetables, cleaning up, satisfying thirst, hydrating one’s body, and
for the preparation of herbal potions and healthful baths.

EFFECT OF WATER ON THE HUMAN BODY AS A TONIC AND
RESTORATIVE AGENT

In general, water acts primarily as a direct means to modify the
temperature of the body. Water at a temperature higher than the
body is a direct stimulant of the circulation, and therefore
stimulates all the bodv’s functions. Cold water. on the other hand,

----- PAGE 414 -----
diminishes a portion of the body’s heat, and therefore is a direct
tranquilizer or sedative to circulation and other functions. However,
when applied correctly, cold can indirectly become a potent
stimulant of bodily functions and a healthful tonic. This happens
because a salient property of a living organism is to react against
whatever tends to depress it. Ordinarily, the more vigorously and
abruptly the depressing influence is exerted the more powerful the
organism’s reaction. (That can give wedlock a run for its money.)
Therefore, cold applications to the body in a certain measure and
for a given time produce a diminished activity of function, which is
quickly followed by a degree of activity greater than that which
originally existed. In this circumstance, the primary effect of heat
and the secondary effect of cold resemble one another quite closely.
However, cold and heat are relative terms; they do not designate
any definite temperature. So we can use 98.6° F., the approximate
temperature of the human body in health, as a standard and
whatever is higher than this may be described as heat; whatever is
lower as cold.

Before you read on: Briefly apply very cold water,
ice, or snow to a portion of your skin. Quickly,
you will feel a stimulation there that mimics the
sensation of the application of heat. This
happened because the interior of your body
insists on maintaining a certain average
temperature throughout itself, including the skin,
and quickly acts to replace the lost heat by a
thermic reaction where in the internal tissues
generate heat and direct it to the chilly zone.

The term bath means the complete or partial immersion of the
body in a fluid or in a vaporous medium such as steam. The effects
of different baths on the system are very dissimilar according to
their temperature. the area of the bodv being immersed. and the

----- PAGE 415 -----
duration of time the individual is subjected to the bath’s influence.
For consistent remedial results, the original temperature of the bath
(tepid, warm, or hot) is to be maintained during the whole time the
individual remains in the water. At the end of a few minutes, the
temperature should be tested with a thermometer and, if required,
hot water added. The sensations of the bather are usually an
inaccurate thermometer.

Heat and cold, as noted before, are relative terms. Objects are
recognized as cold by the body when they have a temperature less
than that of the skin—and the reverse. For convenience in this
discussion of the physiological effects of water, as well as for
describing therapeutic application of various forms of baths, we can
use the terms that have been commonly applied: very cold, cold,
cool, tepid, warm, hot, very hot. It is not easy, however, to fix the
limits of temperature to which each term should be applied, and
this seems to have given rise to much discussion in the
hydrotherapy world.

The following table of temperatures appears agreeable to most
hydrotherapy texts and is convenient for our practical application:

Very cold 32° to 50° F.

Cold 50° to 65° F.
Cool 65° to 75° F.
Tepid 75° to 85° F.
Warm 85° to 98° F.
Hot 98° to 104° F.

Very hot 104° F. and above.

WHOLE BODY BATHS

----- PAGE 416 -----
Tue Cow Bar (Quick Cou Puunce)
(approximarety 32° 10 65° F.)

The effects of cold water on the living body are complex. They
include the direct abstraction of heat, and are followed by a
multitude of fascinating reflex effects due to the mutually
responsive relations between the skin and the body’s internal
organs. The interior of a healthy body maintains a certain average
temperature or within two or three degrees of it, in spite of the
temperature of the surrounding medium. The loss of heat by the
contact of cold water with the skin is more or less completely
balanced by the generation of heat through the organic changes
which are steadily active in every tissue. This immediate and
powerful reaction of the body to cold, along with its efforts to
replace the heat that has been lost by restoring the equilibrium of
the body temperature, is referred to, in hydrotherapy circles, as a
thermic reaction.

The brief application of cold to the skin is so quickly followed by
thermic reaction that the effects seem to be those of direct
stimulation, mimicking the body’s initial reactions to the
application of heat. However, when the body undergoes a continual
abstraction of heat by a prolonged immersion in cold water (or any
cold medium), all the vital processes are depressed; there is a
diminished production of heat, the skin grows pale and shriveled,
the internal organs are overloaded with blood, the pulse beats
slowly, the secretions are diminished, and the muscles grow
lethargic.

When a person plunges into a cold bath, she or he is first sensible
of a sudden sensation of cold upon the surface, accompanied by an
oppression of breathing, causing this function to be performed in
convulsive gasps. This is called the shock, and is caused by a rapid
contraction of the cutaneous capillaries pushing a rush of blood
back to the lungs and other internal organs. In a short time the
difficulty of breathing disappears, the temperature becomes
agreeable, and if the person now leaves the water, a warmth of the
surface of the bodv comes on, termed the glow or the reaction. This

----- PAGE 417 -----
is followed by a sense of invigoration of the entire system and an
upliftment of the mind and emotions. (Try it, you'll love the glow,
invigoration, and upliftment parts.)

However, should the person remain too long in the water, for
whatever reason, another train of symptoms becomes apparent. The
sensation of cold soon turns to an unpleasant degree of chilliness,
followed by tremors. Soon, the surface of the body shows a bluish
tint as the blood accumulates in the internal organs. Upon leaving
the water there is no reaction, or at best a feeble one; the surface of
the body remains cold; the extremities benumbed; and headache
and difficult respiration ensue with a sense of depression and
lassitude.

The goal in proposing a health enhancing quick-cold (plunge)
bath is the tonic influence produced by a sudden, powerful
impression on the nervous system, followed by due reaction. A
tonic is an agent which, systematically applied, gives tone to the
tissue, aiding in the restoration and maintenance of the functions of
nutrition and assimilation and increases the body’s vital resistance.
The tonic effect of cold water is constant and regular whenever
water is applied at a temperature below that of the body.

Cold water is a physiological tonic that awakens quintessential
nervous activity without putting a burden on any vital organs and
without hampering the activity of any bodily function. The tissue
activity set up in the heat-producing tissues of the muscles (as the
result of exposure of the skin to a cold medium for a short time) is
participated in by every cell and tissue in the entire body.

In my opinion, the glow of exhilaration, and the
invigoration and buoyancy of body and mind
which accompany the reaction from a quick
immersion in cold water, along with good food
that you relish eating, pursuing enjoyable exercise
and periods of repose, drinking lots of pure
water, establishing and maintaining adequate
intestinal flora, focusing on happy thoughts, and

----- PAGE 418 -----
playing in the sunlight are the most valuable
means of arousing to activity any and all flagging
energies of the body. These are the most simple,
inexpensive, and reliable means for individuals to
prune chronic and acute disease off their limb of
the family tree.

The cold plunge produces a reliable tonic effect
by lifting the body’s whole vital economy to a
higher level and increasing vital resistance to all
the causes of the pathological processes.

By quickly touching the body’s whole skin surface with waters
having temperatures of 90° F. or below (the more below the better,
short of bouncing on ice), the skin, with its vast network of sensory,
motor, sympathetic, vasomotor, and thermic nerves, arouses every
nerve center, every sympathetic ganglion, every sensory and motor
filament in the entire body to heightened life and activity. Every
blood vessel and cell in the entire body is awakened and quickened
with vital impulse. The reaction produced by tonic application fills
the skin with blood, and if it is repeated daily the blood is finally
fixed in the skin, rendering the skin vibrantly wholesome by
permanently increasing its vascular activity, relieving internal
congestion. Tissue building is accelerated, more blood is in
circulation, more oxygen is absorbed, more CO, and urea are
eliminated, and all the vital functions are quickened, thus causing
the stream of life to flow at a more rapid rate.

The reaction produced by tonic application fills
the skin with blood, and if it is repeated daily the
blood is finally fixed in the skin, rendering the
skin vibrantly wholesome.

When there is any serious infirmity of the heart,

----- PAGE 419 -----
lungs, or kidneys, or illness of any organ essential
to life, the temperature of a bath should not be
lower than 75° F. (a cool bath). If local
applications of cold water cause any chilliness at
all they should be discontinued.

Early morning baths or plunges in the sea, lake, or river, in a tub,
or a naked roll in the snow are immensely invigorating; and in the
summer months cold baths before bedtime are of great service by
rendering sleep more sound and refreshing.

Any individual who has been wearied by laborious effort in a
heated atmosphere will find her or his muscular strength
immediately reinforced by a cold spray, shower, or bath. When
fatigued, a quick application of cold water to the face and head has
a delightfully refreshing effect. The relief, brightened expression,
and increased vigor which follows this simple bathing of the head,
face, and neck with cold are the results of the reflex stimulation of
the nerve centers of the brain and spinal cord and the tonic reaction
which follows such an application. When the whole surface of the
body instead of merely a small area is acted upon, the effect is
proportionally greater.

Water, by its accessibility, its convenience in use, its abundance,
and its high specific heat, more readily lends itself to human beings
in producing restorative and permanent tonic effects than any other
agent.

However, it must be pointed out that it is essential to the efficacy
and safety of a cold bath that a body’s stock of vitality must be
sufficient to create, immediately after its immersion in the water,
those general sensations of warmth and invigoration pictured
above. In other words, cold baths are always contraindicated when,
from debility, the system is too weak to produce a reactive glow. In
all seasons, baths at a lower temperature than 50° F. are considered
unsafe for children and for old persons who are not in good health.
Extremely feeble persons are in the greatest need of tonic treatment,
and vet have the least tolerance for cold water. These folks must be

----- PAGE 420 -----
attended to by an experienced hydrotherapist who knows how to
employ the gentlest measures for administering tonic applications,
such as cold wet-hand rubs, cold friction (rubbing the body with
coarse material dipped in cool water), the salt glow (rubbing the
skin with moist salt and sprayed with cool water which produces a
circulatory reaction), and alternate hot and cold applications to the
spine.

When there is any serious infirmity of the heart, lungs, or kidneys,
or illness of any organ essential to life, the temperature of a bath
should not be lower than 75° F. (a cool bath). If local applications
of cold water cause any chilliness at all they should be
discontinued.

It is important to mention the necessity of avoiding the use of the
general cold bath in cases of extreme exhaustion from violent
exercise, or when, with or without exhaustion, a sensation of
chilliness exists. A cold application should never be used when the
surface of the skin is covered with cold perspiration, or
immediately after a meal.

Some techniques and physical conditions that aid the energies of
the body so that it can develop a prompt and vigorous reaction,
making the toning energy of a cold bath most efficient:

Before the bath

+ Wear warm clothing or expose oneself to the air of a warm room.

+ Take a short hot bath or shower of some sort. If preferred, begin
with a shower at about the temperature of the skin, and gradually
increase it. A very high temperature may be borne this way without
pain. Raising the temperature of the skin has great value as a
preparation for the application of cold. The skin is not only
rendered more susceptible to the influence of cold, but is prepared
to react after a cold application because of the increased nervous
and vascular activity, and the large amount of heat stored up. When
there is rheumatism with painful joints. or the skin is cold. fatigue.

----- PAGE 421 -----
neuralgia, anemia, or lack of energy, this preliminary heating of the
skin is of the greatest importance and value.

+ Drink hot water or some other hot beverage.

+ Exercise more or less vigorously according to one’s strength, but
not so much as to bring on perspiration or fatigue. Vigorous
exercise or a hot bath taken just prior to a cold bath increases the
initial rise of temperature because muscular activity increases heat
production to such a marked degree that the cold application finds
the heat-producing process already in full play. Hence, it is more
able to produce a strong thermic reaction.

+ Friction of the skin until warm and well reddened.
+ Having warm, dry, or slightly moist skin.

+ Being in a state of general health and vigor.

Pertaining to the bath itself

+ The water should be a low temperature (the lower the
temperature the more prompt the reaction).

+ Wet the head before the rest of the body.

+ Immersion should be short and sudden.

After the bath to encourage reaction

+ Employ heat in the form of warm clothing, or hot, dry air, and/or
by drinking a hot beverage (a steaming cup of green tea or hot Chai
gives supreme pleasure at this time).

+ Exercise vigorously.

+ Brisk friction of the skin surface with the hand. rough towel. or

----- PAGE 422 -----
skin brush.

+ A high external temperature of whatever means available, favors
reaction, both by lessening heat elimination and by increasing heat
production.

Conditions to take into consideration which can prevent or delay
the thermic reaction

+ Old age, not necessarily referring to the number of years an
individual has lived, but more specifically to the condition of his or
her arteries. Individuals with progressed hardening of the arteries
react with difficulty, and thus very cold baths must be avoided
unless the area of the body immersed in the bath is very small.

+ Infancy, very young children react poorly.

+ Exhaustion, either of a temporary nature from excessive exercise,
or from lack of sleep, or of extreme nervous exhaustion due to the
weak condition of the nerve centers upon which prompt reaction
depends.

* Obesity, due to relative anemia of the skin

+ Unhealthy or inactive skin

+ Very low temperature of the skin

+ Profuse perspiration, but only when accompanied by great fatigue
+ Extreme nervous irritability or distress

+ An immediately preceding or impending chill

+ Extreme aversion to cold applications

A tepid bath can soothe and invigorate a tired

----- PAGE 423 -----
laborer and uplift a weary traveler following a
long or stressful journey.

A simple method for testing a person’s ability to react healthfully
to a cold immersion is as follows:
+ Dip the corner of a towel in ice-water.

+ Hold the saturated towel against the bared forearm of the person
for one minute, covering a surface of at least ten or twelve square
inches.

+ Do not rub the surface, simply maintain contact of the cold wet
towel with the skin.

+ On withdrawing the towel, dry the surface by light pressure with
the dry end of the towel.

+ Cover to prevent slow cooling by evaporation, and note the length
of time required for the occurrence of reaction, as shown by the
return of redness and natural heat.

+ A good reaction should show distinct reddening of the surface
within 1 or 2 minutes after the application of ice water. General
chilliness produced by this application indicates an irritability of
the nerve centers and of the vasomotor nerves which regulate the
contraction and expansion of the blood vessels, along with an inept
activity of the reflexes. A mottled blueness shows considerable
cardiac weakness.

Tue Coot Bata
(approximatety 65° To 75° r.)

The actions and uses of the cool bath are similar to the cold bath,
but they are less powerful. They are, therefore, better used for
children, for training those individuals who have a strong aversion
to cold, and for those who are somewhat debilitated.

----- PAGE 424 -----
Tue Ter Batu
(approxmatety 75° To 85° F.)

The temperature of this bath is closely approaching that of the
body, therefore the shock and subsequent reaction are slight. This
bath is not calculated to have much modifying influence on the heat
of the body; rather, its peculiar effects are employed more to soften
and cleanse the skin. However, in spite of the fact that the tepid
bath is generally employed for comfort and cleanliness and not as a
remedial agent, for frail persons and very young children, it might
be better suited than lower temperature baths.

To help bolster the health and vigor of the more delicate
individual, it is best to use this bath about noon, when the first
process of digestion of breakfast is over; immediately after the bath
take a brisk walk in the open air. In cases of fatigue and irritation
from overexertion or a long journey, this tepid bath can be quite
beneficial to soothe, invigorate, and uplift the worker and traveler.

Tue Warm Batu
(approxmatety 85° To 98° F.)

The temperature of the warm bath, though below that of normal
body heat, nevertheless produces a sensation of warmth, as its
temperature is above that of the skin’s surface. The warm bath
cannot be deemed, strictly speaking, a stimulant. The first effect of a
warm bath is to produce a sensation of warmth upon the surface of
the body which diminishes any tenseness of pulse. It also
diminishes the frequency of the pulse (especially if previously
accelerated), slows down the respiration, lessens the heat of the
body, and relaxes the skin. The circulation in the skin is noticeably
affected, and the bulk of the body is increased as evidenced by the
increased pressure of any snug-fitting bracelets and of rings worn on
the fingers or toes (it snugs up certain body piercings as well).

With regard to using a bath to help reduce fever. a cool or cold

----- PAGE 425 -----
bath is not recommended. A bath of 88° to 95° F., which would
produce little or no fall of temperature in a healthy person, seems
to decrease temperature in one who is experiencing fever (for
treating recurrent or intermittent-type fevers, see the section below,
“Partial Body Baths, Employing Cold Water”). When a person’s
temperature is three or four degrees above normal body
temperature, the difference in the temperature of the hot skin of his
or her body and that of the bath water is much greater than
ordinary, and consequently the temperature-reducing effect of the
bath is proportionately greater. (A water temperature of 80° to 85°
F. makes an impression on the hot skin of a nervous, feverish
individual similar to that produced by water at a temperature five
or even ten degrees lower on a normal person’s skin.) Baths of 88°
to 92° F. are highly effective in reducing temperature if sufficiently
prolonged (30 to 45 minutes); a bath of this temperature has the
advantage that it does not provoke a thermic reaction to any
considerable degree and therefore does not increase heat
production either during or after the bath. This bath is usually
tolerated without difficulty by feeble individuals experiencing fever
who would do poorly with a more intense application, and will be
effective in lowering their body temperature if needed.

The secondary effects of prolonged immersion in a warm bath
are muscular relaxation, sometimes to a considerable degree. Even
after leaving the bath, there is an inclination to lassitude with a
tendency to perspiration which can continue for some time—a
pleasant experience. This bath often acts as a soothing remedy,
producing a proclivity to sleep, and helps relieve certain diseased
actions and states accompanied by abnormal irritability. This makes
a warm bath quite helpful in eruptive fever conditions (such as
measles) in which the pulse is frequent, the skin exceptionally hot
and dry, and the general condition characterized by restlessness. The
restorative effects of a warm bath depend on its temperature and
the time a person remains in it. Twenty to twenty-five minutes
(making sure to maintain the temperature of the water at 85° to 98°
F.) is commonly recommended, but this is best regulated by
whatever effect is being produced.

----- PAGE 426 -----
Warm baths are beneficial in the onset of any inflammation of
mucous membranes, especially those of the nose and throat, in
some congestion of internal organs, chronic rheumatism, and in
spasmodic afflictions, especially of children. These baths are
remarkably beneficial for relieving convulsions in children
(convulsions may be very serious and need medical diagnosis); they
not only relax spasms, but they soothe nervous irritation. If the
convulsions are severe, it is helpful to also apply cold water to the
head.

A bath of 88° to 95° F., which would produce
little or no fall of temperature in a healthy
person, seems to decrease temperature in one
who is experiencing fever.

The secondary effects of prolonged immersion in
a warm bath are muscular relaxation, sometimes
to a considerable degree.

When a child is given a warm bath, care must be taken not to
expose him or her to the cold air for the purposes of drying the
body. The best technique is to envelop the child in a warm flannel
sheet or warm blanket (including a huge wraparound hug with the
gesture), and place him or her in bed at once. This way the child
will not get chilled.

Warm baths are contraindicated in lung illness or when there is
congestion or an engorgement of blood in the head.

Tue Hor Batu
(approxmatety 98° ro 104+° F.)
Water is recognized as hot when its temperature is above the

temperature of the surface of the body, or between 98° to 104° F.
Above 104° F. it is termed as very hot. Aside from the healthy,

----- PAGE 427 -----
stimulating reaction generated by the body from a quick cold bath
immersion, the hot bath is far more stimulating than the preceding
baths. This is evidenced by the excitement of the pulse, the
quickening of respiration, the sensation of fullness in the head, the
flushing of the face, the reddening of the skin, profuse perspiration,
and the throbbing of cerebral vessels. At a temperature of 120° F. a
full-water bath becomes unendurable and hazardous for most
individuals, although small areas (as in the hand or foot bath, or in
the application of a fomentation) can be gradually trained to
endure a temperature of 130° to 135° F. Vapor (steam) baths,
Turkish baths, and saunas can be tolerated and enjoyed at
temperatures of 112° to 120° F., and up to 220° or even 250° F. for
a short time by trained persons. I’ve actually met some of those
puzzling individuals who enjoy that experience.

Heat is primarily an excitant. It is the most powerful of all vital
excitants, as evidenced by the heat of the sun being the direct source
of animal and vegetable life, stimulating all protoplasmic activity.
In the human organism, heat can increase vital activity, elevate the
temperature, and excite the brain and nerve centers.

The secondary effect of heat is depressant, manifested by the
body’s atonic reaction to it (the reverse of the tonic reaction is
discussed in the section on cold baths). This atonic reaction shows
itself as lowered temperature manifested through reflex action,
which produces lessened heat production and increased heat
elimination with general diminished tissue activity.

A general application of heat first slows, then quickens the pulse.

Short hot applications to the skin surface cause dilation of the
small veins, which draws blood from the internal parts and
increases the excitability and energy of voluntary skeletal muscles.
These short hot applications also powerfully excite the nerves and
nerve centers, and these excitant effects are soon followed by
depressant effects or atonic reaction.

Prolonged hot applications increase heat production and can give
rise to mixed effects of excitation and exhaustion, either of which
may predominate. Excitation may involve circulation, respiration,
and heat production. Exhaustion may involve nerve impulses and

----- PAGE 428 -----
muscles.

Prolonged hot application lessens the energy and excitability of
voluntary skeletal muscles. Very hot applications increase the
excitability of the involuntary smooth muscles. Neutral
temperatures have no influence upon the excitability of the
voluntary muscles; the sedative effect produced by neutral
temperatures depends rather upon the influence on the nerves of
the skin.

Precautionary techniques

A hot bath should never be greatly prolonged, because baths at any
temperature above that of the body cause a rapid accumulation of
heat and rise of temperature. This can mimic the unpleasant
symptoms and effects of sunstroke. The duration of the hot bath
should be 5 to 20 minutes according to the temperature. If the
intention of a hot bath is mainly to induce excitement, it should be
of short duration. The bather is not to be exposed to its action long
enough to cause exhaustion. When the sensation of heat is very
great or one feels strong palpitations of the heart, it is time to leave
the bath.

Before immersing oneself into a hot bath, the head should be
rubbed with hot water. This relaxes the blood vessels of the head
and lightheadedness (anemia of the brain) is avoided. While
partaking in a full hot bath, care must then be taken to avoid
cerebral congestion. To prevent this over-engorgement of the blood
vessels in the brain, apply a cold compress or ice-cap to the head
when hot applications are being made to any large area of the skin.
It is also important to avoid overexcitement of the heart. Therefore,
in general, very hot applications are contraindicated in cases of
weak heart, arteriosclerosis, advanced age if debilitated, and infancy
(below seven years), and also with folks previously injured by
sunstroke or heatstroke.

The hot immersion bath is probably most useful for producing
powerful eliminative effects primarily through increased sweating.

----- PAGE 429 -----
This bath is taken at 104° F. and above for 10 minutes. When
followed by a dry pack, this bath is very efficient for promoting
intense sweating. A dry pack consists of completely enveloping a
person after a hot bath in a cotton sheet and warm dry blankets; the
head only is excluded. A cool damp cloth should be placed on the
person’s forehead.

The hot bath is also a powerful derivative in that it can draw
blood and other fluids from one part of the body to relieve
congestion in another. I’ve read a number of reports where this has
been used successfully in treating bronchitis and bronchial
pneumonia in children; it relieves the overfilled vessels of the lungs
by congesting the vessels of the skin and muscles. This effect is
manifested very quickly as the child’s coughing stops and the
breathing becomes easier. The child is placed in a bath of 104° to
106° F. and removed as soon as there is a strong reddening of the
skin. This can be done 2 to 4 times within a 24-hour span as
necessary. The child may be placed in the bath up to the pit of the
stomach while cool water is gently poured over the upper part of
the body.

The hot immersion bath has proved itself valuable in relieving
suppressed menstruation and amenorrhea (the absence of the
menses). This bath is administered at the time menstruation is due
at 101° to 105° F. for a half hour or more. This may be repeated
twice a day for two or three days in succession. A hot bath taken at
102° to 112° F. for 15 minutes is also an effective measure for
dysmenorrhea (difficult and painful menstruation) with scanty flow.
And the hot bath may also be administered in painful menstruation
when the flow is profuse, but when using it for this purpose it
should be of a short duration of only 3 or 4 minutes at a
temperature of 105° to 110° F.

The hot immersion bath is probably most useful
for producing powerful eliminative effects
primarily through increased sweating.

----- PAGE 430 -----
Heat is primarily an excitant. The secondary effect
of heat is depressant, manifested by the body’s
atonic reaction to it. This is the reverse of the
tonic reaction of cold water.

The very hot bath above 104° F. for 5 to 7 minutes followed by
rubbing the chest and body with a coarse towel or some other type
of friction device relieves congestion of the mucous membrane
when dealing with chronic bronchitis. If this condition is
complicated with asthma, this technique generally affords prompt
relief. Following this, the individual should be gently cooled and oil
rubbed on the skin.

For relieving the discomforts of chronic rheumatism, the hot bath
at 102 to 106° F. can be quite helpful. Rubbing the joints with a
coarse cloth or with the hands and massaging the joints during the
bath aids the circulatory reaction and increases the bath’s beneficial
effect. A prolonged tepid shower is recommended following this
hot bath.

In muscular rheumatism, the hot bath relieves the pain by
encouraging the elimination of the toxins that are the source of the
condition and by relieving congestion with its derivative effects.

In gastric and intestinal colic, stomach and intestinal pain are
quickly relieved by the very hot bath up to 110° F. for 10 to 15
minutes.

The hot bath is also valuable as a palliative measure in cases of
gallstones and kidney stones.

The pain of cystitis or inflammation of the bladder is diminished
by taking a very hot bath of 104° F. and above, but this condition is
aggravated by cold, so the gradual cooling to a neutral temperature
is imperative. Other measures (herbal nutrition and emotional
upliftment) are well used concurrently to remove the causes of the
inflammation.

Heat prepares the skin for cold applications, rendering them
more acceptable to those individuals who feel resistance to cold
applications. As discussed in the section on cold baths, an initial

----- PAGE 431 -----
application of heat assists the tonic reaction one will experience
from a quick cold application to the skin.

Hot baths are contraindicated in cases of organic diseases of the
brain or spinal cord, such as sclerosis and inflammation of the
spinal cord, and in cases of cardiac weakness and hypertrophy, and
arteriosclerosis. In feverish disorders, as the body temperature is
rapidly increased, hot baths are naturally contraindicated.

Comparative Summary or THE Cuter Errecrs oF

Coup ann Heat

From Rational Hydrotherapy by J.H. Kellogg

coLD HEAT

General General

Primarily a depressant. oo, .
oo, Primarily an excitant. Short
Short application is an Co.

. . application is a depressant by
excitant by tonic . .
. atonic reaction. Prolonged
reaction. Prolonged oa . .

oo, application is excitant and
application is a
then depressant
depressant

Special Special

Skin: Action, diminished . oo. _
_ . Skin: Action, increased activity.
activity. Reaction, . a wo
. . Reaction, diminished activity,
increased activity, oa. ae

a sae diminished sensibility
diminished sensibility

Heart: First quickened, then Heart: First slowed, then

----- PAGE 432 -----
slowed. Increased force quickened. Decreased force

Vessels: Action, contraction. Vessels: Action, contraction then
Reaction, dilation dilation. Reaction, contraction

Nerves: Benumbs and .

. __ Nerves: Excites. Depresses by

paralyzes Excites by tonic . .
. atonic reaction

reaction

Muscles: Short application co.
. oa. Muscles: Short application
increases excitability and
. lessens fatigue effects.
capacity Prolonged
Prolonged lessened
diminishes capacity and

excitability excitability and capacity

Lungs: Slows and deepens _ Lungs: Quickens and facilitates

respiration. Increases respiration. Diminishes
amount of respired air. amount of respired air.
Increases CO, Decreases CO

Stomach: Increased HCL and Stomach: Decreased HCL and
motor activity motor activity

. ____ Kidneys: Renders anemic and
Kidneys: Congests and excites
lessens activity
Body heat: Short application Body heat: Short application
increased heat production. diminished heat production.
Prolonged, diminished Prolonged, increased heat
heat production production

----- PAGE 433 -----
Blood: Increased blood
Blood: Decreased blood count,
count, especially

leukocytes especially leukocytes

Metabolism: Increased CO2. Metabolism: Decreased CO3.
Increased urea and Increased urea and general
improved oxidation protein waste

Reaction consists of a series of vital processes following the
application of either a hot or cold medium to the skin or the
mucous membrane. The reflex vital activities induced by cold
applications are much more pronounced than those by heat,
and they differ in their character, depending on a variety of
circumstances as discussed above in the section titled “The
Cold Bath.” However, the vital reactions produced by
applications of heat are clearly defined and quite constant in
character, and these may be advantageously utilized.

Tonic reaction of body to cold Atonic reaction of body to heat
1. Vasodilatation 1. Vasoconstriction
. Skin red . Skin pale
. Pulse slowed . Pulse rate increased
. Skin action decreased

. Temperature lowered

2
3
. Arterial tension increased 4. Arterial tension diminished
5.
6. Temperature lowered
7.

2,
3.
4.
5. Skin action increased
6.
7. Feeling of invigoration . Languor

8. Muscular capacity 8. Muscular capacity
increased decreased

----- PAGE 434 -----
9. Amount of respired air 9. Amount of respired air

increased decreased

10. Heat production increased 10. Heat production decreased

From the above it is apparent that the general and usual
reaction effects of heat are of an atonic or depressant character.
For most purposes it is doubtless true that the tonic reaction
effects resulting from quick cold application are to be
preferred to those from hot applications; nevertheless (as
discussed in the section—“The Hot Bath”), the peculiar effects
obtainable from heat are sometimes better suited to the case in
hand than those arising from cold. Often the dread of cold
water on the part of an individual can be so intense it makes
its use inadmissible without a course of gradual training. In this
case the effects obtainable from heat are particularly
serviceable, and its employment may prevent the development
of an irreversible aversion to cold.

----- PAGE 435 -----
PARTIAL BODY BATHS

Ewptoyinc Corp WatER

A single short application of cold water brought in contact with the
general surface of the body is always restorative and invigorating in
its influence. According to the circumstances under which it is
experienced, the actions of cold water can be stimulant, astringent,
tonic, refrigerant, sedative, or debilitating. Relying on these actions,
cold water can be used to refresh and invigorate after hard labor, to
check feverish and inflammatory processes, to stimulate a sluggish
and overburdened nervous system, to arrest spasm, to relieve
congestion and pain, or to diminish excessive secretions and
bleeding. A cold water bath seems to energize whatever you decide
to do following its application; if you choose to be mellow, it
relaxes you, if you want to be activated, it stimulates you.

Cold water is one of the best applications for a variety of local
inflammations, such as burns, scalds, chafed skin, and the stings of
insects. Cold is one of the most immediate and potent means of
arresting bleeding, whether from the lungs, stomach, bowels
(bleeding from these organs can be serious problems and need
medical diagnosis), nose, uterus, or from wounds. In such cases it
should be applied as near as possible to the source of bleeding. A
prolonged application to the upper portion of the back relieves
congestion of the nasal mucous membrane, and is therefore useful
in nosebleed. A friend of mine, Dr. Don, has been a practicing
physician for more years than he probably cares to mention. He
uses ice as his initial first aid treatment. He explains that the simple
application of ice promotes the healing process of all forms of
injury as it cleans the wound site, reduces the onset of
inflammation, inhibits the action of opportunistic microorganisms,
arrests bleeding, and hastens the repair of tissue. I suggest applying
the ice (cold) treatment for 5 to 10 minutes. When it is removed,
the body’s natural thermic reaction will kick in (see discussion of
thermic reaction in “Whole Body Baths”), raise the temperature of

----- PAGE 436 -----
the area, and enhance vascular activity, quicken vital functions, and
promote rapid delivery of the body’s healing agents for efficient
repair.

Cold water in the form of baths and wet wrappings is well
employed in many cases of recurrent or intermittent fevers where
there is a fall of temperature to normal at periodical intervals, as in
malarial fevers. The use of cold water as a drink for tending to
fevers is instinctual as well as reasonable.

It is possible to induce a warming reaction in cold body parts by
rubbing them with snow or ice in a warm room, and you can warm
cold feet by taking off shoes and stockings and rubbing your bare
feet with snow, then immediately drying and dressing them again to
promote a thermic reaction.

The application of cold fomentation around inflamed joints or
soon after an acute injury to a joint is of great benefit as an
astringent agent to help contain swelling, pain, and inflammation.
To restrain local inflammatory processes, thereby relieving the pain
and swelling of a sprained or strained joint, keep the sprained part
raised high, and during the first 24 hours soak the joint in cold
water or wrap it with a cold or iced fomentation (so as to suppress
as much as possible the body’s natural warming reaction to cold).
Then, after the first day, use hot soaks.

The repressive power of cold water is reliable in the treatment of
burns and scalds. One need apply the cold water immediately after
the injury and continue this steadily. This will help remove the heat
of the burn, lessen inflammation, and reduce damage to tissue.

The sitz bath has fallen into disuse in our
professional health care system, as has
hydrotherapy in general, due most likely to its
relatively labor-intensive nature.

Heatstroke or sunstroke is an emergency, and first aid measures
need to be initiated as soon as possible. In this situation there is not
only an excess of blood within the cranium. but the blood is

----- PAGE 437 -----
excessively hot. A person who can’t be taken to a hospital
immediately should be wrapped in wet bedding or wet clothing
and immersed in cool water or even cooled with ice friction and
fanned while waiting for transportation (cool the individual until
the heat of the skin and fever drops, but beware not to overcool
them).

There is no better palliative for hemorrhoids than frequent
cleansings (ablutions) with cold water, especially after a stool; this
is most efficiently applied with a sponge.

Ewptoyinc Hor Water

A short hot application over the region of the stomach diminishes
the secretion of HCL, at least in cases of hyperacidity. Prolonged
application of heat over the region of the stomach after eating
increases the amount of hydrochloric acid secreted by the organ.

Prolonged application of heat over the region of the liver and
other viscera increases their activity.

Short hot application on the abdominal region relieves visceral
congestion.

SITZ BATH

The sitz bath, also called the hip bath or the sitting bath, is one of
the oldest and most useful of water therapy procedures. It has fallen
into disuse in our professional health care system, as has
hydrotherapy in general, due most likely to its relatively labor-
intensive nature. Yet, with just a little ingenuity, this process can be
made a vital part of domestic health care and home therapy.

----- PAGE 438 -----
&

Sitz Bath

The hot and/or cold sitz bath acts simply to increase circulation
to the organs of the lower abdomen and the pelvis. This in turn
relieves congestion in other areas of the body such as the head and
lungs. At the same time, this also tonifies the organs of digestion
and the sexual organs. Hot baths relax while cold baths tonify the
soft tissue structures; neutral baths have a calming effect on nervous
system control of these areas. It is a valuable remedy in weaknesses
and ailments of the womb, prostate region, genitals, and in
irritations of the pelvic organs.

During a sitz, a hot foot bath is applied to minimize possible
congestion to the pelvic region by pulling excess blood and
lymphatic fluid to the lower extremities. The hot phase of a sitz
bath is concluded with a cold immersion. This acts to prevent
congestion of circulation and to reestablish the natural tone of
(heat-generated) ultra-relaxed soft tissue.

The tub that is required for a sitting bath should be of such a
form and size that the individual may be comfortably seated in it by
leaving the feet outside and hanging the limbs to the floor, and the
feet placed in a separate and smaller tub (foot bath) during the
application. Large plastic wash tubs are just about all one can find
these days to use for this. I set two of them in the bathtub, one for
hot, one for cold, and extend a hose from the spigot to the tubs
with which to fill them and maintain their temperatures. Obviously,

----- PAGE 439 -----
the larger the bath tub, the better.

It is very important that the circulation in and to the legs not be
interfered with by pressure from underneath the legs by the tub’s
edge. Placing a thickly folded towel on the tub’s edge beneath the
legs or elevating the foot bath tub sufficiently to raise up the legs
avoids this problem. When using sitz tubs that have been placed in
a bath tub, the bather can use the tub’s sides to assist their
movement. Otherwise, to make it easier for the bather to get up
and down, it helps to elevate the sitz tub on blocks. For added
comfort, place a folded towel on the bottom of tub along with one
draped over the back and over the sides of the tub.

The physiological effects of a sitz, as in other baths, depends
upon the temperature, the duration, and sometimes the mechanical
effects (rubbing of the skin with hands or friction cloths) that are
combined with the bath. The temperature of the sitz-bath may be
cold, cool, tepid, warm, hot, or very hot depending on the purpose
of the bath. The bath may be administered two or three times a
day.

During a cold sitz or a prolonged tepid sitz, the bather’s body
should always be covered with a flannel sheet and/or blanket, or
rubbed with an attendant’s hands or a coarse towel to prevent
chilling, and the feet are to be kept warm either by the hot foot
bath (104° to 110° F.) or by hot towels wrung out and placed
around the feet and legs.

The materials needed for a sitz bath
+ A washtub (two tubs when doing an alternate hot and cold sitz)

+ A foot tub or simple dishpan
+ Towels and washcloths
+ Flannel sheet and/or blanket to cover the bather

+ Hot water and cold water

----- PAGE 440 -----
+ A bath thermometer

The process
1. Assemble above materials.

2. Place towels on bottom, back, sides, and front of tub.

3. Fill sitz tub and foot tub with appropriate temperature and
appropriate amount of water.

In general

+ If it is to be a hot sitz, use 106° to 110° F. water with a 110° to
112° F. foot bath. Include enough water so level is about 1/2”
above the navel.

+ Bathe for a 3 to 8 minute duration.

+ If it is to be a cold sitz, use 55° to 75° F. water with a 105° to 110°
F. foot bath.

+ Include enough water so level is about 1/2” below the navel.
+ Bathe for a 3 to 8 minute duration.

+ If it is to be a neutral sitz, use 92° to 97° F. water with a 105° to
110° F. foot bath.

+ Include enough water so level is to the navel.
+ Bathe from 1/4 to 2 hours duration.
+ For an alternate hot and cold sitz, use the above temperatures.

+ Bathe 2 to 5 minutes hot, 20 to 60 seconds cold. These can be
repeated as desired.

+ Always start with hot and end with cold.

----- PAGE 441 -----
+ Assist disrobed bather in and out of tub, making sure she or he is
comfortable.

+ It is very important to prevent chilling of the bather. Cover her or
him with a flannel sheet and/or a blanket if necessary.

+ While the bather is in a hot bath, apply cold compresses or ice
bag to head and back of neck to prevent cerebral congestion.

+ Finish a hot sitz bath by pouring cold water over all the parts that
were submerged in the hot water.

+ Finish a hot foot bath by pouring cold water over the feet.
+ Assist bather out of the sitz tub and dry with towels.

+ Have bather lie down for at least a half hour.

Inpications AND ContraInpIcATions For Sitz Batxs

There are certain indications and contraindications for using this
water tool. Basically, the indications for the cold sitz are the same
as the contraindication for the hot sitz and vice versa.
Contraindications for the alternate sitz are a combination of the
contraindications for both the hot and cold sitz.

Hot sitz indications: painful spasm; acute abdominal pain;
intestinal pain; or painful inflammation of kidneys (a serious
condition, needs medical diagnosis); uterine pain; throbbing or
stabbing nerve pain from the ovaries, testicles, or intestines; sciatica;
lumbago; suppressed menses; painful hemorrhoids; congestive
headache.

Hot sitz contraindications: hemorrhage; excessively profuse
menstruation; pelvic congestion; atonic conditions or prolapsed
organs.

Cold sitz indications: incontinence; constipation; benign prostatic
hypertrophy (BPH) and any incontinence due to BPH: prolapsed

----- PAGE 442 -----
uterus; herniated bladder; herniated rectum; excessively profuse
menstruation.

Cold sitz contraindications: acute inflammation; any painful
conditions; spasms; colic; acute lung condition; and heart problems.

Alternating hot and cold sitz indications: pelvic congestion;
congestive headache; prostatitis; vaginal infection; pelvic
inflammatory disease (PID, a serious condition, needs medical
diagnosis); chronic urinary tract infections; improving nerve pain
(neuralgias); insomnia; hemorrhoids; fissures; postpartum
constipation.

Alternating hot and _ cold _ sitz contraindications: see
contraindications under both hot and cold sitz.

Neutral sitz indications: acute urinary tract infection (never
employ a hot or cold sitz for this acute condition); intense itching of
anus or vulva; to calm mental or emotional overexcitement or
sexual overexcitement (that sounds like an oxymoron to me).

Quick Cou Sirz

A quick cold sitz (30 seconds to 2 minutes) produces active dilation
of all vessels of the lower abdomen, increasing the movement of
blood through these parts. The thermic reaction produced heightens
the nutritive processes in the parts concerned. At the same time it
excites contraction of the muscular structures of the viscera along
with the musculo-ligamentous structures which support the
abdominal and pelvic viscera. This has great influence on the
bladder, all pelvic organs (male and female), and all structures that
are involved in the acts of urination and defecation. It is good to
note for those concerned that during the first moments of the cold
sitz there is an increased activity of the heart and a temporary rise
of the blood pressure.

Cow Sirz

The cold sitz (55° to 75° F.. 5 to 8 minutes duration) produces a

----- PAGE 443 -----
profound tonic effect on the body and must be frequently applied.
The cold sitz is most frequently employed to bring about flowing
effects upon the internal pelvic organs. This cold sitz is an excellent
application for individuals who are at least moderately vigorous,
and who suffer from congestion of the liver or spleen. It is very
useful in atonic genito-urinary organs and in the nocturnal urinary
incontinence of children (however, this needs to be introduced and
employed in such manner that the child does not view it as
punishment). It is equally valuable in chronic congestion of the
prostate, in atonic weakness of seminal vessels, and in constipation,
and in lack of tone of the bladder of both men and women. The
cold sitz must not be used in cases of acute inflammation of the
pelvic or abdominal organs, in painful conditions of the bladder or
genital organs, in sciatica, or in cases of lung congestion.

Coot Sirz

A cool sitz-bath (65° to 80° F.) is derivative when continued for 15
to 20 minutes, or long enough to cause a decided reddening of the
submerged skin which will attest to adequate dilation of the surface
vessels. The special use of this bath for decongesting the internal
organs lies in the persistence of a large quantity of blood that has
flowed to and is fixed in the skin. This, accompanied by the
contraction of the internal vessels which is produced at the same
time by the irritation of the cold, aids in the decongestion of the
internal parts.

Protoncep Coo. Srrz

The prolonged cool sitz-bath at 65° to 75° F. for 15 to 40 minutes
causes prolonged contractions of the vessels of the pelvic and
abdominal organs. This action makes this bath an excellent measure
for relieving chronic congestion in this area. A hot foot bath must
always be given simultaneously and the pelvic area should be
rubbed so as to maintain strong surface circulation. This friction is

----- PAGE 444 -----
important to assist the decongestion of the pelvic organs. The
prolonged cool sitz also renders excellent results, when combined
with other measures of treatment, and in relieving chronic
excessively profuse menstruation (when not due to endometriosis).
It is also useful in any bleeding from the bladder, the intestines, the
uterus, urethra, and rectum, in hemorrhoids, and chronic
inflammation of the prostate.

In many cases a temperature of 75° to 80° F. is preferable to a
lower temperature, especially for individuals who have not been
accustomed to cold water applications. In some cases it is desirable
to begin the bath at a temperature of 85° to 90° F. and lower it after
the first few minutes to 75° F. The duration of the bath should be
15 to 20 minutes. This should always be accompanied by a hot foot
bath of 104° to 110° F., but no hotter than this.

The cool sitz-bath and the cold sitz-bath are to be avoided with
individuals who have any kind of heart condition that would be
adversely affected by a sudden increase in arterial pressure. It is also
contraindicated in all acute inflammations and infections involving
the organs of the abdomen or pelvis, painful conditions of the
genito-urinary organs, any conditions of the pelvis accompanied by
muscular spasms, spermatorrhea accompanied by frequent losses of
fluid (see warm sitz), or sciatica. However, in many cases in which
the cold bath is contraindicated, a sitz at 85° F., gradually cooled to
75° F., may be employed with benefit. The length of this bath
should be 15 to 20 minutes.

Quick Cou-Hor Srrz

The quick cold-hot sitz bath is also referred to as a revulsive sitz. It
is a very short cold sitz, a simple dip in the cold water for a few
seconds followed by a very hot sitz of 115° to 120° F. for 3 to 8
minutes duration. This extreme contrast of temperature is a
powerful sedative measure in painful affections of the pelvic
viscera. It has been used quite successfully in cases of ovarian or
uterine pain that has a severe throbbing or stabbing characteristic.

----- PAGE 445 -----
cramps, colic, severe pain in the intestine, often accompanied by
spasmodic contraction of the muscles, and in painful conditions of
the prostate, bladder, and rectum.

Warm (Neurrat) Srrz

The warm (neutral) sitz bath is 92° to 97° F., and the duration may
be from 15 minutes to an hour or two if you have the time. There is
no appreciable thermic or circulatory reaction produced, which is
the beauty of this sitz. It exercises a pronounced calmative effect
upon the viscera of the pelvis and lower abdomen, and the
genitalia.

The neutral sitz is an exceedingly useful means of relieving
nervous irritability and congestion of the pelvic viscera. It is of great
service in the treatment of painful and inflammatory affections of
the genito-urinary organs in both men and women, such as itching
of the vulva and anus, hemorrhoids, frequent urination from
irritability of the bladder, spermatorrhea arising from excessive
irritability of the genito-urinary center, nervous irritability of the
spermatic cord and testicles, and also chronic backache from rectal
and uterine disorders.

The neutral sitz subdues inflammation and may be employed in
subacute and even acute inflammatory conditions of the abdominal
and pelvic regions, such as acute catarrh of the bladder and urethra,
subacute inflammations of the uterus, ovaries, and tubes. It is
especially helpful for relieving nervous pains of the fallopian tubes
and the testicles. It is indicated as a sedative means in cases of
spermatorrhea accompanied by excessive sensibility or painfulness
to touch of the urethra and ejaculatory ducts.

This sitz bath is highly useful in all cases of pelvic disease in
which cold applications feel inappropriate on account of pain or
the inflammatory conditions that may be present.

Very Hor Srrz

----- PAGE 446 -----
The very hot sitz bath is 106° to 120° F., and the duration is 3 to 8
minutes if the bather can handle it. It is suggested to begin with a
temperature of 100° F., rapidly adding hot water until the
maximum temperature is reached. A hot foot bath of 110° to 120°
F. is taken with it. At all times, keep the head cool with cold
compresses. Following this bath, cool the surface of the body
gradually and be sure the bather does not experience any chilly
sensations to the area being treated, for this will undo the benefits
of the bath.

The general effects are essentially the same as those of the hot
immersion bath. At temperatures above 110° F., especially if the
bath is continued beyond 3 or 4 minutes, the effect is to excite the
pelvic circulation, and to concentrate the blood in this portion of
the body. This bath is an excellent means of restoring the menstrual
function when it has been suspended as the result of general chill or
from other causes.

The hot sitz bath is a powerful analgesic, an effective in-home,
non-drug measure for the stilling of pain. For the best effects, it
should be followed by a short cold application. Therefore, this bath
is of great value in relieving the pain and discomfort of sciatica, and
neuralgia or nerve pain of the ovaries, testicles, and the bladder. In
general, this hot sitz is of great help for relieving pain in all
affections of a non-inflammatory character involving the viscera of
the pelvis and lower abdomen.

A shallow, very hot sitz is an excellent measure in relieving the
pain of inflamed hemorrhoids.

FOOT AND LEG BATHS

Hor Foor Bata

This bath requires a suitable receptacle for the feet, and a supply of
very hot water, with cold water for tempering. (See also “Herbal
Baths” below.)

The hot foot bath should be of as high a temperature as can be

----- PAGE 447 -----
borne, so as to redden the skin of the immersed parts effectually.
Ideally the vessel used should be sufficiently deep to allow the legs
to be immersed in the water nearly to the knees. The temperature
required for most positive effects is 104° to 122° F. The foot bath
should begin at a temperature of 100° to 104° F., and should be
gradually increased until 115° to 122° F., reached in about three
minutes. The duration of the bath may be from 5 minutes to half an
hour. The feet should be completely immersed in the water, and
the effect may be intensified by increasing the depth of the water
up to the knees. To produce the true revulsive effect (drawing the
blood from one part of the body to another), the feet should be
dipped in cold water after the hot soak. This sudden cooling of the
skin will encourage a tonic circulatory reaction. At a temperature of
103° to 110° F. the hot foot bath is very useful for balancing the
circulation, by the dilation of the blood vessels of the legs, relieving
congestion of the brain and other organs in the upper half of the
body. The very hot foot and leg bath (as well as cold applications
to the feet) stimulate the involuntary muscles of the uterus,
intestines, bladder, and other pelvic and abdominal viscera. The hot
foot and leg bath are well used in the treatment of insomnia, lung
congestion, dysmenorrhea, suppressed menstruation, ovarian
congestion, and pelvic pain from other causes. It is a simple and
valuable remedy in the early stages of mucous membrane
congestion and local congestion of the head, chest, or abdomen. It
may be made more stimulating by the addition of common salt or
mustard powder. In foot baths, mustard relieves headaches and
cerebral and other internal congestion, especially uterine congestion
that is accompanied with dysmenorrhea.

----- PAGE 448 -----
Foot and Leg Bath

The very hot foot bath is exceedingly useful in a case of sprained
ankle joint—to be employed the day after a cold application is
used first to subdue inflammation and swelling. (See below,
“Cold/Cool Foot Bath”; also see above “Partial Body Baths—
Employing Cold Water.”)

A hot foot bath is contraindicated in any sensory loss to the feet
or in cases of peripheral vascular disease.

Cow Foor Batu (45° to 55° r.)

The cold foot bath is of great service in producing reflex, revulsive,
or counterirritant, and other effects. The sole of the foot is one of
the most important areas in the body, having direct connection with
the nerve centers that control the circulation of the pelvic and
abdominal viscera. The reflex effects cause contraction of the vessels
and muscles of the uterus and the organs connected with it. The
blood vessels of the brain, the stomach, the liver, the bladder, and
the intestines are made to contract at the same time. Intestinal
peristalsis and contraction of the bladder are also excited.

The revulsive effects of the cold foot bath are very strong and
continue for a long time—longer than those obtained from hot foot
baths. The short cold foot bath (duration of 20 to 60 seconds only,
for it is only the primary effect that is desirable) is useful in
cerebral congestion and uterine hemorrhage.

----- PAGE 449 -----
Coot Foor BatH (60° To 70° F.)

The prolonged cool foot bath is well used as an anti-inflammatory
measure in cases of injury to the feet and ankle, such as sprains,
strains, and inflamed bunions. The feet must be well warmed by
rubbing or by heat before the application is made.

Tue Atrernate Foor Bata

This foot bath is a more highly excitant measure than the cold foot
bath.

In cases in which the feet are constantly cold and in cases of
persistent sweating of the feet the alternate foot bath is most
helpful. The feet are placed in hot water for 2 to 3 minutes, then in
cold water for 20 seconds to 1 minute. They are then returned to
the hot water for 2 minutes, then replaced in the cold water, this
operation being repeated a number of times daily.

This alternate bath is also especially useful in treating chilblains
and in eliminating any local stagnation of circulation that can lead
to gangrene.

HAND BATHS

Hand Bath

Immersing the hands in very cold water exercises a powerful
influence upon the cerebral vessels and vessels of the lungs. The
immersion of the hands in cold water for a sufficient length of time

----- PAGE 450 -----
is capable of slowing the pulse and the respiration, and lessening
the pressure in the cerebral arteries. Immersing them in a hot bath
produces the opposite phenomena. The cold hand bath or simply
holding cubes of ice in the hands is an excellent means of checking
nosebleed, and has been used to check the bleeding in pulmonary
hemorrhage very quickly.

HERBAL BATHS

Herbal preparations added to a bath enhance skin stimulation. At
the same time the body absorbs through the skin a great number of
the medicinal components of herbal formulations. The action of an
herbal bath enhances the blood supply to the layers of tissue close
to the skin, and the herbs’ medicinal and tonic actions benefit the
body organism in general. Western therapeutic science has
substantiated these facts with their official experimentation and by
authoritatively announcing its findings (mostly to itself) has finally
caught up in this area of therapeutics with centuries-old folkloric
herbal science. Further clinical data is still required, however, to
convince the more resistant medical authorities and practitioners. In
Europe, the work of two extraordinary herbalists, Herr Kneipp and
Monsieur Messegue, made the use of medicinal herbs in baths a
relatively common procedure. I suggest we lay practitioners move
on with our empirical herbal research and let medical science catch
up with us again later.

Possibly the best, and certainly one of the most sensually
delicious ways of absorbing herbal remedies through the skin, is by
bathing in a full-body herbal bath. Life in general is more fun when
you're naked. A full-body herbal bath is certainly more exotic than
a tincture, naughtier than an elixir, and a heck of a lot more
pleasant than swallowing a capsule or a pill. Herbal bath therapy is
economically administered in one’s home and is practical when
administered as a weekend course of treatment or as a regularly
sustained system of self-pampering health care.

To prepare a herbal bath. one merely has to pour a quart of

----- PAGE 451 -----
strong herbal infusion, herbal decoction, or concentrate into the
bath water, swirl it around, take off the clothes, slip into the brew,
lay back, and relax; high tea is served.

Often volatile oils are placed into the bath water for their
aromatic and medicinal effects. Add a total of 10 to 15 drops to an
already full bath. Agitate the water to thoroughly disperse the oils
before getting in. It is important to bear in mind that when using
essential oils, one drop goes a long way. These oils easily penetrate
the skin and some may cause skin irritation or sensitivity if not
properly diluted or if used in high concentrations. Some people
have sensitivity reactions to essential oils; therefore, it is wise to test
oneself first by applying the dilute oil to a small skin area before
using on larger areas (dilute the volatile oil in a little vegetable oil).

Partial body herbal baths and herbal sitz baths are generally
prepared in the same fashion. An herbal foot bath is prepared by
pouring a quart of tea into a vessel that is large enough to contain
the feet and to this preparation enough hot or cold water is added
to cover the feet to the desired height and the desired temperature.
This can range from a shallow foot bath where merely the soles of
the feet are covered, to one that extends up to the knees.

Herbal hand baths are prepared by simply placing one’s hands
into a container of undiluted herbal infusion or decoction. When
using essential oils in a foot or hand bath, put 5 to 7 drops into the
container of water and disperse fully by agitating the water before
getting into it.

Instead of preparing an infusion or decoction of the herbs
beforehand, a couple handfuls of dried herb can be put into a
cotton muslin bag and the opening of the bag held tightly around
the hot water tap. Turn on the hot water and let it flow into the
bag. This will make a fresh infusion as the hot water flows through
the herbs into the bath. Once the tub is filled, tie off the bag and let
it continue to soak in the bath water. This method is better used in
partial baths and not normally in a full baths for in the latter
(except for small children’s little baths) it becomes quite diluted.

----- PAGE 452 -----
Often a warm, sensually aromatic bath is
prepared for a friend to savor and indulge. If
aromatic volatile oils are used to provide the
magic of the moment, it is imparative to agitate
the surface of the water briskly before entering—
particularly if it is a gentleman bather—for
undiluted aromatic oils can burn tender, delicate
skin which usually makes up one of the first parts
of the male anatomy to plunge through the
water’s surface. This experience can radically alter
the serenity of the moment for him if the oils are
concentrated on the water’s surface. Although
probably to a lesser extent, this experience can
also be disturbing to a lady bather’s bottom.

Of course, one can simply harvest medicinal and aromatic plants,
throw them into the hot bath water, and climb in with them.
Normally, this preparation is only appreciated by individuals who
also enjoy swimming in fresh water ponds, or in kelp beds, and
don’t mind the water flora (and attendant fauna) touching their
skin. My first herb teacher, Norma Myers, used to soak herself in
herb and seaweed baths routinely, but she was a wild woman; she
thrived in that lifestyle.

Any herb that can be taken internally can also be used in a bath.
The following are some suggestions for particularly good herbs to
use for special occasions:

+ Relaxing herbs that help relieve tension and promote restful sleep
—tLavender (Lavandula spp.), Linden blossoms (Tilia spp.),
Chamomile (Matricaria recutita), Peppermint (Mentha piperita),
Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis), or Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis); for children use the more gentle Red Clover (Trifilium
pratense), Chamomile, and/or Linden blossoms.

+ For relief of itchy skin—Chickweed (Stellaria media), Black

----- PAGE 453 -----
Walnut leaves or bark (Juglans nigra), Hyssop (Hyssopus
officinalis), or Chamomile; for dry itchy skin fill a sock with
oatmeal and tie it at the top, steep this in the bath water for a
while, then rub the skin with the bag.

+ For relief of muscular tension and pain—Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris), Chamomile, Horsetail (Equisetum arvense).

+ To help circulation use any of the following stimulating herbs—
Rosemary (Rosemarinus spp.), Yarrow (Achillea millefolium),
Marigold (Calendula officinalis), Cayenne (Capsicum minimum),
Ginger (Zingiber officinalis). Use small amounts of the Cayenne and
Ginger.

These are only a few of the limitless possibilities one can come
up with.

SUMMARY

I’m giving you the above suggestions and precise techniques as
helpful guidance. If you are a water person and inclined to use the
bath as a means of health care, you will need to use your intuition
and good judgment as you implement these procedures in your
home. And, of course, the bather will be the final judge as to how
good and helpful it all feels. When the results you seek are
manifested, please make notes on these successful experiences. If
you make mistakes, learn from them and annotate your
experiences. These notes will be invaluable to you and to others as
we relearn how to employ the remarkable healing energy of
hydrotherapy and simple herbal baths.

----- PAGE 454 -----


----- PAGE 455 -----
POULTICES AND
FOMENTATIONS

There has been an inspired reawakening of Western herb lore in
the minds and hearts of the citizenry in North America. Individuals
within nearly every society of our diverse culture are seeking
knowledge about the utilization of self-medicating materials that
were once commonly used in the homes and communities of our
ancestors. One by one. we are rediscovering the simple vehicles that

----- PAGE 456 -----
efficiently deliver the healing virtues residing in our garden’s herbs
and weeds. We are restocking our home pharmacies with herbal
preparations and reviving the personal and family dignity of taking
care of ourselves. This is the era of our reconnection with plant
spirit; we are about to harvest the health-promoting independence
of our greenselves.

Continuing the progress of this reconnection, we will review in
this chapter the laying of simple herbal waters and succulent pulps
upon our skin. This time-honored process is well used in concert
with the vehicles discussed in the accompanying chapters.

At this point, I trust you are comfortable with the terms “self-
medication” and “self-medicating.” I realize we lay folk, over the
last ninety years, have conditioned ourselves to believe and feel that
“therapeutics,” “medicine,” and “medicating” are professional
mysteries which are the sole domain of licensed medical doctors,
and only a doctor by using medical pharmaceutical products can
competently and safely medicate us. The medical/pharmaceutical
licensing and marketing lobbies have successfully conjured this
collective illusion. Yet I believe the current search for therapeutic
“alternatives” and disease-preventive measures by ever-increasing
numbers of individuals, along with the obvious swell of self-
education in personal health care, illustrates our grassroots
disenchantment with this tenet.

If you feel uncomfortable with the ideas of self-medicating, I
respectfully suggest that it is time to root out and possibly
reconsider the beliefs that underlie these feelings. Boundless
numbers of us in this society are extremely intelligent human
beings, fully capable of making excellent decisions about our lives,
particularly when given access to valid information as a base on
which to work. And in response to this collective calling there is an
ever-increasing number of knowledgeably responsible books,
seminars, hands-on workshops, and intensive school programs
supplied by highly competent herbalists, teaching people how to
use herbs safely, responsibly, and effectively for individual and
family health care (see resource guide). We have every right to
medicate our own persons, and the freedom to do so. (I believe the

----- PAGE 457 -----
ninth amendment to the constitution focuses attention on this
inalienable right.) And unless the state, in fact, does own our
children, we have the same right and responsibility to find out what
is best for them. The knowledgeable use of herbs administered in
the home in place of pharmaceutical drugs is frequently a far more
pragmatic, benign, and responsible choice for an ailing child’s (and
adult’s) well-being. In the face of media blitz with its perennial
promise of medical miracle cures waiting around every corner, we
have allowed ourselves to lose sight of the true healing intelligence
and wisdom each of us possess. We merely need to recall and
revive this basic human function. Healing is inspired, not ordained.

In Iine with these thoughts, we will extend the previous chapter’s
focus on baths by looking at the uses of poultices and compresses,
as these are some of the simplest and most pleasant feeling (bath-
like) vehicles for the home delivery of herbal health care.

POULTICES

Classically, a poultice (a.k.a. cataplasm) is a soft, mushy
preparation composed usually of some pulpy or mealy substance
which is capable of absorbing a large amount of liquid and of such
consistency that it can be applied to any flat or irregular surface.
This herbal material is made into a paste, using hot liquids, and is
spread thickly upon cloths and applied directly to the body while
hot. Poultices owe their primary virtues to the moist heat which
they contain and therefore must be renewed every few minutes, or
somehow kept warm by other means. An exception to these
mechanics is the Mustard (Brassica nigra) poultice, which supplies
its warming action through a volatile component produced when its
crushed seed is mixed with water. In herb land, however, the scope
of the term poultice has broadened and now covers a wide range of
preparations, some of which are applied hot, some cold.

Poultices and fomentations in their most simple form are merely
local baths that utilize warmth and moisture to relax tissue and
relieve pain. Bevond this, herbal preparations can be incorporated

----- PAGE 458 -----
in these soothing hot waters to add further assistance with their
unique therapeutic properties. Therefore, herbal poultices can be
any of the following:

Emollient, which by supplying warmth and moisture are useful
for reducing pain and inflammation and assisting the ripening and
suppurative (pus-generating) process. Emollient poultices can be
made of Flaxseed meal (powdered Flaxseed), Oat meal, bran,
bread, and milk, Plantain, Marshmallow root, or mashed vegetable
materials such as Cabbage, Turnip, Potato, or Carrot.

Medicated, which are intended to exercise a specific influence on
a part of the body, independent of warmth and moisture. These are
made of any or a combination of a wide variety of medicinal
plants, such as astringents, styptics and vulnerarles, anodynes,
disinfectants, etc. They are used to penetrate and reduce enlarged or
inflamed glands, eruptions, abscesses, lacerations, boils, etc.

If you feel uncomfortable with the ideas of self-
medicating, I respectfully suggest that it is time to
root out and possibly reconsider the beliefs that
underlie these feelings.

Counter-irritant or repulsive, which, by inducing a local irritation
or inflammation as they stimulate capillary dilation and action,
cause skin redness. This counter-irritation draws stagnant blood and
other materials from deeper tissues and organs to the surface,
thereby relieving deeper congestion and inflammation. These
poultices also act as derivatives which draw pustular materials from
the body through the skin. These poultices are made using
stimulating herbs such as Mustard, Ginger, Cayenne, Garlic,
Rosemary, etc.

Optimally, medicated herbal poultices are prepared from fresh
herbs which have been chewed, chopped, mashed, bruised, or
blended in an electric blender and mixed with hot water, apple
cider vinegar, or some other hot liquid. A blender suits us well for
these preparations. for it is important to break up the cell walls in

----- PAGE 459 -----
order to gain access to the properties contained in the plant juices.

Dry (dehydrated) herb that has been re-hydrated also can be used
to make poultices. You can rehydrate a dehydrated herb by gently
heating it in a little water, apple cider vinegar, milk, or other liquid
that seems appropriate. Once the herb has absorbed the liquid and
softened, it is ready to use for preparing a poultice in the same way
that you would use a fresh plant.

A poultice can be used again and again during each session.
However, it needs to be re-heated each time before reapplying.

A hot poultice should be applied as hot as can be borne. To test
its temperature apply it to the back of your hand—it should feel
hot, but comfortable. To prevent the rapid loss of heat, it is helpful
to cover the poultice with a thick insulating cloth while it’s on your
body,

First clean the area of the body by using a solution of 1 part
apple cider vinegar to 1 part warm water, or simply soap and
water; then a thin layer of vegetable oil is rubbed on the skin to
protect it, and to prevent the poultice from sticking to the skin.

The vinegar-water mixture is also an especially good solution to
use for washing and conditioning the area after the poultice has
been removed.

Maxine a Poutice

A Very Simple Poultice

1. Put powdered or chopped fresh herbal materials into a
clean white cotton sock. Use two socks and alternate them.

2. Tie it at the top (tie it in a knot, or use string, or elastic).

3. Place this into a shallow bowl.

4. Pour enough hot water over the prefilled sock to soak the

----- PAGE 460 -----
dry herb or heat the fresh herb.

5. With your hands, knead the wet sock until it is quite hot, yet
bearable.

6. Apply this to the affected area until the poultice is cool.
7. Repeat steps 3 to 6 to reheat and reapply the poultice.

Emollient Poultice

A poultice for the eye can be quickly assembled by merely
dropping a tea bag in hot water for an instant, long enough to
wet the herb, then cooling it enough not to burn the eyelid,
and laying the hot moist tea bag on the closed eyelid. Fennel,
Red Raspberry, Chamomile, or disinfectant herbs are excellent
for this purpose. You can purchase strips of empty tea bags
and fill them with the herbs of your choice or use commercial
brand prefilled tea bags.

Eye Poultice
A Flaxseed (Linseed) poultice is a good representative of this

type poultice.

1. Grind a good handful of Flaxseed into a meal using a mortar
and pestle or an electric coffee bean grinder.

2. Add some boiling water [approximate proportions of 300
ml (10 fl. oz.) of water to 120 Gm (4 oz.) of Flaxmeal].

3. Quickly stir the Flaxseed and water together until you have
made a thick paste.

4. Spread this hot paste (at least 1/2-inch thick) onto a clean
white cloth, leaving the edges of the cloth free from the paste
and avoiding the formation of lumps in the paste.

----- PAGE 461 -----
5. Apply the poultice to the body as hot as possible, making
sure it completely covers and even extends a little beyond the
area being soothed. It helps to spread a little vegetable oil on
the skin before applying the poultice to protect the skin and to
make it easier to remove the poultice. Otherwise, it can stick
to the skin.

6. When the poultice is lukewarm, another poultice should be
ready to take its place, and the treatment should be continued
as long as necessary.

7. Of course, you can help retain the heat by insulating the
poultice. First lay a plastic bag directly over the poultice, then
wrap a towel around it, and if appropriate lay a hot water
bottle or heating pad on top of all this to supply prolonged
heat.

Another convenient method to prepare a Flaxseed or similar
poultice is to make several bags of various sizes out of
cheesecloth. Fill the bags half full with Flaxseed or whatever
agent you select, then sew up the open end (store these in the
refrigerator or freezer to prevent the Flaxseed from going
rancid over time). When needed, the appropriate size bag is
submerged in boiling water for a few minutes. When the bag is
taken out of the water, you will see that the Flaxseed has
swelled and filled the bag. Squeeze out any superfluous water,
lay the bag on the body, and cover it with insulating and or
heating materials.

As a poultice, Flaxseed can be used for treating carbuncles,
shingles, and psoriasis, and it can be combined with
Marshmallow root powder to use for reducing swellings and
inflammations, and for drawing out the pus in boils.

Flaxseed poultices mixed with Onion are commonly used to
provide relief in lung conditions, especially with pleurisy,

----- PAGE 462 -----
which calls out for a warm poultice (pleurisy can be a
symptom of serious disease—get it checked out). After
removing a poultice from the chest area, a second one can then
be placed onto the upper back, which will cover and treat the
back regions of the lungs.

Other Herbal Materials Used to Medicate a Poultice

The herbs Calendula, Comfrey, and Plantain are the reigning
matriarchs in the clan of herbal poultices, with Echinacea
giving service as their cardinal aide when further wound
healing and enhanced immune-stimulating action is needed.

Calendula (Calendula officinalis) promotes the healing and
regeneration of bruised tissue, burns, eruptions, abrasions, and
so forth. Overall, this herb is one of the most efficient of all
herbs to use as a poultice or a fomentation (fomentations are
discussed later in the chapter). A Calendula poultice reduces
soreness and inflammation, while its anti-microbial properties
assist in the cleansing of a wound, fostering rapid healing.

Comfrey (Symphytum officinale) is our most valuable plant
ally for repairing wounds, while at the same time it soothes
and softens tissue. It is probably the most healing mucilaginous
remedy in our herbal materia medica, having been used for
centuries to treat external ulceration and all types of lesions
and injuries ranging from small cuts and abrasions to large
wounds and broken bones. A Comfrey poultice quickens the
repair of the normally slow healing process of torn cartilage,
tendons, and ligaments. A common name “Knitbone” refers to
Comfrey’s historic use as a poultice for treating skeletal
fractures in humans and animals. It heals bone tissue. Its
mucilage and tannins produce an astringent and contracting
effect. By drawing a wound together at the surface, it reduces
the need for stitching; and its generous allantoin content
stimulates the regeneration of skin tissue, making the
formation of scar tissue less likely.

----- PAGE 463 -----
Of all the herbs, Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major) is
probably the most accessible and abundant. In league with
Dandelion, it is one of an herbalist s two most loyal and
reliable travel companions. They can be found growing nearly
everywhere on our planet. Plantain is used by herbalists to
remove the ouch! from wounds, especially the venomous ouch
prompted by stinging and biting insects and other skin-
penetrating animals. Plantain (both the narrow leaf and broad
leaf types) helps stop bleeding, neutralizes venom and toxins,
soothes inflammation, and heals wounds. This plant applied as
a poultice is also helpful in withdrawing deeply lodged
splinters.

Plantain and Dandelion are an herbalist s
most loyal and reliable travel companions.
They can be found growing nearly
everywhere on our planet.

Echinacea (Echinacea spp.) is a highly effective wound-
healing plant, generously stimulating the immune system. It is
especially useful in treating sluggardly, longstanding wounds
that are slow to heal. The addition of this plant to any of the
above plant poultices complements and amplifies their
qualities.

A Field Poultice

This poultice is useful if you are the recipient of an insect bite.
It can be a fresh one or an old one that just doesn’t seem to get
better, or any kind of benign, welting, itching, insect bite
including tick, wasp, yellow jacket, or a bee sting. In case of a
bee sting, remove the stinger by sliding the edge of a credit
card along the skin up to the stinger and gently nudging it
sideways out of the skin. Don’t squeeze the stinger by trying to

----- PAGE 464 -----
pull it out with your fingers; you will inject more venom doing
that. In case of a tick bite, pull the tick straight out first.

1. Pick a handful of Plantain.

2. Wad it up by rolling it firmly between your palms, bruising
and crushing it well, or put it in your mouth and chew it
(which is actually better—dogs aren’t the only ones having
therapeutic saliva).

3. If you chew it, don’t swallow the juice. It’s okay to swallow
the juice, but the Plantain-infused saliva is what contacts the
skin as a poultice and “makes you better.”

4. Make the poultice thick and slap it on the skin.

5. Then hold the palm of your hand on top of the poultice to
supply some warmth and some caring touch to the injury.

6. (Optional) When you can, brew a pot of Plantain tea and
drink it freely. Change the poultice a couple times a day and
keep one on the wound overnight with some form of a
bandage. Repeat this daily until all is well again; and it will
be, soon.

Onion Poultice for Earaches

To make and apply an Onion poultice for relieving the pain of
an earache:

1. Cut a medium-size Onion in half and bake it at a low
temperature until it is soft.

2. Place the warm flat surface of the baked Onion directly on
the ear.

----- PAGE 465 -----
3. Secure it with a cloth bandage wrapped around the head
Van Gogh fashion. Unlike Vincent’s technique, however, the
application of a baked Onion will soothe the ear and relieve
the pain and suffering.

Onion Poultice for the Body

While the aroma of Onion is in the air, 1 should explain how
to make an Onion poultice for the rest of the body. (The
notable refinement of detail and characteristic finesse in the
preparation of the following poultice I obtained from a
conversation with my friend “Herbal” Ed Smith, herbalist and
president of Herb Pharm in Williams, Oregon. And although he
is more than likely responsible for a lot of other things, he
should not be held responsible for the wording used here.)
This is what you can do at home to relieve the acute condition
of cough, croup, bronchitis, strep throat, kidney infection, eye
infection, and whatever else hurts:

1. Chop 3 or 4 Onions fine.

2. Sauté them in oil (it doesn’t matter what kind of oil). Make
it a little on the greasy side.

3. Cook the Onions until they become translucent, but don’t
cook them too much. You want them to be hot and flexible,
not mushy.

4. Now, slowly pour on some apple cider vinegar (just enough
to almost, but not quite, float the hot and flexible Onions).

5. Turn the flame down for the next steps to prevent the
Onions from sticking to the pan.

6. Add Cornmeal or Flaxseed meal. Both of these are high in
fat, so they absorb, and later, radiate the heat. You can use

----- PAGE 466 -----
flour in place of the Corn or Flaxseed meals, but poultice
gourmets tend to frown on this substitution.

7. Using a spatula, mix together and knead the Onions, the oil,
and the meal into a wet plastic mass (not too wet, not too dry,
but peanut butter-like).

8. When this is done to your satisfaction, put it on a piece of
cheesecloth, or muslin, or flannel cloth, fold it over like a fat
omelet, and stick the edges of the cloth together.

9. Apply the hot Onion poultice to the body.

This poultice is rich in sulfurated volatile oils and therapeutic
mucilaginous substances. You will want to create a complete
seal between the poultice and the skin by making sure there
are no air pockets that will interfere with the “osmotic
transfer” of energy between the poultice and the body.

When treating the lungs, following a chest poultice, turn the
person over and apply another Onion poultice on the upper
half of the back.

Honey Poultice

Honey is one of the best poultices to apply directly to a
burn. First, cool the burned tissue with cold water,” if possible,
then merely spread honey on the burn or wound and leave it
there for about a half hour. Reapply if necessary. Honey
immediately seals off the damaged tissue from the air, reducing
the pain while it works to rehydrate the wounded tissue; all
the other magical bee-formulated components of honey
proceed to do what they do to embellish the repair. Honey is
antiseptic and helps to avoid infection.

Mustard Poultice (Brassica nigra, Sinapis nigra)

----- PAGE 467 -----
A Mustard poultice, also known as a sinapism, differs from
most other poultices in both its preparation and its action.
Note that you shouldn’t use pure, undiluted Mustard, for it is
very likely to blister the skin. Mustard is ordinarily diluted
with about an equal weight of Cornmeal, Flaxseed meal, or
some other form of flour (sometimes these are called a
diluent).

Prior to mixing the powdered Mustard seed with the diluent,
it is moistened with tepid or lukewarm water (140ish’ F.),
never with boiling water. When water is added to the crushed
seed, its ultimate warming action is aroused as an enzyme acts
upon a glycoside. A volatile “isothiocyanate” is generated,
which is called “volatile mustard oil” (not to be confused with
an aromatic volatile “essential” oil). The formation of the
warming volatile Mustard oil is greatly inhibited if too high
heat is applied, so never use boiling water for this preparation.
This tends to diminish the crucial enzymatic action. It is also
recommended not to use vinegar as a wetting agent, for it too
inhibits the formation of the heat-producing Mustard oil. To
assemble and apply the Mustard poultice:

1. Mix the dry Mustard with the warm water.
2. Mix the diluent with hot water.
3. Stir these two mixtures together.

4. Place a thin cloth on the skin to protect it and to avoid
adhesion to the skin.

5. Spread the poultice thickly onto the cloth.

6. The poultice is allowed to remain on the skin from 10
minutes to a half hour in order to gain its rubefacient activity.

----- PAGE 468 -----
The action is usually at its height in about 15 to 20 minutes,
even though redness is usually produced in a shorter time. If an
individual’s skin is quite tender or there is a weakened system,
a short action may be more effective overall than a prolonged
one.

On delicate, sensitive skin, the Mustard poultice need not
remain on the body for more than 6 to 8 minutes, for its effect
continues some time after its removal. Please keep in mind
that if a Mustard plaster is applied too hot and kept on too
long, the skin can become inflamed, blister, and become
otherwise injured.

The constituents of Mustard applied as a poultice or bath
produce a lively stimulation and arouse the nervous system.
This acts to disperse any pain that is due to congestion.
Employ the wonderfully deep-penetrating, rubefacient,
decongesting, and pain-relieving benefits of this herbal
poultice, but be very attentive to the proper dilution of the
Mustard with the diluent, and closely monitor the reaction of
the individual’s skin.

Cayenne Poultice

As a milder substitute for the deeper-penetrating Mustard
poultice, the Cayenne red pepper or Capsicum poultice will
serve well, and it will not cause blistering. Cayenne can be
used as a poultice by mixing the powder with bread and
moistened with a little hot milk, or mix the Cayenne powder
with some form of powdered grain and moisten with hot milk
or hot water.

White Cabbage Poultice

This (vegetable) herb is good as a poultice for drawing out pus
and other gloomy body exudates. Merely take the inner leaves
of a common White Cabbage, wash them well, and dry them

----- PAGE 469 -----
(the large middle rib is best removed and discarded for easier
processing of the leaves). Bruise the leaves using a rolling pin
or some other like instrument to soften them and place them
on the affected area. Hold the leaves in place by wrapping a
loose bandage or small towel around them. Leave the Cabbage
poultice on for 1/2 to 1 hour, then replace it with a fresh one.
You can add some powdered Myrrh gum or powdered
Echinacea to this if there is any infection.

Applying raw Cabbage leaves as a poultice affords a slightly
stimulating poultice, which is best used in conditions where
one is treating a sluggish, ill-conditioned, offensive skin ulcer.

In addition to bentonite, other types and
colors of clay make excellent poultices as
well.

Root Poultice

These emollient poultices can be prepared from any of the
tender culinary roots (and tubers) like Carrot, Turnip, Potato,
or Burdock. Simply boil the tender roots, remove the skin, and
mash them into a soft pulp. These make a mild, nutritive,
emollient poultice. Like the Cabbage poultice, when needed, a
raw version of these root poultices renders increased
stimulating action. Peel and shred the fresh raw roots, mash
them into pulp, and apply them to the skin.

Clay Poultice

Clay poultices are made using bentonite clay, water, and
appropriate herbal tinctures. Pharmaceutical grade bentonite
can be purchased in health food stores and pharmacies.

1. Dilute an herbal tincture with about half as much water (2
parts tincture to 1 part water). Use this mixture to add to the

----- PAGE 470 -----
clay.

2. Slowly add the liquid to the clay, stirring until you have
made a paste. (Start out with the proportions of about a
tablespoon of clay to each tablespoon of liquid.)

3. At this point you can add a few drops of Lavender or Tea
Tree essential oil (5 to 10 drops) and stir them in.

4. Apply this herbal clay paste to the body.

5. Apply it thick (at least 1/4 inch). This helps keep the
poultice warm and moist. Clay poultices that dry out too
quickly are not as effectual. You want them to remain wet
(when they are most active) as long as possible.

To prepare a bentonite clay poultice for the mouth, teeth, and
gums for reducing the inflammation and agony of an abscessed
tooth, or to help reach down and disperse the stagnating
energy of swollen throat glands, you simply prepare a
medicated clay roll as follows:

1. Add enough water to some pharmaceutical-grade bentonite
clay to make it into a malleable peanut butter consistency.

2. Using an appropriate amount of sterile gauze, roll the clay
into a joint (a controversial cigarette-like contrivance) about
the size of the pain rider’s small finger.

3. Rid the clay roll of any air bubbles and squeeze its ends
closed to seal them.

4. Pack the cylindrical poultice between the gum and cheek
and leave it there for 1/2 to 1 hour, 2 times a day.

5. Rest, holding the poultice in place.

----- PAGE 471 -----
6. The effect of the clay can be enhanced by mixing some
finely powdered Echinacea root or Goldenseal root with the
clay powder before adding the water.

When treating swollen glands, one can add a couple drops of
Poke root (Phytolacca americana) tincture to this poultice. It is
quite helpful to use hand baths also to help pump the nodes in
the neck. Administer the baths by placing both hands in a hot
bath for 3 minutes immediately followed by a cold hand bath
for 1 minute. Repeat this several consecutive times.

FOMENTATIONS

A fomentation (a.k.a. compress) is a form of poultice that is
composed of liquids or lotions, absorbed in woolen or cotton cloths
and usually applied hot. (Cold compresses are prepared for treating
some headaches and sprains, and to stop bleeding.) Basically, a
fomentation is yet another species of a bath employed to convey
heat, combined with moisture, to the part of the body being
fomented. A fomentation, like all therapeutic and tonic baths, is
administered with the intent to soothe, nurse, and/or excite one
back to ebullient, healthy activity.

MATERIAL TO USE FOR MAKING A FOMENTATION

Flannel cloths wrung out of hot liquid form the best fomentation
material. In every process of fomentation there should be two
cloths, one flannel ready while the other is applied. After the water
has been wrung from the flannel, it should be shaken up and laid
lightly over the body part. This involves a considerable amount of
air which, being a poor conductor for heat transfer, retains the heat
in the flannel cloth for a substantial amount of time.

----- PAGE 472 -----
Sticks and Material Loop

When selecting a material to use for applying a fomentation, the
fineness or the coarseness of the flannel is important to note. The
coarser the material, the less readily it conducts heat, but it retains
its warmth longer. It is therefore more efficient for fomenting.
White flannel appears to retain heat longer than colored flannel. Of
course, any absorbent material can be employed to apply a
fomentation. Depending on the body part requiring the assistance,
you can use gauze patches, stocking caps, menstrual pads, cotton
gloves, jock straps, cotton bras, cotton socks, and so on.

For ease of wringing out boiling hot flannel cloths, one can
employ the following technique:

Purchase two pieces of white flannel, each three yards long. (This
is for use in large area fomenting; shorter pieces are appropriate for
smaller jobs.) Sew the ends together making a very large headband-
like device. This can now be wrung out of boiling liquid by means
of two sticks inserted through the loop and turned in opposite
directions. After the hot flannel has been wrung out, shake it up
and lay the double-layered fomentation lightly on the body.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Maxine a Fomentation

To aid digestion in an individual whose stomach appears to be
deficient in producing adequate hydrochloric acid, a simple
hot water fomentation placed over the stomach for an hour or
two after eating increases the amount of hydrochloric acid
secreted by the peptic glands. A hot water bottle might be
more convenient to employ for this purpose, but then where is
the hot water bottle when you need it? And applications of
heat over the abdomen can increase the activity of the digestive
processes in the intestines and the functional activity of the
pancreas and spleen. (In contrast, generally, whole body hot
baths tend to diminish the secretion of HCL.) Hot applications
placed over the liver region increase the flow of bile and
stimulate all the other activities of the liver.

Simple hot water fomentations are remarkably soothing and
revitalizing, but the use of herbal infusions and decoctions as
the hot liquid further enhances their therapeutic action. Also,
tinctures diluted with water can be used to medicate a
fomentation.

Arnica Fomentation

A cold fomentation of Arnica (Arnica spp.) is well used to
enhance peripheral circulation, helping to eliminate the pain
of bruises, sprains, torn muscles, and tendons during the acute
stage of an injury. A tablespoon of Arnica tincture to a half
quart of cold water is used as the liquid in which a
fomentation is soaked and laid on the injury The injury is to
be immobilized immediately and the fomentations are to be
renewed frequently. Once the acute stage has run its course,
one can apply warm poultices made of Comfrey root and
Onion to give deeper action to assist the healing. Sprains can
continue to trouble the individual long after the acute stages of

----- PAGE 474 -----
the injury have passed. This is a good time to administer hot
foot and leg baths or hot hand and arm bath, depending on the
nature and location of the injury. These baths should be
enjoyed for 20 to 30 minutes at a time.

Foxglove Fomentation

Foxglove (Digitalis) is a common garden plant that is toxic
when taken internally, but is quite safe and useful when used
externally as a moist compress. Dr. Rudolf Weiss, in his
excellent book, Herbal Medicine, introduces this technique,
which has been found to be of great value in promoting the
healing of wounds that tend to persist for long periods of time.
Foxglove leaves applied as a hot compress enhance the
peripheral circulation of the skin and promote wound healing,
especially those wounds that appear to be healing very slowly
or not at all, such as chronic skin ulcers. I have found that a
daily cup of herb tea made up of 1 part Comfrey root, 2 parts
Burdock root, sweetened to taste, is a powerful adjunct for this
task. Never drink a tea of Foxglove, however!

Poppy Fomentation

To help diminish pain, there is nothing as congenial than a hot
fomentation made of dried Oriental Poppy (Papaver
somnifera) heads. Drop 10 or 15 of them in water and heat the
water. When it is quite warm, but not to hot to touch, pick out
and tear the soggy Poppy heads in half and drop them back
into the pot. When you finish doing this, bring the water to a
boil, and simmer the Poppy heads for 10 to 15 minutes. The
solution will turn a rich honey brown color. Dip your flannel
into the hot decoction, wring it out, shake up the wet flannel,
and lay it lightly on the painful area. When the flannel has
cooled to warm, replace it immediately with a second
fomentation. Repeat this 4 or 5 times. Leave the last

----- PAGE 475 -----
fomentation on and cover it with plastic. Lay a towel over it,
place a hot water bottle on this, and cover everything with a
warm blanket. Let the individual lie quietly for about half an
hour or so. While he or she is lying there fomenting, massage
his or her feet and scalp.

Castor Oil Fomentation (Hot Pack)

It has been said and I must concur that the Castor oil hot pack
(hot fomentation) is, without doubt, the high monarch of all
herbal compresses; it is the Mohammed Ali, the Florence
Nightingale, the ’°32 Ford Coup, the sensual Sultan of Swat of
all poultices. I suggest that whenever you don’t know what else
to do for an ailing acquaintance, treat them to a Castor oil hot
pack.

Mind you, a Castor oil fomentation can be a bit messy to
administer. It’s nothing a little attention to detail can’t handle,
though. It can take a while to produce noticeable, long-range
results, but acute experiences of deep relaxation and central
nervous system bliss are always noticed immediately These are
perfect experiences to initiate any healing journey

A Castor oil fomentation can relieve muscular and skeletal
pain, but more importantly, it can relieve the deep pain
stemming from fibroids, internal scar tissue, congested lymph
nodes, ovarian cysts, and infections. A series of Castor oil
fomentations can restore health by invigorating scarred tissue
and any deficient and sluggish glands or visceral organs.

Castor oil, which is derived from the Castor bean (Ricinus
communis), is so similar to the natural oils of the human body
it is easily received by human tissues and it is able to assist in
their rejuvenation. Following is an abbreviated list of
therapeutic chores expected by the judicious application of
Castor oil fomentations: calming of nervous irritability and
aiding sleep, detoxification of tissues including the liver when

----- PAGE 476 -----
needed; reduction and healing of cysts, warts, and other
unwanted growths; alleviation of uterine disorders and chronic
infections; soothing the discomfort of bladder infection while
promoting healing; and stimulation of the body’s deep
circulation, including lymphatic circulation. Castor oil
fomentations promote general detoxification and deep
relaxation which in turn rejuvenates all systems of the body.

To prepare and administer a hot Castor oil fomentation:

1. Cut several pieces of laundered white cotton flannel, cotton
felt, or cheesecloth large enough to more than completely
cover the area to be treated. (When fomenting the liver, it is
best to use pieces of material large enough to extend from the
navel, over the liver, and around to the spine, and from the
right hip bone up to the breast/pecs.) I suggest you cut several
pieces of material because it is best for this fomentation to be
several layers thick.

2. Place the cotton material into a clean glass or stainless steel
pan.

3. Pour 1 to 2 cups of Castor oil onto the pieces of material,
soaking them through with the oil.

4. Place the pan of oiled cotton into an oven and heat it until
the oiled material is very warm but still touchable. One can
put a few drops of Lavender, Chamomile, Lemon, and/or Rose
essential oil onto the pack at this point if this floral oil
bouquet will be appreciated.

5. Wash the area of the body to be treated with a mixture of
warm water and apple cider vinegar.

6. Take the fomentation from the pan and remove any excess
oil so there is no dripping.

----- PAGE 477 -----
7. Place the hot fomentation over the area to be fomented. (If
this is a liver pack, the person should be lying on his or her
left side. Otherwise it will be a spleen pack, and that would be
okay too.)

8. Cover the fomentation with a plastic wrap.
9. Over this lay a heating pad or a hot water bottle.

10. Wrap a large towel around all the above and tuck it
comfortably under the body to hold everything in place.

11. Place a warm blanket over the individual and let him or
her receive the fomentation for at least an hour up to several
hours.

12. A gentle foot massage and head massage supplies a
delicious touch to this healthful ritual.

13. When completed, remove the oil from the skin by using a
gentle soap and then a wash of warm water and baking soda.
(This mixture will soothe the area, especially if any minor skin
irritation or rash has developed from the drawing action of the
Castor oil.)

When all is finished, wrap the oiled material in a plastic bag
and store it in the refrigerator. It can be reheated and reused
several times, but only on the same person. Replace it with
fresh material after six to eight applications.

Repeated fomentations over a period of time are often
required to heal the above conditions. These can be given in a
pattern of three days in a row, then four days off. Repeat this
pattern for several weeks or until the ailing condition is
history. Each time you receive the effects of this poultice you
will feel like you’ve just taken a six-week vacation, one in

----- PAGE 478 -----
which you never had to look for parking places or endure
airport fiascoes.

Remember, the tricks for using poultices and fomentations
successfully (although there are always some exceptions) are:

+ Make poultices thick.
+ Keep poultices and fomentations warm and moist.
+ Allow them adequate time to do their work.

Incorporating time in any therapeutic formula is valuable; you
asked for the help, so give yourself the space to receive it. Enjoy
post-trauma time by relaxing and being patient. More than likely,
stress and impatience had major roles in creating the wounds in the
first place.

* REcIPE FOR A HOUSEHOLD BURN CENTER

Into a 2 oz. (60 ml) amber glass bottle, pour 1 fl. oz. (30 ml) of
Aloe Vera juice. Add to this 30 ml of pure Lavender essential oil.
Cap the bottle and keep it in the refrigerator where it will always
remain cold and available. Shake well and pour this blend directly
on any and all burns to immediately cool and soothe the skin tissue.
Then when the skin is cold, apply the honey.

----- PAGE 479 -----


----- PAGE 480 -----
CHAPTER 25

Btstae ter savevey aveve Stave

This chapter is the “grouting stuff’ of the handbook, the
informational mortar that should fill in any inadvertent cracks and
crevices that might have occurred as we laid out the instructional
tiles of the previous chapters. Arranged in an A to Z format, from
Absorbability of Herbal Medicines and the Art of Simpling to
Making Liniments and Lozenges to Placebo Effect and Powdering to
Weights and Measures and the definition of Wildcrafting, this
chapter is a cauldronful of definitions, techniques, concepts, and
pertinent asides. The substance of the materials included supply
sundry supportive. complementary details that should serve well to

----- PAGE 481 -----
caulk the seams of our medicine-making vessel. Therefore, having
said whatever it is that I just said...

Assorsasiity oF Hersa Mepicines

Medicines, in order to be systemically effective, must be soluble in
some absorbable menstruum, or dissolvable in a body fluid.
Medicines are commonly considered most readily absorbed when in
solution.

Some folks believe that alcoholic solutions (tinctures) are
generally more easily taken up by the body than water solutions
(teas); as an herbal vehicle, tinctures are definitely more
preservative. For these reasons, alcohol menstrua might be
considered preferable to water except for the possible
complications inherent with alcohol use. It can cause inebriation
and can be habit-forming to some individuals. However, usual
therapeutic dosage is well below a harmful level even in the long-
term use (see “Alcohol,” Chapter Six, for more details).

Water is harmless and readily absorbable, but has no preservative
effect and can fail to dissolve and extract some desirable medicinal
components (the latter is true for alcohol as well). When making an
extract of dry plant material, a menstruum that combines alcohol
and water is quite practical for tincturing. If a person is extremely
alcohol-intolerant and doesn’t want to chance taking any alcohol at
all, it is advisable to use tinctures prepared with glycerin or vinegar
menstrua or use herbal teas.

The administration of hard and difficult-to-digest medicines
should be avoided because of their slow and uncertain rate of
disintegration and absorption and their consequent unreliability.
Certain compressed tablets, and, often, encapsulated, powdered
whole herbs may pass completely through the intestinal tract
without effect. It is very difficult to determine the quality or
authenticity of commercially powdered and capped herbal
ingredients, for the powdered herb which is encapsulated in a
gelatin capsule is generally never touched. smelled. or tasted by the

----- PAGE 482 -----
consumer.

Systemic medicines can act only when absorbed by the blood or
lymphatics, so it follows that conditions must be right to obtain the
most efficient results. Medicines administered by mouth act most
readily when the stomach is empty, and slowly (sometimes not at
all) when diluted by the contents of the stomach. A full stomach
may greatly reduce absorption. However, if nausea or stomach
upset occurs while taking herbal medicines on an empty stomach, a
small amount of food can be eaten.

Syrups, mucilages, and resins are useful where a prolonged
contact with the tissues is intended, provided they do not lessen the
efficiency of the medicinal ingredients. Syrups are valued chiefly for
their agreeable taste and the fact that the sugar content has a
preservative action, provided the sugar is present in a 2:1 w/v
proportion. However, a sick patient’s stomach might rebel against a
sweet or aromatized medicine.

Most medicines are best given at short intervals, and no matter
what the stomach conditions the general American trend is in favor
of administering herbal medicines in small and often-repeated
doses (i.e., 10 to 30 drops of 1:5 w/v tincture, three to four times a
day).

Medicines most likely act fastest when the circulation is active,
and slowest when the circulation is depressed. When the stomach
and/or the intestines are sluggish, medicines act more quickly when
local stimulants such as Cayenne or Ginger are given with them.
When diarrhea or vomiting occur during administration of
medicines, certainly less is absorbed and a portion is lost through
this heroic elimination.

Arr oF Simpuinc
A simple is a common health-enhancing plant.

A simpler is one who knows how to use these plants ... an herbalist.
The simpler:

----- PAGE 483 -----
+ Uses local herbs, recently harvested.

+ Uses only mild nutritional herbs with generous amounts of pure
water.

+ Uses these simples consistently over a long period of time.

+ Cleanses the body, promotes healthy circulation, and creates a
mild rise in temperature with baths and saunas to promote
sweating.

+ Uplifts, appreciates, and focuses on the individual’s health.

One can always rely on this simpler’s art to support health and heal
ills.

Capsutes

Capsules are used as a vehicle to deliver herbs in their dry form.
They are useful for administering herbs in the following
circumstances:

+ When the herb is to be taken in small amounts, such as 1/2 to 3
Gm. An ounce is approximately 30 Gm.

+ When the herb is intensely bitter or otherwise abominable tasting
(like Saw Palmetto) or contains a lot of mucilage. The flavors of
mild-tasting herbs don’t need to be hidden in a capsule, and when
possible they are better taken as a tea. These tonic plants (Red
Clover, Nettle, Red Raspberry) usually require a larger dose to give
a desired effect than is ordinarily provided by capsules.

+ When an herb or herbal formula is to be taken regularly for a long
period of time.

+ When the whole herb can be taken including the woody material.

----- PAGE 484 -----
+ As an excellent way to administer tinctures that have been infused
in lactose powder (see “Lactose Powder Infusion,” below).

+ Capsulated herbs are very convenient to take, especially when
traveling.

Drawbacks of using capsules

+ You don’t taste the herb, which, granted, can be quite merciful
(like when taking Saw Palmetto. Did I mention that already?).
However, this is a disadvantage when taking herbal bitters, as many
herbalists believe their effectiveness depends on a neurological
reflex triggered by actually tasting their bitter flavor. When put into
a capsule this beneficial action may be lost or greatly diminished.

+ You don’t know what you are getting unless you fill the capsules
yourself. (Of course this can be said about any type of commercial
herbal product.)

+ Short shelf life.

+ Most capsules available on the market are made from gelatin. I
have found that some of these capsules dissolve well and some
don’t. There are those that can travel the full length of your
gastrointestinal tract from its oral commencement to its anal
conclusion without dissolving, which with some pharmaceutical
drugs probably does one a tremendous favor, but it’s better that the
capsules with your herbal preparations dissolve and release their
contents while in the stomach. Check this out first before
purchasing any quantity of empty capsules by first sucking on one
for a while to see if it dissolves easily.

Some capsules on the market are made of plant starch or cellulose
and tend to break down quite quickly. In my experience, these are
less commonly used, more expensive, yet more efficient. In place of
using capsules one can wrap powdered herb in edible rice paper

----- PAGE 485 -----
cut to an appropriate size.

Capsule size

Small “0” capsules are best for children (if they’ll swallow them), or
for administering very strong herbs such as Goldenseal, Wormwood,
Lobelia, or Cayenne. Larger “00” are more suitable for adults.

1 ounce of powdered herb will fill about 60 “0” caps or 30 “00”
caps. One “00” cap holds about 1/4 teaspoon dried powdered herb.

Preparing the herb

Powder the herb finely so you can give a more concentrated dose,
and so it is easier for the body to assimilate. If possible, powder the
herbs as you use them rather than buying powdered herbs.
Powdered herbs which have sat on store shelves deteriorate quickly
and lose their effectiveness. Also, unless you know an herb quite
well by smell or taste, it is nearly impossible to be sure that you are
getting the herb you want when it is merely seen as a powder. Most
green powders look similar; so do most brown powders, tan
powders, yellowish powders, etc.

Procedure for filling capsules

1. Powder herb in coffee bean grinder.

2. Place powder in a small bowl. If using more than one herb,
blend them together at this stage.

3. Separate the two halves of the capsule, and hold the empty
capsule bottom between the thumb and the forefinger.

4. Punch or press the capsule bottom vertically into the powder
until it is filled.

5. Push capsule ends together and place in another bowl.

----- PAGE 486 -----
6. Continue this until all caps are full or all the powder is gone.

Dosage

People ordinarily take 2 “00” caps full of herb 2-3 times a day with
water (1 “O” cap, 2-3 times a day for children).

Storage

Store in tightly sealed bottles in a cool, dark place. Herbs begin to
deteriorate fairly rapidly after they have been powdered. However,
when put into air-free capsules, they keep for a longer time,
approximately 1 year.

Circumstances that modify the effects of medicines

While the effects of herbal remedies are generally much the same
on people, there are conditions or circumstances which tend to
modify their action. These factors create the environment that
makes healing and herbal therapeutics more an art than a science.
The modifying conditions and circumstances are: 1) age of the
patient, 2) the patient’s sex, 3) weight, 4) temperament, 5)
variations of temperature, 6) diseased tissue, 7) drug habit(s), 8)
pregnancy, 9) menstruation, 10) idiosyncrasy, the peculiar
susceptibility (or insusceptibility) of the tissues of certain persons to
the influence of certain medicines, 11) placebo effect, the most
profound, unpredictable, and potentially enlightening of all the
modifying conditions.

Concentrates

A simple method for increasing the potency of an infusion or
decoction is to prepare a concentrate. (This process is not
particularly suitable with sensitive or volatile plants.) In general,
this is done best by using a large volume of tea. as it is easier to

----- PAGE 487 -----
concentrate the brew without burning it. Concentrates are the
common herbal base used to prepare syrups and fomentations. An
easy method for preparing a concentrate is to place a strained and
filtered infusion or decoction into a stainless steel or glass pot. Stick
a chopstick straight down into the center of the liquid touching the
bottom of the pot. Withdraw the stick and make a mark at the
water line. Bring the liquid to a boil. Reduce the flame and gently
simmer the liquid, slowly evaporating the water portion until the
surface of the liquid marks a point half as high on the chopstick as
the original watermark. At this point, one-half the volume of the
original liquid remains, rendering the concentrate double the
potency of the original tea; when it marks a point one-quarter as
high as the original watermark the concentrate is considered to be
four times the strength of the original extract, and so on until the
concentrate is transformed into a tar and ultimately into a powder.
Be sure to use low heat over a long period of time or the
concentrate will “burn” and its therapeutic potency will be trashed.
One can also concentrate a tea by placing it in flat trays inserted in
a dehydrator.

Siphoning Procedure

----- PAGE 488 -----
=

Pipette Guiding Rod

Decantinc

The simple process of decanting is used to separate fluids from
solids. It usually consists of allowing the solids to settle and deposit
at the bottom of the vessel, and then carefully pouring off the liquid
by inclining the vessel. You can also use a food baster for drawing
off the desired liquids. This is a most valuable technique for
separating water and marc from oil when making fresh-plant oil
infusions.

Siphoning. It is sometimes impossible to decant by pouring off the
liquid, either because the holding vessel is too full or because of the
light character of the precipitate (for example, with Usnea extract),
the inclination of the vessel would cause a disturbance in the
powder that would result in an admixture of the liquid and solid. A
siphon can be helpful in a situation like this (see illustration). The
best material to use for the siphon tube is flexible surgical tubing.
Fill the tube with the liquid that is to be siphoned, and then insert
the short end into the liquid that is to be drawn off. Place the long
end in the receiving vessel. When a flow of liquid from the long
end has been established, it need not be stopped until as much of
the liquid as desired has been extracted.

Guiding Rod. Some skill is necessary for decanting liquids

----- PAGE 489 -----
without spillage from vessels of various shapes and when
transferring liquids from a larger container into smaller dropper
bottles. A guiding rod is most helpful in these processes, and it is
good practice to develop the habit of using a guiding rod as
illustrated. When dispensing liquid extracts into dropper bottles,
use the bottle’s pipette (dropper) as the guiding rod.

Dicestion

Digestion, from the Latin digerere, meaning to separate or dissolve,
is simply another maceration process in which the menstruum is
heated, with the heat increasing the solvent power of the
menstruum. Digestion differs from infusion and decoction in that
the period of soaking is considerably longer (1 to 10 days), and the
temperature at which the menstruum is held is much lower, usually
between 100° and 140° F. This process is not used very often for the
preparation of herbal extracts. I use it predominantly for the
preparation of oil infusions (see Chapter Seventeen), and basically
this is the process employed when making herb teas by solar
infusion (placing the fresh and/or dried herbs in a clear jar with a
water menstruum and letting the mixture set in direct sunlight for a
day). A lunar infusion (Witch’s elixir) is done in the same fashion,
except that the subtle energy from the light of the moon is
employed instead; a convivial chorus of cackles can expedite this
process.

Dispensatory

The U.S. Dispensatory is primarily a commentary upon
pharmacopoeias (U.S. as well as some foreign pharmacopoeias,
particularly British), but it is broad enough in scope to include also
every known medicinal or pharmaceutical article and its most
important preparations. The dispensatory is the most
comprehensive single work on medicines and their uses. In it you
may find official. non-official, and common names of plants,

----- PAGE 490 -----
descriptions, and botanical origins, and explanations of parts used.
Notes on adulterants are included. It offers formulas for
compounding preparations, and gives maximum and minimum
doses. The actions of medicines (physiological, toxic, and
medicinal) are fully but briefly discussed.

In reality, the dispensatory is an encyclopedia of drugs and their
uses. It is not necessarily official, nor does it delineate the legal
criterion used in this country. It includes a vast amount of material.
Note that the information concerning the uses of botanicals is not
written by herbalists and is often contrary to our experiences or
what we might at times regard as standardized “b.s.”

Dosace

It is better to err on the side of insufficient dosage and trust to
nature than to overdose. This avoids harming the client. Giving no
medication at all is always better than medicating aimlessly. Many
medicines positively influence conditions of imbalance when given
in minute doses, even though no explanation for the action can be
given. The fractional dose of Matricaria (German Chamomile) or of
Pulsatilla often effects a positive control over nervous phenomena
that cannot be duplicated by more powerful agents or doses (for
example, two Chamomile flowers in a cup of hot tea or 1 drop of
Chamomile tincture in an ounce of water). Try it.

As a general rule, large and robust persons require fuller doses
than small and frail individuals and the elderly require smaller
doses than other adults. In general, beginning at age 65, dosage of
most systemic remedies should run a gradually descending scale,
while it may be necessary to increase that of eliminants such as
gentle laxatives and diuretics. The weight of an individual also has
to be taken into account. When giving medicine to children, certain
rules must be followed. No absolutes can be determined in
administering medicines to children, but one or the other of the
following rules is often used:

Clark’s Rule: Divide the weight in pounds by 150 to give the

----- PAGE 491 -----
approximate fraction of the adult dose. (For example, for a 50-
pound child, divide 50 by 150 = 1/3. Therefore, the dose is one-
third that of the adult dose.)

Cowling’s Rule: The age of the child at his/her next birthday is
divided by 24. That is, for a child coming 3 years of age, 3 divided
by 24 = 1/8. Therefore, the dose is one-eighth that of the dose for
an adult.

Young’s Rule: The dose is computed by dividing the child’s age by
12 plus the age. So, for a child of 4 years, 4 divided by [12+4] =
4/16 = 1/4. Therefore, the dose is one-fourth that which would be
given to an adult.

As I mentioned, no exact rule can be established, and these doses
should be lowered in some instances, most notably when
administering strong and intense medicines like Goldenseal,
Cayenne, Poke, etc.

Dovste Maceration

This is a process of macerating a plant in a menstruum for an
appropriate amount of time, decanting it, pressing it, and then
using that solution (tincture) as the menstruum for a second round,
pouring it over an equal amount of herb as used in the initial
maceration, thereby repeating the entire process. Supposedly, this
technique renders the extract more potent. It is used by some
commercial companies as a marketing gimmick in an attempt to
position their products as superior. However, although this
technique makes sense when extracting very mild herbs such as
Cleavers, Mullein blossoms, Plantain, Nettle leaf, Red Clover
blossoms, or even Ginkgo, with most plants, if one does the initial
maceration properly and is using good-quality herb, double
maceration is really unnecessary, and, in my opinion, needlessly
squanders a lot of good herb.

Druc

----- PAGE 492 -----
“Drug” comes from the Dutch word droog, meaning dried plant.
Strictly speaking, a drug is a dried medicinal plant containing its
entire ingredients. However, corporations cannot patent a natural
plant for economic exploitation. Consequently, the Western
pharmaceutical industry has emphasized and promoted chemical
“drug therapy,” giving themselves more economic control to
manufacture and promote white powders and clear liquids. They
also have fewer problems by not having to deal with organic
materials that decompose and get buggy, and they generate
immense profits from marketing patentable products. So today, by
common cultural experience, a drug is thought of more as a modern
chemical preparation than as a medicinal dried plant, unless of
course that plant can get you high.

Expression (SEE Pressina)

Firrration

Filtration is employed when the solid matter to be removed from a
liquid solution is not present in large quantity. It is done by
submitting the mixture to the separating action of certain materials
which allow the fluids to pass through, but which block the passage
of the solid particles. Sometimes filtration is called straining or
collation. Actually, straining differs from filtration in that it affords
less complete removal of suspended sedimentary matter from the
fluid. It is useful when the solid particles are large enough to be
easily retained by a coarser media than those generally employed
for filtration.

The most common, easily attainable filtering material used in our
work is a paper filter such as a coffee filter. It is advisable to use
unbleached paper filters which have not been heat-sealed into
preformed shapes, because it is suspected that the sealant is
relatively toxic, especially when used to filter alcohol and vinegar-
based extracts or any hot extract.

Collation is the preferred method of separation when the fluid is

----- PAGE 493 -----
of a viscid (sticky or adhering) character, such as glycerites, oil
infusions, and syrups. The filtering media employed here are
cotton, muslin, flannel, or woolen cloth. These cloths can be used to
line a wire sieve before the viscid fluid is poured through.

Hergs and PHarmacguticaL Mepications

Herbs and pharmaceuticals are well-labeled as “complementary
medicines.” Regardless of rampant prejudice in favor of, and in
opposition to either one or the other, they are of equal value; one
primarily for heroic treatment of disease symptoms and crisis
intervention, and the other perfectly suited for convalescent
nourishment, nutritional toning/health sustenance, and disease
prevention and treatment. Both are playing an important role in
modern day health care and disease control. Both provide excellent
service to humans and non-humans when used with a clear mind,
compassionate heart, and a healer’s intent.

+ Normally, individuals having delicate constitutions are more
prone to adverse or unpredictable effects.

+ Herbal products that have been standardized (refined) to an
arbitrary percent of any specific constituent in an attempt to
exaggerate this component and elicit a faster (drug-like) action
frequently demonstrate more (drug-like) side effects. This
refinement process alters the natural synergistic energy of the herb
and modifies the herb’s natural ability to do many things and work
on deeper fundamental levels.

+ Alterative, adaptogen, and tonic actions are unique to herbal
preparations. None of these actions are found in drugs.

+ There are no drugs that can give the complex effects of an herbal
bitter.

+ The fast specific action of drugs dynamically support the surgical

----- PAGE 494 -----
process in crises/disease management and cosmetic and corrective
surgery.

+ Relevant factors to include in the decision to use herbs or drugs:

+ The individual’s preference upon having been clearly advised and/or self-
educated as to the risks and benefits of both types of medication.

+ Effectiveness for desired results
+ Speed of action sought.

+ Probability of dosage compliance, especially when prolonged treatment is
necessary due to the use of a slower acting herbal preparation.

+ Side effects (I regard this as more of a “wool over the eyes” or a “shmoozing”
term. I don’t see that any agent renders some quasi-predictable side effect that
somehow proceeds beyond some intended or predicted effect; there are “the

idual”—the classic “different effects in

effects” an agent causes in “an indi
different people” experience.)

Heras Comparep To Puarmaceurica, Drugs

HERBS DRUGS

Usually just one (often
‘ACTIONS Often multiple using a single specific
receptor site)

Often enhances

body’s own No drug does this
healing ability
Addresses Mostly treats symptoms (can

causal factors be life-saving in a

----- PAGE 495 -----
of an illness crisis/emergency)

aoxertruenTs Many (synergistic) Usually one

SIDE EFFECTS Few and mild Often many, can be severe
May be slow

onseToraction (working on Usually rapid and direct
nutritional level)
Variable
(you can .

cost make your Variable
own)

Hyprotysis

Hydrolysis is a chemical reaction where a substance (plant
constituent) reacts with water and is changed into one or more
other substances, such as starch into glucose or natural fats into
glycerin (glycerol) and fatty acids.

Lacrosz Powner Infusion

This is an excellent method for ultimately obtaining a dry
preparation from a fresh plant or dry plant tincture without having
to use heat. The process is suitable for administering tinctures and
fluid extracts whose menstruum consist of water and/or vinegar and
alcohol. It is not as suitable for those whose menstruum contain any
portion of glycerin. Obviously, it is not a good idea to administer
these preparations to lactose-intolerant individuals.

1. Mix a single tincture or a compound tincture with an equal
weight of lactose powder [i.e.. 30 ml (1 fl. oz.) tincture with 30 Gm

----- PAGE 496 -----
a oz.) lactose powder].

2. Expose this mixture to normal room temperature in a shallow
container. The menstruum will slowly evaporate, leaving the
lactose saturated with the herbal constituents.

3. Triturate the dry powder to an even consistency. (See
“Trituration” below.)

4. Fill the capsules with the dry powder or incorporate the powder
in the making of lozenges, etc.

Livivent

This is more of a preparation thinner than salve, to be rubbed on
the skin. Liniments are compounded and prepared exactly like
tinctures, using vinegar, ethyl alcohol, or denatured rubbing alcohol
as a menstruum. Liniments are prepared especially for external
purposes, and it is a good idea to label them as such (i.e., “For
External Use Only”). If rubbing alcohol is the menstruum, you
might even draw a little skull and crossbones on the label in red
ink.

Depending on the menstruum and the herbs, a liniment is
employed for various purposes: to draw, to warm, and to dry an
area of the skin; to disinfect cuts and wounds; to help heal wounds,
bruises, sprains, burns, and sunburns; as an anodyne to soothe
strained muscles and ligaments; or to work as a counterirritant
(revulsive).

There is a classic herbal liniment formula whose praise is sung in
the notebooks of every attentive herb student in America. This is
The Jethro Kloss Goldenseal & Myrrh Liniment, the Florence
Nightingale of compound rubs for injured athletes and sundry
adventurers. This liniment will last forever and will always be there
for you when you need it.

1. Mix together 1/2 oz. of powdered Goldenseal root. 1 oz. of

----- PAGE 497 -----
powdered Myrrh, and 1/4 oz. of powdered Cayenne.
2. Add to this dry mixture, 1 pint of (rubbing) alcohol.
3. Let stand for seven days; shake well every day.

4. Decant and bottle.

According to Mr. Kloss in his classic herbal, Back to Eden, “If you
don’t have Goldenseal, make it without.” I think a 1/16 to an 1/8
ounce of this endangered herb is more than adequate.

Of course, you can use ethyl alcohol as the menstruum in place of
the rubbing alcohol, whereby this tincture can be used internally as
well.

A lesser-known, quickly prepared liniment that is enthusiastically
recommended by Mr. Kloss is a simple vinegar preparation:

1. Combine 1 tablespoonful of powdered Cayenne red pepper with
1 pint apple cider vinegar.

2. Simmer gently for 10 minutes.

3. Bottle it hot, unstrained.

This makes, “a powerfully stimulating external application for
deep-seated internal congestion and inflammation, sprains, etc.”
The application of this Cayenne liniment arouses strong circulation
upon the surface of the skin inducing smarting and redness, but
does not injure the skin.

Lozences (Atso Cattep Trocues or Pasties)

Lozenges are small, solid, flattened cakes of very finely powdered
therapeutic herbal substance, prepared from a mass made with a
base of sugar for its pleasant flavor and a mucilage prepared from
Slippery Elm bark, or Comfrey root, or Marshmallow root, or from
a mucilage prepared from gum Acacia (a.k.a. gum Arabic). or gum

----- PAGE 498 -----
Tragacanth as an adhesive to give form and consistency. Water
(plain or aromatic flower water) is used to supply the necessary
moisture. Any suitable essential oil (Anise, Peppermint,
Wintergreen, etc.) may be triturated (see “Trituration” below) with
the sugar before this is mixed with the other powders.

Lozenges are placed on the tongue and allowed to dissolve
slowly. They are especially useful when the herbal ingredients are
intended to come into contact with the mucous surface of the
mouth, throat, and upper respiratory tract. The remedial action of
lozenges is generally designed to be local rather than systemic.
(There may, however, be a place for a Damiana lozenge for
enhancing staying power.) The action of a lozenge is normally
expectorant, demulcent, sedative, or antiseptic.

The creation of the lozenge-mass is the critical step in making
this vehicle. The dry herbal powders and sugar must be made into
an adhesive mass that will be sufficiently plastic to enable it to be
rolled into a flat cake without crumbling; at the same time it must
dry quickly, and the lozenge must not become brittle due to
insufficient adhesiveness. Mucilages are thick, viscid, adhesive
liquids that are produced by dissolving gum in water, or by
extracting by cold infusion the mucilaginous principles of Slippery
Elm, Marshmallow, or Comfrey.

When making the lozenge-mass, using a (moist) mucilage is a
preferred technique to mixing the dry gum powder with the other
dry ingredients and then adding the water. In this method it is often
difficult to avoid an excess of moisture.

Preparing a Mucilage

Using mucilaginous herb:

1. Macerate overnight 6 parts (6 Gm) dried herb in 100 parts (100
ml) of water.

2. Press it forcibly through cotton muslin.

----- PAGE 499 -----
Using gum Acacia (gum Arabic):
1. Combine 1 part gum Arabic to 2 parts water, let sit for several
hours, and strain.

2. Or moisten 50 Gm Acacia with 75 ml cold water, set aside for
several hours for the gum to dissolve completely, then add sufficient
water to make up 125 ml.

Using gum Tragacanth:
1. Mix 18 ml glycerin with 76 ml water.

2. Heat to boiling.
3. Remove from fire and add 6 Gm gum Tragacanth.
4. Macerate for 24 hours, stirring now and then.

5. Strain forcibly through cotton muslin.

Preparing the Lozenge

1. Mix and sift the dry powders to be used (powdered herb and
sugar, lactose infusions—see lactose powder infusion, above). If
essential oils are to be incorporated, triturate them with the sugar at
this time. The finer the powder, the better the quality of the
lozenge.

2. Stir in sufficient powder to a prepared mucilage to make a mass
of proper consistency. The quantity of mucilage to use always
depends upon the character of the powder. If the powder is quite
absorbent, more mucilage is required.

3. Once the final mass is prepared, it is ready to be formed into a
flat cake by placing it upon a hard, level, dusted surface and rolling
it with a cylindrical roller (which can be lightly oiled if necessary to
prevent sticking). The thickness of the cake determines the weight
of the lozenge. so it is more exact to have some means of adjusting

----- PAGE 500 -----
the thickness. The herbs I use for making lozenges are not critically
dose specific, so I usually avoid this rolling out (and cutting)
process entirely by calculating an appropriate size portion for a
dose, separating and rolling it between my palms into a little ball,
laying it on a hard surface dusted with powdered sugar, and then
flattening and shaping it with my fingers; then I do another one,
then another... It is a mellow task that proceeds at about the same
rate of speed and degree of excitement as filling capsules. You get
into the rhythm of it, and in a brief, peculiar segment of your
lifespan the job is completed.

Lozenge Rolling Board

4. If you choose to employ the hard surface and roller technique,
cut out each lozenge using a small, improvised, cookie cutter-type
device.

5. Lay the formed lozenges out on a screen or on a large sieve to
dry; a plate works in lieu of a screen; however, you have to turn the
lozenges over with a tiny little spatula to dry them out underneath.

Making lozenges requires some trial and error to discern the right
consistency for the lozenge-mass. Hold aside some of the powder
and some of the mucilage. Be aware that mucilage deteriorates
fairly quickly. Mix a mass, roll out a small portion of it (set the
larger portion in a tightly covered iar to retain its moisture), and cut

----- PAGE 501 -----
the disks, or form the cakes in whatever way you choose, lay them
out to dry overnight, and see what you get. You can always go back
to the main mass and adjust it for further experimentation by
adding more mucilage or more powder. With sufficient stirring and
kneading, the original mass will incorporate the modifying
additions. Take accurate notes until you get it down. Make your
first experimental lozenges tasty (1 part Wintergreen powder to 2
parts sugar makes a pleasant-tasting, aromatic treat); this way
people won’t mind testing these and giving you feedback as to the
tenacity and basic “suckability” of your lozenges.

Remember, the finer the powder (#60 & #80, see “Powdering”
below), the better the lozenge.

Marc

The term marc is from the old French word marcher, to trample (as
on grapes). The marc is the insoluble residue remaining after
extracting the soluble components of an herb with a menstruum
(solvent), or the pulpy residue left after the juice has been pressed
from grapes, apples, other fruits, vegetables, or herbs.

Materia Mepica (Tue Mareriats or Mepicine)

Usually a materia medica is a treatise on the materials used in a
particular school or system of medicine, discussing their history,
source, physical characteristics, constituents, and actions.
Preparations and doses are mentioned, and brief therapeutic and
toxicological notes are usually given. A materia medica can be
combined with therapeutics and these works are called Materia
Medica and Therapeutics. These works include the same stuff which
is found in a materia medica, plus extensive information on the
physiological, chemical, and toxicological action, as well as the
therapeutic usage of the medicines considered. A materia medica
will reveal the individuality of its author. What the author includes
is usually what she or he has personal knowledge of and interest in,
or which meets with her or his approval. In this aspect it differs

----- PAGE 502 -----
from a dispensatory, which is designed to be a book of general
reference.

Mepicine

Medicine is whatever you choose to help you focus on well-being,
to help reduce any resistance to the flow of life force, and to revive
your experience of health. Medicine is any agent that helps revive
your physical, mental, and emotional vitality, and uplifts and
promotes your natural state of wellness, joy, and prosperity. All
medicines are equally creditable; different things resonate
differently with different people.

Meniscus

Due to the capillary attraction of a liquid to the wetted glass walls
of a (graduated) cylinder or pipette, the surface of a liquid in these
containers presents a cup shape called a meniscus. A line drawn
through the bottom of the meniscus is normally selected as the
point at which to read a measurement.

MenstruuM

A menstruum is the solvent used to make extracts. The word
menstruum comes somewhere out of the ancient language of lunar
astrology. It is derived from the Latin word menstruus, monthly
(from mensis, a month), which, according to Caspari’s 1906 Treatise
on Pharmacy, “was applied because of some influence which the
changes of the moon, and consequently the time of the month, were
supposed to exert upon the preparation of solvents.”

Herbalists strive to prepare an extract that represents as much of
the whole plant as is possible and practical. The best menstruum
for extracting an herb will dissolve and bring into solution all the
desired principles of the herb, will leave behind the principles
which are not desired. and will retain the desired soluble

----- PAGE 503 -----
constituents in a stable form that will not be injured by light, heat,
or air during consequent use and storage.

The ideal menstruum for extracting a given herb’s constituents is
determined mainly by experimentation. The formula used to
prepare a menstruum differs with each individual herb or type of
herbal preparation. A menstruum may be pure water or pure ethyl
alcohol; a mixture of alcohol and water; a mixture of alcohol,
water, and glycerin; pure glycerin; glycerin and water; wine; vinegar
(acetic acid); or whatever combination of solvents the medicine-
maker determines to be the most efficient for making an extract of
the particular herb at hand.

Maxine Your “Moyo”

In spite of the common notion a mojo is not an X-rated item. A
mojo is four medicine power-roots that are housed in a small red
pouch. One’s mojo is carried in a pocket, hung on a belt, carried in
a purse. or dwells in a frequently used drawer. This little red bag

----- PAGE 504 -----
full of root allies is painstaking prepared and privately carried so
the active spirit of the plants can assist an individual to remain in
constant touch with her or his creative essence, freedom, wit, safety,
and well-being. Preferably, the roots are wildcrafted; roots that the
individual has personally taken from the soil with deep respect and
full recognition of the powers embodied in the plant entities; roots
that have been dug while the digger maintained clear, undisturbed
focus on his or her requests for the plants’ services; roots that have
been anointed with specific herbal oil infusions that have been
previously prepared for the making of a mojo. A mojo is personal,
a mojo is private, a mojo is a man’s and a woman’s intimate herbal
companion. It carries the visionary vibrations of their secret dreams,
the passion of their desires, and the power of their intentions.

The taproot of the mojo tradition reaches back to the ancestral
herbalists and ancient plant lore of the African continent.
Transplants of this knowing appeared in this country in the West
Indies and the deep South well over two hundred years ago. That is
what I was told.

Once the appropriate wild plants have been approached and
communed with, their roots are dug, carefully washed, dried,
anointed with herbal oils, and placed in a small handmade red
pouch, never to be seen again by anyone other than the carrier, the
creator and possessor of that particular mojo.

With continual awareness and appreciation of their presence the
visions of the roots’ meaning and purpose are internalized by the
carrier like the subtle vibrations of a powerful mantra consciously
connecting him and her to Source energy. The carrier is self-
empowered by the acquisition, preparation, and lifelong
companionship of these wild medicine-roots. Magical occurrences
are consummated by one’s focus on a clear intention in a personal
environment that includes absolute allowing with no resistance or
doubt of any sort to detain the flow of the creative, manifesting
energy; therefore the vibrations of a personally potentized mojo
supports and sustains the ongoing magic and joy of one’s life
journey. The mojo assists its carrier to view life positively, to create
deliberately. to attract delicious life experiences, to have what she

----- PAGE 505 -----
or he truly wants.

The four roots traditionally used to activate a mojo (as this
tradition was passed on to me) are:

1. Two (2)Imomoea Purga (Jalap) roots from the
Convolvulaceae family. One of these roots having a more lengthy
and slender form to energize “Him” (one’s male energy, yang
essence), and one shaped more round and circular to draw in “Her”
(one’s female energy, yin essence). Him and Her are the “power
roots” known as High John the Conqueror. They draw in personal
power protection, manifesting the impeccable warrior. This is star
energy—the brilliance of the Sun. Both Him and Her are anointed
with an oil infusion of Wormwood. Her is further anointed with oil
of St. John’s Wort (Hypericum), Him with a female ritual oil (one’s
own creation), then both roots are anointed with the carrier’s own
saliva (a personal intimate touch).

2. One (1) Bethroot (Trillium erectum) from the Liliaceae family.
This root is known as Southern John. Southern John is the “wealth
root.” It assists one to develop a sense of personal worthiness
bringing wealth of material benefits. One enjoys an endless
abundance of friends, health, love, money, wisdom, humor, and joy.
This root properly anointed is expansive with the vibrations of
Jupiter. Southern John is anointed with oil (infusion) of
Wormwood, oil of Mugwort, oil of Hypericum, and oil of
Calendula.

3. One (1) Alpinia officinarum (Lesser Galangal or Small
Galangal) root from the Zingiberaceae (Ginger) family. This root is
called Little John the Conqueror; or sometimes Chewing John. It is
the “wit root” which assists one to cut through fear and confusion,
giving the power of clear thought, wit, and lucid expression.
Properly anointed, it is the penetrating problem solver, active with
the vibrations of Mercury. Chewing John is anointed with oil of
Wormwood, oil of Hawthorn berry, oil of Mullein blossoms, and oil
of Hypericum.

4. Focus clearly and pointedly on your request of the roots as you
anoint them with the herbal oils. If any of the roots discussed above
are not available to you, you will of course use roots that thrive

----- PAGE 506 -----
where you live which you sense to be equally appropriate for
preparing your personal mojo. Trust your intuition. Our plant allies
live near us. Design and hand-sew the red bag yourself. Make pull
strings to close the top, hang beads on them if so inclined,
whatever; fashion the mojo to suit your style.

Gather your roots, prepare the herbal oils, select and sew some
passionate red material. It takes time to do all this, time in which
you are focusing on your strengths, acknowledging your personal
beauty, tuning into your joy, your health, your power and
worthiness, noting your absolute freedom to choose your thoughts
and live your life as you wish, and to prepare in the present your
ensuing journey into the future. Actualize your dreams, get your
mojo working, enjoy your life, and thrive; it is your spiritual
heritage. You are the healer and the dancer, joy is the music, the
roots are your allies.

Nationa Formutary (NF)

A formulary is a collection of working formulas for the preparation
of medicinal compounds. A formulary may or may not give the
therapeutic properties of such compounds.

The National Formulary is a semi-official work that includes
standard formulas and directions for pharmacists to make the
preparations used widely across the country, but which are no
longer included in the United States Pharmacopoeia. The NF is
basically a treatise of oldies but goodies, medicines that were at one
time official, but no longer are, and are still in popular use by the
medical profession. National Formulary preparations are designated
by the abbreviation NF. When a preparation is prepared exactly as
directed in the National Formulary VI (for example), it can be
identified as such by noting it on the label using the symbol, NF VI.

Herbal medicine-makers are advised to seek out the National
Formularies which were published around 1926 and earlier, when
the healing professions employed mostly botanicals for their
medicines.

----- PAGE 507 -----
Puarmaceutics (PHarmacy)

Pharmaceutics is the science and art of preparing, compounding,
using, and dispensing herbal or chemical medicines.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Pharmacodynamics is a study of the way in which an isolated plant
or chemical constituent affects the body, or a study of the power of
plant and chemical constituents upon normal living organisms
(otherwise known as the physiological action of drugs).

PHarMAcocNosy

Pharmacognosy is from the Greek word gnosis, a knowing or
recognition. It is the science of dried plants which deals primarily
with information on the sources and constituents of plants. It
embraces the knowledge of the history, distribution, cultivation,
collection, selection, preparation, commerce, identification,
evaluation, preservation, and use of plant and chemical medicines.
Modern pharmacognosy texts focus on the microscopic and
chemical qualities of plants. Older books talk more about quality of
the visible (macroscopic) nature of herbs. If you can find one, an
old copy of Youngken’s A Textbook of Pharmacognosy is an
invaluable aid for assessing herb quality.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Pharmacokinetics is the study of how the body affects an herb or
drug (i.e., absorbs, distributes, metabolizes, and eliminates).

PHARMACOLOGY

Pharmacology is from the Greek words pharmakon, a medicine or
drug. and logos, a study or science. It is the study of herbal or

----- PAGE 508 -----
chemical drugs, their chemistry, their effects on the body, useful and
dangerous actions, and dosage, and includes research into newly
discovered plants and chemicals.

PuystotocicaL Action

Physiological action is the action of plant and chemical constituents
upon what biomedical researchers call “healthy animals.” It has
been studied to a lesser extent in humans. Drug action in one
species may be widely divergent from that in non-human or other
human mammals. The maximum value that “scientism’s” grim
animal experimentation can have is to point out the direction and
extent of activity a drug has upon certain types of tissue, and only
in certain animals. This can be and frequently has been dangerously
misleading. For example, thalidomide, a chemical tranquilizer drug
once prescribed in Europe as a sedative to treat morning sickness,
tested safe in the lab on mice, rats, dogs, cats, and monkeys. In
humans, it rendered 10,000 children crippled and deformed at
birth. Biomechanical differences between species are so great that it
is impossible to study one species and expect to learn accurate and
reliable information about another. This is amply illustrated by the
fact that guinea pigs can eat strychnine alkaloid with no ill effects.
Much of the information we have on the physiological action of
drugs upon mankind has been acquired from accidental overdosing
and cases of poisoning (as opposed to the deliberate overdosing
and poisoning of other animal species), and to a lesser extent from
drug proving. All significant medical breakthroughs benefiting
humans have come from the clinical study of the disease process in
human beings, and primarily through improved nutrition and
hygiene.

Pus

Pills are globular dosages designed for oral administration. They are
prepared by incorporating an herb with other material in such a

----- PAGE 509 -----
proportion that a cohesive mass is formed and this in turn is
molded into a desired shape. For the past several hundred years
pills occupied a place of major importance in pharmacy. The word
“pill” was nearly synonymous with doctor and disease; and why
not, with the very root of the word and the main mass of its
spelling being the word “ill.” But not all that long after the horse
was replaced by the automobile and passion was replaced by TV,
the pill started being replaced by the capsule. Most of what remains
in popular use today to honor the tradition of this medical
champion is The Pill, which of course continues to reign as an
undisputed superstar in bedroom pharmacy. Making pills that have
any aesthetic appeal whatsoever and won’t quickly dry out and
harden to the point where they will no longer disintegrate in the
alimentary tract, requires considerable time, labor, and technical
skill. Many of the advantages in administering herbal doses that the
pill once possessed such as smallness of bulk with consequent ease
of administration, concealment of taste, and relative permanence no
longer exist, as these features are supplied today more economically
and more efficiently for an herbalist by the easily acquired capsule.
Therefore, I suggest that if you are determined to make a pill for
delivering a dose of an unpleasant-tasting herbal powder, a very
simple method is to roll the powder in a small piece of fresh bread.
This works very effectively, unless, of course, you are on a grain-
free diet.

Pracezo Errecr

The faith, hope, and beliefs an individual holds when she or he
decides to re-experience his or her health, call forth the innate
ability of the body to heal itself. These are probably the most
dynamic aspects of any therapeutic results. The beliefs of both a
client and a practitioner, their trust in each other, in the process,
and in the form of medicines employed generate a significant
(probably the major) portion of the therapeutic interaction. If a
therapeutic process does not stimulate this profound energy. the

----- PAGE 510 -----
chances of success are greatly diminished, no matter what medicines
are used. The power of the client’s belief in the potential for cure
has been observed by all schools of health care throughout history.
The use of placebos grafts research-based allopathic medicine back
onto the common root stalk from which grew the methods of
primitive medicine people as well as the science of the re-emerged
shamans and herbal medicine folks of today. Modern placebo
research forces the truly objective thinker to reassess all traditional
therapies and view mainstream medicine’s allopathic practice in a
more accurate perspective as one of many diverse, equally effective
health care modalities.

Posotocy

Posology is the study of dosage and its relation to different ages,
sizes, weights, sex, idiosyncrasies, tolerance, time of administration,
and conditions of disease in individuals (see “Dosage” above).

Powperinc

This is the subdividing of dried plant material. Dried herbs are
powdered prior to dispensing or just prior to an extraction process
in order that as much of the cell contents as possible can come in
intimate contact with the digestive juices or a solvent. In pharmacy,
the act of powdering is also referred to ascomminution or
trituration, which means literally to rub, crush, grind, pound, and
pulverize into fine particles or into a powder.

The mortar and pestle is our classic device to use for this
purpose. However, this can be quite laborious to use, which is why
the electric coffee bean grinder (a mortar and blade) has become
the second-generation mortar and pestle, the modern lay herbalist’s
pulverizing tool of choice. Metal hand-powered grain mills, small
electric coffee bean mills, and older model (stainless steel type)
Vita-Mix blenders are excellent tools for grinding all but the hardest
of herbal material: however. nothing short of a rock crusher can

----- PAGE 511 -----
pulverize dried Turmeric, dried Wild Yam, or dried Red Root. You
have to shred dense plant materials like Turmeric and Wild Yam
while they are still fresh (undried) by using a cheese grater or an
electric food processor and then dry them. You need to use pruning
shears or a heavy-duty lopper to process dense woody roots like
Red Root and Oregon Grape root. Later you will be able to powder
the thin dried shreds and woody slices for extraction.

The device used to measure the fineness of a powder is the sieve.
If a sieve has 20 meshes (holes) to a linear inch the powder that
passes through it is called a No. 20 powder, which is referred to in
pharmacy as a “coarse powder”; a 40 mesh sieve renders a No. 40
“moderately coarse powder”; a 50 mesh gives a “moderately fine
powder”; a 60 mesh count supplies us a “fine powder”; and an 80
mesh lays out a “very fine powder” indeed. Numbers 20, 40, and 50
are intended for herbs that are to be macerated and percolated,
while 60 and 80 are used more for pills, lozenges, dispensed or
capsulated powders, and suspensions.

From my kitchen drawers, I dug out four well-stained sieves I’ve
had around my house for years. Measuring their screens, I found
that one of the sieves has a 16-mesh count per inch (I guess that
gives me a No. 16 “uncouth powder”); one has 30-mesh count; one
has 28, and the fourth one is a bamboo sieve that refuses to
conform in any way to a linear evaluation (an East meets West
thing). Therefore, for our lay purposes a common household sieve
or sifter will gives us a “coarse” to a “moderately coarse powder”
(mep) which is most often all we need for our work (except when
making lozenges). “High tech” European sieves sold in department
store kitchen supply centers will give you a finer powder.

Water softens and easily penetrates powdered herb, causing the
powder to expand; however, alcohol has a hardening effect as it
thoroughly dehydrates plant material, leaving behind only hardened
cellulose and other plant solids. A menstruum containing 60
percent or more absolute alcohol tends to harden plant tissue, so a
finer powder is more efficient for those plants requiring a strongly
alcoholic menstruum (Cayenne, Myrrh, Gumweed, Milk Thistle,
etc.).

----- PAGE 512 -----
Powdering should be done only just prior to your actual need for
it. Once powdered, many of the plant’s constituents dissipate
rapidly with the passage of time; store your herbs in as whole a
state as practical in order to inhibit oxidation and loss of volatile
oils.

Prior to rendering resinous or gummy plants into powder, place
them in the freezer for a couple of hours. The frozen, (temporarily)
brittle plant material will grind up quickly and is far less likely to
coat the inside surfaces of your machine with tenacious substance. If
you choose not to do this, denatured rubbing alcohol is a good,
inexpensive cleaning solvent (never to be used as a menstruum for
internal use, however) which then can be removed from the
machine with water and soap.

Powders. Herbal powders can be administered in capsules or
orally as is by being placed on the tongue and chased by a drink of
water or other liquid. If the dosage to be taken is large, you can first
mix the powder with a liquid. Mixing powders with honey, syrup,
or jam will assist in masking any unpleasant taste (see Chapter
Twenty-Two, “Syrups, Honeys, Oxymels, and Electuaries”), and
bitterness can be partially overcome by dissolving the powder in
sweet fruit juice. Some herbalist practitioners believe that due to
the fact the digestive process must extract the properties of the
herb(s), this process provides a slower and more even absorption;
therefore, lower doses of the powders are required to produce the
results obtainable with extracts; however, many other herbalists
believe powders are not as easily digested as teas, tinctures, etc., so
powders require higher doses ... Hmmm.

PreciPrraTion

Precipitation is the formation of solid particles in a previously clear
solution. At times in pharmacy this is promoted intentionally,
usually to “purify” a product. However in our humble work,
precipitation and its formation of precipitates is ordinarily
unintentional. unsightly. and not welcome: so we attempt to avoid

----- PAGE 513 -----
it. For the purpose of appearance, it is usually easier to prevent
disagreeable precipitates or other offensive appearances than it is to
remedy them.

Therefore, if a resinous tincture is to be mixed with water, it is
best that the water be cold and the tincture slowly added to it in a
fine stream while stirring; never do the reverse by pouring the
water into the resinous tincture. By following this procedure, the
resinous particulates are still precipitated, but they are formed in
such fine condition that they are easily diffused by shaking the
mixture.

When you attempt to mix a strong (high percent alcohol that is
high in alcohol-soluble components) with a weaker alcoholic
extract (and maybe then water), the strongly alcoholic liquid should
be gradually diluted with the weaker (and the water added last).
Less precipitation occurs using this procedure.

Pressinc (Atso Rererrep 10 As Expression)

Pressing is a process for separating liquids from solids which
involves the use of some force. This is because pressing is employed
in those cases where the amount of liquid is small compared to the
quantity of solid matter that is to be removed. Pressing is employed
to extract juices and oils from various fruits, nuts, and vegetables,
from some fresh herbs and grasses (see “Succus” below), and the
expression of herbal solutions from their marc.

There are many devices appearing on the market today that have
been designed for the herbalist to press his or her marc. Some of
these devices work reasonably well; some don’t. The renewed
demand for tincture presses has in the past ten years been
significant, and those engineers and machinists who are attempting
to service this request have marketed their first prototypes. I deeply
appreciate their efforts and have used a variety of these presses for
a number of years. However it is obvious to me that significant
modifications need to be incorporated in future product designs, the
most salient starting place being the steel container which holds the

----- PAGE 514 -----
material to be pressed; make it cylindrical rather than rectangular,
please! And let me know when you have one for sale (see
illustration of an old single-screw tincture press).

Hand Wringing

Potato Masher

Single-Screw Press

----- PAGE 515 -----
Hydraulic Press

When using a device like the hydraulic press or the screw-press,
the substance to be pressed is first put into a canvas bag, or a cotton
muslin cloth that has been wrapped tightly around the wet marc
much like a burrito. As pressure is exerted on the herbal burrito,
the pressure forces the liquid between the meshes of the cloth, and
the marc is detained within. Unless, of course, the cloth bursts. This
all too commonly occurring perplexity can be kept under some
measure of control by applying the pressure slowly, giving the
liquid time to exit gracefully through the cloth housing, and by
using press cloths that are relatively fresh. If you insist on using one
that is obviously battle worn, you’re asking for the often ornery
combination of marc and menstruum to extemporarily express itself
as extended cleanup time.

The potato masher (purchasable in antiques and collectibles
stores) is useful for expressing small parcels of marc; use it as you
do a garlic press, and the hand-wrung process is performed as
illustrated.

Ruts (Propose) or Mepicive-Maxina

As a teacher who values the creative potential of students more
than the content of my teaching. I seldom express any rules of the

----- PAGE 516 -----
art and science in discussion. I feel it is wise and important for a
student to learn basic theory and skills from an experienced other,
but then to pursue these ideas and skills in his or her own
creatively evolving fashion. Therefore, I extend principles I feel give
sound direction, but are certainly not gilded as sacrosanct. My eight
prime principles of herbal medicine-making are discussed in
Appendix C. However, there are 5 concepts that are rules in my
work. I think these ideas can be accepted as such by almost
everyone who works with plants and makes plant medicines. See if
you agree.

Rule #1—First and foremost, harvest only plant communities that
are healthy and are growing in great abundance.

Rule #2—The use of high-quality herb is essential for making good
herbal medicine. Regardless of how practiced you are or how
refined your technology of preparation, you can never make a
preparation’s quality better than the quality of the plant with which
you begin.

Rule #3—Pay attention to detail.

Rule #4—Take detailed notes on all your work.

Rule #5—Have fun! If you’re not enjoying yourself, something’s out
of harmony with you. Do something else you enjoy for the time
being.

SouuTion

A solution is the separation of the molecules of a substance (the
solute, herb) and their diffusion through a liquid (the solvent,
menstruum). The cohesion of the molecules of the herb are broken
and uniformly diffused throughout the solvent. A substance that is
not acted on by the solvent is said to be insoluble and ultimately
becomes the marc. Mechanical division (powdering the dried herb)
divides the solute into small particles, and these finer particles
present a greater surface area to the solvent. Heat further favors
solution because it drives the molecules of the solute farther apart,
breaking up cohesion. Heat is not safely used with alcohol solvents.

----- PAGE 517 -----
Frequent agitation is necessary to ensure complete extraction of
soluble matter by maceration. If the mixture is not agitated at least
once every 24 hours, a concentrated solution will envelop the
material and prevent effective solvent action; consequently, only a
small proportion of the soluble constituents will be taken up. So
always remember to:

Shake Your Tinctures.
(Maybe there are six rules.)

When a liquid dissolves in another liquid it is usually said that the
liquids are miscible. For example, glycerin and water are miscible,
as are alcohol and water. Oil and water are obviously not miscible.
A gas (vapor) dissolving in a liquid is called absorption.

Sotvenr ExcHance

Some herbs appear to be most efficiently extracted by using pure
190-proof ethyl alcohol for a menstruum. Examples of this are Milk
Thistle seed (Silybum marianum), a popular liver regenerative and
liver protective tonic; Chaparral (Larrea tridentata), useful for
relieving arthritis and auto-immune conditions; Myrrh
(Commiphora mol-mol), useful for treating infections and
inflammation of the mouth and throat; and Calendula (Calendula
officinalis), a mild and effective anti-inflammatory and lymphatic
well used for children’s health care.

If one wishes to use these extracts, but does not want to ingest
any amount of alcohol (ie., an alcohol-intolerant individual
wanting to heal and nourish the liver with Milk Thistle), the
following simple technique can be used to remove the alcohol and
replace it with glycerin as a preservative after having first used the
alcohol to extract the plant constituents.

1. Make an extract of the desired plant using 100 percent 190-proof
alcohol as the menstruum (no added water).

----- PAGE 518 -----
2. Make note of the exact amount of alcohol used in the
menstruum.

3. Decant and press the finished extract.
4. Measure the total amount of this extract after pressing.

5. Measure an equivalent amount of glycerin to the amount of
alcohol used in the menstruum (as noted in step #2).

6. Pour the glycerin into the extract and place this entire mixture
into a stainless steel or glass pot.

7. Over a low heat, gently warm the liquid extract/glycerin mixture
until its volume is equivalent to the original amount of the extract
in step #4. Keep the heat low, for glycerin will vaporize at 212° F.
The alcohol has boiled off and you are left with an alcohol-free
glycerated extract.

8. Cool, bottle, cap tightly, and store in amber-colored bottles.

A similar method of solvent exchange good for modifying small
quantities of alcohol extract and a little more economical using less
glycerin was shown to me by Karen Aguiar, herbalist and co-owner
of The Herbal Apothecary, Sonoma County, California. She suggests:
“Take 120 ml (4 0z.) of tincture, place in an enameled pot, add 60
ml (2 oz.) of 50 percent glycerin (which is a mixture of 50 percent
absolute glycerin, 50 percent distilled water). Simmer gently on a
very low heat until all the alcohol has evaporated. The finished
amount should measure about 120 ml. You may need to add more
of the 50 percent glycerin to bring up to 120 ml.”

Succus

A succus is simply a juice. The device I use for making an herbal
succus is a Chop-Rite Health Fountain (Wheatgrass) juicer.

----- PAGE 519 -----
It’s the only device I have found that performs this job, and it
does it admirably, though laboriously. A succus is an elegant extract
that will deteriorate readily. Unless it is to be used immediately, it
must be either mixed with absolute alcohol to protect and preserve
it: 3 parts succus to 1 part alcohol, or poured into ice cube trays
and frozen. These succus cubes can then be taken one by one and
dropped into a glass of water, or a cup of juice, or merely put in a
cup and melted as needed. This preservative method of freezing an
extract into individual dosage cubes also works well with herbal
infusions, decoctions, and concentrates.

Freshly picked Cleavers is the only herb I prepare annually as a
succus. Dandelion root and Plantain are two herbs, however, that I
have juiced a number of times, and I highly recommend that an
herbalist experience them in this form. The juice of the Dandelion
root provides a vitally calming liver tonic and the Plantain juice
blesses one with a magical (I mean this literally) vulnerary, anti-
inflammatory, anti-venom/toxin, anti-microbial, astringent agent
that is extremely useful in home and travel first-aid kits. It “fixes”
spider/insect bites (most notably the Brown Recluse spider bite),
poisoning, toothache, earache, inflammation of the skin, and makes
a soothing dressing for fresh cuts, wounds, bruises, hemorrhoids,
etc.; this résumé goes on and on. Wheatgrass is another fine tonic
obtained as a succus. The juices of other medicinal grasses of the
Poaceae family (formerly the Gramineae family) is an herbal
materia medica that has yet to be studied in any depth. From a
botanical family that includes many other power plants such as
Wild Oat, Couchgrass, Rice, Wheat, cane sugar, Bamboo, etc., I think
we will discover a wealth of other excellent medicines.

----- PAGE 520 -----
Chop-rite Health Fountain (Wheatgrass Juicer)

‘THERAPEUTICS

Therapeutics is the art of applying medicinal agents and other
measures for the alleviation or healing of disease. This word comes
from the Greek therapeutikos, inclined to serve or to take care of.
In early Greek times the term therapeutes was applied to the slave
who acted as a nurse or orderly.

Empirical therapeutics is that therapy for which no scientific
support can be given other than that it has been repeatedly used
with success. It does not take into consideration physiological or
pathological mechanisms, but is based upon observations in past
experiences of the effects of plant remedies and other remedial
measures. This is the accumulated knowledge of our approximately
2,000,000-year heritage of human beings experimenting on human
beings (provings). This profound, rich body of truly scientific
knowledge is the accumulated wisdom and knowledge of healing
and of healing agents repeatedly used with success and passed
down to each of us by our ancestral healers. It is the bulk of this
universal human heritage and wisdom that the novice community
of Western medical technology feels compelled to refer to as
quackery.” In Rational therapeutics the method of action of a
remedy can be “accounted for.” It is based upon the use of
medicines according to their known physiological, chemical, or
biological action upon definitely known pathological conditions
and bodv malfunctions. However, it must be noted that to this dav

----- PAGE 521 -----
the mechanism of many drugs in the Physician’s Desk Reference
(PDR) is “unknown.”

The rational starting point of the medical discoveries of the
Western medical world is basically the empiricism of folk medicine
and Herbalism.

TriruraTion

Trituration is the process of reducing the size of particles by
rubbing them in a mortar with a pestle. This renders a crushing and
or a mixing effect as the pestle is plied under pressure in a circular
motion. The most effective method of using the pestle is to begin in
the center of the mortar and describe a circle of small diameter
with the pestle on the substance, and gradually increase the size of
the circle with each revolution until the side of the mortar is
touched. Then reverse the motion, describing circles that are
continually smaller in diameter until the center is again reached.
This is repeated until pulverization or thorough mixing of all
ingredients (powders with sugar, essential oils with sugar, etc.) is
effected. Mortars with pestles having somewhat flattened ends are
the best for this process.

Mortar and Pestle

Unirep States PHARMACOPOEIA (usP)

The U.S. Pharmacopoeia is an official manual of standards for the

----- PAGE 522 -----
identification of drugs known as “official” in this country. The
components and processes identified and outlined in this manual
are the “top 40” of the day, so to speak, as compared to the NF’s
“oldies but goodies”; and like the National Formulary, those USPs
published around 1926 and before will be the most valuable
resource books for herbal medicine-makers. The abbreviation
“USP” stamps a medicine or preparation as official, and as such any
preparation bearing this official title must conform in all respects to
the provisions of a U.S. pharmacopoeia (as designated by its
number, i.e., USP IX).

Many countries compile and publish their own official
pharmacopoeia. Originally, the U.S. Pharmacopoeia was revised
every ten years by a committee of delegates from the American
Pharmaceutical Association, medical and pharmaceutical colleges
and associations, and the army, navy, and marine hospital services
sitting in convention. Today, due to the continual swamping of the
drug market with new patented drugs and drug recalls by
pharmaceutical conglomerates, it is revised much more frequently.
It is accepted as the standard concerning the quality, uniformity,
purity, and integrity of the drugs and chemicals embraced by
modern medicine. It describes them, gives tests, notes the usual
adulterants and sophisticants, sets limits for impurities, gives
instructions on preservation, and, most useful to herbal medicine-
makers—it gives appropriate (official) menstrua and practical
weight/volume ratios for each botanical tincture discussed (as does
the National Formulary). Except for USP II published in 1830,
neither the USP nor the NF gives therapeutic uses in any form
except as may be inferred from the titles of some of their
preparations.

Vererinary Doses

Herbalists are asked to advise in regard to giving herbs to animals
in appropriate dosages. In general, sensible dosage corresponds to
the weight of the animal. but there seems to be some exceptions.

----- PAGE 523 -----
Cows, for instance, appear to be less responsive to medicines than
horses when they are about the same weight. Cows are just more
laid back than horses.

The following doses will work as a good starting place to
develop experience.

Cats—1/8 to 1/4 the dose for an adult human

Dogs—Correspond to adult human dose according to weight
(obviously a 12 pound Shih-tzu/Maltese cross-even though every
bit as brave and tough—cannot take a dose appropriate for a 140
pound Rottweiler.

Horse—8 to 16 times the dose for an adult human

Cow—12 to 24 times the dose for an adult human

Goats and sheep—1 1/2 to 2 1/2 times the dose for an adult
human

Swine—1 to 3 times the dose for an adult human

Llamas and ostriches—If you have them, your guess beats mine

Vivisection

Vivisection is the cutting, puncturing, or otherwise operating on, a
living animal, usually without the use of anesthesia, for scientism’s
medical, physiological, or pathological “rational” investigation. This
method of research renders confinement and usually extreme
suffering for 70,000,000 of our companion animals each year.
Ninety percent of these animals are referred to as “expendable mice
and other rodents”; the “other rodents” being rabbits, squirrels,
ferrets, guinea pigs, and hamsters. The remaining 10 percent of the
animals used are apes, chimpanzees, monkeys, dogs, and cats (both
strays and illegally seized pets), sheep, horses, goats, pigs, and
exotic animals. This 10 percent in real numbers amounts to
7,000,000 non-rodent animals “rationally” violated yearly.

A growing portion of modern medical herbal research, which is
eagerly referenced in most of today’s trendy new herbals, is derived
directly from biomedical vivisection. This helps sustain the market
for animal testing. If this concerns vou. please examine vour sources

----- PAGE 524 -----
as you pursue your herbal studies, considering the role you might
be playing in perpetuating the demand and commercial market for
this sort of rational “medical herbal research.”

Vivisection is a technique that reductionist science instigated to
bestow so called “rational credibility’ upon itself. Currently,
vivisection is employed by many other commercial industries as
well to appease the insurance industry. Reviving the art, science,
and language of Herbalism for enhancing human health simply
does not require the pain and suffering of other species to generate
credibility, nor is this required in any way for lay herbalists to
continue developing insight into the use of plants for nourishment
and well-being. I don’t see how the carnage and abuse of non-
human species will somehow render human beings more healthy
and happy. It is my deeply felt opinion that the continued support
of vivisection and animal testing for gathering herbal knowledge is
not in the least bit what green Herbalism is about. Accessing
research based on vivisection is more about individuals attempting
to establish some form of “medical credibility” and recognition as
“advanced herbalists.” I suggest growing a garden instead, or
adopting a puppy. Focus on life, nourishment, and health; deep
insight and appropriate knowledge will follow.

Weicxts anp Measures

In the herb lab (as well as throughout the rest of the world), it is
most useful to weigh herbs and measure liquids using the metric
system. This system was developed by the French during their
Revolution, supposedly to replace the many varied systems used at
the time throughout the country. Most likely, however, the metric
system was devised to defy the previous government s standard
measurement system which was based on measurements of (royal)
human anatomy. The avoirdupois system of measurement is one of
those archaic systems the French snubbed ages ago, but we continue
to embrace as the U.S. Conventional System. Our inch and ounce
are possibly based on the length and mass of some late French

----- PAGE 525 -----
king’s nose or other item of his anatomy, whereas the prime unit of
measure for the metric system is the meter. This unit is based on the
circumference of the Earth as measured on a line through Paris and
the north and south poles. The length of this line was divided by
40,000,000, and each division was called a meter (from the Greek
word metron, “measure”). Other standards of length (centimeter,
millimeter, kilometer) were further defined by dividing or
multiplying the meter by various factors of 10.

The standards of weight (mass) and volume are also derived from
the meter. The gram (Gm) and its divisions are used for weighing,
while the milliliter (ml), also known as a fluid-gram, is used to
measure liquids.

The gram is a unit of weight set by the mass of a cubic centimeter
(cc) of water under standard conditions. A gram and a cubic
centimeter of distilled water are essentially identical. In other
words, a measure of 1 cc of distilled water weighs 1 Gm (at sea
level, at 4° C.).

A milliliter is identical in volume to 1 cubic centimeter of
distilled water; therefore, 1 Gm = 1 cc = 1 ml of distilled water
(and for our practical purposes this holds for all other liquids we
refer to in this manual).

This approximate 1:1 equality between the weight (the mass) of
a solid substance and the volume of a liquid substance is very useful
for determining weight to volume (w/v) proportions when
calculating and formulating the strengths of liquid extracts. (See
Chapter Twelve on making tinctures.)

Approximate (U ser-Frienpiy)

Eouarenr Measurements

Liquid measures
1 drop* = 1 minim
15 minims = 1 ml = 1 cc

----- PAGE 526 -----
30 ml = 1 fluid ounce = 8 fluid drachms
1000 ml = 1 liter (approximately 1 quart)
500 ml = approximately 1 pint (480 ml = 1 pint)
1 teaspoonful = 5 ml = 5cc
2 teaspoonsful = 10 ml = 10 cc
1 tablespoonful = 15 ml = 15 cc = 3 teaspoonsful
1 wineglassful = 60 ml (2 fluid ounces)
1 teacupful = 120 ml (4 fluid ounces)
1 glassful or cupful = 240 ml (8 fluid ounces)
1 gallon U.S. = 128 fluid ounces = 3.8 liters
1 British Imperial gallon =154 fluid ounces = 4.6 liters 1 liter
=1.8 pints
Weights
30 Gm = 1 ounce (avoirdupois)
454 Gm = 1 pound (avoirdupois)
(This is based on the new 1959 international agreement of
English speaking nations.)
1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds
Length
1 inch = 2.54 centimeters
1 meter = 39.37 inches

* A “drop.” A rose by any other name is still a rose, but is a drop
always a drop? This is questionable. A drop of water is supposed to
be equivalent to a minim and in pharmacy- speak is often referred
to as a “minim.” But this is only true when applied to water, and
then, only when the water is expelled from an “international
standard dropper.” The shape and quality of the surface from which
a drop descends influences its size. However. even when using a

----- PAGE 527 -----
standard dropper these presumptions are seldom true when
applied to liquids other than pure water. Thick, viscous liquids such
as syrups produce a drop five times larger than a drop of a heavy,
mobile liquid like chloroform and three times that of alcohol. If we
use a fluid drachm as a liquid measure, we will find that it holds
250 drops of chloroform; or 146 drops of alcohol, or 130 to 150
drops of an aqueous-alcohol tincture or fluid extract. It will hold
105 to 140 drops of oil, but only 45 to 110 drops of syrup. So,
since there are 8 fluid drachm in a fluid ounce, for all practical
posological purposes we can assume that 1 U.S. fluid ounce of most
commonly used tinctures holds approximately 960 to 1200 drops.
But none of this is any big deal, unless of course one is
administering highly intense or toxic extracts or when administering
medicines to infants. In these situations, measuring doses by the
milliliter (ml) or the cubic centimeter (cc) instead of by drops
would be more reliable.

A “part” of an herbal formula. When putting together a formula,
herbalists design the formula and communicate its composition by
referring to the number of “parts.” Example: for treating and toning
an irritated prostate gland, mix 2 parts Saw Palmetto, 1 part
Echinacea, 1 part Damiana, 1 part Yarrow, 1/8 part Ginger. The
question often arises, what is a part ...? Is it a gram, an ounce, a
cupful, a shovelful, a truckload, or a drop? Of course, the answer is
it can be any of these measures. You retain the proper proportions
as long as each measure used to make up a part is the same
measure as each of the other measured parts in the mixture. It all
comes down to how much mixture you ultimately want to make. If
you chose shovelsful as a measure for each part in the sample
formula, you'll end up with enough mixture for all the prostates in
the NFL. So a more reasonable measure to use is the oz.
(avoirdupois = 16 oz. to the pound) when compounding bulk
herbs or the fluid oz. for blending liquid extracts. Referring back to
the sample formula, you would blend 2 oz. Saw Palmetto, 1 oz.
Echinacea, 1 0z. Damiana, 1 oz. Yarrow, and 1/8 oz. Ginger, ending
up with 5 1/8 oz. of the formula. If you want only half that
amount, make each part 1/2 oz. It doesn’t matter what measure vou

----- PAGE 528 -----
use. A household coffee scoop (filled and leveled) works fine as a
part measure as long as you use the same scoop throughout. (Taken
from The Male Herbal)

Thermometer correspondence

In Fahrenheit’s (F.) thermometer, the freezing point of water is
placed at 32°, and the boiling point at 212°. The number of
intervening degrees is 180. In the Centigrade (C.) or Celsius’s
thermometer the freezing point of water is marked zero and the
boiling point 100°. From this information, it can be seen that 212°
Fahrenheit is equivalent to 100° Centigrade.

To convert degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade—C = (‘F —
32) multiplied by 5 and divided by 9.

To convert degrees Centigrade to degrees Fahrenheit—F = (°C
multiplied by 9 and divided by 5) + 32.

Or find a good conversion table somewhere. The New York
Public Library Science Desk Reference, edited by Patricia Barnes-
Svarney, is the best science reference book I’ve found, published by
The Stonesong Press Inc., MacMillan, 1995.

Solid weight—Liquid weight
1 gram is equal in mass to 1 cc of water at sea level at 4° C (39° F);

a cubic centimeter (cc) is the approximate equivalent of a milliliter
(ml). Therefore, for our purposes: 1 cc = 1 ml = 1 Gm.

Wildcrafting is an ancient, honorable art and craft
of harvesting Earth’s gifts. It is a communion with
the wild green as organic gardening is a
communion with the domestic green. What we
must take care of is to attract to herbalism more
teachers of sustainable wild harvesting to guide
and inspire young herbalists.

----- PAGE 529 -----
Wouocrarrep Hers ano Orcanicatty Curtivatep Here

The term wildcrafted signifies that the plant has grown wild in
nature without human intervention and ideally has been
consciously harvested from unpolluted areas with full regard for the
plant communities and care for ecological balance. These plants
should never be fumigated or irradiated.

Please note, that as the medicinal herbs are becoming more and
more popular, some wildcrafting practices are placing a great
burden on a growing number of wild plant populations; therefore it
is important to begin organically cultivating many of our herbal
medicines rather than over-harvesting and wiping out wild
medicinal plant communities. A good example of the destruction
caused by mindless wildcrafting is the notable loss of fields of wild
Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea purpurea due to commercial
over-harvesting. Organically cultivated Echinacea purpurea is every
bit as effective. Wild Goldenseal is also currently under stress due to
over-harvesting, as are Osha, Lady’s Slipper, American Ginseng,
Blue Cohosh and Black Cohosh, and a growing number of other
native medicinais.

But let us not make a reactionary mistake of construing
wildcrafting as something negative. It is not in the least; it is an
herbal art and a craft that commands respect when performed by a
skilled artist and craftsman. Pursued with intelligence and
understanding, wildcrafting is a process of harvest pruning, which
when practiced knowledgeably never exploits or diminishes wild
plant communities, but instead supports and enhances them. What
is needed is not condemnation of this ancient, honorable craft, but
more well-trained teachers and fervent, plant-loving students.

The term organically cultivated means that the plant has been
cultivated by natural means on unpolluted land without the use of
chemical fertilizers, sewer sludge, pesticides, or herbicides.
Hopefully these plants are never fumigated, irradiated, or
genetically altered (these lists of corporate foolishness keep getting
longer and longer).

----- PAGE 530 -----
* The medical profession’s favorite word, “quack,” wantonly used to demean the
perspectives and practitioners of (most) other health care modalities, is derived from
the term quacksalver. Quacksalver is the archaic name for quicksilver (mercury), which
is the highly toxic allopathic medicine used historically by university-trained medical
doctors (M.D.s) to treat syphilis and other infections. Therefore, to be etymologically
precise, today’s practicing allopathic physician (the M.D.) is, by his and her
professional heritage, the original and authentic quack, but the proponents of other
modalities do not feel required to refer to them as such.

----- PAGE 531 -----


----- PAGE 532 -----
ON MEDICINE

T’was a balmy summer afternoon. Chiron sat waiting in the cool
shade of his summer cave on the northern slope of Mount Pelion.
The Centaur observed with deep affection the students who were
entering the cave and sitting in a circle with him, his grand heart
touched by their individual beauty and eager vitality.
Chiron was a renowned health seer, archer. musician, and

----- PAGE 533 -----
visionary. It is said that he was the wisest and kindest of all
Centaurs. He was learned and skilled in the use of herbs, potions,
gentle words, and healing song. Over the years of his life,
innumerable youths had been entrusted to his charge, amongst them
some of the finest healers and warriors of Western story.

Chiron had summoned the students and their friends to speak
with them about the function of medicine and about the art of
health. Upon the students’ request, he had agreed to share with
them his knowledge of medicine: its value and role in the human
journey.

The wise Centaur knew well that words don’t teach, that it is
only life experiences that teach, but he knew that words stimulate
ideas in the minds of others, and therein he was aware of the great
influence words possess. As always, he agreed to speak with those
who asked him to. Chiron was happy to share any knowledge he
had gained from his centuries of life experience on Earth, especially
his knowledge of the uses of herbs and other medicinal substances
for human beings in their quest for health, joy, and prosperity.

In a short while, all who were to participate in the discussion had
arrived. The final person to join the circle was a woman called
Artemis, who, upon entering the cave, walked over and hugged one
of the students, her young nephew, Asclepius, and sat down beside
him. She then looked with loving eyes at Chiron, her long-time
friend, and nodded her head in warm greeting; the Centaur returned
the salutation, with a gesture of delight and mutual appreciation.

Chiron then closed his eyes for a moment of thought. A tranquil
silence filled the air. Thereupon he opened his eyes and looking to
each of the individuals in the circle, he spoke,

“Thank you for the honor of this gathering, I am most pleased
that you are here with me, and I trust that we will inspire and lift
each other to realms of thought and vision that no gathering before
has experienced in quite the same way. This meeting of spirits in
this physical time and place is unique in all of creation, and I am
delighted to be here with you.

“As health seers and self-healers we focus our attention on the
nature of iov. health. and well-being: and frequently in our

----- PAGE 534 -----
discussions with one another the question arises, ‘What is the nature
of medicine?’ What is its action in the process of individuals
experiencing their intrinsic health or re-establishing wellness from
an experience of illness? If I may share my experience and insights,
T'll offer you a perspective to consider, and as we have brought
ourselves to this communion for mutual upliftment and stimulation
of thought, please be free to contribute what you will during the
time we are here together.”

Chiron fell silent once again. Sensing permission and a concerted
desire from the gathering for him to continue, he drew a deep
breath, “Each of us is an absolutely free spirit, currently choosing to
walk the physical spheres of creation, eagerly participating in this
realm with a physical body, mind, and feelings. We are creators;
this is our essence. Desire is the will of our spirit to create. With our
mind we freely create thoughts, the vibrations of which are
propelled into the universe, bolstered by the passion of our desire
and attendant feelings. From this point of offering, we attract to us
the experiences born of the content of our vision.

Transcribed from the herbal Akashic Records.

“Each individual is complete and independent in his and her
ability to create. If, however, due to circumstances in one’s life, an
individual holds inner resistance to the manifestation of a desire
and feels the need for assistance to allow the experience of that
which he or she strongly desires, ‘medicine’ is a catalyst that can be
empowered to help. With the power invested by the individual’s
belief in it, medicine in turn, bolsters the individual’s belief that he
or she can have what is wanted, reducing inner resistance, allowing
and accelerating the materialization of this desire.

“It is important to note that the use of medicine is appropriate
not only to help alleviate or prevent disease, but also when one
feels it necessary to use an ally to assist in creating whatever is
desired. Therefore, plants, prayer, foods, chants, minerals, the
company or touch of another being. potions, ritual. music.

----- PAGE 535 -----
incantations, charms, amulets, icons, fetishes, and all other
manifestations a person strongly believes in can be utilized as good
and powerful medicine.” Chiron paused for a moment, then added,
“I define the term ‘good’ as ‘that which one wants.’

“Yet ever bear in mind that ‘medicine’ is simply a tool, a means
to facilitate the clearing of a pathway in a person’s life journey to
whatever experience he or she wants. Medicine is not the creator of
one’s life experience; it is not the walker on the path, nor is it the
healer. The human being is the walker; the human being is the
creator, the self-healer.”

Chiron paused, allowing for comments that might come forth; he
looked to the individuals in the circle, and as no one spoke, he
continued,

“I have found it most important to understand that during those
times in one’s life when illness is experienced, medicine does not
‘fix’ a person, simply because he or she is not broken. Human
beings do not weaken, nor are they fragmented by their life
experiences. One is never less than a perfectly whole being,
regardless of the extent of his or her experience of dis-ease. As a
human being travels in his life’s infinitely varied experiences, his
true nature flows forever undivided. Freedom, joy, radiant health,
youthful vitality, passionate enthusiasm, abundant prosperity,
creativity, and growth are—ever accessible—core components of
each individuals whole self. These components, even when resisted,
are never forfeited by one’s temporary experience of the lack of any
of them. They are perpetual qualities of one’s ever-perfect spirit,
one’s true self.” Chiron smiled joyfully to his friends, “Babies, young
children, and playful adults demonstrate this reality each moment
of their day ... for they do not resist it. They are profound teachers.”

A young woman motioned to Chiron that she had a question.
Chiron was pleased and nodded to her. “Chiron, if feeling good,
perfect health, and vitality are indeed our true and natural state of
being, what then is the experience of disease and physical
deterioration? If freedom is a basic component of human nature,
why would one choose to feel bad; why do human beings ever
diminish themselves by choosing illness and physical

----- PAGE 536 -----
degeneration?”

Chiron listened closely to his student’s words. “These are
excellent questions, young Ceres, questions that reach to the very
heart of each person’s journey within this grand physical domain.
Thank you, I will clarify my perspective on this. As I said a moment
ago, humans are creators. This is the dynamic essence of our beings;
and within this vast physical realm, everything is possible. There
are no limits to what an incarnated spirit can manifest within any
of his or her physical life experiences.

“On this planet, Earth, we live in an abundant arena of contrasts
and differences from which we can compare one thing to another,
one experience to another, and, from this infinite array of choices,
decide precisely what we want.

“As you can see, this dense physical realm is a magnificent,
inspiring environment for us creators to direct the creative energy
that is summoned by our desires, and therein relish the exuberant
feelings of this life force flowing through our being.

“As each of us create and manifest our ongoing series of ideas,
beliefs, attitudes, and experiences—thereby ever creating one’s self
—we expand our knowing and grow in wisdom. We unfold the
singular attributes of our spirit and offer a wholly unique
perspective of consciousness to All that Is. Within this grand
universal dance, each of is contributing entirely new dimensions to
the lead edge of thought of which we are integral participants in
this ever-evolving, ever-expanding universe. And it is because we
are entirely free spirits pioneering on this cutting edge that we can
make choices that might at times manifest experiences of bondage,
frustration, and boredom, or symptoms of disease and physical
deterioration. However, in the ever-changing nature of the physical
universe, each and every experience is always temporary and
changing, while our nonphysical spirit, our inner being, the creator,
is eternal and forever ongoing.

“Desire is Spirit’s will to create. Activating my
medicines with the breath of my desire to feel

----- PAGE 537 -----
good, I focus my intent and breathe health into
my potions.”

—T. Exper Sacus

“In light of this, one must keep in mind that venturing into
choices that manifest an experience of dis-ease is not a process of
breaking or diminishing or devaluation. It is quite the contrary.
Illness, like any and all other experiences, is just one of our current
life’s transient manifestations. It is merely a signpost, an illustration,
an intimate teacher, a passing experience indicating to us precisely
how, from our current beliefs and mental attitude, our choices are
flowing our creative energy relative to the broader intention of our
inner being’s true nature. We are in process of gaining knowledge
and wisdom about ourselves, about who we are, and thereby, which
choices harmonize with the individual nature of our unique spirit.
We are steering ourselves on our particular paths of joy.

“Experiencing disease is merely another venture of our
innumerable, ongoing human processes for pressing forward,
feeling, probing, and extending our individual creative boundaries.
Therefore, plunging oneself into life—which I strongly recommend
all beings do with full passion—rummaging through this world’s
vast field of contrast, leaving no experience unconsidered—even
though, sometimes, maybe even frequently, we get ourselves into
trouble—is how each of us expands and evolves our valuable and
indispensable being. Dear companions, our spirits have not
projected themselves into this physical realm to be guarded and
safe; we have come for adventure, to feel the delicious surge of
passion, to flow life force as we create ever more glorious visions
and experiences. Each of us is an ardent explorer, a seer, a warrior,
and a monarch on a grand creative quest.

“Health and disease are the consolidation of one’s current mental
attitude. Illness—not feeling good—is a powerful indicator that we
are holding inner resistance to following our inherent path of joy.
We are diverting our vision from focusing on our bliss, there in
disallowing the vital free flow of our Source energy throughout our

----- PAGE 538 -----
being. We are holding to thoughts, beliefs, and actions that are
contrary to our individual true nature—and they do not feel good to
us, but we fail to acknowledge the truth of there inner signals and
so, for the time being, manifest like experiences of discontent and
dis-ease. Experiencing the contrasting information that illness can
afford us concerning who we are and what we want is one way that
we can grow. It is a segment of our ongoing adventure, a succeeding
step in the unending sequence of movements in our life’s dance; it
is merely a motion forward in an unending series of forward
motions that make up an individual’s unique evolution.

“The experience of health teaches us in the same way. Each and
every one of our life experiences is of paramount significance to the
creative unfolding of our spirit’s abiding journey and, therein, an
integral part of the concerted evolution of all life, of All that Is.
Blessed be diversity my dear friends. Each individual’s path is
unique, and where one stands at any moment is a mark of
perfection in that being’s creation. We are Spiritwalkers; each of us,
in every moment, is a creator with a unique perspective to offer,
powerful, adventurous, and forever whole. We do not break, and
we are never diminished or devalued by any of our experiences.

“Once we determine that a manifestation we’ve attracted does not
or no longer feels good, we can use this life experience as a
platform on which to stand, providing us with a fresh perspective
to determine and envision what we now want instead, and thereby
focus the magnetic vibrations of our creative thought on that fresh
vision and intent. Through this process, we progress our
experiences, we grow, we expand, and we move forth in the
rapture of our spirit’s eternal journey.

“In like manner, once an individual who is experiencing illness
makes a clear impassioned decision that she wants to feel good
again, she has set the revival of her experience of health in motion.
If she does not resist this experience, but rather focuses on those
things and ideas that feel good to her spirit, envisioning her health,
feeling her health, easing inner resistance, allowing the flow of
ideas that ignite feelings of joy in her life, and letting these feelings
become the seeds of fresh experiences, the return of her innate

----- PAGE 539 -----
health is hers; it is inevitable. If she feels she needs an ally to help
her find the state of mind that allows this transformation, whatever
or whoever she believes will do this is good medicine for her.

“This is the nature of medicine; it is an ally. It matters not which
medicine-path one chooses. All medicines are powerful when
empowered by an individual’s belief in them, coupled with one’s
focused desire to be well, or to have whatever else it is that is
wanted. With the empowerment of one’s creative thought and
passionate will, medicine becomes a potent companion. It becomes
wholly empowered to uplift, soothe, nourish, and assist.

“From this point of view, I observe one’s true nature, that
perpetual non-physical inner essence, remaining consummate and
unaltered by any physical experiences that have been amassed. Our
intrinsic health and wholeness are integral parts of our human
nature, always and forever accessible; and each individual remains
whole even in the midst of experiencing disharmony and illness, no
matter how grave his or her immediate condition has been labeled.
Recurrent stories of dramatic personal transformations and
‘miraculous healing’ demonstrate this most vividly. Health remains
innate to our being, and it is always within reach when we desire it
resolutely, focus our attention on it passionately, release inner
resistance to our innate joy, and follow all intuitively inspired
actions. The contrasting experience of the lack of ease in one’s life
merely leads us to an intense desire to experience ease, to put our
life in harmony with the knowing of our inner being. And if one
feels the need of a medicine to help realize this desire, then it is
wise to embrace it, whatever nature of medicine it might be.”

Chiron concluded and smiled at his companions. At that moment
Artemis indicated that she would like to speak. Chiron knew
Artemis to be a bright and wise teacher, and he welcomed the
contribution of his knowledgeable peer. “Yes Artemis, please
speak.”

“Thank you, Chiron” Artemis said, and looking into the eyes of
the young woman who had asked the question of Chiron, she
spoke,

“I know you, voung Ceres. You and vour companion, Bacchus,

----- PAGE 540 -----
seated beside you, have strong, distinct paths that you both follow
with clarity and joyous passion. You offer little resistance to the
flow of life force through you. You seldom react to what others do
or say, but instead you set your own tone in life, which allows
nothing to lead you astray from your chosen path. Your spirit grows
passionately in its own individual way.

“And I observe you honoring with equal spontaneity the
individual paths of others, allowing them, without judgment,
disapproval, or rancor, their way of being, appreciating their
singularity, enjoying their idiosyncrasies. You flow gracefully with
the humor and beauty of life. From your strength of inner knowing
and accordant action, you radiate your undiminished health, youth,
and vitality. Your presence is uplifting to all whose lives you
touch.”

Ceres and Bacchus smiled at Artemis gracefully receiving her
acclaim.

“You embody a path of passionate health,” Artemis continued,
“which we can look to as a model of harmonious nonresistance to
one’s own innate qualities of well-being.”

Then looking to the others sitting in the circle, Artemis said, “So
often I have discussed with Chiron and other health seers what we
feel are the very foundations of health, the understanding of which
can render any illness of mind and body both preventable and
curable. I have found two simple principles that inevitably emerge.
The first is to follow the guidance of your inner spirit always. This
guidance which attends to each and every thought, comes forth to
you through your feelings. Focus your attention on those thoughts
that feel good to you, for these are the ideas and visions that are in
harmony with the truth of your inner nature.

“Hold to the thoughts and actions that follow the instincts which
come forth from within. It is only through one’s intuitive inspiration
that a person takes right action and gains true self-knowledge. It is
not the idealism, morals, whims, and dictates of the outer world, or
the observation of and reaction to other persons’ experiences that
give joyful, healthful guidance. I have seen consistently that when
one’s spirit and one’s mindful personality are in harmony with each

----- PAGE 541 -----
other, life force flows with ease, and life experiences consist
primarily of joy, prosperity, and health.

“Invariably, our inner being holds clear awareness of the original
intent of our incarnation, that unique cardinal path we originally
chose for this life. In accordance with this we have a profound inner
guidance system ever at work; in every thought, one’s mind and
personality are guided from within through a continual
communication with one’s spirit, using the intimate inner language
of feelings. Those thoughts and experiences that vibrate in harmony
with the vast knowing of one’s inner being feel good, and those that
vibrate in discord feel bad; it is that simple. This is why love,
appreciation, enthusiasm, and so forth feel good to us, and why
anger, frustration, guilt, jealousy, and blame feel bad.

“Chronic pain and disease are merely extensions of bad or
painful feelings that one has endured or attempted to ignore and
disregard over a period of time. Disease is initiated by any
prolonged resistance or conflict between the specific choices of
one’s mind and the comprehensive knowing of one’s inner spirit.

“The second principle is to hold sacrosanct in one’s heart and
mind the freedom and importance of all others to follow their
chosen paths. Venerate, as you do your own, the wisdom and true
guidance of another’s inner being; honor their path, be they
connected and in harmony with their inner self or not. They are
learning and growing too. Judge them not; do them no harm; they
are co-creating with you. They do not have to agree with you.
Allow them their way and truly appreciate their individuality. The
vibrations of appreciation are profound, akin to those of
unconditional love.

“Each of us appears to be separate from one another, but
nonetheless each is an integral part of the whole of life, and each
being has her or his own path to follow. The questions of right or
wrong, of good or evil are relative; what is right for one is possibly
wrong for another. And, likewise all standards of morality and
idealism are purely relative. Spirit has no rules. The unique
individuality of every path is hallowed and is wholly essential to
the evolution of All. Appreciating and allowing all others to be as

----- PAGE 542 -----
they are, attracts full freedom to be oneself, and it is this vast field
of diversity we access on this physical plane that allows each of us
to find everything we need to support the realization of our desires.

“We have come into this realm eager to engage in physical life, to
celebrate our individuality, to feel the joy of life force flowing
through our being as we exercise our innate ability and freedom to
deliberately create whatever experiences we desire. Through each
of our life journeys spirit accesses the wonderful contrasts that
compose the physical realm, indulging in the infinite choices this
realm bestows that feed our creative nature; therein we grow in
wisdom and knowledge and expand our being within the grand
evolution of All that Is.

“Life only asks of us that we travel our individual journey with
joy in our heart while allowing all others to do the same,
appreciating their individuality, therein blessing all those around
us. This is the art of health.”

As Artemis finished speaking, Asclepius, sitting beside her,
looked at her, respect and affection lighting his face. She was a
renowned patron of the healing arts and a bright influence in his
life, having taught him the artful way of animal and plant medicine.
In the succeeding moment, however, an expression of puzzlement
cast a fleeting shadow over his face. He gestured to his two teachers
that he wished to speak.

“Dear Artemis and Chiron, I understand your ideas about the
nature of health and illness and I appreciate the depth and practical
significance of your perception. But, what about the symptoms of
disease, shouldn’t we clearly identify these and work to understand
their cause? Wouldn’t an in-depth diagnosis help someone attend to
the discomfort of the symptoms and relieve a person’s irritation?”

Chiron reflected on the young physician’s question for a moment
and then responded; “When one fully recognizes the power of the
mind to create, Asclepius, he will use it only to focus attention on
what he wants. If what is, is not that what you want, then do not
energize the experience further by dwelling on it.

“Physical manifestation is a by-product of your vibrational
offering. I am referring to the vibrations of the mental signals vou

----- PAGE 543 -----
project. Those signals you set forth are the vibration of what you
are giving your attention to, by either your perceiving, your
daydreaming, your imagining, your remembering, and so forth, in
whatever way you are focusing in the moment. In other words, the
signals you send out to the universe, those which in turn attract
things to you, are all about what you are giving your attention to.
The physical reflections of these signals are those manifestations
you experience.

“It is best to walk lightly with understanding and enjoy these
personal manifestations. Appreciate the enormous amount of
information they supply, for they do you a great service by
accurately illustrating to you where you are currently holding your
predominant focus. You are continually molding your experience,
this is ongoing, and the manifestations that occur are there
specifically to give you the information that helps you to identify
more clearly what you want.

“I repeat, Asclepius, we are creators. This is what we have come
to this physical realm to do; it is our life. We are intimate
extensions of the very same Source energy that has created and
sustains this universe. We have come forth in these bodies intending
to evaluate the lush contrast of this physical time space reality,
letting that contrast evoke within us clarity of decision, because it is
through the decisions that we forge, that we direct and flow the
very same creative energy that creates all things. And it is the
flowing of this energy that is life.

“The process of creating one’s life experiences is all about
attraction. It is about what comes to you as a result of your
vibrational offering. When the manifestations you are experiencing
feel joyful and fulfilling, you are creating in harmony with your
inner nature; and these manifestations offer you new perspectives
from which to envision and create even greater and more delightful
experiences. Your creating never ends; manifestations come and go,
informing you of what you are currently attracting; experiences
flow one to another; the journey is forever ongoing.

“If the manifestations you are presently experiencing are not
exactly what vou want. let this insight stimulate vou to examine

----- PAGE 544 -----
more closely what you have been thinking, discussing, believing,
remembering, assuming, or expecting that is attracting these
phenomena into your experience.

“The laws that support the functioning of the universe reflect its
vast transcendent intelligence. The simple universal law of
attraction is a cardinal law. There is no law of projection. There is
nothing that can project itself into your experience unless you allow
this by concurrently attracting it to yourself. You are the sole creator
of your life; you experience only that which matches your creative
output, that which you somehow include in your vibrational
offering. So, it is wise to focus your mental energy consciously on
what you want, rather than including in your mental signal that
which you do not want. Note those thoughts and experiences that
feel good to you, those that are, therefore, in harmony with your
inner being—your true nature—and focus your predominant
attention on them. Attract them and others of like vibrational
quality into your life experience, thereby intentionally creating the
experiences you want.

“Therefore, prolonged diagnosis of disease—dwelling on the
etiology of what you do not want—and attempting to discern the
cause of these symptoms merely includes them strongly in your
signal, and this is the vibration you will continue to energize. Hence
this and other vibrations like it are what you will continue to attract
unto you. Instead, I strongly suggest you use the opportunity to
focus on your health; focus predominantly on what feels good to
you. See your health; envision what you want. Feel these feelings;
dwell on them instead and project these signals to the universe.
Focus your passion on what you want to manifest in your life. Ask
yourself why you want it. This further clarifies your desire as it
magnifies the passion of your wanting and attracts more and more
supportive, harmonious thoughts that further enrich and intensify
your vision. Devote time to this task; this is your work as a creator.
Create in your mind a vivid picture of what it is you want; and feel
this desire. Feel it strongly. Feeling is the first step in the
manifestation of your wishes, a powerful component of consciously
creating vour experiences.

----- PAGE 545 -----
“And by all means, avoid inner resistance to your wishes. Weed
out any contrary, habitual thoughts and beliefs you hold. Do not
contradict the manifestation of what feels good to you by dwelling
for any extended period on imagined obstacles to its manifestation.
Weed out any negativity that vibrates resistance. Seek the company
of those who uplift you and see your health and beauty. Fully allow
your desires to come to you in their perfect time; they will come to
pass; enjoy the process of the returning experience of wellness;
follow your inspired actions, for they will be in harmony with your
creation; relish the journey.”

As Chiron finished speaking, a man whom he had not previously
met, spoke,

“Members of this circle, it is delightful to be here with you.” he
said,

“My name is Sachs, I am here with my young son, Tages, one of
your students, Chiron.”

“I have been an herbalist throughout my life. I help others learn
to communicate with plants and to make herbal medicines.”
Looking to Chiron he continued, “In light of this creative process
that you explain so clearly, Chiron, how is medicine best used by an
individual? What is the wisest counsel to give one who is seeking a
medicine for healing?”

Chiron smiled warmly, pleased to meet this new acquaintance.
He welcomed the elder Sachs and greeted the young man sitting
next to him. He then said, “When you use a ‘medicine’ to assist you
in a creation, your perspective while using it is of paramount
importance; for it is the perspective with which you take a
medicine that formulates your vibrational offering. Decide clearly
what you want to attract. Let the medicine assist you in allowing
yourself to have that which you desire. One’s belief in a medicine
increases the expectation for receiving what is wanted. Enthusiastic
expectation is a perfect state of mind for allowing the manifestation
of one’s desire, because, therein, any resistance to this manifestation
is significantly diminished.

“Hold your primary intent for using a medicine clearly in mind.
Employ the help of vour medicine to accent vour intention to

----- PAGE 546 -----
experience health and well-being. Use it with the conscious intent
to feel good, to manifest vitality, to attract prosperity or whatever
else you seek. This clear intent, bolstered by your belief that the
medicine will assist you strongly directs your signal to attract the
experience of whatever it is that you want. This fertilizes the seeds
of self-healing and intentional creating.

“Do not mis-create by using medicine with the idea of ‘getting rid
of what you don’t want, or to something that is ‘broken,’ or to
attack disease and so forth; for these vibrational offerings, in the
attempt to exclude, will merely attract those very things you do not
want by focusing attention on them. By focusing attention on
symptoms or on past ‘causes,’ one is not moving away from the
unwanted experience, but instead is lingering in the thoughts,
statistics, visual images, and the feelings of their ‘dis-ease,’
prolonging the experience of that which is not wanted. Avoid
reacting to what is. Rather, create the tone of that which you want.

“Symptoms of dis-ease are the manifestations brought about by
an individual’s past thoughts, beliefs, and mental attitude. It is
important to realize that one has no power to change what has
passed. One’s full power, the power to change what is, lies solely in
the present, wherein one can envision, feel, and consciously create
the nature of future experiences.

“Once disease symptoms—reflections of inner disharmony—have
ignited the realization that they are not what one wants, these
manifestations have done their job. It is important to appreciate the
powerful teaching they afford, but there is no longer any value in
focusing further attention on them. Acknowledge that they stem
from past attitude, and that it is this attitude, and its attendant
thoughts, that must be revised in order to change one’s experiences.
Identify those thoughts and beliefs that illicit a sense of uneasiness
within you, thoughts that do not feel good to you, but for whatever
reasons you have continued to hold on to and prolong. These are
the thoughts that resist the flow of your true nature. What is
appropriate now is to decide what is wanted and to focus creative
thought totally and passionately on the visions ignited by that
decision.

----- PAGE 547 -----
“Regardless of present circumstances and despite the etiology of
an illness’s manifestation, ones full power as a creator of future
experiences, as a self-healer, lies entirely here in the present. Use
medicine as a mantra that magnifies the vibrations of your intent;
let your medicines echo the vibrations of your impassioned desire
to regain the experience of your innate health, vitality, and well-
being.”

Asclepius, who, at his young age, had already shown himself to
be a remarkable physician, was clearly fascinated by the
significance of Chiron’s counsel on the use of medicine. He
immediately asked him to elaborate on how, then, the knowledge
and compassion of the herbalist and the physician can help heal
another being.

“Physicians and herbalists, like medicine, can be distinct allies for
a person who regards and trusts them. They are influential
companions for anyone who believes they can help them and have
requested this help. An attending herbalist or physician can
skillfully soothe and mend another person’s physical malaise and
make them more comfortable, but herbalists and physicians do not
‘heal’ others, no one heals another.” Chiron emphasized, “One can
only heal oneself.

“When I use the term heal, I mean reconnecting to one’s Source
energy by one’s removal of inner resistance to the flow of life force,
so that inner ease returns, harmony between one’s mind and spirit
is reestablished, and the experience of one’s intrinsic well-being is
revived.

“A wise practitioner views illness not as an affliction, but instead
as an explicit teacher in one’s life. The experienced practitioner
also knows that, if disease symptoms are merely palliated, and the
teachings these symptoms offer are ignored, the individual will
soon re-experience the effects of illness in the same or in yet
another form. An external remedy offers no cure if a person has not
established mental ease. If one’s spirit is not heard, the rhythm of
mind is broken, and the mark of a person’s illness remains there.

“To assist another’s healing, herbalists and physicians should
consider using their thoughts more to visualize. less to analvze.

----- PAGE 548 -----
seeing their client’s innate health and well-being, not using the time
so much to scrutinize a person’s symptoms of dis-ease. Guide the
person to reveal how he can restore his experience of health. Ask
him what he wants in his life and once he identifies this, ask him
why he wants it. Further indulgence in this liberated flow of desire
will increase the passion of his vision and animate his
determination. Enter into the joy and passion of the realizations
that come forth, and accompany him in his vision wherever he
wants to take it. Accompany him in the creative power of his
daydreams, for these are the exhilarating passageways his spirit has
opened to his heart and mind. Assure him of his ability to manifest
his dreams and his worthiness to have, and to be, and to do
whatever he wants. Encourage him to explore his bliss, uplift him
and assure him of his well-being. Inspire him to find the desires of
his true self and feel the deeply nourishing feelings of connecting in
a positive way with them. This is a trusted ally’s power and
purpose, a gift of medicine, a practitioner’s joy.

“A compassionate herbalist’s or physician’s finest service is to
focus on their client’s innate health, radiate an uplifting attitude,
and assist the client to make heartfelt sense of their experience of
illness. This juncture initiates a highly creative momentum.
Referencing the client’s experience of illness as a provocative
manifestation of what the individual no longer wants to create,
relating to dis-ease merely as a powerfully motivating experience
from which to decide and envision what feels good and what is
now clearly preferred, the practitioner assures the client, without a
shadow of doubt, that this illness by nature is a temporary
condition. The herbalist embraces the client’s impassioned
preferences as the birth of a resplendent idea upon which the client
can build an ever more enlightened vision, generating greater and
greater enthusiasm and vitality for attracting what is now clearly
desired, releasing resistance to what is wanted.”

At this point Chiron wished to elaborate on the topic of
compassion, for he knew the confusion many individuals
experience around this emotion and concurrent feelings of
empathy. He was very aware how the focus of one’s feeling of

----- PAGE 549 -----
empathy can impinge on one’s power to assist another’s healing.
Chiron took a few moments to choose his words precisely, then he
said, “The truest essence of compassion is a very high, pure
vibration—it stems from a deep understanding of well-being.

“The greatest compassion a health seer and counselor—a health
ally—can offer another is, I know without a shadow of doubt that
well-being is your true experience—that very high passionate
vibration of well-being, having no resistance within it.”

“However, when most individuals use the word ‘compassion,’
they are looking at some suffering individual who is in a desperate
situation and feeling empathy for where they are—and that is of no
benefit at all.

“When a health counselor holds someone as their object of
attention from a place of knowing their innate wellness—they may
be temporarily not well—but as a health seer knows their true
well-being, they set the tone of the consultation. The counselor
floods the energy field with a pure, positive, resistance-free
vibration; and the client’s vibration readily acclimates to this higher
vibration. They are attracted to it like a shivering man is attracted
to a warm stove; and well-being becomes their experience. This is
true compassion!

“But so many individuals get lost in the struggle. Many counselors
search for something or someone who seeks their help, but then
upon finding this, they get focused on the needy part. They
acclimate to the needy part and feel the despair of it—and call this
compassion. This only lowers an individual’s vibration separating
the counselor from his or her power to uplift and inspire.

“If a counselor is empathizing with the client’s struggle—now,
instead of maintaining the higher, faster vibration and bringing the
other person to it, their experience is empathy with the client’s
lower, slower vibration and their feelings of discomfort.

“At this point it depends on how the counselor is feeling. True
compassion feels very good, and when feeling this, whomever a
health counselor holds as their object of attention will feel good
also. This is true upliftment!

“Set the tone of the consultation to a vibration of upliftment.”

----- PAGE 550 -----
Chiron stated with impassioned emphasis, “This is the health
counselor’s power of true compassion.

“What good can we do another unless we see them in their
perfect health and hold this in our thought as we counsel? If we see
them any less than this, what good are we doing them? We must
inspire them to be their wholeness which includes perfect health. If
we see them in their disease where can either of us go, except to
merely palliate their symptoms?

“By holding this state of inspired vision and upliftment, you
radiate it. As you think, you feel; as you feel, you radiate, and all is
affected by your offering. This is the power of your influence as a
health seer, herbalist, physician, and health ally.

“When a client experiencing temporary disconnection from their
inner source of joy comes to you for assistance, your intent, as you
are interacting with this person, is to bring them closer to
remembering and appreciating who they are. This means
appreciation and reassurance coming from you is in order. Focus
your attention on them wholly. Listen to the words they offer,
acknowledge their experience of illness, suffering, and discomfort,
but behind it all hear the singing of their spirit. Therein abides their
wellness. See their beauty and perfection, and offer soothing words
like, “I assure you, it will be all right,” and ‘It too will pass, things
will get better.’ When you offer your words of reassurance from
your place of knowing that all is well, they will begin to feel it.
This fresh feeling within them will be the first step in the
manifestation of their re-experience of health. Encourage them to
flow their energy to concordant feelings, to the ideas that inspire
them and feel good to them, to the feelings that stem from deciding
more clearly what they truly want.

“Use gentle humor. It is the unbounded expression of
appreciation. Laughter is life force reflected through a physical
being who is willing to be light enough to let it flow. Keep the
session buoyant; relax, spend more time looking for things to
appreciate, to laugh about, and to play with. Let cheerfulness
deflect all oppressive doubt and depression. It is most efficient to
view all that is right with the individual. focusing upon those areas

----- PAGE 551 -----
in their life that feel good to them—and there are so very many
when one looks from a perspective of appreciation and laughter—
As these positive aspects are identified and felt, others, one after
another after another, those aspects that are in harmony with their
spirit make themselves known, and the appreciation for that which
feels good in their own life grows. The temporary disconnection
from inner joy dissolves.” Chiron fell quiet for a moment, looked
deep into Asclepius’s eyes and continued, “and once a person finds
himself, it no longer matters where he was when he was lost.

“See another’s suffering only long enough to feel your desire
erupting within you to help them, but do not let their suffering take
you to it. See your client’s health, don’t use the time to dissect his or
her dis-ease. Consider using your thoughts more to visualize, less to
analyze. Instead, find within yourself the ability to imagine a better
life for them. You have to imagine their wellness even in the reality
of their experience of (temporary) illness and pain, and exercise the
creative beingness you came here to live. Wish wellness for them,
imagine wellness in them. Know they are well, regardless of what
they say. This is your power. If you go to their way of believing in
the moment, you give up your power.

“But, remember, my companions, you don’t do this for them
because they need it; you do it because it is your true nature, and
because doing it also makes you feel good, and because joining
them in a slower vibration takes you from the very Source that is
you. Your greatest value to others is when you are joyful, when you
are connected to who you are. Your greatest value to others is when
you are radiantly healthy, when you are happy, to have, and to be,
and to do all the things that are very important to you. When you
are doing these things that make you feel good, that bring you joy
and vitality, you are a catalyst inspiring others to an awareness of
that. You have healed yourself, you are immersed in your natural
wellness. Radiate health and well-being and all will be influenced
by this. You are a natural healer, a health seer, a perfect health
ally.”

Chiron fell silent. The others remained silent as well, each
traveling their own pathway amongst Chiron’s ideas. A few

----- PAGE 552 -----
moments passed, and Chiron added,

“Then while harmony between the spirit and the mind is being
brought about, the very cause of the experience of illness being
eradicated, one can apply the herbal oils and salves, administer the
simples, the potions, and the tonics that usher good feelings and a
strong sense of well-being to the body, therein most efficiently using
such physical means as may be appropriate to soothe, tone, and
complete the healing of the body.

“Show your companions how to make herbal brews and potions
that sustain the body’s vitality. Make with them those herbal
preparations that help nourish their bodies and minds and soothe
their afflictions, further assisting them to focus attention on all that
feels good in their life. Remember, health is simply feeling good.

“And, as herbalists, whenever possible show these wonderful
people to the gardens, to the fields and other places where plants
live, for the companionship of living plants is truly the highest
level, the premier expression of herbal medicine. Let folks’ minds
and hearts be uplifted by the silent language of the flower kingdom,
words expressed through the pure positive energy radiating from
the beauty and vitality of each living plant. Let the rhythm of
human pulse be influenced by plants’ enchanted connection with
the cycles of absolute well-being and the jubilant abundance of
Earth. Entreat yourself and your clients to meditate within these
surroundings, this uplifting environment that assists one’s mind to
become calm and widen its outlook, allowing an individual to feel
the visions of what he or she truly wants, rediscovering and
confirming pathways to their bliss.

“And, finally, esteemed students and peers, communicate clearly
to your clients that healing is a human function; it was not the
counselor or the medicines or a supernatural power that healed
them; it was they who healed themselves, for the final
responsibility and the most compassionate act of health seers,
herbalists, and physicians are to ultimately empower their client
companions with the full realization that health and healing come
forth solely from within.”

Upon this final word. voung Bacchus, who, although he loved

----- PAGE 553 -----
listening to the teachings of his mentor, could contain himself no
longer. He jumped up onto his feet saying, “Chiron, is it not time
now to play; is it not time to honor this delicious flow of life by
enhancing its surge with dancing and the taste of fine wines, ripe
fruits, and spiced vegetables?”

“Yes,” added Ceres, “and I have here loaves of fresh bread, sweet
cakes, and rice puddings on which to feast.” She laid out a spread
of food that boggled the minds and aroused the palates of all
present. Artemis had also brought sweet milk, and honey, and
wheels of cheese to share.

Suddenly, in a rush of Nature’s sweet magic, lush green vines
could be seen growing from out of nothingness, lining the walls of
Chiron’s cave whereon clusters of berries, fat bunches of grapes and
fruits, and the kindly buds of the hop family flourished in abundant
display, all ripe for the picking. Dragonflies and damselflies,
hummingbirds, and honey bees touched here and touched there,
finding nectar-full flowers everywhere.

“And we have made potions, cordials, and herbal brews to
share.” said the elder Sachs, as he and Tages drug forth straw
baskets and leather satchels brimming with colorful bottles and fat
little jars full with aromatic liquids, twinkling powders, herbal
blends for smoke, and other enchanting lore.

Chiron, delighted to his core, took out his lyre and began to play
while others passed around flutes, cymbals, rattles and drums, and
together they harmonized their rhythm and melody to the
enchanting music of the spheres.

Outside Chiron’s dwelling, hearing the festive merriment, Hermes
as quickly as thought spread word of the magnificent affair
throughout the land. Soon nymphs and satyrs wearing garlands of
oak leaf and ivy, Psyche and Cupid, faeries and gnomes, Mother
Nature, the Greenman, lovely Venus, and the great Pan himself
arrived at Chiron’s cave and were seen laughing and frolicking
therein.

And as the music plays on, this joyous flow of life sings the songs
of each individual’s freedom, while the boundless creation of All
that Is dances on and on into the wee hours of eternity.

----- PAGE 554 -----
“Imagine for the pleasure of imagining, and your
dreams will all come true.”

—T. Exper Sacus

So, side by side my friends, let’s row our boats

gently down the stream...

creating everything we want,

making life full with all that we can dream...

we live in a child’s garden, you know...

where it is always good to have fun

romping joyfully with the weeds.

pursuing the passion of our dance...

helping care for the garden’s beings...

appreciating the grand diversity of us all...

And remember always,

Earth companions and co-creators,

be very, very good to yourselves...

and life will flow delightfully

with no resistance at all...

Our joy will illuminate the heavens ... our youthful giggles tickling
the moon

and the brightness of our spirits

will twinkle back to the shimmering stars...

The gifts of life are joy ... that we are each beautiful and forever
free...

have fun growing with all this herbal stuff ... affectionately...

—JG, herbalist

----- PAGE 555 -----


----- PAGE 556 -----
APPENDICES

----- PAGE 557 -----
APPENDIX A

THE UNITED PLANT SAVERS LIST OF “AT-RISK MEDICINAL
PLANTS”

We have been seeking a clear vision as to which Native American
medicinal plants are the primary focus of attention for our plant-
protection efforts. This has taken the form of the “UpS At-Risk List,”
which has been defined and reviewed quite exhaustively over the
last year, and has been agreed upon by the UpS Board of Directors.
It consists of herbs broadly used in commerce, which due to over-
harvest or loss of habitat, or by nature of their innate rareness or
sensitivity, are at risk or of a significant decline in numbers within
their current range.

STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

For the benefit of the plant communities, wild animals, harvesters,
farmers, consumers, manufacturers, retailers, and practitioners, we
offer this list of wild medicinal plants we feel are currently most
sensitive to the impact of human activities. Our intent is to assure
the increasing abundance of the medicinal plants presently in
decline due to expanding popularity and shrinking habitat and
range. UpS is not asking for a moratorium on the use of these
herbs; rather we are initiating programs designed to preserve these
important wild medicinal plants.

AT-RISK LIST

The wild medicinal plants on the following list have been proposed
for inclusion on the “At-Risk List,” but they are in need of further
research. In some cases, the plants are abundant in one bio-region
and quite rare in another. Some of these herbs are widely used in

----- PAGE 558 -----
commerce, others are not widely used. United Plant Savers is
watching these herbs and collecting information on levels of
commercial usage while monitoring the viability of these plants
within their current range. We invite your participation in this
project. Please feel free to report on the health of populations of
these plants in your local area. Also, feel free to propose other
medicinal plants that you feel are presently in decline due to
expanding popularity and shrinking habitat and range.

American Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)

Blue Cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Echinacea (Echinacea spp.)

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

Helonias Root (Chamaelirium luteum)

Kava Kava (Piper methysticum) Hawaii only
Lady’s Slipper Orchid (Cypripedium spp.)
Lomatium (Lomatium dissectum)

Osha (Ligusticum porteri, L. spp.)

Partridge Berry, Squawvine (Mitchella repens)
Peyote (Lophophora williamsii)

Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

Sundew (Drosera spp.)

Trillium, Beth Root (Trillium spp.)

True Unicorn (Aletris farinosa)

Venus’ Fly Trap (Dionaea muscipula)

Wild Yam (Dioscorea villosa, D. spp.)

TO-WATCH LIST

Arnica (Arnica spp.)

Butterfly Weed (Asclepias tuberosa)
Calamus (Acorus calamus)
Chaparro (Casatela emorvi)

----- PAGE 559 -----
Elephant Tree (Bursera microphylla)
Eyebright (Euphrasia spp.)

Gentian (Gentiana spp.)

Goldthread (Coptis spp.)

Lobelia (Lobelia spp.)

Maidenhair Fern (Adiaantum pendatum)
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum)
Oregon Grape (Mahonia spp.)

Pink Root (Spigelia marilaandica)
Pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata)
Spikenard (Aralia racemosa, A. californica)
Stone Root (Collinsonia canadensis)
Stream Orchid (Epipactis gigantea)

Turkey Corn (Dicentra canadensis)
Virginia Snakeroot (Aristolochia serpentaria)
White Sage (Salvia apiana)

Yerba Mansa (Anemopsis californica)
Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon californica)

The term “spp” in the context of this list means “all North
American species in this genus.” We are using this category when
there is reason to believe that through misidentification or
intentional collection various species within the genus besides the
officially recognized species are being utilized. We see this situation
clearly when various species of Trillium are harvested to sell as
“Beth Root,” or when various species of Echinacea are harvested as
“Echinacea angustifolia.” We ask wildcrafters to consider the
ecological impact of taking these herbs from the wild. Replanting in
the wild, as well as careful stewarding of your collection areas, is of
tantamount importance if the trade of wildcrafting is to continue.
Although the herb may be abundant in your locality, it has
probably already disappeared from other areas. You are the folks
who have the best understanding of wild medicinal plants, and you
can contribute greatly by providing seed and advising others on
how to plant and grow these herbs. We ask manufacturers and
consumers to assist in the conversion of these plants from

----- PAGE 560 -----
wildcrafted sources to organically grown. If there is a demand for
the wild herbs, then we will continue to lose them. If there is
demand for cultivated herbs, then we create environmentally
friendly jobs while saving the wild plants. Although it is an
expensive proposition, the time is ripe to assure sustainability of
the herbs we love. I would like to express my thanks to the
hundreds of good folks who reviewed this list and gave their
constructive comments: academics, herbalists, government workers,
botanists, and lay enthusiasts. Your views were taken seriously, and
by comparing the feedback of what is considered rare from your
various bio-regions, we have been able to compile much
information on which herbs need our help most urgently.
—Richo Cech, Horizon Herbs, UpS Board Member

United Plant Savers

P.O. Box 98

East Barre, VT 05649

Tel (802) 479-9825

Fax (802) 476-3722

Email: info@www.plantsavers.org

Web site: <www.plantsavers.org >

----- PAGE 561 -----
APPENDIX B

WELCOME TO THE GARDEN

T’ve been waiting for you.

Id like to take the opportunity, while we are here together in the
garden pages of this manual, to restate that in my opinion the
supreme form of all herbal medicine is the direct association with a
living plant. In my experience, the most powerful nourishment
given us by herbal tonics is delivered by simply commingling with
living plants growing in a garden, particularly when it is your own
garden. This is why in my herb school, we start all our intensive
“Roots of Herbalism” and “Foundations of Health” course curricula
and our herbal medicine-making classes and so forth in the garden.
We ground all our teaching in the garden where Herbalism is
rooted and flourishes. This way, we never forget just whom we are
talking about. This way, when we delve into other facets of our
herbal studies, those that often and quite quickly become highly
intellectual and theoretical, we don’t misalign our perspective. We
don’t lose sight of the reality of our most knowledgeable herbal
teachers, the plants. The garden is established as “Home.” At any
point we can step back into this reality from the abstract symbolism
of our mental journeys and be immersed in the organic vibrations
of herbal truth. The garden, from its Earth connection and its
aesthetic nectar, is the only classroom qualified to satisfy the hunger
and thirst of passionate student herbalists, and it is the only teacher
who can answer all their questions ... without speaking a word.

Growing your own garden is very simple. How does one do it?
“Just put your hands and some seeds or roots into the earth and
grow something.” Placing a plant or a seed in the soil, watering it,
and caring for it, makes a “mother” out of you, a nurturer, and if
you don’t think that is important. vou will. Whether vou are a man

----- PAGE 562 -----
or a woman, a young girl or a young boy, the experience of taking
a plant into your life, providing it a place to dwell, paying
attention to it, checking on it every day or so, talking with it (and
you do talk to it with every thought and feeling, because plants
don’t require ears or mouths to communicate), checking to see that
it is happy where you put it, moving it if necessary (it'll let you
know where it likes to be), talking with it some more, all puts
sparkle in your life. And sometimes that’s all we are looking
for ... a little sparkle to help polish the nervous system and clear
the heart valves. You'll be thrilled, and if your thumb’s not green at
first, just keep on gardening, it’ll turn green. Actually, green is the
natural color of all human thumbs. They just get coated with ink,
and grease, and makeup, and all that kind of day-to-day stuff of
civilization. Gardening—bending, kneeling, stretching, reaching,
digging, smiling, spreading, picking up, setting down, pruning,
watering, pushing, pulling, carrying, scratching, and so forth—are
also very gentle, yet excellent forms of physical exercise, akin to
that which wild animals get while roaming the fields, the seashore,
and the countryside gathering their food.

Also, purchase a chime for your garden. Spend some time
selecting it; find the one (or two or three) that resonates perfectly
with the appetite of your aesthetic ear. You'll recognize it when you
feel your inner being humming along with its tone. Buy or build
some bird houses, a bird bath, and a couple of bat houses. (If you
disapprove of bats, consider reconsidering this attitude; unless you
fly at night and you are a whole lot smaller than they are, bats
won’t bother you; and they garble from the garden sky a myriad of
flying insects that take great delight in bothering you.)

Arrange all the above things in your garden near your plants. The
birds you attract eat bugs that eat plants, and most important, the
songs of birds are the perfect serenade for plants. It has been
discovered that no other form of music makes plants happier and
more garden-active. Bats patrol the garden airways for you at night.
The music of the chime announces the arrival of garden breezes;
this uplifting euphony is for you the gardener. It makes your mind
pause a moment while vour insides beam. This is herbal medicine

----- PAGE 563 -----
at its best.

One final suggestion—avoid combat maneuvers in your garden.
Children of every plant, animal, and mineral species do poorly
when raised in or near a battlefield. Gophers, snails, deer, and
aphid are part of the garden phenomenon. Granted they can be a
giant pain, we all can be at times, but poisoning, stabbing-traps,
and gunshots destroy the serenity of a garden, and they are not
enjoyable strategies. Plant-munching critters can be outwitted and
out-maneuvered. Take the challenge. If some of the other local
fauna outmaneuver you, a point for them. Exercise your sense of
humor. Let your frustration stimulate your creative wit.
Companions (of all species) teach; you learn, and the next step in
the garden boogie is yours. We live in the Garden of Earth as
members of a sacred circle of giving. All beings need food, and the
earth provides it for us. At some point in the ongoing dynamics of
this organic cycle, each of us becomes a morsel of food for another.
Eating a succulent garden plant, no matter where it might be
growing (or what species you are), is instinctive, wholesome
participation in the circle dynamics; don’t take it personally. We
garden to grow, to feel good, to be uplifted, and to enjoy our life;
warfare heads us in a different direction. And, if you happen to
have a bad back or some other injury, don’t be deterred by this.
Gardening is well done slowly and easily; it is a timeless adventure
that will adapt gracefully to your rhythm and movements.

A Nore on tHe Purrerinc Rertex

Gardening is a human being’s most efficient means for reviving the
ability to co-communicate with plants. This ability is systematically
developed by the reawakening and refining of one’s innate
“puttering reflex.”

The puttering reflex is triggered automatically the instant you
step into your garden. Since the event of your last appearance in
the garden, the resident plants have been growing and anticipating
your return, and they will have a variety of organic details thev

----- PAGE 564 -----
would appreciate that you attend to.

Upon reentering the garden, you sense this intuitively, and, in
classic reflexive fashion—which seems almost involuntarily
performed—you start tending immediately to the salient project
nearest at hand. The perpetuation of the reflex loop is automatic as
you hear the plants’ requests and respond, hear and respond, hear
and respond throughout the garden community. In short time, this
“puttering” process shifts gears into enchantment, graceful
movements, shameless humming, deliberate creativity, full on joy,
and non-resistance to total participation in the well-being of your
innate health. Time ceases to exist along with the sidecar full of
pressures that habitually ride with time in your life. Garden
puttering is a mild form of trance that you enter, and when you
come out of this green space, both you and the garden are
emotionally and physically transformed. It is an ambrosial
adventure that enhances your immune system and tones your
nervous system. Concurrently, the circulatory system is caressed by
your complete disconnection with all time-related stress; the five
senses are acutely activated; and like your muscles when enjoyably
exercised, the more you use them, in turn, the more pleasure they
give you. So, be well, putter forth, and play with the faeries.

Further note: The impulsive tendency to hug trees is an
opportunistic ancillary response to the puttering reflex.

Green Tuums Tecuotocy or INDEPENDENCE—
A Recommenpep Home Mepicine Garpen

Western States

The size of your garden site will suggest the plants to choose.

Plants that yield a good harvest, yet do not require too much room
(suggestions for an approximately 10’ x 20’ plot)

+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ California Poppy (Eschscholzia californica)

+ Catnip (Nepeta cataria)

----- PAGE 565 -----
+ Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis) (Plant it where you want it to
remain!)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

* Garlic (Allium sativum)

+ Hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis)

+ Lady’s Mantle (Alchemilla vulgaris) (Likes shade!)

+ Lavender (Lavandula vera)

+ Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis)

+ Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca)

+ Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

+ Pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) (Loves wet areas)

+ Peppermint (Mentha piperita) (It spreads in all directions!)
+ Sage (Salvia officinalis)

+ Wood Betony (Stachys officinalis)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

Plants that require a relatively large area to yield an adequate
harvest

+ Angelica (Angelica archangelica)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla)

+ Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

* Globe Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)

+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Red Clover (Trifolium pratense)

+ Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

+ St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

* Wild Oat (Avena fatua, A. sativa)

Plants that do well in pots and boxes

+ Basil (Ocimum basilicum) (requires hot sun!)
+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

+ Lavender (Lavandula spp.)

----- PAGE 566 -----
+ Mints (Mentha spp.)

+ Parsley (Petroselinum spp.)

+ Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)
+ Sage (Salvia spp.)

+ Thyme (Thymus vulgaris)

Wild plants to encourage in your garden and around the house
+ Blackberry (Rubus fructicosus) (Keep an eye on this one and
maintain control!)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
+ Chickweed (Stellaria media)

* Cleaver (Galium aperine)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Gumweed (Grindelia spp.)

+ Horsetail (Equisetum arvense)

+ Oregon Grape (Mahonia spp.)

+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Miner’s Lettuce (Claytonia spp.)

+ Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major)

+ Self-heal (Prunella vulgaris)

+ Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris)
+ Sorrel (Rumex spp.)

+ Stinging Nettle (Urtica spp.)

+ Teasel (Dipsacus spp.)

+ Violet (Viola spp.)

+ Wild Oat (Avena spp.)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

+ Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

+ Yerba Mansa (Anemopsis californica)

+ Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon californicum)

Plants that require digging roots (although other parts of the plant
are often used as well)

Divide the roots’ crowns and replant whenever possible.

+ Angelica (Angelica spp.)

----- PAGE 567 -----
+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

+ Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) (an eastern woodland plant that
requires shade and damp soil—can be grown in West Coast shade
gardens)

+ Horseradish (Cochlearia armoracia)

+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra)

+ Stinging Nettle root (Urtica spp.) (rhizomes are excellent
reproductive organ tonics)

+ Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) (Likes it wet!)

Medicinal trees

+ Crampbark (Viburnum opulus) (actually a large bush)

+ Elder (Sambucus spp.)

+ Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus)

+ Fremontia “California Slippery Elm” (Fremontodendron
californicum)

* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

+ Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.)

+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

+ Willow (Salix alba) (Likes a wet area!)

Plants for the medicine of their beauty
+ California Poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
+ Clary Sage (Salvia sclarea)
+ Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) (all parts are toxic taken
internally—see Chapter Twenty-Four, “Poultices”)
+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)
+ Nasturtium (Nasturtium officinale)
+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra) (toxic)
+ Oriental Poppy (Papaver spp.)
+ Sunflower (Helianthus annuus)
Note: Herbs love good soil and water. In the most part. it is an

----- PAGE 568 -----
erroneous myth that they do better without.

Fertilizer

+ Aged animal manure

+ Kitchen and garden compost

+ Urine (diluted with water 1:5); do not put on leaves.

Pest control

+ Healthy plants

+ Safer soap

* Garlic-Cayenne spray

+ Beneficial insects (i.e., ladybug, praying mantis)

+ Picking snails and slugs off plants every morning throughout the
season. This will drastically reduce their population the following
years.

+ Gophers are highly territorial, so remove one and your garden is
free until another moves in.

+ Moles don’t hurt anything; they merely plow the soil and eat
creepy-crawlers, not plants.

+ To discourage deer (glorified cows), hang from your plants nylon
stocking bags full of smelly little motel soap bars.

Equipment

+ Dehydrator

+ Pruning shears (Good quality)

+ Root-digging tool (Strong trowel or Japanese hori-hori)
+ High-quality garden tools

+ Gloves

Herbs love good soil and water. In the most part,
it is an erroneous myth that they do better
without.

Eastern States

(Suggested by James Green and Leslie Gardner)

----- PAGE 569 -----
The size of your garden site will suggest the plants to choose.

Plants that yield a good harvest, yet do not require too much room
(suggestions for an approximately 10’ x 20’ plot)

+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Catnip (Nepeta cataria)

+ Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara)

+ Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis) (Plant it where you want it to
stay!)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

* Garlic (Allium sativum)

+ Hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis)

+ Lady’s Mantle (Alchemilla vulgaris) (Likes shade!)

+ Lavender (Lavandula vera)

+ Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis)

+ Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

+ Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca)

+ Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

+ Pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) (Loves wet areas)

+ Peppermint (Mentha piperita) (It spreads in all directions!)
+ Sage (Salvia officinalis)

+ Wild Indigo (Baptisia tinctoria)

+ Wood Betony (Stachys officinalis)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

Plants that require a relatively large area to yield an adequate
harvest

+ Angelica (Angelica archangelica)

+ Boneset (Eupatorium pefoliatum)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

+ Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

* Globe Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)

+ Joe-Pve (Eupatorium purpureum)

----- PAGE 570 -----
+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Red Clover (Trifolium pratense)

+ Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

+ St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
+ Stoneroot (Collinsonia canadensis)

+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

* Wild Oat (Avena fatua, A. sativa)

Plants that do okay in pots and boxes

+ Basil (Ocimum basilicum) (requires hot sun!)
+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

+ Lavender (Lavandula spp.)

+ Mints (Mentha spp.)

+ Parsley (Petroselinum spp.)

+ Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)

+ Sage (Salvia spp.)

«Thyme (Thymus vulgaris)

Wild plants to encourage in your garden and around the house
+ Blackberry (Rubus fructicosus) (Keep an eye on this one and
maintain control!)

+ Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)

+ Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)

+ Blue Cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chickweed (Stellaria media)

* Chicory (Cichorium intybus)

* Cleaver (Galium aperine)

+ Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara)

* Culver’s Root (Leptandra virginica)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)

+ Goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea)

+ Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

+ Joe-Pve (Eupatorium purpureum)

----- PAGE 571 -----
+ Jewelweed (Impatiens capensis)

+ Milkweed (Asclepias spp.)

+ Passion Flower (Passiflora incarnata)

+ Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major)

+ Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

+ Stoneroot (Collinsonia canadensis)

«Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare) (Takes hold and spreads!)
‘Violet (Viola spp.)

Plants that require digging roots (although other parts of the plant
are often used as well)

Divide the roots’ crowns and replant whenever possible.
+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

* Golden Seal (Hydrastis canadensis)

+ Horseradish (Cochlearia armoracia)

+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) (Likes it wet!)

Medicinal trees

+ Black Haw (Viburnum prunifolium)

+ Elder (Sambucus spp.)

* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

+ Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.)

+ Sassafras (Sassafras albidum)

+ Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

+ Wild Cherry (Prunus serotina)

+ Willow (Salix alba) (Likes a wet area!)

Plants for the medicine of their beauty

+ Clary Sage (Salvia sclarea)

+ Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) (all parts are toxic taken
internally—see Chapter Twenty-Four, “Poultices”)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

----- PAGE 572 -----
+ Nasturtium (Nasturtium officinale)
+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra) (toxic)
+ Oriental Poppy (Papaver spp.)
+ Sunflower (Helianthus annuus)

Fertilizer

+ Aged animal manure

+ Kitchen and garden compost

+ Urine (diluted with water 1:5); do not put on leaves

Pest control

+ Healthy plants

+ Safer soap

* Garlic-Cayenne spray

+ Beneficial insects (i.e., ladybug, praying mantis)

+ Picking snails and slugs off plants every morning throughout the
season. This will drastically reduce their population the following
years.

+ Gophers are highly territorial, so remove one and your garden is
free until another moves in.

+ Moles don’t hurt anything; they merely plow the soil and eat
creepy-crawlers, not plants.

+ To discourage deer (glorified cows), hang from your plants nylon
stocking bags full of smelly little motel soap bars.

Equipment

+ Dehydrator

+ Pruning shears (Good quality)

+ Root-digging tool (Strong trowel or Japanese hori-hori)
+ High-quality garden tools

+ Gloves

----- PAGE 573 -----
APPENDIX C

E:cur Princes of Excenent Mepicine-Maxinc

THE THREE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES

Harvest only abundance

Harvest only in areas of plant abundance, leaving plant
communities with no particularly noticeable physical evidence that
you were there. Harvesting is not always the taking of plant parts,
but often merely visiting their turf, observing, and harvesting
feelings of connection, insight, and kinship with plant and animal
companions (ally bonding).

Exchange energy

Leave an expendable but intimate part of yourself in exchange for
your harvest: a power object that you previously found, a ritual, a
prayer, a meditation, or some other personal, special expression of
gratitude. Sanction the exchange with your gift, making the herbal
harvest yours to transform into your potions and brews and
dispense as you will.

Plant seeds

The wise carpenter and foresightful printer will honor and support
the healthy life of forests and conserve their range of diversity. The
bright plumber will assist in protecting water resources and esteem
the Earth’s bodies of water so people can continue to draw healthy
fluid through their water pipes. The green herbalist will sow seeds
throughout Gaia, participating in the circle of giving and the simple
cycle of sow and reap. Every occupation draws its primary
resources from Earth and can promote balance by contributing
energy to conserving, recycling, and restoring, learning from Earth’s
intelligent technique for ensuring perpetual abundance.

----- PAGE 574 -----
THE INTUITIVE PRINCIPLE

Be intimately aware of the common life force in all things
Appreciate Unity. Experience, enjoy, and be nourished by your
connection with all life. Recent evidence from several disciplines,
including brain and consciousness research, anthropology,
microbiology, neurophysiology, elemental physics, and mythology
(and simple observation) reveals that body, mind, and
consciousness are inseparable, an indivisible whole, a dynamic
continuum. The universe too, so long thought to consist of
innumerable separate parts, appears to be at its primary level an
unbroken wholeness, a single dimension independent of time and
space in which the seemingly separate parts are not in the least
separated but are all intimately connected. All knowing is available
to all beings.

THE TWO SPIRITUAL/SOCIAL PRINCIPLES

Have fun

When you are having fun, at that moment, you are experiencing
most intimately and clearly who you truly are and what you enjoy
doing. This self-knowledge can escort you to further creativity and
joyful activity in your chosen work/play. Seek responsible
instruction from an experienced teacher to build a foundation, but
ultimately make medicine in your own unique fashion. This is self-
fulfillment, self-nourishment, creativity, and independence. You are
at your best when you’re having fun with life; when you are joyful,
you uplift others which is your most precious gift.

Hurt no one

Kindness is the foundation of peace and health. Honor and
appreciate individuality as mutual appreciation begets mutual
support. Protect the planetary rights of other persons and all
species. Harming oneself and others is the fundamental basis of

----- PAGE 575 -----
disease. Harvest from your heart; connect with the heart of the
circle of giving. Base your herbal research on empirical
investigation and scientific research that does not involve the
confinement and ill-treatment of a member of any species.

THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF PERSONAL POWER

Come from the heart

Expressing our true feelings and intuition from the heart is how
each of us measures up to all others and develops a sense of self-
esteem, personal power, and fearlessness. Spontaneity lives.

Dance and sing
Herbal medicine-making is a Path of Passion. Cut loose and
celebrate your life.

----- PAGE 576 -----
APPENDIX D

Exrracr Inrormation Cuarr

(As prepared for the California School of Herbal Studies)
Country name of herb:
Latin botanical name:
Method: Folk Weight/Volume
W/V.
Total weight of herb used Gm
Total menstruum, ml
Vol. 190-proof alcohol. ml
Vol. distilled water. ml
Vol. vegie glycerin, ml
Other. ml
Batch #.
Date prepared.
Date pressed.

Yield 1st press. ml

Weight wet marc. ml

Weight dry marc ml

Final yield of filtered extract, ml
Source of herb.
Quality: Primo. Excellent. Good.

Procepure Notes: i.e, Methods of grinding used, what worked, what
didn’t; all idiosyncrasies of the herb being processed; how
processing might be done better next time; performance of
menstruum, suggested changes next time; alternate w/v, etc. _

----- PAGE 577 -----
Ewpmicat notes: i.e., all feedback received about the use of this extract.

----- PAGE 578 -----
APPENDIX E

Harvestine Inrormation Cuart

(As prepared for the California School of Herbal Studies)

Herb gathered:

Botanical name.

Common name(s).

Batch # Date collected. Time of day
collected.
Gathering site:
Private or public land; recently worked, farmed, or logged?
Distance from nearest highway, power lines, or other manmade
structures. Types of fertilizers used and when; any history of
herbicides/pesticides used on this land.

Weather conditions during harvest. Temperature.

Handling methods:

Cleaning method (Shaking, peeling, washing, tools used,
etc.)

Drying method (Hanging, racks, dehydrator, etc.)

----- PAGE 579 -----
Drying conditions (Light exposure, moisture, ventilation,
temperature range, environmental factors such as dust, insects, and
odors).

Fresh plant weight, Dried plant weight,

The undersigned individual(s) guarantees that these herbs were
harvested in ecologically sound areas with conscious care for the
plant community and the natural environment in which they are
growing.

Signature. Date.

----- PAGE 580 -----
APPENDIX F

First Aw ror Porsonine By ALKALoms

Plants ordinarily used by herbalists are not poisonous. Yet, as is
well known, some plant components are extremely poisonous. As
health allies and caretakers, it is practical to remember that in cases
of alkaloid poisoning and other kinds of poisoning, the initial
treatment consists in chemical destruction or obstruction and
subsequent evacuation of the poison. While each alkaloid, when
taken by mouth, will require its own special chemical antidote (see
the Merck Index), if any is known, the following general procedure
and drugs may be used:

GENERAL PROCEDURE
1. Remove noxious agent from contact with patient.

2. Keep patient warm and lying down. An unconscious or near-
unconscious person should be placed on their abdomen, head
turned to one side and tongue pulled forward.

3. Give 2-4 glasses of water immediately (milk can be substituted).

4. Induce vomiting immediately by giving 1-2 tablespoons of salt in
a full glass of warm water, or a tablespoon of mustard in warm
water, or have the patient place index finger far back on tongue
and stroke from side to side. Vomiting should also be induced after
each dose of the antidote. Caution: With strychnine, strongly caustic,
or corrosive poison, do not induce vomiting.

5. Give patient the Universal Antidote (see below).

----- PAGE 581 -----
6. Get medical attention as soon as possible. Do not interrupt the
above procedures.

UNIVERSAL ANTIDOTE

If the nature of the poison is unknown, give repeated doses of 1/2
ounce (15 Gm) of the following mixture or a like mixture, stirred in
half a glass of warm water:

+ Pulverized, activated charcoal (burnt toast as an alternative)—2
parts

+ Tannic acid (strong black tea as an alternative)—1 part

+ Magnesium oxide (milk of magnesia as an alternative)—1 part

Never give oils, fats, or alcohol.

Tannin (tannic acid powder or common black tea) precipitates
most alkaloids (as well as certain toxic glycosides and many
metals). But remember that this precipitate redissolves in the acidic
gastric juice, so it should be given with alkaline substances, such as
sodium carbonate or bicarbonate, milk of magnesia, or the like,
which neutralize acids, and then they should be removed by
vomiting or with a stomach pump.

Iodine in the form of Tincture of Iodine diluted, or Lugol’s
Solution (iodine with potassium iodide) may be given as a general
antidote. But this precipitate redissolves in the alkaline juices of the
intestines, so it must be hurried through the bowels by means of a
purgative if it is too late to remove it by vomiting or a stomach
pump.

Activated animal charcoal (or vegetable charcoal as an
alternative) absorbs and obstructs alkaloids. This may be used if
quickly removed from the stomach before re-solution takes place.

----- PAGE 582 -----


----- PAGE 583 -----
‘

REFERENCE

----- PAGE 584 -----
All individuals have their distinctive way of doing things. Some
folks put lids back on, some won’t; some tuck their shirttails in,
others don’t; some do the dishes right after meals, while others let
’em soak. Medicine-making-wise the principles and instruction I
have put forth in this handbook are pretty much how I do my thing.
This how-to-herbal is a crystallization of what I have learned to
date from sundry teachers, fused with the manifest magic of my
salvaged blunders, and that which I have sensed or channeled, much
of which popped into my head as a breezy “wow, that’s a hell-of-
an-idea.” Certain folks may interpret some (maybe all) of what I
have put forth in these pages as merely fond retrospection of brief
psychotic episodes from which I have returned, or at least partially
returned. Milking this compliment all I can, I will savor my
particular madness by clarifying that my castles-in-the-air come
fully endowed with lush gardens, talking plants, wizardly critters,
and quaintly equipped kitchen-labs; the enchanting wonderment of
all this invoking me to visit and water and attend to them regularly.

As to the pathway of my particular education and experiences in
herbal medicine-making, it has been a winding road. At times I’ve
jogged pointedly along its course, asking questions and making
notes; and yet, often I’ve simply dilly dallied with Dandelions and
watched the Mullein blossoms charm the bees. Any attempt to list
in systematic fashion just who or what taught me this and that,
would be very difficult indeed, for the evolution of my insights and
methodologies progressed in a curlicue fashion rather than in any
discernable linear sequence of research and events. Suffice to say
the approaching list of highly talented, visionary beings touched,
taught, and influenced me in one way or another, over and over
again; and with warm heart, I give them my sincere appreciation
and full credit for their profoundly creative work. At the same time,
I probably should also ask their forgiveness if it appears that I have
misinterpreted their teachings, or that I have gnarled the fiber of
their clarity with the sometimes unyielding bent of my
temperament. My grasp of these teachings intertwined with the
passion of my personal direction is reflected to the reader by the
substance of this manual. I hope this will inspire and serve vou

----- PAGE 585 -----
well, and any lucre that comes my way via your purchase of this
compendium of herbal life force will be shared with hands-on
educational centers that further assist anyone who wishes to become
an informed and skilled herbalist.

So, companions, teachers, and esteemed peers, you, whose work
has inspired and assisted me in this journey, as each of your names
is read, wherever you are, will you please smile and nod to the
reader and accept my deeply felt appreciation of your extraordinary
Spirit.

Lina “Carotyn” Staus and Fara Mare Pearson, my herbalist soulmates,
you beautify my life with your sweet hearts and artist touch

The piant spits forever dwelling in the CSHS herb garden and in the
wild gardens that surround our home

Norma Myers, herbalist, wildwoman, and my first mentor

Dr. Jonn Curistoprer, herbalist and most jolly human being, my
second teacher, author of School of Natural Healing

Dr. Epwarp Bacu, quiet master, floral medicineman, author of Heal
Thyself and creator of the 38 original flower essence remedies

Srupents or CSHS, your memory forever dwells in my heart; you are
the green future

James Snow, most compassionate herbal therapist, my brother and
teacher

Micuaet Moore, herbalist pioneer de magnificencia

Ep Sys, herbalist, storyteller, and medicine-maker extraordinaire

Rosemary Giapsrar, my uncommon law sister, grand herbalist,

visionary of United Plant Savers, and author of Herbal Healing
for Women

7Sonc, notorious herbalist, wildcrafter, and first-aid master

Roy Upton, kindred spirit of many journeys, editor of The American
Herbal Phamacopoeia

Nan Koeuzr, birth angel, author of Artemis Speaks and co-founder of

----- PAGE 586 -----
Artemis College

Joszpuine Green, one of the bravest women I know, my role model for
self-healing

Autumn Summers, herbalist and teacher of green botany

Lesuz Garpner, herbalist gardener and Deva whisperer

Resecca Maxrtetp and Jason Maier, nurturers of enchanting babies and
the herb school campus

Ruts Dremr, herbalist, visionary, and health seer

Karen Monpovx, herbalist and seed gatherer

Ricuo Cecx, herbalist, medicine-maker, and medicineseedman

Pam Monrtcomery, herbalist of the Green Nations, author of Partner
Earth

Sara Karz, most organized herbalist with a splendid eye for beauty

Ricuarp Lesmann, N.D., Island captain of the good ship UpS

Paut Straus, greenman forest healer

CuristopHer Hosss, herbalist, woodland dancer, teacher, and prolific
author

Bern Baucu, without whose brilliance many excellent herbals
probably would have never been published

Cuarmoon Ricuarpson, Shroomchef and mushroom master

Diana Dewuca, who put delicious romance back into Western
Herbalism by writing the Botanica Erotica

Grecory Turorp, herbalist, wildcrafter, and author of The
EcoHerbalist’s Fieldbook

Ryan Drum, fearless wildcrafter of land and sea and herbal
brewmaster

Dav Horrmann, herbalist and phyto-bridge between the sciences,
author of scads of herbals

Perer D’Amato, caretaker of the carnivorous green and author of The
Savage Garden

----- PAGE 587 -----
Hua Leye. and Mrs. M. Greve, authors of A Modern Herbal

Wuuam H. Coox, M.D., wonderfully outspoken nineteenth century
physio-medicalist

Cascape Anperson-Geuer, wonderfully outspoken twenty-first century
herbalist and wise woman

Tm Biaxey, herbalist gardener and co-author of Medicinal Herbs in
the Garden, Field, & Marketplace

Lesiey Terra, herbalist and author of The Herbs of Life

Carta Emery, do-it yourself artist and pioneer, author of The
Encyclopedia of Country Living

Karat Kevize and Minpy Green, herbalists and aroma practitioners,
authors of Aromatherapy—A Complete Guide to the Healing Art

Dr. Epwarp Suoox, N.D., D.C., author of Advanced Treatise on
Herbology, your formula 57 made me a believer

Joun Uri Lion, the soulman of herbal pharmacy

D.C. Jarvis, M.D., author of Folk Medicine

JerHro Kioss, the Moses of Herbalism, author of Back to Eden

Wuuam H. Suetvon, PH.D, M.D., author of The Varieties of
Temperament

Rupotr Weiss, M.D., doctor of herbal knowledge, author of Herbal
Medicine

Wnusur Scovuie, PH.G., author of The Art of Compounding

Cuaries Caspar, author of A Treatise on Pharmacy

Josepn P. Remmncron, author of The Practice of Pharmacy

C.ype M. Snow, author of Essentials of Pharmacy

Epwarp Parrisn, author of A Treatise on Pharmacy

Joszpn Sprowts, Ph.D., editor of American Pharmacy

A.W. Prest and L.R. Prest, authors of Herbal Medication

J. H. Keitoce, M.D., hydrotherapist, author of Rational Hydrotherapy:

----- PAGE 588 -----
A. Stu, M.D., and J. Maiscu, Phar.D., authors of The National
Dispensatory; G. B. Woon and F. Bacue, professors of materia

medica, pharmacy and chemistry, authors of The United States
Dispensatory (a very old edition)

Wao Bovis, N.D., master of natural medicine, water therapist, and
departed friend

Francis Joun Fox, who showed me that it’s always best to laugh

Rosert Green, who taught me the bitter, the sweet, and the sour of
making a delicious medicine salad

But Watterson and Gary Larson, you guys crack me up, your medicine
is the best

and last, but certainly never least, joyful Twer, mischievous little
Shih-tzu Maltese cross, indomitable Spirit of the Little Folks.

I want to thank you ... all.

----- PAGE 589 -----


----- PAGE 590 -----
RESOURCES

----- PAGE 591 -----
The following compressed lists of resources will get you started and
on your way. As like attracts like, each item you acquire will lead
to another and your personal list of resources will take on a life of
its own.

The herb books I recommend to you are all written by adept,
hands-on herbalists. I am familiar with their work, and I trust the
contents of their publications. They are good teachers and herbal
craftsmen who love plants and draw from extensive experience.

----- PAGE 592 -----
BOOKS

Bach, Edward. The Bach Flower Remedies, Keats Publishing
Connecticut, 1979. This is three books in one volume: Heal
Thyself, by Edward Bach, The Twelve Healers, by Edward Bach,
and The Bach Remedies Repertory, by F.J. Wheeler.

Batmanghelid, E, M.D. Your Body’s Many Cries for Water, Globabl
Health Solutions, Inc., P.O. Box 3189, Falls Church, VA 22043,
1995.

Black, Penny. The Book of Pressed Flowers, Simon & Schuster, New
York.

Buhner, Stephen. Sacred Plant Medicine, Roberts Rinehart Pub.,
Boulder, Colorado, 1996.

Chancellor, Philip. Handbook of the Bach Flower Remedies, Keats
Publishing, Connecticut, 1980.

Christopher, John R. School of Natural Healing, BiWorld, Orem,
Utah, 1976.

Cech, Richo. Making Plant Medicine, Horizon Herbs Publication,
Box 69, Williams, Oregon, 2000. This work is an excellent
companion and reference for beginning and experienced herbal
medicine-makers.

Cowan, Elliot. Plant Spirit Medicine, Wildflower Press, 1995.

D’Amato, Peter. The Savage Garden: Cultivating Carnivorous Plants,
Ten Speed Press, Berkeley, California, 1998. Growing these
captivating yet endangered wetland plants is a hobby of mine
that I would like to turn you on to. This book is the very best in
its field.

Emery, Carla. The Encyclopedia of Country Living, Sasquatch Books,
Seattle, 1994. A magnificent resource for people who enjoy doing
things for themselves in order to get high-quality products,
includes an excellent chapter on making vinegar in the home.

Foster, Steven. Herbal Bounty! The Gentle Art of Herb Culture,
Peregrine Smith Books, Utah, 1984.

----- PAGE 593 -----
Gladstar, Rosemary. Herbal Healing for Women, Simon & Schuster,
New York, 1993.

Green, James. The Herbal Medicine-Maker’s Handbook, 4th ed., (A
compact, abbreviated version of this 5th ed.). James Green, Box
39, Forestville, CA 95436. $10 postage paid. Include your
address.

Green, James. The Male Herbal, The Crossing Press, Freedom,
California, 1991.

Grieve, Mrs. M. A Modern Herbal, Vols., I & Il, Dover Publications,
New York, 1971.

Griggs, Barbara. Green Pharmacy, Healing Arts Press, Rochester,
Vermont, 1991. A history of grassroots herbal medicine and
pharmacy.

Hobbs, Christopher. Foundations of Health: The Liver and Digestive
Herbal, Botanica Press, Capitola, California, 1992. Christopher
has written many other excellent herbals. Seek them out.

Hoffmann, David. An Elder’s Herbal, Healing Arts Press, Vermont,
1993.

Hoffmann, David. The New Holistic Herbal, Element Books,
Rockport, MA. 1996.

Jarvis, D.C. Folk Medicine, Crest Books, New York, 1962.

Keville, Kathi and Green, Mindy. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide
to the Healing Art, The Crossing Press, Freedom California, 1995.

Levy, Juliette de Bairacli. Common Herbs for Natural Health,
Schocken Books, N.Y., 1974.

Levy, Juliette de Bairacli. Traveler’s Joy, Keats Publishing, Inc.,
Connecticut, 1979. This is a gypsy’s handbook to accompany your
nomad travels.

McQuade Crawford, Amanda. The Herbal Menopause Book, The
Crossing Press, Freedom, California, 1998.

Mills, Simon Y. Out of the Earth, Viking (Penguin Books), N.Y.,
1991

Montgomery. Pam. Partner Earth, Destiny Books, Rochester.

----- PAGE 594 -----
Vermont, 1997.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Mountain West, Museum of
New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 1979.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Desert & Canyon West,
Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 1989.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Pacific West, Red Crane
Books, Santa Fe, 1993.

Poutinen, C.J. The Encyclopedia of Natural Pet Care, Keats
Publishing, Connecticut, 1998.

Shook, Edward. Elementary Treatise in Herbology, Mokelumne Hill
Press, Mokelumne Hill, CA, 1977.

Shook, Edward. Advanced Treatise in Herbology, Revisionist Press,
New York, 1991.

Soule, Deb. The Roots of Healing, Citadel Press, New York, 1995.

St. Clare, Debra. The Herbal Medicine Cabinet, Celestial Arts,
Berkeley, California, 1997.

Sturdivant, Lee & Blakley, Tim. Medicinal Herbs in the Garden,
Field & Marketplace, San Juan Naturals, P.O. Box 642, Friday
Harbor, WA 98250.

Tierra, Lesley. The Herbs of Life, The Crossing Press, Freedom,
California, 1992.

Tierra, Michael. The Way of Herbs, Unity Press, Santa Cruz, 1980.

Tilford, Gregory. The Eco Herbalist’s Fieldbook, Mountain Weed
Pub., Montana, 1993. Mountain Weed Publishing, HC 33, Box 17,
Conner, MT 59827.

Tompkins, P. and Bird, C. The Secret Life of Plants, Harper & Row,
1972. (A true fairytale)

Upton, Roy., ed. American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium, P.O. Box 5159, Santa Cruz, CA, 95063, 1999.

Vogel, A. Swiss Nature Doctor, Keats Publishing, Connecticut, 1990.

Weed, Susun. Healing Wise, Ash Tree Pub., Woodstock, NY, 1989.

Weiss, Rudolf. Herbal Medicine. Beaconsfield Pub. Ltd..

----- PAGE 595 -----
Beaconsfield, England, 1988.

Willard, Terry. Edible and Medicinal Plants of the Rocky Mountains
and Neighboring Territories, Wild Rose College of Natural
Healing, Ltd., Calgary, Alberta Canada, 1992.

PLANT ID GUIDES

Find a plant identification guide whose drawings and photos
appeal to you aesthetically and whose text speaks most clearly to
you. A good series to begin with is the Peterson Field Guide Series
(Houghton Mifflin Co.)—A Field Guide to Wildflowers. They offer a
field guide for the Pacific States Wildflowers, the Rocky Mountain
region, the Northeastern and North-central region of North America,
and so forth. Obviously, any single volume that covers areas as large
as these will identify only a small portion of the resident plant
population. Other plant guides will zero in on specific areas. For
example, I use one that focuses on The Plants of the San Francisco
Bay Region—Mendocino to Monterey (Kozloff & Beidleman, Sagen
Press, Pacific Grove, CA). With a little practice in the art and
technique of using these guides, they become gratifying companions
that can give you an introduction to the local flora by giving you
the plant’s family, common name(s), and its Latin binomial.

SCHOOLS, CORRESPONDENCE COURSES, AND OTHER
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES

Rather than present an exhaustive list of these resources and
probably still leave out a number of excellent sources of herbal
education, I will give you the address and phone number of the
American Herbalists Guild. This organization has compiled a
booklet, The AHG Directory of Herbal Education, which I regard as
the finest listing of both residential and correspondence courses in
Herbalism. This directory also includes many journals, newsletters,
computerized databases, and Internet resources for the herbalist. It
costs $10, which is a mere pittance for the amount of work that
goes into compiling, updating, formatting, and printing the
document. The AHG is a group of herbalists dedicated to the

----- PAGE 596 -----
advancement of excellent herbal education, and with this booklet
and other services provides a tremendous assistance to both serious
and casual students of Herbalism; and the organization can use the

funds to help continue its volunteer work.

The AHG Directory of Herbal Education,

American Herbalists Guild
P.O. Box 70
Roosevelt, Utah 84066

Phone (435) 722-8434 or Fax (435) 722-
8452

SUPPLIES

Alcohol

Aaper Alcohol

P.O. Box 339

Shelbyville, KY 40066

(800) 456-1017

Request 190-proof grain alcohol

Vie-Del Company

P.O. Box 2896

Fresno, CA 93745

(209) 834-2525

Request 169-proof un-aged brandy

A.H. Guild
Directory

1931 Gaddis Rd.
Canton, GA 30115
(770) 751-6021

Fax (770) 751-
7472

Pure grain alcohol (190-proof, 95 percent) is available in liquor
stores throughout the Western states except in California. Everclear
is a well-known brand name. Pure grain alcohol can be bought in
B.C.,. Canada, but only with a special use permit that can be applied

----- PAGE 597 -----
for at a government liquor outlet. One can also bring a liter (1 per
month legally and tax free) of pure grain alcohol over the Mexican
border. It only costs about four or five dollars a liter. Possibly more
than a liter can be brought over, but you will probably have to pay
duty on this.

Glycerin (vegetable source)
Frontier Cooperative Herbs
P.O. Box 299
Norway, lowa 52318
(800) 669-3275
Provides from 2-ounce to 32-ounce sizes to retail customers

Capsules (vegetable source)
Frontier Cooperative Herbs
P.O. Box 299
Norway, lowa 52318
(800) 669-3275

EQUIPMENT

Vita-Mix blender
As suggested in the text of this manual, try to find a Vita-Mix
blender that has the stainless steel container. The new version
comes with a polycarbonate container which may (or may not, I’ve
not used one) be damaged when used for powdering dense, dried
herbal materials.

Vita-Mix Corporation
8615 Usher Road

Cleveland, OH 44138

(800) 848-2649 (1-800-VITAMIX)

A Press

‘The Mini-Jack Press—Horizon Herbs
Box 69, Williams

----- PAGE 598 -----
Oregon, 97544-0069
(541) 846-6704 or order on-line http://www.chatlink.com/~herbseed
Be sure to request their Growing Guide and Seed Catalog.

----- PAGE 599 -----
THE HERBAL
MEDICINE-MAKER’S
HANDBOOK

A Home Manual

James Green
